The 14th legislature of the French Fifth Republic (French : XIV législature de la Cinquième République française) was the French Parliament elected in the 2012 French legislative election.

When the 14th legislature was installed, François Hollande had been President of the Republic for 36 days.

After a tumultuous first term, Hollande decided not to run for a second term. Emmanuel Macron succeeded him on 14 May 2017 following the presidential election of 2017.

François Hollande first reappointed Jean-Marc Ayrault as Prime Minister on June 20, 2012, which composes a single government. Manuel Valls is then named on March 31, 2014, which consists of two governments. Bernard Cazeneuve succeeds him on December 6, 2016 and will remain head of a single government until the election of Emmanuel Macron to the presidency of the Republic. The last government of the fourteenth legislature is that of Édouard Philippe, which is renewed following the parliamentary elections of June 2017.

155 women were elected or reelected and make up 26.86% of French MPs:

125 women MPs from left-wing parties. 29 women MPs from right-wing parties. 1 women MP from the Front National party.

The oldest member of the National Assembly is François Scellier, from the Radical Party, linked to the larger UMP conservative grouping. He represents the 6th Constituency of Val d'Oise and was 76 years old at the beginning of the current parliamentary term.

The youngest member of the National Assembly is Marion Maréchal-Le Pen from the Front National, the MP for the 3rd Constituency of Vaucluse. She was 22 years old at the beginning of the current parliamentary term and was actually the youngest ever MP elected under the French Fifth Republic.

Members of the National Assembly who join the government are required to give up their seats to their substitutes (suppléants) a month after their appointment, as stipulated in the constitution. Should ministers quit the government, they recover their seat in the National Assembly from their substitute a month after their resignation. By-elections are held in the event of the annulation of electoral results or vacancies caused by resignations (in most circumstances not those related to the death of a deputy, in which case the substitute takes the seat if possible), except within the year before legislative elections.

The 1674 derecho, also known as Het Schrickelik Tempeest (English: The Terrible Tempest) in the Netherlands, was an extraordinarily powerful, extremely destructive, and deadly derecho that devastated parts of Western Europe on August 1, 1674. In some parts of the Netherlands, the derecho happened on July 22, as the Gregorian calendar was not used in the whole country yet. The return period of the derecho was estimated to be between 1,000 and 10,000 years, based on the reported hail in Northern France.

Hail stones up to 15–20 cm (5.9–7.9 in) were observed in Northern France, which were one of the largest hail stones ever observed. After moving through France and nowadays Belgium, the derecho attained its peak intensity over the Netherlands with the highest winds occurring in the province of Utrecht with estimated winds of 198–325 km/h (123–202 mph) in the city of Utrecht. The recovery of Utrecht took over a century and the nave of the Dom cathedral was never rebuilt.

The derecho caused over 1,050 deaths in the Netherlands, making it one of the deadliest weather events of the past centuries in the Netherlands. The 1674 derecho was the deadliest and most intense derecho in recorded history.

August 1, 1674 was a very hot and humid day in the Netherlands. In the evening of August 1, an exceptionally active cold front was responsible for causing a fast-moving derecho with an average propagation speed of 60–80 km/h (37–50 mph). The passage of the derecho was noted as far east as Hamburg. Within the derecho, embedded bow echoes occurred. Above the province of Utrecht, the derecho reached its peak intensity around 8 PM, with estimated maximum wind gusts of 198–325 km/h (123–202 mph) based on the amount of damage caused to homes. While the majority of the damage was caused by straight-line winds, embedded vortices weren't ruled out. A rapid change of the wind direction was observed in Medemblik, which might have been related to the passage of a thermal low. The derecho lasted for around half an hour in the municipality of Utrecht, according to observations.

In Northern France, hail stones of 15–20 cm (5.9–7.9 in) were observed, which were one of the largest hail stones ever observed on Earth. Hail stones "as large as a baby's head" were observed in Strasbourg. In Germany, hail was reported to be knee deep in Frankfurt am Main.

The amount of rain that fell during the derecho was described as exceptional. Floodings of houses by rain were described in the city of Utrecht.

The derecho caused the death of approximately 50 people in and near the city of Utrecht. Furthermore, more than 1,000 people deceased near Amsterdam. The roof of the Amsterdam's orphans house collapsed. Six windmills on the city wall of Utrecht were destroyed. A wind-powered powder mill in Monnikendam was severely damaged. Many brick houses and buildings in the city of Utrecht had collapsed walls after the derecho. Most homes in Utrecht lost their roofs. Many well-built houses were severely damaged or leveled to the ground. There were large amounts of uprooted trees. The Dom cathedral of Utrecht collapsed. The roof of the New Church of Amsterdam was severely damaged by hail. A boat flew over several fields near Ilpendam. Nearly all homes in Amsterdam were damaged by the derecho. Several windmills in Amsterdam were overturned. On the island of Texel, the derecho drove many ships to the beach or were sunk. More than 50 houses in Hilversum were leveled to the ground and many deaths were reported. The church towers of Vleuten, Jutphaas, Bunnik, Houten, and IJsselstein were destroyed. Several churches in the city of Utrecht were damaged. Multiple ships in the province of Noord-Holland did not survive the derecho.

Houses in Roosendaal, Oudenbosch, and Zandvliet were severely damaged. Many chimneys were blown off in the city of Utrecht. The recovery of Utrecht took more than a century. Farmhouses were destroyed near Utrecht. Most trees in Amsterdam fell. In the city of Amsterdam, several facades of houses collapsed and 9 ships sank. Nearly all trees at the Janskerkhof in Utrecht fell. Weeks after the derecho, the streets in Utrecht were still filled with debris. The derecho caused severe damage at a large scale to homes in Landsmeer. All homes in the city of Utrecht were damaged. 300 windows were damaged in Koog aan de Zaan. A watermill in Limburg was destroyed. Several trees were damaged in Roosendaal. A church in Zandvliet collapsed. A brewery and an inn in Utrecht were severely damaged. A fallen chimney caused damage to a blacksmith in Wezep. The derecho caused a church to collapse in Ouderkerk. Severe damage was registered in the Diemermeer. 22 mills were destroyed near Amsterdam. The Haarlemmerpoort (Haarlem Gate) in Amsterdam collapsed. An unprecedented amount of roof tiles were blown off in Amsterdam. The city hall of Amsterdam experienced severe damage to its windows. A heavy tree flew over 50 meters through the air. A mill collapsed in Zaandam. Many houses in Purmerend were destroyed by the derecho. A tower in Purmerend collapsed. Several houses and trees were damaged in the Beemster. A church in Wieringen collapsed. 200 homes in Kwadijk were severely damaged, some of them were completely destroyed. A farm in Houten was damaged by the derecho. The Agnieten monastery in Utrecht was heavily damaged. Between Amsterdam and Arnhem, only one church tower was not damaged. Church towers in Rhenen were damaged. The city of Gouda also reported damage. Out of the 36 towers in Utrecht, only five did not collapse. A mill in De Bilt collapsed and the roof of a church in Benschop was destroyed.

Damage was reported in Fontainebleau and Strasbourg. The hail and powerful winds caused severe damage to grain fields, grapes, and orchards. The Royal Palace of Fontainebleau was severely damaged. Hurricane-force winds were observed in the commune of Brie.

Damage was reported in Brussels, Mechelen, Antwerpen, and Turnhout. The bridge in Antwerp was destroyed by the derecho. Many trees in Brussels fell and many facades of homes were damaged. Many homes in Turnhout were destroyed by the derecho.

Presidential elections were held for the first time in France on 10 and 11 December 1848, electing the first and only president of the Second Republic. This election marked the birth of the Second Republic and the dramatic end of the July Monarchy, a transformation born of the February Revolution 's fervour.

The election ended in a landslide victory for Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, nephew of Napoleon I, who won 74% of the popular vote. His appeal to peasants, conservatives, and those nostalgic for Napoleonic glory gave him a decisive edge. This was the only direct presidential election until the 1965 French presidential election under the Fifth Republic.

The six candidates in the election, in order of most votes received, are Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte of the Bonapartists, Louis Eugène Cavaignac of the moderate Republicans, Alexandre Auguste Ledru-Rollin of the Montagnards, François-Vincent Raspail of the Socialists, Alphonse de Lamartine of the Liberals, and Nicolas Changarnier of the Monarchists. Their campaigns reflected the deep ideological divisions of the time, though none could match Bonaparte's popularity.

Following the February 1848 revolution, the French replaced the July Monarchy of Louis-Philippe with a constitutional republic. The revolution came as a surprise to most. The new Second Republic was led by a provisional government and then an executive commission, which held democratic elections for a National Constituent Assembly. The National Constituent Assembly was tasked with drafting a new Constitution for the Second Republic, including the definition of a new head of state to replace the overthrown monarchy.

Constitutional debates took place during the period known as the June Days Uprising. The Second Republic had initiated National Workshops to alleviate urban unemployment. These workshops were paid for by high taxes, but these were ultimately unable to financially maintain them. The closing of the workshops sparked the June Days Uprising. The countryside was broadly opposed to the uprising. Karl Marx argues peasants, specifically conservative farmers, desired government protection, meaning a strong autocratic executive. Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte was the only prominent political figure not to be associated with the June uprising in any manner due to him being in England at the time.

The presidency was defined by the terms of the constitution. Rather than the model of the executive committee given by the First Republic, the constitutional committee preferred to entrust executive power in a single individual. The office was given extensive powers to propose legislation, appoint ministers and high-ranking officials, engage in diplomacy, and command the military, though all decisions were subject to approval by the ministers.

Alexis de Tocqueville commented that "the collapse of commerce, ubiquitous hostility, and fear of socialism increasingly aroused hatred of the Republic" and that "everyone wanted to get rid of the constitution." The April elections already signaled hostility to the Republic: only about a third of seats went to pre-revolution republicans. After the June uprising, politics became divided between a frightened conservative majority no longer interested in compromise and a bitter republican minority.

Napoleon I remained widely popular. There had been a cult dedicated to him ever since the empire fell, which was especially strong in the countryside, and the countryside was the majority of the population. Napoleon I became associated with national pride, a legend that the July Monarchy added to by trying to lean on it for credibility. Some republicans even saw Napoleon I as having furthered the Revolution and did not see Bonapartism as opposed to their cause. Louis Napoleon had attempted to seize power in 1836 and 1840, which, though total failures, had established him as the "Bonapartist pretender."

Workers and socialists saw the National Workshops as the first step to restructuring society and the abolition of capitalism, and thus attached to them a great deal of symbolic importance. To everyone else, the June uprising made a strong executive seem essential. Notables like Alexis de Tocqueville and Karl Marx saw the June Uprising as an instance of class warfare. The left was concerned almost exclusively with urban poverty, and neglected the conditions of the countryside.

The French peasantry faced numerous economic hardships during the Second Republic. Most hated of all was the 45 centime (a centime equivalent to 1/100 of a Franc) tax to pay for the National Workshops. Mortgage rates were also sky-high. The lenders, perhaps not a coincidence, happened to often be government officials. Harvests had begun improving, which drove prices down, and smaller farmers were especially impacted.

Two monarchist factions, Orleanists and Legitimists, could not agree on a potential candidate and thus both ended up supporting Louis Napoleon. The conservative Party of Order, a coalition of monarchists, stayed neutral, which benefitted Louis Napoleon as it does not split the conservative vote with a third-party candidate. The only other conservative candidate in the race, Changarnier, never gained much traction. The Party of Order would go on to oppose Bonaparte's presidency. The urban working class were not a coherent voting bloc and numerous candidates courted their votes.

Bonaparte's Extinction of Pauperism/Poverty (depending on translation) was not unique, but did establish Louis Napoleon as a friend of the worker. The main difference he presented from utopian socialism was the militaristic government intervention to carry out the social plans and advocacy for agricultural colonies. Bonapartism also appealed to the left in its egalitarianism and resentment of "the rich." Louis Napoleon was not seen as an enemy by rank-and-file republicans due to him attaching the republican universal suffrage and active foreign policy to his platform. His proclaimed social aims include meritocracy, cheap credit, less taxation, property for all men, and public works especially communication. Workers did not as a whole identify Bonaparte as in the pockets of Big Business, and his advocacy for public works meant employment and lowered cost of transportation. Newly enfranchised peasants saw the centralized state Louis Napoleon advocated for as their liberation from noble rulers.

Cavaignac remained widely resented by Parisian workers as the Butcher of June in his role suppressing the June Days Uprising as the Minister of War. He and the Second Republic was also widely resented for imposing high taxes. Rumors had begun circulating before the election that Cavaignac was planning a coup.

Cavaignac enjoyed the support of Protestants as well as liberal Catholics. As Louis Napoleon carried the Napoleonic legacy, Cavaignac also overperformed in areas where Napoleon I was not as popular, such as port cities that suffered British blockade during the Napoleonic Wars.

The Constitutional Committee decided that the presidential executive should be chosen by universal male suffrage with secret ballots in late May. The procedure for presidential election was ratified by referendum on 6 October and included in the Constitution, which was adopted on 12 November. Most prominent political figures in France supported election by popular vote. Cavaignac repeatedly opposed legal measures that could have hindered Louis Napoleon, offering various justifications that it was better for the Republic. Alexis de Tocqueville argued "the executive would be too weak if chosen by the Assembly." By the time the Constitution came up for debate in October, opposition to general election for president consisted of monarchists and republicans trying to stop Louis Napoleon. The election was scheduled for 10 December.

The constitution only included provision for one round, and in the absence of a majority for any candidate, the National Assembly would have decided the victor. Louis-Eugène Cavaignac seemed certain to win if the election reached the National Assembly. Louis Napoleon was widely expected to win but it was unclear by what percentage he would win. There was a real chance that he would lack an outright majority and thus be defeated in the Assembly.

Bonaparte had no long political career behind him and was able to depict himself as "all things to all people". The Monarchist right (supporters of either the Legitimist or Orléanist royal households) and much of the upper class supported him as the "lesser evil" candidate, as a man who would restore order, end the instability in France which had continued since the overthrow of the monarchy during the February Revolution earlier that year, and prevent a proto-communist revolution (in the vein of Friedrich Engels). A good proportion of the industrial working class, on the other hand, were won over by Louis-Napoleon's vague indications of progressive economic views. His overwhelming victory was above all due to the support of the non-politicized rural masses, to whom the name of Bonaparte meant something, as opposed to the other, little-known contenders.

Cavaignac conceded before results were even fully in. Bonaparte received a plurality or majority in all departments except the Var, Bouches-du-Rhône, Morbihan, and Finistère, all four of which were won by Cavaignac. Thus did Bonaparte become the second president in Europe (after Jonas Furrer of Switzerland) and the first French president to be elected by a popular vote.

The presidential election in December had abstention rate of 25%, up from 16% in initial legislative elections in April.

Alphonse Henri, comte d'Hautpoul Party of Order

Parliamentary elections were held in France on 13 and 14 May 1849. Voters elected the first National Assembly of the Second Republic. The conservative Party of Order won an overall majority of 450 seats. The Party of Order was a bourgeois, traditionalist, and conservative party opposed to the presidency of Louis Napoleon Bonaparte and the subsequent 1851 coup.

Vote counts and registered voters listed below are approximate.

The single Senegalese seat in the National Assembly was created by decree on 5 March 1848. Following an order of 5 November 1830 and a law of 24 April 1833, all free-born people and freed slaves in Senegal had full civic and political rights, the only French African colony to give such rights until the end of World War II. The right to vote was given to all men over the age of 25 and who could prove they had lived in their municipality for the previous five years. In total 4,991 men registered to vote, up from 4,706 in the 1848 elections. Result:

Incumbent MP Barthélémy Durand Valantin was re-elected with 65% of the vote. Valantin retired from politics in 1851, but before a by-election could be held, a decree of 2 February 1852 abolished Senegalese representation in the National Assembly.

A referendum was held in France on 20 and 21 December 1851. Voters were asked whether they approved of the continuation of the authority of Louis Napoléon Bonaparte and to delegate the powers required to produce a new constitution. It was approved by 92% of voters with an 81.7% turnout.

All French men over the age of 21 were entitled to vote in a commune in which they had resided for six months. Algerians and Kanaks had no right to vote. The vote was secret with the exception of those serving in the military. However, the authorities only printed yes ballots – voters had to supply their own ballots with no.

92.03% of French voters voted in favor of the amendment, while 18.35% of electors abstained from voting. The official tally and free nature of the vote were questioned by dissidents like Victor Hugo.

The coup d'état of 2 December 1851 was a self-coup staged by Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte (later Napoleon III), at the time President of France under the Second Republic. Code-named Operation Rubicon and timed to coincide with the anniversary of his uncle Napoleon I's coronation and victory at Austerlitz, the coup dissolved the National Assembly, granted dictatorial powers to the president and preceded the establishment of the Second French Empire a year later.

Faced with the prospect of having to leave office in 1852, Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte (nephew of Napoleon Bonaparte) staged the coup in order to stay in power and implement his reform programs; these included the restoration of universal male suffrage previously abolished by the legislature. The continuation of his authority and the power to produce a new constitution were approved days later by a constitutional referendum, resulting in the Constitution of 1852, which greatly increased the powers and the term length of the president. A year after the coup, Bonaparte proclaimed himself " Emperor of the French " under the regnal name Napoleon III.

In 1848, Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte was elected President of France through universal male suffrage, taking 74% of the vote. He did this with the support of the Party of Order after running against Louis Eugène Cavaignac. Subsequently, he was in constant conflict with the members (députés) of the National Assembly.

Contrary to the Party's expectations that Louis-Napoleon would be easy to manipulate (Adolphe Thiers had called him a "cretin whom we will lead [by the nose]"), he proved himself an agile and cunning politician. He succeeded in imposing his choices and decisions upon the Assembly, which had once again become conservative in the aftermath of the June Days uprising in 1848. He broke away from the control of the Party of Order and created the Ministère des Commis, appointing General Hautpoul as its head, in 1849. On 3 January 1850, he dismissed Changarnier, a dissident in the Party of Order, thereby provoking an open conflict within the party. He also actively encouraged the creation of numerous anti-parliament newspapers and acquired the support of 150 members of Parliament, the "Parti de l' Elysée ".

The provisions of the constitution that prohibited an incumbent president from seeking re-election appeared to force the end of Louis-Napoleon's rule in December 1852. He therefore spent the first half of 1851 trying to force changes to the constitution through Parliament so he could be re-elected. Bonaparte travelled through the provinces and organised petitions to rally popular support. Two-thirds of the General Council supported Louis-Napoleon's cause, but in the Assembly, supporters of the Duke of Orléans, led by Thiers, concluded an alliance with the far left to oppose Louis-Napoleon's plans. In January 1851, the Parliament voted no confidence in the Ministère des Commis. On 19 July, it refused the constitutional reform proposed by Louis-Napoleon, also scrapping universal male suffrage in an effort to break popular support for Bonaparte.

The coup d'état was meticulously planned from 20 August 1851. Preparations and planning for this coup took place at Saint-Cloud. Among the conspirators were Jean-Gilbert Victor Fialin (a loyal companion of Louis-Napoléon), Charles de Morny (Louis-Napoléon's half-brother), and General Jacques Leroy de Saint Arnaud. On 14 October, Louis-Napoleon asked the Parliament to restore universal male suffrage but the request was turned down. His request for a reconsideration of the constitutional reform proposal was also turned down on 13 November. Prepared to strike, Louis-Napoleon appointed General Saint-Arnaud as the Minister of War and a circular was issued reminding soldiers of their pledge of " passive obedience ". Followers of the President were appointed to various important positions: General Magnan as the Commander of the Troops of Paris, and Maupas, Prefect of Haute-Garonne as Prefect of Police of Paris. Convinced that the coup was now inevitable after the latest refusal, Louis-Napoleon fixed the anniversary of the coronation of Napoleon in 1804, and the victory at Austerlitz in 1805, as the day for the coup. The operation was christened Rubicon, in an allusion to Julius Caesar.

On the morning of 2 December, troops led by Saint-Arnaud occupied strategic points in Paris, from the Champs-Élysées to the Tuileries. Top opposition leaders were arrested and six edicts promulgated to establish the rule of Louis-Napoleon. The National Assembly was dissolved, and universal male suffrage restored. Louis-Napoleon declared that a new constitution was being framed and said he intended to restore the "system established by the First Consul".

Reacting to this coup, parliamentarians took refuge in the mayor's office of the 20th arrondissement of Paris, and 220 of them voted to oust Louis-Napoleon from power. Most prominent among these were liberals like Remusat and moderates like Pascal Duprat, who were arrested soon after. A Parisian insurrection led by the likes of Victor Hugo and Victor Schoelcher erupted despite tight control by the army. The insurgents were soon defeated. On 3 December parliamentarian Jean-Baptiste Baudin was killed, and on 4 December 200 more people fell victim to the suppression of the revolt. The Italian journalist Ferdinando Petruccelli della Gattina was among the rebels and was expelled from France. By evening, the revolt of Paris was suppressed and the city returned to normal. According to Victor Hugo the killings which followed on 4 December were arbitrary and anybody visible to the soldiers was shot at or bayoneted including women and children.

The coup triggered revolts in other places across France. On 5 December, rebellions were reported in big cities, small towns and rural areas in the south-west of France. The department of Basses-Alpes even declared itself administered by a "Committee of Resistance" but the army, still loyal to the President, succeeded in quelling the rebellion. A total of 32 departments were put under a state of alert from 8 December and the rebellious areas were controlled in a few days. Opponents were arrested and some were forced to flee. Victor Hugo fled to Brussels, then Jersey, and finally settled with his family on the Channel Island of Guernsey at Hauteville House, where he would live in exile until Napoleon III's downfall in 1870 and collapse of the regime during the Franco-Prussian War. By the end of the rebellion, 26,000 people were arrested, 9,530 were sent to Algeria and 250 to the prison of Cayenne.

The Bonapartists were finally assured of a victory. Generals Vaillant and Harispe became Marshals of France on 11 December. A new constitution was being drafted. A referendum was organised to ratify the new order and the coup was portrayed as a security operation. On 20 and 21 December, the French population were recorded as having voted for acceptance of the new regime by an overwhelming majority of 7,145,000 to 600,000, although the official tally and free nature of the vote were questioned by dissidents like Victor Hugo. Bonaparte now had the power to draft a new constitution.

Following a referendum in December 1851, a new constitution was adopted in January 1852. It dramatically expanded the powers of the president, who was elected for a period of 10 years with no term limits. He not only possessed executive power, but was vested with the power of legislative initiative, thereby reducing the scope of the Parliament. Bonaparte was automatically reelected to a fresh term as president. For all intents and purposes, he now held all governing power in the nation.

The authoritarian republic proved to be only a stopgap, as Bonaparte immediately set about restoring the Empire. In less than a year, following another referendum on 7 November 1852, the Second French Empire was proclaimed. Again on the symbolic and historic date of 2 December, President Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte became Napoleon III, Emperor of the French. The 1851 constitution concentrated so much power in Louis-Napoléon's hands that when the Empire was proclaimed, the only substantive changes to the document were to replace the word "president" with the word "emperor" and make the post hereditary.

A referendum on re-establishing the Empire was held in France on 21 and 22 November 1852. Voters were asked whether they approved of the re-establishment of the Empire in the person of Louis Napoléon Bonaparte and his family. It was approved by 97% of voters with an 80% turnout. After the plebiscite, Louis Napoléon assumed the style " Napoleon III, Emperor of the French." As with all other plebiscites under Napoleon III (and Napoleon I before him), the results were blatantly rigged and only served to use the façade of democracy to legitimize their rule.

All French men over the age of 21 were entitled to vote in a commune in which they had resided for six months. Algerians and Kanaks had no right to vote.

The vote was secret with the exception of those serving in the military. However, the authorities only printed yes ballots – voters had to supply their own ballots with no.

The 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and State (French : Loi du 9 décembre 1905 concernant la séparation des Églises et de l'État) was passed by the Chamber of Deputies on 3 July 1905. Enacted during the Third Republic, it established state secularism in France. At the time, France was governed by the Bloc des gauches (Left Coalition) led by Émile Combes. The law was based on three principles: the neutrality of the state, the freedom of religious exercise, and public powers related to the church. This law is seen as the backbone of the French principle of laïcité (secularism). It is, however, not applicable in Alsace and Moselle, which were part of Germany when it was enacted.

Prior to the French Revolution of 1789—since the days of the conversion of Clovis I to Christianity in 508 AD— Catholicism had been the state religion of France, and closely identified with the Ancien Régime. However, the revolution led to various policy changes, including a brief separation of church and state in 1795, ended by Napoleon 's re-establishment of the Catholic Church as the national religion with the Concordat of 1801. An important document in the evolution toward religious liberty was Article Ten of the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, stating that "No one may be disturbed on account of his opinions, even religious ones, as long as the manifestation of such opinions does not interfere with the established Law and Order." The 1871 Paris Commune had proclaimed state secularism on 3 April 1871, but it had been cancelled following the Commune's defeat.

After the 16 May 1877 crisis and the victory of the republicans at the following elections, various draft laws requesting the suppression of the Concordat of 1801 were deposed, starting with the 31 July 1879 proposition of Charles Boysset. Beginning in 1879, the French state began a gradual national secularization program starting with the removal of priests from the administrative committees of hospitals and boards of charity, and in 1880 with the substitution of lay women for nuns in hospitals. Thereafter, the Third Republic established secular education with the Jules Ferry laws in 1881–1882, which were a significant part of the firm establishment of the republican regime in France, with religious instruction in all schools forbidden.

In 1886, another law ensured secularisation of the teaching staff of the National Education.

Other moves towards secularism included:

The 1901 Law of Associations, which guaranteed freedom of association, also enabled the control of religious communities and, notably, limited their influence on education. In 1903, while former Catholic seminarian Émile Combes was minister, a commission was selected to draft a bill that would establish a comprehensive separation between the state and the churches. Its president was the former Protestant pastor Ferdinand Buisson, and its minute writer was Aristide Briand.

On 30 July 1904, the Chamber of Deputies voted to sever diplomatic relations with the Holy See following the sanctioning by the Holy See of two French bishops (Albert-Léon-Marie Le Nordez and Pierre Joseph Geay) who had declared themselves republicans and in favour of conciliation with the Republic. The relationship was not reestablished until 1921, after the Senate accepted a proposition brought by Aristide Briand.

The 1905 law put an end to the government funding of religious groups by France and its political subdivisions. (The state had previously agreed to such funding in the Napoleonic Concordat of 1801 as compensation for the Revolution's confiscation of church properties.) At the same time, it declared that all religious buildings were property of the state and local governments and made available for free to the church. Other articles of the law included the prohibition of affixing religious signs on public buildings, and laying down that the Republic no longer names French archbishops or bishops.

Secularization had a profound impact on church music. Government funding had provided a steady revenue source for funding professional musicians and installing large complex organs. Overnight, many choirs were disbanded and organists were forced to earn side income from teaching. A profound break in sacred music complexity can be found in the compositions of this time. Because much 19th century church music required professional forces no longer available, much of it was forgotten.

Alsace-Lorraine is still governed by the 1801 Concordat which recognises four religions, but not secularism. When the 1905 legislation superseded the Concordat elsewhere in France, Alsace-Lorraine was part of the German Empire ; thus, the 1905 law has never applied there. Similarly, the law has never been applied in the overseas Department of French Guiana as it was a colony in 1905.

Pope Pius X condemned the law in the February 1906 encyclical Vehementer Nos as a unilateral break of the 1801 Concordat ; he later condemned it again in his August 1906 encyclical Gravissimo officii munere, declaring it a "nefarious law" and calling French Catholics to "defend the religion of your Fatherland". A third condemnation came in January 1907 through the encyclical Une fois encore. In 1908, the Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Penitentiary ruled that all Deputies and Senators who had voted in favour of the law were latae sententiae excommunicated.

Although the 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State initially was a particularly "painful and traumatic event" for the Catholic Church in France, the French government began making serious strides towards reconciliation with the Catholic Church later during the 1920s by both recognizing the social impact of organized religion in France and amending the law itself through new legislation and rendering court decisions that were favorable to organized religion in France. In 1921, the Catholic Church and French state began a series of negotiations for "pacification of law" in respect to both civil and canon law to create a harmonious day-to-day working relationship. These negotiations culminated in 1926 when Aristide Briand negotiated the Briand-Ceretti Agreement with the Holy See whereby the state reclaimed a role in the process of choosing diocesan bishops.

The leading figures in the creation of the law were Aristide Briand, Émile Combes, Jean Jaurès and Francis de Pressensé.

The 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State declared that cathedrals remained the property of the state and smaller churches that of the local municipal government. Those public authorities had to hand over the buildings to religious organizations (associations culturelles) representing associations formed of laymen, instead of putting them directly back under the supervision of the church hierarchies.

These laymen associations created under the 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State were independent legal entities having rights and responsibilities in the eyes of the law in all matters appertaining to money and properties formerly owned in France by organized religions: churches and sacred edifices, ecclesiastical property, real and personal; the residences of the bishops and priests; and the seminaries. These laymen associations were also authorized by the law to act as administrators of church property, regulate and collect the alms and the legacies destined for religious worship. The resources furnished by Catholic liberality for the maintenance of Catholic schools, and the working of various charitable associations connected with religion, were also transferred to lay associations.

Implementation of the law was controversial, due in some part to the anti-clericalism found among much of the French political left at the time. The law angered many Catholics, who had recently begun to rally to the cause of the Republic, supported by Leo XIII 's Inter innumeras sollicitudines 1892 encyclical (Au Milieu des sollicitudes) and Cardinal Lavigerie 's toast in 1890 favour of the Republic. However, the concept of laïcité progressively became almost universally accepted among French citizens, including members of the Catholic Church who found greater freedom from state interference in cultural matters, now that the government had completely stripped itself of its former Catholic links. The Affaire Des Fiches produced a considerable backlash, after it was discovered that the Combes government worked with Masonic lodges to create a secret surveillance of all army officers to make sure devout Catholics would not be promoted.

A few French politicians and communities have more recently questioned the law, arguing that, despite its explicit stance for state secularism, it de facto favors traditional French religions, in particular the Catholic Church, at the expense of more recently established religions, such as Islam. Indeed, most Catholic churches in the country were built well before the enactment of the 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State, and thus are maintained at full public expense, although not always on time and to the extent that the church would like. With the exception of the historically anomalous Alsace-Lorraine, followers of Islam and other religions more recently implanted in France instead have to build and maintain religious facilities at their own expense. This was one of the controversial arguments used by Nicolas Sarkozy, when he was Minister of Interior, in favour of funding other cultural centers than those of Catholicism, Protestantism and Judaism. In 2016, President Hollande proposed a temporary ban on foreign funding for mosques and shut down at least 20 mosques found to be "preaching radical Islamic ideology". These actions are consistent with Title V, Articles 26, 29, and 35 of the law.

At around 8am on 10 February 1970, after days of very heavy snowfall, a large avalanche struck the town of Val-d'Isère in the Savoie region of France. It hit a chalet run by the UCPA Union nationale des centres sportifs de plein air [an NGO promoting youth access to the outdoors] in the bottom of the valley, claiming several dozen victims, both dead and injured.

At about 8am on 10 February 1970, following days of very heavy snowfall, an avalanche broke away from the Pointe du Front situated to the north-north east of the centre of Val-d’Isère at an altitude of about 2,900m (2,960 m, 45° 27′ 43″ N, 6° 59′ 34″ E). The snow hurtled approximately 1,840m downwards to the valley bottom, crossing the river Isère and the Col de L’Iseran road, before crashing into the UCPA chalet and coming to a stop. The force of the avalanche was later described as extraordinary by the French Council of State.

Thirty-nine young people died, buried under the snow. Most deaths occurred in the dining room where the large windows had shattered easily on impact from the avalanche. Thirty-seven others were injured. At that point in the year, 194 holiday-makers were staying at the chalet.

It was the greatest avalanche-related disaster on French soil since the 1934 Ortiporio avalanche in Corsica.

At a time of major tourist development in the ski areas, there was a real sense of national shock. The Plateau d’Assy disaster, which occurred two months later, further reinforced the need to address natural hazards in France.

Following these events, the National Association for the Study of Snow and Avalanches (ANENA) was set up.

Following legal action in the Administrative Tribunal, pursued on appeal to the Council of State, the State and the local authority were each held liable for 50% of the damages caused by the disaster (decision dated 14/3/1986).

As early as the summer following the disaster (1970), the first French avalanche location map (CLPA) was created in Val-d’Isère in the Haute-Tarentaise region. Also in Val-d’Isère, the zoning of “natural mountain hazards,” developed specifically for avalanches, was introduced in 1975. Since then, a natural disaster prevention plan and a municipal rescue plan have been put in place; they are reviewed regularly.

The UCPA chalet was rebuilt with anti-avalanche protection (different layout, reinforced walls, small windows/door openings, solid shutters etc). A number of other protective measures were put in place, including more than 2km of metal anti-avalanche barriers in the starting zone and the construction of a reinforced concrete wall at the side of the Col de l’Iseran road near to the large dining room windows which had shattered on impact from the avalanche.

The Nice tsunami of 1979 came on October 16. Two tsunamis struck the coast near Nice, accompanied by a landslide at the Nice Airport, and an aseismic submarine landslide. The two waves struck the coast between the Italian border and the town of Antibes (60 miles; 96 km). They reached 3 m high near Nice and 3.5 m at La Salis (Antibes) and decreased in amplitude from there.

The origin of these events has been a subject of academic and judicial debate. One hypothesis said that it was the landslide at the Nice airport ; while the other stated that it was an underwater landslide.

A 0.15 km slide took place off Nice airport while constructing the fill of the new airport, perhaps as a consequence of this work. This landslide would have caused the first tsunami. The material from this slide could have caused a submarine slide that would have caused the second tsunami.

In the second hypothesis, the major natural submarine landslide (~8.7 km) that occurred offshore Nice caused a tsunami which would have caused a landslide of the fill of the new airport. This landslide caused another tsunami.

Casualty estimates range between 8 and 23. At the construction site, the collapsing fill killed seven people.

The tsunamis inundated a 20-mile section of the coast. The water travelled up to 150 m inland. Eleven people were swept away in Nice and one in Antibes. The airport works were finished, but this event forestalled the construction of a new port for Nice.

The nationalization law of February 11, 1982 was passed during President François Mitterrand 's first seven-year term and promulgated by Pierre Mauroy 's Second Government.

Debate began on October 13, 1981, and a version of the bill was approved by Parliament on December 18, 1981. However, this bill was rejected by the Constitutional Council on January 16, 1982 and was never promulgated. A second bill, introduced on January 20, was passed and promulgated on February 11, 1982.

The nationalization plan was part of the " Common Government Program " signed on June 27, 1972, by the Socialist Party (PS), the Communist Party, and the Radical Party of the Left. It was subsequently included in the " 110 Propositions for France " put forward by Mitterrand during the 1981 French presidential election campaign.

Parliament adopted an initial law on December 18, 1981, despite its rejection by the Senate, which was controlled by the opposition. The legislation aimed to nationalize France's five leading industrial groups, thirty-nine banks, and two financial holding companies.

The right-wing opposition (RPR and UDF) did not hesitate to employ parliamentary obstructionist tactics, tabling nearly 1,400 amendments. Charles Millon was one of the bill's fiercest opponents; in 1984, he published L'Extravagante Histoire des nationalisations (The Extravagant History of Nationalizations).

Spurred by the opposition—which was campaigning for higher compensation for the companies to be nationalized—the Constitutional Council, in its decision no. 81-132 of January 16, 1982, struck down Articles 4, 6, 13-1, 16, 18, 30, and 32 of the bill. These articles concerned the valuation mechanisms used to determine compensation for the companies being nationalized; the Council ruled against them on the grounds of the inviolability of the right to property. It cited the will of the people, noting that "through the referendum of May 5, 1946, [the people] rejected a Declaration of Rights containing, in particular, a statement of principles differing from those proclaimed in 1789 in Articles 2 and 17," while conversely, "through the referendums of October 13, 1946, and September 28, 1958, [they] approved texts conferring constitutional status upon the principles and rights proclaimed in 1789."

The bill was withdrawn; a new version was subsequently adopted and promulgated on February 11, 1982, and published in the Journal officiel de la République française on February 13, 1982. For publicly traded companies, the share exchange value was set at the average stock price from October 1980 to March 1981, plus 14% to account for inflation

The companies concerned received a total of 39 billion francs in compensation. The law applies to the following sectors and companies:

According to J.-F. Bocquillon and M. Mariage, proponents of bank nationalization present it as a solution to the following problems:

The law applies only to financial institutions headquartered in France that hold demand deposits or short-term deposit and credit operations, while excluding branches of foreign banks and financial institutions that hold long-term investments. Additionally, the law only applies to banks holding at least one billion French francs for persons residing in France at the beginning of 1981.

In addition, the State acquired the remaining equity in companies it did not yet fully own, notably:

Prior to 1982, employment in state-owned enterprises was stable, hovering around 1.4 million employees. The nationalization law marked a major turning point: by the mid-1980s, the sector reached a historic peak of 2.4 million people, representing one in ten jobs in France. However, this trend was reversed by waves of privatization launched in 1986 by the Chirac government and subsequently in 1993 by the Balladur government, bringing the workforce of these companies down to 1.1 million by the early 2000s.

The Montroc avalanche occurred on February 9, 1999, at 14:20 local time. Twelve people lost their lives, and multiple structures were either damaged or completely destroyed due to the immense force of the avalanche. It was considered one of the most destructive avalanches in the French Alps since the 1970 Val-d'Isère avalanche.

The Peclerey slope, where the avalanche occurred, consisted of two convex slopes. The first began at 2,450 meters and ended at 1,947 meters, halfway down the slope. The second potential avalanche zone started at around 1,700 meters and extended to the base of the slope. The slope's lower end curved slightly upward from the bed of the Arve River towards the road and local communities. Notably, the slope's angle from the top to the road was measured at 25 degrees, which should have resulted in a smoother and less intense avalanche, reducing its impact.

At the start of the year, winter conditions were dry, though sufficient for ski resorts in Le Tour and Chamonix to open early. On January 26, a long-awaited snowfall covered the area with one meter of snow. However, the weather remained dry again afterward. On February 7, a depression moved across France, depositing two meters of snow over Chamonix and nearby communes within three days. A storm of this magnitude had not been seen since 1978.

Heavy snowfall accumulated in the valley above the towns, forming a dangerous bowl of unstable snow. The snow depth reached 2,450 meters at the peak of the slope. Several ski resorts across the French-Swiss border were forced to close due to the heightened avalanche risk. Rumors spread that multiple small avalanches had already damaged a ski lift in Le Tour.

At around 14:40, while local authorities were discussing evacuation plans, a 1.5-meter-deep section of snow, covering an area of 30 hectares, detached from the valley. It cascaded down the slope toward the hamlet of Montroc, reaching a top speed of 60 mph (almost 100 km/h). As it accelerated, the avalanche grew to a size of 300,000 cubic meters of snow. Upon reaching Montroc, more than 100,000 tonnes of snow buried parts of Chamonix under a maximum depth of five meters.

The avalanche caused extensive damage, particularly in Montroc. Records show that 14 buildings were completely destroyed, while six others sustained minor to severe damage. Additionally, 20 cabins, mostly near the Chamonix ski resort, were destroyed. Many newly built homes near the avalanche path were severely affected.

In addition to structural damage, multiple people were buried beneath the snow. Rescue efforts were launched to find survivors and recover victims. Ultimately, 12 people were confirmed dead.

The devastation caused by the avalanche could have been mitigated with better planning by local authorities. The mayor of Chamonix at the time was sentenced to three months in prison for involuntary homicide, as he had failed to evacuate the chalets in time.

Following the disaster, avalanche hazard mapping and disaster prevention measures were taken more seriously.

A small memorial was erected in front of the Peclerey slope to honour the victims. The memorial consists of a cross surrounded by slabs of stone.

The 2007 Zoé's Ark controversy started when members of a French charity organization, the Zoé's Ark (French: L'Arche de Zoé), attempted to fly 103 children out of Chad to France. The members of the charity were charged and eventually convicted of child abduction.

On 30 October 2007, six members of the charity organization Zoé's Ark were formally charged by the government of Chad for child abduction. Despite the group's claim that the children were orphans from Darfur who were being taken to be fostered in France, most of the 103 children were found to be Chadian, and to have had at least one living parent or guardian. Three journalists, seven Spanish Girjet flight crew members, four Chadian and Sudanese nationals, including two Chadian officials, were also charged for complicity.

Allegedly, some parents were convinced to give up their infants for promises of schooling, but had been told that the schooling would occur in Chad rather than France, while some children were offered sweets and biscuits to leave home. These claims were denied by the aid workers.

The incident strained Franco-Chadian relations, ahead of a planned deployment of French peacekeeping troops into the country. Anti-French protests were staged within Chad.

Over the course of the trial, all six aid workers participated in a hunger strike. Possibly as a result, one of the accused fainted in court and required hospitalization. The six were protesting at what they perceived as abandonment by French authorities.

French president Nicolas Sarkozy successfully negotiated the dropping of charges and release of the journalists and flight crew members prior to trial. Six members of the group were convicted on 26 December 2007 and sentenced to eight years of forced labor, although they, ultimately, were instead incarcerated for five months in France, which has no forced labor in its penal system, under an accord between Chad and France. The six were released in March 2008 but were ordered to pay each of the 103 victims restitution equal to approximately $87,000, which amounts to $8.9M per defendant. A Chadian national and a Sudanese national were each also sentenced to four years. The two Chadian officials were acquitted. In March 2008 the president of Chad pardoned the convicted aid-workers, and they were released from the prisons in France.

The 2010 pension reform strikes in France were a series of general strikes and demonstrations which occurred in France throughout September and October 2010.

They involved union members from both the private and public sectors protesting in cities, including Bordeaux, Lille, Lyon, Marseille, Paris, Toulouse, Montpellier and Strasbourg, against a proposal by the French government to raise the normal retirement age for public pensions from 65 to 67 and early reduced pensions from age 60 to 62, which the Assemblée nationale has approved, while temporary pre-crisis taxes cuts are maintained for the benefit of the richest individuals and companies, and top government officials are subject to an ongoing corruption inquiry. Those who object to the changes say the poorest will be most affected by them.

The strikes have led to a reduction in public transport services, motorway blockages by lorry drivers and disruption to oil deliveries to refineries leading to a national fuel shortage. French students also joined the workers in the protests with barricades being built at around 400 high schools across the country in order to try to prevent other pupils attending classes.

The strikes have been compared to the popularly supported 1995 strikes in France, with 70% of respondents to one poll suggesting the 2010 strikes would swell into a national movement akin to 1995, and a majority expressing support for such an event. CGT secretary Bernard Thibault, one of the main trade union leaders, commented to La Chaîne Info : "There have never since 1995 been as many protesters... from both the public and private sectors, and now from all generations. The government is betting on this movement deteriorating, even breaking down. I think we have the means to disappoint them."

In 2007, the French government undertook a general review of its public policies (see French General Review of Public Policies) and one of the key proposals made in order to reduce government expenditure includes postponing the national retirement age.

In 1983, François Mitterrand 's government reduced the retirement age from 65 to 60. The current government plans to raise the normal retirement age for public pensions from 65 to 67 and early reduced pensions from age 60 to 62. This may allow a reduction in public spending. Some people in the working population are opposed to this change. Workers' associations thus organized several strikes.

The size of the strikes also reflects a broader discontent with Sarkozy, with dissatisfaction and mistrust in the government approach for several reasons.

In recent years, and despite the financial crisis, the government has maintained tax cuts for the richest households and companies. A report from the French control department announce that 172 billions €/year are not perceived due to enterprises taxes reductions. French people are confused by the government's reasoning that social spending should be cut because of the lack of money, while pre-crisis special tax cuts are maintained for the richest companies and taxpayers. The 2005 pre-crisis Copé tax cut generated a €22 billion loss in revenue over 3 years, to the benefit of major companies, as opposed to the €1 billion formerly expected. A report by the Conseil des prélèvements obligatoires calculated the real tax rate for major companies, claimed to be about 33%, to actually be approximately 13%, thanks to tax deductions. The cancellation of some of those tax deductions for companies could put €15 to €29 billion a year back into French public finances.

There are concerns the proposals may have a negative effect on the job market, particularly for young workers. The reform may reduce job opportunities by 1 million and has led some students to join the protests.

For the French sociologist Louis Chauvel, due to demographic and economic history, the younger generation is in a specifically difficult situation. The jobless rate for youth (-25 years old) in France has been higher than 20% since 1980, reaching 26% in 2009. Despite the common appeasing promise than the job market would expand when babyboomers retire (2005–2020), the global crisis came, and retirement reforms plan to keep about 1 million more workers on the market. Other problems include repetitive poorly paid internships, job instability and lower incomes, while the qualifications and skills required for vacancies are ever-increasing, requiring several more years of education and financial investment than for previous generations, while postponing savings and contributions to the retirement insurance system. Moreover, rental costs for housing and relatively lower incomes reduce the quality of housing conditions. These tensions are fuelling anti-government feeling and the strike itself.

French union leaders initially organised fourteen days of nationwide strikes and demonstrations, on Tuesday 7 September, Thursday 23 September, Saturday 2 October, Tuesday 12 October and Saturday 16 October, and Tuesday 19 October. The figures regarding the number of participants vary widely, with numbers being reported by the French Interior Ministry, police, and unions.

The second day of strikes saw the cancellation of as many as 50% of flights at airports in Paris and other cities. Half the country's long-distance trains were cancelled.

A prolonged strike by garbage collectors led to a build-up of trash around the port of Marseille. The strike has lasted for at least three weeks.

All twelve fuel refineries on the French mainland have been affected by the strike. As a result, one in four fuel stations across the country has run dry.

Students began to participate in the demonstrations during October, with 1 in every 15 schools in the country affected by the middle of the month. Police fired rubber bullets in Montreuil, Seine-Saint-Denis, causing a 16-year-old student to nearly lose an eye, with other students reported to have also been injured. Police sprayed tear gas on young protesters in Lyon, which was captured by television cameras. Families and children came to the fore on the third day, the first occasion on which a demonstration occurred on a Saturday.

The fifth day of strikes caused the French government to publicly admit that Paris-Charles de Gaulle Airport was rapidly running out of fuel, though it did advise people "not to panic".

As a result of the strike action there have been minor concessions and amendments made to the pension proposals. President Nicolas Sarkozy said some mothers would be able to receive a full pension even if they had taken years out of work to look after children. However, the government maintains that the core of the proposed reform will not be changed.

Emmanuel Macron President of the French Republic

Édouard Philippe Prime Minister of France

Christophe Castaner Minister of Interior

A strike began on 5 December 2019 to protest against broad changes to France's pension system proposed by President Emmanuel Macron. Reforming the pensions was one of President Macron's promises and there are three primary proposals of the pension reform plan. The first is to create a universal state retirement plan, which would replace the 42 individual retirement plans that exist in France. The second is a "points system", to give a pension in proportion to the contributions paid. The third is to "improve the pensions of the most disadvantaged." The result of the system would increase the retirement age of many jobs in France.

The 2019 French pension reform plan follows the prior pension reforms in 1993, 2003, 2010, and 2013, but is far more comprehensive in that rather than adjusting the system. In September 2017, Jean-Paul Delevoye was appointed as High Commissioner for Pension Reforms, and was ordered to review the pensions system. In July 2019, he delivered a report of his recommendations, outlining the basics of a bill to be proposed to the National Assembly for pension reform. He resigned on 16 December after the press revealed he forgot to disclose 13 volunteer activities including a remunerated one for the French Federation of Insurances. Jean-Paul Delevoye was replaced by Laurent Pietraszewski, former employee of the French multinational retail group Auchan. If the bill becomes law, it will only come into force in 2025.

Government ministers have claimed that the pension reforms will simplify a complex system, as well as making it fairer. Unions claim that the system will increase inequality between pensions and decrease the general level of the pensions.

This is the longest strike in modern French history. After a month of protest, polling reported in January 2020 a 61% support in favour of the strikes in the French population.

The strikes, led in part by the CGT but also by the UNSA, the FSU and Solidaires unions, began prior to the disclosure of the details of President Emmanuel Macron's plan to merge France's current 42 different pension schemes into one state-managed system. The French government maintains that merging the variety of profession dependent schemes is crucial. Unions say introducing a single system will mean millions of workers will end up working beyond the legal retirement age of 62 or receiving a far lower pension.

The project itself was officially announced on 11 December 2019. The mandatory impact study of the reform is to be released on 24 January with the submission of the project to the ministers. The government opted for an accelerated procedure with a submission to the House on 17 February.

The new system will essentially work in the following way:

The new system is criticised because of its differences with the current system:

Initially designed to create a unique pension funds system in France, following the protest of the unions, the project has introduced 8 special plans for policemen, aeroplane pilots and stewards, train drivers, firemen, jailmen, truck drivers, fishermen and teachers. These plans were introduced to avoid strikes in critical sectors (police, air traffic) or to try to end ongoing strikes.

French information website France 24 reported that women may be the "biggest losers" with the pension reform.

Strikes began on 5 December 2019 as more than 30 unions launched strike actions with the intention to shut down the country and force President Emmanuel Macron to reevaluate his plans for pension reform. Actions resulted in the Eiffel Tower being shut down along with most of the light rail lines in Paris. 6000 police were deployed in Paris alone in anticipation of the protests, particularly around the Élysée Palace which was barricaded.

The protests became violent in the east of Paris where protesters were seen lighting fires and smashing windows.

The police reported 65,000 people had demonstrated in Paris, while the CGT labour union suggested 250,000 people had turned out. While across the country the Interior Ministry said more than 800,000 people were protesting the CGT said the figure was 1.5 million.

Strikes and protests continued on 6 December as unions said there would be no let-up. While some schools reopened, almost all high-speed train services were cancelled, most of the Paris metro remained shut down, and hundreds of flights were cancelled.

Transport across the country remained paralysed on 8 December as strikes by state rail company SNCF and Parisian public transport group RATP continued into their fourth day. Unions announced they were planning another large demonstration on 10 December.

On 12 December French Prime Minister Édouard Philippe unveiled the government's proposal for raising the retirement age from 62 to 64 and harmonizing the 42 different retirement schedules. The next day, the CFDT announced that it would be calling for its members to join the demonstrations on 17 December.

To protest against the loss of their special regime, ballerinas from the Paris Opera performed Swan Lake in frontcourt of Palais Garnier on 23 December.

Union workers from the electricity company EDF conducted operations to cut power of symbolic companies such as Amazon or deputies from Emmanuel Macron's party LREM, while also performing "Robin Hood" operations to put electricity back on to homes unable to pay their bills.

In Caen, on 8 January 2020, dozens of lawyers threw their robes in front of the ministry of justice Nicole Belloubet as a sign of protest. Lawyers are also on strike protesting against the destruction of their profitable pension regime.

During union demonstrations, the level of violence exhibited by the police, as already condemned by the United Nations during the yellow vests demonstrations, was extremely high with videos allegedly reporting a police officer firing point-blank at the protesters with a riot control gun on 9 January.

On 25 January, French firefighters joined the protests. People rally on the street with Hong Kong anarchist flags, Antifa and Palestinian flags while together sang " L'Internationale " then shouted "Overthrow Capitalism!"; "Revolution now!" and there were several violent clashes with the police.

Jean-Paul Delevoye, the High Commissioner for Pension Reforms, was revealed to be funded by the French Federation of Insurances, which has a direct interest in the pension reform. Moreover, being funded by a private company while being a member of the government is illegal according to the French constitution.

Articles have also pointed out the proximity between Emmanuel Macron and BlackRock, one of the world's largest asset management funds, which is interested in having the billions of euros of the French pension fund enter the financial market. Multiple meetings between the French government and the firm's representatives have been reported. The promotion of the head of BlackRock's French branch, Jean-Francois Cirelli, to rank of officer of the Légion d'honneur also contributed to highlight this proximity.

French President Emmanuel Macron stated that the nationwide strikes would not weaken his resolve to reform the pension system. The workers and most unions are not backing off either.

Polling indicated a strong support of the population in favour of the strikes. According to the conservative newspaper Le Figaro, on 19 December 55% of French people found the movement against the pension reform justified. Two weeks later, in what had become the longest French strike over the last 50 years, 61% still found the movement justified.

Crowdfunding initiatives to support the strikes have flourished with a national one collecting more than 2 million euros.

Macron has delayed the unveiling of the new plan until January 10, 2023.

The 2020s French farmers' protests are a series of protests and road blockages organized non unionized farmers and agricultural unions (FNSEA, Young Farmers [ fr ], Rural Coordination [ fr ], Confédération paysanne [ fr ]) since 18 January 2024. The farmers protested against low food prices, proposed reductions in state subsidies for farmers' diesel fuel, and a EU-Mercosur free trade agreement.

In response to the protests, Gabriel Attal 's government scrapped proposed reductions in government subsidies for agricultural diesel and other measures to reduce financial and bureaucratic burdens for farmers, but the protests persisted.

Since October of 2023, smaller-scale pacific actions where have been carried out first in Occitania and then in other regions by farmers such as turning upside down municipal signage, this movement is called "On marche sur la tête", literally "we walk on the head" which is a french expression for "it's nonsense".

The movement started from Occitania, first with a demonstration in Toulouse on 16 January, which had no impact. Occitan farmers (Jérôme Bayle) then decided to block the A64 motorway Toulouse- Tarbes on 18 January. The movement has damaged property, including government buildings. Thus, on the night of January 18 to 19, an administration building was blown up by an explosion in Carcassonne (Occitania). This act was claimed by the Comité Régional d'Action Viticole (CRAV), a radical Occitan group of winemakers.

On 23 January, a 37-year-old Occitan farmer and her 12-year-old daughter were killed after a car crashed into a roadblock where they were standing. The farmer's husband was badly injured.

Major roads have been affected in France from January 23. Protesters planned to besiege Paris starting January 29. Some Occitan activists from Lot-et-Garonne of the Rural coordination [ fr ] of Agen (Karine Duc and José Perez) even managed to enter the Rungis market (near Paris) but they were immediately arrested by the police.

The blockades of autoroutes were removed by 3 February 2024 after promises announced by Prime Minister Gabriel Attal on February 1. These protests are analogous to the 2024 Italian protests for agriculture.

On 3 June 2024, French farmer unions (The Ultras A64 of Jérôme Bayle and the Rural coordination [ fr ]) collaborated with the Catalan farmers' platform Spanish Revolta Pagesa and other Spanish farmer unions to help block crossing points along the Spanish-French border across the length of the Pyrenees from the Atlantic Ocean to the Mediterranean Sea. Six tractors blocked traffic from the French side.

On May 11, 2026, dozens of French farmers assembled near the Feyzin oil refinery south of Lyon. They demanded a reduction in the price of non-road diesel (GNR), the fuel used in agricultural machinery. The group included members of the Coordination Rurale union and independent producers, and they gathered close to the refinery and its adjacent fuel depot. Describing their protest as a "semi-blockade," they said they aimed to raise awareness of the financial pressure that rising fuel costs have placed on the farming industry.

In November, the movement started again to dissuade the French government from joining the free trade agreement between the European Union and Mercosur.

While the demands were centered around revenue, they varied throughout the movement, depending on who was expressing them, with some demands appearing once unions had taken the leadership of the movement. The main worries of farmers, according to a poll dating from November 2023 were:

At the beginning of the movement, Jérôme Bayle, who initiated it, had three demands:

Jean-Luc Mélenchon Left Party politician

The 2021 French labor protests were a series of protests and strikes organized by the General Confederation of Labour (France) (CGT), other trade unions, and French citizens dissatisfied with the country's economic and employment conditions in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. These were followed by protests against proposed laws that would give greater powers to police.

Three student unions – the National Union of Secondary Students, Mouvement national lycéen [ fr ], and Fédération indépendante et démocratique lycéenne [ fr ] – gathered to announce protests against the government's handling of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the resulting health, economic, and social consequences. They accused the government of making decisions which had negative impacts on employment and youth. Trade unions and other activist organizations decided to mobilize for protests in January and early February to call for job security, especially in the public service.

The first of these protests took place on Tuesday, 19 January 2021, in Marseille. Theatre actors gathered, expressing dissatisfaction with the month-long closure of theatres due to the COVID-19 pandemic. On 20 January 2021, students from various parts of France gathered in Paris and several other cities chanting the slogan: "Defend living conditions and studies." In Paris, on 21 January 2021, hundreds of people demonstrated in front of the Ministry of Health, waving posters that read: "Our struggle, your health", "Increase our salaries", and "Money for the hospital, not the capital". They pointed out the poor working conditions of "all medical, social, health and sanitation workers". Staff of hospitals and nursing homes were offered a salary increase of 183 Euros net minimum as part of the Ségur de la santé [ fr ] consultations with some health professionals, while other workers in the sector were "forgotten" even though "we have equivalent diplomas."

On 23 January, workers from CGT and other worker unions, as well as workers at companies including Sanofi, Cargill, SKF, and General Electric, protested against layoffs; members of the yellow vests movement, along with left-wing parliamentarians including Left Party leader Jean-Luc Mélenchon, attended this protest.

At the invitation of several yellow vests collectives and as part of mobilizations against proposed laws threatening civil liberties – the global security law proposal and the law enforcing respect for the principles of the republic [ fr ] (also known as the law "against separatism") – a united march for freedom was scheduled for Saturday, 23 January 2021, in Paris. The meeting began at 11:00 a.m. in front of the State Council and ended at noon at the Place du Palais-Royal. The convergence took place at 2:00 p.m. in front of the National Assembly.

On 31 January 2021, several thousand members of student associations and the LGBTQ community gathered in Paris to protest against poor educational and social conditions.

The main rally organized by the CGT took place on 4 February 2021 in Paris and other cities across France. Participants came from across all social classes and industries. In Paris, protests by higher education unions, activists, and teachers saw minor incidents between police and protesters.

Unions in Bordeaux chose 6 February 2021 for their own protest and national strike to demand pension reform. Several hundred people gathered on this occasion.

Thousands of people across France came to the streets in October 2022, launching a statewide strike against the rise in the cost of living. The demonstrations erupted following weeks of "walkouts" that have crippled oil refineries and caused gasoline shortages. The demonstrations have been described by Caroline Pailliez and Clotaire Achi of Reuters as the "stiffest challenge" for Emmanuel Macron since his re-election in May 2022.

According to the French Prime Minister Élisabeth Borne, on 18 October less than a 25% of petrol stations across France were experiencing shortages, which was less than the 30% per cent previously on 7 October. Strike action and unplanned maintenance had led to more than 60 per cent of France's refining capacity – or 740,000 barrels per day (bpd) — being offline which in turn forced the country to import more amid the increased energy costs due to the global supply uncertainty. Strikes have further erupted into other sectors such as energy, "including nuclear giant EDF, where maintenance work crucial for Europe’s power supply will be delayed." There have been weeks of strikes at oil refineries for higher salaries which led to calls for a nationwide and general strike.

French President Emmanuel Macron criticized the United States, Norway and other "friendly" natural gas supplier states for the extremely high prices of their supplies, saying that Europeans are "paying four times more than the price you sell to your industry. That is not exactly the meaning of friendship."

The first demonstrations occurred on 16 October 2022, when tens of thousands of people marched in Paris to protest the rising cost of living, during an increasing political situation manifested by strikes at oil refineries and nuclear power plants that threatened to spread. Annie Ernaux, winner of the 2022 Nobel Prize in Literature, known for as an "outspoken supporter of the left", participated in the demonstrations. Jean-Luc Mélenchon, the leader of leftist party La France Insoumise (France Unbowed), was also among the participants.

On Tuesday, transportation workers, as well as some high school teachers and public hospital personnel, demonstrated in dozens of locations across France. According to the French interior minister, 107,000 people participated in the protests following calls from leftwing parties. A number of black-clad protesters clashed with the Police and smashed shop windows with 11 protesters being arrested in Paris. Other estimates stated that over 300,000 people participated in the protests. Accordingly, thousands protested in Bordeaux, Le Havre, Lille, Marseille, Lyon, Toulouse, and Rennes, while union leaders estimated that 70,000 people marched in Paris.

Students protested outside hundreds of additional schools across the nation on Tuesday morning. Protesting students voiced their support for striking refinery workers and opposition to the Macron administration's policies. "We are here against the repression and police violence that are only increasing," said a student speaking to L’Est Republicain. Numerous students also demonstrated in opposition to the government's "discriminatory anti-Muslim legislation and deepening cuts to national education". In French public schools, young Muslim women are strictly prohibited to cover their hair or face using any type of fabric.

Certain unions called for fresh strikes to be taken on 10 November.

Some lawmakers stated that the purpose of the demonstrations was to exert pressure on the administration since "a high-risk week began in the National Assembly, where Mr. Macron no longer has an absolute majority." According to Kacper Kita, analyst and journalist, it is "entirely possible" that the protests could become violent, "especially because the economic situation can get worse and the energy crisis can get worse in the coming weeks and months."

In 2023, a law was passed in France that raises the retirement age from 62 to 64 with a requirement that the retiree has worked at least 43 years. Its provisions, which sparked strikes, were highly controversial, as was Prime Minister Élisabeth Borne 's invocation of Article 49.3 of the French Constitution, allowing a draft law to pass without a vote unless the Assembly adopts a motion of no confidence within a set time. Two such motions were filed within the required timeframe, and both of them were voted down on 20 March.

The law was to deal with a pension system budget deficit projected to reach €13.5 billion per year by 2030.

On 30 January, the bill was introduced to the National Assembly. In February, the Assembly debated the measure. On 14 February, Article 2 of the draft law was rejected by the Assembly by a vote of 203 to 256. On 17 February, Borne invoked Article 47-1 of the Constitution. Said Article states that if the National Assembly has not considered all provisions of a social security financing bill within 20 days of its being introduced, said bill may be transmitted to and considered by the Senate notwithstanding the fact the draft law has not been yet approved by the Assembly in its entirety; it furthermore dictates that after the Senate passes the bill, the latter must be considered by a Joint Committee, which can amend it. The text adopted by the committee is then put up to a vote in both houses of Parliament, which at that point can only vote in favor or against the whole bill, without being able to further amend it. Article 47-1 was employed to circumvent the effort of opposition Deputies, which had introduced thousands of amendments to try to obstruct it.

On 11 March, the Senate passed the bill in a 195–112 vote, with the Senate Republicans and the Rally of Democrats, Progressive and Independent group voting in favour. On 15 March, a Joint Committee considered the bill, ultimately approving it with some amendments in a 10–4 vote. On 16 March, the Senate voted 193–114 to accept the amendments proposed by the committee. Later the same day the Government, fearing the proposed law would not have enough support to pass in the National Assembly, invoked Article 49-3 of the Constitution, engaging its responsibility on the bill. This special procedure allows the bill to automatically pass without a vote unless a motion of no confidence in the government is tabled within 24 hours, in which case the bill is only adopted after said motion is defeated. Two such motions were consequently filed by opposition groups within the required timeframe. Both of them were voted down on 20 March, allowing the bill to pass.

On 14 April, the Constitutional Council issued a ruling on a legal challenge to the bill filed by opposition MPs, finding the draft law to be constitutional and rejecting an initial request for a referendum. Later the same day, Macron signed the bill into law. The Constitutional Council rejected a second referendum request on 3 May.

On 23 July 2024, following the victory of the New Popular Front in the 2024 French legislative election, La France Insoumise proposed to scrap the pension reform plans in a vote, receiving support from the National Rally.

1–3.5 million (according to trade unions, depending on the days of demonstrations)

A series of protests began in France on 19 January 2023 with a demonstration of over one million people nationwide, organised by opponents of the pension reform bill proposed by the Borne government to increase the retirement age from 62 to 64.

The strikes led to widespread disruption, including garbage piling up in the streets and public transport cancellations. In March, the government used Article 49.3 of the Constitution to force the bill through the French Parliament, sparking more protests and two failed no confidence votes, contributing to an increase in violence in protests alongside the union-organised strike action.

Several organizations, including human rights groups such as Reporters Without Borders and France's Human Rights League condemned France's crackdown on protests and also denounced the assault on journalists. In addition, the Council of Europe also criticised the "excessive use of force by agents of the state".

The issue of pension reforms has been dealt with by various French governments over recent decades, specifically to tackle budget shortfalls. France has one of the lowest retirement ages for an industrialised country, and spends more than most countries on pensions, with it amounting to almost 14% of economic output. France's pension system is largely built on a " pay-as-you-go structure "; both workers and employers "are assessed mandatory payroll taxes that are used to fund retiree pensions". This system, "which has enabled generations to retire with a guaranteed, state-backed pension, will not change". Compared to other European countries, France possesses "one of the lowest rates of pensioners at risk of poverty", with a net pension replacement rate ("a measure of how effectively retirement income replaces prior earnings") of 74%, higher than OECD and EU averages.

The New York Times says the government argues rising life expectancies "have left the system in an increasingly precarious state"; "[i]n 2000, there were 2.1 workers paying into the system for every one retiree; in 2020 that ratio had fallen to 1.7, and in 2070 it is expected to drop to 1.2, according to official projections". In addition, the cost of pensions has partially contributed to France's national debt rising to 112% of GDP, compared to 98% before the COVID-19 pandemic; this is one of the highest levels in the EU, higher than the UK and Germany. In an interview in March 2023, Macron said that "when he began working there were 10 million French pensioners and now there were 17 million". The New York Times add that in order "[t]o keep the system financially viable without funneling more taxpayer money into it – something the government already does – Macron sought to gradually raise the legal age when workers can start collecting a pension by three months every year until it reaches 64 in 2030." Additionally, Macron has "accelerated a previous change that increased the number of years that workers must pay into the system to get a full pension and abolished special pension ‌rules that benefited workers in sectors like energy and transportation".

As part of Macron's pension reforms, the retirement age was to be raised to 64 or 65, from 62. The pay-as-you-go system – raising the retirement age would help to further finance, as life expectancy increases and more start work later – would have a surplus of €3.2bn in 2022, but the government's pensions advisory board (COR) forecast that it would "fall into structural deficits in coming decades unless new financing sources are found". In March 2023, Labor Minister Olivier Dussopt said that "without immediate action" the pensions deficit would exceed $13bn annually by 2027. The government stated that the reforms would "balance the deficit" in 2030, with a surplus amounting to billions of dollars that would "pay for measures allowing those in physically demanding jobs to retire early".

The pension reforms have long been under consideration by Macron and his government. Reforming the pension system was a significant part of his platform for election in 2017, with initial protests and transport strikes in late 2019, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic which saw Macron delay the reforms further. Raising the retirement age was not part of these initial reforms, but another "plan to unify the complex French pension system" by "getting rid of the 42 special regimes for sectors ranging from rail and energy workers to lawyers was crucial to keep the system financially viable".

On 26 October 2022, Macron announced that pension reform scheduled for 2023 intended to raise the retirement age to 65, be gradually increased from 62 to 65 by 2031, by three months per year from September 2023 to September 2030. Furthermore, the number of years that contributions would need to be made to qualify for the full state pension would increase from 42 to 43 in 2027, meaning that some may have to work to 67 – the year at which a person is automatically able to receive a state pension from.

In his New Year's Eve speech on 31 December 2022, he clarified that the reforms would be implemented by autumn 2023. In early January 2023 prior to consultation with unions, Prime Minister Élisabeth Borne spoke on FranceInfo radio, stating that the government could "show flexibility" on the intention to raise the retirement age to 65, and were willing to explore "other solutions" that would enable the government to "reach its target of balancing the pensions system by 2030". She announced that the policy would be presented to cabinet on 23 January and debated in parliament in early February, with full details published on 10 January.

Article 49.3 of the French Constitution allows governments to bypass the National Assembly and force through bills without a vote. However, invoking it triggers a proviso that allows for no-confidence motions to be filed in the government. Because each party tends to only vote for their own motions and against those of others, on only one occasion, in 1962, where the Article has been triggered, the government lost a subsequent no-confidence motion.

On 14 March, The Guardian declared that Macron had two options – broker deals with Les Républicains or force the bill through using Article 49.3, "a measure that avoids an Assemblée nationale vote [the government] risks losing". They said that "[m]inisters have said the government would not use the 49.3, widely condemned as undemocratic and which risks inflaming a volatile public mood" and that "[i]nstead, there has been a flurry of negotiations by ministers to guarantee a majority in the lower house"; "[u]nion leaders have said using the 49.3 would lead to a hardening of opposition and would escalate strikes". On 16 March, it was said "[m]inutes before MPs in the lower house were to vote, Macron was still holding a series of frantic meetings with senior political figures, and suddenly chose to use special powers instead of risking a vote, which he appeared poised to lose". The decision to invoke was a "surprise, last-minute decision" by Macron, as "he was not certain of the support of enough lawmakers" to take the bill to a National Assembly vote.

The Guardian explained that 49.3's invoking "illustrates Macron's difficult position in parliament", with his parliamentary party/grouping having lost its majority in the National Assembly following the 2022 legislative election.

The coordination of the strikes by all of France's trade unions has been labelled a "rare show of unity", with transport and energy workers, teachers, dockers and public sector workers (such as museum staff) all having gone on strike. Trade unions "say the reform will penalise low-income people in manual jobs who tend to start their careers early, forcing them to work longer than graduates, who are less affected by the changes."

Polls have consistently shown that the measures are substantially unpopular, as well as the use of Article 49.3 to enact them without a parliamentary vote in the National Assembly. France 24 reported that a poll from a few days prior to the move suggested around "eight out of ten people opposed legislating in this way, including a majority of voters who backed Macron in the first round of last year's presidential election". The American Prospect opined that earlier support from conservative members of the National Assembly for the reforms had faded away as a result of polling that showed the reforms were unpopular. The decision to invoke Article 49.3 was seen by those on the left as "a major defeat and a sign of weakness" for the government, that would now be seen as "being brutal and undemocratic"; Antoine Bristielle, a representative of the Fondation Jean-Jaurès think tank, commented that using 49.3 is "perceived as a symbol of brutality" that could "erode support both for the government and democratic institutions". Le Journal du Dimanche reported that Macron's approval ratings hit a low comparable to the Yellow Jackets protests. In a poll spanning 9 to 16 March, 70% of respondents were dissatisfied with him and only 28% were satisfied.

It has been suggested that the reforms do not adequately tackle the disadvantage women are at within the workforce, who usually retire later than men and with pensions 40% lower in comparison, attributed to more part-time work and maternity leave. Women are already subject to later retirement due to taking time away from work to raise children. Euronews outlined that the reforms would lead to women retiring later and working, on average, seven months longer over the course of their life, while men would work around five months longer. They quoted Franck Riester, the Minister Delegate for Parliamentary Relations, admitting that women would be "a bit penalised by the reform" in January.

As well as this, it has been argued the reforms will hit the working-class and those who work in manual jobs disproportionately. CNN pointed out that blue-collar workers are likely to start working at a younger age than white-collar workers ; The Washington Post pointed out that a minor part of those employed in 'physically or mentally demanding' jobs are still eligible to retire earlier with a full pension, which Macron previously removed most exceptions for allowing them to depart early in case of work induced disabilities [ fr ] although The New York Times equally pointed to how this was a concession by the government to "mollify opposition", which overall has failed because unions view the increase in the retirement age as a "non-starter" and was later removed as result of passing the age rise as a financial law. At the other end of the scale, it has been reported that some are concerned about "being forced to retire later because older adults who want to work but who lose their jobs often face age discrimination in the labor market".

Those opposed to the reforms argue "the government is prioritizing businesses and people who are highly paid over average laborers", and have "disputed the need for urgency", The New York Times saying they contest that "Macron is attacking a cherished right to retirement and unfairly burdening blue-collar workers because of his refusal to increase taxes on the wealthy". In addition, opponents opine that Macron has "exaggerated the threat of projected deficits and refused to consider other ways to balance the system, like increasing worker payroll taxes, decoupling pensions from inflation or increasing taxes on wealthy households or companies", and that "the official body that monitors France's pension system has acknowledged that there is no immediate threat of bankruptcy and that long-term deficits", which Macron and the government have argued would occur if these reforms were not implemented, "were hard to accurately predict".

Jean Garrigues, a historian on France's political culture, theorized the unpopularity of the reforms can be partially attributed to Macron personally, given the "pre-existing anger against" him, having "struggled to shake off the image of an out-of-touch 'president of the rich ' ". He said that "[t]hat's why he has not only all the unions, but also a large part of public opinion against him", as "[b]y tying himself to the project, opposition to it is heightened, dramatized in a way."

It has been criticized for having taken place during a cost-of-living crisis, which some have attributed to worsening the anger and protests over the policies. The Times said that some have "questioned the political wisdom of going ahead with the reform at a time when the public mood has been soured by high inflation", as €7.1 billion of the €17.7 billion that "the reform was meant to have saved has been wiped out by modifications to its provisions".

The protests, in very minor part, gave way to instances of violence and rioting as demonstrators and police forces clashed in the streets.

In Chambéry, "banners, sound systems, flags, and union tunics prepared for the 7 March demonstration went up in smoke" when fire was set to three vehicles parked in front of the Union hall. The methods used resembled those used in other degradations in the area in the preceding year, including a swastika and anti-vax slogans spray-painted on the regional health agency (ARS) offices.

There were black bloc groups at the front of the demonstrations in Paris, Lyon, and Nantes on May 1. There were between 2000 and 3000 in Paris, 1000 in Lyon (among 2000 the Rhône prefecture identified as "risky individuals"), and large numbers were also present in Nantes.

An unauthorized protest on 15 April attracted over 1000 people to downtown Rennes and permitted two men to make off with €25,000 worth of gold bars and coins from a gold seller's shop.

On 19 January, the Ministry of the Interior counted 1.12 million demonstrators, including 80,000 in Paris. Over 200 demonstrations were reported in the country.

More than one million people took to the streets in Paris and other French towns as part of countrywide protests over proposals to raise the retirement age. Eight of the largest unions participated in the strike over pension reforms. The French Ministry of the Interior said that 80,000 demonstrators gathered in the streets in Paris, where small numbers threw bottles, rocks, and fireworks at riot police. Over 200 demonstrations were reported in the country. According to the unions, 2 million people took part in the demonstrations with 400,000 of them participating in the Paris demonstrations.

Despite the demonstrations, Emmanuel Macron emphasized that the pension reforms would go forward. French unions declared that further strikes and protests would be held on 31 January in an effort to halt the government's plans to raise the standard retirement age from 62 to 64. The new law would increase annual pension contributions, from 41 to 43 payments throughout the year. Some flights out of Orly Airport were canceled, while the Eurostar website reported the cancellation of many routes between Paris and London. Though "a few delays" were reported at Charles de Gaulle Airport, owing to striking air traffic controllers, no flights were canceled.

Another demonstration was organized in Paris on 21 January, supposedly long-planned by students and youth organisations.

Demonstrations organized by different groups took place in other cities, like in Dinan, Limoges and Lyon.

Demonstrations were organized around the country with public transport, schools, and electricity production specifically targeted by the strikes. Public television broadcasters were also affected by the strikes, with news broadcasts cancelled and music played instead.

According to the CGT union, 2.8 million people took part in the protests while the Ministry of Internal Affairs counted 1.272 million protesters.

On 7 February, a third day of national protests were held after being called by l'intersyndicale. According to the CGT, 400,000 people demonstrated in Paris, down 100,000 from the 31 of January. In total, over 2,000,000 strikers participated in demonstrations according to the CGT, while the police estimate that around 757,000 strikers participated in protests.

On 11 February, a fourth day of national protests was held. According to the CGT, over 2,500,000 protesters took part in demonstrations, a rise of 500,000 compared to 7 February, while the Ministry of the Interior claims that 963,000 protested, a rise of over 200,000 compared to 7 February. In Paris, over 500,000 people demonstrated against the reform according to the CGT, while 93,000 demonstrated according to the prefecture. The Intersyndicale called for recurring strikes starting on 7 March.

On 16 February, protesters joined fresh rallies and strikes. Unions said some 1.3 million people participated nationwide Thursday, the lowest figure since the protest movement started on January 19. The interior ministry put the national figure at 440,000, down from nearly a million on Saturday (11 Feb). On the day, 30 per cent of flights from Paris's Orly airport were cancelled.

In early March, trains around the country continued to be affected by strikes and protests. It is believed that 1.1 to 1.4 million people participated in over 260 protests across the country. As a part of the protest, union members blocked fuel deliveries from being made, with the intention of bringing the French economy to its knees.

On Saturday, 11 March, the seventh day of protests was held in response to the National Assembly and Senate debating the draft law, with a final vote expected that month. Macron twice declined meetings with unions that week. About 368,000 people protested, below the 800,000–1,000,000 expected. The following day, the Senate passed an initial vote by 195–112.

On 14 March, The Guardian reported that "French unions have called for a show of force with a final day of strikes and protests in the run-up" the vote on the reforms in the National Assembly, which would be the eighth day of national mobilisation sofar. Transport Minister Clément Beaune said "there would be disruption to public transport and flights, but it was unlikely to be a "Black Wednesday"", with "not... the same level of disruptions as with previous mobilisations".

200 protests were reported to have taken place across the country. There were conflicting numbers of the strength of the protests; the Interior Ministry reported 480,000 marched throughout the country, with 37,000 in Paris, while CGT counted 1.78m and 450,000 respectively. Figures from Le Monde dispute both these claims. Reportedly, French police expected 650,000–850,000 protesters nationwide, fewer than the largest protests the previous week, with preliminary figures demonstrating a lower strike turnout in the energy and transport sectors at midday compared to previous days.

Among those who were on strike were train drivers, school teachers, dock workers, oil refinery workers, as well as garbage collectors continuing their now ten-day strike action.

In the afternoon, protesters gathered at the Esplanade des Invalides, with "loud music and huge union balloons". Police had ordered that the build-up of rubbish to be "cleared out along the march route" after some "used garbage to start fires or throw trash at police in recent demonstrations". The marchers were "accompanied by a heavy security force" as they "moved through the Left Bank along unencumbered streets". Police reported that one group of protestors "attacked a small business", and that nine people were detained within three hours of the march beginning. The protestors' march ended at the Place d'Italie. Known as "Greve 15 mars", it was co-ordinated and organised by eight trade unions.

Liquefied natural gas operations were suspended, with public transport severely affected; it was stated that 40% of high-speed trains and half the regional trains were cancelled, with the Paris Métro running slower. The DGAC warned of delays, reporting that 20% of the flights at Paris-Orly airport were cancelled.

Elsewhere, in Rennes, Nantes, and Lyon, "[s]ecurity forces countered violence with charges and tear gas", according to French media. Demonstrations also took place in Le Havre in Normandy, Nice, and Mulhouse.

PBS reported that Interior Minister Gérald Darmanin had asked Paris City Hall to force some of the garbage workers to return to work, calling the build-up along the streets "a public health issue". Paris mayor Anne Hidalgo said that she supported the strike, and in response a government spokesman Olivier Véran declared that if she did not comply, the Interior Ministry would be "ready to act instead".

Protests erupted after the announcement that the pension reforms would be enacted without a parliamentary vote, Borne invoking article 49:3 of the constitution to do so just "minutes" before the scheduled vote on the bill. Inside the National Assembly, opposition MPs on the left booed and jeered the announcement and sang the national anthem in order to prevent Borne from speaking, forcing the session to be briefly suspended before the announcement by Borne was made. Speaking to MPs who were booing her, Borne proclaimed that "[w]e cannot gamble on the future of our pensions... The reform is necessary."

Marine Le Pen announced she would file a no-confidence motion in the government, describing the use of Article 49.3 as "an extraordinary confession of weakness," "a total failure for the government", and that Borne should resign. Fabien Roussel of the French Communist Party, who also "called on street protesters and trade unionists to keep mobilising", stated that the left was ready to make the same motion; Socialist Party leader Olivier Faure "accused Macron of deploying a "permanent coup d'état" to shove through the legislation". The Week said that "Macron and his government insist the reforms are needed to keep the pension system solvent and government borrowing acceptably low".

Politicians from across the political spectrum denounced the move. Conservative MPs, such as those from The Republicans, whom Macron has relied upon for support in votes in the National Assembly, "rebuke[d] the government, warning that its move would radicalise opponents and undercut the law's democratic legitimacy." The Times reported that Macron was thought to have "hoped earlier on Thursday to hold – and win – a parliamentary vote but changed tack after learning that only 35 of the 64 Republican MPs would back the reform, leaving him short of a majority", quoting Labor Minister Olivier Dussopt, who said that they "did everything [to have a vote] right up to the last minute". MoDem MPs, who are aligned with Macron's Renaissance group, said the decision to force the bill through "was a mistake"; Erwan Balanant said "he had left the parliament chamber "in a state of shock"", while "[o]ther centrist MPs said it was a waste and showed weakness".

In the Place de la Concorde, thousands protested (figures are disputed between 2,000 protesters and 7,000). France 24 reported that it was a "spontaneous and unplanned rally", but Le Monde stated that it was "organized by the union Solidaires and authorized by the administrative court". La France Insoumise leader Jean-Luc Mélenchon spoke to the crowd, declaring that Macron had gone "over the heads of the will of the people." He also claimed the reform had "no legitimacy – neither in parliament, nor in the street". It is possible that many joined the rally in Paris after being turned away by police from the "blockade of the Veolia warehouse in Aubervilliers ".

Later, a bonfire was lit, with police armed with shields and batons deploying tear gas in an attempt to clear the square at around 8pm. One police officer was reportedly injured.

By nightfall, 120 people were reported to have been arrested, according to Parisian police, "on suspicion of seeking to cause damage"; by 11:30pm, the number later rose to 217. Protesters in the Place were observed to have thrown cobbled stones at assembled police before they moved in to break up the groups, using tear gas and water cannons, with smaller sections of protesters running down side streets and setting smaller fires, such as to piles of garbage, and "caused damage to shop fronts". Numerous makeshift barricades in Paris streets were set alight.

The CGT announced further strikes and demonstrations for 23 March; its head, Philippe Martinez, said that the forcing through of the law "shows contempt towards the people", with unions describing the move by the government as "a complete denial of democracy". France 24 commented that "unionists were also out in strength, hailing a moral victory even as they denounced Macron's "violation of democracy"".

Protests took place in other cities, such as Rennes, Nantes, Lyon, Toulouse, and Marseille. In the latter, shop windows and bank fronts were smashed, for which "radical leftist groups" were partially blamed, with shops looted. Protests in the former three cities were reported to have resulted in clashes between protesters and police, and in Lyon consisted of approximately "400 people gathered in front of administrative offices, calling for the president to resign". There had been a brief blockade of the National Library early in the day.

The following day, Interior Minister Gérald Darmanin told RTL Radio that 310 had been arrested in relation to protest action nationwide, with 258 in Paris.

Macron made no public comment on 16 March, but AFP reported that "he told a closed-door cabinet meeting: "You cannot play with the future of the country.""

Demonstrations once again took place at the Place de la Concorde, attended by several thousand people "with chants, dancing and a huge bonfire," protesters chanting "Tax the rich", before riot police intervened using tear gas to clear the square, after some "climbed scaffolding on a renovation site, arming themselves with wood", and "lobbed fireworks and paving stones at police in a standoff". On Twitter, a clip of protesters gathered at the Place chanting "we decapitated Louis XVI and we can start again, Macron" went viral, with protesters also, more generally, calling for Macron to resign. Broadcaster BFMTV reported that police detained 61 people following the protests. The Times claimed that the protestors' "ranks were swollen by members of the 'black bloc' – young masked troublemakers out for a fight". Notably, head of the 'moderate' CFDT union, Laurent Berger, said that a change in government or Prime Minister "will not put out this fire, only withdrawing the reform."

Additionally, Paris's Boulevard Périphérique was "disrupted at almost 200 points during peak rush hour" in the morning, by CGT activists. It was also reported that there was "escalated strikes" at refineries, with a blockade of an unspecified refinery in southern France having begun earlier in the day. A CGT representative claimed that strikes would "force the shutdown" of TotalEnergies' Normandy refinery by the weekend, furthering the industrial action; a rolling strike was already in place there, with strikers continuing to deliver less fuel than normal from other sites. (DW reported on 18 March that CGT had already shut it down by Friday evening, however.) The CGT also announced an extension to picket lines at Electricite de France.

Smaller protests and rallies took place in Bordeaux, Toulouse, Toulon and Strasbourg. Specific methods of protest across France reported were street furniture being destroyed, bins set alight, and windows smashed. In Dijon, protesters burned effigies of Macron. Protests also took place in smaller towns like Laval and Évreux.

Earlier in the day, police pepper-sprayed students protesting near Sorbonne University, with some also walking out of lectures. In Lille, the Institute of Political studies was blocked by student protesters. Strikers of the CGT union "voted to halt production at one of the country's largest refineries by this weekend or Monday at the latest", having "already been on a rolling strike at the northern site TotalEnergies de Normandie, and halting production would escalate the industrial action and spark fears of fuel shortages", with striking workers continuing to "deliver less fuel than normal from several other sites". In Bordeaux, "dozens" of protesters and demonstrators trespassed onto tracks at the main train station, including CGT unionists, with CGT and NPA flags being flown. In Donges, a roadblock was in place near to the TotalEnergie refinery oil terminals; in Valenciennes, striking workers blocked the entry of a fuel depot while police in riot gear were observed removing tyres from the road near it; striking rubbish collection workers clashed with police at the Ivry-sur-Seine incinerator; and the blockade of the port of Marseille by striking workers of the CGT continued. Unions from SNCF, the national train operator, "urged workers to continue another continuous strike".

A multi-party no-confidence motion was tabled in the National Assembly earlier in the day. Spearheaded by centrist group Liot, it was co-signed by NUPES, with a total of 91 MPs from five different parliamentary groups signing. Later in the day, National Rally filed a separate no-confidence motion, signed by 81 cross-party MPs; party leader Le Pen said the decision to push through the pension changes was "a total failure for the government".

On RTL radio, Interior Minister "warned against what he called the chaos of random, spontaneous street demonstrations", describing "[t]he opposition is legitimate, the protests are legitimate, but wreaking havoc is not, and "denounced the fact that effigies of Macron, Borne and other ministers were burned at a protest in Dijon" and that ""public buildings had been targeted". Aurore Bergé, head of Renaissance in parliament, wrote to Darmanin "asking him to ensure the protection of MPs who feared violence against them", because "she would not accept MPs living in "fear of reprisals"". He replied, saying "police would be vigilant against any violence directed towards lawmakers."

On 18 March, it was announced protests in Paris were banned on the Place de la Concorde, opposite parliament, as well at the Champs-Élysées. Police explained this was due to "serious risks of disturbances to public order and security", and said those who did not obey this order could be fined. Nevertheless, a bonfire was lit at the Place de la Concorde, with an effigy of Macron dropped onto it to cheers. Despite this, widespread protests were still reported in Paris, with a rally instead planned for Place d'Italie in southern Paris at 6pm that evening, at which demonstrators chanted, once again, for Macron to resign, and "Macron is going to break down, we are going to win". 4,000 were present. Barricades were erected in the streets, rubbish bins were set alight, with the glass on billboards and bus shelters smashed. Barriers used to block the streets and bottles were thrown at riot police, who utilised tear gas and water cannons to disperse protesters. 81 arrests were made in the vicinity. protesters who gathered at the Place d'Italie then "marched toward Europe's biggest waste incineration plant, which has become a flashpoint of tensions", some setting trash cans alight and chanting mottos "such as "the streets are ours" as firefighter sirens wailed". Politico, quoting the Ministry of the Interior, later reported 122 had been arrested in Paris, with a total of 169 nationwide.

Police also used tear gas against protesters who started a fire in Bordeaux, as BFMTV showed demonstrations in major cities such as Marseille, Compiegne, Nantes (where around a thousand protested), Brest, and Montpellier, with around 200 protesting in Lodeve in the south of France. In Nice, the political office of the leader of the Republicans, Éric Ciotti, was ransacked, with tags left that threatened riots if the party refused to support any of the motions of no-confidence in the government. In the afternoon in Nantes, protestors threw bottles at police, who also responded with tear gas; in spite of this, DW described the protests in Nantes, as well as Marseille and Montpellier, as "mostly peaceful marches", as did the AP. They reported that in Marseille, protesters eluded police and occupied the main train station for approximately 15 minutes. In Besançon, "hundreds of demonstrators lit a brazier and burned voter cards. In Lyon, some demonstrators tried to break into a town hall and set it alight, with police arresting 36; police claimed that ""groups of violent individuals" triggered clashes".

A spokesperson for TotalEnergies reported that 37% of its operational staff at refineries and depots, such as at Feyzin and Normandy, were on strike. Rolling strikes also continued on railways. Students and activists from the Permanent Revolution collective "briefly invaded" the Forum des Halles shopping mall, with banners calling for a general strike and chanting for Paris to "stand up" and "rise up", and letting off red smoke canisters. A representative of a union representing waste collectors said strikers at three incinerators outside of Paris would allow some trucks through to "limit the risk of an epidemic", while police claimed trucks from five depots had restarted work. CGT announced "strikers were halting production at two refineries over the weekend".

CGT announced the shutdown of France's largest refinery, TotalEnergies' Gonfreville-L'Orcher (Seine-Maritime) site, and "at least two oil refineries might be shut down starting Monday". Industry Minister Roland Lescure announced the government could order those striking to return to work in order to help avoid fuel shortages.

AP reported that the DGAC had requested 30% of flights at Orly Airport to be cancelled, and 20% in Marseille, for Monday 20 March.

"Hundreds" of protesters were reported in Paris, Lyon, Marseille, and Lille in the evening. In Marseille, a large bonfire was lit, with a large throng of demonstrators dancing around it.

Some neighbourhoods of Paris continued to have collection of waste disrupted; Philippe Martinez from CGT "urged" Paris collection workers to continue their now-two-week-long strike. A few hundred people protested outside the Les Halles shopping centre before police moved them on. Early on Sunday, "dozens" of union activists marched through a shopping mall in Rosny-sous-Bois, and cars were allowed to pass through the tolls on the A1 and A13 motorways for free during the day. Shutdowns of refineries continued, with reports of petrol queues building up in the south of France; authorities claimed that "supplies were high enough to avoid shortages".

In response to reports of constituency offices of various MPs being vandalized, Macron "called the speakers of both houses of parliament to affirm his support for all legislators and said the government was mobilized to "put everything in place to protect them" late on 19 March.

Macron also made his first public statement since 16 March; issued to AFP, he said that he hoped "the text on pensions can go to the end of its democratic journey with respect for all". Bruno Le Maire, the Finance Minister, commented further; "[t]hose among us who are able will gradually need to work more to finance our social model, which is one of the most generous in the world". Leader of the Republicans, Éric Ciotti, said his party would not back the no-confidence motions, as he "refuses to 'add chaos to chaos ' " ; consequently, it was expected that the motions would not pass, as the Republicans act as de facto kingmakers in the National Assembly, neither Macron's bloc or the other opposition parties combined numbering a majority. NUPES' Jean-Luc Mélenchon informed RTL that "[f]or as long as the 64-year reform is on the table, we have to keep it up, but decried the use of violence, advising protesters to not "make our struggle invisible with practices that would be turned against us, as "Macron... is counting on people going too far, so as to profit from a situation of fear." The Times reported that, in response to Ciotti's party refusing to support the motions, and that some Republican MPs may not follow their leader's decision, National Rally president Jordan Bardella was attempting to "persuade more to follow suit by promising his party will not put up candidates against them if the crisis does lead to an election".

DW reported, on 18 March, that union leaders were anticipating that some airports would see nearly a third of flights cancelled on 20 March, owing to strike action. easyJet and Ryanair, both British airlines, warned passengers to expect disruption. Ryanair said it was "expecting possible cancellations and delays on flights to and from France from 20 to 23 March." Eurostar announced that trains would run a normal service on 20 and 21 March, but there would be disruption to public transport in Lille on 20 March.

In the morning, rubbish piles were set alight around the ring road in Rennes as part of a road blockade, with protesters also blockading waste collection points and the nearby Vern-sur-Seiche oil depot was blockaded. The road blockade was attended by a "few hundred people". It began at 6:30am, and led to "over 15 miles of halted traffic around the city". Police used tear gas and charged towards protesters who were on the road and in surrounding fields. Shortly before midday, it was announced they had all been lifted. However, a damaged road in Porte de Saint-Malo meant the speed limit was temporarily reduced to 70 kilometers per hour. Crisis24 said that industrial action at oil refineries was "starting to impact fuel supplies", with shortages of fuel at stations, "particularly" in Marseille and the south of the country. Sky News, on 17 March, stated that garbage collection strikes are set to continue until at least 20 March.

SNCF has warned of "disruption to intercity and regional train services", with only two out of three trains running on several lines of Paris' RATP network. Crisis24 reported that such disruptions will continue until 23 March, when the national strike will exacerbate service provision.

On 17 March, teachers' unions called for strikes in the following weeks, possibly disrupting the baccalauréat exams, which begin on 20 March. CFDT's Laurent Berger proclaimed that she wished for no disruption to the exams as they could just worsen the already-high stress levels of the students taking them.

39% of TotalEnergie workers were on strike. Le Monde reported that half "of filling stations lacked one or more fuels in the southeastern region of Provence Alpes Côte d'Azur, requiring local authorities to limit sales until Thursday", with prohibition on the filling of jerry cans, and "many areas" in the west of the country affected by the continued blockade, and closure, of the Donges refinery. As well as this, they quoted figures from the UFIP oil lobby that 7% of the country's petrol stations were affected by fuel shortages, (up from 4% prior to the weekend; and that only 5–8 of 200 storage facilities were blocked) meaning "people in major cities in particular would be "suffering"; this was worse in some areas, as in Marseille, "around half of petrol stations are reporting shortages, with an estimated 40 per cent completely closed in Bouches-du-Rhône", and that "the Paris region could be hit by shortages at the storage facility of Genevilliers, northwest of the French capital". The "collaborative website" Penurie.mon-essence.fr said that approximately 986 fuel stations were "plagued by partial shortages", with 739 out of fuel "completely". Olivier Gantois, executive chairman of UFIP, said "[t]here will only be a shortage if people continue to rush to fill up", and that "[i]f customers panic, logistics will fail and we will be out of supply"; Le Monde added such comments were "in belief that shortages are the sole result of preemptive purchases on the part of consumers".

It was confirmed on 18 March that two no-confidence motions filed against the government will be debated beginning Monday, 20 March. The Republicans' leader has announced his intention not to support either motion, but The Times reported some LR MPs may defy him.

A poll found that over two-thirds of the French public wanted the no-confidence vote to succeed – despite the likelihood of it doing so being slim – and for Prime Minister Borne to resign regardless of its success or not.

The debate began at 4pm in the National Assembly, with opposition MPs "booing and jeering [the Prime Minister] when she took to the podium". She commented that the government "has never gone so far to form a compromise" to pass the pension reform laws. The author of the transpartisan motion, Charles de Courson, spoke that the removal of the government was "the only way of stopping the social and political crisis in this country". Éric Ciotti, leader of the Republicans, said invoking Article 49.3 was "a result of many years of political failures" that brought to the fore "a profound crisis in our constitution", but did not think the no-confidence votes was the solution required.

Both motions of no-confidence failed. The trans-partisan vote of no confidence failed by nine votes, while National Rally's no-confidence motion only received 94 votes, after other opposition parties declared their intention to not vote for it. Only 19 members of the Republicans voted for the transpartisan motion; France 24 commented that over half of the Republican MPs would have needed to vote in favour for the motion to pass.

Nevertheless, France 24 reported that NUPES MPs did not expect the transpartisan no-confidence vote they were part of to be so close. Immediately after, LFI MPs shouted "Resign!" at Prime Minister Borne, and held placards reading "We'll meet in the streets," while it was also reported left-wing MPs held up paper reading "On continue" ("We will continue") during the proclamation of the results. Prime Minister Borne tweeted that "We are coming to the end of the democratic process of this essential reform for our country. I assumed my responsibility and that of my government with humility and seriousness." She visited the Élysée presidential palace a short time after the government won the non-confidence votes. France 24 revealed that Macron was to meet Prime Minister Borne in the morning of 21 March, the speaker of the National Assembly and the head of the senate over lunch, and with MPs from his Renaissance bloc in the evening. Journalist Benjamin Dodman claimed that Borne et al. would use, and "spin", the success in the no-confidence motions as a measure of how "democratically legitimate" the pension reforms measures are.

France 24 noted some opposition MPs were "exploring legal avenues to challenge the law before the Constitutional Council, which must rule on the constitutionality of the reforms before they can be implemented"; the Council "could decide to strike down some or all of it – if it considers it breaches the constitution". Mélenchon "called on people to "express themselves everywhere and in all circumstances to force the withdrawal of the pension reform"". Mathilde Panot, LFI parliamentary group chief, told gathered press that "[n]othing is solved, we'll continue to do all we can so this reform is pulled back". Marine Le Pen called for Borne to resign, and that Macron, in spite of how unlikely it was, should call a referendum on the reforms; she told the press that "[he]'s deaf to what the French people want".

Spontaneous protests erupted throughout Paris. In the afternoon, those on the streets reacted to the results of the vote by chanting "Macron démission" ("Macron step down"). In the evening, in Place Vauban, protesters gathered, chanting "Macron resign!" and "Aux armes" (Take up arms), with police "push[ing] them back and blocked access to the square". Barricades were erected along the Rue de Rivoli. In Paris, protesters burned objects such as rubbish bins and bikes.

CNN reported "heavy police presence across the capital as demonstrators moved between locations", with AP quoting Paris police chief Laurent Nunez, who said the violence was "caused by groups of up to 300 people quickly moving through the capital". At least 70 people were arrested in Paris in the evening, which later rose to 234; most were arrested for setting rubbish strewn in the streets alight.

Reuters reported that "[i]n some of Paris' most prestigious avenues, firefighters scrambled to put out burning rubbish piles left uncollected for days due to strikes as protesters played cat-and-mouse with police" and "[u]nions and opposition parties said they would step up protests to try and force a u-turn". A CGT statement read that "[n]othing undermines the mobilisation of workers," and called for workers to 'step up' industrial action and "participate massively in rolling strikes and demonstrations." Nunez announced that an internal investigation would take place after footage of an officer punching a man walking backwards, causing him to fall to the ground, went viral on French social media.

AP said that the protests that took place in cities across France were predominantly "small" and "scattered", with only some "degenerating into violence" late in the day. In Bordeaux, a predominantly-young group of 200–300 people chanted for Macron to resign. A "couple" of rubbish bins were set alight, with the gathered protesters chanting "This will blow up". Protests were also reported in Dijon, and in Strasbourg where protestors smashed a department store's windows. 287 people in total were arrested nationwide.

The office of Prime Minister Borne announced late in the evening that she will "directly submit the text of the new law to France's Constitutional Council for a review", and that she hopes that "all the points raised during the debates can be examined"; referring, as France 24 says, to the challenges raised by some parliamentarians on the constitutionality of certain measures in the pension reforms. Opponents of the reforms on the left and far-right have submitted requests for review; only once the Constitutional Council has approved the bill can it be formally signed into law, and it can "reject articles within the measure if they aren't in line with the constitution", with those opposed saying the text "as a whole should be rejected"; Borne's office added that the referral was to "accelerate the process". Furthermore, she "expressed the government's 'solidarity ' " towards the 400 police officers who were injured in recent days, with 42 alone overnight. The Constitutional Council has a month to "consider any objections" to the bill.

On 21 March, Macron announced he does not intend to dissolve the National Assembly for new elections, reshuffle the government, or call a referendum for "a reform he considers necessary for the survival of the system", nor intends to withdraw the reforms. This was reasserted by Prime Minister Borne and Labor Minister Dussopt in Parliament; additionally, Borne said the government would attempt to involve the public and unions in legislating more in future, though offered no details as to how, and the two both agreed they had "devoted as much time to dialogue on the pension bill as possible". Macron, instead, plans to use a TV interview on 22 March to "calm things down" and plan and prepare for further reforms to take place over the rest of his term in office. Reuters reported on 21 March of the unease within the parties that Macron is aligned, or close, to, and that the President should not be "continuing business as usual amid violent protests and rolling strikes that represent the most serious challenge to the centrist president's authority since the "Yellow Vest" revolt". Gilles Le Gendre, a senior Renaissance MP, said that "the president, the government and the majority... are all weakened" and that "it's not because the law was adopted that we can do business as usual". Also of Renaissance, Patrick Vignal "bluntly urged the president to suspend the pension reform bill" due to "the anger it has triggered, and its deep unpopularity".

Reuters quoted Eurointelligence analysts, who said Macron has two choices: "[p]retending that nothing major happened and letting the crisis wear itself out, or pursuing co-habitation with the willing in the assembly. Given Macron's nature, we see him being more attracted to the first option. A risky bet."

On 20 March, CNN reported that "[a]uthorities in charge of civil air traffic asked airlines to cancel 20% of their flights on Tuesday and Wednesday, and Air France warned of flight cancellations in the upcoming days".

Police "were sent in the early hours of Tuesday to unblock the oil terminal of Donges... which had been occupied for a week by strikers. The Ministry of Energy Transition "also announced the requisition of "three employees per shift" at an oil storage facility in Fos-sur-Mer", due to "worsening supply tensions"; they clarified that "[t]he requisition is valid for 48 hours as needed, starting March 21," and relates to "personnel essential to the operation of the storage facility"".

"Hundreds" of workers have blocked access to the gas depots in a town near Marseille, with strikes at multiple refineries across western and southern France, "partially disrupt[ing]" oil shipments. Striking workers clashing with police at ExxonMobil's Fos-sur-Mer oil refinery, as the Energy Transition Ministry announced it would need employees "indispensable to the functioning" of the depot to return to work. "Scuffles broke out", with protesters joining strikers in response to the news. Protestors attempted to block access to the site, some "intermittently thr[owing] objects" such as stones at police, which used tear gas to try to disperse the demonstrators. AP added that the depot supplies fuel for southeastern France gas stations, which are currently most afflicted by shortages; government spokesman Olivier Veran "warned that more orders may follow in the coming days for other sites". In Paris, police Paris announced they had ordered rubbish collectors back to work to "ensure a 'minimum service'; this will cover 674 staff, with 206 garbage trucks resuming operation.

The Guardian, in an article dated 21 March, detailed activity at a blockaded incineration plant in Ivry-sur-Seine, south of Paris. A "crowd of students gathered to support the strikers" at the depot, with only "a slow dribble of very few rubbish trucks... now passing each day" there. The blockade has been ongoing since at least 14 March, with some strikers and their supporters having attended as early as 5am over the course of the action.

In the morning, police had evacuated Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne University 's Tolbiac campus, having been previously blockaded and barricaded by students (which has notorious precedent in that regard); an attendee mentioned that many young students there had spoken of their experiences of police violence. Outside the École Duperré art school, students had "piled up a barricade of bins", with signs saying that the decision to raise the retirement age "would be met with a new May 1968"; one student interviewed said she was too frightened of being the victim of police violence at night to demonstrate at that time of day. Skips were set alight during a protest in Rennes.

At lunchtime, Macron gave a televised interview, questioned by journalists from TF1 and France 2. He called the reform not a "luxury" or a "pleasure", but a "necessity", and that he did not "enjoy passing this reform", and "had a responsibility not to leave the issue alone despite its unpopularity". Of the protests, he "said protesters had a right to take to the streets and their anger had been taken into account, but it was not acceptable when they resorted to violence without any rules whatsoever", and he insisted he had continued confidence in Prime Minister Borne, and regrets "not succeeding in convincing people of the necessity of the reform".

The CGT and CFDT union heads responded; of the former, Philippe Martinez said that the interview was "outlandish", and "had taken millions of protesters for fools in claiming his reforms were the only alternative", and adding that "[t]he best response we can give the president is to have millions of people on strike and in the streets tomorrow," while Laurent Berger of the latter accusing Macron of "rewriting history and lying to hide his failure to secure a majority in parliament", with specific regard to his comments unions had not offered an alternative to the bill. Berger was quoted as having "scolded" the president for "seeking to portray the pension dispute as a tussle "between one responsible (man) and a group of irresponsibles"". Marine Le Pen said "she would not play "any part in putting out the fire" as the president was the only one who had the keys to a political crisis he had himself created", and, pointing out that the interview being broadcast during lunchtime news programmes mostly watched by pensioners – which Reuters stated was "the only demographic that is not dead set against the reform" – was an example of Macron's "disdain for workers", and how "[h]e insults all French people, in general, all those who... are protesting".

Striking workers briefly blocked trains during a demonstration at Nice and Toulouse.

Additionally, it was reported that 13% of petrol stations are undergoing fuel shortages due to oil refinery blockades, and that "almost half the pumps in the Bouches-du-Rhône area of the south have run dry". Unions also said that "up to half of primary school teachers would go on strike as part of Thursday's day of action but demonstrations were continuing on Wednesday, including outside the southern port of Marseille-Fos". News.com.au reported that "[m]ajor fuel shortages are also impacting service stations across the country due to protesters blocking major locations, with the biggest nationwide protest on record for France recorded this week, with rallies held in more than 200 separate areas".

CGT had announced on 16 March that the unions planned another day of strikes and demonstrations for 23 March, the ninth day of nationwide industrial action since the pension reform strikes began. The largest protest was expected to be in Paris, with demonstrators departing from Place de la Bastille at 2pm, marching through the city via Place de la République, and arriving at Place de l'Opéra at 7pm.

Public transport was severely impacted by strikes. Only two Paris metro lines were running normal service. By late morning, there was large disruption to rail services across France, with SNCF saying that only one-in-three regional TER trains and one-in-two TGV or Ouigo services running. At Gare de Lyon train station, several hundred unionists and strikers demonstrated on the railway tracks. An unofficial protest in front of Terminal 1 at Charles de Gaulle Airport blocked vehicle access. The Directorate General of Civil Aviation warned of disruption to flights at Paris-Orly, Marseille-Provence, Lyon and Toulouse. Around 30% of flights at Paris Orly Airport were cancelled, and flight services were expected to be reduced through the weekend.

The Snuipp-FSU union said 40–50% of primary school teachers were on strike, with strong walkouts anticipated in Paris and departments such as Bouches-du-Rhône, Pyrénées-Orientales and Haute-Vienne. The Education Ministry stated that about 24% of primary and middle school teachers walked off the job, as well as 15% in high schools. Exam supervisors also went on strike, disrupting baccalauréat exams, with over half a million students impacted.

Workers voted to strike at an LNG terminal in Dunkirk, reducing output to the minimum. Amid oil refinery and depot blockades, 14% of petrol stations were experiencing shortages of at least one type of fuel, with 7% dry. The impact varied nationwide, with reports suggesting that 40 out of 96 departments are affected, particularly in the north in Brittany and Normandy, as well as the Mediterranean coast. The government mandated minimum staffing at all depots.

The entrance to Paris-Panthéon-Assas University, widely considered the top law school of France, was barricaded; France 24 commented this was "a sign of just how broad the protest movement has become". Major tourist attractions such as the Eiffel Tower, the Arc de Triomphe and the Versailles Palace were closed to the public.

The Independent claimed over "12,000 police officers have taken positions in French streets with 5,000 in Paris, as authorities brace for the biggest strike action".

Numbers of demonstrators vary. The Interior Ministry said up to 1.08m took part in protests across France, with 119,000 in Paris; the latter is the highest number to have protested in Paris since the strikes and protests related to the reforms began in January. The CGT union, meanwhile, claimed 3.5m nationwide, and 800,000 in Paris.

Demonstrations in Paris began at the Place de la Bastille at 2pm local time. ITV News reported in the early afternoon that it was "currently the site of a large demonstration", and also that "[h]uge crowds have started marching in the major cities of Marseille, Lyon, Paris and Nantes as more than 250 protests were organised across the country".

Philippe Martinez, head of the CGT union said that "[t]here is a lot of anger, an explosive situation" at the start of a rally in Paris, as Reuters claimed that union leaders had "called for calm but were angry with what they called Macron's "provocative" comments". Posters along the route of the demonstrations in Paris included those demanding a return to the retirement age of 60, and depicting Macron as Louis XVI. A heavy presence of "[h]eavily armed riot police" was reported. At around 2:40pm GMT, journalist Lewis Goodall claimed that "[t]he main demonstration route [in Paris] is full [and so] they're now filing onto every side street". He quoted the CGT union's claims that 800,000 were demonstrating in Paris. At around 4:05pm GMT, he tweeted that French TV were reporting 14 were arrested so far, presumably in Paris.

BBC News said "the vast majority" of protests "passed off without violence", but in the afternoon, "violent clashes" were reported to have "broken out in parts of Paris", riot police having used tear gas as 'black bloc' protesters were reported to have thrown fireworks, bottles and stones at police and set bins alight. Riot police were also observed using baton charges on the Grands Boulevards. At other times on the march, fires in the streets ignited some of the uncollected piles of rubbish, with some small fires "visible from the junction of Rue Saint-Fiacre and Boulevard Poissonnière".

Mid-afternoon, clashes between police and protesters in Paris had grown more intense. On the Boulevard Bonne Nouvelle, one BFMTV report said "the atmosphere has changed completely" and that "[w]e didn't expect it to get out of hand so quickly". BFMTV also reported that there were at least 350–400 'black bloc' protesters, using "big" fireworks, and at point targeting a Strasbourg-St Denis McDonald's restaurant. A reporter claimed that police are deploying tear gas to push back the crowds, but it was ineffective due to the large number of people attending the protest. The police estimated that there were 1,000 protestors engaged in violence.

By 5pm local time, demonstrators in Paris had converged on the Place de l'Opéra. Firecrackers and bins set alight around Avenue de l'Opéra were reported. At around 5:20pm, it was reported that police on motorbikes had arrived in the Opera area. Known as the Motos Brav-M, it is a "controversial police unit", as "some have accused [them] of using excessive force". They were "booed and hissed" at as they "passed further away down Boulevard de l'Opéra ". By 6pm, "most people [were] now dispersing", but "low-level clashes between police and small groups of rioters [who have] been throwing stones and starting fires" persisted. Up to 5,000 security staff were put on duty in Paris for the day.

320 protests were planned across the country, with the biggest demonstrations in the southern towns of Marseille, Nice, and Toulon; in the former two, "thousands of protesters" demonstrated. Marseille's port was blockaded by demonstrators for a second consecutive day. In Lyon, "hundreds of railway workers, students and others have taken to the tracks disrupting trains". In Normandy, "thousands" turned out in Rouen, Caen, Le Havre and Dieppe. In Rouen, riot police used tear gas against some protesters throwing stones, and in Rennes, used both tear gas and water cannons as "some masked protesters" erected barricades". In Nice, protesters converged on the city centre, before marching to the airport and forming a blockade.

Yahoo! quoted local media that stated almost 10,000 were marching in Tours, where protesters blocked train tracks and caused disruption to train departures. Smoke was observed rising from burning debris that blocked traffic on a Toulouse highway, as "wildcat strikes briefly blocked roads in other cities". Police fired tear gas at protesters in Nantes, where also "a group of activists stormed the administrative court", and used water cannons in Rennes.

In Lorient, a local newspaper reported that projectiles were thrown into the yard of the police station, having "triggered a brief fire", with claims that multiple police officers had been "violently attacked". A local prefecture office also "came under attack" in the town, The Times claiming that activists "sought to storm a government building and to set fire to the town's police station". Interior Minister Gérald Darmanin responded on Twitter: "The attacks on and defacing of the subprefecture and the police station in Lorient are unacceptable. Thoughts with the injured officers. These acts cannot go unpunished."

The Independent reported that a "video on social media showed several trucks dumping tyres, rubbish and manure in front of council offices in several locations", and "[h]ighways were blocked with barriers of burning wood and tyres as protesters raised slogans".

The Palais Rohan in Bordeaux was set on fire by protesters, affecting the front door, though the fire was put out promptly by firefighters.

In the evening, Interior Minister Darmanin made a statement where he declared that there had been an attempt to kill police officers by some protesters. BBC News and France 24 claim he announced 123 police officers had been injured nationwide, while an independent journalist said he claimed 149 had been injured in Paris alone. In Paris, one officer was "dragged to safety while unconscious, as he and his colleagues came under fire from fireworks and other missiles. The officer appeared to have been hit on the head". In Rouen, a young woman was reported to have lost her thumb after hit by a 'flash ball' grenade used by police to try and disperse protesters – Damien Adam, Renaissance MP for the area, "says it's "clearly unacceptable" and he wants a police inquiry to find out what happened" – and police confirmed two officers were injured after missiles were thrown at them. LFI officials have "complained that six protesters had been hurt by police tear gas and stun grenades and wants to know what orders officers were given".

Darmanin claimed over 80 people had been arrested so far. Shortages of firefighters in the evening meant that local residents themselves had to put out fires themselves; Darmanin claimed 140 fires needed to be put out in Paris, with 50 still burning at the time (approximately 8:30pm GMT).

In the afternoon, union heads Berger and Martinez spoke out. Berger appealed for non-violence, for the "respect of property and people", for "non-violent actions that don't handicap people's daily lives". Martinez claimed Macron was blamed for the actions of protesters and demonstrators, saying he had "thrown a can of petrol on the fire". Hugh Schofield of BBC News said that unions and the left "are calling the day a success, with once again a large turn-out of people showing their rejection of Macron's pension bill".

On 28 March, a tenth day of protests was estimated at 740,000 attendees by the French government and 2 million by unions. Prime Minister Borne declined formal mediation, but agreed to talks with eight leading union leaders the following week, when an eleventh day of protest was planned.

The union leaders' meeting with Borne on 5 April ended after about an hour after both sides insisted that the pension reform must respectively be cancelled or remain. Union leaders exiting the meeting called for an eleventh day of protests to go ahead the following day. According to French authorities, between 600,000 and 800,000 demonstrators were expected, with 60,000 to 90,000 in Paris. According to the French Interior Ministry, 111 arrests were made and 154 police officers were injured. Protesters started a fire at Café de la Rotonde, one of Macron's favourite restaurants, and other protesters stormed the office buildings of BlackRock and Natixis Investment Managers.

On 14 April, the Constitutional Council delivered its verdict on the pension bill, declaring it to be compatible with the Constitution. Prior to the ruling being made public, French Prime Minister Élisabeth Borne had said that the proposal was "nearing the end of its democratic process," and said there were "no winners or losers." Macron signed the bill later that same day. Labor Minister Olivier Dussopt said the government is already working hard to implement the changes by 1 September. Before the Constitutional Council's decision, Macron invited labour unions to meet with him. The unions rejected Macron's invitation, noting that he had refused their previous offers of a meeting, and called for mass new protests on 1 May, International Workers Day.

On 17 April, French President Emmanuel Macron vowed to a government action plan in the next 100 days to decrease anger over the pension reform. Macron had also acknowledged the anger over the increasing prices jobs that did not "allow too many French people to live well". Macron also stated that he wanted the Prime Minister, Élisabeth Borne, to take measure on work, law and order, education, and health conditions and issues.

During Emmanuel Macron's tour of France, protesters gathered in Muttersholtz, wearing CGT vests and held unwelcoming signs and banners, including one banner which threatened to cancel the upcoming 2024 Summer Olympics if Macron did not withdraw the pension reform. The protesters, who banged pots and pans in order to be heard, were pushed back by police in numerous locations across the country.

Continuing his tour, Emmanuel Macron was jeered by crowds in eastern France in Sélestat, in Alsace. Locals chanted for Macron to resign and some heckled him. Macron noted that the incidents would not stop him from making visits across France.

After the calling for mass new protests on International Workers' Day, clashes erupted between protesters and security forces on 1 May. French President Emmanuel Macron was greeted with pot-bashing and jeers as he toured the country. During the tour, Macron thanked the French workers to their contributions to the nation, however he did not mention the ongoing protests. Effigies of Macron and Interior Minister Gérald Darmanin were abused or burned across France, including the city of Strasbourg. In Paris, windows were broken at banks and estate agents, projectiles were thrown at law enforcement, including one who was hit with a Molotov cocktail, suffering severe burns to his face and hands. Tear gas was deployed by police officers in the cities of Toulouse and Nantes, and property damage occurred in Nantes, Lyon, and Marseille. That day, 2.3 million people protested according to the protest organizers, while 800,000 protesters were estimated by French authorities. 108 police officers were injured in the clashes, 19 seriously injured in Paris, and 291 protesters were arrested.

After the May Day protests, French trade unions on 2 May announced a new day of nationwide protests against Macron's pension reform, setting the future protests on June 6. The next round marks the 14th wave of protests since the signing of the reform. The government responded that it wanted to "move on" to other issues and stated that it will send invitations to the unions for talks, and that the government would use it to reaffirm their opposition to the pension reform and work on proposals to improve workers' conditions.

On 3 May, France's Constitutional Council rejected a second bid for pension referendum by political opponents. The council issued a statement stating that the proposed referendum failed the legal criteria, which was defined in the constitution, and it also failed to address the required reform regarding social policy. As a result, protests ensued, including some in the financial district of Paris. While the protests continued, Nasser Kanaani, spokesperson for the Iranian Foreign Ministry, called on the French government to refrain from violence against protesters.

While Macron celebrated Victory Day, law enforcement banned gatherings in Paris and Lyon. In Lyon, several streets were closed to traffic, public transportation was disrupted, and some parking was prohibited. Despite the restrictions, protests and bangs of pots and pans followed, in which authorities responded with tear gas being spread. Clashes also erupted at Montluc prison, where Macron paid tribute to a leading resistance figure, Jean Moulin, when protesters attempted to break through a riot police cordon, who were deployed to keep them away from the French president.

Hospital workers protested in front of Carlton Cannes Hotel on 19 May, violating the ban on protests throughout most of the city.

Dozens of protestors gathered in Gannes in the outskirts of Cannes Film Festival on 21 May. Local authorities ordered a ban on protests throughout most of the city.

280,000 protesters marched on 6 June, while strikes forced Orly Airport to cancel one-third of its flights that day. Protesters also stormed the headquarters of the 2024 Summer Olympics in Paris, briefly occupying the headquarters building, however no damage occurred. 11,000 law enforcement officers were deployed, including 4,000 in Paris.

Multiple outlets, including media and unions, have grown concern over the increasing use of violence in the protests, particularly in the days since the government invoked Article 49.3, with comparisons made to the Gilets jaunes (Yellow Vests) protests of the first years of Macron's presidency. On 19 March, The Guardian commented that as "police brace[d] for a week of unpredictable, spontaneous protests in cities and small towns across France, the mood of anger was likened to the start of the gilets jaunes protests". On 20 March, Reuters also voiced that the tone of the protests had deteriorated to, and were "reminiscent" to, that of the Yellow Vest protest in recent days. Euronews, on 21 March, claimed that "government insiders and observers have raised fears that France is again heading for another bout of violent anti-government protests". On 22 March, Reuters outlined that "[p]rotests against the bill have drawn huge crowds in rallies organised by unions since January", of which "[m]ost have been peaceful, but anger has mounted since the government pushed the bill through parliament without a vote last week"; "[t]he past six nights have seen fierce demonstrations across France with bins set ablaze and scuffles with police".

France 24 commented that unions had been "united in coordinating their protests", but that "many expressed fears they could lose control of the protests as more radical demonstrators set the tone". Fabrice Coudour, a leading representative for the 'hard-left' CGT, commented that "tougher action ahead, more serious and further-reaching" was possible that could "escape our collective decision-making". Jean-Marie Pernot, a political scientist specialising in trade unions, said that a lack of "respect [for] any of the channels meant for the expression of dissent, it will find a way to express itself directly". One of the Yellow Vests' "prominent spokesmen", Jerome Rodrigues, spoke to protesters outside the National Assembly after the invoking of Article 49.3 on 17 March, that "the objective was now nothing less than "the defeat" of the president."

Head of the UNSA trade union federation, Lauren Escure, admitted that "when there is this much anger and so many French people on the streets, the more radical elements take the floor", and that it was not something they would want, but was inevitable, and "will be entirely the government's fault," he told AFP. The heads of two 'moderate' unions, Cyril Chabanier of CFTC and Laurent Berger of CFDT, expressed that unions were concerned. Cabanier said that an impression that "it is just violence that pays" was being created, and that "[t]here are some people who are very angry, [and] the anger leads to greater radicalisation and radicalisation unfortunately leads to violence". Berger has been reported as having warned the government that protests could grow more violent if those protesting begin to feel that the Yellow Vests, in France 24 ' s words, "achieved more with violence than established unions with their peaceful, mass demonstrations". Berger told RMC radio, alongside his demand for the reforms to be "withdrawn", that his union "condemn[s] violence", but added "look at the anger. It's very strong, even among our ranks".

On 19 March, The Guardian reported that – alongside the leader of the Republicans' office being vandalised – other MPs from the party were "receiving hundreds of threatening emails a day". Frédérique Meunier told BFMTV that "[i]t's as if tomorrow they want to decapitate us", and that the emails being received "amounted to harassment". The constituency offices of Renaissance MPs – the party from which Macron originates – were also targeted. BBC News ' s Paris correspondent, Hugh Schofield, on 22 March, said that the protests in recent days had been "spectacular, sometimes, visually" but "not huge in terms of scale" and "mostly.. the work of very committed left-wingers, class-warrior types, who are leading the battle". Natasha Butler of Al Jazeera said the violence in recent days was "sporadic".

A strike by waste collectors began on 6 March, which included a blockade of the city's incinerators. The proposed pension reforms would raise their retirement age from 57 to 59. Originally set to last nine days, it was extended by another five on 15 March. As of 15 March, "bin lorries [were] grounded at depots and at least three waste incinerators in the Paris area [were] at a standstill".

The impact of the waste workers' strike has left thousands of tonnes of rubbish uncollected on the streets of Paris. On 17 March, it was estimated the amount was 10,000 tonnes, up from 7,600 earlier in the week. Interior Minister Gérald Darmanin said that "strikers were being forced back under emergency powers designed to safeguard essential services", and from the morning of 17 March told RTL radio that "requisitioning is working and bins are being emptied", although this was disputed by an aide of Paris mayor Anne Hidalgo. Hidalgo has maintained her support for the strikers despite efforts by government to break it, with the deputy mayor in charge of waste, Colombe Brossel, commenting that "any demand to force strikers back to work would be "an attack on the constitutional right to strike"."

Waste collection in Paris is split around half-and-half between municipal waste workers and private companies, who remained in operation with some taking contracts to operate in areas worst hit by the strike action; such as the ninth district, whose mayor, Delphine Burkli, suggested "calling in the army to clear the streets."

Waste collection strikes also affected Antibes, Rennes, and Le Havre.

On 18 March, the mayor of Paris' 12th district, Emmanuelle Pierre-Marie, said that the priority was food waste in the streets – AP describing the "uncollected garbage" as having "become a visual and olfactory symbol of the actions to defeat the president's pension reform plan" – "because it is what brings pests to the surface" and that they "are extremely sensitive to the situation. As soon as we have a dumpster truck available, we give priority to the places most concerned, like food markets." It was claimed that police had "requisitioned garbage workers to clean up some neighborhoods".

As of 19 March, Philippe Martinez from CGT had "urged" Paris collection workers to continue their now-two-week-long strike.

The strike was suspended on 29 March due to declining participation, partly due to requisitions order by the Paris police.

Euronews reported that, of the 292 arrested after the protests on 16 March only nine were "charged with actual offences". Additionally, they have reported that many who just happened to be passing by were taken into custody, some without a "clear reason why", with French media reporting two Austrian children on a school trip were taken into custody after the 16 March protests, only released following intervention by the Austrian Embassy.

On 17 March, 60 people were taken into custody, with 34 cases closed, 21 with another result (such as a caution or warning), with just five ending up at trial. Coline Bouillon, a lawyer who represented some demonstrators, told Euronews that a large group of people who had been at a conference were "rounded up", police justifying the arrests for their "participation in a group with a view to preparing violence", or "concealing their faces"; they were remanded in custody for one to two days; she, among a group of lawyers, intend to "file a collective complaint against the police for "arbitrary detention" and "obstruction of the freedom to demonstrate"."

Such "arbitrary police custody", "mass-arrest", tactics have been accused – by politicians, judges and lawyers alike – of being utilised "simply to frustrate the protest movement", it being perceived, through precedent (such as in the gilet jaunes protests), as a "repression of the social movement". This view was shared by a judges' union, the Syndicat de la Magistrature (SM), with Raphaël Kempf, a French lawyer in judiciary repression methods, commenting that it was the first time the government had used "criminal law to dissuade demonstrators from demonstrating and exercising their freedom," said Raphaël Kempf, a French lawyer specialising in judiciary repression methods". Fabien Jobard, research director at France's National Scientific Research Centre CNRS, said that a "judicialisation of policing" has taken place over the past 15 years, with specific reference to a 2010 law that created the offence of "participation in a group with a view to committing violence or damage"; its original remit of mitigating against 'gang violence' and at sporting venues has been expanded to protests and demonstrations.

According to Le Monde critics are expressing concerns over the "violent confrontations and the systematic use of arrests" at rallies.

On 20 March, on television, police were seen momentarily firing tear gas and rushing at demonstrators in several cities, with special motorbike officers thrusting through protesters, which made Clément Voule, the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Association, respond on Twitter by stating that officers should avoid using disproportionate force.

On 21 March, an Interior Ministry spokesperson commented that "there are no unjustified arrests", and people are questioned for "offences which, in our eyes, are constituted" and "48 hours (of police custody) to try to process the offence is short". AFP was told by a senior police source that instructions have not been given to conduct mass arrests, adding "when high-risk profiles are arrested, they are no longer agitating others"; another officer added that with such a high number of arrests, the "manoeuvre is risky", as they "expose the workforce, monopolise officers" and "risk radicalising the demonstrators".

On 21 March, The Guardian reported that the "police watchdog is investigating allegations that four young women in Nantes were sexually assaulted during police controls at a demonstration last week". On 23 March, British journalist Lewis Goodall, covering the demonstrations in Paris, reported that police were "on pretty brutal form" – stating a member of his team had been targeted by police despite asserting they were press – and were also throwing their stun grenades with "abandon". During the protests of the 23 March, hundreds of officers were injured across France. However, as BBC News wrote, protesters were also injured by police stun grenades, and the Council of Europe declared that there was no justification for "excessive force" by authorities.

Macron's proposal to raise the retirement age from 62 to 64 has been compared to former President Nicolas Sarkozy's 2010 reform that raised the retirement age from 60 to 62, which also led to massive strikes and protests across France. Public opinion polling analysis has shown that Sarkozy's push for reform played a role in driving voters to both the Socialist Party and the far-right National Front in the 2012 presidential election.

One author of a paper in academic journal West European Politics tweeted a screenshot of the results of a study that showed executive approval has historically fallen after no-confidence votes, and linked it to what the impact of invoking Article 49.3 could be. The Guardian touched on political dissatisfaction, comparing the protests to that of the gilet jaunes, which "were initially against fuel tax rises but evolved to encompass a wider lack of trust in the political system". Antoine Bristielle, from the Fondation Jean-Jaures think tank, opined that the invoking of Article 49.3 could be "perceived as a symbol of brutality" and could "erode support both for the government and democratic institutions".

Many theorised that in the aftermath of the pension reforms controversy, Macron would fire Prime Minister Borne, such as "to try and reset his image", while prominent figures of opposition parties suggested using a referendum, and put the decision to implement the reforms to voters.

Prior to the no-confidence votes (which failed and thus the pension reforms entered into law), France 24 outlined the alternatives. They contended that the votes were likely to fail, even the one tabled by the centrist group LIOT which was most likely to attract transpartisan support – unless enough members of the Republicans broke ranks and voted in favour (which did not happen) – and the potential consequence of the National Assembly being dissolved and fresh elections being triggered (which Macron has at his disposal regardless) was also unlikely. Failure of the no-confidence votes leaves attempts to hold a referendum as one other option, known as a référendum d'initiative partagée (a shared-initiative referendum, or RIP); it requires the support of one-fifth of both the National Assembly and Senate, as well as the signatures of a tenth of the electorate, which need to be collected within nine months. However, it was pointed out that the triggering of an 'RIP' would need to have been done "before the enactment of the law"; yet, according to Stéphane Peu, deputy of the Communist Party Deputy, NUPES has had the support of the necessary 185 National Assembly members since 14 March, two days before the invoking of Article 49.3; he said his bill would include language that stated "the retirement age cannot exceed 62". The Times, on 19 March, wrote that the process being started would lead to the pension reforms being unable to be introduced until the referendum took place, "thwarting Macron's plans to start bringing in the changes from September and casting a shadow over the government's other work."

Furthermore, it was announced that members of NUPES would appeal to the Constitutional Council; a deputy of the LIOT group said on 14 March that had the bill passed by vote in the National Assembly, "several appeals" would have been made. France 24 said that NUPES would "argue that the reform, which was inserted into the social security budget, is a legislative rider, since the text addresses more than just finances", and that "[l]eft-wing deputies intend to rely on the opinion of France's Conseil d'État (Council of State), which had warned the government of a risk that certain measures in its pension reform plan, as well as the plan's lack of clear calculations, were unconstitutional".

On 21 March, Macron declared he would not dissolve the National Assembly or call a referendum on the reforms.

On 3 March, it was announced that King Charles III and Queen Camilla, would visit France between 26 and 29 March. However, in the week leading up to the scheduled visit, many news organizations began to report that the King's visit could be disrupted by the ongoing protests.

The optics for the trip were criticised. The author of a biography of the late Queen Elizabeth II, Stephen Clarke, said it was "very bad timing", and that while the people of France would "normally... welcome a British king", "in this moment, people protesting are on high alert for any sign of privilege and wealth"; Associated Press (AP) commented that "what was meant to be a show of bonhomie and friendship... instead... is being seen as an unnecessary display of hereditary privilege". He added that the King and Queen Consort's plans to attend a "lavish dinner at the former royal residence, the Versailles Palace", "does not look good", and "seems very 1789". Associated Press clarified that the "lavish Versailles, once the dazzling center of royal Europe, is a potent symbol of social inequalities and excess". The Daily Telegraph reported that the banquet, intended to take place on 27 March, could be cancelled or moved.

EELV MP Sandrine Rousseau called for the trip to be cancelled, asking if "the priority [is] really to receive Charles III at Versailles? Something is taking place within French society... the priority is to go and talk to society which is rising up."

On 23 March, Associated Press reported how the CGT's members at Mobilier National (the institution in charge of providing flags, red carpets and furniture for public buildings) "would not help prepare a Sunday reception for the king upon his arrival in Paris"; in response, the Élysée Palace said "non-striking workers would set up the necessary accoutrements for the trip". On 23 March, unions called for their tenth day of nationwide action for 28 March, coinciding with the last full day of the state visit.

On 24 March, at the request of the French Government, the state visit was postponed. Macron reportedly decided it would no longer be feasible or appropriate for the visit to take place once unions announced the tenth day of national walkouts on the 28 March, during the state visit. Éric Ciotti, leader of the Republicans said the cancellation brought "shame on our country", while Mélenchon was of an opposing mood, "delighted" that the "meeting of kings at Versailles" had been broken up, and that "the English knew that France's interior minister was pathetic on security". The visit was rescheduled for some time in the summer, "when things calm down again".

Iran condemned what it called “France's repression of protests.” Iranian Foreign Minister Hossein Amir-Abdollahian said "We call on the French government to respect human rights" and further added "instead of creating chaos in other countries, listen to the voice of your people and avoid violence against them." The comments were widely condemned as hypocritical by the government of France.

France's Human Rights League has accused the authorities of disproportionate and dangerous use of public force, undermining citizens' right to protest. The league's president said "The authoritarian shift of the French state, the brutalisation of social relations through its police, violence of all kinds and impunity are a major scandal."

Rights groups and independent bodies, including the National Consultative Commission on Human Rights, have criticized French police for resorting to excessive force and for making preventative arrests that could amount to arbitrary deprivation of liberty. The French Defender of Rights noted on March 21 that "this practice may induce a risk of disproportionately resorting to custodial measures and fostering tensions." Human Rights Watch told AFP it was very concerned about "what appears to be abusive police practices."

According to Reporters Without Borders, several "clearly identifiable" journalists were assaulted by security forces during the demonstrations.

On 20 March, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Association warned French authorities that “peaceful demonstrations are a fundamental right that the authorities must guarantee and protect. Law enforcement officers must facilitate them and avoid excessive use of force.”

The Council of Europe condemned France's crackdown on protests and warned that sporadic acts of violence could not justify "excessive use of force by agents of the state."

White House National Security Council spokesman John Kirby stated "We support the right of people to protest and to express their opinions" when asked about the situation in France.

Dimitris Koutsoumpas, the General Secretary of the Communist Party of Greece, attended a rally in Paris on 23 March; in a statement from Bastille Square, expressing his solidarity with the "struggle of the French people... against anti-labor policies, against the anti-popular choices" utilised by both the French and the Greek governments in order to ensure the working people "finally win" and "pave the way for their own interests and not the interests and profits of the few." The International Anthem was played over loudspeakers, with the railway workers and trade unionists being spoken to offering him a "Friends of the Paris Commune" handkerchief.

In early 2024, a political and economic crisis emerged in the French overseas department of Mayotte.

Mayotte is the poorest overseas department in France, although it remains more economically developed than neighbouring Madagascar and the Comoros. The local economy relies heavily on the labour of economic migrants, many of whom are undocumented.

In 2018, civil unrest was triggered by protests against the economic crisis and the presence of undocumented immigrants from the Comoros Islands. The protests involved roadblocks, a general strike, and demonstrations, with residents expressing concerns over pressure on healthcare, housing, and education services due to the growing migrant population.

In 2021, 54 Members of Parliament warned of an "impending social chaos" resulting from severe poverty and irregular immigration. In early 2023, the French government initiated efforts to demolish approximately 1,000 bangas —makeshift homes located in slums that housed around 40% of the island's population.

By December 2023, emergency services announced they would no longer operate at night due to safety concerns. Protests were also held over water shortages caused by ongoing drought conditions. These issues were further exacerbated by long-standing underinvestment in infrastructure and public services in Mayotte.

In response to the deteriorating situation, the French government launched Operation Wuambushu to address illegal immigration and improve security in the Indian Ocean region.

In January 2024, the President of the National Assembly, Yaël Braun-Pivet, visited Mayotte. Around the same time, police operations were carried out, prompting a fortnight of protests. Road blockades disrupted economic activity and led to food shortages. Incidents of violence were reported, and curfews were imposed in response to the unrest.

The Minister of the Interior and Overseas, Gérald Darmanin, also visited the island and announced plans to restrict the automatic right to French citizenship by birth in Mayotte. The proposed measure received widespread support from the local population, who viewed it as a means to curb irregular immigration.

In April 2024, Marine Le Pen visited Mayotte.

On 16 April 2024, Overseas Minister Marie Guévenoux announced the launch of Operation Wuambushu 2, aimed at combating substandard housing, irregular migration, and organised crime. The operation targeted the arrest of 60 alleged gang leaders and the demolition of 1,300 bangas —twice the number removed during the previous year's campaign.

In the 2024 French legislative election, the National Rally made significant gains in Mayotte, with Anchya Bamana winning the 2nd constituency.

In December 2024, the island was hit by Cyclone Chido. Médecins Sans Frontières said the situation was "very chaotic".

20th-century French philosophy is a strand of contemporary philosophy generally associated with post- World War II French thinkers, although it is directly influenced by previous philosophical movements.

The work of Henri Bergson (1859–1941) is often considered the division point between nineteenth- and twentieth-century French philosophy. Essentially, despite his respect for mathematics and science, he pioneered the French movement of scepticism towards the use of scientific methods to understand human nature and metaphysical reality. Positivism, which, for instance, the French sociologist Durkheim was interested in at the time, was not appropriate, he argued. Unlike later philosophers, Bergson was highly influenced by biology, particularly Darwin 's Origin of Species, which was published in the year Bergson was born. This led Bergson to discuss the 'Body' and 'Self' in detail, arguably prompting the fundamental ontological and epistemological questions to be raised later in the 20th century. Bergson's work was a major influence on Gilles Deleuze, who wrote a monograph on him (Bergsonism, 1966) and whose philosophical analyses of cinema (Cinema 1: The Movement Image and Cinema 2: The Time-Image) develop his ideas.

Following debates concerning the foundation of mathematics around the mathematician and philosopher Henri Poincaré (1854–1912), who opposed Bertrand Russell and Frege, various French philosophers started working on philosophy of science, among them Gaston Bachelard, who developed a discontinuous view of scientific progress, Jean Cavaillès (1903–1944), Jules Vuillemin (1920-2001), or Georges Canguilhem, who would be a strong influence of Michel Foucault ; in his introduction to Canguilhem's The Normal and the Pathological, Foucault wrote:

Take away Canguilhem and you will no longer understand much about Althusser, Althusserism and a whole series of discussions which have taken place among French Marxists; you will no longer grasp what is specific to sociologists such as Bourdieu, Robert Castel, Jean-Claude Passeron and what marks them so strongly within sociology; you will miss an entire aspect of the theoretical work done by psychoanalysts, particularly by the followers of Lacan. Further, in the entire discussion of ideas which preceded or followed the movement of '68, it is easy to find the place of those who, from near or from afar, had been trained by Canguilhem.

Starting in the 1980s, Bruno Latour (1947-2022), teacher at the engineering school École nationale supérieure des mines de Paris, would develop the actor-network theory, a distinctive approach to social theory and research, best known for its controversial insistence on the agency of nonhumans.

Many philosophers and historians of philosophy were teachers at the Sorbonne, the University of Paris, including Léon Brunschvicg (1869–1944), co-founder of the Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale with Xavier Léon and Elie Halévy, Martial Guéroult (1891–1976) and successor of Étienne Gilson at the Collège de France in 1951, Ferdinand Alquié, Paul Ricœur, etc. Jean Wahl taught between 1936 and 1967 and helped introduce the philosophy of Søren Kierkegaard to French thinkers.

Emmanuel Mounier (1905–1950) was a guiding spirit in the French personalist movement, and founder and director of Esprit, the magazine which was the organ of the movement. Mounier, who was the child of peasants, was a brilliant scholar at the Sorbonne. In 1929, when he was only twenty-four, he came under the influence of the French writer, Charles Péguy, to whom he ascribed the inspiration of the personalist movement.

Gabriel Honoré Marcel (1889–1973) was a leading Catholic existentialist and the author of about 30 plays. He shared a great deal in common with Mounier's ideas. They both show Bergson's influence in their assessment of 'being', specifically the Mystery of Being. Interest of Mounier and Marcel in the problems of technology moved French philosophy forward.

Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980) was, if only by birth, the first truly 20th-century French philosopher. He was also well-known as a dramatist, screenwriter, novelist and critic. Sartre popularized (and named) existentialism, making it better known to the lay-person than, for instance, deconstruction. Phenomenology and Marxism were two other key concerns of his. A leading figure of the French Left, Sartre was opposed on his right by Raymond Aron.

Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908–1961) was a French phenomenologist philosopher, strongly influenced by Edmund Husserl. Merleau-Ponty is classified as an existentialist thinker because of his close association with Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir, and his distinctly Heideggerian conception of Being.

It is important to realise that, as well as holding many varying degrees and interpretations of Marxism, many French Philosophers' views on it shifted substantially during their lifetime. Sartre, for instance, became more influenced by Marx during the course of his life.

Alexandre Kojève (1902–1968) was a Marxist and Hegelian political philosopher, who had a substantial influence on intellectual life in France in the 1930s and on the reading of Hegel in France.

Louis Althusser (1918–1990) was a key Marxist philosopher, sometimes considered to be the structuralist equivalent to Marxism that Lacan was to Psychoanalysis and Claude Lévi-Strauss to ethnology (although all of them rejected the identification). In 'Lenin and Philosophy', Althusser explained Lenin's differentiation between Dialectical Materialism and Historical Materialism. He said the former was the philosophy and the latter was the science, and claimed that in history science has always preceded Philosophy. One of his seminal works was Reading Capital (1965), co-written with Étienne Balibar, Roger Establet, Jacques Rancière and Pierre Macherey. He opposed Hegel 's teleological approach to history, drew on Bachelard's concept of " epistemological break " and defined philosophy as "class struggle in theory."

The structuralist movement in French philosophy was highly influenced by the Swiss thinker Ferdinand de Saussure (1857–1913). His ideas laid the foundation for many of the significant developments in linguistics in the 20th century. He is widely considered the 'father' of 20th-century linguistics.

This current was further explored by Claude-Levi Strauss in ethnology. His work influenced important figures like Jacques Derrida and Jacques Lacan significantly. From 1963, a magazine was run in Paris, called Tel Quel, which also dabbled excessively in structuralist analysis of texts. Important figures in this endeavour were Phillip Sollers, the magazine's editor, Julia Kristeva and Roland Barthes.

Jacques Lacan (1901–1981) was specifically interested in the philosophy of psychoanalysis. He could be said to be relevant to the more modern foundations of discursive psychology.

Post-structuralism is, like structuralism, an ambiguous term in some respect. It is first important to understand the nature of the schools of thought - as often it seems they aren't truly separate 'schools' at all. Much like Sartre's interest in art, both of these movements are important to a wide range of academic disciplines. E.g., English literature, cultural studies, media studies / film studies, anthropology, etc. etc.

Michel Foucault (1926–1984), although sometimes considered close to structuralism, quickly drew apart from this movement, developing a specific approach to semiology and history which he dubbed "archeology." His influence is broad-ranging, and his work includes books such as Madness and Civilization (1961), The Order of Things (1966), Discipline and Punish: The Birth of Prison (1975) or The History of Sexuality.

Gilles Deleuze, who wrote Anti-Oedipus (1972) with Félix Guattari, criticizing psychoanalysis, was, like Foucault, one of the key thinkers who introduced a thorough reading of Nietzsche in France, following Georges Bataille 's early attempts — Bataille published the Acéphale review from 1936 to 1939, along with Pierre Klossowski, another close reader of Nietzsche, Roger Caillois and Jean Wahl. Deleuze wrote books such as Difference and Repetition, The Logic of Sense, Spinoza: Practical Philosophy (1970), and also wrote on Bergson, Leibniz, Nietzsche, etc., as well as other works on cinema (Cinema 1: The Movement Image). Both Deleuze and Foucault attempted to take distance from the strong influence of Marxism and psychoanalysis in their works, in part by means of a radical reinterpretation of Marx and Freud.

Jacques Derrida (1930–2004) was an Algerian-born French philosopher, known as the founder of deconstruction. His voluminous work had a profound impact upon continental philosophy and literary theory.

Jean-François Lyotard (1924–1998) was a philosopher and literary theorist. He is well known for his articulation of Postmodernism after the late 1970s.

Other authors include Jean Baudrillard, who started with a situationist criticism of Consumption Society in the 1970s to evolve towards a reflection on simulation and virtual reality, Paul Virilio, both a philosopher and an urbanist, Cornelius Castoriadis, who was, along with Claude Lefort, co-founder of Socialisme ou Barbarie and criticized orthodox Marxism, Alain Badiou, François Laruelle, who developed " Non-philosophy " starting in the 1980s, Philippe Lacoue-Labarthe, Paul Ricoeur (administrator of the University of Nanterre during May '68), Emmanuel Levinas, Vincent Descombes, etc.

The Feminist movement in contemporary France (or at least that which can be placed in the 'Philosophy' genre) is characterised more by deconstructionism and Marxism than much Anglo-American Feminism. Key thinkers include psychoanalytic and cultural theorist Luce Irigaray (born 1930), psychoanalyst and writer Julia Kristeva (born 1941), writer and philosopher Simone de Beauvoir, writer and cultural theorist Hélène Cixous and artist and psychoanalyst Bracha Ettinger.

One suggested way of understanding French philosophy of this period, it has been suggested, is to locate the major influential figures in their current. The major influences were primarily 6 Germans from preceding eras: Hegel, Marx, Freud, Nietzsche, Husserl, Heidegger. For example, Alexander Kojeve's Lectures on the Phenomenology of Spirit were quite a sensation in Paris in the 1930s. It was attended by George Batailles and a young Jacques Lacan among others. Jean Wahl and Jean Hippolyte were also responsible for spreading Hegel's lectures into Parisian circles.

Marx was introduced to philosophers both inside and outside the university. Many, like Sartre and Merleau-Ponty, grew up during the Resistance against Nazi occupation, during which time they were introduced to Marxist-Leninists.

Nietzsche's influence went through George Batailles and the Acéphale group, down to Foucault and Deleuze. The Acéphale group is partly responsible for reclaiming Nietzsche for Western Philosophy, after decades of Nazi appropriation.

Heidegger and Husserl's influence was felt, firstly, in the existential-phenomenology of Sartre and Merleau-Ponty. Even Simon de Beauvoir's feminism borrowed extensively from this current. She used phenomenological conceptualizations of consciousness, time and memory to conceptualize Woman.

20th century French philosophers lived through several very important political upheavals during their time. On the one hand, there was the Resistance against the Nazi forces. For Sartre and Merleau-Ponty, this was the first introduction to communism. Later, they would both become members of the PCF. The other important political event of that era was the Algerian War of Independence, to which the young Foucault, Derrida and Frantz Fanon went. While the PCF had a problematic role to play, dissident Marxist-Leninists of that era went there to help rebelling Algerians. Undoubtedly, for the next generation, the great political upheaval was the student-worker protests of May 1968. Young radicals, from the Sorbonne and Ecole Normale Supérieure organized, went to the factories and encouraged the worker's to go on strike. Many young radicals broke away from Marxism–Leninism towards Maoism at this point, while there were several Anarchists, Trotskyites, Situationists etc. at the protests as well.

Each of these events have shaped the content as well as the form of the writing of these French philosophers. Time and again, the movements have questioned the French state, the university, imperialism and capitalism as well. This has provided impetus, material and structural change to the current of French philosophy consistently.

The 35-hour workweek is a labour reform policy adopted in France in February 2000, under Prime Minister Lionel Jospin 's Plural Left government. Promoted by Minister of Labour Martine Aubry, it was adopted in two phases: the Aubry 1 law in June 1998 and the Aubry 2 law in January 2000. The previous legal working week was 39 hours, established by President François Mitterrand, also a member of the Socialist Party. The 35-hour working week had been on the Socialist Party's 1981 electoral program, titled 110 Propositions for France, but was not pursued because of the poor state of the economy.

Time worked after the standard legal limit of 35 hours is considered overtime. The reform's aim is primarily to lower the unemployment rate, then at a record high of 12.5%, by encouraging the creation of jobs with work sharing.

The main stated objectives of the law were to create new jobs, by making it more cost effective to hire an additional worker than to pay current staff overtime, and the pursuit of decommodification of France's citizens, by lowering the amount of time dedicated to work without lowering their standard of living. Additionally, the Jospin government was able to advantage of the changes introduced with the 35-hour workweek to relax other workforce legislation.

The Aubry 1 law was passed in 1998. It served as an encouragement for businesses to transition voluntarily to a 35-hour workweek. It did so by offering a reduced payroll tax for all businesses that lowered their current employees' working hours and hired additional workers before January 2000.

The Aubry 2 law was adopted in January 2000. It legally lowered the standard hours worked per week from 39 to 35 for companies with more than 20 employees. Small businesses had until January 2002 to prepare for the shift. Additional hours worked after 35 then had to be paid at the overtime premium of 25% for the first eight hours, and then at a 50% premium for any further hours.

Businesses were required to sign an agreement with unions to bargain over the hourly wage increase, to make up for the potential loss of income by the employees' decreasing work time. Unions wanted to ensure that the reduced weekly hours would not result in a reduced income. Their slogan was "35 hours pays 39".

To motivate companies to compromise with unions, the government offered social security rebates to all firms that signed contracts with unions agreeing to a 35-hour workweek and wage increases. The legislation explicitly stated that monthly income must stay at the same level, however this only applied to minimum wage workers. To help small companies make the transition, the government increased the annual limit on overtime hours for small companies and set their overtime premiums at a lower rate.

The Raffarin government, some members of which were vocal critics of the law, gradually pushed for further relaxation of the legal working time requirements. On 22 December 2004, the French Parliament extended the maximum number of overtime hours per year from 180 to 220 under the Fallon laws. The reforms also reduced the payroll tax cuts given to companies that implemented the 35-hour workweek.

On 31 March 2005, another law extended the possibilities of overtime hours.

In August 2016, the El Khomri law reduced overtime payments.

Professor Fabrice Gilles at the University of Lille studied the impact of the Aubry laws, by analyzing data on capital operating time (the average time that capital equipment is in use at firms) from the Bank of France and administrative files on work time regulation agreements from the French Ministry of Labour. He found that capital operating time has not decreased in shift-work firms, because they responded by increasing the intensity of night-shift work and adding some additional overtime. In fact, shift-work companies have expanded scheduled hours to preserve output and increase productivity. Non-shift-work companies have decreased their capital operating costs.

There has not been a significant rise in dual jobholding as a result of the reduction of full-time employment work hours.

Even though the standard hours worked in a week has been lowered to 35, some occupations demand more. The French bar association (CNB) says that 44% of lawyers in the country worked 55 hours or more a week in 2008. Part-time workers work an average 23.3 hours a week in France, compared to the European average of 20.1 hours.

After being implemented, the Aubry reforms were credited with lowering unemployment and expanding the economy, although they have been met with legislative proposals for additional reforms.

Businesses have overhead costs such as training, rent and employment taxes that do not adjust with operating hours. The expenses and higher wages cause the cost benefit of hiring an extra worker to go down, and raise the incremental cost of each additional worker.

Generally speaking, left-wing parties and trade unions support the reduction, while right-wing parties and the MEDEF employer federation oppose it. Critics of the 35-hour working week have argued that it has failed to serve its purpose because an increase in recruitment has not occurred. In their view, the reluctance of firms to take on new workers has instead simply increased hourly production quotas. According to right-wing parties and economic commentators, the main reason that French firms avoid hiring new workers is that French employment regulations on labour flexibility make it difficult to lay off workers during poor economic periods.

The Abbeville Conference was the first meeting of the Franco–British Supreme War Council. It took place on 12 September 1939 in Abbeville, northern France. The meeting was attended by the prime ministers of both states — Édouard Daladier and Neville Chamberlain. The main subject of discussion was the scale of military assistance to Poland, which was fighting against the German invasion.

The primary conclusion of the meeting was the approval of the French Commander-in-Chief, General Maurice Gamelin ’s decision to halt the Saar Offensive ; to continue the deliveries of materiel to Poland that had already been initiated after the outbreak of war; and to prepare for defensive operations in France in view of the imminent German offensive in the west expected by Gamelin – an offensive that did not begin until 10 May 1940.

The conference was the first meeting of the Supreme War Council and expressed the determination of France and the United Kingdom to continue the war until Nazi Germany was defeated. Moreover, three days after the conference, the French Commander-in-Chief once again approved limited offensive actions against Germany. Their scale, however, remained modest, and they were discontinued shortly thereafter.

After the German attack on Poland at dawn on 1 September 1939, her allies — France and the United Kingdom — entered the war on 3 September, being in a state of war with the Third German Reich from 11:00 a.m. (United Kingdom) and 5:00 p.m. (France). The British side immediately began preparing an air attack on the German naval base in Wilhelmshaven, which was carried out in the afternoon of 4 September. The small effects of the raid and the heavy losses incurred caused further similar actions to be suspended for several subsequent weeks. In any case, the operation could not have helped the Poles. In Britain, it was assessed that none of the existing RAF operational plans could significantly help the Polish Army.

A project considered in spring and summer 1939 to transfer several British bomber squadrons to Polish territory after the outbreak of war was ultimately abandoned already in August — after it was concluded that, due to organisational and logistical problems, operations by these units could not bring meaningful benefits.

A British Military Mission was sent to Poland just before the outbreak of war. On 4 September, Romania granted permission for transport of arms across its territory to embattled Poland; on 5 September, the same was done by the Kingdom of Yugoslavia and subsequently by the Kingdom of Greece (1935–1941). Ships carrying aircraft previously ordered by Poland set out from England via the Mediterranean to the port of Constanța, while in Marseille loading continued of tanks, cars, artillery and ammunition that Poland had also ordered earlier.

On land, the French Army was to undertake actions on behalf of Poland under the arrangements adopted on 19 May 1939 in the final protocol of the Franco–Polish military talks. France was to begin, around the third day after the start date of French mobilisation (mobilisation having been announced on 1 September, with the start date designated as 2 September), limited-objective offensive actions; and subsequently, from the fifteenth day after mobilisation began, offensive operations “with the main forces.” In French military terminology of the time, this latter term referred merely to a detached portion of the whole — of unspecified composition and size.

The operational principles were set out in the instruction of the French Chief of the General Staff for National Defence, General Maurice Gamelin, dated 31 May 1939, and the instructions of the commander of the 2nd Army Group, General André-Gaston Prételat (22 July), and of the commander of the North-Eastern Theatre of Operations, General Alphonse Georges (24 July). They envisaged, in the first phase, making contact with the German fortified position (the Westwall — the Siegfried Line) between the Hochwald Forest [ de ] and the western edge of the Vosges, and a “strictly limited” action against advanced elements of that position; and subsequently, in the area east of Saarbrücken, the possibility (treated only as an option) of attempting an attack against German fortifications on a broader front. These plans were unknown to the Polish and British allies.

Immediately after the outbreak of the war, General Gamelin resisted the pressure of Prime Minister Édouard Daladier to undertake immediate action to reduce German pressure on Poland, explaining to the British allies on 4 September that he did not intend to waste his resources merely to create the appearance of doing something. He had already presented a plan for a methodical and orderly operation supported by powerful artillery, leading to a reconnaissance-in-force against the Siegfried Line, with an assault planned for a designated day.

On 3 September he proposed employing British aircraft stationed in France as part of the Advanced Air Striking Force (AASF) in attacks on German infrastructure. The proposal was received with reserve due to doubts about its effectiveness, as well as the risk to civilian populations — an issue highlighted on 1 September by U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt.

The British side ultimately decided that the AASF should be preserved until it could have a decisive effect on the course of the war — for example, against a concentration of German reinforcements brought to the Siegfried Line. This cautious approach was criticised by the then First Lord of the Admiralty Winston Churchill, who demanded more intensive action to relieve Poland.

The first, very small-scale actions on German territory were undertaken by French units during the night of 5–6 September 1939. The so-called “offensive for Poland” began at dawn on 9 September.

Formally, the operation was conducted by three armies (3rd, 4th, and 5th) of the 2nd Army Group, but in practice five divisions of the 4th Army took part, because the remaining forces were still concentrating and were able to act only with part of the resources then available. French actions were carried out in accordance with doctrine and the orders received — slowly and methodically. The goal declared by General Gamelin was to draw toward them the maximum possible number of German forces.

In London, however, these actions raised concern that France might prematurely launch a larger-scale operation at a time when British forces were not yet prepared for such action. British strategy was instead to prepare for a long war (according to Chamberlain's expectations — a three-year one), relying on naval blockade and the buildup of air superiority.

These concerns were heightened by the pressure exerted by the French Prime Minister, Édouard Daladier, who — faced with unexpectedly rapid German advances in the East— sought to induce the British ally to undertake more serious measures on behalf of Poland. His emphasis was primarily on deliveries of military equipment, but also, if possible, air operations.

French air forces had already been active since 4 September — though only in reconnaissance flights and fighter operations, without engaging their relatively weak and outdated bomber forces. The transfer to Poland of five French air squadrons, agreed upon during the May talks with the Polish side, ultimately did not take place — formally due to Poland's loss of the airfields intended for their arrival.

The need to convene a meeting of the Supreme War Council was raised by the British War Cabinet already on 4 September. The meeting was to establish Allied war policy for the coming months. France also recognised the need for such a meeting, though initially it considered holding a broader conference including representatives of Poland.

Ultimately, at British initiative, only a Franco–British meeting took place. Seeking clarification of the situation and concerned by signs that the French might be undertaking overly ambitious operations, British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain proposed to the French on 11 September that the first meeting of the Council be held the next day, suggesting either Amiens or Abbeville in northern France as the location. The meeting was therefore convened on very short notice, without prior agreement even on an agenda. No Polish representatives were invited (in the view of historian Wojciech Mazur, more likely due to haste and the need for secrecy than out of any deliberate disregard for Poland).

The deliberations began shortly before noon on 12 September 1939. Their principal participants were Daladier, Chamberlain, the British Minister for the Coordination of Defence Lord Chatfield, and General Gamelin, who reported on military matters. Chamberlain, wishing to prevent discussion of any possible offensive, did not bring his own staff officers to France.

Polish affairs — one of the main reasons for the meeting — were addressed at the very start. Daladier confirmed British concerns by stating that the offensive launched on the Western Front was progressing favourably and might in time develop into larger-scale operations. This remark, however, was ignored by Chamberlain, who praised France's restraint, asserting that time was working in favour of the Allies and that premature action would be a mistake.

Realising France's dependence on British support, Daladier immediately withdrew from any “offensive” ambitions. The two prime ministers then approved Gamelin's statement that he did not intend to send his forces against the main German defensive line — and that he had already issued the necessary orders.

Gamelin's declaration effectively meant halting the “offensive for Poland,” which had been underway for only three days. Gamelin had always regarded it primarily as a demonstration of force or a political gesture meant to distract Germany. His decision not to continue the 9 September operation was shaped by the rapid German progress in Poland; he was convinced that the forces engaged there would soon be transferred westward for operations against France.

When Lord Chatfield asked whether he would revise his plans if Polish resistance lasted longer than expected, Gamelin said no — adding that such a scenario would simply give the Allies more time to prepare their own defence against a German attack.

Daladier's attempts to emphasise the importance of efforts to sustain the Polish front — even if only through deliveries of materiel — had little effect in the face of Chamberlain's categorical view that “the only real help for Poland is to win the war” through Allied victory. This did not, however, imply an end to arms shipments to Poland; in fact, most of them were dispatched after 12 September.

During the discussion, it was also agreed that because British industry was vulnerable to air attack, and until its air defences and material reserves were strengthened, more intensive air operations against Germany should be avoided. The Allies also wished to avoid civilian casualties resulting from bombing.

The participants then discussed actions Germany might take after completing operations on the Eastern Front; the threat posed by Italy and the potential for using Italy to benefit the Allies; the likely situation in the Balkans and prospects for opening another front there; Spain's stance; and naval operations, including a possible Baltic campaign. The deliberations were not lengthy: their official portion ended at 1:30 p.m.

In the French provisional version of the protocol, the conclusions were summarised in four points:

These points did not appear in the final official protocol. The British-issued press communiqué emphasised instead the determination of both powers united in the struggle and their willingness to “give every possible assistance” to Poland.

The publication of a press communiqué immediately after the conference indicated that its occurrence had not been kept secret.

According to Mazur, the significance of the Abbeville Conference for the development of events in the early phase of the Second World War is often overstated. In his view, the Abbeville meeting did not bring about any meaningful revision of the existing policy toward the Polish ally, which had lost the strategic role of forming the core of a future eastern front as a result of the German–Soviet pact of 23 August 1939. Before the war, France and Britain had assumed that preparing an attack on the Siegfried Line would require time, and that Polish resistance would matter only if Poland became part of a durable and strong eastern front including Romania and previously Czechoslovakia, with at least benevolent neutrality from the USSR — a scenario rendered obsolete after 23 August. The head of the Planning Directorate of the British Air Ministry, Group Captain John Slessor, already concluded at the time that the Allies could not hope to save Poland and that their goal must instead be to restore Poland's independence by defeating Germany in the long term.

The Supreme War Council did not possess decision-making authority; at least nominally, it functioned as a consultative forum — albeit at a very high level. Decisions gained binding force only when approved by the governments concerned.

The agreements reached at Abbeville were very quickly undermined by the French participants themselves. Gamelin, having issued orders to halt the “offensive for Poland,” corrected his position three days later, after protests from, among others, General Georges. In a new instruction he authorised French forces to move closer to the forward defences of the Siegfried Line and to conduct a trial bombardment of its fortifications — although there was no longer any question of an assault on the line itself.

Two weeks after the conference, he even proposed supplementing the text of the “Conclusions” summarising the meeting with a significant clause: “...large-scale operations will not be undertaken by the Allied armies on the Western Front in the initial phase of the conflict; except for those deemed essential for assistance to Poland.” This proposal was accepted by the British side.

Daladier later spoke bitterly of the British stance, criticising, among other things, the lack of RAF bombings of Germany in response to German bombing of Poland. According to Mazur, Daladier — opposed both by the British prime minister and by his own Commander-in-Chief — made only weak attempts to push for active measures on behalf of Poland and soon found himself unable to adjust his position. Mazur argued that Daladier was the only participant able to demonstrate genuine goodwill toward the Polish ally, but his “timid gestures” were too modest to have practical effect; and Daladier himself in practice preferred to continue moral and material support for Poland chiefly to gain time.

Leszek Moczulski assessed the stance of the Allied prime ministers as a “crisis of leadership,” an evaluation Mazur endorsed.

Polish government representatives were neither invited to the conference nor officially informed of its conclusions. Nevertheless, the Allies’ position soon became known in Poland. On 15 September, the head of the Polish Military Mission in London, General Mieczysław Norwid-Neugebauer, reported in a cipher telegram that “the British are determined to wage war until Hitler is completely crushed,” but “for the moment Poland has been left to her own resources, and we can count only on material assistance.”

According to Mazur, there is no basis for asserting (as some historians have done) that Joseph Stalin withheld his decision to attack Poland until the Abbeville meeting and acted only upon learning its results. In Abbeville, the Allies expressed their desire to help Poland and maintain the Polish front; and crucially, the declaration that no large-scale offensive would be undertaken had already been agreed upon at the meeting between Gamelin and British commanders on 4 September. General Louis Faury, appointed head of the French military mission to Poland, who arrived shortly before the war, later described his relevant conversation of 22 August 1939 with Generals Gamelin and Georges, i.e., before the signing of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact:

I then raise the issue that has been troubling me... If Poland becomes the object of aggression, only a French offensive will be able to force the Germans to loosen their crushing grip. When will this offensive begin? Silence. Then General Georges indicates that the French Army is not capable of undertaking an offensive and that no date can be set when it would be ready for large-scale action. Until then, only defensive or limited offensive actions can be considered. When I cannot hide my disappointment, General Gamelin simply adds a few words: “Poland must hold on.”

The Soviet aggression of 17 September 1939 ultimately removed any remaining chances of Polish resistance in the view of the Western Allies. Any Allied offensive in the West could have brought relief only on the scale of months — a fact recognised by at least some Polish staff officers. Moreover, the Western Allies were not yet prepared for large-scale offensive operations, nor were such operations a priority for them.

Chief of Staff to the Commander-in-Chief, General Wacław Stachiewicz, later recalled:

On 16 September the head of the French mission, General Faury, informed me that he had sent a report to his authorities stating that the situation on our front was improving and that if we were given a few days to carry out our orders, we would be able to hold out in eastern Lesser Poland and concentrate significant forces there, opening new possibilities of action. At the same time, however, he informed me that he had received notice that the start of the offensive in the West would be postponed by a few days (to the 20th day of mobilisation, that is, 21 September), as preparations were not yet complete

In Polish historiography, the prevailing view is that the decisions taken on 12 September 1939 constituted a breach of the obligations arising from the alliance treaties. One of the important causes of Poland's rapid defeat has been identified as the lack of proper assistance from the West — a view which, according to Mazur, often disregards the actual circumstances or treats them selectively. One consequence of this approach has been the creation of the “Abbeville betrayal” myth — perpetuated mainly by some Polish historians.

Thus, it is hard to avoid the impression that the French deliberately misled the Poles to believe they would launch an offensive against Germany — and then left them to fight alone. For example, according to Leszek Moczulski, the events can be best described as a medieval concept of feudal felony — betrayal of an ally on the field of battle.

See also: Juliusz Łukasiewicz, Dyplomata w Paryżu. 1936–1939. Wspomnienia i dokumenty Juliusza Łukasiewicza Ambasadora Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej. Expanded edition, ed. Wacław Jędrzejewicz and Henryk Bułhak, London 1989, Polish Cultural Foundation, ISBN 0-85065-169-7;

Edward Bernard Raczyński, W sojuszniczym Londynie. Dziennik ambasadora Edwarda Raczyńskiego 1939–1945, Warsaw 1990, Nowa;

Marek Kornat, Polska 1939 roku wobec paktu Ribbentrop–Mołotow... (PISM 2002), pp. 501–527; 531–654.</ref> According to Paweł Wieczorkiewicz [ pl ], the Abbeville decision represented a violation of the obligations of the Franco–Polish military agreement (which bound the ally to begin an offensive on the fifteenth day after general mobilisation). The leaders of France and Britain were aware of the contents of the secret protocol of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, but did not reveal it to the Polish authorities for fear of Poland's premature capitulation.

Mazur argues, however, that Polish authors generally stopped at fairly schematic critical assessments of the conference and seldom attempted deeper source-based justification. For example, Romuald Szeremietiew considers that by the mere fact of Britain and France declaring war on Germany, Poland achieved its strategic goal.

Marshal Alphonse Juin later called the Abbeville decision shameful and erroneous from a strategic perspective: the military risk of an Allied offensive was negligible (according to Wieczorkiewicz, 74 French divisions faced 44 German divisions — mostly second-line formations — while the Allies had a fourfold superiority in artillery, an eightyfold superiority in tanks, and dominance in the air), and the German Siegfried Line was incomplete. On the other hand, military historians have shown that French tanks, bombers, and artillery were largely outdated, as was French doctrine. Given the French doctrine of a “ material war,” the geography of the Western Front favouring German defenders, and the strength of 44 German divisions, their modern air force, the Siegfried Line, and the major obstacle of the Rhine, France could not have launched a rapid or effective offensive in 1939. All these factors were more than sufficient to stop the French until German forces returned from Poland. In either case, most historians agree that after the Soviet invasion of Poland on 17 September, any Allied offensive became entirely pointless.

The Abbey Church of Sainte-Foy in Conques, France, was a popular stop for pilgrims traveling the Way of St. James to Santiago de Compostela, in what is now Spain. The main draw for medieval pilgrims at Conques were the remains of Sainte Foy, a young woman martyred during the fourth century. The relics of Sainte-Foy arrived in Conques through theft in 866. After unsuccessful attempts to acquire the relics of Saint Vincent of Saragossa and then the relics of St. Vincent Pompejac in Agen, the abbey authorities set their sights on the relics of Sainte-Foy at the ancient St. Faith's Church, Sélestat. The Conques abbey opened a priory next to the shrine in Sélestat. A monk from Conques posed as a loyal monk in Agen for nearly a decade in order to get close enough to the relics to steal them.

Beginning in the 13th century, the abbey began to fall into decline as Saint Faith's popularity was elipsed by that of other saints and due to Conques' marginal location. The abbey was confiscated from the Benedictine order in 1537 by order of the Bishop of Rodez, Georges d'Armagnac, and given to a chapter of regular canons. In 1568, during the Wars of Religion, the Protestants seized Conques and burnt down much of the abbey, including parts of the church, most notably the original towers. The abbey experienced a brief revival in the 17th century, however, further destruction occurred due to the Revolution and the subsequent banishment of the canons, resulting in quarrying the buildings by the then-impoverished villagers. Thanks to the work of individuals such as Prosper Mérimée and Étienne Boissonnade, the building was saved, restored (including the construction of the current towers), and returned to the Premonstratensians who sent monks from Mondaye Abbey. Today, the church remains a functional parish and pilgrimage church while also hosting choral and organ services.

The abbey church has been classified as a national monument of France (French: monument historique classé) since 1840.

The original monastery building at Conques was an eighth-century oratory built by monks fleeing the Saracens in Spain. The original chapel was destroyed in the eleventh century in order to facilitate the creation of a much larger church as the arrival of the relics of Sainte-Foy caused the pilgrimage route to shift from Agen to Conques. The second phase of construction, which was completed by the end of the 11th century, included the building of the five radiating chapels, the ambulatory with a lower roof, the choir without the gallery and the nave without the galleries. The third phase of construction, which was completed early in the twelfth-century, was inspired by the churches of Toulouse and Santiago de Compostela. Like most pilgrimage churches Conques is a basilica plan that has been modified into a cruciform plan. Galleries were added over the aisle and the roof was raised over the transept and choir to allow people to circulate at the gallery level. The western aisle was also added to allow for increased pilgrim traffic. The exterior length of the church is 59 metres (193 ft 7 in). The interior length is 56 metres (183 ft 9 in), and the width of each transept is 14.80 metres (48 ft 7 in). The height of the crossing tower is 26.40 metres (86 ft 7 in) tall.

The arches of the main aisle are simple rounded arches. These arches are echoed in the arches of the gallery which are half of the main arches' height with central supporting piers. Narrower versions of these arches are also found in the apse. The aisle around the apse is separated from the sanctuary by pillars and by the chapels which open up off of the transept. There are three radiating chapels off of the apse and two chapels off of the transept. The side aisles are roofed with a barrel vault that was originally covered with stucco. The nave at Conques is roofed with a continuous barrel vault which is 60 centimetres (24 in) thick. The nave is divided into bays by piers which rise through the gallery and over the barrel vault. The piers of the naves are huge stone blocks laid horizontally and covered with either four half-columns or four pilasters. The interior of the church is 20.70 metres (67 ft 11 in) tall with the sense of verticality being intensified by the repeating pattern of half-columns and pilasters approaching the high altar. The barrel vault's outward thrust is met by the half barrels of the galleries which run the length of the nave and transept.

The crossing dome is a delicate octagon set in square. Ribs radiate out from the center. Figures in the squinches are angels with realistic expressions and animated eyes.

There are 212 columns in Conques with decorated capitals. The capitals are decorated with a variety of motifs including palm leaves, symbols, biblical monsters and scenes from the life of Sainte-Foy. On the fifth capital of the north side of the nave are two intricate and expressive birds. On the corresponding capital on the south side of the nave are flat and lifeless human figures. The figures appear to have a slight hunch, as if they are reacting to the weight of the arches above them. The capitals functioned as didactic picture books for both monks and pilgrims. Traces of color are still visible on a number of the columns.

Light filters into Conques through the large windows under the groin vaults of the aisle and through the low windows under the half barrels of the galleries. The windows in the clerestory and the light from the ambulatory and radiating chapels focus directly onto the high altar. The nave receives direct light from the crossing tower.

The original windows have long since vanished and after WWII the spaces were filled with colourful figurative glass designs. Over time these came to be seen to be at odds with the original spirit of the architecture. In 1986, the artist Pierre Soulages accepted an invitation by the Culture Ministry and the Arts Delegation and Heritage Direction for St.-Foy Abbey-church to design and create 104 windows (95 full windows and 9 oculi) for the building.

Soulages designed abstract, rows of gently bending lines that shift in direction from panel to panel. He created the windows from reconstituted crushed white glass in order to keep the purity and the power of the bay architecture. Pierre Soulages' stained-glass windows are nowadays an integral element of Conques architecture, history and its collective memory "in accordance with the function of this architecture and the emotion felt in this space, agreeing with its purpose of contemplation, meditation and prayer"

The ambulatory allowed pilgrims to glimpse into the sanctuary space through a metal grill. The metal grill was created out of donated shackles from former prisoners who attributed their freedom to Sainte-Foy. The chains also have a number of symbolic meanings including reminding pilgrims of the ability of Sainte-Foy to free prisoners and the ability of monks to free the penitent from the chains of sin. The stories associated with the ability of Sainte-Foy to free the faithful follows a specific pattern. Often a faithful pilgrim is captured and chained about the neck, they pray to Sainte-Foy and are miraculously freed. The captor is sometimes tortured and then dismissed. The liberated pilgrims would then immediately travel to Conques and dedicate their former chains to Sainte-Foy relaying their tale to all who would listen. As stories spread pilgrimage traffic increased.

There is little exterior ornamentation on Conques except necessary buttresses and cornices. The exception to this is the tympanum located above the western entrance which depicts the Second Coming. As pilgrimages became safer and more popular the focus on penance began to wane. Images of doom were used to remind pilgrims of the purpose of their pilgrimage. The tympanum appears to be later than the artwork in the nave. This is to be expected as construction on churches was usually begun in the east and completed in the west. The tympanum depicts Christ in Majesty presiding over the judgment of the souls of the deceased. The cross behind Christ indicates he is both Judge and Savior. Archangel Michael and a demon weigh the souls of the deceased on a scale. The righteous go to Christ's right while the damned go to Christ's left where they are eaten by a Leviathan and excreted into Hell. The tortures of Hell are vividly depicted including poachers being roasted by the very rabbit they poached from the monastery. The tympanum also provides an example of cloister wit. A bishop who governed the area of Conques but was not well liked by the monks of Conques is depicted as being caught in one of the nets of Hell. The virtuous are depicted less colorfully. The Virgin Mary, St. Peter and the pilgrim St. James stand on Christ's left. Above their heads are scrolls depicting the names of the Virtues. Two gable shaped lintels act as the entrance into Heaven. In Heaven Abraham is shown holding close the souls of the righteous. A pudgy abbot leads a king, possibly Charlemagne, into heaven. Sainte-Foy is shown on the lower left kneeling in prayer and being touched by the outstretched hand of God. Particularly interesting are carvings of the "curieux" (the curious ones), forerunners of the World War II-era cartoon image known as Kilroy, who peek over the edges of the tympanum. The tympanum was inspired by illuminated manuscripts and would have been fully colored; small traces of the color survive today.

Conques is the home of many spectacular treasures. One of which is the famous 'A' of Charlemagne. The legend is that Charlemagne had twenty-four golden letters created to give to the monasteries in his kingdom. Conques received his 'A', indicating that it was his favorite. This is only legend; while the 'A' exists, it dates to c. 1100, and no other pieces of Charlemagne's alphabet have ever been found. Conques is also home to an arm of St. George the Dragon Slayer. It is claimed that the arm at Conques is the arm with which he actually slew the dragon.

The golden statue reliquary of Sainte-Foy dominated the treasury of Conques. The reliquary statue itself was of a twelve year old girl who was beheaded for staying loyal to her faith and beliefs. During the Roman persecution of Christians in the fourth century, Foy refused to surrender her devotion to Christianity, even under torture and threats. As written in the Passio, Foy exclaimed, "For the name of my Lord Jesus Christ I have been prepared not only to be threatened but to suffer all kinds of torments," staying true to her exemplary faith. Her strong will ultimately led her to be tortured and burned to death with a hot brazier, a pan made for coal.

Catching a glimpse of the reliquary was the main goal of the pilgrims who came to Conques. The head of the reliquary contains a piece of skull which has been authenticated. The reliquary is a fifth-century Roman head, possibly the head of an emperor, mounted on a wooden core covered with gold plating. Made in the latter half of the ninth-century, the reliquary was 2 feet 9 inches tall. As miracles reportedly increased, the gold crown, earrings, gold throne, filigree work and cameos and jewels, mostly donations from pilgrims, were added. In the fourteenth-century a pair of crystal balls and their mounts were added to the throne. Silver arms and hands were added in the sixteenth century. In the eighteenth-century bronze shoes and bronze plates on the knees were added. There is no one distinct, credited artist for this reliquary because it is a dynamic work of art that changed with the incoming donations to the church over time. The relics themselves were stolen from the nearby town of Agen by the monks of Conques in what was commonly called a furtum sacrum, or holy robbery.

In the aftermath of the French Revolution, the relics and treasures were removed by local residents and hidden nearby, while the sanctuary was converted to a "Temple of Reason."

Upon visiting Conques in 1833, the author and antiquary Prosper Mérimée, then France's Inspector of Historical Monuments found the abbey beyond repair, but inspired thorough restorations of the church. In 1873, Norbertine order (Premonstratensians) were assigned as the Catholic caretakers of the church.

The Sainte-Foy abbey church was added to the UNESCO World Heritage Sites in 1998, as part of the World Heritage Sites of the Routes of Santiago de Compostela in France. Its Romanesque architecture, albeit somewhat updated in places, is displayed in periodic self-guided tour opportunities, especially of the upper level, some of which occur at night with live music and appropriately-adjusted light levels.

The Abbey of Fontenay is a former Cistercian abbey located in the commune of Marmagne, near Montbard, in the département of Côte-d'Or in France. It was founded by Saint Bernard of Clairvaux in 1118, and built in the Romanesque style. It is one of the oldest and most complete Cistercian abbeys in Europe, and became a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1981. Of the original complex comprising church, dormitory, cloister, chapter house, caldarium, refectory, dovecote and the so-called " forge ", all remain intact except the refectory and are well maintained. The Abbey of Fontenay, along with other Cistercian abbeys, forms a connecting link between Romanesque and Gothic architecture.

In the late 11th century during the heyday of the great church of Cluny III (a magnificent Benedictine monastery in Cluny, France), although Cluny had numerous followers, Saint Robert of Molesme, the subsequent founder of Cîteaux Abbey, led a strong reaction against it. Saint Robert thought that Cluny was against the actual Rule of Saint Benedict: “to work is to pray”. As a result, Saint Robert, along with a group of monks who shared this belief, detached from Cluny.

Saint Robert established the Order of Cistercians in Citeaux, France. The new order strictly observed the Rule of Saint Benedict. As part of this rule, monks had to be poor and live a simple life. In order not to be distracted from the religious life, Cistercians built self-sufficient monasteries in isolated areas and refused to use servants. Cistercian monasteries were independent. They differed from Cluny in that all houses were under the direct control of the abbot, and each Cistercian monastery needed to take care of its own. Each of them was most likely an independent individual society.

Bernard of Clairvaux, an abbot and the primary builder of the reformed Cistercian order, shared the same faith with Saint Robert of Molesme. However, Bernard felt that Cîteaux Abbey was not austere enough and did not completely reflect the Rule of Saint Benedict. Thus, in 1118 he founded the Abbey of Fontenay in a Burgundy valley with strictly implemented austerity.

The Cistercian monks moved to Fontenay Abbey in 1130. Nine years later, the Bishop of Norwich fled to Fontenay to escape persecution, and helped finance the construction of the church with his wealth. The church was consecrated in 1147 by Pope Eugene III.

By 1200 the monastic complex was complete and able to serve as many as 300 monks. In 1259, the devout King Louis exempted the Abbey of Fontenay from all taxes, and being in the King's good graces, ten years later the abbey became a royal abbey.

In 1359, the Abbey of Fontenay was pillaged by the armies of King Edward III of England during the Hundred Years' War. It suffered further damage during the Wars of Religion in late 16th century. In 1745, the refectory was destroyed. With the beginning of the French Revolution in 1789 all of the monks successively left the abbey due to dechristianisation during the revolution and in 1791, the site was turned into a paper mill, run by the Montgolfier brothers.

In 1906 Edouard Aynard, an art-loving banker from Lyon, bought the abbey and commenced its restoration which was complete by 1911. Edouard's descendants continued to work on the abbey and it remains in the Aynard family to this day. In 1981 the abbey became a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

All Cistercian churches have the same model and are similar to one another; for example, Graiguenamanagh Abbey's church, built in Ireland in 1204, has a floor plan closely resembling that of Fontenay. The spirit of Cistercian architecture is simple, conservative, and utilitarian. Cistercian monastery churches feature Romanesque architecture, including symmetrical plan, massive walls, sturdy piers, groin vaults, round arches, and a tall central nave. In medieval Europe, the Cistercian ethic of manual labor work became "the main force of technological diffusion" in many fields, including metallurgy.

The Abbey was primarily constructed using stones from local areas. The church of the abbey is of typical Cistercian architecture, built in the Romanesque style. It is in a Latin cross shape, with a nave 66 metres long and 8 metres wide, two side-aisles, and a transept measuring 19 metres. In contrast to earlier churches, the church of the abbey has a flattened apse and two rectangular (instead of semicircular) chapels of each side of the transept. The cloister measures 36 by 38 metres. The chapter house is vaulted, with heavy ribs. There is a large dormitory which was re-roofed in the fifteenth century with an arched braced roof of chestnut timber.

Except for the demolished refectory, the abbey retains almost all of its original buildings: church, dormitory, cloister, chapter house, caldarium or "warming room", dovecote and the so-called "forge", all built in Romanesque style. The abbot's lodgings and infirmary were built at a later date. Today the abbey buildings are set in modern manicured parterres of lawn and gravel.

The structure known as "the forge", with a floor area of 53.3 × 13.5 metres, is located 30 metres south of the main complex. Traditionally, it was often interpreted as a forge or multifunctional workshop building. However, there is no architectural or historical evidence for this and architectural comparisons suggest that it was used as a brewery and/or bakehouse.

In all of the original buildings, neither the exteriors nor interiors are decorated. Although Bernard of Clairvaux did not attempt to reject art or beauty, he was cautious of "those manifestations of beauty which lead the eyes of the mind away from the imago Dei (image of God) to the imagines mundi (images of the world)." Although there are no flowers in the capitals, no decorative motifs and no images anywhere, the abbey is still an outstanding artwork.

The church and the cloister, the centre of life for monks, were built in logically distributed spaces. In anticipation of the monastery's future expansion, instead of creating an enclosed structure, the church and the cloister were created parallel or perpendicular to each other with open ends. In this way, during expansion the existing cloister and church would not be influenced.

There is no bell tower in the abbey, because Bernard of Clairvaux felt this would take away from the austerity. As an alternative, small bells were attached into the wall beside the church door to call lay brothers to gather together.

In the interior of the church, massive cruciform piers sustain high, large barrel vaults consisting of pointed arches and transverse pointed arches. Diaphragm pointed arches are also evident. The abundant use of pointed arches was chosen because “the pointed arch channels the weight onto the bearing piers or columns at a steep angle, ” and will support a tall building for thousands of years.

Bernard of Clairvaux, who constrained decoration, believed that only light should enter the church. For a long time it was also believed that perfect proportions can be achieved through music. Thus, when designing the glass windows, numerical ratios corresponding to music were applied. For instance, the seven windows in the west of the interior were distributed according to a musical ratio of 3/4.

The thirty-six meter cloister located at the back of the church is divided by pillars into small galleries. In each gallery, double column pillars with lanceolate capitals support a double arches vault. This cloister was an important place for monks to spend their spare time reading, working and praying.

This World Heritage Site has retained the greater part of its Romanesque and Early Gothic monastic buildings, giving uniquely intact picture of a Cistercian monastery of the 12th century.

The Abbey of Saint-Jouin-de-Marnes is a historic abbey located in the commune of Saint-Jouin-de-Marnes in the Deux-Sèvres department of Nouvelle-Aquitaine, France. Its former abbey church, a masterpiece of Poitevin Romanesque architecture, stands as one of the region's most significant religious monuments. Originally known as Ensio during the Gallo-Roman period and later Ension, the abbey has played a pivotal role in the spread of Christianity in the area.

In the late 4th century, Jovinus (French : Saint Jouin), hailing from a wealthy family in Mouterre-Silly near Loudun, sought solitude in the forests of the region with a small group of disciples. His brother, Saint Maximin, was among the first archbishops of Trier. According to tradition, around 342, Jovinus established an oratory near Ensio. This oratory evolved into a monastery, initially named Ension, which later became Saint-Jouin-de-Marnes. Following the foundation of Ligugé Abbey by Saint Martin of Tours in 361, it became the second oldest monastery in France. Jovinus' preaching and benevolence led to his veneration, with his relics preserved in the monastery's Carolingian-era church.

In the 6th century, Felix of Nantes, bishop of Nantes, urged Martin of Vertou to evangelize southern parts of his diocese and Poitou. Martin arrived at Ension, where he found an established monastic community and introduced the Rule of Saint Benedict to guide the monks' way of life.

During the wars between Pepin the Short, Charlemagne, and Hunald I, Duke of Aquitaine, in the late 8th century, the monks fled the monastery due to conflicts in the region.

The abbey escaped destruction during the Viking invasions of the early 9th century due to its inland location, away from navigable rivers. It became a cultural hub in Upper Poitou, offering refuge to monks from other monasteries, such as the abbey of Saint Martin of Vertou, who brought relics with them. In 843, after the Vikings withdrew due to Louis the Pious, the monks revitalized the monastery, reinstating the Rule of Saint Benedict. By 878, the Carolingian church was rebuilt, attracting pilgrims whose donations bolstered the abbey's prosperity.

Located along the Via Turonensis, a major pilgrimage route to Santiago de Compostela, the abbey saw a surge in pilgrims during the 11th century, outgrowing its Carolingian church. Construction of a new abbey church began in 1095 under Raoul de La Futaie, a monk and reformer, and was completed by 1130, reflecting the abbey's growing wealth and influence.

In 1100, Raoul became abbot, overseeing the completion of the abbey church by 1130. Its grand proportions and artistic features symbolized the abbey's prosperity. By 1179, the abbey held jurisdiction over 127 churches and their communities, establishing churches in Saint-Sébastien-sur-Loire, Nantes, Vertou, and Les Moutiers-en-Retz.

The Romanesque barrel vaults of the nave and choir were replaced with Angevin Gothic vaults. Structural issues in the southeast choir area led to the addition of unsightly pillars to prevent collapse, altering the choir's harmonious proportions.

During the Hundred Years' War, the region fell under English control between 1369 and 1374. In 1372, the English added a small bell tower to the south tower. Fortifications were expanded, including an elevated southern transept with machicolations and a large spiral staircase for defensive purposes. The abbey withstood attacks, and the region was reclaimed by Bertrand du Guesclin in the 1370s. In 1422, fortifications were further strengthened but sustained significant damage. The monastery was restored in 1447, and in 1467, Saint-Jouin-de-Marnes became a market town. In 1476, Pierre III d'Amboise rebuilt the monastery and cloister, though only the southern cloister gallery survives today.

The French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) devastated the abbey. In February 1568, Protestant cavalry en route to the Battle of Moncontour looted and burned the monastery, destroying Saint Jovinus' relics. Further looting occurred in 1569.

In 1655, the monks joined the Congregation of Saint-Maur, ushering in a period of prosperity. The abbey expanded northwest of the church, housing a painting school.

Monastic life had declined by the mid-18th century. In 1755, the old conventual buildings were demolished and rebuilt, but the abbey lost its independence, falling under Amboise's administration. By 1770, it was largely abandoned. The French Revolution of 1789 ended monastic life, and the abbey was sold as national property, though the church was spared demolition and returned to worship in 1795.

In the mid-19th century, Prosper Mérimée found the abbey in poor condition. His advocacy led to its preservation, and in 1862, the abbey church was designated a monument historique. Paintings, bells, and choir stalls also received protected status.

Restoration, often interrupted, concluded in the mid-20th century. Today, the abbey church, southern cloister gallery, and private convent building remain well-preserved, reflecting its historical spiritual and economic significance. The former presbytery was listed as a historic monument on January 23, 2017.

The abbey church of Saint-Jouin-de-Marnes is a quintessential example of Poitevin Romanesque architecture, characterized by its robust forms, intricate sculptural decoration, and harmonious proportions. Constructed between 1095 and 1130, the church reflects the abbey's prosperity during the height of its influence as a pilgrimage stop along the Via Turonensis.

The church follows a Latin cross plan, typical of Romanesque ecclesiastical architecture, with a prominent nave, transept, and apse. The façade is a highlight, featuring a richly decorated portal adorned with carved reliefs depicting biblical scenes, including the Last Judgment and scenes from the life of Christ. These sculptures, executed with remarkable detail, are characteristic of the Poitevin style, which emphasizes narrative clarity and expressive figures.

The nave, originally covered with a Romanesque barrel vault, was modified in the 13th century with the introduction of Angevin Gothic ribbed vaults, a regional style known for its elegant, plant-like rib patterns. This alteration, while enhancing the interior's verticality, required the addition of reinforcing pillars in the choir due to structural weaknesses in the southeast section, slightly disrupting the original aesthetic harmony. The choir itself is surrounded by an ambulatory with radiating chapels, a common feature in pilgrimage churches designed to accommodate the circulation of pilgrims viewing relics.

The transept, particularly the southern arm, was fortified during the 14th century amid the Hundred Years' War. The addition of machicolations and a defensive upper level, accessible via a large spiral staircase, transformed this section into a fortified structure, reflecting the abbey's strategic role during regional conflicts. The crossing is surmounted by a robust bell tower, which provides a focal point for the church's exterior silhouette.

The cloister, rebuilt in 1476 by Pierre III d'Amboise, retains only its southern gallery, which connects to the church's north side. This gallery features simple Gothic arches, contrasting with the Romanesque grandeur of the church, and serves as a reminder of the abbey's later architectural evolution. The surviving convent buildings, expanded in the 17th century under the Congregation of Saint-Maur, include spaces used for a painting school, though these are now privately owned.

The abbey's architectural significance is further underscored by its designation as a monument historique in 1862, with additional protections for its choir stalls, paintings, and bells. Restoration efforts in the 20th century preserved the church's structural integrity and sculptural details, ensuring its status as a well-preserved example of Poitevin Romanesque art.

Abortion in France is legal upon request until 14 weeks after conception (16 weeks after the pregnant woman's last menstrual period). Abortions at later stages of pregnancy up until birth are allowed if two physicians certify that the abortion will be done to prevent injury to the physical or mental health of the pregnant woman; a risk to the life of the pregnant woman; or that the child will suffer from a particularly severe illness recognized as incurable. The abortion law was liberalized by the Veil Act in 1975.

It is also known as induced abortion or voluntary termination of pregnancy, and refers to the deliberate termination of a pregnancy at the request of a pregnant woman who does not wish to continue the pregnancy.

The First French Republic saw the act of abortion being changed from an act punishable by death to a felony with a sentence of up to 20 years in prison. When the 1810 Napoleonic Code was introduced as a revision of the French Penal Code of 1791, as well as the Code of Offences and Penalties of 1795, abortion retained its felony status. Alongside this, the new penal code made it more difficult for women to divorce their husbands.

In 1920, new abortion laws prohibited the act of abortion, as well as the use of contraception, on the grounds of needing new babies to make up for the loss of population caused by World War I and to boost the birth rate of France that had been considerably lower than other European countries for over a century. The introduction of the Law of 27 March 1923 stated that whoever induced a miscarriage was punished with up to 5 years imprisonment, as well as a fine of up to 10,000 FF, while the woman having the abortion could be imprisoned for up to 3 years.

Just a month before the invasion of Poland, the Penal Code was altered to permit abortions, but only in the instance where the mother's life was in danger. However, with the German Occupation and the implementation of the Vichy Government, abortion was made a capital crime, punishable by death, in the Law of 15 February 1942. The last person to be executed for abortion was Marie-Louise Giraud, a faiseuse d'anges (French slang; literally, "maker of angels") who performed abortions in the region of Cherbourg. For her assisted abortions, she was sentenced to death by guillotine on 30 July 1943.

Following the Liberation of Paris in 1944, the death penalty for abortion was abolished, but abortion continued to be prosecuted vigorously. Illegal abortion rates remained fairly high during the post-war period, and increasing numbers of women began to travel to the United Kingdom to procure abortions after the UK legalized abortion in 1967.

During the period of civil unrest during and after the events of May 1968, a new civil rights movement was becoming prominent throughout the media, campaigning for more equal rights and opportunities for women. The Mouvement de Libération des Femmes 's ("The Women's Liberation Front") main goal was to advocate for women's right of autonomy from their husbands, as well as rights that pertained to the use of contraception and legalization of abortion.

In 1971, the " Manifesto of the 343 ", an open letter and petition, was written by Simone de Beauvoir and published in Le Nouvel observateur. It included the signatures of 343 women who admitted to having had an illegal abortion (punishable by up to 10 years in prison at the time). The petition included the names of many famous female personalities, including Jeanne Moreau and Catherine Deneuve. The manifesto aimed to highlight the prevalence of abortion in French society, despite its clandestine nature, as well as to call for abortion to be made legal, to provide more safe and hygienic spaces for women who want to have an abortion. Later the same year, lawyer Gisèle Halimi, herself one of the 343 women, formed her own group, Choisir ("To Choose"), which worked to protect those who had signed the petition.

In 1975, La Loi Veil ("The Veil Act") was passed, decriminalizing abortion in France. The law was introduced by the presiding Health Minister Simone Veil, under Valéry Giscard d'Estaing. D'Estaing had promised to decriminalize abortion during his campaign; however, Jean Lecanuet, then Minister of Justice, refused to defend the law on personal and ethical grounds, and so, it was up to Veil to prepare the law for vote. The debate that preceded the eventual passing of the vote was accompanied by violent attacks and demonstrations comparing Veil, a concentration camp survivor, with Hitler. In her speech before the National Assembly on 26 November 1974, Veil declared the need for the legalization of abortion, to bring equality in France, as well as explaining to the majority-male assembly that current French law did not protect women who were suffering from the social exclusion and shame as a result of illegal abortions, as well as the after-effects that led to illnesses (such as sepsis) and even death, calling for the law to offer them protection with a change of law to legalize abortions.

The Veil Act (Law 75–17 of 15 January 1975), permitted a woman to receive an abortion on request until the tenth week of pregnancy. This was a temporary law with a sunset clause after 5 years. The law was renewed permanently in December 1979.

Since 1982, much of the costs of abortions have been taken into charge by the French social security system, which allows women in France to access abortion free of charge. France was the first country to legalize the use of Mifepristone as an abortifacient in 1988, allowing its use up to seven weeks of pregnancy under the supervision of a physician, while vacuum aspiration is used for up to 12 weeks.

Several reforms took place in the 21st century, further liberalizing access to abortion. The ten-week limit was extended to the twelfth week in 2001, and it was extended to fourteen weeks in 2022. Also since 2001, minors no longer need mandatory parental consent. A pregnant girl under the age of 18 may ask for an abortion without consulting her parents first if she is accompanied to the clinic by an adult of her choice, who must not tell her parents or any third party about the abortion. Until 2015, the law imposed a seven-day "cool-off" period between the patient's first request for an abortion and a written statement confirming her decision (the delay could be reduced to two days if the patient was getting close to 12 weeks). That mandatory waiting period was abolished on 9 April 2015.

In reaction to the Supreme Court of the United States 's Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization ruling, Mathilde Panot, the leader of the La France insoumise group in the National Assembly, introduced a bill for an amendment adding the right to a safe abortion to the Constitution. It passed on a 337–32 vote on 24 November 2023. However, a private member's bill for a constitutional amendment needs to be approved by referendum ; in order to avoid one, the government introduced a similar bill in December. It was passed 433–30 by the lower house in January and by the Senate 267–50 in February.

The amendment, which takes the form of a one-line addition to article 34 (the list of matters on which Parliament may legislate), was given final approval in a congress (joint session) of Parliament on 4 March 2024, in a 780 to 72 vote. It was signed into law by President Emmanuel Macron on 8 March (International Women's Day). This amendment made France, as of passage, the only nation (and the first) to guarantee the right to an abortion in their constitution. The amendment describes abortion as a "guaranteed freedom"; while Yugoslavia included similar measures in 1974 guaranteeing the right to "decide on having children", the French amendment is the first to explicitly guarantee abortion.

Two types of medical methods exist for terminating a pregnancy: medication-based and surgical methods. The former does not require hospitalization but is limited to early pregnancies: for example, up to seven weeks of pregnancy under French law, equivalent to nine weeks of amenorrhea. Beyond this period and up to the legal limit for abortion, surgical methods must be used. Surgical abortion is legal up to 14 weeks of pregnancy, or a maximum of 16 weeks from the start of the last menstrual period.

The medication-based method can be performed during the first trimester, with the duration depending on the applicable legislation.

The combination of mifepristone and misoprostol results in complete expulsion of the embryo but appears slightly more effective when misoprostol is administered vaginally, achieving a success rate of nearly 95%. However, this finding is debated. The vaginal route is better tolerated.

The main side effects of these medications include significant genital bleeding and various digestive issues. This combination is contraindicated in cases of acute or chronic renal failure, hepatic failure, adrenal insufficiency, severe asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, anemia, coagulation disorders, cardiovascular history, other contraindications to prostaglandins, allergy to mifepristone, or suspected ectopic pregnancy. Age over 35 or smoking increases cardiovascular risks.

This medication-based technique allows for an abortion to be performed at home and is widely used in the United States.

Taking mifepristone as early as possible, followed 24–48 hours later by buccal or vaginal administration of misoprostol, is 98% effective in the first nine weeks of gestation; between nine and ten weeks, the effectiveness drops to 94%. The regimen (200 mg of mifepristone, followed 24–48 hours later by 800 mcg of vaginal misoprostol) previously used by Planned Parenthood clinics in the United States from 2001 to March 2006 was 98.5% effective through 63 days of gestation—with an ongoing pregnancy rate of about 0.5%, and an additional 1% of women requiring uterine evacuation for various reasons, including problematic bleeding, persistent gestational sac, clinician judgment, or a woman's request. The regimen (200 mg of mifepristone, followed 24–48 hours later by 800 mcg of buccal misoprostol) currently used by Planned Parenthood clinics in the United States since April 2006 is 98% effective through 59 days of gestation.

In case of failure of a medical abortion, a surgical abortion remains an option. However, if the patient chooses to continue the pregnancy after a failed medical abortion, there is a risk of fetal malformation.

In France, any physician performing medical abortions must have an agreement with a healthcare facility authorized to perform abortions. A medical abortion requires at least five medical consultations: two preliminary consultations, one for the administration of mifepristone, one for misoprostol, and a follow-up visit 15 days later. The medication is administered in the presence of a physician, midwife, or nurse in an orthogenic center. An abortion must be performed in a healthcare facility if the pregnant woman wishes to remain anonymous.

Abortion under local anesthesia is not painful, except for some women who may experience pain similar to menstrual cramps for a few minutes at the end of the aspiration. However, patients generally prefer general anesthesia (75% versus 20% for local anesthesia in France) to avoid being conscious during the procedure. Both types of anesthesia have equivalent safety, though their complications differ.

The primary surgical method involves aspirating the embryo using a cannula inserted into the uterus after dilation of the cervix and administration of anesthesia, which may be local or general. The success rate of this surgical method is 99.7%.

A simpler aspiration method, requiring neither anesthesia nor cervical dilation, is the Karman method, developed around 1970. This method is safer and faster than curettage or aspiration after dilation.

Curettage (specifically "dilation and curettage") is another surgical method that uses a curette instead of a suction device. This technique, which emerged in the mid-19th century, is increasingly being replaced in developed countries by the safer and more comfortable embryo aspiration method. However, it remains widely used in developing countries and can lead to serious complications (hemorrhages, uterine perforations, infections), sometimes causing infertility or death.

The use of antibiotics (doxycycline) is standard practice, reducing infectious complications from curettage.

The concurrent use of mifepristone or misoprostol softens the cervix and facilitates its dilation.

From the 7th to the 16th week of amenorrhea, abortion can be performed surgically. This method is conducted in a single day and involves aspirating the uterine contents under general anesthesia. At 14 weeks of amenorrhea, the size of the fetus and the solidification of its head make aspiration impossible. It becomes necessary to dismember the fetus and reduce its head in utero.

For example, in Canada, the procedure takes approximately 15 to 30 minutes, followed by about one hour of rest at the clinic.

Regardless of the chosen technique, there are risks that the patient must be informed about. In the case of clandestine abortions, the risks are more numerous and often have more severe consequences. In a favorable context, medical follow-up is also in place to address potential physical risks. For medical abortion, risks include hemorrhage, infection, failure, and side effects of the medications (pain, nausea, vomiting). For surgical abortion, there are risks inherent to any surgical procedure, including a 1% chance of uterine perforation with the risk of intestinal perforation, hemorrhage, failure, infection, and risks to future fertility. No increased risk of infertility, miscarriages, or ectopic pregnancy has been demonstrated in women who have undergone abortion.

It is recommended that the practitioner discuss contraception options with the patient immediately following an abortion. The immediate insertion of an intrauterine device can be done safely. Various emotions may be experienced following an abortion. In most cases, women feel relief, but in others, feelings such as regret or sadness may arise.

In France, the healthcare system is accustomed to receiving women seeking abortion anonymously. However, in December 2009, the French Ministry of Health published a report by the Directorate for Research, Studies, Evaluation, and Statistics (DREES), stating that psychological support for women requesting an abortion is too often neglected.

Typically performed under poor sanitary conditions, clandestine abortions are a cause of severe complications and high female mortality in many countries.

In 2003, 48% of abortions worldwide were performed under unsafe conditions, and over 97% of these unsafe abortions occurred in developing countries. A comprehensive study shows that between 2010 and 2014, 87.5% of abortions in developed countries were safe, compared to only 50.5% in developing countries. The rate of unsafe abortions rises to 76.4% in Latin America and 75.6% in Africa.

Approximately 20 million abortions are performed annually outside appropriate facilities or by practitioners lacking the necessary skills, or self-administered by women. An estimated 68,000 women die each year from these procedures, often due to hemorrhage, sepsis, or poisoning, with millions more suffering long-term consequences, sometimes including secondary infertility.

In 2020, the World Health Organization emphasized in its framework for preventing unsafe abortions:

Virtually all deaths and disabilities from abortions could be prevented through sexual education, the use of effective contraception, access to legal and medically safe induced abortion, and timely care for complications.

In several countries (India, China, Nepal, Vietnam, South Korea, Taiwan, etc.), where abortion has been legal since the 1970s, it is sometimes misused to select the sex of children. Cultural preferences in these countries favor male births due to issues of honor, family heritage, or religious practices. Despite prohibitions in these countries against using abortion for sex selection (e.g., in South Korea, until 2009, gynecologists were barred from revealing the baby's sex), millions of female fetuses are terminated annually. This has led to a surplus of male births in Asia for over two decades, resulting in a significant shortage of women. Asia is the only continent to have become predominantly male, leaving millions of men unable to find partners.

In April 2005, The Observer reported an illegal trafficking of fetuses, including those over 12 weeks, from Ukraine to Russia, where their cells are used in beauty salons for illegal, scientifically dubious, and dangerous cosmetic treatments aimed at wealthy clients seeking rejuvenation. The newspaper alleges that traffickers pay Ukrainian women £100 to consent to abortions and allow the use of their fetuses by public research institutes. However, according to Ukrainian police, these institutes, plagued by corruption, resell the fetuses for £5,000 to private clinics, particularly in Moscow, where these treatments are performed. Some doctors reportedly pay women or deceive them into delaying their abortions, as later-term fetuses are particularly valued. According to the Russian Ministry of Health, 37 out of 41 Moscow clinics offering stem cell treatments were operating illegally.

Abortion, beyond being a physiological phenomenon concerning pregnant women, is a social issue. The struggle for abortion rights is a significant part of the feminist movement, advocating for a woman's right to bodily autonomy, against the inalienability of the human body and the right to life of the embryo.

In countries where abortion is not legalized, mobilizations occur to secure this right. In countries where abortion is legal, particularly in the United States, Italy, and Spain, the right to abortion is sometimes contested by pro-life movements, which are often inspired by religion or conservatism.

However, opponents of abortion, whether based on religious or non-religious grounds, argue that it is primarily an ethical issue concerning the defense of the dignity of the person from the moment of conception. This raises significant philosophical debates about the status of the human person and when such status applies—whether at conception, the development of an embryo, or birth. In French law and Canadian law, only a born child has the legal status of a person. However, certain philosophical, metaphysical, or theological perspectives trace the existence of a being to before birth. In contemporary discourse, these perspectives often emphasize that, from conception, the embryo possesses the complete genetic information of an adult person.

Abortion is a subject of debate in most modern societies. It was traditionally prohibited for various reasons:

Social changes—such as the declining influence of religion and the sanctification of procreation, the reduced importance of population size relative to well-being, medical advancements, earlier sexual activity among youth in Western countries and later in others, poor information on contraception, weakening traditions, and gender equality—have gradually reduced prohibitions and led to broader legalization (expanded conditions, extended legal periods, etc.).

The challenge for legislators is to balance competing positions to set a legal abortion limit, which inevitably dissatisfies some groups. With both sides invoking non-negotiable values (the dignity of life versus personal freedom), abortion has been a persistent source of controversy for decades. Moreover, an ethical solution cannot ignore the profound dilemma posed by choosing one way or the other, given the intense social pressures surrounding the issue. Legally, the status of a person is tied to sufficient embryonic development (a variable limit), permitting abortion before this point and potentially penalizing it afterward. With varying and evolving legislation worldwide, no universal definition of what constitutes an embryo or a full person has been established, as science alone cannot provide an answer.

The Torah states: "There shall be no woman in your land who miscarries or is barren. I will fulfill the number of your days" (Exodus 23:26). However, certain provisions address fetal life directly or indirectly. The strictest prohibition relates to the ban on killing. This prohibition is explicit when the Halakha considers the fetus a living being, though Talmudic sources are neither unanimous nor clear on this (e.g., Rashi suggests that a fetus is not necessarily a human being). Other provisions, such as the general respect owed to human life (evident in the prohibition against harming or destroying human seed), also argue against abortion. Consequently, abortion is generally considered "against the law" and disapproved of. However, the Talmud holds that a fetus is not formed until after 41 days, so an abortion before this period is treated less severely.

Jewish law permits abortion if the fetus poses a direct threat to the pregnant woman's life. The boundaries of this threat are widely debated. The Mishnah explicitly states that the fetus must be sacrificed to save the mother, as the mother's life takes precedence over that of an unborn child. Consequently, most rabbinic authorities allow abortion in cases of a life-threatening risk to the woman, while others extend this to risks of worsening physical or mental health conditions.

With the exception of Rabbi Eliezer Waldenberg, the vast majority of Jewish authorities do not recognize fetal abnormalities as grounds for abortion. Rabbi and posek Moshe Feinstein prohibited prenatal diagnoses leading to abortion requests, stating: "In recent years, there has been a growing number of abortions performed. It is forbidden for doctors who respect the Torah to participate in an abortion in any way, whether the patient is Jewish or not. The prohibition of abortion is a universal prohibition and applies equally to non-Jews and Jews." However, Rabbi and posek Shaul Israeli permits abortion in certain cases of fetal illness, considering it part of the Mitzvah to love one's neighbor.

The Buddhist tradition marks the start of human life, bhava, at the first signs of consciousness : the ability to feel pleasure or pain and react to it. This is when a being inherits past karma. According to Ajahn Brahm, this can be associated with the emergence of the nervous system, the capacity to feel suffering, and the manifestation of will; an embryo outside the maternal womb (e.g., for research or in vitro fertilization) "is not recognized as human life, and thus ethical considerations specific to humans do not apply".

Buddhism prohibits abortion when it ends a life, as the first precept of Buddhist ethics is not to kill (an act of killing is constituted when there is intent to kill, effort to kill, and the death of the victim). According to the monastic code of Theravada Buddhism, the Vinaya, a monk who recommends or facilitates an abortion commits a grave offense (parajika) and faces immediate expulsion from the Sangha. In Tibetan Buddhism, the Dalai Lama acknowledges situations that justify abortion (medical termination of pregnancy). The precise delineation of these situations is generally recognized as a social issue beyond the scope of Buddhist philosophy. From a moral perspective, only compassion, Karuna, can justify such an action.

The Catholic Church reaffirms its condemnation of direct abortion in the encyclical Evangelium Vitae. According to Pope John Paul II, "The one who is eliminated is a human being at the very beginning of life, the most innocent being imaginable: it could never be considered an aggressor, let alone an unjust aggressor! It is weak, defenseless, to the point of being deprived even of the smallest means of defense, that of the imploring cries and tears of a newborn." The Church has not formally pronounced on the exact moment of ensoulment but, per Donum Vitae, calls for respect for life from conception.

In magisterial texts and the Catechism of the Catholic Church, direct abortion is considered, if performed with full knowledge and consent, an extremely grave sin : it falls under the category of mortal sins, which destroy charity in the human heart. According to canon law, it incurs an automatic (latae sententiae) excommunication for anyone over 16 who is fully aware of the act, including the woman undergoing the procedure and the medical or paramedical staff involved. However, indirect abortion, where the fetus's death is an unintended consequence of treatment provided to the mother, is not condemned.

However, some individuals and groups claiming to be Catholic contest the Magisterium's teaching on abortion (and other issues), as evidenced by the 1984 document " A Catholic Statement on Pluralism and Abortion " published in The New York Times and signed by numerous American theologians. The association Catholics for Choice, primarily active in the United States, argues that abortion can be a morally acceptable choice in certain cases; however, the episcopal conferences of the United States and Canada state that it cannot claim to represent Catholicism. The Christian feminist collective L'autre Parole, many of whose members are of Catholic tradition, identifies as "pro-life and pro-choice".

The Orthodox Church 's moral stance aligns with that of Catholicism, but under the principle of preserving life, it may permit abortion if a bishop or priest discerns that continuing the pregnancy would lead to the death of both the unborn child and mother.

The majority of evangelical Christian churches oppose abortion and support recourse to adoption agencies and social support agencies for mothers who wish to keep their babies.

The Quran does not directly address abortion, so interpretations rely on scholarly opinions.

The Sahih al-Bukhari (book of hadiths) indicates that the soul is infused into the fetus after 120 days of gestation. Consequently, some Hanafi scholars permit abortion before the end of this 120-day period, though others teach that abortion within this period is makruh (disapproved, i.e., discouraged). The Maliki school holds that "the fetus is endowed with a soul from conception". Thus, "most Malikis do not permit abortion at any point, considering that the hand of God actively forms the fetus at every stage of its development." However, all Islamic schools of thought agree on the legality of abortion when the mother's life is in danger, as the mother's life takes precedence.

In Shia Islam, abortion is "prohibited after the implantation of the fertilized ovum". The leader of the Iranian Revolution, Ayatollah Khomeini, declared that Sharia prohibits abortion without reason "even at the earliest possible stage". This position is shared by other Shia scholars.

As of 2009, the abortion rate was 17.4 abortions per 1,000 women aged 15–44, a slight increase over the 2002 rate of 16.9 abortions per 1,000 women aged 15–44.

The following tables cover metropolitan France only and do not include the Overseas departments of France (French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Mayotte and Réunion).

The 2001 About–Picard law [abu pika:r], officially the loi n° 2001-504 du 12 juin 2001 tendant à renforcer la prévention et la répression des mouvements sectaires portant atteinte aux droits de l'homme et aux libertés fondamentales, is French legislation passed by the National Assembly in 2000. The law is targeted at movements deemed to be "cults" (sectes) that "undermine human rights and fundamental freedoms ", as well as " mental manipulation ". The law has caused controversy internationally, with some commentators alleging that it infringes on religious freedom while proponents contend that it reinforces religious freedom.

Freedom of religion and separation of church and state have formed part of the French idea of the state since at least the French Revolution and in some ways long before, since the 16th-century period of the Reformation and of the Wars of Religion. Separation of religion and state in France takes the form of laïcité, by which political power avoids interference in the sphere of religious dogma, and religion avoids interference in public policies. The French understand "freedom of religion" primarily as the freedom of the individual to believe or not to believe what any religion teaches. Also, because of a long history of one single dominating church—the Catholic Church —the French state sees its duty less in protecting religion from state interference than in protecting the individual from interference by religion.

In the wake of the Order of the Solar Temple murders and suicides, the French Parliament established the Parliamentary Commission on Cults in France to investigate cults. In December 1995, the Commission delivered a report on cults which caused much controversy, some of it due to a list extracted from an internal study on purported cults by the Renseignements généraux (RG), the French National Police intelligence service.

Following the recommendations of the report, Prime Minister Alain Juppé set up in 1996 the "Interministerial Board of Observation of sects", followed in 1998 by the "Interministerial Mission in the Fight Against Sects" (MILS). In 2002 the "Interministerial Monitoring Mission Against Sectarian Abuses" (MIVILUDES) replaced MILS. Other action of the French government against potential abuses by cults resulted in the passing of the About–Picard law.

Commentators often refer to the Law 2001-504 of June 12, 2001 as the About–Picard law, from the name of its rapporteurs (parliamentarians who report upon the draft law), senator Nicolas About (UDF center-right party) and deputy Catherine Picard (PS center-left party).

The French parliament adopted the law with broad cross-party support under the government of center-right president Jacques Chirac and socialist prime minister Lionel Jospin.

Article 223-15-2 of Penal code: (Act no. 2001-504 of June 12, 2001, article 10 Official Journal of June 13, 2001; Ordinance No. 2000-916 of September 19, 2000, article 3 Official Journal of September 22, 2000, into force January 1, 2002)

Fraudulently abusing the ignorance or state of weakness of a minor, or of a person whose particular vulnerability, due to age, sickness, infirmity, to a physical or psychological disability or to pregnancy, is apparent or known to the offender, or abusing a person in a state of physical or psychological dependency resulting from serious or repeated pressure or from techniques used to affect his judgement, in order to induce the minor or other person to act or abstain from acting in any way seriously harmful to him, is punished by three years' imprisonment and a fine of €375,000. Where the offence is committed by the legal or de facto manager of a group that carries out activities the aim or effect of which is to create, maintain or exploit the psychological or physical dependency of those who participate in them, the penalty is increased to five years' imprisonment and to a fine of €750,000.

The additional penalties that natural or legal persons may incur are mentioned in the following articles 223-15-3 and 4.

Notable new points introduced by the law include:

The initial draft of the About–Picard law included the criminalization of "mental manipulation". Many organizations criticised this clause for its vagueness. Minister of Justice Élisabeth Guigou pushed for the removal of this clause, which the legislators excluded from the final version of the law. However, the law makes it a crime to defraud a person weakened by illness, old age, etc., but also of a person in a state of psychological or physical subjection resulting from grave or reiterated pressures or techniques able to alter judgement.

The first application of the law was its usage against Arnaud Mussy, leader of the Néo-Phare, a small apocalyptic group. Mussy claimed to be Jesus Christ and declared the apocalypse was approaching. In 2002 one of his followers killed himself, and two more were alleged to have attempted suicide. Mussy was charged using the law's provision for "abuse of weakness", and after a high profile trial, was declared guilty. He was sentenced to a three-year suspended prison sentence and €115,000 fine. He appealed the sentence, but it was upheld 6 June 2005. The verdict was celebrated by anti-cultists. Mussy later stated that "It was clear the National Assembly had a new law and they wanted to try it out on some little group to make an example—not a big powerful [cult] like Scientology that has lots of money to defend itself. I have no money. I knew I could not win." Cult researcher Susan J. Palmer argued that the application of the brainwashing concept in this specific case was flawed, even apart from the wider concerns about the legitimacy of the concept and how it is supposed to be proven.

The law has caused controversy internationally, with some commentators alleging that it infringes on religious freedom while proponents contend that it reinforces religious freedom.

The government has taken the position that it will deal with the concrete consequences of cult affiliation, especially with respect to children. The government sees this as particularly important in the light of past abuse committed in some criminal cults, such as sexual slavery and mass suicide. The French government, when challenged on issues of religious discrimination, states that it has no concern in any way with religious doctrine per se and focuses exclusively on harmful conduct. According to government sources, none of the criteria listed in related government documents on sects discuss theology ; they only focus on the actions and the methods of the groups.

The Bishop of Soissons, Marcel Herriot, defended the law on June 25, 2000, asserting it was necessary to protect by law persons, family, society and religions themselves from sects that are violating fundamental freedoms and human dignity.

Human rights activists dubbed the law "un délit d'opinion" (a thought crime).

In an open letter dated June 2000 to Alain Vivien about religious freedom in France, Aaron Rhodes, Executive Director of the International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights (IHFHR), wrote:

We question ourselves how such a law can claim to guarantee human rights when it goes against the rights of association, expression, religion and conscience; when it puts in danger the right of minorities and maintains prejudices that are so incompatible with the concept of tolerance intrinsic to that of human rights. France must deal with its responsibilities and obligations as a signatory for the International Conventions and respect the European laws and its interpretation by the Court of Strasbourg, before one of its citizens become a victim of discrimination due to the law which you propose.

Alain Vivien responded: "[The IHFHR] seems today to have passed into the hands of Scientologists and perhaps other transnational organizations". Aaron Rhodes then acknowledged that the Moscow office of the IHFHR had received funding from the Church of Scientology to print a leaflet about religious freedom in Russia, and voiced his astonishment at the charge. Rhodes voiced his embarrassment: "[...]for you and your fellow French citizens by your recourse to methods of denunciations and insinuations that remind us of those sometimes used by totalitarian and backward regimes."

In the United States, the Church of Scientology utilised pressure groups against the French government, and had some success with the Clinton administration, which repeatedly brought the matter before the French government. According to pastor Jean-Arnold de Clermont, head of the French Protestant federation and himself a strong critic of the first draft of the law, the complaints originating in the United States concerning religious freedom in France were largely based on biased, poor information.

According to a newspaper article published in The Guardian in June 2000, the French government considered American interference regarding religious freedom in France as unwarranted meddling by the US government in France's internal affairs. Paul Webster wrote that President Jacques Chirac told Clinton that religious freedom would no longer be a subject for bilateral presidential talks, "in the light of what has been officially described as 'shocking' White House support for Scientologists and Moonies ". The French government also described the United States Congress 's introduction of laws protecting religious freedom internationally as "an unacceptable intrusion into internal affairs". Alain Vivien, former chairman of the French ministerial mission to combat the influence of cults (MILS), and the president of the Centre Contre les Manipulations Mentales (Centre Against Mental Manipulation), said many observers believed that Clinton was making his peace with big religious movements, "because they offer an indispensable source of political financing ", and that with the help of Scientologists, cults were infiltrating UN and European human rights associations and collaborating on virulent reports against France's policies.

The French did not alter their law following these requests; and the claims and actions of the US government regarding the religious situation in France largely ceased with the Bush administration.

Some critics of French legislation have voiced concerns that countries which do not have the same legal safeguards and constitutional rights as France may emulate this legislation. In the words of a US official:

Yet the law itself remains problematic not only because of the threat the language carries in France, but because it is even now being considered for emulation by countries that lack France’s commitment to rule of law and human rights. Such a model serves only too well as cover for those nations who persecute under the guise of law enforcement.

On September 15, 2006, the United States Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor released a report on religious freedom in France. This report noted that "The constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the Government generally respected this right in practice." It reported mostly anonymous concerns over repression of religious freedom in France, notably in regards to what the report referred to in one case as "cult groups", as well as the law banning religious symbols in schools, and rising anti-semitism in France.

Absolute monarchy in France slowly emerged in the 16th century, forming a centralized political system that sought to consolidate royal authority over competing feudal and provincial powers. While its roots traced back to the reign of Henry IV, the system reached its definitive form during the tenure of Cardinals Richelieu and Mazarin. The zenith of this development was achieved under Louis XIV. By domesticating the high nobility at the Palace of Versailles and emphasizing the doctrine of the divine right of kings, Louis XIV integrated executive, legislative, and judicial pretensions into the person of the monarch. Following this peak, the system underwent a period of gradual institutional strain under Louis XV. The traditional authority of the crown began to decouple from the evolving intellectual climate of the Enlightenment, which questioned the sacral nature of kingship. By the reign of Louis XVI, the inherent contradictions of the system became critical. Efforts to implement necessary fiscal reforms were consistently blocked by well-established aristocratic interests and the complex, overlapping jurisdictions of the Ancien Régime. Unlike the enlightened absolutism practiced by contemporary rulers such as Frederick the Great or Joseph II who often justified their power through rationalism and the benefit of the state as its first servant of the state the French model remained more deeply tethered to traditionalist, sacral justifications and a rigid social hierarchy.

The origins of absolutism in France date back to the 16th century and the reign of Henry IV. When in 1594 Henry IV ascended the throne, he inherited a country that had been completely exhausted by 30 years of religious wars. The country was deeply divided, trade and the economy had collapsed, and the population was declining. Furthermore, the crown had lost most of its authority over the provinces. In order to re-establish royal authority, Henry IV resorted to the Masters of Request and commissioners established under Henry II. Both groups were vested with royal authority to handle matters relating to local landowners, town councils and rebellious subjects.

Based on this system, Cardinal Richelieu, sensing the dangers of an uncontrolled aristocracy that was consuming the resources of the nation, put his greatest effort into the centralization of the state, upon which the grandeur of France depended. Despite Henry IV's efforts, the provinces still enjoyed a great deal of independence, since his commissioners' powers were expressly limited and considered an extraordinary, temporary measure. It was not until 1635 that Richelieu was able to issue commissions on a more regular basis. These commissioners, now known as intendants, received authority over the justices, officers, and subjects of the Crown. They had the power to resolve and decide matters concerning royal service, security, and public peace. They could receive requests, administer justice, preside over courts, and assist governors and lieutenant-generals.

Bernard de La Roche-Flavin's 1617 work outlined the Parlement's powers of verifying, ratifying, refusing, and limiting legislation, acting as a balance among monarchy, aristocracy, and republic. This thesis was abominable to Richelieu, who viewed the checks and balance system as a weakening of the state and characterized the resistance that the Parlement showed to his actions as hors de toute raison. Until his death, Richelieu sought to restrict the powers of the Parlement. He restricted Parlements right to remonstrate, forbade to discuss political questions and limited its judicial functions by the extensive use of judicial commissions. Moreover by claiming that the king, had the right to bring any case before his own council Richelieu was able to check most of parlements decisions.

When Cardinal Mazarin asumed office of Principal Ministre d’État in 1642, he was repeatedly confronted with uprisings against excessive taxes, which ultimately culminated in the outbreak of the Fronde. Although the uprising was suppressed, it had a decisive influence on the adult Louis XIV. The Fronde taught Louis XIV that a divided government is a precursor to total collapse. Having been forced to flee Paris as a child during the uprisings, he developed a lifelong suspicion of the city’s populace and the Parlement of Paris, which he came to view as a threat to the crown's stability rather than a legitimate partner in governance. He realized that the high nobility, if left to their own devices in provincial strongholds, would inevitably prioritize personal ambition over national unity, leading him to centralize all political power within his own person. Moreover he was afraid that he might meet the same fate as Charles I of England.

With the Death of Cardinal Mazarin in March 1661, the personal rule of Louis XIV began. To secure his rule and prevent a second Fronde, Louis XIV set about reshaping the state with the help of his most important supporter, Jean-Baptiste Colbert. The king appointed Colbert as a royal minister and member of the High Council, granting him significant influence over policies affecting the parlements. Colbert also participated in the Council of Dispatches and the Royal Council of Finances, contributing to governance alongside the High Council. Prior to becoming controller general of finances in 1665, he established control over political and financial relations with law courts, marginalizing Chancellor Séguier. Despite this authority, Colbert approached the Parlement of Paris and provincial tribunals with a blend of firmness and restraint, not intending to diminish their roles in public life or law registration. At first, he did not advocate for forced registrations or immediate legislative changes. His 1665 memorandum for the Council of Justice emphasized moderation, opposing drastic laws against the parlements, believing that gradual improvement was more effective than sudden, harsh measures, which often resulted in the parlements regaining their influence after weak monarchs. As the king’s desire for personal control grew, Colbert adapted his methods to meet the king’s demands.

Louis XIV's objectives extended beyond the mere regulation of relations between the Parlement and the councils. His goal of reducing Parliament's political activities resulted in further attacks on the court's privileges and prerogatives. On 25 October 1665, the Council finished Title I, with the King himself having participated in its sessions. Three articles of this title dealt with the registration procedure, the most important of which was Article IV. It applied to lits de justice, whereby the king brought legislation to a court, usually the Parlement of Paris. The phrase 'persons whom we have commissioned for this task' also covered forced registrations conducted in the other high courts of Paris by members of the royal family, as well as in provincial parlements by governors and intendants.

Article IV stipulated that all laws registered in the presence of the King or his representatives were to be 'kept and observed' with immediate effect. This imperative required the parlements to implement any laws registered under duress at once, without any further deliberations or decrees. The article proclaimed that the king could register laws on his own authority, and that, once he had done so, the parlements had no further options. Determined to take advantage of this accomplishment, members of the Council of Justice also banned constitutionalist vocabulary, discarding ideologically offensive words. Thus, the Council purposefully eradicated the word 'remonstrance', deeming it tainted by its use in the Fronde, and replaced it with the cumbersome circumlocution 'represent to us what the parlements and other courts deem appropriate'. The Council also replaced 'sovereign courts' with 'superior courts' as the generic name for the parlements and their affiliated legal bodies, on the basis that subjects were not entitled to use the word 'sovereign'.

In order to strengthen royal authority in the provinces, Louis XIV stopped appointing governors for life and instead appointed them for three years only, a period that could be renewed if they behaved satisfactorily. Towns still enjoyed varying degrees of self-government, although they had long lost most of their former freedom. As the power of the intendants grew, so did the central government's interference in local affairs. Certain forms of self-government were permitted to survive here again, but most of their substance had gone. Ultimately, even the formal election of mayors ceased in many cities as they became permanent officials acquired through purchase. As the power of the intendants increased, so did the central government's interference in local affairs. While certain forms of self-government were permitted to survive, most of their substance had disappeared. Ultimately, even the formal election of mayors ceased in many cities, as they became permanent officials acquired through purchase.

In those provinces (pays d’états) that had retained their Estates or provincial assemblies, the intendants' authority was somewhat limited. These assemblies were composed of deputies from the nobility, clergy, and Third Estate. Such remnants of provincial autonomy appealed little to Louis XIV. He did not, however, abolish the institution outright, but rather deprived the provincial Estates of any real power. The deputies were bullied or bribed into submission. Furthermore, Louis XIV abandoned the old system of allowing the deputies to present the province's grievances before voting on the don gratuit. More importantly, he gave up the custom of asking for more than he expected to receive, then haggling with the deputies through his agents as to the final amount to be paid. From that time onwards, the king demanded a fixed sum which the deputies had to vote immediately, and this amount constantly rose without anyone daring to protest.

When Louis XIV died in 1715, there was widespread distress and discontent in France. The system of absolute rule required a strong king to fulfil its formal and governmental functions. However, the central figure of this entire system, was living in a specific environment. Under Louis XV, that environment was dominated by the court nobility causing the state to move in contrary directions as one court faction or another obtained control. Moreover during the regency of Philip of Orleans (1715–1723) the parlement of Paris regained its former authority with the reinstatement of the right of remonstrance. Although Louis XIV had de-facto abolished the office of Prime Minister, France returned to the model established by Richelieu and Mazarin during Cardinal Fleury’s tenure. When Fleury died, in January 1743, Louis XV returned to the system of his predecessor. This proved to be fatal, however, as he lacked the will and the ability required to govern as a king. By playing one minister or one court faction off against another, he turned the instability within the ministry into a governing principle and gave rise to the spirit that once created the Fronde.

With the accession of Louis XVI in 1774, absolute rule in France started to unravel. Influenced by his closest adviser Jean-Frédéric Phélypeaux, Count of Maurepas he ordered the reinstatement of the Parlement. Louis XVI hoped that this action would secure peace and maintain his popularity, but achieved the opposite: he handed power back to the opponents of absolute rule and made future reforms impossible. Louis XVI’s support for the American colonists, during the War of Independence which was intended to harm Great Britain, led to high levels of national debt. Furthermore, the returning soldiers (such as Lafayette) brought the ideals of liberty and republicanism directly into absolutist France. By dismissing competent minister for reform such as Turgot and Necker Louis XVI put harmony at the court of Versailles over the stability of the state. The constant struggle with Parlement caused Louis XVI to convene an assembly of 144 notables in order to circumvent Parlement’s obstructionist stance. In doing so, Louis XVI heralded the end of absolutism in France.

The absolute monarchy was not the same as totalitarian dictatorship, and there were limits to the king's power. Known as the " fundamental laws of the Kingdom ", these evolved over time and were a set of unwritten principles which placed limits on the otherwise absolute power of the king from the Middle Ages until the French Revolution in 1789. The monarchy had to respect the fundamental laws of the kingdom. He could not change the line of succession at will; he was bound by the Salic Law. He was not to sell royal demesne as the sovereign was considered only tenant of his realm. As the Patron of the Church he was to protect the Church from encroachments of the holy see.

France itself was not a cohesive territorial entity. A number of independent enclaves survived within the frontiers of the Kingdom of France, including Avignon and the Venaissin, Dombes, Mulhouse, Henrichemont, and several others. Additionally, the country was still marked by the presence of exceptional jurisdictions. The Duchy of Bouillon was officially recognised as a sovereign state in law. The Clermontois did not transfer any taxes to Paris and the Boulonnais had its own separate army. Although the old sub-divisions of sénéchaussées, bailliages and syndic perpétuel had lost practically all their administrative significance the authority of the Intendants was never precisely defined and thus varied in many parts of france. At the same time the authority of the central Government was restricted by the independence of the intendants. In the event of an official continuing to oppose its orders, the central government had no option but to remove or dismiss him, though it was rarely prepared to take such drastic action.

Moreover, the large size of most généralités made it difficult to supervise the intendants closely, especially given the intendant’s broad scope of interests in public life. Although primarily a financial officer, the intendant also supervised religious practices, exercised important judicial and police functions, regulated trade and industry, and shared the military authority of the commandant. Despite having all these powers, the intendants never possessed adequate machinery for their continual and effective exercise. At the head of the intendancy bureau was a subdélégué général, and under him was a varying number of subdélégués, who were often accused of incompetence and corruption.

" Abu Dhabi Secrets " refers to a series of investigative reports published in 2023 by members of the European Investigative Collaborations and other media outlets, based on documents obtained from the 2021 hacking of the Swiss private intelligence company Alp Services. The investigations reported that Alp had been contracted by the United Arab Emirates (UAE) government to gather information on and discredit individuals and organizations in Europe who were alleged to be associated with Qatar or the Muslim Brotherhood.

According to the investigations, Alp compiled information on more than 1,000 individuals and 400 organizations in 18 European countries and passed their names and other data to Emirati intelligence services. The reported campaign included the dissemination of negative information through established media, social media and websites, as well as attempts to influence financial institutions. Several individuals and organizations were reportedly targeted on the basis of tenuous or false allegations.

The campaign was linked by the investigators to the political conflict between the UAE and Qatar, particularly the Qatar diplomatic crisis that began in 2017. The disclosures subsequently led to legal proceedings and investigations in several European countries and to lawsuits by some of the alleged targets.

The founder of Alp, Mario Brero, disputed the findings and, through his lawyers, stated that some of the leaked documents had been falsified and that many of the investigators' conclusions were based on false or imagined assumptions.

On 29 March 2021, the computer of Mario Brero, owner of the Geneva-based private intelligence firm Alp Services, which specializes in " dark PR ", was hacked by unknown perpetrators, who stole 1.5 million files and 8 million emails. The attackers initially tried to sell the data. Later, a portion of approximately 78,000 files related to an Alp operation for the United Arab Emirates (UAE) was passed on to journalists for free. Led by Mediapart journalist Yann Philippin, journalists from 13 different media outlets of the European Investigative Collaborations (EIC) network simultaneously investigated the available documents and, from 7 July 2023, published the coordinated results of their investigations under the title "Abu Dhabi Secrets". Prior to the EIC investigation, Mediapart and journalist David D. Kirkpatrick in The New Yorker magazine had already uncovered some details of the later findings in March 2023. Other media outlets published follow-up investigations.

According to these investigations, Alp Services was a hub in a network of individuals and institutions through which the UAE ran a large-scale discrediting campaign from 2017 onward. Indirectly, it targeted Qatar, the Emirates' neighboring state. Directly, it targeted individuals and institutions in 18 European countries, with ties to Qatar that were to be discredited in the course of the campaign by being accused of ties to terrorism. Members of the Muslim Brotherhood were particularly affected. At the same time, individuals and organizations were repeatedly discredited by falsely attributing to them connections or ideological affinity with the Muslim Brotherhood. Some individual campaigns were analyzed in greater detail by journalists. As an example, the campaign against Hazim Nada is detailed below.

Mario Brero did not comment on the findings of the investigations. His lawyers stated that the leaked documents were partly falsified and that "most of the facts" of the investigation were based on "false and/or imagined assumptions".

The more closely examined campaigns may represent only a fraction of the overall operation. For instance, there are no individual analyses for Belgium, where Alp targeted 160 individuals and 80 organizations, Italy, where the same applies to 136 individuals and organizations, or Norway, where Alp compiled a list of 47 individuals and several organizations as potential targets. Additionally, other known targets are not named in the EIC investigations, as most of those identified had requested anonymity from the investigators. Furthermore, the UAE campaign was not conducted through Alp and its contacts and associated organizations alone, but also through other actors. Some of these are briefly mentioned at the end of the article. However, due to the circumstances of the investigation, most publications on the Abu Dhabi Secrets focus on the activities of Alp.

In recent times, the Muslim Brotherhood and related Islamist movements had been the strongest opposition force in several autocratic Arab states, including the UAE. In the course of the Arab Spring, they achieved unexpected electoral successes, particularly in Egypt, Tunisia and Morocco, leading several countries to crack down more decisively on these movements from 2013 onward. In 2013, the military in Egypt, under the leadership of Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, staged a coup against the new Muslim Brotherhood-led government. In the UAE, where – as in Saudi Arabia – the Muslim Brotherhood's call for a moderate, pro-democratic political Islam was seen as the greatest challenge to the ruling family's claim to power, then-Crown Prince Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan banned the movement after the Arab Spring. Several tens of thousands of its members are imprisoned in autocratic countries. Being associated with the Muslim Brotherhood in these countries is therefore potentially dangerous.

In Qatar, by contrast, the Muslim Brotherhood was supported by the government. Since then, it has been at the center of a conflict between Qatar and the UAE (as well as Saudi Arabia and Egypt). The UAE and its allies accused Qatar of financing the Muslim Brotherhood with the goal of seizing power in other Arab states as well. Since the Muslim Brotherhood is not classified as a terrorist organization in any European country, the UAE sought to have it designated as such. The conflict between the UAE and Qatar culminated in the Qatar diplomatic crisis of 2017–2021.

Alp' s first UAE project, codenamed " Operation Arnika ", began in June 2017, a month after the Gulf states severed ties with Qatar.

The contact between the UAE and Alp had been established by former journalist Roland Jacquard, who had founded the non-governmental organization Observatoire international du terrorisme and is its sole member. On this basis, French media refer to him as an "Islamism expert". According to the leaked documents, Jacquard recommended Alp' s founder Mario Brero to the Emiratis and was entitled to 10% of the payments, receiving at least €300,000 under his contract.

On the UAE side, the operation was overseen by Ali Saeed Al Neyadi, a ministerial-level aide to the Emirati politician Tahnoun bin Zayed Al Nahyan. Al Neyadi was officially listed as a board member of the National Emergency Crisis and Disaster Management Authority (NCEMA), while the investigations reported that he actually headed a group with direct links to the Supreme Council for National Security and the armed wing of the Emirati special operations forces. An intelligence officer working under him, identified by the code name "Matar", acted as Alp Services' main Emirati contact.

Alp offered to publish or influence 100 media articles a year in order to "terrorize the terrorists" and thereby destroy their reputations. A payment of between €20,000 and €50,000 was budgeted for each discredited individual. Three months after the first operation — known as Operation Arnika — began, the first contract between the UAE and Alp was signed. By 2021, Alp had received at least €5.7 million. The sender was an Emirati organization named Al Ariaf, which posed as a research center. According to the leaked data from 2021, a collaboration was planned to run from 2017 to 2025.

An Alp document outlined a three-step strategy: (1) publish discrediting articles, (2) mobilize journalists to spread them, and (3) use the publications to influence banks. At the same time, a positive campaign on behalf of the Emirates was also planned.

Steps (1) and (2) were examined in more detail by various teams of journalists. As an example of step (3), the campaign against Hazim Nada will serve as an illustration below.

Alp promised its clients that its operation would spread discrediting but "truthful" information about their targets. For this purpose, Operation Arnika compiled information on around 1,000 individuals and 400 institutions in a project file of the same name. All of them were alleged to be connected to the Muslim Brotherhood, and in some cases also to organizations classified as terrorist even in Europe. Their names and data were passed on to Emirati intelligence.

Some of these targets were indeed individuals convicted of terrorism. For the most part, however, inclusion in the file and the associated network maps was based on far-fetched associations, on rumors, or had no basis at all. French EIC journalists found that the primary criterion for inclusion was prior public allegations of ties to radical Islam in the press or on social media. Spanish journalist Begoña P. Ramírez showed, using several examples, that even marginal or fabricated connections were enough to qualify for inclusion.

Alp obtained information partly through honey traps, infiltration, phone surveillance, and access to targets' bank and phone records obtained under false identities, and also through cooperation with academics, most notably Lorenzo Vidino.

The UAE could then select primary targets from among the individuals and organizations compiled. For each of these, Alp then analyzed exactly how the target could be discredited. Priority was to be given to "financing, ties to terrorism, corruption, money laundering, or other crimes," but this also included embarrassing personal details — for instance, information about the private lives of mistresses, or lax religious practice.

The Swiss media outlet Heidi News lists various media strategies Alp' s staff used against targets to be discredited: writing their own articles on participatory media platforms — on Mediapart, for instance, under the fictitious account "Tanya Klein," which produced fifteen blog posts targeting Qatar and the Muslim Brotherhood between 2018 and 2021, and on Medium under the name "Farrah Ahmed" —, writing or altering Wikipedia articles, and commissioning freelance journalists.

The preferred method, however, was placing articles in established media through journalists, since this allowed Wikipedia articles to be influenced on a lasting basis. Around 200 cooperating journalists were grouped in Alp documents into three categories: those to whom information had to be leaked anonymously; those who could be openly fed information in the hope that they would use it — including journalist Sylvain Besson, who maintained a close exchange with Alp over several years — and five paid journalists who were said to have written articles on commission and were listed as "subcontractors". Heidi lists four of them: the Swiss nationals Alain Jourdan, Kurt Pelda, and Ian Hamel, as well as the most prominent subcontractor, the Frenchman Louis de Raguenel, then editor-in-chief of Valeurs Actuelles, who, according to Alp data, also took part in research for Operation Arnika. The latter three deny this. Pelda and Hamel say they only carried out research.

In addition, Alp organized social media campaigns — for instance against the 2022 FIFA World Cup in Qatar under the hashtag "BOYCOTTQATAR2022" — as well as its own websites, including Muslim-Brotherhood-Watch.com, for which Alp created over 100 fake accounts, and a website promoting the Qatar-critical book InQarcéré, whose author Jean-Pierre Marongiu was also given funded flight tickets, media training, and introductions to journalists by Alp as part of " Operation Swann " to boost his profile.

Alp's first target — and also one of the cases that became known even before the coordinated publication of the Abu Dhabi Secrets investigations began — was the Italian Hazim Nada. Nada was one of the victims of Alp to whom the hackers had offered the data for sale (for $30 million) before passing it on to journalists. He had conducted his own investigations and was also the one who put Kirkpatrick on the trail of his New Yorker article.

Nada lived in the Italian border town of Como and ran the Swiss two-billion-dollar company LORD Energy on the other side of the border. His Egyptian-Italian father Youssef was an avowed member of the Muslim Brotherhood and had, in the past, played a significant political role within the movement. At the instigation of the United States, he had also been listed on terrorism lists for over ten years until 2015 as an alleged financier of al-Qaeda, without any grounds for this assessment ever being made public.

Unlike his father, Hazim Nada was, by his own account, not very religious and had little sympathy for the Muslim Brotherhood either. Kirkpatrick concludes from the Alp data that the idea of targeting Nada originated with journalist Sylvain Besson, who had previously written a book about Nada's father that is generally regarded in scholarship as conspiratorial. Based on the leak, Nada also accuses Lorenzo Vidino of having advised Alp regarding LORD Energy.

After publication of the Abu Dhabi Secrets investigations, Nada filed a lawsuit in February 2024 seeking at least $2.77 billion in damages from, among others, the UAE, Alp, and Vidino. The complaint quotes a six-step action plan against Nada from the Alp leak, which called for negative media articles, Wikipedia entries, targeted tip-offs to banks, and search engine optimization.

In line with this action plan, several articles about Nada and his company appeared starting in December 2017. The first was a report by Africa Intelligence, an outlet that, according to later investigations, cooperated with Alp on multiple occasions. It was followed, among others, by several pieces by freelance journalist Nina Mays on the participatory platform Medium, by a text written to Alp' s precise specifications by Besson in the Swiss daily Le Temps (which also covered Alkarama and Femyso, two further campaign targets of Alp), and by a thematically related Wikipedia entry on LORD Energy. Six months after the media campaign began, Alp, under a false identity, wrote an email to the banking risk database World-Check expressing concerns about the company's ties to "radical Islamists". As a result, the company was briefly listed in the database under the risk category "terrorism". Despite the correction, banks and lenders subsequently no longer granted Nada sufficient credit. Four months later still, at the end of 2018, LORD Energy went bankrupt.

As noted, not only Alp and its partners were active on behalf of the UAE. For example, journalists Ilyes Ramdani and Antton Rouget reviewed a document leaked in 2026 that describes an action plan for Emirati influence on anti-Muslim Brotherhood sentiment in France. The journalists interpreted this as a further operation of the Emirati campaign, in which Alp was not involved.

About two other potential UAE collaborators, some more details are known:

Reportedly also active for the UAE was the Österreichische Gesellschaft für Politikanalyse ("Austrian Society for Political Analysis", ÖGP), which had been operating for several years before Alp' s contract was signed. According to Alp documents, its director, Ingo F., was in contact with a senior Emirati officer; a memo described the ÖGP as having conducted "the most successful UAE-influenced operation in Europe." Operations linked to the ÖGP include the Islam-Landkarte ("Islam Map"; originally created by the University of Vienna in 2012 but relaunched in 2021), the citizens' initiative Stop Extremism, and the website The Global Muslim Brotherhood Daily Watch. However, none of these operations were analyzed in detail by the EIC investigators.

French-Algerian journalist Atmane Tazaghart also communicated with the same Emirati email contact as Alp. He allegedly shared information, such as claimed financial ties between François Fillon and Qatar. Mediapart investigators left open whether Tazaghart was part of the Alp campaign or operated independently on behalf of the UAE. Tazaghart stated in response to inquiries that he had no connection to Alp.

It is documented that, in addition to his email activity, Tazaghart signed a rights agreement on behalf of the shell company Countries Reports Publishing (CRP) for the translation rights to the Qatar-critical book Qatar Papers. The book's authors suspected Emirati funding behind CRP. According to La Lettre, CRP also funded Tazaghart's company Global Watch Analysis, which produced the Muslim Brotherhood-critical magazine Écran de veille and the web TV platform Elmaniya TV. In addition to Qatar Papers, Global Watch Analysis published several relevant works, including the French version of Lorenzo Vidino's book on the Muslim Brotherhood and an anthology featuring a contribution by Roland Jacquard (who was also communicated with the same email contact as Alp and Tazaghart). Tazaghart denied receiving foreign funding and stated that he had no connection to CRP as of at least 2023.

As of 2025, at least eight legal proceedings were pending against the UAE government, Brero, Vidino, and/or other actors. These include a criminal case by the Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Affairs (FDFA), a criminal investigation by the Paris Public Prosecutor's Office, and a lawsuit for at least USD 2.77 billion filed by Hazim Nada in the United States.

The Belgian Ministry of Foreign Affairs summoned the Emirati ambassador.

Following the publication of the Abu Dhabi Secrets investigations, three George Washington University fellows resigned, citing Vidino's employment as incompatible with their values.

In mid-2026, journalist Emran Feroz warned that only the fraction of the UAE campaign related to the Alp operations had been addressed so far. Even from this fraction, disinformation spread by Alp was still circulating.

The following summarizes basic academic ranks in the French higher education system. Most academic institutions are state-run and most academics with permanent positions are civil servants, and thus are tenured (after a one-year probationary period).

Several parallel career paths exist, depending on the type of institution. The three paths correspond to teacher-researchers (enseignants-chercheurs), researchers, and teachers. It is possible to be promoted from one path to another. Several ranks exist within each path. Increases in rank (for example, the promotion from associate professor to full professor) come with an increase in salary and responsibility and are subject to some conditions, such as the habilitation. In most cases, moving to a higher rank requires going through an open recruitment competition, the same procedure used for initially obtaining the position in the lower rank.

Temporary positions include PhD students, postdoctoral researchers, and temporary teachers (usually called vacataires or chargé d'enseignement). There also exist some administrative ranks, held by permanent employees and often elected by their peers, such as university president or dean. Ranks in private schools and grandes écoles are often organized differently.

The following table summarizes the various academic titles used in France, determined by the paths (faculty, research, teaching) and the ranks, together with some equivalent titles in schools with special status. The common abbreviation for the title is presented in parentheses after the title.

Faculty members are called enseignants-chercheurs (literally, teachers-researchers). In general, their statute is governed by the Decree 84-431 of June 6, 1984 (with some exceptions: for example, faculty members in public hospitals have a statute governed by another decree). They are civil servants, but they benefit from a special statute which guarantees academic freedom. While most civil service roles are only available to citizens of the EU, appointments to these positions are made regardless of citizenship.

After gaining a doctorate from a university, and usually after several years of temporary postdoctoral positions, scholars who wish to enter a permanent academic career may apply for the position of maître de conférences (MCF). To achieve this, they must first be approved by the National Council of Universities, made up of elected and appointed MCFs and university professors. For candidates who have first been approved in this way, the recruitment to positions is carried out in each individual university, mostly by a selection committee of other MCFs and professors, half from the university where the position is available, half from other universities, rather than by administrators. However, the final decision is made by the Academic Council of the university.

The salary scale is national, so pay does not vary from one university to another. A recent reform allows for the possibility of salary modulation in the universities, but for now this remains to be implemented.

After some years in the maître de conférences position, an MCF may apply for a habilitation à diriger des recherches (" habilitation to direct research", HDR), which allows them to supervise doctoral theses. Although this qualification is most commonly pursued by MCFs, it is not restricted to them—postdoctoral researchers and other non‐permanent academics may also apply for the HDR. The HDR is a prerequisite for applying for a position of professeur des universités ("university professor"), whether at their home university or at another institution. Their suitability for such a position will be judged by the National Council of Universities (restricted to full professors). Each individual application is examined by a selection committee, composed exclusively of full professors. Application are mostly judged on their published original research as well as on teaching and administrative duties. In the past, this required a higher doctorate ("state doctorate"). In some fields, such as law, management (gestion), and economics, candidates take the competitive examination known as agrégation ; only those achieving the highest grades are appointed.

Note that in French, the word professeur is used much more widely than the English "professor", and when used on its own it suggests a schoolteacher in secondary education. Qualified terms such as professeur des universités are therefore used to clarify the function of the professeur.

In higher educational establishments outside the university system, such as the École polytechnique, teaching staff follow different hierarchies and career paths. In particular, senior staff at the EHESS, EPHE, École des chartes and École française d'Extrême-Orient are called directeurs d'études instead of professeurs des universités.

Maître de conférences and Professeurs des universités are both permanent positions. This is not the same as tenure, strictly speaking, but is instead due to the status of civil servant in public universities. Since all French universities are state-run, faculty members are civil servants and enjoy increased employment protection compared to the private sector.

No one can become Professeur or Maître de Conférences without a doctorate. The habilitation (HDR) to direct doctoral theses is a necessary step to be promoted from MCF to PR. There exists no internal promotion to go from MCF to PR. Instead, a candidate must participate in the competition for an open position, usually in a different university. Progression from one pay grade to the next (e.g. 2nd class to 1st class) is internal to the university, and entails an increase in salary and responsibility.

In Law, Political Science, and Economics, it is possible to be recruited directly as a full professor by passing the agrégation (distinct from the secondary school system's agrégation, more widespread). Consequently, some scholars become professors without prior experience as a Maître de conférences. This remains rare however, most of the time the aggregation is a way to accelerate career advancement for the Maîtres de conférences (this is known as the voie courte, or short way, as opposed to the voie longue).

The French Ministry of Higher Education and Research provides a comparative table for faculty ranks in France and worldwide. For example, professeur corresponds to (full) professor in North America and the UK, while maître de conférences corresponds to (tenured) associate professor in North America, or to lecturer/reader/senior lecturer in the UK depending on pay grade and whether the habilitation was obtained or not.

There also exist equivalent ranks as state employees (non civil service) for professors coming from industry and working part-time in a university. These ranks are maître de conférences associé (MAST) and professeur des universités associé (PAST), depending on academic experience. Despite the similarity, "associé" is not synonymous with "associate" (an associate professor is a mid-seniority professor, where a professeur associé is a part-time professor) and would be closer to adjunct.

There also exist permanent, research positions, without teaching duties. They are offered by certain public research institutions, the Public Scientific and Technical Research Establishments, for instance the French National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS), the Institute of Research for Development (IRD), the National Institute of Health and Medical Research (INSERM), or the French Institute for Research in Computer Science and Automation (Inria). Again, people in these positions are civil servants (thus, in this sense, tenured). Their statute is governed by the Decree #2023-1321 of December 27, 2023.

There are two levels, matching those of the teaching-research staff

The main differences between these research positions and the faculty positions are, of course, the absence of teaching duties, and the ability to move between different labs (for example, a CNRS researcher can request to move to any CNRS lab in France or abroad, whereas a faculty member is employed by a specific university).

Just like for faculty appointments, there are no internal promotion from CR to DR. Instead, each year, national competitions are open to fill new positions, and it is necessary to participate in the national competition to move from one rank to the next. It is possible for a maître de conférences to become directeur de recherches, just like it is possible for a chargé de recherches to become professeurs des universités.

The complete name of the position usually makes the institution explicit, for example directeur de recherche au CNRS, or chargé de recherche à l'INRIA. It has to be noticed that some of these positions can be located not in a laboratory proper to the Public Scientific and Technical Research Establishment, but in a mixed research structure, common with a university (UMR).

These establishments also offer engineer positions that include a research part, besides more technical duties (e.g. preparation of a database, experimental apparatus, etc.): ingénieur d'études may include an important research part, ingénieur de recherche always includes a dominant research part. There also exists some contractual positions (from a few months to a few years).

The grandes écoles is a parallel educational system generally attributed to Napoleon. These institutions of higher education each specialize in a specific domain, such as business, political science, or engineering. Some of them are grands établissements (for example Sciences Po Paris) are part of the state university recruitment system. The others – mainly the private schools – follow various guidelines. Among the business schools it is common to follow the North American terminology. That is,

Typically, anyone teaching in a private school will identify themselves publicly as "Professeur" regardless of their internal rank. This is an acceptable practice for tenured or full-time staff (professeurs permanents) and permanently employed part-time staff (professeurs affiliés). It is considered inappropriate for others who teach a single course (vacataires or chargés d'enseignements).

Other titles exist, each with different ranks:

Several administrative appointments can be held by academics in France. Most are elected positions, with prerogatives and duties described in the statutes of the relevant organization (university, faculty, research lab...).

Achille Marcus Fould (17 November 1800 – 5 October 1867) was a French financier and politician who was four times minister of finance between 1849 and 1867. A major figure of the Second French Empire, his politics have been described as "conservative by instinct, liberal by reflection."

Achille Fould was born on 17 November 1800 in Paris, the third son of French Jewish banker Beer Léon Fould and Charlotte née Brullen. In 1823 he married Henriette (Harriet) Goldschmidt (1800–1870), also a banker's daughter and sister of Adolphus Goldsmith. They had three children: Adolphe-Ernest (1824-1875), Charlotte-Amélie (1826-1917), and Gustave Eugène [ fr ] (1836-1884).

In 1847, Fould acquired a property in Tarbes which he subsequently expanded on designs by architect Louis-Jules Bouchot. In 1863, he had another holiday house erected in Vichy, later known as the chalet des roses.

Fould converted to Protestantism in 1858. Following his death in his Tarbes property, his funeral service was held on 14 October 1867 at the Protestant Oratoire du Louvre in Paris, and he was buried at the Père Lachaise Cemetery.

Achille Fould began his career working for the family bank, which had been started in Paris by his father in 1799 and was later led by his elder brother Benoît Fould. Following the July Revolution in 1830, he acquainted himself with princes of the reigning House of Orléans. In 1834, he was among the founders of the Jockey-Club de Paris.

In 1839, Fould entered politics and was elected a conseiller général in the department of the Hautes-Pyrénées. In 1842, he was elected as a deputy of Hautes-Pyrénées. During subsequent years, he worked in the Chamber of Deputies on economic and fiscal matters.

In 1848, following the revolution of February, he published two pamphlets against the use of paper money, respectively entitled Pas d'Assignats and Observations sur la question financière. He re-entered the National Assembly on 13 September 1848 as deputy of the Seine Department. Despite his past associations with the Orleanists, he moved gradually closer politically to Louis Napoleon, who made him minister of finance on 31 October 1849. He left the ministry in January 1851 but led it again between April and October 1851.

Fould was reappointed as finance minister the day after the coup d'état of December 1851, which he had helped prepare even though he was not directly involved in its execution. On 22 January 1852, following the confiscation of the property of the House of Orléans, he resigned the office of minister of finance but was appointed Senator a few days later. In July 1852, he was appointed Minister of State and in December of the same year, Minister of the Imperial Household, retaining both positions until November 1860. As such, he was one of the most powerful political figures of the Second French Empire, with major influence over economic and financial matters as well as direct authority over prominent national institutions such as the Legion of Honour, the Institut de France, theaters, museums, and libraries. He oversaw Napoleon III's Louvre expansion and directed the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1855. In 1857, he became a member of the Académie des beaux-arts. In 1859, during the absence of Napoleon III who was campaigning in Italy, Fould was effectively in charge of France's government as Secretary of the Privy Council.

Within the new Louvre, Fould was awarded a palatial apartment in the newly built complex later known as the Richelieu Wing, which was also to house the offices of both ministries he led. The suite of ornate rooms was still unfinished when he resigned in late 1860 and was subsequently used by Fould's successor as Minister of State, Alexandre Colonna-Walewski. It later served as official residence of the French Finance Minister from the 1870s to the 1980s. An examplar of the Second Empire style of interior decoration, it became part of the Louvre Museum in 1993 and has been subsequently known as Appartements Napoleon III, sometimes inaccurately referred to as the appartements du duc de Morny. During the second half of the 1850s, Fould's wife Henriette used the Château du Val [ fr ] in Saint-Germain-en-Laye and had it remodeled.

Fould resigned again in November 1860 in protest against Napoleon III's policy announcements which entailed spending which he viewed as imprudent, and retired to his adoptive hometown of Tarbes. From there, he campaigned in favor of greater fiscal discipline. As France was losing the trust of financial markets, Napoleon III eventually reversed course and expressed approval of Fould's views. Fould thus could come back as finance minister on 14 November 1861, succeeding his rival Pierre Magne whom he blamed for excessive laxity. The return of market confidence was crystallized in Napoleon III's visit to James de Rothschild at the latter's Château de Ferrières on 18 December 1862, which Fould orchestrated. Fould then reduced the floating debt by negotiating a loan of 300 million francs (1863).

In view of the regime's sagging popularity at home and growing challenges abroad, the Emperor grew dissatisfied with Fould's fiscal straitjacket and clashed with his finance minister in late 1866. Eventually Napoleon III made Fould resign in January 1867; he was succeeded by stalwart politician Eugène Rouher. Fould spent a few months traveling then again retired to Tarbes, where he died unexpectedly on 5 October 1867.

Achille Fould was made a chevalier in the Legion of Honour in 1848, officier in 1850, commandeur in late 1851, grand officier in 1854, and eventually grand croix, the highest rank, in 1856.

In French administrative law, acts of government (French: actes de gouvernement) are executive measures that are not subject to judicial review because they concern either relations among constitutional authorities or the conduct of France's foreign relations. The doctrine is narrow and defined by case law rather than legislation or a general legal test.

France has separate administrative and ordinary court systems. Most administrative claims begin in an administrative tribunal. Challenges to decrees and certain measures by the national government, including ministers' regulations of national scope, begin in the Conseil d'État. The Conseil d'État may therefore encounter the doctrine when hearing a claim assigned directly to it or when reviewing a lower court's judgment.

The court hearing the claim determines whether the challenged measure is an ordinary administrative act, a measure separable from an act of government, or an act of government. If it finds an act of government, it dismisses the affected claim for lack of jurisdiction without deciding the measure's legality. A court may raise the absence of jurisdiction on its own.

In Mechalikh, the Conseil d'État treated France's failure to repatriate the claimant, whose father had served as an Algerian auxiliary in the French Army and who remained in Algeria until 1980, as inseparable from relations with Algeria. In the companion case Tamazount, it held that the family's treatment in camps after reaching France was reviewable.

When the administrative and ordinary courts disagree about jurisdiction, the Tribunal des conflits may determine which order of courts, if either, can hear the claim. In Israel Shipyards, it held that neither order had jurisdiction to review France's decision to exclude certain Israeli exhibitors from a naval defence exhibition because the decision was inseparable from France's foreign relations.

Early decisions treated an executive measure's political motive as sufficient to prevent review. In Laffitte, the Conseil d'État declined jurisdiction over a politically motivated measure. In Prince Napoléon, it abandoned that test and held that political motivation alone did not remove an administrative act from judicial review. The doctrine nevertheless survived in two narrower categories: relations among constitutional authorities and foreign relations.

The first category concerns relations between the executive and legislature under the Constitution of France. It includes:

The second category covers measures inseparable from France's relations with foreign states or international organizations. Examples include:

Measures separable from foreign relations remain reviewable. The Conseil d'État has reviewed decrees of extradition, including a refusal to extradite a person to Hong Kong; interpreted treaties without deferring to the foreign ministry; reviewed whether a treaty's ratification had received constitutionally required authorization; and reviewed national visa rules adopted under European Union law.

An act of government cannot ordinarily be annulled, and damages cannot be awarded on the ground that the government acted wrongfully. In Mutuelle centrale de réassurance, however, the Conseil d'État held that an administrative court may award damages under liability without fault when an act inseparable from foreign relations imposes a special and exceptionally serious burden. The remedy is unavailable if it would interfere with foreign policy, if the measure was directed at the claimant, if the injury was caused directly by a foreign state or war, or if a special compensation scheme exists.

The European Court of Human Rights has imposed procedural limits without invalidating the doctrine generally. In H.F. and Others v. France, it held that there is no general right to repatriation, but that exceptional circumstances surrounding French women and children held in camps in Syria required refusals of repatriation to receive independent review with safeguards against arbitrariness under Protocol No. 4. In Tamazount and Others v. France, it found no violation of the right of access to a court where the doctrine had been applied narrowly and a claim based on liability without fault remained available.

Action Police CFTC is a very small police union in France, affiliated with the Confédération Française des Travailleurs Chrétiens (CFTC) Christian trade union confederation.

In the 2003 elections of union representatives among the police, Action Police CFTC took 0.32% of the vote. Its rhetoric emphasises the "acknowledgement of the Judeo-Christian roots of Europe and attachment to Christian social morals".

Their leader Thooris displays the royalist fleur-de-lis and cross on the French flag on his internet site. He is also a member of the far-right Mouvement pour la France political party.

Action Police CFTC was noticed nationwide when its leader Michel Thooris protested on the television against a rapper, "Monsieur R.", who mocked the police in a song, "FranSSe" (on the album Politikment incorrekt).

At the beginning of the 2005 French riots, Action Police CFTC caused national outrage by describing the events as "civil war", and requesting the intervention of the French Army in a letter to the Minister of the Interior, Nicolas Sarkozy :

Lucien Cozzoli, national secretary for the police union Unsa-Police-Paris, strongly attacked the request. Bruno Beschizza, leader of Synergie, a police union which represents 42% of police officers, warned against retaliation by far right or Islamic elements. Regarding the letter to the Interior minister, he stated: "It is up to the police and the gendarmerie to patrol these quarters, not to the army, because this is not a war. The residents are not our enemies."

During the 49th Congress of the European Trade Union Confederation, on the 17 November 2005, the leaders of the CFTC were reprimanded by John Monks for the behaviour of Action Police CFTC. "This is the last time you say such things, I don't want to hear you again," Monks said to the leaders of Action Police CFTC. Thooris later said that "The CFTC does not manage to understand that we are in a peculiar situation, with youth armed with bazookas, kalachnikov, heavy weapons and that we are not equipped for this."

Describing itself as " apolitical ", Action Police CFTC nevertheless adopts positions on matters of internal politics, notably:

The administrative divisions of France are concerned with the institutional and territorial organization of French territory. These territories are located in many parts of the world. There are many administrative divisions, which may have political (local government), electoral (districts), or administrative (decentralized services of the state) objectives. All the inhabited territories are represented in the National Assembly, Senate and Economic and Social Council and their citizens have French citizenship and elect the President of France.

The French Republic is divided into 18 regions: 12 in mainland France and 6 elsewhere (1 in Europe : Corsica ; 2 in the Caribbean (the Lesser Antilles): Guadeloupe and Martinique ; 1 in South America : French Guiana ; and 2 in the Indian Ocean near East Africa : Mayotte and Réunion). They are traditionally divided between the metropolitan regions, located on the European continent, and the overseas regions, located outside the European continent. Both have the same status and form the most integrated part of the French Republic.

As of 1 January 2022, metropolitan France is divided into the following:

Five overseas regions (régions d'outre-mer, or ROM), which have the same status as metropolitan regions. The overseas regions are as follows:

Each overseas region is coextensive with an overseas department (département d'outre-mer, or DOM), again with the same status as departments in metropolitan France. The first four overseas departments were created in 1946 and preceded the four overseas regions, Mayotte became a DOM in 2011. The dual structure of overseas region and overseas department, with two separate assemblies administering the same territory, results from the extension of the regional system to the overseas departments in the 1970s. Each overseas region or department may transform into a single territorial collectivity, with the merger of the regional and departmental assemblies, which voters in Martinique and French Guiana approved in two referendums in 2010. In Réunion, the creation of a second department for the southern part of the island has been debated for some time.

The French Republic includes five overseas collectivities (collectivités d'outre-mer, or COM) with a semi-autonomous status:

The French Republic includes one autonomous collectivity, New Caledonia

New Caledonia's status is unique in the French Republic: it is the only French local government that is not a territorial collectivity (although its subdivisions are territorial collectivities). It is regarded as a sui generis collectivity, which means that local government and parliament have the power to pass and enforce specific laws without seeking the consent of the French Government; unless such laws are declared illegitimate by the Constitutional Council in a specific proceeding brought to the Constitutional Council. As agreed in the 1998 Nouméa Accord, a New Caledonian citizenship was established (in addition to the French citizenship which is kept in parallel, along with the consequent European citizenship) and a self-determination referendum was held in 2018. Two follow-up referendums were held in 2020 and 2021.

These territories have no permanent civilian population. The residents consist of military personnel, scientific researchers, and support staff.

1 overseas territory (territoire d'outre-mer, or TOM): the French Southern and Antarctic Lands, which have no permanent population and no communes.

French subdivisions that have a (limited) freedom of administration are called territorial collectivities. Among them are regions, departments, communes, overseas collectivities, provinces (only present in New Caledonia), and the territorial collectivity of Corsica which belongs to no category (but is usually grouped with the regions). New Caledonia is unique as it is not a territorial collectivity.

Citizens from all parts of France, including the overseas administrative divisions, vote in national elections (presidential, legislative), and all of the collectivities are represented in the Senate.

Some areas are the clear responsibility of one level of government (e.g. the state is responsible for international issues), but in other areas it is shared across some or all levels of government (e.g. transport, parks, tourism, culture, and sport get different types of support from different levels).

Historically, France was divided into a complex mosaic of more or less independent entities. Their gradual incorporation into France as provinces may be followed in the article Territorial formation of France.

Adolphe Marie Messimy (French: [ adɔlf maʁi mɛsimi ] ; 31 January 1869 – 1 September 1935) was a French politician and general. He served as Minister of War in 1911–12 and then again for a few months during the outbreak of and first three weeks of the First World War. Having begun his career as an army officer, he returned to the Army and successfully commanded a brigade at the Battle of the Somme, and later a division. Defeated for re-election to the Chamber of Deputies in 1919, he served as an influential senator from 1923 until his death in 1935.

Born in Lyon on 31 January 1869, Adolphe Messimy was the eldest son of notary Paul Charles Léon Messimy and Laurette Marie Anne Girodon. He married Andrée, the daughter of Victor Cornil, whom he divorced in 1921. His second marriage, in 1923, was to Marie-Louise Blanc (née Viallar), a widow. He had two children from each marriage.

Tuchman described him as “an exuberant, energetic, almost violent man, with … bright peasant’s eyes behind spectacles and a loud voice”.

His hobbies were mountain-climbing and collecting weapons and furniture.

Messimy entered the military academy of Saint-Cyr at the age of eighteen and after graduation began a career as a line officer. He was promoted to captain at the age of twenty-five and at twenty-seven attained his Brevet d'état-major (qualified as a staff officer), opening up the promise of an excellent military career. In 1899 he resigned from his post as a captain of chasseurs in protest at the Army's refusal to reopen the Dreyfus case, entering politics determined on “reconciling the army with the nation".

After leaving the Army he became a journalist, writing on military matters for a number of Paris newspapers including Le Temps, le Matin, le Rappel, le Radical and Lyon-Républicain. He also published documented studies in La Revue politique et parlementaire, La Revue des questions coloniales, La Revue bleue and Revue de Paris.

He also became an administrator of the General Company of Niger.

He was elected to the Chamber of Deputies as a Radical-socialiste in 1902, for the Seine constituency (14th arrondissement of Paris). In the second round (11 May) he defeated the incumbent deputy, Girou, by 9,068 votes to 8,569. In 1905 he voted in favour of the law separating church and state.

He was re-elected as a Gauche radicale-socialiste, again at the second round, on 20 May 1906, by 11,894 votes to 5,438 for his opponent Fraguier. On 8 May 1910, once again at the second round, he was re-elected as a Républicain radicale-socialiste by 9,462 votes to 7,182 for his opponent Grangier.

His prewar writings included: "The Armed Peace, France can Lighten the Burdens" (1905), "General Considerations on the Organisation of the Army" (1907), "The Army and its Cadres" (1909) and "Our Colonial Work" (1910).

Messimy became Minister of the Colonies in the government of Ernest Monis and served from 2 March 1911 to 27 June 1911.

From 27 June 1911 to 14 January 1912 Messimy served as Minister of War in the government of Joseph Caillaux. He was the fourth new War Minister that year, and within a few days of his appointment the German gunboat Panther arrived at Agadir, sparking the Second Moroccan Crisis.

Until 1911 the vice-president of the Conseil Supérieur de Guerre (a body of senior generals, chaired by the President of the Republic) was commander-in-chief designate in the event of war but had no planning staff, whilst the Army Chief of Staff reported to the War Minister and dealt solely with administrative matters. The vice-president, General Victor-Constant Michel, proposed that the French Army adopt a more defensive war plan and attach a regiment of reserves to each regular regiment. Messimy, in common with senior French generals, thought that these plans would blunt the fighting spirit of the French Army. He described them as “comme une insanité” and Michel a “national danger” and helped to ensure his removal.

Messimy abolished the job of vice-president, and created a new post – soon given to General Joseph Joffre – of Chief of the General Staff (and Commander-in-Chief designate). There were to be two sub-chiefs, one heading the General Staff, based in the ministry and a member of the War Minister's military cabinet, whilst the other was chief of staff to the Commander-in-Chief and dealt with mobilisation and concentration. Alexandre Millerand abolished the former post (in his 1912–13 tenure), helping to create the situation where Joffre acquired enormous power in his hands during the early years of the First World War. Messimy was suspicious of Joffre's choice of the clericalist right-winger General de Castelnau as his chief of staff.

As War Minister Messimy proposed other reforms. He advocated that the manpower of the French Army should be enhanced with large contingents of black Africans, a view which he shared with General Charles Mangin. Like President Theodore Roosevelt he ordered generals to conduct manoeuvres on horseback, to weed out elderly and unfit generals who were “incapable not only of leading their troops but of following them". Messimy and General Auguste Dubail had tried to introduce 105mm heavy guns, but French generals saw them as a defensive weapon like machine guns and as a drag on their offensive doctrine, preferring the more mobile " Soixante-Quinze " gun, so only a few had been introduced by 1914.

Returning to his native district, Messimy was, on 25 February 1912, elected deputy for the arrondissement of Trévoux (the Ain) for the Parti républicain radical et radical socialiste, replacing Donat-Auguste Bollet, who had become a senator. Messimy polled 9,734 votes against 4,648 for Ducurtyl and 3,420 for Nanssex, out of 18,186 ballots cast.

After visiting the Balkans and seeing the advantage held by Bulgarians in their inconspicuous uniforms, Messimy also proposed replacing the red kepi and pantalon rouge (red trousers) worn by the French Army since 1830 by a grey-blue or grey-green uniform (the British Army had recently switched from scarlet to khaki and the Germans from blue to field-grey). This plan was blocked by French generals and politicians. Messimy later wrote of the “blind and imbecile attachment to the most visible of all colours”.

He was re-elected for his Ain seat unopposed on 26 April 1914, obtaining all of the 11,713 votes cast and holding the seat until his defeat in 1919.

On 13 June 1914 he entered the government, led by René Viviani, as Minister of War. On 24 July 1914 Messimy summoned Joffre to warn him that war was likely.

News of the German Kriegesgefahr (announcement of danger of war) was announced around 5.30pm on 31 July. Messimy, who had been tipped off an hour earlier by a banking friend in Amsterdam, told the cabinet it was “une forme hypocrite de la mobilisation”. Joffre, who had previously been ordered to keep French troops 10 km away from the frontier, arrived and demanded French mobilisation, but was only allowed to send a “covering order” because of the Tsar ’s last minute appeal to the Kaiser. Messimy was left fretting at the “green baize routine” by which each minister was permitted to speak in turn at cabinet meetings.

The next morning (1 August), after the German ultimatum to Russia, the cabinet agreed that the mobilisation order could be issued but Messimy was required to keep it in his pocket till 3.30pm. Public posters appeared at 4pm, but that evening Messimy had to order the Army, in the president's name, to keep out of the 10 km zone, on pain of court martial. Not even patrols were permitted, and special orders were issued to General Foch, commander of XX Corps, who was suspected of patrolling aggressively. Until the Germans were confirmed to have entered Belgium, Messimy forbade any French troops to enter in case reports were a trick to make the French into the violators of Belgian neutrality.

Messimy was keen to bring the Colonial Corps from North Africa to France. In the fraught atmosphere of the Crisis he was challenged to a duel on 2 August by Navy Minister Armand Gauthier, who had forgotten to send torpedo boats into the English Channel but now wanted to redeem his reputation by using the French Navy to attack the German warships Goeben and Breslau, currently in the Mediterranean, before Germany and France were actually at war. He eventually embraced Messimy tearfully and was persuaded to resign on grounds of health.

The Germans attacked the outermost Liège forts on 5 August. Three cavalry divisions under General Sordet were to enter Belgium on 6 August to reconnoitre east of the Meuse. Like President Poincare, Messimy would have preferred to send five corps, but this did not meet with Joffre's approval.

Messimy called in General Hirschauer of the engineers on 13 August and ordered him to have the Paris defences ready in 3 weeks, as a precaution. General Gallieni, who had been designated as Joffre's successor "in case of accident" went to Vitry (14 August) to lobby Joffre as Messimy refused to go, believing (wrongly) that Joffre would be more likely to listen to his former superior. Messimy rang GQG on the night of 18/19 August “in anguish” at the weakness of the French left wing. He spoke to General Berthelot, who assured him that the German centre was weak and he agreed that Joffre should not be wakened.

With the French armies falling back in retreat, and the Paris defences still not ready, Messimy sent for Gallieni and offered him the job of Military governor of Paris in place of General Michel. He shook Gallieni's hand effusively and kissed him when he agreed, promising him three active corps to avoid “the fate of Liège and Namur ”, asking him to return later when he hoped to have cabinet authority to appoint him. Messimy fully supported Joffre in his purge of unsuccessful generals, even suggesting that, as in 1793, some of them simply ought to be executed.

Messimy then learned from General Ebener, GQG's representative at the War Office, that Joffre had ordered 61st and 62nd Reserve Divisions up from Paris to the Amiens sector (where they would form part of a new Sixth Army under Michel Maunoury). When Messimy protested that Paris was in the Zone of the Interior not the Zone of the Armies, and that the troops could not be moved without the authority of the president, the prime minister and himself, Ebener replied that the move was already “in execution” and that Ebener himself was to command the two divisions. This left Paris guarded by only one reserve division and three territorial divisions. Messimy hung onto 45th Division despite demands from GQG.

Messimy and Poincaré had studied the decrees of 1913 and agreed that in wartime the commander-in-chief had “extended powers” across the whole country and “absolute power”, including over the civilian authorities, in the Zone of the Armies. They wished to avoid a repetition of 1870 when War Minister Palikao had taken charge of strategy, sending Marshal MacMahon on his disastrous mission to be encircled and forced to surrender at Sedan. However Messimy found a clause entitling the civil power to protect “the vital interests of the country” and so, between 2am and 6am he drafted an order to Joffre demanding that he release three corps for the defence of Paris, which he telegraphed and also sent by hand at 11am on 25 August accompanied by a friendly letter.

On 25 August Messimy complained to Joffre that German cavalry were running amok in Belgium and that “Sordet, who has had very little fighting, is asleep. This is inadmissible.” This was unfair criticism.

Messimy now learned that his job was at risk as the price of getting Millerand back into the government (Delcassé was also getting back his old job as Foreign Minister in place of Doumergue). He exploded “to hell with Albania!” at his last cabinet meeting when that country was discussed, and had to be told to calm down by President Poincaré. His last act was to remove General Victor-Constant Michel a second time, this time as military governor of Paris, threatening him with arrest until Viviani arrived (apparently by accident) and persuaded Michel to resign. Messimy himself also refused to resign or to accept the position of minister without portfolio, so the whole government had to resign on 26 August, so Viviani could form a National Unity Government.

Poincaré later wrote that Messimy had been too gloomy, warning of imminent defeat. Greenhalgh writes that he was “temperamentally unsuited … and not strong enough to withstand the strain” of being War Minister.

After his resignation Messimy came to say goodbye to Joffre on 1 September. Joffre told him that he expected to renew the offensive on 8 September at Brienne-le-Chateau, a town between the Marne and the Seine – the counterstroke which would become the First Battle of the Marne. Messimy wrote that he had been impressed by his calm. At the time his feelings may have been less cordial: in late December 1914 he complained to Abel Ferry that Joffre was responsible for the “divorce” between GQG and the troops, and that bad intelligence had been responsible for the near disaster of Charleroi and for Joffre's partial and costly attacks.

Messimy rejoined the army as a staff captain on the staff of XIV Corps. He soon became head of the deuxième bureau (intelligence) and acted as a liaison officer. He was part of Dubail ’s First Army. He was soon promoted to major and made a Chevalier de la Légion d'honneur on 16 November 1914. By 1915 Messimy had been promoted to lieutenant-colonel and on 27 July 1915 he was wounded in the Vosges, leading a unit of Chasseurs Alpins on 27 July 1915. Soon afterwards he was promoted to colonel and was given command of the 6th Chasseurs Half-Brigade.

Messimy and his brigade took part in the Somme Offensive. His brigade was part of Fayolle ’s Sixth Army, itself part of Foch 's Army Group North. On 4 September it attacked the Bois Reinette, Bois Marries and Bois Madame in front of the German Third Position. Philpott describes this as a “textbook assault”. The lead battalions took the first objectives – a makeshift trench along the track from Ferme de l’Hopital to Cléry and some observation posts on the ridge behind, in one rush. The reserve battalion pushed on in skirmish order into the woods, despite machine gun fire on the left (north). In three hours the brigade had taken 150 prisoners and suffered 670 casualties. As a result of this and other successful French attacks, the Germans pulled back to their Third Position across the southern sector of the Somme front.

The brigade attacked again on 12 September. At 1.05pm Messimy learned that his men had taken the German Third Position west of the Bapaume-Peronne road. He asked for and was sent two more battalions from the 44th and 133rd Infantry Regiments. At 6.39pm they advanced again across the final line of trenches, followed by three companies of chasseurs exploiting without orders, into Bouchavesnes village. By 7.30pm they had taken 500 prisoners and ten guns. A statue of Foch now stands nearby. The German front had been pushed back 3 km, part of a broader Sixth Army advance which took 6 km of the German Third Line. Fayolle, normally highly critical of his subordinates, wrote “Messimy’s spirit was superb”. In common with other French successes on the Somme, this was overshadowed by the Battle of Verdun and received – then and now – less recognition than it deserved. The following day (13 September) the City of Verdun was awarded the Legion d’Honneur and the British Military Cross.

Flanking attacks having failed – Fayolle thought Foch mad to demand a further attack now the German defence was stiffening up – Messimy's brigade attacked the Bois St Pierre Vast from the south-west on 5 November. His men waded through knee-deep mud, but the attack failed and they had to withdraw to the start-line. Messimy issued his final order to his chasseurs on 17 November 1916, praising their performance. The brigade had lost 71 officers and 3000 men.

In early April 1917 Messimy warned Prime Minister Ribot, correctly, that most of the senior generals in Micheler ’s Reserve Army Group thought Nivelle ’s planned offensive would cause high casualties but would not succeed. Again wounded, Messimy was promoted to général de brigade on 11 September 1917 and transferred to command the 213th Infantry Brigade. He ended the war in command of the 162nd Infantry Division with which he liberated Colmar.

During the war he received eight citations and ended with the rank of général de brigade à titre definitif. He was awarded the Croix de Guerre, and was a Grand Officer of the Légion d'honneur.

After the end of the war Messimy re-entered active politics but he was defeated for re-election in 1919. On 15 November he came only sixth out of the list of candidates for the union républicaine et démocratique, receiving only 16,494 votes out of 68,762 cast.

He was elected a senator in 1923 at a by-election caused by the death of Alexandre Bérard. At the second round, held on 10 June, he was convincingly elected with 665 votes out of 871 cast. He was re-elected, this time at the first ballot, on 20 October 1929, with 469 votes out of 877 cast. In the Senate Messimy served on the Committees of the Army, the Air Force, the Colonies and Foreign Affairs. He was president of the Colonies Committee for five years from 1926, before succeeding Albert Lebrun as president of the Army Committee.

He died, still a senator, on 1 September 1935 at Charnoz-sur-Ain from the effects of a cerebral haemorrhage.

In his posthumous memoirs (1937, pp350–1) Messimy once again argued that unsuccessful generals in 1914 should have been executed, quoting the names of six who were sent to the guillotine in 1793–1794.

Adoption in France is codified in the French Civil Code in two distinct forms: simple adoption and plenary adoption.

Simple adoption (French : adoption simple) is a type of adoption which allows some of the legal bonds between an adopted child and his or her birth family to remain. It is formalized under articles 343 and following of the French Civil Code.

Simple adoption is less restrictive in its requirements and less radical in effects than plenary adoption.

Plenary adoption (French : adoption plénière) is an alternate form of adoption which terminates the relationship between birth parent and child. Thus, all rights and status which the child may have had from the birth family are revoked and replaced with the rights and status granted by the adopting family.

The term "plenary adoption" distinguishes it from the other form of adoption practised in France, simple adoption, which allows some of the legal bonds between an adopted child and his or her birth family to remain.

France was one of the first countries to adopt the euro after its introduction in 1999, phasing out its previous national currency, the French franc, entirely after 1 January 2002.

The conceptualization of the euro began in the late 1970s, sparked by the desire for a European response to the dominance of the U.S. dollar. German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt and French President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing played pivotal roles in this development. Initially, the euro served as an accounting unit for international transactions, known as the ECU, before evolving into a common currency. The euro officially came into existence on 1 January 1999, as part of efforts to create an economic and monetary union within the European Union.

France was one of the first countries to adopt the euro, with the French franc ceasing to be legal tender after 31 December 2001.

The transition to the euro in France involved a three-year period, starting from 1 January 1999, during which the euro existed as "book money". Euro banknotes and coins were introduced on 1 January 2002. This was the earliest date for any member state when the national currency ceased to be legal tender. The French government introduced dual circulation period – when both the French franc and the euro had legal tender status – ended on 17 February 2002. The government of France replacing the French franc at a fixed conversion rate of 6.55957 FRF per one euro. French government and financial institutions undertook extensive efforts to ensure a seamless transition to the Euro. This included the modification of financial software, recalibration of ATMs, and widespread distribution of new euro banknotes and coins. Also, the exchange of the former French national currency was done by the Banque de France (Bank of France) exchanged French franc coins until 17 February 2005 and franc banknotes until 17 February 2012.

The Affiche Rouge (French pronunciation: [ a.fiʃ ʁuʒ ] Red Poster) is a notorious propaganda poster, distributed by Vichy France and German authorities in the spring of 1944 in occupied Paris, to discredit 23 immigrant French Resistance fighters, members of the Manouchian Group. The term Affiche Rouge also refers more broadly to the circumstances surrounding the poster's creation and distribution, the capture, trial and execution of these members of the Manouchian Group.

In mid-November 1943, the French police arrested 23 members of the Communist Francs-Tireurs et Partisans de la Main d'Oeuvre Immigrée (FTP-MOI), who were part of the French Resistance. They were called the Manouchian Group after the commander, Missak Manouchian. The group was part of a network of about 100 fighters, who committed nearly all acts of armed resistance in the Paris metropolitan region between March and November 1943.

Its membership included men of different backgrounds. 22 of them were Poles, five Italians, three Hungarians, two Armenians, three Spaniards, 1 French man and a Romanian woman; eleven members were Jewish.

After having been tortured and interrogated for three months, the 23 were tried by a German military court. To discredit the Resistance, the authorities invited French celebrities (from the world of the cinema and other arts) to attend the trial and encourage the media to give it the widest coverage possible. All but one of the Manouchian Group's members were executed before a firing squad in Fort Mont-Valérien on 21 February 1944. Olga Bancic, who had served the group as a messenger, was taken to Stuttgart, where she was beheaded with an axe on 10 May 1944.

In the spring of 1944, the Vichy authorities launched a propaganda campaign, designed to discredit the Manouchian Group and defuse public anger over their execution. They created a poster, which became known as Affiche Rouge, due to its red background. It featured ten men of the group, with nationality, surnames, photos and descriptions of their crimes; the Germans distributed an estimated 15,000 copies of the poster.

Along with these posters, the Germans handed out flyers that claimed the Resistance was headed by foreigners, Jews, unemployed people, and criminals; the campaign characterized the Resistance as a "foreigners' conspiracy against French life and the sovereignty of France":

Si des Français pillent, volent, sabotent et tuent... Ce sont toujours des étrangers qui les commandent. Ce sont toujours des chômeurs et des criminels professionnels qui exécutent. Ce sont toujours des juifs qui les inspirent. C’est l’armée du crime contre la France. Le banditisme n’est pas l’expression du patriotisme blessé, c’est le complot étranger contre la vie des Français et contre la souveraineté de la France. C'est le complot de l'anti-France!... C'est le rêve mondial du sadisme juif... Étranglons-le avant qu'il nous étrangle, nous, nos femmes et nos enfants!

If Frenchmen loot, steal, sabotage and murder... It is always foreigners who command them. It is always unemployed and professional criminals who execute. It is always Jews who inspire them. It is the army of crime against France. Banditism is not the expression of wounded patriotism, it is the foreign plot against the lives of the French and against the sovereignty of France. It is the plot of anti-France!... It is the world dream of Jewish sadism... Let's strangle it before it strangles us, our wives and our children!

Although the poster attempted to depict the group as "terrorists", the campaign seems to have had the effect of highlighting the feats of people whom the general public considered to be freedom fighters. Legend has it that supporters wrote the graffiti Mort pour la France (lit. They died for France) across the posters and laid flowers beneath some of them. In 1975, historian Philippe Diaz Raymond claimed that there was no historical record of such activity. However, more recent research has in fact confirmed that such additions by residents did take place.

In 1955, Louis Aragon wrote a poem memorializing the Manouchian Group, " Strophes pour se souvenir ". The poem was published in 1956 in Le roman inachevé. In 1959 Léo Ferré set it to music and recorded it as " L'Affiche rouge ". Rouben Melik and Paul Éluard also wrote poems in honour of the Manouchian Group.

In 1997, at the prompting of Robert Badinter, a French senator and former Minister of Justice, the French Parliament authorized a monument to commemorate the execution at Mont-Valérien of 1,006 citizens and members of the French Resistance, including the Manouchian Group, between 1940 and 1944. The sculptor Pascal Convert was commissioned to create the monument and Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin dedicated it on 20 September 2003.

In the 1980s, some French political factions suggested that, because of political infighting, some members of the Resistance had been complicit in the capture of many of the members of the Manouchian Group. A film documentary by Stéphane Courtois and Mosco Boucault, Des terroristes à la retraite, shot in 1983 and broadcast by Antenne 2 in 1985, included interviews of surviving FTP-MOI members and families of the victims. Boucault accused the French Communist Party (PCF) of having deliberately sacrificed the fighters in the power struggle with the Gaullists for control over the National Council of Resistance (CNR). He suggested this was done because the fighters' foreign origins undermined French depictions of the Resistance as a native patriotic movement. In Des terroristes à la retraite, Boris Holban was accused of having betrayed groupe Manouchian, sparking a heated dispute known as L’Affaire Manouchian. The film was rebroadcast in 2001, minus 12 minutes deleted to reflect more recent historical research.

La traque de l'Affiche rouge, a documentary produced by Denis Peschanski [ fr ] and Jorge Amat [ fr ], broadcast by France 2 on 15 March 2007, refuted Courtois and Boucault's allegations. Quoting the historian Denis Peschanski, who had access to new documents from the Russian, French and German archives, the new documentary alleged that the fall of the Manouchian Group had been due exclusively to the French police. The two newly created branches of the Renseignements généraux (RG) intelligence agency—the Brigades spéciales 1 and 2—had trailed the Résistance fighters for months. On 28 September 1943, Marcel Rayman, with several others, shot and killed the SS General Julius von Ritter [ fr ; de ]. Ritter organized the forced labor of the Service du travail obligatoire (STO). At that time, Rayman had already been under surveillance for two months. The French Milice arrested and dismantled the Manouchian Group after the attack, aided by information given by some members under torture.

In September 2009, the dramatic film L'Armée du crime opened in France, featuring the story of the Manouchian Group. Directed by Robert Guédiguian, a Marseille -based filmmaker of German and Armenian parentage, it was adapted from a story by Serge Le Péron. It reflects some of the divisions among the Résistance. In association with the film's release, reporters interviewed the last surviving member of the FTP-MOI group, Arsène Tchakarian. He decisively refuted the allegation that the PCF had betrayed the Manouchian Group and said that 35 members of the 40 in the group were communists. The film opened in the United States in 2010.

Des libérateurs? La libération par l'armée du crime! "Liberators? Liberation by the army of crime!"

From left to right, and top to bottom, individual portraits are labeled:

Affranchi (/ ə ˈ f r ɒ̃ ʃ i /, French: [ afʁɑ̃ʃi ]) is a former French legal term denoting a freedman or emancipated slave, but also a pejorative term for free people of color. The equivalent term in French for women is affranchie with a final "e" denoting the feminine grammatical gender. It is used in the English language to describe the social class of freedmen in Saint-Domingue, and other slave-holding French territories, who held legal rights intermediate between those of free whites and enslaved Africans. In Saint-Domingue, roughly half of the affranchis were gens de couleur libres (free people of color; Mulatto) and the other half African slaves.

The term is derived from the French word for emancipation— affranchissement, or enfranchisement in terms of political rights. But, the affranchis were barred from the franchise (voting) prior to a 1791 court case, which followed the French Revolution. The decision in their favor prompted a backlash from the French white planter class on Saint-Domingue, who also exerted power in France. These elements contributed to the outbreak of the Haitian Revolution.

The affranchis had legal and social advantages over enslaved Africans. They became a distinct class in the society between whites and slaves. They could get some education, were able to own land, and could attend some French colonial entertainments. Planters who took slave women or free women of color as concubines, often sent their sons to France for education. In some cases these sons entered the French military. The parents were more likely to settle property on them as well. Because of such property and class issues, some free men of color considered themselves to have status above that of the petits blancs, shopkeepers and workers. Nonetheless, the latter had more political rights in the colony until after the Revolution.

The colonists passed so many restrictions that the affranchis were limited as a separate caste : they could not vote or hold colonial administrative posts, or work in professional careers as doctors or lawyers. There were sumptuary laws: the free people of color were forbidden to wear the style of clothes favored by the wealthy white colonists. In spite of the disadvantages, many educated affranchis identified culturally with France rather than with the enslaved population. A social class in between, the free people of color sometimes had tensions with both whites and enslaved Africans.

Ambitious mulattoes worked to gain acceptance from the white colonists who held power in that society. As they advanced in society, affranchis often also held land and slaves. Some acted as creditors for planters. One of their leaders in the late 18th century, Julien Raimond, an indigo planter, claimed that affranchis owned a third of all the slaves in the colony at that time. In the early years of the French Revolution and Haitian Revolution, many gens de couleur were committed to maintaining the institution of slavery. They wanted political equality based on class—that is, extended for men of property, regardless of skin color.

Agence des participations de l'État (French pronunciation: [ aʒɑ̃s de paʁtisipasjɔ̃ də leta ], APE, lit. ' State Participations Agency '), created in 2004 under the government of Jean-Pierre Raffarin, is the French agency responsible for managing the State's shareholdings in companies of strategic importance. As of 2022, APE has €732.514 billion worth of assets under management, which includes investments in companies involved in energy, industry, defence, transport, communication and finance, among others.

The State participation agency is a Service à compétence nationale (service with national competence) created in September 2004. The creation of the Agency responded to the need to clarify the role of a shareholder of the State and the promotion of its patrimonial interests alongside the regulatory functions, tax collection, sectoral supervision, buyer that the State exercises.

This first step provided the State with a structure embodying and exclusively exercising its role as a shareholder. The second step was to endow the APE with greater autonomy. The appointment of a State Equity Commissioner, reporting directly to the French Ministry of the Economy and Finance, completed the process. Since May 2017, the APE has 88 companies in its portfolio.

Since 2001, the activity of the State shareholder has been traced every year in a report appended to the draft Loi de finances en France (Finance law in France).

The main operations carried out by the agency were:

The four missions of the Agency are as follows: Foster the economic performance of companies, their profitability and their long-term development; Act as a wise shareholder in corporate governance companies; Manage the portfolio of investments through acquisitions, disposals or shareholder mergers; Promote the exemplarity and social and environmental responsibility of companies.

The agency exercises the usual responsibilities of shareholders. In particular, the members of the agency represent the State on the boards of directors. The agency "ensures a sufficient level of control in companies operating in sectors that are particularly sensitive in terms of sovereignty". It enforces political decisions in corporate governance, such as feminization, and executive compensation.

Since 2017, the Agency has revised its shareholder strategy. From now on, the State is intended to be a shareholder in three types of companies: strategic companies which contribute to sovereignty (defense and nuclear), companies participating in public service missions or of national or local general interest for which regulation would be insufficient to preserve public interests and ensure public service missions, companies in difficulty whose disappearance could lead to a systemic risk.

For the performance of its missions, the APE has a tight team of 53 people, mostly civil servants. As of 1 July 2019, it had 27 senior executives and investment managers (General management and investment management) traditionally from engineering bodies (44%), but also, in order to diversify profiles, from other bodies. (30% civil administrators, 33% civil servants from other bodies – INSEE, Banque de France, IGF, Cour des comptes) or contract employees. Nearly 30% of the senior managers of the APE are also graduates of a major business school. The areas of expertise (financial, legal, audit and accounting and communication), support functions and secretariats employ 26 people.

Resulting from historical stratification, the entities falling within the scope of APE represent both companies in various sectors (services and finance, energy, transport, industry) and multiple statutes – public limited companies in the majority of cases, but also public institutions of an industrial and commercial nature (établissements publics à caractère industriel et commercial – EPIC).

The Agence nationale de la sécurité des systèmes d'information (ANSSI ; English: French National Agency for the Security of Information Systems) is a French service created on 7 July 2009 with responsibility for computer security.

ANSSI reports to the Secretariat-General for National Defence and Security (SGDSN) to assist the Prime Minister in exercising his responsibilities for defence and national security.

ANSSI replaced the Central Directorate of Computer Security [ Wikidata ], which on July 31, 2001, replaced the SCSSI.

Guillaume Poupard, Chief Engineer of Armaments, was appointed director general of ANSSI on 27 March 2014, succeeding Patrick Pailloux [ Wikidata ].

Vincent Strubel succeeds Guillaume Poupard as new director general on January 4, 2023.

ANSSI has a budget of €80 million (2014) and a workforce of 500 in 2015, with a target of 567 by the end of 2017.

ANSSI is heir to a long line of bodies responsible for ensuring the security of sensitive information belonging to the French State:

These organizations initially created in a military security perspective confidential information and data protection have gradually evolved. In 1986, the Central Communications Security Establishment has been replaced by the Central Service for Computer Security. Today ANSSI retains a mission of the defence of state information systems, but is also charged with a mission to provide advice and support to government and operators of critical national infrastructure.

"The agency ensures the mission of national authority security of information systems. As such it is responsible for proposing rules for the protection of state information systems and verify the implementation of measures adopted. In the field of cyber defence, it provides a monitor, detect, alert and reaction to computer attacks, especially on the networks of the State."

ANSSI also developed SecNumCloud, a security framework introduced in 2016 for the qualification of cloud service providers.

ANSSI is headed by a director general (currently Vincent Strubel), appointed by the Prime Minister. He is assisted by a deputy director and a chief of staff.

ANSSI also has its own training centre, the Safety Training Centre for Information Systems (CFSSI), including delivering degrees in computer security (ESSI), registered in the National Directory of Professional Certifications.

ANSSI governance is ensured by a Strategic Committee including:

According to a Senate report, although significant efforts have been put in place in recent years, the situation in France with regard to the threat from cyber attacks is still unsatisfactory. Indeed, ANSSI lacks financial and human resources comparable to its American, British and German counterparts.

To meet the national challenge of cyber security, ANSSI continues to expand its teams with positions to be filled in all line of work. The aim is to reach 675 agents in 2022 according to the Public Finance Programming Bill of 2018.

According to French newspaper Le Monde, the ANSSI would have thwarted what seemed to be a simple attack, an interference by the Russians during the French presidential campaign of 2017. "This is not a simple hacking operation, but an attempt to destabilize the French presidential election," wrote the political party En marche! in the early evening of May 5, 2017.

Following the data leak, ANSSI opened an investigation into the breach.

The Agence nationale pour l'emploi, or ANPE (English: "National Employment Agency" or "National Work Agency") was a French government agency which provided counseling and aid to those who are in search of a job or of training.

The ANPE was created on 13 July 1967. In December 2008, the ANPE merged with the Assedic benefits agency to create a comprehensive employment agency called Pôle emploi, based on those of Germany and the UK.

The National Employment Agency (ANPE)'s main task was to encourage meetings between supply and demand, to help jobseekers find new jobs and help employers hire. With more than 3.7 million job entrusted by companies in 2007 and more than 3.3 million successful hiring, the ANPE was a central player in the labour market. It was open to all job seekers, whatever their situation, compensated or not. In 2007, 19 million maintenance consultants had been made. The main tasks were helping the unemployed back into work, supporting companies in their recruitment requirement, fighting against discrimination. To assist job seekers in their search, the agency offered services.

Starting on 1 January 2006, ANPE offered all job seekers monthly monitoring with a personal adviser referral until their return to employment. To facilitate recruitment, the ANPE had a partnership with 568,000 companies to promote the adequacy between supply and demand, including developing the skills of job seekers by training.

The ANPE administrations employed 28,459 people in France in 2007. The ANPE claimed 15 million visits per month on its website, anpe.fr. It had more than 1,300 settlements across France, with 22 regional units to define priority action plans in each region. The central administration gave the direction, planning implementation and assessing results.

In 1996 the registration of jobseekers was transferred to the Assedic to simplify the process.

In 1997, the official website was launched; it is now the first European website for jobs. From 2002, it has been possible for job seekers to demand jobs directly on the website. From 2003, it has published anonymous CVs profiles on the website. In 1998 the Observatoire de l'ANPE was created to publish studies.

In 2004 a National Plan against the recruitment difficulties was launched, and in 2005 an Emergency Plan for Employment was implemented. From 2006, a monthly personalized with a counselor referent has been implemented.

In 2008, a new public agency was created, resulting from the merging of the ANPE with the Unédic administration.

The Agence nationale pour la gestion des déchets radioactifs (French pronunciation: [ aʒɑ̃s nɑsjɔnal puʁ la ʒɛstjɔ̃ de deʃɛ ʁadjoaktif ] ; ANDRA), or National agency for the management of radioactive waste, is a 'public institution of an industrial and commercial nature' charged with the management of radioactive waste in France.

Placed under the supervision of the ministers for research, the industry and the environment, ANDRA leads complementary industrial, research and public information missions.

ANDRA's funding comes from a mixture of public and private sources, including a tax on producers of radioactive waste and commercial contracts with waste producers.

ANDRA is responsible for the Cigéo deep geological repository project.

ANDRA is currently based at five locations:

Andra publishes a national inventory of radioactive materials and wastes every three years, then every five years following the public debate of 2019. The first three inventories were criticised for not containing information on military nuclear sites. The 1996 edition touches on 29 sites relevant to the ministry of defence and contains military nuclear wastes, and the 1997 edition touches on 45 sites.

ANDRA develops public-public and public-private partnerships with other organisations. For example:

Andra was created in November 1979 within the CEA.

In 1983, ANDRA selected twenty-eight sites whose geology would be favourable to the establishment of an underground storage facility for long-lived HLW. Lively local opposition forced ANDRA to abandon research on these sites.

The law of 30 December 1991 relating to research on radioactive waste management (known as the Bataille Law after its sponsor, Christian Bataille), gave Andra its independence from the CEA and gave it its statue as an établissement public à caractère industriel et commercial. Andra is notably charged with designing and realising new storage centres taking account of long-term perspectives on production and management of wastes, and to carry out all necessary studies to this end, such as the realisation and operation of underground laboratories for the study of deep geological formations. Andra installed its headquarters at Châtenay-Malabry.

In 2003, ANDRA decided to record certain of its archives on permanent paper in resistant ink, with the aim of guaranteeing preservation of the information for a minimum of 300 years, for the purpose of compliance with decree No. 2003-30 of 10 January 2003, which obliges the Manche storage centre to permanently record information relating to its stored wastes after the site is closed.

In the context of dismantling of French nuclear facilities, ANDRA launched an invitation to tender in September 2015 for the development of innovative technological solutions aiming at minimising the impact of nuclear wastes. According to estimates, dismantling of nuclear facilities will produce 2.1 million cubic metres of Very Low Level Waste (VLLW), which is more than three times the capacity of the Aube storage centre.

On 5 August 2015, the Constitutional Council censured the insertion into the law for growth, activity and equal economic opportunities, known as the Macron law, of an article defining reversibility adopted in the Senate on 18 April on the proposal of Gérard Longuet, on the grounds that it does not have a link, even indirect, with the provisions contained in the bill. The condition of reversibility is nevertheless included in the law defining the scope of the Cigéo project adopted in July 2016.

In the 2017 finance bill, ANDRA's budget is charged to the budgetary programme of the Ministry of Ecology, under item 174 (Energy, Climate and post-mining).

In 1999, ANDRA was charged by the State with creating an underground laboratory in the commune of Bure, Meuse for the study of radioactive waste storage, and to operate it until 2006. The project consists of testing deep geological storage (at a depth of 500 m in a layer of clay), of the most dangerous wastes. The aim of deep geological storage is to contain the wastes until they become non-hazardous, over a period of 100 000 years. ANDRA has been progressively buying land for the site, and has created a public information centre at Saudron, to inform the public on the principles of geological disposal. As of August 2015, 1650 m of tunnels had been constructed.

The construction of this laboratory has provoked a strong opposition among some local residents. In exchange for the use of the underground, ANDRA consecrates a budget of 5 million French Francs per year to support local communities (10 million in 1997), and promises 60 million Francs if the laboratory is constructed. Opponents of the project foresee a potential for corruption of the local political authorities as a result of these funding offers.

In December 2002, the Société générale pour les techniques nouvelles (then a subsidiary of AREVA) and COGEMA signed a framework contract with ANDRA for engineering studies relating to the project.

ANDRA proposes the following provisional timeline, assuming that the necessary authorisations are obtained:

After more than thirty years of research, including at the Meuse/Haute Marne Underground Research Laboratory, Andra applied in 2023 to ASN, the French nuclear safety authority, for permission to construct the facility.

The council is composed of 23 members: two representatives of the French Parliament ; six representatives of the State ; seven qualified persons; eight representatives of the employees of the agency. Since the 9 May 2019, it is presided over by Adolphe Colrat, préfet hors classe.

The Scientific council was created by the law of 30 December 1991. It is composed of twelve additional members, nominated for five years. The members are French and foreign experts, men and women, chosen by the ministers on proposition by Andra. The Scientific council issues opinions on the strategy, research programmes and results presented by the agency.

The agency declares having an annual communications budget of a little over 1 million Euros at its disposal.

For 2020, the agency declared to the Haute Autorité pour la transparence de la vie publique that it engaged in lobbying activities in France pour with a value not exceeding 200 000 Euros.

ANDRA edits and distributes a free journal (200 000 copies) as well as pedagogical materials aimed at teachers.

The agency finances video-bloggers (Simon Puech, Anonimal, David Sheik), the Play Bac enterprise (2010 et 2017) and Usbek & Rica in order to promote the Cigéo project.

Agessa is a French association that manages social security taxation for individuals who earn money through licensing or sale of original, copyrighted material such as photographs, musical manuscripts or written texts. Agessa exists since January 1, 1978 and stands for Association pour la Gestion de la Sécurité Sociale des Auteurs (Association for the Management of Authors' Social Security).

Precise information regarding taxation can be obtained from the Agessa website, as the percentages and manners of payment change regularly. In recent years, a percentage of proceeds from copyright licensing in France must be paid directly to Agessa by the party obtaining the license.

For example, imagine that a script is licensed to a production company for the filming of a movie. If the contract of sale of the license to use the script stipulates that the production company will pay the author 10,000 euro, the production company will pay the author a lesser amount (in 2006, 9215.5 euro) and Agessa the remainder (in 2007, 784.5 euro).

It may be thought of as the equivalent of the tax withholding in the United States. The money withheld by the buyer does not account for all tax be paid.

An agglomeration community (French : communauté d'agglomération, pronounced [ kɔmynote daɡlɔmeʁasjɔ̃ ]) is a consortium of communes (municipalities) in France, created as a government structure by the Chevènement Law of 1999. It is one of four forms of an intercommunal structure with fiscal power, less integrated than a métropole or a communauté urbaine but more integrated than a communauté de communes. Agglomeration communities must consist of a contiguous grouping of communes with a total population of at least 50,000, including a central commune with at least 15,000 inhabitants. In the case of an agglomeration community that includes a prefecture, the 50,000 threshold is reduced to 30,000 and the 15,000 threshold does not apply.

As of January 2025, there are 230 agglomeration communities in France (214 in metropolitan France and 16 in the overseas departments). The population (as of 2022) of the agglomeration communities ranges from 28,318 inhabitants (CA Grand Verdun) to 364,744 inhabitants (CA Roissy Pays de France).

Several former communautés d'agglomération have been converted into communautés urbaines or métropoles, for instance those of Strasbourg, Rouen, Saint-Étienne and Caen.

The table below lists the communautés d'agglomération with more than 200,000 inhabitants (as of 2022).

Agir (French: [ aʒiʁ ]), officially Agir, la droite constructive (lit. ' Act, the Constructive Right '), is a political party in France, established on 26 November 2017. The majority of its founding members were previously associated with the Constructive faction within The Republicans. Styling itself as a " liberal, social, European, humanist and reformist " party, Agir was founded by a group of 19 established politicians as an alternative to The Republicans. The party merged with Renaissance (formerly La République En Marche!) as an "associate party" in 2022.

Agir Members of Parliament (MPs) were members of the Agir ensemble parliamentary group in the National Assembly. Fabienne Keller was the party's only Member of the European Parliament (MEP).

Following the defeat of Les Républicains (LR) candidate François Fillon in the first round of the 2017 French presidential election and the ascension of Laurent Wauquiez, perceived as coming from the right wing of Les Républicains, to the leadership of the party, 19 politicians from LR and the centre-right Union of Democrats and Independents formed the group.

In the run-up to the 2022 French presidential election, Agir joined and formed part of the Ensemble Citoyens coalition, which supported President Emmanuel Macron in his re-election bid. The party grew closer to Macron's political camp following the election, and when it was later announced that his party would attempt to unify the presidential majority into a single party grouping, Agir took steps towards integrating into the ruling majority. Ultimately, Agir merged into Macron's party as it reformed and rebranded under the name Renaissance on 17 September 2022.

Agir was identified as part of centre-right politics, defining itself as pro-European, liberal and humanist, and rejecting the "identitarian, authoritarian, eurosceptic and ultra-conservative" right.

Agir had 12 Members of Parliament in the 15th assembly. In the 2022 French legislative election, 6 were elected as part of the Ensemble Citoyens coalition.

Agneau de pré-salé (French : ' salt marsh lamb ') is a type of lamb which was raised in salt marsh meadows of France (especially Mont Saint-Michel in Normandy and the Bay of the Somme in Picardy), and parts of the UK and the Netherlands. The sheep graze in pastures that are covered in halophyte grasses with a high salinity and iodine content, causing their meat to have a distinct taste considered a delicacy.

In 2006, salt marsh lamb raised in the area around the Bay of the Somme was registered as an Appellation d'origine contrôlée (AOC), followed by registration as an EU Protected Designation of Origin (PDO, French: Appellation d'origine protégée, AOP) in 2013 under the name Prés-salés de la baie de Somme. In the same year also salt marsh lamb raised near Mont-Saint-Michel was registered as PDO under the name: Prés-salés du Mont-Saint-Michel.

Salt marsh lambs can also be found, to a lesser extent, in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands. The Gower Salt Marsh Lamb was protected under UK law as a PDO in 2021, and in 2023 (despite opposition from France) under EU law. The places where salt marsh lamb are also reared in the UK aside from Harlech and the Gower Peninsula in Wales, are the Somerset Levels and Morecambe Bay in England, and the Solway Firth in Scotland.

France is the largest producer of agricultural products in Europe (accounting for 18% of total production in the European Union). Favorable agro-climatic conditions contribute to this status. The country ranks among the top five exporters of agricultural products. Agriculture accounts for approximately 2% of GDP, while the agro-industrial complex accounts for more than 4%.

As of 2019, the area of ​​agricultural land was estimated at 28.6 million hectares (52.6% of the country's territory), including arable land (18.1 million hectares or 33.4%), permanent crops (1 million hectares or 1.8%), and pastures (9.5 million hectares or 17.5%). Forests account for 29.2% of the country's territory. The number of farms has been steadily declining; while there were 2 million farms in the 1950s, only 700,000 remained by the end of the 1990s. According to 2020 census data, there were 416,500 farms in France, with an average size of 69 hectares. Large farms (with an annual turnover exceeding €250,000) accounted for 20% of the total, while micro-farms (under €25,000) accounted for 30%. Farms employed 524,000 managers and 758,000 hired workers. As of 2023, France ranked among the top ten countries globally in the production of the following agricultural products: hemp (1st place), grapes (3rd), duck meat (3rd), barley (3rd), rabbit meat (4th), fresh peas (4th), sugar beets (4th), beans (5th), turkey meat (5th), goat milk (5th), gooseberries (5th), rapeseed (5th), dried peas (6th), wheat (6th), sunflower seeds (6th), apricots (8th), hazelnuts (8th), potatoes (8th), kiwifruit (8th), cow milk (8th), asparagus (8th), mushrooms (9th), flaxseed (9th), pork (9th), apples (9th), beef (10th), and lupin (10th).

In 2023, France held leading global positions in the export of the following agro-industrial products (by volume): fresh peas (1st), hemp seed (1st), cattle (1st), flax (1st), hemp fiber (1st), malt (1st), baking mixes and dough (1st), chicory (1st), grapes (2nd), glucose and dextrose (2nd), mustard powder (2nd), baby food (2nd), yogurt with additives (2nd), potatoes (2nd), pet food (2nd), buttermilk (2nd), processed cheese (2nd), ducks (2nd), barley (2nd), wine and vermouth (3rd), grape must (3rd), green onions (3rd), rabbit meat (3rd), alfalfa (3rd), ice cream (3rd), cow's milk cheese (3rd), duck meat (3rd), hazelnuts (3rd), apricots (4th), artichokes (4th), turkeys (4th), canned corn (4th), lactose (4th), horses (4th), skimmed milk powder and whey (4th), rapeseed oil (4th), rice flour (4th), sugar (4th), sunflower seeds (4th), cream (4th), sorghum (4th), alcoholic beverages (4th), lamb (5th), baked goods (5th), frozen potatoes (5th), goat meat (5th), frozen corn (5th), fresh corn (5th), poppy seeds (5th), cauliflower (5th), egg powder (5th), beans (6th), grape juice (6th), dried peas (6th), walnuts (6th), wheat (6th), cocoa butter (6th), chickens (6th), millet (6th), rapeseed (6th), butter (6th), prunes (6th), wool (6th), barley groats (6th), turkey meat (7th), chestnuts (7th), roasted coffee (7th), rabbits (7th), raspberries (7th), frozen vegetables (7th), tomatoes (7th), lard (7th), dried milk (7th), cocoa powder (8th), canned mushrooms (8th), oats (8th), sunflower oil (8th), rye (8th), beef (9th), corn flour and maize grain (9th), wheat flour (9th), rye flour (9th), cider (9th), dried mushrooms (9th), apples (9th), goose meat (10th), horse meat (10th), pork (10th). In monetary terms, France was the world's largest exporter of wine and the second-largest exporter of spirits. Taxation of French farms is the highest in the European Union; in 2022, France accounted for 35% of EU farm taxes, with production taxes amounting to 18 euro cents per euro of output, compared to an EU average of 8 euro cents and just 2 euro cents in Germany. Regarding agricultural subsidies, France ranked among the lowest in the EU, with subsidies amounting to 11 euro cents per euro (the EU average was 13 euro cents, whereas in the US, subsidies account for 25% of turnover).

As of 2021, crop production accounted for 61% of the total value of agricultural output, including cereals (18%), vegetable and fruit growing (17%), and viticulture (13%).

Cereal cultivation leads the crop sector; one in every two French farms produces grain. Soft wheat accounts for half of the area sown with grain crops; corn (16%) and barley also play significant roles, while other important crops include triticale, oats, sorghum, rye, and rice. Total grain production amounts to 57 million tonnes annually, comprising 30 million tonnes of wheat, 13 million tonnes of corn, and 10 million tonnes of barley. Average yields are: wheat — 76.6 centners/ha; corn — 91.1 centners/ha; barley — 68.4 centners/ha. The primary region for wheat cultivation is the Paris Basin ; for corn, the Garonne Lowland; and for rice, the Rhône Delta.

The main oilseed crops by gross harvest volume are rapeseed (3.3 million tonnes in 2020), sunflower (1.6 million tonnes), and soybeans (406.7 thousand tonnes); olives are grown along the Mediterranean coast. The main industrial crop sugar beet is a major crop, grown primarily in the Hauts-de-France and Île-de-France regions, where the majority of sugar refineries are also located. Sugarcane cultivation is common in the overseas territories (Martinique, Réunion). The main tobacco-producing areas are Aquitaine, Alsace, and the foothills of the central Pyrenees. Flowers—primarily roses—are grown along the Mediterranean coast; the commune of Grasse is the main center for flower cultivation for the perfume industry.

Total potato production exceeds 8 million tonnes, while vegetable production stands at 4.4 million tonnes; the main vegetable varieties are onions, tomatoes, carrots, and cabbage. France ranks third in Europe for fruit production, behind Italy and Spain; in 2020, total output was 8.9 million tonnes, including 1.6 million tonnes of apples, 179,000 tonnes of peaches, 201,000 tonnes of plums, 138,000 tonnes of pears, and 86,000 tonnes of apricots. Other crops include melons (266,000 tonnes), strawberries (55,000 tonnes), citrus fruits (73,000 tonnes), walnuts (35,700 tonnes), and mushrooms (80,000 tonnes).

Grape production in France amounts to approximately 6 million tonnes annually. The main wine-producing regions are Languedoc, Champagne, Burgundy, the middle Loire valley, the lower Garonne valley, Gascony, and the Rhône and Rhine valleys.

In 2023, France was the world's largest wine producer, with an output of 48 million hectolitres.

In 2021, livestock farming accounted for 33% of the value of agricultural output, comprising meat (14%), milk (13%), and eggs (6%). Livestock farming is most developed in the western part of France (the Brittany and Normandy regions). The cattle herd—the largest in Europe—numbers 19 million head, including 3.8 million dairy cows and 4 million beef cattle; the herd size has been declining since the early 1980s due to European Union milk quotas. Common beef breeds include Charolais, Limousin, Blonde d'Aquitaine, Salers, Aubrac, and Gasconne. France ranks second in Europe for milk production (23 billion liters per year). Dairy farming is carried out by over 80,000 farms, with an average of 44 cows and 60 hectares of pasture or cropland per holding. Milk is processed at 700 dairy plants.

The pig population in France stands at 14 million head (10% of the European total). Main breeds: French Landrace, Large White, Pietrain, and Duroc. France ranks third in the European Union for pork production.

France's fishery resources are severely depleted. Farmed trout accounts for the majority of the catch in rivers and lakes. Marine fishing is developed in the coastal waters of the Atlantic Ocean (in the Bay of Biscay and the English Channel), targeting herring, cod, tuna, sardines, mackerel, flatfish, and silver hake, as well as lobsters, shrimp, and shellfish.

The fish catch in 2020 totaled 458.5 thousand tonnes (5th place in the EU). The fishing fleet comprises 6.2 thousand vessels, and the industry employs 20 thousand people. Major fishing ports include Boulogne-sur-Mer, Lorient, and La Rochelle. Oyster farming is established in the towns of Arcachon, La Tremblade, Marennes, and Cancale.

As of 2005, 75% of French farmers were members of cooperatives, with a total of approximately 6,900 cooperatives in existence. Agricultural cooperatives in France began to emerge in the late 19th century; a process of consolidation began in the 1950s. By the beginning of the 21st century, some cooperatives had evolved into large agro-industrial groups with networks of overseas subsidiaries.

Cooperatives with a turnover of over €1 billion as of 2023 :

In 1998, France became the first country in Europe to begin cultivating genetically modified maize from seeds imported from the USA (developed by the company Novartis). However, a moratorium on the use of GMOs was imposed that same year. In 2005, the cultivation of modified maize (this time developed by Monsanto, MON 810) resumed; by 2007, the cultivated area exceeded 20,000 hectares. Experiments with GMOs in France were accompanied by heated political debates, protests, and acts of vandalism by environmentalists and certain farmers' organizations.

A 2008 law banned the cultivation of genetically modified plants for commercial use in France. Later, in 2011, this law was ruled to be in conflict with European Union regulations by both the European Court of Justice and the French Council of State ; Nevertheless, the ban on GMO cultivation remains in place, and in 2020 it was extended to include artificial mutagenesis.

Special authorization is required for the import of modified varieties; as of 2022, approximately 100 varieties of maize, soybean, rapeseed, cotton, and sugar beet had been approved for import, allowing them to be processed and sold with appropriate labeling. France imports large quantities of modified soybeans for animal feed (primarily from Brazil). Oversight of GMO use is carried out by the National Agency for Food, Environmental and Occupational Health Safety (ANSES) and, at the pan-European level, by the European Food Safety Authority. The ban on GMOs does not apply to experiments conducted for research purposes.

In France, the agrégation (French pronunciation: [ aɡʁeɡasjɔ̃ ]) is the most competitive and prestigious examination for civil service in the French public education system. Successful candidates become professeurs agrégés ([ pʁɔfesœʁ(z‿)aɡʁeʒe ]) and are usually appointed as teachers in secondary schools or preparatory classes, or as lecturers in universities.

Originating from the 18th century, the agrégation is a highly prestigious and competitive examination. The level of selectivity varies between disciplines: every year, the French Ministry of National Education determines and publishes a list of annual quotas for each discipline. There are about 300 to 400 positions open each year for mathematics, but usually fewer positions for humanities and social sciences (for example, 85 positions for philosophy were offered in 2024) and perhaps only one seat in some rarely taught foreign languages such as Japanese.

The agrégation is typically open only to holders of a five-year university diploma (master's degree) or above. There is also an internal agrégation for professeurs certifiés.

The examination requires usually more than a year of preparation. Students of the écoles normales supérieures as well as graduate students who have just completed their master's degree often dedicate an entire year of their curriculum to prepare this examination, enrolling into specific graduate programs. Candidates are called agrégatifs.

The competitive exam generally consists first of a written part (admissibility), then an oral part (admission).

The jury is composed of university professors and "classes préparatoires" teachers.

The admissibility phase is composed of numerous writing tests, which consist of essays and analyses of documents. Each test takes up to 7 hours in duration, and the admissibility phase usually runs over an entire week.

Points obtained at each test are totaled, and candidates that meet the threshold set by the yearly quota are pronounced admissible by the jury. The writing part is when most candidates are eliminated.

The remaining candidates have to go through an oral part (admission), composed of different oral exams. In front of the jury, candidates must demonstrate their ability to prepare and give lectures on any topic within the scope of the discipline.

These lectures provide the opportunity to verify that the candidates possess the appropriate speaking skills and master the main exercises and components of their discipline; for example, in the Agrégation of Classics (French, Greek, Latin), candidates have to translate and comment on classical texts and texts from French literature. These lessons extend well above the secondary education level; the candidate may have to present a lesson appropriate for the second, third, or even fourth years of specialized courses at the university level. One reason is that the agrégés should be able to teach in preparatory classes, very similar in nature to grammar schools, or in universities.

Points obtained at the admissibility and admission phases are ultimately totaled and used to rank candidates in accordance with the yearly quota: for instance, for a quota of 60 positions, the first 60 candidates will pass the exam and are pronounced admis by the jury.

The agrégation is therefore used as an unofficial national ranking system for students, giving a fair comparison between candidates of different universities. That is especially true in the humanities and social sciences, for which the agrégation is highly selective and supposedly demonstrates erudition of the candidate.

In France, professeurs agrégés are distinguished from professeurs certifiés, recruited through the CAPES, the other main competitive exam in the French education system. The agrégés receive a higher salary and are usually endorsed with a smaller teaching service. While agrégés are expected to teach in sixth-form colleges (lycées) and universities and the certifiés in secondary schools (collèges), there is a significant overlap.

In addition to the vast majority of agrégés teaching in sixth-form colleges and secondary schools, some agrégés teach in the preparatory classes for the grandes écoles, or at the university level, through a faculty position known as PRAG and focused on teaching, which does not require to undertake scientific research, as other university academics do. A few positions that include research activities, called agrégé préparateur, or AGPR, exist in the écoles normales supérieures.

In the 1988 movie L'Étudiante, a dramatic scene features Sophie Marceau undertaking the oral exam for the agrégation of Classic Literature.

In the TV show The Bureau, Paul Lefebvre, one of the aliases of French spy Guillaume Debailly, played by Mathieu Kassovitz, holds the agrégation of Modern Literature.

Although both Agrégations are labelled as Agrégation of economics, the Agrégation of economics and social sciences is more oriented towards political economy, whereas the Agrégation of economics and management is more oriented towards business economics.

In some disciplines of higher education such as law, legal history, political science, economics, management, there exists an agrégation for the professorship positions, called agrégation de l'enseignement supérieur. In this competitive exam, the candidate also has to give several lessons in front of a committee. Usually there are three lessons, spread over several months, except in economics, where there are only two lessons. The first and the last lessons have to be prepared alone, during eight hours, in a library of basic titles selected by the committee. For the remaining lesson, when it exists, the candidate has a full 24 hours to prepare for the examination, and may use several libraries as well as a team of "helpers" (usually doctoral candidates or fellow candidates, but never full professors).

Some sociologists like Pierre Bourdieu have argued that this version of the exam measures a candidate's social connections as much as their ability to present a lesson, especially considering the composition of the examining committee.

The agrégation externe d'histoire is a French competitive examination for the recruitment of associate professors who teach history or geography at the collège, or lycée level. There is also an agrégation externe de géographie and the agrégation interne d'histoire et géographie. In practice, though not an absolute requirement, it is often used as a selection criterion for teaching history in the CPGE and in higher education.

Since 2010, it has been necessary to have a master's degree to take this exam, one of the most attractive and selective literary agrégations and remains de facto required to teach history in Classe préparatoire aux grandes écoles or at university.

The agrégation d'histoire et de géographie was created in 1831. The division of agrégations between the two disciplines was established under the influence of the geographer Emmanuel de Martonne and with the agreement of the minister, the historian and antiquarian Jérôme Carcopino, in 1941 (decree and order of 28 April) then definitively ratified by the order of 28 September 1943: "an agrégation in history and an agrégation in geography shall be instituted".

Each of the history written tests must deal with a different historical period. These two essays are given in chronological order: if medieval history, for example, is the subject of the first essay, the second essay will automatically deal with the question on modern history or contemporary history (but not ancient history, which may be given as a commentary).

In history, two out of four of the questions are renewed each year, with each question remaining on the curriculum for two years. In geography, one question on France is included every year, while the other question changes. Since 2008, the question on France has been topical.

The subjects for 2021 were: medieval history : 'Stability and precariousness of the written word', contemporary history: 'Being a worker', explanation of texts in modern history: ' Un mémoire sur les continuations de privilèges (vers 1670) ' by Antoine Vitré (159?-1674) and geography of territories: ' Paysages et recompositions des espaces ruraux en France '.

The 2021 session was affected by the COVID-19 pandemic due to mandatory distancing and wearing of masks within examination centres by all candidates, during written and oral tests. Oral admission tests were not attended by the public for the 2021 session. 150 candidates were eligible.

This session was notable for the absence of oral tests due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The written eligibility tests were considered valid as admission tests. They were organised from 22 to 25 June 2020 instead of March.

The 2020 topics are: Ancient History composition: "Piety and Impiety in Public Religion"., contemporary history composition: "the 1968s : culture and protest" interpretation of medieval history texts: "The books of a Dominican friar in the 13th century on 17 June 1287" and composition of the geography of territories: "Natural risks and territories in South-East Asia".

Between 2003 and 2009, the number of successful candidates decreased by 30%, without offsetting the decrease in the number of posts (-37% over the period). From year to year, the competition has become more and more selective: since 2005, the real admission rate has never exceeded 7%, and from 2003 to 2010 (except in 2007), the percentage of admitted candidates compared to those not eliminated was lower than that of the agrégation de philosophie. In 2011, following a sharp drop in the number of candidates not eliminated, the agrégation in history became less selective than that in philosophy.

The success rate varies greatly from one academy to another. It is exceptionally high in the academies of Créteil-Paris-Versailles and Lyon because of the presence of the École Normale Supérieure of rue d'Ulm, Lyon, Cachan (students from the latter benefiting from the preparation offered by rue d'Ulm), the École des Chartes, and renowned faculties such as Paris-I and Paris-IV.

In 1883, Ernest Lavisse, speaking to Parisian students, said:

"The agrégation will not require of those of you who choose the history of antiquity the slightest notion of epigraphy or archaeology; nor will it require of those who choose the history of the Middle Ages the slightest notion of palaeography or diplomacy or medieval philology [...] and all that you will not be asked for will be indispensable."

In 1888, Ernest Denis, who was to hold the chair of modern history at the Sorbonne, and who was himself an agrégé, said of the agrégation that "there is only one way to improve it, and that is to abolish it!" - what Jacques Le Goff described in 1966 as "words that are, alas, still relevant and likely to remain so". In 1892, it was Ferdinand Lot (who was chartered, not an agrégé and ended his career as a professor of medieval history at the Sorbonne) who judged "that the agrégation is an evil institution which, more than any other, has contributed to our scientific degradation, that it is a gnawing canker which devours the intelligence of teachers and students."

The agrégation d'histoire received unusual amount of attention from the general public in 2011: the text given for the historical commentary test was presented as an authentic medieval text written in the 15th century, when in fact it was a fictionalized reconstruction of Palémon Glorieux, published in 1964. The two historians behind the subject, Catherine Vincent and Denyse Riche, resigned from the jury after their error was revealed by the French media. The Ministry of Education officially took a position by announcing that this error, although not in line with the required scientific rigour, did not lead to the cancellation of the test since the principle of equality between candidates had not been violated.

Famous recipients of the agrégation in history-geography and later in history include:

Agénor Bardoux (15 January 1829, Bourges, Cher – 23 November 1897, Paris) was a French statesman and republican.

A native of Bourges, he was born on 15 January 1829. He was a son of Jacques Bardoux (1795–1871) and the former Thérèse Pignet (1807–1883).

Bardoux was established as an advocate in Clermont-Ferrand, and did not hesitate to proclaim his Republican sympathies. In 1871 he was elected deputy of the French National Assembly, and re-elected in 1876 and in 1877. In the chamber he was president of the Centre gauche group, standing strongly for the republic but against anti-clericalism, and during the constitutional crisis of May 1877 he was one of the 363 signatories to the vote of no confidence. In the subsequently elected republican chamber he became minister of public instruction (December 1877) and proposed various republican laws, notably on compulsory primary education. He resigned in 1879. He was not re-elected in 1881 but in December 1882 was named senator for life.

On 15 July 1873, he married Clémence Villa (1847–1939) in Montpellier. She was a daughter of Achille Villa and the former Sophie Bimar. Together, they had at least one son:

Bardoux died in Paris on 23 November 1897.

Through Jacques, he was a great-grandfather of Valéry Giscard d'Estaing (b. 1926) was president of France from 1974 until 1981.

Air France (French pronunciation: [ ɛːʁ fʁɑ̃s ] ; legally Société Air France, S.A.), stylised as AIRFRANCE, is the flag carrier of France, and is headquartered in Tremblay-en-France. The airline is a subsidiary of the Air France–KLM Group and is one of the founding members of the SkyTeam airline alliance. As of 2013, Air France served 29 destinations in France and operates worldwide scheduled passenger and cargo services to 201 destinations in 78 countries (93 including overseas departments and territories of France) and also carried 46,803,000 passengers in 2019. The airline maintains its global and domestic hub at Charles de Gaulle Airport. Air France's corporate headquarters, previously in Montparnasse, Paris, are located at the Roissypôle complex on the grounds of Charles de Gaulle Airport, north of Paris.

Tracing its origins back to the 1910s, Air France was formed on 30 August 1933 through the merger of five existing airlines in France. During the Cold War, from 1950 until 1990, it was one of the three main Allied scheduled airlines operating in Germany at West Berlin 's Tempelhof and Tegel airports. In 1990, it acquired the operations of French domestic carrier Air Inter and international rival UTA – Union de Transports Aériens. It merged with KLM to form Air France – KLM in 2003.

In 2018, Air France and its regional subsidiary Hop carried 51.4 million passengers. Air France operates a mixed fleet of Airbus and Boeing wide-body jets on long-haul routes, and uses Airbus A320 family narrow-body aircraft on short-haul routes. Air France introduced the Airbus A380 on 20 November 2009 with service from Paris to New York. Air France Hop (formerly HOP!) operates the majority of its regional domestic and European scheduled services with a fleet of regional jet aircraft.

The predecessor companies of Air France date back to Compagnie générale transaérienne (CGT), established in 1909, which flew the world's first scheduled passenger-carrying fixed-wing flights within France in 1913. Air France was formed on 30 August 1933 as a merger of five existing airlines: Compagnie Générale Aéropostale, which was founded in 1918 as Société des lignes Latécoère and, in some sources, the earliest lineage of Air France is stated to be 1918; Société Générale des Transports Aériens (SGTA), which was founded in 1919; Compagnie Internationale de Navigation Aérienne (CIDNA), which was founded in 1920; Air Union, which was founded in 1923 and formed from the merger of Compagnie des Messageries Aériennes (CMA), which absorbed CGT, and Grands Express Aériens ; and Air Orient, which was founded in 1929. SGTA was the first commercial passenger airline company in France; founded as Lignes Aériennes Farman in 1919, it began a weekly service between Paris and Brussels on 22 March 1919, the world's first international commercial aviation service. Société des lignes Latécoère began airmail services in 1924. These airlines built extensive networks across Europe, to French colonies in North Africa and farther afield prior to their merger into Air France in 1933.

In 1936, Air France added French-built twin engine Potez 62 aircraft to its fleet featuring a two-compartment cabin that could accommodate 14 to 16 passengers. A high-wing monoplane, it had a wooden fuselage with composite coating while the wings were fabric-covered with a metal leading edge. Equipped with Hispano-Suiza V-engines, they were used on routes in Europe, South America and the Far East. Although cruising at only 280 km/h (175 mph), the Potez 62 was a robust and reliable workhorse for Air France and remained in service until the Second World War with one used by the Free French Air Force.

During World War II, Air France moved its operations to Casablanca, Morocco. On 26 June 1945, all of France's air transport companies were nationalised. On 29 December 1945, a decree of the French Government granted Air France the management of the entire French air transport network. Air France recruited its first female flight attendants in 1946. The same year the airline opened its first air terminal at Les Invalides in central Paris. It was linked to Paris Le Bourget Airport, Air France's first operations and engineering base, by coach. At that time the network covered 160,000 km, claimed to be the longest in the world. Société Nationale Air France was set up on 1 January 1946.

European schedules were initially operated by a fleet of Douglas DC-3 aircraft. On 1 July 1946, Air France started direct flights between Paris and New York via refuelling stops at Shannon and Gander. Douglas DC-4 piston -engine airliners covered the route in just under 20 hours. In September 1947, Air France's network stretched east from New York, Fort de France and Buenos Aires to Shanghai.

By 1948, Air France operated 130 aircraft, one of the largest fleets in the world. Between 1947 and 1965, the airline operated Lockheed Constellations on passenger and cargo services worldwide. In 1946 and 1948, respectively, the French government authorised the creation of two private airlines: Transports Aériens Internationaux – later Transports Aériens Intercontinentaux – (TAI) and SATI. In 1949, the latter became part of Union Aéromaritime de Transport (UAT), a private French international airline.

Compagnie Nationale Air France was created by act of parliament on 16 June 1948. Initially, the government held 70%. In subsequent years, the French state 's direct and indirect shareholdings reached almost 100%. In mid 2002, the state held 54%.

On 4 August 1948, Max Hymans was appointed the president. During his 13-year tenure he would implement modernisation practices centred on the introduction of jet aircraft. In 1949, the company became a co-founder of Société Internationale de Télécommunications Aéronautiques (SITA), an airline telecommunications services company.

In 1952, Air France moved its operations and engineering base to the new Orly Airport South terminal. By then the network covered 250,000 km. Air France entered the jet age in August 1953, flying the original, short-lived de Havilland Comet series 1A Paris-Rome-Beirut.

In the mid 1950s, it also operated the Vickers Viscount turboprop, with twelve entering service between May 1953 and August 1954 on the European routes. On 26 September 1953, the government instructed Air France to share long-distance routes with new private airlines. This was followed by the Ministry of Public Works and Transport's imposition of an accord on Air France, Aigle Azur, TAI and UAT, under which some routes to Africa, Asia and the Pacific region were transferred to private carriers.

On 23 February 1960, the Ministry of Public Works and Transport transferred Air France's domestic monopoly to Air Inter. To compensate for the loss of its domestic network Air France was given a stake in Air Inter. The following day Air France was instructed to share African routes with Air Afrique and UAT.

The airline started uninterrupted jet operations in 1960 with the Sud Aviation Caravelle and the Boeing 707 ; jet airliners cut travel times in half and improved comfort. Air France later became an early Boeing 747 operator and eventually had one of the world's largest Boeing 747 fleets.

On 1 February 1963, the government formalised division of routes between Air France and its private sector rivals. Air France was to withdraw services to West Africa (except Senegal), Central Africa (except Burundi and Rwanda), Southern Africa (including South Africa), Libya in North Africa, Bahrain and Oman in the Middle East, Sri Lanka (then known as Ceylon) in South Asia, Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore in Southeast Asia, Australia, New Zealand as well as New Caledonia and Tahiti. These routes were allocated to the new Union de Transports Aériens (UTA), a new private airline resulting from the merger of TAI and UAT. UTA also got exclusive rights between Japan, New Caledonia and New Zealand, South Africa and Réunion island in the Indian Ocean, as well as Los Angeles and Tahiti.

In 1974, Air France began shifting the bulk of operations to the new Charles de Gaulle Airport north of Paris. By the early 1980s, only Corsica, Martinique, Guadeloupe, most services to French Guiana, Réunion, the Maghreb region, Eastern Europe (except the USSR), Southern Europe (except Greece and Italy), and one daily service to New York (JFK) remained at Orly. In 1974, Air France also became the world's first operator of the Airbus A300 twin-engine widebody plane, Airbus Industrie 's first commercial airliner for which it was a launch customer.

On 21 January 1976, Air France operated its inaugural supersonic transport (SST) service on the Paris (Charles de Gaulle) to Rio (via Dakar) route with Anglo-French BAC-Aérospatiale Concorde F-BVFA. Supersonic services from Paris (CDG) to Washington Dulles International Airport began on 24 May 1976, also with F-BVFA. Service to New York (JFK) – the only remaining Concorde service until its end – commenced on 22 November 1977. Paris to New York was flown in 3 hours 23 minutes, at about twice the speed of sound. Approval for flights to the United States was initially withheld due to noise protests. Eventually, services to Mexico City via Washington, D.C., were started. Air France became one of only two airlines – British Airways being the other – to regularly operate supersonic services, and continued daily transatlantic Concorde service until late May 2003.

By 1983, Air France's golden jubilee, the workforce numbered more than 34,000, its fleet about 100 jet aircraft (including 33 Boeing 747s) and its 634,400 km network served 150 destinations in 73 countries. This made Air France the fourth-largest scheduled passenger airline in the world, as well as the second-largest scheduled freight carrier. Air France also codeshared with regional French airlines, TAT being the most prominent. TAT would later operate several regional international routes on behalf of Air France. In 1983, Air France began passenger flights to South Korea, being the first European airline to do so.

In 1986, the government relaxed its policy of dividing traffic rights for scheduled services between Air France, Air Inter and UTA, without route overlaps between them. The decision opened some of Air France's most lucrative routes on which it had enjoyed a government-sanctioned monopoly since 1963 and which were within its exclusive sphere of influence, to rival airlines, notably UTA. The changes enabled UTA to launch scheduled services to new destinations within Air France's sphere, in competition with that airline.

Paris-San Francisco became the first route UTA served in competition with Air France non-stop from Paris. Air France responded by extending some non-stop Paris-Los Angeles services to Papeete, Tahiti, which competed with UTA on Los Angeles-Papeete. UTA's ability to secure traffic rights outside its traditional sphere in competition with Air France was the result of a campaign to lobby the government to enable it to grow faster, becoming more dynamic and more profitable. This infuriated Air France.

In 1987, Air France together with Lufthansa, Iberia and SAS founded Amadeus, an IT company (also known as a GDS) that would enable travel agencies to sell the founders and other airlines' products from a single system.

In 1988, Air France was a launch customer for the fly-by-wire (FBW) Airbus A320 narrow-body twin, along with Air Inter and British Caledonian. It became the first airline to take delivery of the A320 in March 1988, and along with Air Inter, became the first airlines to introduce A320 service on short-haul routes.

On 12 January 1990, the operations of government-owned Air France, semi-public Air Inter and wholly private Union de Transports Aériens (UTA) were merged into an enlarged Air France. Air France's acquisition of UTA and Air Inter was part of an early 1990s government plan to create a unified, national air carrier with the economies of scale and global reach to counter potential threats from the liberalisation of the European Union 's internal air transport market.

On 25 July 1994, a new holding company, Groupe Air France, was set up by decree. Groupe Air France became operational on 1 September 1994. It acquired the Air France group's majority shareholdings in Air France and Air Inter (subsequently renamed Air Inter Europe). On 31 August 1994, Stephen Wolf, a former United Airlines CEO, was appointed adviser to the Air France group's chairman Christian Blanc. Wolf was credited with the introduction of Air France's hub and spoke operation at Paris Charles de Gaulle. Wolf resigned in 1996 to take over as CEO at US Airways.

In 1997, Air Inter Europe was absorbed into Air France. On 19 February 1999, French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin 's Plural Left government approved Air France's partial privatisation. Its shares were listed on the Paris stock exchange on 22 February 1999. In June 1999, Air France and Delta Air Lines formed a bilateral transatlantic partnership. On 22 June 2000, this expanded into the SkyTeam global airline alliance.

On 30 September 2003, Air France and Netherlands -based KLM Royal Dutch Airlines announced the merger of the two airlines, with the new company to be known as Air France–KLM. The merger took place on 5 May 2004. At that point former Air France shareholders owned 81% of the new firm (44% owned by the French state, 37% by private shareholders), former KLM shareholders the rest. The decision of the Jean-Pierre Raffarin government to reduce the French state's shareholding in the former Air France group from 54.4% to 44% of the newly created Air France–KLM Group effectively privatised the new airline. In December 2004, the state sold 18.4% of its equity in Air France–KLM. The state's shareholding in Air France–KLM subsequently fell to just under 20%.

Air France–KLM became the largest airline in the world in terms of operating revenues, and third-largest (largest in Europe) in passenger kilometres. Although owned by a single company, Air France and KLM continued to fly under their own brand names. Air France–KLM remained part of SkyTeam alliance, which then included Aeroflot, Delta Air Lines, Aeroméxico, Korean Air, Czech Airlines, Alitalia, Northwest Airlines, China Southern Airlines, China Eastern Airlines, China Airlines, Air Europa, Continental Airlines, Garuda Indonesia, Vietnam Airlines, Saudia, Aerolineas Argentinas, and XiamenAir. As of March 2004, the group employed 71,654 people. As of March 2007, the group employed 102,422 personnel.

On 17 October 2007, the creation of a profit and revenue-sharing transatlantic joint venture between Air France-KLM and Delta Air Lines was announced during a press conference at Air France-KLM's headquarters. The venture became effective on 29 March 2008. It aimed to exploit transatlantic opportunities to capture a major share of long-haul business traffic from London Heathrow, which opened to unrestricted competition on that day as a result of the " Open Skies " pact between the EU and US. It was envisaged that Air France and Delta would begin nine daily round trips between London-Heathrow and destinations in the US, including a daily London (Heathrow) to Los Angeles service by Air France. Once the new Air France-Delta venture received antitrust immunity, it was to be extended to the other two transatlantic SkyTeam partners, enabling all four partners to codeshare flights as well as to share revenue and profit. The new transatlantic joint venture marks the Air France-KLM Group's second major expansion in the London market, following the launch of CityJet -operated short-haul services from London City Airport that have been aimed at business travellers in the City 's financial services industry. However, the daily London (Heathrow) to Los Angeles service was not as successful as hoped, and was discontinued in November 2008.

On 12 January 2012, Air France-KLM announced a three-year transformation plan, called Transform 2015, to restore profitability. The plan was to restore competitiveness through cost-cutting, restructuring the short- and medium-haul operations and rapidly reducing debt. The main objective of this plan was to turn Air France-KLM back into a world player by 2015. Air France had been losing 700 million euros a year. As the financial results of 2011 demonstrated, the long-haul operations, also subject to increasing competition, would not be able to offset these losses. On 22 February 2012, Air France released its plan for the summer schedule. Because of the uncertain economic environment, Air France-KLM set a limit of 1.4% maximum increase in capacity from 25 March 2012 to 28 October 2012.

On 21 June 2012, Air France-KLM had announced its decision to cut just under 10% of the total 53,000 workforce (about 5,000 jobs) by the end of 2013 in an attempt to restore profitability. The airline expected to lose 1,700 jobs through natural turnover and the rest by voluntary redundancies. As of August 2012, the Transform 2015 plan was accepted by ground staff and pilot unions but rejected by cabin crew unions.

At the beginning of July 2012, it was announced that Air France-KLM found partners for the new sub-Saharan African start-up airline Air Cemac, which was co-founded by six countries in Central Africa to replace the former Air Afrique. But several problems and two partners, who decided to back out, delayed the implementation of the project. Following its launch, Air Cemac announced it would commence operations in 2013, however this never occurred and plans were cancelled in 2015.

In September 2013, Air France introduced a brand new Economy product along with an improved Premium Economy seat and service. It is expected that the new improvements would be fitted on aircraft from June 2014 onwards. In October 2013, Air France-KLM announced it was writing off the 25% stake in Alitalia, as it was hesitant the struggling carrier would obtain the 300 million euros in financing. The group has denied Alitalia of additional funds as it is currently struggling to restructure itself to profitability with the Transform 2015 plan.

In December 2013, Air France announced that Cityjet no longer meets the short haul needs of the group and is in the process of closing a deal with German firm Intro Aviation by the end of Q1 of 2014.

In 2014, the airline was targeted by a negative publicity campaign, spearheaded by PETA, for being the only major airline that permits the transport of primates for research. In 2022, the airline announced it would stop transporting nonhuman primates.

On 4 February 2014, the new business product was unveiled, featuring a fully flat bed from Zodiac Aerospace. The seat was fitted on Boeing 777 aircraft from June 2014 onwards. In September 2014, Air France announced it would sell a 3 per cent stake in travel technology company Amadeus IT Group for $438 million.

Late in 2015, Air France faced a financial crisis, which was exacerbated by a pilot's strike against the airline. The airline answered the strike by announcing it would cut some 2,900 jobs. In December 2015, Air France announced the retirement of its last Boeing 747-400 with a special scenic flight on 14 January 2016. The airline operated the 747 in several variants since 1970.

In January 2017, Air France received its first Boeing 787–9. In November, CityJet no longer operated on Air France flights and the affected destinations were served by Air France and HOP! from then on.

In July 2017, Air France-KLM entered into a multi-airline strategic partnership with Delta Air Lines, China Eastern Airlines, and Virgin Atlantic, solidifying the existing ties between the carriers. Under the agreement Delta and China Eastern would each buy 10% of Air France-KLM, while Air France-KLM would buy 31% of Virgin Atlantic. In December 2019, the purchase of Virgin Atlantic was cancelled.

Air France announced it would terminate services to Iran from September 2018, explaining the concern that, due to the redefined US sanctions, the route to Iran would be no longer commercially viable. In December 2018, Anne Rigail was appointed as Executive Director of the company.

Air France's head office is located in the Roissypôle complex on the grounds of Charles de Gaulle Airport and in the commune of Tremblay-en-France, Seine-Saint-Denis, near the city of Paris. Wil S. Hylton of The New York Times described the facility as "a huge white box that squats near the runways at Charles de Gaulle Airport."

The 130,000-square-metre (1,400,000 sq ft) complex was completed in December 1995. The French firm Groupement d'Etudes et de Méthodes d'Ordonnancement (GEMO) managed the project. The architect was Valode & Pistre and the design consultants were Sechaud-Boyssut and Trouvin. The project cost 137,000,000 euros (less than 700 million francs). The runways of the airport are visible from the building. The Air France Operations Control Centre (OCC, French: Centre de Contrôle des Opérations, CCO), which coordinates Air France flights worldwide, is situated at the AF head office.

For about 30 years prior to December 1995, Air France's headquarters were located in a tower adjacent to the Gare Montparnasse rail station in the Montparnasse area and the 15th arrondissement of Paris. By 1991, two bids for the purchase of the Square Max Hymans building had been made. By 1992, the complex was sold to Mutuelle générale de l'Éducation nationale [ fr ] (MGEN) for 1.6 billion francs. By that year, Air France had planned to move its head office to Roissypôle, taking 50,000 square metres (540,000 sq ft) of space inside the hotel, office, and shopping complex on the grounds of Charles de Gaulle Airport. After Air France moved to Tremblay-en-France, the ownership of the former head office complex was transferred.

On a previous occasion, the head office was at 2 rue marbeuf in the 8th arrondissement of Paris.

Air France's United States offices are in the 125 West 55th Street building in Midtown Manhattan, New York City. Air France first signed a lease to occupy the building in 1991. The site also formerly housed the New York City ticket office for Air France.

Air France-KLM's head office for the United Kingdom and Ireland operations, which includes facilities for Air France and KLM, is located in Plesman House in Hatton Cross. The facility's inauguration was on 6 July 2006. Air France moved the office from Hounslow to Hatton.

In London, the airline also operated a storefront ticket-office for prospective passengers in 158 New Bond Street from the late 1950s to the early 1990s but moved to 177 Piccadilly, French Railways House, which was also the venue of Maison de La France, the French Government Tourist Office, until closure in the mid 2000s.

Air France Cité PN, located at Charles de Gaulle Airport, acts as the airline's crew base. The building, developed by Valode & Pistre, opened in February 2006. The first phase consisted of 33,400 square metres (360,000 sq ft) of space and 4,300 parking spaces. The building is connected to the Air France head office.

Until 2022, Air France operated the Air France Vaccinations Center in the 7th arrondissement of Paris. The centre distributed vaccines for international travel. Since 2001, the centre was the only French vaccination centre certified International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 9001. In 2005, the centre moved from the Aérogare des Invalides to its current location. In late 2022, Air France sold its vaccination centre to Elsan.

The Aérogare des Invalides in the 7th arrondissement of Paris houses the Agence Air France Invalides and the Air France Museum. Until 2005, the building hosted the Air France Vaccinations Centre. On 28 August 1959, Air France opened a ticket and information agency in the former air terminal in Invalides, targeting transit passengers and customers from offices and companies in the Invalides area.

Air France and Dutch affiliate Transavia formed Transavia France, a low-cost joint venture in May 2007, based at Orly Airport. Air Corsica and Air France Hop all operate flights on behalf of Air France, either as subsidiaries or as franchisees.

As of January 2019, Air France was investigating how it could shut down its low-cost subsidiary Joon and absorb its employees and aircraft into the parent company.

Owing to the disputed status of Taiwan, Air France could not operate flights to the island under its own name. In 1993, its subsidiary, Air Charter, began operating flights between Paris and Taipei via Hong Kong, but after Air Charter ceased operations in 1998, a subsidiary called Air France Asie was established. The airline was one of a number of airline subsidiaries flying under the "Asia" name with the purpose of flying to Taiwan, which included Japan Asia Airways (a Japan Airlines subsidiary), KLM Asia, British Asia Airways, Swissair Asia, and Australia Asia Airlines (a Qantas subsidiary).

The livery of Air France Asie differed from that of Air France by having blue and white stripes on the tailfin, rather than blue, white and red ones, representing the French Tricolour. Air France Asie used two Airbus A340-200 aircraft, F-GLZD and F-GLZE, and two Boeing 747-428Ms, F-GISA and F-GISC. Similarly, Air France Cargo Asie used a 747–200 Combi (for passengers and freight), F-GCBH) or the all-cargo (F-GCBL, F-GPAN and F-GBOX). Air France Asie ceased operations in 2004 while Air France Cargo Asie ceased operations in 2007.

In 2010, Air France migrated from an internally managed passenger service system (Alpha3) that manages reservation, inventory and pricing to an external system (Altéa) managed by Amadeus. In rail ventures, Air France and Veolia are looking into jointly operating high-speed rail services in Europe. Routes have become available to operators in accordance with European rail liberalisation on 1 January 2010.

Air France's present livery is a "Eurowhite" scheme, comprising a white fuselage with the blue Air France title and design. The tail is white with a series of parallel red and blue lines across the tail at an angle, and a small European flag at the top. The engines have the old Air France (and formerly Air Orient) logo painted on, though only on newer aircraft. This livery has been in use since the late 1970s. Prior to the "Eurowhite" livery, Air France aircraft had a bare-metal underside, extending up to a blue cheat-line that ran across the cabin windows. Above the cheat-line the fuselage was again white, with Air France titles and a French flag. The tail was white with two thick blue lines, which tapered from the rear of the tail and met at a point towards the front bottom. This basic livery, with minor variations, would appear on all post-war Air France aircraft until the late 1970s.

In January 2009, to coincide with Air France's new logo, a new livery was unveiled. Air France rolled out its new livery on 11 February 2009. The 2009 livery saw the tail slightly changed; there are now three blue bars running down instead of the previous four. The bars also now curve at the bottom, reflecting the design of the logo. In 2017, Air France received their first Boeing 787 with a revised livery which included larger Air France titles. In 2019, Air France revised the livery with the arrival of the Airbus A350, with blue winglets featuring the hippocampe ailé. This coincided with reintroducing the practice of naming each of their aircraft, with the name written under the front cabin windows; the first A350-900 was named after the city of Toulouse. In 2021, Air France once again revised the livery, while most elements were still identical to the 2019 version, the hippocampe ailé icon is now added between cockpit windows and front cabin doors, replacing the SkyTeam logo. The aircraft type, SkyTeam logo and Air France-KLM logo now feature at the back of the fuselage.

In the 1950s and 1960s, graphic designer Jean Carlu produced promotional posters for Air France.

The new official song played before and after Air France flights (during boarding and after landing) is 'The World Can Be Yours' by Telepopmusik. Air France has used different popular music groups for its marketing and on-board ambience, ranging from The Chemical Brothers in 1999 to Telepopmusik in 2010.

Air France launched a new ad campaign in 2015 designed by BETC and directed by We Are From LA, focusing on French culture. Along with the ad campaign and print ads, Air France also introduced a similarly themed safety video. The music is a customised version of Glass Candy 's song Warm in the Winter.

Air France uniforms denote the ranks for the flight attendants. Two silver sleeve stripes denote a senior Purser. One silver sleeve stripe denote a Purser. Flight attendants do not have any sleeve stripes. The female cabin crew uniforms feature the stripes on the breast pocket rather than the sleeve for their male counterparts. Air France's current uniforms were created by French fashion designer Christian Lacroix.

Upon its formation, Air France adopted the seahorse logo of its predecessor Air Orient, known as the hippocampe ailé (sometimes derisively called "la crevette" – or shrimp – by its employees), as its insignia. Prior to the Air France-KLM merger, the hippocampe ailé was used on the nose section of aircraft next to the Groupe Air France title; after the merger, the Air France-KLM logo was substituted at the nose area, and the hippocampe ailé was relocated to engine nacelles. The acronym "AF" has also featured prominently on the airline's flag and its signage. On 7 January 2009, Air France officially changed its logo to a red stripe.

As of 2022, Air France flies to 29 domestic destinations and 201 international destinations in 94 countries (including overseas departments and territories of France) across six continents, including 19 in the United States and 16 in Italy. This includes Air France Cargo services and destinations served by franchisees Air Corsica, and Air France HOP. Most of Air France's international flights operate from Paris-Charles de Gaulle. Air France also has a strong presence at the following French airports: Lyon-Saint-Exupéry, Marseille Provence, Toulouse Blagnac and Nice Côte d'Azur.

Air France codeshares with the following airlines:

Air France has interline agreements with the following airlines:

On 16 September 2011, Air France-KLM announced orders for 50 Airbus A350s and Boeing 787s with 60 options, to be operated by both Air France and KLM. Air France-KLM committed 37 Boeing 787s, 25 directly and 12 leased, of which 16 are earmarked for Air France to replace some A340-300s, subsequent A340s would be replaced by Airbus A350s from 2019. The first Boeing 787-9 entered into service with KLM in 2015 and with Air France in early 2017. Air France-KLM had 28 A350s on firm order.

In June 2019, the group announced a revision of the original order with Air France becoming the sole operator of the Airbus A350, with KLM only operating Boeing 787s, including six originally earmarked for Air France. The first Airbus A350-900 (named Toulouse) was delivered to Air France on 27 September 2019.

The Air France-KLM Group confirmed firm orders for the Airbus A350F in two stages: initially for Air France, with a firm order placed on 12 April 2022 (following a December 2021 Letter of Intent) for 4 aircraft, and later for Martinair (KLM Cargo), with a firm order for 4 additional aircraft announced on 27 January 2023, however in March 2025, the group reduced its commitment from eight to six amid the delayed freighter's entry into service.

In September 2023 Air France-KLM announced an order for 50 Airbus A350 900 and A350 1000 with combined options for 40 more with deliveries scheduled for 2026, which will be allocated to both Air France and KLM to replace their aging Airbus A330 and Boeing 777 200ER aircraft.

In August 2025 the Group converted eight of the 11 -1000 orders to the -900 variant for better flexibility across the group.

Air France operates a fleet of all four variants of the Airbus A320 family aircraft with a total of 114 jets. In July 2019, a first order was announced as part of replacing its narrow-body fleet. The smaller Airbus A318 and A319 fleet will be replaced by 60 Airbus A220-300s starting in 2021. Air France would have to cut emission by half by 2024 for flights within mainland France as part of conditions of a €7 billion state support from France. As a result, Air France plans to place more Airbus A220 aircraft onto its domestic network.

The five Air France Concordes were retired on 31 May 2003, as a result of insufficient demand following the 25 July 2000 crash of AF Concorde F-BTSC, at Gonesse (near Charles de Gaulle Airport), as well as higher fuel and maintenance costs. British Airways flew its last Concorde service on 24 October 2003. Concorde F-BVFA was transferred to the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center at Washington Dulles International Airport. F-BVFB was given to the Sinsheim Auto & Technik Museum in Germany, F-BTSD to the Musée de l'Air et de l'Espace at Le Bourget Airport in Paris, while F-BVFC returned to its place of manufacture in Toulouse, at the Airbus factory. F-BVFF is the only example to remain at Charles de Gaulle Airport.

The airline started operating the Boeing 747 on 3 June 1970, when a 747-100 was put into service that was delivered on 20 March that year. It would go on to operate the -200, -300 and -400 variants. In January 2016, Air France finally retired its last Boeing 747-400. They were replaced by Airbus A380 and Boeing 777-300ER aircraft. Freighter versions were replaced by Boeing 777Fs.

Air France offers a mix of three and four cabin configurations for international long haul routes, featuring La Première (select aircraft), Business, Premium Economy and Economy. Personal screens with audio video on demand is available in all cabins on all long-haul aircraft. European short-haul and medium-haul flights feature a three cabin configuration with Business, Premium Economy, and Economy.

La Première is Air France's long-haul first class product. It is available on selected Boeing 777-300ERs. The Première cabin features wood and leather seats which recline 180°, forming two- metre long beds. Each seat features a 10.4" touchscreen personal screen with interactive gaming and audio video on demand, a privacy divider, automassage feature, reading light, storage drawer, noise-cancelling headphones, personal telephone, and laptop power ports. Each passenger is also provided with a personalised coat service, pure merino wool blanket, a "boudoir-style" cushion, and a travel kit featuring Biologique Recherche facial and body care products to moisturise and refresh the skin. Turndown service includes a mattress, a duvet, hypoallergenic feather pillow, sleepwear, a dust bag for shoes, and a pair of slippers À la carte on-demand meal services feature entrées created by Chef Guy Martin. Private lounge access is offered worldwide featuring a chauffeured car to the aircraft. La Première is not available on Airbus A330s, A350s, and most Boeing 777s, on which Business is the highest cabin class. Four-class 777-300ER configurations are equipped with four seats. Air France is also planning to introduce an updated version of La Première in 2025, with the Airbus A350-900 being a potential aircraft to be equipped with the updated cabin. The new La Première experience has been introduced in March 2025 and will equip the Boeing 777-300ER. The new private suite offers five windows and occupies 3.5 square metres (38 sq ft). The seat can be transformed into a 2-metre-long (7 ft) bed. The first flight with the new cabin flew from Paris to New York JFK on 8 April 2025.

Business, Air France's long-haul business class product, is available on all long haul aircraft. Business features angled lie-flat seats which recline to two metres in length. Each seat includes a 10.4" touchscreen TV monitor with interactive gaming and AVOD, reading light, personal telephone, and laptop power ports. Meal service features three-course meals and a cheese service, or an express menu served shortly after takeoff.

The current business class product features Zodiac Aerospace Cirrus seats is designed by Mark Collins of Design Investment, specialised in the world of high-end transportation and by the design and branding agency, Brandimage. Initially debuting on Boeing 777s in June 2014, they were retrofitted onto all other aircraft types except for the Boeing 747-400, Airbus A380s, and Airbus A340-300 as they were to be retired from the fleet by 2016, 2019, and 2020 respectively. A total of 2,102 seats would be installed. The new cabin features a 1-2-1 layout as opposed to a 2-3-2 layout previously used on 777s or the 2-2-2 seat configuration of the Airbus A330s. The new 16-inch (41 cm) screen offers a unique onboard navigation experience similar to a tablet. With a completely redesigned user interface and available in 12 languages (French, English, Spanish, Brazilian Portuguese, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, German, Italian, Dutch, Russian and Arabic), choosing an entertainment program from over 1,000 hours of entertainment. The seat converts into a fully flat bed with 180 degrees recline, and features a touchscreen remote control, USB port, universal electrical outlet, new noise cancelling headphones, privacy screen, an Air France signature padded headboard, ample storage space, adjustable headrest, and a duvet with XXL feather down pillow.

Premium Economy is featured on all long-haul flights. This cabin made its debut on Boeing 777s and Airbus A330s beginning in late 2009 and early 2010. The seats were also installed on Airbus A340-300s between late 2009 and early 2010 and the Airbus A380s in late 2010 and early 2011. It is a dedicated cabin section with a 2-4-2 (2-3-2 on the long haul Airbus fleet and 3-3-3 for Alize on the 777-300 serving Indian Ocean and Caribbean routes) configuration with 38-inch (97 cm) pitch (36 inches [91 cm] for long-haul Alize seats), 123° reclining fixed-shell seats, including an adjustable headrest, a 10.4″ touchscreen, personal reading lamp, universal power ports, and an adjustable leg rest (40% more space, compared to Voyageur seats; the seats are 20% wider and offer 20% more legroom). This cabin contains 32 seats on Boeing 777-300ERs, 24 on Boeing 777-200ERs and Airbus A350-900s, and 21 on Airbus A330-200s and Boeing 787-9s. Passengers receive double baggage allowance, priority airport services, lounge access (for a fee), and extra frequent flier mileage. On board, business-class amenities include Sennheiser noise-cancelling headphones, an amenity kit (featuring socks, eye mask, toothbrush & toothpaste, and earplugs), improved blankets, and an enhanced meal service with second hot meal, candies, and ice cream, all served with real glass and metal cutlery. A new improved Premium Economy seat using the same shell was introduced from June 2014 on the Boeing 777 aircraft, featuring better cushioning and improved foot rest, adding comfort to the passenger.

Air France's economy class long-haul product features seats that recline up to 118°. The current long-haul Economy seat, which debuted on the Boeing 777-300ER, includes winged headrests, a personal telephone, and a touchscreen TV monitor with AVOD Interactive Entertainment System which have been installed on all of Air France's long-haul fleet. On long-haul flights, a menu is presented with a choice of two meals. Short- and medium-haul Economy services are operated by Airbus A320 family aircraft with different seating arrangements. Air France is one of the few airlines who features winged headrests on short-to-medium-haul aircraft in both classes. On short-haul flights, a snack is served, while on medium-haul flights, a three-course cold meal is served. Free alcoholic beverages are available on all flights, including champagne. On most aircraft, Air France offers extra-legroom seats in economy called Seat Plus. These seats are located in the economy-class exit rows and other rows depending on the aircraft type, offering at least 4 inches (10 cm) more seat pitch (36 inches [91 cm] versus the usual 32 inches [81 cm] in standard economy seats). Seat Plus prices vary by flight time, but it is free to elites and passengers with a full-fare economy ticket.

Air France has introduced a brand-new economy long-haul product which features a new slimline seat providing up to an inch more legroom, wider table, universal electrical sockets, retractable armrests, winged leather headrests, more storage space, high-definition 10-inch screens featuring the latest in-flight entertainment with a USB port, a headphones holder, and newly designed pillows featuring different patterns of the Air France logo. The seats would be installed along with the new La Première, Business, and Premium Economy seats from June 2014 till summer 2016 on the Boeing 777 aircraft, the core of the fleet. All other aircraft would be retrofitted except the Airbus A340-300s, Airbus A380-800s, and Boeing 747-400s, as all three types would be retired by 2020.

For La Première, Air France's first class menu is designed by Guy Martin, chef of Le Grand Vefour, a Michelin three-star restaurant in Paris. Menu items include hors d'oeuvres, entrées, bread basket, and cheeses, along with a dessert cart including pastries, petit fours, and tartlets. On long-haul flights, Air France also serves complimentary champagne and wine to passengers in all classes.

Air France offers Audio Video on Demand (AVOD) in all cabins on all long haul aircraft. The in flight entertainment system features multiple channels of video, audio, music, and games. Air France Magazine, the airline's in-flight publication, is included at each seat, and Air France Madame, a fashion luxury magazine with a feminine perspective, is included in La Première and Business cabins and lounges. On all flights, all films may be watched in English, Spanish, and French. Selected films on all flights are also available in Chinese, Japanese, Hindi, and Korean. The airline offers Berlitz International language courses via the in-flight entertainment system.

On 29 May 2013, KLM and Air France launched a pilot to test inflight Wi-Fi. Both airlines have equipped one Boeing 777-300ER of each of their fleets with Wi-Fi. Using the inflight Wi-Fi, passengers can stay online using their Wi-Fi enabled smartphones, laptops, or tablets. Wireless service would commence once the flight has reached 20,000 feet.

Air France lounges are known as Le Salon, and are open to La Première and Business passengers, as well as Flying Blue Gold, Flying Blue Platinum and SkyTeam Elite Plus members. Worldwide, there are 530 Air France and SkyTeam lounges in 300 international airports on every continent except Antarctica.

Flying Blue, the frequent flyer program of Air France-KLM, awards members points based on distance travelled and class of service. Membership into the program is free. The program is divided into standard (Explorer), Elite (Silver) and Elite Plus (Gold and Platinum) statuses. Explorer is the basic level which is attained upon entry into the program. Elite status is attained by accruing a certain number of XP (Experience Points) within one year. Elite Silver, Elite Plus Gold, and Elite Plus Platinum cards have added benefits. An invitation-only card called Club 2000 is attributed to some VIPs, celebrities and politicians. Officially, it provides the same benefits as Platinum status but numerous sources confirm it almost guarantees upgrade to Business or La Première. Flying Blue succeeded Air France's previous frequent flyer program, Fréquence Plus, which operated until the Air France-KLM merger in 2003.

On 14 November 2008, Air France released the first picture of an Airbus A320 that had been repainted in the full 1946 paint scheme to celebrate the airline's 75th anniversary. This heritage aircraft was planned to fly under the special colours until early 2010. In 2013 the aircraft was withdrawn from use for scrapping.

On 24 June 2024, Air France was voted for multiple top awards by Skytrax ; 2024 World's Best First Class Catering, Best Airline in Western Europe and Best First Class Lounge Dining.

Air France has been involved in a number of major accidents and incidents. The airline's deadliest accident occurred on 1 June 2009, when Air France Flight 447, an Airbus A330-203, crashed into the Atlantic Ocean killing all 228 on board. Another notable crash in Air France's records occurred on 25 July 2000, when Air France Flight 4590, a Concorde, caught fire immediately after take-off due to metal debris on the runway damaging a tire, which produced debris that struck a fuel tank on the underside of the wing, catching fire. The fire started to disintegrate the aircraft's left wing and the plane started to tilt to its side. This caused the aircraft to crash into a hotel on the outskirts of Gonesse, France. All 109 passengers and crew inside Flight 4590, as well as four people inside the hotel, were killed.

Air France–KLM S.A., also known as Air France–KLM Group (stylised as AIRFRANCEKLM GROUP), is a French–Dutch multinational airline holding company with its headquarters in the Rue du Cirque, Paris, France. The group's three major brands are Air France, KLM and Transavia. Air France–KLM is the result of the merger in 2004 between Air France and KLM. Both Air France and KLM are members of the SkyTeam airline alliance. The group's main hubs are Paris–Charles de Gaulle Airport, Paris Orly Airport and Amsterdam Airport Schiphol. Air France–KLM airlines transported 83 million passengers in 2022.

On 5 May 2004, Air France–KLM was created by the mutually agreed merger between Air France and Netherlands-based KLM. As a result of the deal, the French government's share of Air France was reduced from 54.4% (of the former Air France) to 44% (of the combined airline). Its share was subsequently reduced to 25%, and later to 17.6%. At the time of the merger in May 2004, Air France and KLM combined offered flights to 225 destinations in the world. In the year ending 21 March 2003, the two companies combined transported 66.3 million passengers.

In October 2005, Air France Cargo and KLM Cargo, the two freight subsidiaries of the group, merged their commercial activities. The Joint Cargo Management Team now operates the organisation worldwide from the Netherlands.

In a 2007 opening for a majority takeover of the loss-generating Alitalia, Air France–KLM was one of three bidders, and was favoured by the board of Alitalia. However, on 2 April 2008, it was reported that negotiations have been abandoned. After the acquisition of Alitalia and Air One by Compagnia Aerea Italiana on 12 December 2008, Air France–KLM was interested once again in purchasing a participation in the new merged company. On 12 January 2009, Air France–KLM bought a 25% share in this company for €323 million.

In 2008, it was the largest airline company in the world in terms of total operating revenues, and also the largest in the world in terms of international passenger-kilometres.

Air France–KLM, along with its partner Delta Air Lines, were in talks about investing with Japan Airlines, which is part of the Oneworld alliance (rival to SkyTeam) but was experiencing financial problems. Air France–KLM, along with Delta and Delta's rival, American Airlines (AMR Corporation, part of Oneworld), discussed investments of $200–300 million to help the financially struggling carrier, which is Asia's largest airline by revenue. The Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism of Japan had recommended Air France–KLM and/or Delta for partners because of their "healthy" financial status, compared to AMR Corporation. Delta was also recommended because of its extensive Asian network, acquired through the acquisition of Northwest Airlines. Korean Air, also a SkyTeam member, was also in talks with JAL. Air France, Alitalia, China Airlines, China Southern Airlines, Korean Air, and Vietnam Airlines are SkyTeam members that currently have code-sharing with JAL. On 7 February 2010, several news outlets reported that JAL decided to keep its alliance with American Airlines and end talks with Delta. According to reports, new JAL CEO Inamori and ETIC officials, decided that switching alliances (from Oneworld to SkyTeam) would be too risky and could hinder JAL's ability to turn around the airline quickly. On 9 February 2010, JAL officially announced their decision to strengthen its partnership with American, which included the joint application of antitrust immunity approval on transpacific routes. The airline also planned to fortify its relationship with other partners in the Oneworld alliance.

In February 2011, Air France–KLM and Delta Air Lines were working together to examine a bid for Virgin Atlantic as Richard Branson had a 51 percent stake and the rest is held by Delta.

In August 2011, Air France–KLM was categorised as one of World's 10 safest airlines.

In December 2013, Air France–KLM sold its subsidiary CityJet to Intro Aviation.

In early April 2016, Alexandre de Juniac, Chairman and CEO since 1 July 2013 resigned and was replaced by Jean-Marc Janaillac on 4 July 2016.

In January 2018, before the French Senate, Jean-Marc Janaillac reported for 2017 a higher revenue due to a rising fleet utilisation and a faster growth to come, and a better operating profit with 6% for the group (Air France 4%, KLM 9%) but lagging the 9% of Lufthansa and 10 to 12% of British Airways, while he deplored Paris-Charles de Gaulle luggage handling and safety waiting lines, obstructing connections, and anticipating a difficult 2018 with rising jet fuel prices and competition from Gulf carriers, Turkish Airlines, Chinese and Asian airlines, and low-cost carriers, either easyJet, Volotea, Ryanair or long haul.

At the end of 2018, Air France–KLM will select its medium-haul fleet replacement for Air France, HOP!, KLM and Transavia, operating 120 Boeing 737 NG, 118 Airbus A320ceo family, 64 Embraer E-Jets, 25 Bombardier CRJ700 series and 13 Embraer E145 aircraft. After renewing its long-haul fleet with the 787 Dreamliner and the A350 XWB from 2019, specifications will be released in the first trimester, seeking proposals from Airbus, Boeing, Bombardier Aerospace and Embraer, aiming for lower aircraft noise and biofuel usage.

On 4 May 2018, Jean-Marc Janaillac announced that he will be resigning as CEO of Air France–KLM, after employees rejected new salary package.

On 16 August 2018, the Board of Directors of Air France–KLM announced the appointment of Benjamin Smith as new CEO. He took up his duties at Air France–KLM on 30 September 2018.

On 26 February 2019, the Dutch government announced that it had "purchased 12.68 percent of shares in Air France–KLM" and "plans to build up its stake to around 14 percent".

In May 2022, Air France–KLM signed a strategic partnership with CMA CGM to develop their air cargo capacities together. CMA CGM is the parent company of CMA CGM Air Cargo which was founded in 2021. As part of the agreement CMA CGM acquired a 9% stake in Air France–KLM; however, this agreement was terminated by mutual agreement in January 2024 without change in the capital structure of the group.

On 12 July 2023, Air France–KLM announced a 10-for-1 reverse stock split and an ISIN change on 31 August 2023.

In October 2023, Air France–KLM, the Danish state and two investment firms (Castlelake and Lind Invest) announced plans to invest in SAS Group (the parent company of Scandinavian Airlines) following the airline company's Chapter 11 process in the United States, with the carrier taking 19.9% stake. In March 2024, the US Bankruptcy Court approved the restructuring plan that would allow SAS to exit Chapter 11 proceedings with approval from the European Commission following on 28 June 2024. Following the approval for the investment, SAS exited Star Alliance on 31 August 2024, and joined SkyTeam on 1 September 2024

On 4 July 2025, Air France–KLM announced its intention to increase its stake in SAS's share capital from 19.9% to 60.5%, taking over Castlelake and Lind Invest's stakes in the company. Pending approval from competition authorities, Air France–KLM expect SAS to become a subsidiary in the Air France–KLM Group, where the Danish Ministry of Finance will retain its minority stake of approximately 26% in the subsidiary. This move was not unexpected as already in 2023, Air France–KLM announced the ambition to become a controlling stakeholder after a minimum of 2 years.

In May 2010, Air France–KLM announced increased losses (€1.56 billion for the year to 31 March 2010), and warned that the 2010 eruptions of Eyjafjallajökull had caused a further €160 million loss in the current financial year. Air France–KLM is one of the largest airline companies in Europe, with 204.7 billion passenger-km in the year ending 31 March 2011.

Private shareholders own 81.4% of the company with 37% held by former Air France shareholders and 21% held by former KLM shareholders. The Government of France owns the remaining 15.9%.

In June 2008, Air France–KLM agreed to pay $350 million to settle charges of cargo price fixing in an investigation conducted by the U.S. Justice Department. Cathay Pacific, Martinair Holland, and SAS Cargo Group also agreed to fines bringing the total to $504 million. In November 2010, the European Commission fined Air France–KLM €310 million following another price-fixing investigation.

The company spends about a third of its revenue on staff, its biggest expense, while Lufthansa only spends around a quarter, so to save around 800 million euros (app. 1.04 billion US$) annually over the next three years, the company will make a recruitment freeze which will lead to 2,000 job cuts in 2012.

In February 2014, Air France–KLM invested $100 million in Brazilian airline Gol Linhas Aéreas Inteligentes in advance of the 2014 football World Cup.

During 2015, Air France went through a severe business crisis and a pilot's strike, which made the French airline cut almost 3,000 jobs, KLM defer some of its pending 787 deliveries, KLM's cargo subsidiary Martinair to retire six McDonnell-Douglas MD-11 airplanes, and Air France–KLM to suffer as a company.

As of December 2024, the shareholding structure of the group is:

Air France–KLM's head office is located in the Roissypôle complex on the grounds of Charles de Gaulle Airport and in Tremblay-en-France, near Paris. The 130,000-square-metre (1,400,000 sq ft) complex was completed in December 1995. The French firm Groupement d'Etudes et de Méthodes d'Ordonnancement (GEMO) managed the project. The architect was Valode & Pistre and the design consultants were Sechaud-Boyssut and Trouvin. The project amounted to a cost of 137,000,000 euros.

Wholly owned subsidiaries of Air France–KLM include:

Until January 2017, Air France–KLM also fully owned Cobalt Ground Solutions the third largest ground handling company based at London Heathrow Airport. The company was formed on 1 April 2009 by merging the two ground services subsidiaries of Air France and KLM in the UK – formerly Air France Services Ltd (AFSL) and KLM Ground Services Ltd (KGS). Cobalt Ground Solutions was sold to Groupe CRIT, who purchased 100% of the company through its subsidiary Groupe Europe Handling.

Air France Services Ltd (AFSL) was one of the major ground handling companies at Heathrow airport. AFSL was created on 15 January 1997 and was in the beginning a partnership between Air France and Servisair Ltd. Servisair then decided to pull out.

The group also owns Cygnific which is one of the biggest Sales & Service Centres of Air France–KLM. Cygnific is a full subsidiary of KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, operating as an independent company with its own business strategy, operational processes and human resources policy. Cygnific serves passengers and travel agents on behalf of KLM, Air France and Delta Air Lines.

Airlines in which Air France–KLM owns a minority interest :

Air Liquide S.A. (/ ˌ ɛər l ɪ ˈ k iː d / AIR lih- KEED, French: [ ɛːʁ likid ] ; literally " liquid air ") is a French multinational company which supplies industrial gases and services to various industries including medical, chemical and electronic manufacturers. Founded in 1902, Air Liquide is the second largest global supplier of industrial gases by revenues (after Linde plc) and has operations in over 70 countries.

The company's headquarters are in the 7th arrondissement of Paris. It also has major offices in Japan, Houston, Newark, Delaware, New Delhi, Frankfurt, Shanghai and Dubai. The company's research and development (R&D) targets the creation of industrial gases, and gases that are used in products such as healthcare items, electronic chips, foods, and chemicals.

On May 25, 1902, and after two years of research, Georges Claude developed a process for liquefying air in order to separate the components (oxygen, nitrogen, argon). On November 8, 1902, Paul Delorme gathered twenty-four subscribers, mainly engineers, to financially support the project, and became the first president of "Air liquide, a company for the study and exploitation of Georges Claude processes". The company originally had a capital of 100,000 francs.

In 1906, Air Liquide began operations in Belgium and Italy, followed by Canada, Japan and Hong Kong. On February 20, 1913, the company was listed on the Paris Stock Exchange.

By 1930, the company had grown considerably despite not taking on debt to fuel its expansion, to the extent that debt securities comprised only 15 percent of the company's overall resources. In 1938, Air Liquide acquired La oxígena S.A.and started operating in Argentina via the acquisition of the company La Oxígena.

In 1943, under the aegis of engineer Émile Gagnan (an employee of Air Liquide) and Lieutenant-Commander (ship-of-the-Line Lieutenant) Jacques-Yves Cousteau, Air Liquide manufactured scuba set prototypes that Cousteau and Frédéric Dumas used to shoot the underwater film Épaves (Shipwrecks), directed by Cousteau the same year. They were the first modern diving regulators. In 1945, after the Second World War, Jean Delorme, the son of Paul Delorme and the second President of the Group, pursued renovation and the development of industrial tools. In 1946, Air Liquide founded La Spirotechnique, a design and marketing company for regulators and other diving equipment. That same year, La Spirotechnique launched the CG45, the first modern diving regulator to be marketed; this marked the beginning of the popularization of scuba diving.

In 1957, Air Liquide began its activity in the large industry and created networks of pipelines irrigating several large industrial basins in the world.

In the 1960s, the company acquired American Cryogenics, as well as several other American companies.

In 1962, Air Liquide launched its activities into the space industry.

In 1970, the company inaugurates the Claude-Delorme Research & Development Center, located in Les Loges-en-Josas (Yvelines) where over 250 researchers work in 35 laboratories, covering various research areas such as applied mathematics, clinical trials and process engineering. In March 2014, the group announced its intentions to expand and modernize the center.

In 1986, Air Liquide expanded into the United States with the acquisition of Big Three for $1.05 billion, a US-based company with operations in many countries across Europe and Asia. That same year, it acquired SEPPIC, a French specialty chemicals company, as part of its activities in the healthcare sector.

During the 2000s, Air Liquide increased its investments in hydrogen production plants.

In 2001, Air Liquide acquired Messer Griesheim 's operations in South Africa, Trinidad and Tobago, Canada, Egypt, Argentina and Brazil for €185 million.

In September 2002, Air Liquide formed a Japanese-based joint venture with BOC under the name Japan Air Gases (JAG), which strengthened the group's presence in the Far East.

In 2007, Air Liquide acquired the activities of Linde Gas in the United Kingdom, as well as the German engineering company, Lurgi, for €550 million.

In 2013, Air Liquide created ALIAD, a venture capital investor. The company was established the same year in the Air Liquide innovation laboratory in Paris, the i-Lab, launched in 2013 to support and share innovation across the Group.

In November 2015, Air Liquide announced it would acquire the American firm Airgas for a total of $13.4 billion, including debt. The Airgas shareholders approved Air Liquide's acquisition on February 23, 2016. On May 23, 2016, Air Liquide announced the completion of the acquisition of Airgas.

In May 2017, Air Liquide announced the sale of Welding, its subsidiary of 2,000 employees to Lincoln Electric.

In August of the same year, Air Liquide took control of Skagerak Naturgass AG, a subsidiary of Skagerak Energi, producer of biomethane for vehicles in Norway.

In February 2018, Air Liquide launched the world's largest oxygen production unit for Sasol.

In September 2018, Air Liquide opened its Paris Innovation Campus, located on the "Plateau de Saclay", near Paris. The campus includes Air Liquide's largest Research & Development Center. On this occasion, Air Liquide announced the creation of a deep-tech start-up accelerator on the Innovation Campus by 2019.

In August 2025, in the context of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, a decree signed by Vladimir Putin placed Air Liquide's subsidiaries under "temporary management" of the Russian company M-Logistika.

On August 22, 2025, Air Liquide agreed to buy South Korea’s DIG Airgas for an amount of 2.85 billion euros that comes to $3.31 billion which includes debt and cash. This move was aimed to strengthen its market position in the country.

An explosion occurred at a Air Liquide location in High Springs, Florida on May 4, 2023 The incident occurred at a site that creates specialty gas used to make computer chips. Four people were transported to local hospital, one of injured was airlifted.

Airbus SE (/ ˈ ɛər b ʌ s / AIR -buss ; French: [ ɛʁbys ] ; German: [ ˈɛːɐ̯bʊs ] ; Spanish: [ ˈejɾβus ]) is a European aerospace corporation. While the company's primary business is the design and manufacture of commercial aircraft, it also operates separate divisions for Defence and Space and Helicopters. Airbus has long been the world's leading helicopter manufacturer and, in 2019, emerged as the world's largest manufacturer of airliners.

Airbus originated from Airbus Industrie GIE, a consortium of European aerospace companies established in 1970 to produce a wide-body aircraft to compete with American-built airliners. In 2000, the consortium's parent firms— Aérospatiale - Matra of France, DASA of Germany, and CASA of Spain—merged to form the European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company (EADS), which later acquired full ownership of Airbus Industrie. EADS rebranded as Airbus SE in 2015. Reflecting its multinational origins, the company operates offices and assembly plants in France, Germany, Spain, and the United Kingdom, along with more recent additions in Canada, Malaysia, the United States, Morocco, and India.

Airbus's headquarters are legally registered in Leiden, Netherlands, while day-to-day management is conducted from the company's main office in Blagnac, France. The SE in its name denotes Societas Europaea, a public company under European Union corporate law. Airbus is led by CEO Guillaume Faury and is included in the EURO STOXX 50 stock market index. Since its inception in 2000, the company's shares have been listed on the Paris, Frankfurt, and four Spanish stock exchanges, including the Bolsa de Madrid.

Airbus is the product of several historical forces: the desire of European governments to create an aerospace and defence manufacturer large enough to compete with major American firms; the consolidation of the sector following the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the ensuing "peace dividend", which raised concerns that companies could be acquired by non-European firms; and efforts to privatise state-owned companies.

The company traces its origins to the formation of the Airbus Industrie GIE, a consortium of European aerospace companies established in 1970 to produce a wide-body aircraft to compete with American-built airliners. France's state-owned Aérospatiale owned 37.9% of Airbus Industrie, West Germany's Deutsche Airbus also owned 37.9%, British Aerospace held 20%, and Spain's largely state-owned CASA owned 4.2%.

In 2000, the European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company (EADS) was established through the merger of Aérospatiale and Matra of France, DASA (the successor to Deutsche Airbus) of Germany, and CASA. EADS held 100% of Eurocopter S.A., established in 1992 and later renamed Airbus Helicopters, along with 80% of Airbus Industrie GIE, which was quickly reorganised as Airbus S.A.S., a simplified joint-stock company. In 2006, EADS acquired the remaining 20% of Airbus S.A.S. from BAE Systems (the successor of British Aerospace). EADS was renamed Airbus Group N.V. in 2014 and Airbus Group S.E. in 2015.

Airbus S.A.S. and Airbus Group S.E. were merged in January 2017, and in April 2017 the combined entity adopted the name Airbus SE. Since then, Airbus SE has owned the commercial aircraft manufacturing operations while also serving as the parent company of the other two divisions, Airbus Defence and Space and Airbus Helicopters.

Daimler-Benz (aerospace unit, est. 1926)

The Airbus product line started with the A300 in 1972, the world's first wide-body, twinjet aircraft. Initial sales were slow, leading to calls to end the Airbus program. However, the aircraft would greatly benefit from the 1976 introduction of the ETOPS 90 rule, which allowed twinjet aircraft to operate up to 90 minutes—an increase from 60 minutes—away from the nearest airport. Under the new rule, the A300 was able to operate over the North Atlantic, the Bay of Bengal, and the Indian Ocean, making it a more efficient alternative to the trijets and four-engined aircraft offered by competitors, leading to renewed airline interest and a sharp increase in sales.

Airbus then developed the A310 to meet demand for a shorter-body but longer-range version of the A300. The aircraft also introduced a glass cockpit, which eliminated the need for a flight engineer, and a redesigned rear fuselage that used space more efficiently, creating additional capacity. The A310 was manufactured from 1981 to 1998. These design changes were later incorporated into the A300, resulting in the A300-600.

Building on its success with the A300, Airbus developed the narrow-body A320 aircraft that was launched in 1987, which became and remains a major commercial success. The A320 was the first commercial jet to use a digital fly-by-wire control system. All Airbus models developed since have adopted cockpit systems similar to the A320, making it easier for crews to transition between aircraft types. The success of the A320 led Airbus to introduce a lengthened version, the A321, in 1993, followed by the shorter A319 in 1995 and the even shorter A318 in 2002. In 2016, Airbus re-engineered the narrow-body family under a programme called the A320neo (new engine option).

Airbus also embarked on an effort to develop new wide-body aircraft derived from the cross-section of the A300, but with greater range and seating capacity and integrating technologies developed from the A320 programme. This effort led to the introduction of the four-engine A340 in 1991 and the twinjet A330 in 1992. At that time, Airbus wanted to offer a four-engined jet aircraft to allow for transpacific flights. However, during the aircraft's development, new ETOPS rules extended twinjet operations to 120 minutes in 1986 and 180 minutes in 1989. Although these changes hurt sales of the A340, they greatly benefited the A330. Production of the A340 ended in 2011, while the A330 was re-engineered as the A330neo (new engine option) in 2018.

In 2005, Airbus introduced the world's largest passenger airliner: the A380 is a four-engine aircraft with two full-length passenger seating decks. Intended to challenge the dominance of the Boeing 747 in the long-haul market, the A380 was ultimately a money-losing venture for Airbus due to large development costs and limited sales arising from high operating costs, and production ended in December 2021.

The A350, a wide-body, twinjet aircraft, was introduced in 2015. The A350 was the first Airbus aircraft that was largely produced from carbon-fiber-reinforced polymers. It is longer and wider than the fuselage used on the A300, A310, A330, and A340.

A second narrow-body jet was added to the product list in 2018 when Airbus gained control of the Bombardier CSeries programme, and rebranded it as the A220. The jet offers five-abreast seating compared to the six-abreast seating on the A320.

In December 2024, it was reported that the total aircraft delivery in the year for Airbus has reached 643 units, with 84 planes delivered in November 2024 alone. Subsequently, in January 2025, it was reported that Airbus had successfully delivered 766 aircraft to its customers out of 878 orders in the entire 2024, marking a 4% increase from the previous year. In October 2025, the A320 overtook the Boeing 737 as the most delivered airliner.

Airbus Corporate Jets markets and modifies new aircraft for private and corporate customers. It has a model range that parallels the commercial aircraft offered by the company. Following the entry of the 737-based Boeing Business Jet, Airbus joined the business jet market with the A319 Corporate Jet in 1997. Although the term Airbus Corporate Jet was initially used only for the A319CJ, it is now often used for all models, including VIP widebodies. As of December 2008, 121 corporate and private jets are operating, and 164 aircraft have been ordered.

The company also owns 10% of Dassault Aviation, which builds the Falcon family of smaller business jets.

Airbus Defence and Space markets and either builds or modifies new aircraft for military use. Airbus became increasingly interested in developing and selling to the military aviation market in the late 1990s. It embarked on two main fields of development: aerial refuelling with the Airbus A310 MRTT (Multi-Role Tanker Transport) and later the Airbus A330 MRTT, and tactical airlift with the Airbus A400M Atlas. The company has also continued to market and assemble some military aircraft previously offered by the companies that formed Airbus, notably CASA.

The A310 and A330-based MRTT aircraft are conversions of civilian airliners. The aircraft are called multi-role tanker transports because, in addition to their aerial refuelling capability, the aircraft can also be configured for troop transport, medevac, and cargo transportation.

The A400M Atlas is a four-engine, turboprop -powered tactical transport aircraft. The A400M is sized between the American-made C-130 and the C-17 transports, and while it can carry heavier loads than the C-130, its turboprop engines allow it to retain the ability to use rough landing strips. The A400M was developed for European NATO members Belgium, France, Germany, Luxembourg, Spain, Turkey, and the UK, as an alternative to relying on foreign aircraft. During development, the A400M programme faced delays and cost overruns; with customer nations stepping in to offer additional subsidies. The first aircraft was delivered to the French Air Force in 2013, and by 2023, more than 100 aircraft had been built.

The Defence and Space division also markets and assembles the EADS CASA C295, a smaller tactical transport aircraft, that was designed and initially manufactured by the Spanish aerospace company CASA.

The company is also a 50% owner of the ArianeGroup joint venture which builds the Ariane 5 space launch vehicle, a 46% owner of the Eurofighter joint venture which builds the Typhoon fighter jet, a 42.5% owner of the Panavia Aircraft joint venture which built the Tornado fighter jet, a 37.5% owner of the MBDA joint venture which builds missiles, and formerly a 10% owner of Dassault Aviation which builds the Rafale fighter jet, and previously, the Mirage 2000 fighter.

Airbus Helicopters builds and markets new rotorcraft for civilian and military use. The division was founded formed in 1992 as the Eurocopter Group, through the merger of the helicopter divisions of Aérospatiale and DASA (two of the founding companies of Airbus). Airbus Helicopters is the foremost player in the turbine helicopter industry in terms of both revenue and deliveries.

The division's civilian products include the single-engine H125 and H130, the light twin-engine H135 and H145, the medium twin-engine H155 and H160, the super medium twin-engine H175, and the heavy twin-engine H215 and H225.

Military products include the Tiger attack helicopter, along with militarised versions of the H125, H135, H145, H160, H175, H215, and H225.

The company owns 62.5% of NHIndustries joint venture, which builds the NH90 military utility helicopter.

Commercial aircraft generated 74% of total revenue for the Airbus group in 2018 and 72% in 2023. The key trends for Airbus Commercial Aircraft (excluding Defence, Space and Helicopters) are as of each financial year ending 31 December:

Airbus Defence and Space was formed in January 2014 as part of the group restructuring from the former EADS divisions Airbus Military, Astrium, and Cassidian (composed of Cassidian Electronics – develops and manufactures sensors, radars, avionics, and electronic warfare systems for military and security applications, Cassidian Air Systems – develops manned and unmanned aerial systems (UAVs), mission avionics, electronic defence and warning systems, and Cassidian Systems – provides global security systems such as command & control, lead system integration, TETRA and TETRAPOL communication systems for public safety, industry, transportation, and defence). This line of business was the first one in the world to begin field tests with TETRA Enhanced Data Service (TEDS).

The Airbus Military division, which manufactured tanker, transport, and mission aircraft; Airbus Helicopters, the world's largest helicopter supplier; Astrium, provided systems for aerial, land, naval, and civilian security applications, including Ariane, Galileo, and Cassidian. Through Cassidian, EADS was a partner in the Eurofighter consortium as well as in the MBDA missile systems manufacturer.

Airbus Helicopters, formerly known as Eurocopter, is a helicopter manufacturing and support company.

The 10 largest shareholders of Airbus in early 2026 were:

Airbus has several final assembly lines for different models and markets. These are:

Airbus, however, has a number of other plants in different European locations, reflecting its foundation as a consortium.

For aircraft assembled in Europe, aircraft parts often move between the different factories and the assembly lines via the use of the Beluga and BelugaXL, a fleet modified aircraft capable of carrying entire sections of fuselage. For aircraft assembled in China and the United States, the parts needed to build an aircraft meet in a single European location where they are loaded onto ships for the final journey to the assembly line.

Airbus opened an assembly plant for the A320 family of aircraft in Tianjin, China in 2009. Airbus started constructing a $350 million component manufacturing plant in Harbin, China in July 2009. It was fully operational by early 2011, the 30,000 square metre plant manufactures composite parts and assembles composite work-packages for the A350 XWB, A320 families and future Airbus programmes. Harbin Aircraft Industry Group Corporation, Hafei Aviation Industry Company Ltd, AviChina Industry & Technology and other Chinese partners hold an 80% stake in the plant while Airbus controls the remaining 20%. In 2022, the Tianjin plant finished upgrading works to allow for production of A321. In 2023, the Tianjin final assembly plant started construction to be expanded with a second production line.

North America plays a crucial role for Airbus, both in terms of aircraft sales and suppliers. Of the approximately 5,300 Airbus jetliners sold worldwide, 2,000 are ordered by North American customers. These orders span Airbus' entire product line, from the compact A318 to the massive A380, accommodating 107 to 565 passengers. Notably, US contractors contribute significantly, supporting around 120,000 jobs and generating an estimated $5.5 billion in business. For instance, the A380 boasts 51% American content in terms of work share value.

Plans for a Mobile, Alabama aircraft assembly plant were unveiled by Airbus CEO Fabrice Brégier from the Mobile Convention Centre on 2 July 2012. The plans include a $600 million factory at the Mobile Aeroplex at Brookley for the assembly of the A220, A319, A320 and A321 aircraft. It could employ up to 1,000 full-time workers when operational. Construction began on 8 April 2013, and became operable by 2015, producing up to 50 aircraft per year by 2017.

On 16 December 2024, it was reported that Airbus had leased 650,000 sq ft of office space in Bengaluru 's Whitefield to build its Global Capacity Centre. The lease is for 10 years and valued at Rs 500 crore, securing the entire building in Titanium Tech Park. In this way, Airbus intends to strengthen its position in India.

The key trends of Airbus SE are (as of each financial year ending 31 December):

In October 2005 the British Ministry of Defence warned European politicians to stop, as it saw it, interfering in the corporate governance of EADS. The former UK Defence Procurement Minister Lord Drayson hinted that the UK government, a major customer for EADS, may withhold future contracts. "As a key customer, we see it as important for EADS to move in a direction that is free from political interference."

On 4 April 2006, DaimlerChrysler announced its intention to reduce its shareholding from 30% to 22.5%. The company placed a value on the stake at "approximately €2.0 billion." Lagardère was to reduce its holding by an identical amount. However, Caisse des Dépôts et Consignations, a unit of the French government, acquired 2.25% of EADS. At issue, as a result, is the fact that the German and French shareholdings were now in imbalance.

On 30 August 2006, shortly after the stock price decline caused by the A380 delivery delays, more than 5% of EADS stock was reportedly purchased by the Russian state-owned Vneshtorgbank, bringing its share to nearly 6%. In December 2007, Vneshtorgbank sold EADS shares to another state-controlled bank, Vnesheconombank. EADS shares were to be delivered by Vneshekonombank to the charter capital of JSC United Aircraft Corporation in 2008.

On 3 October 2006, shortly after EADS admitted further delays in the Airbus 380 programme would cost the company 4.8 billion euros in lost earnings in 2010, EADS shares, traded on the Paris arm of Euronext, were suspended after they surpassed the 10% loss limit. Trading resumed later in the day with the one-day loss holding at 7%.

In 2007, Dubai Holding acquired 3.12% of EADS stock, making the Dubai buy-out fund one of the largest institutional shareholders.

In 2008, EADS had arms sales equivalent to $17.9 billion, which constituted 28% of total revenue.

In April 2013, Daimler sold its shares in EADS.

As of 31 December 2024, 73.7% of Airbus Group stock is publicly traded on six European stock exchanges (Euronext Paris in France, the Frankfurt Stock Exchange in Germany, and the four regional stock exchanges Bolsa de Madrid, Borsa de Barcelona, Bolsa de Valencia and Bolsa de Bilbao in Spain). 0.6% of the shares are treasury shares owned by Airbus, while the remaining 25.7% are owned by a "Contractual Partnership". As of 31 December 2024, the partnership is owned by SOGEPA (10.8%), GZBV (10.8%) and SEPI (4.1%). SOGEPA is owned by the French State, GZBV is majority owned by the German state-owned investment and development bank KfW, and SEPI is a Spanish state holding company.

In April 2020, Airbus announced that it had cut aircraft production by a third due to the COVID-19 outbreak. According to Guillaume Faury, the company was "bleeding cash at an unprecedented speed". The recession put its survival at stake and presented the need for deep job cuts throughout all Airbus departments. 3,000 workers in France were involved in government-assisted furlough schemes.

Airbus has committed to "Flightpath 2050", an aviation industry plan to reduce noise, CO 2, and NOx emissions.

Airbus was the first aerospace business to become ISO 14001 certified, in January 2007; this is a broader certification covering the whole organisation, not just the aircraft it produces.

In association with Honeywell and JetBlue, Airbus has developed an aviation biofuel to reduce pollution and dependence on fossil fuels, claiming that this has the potential to replace up to a third of the world's aviation fuel. Algae-based biofuel absorbs carbon dioxide during growth and does not compete with food production. This alternative may be commercially available by 2030 but algae and other vegetation-based fuels are in an early stage of development, and fuel-bearing algae have been expensive to develop. Airbus offers delivery flights to airlines using a 10% biofuel blend in standard engines. The fuel does not cut carbon emissions but is free of sulphur emissions, which demonstrates that the fuel could be used in commercial flights in unmodified engines.

On 22 July 2024, at the 2024 Farnborough International Airshow, Airbus and Airports Council International (ACI) World association signed a cooperation agreement to support the industry's efforts to reduce the environmental impact of aviation, including the adoption of sustainable aviation fuel (SAF).

In September 2020, Airbus unveiled three liquid hydrogen -fueled "ZEROe" concept aircraft that it claims could become the first commercial zero-emission aircraft, entering service by 2035. The design includes an aircraft with six eight-bladed removable motors.

At the Airbus Summit in March 2025, Airbus delivered updates on its development of the ZEROe hydrogen powered aircraft.

Boeing has continually protested over "launch aid" and other forms of government aid to Airbus, while Airbus has argued that Boeing receives illegal subsidies through military and research contracts and tax breaks.

In July 2004, former Boeing CEO Harry Stonecipher accused Airbus of abusing a 1992 bilateral EU-US agreement providing for disciplines for large civil aircraft support from governments. Airbus is given reimbursable launch investment (RLI), called "launch aid" by the US, from European governments, with the money being paid back with interest plus indefinite royalties, but only if the aircraft is a commercial success. Airbus contends that this system is fully compliant with the 1992 agreement and WTO rules. The agreement allows up to 33% of the programme cost to be met through government loans, which are to be fully repaid within 17 years with interest and royalties. These loans are held at a minimum interest rate equal to the cost of government borrowing plus 0.25%, which would be below market rates available to Airbus without government support. Airbus claims that since the signature of the EU-US agreement in 1992, it has repaid European governments more than US$6.7 billion and that this is 40% more than it has received.

Airbus argues that the military contracts awarded to Boeing, the second largest US defence contractor, are in effect a form of subsidy, such as the controversy surrounding the Boeing KC-767 military contracting arrangements. The significant US government support of technology development via NASA also provides significant support to Boeing, as do the large tax breaks offered to Boeing, which some people claim are in violation of the 1992 agreement and WTO rules. In its recent products such as the 787, Boeing has also been offered direct financial support from local and state governments.

In January 2005 the European Union and United States trade representatives, Peter Mandelson and Robert Zoellick respectively, agreed to talks aimed at resolving the increasing tensions. These talks were not successful with the dispute becoming more acrimonious rather than approaching a settlement.

WTO ruled in August 2010 and in May 2011 that Airbus had received improper government subsidies through loans with below market rates from several European countries. In a separate ruling in February 2011, WTO found that Boeing had received local and federal aid in violation of WTO rules.

In 2005 the Government Pension Fund of Norway recommended the exclusion of several companies producing cluster bombs or components. EADS and its sister company EADS Finance BV were among them, arguing that EADS manufactures "key components for cluster bombs". The criticism was centred around TDA, a joint venture between EADS and Thales S.A. TDA produced the mortar ammunition PR Cargo, which can be considered cluster ammunition, however this definition has since been successfully battled by EADS. EADS and its subsidiaries are now regarded as fulfilling all the conditions of the Ottawa Treaty. According to the new point of view, no product of EADS or its subsidiaries falls into the category of antipersonnel mines as defined by the Ottawa Treaty (" landmines under the Ottawa Treaty"). In April 2006, the fund declared that the basis for excluding EADS from investments related to the production of cluster munitions is no longer valid, however its shareholding of MBDA means the fund still excludes EADS due to its indirect involvement in nuclear weapons production.

On 2 June 2006 co-CEO Noël Forgeard and Airbus CEO Gustav Humbert resigned following the controversy caused by the June 2006 announcement that deliveries of the A380 would be delayed by a further six months. Forgeard was one of a number of executives including Jean-Paul Gut who exercised stock options in November 2005 and March 2006. He and twenty-one other executives are under investigation as to whether they knew about the delays in the Airbus A380 project which caused a 26% fall in EADS shares when publicised. The French government's actions were also under investigation; The state-owned bank Caisse des Dépots et Consignations (CDC) bought part of Lagardère's 7.5% stake in EADS in April 2006, allowing that latter to partially escape the June 2006 losses.

In September 2024, Airbus received negative press attention for its links with Aviation Industry Corporation of China (AVIC), a Chinese company that provides aircraft to the Myanmar junta. In a joint report, NGOs Justice for Myanmar and Info Birmanie outlined how the supplied aircraft and weapons were used by the Myanmar military to commit war crimes in the Myanmar civil war. The report called on Airbus to use its influence to pressure the Chinese firm to end its arms sales to the Myanmar junta.

In response to the report, Airbus stated its collaboration focused exclusively on the civil domain, and that its conduct complied with all laws and regulations. In June 2025, Justice for Myanmar reported that Airbus had completed its divestment from AviChina, AVIC's publicly listed subsidiary, by 1 April 2025.

In 2003 Tony Yengeni, former chief whip of South Africa's African National Congress, was convicted of fraud worth around US$5 billion relating to an arms deal with South Africa, in which Airbus (formerly EADS) were major players. It was claimed that Airbus had admitted that it had "rendered assistance" to around thirty senior officials, including defence force chief General Siphiwe Nyanda, to obtain luxury vehicles. In March 2003, South Africa withdrew all charges of bribery against the former head of EADS South Africa, and in September 2004, the prosecutor's office dismissed the bribery charges against Yengeni.

In August 2012 the UK's Serious Fraud Office opened a criminal investigation into an EADS subsidiary, GPT Special Project Management Ltd, regarding bribery allegations made by GPT's former programme director, Ian Foxley. Foxley alleged that luxury cars were bought for senior Saudis, and that millions of pounds sterling were paid to mysterious Cayman Islands companies, possibly to secure a £2 billion contract to renew the Saudi Arabian National Guard 's military telecommunications network. Foxley's allegations were supported by two other GPT employees. The later agreement between Airbus and the SFO on 31 January 2020 excluded the settlement of this case.

The French National Financial Prosecutor's Office (PNF), the UK Serious Fraud Office (SFO) and the US Department of Justice (DoJ) had been jointly investigating irregularities in Airbus marketing practices since 2016, in particular the activities of agents Saudi Arabia, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Indonesia and Austria, but also China, the United Arab Emirates, South Korea, Japan, Taiwan, Kuwait, Turkey, Russia, Mexico, Brazil, Vietnam, India, Colombia and Nepal.

In July 2016, SFO opened a criminal investigation into "suspicions of fraud, bribes and corruption" after Airbus informed British authorities of a failure to disclose the role played by some intermediaries facilitating the sale of aircraft. Airbus was required to provide this information in order to benefit from export credits, which the British, French and German governments had suspended. In March 2017, the PNF subsequently opened a preliminary investigation into "suspicions of fraud and corruption in civil aviation activities" in cooperation with the SFO.

The allegations included that from 2012 onwards Airbus was responsible for recruiting and remunerating intermediaries to influence the award of civil and military contracts. Payments worth hundreds of millions of euros in alleged secret commissions were made and numerous sales including in Saudi Arabia, Kazakhstan, Philippines, Indonesia, Austria, China and Mauritius were under suspicion of bribery.

The investigation focused on the Airbus, Strategy and Marketing Organization (SMO), the department responsible for negotiating sales contracts and which, La Tribune reported as having "a network and an incredible influence around the world". Directed successively by Jean-Paul Gut and Marwan Lahoud, the SMO was dissolved in 2016 under the new executive director, Thomas Enders, as part of a "clean hands" operation.

In 2014, in a case referred to as the Kazakhgate affair, a search at Airbus Helicopters by French authorities found emails confirming that Airbus had agreed in principle to pay €12 million in bribes to the Prime Minister of Kazakhstan to facilitate the sale of helicopters. Officers from the Central Anti-Corruption Office (OCLCIFF) then searched the home of Marwan Lahoud on 8 February 2016. This revealed that two Turkish intermediaries had claimed payment of commissions due in connection with the sale of 160 aircraft to China valued at US$10 billion. A message by Lahoud suggested that the commissions could reach US$250 million. The SMO was to conceal these commissions as false invoices for a fictitious Caspian pipeline project.

In January 2020, French, British and American courts validated three agreements between Airbus and the PNF, the UK SFO, and the US DoJ. Airbus recognised the charges and agreed to pay fines of €2.1 billion in France, €984 million in the United Kingdom and €526 million in the United States. The penalties were the highest ever issued by the French and British bodies.

These settlements close the prosecution of Airbus regarding the Kazakhstan case but not allegations of misconduct in Saudi Arabia, China and Turkey, which Airbus denies. Airbus managers may still be pursued as private individuals.

In January 2020, the US State Department reached a settlement with Airbus to resolve alleged violation of the Arms Export Control Act (AECA) and International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR). The charges included providing false statements on authorization requests and failure to maintain records involving ITAR-controlled transactions; and the unauthorized re-export and retransfer of defense articles. Under the terms of the settlement, paid a civil penalty of $10 million, with $5 million of this amount suspended on the condition the funds were used for remedial compliance measures. Airbus was required to appoint an external Special Compliance Official to oversee the Agreement, and to conduct two external audits of its compliance program during the Agreement term as well as implement additional compliance measures.

In July 2026, Airbus announced that it had paid a fine of £6.4 million to UK revenue and ‌customs authorities to settle a two-year-old investigation into export control violations. The investigation focused on anomalies over the cross-border transfer of parts for the A400M military airlifter that came to light during an audit in 2022.

According to HMRC sources, the breaches included:

Alain Carignon (French pronunciation: [ alɛ̃ kaʁiɲɔ̃ ] ; born 23 February 1949 in Vizille (Isère)) is a conservative French politician. From 1986 to 1995, he was deputy to the National Assembly, before becoming a junior minister in charge of environmental issues in the second Chirac government ; in 1986 he proposed legislation against major radioactive risks. He then became minister in charge of media and telecommunication in the Balladur government., but had to resign from that position when his indictment for corruption became inevitable. He was later sentenced to a 4 years jail term, and made unelectable for a further 5 years. He served 29 months of his jail sentence, the longest to date for a French politician convicted of corruption.

He returned to political activity in 2002 at the end of his unelectability term, and has since unsuccessfully run for several elected positions.

Alain Devaquet (4 October 1942 – 19 January 2018) was a French politician who was a minister under Jacques Chirac. A university professor before embarking on his political career with the Rally for the Republic, Devaquet was given the role of junior minister for universities. In this role he became the public face of a controversial proposal to reform the higher education system in 1986, the proposals becoming known as the Devaquet Law, despite originating from more senior members of the government. The plan allowed universities to be more selective in the admission of students and to charge fees.

The reaction against the proposals was strong, with mass protests by students and some strikes in support of their opposition. With the mobilisation of students also closely linked to other proposals aimed at tightening immigration laws, things came to a head with the death of Malik Oussekine, a student bystander who died in police custody on 6 December 1986 and whose death prompted mass outpouring of anger. The law was withdrawn two days later and Devaquet was forced to resign, although the incident proved a strong blow to the government and enhanced the profile of François Mitterrand due to his opposition.

Alain Joyandet (born 15 January 1954) is a French politician of the Republicans (LR) who has been serving as a member of the French Senate since 2014, representing Haute-Saône. From 2008 to 2010, he served as Secretary of State for Cooperation and Francophony in the government of Prime Minister François Fillon.

Prior to entering national politics, Joyandet was CEO of the Société Nouvelle des Éditions Comtoises (SNEC), a publisher of weekly newspapers and journals.

Joyandet was mayor of Vesoul from 1995 to 2012 and senator of Franche-Comté from 1995 to 2002.

In 2010, Joyandet won the UMP nomination for President of Franche-Comté, but lost to socialist candidate Marie-Guite Dufay in the general election.

Secretary of State for Cooperation and Francophony : 2008-2010 (Resignation on 4 July 2010).

Senator of Haute-Saône : 1995-2002 (Resignation, became a member of the National Assembly of France in 2002).

Member of the National Assembly of France for Haute-Saône (1st constituency) : 2002-2008 (Became secretary of State in 2008) / Since 2010. Elected in 2002, reelected in 2007.

Leader of the Opposition in the Regional Council : March–July 2010.

Regional councillor of Franche-Comté : march-July 2010 (Resignation).

General councillor of Haute-Saône : 1992-2002 (Resignation). Reelected in 1998.

Mayor of Vesoul : 1995-2012. Reelected in 2001, 2008.

Municipal councillor of Vesoul : since 1989. Reelected in 1995, 2001, 2008

On 4 July 2010, Joyandet resigned his government post, the same day as Christian Blanc, Secretary of State for Development of the capital region. The French press had reported the suspected misuse of public money by the two ministers. Joyandet was accused of renting a private jet to €116,500 to travel to Martinique, where he was to attend an international conference for reconstruction after the earthquake of Haiti.

An article in Canard Enchaîné also suspected Joyandet of having received an illegal building permit for his house of Grimaud, which he abandoned shortly after.

Alain Marie Juppé OQ ([ alɛ̃ maʁi ʒype ] ; born 15 August 1945) is a French politician. A member of The Republicans, he was Prime Minister of France from 1995 to 1997 under President Jacques Chirac, during which period he faced major strikes that paralysed the country and became very unpopular. He left office after the victory of the left in the snap 1997 legislative elections. He had previously served as Minister of Foreign Affairs from 1993 to 1995, and as Minister of the Budget and Spokesman for the Government from 1986 to 1988. He was president of the political party Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) from 2002 to 2004 and mayor of Bordeaux from 2006 to 2019.

After the ghost jobs affair in December 2004, Juppé suspended his political career until he was re-elected as mayor of Bordeaux in October 2006. He served briefly as Minister of State for Ecology and Sustainable Development in 2007, but resigned in June 2007 after failing in his bid to be re-elected in the 2007 legislative election. He was Minister of Defence and Veterans Affairs from 2010 to 2011 and Minister of Foreign Affairs from 2011 to 2012.

Juppé announced in 2015 his intention to contest his party's primary election ahead of the 2017 presidential election. He came in second place in the first open primary of the right and centre, and in the run-off, he lost to François Fillon. At the beginning of 2019, he accepted a nomination to become a member of the French Constitutional Council and subsequently announced that he would be resigning as mayor of Bordeaux.

Juppé was born Alain Marie Juppé on 15 August 1945, in Mont-de-Marsan, Aquitaine. His father was Robert Juppé (1915-1998), a Gaullist resistance fighter at the end of World War II, who came from a family of railwaymen and later became a farmer, and his mother was Marie Darroze (1910-2004), the devoted Catholic daughter of a judge.

His secondary studies took place at the Lycée Victor-Duruy (Landes). At 17, he graduated with a Baccalauréat. He then came to Paris for a literary preparatory classe at the Lycée Louis-le-Grand and entered the École Normale Supérieure (ENS) in 1964 to get a Classics agrégation in 1967. He completed his degrees at Sciences Po (1968) and at the National School of Administration (ENA) (1970-1972). From 1969 to 1970, he executed his compulsory military service.

Alain Juppé's profession, outside politics, is Inspector of Finances, a position from which he was on leave to hold his various elected and appointed offices. He retired from the Inspection of Finances on 1 January 2003.

As a senior civil servant, he met Jacques Chirac at the end of the 1970s and became his adviser in the city council of Paris. In 1981, he was selected to be one of the first Young Leaders of the French-American Foundation.

A member of the RPR since its foundation in 1976, he lost his first attempts to be elected during the 1978 legislative elections and the 1979 cantonal elections. Then he moved to Paris to work with Chirac as one of the closest advisors to the mayor. In 1979, he was elected at the national board of the party. Two years later, he became the second manager of Chirac's campaign for the presidential election. Chirac ended third with 18% of the vote.

With Michel Aurillac, he led the club 89, officially a think tank, indeed a sort of counter-government to prepare the 1986 legislative elections. The victory of the RPR-UDF alliance in this ballot made Socialist President Mitterrand appointing Chirac as his Prime Minister.

He was minister of budget and spokesperson of Jacques Chirac's government from 1986 to 1988. He contributed to the free-market policy of Edouard Balladur, minister of Finances, during these years. During the 1988 presidential election, he combined these positions with those of spokesman of Chirac's campaign and head of his support committee.

Then, he was secretary general of the Rally for the Republic (Rassemblement pour la République or RPR) political party from 1988 to 1995. His role was to maintain Chirac's leadership on the party against the rise of the younger generation of "renovators" and of sovereignist Gaullists such as Philippe Séguin and Charles Pasqua. Pasqua humorously wrote in his Memoirs : " The RPR was now ruled like the North-Korean Communist Party... without the enlightened leadership of Kim Il Sung ". He led the RPR-UDF alliance with former President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing for the 1989 European elections but resigned from the European Parliament some months later because he was only needed to be a kind of electoral locomotive. In 1992, Chirac and Juppé supported the treaty of Maastricht against the majority of the RPR's members. The Gaullist fringe then considered him as a traitor.

In 1993, he was made Édouard Balladur 's Foreign Minister. Along with President Mitterrand, he advocated a French expedition in Rwanda to save the most possible of threaten lives, while Prime minister Balladur and Defense minister François Léotard were fearing a slip toward a colonial intervention. Juppé defended the Turquoise Operation at the United Nations. Some controversies have emerged later on this subject (in August 2008, he was named in a Rwandan government report on the alleged French connection in the Rwanda genocide during his tenure as Foreign Minister). From a general point of view, he has been considered to be one of the best Foreign ministers in France's recent history. Although he held the position of president of the RPR, he participated in the debate and endorsed Jacques Chirac instead of Balladur in the 1995 presidential election.

Because he supported Jacques Chirac against Edouard Balladur during the 1995 presidential campaign, he succeeded him as Prime Minister, also becoming president of the RPR. Jacques Chirac claimed Alain Juppé was "the best among us".

However, in November/December 1995, his plan for Welfare State reform caused the biggest social conflict since May 68 and, under duress, abandoned it. He became the most unpopular Prime Minister of the Fifth Republic (challenged only by Édith Cresson).

In January 1996, Alain Juppé, together with interior minister Jean-Louis Debré, opened negotiations with the FLNC-Canal Historique, then the largest guerrilla group in the Corsican conflict. The ensuing Tralonca peace campaign became Juppé's priority in government, holding numerous meetings and conferences and even traveling to Corsica. the peace would fail in 1996 after the French government refused to release political prisoners arrested during the peace process.

In spring 1997, President Chirac dissolved the National Assembly but lost the legislative election. Alain Juppé was succeeded by the Socialist Lionel Jospin. Furthermore, Juppé left the leadership of the RPR.

He campaigned for the unification of all the parties of the centre right behind Jacques Chirac, resulting in the Union for the Presidential Majority which became the Union for a Popular Movement (Union pour un mouvement populaire or UMP), and was its first president from 2002 to 2004.

As a member of the National Assembly (as representative of Paris from 1986 to 1997, then representative of Gironde), he was elected Mayor of Bordeaux in 1995, succeeding former Prime Minister Jacques Chaban-Delmas.

In 2004, Alain Juppé was tried for the felony of abuse of public funds, when he was head of the RPR and the RPR illegally used personnel provided by the City of Paris for running its operations. He was convicted and sentenced to an 18-month suspended jail sentence, the deprivation of civic rights for five years, and the deprivation of the right to run for political office for 10 years. He appealed the decision, whereupon his disqualification from holding elected office was reduced to one year and the suspended sentence cut to 14 months. He announced he would not appeal the ruling before the Court of Cassation. (See Corruption scandals in the Paris region.)

As a consequence, Alain Juppé resigned his mayoralty of Bordeaux and his position of head of the Bordeaux urban community.

It is regrettable that at the time when the legislative body became aware of the need to end criminal practices which existed for the financing of political parties, Mr Juppé did not apply to his own party the very rules that he had voted for in Parliament.

It is equally regrettable that Mr Juppé, whose intellectual qualities are unanimously recognized, did not judge appropriate to assume before Justice his entire criminal responsibility and kept on denying established facts.

However, Mr Juppé has given himself for many years to the service of the State, while he did obtain no personal enrichment from these crimes he committed for the benefit of his political party, for which he should not be a scapegoat.

Some commentators, such as Jean-Marc Ayrault, head of the National Assembly group of the Socialist Party, have argued that Juppé, in this judicial group, paid for a wider responsibility than his own.

Some law professors argued that the Versailles court could not legally exempt Juppé from a disposition of the Electoral Code article L7, which bars any person sentenced for illegal taking of interests from being on an electoral roll for a period of 5 years, also preventing that person from running for office. Another disposition of the Electoral Code specifies that any person deprived of the right to be on an electoral roll for a certain period following a judicial sentence is deprived of the right of running for the French National Assembly for double that period, which would bar Juppé for 10 years. When Alain Juppé registered again as a voter, other voters sued to have his registration cancelled; however, the Bordeaux court of small claims ruled against them. Some of the plaintiffs declared they would appeal the decision before the Court of Cassation. Another possible issue is that should Alain Juppé be elected to national office, the Constitutional Council could cancel the election on grounds that Juppé was illegally registered as a voter. President Jacques Chirac could have used his right of pardon in favor of Juppé, but this would have probably been politically disastrous.

Juppé considered giving classes on public administration at a variety of prominent United States and Quebec universities and colleges, including the UQÀM in Montreal, some of which were initially receptive to having a former prime minister be a member of their faculty. However, following Juppé's conviction, his appointment was contested by some teachers. Juppé was finally taken in by the École nationale d'administration publique in Montreal where he served as a full-time faculty member for the academic year 2005–2006.

Juppé was reelected as Mayor of Bordeaux in October 2006.

In May 2007, he was appointed Minister of State, Minister of Ecology and Sustainable Development in the Government of François Fillon, being in fact the number two of the Government in protocolar order. This is the third time in the history of Fifth Republic (after Michel Debré and Laurent Fabius) that a former Prime Minister returned as a Minister in another government (although some Presidents of the Council of the Fourth Republic were Ministers of the Fifth Republic).

Juppé ran unsuccessfully in the 2007 legislative elections, and as a consequence announced his resignation from the government. Prime Minister Fillon had announced that all ministers that chose to run in these elections and were beaten would have to leave the government, for it meant that these ministers did not enjoy the confidence of the people.

On 9 March 2008, Juppé was reelected as Mayor of Bordeaux, winning 56% of the popular vote in the first round.

In 2010, after the disappointed result of the regional elections of the ruling UMP, Nicolas Sarkozy called Alain Juppé to come back in government. Juppé refused the Justice Ministry and Interior Ministry. He accepted to be Minister of Defense.

In 2011, after the resignation of Michèle Alliot-Marie, Juppé was appointed Foreign Minister. This came while the Arab Spring was underway. He advocated a military intervention in Libya with the support of most of the mediatic and political class. In November 2011, he told that the Syrian regime would fall soon and that Bashar al-Assad should be judged by the International Penal court. Later, this attitude has been condemned or badly evaluated by experts or politicians, estimating that the destabilization of nation-states has permitted the extension of Islamic extremism, but Juppé has maintained his positions.

Endorsing Nicolas Sarkozy for the 2012 presidential election, he deplored the role of biased media in the campaign and dismissed François Hollande 's economic program as " dangerous ". Considering the weak score of Sarkozy in his Gironde's 2nd constituency, he renounced to be candidate at the June 2012 legislative elections. His successor, Nicolas Florian, was beaten by Socialist candidate Michèle Delaunay.

After the 2012 defeat, Juppé stayed far from the troubled period of his party. In March 2014, he was triumphantly re-elected as mayor of Bordeaux. Two months later, following the resignation of Jean-François Copé from the head of the UMP, it was announced that former Prime Ministers Alain Juppé, François Fillon and Jean-Pierre Raffarin would rule the party until a new leadership election in October. They resigned after the designation of Nicolas Sarkozy.

Juppé announced his intention to contest the 2016 Republicans (formerly UMP) internal election which decided who would be the candidate of the right-wing for the 2017 presidential election. One of the most popular politicians in France, he was described by The Daily Telegraph as "a consensual conservative seen as less divisive than Nicolas Sarkozy ". His main rival was thought to be Nicolas Sarkozy who chose to run on a hard line to thwart Juppé's centrist line. Indeed, Juppé advocated a " happy identity " in response to the French philosopher Alain Finkielkraut whose last book was entitled The unhappy identity. He was endorsed by former President Jacques Chirac and his daughter Claude, by MoDem leader François Bayrou and by centrist parties such as the Radical Party or the UDI. Surveys showed that he would benefit from the support of left-wing voters.

His record as mayor of Bordeaux was often seen as one of his strengths in the primary. However, his judicial conviction and his record as prime minister of France attracted criticism, as well as his positions on immigration and Islam, mainly in the right wing of his party. Some detractors have dubbed him "Ali Juppé".

Juppé came in second place in the first Republican presidential primary on 20 November 2016 and went into a run-off against the first-placed François Fillon on 27 November. He received 28.6% of the vote compared to 44.1% for François Fillon. One week later, he lost to Fillon with 33.5% and officially supported his rival. This result was viewed as a shock as Juppé had been the consistent front-runner in the polls.

On 13 February 2019, it was announced that Juppé would take over Lionel Jospin's seat on the Conseil Constitutionnel in March 2019, which entailed his resignation as mayor of Bordeaux and president of its metropolitan area. At the press conference organized the following day, the former prime minister lamented an "unhealthy public spirit" and the physical and verbal violence of the political environment.

In March 2009, he criticized Pope Benedict XVI over his comments that condoms will only worsen the AIDS crisis, saying that as a Christian, he felt that such declarations were totally unacceptable. He was also awarded on behalf of Armenia the Mesrob Mashdots Medal for his service in strengthening and deepening the cooperation between the governments of Armenia and France.

Juppé's position on Europe has changed through years. In 1977, as a national delegate of the neo-Gaullist RPR, he advocated a "Europe of the peoples" against a "Europe of technocrats", opposing the confederal model to the federal model.

But fifteen years later, he convinced Jacques Chirac to agree to the Maastricht Treaty, while the party was strongly divided on the subject. He then said that the treaty was "common sense" and that the Euro is "a strategy for growth". In 2000, he co-signed a tribune in Le Figaro with Jacques Toubon asking for a European constitution to create a federal Europe. In 2011, he seemed to regret his positions, declaring at the National Assembly "If the Maastricht Treaty had been better built, we would probably not be where we are now". But the same year, interviewed on the public television channel France 2, Juppé strongly advocated for the creation of a European federation to respond to the euro crisis.

During the Greek debt crisis in 2015, he proposed to take out Greece of the Eurozone but then changed his mind. Reacting to the Brexit vote in 2016, he refused the idea of a similar referendum in France, thinking it would be "a present to Madame Le Pen ".

In 1977, he proposed granting preferential status for jobs to French citizens. In 1990, he judged that immigration was "a permanent and huge" problem. The same year, the general meeting of the RPR led to strict propositions : borders closing, suspension of immigration, and declarations of the incompatibility between Islam and French laws.

His position changed in the late 1990s. He supported a MEDEF report asking for more immigration on the labour market. In 2002, he said "the French peoples have perfectly understood that we need to welcome more foreigners in Europe and in France". He has also denied the effectiveness of a cultural assimilation of migrants and advocates a simple integration, wanting to "happy identity". His positions are harshly criticized by the right-wing part of his party and by the National Front. Nicolas Sarkozy have mocked him as a naïve idealist and a "prophet of happiness".

On 16 December 2010, he said in an interview with Le Monde that he does not support the French ban on face covering to not "stigmatize Islam". Hosted on France 2 by journalist David Pujadas on 2 October 2014, he denied having said that. In a 2011 Le Parisien interview, talking about the Arab Spring, he declared: "Do not stigmatize all those who call themselves islamists, there are people attached to Islam and ready to accept the basic laws of democracy".

In October 2016 during a speech he urged overhaul of Le Touquet Agreement calling for the UK border to be moved from Calais to Kent.

Minister of Budget and government spokesman: 1986–1988.

Minister of Ecology, Development and Sustainable Planning: May–June 2007.

Minister of State, Minister of Defense and Veterans Affairs: 2010–2011.

Minister of State, minister of Foreign and European Affairs: 2011–2012.

Member of European Parliament : 1984–1986 (Became minister in 1986) / June–October 1989 (Resignation).

Member of the National Assembly of France for Paris (18th constituency): Elected in March 1986 (Became minister in March 1986) / 1988–1993 (Became minister in 1993). Elected in 1986, reelected in 1988, 1993.

Member of the National Assembly of France for Gironde (2nd constituency): 1997–2004 (Resignation, involved in judicial affairs in 2004). Reelected in 2002.

Regional councillor of Île-de-France : March–April 1992 (Resignation).

Mayor of Bordeaux : 1995–2004 (Resignation, involved in judicial affairs in 2004) / Since 2006. Reelected in 2001, 2006, 2008, 2014.

Municipal councillor of Bordeaux: 1995–2004 (Resignation, involved in judicial affairs in 2004) / Since 2006. Reelected in 2001, 2006, 2008.

Deputy-mayor of Paris XVIIIe: 1983–1995. Reelected in 1989.

Councillor of Paris: 1983–1995. Reelected in 1989.

President of the Urban Community of Bordeaux : 1995–2004 (Resignation, involved in judicial affairs in 2004) / Since 2014. Reelected in 2001, 2014.

Vice-president of the Urban Community of Bordeaux : 2006–2014. Reelected in 2008.

Member of the Urban Community of Bordeaux : 1995–2004 (Resignation, involved in judicial affairs in 2004) / Since 2006. Reelected in 2001, 2006, 2008, 2014.

President of the Rally for the Republic : 1994–1997.

President of the Union for a Popular Movement : 2002–2004 (Involved in judicial affairs in 2004).

Albert Bedouce (8 January 1869, Toulouse – 4 August 1947, Paris) was a French politician. He joined at first the French Workers' Party (POF), which in 1902 merged into the Socialist Party of France (PSdF), which in turn merged into the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO) in 1905. Bedouce was a member of the Chamber of Deputies from 1906 to 1919 and from 1924 to 1940. He was Minister of Public Works from 1936 to 1937. In the 1939 presidential election Bedouce was the candidate of the SFIO, but lost to Albert Lebrun, the candidate of the Democratic Republican Alliance. On 10 July 1940, he voted in favour of granting the Cabinet presided by Marshal Philippe Pétain authority to draw up a new constitution, thereby effectively ending the French Third Republic and establishing Vichy France. For this he was expelled from the SFIO after the Liberation of France. In 1945, with his associate Émile Berlia, he joined the newly founded Democratic Socialist Party (PSD).

Albert de Broglie, 4th Duke of Broglie (French: [ albɛʁ də bʁɔj, bʁœj ] ; 13 June 1821 – 19 January 1901) was a French monarchist politician, diplomat and writer (of historical works and translations).

Broglie twice served as Prime Minister of France, first from May 1873 to May 1874, and again from May to November 1877.

Jacques Victor Albert de Broglie was born in Paris, France, the eldest son of Victor, 3rd duc de Broglie, a liberal statesman of the July Monarchy, and Albertine, baroness Staël von Holstein, the fourth child of Madame de Staël. He was therefore the great-grandson of Jacques Necker.

After a brief diplomatic career at Madrid and Rome, upon the revolution of 1848 Albert de Broglie withdrew from public life and devoted himself to literature. He had already published a translation of the religious system of Leibniz (1846). He now at once made his mark by his contributions to the Revue des deux mondes and the Orleanist and clerical organ Le Correspondant. These, and other contributions, brought him the succession to Lacordaire 's seat in the Académie française in 1862, joining his father in this august society.

In 1870 he succeeded his father as the 4th duc de Broglie, having previously been styled prince de Broglie. In the following year he was elected to the National Assembly for the département of the Eure, and a few days later (on 19 February) was appointed French Ambassador to London. After his negotiations concerning the commercial treaties between Britain and France were met with criticism he resigned as ambassador in March 1872 and took his seat in the Assembly, where he became the leader of the royalist campaign against President Thiers.

When Thiers was replaced by Marshal Mac-Mahon, Broglie was appointed Prime Minister and Foreign Minister in May 1873. On 26 November, after the passing of the Septennate, the government was restructured and Broglie exchanged the Foreign with the Interior Ministry. His conservative policies roused the bitter hatred of the Republicans, while his attempts to reach a compromise between the rival claimants to the monarchy alienated both the Legitimists and the Bonapartists.

The result was the fall of the cabinet on 16 May 1874. Three years later (on 16 May 1877) he was entrusted with the formation of a new Cabinet, with the object of appealing to the country and securing a conservative majority in the chamber. While the conservatives increased their share of the vote, the election nevertheless confirmed a decisive Republican majority. De Broglie was defeated in his own constituency and resigned on 20 November.

Defeated again in 1885, he abandoned politics and reverted to his historical work, publishing a series of historical studies and biographies. He died in Paris on 19 January 1901, aged 79.

Albert François Lebrun (French: [ albɛʁ ləbʁœ̃ ] ; 29 August 1871 – 6 March 1950) was a French politician who served as President of France from 1932 to 1940. He was the last president of the Third Republic before its dissolution into the rump state of Vichy France in the early days of the Second World War. He was a member of the centre-right Democratic Republican Alliance (ARD).

Born to a farming family in Mercy-le-Haut, Meurthe-et-Moselle, he attended the École Polytechnique and the École des Mines de Paris, graduating from both at the top of his class. He then became a mining engineer in Vesoul and Nancy, but left that profession at the age of 29 to enter politics.

Lebrun won a seat in the Chamber of Deputies in 1900 as a member of the Left Republican Party, later serving on the cabinet as Minister for the Colonies from 1912 to 1914, Minister of War in 1913 and Minister for Liberated Regions from 1917 to 1919. Joining the Democratic Alliance, he was elected to the French senate from Meurthe-et-Moselle in 1920, and served as Vice President of the Senate from 1925 through 1929. He was president of that body from 1931 to 1932.

Lebrun was elected President of France by the newly elected Chamber of Deputies following the assassination of President Paul Doumer by Paul Gorguloff on 6 May 1932. Re-elected in 1939, largely because of his record of accommodating all political sides, he exercised little power as president.

In June 1940, with the military collapse of France imminent, Lebrun wrote "the uselessness of the struggle was demonstrated. An end must be made." With the Cabinet wanting to ask for an armistice, on 17 June 1940 Prime Minister Paul Reynaud resigned, recommending to President Lebrun that he appoint Marechal Philippe Pétain in his place, which he did that day. British General Sir Edward Spears, who was present with the French cabinet during this crisis wrote "it is clear that the President had made up his mind that France was free of her obligations to Britain, and was at liberty to ask for an armistice [with Germany] if she deemed it to be in her interests to do so."

On 10 July 1940, Lebrun enacted the Constitutional Law of 10 July 1940, which the National Assembly had voted for by 569 votes to 80, allowing Prime Minister Philippe Pétain to promulgate a new constitution. On 11 July, Lebrun was replaced by Pétain as head of state.

Lebrun fled to Vizille (Isère) on 15 July, but was captured on 27 August 1943, when the Germans moved into the region. He was then sent into captivity at the Itter Castle in Tyrol. On 10 October 1943 he was allowed to return to Vizille due to illness, but was kept under constant surveillance.

On 15 August 1944, Operation Dragoon began. One week later, Grenoble, Vizille and other cities were freed. The German 19th Army withdrew quickly.

On 11 October 1944, Lebrun met with Charles de Gaulle and acknowledged the General's leadership. Conveniently forgetting the new Constitutional Law he had enacted in 1940, Lebrun said that he had not formally resigned as president because the dissolution of the National Assembly had left nobody to accept his resignation. Whether or not de Gaulle accepted this lie is unknown. During the post-war Pétain trial "all the available celebrities of the Third Republic testified, including Lebrun, all whitewashing themselves". Lebrun argued again that he had never officially resigned. De Gaulle made no mystery of his low opinion of Lebrun, and wrote of him in his memoirs: "As a head of state he lacked two things: there was no state, and he wasn't a head."

After the war, Lebrun lived in retirement. He died of pneumonia in Paris on 6 March 1950 after a protracted illness.

Lebrun was married to Marguerite Lebrun (née Nivoit). Together they had two children: a son, Jean, and a daughter, Marie.

Albert Thomas (16 June 1878 – 7 May 1932) was a prominent French socialist and the first Minister of Armament for the French Third Republic during World War I. Following the Treaty of Versailles, he was nominated as the first Director General of the International Labour Office, a position he held until his death in 1932. As Director-General, he was succeeded by Harold Butler.

He was born at Champigny-sur-Marne on 16 June 1878. In 1898, he entered the École Normale Supérieure, where he studied history and won a travelling scholarship which enabled him to visit Russia. Other educational distinctions followed, including degrees in literature and history at the University of Paris. In 1904, Thomas was both appointed to the editorial staff of L'humanité and elected a municipal councillor for Champigny, where, eight years later he was elected mayor. As a journalist, Thomas wrote for L'information and the Revue socialiste founded the Revue syndicaliste and subsequently launched L'Information ouvrière et sociale.

In 1910, Thomas was elected member of the Chamber of Deputies for one of the constituencies of the Department of the Seine, and he was re-elected in 1914. He became a member of the public works, railways, and finance committees of the Chamber and was active in shaping legislative measures, notably those relating to conditions in mines, industrial and agricultural workers pensions, and pensions for miners.

When the First World War broke out, Thomas served in a territorial regiment of the French Army for a few weeks after which he was summoned to Paris and placed in control of the railway services, acting as a link between the General Staff and the Ministry of Public Works. In October 1914, the Government gave him the task of organising factories with a view to the intensive production of munitions. In May 1915, he was appointed Under-Secretary of State for Artillery and Munitions, becoming Minister of Munitions the following year. Thomas first became a member of the cabinet on 12 December 1915 when he was made the Sub-Minister of Artillery and Munitions under the Minister of War. Due in large part to the need for more shells for the widely used "Soixante-Quinze" cannon, he was promoted again on 12 Dec 1916 to become Minister of Armaments. He answered only to the Prime Minister and subsequently President of the Republic, Raymond Poincaré. Thomas was removed from the Ministry on 12 September 1917 by Louis Loucheur.

Thomas was elected Deputy for the Tarn. In November 1919, during the inaugural Session of the International Labour Conference in Washington, at which he was not present, the Governing Body of the ILO chose him to be the Director of the Office. From then, Thomas gave himself up entirely to the work of the ILO.

Thomas gave ILO a strong impetus from the very beginning. In a few years, he created, out of a small group of officials housed in a private residence in London, an international institution with a staff of 400 and a building of its own in Geneva. In the first two years, 16 international Labour Conventions and 18 Recommendations had been adopted. From 1920 onwards, the ILO launched an ambitious programme of publications, which included the Official Bulletin, the monthly International Labour Review and various other periodicals and newspapers. As Director, Thomas took personal interest in recruiting an international team to form the Secretariat of the Organisation. His leadership helped to establish the image of the ILO as one of boundless enthusiasm and explosive energy.

Opposition between national governments, organised labour and employer representative bodies soon began to develop, and the optimism that had prevailed immediately following the end of the war gave way to doubt and pessimism. Some members sought to restrict the powers and activities of the Organisation. Firstly, it was felt that the Conference had gone too far and too quickly in the output of Conventions and Recommendations. National governments and parliaments could not or would not keep up. Thomas, noting the disappointing number of ratifications reached the conclusion that over-production of Conventions and Recommendations should stop.

The publications programme of the Office became a target for criticism, namely that its research was not objective and impartial. At the same time, efforts were being made to restrict the competence of the ILO. In 1921, the French government took the position that the ILO was not competent to deal with agricultural matters and the Permanent Court of International Justice was requested to give an advisory opinion on the question. The Court found that the competence of the ILO did extend to international regulation of the conditions of labour of persons in agriculture, rejecting a restrictive interpretation of the Constitution. Other attempts to induce the Court to restrict the scope of action of the ILO also failed in 1922 and 1926.

Another serious difficulty emerged over the financing of the Organisation. Under the Constitution, the ILO was dependent on the League of Nations for its financing, but in all matters of general policy the Constitution provided the ILO for absolute independence. In 1923, a group of governments worked in the Governing Body to reduce the ILO's budget to approximately US $1,400,000 - which became established as a standard level for the ILO.

The restriction of the budget made stabilization and consolidation of ILO programmes and activities necessary. That, in turn, had positive spillover effects. Between 1922 and 1931, the Conference continued to meet each year but adopted only 15 Conventions and 21 Recommendations. The limitation of the standard-setting work of the ILO allowed national governments to devote adequate attention to applying the provisions of the international agreements in national laws and regulations. More and more countries ratified ILO Conventions and ILO standards began to exercise an effective influence in the improvements of conditions of life and work. In 1926, an important innovation was introduced when the International Labour Conference set up a supervisory system on the application of its standards, which still exists today. It created the Committee of Experts composed of independent jurists responsible for examining government reports and presenting its own report each year to the Conference.

The stabilization of the ILO's basic programmes in no sense implied stagnation. As Director, Thomas continued to inspire his staff to take advantage of every opportunity to promote the objectives of the ILO. He was a great believer in the "policy of presence", and he spent a good deal of time travelling in order to seek support for the objectives and functions of the Organisation. He visited all the European countries, as well as countries in North and South America, China and Japan. In 1932, after having assured the ILO's strong presence in the world for 13 years, Thomas suddenly died at 53.

The Albion Plateau is a high plain located across the French departments of Vaucluse, Drôme, and Alpes-de-Haute-Provence. It is administratively divided into seven municipalities: Sault and Aurel (Vaucluse), Ferrassières (Drôme), Revest-du-Bion and Simiane-la-Rotonde (Alpes-de-Haute-Provence), and Saint-Trinit and Saint-Christol (Vaucluse).

From 1971 to 1996, the Albion Plateau served as the launch base [ fr ] for the French nuclear deterrent force ’s ground-to-ground ballistic missiles, with military installations extending into the municipality of Lagarde-d’Apt.

In Antiquity, the plateau was inhabited by the Albienses, a people belonging to the Albici federation. In Classical Provençal [ fr ], it is referred to as Plan d’Aubion, and in Mistralian- norm Provençal as Plan d’Aubioun.

Access to the Albion Plateau is via several mountain passes:

During the Jurassic period, more than 1,000 meters of alternating layers of limestone, marl, and clay were deposited.

The plateau rests on a limestone substratum of Urgonian facies (Cretaceous). This formation features a karstic landscape with limestone pavements, calcarenite, and dolines. It is associated with Aptian sedimentary layers and Barremian calcareous sandstones, overlain by siliceous colluvium, alluvium, and Quaternary decalcification clays.

The limestone plateau, characterized by numerous sinkholes, forms a large aquifer extending from the Lure Mountain [ fr ] to Mont Ventoux. Its underground rivers supply the Fontaine de Vaucluse. More than 200 sinkholes or shafts have been identified, often with narrow and difficult-to-access openings. The deepest include the Jean Nouveau shaft, with a 168-meter vertical drop, and the Autran shaft, both exceeding 600 meters in depth. The Souffleur system (Aven des Neiges–Aubert–Trou Souffleur) in Saint-Christol connects to the Albion River at 620 meters, with explorations reaching water-filled chambers at a depth of 921 meters.

The plateau shares the climatic characteristics of the Southern Alps, of which it forms, together with Mont Ventoux and the Lure Mountain [ fr ], the westernmost chain. It transitions from a Mediterranean climate near Simiane-la-Rotonde to temperate and then continental conditions, with a mountain climate present only at the highest elevations.

Flora of the woodlands include the downy oak, sessile oak, beech, aspen, birch, Scots pine, maritime pine, broom, heather, and chestnut. Seasonal mushrooms are abundant on the plateau, often associated with specific tree species. Common varieties include saffron milk cap, bloody milk cap, black porcini, golden chanterelle (Cantharellus cibarius), hedgehog mushroom (Hydnum repandum), and the Ventoux grayling (Tricholoma myomyces). Other flora include spiny restharrow, erect brome, thyme, ash-colored broom, narrow-leaved lavender, corn gagea, marsh adder’s-tongue, alpine oat-grass, doubtful ventenata, laurel-leaved rockrose, flax-leaved adonis, field bedstraw, small-fruited false flax, three-spined bedstraw, large polycnemum, round-leaved hare’s-ear, corn-cockle, large-caliced androsace, and Spanish sainfoin.

There are numerous diurnal raptors, such as the short-toed snake eagle, Montagu’s harrier, golden eagle, booted eagle, northern goshawk, Eurasian hobby, European honey buzzard; nocturnal raptors include the Eurasian scops owl, Eurasian eagle-owl, little owl, boreal owl. There are also the woodchat shrike, red-backed shrike, southern grey shrike, masked shrike. Other birds include the rock, ortolan, and corn buntings; the common quail and rock sparrow; the western Orphean warbler, European bee-eater, Eurasian hoopoe, Eurasian stone-curlew, lesser spotted woodpecker, corncrake, Eurasian wryneck; the crested lark, Eurasian woodcock, and the little bustard.

Mammals include the red deer, wild boar, fox, hare, rabbit, and bats of the species Leisler's and greater and lesser horseshoe. There is also the parsley frog, asp viper, great capricorn beetle, stag beetle, and Jersey tiger moth.

During the Second World War, following the German occupation of Provence, a resistance network was established in the area between Mont Ventoux and the Lure Mountain. At its center, Fernand Jean, head of the Landing and Parachuting Section (SAP), along with deputies Arthur Delan of Caseneuve and Augustin Courveille of Apt, organized a network of landing sites across the Albion Plateau.

Fernand Jean, known as Junot, housed one of the SAP teams in an outbuilding of the Berre farm, located about one kilometer from the Spitfire and Abris landing sites.

He recounted one of the most striking episodes of the spirit of resistance that prevailed then: “On July 1, 1944, the occupying Security Services carried out a lightning raid on the farm. All my men managed to flee along with one of the family’s sons, Marcel Gaillard. They were forced to watch helplessly as the tragedy unfolded inexorably. Without any form of trial, Madame Blanche Gaillard, widow, was shot in front of her home, before the eyes of her other children, including Marceau Gaillard. He was fourteen years old at the time. Three times, he was put against the wall to make him confess where the maquisards and weapons were hidden. He knew, but he said nothing! He was ultimately spared, but the Boches set fire to the farm.”

In 1971, ethnology students from the University of Provence at Aix-en-Provence, within the framework of the CERESM program, conducted a study of the village’s environmental and economic characteristics.

The village, built on a central mound within the municipality, functions as a hub where paths, drove roads, and roads converge, linking dispersed agricultural holdings and connecting the area to surrounding settlements. Its position has historically made it an important center for the distribution of goods through local shops and for the circulation of information in public spaces. However, some paths leading from farms toward neighboring municipalities, particularly in the northern part of Revest, have been poorly maintained and remain difficult to use.

The village community developed a strong sense of identity, expressed in the phrase “I am Revestois,” signifying belonging to Revest and its long-established population. Outsiders were categorized with specific terms: those from the plateau were called estrangié du dedans (“outsider from within”), those from the surrounding region estrangié du dehors (“outsider from outside”), and those from elsewhere estrangié pas d’ici (“outsider not from here”).

A distinction existed within the communal population between residents of the village and those living outside it. This reflected differences between the largely self-sufficient peasantry in the surrounding “quarters” and the villagers, who had access to public spaces, services, shops, and a place of worship.

On the plateau, the term quartier refers to areas that may be inhabited or uninhabited. These areas can be named after families, such as Plan des Barruols, Les Cléments, Le Michalet, Le Gendre, or Les Morards, or after geographical features, such as Combe de Bordeaux, Font d’Artigues, Combe du Pommier, or Le Médéric. Until the mid-20th century, residents of these outlying settlements regularly traveled to the village, typically three times a week, to shop and obtain bread from the baker, to whom they had previously supplied flour.

The central square functioned as the main space of village sociability, bringing together multiple activities within a small area. It served as a gathering place with benches, cafés, and a washhouse; a site of leisure with a boules ground; a center of economic activity with shops and public services; and a reference point marked by the public clock. It also provided a setting for social interaction and display.

A survey conducted in the 1970s indicated that village spaces were informally divided according to gender and age. Men primarily frequented cafés, the boules ground, the town hall, and a square reserved for their use. Women gathered at fountains, the washhouse, shops, and the church. The elderly occupied separate spaces, often benches located in shaded areas during summer and sunny areas in winter. Children primarily used the new village square.

From the early 20th century, Portissol Square served as an economic center. It hosted the four annual Revest fairs and functioned as a marketplace where lavender, agricultural products, and household goods were sold. Local shops offered wheat, potatoes, game, mushrooms, charcoal, and ochre, while some products, such as thrushes and mushrooms, were exchanged through barter for items like coffee, sugar, chocolate, soap, or canned goods.

In the second half of the 20th century, the village continued to serve as a center for the sale of cereals, wool, straw, fodder, and almonds, which passed through a local broker. Honey, mushrooms, cheeses, eggs, and poultry were partly resold by shopkeepers in Portissol Square. Potatoes were traded in Saint-Christol, lambs and wool in Sault, and thrushes and mushrooms to a cannery in Saint-Trinit. Lavender was marketed through brokers based in Séderon, Sault, or Carpentras. A significant change occurred at the end of the 1960s with the establishment of medium-sized stores in Sault, followed by the development of a commercial zone.

At the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century, numerous fairs were organized on the Plateau d’Albion. The inhabitants of Revest generally attended only those held in their village, with the exception of fairs in Sault (Palm Sunday, Saint John, Our Lady, and Saint Catherine), the Tommes fair in Banon on Saint Peter’s Day, and the horse fair in Barret-de-Lioure. Despite its altitude of 950 meters, the village’s location on a plateau facilitated communication with neighboring communities. Its central position allowed it to host four annual fairs, the most important being the Machottes fair in early July. These fairs attracted farmers and shepherds from surrounding villages, including Contadour, Banon, Sault, Ferrassières, and Saint-Christol, and played a significant role in horse trading and lamb sales. A notary from Banon was present to record transactions.

In Revest, where large landholdings were predominant, farms were distributed across different communal lands, including heathland, woods, meadows, and arable fields. This organization reflected traditional rights to water and irrigable plots. Springs, wells, reservoirs, and fountains were considered communal property.

Heathlands and woods, used for hunting and gathering products such as mushrooms and chestnuts, as well as drove roads for livestock passage, were subject to specific management due to their economic significance. Hunting was regulated through a system of progressive fees established by managing associations. Landowners paid the lowest rates, while hunters with no ties to the commune paid the highest. Intermediate fees applied to non-owner residents, former residents, and relatives of landowners. Similar regulations governed the gathering of chestnuts and mushrooms.

The protection of communal property was also reflected in family property, particularly in relation to the household, traditionally considered a feminine domain. Access to the home was preceded by established social rituals and exchanges, often concluding with an invitation to enter.

Studies of marriage patterns indicate significant changes in relationships between inhabitants of the commune and those from outside areas over the course of a century. Endogamous marriages, primarily between residents of Revest or the Plateau d’Albion, were gradually replaced by exogamous marriages involving spouses from more than 30 kilometers away. Until 1940, marriage networks largely coincided with the local economic zone of the plateau. After the Second World War, this framework broadened with the influx of labor associated with the construction of the base infrastructure and missile silos.

From 1971 to 1996, the Plateau d’Albion hosted nuclear missile installations that formed part of France’s strategic deterrence force. The site included eighteen missile silos and two firing control centers, which were later dismantled. The former Air Base 200, which supported the installations, is now used by the 2nd Foreign Engineer Regiment of the French Foreign Legion and houses a listening station of the DGSE.

This type of housing is characteristic of the Mediterranean region. Villages built on elevated rocky sites, often preserving their medieval layout, display façades oriented toward valleys or communication routes, creating a form of linear fortification.

Fernand Benoit [ fr ] highlights the possible prehistoric origins of these sites, noting that Cicero referred to the Ligurians of the region as castellani, or inhabitants of castellas (Brutus, LXXIII, 256).

These perched villages are mainly located in hilly areas with poor alluvial soils and limited water resources. In contrast, the lower Rhône Valley and the Durance Valley are characterized by fertile alluvial soils and easier access to water, often through wells dug within house courtyards.

This clustering of housing into compact communities is characteristic of regions with smallholdings, where fertile land is limited to valley bottoms. Such concentration also supported the development of rural crafts necessary to village life, such as wheelwrighting and blacksmithing. In contrast, dispersed housing is generally associated with large estates operating in relative self-sufficiency. Historian Fernand Benoit summarized this dynamic with the maxim: “Poverty groups housing together, affluence disperses it.”

Fernand Benoit described this type of dwelling as distinctive for placing animals on the lower level and people above. Following a Mediterranean tradition, the building combines both functions under one roof: the ground floor served as a stable and storage area, the upper floors as living quarters, and the attic as additional storage. This form of housing, common in villages, was typically used by peasants with limited livestock, as the confined space could not accommodate larger animals such as horses and teams.

This type of dwelling is still present in various mountain ranges and plateaus of western Provence.

Most examples date from the 16th century, when the Wars of Religion encouraged residence within fortified villages. After the conflicts, settlement gradually expanded outward, leading to the construction of ground-level houses on the outskirts, which were better adapted to accommodate annex buildings.

This type of dwelling, which housed both people and animals within a village, was fixed in place, with expansion possible only upward. Its characteristic architecture included a narrow façade with one or two windows and a height of up to four or five stories, including the attic, often equipped with an exterior pulley for hoisting fodder. Since these houses have lost their agricultural function, common modifications include converting the ground floor into a garage and creating additional rooms in the attic. In restored examples, access to the main living floor is often still provided by an external staircase attached to the façade.

A terrace or balcony was a common feature of these houses, primarily used for drying fruits and vegetables. When covered with a vine trellis forming a rustic pergola, it was known as a trihard. When arranged as a loggia, with small columns supporting a tiled awning, it was referred to as a galarié or souleriè.

Divided lengthwise, this type of house represents a later stage of development compared to the “house on height” and is characteristic of dispersed settlements. It is the traditional dwelling associated with areas of intensive cultivation, including regions devoted to lavender.

This type of house is divided lengthwise into two distinct sections. The first section, on the ground floor, contains a common room with an integrated kitchen, often accompanied at the back by a cellar for wine storage and a bedroom. A narrow corridor provides access to the upper floor and separates this part from the second section, reserved for animals. This latter section generally includes a storage area that may serve as a stable and cowshed. The upper floor is typically used for bedrooms and the hayloft, which is connected to the stable and cowshed by a chute.

Additional annexes were often added to this type of dwelling. Common examples included a pigeon tower, as well as structures such as a pigsty, rabbit hutch, henhouse, and sheepfold.

Unlike houses built on height, which did not include latrines even in urban settings, houses on the ground allowed for the installation of latrines outside the dwelling. Until the mid-20th century, these typically consisted of simple plank shelters covered with reeds, with waste evacuated directly to a manure pit or dung heap.

The construction of such dwellings generally took place over an extended period and followed no fixed architectural plan. Each owner adapted the building according to individual needs and priorities, resulting in heterogeneous layouts where the roofs of different structures often overlapped in a staggered manner.

Rural houses in the region were often distinguished by individualized exterior layouts, though certain features were recurrent. A vine trellis was commonly installed to shade the entrance, providing protection from the sun in summer while allowing more light into the main room after the leaves fell in autumn. A well was typically located nearby, either covered by a dry-stone corbelled structure closed with a wooden door or fitted with two pillars and a lintel supporting a pulley system. Water supply was frequently supplemented by a cistern collecting rainwater from the roof. Following the French Revolution, the pigeon tower became a characteristic feature of these dwellings, symbolizing the end of seigneurial privilege, as its construction had previously been restricted to noble estates. The tower could be attached to the house or built independently. Large in size and intended to enhance the status of the dwelling, it usually rose to two stories, with the upper level reserved for pigeons. To prevent rodent intrusion, access was systematically protected with glazed tiles.

This type of dwelling consists of buildings and outbuildings arranged around a central courtyard. It is characteristic of large cereal-growing estates and sometimes resembles a château, with walls flanked by turrets or corner towers. The structure is adapted to agricultural practices in regions where the climate did not require barns for storing wheat sheaves, as threshing took place immediately after cutting on an earthen threshing floor. In this system, grain was kept in sacks within a shed, while straw was piled outdoors, protected only by a layer of dust and clay. Fodder was the only product stored indoors.

This agrarian structure is rare in Provence.

This architectural style characterizes large seigneurial houses that persisted for centuries, including after the Renaissance. These buildings, isolated and sometimes equipped with an inner courtyard, typically feature façades flanked by two towers or layouts reinforced by four corner towers.

The fortification of rural houses dates back to the High Middle Ages, with the castellum serving as an early example, particularly in Provence, where plans with corner towers were common. This tradition has Roman origins, as many villæ rusticæ were also protected by towers.

The “small house in the fields” is associated with agricultural activity that required peasants to remain away from their primary residence. In his study of rural housing, Fernand Benoit [ fr ] distinguished between pastoralism and sedentary farming. In the case of pastoralism, transhumance, which involved moving flocks to alpine pastures during summer, necessitated the use of simple on-site housing for shepherds. Depending on the location, this could take the form of a dry-stone jas or a hut built with mixed materials, serving both as a shelter and as a dairy.

For sedentary peasants, the distance from their fields often required the construction of a dwelling near the cultivated plots. In this context, the cabanon functioned as a seasonal residence, used during extended periods of agricultural work.

These structures, located either at the edge or in the center of the fields, also served as markers of land ownership, distinguishing private property from communal land.

In Provence, a dry-stone hut is known as a borie, from the Latin boria and spelled bori in Provençal. In the Provençal Alps, particularly around Forcalquier, it is also referred to as a cabanon pointu. Built entirely from dry stone, the borie served as an annex to the main dwelling, used for storing agricultural tools, protecting harvests or water reserves, and occasionally providing shelter. This form of construction was made possible by the clearing of stones from cultivated fields and is commonly found in mountainous areas, dry plateaus, and terraced hillsides (restanques).

The plateau, known for its lavender cultivation, has an economy primarily based on agriculture—including honey production, spelt and other cereals, as well as goat and sheep farming—and tourism activities such as camping, hiking, mountain biking, caving, and lavender-related routes.

Lavender, often associated with sunshine and holidays and described by Jean Giono as “the soul of Haute-Provence,” has long been cultivated in the region of Ventoux, the Baronnies, and the Lure mountain. Traditionally gathered in the wild for centuries, its organized harvest began in the 16th century alongside the development of flower distillation. The crop experienced its peak in the early 20th century, with widespread planting in the 1920s. After declines following the 1929 economic crisis and the Second World War, demand revived around 1955 but quickly entered into crisis again in the early 1960s. Mechanization of harvesting, improved market organization, and the introduction of a controlled designation of origin (AOC) for “Haute-Provence lavender essential oil” in 1981 contributed to restructuring the sector. Production, estimated at around 200 tons in the early 1980s, decreased to 25 tons in the 1990s before rising again to 80 tons in 2003. On the Albion plateau, lavender cultivation extends over approximately 4,500 hectares.

Einkorn is an ancient variety of wheat, with archaeological evidence tracing its cultivation back approximately 9,000 years BCE. It is adapted to poor soils and resistant to long, cold winters. Typically sown in September or October, it has a growing cycle of about eleven months. The crop was widely cultivated on the Albion plateau and the slopes of Mont Ventoux until the 19th century, before declining in use. It was reintroduced in the 1980s, and within the framework of the cooperative SICA [ fr ] C éréales Ventoux, around fifty producers now supply a market consuming about 200 tons annually.

Banon cheese has been protected by an Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée (AOC) since 2003, becoming the first cheese of the Provence-Alpes-Côte d’Azur region to obtain this designation. The Institut National de l’Origine et de la Qualité (INAO) authorized 179 communes where milk production from Provençal, Rove, and Alpine goat breeds qualifies for the appellation. These include 111 communes in Alpes-de-Haute-Provence, 33 in Hautes-Alpes, 21 in Drôme, and 14 in Vaucluse. The seven communes of the Albion plateau are part of the production area.

It is a soft cheese with a natural rind, produced using the sweet curd technique. The curd is ladled into molds, then wrapped in brown chestnut leaves and tied with natural raffia. Prior to wrapping, the cheese is dipped in alcohol to limit mold development.

The Mont Ventoux goat cheese is produced artisanally from the milk of Rove goats or Provence goats, at the foot of Mont Ventoux. The main producer is located near Saumane, in the Alpes-de-Haute-Provence, a commune situated between the Albion plateau and the Lure Mountain [ fr ].

Provence honey is protected by a red label and a protected geographical indication, covering both multifloral honey and lavender or lavandin honey. The region has an estimated 4,500 beekeepers, including about 700 with 70 to 150 hives. Annual production is around 2,000 tons, representing approximately 8% of national output. Transhumance is common, with hives moved seasonally from the coast to Haute-Provence. Lavender honey is primarily produced in summer within an area bounded by Montélimar and Digne to the north, and Mont Ventoux, the Albion plateau, the Lure Mountain [ fr ], the Vaucluse mountains, and the Luberon massif to the south. Multifloral honey is produced across a larger area extending between Nîmes, Montélimar, Gap, Digne, Nice, Toulon, Marseille, and Avignon.

Sisteron lamb [ fr ] is a regional product originating from the Provençal Alps and Drôme Provençale [ fr ]. It is raised on traditional farms, primarily from ewes of the Mérinos d’Arles, Mourérous, or Southern Prealps breeds, which nurse the lambs for at least two months. Production follows specific conditions, including low stocking density and the use of extensive pastureland. The product has held a French red label since 2005 and has been protected by a European Union geographical [ fr ] indication since 2007.

This requirement ended the practice of marketing animals raised under similar conditions but originating from other regions, including Provence, the Massif Central, and Piedmont. Each year, nearly 400,000 animals passed through the Sisteron slaughterhouses, benefiting from a lack of strict controls to claim this designation.

Ventoux pork [ fr ] is a quality label established in 1998 for outdoor pig farming in the Mont Ventoux area. The production zone is located on the eastern side of Sault, within a 50 km area of the Vaucluse mountains south of Mont Ventoux, at an altitude of 800 to 1,000 metres. The pigs are raised outdoors with pasture space of about 100 to 110 m² per animal. Their diet consists of more than 70% cereals, supplemented with legumes. The use of growth-promoting substances or animal-based products is prohibited by the sector’s production charter.

Two main factors have contributed to the development of tourism on the plateau: the cultivation of aromatic plants, particularly lavender, and speleology.

In the early 2000s, an Australian newspaper described the lavender plateaus of Haute-Provence as among the ten essential sites to visit worldwide. The region’s landscape has been shaped by dry farming practices, particularly the cultivation of lavender, lavandin, and clary sage. Lavender and lavandin bloom from mid- to late June, reaching their peak in early July. These crops form the basis of tourist routes, often promoted as scenic and aromatic itineraries, which can be explored on foot or by bicycle from nearby accommodations.

The village of Saint-Christol serves as a base for speleological activities, offering accommodation and access to exploration sites. Its location between Montagne de Lure, Mont Ventoux, and the Nesque gorges [ fr ], areas classified as UNESCO Biosphere Reserves, makes it a significant starting point for such activities.

The first photovoltaic solar power plant on the Albion Plateau was established on a former missile launch site in the commune of Sault. The site, decommissioned in 1996 and dismantled between 1997 and 1999, originally included a cylindrical steel and concrete silo 30 metres deep, covered by a 9-metre-thick slab. The silo was filled with gravel, while the exterior building and perimeter fence were retained and adapted for the operation of the solar facility. The plant is located on the former Launch Zone 2-2.

The construction and operation of the facility were entrusted to AES Solaire France, a company specializing in photovoltaic projects. Covering three hectares, the plant has a capacity of 1.2 MWp, with 16,400 panels installed at a cost of about 5 million euros. It began commercial operation in December 2009, supplying electricity for approximately 600 households. The electricity is sold to Électricité de France (EDF) under a twenty-year contract.

The plant was officially inaugurated on 17 June 2010 in the presence of the mayor of Sault, André Faraud. He recalled that the site had been purchased by a farmer in the late 1990s and leased in 2008 to an operator for the installation of a photovoltaic power plant. The electricity produced by the panels is transferred to a power station located in the former military buildings, which is equipped with an inverter and a transformer. At this stage, the low-voltage direct current generated by the panels is converted into medium-voltage alternating current. The electricity is then delivered to the nearby Électricité de France (EDF) line through an on-site delivery station equipped with a meter. The plant is also fitted with two weather stations and operates autonomously, with remote computer monitoring and on-site surveillance provided by 18 cameras.

Since December 2009, the solar plant has produced an average of 3,000 kWh per household per year, avoiding an estimated 11,000 tons of CO₂ emissions. The installation uses First Solar thin-film panels connected by 32 kilometres of cables. Developed by AES Solaire France, based in Aix-en-Provence, it was the company’s first operational project.

Eco Delta Développement (EDD) obtained a permit from the commune of Revest-du-Bion to build a photovoltaic park on a former missile launch site. The facility, with a capacity of 1.2 MWp, consists of 4,000 panels covering 3 hectares. The project required an investment of 4.5 million euros. Construction began in January 2010, and the plant was commissioned in spring 2011 to supply electricity to the local population.

In 2020, three former nuclear silo sites in the commune of Simiane-la-Rotonde were designated for the installation of photovoltaic power plants with capacities of 2.5 MWp, 3.6 MWp, and 3.7 MWp, to be operated by the developer Sonnedix.

The history of New France as a colonial space is inextricably linked to the trade and commerce of alcohol. Whether it is the use of brandy as a commodity in the fur trade, the local consumption of spirits and beer by the colonists at home and in the cabarets, or the wine used in religious ceremonies, its presence was ubiquitous and was one of the staples of the economy. The King, Sovereign Council, and ecclesiastics were very concerned over the commerce of this substance and took several measures to regulate the trade over the course of the colonies' existence.

From the very first arrivals, French explorers and settlers of Canada observed with great interest the grapes they found growing natively in the Saint Lawrence Valley, often in the hope of producing wine with them. Indeed, in 1535, Jacques Cartier named what is today the Île d'Orléans "L'Île de Bacchus" for the grapes found there. Although in abundance and of formidable size, they were not as suitable for winemaking as European varieties, owing to a thickened skin evolved to cope with the harsh Canadian winter, which produced an acrid taste.

Local production of wine began nonetheless with Recollect and Jesuit missionaries needing to provide for religious ceremony, who found their imported supplies often close to depletion. The Sulpicians even attempted to make wine from imported French grapes. Such production was limited to religious purposes.

Attempts to domesticate local varieties, beginning with Samuel de Champlain in 1608, or to profitably cultivate imported French varieties, were largely unsuccessful. Aside from the aforementioned missionaries, production of Canadian wine in New France was non-existent. Consequently, colonists imported large quantities of wine from France, especially during the 18th century, with a strong preference for red wine.

During the 16th and 17th centuries, the preeminence of La Rochelle as the European point of departure to New France translated into a dominance of wines from Aunis and surrounding regions. However, rochelais merchants, receiving payment prior to shipment, were infamously lackadaisical, and wine from their port often arrived spoiled, even heavily diluted, much to the displeasure of Governor General Frontenac, who, in response, encouraged trade with other ports instead. The 18th century was marked by a huge shift to wines from Bordeaux and surrounding regions, carried on ships leaving from its ports: through the period 1700–1760, they accounted for 97% of wines inventoried in Quebec. Bordeaux wines were favoured, amongst other reasons, for their longevity, crossing the Atlantic without diminishing in quality. Towards the middle of the century, wines from regions all across France— Languedoc, Quercy, Cahors, Montauban, Domme, Gensac, Sainte-Foy, and Cognac, to name a few—were also making their passage to New France through Bordeaux, which greatly increased the colonists' variety of wines.

From the late-17th century, fortified wines imported from southern regions of Europe also featured prominently. Wines of the Muscat grape made up a majority of imports in this category, the most popular of which being frontignan. They were a luxury drink in which only wealthy Canadians could indulge.

Beer, on the other hand, was relatively easily brewed by settler families in their homes, as early as 1627, for their own supply. Even earlier, in 1620, the Recollects were producing beer at Notre-Dame-des-Anges. In 1635, the Jesuits began brewing, also mostly for their own consumption, and not for wider trade.

Production on a larger scale was soon to follow in the 1640s with the establishment of the brewery of the Communauté des habitants in Quebec; in 1648, Jacques Boisdon was granted the exclusive right to open an inn and to use the brewery for its supply of beer.

Not long after his arrival in 1665, the first Intendant of New France Jean Talon put "his own money" towards a brewery in Quebec, in the hopes that state-driven production of beer would generate a local industry, reduce dependence on imported alcohol, ensure that excess grain was put to use, and reduce drunkenness of Canadians and Natives alike (beer being a 'weaker' alcohol). Roughly half of the annual production of around 800,000 litres was kept in Quebec, the other half being exported to the Antilles. Despite a promising start, the brewery closed permanently less than ten years after opening in 1668, its product unable to compete with domestic brewing and a rise in imports of other alcohols, and moreover, failing to be in sufficient demand from the small colonial population. Under French rule, there were no further attempts to create a state-owned brewery. Breweries at Montreal and Longueuil in the latter half of the 17th century and the first half of the 18th century, such as that at the Institut des frères Charon, were similarly short-lived.

Nonetheless, there was a relative abundance of inns (auberges) and liquor stores (cabarets), almost one for every one hundred inhabitants in Montreal and Quebec, often operated out of a family's home as a secondary source of income.

Over the course of the French Regime, censuses counted around twenty official brewers operating across Quebec, Trois-Rivières, and Montreal. While there is no pattern to their origins in France, a great number of their wives were from Normandy, a region with a rich history of brewing. It is suggested that the required skills were often passed on through females, who oversaw many indispensable brewing processes. They were, however, themselves unrecognised as brewers due to a prevailing patriarchy which limited the professional opportunities of women.

Commercial Canadian brewing would not truly take off until the arrival of John Molson in 1782 after cession of the colony at Canada to the English.

Eau-de-vie, in French (plural: eaux-de-vie), refers to a broad category of beverages produced by fermentation and then distillation, and includes such common alcohols as brandy (wine grapes), whisky and vodka (grain), bourbon (maize), and rum (sugarcane).

While it remains unclear if there was any significant production of eaux-de-vie in Canada, records indicate that it was imported in considerable quantities from both France and the Antilles.

La Rochelle, Nantes, Bayonne, and Bordeaux were the major French ports to export eaux-de-vie to Canada, distilled from the wines of the corresponding regions, but also notably from Armagnac (through Bordeaux). Eaux-de-vie made using sugarcane, a plant incapable of withstanding boreal winters, was produced on and exported from the islands of Martinique, Guadeloupe, and Saint-Domingue. True inter-colonial exchange was taking place: on ships returning to the Antilles, Canadians sold flour, cod, vegetables, and lumber. As they were banned from importation into France from 1713 to 1777, these rums, tafias, and guildives found Canada as their primary destination market.

From the earliest years of the colonial establishment in New France alcohol was a contentious issue, often opposing members of the clergy with the Intendant and the habitants of the region. From the very beginning of the establishment of the Superior Council attempts were made to legislate the sale and consumption of the various types of alcohol available in the colony. Between 1663 and 1760, 78 edicts of the Superior Council of New France pertained to the sale and consumption of alcohol in the colony.

Alcohol and its commerce in the colony was the subject of acrimonious debate between ecclesiastical interests, merchants and the government. "…the struggle over the sale of liquor to the Indians may be classed as the second cause for the erection of the Sovereign Council." In the early years of the colony ecclesiastics held a considerable amount of power. Bishop Laval, in the early 1660s obtained a law punishing the trade of brandy with natives with death which forced the newly arrived governor Avaugour to execute two offenders. The governor would quickly declare after another situation arose that no one should be punished for bartering liquor with the natives. This episode led Bishop Laval to sail for France and consult with the king. This meeting would be reflected in the composition of the Sovereign Council whose members would be jointly named by the Bishop and the Governor.

The trade of alcohol with the natives in New France was very profitable for European fur traders but caused ravages in indigenous communities. The first laws concerning the trade of alcohol with the natives appeared early in the history of New France. Samuel de Champlain first outlawed the sale and trade of alcohol with the natives in 1636. The first laws were aimed primarily at the French with the objective of cutting off the supply to the natives at the source. The punishment was often a fine, and in case of insolvability or repeat offense corporal punishment was applied. Natives who were found under the influence of alcohol would be retained until they gave up the name of the person who had given them the drink.

In 1668 under the Intendant Jean-Talon the Sovereign Council legalized the trade of alcohol with the natives for all French citizens at the same time as they made it illegal for natives to get drunk.

Finally edicts of 1669 and 1679 of the Sovereign Council made it so that trade in alcohol with the natives could not be carried out in their villages but was permitted only in French establishments.

A cabaret in New France was any establishment that served alcoholic beverages. The major legislation of the Sovereign Council concerning the exploitation of cabarets was passed at two different times in the history of New France, The first set of legislation was passed in 1676, under Jacques Duchesneau de la Doussinière et d'Ambault and the second set in 1726 by Claude-Thomas Dupuy.

Trade and sale of alcohol to Indigenous peoples was an issue of controversy in New France. Prior to European presence in North America, aboriginal groups in what is now considered Canada were unfamiliar with the production and consumption of alcohol. Although historians have argued that brandy (eau de vie), rum, beer, wine, and whiskey were neither easily produced nor imported to the region, and would have thus been in limited supply, alcohol was certainly present in the colony and played a major role in trade and diplomacy with Native peoples. The French first introduced wine to Natives at Port Royal. Although skeptical at first, Natives eventually came to enjoy alcohol's inebriating effects. By 1634, Jesuits reported that drunkenness was common among the Montagnais, and in less than a decade, intoxicant use had spread to the Upper St. Lawrence and Great Lakes tribes. Mi'kmaq, Algonquin, Huron, Iroquois, and Odawa, as well as other Nations in Acadia and Western posts were similarly abusing alcohol by the latter half of the 17th century, according to missionary accounts.

Religious condemnations attempted to respond to the issue of Natives' alcohol abuse in the colony, with varying degrees of success. Although the majority of arriving Europeans identified with Christian cultural ideas and held certain moral views regarding alcohol consumption, Catholicism did not forbid alcohol consumption outright, but merely discouraged its excess and misuse. The Christian view held that alcohol abuse deprived families of a good living and inspired violence between men. Jesuit missionaries in New France frequently recognized that Aboriginal peoples had their own spiritual beliefs and practices, yet because the threat of eternal damnation and notion of temperance were not part of Native spiritual practices, Jesuits believed that Native peoples who used intoxicants were unable to abstain or control themselves, reinforcing the existing view that they were "savages." In 1636, Paul Le Jeune, a Jesuit missionary, reported in the Relations that excessive alcohol consumption was having a negative effect in the colony, especially among Natives. Murder, moral degradation, poverty, violence, and prostitution were viewed as some of the direct and indirect consequences of alcohol's obtainability, documented and condemned by missionary reports and further substantiated by traders and other Natives. By 1637, Le Jeune reported that alcohol abuse was rampant in Native communities, even among women and children. In response, missionaries, with support from some Aboriginal leaders, founded villages in which alcohol was banned. They pressured the Catholic Church to provide support by regulating alcohol, and in 1658, the Roman Catholic Church declared trading liquor with Indigenous peoples to be a mortal sin. Those who defied the Church and provided alcohol to Indigenous people could repent or else face excommunication. Religious correctional efforts, many of which were conducted by Bishop François de Montmorency-Laval, had short-lived success. Missionaries did their best to continue Native conversion efforts and assuage the ramifications of prevailing trade and commercial interests, but ecclesiastical representatives experienced difficulty without the full support of French Royal authorities. In 1713 the priest-to-person ratio was 1:83 in urban areas, and only 1:289 in the rest of the colony. Many parishes had no resident priest. Jacques Duchesneau de la Doussinière et d'Ambault, Intendant from 1675 to 1682, agreed with Jesuits that alcohol was the "obstacle to religion" that contributed to the destruction of Native societies. Yet he also acknowledged the dilemma of attempting to combat the issue in consideration of the distance.

Overall, efforts to regulate and even prohibit the trading of alcohol with Natives varied. Samuel de Champlain had banned the use of alcohol in trade practices with Natives as early as 1621. By 1636, state officials required that intoxicated Natives provide the name of the person who had sold the liquor, so that the individual could be fined. By 1663, French Royal authorities prohibited the use of eau de vie, most commonly used in trade. Although Aboriginal population decline in the latter half of the 17th century cannot solely be attributed to the ineffectiveness of alcohol regulations, Governor Denonville blamed brandy overconsumption for Native susceptibility to physical decline and illness.

Other attempts to regulate and curtail Native access to alcohol involved price and licensing restrictions, typically in urban areas. In Montreal and Quebec City, intoxicated Natives could be fined or jailed. In 1679, a Royal ordinance declared the carrying and selling of brandy to Native villages illegal, however Natives could still purchase alcohol legally in French settlements. As of 1710, ten establishments could legally sell only to non-Natives, while nine were licensed to sell to Natives and non-Natives alike. These restrictions actually did little to combat public drunkenness and social problems in Native communities, and eventually the policy was reversed. Regardless of state limitations, attempts to curtail alcohol use were generally ineffective, due to other political and economic factors at play. If French fur traders refused to supply brandy, Natives threatened to bring their furs to the British, so the French frequently refused to heed state restrictions in order to secure economic and political partnership. Missionaries and Intendants argued that trade relations suffered nonetheless, as inebriated Natives were poor hunters and provided fewer pelts, but authorities were unwilling to offer full military support to enforce alcohol restrictions for fear of losing essential trade networks.

When the Superior Council officially prohibited the trade or sale of intoxicants to Aboriginals, illegal operations supplied alcohol. Traders, coureurs de bois, and even soldiers peddled alcohol without much repercussion, especially in Western posts such as Michilimackinac, where Frontenac, Governor at the time, eventually allowed liquor sales. Representatives of both church and state frequently disputed over the liquor issue in matters of trade with Aboriginal allies. Compliance in view of the royal ordinance varied depending on colonial governing and administrative powers of the time. In 1721, Intendant Michel Bégon renewed prohibition, but by 1732, Governor Beauharnois viewed punishment for illicit alcohol use as unrealistic, and argued again that colonial trade suffered as a result. The Church continued to attempt to fight the use of alcohol in trade, but could not obtain jurisdiction where matters of colonial economics were concerned.

Though all native peoples were not using alcohol, there was significant use among the population. They themselves did not document the use of alcohol, however we have many accounts from missionaries who were involved with native peoples during the time of New France, most notably the Jesuits, in their first hand accounts and observations in the Jesuit Relations. These documents tell us how natives handled the introduction of alcohol into their societies. The Jesuits and other missionaries saw first hand the detrimental affects that alcohol was having on the native population, and were staunch supporters in having the alcohol trade banned. They believed that the alcohol trade led to innumerable social conflicts, "murders, violations, and monstrous unheard-of crimes" to the point that many native groups also wanted the trade stopped.

Though the stereotype of the "drunken Indian" held strong throughout much of the colonies existence and beyond, native practices involving alcohol had other uses beyond drinking to get intoxicated. Natives introduced new words and terminology to refer to drinking; this was due to a need to understand the powerful affects that alcohol had on the body. They were attempting to create rules for drinking, where even drinking to the point of unconsciousness sometimes made logical sense. There were a range of situations where they chose to drink, but this often varied from group to group. Some native societies chose to integrate liquor into religious rituals, while others for political or social ones. Natives in eastern North America attempted to integrate alcohol into existing ceremonies, such as hospitality and mourning rituals; some also wanted liquor for marriages and ceremonial dances, and as well for its ability to help dull pain. Others would use alcohol in spiritual and psychological quests, using the disorientation it caused to achieve a greater sense of personal power. Many natives drank for the following three reasons; first they valued the sense of power that alcohol induced; second, they used alcohol in hospitality rituals; and third, they relied on liquor for mourning ceremonies. Additionally, Natives often shared the assumption that a man who turned violent after consuming alcohol could not be held accountable for his actions. This suggests that they saw alcohol as a powerful substance that could not always be controlled. This meant that murder committed while under the influence exonerated an individual from the crime, and protected them from the relatives of the victim seeking revenge. Natives argued that it was alcohol that was the criminal, not the man. This led to a number of different practices: first, individuals would get highly intoxicated then seek out enemies or people whom they held grudges against, and commit violent acts against them, often murder, without the fear of retribution. Secondly, if there was an individual marked by the community as a problem, they could be marked for death. One member of the community, generally a man, would be selected to get intoxicated, then once under the influence of alcohol they would start a fight with the miscreant and would kill them. This was a sort of punitive judicial system, which was solely able to function because the executioner was intoxicated, therefore freeing him from any acts of revenge or punishment for the killing.

Many observers that natives solely drank for the purpose of getting as drunk as possible, they believed that absolute drunkenness apparently conferred power to the drinker, and that inebriation was a desirable state. Furthermore, the most prominent and oft reported aspect of native consumption of alcohol, was their determination to drink to the point of heavy intoxication. François Vachon de Belmont, a Sulpician missionary, wrote extensively on Native alcohol consumption patterns. He argued that alcohol caused three basic changes in natives. First, it "enlivens their natural sluggishness, dispels their timidity, their sense of shame and inferiority." Second, alcohol would lead them to "undertake with vigor and bravado almost any evil action such as anger, vengeance, or impurity." Third, drunkenness provided natives with a "valid excuse for any evil which they commit in such a condition." A particular instance of native's desire to get as intoxicated as possible is highlighted by Belmont, when natives had a limited amount of alcohol, rather than share it out equally amongst their numbers as Europeans would do, they preferred to give it all to one person to drink to excess while the others remained sober. Natives saw alcohol as a type of medicine that had to be taken in a large quantity if the drinker were to derive any benefit from it. They would have no interest in drinking unless they had enough alcohol to become substantially intoxicated. Jesuit missionary Paul Le Jeune reported that having procured alcohol, Natives would sit and drink until the bottle was empty. Chrétien Le Clercq a Recollet missionary in New France, recognized that the central feature of native drinking was to become as intoxicated as possible. Claiming that they made it a principle of honour to gorge themselves and only drink to get intoxicated. He also emphasized the role of the traders, who would purposefully get their clients as intoxicated as possible in order to deceive them more easily and rid them of their reason, this was in order to obtain furs for next to nothing. He also claimed the traders were committing fraud twice over; due to the fact they watered down the brandy they were selling to the natives. A Jesuit is quoted as referring to alcohol as "a demon that robs (Indians) of their reason, and so inflames their passion that, after returning from the chase richly laden with beaver-skins, instead of furnishing their families with provisions, clothing, and other necessary supplies, they drink away the entire proceeds in one day and are forced to pass the winter in nakedness, famine, and all sorts of deprivation. The same Jesuit claimed that some natives even sold their children to purchase more alcohol. The social consequences of drinking included intoxicated children who beat their parents, young men who plied girls with alcohol and corrupted them while drunk, and countless acts of violence that often ended in fatalities. In 1720, one official, ignoring the horrors brought about by the liquor trade, noted that natives became more docile and submissive to the French once given liquor, and they would devote their energy to obtaining more furs. Well into the 18th century, this logic behind the alcohol trade persisted; intoxicated natives would sell their furs more cheaply than sober ones. The practice of the double fraud continued, with brandy being watered down by half, allowing the traders to profit heavily from the natives.

Eventually there was little hope of ever halting the trade as the natives themselves began to be involved; most notably the Assiniboine who became the vital link between native communities further west and European traders in the colony. This meant that by the early nineteenth century the alcohol trade was still growing and expanding ever further into the continent.

Although natives were fully aware that alcohol destroyed their communities, they continued to drink. Often the continuation of the practice was due to a deep-rooted depression permeating their society because of the omnipresence of death. This is not uncommon for groups facing profound and unsettling changes to their societies to drink heavily when alcohol is available (p83). Many natives drank to escape the world they occupied, or to reach a more desirable state of mind, alcohol seemingly gave them temporary power and control over their lives once more. However the trade was still ravaging native communities, and the psychological effects were having a deep impact on their way of life. Three anonymous reports by missionaries in 1693 give us some insight into the intense details of the psychological turmoil that the brandy trade brought to native communities. Observers claimed that alcohol contributed to family violence, sexual license, theft, and murder. Pregnant women killed their babies or aborted them. And there were significant economic consequences as well; natives involved in the brandy trade became poor and lethargic, reducing the amount of furs that could be sent back to France. Furthermore, the liquor trade made colonization efforts more difficult due to the fact that intoxicated natives attacked colonists and made life unbearable for those around them.

No matter the specific details, native populations in the New World paid dearly for their thirst for alcoholic beverages. Alcohol undermined native villages by eroding the civility necessary to maintain a community. It contributed to the demographic catastrophe that reduced native populations. The pursuit of brandy led natives into poverty and debt. And drinking produced a culture of violence and fear. As well, though there is no evidence of widespread afflictions commonly associated with alcoholism, there were a significant number of recorded accidents due to intoxication, often ending in serious injury or death, which would affect the individual's family and community after the tragedy.

Alexandre Millerand (French: [ alɛksɑ̃dʁ milʁɑ̃ ] ; (1859-02-10) 10 February 1859 – (1943-04-06) 6 April 1943) was a French politician who served as President of France from 1920 to 1924, having previously served as Prime Minister of France earlier in 1920. His participation in Waldeck-Rousseau 's cabinet at the start of the 20th century, alongside the Marquis de Galliffet, who had directed the repression of the 1871 Paris Commune, sparked a debate in the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO) and in the Second International about the participation of socialists in bourgeois governments.

In 1912 Millerand was appointed as war minister in Poincaré's cabinet. He returned to the same post during the first year of World War I, helping set French war strategy. After Clemenceau's defeat in 1920, Millerand formed a cabinet and held both the premiership and the ministry of Foreign Affairs. In 1920–1924 he served as president of France. He faced criticism for openly supporting conservative candidates in the 1924 elections and the left majority forced his resignation. Thereafter he played only a minor role in politics.

Millerand was brought up in Paris, to Jean-François Millerand and Amélie-Mélanie Cahen. His mother was of Alsatian Jewish origin, while his paternal family originated from Franche-Comté.

Millerand was baptized in 1860, while his mother converted to Catholicism. However, Millerand later became an agnostic, even going as far as to participate in a civil marriage ceremony. None of his children were baptized either.

Born in Paris, he was educated for the bar and was elected Secrétaire of the Conférence des avocats du barreau de Paris. He made his reputation through his defence, in company with Georges Laguerre, of Ernest Roche and Duc-Quercy, the instigators of the strike at Decazeville in 1883. He then took Laguerre's place on Georges Clemenceau 's newspaper, La Justice. He was a freemason between 1883 and 1905.

He was elected to the Chamber of Deputies for the Seine département in 1885 as a Radical Socialist. He was associated with Clemenceau and Camille Pelletan as an arbitrator in the Carmaux strike (1892). He had long had the ear of the Chamber in matters of social legislation, and after the Panama scandals had discredited so many politicians, his influence grew.

He was chief of the Independent Socialist faction, a group which then mustered sixty members. Until 1896, he edited their newspaper, La Petite République. His programme included the collective ownership of the means of production and the international association of labour.

In June 1899 he entered Pierre Waldeck-Rousseau 's cabinet of "republican defence" as Minister of Commerce. In contrast to his earlier activism, he now limited himself to practical reforms, devoting his attention to the improvement of the merchant marine, to the development of trade, of technical education, of the postal system, and to the amelioration of the conditions of labour. Labour questions were entrusted to a separate department, the Direction du Travail, and the pension and insurance office was also raised to the status of a " direction ".

In 1902, he did not join fellow independent socialist Jean Jaurès in forming the Parti Socialiste Français, but in 1907 instead formed the small Independent Socialist Party, which became the Republican-Socialist Party (PRS) in 1911. His influence with the far-left had already declined, for it was said that his departure from the true Marxist tradition had disintegrated the movement.

In 1909/1910, he served as Minister of Public Works, Posts and Telegraphs.

As labour minister, he was responsible for the introduction of a wide range of reforms, including the reduction in the maximum workday from 11 to 10 hours in 1904, the introduction of an 8-hour workday for postal employees, the prescribing of maximum hours and minimum wages for all work undertaken by public authorities, the bringing of workers' representatives into the Conseil supérieur de travail, the establishment of arbitration tribunals and inspectors of labour, and the creation of a labour section inside his Ministry of Commerce to tackle the problem of social insurance.

The introduction of trade union representatives on the Supreme Labour Council, the organisation of local labour councils, and instructions to factory inspectors to put themselves in communication with the councils of the trade unions were valuable concessions to labour. He further secured the rigorous application of earlier laws devised for the protection of the working class. His name was especially associated with a project for the establishment of old age pensions, which became law in 1905. In 1898, he became editor of La Lanterne.

Millerand twice served as minister of war, first from 1912 to 1913 and again, during the early stages of World War I, from 1914 to 1915.

Millerand continued to move to the right, being appointed prime minister by the conservative president, Paul Deschanel. During his time as prime minister, a decree of February 1920 introduced the eight-hour day for seamen.

When Deschanel had to resign later in 1920 due to his mental disorder, Millerand emerged as a compromise candidate for President between the Bloc National and the remnants of the Bloc des gauches. Millerand appointed Georges Leygues, a politician with a long career of ministerial office, as Prime Minister and attempted to strengthen the executive powers of the presidency. This move was resisted in the Chamber of Deputies and the French Senate, and Millerand was forced to appoint a stronger figure, Aristide Briand. Briand's appointment was welcomed by both left and right, although the Socialists and the left wing of the Radical Party did not join his government.

However, Millerand dismissed Briand after just a year, and appointed the conservative republican Raymond Poincaré.

Millerand was accused of favouring conservatives in spite of the traditional neutrality of French presidents and the composition of the legislature. On 14 July 1922, Millerand escaped an assassination attempt by Gustave Bouvet, a young French anarchist. Two years later, on 11 June 1924, Millerand resigned in the face of growing conflict between the elected legislature and the office of the president, following the victory of the Cartel des Gauches. Gaston Doumergue, who was the president of the Senate at the time, was chosen on 13 June to replace Millerand.

Millerand died in 1943 at Versailles, and was interred in the Passy Cemetery. He was awarded Serbian Order of Karađorđe's Star.

Alfredo Roberto Joignant Rondón (born August 28, 1964) is a Chilean sociologist and political scientist who served on the Governing Council of Chile's Electoral Service (Servel) from 2013 to 2025. A professor at Diego Portales University and principal researcher at the Center for Social Conflict and Cohesion Studies (COES), he has played a prominent role in Chilean academic and political discourse. Joignant has also held leadership positions in professional associations, contributed to major policy debates, and maintained a regular presence in national media.

Joignant was born in Santiago, Chile. He is the son of Alfredo Joignant Muñoz, who served as Intendant of Santiago and Director of the Investigations Police (PDI) during the government of Salvador Allende. Following the 1973 coup d'état, his father was imprisoned on Dawson Island, and the family was later expelled from the country. Joignant lived in exile in France for 13 years before returning to Chile in 1989. He attended Colegio Manuel de Salas in Santiago and later continued his education in Paris.

He earned his PhD in political science from Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne University in 1995.

Joignant is a full professor at the School of Political Science of Diego Portales University. He previously served as president of the Chilean Political Science Association from 1998 to 2000. He has held visiting academic positions at Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne, Paris III (Pablo Neruda Chair in Chilean Studies), the Institute of Political Studies in Grenoble, and Leiden University in the Netherlands.

His research has been published in numerous international academic journals, including Revue française de science politique, Genèses, Politix, Journal of Latin American Studies, Revista mexicana de sociología, Democratization, Bulletin of Latin American Research, Política y Gobierno, and Estudios Públicos.

Joignant was a member of the French jury d'agrégation in political science in 2019.

In 2013, Joignant was appointed by the Chilean Senate, following a proposal from President Sebastián Piñera, as a member of the Governing Council of the Electoral Service for a four-year term. In 2017, he was confirmed by the Senate for an additional six-year term, this time on the proposal of President Michelle Bachelet. Although his mandate formally expired in February 2023, Joignant remained in office under a legal provision that allowed councilors to stay on until their replacement was appointed. Following a protracted political dispute between the Socialist Party (PS) and President Gabriel Boric over control of the seat, the President ultimately nominated PS member and former undersecretary Marcelo Carvallo Ceroni as his replacement. The Senate approved Carvallo's nomination on July 15, 2025, formally ending Joignant's 12-year tenure on the council.

Joignant has been an active participant in Chilean public discourse, particularly in debates on democracy, political representation, and institutional reform. He is a member of the Socialist Party, although his party affiliation was suspended by law during his tenure at Servel. Joignant co-authored El otro modelo (2013), a widely cited critique of Chile's neoliberal framework. He is a regular contributor to political media programs such as Tolerancia Cero on CNN Chile and Mesa Central on Tele13 Radio, where he hosts his own podcast, Hay algo allá afuera. Since 2023, he has published a weekly opinion column in El País newspaper.

He has also been a vocal critic of populist discourse in Latin America, notably denouncing the book El engaño populista by Axel Kaiser and Gloria Álvarez. In 2018, he publicly debated Recoleta mayor Daniel Jadue, a member of the Communist Party and supporter of the Maduro government, over the political situation in Venezuela.

Joignant is married to Carolina Carrera and has two children. He enjoys listening to heavy metal music and has an interest in the UFO phenomenon.

Aligot (Occitan : Aligòt) is a dish made from cheese blended into mashed potatoes (often with some garlic) that is made on the high plateau of Aubrac (part of the Aveyron, Cantal, and Lozère departments) in the southern Massif Central of France. This dish is a common sight in Auvergne restaurants.

Traditionally made with fresh tomme de Laguiole (tomme fraîche), or tomme d' Auvergne cheese, aligot is highly appreciated in the local gastronomy with thick Toulouse sausages or roast beef. Other cheeses are sometimes used in place of fresh tomme, which is hard to get by as it should ideally be used in the days following its making, or else it will be too strong in taste. The choice of cheese is important, and strongly affects the result. The cheese must be mild, with a lactic tang, but not too much salt, and melt easily. Floury potatoes are preferable, rather than waxy.

Aligot is made from mashed potatoes blended with butter, cream, and melted cheese, often but not always with crushed garlic. The dish is ready when it develops a smooth, elastic texture. While recipes vary, the Larousse Gastronomique gives the ingredients as 1 kg potatoes; 500 g tomme fraîche, Laguiole, or Cantal cheese; 2 garlic cloves; 30 g butter; salt and pepper.

This dish was prepared for pilgrims on the way to Santiago de Compostela who stopped for a night in that region. According to legend, aligot was originally prepared with bread, and potatoes were substituted after their introduction to France. Today, it is enjoyed for village gatherings and celebrations as a main dish. In the region of Aubrac, and more generally in the south of Auvergne, Aligot is still cooked by hand in homes and street markets. During the summer, it is the main (and often only) dish served in traditional farm buildings known as "burons", where cows used to be milked, that are converted into seasonal restaurants.

The name aligot may have been derived from the Occitan alicouot, from the Latin aliquid, or from the Old French harigoter.

The Alliance for a Free Kabylia (AKAL; French : Alliance pour une Kabylie libre), shortened as AKAL is a Kabyle nationalist and pro-independence political movement. It emerged from a faction of the Union for a Kabyle Republic (URK), itself led by Bouaziz Ait Chebib, former chairman of the MAK.

The organization was initially a wing of the Union for a Kabyle Republic led by Bouaziz Ait Chebib. In 2020, this faction split from the movement to become the Alliance for a Free Kabylia or AKAL which also means "Land" in the Kabyle language.

In 2021, Bouaziz Ait Chebib, leader of the movement, was taken into custody by the gendarmerie of Tizi-Ouzou.

On January 23, 2021, the movement created three wings in different countries. Malika Merbet was appointed as the coordinator of AKAL France, Slotane Benyoub, as the coordinator of AKAL Canada, and Arina Adour, as the coordinator of AKAL Germany.

On June 29, 2021, the movement is classified as a terrorist movement by Algeria.

The AKAL advocates for the independence of Kabylia through peaceful means.

The Alps conifer and mixed forests is a temperate coniferous forest ecoregion in central Europe. It extends along the Alps mountains through portions of France, Italy, Switzerland, Germany, Liechtenstein, Austria, and Slovenia. The ecoregion extends from the lower slopes of the Alps to its peaks, which include Mont Blanc, at 4,809 m (15,778 ft) the highest peak in the Alps.

The Alps forests are at the transition between the Mediterranean climate regions of southern Europe and the more humid and temperate Euro-Siberian region of western, central, and northern Europe.

The ecoregion's elevational range, and its central location between Europe's climatic regions, support a variety of plant communities and species. The ecoregion has 4,500 native vascular plant species, including 400 endemic species.

The forests on the lower slopes are mostly deciduous broadleaf trees, including the oaks Quercus robur, Quercus petraea, Quercus pubescens. Broadleaf sclerophyllous evergreen trees are found in southern valleys adjacent to Mediterranean-climate regions.

Montane forests include a mix of conifers Norway spruce (Picea abies), Silver fir (Abies alba), and mountain pine (Pinus mugo), with the broadleaf deciduous European beech (Fagus sylvatica), aspen (Populus tremula), silver birch (Betula pendula) and downy birch (Betula pubescens). In more continental-climate parts of the range, European larch (Larix decidua), arolla pine (Pinus cembra), and Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris) replace Pinus mugo. Scots pine and Pinus mugo can form a hybrid pine Pinus × rhaetica. Black pine (Pinus nigra) occurs on some south facing slopes in the eastern part of the range.

Subalpine and alpine plant communities including heath and alpine tundra occur above the timberline, and include many endemic species.

The Alps are home to 80 species of mammals. Large mammals include Eurasian brown bear (Ursus arctos), Alpine ibex (Capra ibex), Alpine chamois (Rupicapra rupicapra rupicapra), Eurasian lynx (Lynx lynx), wolf (Canis lupus), wild boar (Sus scrofa), red deer (Cervus elaphus elaphus), and roe deer (Capreolus capreolus).

The Alps are home to 200 species of birds, including lammergeier (Gypaetus barbatus), western capercaillie (Tetrao urogallus crassirostris) and rock ptarmigan (Lagopus muta).

40,470 km, or 27%, of the ecoregion is in protected areas. One-third of the unprotected area is still forested. Protected areas include Ecrins National Park, Mercantour National Park, Vanoise National Park, and Queyras Regional Nature Park in France, Gran Paradiso National Park and Dolomiti Bellunesi National Park in Italy, Gruyère Pays-d'Enhault Regional Nature Park in Switzerland, Berchtesgaden National Park in Germany, and Kalkalpen National Park and Gesäuse National Park in Austria.

Alsace–Lorraine (German : Elsaß–Lothringen), officially the Imperial Territory of Alsace–Lorraine (German: Reichsland Elsaß–Lothringen), was a territory of the German Empire between 1871 and 1918, comprising most of Alsace and part of Lorraine. Its capital was Strasbourg. It was annexed by the German Empire following its victory in the Franco-Prussian War and formally ceded by France under the Treaty of Frankfurt (1871). French resentment over the loss of the territory was one of the contributing factors to World War I. Following Germany's defeat in that conflict in 1918, Alsace–Lorraine was restored to France; its cession was confirmed under the Treaty of Versailles.

Alsace–Lorraine was the only territory of the German Empire administered directly by the imperial government rather than as a constituent state. It gradually acquired representative institutions, culminating in the 1911 constitution, an elected Landtag, and limited internal autonomy. It also elected deputies to the Reichstag, where protest, autonomist, and empire-wide political parties competed for electoral support.

Most inhabitants spoke German dialects, while French was spoken mainly in parts of Lorraine. The territory's linguistic, religious and political diversity shaped its public life throughout the German period. During the Second World War, Alsace and Moselle were annexed by Nazi Germany before being restored to France again in 1944–45.

Some legal provisions specific to the territory remain in force as the local law in Alsace–Moselle. Since 2016, the area has formed part of the French administrative region of Grand Est.

Alsace–Lorraine had a land area of 14,496 km (5,597 sq mi). Its capital was Straßburg. It was divided into three districts (Bezirke in German):

The largest urban areas in Alsace–Lorraine at the 1910 census were:

The modern history of Alsace–Lorraine was primarily influenced by the rivalry between French and German nationalism.

France long sought, strategically, to attain and preserve what it considered its "natural boundaries" —the Pyrenees to the southwest, the Alps to the southeast, and the Rhine to the northeast; these strategic aims led to its annexing territories in the Holy Roman Empire west of the Rhine. What is now known as Alsace was progressively conquered by France under Louis XIII and Louis XIV in the 17th century, Strasbourg being conquered in 1681, while Lorraine was incorporated from the 16th century under Henry II to the 18th century under Louis XV. (in the case of the Three Bishoprics, as early as 1552). The territory of the Duchy of Lorraine came under French influence after the War of the Polish Succession, when the French candidate for the Polish throne was given the (previously owned by Francis of Lorraine, Maria Theresa’s husband) Duchy of Lorraine, which came into the French crown territories upon his death in 1766. These border changes at the time meant more or less that one ruler (the local princes and city governments, with some remaining power of the Holy Roman Emperor) was exchanged for another (the King of France).

German nationalism, on the other hand, which in its 19th century form originated as a reaction against the French occupation of large areas of Germany under Napoleon, sought to unify all the German-speaking populations of the former Holy Roman Empire into a single nation-state. As various German dialects were spoken by most of the population of Alsace and Moselle (northern Lorraine), these regions were viewed by German nationalists to be rightfully part of a hoped-for united Germany in the future, despite what the French parts of their population wanted.

The will of a people has nothing to do with the distribution of its soil. [German historian von] Treitschke well defined German doctrine in speaking of Alsace-Lorraine: "We Germans who know Germany and France, know better what suits the Alsatians than the unfortunates themselves. In the perversion of their French life, they have no exact idea of what concerns Germany." [The 1871 pamphlet from von Tretschke is alternatively translated by University of Wisconsin professor, Barry Cerf, as saying, "We Germans who know Germany and France, know better what is good for Alsace than the unhappy people themselves, who through their French associations have lived in ignorance of the new Germany." ]

In 1871, the newly created German Empire's demand for Alsace from France after its victory in the Franco-Prussian War was not simply a punitive measure. The transfer was controversial even among the Germans: The German chancellor, Otto von Bismarck, was initially opposed to it, as he thought (correctly) that it would engender permanent French hostility toward Germany. Some German industrialists did not want the competition from Alsatian industries, such as the cloth makers who would be exposed to competition from the sizeable industry in Mulhouse. Karl Marx also warned his fellow Germans:

Bismarck and the South German industrialists proposed to have Alsace ceded to Switzerland, while Switzerland would compensate Germany with another territory. The Swiss rejected the proposal, preferring to remain neutral between the French and Germans.

The German Emperor, Wilhelm I, eventually sided with army commander Helmuth von Moltke, other Prussian generals and other officials who argued that a westward shift in the French border was necessary for strategic military and ethnographic reasons. From a linguistic perspective, the transfer involved people who for the most part spoke Alemannic German dialects. At the time, ethnic identity was often based primarily on language, unlike today's more multifaceted approach focusing on self-identification. From a military perspective, by early 1870s standards, shifting the frontier away from the Rhine would give the Germans a strategic buffer against feared future French attacks. Due to the annexation, the Germans gained control of the fortifications of Metz and Strasbourg (Strassburg) on the left bank of the Rhine and most of the iron resources of Lorraine.

The possibility of granting Alsace–Lorraine the status of a constituent state of the German Empire with its own sovereign and constitution was not considered, in part because Prussia was convinced that the population of the territory would first have to be Germanized, i.e., accustomed to the new German-Prussian form of government. The Imperial Territory (Reichsland) created on 28 June 1871 was therefore treated initially as an occupied territory and administered directly by an imperial governor (Oberpräsident) appointed by Wilhelm I. Although it was not technically part of the Kingdom of Prussia, in practical terms, it amounted to the same thing since the emperor was also king of Prussia and the chancellor its minister-president.

Memory of the Napoleonic Wars was still alive in the 1870s. Wilhelm I himself had had to flee with the Prussian royal family to East Prussia as a nine-year-old in 1806 and had served in the Battle of Waterloo. Until the Franco-Prussian War, the French had maintained a long-standing desire to establish their entire eastern frontier on the Rhine. Thus, most 19th-century Germans viewed them as aggressive and acquisitive people. In the years before 1870, the Germans feared the French more than the French feared the Germans. Many Germans at the time thought that the unification of Germany as the new Empire would in itself be enough to earn permanent French enmity and thus desired a defensible border with their long-standing enemy. Any additional hostility earned from territorial concessions was downplayed as marginal and insignificant in the scheme.

The annexed area consisted of the northern part of Lorraine and Alsace.

This area corresponded to the present French départements of Bas-Rhin (in its entirety), Haut-Rhin (except the area of Belfort and Montbéliard), and a small northeast section of the Vosges département, all of which made up Alsace, and most of the départements of Moselle (four-fifths of Moselle) and the northeast of Meurthe (one-third of Meurthe), which were the eastern part of Lorraine.

The remaining two-thirds of the département of Meurthe and the westernmost one-fifth of Moselle, which had escaped German annexation, were joined to form the new French département of Meurthe-et-Moselle.

The new border between France and Germany mainly followed the geo-linguistic divide between French and German dialects, except in a few valleys of the Alsatian side of the Vosges mountains, the city of Metz and its region and in the area of Château-Salins (formerly in the Meurthe département), which were annexed by Germany although most people there spoke French. In 1900, 11.6% of the population of Alsace–Lorraine spoke French as their first language (11.0% in 1905, 10.9% in 1910).

That small francophone areas were affected was used in France to denounce the new border, since Germany had justified the annexation on linguistic grounds. The German administration was tolerant of the use of the French language (in sharp contrast to the use of the Polish language in the Province of Posen), and French was permitted as an official language and school language in those areas where it was spoken by a majority; this changed in 1914 with the First World War.

Under the provisions of the Treaty of Frankfurt, the inhabitants of the annexed areas received Alsace–Lorraine citizenship unless they had migrated directly from France. Until 1 October 1872, they had the option of retaining French citizenship. A total of 160,878 people, or about 10.4% of the total population, took the option. The proportion was particularly high in Upper Alsace, where 93,109 people (20.3%) declared that they wished to retain French citizenship, and much lower in Lower Alsace (6.5%) and Lorraine (5.8%).

Originally it was envisaged that those who chose French citizenship would have to leave Alsace–Lorraine. They were allowed to either take their property with them or sell it. Ultimately only about 50,000 people left for France, corresponding to 3.2% of the population of Alsace–Lorraine. The approximately 110,000 optants who had not emigrated by 1 October 1872 lost their option of French citizenship, although they were not expelled by the German authorities but retained German citizenship. Some estimates of the total number of optants, however, are as high as 280,000, with the number who left for France set at about 130,000.

After the Franco-Prussian War, Alsace–Lorraine was directly annexed to the German Empire as an imperial territory and was not a state in its own right. It was not until the decree of Emperor Wilhelm I on 29 October 1874 that a popular representation was established, the Territorial Committee (Landesausschuss). The members of the Territorial Committee were not elected by the people but appointed by the district assemblies (Bezirkstagen). The three district assemblies for Lorraine, Upper Alsace and Lower Alsace each appointed ten members. In 1879 the Territorial Committee was enlarged to 58 members who were indirectly elected by the district assemblies (Lorraine 11, Upper Alsace 10, Lower Alsace 13), the autonomous cities (1 member each from Strassburg, Mülhausen, Metz and Colmar) and the counties (20 members). Initially the Territorial Committee had only an advisory function. In 1877 it was granted a legislative function and the right to create a budget. From 1879 it was allowed to initiate legislation, although the Bundesrat in Berlin had to approve the laws before they were formally enacted by the emperor. Also in 1879, the office of imperial governor in Alsace–Lorraine (Reichsstatthalter) was introduced. He represented the Imperial Territory on behalf of the emperor. The state secretary of the Imperial Office for Alsace–Lorraine headed the government of the Territory.

On 22 June 1877, Eduard von Moeller, the first governor of Alsace–Lorraine, decreed that 90 place names in the district of Lorraine were to be changed from their French to the German forms.

When the constitution of the Imperial Territory of Alsace–Lorraine of 31 May 1911 was enacted, a directly elected state parliament (Landtag) replaced the Territorial Committee. Alsace–Lorraine was granted its own constitution, a freely elected parliament and three representatives in the Bundesrat, the German federal council. Since the Bundesrat represented the interests of the states in Berlin, the members from each state were required to vote as a bloc. In Alsace–Lorraine, the governor determined how its three representatives voted. The votes were not counted if they gave an otherwise defeated Prussian motion a majority.

The introduction of an upper house in parliament was criticized across party lines in Alsace–Lorraine. While upper houses had historical reasons in the other parts of Germany, there was no noble class in Alsace–Lorraine to be integrated in an upper house. It was thus a purely honorary body. The emperor's right to appoint members was particularly criticised.

The upper house was composed of representatives of the major religious communities (Catholics, Lutherans, Protestant Reformed and Jews), the chambers of agriculture and commerce, the trade unions, the judiciary, the cities of Strassburg, Metz, Mülhausen and Colmar, and the University of Strassburg. There were also 18 members appointed by the emperor at the recommendation of the Bundesrat.

The lower house consisted of 60 deputies who were elected for a term of three years by majority vote in the 60 electoral districts. It was called the "People's Parliament" (Volksparlament) in distinction to the upper house, which consisted of notables. The minimum age for eligibility was 25. Male citizens aged 25 and over had the right to vote.

For the late nineteenth century, the constitution was both conservative in defining the first chamber and progressive in the universal and equal manhood suffrage for electing the second chamber. The representation of trade unions in the first chamber was also remarkable since they were not yet legally recognized as workers' representatives. The first and only elections to the parliament of the Imperial Territory took place on 22 and 29 October 1911. The strongest parties were the Alsatian Centre and the Social Democrats with 31.0% and 23.8% of the vote respectively, followed by the Lorraine Autonomists with 16.3%.

In 1874, Alsace–Lorraine was granted 15 seats in the German Reichstag. Between 6 and 10 of the 15 Alsatian–Lorraine deputies elected in each of the Reichstag elections from 1874 through 1887 were counted as "Protest Deputies" because of their opposition to the annexation. Shortly after the 1874 election, the Protesters introduced a French-language motion in the Reichstag requesting that a plebiscite be held on the Imperial Territory's state affiliation: "May it please the Reichstag to decide that the population of Alsace–Lorraine, which has been incorporated into the German Empire by the Treaty of Frankfurt without having been consulted, be called upon to express its opinion on this annexation." The motion was rejected by a large majority in the Reichstag. The population was also not asked for its opinion on state affiliation in 1918 when it returned to France.

The Protesters rejected both cooperation with the German authorities and constructive political work in the Reichstag. They did not attend its sessions after their election (some Lorraine deputies were not able to do so because of their lack of command of German). There were also people in political life who, for various motives, pleaded for an "attitude of reason". The so-called Autonomists were more or less either pro-German or pro-French and strove for a local autonomy of the Imperial Territory that was as far-reaching as possible.

The Protestant minority population voted predominantly for the Autonomists from the 1877 Reichstag election onwards. Over time, however, the population of Alsace–Lorraine turned more and more to the German parties, such as Catholics to the Centre Party, the Protestant bourgeoisie to the Liberals and Conservatives, and the emerging working class to the Social Democrats. The Protesters no longer played a significant role after the election of 1890.

The majority of Alsace–Lorraine's inhabitants were sceptical of the German Empire during the first two decades and voted for regional parties (Alsace–Lorraine Protesters and Autonomists). After Chancellor Bismarck's dismissal in 1890, the party landscape loosened, and parties of the Empire (Social Democrats, Centre, National Liberals, Left Liberals and Conservatives) found more and more supporters. In the countryside and the predominantly French-speaking electoral districts of Lorraine, the Autonomists remained strong, while in the cities, especially Strassburg, they increasingly played only a subordinate role, with the Social Democrats dominating.

The election results, showing the percentage of votes and the number of seats won (in parentheses), were as follows:

The flag used officially in the Imperial Territory was the black-white-red flag of the German Empire. A modified imperial service flag of the Foreign Office was adopted on 29 December 1892 for use at state institutions in Alsace–Lorraine. It was the imperial tri-colour with the imperial eagle in the centre and the crowned escutcheon of Alsace–Lorraine in the upper left corner.

On 25 June 1912, the parliament of the Imperial Territory unanimously approved the proposal for a state flag consisting of the red and white striped flag of Alsace bearing a yellow Lorraine cross in the upper left corner. The decision to adopt the flag was never implemented by government authorities in Berlin. The flag was often raised privately and on semi-official occasions. It was not welcomed by German authorities and the military but was tolerated in part even in wartime.

Unofficially, the traditional red and white territorial flag was popular in Alsace and was often used decoratively and as a postcard motif. It was also sometimes taken as a sign of protest against the German annexation.

In the decades after 1871, the fortress of Metz was expanded under German rule to become the largest fortification in the world, with a ring of outworks, some of which were located far in advance of the fortifications themselves. Metz became a majority German-speaking city due to the influx of military personnel and other immigrants from the rest of Germany.

When the German Army was formed after the foundation of the Empire, the XV Prussian Army Corps was created from existing troops. The corps' district was the new "Border Region" Alsace–Lorraine, as was that of the XVI Army Corps, which was formed in 1890. The southern regions of the Imperial Territory belonged to the districts of the XIV Army Corps, which was made up in 1871 of troops from Baden. From 1912, the northeastern regions belonged to the XXI Army Corps.

The recruiting districts of the corps were outside Alsace–Lorraine, as was the case with the Upper and Lower Alsatian and Lorraine regiments that were established later within the corps as part of army enlargements. The corps were not always stationed in the Imperial Territory. Alsatians and Lorrainers who were called up for military service were distributed among all Prussian Army units, as were active and passive social democrats, who were also considered to be politically unreliable. It was not until 1903 that a quarter of Alsatian recruits were assigned on a trial basis to troops stationed in their native region.

In 1910, 4.3% of the local population – about 80,000 men – were military personnel, which made Alsace–Lorraine the region in Germany with the highest concentration of troops.

At the end of 1913, protests broke out in the Alsatian town of Zabern, where two battalions of Prussian infantry were stationed. A young German lieutenant insulted the Alsatian population in a speech to soldiers and called for rebellious Alsatians to be stabbed. In what came to be known as the Zabern Affair, the military reacted to the protests with arbitrary acts that were not covered by law. The assaults led to a Reichstag debate on the militaristic structures of German society and strained the relations between Alsace–Lorraine and the rest of Germany.

Planning began in 1871 for a strategic railway line from Berlin to Metz in order to integrate the new Imperial Territory militarily and strategically. The "cannon railway" was completed in the 1870s. The railways of the private French Eastern Railway Company (Compagnie des Chemins de Fer de l'Est) – a total of 740 km of lines – were bought by the French state and then sold to Germany for 260 million gold marks. The purchase price was offset against the war compensation to be paid by France. The Imperial Railways in Alsace–Lorraine was the first railway owned by the German Reich.

Until the First World War, the Imperial Territory experienced a great economic boom, and many new socio-political benefits such as social security and health insurance were introduced in line with developments in the rest of the German Empire.

In 1872, the University of Strassburg was re-founded and in 1877 given the name "Emperor Wilhelm University" (after Emperor Wilhelm I). Through generous expansion measures, it developed into one of the largest universities in the Empire. Professional training in Alsace developed as a result of stimuli from Germany. The German administration promoted the education of young Alsatian artists at German universities and academies, giving rise to the Cercle de Saint-Léonard, an artists' association that sought to combine German and Alsatian art.

Although the proportion of native speakers of German dialects in the new Imperial Territory was around 90%, Catholics in Alsace–Lorraine tended initially to be sceptical about the ethnographic unification with Germany, which had come about under the leadership of predominately Protestant Prussia. While the Catholics frequently identified with the French Catholic state and feared disadvantage in Prussian hands, the local Protestants were in favour of becoming part of Germany. The Evangelical Lutheran Church professed allegiance to Germany, hoping to reduce French-influenced Catholic "paternalism". The rural population in particular supported their efforts, while quite a few critics of unification spoke out in the cities of Strassburg and Mülhausen.

After the Kulturkampf – the conflict between the state and the Catholic Church driven by Chancellor Otto von Bismarck – reached Alsace–Lorraine in 1872/73, the Catholic Church became a vehicle of resistance against the German authorities. In all of the Reichstag elections from 1874 to 1912, between three and seven of the 15 Alsace–Lorraine deputies were Catholic priests. The dispute reached a climax when, on 3 August 1873, a pastoral letter from the Bishop of Nancy-Toul calling for prayers for the reunification of Alsace–Lorraine with France was read in the Alsace–Lorraine districts of Château-Salins and Saarburg, which still belonged to his diocese. The German authorities reacted with police measures, arrests and disciplinary proceedings as well as a ban on the Catholic press.

After the beginning of the 20th century, opposition to German authorities played hardly any role. There were no longer major social groups that advocated a return to France. The Protestants traditionally had a positive image of Germany, while after the Dreyfus affair the Jewish population regarded France with extreme suspicion. Catholics also turned away from France. The rise of socialism there permanently unsettled Catholic sentiments in Alsace–Lorraine, and France's laicist policy from 1905 onwards (Law on the Separation of the Churches and the State) also led to Catholic alienation from France. Germany had granted the region significantly more freedom, and the region's economic situation had developed positively. The younger inhabitants, who had had no contact with France, especially saw themselves as Germans as a matter of course.

In French foreign policy, the demand for the return of Alsace and Lorraine faded in importance after 1880 with the decline of the French monarchist element, but when World War I broke out in 1914, recovery of the two lost provinces became the top French war goal.

The increased militarization of Europe and the lack of negotiations between major powers led to harsh and rash actions regarding Alsace–Lorraine being taken by both sides during World War I. As soon as war was declared, both the French and German authorities used the inhabitants of Alsace–Lorraine as propaganda pawns.

Germans living in France were arrested and placed into camps by French authorities. When the French army occupied certain villages, veterans on the German side of the 1870 conflict were sought out and arrested.

The Germans responded to the outbreak of war with harsh measures against the Alsace–Lorraine populace. The Zabern Affair had convinced the high command that the population was hostile to the German Empire and that it should be forced into submission. German troops occupied some homes. The German military feared that French partisans – called francs-tireurs during the Franco-Prussian War – would reappear.

German authorities developed policies aimed at reducing the influence of French. In Metz, street names had been sign-posted in French and German; French was suppressed in January 1915. On 15 July 1915, German became the only official language in the region, leading to the Germanization of towns' names from 2 September 1915.

Prohibiting the speaking of French in public further increased the exasperation of some of the natives, who were long accustomed to mixing their conversation with French language; the use of even one word, as innocent as "bonjour", could incur a fine. Some ethnic Germans in the region cooperated in the persecution as a way to demonstrate German patriotism.

German authorities became increasingly worried about renewed French nationalism. The governor stated in February 1918: "Sympathies towards France and repulsion for Germans have penetrated to a frightening depth the petty bourgeoisie and the peasantry." But in order to spare them possible confrontations with relatives in France and also to avoid any desertion of Alsatian soldiers to the French army, German Army draftees from Alsace–Lorraine were sent mainly to the Eastern front or to the Navy (Kaiserliche Marine). About 15,000 Alsatians and Lorrainers served in the German Navy.

In the general revolutionary atmosphere of the expiring German Empire, Marxist councils of workers and soldiers (Soldaten- und Arbeiterräte) formed in Mulhouse, Colmar, and Strasbourg in November 1918, in imitation of the soviets of revolutionary Russia, and in parallel to other such bodies set up in Germany.

In this chaotic situation, the Alsace–Lorraine's state parliament proclaimed itself the supreme authority of the land with the name of Nationalrat, the Strasbourg Soviet proclaimed the Alsace-Lorraine Soviet Republic, however Jacques Peirotes, the SPD Reichstag representative for Colmar, announced the establishment of French rule, urging Paris to send troops quickly.

The soviet councils disbanded themselves with the departure of the German troops between 16 and 20 November. The arrival of the French Army stabilized the situation: French troops put the region under military occupation and entered Strasbourg on 22 November. The Nationalrat proclaimed the annexation of Alsace to France on 5 December. The Soviet Republic came to an end, but the annexation was not internationally recognized until the Treaty of Versailles was concluded in 1919.

France divided Alsace–Lorraine into the départements of Haut-Rhin, Bas-Rhin, and Moselle, the same political structure as before the annexation and as created by the French Revolution, but with slightly different limits. Even today, laws in the three regions are somewhat different from the rest of France. The specific provisions in force are known as the local law in Alsace–Moselle.

The département Meurthe-et-Moselle was maintained even after France recovered Alsace–Lorraine in 1919. The area of Belfort became a special status area and was not reintegrated into Haut-Rhin in 1919, but instead was made a full status département in 1922 under the name Territoire-de-Belfort.

The French government immediately started a Francization campaign that included the forced deportation of all Germans who had settled in the area after 1870. For that purpose, the population was divided in four categories: A (French citizens before 1870), B (their descendants), C (citizens of Allied or neutral states), and D (enemy aliens—Germans). By July 1921, 111,915 people categorized as " D " were expelled to Germany. All place names were gallicized (e.g., Strassburg → Strasbourg, Mülhausen → Mulhouse, Schlettstadt → Sélestat, etc.).

On 1 September 1939, the day World War II started, residents of Alsace and Moselle living in the Franco-German border region were evacuated. This comprised about one third of the population of Alsace and Moselle, or about 600,000 residents. The evacuation was aimed at providing space for military operations and for protecting citizens from attack. The evacuees were allowed to return in July 1940, after France surrendered to Germany.

The area then came under German occupation. Nazi laws against homosexuality were applied to Alsace–Moselle, and homosexuals were deported. The Nazis also deported refugee and resident Jews, mostly to concentration camps.

After the defeat of France in the spring of 1940, Alsace and Moselle were not formally annexed by Nazi Germany, which nonetheless exercised de facto control. Although the terms of the armistice specified that the integrity of the whole French territory could not be modified in any way, Adolf Hitler, the German Führer, drafted an annexation law in 1940 that he kept secret, expecting to announce it in the event of a German victory. Alsace and Moselle were each placed under a Chief of Civil Administration (CdZ), who was the Nazi Party Gauleiter and Reichsstatthalter (Reich Governor) of the adjacent German territory. Alsace was administered as part of Gau Baden under Robert Heinrich Wagner and his deputy, Hermann Röhn. Moselle was administered as part of the Gau Saarpfalz, (later Gau Westmark) under Josef Bürckel and his deputy, Ernst Ludwig Leyser. Beginning in 1942, people from Alsace and Moselle were made German citizens by decree of the Nazi government.

Beginning in October 1942, young Alsatian and Lorrainian men were conscripted into the German armed forces. Sometimes they were known as the malgré-nous, which could be translated into English as "against our will". A small minority volunteered, notably the author of The Forgotten Soldier, known by the pseudonym Guy Sajer. Ultimately 100,000 Alsatians and 30,000 Mosellans were enrolled, many of them to fight against the Soviet Red Army, on Germany's eastern front. Most of those who survived the war were interned in Tambov in Russia in 1945. Many others fought in Normandy against the Allies as the malgré-nous of the 2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich, some of whom were involved in the Oradour sur Glane and Tulle war crimes.

The German-linked Alsatian dialect remains the lingua franca of the region, although perhaps used more by older people. Both French and German are taught in the schools.

When Alsace and the Lorraine department became part of Germany, the French laws regarding religious bodies were preserved, with special privileges to the then recognised religions of Calvinism, Judaism, Lutheranism and Roman Catholicism, under a system known as the Concordat. However, the Roman Catholic dioceses of Metz and of Strasbourg became exempt jurisdictions. The Church of Augsburg Confession of France, with its directory, supreme consistory and the bulk of its parishioners residing in Alsace, was reorganised as the Protestant Church of Augsburg Confession of Alsace and Lorraine (EPCAAL) in 1872, but territorially confined to Alsace–Lorraine only. The five local Calvinist consistories, originally part of the Reformed Church of France, formed a statewide synod in 1895, the Protestant Reformed Church of Alsace and Lorraine (EPRAL). The three Israelite consistories in Colmar [ de ], Metz [ de ] and Strasbourg [ de ] were disentangled from supervision by the Israelite Central Consistory of France and continued as separate statutory corporations which never formed a joint body, but cooperated. All the mentioned religious bodies retained the status as établissements publics de culte (public bodies of religion). When the new Alsace–Lorraine constitution of 1911 provided for a bicameral state parliament (Landtag of Alsace–Lorraine [ fr ]), each recognised religion was entitled to send a representative into the first chamber of the Landtag as ex officio members (the bishops of Strasbourg and of Metz, the presidents of EPCAAL and EPRAL, and a delegate of the three Israelite consistories).

The population in 1910 was 1,874,014, which broke down according to religions, thus:

Both Germanic and Romance dialects were traditionally spoken in Alsace–Lorraine before the 20th century.

Romance dialects (belonging to the langues d'oïl like French):

Alsatian (Alsatian: Elsässisch or Elsässerditsch "Alsatian German"; Lorraine Franconian : Elsässerdeitsch ; French : Alsacien ; German : Elsässisch or Elsässerdeutsch) is the group of Alemannic German and Franconian dialects spoken in most of Alsace, a formerly disputed region in eastern France that has passed between French and German control five times since 1681.

Alsatian is closely related to other nearby Alemannic dialects, such as Swiss German, Swabian, Markgräflerisch, Kaiserstühlerisch and the other Alemannic dialects of Baden. It is often confused with Lorraine Franconian, a more distantly related Franconian dialect spoken in the northwest corner of Alsace and in neighbouring Lorraine. Like other dialects and languages, Alsatian has also been influenced by outside sources. Words of Yiddish origin can be found in Alsatian, and modern conversational Alsatian includes adaptations of French words and English words, especially concerning new technologies.

Since 1992, the constitution of the Fifth Republic states that French is the official language of the Republic. However, Alsatian, along with other regional languages, is recognized by the French government in the official list of languages of France. France is a signatory to the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages but has never ratified the law and has not given regional languages the support that would be required by the charter.

Alsatian has gone from being the prevalent language of the region to one in decline. A 1999 INSEE survey counted 548,000 adult speakers of Alsatian in France, making it the second-most-spoken regional language in the country (after Occitan). Like all regional languages in France, however, the transmission of Alsatian is declining. While 43% of the adult population of Alsace speaks Alsatian, its use has been largely declining amongst the youngest generations.

In 2023 local French public schools began offering Alsatian immersion for the first time. The programs have proven popular with students and parents, but after years of official state suppression of the language, struggle to find enough teachers.

A dialect of Alsatian German is spoken in the United States by a group known as the Swiss Amish, whose ancestors emigrated there in the middle of the 19th century. The approximately 7,000 speakers are located mainly in Allen County, Indiana, with "daughter settlements" elsewhere.

C, Q, and X are only used in loanwords. Y is also used in native words, but is more common in loanwords.

Orthal (Orthographe alsacienne) is a revised orthography meant for use by all dialects of Alsatian promoted by the Office pour la Langue et les Cultures d'Alsace et de Moselle (OLCA).

The latest version (2016) of Orthal is described below. Not all dialects are expected to use all letters & diacritics. For example, Owerlandisch from Southern Alsace primarily uses the additional vowel letters, Ä À Ì Ü.

Dialects from the north (Strasbourg region) make use of more letters including Ë, Ö, Ù and the diphthong ÈI.

In general the principles of Orthal are to:

The vowels are pronounced short or long based on their position in the syllable besides the letter type.

A vowel at the end of a syllable, without a subsequent consonant, is a long vowel "V" = Long Vowel (LV). e.g., hà, sì

A vowel followed by a single consonant in a syllable is pronounced as a long vowel "V + C" = Long Vowel (LV). e.g., Ros

Note – A vowel followed by several consonants ("V + C + C") in a syllable is pronounced as a Short Vowel. e.g., Ross

Three consonants are restricted in their distribution: /kʰ/ and /h/ only occur at the beginning of a word or morpheme, and then only if followed immediately by a vowel; /ŋ/ never occurs at the beginning of a word or morpheme.

Alsatian, like some German dialects, has lenited all obstruents but [k]. Its lenes are, however, voiceless as in all Southern German varieties. Therefore, they are here transcribed /b̥/, /d̥/, /ɡ̊/. Speakers of French tend to hear them as their /p, t, k/, which also are voiceless and unaspirated.

The phoneme /ç/ has a velar allophone [x] after back vowels (/u/, /o/, /ɔ/, and /a/ in those speakers who do not pronounce this as [æ]), and palatal [ç] elsewhere. In southern dialects, there is a tendency to pronounce it /x/ in all positions, and in Strasbourg the palatal allophone tends to conflate with the phoneme /ʃ/. A labiodental voiced fricative /v/ sound is also present as well as an approximant /ʋ/ sound. /ʁ/ may have phonetic realizations as [ʁ], [ʁ̞], and [ʀ].

Short vowels: /ʊ/, /o/, /ɒ/, /a/ ([æ] in Strasbourg), /ɛ/, /ɪ/, /i/, /y/.

Long vowels: /ʊː/, /oː/, /ɒː/, /aː/, /ɛː/, /eː/, /iː/, /yː/

Alsatian nouns inflect by case, gender and number:

Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Alsatian:

Àlli Mensche kùmme mìt de gliche Wìrde ùn Rachte ùff d’Walt. Sie hàn àlli Vernùnft ùn Gewìsse ùn selle mìt Brìederlichkeit de àndere gejjenìwwer hàndle.

Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in English:

All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.

Alstom SA (French: [ alstɔm ]) is a French multinational rail transport systems manufacturer. It is active in the fields of passenger transportation, rail services, signalling, and locomotives, producing high-speed, suburban, regional and urban trains along with trams.

The company and its name (originally spelled Alsthom) were formed by a merger between the electric engineering division of Société Alsacienne de Constructions Mécaniques (Als) and Compagnie Française Thomson-Houston (thom) in 1928. Significant acquisitions later included the Constructions Électriques de France (1932), shipbuilder Chantiers de l'Atlantique (1976) (sold in 2006), and parts of ACEC (late 1980s).

Alsthom (at the time, with an 'h' in the word) was founded in 1928 from the merger of the French heavy engineering subsidiary of the Thomson-Houston Electric Company, the Compagnie française Thomson Houston, CFTH, and of the Société Alsacienne de Constructions Mécaniques. In 1932, Alsthom expanded into transportation by acquiring the Constructions électriques de France, Tarbes, a manufacturer of electric locomotives as well as electrical and hydraulic equipment.

In 1969, Compagnie Générale d'Électricité (CGE) became the majority shareholder of Alsthom. In 1976, Alsthom merged with Chantiers de l'Atlantique, becoming Alsthom Atlantique. Thus, the business expanded into marine. The next year, it constructed the first 1300 MW generator set for the Paluel Nuclear Power Plant, setting a world record with an output of 1500 MW.

In 1978, Alsthom delivered its first TGV to SNCF. The TGV went on to break world rail speed records in 1981 (at 380 kilometres per hour (240 mph)) and in 1990 (at 515.3 kilometres per hour (320.2 mph)). It also set the world endurance record for high-speed train lines in 2001, travelling the 1,067.2 kilometres (663.1 mi) from Calais to Marseille in 3 hours and 29 minutes. In 1986, Alsthom Belfort received an order from EDF for the largest gas turbine in the world (212 MW).

In 1988–89, the holding company, CGEE Alsthom, acquired ACEC Énergie (hydroturbines and electrical equipment for the nuclear industry) and ACEC Automatisme (automation) from the dissolution of the Belgian electrical engineering company Ateliers de Constructions Electriques de Charleroi. Alsthom acquired 100% of ACEC's transport division and renamed it ACEC Transport.

In early 1989, GEC Alsthom was formed from a 50–50 merger of Alsthom and the Power Systems Division of the British General Electric Company ; for Alsthom this move was intended to aid Alsthom in selling its products outside the French market. In May of that year GEC Alsthom bought British rail vehicle manufacturer Metro-Cammell.

During the early-1990s, GEC Alsthom was the principal manufacturer of the British Rail Class 373, a variant of their TGV family specially designed for traversing the Channel Tunnel between the UK and France. Although collectively operated by Eurostar, the type was ordered by three different railway companies: 16 by SNCF, four by NMBS/SNCB, and 18 by British Rail, of which seven were shortened North of London sets. The first Class 373 set was completed at GEC Alstom's Belfort facility during 1992.

In 1994, GEC Alsthom acquired a 51% shareholding in Linke-Hofmann-Busch from Salzgitter AG. In 1995, the company acquired the remaining shares in the steam turbine manufacturer MAN Energie. In early 1998, GEC Alsthom acquired the electrical contractor Cegelec, renaming it Alstom Power Conversion.

In 1998, GEC Alsthom bought Italian firm SASIB 's rail signalling subsidiary Sasib Railways, which included the former General Railway Signal (USA).

In June 1998, GEC Alsthom was listed on the Paris Stock Exchange ; both GEC and Alcatel elected to sell off part of their stakes (23.6% each). Around this time, the company was officially renamed Alstom.

In 1999, Alstom bought half of ABB 's power systems division, forming a 50-50 joint company known as ABB Alstom Power. Alstom also bought Canada's Télécité, a passenger information and security solutions company, and sold to General Electric its heavy-duty gas turbine business (GE license design) The next year, the company bought out ABB's share in the former joint venture ABB Alstom Power.

In 2000, Alstom sold its diesel engine businesses (Ruston, Paxman, and Mirrlees Blackstone) to MAN Group. It also acquired a 51% stake in Italian rail manufacturer Fiat Ferroviaria, a world leader in tilting technology. In April 2003, Alstom sold its industrial turbine business to Siemens for €1.1 billion.

By 2003, Alstom was facing a financial crisis caused by a mix of poor sales and over $5 billion of debt liabilities. It reportedly had the potential to force the company's liquidation. These heavy debts were largely due to a $4 billion charge over a design flaw in a turbine developed by ABB, acquired by Alstom in 2000, as well as the collapse of customer Renaissance Cruises amid a general downturn in the marine market. Alstom's share price had dropped by 90% over two years. The European Commission objected to a €3.2 billion rescue plan involving the French state; European Union competition law bans most state aid without EC permission. This was obtained, but required Alstom to sell several of its subsidiaries, including its shipbuilding and electrical transmission assets.

In 2004, the French state took a 21% stake in Alstom for €772 million and Alstom received an EU-approved bailout worth in total €2.5 billion. The company sold its electrical transmission and distribution ("grid") activities to Areva, the diesel locomotive manufacturer Meinfesa to Vossloh, and Alstom Power Rentals to APR LLC. In 2010, Alstom re-acquired the electric power transmission division of Areva.

In 2005, the former Metro-Cammell rail vehicle works in Washwood Heath closed. In the same year, Alstom sold its Australian subsidiary, Alstom Transport Australia and New Zealand, to United Group, which became part of the latter's UGL Rail division. Alstom would restart its manufacturing operations in Australia by the early 2010s.

In 2006, Alstom sold its Marine Division to the Norwegian group Aker Yards, with a commitment to retain 25% of the shares until 2010; it also sold Alstom Power Conversion, which became Converteam, in a leveraged buy-out deal funded by Barclays Private Equity France SAS.

In June 2006, Bouygues acquired the French government's 21% holding in Alstom for €2 billion. Later that year, Bouygues elected to increase its shareholding in the firm to 24%.

In 2007, the TGV POS set the world speed record for rail vehicles of 574.8 kilometres per hour (357.2 mph). In March, Alstom acquired Power Systems Manufacturing LLC (Florida, USA) a manufacturer of gas turbine components from Calpine Corporation for $242 million. In June, Alstom acquired the Spanish wind turbine manufacturer Ecotècnia, renamed as Alstom Ecotècnia (since 2010 Alstom Wind). The company also adopted a new graphic chart (logo, corporate identity) using "alstom" as its trading name, reserving "Alstom SA" for legal documents.

In 2009, Alstom acquired a 25% stake in the Russian locomotive manufacturer Transmashholding. Six years later, Alstom decided to increase its shareholding in Transmashholding to 33% at a reported cost of €54 million. As a consequence of an alignment agreement between Transmashholding and another entity, LocoTech-Service, Alstom's stake in the former decreased to 20% in August 2018.

In 2011, Alstom and the Iraqi government signed a memorandum of understanding regarding the construction of a new high-speed rail line between Baghdad and Basra.

In 2012, Alstom opened construction of factories at Sorel-Tracy, Quebec, Canada (passenger rail vehicles). After a consortium of Alstom (Alstom Wind), EDF, and DONG Energy was awarded three major French offshore wind farm contracts, the company initiated construction of factories at Cherbourg-en-Cotentin (turbine blades in association with LM Power, also wind turbine towers) and Saint-Nazaire (Nacelles and generators).

Also in 2012, the company formed a joint venture with RusHydro to manufacture hydropower equipment for small and medium power hydropower plants (up to about 100 MW).

Late in 2012, to further the development of its tidal energy business, Alstom acquired Tidal Generation Ltd from Rolls-Royce, however this was later sold to GE in 2015 as part of the sale of Alstom's energy business.

In November 2013, Alstom announced it planned to raise €1 to €2 billion through sale of some non-core assets, plus the possible sale of a stake in Alstom Transport, and cut 1,300 jobs. In 2014, Alstom sold its steam auxiliary components activities (air preheaters and gas-gas heaters for thermal power, other industrial heat transfer equipment, and grinding mills) to Triton Partners for €730 million.

In November 2014, Alstom was awarded a $429.4 million contract to modernise 85 trains for the Mexico City Metro system.

Starting in 2009, Alstom's practices were questioned by the United States Department of Justice (DOJ) on the basis that they violated the 1977 Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. This American law has extraterritorial scope. At the time, Alstom seemed to cooperate with the proceedings. In 2010, the DOJ opened an investigation into Alstom's commercial practices, focusing on a 2003 deal in Indonesia valued at $118 million in particular.

On 13 April 2013, Alstom senior executive Frédéric Pierucci was arrested at the John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York. He was accused of willful blindness of his company's suspected corruption and was imprisoned in a high security facility for 14 months and denied release on bail until the week of Alstom's acquisition by the US conglomerate General Electric. In late 2014, Alstom was fined $772 million by the DOJ, and admitted guilt under the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act in relation to bribes paid to obtain contracts in various countries.

In mid-2014, Alstom Network UK was charged by the UK Serious Fraud Office (SFO) in relation to corruption offences alleged to have been committed when obtaining transportation contracts in India, Poland and Tunisia, covered under sections 1 of the Prevention of Corruption Act 1906 and Criminal Law Act 1977. Further charges were brought in late 2014 by the SFO in relation to corrupt practices used to obtain energy contracts in Lithuania. Additional charges relating to contracts for the Budapest Metro in Hungary were added in April 2015. In December 2018, three executives of Alstom were found guilty of conspiracy to corrupt following an investigation by the SFO into allegations of several Lithuanian politicians and officials being offered bribes in return for securing contracts.

In February 2020, the United Nations published a database of all business enterprises involved in certain specified activities related to the Israeli settlements. Alstom has been listed on the database in light of its involvement in activities related to "the provision of services and utilities supporting the maintenance and existence of settlements" and "the use of natural resources, in particular water and land, for business purposes". On 5 July 2021, Norway 's largest pension fund KLP said it would divest from Alstom together with 15 other business entities implicated in the UN report for their links to Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank.

On 24 April 2014, unconfirmed reports claimed that US conglomerate General Electric (GE) was in acquisition talks with Alstom for $13 billion with the support of 29%-shareholder Bouygues, causing Alstom's share price to rise 18% in one day. On 27 April, Le Figaro reported that a rival 'cash plus asset swap' offer was issued by Siemens, trading Alstom's power business for part of its rail arm, plus a cash offer as good as GE's and job guarantees. Siemens' bid was reportedly promoted by French economic minister Arnaud Montebourg. Siemens and Alstom had a greater product overlap and thus a greater risk to jobs, along with potential issues with EU competition regulators. Siemens' offer was characterised as "defensive", being skeptically received by investors and analysts.

On 29 April, Reuters reported that Alstom's board had accepted a €10 billion bid by GE for its energy division; In a letter from GE executive Jeffrey R. Immelt to President François Hollande published in Les Echos, Immelt gave assurances about continued investment in Alstom's French activities, the security of the civil nuclear sector, and on job commitments made by Alstom Wind, whilst making its wind activities available to investors. On 30 April, Alstom confirmed that an offer for its power and grid divisions (representing an equity value of €12.35 billion, €11.4 billion enterprise value) was under review with key interests including the French state. On 30 April, GE confirmed it had made a $16.9 billion offer, comprising a $13.5 billion value plus $3.4 billion cash. On 5 May, GE offered to buy one-fourth of the shares in Alstom's Indian power and distribution companies – Alstom T&D India and Alstom India – at 261.25 and 382.20 rupees a share (value US$278 million and $111 million respectively) subject to its bid for Alstom SA being successful.

On 5 May 2014, the French government stated it did not back GE's bid, citing concerns on the future of Alstom's rail division as a smaller separate entity, suggesting that GE transfer its own rail division to Alstom; other concerns were over the civil nuclear field's national independence, and French jobs. On 14 May, France issued a decree (Décret n° 2014-479 du 14 mai 2014.), nicknamed " décret Alstom ", extending to power of the state to veto the takeover of "strategic interests" into areas of energy supply, water, transport, telecoms and public health. Both the French employer organisation MEDEF and the European Commissioner for Internal Market and Services (Michel Barnier) responded negatively to the decree.

On 16 June, Siemens and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries (MHI) submitted a competing offer for Siemens to acquire Alstom's gas turbine activities for €3.9 billion while MHI would form joint ventures with Alstom, acquiring 40%, 20% and 20% stakes in Alstom's steam and nuclear, electrical grid, and hydroelectric businesses respectively, for €3.1 billion. The proposal included an offer to buy a further 10% stake from shareholder Bouygues and an option to form a rail transport joint venture. On 19 June, GE revised its bid, matching the same price with a lower cash transaction value; it also proposed forming a joint venture of their renewable, electric grid, steam turbine and nuclear power businesses. GE announced a memorandum of understanding between the two firms in the rail sector and the sale of GE's rail signalling unit to Alstom. On 20 June, Siemens and MHI modified their bid, with MHI increasing its stake in Alstom's steam, hydro, and grid businesses to 40% in all three (total €3.9 billion) while Siemens increased its offer by €400 million to €4.3 billion. Subsequently, Economy minister Arnaud Montebourg stated he would block both bids, but the French government backed GE's offer and had given GE more specifications on commitments and guarantees; it also intended to buy two-thirds of Bouygues' shareholding (20%). The next day, Alstom's board backed GE's revised bid. On 22 June, the French state agreed terms with Bouygues, buying a 20% stake in Alstom from Bouygues at a 2–5% discount on a minimum value of ≈€35 per share.

Initially, the acquisition was expected to be finalised by early 2015. In early 2015, the EU Competition Commission began examining the deal. Both EU and US competition regulators approved the deal by September 2015, subject to the divestiture of Alstom's large and very large gas turbine (GT26 and GT36 models) manufacturing and service business; and its GE7FA gas turbine aftermarket parts subsidiary business, Power Systems Mfg. LLC (PSM), to another company, Ansaldo Energia.

The sale of Alstom's energy division to GE was finalised on 2 November 2015; the final valuation being €12.4 billion, of which €9.7 billion was transferred to Alstom, the remainder being reinvested in GE/Alstom joint ventures plus other corrections. The acquired businesses were reorganised within GE's existing power generation business (GE Power & Water) as GE Power. The remainder of Alstom Group, including GE Signalling (acquired via a €700 million deal), refocused on rail transport. Due to the acquisition, GE accrued $17.3bn of goodwill, consisting of Alstom's negative book value of $7.2bn at the time of acquisition and the $10.1bn purchase price. In October 2018, GE wrote-off $23bn from the value of its power industry division, largely attributed to the Alstom purchase.

In November 2015, Alstom was awarded a contract by the Indian Railways to construct an electric locomotive factory in Madhepura (Bihar), receiving an initial order of 800 twin-section 9MW locomotives for use on the Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor, valued at ₹190 billion (about US$2.9 billion). This factory was to be operated under a joint venture with the Ministry of Railways (26%) at a cost of ₹13 billion (roughly US$200 million).

In September 2015, it was announced that Amtrak would award Alstom a contract for $2.5 billion for the next generation high-speed train sets for the Northeast Corridor. This would result in the creation of 750 jobs across upstate New York with 400 direct manufacturing jobs at Alstom. The order for 28 Avelia Liberty trainsets was officially confirmed in August 2016 by Amtrak. These trainsets are manufactured at Alstom's plant in Hornell, New York.

In March 2016, a joint venture of Alstom and Gibela began construction of a new 60,000 square metres (650,000 sq ft) train building factory in Dunnotar, outside of Johannesburg, South Africa. Initial orders for the factory included 580 X'Trapolis Mega passenger trains for Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa under a €4 billion contract that was awarded in 2013.

In September 2016, Alstom announced it was to cease locomotive manufacturing at its Belfort (France) site by 2018 due to low orders; remaining production activity was to be transferred to its facility of Alstom DDF in Reichshoffen, Alsace. However, during October 2016, the French state placed an order of about €650 million for 15 TGV Euroduplex trains; an order for 20 locomotives; plus an order for 30 intercity trains to be built at Reichshoffen. Together, these orders were sufficient to prevent the Belfort plant's closure in the short to medium term.

In June 2017, Alstom opened the largest train modernisation facility in the UK at Halebank on the outskirts of Liverpool. Initial work involved the repainting of the Class 390 Pendolino s.

On 12 November 2024, Alstom announced on their official website that the first of 35 fully automated Metropolis trains has been delivered to Taiwan. The four-car stainless-steel train can carry up to 700 passengers, including 108 seated, with speeds up to 100 km/h.

In September 2025, Alstom was awarded a NZ$1.066 billion contract to build and maintain 18 new battery trains New Zealand BEMU class electric multiple unit in Wellington. The trains will be built in India. The trains will arrive in New Zealand in around 2029 and enter service in 2030.

In September 2026, Alstom was awarded a £1 billion contract to construct a fleet of battery-powered trains for the UK. Twenty-nine trains are to be built starting in 2028 and would be delivered from 2034 onward.

On 26 September 2017, Alstom announced a proposal to merge with Siemens Mobility, the rolling stock division of German conglomerate Siemens ; this merger was promoted as the creation of "a new European champion in the rail industry". The combined rail business, which was to have been reportedly named Siemens Alstom and headquartered in Paris, would have $18 billion U.S. in revenue and employ 62,300 people in more than 60 countries. During November 2018, the European Commission voiced its concerns surrounding the proposed merger of the two companies, particularly that the combined entity would be too dominant in the European market; alleged impacts from such dominance included potential increases in passenger fares and cargo fees. Furthermore, a series of popular protests concerning the financial reforms of both the French territorial railway infrastructure and SNCF occurred.

The proposed merger was viewed by some as a measure to counter the rise of rival Chinese rail business CRRC ; it reportedly received support from many figures within both the French and German governments. The transaction, which was originally due to close by the end of 2018, was met with opposition by French trade union officials who voiced their concerns that such a merger would have the potential for job losses. On 17 July 2018, Alstom shareholders overwhelmingly approved the proposed merger with Siemens. On 6 February 2019, the planned merger between the two companies was vetoed by the European Commission. In response to this ruling, Alstom's Chief Executive Officer Henri Poupart-Lafarge stated that he viewed the decision to block the merger was a result of "ideological prejudices".

In mid-February 2020, Alstom announced that it had signed a Memorandum of Agreement to buy Bombardier Transportation, the multinational train maker headquartered in Berlin, Germany for between €5.8 billion and €6.2 billion. The deal required the approval by Alstom shareholders at a meeting to be held in October 2020 and approval by European regulators. Bombardier's major shareholder, Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec, had already agreed to the sale.

In July 2020, it was announced that the EU competition authorities had approved the purchase. To finish the deal, Alstom had to sell the Alstom DDF factory based in France, a regional train division, a Bombardier facility in Germany, and a Bombardier trains division. The company also had to provide guarantees and pass on some of Bombardier's assets.

The merger between Alstom and Bombardier was completed on 29 January 2021.

Alstom plans in 2024 to issue €1.75 billion of shares and bonds to reduce its debt, which was at risk of a credit downgrade into junk bond status.

In September 2024, Alstom completed the sale of its American rail signalling business to Knorr-Bremse for $690 million.

In August 2025, Alstom closed an agreement with Virgin Trains for 12 new high-speed Avelia Stream trains. The trains will be part of Virgin's new £700 million service across western Europe, including through the Channel Tunnel.

Alstom Transport develops and markets a complete range of systems, equipment, and service in the railway industry. The division had annual sales of €5.5 billion in 2013. It is one of the world's largest manufacturers of high-speed trains, tramways and metros, electrical and diesel trains, information systems, traction systems, power supply systems, and track work. The company also operates in the rail infrastructure market, designing, producing, and installing infrastructure for the rail network. These include information solutions, electrification, communication systems, track laying, station utilities, as well as workshops and depots. Maintenance, rebuilding, and renovation services are also provided by the company. Alstom Transport operates in 70 countries and employs 26,000 people.

Notable products includes series production of the TGV high-speed trains with over 650 trainsets sold over 25 years, as well as the London Underground 1995 Stock, London Underground 1996 Stock, British Rail Class 390 and AGV.

Since a merger with General Railway Signal in 1998, Alstom has been manufacturing railway signaling equipment at a former GRS factory located in a suburb near Rochester, New York. After the merger with GE signaling the manufacturing was transferred to Missouri, and GRS factory kept engineering the GRS legacy products.

Since 2002, Alstom has manufactured the Pendolino tilting train, following the acquisition of Fiat Ferroviaria.

The company also produces Citadis trams; in 2007, over 1,100 Citadis trams were in use by 28 cities including Dublin, Algiers, Barcelona, Melbourne, Rotterdam and Paris.

Between 2007 and 2010, the company produced 1,002 R160A New York City subway cars at its manufacturing plant in Hornell, New York, while the body shells were built at their Lapa plant, in São Paulo, Brazil. In 2013, Alstom was awarded the contract to supply 168 coaches to Chennai Metro at a cost of ₹ 1,470 crore (US$150 million). The company also owns the tender for supplying coaches to Kochi Metro. In September 2015, it was announced in Hornell, New York, by Senator Charles Schumer (D-NY) that Amtrak will be awarding Alstom a contract for $2.45 billion for the next-generation high-speed train sets for the Northeast Corridor. This would result in the creation of 750 jobs across upstate New York with 400 direct manufacturing jobs at Alstom. The new trainsets will be able to reach speeds up to 186 mph (300 km/h) and feature active tilting technology. The 28 new train sets were scheduled to enter service by 2023, but only 14 of the 28 have been built as of Spring 2025. The first five trainsets entered service on August 28, 2025.

Next-generation high-speed trains under development by Alstom are the Avelia family: ETR 675, Avelia Horizon and Avelia Liberty.

Alstom has developed a ground-level power supply (alimentation par le sol - APS) system for use with buses and other vehicles. The system has been tested for compatibility with snow plows and for safety under exposure to snow, ice, salting, and saturated brine. The eRoadMontBlanc project is set to trial Alstom's electric road system on the public road RN205 on trucks and other vehicles in the Rhône-Alpes region between 2024 and 2027. This is anticipated to be the first public electric road in France.

Alstom power activities were collectively called Alstom Power Systems and included the design, manufacturing, services, and supply of products and systems for the power generation sector and industrial markets. The group covered most energy sources, including gas, coal, nuclear, hydro, wind. Power Systems provided components for power generation including boilers, steam turbines, and gas turbines, wind turbines, generators, air quality control systems, and monitoring and control systems for power plants, as well as related products. It had a special focus on boilers and emissions control equipment.

Power Systems also provided services such as product retrofitting for nuclear and fossil steam turbines and refurbishment of existing power plants. It performed maintenance and servicing under long-term agreements for its own turbines, as well as those manufactured by GE and Siemens.

In Russia, the company serviced nuclear equipment under a joint agreement with Atomenergomash and provided technology transfer for a project of floating nuclear power plants. In Brazil, Alstom, together with Bardella, ran a joint venture called Indústria Metalúrgica e Mecânica da Amazônia to build hydroelectric power plants throughout the Amazon and Latin American regions. In India, Alstom had a joint venture with Bharat Forge to manage power production from start to finish.

In 2015, the entire power sector was taken over by General Electric.

A third business section based on power transmission was formed on 7 June 2010 with the acquisition of the transmission business of Areva SA. The division manufactures equipment for the entire chain of electrical power transmission, including ultra-high voltage transmission lines (both AC and DC). Alstom Grid is headquartered at La Défense, the business district west of Paris, and has four main businesses: electrical transmission system products, power electric system, automation, and service. Alstom Grid has roughly 10% of the global market share.

In 2015, the grid division was taken over by General Electric and renamed as GE Grid Solutions.

Alstom was listed on the London, New York and Paris Stock Exchanges when it was floated on 22 June 1998. Following the financial reconstruction in 2003, the company remained listed on the Paris Stock Exchange, but was delisted from the London Stock Exchange on 17 November 2003 and the New York Stock Exchange in August 2004.

The Alternative Anticapitalist Anti-War Village (VAAAG) was an anarchist and anti-globalization camp organized between 28 May and 3 June 2003, on the fringes of the G8 summit in Évian-les-Bains. Bringing together between 3,000 and 4,000 anarchists and anti-globalists, the village was self-managed across numerous aspects of its operations.

Following the rebirth of the anarchist movement in the West and the spread of the anti-globalization movement, the two having been linked from the start, initiatives uniting both movements began to multiply. To protest the G8 summit, the village was launched by a relatively large number of anarchist groups and organizations. Despite internal conflicts with Le Point G, a women-only feminist village located near the VAAAG, these disputes, debates, and links created a situation where the feminist demands of Le Point G began to influence the VAAAG and, more broadly, the European far-left.

Anarchists considered the establishment of the village a 'success' that succeeded in uniting the anti-globalization and anarchist movements while maintaining a visible presence; it thus marked the period of rebirth of the anarchist movement and its growing influence on the far-left of that period. Nevertheless, some, such as Francis Dupuis-Déri, believe the village should have been more open to feminist demands.

From the 1970s onward, and even more so following the fall of the USSR and the 1990s, the anarchist movement underwent a rebirth in the West. Several factors drove this resurgence, including the evolution of capitalism at the end of the 20th century (offshoring, etc.), the end of state-communist support for Marxist-Leninist parties, and the fact that state-socialist and communist movements were increasingly discredited within the far left. According to historian Spencer Beswick and Marxist historian Max Elbaum, from the late 20th century onward, anarchists began to outpace other far-left currents, 'eclipsing' the influence of Marxist-Leninists on popular demands and struggles.

The anti-globalization movement formed during the same period and was influenced by the anarchists who joined it from the very beginning. Although not all anti-globalists were anarchists, the two movements largely converged; this resulted in the anti-globalization movement adopting anarchist political procedures and practices. The fact that anarchists invested so heavily in anti-globalization is one of the reasons for their spread; they were quicker than communists or other political movements to link their struggles to anti-globalization, which ultimately strengthened them.

In October 2002, the No Pasaran network began floating the idea of organizing an anarchist and anti-globalization campsite in Évian for the G8 summit; a similar camp had been envisioned for the 2002 G8 in Canada, but authorities intervened at the time to prevent its organization.

The organization was led by local groups and a number of individuals returning from the No Border network camps. Drawing on this activist experience, they set about organizing the project. The preliminary consultation phase saw conflicts with non-anarchist and less radical leftist groups, such as ATTAC or the Trotskyists of the Revolutionary Communist League (LCR); these two groups did not want a self-managed village and consequently left the discussions, seeking to launch a smaller, competing campsite instead.

Following their departure, the organization continued without them, with anarchists and alter-globalists uniting under the Collective of Anti-authoritarian and Anti-capitalist Struggles against the G8 (CLAAACG8). This collective brought together a significant number of anarchist groups in addition to the No Pasaran network, including the Francophone, Anglophone, and Italian Anarchist Federations, the Confédération nationale du travail (CNT), the Libertarian Collective of Bordeaux, Alternative Libertaire (AL), the Libertarian Communist Organization (OCL), the Federation of Anarchist Communists, the Freie Arbeiter*innen-Union (FAU), the Libertarian Socialist Organization (OSL), the Anti-WTO Coordination, and the Red Libertaria Apoyo Mutuo.

One of the organizers was the anarchist historian Francis Dupuis-Déri. They secured a campsite through negotiations with the local town hall, rendering the settlement legal.

The village took place from 28 May to 3 June 2003, with the G8 summit itself held between 1 and 3 June; it was located in the vicinity of the Annemasse aerodrome. About ten days before the official opening, an initial wave of anarchists arrived at the site to set up the necessary infrastructure to welcome visitors and newcomers.

The village grew to host between 3,000 and 4,000 people, placing it behind Anarchy 2023 on the list of the largest anarchist gatherings of the 21st century. Many aspects of its organization and management were self-managed; the village was divided into neighborhoods, similar to the No Border network camps, with each neighborhood having its own general assembly to make local decisions.

A women-only feminist village, Le Point G, was held alongside the VAAAG. This feminist village was established on land provided by the VAAAG, which entrusted its management to them. However, despite this initial proximity, conflicts emerged between the activists of Le Point G and those of the VAAAG. The women were mocked for their choice of a women-only space, and generally, the VAAAG participants did not understand their orientation, this caused a rift between the two groups, as some activists viewed them as practicing 'separatism'. Nevertheless, Le Point G, its members, and the debates surrounding these issues succeeded in permeating the anarchist and anti-globalization movements with their feminist inquiries and demands.

Numerous screenings were organized throughout the village's duration, and theoretical and practical debates and discussions took place among participants. Some of these screenings brought together members from Le Point G and anarchists from the VAAAG, who still met during these types of joint activities.

On the fringes of the gathering, some anarchists engaged in more radical actions, such as attempting to disrupt the G8 summit they had come to protest; the premises where the Socialist Party (PS) was holding a 'well-behaved' conference were pelted with stones.

In an article published in December 2003 in Le Monde libertaire, the press organ of the Francophone Anarchist Federation (FA), several anarchists representing various organizing groups expressed satisfaction with the event. They described it as a 'successful mobilization', and a representative of the FA wrote:

[This initiative] allowed us to show that, by standing united, the libertarian movement could be an essential force for mobilization and protest, while also demonstrating its capacity to offer concrete social alternatives. We championed the idea of a break with capitalism. The goal of the libertarian mobilization against the G8 [...] was to assert and establish an anti-capitalist, anti-authoritarian, and revolutionary political and syndicalist pole, a pole autonomous from reformist currents, NGOs, or anyone seeking merely to humanize capitalism.

Dupuis-Déri maintains that while the gathering was innovative and succeeded in uniting the anarchist and anti-globalization movements, the initiative also faced internal issues during its operation. According to the anarchist historian, these primarily concerned the management of its relationship with Le Point G, which he argues should have received broader support for its political choices.

The Altran Foundation for Innovation is a vehicle of social action of the group Altran Technologies. Created in 1996, its main focus is promoting technological innovation for human benefit. One of the ways it does this is by holding an international scientific competition with a new theme every year, rewarding leaders of innovative technology-oriented projects.

The brain–computer interface system of Professor Jonathan Wolpaw aims to facilitate the communication of patients with locked-in syndrome. It enables patients to move a cursor on a computer screen, dictate a text or control a robotic arm.

The artificial retina of Professor José Sahel and his team at the Quinze-Vingts National Ophthalmology Hospital Centre aims to allow people with degenerative retinal disease, numbering 1.5 million in 2008, to accomplish everyday activities. Placed under the existing retina, it directly stimulates the neurons, replacing defective cells. These implants should eventually allow patients to recognize faces, read large print and move independently in a restricted environment. The challenge for the Altran teams was to find solutions to produce artificial retina in series, in order to bring solutions to the widest number of patients.

In 1998, the Altran Foundation prize was awarded to the Toulouse- Rangueil University laboratory, and to the Kappa Biotech company for their pain-treatment project based on cell micro-encapsulation. The micro-encapsulation process stops the organism from rejecting these cells by protecting them in a sphere, thus preventing the immune system from recognizing them. The process involves creating biocompatible micro-membranes which are implanted using in-vitro fertilization which is live allogeneic or xenogenic cells that are wrapped in a semi-permeable immune-sparing membrane using a bioengineering technique known as cell encapsulation for therapeutic purposes. Until recently, the implantation posed a number of productivity problems, as it was taking 15 minutes for one micro-membrane to be implanted. Altran teams stepped in to help solve this problem. Their studies demonstrated that the automated implantation option, using a laser optical guidance system, was the most promising approach. With the cooperation of Tarbes E.N.I. students, Altran consultants developed a robot to automate the microcapsule filling operation using a dual-needle system. The robot is now commercialized.

The team from DBV Technologies has developed a patented innovative process, the E-patch, which is used to determine allergies of children. The ready-to-use standardised patch tests are highly reliable and conserve the allergic agents in their best state of allergy.

This innovative technique uses the principal of freeze drying and electrification to retain the allergic agents on the patch, without using solvent or glue. The E-patch is then conditioned so that it remains air and water tight. Once applied to the child the allergic agents are rapidly hydrated by body transpiration and liberated from the patch. They enter into contact with the skin and create, if positive, a reaction which can be seen by the doctor 48 hours later.

The MAXXUN project was to develop a system of disruptive solar cells based on the luminescent solar concentrating (LSC) technology, in order to lower the investment for a solar energy system by more than half. Altran Technologies consultants have worked during a year with the award-winning team to increase the surface area of the panel from 2.5 cm to 10 cm ; to apply an absorbing and dispersing layer on this extra surface area; to optimize light power under different conditions; to build a demonstration model and to identify potential partners.

The Altran Foundation jury awarded the first prize 2001 to Julien Troquet, a young research engineer and founder of the start-up company Biobasic Environnement. His project consists in developing a decontamination process for soil using bioremediation. This process allows for a complete decontamination using a gentle "alternative" method, so the excavation of the site is not necessary and the ecosystem is preserved. It is five times less expensive than competing techniques and can also be used on many different types of pollution.

The companies Jaulard and Trivella (companies from France and Italy respectively), together with the laser specialists Quantel (France) and Unilaser (from France and Portugal) have developed the LAMA project of a laser that can be carried by hand and used to clean the facades and sculpted ornaments of historical monuments. The process makes it easier to select the area to be cleaned without damaging "the outer skin" of the stone and outperforms all other existing systems at a fifth of the cost.

Work by Viviane Renaudin has led to the development of a new type of multiple-effect plate evaporator, which can be used for the desalination of brackish or sea water. The proposed distillation process is based on the principle of multiple-effect dripping film plate evaporators. The innovation lies in the horizontal transfer of vapour to the condensation zone. From a socio-economic point of view, thanks to its human-scale dimensions, its modular construction and its ease of assembly, the system has the advantage of being usable by unskilled operators in developing countries. The process also has political value: it enables countries to end their dependence on their neighbours for their drinking water supplies.

The aim of Guy Reinaud's project is to reply to the needs, in renewable domestic energy, of a population of 2 billion individuals living in the tropical regions of Africa, Latin America and Asia, and at the same time fighting against deforestation and climatic changes. The proposed solution is biomass charcoal as a source of renewable energy - patented and developed by Pro-Natura International. Biomass charcoal produces domestic energy from non-upgraded biomass, other than wood, in particular agricultural residues non-consumed by animals. By reducing the dependence on wood, biomass charcoal protects forests and as a consequence fights against desertification. Moreover, the energy produced by biomass charcoal is equal to that of wood charcoal for a sales price per kilo 50% cheaper.

HiSPARC, a Dutch university research Institute, is proposing to challenge teams of secondary school pupils and teachers with the study of ultra-high energy cosmic rays. HiSPARC wants to make young people discover and "experience the sciences" by creating a teaching network of teams of pupil-researchers. Liaising closely with academic and scientific institutions, these groups will work on the design, control and operation of particular items of detection equipment. The retrieval of the data obtained and its analysis will then be the subject of interpretation.

The first prize went to Dominique Grégoire from the company TechniGREG who developed new tracing systems: TraciLOG and TraciMEAL. This improved monitoring of the cold chain is a major step forward as far as consumer safety is concerned. The principle is to endow each mobile container with "electronic intelligence", thus enabling it to log each of the phases through which it passes, monitor its internal temperature and record information about whether its doors are open or closed. This information is gathered automatically and securely, without any contact with the contents, and requires no human intervention. It is a reliable global management indicator for use by the logistics service in charge of maintaining the cold chain. Altran engineers worked side by side with the prize-winner, on conducting market studies, on the choice of suppliers, at developing product packaging, on the design of an electronic module and on the transition to the production stage for both TraciLOG and TraciMEAL. After the support, TechniGREG increased its capital of more than 1 million euros. The efforts of these teams were rewarded in March 2001, when a fully operational version of TraciLOG was installed for the first time by a supermarket distributor. TraciMEAL was adopted last May by an institutional food service provider in Toulouse. Since then, TechniGREG, which has registered many patents related to this innovation, has come into business with many companies, particularly in the air transport sector.

Ambigu is a French term meaning a type of meal service that was popular in the upper class circles of France and Britain during the second half of the 17th Century and 18th Century.

It originated from the needs of high society to provide an elegant but informal format for entertaining large numbers of people. This kind of meal, the ambigu or collation (at a collation, a term used in French courts of the early modern period, all the food was cold, whereas an ambigu might include hot dishes) was served late in the day, during the usual hours for dinner and supper.

The ambigu involved the simultaneous presentation of all the courses including the dessert. Although an ambigu could be served to guests seated at a table, in the style of a dinner party, it was typically presented as a buffet, often in bite-sized portions. It could be served in the main salon of the house, the terrace or garden, and in a grotto surrounded by fountains.

An aspect that made the ambigu so popular was its ability to incorporate musical performances, dances, or other forms of entertainment without the rigid formality and hierarchy of a traditional banquet.

This made it ideal for fêtes at Versailles becoming increasingly famous and popular during the early years of Louis XIV 's reign.

Ambroise-Polycarpe de La Rochefoucauld GE (2 April 1765 – 2 June 1841), 1st Duke of Doudeauville, was a French soldier and politician. He was Minister of the Royal Household from 1821 to 1827.

Ambroise-Polycarpe de La Rochefoucauld was born in Paris on 2 April 1765 into the House of La Rochefoucauld. He was a son of Anne-Sabine-Rosalie de Chauvelin and Brigadier Jean-François de La Rochefoucauld (1735-1789), 5th Marquis of Surgères, who was Governor of Chartres. His only surviving sibling, Anne Alexandrine Rosalie de La Rochefoucauld, had married Armand Alexandre Roger de La Rochefoucauld, Count of Durtal (younger brother of François de La Rochefoucauld, 7th Duke of La Rochefoucauld). His sister, the Countess of Durtal, was guillotined in Paris in 1794 during the Reign of Terror alongside their uncle, Louis Desacres de l'Aigle.

His paternal grandfather was Alexandre-Nicolas de La Rochefoucauld, 4th Marquis of Surgères, who was cited by Voltaire in his Éloges. His maternal grandfather was Germain Louis de Chauvelin, Marquis de Grosbois, Keeper of the Seals of France.

At age 16, he joined the Dragoons as a Second lieutenant, serving in the King's Army until 1792, rising to the rank of Deputy-Major of Cavalry. During the French Revolution he emigrated, and made a series of tours of different countries of Europe, returning to France under the Consulate, but staying out of politics. Despite offers from Napoleon, he only accepted the position of a member of the General Council of the Marne.

The Duke of Doudeauville title was created for La Rochefoucauld in the peerage of the Kingdom of Spain in 1782, granting him precedence as a Grandee of Spain (through his wife as heir to the title of Duke of Doudeauville of the Le Tellier de Courtanvaux family).

After the first Bourbon Restoration on 4 June 1814, De la Rochefoucauld was appointed to the Chamber of Peers. His dukedom was not recognized in France until the Charter of 1814. He was made a Hereditary peer of France on 19 August 1815, Hereditary Duke-Peer on 31 August 1817. He sat among the most ardent royalists. He voted for death in the trial of Marshal Ney. He fought against freedom of the press, which he viewed as a source of ruin for the country.

On 26 September 1822 he was appointed director general of the posts. He gained a reputation as a skilled administrator, and introduced several visible improvements in the service.

On 4 August 1824 King Charles X appointed La Rochefoucauld Minister of the Royal Household in place of Marshal Jacques Lauriston. One of his main acts while in office was to acquire the lands of Grignon for the royal domain and to establish there the Royal Agronomic Institute of Grignon. In 1828, he fought against the dismissal of the National Guard. He resigned as minister on 4 January 1828 and from then on devoted himself to managing charitable institutions.

La Rochefoucauld was greatly attached to the elder branch of the Bourbons, and did not approve of the July Revolution of 1830. He spoke in the Chamber of Peers against proposals to perpetually banish the former royal family. On 9 January 1831 he resigned from the Chamber and his name was removed from the list of peers of France.

On 8 April 1779, at the age of fourteen, La Rochefoucauld married Bénigne-Augustine Le Tellier de Louvois (1764–1849), Mademoiselle de Montmirail, eldest daughter and heiress of Charlotte-Bénigne Le Ragois de Bretonvilliers and Charles-François-César Le Tellier de Louvois and a descendant of François-Michel le Tellier, Marquis de Louvois. In 1822, Bénigne was a founder of the Religieuses de Nazareth [ fr ]. Together, they were the parents of:

He died at the Château de Montmirail, Montmirail, Marne, on 2 June 1841, aged 76.

Through his daughter Françoise, he was a grandfather of Zénaïde Chapt de Rastignac (1798–1875), who married François XIV de La Rochefoucauld, 9th Duke of La Rochefoucauld (eldest son and heir of François de La Rochefoucauld, 8th Duke of La Rochefoucauld), in 1817.

The Cathedral of Our Lady of Amiens (French : Cathédrale Notre-Dame d'Amiens ; Picard : Cathédrale Noter-Danme d'Anmiens), or simply Amiens Cathedral, is a Catholic cathedral. The cathedral is the seat of the Bishop of Amiens. It is situated on a slight ridge overlooking the River Somme in Amiens, the administrative capital of the Picardy region of France, some 120 kilometres (75 miles) north of Paris.

The cathedral was built almost entirely between 1220 and c. 1270, a remarkably short period of time for a Gothic cathedral, giving it an unusual unity of style. Amiens is an early example of the High Gothic period, and the Rayonnant style of Gothic architecture. The Rayonnant appeared in the triforium and clerestory, which were begun in 1236, and in the enlarged high windows of the choir, added in the mid-1250s.

Its builders were trying to maximize the internal dimensions in order to reach for the heavens and bring in more light. As a result, Amiens Cathedral is the largest by volume in France, 200,000 cubic metres (260,000 cu yd), more than double the volume of Notre Dame of Paris.

The cathedral has been listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1981. Although it has lost much of its original stained glass, Amiens Cathedral is renowned for the quality and quantity of early 13th-century Gothic sculpture in the main west façade and the south transept portal, and a large quantity of polychrome sculpture from later periods inside the building.

According to local tradition, Christianity was brought to Amiens in the third century A.D. by two Christian martyrs, known as Firmin the Martyr and Firmin the Confessor. Saint Martin was baptised in Amiens in 334. The church was suppressed by the invasions of the Vandals, and did not recommence until the end of the fifth century, with the baptism of Clovis I in 498 or 499. The first Bishop of Amiens was Edibus, who participated in a Council in 511. An early cathedral with two churches dedicated to the two Fermins is said in documents to have existed on the site of the present church, but there is no archaeological evidence. Salvius, bishop of Amiens around 600, is credited with building this cathedral, but his Life is of very dubious accuracy.

A fire destroyed the two churches and much of the town, and a Romanesque cathedral was built to replace it between 1137 and 1152. This cathedral hosted the wedding in 1193 of King Philip II of France. In 1206 Amiens received a celebrated relic, the reputed head of John the Baptist, purchased in Constantinople. This relic made Amiens a major pilgrimage destination, and gave it an important source of revenue (The reliquary was destroyed during the French Revolution but a recreation made in 1876 by a Paris jeweller, using some of the original rock crystal, is displayed today in the cathedral treasury).

A fire destroyed the Romanesque cathedral in 1218. A plan for a new cathedral was made by master-builder Robert de Luzarches, and in 1220 Bishop Evrard de Fouilloy laid the first stone. Luzarches revolutionised the system of Gothic construction by using pieces of stone of standardised sizes and forms, rather than making unique pieces for each function. He was the architect until 1228, and was followed by Thomas de Cormont until 1258. Thomas's son, Renaud de Cormont, acted as the architect until 1288.

The construction was carried out, unusually, from the west to the east, beginning in the nave. De Cormont gave the structure its striking dimensions and harmony by his construction of the grand arcades and the upper windows. The nave was completed in 1236, and by 1269, the upper windows of the choir were in place. At the end of the 13th century, the arms of the transept were completed, and in the beginning of the 14th century the facades and the upper towers were finished. While these works were underway, the chapels between the buttresses and at the angles of the transept were added.

The original design of the flying buttresses around the choir had them placed too high to counteract the force of the ceiling arch pushing outwards resulting in excessive lateral forces being placed on the vertical columns. The structure was only saved when masons placed a second row of more robust flying buttresses that connected lower down on the outer wall.

In 1497 the four pillars of the transept crossing, as well as the two left columns of the chevet began to show cracks and other signs of stress. A team of experts examined the damage and carried out some repairs, but the cracks continued. The problem was finally resolved by Pierre Tarisel, who in 1498 installed a wrought iron bar chain around the level to resist the forces pushing the stone columns outward. The chain was installed red hot to act as a cinch, tightening as it cooled, and is still in place. In 1503 Tarisel took similar actions to reinforce portions of the entrance of the choir.

In the 16th century, the cathedral suffered damage from fires, windstorms, and the explosion of a nearby powder mill, without major damage. It also underwent several modifications to accommodate changing styles; a new rose window, in the Flamboyant Gothic style, full of curls and counter-curls, was installed in the south transept. In the 18th century, architectural modifications were made to comply with new doctrines pronounced by the Council of Trent. The old medieval rood screen between the choir and nave was replaced by an ornate iron grill choir screen, so that the parishioners in the nave could see the altar. The altar itself was modified, removing the twelve massive candelabras and twelve chests of relics of martyred saints. Major works were also carried out to strengthen the flying buttresses.

The cathedral, like other cathedrals across France, suffered considerable damage during the French Revolution. Much of the sculpture was smashed with hammers, and the heads of many statues were broken off. Many of the furnishings, fittings and treasures were stolen; part of the cathedral was used as a storehouse for materials used in various Revolutionary celebrations.

The cathedral was returned to its religious function in 1800, and the first restoration work began in 1802. Beginning in 1810, the neoclassical architect Etienne Hyppolyte Godde was put in charge of the work, followed in 1821 by Francois Auguste Cheussey, who commissioned three sculptors to make new statues. After the press criticized faults in the sculpture and restoration, Cheussey resigned and was replaced in 1849 by Eugène Viollet-le-Duc. Viollet-le-Duc began a more ambitious program aimed at returning the building as much as possible to its medieval spirit, including adding sculpted gargoyles and other typical Gothic features. Viollet-le-Duc worked almost continually on the cathedral until 1874.

The stained glass windows of the church were removed to protect them during both world wars, and the church suffered only minor damage. However, in 1920, some of the windows, which were being stored in the workshop of a master glass maker for their protection, were destroyed by a fire.

Between 1973 and 1980, the flèche, or spire, was entirely restored. In 1981, the cathedral was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Restoration of the west facade was completed in 2001. In 1992, the art historian Stephen Murray was appointed by the French Ministry of Culture in the scientific committee to oversee the restoration of Amiens Cathedral: Murray was made an honorary citizen of Amiens and awarded an honorary Doctorate at University of Picardy, Jules Verne, following this work.

The west facade of the cathedral was built in a single campaign from 1220 to 1236, and shows an unusual degree of artistic unity. The level of the rose window was finished in about 1240. Afterward, construction moved more slowly. The upper parts of the towers were not completed until the 14th century.

The facade has three deep porches with pointed arches, covering the three portals. Above the portals are two galleries; the upper is the Gallery of Kings, with twenty-two life-size statues of the kings of France. Nearly all of the statues date to the restoration by Viollet-le-Duc. Above the gallery is the rose window, whose stone tracery or framework dates from the 16th century. Above the rose window is the Musicians or Bellringers gallery, a 19th-century reconstruction of the original.

The central portal is dedicated to the Last Judgement, the left portal to the martyr Saint Firmin ; and the right portal to the Virgin Mary. Over each portal is a tympanum filled with sculpture. The centerpiece of the Tympanum of the Last Judgement is the figure of Christ, raising his hands, judging those below him. On his right and left, the Virgin Mary and Saint John appeal to him to be merciful. The good Christians, to his right, are escorted to Paradise, while the sinners, to his left, are marched to hell. A recent cleaning of the sculpture revealed traces of the painted red marks on Christ's hands, representing where nails were driven during his crucifixion.

Statues of saints in the tympanum include locally venerated Saints Victoricus and Gentian, Saint Domitius, Saint Ulphia, and Saint Fermin.

The upper portions of the towers of the west facade, above the rose window, were later constructions, and are of different heights. The south bell tower on the right facing the facade, is shorter and was completed first in about 1366, The north tower was completed in 1406, and is decorated in the late Gothic Flamboyant style. The elaborate Bell-Ringers or Musicians Gallery, which joins the two towers at the roof level, was added at this time, and was substantially restored or recreated in the 19th century by Viollet-le-Duc. Viollet-le-Duc redesigned the gallery on the model of the gallery of Chartres Cathedral from the same period.

One unusual feature of the towers is the Beau Pilier (Beautiful pillar), a supporting buttress that was added in the 14th century at the junction between the north tower the first of two new chapels built on the north side. The pillar and chapels were commissioned by Jean de la Grange, Bishop of Amiens (1373–1375) who was a principal advisor to King Charles VI of France.

The pillar holds nine statues representing the major political, religious and military figures of France at the time; at the bottom, Cardinal de la Grange himself; The Chamberlain, Bureau de la Riviere, and Admiral Jean de Vienne, above them, King Charles himself (Centre); his son the Dauphin, the future King Charles VI of France, and his younger son. Above these statues are statues of John the Baptist, The Virgin Mary, and Saint Firmin.

The original 13th-century flèche, or spire of the cathedral, located over the crossing point of the transept and nave, was destroyed by lightning in 1528, but was replaced by a flèche constructed of wood covered with gilded lead plates in 1533. It was frequently damaged by storms and repaired in the following years but, unlike the flèche of Notre Dame de Paris, never entirely redesigned and rebuilt. It still retains much original 16th century material, including the wooden framework. From the ground to sculpted cockerel at the pinnacle, the flèche reaches a height of 112.70 m (369.8 ft).

The statues on the flèche, made of lead, represent Christ (facing the nave); Saint Paul, Saint Firmin (wearing a Bishop's mitre); Saint John the Evangelist; The Virgin Mary crowned and holding the infant Jesus; Saint John the Baptist; Saint James the Great and Saint Peter.

The flying buttresses are the architectural device that made possible the exceptional height of the walls of the nave and choir. The arched buttresses leap over the outer, lower level of the cathedral, where the ambulatory and chapels are located, to stabilise the upper walls of the clerestory. They counteract the outward and downward thrust of the vaulted ceiling, so that the walls between the buttresses can be thin and mostly filled with large windows. The buttresses were later given additional stability by the placement of heavy stone pinnacles on top of their vertical piers. The buttresses of the nave are older, from about 1230, and each pier has two arches, one above the other. Both make a single jump to the wall of the nave; one arch meets the wall just above the point of maximum outward thrust from the nave vault; the other just below that point.

The buttresses of the choir are slightly later and were finished about 1260, to a different design. Each buttress has two vertical piers, one taller than the other, and the arches reach the wall by means of two vaults, meeting it at the point of maximum outward thrust. These choir buttresses have an additional function; channels in the top of the arches carry rain water as far as possible from the structure, jetting it out from the mouths of carved gargoyles.

The nave and the transept were the areas where the public worshiped, while the choir was reserved for clergy. At Amiens, the nave followed the model of the Early Gothic Chartres Cathedral and Soissons Cathedral. The elevation has three levels; the grand arcades, the triforium, and the clerestory at the top. The grand arcades, unlike earlier cathedrals, occupy a full half of the height of the wall. The pillars of the arcade, eighteen meters high, are composed of massive columns surrounded by four thinner colonettes, which continue up the walls to support the vaulted ceiling. The total height of the walls beneath the vaults is 42 meters, compared with 36 meters at Chartres Cathedral and Reims Cathedral. They are exceeded in height only by Beauvais Cathedral, whose vaults partially collapsed in 1284.

The Baroque pulpit on the north side of the nave was installed in 1773 and is made of painted and gilded wood. The pulpit is supported by statues representing Faith, Hope and Charity. Behind the pulpit gilded stone drapery. The tester is carved to resemble clouds supported by stone angels. Atop the "clouds" is a larger angel, pointing heavenwards, holding a book with the inscription, Hoc fac et vives (Do this and you shall live).

The transept crossing the church in the center is seventy meters long, and divided into three vessels. The centre of the transept, where it crosses the nave, is covered by a massive star vault, one of the earliest in France, supported by four massive pillars. The elevation has three levels, like the nave; the arcades, triforium and the clerestory at the top. The triforium and the clerestory are entirely walled with stained glass, filling the center of the cathedral with light. The rose windows are later additions. The north rose window is in the Rayonnant style, while the later south rose window is in the Flamboyant style. The spire over the central crossing was added between 1529 and 1533.

The early 16th century choir stalls, are among the great treasures of the cathedral. The upper rows were occupied by the Canons and the lower by the Clerks. The King's representative occupied the first seat in the north stalls, and the dean of the cathedral, the senior clergyman, the first seat in the south stalls.

The stalls are decorated with a multitude of carved figures, more than four thousand in total. The armrests, pendentives and dais are also richly decorated with sculpted images of animals both real and mythical, figures from the Old and New Testaments and secular images of professions and trades in the city. One hundred ten of the original one hundred twenty stalls are the original 16th century fabric and carving.

The ambulatory surrounding the choir is richly decorated with polychrome sculpture and flanked by numerous chapels. One of the most sumptuous is the Drapers' chapel. The cloth industry was the most dynamic component of the medieval economy, especially in northern France, and the cloth merchants were keen to display their wealth and civic pride. Another striking chapel is dedicated to St Thomas of Canterbury, a 13th-century dedication that complements the cathedral's own very full list of martyrs.

The interior contains works of art and decoration from every period since the building of the cathedral. There are notably baroque paintings of the 17th century, by artists such as Frans II Francken and Laurent de La Hyre.

Among the most celebrated art treasures of the cathedral are the polychrome sculptures which are displayed in the ambulatory, on the outer walls of the enclosure of the Choir. They illustrate the lives of Saint Fermin (south side, made between 1490 and 1530) and John the Baptist (north side, made in 1531)). Both subjects were connected with the cathedral; The purported head of John the Baptist was an important relic held in the treasury, and the martyred Saint Fermin was considered the first bishop of Amiens. Another group of polychrome sculpture in the north ambulatory depicts in imaginative fashion Christ's cleansing of the Temple. The tombs of several bishops and other religious figures of the cathedral, also abundantly decorated are found in the lower portions of the enclosure, below the sculptural scenes.

In the mid-18th century the centre of the cathedral was entirely redesigned in the Roccoco style, to follow changes in church doctrine ordained by the Council of Trent and changing architectural taste. A new floor of coloured marble was installed, along with a new main altar. In 1768 the "Gloire", a monumental Baroque screen of sculpted and gilded wood representing heaven and crowded with sculpture of cherubs and angel was placed behind the altar.

A labyrinth in the centre of the floor of the nave was a common feature of early and High Gothic cathedrals; they were also found in the cathedrals of Sens, Chartres, Arras and Reims. It symbolised the obstacles and twists and turns of the journey toward salvation, but also showed that with determination the journey was possible. On certain religious holidays, pilgrims would follow the labyrinth on their knees. The Amiens labyrinth is 240 meters long and was originally laid out in 1288 by the architect Rene de Cormont. The labyrinth today is an exact copy, made in the 19th century.

The east end of the cathedral largely preserves the original medieval design, containing the choir, the space reserved for the clergy. It is surrounded by a very ornate carved wooden screen, and seven chapels in the semicircular apse. An ambulatory allows visitors to walk around the circuit of the chapels behind the choir.

The semicircular wall at the east end marked a new stage in the development of the Gothic. The upper walls of the clerestory, just beneath the vaults, and the walls of the triforium below them were entirely filled with glass. The arches of the triforium and arcades were topped with pointed arches, stressing the vertical, and admitted a maximum amount of light from different heights and directions, depending upon the time of day. Light also filtered down into the disambulatory from the upper levels.

Seven chapels are arranged around the semicircular east end. The Lady's Chapel, dedicated to The Virgin Mary, was at the very end of the cathedral, was reserved for the servants of the Canons who lived in the cloisters of the cathedral. The first chapel on the south side of the chevet is devoted to Saint Eloi, and now serves as the entrance to the cathedral treasury. Its primary decoration is a series of eight paintings of the Sibyls from the 16th century.

Three of the chapels in the east end were entirely re-fitted by Viollet-le-Duc in the 19th century to return them to what was thought to be their medieval aspect; these are St. Theodisius, in the north, The Lady's Chapel (Notre-Dame-Drapiere) in the centre, and Saint Jacques or the Sacred Heart, in the south. Viollet-le-Duc designed all the furnishings and decoration, including the gilded bronze altar in the Chapel of the Sacred Heart.

In addition to the chapels at the east end, small chapels occupy both sides of the nave and angles of the transept. The original decoration of these chapels was replaced in the 18th century by the present decor. Each chapel is dedicated to a particular saint, and features large paintings reaching up to the windows, altars, stone and wooden statuary, all from the 18th century. The chapels are closed by ornamental wrought-iron screens and gates.

In the north transept, the Chapel of Saint Peter occupies the northeast corner. It was created in response to the plague epidemic that struck Amiens in 1667–68, but was not completed until 1709. It was made by Gilles Oppenord, one of the pioneers of the Rococo style.

On the east side of the north transept is the Chapel of Saint Sebastian, also known as the Chapel of the Green Pillar. At its summit is a sculpture by Nicolas Blasset, "Saint Sebastian surrounded by the allegories of Justice, Peace, and Saint Roche", which was completed in 1627. A sculpture of Saint Louis by Louis Duthoit was added to the chapel in 1832.

On the west wall of the north transept are four scenes in high relief showing Christ driving the merchants from the Temple, made in 1523 by Jean Wytz.

Another early work in the transept is the altarpiece of the Chapel of Our Lady of the Red Pillar, an assembly of sculpture and paintings, clustered around a main pillar. It was completed in 1627 by Nicolas Blasset. The painting of the Assumption of Mary (1627) is by François Franken, and the sculptures of Saint Sebastian, the Virgin Mary, David and Solomon, and Judith and Saint Genevieve, made by Blasset.

The south transept contains the Chapel of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, in the southeast corner, with statues of those saints made by Jean-Baptiste Michel Dupuis in 1749. It also contains an altarpiece with a painting of the Adoration of the Magi from the early 18th century.

A group of polychrome reliefs illustrating the vow of John the Baptist, made in 1511, is found on the west wall of the south transept.

The treasury is located in the apse at the east end of the cathedral, on the southern side near the sacristy. The collection of reliquaries and other precious objects was dispersed in 1793 during the Revolution, but gradually some of the treasures were returned, some were recreated, while others were added by other donors.

Objects of particular interest include the Crown of Paraclet, made in about 1230–1240, which was saved from destruction at the Cistercian monastery of Paraclet, not from Amiens. It contains what are said to be relics of the Passion of Christ, set into a gilded and enamelled crown decorated with jewels, pearls and precious stones. A fine statue of the Virgin Mary and Child, made of polychrome wood in the 15th century is also found in the treasury.

Other objects of interest are found in the chapels along the nave and transept. The initial impetus for the building of the cathedral came from the installation of the reputed head of John the Baptist on 17 December 1206. The head was part of the loot of the Fourth Crusade, which had been diverted from campaigning against the Turks to the sacking of Constantinople, the capital of the Byzantine Empire. A sumptuous reliquary, with the face of the Saint, was made to house the skull. The original reliquary was lost during the Revolution but the skull and its medieval rock cristal shrine were preserved, being hidden by the mayor of Amiens, Louis-Alexandre Lescouvé. In 1876 a new reliquary was made by Placide Poussielgue-Rusand as a copy of the lost original (the aspect of which was known thanks to a 1665 engraving) and is displayed on the north aisle.

Only a few of the original stained glass windows still remain; many were removed during the remodeling of the cathedral in the 18th century. Others were destroyed when the church was sacked by the Protestant Huguenots in 1561, by hurricanes in 1627 and 1705; by the explosion of a powder mill in 1675. A large group of early windows, which had been removed in 1914 to protect them from damage during the First World War, were destroyed in 1920 when the studio where they were stored was destroyed by fire.

Some of the early glass dates from same period as those of Chartres Cathedral, though most of the earliest windows have disappeared. Some of the earliest glass, from about 1269, is found in two of the lancets in the high windows of the chapel at the end of the apse, at the east end of the cathedral. These two windows depict the same scene, one the inverse of the other. They show a clergyman presenting the stained glass to the Virgin Mary, to whom the chapel is dedicated. Angels carry crowns which they hold over the heads of the elongated figures.

Several very early panels of glass, from about 1300, can be seen in the windows of the triforium, the mid-level of the wall, in the apse. They depict a procession of saints, apostles, prophets and bishops of monumental size, set against a background of light-coloured glass, to make them stand out. They face the centre of the Apse, underneath a window depicting the Virgin Mary and the Annunciation.

A few other original 13th century panels, including one representing King David from a Tree of Jesse window depicting the genealogy of Christ, are found in the Chapel of Saint Francis of Assisi, in the apse.

The innovative feature of the upper windows of Amiens Cathedral was how they filled the entire space of the upper wall. Thanks to the thin stone mullions that separate the group of lancet windows and the small circular windows on the upper levels, and the massive buttresses on the exterior that provided support for the walls, the individual windows in each bay seemed to merge into one great window, filling the nave below with light.

The largest part of the stained glass in the cathedral comes from the 19th century. The window in the Chapel of Saint Theodosius in the apse, for example, was made by the glass artist Gérente in 1854 donated by Emperor Louis Napoleon. The lower portions of the window depict the Emperor, the Empress Eugenie, the Bishop of Amiens and Pope Pius IX. The cathedral also features some 20th-century Art Deco glass, in the Chapel of Sacré Coeur, made in 1932–1934 by the master glass artist Jean Gaudin, based on designs of the painter Jacques le Breton.

The rose window of the north transept is the oldest, with characteristic radiating tracery of the Rayonnant Gothic. The south transept's rose window dates from 1489 to 1490, with the curves and reverse curves of the late Gothic Flamboyant style. It depicts fourteen angels, heads towards the centre of the window, in a style characteristic of the Picard style of window in the late 15th century. The window of the west facade, also in the flowing Flamboyant style, replaced an earlier High Gothic version.

The first organ in the cathedral was a gift from Alphonse Lemire, an official of the court of King Charles VI of France. It was installed on the interior of the west wall of the cathedral, below the rose window, between 1442 and 1449. All that survives of this organ is wooden gallery, lavishly decorated with Flamboyant Gothic carvings. The current pipes and case were installed in 1549, with additions in 1620. It was restored in the 19th century and again shortly before World War II.

During the process of laser cleaning in the 1990s, evidence was discovered of the original multi-coloured painted decoration of the west front. A technique was perfected to determine the exact composition of the paints used in the 13th century. In conjunction with the laboratories of EDF and the expertise of the Society Skertzo, lighting techniques were developed to project these colours directly on the façade with precision, recreating the polychromatic appearance of the 13th century without touching the surface of the stone.

An amuse-bouche (/ ə ˌ m uː z ˈ b uː ʃ / ; French: [ a.myz.buʃ ]) or amuse-gueule (UK : / ə ˌ m uː z ˈ ɡ ɜː l /, US : /- ˈ ɡ ʌ l / ; French: [ a.myz.ɡœl ]) is a single, bite-sized hors d'œuvre. Amuse-bouches are different from appetizers in that they are not ordered from a menu by patrons but are served free and according to the chef's selection alone. These are served both to prepare the guest for the meal and to offer a glimpse of the chef's style.

The term is French and literally means "mouth amuser". The plural form may be amuse-bouche or amuse-bouches. In France, amuse-gueule is traditionally used in conversation and literary writing, while amuse-bouche is not even listed in most dictionaries, being a euphemistic hypercorrection that appeared in the 1980s on restaurant menus and used almost only there, although in the anglosphere, it is an abstract expression for any kind of luxurious exploit of decadence. (In French, bouche refers to the human mouth, while gueule means the wider mouth of an animal, e.g. dog, though commonly used for mouth and derogatory only in certain expressions, e.g. " ferme ta gueule ".)

The amuse-bouche emerged as an identifiable course during the nouvelle cuisine movement, which emphasized smaller, more intensely flavoured courses. It differs from other hors d'œuvres in that it is small, usually just one or two bites, preselected by the chef and offered free of charge to all present at the table.

The function of the amuse-bouche could be played by rather simple offerings, such as a plate of olives or a crock of tapenade. It often becomes a showcase, however, of the artistry and showmanship of the chef, intensified by the competition among restaurants. According to Jean-Georges Vongerichten, a popular New York celebrity chef with restaurants around the world, "The amuse-bouche is the best way for a great chef to express his or her big ideas in small bites".

At some point, the amuse-bouche transformed from an unexpected bonus to a de rigueur offering at Michelin Guide -starred restaurants and those aspiring to that category (as recently as 1999, The New York Times provided a parenthetical explanation of the course). This in turn created a set of logistical challenges for restaurants: amuse-bouche must be prepared in sufficient quantities to serve all guests, usually just after the order is taken or between main courses. This often requires a separate cooking station devoted solely to producing the course quickly as well as a large and varied collection of specialized china for serving the amuse. Interesting plates, demitasse cups, and large Asian-style soup spoons are popular choices. In addition, the kitchen must try to accommodate guests who have an aversion or allergy to ingredients in the amuse.

Anarchism in France can trace its roots to thinker Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, who grew up during the Restoration and was the first self-described anarchist. French anarchists fought in the Spanish Civil War as volunteers in the International Brigades. According to journalist Brian Doherty, "The number of people who subscribed to the anarchist movement's many publications was in the tens of thousands in France alone."

The origins of the modern anarchist movement lie in the events of the French Revolution, which the historian Thomas Carlyle characterized as the "open violent Rebellion, and Victory, of disimprisoned Anarchy against corrupt worn-out Authority ". Immediately following the storming of the Bastille, the communes of France began to organize themselves into systems of local self-government, maintaining their independence from the State and organizing unity between communes through federalist principles. Direct democracy was implemented in the local districts of each commune, with citizens coming together in general assemblies to decide on matters without any need for representation. When the National Constituent Assembly attempted to pass a law concerning the governance of the communes, the districts instantly rejected it as it had been constituted without their sanction, causing the scheme to be abandoned by its proponents.

In particular, the sans-culottes of the Paris Commune were denounced as "anarchists" by the Girondins. The Girondin Jacques Pierre Brissot spoke at length about the need for the extermination of the "anarchists", a group that did not form any political grouping in the National Convention, but nevertheless were active participants in the revolution and vocal opponents of the nascent bourgeoisie. The Enragés were among the defenders of the sans-culottes and expressed a form of proto-socialism that advocated for the transformation of France into a directly democratic "Commune of Communes", a call later taken up by the 19th century French anarchist movement. The Enragés attacked the bourgeoisie and the representational composition of the National Convention, which they opposed in favor of the sectional assemblies.

The conflict between the Paris Commune and the National Convention escalated into a "third revolution", as an insurrection was openly championed by the Enragés led by Jean-François Varlet, who desired to overthrow the convention and establish direct democracy throughout France. However, this attempted "revolution of anarchy" was defeated by the Girondins, partly due to a lack of support from the Jacobin Club and the National Guard. Nevertheless, the continuing escalation of the conflict and increasing radicalization culminated in the Insurrection of 31 May – 2 June 1793, during which the Girondins were purged from the Convention and the Montagnards took control, centralizing power in the hands of the Committee of Public Safety and leaving the direct democratic ambitions of the sans-culottes and Enragés completely unfulfilled.

With the beginning of the Reign of Terror, the Enragés underwent a campaign of repression by the committee, although the government also attempted to make some economic concessions in order to not alienate the sans-culottes. The Enragés leader Jacques Roux committed suicide after being called to trial by the Revolutionary Tribunal and by 1794 the Enragés had all but disappeared from public view. The Committee subsequently began to move against sectional democracy and undertook a vast bureaucratization of the state machinery, converting elected positions into ones appointed by the state and transferring power from the hands of the sectional assemblies into those of the government. The power of the sans-culottes began to wane as the Terror intensified, with the Hébertists and Dantonists also being suppressed. Eventually, the fall of Maximilien Robespierre brought an end to the Terror and the Thermidorian Reaction began to rollback many of the revolutionary changes that had taken place.

The lasted vestiges of revolutionary anarchism were expressed by the Conspiracy of the Equals, which advocated for the overthrow of the Directory and its replacement with a communist society. In his Manifesto of the Equals (1796), the proto-anarchist thinker Sylvain Maréchal demanded "the communal enjoyment of the fruits of the earth" and looked forward to the disappearance of "the revolting distinction of rich and poor, of great and small, of masters and valets, of governors and governed." The Conspiracy's attempt to overthrow the Directory failed and its leader François-Noël Babeuf was executed by guillotine, but their ideas carried on into the 19th century. Following the Napoleonic Wars and the restoration of monarchy, socialist and anarchist ideas inspired by the Enragés and Equals began to replace republican ideals, setting up a new framework for French radicalism that began to reach an apex during the time of the July Monarchy.

Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (1809–1865) was the first philosopher to label himself an "anarchist." Proudhon opposed government privilege that protects capitalist, banking and land interests, and the accumulation or acquisition of property (and any form of coercion that led to it) which he believed hampers competition and keeps wealth in the hands of the few. Proudhon favoured a right of individuals to retain the product of their labor as their own property, but believed that any property beyond that which an individual produced and could possess was illegitimate. Thus, he saw private property as both essential to liberty and a road to tyranny, the former when it resulted from labor and was required for labor and the latter when it resulted in exploitation (profit, interest, rent, tax). He generally called the former "possession" and the latter "property." For large-scale industry, he supported workers associations to replace wage labour and opposed the ownership of land.

Proudhon maintained that those who labor should retain the entirety of what they produce, and that monopolies on credit and land are the forces that prohibit such. He advocated an economic system that included private property as possession and exchange market but without profit, which he called mutualism. It is Proudhon's philosophy that was explicitly rejected by Joseph Déjacque in the inception of anarchist-communism, with the latter asserting directly to Proudhon in a letter that "it is not the product of his or her labor that the worker has a right to, but to the satisfaction of his or her needs, whatever may be their nature."

An early anarchist communist was Joseph Déjacque, the first person to describe himself as " libertaire ". Unlike Proudhon, he argued that, "it is not the product of his or her labor that the worker has a right to, but to the satisfaction of his or her needs, whatever may be their nature." According to the anarchist historian Max Nettlau, the first use of the term libertarian communism was in November 1880, when a French anarchist congress employed it to more clearly identify its doctrines. The French anarchist journalist Sébastien Faure, later founder and editor of the four-volume Anarchist Encyclopedia, started the weekly paper Le Libertaire (The Libertarian) in 1895.

Déjacque was a major critic of Proudhon. Déjacque thought that "the Proudhonist version of Ricardian socialism, centred on the reward of labour power and the problem of exchange value. In his polemic with Proudhon on women's emancipation, Déjacque urged Proudhon to push on 'as far as the abolition of the contract, the abolition not only of the sword and of capital, but of property and authority in all their forms,' and refuted the commercial and wages logic of the demand for a 'fair reward' for 'labour' (labour power). Déjacque asked: 'Am I thus... right to want, as with the system of contracts, to measure out to each — according to their accidental capacity to produce — what they are entitled to?' The answer given by Déjacque to this question is unambiguous: 'it is not the product of his or her labour that the worker has a right to, but to the satisfaction of his or her needs, whatever may be their nature.'"...For Déjacque, on the other hand, the communal state of affairs — the phalanstery 'without any hierarchy, without any authority' except that of the 'statistics book' — corresponded to 'natural exchange,' i.e. to the 'unlimited freedom of all production and consumption; the abolition of any sign of agricultural, individual, artistic or scientific property; the destruction of any individual holding of the products of work; the demonarchisation and the demonetarisation of manual and intellectual capital as well as capital in instruments, commerce and buildings.

Déjacque "rejected Blanquism, which was based on a division between the 'disciples of the great people's Architect' and 'the people, or vulgar herd,' and was equally opposed to all the variants of social republicanism, to the dictatorship of one man and to 'the dictatorship of the little prodigies of the proletariat.' With regard to the last of these, he wrote that: 'a dictatorial committee composed of workers is certainly the most conceited and incompetent, and hence the most anti-revolutionary, thing that can be found...(It is better to have doubtful enemies in power than dubious friends)'. He saw 'anarchic initiative,' 'reasoned will' and 'the autonomy of each' as the conditions for the social revolution of the proletariat, the first expression of which had been the barricades of June 1848. In Déjacque's view, a government resulting from an insurrection remains a reactionary fetter on the free initiative of the proletariat. Or rather, such free initiative can only arise and develop by the masses ridding themselves of the 'authoritarian prejudices' by means of which the state reproduces itself in its primary function of representation and delegation. Déjacque wrote that: 'By government I understand all delegation, all power outside the people,' for which must be substituted, in a process whereby politics is transcended, the 'people in direct possession of their sovereignty,' or the 'organised commune.' For Déjacque, the communist anarchist utopia would fulfil the function of inciting each proletarian to explore his or her own human potentialities, in addition to correcting the ignorance of the proletarians concerning 'social science.'"

After the creation of the First International, or International Workingmen's Association (IWA) in London in 1864, Mikhail Bakunin made his first tentative of creation an anti-authoritarian revolutionary organization, the "International Revolutionary Brotherhood" ("Fraternité internationale révolutionnaire") or the Alliance ("l'Alliance"). He renewed this in 1868, creating the "International Brothers" ("Frères internationaux") or "Alliance for Democratic Socialism".

Bakunin and other federalists were excluded by Karl Marx from the IWA at the Hague Congress of 1872, and formed in Switzerland the Jura Federation, which met the next year at the 1872 Saint-Imier Congress, where was created the Anarchist St. Imier International (1872–1877).

In 1870 Mikhail Bakunin led a failed uprising in Lyon on the principles later exemplified by the Paris Commune, calling for a general uprising in response to the collapse of the French government during the Franco-Prussian War, seeking to transform an imperialist conflict into social revolution. In his Letters to A Frenchman on the Present Crisis, he argued for a revolutionary alliance between the working class and the peasantry and set forth his formulation of what was later to become known as propaganda of the deed.

Anarchist historian George Woodcock reports that "The annual Congress of the International had not taken place in 1870 owing to the outbreak of the Paris Commune, and in 1871 the General Council called only a special conference in London. One delegate was able to attend from Spain and none from Italy, while a technical excuse - that they had split away from the Fédération Romande - was used to avoid inviting Bakunin's Swiss supporters. Thus only a tiny minority of anarchists was present, and the General Council's resolutions passed almost unanimously. Most of them were clearly directed against Bakunin and his followers." In 1872, the conflict climaxed with a final split between the two groups at the Hague Congress, where Bakunin and James Guillaume were expelled from the International and its headquarters were transferred to New York. In response, the federalist sections formed their own International at the St. Imier Congress, adopting a revolutionary anarchist program.

The Paris Commune was a government that briefly ruled Paris from March 18 (more formally, from March 28) to May 28, 1871. The Commune was the result of an uprising in Paris after France was defeated in the Franco-Prussian War. Anarchists participated actively in the establishment of the Paris Commune. They included Louise Michel, the Reclus brothers, and Eugène Varlin (the latter murdered in the repression afterwards). As for the reforms initiated by the Commune, such as the re-opening of workplaces as co-operatives, anarchists can see their ideas of associated labour beginning to be realised...Moreover, the Commune's ideas on federation obviously reflected the influence of Proudhon on French radical ideas. Indeed, the Commune's vision of a communal France based on a federation of delegates bound by imperative mandates issued by their electors and subject to recall at any moment echoes Bakunin's and Proudhon's ideas (Proudhon, like Bakunin, had argued in favour of the "implementation of the binding mandate" in 1848...and for federation of communes). Thus both economically and politically the Paris Commune was heavily influenced by anarchist ideas. ". George Woodcock manifests that "a notable contribution to the activities of the Commune and particularly to the organization of public services was made by members of various anarchist factions, including the mutualists Courbet, Longuet, and Vermorel, the libertarian collectivists Varlin, Malon, and Lefrangais, and the bakuninists Elie and Élisée Reclus and Louise Michel."

Louise Michel was an important anarchist participant in the Paris Commune. Initially she worked as an ambulance woman, treating those injured on the barricades. During the Siege of Paris she untiringly preached resistance to the Prussians. On the establishment of the Commune, she joined the National Guard. She offered to shoot Thiers, and suggested the destruction of Paris by way of vengeance for its surrender.

In December 1871, she was brought before the 6th council of war, charged with offences including trying to overthrow the government, encouraging citizens to arm themselves, and herself using weapons and wearing a military uniform. Defiantly, she vowed to never renounce the Commune, and dared the judges to sentence her to death. Reportedly, Michel told the court, "Since it seems that every heart that beats for freedom has no right to anything but a little slug of lead, I demand my share. If you let me live, I shall never cease to cry for vengeance."

Following the 1871 Paris Commune, the anarchist movement, as the whole of the workers' movement, was decapitated and deeply affected for years.

Parts of the anarchist movement, based in Switzerland, started theorizing propaganda of the deed. From the late 1880s to 1895, a series of attacks by self-declared anarchists brought anarchism into the public eye and generated a wave of anxieties. The most infamous of these deeds were the bombs of Ravachol, Emile Henry, and Auguste Vaillant, and the assassination of the President of the Republic Sadi Carnot by Caserio.

After Auguste Vaillant 's bomb in the Chamber of Deputies, the " Opportunist Republicans " voted in 1893 the first anti-terrorist laws, which were quickly denounced as lois scélérates ("villainous laws"). These laws severely restricted freedom of expression. The first one condemned apology of any felony or crime as a felony itself, permitting widespread censorship of the press. The second one allowed to condemn any person directly or indirectly involved in a propaganda of the deed act, even if no killing was effectively carried on. The last one condemned any person or newspaper using anarchist propaganda (and, by extension, socialist libertarians present or former members of the International Workingmen's Association (IWA)):

"1. Either by provocation or by apology... [anyone who has] encouraged one or several persons in committing either a stealing, or the crimes of murder, looting or arson...; 2. Or has addressed a provocation to military from the Army or the Navy, in the aim of diverting them from their military duties and the obedience due to their chiefs... will be deferred before courts and punished by a prison sentence of three months to two years.

Thus, free speech and encouraging propaganda of the deed or antimilitarism was severely restricted. Some people were condemned to prison for rejoicing at the 1894 assassination of French president Sadi Carnot by the Italian anarchist Caserio. The term of lois scélérates ("villainous laws") has since entered popular language to design any harsh or injust laws, in particular anti-terrorism legislation which often broadly represses the whole of the social movements.

The United Kingdom quickly became the last haven for political refugees, in particular anarchists, who were all conflated with the few who had engaged in bombings. Already, the First International had been founded in London in 1871, where Karl Marx had taken refuge nearly twenty years before. In the 1890s, the UK became a nest for anarchist colonies expelled from the continent, in particular between 1892 and 1895, which marked the height of the repression, with the " Trial of the Thirty " taking place in 1894. Louise Michel, a.k.a. "the Red Virgin", Émile Pouget and Charles Malato were the most famous of the many anonymous anarchists, deserters or simple criminals who had fled France and other European countries. Many of them returned to France after President Félix Faure 's amnesty in February 1895. A few hundred persons related to the anarchist movement would however remain in the UK between 1880 and 1914. The right of asylum was a British tradition since the Reformation in the 16th century. However, it would progressively be eroded, and the French immigrants were met with hostility. Several hate campaigns would be issued in the British press in the 1890s against these French exiles, relayed by riots and a "restrictionist" party which advocated the end of liberality concerning freedom of movement, and hostility towards French and international activists.

Le Libertaire, a newspaper created by Sébastien Faure, one of the leading supporters of Alfred Dreyfus, and Louise Michel, alias "The Red Virgin", published its first issue on November 16, 1895. The Confédération générale du travail (CGT) trade-union was created in the same year, from the fusion of the various " Bourses du Travail " (Fernand Pelloutier), the unions and the industries' federations. Dominated by anarcho-syndicalists, the CGT adopted the Charte d'Amiens in 1906, a year after the unification of the other socialist tendencies in the SFIO party (French Section of the Second International) led by Jean Jaurès and Jules Guesde.

Only eight French delegates attended the International Anarchist Congress of Amsterdam in August 1907. According to historian Jean Maitron, the anarchist movement in France was divided into those who rejected the sole idea of organisation, and were therefore opposed to the very idea of an international organisation, and those who put all their hopes in syndicalism, and thus "were occupied elsewhere". Only eight French anarchists assisted the Congress, among whom Benoît Broutchoux, Pierre Monatte and René de Marmande.

A few tentatives of organisation followed the Congress, but all were short-lived. In the industrial North, anarchists from Lille, Armentières, Denains, Lens, Roubaix and Tourcoing decided to call for a Congress in December 1907, and agreed upon the creation of a newspaper, Le Combat, which editorial board was to act as the informal bureau of an officially non-existent federation. Another federation was created in the Seine and the Seine-et-Oise in June 1908.

However, at the approach of the 1910 legislative election, an Anti-Parliamentary Committee was set up and, instead of dissolving itself afterwards, became permanent under the name of Alliance communiste anarchiste (Communist Anarchist Alliance). The new organisation excluded any permanent members. Although this new group also faced opposition from certain anarchists (including Jean Grave), it was quickly replaced by a new organization, the Fédération communiste (Communist Federation).

The Communist Federation was founded in June 1911 with 400 members, all from the Parisian region. It quickly took the name of Fédération anarcho-communiste (Anarcho-Communist Federation), choosing Louis Lecoin as secretary. The Fédération communiste révolutionnaire anarchiste, headed by Sébastien Faure, succeeded to the FCA in August 1913.

The French anarchist milieu also included many individualists. They centered around publications such as L'Anarchie and L'En-Dehors. The main French individualist anarchist theorists were Émile Armand and Han Ryner who also were influential in the Iberian Peninsula. Other important individualist activists included Albert Libertad, André Lorulot, Victor Serge, Zo d'Axa and Rirette Maîtrejean. Influenced by Max Stirner 's egoism and the criminal/political exploits of Clément Duval and Marius Jacob, France became the birthplace of illegalism, a controversial anarchist ideology that openly embraced criminality.

Relations between individualist and communist anarchists remained poor throughout the pre-war years. Following the 1913 trial of the infamous Bonnot Gang, the FCA condemned individualism as bourgeois and more in keeping with capitalism than communism. An article believed to have been written by Peter Kropotkin, in the British anarchist paper Freedom, argued that "Simple-minded young comrades were often led away by the illegalists' apparent anarchist logic; outsiders simply felt disgusted with anarchist ideas and definitely stopped their ears to any propaganda."

After the assassination of anti-militarist socialist leader Jean Jaurès a few days before the beginning of World War I, and the subsequent rallying of the Second International and the workers' movement to the war, even some anarchists supported the Sacred Union (Union Sacrée) government. Jean Grave, Peter Kropotkin and others published the Manifesto of the Sixteen supporting the Triple Entente against Germany. A clandestine issue of the Libertaire was published on June 15, 1917.

From the legacy of Proudhon and Stirner there emerged a strong tradition of French individualist anarchism. An early important individualist anarchist was Anselme Bellegarrigue. He participated in the French Revolution of 1848, was author and editor of 'Anarchie, Journal de l'Ordre and Au fait! Au fait! Interprétation de l'idée démocratique' and wrote the important early Anarchist Manifesto in 1850. Catalan historian of individualist anarchism Xavier Diez reports that during his travels in the United States "he at least contacted (Henry David) Thoreau and, probably (Josiah) Warren." Autonomie Individuelle was an individualist anarchist publication that ran from 1887 to 1888. It was edited by Jean-Baptiste Louiche, Charles Schæffer and Georges Deherme.

Later, this tradition continued with such intellectuals as Albert Libertad, André Lorulot, Émile Armand, Victor Serge, Zo d'Axa and Rirette Maîtrejean, who developed theory in the main individualist anarchist journal in France, L'Anarchie in 1905. Outside this journal, Han Ryner wrote Petit Manuel individualiste (1903). Later appeared the journal L'En-Dehors created by Zo d'Axa in 1891.

French individualist circles had a strong sense of personal libertarianism and experimentation. Naturism and free love contents started to have an influence in individualist anarchist circles and from there it expanded to the rest of anarchism also appearing in Spanish individualist anarchist groups. "Along with feverish activity against the social order, (Albert) Libertad was usually also organizing feasts, dances and country excursions, in consequence of his vision of anarchism as the " joy of living " and not as militant sacrifice and death instinct, seeking to reconcile the requirements of the individual (in his need for autonomy) with the need to destroy authoritarian society."

Anarchist naturism was promoted by Henri Zisly, Émile Gravelle and Georges Butaud. Butaud was an individualist "partisan of the milieux libres, publisher of "Flambeau" ("an enemy of authority") in 1901 in Vienna. Most of his energies were devoted to creating anarchist colonies (communautés expérimentales) in which he participated in several.

"In this sense, the theoretical positions and the vital experiences of french individualism are deeply iconoclastic and scandalous, even within libertarian circles. The call of nudist naturism, the strong defence of birth control methods, the idea of " unions of egoists " with the sole justification of sexual practices, that will try to put in practice, not without difficulties, will establish a way of thought and action, and will result in sympathy within some, and a strong rejection within others."

Illegalism is an anarchist philosophy that developed primarily in France, Italy, Belgium, and Switzerland during the early 1900s as an outgrowth of Stirner's individualist anarchism. Illegalists usually did not seek moral basis for their actions, recognizing only the reality of "might" rather than "right"; for the most part, illegal acts were done simply to satisfy personal desires, not for some greater ideal, although some committed crimes as a form of Propaganda of the deed. The illegalists embraced direct action and propaganda by the deed.

Influenced by theorist Max Stirner's egoism as well as Proudhon (his view that Property is theft!), Clément Duval and Marius Jacob proposed the theory of la reprise individuelle (Eng: individual reclamation) which justified robbery on the rich and personal direct action against exploiters and the system.,

Illegalism first rose to prominence among a generation of Europeans inspired by the unrest of the 1890s, during which Ravachol, Émile Henry, Auguste Vaillant, and Caserio committed daring crimes in the name of anarchism, in what is known as propaganda of the deed. France's Bonnot Gang was the most famous group to embrace illegalism.

After the war, the CGT became more reformist, and anarchists progressively drifted out. Formerly dominated by the anarcho-syndicalists, the CGT split into a non-communist section and a communist Confédération générale du travail unitaire (CGTU) after the 1920 Tours Congress which marked the creation of the French Communist Party (PCF). A new weekly series of the Libertaire was edited, and the anarchists announced the imminent creation of an Anarchist Federation. A Union Anarchiste (UA) group was constituted in November 1919 against the Bolsheviks, and the first daily issue of the Libertaire got out on December 4, 1923.

Russian exiles, among them Nestor Makhno and Piotr Arshinov, founded in Paris the review Delo truda (Дело труда, The Cause of Labour) in 1925. Makhno co-wrote and co-published The Organizational Platform of the Libertarian Communists, which put forward ideas on how anarchists should organize based on the experiences of revolutionary Ukraine and the defeat at the hand of the Bolsheviks. The document was initially rejected by most anarchists, but today has a wide following. It remains controversial to this day, some (including, at the time of publication, Volin and Malatesta) viewing its implications as too rigid and hierarchical. Platformism, as Makhno's position came to be known, advocated ideological unity, tactical unity, collective action and discipline, and federalism. Five hundred people attended Makhno's 1934 funeral at the Père Lachaise Cemetery.

In June 1926, "The Organisational Platform Project for a General Union of Anarchists", best known under the name "Archinov's Platform", was launched. Volin responded by publishing a Synthesis project in his article "Le problème organisationnel et l'idée de synthèse" ("The Organisational Problem and the Idea of a Synthesis"). After the Orléans Congress (July 12–14, 1926), the Anarchist Union (UA) transformed itself into the Communist Anarchist Union (UAC, Union anarchiste communiste). The gap widened between proponents of Platformism and those who followed Volin's synthesis anarchism.

The Congress of the Fédération autonome du Bâtiment (November 13–14, 1926) in Lyon, created the CGT-SR (Confédération Générale du Travail-Syndicaliste Révolutionnaire) with help from members of the Spanish Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (CNT), which prompted the CGT's revolutionary syndicalists to join it. Julien Toublet became the new trade-union's secretary. Le Libertaire became again a weekly newspaper in 1926.

At the Orléans Congress of October 31 and November 1, 1927, the UAC became Platformist. The minority of those who followed Volin split and create the Association des fédéralistes anarchistes (AFA) which diffused the Trait d'union libertaire then La Voix Libertaire. Some Synthesists later rejoined the UAC (in 1930), which took the initiative of a Congress in 1934 to unite the anarchist movement on the basis of anti-fascism. The Congress took place on 20 and 21 May 1934, following the February 6, 1934, far right riots in Paris. All of the left-wing feared a fascist coup d'état, and the anarchists were at the spearhead of the anti-fascist movement. The AFA dissolved itself the same year, and joined the new group, promptly renamed Union anarchiste. However, a Fédération communiste libertaire later created itself after a new split in the UA.

Anarchists then participated in the general strikes during the Popular Front (1936–1938) which led to the Matignon Accords (40 hours week, etc.) Headed by Léon Blum, the Popular Front did not intervene in the Spanish Civil War, because of the Radicals ' presence in the government. Thus, Blum blocked the Brigades from crossing the borders and sent ambulances to the Spanish Republicans, while Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini were sending men and weapons to Francisco Franco. In the same way, Blum refused to boycott the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin, and to support the People's Olympiad in Barcelona. Some anarchists became members of International Antifascist Solidarity (Solidarité internationale antifasciste), which helped volunteers illegally cross the border, while others went to Spain and joined the Durruti Column 's French-speaking contingent, The Sébastien Faure Century. A Fédération anarchiste de langue française (FAF) developed from a split in the UA, and denounce the collusion between the French anarchists with the Popular Front, as well as criticizing the CNT – FAI 's participation to the Republican government in Spain. The FAF edited Terre libre, in which Volin collaborated. Before World War II, there are two organizations, the Union anarchiste (UA), which had as its newspaper Le Libertaire, and the Fédération anarchiste française (FAF) which had the Terre libre newspaper. However, to the contrary of the French Communist Party (PCF) which had organized a clandestine network before the war – Édouard Daladier 's government even had made it illegal after the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact – the anarchist groups lacked any clandestine infrastructure in 1940. Hence, as all other parties apart from the PCF, they quickly became completely disorganized during and after the Battle of France.

After Operation Barbarossa and the Allies' landing in North Africa, Marshal Philippe Pétain, head of the new "French State" (Vichy regime) which had replaced the French Third Republic, saw "the bad wind approaching." ("le mauvais vent s'approcher"). The Resistance began to start organizing itself in 1942 – 1943. Meanwhile, the French police, under the orders of René Bousquet and his second in command, Jean Leguay, systematically added to the list of targets designed by the Gestapo (communists, freemasons, Jews, and anarchists.)

On 19 July 1943, a clandestine meeting of anarchist activists took place in Toulouse ; they spoke of the Fédération internationale syndicaliste révolutionnaire. On January 15, 1944, the new Fédération Anarchiste decided on a charter approved in Agen on October 29–30, 1944. Decision was taken to publish clandestinely Le Libertaire as to maintain relations; its first issue was published in December 1944. After the Liberation, the newspaper again became a bi-weekly, and on October 6–7, 1945, the Assises du mouvement libertaire were held.

The Fédération Anarchiste (FA) was founded in Paris on December 2, 1945, and elected Georges Fontenis as its first secretary the next year. It was composed of a majority of activists from the former FA (which supported Volin's Synthesis) and some members of the former Union anarchiste, which supported the CNT-FAI support to the Republican government during the Spanish Civil War, as well as some young Resistants. A youth organization of the FA (the Jeunesses libertaires) was also created. Apart from some individualist anarchists grouped behind Émile Armand, who published L'Unique and L' EnDehors, and some pacifists (Louvet and Maille who published A contre-courant), the French anarchists were thus united in the FA. Furthermore, a confederate structure was created to coordinate publications with Louvet and Ce qu'il faut dire newspaper, the anarcho-syndicalist minority of the reunited CGT (gathered into the Fédération syndicaliste française (FSF), they represented the 'Action syndicaliste' current inside the CGT), and Le Libertaire newspaper. The FSF finally transformed itself into the actual Confédération nationale du travail (CNT) on 6 December 1946, adopting the Paris charter and publishing Le Combat Syndicaliste.

The Confédération nationale du travail (CNT, or National Confederation of Labour) was founded in 1946 by Spanish anarcho-syndicalists in exile with former members of the CGT-SR.

The anarchists started the 1947 insurrectionary strikes at the Renault factories, crushed by Interior Minister socialist Jules Moch, whom created for the occasion the Compagnies Républicaines de Sécurité (CRS) riot-police. Because of the CNT's inner divisions, some FA activists decided to participate to the creation of the reformist CGT-FO, issued from a split within the communist dominated CGT. The FA participated to the International Anarchist Congress of Puteaux in 1949, which gathered structured organizations as well as autonomous groups and individuals (from Germany, USA, Bolivia, Cuba, Argentina, Peru and elsewhere). Some communist anarchists organized themselves early in 1950 in a fraction, named Organisation pensée bataille (OPB) which had as aim to impose a single political stance and centralize the organization.

The GAAP (Groupes anarchistes d'action prolétarienne) were created on February 24–25, 1951, in Italy by former members of the FAI excluded at the congress of Ancône. The same year, the FA decides, on a proposition from the Louise Michel group animated by Maurice Joyeux, to substitute individual vote to the group vote. The adopted positions gain federalist status, but are not imposed to individuals. Individualists opposed to this motion failed to block it. "Haute fréquence", a surrealist manifest was published in Le Libertaire on July 6, 1951. Some surrealists started working with the FA. Furthermore, the Mouvement indépendant des auberges de jeunesse (MIAJ, Independent Movement of Youth Hostels) was created at the end of 1951.

In 1950 a clandestine group formed within the FA called Organisation Pensée Bataille (OPB) led by Georges Fontenis. The OPB pushed for a move which saw the FA change its name into the Fédération communiste libertaire (FCL) after the 1953 Congress in Paris, while an article in Le Libertaire indicated the end of the cooperation with the French Surrealist Group led by André Breton. The FCL regrouped between 130 and 160 activists. The new decision-making process was founded on unanimity : each person has a right of veto on the orientations of the federation. The FCL published the same year the Manifeste du communisme libertaire. The FCL published its 'workers' program' in 1954, which was heavily inspired by the CGT's revendications. The Libertarian Communist International (ICL), which groups the Italian GAAP, the Spanish Ruta and the North African Libertarian Movement (MLNA), was founded to replace the Anarchist International, deemed too reformist. The first issue of the monthly Monde libertaire, the news organ of the FA which would be published until 1977, came out in October 1954.

Several groups quit the FCL in December 1955, disagreeing with the decision to present "revolutionary candidates" to the legislative elections. On August 15–20, 1954, the Ve intercontinental plenum of the CNT took place. A group called Entente anarchiste appeared which was formed of militants who didn't like the new ideological orientation that the OPB was giving the FCL seeing it was authoritarian and almost marxist. The FCL lasted until 1956 just after it participated in state legislative elections with 10 candidates. This move alienated some members of the FCL and thus produced the end of the organization.

A group of militants who didn't agree with the FA turning into FCL reorganized a new Federation Anarchiste which was established in December 1953. This included those who formed L'Entente anarchiste who joined the new FA and then dissolved L'Entente. The new base principles of the FA were written by the individualist anarchist Charles-Auguste Bontemps and the non-platformist anarcho-communist Maurice Joyeux which established an organization with a plurality of tendencies and autonomy of group organized around synthesist principles. According to historian Cédric Guérin, "the unconditional rejection of Marxism became from that moment onwards an identity element of the new Federation Anarchiste" and this was motivated in a big part after the previous conflict with Fontenis and his OPB. Also it was decided to establish within the organization a Committee of Relations composed of a General Secretary, a Secretary of Internal Relations, a Secretary of External Relations a Committee of Redaction of Le Monde Libertaire and a Committee of Administration. In 1955 a Commission on Syndicalist Relations was established within the FA as proposed by anarcho-syndicalist members.

Regrouping behind Robert and Beaulaton, some activists of the former Entente anarchiste quit the FA and created on November 25, 1956, in Bruxelles the AOA (Alliance ouvrière anarchiste), which edited L'Anarchie and would drift to the far-right during the Algerian war.

The French Surrealist group led by André Breton now openly embraced anarchism and collaborated in the Fédération Anarchiste. In 1952 Breton wrote "It was in the black mirror of anarchism that surrealism first recognised itself." "Breton was consistent in his support for the francophone Anarchist Federation and he continued to offer his solidarity after the Platformists around Fontenis transformed the Fédération Anarchiste into the Federation Communiste Libertaire. He was one of the few intellectuals who continued to offer his support to the FCL during the Algerian war when the FCL suffered severe repression and was forced underground. He sheltered Fontenis whilst he was in hiding. He refused to take sides on the splits in the French anarchist movement and both he and Peret expressed solidarity as well with the new Fédération Anarchiste set up by the synthesist anarchists and worked in the Antifascist Committees of the 60s alongside the Fédération Anarchiste."

Many leaders of the Mouvement du 22 Mars, the March 1968 decentralized student protest in Nanterre, came from small anarchist groups. The anarchists rejected the Fédération anarchiste (FA), which they described as dogmatic, and instead mixed with other revolutionaries, such as Trotskyites and other militants. Anarchism was in a lull at the time of the radical May 1968 events. It was minimally present in the events. Even the Situationists, who held similar positions, bristled at being publicly grouped with the anarchists. Daniel Guérin 's Anarchism: From Theory to Practice was popular during the May 1968 events.

Anarchism influenced but did not capitalize on the 1968 student committees and workplace occupations. Anarchist groups active during the May 1968 events in France included the FA, Mouvement communiste libertaire [ fr ] (MCL), Union fédérale des anarchistes [ fr ], Alliance ouvrière anarchiste [ fr ], Union des groupes anarchistes communistes [ fr ] (UGAC), Noir et Rouge [ fr ], Confédération nationale du travail, Union anarcho-syndicaliste [ fr ], Organisation révolutionnaire anarchiste (ORA), Cahiers socialistes libertaires [ fr ], À contre-courant, La Révolution prolétarienne, and the publications close to Émile Armand. The ORA grew within the FA and became independent in 1971. It formed over 100 groups in the early 1970s and split into Organisation Communiste Libertaire [ fr ] and the Union des Travailleurs Communistes Libertaires [ fr ]. The latter became Alternative Libertaire.

In the seventies the FA evolved into a joining of the principles of both synthesis anarchism and platformism. Today the FA is constituted of about one hundred groups around the country.

The contemporary movement is divided into multiple groups. The social anarchists of FA run a radio station, a weekly periodical, and a bookshop network. Alternative Libertaire is a smaller organization.

The ancien régime (/ ˌ ɒ̃ s j æ̃ r eɪ ˈ ʒ iː m / ; French: [ ɑ̃sjɛ̃ ʁeʒim ] ; lit. ' former regime ') was the political and social system of the Kingdom of France that the French Revolution overturned. This was accomplished through its abolition in 1790 of the feudal system of the French nobility and in 1792 through its execution of King Louis XVI and declaration of a republic. "Ancien régime" is now a common metaphor for "a system or mode no longer prevailing".

The administrative and social structures of the ancien régime in France evolved across centuries of state-building, legislative acts (like the Ordinance of Villers-Cotterêts), and internal conflicts. The attempts of the House of Valois to reform and re-establish control over the scattered political centres of the country were hindered by the Wars of Religion from 1562 to 1598. During the House of Bourbon, much of the reigns of Henry IV (r. 1589–1610) and Louis XIII (r. 1610–1643) and the early years of Louis XIV (r. 1643–1715) focused on administrative centralization. Despite the notion of " absolute monarchy " (typified by the king's right to issue orders through lettres de cachet) and efforts to create a centralized state, ancien régime France remained a country of systemic irregularities: administrative, legal, judicial, and ecclesiastic divisions and prerogatives frequently overlapped, the French nobility struggled to maintain their influence in local judiciary and state branches while the Fronde and other major internal conflicts violently contested additional centralization.

The drive for centralization related directly to questions of royal finances and the ability to wage war. The internal conflicts and dynastic crises of the 16th and the 17th centuries between Catholics and Protestants, the Habsburgs ' internal family conflict, and the territorial expansion of France in the 17th century all demanded great sums, which needed to be raised by taxes, such as the land tax (taille) and the tax on salt (gabelle), and by contributions of men and service from the nobility.

One key to the centralization was the replacing of personal patronage systems, which had been organised around the king and other nobles, by institutional systems that were constructed around the state. The appointments of intendants, representatives of royal power in the provinces, greatly undermined the local control by regional nobles. The same was true of the greater reliance that was shown by the royal court on the noblesse de robe as judges and royal counselors. The creation of regional parlements had the same initial goal of facilitating the introduction of royal power into the newly assimilated territories, but as the parlements gained in self-assurance, they started to become sources of disunity.

By the end of 1789 the term Ancien Régime was commonly used in France by journalists and legislators to refer to the institutions of French life before the Revolution. It first appeared in print in English in 1794 (two years after the inauguration of the First French Republic) and was originally pejorative. Simon Schama has observed that "virtually as soon as the term was coined, 'old regime' was automatically freighted with associations of both traditionalism and senescence. It conjured up a society so encrusted with anachronisms that only a shock of great violence could free the living organism within. Institutionally torpid, economically immobile, culturally atrophied and socially stratified, this 'old regime' was incapable of self-modernization".

The Nine Years' War (1688–97), between France and a coalition of Austria and the Holy Roman Empire, the Dutch Republic, Spain, England and Savoy, was fought in continental Europe and on the surrounding seas, and in Ireland, North America and India. It was the first truly global war.

Louis XIV emerged from the Franco-Dutch War in 1678 with increased influence in Europe and consolidated authority within France. Through a combination of military campaigns, annexation and quasi legal means, he sought to extend and secure France's frontiers, a process that culminated in the War of the Reunions (1683–1684). The resulting Truce of Ratisbon recognized France's territorial acquisitions for a period of 20 years. Subsequent developments, including the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685, contributed to growing tensions with other European powers. Louis XIV's decision to cross the Rhine in September 1688 was intended to advance French territorial and dynastic claims and to influence the policies of the Holy Roman Empire. In response, Leopold I, and several German princes resolved to resist French expansion. The States General and William III subsequently brought the Dutch and the England into the war against France, creating a broad coalition that opposed Louis XIV's policies and contributed to the outbreak of the Nine Years' War.

The main fighting took place around France's borders in the Spanish Netherlands, the Rhineland, the Duchy of Savoy, and Catalonia. The fighting generally favoured Louis XIV's armies, but by 1696, France was in the grip of an economic crisis. The maritime powers (England and the Dutch Republic) were also financially exhausted, and when Savoy defected from the alliance, all of the parties were keen for a negotiated settlement. By the terms of the Treaty of Ryswick (1697), Louis XIV retained the whole of Alsace, but was forced to return Lorraine to its ruler and to give up any gains on the right bank of the Rhine. Also, Louis XIV accepted William III as the rightful King of England, and the Dutch acquired their barrier fortress system in the Spanish Netherlands to help secure their own borders. However, with the ailing and childless Charles II of Spain approaching his end, a new conflict over the inheritance of the Spanish Empire would soon embroil Louis XIV and the Grand Alliance in a final war: the War of the Spanish Succession.

Spain had a number of major assets apart from its homeland. It controlled important territory in Europe and the New World. Spain's American colonies produced enormous quantities of silver, brought to Spain every few years in convoys.

Spain also had many weaknesses. Its domestic economy had little business, industry or advanced craftsmanship and was poor. Spain had to import practically all of its weapons and its large army was poorly trained and poorly equipped. Spain had a small navy since seamanship was a low priority for the elites. Local and regional governments and the local nobility, controlled most of the decisionmaking. The central government was quite weak, with a mediocre bureaucracy, and few able leaders. King Charles II reigned 1665 to 1700, but was in very poor physical and mental health.

As King Charles II had no children, the question of who would succeed to the Spanish throne unleashed a major war. The Vienna-based Habsburg family, to which Charles II belonged, proposed its own candidate for the throne. However, the Bourbons, the ruling family of France, instinctively opposed expansions of Habsburg power within Europe and had their own candidate : Philip, the grandson of the powerful Louis XIV. That was a confrontation between two different styles of ancien régime : the French and Spanish style versus the Habsburg style.

Spain's silver and its inability to protect its assets made it a highly visible target for ambitious Europeans. For generations, Englishmen contemplated capturing the Spanish treasure fleet, a feat that had been accomplished only once: in 1628 by the Dutchman Piet Hein. English mariners nevertheless seriously pursued the opportunities for privateering and trade in Spain's colonies.

As he neared his death, Charles II bequeathed his throne to the Bourbon candidate, the future Philip V of Spain. Philip's grandfather, Louis XIV, eagerly endorsed the choice and made unilateral aggressive moves to safeguard the viability of his family's new possessions, such as moving the French army into the Spanish Netherlands and securing exclusive trading rights for the French in Spanish America. However, a coalition of enemies opposed to that rapid expansion of French power quickly formed, and a major European war broke out from 1701 to 1714.

To France's enemies, the notion of France gaining enormous strength by taking over Spain and all its European and overseas possessions was anathema. Furthermore, the prospect of capturing Spanish territories in the New World proved very attractive. France's enemies formed a Grand Alliance, led by the Holy Roman Empire's Leopold I, which included Prussia and most of the other German states, the Dutch Republic, Portugal, Savoy (in Italy) and England. The opposing alliance was primarily France and Spain but also included a few smaller German princes and dukes in Italy. Extensive back-and-forth fighting took place in the Netherlands, but the dimensions of the war once again changed when both Emperor Leopold and his son and successor, Joseph, died. That left Archduke Charles, the second son of Leopold, younger brother to Joseph, as the Alliance candidate for both king of Spain and Holy Roman Emperor.

Since such a union between Spain and the Holy Roman Empire would be too powerful in the eyes of Charles VI's allies, most of the allies quickly concluded a separate peace with France. After another year of fruitless campaigning, Charles VI did the same and abandoned his desire to become the king of Spain.

The 1713 Treaty of Utrecht resolved all these issues. France gave up Newfoundland and Nova Scotia. Louis XIV's grandson became King Philip V of Spain and kept all of his overseas colonies but renounced any rights to the French throne. Spain lost its European holdings outside the homeland itself.

The former members of the alliance also profited from the war. The Dutch maintained their independence in the face of French aggression. The Habsburgs picked up territory north of Austria and in Italy, including the Spanish Netherlands and Naples. However, the greatest beneficiary of the war was Great Britain, since in addition to extensive extra-European territorial gains at the expense of Spain and France, it established further checks to French expansion within the continent by moderately strengthening its European allies.

The quarter-century after the Treaty of Utrecht was peaceful, with no major wars. The main powers exhausted themselves in warfare, and suffered many deaths, disabled veterans, ruined navies, high pension costs, heavy loans and high taxes. In 1683, indirect taxes had brought in 118,000,000 livres, but by 1714, these revenues had plunged to only 46,000,000 livres.

Louis XIV, with his eagerness for warfare, was gone and replaced by a small sickly child, the last Bourbon survivor. This death had the potential to throw France into another round of warfare. Louis XV lived until the 1770s. France's main foreign policy decisionmaker was Cardinal André-Hercule de Fleury, who recognised France's need to rebuild and so pursued a peaceful policy.

France had a poorly designed taxation system in which tax farmers kept much of the money, and the treasury was always short. The banking system in Paris was undeveloped, and the treasury was forced to borrow at very high interest rates. London's financial system proved strikingly competent in funding not only the British Army but also those of its allies. Queen Anne was dead, and her successor, King George I, was a Hanoverian who moved his court to London but never became fluent in English and surrounded himself with German advisors. They spent much of their time and most of their attention on Hanoverian affairs. He too was threatened by an unstable throne, since the Stuart pretenders, long supported by Louis XIV, threatened repeatedly to invade through Ireland or Scotland and had significant internal support from the Tory faction. However, Sir Robert Walpole was the dominant decision-maker from 1722 to 1740, in a role that would later be called prime minister. Walpole strongly rejected militaristic options and promoted a peace program that was agreed to by Fleury, and the two powers formed an alliance.

The Dutch Republic was much reduced in power and so agreed with Britain's idea of peace. In Vienna, the Holy Roman Empire's Habsburg emperors bickered with the new Bourbon king of Spain, Philip V, over Habsburg control of most of Italy, but relations with France were undramatic.

In the mid-15th century, France was smaller than it is today, and numerous border provinces (such as Roussillon, Cerdagne, Conflent, Vallespir, Capcir, Calais, Béarn, Navarre, County of Foix, Flanders, Artois, Lorraine, Alsace, Trois-Évêchés, Franche-Comté, Savoy, Bresse, Bugey, Gex, Nice, Provence, Dauphiné and Brittany) were autonomous or belonged to the Holy Roman Empire, the Crown of Aragon or the Kingdom of Navarra ; there were also foreign enclaves like the Comtat Venaissin.

In addition, certain provinces within France were ostensibly the personal fiefs of noble families. Notably the Bourbonnais, Forez and Auvergne were held by the House of Bourbon until the provinces were forcibly integrated into the royal domain in 1527 after the fall of Charles III, Duke of Bourbon.

From the late 15th century to the late 17th century and again in the 1760s, French territory greatly expanded and it attempted to better integrate its provinces into an administrative whole.

Despite centralization efforts of the kings, France remained a patchwork of local privileges and historical differences. The arbitrary power of the absolute monarchy was much limited by historic and regional particularities. Administrative (including taxation), legal (parlement), judicial and ecclesiastic divisions and prerogatives frequently overlapped (for example, French bishoprics and dioceses rarely coincided with administrative divisions).

Certain provinces and cities had won special privileges, such as lower rates for the gabelle or salt tax. Southern France was governed by written law adapted from the Roman legal system, but northern France used common law, codified in 1453 into a written form.

The representative of the king in his provinces and cities was the gouverneur. Royal officers chosen from the highest nobility, provincial and city governors (oversight of provinces and cities was frequently combined) were predominantly military positions in charge of defense and policing. Provincial governors, also called lieutenants généraux, also had the ability to convoke provincial parlements, provincial estates and municipal bodies.

The title gouverneur first appeared under Charles VI. The Ordinance of Blois in 1579 reduced their number to 12, and an ordinance of 1779 increased their number to 39 (18 first-class governors and 21 second-class governors). Although in principle, they were the king's representatives, and their charges could be revoked at the king's will, some governors had installed themselves and their heirs as a provincial dynasty.

The governors reached the height of their power from the mid-16th to the mid-17th century. Their role in provincial unrest during the civil wars led Cardinal Richelieu to create the more tractable positions of intendants of finance, policing and justice, and in the 18th century, the role of provincial governors was greatly curtailed.

1. Île-de-France (Paris) 2. Berry (Bourges) 3. Orléanais (Orléans) 4. Normandy (Rouen) 5. Languedoc (Toulouse) 6. Lyonnais (Lyon) 7. Dauphiné (Grenoble) 8. Champagne (Troyes) 9. Aunis (La Rochelle) 10. Saintonge (Saintes) 11. Poitou (Poitiers) 12. Guyenne and Gascony (Bordeaux) 13. Burgundy (Dijon) 14. Picardy (Amiens) 15. Anjou (Angers) 16. Provence (Aix-en-Provence) 17. Angoumois (Angoulême) 18. Bourbonnais (Moulins) 19. Marche (Guéret) 20. Brittany (Rennes, parlement briefly at Nantes) 21. Maine (Le Mans) 22. Touraine (Tours) 23. Limousin (Limoges) 24. Foix (Foix)

25. Auvergne (Clermont-Ferrand) 26. Béarn (Pau) 27. Alsace (Strasbourg, cons. souv. in Colmar) 28. Artois (cons provinc. in Arras) 29. Roussillon (cons. souv. in Perpignan) 30. Flanders and Hainaut (Lille, parliament first in Tournai, then in Douai) 31. Franche-Comté (Besançon, formerly at Dole) 32. Lorraine (Nancy) 33. Corsica (off map, Ajaccio, cons. souv. in Bastia) 34. Nivernais (Nevers) 35. Comtat Venaissin (Avignon), a Papal fief 36. Imperial Free City of Mulhouse 37. Savoy, a Sardinian fief (parl. in Chambéry 1537–59) 38. Nice, a Sardinian fief 39. Montbéliard, a fief of Württemberg 40. (not indicated) Trois-Évêchés (Metz, Toul and Verdun) 41. (not indicated) Dombes (Trévoux) 42. (not indicated) Navarre (Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port) 43. (not indicated) Soule (Mauléon) 44. (not indicated) Bigorre (Tarbes) 45. (not indicated) Beaujolais (Beaujeu) 46. (not indicated) Bresse (Bourg) 47. (not indicated) Perche (Mortagne-au-Perche)

In an attempt to reform the system, new divisions were created. The recettes générales, commonly known as généralités, were initially only taxation districts (see "state finances" below). The first 16 were created in 1542 by edict of Henry II. Their role steadily increased, and by the mid-17th century, the généralités were under the authority of an intendant and were a vehicle for the expansion of royal power in matters of justice, taxation and policing. By the revolution, there were 36 généralités, the last two being created in 1784.

1. Généralité of Bordeaux, (Agen, Guyenne) 2. Généralité of Provence, or Aix-en-Provence (Provence) 3. Généralité of Amiens (Picardy) 4. Généralité of Bourges (Berry) 5. Généralité of Caen (Normandy) 6. Généralité of Châlons (Champagne) 7. Généralité of Burgundy, Dijon (Burgundy) 8. Généralité of Grenoble (Dauphiné) 9. Généralité of Issoire, later of Riom (Auvergne) 10. Généralité of Lyon (Lyonnais, Beaujolais and Forez) 11. Généralité of Montpellier (Languedoc) 12. Généralité of Paris (Île-de-France) 13. Généralité of Poitiers (Poitou) 14. Généralité of Rouen (Normandy) 15. Généralité of Toulouse (Languedoc) 16. Généralité of Tours (Touraine, Maine and Anjou) 17. Généralité of Metz (Trois-Évêchés) 18. Généralité of Nantes (Brittany) 19. Généralité of Limoges (divided in two parts: Angoumois & Limousin – Marche)

20. Généralité of Orléans (Orléanais) 21. Généralité of Moulins (Bourbonnais) 22. Généralité of Soissons (Picardy) 23. Généralité of Montauban (Gascony) 24. Généralité of Alençon (Perche) 25. Généralité of Perpignan (Roussillon) 26. Généralité of Besançon (Franche-Comté) 27. Généralité of Valenciennes (Hainaut) 28. Généralité of Strasbourg (Alsace) 29. (see 18) 30. Généralité of Lille (Flanders) 31. Généralité of La Rochelle (Aunis and Saintonge) 32. Généralité of Nancy (Lorraine) 33. Généralité of Trévoux (Dombes) 34. Généralité of Corsica, or Bastia (Corsica) 35. Généralité of Auch (Gascony) 36. Généralité of Bayonne (Labourd) 37. Généralité of Pau (Béarn and Soule)

The desire for more efficient tax collection was one of the major causes for French administrative and royal centralisation during the early modern period. The taille became a major source of royal income. Exempted were clergy and nobles (except for non-noble lands held in pays d'état, see below), officers of the crown, military personnel, magistrates, university professors and students, and certain cities (villes franches) such as Paris.

The provinces were of three sorts, the pays d'élection, the pays d'état and the pays d'imposition. In the pays d'élection (the longest-held possessions of the French crown; some of the provinces had held the equivalent autonomy of a pays d'état but had lost it through the effects of royal reforms) the assessment and collection of taxes were trusted to elected officials (at least originally, since later on those positions were bought), and the tax was generally "personal" and so was attached to non-noble individuals.

In the pays d'état ("provinces with provincial estates"), Brittany, Languedoc, Burgundy, Auvergne, Béarn, Dauphiné, Provence and portions of Gascony, such as Bigorre, Comminges and the Quatre-Vallées, recently acquired provinces that had been able to maintain a certain local autonomy in terms of taxation, the assessment of the tax was established by local councils and the tax was generally " real " and so was attached to non-noble lands (nobles with such lands were required to pay taxes on them). Pays d'imposition were recently conquered lands that had their own local historical institutions (they were similar to the pays d'état under which they are sometimes grouped), but taxation was overseen by the royal intendant.

Taxation districts had gone through a variety of mutations since the 14th century. Before the 14th century, oversight of the collection of royal taxes had fallen generally to the baillis and sénéchaux in their circumscriptions. Reforms in the 14th and the 15th centuries saw France's royal financial administration run by two financial boards, which worked in a collegial manner: the four Généraux des finances (also called général conseiller or receveur général) oversaw the collection of taxes (taille, aides, etc.) by tax-collecting agents (receveurs) and the four Trésoriers de France (Treasurers) oversaw revenues from royal lands (the " domaine royal ").

Together, they were the Messieurs des finances. The four members of each board were divided by geographical districts (although the term généralité appears only in the late 15th century). The areas were named Languedoïl, Languedoc, Outre-Seine-and-Yonne, and Nomandy (the last was created in 1449, the other three earlier), with the directors of the "Languedoïl" region typically having an honorific preeminence. By 1484, the number of généralités had increased to six.

In the 16th century, the kings of France, in an effort to exert more direct control over royal finances and to circumvent the double board, which was accused of poor oversight, made numerous administrative reforms, including the restructuring of the financial administration and increasing the number of généralités. In 1542, France was divided into 16 généralités. The number increased to 21 at the end of the 16th century and to 36 at the time of the French Revolution; the last two were created in 1784.

The administration of the généralités of the Renaissance went through a variety of reforms. In 1577, Henry III established 5 treasurers (trésoriers généraux) in each généralité who formed a bureau of finances. In the 17th century, oversight of the généralités was subsumed by the intendants of finance, justice and police. The expression généralité and intendance became roughly synonymous.

Until the late 17th century, tax collectors were called receveurs. In 1680, the system of the Ferme générale was established, a franchised customs and excise operation in which individuals bought the right to collect the taille on behalf of the king, through six-year adjudications (certain taxes like the aides and the gabelle had been farmed out in this way as early as 1604). The major tax collectors in that system were known as the fermiers généraux ('farmers-general").

The taille was only one of a number of taxes. There also existed the taillon (a tax for military purposes), a national salt tax (the gabelle), national tariffs (the aides) on various products (wine, beer, oil and other goods), local tariffs on speciality products (the douane) or levied on products entering the city (the octroi) or sold at fairs and local taxes. Finally, the church benefited from a mandatory tax or tithe, the dîme.

Louis XIV created several additional tax systems, including the capitation, which began in 1695 and touched every person, including nobles and the clergy although exemption could be bought for a large one-time sum and the "dixième" (1710–1717, restarted in 1733), which enacted to support the military and was a true tax on income and on property value. In 1749, under Louis XV, a new tax based on the dixième, the vingtième, was enacted to reduce the royal deficit and continued for the rest of the ancien régime.

Another key source of state financing was through charging fees for state positions (such as most members of parlements, magistrates, maître des requêtes and financial officers). Many of the fees were quite high, but some of the offices conferred nobility and could be financially advantageous. The use of offices to seek profit had become standard practice as early as the 12th and the 13th centuries. A law in 1467 made these offices irrevocable except through the death, resignation or forfeiture of the title holder, and the offices, once bought, tended to become hereditary charges that were passed on within families with a fee for transfer of title.

In an effort to increase revenue, the state often turned to the creation of new offices. Before it was made illegal in 1521, it had been possible to leave the date that the transfer of title was to take effect open-ended. In 1534, a rule adapted from church practice made the successor's right void if the preceding office holder died within forty days of the transfer, and the office returned to the state. However, a new fee, the survivance jouissante protected against that rule. In 1604, Sully created a new tax, the paulette or "annual tax" of a sixtieth of the official charge, which permitted the titleholder to be free of the forty-day rule. The paulette and the venality of offices became key concerns in the parliamentarian revolts of the 1640s called the Fronde.

The state also demanded a "free gift", which the church collected from holders of ecclesiastic offices through taxes called the décime (roughly a twentieth of the official charge, created under Francis I).

State finances also relied heavily on borrowing, both private (from the great banking families in Europe) and public. The most important public source for borrowing was through the system of rentes sur l'Hôtel de Ville of Paris, a kind of government bond system offering investors annual interest. The system first came to use in 1522 under Francis I.

Until 1661, the head of the financial system in France was generally the surintendant des finances. That year, the surintendant Nicolas Fouquet fell from power, and the position was replaced by the less powerful contrôleur général des finances.

The Courts and Law in seigneurial lands, including those held by the church or that lay within cities, was generally overseen by the seigneur or his delegated officers. In the 15th century, much of the seigneur's legal purview was given to the bailliages or sénéchaussées and the présidiaux, leaving only affairs concerning seigneurial dues and duties, and small affairs of local justice. Only certain seigneurs, those with the power of haute justice (seigneurial justice was divided into "high" "middle" and "low" justice), could enact the death penalty and only with the consent of the présidiaux.

Crimes of desertion, highway robbery and mendicants (so-called cas prévôtaux) were under the supervision of the prévôt des maréchaux, who exacted quick and impartial justice. In 1670, their purview was overseen by the présidiaux.

The national judicial system was made up of tribunals called bailliages in northern France and sénéchaussées in southern France. These tribunals numbered around 90 in the 16th century and far more at the end of the 18th century, were supervised by a lieutenant général and were subdivided into:

To reduce the case load in the parlements, certain bailliages were given extended powers by Henry II of France, which were called présidiaux.

The prévôts or their equivalent were first-level judges for non-nobles and ecclesiastics. In the exercise of their legal functions, they sat alone but had to consult with certain lawyers called avocats or procureurs, whom they chose themselves. To use the technical phrase, these lawyers were "summoned to their council". Appeals of their sentences went to the bailliages, who also had jurisdiction in the first instance over actions brought against nobles. Bailliages and présidiaux were also the first court for certain crimes called cas royaux which had formerly been under the supervision of the local seigneurs: sacrilege, lèse-majesté, kidnapping, rape, heresy, alteration of money, sedition, insurrection and the illegal carrying of arms. Appeals of a bailliage ' s decisions went to the regional parlements.

The most important of the royal tribunals was the prévôté and présidial of Paris, the Châtelet, which was overseen by the prévôt of Paris, civil and criminal lieutenants, and a royal officer in charge of maintaining public order in the capital, the Lieutenant General of Police of Paris.

The following were cours souveraines, or superior courts, whose decisions could be revoked only by "the king in his conseil" (see administration section below).

The head of the judicial system in France was the chancellor.

One of the established principles of the French monarchy was that the king could not act without the advice of his counsel, and the formula "le roi en son conseil" expressed that deliberative aspect. The administration of the French state in the early modern period went through a long evolution, as a truly administrative apparatus, relying on old nobility, newer chancellor nobility ("noblesse de robe") and administrative professionals, was substituted to the feudal clientelist system.

Under Charles VIII and Louis XII, the Conseil du Roi (King's Counsel) was dominated by members of about 20 noble or rich families. Under Francis I the number of counsellors increased to roughly 70 (although the old nobility was then proportionally more important than had been in the previous century). The most important positions in the court were those of the Great Officers of the Crown of France, headed by the connétable (chief military officer of the realm) until it was eliminated in 1627) and the chancellor.

The royal administration during the Renaissance was divided between a small counsel (the "secret" and later "high" counsel) of 6 or fewer members (3 members in 1535, 4 in 1554) for important matters of state and a larger counsel for judicial or financial affairs. Francis I was sometimes criticised for relying too heavily on a small number of advisors, and Henry II, Catherine de Medici and their sons found themselves frequently unable to negotiate between the opposing Guise and Montmorency families in their counsel.

Over time, the decision-making apparatus of the council was divided into several royal counsels. Its subcouncils can be generally grouped as "governmental councils", "financial councils" and "judicial and administrative councils". With the names and subdivisions of the 17th and 18th centuries, the subcouncils were the following:

In addition to the above administrative institutions, the king was also surrounded by an extensive personal and court retinue (royal family, valet de chambres, guards, honorific officers), regrouped under the name " Maison du Roi ".

At the death of Louis XIV, the Regent Philippe II, Duke of Orléans abandoned several of the above administrative structures, most notably the Secretaries of State, which were replaced by councils. That system of government, called the Polysynody, lasted from 1715 to 1718.

Under Henry IV and Louis XIII, the administrative apparatus of the court and its councils was expanded and the proportion of the "noblesse de robe" increased and culminated in the following positions during the 17th century:

Royal administration in the provinces had been the role of the bailliages and sénéchaussées in the Middle Ages, but that declined in the early modern period, and by the late 18th century, the bailliages served only a judicial function. The main source of royal administrative power in the provinces in the 16th and the early 17th centuries fell to the gouverneurs (who represented "the presence of the king in his province"), positions which had long been held by only the highest ranked families in the realm. With the civil wars of the early modern period, the king increasingly turned to more tractable and subservient emissaries, which caused the growth of the provincial intendants under Louis XIII and Louis XIV. Indendants were chosen from among the maître des requêtes. Those attached to a province had jurisdiction over finances, justice and policing.

By the 18th century, royal administrative power had been firmly established in the provinces, despite protestations by local parlements. In addition to their role as appellate courts, regional parlements had gained the privilege to register the edicts of the king and to present the king with official complaints concerning the edicts. They thus had acquired a limited role as the representative voice of (predominantly) the magistrate class. A refusal by the parlement to register the edicts (frequently concerning fiscal matters) allowed the king to impose its registration through a royal assize ("lit de justice").

The other traditional representatives' bodies in the realm were the États généraux (created in 1302), which reunited the three estates of the realm (clergy, nobility and the third estate) and the États provinciaux (Provincial Estates). The États généraux (convoked in this period in 1484, 1560–61, 1576–1577, 1588–1589, 1593, 1614 and 1789) had been reunited during fiscal crises or convoked by parties malcontent with royal prerogatives (the Ligue, the Huguenots), but they had no true power since dissensions between the three orders rendered them weak and they were dissolved before having completed their work. As a sign of French absolutism, they ceased to be convoked from 1614 to 1789. The provincial estates proved to be more effective and were convoked by the king to respond to fiscal and tax policies.

The French monarchy was irrevocably linked to the Catholic Church (the formula was la France est la fille aînée de l'église, or "France is the eldest daughter of the church"), and French theorists of the divine right of kings and sacerdotal power in the Renaissance had made those links explicit. Henry IV was able to ascend to the throne only after abjuring Protestantism. The symbolic power of the Catholic monarch was apparent in his crowning (the king was anointed with blessed oil in Rheims) and he was popularly believed to be able to cure scrofula by laying on his hands (accompanied by the formula " the king touches you, but God heals you ").

In 1500, France had 14 archbishoprics (Lyon, Rouen, Tours, Sens, Bourges, Bordeaux, Auch, Toulouse, Narbonne, Aix-en-Provence, Embrun, Vienne, Arles and Rheims) and 100 bishoprics. By the 18th century, archbishoprics and bishoprics had expanded to a total of 139 (see List of Ancien Régime dioceses of France). The upper levels of the French church were made up predominantly of old nobility, both from provincial families and from royal court families, and many of the offices had become de facto hereditary possessions, with some members possessing multiple offices. In addition to the fiefs that church members possessed as seigneurs, the church also possessed seigneurial lands in its own right and enacted justice upon them.

In the early the 16th century, the secular clergy (curates, vicars, canons, etc.) accounted for around 100,000 individuals in France.

Other temporal powers of the church included playing a political role as the first estate in the "États Généraux" and the "États Provinciaux" (Provincial Assemblies) and in Provincial Conciles or Synods convoked by the king to discuss religious issues. The church also claimed a prerogative to judge certain crimes, most notably heresy, although the Wars of Religion did much to place that crime in the purview of the royal courts and parliament. Finally, abbots, cardinals and other prelates were frequently employed by the kings as ambassadors, members of his councils (such as Richelieu and Mazarin) and in other administrative positions.

The faculty of theology of Paris (often called the Sorbonne), maintained a censorship board, which reviewed publications for their religious orthodoxy. The Wars of Religion saw their control over censorship however pass to the parliament and, in the 17th century to the royal censors, although the church maintained a right to petition.

The church was the primary provider of schools (primary schools and "colleges") and hospitals ("hôtel-Dieu", the Sisters of Charity) and distributor of relief to the poor in pre-revolutionary France.

The Pragmatic Sanction of Bourges (1438, suppressed by Louis XI but brought back by the États Généraux of Tours in 1484) gave the election of bishops and abbots to the cathedral chapter houses and abbeys of France, thus stripping the pope of effective control of the French church and permitting the beginning of a Gallican church. However, in 1515, Francis I signed a new agreement with Pope Leo X, the Concordat of Bologna, which gave the king the right to nominate candidates and the pope the right of investiture. The agreement infuriated Gallicans but gave the king control over important ecclesiastical offices with which to benefit nobles.

Although exempted from the taille, the church was required to pay the crown a tax called the "free gift" ("don gratuit"), which it collected from its office holders, at roughly a twentieth the price of the office (that was the "décime", reapportioned every five years). In its turn, the church exacted a mandatory tithe from its parishioners, called the " dîme ".

In the Counter-Reformation, the French church created numerous religious orders such as the Jesuits and made great improvements in the quality of its parish priests; the first decades of the 17th century were characterized by a massive outpouring of devotional texts and religious fervor, exemplified in Saint Francis of Sales and Saint Vincent de Paul. Although the Edict of Nantes (1598) permitted the existence of Protestant churches in the realm (characterized as "a state within a state"), over the next eighty years the rights of the Huguenots slowly eroded, until Louis XIV finally revoked the edict in 1685, which caused a massive emigration of Huguenots to other countries. Religious practices that veered too close to Protestantism (like Jansenism) or to the mystical (like Quietism) were also severely suppressed, as were libertinage or overt atheism.

Regular clergy (those in Catholic religious orders) in France numbered into the tens of thousands in the 16th century. Some orders, like the Benedictines, were largely rural; others, like the Dominicans (also called "Jacobins") and the Franciscans (also called "cordeliers") operated in cities.

Although the church came under attack in the 18th century by the philosophers of the Enlightenment and recruitment of clergy and monastic orders dropped after 1750, figures show that on the whole, the population remained a profoundly Catholic country (absenteeism from services did not exceed 1% in the middle of the century). At the eve of the revolution, the church possessed upwards of 7% of the country's land (figures vary) and generated yearly revenues of 150 million livres.

Louis XIV supported the Gallican Church to give the government a greater role than the pope in choosing bishops and the revenues from vacant bishoprics. There would be no inquisition in France, and papal decrees only held sway after the government approved them. Louis avoided schism and wanted more royal power over the French Church but did not want to break free of Rome. The pope likewise recognized the "most Christian king" was a powerful ally, who could not be alienated.

Until the French Revolution, the monastic community constituted a central element of the economic, social, and religious life of many localities under the Old Regime. From the end of the Wars of Religion to the French Revolution, Menat, a Cluniac abbey dating back to 1107, ruled over the Sioule Valley in the northwest region of the Clermont diocese. The monks were large landholders and developed a diversified and complex set of links with their neighbors. They received seigniorial rights; provided work to the rural poor and were in daily contact with notaries public, merchants, and surgeons. While they did not directly manage the religious life of the faithful, which was done by parish priests, monks were a motivating force in it by setting up of a parish clergy, providing alms and social services and playing the role of intercessors.

Communities of nuns in France on the eve of Revolution had on average 25 members and a median age of 48 years. Nuns were both entering the profession later and living longer than ever. In general, they had little wealth. Recruitment varied from region to region and by convent lifestyle (active or contemplative, austere or opulent, lower class or middle class). The nature of male and female monasticism differed greatly in France both before and during the revolution. Convents tended to be more isolated and less centrally controlled, which made for greater diversity among them than among male monasteries.

French Protestantism, which was largely Calvinist, derived its support from the lesser nobles and trading classes. Its two main strongholds were southwestern France and Normandy, but even there, Catholics were a majority. Protestantism in France was considered to be a grave threat to national unity, as the Huguenot minority felt a closer affinity with German and Dutch Calvinists than with its fellow Frenchmen. In an effort to cement their position, Huguenots often allied with France's enemies. The animosity between the two sides led to the French Wars of Religion and the tragic St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre. The religious wars ended in 1593, when the Huguenot Henry of Navarre (1553–1610), who was already effectively king of France, became a Catholic and was recognized by both Catholics and Protestants as King Henry IV (reigned 1589–1610).

The main provisions of the Edict of Nantes (1598), which Henry IV had issued as a charter of religious freedoms for the Huguenots, allowed Huguenots to hold religious services in certain towns in each province, allowed them to control and fortify eight cities, established special courts to try Huguenots, and gave Huguenots the same civil rights as Catholics.

Military privileges were incorporated in the edict to allay the fears of the minority. Over time, those privileges were clearly open to abuse. In 1620, the Huguenots proclaimed a constitution for the "Republic of the Reformed Churches of France", and Prime Minister Cardinal Richelieu (1585–1642) invoked the full powers of the state and captured La Rochelle after a long siege in 1628. The next year, the Treaty of Alais left the Huguenots their religious freedom but revoked their military freedoms.

Montpellier was among the most important of the 66 villes de sûreté that the 1598 edict had granted to the Huguenots. The city's political institutions and university were handed over to the Huguenots. Tension with Paris led to a siege by the royal army in 1622. Peace terms called for the dismantling of the city's fortifications. A royal citadel was built, and the university and consulate were taken over by the Catholics. Even before the Edict of Alès, Protestant rule was dead and the ville de sûreté was no more.

By 1620 the Huguenots were on the defensive, and the government increasingly applied pressure. A series of small civil wars that broke out in southern France between 1610 and 1635 were long considered by historians to be regional squabbles between rival noble families. New analysis shows that the civil wars were in fact religious in nature and remnants of the French Wars of Religion, which had largely ended by the Edict of Nantes. Small wars in the provinces of Languedoc and Guyenne had Catholics and Calvinists use destruction of churches, iconoclasm, forced conversions and the execution of heretics as weapons of choice.

Louis XIV acted more and more aggressively to force the Huguenots to convert. At first, he sent missionaries, which were backed by a fund to reward converts to Catholicism financially. Then, he imposed penalties, closed Huguenots' schools and excluded them from favorite professions. Escalating the attack, he tried to convert the Huguenots by force by sending armed dragonnades (soldiers) to occupy and loot their houses. Finally, the 1685 Edict of Fontainebleau revoked the Edict of Nantes.

The revocation forbade Protestant services, required children to be educated as Catholics and prohibited most Huguenot emigration. That proved disastrous to the Huguenots and costly for France by precipitating civil bloodshed, ruining commerce and resulting in the illegal flight from the country of about 180,000 Protestants, many of whom became intellectuals, doctors and business leaders in England, Scotland, the Netherlands Prussia and South Africa; also, 4000 went to the American colonies.

The English welcomed the French refugees by providing money from both government and private agencies to aid their relocation. The Huguenots who stayed in France became Catholics and were called "new converts". Only a few Protestant villages remained in isolated areas.

By the 1780s, Protestants comprised about 700,000 people, or 2% of the population. It was no longer a favorite religion of the elite since most Protestants were peasants. Protestantism was still illegal. The law was seldom enforced but could be a threat or a nuisance to Protestants.

Calvinists lived primarily in the southern France, and about 200,000 Lutherans lived in Alsace, where the 1648 Treaty of Westphalia still protected them.

In addition, there were about 40,000 to 50,000 Jews in France, chiefly centred in Bordeaux, Metz and a few other cities. They had very limited rights and opportunities, apart from the moneylending business, but their status was legal.

Political power was widely dispersed among the elites. The law courts called parlements were powerful, especially that of France. However, the king had only about 10,000 officials in royal service: very few indeed for a large country with very slow internal communications over an inadequate road system. Travel was usually faster by ocean ship or river boat. The different estates of the realm (the clergy, the nobility, and commoners) occasionally met together in the Estates General, but in practice, the Estates General had no power since it could petition the king but not pass laws itself.

The Catholic Church controlled about 40% of the country's wealth, which was tied up in long-term endowments that could be added to but not reduced. The king, not the pope, nominated bishops, but typically had to negotiate with noble families that had close ties to local monasteries and church establishments.

The nobility came second in terms of wealth but had no unity. Each noble had his own lands, his own network of regional connections and his own military force.

The cities had a quasi-independent status and were largely controlled by the leading merchants and guilds. Paris was by far the largest city, with 220,000 people in 1547 and a history of steady growth. Lyon and Rouen each had about 40,000 population, but Lyon had a powerful banking community and a vibrant culture. Bordeaux was next, with only 20,000 population in 1500.

The role of women has recently received attention, especially regarding their religiosity.

Peasants made up the vast majority of the population, and in many cases had well-established rights the authorities had to respect. In 1484, about 97% of France's 13 million people lived in rural villages. In 1700, at least 80% of the population of 20 million were peasants.

In the 17th century, peasants had ties to the market economy, provided much of the capital investment necessary for agricultural growth and frequently changed villages or towns. Geographic mobility, directly tied to the market and the need for investment capital, was the main path to social mobility. The stable core of French society, town guildspeople and village labourers, included cases of staggering social and geographic continuity, but even that core required regular renewal.

Accepting the existence of both of those societies, the constant tension between them and extensive geographic and social mobility tied to a market economy were the key to the evolution of the social structure, the economy and even the political system of early modern France. The Annales School paradigm underestimated the role of the market economy and failed to explain the nature of capital investment in the rural economy and grossly exaggerated social stability. Demands by peasants played a major role in fashioning the early stages of the French Revolution in 1789.

Historians have explored numerous aspects of peasant life in France, such as:

In 1789, the ancien régime was violently overthrown by the French Revolution. Long among of the richest and most powerful nations of Europe, France had serious economic difficulties in 1785. The French people also enjoyed more political freedom and a lower incidence of arbitrary punishment than many of their fellow Europeans.

However, Louis XVI, his ministers, and the widespread French nobility had become immensely unpopular because the peasants and, to a lesser extent, the bourgeoisie were burdened with ruinously high taxes, which were levied to support wealthy aristocrats and their sumptuous lifestyles.

Historians explain the sudden collapse of the ancien régime as stemming in part from its rigidity. Aristocrats were confronted by the rising ambitions of merchants, tradesmen and prosperous farmers allied with aggrieved peasants, wage-earners and intellectuals influenced by the ideas of Enlightenment philosophers. As the revolution proceeded, power devolved from the monarchy and privileged-by-birth to more representative political bodies, like legislative assemblies, but conflicts among formerly allied republican groups caused considerable discord and bloodshed.

A growing number of French people had absorbed the ideas of "equality" and "freedom of the individual" as presented by Voltaire, Diderot, Turgot, and other philosophers and social theorists of the Enlightenment. The American Revolution had demonstrated that Enlightenment ideas about the organisation of governance could actually be put into practice. Some American diplomats, like Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson, had lived in Paris and consorted freely with members of the French intellectual class there. Furthermore, contact between American revolutionaries and the French soldiers, who had provided aid to the Continental Army in North America during the American Revolutionary War, helped to spread revolutionary ideals in France.

After a time, many people in France began to attack the democratic deficit of their own government, push for freedom of speech, challenge the Roman Catholic Church and decry the prerogatives of the nobles.

The revolution was caused by not a single event but a series of events that together irreversibly changed the organisation of political power, the nature of society and the exercise of individual freedoms.

For some observers, the term came to denote a certain nostalgia. For example, Charles de Talleyrand famously quipped:

Celui qui n'a pas vécu au dix-huitième siècle avant la Révolution ne connaît pas la douceur de vivre : ("He who has not lived in the eighteenth century before the Revolution does not know the sweetness of living.")

That affection was caused by the perceived decline in culture and values after the revolution, in which the aristocracy lost much of its economic and political power to what was seen as a rich, coarse and materialistic bourgeoisie. The theme recurs throughout 19th-century French literature, with Honoré de Balzac and Gustave Flaubert alike attacking the mores of the new upper classes. To that mindset, the ancien régime had expressed a bygone era of refinement and grace before the revolution and its associated changes ushered in a crude uncertain modernity.

The historian Alexis de Tocqueville argued against that defining narrative in his classic study L'Ancien Régime et la Révolution, which highlighted the continuities in French institutions before and after the revolution.

The Andorra–France border extends for 57 km (35 mi) in southern France (Ariège and Pyrenees-Orientales départements) and northern and north-eastern Andorra.

The border is France's third-shortest, after its borders with Monaco and the Kingdom of the Netherlands (the latter on the Caribbean island of Saint Martin).

The border's western extremity starts at the western Andorra– Spain –France tripoint, located at the summit of the Pic de Médécourbe (42°36'13"N 1°26'33" E). It then follows a general north-east direction before switching south-eastwards to the eastern Andorra–Spain–France tripoint 42°30'09"N 1°43'33" E).

Most of the Franco-Andorran border is determined by custom – there is no international treaty formally fixing the course of the border, except for the cases below.

In 2001, a bilateral treaty between France and Andorra rectified and amended the border slightly. It provided for the exchange of two equal plots of land of 15,925 m (4 acres) each, to enable Andorra to construct on its assigned plot a viaduct linking the Envalira tunnel to the French RN22.

The French town of Porta, in the Pyrénées-Orientales département, challenged the land swap at the Judicial Division of the French Council of State, contesting that it was contrary to French Constitution : it claimed not to have been consulted before the border treaty was drafted and approved. The Council of State dismissed the application, ruling that the treaty had been ratified by law and that therefore it was not for the Council to rule on the legality of the law. Moreover, there is no legal requirement for the state to consult with municipalities adjoining a border when adjusting the border. In May 2015 the European Commission adopted a cooperation programme to improve environmental protection along Andorra's borders with Spain and France.

There are some, probably minor, checks at the border, as Andorra is neither in the Schengen Area nor in the European Union. Prior to 2017, most European passport holders were subject only to minimum visual passport checks when entering and leaving the Schengen Area, taking less than 5 seconds. Following several terrorist attacks in Europe, the Schengen Borders Code was amended in 2017 to require that the passports of all travellers (including those entitled to free movement between the two countries concerned) be machine-scanned upon entering and leaving the Schengen Area to check against various criminal databases. This process can take up to 30 seconds per traveller and has led to long delays at all borders between Schengen and non-Schengen countries, both at airports and at road and rail borders.

The only road border between the two countries is east of Pas de la Casa, at nearly 2,000 metres (6,600 ft) above sea level. Here it may be possible to get a souvenir passport stamp if one asks at the Andorra border post. There is no rail crossing point, though a bus service connects the Pas de la Casa to the train station in the French border town of L'Hospitalet-près-l'Andorre).

Helicopters may fly between Andorra and non-Andorran airports with international border control facilities. The most frequent flights connect Andorra with the airports in Barcelona and Toulouse.

There is an agreement signed in 2003 between France, Spain and Andorra on the movement and residence in Andorra of citizens of third countries. It stipulates that the three countries must coordinate their visa requirements (in practice, that Andorra adopt the Schengen visa requirements already adhered to by both France and Spain) and that Andorra accept entry only of those who have right of entry of Spain or France. Andorra is allowed to permit long stays for any person. Travellers requiring a Schengen visa to enter the Schengen Area may enter Andorra using this visa, but it must be a multiple-entry visa, as entering Andorra entails leaving the Schengen Area.

7 in Ariège: Auzat, Lercoul, Siguer, Gestiès, Aston, Mérens-les-Vals and L'Hospitalet-près-l'Andorre ; 2 in Pyrénées-Orientales: Porté-Puymorens and Porta.

La Massana, Ordino, Canillo and Encamp.

André Le Troquer (27 October 1884 – 11 November 1963) was a French politician and socialist lawyer. He served as president of the National Assembly from 12 January 1954 to 10 January 1955, and a second time from 24 January 1956 to 4 October 1958.

Elected deputy of Paris in 1936, he sat on the National Assembly from 1945 to 1958. André Le Troquer spoke out against the demands of the armistice of June 1940. In 1942, with Félix Gouin, he defended Léon Blum during the Process of Riom. He sat on the Consultative Assembly of Algiers before being named commissioner of War. He was at the side of Charles de Gaulle at the liberation of Paris.

In 1945, Le Troquer became minister of the interior from 23 January 1946 to 2 June 1945 in the Félix Gouin government and minister of national defense in Léon Blum's government from 13 December 1946 to 13 January 1947. Vice President of the National Assembly, he was the interim president of the Congress of Versailles at the time of the election of René Coty to the presidency of the Republic in December 1953.

In his capacity as president of the National Assembly, he played an important role throughout the events of May–June 1958 that marked the return of General de Gaulle to power. He went with Senate president Gaston Monnerville to Saint-Cloud for a decisive conference with de Gaulle and was there assured that de Gaulle's return would be carried out in conformance to constitutional practices. He read René Coty's message announcing that he had "appealed to the most renowned of the French" and presided over the sittings from the first to the third of June 1958 (inauguration of de Gaulle and powers to refine the new constitution). Defeated in the legislative elections of November 1958, he left politics in 1960 but not without having called for a "no" vote on the referendum of 8 January 1961 about Algeria.

Le Troquer was charged with "offenses against morality" in the 1959 ballets roses scandal for which he was sentenced to probation and charged a modest fine.

He was president of the Municipal Council of Paris. He was decorated with the Croix de guerre for his participation in World War I where he was injured, resulting in the amputation of his right arm.

André Pierre Gabriel Amédée Tardieu (French: [ ɑ̃dʁe taʁdjø ] ; 22 September 1876 – 15 September 1945) was three times Prime Minister of France (3 November 1929 – 17 February 1930; 2 March – 4 December 1930; 20 February – 10 May 1932) and a dominant figure of French political life in 1929–1932. He was a moderate conservative with a strong intellectual reputation, but became a weak prime minister at the start of the worldwide Great Depression.

Tardieu's paternal grandmother was the composer and pianist Charlotte Tardieu. Andre Tardieu was a graduate of the elite Lycée Condorcet. He was accepted by the even more prestigious École Normale Supérieure, but instead entered the diplomatic service. Later, he left the service and became famous as foreign affairs editor of the newspaper Le Temps. He founded the conservative newspaper L'Echo National in association with Georges Mandel.

In 1914, Tardieu was elected to the Chamber of Deputies from the département of Seine-et-Oise, as a candidate of the center-right Democratic Republican Alliance (Alliance Démocratique – AD). He retained this seat till 1924. From 1926 to 1936, he represented the département of Territoire de Belfort.

When World War I broke out, Tardieu enlisted in the army and served before he was wounded and invalided home in 1916. He then returned to politics. He served as Georges Clemenceau 's lieutenant in 1919 during the Paris Peace Conference and as Commissioner for Franco-American War Cooperation. On 8 November 1919, he became Minister of Liberated Regions, administering Alsace and Lorraine, and served until Clemenceau's defeat in 1920.

In 1926, Tardieu returned to government as Minister of Transportation under Raymond Poincaré. In 1928, he moved to Minister of the Interior, continuing under Poincaré's successor Aristide Briand.

In November 1929, Tardieu himself succeeded Briand as Président du Conseil (Prime Minister) and remained Interior Minister. Though generally considered a conservative, he introduced a program of welfare measures, including public works, social insurance, and free secondary schooling, and he encouraged modern techniques in industry. On 11 March 1932, legislation was passed that established universal family allowances for all wage earners in business and industry with at least two children.

He hoped to replace the old ideological standoff between the right and left to a more relevant division based on the modern economy. He argued that "a more dynamic capitalism would dry up the Marxism of the working classes." The goal of his leadership was prosperity. When the Great Depression began in 1929, his goal was to evade a depression in France, which worked for several years. According to Monique Clague, "An obstinate deflationist throughout the thirties Tardieu would clearly not have given France a new deal." In the election of 1932 "he acknowledged the responsibility of the modern state for curing unemployment, but, devoted to the Poincaré franc, he would have sacrificed employment to the maintenance of the gold standard."

Tardieu was displaced from both offices for ten days in February–March 1930 by Radical Camille Chautemps, but he returned until December. He was then Minister of Agriculture in 1931, Minister of War in 1932, and again Prime Minister (this time, also Minister of Foreign Affairs), from 20 February to 3 June 1932, until his coalition was defeated in the May elections.

As Prime Minister, Tardieu served for three (7–10 May 1932) days as the Acting President of the French Republic, between the assassination of Paul Doumer and the election of Albert Lebrun.

He was briefly a Minister of State without portfolio in 1934.

His later political activity was largely concerned with containing and responding to German expansion.

In his two-volume book La Révolution à refaire, Tardieu criticized the French parliamentary system.

André Trigano (French pronunciation: [ ɑ̃dʁe tʁiɡano ] ; 13 September 1925 – 6 May 2024) was a French businessman and politician who was the mayor of Pamiers in the French Pyrenees, a post he held from 1995 until 2020.

Trigano was born to immigrant Sephardic Algerian Jewish parents in Montreuil in 1925 and was 15 years old when the Nazis occupied the city during World War II. The family fled to the mountains of Ariège in the south of France when his parents were tipped off by a police officer who lived in their building that their names were on a Gestapo arrest warrant. Trigano then joined the Resistance and was involved in assisting downed Allied pilots by forging documents that allowed them to escape to nearby Spain. He was arrested three times during the war by the Nazis.

After the war, Trigano started a camping holiday business to complement his family's tent-making business. They subsequently won a contract to supply tents to the newly established Club Med – which in its first 15 years was a camping holiday business – renting tents for vacations in locations such as Majorca, Corfu and Djerba in Tunisia. Trigano was the founder of the Campéole group, which now includes 40 campsites in France and Corsica. This company was sold to the Central Fund of Social Activities of the Electricity and Gas Industries (CCAS) on 30 December 2009.

Trigano had a long career in politics, first serving as mayor of Mazeres between 1971 and 1995, while simultaneously serving as a deputy in the National Assembly for the 2nd constituency of Ariège. He held the office of the mayor of Pamiers from 1995 until 2020 and was succeeded by Frédérique Thiennot. He has contested 19 elections, was re-elected in the first round in 2008 with 50.65% of votes and has lost twice.

Trigano was also a racing driver, a member of the second district of Ariege from 1993 to 1997, and chairman of the Committee on Tourism Midi-Pyrenees. He was general counsel of the township of Saverdun for 12 years. On 14 December 2012, Trigano sued Milan Kovac of Bratislava, Slovakia for infringing on copyright and trademark laws by registering the domain name www.andretrigano.com. The WIPO ruled in favor of Trigano and ordered the domain to be transferred to him.

Trigano was a classic car collector. He had a collection of around 180 classic cars, which have since been sold as of September 2020, including vintage Citroens, Cadillacs, Triumphs, Rolls Royces, and an Excalibur.

Trigano died on 6 May 2024, at the age of 98.

Ange René Armand, Baron de Mackau (17 February 1788 – 13 May 1855) was a French naval officer and politician. In 1825, he led 14 brigs of war to Haiti in one of the earliest instances of gunboat diplomacy, forcing the recently emancipated people of Haiti to pay 150 million francs to their former enslavers. The Mackau Law that he later instigated as Minister of the Navy and of Colonies paved the way for the abolition of slavery.

Descendant of an ancient family of Ireland who followed King James II to France and grandson of the deputy governess of the sisters of Louis XVI, Ange de Mackau was raised in the same institution as Jérôme Bonaparte, Napoleon 's youngest brother, and entered the navy as a novice at 17.

On the orders of Prince Jérôme, he embarked on the ship-of-the-line Vétéran. Upon his return from its campaign in the Atlantic and the Caribbean in 1808, his conduct and excellent exam scores earned him the rank of Aspirant, 1st class. He was then called to command a station of the French coast guard, where he acquitted himself honorably in engagements with a British cruiser.

He subsequently made a long cruise on the frigate Hortense, commanded by Captain Baudin. When Baudin was promoted to contre-amiral, he attached Ange de Mackau as his deputy-adjunct in the Mediterranean squadron and kept him nearby until 1810.

At that time, Mackau went as first lieutenant on the brig Abeille. On 26 May 1811, returning from a mission to Corsica, Abeille encountered HMS Alacrity off Bastia and attacked the larger brig without hesitation. After having seen all its officers lost in combat, fifteen crewmen killed, and twenty others wounded, Alacrity surrendered and was dragged in triumph to Bastia. For this success, Mackau was promoted to ship-of-the-line lieutenant, made a knight of the Legion of Honor, and granted command of the captured ship.

After several other battles and the capture of several merchant vessels, Mackau was named in 1812 as a frigate captain at age 24. He received command of the French squadron charged with protecting the Tuscan coast, where in December he participated in the defense of Livorno. The next year, he returned to Toulon with every ship-of-the-line in his squadron unharmed and a great quantity of supplies drawn from Livorno and Genoa.

Under the Restoration, which preserved his rank, he requested and obtained important missions to Île Bourbon and Madagascar, where he obtained and provided useful information. In 1816, he was named second-in-command for the frigate Eurydice, and in 1818 he received the command of Golo and campaigned in almost every sea in the world while participating in important hydrographic work.

Named ship-of-the-line captain on 1 September 1819, he was directed to Senegal, where the French government planned to found new settlements. After investigation, he decided to abandon this project and only maintain the existing ones. According to him, Senegal could only be a trading colony and not a farming one. During this mission, he also gathered information on the black slave trade.

On his return to France, he was named a gentleman of the chamber of King Louis XVIII. In June 1821, he then received command of Clorinde, a 58-gun frigate, which he sailed to the Pacific in order to conduct negotiations with the new states of Chile and Peru.

In command of Circé, he was next directed to Haiti in order for it to accept the "Ordinance of Emancipation" of 17 April 1825, which partially recognized the independence of the formerly French half of the island (while leaving Haiti's occupation of the formerly Spanish half unrecognized, and in the event withholding full diplomatic recognition for another decade) while ordering, in return, five annual payments of ₣30 million in cash from the impoverished nation, opening of the ports to trade from all nations, and a tariff rate for French goods half that of any other nation. The Haitians particularly objected to the exemption of the Spanish section from any obligation or recognition under the treaty, a stipulation which would lead to the Dominican War of Independence, but being met by the additional squadrons under Admirals Jurien de la Gravière and Grivel and threatening French reconquest of the nation, Mackau obtained confirmation of the order.

Named counter admiral on 1 September 1825, member of the Council of the Admiralty in 1828, and director of naval personnel on 17 September 1829, he participated in the preparation of the Algerian Expedition and displayed there a marked firmness of will and power.

President of the electoral college of Lorient, Admiral Mackau was elected deputy by the 2nd electoral arrondissement of Morbihan on 23 June 1830.

He took the oath to the July monarchy, renounced his position in personnel, and was named in 1831 as commander of the Squadron of the Downs, whose purview at the time included the war between the Netherlands and its rebellious southern provinces, which had declared independence as Belgium. This squadron transported the garrison of Antwerp from Dunkerque to Vlissingen and was charged with blockading the Dutch ports.

Returned to Cherbourg-en-Cotentin, Admiral Mackau was named commander of the Antilles station. On 3 August 1833 the French consul at Cartagena, Adolphe Barrot, was arrested and his official papers seized. After informing the government of New Granada of the reparations demanded by the French government and being rebuffed, Admiral Mackau prepared his force for action pending instructions from Paris. After nearly a year, he received orders permitting him the widest latitude and left Martinique with five vessels and the consul, arriving unexpected at Cartagena forcing the Boca Chica, and placing himself in a position to capture the forts guarding the sole entrance to the port. Reopening negotiations, he obtained complete reparations.

After having rendered to the navy other important services, the admiral was charged with the inspection of French fishing establishments at Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon and the island of Newfoundland. He was barely returned to France when a rupture with the United States became imminent. Admiral Mackau was named commander in chief of the naval forces of the Antilles and governor of Martinique in order to take measures to protect French settlement and commerce in the Antilles and Atlantic, but the war was averted. In these functions, Mackau was preoccupied with the anti-slavery movement which arose and strove to improve the plight of the blacks.

Mackau left Martinique. On the way, the frigate Terpsichore, on which he travelled with all his family, was assailed by a terrible tempest and remained several days in distress off the coast of Ireland. In these grave circumstances, he assumed command of the frigate and assisted by her captain, officers, and crewmen, he managed to lead Terpischore into the port of Cork.

On 30 May 1837, he was named a Vice-Admiral and new member of the Council of the Admiralty.

In 1840, Admiral Mackau went at the head of 43 warships to make vigorous demonstrations in the Río de la Plata in order to conclude an agreement with Rosas, dictator of Argentina, which was completed 29 October.

Created a peer of France on 20 July 1842, he was commanding the Mediterranean squadron when he was called to head the Ministry of the Navy and Colonies on 24 July 1843 as a replacement for Admiral Albin Roussin. During his administration, he reorganized the departments of control and accountability; proposed the laws of 18 and 19 July 1845, called the Mackau Law, which made preparations for the abolishment of slavery throughout the French Empire ; and also the law of 3 July 1846 opening a credit of ₣93 million for the improvement of the French Navy. He received the Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor on 29 October 1845.

Several trials called public attention to the abuses and disorder within the naval administration. Mackau tried unsuccessfully to fix them and was forced to accept an inquiry demanded by the Chamber of Deputies. Furthermore, the French Parliament considered the measures against slavery insufficient, and the deputies adopted the proposal of Alexandre Ledru-Rollin on the subject. Faced with a vote of no confidence, Mackau resigned on 8 May 1847. Nevertheless, he was promoted to full admiral on 23 December.

Avoiding the Second Republic, he became a senator during the Second Empire by right of his admiralty on 26 January 1852. He died three years later after having vainly sought a command in the Crimean War.

He was the father of Armand de Mackau (1832–1918), a deputy of the Third Republic.

The Annales school (French pronunciation: [ a'nal ]) is a group of historians associated with a style of historiography developed by French historians in the 20th century to stress long-term social history. It is named after its scholarly journal Annales. Histoire, Sciences Sociales, which remains the main source of scholarship, along with many books and monographs. The school has been influential in setting the agenda for historiography in France and numerous other countries, especially regarding the use of social scientific methods by historians, emphasizing social and economic rather than political or diplomatic themes.

The school deals primarily with late medieval and early modern Europe, before the French Revolution, with little interest in later topics. It has dominated French social history and heavily influenced historiography in Europe and Latin America. Prominent leaders include co-founders Lucien Febvre (1878–1956), Henri Hauser (1866–1946) and Marc Bloch (1886–1944). The second generation was led by Fernand Braudel (1902–1985) and included Georges Duby (1919–1996), Pierre Goubert (1915–2012), Robert Mandrou (1921–1984), Pierre Chaunu (1923–2009), Jacques Le Goff (1924–2014), and Ernest Labrousse (1895–1988).

Institutionally it is based on the Annales journal, the SEVPEN publishing house, the Fondation Maison des sciences de l'homme (FMSH), and especially the 6th Section of the École pratique des hautes études, all based in Paris. A third generation was led by Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie (1929–2023) and includes Jacques Revel, and Philippe Ariès (1914–1984), who joined the group in 1978. The third generation stressed history from the point of view of mentalities, or mentalités. The fourth generation of Annales historians, led by Roger Chartier (born 1945), clearly distanced itself from the mentalités approach, replaced by the cultural and linguistic turn, which emphasizes the social history of cultural practices.

The main scholarly outlet has been the journal Annales d'Histoire Economique et Sociale ("Annals of Economic and Social History"), founded in 1929 by Lucien Febvre and Marc Bloch, which broke radically with traditional historiography by insisting on the importance of taking all levels of society into consideration and emphasized the collective nature of mentalities. Its contributors viewed events as less fundamental than the mental frameworks that shaped decisions and practices. The informal successor as head of the school was Le Roy Ladurie. Multiple responses were attempted by the school. Scholars moved in multiple directions, covering in disconnected fashion the social, economic, and cultural history of different eras and different parts of the globe. By the time of the crisis the school was building a vast publishing and research network reaching across France, Europe, and the rest of the world. Influence spread out from Paris, but few new ideas came in. Much emphasis was given to quantitative data, seen as the key to unlocking all of social history. The Annales ignored the developments in quantitative studies underway in the U.S. and Britain, which reshaped economic, political, and demographic research. An attempt to require an Annales -written textbook for French schools was rejected by the government. By 1980 postmodern sensibilities undercut confidence in overarching metanarratives. As Jacques Revel notes, the success of the Annales school, especially its use of social structures as explanatory forces, contained the seeds of its own downfall, for there is "no longer any implicit consensus on which to base the unity of the social, identified with the real". The Annales school kept its infrastructure, but lost its mentalités.

The journal began in Strasbourg as Annales d'histoire économique et sociale ; it moved to Paris and kept the same name from 1929 to 1939. It was successively renamed Annales d'histoire sociale (1939–1942, 1945), Mélanges d'histoire sociale (1942–1944), Annales. Economies, sociétés, civilisations (1946–1994), and Annales. Histoire, Sciences Sociales (1994–).

In 1962, Braudel and Gaston Berger used Ford Foundation money and government funds to create a new independent foundation, the Fondation Maison des sciences de l'homme (FMSH), which Braudel directed from 1970 until his death. In 1970, the 6th Section and the Annales relocated to the FMSH building. FMSH set up elaborate international networks to spread the Annales gospel across Europe and the world. In 2013, it began publication of an English language edition, with all the articles translated.

The scope of topics covered by the journal is vast and experimental—there is a search for total history and new approaches. The emphasis is on social history, and very long-term trends, often using quantification and paying special attention to geography and to the intellectual world view of common people, or "mentality" (mentalité). Little attention is paid to political, diplomatic, or military history, or to biographies of famous men. Instead the Annales focused attention on the synthesizing of historical patterns identified from social, economic, and cultural history, statistics, medical reports, family studies, and even psychoanalysis.

The Annales was founded and edited by Marc Bloch and Lucien Febvre in 1929, while they were teaching at the University of Strasbourg and later in Paris. These authors, the former a medieval historian and the latter an early modernist, quickly became associated with the distinctive Annales approach, which combined geography, history, and the sociological approaches of the Année Sociologique (many members of which were their colleagues at Strasbourg) to produce an approach which rejected the predominant emphasis on politics, diplomacy and war of many 19th and early 20th-century historians as spearheaded by historians whom Febvre called Les Sorbonnistes.

Instead, they pioneered an approach to a study of long-term historical structures (la longue durée) over events and political transformations. Geography, material culture, and what later Annalistes called mentalités, or the psychology of the epoch, are also characteristic areas of study. The goal of the Annales was to undo the work of the Sorbonnistes, to turn French historians away from the narrowly political and diplomatic toward the new vistas in social and economic history.

Co-founder Marc Bloch (1886–1944) was a quintessential modernist who studied at the elite École Normale Supérieure, and in Germany, serving as a professor at the University of Strasbourg until he was called to the Sorbonne in Paris in 1936 as professor of economic history. Bloch's interests were highly interdisciplinary, influenced by the geography of Paul Vidal de la Blache (1845–1918) and the sociology of Émile Durkheim (1858–1917). His own ideas, especially those expressed in his masterworks, French Rural History (Les caractères originaux de l'histoire rurale française, 1931) and Feudal Society, were incorporated by the second-generation Annalistes, led by Fernand Braudel.

Georges Duby, a leader of the school, wrote that the history he taught:

The Annalistes, especially Lucien Febvre, advocated a histoire totale, or histoire tout court, a complete study of a historic problem.

Bloch was shot by the Gestapo during the German occupation of France in World War II for his active membership of the French Resistance. Febvre carried on the Annales approach in the 1940s and 1950s. It was during this time that he mentored Braudel, who became one of the best-known exponents of this school.

Braudel's work came to define a second era of Annales historiography and was influential throughout the 1960s and 1970s, especially for his work on the Mediterranean region in the era of Philip II of Spain. Braudel developed the idea, often associated with Annalistes, of different modes of historical time: l'histoire quasi immobile (the quasi motionless history) of historical geography, the history of social, political and economic structures (la longue durée), and the history of men and events, in the context of their structures.

While authors such as Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, Marc Ferro and Jacques Le Goff continue to carry the Annales banner, today the Annales approach has been less distinctive as more and more historians do work in cultural history, political history and economic history.

Bloch's Les Rois thaumaturges (1924) looked at the long-standing folk belief that the king could cure scrofula by his thaumaturgic touch. The kings of France and England indeed regularly practiced the ritual. Bloch was not concerned with the effectiveness of the royal touch—he acted instead like an anthropologist in asking why people believed it and how it shaped relations between king and commoner.

The book was highly influential in introducing comparative studies (in this case France and England), as well as long durations ("longue durée") studies spanning several centuries, even up to a thousand years, downplaying short-term events. Bloch's revolutionary charting of mentalities, or mentalités, resonated with scholars who were reading Freud and Proust.

In the 1960s, Robert Mandrou and Georges Duby harmonized the concept of mentalité history with Fernand Braudel 's structures of historical time and linked mentalities with changing social conditions. A flood of mentalité studies based on these approaches appeared during the 1970s and 1980s. By the 1990s, mentalité history had become interdisciplinary to the point of fragmentation, but still lacked a solid theoretical basis. While not explicitly rejecting mentalité history, younger historians increasingly turned to other approaches.

Fernand Braudel became the leader of the second generation after 1945. He obtained funding from the Rockefeller Foundation in New York and founded the 6th Section of the Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, which was devoted to the study of history and the social sciences. It became an independent degree-granting institution in 1975 under the name École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales (EHESS). Braudel's followers admired his use of the longue durée approach to stress slow, and often imperceptible effects of space, climate and technology on the actions of human beings in the past.

The Annales historians, after living through two world wars and incredible political upheavals in France, were deeply uncomfortable with the notion that multiple ruptures and discontinuities created history. They preferred to stress inertia and the longue durée. Special attention was paid to geography, climate, and demography as long-term factors. They believed the continuities of the deepest structures were central to history, beside which upheavals in institutions or the superstructure of social life were of little significance, for history lies beyond the reach of conscious actors, especially the will of revolutionaries. They rejected the Marxist idea that history should be used as a tool to foment and foster revolutions. In turn, the Marxists called them conservatives.

Braudel's first book, La Méditerranée et le Monde Méditerranéen à l'Epoque de Philippe II (1949) (The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II), was his most influential. This vast panoramic view used ideas from other social sciences, employed effectively the technique of the longue durée, and downplayed the importance of specific events and individuals. It stressed geography but not mentalité. It was widely admired, but most historians did not try to replicate it and instead focused on their specialized monographs. The book dramatically raised the worldwide profile of the Annales School.

In 1951, historian Bernard Bailyn published a critique of La Méditerranée et le Monde Méditerranéen à l'Epoque de Philippe II, which he framed as dichotomizing politics and society.

Before Annales, French history supposedly happened in Paris. Febvre broke decisively with this paradigm in 1912, with his sweeping doctoral thesis on Philippe II et la Franche-Comté. The geography and social structure of this region overwhelmed and shaped the king's policies.

The Annales historians did not try to replicate Braudel's vast geographical scope in La Méditerranée. Instead they focused on regions in France over long stretches of time. The most important was the study of The Peasants of Languedoc by Braudel's star pupil and successor Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie. The regionalist tradition flourished especially in the 1960s and 1970s in the work of Pierre Goubert in 1960 on Beauvais and René Baehrel on Basse-Provence.

Annales historians in the 1970s and 1980s turned to urban regions, including Pierre Deyon (Amiens), Maurice Garden (Lyon), Jean-Pierre Bardet (Rouen), Georges Freche (Toulouse), Gregory Hanlon (Agen and Layrac), and Jean-Claude Perrot (Caen). By the 1970s the shift was underway from the earlier economic history to cultural history and the history of mentalities.

The Annales school systematically reached out to create an impact on other countries. Its success varied widely. The Annales approach was especially well received in Italy and Poland. Franciszek Bujak (1875–1953) and Jan Rutkowski (1886–1949), the founders of modern economic history in Poland and of the journal Roczniki Dziejów Spolecznych i Gospodarczych (1931–), were attracted to the innovations of the Annales school. Rutkowski was in contact with Bloch and others, and published in the Annales.

After the Communists took control in the 1940s, Polish scholars were safer working on the Middle Ages and the early modern era rather than contemporary history. After the " Polish October " of 1956 the Sixth Section in Paris welcomed Polish historians and exchanges between the circle of the Annales and Polish scholars continued until the early 1980s. The reciprocal influence between the French school and Polish historiography was particularly evident in studies on the Middle Ages and the early modern era studied by Braudel.

British historians, apart from a few Marxists, were generally hostile. Academic historians decidedly sided with Geoffrey Elton 's The Practice of History against Edward Hallett Carr 's What Is History? One of the few British historians who were sympathetic towards the work of the Annales school was Hugh Trevor-Roper.

The Wageningen school centered on Bernard Slicher van Bath was viewed internationally as a Dutch counterpart of the Annales school, although Slicher van Bath himself vehemently rejected the idea of a quantitative "school" of historiography.

Among American academics, founding figure in American history of technology Lynn White Jr. dedicated his seminal and controversial book Medieval Technology and Social Change to Annales founder Marc Bloch. Both the American and the Annales historians picked up important family reconstitution techniques from French demographer Louis Henry.

In South America, the Annales approach became popular. From the 1950s Federico Brito Figueroa was the founder of a new Venezuelan historiography based largely on the ideas of the Annales School. Brito Figueroa carried his conception of the field to all levels of university study, emphasizing a systematic and scientific approach to history and placing it squarely in the social sciences. Spanish historiography was influenced by the "Annales School" starting in 1950 with Jaume Vicens Vives (1910–1960).

In Mexico, exiled Republican intellectuals extended the Annales approach, particularly from the Center for Historical Studies of El Colegio de México, the leading graduate studies institution of Latin America.

The Annales school has been cited as a key influence in the development of World Systems Theory by sociologist Immanuel Wallerstein.

The current leader is Roger Chartier, who is Directeur d'Études at the École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales in Paris, Professeur in the Collège de France, and Annenberg Visiting professor of history at the University of Pennsylvania. He frequently lectures and teaches in the United States, Spain, Mexico, Brazil and Argentina. His work in Early Modern European History focuses on the history of education, the history of the book and the history of reading.

Recently, he has been concerned with the relationship between written culture as a whole and literature, particularly theatrical plays, for France, England and Spain. His work in this specific field, based on the criss-crossing between literary criticism, bibliography, and sociocultural history, is connected to broader historiographical and methodological interests, which deal with the relation between history and other disciplines: philosophy, sociology, anthropology.

Chartier's typical undergraduate course focuses upon the making, remaking, dissemination, and reading of texts in early modern Europe and America. Under the heading of "practices", his class considers how readers read and marked up their books, forms of note-taking, and the interrelation between reading and writing from copying and translating to composing new texts.

Under the heading of "materials", his class examines the relations between different kinds of writing surfaces (including stone, wax, parchment, paper, walls, textiles, the body, and the heart), writing implements (including styluses, pens, pencils, needles, and brushes), and material forms (including scrolls, erasable tables, codices, broadsides and printed forms and books).

Under the heading of "places", his class explores where texts were made, read, and listened to, including monasteries, schools and universities, offices of the state, the shops of merchants and booksellers, printing houses, theaters, libraries, studies, and closets. The texts for his course include the Bible, translations of Ovid, Hamlet, Don Quixote, Montaigne's essays, Pepys's diary, Richardson's Pamela, and Franklin's autobiography.

The Annual flat-rate tax (French : Imposition forfaitaire annuelle or IFA) was an annual flat-tax payable by French corporations liable for corporate tax. The tax was created by the Law 73-1150 of 27 December 1973, and repealed completely on January 1, 2014.

All legal entities that were liable for the corporate tax were also liable for the flat-rate tax except some newly established corporations (whose capital was composed of at least 50% of cash contributions) and certain not-for-profit organizations.

Before 2006 the amount of IFA tax payable could be deducted against the corporate tax payable (or carried forward for 2 years).

The 2006 budget removed that possibility and instead the IFA became a deductible expense in the computation of the corporate tax.

The 2009 budget presented a plan to progressively repeal the IFA in three phases

Anti-Corsican sentiment or Anti-Corsianism is hostility, rejection, discrimination against and/or hatred towards Corsica, Corsican culture or the Corsican ethnic group. In the 21st century, some denounce the use of the term as a victimization phenomenon.

Some stereotypes of Corsicans include that they don't like tourists, that they are racist or lazy, or that they are terrorists or members of mafia groups.

The Greek geographer Strabo wrote: «The island of Cyrnos, which the Romans call Corsica, is a terrible country to inhabit, given the harsh nature of the soil and the almost absolute lack of passable roads, which means that the populations are confined to the mountains and reduced to living by banditry, are wilder than wild beasts. This is what we can, moreover, verify without leaving Rome, because it often happens that the Roman generals make raids on the island, unexpectedly attack some of the fortresses of these barbarians and thus remove a large number of slaves; we can then closely observe the strange physiognomy of these men, fierce like the beasts of the woods or stupid like cattle, who cannot bear to live in servitude, or who, if they resign themselves not to die, wear out the masters who bought them with their apathy and insensitivity, to the point of making them regret the little money they cost them. There are, however, certain portions of the island, which are strictly habitable, and where we even find a few small towns, such as Blésinon, Charax, Eniconiæ and Vapanes.»

The Corsican population was oppressed under the Genoese domination of the island. The Corsicans were notably overtaxed, despised and most were forcibly expelled from certain large cities, notably Bonifacio and Calvi.

In France, well before the annexation of Corsica by France, descriptions devalue the Corsican population. According to Pierre Davity, the Corsicans are hardly civilized for the most part and there is not in them this politeness that the we see among the Italians. They would be described as "extremely cruel" however Davity notes that they would be brave soldiers.

During the Napoleonic period, the royalists took up the Corsican name of Napoleon Bonaparte, Buonaparte, because they did not recognize his imperial dignity acquired due to his ethnic origins after the breakdown of the Peace of Amiens (1803) and thus refused to use only his first name, sign of his title.

The writer Victor Hugo notably wrote: «Each state has its slave, each kingdom drags its ball and chain. Turkey has Greece, Russia has Poland, England has Ireland and France has Corsica. Alongside each master people, a people of slaves. Poorly built building: half marble, half plaster.»

In 1890, the trip of President Sadi Carnot to Corsica was recounted in Le petit journal, with a circulation of more than a million copies, in an article entitled: «The President among the savages.»

The Corsicans were one of the ethnic groups victimized by the Barbary slave trade and were favored targets for North African slavers and pirates, as a result, many coastal villages were raided by Ottoman fleets. However, some corsairs who kidnapped Corsicans were themselves of Corsican origin who had been kidnapped decades earlier by the Barbarys.

On French social networks, Corsicans are one of the most stereotyped groups and subject to hostility. There was also an awkwardness on the part of Agence France-Presse following a case of racism by speaking directly about Corsica before mentioning that the case is taking place throughout France.

Television host Laurent Ruquier has attracted controversy several times for his hostile jokes towards Corsicans. In 2001, he declared, "Discreetly, Jospin gave himself a little pleasure by firing Zuccarelli: blowing up a Corsican without us hearing the sound of the explosion". He notably declared in 2011, "In Corsica, there are elected officials, beaten elected officials and dejected elected officials. We went from prefects to mayors. When it comes to job cuts on the Isle of Beauty, we're not doing any better".

Interior Minister Manuel Valls declared in 2013 that "Violence is rooted in Corsican culture" following the assassination of PNRC president Jean-Luc Chiappini and asked Corsicans to support French justice. The comments were highlighted and outraged several Corsicans, one of whom questioned him about his comments: “I wanted to tell you that I am Corsican, I work for Corsica and for me violence is not at all part of my culture. I believe that the violence today in Corsica is part of a political and economic context that is difficult to control. But it's a little disheartening to hear that it's part of our culture. It's like there's nothing we can do about it." Many French people disapproved of Manuel Valls' comments.

Comments on social networks also report calls to «must get rid of this island», describing the Corsican population as “inbred” or others like «The only ones who work in your country are the funeral directors because you're shooting at each other like idiots.» or «I want to invest in a bacteriological bomb that I send to Corsica»

In 2023, the attack on a father and his eight-year-old son sick with cancer, supporters of Olympique de Marseille, by supporters of AC Ajaccio leads to an increase in hostility against the Corsicans.

Anti-Gaullism refers to organized opposition to Gaullism. It encompasses individuals, groups, and movements that oppose the political and philosophical principles of Charles de Gaulle.

Even more than Gaullism, anti-Gaullism is not a rigid doctrinal framework but a mood that is capable of spanning the French political spectrum from right to left. De Gaulle's biographer Julian Jackson traces four often interlinked traditions of anti-Gaullism:

In the year of 1942, there was a great debate between De Gaulle and Henri Giraud, called the " De Gaulle–Giraud Dispute." Both of these men were fierce anti-Nazis, but both were vying for the control and power of the government of Free France – which would likely mean the control over the French government that would come after the war.

For supporters of the Vichy Regime, Pétain's assumption of power was legitimate and so de Gaulle 's self exile and opposition to the regime was seen as military rebellion. Consequently, de Gaulle was sentenced to death by the government for "treason, intelligence with the enemy, and desertion to a foreign country".

Charles Maurras denounced him as a traitor who had sold out to the British, whom he regarded as "enemy number one".

Charles de Gaulle 's eventual support for Algerian independence alienated much of the right, Far-right former supporters, such as Pierre Lagaillarde and Guy Forzy, founded the clandestine terrorist organization Organisation armée secrète (OAS) following the Week of the Barricades, advocating a continued French presence in Algeria. Even moderate right-wing politicians like Roger Duchet, a senator from 1946 to 1959, opposed the self-determination policy. When the Évian Accords referendum was held, several members of the major conservative party, the National Centre of Independents and Peasants (CNIP), opposed the agreement.

The establishment of the Fifth Republic divided the political right. Despite support from figures like Henri Dorgères, others such as Jacques Isorni, strongly opposed de Gaulle's inauguration, declaring, "The defender of Louis XVI cannot vote for Robespierre".

In 1962, unable to overthrow de Gaulle, right-wing anti-Gaullists censured the Pompidou government with former de Gaulle ally Paul Reynaud being the first to sign the motion, which was endorsed by 109 CNIP deputies out of 121.

As early as 1946, some of de Gaulle 's right-wing adversaries emerged within the Popular Republican Movement (MRP), which had been loyal to Gaullism during the French Resistance. Ideological divergences, especially regarding France’s integration into Europe, became apparent.

During de Gaulle’s presidency, his economic and monetary policies were criticized. His proposal to involve workers in company profits alarmed business circles. Gaston Monnerville, president of the Senate, accused him of "treason".

Unlike the right, the French left was less divided in its opposition to de Gaulle 's policies, given his identity as a right-wing leader. Most left-wing politicians opposed Gaullist measures during the Fifth Republic.

During World War II, some French Communists joined de Gaulle in the French Resistance, such as Jean Moulin. However, the communists later opposed de Gaulle over the powers of the Constituent Assembly, the institutions, and the regime's nature. Upon the creation of the Rally for the French People (RPF), the French Communist Party (PCF) accused de Gaulle of being neither democratic nor republican but instead a defender of capitalism and big business. Until 1958, de Gaulle was labeled a "fascist" or a "wannabe dictator serving big capital".

As early as 1947, socialists, including Vincent Auriol, then President of France, considered the Rally for the French People (RPF) a movement partly composed of Vichy sympathizers and fascists. Although some socialists, like Guy Mollet, supported de Gaulle during the establishment of the Fifth Republic, his governance soon diverged from their parliamentary vision. They criticized him for exercising personal power and ignoring national realities, particularly opposing his proposal for the president to be elected by direct universal suffrage.

Key figures of moderate left-wing anti-Gaullism included Pierre Mendès France and François Mitterrand, the latter running against de Gaulle in the second round of the 1965 French presidential election.

In the 1970s, an anti-nuclear movement in France, consisting of citizens' groups and political action committees, emerged. Between 1975 and 1977, some 175,000 people protested against nuclear power in ten demonstrations.

In 1972, the anti-nuclear weapons movement maintained a presence in the Pacific, largely in response to French nuclear testing there. Activists, including David McTaggart from Greenpeace, defied the French government by sailing small vessels into the test zone and interrupting the testing program. In Australia, scientists issued statements demanding an end to the tests; unions refused to load French ships, service French planes, or carry French mail; and consumers boycotted French products. In 1985 the Greenpeace ship Rainbow Warrior was bombed and sunk by the French DGSE in Auckland, New Zealand, as it prepared for another protest of nuclear testing in French military zones. One crew member, Fernando Pereira of Portugal, photographer, drowned on the sinking ship.

In January 2004, up to 15,000 anti-nuclear protesters marched in Paris against a new generation of nuclear reactors, the European Pressurised Reactor (EPR). On March 17, 2007, simultaneous protests, organised by Sortir du nucléaire, were staged in 5 French towns to protest construction of EPR plants.

After Japan's 2011 Fukushima nuclear disaster, thousands staged anti-nuclear protests around France, demanding reactors be closed. Protesters' demands were focused on getting France to shut its oldest nuclear power station at Fessenheim. Many people also protested at the Cattenom Nuclear Power Plant, France's second most powerful. In November 2011, thousands of anti-nuclear protesters delayed a train carrying radioactive waste from France to Germany. Many clashes and obstructions made the journey the slowest one since the annual shipments of radioactive waste began in 1995. Also in November 2011, a French court fined nuclear power company Électricité de France €1.5m and jailed two senior employees for spying on Greenpeace, including hacking into Greenpeace's computer systems. The sentence was overturned by an appeals court in February 2013.

In March 2014, police arrested 57 Greenpeace protesters who used a truck to break through security barriers and enter the Fessenheim nuclear power plant in eastern France. The activists hung antinuclear banners, but France's nuclear safety authority said that the plant's security had not been compromised. President Hollande has promised to close Fessenheim by 2016, but Greenpeace wants immediate closure.

In France, opposition to nuclear weapons has been somewhat muted since they are perceived as a national symbol and as securing French independence. The strongest anti-nuclear opposition has emerged over nuclear power "as a reaction to the centralising traditions of the French state and the technocratic trends of modern society".

France began a nuclear power program in the 1950s and announced a shift to the Westinghouse light water reactor in 1969. Following the 1973 oil crisis, the government announced a dramatic increase in planned nuclear capacity. These major decisions were put forward as a fait accompli, with no opportunity for meaningful parliamentary debate. An intense extra-parliamentary opposition, of citizens' groups and political action committees, emerged. In the 1970s, there were many large and dramatic anti-nuclear protests and demonstrations in France.

In 1971, 15,000 people demonstrated against French plans to locate the first light -water reactor power plant in Bugey. This was the first of a series of mass protests organized at nearly every planned nuclear site until the massive demonstration at the Superphénix breeder reactor in Creys-Malvillein in 1977 culminated in violence. Between 1975 and 1977, some 175,000 people protested against nuclear power in ten demonstrations.

In 1972, the anti-nuclear weapons movement maintained a presence in the Pacific, largely in response to French nuclear testing there. Activists, including David McTaggart from Greenpeace, defied the French government by sailing small vessels into the test zone and interrupting the testing program. In Australia, thousands joined protest marches in Adelaide, Melbourne, Brisbane, and Sydney. Scientists issued statements demanding an end to the tests; unions refused to load French ships, service French planes, or carry French mail; and consumers boycotted French products. In Fiji, activists formed an Against Testing on Mururoa organization.

On 18 January 1982, Swiss activist and eco-terrorist Chaïm Nissim fired five rockets, obtained from the Red Army Faction through Carlos the Jackal, on the Superphénix nuclear plant, then under construction. Rockets were launched at the incomplete containment building and caused damage, missing the reactor's empty core.

In 1985 the Greenpeace ship Rainbow Warrior was bombed and sunk by the French DGSE in Auckland, New Zealand, as it prepared for another protest of nuclear testing in French military zones. One crew member, Fernando Pereira of Portugal, photographer, drowned on the sinking ship while attempting to recover his photographic equipment. Two members of DGSE were captured and sentenced, but eventually repatriated to France in a controversial affair.

Following the 1986 Chernobyl disaster, radiation levels were much higher than originally thought, and some farmers in the eastern part of France had to plow under tainted lettuce and cabbage crops. French authorities at the time of the Chernobyl disaster were "criticised for a lack of transparency, with many interpreting officials' declarations as saying that radioactive pollution had not crossed the border from Germany into France".

In January 2004, up to 15,000 anti-nuclear protesters marched in Paris against a new generation of nuclear reactors, the European Pressurised Reactor (EPR). Also in 2004, an anti-nuclear protester, Sebastien Briat, was run over by a train carrying radioactive waste.

In 2005, thousands of anti-nuclear demonstrators marched to commemorate the 1986 Chernobyl disaster and demand an end to government plans to build a nuclear plant in western France.

On March 17, 2007, simultaneous protests, organised by Sortir du nucléaire (Get Out of Nuclear Power), were staged in 5 French towns to protest construction of EPR plants; Rennes, Lyon, Toulouse, Lille, and Strasbourg.

On April 26, 2007 (the 21st anniversary of the Chernobyl disaster) around 30 protesters blocked entrances and chained themselves to cranes at the EPR site in Flamanville, some remaining on the site for 24 hours. A truck was also parked in front of the entrance to block its access.

In 2008, twenty Greenpeace activists delayed construction of a new nuclear reactor being built in Flamanville for 50 hours. In July 2008 there were a series of accidents at the French nuclear site Tricastin-Pierrelatte, and Greenpeace France launched two court cases in an effort to find out more details about these. In August 2008, Sortir du nucléaire called Areva 's radioactive emissions 'very dangerous' and sought an official safety inspection of its factories.

Following the 2011 Fukushima I nuclear accidents, around 1,000 people took part in a protest against nuclear power in Paris on March 20. Most of the protests, however, are focused on the closure of the Fessenheim Nuclear Power Plant, where some 3,800 French and Germans demonstrated on April 8 and April 25.

Thousands staged anti-nuclear protests around France, on the eve of the 25th anniversary of Chernobyl and after Japan's Fukushima nuclear disaster, demanding reactors be closed. Protesters' demands were focused on getting France to shut its oldest nuclear power station at Fessenheim, which lies in a densely populated part of France, less than two kilometres from Germany and around 40 kilometres (25 miles) from Switzerland.

Around 2,000 people also protested at the Cattenom nuclear plant, France's second most powerful, in the Mosel region to the northwest of Strasbourg. Protesters in southwestern France staged another demonstration in the form of a mass picnic in front of the Blayais nuclear reactor, also in memory of Chernobyl. In France's northwestern region of Brittany, around 800 people staged a good-humoured march in front of the Brennilis experimental heavy-water atomic plant that was built in the 1960s. It was taken offline in 1985 but its dismantling is still not completed after 25 years.

Three months after the Fukushima nuclear disaster, thousands of anti-nuclear campaigners protested in Paris.

On June 26, 2011, around 5,000 protesters gathered near Fessenheim nuclear power plant, demanding the plant be shut down immediately. Demonstrators from France and Germany came to Fessenheim and formed a human chain along the road. Protesters claim that the plant is vulnerable to flooding and earthquakes. Fessenheim has become a flashpoint in renewed debate over nuclear safety in France after the Fukushima accident. The plant is operated by French power group EDF.

In November 2011, a French court fined nuclear power giant Électricité de France €1.5m and jailed two senior employees for spying on anti-nuclear group Greenpeace, including hacking into Greenpeace's computer systems. Greenpeace was awarded €500,000 in damages. Although EDF claimed that a security firm had only been employed to monitor Greenpeace, the court disagreed, jailing the head and deputy head of EDF's nuclear security operation for three years each.

In November 2011, thousands of anti-nuclear protesters delayed a train carrying radioactive waste from France to Germany. Many clashes and obstructions made the journey the slowest one since the annual shipments of radioactive waste began in 1995. The shipment, the first since Japan's Fukushima nuclear disaster, faced large protests in France where activists damaged the train tracks. Thousands of people in Germany also interrupted the train's journey, forcing it to proceed at a snail's pace, covering 1,200 kilometers (746 miles) in 109 hours. More than 200 people were reported injured in the protests and several arrests were made.

As of November 2011, France is locked in a national debate over a partial nuclear phaseout. Opinion polls show support for atomic energy has dropped since Fukushima. Forty-percent of the French "are 'hesitant' about nuclear energy while a third are in favor and 17 percent are against, according to a survey by pollster Ifop published November 13". Following François Hollande's victory in the 2012 Presidential Election, there may be a partial nuclear phaseout in France, with his Socialist party in favour of closing the oldest 24 reactors by 2025.

On December 5, 2011, nine Greenpeace activists cut through a fence at the Nogent Nuclear Power Plant. They scaled the roof of the domed reactor building and unfurled a "Safe Nuclear Doesn't Exist" banner before attracting the attention of security guards. Two activists remained at large for four hours. On the same day, two more campaigners breached the perimeter of the Cruas Nuclear Power Plant, escaping detection for more than 14 hours, while posting videos of their sit-in on the internet.

On the first anniversary of the Fukushima nuclear disaster, organisers of French anti-nuclear demonstrations claim 60,000 supporters formed a human chain 230 kilometres long, stretching from Lyon to Avignon.

In March 2014, police arrested 57 Greenpeace protesters who used a truck to break through security barriers and enter the Fessenheim nuclear power plant in eastern France. The activists hung antinuclear banners, but France's nuclear safety authority said that the plant's security had not been compromised. President Hollande had promised to close the plant by 2016, but this has been pushed back until the Flamanville 3 unit comes on line sometime in late 2018.

France 's anti-waste law for a circular economy (la loi anti-gaspillage pour une économie circulaire) was passed in an effort to eliminate improper disposal of waste as well as limit excessive waste. This law is part of Europe 's larger environmental activism efforts and builds on previous laws the country has passed.

The law aims to reduce the country's production and use of single-use plastic massively and to promote a more circular economic structure. Similarly to the United States ' Reduce, reuse and recycle efforts, the anti-waste law acts similarly in promoting more eco-friendly consumer behaviors as well as holding producers to the same standards.

On the product production side, the anti-waste law bans the incineration of unsold and unused goods. The law forces manufacturers to repurpose the products which include but is not limited to donating and recycling. This includes recycling, donating and repurposing the scraps that are left over when new products are made. Furthermore, the law requires repairability indexes on products, this helps consumers recycle and repair products before buying them new or throwing them away, promoting a more circular economy.

The European-Union's environmental efforts began several years ago with one of their more well-known contributions: the EU Ecolabel, a label that manufacturers volunteer to put on their products that applies to those "with a low environmental impact throughout their life cycle, from the extraction of raw material through to production, use and disposal." To use the label, all requirements of the label must be met which include "the use of biocides, water consumption and water discharge, air emissions and the use of hazardous substances." It also covers product safety requirements for the consumer. " The Ecolabel was a larger EU effort that began France's circular economy efforts.

In 2010, the European Union passed Directive 2010/75/EC that addressed the EU's efforts toward preventing and limiting environmental pollution.

In 2013, the European Union began their "Single Market for Green Products Initiative" that called attention to individual environmental impact and individual environmental footprint.

In 2018, the EU amends prior Directive 2008/98/EC. "The Waste Framework Directive requires for the first time that the Member States set up separate waste collection for textiles, including a deadline for implementation."

The law was first presented on July 10, 2019, by France's Minister of State and Minister for the Ecological and Inclusive Transition, François de Rugy, and Secretaries of State to the Minister of State and Minister for the Ecological and Inclusive Transition, Brune Poirson and Emmanuelle Wargon.

The initial proposal outlined the goals and objectives for the new law as well as the positive environmental impact that it would have. The four main areas that the law covers are as follows:

The law was passed on February 10, 2020, and put into effect on February 11, 2020. On Feb. 11, the law was published for public viewing on the Légifrance website. The final law that was passed has 130 articles and six sections that break it down into different areas.

In the developmental stages of creating the initial proposal for the anti-waste law, French law, and policymakers worked closely with environmental agencies to create a comprehensive, all-encompassing approach. As reported by the French non-profit donation agency "L'Agence du Don en Nature", "630 million euros of products are destroyed each year, i.e. equivalent to 7 times the sum received for the Téléthon 2018".

This section covers the phased approach to reducing the use of disposable plastic until it is no longer used or produced in France. With these efforts, disposable plates, containers and utensils at fast-food restaurants will be replaced with reusable, more sustainable options. Disposable tableware includes both single-use plastic and cardboard items. As of Jan. 1, 2023, restaurants must serve dine-in customers with reusable tableware. Furthermore, there will be a prohibition on using the word " biodegradable " on product packaging due to "lack of scientific consensus". Additional product bans include the following:

Informing consumers of the sustainability, repairability and recyclability of the products they purchase is a vital piece of the anti-waste law. The law posits that better informed consumers will make better environmentally friendly decisions when it comes to what they purchase. Electronic products being manufactured and sold in France must provide a repairability index that assesses the following categories of a product: documentation, disassembly, availability of spare parts for the product, price of spare parts, and product-specific aspects. "Each criterion is scored on 20 points and each number is then compiled into an aggregate score out of 100, which is then divided by 10 and rounded to 1 decimal digit to make the final grade."

The law also strictly prohibits the destruction of unsold goods – something many manufacturers and businesses have been accused of doing in recent years. This applies to food products, textile products, and hygiene products and will be enacted in a staged approach between 2021 and 2023. France's robust recycling system was given an update with the anti-waste law being passed. Now, as of January 2023, French residents can recycle any product that comes in plastic packaging in the yellow bins provided throughout France and not have to worry about sorting things themselves. Similarly to the section on consumer information, this section also urges consumers to reuse and repurpose older products in order to reduce waste as much as possible.

The vast majority of this section covers the policy referred to as the "polluter pays" – this implies that producers will be fined for illegal and improper disposal of waste. Instead of making companies simply pay a fine, there is also a five-year-plan aspect that companies must complete in addition that covers how they will avoid issues like this in the future.

The law reads that: "Every five years, the producers subject to the polluter pays schemes will have to draw up a prevention and eco-design action plan for their products so that they contain more recycled material and are more recyclable on the national territory. Provision is made for PRO – producer’s responsibility organizations to be able to facilitate the drawing up of these plans whose implementation will remain in the hands of producers."

The section covering "wild deposits" is a continuation of improper waste disposal. Environmental pollution is the issue that these articles aim to address by detailing the legal ways that manufacturers can dispose of waste and where it should be done. To avoid greenwashing and similar false advertising, Articles 93 through 106 also place further guidelines on when companies can use terms like " biodegradable ", "environmentally friendly", and " compostable ".

The law has several goals and milestones to track the law's process since implementation. A main goal of the policy is to cut back on waste on an individual household scale and as an economy. The measurable statistics France's government is looking for are a "15% decrease in household trash per inhabitant by 2030" and "a 5% decrease in waste from economic activity".

By 2025, the law posits that the country's population will be recycling "100% of plastics" and will "end the use of single-use plastic packaging by 2040". "In 2021, it is prohibited to use straws, single-use cutlery, plastic stirrers, styrofoam boxes at fast-food restaurants, and free distribution of plastic bottles in businesses". As of 2022, it is illegal to sell produce in plastic packaging if the portion is under 1.5 kilograms and "public buildings must have a public water fountain". "In 2023, fast-food restaurants will no longer be allowed to use disposable plates and cups for on-premise consumption of food and beverages."

The ban on selling "medical devices containing microplastics " will be enacted in January 2024.

"France will ban the sale of cosmetic products that contain microplastics – such as shampoos, hair colouring products, shower gels and makeup removers."

Antillean Creole (also known as Lesser Antillean Creole, Kreyol, or Patois) is a creole language that is primarily spoken in the Lesser Antilles. Its grammar and vocabulary include elements of Indigenous languages, African languages, French, and English.

There are two main geographical and linguistic groups in the Antilles or Caribbean Islands : the Greater Antilles and the Lesser Antilles. Intercomprehension between these two groups is possible, but despite a large proportion of shared vocabulary and largely similar grammatical functioning, it is limited by varying key vocabulary and different words for basic grammar. Nevertheless, it is easy to begin to understand each other completely, as long as one of the two has a basic knowledge of the other's language.

Antillean Creole is spoken natively, to varying degrees, in Haïti, Saint Lucia, Grenada, Guadeloupe, Îles des Saintes, Martinique, Saint-Barthélemy (St. Barts), Dominica, French Guiana, Trinidad and Tobago, and Venezuela (mainly in Macuro, Güiria and El Callao Municipality). It is also spoken in various Creole-speaking immigrant communities in the United States Virgin Islands, British Virgin Islands, and the Collectivity of Saint Martin. Antillean Creole has approximately thirteen million speakers and is a means of communication for migrant populations traveling between neighboring English- and French-speaking territories. Since French is a Romance language, French Antillean Creole is considered to be one of Latin America's languages by some linguists.

In a number of countries (including Dominica, Grenada, St. Lucia, Trinidad, Brazil (Lanc-Patuá) and Venezuela) the language is referred to as patois. It has historically been spoken in nearly all of the Lesser Antilles, but its number of speakers has declined in Trinidad and Tobago and Grenada. Conversely, it is widely used on the islands of Dominica and Saint Lucia ; though they are officially English-speaking, there are efforts to preserve the use of Antillean Creole, as there are in Trinidad and Tobago and its neighbour, Venezuela. In recent decades, Creole has gone from being seen as a sign of lower socio-economic status, banned in school playgrounds, to a mark of national pride.

Since the 1970s, there has been a literary revival of Creole in the French-speaking islands of the Lesser Antilles, with writers such as Raphaël Confiant and Monchoachi employing the language. Édouard Glissant wrote theoretically and poetically about its significance and its history.

Pierre Belain d'Esnambuc was a French trader and adventurer in the Caribbean who established the first permanent French colony, Saint-Pierre, on the island of Martinique in 1635. Belain sailed to the Caribbean in 1625, hoping to establish a French settlement on the island of St. Christopher (St. Kitts). In 1626, he returned to France, where he won the support of Cardinal Richelieu to establish French colonies in the region. Richelieu became a shareholder in the Compagnie de Saint-Christophe, created to accomplish that with d'Esnambuc at its head. The company was not particularly successful, and Richelieu had it reorganised as the Compagnie des Îles de l'Amérique. In 1635, d'Esnambuc sailed to Martinique with 100 French settlers to clear land for sugarcane plantations.

After six months on Martinique, d'Esnambuc returned to St. Christopher, where he soon died prematurely in 1636, leaving the company and Martinique in the hands of his nephew, Jacques Dyel du Parquet, who inherited d'Esnambuc's authority over the French settlements in the Caribbean. Dyel du Parquet became governor of the island. He remained in Martinique and did not concern himself with the other islands.

The French permanently settled on Martinique and Guadeloupe after being driven off Saint Kitts and Nevis (French : Saint-Christophe) by the British. Fort Royal (now Fort-de-France) on Martinique was a major port for French battle ships in the region from which the French were able to explore the region. In 1638, Dyel du Parquet decided to have Fort Saint Louis built to protect the city against enemy attacks. From Fort Royal, Martinique, Du Parquet proceeded south in search for new territories, established the first settlement in Saint Lucia in 1643 and headed an expedition that established a French settlement in Grenada in 1649.

Despite the long history of British rule, Grenada's French heritage is still evident by the number of French loanwords in Grenadian Creole and the French-style buildings, cuisine and placenames (Petit Martinique, Martinique Channel, etc.)

In 1642, the Compagnie des Îles de l'Amérique received a 20-year extension of its charter. The king would name the governor general of the company, and the company would name the governors of the various islands. However, by the late 1640s, Cardinal Mazarin had little interest in colonial affairs, and the company languished. In 1651, it dissolved itself, selling its exploitation rights to various parties. The Du Paquet family bought Martinique, Grenada and Saint Lucia for 60,000 livres. The sieur d' Houël bought Guadeloupe, Marie-Galante, La Desirade and the Saintes. The Knights of Malta bought Saint Barthélemy and Saint Martin and then sold them in 1665 to the Compagnie des Indes occidentales, formed one year earlier.

Dominica is a former French and British colony in the Eastern Caribbean, about halfway between the French islands of Guadeloupe (to the north) and Martinique (to the south). Christopher Columbus named the island after the day of the week on which he spotted it, a Sunday (Latin: dies Dominica), on 3 November 1493. In the 100 years after Columbus's landing, Dominica remained isolated. At the time, it was inhabited by the Island Caribs, or Kalinago people. Over time, more settled there after they had been driven from surrounding islands, as European powers entered the region.

In 1690, French woodcutters from Martinique and Guadeloupe begin to set up timber camps to supply the French islands with wood and gradually become permanent settlers. France had a colony for several years and imported slaves from West Africa, Martinique and Guadeloupe to work on its plantations. The Antillean Creole language developed.

France formally ceded possession of Dominica to Great Britain in 1763. The latter established a small colony on the island in 1805. As a result, Dominica uses English as an official language, but Antillean Creole is still spoken as a secondary language because of Dominica's location between the French-speaking departments of Guadeloupe and Martinique.

In Trinidad, the Spanish possessed the island but contributed little towards advancements, with El Dorado being their focus. Trinidad was perfect for its geographical location. Because Trinidad was considered underpopulated, Roume de St. Laurent, a Frenchman living in Grenada, was able to obtain a Cédula de Población from King Charles III of Spain on 4 November 1783.

Trinidad's population jumped to over 15,000 by the end of 1789, from just under 1,400 in 1777. In 1797, Trinidad became a British crown colony, despite its French-speaking population.

Antillean Creole began as the pidgin "baragouin" in 1635. It was spoken by French settlers, the Africans they enslaved, and Aboriginal peoples that resided on the islands. It originated in the Guadeloupe and Martinique areas of the Lesser Antilles. It was not until 1700, when there was an increase in African influences, that this pidgin transitioned into the creole that it is today. The formation of this creole was influenced by many different dialects and languages. These include dialects of French, other European languages, Carib (both Karina and Arawakan), and African languages.

Due to the influences from its origins, this creole has some distinctive linguistic features. Features of French included in Lesser Antillean Creole include infinitive forms of verbs, the use of only the masculine noun forms, oblique pronouns, and its subject to verb word order. Features from African languages include their verbal marking system as well as providing a West-African substrate. Other features of this creole also include doubling to emphasize a sentence, the word "point" to inflect the negative, and the non-distinguished adverbs and adjectives.

The language emerged in a context of plantation slavery in the French Antilles. Due to differing native tongues, it was difficult for French settlers to communicate with the enslaved Africans and vice versa, as well as for slaves of different ethnic origins to communicate between each other. As a result, they were forced to develop a new form of communication by relying on what they heard from their colonial enslavers and other slaves. According to Jesuit missionary Pierre Pelleprat, French settlers would change their way of speaking to a simpler form to be more accommodating to the enslaved people. For example, to say "I have not eaten" settlers would say "moi point manger" even though the proper French translation is "Je n'ai pas mangé". This simpler form of French, along with linguistic influences from other languages, eventually evolved into Antillean Creole.

There is some variation in orthography between the islands. In St. Lucia, Dominica and Martinique 'dj' and 'tj' are used whereas in Guadeloupe 'gy' and 'ky' are used. These represent differences in pronunciations. Several words may be pronounced in various ways depending on the region:

The letter 'r' in St. Lucia and Dominica represents the English / ɹ / whereas in Guadeloupe and Martinique it represents the more French-like sound / ɣ /.

Personal pronouns in Antillean Creole are invariable so they do not inflect for case as in European languages such as French or English. This means that mwen, for example, can mean I, me or my; yo can mean they, them, their etc.

Possessive adjectives are placed after the noun; kay mwen 'my house', manman'w 'your mother'

'ou' and 'li' are used after nouns ending in a consonant and 'w' and 'y' after nouns ending in a vowel. All other possessive adjectives are invariable.

Kaz ou - Your house, Kouto'w - Your knife

Madanm li - His wife, Sésé'y - Her sister

The indefinite article is placed before the noun and can be pronounced as on, an, yon, yan. The word yonn means "one".

This example does not work for Guadeloupe Creole where article are always "la", and for Haitian Creole whose article are more similar but have "nan" in addition.

In Creole, there are five definite articles (la, lan, a, an, nan) which are placed after the nouns they modify, in contrast to French. The final syllable of the preceding word determines which is used with which nouns.

If the last sound is an oral consonant and is preceded by an oral vowel, it becomes la :

If the last sound is an oral consonant and is preceded by a nasal vowel, it becomes lan :

If the last sound is an oral vowel and is preceded by an oral consonant, it becomes a :

If a word ends in a nasal vowel, it becomes an :

If the last sound is a nasal consonant, it becomes nan, but this form is rare and is usually replaced by lan :

Note that in Guadeloupean Creole there is no agreement of sounds between the noun and definite article and la is used for all nouns

Like the definite article this is placed after the noun. It varies widely by region.

Verbs in Creole are invariable and unlike French or English have no inflection to distinguish tenses. A series of particles placed before the verb indicate tense and aspect. There is no Subjunctive mood.

The vocabulary of Antillean Creole is based mostly on French, with many contributions from West African languages, Spanish, English and Amerindian languages.

Martinican Creole is widely spoken in Martinique which had mixed between French and African languages developed between the white settlers and the slaves from Africa who has settled in the New World. Martinique's history and its origin were the Arawaks that became the first known inhabitants along with the Carib tribes before the Spanish led by Christopher Columbus arrive in Martinique in 1502 and claimed it for Spain before handing over to the French in 1635 by King Louis XIV of France which affected as the Code Noir which tens of thousands of slaves from Africa were taken to the new French colony of Martinique. The elements of Martinican Creole was mixed with English, Spanish, Portuguese, Indian, African, Amerindian and other ethnic minorities as a mixture of blend like Haitian Creole and Louisiana Creole once the French settlers along with their African slaves became the heart of the French Caribbean. Martinican Creole is a regional language because the island has European, British, French, Spanish, Portuguese, Indians (Tamils), Blacks (Africans), Martinicans, Caribs and others. It is considered part of Overseas France and a European region which became an Overseas département on 19 March 1946. Martinique shares characteristics with both the Caribbean and Latin America as a whole, with various African language that develops Martinican Creole had bring more closely tied to the latter due to its French, Spanish and Latin connections with the black majority.

Dominican Creole French is the generally-spoken language in Dominica. Its mutual intelligibility rate with other varieties of Antillean Creole is almost 100%. Its syntactic, grammatical and lexical features are virtually identical to that of Martinican Creole, but like its Saint Lucian counterpart, it has more English loanwords than the Martinican variety. People who speak Haitian Creole can also understand Dominican Creole French. Even though there are a number of distinctive features, they are mutually intelligible.

Like the other Caribbean Creoles, Dominican French Creole combines a syntax of African and Carib origin with a vocabulary primarily derived from French.

Saint Lucian French Creole is commonly spoken in Saint Lucia. Its syntactic, grammatical and lexical features are virtually identical to that of Martinican Creole.

Like the other Caribbean creoles, Saint Lucian French Creole combines a syntax of African and Carib origin with a vocabulary primarily derived from French. The language can be considered to be mutually intelligible with French creoles of the Lesser Antilles and is related to Haitian Creole, which has nonetheless a number of distinctive features.

It is still widely spoken in Saint Lucia. In the mid-19th century, migrants took the language with them to Panama, where it is now moribund.

Historically, French, or French Creole, was the language of the large majority of the inhabitants, enslaved Africans and estate owners. Though the new British administrators spoke English, French was still predominant.

Grenadian Creole French is a variety of Antillean Creole French. In Grenada and among Grenadians, it is referred to as Patois or French Patois. It was once the lingua franca in Grenada and was commonly heard as recently as the mid 1900s when many in rural areas could speak it. In the 21st century, it can be heard only among elderly speakers in a few small pockets of the country. They are becoming fewer and fewer because unlike St. Lucia and Dominica, which lie close to the French islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe, Grenada does not have Kwéyòl-speaking neighbours to keep the language alive.

Additionally, the language is not taught in schools.

Trinidadian French Creole is a French Creole (Patois) of Trinidad spoken by descendants of the French Creole migrants from the French Antilles.

The Cedula of Population of 1783 laid the foundation and growth of the population of Trinidad. French planters and the Africans they enslaved, free coloureds and mulattos, from the French Antilles of Martinique, Grenada, Guadeloupe and Dominica, migrated to Trinidad during the French Revolution. The immigrants establishing local communities of Blanchisseuse, Champs Fleurs, Paramin, Cascade, Carenage, Laventille, etc. Trinidad's population, which numbered less than 1,400 in 1777, soared to over 15,000 by the end of 1789.

In 1797, Trinidad became a British crown colony, with a French-speaking and Patois-speaking population. Today, Trinidadian French Creole can be found spoken in regional pockets among the elders, particularly in the villages of Paramin and Lopinot.

Below are samples of St. Lucian Creole French taken from a folktale.

Pwenmyé ki pasé sé Konpè Kochon. I di, "Konpè Lapen, sa ou ka fè la?"

Konpè Lapen di'y, "Dé ti twou yanm ng'a (mwen ka) fouyé bay ich mwen pou mwen bay ich mwen manjé."

Konpè Kochon di, "Mé, Konpè, ou kouyon, wi! Ou vlé di mwen sa kay fè yanm?"

An English translation from the same source:

First to pass was Konpè Kochon (Mister Pig). He said, "Konpè Lapen (Mister Rabbit), what are you doing there?"

Konpè Lapen told him, "I am digging a few holes to plant yams to feed my children."

Konpè Kochon said, "But, Konpè, you're too foolish! You mean to tell me you can grow yams there?"

The anti-money laundering framework for financial institutions in France encompasses the key components of the country's regulations aimed at combating money laundering and financing of terrorism (AML/CFT). This framework includes the laws and regulations established for responsible parties, ensuring compliance with international initiatives.

In France, the anti-money laundering framework is based on Ordinance 2009-104 of January 30, 2009, which is codified in Articles L. 561-1 and subsequent articles of the French Monetary and Financial Code.

The fourth directive on combating money laundering and the financing of terrorism (AML-CFT), initiated on February 5, 2013, was adopted by committees of the European Parliament on January 27, 2015. This directive introduced several legal innovations, including the establishment of national databases. It was transposed into domestic law by Member States by June 26, 2017, which marked its entry into force in France.

The fifth European AML-CFT directive (Directive (EU) No 2018/843 of May 30, 2018) took effect in July 2018.

In addition to the European legislative framework, the regulatory requirements for governance and internal control related to AML/CFT were defined by the decree of January 6, 2021, which came into effect on March 1, 2021.

The Autorité de Contrôle Prudentiel et de Résolution (ACPR) oversees compliance with AML/CFT obligations, while a common supervisory framework by the European Union is anticipated to be implemented in 2023.

The list of liable parties responsible for combating money laundering and terrorist financing is defined in Article L561-2 of the Monetary and Financial Code (hereinafter "CMF") and includes:

The fourth AML/CFT directive establishes obligations regarding customer due diligence, suspicious transaction reporting, data retention, and internal control provisions in the event of serious, repetitive, or systematic breaches by obligated entities:

The Third Anti-Money Laundering Directive 2005/60/EC, adopted on October 26, 2005, was transposed into national law by Ordinance 2009-104 of January 30, 2009. This transposition marked a shift from a threshold-based approach to due diligence to a risk-based approach that considers the actual risk of money laundering.

This "risk-based approach" was advocated by banking professionals, particularly in the Anglo-Saxon context, to ensure that resources are concentrated where they are most needed. Under this framework, the principle of due diligence is adjusted to account for various money laundering and terrorist financing risks associated with the customer, the product, or the distribution method.

The due diligence obligations are specified in Articles L. 561-5 to -10-2 of the aforementioned ordinance and in Articles R. 561-5 and -6 of the decree dated September 2, 2009.

Professionals are required to implement their due diligence obligations regularly, adapting their practices according to this new risk-based approach. Consequently, there are three levels of due diligence, with varying intensities of procedures: simplified, standard, and enhanced.

The simplified due diligence level is justified by the presence of low risk in the business relationship, leading to a reduction in the obligations of the obligated party concerning certain categories of customers and transactions. When the risk of money laundering is assessed as low, due diligence can be performed in a simplified manner, both in terms of customer identification and transaction processing. This risk assessment can be based on various criteria, including the customer, the product, or its marketing method.

Article R561-15 of the CMF, derived from Decree No. 2009/1087 of September 2, 2009, specifies the conditions for applying these simplified control measures and outlines cases presenting a low risk of money laundering and terrorist financing. These cases include when the customer or the "beneficial owner" is:

Article R561-16 of the aforementioned text details the products for which these simplified due diligence measures will be applied, including:

These exemptions require obligated entities to gather the necessary information to confirm that the customer meets the specified conditions.

In the insurance sector, simplified due diligence is also addressed in the decree of November 10, 2009 (JORF No. 0264 of November 14, 2009).

This level of due diligence corresponds to a medium risk, which applies to the majority of customers. It necessitates the application of the following principles:

When the risk of money laundering and terrorist financing presented by a customer, product, or transaction is assessed as high, obligated entities must enhance the intensity of the measures outlined in Articles L561-5 and L561-6.

The strengthened due diligence measures specified in Articles L561-10-1 and L561-10-2 of the CMF are particularly applicable in the following situations:

Beyond these specific provisions, institutions may establish their risk management policies and adjust their controls based on the nature of the risks they face.

As part of the checks conducted by the French Prudential Supervision and Resolution Authority (ACPR) of the Bank of France, entities must be prepared to justify the nature of the measures implemented within the framework of their risk-based approach.

This approach is operationalized through the adoption of a risk mapping process, which relies on an analysis of business processes that is cross-referenced with an operational risks typology.

Customer knowledge is a fundamental pillar of anti-money laundering efforts, as a thorough understanding of the customer base facilitates the detection of atypical transactions that may be linked to illicit activities and enables the reporting of suspicious activities. Customer knowledge primarily involves identification and verification (including identity, address, activity, etc.) through credible documentation, as well as gathering information related to the purpose and nature of the relationship, to determine the customer's risk profile.

The ordinance imposes a duty of due diligence on entities specified in Article L.561-2 of the CMF, which consists of understanding the customer.

This principle is internationally recognized as KYC (Know Your Customer). Therefore, professionals must ensure compliance with the information regarding their customers and, if applicable, the beneficial owners both before entering into a business relationship (Article L.561-6, para. 1 of the CMF) and throughout that relationship (Article L.561-6, para. 2 of the CMF).

According to Article L.561-5 of the CMF, before entering into a business relationship or assisting a customer in preparing or executing a transaction, financial institutions must identify their customer and, if applicable, the beneficial owner of the business relationship through appropriate means. They must also verify these identification elements upon presentation of any supporting written documents. The term "customer" is understood in the broadest sense to include natural persons, legal entities, industrial, commercial, or service companies, guarantors, intermediaries, management companies, correspondent banks, and others.

A business relationship is established when a qualified professional initiates a professional or commercial relationship that is expected to last for a certain duration at the time the contact is established (Article L.561-2-1 CMF).

Thus, the establishment is required to identify its customer or beneficial owner before entering into a business relationship by collecting all relevant information related to the purpose and nature of that relationship, as well as any other pertinent customer information.

The "beneficial owner" is defined in Article L.561-2-2 of the CMF as a natural person who:

A decree by the Council of State clarifies the definition and the methods for determining the beneficial owner.

The decree of September 2, 2009, specifies in Article R.561-1 of the CMF that the beneficial owner is the person who ultimately benefits from the transaction. This individual must be a natural person who directly or indirectly holds at least 25% of the capital or voting rights of the company, or who holds control, administrative, or managerial authority over the company or its governing body.

For natural persons, the institution must verify the identity and authority of individuals acting on their behalf. The customer or beneficial owner must present a valid official document containing a photograph. The financial institution is then required to verify the following details: name, first name, date and place of birth, date and place of issue of the document, and the issuing authority.

Customer knowledge must also facilitate the identification of the customer's resources, necessitating an understanding of their economic situation. In relation to the economic situation of the customer or beneficial owner, the financial institution must obtain proof of the current address, details of current professional activities, and any information necessary for assessing assets, income, or other resources.

These elements allow for a concrete analysis of the customer's economic transactions to determine whether they align with the customer's economic capacity or exhibit suspicious characteristics. Certain attributes of the customer can significantly impact the risk associated with the relationship, particularly if the customer is a politically exposed person (PEP).

The regulations stipulate that all relevant information must be gathered regarding the customer, including an analysis of their economic, financial, and legal environment, as well as their reputation, to ensure a comprehensive understanding of the customer.

In some cases, customer knowledge requirements may be deemed automatically satisfied, resulting in the waiver of due diligence obligations. Article L.561-9, paragraph II of the CMF provides exemptions under specific conditions, as detailed in the implementing decree of September 2, 2009:

Before establishing a business relationship, the financial institution must perform "standard" due diligence, which includes continuous monitoring of the customer. Pre-established information allows for the classification of customers into low-, medium-, or high-risk categories.

The Fourth European Directive of May 20, 2015, transposed into French law by Ordinance No. 2016-1635 of December 1, 2016, mandates the establishment of "registers of beneficial owners" in all EU countries. These registers, which refer to individuals owning more than 25% of the capital or voting rights, must be publicly accessible. The document filed with the commercial court registry must include, for each customer involved in a transaction, the name, first name, date and place of birth, nationality, personal address of the beneficial owners, the date they became beneficial owners, and the nature of control they exercise over the company. This requirement applies to new companies from August 1, 2017, and to existing companies from April 1, 2018.

Article L.561-6, paragraph I of the CMF stipulates that customer identification must encompass all information related to the purpose and nature of the relationship, along with any other relevant customer information.

The decree of September 2, 2009, further specifies that, as part of the knowledge of the business relationship, the financial institution must accurately identify the amount and nature of the planned transactions, the source of funds, the destination of funds, the economic justification provided by the customer, and the intended operation of the account.

The purpose and nature of the relationship must be defined based on the transactions anticipated with the customer. In analyzing the nature of the relationship, it is essential to consider the types of operations requested by the customer.

In the context of certain transaction types, the financial institution must adopt a risk-based approach tailored to its specific circumstances and expertise. This approach involves implementing due diligence measures based on a risk matrix.

The ordinance of January 30, 2009, distinguishes between two types of risk and three types of due diligence:

Article L.561-5 II of the CMF states: "Notwithstanding paragraph I, when the risk of money laundering or terrorist financing appears low and under conditions defined by decree of the Council of State, only the verification of the customer’s identity, and where applicable, that of the beneficial owner, may be carried out during the establishment of the business relationship."

The decree of September 2, 2009, which pertains to the obligations of due diligence and reporting for the prevention of the use of the financial system for money laundering and terrorist financing, defines the relevant conditions in Article R.561-15 of the CMF.

Consequently, banks and financial institutions established in European or French territory are generally regarded as presenting a low risk. For an entity located in a non-European Union country to be considered low-risk, it must implement an equivalent anti-money laundering system, which underscores the importance of publishing AML/CFT questionnaires.

Additionally, a listed company whose securities are admitted to trading on at least one regulated market in France or a state party to the Agreement on the European Economic Area, or in a third country with transparency requirements compatible with EU legislation, may also be deemed low-risk. For example, a company listed on the CAC 40 could qualify under this category.

The decree of September 2, 2009, also identifies several types of activities considered to present a low risk of money laundering. These include life insurance contracts with an annual premium of less than €1,000, certain consumer credit operations, and specific insurance transactions.

Lastly, public authorities or public bodies whose identities are accessible to the public are also classified as presenting a low risk of money.

Article L.561-10 of the CMF states that additional due diligence measures may be imposed on obligated entities beyond the obligations already stipulated in Articles L.561-5 and L.561-6.

These additional measures must be implemented under the following circumstances:

Article R.561-18 of the CMF, derived from the implementing decree of September 2, 2009, defines a politically exposed person (PEP) as an individual "who is exposed to particular risks due to their functions," residing outside France and currently holding or having held, within the last year, one of the functions exhaustively listed in the article.

The previous political position of a PEP increases susceptibility to corruption. Therefore, it should be treated as an alert situation if, for example, a German PEP opens an account in another country, such as France. Identifying this status necessitates the implementation of additional due diligence measures.

The financial institution must collect various documents:

The decree of September 2, 2009, specifies the additional measures that banking institutions must implement in these situations. Entities mentioned in Article L.561-2 of the CMF must:

In conclusion, enhanced due diligence measures must be undertaken when the customer is a politically exposed person or when the identification of this individual is unclear. The ordinance also provides for strengthened vigilance measures.

The ordinance stipulates that strengthened due diligence measures must be applied when the risk of money laundering and terrorist financing presented by a customer, a product, or a transaction is deemed high.

Strengthened due diligence measures are required in the following situations:

The specific measures for strengthened due diligence include:

Given that medium-risk situations are not explicitly addressed in the regulations, each financial institution is required to establish its criteria for identifying and managing these intermediate-risk situations.

Article L.561-6 of the CMF mandates that obligated entities conduct ongoing due diligence on customers throughout the business relationship. The purpose of this continuous monitoring is to ensure that the oversight of customers is appropriately aligned with the money laundering risks they present.

This obligation requires obligated entities to carefully scrutinize the transactions conducted by their customers, verifying that these transactions are consistent with the customer's profile. This necessitates maintaining an up-to-date understanding of the customer.

According to Article R.561-11 of the CMF, obligated entities must perform a new identification of their customer when they have "good reasons to believe" that the information obtained regarding the customer's identity at the outset of the relationship is no longer accurate.

It is essential to analyze any minor changes that may impact the assessment of the risk posed by the customer:

Financial institutions must regularly update their knowledge of customers to apply appropriate due diligence measures. All collected information must be documented in writing and retained for five years from the termination of the business relationship.

Article L561-8 of the CMF outlines two scenarios in which a financial intermediary is prohibited from entering into a business relationship:

Furthermore, when an obligated entity terminates the business relationship under the conditions specified in Article L.561-8, it must file a suspicious transaction report with TRACFIN if it suspects or has reasonable grounds to suspect money laundering or terrorist financing offenses.

The new French system is based on a dual set of complementary obligations:

France has not adopted an automatic reporting system based solely on predefined objective criteria. Instead, except for specific cases where the law mandates reporting under certain conditions, the system relies on a case-by-case analysis of sums and transactions, taking into account the profile of the business relationship and the risk classification established by the obligated entity.

As a result, organizations must analyze their customers' situations based on updated information, examine any suspicions of money laundering, and, if necessary, submit a report to TRACFIN (Intelligence Processing and Action Against Clandestine Financial Circuits). The obligations regarding the reporting of suspicions are outlined in Article L.561-15 of the CMF.

In France, legal obligations concerning anti-money laundering measures have continuously expanded since 1990, encompassing both national and European texts. This expansion has broadened the scope of professions subject to these measures and the obligation to report suspicions.

Over the past two decades, the obligation to report suspicions to TRACFIN has been increasingly defined through various provisions, culminating in the transposition of the 3rd European Directive of October 26, 2005, into French law via the ordinance of January 30, 2009, along with related decrees and orders issued in 2009.

Article L.561-15 I of the CMF now mandates that professionals report to TRACFIN any sums or transactions they "know, suspect, or have good reason to suspect" are derived from an offense punishable by imprisonment for more than one year or that contribute to the financing of terrorism.

Prior to the transposition of the 3rd European Directive, only five specific offenses fell under the scope of suspicious transaction reporting.

Currently, the obligation encompasses all crimes and offenses punishable by imprisonment for more than one year, effectively targeting almost the entire French criminal code, with the exception of misdemeanors. Consequently, this ordinance covers all financial crimes and offenses likely to generate proceeds, including money laundering related to offenses such as embezzlement, counterfeiting, fraud, and breach of trust. Notably, the ordinance also establishes the requirement to report any suspicion of money laundering arising from tax fraud.

Ordinance No. 2009-104 of January 30, 2009, expanded the scope of suspicious transaction reporting to include sums or operations that may arise from any offense punishable by imprisonment for more than one year or that could contribute to the financing of terrorism. This extension now encompasses tax fraud, which in France is punishable by up to five years of imprisonment and a fine of €37,500.

According to Article 1741 of the General Tax Code, a person is guilty of tax fraud if they have evaded or attempted to evade taxes fraudulently. Tax fraud can manifest through various actions, including:

The complexity of certain tax fraud cases has been highlighted in joint guidelines published by the Banking Commission and TRACFIN in December 2009. To assist professionals in detecting such offenses, the ordinance establishes specific criteria defined by decree.

These criteria are alternative, meaning that obligated entities must report to TRACFIN any transaction that meets at least one of them when they suspect tax fraud. The report must include the elements of analysis that led to the selection of at least one criterion.

The 16 criteria used to qualify for tax fraud can be categorized into five groups:

Financial institutions are mandated to conduct enhanced scrutiny on transactions that are particularly complex, unusually high in value, or lack clear economic justification. When such unusual transactions are identified, institutions must carry out a thorough and individualized analysis, which involves.

To facilitate this process, the Financial Markets Authority has provided a non-exhaustive list of relevant information that should be collected and retained, including:

If, after this enhanced scrutiny, suspicion remains unresolved, the institution must submit a report to TRACFIN. Importantly, reporting is not automatic; it follows a comprehensive analysis that fails to dispel suspicion.

Trusts and fiduciaries, rooted in Anglo-Saxon law, complicate the identification of ultimate beneficiaries since they often involve multiple parties: the settlor (who transfers ownership), the trustee (who manages the assets), and the beneficiary (who benefits from the trust). Due to this complexity, financial institutions must undertake diligent efforts to identify:

If the ultimate beneficiaries cannot be identified or if there are doubts regarding their identity, institutions are required to file a suspicious activity report. This proactive approach is crucial in maintaining compliance and mitigating risks associated with money laundering and terrorist financing.

Article L.561-15 V of the CMF mandates that professionals must promptly notify TRACFIN of any new information that could confirm, refute, or modify elements in an initial report. This includes details about the characteristics of reported transactions or any relevant information about the business relationship. If a financial institution suspects ongoing financial flows from a customer whose transactions have already been reported, a supplementary report can only be submitted if the new transactions involve significant amounts, typically at least equivalent to those previously reported.

When a financial institution is unable to identify a customer or gather necessary information about the purpose and nature of a business relationship, it must refrain from conducting transactions or establishing the relationship. If the relationship is already in place, it must be terminated. In this scenario, the institution is also required to consider filing a suspicious transaction report.

The obligation to report after terminating a business relationship does not imply automatic reporting; instead, it necessitates a thorough, individualized analysis of the situation. The financial institution must evaluate the circumstances based on the information available to determine if a suspicious transaction report is warranted. This approach ensures that reporting is based on substantive findings rather than a blanket response to termination.

The written suspicious transaction report must be completed using a form available on the TRACFIN website. This form facilitates quick and automated processing of reports. The declarant is required to specify the legal or regulatory provision that necessitated the report. The online platform, TéléDS, allows for direct completion of the form and enables the simultaneous uploading of supporting documents.

While the written report is the standard procedure, a verbal report is also permitted under Articles L.561-18 and R.561-31 of the CMF. However, this option is limited to situations where the circumstances surrounding the operation warrant immediate verbal communication. In such cases, the declarant must visit TRACFIN's premises and present supporting documents.

Regardless of the reporting method, Article R.561-31 I of the CMF outlines essential content requirements for the report:

For reports related to tax fraud, the declarant must specify the elements that align with at least one of the 16 criteria outlined in Decree No. 2009-874 of July 16, 2009. All relevant documentation must be attached to ensure effective processing by TRACFIN.

The declarant has the option to provide additional information in a supplementary report, which can either confirm or refute initial suspicions. This mechanism allows for ongoing communication with TRACFIN and ensures that the agency has the most accurate and comprehensive information available.

The quality of a suspicious transaction report (STR) is crucial for effective processing by TRACFIN. Deficiencies in the report can render it unusable. Common issues that may affect the report's quality include:

According to Article L.561-16 of the CMF, explicitly establishes the principle of suspicious transaction report prior to the execution of the transaction in order, if necessary, to allow TRACFIN to exercise its opposition right.

The professional must therefore refrain from carrying out any operation that he suspects is related to money laundering or terrorist financing. However, Article L.561-16, paragraph 2 outlines exceptions where the report may concern transactions that have already been executed. These exceptions include:

In these cases, professionals must analyze the facts leading to the suspicion and submit the declaration without delay if their analysis confirms it.

Declarants need to avoid unnecessary delays between identifying the initial suspicious transaction and submitting the STR to TRACFIN. While regulations advocate for a priori reporting, practical scenarios often result in a posteriori reports. In retail banking, for example, customers may operate their accounts independently, which can complicate the detection of suspicious activities. Consequently, it is often a pattern of transactions or general account activity that raises red flags, rather than isolated transactions.

In summary, maintaining high-quality reports and adhering to prompt reporting protocols are critical components of effective anti-money laundering practices.

Financial institutions are required to retain specific documents related to suspicious transaction reports (STRs) for five years following the termination of the corresponding business relationship. These documents include:

It is important to note that, in compliance with Article 6 of the law of January 6, 1978, concerning data processing and freedoms, these retained documents can only be used for the purposes for which they were collected. They must not be kept longer than necessary for those purposes.

Confidentiality surrounding suspicious transaction reports is critical. Key aspects of this confidentiality include:

Under Article L. 561-29 of the CMF, TRACFIN has the authority to disclose information to several French authorities, including:

This framework ensures that while the confidentiality of STRs is upheld, necessary cooperation with judicial and regulatory authorities is maintained to combat money laundering and terrorism financing.

Entities subject to reporting obligations, such as those within the same group, network, or professional structure, can share information about the existence and content of suspicious transaction reports (STRs). This exchange must follow specific procedures established by these entities. In exceptional cases, this sharing can extend to entities not belonging to the same group, provided they are subject to equivalent confidentiality obligations and have operations in an EU member state or a recognized equivalent third country.

Article L. 561-22 5° of the CMF outlines conditions under which professionals can be exempt from criminal liability for money laundering offenses when they submit a suspicious transaction report:

This framework encourages professionals to report suspicious activities without the fear of liability, provided they act in good faith and adhere to the established legal protocols.

The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) is an intergovernmental organization established in 1989, primarily aimed at combating money laundering and terrorist financing. It functions as a policy-making body that develops and promotes standards for effective legislative, regulatory, and operational measures in this domain.

The FATF has formulated a series of recommendations recognized as the international standard for anti-money laundering (AML) and counter-terrorist financing (CFT). These recommendations provide a framework for countries to establish and enhance their AML/CFT measures. Additionally, the FATF facilitates a coordinated global response to the threats posed by money laundering and terrorist financing, ensuring that countries work towards similar standards and practices. By providing a consistent set of guidelines, the FATF contributes to the harmonization of AML/CFT regulations across jurisdictions, which helps protect the integrity of the financial system worldwide.

Established by Law No. 90-614 on July 12, 1990, following the G7 Summit at La Grande Arche in July 1989, TRACFIN (Intelligence Processing and Action Against Clandestine Financial Circuits) contributes to the growing concern for combating money laundering and developing a healthy economy.

Originally a financial intelligence coordination unit within the General Directorate of Customs, TRACFIN became a national competence service by Decree No. 2006-1541 of December 6, 2006, and gained its direction. The TRACFIN unit operates under the auspices of the Ministry of Economy, Finance, Industry, and Employment, as well as under the minister responsible for Budget, Public Accounts, Public Service, and State Reform.

The legislator has assigned TRACFIN three primary missions:

TRACFIN's role is to collect, analyze, and enhance reports submitted by obligated professionals. As an administrative investigation service, its actions occur upstream of the judicial phase, responding to alerts from entities regarding atypical financial transactions.

The effectiveness of TRACFIN's system is largely due to its unique partnership with financial institutions. According to the 2008 annual report, out of the 14,565 reports received, 1,171 were submitted in a dematerialized form. A significant portion of these reports came from banks and credit institutions (79%), followed by manual currency exchangers (10%), insurance companies (5%), notaries (2%), and various other professions, including accountants, auditors, and auctioneers (4%).

To conduct cross-referencing of financial information on reported operations, TRACFIN is endowed with various powers that are strictly regulated by law:

However, these two prerogatives are subject to certain restrictions for specific professions, such as lawyers and solicitors. In such cases, approval from the Bar Council or the president of the company is required before any documents can be communicated or seized, unless the lawyer is acting in a fiduciary capacity.

This ability was not provided for by the New Economic Regulation Law of 2001, which had limited this possibility to only state administrations, local authorities, regulatory authorities, public establishments, and organizations mentioned in Article L.134-1 of the Code of Financial Jurisdictions. The addition of new interlocutors as diverse as the URSSAF, professional unions, or sports leagues, often holders of information related to suspicious legal structures, will allow TRACFIN to obtain much more targeted and precise information effectively.

The ACPR (Autorité de Contrôle Prudentiel et de Résolution) is an institution integrated into the Bank of France, responsible for supervising the activities of banks and insurance companies in France. It was founded in January 2010 by Ordinance No. 2010-76.

It is responsible for ensuring compliance by the entities subject to AML/CFT obligations and, in this capacity, conducts both document-based and on-site inspections.

In addition to the tools provided by the legislature, TRACFIN participates in the Egmont Group, an informal forum established in Brussels. The primary objective of this group is to enhance international cooperation among various anti-money laundering units, particularly through improved information exchange among its members and the pooling of expertise. Notable achievements of the forum include the development of a standard bilateral agreement to facilitate cooperation between different financial intelligence units, the regular exchange of personnel, and the organization of regional training workshops.

This forum operates independently of police, judicial, or diplomatic structures, allowing for the implementation of practical solutions to address the daily challenges of anti-money laundering efforts. By circumventing bureaucratic hurdles associated with initiating judicial cooperation procedures, information flow becomes more agile, enhancing the responsiveness of these intelligence-gathering units. As of November 30, the Egmont Group recognized 58 financial intelligence units worldwide.

Despite the ongoing capability for information exchange, this facility remains significantly underutilized. In 2008, TRACFIN made only 957 requests for information to its foreign counterparts, primarily within the EU, and received 951 requests from abroad, with 93% originating from European entities. Furthermore, this exchange capability is restricted to reconstructing transactions carried out by individuals or legal entities following a declaration, or to informing foreign financial intelligence units.

The judicial authority is the primary recipient of the information gathered by TRACFIN. A thorough analysis is conducted based on all received declarations. If TRACFIN identifies sufficient elements suggesting that an offense has been committed, it can refer the case to the competent Public Prosecutor.

According to the 2008 annual report, out of the 359 declarations forwarded to the judiciary:

In addition to processing forwarded cases, it has become customary for the most sensitive matters to undergo preliminary discussions before being transmitted to the judiciary. The Ministry of Justice is responsible for communicating the exact number and nature of convictions handed down for money laundering offenses. TRACFIN has the right to know the outcomes of its transmissions to the judiciary and to inform the reporting institutions about the status of their declarations.

Since February 1, 2009, the tax administration has had the right to access information held by TRACFIN, as stipulated by Article L.561-29 of the CMF. TRACFIN transmits information to the tax administration regarding facts that may constitute tax fraud or money laundering from the proceeds of such offenses. This information can be used by the tax administration in its functions, including tax audits and criminal enforcement. To enhance the efficiency of this collaboration, officials from the tax administration provide accounting and tax expertise on money laundering schemes within TRACFIN.

Antoine B. Beauvilliers (1754 – 31 January 1817) was a French restaurateur who opened the first grand restaurant in Paris and wrote the cookbook L'Art du Cuisinier. Jean Anthelme Brillat-Savarin considers him the most important of the early restaurateurs, as "he was the first to have an elegant dining room, handsome well-trained waiters, a fine cellar and a superior kitchen." Beauvilliers is described as a "portly figure, his triple chin, his broad, joyous face, and the light that sparkles in his large grey eye." He dressed fashionably and carried a sword. His success was enhanced by his ability to "cater to and flatter rich patrons", attending to them personally and helping them with items on the menu; he had a prodigious memory and could recall a patron he had not seen in 20 years. He is buried in Père Lachaise Cemetery (division 26).

Of humble parentage, Beauvilliers worked his way up from kitchen boy to become the chef of Monsieur, the Count of Provence and future King Louis XVIII. Beauvilliers opened a restaurant called the La Grande Taverne de Londres in the Palais-Royal, Paris, sometimes between 1782 and 1786. The restaurant was intended for a wealthy and aristocratic clientele; it had tables made of mahogany, crystal chandeliers, and tablecloths of fine linen, an extensive wine cellar, and elegantly-dressed waiters. Dishes on the restaurant menu included partridge with cabbage, veal chops grilled in buttered paper, and duck with turnips. The restaurant Beauvilliers became a rendez-vous of conservative political factions, in which Beauvilliers was implicated; in 1795 he was forced to close his establishment and to live away from the trade that was his life. When he reopened La Grande Taverne de Londres, at 26 rue de Richelieu, tastes had changed and he met with less success. The restaurant closed in 1825.

In 1814, he published the two-volume L'art du Cuisinier, with a great number of illustrative engravings. It became a classic of French gastronomic literature. A second edition, with a supplement, appeared in 1821. An English translation, The Art of French Cookery, was published in London in 1824.

Antoine de Chabannes (1408–1488), from 1439 Count of Dammartin (with a gap in 1463–1465), was a significant military and political figure of 15th-century France. An indefatigable fighter, during his long career he joined or led numerous military campaigns all over France and beyond. He served the Valois kings Charles VII, Louis XI and Charles VIII, but also participated in two aristocratic uprisings, the Praguerie against Charles VII in 1440 and the War of the Public Weal in 1465 against Louis XI. Associated early in his life with the Armagnac faction, he fought in Charles VII's campaigns against England, including those involving Joan of Arc, and (except for a troubled period in the early 1460s) also remained generally opposed to the Burgundians and their Habsburg successors. 18th-century scholar Charles Pinot Duclos described him as "one of the bravest men of his time, sincere, faithful, quick-tempered, a keen friend and implacable enemy" (un des plus braves hommes de son temps, sincère, fidèle, naturellement emporté, ami vif et implacable ennemi). Claude Villaret [ fr ] called him "the most experienced general of his era" (le général le plus expérimenté de son siècle).

His reputation has been tainted by his late-1430s freebooting écorcheur raids and by his avidity in appropriating properties of the disgraced Jacques Coeur in the early 1450s, mainly the lordship of Puisaye which Coeur's successors tried to reclaim in legal procedures that extended beyond Chabannes's lifetime. His rule in Puisaye, however, coincided with the revival of that region following the ravages of the Hundred Years' War and the broader Crisis of the Late Middle Ages.

The Chabannes were an aristocratic family established in the Limousin since the 13th century. Antoine's father Robert de Chabannes, lord of Charlus-le-Pailhoux (now in Saint-Exupéry-les-Roches), died at the Battle of Agincourt in 1415, and his elder brother Etienne de Chabannes died at the Battle of Cravant in 1423, where 15-year-old Antoine fought as well.

Following this succession of events, the family estates went to his brother Jacques de Chabannes. Antoine was left to assemble properties and titles on his own, which he kept doing throughout his long life.

Antoine de Chabannes was involved from a young age in the intrigues and fights of the embattled king Charles VII, associating himself with commanders La Hire and Xaintrailles. He was captured at the Battle of Verneuil but, given his youth, was freed without ransom by the Duke of Bedford. He then served Duke Charles I of the House of Bourbon as a page until 1426. The contemporary chronique martinienne observes of him at that time that "he was inclined towards fighting and eager to acquire recognition and properties" (tant il avait le coeur aux armes et envie d'acquérir honneurs et biens).

By 1428, 20-year-old Antoine de Chabannes fought alongside Joan of Arc in battles including Jargeau, Patay (where he led the vanguard and was wounded), and the Siege of Compiègne where Joan was captured in May 1430. In the meantime he had participated in the March to Reims and attended the epic coronation (sacre) of Charles VII, on 17 July 1429.

In the summer of 1429, Charles VII made him bailiff of Troyes, and in 1432, Captain of Creil, a stronghold loyal to Charles surrounded by hostile territory. In 1434, he was wounded in a bold attack on Old Talbot near Beaumont-sur-Oise. On 12 November 1437, he was with Charles VII at the latter's ceremonial entry into Paris, a major symbolic moment following the 1435 Treaty of Arras that put an end to the most chaotic period of the Hundred Years' War.

He spent most of the late 1430s leading his own band of soldiers, as one of the most prominent écorcheurs as they were labeled in contemporary chronicles, especially Burgundian ones: literally "flayers", referring to their practices of robbing and ransoming. Many of his freebooting raids were directed at lands of the Duke of Burgundy such as Hainaut, Cambrésis and Charolais, typically condoned by the king despite the stipulations of the Peace of Arras. Antoine de Chabannes also fought for the Duke of Bourbon, who made him Captain of Chavroches in 1438, and as part of royal operations, such as the siege of Meaux in 1439 led by Constable of France Arthur de Richemont. He occasionally let himself and his troops be hired as mercenaries, most notably for Antoine de Vaudémont against René of Anjou in 1438-39. He also used castles of the Chabannes family as his bases, such as the Château de Montaigu-le-Blin [ fr ] where he kept the lord of Pesmes prisoner in 1439. The grey area in which Antoine de Chabannes operated during those years, a hybrid of unsupervised banditry and royal service, is illustrated by a chronicler's story that Charles VII once saluted him ironically as "capitaine des écorcheurs", to which his reply was "Sire, I only flayed your enemies, and methinks their skins will bring you more profit than to me; I never flayed anybody else" (Sire, je n'ai écorché que vos ennemis, et il me semble que leurs peaux vous feront plus de profit qu'à moi; je n'en écorchai jamais d'autres).

On 20 September 1439 Antoine de Chabannes married Marguerite de Nanteuil, Countess of Dammartin-en-Goële, to whom he had been recommended by the king. The marriage brought him the County of Dammartin as her dowry, as well as the barony of Le Thour in Champagne and the lordship of Marcy in Nivernais.

In 1440, he was one of the leaders of the Praguerie against Charles VII, and kept associating with the Dauphin Louis's actions in the following years, such as the Siege of Dieppe in 1442-43 and an expedition to support Sigismund of Habsburg against the Swiss, including the Battle of St. Jakob an der Birs near Basel where he fought furiously. Charles VII made him conseiller du roi in 1444, then Grand Panetier of France in 1445 (and again in 1447), after he had forced him and other warlords of the Hundred Years' War to dismiss their bands of soldiers as he strived to establish a standing army. On that occasion, Antoine de Chabannes wore mourning clothes, telling the king that he was "taking life away from him by separating him from his soldiers" (Sire, vous m'ôtez la vie d'éloigner mes gens d'armes de moi, avec lesquels j'ai vécu vingt ans sans reproche et sans faire de faute).

Antoine de Chabannes eventually broke with Louis in September 1446, by revealing to Charles VII the Dauphin's intrigues against Pierre de Brézé, and beyond against the king himself. This episode led to Louis's temporary banishment to the Dauphiné, upon which Louis swore that he would "take revenge against those who threw me out of my house", meaning Chabannes.

In 1449, he was with the king in the reconquest of Normandy, and in 1451 fought in Guyenne where he reconquered from the English the Château de Blanquefort near Bordeaux, nominally part of Marguerite de Nanteuil's dowry but out of her family's hands for 160 years. That castle was retaken by England later in 1451, and reconquered again by Chabannes in 1453. Charles VII confirmed his ownership of it in 1455 but Louis XI took it back in 1466.

Also in 1451, Antoine de Chabannes was appointed to chair the committee that investigated and led to the downfall of Jacques Coeur. He promptly appropriated a number of Coeur's properties including his recently acquired lordship of Puisaye. Charles VII's decision of 29 May 1453 specifically granted him: "(1) the lands, castles and lordships of Saint-Fargeau, of Lavau, of La Couldre, of Perreuse, of Champignelles, of Mézilles, or Villeneuve-les-Genêts and their dependencies; (2) the lands of Saint-Maurice-sur-Aveyron, Melleroy, La Frenaie, Fontenelles, and their dependencies; (3) the Barony of Toucy with its belongings and dependencies." Between 1453 and 1455 he further secured ownership of the Puisaye domains by purchasing them in auction.

In October 1453, he received the command of soldiers of his brother Jacques, who had died from his wounds at the Battle of Castillon. He then led a campaign in 1454 against John V, Count of Armagnac on the king's behalf, jointly with Jean Bureau, for which he was awarded a number of lands in Rouergue and Languedoc including the lordship of Sévérac. In 1455-56 he was sent to Lyon, Savoy and the Dauphiné to put an end to the Dauphin Louis's machinations, prompting the latter's flight to the court of Burgundy. In 1458, he and Jean d'Aulon jointly led a successful embassy to Louis, Duke of Savoy and Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy to avert war between France and them both. in 1461, he stayed with Charles VII at the Château de Mehun-sur-Yèvre until the king's death on July 22.

On succeeding Charles VII in 1461, Louis XI was initially hostile to Antoine de Chabannes, banished him from the kingdom, then upon his voluntary return from the Holy Roman Empire in August 1462 imprisoned him briefly in the Conciergerie and then in the Louvre. Following a hearing on 20 August 1463, Chabannes received a death sentence from the Parlement of Paris, which was commuted by the king into perpetual banishment to Rhodes, then after a change of mind, imprisonment in the Bastille. Meanwhile, Louis XI had the Puisaye domains returned to Jacques Coeur 's son Geoffroy, and Chabannes's other properties granted to his rivals Charles de Melun, Jean de Montespedon and Antoine de Chateauneuf.

The ever-resourceful Chabannes, however, managed to escape from the Bastille in early March 1465 and joined the so-called League of the Public Weal against the king. That conflict was swiftly resolved following the Treaty of Conflans, of which he was one of the main negotiators. At the request of the League's princely members, the treaty included a specific clause by which Louis XI gave back to Antoine de Chabannes all his former domains. In February 1467, the king further made him the Grand Master of France, in replacement of his former nemesis Charles de Melun (who ended up decapitated the next year), and in August 1468 finally annulled his 1463 conviction. However, the legal procedures with the Coeur family over the Puisaye domains lingered on until a final settlement in 1489, shortly after Antoine de Chabannes's death.

In 1468, Chabannes decisively refused to demobilize the royal troops assembled in Noyon despite a written order Louis had signed under duress in Péronne, which fully regained him the King's confidence. He had the honor of being among the Order of Saint Michael 's first cohort of 15 knights in August 1469, confirming his return to the inner core of the French royal court. In late 1469 he was sent by Louis XI to pacify the Guyenne and Armagnac, leading John V, Count of Armagnac to flee across the border to Hondarribia, and gained additional lands in Rouergue as reward from the king.

In the early 1470s he led royal military campaigns together with Louis of Luxembourg, Count of Saint-Pol, always under tight instructions from Louis XI. In 1470 he took Amiens from Burgundy. In 1472 he was made Military governor of Paris, and participated in the defense of Beauvais against Charles the Bold. In December 1474, he had the honor of hosting the king and the royal court in his castle of Dammartin; around that time Louis would address him familiarily as his "cousin". On 29 August 1475, he attended the meeting of Picquigny between Louis XI and Edward IV of England, which undermined the Anglo-Burgundian alliance and marked the formal end of the Hundred Years' War. Following Charles the Bold 's death in January 1477, still fit to lead military operations despite his advanced age, he raided Flanders during the War of the Burgundian Succession. He then held the frontline stronghold of Le Quesnoy for more than a year. Louis XI, heowever, replaced him there with Jean Daillon [ fr ] in June 1478 as part of a truce in which the king relinquished Hainaut to Maximilian, and episode that crystallized a new deterioration of Chabannes's relationship with the king.

In the spring of 1479, Louis XI relieved him of his military command, even though he kept his pension and other titles, and was still occasionally called for advice. In 1483, some of his domains in Rouergue were granted by Louis to the Canons Regular of the Lateran, as part of the donation that eventually resulted in the President of France being an honorary canon of Saint John Lateran. Chabannes was duly indemnified.

Following Louis XI's death, Antoine de Chabannes was back in favor under the young Charles VIII, who on 23 October 1483 reappointed him captain and governor of Sévérac. At the Estates General in Tours, in February 1484, he was sitting on the bench to the king's right, together with Jean IV de Rieux and Louis II de la Trémoille. In 1485, he further increased his domains by purchasing the barony of Courtenay, just north of the Puisaye. In his last years, he lived mainly in his castles of Dammartin-en-Goële and Saint-Fargeau, with occasional Parisian stays in his hôtel de Beautreillis, part of the former royal palace of Hôtel Saint-Pol whose name survives in the Rue Beautreillis. He was again made Military governor of Paris by the regent Anne of France. He maintained an active written correspondence with the king, who appears to have valued his advice.

Antoine de Chabannes died on Christmas Day 1488. He was buried in the collegiate church of Our Lady (Collégiale Notre-Dame) in Dammartin-en-Goële, which he had built from 1480, following a wish he had made in 1463 while imprisoned in the Bastille, on the site of a chapel that had been destroyed during the War of the Public Weal. The church had been consecrated by the Bishop of Meaux on 18 February 1488, less than a year before Chabannes's death.

The still-extant monumental tomb displays an idealized youth portrait of him as a gisant with a phoenix bird at his feet, which may refer to eternal life but also to the ups and downs of his long career. The tomb was opened and restored in 1804, as related by a commemorative plaque which is now placed in front of it. The inscription on the rim of the lid reads: "Cy gist noble et puissant seigneur messire anthoine de chabannes, ch[eva]l[ie]r de l' ordre du Roy n[ot]r[e] s[ir]e, en son vivant comte de dampmartin baron de toussy et du tour en Champaigne, et seignieur de saint fargeau de saint morise de courtenay et du pays de puisaye, et grand maistre d'ostel de France ; Et fut premier fond[at]eur du chapitre et coliège de l'église de céans, le quel trépassa le jour de Noël de l'an de grace mil CCCC.IIIIxx et huit : Dieu lui face pardon à l'âme et à tous aultres trespassés. Amen : Pater noster."

Chabannes's heart and innards were buried separately in the church of Saint-Ferréol in Saint-Fargeau, at the core of his domains in Puisaye, where his wife had been buried in 1475. Until the 17th century, the corresponding location inside the church was adorned with a small monument and an epitaph that read "Antoine de Chabannes, / Mort suis sans trahison / Mais bien aimant raison / Conte et aussi grant mestre. / Dieu me mettre en bon estre! / J'aimai loyauté / Qui m'a toujours porté, / Tant qu'au monde ait esté; / D'ennemi non vaincu / D'ans IIIIxx [80] j'ai vescu, / On le sait, de trois roys non reprint. / Sur ce point, Dieu m'a print." The metal chest that contained the heart was later relocated to a chapel within the same church, in which Antoine de Chabannes's son had also erected an equestrian statue of him, probably destroyed in 1793.

He was succeeded as Count of Dammartin-en-Goële by his only surviving son John (Jean de Chabannes), born in 1462, who had already been calling himself Lord of Saint-Fargeau since 1470. Antoine's direct male line became extinct at Jean's death in 1503. In 1554, the County of Dammartin was purchased by Constable Anne de Montmorency, and remained in the House of Montmorency, then (after the 1632 execution of Henri II de Montmorency, which also led to the Dammartin castle's destruction) of Bourbon-Condé until the French Revolution. The domains in Puisaye were soon divided between Saint-Fargeau, which went to the Houses of Anjou-Mézières and then of Bourbon-Montpensier, and Toucy, which remained in the local family of Prie. Other branches of the Chabannes family survive to this day.

Antoine de Chabannes features in Le Spectre de Châtillon, a 1855 novel by Élie Berthet.

He is portrayed as a devious military governor of Paris in the 1956 film The Vagabond King.

Antoine Westermann (4 April 1946, Wissembourg, Alsace, France) is a French chef.

He held 3 Michelin Guide stars for his Strasbourg restaurant Le Buerehiesel and maintained a star rating at the restaurant for over 31 years until 2007, when he asked the Michelin Guide to remove them.

Antoine Westermann decided to become a chef at age 8, encouraged by his father. He studied at L'Ecole Hôteliere in Strasbourg while apprenticing at the nearby Buffet de la Gare.

In 1969, after Westermann earned his professional diploma, his father took out a mortgage on their home to purchase a farmhouse in the middle of Strasbourg's Parc de l'Orangerie for Westermann, then at 23, turned it into a restaurant. That spot became Le Buerehiesel, the Alsatian dialect meaning for "little farmhouse".

Westermann remained head chef and proprietor of Le Buerehiesel for 38 years. The restaurant earned its first Michelin star in 1975, followed by a second star in 1983.

In 1994, 25 years after its opening, Le Buerehiesel was awarded both a 3-star Michelin ranking and a 19/20 rating in the " Gault & Millau Guide " while Westermann was named one of France's top chefs along with Joël Robuchon, Michel Bras, Guy Savoy and Alain Ducasse.

From 1998 to 2006 Westermann worked at Fortaleza do Guincho in Cascais, Portugal, alongside executive chef Vincent Farges. The restaurant has retained one Michelin star since 2001.

In 2007, Westermann gave up his 3 stars to turn to new culinary adventures. His son, Eric Westermann took over Le Buerehiesel and won 1 Michelin star in 2008.

In homage to his mother's cuisine, Westermann opened the vegetable-centric bistro Mon Vieil Ami (meaning "My Old Friend") in 2003. The restaurant became the first table d'hôte in Paris, an otherwise traditional Alsatian format that ran until its closing in 2017.

In 2006, Westermann worked at Drouant, where the Goncourt and Renaudot prizes have taken place since 1914. Westermann sold Drouant to restaurateurs Gardinier & Fils in 2018.

Westermann hopes to expand the market for ethically labeled meat production throughout France and the United States.

He created the brand and the first concept of a mono-maniac bistro around poultry, Le Coq Rico, in Paris. The restaurant is recognized as the best roasted chicken in Paris by several food critics.

In September 2021, Le Coq Rico became Le Coq & Fils – The Poultry House

He later developed his savoir-faire in New York and branded Le Coq Rico in financial association with Francis Staub. It received 2 stars from The New York Times and Best Roasted Poultry from NYC.

In August 2018, he was fired from office by his partner. He works with farmers on the development of old breeds, such as the red turkey of the Ardennes, the Landes poultry, the poultry of Contre, the Naked Neck of Forez, La Flèche.

He conducts the " Le tour de France des belles volailles " – a monthly event with an old breed in addition to the menu. He is the ambassador of the Live Stock Conservancy, an organization that manages the reintroduction and enhancement of ancient American breeds.

Westermann's cooking style focuses on reinventing traditional Alsatian recipes to create signature dishes such as "Beer Brioche", "Oyster Soup", and " Pâté en Croûte." Outside of Alsace, Westermann's style is heavily influenced by the Mediterranean cuisine of South-Eastern France. Westermann is a proponent of the ethical sourcing of meat.

The menu at Le Coq Rico has multiple breeds of chicken, rooster, guinea fowl, and duck.

Chef Westermann claims to want to reintroduce ancient poultry breeds and cook poultry in French, European, and American regions.

Burger de Chefs by Thérèse Rocher photos by Delphine Amar-Constantini - Éditions Larousse pages 192 to 194: Poultry Burger and Strass'Burger, 2014 ISBN 978-2-03-590461-4

Antonin Proust (15 March 1832 – 20 March 1905) was a French journalist and politician.

Antonin Proust was born at Niort, Deux-Sèvres. In the 1840s, Proust attended the Collège Rollin where he met lifelong friend Édouard Manet. In September 1850, Proust and Manet joined the studio of Thomas Couture for artistic training. In 1864, Proust founded an anti-imperial journal, La Semaine hebdomadaire which appeared in Brussels. He was war correspondent for Le Temps in the early days of the Franco-Prussian War, but after the Battle of Sedan (1870) he returned to Paris, where he became secretary to Léon Gambetta and superintended the refugees in Paris.

He entered the Chamber of Deputies as representative for his native town in 1876, taking his seat on the left. In Gambetta's cabinet (1881–1882) he was minister of the fine arts, and in the Chamber of Deputies] he was regularly commissioned to draw up the budget for the fine arts, after the separate department had ceased to exist. Prosecuted in connection with the Panama scandals, he was acquitted in 1893. From this time he lived in the closest retirement. On 20 March 1905 he shot himself in the head, dying of the wound two days later.

He was not related to Marcel Proust, the famous writer.

The Association pour la promotion du naturisme en liberté (APNEL) is a French organization that seeks decriminalization of nudity, with particular emphasis on the section of the French penal code relating to sexual exhibitionism.

The "Association Pour la Promotion du Naturisme en Liberté" (APNEL) is a French association with international scope, registered under current statutes and governed by the law of 1 July 1901 and the decree of 16 August 1901.

APNEL is an association which adheres to the spirit and ethics of the environmental movement and the naturist movement, and wishes to collaborate closely with both of them. Its aim is that French law might catch up with the laws of its European neighbours in regard to the right to be naked.

The object of the association is as follows:

For several years the concept of the right to be naked was brought up periodically on an Internet discussion group. The underlying problem concerned unforeseen meetings between naturists and non-naturists. Even though these meetings usually took place with no problem at all, the question of the legality of the practice of nudity outside of places specifically reserved for naturism caused many debates. Most of the supporters of the right to be naked consider that there is a gap in the French Penal Code, which while not explicitly forbidding simple nudity, does not explicitly authorize it.

The idea of creating a nationwide association of naturist walkers dates from April 2006, and the following month a proposal for an association's statutes was discussed. However, the people who were interested in forming such an association were not able to agree on the exact terms to best describe certain concepts, for example the list of operating constraints to be used in the association's statutes.

The next autumn, two events boosted interest in this kind of association:

At the beginning of September 2006 a naked man was walking alone with his shorts in his hand in a forest in Essonne when from about fifty meters away a person near a barn shouted at him "ça va pas!" (That's not allowed!). He just answered "si" (It is) before turning back without getting dressed again. Later he was arrested by police who told him they were acting on a complaint made by a gamekeeper and he was told that the place was a gay Mecca. At the police station a report was made accusing him of "public indecency" and "sexual exhibition". After the accused had explained his practice of naturism and the existence of collectively organized naked walks, he was told that the Public Prosecutor had treated the affair as a final warning. Since this event he has not dared to walk naked alone for fear of heavy penalties if he is caught again.

In December 2006 a naturist in Seine-et-Marne took part in a television programme on the subject of modesty. After some filming at his home, he drove nude in his car with the television journalists. Being hungry, he stopped at the local McDonald's to order some food but without getting out of his car. After he had paid at the first window two cashiers approached and asked him if he was naked, which he confirmed. The journalists were filming the scene, which seemed to delight the cashiers. After he had parked his car to await the completion of his order two policemen arrived and arrested him roughly at gunpoint. He was, however, able to put on his shorts before getting out of the car. At the police station he was told that as a result of the complaint of three cashiers (one of whom was pregnant and had been attacked the previous week), he would be charged with "sexual exhibition in flagrante delicto on the public highway". Although he argued verbally for a long time claiming in particular that he had only been only visible as bare-chested from outside his car, he was summoned the following month by the prosecutor who fined him €300 as a settlement under criminal law. Being unable to find a lawyer prepared to defend him in a possible trial, the accused, who is a state employee, chose to accept the verdict which amounted to an admission of guilt.

Having heard of the above arrest, other members of the discussion group (randonue) organized a fine-sharing collection (solidarinue) to spread the payment of the fine between the maximum number of people. At a rate of 10 € per person approximately three times the amount required was collected in less than two months. A few hundred euros of support even came from Belgium.

The naturist who was fined did not profit from the collection. He also contributed €10 and decided to use the excess collected for the creation of APNEL of which he became the first president. Statutes very similar to the original were deposited in the sub-prefecture of Palaiseau in March, but it was not until June 2007, after the publication of the notice in the Gazette, that the establishment of the Association for the Promotion of Naturism en Liberté was announced on the Internet.

APNEL began to be an active organisation at its General Assembly in January 2008. In 2008 the association was administered by eight members, including seven French and one Belgian. A woman was elected president. Following the general assembly in 2009 the number of directors was increased to 12 with more regions represented. Since 2010, the association has had over 150 members. It has been affiliated to the French Naturist Federation since April 2011.

During the summer of 2008 numerous newspapers devoted articles to naturist freedom. Over half of these articles made mention of APNEL and the issues it raised:

Various events involving naked people were also an opportunity for members of APNEL to promote their association:

This is one of the aims of the association, but no legislative work (like writing a bill) has yet been undertaken.

On the other hand, in 2009, one of the organizers of a naturist group in Provence made contact with the city of Seillans and obtained official permission for naturist walks in forests within the commune. A municipal order authorized two randonues on Sunday and Easter Monday with a municipal police officer to supervise them.

Also to be noted, in Marseille contacts with the Groupment d'Intérêt Public des Calanques, which envisages the creation of a national park of 12,500 hectares, resulted in naturism being an officially recognized activity without limitation throughout the whole massif outside of habitations, car parks and frequented trails.

In early 2008, APNEL organized a fine-sharing collection (solidarinue) for a person who, having sunbathed naked next to his car parked beside a canal and then dressed himself, had to suddenly drop his trousers because of a health problem, was seen doing it from the other bank and fined by the court.

In the summer of 2009, even although all members of the association did not share their extreme commitment, certain officers of APNEL:

The year 2013 has been an opportunity to address the problem of vagueness of the law on sexual exhibitionism. It all started in February when a teacher on vacation near La Roche-Chalais decided to walk around naked in a secluded forest area. He was seen by a woman who followed him, noted the registration number of his car, and made a report to the police.

The next day, the police searched his room and examined the files from his computer before turning into custody 21.

Prosecuted for indecent exposure, he refused to accept this term. Indeed, he had chosen a secluded place to walk naked and tried not to offend anyone. Besides, the woman who denounced him did not appear. He contacted the APNEL 22 and obtained their support.

An appearance on prior recognition of guilt took place in May 2013. The accused denying the charge of indecent exposure, the case was referred to the court for trial at Périgueux.

The trial took place on July 1, 2013. Several members of the APNEL came to support. This was an opportunity for the lawyer, Tewfik Bouzenoune, to ask a priority issue of constitutionality (QPC = question prioritaire de constitutionalité) because Article 222-32 of the Criminal Code is too imprecise for every citizen to know what is legal or not.

The attorney (the same as for the hearing in May) did not seem to wish the Constitutional Council to consider the right to nudity. For him, given the case law of the Court of Cassation, the case was clear enough: even if the accused walked around naked, he did not try to show his nakedness, which was deliberately hidden on hearing a noise. Therefore, there has been no display. It was considered that the court did not need to ask the opinion of the Constitutional Council for a verdict and required acquittal.

The court gave its verdict on September 11, 2013: rejection of the QPC, which did not have to be referred to the Constitutional Council, and dismissal of the preliminary case. The teacher stated that he was relieved but hoped that his trial had made some progress for freedoms. From the side of APNEL, a review of the priority issue of constitutionality would have been preferred, but the lawyer believed that it could be raised again when another naked hiker was prosecuted for a similar reason.

Until 1993 the penal code provided for the offence of "Indecent Exposure" that allowed easy suppression of simple nudity.

The new penal code which has since come into force only retains an offence of "Sexual Exhibition" (Article 222-32).

This latter is included in a chapter entitled "Sexual Assaults" which includes rape and other offences (first article of the chapter), other acts of sexual violence, sexual exhibitionism (penultimate section) and finally, sexual harassment.

In the general opinion of naturists, simple nudity on its own can not be considered as a sexual assault. As for the exhibition aspect, it allows the whole body to be seen without highlighting a particular organ to which one might attribute a sexual nature.

However, the problems described above show that in case of a complaint, the people in charge of public authority often think in terms of the old offence of "Indecent Exposure" which is still mentioned in some printed editions of the new penal code.

It is for this reason that APNEL is not content with an "unspoken understanding" in the penal code concerning simple nudity, and it seeks official recognition of its legality.

Spain is the country of reference for naturists because it recognizes the right to nudity in its constitution. The reasoning relates to the Right to Image that allows everyone to show the self-image he desires. On the other hand, Spanish law provides for punishment of lewd acts, which approximates the sense that the French naturist give to "sexual exhibition". Simply, the Spanish law distinguishes between simple nudity (authorized and deemed not offensive) and the nudity of a sexual nature. Catalonia appears to be the Spanish province that best defends the right to nudity. In particular, the city of Barcelona which authorized nudity in the city. However, on April 30, 2011, the Barcelona City Council voted a by-law forbidding walking "naked or nearly naked in public spaces" and limiting the wearing of bathing costumes to pools, beaches, adjacent streets and sea-side walks. Since then cases of nudity, very rare in the city, are liable for 300 to 500 euro fines. "This is a ban that over-rides laws that decriminalized nudity twenty-two years ago," says Jacit Ribas i Deix, president of the Association for Defence of the Right to Nudity.

In Navarre, during the protests against bullfighting in Pamplona officially announced as "naked", the authorities imposed (except maybe the first year) the wearing of a slip or a G-string.

In Portugal the right to nudity seems to have increased in recent years.

In Belgium, the situation seems similar to that of France, but the proximity of cities to each other does not facilitate naturism in liberty.

In Germany, being naked in nature does not pose a problem. However, in practice, the Germans use this right mostly for swimming, and much less for forest walks.

In Scandinavian countries, Denmark recognizes the right to nudity on the beaches and the coastal strip. This has not prevented the creation of naturist campsites in this country.

In Sweden, the custom of allemansrätten (the Right of Public Access), dating from the Middle Ages, provides interesting possibilities of life in nature but it did not anticipate the case of naturism. The latter has steadily declined since the 1970s. Wearing a bathing suit is common along the beaches and lakes frequented by the public. If there are instances of nudity, they are discreetly practised. Collective nudity is common in saunas, showers and in swimming pools but in the latter case with separate male and female facilities. It is necessary, however, to wear a bathing costume to swim in the pool, but, as in France, some groups of women claim the right to bare breasts.

In the British Isles, England is fairly tolerant, whereas Scotland considers simple public nudity as a "breach of peace". Hence the legal troubles of Steve Gough previously mentioned.

The Arc de Triomphe de l'Étoile (UK : / ˌ ɑːr k d ə ˈ t r iː ɒ m f, - ˈ t r iː oʊ m f /, US : /- t r iː ˈ oʊ m f /, French: [ aʁk də tʁijɔ̃f də letwal ] ; " Triumphal Arch of the Star "), often simply called the Arc de Triomphe, is one of the most famous monuments in Paris, France. It is located at the western end of the Champs-Élysées, at the centre of the Place Charles de Gaulle —formerly known as the "Place de l'Étoile"—named for the star-shaped configuration formed by the convergence of twelve radiating avenues. The monument is situated at the intersection of three arrondissements : the 16th (to the south and west), the 17th (to the north), and the 8th (to the east). Commissioned to honor those who fought and died for France during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, the Arc bears the names of French victories and its generals engraved on its inner and outer surfaces. Beneath its vault lies the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier from World War I, marked by an eternal flame commemorating unidentified fallen soldiers of the French Nation.

The central cohesive element of the Axe historique (" historical axis ", a sequence of monuments and grand thoroughfares on a route running from the courtyard of the Louvre Palace to the Grande Arche de la Défense), the Arc de Triomphe was designed by Jean-François Chalgrin in 1806; its iconographic programme depicts heroically nude warriors and set the tone for public monuments with triumphant patriotic messages. Inspired by the Arch of Titus in Rome, Italy, the Arc de Triomphe has an overall height of 49.54 m (162.5 ft), width of 44.82 m (147.0 ft) and depth of 22.21 m (72.9 ft), while its large vault is 29.19 m (95.8 ft) high and 14.62 m (48.0 ft) wide. The smaller transverse vaults are 18.68 m (61.3 ft) high and 8.44 m (27.7 ft) wide.

Paris's Arc de Triomphe was the tallest triumphal arch until the completion of the Monument to the Revolution in Mexico City, Mexico in 1938, which is 67 m (220 ft) high. The Arch of Triumph in Pyongyang, North Korea, completed in 1982, is modeled on the Arc de Triomphe and is slightly taller at 60 m (197 ft). The Grande Arche in La Défense near Paris, France is 110 m (361 ft) high, and, if considered to be a triumphal arch, is the world's tallest.

The Arc de Triomphe is located on the right bank of the Seine river at the centre of a dodecagonal configuration of Place Charles de Gaulle.

It was commissioned in 1806, after the victory at Austerlitz by Emperor Napoleon I at the peak of his successes. Laying the foundations alone took two years and in 1810, when Napoleon entered Paris from the west with his new bride, Archduchess Marie-Louise of Austria, he had a wooden mock-up of the completed arch constructed. The architect, Jean-François Chalgrin, died in 1811 and the work was taken over by Louis-Robert Goust.

During the Bourbon Restoration, construction was halted until 1823, and it would not be completed until the reign of Louis Philippe I in 1836, by architects Louis-Robert Goust and Jean-Nicolas Huyot, under the direction of Louis-Étienne Héricart de Thury, then by Guillaume-Abel Blouet. The final cost was reported at about 10 million francs (equivalent to an estimated €65 million or $75 million in 2020).

Various designs were proposed to crown the monument with a monumental sculptural group, yet none was permanently realized. In 1838, Bernard Seurre submitted La France victorieuse (" Victorious France "), depicting a chariot drawn by six horses. In 1840, this proposal gave way to a temporary sculptural group representing Napoleon I, installed above the arch by the architect Guillaume-Abel Blouet for the return of the Emperor's remains. In preparing this installation, Blouet returned to a scheme he had drafted in 1834, modifying it by substituting the originally intended allegorical figure of France with that of the Emperor.

From 1882 to 1886, a quadriga by Alexandre Falguière was erected above the arch. The work, entitled Triomphe de la Révolution (" The Triumph of the Revolution "), depicted a chariot drawn by horses advancing "to crush Anarchy and Despotism". Executed in plaster, the group was hoisted to the summit of the monument in order to assess its visual effect. The result was judged unconvincing; although the sculpture remained in place for four years, its material deteriorated under exposure to the elements and it was ultimately removed. Following this episode, the proposal to crown the monument was ultimately abandoned.

Apparently, on the day the Battle of Verdun began in 1916, the sword carried by the figure of the Republic in La Marseillaise sculptural group broke off. The relief was immediately hidden by tarpaulins to conceal the accident and avoid any undesired ominous interpretations. On 7 August 1919, three weeks after the Paris victory parade marking the end of hostilities in World War I, Charles Godefroy flew his Nieuport biplane under the arch's primary vault, with the event captured on newsreel. Jean Navarre was the pilot who was tasked to make the flight, but he died on 10 July 1919 when he crashed near Villacoublay while training for the flight.

Following its construction, the Arc de Triomphe became the rallying point of French troops parading after successful military campaigns and for the annual Bastille Day military parade. Famous victory marches around or under the Arc have included the Germans in 1871, the French and Allies in 1919, the Germans in 1940, and the French and Allies in 1944 and 1945. After the interment of the Unknown Soldier, however, all military parades (including the aforementioned post-1919) have avoided marching through the actual arch. The route taken is up to the arch and then around its side, out of respect for the tomb and its symbolism. Both Adolf Hitler in 1940 and Charles de Gaulle in 1944 observed this custom.

By the early 1960s, the monument had grown very blackened from coal soot and automobile exhaust, and during 1965–1966 it was cleaned through bleaching. In the prolongation of the Avenue des Champs-Élysées, a new arch, the Grande Arche de la Défense, was built in 1982, completing the line of monuments that forms Paris's Axe historique. After the Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel and the Arc de Triomphe de l'Étoile, the Grande Arche is the third arch built on the same perspective.

In 1995, the Armed Islamic Group of Algeria placed a bomb near the Arc de Triomphe which wounded 17 people as part of a campaign of bombings.

On 12 July 1998, when France won the FIFA World Cup for the first time after defeating Brazil 3–0 at the Stade de France, images of the players including double goal scorer Zinedine Zidane and their names along with celebratory messages were projected onto the arch.

In late 2018, the Arc de Triomphe suffered acts of vandalism during the yellow vests protests. A crowd of demonstrators sprayed the monument with graffiti and ransacked its museum. In September 2021, the Arc was wrapped in a silvery blue fabric and red rope, as part of L'Arc de Triomphe, Wrapped, a posthumous project planned by artists Christo and Jeanne-Claude since the early 1960s.

The astylar design is by Jean-François Chalgrin (1739–1811), in the Neoclassical version of ancient Roman architecture. Among the major French academic sculptors represented on the Arc de Triomphe are Jean-Pierre Cortot, François Rude, Antoine Étex, James Pradier, and Henri Lemaire.

The main sculptures are not integral friezes but are treated as independent trophies applied to the vast ashlar masonry masses, not unlike the gilt-bronze appliqués on Empire furniture. The four sculptural groups at the base of the Arc are The Triumph of 1810 (by Jean-Pierre Cortot), The Resistance of 1814 and The Peace of 1815 (both by Antoine Étex), and the most renowned of them all, The Departure of the Volunteers of 1792, commonly called La Marseillaise (by François Rude). The face of the allegorical representation of France calling forth her people on this last was used as the belt buckle for the honorary rank of Marshal of France. The sculptures representing Triumph, Resistance and Peace commemorate Napoleon 's victories, the invasion of France in 1814, and the end of hostilities in 1815.

On the attic above the richly sculptured frieze of soldiers are 30 shields engraved with the names of major French victories in the French Revolution and Napoleonic wars. The inside walls of the monument list the names of 660 officers, among which are 558 French generals of the First French Empire ; the names of those killed in battle are underlined. Also inscribed, on the shorter sides of the four supporting columns, are the names of the major French victories in the Napoleonic Wars. Battles that took place during the Hundred Days are not included.

Inside the monument, a permanent exhibition, conceived by artist Maurice Benayoun and architect Christophe Girault, opened in February 2007.

Beneath the Arc is the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier from World War I. Interred on Armistice Day 1920, an eternal flame burns in memory of the dead who were never identified (now in both world wars).

A ceremony is held at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier every 11 November on the anniversary of the Armistice of 11 November 1918 signed by the Entente Powers and Germany in 1918. It was originally decided on 12 November 1919 to bury the unknown soldier's remains in the Panthéon, but a public letter-writing campaign led to the decision to bury him beneath the Arc de Triomphe. The coffin was put in the chapel on the first floor of the Arc on 10 November 1920, and put in its final resting place on 28 January 1921. The slab on top bears the inscription: Ici repose un soldat français mort pour la Patrie, 1914–1918 (" Here rests a French soldier who died for the Fatherland, 1914–1918 ").

In 1961, U.S. President John F. Kennedy and First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy paid their respects at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, accompanied by President Charles de Gaulle. After the 1963 assassination of President Kennedy, Mrs. Kennedy remembered the eternal flame at the Arc de Triomphe and requested that an eternal flame be placed next to her husband's grave at the Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia, United States.

The four main sculptural groups on each of the Arc's pillars are:

Six reliefs sculpted on the façades of the arch, representing important moments of the French Revolution and of the Napoleonic era include:

The names of 158 battles fought by the French First Republic and the First French Empire are engraved on the monument. Among them, 30 battles are engraved on the attic, and 96 battles are engraved on the inner façades, under the great arches.

The names of 660 military leaders who served during the French First Republic and the First French Empire are engraved on the inner façades of the small arches. Underlined names signify those who died on the battlefield.

The spandrels of the great arches are decorated with allegorical figures representing characters in Roman mythology (by James Pradier). The ceilings of the monument are adorned with sculpted roses.

The Arc de Triomphe is accessible by the RER and Metro, with the closest stop being Charles de Gaulle–Étoile. Due to heavy traffic on the roundabout of which the Arc is the centre, pedestrians use two underpasses accessible from the Champs-Élysées and the Grande Armée avenues. The ascent to the rooftop terrace comprises 284 steps. It begins with a 240-step spiral staircase leading to the mezzanine floor in the attic of the monument. Above the mezzanine is the museum hall, where large models of the Arc and interactive exhibits on its history, construction, and cultural significance are displayed. Approximately 40 further steps lead to the rooftop terrace, offering panoramic views of Paris. Elevators providing access to the museum and rooftop terrace are available.

The location of the Arc, as well as the Place de l'Étoile, is shared between three arrondissements : the 16th (to the south and west), the 17th (to the north), and the 8th (to the east).

While many structures around the world resemble the Arc de Triomphe, some were actually inspired by it. Replicas that used its design as a model include the Rosedale World War I Memorial Arch in Kansas City, United States (1924); the Arcul de Triumf in Bucharest, Romania (1936); the Arch of Triumph in Pyongyang, North Korea (1982); a miniature version at the Paris Casino in Las Vegas, United States (1999); and the Simpang Lima Gumul Monument in Kediri, Indonesia (2008).

Arc Manche (French: arc, "arch"; and La Manche, "the English Channel") was a partnership between territories in France and the United Kingdom bordering the Channel. Its purposes were to advocate the shared interests of this area and to promote Franco-British co-operation. It enabled local stakeholders to share best practices and to consult each other when they faced common issues, especially in the maritime area. The co-operation network also provided a vehicle to drive large-scale bi-national projects, such as CAMIS, using European funds.

Created in 1996, the network was relaunched in 2003. With the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union, its activities ceased.

The English Channel is one of the world's busiest shipping lanes, primarily because of its strategic location as the entry/exit door to the European Union. It links the Atlantic Ocean with the North Sea, which generates considerable flows in people and goods, and makes it one of the main exchange zones in Europe.

It engenders a concentration of maritime opportunities, but also risks, which explains the co-operation between French and British local authorities in areas like maritime security, marine pollution prevention or the preservation of biodiversity.

This area is 112,519 km including the Channel Islands.

The area's total population was 17,503,211 inhabitants in 2002, of which 5,445,000 resided in the United Kingdom and 12,058,211 in France.

Total GDP (1998–2000): 364,829 million Euros

GDP per capita (1998–2000): 20,395 Euros

The economic structure of the area is heterogeneous: Northern France is a highly industrialised area, whereas the prosperous South East of England economy relies more on high tech services and the tourism sector. The western part of the area in both France and Great Britain (Brittany, Lower Normandy and Cornwall) has a more rural economy relying on agriculture and tourism. Fishing is also an important activity in some parts of the area. There are 18 maritime zones and 50 important fishing ports in the area.

Tourism is a structuring activity for the area: in 2004, about 84 million tourists travelled within the Channel area. 32 sites are inscribed on the list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites, including the Jurassic Coast, Mont Saint-Michel, Stonehenge and the city of Le Havre.

The promotion of the Channel Arc Manche co-operation network originates from two main concerns:

2001–2002 : consultation of local executives concerning the revival of the Channel Arc Manche.

20 March 2003 : Common declaration, signed by the 5 French Regions bordering the Channel and 5 Southern England local authorities.

2005 : Creation of the Channel Arc Manche Assembly: Alain Le Vern, President of the Haute-Normandie Region, is elected chairman and Brad Watson, councillor of West Sussex County Council becomes vice-chairman.

2004 : Espace Manche Development Initiative project, which was elaborated within the framework of the Interreg European programme.

2006 : Following the lobbying efforts of the Channel Arc Manche Assembly towards the European Union, the French and British territories bordering the Channel become fully eligible to the cross-border cooperation programmes. First Conference of the Channel Arc Manche Assembly at Fontwell Park (West Sussex). Presentation of the Channel area strategic vision, elaborated within the framework of the EMDI project.

2007 : Creation of the Channel's federation of regional and local ports in Saint-Brieuc. Brad Watson becomes President of the Channel Arc Manche Assembly.

June 2008 : Publication of the book "Channel Spaces, a world within Europe", edited by Pascal Buléon and Louis Shurmer-Smith.

December 2008 : Conference of the Channel Arc Manche Assembly in Folkestone, with discussion about coastal zones' adjustment to climate change.

June 2009 : Approval of the CAMIS (Channel Arc Manche Integrated Strategy) project, co-financed by the Interreg IVA France (Channel) – England programme.

December 2009 : Channel Arc Manche Conference in Rouen with the theme "What are the challenges for coastal economies in the Channel? Trends, current situations and local experience in coastal towns".

2011 : Annual conference of the Channel Arc Manche in Fécamp with the theme "Tackling maritime pollution risks in the Channel for local authorities" parallel to the CAMIS project. Adpoption of the Fécamp Declaration.

Full members are the French Regions and the English local authorities bordering the Channel. Associate members are all other organisations located on this territory and willing to contribute to the achievement of the Channel Arc Manche Assembly's objectives.

The Bureau consists of the chairman and the vice-chairman of the assembly. They are elected by full members for two years, the presidency alternating between the French and the British.

Assisted by the vice-chairman, the chairman is responsible for advocating the objectives of the Channel Arc Assembly towards European and national institutions, elaborating common declarations, and ensuring that the decisions of the assembly are implemented.

An annual meeting takes place during the first week of July for the exchange of good practices and to identify potential areas of co-operation. The conference is attended by full and associate members, and is also open to other interested organisations.

The executive committee consists of all the full members and takes the decisions necessary to achieve the objectives of the Channel Arc Manche Assembly. It meets at least twice a year and decisions are taken through consensus.

The Secretariat deals with day-to-day running, the preparation and the follow-up of work in the executive committee and the annual conference, as well as administering the website.

The Channel Arc Manche partnership does not hold its own budget. The means dedicated by its members to the co-operation network mostly consist of working time and limited logistic expenses. European structural funds are often requested to finance individual co-operation projects within the Channel area.

European funding, in particular the European Regional Development Fund, enables the Interreg co-operation programmes to support Franco-British co-operation projects of different scales. Between 2007 and 2013, 173 million Euros were allocated to Franco-British co-operation in the Channel area. Along with all other projects, the Channel Arc Manche partnership supports in particular two large and structural projects for the area: the Espace Manche Development Initiative (EMDI) and the Channel Arc Manche Integrated Strategy (CAMIS).

The EMDI project, which gathered 22 partners between 2004 and 2008, aimed to develop and reinforce Franco-British co-operation within the Channel area. 48% of its budget was co-funded by the Interreg IIIB co-operation programme. It led to:

The CAMIS project (2009–2013), with a budget of 3.3 million Euros, half of which was funded by the Interreg IVA France (Channel) England programme, gathered ten local authorities from Britain and France and nine other organisations.

ArcelorMittal S.A., headquartered in Luxembourg City, is a multinational steel manufacturing corporation, with operations in iron ore and coke mining as well as scrap recycling. It is the second-largest steelmaker worldwide behind Baowu and was the largest steelmaker worldwide until 2019, when Baowu acquired other Chinese steelmakers.

ArcelorMittal has steel-making operations in 14 countries, including 34 integrated and mini-mill steel-making facilities. In 2025, the company had production capacity of 74.6 million tons of steel and produced 55.6 million tons of steel. The company's production was 40% in the Americas, 53% in Europe and 7% in other countries, such as South Africa and Ukraine. The company is vertically integrated and produces 72% of its iron ore needs from mining operations, 91% of its coke needs, and 55% of its scrap and direct reduced iron needs. The company is ranked 190th on the Fortune Global 500 and 256th on the Forbes Global 2000. As of December 2025, the company was 44.68% owned by Lakshmi Mittal and his family and the remainder of the company is publicly traded.

The company has iron ore mining activities in Brazil, Canada, Liberia, Mexico, Ukraine, South Africa and, via its joint venture in India and associate in Baffinland in Canada. The company's market share in the production of steel for the automotive industry is 16%.

ArcelorMittal was formed in 2007 from the $33 billion acquisition of Arcelor by Mittal Steel Company. The merger was consummated after Mittal Steel Company raised its bid for Arcelor and the Mittal family agreed to relinquish its controlling stake in the company and execute a standstill agreement not to acquire a controlling interest without approval from independent directors. The resulting firm produced approximately 10% of the world's steel, and was at that time the largest steel company worldwide.

In August 2007, the company acquired Sicartsa, operator of a plant in Mexico, from Grupo Villacero for $1.44 billion. In October 2007, the company acquired 90% of Rongcheng Chengshan Steelcord, a Chinese steel wire company, for $26.6 million. In November 2007, the company increased its stake in China Oriental Group to over 73%, becoming the first foreign company to control a steel mill in China.

In April 2008, the company, in partnership with its joint venture partner Nippon Steel announced a $240 million investment to double galvanized production capacity at their I/N Kote with the addition of a new $240-million continuous galvanizing line. In December 2008, the company sold the Bethlehem Steel plant in Lackawanna, New York and the Sparrows Point Mill to Severstal, to satisfy conditions for regulatory approval of the merger with Arcelor. In December 2008, during the Great Recession, the company closed its steel mill in Hennepin, Illinois ; it was demolished in 2017. In July 2009, the company acquired Noble's European Laser Welded Operations as part of the bankruptcy of Noble International.

In January 2011, the company completed the corporate spin-off of its stainless steel division, Aperam.

In April 2011, the European Commission fined 17 steel producers for operating a cartel for the period of 1984 to 2002; ArcelorMittal received the largest fine of €45.7 million.

In May 2012, the company sold Skyline Steel and Astralloy to Nucor for $605 million. In July 2012, due to overcapacity and reduced demand in Europe, it had idled 9 of 25 blast furnaces. In October 2012, it permanently shut down two blast furnaces in Florange, France. However, it revived them two months later when it agreed with the French government on a substantial investment.

In May 2013, the company sold a 15% interest in its Labrador Trough iron ore mining and infrastructure asset to Posco and China Steel for $1.1 billion.

In February 2014, ThyssenKrupp sold its carbon steel facility in Calvert, Alabama, to ArcelorMittal and Nippon Steel for $1.55 billion. The facility was renamed AM/NS Calvert through the 50/50 joint partnership with Nippon Steel & Sumitomo Metal Corp. In June 2025, to gain approval for the acquisition of U.S. Steel by Nippon Steel, Nippon Steel sold its 50% stake in the facility to ArcelorMittal for $1 and the facility was renamed ArcelorMittal Calvert.

In June 2014, the arbitration court of the International Chamber of Commerce awarded Senegal $150 million from the company and allowed the government of Senegal to rescind a $2.2 billion contract given to the company to develop an iron ore deposit and construct a 750 km (466 mi) railway line after the company stalled on construction.

In September 2014, ArcelorMittal and Gerdau sold Gallatin Steel to Nucor for $770 million.

In February 2016, the company sold its 35% stake in Gestamp Automacion to the Riberas family for €875 million. In June 2016, the company released Usibor 2000, a steel grade that was said to be one-third stronger than other steels then available for car-making.

In August 2016, after an investigation that began in 2008, the Competition Commission (South Africa) found the company guilty of price fixing for the period of January 1984 to September 2002 and fined the company 1.5 billion South African rand (US$110.9 million). The company also agreed to invest R4.64 billion rand in capital expenditures in capital over five years.

In February 2017, ArcelorMittal and Votorantim announced plans to combine their long steel operations in Brazil. Under the deal, Votorantim Siderurgia became a subsidiary of ArcelorMittal Brasil. In 2017, ArcelorMittal and the Steel Authority of India Ltd (SAIL) agreed on preliminary terms to form a $913 million joint venture to export a fifth of the auto-grade steel made by the venture. In March 2017, the company proposed a US$6.5 billion steel project in Karnataka, after entering into a pact with the Karnataka government in February 2017. In April 2017, the company sold Georgetown Steelworks in South Carolina to Sanjeev Gupta 's Liberty House Group.

In January 2018, black snow fell in the city of Temirtau, Kazakhstan, where an ArcelorMittal plant was located, which locals blamed on the plant. The company claimed that the discoloration of the snow was caused by a lack of wind which would otherwise blow the pollution away.

In July 2018, the Indiana Occupational Safety and Health Administration found five serious safety violations at the company's Indiana Harbor steel mill in East Chicago after the death of a steelworker while driving a golf cart at the facility with faulty brakes. The company was fined $21,000.

In November 2018, a consortium led by ArcelorMittal acquired Ilva, owner of the Taranto steelworks in southern Italy, which has Europe's largest steel output, for €1.8 billion. To receive approval, the consortium agreed to invest €2.4 billion into Ilva, renamed ArcelorMittal Italia, while the state agreed to invest €2 billion. ArcelorMittal accused the state of not investing the agreed-upon amount and, in February 2024, Italy's industry minister took control of the venture in a manner similar to a bankruptcy, after an increase in energy prices and a drop in rolled steel coil prices led the venture to accumulate huge debts.

In March 2019, the company, in partnership with Nippon Steel, acquired Essar Steel, which had filed for bankruptcy protection. In July 2019, the company sold seven major steelworks and five service centers in seven European countries to Sanjeev Gupta 's Liberty House Group. In August 2019, the company took over management of Hibbing Taconite, of which it owns 62.3%, from Cleveland-Cliffs. Also in August 2019, the company acquired Legault Métal.

In December 2020, the company sold ArcelorMittal USA, which had 2019 revenues of $17 billion, to Cleveland-Cliffs for approximately $1.4 billion. In March 2022, the company acquired John Lawrie Metals, a metals recycler in Scotland. In May 2022, the company acquired 10 scrap yards in the south of Germany. In July 2022, the company acquired an 80% interest in Voestalpine 's hot-briquetted iron plant near Corpus Christi, Texas, based on a $1 billion valuation. In December 2022, the company acquired Riwald Recycling. In September 2022, the company closed two plants in Germany, including a blast furnace in Bremen and a wire-rod plant in Hamburg due to increased costs for electricity and natural gas.

In March 2023, the company acquired Companhia Siderúrgica do Pecém, owner of a 3-million-metric-ton blast furnace and slab plant in northeastern Brazil, for $2.2 billion. In April 2023, the company's joint venture with Nippon Steel acquired Indian Steel Corporation, which had filed for bankruptcy protection. In December 2023, after the Kostenko mine disaster, the company sold its assets in Kazakhstan, the Temirtau steel mill and the Aktau pipe plant, for $286 million to a Kazakh state-owned investment fund.

In 2023, the company spent $23 million to buy 3 cargoes of coal from Russian companies despite international sanctions during the Russian invasion of Ukraine. The action was criticized by Global Witness, which noted that the company has operations in Ukraine.

In August 2024, ArcelorMittal acquired a 27.5% interest in Vallourec, a producer of seamless steel tubes, from funds managed by Apollo Global Management for €955 million.

In January 2025, the company's South Africa division ended production of long steel products due to high logistic and energy costs.

In March 2025, after being sued by 300 local residents and environmental groups, the company was placed under judicial supervision, subject to a €250,000 bail bond and a €1.75 million bank guarantee, for pollutants discharged by its steel plant at Fos-sur-Mer, which has an annual production capacity of 4 million tons of steel. The company claimed that it has reduced pollution at the plant by 70% since 2002.

In July 2025, the company closed a wire mill in Hamilton, Ontario, affecting 153 jobs.

In September 2025, the company ceased operations at Hunedoara steel works in Hunedoara, Romania due to high energy costs and reduced orders, affecting 477 jobs; the mill was sold to UMB Grup in April 2026 for €12.5 million plus VAT.

In October 2025, the company sold its operations in Bosnia.

In April 2026, the company donated steel for the White House State Ballroom. The company had previously been listed as one of the donors who funded the White House's East Wing demolition and planned building of the ballroom.

In May 2026, the company sold a 10% interest in Vallourec for $667 million.

In June 2026, the company announced a $57 million investment to establish the North American headquarters of ArcelorMittal Building Solutions in Macon-Bibb County.

Guillaume Faye (French: [ ɡijom faj ] ; 7 November 1949 – 6 March 2019) was a French political theorist, journalist, writer, and leading member of the French New Right.

Continuing the tradition of Giorgio Locchi, his various articles and books sought to posit Islam as a nemesis necessary to unite the white non-Muslim peoples of Europe and the former Soviet Union into an entity named "Eurosiberia". Faye considered regional and national grievances to be counterproductive to this goal and was supportive of European integration.

Scholar Stéphane François describes Faye as "pan-European revolutionary-conservative thinker who is at the origin of the renewal of the doctrinal corpus of the French Identitarian Right, and more broadly of the Euro-American Right, with the concept of 'archeofuturism'."

Guillaume Faye was born on 7 November 1949 in Angoulême from a family close to the Bonapartist right. He attended the Paris Institute of Political Studies, where he ran the student's associations Cercle Pareto and Association GRECE between 1971 and 1973.

On the advice of Dominique Venner, Faye joined GRECE in 1970, an ethno-nationalist think tank led by Nouvelle Droite thinker Alain de Benoist. He soon became the head of movement's Secretariat for Research and Studies, and one of the major Nouvelle Droite theorists. Faye wrote at that time for many New Right journals such as Éléments, Nouvelle École, Orientations, and Études et Recherches. From 1978, he became a promoter of the strategy of " metapolitics " embodied by GRECE, although he eventually failed his project of entryism within the mainstream right-wing newspaper Figaro Magazine.

After intellectual and financial disagreements with de Benoist, Faye was marginalized in GRECE. He is said to have been ousted from the think tank in late 1986, although his departure was only officially announced in August 1987 via a letter wrote by Pierre Vial to the newspaper Le Monde.

Faye then distanced himself from political activism and became actively involved with the media industry. Between 1991 and 1993, he worked as an entertainer under the name of 'Skyman' at the urban radio station Skyrock. He was also a journalist at L'Écho des Savanes and VSD, and appeared on the France 2 talk-show Télématin. Faye taught the sociology of sexuality at the University of Besançon, and he has also claimed to have acted in pornographic films.

"In a society that considers all genuine ideas subversive, which seeks to discourage ideological imagination, and which aims to abolish thought in favour of spectacle, the main goal must be to awaken people’s consciences, raising traumatising problems and sending ideological electroshocks: shocking ideas."

Faye went back to political activism in 1998 with the publication of his book Archeofuturism, followed in 2000 by The Colonization of Europe. The latter, criticized as "strongly racist" by de Benoist, earned him a criminal conviction for incitement to racial hatred. Faye organized conferences with GRECE sympathizers, Monarchists, Traditional Catholics and neo-Pagans. At the request of de Benoist, however, he was excluded once again from GRECE in May 2000.

Faye then became close to Terre et Peuple, a neo-Pagan movement founded in 1995 by former GRECE members Pierre Vial, Jean Mabire and Jean Haudry, but he was also expelled in 2007 after the publication of his book The New Jewish Question ('La Nouvelle Question Juive'), regarded within some revolutionary-nationalist and Catholic traditionalists circles as too overly "Zionist". In 1999 and 2002, he was invited to speak at conferences organized by the Club de l'Horloge, a national-liberal think tank led by Henry de Lesquen.

Faye died on 6 March 2019, after a long battle with cancer. While his death received limited media coverage in the mainstream press, he was praised by many far-right activists, including Jean-Marie Le Pen, Dan Roodt, Daniel Friberg, Greg Johnson, Jared Taylor, Richard Spencer, and Martin Sellner.

A key concept of Faye's thought is that paganism – viewed as a quasi-ideal object aligned on the cosmic order that allowed for a holistic and organic society – is a rooted and differentialist religion, and thus a solution to the dominant " mixophile " and universalist worldview of the West. Faye has also participated in the diffusion of an identity defined as biological and cultural. In 1979, he argued that immigration, rather than immigrants, should be combated in order to preserve cultural and biological "identities" on both sides of the Mediterranean Sea.

His first books, published in the early 1980s, developed a rejection of the consumerist society and the standardization and Westernization of the world, one of Faye's intellectual constants. For him, a multiracial society is by essence "multiracist", and he has called for the return of non-European immigrants to their respective "civilizational areas". In 1985, Faye stated that Zionist "opinion circles" in France had forced the French government to break ties with the Ba'athist regime of Saddam Hussein, and he has denounced "Zionist lobbies" in the US that wished to influence geopolitics in favour of Israel. After his return to politics in the late 1990s, however, Faye reversed from his pro-Arab position and became a supporter of Israel as a potential political ally of circumstance against Arabs and Muslims.

Through several books Faye published from the late 1990s onward, which he conceived as an appeal to the "ethnic awareness" of Europeans, Faye became an important ideologue of nativism and advocated a form of racialism that scholar Stéphane François has described as "reminiscent of the 1900s to the 1930s". The "ethnic foundations of a civilization", Faye argued, "rest on its biological roots and those of its peoples." He has also made references to the "loyalty to values and to bloodlines", promoted natalist and eugenicist politics to resolve Europe's demographic issues, and adopted a racialist Darwinian concept of the "struggle of the fittest", regarding other civilizations as enemies to be eliminated.

Faye believed the West to be threatened by its demographic decline and decadent social fabric, by a supposed ethnoreligious clash between the North and the South, and by a series of global financial crisis and uncontrolled environmental pollution. To avoid the announced civilizational and ecological collapse, Faye has promoted an authoritarian regime led by a "born chief", a charismatic and providential man protecting the people's identity and ancestry, and taking the right decisions in emergency situations. Faye also condemned what he has called " ethnomasochism ", defined as the self-hating of one's own ethnic group. In Why We Fight, originally published in 2001, Faye defined ' metapolitics ' as the "social diffusion of ideas and cultural values for the sake of provoking profound, long-term, political transformation."

" Archeofuturism ", a concept coined by Faye in 1998, refers to the reconciliation of technoscience with "archaic values". He argues that the term "archaic" should be understood in its original Ancient Greek, that is to say as the 'foundation' or the 'beginning', not as a blind attachment to the past. According to Faye, anti-moderns and counter-revolutionaries are actually mirror-constructs of modernity that share the same biased linear conception of time. Defining his theories as "non-modern", Faye was influenced by Friedrich Nietzsche 's concept of eternal return and Michel Maffesoli 's post-modern sociological works. Political scientist Stéphane François has described archeofuturism as a combination of "post-modern philosophy, some elements of Western counterculture, and racism."

This, Faye himself argues, can only proceed in a manner similar to the Conservative Revolution :

Today it is not a matter of ‘conserving’ the present or returning to a recent past that has failed, but rather of regaining possession of our most archaic roots, which is to say those most suited to the victorious life.

We should avoid being backward-looking, concerned with restoration and reaction, for it is the last few centuries that have spawned the pox that is now devouring us. It is a matter of returning to archaic and ancestral values, while at the same time envisioning the future as something more than the extension of the present.

In the 1980s, his work was translated into English, Italian, German, or Spanish, and Faye spoke at numerous conferences organized by European New Right groups. Although he had initially abandoned all political activities in the late 1980s, his first books and articles continued to be discussed among American activists of the nascent movement that was later called the " Alt Right ". Following his comeback to political writings, Faye renewed his links with GRECE and nationalist-revolutionary militants between 1998 and 2006. He became an important figure of "national-westernism", finding himself alongside European far-right militants the likes of Gabriele Adinolfi, Pierre Krebs, Ernesto Milá, Pierre Vial or Galina Lozko to defend the "future of the white world", as one conference organized in Moscow in June 2006 was entitled.

After 2006, Faye took part in conventions organized by the American Renaissance association led by Jared Taylor, and his ideas have been discussed by the American Alt Right website Counter-Currents. His works from the second intellectual period have been translated into English by Arktos Media, described as the "uncontested global leader in the publication of English-language Nouvelle Droite literature." The writings of Faye and Alain de Benoist, especially their metapolitical stance, have also influenced American far-right activist Richard B. Spencer, Swedish Identitarian Daniel Friberg, and the Identitarian movement at large. As for de Benoist, Faye's writings were discussed in the American New Left journal Telos, founded by philosopher Paul Piccone. According to Stéphane François, Faye "is responsible for the doctrinal renewal of French nativism and, more widely, for the development of the European-American radical Right". The translation of his books Archeofuturism and Why We Fight in English by Arktos in 2010 and 2011 made Faye into a "celebrity-intellectual" within the global New Right network.

The Archives nationales (French pronunciation: [ aʁʃiv nɑsjɔnal ] ; abbreviated AN ; English: National Archives) are the national archives of France. They preserve the archives of the French state, apart from the archives of the Ministry of Armed Forces and Ministry of Foreign Affairs, as these two ministries have their own archive services, the Defence Historical Service (SHD) and Diplomatic Archives [ fr ] respectively. The National Archives of France also keep the archives of local secular and religious institutions from the Paris Region seized at the time of the French Revolution (such as local royal courts of Paris, suburban abbeys and monasteries, etc), as well as the archives produced by the notaries of Paris during five centuries, and many private archives donated or placed in the custody of the National Archives by prominent aristocratic families, industrialists, and historical figures.

The National Archives have one of the largest and oldest archival collections in the world. As of 2022, they held 383 km (238 mi) of physical records (the total length of occupied shelves put next to each other) from the year 625 to the present time, and as of 2020 74.75 terabytes (74,750 GB) of electronic archives.

To deal with this massive volume of documents, the National Archives currently operate from two sites in the Paris Region: the historical site of the National Archives in the heart of Paris (in the Medieval Marais district), which contains the physical records of the French state from before the French Revolution as well as the records of the Paris notaries from all periods, and the newer site at Pierrefitte-sur-Seine, in the northern suburbs of Paris, opened in 2013, which contains all the physical records of the French state since the French Revolution, as well as the private archives from all periods.

Two sister agencies, the National Overseas Archives (ANOM) and the National Archives of the World of Labour [ fr ] (ANMT) are located in Aix-en-Provence and in Roubaix respectively. These are managed separately from the National Archives.

The Archives nationales are heir to the Trésor des chartes ("Charters Treasury"), the archives of the French crown that were kept in the ancient Capetian royal palace on the Île de la Cité until the French Revolution, although the Trésor des chartes was more limited in scope than the current Archives nationales, since it contained only charters and legal records constituting title deeds for the French crown, used to establish the rights of French kings over crown lands. The Trésor des chartes today still forms one of the most renowned archival series in the collections of the National Archives.

The Archives nationales were created at the time of the French Revolution in 1790. It was a state decree of 1794 that made it mandatory to centralise all the pre-French Revolution private and public archives seized by the revolutionaries, completed by a law passed in 1796 which created departmental archives (archives départementales) in the departments of France to alleviate the burden on the Archives nationales in Paris, thus creating the collections of the French archives as we know them today. In 1800 the Archives nationales became an autonomous body of the French state.

The National Archives are under the authority of the Archives of France administration (Service interministériel des Archives de France) in the Ministry of Culture. The Archives of France also manage the 101 departmental archives located in the prefectures of each of the 100 departments of France plus the city of Paris, as well as various other local (municipal) archives, plus 12 more recent regional archives (which store the archives of the regional councils and their agencies). The departmental and local archives contain all the archives from the deconcentrated branches of the French state, as well as all the archives of the pre-French Revolution provincial and local institutions seized by the revolutionaries (parliaments, chartered cities, abbeys, and churches).

In addition to the 459 kilometres (285 mi) of physical records and 74.75 terabytes of electronic archives kept by the National Archives and its sister agencies, the National Overseas Archives (ANOM) in Aix-en-Provence and the National Archives of the World of Labour [ fr ] (ANMT) in Roubaix, this as of the end of 2020 (373 km and 74.75 TB at the National Archives strictly speaking, and 86 km at ANOM and ANMT), another 3,591 kilometres (2,231 mi) of physical records and 225.25 terabytes of electronic archives were kept in the regional, departmental and local archives in the end of 2020, in particular the church records and notarial records used by genealogists.

The archives of the Ministry of Armed Forces (Defence Historical Service, ca. 450 kilometres (280 mi) of physical records) and the archives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Diplomatic Archives [ fr ], ca. 120 kilometres (75 mi) of physical records) are managed separately by their respective ministries and do not fall under the jurisdiction of the Archives of France administration.

The National Archives have one of the largest and most important archival collections in the world. As of 2022, the National Archives contained 383 km (238 mi) of physical records (the total length of occupied shelves put next to each other) and as 2020 74.75 terabytes (74,750 GB) of electronic archives, an enormous mass of documents growing every year (3.1 km of physical records and 4.7 terabytes of electronic archives entered the National Archives in 2020 despite the COVID-19 lockdowns).

Due to the events of the French Revolution, the pre-French Revolution archives kept by the National Archives are not just the archives of the central state, but also the many local archives of the Paris region, such as all the archives of the abbeys surrounding Paris (e.g. the Royal Abbey of St Denis), the archives of the churches of Paris, and the archives of the medieval Paris city hall. Thus, the National Archives serve as the archives of the French central state for records from 1790 onwards, but for records before 1790 they serve as both the archives of the central state and the local archives of Paris and its region. The National Archives, however, do not keep the pre-1790 church records of Paris (baptisms, marriages and burials). These were kept at the municipal archives of Paris (original series from 16th century to French Revolution) and at the Palais de Justice (duplicate registers from 1700 to French Revolution), and were entirely destroyed by fires set by extremists at the end of the Paris Commune in May 1871 which destroyed both the municipal archives and a large part of the Palais de Justice.

The oldest original record kept at the National Archives is a papyrus dated AD 625 coming from the archives of the Royal Abbey of St Denis seized at the time of the French Revolution. This papyrus is the confirmation by King Chlothar II of a grant of land in the city of Paris to the Royal Abbey of Saint-Denis previously made by the vir illustris Dagobert, son of Baddo. This charter is the oldest original one kept by the National Archives, but the National Archives possess medieval copies of earlier records from the 6th century (but not the originals). The National Archives also possess a small fragment of an original papyrus record from the year 619 or 620 (uncertain date), a private donation, probably to the basilica of St Denis, but the charter from 625 is the oldest one preserved in its entirety.

The National Archives keep 211 authentic, original records from the 1st millennium (later copies and forgeries not included). The oldest Merovingian records are all written on papyrus imported from Egypt, in continuation of Roman practices. Records written on parchment appear after 670, due to the Muslim conquest of the Southern Mediterranean, and completely replace papyrus records within a few decades.

Detail of the 211 authentic, original records from before the year 1000 kept by the National Archives:

In total, the National Archives possess 47 original records from the Merovingian period (ended in 751). They also possess 5 original records from the reign of Pepin the Short (751–768), 31 from the reign of Charlemagne (768-814), 28 from the reign of Louis the Pious (814-840), 69 from the reign of Charles the Bald (840-877), 4 from the reign of Hugh Capet (987–996), 21 from the reign of Robert the Pious (996–1031), and then a rapidly increasing number of original records after Robert the Pious, with for example more than 1,000 original records from the reign of Philip Augustus (1180–1223) and several thousand original records from the reign of Saint Louis (1226–1270).

The National Archives also hold the original draft of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, dating from 1789, a core statement of the values of the French Revolution which had a major impact on the development of popular conceptions of individual liberty and democracy in Europe and worldwide. It was inscribed on UNESCO 's Memory of the World Programme Register in 2003 in recognition of its historical significance. A draft of Charles de Gaulle 's Appeal of 18 June is also held by the archives.

Due to the massive volume of documents and records kept by the National Archives, these have been divided among two sites, one in the historic center of Paris, the other one in the northern Parisian suburb of Pierrefitte-sur-Seine (opened in 2013), complemented by a microform centre at the Château d'Espeyran, in Saint-Gilles-du-Gard, serving as a back-up in case original documents are destroyed. A third site in the Paris Region, at Fontainebleau, was closed in 2016 and its content moved to Pierrefitte-sur-Seine.

The National Archives has been located since 1808 in a group of buildings comprising the Hôtel de Soubise and the Hôtel de Rohan in the district of Le Marais in the centre of Paris.

Since the opening of the Pierrefitte-sur-Seine site in 2013, the historic Paris site stores only the documents and records from before the French Revolution, as well as the so-called Minutier central of Paris, i.e. the archives of all the Parisian notaries extending from the 15th century to the beginning of the 20th century. Since 1867 it has also housed the Musée des Archives Nationales.

In 2004, the Paris site of the National Archives kept 98.3 kilometres (61.1 mi) of physical records: 15 kilometres (9.3 mi) of pre-French Revolution archives; 52 kilometres (32 mi) of records of the French central state from 1790 to 1958; 20 kilometres (12 mi) of Paris notary records (Minutier central); 5.8 kilometres (3.6 mi) of private archives, notably the archives of the aristocratic families seized at the time of the French Revolution; 4.5 kilometres (2.8 mi) of books; and finally 1 kilometre (0.62 mi) of ancient maps and plans.

In 2012-2013, all archives, maps and plans from 1790 to the 20th century, as well as all private archives from all periods, were moved to the new site of Pierrefitte-sur-Seine, and as a result the amount of archives stored at the historic Paris site was reduced to 45.8 kilometres (28.5 mi) of physical records (situation as of the end of 2015).

The space liberated by the departure of more than 50 km of records allowed the National Archives to resume the collection of archives from the Paris notaries, in particular late 19th and early 20th centuries records which hadn't been collected yet. As of 2022, the Minutier central of the Paris notaries stored at the National Archives was filling 23.8 kilometres (14.8 mi) of shelves, representing 20 million notary records from the 1460s to the first half of the 20th century.

In 2004, the decision was made to construct a new National Archive centre in Pierrefitte-sur-Seine, located in the northern suburbs of Paris. This initiative aimed to alleviate the burden on the historic sites in Paris and the newer Fontainebleau site. Designed by the Italian architect Massimiliano Fuksas, it opened to the public in January 2013. It was meant to become the main site of the National Archives, with a capacity of 380 kilometres (240 mi) of shelves, one of the largest storage capacities in the world.

Between 2012 and 2013, over 50 km of records from the Paris site and 150 km from the Fontainebleau site were transferred to the new Pierrefitte site. By the end of 2015, the Pierrefitte site kept 219.5 kilometres (136.4 mi) of records. The decision to close the Fontainebleau site in 2016 after the discovery of structural issues in 2014 has led to the transfer of all Fontainebleau's remaining archives to the Pierrefitte site, a transfer that was to be completed in 2022, at which point the Pierrefitte site of the National Archives would store more than 300 kilometres (190 mi) of physical records, close to maximum capacity, at a much earlier date than was originally anticipated. As a result, the National Archives have launched the construction of new storage capacity (100 km of shelves) at the Pierrefitte site, which should bring the total capacity of the Pierrefitte site to 480 kilometres (300 mi) of shelf space by 2026.

The Pierrefitte-sur-Seine site of the National Archives stores all the archives of the French central state since 1790 (except those of the Ministry of Armed Forces and of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which have their own archive agencies, the Defence Historical Service and the Diplomatic Archives [ fr ] respectively), as well as all the private archives from all periods seized during the French Revolution or deposited at the National Archives since then (archives of aristocratic families, industrialists, major historical figures, etc). The Pierrefitte site will receive all the new records from the central state every year for the next 30 years after its opening.

The Centre for Contemporary Archives (Centre des archives contemporaines or CAC), founded as the Cité interministérielle des archives, opened in Fontainebleau in 1969. It was the repository for documents produced by the French central state since 1958 (founding of the Fifth Republic). In 2006 it contained 193 kilometres (120 mi) of physical records. The Fontainebleau site also stored the electronic archives collected by the National Archives, as well as the audio and video files kept by the National Archives.

With the construction of the new Pierrefitte-sur-Seine site of the National Archives, it was decided to transfer most of the archives stored at Fontainebleau to Pierrefitte, and to keep at Fontainebleau only the electronic archives, the audio and video files, as well as some series of physical records concerning specific individuals, such as naturalization records or the career files of government employees, representing an estimated 60 km of shelf space.

After the discovery of structural issues with the buildings at the Fontainebleau site in 2014, it was decided to permanently close the Fontainebleau site in 2016, and move all the remaining physical records stored there to the Pierreffitte site of the National Archives. The removal of more than 70 km of records to Pierrefitte was due to be completed by 2022.

The National Microfilm Centre (Centre national du microfilm), opened in the Château d'Espeyran, in Saint-Gilles-du-Gard, in 1973. This centre stores original microforms of documents held in other archive centres, both national and departmental, in case the original documents were destroyed. This centre keeps approximately 61 million views of original documents.

The National Overseas Archives (Archives nationales d'outre-mer or ANOM), originally the Centre for Overseas Archives (Centre des archives d'outre-mer), opened in Aix-en-Provence in 1966. It stores the archives from the ministries in charge of the French colonies and Algeria until the 1960s (such as the Ministry of Colonies) as well as the archives transferred from the French colonies and Algeria at the time of their independence between 1954 and 1962. The ANOM also possesses private and corporate archives related to the former French colonies and Algeria. In total the ANOM keeps 36.5 kilometres (22.7 mi) of archives from the 17th to the 20th century covering more than 40 currently independent countries spread over 5 continents. Note that the archives concerning Tunisia and Morocco, which were protectorates and not colonies, are kept by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in its Diplomatic Archives.

In addition to these 36.5 km of archives, the ANOM also possesses 60,000 maps and plans going back to the 17th century, 150,000 photographs, 20,000 postcards, and 100,000 books.

The National Archives of the World of Labour (Archives nationales du monde du travail [ fr ] or ANMT), originally the Centre for the Archives of the World of Labour (Centre des archives du monde du travail), opened in Roubaix in 1993. It stores the archives of businesses, trades unions, associations and corporations, and architects. In total it contains 49.8 kilometres (30.9 mi) of archives (as of 2020). Most of the archives at the ANMT are private archives.

The Archives nationales d'outre-mer (National Overseas Archives) in Aix-en-Provence is a branch of the Archives Nationales of France that documents the French colonial empire. According to one scholar, "half the history of France overseas was represented in the mass of papers" first assembled in Aix in 1966. The materials originated in various offices and repositories scattered throughout the colonies. The Dépôt des Archives d'Outre-Mer opened in 1966, and its successor, the Centre des Archives d'Outre-Mer, in 1987. It was later renamed the "Archives nationales d'outre-mer." Its facilities occupy a site near the Université de Provence Aix-Marseille I.

The archives groups its holdings by ministry, territory, document format (images, maps); it also has non-government materials. In 1986 the main national archives in Paris transferred to Aix its records of the "Section outre-mer." In 1995 the archives received substantial additional materials generated by colonial offices. Directors have included Martine Cornède (2007-2014) and Benoît Van Reeth (2014–present).

The archives has published inventories of some of its records, including those related to the colonial administration of Algeria, French Equatorial Africa, and French Indochina ; the governmental Secrétariat d'Etat à la Marine and Ministère des Colonies [ fr ] ; bagnes (prisons); private organizations such as the Comité central français pour l'Outre-Mer ; and individuals such as Madeleine de Lyée de Belleau [ fr ], Léonce Jore, and Ho Chi Minh.

The Ardennes, also known as the Ardennes Forest or Forest of Ardennes, is a region of extensive forests, rough terrain, rolling hills and ridges primarily in Belgium and Luxembourg, extending into Germany and France.

Geologically, the range is a western extension of the Eifel ; both were raised during the Givetian age of the Devonian (382.7 to 387.7 million years ago), as were several other named ranges of the same greater range.

The Ardennes proper stretches well into Germany and France (lending its name to the Ardennes department and the former Champagne-Ardenne region) and geologically into the Eifel (the eastern extension of the Ardennes Forest into Bitburg-Prüm, Germany); most of it is in the southeast of Wallonia, the southern and more rural part of Belgium (away from the coastal plain but encompassing more than half of the country's total area). The eastern part of the Ardennes forms the northernmost third of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, also called " Éislek " (German : Oesling). On the southeast the Eifel region continues into the German state of the Rhineland-Palatinate.

The trees and rivers of the Ardennes provided the charcoal industry assets that enabled the great industrial period of Wallonia in the 18th and 19th centuries, when it was arguably the second great industrial region of the world. The greater region maintained an industrial eminence into the 20th century, after coal replaced charcoal in metallurgy. The strategic position of the Ardennes has made it a battleground for European powers for centuries; it was the site of major battles during both World Wars.

Much of the Ardennes is covered in dense forests, with the hills averaging around 350–400 m (1,150–1,310 ft) in height but rising to over 694 m (2,277 ft) in the boggy moors of the High Fens region of south-eastern Belgium. The region is typified by steep-sided valleys carved by swift-flowing rivers, the most prominent of which is the Meuse. Its most populous cities are Verviers in Belgium and Charleville-Mézières in France, both exceeding 50,000 inhabitants. The Ardennes is otherwise relatively sparsely populated, with few of the towns exceeding 10,000 inhabitants. (Exceptions include Belgium's Eupen and Bastogne.)

The Eifel range in Germany adjoins the Ardennes and is part of the same geological formation, although they are conventionally regarded as being two distinct areas.

The Ardennes are the remnants of a mountain range formed during the Hercynian orogeny ; in France similar formations are the Armorican Massif, the Massif Central, and the Vosges. The low interior of such former mountains often contains coal, plus iron, zinc and other metals in the sub-soil. This geologic fact explains the greatest part of the geography of Wallonia and its history. In the North and West of the Ardennes lie the valleys of the Sambre and Meuse rivers, forming an arc (Sillon industriel) going across the most industrial provinces of Wallonia, for example Hainaut Province, along the river Haine (the etymology of Hainaut); the Borinage, the Centre and Charleroi along the river Sambre; Liège Province along the river Meuse.

The region the Ardennes are part of has been uplifted further in the last few hundred thousand years by a mantle plume, as measured from the present elevation of old river terraces, with the largest amount of uplift concentrated in the east, where the Ardennes connect with the Eifel, where the same mantle plume is also responsible for volcanic activity.

This geological region is important in the history of Wallonia because this former mountain is at the origin of the economy, the history, and the geography of Wallonia. "Wallonia presents a wide range of rocks of various ages. Some geological stages internationally recognized were defined from rock sites located in Wallonia: e.g., Frasnian (Frasnes-lez-Couvin), Famennian (Famenne), Tournaisian (Tournai), Visean (Visé), Dinantian (Dinant), and Namurian (Namur)". Except for the Tournaisian, all these rocks are within the Ardennes geological area.

The Ardennes includes the greatest part of Belgium's Luxembourg Province (not to be confused with the neighbouring Grand Duchy of Luxembourg), the south of Namur Province, and Liège Province, plus a very small part of Hainaut Province, as well as the northernmost third of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, called " Éislek " (German : Ösling) and the main part of the French Ardennes department.

Before the 19th century industrialization, the first furnaces in these four Belgian provinces (all in the Wallonia region) and in the French Ardennes used charcoal for fuel, made from harvesting the Ardennes forest. This industry was also in the extreme south of present-day Luxembourg Province (which until 1839 was part of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg), in the region called Gaume. The most important part of the Walloon steel industry, using coal, was built around the coal mines, mainly in the region around the cities of Liège, Charleroi, La Louvière, the Borinage, and further in the Walloon Brabant (in Tubize). Wallonia became the second industrial power area of the world (after Great Britain) in proportion to its territory and to its population (see further).

The rugged terrain and the harsh climate of the Ardennes limits the scope for agriculture ; arable and dairy farming in cleared areas form the mainstay of the agricultural economy. The region is rich in timber and minerals, and Liège and the city of Namur are both major industrial centres. The extensive forests have an abundant population of wild game. The scenic beauty of the region and its wide variety of outdoor activities, including hunting, cycling, walking and canoeing, make it a popular tourist destination.

The region takes its name from the vast ancient forest known as Arduenna Silva in the Roman Period. Arduenna probably derives from a Gaulish cognate of the Brythonic word ardu- as in the Welsh : ardd ("high") and the Latin arduus ("high", "steep"). The second element is less certain, but may be related to the Celtic element *windo- as in the Welsh wyn / wen ("fair", "blessed"), which tentatively suggests an original meaning of "forest of blessed/fair heights".

The Ardennes probably shares this derivation with the numerous Arden place names in Britain, including the Forest of Arden.

The modern Ardennes region covers a greatly diminished area from the forest recorded in Roman times.

A song about Charlemagne, the Old French 12th-century chanson de geste Quatre Fils Aymon, mentions many of Wallonia's rivers, villages and other places. In Dinant the rock named Bayard takes its name from Bayard, the magic bay horse which, according to legend, jumped from the top of the rock to the other bank of the Meuse.

On their pillaging raids in the years 881 and 882, the Vikings used the old Roman roads in the Ardennes, attacking the abbeys of Malmedy and Stavelot and destroying Prüm Abbey in the Eifel.

The strategic position of the Ardennes has made it a battleground for European powers for many centuries. Much of the Ardennes formed part of the Duchy (since 1815, the Grand Duchy) of Luxembourg, a member state of the Holy Roman Empire, which changed hands numerous times between the powerful dynasties of Europe. In 1793 revolutionary France annexed the entire area, together with all other territories west of the Rhine river. In 1815, the Congress of Vienna, which dealt with the political aftermath of the Napoleonic Wars, restored the previous geographical situation, with most of the Ardennes becoming part of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. After the revolution of 1830, which resulted in the establishment of the Kingdom of Belgium, the political future of the Ardennes became a matter of much dispute between Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands, as well as involving the contemporary great powers of France, Prussia, and Great Britain. As a result, in 1839, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg ceded the westernmost 63% of its territory (being also the main part of the Ardennes) to the new Kingdom of Belgium, which is now its Luxembourg Province.

In the 20th century, leading military strategists generally considered the Ardennes to be unsuitable for large-scale military operations, due to its difficult terrain and narrow communication lines. However, in World War I as well as World War II, Germany successfully gambled on making a rapid passage through the Ardennes to attack a relatively lightly defended part of France. The Ardennes became the site of three major battles during the world wars: the Battle of the Ardennes (August 1914) in World War I, the Battle of France (1940), and the Battle of the Bulge (1944–1945) in World War II. Many of the towns of the region suffered severe damage during the two world wars and its various battles.

Allied generals in World War II believed that the region was impenetrable to massed vehicular traffic and especially armoured tanks, so the area was effectively "all but undefended" during the war. The German Army twice used this region to invade northern France and southern Belgium, via Luxembourg in the Battle of France and the later Battle of the Bulge.

In 1939 and 1940, Nazi Germany 's military strategists selected the forest as the primary route of their mechanised forces in the Invasion of France. The forest's great size could conceal the armoured divisions, and because the French did not suspect that the Germans would make such a risky move, they either did not consider a breakthrough there, or imagined that it would take at least 15 days for an army to pass through the forest. German forces, primarily under the command of Erich von Manstein, carried out the plan in two days, and managed to slip numerous divisions past the Maginot Line to attack France from the north, and rout the French forces. In May 1940 the German army crossed the Meuse, despite the resistance of the French Army. Under the command of General Heinz Guderian, the German armoured divisions crossed the river at Dinant and at Sedan, France. This was a crucial step in the push towards Paris, and France fell on 25 June 1940.

At the other end of the war, the Ardennes area came to prominence again during the Battle of the Bulge. The German Army, which had been forced to retreat for some time, launched a surprise attack in December 1944 in an attempt to recapture Antwerp and to drive a wedge between the advancing British and American forces in northern France. After a fierce battle the Allied forces blocked the German advance on the river Meuse at Dinant.

In the postwar period, the Ardennes has become a weekend retreat that is popular among Belgians as well as people from neighbouring countries. The tourist industry offers an extensive and varied range of activities and types of accommodation.

The Arenc affair began on April 16, 1975 in Marseille, France, when attorney Sixte Ugolini publicly condemned the police's kidnapping of his client, Mohamed Chérif, a Moroccan citizen with legal status. Shortly thereafter, the general public discovered a dormant warehouse located in the port of Arenc [ fr ] that had been covertly used by the prefecture for more than a decade to detain non-nationals (primarily Algerians) awaiting deportation, outside of any established legal framework. The affair foreshadowed the establishment of administrative detention centers [ fr ], which were brought into law in October 1981.

By the end of 1962, the French police aimed to restrict Algerian migration to Marseille to prevent a surge of "unemployed, sick, homeless, and socially undesirable masses." Starting April 1963, France circumvented the "free movement" arrangement under the Évian Accords by introducing "health checks" (essentially fitness-for-work assessments), leading to approximately 13% of Algerians being denied entry. While waiting to reboard the ship, individuals denied entry were housed overnight, initially in a hostel located behind the port and later from September 1963 in a 600 m facility within the port of Arenc. The facility occupied the second floor of a previously decommissioned warehouse, accessible by only an external metal staircase. This area had previously been used since May 1962 to receive and distribute repatriated Algerians.

As the "sanitary" measures proved inadequate in sufficiently controlling immigration, the government revised the principle of free movement through the Nekkache-Grandval agreements of April 1964. These agreements introduced a "tourist" visa and mandated Algerian nationals to possess a residence certificate or an "ONAMO" work permit issued by the Office National de la Main-d'Œuvre [ fr ]. A classified clause, as identified by sociologist Alexis Spire, authorized an initiative to "repatriate the idle"ː

"Algerian nationals (...) without employment or resources (...) may be repatriated to Algeria by the French government, unless humanitarian reasons prevent it."

The circular issued on April 17, 1964, stipulates that the prefecture is solely responsible for determining the repatriation cases without any possibility of appeal.

The Arenc center, starting from May 1964, was placed under the direct control of the port's specialized police station, and detention, originally reserved only for "non-admitters," was expanded to include people who were being expelled by ministerial order (arrêté ministériel - A.M.). Also, "idle" Algerians who were in the process of being repatriated, according to a prefectoral decision (décision préfectorale - D.P.), were also included. On July 17, 1964, the Ministry of the Interior notified the Bouches-du-Rhône Prefect regarding the same matterː

"As the Algerian nationals in question are not subject to a custodial sentence, it is important that during their stay at the center, surveillance measures are strictly limited to those necessary to prevent their escape [sic]."

The hunt for "fake Algerian tourists", followed by a so-called "fight against substandard housing", whose aim was in fact to prevent the arrival of the wives and children of Algerians living in Marseille, led to an increase in the number of expulsions: in 1965, over 11,400 people passed through the Arenc center. By the end of the 1960s, the number of Moroccan, Tunisian, Malian and Senegalese nationals at the center was increasing.

Detainees in Arenc are unable to appeal deportation decisions or contact legal counsel. The confinement conditions are quite dire, with rundown facilities and intermittent heating, and the center lacked showers. Meals consisted of two hard-boiled eggs, a ration of cheese, a slice of bread, and a can of sardines, which some inmates have utilized in suicide attempts. Notably, in 1969, a hunger strike was suppressed through the expulsion of the "ringleaders." The premises consisted of three main dormitories: one for "AM/DP" (nationals subject to a ministerial order or prefectoral decision), one for women and children, and another for "non-admis" (rejected upon entry). Additionally, there was a small room designated for solitary confinement.

The association Aide aux travailleurs d'outre-mer (ATOM), which has been appointed by the prefecture to manage several social reception centers in Marseille, was responsible for cleaning and laundering the dormitories.

According to a press release from the Ministry of the Interior dated April 22, 1975, a total of 3,299 individuals were detained at Arenc in 1974.

The Arenc affair began with the revelation that the police had taken Mohamed Chérif into custody without his consent. Mohamed Chérif, a Moroccan citizen and supporter of the MTA, was legally residing in Marseille with a valid permit for residency. He worked as a fisherman and had filed a complaint in August 1974, reporting that he was subjected to brutality while on the grounds of the Moroccan consulate. During his civil hearing, an attaché of the consul threatened him with deportation to Morocco. On April 11, 1975, Mohamed Chérif disappeared after attending a meeting at the prefecture. His friends informed Sixte Ugolini, who was in charge of the local syndicat des avocats de France (SAF), about the existence of a clandestine detention center near the Arenc ferry terminal.

On April 15, 1975, Saïd Bennia, an Algerian national born in 1956 in Marseille and a client of Sixte Ugolini, was arrested by the police immediately after he was judged free by the court. His parents followed the police van to the entrance of the Arenc prison where he was incarcerated.

On April 16, 1975, Sixte Ugolini called a press conference to denounce what he deemed a kidnapping due to the lack of news regarding Mohamed Chérif's appearance before the public prosecutor 's office within the legal period of police garde à vue. Journalist Alex Panzani reported that "immigrant circles" were aware of the center's existence while historian Ed Naylor hypothesized that Sixte Ugolini's surprise during the press conference may have been staged as part of a media move.

The conference's success ultimately resulted in Mohamed Chérif's immediate release. He was in Sète at the time, with his departure for Morocco impending. Upon his return to Marseille, he informed his lawyer through an interpreter that he had been coerced into signing incomprehensible documents before being confined in a warehouseː

"On April 11, I went to the police summons, in an office on the second floor. A policeman called twice, and I recognized the word 'prefecture', which came up a lot. Then he told me: "You're going back to your country. You have to sign this paper. I don't read French. I asked what it meant, but the policeman said, "You have to sign it, it's legal." So I signed. And I waited. An hour and a half later, I was taken by van to a warehouse in La Joliette. I stayed there for six days. In this warehouse with its barred windows, there were fifty to sixty people, including two women. We slept on bunk beds. We were guarded by six or seven uniformed policemen. On April 16, at 1pm, I was taken in a van to the Sète police station with five other Moroccans who were to be deported like me aboard the cargo ship Agadir. At around 9.30pm, the police came to collect my companions. They left me behind. But at around 10pm, they told me: "You can go to Marseille, you're free...".

Saïd Bennia was released on April 16 by the Prefecture of Police's order. This information is evidenced by the margin entry of his name in the register for the Arenc center.

Published photographs in La Marseillaise on April 19, 1975 establish detention activity in the warehouse, elevating the incident to a national level. On April 22, 1975, the Ministry of the Interior attempted to dispel the controversy surrounding Arenc prison by denying the existence of a secret center. It stated that Arenc was actually a "transit center" that had been legally established in 1964 and housed individuals who were denied entry into France, foreign nationals who had received an administrative expulsion order, and illegal immigrants. However, neither Mohamed Chérif nor Saïd Bennia fell under these categories. Following this, a "collective against Arenc prison" was formed in Marseille. The presence of a contentious detention facility in Paris is brought to light.

A Marseilles resident, Salah Berrebouh, was sent to Algeria and barred from attending court proceedings; however, he later clarified the details of his deportation to the judge once he returned to France. Berrebouh filed a complaint against X for an unlawful arrest, unjustified confinement, and deprivation of liberty. He was subsequently released without charge. Berrebouh's case was dismissed in December 1978.

In late April 1975, Minister of the Interior Michel Poniatowski defended the center's existence, disregarding police custody regulationsː

"There's no mystery or drama (...) This is a temporary accommodation center for foreign nationals who have been refused entry. The fact is, and this is why I have taken steps to open up additional appropriations, that the accommodation conditions were inadequate."

On April 30, 1975, during a session of the National Assembly, Jean Lecanuet, France's Minister of Justice stated that there were no detention centers in France, clarifying that the "transit center" was not a clandestine facility. However, he avoided answering a question from Paul Cermolacce, a Communist deputy from Bouches-du-Rhône, who inquired about why the public prosecutor's office had opened an investigation. The Syndicat de la Magistrature deemed the center completely illegal due to its clandestine nature and demanded its closure. However, their efforts proved to be unsuccessful.

Gustave Essaka, a Cameroonian national who had been detained in the center for almost a month without an arrest warrant or conviction, was eventually deported and returned to Marseille before filing a complaint. The apparent legality of detention is once more in doubt when Enrico Fernandez Rodriguez, a Spanish detainee, is admitted to the detainee ward at Hôpital de la Conception [ fr ] on May 17 after attempting to escape and injuring himself. The public prosecutor's office decides to transfer Rodriguez to the main ward despite the lack of judicial supervision over him. It is worth noting that Rodriguez was eventually released from the hospital.

On May 29, 1975, Judge Locques conducted a search of the center in response to complaints of sequestration. The Syndicat des avocats de France expressed satisfaction with the search. Prior to the judge's arrival, the guards received instructions to release a family with six children. Although Judge Locques deemed the complaints to be well-founded, the Aix-en-Provence public prosecutor's office sought the dismissal of the case. In 1977, the case was referred to the Criminal Division of the French Cour of Cassation, which implicated the Marseille Prefect of Police. Following this, the Interior Ministry could no longer deny the existence of Arenc and attempted regulation by issuing a circular on November 21, 1977, and a decree in December 1978. Finally, the civil parties were dismissed on November 14, 1978.

On June 14, 1975, approximately one thousand people gathered in Marseille for a demonstration demanding the immediate closure of Arenc prison and the indictment of those responsible. The event was organized by the Committee for the closure of Arenc prison, according to which around one thousand people attended, while the police estimated the number to be 550. Protest declined during the 1975 summer months, but in September, it was reignited by the release of the book Une prison clandestine de la police française, Arenc by Alex Panzani. a journalist for La Marseillaise who was involved in the investigation.

At a National Assembly session on November 24, 1976, Interior Minister Michel Poniatowski addressed Communist deputy Paul Cermolacce's concerns about the Arenc center, citing it as a more humane alternative to prison. Poniatowski stated that under article 120 of the penal code, individuals could be sent to prison, but to avoid harsh conditions, they are instead sent to the Arenc accommodation center.

The Barre administration [ fr ] endeavored to establish a legal basis for this practice retrospectively via a circular dated November 21, 1977, which proposed termination of employing the Arenc center and substitution with confinement in "a penitentiary establishment for a period not exceeding seven days". However, the circular was nullified by the Conseil d'État on a matter of form. On December 9, 1978, the government enacted a decree restricting detention to "the time strictly necessary for the effective execution of the expulsion". Protests persisted throughout the streets of Marseille.

In early 1979, Interior Minister Christian Bonnet proclaimed a new administrative detention law, permitting detention for a maximum of seven days that could only be extended by court order. However, the bill faced severe opposition from legal experts and members of the French National Assembly and Senate. Opposition deputy Raymond Forni cited article 66 of the Constitution, stating that "no one may be arbitrarily detained" and voiced his objections. Article 3 of the bill permits the detention of foreigners who have been denied permission to enter or reside on French territory. The sole intention of this provision is to legitimize the arbitrary practices carried out in centers like Arenc. The Constitutional Council invalidated the law on January 9, 1980, citing that "individual liberty can only be safeguarded if the judge intervenes as soon as possible". However, detention was still deemed justifiable under the December 9, 1978 decree.

Finally, Gaston Defferre proposed a law that was passed on October 29, 1981, after François Mitterrand was elected. This legalization of detention was the paradoxical result of activist activity against Arenc.

In 1999, Sixte Ugolini commented on the ongoing tightening of detention laws since Arenc was exposed to the publicː

"France has simply legalized this lawless situation, and for foreigners, nothing has changed. The interpretation of the law applied to them continues to reflect our society and the xenophobia that characterizes it."

The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture published a report in 1996 exposing the dire living conditions caused by the deteriorating state of the Arenc warehouse. In 2006, the Council of Europe issued another report corroborating these findings. The responsible party remained in their position until 2006. The Arenc warehouse was replaced by a new building located in the Canet district of the 14th arrondissement. However, the public appeared indifferent towards this development. As soon as the new center opened, the Contrôleur général des lieux de privation de liberté [ fr ], which serves as the French national watchdog for places of deprivation of liberty, noted that the accommodation conditions were unacceptable.

The Arenc warehouse was eventually demolished in 2009 and its location now serves as a parking lot for heavy goods vehicles on the port quays. In 2013, the Hangar J1 [ fr ], held the Marseille-Provence 2013, a significant exhibition about the Mediterranean and "the beginning of a random voyage" [ sic ], which did not mention this controversy.

Since 1978, approximately 100,000 individuals, including young children, have been detained at Arenc. According to a report by Mediapart, Saïd Bennia, who was born in Marseille, was arrested by the police in April 1975 and detained at Arenc. He was expelled 15 times, with the most recent occurrence taking place in 2000, before being admitted to a psychiatric ward.

The archives of the facility were deposited in 2007 and will be open for consultation at the Bouches-du-Rhône departmental archives [ fr ] in 2057.

In the history of the Russian Empire, and Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, arendator (literally " lease holder") (Ukrainian : "Орендар" (Orendar), Russian : "Откупщик" (Otkupshchik)) was a person who leased fixed assets, such as land, mines, mills, inns, breweries, or distilleries, or of special rights, such as the right to collect customs duties, taxes, or the right to mint money, for example. Individuals trusted by state officials were often given such rights to collect rent or revenue and were allowed to keep a portion of the money in exchange for this service, sometimes as a reward for other services to the state. The practice is called "rent/revenue farming ".

The 1913 Webster's dictionary gives the following definition:

||Ar`en*da"tor (?), n. [LL. arendator, arrendator, fr. arendare, arrendare, to pay rent, fr. arenda yearly rent; ad + renda, F. rente, E. rent. Cf. Arrentation and Rent.] In some provinces of Russia, one who farms the rents or revenues.

Many estates of absentee landlords in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth during the 16–18th centuries were managed by arendators, many of whom were Jewish. This led to significant resentment and antisemitic violence during the Khmelnytsky Uprising (1648–1657).

This extremely lucrative fiscal practice was also common in tax collecting in medieval Spain and France. There were frequent problems with corruption. The practice continued in the Russian Empire until the late 19th century.

Areva S.A. was a French multinational group specializing in nuclear power, active between 2001 and 2018. It was headquartered in Courbevoie, France. Before its 2016 corporate restructuring, Areva was majority-owned by the French state through the French Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission (54.37%), Banque publique d'investissement (3.32%), and Agence des participations de l'État (28.83%). Électricité de France, in which the French government has a majority ownership stake, owned 2.24%; the Kuwait Investment Authority owned 4.82% as the second largest shareholder after the French state.

As a part of the restructuring program following its insolvency, Areva sold or discontinued its renewable energy businesses and sold its reactors subsidiary Areva NP (which has reverted to its original name, Framatome) to EDF. Its nuclear propulsion and research reactors subsidiary Areva TA (now TechnicAtome) was sold to the Agence des participations de l'État and its nuclear cycle business was reorganized into a separate company New Areva (becoming Orano). A new holding, Areva S.A., was also created to act as a hive-off vehicle for Areva's ongoing “at-risk” activities, including the completion and delivery of the Olkiluoto 3 in Finland, execution of Areva's remaining renewable energy projects, and finalization of the sale of Areva NP to EDF.

In 2017, the sale of Areva TA was finalized and in January 2018, so was that of Areva NP, while New Areva was rebranded Orano; these developments marked the end of the Areva group.

Areva was created on 3 April 2001 by the merger of Framatome (later: Areva NP, now: Framatome), Cogema (later: Areva NC, now: Orano Cycle) and Technicatome (later: Areva TA, now: Technicatome). It was based on the structure of its precursor, CEA-Industrie. Anne Lauvergeon became its first CEO.

Jean-Pierre Raffarin, the former Prime Minister of France, announced the privatization of Areva in 2003, but it was postponed several times, the French government opting finally for the privatization of GDF and EDF. At the end of October 2005, French Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin announced that he had suspended the privatization process.

In 2003, Areva secured a contract for the Olkiluoto 3 project, which foresaw construction of the third generation EPR -type pressurised water reactor. In 2004 a contracted fixed price was established as €3.2 billion. Construction started in 2005.

In 2004, Areva acquired Alstom 's transmission and distribution activities, which became Areva T&D. It was sold back to Alstom and Schneider Electric in June 2010.

On 15 September 2005, Areva and Constellation Energy of Baltimore announced a joint venture called UniStar Nuclear to market the commercial EPR in the United States. The joint venture later became UniStar Nuclear Energy in 2007. In 2010, EDF acquired 100% of UniStar Nuclear Energy. However these plans failed to come to fruition, and in February 2015 Areva suspended the EPR Design Certification Application Review process at the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC).

In 2006, Areva created its renewable energies business group. Creusot Forge and Creusot Mécanique merged into the Areva group, even though there were quality concerns over Creusot Forge's work. In 2007, Areva purchased 51% of offshore wind turbine manufacturer Multibrid. Multibrid has been a start-up and German offshore wind pioneer, producing wind turbines in Bremerhaven. The innovative M5000 wind turbine has a compact medium speed drive train and carbon rotor blades. The patented air treatment to prevent corrosion was unique. The turbine was designed by aerodyn Energiesysteme GmbH. In 2015 the renewable unit of Areva changed into ADWEN GmbH.

In June 2010, Areva purchased the remaining 49% and formed Areva Wind. In February 2010, Areva bought Ausra, and renamed it Areva Solar.

In 2007, Areva purchased UraMin, which later became Areva Resources Southern Africa (now part of Orano).

In 2007, Areva started construction of the Flamanville 3 EPR reactor. In addition, in November 2007 Areva agreed to an €8 billion deal with the China Guangdong Nuclear Power Group to supply them with two EPRs for Taishan Nuclear Power Plant. Under the terms of the agreement, Areva also had to help operate the plant, including the reprocessing of spent fuel. Also in 2007, Areva and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries created a joint venture named Atmea to develop a 1,100 MWe Atmea-1 pressurised water reactor (Generation III reactor). In 2009, Siemens sold its remaining shares of Areva NP and Arvea NP became wholly owned by Areva. At the same year, Areva NP acquired 30% stake in the Mitsubishi Nuclear Fuel company.

On 6 May 2008, Areva announced that it would seek all necessary approvals to build an enrichment facility in Bonneville County, Idaho. The project was later cancelled. Also in 2008, Areva was awarded an operations contract to clean up the Sellafield nuclear reprocessing site as part of the Nuclear Management Partners consortium, made up of URS, Amec and Areva.

In June 2008, Areva reached an agreement with Kazatomprom to create a joint-venture Katco.

On 4 February 2009, Areva signed a memorandum to supply two to six nuclear reactors to the Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited for the Jaitapur Nuclear Power Project in the Indian state of Maharashtra.

In March 2010, Areva indicated work was being done on a new type of burner reactor type capable of breaking down actinides created as a product of nuclear fission.

In 2011, Areva was listed on the Euronext stock exchange in Paris.

In December 2011, Areva suspended building work at several sites in France, Africa and the United States, one day after forecasting a €1.6 billion ($2.1 billion) loss.

Areva halted "capacity extensions" at its La Hague Reprocessing Plant, in northern France, at its Melox factory in the southwest, and at two sites attached to its Tricastin power plant in the south. Work has also stopped on extensions to uranium mines in Bakouma in the Central African Republic, Trekkopje in Namibia, and Ryst Kuil in South Africa, and caused a potential delay in construction until a capital solution is secured for the Eagle Rock Enrichment Facility in the United States. Areva wrote off most of the $2.5 billion purchase cost of Canadian uranium mining company Uramin, purchased in 2007, after concluding that its uranium ore deposits were of negligible value.

In September 2014 Standard & Poor's stated it might downgrade Areva's credit rating following weak first-half results, leading to Areva indicating it would cut capital spending and dispose of some assets. In March 2015 Standard & Poor's further downgraded Areva's credit rating to BB− after Areva posted a €4.8 billion loss for 2014.

In 2012, Areva acquired the hydrogen technology developer Compagnie européenne des technologies de l'hydrogène (CETH) and renamed it Areva H2Gen. In the same year, it inaugurated a hydrogen storage system called the MYRTE platform near Ajaccio, Corsica (MYRTE is the French acronym for Mission Hydrogène Renouvelable pour l’intégration au réseau électrique). The system aims to establish the feasibility of a storage solution for solar energy using hydrogen technologies, which would serve as a back-up system to stabilize Corsica's power grid. In 2014, Areva's energy storage and management system, the Greenergy Box, was added to the existing installation, in operation since early 2013. In January 2014, Areva and Spain's wind turbine manufacturer Gamesa Corporación Tecnológica created on the basis of Areva Wind a joint venture Adwen. In August 2014, Areva exited the solar industry.

In October 2013, Areva won a $2.7 billion contract to supply two EPR nuclear reactors with nuclear steam supply and control systems at the Hinkley Point C plant in Somerset, England. It will also provide uranium extraction and enrichment for the fuel fabrication stage.

In December 2013, Areva and China General Nuclear Power (CGN) agreed to a partnership in renewable energy, with a focus on offshore wind, biomass, concentrated solar power, and energy storage.

In October 2014, CEO Luc Oursel took a leave of absence for health reasons. He died in December of the same year. On 20 November 2014 Standard & Poor's downgraded Areva long-term debt to BB+ and short-term-debt to A-3.

In May 2014, Areva, through its subsidiary CETH2, and the ADEME (French Environment and Energy Management Agency), announced the creation of the AREVA H2-Gen joint venture.

In December 2015 operations at Le Creusot Forge were stopped following a discovery at the Flamanville Nuclear Power Plant. About 400 large steel forgings manufactured by Le Creusot Forge since 1965 found to have carbon-content irregularities that weakened the steel. A widespread programme of reactor checks was started involving a progressive programme of reactor shutdowns. This caused power price increases in Europe as France increased electricity imports, especially from Germany, to augment supply. In December 2016 international inspectors found evidence of recent doctored paperwork, which had not been detected by Areva's independent quality control checks. In April 2017 Autorité de sûreté nucléaire (ASN) published the requirements for forging to resume at Le Creusot Forge. In August 2017 ASN published a draft decision requiring the examination of Le Creusot Forge manufacturing records of all components during scheduled reactor refuelling outages.

In June 2016 Areva's restructuring plans were made public, including the sale of the majority of its reactor business to EDF in 2017, excluding the Olkiluoto 3 EPR under construction in Finland which will remain with Areva SA. In December 2017, Areva and EDF signed agreements on the transfer of Areva NP's nuclear reactor operations. As part of the restructuring plan, Areva created a new fuel cycle company, dubbed as New Co or New Areva. The new company combined Areva Mines, Areva NC, Areva Projects, and Areva Business Support companies. It was created as a wholly owned subsidiary of Areva; however, Areva lost control over the company as the French government invested to recapitalize the company. On 23 January 2018 that company changed its name to Orano. In January 2017, Areva sold its stake in the wind turbine manufacturer Adwen. In March 2017, Areva sold its nuclear propulsion and research reactor subsidiary Areva TA to Agence des Participations de l'Etat.

As of 2019, Areva S.A. is responsible only for the liabilities related to the Olkiluoto 3 project. The reactor, which is one of the first of the new Generation III reactors, was initially expected to begin producing electricity in 2009, but project completion was delayed eventually until 2023, and it has faced several price increases. Areva and TVO have reached an agreement, according to which Areva would pay €450 million in compensation over the delays and lost income. The agreement would settle all legal actions between the two companies.

Areva was a company with a presence in each industrial activity linked to nuclear energy: mining, chemistry, enrichment, fuel assembly, reprocessing, engineering, nuclear propulsion and reactors, treatment, recycling, stabilization and dismantling. Areva also offered technological solutions for renewable energy. Areva's activities were divided into five business groups.

The mining business group managed the exploration of uranium ore, its extraction, and processing, as well as the restoration of sites after mine closure. It had staff on five continents and operated uranium production sites in Canada, Kazakhstan, and Niger. As of the end of 2013, the Mining Business Group employed 4,463 people. Uranium production accounted for 19% of Areva's consolidated revenue in 2013. It is now part of Orano.

The front end business group provided access to fuel for Areva's customers, and oversees operations to convert uranium into nuclear fuel, including the chemical conversion of ore into uranium hexafluoride, the enrichment of uranium, and the design and production of fuel for nuclear reactors. As of the end of 2013, 8,555 people worked for Areva's front end business group. It accounted for 24% of Areva's consolidated revenue in 2013. It is now part of Orano.

The reactors and services business group designed and built pressurized water reactors and boiling water reactors, and offers products to service nuclear reactors. It is now part of Framatome. The business group also designed and built naval propulsion and research reactors, which is now Technicatome. The business group had 15,592 employees at the end of 2013 and generated 36% of Areva's revenue in the same year.

The back end business group developed recycling solutions for used fuel for reuse in reactors. It also offered storage and transportation solutions for radioactive material, and site rehabilitation at nuclear facilities. It is now part of Orano. At the end of 2013, it had 11,583 employees and made up for 19% of Areva's revenue. In 2017 the NUHOMS Matrix advanced used nuclear fuel storage overpack, a high-density system for storing multiple spent fuel rods in canisters, was launched.

Areva created its global renewable energies business group in 2006. This group represented four business lines: concentrated solar power, offshore wind power, biomass power, and hydrogen power storage and distribution. Areva built biomass power plants worldwide, representing 2.5 GWe of installed capacity. These plants are located in Brazil, Chile, Germany, the Netherlands, India and Thailand. Its subsidiary Areva Renewables Brazil built biomass power plants based on bagasse (organic waste from sugar cane). In the United States, Areva formed a partnership with Duke Energy to build and operate 55 MW biomass power plants based on wood waste.

Areva acquired a bio-coal production technology called Thermya, which produces a biofuel issued from biomass torrefaction that can replace coal to generate thermal energy and electricity. Areva also developed AdCub, a modular concept for compact power plants targeting small-scale biomass resources that addresses relatively untapped growth opportunities in Europe. The objective is to combine innovative solutions which optimize customer costs for small-scale power plants (between 3 and 6 MW) and reduce construction time. This new biomass plant concept also aims to improve upstream technologies for multi-fuel acceptance and higher availability.

Areva designed, manufactured and industrialized turnkey energy storage solutions and products to generate electricity with fuel cells and produce hydrogen by electrolysis. Areva supported research in the hydrogen field through partnerships with a number of industrial companies and national research organizations including Agence Nationale de la Recherche, the Horizon Hydrogen Energy (H2E) program, PAN-H (Plan d'Action National sur l'Hydrogène et les piles à combustible) and Pôle Capenergies, an innovation cluster dedicated to the development of renewable forms of energy without greenhouse gas emissions.

Areva was involved in military technology, such as designing the nuclear reactor for the French Barracuda class submarine. One of Areva's subsidiaries, Euriware (founded in 1991) was specialized in consulting and IT services and employs 2,200 people. Areva also owned 1.99% of Safran and 1.4% of Suez Environnement.

CERCA, a subsidiary of Areva that produces fuel for research reactors, was also involved in TRIGA, a research reactor established in 1996 with the US firm General Atomics that is used for training, research, and the production of radioisotopes.

Areva was a former corporate member of the Bruegel think tank.

In January 2007, Areva was fined €53 million by the European Commission for rigging EU electricity markets through a cartel involving 11 companies, including ABB, Alstom, Fuji, Hitachi, AE Power Systems, Mitsubishi Electric, Schneider Electric, Siemens, Toshiba and VA Tech Wabag. According to the commission, "between 1988 and 2004, the companies rigged bids for procurement contracts, fixed prices, allocated projects to each other, shared markets and exchanged commercially important and confidential information."

Areva is not accused of any cartel involvement other than through the acquisition of an Alstom unit in January 2004. "This subsidiary was acquired by the Areva group towards the end of the infringement, in January 2004. The parent entities of the Areva group share a joint liability with that subsidiary for the period after its acquisition." "A few months before the cartel ended, Alstom sold the unit involved to Areva, which knew nothing of the cartel. It [Areva] and Alstom have joint liability for 53.6 million, which they must decide how to split."

EU Competition Commissioner Neelie Kroes declared that "The commission has put an end to a cartel which has cheated public utility companies and consumers for more than 16 years".

On 13 August 2007, the French newspaper Le Parisien alleged that the Franco-Libyan civil nuclear power agreement signed by President Nicolas Sarkozy did not concern desalinization of sea water, as claimed by the French government, but instead focused in particular on selling the EPR to Libya, a contract potentially worth $3 billion. Le Parisien cited Philippe Delaune, deputy to the deputy director of international affairs for the CEA atomic agency, which is the main share-holder in Areva. Following allegations that the deal had been related to the release of the Bulgarian nurses, the French Socialist Party, through the spokesperson Jean-Louis Bianco, declared that this deal was "geopolitically irresponsible". The German government also denounced the agreement.

On 24 June 2012, an armed group assaulted a uranium plant operated by Areva at Bakouma in the southeast of the Central African Republic. A statement by the military described that "a violent clash on Sunday afternoon pitted" Central African troops against "an unidentified group of armed men attempting to launch an assault on the site of mining company Areva".

According to the report the army successfully repelled the attack, but "the enemy did some material damage and pulled back while taking a sizeable quantity mainly of food with them." The Areva group issued no immediate statement regarding the attack. Central African military sources believe that the attack was organized by members of the Chadian rebel group Popular Front for Recovery (FPR) led by 'General' Baba Ladde, which has been active in the region since 2008. The army says it is conducting further operations to neutralize the remaining armed rebels in the region of Bakouma.

In May 2013, the company's uranium mine in Niger was damaged and one civilian was killed in an Al-Qaeda -linked suicide bomb attack. The mine reached full production again in August 2013.

In November 2009, Greenpeace released a report indicating that two villages near Areva's mining operations in Niger had dangerously high levels of radiation.

In January 2014, Al Jazeera produced Orphans of the Sahara, three-part series on the Tuareg people of the Sahara desert, in which claims were brought to light that Areva mining and consequent irradiations are causing diseases and deaths among their people.

Al Jazeera also published Areva's response, in which the company said it submits regular reports on its environmental monitoring of water, air and soil to the Nigerien Office of Environmental Assessments and Impact Studies (BEEEI) which indicate that there is no pollution around the sites in question.

Areva sponsored several sporting events over the years. In 2009, Areva launched Athlenergy.com, an online resource for runners, and became the sponsor of the French Athletics Federation and the official sponsor of Meeting Areva, a track and field competition held annually at the Stade de France in Saint-Denis, France. In May 2014, Athlenergy.com became Arevarun. Areva also sponsors several running events, including the Paris Half Marathon and Saintélyon, a night run from Sainte Etienne to Lyon, in France.

In 2008, Areva signed a contract to sponsor the German football club FC Nürnberg until 2012. The contract was completed in 2012.

Areva sponsored the French "Defi Areva" team in the 2002 America's Cup race, and the French "Areva Challenge" team in the 2007 America's Cup race. In 2002, during its first public appearance, in Lorient, France, the "Defi Areva" yacht collided with a dinghy carrying four Greenpeace protesters, and the impact knocked a hole in the side of the 80-foot boat.

Arles, Roman and Romanesque Monuments (French: Arles, monuments romains et romans) is an area containing a collection of monuments in the city centre of Arles, France, that has been listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1981.

The official brief description for this as a World Heritage Site is:

Arles is a good example of the adaptation of an ancient city to medieval European civilization. It has some impressive Roman monuments, of which the earliest—the arena, the Roman theatre and the cryptoporticus (subterranean galleries)—date back to the 1st century B.C. During the 4th century Arles experienced a second golden age, as attested by the baths of Constantine and the necropolis of Alyscamps. In the 11th and 12th centuries, Arles once again became one of the most attractive cities in the Mediterranean. Within the city walls, Saint-Trophime, with its cloister, is one of Provence's major Romanesque monuments.

The protected area covers 65 hectares (160 acres). The following buildings are located within this area:

Armando Uribe Arce (October 28, 1933 – January 22, 2020) was a Chilean writer, poet, lawyer, and diplomat.

Uribe was born in Santiago. He was educated at the Saint George's College. He later studied law in the University of Chile and received his law degree in 1959, where he served as a law professor for over 30 years.

In addition, Uribe held various positions in law at the Pontifical Catholic University of Chile, Michigan State University, University of Sassari in Italy, and University of Paris 1 Pantheon-Sorbonne in France. He published numerous works on politics, religion, criminal law, and mining, and was a member of the Chilean Academy of Language and the Royal Spanish Academy.

Uribe served a tenure as a diplomat between 1967 and 1973, being assigned to United Nations in 1968, and later the Chilean embassy in the United States between 1968 and 1970. In 1971, he became Chile's ambassador to the People's Republic of China under the Salvador Allende government until the 1973 Chilean coup d'état. Due to the recognition of the new Augusto Pinochet regime by the Chinese government, Uribe denounced the junta, after which he was dismissed from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. As a result, he went into exile with his family in France, not returning to Chile until 1990.

Uribe won the Chilean National Prize for Literature in 2004.

Arnaud Montebourg ([ aʁno mɔ̃t(ə)buʁ ] ; born 30 October 1962) is a French politician, lawyer and entrepreneur who served as Minister of Industrial Renewal from May 2012 to April 2014, then as Minister of Economy, Industrial Renewal and Digital Affairs until August 2014. He is a former member of the Socialist Party (PS), having participated in its 2011 and 2017 presidential primaries, finishing third both times. Following his 2017 primary run, he withdrew from active politics but remained a public commentator, leaving the PS in 2018.

A native of Nièvre, Montebourg grew up in neighbouring Côte-d'Or. He worked as a lawyer in Paris until his election to the National Assembly in the 6th constituency of Saône-et-Loire in 1997, a seat he retained until his appointment to the government to 2012. Locally, Montebourg was elected to the General Council of Saône-et-Loire for the canton of Montret from 2008 to 2015, holding the council's presidency from 2008 to 2012. In 2014, comments he made criticising the government 's economic policy led to its resignation the day following, and the formation of a new government. Montebourg had characterised his political action as social-patriotic, criticising the government's austerity measures.

In 2015, Montebourg founded Les Équipes du Made in France, a company designed to support French businesses in agriculture and industry. In the years that followed, he helped launch a number of French businesses, including in the production of honey (Bleu Blanc Ruche) in 2018 and almonds (Compagnie des amandes) in 2023, as well as in railway transport (Ferromobile) in 2022. Ahead of the 2022 presidential election, he announced his candidacy, before withdrawing.

Montebourg was born on 30 October 1962, in the French commune of Clamecy, in Nièvre department. His father, Michel Montebourg, who was a tax inspector for the Ministry of Economy and Finances, was born in 1933. His mother, Leïla Ould Cadi, who was born in 1939 in Algeria, was of Algerian and French descent; she was born into a family of wālis (governors) from Hachem in Northern Algeria. His Algerian grandfather fought in the French Army during World War II. His Algerian great-grandfather, Ahmed Ould Cadi, who was an agha (chieftain), fought against the Ottoman caliphate before joining the French Army. He was appointed Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour in 1867.

Montebourg began working as a lawyer in 1990 with notable lawyer Thierry Lévy in Paris.

He has worked in several publicised cases. In 1995, he worked as the lawyer of Christian Didier, assassin of René Bousquet. Bousquet was a former Vichy official who had been indicted for war crimes and was soon to be tried. Didier was convicted in 1995 and received a 10-year sentence. Didier did not want to be considered insane, so Montebourg helped get the court to recognise him as responsible for the act.

Montebourg was first elected to the National Assembly in Saône-et-Loire in the 1997 legislative election. He was reelected in 2002 and 2007.

In 2001, together with Bastien François, a professor of Political Science at Panthéon-Sorbonne University, Montebourg became the cofounder of the Convention pour la VI-ème République (C6R). This convention called for significant constitutional changes, and for a Sixth French Republic. Its objectives were to decrease the power of the president and allow a parliamentary balance.

Montebourg was one of the founding members of the political movement known as the Nouveau Parti Socialiste (New Socialist Party), where he defended economical protectionism and sovereignty. When the movement ended due to internal difficulties, he created a new movement within the Socialist Party called Rénover, Maintenant (Renewal, Now). He was one of the leading opponents of President Jacques Chirac 's immunity from prosecution, especially concerning the corruption scandals in the Paris region.

Montebourg also supported reporter Denis Robert for his role in revealing the illegal system of double-accounts maintained by Clearstream, a clearing-house based in Luxembourg, involving high-ranking politicians. He has also been engaged in a campaign against the rules governing taxation of foreign nationals and the banking secrecy of Switzerland.

Montebourg was appointed spokesman for Ségolène Royal 's presidential campaign following his endorsement of her candidacy during the Socialist Party primary election in November 2006. On 18 January 2007, Royal suspended him from her campaign for one month the day after he gave an interview on a Canal+ talk show, where he said, "Ségolène Royal has only one fault, her partner." He was referring to the contradictory statements on tax policy made by Royal's partner, François Hollande, who was at the time serving as First Secretary of the Socialist Party. Montebourg had offered his resignation, which Royal declined to accept.

In 2008, Monteboug became President of the General Council of Saône-et-Loire, elected in the canton of Montret, while at the same time retaining his mandate as a parliamentarian. In 2011, when Dominique Strauss-Kahn was released from prison and flown back to France, Montebourg urged him to apologise for embarrassing the Socialist Party.

Montebourg finished third in the Socialist Party's primary election for the 2012 presidential election, receiving about 17% of the vote. François Hollande finished first; after Hollande was elected President of France, Montebourg was appointed Minister of Industrial Renewal on 16 May 2012 in the government of Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault. On 2 April 2014, his portfolio was expanded to become the Ministry of Economy, Industrial Renewal and Digital Affairs in the government of Manuel Valls, following Pierre Moscovici leaving the government.

Montebourg defended nuclear energy, considering it "an industry of the future" despite the 2011 Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster. On national interests in international trade alliances, Montebourg made further controversial statements about Lakshmi Mittal by declaring that "Mittal's lies since 2006 are overwhelming… he has never kept his word", urging him to leave the country: "We no longer want Mittal in France because they don't respect France."

Montebourg considered the General Electric takeover of Alstom a risk to French sovereignty. He notably introduced a decree, the décret Alstom, nicknamed décret Montebourg by the press, extending the French state's right to veto foreign takeovers of assets in the energy, water, transport, telecommunication, public health sectors. Montebourg was quoted as saying the decree protected France's strategic interests and represented the end of laissez-faire economic policy.

On 11 February 2014, Montebourg was among the guests invited to the state dinner hosted by US President Barack Obama in honour of Hollande at the White House.

On 28 May 2014, Montebourg said that if the United Kingdom "were to vote to leave the EU, France will roll out the red carpet to British investors who will flee their country. They will all come to France because companies need Europe." Nevertheless, he supports a balance between the EU's interests and states' interests.

On 24 August 2014, Montebourg made public comments disparaging the government's economic policy. He resigned the following day, citing policy differences with Valls; Montebourg had presented himself as a social-patriot, criticising the government's austerity measures. Montebourg was supported in this criticism by Education Minister Benoît Hamon and Culture Minister Aurélie Filippetti. On 26 August, Valls presented Hollande with the resignation of his government.

In October 2014, Montebourg enrolled in the INSEAD graduate business school for a four-week course and sought a bursary for his studies.

In January 2015, he launched Les Équipes du Made in France with his savings, to "implement French projects", as "a tool for bringing together financial, industrial, production and management teams to either take over or create businesses." The company's focus lies on agricultural and industrial projects. Between 16 and 26 February 2015, he was invited as a visiting professor of economics at Princeton University.

On 19 March 2015, he was appointed vice president of the supervisory board of the furniture chain Habitat. On 26 March, the French-based consulting and business analyst company Talan announced that Montebourg had been given a place on its strategic policy committee.

In 2023, Les Echos reported Montebourg to be at the helm of ten businesses.

On 21 August 2016, he announced his plans to run as a candidate for the Socialist Party's presidential nomination in the 2017 presidential election. He finished third with 17.8% of the vote.

On 4 September 2021, after having taken a step back from politics in 2017, Montebourg announced his candidacy in the 2022 presidential election from his home town of Clamecy, without going through a party primary election. Earlier in 2021 a new party was launched, L'Engagement. With the party lacking significant funds, only events were funded; instead of booking a hotel room after campaign events, he indicated staying over at supporters' houses.

His supporters included the Citizen and Republican Movement, founded by Jean-Pierre Chevènement, the former Socialist minister Laurence Rossignol, Socialist senators Mickaël Vallet and Jean-Claude Tissot, demographer Emmanuel Todd, economist Gaël Giraud, politologist Thomas Guénolé, and economist and entrepreneur Valentin Przyluski. He withdrew from the race on 20 January 2022, after failing to gain momentum. He did not endorse other candidates.

Montebourg lived from 2010 to 2012 with journalist Audrey Pulvar and from 2014 until 2017 with fellow minister Aurélie Filippetti, with whom he has a daughter, Jeanne, born in September 2015.

In February 2015, Montebourg was called a hero for saving several fellow diners in the New York City brasserie Balthazar from serious injury by single-handedly holding up a large mirror which had fallen from the restaurant's wall.

Arpitania (Arpitan and Italian: Arpitania, French : Arpitanie [ aʁpitani ]) is a cultural region in Western Alps where the Arpitan language was historically spoken and still persists today. It approximately encompasses parts of eastern France, northwestern Italy and western Switzerland, concretely:

Even though Arpitania has never been constituted as a united political entity, it roughly corresponds to the historical County of Savoy and its successor state the Duchy of Savoy. Currently, the only Arpitan-speaking region which formally recognises the language is the Aosta Valley, where it is protected.

Over 7,600,000 people live in Arpitania, but only around 150,000 speakers of Arpitan live here. French is the most-spoken language in Arpitania, followed by Italian. The most populous cities in Arpitania are Lyon, Geneva, and Saint-Étienne.

The terms Arpitan and Arpitania (Arpitanie) are neologisms coined in the 1970s by Joseph Henriet (born 1945), a Communist school teacher who was influenced by the Basque activist Federico Krutwig. In his Garaldea (published 1978), Krutwig names the Basques "Garalditans", a purported Neolithic race which he claimed existed thousands of years ago. Looking for racial or linguistic remnants of the "Garalditans", he moved to the Aosta Valley in 1970, constructing Basque etymologies for local placenames.

In Aosta, Krutwig befriended the young Maoist activist Joseph Henriet. Influenced by Krutwig, Henriet declared the local patois the descendant of the Neolithic "Garalditan language". He later replaced the term garalditan with harpitan, a conflation of the patois words arpa " alp ", arpian "one who works on an alp", and the Basque etymology Basque harri-pe "under the rocks" proposed by Krutwig.

Around 1980, Henriet dropped the Basque-inspired initial h-, now proposing an "Arpitan confederation" (Confédération arpitane) uniting Savoy and the Valais (but not including the patois-speaking Vaud). With the failure of his Arpitan political movement, he retired to private life.

The term arpitan since the 1990s has found usage beyond the immediate sphere of Henriet's activities, especially driven by online use. Pichard (2009) suggests its newfound success was due to the happy rhyme with Occitan and the unwieldiness of the alternative francoprovençal. The alternative term patois, while viewed with affection in Switzerland, has a condescending or "humiliating" connotation in France. An Aliance Culturèla Arpitanna was founded in 2004.

The geographic extent of Arpitania, usually defined by linguistic or cultural factors, is dispersed over three countries.

Traditionally, Arpitania is divided into the following regions.

The most populous city in Arpitania is Lyon, which has a metropolitan area with 2,327,861 inhabitants. Other significant metropolitan areas are Grand Geneva (1,046,168 inhabitants) and -to a lesser extent- the Grenoble metropolitan area (714,799 inhabitants). Most bigger cities in Arpitania are located in either of these three metropolitan areas.

The Arpitan language, formerly known as Franco-Provençal or alternatively patois, is the native language of Arpitania. It belongs to the Gallo-Romance languages, while also being influenced strongly by the bordering languages Occitan, Piedmontese, and Romansh. Ethnologue describes Arpitan as "nearly extinct".

The language is only recognised in the Aosta Valley, where it is commonly referred to as valdôtain, but does not form part of the education system, nor is the language present in the education systems in other parts of Arpitania. In 2022, the UNPO denounced the "severe restriction of language rights by the French government" in Arpitania due to the lack of any formal recognition of the language in France. It is also only the Aosta Valley where Arpitan is still spoken across different generations, while the remaining regions have almost only elderly speakers.

Due to strong dialectal differences in Arpitan and a general lack of shared identification among Arpitan-speakers, the language is often referred to by using geolinguistic names, including valsoanin, mâconnais, and savoyard. To unify these dialects in written Arpitan, a standard orthography has been developed by the Arpitan linguist Domenico Stich [ frp ] in 2003, which was dubbed ORB (Ortografia de rèference B). This orthography is used in dictionaries and automatic translation machines. Next to the standard orthography, many dialects of Arpitan dispose over their own orthography.

An arrondissement (English: / ə ˈ r ɒ n d ɪ s m ə n t /, French: [ aʁɔ̃dismɑ̃ ]) is the third level of administrative division in France generally corresponding to the territory overseen by a subprefect. As of 2023, the 101 French departments are divided into 333 arrondissements (including 13 overseas).

The capital of an arrondissement is called a subprefecture. When an arrondissement contains the prefecture (capital) of the department, that prefecture is the capital of the arrondissement, acting both as a prefecture and as a subprefecture. Arrondissements are further divided into communes.

The term arrondissement can be roughly translated into English as district.

Some municipalities in Quebec are divided into arrondissements, reflecting the province's historical link to New France.

The administration of an arrondissement is assigned to a subprefect (French : sous-préfet) who assists the departmental prefect (préfet).

Unlike French regions, departments and communes, arrondissements do not have the status of legal entity in public law. In addition, unlike those other administrative divisions, they are not run by elected officials, but by political appointees, officials appointed by the French president.

The concept of arrondissements was proposed several times as an administrative reform during the Ancien Régime, notably by the intendant of the généralité of Brittany, Gaspard Louis de Caze de La Bove [ fr ], in his Mémoire concernant les subdélégués de l'intendance de Bretagne (1775).

An equivalent division between departments and communes, the district (district), had been created in 1789 at the start of the French Revolution, but abolished in 1795 by the Directory and replaced with smaller canton -level municipal governments covering several communes.

They were recreated by the Consulate, which was also restoring the position of communes: article 1 of the Constitution of the Year VIII (1799) provided for the division of the territory in departments and arrondissements communaux, both quickly organised by the Law of 28 Pluviôse Year VIII (17 February 1800).

In certain periods in French history, arrondissements have used in legislative elections, especially during the Third Republic. In 1926, 106 of them were abolished, the Poincaré–Sarraut reform. While it claimed it was to achieve fiscal savings, some political analysts considered the results electoral manipulation. Some of these suppressed arrondissements were restored in 1942.

Until 1940, arrondissements had a council (conseil d'arrondissement), a deliberative assembly placed alongside the subprefect. Its members (conseillers d'arrondissement) were originally appointed by the central government, then elected from 1833, in the same election as the department's general councils (by half every three years at the time). It was originally expected to represent local interests, especially in the distribution of public funds, and to act as a check on the sub-prefect, but remained consultative and, despite receiving some legal powers in the early years, was never granted legal personhood, unlike departments and communes; the legal execution of its decision fell on the general councils.

This left arrondissement councils little-known and long criticised as useless, and repeated proposals to abolish them were made over a century. They disappeared in 1940, actually suspended, alongside other councils, by the law of 12 October issued by the government of Vichy France, but not revived in 1945, leaving them to disappear for good by desuetude.

The most recent creations and disestablishments of arrondissements are listed in the table below.

Most departments have three or four arrondissements. The departments of Paris and of the Territoire de Belfort have only one, while the department of Pas-de-Calais has seven. Mayotte has none.

The Artistic Recovery Commission (French : Commission de récupération artistique, or CRA) was a French public body of the Ministry of Education created on November 24, 1944, in order to process and return artworks and books plundered by the Nazis during the Occupation of France by Germany during World War II, discovered by the Allies after the defeat of Nazi Germany.

During World War II, Nazis engaged in massive looting of territories occupied by the German army through Nazi looting organizations, notably the Einsatzstab Reichsleiter Rosenberg (ERR). In France, the number of works and objects of art looted by German forces during the Occupation is estimated at 100,000 pieces. These included paintings, sculptures, jewelry and furniture mainly stolen from Jewish families, who were targeted by anti-Jewish racial laws.

After the defeat of Germany, artworks that the Nazis had looted from France were discovered in Germany. Rose Valland, a conservation curator at the Jeu de Paume, played an important role in tracing, identifying and recovering the artworks looted by the ERR in France. The looted works were gathered in Central Collecting Points in Düsseldorf, Baden-Baden, Munich and Wiesbaden. Objects thought to have been looted from France were transferred by the Allied Monuments Men to France, for return to their original owners. In addition many books, archives and manuscripts were discovered in several repositories in France and in the other territories occupied by the Reich. Between 1.1 and 2 million looted books were found although the total number of these books in France was estimated at 20 million the day after the war.

Historians, art historians, librarians and experts travelled to Germany to examine the collections and send them back to their countries of origin. In order to process the works returned to France, the provisional government of the Republic set up a dedicated body: the Commission de récupération artistique, or CRA, was created on November 24, 1944, by an order of the Minister of National Education René Capitant at the request of Jacques Jaujard, director of the National Museums of France.

Chaired by the art collector Albert Henraux, president of the Société des Amis du Louvre and vice-president of the Higher Council of Museums, the CRA then had seventeen members who could be assisted by experts appointed by the Ministry of Education. The number of members rose to thirty a few years later: among them are notably Jacques Jaujard, René Huygh and Rose Valland. Until August 1946, the organization was housed in the premises of the Jeu de Paume museum in Paris, the headquarters of the ERR during the war, before moving to avenue Rapp and rue de Montessuy in annexes of the Louvre Museum. The CRA is made up of two services:

The services of the CRA are in direct contact with other French authorities: the Office of Private Property and Interests (OBIP) of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for property looted and found abroad or in Alsace-Moselle, and with the restitution service of the Ministry of Finance for those found in the rest of France. The role of the CRA is to provide its expertise to complete the declarations of spoliations made by the victims to the OBIP, the only administration required to receive the files.

When these files relate to cultural property, they are transmitted to the CRA which then estimates the value in francs of the property declared looted and then crosses the information in an attempt to locate it among the collections that have been found. The sub-committee for books is directly in charge of returning documents, although it reports to OBIP. The CRA publishes two catalogs of exhibitions that it has organized to present the objects found: in 1946, Masterpieces from French private collections found in Germany, then in 1949 Manuscripts and precious books found in Germany.

Even though the identification and restitution operations had not been completed, a decree of September 30, 1949 abolished the CRA on December 31, 1950. The OBIP resumed its powers and four "selection committees" were made responsible for processing unreturned collections.

To examine precious works, a "selection commission" for rare books and manuscripts was created by a decree of October 12, 1949. Numerous documents have been allocated to the Libraries Directorate of the Ministry of National Education and to the administration of the Domains which proceed to their allocation or their deposit in public libraries or university establishments: some 13,800 looted books deposited at the end of the operations of restitution to the owners in some forty French libraries between 1950 and 1953.

Among the 61,233 objects found at the end of the conflict, 45,441 were returned before 1950, to their owners or beneficiaries. Many owners could not be identified, 12,463 works are sold by the administration of the Domains while 2,143 others are deposited with the National Museums or other museums after having been presented to the public at the Château de Compiègne from 1950 to 1954: these works have since been considered as National Salvage Museums and designated by the acronym "MNR".

The archives are held by France Archives.

The As d'Or (Golden Ace) is a games award given out by a jury at the Festival International des Jeux in Cannes, France.

The awards were established in 1988 "to highlight the best games offered at the Festival and help festival-goers and the public in their gaming choices". From 1989 to 2003, a jury of journalists allotted "Golden Aces" by category to games presented by their editors. A special prize, the Super As d'Or, was allotted to the best game from any category.

In 2003, the process was modified to give more autonomy to the jury. A single As d'Or was awarded, and 10 nominees were announced.

In 2005, the award merged with the Jeu de l'Année. It was decided that the combined award should be named after the year of awarding rather than year of publication, so the first combined award was the 2005 As d'Or Jeu de l'Année with awards in three categories: public/family games, experts, and children. In 2012, the As d'Or Prix du Jury was added. The 2020 edition took place Thursday, February 20 and the nominees were presented at the end of January.

In 2022, a new category "Initié" (connoisseur) was created.

L'As d'Or Jeu de l'Année combined in 2005 the L'As d'Or and the Jeu de l'Année into a single set of awards, presented in four categories.

The assassination of Henry IV of France on May 14, 1610, in Paris was one of the most momentous assassinations in French history. The king, founder of the House of Bourbon on the French throne and known as Good King Henry, fell victim to an assassination attempt by the fanatical Catholic assassin François Ravaillac. The assassination took place during a politically tense period marked by religious conflicts between Catholics and Huguenots, as well as foreign policy tensions in Europe. Henry's death triggered a deep crisis in the French kingdom and had far-reaching consequences for the further development of France and Europe.

Henry IV, originally a Huguenot and King of Navarre, ascended the French throne after the death of Henry III in 1589. In the midst of the bloody Huguenot Wars, which tore France apart between Catholics and Protestants, Henry IV faced the challenge of uniting a deeply divided country. In order to pacify the Catholic majority of the country and secure the crown, he converted to Catholicism in 1593 – allegedly with the words Paris is worth a Mass. This change made him a traitor to many Protestants, and he remained a former heretic to radical Catholics. With the Edict of Nantes in 1598, Henry IV attempted to establish religious tolerance by granting limited rights to the Huguenots. Although it ended the violence of the Huguenot Wars, the edict met with fierce resistance from Catholic hardliners, who saw it as a threat to the supremacy of the Catholic Church. At the same time, Henry's policy of strengthening France economically and consolidating the power of the monarchy drew the ire of various factions of the nobility. They saw their privileges threatened by Henry's reforms and were partly hostile toward him.

Francois Ravaillac was born in Angoulême in 1578 to humble parents. He initially worked as a minor provincial lawyer. Due to debts, he was imprisoned by some of his creditors. During this time, he became radicalized. After his release, he joined the Congregation of the Feuillants, but was expelled again due to his hallucinations and eccentric behavior. He tried to join the Society of Jesus, but was rejected again. He returned to his original profession as a lawyer, but was unable to secure a decent livelihood. Ravaillac was falsely accused of involvement in a murder but acquitted. Due to the debts he had accumulated for his defense, he was thrown back into prison. There he developed the delusional belief that he was destined to serve as the pope's most important protector.

After the death of the last Duke of Jülich-Kleve-Berg on March 25, 1609, a dispute arose over his succession, as there were no direct heirs. Several European powers, including Spain and the Habsburgs, had a keen interest in this region, as it was strategically important and played a key role in controlling the Rhine areas. Henry IV saw this crisis as an opportunity to weaken Habsburg supremacy in Europe and to act as protector of the Protestant princes in the Holy Roman Empire. By early May, preparations for the campaign were already in full swing, and Henry had mobilized a large army.

Back in December 1609, Ravaillac had tried unsuccessfully to speak to Henry IV while he was traveling through Paris. Later, in Angoulême, Ravaillac heard rumors that the king was planning to support the Protestants in Germany against the pope. It was said that the papal legate had threatened excommunication, to which Henry allegedly replied that his predecessors had placed the popes on their thrones and that he could depose them if he were excommunicated. These rumors led to further mental instability and made him believe that it was sacrilegious to oppose the Pope. When he returned to Paris in April 1610, he spoke with the king's troops, who expressed their willingness to fight against the pope – something he found unbearable. Convinced that the Pope was God and God was the Pope, Ravaillac decided to assassinate the king. Shortly after his return to Paris, Ravaillac took a knife from an inn and kept it hidden in his pocket for three weeks while he waited for the right moment to fulfill his supposedly divine mission.

Despite his intentions, he could not bring himself to do so and decided once again to return to Angoulême. On his way there, he passed a crucifix near Étampes. The sight of Christ on the cross, crowned with thorns, struck him deeply, as if it were reproaching him for his lack of courage and loyalty. Overwhelmed by this impression, he immediately turned back and arrived in Paris shortly before the queen's coronation, which was scheduled for May 13.

On May 14, at around two or three in the afternoon, the king had his carriage brought around, as he intended to visit the Quartier de l'Arsenal and meet with the Duke of Sully, his finance minister. He left the Louvre accompanied by the Duke of Montbazon, the Duke of Épernon, Marshals Lavardin, Roquelaure, and La Force, as well as the Marquis of Mirebeau and his chief equerry, Liancourt. There was a brief discussion between the king and Nicolas de L'Hôpital, the captain of the guard, about whether the king wanted to be accompanied by his guards, but the king declined. Instead, the king decided to travel with only a small group of nobles—some rode in the carriage, others rode on horseback, and a few walked.

As it was a pleasant day, the king decided to pull back the leather curtains of the carriage to enjoy the weather. He sat on the left side of the carriage, Épernon to his right, while Montbazon and Lavardin sat opposite them. Their route took them along the Croix-du-Tiroir, then onto the Rue Saint-Honoré, before turning onto the Rue de la Ferronnerie, a street bordering the large Saint-Innocent cemetery. Rue de la Ferronnerie was narrow and busy, and soon the carriage had to stop due to a traffic obstruction caused by a wine cart and a hay wagon blocking the way. Ravaillac had taken up position at the gates of the Louvre early that morning and had followed the carriage with the king to this point.

The royal carriage stopped opposite the office of a notary named Pontrain. At this point, most of the servants accompanying the carriage took a shortcut through the Saint-Innocent cemetery to meet up with the carriage at the end of the street. Of the two remaining servants, one went ahead to ease the traffic congestion, while the other paused to tie his garter. Inside the carriage, the king and the nobles listened to the Duke of Épernon, who read a letter that the king had given him. Henry, who had forgotten his glasses, relied on Épernon to read what was probably a memorandum from the Count of Soissons, a disgruntled nobleman who had recently left the royal court.

When the cocher tried to drive around two carts blocking the way, he swerved sharply to the left. This maneuver caused the vehicle to tip over, with the right wheel sinking into the gutter in the middle of the road and the left wheel lifting up. At that moment, Ravaillac suddenly jumped onto the wheel and stabbed the king in the chest with a knife. Henry screamed that he had been stabbed. The attacker stabbed again, and the king fell silent, mortally wounded. A third stab was made, but it missed and grazed the sleeve of the Duke of Montbazon. The attack was so quick that none of the nobles in the carriage could clearly identify the attacker. Ravaillac, however, remained motionless at the scene of the crime and allowed himself to be arrested without resistance. Meanwhile, Épernon noticed that blood was flowing from the king's mouth and covered him with a cloak. To calm the agitated spectators, he assured them that the king was not seriously injured. The carriage then rushed directly to the Louvre. However, when they arrived there, the king was already dead.

After the assassination of King Henry IV, the Paris Parliament deemed it necessary to put the murderer Ravaillac on public display. Ravaillac was tortured on May 25 and urged to tell the truth, even though he believed in his freedom and innocence. On May 27, the Paris Parliament found Ravaillac guilty of high treason against God and man, specifically for murder. He was forced to confess his crime publicly in front of the main portal of Notre Dame, where he was brought in a cart. Ravaillac was to confess that he had committed the murder and killed his ruler with two knife stabs, and ask for forgiveness from God, the king, and the law.

Ravaillac was sentenced to a cruel punishment for his crime, which included torture, being drawn and quartered by horses, burning his body, and scattering his ashes. His property was confiscated, his birthplace demolished, and rebuilding it was prohibited. His family was also severely punished: his parents were expelled from the country and threatened with the death penalty if they returned; his relatives were forbidden to bear the name Ravaillac. The court wanted to hold his entire family responsible for his actions. After the verdict was announced, Ravaillac was tortured again to find out the names of possible accomplices. However, he insisted that he had acted alone. Ravaillac was brought, bound hand and foot, to a chapel, where he confessed to two Scholars from the Sorbonne that no one had influenced or supported him. This statement remained unchanged even in the presence of the Parliament's clerk. At 3:00 p.m., he was led from the chapel to the prison gates, where other prisoners and onlookers mocked him. The loud cries drowned out the public reading of his death sentence.

Before Ravaillac went up to the scaffold, he was asked to confess the whole truth, but he repeated that he had nothing more to say. Then he asked the king, the queen, “and everyone else” for forgiveness. On the scaffold, he was cruelly tortured: the arm with which he had committed the murder was dipped in burning sulfur, his flesh was torn out with red-hot tongs, and molten lead, boiling oil, resin, wax, and sulfur were poured into the wounds. Ravaillac asked to recite the Salve Regina, a prayer to the Virgin Mary, but the crowd shouted that he did not deserve it because his soul was damned. The clerk urged Ravaillac several times to name his accomplices, but he insisted that he had acted alone.

The first part of his torture lasted one to two hours and was deliberately prolonged. In the second phase, his arms and legs were tied to four horses pulling in opposite directions. The angry crowd pulled on the ropes to help the horses. When one of the horses got tired, a spectator replaced it with his own, which broke Ravaillac's thigh bone with a powerful jerk. After an hour and a half of this agonizing ordeal, Ravaillac finally died. His body was then torn to pieces. The angry crowd attacked the remains with swords, knives, sticks, and whatever else was at hand, beating, hacking, and dragging them through the streets. Some burned the body parts, scattered the ashes, or trampled them underfoot.

Following Ravaillac's execution, rumors began to circulate that Henry IV's assassination was the result of a conspiracy. There were many people who wanted to get rid of the king and were prepared to take whatever measures necessary to achieve this. In addition, there were even more people who would have welcomed his death, even if they were not prepared to actively participate in it. The former included Henriette d'Entragues and her father, the Duke of Auvergne and the Duke of Bouillon, the Duke of Épernon and his mistress Madame du Tillet, Concini, whom Marie de' Medici had brought with her from Italy before her marriage to the king, and the Jesuits. Épernon in particular was identified as the main suspect. He had known Ravaillac for some time and his antipathy towards Henry was well known. If he had been looking for an assassin for the king, he would most likely have found a suitable man in Ravaillac. Moreover, Ravaillac had made no secret of his intentions.

Some eyewitnesses to the murder noted that Épernon made no attempt to protect the king from further violence after the initial attack, even though he could easily have done so. Épernon also managed to bring Ravaillac to his own house while he was still at the Hôtel de Retz, where he remained for the entire day. No one knows what went on behind closed doors during this time, but many people believed that if Ravaillac had remained at the Retz, he might have been forced or persuaded to tell the truth. Ultimately, this would not have made any difference to his final fate, as he was going to be executed anyway. This may have been pure speculation, but there was some evidence to support it, albeit only indirect. After all, Épernon threatened to stab one of the judges investigating the crime if he did not promise not to investigate the role that Épernon or the queen had played in the matter. Even the queen was under suspicion. Unlike Épernon, she was not accused of being directly involved in a conspiracy, but rather of knowing about it and turning a blind eye. In the last years of her marriage, she had been afraid of her husband because he had threatened to send her back to Italy, and she even thought he might kill her.

Although there was no concrete evidence that Bouillon or Auvergne were involved in a plot to assassinate the king, both had been involved in the conspiracies of Biron and Entragues. They might have attempted another assassination if they had been certain of success. Furthermore, there was another aspect of the case that led many people to believe that there may have been another conspiracy whose goal was to prevent a thorough investigation of the murder. The entire nation would have been plunged into chaos if it had turned out that the Jesuits, the former leaders of the League, or one of the groups that had previously conspired against the monarch, such as Auvergne, Entragues, or Bouillon, were responsible. The king's assassination would also have benefited Concini, Marie de' Medici's right-hand man, as he had considerable influence over her after she became regent. After Henry's death, the queen granted him a generous allowance and appointed Concini as Marquis d'Ancre and governor of Peronne, Roye, and Montdidier.

In 2009 French historian Jean-Christian Petitfils, hypothesized that Henry IV's assassination was orchestrated by Albert of Austria, the ruler of the Spanish Netherlands. After learning of the facts, the Spanish monarchs attempted to conceal them out of concern that they would be linked to his purported self-initiated actions. Petitfils does not support the theory that the Duke of Épernon conspired against the king, as his actions shortly after the king's assassination would contradict this view. In fact, he protected Ravaillac from being killed by the guards and the population, a decision that would have prevented the possible exposure of accomplices.

Instead he focused on the love affair between Henry IV and Charlotte-Marguerite de Montmorency, which had been known since 1609. The King of France fell in love with the 15-year-old during a rehearsal for a show, and he convinced his nephew, Henry II of Bourbon-Condé, to marry her. However, Henri de Condé, feeling his honor had been compromised, fled with his wife and took refuge in Brussels with Albert of Austria. Henri IV demanded the return of his nephew and wife, and a military expedition was prepared as part of the War of Succession. Albert of Austria, outraged by Henry IV's behavior, sent a team of assassins to Paris to end the reign of the King of France.

According to Jean-Christian Petitfils, the party of men in Rue de la Ferronnerie who tried to execute Ravaillac but were stopped by Baron de Courtomer were the "commando" that Albert of Austria had dispatched to Paris. They would have supported the future regicide in his plans to assassinate the King of France because they had met him a few days prior (Ravaillac and this group went to the same church when Ravaillac was in Paris). They would have wanted to stop him from speaking, having been preempted by him.

The death of Henry IV immediately led to a power vacuum. His son and successor, Louis XIII, was only nine years old at the time, so a regency was established under the leadership of his mother, Marie de' Medici. This weakened the central royal authority and led to a destabilization of the political situation in France. Maria de' Medici, who pursued a strongly pro-Catholic course, was unable to exert the same integrative power as Henry IV, who had established religious peace between Catholics and Protestants with the Edict of Nantes in 1598. Tensions between the religious groups increased again after his death, as the Huguenots increasingly saw their rights threatened.

The assassination of Henry IV had also long-term consequences for French domestic and foreign policy. His death marked the end of the reforms he had sought to implement and his attempt to strengthen the power of the monarchy without completely undermining the rights of the estates. Under Marie de' Medici and later Louis XIII, there was instead an increasing concentration of power in the crown, which was reinforced under Cardinal Richelieu. This drove the development of absolutism in France, which was to reach its peak under Louis XIV. In terms of foreign policy, Henry's death meant that France initially played a less active role in European politics. Henry had forged plans for a grand European alliance to break the Habsburgs' hegemony in Europe. These plans were abandoned after his death, which initially gave the Habsburg powers more room for maneuver.

The Assembly of French Citizens Abroad (French : Assemblée des Français de l'étranger) is the political body that represents French citizens living outside France. The assembly advises the government on issues involving French nationals living outside France, as well as the role of France in overseas developments. Membership consists of 90 representatives elected among and by an electorate composed of all 442 elected consular representatives (themselves elected directly by all 3 million French citizens living outside of France), across 15 worldwide electoral districts.

The issue of representation for French nationals abroad was first addressed in the French Fourth Republic (1946–1958). Three seats were allocated to the Council of the Republic (the then-upper house of Parliament), representing citizens residing in Europe, America and Asia - Oceania. In addition, there were four agencies based in Paris also representing French interests abroad: the Union of French Chambers of Commerce Abroad, the Federation of French Teachers Abroad, the Federation of French Veterans Residing Outside France, and the Union of French Citizens Abroad (UFE). The conflict between these organization and the National Assembly in appointing the three members of the Council of the Republic led to the decision to form an entirely new body to represent French citizens abroad.

Foreign minister Georges Bidault signed the decree establishing the High Council of French Citizens Abroad (French : Conseil supérieur des Français de l'étranger, CSFE) in July 1948. The CSFE consisted of 55 members: the three Councillors of the Republic representing French nationals abroad, the presidents of the four organizations above, 42 elected members, and five members appointed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs. The first elections were held in 1970 in 70 countries.

Turnout in these elections suffered a decline from 1997, which prompted efforts to extensively reform the CSFE. It was renamed the Assembly of French Citizens Abroad. The proportion of elected members was further increased. In addition, the electoral boundaries were revised to account for the changing demographics of French nationals abroad.

The assembly is tasked with protecting the interests of French citizens abroad on issues such as the teaching of French, rights as citizens, social and economic problems, and taxation. They advise the French government on issues concerning French nationals living outside France and the role of France in overseas developments. The assembly also appoints representatives to various public agencies in France, including the National Stock Exchange, Permanent Commission for Employment and Vocational Training of French Citizens Abroad, etc.

The assembly meets four times a year. Bureau meetings take place in June and December, while plenary sessions are held in March and September.

The AFE is composed of 90 members elected by universal suffrage from 15 districts around the world who serve six-year terms

Day-to-day affairs are run by a general secretariat. The secretary general is appointed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Members also join committees which prepare reports on specific issues which are submitted to the council's sessions. The permanent committees include:

Elections to the assembly are staggered based on geographical location.

The 90 elected seats are distributed among 15 electoral districts proportional to population. The districts are as follows:

Members organize themselves into political groups. A minimum of 10 members is required to form a group. The assembly currently consists of five groups.

An assignat ([ asiɲa ]) was a monetary instrument, an order to pay, used during the time of the French Revolution, and the French Revolutionary Wars.

Assignats were paper money (fiat currency) authorized by the Constituent Assembly in France from 1789 to 1796, during the French Revolution, to address imminent bankruptcy. They were originally backed by the value of properties now held by the nation; those of the crown taken over on 7 October, and those of the Catholic Church, which were confiscated, on the motion of Mirabeau, by the Assembly on 2 November 1789. Credit was wrecked, according to Talleyrand; for Mirabeau "the deficit was the treasure of the nation". In September the treasury was empty. Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord proposed "national goods" should be given back to the nation. Necker proposed to borrow from the Caisse d'Escompte, but his intention to change the private bank into a national bank similar to the Bank of England failed. A general default seemed certain. On 21 December 1789 a first decree was voted through, ordering the issue (in April 1790) of 400,000 livres' worth of assignats, certificates of indebtedness, with an interest rate of 5%, secured and repayable based on the auctioning of the " Biens nationaux ". The assignats were immediately a source of political controversy. Constitutional monarchists such as Jean-Sifrein Maury, Jacques Antoine Marie de Cazalès, Nicolas Bergasse and Jean-Jacques Duval d'Eprémesnil opposed it. While their proponents, like other eighteenth-century advocates of "land banks," argued that land was a more stable source of value than was gold or silver, the assignats' opponents saw them as based on an illegitimate seizure of property.

The assignats were first to be paid to the creditors of the state. With these the creditors could purchase national land, the assignats having, for this purpose, the preference over other forms of money. If the creditor did not care to purchase land, it was supposed that he could obtain the face value for them from those who desired land. Those assignats which were returned to the state as purchase-money were to be cancelled, and the whole issue, it was argued, would consequently disappear as the national lands were distributed.

Originally meant as bonds, the assignats were re-defined as legal tender (assignats-monnaie) in April 1790 to address the liquidity crisis provoked by the political, social, and cultural instability of the Revolution.

Étienne Clavière lobbied for large issues of assignats representing national wealth and operating as legal tender. On 17 April 1790, the notes were declared legal tender but their interest was reduced to 3%. For daily life smaller denominations of 200 and 300 livres were needed. The assignats would compensate for the scarcity of coin and would revive industry and trade. Once the assignats were paid, they had to be burnt. A surety was prepared for future issues of paper money. As soon as the assignats started to circulate, their value decreased by 5 percent. Du Pont de Nemours feared the emission of assignats would double the price of bread.

Jacques Necker himself argued at the National Assembly on 27 August that the assignats were a paper money which would bankrupt France. Talleyrand had also attacked them on the grounds that they risked the same fate as John Law 's schemes. Camus stressed what he believed was the lesson of American experience of paper, which had undermined metal money and sent prices spiralling. Nicolas de Condorcet and Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours argued that the assignats would drive out silver and other forms of coin, raise prices relative to paper, and thereby dangerously restrict commerce. All of these writers preferred the issue of treasury bills at interest through the Caisse d'Escompte, a revised tax-system, and increased loans.

On 27 August 1790 the Assembly decided another issue of 1,9 billion assignats which would become legal tender before the end of the year for all actions, c.q. banknotes, which could be acquired by anyone and used for ordinary business transactions. Necker, suspected of reactionary tendencies, resolutely against the transformation of the assignat into paper currency, handed in his resignation on 3 September. The massive and dangerous issue of 1,9 billion he succeeded to get down to 800 million, but the attacks may have influenced his resignation. Necker was not backed by Comte de Mirabeau, his strongest opponent who called for "national money".

By September 1790, all authorized assignats had been paid out by the government. Supporters of the paper money argued that since the assignats were secured by land, more notes could be safely issued as long as they were retired and burned at the same rate that the lands securing them were sold. On 29 September 1790, the National Assembly authorized a further issue of 800 million livres and abolished interest on the assignats altogether.)

Necker foretold that the paper money, with which the dividends were about to be paid, would soon be of no value. Since no one had truly the right to make assignats, everyone would soon begin to do so. Montesquiou-Fézensac, charged with the issue of assignats, feared stockjobbing and greed.

By September 1790, the assignat had become a true circulating paper currency, and 800 million livres worth of non-interest bearing notes were added to the initial issue, in denominations of 50, 60 70, 80, 90, 100, 500, and 2000 livres with legal-tender status. The lower denominations were produced in large numbers in order to ensure wide circulation. This change stimulated the economy but also increased inflationary pressures.

When the cost of reimbursing Old Regime venal office holders for their properties (judgeships, military ranks etc.) added yet more to the Revolution's inherited debts, the National Assembly voted by a narrow margin to issue additional assignats in September 1790, initially of an additional 800 million francs. By September 1791, the value of the assignats had depreciated by 18–20 percent.

The properties backing the assignats were renamed biens nationaux ("national goods") and auctioned by district-level authorities. On 10 March 1790, on the proposition Pétion, the administration of the church property was transferred to the municipalities. Through the sale of these properties, assignats were used to successfully retire a significant portion of the national debt. However, since these land sales were their original intent, the assignats were issued only in large denominations (50, 100, 200, and 1000 livres) that worked poorly as a daily medium of exchange. Moreover, the National Assembly never mandated that assignats and Old Regime coins (which remained in circulation) had to be exchanged on par. Already in fall 1790, the National Assembly itself was paying a 7.5% commission to exchange large denomination assignats for smaller coins. By the end of 1791, the discount rate was often 20% or more. These limits on the bills' practical use, and further issues eventually totalling 3.75 billion francs, coupled with the organized opposition of counter-revolutionaries, led to their losing value. On 1 February 1792 the assignats depreciated almost with 50%. Patriotic revolutionaries blamed the assignats' depreciation on foreign conspiracies. Clavière held the coalition of states responsible for the collapse of the assignat. Stephen D. Dillaye, an American politician who referred to monetary policy history, wrote that the British, Belgian, and Swiss counterfeited the currency industrially: "Seventeen manufacturing establishments were in full operation in London, with a force of four hundred men devoted to the production of false and forged Assignats." On 17 October 1792, no less than 2,400 million assignations were in circulation.

After the outbreak of war, the fall of the monarchy, and the declaration of a Republic, the National Convention mandated that bills and coins exchange on par, but this law could never be enforced. Instead, the assignats continued depreciating. On 10 April 1793 Robespierre accused Dumouriez in a speech: "Dumouriez and his supporters have brought a fatal blow to the public fortune, preventing circulation of assignats in Belgium".

Counterfeiting of assignats was widespread, both in France and abroad. Researchers have documented how French royalists worked with British authorities, including senior ministers and military commanders, to manufacture paper for counterfeit assignats at mills across England, after which the paper was distributed across various locations for printing. By August 1793 the amount of assignats in circulation had doubled to 5 billion. Rising prices and food shortages exacerbated public unrest in September. Bills such as the Maximum Price Act of 1793 aimed to address this situation.

On 8 November 1793 the director of the manufacture of assignats fr:Simon-François Lamarche was executed. On 2 December Clavière was arrested; he committed suicide within a week. On 24 February 1794 the extension of the "maximum" to all commodities only increased the confusion. Trade was paralysed and all manufacturing establishments were closed down.

By June 1794 the total number of assignats aggregated nearly 8 billion, of which only 2,464 million had returned to the treasury and been destroyed, after an emission of 1,205 million assignats on 19 June; the assignat was losing more and more value. In August, the Thermidorian Convention lifted the Maximum Price Act in the name of "economic freedom" and the assignats lost almost all value over the next year. Toward the end of 1794 seven billion in assignats were in circulation. The assignat fell from 31% of its face value in August 1794 to 24% in November, 17% in February, and 8% in April 1795. By the end of May, 1795, the circulation was increased to ten billion, at the end of July, to fourteen billion. By 1796 the issues had reached 45.5 billion francs, excluding counterfeits, and the Directoire issued Mandats, a currency in the form of land warrants to replace the assignats, although these too quickly failed and were received back by the state at a steep discount. Napoleon opposed all forms of fiat currency. By the 1830s–1840s, the assignats and other papers issued during the Revolution had become collector's items.

Between 1798 and 1799, the revolutionary French forces established the Roman Republic, which also issued assignats (Italian: assegnati). They were issued by the law of 23 Fructidor VI (14 Sept 1798). The currency used was paolo or giulio, the older currency of the Papal States. Roman Republic also issued coins denominated in baiocco and scudo.

The term assignat is similar to the Russian word assignatsia which means "banknote". Assignatsionny rubl (assignation ruble) was used in Russia from 1769 until 1 January 1849. This had no connection to the French Revolution.

The Association for the Defense of Nature (ADN; Associació per a la Defensa de la Natura) is an Andorran non-governmental organization that was founded in 1986 as a result of the concern of a group of people for the environment. It aims to protect and study nature in Andorra. The ADN pursues its aims through three basic lines of action: conservation, study and information.

ADN carries out direct actions that result in the conservation of nature. For instance, they engage with environmental protection laws and planning policies that affect human impacts on the environment, and encourage the creation of protected natural areas by suggesting areas in need of protection, and appropriate management of those areas. ADN monitors and safeguards endangered species in Andorra, both flora and fauna. ADN is also concerned with finding solutions to the problems of waste and pollution, including water quality.

ADN contributes to research on the environment and this protection:

The ADN is to discover and appreciate nature and therefore:

Check educational tours to the mountain and protected natural areas Conferences, symposia and debates. Shares of environmental education with a solid scientific basis, in coordination with other institutions.

Informative publications on the natural heritage of Andorra and the need to preserve it. The periodical "Aigüerola".

It is affiliate to BirdLife International. BirdLife is the largest world organization for the study and protection of birds and their habitats.

Maintains contact and exchanges with many international organizations with similar objectives.

Participates and organizes symposia and international conferences.

Association négaWatt is a French advocacy group based in Valence, Drôme. It was founded in 2001 to promote the negawatt concept and its application to French society. The association seeks to reduce the use of fossil fuels and nuclear power. Its approach is based on energy conservation, energy efficiency and the use of renewable energies. It published a scenario that details a path to phasing out these energy sources.

The association unites energy specialists in France, relying mostly on volunteer engineers. Other specialists include volunteer sociologists, economists and urban planners, who work together to create energy transition scenarios and to suggest political steps that would need to be taken.

Association négaWatt inspired local initiatives in transition towns called "Virage-Énergie," meaning "energy bend".

The NégaWatt scenario spans from 2012 to 2050. The scenario starts by assessing energy needs for heating, transportation and specific electricity, and suggests a transition path. It then couples the NégaWatt and the Afterterres 2050 scenarios. The Afterres2050 [ fr ] association targets agriculture energy use and can evaluate biomass production, providing the NégaWatt scenario with realistic figures.

The scenario employs the power to gas process to compensate for the intermittent nature of most renewable energies. The stability of the electricity network is guaranteed with a maximal time step of one hour. The scenario concludes that proven technologies are available to effect the transition.

A Swiss NégaWatt organization was founded in 2016, on the basis of the French one.

Assédic is the partial acronym of " Association pour l’emploi dans l’industrie et le commerce " (transl. Association for Employment in Industry and Trade). Created in 1958, it was a French agency that collected and paid unemployment insurance contributions. It was associated with the UNEDIC agency, which set the amount of the contributions. In 2009, it was merged with the ANPE into the new agency Pôle emploi.

Assédic's main mission was to manage an unemployment insurance system. It collected insurance contributions paid by both employers and employees. There were 30 local Assédic in France, with more than 600 offices, which now belong to Pôle emploi. (Now France Travail)

For people coming to live in France, it is very important to remember the importance of all certificates, paychecks, and other documents in nearly all aspects of French public administration. People living in France and needing unemployment support between jobs must keep the job contract, all payslips (which show all salary figures, and deductions), the "Certificat de Travail", which is proof that you have in fact worked at that enterprise, and an "Attestation de L'Employeur", designed specifically for Assédic, that shows all mathematical details of the employee's company work record.

Assédic is flexible and up to a limit approaching your former salary, allows you to work part-time. Revenues for working part-time are not punitively deducted from your income, and they are also considered taxable but also retirement-benefit augmentation income (although at a lower level than at the standard working level). Assedic bases its allocations to an individual's revenue on the amount of money earned over a previous period, a percentage of which is calculated and awarded on a daily (compiled in the monthly allocation) basis. Therefore, if a person, over a two-year period, were to lose their job through means other than resigning voluntarily, or being dismissed for serious breaches of contract or criminal behaviour, they are entitled to a certain number of days (broken down into hours for calculation purposes) paid at a certain rate per day. If they work part-time, their regular pay is counted, the number of hours is counted, and their unused entitlement income is transferred "pro rata" into the following month.

Asterix (French : Astérix or Astérix le Gaulois [ asteʁiks lə ɡolwa ], "Asterix the Gaul "; also known as Asterix and Obelix in some adaptations or The Adventures of Asterix) is a French comic album series about a Gaulish village which, thanks to a magic potion that enhances strength, resists the forces of Julius Caesar 's Roman Republic Army in the time after the Gallic Wars. Many adventures take the titular hero Asterix and his friend Obelix to Rome and beyond.

The series first appeared in the Franco-Belgian comic magazine Pilote on 29 October 1959. It was written by René Goscinny and illustrated by Albert Uderzo until Goscinny's death in 1977. Uderzo then took over the writing until 2009, when he sold the rights to publishing company Hachette ; he died in 2020. In 2013, a new team consisting of Jean-Yves Ferri (script) and Didier Conrad (artwork) took over. As of 2025, 41 volumes have been released; the most recent was penned by new writer Fabcaro and released on 23 October 2025. By that point, the volumes in total had sold 393 million copies, making them the best-selling European comic book series, the fourth best-selling comic book series in the world and the second one after One Piece in terms of collected volumes -format comics.

Asterix comics usually start with the following introduction:

The year is 50 BC. Gaul is entirely occupied by the Romans. Well, not entirely... One small village of indomitable Gauls still holds out against the invaders. And life is not easy for the Roman legionaries who garrison the fortified camps of Totorum, Aquarium, Laudanum and Compendium...

The series follows the adventures of a village of Gauls as they resist Roman occupation in 50 BC. They do so using a magic potion, brewed by their druid Getafix (Panoramix in the French version), which temporarily gives the recipient superhuman strength. The protagonists, the title character Asterix and his friend Obelix, have various adventures. The -ix ending of both names (as well as all the other pseudo-Gaulish -ix names in the series) alludes to the -rix suffix (meaning ' king ', like rex in Latin) present in the names of many real Gaulish chieftains such as Vercingetorix, Orgetorix, and Dumnorix.

In some of the stories, they travel to foreign countries, whilst other tales are set in and around their village. For much of the history of the series (volumes 4 through 29), settings in Gaul and abroad alternate, with even-numbered volumes set abroad and odd-numbered volumes set in Gaul, mostly in the village.

The Asterix series is one of the most popular Franco-Belgian comics in the world, with the series being translated into 111 languages and dialects as of 2009.

The success of the series has led to the adaptation of its books into 15 films : ten animated, and five live action (two of which, Asterix & Obelix: Mission Cleopatra and Asterix and Obelix vs. Caesar, were major box office successes in France). There have also been a number of games based on the characters, and a theme park near Paris, Parc Astérix. The very first French satellite, Astérix, launched in 1965, was named after the character, whose name is close to Greek ἄστρον (astron) and Latin astrum, both meaning ' star '. As of 20 April 2022, 385 million copies of Asterix books had been sold worldwide and translated into 111 languages, making this the world's most widely translated comic book series, with co-creators René Goscinny and Albert Uderzo being France's best-selling authors abroad.

In April 2022, Albert and René's general director, Céleste Surugue, hosted a 45-minute talk entitled "The Next Incarnation of a Heritage Franchise: Asterix" and spoke about the success of the Asterix franchise, of which he noted: "The idea was to find a subject with a strong connection with French culture and, while looking at the country's history, they ended up choosing its first defeat, namely the Gaul's Roman colonisation". He also went on to say how, since 1989, Parc Asterix has attracted an average of 2.3 million visitors per year. Other notable mentions were how the franchise includes 10 animated movies, which recorded over 53 million viewers worldwide. The inception of Studios Idéfix in 1974 and the opening of Studio 58 in 2016 were among the necessary steps to make Asterix a "100% Gaulish production", considered the best solution to keep the creative process under control from start to finish and to employ French manpower. He also noted how a new album is now published every two years, with print figures of 5 million and an estimated readership of 20 million.

Prior to creating the Asterix series, Goscinny and Uderzo had had success with their series Oumpah-pah, which was published in Tintin magazine. Astérix was originally serialised in Pilote magazine, debuting in the first issue on 29 October 1959. In 1961, the first book was put together, titled Asterix the Gaul. From then on, books were released generally on a yearly basis. Their success was exponential; the first book sold 6,000 copies in its year of publication; a year later, the second sold 20,000. In 1963, the third sold 40,000; the fourth, released in 1964, sold 150,000. A year later, the fifth sold 300,000; 1966's Asterix and the Big Fight sold 400,000 upon initial publication. The ninth Asterix volume, when first released in 1967, sold 1.2 million copies in two days.

Uderzo's first preliminary sketches portrayed Asterix as a huge and strong traditional Gaulish warrior. But Goscinny had a different picture in his mind, visualizing Asterix as a shrewd, compact warrior who would possess intelligence and wit more than raw strength. However, Uderzo felt that the downsized hero needed a strong but dim companion, to which Goscinny agreed. Hence, Obelix was born. Despite the growing popularity of Asterix with the readers, the financial backing for the publication Pilote ceased. Pilote was taken over by Georges Dargaud.

When Goscinny died in 1977, Uderzo continued the series by popular demand of the readers, who implored him to continue. He continued to issue new volumes of the series, but on a less frequent basis. Many critics and fans of the series prefer the earlier collaborations with Goscinny. Uderzo created his own publishing company, Éditions Albert René, which published every album drawn and written by Uderzo alone since then. However, Dargaud, the initial publisher of the series, kept the publishing rights on the 24 first albums made by both Uderzo and Goscinny. In 1990, the Uderzo and Goscinny families decided to sue Dargaud to take over the rights. In 1998, after a long trial, Dargaud lost the rights to publish and sell the albums. Uderzo decided to sell these rights to Hachette instead of Albert-René, but the publishing rights on new albums were still owned by Albert Uderzo (40%), Sylvie Uderzo (20%) and Anne Goscinny (40%).

In December 2008, Uderzo sold his stake to Hachette, which took over the company. In a letter published in the French newspaper Le Monde in 2009, Uderzo's daughter, Sylvie, attacked her father's decision to sell the family publishing firm and the rights to produce new Astérix adventures after his death. She said:

... the co-creator of Astérix, France's comic strip hero, has betrayed the Gaulish warrior to the modern-day Romans – the men of industry and finance.

However, René Goscinny's daughter, Anne, also gave her agreement to the continuation of the series and sold her rights at the same time. She is reported to have said that " Asterix has already had two lives: one during my father's lifetime and one after it. Why not a third?". A few months later, Uderzo appointed three illustrators, who had been his assistants for many years, to continue the series. In 2011, Uderzo announced that a new Asterix album was due out in 2013, with Jean-Yves Ferri writing the story and Frédéric Mébarki drawing it. A year later, in 2012, the publisher Albert-René announced that Frédéric Mébarki had withdrawn from drawing the new album, due to the pressure he felt in following in the steps of Uderzo. Comic artist Didier Conrad was officially announced to take over drawing duties from Mébarki, with the due date of the new album in 2013 unchanged.

In January 2015, after the murders of seven cartoonists at the satirical Paris weekly Charlie Hebdo, Astérix creator Albert Uderzo came out of retirement to draw two Astérix pictures honouring the memories of the victims.

Numbers 1–24, 32 and 34 are by Goscinny and Uderzo. Numbers 25–31 and 33 are by Uderzo alone. Numbers 35–39 are by Jean-Yves Ferri and Didier Conrad. Numbers 40-41 are by Fabcaro and Conrad. Years stated are for their initial album release.

Asterix Conquers Rome is a comics adaptation of the animated film The Twelve Tasks of Asterix. It was released in 1976 and was the 23rd volume to be published, but it has been rarely reprinted and is not considered to be canonical to the series. The only English translations ever to be published were in the Asterix Annual 1980 and never an English standalone volume. A picture-book version of the same story was published in English translation as The Twelve Tasks of Asterix by Hodder & Stoughton in 1978.

In 1996, a tribute album in honour of Albert Uderzo was released titled Uderzo Croqué par ses Amis, a volume containing 21 short stories with Uderzo in Ancient Gaul. This volume was published by Soleil Productions and has not been translated into English.

In 2007, Éditions Albert René released a tribute volume titled Astérix et ses Amis, a 60-page volume of one-to-four-page short stories. It was a tribute to Albert Uderzo on his 80th birthday by 34 European cartoonists. The volume was translated into nine languages. As of 2016, it has not been translated into English.

In 2016, the French publisher Hachette, along with Anne Goscinny and Albert Uderzo decided to make the special issue album The XII Tasks of Asterix for the 40th anniversary of the film The Twelve Tasks of Asterix. There was no English edition.

The main setting for the series is an unnamed coastal village, rumoured to be inspired by Erquy in Armorica (present-day Brittany / Normandy), a province of Gaul (modern France), in the year 50 BC. Julius Caesar has conquered nearly all of Gaul for the Roman Republic during the Gallic Wars. The little Armorican village, however, has held out in this alternate history because the villagers can gain temporary superhuman strength by drinking a magic potion brewed by the village druid, Getafix. His chief is Vitalstatistix.

The main protagonist and hero of the village is Asterix, a diminutive warrior who, because of his shrewdness, is usually entrusted with the most important affairs of the village. He is aided in his adventures by his rather corpulent and slower-thinking friend, Obelix, a menhir deliveryman who, because he fell into the druid's cauldron of the potion as a baby, has permanent superhuman strength (because of this, Getafix steadfastly refuses to allow Obelix to drink the potion, as doing so would have a dangerous and unpredictable result, eventually revealed in Asterix and Obelix All at Sea to be petrifaction into granite). Following Asterix and the Banquet, Obelix adopts, and thus is usually accompanied by, his little dog Dogmatix. (Except for Asterix and Obelix, the names of the characters change with the language. For example, Obelix's dog's name is "Idéfix" in the original French edition.)

Asterix and Obelix (and sometimes other members of the village) go on various adventures both within the village and in far away lands. Places visited in the series include parts of Gaul (Lutetia, Corsica etc.), neighbouring nations (Belgium, Spain, Britain, Germany etc.), and far away lands (North America, Middle East, India etc.).

The series employs science-fiction and fantasy elements in the more recent books; for instance, the use of extraterrestrials in Asterix and the Falling Sky and the city of Atlantis in Asterix and Obelix All at Sea.

With rare exceptions, the ending of the albums usually shows a big banquet with the village's inhabitants gathering – the sole exception is the bard Cacofonix restrained and gagged to prevent him from singing (but in Asterix and the Normans the blacksmith Fulliautomatix was tied up). Mostly the banquets are held under the starry nights in the village, where roast boar is devoured and all (but one) are set about in merrymaking. However, there are a few exceptions, such as in Asterix and Cleopatra.

The humour encountered in the Asterix comics often centers around puns, caricatures, and tongue-in-cheek stereotypes of contemporary European nations and French regions. Much of the multi-layered humour in the initial Asterix books was French-specific, which delayed the translation of the books into other languages for fear of losing the jokes and the spirit of the story. Some translations have actually added local humour: In the Italian translation, the Roman legionaries are made to speak in 20th-century Roman dialect, and Obelix's famous Ils sont fous, ces Romains! ("These Romans are crazy") is translated as Sono pazzi questi romani, a long-established humorous expansion of the Roman abbreviation SPQR. In another example: Hiccups are written onomatopoeically in French as hips, but in English as "hic", allowing Roman legionaries in more than one of the English translations to decline their hiccups absurdly in Latin (hic, haec, hoc). The newer albums share a more universal humour, both written and visual.

All the fictional characters in Asterix have names which are puns on their roles or personalities, and which follow certain patterns specific to nationality. Certain rules are followed (most of the time) such as Gauls (and their neighbours) having an -ix suffix for the men and ending in -a for the women; for example, Chief Vitalstatistix (so called due to his portly stature) and his wife Impedimenta (often at odds with the chief). The male Roman names end in -us, echoing Latin nominative male singular form, as in Gluteus Maximus, a muscle-bound athlete whose name is literally the butt of the joke. Gothic names (present-day Germany) end in -ic, after Gothic chiefs such as Alaric and Theoderic ; for example Rhetoric the interpreter. Greek names end in -os or -es ; for example, Thermos the restaurateur. British names usually end in -ax or -os and are often puns on the taxation associated with the later United Kingdom ; examples include Mykingdomforanos, a British tribal chieftain, Valuaddedtax the druid, and Selectivemploymentax the mercenary. Names of Normans end with -af, for example Nescaf or Cenotaf. Egyptian characters often end in -is, such as the architects Edifis and Artifis, and the scribe Exlibris. Indic names, apart from the only Indic female characters Orinjade and Lemuhnade, exhibit considerable variation; examples include Watziznehm, Watzit, Owzat, and Howdoo. Other nationalities are treated to pidgin translations from their language, like Huevos y Bacon, a Spanish chieftain (whose name, meaning eggs and bacon, is often guidebook Spanish for tourists), or literary and other popular media references, like Dubbelosix (a sly reference to James Bond 's codename "007").

Most of these jokes, and hence the names of the characters, are specific to the translation; for example, the druid named Getafix in English translation — ‌"get a fix", referring to the character's role in dispensing the magic potion ⁠ ‍ — ‍ ‌is Panoramix in the original French and Miraculix in German. Even so, occasionally the wordplay has been preserved: Obelix's dog, known in the original French as Idéfix (from idée fixe, a "fixed idea" or obsession), is called Dogmatix in English, which not only renders the original meaning strikingly closely ("dogmatic") but in fact adds another layer of wordplay with the syllable "Dog–" at the beginning of the name.

The name Asterix, French Astérix, comes from astérisque, meaning " asterisk ", which is the typographical symbol " * " indicating a footnote, from the Greek word ἀστήρ (aster), meaning "star". His name is usually left unchanged in translations, aside from accents and the use of local alphabets. For example, in Esperanto, Polish, Slovene, Latvian, and Turkish it is Asteriks (in Turkish he was first named Bücür meaning "shorty", but the name was then standardised). Two exceptions include Icelandic, in which he is known as Ástríkur ("Rich of love"), and Sinhala, where he is known as සූර පප්පා (Soora Pappa), which can be interpreted as " Hero ". The name Obelix (Obélix) may refer to " obelisk ", a stone column from ancient Egypt (and hence his large size and strength and his task of carrying around menhirs), but also to another typographical symbol, the obelisk or obelus (†).

For explanations of some of the other names, see: List of Asterix characters.

Many of the Asterix adventures take place in other countries away from their homeland in Gaul. In every album that takes place abroad, the characters meet (usually modern-day) stereotypes for each country, as seen by the French.

When the Gauls see foreigners speaking their foreign languages, these have different representations in the cartoon speech bubbles :

The various volumes have been translated into more than 120 languages and dialects. Besides the original French language, most albums are available in Arabic, Basque, Bulgarian, Catalan, Chinese, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, Finnish, Galician, German, Greek, Hebrew, Hindi, Icelandic, Irish, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Latin, Latvian, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Serbian, Slovene, Spanish, Swedish, Turkish, and Ukrainian.

Some books have also been translated into languages including Esperanto, Scottish Gaelic, Irish, Scots, Indonesian, Hindi, Persian, Bengali, Afrikaans, Arabic, Frisian, Romansch, Thai, Vietnamese, Welsh, Sinhala, Ancient Greek, and Luxembourgish.

In Europe, several volumes were translated into a variety of regional languages and dialects, such as Alsatian, Breton, Chtimi (Picard), and Corsican in France; Bavarian, Swabian, and Low German in Germany; and Savo, Karelia, Rauma, and Helsinki slang dialects in Finland. In Portugal a special edition of the first volume, Asterix the Gaul, was translated into local language Mirandese. In Greece, a number of volumes have appeared in the Cretan Greek, Cypriot Greek, and Pontic Greek dialects. In the Italian version, while the Gauls speak standard Italian, the legionaries speak in the Romanesque dialect. In the former Yugoslavia, the "Forum" publishing house translated Corsican text in Asterix in Corsica into the Montenegrin dialect of Serbo-Croatian (today called Montenegrin).

In the Netherlands, several volumes were translated into West Frisian, a Germanic language spoken in the province of Friesland ; into Limburgish, a regional language spoken not only in Dutch Limburg but also in Belgian Limburg and North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany ; and into Tweants, a dialect in the region of Twente in the eastern province of Overijssel. Hungarian-language books were published in the former Yugoslavia for the Hungarian minority living in Serbia. Although not translated into a fully autonomous dialect, the books differ slightly from the language of the books issued in Hungary. In Sri Lanka, the cartoon series was adapted into Sinhala as Sura Pappa.

Most volumes have been translated into Latin and Ancient Greek, with accompanying teachers' guides, as a way of teaching these ancient languages.

In the early 1960s, translations of some strips were published in British comics including Valiant, Ranger, and Look & Learn, under names Little Fred and Big Ed, and Beric the Bold, set in Roman-occupied Britain. These were included in an exhibition on Goscinny's life and career, and Asterix, in London's Jewish Museum in 2018.

In 1970, William Morrow and Company published English translations in hardback of three Asterix albums for the American market. These were Asterix the Gaul, Asterix and Cleopatra and Asterix the Legionary. Lawrence Hughes in a letter to The New York Times stated, "Sales were modest, with the third title selling half the number of the first. I was publisher at the time, and Bill Cosby tried to buy film and television rights. When that fell through, we gave up the series."

The first 33 Asterix albums were translated into English by Anthea Bell and Derek Hockridge (including the three volumes reprinted by William Morrow), who were widely praised for maintaining the spirit and humour of the original French versions. Hockridge died in 2013, so Bell translated books 34 to 36 by herself, before retiring in 2016 for health reasons. She died in 2018. Adriana Hunter became translator.

US publisher Papercutz in December 2019 announced it would begin publishing "all-new more American translations" of the Asterix books, starting on 19 May 2020. The launch was postponed to 15 July 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The new translator is Joe Johnson, a professor of French and Spanish at Clayton State University. The comics' popularity has been relatively low in US markets, where Franco-Belgian comics have less mainstream exposure.

The series has been adapted into various media. There are 18 films, 15 board games, 40 video games, and 1 theme park.

Dogmatix and the Indomitables, an animated series of eleven-minute episodes, was produced by Studio 58 and Futurikon, and premiered on the Okoo streaming service on 2 July 2021 before beginning its linear broadcast on France 4 on 28 August 2021. The animation is produced by o2o Studio. The show is distributed globally by LS Distribution.

Asterix and Obelix: The Big Fight, a CG-animated miniseries based on the 1966 album, and directed by Alain Chabat, debuted on Netflix in 2025.

Many gamebooks, board games and video games are based upon the Asterix series. In particular, many video games were released by various computer game publishers.

Parc Astérix, a theme park 35 kilometres (22 miles) north of Paris, based upon the series, was opened in 1989. It is one of the most visited sites in France, with around 2.3 million visitors per year.

Astrid Panosyan-Bouvet (born 13 August 1971) is a French politician and corporate director who served as Minister of Labour in the successive governments of Prime Ministers Michel Barnier and François Bayrou from 2024 to 2025. She served as a member of the National Assembly for Paris's 4th constituency from 2022 to 2024.

Born to an Armenian father and a Norwegian mother, Panosyan-Bouvet is a graduate of HEC Paris, Sciences Po and the Harvard Kennedy School.

Panosyan-Bouvet held senior positions at two of the main insurance groups in France, AXA and Groupama.

As a member of Emmanuel Macron’s cabinet when he was France’s economy minister, Panosyan-Bouvet advised him on international investments and the attractiveness of France’s economy. In 2016, she co-founded the En Marche movement and was later part of a trio (together with Arnaud Leroy and Bariza Khiari) who led the movement for several months before Christophe Castaner took over the position as party leader. As the movement’s head of international relations, she negotiated its coalition with the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe (ALDE) ahead of the 2019 European Parliament election.

In parliament, Panosyan-Bouvet served on the Committee on Social Affairs from 2022 to 2024. In addition to her committee assignments, she was a member of the French-Israeli Parliamentary Friendship Group and the French- American Parliamentary Friendship Group from 2022 to 2024.

Atelier 801 is a French independent video game development company founded by Jean-Baptiste Le Marchand (Tigrounette) and Mélanie Christin (Melibellule). They are best known for developing Transformice, which as of 2020 has 105 million accounts.

Transformice was the second game Le Marchand developed, after Extinction (permanently closed), a platform with three games, Aaaah!, Bouboum, and Forteresse. Transformice was a side-project of Christin, designer, and Le Marchand, developer. They posted Transformice on an online forum in 2010. The game quickly spread by word of mouth, and overwhelmed by the unexpected success of the game, they spent evenings and weekends to cope with the massive influx of players.

In 2011 they left their jobs at Ankama to start Atelier 801, allowing them to finally fulfill players' demand by working full time on the game and now employing ten extra people. Atelier 801 was hosted in one of the business incubators of the northern La Ruche network in Tourcoing until January 2013, when they moved to Lille. Between August 2012 and August 2013, Atelier 801 posted sales of $1.2 million.

They received, in 2013, the "Entrepreneur of the Year" prize by the local Nord area.

Atelier 801 revived two of Le Marchand's games with Bouboum in 2013 and then Fortoresse a few months later. The year 2014 proved to be busy as they released Nekodancer, a massively multiplayer musical game, and then their first mobile game on iOS and Android called Run for Cheese, the first one set in the Transformice universe, in October 2014.

In 2015, they co-produced Transformice: The Cartoon Series, an animated series set in the Transformice universe, with Cross River Productions and Believe Digital. They also began working on Dead Maze, a survival MMO set in a contemporary world, filled with zombies and crafting possibilities. It was released on Steam on 13 February 2018.

In May 2019, Atelier 801 launched a Kickstarter campaign for Transformice Adventures, another game set in the Transformice universe. The campaign was cancelled two weeks later, although the game is still in development. Eight employees were laid off. In July 2019, Antarès was released.

In 2021, the multiplayer platform game Tomb Rumble was released on Steam.

All games are available on Windows, macOS and Linux, except Run for Cheese (iOS and Android).

Athanase Jean (born 1861 in Saint-Césaire, died 1932 at Rouffiac, Charente-Maritime) was a French medical doctor and writer.

Athanase Jean, better known by the name of Doctor Jean, was born on 24 November 1861 at Saint-Cesaire, Charente-Maritime, into a family of winemakers. Having done well at his studies undertaken in Pons, Saintes and Rochefort and ending up specialising in naval health, he found himself posted to Guyana for his military service. It was there that he began practising medicine.

On his return to France, he was able to complete his university degree. He was subsequently asked by the residents of Rouffiac to become their local doctor, a post that he kept until his death on 17 February 1932.

An enthusiastic man and curious about everything, he kept his peasant roots at heart and showed a talent for speaking and writing about the Saintonge using the local dialect. This resulted in several works, the most relevant and most popular of which was undoubtedly "La Mérine à Nastasie", a comedy in three acts in Saintongeais, and published under the pseudonym of Yan San Acer (Saint-Acer being the Saintonge name of his birthplace, Saint-Césaire). It was performed for the first time on 25 May 1902 at the Chateau de Mauleon in Rouffiac. On 4 December of the same year it made its début in Paris at the Salle Lancry. It has been reprised on various occasions throughout the twentieth century.

As well as working tirelessly as doctor, he also took part in local government serving on the municipal council and serving as mayor and councillor for the town of Pons. He worked to promote the revival of the local vineyard after its destruction by phylloxera, and was instrumental in having a railway station built to serve the village using the receipts from the first performance of his play "La Mérine à Nastasie". He was also responsible for bringing the telephone to the commune.

Like Barthélemy Gautier, well known for his sketches of peasant life, "Doctor Jean" will remain with Evariste Poitevin and Odette Comandon as one of the principal names associated with Saintonge culture.

Jean died on 17 February 1932 in Rouffiac, Charente-Maritime.

La Mérine à Nastasie Le crassou Rouffiat!... Ine minute d'arrêt!... Buffez! Le Piantit de Cadet Bitounîa boet dau champagne! Batégail dejhun cheû Richardâ In voeyage malhureux Toque et Canul Le judgement du Bac de Chauveau

The Atlantic mixed forests is a terrestrial ecoregion in western Europe. It extends along the western edge of continental Europe, from southwestern France through northern France, Belgium, the Netherlands, northwestern Germany, and western Denmark. Most of the region's forests and dunes have been converted to fields, pastures, and forest plantations, and its once-extensive wetlands have mostly been drained and filled.

The ecoregion covers an area of 380,246 km. The terrain is generally flat or gently rolling, except in Brittany where the terrain is hilly and the coast is rocky. In several places, notably the Landes forest in southwestern France, dunes extended inland for miles from the shore.

Mixed oak forests are typical, with Quercus robur, Betula pendula and Betula pubescens prevalent on acidic soils, and Q. robur and Fagus sylvatica on other soils. In the southern portion of the ecoregion Quercus petraea and Q. pubescens are also present. In the northern part of the ecoregion Abies alba also occurs. Pinus pinaster grows naturally on sandy soils, and has been planted extensively to stabilize dunes, along with Pinus sylvestris. Heathlands dominated by Calluna vulgaris, Ulex and Juniperus communis occur in coastal areas subject to wind and salt spray. Substantial areas of the German, Danish and Dutch parts of the ecoregion used to be covered with extensive bogs, which now have been mostly destroyed for agriculture.

The original forests hosted a large variety of animals. Large mammals native to the region include red deer, roe deer and wild boar. Wolves and lynx are returning in parts of this region. Wisents are reintroduced as well. Formerly it was also inhabited by brown bears, eurasian elk, and the now globally extinct aurochs. Seasonally, harbor porpoise from the North Sea follow the rivers deeply into the country's interior.

The forests are home to blackbird, blue tit, great tit, common chaffinch, firecrest, black woodpecker, black stork, goshawk, eurasian sparrowhawk, little owl, eagle-owl, among others. The golden eagle used to live here as well, but was exterminated. Mammals, such as pine marten, wood mouse, badger, and European wildcat, call the forests home, as do insects like cockchafer, stag beetle and dor beetle.

The region's numerous rivers and streams are inhabited by such fish species as northern pike, common roach or bream. Formerly widespread migratory fish, such as Atlantic salmon, sea trout, European sea sturgeon, allis shad and the European eel, are now all endangered due to factors including habitat destruction and fragmentation by hydropower, pollution and foreign disease. Otters and beavers were exterminated, but are now making a comeback. Aquatic invertebrates include the great ramshorn and the endangered freshwater pearl mussel. Examples for birds associated with wetlands, rivers and other bodies of water include white stork, white-tailed eagle, little ringed plover and numerous species of duck, e.g. the mallard.

The Wadden Sea area on the northern coast is important for migratory birds.

The peat bogs in the northern part of the ecoregion have a specialized fauna consisting of insects like Aeshna subarctica, Agonum ericeti, Agriades optilete, amphibians like the moor frog and birds such as common snipe, swamp harrier, golden plover.

Open landscapes such as fields, heaths and meadows, whose extent was probably expanded by anthropogenic deforestation following the introduction of farming to the region, are the preferred habitat of species such as grey partridge, red kite and European hare. Many of these species are now endangered due to modernized agricultural practices.

59,657 km, or 16%, of the ecoregion is in protected areas. Another 19% of the ecoregion's area is forested but unprotected.

In France, the system of regional nature parks preserves biodiversity and sustainable agriculture. Regional nature parks include farms and villages as well as forests, heathlands and wetlands. Regional nature parks in the Atlantic mixed forests include Armorique, Brenne, Boucles de la Seine normande, Caps et Marais d'Opale, Causses du Quercy [ fr ; nl ], Gâtinais français, Haute Vallée de Chevreuse, Landes de Gascogne, Loire-Anjou-Touraine, Marais Du Cotentin Et Du Bessin, Marais poitevin, Montagne de Reims, Oise-Pays de France, Perche, Vallée de la Scarpe et de l'Escaut avesnois, and Vexin français.

Protected areas in the Netherlands include De Alde Feanen, De Biesbosch, De Groote Peel, De Hoge Veluwe, De Loonse en Drunense Duinen, De Maasduinen, De Meinweg, Drents-Friese Wold, Duinen van Texel, Dwingelderveld, Drentsche Aa, Nieuw Land, Oosterschelde, Sallandse Heuvelrug, Schiermonnikoog, Utrechtse Heuvelrug, Veluwezoom, Weerribben-Wieden, and Zuid-Kennemerland national parks.

Lüneburg Heath (Lüneburger Heide) in northern Germany includes area of heathland, bog, and downy oak forest, as well as coppiced woodlands and pine plantations.

The European Environment Agency's Digital Map of European Ecological Regions (DMEER) designates two Atlantic forest ecoregions – the Northern Temperate Atlantic and Southern Temperate Atlantic. The WWF's system combines them into one Atlantic mixed forests ecoregion, with the same external boundary.

The Attacks on High Wood, near Bazentin le Petit in the Somme département of northern France, took place between the British Fourth Army and the German 1st Army during the Battle of the Somme. After the Battle of Bazentin Ridge on 14 July 1916, High Wood lay undefended for most of the day but delays in communication and confusion caused by orders and counter-orders from British corps headquarters, which had overlapping responsibilities, led to the occupation of High Wood being forestalled by German reserves, which had moved forward to counter-attack British troops in the villages of Bazentin-le-Grand and Bazentin-le-Petit.

Men from the 7th Division managed to occupy the southern half of the wood and two cavalry squadrons advanced on the east side to Wood Lane, which connected the wood to Longueval. On 15 July, the wood was evacuated by the survivors and the cavalry retired. The British and the Germans fought for control of the wood from 14 July to 15 September. Both sides had many casualties and chronic communication problems; inclement weather grounded aircraft, obscured the view and slowed movement on the roads, which had been severely bombarded and turned to mud as soon as it rained. Trenches and shell holes filled with water, which made infantry movement exceedingly difficult and exhausted trench garrisons. The British and French found it impossible to arrange co-ordinated attacks and fought many small piecemeal actions, rather than general attacks until 15 September.

British–French co-operation broke down again and the French did not attack on 15 September, when the British captured the wood during the Battle of Flers–Courcelette (15–22 September). The German defenders had great difficulty finding fresh troops for the Somme front, despite ending the Battle of Verdun (21 February – 20 December) and had to send divisions to the Eastern Front and to Romania after it declared war on 27 August. Turnover of German divisions was high and many had to be withdrawn and replaced after fourteen days in the front line. The Germans lacked the resources to make many big organised counter-attacks and those at High Wood and the vicinity were often as costly and ineffective as corresponding British attacks.

The French name for the wood was Bois des Foureaux (now Bois des Fourcaux) but to the British infantry it was known as High Wood. The wood is on the D 107 road, which runs from Martinpuich to Longueval, about half-way between Bazentin-le-Petit and Bazentin-le-Grand to the south-west, Martinpuich to the north-west and Longueval to the south-east. Delville Wood lay 3,500 yd (2.0 mi; 3.2 km) to the east. Before the Battle of the Somme the wood was behind the German second line, which lay in front of Bazentin-le-Grand and Bazentin-le-Petit. The wood crowned a ridge which was about 100 ft (30 m) high and overlooked the ground around for a considerable distance. An attack on the wood could be seen easily from the ridge which ran through the north end of the wood. Before the battle the trees were undamaged and the ground had not been churned by shell-fire.

Despite considerable debate among German staff officers, Falkenhayn laid down a continuation of the policy of unyielding defence. On the Somme front, the fortification construction plan ordered by Falkenhayn in January 1915 had been completed. The reserve line, renamed the second line, was as well built and wired as the first line and had been built beyond the range of Allied field artillery, to force attackers to stop and move their artillery forward before an attack. The second line had become the front line in the area of High Wood, after the Battle of Bazentin Ridge on 14 July. German artillery was organised in a series of sperrfeuerstreifen (barrage sectors) for the simpler task of placing barrages on no man's land. Telephone lines between the German front lines and their artillery support were often cut but the front line troops used signal flares to communicate. High Wood had grassy rides and many saplings in the undergrowth, which impeded movement off the rides and the wood had been fortified.

General Henry Rawlinson, the Fourth Army commander, planned an attack at dawn on 14 July, when there would be insufficient light for German machine-gunners to see far ahead. XIII Corps was to attack with two divisions from Longueval to Bazentin-le-Grand and XV Corps was to attack from Bazentin-le-Petit to the north-west edge of Mametz Wood; one division of III Corps was to attack further west. The British infantry was to cross up to 1,200 yd (1,100 m) of no man's land in the dark and assemble close to the German second line. In this area the second line had become the front line, after the British and French advances during the Battle of Albert (1–13 July). A preparatory bombardment began on 11 July and a shortage of heavy artillery ammunition along with transport difficulties over wet and cut up ground, were eased by the air supremacy of the Royal Flying Corps (RFC), which made it impossible for the German air units to reconnoitre behind the British lines. On 14 July, the 9th (Secunderabad) Cavalry Brigade of the 2nd Indian Cavalry Division were to capture the wood and the Switch Line either side with two cavalry regiments, after which the 7th Division was to relieve the cavalry and the 21st Division was to advance and occupy the area between Bazentin-le-Petit and Martinpuich. The advance was expected to assist III Corps to the west, when it attacked the German second position and then combined with the 1st Division attack at 2:30 p.m., as the 34th Division probed towards Pozières in the west.

The Fourth Army attacked High Wood with divisions from XV Corps on 14 July, during the Battle of Bazentin Ridge. The wood was abandoned by the Germans but delays meant that the British did not attempt to occupy it until 7:00 p.m. Rawlinson had ordered the 7th Division forward at 12:15 p.m. but the order was over-ruled by Lieutenant-General Henry Horne, the XV Corps commander, because the capture of Longueval, on the flank of the proposed advance, was incomplete. The 7th Division advanced and two battalions managed to occupy the southern half of the wood, after German reserves had arrived and counter-attacked several times. On the right flank, a squadron from each of the 7th Dragoon Guards and the 20th Deccan Horse of the 2nd Indian Cavalry Division, had been ordered forward at 7:40 a.m. but took until early evening to make their way across trenches and devastated ground.

The 20th Deccan Horse made the only cavalry charge of the Battle of the Somme, against III Battalion, Infantry Regiment 26 concealed in crops east of the wood. The crew of an aircraft of 3 Squadron RFC saw the infantry and cavalry advance and the pilot dived at the German troops, strafing them from a height of 300 ft (91 m). The observer dropped a sketch of the German dispositions onto the cavalry before the aircraft departed, having been riddled by ground fire. Reserves of the 2nd Guard Division were incapable of assisting the defenders, as they had been caught by British machine-gun fire as they moved up towards Bazentin-le-Petit and machine-gunners in Longueval were silenced by the cavalry machine-guns. German heavy artillery had been withdrawn and field artillery was unable to take aim at such a fast-moving target. About 100 Germans were killed or taken prisoner in the cornfields, eight cavalrymen were killed, about 100 were wounded and 130 horses were killed or wounded.

The cavalry took up a line from Longueval to the southern corner of High Wood until the early morning of 15 July and began to withdraw from 3:40 a.m. Alarmist reports that the British cavalry had broken through between Longueval and Pozières and were advancing beyond High Wood, reached the German IV Corps and 2nd Army headquarters. General Fritz von Below, the 2nd Army commander, put the 8th Division, 5th Division, 24th Reserve Division and the 8th Royal Bavarian Reserve Division at the disposal of General Friedrich Sixt von Armin, the IV Corps commander, to counter-attack the British breakthrough. When the truth emerged, the counter-attack was called off and the 5th and 8th Bavarian Reserve divisions went back into reserve. At 9:00 a.m. on 15 July, the 7th Division attacked the wood with the 91st Brigade. The British infantry were stopped by machine-gun fire from the Switch Line where it ran through the wood. After a preliminary bombardment by German artillery, II Battalion, Infantry Regiment 165 of the 7th Division and III Battalion, Infantry Regiment 72 of the 8th Division, which had relieved the 183rd Division, counter-attacked at 2:30 p.m. and recaptured part of the wood, until driven out by the brigade reserve.

At 4:45 p.m. the British attacked after a bombardment which inflicted many casualties on the German infantry but failed to overwhelm the defenders. High Wood was not visible to British ground observers and at 5:00 p.m. a 3 Squadron reconnaissance sortie, reported that British troops were in the west of the wood and south of the Bazentin-le-Petit road. Flags were seen in the west side of the wood but the east side was full of Germans and the Switch Trench was packed with German infantry. High Wood was judged to be untenable and at 11:25 p.m. the 91st Brigade was withdrawn and the wood was bombarded by the divisional artillery. The 1/9th Highland Light Infantry (HLI) of the 33rd Division had also attacked the wood at 9:00 a.m. on 15 July, during an attack on the Switch Line, when three platoons advanced on the west side of the wood. Machine-gun fire from the II and III battalions of Infantry Regiment 93 in High Wood, hit the attackers from the flank and the attack was repulsed. The 16th Battalion, King's Royal Rifle Corps and the 2nd Worcester were sent forward as reinforcements but were back on the start line by 4:00 p.m. Two German infantry companies worked southwards from the Switch Line for 500 yd (460 m) later in the evening but a renewal of the counter-attack was found to be impossible, due to the tremendous volume of British barrage fire and the presence of British reconnaissance and artillery-observation aircraft.

The 33rd Division attacked again at dusk on 19 July, when a battalion from the 100th Brigade pushed advanced posts towards the wood from Bazentin-le-Petit as a flank guard. Two battalions of the 19th Brigade crept forward on 20 July, during a bombardment and attacked when it lifted at 3:25 a.m. The infantry got into the wood against machine-gun fire from the 8th Division troops of II Battalion, Infantry Regiment 165 and part of III Battalion, Infantry Regiment 72 in the Switch Line and a strong point in the western corner. Observers of 3 Squadron flew over the wood and despite mist, glimpsed enough to report that all but the north end of the wood had been captured and in the evening reported the loss of the north end to a counter-attack.

A third battalion on the right flank arrived and helped to occupy the southern portion of the wood, thirty Germans being taken prisoner. During the afternoon of 21 July, another battalion went forward and managed to reach the northern fringe of the wood. Due to the number of British casualties, two more battalions were sent forward as reinforcements but as dark fell a German bombardment forced the British from the north end of the wood, which was re-occupied by German troops near Foureaux Riegel (known to the British as the Switch Line) and both sides dug in. During the fighting for High Wood, the 5th Division and 7th Division attacked the Switch Line to the east. The 51st (Highland) Division relieved the 33rd Division after dark.

Fog covered the area around High Wood until 22 July when vague reports of German digging in front of the Switch Line were confirmed. The crew of a 34 Squadron aircraft dived through the mist and saw a new German trench, several hundred yards in front of the Switch Trench, parallel to the British line from Bazentin-le-Peitit to High Wood. This new Intermediate Line was full of German troops and the III Corps headquarters immediately cancelled the 19th (Western) Division attack on the Switch Line, to make the new line the first objective. On the night of 22/23 July, the 51st (Highland) Division attacked High Wood with two battalions of the 154th Brigade at 1:30 a.m., to capture the rest of the wood and 600 yd (550 m) of the Switch Line. The British bombardment had begun at 7:00 p.m. on 22 July, under the direction of low-flying British artillery-observation aircraft. German sources reported that the shelling was of painful accuracy and prevented the troops in High Wood from being relieved, despite the number of casualties. One battalion lost direction in the wood and had many casualties to machine-gun fire. The second battalion attacked up a dip to the south-west of the wood but was also caught by machine-gun fire from the Intermediate Line; by 3:00 a.m. both battalions were back on the start line having lost 450 casualties.

The Germans in the wood also suffered greatly in the hand-to-hand fighting. III Battalion, Infantry Regiment 165 of the 7th Division and part of I Battalion, Infantry Regiment 62 of the 12th Division, were reinforced from the Switch Line by I Battalion, Infantry Regiment 91, early on 23 July. British gunners had difficulty supporting attacks on High Wood, because they had to fire over Bazentin Ridge. The low elevation of the guns meant that shells skimmed the British trenches, the margin for error was small and numerous complaints were made that British infantry casualties were caused by the British artillery. Worn guns, defective ammunition and inaccurate information about the location of British infantry positions were blamed for short-shooting. The 51st (Highland) Division pushed saps forward on 2 August, towards the Switch Line and dug a new trench near Wood Lane to the east of High Wood.

The 33rd Division relieved the 51st (Highland) Division and on 11 August, continued to push sap heads forward towards the Switch line and dug a new trench closer to Wood Lane to the east. Two large flame-throwers and pipe-pushers (devices to force a pipe filled with explosives underground, parallel with the surface, to create a sap when the explosives were detonated) were brought forward, as both sides patrolled the area. On 18 August, a battalion of the 33rd Division attacked the wood, using the flame throwers and thirty oil drums thrown by Livens Projectors but the flame throwers failed and the projectors were buried by British artillery-fire which fell short; the pipe pushers fouled tree roots in the wood and one was deflected backwards, blowing a crater into the trench line of one of the attacking battalions. All attempts by the infantry to advance failed, although some troops broke into the German defences and were ejected by I Battalion, Infantry Regiment 134 and Infantry Regiment 104 recorded many casualties. On 20 August, the division attacked the wood with one battalion, to occupy a trench on the western edge of the wood. On 24 August, three battalions of the 100th Brigade attacked between High Wood and Delville Wood. On the night of 27/28 August, the 1st Division relieved part of the 33rd Division and next day attacked on the east side of the wood, advancing a short distance. The rest of the 33rd Division was relieved by the 24th Division on 31 August. The largest German counter-attack of the Battle of the Somme, took place on the same day to the east of the wood, in the afternoon and evening. Troops of the II Bavarian Corps and XII Corps, pushed one battalion into the eastern side of the wood at Edge Trench.

On 3 September, a 1st Brigade battalion of the 1st Division attacked in High Wood as part of the fighting for Guillemont, making another attempt to use the flame-throwers and Livens Projectors. A 178th Tunnelling Company mine, with 3,000 lb (1,400 kg) of explosives, was sprung under the strong point at the east corner of the wood thirty seconds before the infantry advance. The strong point was overrun by an infantry company and consolidated by an engineer field company. The pipe pushers blew back and a mortar bomb dropped short and set off the oil drums in the Livens Projectors, causing much confusion among the attackers.

Bombers worked towards the western flank but a counter-attack at 3:00 p.m. by Bavarian Infantry Regiment 5 from the Switch Line forced the British back to their start line. At 6:00 p.m. a fresh battalion advanced to the middle of the wood and reached its objective on the right flank but was checked in the left. An attack on the south-west face of the wood also reached the objective and two companies of the 15th (Scottish) Division got into the western corner and repulsed a German counter-attack with Lewis-gun fire. Another counter-attack was defeated at 8:00 p.m. but the British then withdrew, except for one company which retired at 4:00 a.m.

On 8 September, the 1st Division attacked the west end of the wood at 6:00 p.m. with two battalions. The right-hand battalion reached its objective on its right flank, where German troops were found to be in wired shell-craters but not on its left flank. The left-hand battalion attacked the south-west face and reached the objective as a battalion of the 15th (Scottish) Division to the west captured a German trench beyond the west side of the wood. Two German counter-attacks were repulsed but the British were ordered to retire and by midnight were back on their start lines. About fifty prisoners of III Battalion, Bavarian Infantry Regiment 18 of the 3rd Royal Bavarian Division were taken.

The 178th Tunnelling Company reopened the gallery of the mine fired on 3 September and charged it with another 3,000 lb (1,400 kg) of ammonal. On 9 September, the 1st Division attacked High Wood and German positions on the right flank; two battalions captured Wood Lane and two battalions attacked in the wood after the new mine was exploded thirty seconds before zero hour. The crater was occupied but the garrison was then bombed out by the Bavarians after 90 minutes, an advance on the western side also failed. By 14 September, it was estimated that the British had suffered 6,000 casualties in the struggle for High Wood.

On 15 September, the 47th (1/2nd London) Division, which had relieved the 1st Division from 7 to 11 September, attacked the wood and the adjacent areas to the right and left with two brigades, between the New Zealand and 50th divisions. Due to the narrowness of no man's land in and around the wood, the British troops were withdrawn during the preliminary bombardment but then sent forward again and the creeping bombardment was fired 150 yd (140 m) beyond the German front line. The artillery were given the wrong map coordinates, which led to the creeping barrage being fired another 100 yd (91 m) further on; four of the eight tanks allotted to the corps were substituted for a closer creeping bombardment at High Wood. The tanks advanced at 6:20 a.m. and two reached the south of the wood but then turned east to find open ground. Tank D-22 lost direction, ditched in the British front line and then fired on British troops by mistake.

The second tank drove into a shell hole but D-13 got into the wood and fired on Bavarian Infantry Regiment 18 in the German support line, until the tank was hit and set on fire. A German infantryman crept up on the tank and shot one of the crew in the leg through a loophole; the fourth tank broke down in no man's land. The fate of the three tanks was reported at 10:00 a.m. by the crew of a 34 Squadron contact patrol, who then flew back to the wood and saw that the attacks by the New Zealanders and the 50th (Northumbrian) Division had enveloped the wood and the defenders of the Switch Trench nearby. On their return, the crew convinced the III Corps headquarters to cancel an attack from the wood. The infantry advance into the wood had been stopped by machine-gun fire and in the mêlée, part of the three battalions advancing ready to attack the second objective, went into the wood and joined in.

At 11:40 a.m., the 140th Trench Mortar Battery fired a hurricane bombardment of 750 mortar bombs into the wood in fifteen minutes. The 34 Squadron crew made a second sortie and at 12:30 p.m., watched as parties of Germans began to surrender to bombers working forward along the edges of the wood. Several hundred soldiers of Bavarian Infantry Regiment 23 of the 3rd Royal Bavarian Division were taken prisoner, along with six machine-guns and two heavy howitzers and the survivors of the 141st Brigade captured the wood by 1:00 p.m. As night fell, the division had no organised front line, except on the extreme right and only the first objective had been captured, although this gave the British observation of the German defences north-eastwards to Bapaume.

The survivors of Bavarian Infantry Regiment 23 managed to rally beyond Martinpuich and reinforcements from the 50th Reserve Division arrived and then counter-attacked with the remnants of the Bavarians at 5:30 p.m. The Germans managed to advance to within several hundred yards of High Wood and Martinpuich and then dug in. Engineers of the 50th (Northumbrian) Division on the left of the 47th (1/2nd London) Division worked from 16 to 17 September, using bricks from Bazentin-le-Petit to fill shell holes in the road leading to High Wood and dug Boast Trench to link the flanks of both divisions, which had been separated for three days. Tramlines were built west of the wood towards Eaucourt l'Abbaye and later extended to Bazentin-le-Petit, so that the wood could be avoided.

The 47th (1/2nd London) Division was considered to have failed, because High Wood was only the first objective. In four days of fighting, the division had suffered over 4,500 casualties and the 141st Brigade was so depleted that after the occupation of the wood, it was reorganised into a composite battalion. The divisional commander Major-General Charles Barter had urged Lieutenant-General William Pulteney, the III Corps commander, to cancel the attempt to use tanks in the wood as a substitute for artillery but had been over-ruled. The failure of the tanks was considered by the 47th (1/2nd London) Division to have been the main cause of the large number of casualties in the division but Barter was sacked on 28 September, for "wanton waste of men".

Peter Liddle wrote that beyond imposing a delay, the German policy of unyielding defence and counter-attack failed and ought to be judged on the same terms as British and French methods. Haig and Joffre were right to believe that a serious German collapse was possible until late July and no convincing alternative to attrition, in the circumstances of late July to early September, has been proposed. Analysis of captured documents and prisoner interrogations indicated the strain being imposed on the German army. William Philpott criticised the weeks of costly, small, narrow-front attacks against a skilful and determined defence by the Germans, yet Gallwitz "had no better tactical method", which reduced operations to a battle of wills. In the Fourth Army area from 15 July to 4 September, 72 German counter-attacks were made against 90 British attacks, exposing German infantry to similar costly and frustrating failures. German artillery and air inferiority was a great disadvantage and led to constant losses.

Sheldon also wrote that Allied aerial dominance in August put the Germans at a serious tactical disadvantage, that some troops began to avoid the remaining dugouts and that much of the Allied artillery was used constantly to bombard targets deep behind German lines. J. P.Harris wrote that on the German side, conditions were worse and the British improved the accuracy of their artillery-fire, with the help of aircraft observation. At the end of August, Falkenhayn was dismissed, partly due to disagreements over his conduct of the defence of the Somme. Prior and Wilson analysed the British on the Somme from 15 July to 12 September, which included the fighting for High Wood. In the first sixty days of the offensive, thirty-two British divisions had engaged and had suffered 126,000 casualties. The British were bogged down, having advanced 1,000–1,500 yd (910–1,370 m) on a 12,000 yd (6.8 mi; 11 km) front.

On fifty days in the period, an average of eight divisions were in the line but fewer than six battalions attacked and only twice were more than half of the battalions in the line engaged simultaneously. British assaults were constant, small and narrow-front, against which the Germans could concentrate artillery, easily to inflict many casualties. British divisions stayed in the front line from 2 to 42 days and casualties varied from 500 per day in the 5th Division to fewer than 100 per day in the 23rd Division. Gary Sheffield wrote that criticism of Haig underestimated the difficulty in balancing tactical, operational and strategic demands; line straightening attacks were costly but were better than imposing complicated manoeuvres on the infantry.

From 11 to 27 July the 1st Division suffered 3,078 casualties and from 14 to 20 July, the 7th Division lost 3,413 casualties. The German 7th and 8th divisions had 9,498 casualties from 15 to 27 July, on the front from Delville Wood to High Wood. From 22 July to 7 August, the 51st (Highland) Division had 2,120 casualties and the 47th (1/2nd London) Division suffered more than 4,500 men from 15 to 19 September. At least 8,000 British and German soldiers died in the wood in 1916.

On the edge of High Wood is the London Cemetery and Extension. This Commonwealth cemetery was opened with the interment of 47 soldiers of the 47th (1/2nd London) Division in the days following 15 September 1916 and extended in 1934. The men were buried in a large shell hole and by 1987, the cemetery contained the remains of 3,870 men, 3,114 of whom have no name. Opposite the cemetery is a 47th (1/2nd London) Division memorial and a cairn for the 9th (Glasgow Highlanders) Highland Light Infantry. A memorial to the Cameron Highlanders and Black Watch lies on the east side of the wood. Memorials to the 1st and 51st divisions, 1st Northumberland Fusiliers, Cameron Highlanders, 1st South Wales Borderers, 10th Glosters and the 20th Royal Fusiliers were also built in the wood; Thistle Dump Cemetery is in a field to the south. High Wood is also mentioned in a poem by Siegfried Sassoon and is the subject of High Wood by P. Johnstone. Ted Hughes describes his uncle Walter (16th King's Royal Rifle Corps) wounded from a German sniper's bullet and lying out in No Man's Land after one of the 33rd Division attacks in Walt - I: Under High Wood. The stench of rotting corpses in the wood was overwhelming and it inspired Ewart MacKintosh to write a parody of Chalk Farm to Camberwell Green.

High Wood to Warterlot Farm To the tune of "Chalk Farm to Camberwell Green" There is a wood at the top of a hill, If it's not shifted it's standing there still; There is a farm a short distance away, But I'd not advise you to go there by day, For the snipers abound, and the shells are not rare, And a man's only chance is to run like a hare, So take my advice if you're chancing your arm From High Wood to Waterlot Farm. Chorus High Wood to Waterlot Farm, All on a summer's day, Up you get to the top of the trench Though you're sniped at all the way. If you've got a smoke helmet there You'd best put it on if you could, For the wood down by Waterlot Farm Is a bloody high wood.

Au jus (French: [ o ʒy ]) is a French culinary term meaning "with juice". It refers to meat dishes prepared or served together with a light broth or gravy, made from the fluids secreted by the meat as it is cooked. In French cuisine, cooking au jus is a natural way to enhance the flavour of dishes, mainly chicken, veal, and lamb. In American cuisine, the term is sometimes used to refer to a light sauce for beef recipes, which may be served with the food or placed on the side for dipping.

To prepare a natural jus, the cook may skim off the fat from the juices left after cooking and bring the remaining meat stock and water to a boil. Jus can be frozen for six months or longer, but the flavour may suffer after this time.

Au jus recipes in the United States often use soy sauce, Worcestershire sauce, salt, pepper, white or brown sugar, garlic, beets, carrots, onions, or other ingredients to make something more like a gravy. The American jus is sometimes prepared separately, rather than being produced naturally by the food being cooked. An example could be a beef jus made by reducing beef stock to a concentrated form (also known as Glace de Viande) to accompany a meat dish. It is typically served with the French dip sandwich.

Jus can also be made by extracting the juice from the original meat and combining it with another liquid e.g. red wine (thus forming a red wine jus).

A powdered product described as jus is also sold and is rubbed into the meat before cooking or added afterwards. Powdered forms generally use a combination of salt, dried onion, and sometimes sugar as primary flavoring agents.

In the United States, the phrase au jus is often used as a noun, owing to its having been adapted in culinary references into the noun form: Rather than a "sandwich au jus", the menu may read "sandwich with au jus".

The droit d'aubaine was a feudal right stipulating that a lord or monarch inherited the property of someone considered to be an outsider, or in French : aubain, upon their death, as if they lived under servile conditions.

According to historian Peter Sahlins, this right was adopted under the Ancien Régime by European sovereigns, particularly in France.

The aubains were distinguished from régnicoles [ fr ], that is, subjects of the Crown who were born and resided in the kingdom.

According to the Dictionnaire de droit by Claude-Joseph de Ferrière [ fr ] in its 1749 edition, an aubain, meaning a foreigner, is someone born in another kingdom, so quasi alibi natus (as if born elsewhere). Foreigners paid no tribute to the king to reside there, however they were not able to avail themselves of civil rights, and were subject to the droit d'aubaine unless they had obtained letters of naturalization from the king. But they were still covered by the Law of Nations, also known as jus gentium. They could therefore engage in activities and contracts between living persons, as well as make and accept gifts between living persons. They had the ability to acquire and possess real estate and dispose of it during their lifetime. However, they could not bequeath goods or property upon death, nor make valid wills, nor ensure arrangements made as part of any final wishes before death.

There were other implications of droit d'aubaine. Such foreigners could not take on religious benefices, or hold public office, and had to pay a bond before trials, restrictions which would not necessarily apply to those considered to be régnicole. They were also liable to bodily restraint from the king's officers.

The differences, and the reason for them, were that contracts between living persons fall under the Law of Nations, which is common to all residents, without distinguishing whether they are the king's subjects or foreigners; whereas wills and final wishes depend entirely on civil law, in which the king's subjects participate, and from which foreigners are excluded. Foreigners had no heirs ab intestat (so as if without a will), because while they lived as free individuals, effectively they died as slaves. Thus, any property left behind upon death belonged to the king. An exception was made when a foreigner who died in France left behind legitimate régnicole children, born through marriage to a régnicole, who could potentially inherit from their aubain parent, instead of the treasury. The estate of aubains belonged to the king, rather than to any local lord or seigneur, notwithstanding any contrary customs.

However, there was also a seigneurial droit d'aubaine in certain places. It consisted of the fact that a person foreign to a lordship who settled there was considered to be of servile condition, known as mainmorte, if they had not declared their bourgeois status, and upon their death, the property of their estate was acquired by the lord. This right persisted in the few regions where real serfdom or mainmorte had not been completely abolished.

This casual right [ fr ] posed a significant risk for foreign merchants attending fairs, entrepreneurs and workers attracted to manufactories, mercenary soldiers, foreigners holding annuities or loan securities, and cities with large foreign populations. To secure their situation while ensuring revenue for the state, the droit d'aubaine was transformed into a specific tax on foreigners: in exchange for a 5% tax on the value of the deceased's property, the king waived the droit d'aubaine for nationals of Geneva (1608), Holland (1685), England (1739), Denmark (1742), Naples, Spain and other possessions of the European Bourbons (1762), the Grand Duchy of Tuscany (1768), and the Duchy of Parma (1769).

The implications of droit d'aubaine was not always clear cut. While foreign residents were in theory at risk of restraint from the king's officers or agents, this was not always a realistic threat. Equally there would be examples of régnicoles who would have faced arbitrary treatment. In practice at least some aubains were able to use diplomacy, or their skills, to skirt around the restrictions that were theoretically in place. Over time, and before the French Revolution, the modern concepts of citizenship and nationality, based more on legal rather than political definitions, became more established in France towards the end of the 17th-century.

The droit d'aubaine was abolished by the National Constituent Assembly during the Revolution. Reinstated in the draft of the Civil Code of 1803, it was definitively abolished in 1819 under the Restoration. The concept of escheat or vacant succession [ fr ] can be considered a distant successor to this droit d'aubaine.

In old French customs, aubaine (French pronunciation: [ obɛn ], windfall) was an originally feudal right regulating the inheritance of goods from a foreigner who died in a country where he was not naturalized. The word is formed from aubain, a foreigner, which Gilles Ménage derived further from the Latin alibi natus ; Jacques Cujas derived from advena ; and du Cange from albanus, a Scot or Irishman, by the reason that these were anciently frequent travelers living abroad.

The opposite of an aubain was a régnicole, someone who died outside the French kingdom but was a royal subject by birth and residence.

In the Ancien Régime, aubaine was a right of the King of France, allowing him to claim the inheritance of all foreigners in his dominions; exclusive of all other lords, and even of any testament the deceased could make. An ambassador, though not naturalized, was not subject to the right of aubaine. The Swiss, Savoyards, Scots, and Portuguese were also exempted from aubaine, as they were considered naturalized. This right applied to every holder of a secular or church fief. It also applied to abandoned children, but the holder of the right was the owner of the place where the child was left, who could thus recoup the costs of the care and education of the child if there were no inheritors.

This right was a major risk for foreign traders at fairs, foreign contractors and workers in manufactures, mercenary soldiers, foreigners with rents or securities, and cities with large foreign populations. To give them security while generating state revenue, the right of aubaine was transformed into a tax on foreigners: for a 5% tax on the value of the property of the deceased, the king waived his right of aubaine for the nationals of Geneva (1608), Holland (1685), England (1739), Denmark (1742), Naples, Spain and other Bourbon lands in Europe (1762), the duchy of Tuscany (1768), and the duchy of Parma (1769).

The right of aubaine was abolished by the French Revolutionary Assembly. Reinstated in the Napoleonic Code of 1803, it was finally abolished in 1819 under the Restoration.

AUKUS (/ ˈ ɔː k ə s / AW -kəs), also styled as Aukus, is a trilateral security partnership between Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States, which have stated that its goals are to "promote a free and open Indo-Pacific that is secure and stable." Initially announced on 15 September 2021, the partnership involves two lines of effort referred to as pillars. Pillar 1 focuses on Australia acquiring nuclear-powered attack submarines and the rotational basing of US and UK nuclear-powered attack submarines in Australia. Pillar 2 entails the collaborative development of advanced capabilities in six technological areas: undersea capabilities, quantum technologies, artificial intelligence and autonomy, advanced cyber, hypersonic and counter-hypersonic capabilities, and electronic warfare ; and in two broader functional areas: innovation and information sharing.

AUKUS is widely seen as a response to the perception among its members that the People's Republic of China poses a threat to the Indo-Pacific region. The Chinese government said, when the partnership was announced, that it risked "severely damaging regional peace" and had a " cold-war mentality ".

A direct result of the creation of the partnership was Australia's controversial cancellation of a French-Australian submarine contract worth € 56 billion (A$ 90 billion). The Australian government only gave the French government a few hours' notice of this before the public announcement of AUKUS. The Australian government agreed to a €555 million (US$ 584 million) compensation settlement with French defence contractor Naval Group.

In 2009, two years after the start of the project to replace the Royal Australian Navy 's conventionally-powered Collins -class submarines, the Australian Defence White Paper stated: "The Government has ruled out nuclear propulsion for these submarines".

In 2016, Prime Minister of Australia Malcolm Turnbull signed a A$50 billion (€31 billion) deal with the majority French government-owned company Naval Group (known as DCNS until 2017) to design a new generation of submarines, known as the Attack class, under the "Future Submarine Program", scheduled to replace the Collins class. The design was based on the latest French nuclear-powered attack submarine, the Barracuda class, which required converting the nuclear propulsion to conventional propulsion. Another difference was that Australia chose to equip it with a United States Navy combat system and torpedo with Lockheed Martin Australia selected to integrate them into the design. Australia typically requires that part of their vessels be built there, which increases the cost. In this case it corresponded to 60 per cent of the contract value, with France handling the technology transfer.

In 2019, Australia signed a strategic partnership agreement with Naval Group to design and construct twelve submarines to be built in Australia. However, the project was beset by delays and cost overruns, leading to uncertainty and tension behind the scenes. The revised cost, including inflation during the length of the program, was A$90 billion (€56 billion).

In February 2021, an initial design plan was rejected as being too expensive, and Naval Group were given until September to improve their proposal. At a Senate inquiry in early June 2021, with delays ongoing, Defence Secretary Greg Moriarty revealed under questioning that he had considered making contingency plans if the French project was to fail, admitting that there had been ongoing problems for over a year. Two weeks later, Australian prime minister Scott Morrison met French president Emmanuel Macron in Paris and expressed concern about the project going off track, to which Macron replied that France was giving "full and complete" commitment and would proceed "further and faster if possible".

On 30 August 2021, the French and Australian defence and foreign affairs ministers released a joint statement reaffirming the project, stating that the "Ministers underlined the importance of the Future Submarine program."

Less than three weeks later, Australia decided to publicly cancel the contract with Naval Group for the Attack class submarines despite having already spent about A$ 2.4 billion on the French project. It was expected that Australia would have to pay hundreds of millions of euros in penalties for cancelling the contract. The contract contained "control gates" with "off-ramps" at which point Australia could withdraw from the contract.

The Australian Department of Defence wrote to Naval Group on the same day the security partnership was announced. The French Ministry of Defence claim the department told them that "they were satisfied with the submarine's achievable performance and with the progress of the program." Naval Group said that Australia "terminated the contract for convenience".

Morrison said that Australia now required a nuclear-powered submarine which has clear advantages of greater endurance, speed, power, stealth and carrying capacity than a conventionally-powered submarine, based on changes in the strategic situation in the Indo-Pacific.

The Sunday Telegraph reported that in March 2021 the Australian navy chief Vice Admiral Michael Noonan met in London with his British counterpart Admiral Tony Radakin and requested assistance from the UK and the US in acquiring nuclear-powered submarines. The Daily Telegraph reported that British Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab "helped broker the deal". The New York Times also reported that Australia first approached the UK for assistance. The Wall Street Journal reported Australia approached the US in April 2021. A trilateral discussion was held between Johnson, Biden and Morrison at the June 2021 G7 summit held in Cornwall, England. The talks took place without the knowledge of the French government or Naval Group. This approach was possible as a result of the UK not entering into a formal foreign policy and security treaty in the post-Brexit deal with the EU. As a result, the UK was free to pursue enhanced cooperation with other allies. Axios reported that the Biden administration sought assurances from Australia that cancelling the contract was not dependent on the US providing them with assistance and that cancelling was a fait accompli. Morrison said Australia had been considering an alternative to the Attack class submarine deal for the past 18 months.

Although the joint announcement by Australian prime minister Scott Morrison, British prime minister Boris Johnson and US president Joe Biden did not mention any other country by name, except France, anonymous White House sources have alleged it is designed to counter the influence of Chinese forces in the Indo-Pacific region. However, Johnson later told parliament that the move was not intended to be "adversarial towards any other power".

United States secretary of state Antony Blinken and United States secretary of defense Lloyd Austin said that Australia did not have any "reciprocal requirements" as a consequence of the US sharing nuclear submarine propulsion technology such as Australia hosting intermediate-range missiles.

Under the partnership, the US and UK will share nuclear propulsion technology with Australia, as they have done with each other since 1958 under the US–UK Mutual Defence Agreement. The Royal Australian Navy (RAN) will acquire at least eight nuclear-powered submarines armed with conventional weapons. The basic design and key technologies will be decided by the Australian Nuclear-Powered Submarine Task Force an 18-month Department of Defence research project headed by Vice Admiral Jonathan Mead, begun in September 2021 with assistance from the US and UK.

Australia will extend the life of its Collins class submarines that the Attack class was due to replace and may consider leasing or buying nuclear-powered submarines from the US or the UK in the interim until the delivery of its future nuclear powered submarines. Also in the interim, Australian Defence Minister Peter Dutton said that Australia will have regular visits by US and UK nuclear-powered submarines. The annual Australia-US Ministerial Consultations (AUSMIN) between the Australian Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Defence and the US Secretaries of State and Defense held in September 2021 endorsed "increasing logistics and sustainment capabilities of US surface and subsurface vessels in Australia."

Australia considered purchasing French nuclear submarines which use nuclear reactors fuelled by low-enriched uranium at less than 6%. However, French reactor designs have to be refuelled every ten years, and Australia does not have a civil nuclear capability with nuclear energy prohibited. In contrast, American and British designs power the submarines for the expected life of the submarines using nuclear reactors fuelled by highly enriched uranium (HEU) at 93% enrichment.

Currently, six countries have nuclear submarines, the five permanent members of the UN Security Council (China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States) and India. The New York Times reported that Australia will probably buy HEU from the US for the nuclear reactor that powers the submarine. The United States' naval reactors are all pressurized water reactors (PWR). The latest UK propulsion system is the Rolls-Royce PWR3 that will power the Royal Navy 's (RN) new Dreadnought -class submarines currently being built and is "based on a US design but using UK reactor technology".

US officials have said that sharing nuclear propulsion technology with Australia is a "one-off" and that they have no "intention of extending this to other countries". South Korea, also a US treaty ally, has had ambitions to acquire nuclear-powered submarines since 2017 and was reportedly refused US assistance in September 2020 because of nuclear non-proliferation.

On 22 November 2021, Australia, the US and the UK signed the Exchange of Naval Nuclear Propulsion Information Agreement (ENNPIA) treaty. The treaty permits the disclosure of information by the US and the UK to Australia and its use. The US is restricted by the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 from sharing information without an agreement and the UK is also restricted by the 1958 US-UK Mutual Defence Agreement unless authorised. The treaty was considered in Australia by the Parliament 's Joint Standing Committee on Treaties, in the UK by the Parliament and in the US by Congress. The ENNPIA treaty entered into force on 8 February 2022.

On 31 August 2022, the UK announced that Australian submariners would receive training aboard Astute -class submarines.

On 13 March 2023, AUKUS announced that a new nuclear powered submarine class would be built in the UK and Australia to be called the SSN-AUKUS, also known as the SSN-A. The US intends to sell Australia three nuclear-powered Virginia class submarines, subject to congressional approval, to ensure there is no capability gap as the Collins class submarines are retired, with the potential to sell up to two more if needed. RAN personnel are embedded in the RN and USN to receive nuclear training and at UK and US submarine industrial bases. The Submarine Rotational Force-West initiative which will from as early as 2027 base USN Virginia class and RN Astute class submarines on a rotational basis at the RAN's HMAS Stirling submarine base in order to accelerate Australia's ability to operate nuclear-powered submarines and to contribute to security in the Indo-Pacific region.

The SSN-AUKUS class will based on the UK SSNR design already under development. The RN is planned to receive its first SSN-AUKUS class submarine as early as the late 2030s. The RAN is planned to receive their first submarine in the early 2040s. Australia will reportedly build five SSN-AUKUS submarines. The RAN is planned to receive their first Virginia class submarine from the US in the early 2030s.

The Australian Submarine Agency was established on 1 July 2023. It has the role of managing the Australian nuclear submarine program, and includes personnel posted to the UK and US.

In November 2023, Capt. Lincoln Reifsteck USN, the USN's AUKUS integration and acquisition program manager, talked at the Naval Submarine League's annual symposium. He said that, in 2032 and 2035, the US will sell to Australia in-service Block IV Virginia class submarines, the first of which was commissioned in 2020, and the final will likely commission around 2026. Thus, Australia would receive submarines with between six and 15 years' worth of use, out of their designed service life of 33 years. He also said that the US would sell a new Block VII boat to Australia in 2038, the Block VIIs being the original Virginia class length without the Virginia Payload Module, set to begin construction in FY2029.

In August 2024, Australian prime minister Anthony Albanese, made undisclosed "political commitments" with its AUKUS partners in an agreement for the transfer of naval nuclear technology to Australia, sparking concerns about the potential for high-level radioactive waste to be stored in the country. The White House confirmed that Australia, the UK, and the US reached a significant milestone in their cooperation, essential for Australia's future nuclear-powered submarine capabilities. Despite assurances from the government, critics, including the Greens, warned of possible loopholes that could lead to uranium enrichment and radioactive waste management in Australia.

On 1 June 2025, the UK government announced that it will build up to twelve SSN-AUKUS submarines to replace the Royal Navy 's seven Astute- class attack submarines from the late 2030s. The announcement also said that there will be a major expansion of industrial capability at BAE Systems Submarines at Barrow and at Rolls-Royce Submarines at Derby, with a new boat scheduled to be built every eighteen months. On 26 July 2025, the UK and Australian governments signed the Geelong Treaty, a 50-year bilateral defence agreement to facilitate bilateral cooperation on the construction of Australia's SSN-AUKUS submarines.

By November 2025, 10% of USN attack submarine crews were Australian, with 170 qualified or training RAN officers and sailors. On 30 May 2026, at an AUKUS Defence Minister's Meeting held in Singapore it was announced that the third Virginia- class boat that Australia is planned to receive will now be an in-service Block IV boat the same as the first two. This will simplify fleet training and maintenance for Australia and save them significant costs.

AUKUS Pillar 2 encompasses a wide array of activities (including many commonly referred to by the US Department of Defense as international armaments cooperation). There may include information and personnel exchange, cooperative research, development, testing, and evaluation, and joint production. In contrast to Pillar 1 activities, which will take decades to deliver results, Pillar 2 is likely to produce more immediate capability improvements.

Undersea capabilities, in the context of AUKUS, refer to systems and technologies that operate underwater but are not crewed submarines. Pillar 2 activities in this area include the “AUKUS Maritime Autonomy Experimentation and Exercise Series,” which the three governments have described as “a series of integrated trilateral experiments and exercises aimed at enhancing capability development, improving interoperability, and increasing the sophistication and scale of autonomous systems in the maritime domain.” The AUKUS governments are also working on the ability to deploy and recover UUVs (Uncrewed Underwater Vehicles) from crewed submarines (sometimes referred to as “launch and recovery”), conducting activities to develop and improve “the ability to launch and recover undersea vehicles from torpedo tubes on current classes of submarines to deliver effects such as strike and intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance.” In November 2023, the United States Department of Defense announced that the AUKUS partners had participated in a joint exercise to demonstrate and improve capabilities relating to the protection of underwater infrastructure and the use of autonomous and semiautonomous undersea systems.

The Defence Minister's meeting on 30 May 2026 announced that the first signature project of Pillar 2 would be cutting-edge sensors, payloads and weapons systems for UUVs with delivery to commence in 2027.

As part of the Quantum Technologies working group, the AUKUS nations have established the AUKUS Quantum Arrangement (AQuA), an initiative to coordinate U.S., British, and Australian RDT&E efforts concerning quantum technologies. Initial AQuA efforts were expected to focus on developing alternate solutions for position, navigation, and timing (similar to current Global Positioning System capability) through trials and experimentation through 2025. Additionally, the AUKUS governments announced in December 2023 that they were “accelerating the development of quantum technologies for positioning, navigation, and timing in military capabilities,” with a particular focus on improving “resilience for our trilateral forces in Global Positioning System-degraded environments and enhance stealth in the undersea domain.”

The announcement of AUKUS included the stated aim of improving "joint capabilities and interoperability. These initial efforts will focus on cyber capabilities, artificial intelligence, quantum technologies, and additional undersea capabilities." Tom Tugendhat, chair of the British Commons' Foreign Affairs Committee, later commented on Twitter that "Bringing together the military-industrial complex of these three allies together is a step-change in the relationship. We've always been interoperable, but this aims at much more. From artificial intelligence to advanced technology the US, UK and Australia will now be able to cost save by increasing platform sharing and innovation costs. Particularly for the smaller two, that's game-changing." Engineering & Technology pointed to the increasing expansion of Chinese technology firms such as Huawei, which has been excluded from tendering for participation in telecommunications networks by the US and Australia on national security grounds, and government vetoes over the attempted Chinese acquisition of American company Lattice Semiconductor and ongoing British consideration of proposed takeovers of local semiconductor firms. Engineering & Technology also pointed to the March 2021 statement of the US National Security Commission on AI, of the imperative to intensify local efforts but also "rally our closest allies and partners to defend and compete in the coming era of AI-accelerated competition and conflict".

Under the partnership, the three countries will cooperate to accelerate development of hypersonic missiles and defence against such missiles. Hypersonic and counter-hypersonic cooperation was one of four additional areas of cooperation announced on 5 April 2022. Australia and the US have been cooperating on the development of hypersonic missiles since 2020 after signing an agreement to "flight test full-size prototype hypersonic cruise missiles" under the Southern Cross Integrated Flight Research Experiment (SCIFiRE).

The AUKUS partners have announced they will “pursue opportunities in Long Range Fires under AUKUS Pillar II in 2024,” and have also announced the establishment of a Deep Space Advanced Radar Capability (DARC) program to constantly track, detect, and identify objects in deep space from up to 22,000 miles away from Earth (the first will be built in Western Australia and is expected to be operational by 2026, with the radars based in the UK and the US aimed to be completed by 2030). In addition, the U.S., British, and Australian governments have established a number of initiatives designed to support Pillar 2 efforts as a whole, such as the AUKUS Advanced Capabilities Industry Forum and the AUKUS Defense Investors Network.

Since the announcement of "Pillar II" of AUKUS, there has been persistent speculation that Japan will eventually join the partnership; American Ambassador to Japan Rahm Emanuel wrote that Japan was "about to become the first additional Pillar II partner" in The Wall Street Journal on 3 April 2024. On 7 April 2024, the Financial Times reported that AUKUS defence ministers will announce on 8 April 2024 that they will launch talks related to the expansion of Pillar II of the alliance. While many officials in the US government advocate the inclusion of Japan in AUKUS, notably Deputy Secretary of State Kurt Campbell, there has been push back for months from the UK and Australia partly in order to focus on ironing out existing complications in AUKUS, however primarily over concerns that Japan lacks the security systems required to protect highly sensitive information.

In September 2024, the leaders of Australia, the UK and the US issued a joint statement announcing that AUKUS partners and Japan were exploring opportunities to improve interoperability of their maritime autonomous systems as an initial area of cooperation.

New Zealand has agreed to officially explore the potential benefits of joining Pillar 2. In March 2023, New Zealand's defence minister Andrew Little said New Zealand had been offered the opportunity to discuss joining AUKUS for the non-submarine co-operation areas. New Zealand has indicated it was "willing to explore" the proposal. In July 2023, US Secretary of State Antony Blinken told New Zealand reporters that the “door is open” for New Zealand, as well as other countries, to join the security partnership. In December 2023, following the formation of a new government, Prime Minister Christopher Luxon said that New Zealand was open to joining the non-nuclear pillar of the AUKUS agreement during a state visit to Australia.

In February 2024, Australia agreed to brief New Zealand on Pillar 2 developments following a joint bilateral meeting between Australian and New Zealand foreign and defence ministers in Melbourne. Australian Defence Minister Richard Marles confirmed that Australia would send officials to brief their New Zealand counterparts on Pillar 2. The four ministers also issued a joint statement expressing concerns about human rights violations in Xinjiang, Tibet and Hong Kong. In response to the joint Australian-NZ bilateral meeting, the Chinese Embassy in Wellington issued a statement deploring critical statements about China's internal affairs and describing AUKUS as "counter to the letter and spirit of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime". On 12 February, the New Zealand Labour Party also reversed its previous support for the Pillar Two component of AUKUS, with associate foreign spokesperson Phil Twyford describing AUKUS as an "offensive warfighting alliance against China." Similar sentiments were echoed by former Labour Prime Minister Helen Clark, who expressed concern that the National-led coalition government was shifting New Zealand foreign policy away from a bipartisan nuclear free policy and getting the country drawn into geopolitical games.

In September 2024, the leaders of Australia, the UK and the US issued a joint statement announcing that they were consulting with Canada, New Zealand, and South Korea to identify possibilities for collaboration on advanced capabilities under AUKUS Pillar II.

The following non-participating nations were also subject to media speculation about potentially joining:

The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty allows non-nuclear-weapon states to produce the highly enriched uranium for naval reactor fuel. Nevertheless, the agreement to transfer US or UK nuclear submarine technology including possibly highly enriched uranium has been described as an act of nuclear proliferation, and has been criticised by scholars and politicians. In the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, scholar Sébastien Philippe criticised AUKUS and wrote "we can now expect the proliferation of very sensitive military nuclear technology in the coming years, with literally tons of new nuclear materials under loose or no international safeguards". James M. Acton of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace wrote that "the nonproliferation implications of the AUKUS submarine deal are both negative and serious. For Australia to operate nuclear-powered submarines, it will have to become the first non-nuclear-weapon state to exercise a loophole that allows it to remove nuclear material from the inspection system of the International Atomic Energy Agency. I have no real concerns that Australia will misuse this material itself, but I am concerned that this removal will set a damaging precedent. In the future, would-be proliferators could use naval reactor programs as cover for the development of nuclear weapons."

Australia and Brazil would be the first countries without nuclear weapons to have nuclear-powered submarines. Concerns were raised that this may lead to increased risk of arms proliferation if other countries follow the same approach because it would involve other countries enriching uranium for naval reactors, potentially creating more avenues to develop material needed for nuclear weapons without the safeguards provided by regular inspections.

The federal opposition leader at the time, Anthony Albanese, of the Australian Labor Party, said that his party would support nuclear submarines as long as there was no requirement to have a domestic civil nuclear industry, no possession of nuclear weapons and that the deal is consistent with Australia's responsibilities under the nuclear non-proliferation treaty. Former Labor prime minister Paul Keating condemned the deal, saying "This arrangement would witness a further dramatic loss of Australian sovereignty, as material dependency on the United States robbed Australia of any freedom or choice in any engagement Australia may deem appropriate". Former Labor prime minister Kevin Rudd warned against overly obtrusive criticism of China and recommended that Australia focus on quietly improving military capability.

Former Liberal prime minister Malcolm Turnbull, who had signed the original deal for the Attack class submarines called the decision to scrap the deal "an appalling episode in Australia's international affairs and the consequences of it will endure to our disadvantage for a very long time". He called the actions of his successor as deceitful and that it would damage Australia as foreign nations would no longer be able to trust Australia.

Former Liberal prime minister Tony Abbott called the move "the biggest decision that any Australian government has made in decades" as "it indicates that we are going to stand shoulder to shoulder with the United States and the United Kingdom in meeting the great strategic challenge of our time, which obviously, is China". Abbott said that Australia would be safer as a result, and cited China's increasing naval firepower as a justification for the deal.

The Australian defence minister at the time, Peter Dutton, responded by saying that Australia wanted peace and stability and "an opportunity for Indonesia, Vietnam and Sri Lanka and Korea to continue to develop". Dutton further dismissed "outbursts from China" and said that Australia was a "proud democracy" committed to "enduring peace and this collaboration makes it a safer region... no amount of propaganda can dismiss the facts".

Australian Greens leader Adam Bandt criticised the deal, saying that it escalates tensions in the region and "makes Australia less safe".

Prime Minister at the time, Boris Johnson, said that the deal would create "hundreds of high-skilled jobs" and "preserve security and stability around the world" but said that the relationship with France was "rock solid". Conservative MP Tom Tugendhat said: "After years of bullying and trade hostility, and watching regional neighbours like the Philippines see encroachment into their waters, Australia didn't have a choice, and nor did the US or UK [to make the deal]". Former prime minister Theresa May questioned whether the UK would be forced into a war with China should Taiwan be invaded.

Johnson responded to French anger on 21 September by saying "I just think it's time for some of our dearest friends around the world to prenez un grip about this and donnez-moi un break"; the latter being broken French for "get a grip and give me a break". He made further reference to the deal in his speech at the Conservative Party Conference the next month, touting it as "a supreme example of global Britain in action, of something daring and brilliant that would simply would not have happened if we'd remained in the EU", whilst acknowledging "a certain raucous squawkus from the anti-AUKUS caucus."

Foreign Secretary at the time, Liz Truss viewed AUKUS as the beginning of a "Network of Liberty", and also stated "On security we are striking new pacts to protect our sea routes, trade routes and freedoms", adding that "We are in talks with Japan about better military access and operational support between our two countries [and] we want closer security ties with key allies like India and Canada in everything from fighting cyber to traditional defence capability".

In 2026, the Defence Select Committee inquiry on AUKUS found that the political leadership of the programme had faded and that the UK commitment to Astute -class submarine visits to Australia had placed severe pressure on the overstretched Royal Navy. Responsibility for AUKUS had been transferred from the Cabinet Office to the Ministry of Defence, though the view that Prime Ministerial leadership would be important to maintaining the political impetus to deliver AUKUS was reported. The MOD had forecast that the UK nuclear workforce (defence plus civil) will need to increase by 40,000 by 2030 to support AUKUS and the wider demands on the Defence Nuclear Enterprise. To 2026, the UK government had committed £16 billion to developing AUKUS: long lead components for SSN-AUKUS, BAE and Rolls-Royce plant upgrades, and the Rolls-Royce nuclear reactors for submarines. It noted that trilateral progress on advanced technology under Pillar 2 had been inadequate and was losing credibility.

President Joe Biden stated that the deal was a way to "address both the current strategic environment in the (Indo-Pacific) region and how it may evolve". After a call between the French and US presidents, the White House acknowledged the crisis could have been averted if there had been open consultations between allies. It was agreed the process would continue in such manner.

In June 2025, the United States Department of Defense launched a review to inform whether to modify or cancel the AUKUS agreement with Australia and the United Kingdom, after a push by the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, Elbridge Colby.

On 12 April 2022, Sankei Shimbun reported that the United States, United Kingdom, and Australia were inquiring about Japan's participation in the security framework of AUKUS. The newspaper added that the aim of said negotiations was related to the incorporation of Japanese hypersonic weapon development and the strengthening of electronic warfare capabilities. Prior to this, in November 2021, former prime minister Shinzo Abe in a virtual address to the Sydney Dialogue, welcomed the creation of AUKUS in the midst of an increasingly severe security environment, and called for greater Japan-AUKUS cooperation and integration concerning artificial intelligence and cyberwarfare capabilities. The US denied inviting Japan into the security alliance, with Jen Psaki stating that Sankei Shimbun's report was "inaccurate". This was followed by another denial from Hirokazu Matsuno, the Japanese chief cabinet secretary. On 10 December 2022, Australia's Minister for Defence announced their desire for Japan to join the partnership.

On 14 March 2023, Japanese prime minister Kishida Fumio expressed his support for Australia's planned acquisition of US-made nuclear-powered submarines under the AUKUS partnership.

The French government received official notification from Australia that the Attack class submarine project was to be cancelled only a few hours before it was publicly announced. Le Monde reported that the original cost of the project in 2016 was €35 billion of which €8 billion (A$12 billion) was to go to French companies. The project was reportedly going to employ 4,000 people in France over six years at Naval Group and its 200 subcontractors. The French government was angered by both the cancellation of the Attack class submarine project and not being made aware of the negotiations that led to the AUKUS agreement. In a joint statement, French foreign minister Jean-Yves Le Drian and armed forces minister Florence Parly expressed disappointment at Australia's decision to abandon their joint submarine program with France.

On 31 October 2021, at the G20 summit in Rome, Macron was asked whether he thought that PM Morrison lied about the French submarine contract, to which Macron responded "I don't think, I know". The French Ambassador also criticised Morrison on the basis that he lied about the former contract.

Le Drian further stated in a radio interview that the contract termination was a "stab in the back". On 17 September, France recalled its ambassadors from Australia and the US, Jean-Pierre Thébault and Philippe Étienne respectively. Despite tension in the past, France had never before withdrawn its ambassador to the United States. In a statement, Le Drian said that the "exceptional decision is justified by the exceptional gravity of the [AUKUS] announcements" and that the snap cancellation of the submarine contract "constitute[d] unacceptable behaviour between allies and partners". French president Emmanuel Macron has not commented but is reported to have been "furious" about the turn of events. In response to questions about the Australia-EU trade deal currently being negotiated, French secretary of state for European affairs Clément Beaune stated that he doesn't see how France can trust Australia. Arnaud Danjean, a French MEP, said that "Australians can expect more than a delay in concluding the Free Trade Agreement with the EU". French Lowy Institute policy analyst Hervé Lemahieu said the diplomatic damage from the cancellation will take years to repair and leave a lasting legacy of mistrust". After a call between the French and US presidents, the French ambassador returned to the US on 30 September.

Beaune described the United Kingdom as a junior partner and vassal of the United States due to the partnership, saying in an interview: "Our British friends explained to us they were leaving the EU to create Global Britain. We can see that this is a return into the American lap and a form of accepted vassalisation." Le Drian stated that "We have recalled our ambassadors to [Canberra and Washington] to re-evaluate the situation. With Britain, there is no need. We know their constant opportunism. So there is no need to bring our ambassador back to explain." A Franco-British defence summit was cancelled.

Some opposition politicians in France, such as Xavier Bertrand, Jordan Bardella, and Fabien Roussel, criticised the French government and demanded that France leave NATO, with Christian Jacob as well as demanding a parliamentary inquiry.

A foreign ministers meeting between France, Germany, the UK, and the US had been postponed, and a ministerial meeting between Australia, France, and India was cancelled. France however, contacted India to talk about strengthening their cooperation in the Indo-Pacific. France's foreign commerce minister declined a meeting with his Australian counterpart.

French president Macron said that Europe needs to stop being naïve when it comes to defending its interests and build its own military capacity.

Following the ousting of Scott Morrison's government after the 2022 Australian federal election, the new Labor government led by Prime Minister Anthony Albanese agreed to a €555 million (US$584 million) settlement with French defence contractor Naval Group. In response, French defence minister Lecornu said that France aims to rebuild its relationship with Australia. In addition, Albanese announced plans to travel to France to reset bilateral relations between the two countries.

The exclusion of France from AUKUS has been conceptualised within the longue durée of the fractious relationship between France and the Anglosphere, potentially reducing scope for coordination in the Indo-Pacific in the short term.

The People's Republic of China (PRC)'s foreign affairs department spokesperson Zhao Lijian said, "The nuclear submarine cooperation between the US, the UK, and Australia has seriously undermined regional peace and stability, intensified the arms race and undermined international non-proliferation efforts". Zhao also said "The three countries should discard the Cold War zero-sum mentality and narrow geopolitical perspective". Spokesperson Hua Chunying said "China is firmly opposed to the US, the UK and Australia's malicious exploitation of loopholes in the Nuclear non-proliferation treaty and the International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards mechanism".

The Chinese Communist Party -owned tabloid Global Times, which is known for being more aggressive than official government statements, denounced Australia and said it had "turned itself into an adversary of China" and warned that Australia could be targeted by China as a warning to other countries if it acted "with bravado " in alliance with the US, or by being "militarily assertive". It further told Australia to avoid "provocation" or else China would "certainly punish it with no mercy", and concluded "Thus, Australian troops are also most likely to be the first batch of western soldiers to waste their lives in the South China Sea".

A Chinese Communist Party official, Victor Gao — former interpreter for Deng Xiaoping and vice president of a Beijing think tank, the Center for China and Globalization — considered the move to be a violation of international law and warned that Australia's moves towards nuclear-powered submarines would lead to the country "being targeted with nuclear weapons", in a future nuclear war.

The PRC ambassador to France Lu Shaye urged the new alliance to fulfill their nuclear non proliferation obligations and said Asia-Pacific needs jobs, not submarines, and urged France to boost cooperation.

President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen told CNN that "one of our member states has been treated in a way that is not acceptable.... We want to know what happened and why." The EU also demanded an apology from Australia. President of the European Council Charles Michel denounced a "lack of transparency and loyalty" by the US. The EU said the crisis affects the whole union.

Preparations for a new EU-US trade and technology council between the US and EU were postponed. France eventually dropped their opposition to these talks which took place in Pittsburgh on 29 September 2021. France also attempted to delay the free trade talks between the EU and Australia. Apparently "most of Europe felt that transatlantic ties were too important to sacrifice to French pique"; such as the pro-free trade Northern Europe countries, as well as Eastern European nations that prioritize security ties with Washington, who "resented the French attempt to impose its indignation on the rest of the bloc". Key advocates for the TTC talks included EU's digital chief Margrethe Vestager, who favors open markets, and EU trade chief Valdis Dombrovskis from Latvia, who views the US alliance and NATO as a vital counterweight to Russia and China. Lithuanian deputy European Affairs Minister Arnoldas Prankevicius proclaimed "What is important is to keep trans-Atlantic unity, because we believe this is our biggest strength and biggest value, especially vis-à-vis such countries as Russia and China".

The history of autism in France has been shaped by the influence of psychoanalysis and institutionalization practices that have often violated the rights of autistic individuals. As of 2016, it was estimated that 0.7 to 1% of the French population has an autism spectrum disorder, with many cases undiagnosed, leading to varying degrees of disability.

Before medical and intervention efforts, autistic individuals were often marginalized and subjected to mistreatment. The first steps toward addressing autism in France began in the 1950s, with Professor Roger Misès establishing day hospitals and creating the French classification of mental disorders in children. Interest in autism increased after the publication of Bruno Bettelheim 's The Empty Fortress (1967). In the 1990s, the government, under Simone Veil, began to take action, and by the early 2000s, parents' associations began challenging the psychiatric approach that viewed autism as a mental illness tied to poor parenting. These efforts led to autism being recognized as a disability and the introduction of new policies, including four "Autism Plans" in the 2000s. These plans aimed to improve school enrollment and employment opportunities for autistic individuals, and autism is now recognized as a spectrum disorder.

The treatment of autism in France has been marked by debates over intervention methods. These debates often center on differing views between supporters of behavioral approaches and those who maintain psychoanalytic perspectives. Additionally, specific practices, such as using the term "autistic" as an insult and the overmedication of individuals with neuroleptics, have been sources of social exclusion and suffering. Recent research advocates for focusing on the unique interests of people with autism to foster a more inclusive society.

According to sociologist Lise Demailly, autism in France is marked by intense debates and conflicts, often leading to legal disputes. She highlights the range of ideological, ethical, and practical disagreements surrounding the issue.

The field of autism in France is characterized by a variety of approaches, influenced by psychoanalysis. However, in places like Quebec, where psychoanalysis is not used, parents also express dissatisfaction with the services available. The scientific discourse on autism is now global, with much of the research coming from neurobiologists and geneticists, often in English.

While French psychiatrists and psychoanalysts face growing criticism and diminishing influence with public authorities, they continue to produce intellectual work outside mainstream scientific journals. Demailly notes that there is no single, widely accepted scientific definition of autism or understanding of its causes. Despite this, there is general agreement on the description of autism symptoms, though tensions persist. The representation of autistic people in France remains limited, with the neurodiversity movement arriving relatively late.

In France, autism is described as a lifelong neurodevelopmental disorder, with three main factors: genetics, brain development and behavior. It is characterized by communication difficulties, repetitive behaviors, strong resistance to change, and obsessive interests or activities. There may also be sensory sensitivities. Autistic individuals may experience additional conditions like epilepsy, hyperactivity, or sleep and eating disorders.

The French Ministry of Solidarity and Health has moved away from sub-categories of autism and now uses the term Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), which reflects the varying development of individuals within society.

According to Franck Ramus of the French National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS), autism involves differences in three areas: social interaction, communication, and preferred interests or activities. These differences can lead to challenges in adapting to family and social life, causing difficulties for both the individuals and those around them.

Cognitive psychiatrist Laurent Mottron notes that while most autistic people struggle with societal adaptation, a small group, around 10%, can be verbal, relatively independent, and successful in adulthood. However, others may remain non-verbal or experience behaviors that are harder to manage.

The cause of autism is considered multifactorial, with a significant genetic component. Research has identified genetic mutations that affect communication between neurons. Claims that autism is caused by psychological factors, such as parental traits, or even gluten, vaccines, or mercury, are not supported by scientific evidence.

Some critics, like journalist Gerald Messadié, argue that psychoanalysis has contributed to the incorrect belief that autism is purely psychological. In France, the term "child psychosis" has often been linked to psychodynamic explanations of autism. However, many researchers and professionals, including psychiatrists and psychoanalysts, have suggested various psychological models to understand autism, though these views are not universally accepted.

The French Classification of Mental Disorders in Children and Adolescents (CFTMEA) includes subcategories for autism, such as deficit psychosis and psychotic dysharmonia, which are not found in international classifications like the ICD-10 and DSM-5. Other forms of autism, such as infantile autism and Asperger's syndrome, are recognized in both the CFTMEA and international classifications. The recognition of autism in France has been delayed by limited research and debates within the field.

Pervasive developmental disorders – early psychoses

The use of the term " psychosis " to describe autism was criticized in the early 2000s. Some professionals, like Claude Wacjman, argue that the CFTMEA's use of "psychosis" helps align French practices with international systems, improving service coordination. However, other professionals, including Jean-Claude Maleval and Claude Wacjman, oppose broader international concepts of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), seeing them as too inclusive or commercialized. Some experts, like Jacques Hochmann, suggest the term "autism spectrum" may eventually be replaced by "autism."

The classification of autism in France has been inconsistent, initially seen as a mental health condition and now classified as a disability. This has made it challenging to develop clear policies. Some critics, including Josef Schovanec, highlight the issues with classifying autistic individuals as mental health patients, leading to unwanted psychiatric treatments. Despite this, autism is officially recognized as a disability, with varying degrees of impact on an individual’s ability to function in society, from significant challenges to minimal limitations.

Reference data were collected in 2010 by epidemiologist Éric Fombonne for the Haute Autorité de santé report on knowledge of autism:

The prevalence of autism in France is estimated at around 1% of the population, or approximately 700,000 people, with 100,000 of them under 20 years old. The male-to-female ratio is about 4:1. Estimates vary, with some reports suggesting between 250,000 and 600,000 autistic individuals in the country. However, there is a significant under-diagnosis, and some studies show a lower prevalence in France compared to other countries.

The prevalence of autism in France has been debated, with estimates ranging from 4 to 5 per 10,000 births for typical autism, and 12 per 10,000 for all pervasive developmental disorders. The figures include various forms of autism, including atypical forms, deficit psychoses, and other related conditions. Some experts believe the increase in diagnoses may be due to improved detection rather than a true rise in cases.

Experts also note that the number of people with autism is difficult to determine, as many individuals remain undiagnosed. Some estimates suggest there are between 450,000 and 650,000 people with autism in France, based on international diagnostic criteria. A survey of 900 French people with autism showed that 55% had infantile autism, 23.5% had an unspecified pervasive developmental disorder, and 16.6% had Asperger syndrome.

According to a survey of 900 French people with autism conducted by Doctissimo and the FondaMental Institute and published in March 2013, 55% of respondents have infantile autism, 23.5% have an unspecified pervasive developmental disorder and 16.6% have Asperger syndrome.

France, along with Latin America, is one of the regions where psychoanalysts have historically included infantile autism in their explanations of the condition, especially after the 1970s and 1980s. Psychoanalytic practices continue to influence psychiatric approaches to autism in the country. The deinstitutionalization process in France started later than in other countries, with a high rate of institutionalization for children with autism compared to the rest of Europe. Additionally, there has been significant opposition between parent associations and health professionals regarding the treatment of autism.

In the 2010s, French parent associations, initially focused on securing institutional care and funding, began advocating for changes in the way autistic children were treated and educated. Sociologists note that these efforts were partly driven by public authorities to push forward deinstitutionalization, although this led to concerns among health professionals about the availability of resources for vulnerable families. Over the years, the classification of autism has evolved from being seen as a rare and severe disorder to a broader spectrum of related conditions, affecting around 1% of the population. Since the 1990s, autism has increasingly been viewed as a social issue, with significant legal developments, although resistance to change remains.

Before the concept of autism was defined, individuals with the condition were often marginalized and described as "idiots", "crazy" or "wild children." One example is Victor de l'Aveyron, a child found in 1801 who exhibited behaviors now associated with autism. Dr. Jean Itard, who cared for him, also described a form of non-verbal autism in 1828, calling it intellectual mutism. In the 19th and early 20th centuries, many medical professionals viewed these individuals as suffering from hereditary degeneration, influenced by eugenic theories. Itard and Édouard Séguin were among the first to study and describe individuals who may have had autism.

The first formal descriptions of autism and Asperger's syndrome appeared in the 1940s in international scientific literature. During the German occupation of France, autistic individuals were likely among those who died in psychiatric hospitals due to starvation and harsh conditions.

Until the 1980s, autism in France was primarily understood as infantile autism, or Kanner autism, and was categorized with psychoses or schizophrenia. Additionally, until the 1990s, autism was rarely diagnosed, as it was believed that individuals could not be considered autistic if they spoke. The publication of The Empty Fortress in 1967 brought attention to autism and influenced public perception, particularly with the idea of the autistic child as a "machine child". The 1974 television program by Daniel Karlin and conferences by Bettelheim also popularized his views on autism, including the controversial "mother refrigerator" theory.

In France, autism was long equated with childhood schizophrenia, and it wasn't until the 1980s that the distinction between the two was made. The team at Tours hospital, led by psychiatrist Gilbert Lelord, neurologist Catherine Barthélémy, and child psychiatrist Dominique Sauvage, became pioneers in autism research and support. However, autism did not receive significant attention from French public authorities until the 1990s.

According to Jacques Hochmann, French psychoanalysts were among the first to approach autistic children with humanity. From the 1950s onward, inspired by practices in the United States and the United Kingdom, psychiatrists and psychoanalysts like Roger Misès and Serge Lebovici introduced care, education, and pedagogy for autistic children in France. These efforts led to the creation of part-time institutions, day hospitals, and outpatient care to support communication and social relationships. The creation of the Santos-Dumont day hospital in Paris in 1963, by the Association Serving Misfits with Personality Disorders (ASITP), marked a significant step in this approach. By the 1970s, these methods spread throughout France. French child psychiatry supported an environmental cause for autism, incorporating it into a broader multifactorial approach and developing care structures in line with a "sector" policy. These structures, meant for children with serious personality disorders, offered a combination of psychological, educational, pedagogical, and rehabilitative care.

However, depending on the severity of their disorders, individuals with autism were often referred to psychiatric hospitals or medical-social institutes. The approaches in these institutions were sometimes deemed insufficient due to limited resources and a focus on "care" over education. In 1989, the Creton amendment allowed disabled adults over 20 to remain in medico-social institutes, typically for those with high dependency or multiple disabilities.

In the 1980s, French parents learned about behavioral therapies for autistic children from North America and sought to introduce them in France. This interest was driven by the guilt associated with psychoanalytic theories of autism and the desire to actively engage in their children's education. In 1989, psychiatrist Catherine Milcent translated Eric Schopler 's work into French and established the first French class integrated with the TEACCH program in Meudon. In the 1990s, dedicated units for autistic individuals were created, offering behavioral programs like TEACCH and ABA. However, these programs were limited in number and faced skepticism from the medico-social sector. Despite this, the introduction of these programs led to a shift in how autism was approached, with health professionals adopting a more multidisciplinary approach and becoming more open to the Anglo-Saxon model.

In 1993, Simone Veil, newly appointed to the Ministry of Social Affairs, Health, and Urban Affairs, acknowledged significant challenges in supporting autistic individuals, following pressure from parents' associations. Three reports were published in 1994 and 1995 addressing these issues. At the time, autism was defined by the National Agency for the Development of Medical Evaluation (ANDEM) as involving delays or deviations in social interactions, verbal and non-verbal communication, and behaviors, often accompanied by fears, sleep and eating disorders, and aggression. In April 1995, the Veil circular was introduced, with a budget of 100 million francs over five years, but it was not implemented due to budget cuts. Between 1995 and 2000, four specialized centers and 2,000 childcare spaces were created, but the 1999 UNAPEI report deemed these measures insufficient, citing diagnostic errors and inadequate care facilities.

In 1995, disagreements between health professionals and parent associations intensified. The issue of social exclusion was raised before the Council of Europe, noting that only 3 to 7% of autistic individuals achieve independence as adults. The Autisme France association appealed to the National Consultative Ethics Committee (CCNE) in 1994, highlighting difficulties in early diagnosis, the use of outdated classifications, and psychoanalytically influenced treatments. The CCNE issued Opinion No. 47 in January 1996, which helped foster collaboration between parent associations and public authorities to improve autism care.

The special education allowance (AES), established under the 1975 law for parents of disabled children, was initially not extended to parents of autistic children, as autism was considered a disease. On 11 December 1996, the "Chossy law" was passed, introduced by Jean-François Chossy, to ensure multidisciplinary interventions for autistic individuals and to officially recognize autism as a disability. This law, adopted unanimously, was the first in France aimed at supporting the rights of autistic people and helped reduce the stigma of considering autism a psychiatric illness.

In January 2000, a new funding allocation was approved to create more places for autistic people between 2001 and 2003. During this period, many French families moved to Wallonia, Belgium, due to the availability of educational centers, while others sought training in countries that offered behavioral methods to improve their children's future prospects.

In 2000, the concept of pervasive developmental disorder and Asperger syndrome was introduced into the French classification of autism. This change was met with resistance from many French psychiatrists, who still viewed autism as a rare and severe condition.

The 2002 law on user representation aimed to encourage the participation of autistic individuals in public decision-making about their care.

In October 2003, Jean-François Chossy submitted a report on the situation of autistic people in France, highlighting insufficient support for many individuals. The report called for a comprehensive plan to address early diagnosis, research, lifelong support, training for professionals, and better integration in society. It rejected the divide between "psychodynamic" and "educational" approaches, advocating for care that meets individual needs with a multi-year plan and adequate financial support. The report was strongly influenced by the positions of Autism France.

In 2003, lawyer Évelyne Friedel, then president of Autism France, brought the issue of lack of education access for autistic children to the Court of Justice of the European Union. The court ruled in November 2003 that this was a violation, leading to France’s first European conviction for discrimination in 2004. The Autism Europe Association supported the case, noting not only the lack of educational access but also the limited availability of specialized education and a narrower definition of autism than the World Health Organization 's.

In 2004, the French Federation of Psychiatry and the High Authority for Health developed recommendations for early diagnosis. Following the European ruling, France introduced four successive autism plans between 2005 and 2022 (2005–2007, 2008–2010, 2013–2017, and 2018–2022) to address the growing number of diagnoses and the general lack of awareness among both the public and medical professionals.

The 2005 Disability Act aimed to ensure equal rights and opportunities for people with autism, marking France's first major step toward securing the schooling of children with autism. However, some critics, like Claude Wacjman, argued that the law’s definition of psychological disability may reinforce stigma by implying that there is no hope for improvement. On the other hand, Marcel Hérault, president of Sésame Autisme, supported linking autism to the field of disability, viewing it as a condition affecting individuals at a given moment, while also acknowledging the role of psychiatry in autism care.

As a result of the first European condemnation of France, the first Autism Plan was introduced in 2005. It led to the creation of Autism Resource Centers (CRA) in each French region and focused on improving professional training and increasing the availability of specialized care. The plan also recommended more inclusive schooling for autistic children, with better support for parents, families, and teachers.

In November 2007, the Comité Consultatif National d'Éthique (CCNE) issued a critical report based on feedback from five parent associations. The report highlighted the lack of support for autistic individuals and the distress faced by families.

It criticized the absence of early diagnosis, mainstream schooling, and socialization, which it claimed led to missed opportunities for children and neglect. The CCNE called for earlier diagnoses, individualized education, and access to effective educational methods, such as cognitive-behavioral programs. It also recommended the use of medication for severe symptoms and psychological support for families. The CCNE report criticized the harmful impact of the " refrigerator mothers " theory and called for more reliable, early diagnoses and better educational support for children. The report also acknowledged the emerging role of psychoanalysts in multidisciplinary care, though it emphasized the need for approaches based on educational methods.

The CCNE's views on psychoanalysis were met with criticism from some professionals, including psychoanalyst Boris Chaffel and child psychiatrist Anne-Sylvie Pelloux, who argued that the report oversimplified the history of psychoanalytic theories and overlooked valuable work in the field.

The second Autism Plan was launched in May 2008 by Valérie Létard. Over two years, the plan aimed to create 4,100 spaces in institutions for autistic children and adults. The High Authority for Health was tasked with developing a scientific and multidisciplinary knowledge base on autism, while the National Agency for the Evaluation and Quality of Establishments and Social and Medico-Social Services (Anesm) was responsible for defining best practices. This base was published in January 2010.

The plan also financed seven experimental intervention projects and aimed to improve access to diagnosis and support. In February 2010, the Committee of Ministers adopted a recommendation on the deinstitutionalization of disabled children, emphasizing the importance of respecting children's rights. At the end of 2011, Valérie Létard reported that while some objectives were not fully met, 70% of the planned spaces had been created, and 25,000 autistic children were enrolled in school.

In 2012, autism was declared an important national priority under Prime Minister François Fillon. The year saw various awareness campaigns and media coverage, particularly following the release of the documentary Le Mur. In January, MP Daniel Fasquelle proposed a law aimed at ending psychoanalytic practices in autism treatment, promoting the use of educational and behavioral methods, and reallocating funding for these approaches.

In March, the High Authority for Health recommended certain educational and behavioral approaches, such as the ABA method, Early Start Denver Model, and the TEACCH program, noting their effectiveness in improving IQ, communication skills, and language development in about 50% of children. The report did not recommend certain methods like the Son-Rise program, the 3i method, and others, and excluded psychoanalysis and institutional psychotherapy, citing a lack of evidence for their effectiveness. It also opposed practices like "packing" except in research contexts.

The report sparked controversy, with proponents of cognitive-behavioral therapies calling for the ban of psychoanalysis, while psychoanalysts criticized the methodology and argued that the report failed to capture the complexity of autism. Some medical professionals expressed concerns about the approach used to develop the recommendations, claiming that the focus on cognitive-behavioral methods was not well-supported and did not provide enough guidance for families and healthcare providers.

The third Autism Plan, announced on 2 May 2013 by Marie-Arlette Carlotti, included measures to improve early diagnosis, support for families, and the creation of 700 specialized teaching places in nursery schools to help autistic children integrate into primary schools. The plan, with a budget of 205 million euros, focused on early diagnosis, childhood support, family assistance, research, and training for professionals. An official website was launched to provide reliable information.

In February 2014, the Council of Europe concluded that the rights of autistic children to schooling and professional training were not being fully respected in France. The report also noted that specialized institutions lacked an educational focus.

In 2016, Ségolène Neuville recommended educational methods for autism and opposed blaming mothers. Later that year, Daniel Fasquelle proposed a resolution to promote care based on official recommendations, but it was rejected.

By 2014-2015, the number of autistic children in school increased to 26,347 from 23,545 the previous year. However, a report from the General Inspectorate highlighted weaknesses in epidemiology, involvement of health professionals, and regional managements. Despite progress in school integration and screening, the support available, particularly for adults, remained insufficient.

During the 2016 national disability conference, François Hollande announced the preparation of the fourth Autism Plan, set to run from 2018 to 2022. Josef Schovanec was tasked with developing a plan focused on the training, integration, and professional activity of autistic adults. The report, submitted in March 2017, recommended reviewing budgets to improve care. In 2017, a commission of international scientists was assembled to define good intervention practices. The fourth plan, called the "autism strategy," included autism within broader disability policies and emphasized better access to medical and educational services. Recommendations for adults were published by the High Authority for Health (HAS) in June 2017. The consultation was officially launched on 6 July 2017, with President Emmanuel Macron delivering a speech.

On 1 January 2019, a key measure of the plan, the early intervention package, was implemented. In February 2019, the UN released a report on disability in France, highlighting issues such as institutionalization, under-representation of autistic individuals in decision-making, and violations of their human rights.

At the start of the 21st century, France began aligning more with international classifications of autism spectrum disorders (DSM-5 and ICD-10), broadening the definition of autism, which was previously referred to by terms like "child psychoses" and Asperger's syndrome. While efforts to improve diagnosis have reduced the average age of diagnosis, many parents still experience delays. Signs of autism are typically noticed between 2 and 3 years old, but the first attempt to seek help often does not lead to follow-up care, causing further delays. As of 2013, the average age of diagnosis was around 5.5 years, still later than the recommended age. A quarter of children are diagnosed four years after the first signs, and 10% after eight years.

Reliable screening can start as early as 18 months using tools like the M-CHAT test. More accurate diagnoses can be made with tests like ADOS and ADI-R. Asperger syndrome, a form of autism, is often harder to diagnose due to subtle symptoms and no language delay, which can lead to delayed diagnoses and support. Some individuals with Asperger's syndrome may not receive support, and reluctance from health professionals to diagnose autism or Asperger's has contributed to these delays.

In France, autism interventions and expertise are primarily viewed as part of the medical field. The level of support for autistic individuals varies based on factors like social background, financial resources, and location. Wealthier families may have access to private resources, while others, particularly those with highly intensive support needs, may face challenges in finding adequate support. Research indicates that children from disadvantaged backgrounds, especially immigrants, are more likely to use child psychiatry services, though autism affects all social groups. Autistic individuals have rights, including dignity, privacy, freedom of movement, access to care, and participation in society.

Psychological support in France is available but often influenced by psychoanalytic approaches. These treatments focus on improving relationships and reducing anxiety, rather than traditional psychoanalytic methods.

There are 26 Autism Resource Centers (CRAs) in France that provide support but do not make diagnoses. These centers work with medical teams to offer guidance.

Disability organizations, such as departmental centers (MDPH), help with administrative tasks, and medico-social services (SAMSAH) assist with social and professional reintegration.

Despite efforts, there remains some discomfort in associating autism with disability, with a perceived disconnect between autism-focused and disability advocacy groups.

A 2016 IFOP survey found that 79% of French people believe autistic individuals face discrimination. Common misconceptions about autism include ideas of violence, unpredictability, and insensitivity. French society struggles with accepting people who do not fit social norms, and negative views often stem from past associations with severe communication and social challenges.

Josef Schovanec 's report highlights the challenges autistic people face, such as exclusion, limited opportunities, and difficulties accessing medical care, especially in adulthood. Many also experience social and psychological struggles. Schovanec emphasizes that social development is more influenced by the environment than the severity of autism.

The economic crisis is thought to increase rejection of those seen as "different," adding financial and social burdens for autistic individuals and their families. Autistic people also face higher suicide rates, with studies showing a rate nine times higher than the general population, and difficulties with driving and housing depending on their independence.

The issue of deinstitutionalization remains debated. While those in institutions may have their basic needs met, individuals outside institutions can face precarious situations, especially if they are seen as autonomous but lack support.

In France, the term "autistic" is often used as an insult, reinforcing negative stereotypes about autism. It is commonly associated with being strange or unsociable, though this does not reflect the reality of autism.

A 2016 survey found that 72% of French people were surprised by the use of "autistic" as an insult, with younger people more likely to use it in this way. This shift in meaning has occurred alongside increased public representation of autism, which often reinforces negative images.

Autism is sometimes linked to psychiatric or psychological conditions in the public mind, contributing to its use as an insult. The term has been used in various media and political contexts in a derogatory manner, leading to public debate and raising awareness of the issue, though these discussions often lack a clear understanding of autism.

The High Authority for Health recommends using the term "autistic person" instead of other phrases like "person with autism" or "autistic" as shorthand.

In France, the issue of schooling for autistic individuals has gained attention in recent years, with a focus on care over education until the 1980s. The inclusion of autistic students in mainstream schools started in the 2000s, following the 2005 disability law.

While the rate of inclusion in regular classrooms has increased, it remains low, with around 20% of autistic children attending mainstream schools as of 2012. Many are placed in special classes or units with limited time in general education. In 2014, nursery school units for autistic children were created, but the enrollment rate for autistic children in France is still lower than in other Western countries.

Challenges such as inadequate teacher training, lack of individualized support, and limited access to education for children with severe autism continue. Many parents provide care themselves due to a lack of school or childcare options. Despite some improvement, France has faced criticism from the Council of Europe for discrimination against autistic children and inadequate access to education.

The employment situation for autistic individuals in France remains difficult, with efforts still in early stages. There is a lack of statistical data, as many autistic adults are undiagnosed. Some views, particularly from the anti-psychiatry movement, have contributed to exclusion from employment, viewing work as harmful. Employment opportunities have traditionally been limited to medical-professional institutes, which often do not address the needs of autistic people. There's also a misconception that only those with severe autism cannot work, despite no evidence linking disability severity to job skills. Some companies are now seeking "Asperger profiles," while others note that many autistic people prefer more private work settings. Suggested fields for employment include translation, mechanics, IT, and arts and crafts.

Surveys show general support for the inclusion of autistic people in the workforce, but the number of autistic adults employed in regular jobs remains low, with many excluded, particularly those with invisible disabilities.

Several research units and researchers in France have contributed to the study of autism. A key team at the CHRU of Tours, including Gilbert Lelord and Catherine Barthélémy, established the first research unit dedicated to autism at INSERM in 1988. The team also includes child psychiatrists such as Dominique Sauvage and Frédérique Bonnet-Brilhault, who were involved in developing exchange and development therapy.

In neuroscience, Marion Leboyer and Bernadette Rogé have made significant contributions, with Rogé receiving the Legion of Honor in 2012 for her work. Thomas Bourgeron's team discovered the first monogenic mutation linked to autism in 2007. Other notable researchers include Éric Lemonnier and Laurent Mottron, who opposed psychoanalytic approaches to autism, and Franck Ramus, a more recent contributor to autism research.

Psychoanalysts like Françoise Dolto, who believed autism was caused by negative relationships with the mother, have been associated with early views on autism, though some argue these ideas led to misunderstandings. Maud Mannoni and Serge Lebovici also promoted psychoanalytic perspectives on autism. Other researchers, such as Bernard Golse and Pierre Delion, focused on child development and therapy, while Jacques Hochmann and Henri Rey-Flaud explored the history and conceptualization of autism in France. Researchers like Marie-Dominique Amy, Marie-Christine Laznik, and Jean-Claude Maleval have examined autism through psychoanalytic and Lacanian lenses, focusing on communication, development, and socialization.

In France, there are many associations for parents of autistic children and/or autistic individuals, including those diagnosed with Asperger's syndrome. Most national associations have their headquarters in Paris, while several quality regional associations are also active across the country.

In France, associations focused on autism were largely created by parents in response to institutional shortcomings and poor relationships with health professionals. These associations began playing a larger role in public decision-making in the 2000s, helping to shape the approach to autism, including changes in diagnoses, interventions, and public perceptions. They have generally pushed for broader diagnostic criteria and have emphasized a neurological understanding of autism, although some families remain underrepresented. These groups often focus on neuroscience research and are typically led by middle or upper-class parents who utilize legal, media, and other resources.

The first parent association for children with disabilities, including those with autism, was established in 1962. In the 1980s, several new associations were formed, including AIDERA, Autisme Île-de-France, and others. These associations were involved in promoting different treatment approaches, such as cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), which led to disagreements with psychoanalysts and the eventual formation of opposing groups like Autisme France and Sésame Autisme. These two associations played a key role in the debate over autism treatment in France.

In 1991, Autisme France became a major association in the field, focusing on challenging psychiatry-psychoanalysis and organizing scientific events and political discussions. Other associations like Vaincre Autisme, the Autism Foundation, and SOS Autisme France are also active in France. Several associations, including Asperger Aide France and Sésame Autisme, are part of the "Autism Collective," which represents around 30,000 families affected by autism. These groups also manage establishments and play roles as employers in the field.

In the early 2000s, there was no organization representing autistic people in France, leading to the creation of SATEDI, the first French-speaking association focused on self-representation for autistic individuals. The Autistic Alliance, founded in 2014 by Eric Lucas, is an association of autistic people opposed to the "defectological" view of autism and advocates for the rights of autistic individuals in line with international conventions.

A National Consultative Committee of Autistic People of France (CCNAF) was also established to represent people with disabilities in accordance with the UN convention. In 2016, the French-speaking Association of Autistic Women was created.

Since the 2000s, autistic individuals have organized online discussions and events, including "Asperger cafés" and regional associations like Asperger Amitié and Asperger Lorraine. Josef Schovanec has recommended specific discussion forums for people affected by autism, including those by the Asperansa and SATEDI associations.

Health professionals became involved in autism-related associations as well. The Association for Research on Autism and the Prevention of Maladaptations (ARAPI) was founded in 1983, featuring equal representation from both parents and health professionals. In 2004, psychoanalysts Geneviève Haag and Marie-Dominique Amy founded the International Coordination for Psychotherapists and Psychoanalysts Working with Autistic Individuals, called CIPPA.

The word "autism" was largely unknown in French media until the 1990s. In 1974, a program by Daniel Karlin on the ORTF introduced of Bruno Bettelheim 's orthogenic school and his theory of The Empty Fortress, influencing the perception of autism in France, particularly among psychoanalysts. This sparked controversy over the role of parents, especially mothers, in the development of autism. Further controversies arose in 1988 when the TEACCH method was introduced to the public. Since then, media coverage of autism has increasingly focused on criticisms of French psychiatry, especially from parent associations, particularly since 2012. Changes in the definition of autism and its increased prevalence have led to more media attention. However, Josef Schovanec notes a "bilateral misunderstanding" between the autism community and the media, with some French associations feeling negative about this coverage. Stories about mistreatment in establishments are frequently reported, and public perception of autism remains poor, as seen when the media quickly linked an American mass killer to autism in 2012.

In 2016, a special program on autism on France 2 attracted more than 3 million viewers, achieving the second-best audience score of the evening among French television channels.

The Sésame Autisme association co-produced the documentary La vie en miettes, which aired on France 2 in 1994. In 2008, Sandrine Bonnaire directed Elle s'appelle Sabine, a documentary about her sister, Sabine, who had been institutionalized since her late 20s. The film portrays Sabine's love for English, geography, and music before her hospitalization.

In 2011, the documentary Le Mur by Sophie Robert sparked a controversy regarding the treatment of autism in France. The film highlighted the difference between the views of psychoanalysts and scientific knowledge on autism. The psychoanalysts featured in the film filed a complaint, leading to a two-year censorship, which was later overturned by the courts in 2013.

Sophie Révil's 2012 documentary Le Cerveau d'Hugo tells the fictional story of Hugo, an autistic person, from childhood to adulthood, combining real-life testimonies. The film explores the evolving understanding of autism. In 2012, American activist Alex Plank released a documentary Shameful, addressing the situation of autistic people in France. In 2016, Julie Bertuccelli 's Dernières Nouvelles du cosmos focused on Babouillec, a non-verbal autistic poet.

Fiction films have also explored autism. Le Goût des merveilles, features an autistic man with hypersensitivity and talents in mathematics, inspired by the lives of figures like Daniel Tammet and Temple Grandin. Monsieur je-sais-tout (2018) tells the story of an autistic footballer. Hors normes (2019) focuses on the work of educators with autistic children and adolescents, adapted from the novel by Alain Gillot, The Repair Surface (Flammarion, 2015).

Several autistic individuals and activists have contributed to the movement for the rights of autistic people through writing and speaking engagements. Hugo Horiot, author of The Emperor, It's Me, received the Patient Words Prize in 2013, and ran for the 2017 French presidential election to advocate for neurodiversity. He is critical of psychoanalysis, considering it "harmful".

Josef Schovanec, a polyglot and researcher, was a spokesperson for autistic people during the 2012 National Cause Year. He also published his first book, Je suis à l'Est!, reflecting on his life and experiences as an autistic person. He advocates for the benefits of travel for autistic individuals:

Travel, like medicines in physical form, should be reimbursed by Social Security. I think in particular of all the autistic people, who have committed no crime, and yet spend their lives in closed establishments. What walls could contain their cries? What chemical straitjacket is the scandal?

— Josef Schovanec, In praise of travel for autistic people and those who are not autistic enough.

Julie Dachez, a social science researcher and YouTuber, has written a comic strip about her life with Asperger syndrome and published In Your Bubble: Autistic People Have the Floor, combining personal and activist perspectives. In 2020, a graphic novel partially based on her experiences as an autistic woman was released in English as Invisible Differences. Émilien Hamel, a baritone singer and composer, founded an ensemble of autistic and non-autistic musicians.

Several French parents have also been active in advocating for autism rights. Danièle Langloys (Autisme France) and M'Hammed Sajidi (Vaincre l'autisme) are among them. In 2000, Annie Beaufils, a mother of an autistic child, protested forced placements in institutions through a hunger strike. Paul and Chantal Tréhin, parents of artist Gilles Tréhin, campaigned against psychoanalysis and encouraged other parents to join autism associations.

Media personalities have shared their experiences as well. Francis and Gersende Perrin wrote Louis, Pas à Pas, about raising their autistic son and advocating for the ABA method. Olivia Cattan, president of SOS Autisme France, supports CBT and discusses the challenges faced by families affected by autism in her autobiography. Television host Églantine Éméyé, in contrast, defends the practice of packing in her autobiography The Toothbrush Thief, based on her son's positive experiences.

Autism in France is a subject of ongoing controversy. Travel writer Adam Feinstein, in his 2010 book A History of Autism: Conversations with the Pioneers, noted that France "remains retrograde" in its approach to autism, with many individuals diagnosed with autism being placed in psychiatric hospitals.

Disciplinary rivalries, competition between theories and approaches, and differing methods of intervention contribute to these controversies. These conflicts are often seen as more harmful than helpful, delaying progress in public policies related to autism. Jacques Hochmann criticizes what he sees as a "communitarianism in the battle of autism ", pointing to the tension between parent associations and autistic individuals' activism. Josef Schovanec observes that concerns about communitarianism in autism are more prominent in France than in Anglo-Saxon countries, where such concerns are less common.

There is a notable gap between international scientific knowledge on autism and the practices in France, according to Catherine Barthélémy and Frédérique Bonnet-Brilhault (2012). Many institutions serving autistic children continue to use outdated or unproven theories. A 2017 audit found that only 14% of these institutions follow current scientific recommendations, with some presenting autism as an infantile psychosis. Additionally, the focus on autism as a medical condition rather than a disability persists, despite the 2005 law. Training in early detection remains insufficient, and wait times for diagnoses can be long. Rural areas, in particular, face challenges in raising awareness and providing accurate diagnoses.

A 2010 survey by the Autism Collective found that 90% of French people were unaware of autism's prevalence, and a significant number of general practitioners lacked knowledge of the condition. In 2016, a survey showed that most people underestimated the number of people affected by autism. The lack of specialized training and understanding of autistic people's needs remains a major issue.

Josef Schovanec highlights the misconception that autistic people are mentally disordered and the persistent association of autism with childhood. He stresses the importance of improving the dissemination of accurate knowledge and best practices.

According to Feinstein (2010), some French professionals still believe that parents are responsible for their children's autism. This belief, rooted in the refrigerator mother theory, has caused significant distress for both parents and children, who were often seen as uneducable. This view has contributed to the ongoing tension between parent associations and health professionals. Brigitte Chamak mentions that many parents have shared stories of mistreatment, including being blamed for their child's condition and facing a lack of proper support or educational interventions. Some psychiatrists have even denied autism diagnoses or special education assistance, contrary to disability laws. Chamak also notes that psychodynamic approaches often focus on parent-child relationships and can lead to judgments about parents' abilities. When treatments fail, the blame is frequently placed on the parents or children rather than the therapies themselves.

Olivia Cattan emphasizes the challenges faced by parents, particularly single-parent or middle-class families, who often have to abandon careers to care for their children due to a lack of available care services. Wealthier families may move to countries with better care, while poorer families face increased social inequality due to inadequate resources.

According to a government report by Christel Prado (2012), interventions for autism in France have been the subject of ongoing debates between proponents of psychoanalysis and those advocating for educational approaches. This has created challenges for autistic individuals and their families.

Many parents and researchers oppose the use of psychoanalysis in treating autism. They criticize its continued influence in France, particularly through the legacy of figures like Bruno Bettelheim. Experts like Fred R. Volkmar have expressed surprise at the persistence of psychoanalytic approaches, which they see as outdated compared to practices in other countries. Some argue that psychoanalysis in France is maintained due to the influence of authoritative figures and intellectual circles.

Sociologist Cécile Méadel observed in 2006 that psychoanalytic views on autism were still widely used, sparking strong reactions from parents. Brigitte Chamak's study of French child psychiatric services in 2009 found that psychoanalytic theories were still prominent in the training of psychiatrists, though many parents rejected the idea that they were responsible for their child's autism. These psychoanalytic approaches were often seen as pessimistic regarding the potential for improvement in autistic children.

A review of French literature on autism, conducted from 1989 to 2014, revealed a dominance of psychoanalytic and psychiatric perspectives. However, experts like Laurent Mottron have criticized these outdated approaches, acknowledging that France's methods were out of step with global standards. Chamak further emphasized that the situation in France is complex and cannot be solely attributed to psychoanalysis, as it also involves issues like insufficient specialized services.

Some child psychoanalyst, like Maria Rhode, argue that it's a misconception that all psychoanalysts blame parents for autism. Claude Wacjman suggests that educational and therapeutic approaches can be complementary, and that psychoanalysis can include educational elements if properly integrated.

Packing, also known as wet wrapping, involves wrapping an autistic person in cold, damp cloths, which are gradually warmed. This technique is primarily used in France, despite being abandoned in most other countries due to a scientific consensus against it. Some French professionals, like Professor Pierre Delion, believe it can be beneficial for treating autistic and psychotic children. However, critics, including M'hammed Sajidi, point out contradictions, noting that children undergoing packing are often also medicated. Parent associations strongly oppose the practice, calling it harmful.

International bodies, including the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC), have recommended banning the technique, considering it a form of ill-treatment. In response, French authorities, including Ségolène Neuville, called for public institutions to stop using packing in 2016. A bill to ban the practice and its teaching was proposed in May 2016.

Cognitive-behavioral therapies (CBT) are controversial in France. Some studies suggest CBT can help reduce issues like anxiety and anger in people with autism, which led to recommendations for its use. However, some critics argue that France's strong push away from psychoanalytic approaches has led to an uncritical acceptance of behavioral therapies, with little public questioning of their effectiveness.

Psychoanalysts like Pierre Delion and Yannick Pinard criticize the dominance of behavioral methods, calling it an over-simplification and a political decision influenced by external pressures. They argue that these therapies focus too much on behavior without considering the unique cognitive and emotional aspects of autistic individuals.

Reports from parent associations and organizations highlight concerns about the cost and potential mistreatment in centers using CBT, with some even citing dysfunctions in specific centers. These concerns have received limited media coverage.

The placement of autistic children is a sensitive issue in France. Some parents report that child welfare services often request the separation of autistic children from their families. Parents' associations have criticized this practice, claiming that autism is sometimes confused with abuse, leading to unjust placements. This issue was highlighted by the Committee on the Rights of the Child in 2016, which called for better protection for autistic children and their families in these situations.

In 2015, the Rachel Affair [ fr ], involving the placement of the three children of a divorced mother on the grounds of Münchhausen syndrome by proxy and parental alienation syndrome, was heavily publicized by parents associations of autistic children.

In 2007, around 3,500 French autistic children were placed in medical and educational institutions in Belgium due to a shortage of appropriate facilities in France. This practice has continued in recent years, with some parents sending their children to Belgium or Switzerland for education, often covered by social security. Some parents believe that the care available in these countries is better than in France.

The associations Vaincre l'Autisme and SOS Autisme France have highlighted concerns about mistreatment in care facilities. In 2014, the Autism Collective estimated that 43.8% of French autistic individuals have experienced mistreatment in such establishments. Issues reported include excessive medication to manage staff, and cases of physical restraint or poor living conditions. These problems are often attributed to a lack of staff and the inexperience of nursing assistants.

The children's rights committee, along with autistic individuals such as Josef Schovanec and Stefany Bonnot-Briey, have raised concerns about overmedication by some psychiatrists. Schovanec highlights that certain young people, particularly men, are prescribed multiple neuroleptics at once, which can be debilitating and harmful in the long term. This practice is sometimes seen as aiming to reduce disturbances rather than promoting the individual’s development.

The Autorité de Régulation des Activités Ferroviaires is a French government agency which regulates rail transport.

ARAF was officially founded in December 2010, but there was considerable informal work before that date. The headquarters is in Le Mans. and Pierre Cardo was appointed as its first president. ARAF is funded by a levy on track access fees paid to RFF. The president of ARAF is Pierre Cardo.

Much of ARAF's early work involves Réseau Ferré de France and track access. A key part of its role is to encourage competition in rail transport, following the Second Railway Package and Third Railway Package.

In May 2013, the French government announced plans to reform SNCF Infra and RFF and create a single national infrastructure operator; this may lead to ARAF taking a bigger role in ensuring equal access for other train operators.

The Autorité de Régulation des Communications Électroniques, des Postes et de la Distribution de la Presse (ARCEP or Arcep) is the French regulatory authority in charge of regulating telecommunications, postal services and print media distribution in France. It can be compared somewhat with the United States' Federal Communications Commission (FCC), though regulation of the radio spectrum falls to the Agence nationale des fréquences (fr : ANFR), and regulation of audiovisual and digital communication falls to the Autorité de régulation de la communication audiovisuelle et numérique (fr : Arcom) since the merger on 1 January 2022 of the former Conseil supérieur de l'audiovisuel (fr : CSA) and the former Haute Autorité pour la diffusion des œuvres et la protection des droits sur internet (fr : Hadopi). The ARCEP has its head office in 14 rue Gerty Archimède in Bercy, Paris, France.

ARCEP or Arcep is France 's "Electronic Communications, Postal and Print media distribution Regulatory Authority".

It was created on 5 January 1997, and originally called the "Telecoms Regulatory Authority" (officially in French: Autorité de Régulation des Télécommunication or ART).

It was later extended to also regulate postal services on 21 May 2005 when it was renamed the "Electronic Communications and Postal Services Authority" (officially in French: Autorité de Régulation des Communications Électroniques et des Postes or ARCEP). The French authority was modelled for national authorities regulating these sectors in several French-speaking African countries (Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad, Gabon, Niger, and Togo), adopting the same name and acronym with a similar statutory extension of their missions, and following common terminologies in cooperation with France's authority.

Finally, the regulation of print media distribution (in the press sector) was added on 18 October 2019, when it took its current name (keeping its acronym), overtaking the missions of two other former authorities, the "Print Media Distribution Authority" (officially in French: Autorité de régulation de la distribution de la presse or ARDP) and of the former "Higher Council of Press Messenging Services" (officially in French: Conseil supérieur des messageries de presse or CSMP).

Arcep is managed by a college of seven members (5 members until 2005). Three of them, including the president, are appointed by the President of the Republic, on the proposal of the Prime Minister; two members are appointed by the President of the National Assembly and the last two by the President of the Senate.

Members of the college are not dismissable, their six-year term is not renewable and their function is incompatible with any other professional activity, national mandate or public employment. They are also subject to asset declaration and interest declaration obligations.

In Europ, Arcep is member of BEREC (Body of European Regulators of Electronics Communications).

Arcep has the status of Independent Administrative Authority (IAA). This is the principal legal form that the legislator has most often chosen to build regulatory authorities.

The Autorité des marchés financiers (AMF ; English : "Financial Markets Authority") is the securities commission in France. The AMF is an independent public body that is responsible for safeguarding investments in financial instruments and in all other savings and investments, as well as maintaining orderly financial markets.

Whereas it is governed under a national framework of accountability, the AMF increasingly implements policies set at the European Union level. It is a voting member of the Board of Supervisors of the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA). It is also a member of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB).

France's first securities commission, the Commission des Opérations de Bourse [ fr ] (COB, lit. ' Exchange Transactions Commission '), was established in 1967 as part of the financial reform package promoted by Finance Minister Michel Debré. Its successive presidents included André Postel-Vinay [ fr ] (1973-1974), Jean Donnedieu de Vabres [ fr ] (1974-1980), Bernard Tricot [ fr ] (1980-1984), Yves Le Portz (1984-1988), Jean Farge [ fr ] (1988-1989), Jean Saint-Geours [ fr ] (1989-1995), and finally Michel Prada (1995-2003).

In 2003, the COB merged with the Conseil des Marchés Financiers (CMF, lit. ' Financial Markets Council ') and the Conseil de Discipline de la Gestion Financière (CDGF, lit. ' Council for Conduct in Asset Management ') to form the AMF.

The AMF was established by the Financial Security Act of 1 August 2003, as an independent public body with legal personality and financial autonomy, with the duty of:

It falls under the European regulatory umbrella of the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID).

Shareholders are required to notify their holdings to the AMF when their stake exceeds or falls below certain thresholds. According to the act of 26 July 2005, the lowest disclosure threshold is 5% (article l. 233-7 of the commercial code). Pursuant, the same article allows that companies can set additional notification thresholds in their articles of association. In July 2012, after Jacques Delmas-Marsalet took on the interim presidency of the AMF, the competent parliamentary committees gave the green light to the appointment of Gérard Rameix as head of the AMF, replacing Jean-Pierre Jouyet. He was appointed Chairman of the AMF by a decree dated August 1.

The successive chairs (French : Président) of the AMF have been:

The role of chief executive officer, referred to as Secretary-General (French : secrétaire général), has been held successively by:

Auvergnat (/ ˌ oʊ v ɛ r n ˈ j ɑː / ; French pronunciation: [ ovɛʁɲa ]) or Occitan auvergnat (endonym : auvernhat) is a northern dialect of Occitan spoken in central and southern France, in particular in the former administrative region of Auvergne.

Currently, research shows that there is not really a true Auvergnat dialect but rather a vast northern Occitan linguistic area. The word "Auvergnat" is above all a local historiographical creation. According to linguist Jean Roux, "It is by simplification that we use this term, because in no case Auvergnat can be considered as an autonomous linguistic entity".

With around 80,000 speakers in the Auvergne region at the beginning of the 21st century, it is considered to be severely endangered.

Auvergnat falls under the following categories and subcategories: Indo-European, Italic, Romance, Italo-Western, Gallo-Iberian, Gallo-Romance, Occitan.

Several troubadours were from the Auvergne, including Castelloza, Dalfi d'Alvernhe, the Monje de Montaudon, the Vesques de Clarmon, Peire d'Alvernhe, Peire Rogier and Pons de Capduelh. They did not, however, compose in the Auvergnat dialect, but in the standard literary register of Old Occitan.

Official documents in Auvergnat become common around 1340 and continue to be found down to 1540, when the transition to French was complete. The high point for the use of Auvergnat as an official language was between 1380 and 1480. There is a passion play, Passion d'Auvergne, first performed in Montferrand in 1477, that is written mainly in French but which contains an Auvergnat section of 66 lines. Auvergnat had been replaced by French in official usage in the Montferrand already in 1388. French had also supplanted Auvergnat as the language of the upper classes, but it remained the language of rural communities.

The effective borders of Auvergnat do not completely coincide with those of the current Region of Auvergne or the historical region of Auvergne but can be described as follows:

There are strong oppositions between Pierre Bonnaud (for whom the Auvergnat is a language of its own, see the light orange line on the map – note it is including the easternmost part of the Marchois dialect) and for instance Roger Teulat.

Light blue area labelled fr is for French-Langue d'Oïl. Light purple area labelled frp is for Francoprovençal.

These are not characteristic of Auvergnat as a whole but allow for defining a boundary:

Note that most Occitanists use rather 7 than 8 to define the southern boundary.

Note some of the definition boundaries allow defining an internal variation. The most traditional one between Lower or Northern Auvergnat and Upper or Southern Auvergnat is the mutation of s before [k], [p], and [t] (line 9). Lower Auvergnat, defined by Teulat, is the light green area labelled 1 on the map. Upper Auvergnat, defined by Teulat, is the light brown-yellow area labelled 2 on the map. A broader area (light yellow) is generally defined. A Northwestern Auvergnat may be defined as well by 5 and 6. The Northeastern (East of 5 and 6, North of 9) has, according to Bonnaud, a stronger influence from French phonetics (a bit like Marchois).

Auvergnat is most often categorized in the Northern Occitan dialect group, along with Limousin and Vivaro-Alpine.

There are two primary distinctions in Auvergnat:

The suggestion that Auvergnat is an independent language, distinct from Occitan, has found little resonance with linguists, especially Romance linguists. It is strongly defended by those who espouse the norme bonnaudienne a standardization of Auvergnat.

An understanding of the vitality and overall usage of Auvergnat can be garnered from a survey carried out in 2006 in the Auvergne region.

The largest group of the two languages spoken in the Auvergne region is referred to as patois (78% of the population) compared with other regional terms, with certain cultural identities emerging, such as auvergnat (10%), occitan (8%), bourbonnais (5%) or langue d'oc (4%).

The regional language, whether Occitan (in the whole of the Auvergne region) or Oïl (the north of Allier), represents a strong presence in the region:

A large part of the population that understands or speaks even a little or, moreover, fluently, neither know how to write nor read in that language.

Language learning is found to be essential within the home, according to the survey, (grandparents noted as 61%, or other family members at 50%) with a very weak result from the schools (10%). Herein is found the problem of language-transmission when dependent upon State sponsorship. 40% of adults who did not teach their language to their children report regretting it at the time of the survey. This feeling is reported more strongly among the 35 or less demographic, at 58%. The desire to learn the local language is reported strongly, with increasing representation among the young, reported at 23%. According to the survey the desire to incorporate local language learning in schools is as follows: Haute-Loire (53%), Puy-de-Dôme (51%) et Cantal (74%). The desire to teach to their own children is strong (41%) and is stronger still with the 35 and under demographic (58%). 71% of the region's inhabitants are favorable to the idea of maintaining the regional language and culture, with a stronger result in the 35-and-unders (76%). To achieve this desire, different institutions are expected to play a role (in percentage of those surveyed):

The following are authors who have published in Auvergnat:

Avisa Partners is a French firm involved in lobbying, cybersecurity and copyright, competitive intelligence, and online influence. It was created in 2010 and evolved from predecessors including iStrat and a 2018 merger between Demeter, Lexfo and Avisa.

2022 investigations by Mediapart, Marianne, Fakir [ fr ], Libération, and Le Monde revealed Avisa Partners' activities in publishing ghostwritten articles and intervening in Wikipedia to promote the interests of its clients and to criticise clients' adversaries, giving rise to accusations of information manipulation.

Avisa Partners was created in 2010 by Matthieu Creux and Arnaud Dassier under the name iStrat. It was subsequently rebranded to Demeter Partners, and was reorganised as Avisa Partners in 2018 by a merger between Demeter Partners, cybersecurity firm Lexfo and the Belgian public affairs company Avisa Partners.

Around 2019, Avisa Partners bought the German firm International Dialogue Advisors (IDA) Group, the London firm Gabara Strategies Ltd, and opened an office in Washington, D.C. That same year, Raise Investissement and Rive Croissance acquired a stake of 25% in Avisa Partners, at a valuation of € 130 million.

In 2020, Avisa purchased Compagnie européenne d'intelligence stratégique. In 2021, Avisa bought Observatoire des pays arabes. In November 2021, Avisa purchased 35°Nord, a group involved in providing advice and information for businesses and politicians in relation to Africa. In 2022, Avisa Partners bought Databack, involved in recovering data lost in cyberattacks, and LeakID, involved in tracing illegal streaming of digital media.

Avisa Partners was created in its early format as iStrat by Matthieu Creux and Arnaud Dassier. Olivia Grégoire, a minister of the French government in 2022, was co-leader of iStrat during 2013–2014. Grégoire stated that she had had no responsibility for the content published by iStrat. Libération stated that former iStrat writers disagreed, describing Grégoire as having supervised the creation of articles under fake profiles.

For the 2021 calendar year, Avisa Partners declared € 1,845,000 in lobbying costs to European Union (EU) institutions, with 21 half-time lobbyists employed. Its most costly EU actions in 2021 were for Monaco, Airbus and LVMH on issues including the European Green Deal and the Fit for 55 plan for greenhouse gas emission reduction. Avisa spent US$ 570,000 lobbying in the United States in 2021.

Avisa Partners describes its specialties in which it "claim[s] real expertise: competition, trade, regulatory affairs (e.g. digital and media, energy, environment, telecommunications, financial services and corporate social responsibility), online advocacy and cyber-security".

Avisa Partners is involved, through its components Databack and LeakID, in cybersecurity and copyright. As of 2022, it had been involved in recovering patient data for a hospital in the town of Dax and in protecting the copyright of broadcasting a Champions League competition. The organisation carries out data recovery activities for targets of ransomware.

In mid 2022, from a quarter to half of Avisa Partners' revenue flow was from cybersecurity and copyright-related activities, according to the organisation.

As of 2022, Avisa Partners is involved in organising the Forum international de la cybersécurité, an international conference on the topic of cybersecurity, together with the National Gendarmerie, one of the two national-level French law enforcement agencies.

In addition to cybersecurity, Avisa Partners carries out competitive intelligence. Avisa Partners describes its specialties in which it "claim[s] real expertise: competition, trade, regulatory affairs (e.g. digital and media, energy, environment, telecommunications, financial services and corporate social responsibility), online advocacy and cyber-security".

In January 2015, during takeover bids for Club Med by Fosun International and Andrea Bonomi, Le Journal du Net [ fr ] (JDN) found that a fake personality of a financial analyst, "Marc Fortin", had been created on JDN ' s own site and had analysed and criticised Bonomi's takeover bid. The fake personality had used a Twitter account, profiles on LinkedIn and Google+, a fake management diploma and work record. JDN traced similar fake accounts attacking Bonomi on Les Echos and Mediapart. JDN ' s analysis including tracing the IP address used to create the JDN fake analyst, and accused iStrat, as Avisa Partners was called at the time, and its owners Matthieu Creux and Arnaud Dassier of being responsible. Creux and Dassier denied the claim. JDN listed articles of the French criminal code in relation to the creation of false identities and distributing false information in relation to financial markets. IStrat stated that it would take legal action against anyone propagating "the false claims".

Challenges stated that it too had unwittingly allowed fake personalities to publish critical commentary in relation to the Club Med takeover bids. Challenges interviewed Arnaud Dassier, who stated that neither Fosun International nor its affiliated companies were clients of iStrat, and that he had no opinion on people who published online commentary under faked names.

In June 2022, Julien Fomenta Rosat (a pseudonym) published a description in Fakir [ fr ] of how, starting in 2015, he had ghostwritten 595 articles on economics, energy geopolitics, renewable energy, health advice, glyphosate, and as a legal expert and risk auditor, based on no research or expertise in the subjects, for iStrat known under an alternative name, Maelstrom Media. His ghostwritten articles were mostly published under fake names. Some were signed by politicians or company executives. Pay rates started at € 60 per article and successively increased to € 110 to € 200 per article after a few years. On the topic of glyphosate, Rosat was commissioned to write articles in favour of glyphosate and discrediting the International Agency for Research on Cancer.

IStrat hid its true name and its employees' names from Rosat. Rosat stated that he felt more and more uncomfortable with his ghostwriting. He investigated his employer and found JDN ' s 2015 article on iStrat, and inferred that "MM", to which he addressed the invoices for his ghostwritten articles, was iStrat/Maelstrom Media. Rosat's employer requested him to prepare an article attacking journalist François Ruffin, known for directing the film Merci patron!, critical of the French businessman Bernard Arnault. Rosat cooperated with Fakir [ fr ], founded by Ruffin, letting Fakir ghostwrite the article attacking Ruffin. The article was published under the pseudonym "Kevin, political writer" with a photo from an image bank. Rosat compared an identity number on the invoice for the article with identity numbers on previous articles he had written for iStrat, and inferred that the client ordering the article attacking Ruffin was likely to be Arnault.

Rosat quit his work for iStrat/Maelstrom Media at the end of 2021, when he talked to journalist Sylvain Pak about his ghostwriting for the firm.

Mediapart stated that 634 blog articles by 100 fake author profiles had been published in its user-contributed content by Avisa Partners. The aims of the blogs were to describe Avisa's clients positively or to denigrate opponents.

According to Le Monde, Uber hired iStrat to manipulate public debate in 2014. Uber Files documents show that iStrat published 19 fake articles on 13 websites, including Challenge, Les Echos, Le Journal du Net and Mediapart, during November and December 2014, while a legal case concerning UberPop was being considered by the Tribunal de commerce de Paris.

In July 2022, Avisa Partners was found to have intervened in the online encyclopedia Wikipedia on behalf of the president of the Republic of Congo, Denis Sassou Nguesso and for CAC 40 businesspeople.

According to Marianne, Avisa Partners bought or created three news websites dedicated to fake articles: Monde de l'énergie, Revue Internationale, and Raison d'être.

Clients of Avisa Partners have included the European Commission, the French Ministry of Armed Forces, CAC 40 businesses including LVMH and Société Générale, Kazakhstan, and president of the Republic of the Congo Denis Sassou Nguesso, described by Marianne as a dictator.

Jeune Afrique stated in 2021 that Avisa Partners had regular meetings with the Directorate-General for External Security, France's foreign intelligence agency, for preventing Avisa's actions in Africa from conflicting with those of the French government.

Avize Modern Alpine, or simply Avize, is a restaurant in the West Midtown neighborhood of Atlanta, Georgia. It specializes in Alpine cuisine. It has been named to multiple lists of the best restaurants in the country.

The restaurant is located in Atlanta's West MidTown neighborhood. The menu focuses on the Alpine cuisines of Switzerland, Austria, Italy, Germany, and France. According to Jacinta Howard writing for The Infatuation, dinner "unfolds at a very leisurely pace". The interior is decorated to resemble a mountain lodge with an open kitchen.

The restaurant opened in October of 2024 with Karl Gorline as executive chef and Taurean Philpott as sommelier.

It was included in The New York Times ' s 2025 list of the nation's 50 best restaurants and Bon Appétit’s list of the top 20 best new restaurants of 2025. In 2026 it was named to S.Pellegrino & Acqua Panna's list of North America's 50 Best Restaurants.

Axa S.A. (styled AXA) is a French multinational insurance company whose registered office is in the 8th arrondissement of Paris. It ranks among the largest insurers in the world by revenue and also sells assistance and related services through its subsidiaries. For 2025 the group reported gross written premiums and other revenues of €115.5 billion, more than 92 million customers in 52 countries and a workforce of about 156,000.

The company grew out of a small mutual insurance society set up at Rouen, in Normandy, in 1817 to insure against fire. It remained a regional mutual group, known for most of that time as Ancienne Mutuelle, until it took the name Mutuelles Unies in 1978. Between 1982 and 1989 Claude Bébéar turned it into the largest private insurance group in France winning contested takeovers of Drouot, of Présence and of Compagnie du Midi. The enlarged business took the Axa name in July 1985. Expansion abroad followed quickly. Axa took control of The Equitable in the United States in 1992 and of National Mutual in Australia in 1995, merged with UAP in 1996–97 in what was then the largest transaction French insurance had seen, and bought Guardian Royal Exchange in 1999 and Winterthur in 2006.

Under Thomas Buberl, chief executive since 2016, the group has moved away from capital-intensive savings business and towards property and casualty, commercial and health insurance. The purchase of the Bermudian insurer XL Group for $15.3 billion in 2018 gave Axa the leading global platform in property and casualty commercial lines, and was paid for in part by floating and then disposing of the American life business, Axa Equitable Holdings. The asset manager Axa Investment Managers was sold to BNP Paribas in 2025.

Axa S.A. is listed on Euronext Paris and is a constituent of the CAC 40 and Euro Stoxx 50 indices. Its largest shareholders are two French mutual insurers, together called the Mutuelles AXA, which at the end of 2025 held 15.64% of the capital and 25.78% of the voting rights.

As of 2024, it is the fourth largest financial services company by revenue in France, and the eighth largest French company. In 2023, the company was ranked 48th in the Forbes Global 2000.

Although the company writes it in capitals, "AXA" is not an acronym and stands for nothing. After the Drouot group was taken over in 1982, chairman and chief executive Claude Bébéar commissioned a computer-assisted search for a short name that would be pronounced the same way in any language, in keeping with the group's international ambitions. The first choice, "Elan", was abandoned when Canadian executives pointed out that élan is the French word for moose.

Bébéar later recalled that the name had come out of nowhere, and that it appealed to him because the group wanted to be first and the word began with the first letter of the alphabet. It was also short, it was easy to remember and it read the same backwards. The brand was launched in July 1985, when Mutuelles Unies and Drouot began trading under it together. Ownership of the trademark passed to the listed company only in 2005, when FINAXA, the holding company that legally held the brand, was absorbed into Axa S.A.

Interbrand rated Axa the most valuable insurance brand in the world for nine years running, a run the company last claimed in 2017, when it put the brand's value above $11 billion. In Interbrand's 2025 ranking it placed 43rd overall and second among insurers, behind Allianz.

The oldest ancestor of Axa was the Compagnie d'assurances Mutuelles contre l'incendie dans les départements de la Seine Inférieure et de l'Eure, set up at Rouen in 1817 by the architect Jacques-Théodore Le Carpentier and seventeen fellow property owners. The first claim it paid, in 1819, came to 7.5 francs and prompted the company to build up a reserve fund. Its manager Adolphe Lanne split the business in 1847 into Mutualité Immobilière and Mutualité Mobilière ; the two came back together in 1881 as Ancienne Mutuelle, alongside a newly formed life company, Mutuelle Vie.

The group gathered all its offices in Rouen in 1902 and began writing motor insurance in 1922 through Ancienne Mutuelle Accidents. Its chairman, Gaston Payenneville, was killed in the Allied bombing of Rouen in 1944.

André Sahut d'Izarn took charge in 1946 and put together the Groupe Ancienne Mutuelle : Ancienne Mutuelle du Calvados was absorbed that year, the Mutuelle d'Orléans merged in 1950 and La Participation was bought in 1954. By 1955 the group held eight mutual companies and a number of subsidiaries, and had made its first move abroad, into Quebec. A new head office of 22,000 m (240,000 sq ft) opened at Belbeuf, outside Rouen, in 1968, and a reinsurance arm, Ancienne Mutuelle de Réassurance, later Axa RE, was set up in 1977.

After buying the Compagnie Parisienne de Garantie and the Mutuelle de l'Ouest, the group renamed itself Mutuelles Unies in 1978. Turnover then stood at the equivalent of some €160 million and it employed 1,850 people.

Claude Bébéar, a graduate of the École Polytechnique who had joined Ancienne Mutuelle de Rouen in 1958, was made general manager in 1974 and chairman the following year, aged 40. Over the next fifteen years he turned a provincial mutual into the largest private insurance group in France by winning three contested takeovers in a row.

The first was Drouot, then the leading French private insurer, with 6 billion francs of premiums, left vulnerable by the death of the man who had run it for decades. Francis Bouygues tried to take control, the Hottinguer and Aaron families, who held 60% of the key holding company, took him to court, and Bébéar stepped in as a white knight, won over the shareholders and took Drouot in 1982. Axa's own official history admits the operation was carried through by force rather than by agreement. Within two years Drouot's annual losses of about $40 million had turned into a profit of $10 million.

The second contest came in 1986, when Bernard Pagezy of Compagnie du Midi bid for the Présence group, made up of La Providence and Le Secours and carrying 4 billion francs of premiums. Bébéar counter-bid in Drouot Assurances shares and won once Paribas, which held 25%, came down on his side in March 1986. Présence became an Axa company on 15 December 1986, and by the end of that year Axa was the third-largest insurance group in France, with 18 billion francs of premiums.

The third operation moved Axa inside a former rival. Under a protocol agreed with Assurances du Groupe de Paris in April 1988, Axa transferred its insurance business into the listed Compagnie du Midi, which then took the Axa name, which is why the modern listed company is, in law, the former Compagnie du Midi, incorporated in 1957. Generali, under Antoine Bernheim, had meanwhile built a stake in Midi; on 25 January 1989 Pagezy and Bébéar offered it two board seats in return for capping that stake at 20%, and at the shareholders' meeting of 28 February 1989 Bébéar carried a majority, Generali's votes included, and became president. Axa by then brought together 42 companies worldwide, 4,000 general agents and 16,000 employees, against 700 agents and 2,300 employees in 1980.

Bébéar built a shared culture across the assembled group through large corporate expeditions, among them a seminar in the Ténéré desert in November 1986 and the "AXA Europe Express" train journey across northern and eastern Europe in October 1988, used to bring the management of Assurances du Groupe de Paris together. He called his method managing by opportunity, and took the AIG standard of a 15% return on equity as the group's target.

A reorganisation in October 1990 put a listed financial holding company, FINAXA, above the operating company Axa S.A.

Axa moved into the United States in July 1991, agreeing to put $1 billion into the ailing Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States, a deal that also brought it the asset manager Alliance Capital and the investment bank Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette. The Equitable demutualised on 22 July 1992 and became a subsidiary of The Equitable Companies Incorporated, in which Axa held 49% of the common stock at first and 60.6% by the end of 1995. The holding company was renamed Axa Financial in 1999. In 1995 Axa took majority control of the demutualised Australian life insurer National Mutual Holdings, renamed Axa Asia Pacific Holdings in 1999; Forbes Global reported a price of $840 million, while Axa's own account gives A$1 billion for 40% of the company, rising to 51% once it was listed.

The decade's biggest deal was the merger with Compagnie UAP, the largest insurer in France, settled on 11 November 1996 and announced the next day as an exchange offer between equals. It created the leading French insurer and the second-largest insurance and asset management group in the world. Forbes Global put the price at $8 billion in Axa stock, and the target as much the weaker of the two: $42 billion of revenues in 1996 on a return on equity of 5%, a loss of 2 billion francs in 1995 and twice as many staff as Axa. Jacques Friedmann chaired the supervisory board of the merged group and Bébéar the management board, and the name Axa-UAP stayed in use until the last subsidiaries had been rebranded at the end of 1999. The merger also brought in the German insurer Colonia, which UAP had controlled since 1993 and which became Axa Colonia Konzern in 1997 and Axa Konzern in September 2001.

On 2 February 1999 Axa agreed a recommended offer of £3.4 billion for Guardian Royal Exchange, made through Sun Life & Provincial Holdings, the British subsidiary in which it held 71.6%. GRE was broken up at once: Sun Life & Provincial kept the British and Irish business, GRE Overseas went to Axa for £972 million, the German operations to Axa Colonia for DM 1.66 billion and the American ones to Liberty Mutual for $1.465 billion. That November Axa also agreed to buy the Japanese life insurer Nippon Dantai; the resulting company, Axa Nichidan, was formed in March 2000 and described by Axa as the first foreign-owned holding company in Japan since the Second World War.

Henri de Castries took over the chairmanship of the management board from Bébéar in May 2000, when the group had revenues of roughly €80 billion and 50 million customers. Bébéar moved to the supervisory board and was made honorary chairman on 22 April 2008. He died in November 2025, aged 90.

The minority shareholders of Sun Life & Provincial Holdings were bought out in 2000. That same year Alliance Capital paid about $3.5 billion in cash and partnership units for the American research and asset management house Sanford C. Bernstein, producing a manager with $477 billion of assets. Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette was sold on to Credit Suisse for $8 billion, and in 2001 the September 11 attacks cost Axa €650 million.

An agreement to buy the MONY Group for about $1.5 billion was reached by Axa Financial in September 2003. The offer was lifted from $29.50 to $31.00 a share. A proxy campaign against it by the hedge fund Highfields Capital Management collapsed when the Second Circuit overturned a favourable district court ruling on 1 April 2004, and 53.4% of the outstanding shares approved the merger on 18 May 2004. It closed on 8 July.

On 16 December 2005 FINAXA was absorbed into Axa at a ratio of fifteen Axa shares for four FINAXA shares. The merger shortened the ownership chain, widened the free float and brought the Axa brand into the listed company. The Mutuelles AXA, which until then had controlled Axa through FINAXA, were left with roughly 14.3% of the shares and 23.3% of the votes.

The largest purchase of the period was announced on 14 June 2006: the whole of the Swiss insurer Winterthur, bought from Credit Suisse for CHF 12.3 billion (€7.9 billion) plus CHF 1.6 billion to refinance its debt, and paid for with a €4.1 billion capital increase and €4.8 billion of borrowing. Winterthur brought 13 million customers in 17 countries and CHF 153 billion of assets under management. Axa forecast annual pre-tax cost synergies of CHF 440 million by the end of 2008, against CHF 800 million of restructuring charges in 2007. The deal closed in December 2006. It also carried with it the German insurer DBV-Winterthur, whose German business was folded into Axa Konzern in May 2009.

In February 2008 Axa agreed to pay $1.5 billion for the Mexican insurance business of ING. ING Seguros ranked third in Mexico with 12% of the market, 5.5 million policyholders and 7,500 agents; the purchase completed that July and the company was renamed Axa Seguros. Axa later sued an ING subsidiary in New York, alleging misrepresentation in the sale and claiming damages in the tens or hundreds of millions of dollars.

Governance was simplified in 2010. Acting on a proposal from Jacques de Chateauvieux, chairman of the supervisory board, the shareholders' meeting of 29 April 2010 abolished the two-tier structure of management and supervisory boards in favour of a single board of directors, and de Castries became chairman and chief executive. Axa left the American capital markets in the same weeks. It filed to remove its American depositary receipts from the New York Stock Exchange on 16 March 2010, traded there for the last time on 25 March, moved to the American over-the-counter market the next day and deregistered with the SEC in June.

Several markets were then left behind. The Canadian operations went to Intact Financial for C$2.6 billion in 2011, and in March 2011 Axa agreed to merge its Australian and New Zealand business into AMP while keeping Axa Asia Pacific's Asian operations. In the other direction, Axa bought the property and casualty operations of HSBC in Hong Kong and Singapore, completing in November 2012 alongside an exclusive bancassurance agreement. A study of ownership links among transnational corporations published in PLOS One in 2011 placed Axa second among companies ranked by potential control over global corporate networks.

De Castries made his retirement known on 21 March 2016. Underlying earnings had grown roughly eightfold during his time in charge, to a record €5.6 billion in 2015, and debt gearing had fallen from 54% to 23%. The board split the two offices he had held, naming Thomas Buberl chief executive and Denis Duverne non-executive chairman with effect from 1 September 2016.

Buberl set out his first strategic plan, "Ambition 2020", on 21 June 2016. It rested on two pillars, described as focus and transformation, and announced a move away from simply paying claims and towards acting as a partner to the customer. In practice it was carried out by rebuilding the group around commercial property and casualty insurance and by withdrawing from capital-intensive savings business in the United States.

The purchase of XL Group, a commercial property and casualty insurer and reinsurer based in Bermuda, was announced on 5 March 2018. Axa offered $57.60 a share in cash, a premium of 33%, which valued the target at $15.3 billion (€12.4 billion), and it presented the deal as creating the leading global platform in property and casualty commercial lines and as tilting the group away from life and savings. Completion followed on 12 September 2018, and XL was merged with Axa Corporate Solutions and Axa Art to form the Axa XL division.

Much of the money came from the American life and annuity arm. Axa Equitable Holdings was floated on 14 May 2018, when 137.25 million shares were sold at $20 apiece for gross proceeds of $4.02 billion and 24.5% of the company, the largest American initial public offering of the year up to that date. A secondary offering in March 2019 took Axa below a majority, from 60.1% to 48.3%, and the sale of a further 144 million shares that November raised about $3.1 billion. What was left, held through bonds mandatorily exchangeable into Equitable Holdings shares, was extinguished in May 2021, when those bonds matured and Equitable bought back 7.1 million shares from Axa.

The COVID-19 pandemic left the group with €1.5 billion of claims in 2020 and cut underlying earnings by 34%, to €4.3 billion. On 1 December 2020 Axa presented a successor plan, "Driving Progress 2023", organised around five lines of action: growth in health and protection, a simpler customer experience, tighter underwriting, continued leadership on climate and higher cash generation.

Disposals continued through the early 2020s. The operations in Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia went to Uniqa for €1.0 billion in October 2020. The Gulf businesses were sold to the Gulf Insurance Group in September 2021 for $269 million in all, and the Singaporean business to HSBC for $0.6 billion, announced in August 2021. Axa Bank Belgium passed to Crelan on 31 December 2021 for €691 million, together with a long-term agreement to distribute Axa products across the Crelan network. One disposal did not go through. The €1.2 billion sale of the Dublin-based variable annuity platform Axa Life Europe to Cinven, agreed in 2018, lapsed in August 2020 when its conditions went unmet, and about €3 billion of the platform's reserves were reinsured with a Munich Re subsidiary in May 2024 instead. The same announcement recorded that a sale of a closed German life and pensions portfolio to Athora, agreed in July 2022, had been called off by mutual agreement.

Antoine Gosset-Grainville took over from Denis Duverne as chairman in April 2022. The following year Axa reinforced its European health business by buying the Irish insurer Laya Healthcare from a Corebridge Financial subsidiary for €650 million, completing on 31 October 2023. A third plan, "Unlock the Future", covering 2024 to 2026, was announced on 22 February 2024.

Axa opened exclusive negotiations on 1 August 2024 to sell Axa Investment Managers to BNP Paribas. Signed on 21 December 2024 and completed on 1 July 2025, the transaction valued Axa IM at €5.1 billion in cash, or €5.4 billion including the investment-solutions business Select. The two groups also entered a long-term partnership under which BNP Paribas manages assets on Axa's behalf while Axa keeps full authority over product design, asset allocation and asset-liability management. Combined with BNP Paribas Asset Management, the business had about €1.5 trillion under management, and Axa began a €3.8 billion share buyback on completion.

At the same time the group was buying in Italian retail insurance. The €423 million acquisition of Gruppo Nobis, with an earn-out of up to €55 million, completed on 1 April 2025. On 28 November 2025 Axa took a 51% majority stake in the digital motor insurer Prima Assicurazioni for €0.5 billion, with call and put options over the rest expected to be exercised in 2029 or 2030. Chiara Soldano, chief executive of Axa Italy, put the combined outlay at close to €1 billion.

The annual general meeting of 30 April 2026 renewed Buberl's mandate as a director for four years and reappointed him chief executive for the same period.

In May 2016, the firm announced that it would stop investing in tobacco shares and bonds and allow its portfolio of tobacco-related bonds to run off.

In 2019, Axa partially disinvested from the Israeli arms group Elbit Systems following pressure from the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement. The move followed several years of campaigning by NGOs, including an April 2018 petition launched by SumOfUs that received 140,000 signatures, leading Axa to "quietly reduce" its investments in Elbit and Israeli banks. Axa remains indirectly invested in Elbit and Israeli banks through a non-controlling interest in its former subsidiary Alliance Bernstein.

In 2023, Axa has increased investments in Israel as a shareholder in three Israeli banks known to support the Israeli occupation of the West Bank : Bank Hapoalim (US$9.99M), Bank Leumi (US$6M), and Israel Discount Bank (US$3.4M). By August 2024, however, AXA had completed a "full divestment" from all three banks, according an analysis by ethical-investing advocacy group Ekō.

In February 2023, the company sold a 7.94% stake in Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena (MPS) to institutional investors. The package included approximately 100,000,000 MPS shares at a price of €2.33 (US$2.50) per share, for a total transaction value of €233 million (US$250 million). Axa retained 0.0007% of the Italian bank's capital.

Axa Investment Managers acquired France's Bry-sur-Marne film studio and the 12-hectare (30-acre) plot of land on which it is located for €150m in June 2023.

Axa is a French société anonyme governed by a board of directors. Thomas Buberl has been chief executive officer since the board appointed him in September 2016, and Antoine Gosset-Grainville has chaired the board since the shareholders' meeting of 28 April 2022, when he succeeded Denis Duverne, chairman since 2016.

After the annual shareholders' meeting of 30 April 2026 the board had fourteen members, eight women and six men, nine of them regarded as independent under the criteria of the Afep-Medef corporate governance code. Its work is prepared by three committees: an audit committee chaired by Ewout Steenbergen, a finance and risk committee chaired by Ramon Fernandez, and a compensation, governance and sustainability committee chaired by Guillaume Faury.

The chief executive officer is assisted by a management committee, which has no formal decision-making power and had fifteen members on 1 September 2026, among them the group deputy chief executive officer George Stansfield, the group chief financial officer Alban de Mailly Nesle and the chief executives of Axa France, of European markets and health, of international markets and of Axa XL. A wider Partners group, made up of the management committee and about thirty other executives, meets at least twice a year.

Axa headquarters is located in the 8th arrondissement of Paris. Axa, which already owned 23 Avenue Matignon, acquired the former Hôtel de La Vaupalière, an 18th-century building, in the late 1990s. Architect Ricardo Bofill integrated the facade of the hotel with a modern glass building that covers the courtyard that the hotel also occupies. The complex serves as Axa's head office.

Axa trades in the United Kingdom as Axa UK, with subsidiaries including Axa Insurance, Axa Wealth and Axa Health. Axa PPP International was the trading name for Axa PPP healthcare's international health insurance division, which was later rebranded as Axa Global Healthcare on 1 January 2017. The company bought the online insurer Swiftcover, which was notorious for its controversial Iggy Pop TV advertising campaign, which was subsequently banned for being misleading, on the grounds that Iggy Pop would not be eligible for cover as someone working in the entertainment industry.

In September 2013, Axa Wealth was fined £1.8 million by the FCA for failing to ensure it gave suitable investment advice to its customers. The regulator says it found "serious defects" in the way Axa advisers in Clydesdale Bank, Yorkshire Bank and the West Bromwich Building Society advised customers on investments.

In 2018, they became the 'Official Global Insurance' partner of Premier League team Liverpool F.C. and in 2019, began sponsoring the training kits of the team. In 2020, the partnership was cemented further, when they purchased the naming rights to the club's newly built training centre, which became officially known as 'The AXA Training Centre.'

In 2016, Axa Wealth was sold to the Phoenix Group, which later changed its name to Standard Life plc in 2026.

Axa Health sells private medical insurance in the UK and was known as Axa PPP Healthcare until 2020. It was previously the London Association for Hospital Services, set up in 1938 as a private healthcare scheme for people of middle income in London. It was incorporated in 1940 with assistance from the British Medical Association, the King's Fund, and the medical royal colleges.

Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance bought it in 1998 for £435 million; a year later it was bought by Sun Life & Provincial Holdings, an Axa subsidiary.

Axa Global Healthcare has previously been known as Axa PPP International, Axa Global Protect or Axa Healthcare Management. In 2017, the subsidiary Axa Global Healthcare became an independent Managing General Agent, selling and administering international health insurance products. While Axa Health provides insurance across the UK, Axa - Global Healthcare caters to those needing health insurance around the world.

In 2018, Axa Global Healthcare launched a Virtual Doctor service for its customers with outpatient cover and in 2020 offered it across all plans. Provided by Teladoc Health, it offers anytime access to medical advice by phone or video by doctors located around the world who speak more than 15 languages and is targeted at expatriates.

Axa established a presence in Ireland in 1999 when it bought British-based Guardian Royal Exchange, which had previously acquired PMPA. PMPA, Private Motorists Protection Association, was at the time one of Ireland's biggest insurance companies. It is the third-largest general insurer in the Republic of Ireland.

In August 2023, it was announced Axa had acquired the Little Island, Cork -headquartered health insurance company, Laya Healthcare for €650 million.

Axa Canada marketed insurance in Quebec, Ontario, Western Canada and Atlantic Canada. In 2009 it had a total of approximately 2300 employees and 4000 brokers and advisors. The head office was in Montreal, Quebec. In 2011 it was sold to Intact Financial Corp. for C$2.6 billion.

Axa's activities in the United State primarily fall under Axa Partners SA, which includes Axa Travel Insurance marketed directly to consumers as well as various services and third-party administration provided to health, auto, home, and other insurers.

Axa previously owned life insurance companies in the US, including MONY (formerly Mutual of New York) and US Financial Life, and various entities under Equitable Holdings, Inc. (previously known as AXA Equitable Holdings, AXA America Holdings, The Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States, and other names), but sold or spun off these holdings in the 2010s.

In July 2008, Axa acquired ING Insurance Mexico, offering essentially the same services that ING offered. Axa then sued an ING Group subsidiary over alleged misrepresentations in the $1.5 billion sale stating it suffered "tens (if not hundreds) of millions of dollars in damages."

In 1995 the Axa Group purchased a 51 per cent controlling interest in Australian life insurer, National Mutual It was rebranded Axa. In March 2011, Axa agreed to merge its Australian operations with AMP under the AMP brand.

In April 2016 Axa unveiled a partnership with Lloyd's of London insurer Chaucer Holdings to enter the growing market of speciality insurance in Africa. Axa Africa Specialty Risks helps to mitigate risks through its coverholder, Chaucer Syndicate 1084 and Axa Africa Specialty Risks 6130. Axa ASR focuses on specialty and corporate lines, with coverage and an on-the-ground presence across Africa. Axa and Lloyd's both have excellent international financial strength ratings (AA- by Fitch and A+ by Standard & Poor's). The lines of business include: Political Risk, Political Violence and Terrorism, Energy, Construction, Property, Liability, Marine and Aviation. Since 2014 Axa has made several acquisitions of other insurers in an attempt to expand. Axa already operates in Cameroon, Egypt, Gabon, Ivory Coast, Morocco, Nigeria, Senegal and Algeria. Axa Africa also has a role in the trade between Asia and some African countries.

In January 2016, Axa created Kamet Ventures, an insurtech incubator, to build disruptive businesses in the insurance, healthcare and assistance space with an initial funding of €100 million. Some of Kamet's investments include an insurance advice platform, Anorak Technologies and an elderly care platform, Birdie.

Axa Investment Managers (Axa IM), was a global investment management company with offices in over 22 locations worldwide. As of 31 December 2020, it managed over €858 billion in assets on behalf of institutional and retail clients. It operated as the investment arm for Axa. In December 2024 it was acquired by BNP Paribas.

Axa Asia Pacific Holdings Limited acquired MLC (Hong Kong) Limited and re-branded it as Axa (Hong Kong) Life Insurance Company Limited in 2006.

In 2010, Axa sold a UK business unit called SunLife to Resolution Limited.

In 2021, the Gulf Insurance Group acquired Axa's holdings in the Gulf region, rebranding them as GIG in the Middle East.

Azouz Begag (Arabic : عزوز بقاق) (born 5 February 1957) is a French writer, politician and researcher in economics and sociology at the CNRS. He was the delegate minister for equal opportunities of France in the government of French Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin (Union for a Popular Movement, UMP) till 5 April 2007. He resigned to support the moderate centrist candidate François Bayrou, one of the two UMP ministers to do so.

Before becoming minister, Begag was decorated and made Chevalier de l’Ordre national du Mérite and Knight of the Legion of Honor.

Begag is the son of Algerian parents who arrived in France in 1949. In his teens, he qualified as an electrician. He grew up in a shanty town outside Lyon, "les bas quartiers", before the family progressed to a tower block in the Cité de la Duchère.

Begag is the father of two daughters. He is divorced from his wife.

Begag has a doctorate in economics from Lumière University Lyon 2. He has combined the functions of researcher in economy at the CNRS and at the Maison des sciences sociales et humaines of Lyon since 1980 and the one of professor at the École Centrale de Lyon. A visiting professor in Spring 2002 at the Winthrop-King Institute for Contemporary French and Francophone Studies at Florida State University, Begag was later made an honorary professor. In addition, he was a visiting professor at Cornell University in New York for one year. Begag's academic career, culminating in his place as a researcher at the CNRS, as well as his political career to date, have also centered around the problems of unequal opportunity for those brought up in industrial suburbs and ghettos. In his account in 2007 of his two years as minister, The Sheep in the Bathtub, he describes his research work as that of a sociologist.

Begag has written approximately 20 literary books for adults and children, as well as songs. Furthermore, he is the scriptwriter of the French movie Camping à la ferme ("Camping at the farm"), where he exposed his vision of "three levels of riches" multiculturalism in today's French society : the advantages of its relatively new multiethnicity due to a new non-European immigration mixed with the basis of its historical and natural multiculturality whether coming from the riches of its several regional cultures and languages or from the successful integration of previous waves of European immigration during its history.

Begag's best known literary work (he has published many novels often inspired by his childhood) is the autobiographical novel Le Gone du Chaâba, published in 1986 by Éditions du Seuil. The title itself is a clever play on one of his regional language's words. 'Gone' is a term for 'kid' or 'lad' in the Lyonnais dialect of Arpitan used in his native region and city, while 'Chaâba' is an Arabic word, used in the book as the name of a shantytown in Sétif, Algeria. Both Azouz Begag and the protagonist of the novel grew up in a shanty town outside Lyon, almost entirely inhabited by Algerian or Kabyle immigrant workers. The language and culture were predominantly a mix of Algerian Arabic, Kabyle Tamazigh and Arpitan. The problems of the ghetto-like environments established by and for guest workers in France after WWII, of the individual children of these ghettos who are French Citizens by dint of being born in France and even often from French parents and for whom 'breaking out' is both very difficult and statistically improbable, and Azouz Begag's own success in managing being part of the mainstream of French culture without having to forget any part of his heritage but rather by accumulating all cultural influences, are at the heart of the novel.

His most widely published book is his account in 2007 of his two years as minister. Titled The Sheep in the Bathtub, this is a reference to a quote from Nicolas Sarkozy warning French Muslims not to slaughter sheep in their bathtubs for Eid al-Adha.

Azouz Begag was minister during the 2005 civil unrest in France. Begag confronted Interior minister Nicolas Sarkozy (UMP) on the subject of the policies in the suburbs of Paris. Azouz Begag also publicly opposed Sarkozy in his movie 'Camping à la ferme' (from 2005, coming out shortly after he was named minister).

He was, in October 2005, at the centre of a diplomatic incident between France and the United States. Begag, despite being a French citizen, a French minister and holding an A1 diplomatic visa, was intercepted at US immigration in Atlanta airport, saw his diplomatic immunity challenged and was heavily questioned in the green room. This was considered as racial profiling on the part of the US immigration officers and very strongly criticized in France.

On 16 March 2007, Begag officially announced his support for the UDF candidate François Bayrou. Begag resigned from the French government on 5 April 2007.

He is a MoDem regional councillor in the Centre region. In 2009, he was selected to be the MoDem 's candidate in the Rhône-Alpes region for the 2010 regional elections.

A baguette (/ b æ ˈ ɡ ɛ t / ; French: [ baɡɛt ]) is a long, thin type of bread commonly made from basic lean dough. Both the dough and the physical dimensions of the traditional baguette are defined by French law. It is distinguishable by its length and crisp crust.

A baguette has a diameter of about 5 to 6 cm (2– 2 + 1 ⁄ 2 in) and a usual length of about 65 cm (26 in), but can be up to 1 m (39 in) long.

In November 2018, documentation surrounding the "craftsmanship and culture" of making this bread was added to the French Ministry of Culture 's National Inventory of Intangible Cultural Heritage. In 2022, the artisanal know-how and culture of baguette bread was inscribed to the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists.

Much of the history of the baguette is speculation; however, some facts can be established. Long, stick-like breads in France became more popular during the 18th century, French bakers started using " gruau," a highly refined Hungarian high-milled flour in the early 19th century, Viennese steam oven baking was introduced to Paris in 1839 by August Zang, and the Austrian Adolf Ignaz Mautner von Markhof [ de ] 's compact yeast in 1867 at the Universal Exposition. Finally, the word "baguette" appears to define a particular type of bread in a regulation of the department of the Seine in August 1920: "The baguette, having a minimum weight of 80 g [ 2 + 3 ⁄ 4 oz] and a maximum length of 40 cm [16 in], may not be sold for a price higher than 0.35 francs apiece". No one of these events constitutes "the invention of the baguette," but together they define the modern "baguette."

In summary, "the bread which became known as the baguette first appeared in its most primitive form in the eighteenth century, then experienced several refinements and variations before being (officially) given that name in 1920."

The word baguette means "wand," "baton," or "stick," as in baguette magique (magic wand), baguettes chinoises (chopsticks), or baguette de direction (conductor's baton). It was first recorded as a kind of bread in 1920.

Outside France, the baguette is often considered a symbol of French culture, but the association of France with long loaves long predates it. Long, wide loaves had been made since the time of King Louis XIV, long thin ones since the mid-18th century, and by the 19th century, some were far longer than today's baguette: "... loaves of bread six feet [1.8 m] long that look like crowbars!" " Housemaids were hurrying homewards with their purchases for various Gallic breakfasts, and the long sticks of bread, a yard or two [ 0.9 m to 1.8 m ] in length, carried under their arms, made an odd impression upon me."

A less direct link can be made with deck or steam ovens. These combine a traditional gas-fired oven and a brick oven, a thick "deck" of stone or firebrick heated by natural gas instead of wood. The first steam oven was brought to Paris in the early 19th century by August Zang, who also introduced Vienna bread (pain viennois) and the croissant, and whom some French sources thus credit with originating the baguette.

Deck ovens heated to over 200 °C (390 °F) use steam injection to allow the crust to expand before setting, thus creating a lighter, airier loaf, and to melt the dextrose on the bread's surface, giving a slightly glazed effect.

In April 1944, a competition called Le Grand Prix de la Baguette began in France to determine who made the best baguettes. Nearly 200 bakers compete each year in front of a 14-judge panel following strict guidelines. They are judged based on baking, appearance, smell, taste, and crumb. The winner receives €4000 and supplies France's president with their daily bread for that year until a new winner is chosen.

Following the World Wars, French bakers began baking a whiter, softer baguette that contrasted with the darker loaves produced because of rationing during the wars. These doughs took less time to ferment and used more additives but had significantly less taste. They also began using pre-made dough and molds. The average consumption of bread fell from 600 grams/day in the early 1900s to 170 grams/day in 1986.

In 1993, the French Parliament passed Le Décret Pain (The Bread Decree). Le Décret Pain states that breads under the name of pain maison (homemade bread) must be "fully kneaded, shaped, and baked at their place of sale." This decree also placed strict guidelines on what pain traditionnel français (traditional French bread) is allowed to be made of, banning pre-made dough from being used for traditional French baguettes.

Since 1994, the city of Paris awards the Grand prix de la baguette de tradition française de la ville de Paris for the best baguette in the city.

Because the history of the French baguette is not completely known, several myths have spread about the origins of this type of bread.

Some say Napoleon, in essence, created the French baguette to allow soldiers to more easily carry bread with them. Since the round shape of other breads took up a lot of space, Bonaparte requested they be made into the skinny stick shape with specific measurements to slide into the soldiers' uniform.

Other stories credit baguettes as being an invention to stop French metro workers from having to carry knives that they used to cut their bread. The workers often fought, so the management did not want them to carry knives and requested that bread be easily ripped apart, ending the need for knives. The skinny, easily rippable shape of a baguette would have been the response to this.

Some believe baguettes were the "Bread of Equality" following a decree post-French Revolution requiring a type of bread to be made accessible to the rich and poor.

Another account states that in October 1920, a law prevented bakers from working before 4 am, making it impossible to make traditional round loaves in time for customers' breakfasts. Switching from the round loaf to the previously less-common, slender shape of the baguette solved the problem because it could be prepared and baked much more quickly. The law in question appears to be one from March 1919, though some say it took effect in October 1920:

It is forbidden to employ workers at bread and pastry making between ten in the evening and four in the morning.

The "baguette de tradition française" is made from wheat flour, water, yeast (as the leavening agent), and common salt. It may contain up to 2% broad bean flour, up to 0.5% soya flour, and up to 0.3% wheat malt flour.

Standard baguettes, baguettes ordinaires, are made with baker's yeast, and artisan-style loaves are usually made with a pre-ferment (poolish) to increase flavor complexity and other characteristics. They may include whole-wheat flour or other grains such as rye. Baguettes are also sometimes referred to as either "Classique" (typically mass produced and made with yeast as well as additives), and "tradition" regulated to 4 ingredients (flour, water, leavening, and salt) often using a sourdough starter as the leavening agent

Baguettes are closely connected to France, though they are made worldwide. In France, not all long loaves are baguettes; for example, a short, almost rugby ball-shaped loaf is a bâtard (literally, bastard); its origin is variously explained but undocumented. Another tubular-shaped loaf is known as a flûte, also known in the United States as a parisienne. Flûtes closely resemble baguettes but are about twice the size.

A thinner loaf is called a ficelle (string). A short baguette is sometimes known as a baton (stick), or in the UK, referred to using the English translation French stick. None of these is officially defined, either legally or, for instance, in major dictionaries, any more than the baguette. French breads are also made in forms such as a miche, which is a large pan loaf, and a boule, literally ball in French, a large round loaf. Sandwich-sized loaves are sometimes known as demi-baguettes or tiers. Italian baguettes, or baguette italienne, involve more spices and a denser texture, giving the baguette a slightly different, more Italian taste. Pain viennois is much sweeter and softer than the standard baguette.

In France, a baguette typically weighs around 250 g (8 + 3 ⁄ 4 oz), a bâtard 500 g (17 + 1 ⁄ 2 oz) and a ficelle 100 g (3 + 1 ⁄ 2 oz) ; no legal text establishes any of these weights, which can vary throughout the country. Baguettes, either relatively short single-serving size or cut from a longer loaf, are very often used for sandwiches, usually of the submarine sandwich type, but also a panini. They are often sliced and served with pâté or cheese. As part of the traditional continental breakfast in France, slices of baguette, known as tartines, are spread with butter and jam and sometimes dunked in bowls of coffee or hot chocolate.

Baguettes are generally made as partially free-form loaves, with the loaf formed with a series of folding and rolling motions, raised in cloth-lined baskets or in rows on a flour-impregnated towel, called a couche, and baked either directly on the hearth of a deck oven or in special perforated pans designed to hold the shape of the baguette while allowing heat through the perforations. American-style "French bread" is generally much fatter and is not baked in deck ovens but in convection ovens.

As of the 2000s, there is increasing customer demand in France for only partially baked baguettes. In 2004, the bakery chain Marie Blachère introduced the option to select three varieties of baguettes distinguished by baking time: bien cuite (well done), dorée (golden) and blanche (white).

Outside France, baguettes are also made with other doughs. For example, the Vietnamese bánh mì uses a high proportion of rice flour, while many North American bakeries make whole wheat, multigrain, and sourdough baguettes alongside French-style loaves. In Cambodia, it is found in the form of a hot sandwich filled called num pang. In addition, even classic French-style recipes vary from place to place, with some recipes adding small amounts of milk, butter, sugar, or malt extract, depending on the desired flavor and properties in the final loaf.

Algeria consumes about 49 million baguettes per day, and France consumes about 30 million.

A baked potato, also known in the United Kingdom as a jacket potato, is a preparation of potato. After baking, it may be served with fillings, toppings or condiments, such as butter, cheese and bacon bits, sour cream and chives, chicken curry, baked beans and tuna.

Some varieties of potato, such as Russet Burbank and King Edward, are more suitable for baking, owing to their size and consistency. Despite the popular misconception that potatoes are fattening, baked potatoes can be part of a healthy diet.

Potatoes originated in South America, and were long cultivated in the Inca Empire, who baked them in a huatia, an underground cooking pit.

Potatoes can be baked in a gas or electric oven, on a barbecue grill, or on (or in) an open fire. They can also be cooked in a microwave oven, although the skin will not be crisp as with other methods of preparation unless finished in a conventional hot oven. Some restaurants use special ovens designed specifically to cook large numbers of potatoes, then keep them warm and ready for service.

The potato is first scrubbed clean, and usually washed and dried, with eyes and surface blemishes removed. It may be rubbed with oil, butter, salt, or a combination of these. Pricking the potato skin allows steam to escape during cooking, preventing accidental sometimes explosive rupturing of the potato skin due to accumulated steam pressure. Potatoes cooked in a microwave oven without pricking the skin are especially susceptible due to rapid fluctuations in heat.

A large potato takes between one and two hours to bake in a conventional oven at 200 °C (392 °F). A microwave oven takes from six to twelve minutes, depending on oven power and potato size, but does not produce a crisp skin. Some recipes use a microwave oven followed by a conventional oven to crisp the skin. A combination microwave and thermal oven can be used.

Wrapping the potato in aluminium foil before cooking in a standard oven will retain moisture, while leaving it unwrapped will result in a crisp skin. Cooking over an open fire or in the coals of a barbecue may require wrapping in foil to prevent burning of the skin. A potato buried directly in coals of a fire cooks well, albeit with a mostly burned and inedible skin. A baked potato is fully cooked when its internal temperature reaches 99 °C (210 °F).

Some people discard the skin of a baked potato, while others also eat the skin, which has a characteristic taste and texture and is rich in dietary fiber. Potatoes baked in their skins may lose between 20 and 40% of their vitamin C content, because heating in air is slow and vitamin inactivation can continue for a long time. Small potatoes, which bake more quickly, retain more of their vitamin C.

Some people bake their potatoes and then scoop out the interior, leaving the skin as a shell. The white interior flesh can then be mixed with ingredients such as cheese, butter, or bacon bits, then spooned back into the skin shells and returned to the oven to warm and possibly brown. These are known variously as loaded potato skins, filled potatoes and twice-baked potatoes.

In Great Britain, toppings or fillings include baked beans, curried chicken, coronation chicken, chili con carne, shredded cheese, tuna mayonnaise, and coleslaw. In Scotland, haggis is sometimes used.

A variation is Hasselback potatoes, in which the potato is cut into thin slices almost down to the bottom, so that the potato still holds its shape, and is then baked in the oven, occasionally scalloped with cheese. The name "Hasselback" refers to the luxurious Hasselbacken hotel and restaurant in Stockholm, which originated this dish.

Many restaurants serve baked potatoes with sides such as butter, sour cream, chives, shredded cheese, and bacon bits. Sides are usually optional and customers can order as many or as few as they wish. Baked potatoes that are served with a number of these sides are commonly referred to as loaded potatoes or loaded baked potatoes. These potatoes can themselves be a side item to a steak dinner, or a similar entrée.

Large and stuffed baked potatoes may be served as an entrée, usually filled with meat in addition to any of the ingredients mentioned above. Barbecued or smoked meat or chili is substituted.

Of US states, Idaho is the major producer of potatoes. The Idaho baked potato was heavily promoted by the Northern Pacific Railroad in the early 20th century, often using Hollywood movie stars.

Hazen Titus was appointed as the Northern Pacific Railway's dining car superintendent in 1908. He talked to Yakima Valley farmers who complained that they were unable to sell their potato crops because their potatoes were simply too large, so they fed them to hogs instead. Titus learned that a single potato could weigh from two to five pounds, with smaller potatoes preferred by the end buyers of the vegetable and that many considered them not to be edible because their thick, rough skin made them difficult to cook.

Titus and his staff discovered the "inedible" potatoes were delicious after baking in a slow oven. He contracted to purchase as many potatoes as the farmers could produce that were more than two pounds in weight. Soon after the first delivery of " Netted Gem Bakers ", they were offered to diners on the North Coast Limited beginning in 1909. Word of the line's specialty offering traveled quickly, and before long it was using "the Great Big Baked Potato" as a slogan to promote the railroad's passenger service.

When an addition was built for the Northern Pacific's Seattle commissary in 1914, a reporter wrote, "A large trade mark, in the shape of a baked potato, 40 ft. long and 18 ft. in diameter, surmounts the roof. The potato is electric lighted and its eyes, through the electric mechanism, are made to wink constantly. A cube of butter thrust into its split top glows intermittently." Premiums such as postcards, letter openers, and spoons were produced to promote "The Route of the Great Big Baked Potato". The slogan served the Northern Pacific for about 50 years. The song "Great Big Baked Potato" (words by N.R. Streeter and H. Caldwell, music by Oliver George) was written about this potato.

A baked potato, long a popular food in the United Kingdom, is sometimes called a jacket potato. In the mid-19th century, jacket potatoes were sold on the streets during autumn and winter. In London, it was estimated in the mid-19th century that some 10 tons of baked potatoes were sold on the streets each day. Common jacket potato fillings (or "toppings") in the United Kingdom include grated cheddar cheese, baked beans, tuna mayonnaise, chili con carne, and chicken curry.

Baked potatoes are often eaten on Guy Fawkes Night, traditionally baked in the glowing embers of a bonfire.

A baked potato is called "pomme de terre au four" in French. As in other countries, it may be served as an accompaniment to a meat dish, or, in a fast-food restaurant (called a "pataterie" in France) be the centre of a meal.

Kumpir (from Bulgarian компир, "potato"), a baked potato with various fillings, is a popular fast food in Turkey. In its basic form, it is made with potatoes that are wrapped with foil and baked in special ovens. The potatoes are sliced down the middle and the insides are mixed with unsalted butter and puréed with kaşar cheese. A variety of foods can be added to the potato such as mayonnaise, ketchup, pickles, sweetcorn, sausage slices, carrots, mushrooms and Russian salad.

The " Balladur jurisprudence," named after former French Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, is an unwritten rule according to which a member of the French government who has been indicted in a judicial affair should resign from his functions. It is misnamed, as it was in fact the Socialist Prime Minister Pierre Bérégovoy who imposed this for the first time by forcing Bernard Tapie, then Minister of the City, to resign in May 1992. That political custom effectively came to an end when Emmanuel Macron, despite abiding to the rule in the first part of his presidency, chose to maintain his confidence in Minister of Justice Dupond-Moretti when indicted in 2021 over suspected conflict of interest.

Various governmental personalities were forced by Balladur to resign after being indicted by the French justice, mostly for corruption affairs. Those included Alain Carignon, who resigned in July 1994 and was sentenced to five years of prison in 1996; Michel Roussin, indicted in the frame of the corruption scandals in the Paris region (condemned in 2005 to four years of prison on probation); Gérard Longuet, indicted in the same scandals as Michel Roussin (and acquitted in 2005) and for a minor affair concerning the building of his villa in Saint-Tropez (acquitted in 1998).

In November 1999, Dominique Strauss-Kahn resigned from his functions in Lionel Jospin 's Plural Left cabinet, in agreement with the "Balladur jurisprudence." He was later acquitted of all charges

After the June 2007 legislative election, Prime Minister François Fillon broke for the first time with this informal rule by appointing André Santini, indicted in the Fondation Hamon affair on charges of corruption, Secretary of State.

Bandes dessinées (sg. bande dessinée, abbr. BDs ; lit. ' drawn strips '), also referred to as Franco-Belgian comics (French : BD franco-belge), are comics that are usually originally in French and created for readership in France and Belgium. These countries have a long tradition in comics, separate from that of English-language comics. Belgium is a mostly bilingual country, and comics originally in Dutch (stripverhalen, lit. ' strip stories ', or simply "strips") are culturally a part of the world of bandes dessinées, even if the translation from French to Dutch far outweighs the other direction.

Among the most popular bandes dessinées are The Adventures of Tintin (by Hergé), Spirou and Fantasio (Franquin et al.), Gaston (Franquin), Asterix (Goscinny & Uderzo), Lucky Luke (Morris & Goscinny), The Smurfs (Peyo) and Spike and Suzy (Willy Vandersteen). Some highly regarded realistically drawn and plotted bandes dessinées include Blueberry (Charlier & Giraud, a.k.a. "Mœbius"), Thorgal (Van Hamme & Rosiński), XIII (Van Hamme & Vance), and the creations of Hermann Huppen.

In Europe, French is spoken natively not only in France and the city state of Monaco, but also by significant portions of the population of Belgium, Luxembourg, and Switzerland. The shared language creates an artistic and commercial market where national identity is often blurred, and one of the main rationales for the concept of the (English) "Franco-Belgian comics" expression. The potential appeal of the French-language BDs extends beyond Francophone Europe, as France in particular has strong historical and cultural ties with several Francophone overseas territories. Of these territories it is Quebec, Canada, where Franco-Belgian BDs are doing best, due – aside from the fact that it has the largest BD reading Francophone population outside Europe – to that province's close historical and cultural ties with France from colonisation, in the process heavily influencing its own native Quebec comics scene. This is in stark contrast to the English-speaking part of the country, which is culturally US comics oriented.

While the originally in Dutch written Flemish Belgian comic books, or rather BD albums are influenced by Francophone BDs, especially in the early years, they evolved into a distinctly different style, both in art and in spirit, which is why they are nowadays sub-categorised as Flemish comics, as their evolution started to take a different path from the late 1940s onward, due to cultural differences stemming from the increasing cultural self-awareness of the Flemish people. And while French-language publications are habitually translated into Dutch, Flemish publications are less commonly translated into French, for cultural reasons. Likewise, despite the shared language, Flemish BDs do not do that well in the Netherlands and vice versa, save for some notable exceptions, such as the Willy Vandersteen creation (Spike and Suzy (Dutch : Suske en Wiske) which is popular across the border. Concurrently, the socio-cultural idiosyncrasies contained within many Flemish BDs also means that these comics have seen far less translations into other languages than their French-language counterparts have due to their more universal appeal, and the French language's cultural status.

Belgium is officially a trilingual country as there is a German-speaking Community of Belgium. Belgian BD home market first print releases, be it in Dutch or in French, are rarely translated into that language with German-speaking Belgians having to wait for internationally released editions for reading in their native tongue, typically those from licensed publishers stemming from neighbouring Germany. Though Dutch and German both are Germanic languages, the German-speaking Community lies within the territory of the Walloon Region, so that French is the most utilised (second) language in that area and has caused the handful of BD artists originating from there, such as Hermann and Didier Comès, to create their BDs in French. Born Dieter Hermann Comès, Comès actually "Frenchified" his given name to this end, whereas Hermann Huppen has dispensed with his (Germanic) family name "Huppen" for his BD credits as "Hermann", though he maintained the Germanic spelling for his first name. Due to its relative modesty, both in size and in scope, and despite the close historical and cultural ties, no German-Belgian artists are as of 2018 known to have created BDs specifically for the German comics world, when discounting commercial translations of their original Francophone creations.

A similar situation exists in France, which has several regional languages, of which Breton and Occitan are two of the more substantial ones. But while these languages are culturally recognised as regional languages, they are not official national languages, contrary to Belgium in regard to German, with similar consequences as in Belgium for BDs and their artists. Native BDs are rarely, if at all, released in these languages by the main BD publishers, whereas artists stemming from these regions, invariably create their BDs in French – like their German-Belgian counterparts forced to do so in order to gain commercial access to the main market. The situation for France's German-speaking minority is therefore identical to its more sizeable counterpart in northern neighbour Belgium in regard to BD-related matters.

The term bandes dessinées is derived from the original description of the art form as "drawn strips". It was first introduced in the 1930s, but only became popular in the 1960s, by which time the "BD" abbreviation was also in use for its book, or album, publications formats.

Bandes dessinées were described as the "ninth art" in Francophone scholarship on the medium (le neuvième art). The "ninth art" designation stems from a 1964 article by Claude Beylie [ fr ] in the magazine Lettres et Médecins, and was subsequently popularised in an article series about the history of comics, which appeared in weekly instalments in Spirou magazine from 1964 to 1967. Written by Belgian Morris with editorial input from the below-mentioned Frenchman Claude Moliterni, the article series was in itself an example of a Franco-Belgian BD project. The publication of Francis Lacassin 's book Pour un neuvième art: la bande dessinée in 1971 further established the term.

In North America, Franco-Belgian BDs are often seen as equivalent to what are known as graphic novels — most likely a result of their deviating from the US 32-page comic book standard. In recent decades the English "graphic novel" expression has increasingly been adopted in Europe as well in the wake of the works of Will Eisner and Art Spiegelman, but with the specific intent to discriminate between comics intended for a younger and/or general readership, and publications which are more likely to feature mature content, literary subject matter or experimental styles. As a result, European BD scholars have retroactively identified the 1962 Barbarella comic by Jean-Claude Forest (for its theme) and the first 1967 Corto Maltese adventure The Ballad of the Salty Sea by Hugo Pratt (for both art, and story style) in particular, as the comics up for consideration as the first European "graphic novels".

During the 19th century, there were many artists in Europe drawing cartoons, occasionally even utilising sequential multi-panel narration, albeit mostly with clarifying captions and dialogue placed under the panels rather than the speech balloons commonly used today. These were humorous short works rarely longer than a single page. In the Francophonie, artists such as Gustave Doré, Nadar, Christophe and Caran d'Ache began to be involved with the medium.

In the early decades of the 20th century, comics were not stand-alone publications, but were published in newspapers and weekly or monthly magazines as episodes or gags. Aside from these magazines, the Catholic Church, in the form of its then powerful and influential Union des œuvres ouvrières catholiques de France [ fr ], was creating and distributing "healthy and correct" magazines for children. In the early 1900s, the first popular French comics appeared. Two of the most prominent comics include Bécassine and Les Pieds Nickelés.

In the 1920s, after the end of the first world war, the French artist Alain Saint-Ogan started out as a professional cartoonist, creating the successful series Zig et Puce in 1925. Saint-Ogan was one of the first French-speaking artists to fully utilise techniques popularised and formularised in the United States, such as Speech balloons, even though the text comic format would remain the predominant native format for the next two to three decades in France, propagated as such by France's educators. In 1920, the Abbot of Averbode in Belgium started publishing Zonneland, a magazine consisting largely of text with few illustrations, which started printing comics more often in the following years.

Even though Les Pieds Nickelés, Bécassine and Zig et Puce managed to survive the war for a little while longer, modernised in all three cases and all of them continued by artists (the most notable one being Belgian Greg for the latter in the 1960s) other than the original creators, none of them succeeded to find a readership outside France itself and are consequently remembered in their native country only.

One of the earliest proper Belgian comics was Hergé 's The Adventures of Tintin, with the story Tintin in the Land of the Soviets, which was published in Le Petit Vingtième in 1929. It was quite different from future versions of Tintin, the style being very naïve and simple, even childish, compared to the later stories. The early Tintin stories often featured racist and political stereotypes, which caused controversies after the war, and which Hergé later regretted. After Tintin' s early massive success, the magazine decided to release the stories in hardcover book format as well, directly after they had run their respective courses in the magazine — in the process introducing something new in the Belgian comic world: the comic album. The 1930 Tintin au pays des Soviets title is generally considered the first of its kind – even though there are three similar Zig et Puce titles from French publisher Hachette, known to predate the Tintin title by one to two years, but which failed to find an audience outside France. The magazine continued to do so for the subsequent three stories until 1934 when the magazine, as such not particularly well-suited as book publisher, turned album publication over to Belgian specialised book publisher Casterman, who has been the Tintin album publisher ever since.

The criticisms regarding the early stories notwithstanding and even though the format still had a long way to go, Tintin is widely considered the starting point and archetype of the modern Franco-Belgian comic as currently understood, and as amply demonstrated in the vast majority of treatises and reference works written on the subject since the 1960s, and the first to find a readership outside its originating country. As such the Tintin series went on to become one of the greatest post-war successes of the Franco-Belgian comic world, having seen translations in dozens of languages, including English, as well as becoming one of the relatively few European comics to have seen a major, successful, Hollywood movie adaptation as late as 2011, nearly thirty years after the death of its creator.

A further step towards modern comic books happened in 1934 when Hungarian Paul Winkler, who had previously been distributing comics to the monthly magazines via his Opera Mundi bureau, made a deal with King Features Syndicate to create Le Journal de Mickey, a weekly 8-page early "comic-book". The success was immediate, and soon other publishers started publishing periodicals with US series, which enjoyed considerable popularity in both France and Belgium. This continued during the remainder of the decade, with hundreds of magazines publishing mostly imported material. The most important ones in France were Robinson (with Flash Gordon and Mandrake), Hurrah (with Brick Bradford, Ace Drummond and King), and the Fleurus presse [ fr ] (on behalf of the Action catholique des enfants [ fr ] a.k.a. Cœurs Vaillants et Âmes Vaillantes de France) publications Cœurs Vaillants ("Valiant Hearts", 1929, for adolescent boys), Âmes vaillantes [ fr ] ("Valiant Souls", 1937, for adolescent girls) and Fripounet et Marisette [ fr ] (1945, for pre-adolescents), while Belgian examples included Wrill and Bravo.

Cœurs Vaillants started to publish The Adventures of Tintin in syndication from 1930 onward, constituting one of the earliest known French-Belgian comic world cross-fertilisations, only reinforced when Abbot Courtois, editor-in-chief of Cœurs Vaillants, asked Hergé to create a series about real children with a real family as opposed to Tintin ' s ambiguous age and family (and thus more in line with the Catholic norms and values on which the magazine was founded), which resulted in the 1936 comic The Adventures of Jo, Zette and Jocko. Incidentally, as Hergé created his comics in the increasingly popular speech balloon format, it initially led to a conflict with Cœurs Vaillants, which utilised the text comic format its editors considered more appropriate from an educational point-of-view. Hergé won the argument, and speech balloon comics were henceforth featured alongside text comics in the magazine (and that of its spin-offs) until the mid-1960s, when speech balloon comics were all but abandoned by the magazine(s), the general trend notwithstanding.

In 1938, the Belgian Spirou magazine was launched. Conceived in response to the immense popularity of Journal de Mickey and the success of Tintin in Le Petit Vingtième, the black and white/colour hybrid magazine featured predominantly comics from an US origin (Red Ryder, Dick Tracy, Superman) at the time of its launch until the war years, but there were also native comics included. These concerned Spirou, created by the Frenchman Rob-Vel (and thus another early cross-fertilisation example) and who served as the mascot and namesake for the new magazine, and Tif et Tondu created by Belgian artist Fernand Dineur. Both series would survive the war and achieve considerable popularity after the war, albeit under the aegis of other artists (see below). Published in a bi-lingual country, Spirou simultaneously appeared in a Dutch-language version as well under the name Robbedoes for the Flemish market. Export to the Netherlands followed a few years later shortly after the war. The magazine was conceived and published by publisher Éditions Dupuis S.A. (as of 1989, simply: Dupuis), which was established by its founding namesake Jean Dupuis [ fr ] as a printing business in 1898, but changed to being a publishing house in 1922, publishing non-comic books and magazines. Since the launch of Spirou however, Dupuis has increasingly focused on comic productions and is currently, as of 2017, a comics publisher exclusively and one of the two great Belgian Franco-Belgian comic publishing houses still in existence.

As post-war exports to France (like in the Netherlands, the magazine was not available in France until 1945-46), Spirou – featuring the (early) creations of Belgian greats like Morris, Franquin and Jijé – became a significant inspiration for future French BD greats such as Jean "Mœbius" Giraud and Jean-Claude Mézières, eventually setting them off on their comic careers, but who were schoolboys at the time they became acquainted with the magazine.

When Germany invaded France and Belgium, it became close to impossible to import US comics. The occupying Nazis banned US animated movies and comics they deemed to be of a questionable character. Both were, however, already very popular before the war and the hardships of the war period only seemed to increase the demand. This created an opportunity for many young artists to start working in the comics and animation business. At first, authors like Jijé in Spirou and Edgar P. Jacobs in Bravo continued unfinished US stories of Superman and Flash Gordon. Thus, by imitating the style and flow of those comics, they improved their knowledge of how to make efficient comics. Soon even those homemade versions of US comics had to stop, and the authors had to create their own heroes and stories, giving the new talents a chance to be published. Many of the most famous artists of the Franco-Belgian comics started in this period, including the Belgians André Franquin, Peyo (who started together at the small Belgian animation studio Compagnie Belge d'Animation – CBA), Willy Vandersteen, and the Frenchmen Jacques Martin and Albert Uderzo, who worked for Bravo.

A lot of the publishers and artists who had managed to continue working during the occupation were accused of being collaborators and were imprisoned after the liberation by the reinstated national authorities on the insistence of the former French resistance, although most were released soon afterwards without charges being pressed. For example, this happened to one of the famous magazines, Cœurs Vaillants. It was founded by Abbot Courtois (under the alias Jacques Coeur) in 1929. As he had the backing of the church, he managed to publish the magazine throughout the war, and was charged with being a collaborator. After he was forced out, his successor Pihan (as Jean Vaillant) took up the publishing, moving the magazine in a more humorous direction. Likewise, Hergé was another artist who also found himself on the receiving end of similar accusations of the former Belgian resistance. He managed to clear his name and went on to create Studio Hergé in 1950, where he acted as a sort of mentor for the assistants that it attracted. Among the people who worked there were Bob de Moor, Jacques Martin and Roger Leloup, all of whom exhibit the easily recognisable Belgian ligne claire (clean line style), often opposed to the " Marcinelle school " style (named for the seat of Spirou publisher Dupuis), mostly proposed by authors from Spirou magazine such as Franquin, Peyo and Morris. In 1946, Hergé also founded the weekly Tintin magazine, which quickly gained enormous popularity, like the weekly Spirou appearing in a Dutch version under the name Kuifje for the Flemish and Dutch markets. Notable Belgian comic artists who at a later point in time achieved fame while working for Tintin magazine included among others William Vance, the aforementioned Greg, Tibet and Hermann Huppen.

Tintin magazine publisher Les Éditions du Lombard (as of 1989 simply: Le Lombard) was especially founded by Raymond Leblanc for the magazine's launch in conjuncture with Hergé as the latter could not find a publisher due to the fact that he was at that time still under investigation for alleged collaboration. Remarkably, album publications of the creations from the early group of artists centred around Hergé was, then and now, outsourced to longstanding Tintin book publisher Casterman, while Lombard itself only started album publications for those artist who joined the magazine at a later point in time. Nonetheless, with Lombard Francophone Europe had received its first specialised comics publisher actually conceived as such. Le Lombard went on to become one of the three great Belgian publishing houses to produce comics in French (and in Dutch as well for that matter due to the bi-lingual nature of the country), alongside Dupuis and Casterman, and like them as of 2017 still in existence.

Many other magazines did not survive the war: Le Petit Vingtième had disappeared, Le Journal de Mickey only returned in 1952. In the second half of the 1940s many new magazines appeared, although in most cases they only survived for a few weeks or months. The situation stabilised around 1950 with Spirou and the new Tintin magazine (with the team focused around Hergé) as the most influential and successful magazines for the next decade.

Yet, 1944 (both France and Belgium were liberated before war's end) had already seen the start of the industry career of the French-Belgian Jean-Michel Charlier, in the process becoming one of its most towering figures. That year and a lawyer by trade, Charlier joined the newly formed comic syndication agency World Press [ fr ] of Georges Troisfontaines, Belgium's answer to King Features Syndicate. Originally hired as an editorial draughtsman, Troisfontaines recognised Charlier's talent for writing and persuaded him to switch from drawing to scripting comics, something Charlier did with great success for the remainder of his life, creating close to three dozen series, several of them becoming classics of the Franco-Belgian BD. Spirou magazine became the agency's first and foremost client, and the first post-war decade saw the infusion into the magazine with many new series from young, predominantly Belgian talents like Eddy Paape, Victor Hubinon, Mitacq, Albert Weinberg [ fr ], instituting an era in which Jijé's career truly took off with his best-known creation, the Western comic series Jerry Spring, that started its run in Spirou in March 1954. Jijé incidentally, had magazine tenure, but closely cooperated with the World Press artists before embarking on his own creation. Successful series Charlier himself created in this period were the educational short series Les Belles Histoires de l'oncle Paul (serving as proving ground in order to develop the talents and skills of young aspiring artists like Belgians Mitacq, Arthur Piroton [ fr ], Hermann, Dino Attanasio and the Frenchman Jean Graton among others, several of whom switching over to industry competitor Lombard at a later point in their careers, most notably Hermann), Buck Danny (with Hubinon), La Patrouille des Castors (with Mitacq after his apprenticeship on L'oncle Paul) and Jean Valhardi (with Paape and Jijé). Aside from being a very prolific comic script writer, becoming his trademark henceforth, Charlier also became an editorial driving force and spokesperson for the agency, because of his background in law and his assertive personality. As such, he was responsible for introducing the two Frenchmen René Goscinny (who also starting out his comics career at the agency) and former Bravo artist Albert Uderzo to each other in 1951 at the in that year opened Paris, France, office of World Press, in the process creating one of Franco-Belgium's most successful BD partnerships. One of the first comics both men created together in the employ of the agency was the in colonial French-Canada era set Western series Oumpah-pah, which was already conceived as loose gags in 1951, but failed to find a magazine publisher. Reworked into complete stories, the comic became successful in Tintin magazine in the period 1958–1962 (and thus, alongside Martin's The Adventures of Alix, one of the first purely French comics to appear in the Belgian magazine), effectively becoming the "spiritual father" of their later Asterix creation.

But it were not just the artists contracted by World Press who infused Spirou with its new elan, Dupuis itself had contracted a group of artists who were as much responsible for its success and then some as it was this group that defined the rejuvenated magazine in the post-war era. Upon war's end three artists from the defunct animation studio CBA were hired by Dupuis as staff artists for Spirou, Eddy Paape (before he switched over to World Press), André Franquin and Maurice "Morris" De Bevere, and it was Morris who created in 1946 the second one of the great Franco-Belgian comic classics, Lucky Luke, which made it first appearance in the Almanach appendix issue of 7 December 1946. Franquin was passed the comic Spirou et Fantasio by his mentor Jijé, who himself had taken over the series from original creator Rob-Vel in the war years, and it was Franquin who provided the series with its popularity, before he embarked for the magazine on his most popular creation Gaston in 1957. With the addition of artist Willy "Will" Maltaite, who took over the series Tif et Tondu from original creator Fernand Dineur, the group that became known as " La bande des quatre " (Gang of 4), consisting of Jijé, Franquin, Morris and Will, was complete and constituted the foundation of what was dubbed the "Marcinelle school" style. However, such was the success of these artists, that the work of pre-war artists Rob-Vel and Dineur, was eclipsed by that of the younger generation, causing them to slide into oblivion. In 1952, another future great working in the Marcinelle school tradition was added to Spirou, artist Pierre "Peyo" Culliford upon introduction by Franquin. Peyo was actually a former colleague of Franquin at CBA, but was at the time of the demise of the animation studio not considered by Dupuis because of his young age. For Spirou Peyo continued with the series Johan and Peewit, which he had already started in 1947 for the Belgian newspapers La Dernière Heure and Le Soir. It was this series that in 1957 spawned another of the great Franco-Belgian comic classics, The Smurfs. With both magazines firmly in place, it was the success of Spirou and Tintin that initiated what many fans and scholars consider the golden age of the (Franco-)Belgian comic. As a result, the US comics didn't come back in as great a volume as before in both Belgium and France after the war, but in the case of France not for want of popularity, quite the contrary actually.

In France, a 1949 law about publications intended for the youth market was partly written by the French Communist Party, a major political force in France directly after the war (because of their highly successful and effective resistance in the war years), to actually exclude most of the US publications. The law, called " Loi du 16 juillet 1949 sur les publications destinées à la jeunesse [ fr ] " ("Law of July 16th 1949 on Publications Aimed at the Youth") and passed in response to the post-liberation influx of US comics, was invoked as late as 1969 to prohibit the comic magazine Fantask [ fr ] —which featured translated versions of Marvel Comics stories — after seven issues. The formal and official justification for the law was the legislative desire to protect the youth of France from the perfidious and corruptive influence perceived to permeate foreign comics, especially in regard to violence and sexuality, the US ones in particular (even though they were not mentioned by name in the law), and in this the French law actually foreshadowed the 1954 publication of the comic condemning treatise Seduction of the Innocent by Fredric Wertham in the United States itself. But there was an equally important, but unofficial, reason for the law as well; US comics were doing so well in post-liberation France, that native comic magazines, particularly the Catholic ones, became threatened in their very existence, and the law therefore became concurrently a veiled market protection mechanism. An added sense of urgency was, besides the huge popularity the US magazines enjoyed among France's youth, that the native publications had at that time a distinct disadvantage over their US counterparts as the country still experienced a serious post-war paper shortage (reflected as such in the poor paper quality, relatively low page count and lower circulation numbers of the native magazines of that era), something the higher quality US ones did not suffer from, they receiving preferential treatment under the Marshall Plan. The first targeted US comic for example, Tarzan, enjoyed a weekly circulation of 300,000 copies, twice the one Cœurs Vaillants had and dwarfing the 76,000 copy circulation of Tintin, and it was but one of the many US comics published in France in the immediate post-war era. It was the very reason for the unlikely French Catholic-Communist alliance in this regard, and a very effective one at that as US comics all but disappeared from the French comic scene for the time being, the Le Journal de Mickey excepted, which only reappeared three years later in former occupied western Europe.

It was not just US productions which were prohibited under the law, several Belgian French-language comic creations of the era also fell victim to the scrutiny of the oversight committee charged with upholding the law for varying reasons, as stipulated in its rather sweeping article 2 (presently article 3), which allowed for almost at will prohibition of comics for reasons that suited the policies of any French government in power at any given time. A famous example concerned the two Korean War volumes of the popular aviation comic series Buck Danny, created by Belgians Charlier (who as spokesperson for World Press/ Spirou was actually summoned to appear in person for a board of inquiry at the French Ministry of Information to account for himself) and Hubinon, which were prohibited in 1954 as article 2 expressly forbade any mentioning of an actual, current armed conflict in a children's publication – but also because communist members of the commission had issues with the strong anticommunist sentiment expressed in the comic according to writer Charlier. Both volumes remained prohibited in France until 1969, though French fans on holiday in Belgium, Switzerland or Luxembourg could pick up the albums unhindered over there. The law also came in handy to somewhat regulate – though not prohibiting – the availability in France of Belgian magazines like Spirou (which actually came close to prohibition however, as the Korean War stories were serialised in the magazine, but which was narrowly averted at the eleventh hour by Charlier) and Tintin in favor of the native Catholic magazines, after the conservatives had reasserted their political predominance in the country during the 1950s.

Rigorously enforced by the government oversight committee Commission de surveillance et de contrôle des publications destinées à l'enfance et à l'adolescence [ fr ] ('Committee in Charge of Surveillance and Control over Publications Aimed at Children and Adolescents'), particularly in the 1950s and the first half of the 1960s, the law turned out to be a stifling influence on the post-war development of the French comic world until the advent of Pilote magazine and more specifically the May 1968 social upheaval. Legally, the Commission had no punitive powers, only advisory ones, but in practice Charlier begged to differ. The all powerful Commission, shielded by the Justice Ministry (which was the punitive authority, but who took any and all Commission recommendations at face value, no questions asked), convened on a weekly basis, sifting through publications and weeding out those they felt subject to prohibition under the law, every decision they took being final, under no obligation to ever provide any formal justification whatsoever and without any possibility for appeal, which amounted to de facto state censorship according to Charlier.

Yet, it were also the communists who provided the comic scene in France with a single bright-spot; Having its origins in the communist wartime underground resistance publications, the comic magazine Vaillant (not to be confused with the two near-similarly named Fleurus publications) was launched in 1945 upon war's end. The secular magazine provided a platform for predominantly native comic talent born between the 1920s and the 1940s, not able or willing to work for the Catholic magazines, to showcase their work. French names of note who started out their career in the magazine were among others Nikita Mandryka, Paul Gillon, Jean-Claude Forest and Marcel Gotlib, and were less beholden to what was then still the Belgian bande dessinée tradition, other native contemporaries were – in essence ranking among the first native French artists to provide the "Franco" element in what later would become the "Franco-Belgian comics" expression, with comic artist Marijac having been a trailblazer. Marijac actually started out for Cœurs Vaillants in the 1930s, but distanced himself from the magazine directly after the liberation, when he started the secular comics magazine Coq hardi [ fr ] (1944–1963), France's first recognisable modern BD magazine. Marijac himself became a prolific figure of note in the French comic scene of the 1950s as co-editor and contributor for a series of native comic magazines other than his own Coq Hardi, and conceived in the era under the shadow of the all-present Catholic publications to fill the void left by the banned US comics such as Les Grandes Séries Internationales, Cricri Journal, Mireille, Ouest-Magazine, Nano et Nanette, Héros du Far West, Frimousse, Cocorico and Allez-France, all of which filled with work from French artists, now forgotten save Marijac himself (who was honoured for his efforts at the 1979 Angoulême comics festival with its most prestigious award), along with the magazines they created their work for.

It has been observed that, unlike the Belgian publications, these mostly secular native magazines were largely left alone by the Commission de Surveillance, save for one notable exception; Pierre Mouchot, creator and editor of US inspired comic magazines in the immediate post-war era, was on recommendation of the Commission persecuted for his likewise US (and Italian) inspired comic series Big Bill le Casseur and P’tit Gars, having to appear in court no less than eight times in the period 1950 - 1954, actually winning most of his cases in the lower courts. And even though he and his creations are both in equal measure forgotten, Mouchot became the only French comics artist ever to be legally persecuted, and ultimately convicted by the highest court of appeal (though only receiving symbolic punishment) under article 2 of the 1949 law for real. However, the conviction did serve as an effective deterrent for other native artists – and thus firmly establishing the Commission as a force to be reckoned with, even though they had a tough time becoming so as Mouchot kept winning his lower court cases – who continued to create their comics while erring on the side of caution for the next decade. It is in this light that some of the other early French contemporary greats, such as Martin, Graton, Uderzo, and his writing partner Goscinny opted to start out their careers for Belgian comic publications, neither wanting to submit themselves to the scrutiny of the Commission de Surveillance directly, nor wanting to work for either the Catholic or communist magazines for personal reasons.

The situation in Belgium was nowhere near as restrictive as it was in France. Catholics, who were the dominant factor in politics in the country as well at the time, did not have to contend with the negligible influence of the communists, contrary to their French counterparts. There was actually no need perceived for regulating measures in Belgium as US productions, contrary to France, were already supplanted in popularity by the native comics (aided by the fact that Belgium had not seen the massive influx of US comics in the same measure France had, as Belgium had been predominantly liberated by British and Canadian forces, whose soldiers did not bring along their comics in the same volume the USs did), whereas the majority of Belgian comics artists were either Catholics themselves (or at least sympathetic to the faith) such as Jijé (whose early realistic works were deeply steeped in the faith), or had, like Hergé did, strong ties with the as "healthy" considered scouting movement – a significant presence in Belgian society at the time, which also explains the contemporary popularity of Charlier's La patrouille des Castor series in Belgium, which was centred around a scouting chapter – and were thus, to use the modern expression, already " politically correct " in the first place, that is from the Belgian perspective at least. However, the incident Charlier had experienced with the Commission shook up the editors of Spirou and Tintin, and as France was a too important market to lose, they too henceforth chose to err on the side of caution by screening the creations of their artists before magazine publication, essentially being forced by the French to exercise self-censorship. Having already embarked on their divergent evolutionary path, Flemish comics escaped this kind of scrutiny, as they were at the time rarely, if at all, translated into French.

In 1959, the influential French weekly Pilote launched, already from the start an attempt to be a more mature alternative to Spirou and Pilote, aimed at a teenage audience, with the " Asterix " series as an almost instantaneous success. The audience radicalised at a faster pace than the editors, however, which had trouble keeping up. The French satire magazine Hara-Kiri was launched, also aimed at an adult audience.

In the 1960s, most of the French Catholic magazines, such as the Fleurus publications, waned in popularity, as they were "re-Christianised" and went to a more traditional style with more text and fewer drawings. This meant that in France, magazines like Pilote and Vaillant (relaunched as Pif gadget in 1969), and Spirou and Tintin for French-speaking Belgium, gained almost the entire market and became the obvious goal for new artists from their respective countries, who took up the styles prevalent in those magazines to break into the business.

With a number of publishers in place, including Dargaud (Pilote), Le Lombard (Tintin), and Dupuis (Spirou), three of the biggest influences for over 50 years, the market for domestic comics had reached (commercial) maturity. In the following decades, magazines like Spirou, Tintin, Vaillant (relaunched as Pif Gadget in 1969), Pilote, and Heroïc-Albums [ fr ] (the first to feature completed stories in each issue, as opposed to the episodic approach of other magazines) would dominate the market. At this time, the French creations had already gained fame throughout Europe, and many countries had started importing the comics in addition to — or as substitute for — their own productions.

The aftermath of the May 1968 social upheaval brought many mature – as in aimed at an adult readership – BD magazines, something that had not been seen previously and virtually all of them of purely French origin, which was also indicative of France rapidly becoming the preeminent force in the (continental) European BD world, eventually usurping the position the Belgians held until then. L'Écho des Savanes (from new publisher Éditions du Fromage [ fr ], founded by Pilote defectors Nikita Mandryka, Claire Bretécher, and Marcel Gotlib), with Gotlib's pornography watching deities and Bretécher's Les Frustrés ('The Frustrated Ones'), and Le Canard Sauvage ('The Wild Duck/Mag'), an art-zine featuring music reviews and BDs, were among the earliest. Following suit was Métal Hurlant (vol. 1: December 1974 – July 1987 also from a new French publisher Les Humanoïdes Associés, founded by likewise Pilote defectors, Druillet, Jean-Pierre Dionnet, and Mœbius) with the far-reaching science fiction and fantasy of Mœbius, Druillet, and Bilal. Its translated counterpart made an impact in the US as Heavy Metal. This trend continued during the seventies, until the original Métal Hurlant folded in the early eighties, living on only in the US edition, which soon had an independent development from its French-language parent. Nonetheless, it were these publications and their artists which are generally credited with the revolutionising and emancipation of the Franco-Belgian BD world. As indicated, most of these early adult magazines were established by former Pilote BD artists, who had left the magazine to break out on their own, after they had staged a revolt in the editorial offices of Dargaud, the publisher of Pilote, during the 1968 upheaval, demanding and ultimately receiving more creative freedom from then editor-in-chief René Goscinny (see also: " Jean "Mœbius" Giraud on his part in the uprising at Pilote ").

Essentially, these new magazines along with other contemporaries of their kind, were the French counterparts of the slightly earlier US underground comix, also conceived and popularised as a result of the counterculture of the 1960s, of which the French May 1968 events were only a part. But unlike their US counterparts, the French magazines were mainstream from the start when they eventually burst onto the scene in the early 1970s, as publications of this kind could not escape the scrutiny of the Commission de Surveillance prior to 1968, as editor François Cavanna of the satirical magazine Hara-Kiri (launched in 1960) had experienced several times to his detriment, having had to reinvent his magazine on several occasions. Aside from the creative aspects, the 1960s brought in effect another kind of freedom for French BD artists as well - commercial and financial freedom. Until the revolt in the offices of Pilote, artists worked in a studio system, namely a tenured exclusive working relationship at the magazine or publisher, with artists having little to no control over both commercial and creative aspects of their creations – except for a few artists who also held editorial offices at publishing houses such as Goscinny, Charlier and Greg, the former of which incidentally, having also been a major element for the revolt at Pilote. That changed as well after 1968, when more and more artists decided to ply their trade as free-lancers, the L'Écho des Savanes founders having been early pioneers in that respect, and has as of 2017 become the predominant artist-publisher relationship. While contracts tend to be long-term for specific series at a particular publisher, they no longer prevent artists, like the below-mentioned François Bourgeon and Hermann Huppen, to create other BDs for other publishers, sometimes even suspending a series for the one in favour of a series for the other.

The advent of the new adult magazines had a profound effect on France's hitherto most influential BD magazine Pilote. Editor-in-chief Goscinny had at first refused to implement the changes demanded by its artists during the 1968 revolt in the editorial offices, but he now found himself suddenly confronted with the magazine haemorrhaging its most promising BD talents and diminishing sales. The magazine was eventually turned into a monthly magazine, its artists who had not yet left given more creative freedoms and the Belgian influence terminated definitively with the departure of co-editor Charlier in 1972 and the last Belgian artists Hubinon and Jijé following suit a short time thereafter, transforming the magazine into a purely French one. However, while the magazine was now targeted at an older adolescent readership with stories featuring more mature themes, Goscinny stopped short of letting the magazine become a truly adult magazine. Yet, the magazine was unable to regain the dominant position it had held in the previous one-and-a-half decade, due to the flooding of the market with alternatives.

Lagging behind the French for the first time in regard to the more mature BDs, the Belgians made good on their arrear when publisher Casterman launched the magazine À Suivre (Wordt Vervolgd for its Dutch-language counterpart, both of which translating into English as "To Be Continued") in October 1977. Until then the old venerable publisher (est. in 1780 as a printing and publishing company) had somewhat limited itself as the album publisher of Hergé's Tintin since 1934, slightly expanded upon after the war with a couple of Hergé inspired creations by closely affiliated artists such as Jacques Martin, François Craenhals and the Danish C. & V. Hansen couple. It was with the specific intent to expand beyond the somewhat limited Hergé boundaries with other, more diverse high quality work, that the publisher launched (À Suivre), which printed BD creations by Ted Benoît, Jacques Tardi, Hugo Pratt, François Schuiten, Paul Teng and many others from French, Italian and/or Dutch origins, but relatively few from Belgian artist as there were not that many active in the adult field at that time, with Schuiten, Didier Comès – as already stated, one of the very few BD artists of German-Belgian descent, alongside Hermann Huppen – and Jean-Claude Servais [ fr ] being three of the few exceptions. It was À Suivre that popularised the concept of the graphic novel – in French abbreviated as "Roman BD", "roman" being the translation for "novel" – as a longer, more adult, more literate and artistic BD in Europe. Unlike its Dupuis counterpart, and while their BD catalog has expanded considerably since then, Casterman has never evolved into a purely BD publisher by completely abandoning its book publishing roots, as it is currently also a prolific publisher of children's books.

Yet, it remained French publications and French artists who would continue to dominate the field from the late-1970s onward to this day, with such (sometimes short-lived) magazines as Bananas, Virus, Mormoil, the feminist Ah! Nana [ fr ], Casablanca and Fluide Glacial. It were in these such magazines that a younger, post-war generation of French BD artists like Yves Chaland, Édika and Philippe Foerster [ fr ] debuted, whereas veterans like Gotlib and Franquin found a home for their later, darker and more cynical work.

A major player in the field became French publisher and newcomer Glénat Éditions (founded in 1972, and who actually started out publishing graphic novels directly as albums before the launch of Circus) with their two main magazine publications Circus [ fr ] (1975–1989) and Vécu [ fr ] (1985–1994, with emphasis on mature stories of an accurate historical nature), featuring predominantly the work of French BD talents, but who did so with a twist; Glénat targeted their magazines at a readership positioned between the adolescent readership of Pilote, Tintin and Spirou and the mature readership of such magazines as (À Suivre), Métal Hurlant and others. French BD artists of note who were nurtured into greatness in the Glénat publications were among others Mayko and Patrick Cothias, but most conspicuously François Bourgeon and André Juillard. Exemplary of the different, older target audience Glénat was aiming at, became the two finite, historical series Bourgeon created; Les Passagers du vent (1979–2009, The Passengers of the Wind, seven volumes, set in 18th-century seafaring and slave trading Europe, becoming one of the first BD series to deal realistically in considerable detail with the dark slavery chapter in human history) and Les Compagnons du crépuscule (1983–1989, 'Companions of the Dusk', three volumes, set in 13th-century Europe and published by Casterman). Both series made short work of any romantic notion about the two historic eras still lingering in anyone's subconscious because of imagery imbued upon them by 1940s–1960s Hollywood movie productions or Franco-Belgian bandes dessinées as published in Cœurs Vaillants, Tintin, or Spirou in the same era for that matter. Renowned for his meticulous research into the subject matter of the BD series he was creating, not seldom taking as long as it took him to create the series in question, Bourgeon depicted an historical reality devoid of any so-called "heroes", only featuring common people who were as often victimised as they were heroic, living in a world which was brutally hard while living a live which was therefore all too often very short for the common man, being habitually subjugated to the will of the powerful without any recourse whatsoever to objective justice, especially the women. Bourgeon however, made his harsh message to his readership palatable by his relatively soft art style and his optimistic view regarding human resilience. No such respite was afforded the reader however with Hermann's 11th-century epos The Towers of Bois-Maury (1984–1994, French : Les Tours de Bois-Maury), whose original ten-volume series was serialised in Vécu in the same era Bourgeon's Passagers was in Circus. Not only did Hermann's stark and uncompromising art style served to reinforce the grim atmosphere of his medieval settings, any and all redeeming optimistic commentary on human nature was also lacking in his narrative, quite the contrary actually, making his Middle Ages truly the Dark Ages where the vast majority of humanity was living short, violent lives in abject squalor, with not a single so-called "hero" in sight anywhere in his series. To hammer home the point, both artists had their mediaeval knights, around whom both narratives were centred, die violent deaths nowhere near the fulfilment of their respective quests, thereby reinforcing the futility of such endeavours. With such series driving home the point that real history is made by mere humans and not "super-humans", the Franco-Belgian historical BD had come a long way since their first romanticised and/or idealised appearances in the 1940s–1970s, particularly in Tintin and Pilote as portrayed by such artists as the Fred and Liliane Funcken couple [ fr ] (Le Chevalier blanc, Harald le Viking, Lieutenant Burton), William Vance (Howard Flynn, Rodric, Ramiro), François Craenhals (Chevalier Ardent) or Victor Hubinon (Barbe Rouge), to name but a few.

It was not just the BD scene these new publications and their artists changed, the perception of the medium in French society also changed radically in the 1970s–1980s, in stark contrast to the one it held in the 1940s–1950s. Recognising that the medium-advanced France's cultural status in the world, the cultural authorities of the nation started to aid the advancement of the medium as a bonafide art form, especially under the patronage of Minister of Culture Jack Lang, who had formulated his long-term Quinze mesures nouvelles en faveur de la Bande dessinée ('15 new measures in favour of the BD') ministry policy plan in 1982, which was updated and reaffirmed by a latter-day successor of Lang in 1997. It was consequently in the 1980s–1990s era that the medium achieved its formal status in France's Classification des arts (Classifications of the arts) as "Le Neuvième Art" ("the 9th art"), aside from becoming accepted as a mature part of French culture by Francophone society at large (in France and French-speaking Belgium it is as common to encounter grownup people reading BDs in public places, such as cafe terraces or public transportation, as it is people reading books, newspapers or magazines). Since then more than one BD artist have received " Ordre des Arts et des Lettres " civilian knighthoods, and these were not restricted to French nationals alone, as Japanese artist Jiro Taniguchi has also received one in 2011 for his efforts to merge the Franco-Belgian BD with the Japanese manga format (see below).

But it is however Jean "Mœbius" Giraud, called "the most influential bandes dessinées artist after Hergé" by several academic BD scholars, who is considered the premier French standard bearer of "Le Neuvième Art", as he has received two different civilian knighthoods with a posthumous rank elevation of his Arts and Letters knighthood to boot, an unicum for a BD artist and something the de facto inventor of the Franco-Belgian BD, Hergé, has never achieved even once, not even from his own native country Belgium (presumably because of the lingering impressions left by either the criticisms regarding his early Tintin stories, the post-war collaboration allegations, or both and neither of which he had ever managed to fully free himself from in his lifetime). Exemplary of Mœbius' standing in French culture, was the high-status, high-profile "Mœbius transe forme" exposition the prestigious Parisian Fondation Cartier pour l'Art Contemporain art museum organised from 2 October 2010 – 13 March 2011. As of 2017, it stands out as one of the largest exhibitions ever dedicated to the work of an individual BD artist by an official, state-sanctioned art museum – art as in art with a capital "A" – alongside the 20 December 2006 - 19 February 2007 Hergé exposition in the even more prestigious Centre Georges Pompidou modern art museum (likewise located in Paris and incidentally one of President Mitterrand's "Great Works") on the occasion of the centenary of that artist's birth. Giraud's funeral services in March 2012 was attended by a representative of the French nation in the person of Minister of Culture Frédéric Mitterrand, who also spoke on behalf of the nation at the services, and who was incidentally also the nephew of former President of France François Mitterrand, who had personally awarded Giraud with his first civilian knighthood in 1985, thereby becoming one of the first BD artists to be bestowed the honour. Giraud's death was a considerable media event in France, but ample attention was also given to his demise in press releases all around the world in even as faraway places like Indonesia (Jakarta Globe, 11 March 2012), a country not particularly known for a thriving comic culture. Yet, and despite the nation having embraced the BD, it should also be noted that both the law of 1949 and its oversight committee are as of 2025 still in existence, their legitimacy remaining as intact as it was in 1949. And while their impact and influence have significantly diminished in the wake of the events of 1968, their continued legal existence in the fringes does constitute the proverbial " Sword of Damocles " for the French BD world, despite artists, publishers, politicians and academics having questioned the relevance of both manifestations in a modern world in a public debate during a 1999 national conference organised on the subject by the Centre national de la bande dessinée et de l'image [ fr ] (CNBDI), France's largest and most important BD organisation.

Belgium, where the modern Franco-Belgian BD format was conceived after all, was somewhat slower in advancing the format as a bonafide art form, but has strongly followed suit in considering the Franco-Belgian BD as a "key aspect of Belgium's cultural heritage". While the expression "the 9th art" has been popularised in other countries as well, Belgium and France remain as of 2025, the only two countries worldwide where the medium has been accorded the formal status (when discounting the manga, which has achieved a near-similar, yet not quite identical status in native Japan), with its resultant strong backing from cultural authorities.

A visible manifestation of the latter has become the prestigious " Belgian Comic Strip Centre " (Dutch : Belgisch Centrum voor het Beeldverhaal, French : Centre belge de la Bande dessinée) established in 1989 in the Belgian capital Brussels, and which, as one of the largest BD museum in Europe, draws in 200,000 visitors annually. The museum is housed in a state-owned 1905 building designed by architect Victor Horta in the Art Nouveau style, the same style French female artist Annie Goetzinger has employed for her BDs. Belgium possesses two other, smaller, museums dedicated to individual BD artists, the Marc Sleen Museum (est. 2009), located across the street of the Comic Centre and dedicated to the work of the namesake Flemish BD creator, and, unsurprisingly, the especially built Musée Hergé (est. 2009) located in Louvain-la-Neuve, its interiors designed by Dutch BD artist Joost Swarte, who had worked in the Hergé tradition.

In France, Minister Jack Lang – who hit upon the idea after he had visited the permanent BD exhibition in the town's art museum in 1982, incidentally inspiring his long-term fifteen points policy plan for the medium that year, which included the establishment of a national BD museum – announced in 1984 the advent of a major national BD museum as part of President Mitterrand's grand scheme of providing the nation with major public works of a cultural nature (known in France as Grandes Operations d'Architecture et d'Urbanisme), to be housed in the historical town of Angoulême, already the locus of France's biggest annual BD festival since 1974. A major project in the making, involving the renovation of several ancient buildings and the designing of a new one spread over the grounds of the town's former brewery by renowned architect Roland Castro, the museum, Cité internationale de la bande dessinée et de l'image [ fr ], only opened its doors in June 2009 (though two smaller sub-museums, eventually incorporated in the larger final one, were already open to the public as early as 1991) in the process becoming the largest BD museum in Europe. The museum is administered by the CNBDI, established in 1985 for upcoming museum, but which has since then expanded its work on behalf of the BD beyond the confines of the museum alone, as already indicated above. On 11 December 2012, one of the buildings on the museum grounds, the futuristic building finished at the end of the 1980s housing the museum and CNBDI administrations, cinema, conference rooms, library and the other facilities for comics studies, was rechristened "The Vessel Mœbius" (French : Le Vaisseau Mœbius), in honour of the in that year deceased BD artist. When Lang had presented his plans, he was faced with opposition from some politicians who had rather seen such a museum in the capital of France, Paris. These politicians did have a point however, as Angoulême is somewhat located off the beaten tourist track, resulting in that the museum only draws in about roughly half the visitor numbers its smaller Belgian counterpart does annually, and most of them visiting the museum during the festival season, whereas the Belgian museum draws in a steady stream of visitors all year round.

A further revival and expansion came in the 1990s with several small independent publishers emerging, such as L'Association (established in 1990), Le Dernier Cri, Amok, Fréon (the latter two later merging into Frémok), and Ego comme X Known as "la nouvelle bande dessinée" (similar to the North American alternative comics), including La Cinquième Couche (founded 1993), which specialises in conceptual and experimental comics. These books are often more artistic, graphically and narratively, than the usual products of the big companies.

Dupuy and Berberian, Lewis Trondheim, Joann Sfar, Marjane Satrapi (Persepolis), Christophe Blain, Stéphane Blanquet, Edmond Baudoin, David B, and Emmanuel Larcenet all started their careers with these publishers, and would later gain fame with comics such as Donjon (Trondheim & Sfar), Isaac the Pirate (Blain), Professeur Bell (Sfar). Léo Quievreux, a key artist in the 1990s scene, founded and ran his own publication house, Gotoproduction, which he ran along with Jean Kristau and Anne-Fred Maurer from 1991 to 2000 or 2001, and which published over 60 books.

Before the Second World War, comics were almost exclusively published in tabloid newspapers. Since 1945, the " comic album " (or " comics album ", in French " album BD " for short) format gained popularity, a book-like format about half the former size. The albums, usually coloured all the way through, are almost always hardcover for the French editions and softcover for the Dutch editions—though the hardcover format has steadily gained ground from the late-1980s onward as customer option alongside the softcover format, contrary to Francophone Europe, where the hardcover format is the norm. When compared to US comic books and trade paperbacks (such as the later US graphic novel format), the European albums are rather large (roughly A4 standard). Comic albums started to receive their own individual ISBNs from the mid-1970s onward all over Europe solidifying their status as books.

Conceived as a format as currently understood in Belgium with the first Tintin albums in the early 1930s—incidentally the second reason for considering Tintin the starting point of the modern Franco-Belgian comic, besides the art style and format—albums were usually published as a collected book after a story or a convenient number of short stories had finished their run in serialised magazine (pre-)publication, usually with a one to two year lag. Since the inception of the format, it has been common for these albums to contain either 46 (for decades the standard) or, to a lesser degree, 62 pages (discounting the two disclaimer, and title pages) for print and binding technical reasons as printers traditionally printed eight double-sided pages on one sheet of print paper, though albums with a larger page count—provided the total page count is a multiple of eight—are not that uncommon, the graphic novel album publications of À Suivre publisher Casterman in particular.

It is in this field that Jean-Michel Charlier again turned out to be a seminal influence for the cultural phenomenon bandes dessinée. As publishing co-editor of Pilote, it was he who initiated a line of comic albums, for Dargaud, collecting the stories as serialised in the magazine until then, becoming in effect Dargaud's first comic album releases. The first July 1961 title in the series, titled La Collection Pilote, was the first adventure of Asterix from Uderzo and Goscinny, a runaway success right from the bat, followed by sixteen further titles from the magazine, with the first Blueberry adventure, "Fort Navajo", becoming the last to be released in July 1965. After that, the collection was suspended and each comic hero(s) hitherto featured therein, spun off in album series of their own. In order to give these releases a more "mature" book-like image, the albums were from the very start executed as hardcover editions for France, while being executed in softcover by licensee Le Lombard for Charlier's own native Belgium, somewhat reflecting the status comic albums still had in that country, as it had in other European countries. Charlier's initiative was not entirely devoid of a healthy dose of self-interest, as over half the releases in the collection were titles form comic series he had (co-)created. While Charlier did not conceive the format as such—since Casterman already released such albums since the early 1930s (Tintin), as did Dupuis sometime thereafter with some of its releases, but certainly not all as most of its albums like the Buck Danny series were released in softcover at the time – "his" albums were more than favorably received however, and the collection has attained a mythical status in the world of Franco-Belgian comics, especially in France where such releases had until then been rarities at best – excepting the "recuil" magazine series releases, album-like hard/softcover editions, chronologically collecting several magazine issues into one volume like Cœurs Vaillants, Spirou etc. and for decades a staple in Francophone Europe (and after the War, in Dutch-Europe as well).

It was only after the runaway success of the Collection that the hardcover became the norm for album releases in France. Even though the success of the collection prompted Le Lombard to speed up its hitherto lacklustre album releases, they did so initially in the predominant soft cover format until the mid-1970s like Dupuis was already doing, while maintaining the softcover format as standard for the Dutch-language editions for decades thereafter, as did Dargaud. Being a relative newcomer in the field Dargaud entered into a joint venture for the album releases with Le Lombard for nearly two decades. This meant that Dargaud album titles were released by Lombard for French-speaking Belgium (initially as soft covers in the first decade) and with a couple of years lag, for Dutch-Belgium as well (for the Netherlands and likewise with a lag, Dargaud sought out cooperation with other, local publishers for their releases), whereas Lombard album titles were released in France by Dargaud, invariably as hardcovers for their own releases, but in softcover for the first five years or so for the Lombard releases before permanently switching to hardcover, even before Lombard did for its Belgian home market. By the late 1970s, Dargaud had its own international distribution system in place, and the cooperation with Le Lombard was dissolved, that is until both were merged into a single publisher in 1992 – though maintaining their respective imprints – after they were absorbed in 1988 and 1986 respectively into the French holding company Média-Participations. Incidentally, Dupuis was in June 2004 bought by Média-Participations as well, though it has retained its separate status within the holding group because of its traditional focus on a somewhat younger readership than Dargaud/Le Lombard.

Since the mid-1980s, many comics are published directly as albums and do not appear in the magazines at all, as many comic magazines have disappeared since then for socio-economic reasons, including greats like Tintin, À Suivre, Métal Hurlant, and Pilote. The album format has also been adopted for native comics in most other European countries (the United Kingdom having until recently been one of the most manifest exceptions), as well as being maintained in foreign translations, in the process becoming the preeminent publication format of comics on the European continent, including the former Eastern Bloc after the fall of the wall in 1989. As with the Dutch-language editions, the soft cover format was initially the predominant format in which the foreign editions were released, but like the Dutch editions, the hard cover format has steadily gained ground in the other European countries as well, with Spain and Portugal having been early adopters as several volumes from La Collection Pilote were already released as such in the second half of the 1960s by local Dargaud/Lombard affiliated publishers, albeit as separate series contrary to the Collection source publication.

Since the mid-1980s, many of the popular, longer-lasting album series, and also several long out-of-print classic series, also get their own hardcover collected "omnibus" album editions, or intégrales, with each intégrale book generally containing two to five (sequential) titles of the series' original individual album releases, and from the mid-1990s onward increasingly including several inédits habitually – material that hasn't been published in albums before, such as magazine covers not used for albums – as well, alongside detailed illustrated editorials providing background information on the series in question and its creator(s), predominantly written by native comics scholars of which José-Louis Bocquet [ fr ], Patrick Gaumer [ fr ], and Gilles Ratier [ fr ] are the most prolific ones (see below). A practical reason for publishers to proceed in this manner, is the more recent fact that these older series have to some extent ran their courses in decades-long reprint runs of the individual volumes, and that it has commercially become more expedient to re-issue sold out volumes in this format, instead of continuing to reprint the individual volumes, aside from tapping into a new replacement market by targeting the nostalgia of now grown-up and more affluent readers who want to upgrade their worn-out individual copies they had bought and read as youths. Initially only released in French and, to a lesser degree, Dutch, these editions have after the late-1990s surged in popularity, becoming increasingly popular in other European countries as well in (hardcover) translation, where the intégrale format is in some cases also employed for native comics, particularly in Spain (by publishers such as Editores de Tebeos [ es ], Ponent Mon [ es ], and Dolmen Editorial [ es ]), the Netherlands (notably by Uitgeverij L [ nl ]) and Germany, a few of them reciprocally translated into French. All of the great Franco-Belgian comic publishing houses, still in existence, are as of 2017 engaged in releasing intégrales, either by themselves, or by licensing them out to local publishers for other European countries – or both, as is the case for Dutch language editions.

While more recent comics can no longer be easily categorised into one art style anymore (due to the increasing blurring of the boundaries between the styles in more recent comic creations – aside from the introduction of new and/or other art styles), and the old artists who pioneered the market are retiring, there were initially three basic, distinct styles within the field prior to the mid-1970s, featured in those comics with Belgian pedigree in particular.

One of the early greats, Belgian Joseph "Jijé" Gilian, was noted for creating comics in all three styles, the schematic style for his early work, "comic-dynamic" style for his later humouristic comics, as well as creating comics in the realistic style. The latter style he acquired during World War II when he had to complete realistic comics such as Fred Harman 's Red Ryder after the occupying Germans prohibited the import of these US comics. At first influenced by the style of such US artists like Harman, Jijé developed a realistic style distinctively his own (and thus European), and which became a major source of inspiration for future French/Belgian talents aspiring a career in creating realistic comics, the first and foremost of them having been Jean Giraud. Another of these Jijé-inspired youngsters was Jean-Claude Mézières, who actually started out his famed science-fiction creation Valérian and Laureline in the "comic-dynamic" style, but which quickly gravitated towards the realistic style, though traces of the former remain discernible in the depictions of his aliens, which therefore constituted an early example of the mixing of the three basic art styles. Another ambiguous, even earlier, example concerned the creations of Victor Hubinon (Buck Danny, Redbeard), who created comics in his own distinct style that had the characteristics of both the realistic and schematic styles, but which can not be unambiguously be categorised as either, or at the most be categorised as an "in between" style.

The realistic comics are often laboriously detailed. An effort is made to make the comics look as convincing, as natural as possible, while still being drawings. No speed lines or exaggerations are used. This effect is often reinforced by the colouring, which is less even, less primary than schematic or comic-dynamic comics. Famous examples are Jerry Spring by Jijé, Blueberry by Giraud, and Thorgal by Rosiński.

This is the almost Barksian line of Franquin and Uderzo. The humoristic comics in Pilote were almost exclusively comic-dynamic, and so were the ones in Spirou and l'Écho des savanes. These comics have very agitated drawings, often using lines of varying thickness to accent the drawings. The artists working in this style for Spirou, including Franquin, Morris, Jean Roba, and Peyo, are often grouped as the Marcinelle school.

The major factor in schematic drawings is a reduction of reality to easy, clear lines. Typical is the lack of shadows, the geometrical features, and the realistic proportions. Another trait is the often "slow" drawings, with little to no speed-lines, and strokes that are almost completely even. It is also known as the Belgian clean line style or ligne claire. The Adventures of Tintin is not only a very good example of this, it is currently also considered as the original template for the style as used in modern European comics. Other works in this style are the early comics of Jijé, who not only worked in the style, but also expanded upon it by adding Art Deco elements resulting in what several scholars came to consider a separate spin-off style, dubbed the "Atom style". This Jijé specific comics style enjoyed a revival in later works from French, Flemish and Dutch artists like Yves Chaland, Ever Meulen, and Joost Swarte respectively, the latter of whom, incidentally, actually coined the alternative ligne claire designation in 1977.

Even though Jijé has somewhat receded in oblivion outside his own native Belgium, he is held in high esteem by many of his peers, both those he tutored like Franquin and Mœbius, and others, and his versatility was such that it solicited an accolade of high praise from fellow artist Tibet, author of Ric Hochet and Chick Bill, who has stated that "If Hergé is considered as God the Father, then Jijé undoubtedly is the Godfather". After Jijé, it were predominantly French (Philippe Druillet, Jean Giraud as "Mœbius", Jacques Tardi, Annie Goetzinger, Fred) and Italian (Guido Crepax, Hugo Pratt, Lorenzo Mattotti, Attilio Micheluzzi) comics artists who increasingly introduced alternative art styles – sometimes extensive innovations/modernisations/expansions of the three existing basic styles, sometimes entirely new – in the medium from the mid-1970s onward, either by creating them directly for native publications, or by becoming major influences through translations which in Francophone Europe was especially the case for the Italians.

Despite the large number of local publications, the French and Belgian editors release numerous adaptations of comics from all over the world. In particular these include other European publications, from countries such as, most conspicuously, Italy (Guido Crepax, Hugo Pratt, and Milo Manara among many others), and to a somewhat lesser degree Spain (Daniel Torres), and Argentina (Alberto Breccia, Héctor Germán Oesterheld, and José Antonio Muñoz). Some well-known German (Andreas, Matthias Schultheiss), Swiss (Derib, Job, Cosey, Zep, Enrico Marini), and Polish (Grzegorz Rosiński) authors work almost exclusively for the Franco-Belgian market and their publishers such as Glénat and, most conspicuously, Le Lombard. Likewise, the French naturalised Yugoslav Enki Bilal worked exclusively for French publishers Dargaud and subsequently Les Humanoïdes Associés, whereas Dutch graphic novelist Paul Teng has, after his career failed to take off in his native country, first worked for Casterman before switching to Le Lombard and subsequently to Dargaud.

Classic US and British comic books, those of the traditional superhero genres in particular, are not as well represented in the French and Belgian comics market, for the reasons as explored above. However, the graphic novel work of Will Eisner and Art Spiegelman (first published in French in À Suivre) is respected to such a high extent that it has actually led to the adoption of the English expression in mainland Europe as well, particularly for such mature works as published by Casterman or Les Humanoïdes Associés. Nonetheless, a few comic strips like Peanuts and Calvin and Hobbes have had considerable success in France and Belgium. Yet, it was in the field of the graphic novels that US and British creations did attract attention from the Franco-Belgian comic world, the early ones having been Richard Corben and Bernie Wrightson, the former of which having started out in the US underground comix scene, where artists created comics with the express intent to distance themselves from the classic US comics as produced by the big studios. Both men were published in the Métal Hurlant US spin-off Heavy Metal and reciprocally translated for the French mother magazine. As mentioned, Heavy Metal made a deep artistic impact on an entire young generation of English-speaking comic creators, such as Neil Gaiman and Mike Mignola, who started to create more modern, more mature comics henceforth. It were these comics that were given attention by publisher Glénat, when they established the subsidiary Comics USA in 1988. Actually starting out with (hardcover!) comic book sized publications in the classic superhero genre, but created by a young generation of artists, the classic US comic failed to make a convincing come-back and the subsidiary folded in 1991 after 48 issues. Subsequently, Glénat focused solely on its concurrent Glénat Comics imprint which concentrated on album releases of modern US graphic novels from such publishers as Image Comics, Dark Horse, and Oni Press, and as such still in existence as of 2017. Glénat was actually preceded in 1986 by Delcourt, a newcomer presently specialised in US/UK graphic novels (and Japanese manga). Of the post-classic superhero era, Mike Mignola has become one of the most in French translated US comic artists. Recently, Eaglemoss Collections and DC Comics have embarked on yet another attempt to re-introduce Francophone readership to the classic US superhero genre with their DC Comics: Le Meilleur des Super-Héros collection, launched in French in 2015, following in the wake of publisher Hachette who launched their Marvel Comics: La collection the year previously in an attempt to capitalise on the break-out success of the 21st-century Marvel Comics film adaptions.

Japanese manga started to receive more attention from the early to mid-1990s onward. Recently, more manga has been translated and published, with a particular emphasis on independent authors like Jiro Taniguchi. Manga now represents more than one fourth of comics sales in France. French comics that draw inspiration from Japanese manga are called manfra (or also franga, manga français or global manga). In addition, in an attempt to unify the Franco-Belgian and Japanese schools, cartoonist Frédéric Boilet started the movement La nouvelle manga. Illustrative of the market share the manga has conquered is that Dargaud has in 1996 spun off their manga French-language publications into a specialised publisher of it own, Kana, currently co-existing alongside the already established specialist Delcourt, and since 2000 joined by specialists Pika Édition, Kurokawa [ fr ], Kazé, and Ki-oon. In 2014, Delcourt acquired the earliest known such specialist Tonkam, which had already been established in 1993.

There are many comics conventions in Belgium and France. The most famous, prestigious and largest one is the Angoulême International Comics Festival, an annual festival begun in 1974, in Angoulême, France, and the format has been adopted in other European countries as well, unsurprisingly perhaps considering the popularity the Franco-Belgian comics enjoy in these countries, though they are typically of a more modest size, the Italian " Lucca Comics & Games " festival excepted – though, as the name already suggest, that festival extents beyond comics alone, whereas the Angoulême festival is comics specific. During his tenure as culture minister, Jack Lang was a frequent guest of honour of the festival as part of his endeavours to advance the cultural status of the BD, and personally awarded the festival's awards to comic artists, which included Jean Giraud in 1985 when he received the festival's most prestigious award, the year after Lang had announced the advent of the national comics museum on the previous edition of the festival.

Typical for conventions are the expositions of original art, the signing sessions with authors, sale of small press and fanzines, an awards ceremony, and other comics related activities. Also, some artists from other counties travel to Angoulême and other festivals to show their work and meet their fans and editors. The Angoulême festival draws in over 200,000 visitors annually, including between 6,000 and 7,000 professionals and 800 journalists. Contrary to their US Comic Con counterparts, where other pop-culture media manifestations are increasingly taking precedence, movie and television productions in particular, continental European comics conventions remain to this day largely and firmly grounded in its source medium, the printed comics. US-style comic conventions are becoming popular as well though, but are invariably organised separately from the traditional BD festivals under the English denomination, and where the print materials are concerned focused on the US comic book, and Japanese manga publications.

One of the oldest Franco-Belgian comics conventions was the "Convention de la B.D. de Paris" (1969–2003), which was co-founded by Claude Moliterni. Though Moliterni was a BD writer (usually for artist Robert Gigi), he became primarily renowned as a tireless champion for the medium, in the process becoming one of France's first serious comics scholars by launching one of the first professional and serious comics journals worldwide, Phénix (périodique) [ fr ] (1966–1977), and writing numerous articles, reference books and, later on, (co-)launching specialised websites as well, on the subject matter. In doing so Moliterni became the European counterpart of equally renowned US – but French-born – comics scholar Maurice Horn, a contemporary with whom Moliterni had actually cooperated in the early years of their careers. Aside from this, Moliterni also became a prolific founder of comics conventions. The first one he co-founded was actually the Lucca one, experience gained on that experience put to good use for the Parisian one. Moliterni went on to co-found seven more conventions and permanent exhibitions in France and Italy, including Angoulême for which he is most renowned. His efforts for the medium gained Moliterni no less than three French civilian knighthoods.

The trailblazing journalistic – and subsequent scholastic – approach pioneered by Moliterni, which greatly aided in the acceptance of the medium as a mature part of Francophone culture, served as an inspiration for his successors, such as Henri Filippini [ fr ], Thierry Groensteen, Stan Barets [ fr ], Numa Sadoul, as well as the already mentioned Bocque, Gaumer, and Ratier, who have followed in his footsteps. With Gaumer incidentally, Moliterni revisited his 1964-1967 Spirou article series he had co-edited with Morris, which resulted in the edited and greatly enhanced 1994 reference work Dictionnaire mondial de la bande dessinée, published by Éditions Larousse (a renowned French encyclopaedia publisher), and a work very similar to Horn's 1976 The World Encyclopaedia of Comics, which in turn greatly resembled the older Spirou article series.

Likewise, his Phénix trade journal has seen a plethora of successors following suit all over western Europe as well. Actually, the second oldest known professional European comics trade journal was the Dutch Stripschrift [ nl ], launched in 1968 and coinciding with the definitive breakthrough of the BD in the Netherlands, before a second Francophone comics journal (Les Cahiers de la bande dessinée [ fr ], launched in 1969 as Schtroumpf by Jacques Glénat [ fr ] and in effect the founding block of his namesake publishing house) had even entered the fray. During its first couple of years of publication, Stripschrift was in effect very reliant on Phénix for content, before it managed to shake off its French roots and stand on its own, and is, contrary to its French progenitor, still being published as of 2020 and thus the oldest known professional comics journal still in existence worldwide.

Franco-Belgian comics have been translated in most European languages, with some of them enjoying a worldwide success. Some magazines, aside from the Dutch-language editions, have been translated in Greek, Portuguese, Italian and Spanish, while in other cases foreign magazines were filled with the best of the Franco-Belgian comics. In France and Belgium, most magazines have since then disappeared or have a largely reduced circulation for socio-economic reasons (but mostly because modern readership no longer possesses the patience to read their comics in weekly or monthly instalments, instead preferring to have a story presented to them wholesale in album format), but the number of published and sold albums stays relatively high – the majority of new titles being currently directly published as albums without prior magazine serialisation – with the biggest successes still on the juvenile and adolescent markets. This state of affairs has been mirrored in the other European countries as well. As a format, the Franco-Belgian comic has been near-universally adopted by native comic artists all over Europe, especially in the neighbouring countries of Belgium and France (and including Italy, despite that country having had a rich and thriving comics culture of its own and with the Netherlands as an early adopter being one of the first, if not the first, to do so), solidifying the position of the Franco-Belgian comic as the preeminent force on the European comics scene, Great Britain excepted.

The greatest and most enduring success however was mainly for some series started in the 1940s, 1950s and 1960s (including Lucky Luke, The Smurfs, and Asterix), and the even older Adventures of Tintin, while many more recent series have not made a significant commercial impact outside mainland Europe and those overseas territories historically beholden to France, despite the critical acclaim for authors like Mœbius. One out-of-the-ordinary overseas exception where Franco-Belgian comics are as of 2017 still doing well turned out to be the Indian subcontinent where translations in Tamil (spoken in the south-eastern part of India, Tamil Nadu, and on the island state of Sri Lanka) published by Prakash Publishers under their own " Lion/Muthu Comics " imprints, have proven to be very popular, though their appeal remain somewhat limited to the classic series for an adolescent readership as conceived in the 1960s–1980s, and that more recent, more mature series have yet to make an impression in those territories.

While hundreds of comic series have been produced in the Franco-Belgian group, some are more notable than others. Most of those listed are aimed at the juvenile or adolescent markets:

La bande noire ("The black band") was the name given to some speculative, asset-stripping organizations in the 1790s. They bought ancient castles and abbeys at knockdown prices in the wake of the French Revolution, only to demolish them and sell off the building materials. These speculators also bought the works of art of all kinds which they contained, and then broke up the surrounding landed estates into small and often unviable parcels of land.

Among the famous châteaux destroyed were:

Their dramatic name was invented by the Romantic writers. The ruin of such ornamented and "ancient" structures played to the Romantic focus on scenic locales and tragic histories. La bande noire is also the title of a well-known poem by Victor Hugo, written in 1823 and published in his Nouvelles Odes, also about such speculation.

The Bank of France (French : Banque de France [ bɑ̃k də fʁɑ̃s ]) is the national central bank for France within the Eurosystem. It was the French central bank between 1800 and 1998, issuing the French franc.

The Bank of France was originally established by Napoleon Bonaparte as a private-sector corporation with unique public status. It was granted note-issuance monopoly in Paris in 1803 and in the entire country in 1848. Long independent from direct political interference, it was brought under government control in 1936 and eventually nationalized in 1945. While other banks of issue were established in the French colonial empire, the Bank of France remained Metropolitan France 's sole monetary authority until France's adoption of the euro as its currency. As of 2025, its balance sheet total was $1.818 trillion, making it the 5th largest central bank in the world.

The Bank of France long held high prestige as an anchor of financial stability, especially before the monetary turmoil that followed World War I. In 1907, Italian economist and statesman Luigi Luzzatti referred to the Bank of France as "the centre of the world's monetary power."

The French framework for banking supervision was initiated by the Vichy Government in 1941 and entrusted from the start to a separate body under the aegis of the Bank of France, which in 2013 became the Prudential Supervision and Resolution Authority (French acronym ACPR). In 2017 the ACPR lost its prior status as an independent administrative authority under French law, but retains a distinct governance framework that also involves the French government. The Bank of France is not itself a financial supervisory authority, but oversees payment systems and participates in European banking supervision as a member of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank alongside the ACPR. It is also a member of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB).

The Kingdom of France 's first experiment with a central bank was the Banque Générale (Banque Générale Privée or "General Private Bank"), set up by John Law at the behest of the Duke of Orléans after the death of Louis XIV. Law received the bank's 20-year charter in May 1716 and its stock consisted of 1,200 shares valued at 5,000 livres apiece. It was meant to stimulate France's stagnant economy and pay down its staggering national debt acquired from Louis XIV's wars, including the War of the Spanish Succession. It was nationalized in December 1718 at Law's request and formally renamed the Banque Royale a month later. It saw great initial success, increasing industry 60% in two years, but Law's mercantilist policies saw him seek to establish large monopolies, leading to the Mississippi bubble. The bubble ultimately burst in a financial crisis in 1720, and on 27 November of that year, the Banque Royale officially closed.

The collapse of the Mississippi Company and the Banque Royale tarnished the word banque ("bank") so much that France abandoned central banking for almost a century, possibly precipitating Louis XVI 's economic crisis and the French Revolution. Successors such as the Caisse d'Escompte (from 1776 to 1793) and Caisse d'escompte du commerce (from 1797 to 1803) used the word " caisse " instead, until Napoleon retook the term with la Banque de France ("Bank of France") in 1800.

In 1803, financial power in France was in the hands of fifteen members of the Haute Banque, when the shareholders' meeting ratified the appointment of a “Council of Regency” composed of Jean-Frédéric Perregaux, Guillaume Mallet [ fr ], Jean-Barthélemy Le Couteulx de Canteleu, Joseph Hugues-Lagarde [ fr ], Jacques-Rose Récamier, Jean-Pierre Germain [ fr ], Carié-Bézard [ fr ], Pierre-Léon Basterrèche [ fr ], Jean-Auguste Sévène [ fr ], Alexandre Barrillon [ fr ], Georges-Antoine Ricard [ fr ], Georges-Victor Demautort [ fr ], Claude Perier, Pierre-Nicolas Perrée-Duhamel [ fr ], Jacques-Florent Robillard [ fr ], and Jean-Conrad Hottinguer. These powerful bankers, representative of the financial elite that would become referred to in France as the Haute banque, were deeply involved in the agitations leading up to the French Revolution. When the revolutionary violence got out of hand, they orchestrated the rise of Napoleon Bonaparte, whom they regarded as the restorer of order. As a reward for their support, Napoleon, in 1800, gave the bankers a monopoly over French finance by giving them control of the new Bank of France (Banque de France). Banker Claude Perier drafted the first statutes and Emmanuel Crétet was the first governor of the Bank.

On 24 Germinal, year XI (14 April 1803), the new Bank received its first official charter granting it the exclusive right to issue paper money in Paris for fifteen years.

On 22 April 1806, a new law replaced the Central Committee with a Governor and two Deputy Governors. All three were appointed by the Emperor. On 16 January 1808, a decree set out the "Basic Statutes", which were to govern the Bank's operations until 1936.

For the first fifteen years, the Bank of France was the sole issuer of bank notes in Paris, and this privilege was extended to other financially important cities and the rest of the country by 1848.

The Bank was also instrumental in the creation of the Latin Monetary Union (LMU) in 1865. The countries of France, Belgium, Italy, and the Swiss Confederation established the LMU franc as a common bimetallic currency.

In World War I, the Bank sold short-term Treasury bonds abroad to help pay for wartime expenditures. France abandoned the gold standard shortly after the outbreak of war. Debts amounted to approximately 42 billion francs by 1919. Following the war, the Bank sought to re-establish the gold standard and acquired capital from a number of American and British banking syndicates to defend the franc from exchange-rate fluctuations. The Bank also began to hoard gold reserves and, at its peak, held 28.3 percent of the world's gold stock (only behind the United States at 30.4 percent). Some scholars have asserted that this gold accumulation was a contributing factor to the Great Depression. Under Émile Moreau, Governor from 1926 to 1930, the Bank consolidated gold reserves created a stabilization insurance fund (fonds de stabilisation), and tested new monetary policies in the wake of a global depression.

In World War II, the Bank oversaw the transfer of gold reserves overseas, which mainly included Canada, the United States, and the French overseas territories. In 1945, the Bank was nationalized by Charles de Gaulle and became a state-owned institution. Existing shareholders received bonds to replace their shares in the company. The Bank's statute was reformed in 1973.

In 1993, the Bank of France was again reformed when it obtained independence from the state. It sought to establish credibility by promising to adhere to the single mandate of price stability. Jean-Claude Trichet, Governor from 1993 to 2003, was the final Governor of the Bank until the establishment of the European Central Bank (ECB) in June 1998. Today, the ECB sets monetary policy and oversees price stability for all countries in the Eurozone, including France.

On 1 June 1998, a new institution was created, the European Central Bank (ECB), charged with steering the single monetary policy for the euro. The body formed by the ECB, and the national central banks (NCB) of all the member states of the European Union, constitute the European System of Central Banks (ESCB). According to the Maastrict Treaty, the Bank would oversee the functioning of the payment system and conduct independent research on the French economy, while the newly established European Central Bank conducted monetary policy for the entire Eurozone. The French franc was replaced by the Euro as a virtual currency on 1 January 1999, being replaced entirely with coins and banknotes on 1 March 2002.

Following the Great Recession, the Bank of France implemented quantitative easing for the account of the ECB.

In 2010, the French government's Autorité de la concurrence (the department in charge of regulating competition) fined eleven banks, including Bank of France, the sum of €384,900,000 for colluding to charge unjustified fees on check processing, especially for extra fees charged during the transition from paper check transfer to " Exchanges Check-Image " electronic transfer.

The Bank recently established a "Lab", located on the Rue Réaumur in Paris, where start-ups and small businesses work on blockchain, artificial intelligence, and virtual reality. The Bank is the first to set up a blockchain system.

With the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and the ensuing economic crisis, the Eurosystem resolved to inject €3 trillion of liquidity into banks, allowing them in turn to support households and businesses, particularly with regard to urgent cash flow needs. In addition to membership in the Eurosystem, the Banque de France is in charge of credit mediation. This service, which has been in very high demand during the crisis, provides assistance to companies facing difficulties in their relations with financial institutions. The Banque de France manages procedures to resolve overindebtedness, and while its premises are no longer open to the public, requests continue to be processed.

The Bank of France describes itself as responsible for three missions: monetary strategy, financial stability, and services to the economy.

The Bank of France contributes to the design of the monetary policy of the Eurozone, through macroeconomic research and forecast and by taking part in the deliberations on ECB decisions, and implements it in France. It prints euro bank notes, in larger volumes than any of its Eurosystem peers, and manages the circulation of bank notes and coins. It also participates in the fight against counterfeit money, by training bank employees, merchants, police, and other stakeholders. It manages part of the foreign exchange reserves of the ECB.

The Bank of France participates in the prudential oversight of the French financial sector through the Prudential Supervision and Resolution Authority (ACPR) which operates under its aegis.

The Banque de France also has special responsibilities with regard to payment systems and financial market infrastructures. It has direct oversight responsibility over LCH SA, a central counterparty (CCP); Euroclear France and ID2S, two central securities depositories ; and CORE(FR) and SEPA.EU, two retail payment systems operated by STET SA. It is also involved in the cooperative oversight of ten infrastructures for which the lead oversight role belongs to another institution:

Like many other central banks, the Bank of France publishes a periodical Financial Stability Review (Revue de la Stabilité Financière).

The Bank of France provides services to households, businesses, and the French state:

The governor of the Bank of France is appointed by the president and is, as of 2019, François Villeroy de Galhau, since 1 November 2015. He presides over the Bank's General Council, the body responsible for deliberating on all matters relating to non-Eurosystem activities. As of late 2023, the first deputy governor was Denis Beau [ fr ] and the second deputy governor was Agnès Bénassy-Quéré.

In 2019, the main key figures of the Bank of France are as follows:

The Bank distributed dividends to the French state of 4.5 billion euros in 2016, 5.0 billion euros in 2017 and 6.1 billion euros in 2019.

A decree on 6 March 1808 authorized the Bank to purchase the former mansion of the Count of Toulouse in the rue de la Vrillière in Paris for its headquarters. The bank's head office subsequently expanded from that original property, through the acquisition and remodeling of adjacent buildings and in the surrounding neighborhood. A major expansion occurred in 1924-1927 as part of an urban renewal project that entailed the demolition of several historical buildings and the creation of a new thoroughfare, the rue du Colonel-Driant [ fr ]. It entailed the erection of a new complex for the bank above a large underground bunker known as the Souterraine [ fr ], designed by architect Alphonse Defrasse.

The Bank of France commissioned the erection of branches in many French towns and cities, which are often prominent in the urban landscape.

In 2019, the bank opened its museum, the Cité de l'économie et de la monnaie, in a former branch in the 17th arrondissement of Paris. This followed comparable initiatives in Europe such as the Museum of the National Bank of Belgium (opened 1982), the Bank of England Museum (1988), and the Bundesbank Money Museum [ de ] (1999).

In France, a banlieue (UK : / b ɒ n ˈ lj uː / ; French: [ bɑ̃ljø ]) is a suburb of a large city, or all its suburbs taken collectively. Banlieues are divided into autonomous administrative entities and do not constitute part of the city proper. For instance, 80 percent of the inhabitants of the Paris metropolitan area live outside the city of Paris.

Beginning in the 1970s, the term banlieue has taken on a particular connotation, becoming a popular word for economically-deprived suburbs featuring low-income housing projects (HLMs) that are home to large immigrant populations. People of foreign descent reside in what are often called poverty traps. As of 2025, in France, approximately 1,500 suburbs are home to more than 5 million people.

The French word banlieue is derived from the thirteenth century Vulgar Latin term banleuca composed of the German term ban meaning decree or official announcement with leuca which refers to the extension of the authority beyond the walls of a town.

In France, since the establishment of the Third Republic at the beginning of the 1870s, communities beyond the city centre essentially stopped spreading their own boundaries, as a result of the extension of the larger Paris urban agglomeration. The city – which in France corresponds to the concept of the "urban unit" – does not necessarily have a correspondence with a single administrative location, and instead includes other communities that link themselves to the city centre and form the banlieues.

Since the annexation of the banlieues of major French cities during the Second Empire period (Lyon in 1852, Lille in 1858, Paris in 1860, Bordeaux in 1865), French cities have extended their boundaries very little despite the growth of the cities. Almost all large and mid-sized cities in France with a banlieue have developed a couronne périurbaine (in English: peri-urban ring).

Communities in the countryside beyond the near-urban ring are regarded as being outside the city's strongest social and economic sphere of influence, and are termed communes périurbaines. In either case, they are divided into numerous autonomous administrative entities.

Banlieues 89, a design-led urban policy backed by the French government, renovated over 140 low-cost estates, such as Les Minguettes and the Mas du Taureau block in Vaulx-en-Velin. Improvements were made in road and rail access, cafes and shops were built, and the towers and blocks were made to look more attractive. In Vaulx-en-Velin, for instance, shops and a library were built, houses were built to make the landscape more interesting, 2,500 homes were renovated, and the blocks were repainted.

The word banlieue is, in formal use, a socially neutral term, designating the urbanized zone located around the city centre, comprising both sparsely and heavily populated areas. Therefore, in the Parisian metropolitan area, for example, the wealthy suburb of Neuilly-sur-Seine may be referred to as a banlieue as might the poor suburb of La Courneuve. To distinguish them, Parisians refer to a banlieue aisée (in English: comfortable suburb) for Neuilly, and to a banlieue défavorisée (in English: disadvantaged suburb) for Clichy-sous-Bois.

The Paris region can be divided into several zones. In the northwest and the northeast, many areas are vestiges of former working-class and industrial zones, in the case of Seine-Saint-Denis and Val-d'Oise. In the west, the population is generally upper class, and the centre of business and finance, La Défense, is also located there. Versailles, Le Vésinet, Sceaux, Maisons-Laffitte and Neuilly-sur-Seine are affluent suburbs of Paris, while Clichy-sous-Bois, Bondy and Corbeil-Essonnes are less so.

The southeast banlieues are less homogenous. Close to Paris, there are many communities that are considered "sensitive" or unsafe (Bagneux, Malakoff, Massy, Cachan, Les Ulis), divided by residential zones with a better reputation (Verrières-le-Buisson, Bourg-la-Reine, Antony, Fontenay-aux-Roses, Sceaux).

The farther away from the Paris city centre, the more the banlieues of the south of Paris can be divided into two zones. On one side, there are the banks of the Seine, where working-class residents used to live (there are still pockets of disadvantaged areas) but also other areas that are especially well off. Also are large cities close to Paris, such as Chanteloup-les-Vignes, Sartrouville, Les Mureaux, Mantes-la-Jolie, Poissy, Achères, Limay, Trappes, Aubergenville, Évry-Courcouronnes, Grigny, Corbeil-Essonnes, Saint-Michel-sur-Orge, Brétigny-sur-Orge, Sainte-Geneviève-des-Bois and Fleury-Mérogis.

On the other hand, small communities that are affluent can be found in the Yvelines department with Villennes-sur-Seine, Chatou, Croissy-sur-Seine, Le Pecq, Maisons-Laffitte but also in the Essonne and Seine-et-Marne departments: Etiolles, Draveil, Soisy-sur-Seine, Saint-Pierre-du-Perray or Seine-Port.

The banlieues rouges ("red banlieues") are the outskirt districts of Paris where, traditionally, the French Communist Party held mayorships and other elected positions. Examples of these include Ivry-sur-Seine and Malakoff. Such communities often named streets after Soviet personalities, such as Avenue Vladimir-Ilitch-Lénine in Nanterre, or rue Youri Gagarine in Colombes.

The banlieues of large cities like Lyon and Marseille, like those of Paris, have also tended to suffer from a negative reputation. Ever since the French Commune government of 1871, they were and still are often ostracised and considered by other residents as places that are "lawless" or "outside the Republic", as opposed to "deep France", or "authentic France" associated with the provinces. However, it is in the banlieues that the young working households are found that raise children and pay taxes but lack in public services, in transportation, education, sports, as well as employment opportunities.

In the summer of 1981, events involving young Franco-Maghrebis were met with varying reactions from the French public. Within the banlieues, events, called rodeos, would occur, where young "banlieusards" would steal cars and perform stunts and race them. Then, before the police could catch them, they would abandon the cars and set them on fire.

In July and August 1981, around 250 cars were vandalised. Grassroots groups began to demonstrate in public in 1983 and 1984 to publicise the problems of the Beurs and immigrants in France.

Violent clashes between hundreds of youths and French police in the Paris banlieue of Clichy-sous-Bois began on 27 October 2005 and continued for more than 17 nights. The 2005 Paris suburb riots were triggered by the deaths of two teenagers (of black and Maghrebi descent) allegedly attempting to hide from police in an electrical substation, who were electrocuted.

From 18 April 2020, Paris saw several nights of violent clashes over police treatment of ethnic minorities in the banlieues during the COVID-19 lockdown.

A number of films, both fiction and documentary, have focused on the banlieues. A selection are listed below.

The Baronnies (French pronunciation: [ baʁɔni ]) is a historic name for the area east and north of Mont Ventoux in Southern France.

Today most of the Baronnies is part of the department of Drôme (a part of the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes region). Smaller areas in the east and south belong to the departments of Vaucluse, Hautes-Alpes and Alpes-de-Haute-Provence (part of the Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur region). The area of roughly 2,000 km (770 sq mi) is sparsely populated; the 1999 census counted only 22,000 inhabitants. Since the 17th century les Baronnies, especially its eastern parts, suffered from land flight due to harsh economic conditions. Starting in the 1980s land flight has stopped and the population is now increasing especially in and around the towns of Nyons, Buis-les-Baronnies, Mirabel-aux-Baronnies, Faucon and Puymeras. There are plans to create the Parc Naturel Régional des Baronnies. The area is paradise for hiking, mountaineering, rock climbing, cycling, mountain biking, horse-riding, hang gliding and paragliding.

Legend has it that Hannibal, the Carthaginian leader crossed les Baronnies with his elephants during the Second Punic War (218 - 201 B.C.). Later the area retired Roman soldiers were given land here. After the Roman Empire collapsed in the 3rd century, hundreds of years of invasions by Franks, Lombards, Saracens and marauding bands followed. During this period local fiefs started to fortify villages and consolidate power. In the 11th century the area was part of the Holy Roman Empire. During the Barons of Mévouillon consolidated their power over a large part of les Baronnies, they ruled for roughly 300 years from capital in Buis-les-Baronnies. As a result of a family feud in 1125, the western part of les Baronnies was ruled by a different line of Mévouillons. They called themselves Barons de Montauban, hence the name "les Baronnies" (plural). They established their capital in Nyons. Within a short period of time both had to sell their possessions to the Count of Vienne, nicknamed le Dauphin (the dolphin was his coat of arms), who ceded his territory to the King of France in 1349 to pay his debts.

Similar to the Luberon, the Baronnies was a stronghold of Protestantism in Provence. It suffered heavily during the French Wars of Religion (1562-1598). Two of the most notable military leaders came from the Baronnies: Charles Dupuy-Montbrun, the Protestant leader from Montbrun-les-Bains and Faulque Thollon de Sainte Jalle, the Catholic leader from Sainte-Jalle. After a short lived economic revival the pest struck in 1629 and then again in 1652. The population was decimated.

The period from the 18th century to modern day was marked by economic decline and land flight. Only in the 1980s were the Baronnies "discovered". Tourism started to develop and the area between Vaison-la-Romaine and Nyons started to become very popular with tourists and retirees.

The Baronnies has two historic towns, Nyons and Buis-les-Baronnies. There are many rustic ancient villages, most notable are Brantes, Faucon, Mirabel-aux-Baronnies, Mollans-sur-Ouvèze, Montbrun-les-Bains, La Motte-Chalancon, Orpierre, Puymeras, Rémuzat, Rousset-les-Vignes, Sainte-Jalle, Séderon and Venterol. Also notable is the castle of Aulan near Montbrun-les-Bains.

Main economic activity is agriculture and tourism. Nyons is the center of the local olive tree cultivation with numerous oil mills, an olive oil cooperative and an olive tree/olive oil museum. The olives grown in Nyons and les Baronnies have an AOC (Appellation d'Origine Contrôlée) quality label.

The Barrière d'Enfer (French pronunciation: [ baʁjɛʁ dɑ̃fɛʁ ], lit. ' Gate of Hell ') is a pair of tollhouses in Paris that once served as a gate through the Wall of the Farmers-General (Mur des Fermiers généraux) at the current location of the Place Denfert-Rochereau.

The name "Barrière d'Enfer" comes from the street "Rue d'Enfer" (now called "Rue Denfert-Rochereau") which leads there after crossing the Rue de Faubourg-Saint Jacques. Some historians think the street was named because it was "a place of debauchery and robbery", while others believe that the name comes from a corruption of the Latin via inferior (in contrast with Rue Saint-Jacques, which was known as the via superior). According to Michel Roblin, the name may be derived from the nickname en fer ("of iron") given to a door on the Wall of Philip II Augustus.

The two neo-classical pavilions that make up the Barrière were built in 1787 by the architect Claude Nicolas Ledoux, both of which exist still. The buildings are decorated by friezes depicting dancers sculpted by Jean Guillaume Moitte. The tollhouses were designed for collecting the octroi, or taxes on goods entering the city.

The main streets originating from the Barrière d'Enfer were the Boulevard d'Enfer (now a part of the Boulevard Raspail), the Rue d'Enfer, and the Boulevard Saint-Jacques.

The third act of the opera La Bohème by Giacomo Puccini portrays Mimi approaching the Barrière d'Enfer from the Paris side to visit a tavern.

The Barrière is also mentioned in Victor Hugo 's novel Les Misérables :

The Barrière consists of two identical buildings on either side of the Avenue du Colonel-Henri-Rol-Tanguy, which is itself located along the axis of the Avenue Denfert-Rochereau and Avenue du Général-Leclerc.

In commemoration of this, a portion of the Place Denfert-Rochereau between the two buildings was renamed avenue du Colonel-Henri-Rol-Tanguy on the 15th of March 2004, on the sixtieth anniversary of the Liberation of Paris.

The Barrière du Trône (Trône Gate) was a toll barrier (barrière d’octroi) in the wall of the Fermiers généraux (the tax farmers’ enclosure) that was built around Paris in the 1780s. It was part of a wall that, just prior to the French Revolution, surrounded Paris. The purpose of the wall, which was designed by Claude Nicolas Ledoux, was to facilitate the collection of municipal duties on merchandise entering Paris by reducing smuggling and fraud. It is located in eastern Paris and straddled what is now the 11th arrondissement and the 12th arrondissement. The barrier takes its name from its location on the former Place du Trône, now called place de la Nation.

This barrier was located on what is today the Avenue du Trône, near Place de la Nation (formerly known as Place du Trône). Its purpose was to facilitate the collection of taxes on goods entering the capital. It is one of four extant toll houses from among the 55 built under Ledoux's program (the other three are located at place de Denfert-Rochereau, place de Stalingrad and at an entryway to the Parc Monceau).

The barrière comprised two guardhouses flanking a grille about 60 meters wide. The guardhouses served as pedestals for two columns each 28 meters in height. On its eastern side, two identical toll houses on either side of the avenue du Trône housed offices and lodgings for the octroi officials. The barriére du Trône follows a typical plan for such toll houses inasmuch as it consists of two identical and perfectly symmetric houses. The other extant barrière that follows this same plan is the barrière de l’Enfer located at what is now place de Denfert-Rochereau.

Together with the barrière de l’Étoile (which was demolished by Baron Haussmann), the barrière du Trône celebrated a royal entrance (the entry of Louis XIV and Marie-Thérèse of Austria after their marriage) and for that reason was adorned with the additional decoration of two monumental columns.

The barrière du Trône was built in 1787 as part of a broader tax wall project designed by the architect Claude-Nicolas Ledoux. Ledoux spared no expense in the construction of this project, including the barrière du Trône. He was severely criticized during construction and, in May 1789, was dismissed for cost overruns. He spent time in prison during the French Revolution because of his involvement in this project.

During the Reign of Terror, a guillotine was installed next to the southern customs house (in what is now the 12th arrondissement). Of the 2,639 executions carried out in Paris between April 1793 and July 1794, the six weeks of operation of this guillotine in June and July 1794 accounted for almost half (1306 executions). The bodies were sent to mass burial pits located in what is now known as the Picpus Cemetery, which was only a few hundred meters away. This relatively remote location was chosen because the Reign of Terror was becoming increasingly unpopular with the French public and Revolutionary authorities needed an out-of-the-way place to operate the guillotine and dispose of the bodies.

In 1845, the columns were topped with two statues of French kings (each 3.8 m high): Philippe Auguste sculpted by Auguste Dumont on the south (12ᵉ arrondissement) and Saint Louis by Antoine Étex on the north (11ᵉ arrondissement).

The barrier was classified as a historical monument on 24 April 1907.

By 2002, the columns were in a severely degraded state. Between July 2008 and July 2010, restoration work took place including removal and renovation of the bronze statues and replacement of many of the lower stones of the column shafts.

Since 1993, the pavilions have housed social housing managed by Paris Habitat. Their façades and roofs were restored in 2016.

The Base Palissy is the database of French movable heritage, created and maintained by the French Ministry of Culture. It was created in 1989, and placed online in 2002. The database is periodically updated, and contains more than 515,000 entries as of October 2020. It covers several types of objects: stained glass, paintings, sculptures, religious and civil objects, scientific collections and industrial heritage. Many, but not all of the described objects are also listed as historical monuments. The database was named after 16th century potter and writer Bernard Palissy. In 2005, the Palissy database contained some 280,000 records, including 170,000 for the Inventory and 110,000 for historic monuments. 25,000 entries are illustrated by the Mémoire database. 5,000 complete documentary files are associated with the records.

The Basque conflict, also known as the Spain–ETA conflict, was an armed and territorial conflict from 1959 to 2011 between Spain and the Basque National Liberation Movement, a group of social and political Basque organizations which sought independence from Spain and France. The movement was built around the separatist organization ETA, which had launched a campaign of attacks against Spanish administrations since 1959. ETA had been proscribed as a terrorist organization by the Spanish, British, French and American authorities at different moments. The conflict occurred mainly in Spain but also affected parts of France, where ETA often found refuge. It was the longest running violent conflict in modern Western Europe. It has been sometimes referred to as "Europe's longest war".

While ETA officially began its armed campaign in 1959, the roots of the Basque conflict trace back to the repressive policies of the regime of Francisco Franco, which suppressed the Basque language, culture, and political expression. During the Spanish Civil War, the Luftwaffe carried out the bombing of Guernica (Gernika) on behalf of Franco's forces in 1937—a traumatic event that symbolized the brutal repression of Basque identity. This historical suppression of Basque autonomy created fertile ground for resistance movements, including ETA, which later took up arms to fight for independence.

The terminology surrounding the conflict remains highly contested. While the term "Basque conflict" is preferred by many Basque nationalist groups, including those opposed to ETA's violent methods, others reject the framing of the situation purely as a "conflict," viewing it instead as a struggle for Basque self-determination.

Several Basque scholars and political leaders argue that, in spite of the struggle falling short of securing full independence, the Basque people succeeded in obtaining substantial autonomy, cultural recognition, and democratic rights within Spain.

Conversely, some Spanish commentators and officials emphasize the role of state institutions in defeating ETA, presenting the outcome as a triumph of the rule of law and counterterrorism measures.

The conflict had both political and military dimensions. Its participants included political actors, militants, and civil society figures on both sides. On one side were the abertzale left —the Basque nationalist left advocating for self-determination—and, on the other, the Spanish and French governments and their respective security forces, which conducted counterinsurgency operations against ETA and other related groups. These operations also targeted smaller youth and grassroots movements such as those involved in the kale borroka (urban youth protests and sabotage). Far-right paramilitary groups, often operating with tacit or covert support during the Spanish transition to democracy, were active in the 1970s and 1980s, carrying out attacks against Basque nationalists and suspected ETA sympathizers.

Although the debate over Basque independence dates back to the 19th century, armed conflict did not begin until the formation of ETA in 1959. Between 1959 and the end of the conflict in 2011, over 1,000 people were killed, including members of the Spanish Armed Forces, police, private security personnel, politicians, journalists, civilians, and ETA members. Thousands more were injured, and dozens were kidnapped. The prolonged violence, political tensions, and repression led to significant social disruption, with tens of thousands of Basques—particularly during the Francoist period and the height of the conflict, reportedly leaving the region either in fear of violence or to avoid prosecution.

On 20 October 2011, ETA announced a "definitive cessation of its armed activity". With the end of ETA's campaign of violence, the Spanish and French governments regained control over the Basque Country. However, the broader Basque nationalist movement continues politically, focusing on regional autonomy rather than armed independence. Spanish premier José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero described the move as "a victory for democracy, law and reason," reflecting the end of violence and the return to peaceful political engagement.

The term "Basque conflict" is used either to define:

France was not initially involved in the conflict with ETA nor was it ever targeted by the organization, and the French only slowly began to cooperate with Spanish law enforcement, beginning in 1987, regarding the conflict. Unlike the British participation in the conflict in Northern Ireland, the Spanish armed forces were never deployed or involved in the Basque conflict, although they represented one of ETA's major targets outside the Basque Country.

José Luis de la Granja, Santiago de Pablo and Ludger Mees argue that the term Basque conflict, while technically correct in several languages as equivalent of 'question' or 'problem', should not give the impression of a war between Euskal Herria and the states of Spain and France, preferring the terms problema or cuestión (problem or question), that would encompass both the problems in the integration of the Basque territories in the contemporary Spanish state and also the secular problems of cohabitation among the Basques themselves.

According to Paddy Woodworth in a 2009 article in The New York Times,

The core issue is whether there is a "Basque conflict" at all. Spanish public opinion, on both left and right, generally denies that there is, and sees the problem as akin to smashing a criminal mafia. But Basque nationalists, including a big majority who abhor ETA's methods, believe there is a deep underlying political conflict about Basque self-determination. They want this question to be addressed with the same imagination and courage as the British and Irish governments used in talking to the IRA. However, even raising this issue has become almost taboo among most Spaniards. They regard the Basque country, in the words of one pro-Spanish Basque politician I have interviewed, as "not just a part of Spain, but the heart of Spain."

According to Gaizka Fernández Soldevilla, the narrative of the existence of a secular conflict between Basques and Spaniards has been one of the most used tropes by ETA and the abertzale left as pretext for the activity of the former. José Antonio Pérez Pérez points out that the perception of a war between an occupying Spain and a Basque people defending themselves from genocide would have served as justifying framework of the ETA's armed activity. According to Luis Castells and Fernando Molina, the formulation of the existence of two symmetric violences, that would allow for a split of responsibilities between ETA and the states of Spain and France, carrying therefore a dilution of the responsibility of ETA, is a narrative heavily espoused by the Abertzale left, that also would present ETA as an inevitable historic response to the secular conflict. According to Fernández Soldevilla, in spite of the end of the armed activity, the narrative of the basque conflict, fixed and divulgated by abertzale organic intellectuals such as historians Francisco Letamendia and Jose Mari Lorenzo, publicists such as Iñaki Egaña or Eduardo Renobales or journalists such as Luis Núñez Astrain, would be still useful as suggestive message in order to delegitimize the current democratic system, mixing victims with victimaries and equating the Basque case to real conflicts such as those of South Africa and Northern Ireland.

This idea has been rejected, for example, by José Maria Ruiz Soroa and by the main constitutionalist Spanish parties. Some politicians have gone as far as rejecting the existence of even a political conflict and refer only to the action of a terrorist organisation against the rule of law. A group of Basque historians argued that, rather than a Basque Conflict, the situation in the Basque Country was one of "ETA totalitarianism." In 2012, Antonio Basagoiti, the head of the Basque branch of the People's Party admitted the existence of a Basque conflict, but stated that it was a political one between different entities in the Basque country. Joseba Louzao and Fernando Molina argue that the idea of pluralism used by a part of Basque historiography relates more to a particular state of the public sphere ('plurality') rather than to a positive engagement of the several political and social actors ('pluralism'); according to them, the appeal to pluralism finally led to its conceptual voidment and banalization, allowing for it to be subsumed within the metanarrative of the basque conflict.

Amaiur Senator Urko Aiartza and Julen Zabalo have written that

There is no unanimous agreement when it comes to determining the reasons for the so-called Basque conflict. According to different sources, it is either a long conflict with historical roots, an instrument of Basque nationalist politics, an attempt to impose a privilege, or evidence of the state's obstinacy. Whichever of these may be the case, an understanding of the historical relations between the Basque provinces and the Spanish and French states is indispensable in order to explain the present conflict.

The Basque Country (Basque : Euskal Herria) is the name given to the geographical area located on the shores of the Bay of Biscay and on the two sides of the western Pyrenees that span the border between France and Spain. Nowadays, this area roughly belongs to three different political structures: the Basque autonomous community, also known as Euskadi; Navarre in Spain; and the three Northern Basque historical provinces (Labourd, Lower Navarre and Soule), administratively part of the French department of Pyrénées-Atlantiques. Approximately 3,000,000 people live in the Basque Country.

The Basques have managed to preserve their own identifying characteristics such as their own culture and language throughout the centuries and today a large part of the population shares a collective consciousness and a desire to be self-governed, either with further political autonomy or full independence. For instance, the football club Athletic Bilbao, maintains a signing policy of only recruiting Basques born or raised players. Over the centuries, the Basque Country has maintained various levels of political self-governance under different Spanish political frameworks. Nowadays, Euskadi enjoys the highest level of self-governance of any nonstate entity within the European Union. However, tensions about the type of relationship the Basque territories should maintain with the Spanish authorities have existed since the origins of the Spanish state and in many cases have fuelled military confrontation, such as the Carlist Wars and the Spanish Civil War.

Following the 1936 coup d'état that overthrew the Spanish republican government, a civil war between Spanish nationalist and republican forces broke out. Nearly all Basque nationalist forces, led by the Basque Nationalist Party (PNV) sided with the Republic, even though Basque nationalists in Álava and Navarre fought along Basque Carlists on the side of Spanish nationalists. The war ended with the victory of the nationalist forces, when General Francisco Franco established a dictatorship that lasted for almost four decades. During Franco's dictatorship, Basque language and culture were banned, institutions and political organisations abolished (to a lesser degree in Alava and Navarre), and people killed, tortured and imprisoned for their political beliefs. Although repression in the Basque Country was considerably less violent than in other parts of Spain, thousands of Basques were forced to go into exile, usually to Latin America or France.

Influenced by wars of national liberation such as the Algerian War or by conflicts such as the Cuban Revolution, and disappointed with the weak opposition of the PNV against Franco's regime, a young group of students formed ETA in 1959. It first started as an organization demanding the independence of the Basque Country, from a socialist position, and it soon started its armed campaign. According to Xosé Manoel Núñez Seixas, ETA became a socialist and revolutionary organization using violence after inner struggles related both to the difficulties found in applying a Third World model of national liberation in an already industrialized territory and the division between purely nationalist stances (such as the Branka splinter group) and the revolutionary ones.

ETA's first attacks were sometimes approved of by a part of the Spanish and Basque societies, who saw ETA and the fight for independence as a fight against the Franco administration. In 1970, several members of the organization were condemned to death in the Burgos trials (Proceso de Burgos), although international pressure resulted in commutation of the death sentences. ETA slowly became more active and powerful, and in 1973 the organisation was able to kill the president of the Government and possible successor of Franco, Luis Carrero Blanco. From that moment on, the regime became tougher in their struggle against ETA: many members died in shootouts with security forces and police carried out big raids, such as the arrest of hundreds of members of ETA in 1975, after the infiltration of a double agent inside the organisation.

In mid-1975, a political bloc known as Koordinadora Abertzale Sozialista (KAS) was created by Basque nationalist organisations. Away from the PNV, the bloc comprised several organisations formed by people contrary to the right-wing Franco's regime and most of them had their origins in several factions of ETA, which was part of the bloc as well. They also adopted the same ideology as the armed organisation, socialism. The creation of KAS would mean the beginning of the Basque National Liberation Movement.

In November 1975, Franco died and Spain started its transition to democracy. Many Basque activists and politicians returned from exile, although some Basque organizations were not legalized as had happened with other Spanish organizations. On the other side, the death of Franco elevated Juan Carlos I to the throne, who chose Adolfo Suárez as Prime Minister of Spain. Following the approval of the Spanish constitution in 1978, a Statute of Autonomy was promulgated and approved in referendum. The Basque Country was organized as an Autonomous Community.

The new Spanish constitution had overwhelming support around Spain, with 88.5% voting in favour on a turnout of 67.1%. In the three provinces of the Basque Country, these figures were lower, with 70.2% voting in favour (the lowest result in the country) on a turnout of 44.7%. This was due to the call to abstention by EAJ-PNV and the creation of a coalition of Abertzale left organisations brought together to advocate for "no" in the referendum, as they felt that the constitution did not meet their demands for independence. The coalition was the beginning of the political party Herri Batasuna, which would become the main political front of the Basque National Liberation Movement. The coalition had its origins in another one made two years before, named Mesa de Alsasua. ETA also felt that the constitution was unsatisfactory and intensified their armed campaign: 1978 to 1981 were ETA's bloodiest years with more than 230 people killed. Around 1975, the first far right paramilitary organizations (to which former OAS members joined) that fought against ETA and its supporters had been created, such as the Triple A (Alianza Apostólica Anticomunista), Guerrilleros de Cristo Rey, Batallón Vasco-español (BVE) and Antiterrorismo ETA (ATE); 41 deaths and 36 wounded have been reported in attacks blamed on paramilitary far-right organisations in the 1977–1982 period.

Also in the late 1970s, several Basque nationalist organizations, such as Iparretarrak, Hordago or Euskal Zuzentasuna, started to operate in the French Basque Country. An anarchist breakaway of ETA, Comandos Autónomos Anticapitalistas, also started carrying out attacks around the Basque Country. A similar but smaller organization to ETA, Terra Lliure, appeared demanding independence for the Catalan Countries. The Basque conflict had always had an influence on the Catalan society and politics, due to the similarities between Catalonia and the Basque Country.

During the process of electing Leopoldo Calvo-Sotelo as Spain's new president in February 1981, Civil Guards and army members broke into the Congress of Deputies and held all deputies at gunpoint. One of the reasons that led to the coup d'état was the increase in ETA's violence. The coup failed after the King called for the military powers to obey the Constitution. Days after the coup, ETA's faction politiko-militarra started its disbanding, with most of its members joining Euskadiko Ezkerra, a leftist nationalist party away from the Abertzale left. General elections were held in 1982, and Felipe González, from the Socialist Workers' Party became the new president, while Herri Batasuna won two seats. In the Basque Country, Carlos Garaikoetxea from the PNV became lehendakari in 1979. During those years, hundreds of members of Herri Batasuna were arrested, especially after some of them sang the Eusko Gudariak in front of Juan Carlos I.

After Felipe González's victory, the Grupos Antiterroristas de Liberación (GAL), death squads established by officials belonging to the Spanish government, were created. Using state terrorism, the GAL carried out dozens of attacks around the Basque Country, killing 27 people. It targeted ETA and Herri Batasuna members, although sometimes civilians were also killed. The GAL were active from 1983 until 1987, a period referred to as the Spanish Dirty War. ETA responded to the dirty war by intensifying its attacks. These included the Plaza República Dominicana bombing in Madrid - which killed 12 police officers, the Hipercor bombing in Barcelona - which killed 21 civilians and the Zaragoza barracks bombing - which killed 11 people. After the Hipercor bombing, most of the Spanish and Basque political parties signed many pacts against ETA, such as the Madrid pact or the Ajuria-Enea pact. It was during this time that Herri Batasuna got its best results: it was the most voted party in the Basque autonomous community for the European Parliament elections.

While talks between the Spanish government and ETA had already taken place in the late 1970s and early 1980s, which had led to the dissolution of ETA politiko-militarra, it was not until 1989 that both sides held formal peace talks. In January, ETA announced a 60-day ceasefire, while negotiations between ETA and the government were taking place in Algiers. No successful conclusion was reached, and ETA resumed violence.

After the end of the dirty war period, France agreed to cooperate with the Spanish authorities in the arrest and extradition of ETA members. These would often travel between the two countries, using France as a base for attacks and training. This cooperation reached its peak in 1992, with the arrest of all ETA leaders in the town of Bidart. The raid came months before the 1992 Olympic Games in Barcelona, with which ETA tried to gather worldwide attention with massive attacks around Catalonia. After that, ETA announced a two-month ceasefire, while they restructured the whole organisation and created the kale borroka groups.

In 1995, ETA tried to kill José María Aznar, who would become prime minister of Spain one year later, and Juan Carlos I. That same year, the organisation made a peace proposal, which was refused by the government. The following year, ETA announced a one-week ceasefire and tried to engage in peace talks with the government, a proposal that was once again rejected by the new conservative government. In 1997, a young councillor, Miguel Ángel Blanco, was kidnapped and killed by the organisation. The killing produced a widespread rejection by Spanish and Basque societies, massive demonstrations and a loss of sympathisers, with even some ETA prisoners and members of Herri Batasuna condemning the killing. That same year, the Spanish government arrested 23 leaders of Herri Batasuna for allegedly collaborating with ETA. After the arrest, the government started to investigate Herri Batasuna's ties with ETA, and the coalition changed its name to Euskal Herritarrok, with Arnaldo Otegi as their leader.

In the 1998 Basque elections, the Abertzale left got its best results since the 1980s, and Euskal Herritarrok became the third main force in the Basque Country. This increase of support was due to the declaration of a ceasefire by ETA one month before the elections. The ceasefire came after Herri Batasuna and several Basque organisations, such as the PNV, which at that time was part of the PP's government, agreed to the Lizarra pact, aimed at putting pressure on the Spanish government to make further concessions towards independence. The Basque nationalist forces agreed in defining the Basque conflict as having a political nature and in presenting ETA and the Spanish State as the two conflicting parties. Influenced by the Northern Ireland peace process, ETA and the Spanish government engaged in peace talks, which ended in late 1999, after ETA announced the end of the ceasefire.

In 2000, ETA resumed violence and intensified its attacks, especially against senior politicians, such as Ernest Lluch. At the same time, dozens of ETA members were arrested and the Abertzale left lost some of the support it had obtained in the 1998 elections. The breaking of the truce provoked Herri Batasuna's dissolution and its reformation into a new party called Batasuna. Following disagreements over the internal organization of Batasuna, a group broke away to form a separate political party, Aralar, present mainly in Navarre. In 2002, the Spanish government passed a law, named Ley de Partidos (Law of Parties), which allows the banning of any party that directly or indirectly condones terrorism or sympathises with a terrorist organisation. As ETA was considered a terrorist organisation and Batasuna did not condemn its actions, the government banned Batasuna in 2003. It was the first time since Franco's dictatorship that a political party had been banned in Spain. That same year, Spanish authorities closed the only newspaper written fully in Basque, Egunkaria, and journalists were arrested, due to allegations of links with ETA which were dismissed by a Spanish justice seven years later. In 1998, another newspaper, Egin, had already been closed on similar grounds that were also dismissed eleven years later.

After the government falsely accused ETA of carrying out the 2004 Madrid train bombings, the conservative government lost the elections to the Socialist Workers' Party, and José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero became the new Prime Minister of Spain. One of Zapatero's first actions was to engage in new peace talks with ETA. In mid-2006, the organisation declared a ceasefire, and conversations between Batasuna, ETA and the Basque and Spanish governments started. Despite the claims of peace talks ending in December, when ETA broke the truce with a massive car bomb at Madrid-Barajas Airport, a new round of conversations took place in May 2007. ETA officially ended the ceasefire in 2007, and resumed its attacks around Spain. From that moment on, the Spanish government and police intensified their struggle against both ETA and the Abertzale left. Hundreds of members of the armed organisation were arrested after the end of the truce, with four of its leaders being arrested in less than one year. Meanwhile, the Spanish authorities banned more political parties such as Basque Nationalist Action, Communist Party of the Basque Homelands and Demokrazia Hiru Milioi. Youth organisations such as Segi were banned, while members of trade unions, such as Langile Abertzaleen Batzordeak were arrested. In 2008, Falange y Tradición, a new Spanish far-right nationalist group, appeared and carried out dozens of attacks in the Basque Country. The organisation was dismantled in 2009.

In 2009 and 2010, ETA suffered even more blows to its organization and capacity, with more than 50 members arrested in the first half of 2010. At the same time, the banned Abertzale left started to develop documents and meetings, where they committed to a "democratic process" that "must be developed in a complete absence of violence". Due to these demands, ETA announced in September that they were stopping their armed actions.

On 17 October 2011, an international peace conference was held in Donostia-San Sebastián, aimed at promoting a resolution to the Basque conflict. It was organized by the Basque citizens' group Lokarri and included leaders of Basque parties, as well as six international personalities known for their work in the field of politics and pacification: Kofi Annan (former UN Secretary-General), Bertie Ahern (former Taoiseach of Ireland), Gro Harlem Brundtland (international leader in sustainable development and public health, former Prime Minister of Norway), Pierre Joxe (former Interior Minister of France), Gerry Adams (president of Sinn Féin and member of the Irish Parliament) and Jonathan Powell (British diplomat who served as the first Downing Street Chief of Staff). Tony Blair (former Prime Minister of the UK) could not be present due to commitments in the Middle East, but he supported the final declaration. Former US President Jimmy Carter and former US senator George J. Mitchell (involved in the Northern Ireland peace process) also backed this declaration.

The conference resulted in a five-point statement that included a plea for ETA to renounce any armed activities and to demand instead negotiations with the Spanish and French authorities to end the conflict. It was seen as a possible prelude to the end of ETA's violent campaign for an independent Basque homeland.

Three days later – on 20 October – ETA announced a "definitive cessation of its armed activity". They said they were ending their 43-year armed campaign for independence and called on Spain and France to open talks. At this time ETA was believed to have no more than 50 active members capable of organizing an attack. Spanish premier José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero described the move as "a victory for democracy, law and reason".

In 2016 French police made a declaration warning that ETA had made no steps towards dissolution. In March 2017 ETA declared that it would disarm completely by 8 April. On that date, civilian 'go-betweens' (Artisans of Peace) handed a list of 8 coordinates to the authorities which showed the locations of weapons caches in southwestern France used by the group. The caches were reported to have contained 120 firearms, about 3 tonnes of explosives and several thousand rounds of ammunition, which were seized by the Spanish and French authorities. The Spanish government stated that ETA will gain no impunity for their disarmament, and urged the group to dissolve formally. On 3 May 2018, during a ceremony held at the Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue in Geneva, Switzerland, the ETA released a statement announcing its permanent dissolution, which was distributed by the centre's director. Following this announcement, a ceremony was organized in Northern Basque Country, in Cambo-les-Bains (Basque: Kanbo) where the "declaration of Arnaga" was pronounced.

Estimates of the total number of conflict-related deaths vary and are highly disputed. The number of deaths caused by ETA is consistent among different sources, such as the Spanish Interior Ministry, the Basque government, and most major news agencies. According to these sources, the number of deaths caused by ETA are 829. This list does not include Begoña Urroz, killed in 1960 when she was 22 months old. Although this killing was attributed by Ernest Lluch to ETA in 2000, as revealed in El País, the attack was committed by the DRIL (Directorio Revolucionario Ibérico de Liberación).

Some organizations such as the Colectivo de Víctimas del Terrorismo en el País Vasco raise the death toll of ETA's victims to 952. This is due to the inclusion to the list of several unresolved attacks such as the Hotel Corona de Aragón fire. The Asociación de Víctimas del Terrorismo also includes the victims of the Corona de Aragón fire on its list of ETA's deaths. Sources have suggested ETA responsibility in the crash of Iberia Airlines Flight 610 at Monte Oiz (Bilbao) on 19 February 1985 with 148 killed

Regarding the Basque National Liberation Movement side the Euskal Memoria foundation, linked to the Abertzale left, and born in 2009 with the proclaimed purpose of having a database in order to "counter the lies from the State", list the number of deaths on their side as 474 in the period between 1960 and 2010. News agency Eusko News states that at least 368 people died on the Basque nationalist side. Most of the lists also include an undefined number of suicides caused by the conflict, coming from former ETA members, tortured people or policemen. Additional death causes in the Euskal Memoria list such as deaths to natural illnesses, a death of an ETA member due to a stroke suffered while having sexual relations, deaths due to the accidental activation of ETA bombs by ETA members, deaths in car and plane accidents, the death of common criminals, the death of a football fan killed by rivals, and deaths abroad such as a death in a mine in Nicaragua, a missionary killed by guerrilla in Colombia, two Uruguayans in Uruguay, two guerrilla collaborators in El Salvador and a protester in Rome have been claimed.

The Spanish and French law enforcement agencies have convicted a number of people for terrorist activities (primarily murder or attempted murder), or for belonging to ETA or organizations subservient to this organization. A small minority have been imprisoned for "enaltecimiento del terrorismo" which literally translates as "glorification of terrorism". The number of people incarcerated reached a peak of 762 in 2008. These prisoners are jailed in prisons all over France and Spain "to make it difficult for ETA to communicate with them," according to non-revealed sources. There have officially been 5,500 claims or complaints of torture or mistreating in police custody in the Basque Autonomous Community, but some sources and Spanish authorities claim that many of those claims are false because ETA used to instruct their militants to systematically denounce torture by the Spanish Forces.

For the Abertzale left this is one of the most emotive issues relating to Basque Nationalism. Demonstrations calling for their return to the Basque region often involve thousands of people. Currently there is a highly publicised campaign calling for the return of these dispersed prisoners to the Basque Country. Its slogan is "Euskal presoak- Euskal Herrira" ("Basque prisoners- to the Basque Country").

Some groups such as Etxerat have been calling for a general amnesty, similar to that which took place in Northern Ireland in 2000. The Spanish government has so far rejected moves to treat all prisoners in the same way. Instead they opened the 'Via Nanclares' in 2009 which is a way for individual prisoners to get better conditions, and eventually gain limited release. It involves individuals' asking for forgiveness, distancing themselves from ETA and paying compensation.

Basque (/ ˈ b æ s k, ˈ b ɑː s k / BASK, BAHSK ; endonym euskara [ eus̺ˈkaɾa ]) is a language spoken by Basques and other residents of the Basque Country, a region that straddles the westernmost Pyrenees in adjacent parts of southwestern France and northern Spain. Basque is Europe 's only known language isolate (with no relation to any other known languages) and the only surviving language of Paleo-European origin. The Basques are indigenous to and primarily inhabit the Basque Country. Basque has 806,000 speakers: 93.7% (756,000) are in the Spanish area of the Basque Country and the remaining 6.3% (51,000) are in the French portion.

Native speakers live in a contiguous area that includes parts of four Spanish provinces and the three "ancient provinces" in France. Gipuzkoa, most of Biscay, a few municipalities on the northern border of Álava and the northern area of Navarre formed the core of the remaining Basque-speaking area before measures were introduced in the 1980s to strengthen Basque fluency. By contrast, most of Álava, the westernmost part of Biscay, and central and southern Navarre are predominantly populated by native speakers of Spanish, either because Basque was replaced by either Navarro-Aragonese or Spanish over the centuries (as in most of Álava and central Navarre), or because it may never have been spoken there (as in parts of Enkarterri and south-eastern Navarre).

In Francoist Spain, Basque language use was suppressed by the government's repressive policies. In the Basque Country, "Francoist repression was not only political, but also linguistic and cultural." Franco 's regime suppressed Basque from official discourse, education, and publishing, making it illegal to register newborn babies under Basque names, and even requiring tombstone engravings in Basque to be removed. In some provinces the public use of Basque was suppressed, with people fined for speaking it. Public use of Basque was frowned upon by supporters of the regime, often regarded as a sign of anti-Francoism or separatism. In the 1960s and later, still under the regime, the trend reversed and education and publishing in Basque began to flourish. As a part of this process, a standardised form of the Basque language, called Euskara Batua, was developed by the Euskaltzaindia in the late 1960s.

Besides its standardised version, the five historic Basque dialects are Biscayan, Gipuzkoan, and Upper Navarrese in Spain and Navarrese–Lapurdian and Souletin in France. They take their names from the historic Basque provinces, but the dialect boundaries are not congruent with province boundaries. Euskara Batua was created so that the Basque language could be used—and easily understood by all Basque speakers—in formal situations (education, mass media, literature), and this is its main use today. In both Spain and France, the use of Basque for education varies from region to region and from school to school.

The current mainstream scientific view on the origin of the Basques and of their language is that early forms of Basque developed before the arrival of Indo-European languages in the area, i.e. before the arrival of Celtic and Romance languages, as the latter today geographically surround the Basque-speaking region. Basque grammar remains markedly different from that of Standard Average European languages, due to its agglutinative morphology and ergative-absolutive alignment. Agglutinative morphology refers to the fact that it is a language that is formed by stringing together morphemes (word parts) without significant changes made to their forms. Moreover, ergative-absolute alignment refers to a system in which the subject of an intransitive verb is treated similarly to the object of a transitive verb, while the subject of a transitive verb is marked differently.

The endonym of the language varies depending on the dialect, although in standard Basque it is euskara.

In French, the language is normally called basque though euskara has become common in recent times. Spanish has a greater variety of names for the language. Today, it is most commonly referred to as vasco, lengua vasca, or euskera. Both terms, vasco and basque, are inherited from the Latin ethnonym Vascones, which in turn goes back to the Greek term Οὐάσκωνες (ouáskōnes), an ethnonym used by Strabo in his Geographica (23 CE, Book III).

The Spanish term vascuence, derived from Latin vasconĭce, has acquired negative connotations over the centuries and is not well-liked amongst Basque speakers generally. Its use is documented at least as far back as the 14th century when a law passed in Huesca in 1349 stated that Item nuyl corridor nonsia usado que faga mercadería ninguna que compre nin venda entre ningunas personas, faulando en algaravia nin en abraych nin en basquenç : et qui lo fara pague por coto XXX sol —essentially penalising the use of Arabic, Hebrew, or Basque in marketplaces with a fine of 30 sols (the equivalent of 30 sheep).

Despite the Basque language being geographically surrounded by Romance languages, it is a language isolate that is unrelated to them or to any other living language. Most scholars believe Basque to be the last remaining descendant of one of the pre-Indo-European languages of prehistoric Europe. Consequently, it may be impossible to reconstruct the prehistory of the Basque language by the traditional comparative method except by applying it to differences between Basque dialects. Little is known of its origins, but it is likely that an early form of the Basque language was present in and around the area of modern Basque Country before the arrival of the Indo-European languages in western Europe during the 3rd millennium BC.

Authors such as Miguel de Unamuno and Louis Lucien Bonaparte have noted that the words for "knife" (aizto), "axe" (aizkora), and "hoe" (aitzur) appear to derive from the word for "stone" (haitz), and have therefore concluded that the language dates to prehistoric Europe when those tools were made of stone. Others find this theory unlikely.

Latin inscriptions in Gallia Aquitania preserve a number of words with cognates in the reconstructed proto-Basque language, for instance, the personal names Nescato and Cison (neskato and gizon mean 'young girl' and 'man', respectively in modern Basque). This language is generally referred to as Aquitanian and is assumed to have been spoken in the area before the Roman Republic 's conquests in the western Pyrenees. Some authors even argue for late Basquisation, that the language moved westward during Late antiquity after the fall of the Western Roman Empire into the northern part of Hispania into what is now the Basque Country.

Roman neglect of this area allowed Aquitanian to survive while the Iberian and Tartessian languages became extinct. Through the long contact with Romance languages, Basque adopted a sizeable number of Romance words. Initially the source was Latin, later Gascon (a branch of Occitan) in the north-east, Navarro-Aragonese in the south-east and Spanish in the south-west.

The process of literary unification began in 1918 with the founding of the Royal Academy of the Basque Language (Euskaltzaindia).

Since 1968, Basque has been immersed in a revitalisation process, facing formidable obstacles. However, significant progress has been made in numerous areas. Six main factors have been identified to explain its relative success:

While those six factors influenced the revitalisation process, the extensive development and use of language technologies is also considered a significant additional factor.

Many linguists have tried to link Basque with other languages, but no hypothesis has gained mainstream acceptance. Apart from pseudoscientific comparisons, the appearance of long-range linguistics gave rise to several attempts to connect Basque with geographically very distant language families such as Kartvelian. Historical work on Basque is challenging since written material and documentation has been available only for some few hundred years. Almost all hypotheses concerning the origin of Basque are controversial, and the suggested evidence is not generally accepted by mainstream linguists. Some of these hypothetical connections are:

The region where Basque is spoken has become smaller over centuries, especially at the northern, southern, and eastern borders. Nothing is known about the limits of the region in ancient times but on the basis of toponyms and epigraphs, it seems that in the beginning of the Common Era it stretched to the river Garonne in the north (including the south-western part of present-day France); at least to the Val d'Aran in the east (now a Gascon -speaking part of Catalonia), including lands on both sides of the Pyrenees ; the southern and western boundaries are not clear at all.

The Reconquista temporarily counteracted that contracting tendency when the Christian lords called on northern Iberian peoples (Basques, Asturians, and " Franks ") to colonise the new conquests.

By the 16th century, the Basque-speaking area was reduced basically to the present-day seven provinces of the Basque Country, excluding the southern part of Navarre, the south-western part of Álava, and the western part of Biscay, and including some parts of Aragon and Béarn.

In 1807, Basque was still spoken in the northern half of Álava—including its capital city Vitoria-Gasteiz —and a vast area in central Navarre, but in those two provinces, Basque experienced a rapid decline that pushed its border northwards. In the French Basque Country, Basque was still spoken in all the territory except in Bayonne and some villages around, and including some bordering towns in Béarn.

In the 20th century, however, the rise of Basque nationalism spurred increased interest in the language as a sign of ethnic identity, and with the establishment of autonomous governments in the Southern Basque Country, it has recently made a modest comeback. In the Spanish part, Basque-language schools for children and Basque-teaching centres for adults have brought the language to areas such as western Enkarterri and the Ribera del Ebro in southern Navarre, where it is not known to ever have been widely spoken; and in the French Basque Country, those schools and centres have almost stopped the decline of the language.

Historically, Latin or Romance languages have been the official languages in the region. However, Basque was explicitly recognised in some areas. For instance, the fuero or charter of the Basque-colonised Ojacastro (now in La Rioja) allowed the inhabitants to use Basque in legal processes in the 13th and 14th centuries. Basque was allowed in telegraph messages in Spain thanks to the royal decree of 1904.

The Spanish Constitution of 1978 states in Article 3 that the Spanish language is the official language of the nation, but allows autonomous communities to provide a co-official language status for the other languages of Spain. Consequently, the Statute of Autonomy of the Basque Autonomous Community establishes Basque as the co-official language of the autonomous community. The Statute of Navarre establishes Spanish as the official language of Navarre, but grants co-official status to the Basque language in the Basque-speaking areas of northern Navarre. Basque has no official status in the French Basque Country and French citizens are barred from officially using Basque in a French court of law. However, the use of Basque by Spanish nationals in French courts is permitted (with translation), as Basque is officially recognised on the other side of the border.

The positions of the various existing governments differ with regard to the promotion of Basque in areas where Basque is commonly spoken. The language has official status in those territories that are within the Basque Autonomous Community, where it is spoken and promoted heavily but only partially in Navarre. The Ley del Vascuence (' Law of Basque '), seen as contentious by many Basques, but considered fitting Navarra's linguistic and cultural diversity by some of the main political parties of Navarre, divides Navarre into three language areas: Basque-speaking, non-Basque-speaking, and mixed. Support for the language and the linguistic rights of citizens vary, depending on the area. Others consider it unfair, since the rights of Basque speakers differ greatly depending on the place they live.

The 2021 sociolinguistic survey of all Basque-speaking territories showed that, of all people aged 16 and above:

In 2021, out of a population of 2,634,800 over 16 years of age (1,838,800 in the Autonomous community, 546,000 in Navarre and 250,000 in the Northern Basque Country), 806,000 spoke Basque, which amounted to 30.6% of the population. Compared to the 1991 figures, that represents an overall increase of 266,000, from 539,110 speakers 30 years previously (430,000 in the BAC, 40,110 in FCN, and 69,000 in the Northern provinces). The number has tended to increase, as in all regions the age group most likely to speak Basque was those between 16 and 24 years old. In the BAC, the proportion in that age group that spoke the language (74.5%) was nearly triple the comparable figure from 1991, when barely a quarter of the population spoke Basque.

While there is a general increase in the number of Basque speakers during the period, that is mainly because of bilingualism. Basque transmission as a sole mother tongue has decreased from 19% in 1991 to 15.1% in 2016, and Basque and another language being used as mother language increased from 3% to 5.4% in the same time period. General public attitude towards efforts to promote the Basque language have also been more positive, with the share of people against those efforts falling from 20.9% in 1991 to 16% in 2016.

In 2021, the study found that in the BAC, when both parents were Basque speakers, 98% of children were communicated to only in Basque, and 2% were communicated to in both Basque and Spanish. When only one parent was a Basque-speaker and had Basque as a first language, 84% used Basque and Spanish and 16% only Spanish. In Navarre, the family language of 94.3% of the youngest respondents with both Basque parents was Basque. In the Northern Basque Country, however, when both parents were Basque-speaking, just two thirds transmitted only Basque to their offspring, and as age decreased, the transmission rate also decreased.

Basque is used as a language of commerce both in the Basque Country and in locations around the world where Basques immigrated throughout history.

The modern Basque dialects show a high degree of dialectal divergence, sometimes making cross-dialect communication difficult. That is especially true in the case of Biscayan and Souletin, which are regarded as the most divergent Basque dialects. In 1729, the Jesuit Manuel de Larramendi published a grammar of Basque, titled El Imposible Vencido. El arte de la lengua bascongada in which he spoke about diverse dialects. Specifically, he mentions Gipuzkoan, Biscayan and Navarrese or Labourdian, which he says are often the same.

Later, the Basque philanthropist Louis-Lucien Bonaparte created a map to classify the dialects, which was later reviewed by the priest and first president of the Academia de la Lengua Vasca, Resurrección María de Azkue (1864-1951). However, in 1998, the linguist Koldo Zuazo, revised the classification of Basque dialects, which divides Basque into six dialects (euskalkiak in Basque): Biscayan dialect, Gipuzkoan dialect, Upper Navarrese dialect, Eastern Navarrese dialect (Roncalese, extinct), Navarro-Lapurdian dialect, and Souletin dialect.

Those dialects are divided in 11 subdialects, and 24 minor varieties among them. According to Koldo Zuazo, the Biscayan dialect or "Western" is the most widespread dialect, with around 300,000 speakers out of a total of around 660,000 speakers. The dialect is divided in two minor subdialects (Western Biscayan and Eastern Biscayan), as well as transitional dialects.

There is some debate over whether the Roncalese dialect can be considered a subdialect of Souletin, or its own dialect. Formerly spoken in the seven villages of the Roncal Valley, this dialect disappeared in 1991 when its last speaker, Fidela Bernat, died.

A lesser-known dialect is the Alavese dialect, which became extinct in the 19th century. However, toponymy tells us that it was very similar to the Western dialect. The primary source of information on the Basque spoken in Álava today is the manuscript of Joan Perez de Lazarraga (16th century), as it provides the most comprehensive written source.

The phonological, morphosyntactic, and lexical differences between two geographically distant dialects can be as abundant as those between Catalan and Castilian Spanish. Biscayan (westernmost region) and Souletin (easternmost region) are prime examples of this; they are typified by their distance from other dialects and are spoken at two extreme points of the Basque linguistic region. All the same, for most Basque speakers, speaking different dialects does not get in the way of their understanding one another. For example, a Basque speaker from Navarre can understand someone speaking a western variety fairly easily, due to the familiar words used, which they will have come across in formal contexts.

Furthermore, although standard Basque is the official form of the language, the presence of the dialects in methods of communication, such as local radio and publications, shows efforts to integrate them into daily life.

Although the influence of the neighbouring Romance languages on the Basque language (especially the lexicon, but also to some degree Basque phonology and grammar) has been much more extensive, it is usually assumed that there has been some influence from Basque into those languages as well. Gascon and Aragonese particularly and Spanish to a lesser degree are thought to have received Basque influence in the past. In the cases of Aragonese and Gascon, that would have been through substrate interference following language shift from Aquitanian or Basque to a Romance language that has affected all levels of the language, including place names around the Pyrenees.

Although a number of words of alleged Basque origin in Spanish are circulated (e.g. anchoa 'anchovies', bizarro 'dashing, gallant, spirited', cachorro 'puppy', etc.), most of them have more easily-explained Romance etymologies or not particularly convincing derivations from Basque. Ignoring cultural terms, there is one strong loanword candidate, ezker, long considered the source of the Pyrenean and Iberian Romance words for "left (side)" (izquierdo, esquerdo, esquerre). The lack of initial /r/ in Gascon could arguably be from Basque influence, but that issue is under-researched.

There are other most commonly-claimed substrate influences:

The first two features are common, widespread developments in many Romance (and non-Romance) languages. The change of /f/ to /h/ occurred historically only in limited areas (Gascony and northern Old Castile), which correspond almost exactly to the places where heavy Basque bilingualism in the past is assumed and, as a result, has been widely postulated and equally strongly disputed. Substrate theories are often difficult to prove (especially in the case of phonetically plausible changes like /f/ to /h/). As a result, many arguments have been made on both sides, but the debate largely comes down to the a priori tendency on the part of particular linguists to accept or reject substrate arguments.

Examples of arguments against the substrate theory and possible responses:

Some examples in the initial position are for example, /v/ in Latin vulture, which became the /p/ of putre ; initial Spanish /b/ of bolsa, "purse" also converged to a voiceless in Basque poltsa, while /p/ of Latin pace[m], "peace" has evolved into the reverse direction, the voicing sound /b/ of bake, or Latin pica[m], "magpie", which didn't change anything as pika. Latin /f/ of ficus, "fig" or fagus, "beech" changed also into /p/ piku and pago. Each parallelism depends on phonetic evolutions, the time of the borrowing, and the language from which it was loaned (Latin, Late Latin, Early Romance, Spanish, French or others). The same could be said for the borrowings in the reverse direction.

Beyond those arguments, a number of nomadic groups of Castile are also said to use or have used Basque words in their jargon, such as the gacería in Segovia, the mingaña, the Galician fala dos arxinas and the Asturian Xíriga.

Part of the Romani community in the Basque Country speaks Erromintxela, which is a rare mixed language, with a Kalderash Romani vocabulary and Basque grammar.

A number of Basque-based or Basque-influenced pidgins have existed. In the 16th century, Basque sailors used a Basque–Icelandic pidgin in their contacts with Iceland. The Algonquian–Basque pidgin arose from contact between Basque whalers and the Algonquian peoples in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence and Strait of Belle Isle.

The Basque language features five vowels: /a/, /e/, /i/, /o/ and /u/ (the same that are found in Spanish, Asturian and Aragonese). In the Zuberoan dialect, extra phonemes are featured:

There is no distinctive vowel length in Basque although vowels may be lengthened for emphasis. The mid vowels /e/ and /o/ are raised before nasal consonants.

Basque has an elision rule according to which the vowel /a/ is elided before any following vowel. That does not prevent the existence of diphthongs with /a/ present.

There are six diphthongs in Basque, all falling and with /i̯/ or /u̯/ as the second element.

In syllable-final position, all plosives are devoiced and are spelled accordingly in Standard Basque. When between vowels, and often when after /r/ or /l/, the voiced plosives /b/, /d/, and /ɡ/, are pronounced as the corresponding fricatives [β], [ð], and [ɣ].

Basque has a distinction between laminal and apical articulation for the alveolar fricatives and affricates. With the laminal alveolar fricative [ s̻ ], the friction occurs across the blade of the tongue, the tongue tip pointing toward the lower teeth. That is the usual /s/ in most European languages and is written with an orthographic ⟨ z ⟩. In contrast, the voiceless apicoalveolar fricative [ s̺ ] is written ⟨ s ⟩ ; the tip of the tongue points toward the upper teeth and friction occurs at the tip (apex). For example, zu ' you ' (singular, respectful) is distinguished from su ' fire '. The affricate counterparts are written ⟨ tz ⟩ and ⟨ ts ⟩. So, etzi ' the day after tomorrow ' is distinguished from etsi ' to give up ' ; atzo ' yesterday ' is distinguished from atso ' old woman '.

In the westernmost parts of the Basque country, only the apical ⟨ s ⟩ and the alveolar affricate ⟨ tz ⟩ are used.

Basque also features postalveolar sibilants (/ʃ/, written ⟨ x ⟩, and /tʃ/, written ⟨ tx ⟩).

The letter ⟨ j ⟩ has a variety of realisations according to the regional dialect: [j, dʒ, x, ʃ, ɟ, ʝ], as pronounced from west to east in south Bizkaia and coastal Lapurdi, central Bizkaia, east Bizkaia and Gipuzkoa, south Navarre, inland Lapurdi and Low Navarre, and Zuberoa, respectively.

The letter ⟨ h ⟩ is pronounced in the northern dialects but not in the southern ones. Unified Basque spells it except when it is predictable, after a consonant.

Unless they are recent loanwords (e.g. Ruanda ' Rwanda ', radar, robot...), words may not have initial ⟨ r ⟩. In older loans, initial r- took a prosthetic vowel, resulting in err- (Erroma ' Rome ', Errusia ' Russia '), more rarely irr- (for example irratia ' radio ', irrisa ' rice ') and arr- (for example arrazional ' rational ').

Basque does not have /m/ in syllable final position, and syllable-final /n/ assimilates to the place of articulation of following plosives. As a result, /nb/ is pronounced like [mb], and /nɡ/ is realized as [ŋɡ].

Basque has two types of palatalization, automatic palatalization and expressive palatalization. Automatic palatalization occurs in western Labourd, much of Navarre, all of Gipuzkoa, and nearly all of Biscay. As a result of automatic palatalization, /n/ and /l/ become the palatal nasal [ɲ] and the palatal lateral [ʎ] respectively after the vowel /i/ and before another vowel. An exception is the loanword lili 'lily'. The same palatalization occurs after the semivowel [j] of the diphthongs ai, ei, oi, ui. The palatalization occurs in a wider area, including Soule, all of Gipuzkoa and Biscay, and almost all of Navarre. In a few regions, /n/ and /l/ can be palatalized even in the absence of a following vowel. After palatalization, the semivowel [j] is usually absorbed by the palatal consonant. That can be seen in older spellings, such as malla instead of modern maila 'degree'. However, the modern orthography for Standard Basque ignores automatic palatalization.

In certain regions of Gipuzkoa and Biscay, intervocalic /t/ is often palatalized after /i/ and especially [j]. It may become indistinguishable from the affricate /tʃ/, spelled ⟨ tx ⟩, so aita 'father' may sound like it were spelled atxa or atta. That type of palatalization is far from general, and is often viewed as substandard.

In Goizueta Basque, there are a few examples of /nt/ being palatalized after /i/, and optional palatalization of /ld/. For example, mintegi 'seedbed' becomes [mincei], and bildots 'lamb' can be /biʎots̺/.

Basque nouns, adjectives, and adverbs can be expressively palatalized and express 'smallness', rarely literal; they often show affection in nouns and mitigation in adjectives and adverbs. That is often used in the formation of pet names and nicknames. In words containing one or more sibilant, those sibilants are palatalized to form the palatalized form. That is, s and z become x, and ts and tz become tx. As a result, gizon 'man' becomes gixon 'little fellow', zoro 'crazy, insane' becomes xoro 'silly, foolish', and bildots 'lamb' becomes bildotx 'lambkin, young lamb'.

In words without sibilants, /t/, /d/, /n/, and /l/ can become palatalized, which is indicated in writing with a double consonant except in the case of palatalized /n/, which is written ⟨ ñ ⟩. Thus, tanta 'drop' becomes ttantta 'droplet', and nabar 'grey' becomes ñabar 'grey and pretty, greyish'.

The pronunciation of tt and dd, and the existence of dd, differ by dialect. In the Gipuzkoan and Biscayan dialects tt is often pronounced the same as tx, that is, as [ tʃ ], and dd does not exist. Likewise, in Goizueta Basque, tt is a voiceless palatal stop [c] and the corresponding voiced palatal stop, [ɟ], is absent except as an allophone of /j/. In Goizueta Basque, /j/ is sometimes the result of an affectionate palatalization of /d/.

Palatalization of the rhotics is rare and occurs only in the eastern dialects. When palatalized, the rhotics become the palatal lateral [ʎ]. Likewise, palatalization of velars, resulting in tt or tx, is quite rare.

A few common words, such as txakur 'dog', pronounced /tʃakur/, use palatal sounds even though in current usage, they have lost the diminutive sense, the corresponding non-palatal forms now acquiring an augmentative or pejorative sense: zakur 'big dog'.

There are some rules governing the behaviour of consonants in contact with each other and apply both within and between words. When two plosives meet, the first one is dropped, and the second becomes voiceless. If a sibilant follows a plosive, the plosive is dropped, and the sibilant becomes the corresponding affricate. When a plosive follows an affricate, the affricate becomes a sibilant, and a voiced plosive is devoiced. When a voiced plosive follows a sibilant, it is devoiced except in very slow and careful speech. In the central dialects of Basque, a sibilant turns into an affricate if it follows a liquid or a nasal. When a plosive follows a nasal, there is a strong tendency for it to become voiced.

Basque features great dialectal variation in accentuation, from a weak pitch accent in the western dialects to a marked stress in central and eastern dialects, with varying patterns of stress placement.

Stress is in general not distinctive (and for historical comparisons not very useful); there are, however, a few instances in which stress is phonemic, serving to distinguish between a few pairs of stress-marked words and between some grammatical forms (mainly plurals from other forms), e.g. basóà (' the forest ', absolutive case) vs. básoà (' the glass ', absolutive case; an adoption from Spanish vaso); basóàk (' the forest ', ergative case) vs. básoàk (' the glass ', ergative case) vs. básoak (' the forests ' or ' the glasses ', absolutive case).

Given its great deal of variation among dialects, stress is not marked in the standard orthography and Euskaltzaindia (the Academy of the Basque Language) provides only general recommendations for a standard placement of stress, basically to place a high-pitched weak stress (weaker than that of Spanish, let alone that of English) on the second syllable of a syntagma, and a low-pitched even-weaker stress on its last syllable, except in plural forms in which stress is moved to the first syllable.

That scheme provides Basque with a distinct musicality that differentiates its sound from the prosodical patterns of Spanish (which tends to stress the second-last syllable). Some Euskaldun berriak (' new Basque-speakers ', i.e. second-language Basque-speakers) with Spanish as their first language tend to carry the prosodical patterns of Spanish into their pronunciation of Basque, e.g. pronouncing nire ama (' my mum ') as nire áma (– – ´ –), instead of as niré amà (– ´ – `).

The combining forms of nominals in final /-u/ vary across the regions of the Basque Country. The /u/ can stay unchanged, be lowered to an /a/, or it can be lost. Loss is most common in the east, while lowering is most common in the west. For instance, buru, ' head ', has the combining forms buru- and bur-, as in buruko, ' cap ', and burko, ' pillow ', whereas katu, ' cat ', has the combining form kata-, as in katakume, ' kitten '. Michelena suggests that the lowering to /a/ is generalised from cases of Romance borrowings in Basque that retained Romance stem alternations, such as kantu, ' song ' with combining form kanta-, borrowed from Romance canto, canta-.

Basque is an ergative–absolutive language. The subject of an intransitive verb is in the absolutive case (which is unmarked), and the same case is used for the direct object of a transitive verb. The subject of the transitive verb is marked differently, with the ergative case (shown by the suffix -k). That also triggers main and auxiliary verbal agreement.

The auxiliary verb, which accompanies most main verbs, agrees not only with the subject but also with any direct or indirect object present. Among European languages, the polypersonal agreement is found only in Basque, some languages of the Caucasus (especially the Kartvelian languages), Mordvinic languages, Hungarian, and Maltese (all non-Indo-European). The ergative–absolutive alignment is also rare among European languages and occurs only in some languages of the Caucasus but is frequent worldwide.

AUX. 3. OBJ - PL. OBJ -me. IO [ 3SG _ SBJ ]

Martin-ERG newspaper-PL.ABS buy-GER AUX.3.OBJ-PL.OBJ-me.IO[3SG_SBJ]

Martin-ek is the agent (transitive subject), so it is marked with the ergative case ending -k (with an epenthetic -e-). Egunkariak has an -ak ending, which marks plural object (plural absolutive, direct object case). The verb is erosten dizkit, in which erosten is a kind of gerund ("buying") and the auxiliary dizkit means "he/she (does) them for me". The dizkit can be divided like this:

AUX. 3. OBJ - PL. OBJ -me. IO -you(PL). SBJ

you-ERG(PL) newspaper-PL buy-GER AUX.3.OBJ-PL.OBJ-me.IO-you(PL).SBJ

"You (plural) buy the newspapers for me."

The auxiliary verb is composed as di-zki-da-zue and means 'you pl. (do) them for me'.

The pronoun zuek 'you (plural)' has the same form both in the nominative or absolutive case (the subject of an intransitive sentence or direct object of a transitive sentence) and in the ergative case (the subject of a transitive sentence). In spoken Basque, the auxiliary verb is never dropped even if it is redundant: dizkidazue in zuek niri egunkariak erosten dizkidazue 'you (pl.) are buying the newspapers for me'. However, the pronouns are almost always dropped: zuek in egunkariak erosten dizkidazue 'you (pl.) are buying the newspapers for me'. The pronouns are used only to show emphasis: egunkariak zuek erosten dizkidazue 'it is you (pl.) who buys the newspapers for me', or egunkariak niri erosten dizkidazue 'it is me for whom you buy the newspapers'.

Modern Basque dialects allow for the conjugation of about fifteen verbs, called synthetic verbs, some occurring only in literary contexts. They can exist in the present and the past tenses in the indicative and the subjunctive moods, in three tenses in the conditional and the potential moods, and in one tense in the imperative. Each verb that can be taken intransitively has a nor (absolutive) paradigm and possibly a nor-nori (absolutive–dative) paradigm, as in the sentence Aititeri txapela erori zaio (' The hat fell from grandfather['s head] '). Each verb that can be taken transitively uses those two paradigms for antipassive-voice contexts in which no agent is mentioned (Basque lacks a passive voice, and displays instead an antipassive voice paradigm), and also has a nor-nork (absolutive–ergative) paradigm and possibly a nor-nori-nork (absolutive–dative–ergative) paradigm. The last is exemplified by dizkidazue above. In each paradigm, each constituent noun can take on any of eight persons, five singular and three plural, with the exception of nor-nori-nork in which the absolutive can be only third-person singular or plural. The most ubiquitous auxiliary, izan, can be used in any of those paradigms, depending on the nature of the main verb.

There are more persons in the singular (5) than in the plural (3) for synthetic (or filamentous) verbs because of the two familiar persons— informal masculine and feminine second-person singular. The pronoun hi is used for both of them, but though the masculine form of the verb uses a -k, the feminine uses an -n. That is a property rarely found in Indo-European languages. The entire paradigm of the verb is further augmented by inflecting for "listener" (the allocutive) even if the verb contains no second person constituent. If the situation calls for the familiar masculine, the form is augmented and modified accordingly and likewise for the familiar feminine.

(Gizon bat etorri da, ' a man has come ' ; gizon bat etorri duk, ' a man has come [you are a male close friend] ', gizon bat etorri dun, ' a man has come [you are a female close friend] ', gizon bat etorri duzu, ' a man has come [I talk to you (Sir / Madam)] ') That multiplies the number of possible forms by nearly three. Still, the restriction on contexts in which those forms may be used is strong since all participants in the conversation must be friends of the same sex and not too far apart in age. Some dialects dispense with the familiar forms entirely, but the formal second-person singular conjugates in parallel to the other plural forms, which perhaps indicates that it was originally the second-person plural and later came to be used as a formal singular, and the modern second-person plural was formulated only later as an innovation.

All other verbs in Basque are called periphrastic and behave much as participles would in English. They have only three forms in total, called aspects : perfect (various suffixes), habitual (suffix -t[z]en), and future/potential (suffix. -ko/-go). Verbs of Latinate origin in Basque, as well as many other verbs, have a suffix -tu in the perfect, adapted from the Latin perfect passive -tus suffix. The synthetic verbs also have periphrastic forms, for use in perfects and in simple tenses in which they are deponent.

Within a verb phrase, the periphrastic verb comes first, followed by the auxiliary.

A Basque noun phrase is inflected in 17 different ways for case, multiplied by four ways for its definiteness and number (indefinite, definite singular, definite plural, and definite close plural: euskaldun [Basque-speaker], euskalduna [the Basque speaker, a Basque-speaker], euskaldunak [Basque-speakers, the Basque-speakers], and euskaldunok [we Basque speakers, those Basque-speakers]). The first 68 forms are further modified based on other parts of the sentence, which in turn are inflected for the noun again. It has been estimated that with two levels of recursion, a Basque noun may have 458,683 inflected forms.

The common noun liburu ' book ' is declined as follows:

The proper name Mikel (Michael) is declined as follows:

Within a noun phrase, modifying adjectives follow the noun. As an example of a Basque noun phrase, etxe zaharrean ' in the old house ' is morphologically analysed as follows by Agirre et al.

Basic word order in syntactic construction is subject–object–verb. The order of the phrases within a sentence can be changed for thematic purposes, whereas the order of the words within a phrase is usually rigid. As a matter of fact, Basque phrase order is topic–focus, meaning that in neutral sentences (such as sentences to inform someone of a fact or event) the topic is stated first, then the focus. In such sentences, the verb phrase comes at the end. In brief, the focus directly precedes the verb phrase. This rule is also applied in questions, for instance, What is this? can be translated as Zer da hau? or Hau zer da?, but in both cases the question tag zer immediately precedes the verb da. This rule is so important in Basque that, even in grammatical descriptions of Basque in other languages, the Basque word galdegai ' focus ' is used.

In negative sentences, the order changes. Since the negative particle ez must always directly precede the auxiliary, the topic most often comes beforehand, and the rest of the sentence follows. This includes the periphrastic, if there is one: Aitak frantsesa irakasten du, ' Father teaches French ', in the negative becomes Aitak ez du frantsesa irakasten, in which irakasten (' teaching ') is separated from its auxiliary and placed at the end.

Through contact with neighbouring peoples, Basque has adopted many words from Latin, Spanish, French and Gascon, among other languages. There are a considerable number of Latin loans (sometimes obscured by being subject to Basque phonology and grammar for centuries), for example: lore (' flower ', from florem), errota (' mill ', from rotam, ' [mill] wheel '), gela (' room ', from cellam), gauza (' thing ', from causa).

Basque is written using the Latin script including ⟨ ñ ⟩ and sometimes ⟨ ç ⟩ and ⟨ ü ⟩. Basque does not use ⟨ c, q, v, w, y ⟩ for native words, but the Basque alphabet (established by Euskaltzaindia) does include them for loanwords:

The phonetically meaningful digraphs ⟨ dd, ll, rr, ts, tt, tx, tz ⟩ are treated as pairs of letters.

All letters and digraphs represent unique phonemes. The main exception is ⟨ i ⟩ if it precedes ⟨ l ⟩ and ⟨ n ⟩, which, in most dialects, palatalises their sounds into / ʎ / and / ɲ /, even if they are not written. Hence, Ikurriña can also be written Ikurrina without changing the sound, and the proper name Ainhoa requires the mute ⟨ h ⟩ to break the palatalisation of the ⟨ n ⟩.

⟨ h ⟩ is mute in most regions but is pronounced in many places in the north-east, the main reason for its existence in the Basque alphabet. Its acceptance was a matter of contention during the standardisation process because the speakers of the most widespread dialects had to learn where to place ⟨ h ⟩, which was silent for them.

In Sabino Arana 's (1865–1903) alphabet, digraphs ⟨ ll ⟩ and ⟨ rr ⟩ were replaced with ⟨ ĺ ⟩ and ⟨ ŕ ⟩, respectively.

A typically Basque style of lettering is sometimes used for inscriptions. It derives from the work of stone and wood carvers and is characterised by thick serifs.

Basque millers traditionally employed a separate number system of unknown origin. In this system the symbols are arranged either along a vertical line or horizontally. On the vertical line the single digits and fractions are usually off to one side, usually at the top. When used horizontally, the smallest units are usually on the right and the largest on the left. As with the Basque system of counting in general, it is vigesimal (base 20). Although it is in theory capable of indicating numbers above 100, most recorded examples do not go above 100. Fractions are relatively common, especially 1 ⁄ 2.

The exact systems used vary from area to area but generally follow the same principle with 5 usually being a diagonal line or a curve off the vertical line (a V shape is used when writing a 5 horizontally). Units of ten are usually a horizontal line through the vertical. The twenties are based on a circle with intersecting lines. This system is no longer in general use but is occasionally employed for decorative purposes.

Esklabu erremintaria Sartaldeko oihanetan gatibaturik Erromara ekarri zinduten, esklabua, erremintari ofizioa eman zizuten eta kateak egiten dituzu. Labetik ateratzen duzun burdin gorria nahieran molda zenezake, ezpatak egin ditzakezu zure herritarrek kateak hauts ditzaten, baina zuk, esklabu horrek, kateak egiten dituzu, kate gehiago.

The blacksmith slave Captive in the rainforests of the West they brought you to Rome, slave, they gave you the blacksmith work and you make chains. The incandescent iron you take out of the oven can be adapted as you wish, you could make swords so your people could break the chains, but you, o, slave, you make chains, more chains.

Basques are a Southwestern European ethnic group, characterised by the Basque language, a common culture, shared genetic ancestry to the ancient Vascones and Aquitanians, and are considered among the last remaining direct descendants of Neolithic European populations in Europe.

Basques are indigenous to, and primarily inhabit, an area traditionally known as the Basque Country (Basque : Euskal Herria)—a region that is located around the western end of the Pyrenees on the coast of the Bay of Biscay and straddles parts of north-central Spain and south-western France.

The English word Basque may be pronounced / b ɑː s k / or / b æ s k / and derives from the French Basque (French: [ bask ]), itself derived from Gascon Basco (pronounced [ ˈbasku ]), cognate with Spanish Vasco (pronounced [ ˈbasko ]). Those, in turn, come from Latin Vascō (pronounced [ ˈwaskoː ] ; plural Vascōnēs —see history section below). The Latin / w / generally evolved into the bilabials / b / and / β̞ / in Gascon and Spanish, probably under the influence of Basque and the related Aquitanian (the Latin /w/ instead evolved into / v / in French, Italian and other Romance languages).

Several coins from the 2nd and the 1st centuries BC found in the Basque Country bear the inscription barscunes. The place in which they were minted is not certain but is thought to be somewhere near Pamplona, in the heartland of the area that historians believe was inhabited by the Vascones. Some scholars have suggested a Celtic etymology based on bhar-s-, meaning "summit", "point" or "leaves", according to which barscunes may have meant "the mountain people ", "the tall ones" or "the proud ones", and others have posited a relationship to a Proto-Indo-European root *bar- meaning "border", "frontier", "march".

In Basque, people call themselves the euskaldunak, singular euskaldun, formed from euskal- (i.e. "Basque (language)") and -dun (i.e. "one who has"); euskaldun literally means a Basque-speaker. Not all Basques are Basque-speakers. Therefore, the neologism euskotar, plural euskotarrak, was coined in the 19th century to mean a Basque person, whether Basque-speaking or not. Alfonso Irigoyen posits that the word euskara is derived from an ancient Basque verb enautsi "to say" (compare modern Basque esan) and the suffix -(k)ara ("way (of doing something)"). Thus, euskara would mean literally "way of saying" or "way of speaking". One item of evidence in favour of that hypothesis is found in the Spanish book Compendio Historial, written in 1571 by the Basque writer Esteban de Garibay. He records the name of the Basque language as enusquera. That may, however, be a writing mistake.

In the 19th century, the Basque nationalist activist Sabino Arana posited an original root euzko, which he thought came from eguzkiko ("of the sun", related to the assumption of an original solar religion). On the basis of that putative root, Arana proposed the name Euzkadi for an independent Basque nation, composed of seven Basque historical territories. Arana's neologism Euzkadi (in the regularized spelling Euskadi) is still widely used in both Basque and Spanish since it is now the official name of the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country.

The distinctiveness noted by studies of classical genetic markers (such as blood groups) and the pre-Indo-European of the Basque language has resulted in a popular and long-held view that Basques are "living fossils" of the earliest modern humans who colonised Europe. Partly for these reasons, anthropological and genetic studies from the beginning and the end of the 20th century theorized that the Basques are the descendants of the original Cro-Magnons.

But although they are genetically distinctive in some ways due to isolation, the Basques are still very typically European in their Y-DNA and mtDNA sequences, and in some other genetic loci. These same sequences are widespread throughout the Western half of Europe, especially along the Western fringe of the continent.

Basque tribes were mentioned in Roman times by Strabo and Pliny, including the Vascones, Aquitani, and others. There is enough evidence to support the hypothesis that at that time and later they spoke old varieties of the Basque language (see: Aquitanian language).

In the Early Middle Ages, the territory between the Ebro and Garonne rivers was known as Vasconia, a vaguely defined ethnic area and political entity struggling to fend off pressure from the Iberian Visigothic kingdom and Arab rule to the south, as well as the Frankish push from the north. By the turn of the first millennium, the territory of Vasconia had fragmented into different feudal regions, such as Soule and Labourd, while south of the Pyrenees the Castile, Pamplona and the Pyrenean counties of Aragon, Sobrarbe, Ribagorça (later Kingdom of Aragon), and Pallars emerged as the main regional entities with Basque population in the 9th and 10th centuries.

The Kingdom of Pamplona, a central Basque realm, later known as Navarre, underwent a process of feudalization and was subject to the influence of its much larger Aragonese, Castilian and French neighbours. Castile deprived Navarre of its coastline by conquering key western territories (1199–1201), leaving the kingdom landlocked. The Basques were ravaged by the War of the Bands, bitter partisan wars between local ruling families. Weakened by the Navarrese civil war, the bulk of the realm eventually fell before the onslaught of the Spanish armies (1512–1524). However, the Navarrese territory north of the Pyrenees remained beyond the reach of an increasingly powerful Spain. Lower Navarre became a province of France in 1620.

Nevertheless, the Basques enjoyed a great deal of self-government until the French Revolution (1790) and the Carlist Wars (1839, 1876), when the Basques supported heir apparent Carlos V and his descendants. On either side of the Pyrenees, the Basques lost their native institutions and laws held during the Ancien régime. Since then, despite the current limited self-governing status of the Basque Autonomous Community and Navarre as settled by the Spanish Constitution, many Basques have attempted higher degrees of self-empowerment (see Basque nationalism), sometimes by acts of violence. Labourd, Lower Navarre, and Soule were integrated into the French department system (starting 1790), with Basque efforts to establish a region-specific political-administrative entity failing to take off to date. However, in January 2017, a single agglomeration community was established for the Basque Country in France.

The Basque region is divided into at least three administrative units, namely the Basque Autonomous Community and Navarre in Spain, and the Basque Country Agllomeration Community in the département of Pyrénées Atlantiques, France.

The autonomous community (a concept established in the Spanish Constitution of 1978) known as Euskal Autonomia Erkidegoa or EAE in Basque and as Comunidad Autónoma Vasca or CAV in Spanish (in English: Basque Autonomous Community or BAC), is made up of the three Spanish provinces of Álava, Biscay and Gipuzkoa. The corresponding Basque names of these territories are Araba, Bizkaia and Gipuzkoa, and their Spanish names are Álava, Vizcaya and Guipúzcoa.

The BAC only includes three of the seven provinces of the currently called historical territories. It is sometimes referred to simply as "the Basque Country" (or Euskadi) by writers and public agencies only considering those three western provinces, but also on occasions merely as a convenient abbreviation when this does not lead to confusion in the context. Others reject this usage as inaccurate and are careful to specify the BAC (or an equivalent expression such as "the three provinces", up to 1978 referred to as "Provincias Vascongadas" in Spanish) when referring to this entity or region. Likewise, terms such as "the Basque Government" for "the government of the BAC" are commonly though not universally employed. In particular in common usage the French term Pays Basque ("Basque Country"), in the absence of further qualification, refers either to the whole Basque Country ("Euskal Herria" in Basque), or not infrequently to the northern (or "French") Basque Country specifically.

Under Spain's present constitution, Navarre (Nafarroa in present-day Basque, Navarra historically in Spanish) constitutes a separate entity, called in present-day Basque Nafarroako Foru Erkidegoa, in Spanish Comunidad Foral de Navarra (the autonomous community of Navarre). The government of this autonomous community is the Government of Navarre. In historical contexts Navarre may refer to a wider area, and that the present-day northern Basque province of Lower Navarre may also be referred to as (part of) Nafarroa, while the term "High Navarre" (Nafarroa Garaia in Basque, Alta Navarra in Spanish) is also encountered as a way of referring to the territory of the present-day autonomous community.

There are three other historic provinces parts of the Basque Country: Labourd, Lower Navarre and Soule (Lapurdi, Nafarroa Beherea and Zuberoa in Basque; Labourd, Basse-Navarre and Soule in French), devoid of official status within France's present-day political and administrative territorial organization, and only minor political support to the Basque nationalists. A large number of regional and local nationalist and non-nationalist representatives have waged a campaign for years advocating for the creation of a separate Basque département, while these demands have gone unheard by the French administration.

There are 2,123,000 people living in the Basque Autonomous Community (279,000 in Alava, 1,160,000 in Biscay and 684,000 in Gipuzkoa). The most important cities in this region, which serve as the provinces' administrative centers, are Bilbao (in Biscay), San Sebastián (in Gipuzkoa), and Vitoria-Gasteiz (in Álava). The official languages are Basque and Spanish. Knowledge of Spanish is compulsory under the Spanish constitution (article no. 3), and knowledge and usage of Basque is a right under the Statute of Autonomy (article no. 6), so only knowledge of Spanish is virtually universal. Knowledge of Basque, after declining for many years during Franco's dictatorship owing to official persecution, is again on the rise due to favorable official language policies and popular support. Currently about 33 percent of the population in the Basque Autonomous Community speaks Basque.

Navarre has a population of 601,000; its administrative capital and main city, also regarded by many nationalist Basques as the Basques' historical capital, is Pamplona (Iruñea in modern Basque). Only Spanish is an official language of Navarre, and the Basque language is only co-official in the province's northern region, where the highest concentration of Basque speakers is found. In absolute figures, however, the majority of Basque speakers in the province are located outside this co-official area.

About a quarter of a million people live in the French Basque Country. Nowadays Basque-speakers refer to this region as Iparralde (Basque for North), and to the Spanish provinces as Hegoalde (South). Much of this population lives in or near the Bayonne-Anglet-Biarritz (BAB) urban belt on the coast (in Basque these are Baiona, Angelu and Miarritze). The Basque language, which was traditionally spoken by most of the region's population outside the BAB urban zone, is today rapidly losing ground to French. The French Basque Country's lack of self-government within the French state is coupled with the absence of official status for the Basque language in the region. Attempts to introduce bilingualism in local administration have so far met direct refusal from French officials.

Large numbers of Basques have left the Basque Country to settle in the rest of Spain, France or other parts of the world in different historical periods, often for economic or political reasons. Historically the Basques abroad were often employed in shepherding and ranching and by maritime fisheries and merchants. Millions of Basque descendants (see Basque American and Basque Canadian) live in North America (the United States; Canada, mainly in the provinces of Newfoundland and Quebec), all over Latin America, South Africa, and Australia.

Spanish author Miguel de Unamuno said: "There are at least two things that clearly can be attributed to Basques: the Society of Jesus and the Republic of Chile." Chilean historian Luis Thayer Ojeda estimated that 48 percent of immigrants to Chile in the 17th and 18th centuries were Basque. Estimates for the number of Basque descendants living in Chile range between 2.5 and 5 million; the Basque have been a major, if not the strongest, influence in the country's cultural and economic development.

In Bolivia, the War of the Vicuñas and Basques (Spanish: Guerra de Vicuñas y Vascongados), was an armed conflict in Charcas Province that lasted between June 1622 and March 1625, fought between Basques and "Vicuñas"; an informal term for non-Basque Spaniards in Upper Peru, a name obtained through the habit of wearing hats made of vicuña skins. Competition over the control of the silver mines in Potosí, Lípez and Chichas surged in the early 17th century, pitting Basques and Vicuñas against each other. The Vicuñas had initially employed legal and political measures attempting to block the Basque attempts to monopolize control over the cabildo (municipal government) of Potosí and the silver mining sector. The war pitted different sectors of the viceregal administration against each other, as some supported the Basque claims for hegemony whilst others had a conciliatory approach to the Vicuña rebels. Personalities involved in the conflict included the president and oidores of the Royal Audiencia of Charcas, treasury officials and the corregidor of Potosí and the visitador (sent to the area in order to audit fiscal accounts).

Basque place names are to be found in the Americas, such as Nueva Vizcaya (now Chihuahua and Durango, Mexico), New Navarre (now Sonora and Sinaloa, Mexico), Biscayne Bay (United States), and Aguereberry Point (United States). Nueva Vizcaya was the first province in the north of the Viceroyalty of New Spain (Mexico) to be explored and settled by the Spanish. It consisted mostly of the area which is today the states of Chihuahua and Durango (the original Durango is a known city in Biscay).

In Mexico most descendants of Basque émigrés are concentrated in the cities of Monterrey, Saltillo, Reynosa, Camargo, and the states of Jalisco, Durango, Nuevo León, Tamaulipas, Coahuila, and Sonora. The Basques were important in the mining industry; many were ranchers and vaqueros (cowboys), and the rest opened small shops in major cities such as Mexico City, Guadalajara and Puebla. In Guatemala, most Basques have been concentrated in Sacatepequez Department, Antigua Guatemala, Jalapa for six generations now, while some have migrated to Guatemala City.

In Colombia, a large number of Basques settled mainly in Antioquia and the Coffee Axis. In 1955, Joaquín Ospina said: "Is there something more similar to the Basque people than the " antioqueños ". Also, writer Arturo Escobar Uribe said in his book " Mitos de Antioquia " (Myths of Antioquia) (1950): "Antioquia, which in its clean ascendance predominates the peninsular farmer of the Basque provinces, inherited the virtues of its ancestors.... Despite the predominance of the white race, its extension in the mountains... has projected over Colombia's map the prototype of its race; in Medellín with the industrial paisa, entrepreneur, strong and steady... in its towns, the adventurer, arrogant, world-explorer.... Its myths, which are an evidence of their deep credulity and an indubitable proof of their Iberian ancestor, are the sequel of the conqueror's blood which runs through their veins". Bambuco, a Colombian folk music, has Basque roots.

The largest of several important Basque communities in the United States is in the area around Boise, Idaho, home to the Basque Museum and Cultural Center, host to an annual Basque festival, as well as a festival for the Basque diaspora every five years. Reno, Nevada, where the Center for Basque Studies and the Basque Studies Library are located at the University of Nevada, is another significant nucleus of Basque population. Elko, Nevada, sponsors an annual Basque festival that celebrates the dance, cuisine and cultures of the Basque peoples of Spanish, French and Mexican nationalities who have arrived in Nevada since the late 19th century.

Texas has a large percentage of Hispanics descended from Basques who participated in the conquest of New Spain. Many of the original Tejanos had Basque blood, including those who fought in the Battle of the Alamo alongside many of the other Texans. Along the Mexican/Texan border, many Basque surnames can be found. The largest concentration of Basques who settled on Mexico's north-eastern "frontera", including the states of Chihuahua, Durango, Coahuila, Nuevo León, and Tamaulipas, also settled along Texas' Rio Grande from South Texas to West Texas. Many of the historic hidalgos, or noble families from this area, had gained their titles and land grants from Spain and Mexico; they still value their land. Some of North America's largest ranches, which were founded under these colonial land grants, can be found in this region.

California has a major concentration of Basques, most notably in the San Joaquin Valley between Stockton, Fresno and Bakersfield. The city of Bakersfield has a large Basque community and the city has several Basque restaurants, including Noriega's which won the 2011 James Beard Foundation America's Classic Award. There is a history of Basque culture in Chino, California. In Chino, two annual Basque festivals celebrate the dance, cuisine, and culture of the peoples. The surrounding area of San Bernardino County has many Basque descendants as residents. They are mostly descendants of settlers from Spain and Mexico. These Basques in California are grouped in the group known as Californios.

Basques of European Spanish-French and Latin American nationalities also settled throughout the western U.S. in states like Louisiana, New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, Oregon, and Washington.

The identifying language of the Basques is called Basque or Euskara, spoken today by 25-30% of the region's population. An idea of the central place the language has in cultural terms is given by the fact that Basques identify themselves by the term euskaldun and their country as Euskal Herria, literally "Basque speaker" and "Country of the Basque Language" respectively. The language has been made a political issue by official Spanish and French policies restricting its use either historically or currently; however, this has not stopped the teaching, speaking, writing, and cultivating of this minority language. This sense of Basque identity tied to the local language does not only exist in isolation. For many Basques, it is juxtaposed with a sense of either Spanish or French identity tied with the use of the Spanish and French languages among other Basques, especially in the French Basque Country. Regarding the Spanish Basque Country, Basques that don't have a sense of Spanish identity make up an important part of the population. As with many European states, a regional identity, be it linguistically derived or otherwise, is not mutually exclusive with the broader national one. For example, Basque rugby union player for France, Imanol Harinordoquy, has said about his national identity:

I am French and Basque. There is no conflict, I am proud of both... I have friends who are involved in the political side of things but that is not for me. My only interest is the culture, the Euskera language, the people, our history and ways.

As a result of state language promotion, school policies, the effects of mass media and migration, today virtually all Basques (except for some children below school age) speak the official language of their state (Spanish or French). There are extremely few Basque monolingual speakers: essentially all Basque speakers are bilingual on both sides of the border. Spanish or French is typically the first language of citizens from other regions (who often feel no need to learn Basque), and Spanish or French is also the first language of many Basques, all of which maintains the dominance of the state tongues of both France and Spain. Recent Basque Government policies aim to change this pattern, as they are viewed as potential threats against mainstream usage of the minority tongue.

The Basque language is thought to be a genetic language isolate in contrast with other European languages, the vast majority of which belong to the broad Indo-European language family. Another peculiarity of Basque is that it has probably been spoken continuously in situ, in and around its present territorial location, for longer than most other modern European languages, which are typically thought to have been introduced in historic or prehistoric times through population migrations or other processes of cultural transmission.

However, popular stereotypes characterizing Basque as "the oldest language in Europe" and "unique among the world's languages" may be misunderstood and lead to erroneous assumptions. Over the centuries, Basque has remained in continuous contact with neighboring western European languages with which it has come to share numerous lexical properties and typological features. Basque is also a modern language, and is established as a written and printed one used in present-day forms of publication and communication, as well as a language spoken and used in a very wide range of social and cultural contexts, styles, and registers.

Basques have a close attachment to their home (etxe(a) 'house, home'), especially when this consists of the traditional self-sufficient, family-run farm or baserri (a). Home in this context is synonymous with family roots. Some Basque surnames were adapted from old baserri or habitation names. They typically related to a geographical orientation or other locally meaningful identifying features. Such surnames provide even those Basques whose families may have left the land generations ago with an important link to their rural family origins: Bengoetxea "the house of further down", Goikoetxea "the house above", Landaburu "top of the field", Errekondo "next to the stream", Elizalde "by the church", Mendizabal "wide hill", Usetxe "house of birds" Ibarretxe "house in the valley", Etxeberria "the new house", and so on.

In contrast to surrounding regions, ancient Basque inheritance patterns, recognised in the fueros, favoured survival of the unity of inherited land holdings. In a kind of primogeniture, these usually were inherited by the eldest male or female child. As in other cultures, the fate of other family members depended on the assets of a family: wealthy Basque families tended to provide for all children in some way, while less-affluent families may have had only one asset to provide for one child. However, this heir often provided for the rest of the family (unlike in England, with strict primogeniture, where the eldest son inherited everything and often did not provide for others). Even though they were provided for in some way, younger siblings had to make much of their living by other means. Mostly after the advent of industrialisation, this system resulted in the emigration of many rural Basques to Spain, France or the Americas. Harsh by modern standards, this custom resulted in a great many enterprising figures of Basque origin who went into the world to earn their way, from Spanish conquistadors such as Lope de Aguirre and Francisco Vásquez de Coronado, to explorers, missionaries and saints of the Catholic Church, such as Francis Xavier.

A widespread belief that Basque society was originally matriarchal is at odds with the current, clearly patrilineal kinship system and inheritance structures. Some scholars and commentators have attempted to reconcile these points by assuming that patrilineal kinship represents an innovation. In any case, the social position of women in both traditional and modern Basque society is somewhat better than in neighbouring cultures, and women have a substantial influence in decisions about the domestic economy. In the past, some women participated in collective magical ceremonies. They were key participants in a rich folklore, today largely forgotten.

Basque cuisine is at the heart of Basque culture, influenced by the neighboring communities and produce from the sea and the land. A 20th-century feature of Basque culture is the phenomenon of gastronomical societies (called txoko in Basque), food clubs where men gather to cook and enjoy their own food. Until recently, women were allowed entry only one day in the year. Cider houses (Sagardotegiak) are popular restaurants in Gipuzkoa open for a few months while the cider is in season.

At the end of the 20th century, despite ETA violence (ended in 2010) and the crisis of heavy industries, the Basque economic condition recovered remarkably. They emerged from the Franco regime with a revitalized language and culture. The Basque language expanded geographically, led by a significant increase in its usage among the major urban centers of Pamplona, Bilbao, and Bayonne, where only a few decades prior the Basque language had all but disappeared. Nowadays, the number of Basque speakers is maintaining its level or increasing slightly.

Traditionally Basques have been mostly Catholics. In the 19th century and well into the 20th, Basques as a group remained notably devout and churchgoing. In recent years church attendance has fallen off, as in most of Western Europe. The region has been a source of missionaries like Francis Xavier and Michel Garicoïts. Ignatius Loyola, founder of the Society of Jesus, was a Basque. California Franciscan Fermín Lasuén was born in Vitoria. Lasuén was the successor to Franciscan Padre Junípero Serra and founded 9 of the 21 extant California Missions along the coast.

A sprout of Protestantism in the continental Basque Country produced the first translation of the new Testament into Basque by Joanes Leizarraga. Queen Jeanne III of Navarre, a devout Huguenot, commissioned the translation of the New Testament into Basque and Béarnese for the benefit of her subjects. By the time Henry III of Navarre converted to Catholicism in order to become king of France, Protestantism virtually disappeared from the Basque community.

Bayonne held a Jewish community composed mainly of Sephardi Jews fleeing from the Spanish and Portuguese Inquisitions. There were also important Jewish and Muslim communities in Navarre before the Castilian invasion of 1512–21.

Nowadays, according to one single opinion poll, only slightly more than 50% of Basques profess some kind of belief in God, while the rest are either agnostic or atheist. The number of religious skeptics increases noticeably for the younger generations, while the older ones are more religious. Catholicism is, by far, the largest religion in the Basque Country. In 2019, the proportion of Basques that identify themselves as Roman Catholic was 60%, while it is one of the most secularized communities of Spain: 24.6% were non-religious and 12.3% of Basques were atheist.

The Christianisation of the Basque Country has been the topic of some discussion. There are, broadly speaking, two views. According to one, Christianity arrived in the Basque Country during the 4th and 5th centuries but according to the other, it did not take place until the 12th and 13th centuries. The Encyclopaedia Britannica says that the Basques were not Christianized until the tenth century, however, and that their earlier animism survives in their folklore. The main issue lies in the different interpretations of what is considered Christianisation. Early traces of Christianity can be found in the major urban areas from the 4th century onwards, a bishopric from 589 in Pamplona and three hermit cave concentrations (two in Álava, one in Navarre) that were in use from the 6th century onwards. In this sense, Christianity arrived "early".

Pre-Christian belief seems to have focused on a goddess called Mari. A number of place-names contain her name, which would suggest these places were related to worship of her such as Anbotoko Mari who appears to have been related to the weather. According to one tradition, she travelled every seven years between a cave on Mount Anboto and one on another mountain (the stories vary); the weather would be wet when she was in Anboto, dry when she was in Aloña, or Supelegor, or Gorbea. One of her names, Mari Urraca possibly ties her to an historical Navarrese princess of the 11th and 12th century, with other legends giving her a brother or cousin who was a Roman Catholic priest. So far the discussions about whether the name Mari is original and just happened to coincide closely with the Christian name María or if Mari is an early Basque attempt to give a Christian veneer to pagan worship have remained speculative. At any rate, Mari (Andramari) is one of the oldest worshipped Christian icons in Basque territories.

Mari's consort is Sugaar. This chthonic couple seems to bear the superior ethical power and the power of creation and destruction. It's said that when they gathered in the high caves of the sacred peaks, they engendered the storms. These meetings typically happened on Friday nights, the day of historical akelarre or coven. Mari was said to reside in Mount Anboto ; periodically she crossed the skies as a bright light to reach her other home at Mount Txindoki.

Legends also speak of many and abundant genies, like jentilak (equivalent to giants), lamiak (equivalent to nymphs), mairuak (builders of the cromlechs or stone circles, literally Moors), iratxoak (imps), sorginak (witches, priestesses of Mari), and so on. Basajaun is a Basque version of the Woodwose. There is a trickster named San Martin Txiki ("St Martin the Lesser").

It is unclear whether Neolithic stone structures called dolmens have a religious significance or were strictly functional, built as shelters to house animals or resting shepherds. Some of the dolmens and cromlechs are burial sites serving also as border markers.

The jentilak (' giants '), on the other hand, are a legendary people which explains the disappearance of a people of Stone Age culture that used to live in the highlands and with no knowledge of iron. Many legends about them tell that they were bigger and taller, with a great force, but were displaced by the ferrons, or workers of ironworks foundries, until their total fade-out. They were pagans, but one of them, Olentzero, accepted Christianity and became a sort of Basque Santa Claus. They gave name to several toponyms, as Jentilbaratza.

Historically, Basque society can be described as being somewhat at odds with Roman and later European societal norms. Strabo 's account of the north of Spain in his Geographica (written between approximately 20 BC and 20 AD) makes a mention of "a sort of woman-rule—not at all a mark of civilization" (Hadington 1992), a first mention of the—for the period—unusual position of women: "Women could inherit and control property as well as officiate in churches." The evidence for this assertion is rather sparse however.

This preference for female dominance existed well into the 20th century:

... matrilineal inheritance laws, and agricultural work performed by women continued in Basque country until the early twentieth century. For more than a century, scholars have widely discussed the high status of Basque women in law codes, as well as their positions as judges, inheritors, and arbitrators through ante-Roman, medieval, and modern times. The system of laws governing succession in the French Basque region reflected total equality between the sexes. Up until the eve of the French Revolution, the Basque woman was truly 'the mistress of the house', hereditary guardian, and head of the lineage.

While women continued to have a higher position in Basque than other western European societies, there is no clear evidence for the assertion that the society was at any point fully 'matriarchal'. The 'Basque matriarchy' argument is typically tied to 20th century nationalism and is at odds with earlier accounts of the society.

Although the Kingdom of Navarre did adopt feudalism, most Basques also possessed unusual social institutions different from those of the rest of feudal Europe. Some aspects of this include the elizate tradition where local house-owners met in front of the church to elect a representative to send to the juntas and Juntas Generales (such as the Juntas Generales de Vizcaya or Guipúzcoa) which administered much larger areas. Another example was that in the medieval period most land was still owned by the farmers themselves, rather than the Church or a king.

The great family of ball games has its unique offspring among Basque ball games, known generically as pilota (Spanish: pelota). Some variants have been exported to the United States and Macau under the name of Jai Alai.

There are several sports derived by Basques from everyday chores. Heavy workers were challenged and bets placed upon them. Examples are:

The encierro (bull run) in Pamplona 's fiestas Sanfermines started as a transport of bulls to the ring. These encierros, as well as other bull and bullock related activities are not exclusive to Pamplona but are traditional in many towns and villages of the Basque country.

There are several clubs within the Basque Country, such as Athletic Bilbao, Real Sociedad, Deportivo Alavés, SD Eibar and, as Navarre club, the CA Osasuna (the only club in La Liga that has a Basque name— osasuna means "health"). In the 2016–17 season these five clubs played together in La Liga, the first instance where five Basque clubs have reached that level at the same time. Athletic's recruitment policy has meant the club refuses to sign any non-Basque players, with "Basque" currently defined to include either ethnic Basques or players of any ethnicity trained by a Basque club. Real Sociedad also previously employed such a policy.

The Basque Country also features several professional basketball teams, the most notable of which is Saski Baskonia from Vitoria-Gasteiz, one of the 11 clubs that own stakes in Euroleague Basketball, the company that operates the continent-wide EuroLeague and EuroCup. They are currently joined in the Spanish top flight, Liga ACB, by Bilbao Basket, with the two clubs involved in a longstanding rivalry. Another club from the Basque Country, Gipuzkoa Basket from San Sebastián, currently plays in the second-level LEB Oro.

Rugby union is a popular sport among French Basques, with major clubs Biarritz Olympique and Aviron Bayonnais traditional powerhouses in the premier division of French Rugby (the Top 14). Biarritz regularly play Champions Cup matches, especially knockout matches, at Estadio Anoeta in San Sebastián. Games between the Basque clubs and Catalan club USA Perpignan are always hard fought.

Cycling is popular and the Euskaltel–Euskadi professional cycling team, partly sponsored by the Basque Government participated in the UCI World Tour division until 2014. Known for their orange tops and hill-climbing ability, their fans were famous for lining the famous Pyrenean climbs in the Tour de France, in support of their compatriots.

Each April, the week-long Tour of the Basque Country route features the region's countryside. Miguel Induráin, born in Villava-Atarrabia, is widely regarded as one of cycling's most successful riders, having won 5 consecutive Tours de France titles.

While there is no independent Basque state, Spain's autonomous community of the Basque Country, made up of the provinces of Álava (Araba), Biscay (Bizkaia) and Gipuzkoa, is primarily a historical consequence and an answer to the widespread autonomy claim of its population.

Navarre has a separate statute of autonomy, a contentious arrangement designed during Spanish transition to democracy (the Amejoramiento, an 'upgrade' of its previous status during dictatorship). It refers back to the kingdom status of Navarre (up to 1841) and their traditional institutional and legal framework (charters). Basque, the original and main language of Navarre up to the late 18th century, has kept family transmission especially in the northern part of Navarre and central areas to a lesser extent, designated as Basque speaking or mixed area in Navarrese law. Questions of political, linguistic and cultural allegiance and identity are highly complex in Navarre. Politically some Basque nationalists would like to integrate with the Basque Autonomous Community.

The French Basque Country today does not exist as a formal political entity and is officially simply part of the French department of Pyrénées Atlantiques, centered in Béarn. In recent years the number of mayors of the region supporting the creation of a separate Basque department has grown to 63.87%. So far, their attempts have been unsuccessful.

Both the Spanish and French governments have, at times, suppressed Basque linguistic and cultural identity. The French Republics, the epitome of the nation-state, have a long history of attempting the complete cultural absorption of cultural minority groups. Spain has, at most points in its history, granted some degree of linguistic, cultural, and even political autonomy to its Basques, but under the regime of Francisco Franco, the Spanish government reversed the advances of Basque nationalism, as it had fought in the opposite side of the Spanish Civil War : cultural activity in Basque was limited to folkloric issues and the Catholic Church.

Today, the Southern Basque Country within Spain enjoys an extensive cultural and political autonomy. The majority of schools under the jurisdiction of the Basque education system use Basque as the primary medium of teaching. However, the situation is more delicate in the Northern Basque Country within France, where Basque is not officially recognized, and where lack of autonomy and monolingual public schooling in French exert great pressure on the Basque language.

In Navarre, Basque was declared an endangered language, since the conservative government of the Navarrese People's Union restricted its use.

Basque is also spoken by immigrants in the major cities of Spain and France, in Australia, in many parts of Latin America, and in the United States, especially in Nevada, Idaho, and California.

Since its articulation by Sabino Arana in the late 19th century, the more radical currents of Basque nationalism have demanded the right of self-determination and even independence. Within the Basque country, this element of Basque politics is often in balance with the conception of the Basque Country as just another part of the Spanish state, a view more commonly espoused on the right of the political spectrum. In contrast, the desire for greater autonomy or independence is particularly common among leftist Basque nationalists. The right of self-determination was asserted by the Basque Parliament in 2002 and 2006. Since self-determination is not recognized in the Spanish Constitution of 1978, a wide majority of Basques abstained (55%) and some even voted against it (23.5%) in the ratification referendum of 6 December that year. However, it was approved by clear majority overall in Spain (87%). The autonomous regime for the Basque Country was approved in a 1979 referendum but the autonomy of Navarre (Amejoramiento del Fuero : "improvement of the charter") was never subject to a referendum but only approved by the Navarrese Cortes (parliament).

As with their language, the Basques are clearly a distinct cultural group in their region. They regard themselves as culturally and especially linguistically distinct from their surrounding neighbours. Some Basques identify themselves as Basques only whereas others identify themselves both as Basque and Spanish. Many Basques regard the designation as a "cultural minority" as incomplete, favouring instead the definition as a nation, the commonly accepted designation for the Basque people up to the rise of the nation-states and the definition imposed by the 1812 Spanish Constitution.

In modern times, as a European people living in a highly industrialized area, cultural differences from the rest of Europe are inevitably blurred, although a conscious cultural identity as a people or nation remains very strong, as does an identification with their homeland, even among many Basques who have emigrated to other parts of Spain or France, or to other parts of the world.

The strongest distinction between the Basques and their traditional neighbours is linguistic. Surrounded by Romance-language speakers, the Basques traditionally spoke (and many still speak) a language that was not only non-Romance but non-Indo-European. The prevailing belief amongst Basques, and forming part of their national identity, is that their language has continuity with the people who were in this region since not only pre-Roman and pre-Celtic times, but since the Stone Age.

Among the most notable Basque people are Juan Sebastián Elcano (who led the first successful expedition to circumnavigate the globe after Ferdinand Magellan died mid-journey); Sancho III of Navarre ; and Ignatius of Loyola and Francis Xavier, founders of the Society of Jesus.

Don Diego María de Gardoqui y Arriquibar (1735–1798) was also a Basque, who became Spain's first Ambassador to the United States, and Miguel de Unamuno was a noted novelist and philosopher of the late 19th and the 20th century, was also a Basque.

Another well-known Basque was Father Alberto Hurtado, S.J. (1901–1952), a Jesuit priest who founded the charitable housing system Hogar de Cristo, meaning hearth, or home, of Christ, in Chile. El Hogar provided a home-like milieu for the homeless. Hurtado also founded the Chilean Trade Union Association to promote a union movement based on the social teachings of the Catholic Church. He was a friend and savior to all the poor and homeless, and was beatified by Pope John Paul II on 16 October 1994. He was canonized by Pope Benedict XVI on 23 October 2005.

Basroch refugee camp was situated in Grande-Synthe, Dunkirk, France. It began as an informal refugee camp in a muddy field in about 2006. As late as summer 2015, it still only contained about 60 residents, but by January 2016, the camp had expanded to more than 2000 people.

The very rapid expansion created a humanitarian crisis, as the site was not at all suitable for the large numbers of people who were living there. The rats, refuse, and disease led to it being referred to as "Europe's worst refugee camp." It was described as "appalling," "gut wrenching", and "deplorable."

The international NGO Médecins Sans Frontières stated:

Hygiene was dire in Basroch camp, and several areas became a muddy quagmire every time it rained. The mayor called it “the camp of shame” and MSF workers described it in interviews as a “gigantic refuse dump”

Aid organisations working at Basroch camp included Emmaüs, Terre d'Errance, Secours catholique et Secours populaire, Aid Box Convey and Edlumino, which provided education to the children of the camp.

Bastille Day is the common name given in English-speaking countries to the national day of France, which is celebrated on 14 July each year. It is referred to, both legally and commonly, as le 14 juillet (French: [ lə katɔʁz(ə) ʒɥijɛ ]) in French, though la fête nationale is also used in the press.

French National Day is the anniversary of the Storming of the Bastille on 14 July 1789, a major event of the French Revolution, as well as the Fête de la Fédération that celebrated the unity of the French people on 14 July 1790. Celebrations are held throughout France. One that has been reported as "the oldest and largest military parade in Europe" is held on 14 July on the Champs-Élysées in Paris in front of the President of France, along with other French officials and foreign guests.

In 1789, tensions rose in France between reformist and conservative factions as the country struggled to resolve an economic crisis. In May, the Estates General legislative assembly was revived, but members of the Third Estate broke ranks, declaring themselves to be the National Assembly of the country, and on 20 June, vowed to write a constitution for the kingdom.

On 11 July, Jacques Necker, the finance minister of Louis XVI, who was sympathetic to the Third Estate, was dismissed by the King, provoking an angry reaction among Parisians. Crowds formed, fearful of an attack by the royal army or by foreign regiments of mercenaries in the King's service and seeking to arm themselves. Early on 14 July, a crowd besieged the Hôtel des Invalides for firearms, muskets, and cannons stored in its cellars. That same day, another crowd stormed the Bastille, a fortress-prison in Paris that had historically held people jailed on the basis of lettres de cachet (literally "signet letters"), arbitrary royal indictments that could not be appealed and did not indicate the reason for the imprisonment, and which was believed to hold a cache of ammunition and gunpowder. As it happened, at the time of the attack, the Bastille held only seven inmates, none of great political significance.

The crowd was eventually reinforced by the mutinous Régiment des Gardes Françaises ("Regiment of French Guards"), whose usual role was to protect public buildings. They proved a fair match for the fort's defenders, and Governor de Launay, the commander of the Bastille, capitulated and opened the gates to avoid a mutual massacre. According to the official documents, about 200 attackers and just one defender died before the capitulation. However, possibly because of a misunderstanding, fighting resumed. In this second round of fighting, de Launay and seven other defenders were killed, as was Jacques de Flesselles, the prévôt des marchands ("provost of the merchants"), the elected head of the city's guilds, who under the French monarchy had the responsibilities of a present-day mayor.

Shortly after the storming of the Bastille, late in the evening of 4 August, after a very stormy session of the Assemblée constituante, feudalism was abolished. On 26 August, the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (Déclaration des Droits de l'Homme et du Citoyen) was proclaimed.

As early as 1789, the year of the storming of the Bastille, preliminary designs for a national festival were underway. These designs were intended to strengthen the country's national identity through the celebration of the events of 14 July 1789. One of the first designs was proposed by Clément Gonchon, a French textile worker, who presented his design for a festival celebrating the anniversary of the storming of the Bastille to the French city administration and the public on 9 December 1789. There were other proposals and unofficial celebrations of 14 July 1789, but the official festival sponsored by the National Assembly was called the Fête de la Fédération.

The Fête de la Fédération on 14 July 1790 was a celebration of the unity of the French nation during the French Revolution. The aim of this celebration, one year after the Storming of the Bastille, was to symbolize peace. The event took place on the Champ de Mars, which was located far outside of Paris at the time. The work needed to transform the Champ de Mars into a suitable location for the celebration was not on schedule to be completed in time. On the day recalled as the Journée des brouettes ("The Day of the Wheelbarrow"), thousands of Parisian citizens gathered together to finish the construction needed for the celebration.

The day of the festival, the National Guard assembled and proceeded along the boulevard du Temple in the pouring rain, and were met by an estimated 260,000 Parisian citizens at the Champ de Mars. A mass was celebrated by Talleyrand, bishop of Autun. The popular General Lafayette, as captain of the National Guard of Paris and a confidant of the king, took his oath to the constitution, followed by King Louis XVI. After the end of the official celebration, the day ended in a huge four-day popular feast, and people celebrated with fireworks, as well as fine wine and running nude through the streets in order to display their freedom.

On 30 June 1878, a feast was officially arranged in Paris to honour the French Republic (the event was commemorated in a painting by Claude Monet). On 14 July 1879, there was another feast, with a semi-official aspect. The day's events included a reception in the Chamber of Deputies, organised and presided over by Léon Gambetta (a military reviewer at Longchamp), and a Republican Feast in the Pré Catelan. All throughout France, Le Figaro wrote, "people feasted much to honour the storming of the Bastille".

In 1880, the government of the Third Republic wanted to revive the 14 July festival. The campaign for the reinstatement of the festival was sponsored by the notable politician Léon Gambetta and scholar Henri Baudrillant. On 21 May 1880, Benjamin Raspail proposed a law, signed by sixty-four members of government, to have "the Republic adopt 14 July as the day of an annual national festival". There were many disputes over which date to be remembered as the national holiday, including 4 August (the commemoration of the end of the feudal system), 5 May (when the Estates-General first assembled), 27 July (the fall of Robespierre), and 21 January (the date of Louis XVI 's execution). The government decided that the date of the holiday would be 14 July, but that was still somewhat problematic. The events of 14 July 1789 were illegal under the previous government, which contradicted the Third Republic's need to establish legal legitimacy. French politicians also did not want the sole foundation of their national holiday to be rooted in a day of bloodshed and class-hatred as the day of storming the Bastille was. Instead, they based the establishment of the holiday as both the celebration of the Fête de la Fédération, a festival celebrating the anniversary of the Republic of France on 14 July 1789, and the storming of the Bastille. The Assembly voted in favor of the proposal on 21 May, and 8 June. The law was approved on 27 and 29 June. The celebration was made official on 6 July 1880.

In the debate leading up to the adoption of the holiday, Senator Henri Martin, who wrote the National Day law, addressed the chamber on 29 June 1880:

Do not forget that behind this 14 July, where victory of the new era over the Ancien Régime was bought by fighting, do not forget that after the day of 14 July 1789, there was the day of 14 July 1790 (...) This [latter] day cannot be blamed for having shed a drop of blood, for having divided the country. It was the consecration of the unity of France (...) If some of you might have scruples against the first 14 July, they certainly hold none against the second. Whatever difference which might part us, something hovers over them, it is the great images of national unity, which we all desire, for which we would all stand, willing to die if necessary.

The Bastille Day military parade is the French military parade that has been held in the morning, every year in Paris, since 1880. While previously held elsewhere within or near the capital city, since 1918 it has been held on the Champs-Élysées, with the participation of the Allies as represented in the Versailles Peace Conference, and with the exception of the period of German occupation from 1940 to 1944 (when the ceremony took place in London under the command of General Charles de Gaulle); and 2020 when the COVID-19 pandemic forced its cancellation. The parade passes down the Champs-Élysées from the Arc de Triomphe to the Place de la Concorde, where the President of the French Republic, his government and foreign ambassadors to France stand. This is a popular event in France, broadcast on French TV, and is the oldest and largest regular military parade in Europe.

Smaller military parades are held in French garrison towns, including Toulon and Belfort, with local troops.

Liège celebrates Bastille Day each year since the end of the First World War, as Liège was decorated by the Légion d'Honneur for its unexpected resistance during the Battle of Liège. The city also hosts a fireworks show outside of Congress Hall. Specifically in Liège, celebrations of Bastille Day have been known to be bigger than the celebrations of the Belgian National holiday. Around 35,000 people gather to celebrate Bastille Day. There is a traditional festival dance of the French consul that draws large crowds, and many unofficial events over the city celebrate the relationship between France and the city of Liège.

Vancouver, British Columbia, holds a celebration featuring exhibits, food, and entertainment. The Toronto Bastille Day festival is also celebrated in Toronto, Ontario. The festival is organized by the French-Canadian community in Toronto and sponsored by the Consulate General of France in Toronto. The celebration includes music, performances, sport competitions, and a French Market. At the end of the festival, there is also a traditional French bal populaire [ fr ].

Since 2008, Prague has hosted a French market " Le marché du 14 juillet " ("Fourteenth of July Market") offering traditional French food and wine as well as music. The market takes place on Kampa Island, it is usually between 11 and 14 July. It acts as an event that marks the relinquish of the EU presidency from France to the Czech Republic. Traditional selections of French produce, including cheese, wine, meat, bread and pastries, are provided by the market. Throughout the event, live music is played in the evenings, with lanterns lighting up the square at night.

The amusement park Tivoli celebrates Bastille Day.

Budapest 's two-day celebration is sponsored by the Institut de France. The festival is hosted along the Danube River, with streets filled with music and dancing. There are also local markets dedicated to French foods and wine, mixed with some traditional Hungarian specialties. At the end of the celebration, a fireworks show is held on the river banks.

Bastille Day is celebrated with great festivity in Pondicherry, a former French colony.

The Embassy of France in Ireland organizes several events around Dublin, Cork and Limerick for Bastille Day; including evenings of French music and tasting of French food. Many members of the French community in Ireland take part in the festivities. Events in Dublin include live entertainment, speciality menus on French cuisine, and screenings of popular French films.

The Auckland suburb of Remuera hosts an annual French-themed Bastille Day street festival. Visitors enjoy mimes, dancers, music, as well as French foods and drinks. The budding relationship between the two countries, with the establishment of a Maori garden in France and exchange of their analyses of cave art, resulted in the creation of an official reception at the Residence of France. There is also an event in Wellington for the French community held at the Residence of France.

Franschhoek 's weekend festival has been celebrated since 1993. (Franschhoek, or 'French Corner,' is situated in the Western Cape.) As South Africa's gourmet capital, French food, wine and other entertainment is provided throughout the festival. The French Consulate in South Africa also celebrates their national holiday with a party for the French community. Activities also include dressing up in different items of French clothing.

Following colonial rule, France annexed a large portion of what is now French Polynesia. Under French rule, Tahitians were permitted to participate in sport, singing, and dancing competitions one day a year: Bastille Day. The single day of celebration evolved into the major Heiva i Tahiti festival in Papeete Tahiti, where traditional events such as canoe races, tattooing, and fire walks are held. The singing and dancing competitions continue with music composed with traditional instruments such as the nasal flute and ukulele.

Within the UK, London has a large French contingent, and celebrates Bastille Day at various locations across the city including Battersea Park, Camden Town and Kentish Town. Live entertainment is performed at Canary Wharf, with weeklong performances of French theatre at the Lion and Unicorn Theatre in Kentish Town. Restaurants feature cabarets and special menus across the city, and other celebrations include garden parties and sports tournaments. There is also a large event at the Bankside and Borough Market, where there is live music, street performers, and traditional French games played.

More than 20 cities in the United States conduct annual celebrations of Bastille Day, with many French staples such as food, music, games, and sometimes the recreation of famous French landmarks.

Baltimore, Maryland, has a large Bastille Day celebration each year at Petit Louis in the Roland Park area.

Boston has a celebration annually, hosted by the French Cultural Center for 40 years. The street festival occurs in Boston's Back Bay neighborhood, near the Cultural Center's headquarters. The celebration includes francophone musical performers, dancing, and French cuisine.

New York City has numerous Bastille Day celebrations each July, including Bastille Day on 60th Street hosted by the French Institute Alliance Française between Fifth and Lexington Avenues on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, Bastille Day on Smith Street in Brooklyn, and Bastille Day in Tribeca. There is also the annual Bastille Day Ball, taking place since 1924.

Philadelphia 's Bastille Day, held at Eastern State Penitentiary until 2018, involved Marie Antoinette throwing locally manufactured Tastykakes at the Parisian militia, as well as a re-enactment of the storming of the Bastille.

In Newport, Rhode Island, the annual Bastille Day celebration is organized by the local chapter of the Alliance Française. It takes place at King Park, at the monument memorializing the accomplishments of the General Comte de Rochambeau whose 6,000 to 7,000 French forces landed in Newport on 11 July 1780. Their assistance in the defeat of the English in the War of Independence is well documented and is proof of the special relationship between France and the United States.

In Washington D.C., food, music, and auction events are sponsored by the Embassy of France. There is also a French Festival within the city, where families can meet period entertainment groups set during the time of the French Revolution. Restaurants host parties serving traditional French food.

In Dallas, Texas, the Bastille Day celebration, "Bastille On Bishop", began in 2010 and is held annually in the Bishop Arts District of the North Oak Cliff neighborhood, southwest of downtown just across the Trinity River. Dallas' French roots are tied to the short-lived socialist Utopian community La Réunion, formed in 1855 and incorporated into the City of Dallas in 1860.

Miami 's celebration is organized by "French & Famous" in partnership with the French American Chamber of Commerce, the Union des Français de l'Etranger and many French brands. The event gathers over 1,000 attendees to celebrate "La Fête Nationale". The location and theme change every year. In 2017, the theme was "Guinguette Party" and attracted 1,200 francophiles at The River Yacht Club.

New Orleans, Louisiana, has multiple celebrations, the largest in the historic French Quarter.

In Austin, Texas, the Alliance Française d'Austin usually conducts a family-friendly Bastille Day party at the French Legation, the home of the French representative to the Republic of Texas from 1841 to 1845.

Chicago, Illinois, has hosted a variety of Bastille Day celebrations in a number of locations in the city, including Navy Pier and Oz Park. The recent incarnations have been sponsored in part by the Chicago branch of the French-American Chamber of Commerce and by the French Consulate-General in Chicago.

Milwaukee 's four-day street festival begins with a "Storming of the Bastille" with a 43-foot replica of the Eiffel Tower.

Minneapolis, Minnesota, has a celebration with wine, French food, pastries, a flea market, circus performers and bands. Also in the Twin Cities area, the local chapter of the Alliance Française has hosted an annual event for years at varying locations with a competition for the "Best Baguette of the Twin Cities ".

Montgomery, Ohio, has a celebration with wine, beer, local restaurants' fare, pastries, games and bands.

St. Louis, Missouri, has annual festivals in the Soulard neighborhood, the former French village of Carondelet, Missouri, and in the Benton Park neighborhood. The Chatillon-DeMenil Mansion in the Benton Park neighborhood, holds an annual Bastille Day festival with reenactments of the beheading of Marie Antoinette and Louis XVI, traditional dancing, and artillery demonstrations. Carondelet also began hosting an annual saloon crawl to celebrate Bastille Day in 2017. The Soulard neighborhood in St. Louis, Missouri celebrates its unique French heritage with special events including a parade, which honors the peasants who rejected the monarchy. The parade includes a 'gathering of the mob,' a walking and golf cart parade, and a mock beheading of the King and Queen.

Portland, Oregon, has celebrated Bastille Day with crowds up to 8,000, in public festivals at various public parks, since 2001. The event is coordinated by the Alliance Française of Portland.

Seattle 's Bastille Day celebration, held at the Seattle Center, involves performances, picnics, wine and shopping.

Sacramento, California, conducts annual "waiter races" in the midtown restaurant and shopping district, with a street festival.

The Battle of La Flèche (8–11 December 1793) was a military engagement during the War in the Vendée, a significant episode of the French Revolution. It took place in La Flèche, Sarthe, France.

Following the failure of the Virée de Galerne at Granville, the Vendéan army sought to cross the Loire River to return to the Vendée. Repelled at the Siege of Angers, the disorganized Vendéans, pursued by 5,000 republican troops under François-Joseph Westermann, retreated toward La Flèche to regroup and resupply. The town was held by 1,500 republican soldiers led by Louis François Jean Chabot, and the bridge over the Loir River had been destroyed, leaving the Vendéans vulnerable to attack from Westermann’s forces.

Last night, I discussed the Vendéan brigands with Richard, La Flèche’s postmaster and a refugee. Citizen Lamotte arrived with a letter from Madame Richard, reporting:

When the enemy entered La Flèche, panic erupted with cries of "Save yourselves!" Hiding in a street, I saw their 20,000–25,000-strong force, over half women, children, and sick, in a pitiful state. They abandoned a near-dead child in a field, whom I saved. They looted patriots’ homes, taking only grain, hay, and provisions from aristocrats, leaving spoiled forage in streets and gardens. After their departure, pursued by the Army of Mainz to Durtal, I returned to La Flèche and found three exhausted Catholics in a stable, who were killed for shouting "Long live the king, long live our priests!" instead of republican slogans. Their priests said over 200 masses daily. The army spread disease, requiring vinegar to cleanse rooms. Several died of starvation, and 60–80 were killed, with Iteau’s son’s house reduced to walls.

Lamotte noted discontent among Vendéans against their leaders and no killings, as only women and children remained. Le Lude is guarded, raising 500 men but lacking weapons. There’s no immediate danger. D’Autichamp lost an arm, and 2,000 dead were found on the road to Durtal. I couldn’t meet Lefèvre, the Vendôme commissioner, absent from the surveillance committee. Please confirm receipt of my package and this letter.

— Report by Blavette to the Château-du-Loir administration

Henri de La Rochejaquelein dispatched Piron de La Varenne with a detachment to delay Westermann’s republican cavalry. Leading 400 cavalry and 400 infantry mounted behind them, La Rochejaquelein scouted the Loir River, located a ford, and attacked Chabot’s forces from the rear. Caught off guard, Chabot’s troops fled. After repairing the bridge, La Rochejaquelein reinforced Piron, forcing the republicans to retreat. This victory secured the Vendéans two days to rest and regroup.

On 10 December, the Vendéans departed for Le Mans, leaving their sick at the hospital, where they were massacred by republican soldiers. Westermann’s vanguard captured La Flèche, killing stragglers. He reported 700 Vendéans “killed and massacred,” including 100 in the town and 600 in surrounding villages.

D’Obenheim reports the Vendéan army at Baugé was attacked by republican chasseurs the day after arriving, repelling them but tiring the poorly organized troops. Expecting to march on Saumur, they redirected to La Flèche upon learning of Kléber’s advancing division.

Many soldiers, believing only their leaders were targeted and travel passports were no longer needed, planned to desert, discarding rifles for sticks to gain republican hospitality. They followed the army, seeking escape.

As the Vendéans neared La Flèche, chasseurs attacked their rear, causing chaos. The broken bridge and republican cannons could have been fatal if the chasseurs were stronger, but they only harassed the rear. The Vendéan vanguard shot the bridge’s gunners, crossed the river via two boats near a mill, and forced a republican retreat as night fell. La Rochejaquelein’s 200–300 men drove off the defenders.

Securing La Flèche, La Rochejaquelein repelled the chasseurs, who retreated to a village. The bridge was repaired, allowing cannon crossings at dawn. While resting, chasseurs looted carts, but La Rochejaquelein drove them back, losing men. The unsupported vanguard weakened, and chasseurs with horse artillery nearly routed the Vendéans before withdrawing, leaving many dead and fear of republican forces.

Over 30 sick or wounded Vendéans died of cold on carts outside town, a grim sight. That evening, a weak republican force on the Le Mans road further exhausted the army. Another chasseur attack could have been devastating. Noticing disarmament at Baugé, leaders restricted supplies to those with rifles.

Yesterday at 1 p.m., we were attacked at La Flèche by about 18,000 Vendéans; fierce fighting lasted until 6 p.m. Heavy fire was heard behind the enemy, likely the Army of Mainz in pursuit. Too weak to hold, Chabot ordered a retreat to Fouilletourte. The next day, he advanced but, fearing encirclement after cannon fire, withdrew to Le Mans, which was attacked and captured on the 10th.

On 20 December, we camped a league from La Flèche, where the enemy had repaired the bridge and held the town. That night, I had their outposts killed; our army planned to attack via Turtalle. At dawn, the enemy fled to Le Mans, cutting the bridge. By 7 a.m., my cavalry swam the river, and 300 infantry crossed using beams, planks, and boats. We killed several hundred brigands in the town, capturing cannons, caissons, and carts. Pursuing to Fulturte, we found the road littered with corpses and slaughtered over 600 brigands in nearby villages and farms that night.

On 11 December, General Jean-Baptiste Kléber entered La Flèche, finding 300 sick or wounded “brigands,” all of whom died from lack of care, according to him. However, H. Le Prestre de Châteaugiron claimed they were “all massacred that day and thrown into the street, where I saw them.”

21 Frimaire (11 December). Arrived at La Flèche. The next day, my column entered, finding nearly 300 sick or wounded brigands at the Jesuit college, all dead or dying from neglect and buried locally. Townspeople reported over 12,000 women, priests, and non-combatants with the exhausted, dysentery-stricken Vendéan army. Leaders took goods from shops, paying with their own assignats.

Among the fallen was Vendéan leader Mathieu de Verteuil, killed when both legs were torn off by a cannonball.

Beef tongue (also known as neat's tongue or ox tongue) is a cut of beef made of the tongue of a cow. It can be boiled, pickled, roasted or braised in sauce. It is found in many national cuisines, and is used for taco fillings in Mexico and for open-faced sandwiches in the United Kingdom. In France and Belgium it is served with Madeira sauce, while chrain is the preferred accompaniment in Ashkenazi and Eastern European cuisines. Germans make white roux with vinegar and capers, or horseradish cream, which is also popular in Polish cuisine.

Beef tongue is very high in fat, which contributes up to 72% of its caloric content. Some countries, including Canada and specifically the province of Alberta, export large quantities of beef tongue.

Beef tongue is often seasoned with onion and other spices, and then placed in a pot to boil. After it has cooked the skin is removed. Pickled tongue is often used because it is already spiced. If cooked in a sauce, it can then later be reused as a sauce for meatballs or any other food item.

Another method of preparing beef tongue is to scald it in hot water, remove the skin, and then roast it in the oven while making a gravy with the pan drippings.

Beef tongue is used in North America as a major ingredient of tongue toast, an open-faced sandwich prepared for breakfast, lunch, or dinner and sometimes offered as an hors d'oeuvre. It is widely used in Mexican cuisine, and often seen in tacos and burritos (lengua). In Puerto Rican cuisine, lengua al caldero, pot roast tongue, and lengua rellena, braised stuffed tongue, are both served with pique criollo.

In France and Belgium, boiled beef tongue is often prepared with mushrooms in a Madeira sauce but can also be served with a vinaigrette. In Ashkenazi Jewish, Russian and Ukrainian cuisine, boiled tongue is often served with chrain. Beef tongue or veal tongue is also found in classic recipes for Russian salad. In Austria, Germany, Czechia and Poland, it is commonly served either with chrain or with horseradish cream sauce. The traditional Berlin or North German variant adds capers and vinegar to the sauce based on the broth with white roux.

In Japanese cuisine, the dish gyūtan, originating in the city of Sendai, is made of grilled tongue.

Also, tongue is a part of Albanian, Argentine, Brazilian, Bulgarian (tongue with butter), British, French, Indonesian (semur lidah or beef tongue stew), Italian (typical dish in Piemonte, Liguria and Veneto), Colombian, Chinese (braised), Japanese, Kenyan, Korean (hyeomit gui), Filipino, Lithuanian, Latvian, Norwegian, Mexican, Mongolian, Nicaraguan, Persian (as forms of fried, roasted, boiled and eaten cold in a sandwich), Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Spanish, South African, Turkish, and Uruguayan cuisine.

A beefsteak, often called just steak, is a flat cut of beef with parallel faces, usually cut perpendicular to the muscle fibers. In common restaurant service a single serving has a raw mass ranging from 120 to 600 grams (4 to 21 oz). Beef steaks are usually pan-seared, grilled, broiled, or cooked sous vide. The more tender cuts from the loin and rib are cooked quickly, using dry heat, and served whole. Less tender cuts from the chuck or round are cooked with moist heat or are mechanically tenderized (as with, for example, cube steak).

In Australia, beef steak is referred to as just "steak" and can be purchased uncooked in supermarkets, butchers, and some smallgood shops. It is sold cooked as a meal in almost every pub, bistro, or restaurant specialising in modern Australian food, and is ranked based on the quality and the cut. Most venues usually have three to seven different cuts of steak on their menu and serve it from blue to well-done according to preference. A steak is normally accompanied by a choice of sauces and a choice of either french fries (known as steak frites from French influence; see below) or mashed potato. A complementary choice of side salad or steamed vegetables is also commonly offered.

In France, steak, locally called bifteck, is usually served with fried potatoes (pommes frites in French). The combination is known as steak frites. Vegetables are not normally served with steak in this manner, but a green salad may follow or (more commonly) be served at the same time. Steaks are often served with classic French sauces.

In Indonesia, bistik jawa is a beefsteak dish that is influenced by Dutch cuisine. Another Indonesian beefsteak is selat solo with Dutch-influence, a specialty of Surakarta, Central Java.

In Italy, steak was not widely eaten until after World War II because the relatively rugged countryside does not readily accommodate the space and resource demands of large herds of cattle. Some areas of Piedmont, Lombardy, and Tuscany, however, were renowned for the quality of their beef. Bistecca alla fiorentina is a well-known specialty of Florence ; it is typically served with just a salad. From the 1960s onward, economic gains allowed more Italians to afford a red-meat diet.

In Mexico, as well as in Spain and other former Spanish colonies, bistec (a Spanish loan word from English "beefsteak") refers to dishes of salted and peppered beef sirloin strips. One form of Mexican bistec is usually flattened with a meat tenderizing tool. The dish is often served in tortillas as a taco.

Spain and its former colonies have variations of bistec encebollado (beefsteak with onions). It can be found across Latin America.

In the United Kingdom, in steak restaurants the beef is aged for several weeks, seasoned with sea salt and pepper and seared on a grill. It is then served with chips or potatoes, vegetables and a wedge salad with dressings. Sauces are usually served on the side such as peppercorn, Diane, bordelaise, mushroom or a Béarnaise sauce. In more casual restaurants and pubs steak is often served with medium-thick fried potatoes (chips), fried onions, mushrooms, onion rings and tomatoes.

In the United States, a restaurant that specializes in beef steaks is a steakhouse. The more expensive steakhouses serve the highest grades of beef and often dry-age it for many weeks. The well-aged beef cooked on high-heat grills and broilers produces a steak difficult to emulate in a home kitchen. A typical steak dinner consists of a steak, optionally topped with sautéed onions or mushrooms, with a starchy side dish; usually baked or mashed potatoes, or thick-cut fried potatoes known as steak fries. Chili, rice, pasta, or beans are also common sides. A side salad or a small serving of cooked vegetables often accompanies the meat and side, with corn on the cob, green beans, creamed spinach, asparagus, tomatoes, mushrooms, peas, and onion rings being popular. Bread is generally served, usually a dinner roll.

Steak is sometimes served with shrimp or lobster tail, giving " surf and turf " or "reef and beef".

Prepared condiments known as steak sauces are generally on the table in steakhouses. Tenderized round or sirloin steaks, breaded, and pan-fried or deep-fried, are called "chicken fried" or "country fried" steaks, respectively. An iconic specialty of Philadelphia is the Philly cheesesteak, composed of thinly sliced ribeye or other tender cuts, cooked on a hot griddle and shredded slightly, and served on Italian-style rolls with one of a few types of cheese (American, mild Provolone or "Cheez Whiz" sauce).

The amount of time a steak is cooked is based upon personal preference; shorter cooking times retain more juice, whereas longer steak cooking times result in drier, tougher meat, but reduce concerns about disease. A vocabulary has evolved to describe the degree to which a steak is cooked. The following terms are in order from least cooked to most cooked:

A style exists in some parts of North America called "Chicago". A Chicago-style steak is cooked to the desired level and then quickly charred. The diner orders it by asking for the style followed by the doneness (e.g. "Chicago-style rare"). A steak ordered "Pittsburgh rare" is rare or very rare on the inside and charred on the outside. In Pittsburgh, this style is referred to as "black and blue" (black or "sooty" on the outside, and blue rare on the inside).

The Belgium–France border, or more commonly the Franco-Belgian border, separates France and Belgium and is 620 km (390 mi) long. Part of it is defined by the Lys river. The western end is at the North Sea (51°5′22″N 2°32′43″E ﻿ / ﻿ 51.08944°N 2.54528°E ﻿ / 51.08944; 2.54528 near De Panne and Bray-Dunes). The eastern end is at the Belgium-France-Luxembourg tripoint [ fr ] (at 49°32′46″N 5°49′5″E ﻿ / ﻿ 49.54611°N 5.81806°E ﻿ / 49.54611; 5.81806 near Athus and Mont-Saint-Martin). The straight distance between these points is 289 km (180 mi).

Since 1995, Belgium and France have been parts of the Schengen Area. This means there are no permanent border controls at this border, but there have been temporary controls.

The Belgian side of the border is shared by, from north to south, the provinces of West Flanders (Flemish Region) and Hainaut, Namur and Luxembourg (Walloon Region).

The French side of the border is shared by, from north to south, the departments of Nord and Aisne (region of Hauts-de-France) and Ardennes, Meuse and Meurthe-et-Moselle (region of Grand Est).

The limits of the border are outlined in the 1820 Treaty of Kortrijk, agreed between France and the then- United Kingdom of the Netherlands. Belgium inherited the border upon its independence, which consists of a number of border posts. Maintenance of and disputes concerning the border are managed by a mixed Franco-Belgian border delimitation commission, which is convened when required. A commission was convened in 2000 concerning the maintenance of the border posts between France and the Belgian province of West Flanders.

In April 2021, one of the border stones in Bousignies-sur-Roc was found to have been moved by a few metres. A farmer was presumed to have moved it to enlarge his field, but the person responsible was not identified.

Benjamin Haddad (French pronunciation: [ bɛ̃ʒamɛ̃ adad ] ; born 23 October 1985) is a French politician who has served as Minister Delegate for European Affairs in the governments of successive Prime Ministers Michel Barnier, François Bayrou and Sébastien Lecornu since 2024. A member of Renaissance (RE), he previously served in the National Assembly from 2022 to 2024, representing Paris's 14th constituency, which encompasses most of its 16th arrondissement.

Haddad was born in the 16th arrondissement of Paris in a Sephardic Jewish family from Tunisia. He obtained a Master of Arts in international affairs from Sciences Po in Paris and an MA from HEC Paris in financial economics.

From 2014 to 2018, Haddad was a fellow at the Hudson Institute in Washington, DC. From 2019 to 2022, he worked as senior director of the Atlantic Council 's Europe Centre. In 2019, he published his book Le paradis perdu : L'Amérique de Trump et la fin des illusions européennes.

Prior to being elected to the National Assembly, Haddad was an activist within the Union for a Popular Movement in the early 2010s. He joined Emmanuel Macron 's En Marche movement in 2016, which would later be renamed La République En Marche! and Renaissance.

In the 2022 legislative election, Haddad defeated Francis Szpiner of The Republicans in the 14th constituency of Paris with 53.2% of the second-round vote.

In Parliament, he served on both the Committee on Foreign Affairs and Committee on European Affairs. In addition to his committee assignments, he chaired the French-Ukrainian parliamentary friendship group. In December 2023, Haddad co-authored a joint letter of more than a hundred senior European lawmakers to their counterparts in the United States, pleading for the United States Congress to unlock further military aid to Ukraine in response to the Russian invasion of the country.

In September 2024, Haddad was appointed to the government of Prime Minister Michel Barnier as Minister Delegate for European Affairs under Foreign Minister Jean-Noël Barrot. In the days following his appointment, he announced he would advocate for the European Union to tighten its immigration policy guidelines: "Everywhere, in all of our countries, beyond the left-right divide, there's a strong demand from our citizens to take control of our immigration".

After the 2026 state elections in Germany's Saxony-Anhalt, Haddad warned of increased nationalism and xenophobia.

Benoît Hamon (French: [ bənwa amɔ̃ ] ; born 26 June 1967) is a French politician known for his former role within the Socialist Party (PS) and Party of European Socialists (PES) and his political party Génération.s.

Hamon joined the Socialist Party in 1988 and by 1993 became the leader of the Young Socialist Movement, serving until 1995. In 2004, Hamon was elected MEP for East of France and during his time as MEP he ran for leadership of the Socialist Party, losing in the first round of the Reims Congress and endorsing the Eurosceptic option in the 2005 European Constitution referendum.

In 2012, Hamon was elected to the National Assembly in Yveline's 11th constituency, though he resigned after being appointed as junior minister for the Social Economy at the Ministry of the Economy, Finance, and External Trade by President François Hollande. Hamon was then appointed Minister of National Education in Manuel Valls ' new government. He was removed from this position alongside Economy Minister Arnaud Montebourg when they both publicly opposed the government economic policy. He later returned to the National Assembly in September of the same year, running in his previous constituency. Hamon's stint in the National Assembly consisted of voting in line with a group labelled the Frondeurs, a socialist group opposed to the social-liberal politics of Francois Hollande and Manuel Valls.

In 2016, Hamon declared his intention to run in the Socialist Party primary for the 2017 presidential election. Being dubbed the " Jeremy Corbyn of the French-left" and "reinventing the French left", Hamon ran on ideas accused of being "far-out" such as legalising cannabis, taxing automation and introducing a universal basic income. Hamon eventually won in a run-off against former Prime Minister Manuel Valls and campaigned on similar ideals in the general election, though only gathering 6.36 per cent of votes. Shortly following his loss in the legislative election, Hamon left the Socialist Party in July 2017 to found his own political party called 1 July Movement, later renamed Génération.s.

After failing to win any seats in the 2019 European elections, Hamon said that he would step back to reflect on his and his movement's political future.

Hamon was born 26 June 1967 in Saint-Renan, Finistère to an engineer father who worked for Naval Group in Brest and a secretary mother.

Hamon lived in Brest until 1980, moving with his parents to Dakar, Senegal where he attended a Cours Sainte Marie de Hann private school. Hamon credited growing up in Dakar as influential to the future of his life due to the religious and ethnic diversity of the region. Hamon returned to Brittany following his parents divorce in 1984 and eventually enrolled in the University of Western Brittany studying a degree in History where he joined the Young Socialist movement. Hamon lived in an apartment with current Socialist Party first secretary Olivier Faure during his academic life.

After obtaining a degree in history at the University of Western Brittany in 1991, Hamon started his parliamentary career as an assistant to Socialist Party deputy Pierre Brana at the age of 24. Hamon had been taking part in student protests since the age of 19, starting his involvement in politics during a demonstration against Alain Devaquet 's 1986-1987 education reform. Hamon joined the Socialist Party afterwards and became active in the Brest Socialist Party, being an advocate and supporter of Prime Minister Michel Rocard. Hamon also campaigned in support of the Maastricht Treaty in 1992.

Following the Socialist Party's loss in the 1993 legislative election, Michel Rocard, with the support of the socialist wing of the party, became the first secretary. The subsequent shake-up of the party's establishment led to the Socialist Party's secretary of communication, Manuel Valls', appointing Hamon within the administration of the Young Socialists. Hamon was a regional manager with supervision over Brittany, Nancy and Lyon. Hamon's leadership was inspired entirely by Rocard, independent from the then-leadership of the Young Socialists. Hamon was elected the leader of the Young Socialists in November 1993.

Hamon's leadership of the Young Socialists was marked by a closeness to student unions, which helped current Socialist Party politicians such as Pouria Amirshahi win elections for leadership positions within different student unions. Hamon also led an increase in membership from 500 members to 3,000, an expansion in terms of bases the Young Socialists have in universities and an increase of membership age from 25 to 29, mainly due to Hamon's own age of 26 at the time.

Following the revelation that then-president François Mitterrand and former high ranking Vichy member René Bousquet had a friendship, Hamon resigned as the leader of the Young Socialists. He was succeeded by Régis Juanico and became the national Representative of youth issues for the Socialist Party and then the advisor for youth policy in Lionel Jospin's 1995 presidential election.

Hamon ran for the National Assembly in 1997, in Morbihan's 2nd constituency's, losing in the second round. Hamon was then appointed as an advisor to Martine Aubry's Employment Ministry, mainly in charge of youth employment from 1997 to 1998 before becoming a senior advisor in 1998 to 2000. Hamon became a city councillor for Brétigny-sur-Orge in 2001, serving until 2008. He was also the director for strategic planning at Ipsos from 2001 to 2004.

In 2003, Hamon founded a caucus within the Socialist Party called the "New Socialist Party" with Arnaud Montebourg, Vincent Peillon, Julien Dray. The caucus was able to gather 17% of votes at the Dijon Congress, the second most behind Francois Hollande, who was eventually elected the first secretary of the Socialist Party. The caucus became the main Socialist Left affiliation within the party following an endorsement by former-first secretary Henri Emmanuelli. The "New Socialist Party" split after a motion proposed by the party at the Le Mans Congress, was rejected by leading member Arnaud Montebourg. The caucus finally collapsed in 2006 after the leadership of the caucus endorsed different candidates during the primary for the presidential election.

Hamon was Member of the European Parliament (MEP) for the East of France from 2004 to 2009, attached to the PES Group. He served as a member of the Committee of Economic and Monetary affairs, an alternative member of the Committee on Consumer Protection and the Vice-Chairman of the Delegate for the United States. Hamon was a campaigner for a "no" vote in the 2005 European Constitution referendum and was the national secretary for the PES Group, elected in 2005 and resigning in 2007 after the Socialist Party's support of the Lisbon Treaty despite promises made during the Le Mans Congress.

Hamon became a spokesman for the Socialist Party in the 2007 legislative elections.

After the candidacy for the First Secretary of the PS became a contest between Ségolène Royal and Martine Aubry, Hamon urged his supporters to vote for Aubry, who secured a narrow, contested majority.

On 16 May 2012, Hamon was appointed Junior Minister for the Social Economy at the French Ministry of the Economy, Finance, and External Trade by President François Hollande. Hamon was Minister of National Education from 2 April 2014 until 25 August 2014, resigning as a result of Hollande's abandonment of a socialist agenda. He was national secretary for Europe and spokesperson for the Socialist Party.

Hamon announced his intention to seek the French presidency in August 2016. Critical of the social-liberal politics of Hollande and Prime Minister Manuel Valls, Hamon represented the left-wing and green side of the Socialist Party during the primary.

Hamon wants to give all French citizens a basic income, believing that the availability of work will decrease due to automation. He supports a 35-hour workweek, and less if a worker chooses in exchange for state compensation, and supports the legalisation of cannabis and euthanasia. He also argues for sizeable investments in renewable energy, aiming for renewable sources to provide 50% of French energy by 2025, and wants to protect the "common goods" (water, air, biodiversity) in the Constitution. Hamon is also very critical of the neoliberal "myth of infinite economic growth ", which he blames for " destroying the planet " and argues is a "quasi-religion" among politicians, saying: "There is an urgency to change now our way to produce and consume. [...] We can negotiate with bankers, but we can't negotiate with the planet".

Polling in January 2017 showed that his support had tripled and put him into serious contention for the nomination. On 22 January 2017, Hamon came in first in the first round of the primary, ahead of Valls. He secured the support of Arnaud Montebourg, who placed third, soon thereafter. In the runoff on 29 January, he won the Socialist Party nomination.

Hamon conceded defeat after the first round of the presidential election on 23 April, and immediately announced his support for Emmanuel Macron in the second round.

Addressing the 1 July Movement on 1 July 2017, Hamon said he was leaving the Socialist Party, but not socialism and called for the formation of local committees of the left to decide the movement's future.

Hamon is in a civil union, also known as PACS in France, with Gabrielle Guallar with whom he has two daughters. The couple met while Hamon was an MEP for East France.

Hamon has an estate in his home department of Finistère and an apartment in Hauts-de-Seine.

A beret (UK : / ˈ b ɛr eɪ / BERR -ay, US : / b ə ˈ r eɪ / bə- RAY ; French : béret [ beʁɛ ] ; Basque : txapel [ t͡ʃa.pel ] ; Spanish : boina [ ˈbojna ]) is a soft, round, flat-crowned cap made of hand-knitted wool, crocheted cotton, wool felt, or acrylic fibre.

Mass production of berets began in the 19th century specifically in the Basque Country, where they were already common headwear among the indigenous population, before spreading to Southern France and the north of Spain ; as such, the beret remains associated with these countries. Berets are worn as part of the uniform of many military and police units worldwide, as well as by other organizations.

Archaeology and art history indicate that headwear similar to the modern beret has been worn since the Bronze Age across Northern Europe and as far south as ancient Crete and Italy, where it was worn by the Minoans, Etruscans and Romans. Such headgear has been popular among the nobility and artists across Europe throughout modern history.

The 17th century Dutch artist Rembrandt was well known for wearing a beret and may have inspired the beret's association with artists.

The Basque-style beret was the traditional headwear of Aragonese and Navarrian shepherds from the Ansó and Roncal valleys of the Pyrenees, a mountain range that divides southern France from northern Spain. The commercial production of Basque-style berets began in the 17th century around Oloron-Sainte-Marie in the Béarn province of southern France. Originally a local craft, beret-making became industrialised in the 19th century. The first factory, Beatex-Laulhere, claims production records dating back to 1810. By the 1920s, berets were associated with the working classes in a part of France and Spain and by 1928 more than 20 French factories and some Spanish and Italian factories produced millions of berets.

In Western fashion, men and women have worn the beret since the 1920s as sportswear and later as a fashion statement.

Military berets were first adopted by the French Chasseurs Alpins in 1889. After seeing these during the First World War, British General Hugh Elles proposed the beret for use by the newly formed Royal Tank Regiment, which needed headgear that would stay on while climbing in and out of the small hatches of tanks. They were approved for use by King George V in 1924. Traditional French and Basque berets are made of felted wool, making them not only warm and windproof, but also waterproof. Another possible origin of the RTR beret is that it was suggested to Alec Gatehouse by Eric Dorman-Smith. While the two officers were serving at Sandhurst in 1924, Gatehouse, who had transferred to the Royal Tank Corps, had been given the task of designing a practical headgear for the new corps. Dorman-Smith had toured Spain, including the Basque region, with his friend Ernest Hemingway during the past few years, and had acquired a black Basque beret during his travels.

The specifications were that it had to protect men's hair from the oil in a tank but not take up space in the cramped interior, and he led Gatehouse straight to his room. Hanging on the wall was his Basque beret from Pamplona. He tossed it across, and Gatehouse gingerly tried it on. The beret design was adopted...

The black RTR beret was made famous by Field Marshal Montgomery in the Second World War.

The beret fits snugly around the head, and can be "shaped" in a variety of ways – in the Americas it is commonly worn pushed to one side. In Central and South America, local custom usually prescribes the manner of wearing the beret; there is no universal rule and older gentlemen usually wear it squared on the head, jutting forward. It can be worn by both men and women.

Military uniform berets feature a headband or sweatband attached to the wool, made either from leather, silk or cotton ribbon, sometimes with a drawstring allowing the wearer to tighten the cap. The drawstrings are, according to custom, either tied and cut off or tucked in or else left to dangle. The beret is often adorned with a cap badge, either in cloth or metal. Some berets have a piece of buckram or other stiffener in the position where the badge is intended to be worn.

Berets are not usually lined, but many are partially lined with silk or satin. In military berets, the headband is worn on the outside; military berets often have external sweatbands of leather, pleather or ribbon. The traditional beret (also worn by selected military units, such as the Belgian Chasseurs Ardennais or the French Chasseurs Alpins), usually has the "sweatband" folded inwardly. In such a case, these berets have only an additional inch or so of the same woollen material designed to be folded inwardly. Newer beret styles made of Polar fleece are also popular.

Berets came to be popularised across Europe and other parts of the world as typical Basque headgear, as reflected in their name in several languages (e.g. béret basque in French; Baskenmütze in German; Basco in Italian; Tascu/Birritta in Sicilian; or baskeri in Finnish), while the Basques themselves use the words txapela or boneta. They are very popular and common in the Basque Country. The colours adopted for folk costumes varied by region and purpose: black and blue are worn more frequently than red and white, which are usually used at local festivities. The people of Aragon and the Basque country adopted red berets while the black beret became the common headgear of workers in both Spain and France.

A big commemorative black beret is the usual trophy in sport or bertso competitions, including Basque rural sports, the Basque portions of the Tour de France, and the Vuelta Ciclista al Pais Vasco. It may bear sewn ornamental references to the achievement or contest.

The black beret was once considered the national cap of France in Anglo-Saxon countries and is part of the stereotypical image of the Onion Johnny. It is no longer as widely worn as it once was, but it remains a strong sign of local identity in the southwest of France. When French people want to picture themselves as "the typical average Frenchman" in France or in a foreign country, they often use this stereotype from Anglo-Saxon countries. Today, there are three manufacturers in France. Laulhère (who acquired the formerly oldest manufacturer, Blancq-Olibet, in February 2014) has been making bérets since 1840. The beret still remains a strong symbol of the unique identity of southwestern France and is worn while celebrating traditional events.

In Spain, the beret is usually known as the boina, sometimes also as bilbaína or bilba. They were once common men's headwear across the north and central areas of the country. The first areas to wear it were the Basque Country, Navarre, Aragon and Castile, but its use spread over rest of Spain during the 19th century.

In the 20th century, the beret became part of a common stereotype of rural people, often with negative connotations of boorishness and uncouthness, found in expressions such as " paleto de boina a rosca " ("a hick wearing a screwed-on beret"), which has greatly reduced the popularity of the beret in Spain.

There are several traditional Scottish variants of the beret, notably the Scottish bonnet or Bluebonnet (originally bonaid in Gaelic), whose ribbon cockade and feathers identify the wearer's clan and rank. Other Scottish types include the tam-o'-shanter (named after a Robert Burns ' character in one of his poems) and the striped Kilmarnock cap, both of which feature a large pompom in the centre.

The beret's practicality has long made it an item of military, police and other uniform clothing.

Among a few well-known historic examples are the Scottish soldiers, who wore the blue bonnet in the 17th and 18th centuries, the Volontaires Cantabres, a French force raised in the Basque country in the 1740s to the 1760s, who also wore a blue beret, and the Carlist rebels, with their red berets, in 1830s Spain.

The French Chasseurs alpins, a corps of mountain troops created in 1888, were the first permanently established military force to wear the military beret as a standard headgear. As retained until the present day the chasseur beret is a large and somewhat floppy headdress. The Commandos de Chasse worn an unusual bi-colored beret.

In the 20th century, royal approval was given for the Royal Tank Corps to adopt the black beret in 1924, with the 11th Hussars adopting a brown beret in 1928. In World War II, the Royal Dragoons adopted the grey beret at the end of 1939, with other mechanised units of the British Army, such as the Royal Armoured Corps and the Guards Armoured Division, adopting the black beret in 1941. British officer Bernard Montgomery ("Monty") took to wearing a black beret given to him by the driver of his command vehicle in 1942, and it became his trademark.

The maroon beret (not to be confused with the red beret), was officially introduced in July 1942 at the direction of Major-General Frederick Browning, commander of the British 1st Airborne Division, and soon became an international symbol of airborne forces. In the 1950s the U.S. Army's newly conceived special forces units began to wear a green beret as headgear, following the custom of the British Royal Marines, which was officially adopted in 1961 with such units becoming known as the " Green Berets ", and additional specialized forces in the Army, U.S. Air Force and other services also adopted berets as distinctive headgear.

The beret is part of the long-standing stereotype of the intellectual, film director, artist, " hipster ", poet, bohemian and beatnik. The painter Rembrandt and the composer Richard Wagner, among others, wore berets. In the United States and Britain, the middle of the 20th century saw an explosion of berets in women's fashion. In the latter part of the 20th century, the beret was adopted by the Chinese both as a fashion statement and for its political undertones. Berets were also worn by bebop and jazz musicians like Dizzy Gillespie, Gene Krupa, Wardell Gray and Thelonious Monk.

Guerrillero Heroico, an iconic photograph of the Argentine revolutionary Che Guevara, shows him wearing a black beret with a brass star.

In the 1960s several activist groups adopted the black beret. These include the Provisional Irish Republican Army (PIRA), the ETA (who wore black berets over hoods in public appearances), the Black Panther Party of the United States, formed in 1966, and the "Black Beret Cadre" (a similar Black Power organisation in Bermuda). In addition, the Brown Berets were a Chicano organisation formed in 1967.

The Young Lords Party, a Latino revolutionary organisation in the United States in the 1960s and 1970s, also wore berets, as did the Guardian Angels unarmed anti-crime citizen patrol units originated by Curtis Sliwa in New York City in the 1970s to patrol the streets and subways to discourage crime (red berets and matching shirts).

Adherents of the Rastafari movement often wear a very large knitted or crocheted black beret with red, gold and green circles atop their dreadlocks. The style is often erroneously called a kufi, after the skullcap known as kufune. They consider the beret and dreadlocks to be symbols of the biblical covenant of God with his chosen people, the "black Israelites". This style of hat is also known as a Rastacap.

Bernard Guy Georges Cazeneuve (French: [ bɛʁnaʁ kaznœv ] ; born 2 June 1963) is a French politician and lawyer who served as Prime Minister of France from 6 December 2016 to 15 May 2017. He represented Manche 's 5th constituency in the National Assembly from 1997 to 2002 and again from 2007 to 2012, in addition to the department's 4th constituency briefly in 2012 and 2017. For most of his political career, he was a member of the centre-left Socialist Party, but quit in 2022 after disagreeing with the party's decision to join an electoral coalition agreement that included the leftist La France Insoumise.

He was Mayor of Cherbourg-Octeville from 2001 to 2012. In 2012, he was appointed Minister Delegate for European Affairs in the Ayrault government. A year later, Cazeneuve was named Minister Delegate for the Budget after the resignation of Jérôme Cahuzac. In 2014, he was appointed Minister of the Interior in the First Valls government, a role he retained with the formation of the Second Valls government. In 2016, Cazeneuve was appointed prime minister by President François Hollande, after Manuel Valls resigned to concentrate on his candidacy for the 2017 presidential election. Following the election of Emmanuel Macron as President of the French Republic, Cazeneuve resigned from office and returned to private practice. During the 2024 French political crisis, Cazeneueve was reported to be the front-runner candidate for Prime Minister but was ultimately passed over in favor of Michel Barnier.

Bernard Cazeneuve was born on 2 June 1963 in Senlis, Oise. His father was the head of the Socialist Party in Oise, which gave him the opportunity to attend a meeting with François Mitterrand. During his studies at the Institut d'études politiques de Bordeaux, he led the Young Radicals of the Left movement in the Gironde department. After graduating from the IEP de Bordeaux, he joined the Socialist Party.

Cazeneuve began his career as a legal adviser in Groupe Banque Populaire, before starting in politics. In 1991, he became a councillor in the cabinet of Thierry de Beaucé, Secretary of State for International Cultural Relations, then in 1992, Principal Private Secretary for Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs Alain Vivien. In 1993, he was appointed Principal Private Secretary in the cabinet of Charles Josselin, Secretary of State for the Sea. That same year, he was named Secretary General of the Council on Boating and Nautical Sports.

Rising in the Socialist Party, Cazeneuve moved in 1994 to Octeville in Manche department to put an end to local divisions in party politics, which had led to a loss of the mayor's office in 1989. That same year, he was elected General Councillor. He held the position in the Manche department from 1994 to 1998. He was later elected mayor of Octeville where he served from 1995 to 2000. In 1997, he was elected to the National Assembly representing the 5th constituency of Manche, campaigning on the issue of a "Greater Cherbourg", which would combine the six communes of the Cherbourg urban agglomeration. This issue went to referendum; it led to the combination of two communes, Cherbourg and Octeville.

In 2007, Cazeneuve represented the Socialist Party in the legislative election for the 5th Constituency of Manche, defeating UMP candidate Jean Lemière with 58.96% of the vote. After this victory he resigned from his position with the Regional Council of Lower Normandy. Then, facing divided opposition from the right in the 2008 municipal elections, he retained his position as mayor of Cherbourg-Octeville. In his second term as mayor, he campaigned to promote the maritime character of the city, organising a nautical festival that featured an international sailing competition. He also focused on urban renewal of the Bassins and Provinces quarters of Cherbourg-Octeville, bringing together commercial and cultural projects.

On the national level, he represented the victims of the 2002 Karachi bus bombing, who were mostly from Cotentin, against their employer DCNS. As Secretary of the Commission on National Defense in the National Assembly, he was recorder between November 2009 and May 2010 of the Parliamentary inquiry into the Karachi attack. Due to the lack of government transparency regarding the Karachi case, Cazeneuve wrote a book titled Karachi, the impossible investigation.

After supporting no candidate in the 2011 Socialist Party presidential primary, he was named as one of candidate François Hollande 's four spokespersons. He spoke to the media on issues related to industry and nuclear power, particularly the latter due to his role in not postponing the construction of a new reactor at the Flamanville Nuclear Power Plant and the reprocessing of nuclear waste at the La Hague site.

Cazeneuve was elected to head the new commune of Cherbourg-Octeville in 2001, succeeding Jean-Pierre Godefroy and defeating the Rally for the Republic (RPR) candidate Jean Lemière. His political ascent was interrupted by a defeat for reelection to his seat in the National Assembly in the 2002 elections.

At the same time, he pursued a judicial career, being named a judge to the High Court and Cour de Justice de la République during his term as a member of the National Assembly. He was called to the bar of Cherbourg-Octeville in 2003.

In 2004, François Hollande convinced Cazeneuve to join the Socialist Party electoral list for the 2004 regional elections, representing the Manche department in the Regional Council of Lower Normandy, after Jean-Pierre Godefroy withdrew from consideration. His strong favour for nuclear energy, particularly the construction of a new nuclear reactor on the Cotentin, caused a rift between the Socialist Party and The Greens, who allied with the Radical Party of the Left in the first round of the regional election. After the victory of the Socialist Party, led by Philippe Duron, Cazeneuve was appointed first Vice-President of the Regional Council and President of the Regional Norman Tourism Committee, comprising the regions of Upper and Lower Normandy.

In 2005 he supported the "no" vote on the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe. Between 2006 and 2008 Cazeneuve worked for a Paris law firm, August & Debouzy, in their "Public, Regulation, and Competition" practice.

Mentioned as a potential minister, notably for the Defense portfolio, he was named on 16 May 2012 as Minister Delegate for European Affairs, serving under Laurent Fabius in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

In the 2012 legislative elections he was re-elected to the National Assembly in the newly redrawn 4th Constituency of Manche, with Geneviève Gosselin, the deputy mayor of Cherbourg-Octeville, as his alternate. He won the election in June with 55.39% of the vote, but had to resign to assume his post in the new government, leading to Gosselin becoming the new deputy to the National Assembly. He also resigned as mayor of Cherbourg-Octeville, with the position being taken by Jean-Michel Houllegatte. As minister, he was tasked with defending the 2012 European Fiscal Compact to Socialist deputies in the National Assembly.

On 19 March 2013, he was named Minister Delegate for the Budget after the resignation of Jérôme Cahuzac, who was accused of fraud. He was replaced as Junior Minister for European Affairs by Thierry Repentin, formerly Minister of State for Professional Training and Apprenticeship. He affirmed a policy of reducing the deficit to save 5 billion euros from the national budget for 2014. He intervened personally in the National Assembly to bury an amendment enlarging the tax base for a proposed tax on transactions for high frequency trading, one of François Hollande 's campaign promises. He also proposed an amendment to increase the value added tax on equestrian activities from 7% to 20%, called the " equitax ", which encountered strong opposition from professionals and amateurs in the equestrian world.

On 2 April 2014, Cazeneuve was named Minister of the Interior in the First Valls Government. In January 2015, he directed the response to the Île-de-France attacks.

During a vote on a counter-terrorism law, he proposed an amendment that would give authority to demand that search engines de-list certain website without the approval of a judge. In July 2015, he proposed a reform to the rights of foreigners in France, which would fundamentally change policies concerning entry and length of stay.

As a spokesman for France after 18 November 2015 killing of the suspected mastermind of the terrorists responsible for the November 2015 Paris attacks, Cazeneuve told the press that Abdelhamid Abaaoud, a Moroccan who was a Belgian national who had visited Syria, "played a decisive role" in the Paris attacks and played a part in four of six terror attacks foiled since spring, with one alleged jihadist claiming Abaaoud had trained him personally.

Cazeneuve said that he would be meeting with EU ministers on 20 November in Brussels to discuss how to deal with terrorism across the territory because "cooperation in the fight against terrorism is crucial" in the European Union. "We have to move quickly and strongly. Europe must do it while thinking about the victims of terrorism and their loved ones."

Reports after that meeting indicated that all EU citizens entering or leaving the free-travel area, known as Schengen, should undergo "systematic" screening against pan-European databases. "Terrorists are crossing the borders of the European Union", said Cazeneuve. Indeed, all of the known Paris attackers were EU nationals, who crossed borders without difficulty although they were registered as terrorism suspects, according to The Guardian. Cazeneuve, said the clampdown on borders would take effect immediately. This would be on a temporary basis until the European commission modified the Schengen rules to make the new borders regime mandatory and obligatory; that could take months to enact.

Valls announced on 6 December 2016 that, as the likely candidate for the Socialist Party in the presidential election, he would resign to concentrate on campaigning. Cazeneuve was appointed by outgoing President Hollande to replace Valls. The appointment was considered difficult, since it resulted in a change of leadership in the Interior Ministry at a time when the French terror alert was at its highest level. Cazeneuve officially resigned on 10 May 2017, after the official announcement of the results of the presidential election. His tenure as prime minister, at five months and four days, was the shortest in the history of the Fifth Republic until that of Michel Barnier, lasting 90 days. He was replaced by Édouard Philippe, nominated by new President Emmanuel Macron.

After leaving Matignon, he returned to his private law practice. In 2022, Cazeneuve resigned from the Honorary Board of Fight Impunity, a Brussels-based human rights NGO, following corruption allegations against its founder, Antonio Panzeri.

That same year, Cazeneuve resigned from the Socialist Party over leader Olivier Faure 's agreement to run a joint electoral list with Jean-Luc Mélenchon 's La France Insoumise, known as the Nouvelle Union populaire écologique et sociale (New People's Ecologic and Social Union, or NUPES), feeling that Mélenchon's party and traditional French social democracy were incompatible. In September 2022, he wrote a manifesto calling for a "social-democratic, republican, humanist and ecological left", away from Mélenchon and NUPES. It was signed by 400 current and former members of the Socialist Party. In early 2023, he announced "La Convention" (The Convention), a political movement espousing those values. It held its first meeting on 10 June 2023, where Cazeneuve was joined by François Hollande, as well as former Social Democratic Party of Germany leader Martin Schulz and former Italian Democratic Party leader and prime minister Enrico Letta.

On 12 November 2023, he took part in the March for the Republic and Against Antisemitism in Paris in response to the rise of anti-Semitism in France since the start of the Gaza war.

Following the 2024 French legislative election, France experienced months of political deadlock, during which President Emanuel Macron considered various candidates for the position of Prime Minister. The left-wing alliance New Popular Front (NFP), which secured a plurality of votes, nominated Lucie Castets for the role. However, in August 2024, Le Monde reported that Cazeneuve was among the front-runners. His candidacy sparked controversy with the NFP, with members of La France Insoumise (LFI) condemning it as a "total betrayal of millions of voters". Meaning, others, including Socialist Paris Mayor Anne Hidalgo, supported Cazeneuve and criticised the Socialist Party leadership for obstructing his nomination. Eventually, Macron appointed conservative Michel Barnier as the head of a coalition government.

Cazeneuve had a wife, Véronique, with whom he had two children. The couple divorced but remarried on 12 August 2015 in Aiguines. She was an editor at Éditions À dos d'âne, a publisher of young adult fiction. They resided in Domaine du Lys-Chantilly, a tree-lined community in Oise not far from Paris. She died in June 2024.

He was a business lawyer from 2006 to 2008.

Bernard Chenot (20 May 1909, in Paris – 5 June 1995) was a French politician and senior official.

Bernard Chenot was the son of a Parisian barrister. He became a member of the Conseil d'Etat during the Third Republic, and worked in several government departments. He remained in his position under the Vichy government after 1940. Under the Fourth Republic he was director of the coal-fields of northern France for a while, and an official adviser to successive governments on economic matters.

He served under Charles de Gaulle as Minister of Health, and then, until 1962, as Minister of Justice. When Georges Pompidou became prime minister, Chenot replaced him on the Constitutional Council for two years. He then went into business for some time, returning to public service in 1971 as the vice-president of the Conseil d'Etat, retiring in 1978.

He also lectured at the Institut d'Etudes Politiques and wrote a number of books about politics; his publications included Etre ministre (1967), L'Hopital en question (1970) and Reflexions sur la cite (1981).

Bernard Roger Tapie (French: [ bɛʁnaʁ ʁɔʒe tapi ] ; 26 January 1943 – 3 October 2021) was a French businessman, politician and occasional actor, singer, and TV host. He was Minister of City Affairs in the government of Pierre Bérégovoy.

He was the manager of a group of companies, notably owner of Adidas and Olympique de Marseille, manager of the Bernard Tapie Group and owner of the La Provence Group, which publishes the newspaper of the same name, as well as Corse-Matin.

At the beginning of 1984, he presented his cycling team La Vie claire, then bought OM a few years later.

In the 1990s, he engaged in politics within the radicals, a centre-left party. He was twice Minister of the City in the Bérégovoy government, deputy for Bouches-du-Rhône twice, European deputy (his list obtained 12% in the 1994 elections) as well as general councilor for Bouches-du-Rhône.

His political career ended due to his legal troubles. Involved in several financial scandals, he was convicted in the VA-OM affair (for which he was imprisoned in 1997 for nearly six months), in the Phocéa affair and in the Testut affair.

In the 2010s, following an arbitration condemning the State to pay him 403 million euros in compensation in the context of the Crédit Lyonnais affair, he was prosecuted again, his death putting an end to the criminal proceedings.

Tapie was born in Paris. He was a businessman who specialized in recovering bankrupt companies, among which Adidas is the most famous (he owned Adidas from 1990 to 1993); and owner of sports teams: his cycling team La Vie Claire won the Tour de France twice – in 1985 and 1986 – and his football club Marseille won the French championship four times in a row, and the Champions League in 1993.

La Vie Claire, one of Tapie's former businesses, is a chain of health product stores. It sponsored one of the strongest cycling teams of all time, La Vie Claire, which was founded after the 1983 European cycling season, when multiple Tour de France winner Bernard Hinault had acrimoniously broken away from the Renault–Elf–Gitane team. Hinault and Greg LeMond won successive Tours with the La Vie Claire team in 1985 and 1986. From 1986 to 1994, Tapie was the president of the Marseille football club, which became champions of France five times in a row (from 1989 to 1993) and won the 1992–93 UEFA Champions League.

In 1985, Tapie bought the sailing ship Club Méditerrannée from the wife of disappeared French navigator Alain Colas. The boat was transported to Marseille, where Tapie had his football team, and restored for two years. It was renamed Phocea and was at that time the longest sailing ship in the world (70 m or 225 ft). Tapie took command of it with a new crew in 1988 and broke the world record for crossing the Atlantic Ocean.

In 2021, Tapie and his wife were severely beaten in a home invasion robbery.

In 1993, the same year that Marseille won the Champions League, he was accused of fixing the match between his club and minor club Valenciennes ; the motivation seemed to be that he could thus save his best players for important matches and not waste their energy. His club was stripped of its French league championship, although not of the Champions League title, and later suffered a forced relegation to the second division because of this match-fixing suspicion.

In 1994, Tapie was under criminal investigation for complicity of corruption and witness tampering. In 1995, after a high-profile case by public prosecutor Éric de Montgolfier, he was sentenced by the Court of Appeals of Douai to two years in prison, including 8 months non-suspended and three years of deprivation of his civic rights.

From 1993 to 2008, there was a long legal battle between Tapie and the state-owned Crédit Lyonnais bank. Crédit Lyonnais had defrauded Tapie in 1993 and 1994 when it sold Adidas on his behalf to Robert Louis-Dreyfus, apparently by arranging a larger sale with Dreyfus without Tapie's knowledge. In 1995, A 600-million-franc (90-million-euro) sum was granted by the French justice system. In 2005, after an appeal from Crédit Lyonnais, the Appeal Court increased the sanction to 150 million Euros. This ruling was partially dismissed in Cassation.

In 2008, a special judicial panel ruled that Tapie should receive compensation of €404 million from the French Ministry of Finance, headed by Christine Lagarde. She decided not to challenge the ruling. On 3 December 2015, a French court ruled that Tapie should return this compensation with interest. A few days later, the Court of Justice of the Republic ordered that Lagarde should stand trial for negligence.

On 19 December 2016, Lagarde was convicted of negligence. The conviction was not deemed a criminal record and Lagarde was not sentenced to any punishment. In 2012, the new French government held by the socialists announced they would challenge in courts the Arbitrage sentence ruled in favor of Tapie under the presidency of Nicolas Sarkozy. After four years of new trials, the Arbitrage was canceled on the basis of a "suspected fraud" in the nomination and impartiality of one of the three judges who ruled in favor of Tapie.

In 2019, a criminal case was conducted against Tapie. The suspected judge concluded there was no fraud and the arbitrage was fully legal. The French authorities, supervised by the French government, appealed this decision. After 26 years of proceedings, this legal battle was still ongoing at the time of Tapie's death in 2021.

Tapie made his fortune in the late 1970s and 1980s by acquiring bankrupt companies. The first two companies that he purchased were paper related companies. He merged Diguet-Denis, a publisher, and Duverger, a printer. Later came larger companies such as Leclanché Wonder – a large producer of batteries. He later sold this company to Ucar.

In 1990, Tapie purchased Adidas for nearly 1.6 billion francs, equivalent to € 452.21 million in 2025. He took up a loan syndicated with a banking pool with a majority of foreign banks, German and Japanese banks for the main part, and in minority from French backers, in particular with the Société de Banque Occidentale SdBO, the subsidiary of Crédit Lyonnais group hidden for several years.

In 1995, Adidas was listed on the Stock Exchange for a valuation of 11 billion francs, nearly six times the price paid by Robert to Tapie to acquire it. He had a number of legal difficulties associated with the sale of the company, conducted by the French state-owned Crédit Lyonnais, which was sanctioned for lack of loyalty, by not informing Tapie he could sell the company at a much higher price than Crédit Lyonnais declared, and for breaching the obligation not to buy the company themselves. Crédit Lyonnais used offshore companies to buy Adidas on their behalf but without declaring it.

The Tapie group, through Bernard Tapie's son Laurent Tapie, who had formed a company in the sports betting company that he sold in 2008, also tried to dabble in the online poker world when Laurent Tapie tried to acquire Full Tilt Poker. They were unable to negotiate a deal with the United States Department of Justice, and the deal fell through.

In 1995, Tapie turned to artistic endeavors because he was unable to pursue his previous interests: he was personally bankrupt and therefore unable to pursue business ventures, he was declared ineligible to run for political office, and he was banned from football. The first thing he turned to was film. He starred, together with Fabrice Luchini, in Claude Lelouch 's 1996 movie Hommes, femmes, mode d'emploi (Men, Women: A User's Manual).

In 1998, Tapie collaborated on a song written by Doc Gynéco, "C'est beau la vie". In 2000, he made his debut as a theater actor, receiving great reviews from French critics for his re-enactment of Jack Nicholson 's role of Randle McMurphy in One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest. In 2001, a documentary titled Who is Bernard Tapie? was produced by American filmmaker Marina Zenovich.

From 2001 to 2005, Tapie acted in theater plays, and appeared in the French TV series Valence as a police chief. In 2018, Tapie was diagnosed with double cancer, stomach and esophagus. He was later treated in France and in Belgium, partially with experimental treatments. In 2023, Netflix released the biographical limited series Class Act.

In the morning of 3 October 2021, his family announced that he had died at the age of 78. Tapie had been suffering from stomach cancer for several years. President Emmanuel Macron, a lifelong supporter of Marseille, expressed his condolences to Tapie's family in a statement, saying he and his wife "have been touched by the news of the death of Bernard Tapie, whose ambition, energy and enthusiasm were a source of inspiration for generations of French people".

Marseille said in a statement: "Olympique de Marseille learned with deep sadness of the passing of Bernard Tapie. He will leave a great void in the hearts of the Marseillais and will forever remain in the legend of the club."

Bernay Abbey (abbaye Notre-Dame de Bernay) was a Benedictine abbey in Bernay, Eure, France. The designers of its abbey church were ahead of their time, making it one of the first examples of Romanesque architecture in Normandy. It shows the early evolution of that style, its decorative elements and its building techniques.

Founded in the 11th century by Judith of Brittany, daughter of Conan I of Rennes and wife of Richard II, Duke of Normandy, the abbey church was listed as a historic monument in 1862, the other abbey buildings in 1965 and the archaeological remains on the site in 1999.

When Judith married Richard II of Normany, she received a dowry of her father's lands in Cotentin, Cinglais and Lieuvin. Bernay or 'Bernayum' was the centre of these lands, comprising 13 'charruées' (around 800 acres) of land, 18 mills and 21 churches. Judith decided to devote Bernay to the foundation of a Benedictine monastery dedicated to the Virgin Mary.

Construction began in 1010, but Judith died in 1017 before work was completed. In 1025 Richard II had a charter witnessed by the young princes Richard and Robert (the future Richard III and Robert I), the bishops of the province and most of the nobility of Normandy - it granted the abbey a vast estate stretching from Giverville to Courtonne and from Cernières to Beaumont. He also made the new monastery a satellite of Fécamp Abbey, resumed construction and put the Italian architect and abbot Guillaume de Volpiano in charge of the building work.

For a long while the abbey remained a satellite of Fécamp, without its own abbot and dependent on "guardians" sent from the mother house. The first of these was Thierry, probably also abbot of the abbeys at Jumièges and Mont-Saint-Michel, who died on 17 May 1027. The next was Raoul de Vieilles, also abbot of Mont-Saint-Michel, who gave half the burgh of Bernay to Robert I of Montgommery, son of Roger de Montgomery, seigneur of Montgomery and favourite of Duke Robert I - the abbey never got these lands back. He also gave his uncle Onfroy de Vieilles important lands in Saint-Évroult and Beaumont-le-Roger previously owned by Bernay Abbey.

Vitalis of Creuilly became abbot around 1055. He had been a monk at Fécamp and thanks to him Bernay was granted autonomy and full abbey status. He was a confidant of John of Fécamp, who also gave him the task of Saint-Gabriel-Brécy Priory around 1058. Vitalis remained at Bernay until he was made abbot of Westminster Abbey in 1076 by William I of England after the Norman conquest of England - he died there in 1082. He carried out considerable building works at Bernay and the conquest also brought Bernay three priories in Suffolk and Northamptonshire. Vital was replaced by his brother Osbern.

The abbey archives are lost and so the next period of the abbey's history is unclear. The monks certainly profited from their town's prosperity after it became a textile and financial centre in the 12th century. In 1249 a major fire destroyed part of the monastery, reducing it from 35 to 15 monks. In the 15th century the abbey church's north nave aisle and apse were rebuilt in the Gothic style. In 1563, Gaspard II de Coligny sacked the abbey and looted its treasures and archives and it was further damaged by the rural Gauthier uprising in 1589. It was then left almost deserted until 1618, when the cloister was rebuilt. From 1628 it was taken on by the Mauristes, who began major building works in 1686. The refectory dates to 1694. The works also demolished the church's two westernmost bays and two eastern apse chapels. A new classical façade replaced the church's original one and most of the capitals in the nave were plastered in stucco. The central tower was also heavily reworked.

Only nine monks were left in the abbey by 1790, when it was suppressed. It was then re-used as a town hall, tribunal, prison and then as a Sous-Préfecture. The north transept disappeared in 1810 and four years later the abbey church became a wheat market before being subdivided between several different users. The apse was demolished in 1827 and the central tower was also razed at an unknown date. The abbey church was in a very bad state by 1963, when a restoration commenced by the town of Bernay and France's national 'Monuments historiques'. A very fine 12th century arch (probably from the chapter house) was uncovered and in 1965 the capitals of the south transept were rediscovered. Another restoration occurred in 1978, revealing the building's importance to the study of 11th century architecture.

Built at a time when the duchy had not yet really discovered in its way, the Bernay Abbey represents an almost isolated attempt, prepared by a single surviving precedent, the Saint-Pierre church of the Jumièges Abbey, as a little bit premature work of talented minds and evidence of innovative traits decisive for Norman architecture: the adoption of the stepped bedside, composite stacks and the passageway at the upper level of the transept arm is. Most of the solutions of the architectural or decorative details appear without obvious ancestry and without obvious posterity, perhaps they were Burgundian imports, which were badly assimilated, but with a local rooting of traditions born at the end of the Merovingian period on the soil of the future Normandy, preserved and deepened under the Carolingians and having managed to survive the ravages of the Vikings.

Berrichon (French pronunciation: [ beʁiʃɔ̃ ] or [ bɛʁiʃɔ̃ ]) is an Oïl language very closely related to French or a dialect of it traditionally spoken in the historical area of the French province of Berry. The word is also used as a demonym and as an adjective meaning "pertaining to Berry".

The dialect evolved out of the langues d'oïl which evolved during the Middle Ages out of the Vulgar Latin spoken in northern Gaul. Its general use in the Berry region began to decline in the sixteenth century as the local aristocracy and bourgeoisie began to adopt standard French, leaving Berrichon as a " patois " used by the peasantry in the countryside. Subsequent developments, such as the French Revolution, which created a sense of nationalism, and the establishment of free, mandatory, primary education under the Minister of Public Instruction, Jules Ferry, which greatly expanded the teaching of French, further undermined the position of Berrichon.

The decline of Berrichon has virtually led to it being regarded as a sub-standard dialect of French rather than a separate language. Additionally, as most speakers in its region now speak standard French, it is no longer possible to say that a Berrichon "patois" exists, but rather that a regional version of French does. Nevertheless, traces of Berrichon and its regional varieties remain today. This is exemplified in the continued use of Berrichon terms in spoken French among speakers in the region.

Although Berrichon does not have an official grammar or pronunciation, there are general rules as to how it differs from French. Berrichon differentiates between closed and open a. R s are rolled and emphatic. Words which have the o sound in standard French are pronounced with a close back rounded vowel, resulting in, for example, un houmme (man), une poumme (apple). The oi [wa] sound becomes oé [oe]. The suffix - eur becomes - eux in Berrichon, and - eau becomes - iau ; therefore, leurs (theirs) is ieux and un seau d'eau (a bucket of water) is un siau d'iau.

Conjugation is also different. The present indicative of the first- person singular, the third-person singular and the third-person plural are all conjugated in the same manner, which results in phrases of the type, " j'menons les oies " ("I lead the geese "). There is also frequent truncation: " i m'nons les oies " ("they lead the geese"). Tense endings are also different from standard French, as in the third person plural imperfect ending -aient is replaced by -aint, e.g., " i's étaint " instead of " ils étaient " ("They used to be").

In Berry, it is customary to precede given names with articles : la for women's names and eul for men's names.

When referring to weather terms, the pronoun ça is used in place of the French il. For example, "Il pleut" (It is raining.) would be "Ça pleut" in Berrichon.

Examples of Berrichon vocabulary being used instead of their French counterparts include:

Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights :

" Tertous euls houmes naquissont libres et parés catté d'la digneté et des drèts. Is tindont d'la radzon et unne aîme et is doévont s'aidier entermi ieux coume des frères. "

Bertrand Bernard Léon Pujo, born on 26 August 1878 in Orignac, Hautes-Pyrénées, and died on 14 September 1964 in Paris, was a French military officer, briefly Minister of Air in 1940, and President of Air France.

Bertrand Pujo completed his secondary education at the Tarbes lycée. Accepted to the Special Military School of Saint-Cyr, he joined the school on 26 October 1897.

Graduating as a second lieutenant in 1899, he chose the French Foreign Legion and was assigned to the 21st Company of the 2nd RE. In August 1900, he embarked with the 6/2nd RE for Haiphong. His unit was deployed in the Yên Bái region as part of the 2nd RE Marching Regiment. He participated in the China campaign with the 14th Company. Promoted to lieutenant on 1 October 1901, he returned to France at the end of his tour in October 1902. After a year at Saïda in the 17th Company of the 5th Battalion of the 2nd RE, he returned to Tonkin with the 5/2nd RE. He was stationed in Yen Luong, Viétri, and Phu Doan. Later, he joined the 1st RE during a reorganization of the Legion's units in Tonkin.

Repatriated to Algeria in 1907, he was stationed in Sidi Bel Abbès. After being admitted to the École supérieure de guerre, he graduated as a staff officer. Promoted to captain on 24 September 1912, he was assigned to the 18th Army Corps staff and earned his observer pilot's certification. On 1 January 1914, he was named a Knight of the Legion of Honour.

From July 1914, he became exclusively an aviator, performing numerous observation missions over enemy-occupied territory. He received two citations at the army level. Promoted to major on 1 October 1916, he was appointed deputy chief of aviation at the Grand Headquarters. In 1919, he joined the War Ministry under General Henri Mordacq. Promoted to lieutenant colonel and awarded the Officer's Cross of the Legion of Honour on 16 June 1920, he became a colonel in December 1921, commanding the 35th Aviation Regiment on 8 April 1922. He earned his pilot's certification on 24 June 1922.

In September 1926, he was promoted to the first section of general officers and awarded the commander of the Legion of Honour in 1928. Promoted to major general in January 1930, he joined the Superior Council of the Air. By December 1935, he was named Chief of Staff of the French Air Force and vice president of the Superior Air Council.

He retired from active service on 14 October 1936 to take over the presidency of Air France. In 1938, he was awarded the dignity of Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour.

Elevated to the rank and title of air army general on 2 September 1939, he was appointed minister of air by Marshal Pétain, serving from 16 June to 12 July 1940 in the last cabinet of the French Third Republic. From 12 July to 5 September 1940, he served as secretary of state for aviation. He then resumed his role as president of Air France, holding the position until 1944. Accused of treason in November 1944, he was cleared by the High Court of Justice, which granted a dismissal of charges in light of his activities in the French Resistance.

Beur (pronounced [ bœʁ ]), or alternatively rebeu, is a colloquial term, sometimes considered pejorative, in French to designate European-born people whose parents or grandparents are immigrants from the Maghreb. The equivalent term for a female beur is a beurette. However, the term beurette is condemned and criticized by several anti-racist organizations because of the xenophobic and degrading connotation that this word has taken on over the decades (in particular because of the fetishization of North African women in France as well as an insult stemming from colonialism. The term rebeu is neither applicable to females nor does it have a female version.

The word beur was coined using verlan for the word arabe, which means Arabic or Arab in French. Since the late 1990s, many young people have used the twice-verlanised term rebeu as a synonym. This term is now the dominant term used by the younger generations (under 30). The word beurette, the female version of beur, is created by adding the -ette female suffix in French. In French many slang words are created by simply reversing the syllables in a word and then reading the result (e.g. "femme" becomes "meuf" in verlan. The word beurgeois is derived from a combination of the words beur and bourgeois.

The term is mostly used in French-speaking European countries ― France, Belgium, Monaco, Luxembourg and Switzerland ― as well as in the Maghreb. Due to cultural integration between such peoples across Europe, the term is now popular in other parts of Europe with a large Maghrebi community, such as the UK, Spain, the Netherlands and Italy.

Since 1992, the BEUR.FM radio station has broadcast nationwide (106.7 FM in Paris).

A beurgeois is a middle-class (and upwards) Muslim born in a working-class area of France to parents of Maghrebi origin, who continues to proclaim their roots and who is aged between 30 and 40 years old with a successful professional career, a high purchasing power and a demand for a certain quality of life.

Beurgeois is a portmanteau neologism created in France from the words " beur " (meaning a person of Arab, Berber or other Maghrebi descent in verlan) and " bourgeois " (meaning affluent).

Among the beurgeois themselves, opinion over the beurgeois designation is quite divided. While some people consider it as a sort of recognition of their success, the majority believe that this pejorative term is once again expressing their stigmatization and discrimination as French people of Muslim descent.

The "beurgeois" among France's estimated 6-7 million-strong Muslim community are an emerging economic demographic, being catered to by a market in halal food and drinks. This has resulted in an increase in sales of halal products from the fast food chain to major retail chains to some top restaurants —all opening in many French cities to accommodate these customers. These offer a wide range of halal products including alcohol-free champagne and foie gras approved by Islamic law (an unexpected success first introduced into supermarket chains across the country in 2008 at the end of the Muslim fast of Ramadan). Thus the beurgeois have become a chosen marketing target that require to be treated as consumers having specific needs- which has been adapted to by a specific and growing market sector.

Yanis Bouarbi, an IT specialist who started the website paris-hallal.com (a website which lists more than 400 halal restaurants in Paris and its suburbs and is planning to expand to other French cities), who says young Muslims are at the heart of a mini social revolution ; "When our parents and grandparents came to France they did mostly manual work and the priority was having enough to feed the family. But second or third-generation people like me have studied, have good jobs and money and want to go out and profit from French culture without compromising our religious beliefs. We don't just want cheap kebabs, we want Japanese, Thai, French food ; we want to be like the rest of you." A similar sentiment is echoed in Paris's 11th arrondissement Les Enfants Terribles restaurant, run by brothers Kamel and Sosiane Saidi, which serves halal French haute cuisine ; "Before, Muslims wishing to eat halal would go to a restaurant and it was fish or nothing. Now we have a choice," said Sosiane, 28, who worked in the property market before setting up the restaurant three years ago. "Young Muslims have money and want to eat out like everyone else but according to their religion. The food doesn't taste any different; we have many French customers who don't even know we're totally halal. To us, that is what integration is about."

The demand for halal products, which is increasing by an estimated 10% per year, has captured the attention of food distributors, growers, companies, and the like. Sales of halal products totaled 4 billion euros in 2009 and Solis (a consultancy that specializes in marketing to ethnic minorities) forecasts the market will expand about 10% in 2010, compared with a 2% growth in overall food sales. Antoine Bonnel, director of the 2010 Paris Halal trade show said, "It's mostly driven by the second and third generations. It's not a case of the Muslim community withdrawing into itself, but rather one of integration, since they want to be able to buy halal sauerkraut or spring rolls ". French sales of halal food are forecast to hit 5.5 billion euros for 2010 and according to Bonnel, move "from the ethnic market to the mass market " due to the beurgeois, who are forcing international food suppliers to cater for their demands and as one French website put it, halal is "very good business" for French companies.

In general, there have been many supermarket chains and packaged-food companies that find the demographic important enough to aim for a share of the halal market. But companies see a potentially lucrative business in supplying religiously sanctioned food to France's growing ranks of young, professional Muslims, who want to eat Western food that is halal. These include: Nestlé 's French operations, supermarket chain Groupe Casino, Pierre Martinet (France's biggest prepared salad maker), fast-food chain Quick (which has a number of halal-only burger bars), Hal'shop (a new supermarket in a Paris suburb which sells only halal food- and plenty of French dishes), flourishing Muslim corner shops (selling exclusively halal foods and drinks including eggs, turkey and pork-free sausages as well as alcohol-free "champagne", known as Cham'Alal), as well as Carrefour (the world's second-largest retailer by sales after Wal-Mart), which is considering launching its own line of halal foods.

However, the expansion of halal offerings (that is occurring along with the rise of the beurgeois) is in some cases provoking a backlash. Claude Capillon, the mayor of Rosny-sous-Bois, east of Paris, where the fast-food chain Quick has an all-halal restaurant, sent the company a letter saying it was discriminating against non-Muslim customers. Therefore, some food companies are trying to give their halal products a low profile because of such reactions. After Labeyrie, France's biggest foie gras producer by revenue and a unit of food company Alfesca launched a halal foie gras, some bloggers accused it of funding Islamic extremists. As a result, it sells its halal pâté in a few stores and doesn't advertise it on the company website.

The beurgeois are not only a useful demographic to retailers but also to French politicians—and somewhat unlike their previous generations, the group does not intend have higher levels of apathy when it comes to the relationship of the sector to the country's government. It has been noted that the demographic has a greater interest in domestic politics, in order to make their voices heard as French citizens contributing to the culture and political climate of their country.

Among the hundreds of prominent beurgeois that are senior civil servants, entrepreneurs, artists, doctors etc., some include:

Beurre maître d'hôtel (French pronunciation: [ bœʁ mɛtʁ dotɛl ]), also referred to as maître d'hôtel butter or maître d' butter, is a type of compound butter (French : "beurre composé") of French origin, prepared with butter, parsley, lemon juice, salt and pepper. It is a savory butter that is used on meats such as steak (including the sauce for Chateaubriand steak), fish, vegetables and other foods. It may be used in place of a sauce, and can significantly enhance a dish's flavor. Some variations with a sweet flavor exist. It is usually served cold as sliced disks on foods, and is sometimes served as a side condiment.

The name of beurre maître d'hôtel is derived from the manner in which it was commonly prepared from scratch by a restaurant's maître d'hôtel at diners' tables. It is also referred to as maître d'hôtel butter.

Beurre maître d'hôtel is a savory butter prepared by mixing softened butter with very finely minced parsley, lemon juice, salt and pepper. A ratio of around 1.5 tablespoons of parsley to two ounces of butter may be used. Additional ingredients may include shallot and Worcestershire sauce. Vinegar is sometimes used, although its inclusion is rare. Cayenne pepper has also been used. After mixing, it is typically rolled in parchment paper or plastic wrap and chilled to harden.

Beurre maître d'hôtel is usually served cold as sliced disks atop various foods, and sometimes as a side condiment. It is used on grilled meats such as steak and fish, and also on eggs, vegetables, potatoes and breads. Some variations exist, including a few sweet versions that include sugar, which may be used on dishes such as pancakes. When used as a topping, it is typically added just before the dish is served. It has also been served melted atop dishes, whereby it is placed atop foods during the last few minutes of cooking. It may be used in the place of a sauce, and a small amount can significantly add to a dish's overall flavor.

Beurre maître d'hôtel is used as an ingredient in Chateaubriand sauce, which is sometimes used in the preparation of Chateaubriand steak. The butter is used in the last stage of the sauce's preparation, whereby after the sauce is strained, it is finished with beurre maître d'hôtel. Chopped tarragon may also be added to the sauce during this last preparation stage.

Beurre, œuf, fromage (butter, egg, cheese; BOF) is an old French acronym by the food trade from the central food halls of Les Halles to creamery retailers that sold the three staples of the French diet — butter, eggs and cheese — and were referred to as Les BOF. Its meaning became a pejorative term in France during the German Occupation in World War II and the following years after the war, when ration cards were much sought-after on the black market.

By extension, BOF came to designate a person making money on the black market during this period. The Jean Dutourds novel The Best Butter (Au bon beurre), considered the best known and most-cited work on the black market in occupied France, features the satirical adventures of a BOF couple, the Poissonard family who work in a Paris dairy shop during the German occupation and think only of getting rich.

In the immediate post-war period, the black market's capture of food shortages continued, triggering demonstrations throughout 1947, notably that of November 12 in Marseille, during which a young 19-year-old worker, Vincent Voulant, was shot dead and four other demonstrators, also victims of gunfire from the same night bar, were seriously wounded, two of whom underwent surgery and were still in critical condition the following day.

Peter Waldo, was the first to commission a Bible translation into a modern vernacular language in the late 1170s with his translation of the New Testament into Franco-Provençal.

Portions of the Bible have been translated into the island dialects of Norman.

George Métivier translated the Gospel of Matthew into Guernésiais and it was published in London in 1863. This is now available online.

Thomas Martin translated the whole Bible into Guernésiais and this has never been published.

Only selected passages from the Bible have been translated into Jèrriais, the form of the Norman language spoken in Jersey, in the Channel Islands, off the coast of France, in Europe.

A translation of the Parable of the Sower (Parabol du smeaux) was transcribed and published by Louis Lucien Bonaparte in 1863.

Bien mérité de la Patrie (French: "Well deserved recognition of the Fatherland") is a French expression that qualifies national heroes. During the French Revolution, the phrase became a formula discerned as an award by the National Convention to deserving citizens.

During the Ancien Régime, the Monarchy bestowed awards to deserving subjects in the form of noble titles, precious swords personally awarded by the King, or membership in chivalric orders; in particular, the Royal and Military Order of Saint Louis could be bestowed upon non-nobles. During the French Revolution, after the advent of the First French Republic, these customs fell in disfavour due to their monarchic connotations, and the anti-egalitarian sentiment of having special titles of nobility or awards that were only available for nobles. Thus, for instance, when Captain Jean-Baptiste-François Bompart was awarded a gold medal by the population of New York to commemorate the action of 31 July 1793, he accepted on the condition that he would not have to wear it.

To fill the requirement with an equalitarian national award, the National Convention developed the practice of passing resolutions by vote, solemnly stating that a deserving citizen, or group of citizen, had Bien mérité de la Patrie. These resolutions were published in Le Moniteur Universel, in a manner similar to being mentioned in dispatches.

The practice was pursued under the French Consulate, which furthermore instituted the award of Weapons of Honour for the military, and scarfs of honour to civilians. These were replaced by the Legion of Honour, founded by Bonaparte on 9 May 1802, morphing the award back into an order of chivalry (however, the Legion was awarded without reference to the distinction between noble and non-noble).

The term " bien mérité de la Patrie ", or the close " bien mérité du pays ", is still used in citations awarding the Legion of Honour. For instance, the city of Verdun was awarded the Legion of Honour on 12 September 1916 for

Since the last 21 February, the city of Verdun, in her fierce resolution to maintain her territory unviolated, oppose to the army of the invader a resistance that inspires admiration to the world. The marvelous heroism of her defenders, united to the firmness of the soul of her population, has forever made illustrious the name of this valliant city. It is the duty of the Government of the Republic to proclaim that the city of Verdun has bien mérité de la patrie

The pediment of the Panthéon carries the closely related mention " Aux grands hommes, la patrie reconnaissante " ("To its great men, a grateful fatherland").

The biens nationaux were properties confiscated during the French Revolution from the Catholic Church, the monarchy, émigrés, and suspected counter-revolutionaries for "the good of the nation".

Biens means "goods", both in the sense of "objects" and in the sense of "benefits". Nationaux means "of the nation". This can be summarized as "things for the good of the nation", or simply "national goods".

The possessions of the Roman Catholic Church were declared national property by the decree of 2 November 1789 [ fr ]. These were sold to resolve the financial crisis that caused the Revolution. Later, the properties of the Crown were given the same treatment.

The concept of national property was later extended to the property of the émigrés, and the suspected counter-revolutionaries, which were confiscated from 30 March 1792, and sold after the decree of 27 July.

A few months into the Revolution, the public purse was all but empty. To amend this fiscal problem, the deputy Talleyrand proposed nationalizing the goods of the clergy. Pursuing the proposal, on 2 November 1789, the Assemblée Nationale voted that all the goods of the clergy "will be placed at the disposal of the nation", declared to be henceforth biens nationaux, national goods, to be put out to bid at auction on behalf of the State.

This legacy, evaluated to just about 3 billion livres, constituted a substantial improvement for public finance. The disposition of these goods was entrusted to a special office, the Caisse de l'Extraordinaire, which was formed on 19 December 1789.

The difficulty was that the sale of so many biens would take time, at least a year, while the caisses of the State were empty and national bankruptcy appeared to be immediate. Therefore, it was decided to produce, the very same day as the creation of la Caisse de l'Extraordinaire, a type of bonds called assignats. The value of these bills or bonds was based on the estimated value of the clerical properties. The assignats were issued by the National Constituent Assembly.

Initially meant as bonds, the assignats developed into a paper currency used as legal tender.

As there was no control over the amount to be printed, the value of the assignats went beyond the limits of the confiscated properties. This caused hyperinflation. In the beginning of 1792, they had lost most of their supposed value.

This hyperinflation was inspired by continual food shortages. Rather than solving the financial problems, the assignats became a cause for food riots. Insecurity continued after the abolition of the monarchy, and the situation got worse with the wars France faced. These circumstances interfered with the completion of good financial policies that would reduce debts. Bills were passed such as the Maximum Price Act (loi du maximum général) of 1793, meant to control price increases.

On 28 December 1793, the Assembly issued the legislation to confiscate the property of individuals regarded as enemies of the Revolution, which included the émigrés and fugitives, hostile priesthood, the deportees, prisoners, those sentenced to death, and the aliens from enemy countries.

When the Directoire came into power in 1795 the Maximum Price Act was lifted. High monetary inflation reemerged and in the next four years Paris was the scene of yet more riots. The assignats were becoming worthless.

France's financial problems were solved during the French Consulate when Napoleon, the First Consul, created the country's new currency, the franc germinal, by the law of 28 March 1803 (loi du 7 Germinal an XI).

Bigordans is the term for the inhabitants of Bigorre.

At least into the first half of the 20th century the Bigordans maintained a separate ethnic and cultural identity from other French people. There were very adamant in claiming differences from the neighboring Béarnais. However, by the start of the 20th century the springs and baths of Bigorre were attracting many visitors from other parts of France, and the local ethnic uniqueness was threatened.

In the 1984 edition of the Britannica, Bigordans are still shown as a separate ethnic group on the map "Primary European Ethnic Culture Areas". However this same map still shows Silesia and East Prussia as inhabited by Germans, as well as the Sudetenland. Since these areas had mass deportations of their German population after the Second World War, it is evident that the map does not reflect the reality of ethnic concentrations in Europe for any year after 1945.

A coiffe bigoudène (Breton : pennwisk bigouden) refers to a 30–40-cm high "Breton hat," or coif, worn by women with traditional Breton costume. By extension, the women wearing the coif and the costume associated with it are also called bigoudènes.

The bigoudène coif is worn by the women of the Bigouden Country (Breton : Bro-Vigoudenn ; French : Le Pays Bigouden) historically known as "Cap Caval" and located along the Bay of Audierne (Bro Kernev), south-west of Quimper, Brittany. They have been officially based in the French departement of Finistère since 1790.

The term bigoudène should not be confused with " bigoudénnie ", the geographical concentration of these women, and with the Bigouden region.

The first attestation of the term bigoudène being used in the French language (from Breton : bigoudenn) was in 1881 in the Revue des deux Mondes (French : [ʁəvy de dø mɔ̃d], Review of the Two Worlds). It had been used in the Breton language around 1830 through the meaning: " headdress of linen or cotton worn in the region of Pont-l'Abbé ". It is related to the terms bigoudi (hair curler), bigot (part of the racage from a yard on top of a traditional square rigged ship) and bigue (kind of pulley, type of spar used as a crane).

Here and there, a man from Pont-l'Abbé proudly displays his superimposed jackets, on which brightly colored woolen ribbons stand out as well as sometimes a holy ciborium embroidered on the back. The women of this same village whose strange figure is reminiscent of the Lapland type, wear the hair brought back to the top of their head and kept by a narrow braiding headdress, are called bigoudènes. Their dress has a liveliness of oriental color: wide yellow or scarlet breastplates, corsages and cuffs supported by silver, green skirts embellished with dazzling embroidery.

— André Theuriet, "Douarnenez, landscapes and impressions", Revue des Deux Mondes, volume 43, 1881

Contrary to a widespread legend encapsulating the headdresses’ size as a response to the cut steeples cut during the Revolt of the papier timbré (anti-fiscal revolt in the west of Ancien Régime France, reign of Louis XIV from April to September 1675); the bigoudène headdress only became really high in the twentieth century, especially in the Interwar period (November 1918 - September 1939) where it gained a centimeter per year. The maximum height of the cap is reached at the end of the Second World War, when the Breton costume started to become old-fashioned.

The high headdress is for ceremonies or states of mourning : the everyday headdress worn during the daily work is a simple black velvet ribbon around the comb and behind which one concealed the chignon. In 1977, 31% of women over 47 years old wore the headdress. This figure drastically decreased to only 500 women (of all ages) in 1993. In 2011 Maria Lambour was one of the last women to wear this headdress on a daily basis. Today it is worn only during cultural events and by rare women on an almost daily basis.

On 11 June 2018 the then doyenne (eldest) of the Bigoudènes, Marie Pochat, died at the age of 102 in her native Brittany. She was one of the last few irreducible Bretons still wearing the headdress. Born on 29 February 1916 in Léchiagat (now Treffiagat) in the Bigouden country, Marie Pochat regularly wore the headdress from the age of 12. "Without this headdress, I feel that I am missing something," she told France 3 Brittany on the occasion of the celebration of her centenary in 2016. Only a handful of Bretons still wear this lace headdress, a true symbol of Brittany that appeared in 1747. In 2015 the Museum of Brittany had hosted an exhibition by photographer Charles Fréger showing the considerable richness and diversity of Breton headdresses.

The confection of the bigoudènes' traditional costume is recognized as a landmark of French sartorial heritage and high craftsmanship. The oldest known Bigoudène headdress dates back to 1830; still ample, the headdress largely covers the hair; limited to a small rectangle, the embroidery is nascent. It is exhibited at the Bigouden Museum in Pont-l'Abbé. One of the most important sartorial events for bigoudènes is the "Feast of Embroiderers" (French : Fête des Brodeuses) taking place every year in July in Pont-l'Abbé, Finistère, Brittany.

Numerous artists immortalized the bigoudènes such as:

In the French-speaking world, since the 1970s, television commercials from Breizh Cola and most importantly the French food industry company " Tipiak " have been portraying elderly women dressed as Bigoudènes while shouting "Tipiak, Pirates!". This famous slogan propelled the term " Tipiak " to become synonymous with " hacker " in web communities and now refers to hackers or counterfeiters.

The sticker made by the textile enterprise À l'Aise Breizh symbolizing a small figure wearing a bigoudène headdress is stuck on more than 1.5 million cars across the world as of July 2011 and has become a popular symbol of recognition for Bretons.

The bigouden coiffe is part of local identity, almost in tourist brochures.

The Bigoudène briochée (Brioched Bigoudène) is a pâtisserie popularized during the Tourelle des Perdrix ' centenary in Loctudy. It is composed of a raised dough wrapped around a cylinder and cooked on a spit and slowly browned. It is sold on city markets around the bigoudénnie and most preponderantly in Locronan regularly elected "one of the most beautiful villages in France". There are two kinds of those pastry headdresses: a savoury one with emmenthal and black olives and the other ones, sweet, covered with sugar or chocolate. The idea was partly inspired by the Eastern countries (Romania, Hungary) where they are very fond of this type of dough put aside to rise for a moment before being put on a grill.

A bistro or bistrot (/ ˈ b iː s t r oʊ /), in its original Parisian form, is a small restaurant serving moderately priced, simple meals in a modest setting.

In a 2007 survey of national cuisines, a bistro is characterised as typically:

A Paris newspaper in 1892 referred to dishes served at a bistro, including escargots, veal with sauce ravigote, navarin of lamb, hachis Parmentier, eggs, sausages and hot roast chicken.

The Oxford Companion to Food comments that the idea of simple inexpensive food served in a French atmosphere has wide appeal, so that by the end of the 20th century the term had "begun to be annexed by more pretentious premises".

The etymology is unclear. The Dictionnaire de l'Académie française dates the word from the 19th-century term bistro ("innkeeper") and suggests that it may be linked to the Poitevin word bistraud ("little servant") or to bistrouille ("cheap liquor"). It recommends the spelling "bistrot" in preference to "bistro".

The word was used to describe a drinking establishment, estaminet ("saloon"), or small popular local restaurant where alcoholic beverages were served. In the early part of the 19th century, the term "gargote" signified a basic style of restaurant, but the term "bistro" or "bistrot" was not recorded until toward the end of the century. An early appearance of the term in print is in Les deux gosses by Pierre Decourcelle, published in 1880.

A popular folk etymology, not attested by the Dictionnaire de l'Académie française, claims that the word originated among Russian troops who, following the Battle of Paris in March 1814, occupied the city and visited these tiny places to drink a coffee. They might have shouted Bistro! Bistro! (Russian : быстро, lit. ' quickly ') when they wished to be served quickly. This etymology has been dismissed by linguists, because there is no attestation to the occurrence of the term until the late 19th century.

The bistro became familiar in France throughout the 19th century. During this period, the Auvergnats (French people originating from the Auvergne region), often called the "bougnats", transformed and developed the French bistro. Indeed, they started to offer meats with their choice of wines and spirits. Another older definition of bistro is a wine merchant serving simple cuisine along with tasting samples of offered wines to potential buyers.

In the 20th century these places became very popular and widely represented the diversity of Parisian life. More than that, bistros became the hallmark of the French lifestyle and inspired a multitude of artists (painters, photographers, writers, etc.).

Black Saturday (samedi noir in French) refers, in France, to the day of the year when road traffic is most dense due to the many departures on holiday. (Traffic problems are exacerbated by France's extreme centralisation, with Paris being the hub of the entire national highway network.) This Saturday is usually at the end of July, though in 2007 both the last Saturday of July and the first Saturday of August were designated as Black Saturdays.

The Autoroute du Soleil, the highway to the south of France and Spain, is usually particularly busy. In 2004 there was more than 700 kilometres (430 mi) in accumulated traffic congestion.

The black colour is the qualification with which the French government web site Bison Futé designates a day with extrêmement dense (extremely busy) traffic. The French newspapers call this day samedi noir after Bison Futé's designation. Usually, the French call these days les jours de grands départs (days of great departures). In Dutch, this French phenomenon was known as zwarte zaterdag long before the French adopted the term samedi noir, both meaning (literally) Black Saturday.

The term Black Saturday may also refer to Saturday July 31, 1982, when the worst road accident in French history happened. Around 1:45 AM, a coach collided into passenger cars near Beaune in dense holiday traffic during rainfall. The collision and subsequent fire killed 53 people, among which 46 were children. After this crash, a regulation was enforced to prohibit the transportation of groups of children during this part of the year.

The Blaise Pascal Chairs (Chaires Internationales de Recherche Blaise Pascal), established in 1996 by the Government of the Île-de-France Region for internationally acclaimed foreign scientists in all disciplines. A scientific committee annually selects the most outstanding candidates from all over the world. Since their inception a number of famous scientists have been Blaise Pascal Chair laureates: Gérard Debreu (UC Berkeley, 1983 Nobel Prize in Economics), Ahmed Zewail (Caltech, 1999 Nobel Prize in Chemistry), Igor Mel'čuk (University of Montreal, the world leading researcher in linguistics), George Smoot (LBL, 2006 Nobel Prize in experimental Astrophysics), Robert Langlands (UBC, 1996 Wolf Prize, one of the most influential mathematicians of the 20th century), outstanding theoretical physicists Gabriele Veneziano (CERN/College de France), Alexander Zamolodchikov (Rutgers), and others.

Blancmange (/ b l ə ˈ m ɒ n ʒ /, from French : blanc-manger [ blɑ̃mɑ̃ʒe ], lit. ' white food ') is a sweet dessert made throughout Europe commonly made with milk or cream, and sugar, thickened with rice flour, gelatin or cornflour, and often flavoured with almonds.

It is usually set in a mould and served cold. Although traditionally white, blancmanges are frequently given other colours.

Blancmange originated at some time during the Middle Ages from the older Middle Eastern muhallebi, and usually consisted of capon or chicken, milk or almond milk, rice, and sugar; it was considered to be an ideal food for the sick.

Similar desserts include Bavarian cream, Italian panna cotta, Turkish tavuk göğsü, Brazilian manjar branco, Chinese almond tofu, Hawai'ian haupia and Puerto Rican tembleque.

The origins of the blancmange have long been believed to lie in the introduction of rice and almonds in early medieval Europe by Arab traders. Recently, it has been shown that there have been similar Arab dishes from that period such as muhallebi. Muhallebi, or another similar dish from the medieval Islamic world, spread to Europe first as blanc-manger in France, later translated to biancomangiare in Italy and manjar blanco in Spain. Additionally, related or similar dishes have existed in other areas of Europe under other names, such as the 13th-century Danish hwit moos ("white mush"), and the Anglo-Norman blanc desirree ("white dish"); Dutch calijs (from Latin colare, "to strain") was known in English as cullis and in French as coulis, and was based on cooked and then strained poultry. The oldest recipe for blancmange is from the oldest extant Danish cookbook, written by Henrik Harpestræng, who died in 1244, which dates it to the early 13th century at the latest. The work may be a translation of a German cookbook, which is believed to have been based on a Latin or Romance vernacular manuscript from the 12th century or even earlier.

The "whitedish" (from the original Old French term blanc manger) was a dish consumed by the upper-classes and common to most of Europe during the Middle Ages and early modern period. It occurs in countless variations from recipe collections from all over Europe and was one of the few truly international dishes of medieval and early modern Europe. It is mentioned in the prologue to Geoffrey Chaucer 's Canterbury Tales and in an early 15th-century cookbook written by the chefs of Richard II. The basic ingredients were milk or almond milk, sugar, and shredded chicken (usually capon) or fish, often combined with rosewater and rice flour, and mixed into a bland stew. Almond milk and fish were used as substitutes for the other animal products on fast days and Lent. It was also often flavoured with spices such as saffron or cinnamon and the chicken could be exchanged for other fowl, such as quail or partridge. Spices were often used in recipes of the later Middle Ages since they were considered prestigious.

On festive occasions and among the upper classes, whitedishes were often rendered more festive by colouring agents: the reddish-golden yellow of saffron ; green with various herbs ; or sandalwood for russet. In 14th-century France, parti-colouring (the use of two bright contrasting colours on the same plate) was especially popular and was described by Guillaume Tirel (also known as Taillevent), one of the primary authors of the later editions of Le Viandier. The brightly coloured whitedishes were one of the most common of the early entremets : edibles that were intended to entertain and delight through a gaudy appearance as much as through flavour.

In the 17th century (1666), the durian fruit was compared to blanc-mangé by Alexandre de Rhodes:

il est plein d'une liqueur blanche, épaisse & sucrée : elle est entierement semblable au blanc-mangé, qu'on sert aux meilleures tables de France; c'est une chose fort saine, & des plus delicates qu'on puisse manger [It is full of a white liquor, thick and sweet, which is entirely similar to blanc-mangé, served at the best tables in France; it is a very healthy thing, and one of the most delicate things one can eat].

In the 17th century, the whitedish evolved into a meatless dessert pudding with cream and eggs, and later, gelatin. In the 19th century, arrowroot and cornflour were added, and the dish evolved into the modern blancmange.

The word blancmange derives from Old French blanc mangier. The name "whitedish" is a modern term used by some historians, though the name historically was either a direct translation from or a calque of the Old French term. Many different local or regional terms were used for the dish in the Middle Ages as translations of the French term:

Though it is fairly certain that the etymology is indeed "white dish", medieval sources are not always consistent as to the actual colour of the dish. Food scholar Terence Scully has proposed the alternative etymology of bland mangier, "bland dish", reflecting its often mild and "dainty" (in this context meaning refined and aristocratic) taste and popularity as a dish for the sick.

Blanquism (/ ˈ b l ɒ ŋ k ɪ z əm /) refers to a conception of revolution generally attributed to Louis-Auguste Blanqui (1805–1881) that holds that socialist revolution should be carried out by a relatively small group of highly organised and secretive conspirators. Having seized power, the revolutionaries would then use the power of the state to introduce socialism. It is considered a particular sort of "putschism"—that is, the view that political revolution should take the form of a putsch or coup d'état.

Blanquism is distinguished from other socialist currents in various ways: on the one hand, Blanqui did not believe in the predominant role of the proletariat, nor did he believe in popular movements—instead he believed that revolution should be carried out by a small group of professional, dedicated revolutionaries, who would establish a temporary dictatorship by force. This dictatorship would permit the implementation of the basis of a new order, after which power would then be handed to the people. In another respect, Blanqui was more concerned with the revolution itself rather than the future society that would result from it—if his thought was based on precise socialist principles. Blanquist thought rarely goes so far as to imagine a purely socialist society. For Blanquists, the overturning of the bourgeois social order and the revolution are ends sufficient in themselves, at least for their immediate purposes.

The Central Revolutionary Committee (CRC) was a French Blanquist political party founded in 1881 and dissolved in 1898.

The CRC was founded by Édouard Vaillant to continue the political struggle of Auguste Blanqui (1805 – 1881). The CRC was a Blanquist party, supporting revolutionary activism, atheism, patriotism, and the Jacobinism of the French Revolution. The CRC was weakened by a split in 1888, when numerous members (Henri Rochefort) followed General Georges Boulanger who synthesized Jacobin nationalism with socialism. Many saw Boulangism as a possible way to socialism. Following the Boulangist dissidence, Vaillant adopted a strategy of syndicalism and strike action.

The CRC was further re-enforced by the affiliation of the Revolutionary Communist Alliance (ACR), formed by dissidents of the Revolutionary Socialist Workers' Party (POSR) in 1896.

The CRC merged into the Socialist Revolutionary Party in 1898.

The term "Blanquism" has often been used polemically to accuse some revolutionaries of failing to sufficiently meld their praxis with the mass working class. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels were keen to distinguish their conception of revolution from Blanquism. As Engels put it in a short fragment, The Program of the Blanquist Fugitives from the Paris Commune :

Blanqui is essentially a political revolutionist. He is a socialist only through sentiment, through his sympathy with the sufferings of the people, but he has neither a socialist theory nor any definite practical suggestions for social remedies. In his political activity he was mainly a "man of action", believing that a small and well organized minority, who would attempt a political stroke of force at the opportune moment, could carry the mass of the people with them by a few successes at the start and thus make a victorious revolution.

Rosa Luxemburg and Eduard Bernstein have criticised Vladimir Lenin on the grounds that his conception of revolution was elitist and essentially Blanquist. For instance, as part of a longer section on Blanquism in her Organizational Questions of the Russian Social Democracy (later published as Leninism or Marxism?), Luxemburg writes:

For Lenin, the difference between the Social Democracy and Blanquism is reduced to the observation that in place of a handful of conspirators we have a class-conscious proletariat. He forgets that this difference implies a complete revision of our ideas on organization and, therefore, an entirely different conception of centralism and the relations existing between the party and the struggle itself. Blanquism did not count on the direct action of the working class. It, therefore, did not need to organize the people for the revolution. The people were expected to play their part only at the moment of revolution. Preparation for the revolution concerned only the little group of revolutionists armed for the coup. Indeed, to assure the success of the revolutionary conspiracy, it was considered wiser to keep the mass at some distance from the conspirators.

By " social democracy ", Luxemburg has in mind the original use of the term derived from Marx and synonymous with "socialism"; she conceived of the social democratic party as a mass-based organisation of working class struggle. However, Lenin dismissed as meaningless rhetoric the conflation of Blanquism with Bolshevism:

The bourgeoisie wants, by using the bogy of “Blanquism”, to belittle, discredit and slander the people’s struggle for power. The bourgeoisie stands to gain if the proletarians and peasants fight only for concessions from the old regime. The Right Social-Democrats use the word “Blanquism” merely as a rhetorical device in their polemics. The bourgeoisie converts this word into a weapon against the proletariat: “Workers, be reasonable! Fight for the extension of the powers of the Cadet Duma! Pull the chestnuts out of the fire for the bourgeoisie, but don't dare to think of such madness, anarchism, Blanquism, as fighting for complete power for the people!"

Lenin himself denied any accusations of Blanquism in The State and Revolution (1917) and accused Bernstein of " opportunism ".

Bloisian (Blésois in French) is a natural region of France located around the city of Blois, Loir-et-Cher, Centre-Val de Loire. This term also refers to the locals living there. Historically, Bloisian was part of the County of Blois, and from 1498 part of the Orléanais province.

This natural region is located in the center of the Loir-et-Cher department. With Val de Loire orléanais, Val de Loire tourangeau and Val d'Anjou, it is part of a larger natural region called Val de Loire.

Bloisian is between the following natural regions:

The word “Bloisian” comes from the city of Blois, whose name was firstly given by Romans to the surroundings as pagus Blesensi, and seems to derivate itself from the Celtic word bleiz, meaning “ wolf ”. As a result, Bloisian was originally the “ land of wolves ”, even though this animal disappeared in this region.

By analogy, this refers to a local dialect too.

The French term is “Blésois”, but the former “Blaisois” was once correct, but it has to be avoided since it can be confused with the Blaise river surroundings.

The Blue River Provincial Park (French : Parc provincial de la Rivière Bleue) is a nature reserve in Yaté Commune, South Province, New Caledonia.

The 22,000 ha (54,000 acres) Blue River Provincial Park is part of the larger 15,900 ha (39,000 acres) Upper Yaté fauna reserve. The Park covers the basins of the Blue, White, and Month of May Rivers, the latter two of which have drained into Yaté Lake since the construction of the Yaté Dam in 1958. Part of the banks and the length of the lake are in the park, including a large drowned forest. The altitude varies from 160–1,250 m (520–4,100 ft).

The hydrography and the nature of the terrain lead to the presence of several waterfalls, water holes, and giant's kettle in the Blue River valley.

The park includes two biomes typical of New Caledonia: maquis shrubland overlying peridotite rock and tropical rainforest. There is a very high rate of biodiversity of New Caledonia. In particular, the park is known for being one of the last areas where the kagu, an endangered bird which has become a symbol of the country, can be seen in its natural habitat, with a population of about 700; this is the largest single population of the species in the wild. Other endemic and rare animals in the park include the crow honeyeater, notou, New Caledonian crow, and crested gecko.

The park contains a thousand-year-old, forty-metre-tall giant Agathis lanceolata tree, one of the largest known in New Caledonia. There are also wild carnivorous plants (Drosera neocaledonica and Nepenthes vieillardii) and orchids.

Human settlement in the park is prehistoric; petroglyphs can be found in the Blue River valley. At the beginning of the twentieth century, forestry and chrome mining led to the development of modern transport infrastructure, much of which is still in place; there are still 36km of railways for transporting logs and ore, a traction engine winch and the Pérignon bridge, made of local wood, which crosses the branch of the lake created in the White River in 1958. The construction of the Yaté Dam the same year made major changes to the terrain. The park was founded in 1980 and came under the responsibility of the South Province when the provinces of New Caledonia were created in 1989.

The South Province initiated the development of the park in 1998 in response to increasing visitor numbers with the goals of protecting nature, educating visitors about the environment and of further attracting tourists. A "Maison du Parc" was thus inaugurated in 2002 at the main entrance, with an exhibition hall (containing a permanent display about the park since June 2003), a library, a conference room, a shop, archives, and storage rooms. Areas set up for camping and picnics were set up along the rivers, as well as a network of walking and cycling trails.

BlueNext was a European environmental trading exchange, considered the largest CO 2 permit spot market, with headquarters in Paris, France. On October 26, 2012, BlueNext announced that it would close permanently its spot and derivatives trading operations as of December 5, 2012.

BlueNext was founded in December 2007 when NYSE Euronext and Caisse des Dépôts purchased the carbon market from PowerNext. NYSE Euronext holds a 60 percent majority stake in BlueNext and Caisse des Dépôts owns the other 40 percent. PowerNext continues to operate its electricity market separately.

Members of BlueNext are offered spot trading of carbon (CO 2) emission rights and derivative products (futures) on European Union Allowances (EUAs) and Certified Emission Reductions (CERs). LCH.Clearnet SA provides clearing services for BlueNext futures EUA and BlueNext futures CER.

NYSE Euronext and APX announced on September 7, 2010 plans for a joint venture, NYSE Blue, that will focus exclusively on environmental and sustainable energy markets, and expansion of these services in North America and Asia. NYSE Euronext will contribute its ownership in BlueNext in return for a majority interest in the joint venture, while APX will contribute its business (operational, regulatory infrastructure and services for the environmental and sustainable energy markets) in return for a minority interest in the venture.

China is the world’s leading source of greenhouse gases and is identified as the source of more than 80 percent of carbon credits traded globally. In June 2009, BlueNext and the China Beijing Environmental Exchange (CBEEX) signed an agreement to set up an international carbon-trading related information platform that would jointly publish and promote Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) projects based in China. This information is to be sourced from the China Beijing Environmental Exchange.

The second joint project between BlueNext and CBEEX is the Panda Standard – the first voluntary standard designed specifically for China and the Chinese carbon marketplace, with an initial primary focus on agriculture and forestry.

BNP Paribas (French: [ beɛnpe paʁiba ] ; sometimes referred to as BNPP, Paribas or BNP) is a French multinational universal bank and financial services holding company headquartered in Paris. It was founded in 2000 from the merger of two of France's foremost financial institutions, Banque Nationale de Paris (BNP) and Paribas. It also incorporates many other major institutions through successive acquisitions, including Fortis Bank in Belgium, Direkt Anlage Bank in Germany, Banca Nazionale del Lavoro in Italy, Banque Générale du Luxembourg in Luxembourg, and Türk Ekonomi Bankası in Turkey. The group also had a presence in the United States through its subsidiaries Bank of the West until 2023 and First Hawaiian Bank until 2019. With 190,000 employees, the bank is organized into three major business areas: Commercial, Personal Banking & Services (CPBS); Investment & Protection Services (IPS); and Corporate & Institutional Banking (CIB).

BNP Paribas is listed on Euronext Paris and is a component of the Euro Stoxx 50 stock market index. It is the second largest bank in Europe and eighth largest bank in the world by total assets. It became one of the five largest banks in the world following the 2008 financial crisis. It is considered a systemically important bank by the Financial Stability Board. In the Forbes Global 2000, BNP Paribas was ranked as the 33rd largest public company in the world. It has been designated as a Significant Institution since the entry into force of European Banking Supervision in late 2014, and as a consequence is directly supervised by the European Central Bank.

Although a French banking group, the Belgian government has been a significant shareholder since 2009 (with 5.3% equity ownership as of mid-2023) as a result of the group's acquisition of Fortis Bank Belgium, heir to the Société Générale de Belgique established in 1822.

According to S&P Global 's April 2026 report, BNP Paribas is Europe's largest bank by assets, with $3.279 trillion in assets.

In 1999, BNP and Société Générale fought a complex battle on the stock market, with Société Générale bidding for Paribas and BNP bidding for Société Générale and counter-bidding for Paribas. BNP's bid for Société Générale failed, while its bid for Paribas succeeded, which led to a merger of BNP and Paribas one year later on 23 May 2000.

In 2006, BNP Paribas purchased Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL), Italy's sixth-largest bank. On 9 August 2007, BNP Paribas became the first major financial group to acknowledge the impact of the sub-prime crisis by closing two funds exposed to it. This day is now generally seen as the start of the 2008 financial crisis and the bank's quick reaction saved it from the fate of other large European banks such as UBS.

On 6 October 2008, BNP took over 75% of troubled bank Fortis ' activities in Belgium, and 66% in Luxembourg, in exchange for the Belgian government becoming the new group's major shareholder. The sales of the Fortis shares was suspended by a court order from the Court of Appeal on Friday, 12 December. In the end of January, the Belgian government and BNP negotiated for a 75% partnership in Fortis Bank Belgium. Fortis Insurance Belgium would be reintegrated in Fortis Holding.

On 11 February, Fortis' shareholders decided that Fortis Bank Belgium and Fortis Insurance Belgium should not become the property of BNP Paribas. However, the acquisition was completed, and BNP Paribas took 75% shareholding and renamed the new subsidiary BNP Paribas Fortis. After this only Fortis Insurance International was left in Fortis Holding and this was renamed as Ageas, a business that had Insurance all over Europe and Asia. In April 2024, it was announced BNP Paribas had acquired Fosun International 's entire 9% stake in Ageas, worth €730 million. The remaining Fortis Bank Netherlands was in the hands of the Dutch Government which merged it with other ABN AMRO holdings it already owned under the name ABN AMRO.

In May 2009, BNP Paribas became the majority shareholder (65.96%) of BGL (formerly Fortis Bank Luxembourg), the State of Luxembourg retaining 34% making BNP the eurozone 's largest bank by deposits held. On 21 September, the bank's registered name was changed to BGL BNP Paribas and in February 2010, BGL BNP Paribas became the 100% owner of BNP Paribas Luxembourg. The transfer was finalised on 1 October 2010 with the incorporation of BNP Paribas Luxembourg's business in the operational platforms of BGL BNP Paribas.

BNP Paribas reached an agreement in December 2013 to acquire Rabobank 's Polish unit BGZ Bank for around $1.4 billion. In 2013 BNP Paribas was awarded the Bank of the Year award by The International Financing Review ("IFR"), Thomson Reuters ' leading financial industry publication. In September 2014, BNP completed the purchase of BGZ Bank for a final fee stated in the media to be $1.3 billion.

In December 2021, BNP Paribas announced to exit US retail banking business by selling its Bank of the West to the Bank of Montreal for $16.3bn.

In November 2023, HSBC agreed to sell its hedge fund administration business in several markets, including Hong Kong, Singapore, Ireland, and Luxembourg to BNP Paribas’ Securities Services.

In April 2024, BNP Paribas acquired Fosun International 's entire 9% stake in Belgian insurance company Ageas for €730 million, and BNP Paribas further increased its stake in Ageas up to 15,07% in February 2025. In September 2024, BNP Paribas acquired HSBC private banking activities in Germany. BNP Paribas has around $80 billion under management in Asia by 2024. The bank has hired 20 private bankers, including Tiffeny Situ from Morgan Stanley, Wendy Chan from Citigroup and Martin Loh from Credit Suisse Group, as part of its expansion program.

BNP Paribas and BPCE have finalized an agreement of a joint venture to create Estreem, to become a top-three European payment processor in February 2025. The company is expected to handle 17 billion transactions annually, which will make it the leader with 30% volume of card payment in France.

In February 2025, Karine Delvallee has been appointed as the new regional head for Southeast Asia by BNP Paribas and the CEO of its Singapore branch. Delvallee, who was formerly the CEO of BNP Paribas Australia and New Zealand, will now be overseeing operations in Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, and Vietnam, with a focus on growth strategy and strengthening client relationships. However, she will also continue to supervise service over Australia and New Zealand as well.

In February 2025, Philippe Maillard was appointed as group COO by BNP Paribas. His tenure would be effective from 11 February, replacing Laurent David. As a company veteran since 1992, Maillard will oversee technology, IT, data, and operations. He will also be joining the bank's executive committee.

In March 2025, Matthew Ponsonby, BNP Paribas' UK head of global banking, resigned from his position. The bank stated a successor will be announced soon. Ponsonby, who joined in 2017, expressed pride in the progress made during his tenure and mentioned moving to an undisclosed "compelling opportunity." Under his leadership, BNP Paribas expanded its investment banking activities in Europe, particularly in the UK, making notable progress in mergers and acquisitions.

In June 2025, BNP Paribas agreed to acquire the custody and depositary bank business of HSBC Germany. In July 2025, HSBC has announced the sales of its fund administration business in Germany, i.e. Internationale Kapitalanlagegesellschaft (INKA), to a fund managed by BlackFin Capital Partners.

The first of July 2025, BNP Paribas acquired Axa Investment Managers from Axa.

On 22 September 2025, the Financial Times reported that BNP Paribas had dropped its previous pledge not to finance companies involved in the production of so-called controversial weapons. The policy change aligns with a broader shift in European banks' approach to defense sector financing.

In December 2025, BNP Paribas announced an expansion of its investment banking activities in both the United States and the United Kingdom, including new hires in London and New York aimed at strengthening its mergers and acquisitions advisory capabilities.

Gilles Zeitoun succeeded Charlotte Dennery as Director and chief executive officer of BNP Paribas Personal Finance on 1 January 2026. Dennery became chair of the board of directors and Senior Advisor for the Commercial, Personal Banking & Services division.

In 2022, total revenues of €50.4 billion represent an increase of 9% compared to 2021, BNP Paribas remains at the top of the French banks' ranking in terms of activity. During this year, BNP Paribas Group net income attributable to equity holders increased to 7.5% (to 10.2 billion euros). The geographic breakdown of Net Banking Income (NBI) at the end of 2020 is as follows: Europe (72.2%), North America (12.9%), Asia Pacific (8.6%) and others (6.3%).

The BNP Paribas logo since 2000 (designed by Laurent Vincent under the leadership of the Communications Director, Antoine Sire) is called the "courbe d'envol" (curve of taking flight). The stars allude to Europe and universality. The transformation of the stars into birds conveys openness, freedom, growth, and the ability to change and adapt. The shape and movement of the curve places the logo in the universe of life. The green square symbolises nature and optimism.

The General Management and the executive committee are composed as follows:

BNP Paribas Corporate and Institutional Banking (CIB) is the global investment banking arm of BNP Paribas, a French multinational bank. In October 2010, BNP Paribas was ranked by Bloomberg and Forbes as the largest bank and largest company in the world by assets with over US$3.1 trillion.

BNP Paribas CIB's main centres are in Paris and London, with large scale operations in New York, Hong Kong, and Singapore, and smaller operations in almost every financial centre in the world. It employs 185,000 people across 56 countries and provides financing, advisory and capital markets services. BNP Paribas CIB is a globally recognised leader in two areas of expertise: trading derivatives on all asset classes, and structured financing. BNP Paribas CIB also has a large corporate advisory network in Europe and Asia. BNP Paribas CIB has 13,000 clients, consisting of companies, financial institutions, governments, investment funds and hedge funds.

BNP Paribas CIB benefits from the Group's large asset base (over €2 trillion) and diverse business model, and was resilient through the 2008 financial crisis. Revenues from BNP Paribas CIB nearly doubled in the second quarter of 2009 as robust investor demand boosted revenues from the bank's fixed income trading business unit. CIB's revenues totaled €3.351 billion (US$4.82 billion) for the quarter, up 81 percent from the second quarter of 2008, and following record revenues of €3.696 billion in the first quarter of 2009.

BNP Paribas Real Estate, formerly Atisreal, is a European commercial property consultancy company and subsidiary of BNP Paribas with around 2,600 employees in 51 cities.

Atisreal was formed in 2003 when the Vendome Rome Group acquired three leading European surveying firms: Auguste-Thouard in France, Müller in Germany and Weatherall Green & Smith in the UK. In 2006, Atisreal became a subsidiary of BNP Paribas Real Estate. In June 2009 the Atisreal brand was dropped and the BNP Paribas Real Estate brand replaced it. Its headquarters were in Levallois-Perret, France.

BNP Paribas Asset Management is the dedicated, autonomous asset management branch of BNP Paribas and the third largest asset management firm in Europe, with over €1.6 trillion in assets under management (AUM).

In 2007, BNP Paribas regrouped its functions in asset management under the brand name BNP Paribas Investment Partners.

In 2010, the closing of the transaction between BNP Paribas Investment Partners and Fortis Investments was completed.

In June 2017, BNP Paribas Investment Partners rebranded as BNP Paribas Asset Management.

In August 2024, BNP Paribas Asset Management entered exclusive talks with Axa for the acquisition of Axa Investment Managers for €5.1bn, in order to create one of the largest asset management firms in Europe, with around €1.5tn of assets under management. On 21 December 2024, Axa and BNP Paribas signed the purchase agreement of Axa Investment Managers by Cardif (BNP Paribas' insurance company) and the takeover was completed on 1 July 2025.

On 31 December 2025, BNP Paribas merged AXA investment Managers and BNP Paribas Real Estate Investment Management (BNPP REIM) into BNP Paribas Asset Management in order to create a single asset management entity. Following this merger, BNP Paribas Asset Management became the third largest asset management firm in Europe (after Amundi and UBS Asset Management), with over €1.6 trillion in assets under management (AUM).

BNP Paribas Hong Kong and BNP Paribas Private Bank are subsidiaries of BNP Paribas and licensed banks in Hong Kong SAR China. It is one of the top foreign banks operating in Hong Kong.

BNP Paribas acquired Peregrine and renamed BNP Paribas Peregrine, a famous investment bank and brokerage in 1998. BNP Paribas Peregrine is headquartered in Hong Kong, with a presence in all major East Asian countries, as well as sales teams in London, Paris and Milan. BNP Paribas has a branch in Macau, and also operational branches and two representative offices in mainland China. The Peregrine name has since been absorbed and is no longer used.

In 2016 BNP reached an undisclosed settlement with a Jewish employee, following a $40M lawsuit. The employee had been made to watch a training video in the form of a parody of the movie Downfall, portraying Adolf Hitler as the CEO of Deutsche Bank, one of BNP's competitors and the Nazi soldiers around him as Deutsche Bank executives. Also, his colleagues made a number of anti-semitic comments during his time at BNP Paribas.

On 30 May 2014, The Wall Street Journal reported that the United States Department of Justice was negotiating a possible guilty plea with BNP Paribas as well as the size of the resulting fine for violating U.S. regulations and evading US sanctions. The Justice Department sought a fine of more than US $ 10 billion, which was expected to be reduced to $8 or $9 billion in negotiations. BNP Paribas was said to have laundered up to US$100 billion from the sanctioned countries of Sudan, Iran, and Cuba.

On 1 July 2014, BNP Paribas pled guilty in a New York state court to falsifying business records as well as conspiracy in connection to those falsifications. It was also expected to plead guilty in federal court to violating laws against money-laundering. It agreed to pay $8.9 billion, the largest fine ever for violating U.S. sanctions, and substantially more than the previous record of $1.9 billion. BNP Paribas was also barred for one year under the plea agreement from certain US dollar-dominated transactions. The fine exceeded the bank's $6.4 billion 2013 annual income and the $1.1 billion it previously had allocated for the anticipated fine.

The bank's failure to cooperate with the multi-year investigation was given as a significant factor in the size of the fine. Additionally, BNP Paribas continued to process sanctioned transactions after the investigation began. After the fine was announced, BNP said it would be "just fine" and that it had "a comprehensive plan" to avoid similar violations in the future. The company's stock, which had fallen 12% since news of the investigation first leaked, rose 4% on the announcement. To comply with the transaction ban, BNP Paribas will use a third party to clear its US transactions.

On 6 February 2024, the Federal Reserve announced that it had lifted a pair of 2014 enforcement actions it imposed on France's BNP Paribas, after the bank overhauled its compliance with U.S. sanctions laws.

In 2010 the French government's Autorité de la concurrence fined BNP and 10 other banks €384 million for colluding to charge unjustified fees on check processing, including extra fees during the transition from paper check transfer to "Exchanges Check-Image" electronic transfer.

The German Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung FOCUS, Bloomberg and the French Les Échos newspapers published an article regarding a €152 million mistrade (erroneous trade) in which BNP Paribas Arbitrage was allegedly involved. The bank has sold securities for €326,400 to the investor Armin S. but the value of the securities is €163 million according to the bank. According to the article, the error remained unnoticed for several days. BNP has even reconfirmed the original price.

The Financial Times published an article in March 2018 about the case with the title "BNP Paribas failed to book trades in Germany for a week". It cites internal documents that show it did not book all trades that happened in structured products in Germany from 2 to 9 December 2015. The Financial Times estimates that 8,500 trades might have been affected. It also questions if the bank has hedged its positions if the trades have not been booked.

BNP Paribas has been a major sponsor of tennis. In 1973 it became the major sponsor of the French Open, one of the four prestigious Grand Slam tournaments in the sport. In 2001 the bank began to sponsor the Davis Cup before becoming the title sponsor in 2002. In 2002 it became the sponsor of the Paris Masters, an ATP World Tour Masters 1000 tournament.

In 2008 it became the sponsor of the BNP Paribas Primrose Bordeaux, an ATP Challenger Tour tournament. The company's sponsorship expanded to the United States in 2009 when it became the title sponsor of the Indian Wells Masters, an ATP World Tour Masters 1000 two-week tournament in California. It also sponsored the BNP Paribas Showdown and BNP Paribas Tennis Classic exhibition tournaments held in New York City and London respectively. The Stanford Classic, since 1992, is instead directly sponsored by the Bank of the West subsidiary.

In 2018, BNP Paribas created the production company BNP Paribas Pictures, and supports young cinema talents through an investment fund dedicated to the financing and co-production of the first films of new talents in Cinema, the Fonds Nouveaux Talents. In 2019, the group supports the Femis Residence and Mille visages, which aims to democratize the cinema environment and create bridges between the different professions in cinema. The group also participates in the restoration of cinematographic works such as Charlie Chaplin 's " Modern Times " in 2003.

Between 1981 and early May 2020, BNP Paribas was a partner of the Belgian club RSC Anderlecht for 39 years through BNP Paribas Fortis.

Bobo is a portmanteau used to describe the socio-economic bourgeois - bohemian group in France. The geographer Christophe Guilluy has used the term to describe France's elite class, whom he accuses of being responsible for many of France's current problems.

The term was introduced into the English language by the cultural commentator David Brooks to describe the 1990s descendants of the yuppies in the book Bobos in Paradise (2000). Brooks describes Bobos as "highly educated folk who have one foot in the bohemian world of creativity and another foot in the bourgeois realm of ambition and worldly success". Brooks describes the relation between the two cultural groups in Paris starting in the 1820s when the Bourgeoisie had "displaced the aristocracy as the moving group in society" and the bohemians "really rose up" to express their disgust, expressed by Stendhal :

"Hatred of the bourgeoisie is the beginning of all virtues, and they make him want to weep and vomit at the same time."

According to Brooks, the two groups continued to coexist in a culture war for decades, with the bohemians displaying contempt, loathing, etc. for their enemy, and the bourgeoisie ignoring the bohemians and embracing "useful, prosaic virtues: self-discipline, frugality, order, punctuality, moderation, industry, temperance, fidelity, and faith". Further,

[The] bourgeois were materialists and the bohemians were antimaterialists. The bourgeois were polite; the bohemians were raw. The bourgeois were career-oriented, so the bohemians were experience-oriented. The bourgeois pretended to be chaste, and the bohemians pretended to be promiscuous.

In the 1960s, a sea change occurred, when bohemianism evolved (in the United States at least) from a fringe phenomenon of artists and writers, to a mass movement sometimes called the counterculture or Hippie movement. They opposed political situations such as the Vietnam War, and segregation, as well as the social institutions of Bourgeois values, as expressed by Theodore Roczak in his 1970 book, The Making of the Counter Culture :

The bourgeoisie [...] is obsessed by greed. Its sex life is insipid and prudish. Its family patterns are debased. Its slavish conformities of dress and grooming are degrading. Its mercenary routinization of life is intolerable[.]

Brooks describes middle class conformists as finally paying attention to bohemians and reacting against them in the 1980s by becoming " Yuppies " (a "sort of bourgeois on steroids"). Conservative authors decried the "self-indulgent nihilism" and social destructiveness of bohemianism. Still, although the counterculture did not overthrow capitalism, it did have a significant cultural impact. By 2000, when Brooks was writing, "arty coffee shops", "gourmet bread stores", "vegetarian dog biscuits", "Basmati rice", and "all-natural hair colorings", that had previously been the domain of counterculture bohemians, had spread to conservative upper and upper middle class communities.

They've taken all the things that were from the '60s of interest to teenagers, like free love and nudity, and gotten rid of them, and kept all the things that are of interest to middle-aged hypochondriacs, like whole grains and fancy rice.

Along with the generational influence of the counterculture, Brooks claims that capitalism evolved to produce an "information age", where "ideas and creativity are as important as finance capital and natural resources to producing wealth", and ideas and creativity are within the world of bohemia.

Beef à la mode or bœuf à la mode (French pronunciation: [ bœf a la mɔd ]) is a French dish of a piece of beef braised in stock and wine with carrots and onions.

In French recipes, the preferred cut is the pointe de culotte, the rump cap. In older recipes, it is invariably larded. Most recipes start by marinating the meat in wine. It is first browned in fat then braised in a liquid composed primarily of stock or broth and red or white wine with carrots, onions, and herbs. Modern recipes often include celery. Some recipes add tomatoes, while others add brandy or other distilled spirits. Most French recipes include a boned calf's foot to add gelatin to the braising liquid, which serves to thicken the resulting sauce.

To finish the dish, the braised beef is removed and set aside to rest. Meanwhile, the braising liquid is strained and reduced to a sauce. The beef is sliced and served with this sauce. In simple versions à la ménagère 'housewife style', the vegetables from the braising liquid are served as the garnish. In more elaborate versions à la bourgeoise 'classy style', the vegetables that have cooked with the meat are strained out, and freshly cooked carrots and onions are added.

The braising liquid varies from all-stock, to about 1:3 wine to stock, to all wine. One American recipe from 1896 uses just water.

In English, the dish was formerly called both "beef à la mode" and "à la mode beef" (sometimes spelled "alamode"). In French, it is now often called boeuf mode.

48°52′N 2°15′E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.86°N 2.25°E ﻿ / 48.86; 2.25

The Bois de Boulogne (French pronunciation: [ bwɑ d(ə) bulɔɲ ], "Boulogne woodland") is a large public park that is the western half of the 16th arrondissement of Paris, near the suburb of Boulogne-Billancourt and Neuilly-sur-Seine. The land was ceded to the city of Paris by the Emperor Napoleon III to be turned into a public park in 1852.

It is the second-largest park in Paris, slightly smaller than the Bois de Vincennes on the eastern side of the city. It covers an area of 845 hectares (2088 acres), which is about two and a half times the area of Central Park in New York, slightly larger than Phoenix Park in Dublin, and slightly smaller than Richmond Park in London.

Within the boundaries of the Bois de Boulogne are an English landscape garden with several lakes and a cascade; two smaller botanical and landscape gardens, the Château de Bagatelle and the Pré-Catelan; a zoo and amusement park in the Jardin d'Acclimatation ; GoodPlanet Foundation 's Domaine de Longchamp dedicated to ecology and humanism, the Jardin des Serres d'Auteuil, a complex of greenhouses holding a hundred thousand plants; two tracks for horse racing, the Hippodrome de Longchamp and the Auteuil Hippodrome ; Stade Roland Garros where the French Open tennis tournament is held each year, the Louis Vuitton Foundation art museum and cultural center, and other attractions.

The Bois de Boulogne is a remnant of the ancient oak forest of Rouvray, which included the present-day forests of Montmorency, Saint-Germain-en-Laye, Chaville, and Meudon. Dagobert I hunted bears, deer, and other game in the forest. His grandson, Childeric II, gave the forest to the monks of the Abbey of Saint-Denis, who founded several monastic communities there. Philip Augustus (1180–1223) bought back the main part of the forest from the monks to create a royal hunting reserve. In 1256, Isabelle de France, sister of Saint-Louis, founded the Longchamp Abbey at the site of the present hippodrome.

The Bois received its present name from a chapel, Notre Dame de Boulogne la Petite, which was built in the forest at the command of Philip IV of France (1268–1314). In 1308, Philip made a pilgrimage to Boulogne-sur-Mer, on the French coast, to see a statue of the Virgin Mary which was reputed to inspire miracles. He decided to build a church with a copy of the statue in a village in the forest not far from Paris, in order to attract pilgrims. The chapel was built after Philip's death between 1319 and 1330, in what is now Boulogne-Billancourt.

During the Hundred Years' War, the forest became a sanctuary for robbers and sometimes a battleground. In 1416–17, the soldiers of John the Fearless, the Duke of Burgundy, burned part of the forest in their successful campaign to capture Paris. Under Louis XI, the trees were replanted, and two roads were opened through the forest.

In 1526, King Francis I of France began a royal residence, the Château de Madrid, in the forest in what is now Neuilly and used it for hunting and festivities. It took its name from a similar palace in Madrid, where Francis had been held prisoner for several months. The Château was rarely used by later monarchs, fell into ruins in the 18th century, and was demolished after the French Revolution.

Despite its royal status, the forest remained dangerous for travellers; the scientist and traveller Pierre Belon was murdered by thieves in the Bois de Boulogne in 1564.

During the reigns of Henry II and Henry III, the forest was enclosed within a wall with eight gates. Henry IV planted 15,000 mulberry trees, with the hope of beginning a local silk industry. When Henry annulled his marriage to Marguerite de Valois, she went to live in the Château de la Muette, on the edge of the forest.

In the early 18th century, wealthy and important women often retired to the convent of the Abbey of Longchamp, located where the hippodrome now stands. A famous opera singer of the period, Madmoiselle Le Maure, retired there in 1727 but continued to give recitals inside the Abbey, even during Holy Week. These concerts drew large crowds and irritated the Archbishop of Paris, who closed the Abbey to the public.

Louis XVI and his family used the forest as a hunting ground and pleasure garden. In 1777, his brother the Comte d'Artois built a charming miniature palace, the Château de Bagatelle, in the Bois in just 64 days, on a wager from his sister-in-law, Marie Antoinette. Louis XVI also opened the walled park to the public for the first time.

On 21 November 1783, Pilâtre de Rozier and the Marquis d'Arlandes took off from the Château de la Muette in a hot air balloon made by the Montgolfier brothers. Previous flights had carried animals or had been tethered to the ground; this was the first manned free flight in history. The balloon rose to a height of 910 meters (3000 feet), was in the air for 25 minutes, and covered nine kilometers.

Following the defeat of Napoleon in 1814, 40,000 soldiers of the British and Russian armies camped in the forest. Thousands of trees were cut down to build shelters and for firewood.

From 1815 until the French Second Republic, the Bois was largely empty, an assortment of bleak ruined meadows and tree stumps where the British and Russians had camped and dismal stagnant ponds.

The Bois de Boulogne was the idea of Napoleon III, shortly after he staged a coup d'état and elevated himself from the President of the French Republic to Emperor of the French in 1852. When Napoleon III became Emperor, Paris had only four public parks - the Tuileries Gardens, the Luxembourg Garden, the Palais-Royal, and the Jardin des Plantes - all in the center of the city. There were no public parks in the rapidly growing east and west of the city. During his exile in London, he had been particularly impressed by Hyde Park, by its lakes and streams and its popularity with Londoners of all social classes. Therefore, he decided to build two large public parks on the eastern and western edges of the city where both the rich and ordinary people could enjoy themselves.

These parks became an important part of the plan for the reconstruction of Paris drawn up by Napoleon III and his new Prefect of the Seine, Baron Georges-Eugène Haussmann. The Haussmann plan called for improving the city's traffic circulation by building new boulevards; improving the city's health by building a new water distribution system and sewers; and creating green spaces and recreation for Paris' rapidly growing population. In 1852, Napoleon donated the land for the Bois de Boulogne and for the Bois de Vincennes, which both belonged officially to him. Additional land in the plain of Longchamp, the site of the Château de Madrid, the Château de Bagatelle, and its gardens were purchased and attached to the proposed park, so it could extend all the way to the Seine. Construction was funded out of the state budget, supplemented by selling building lots along the north end of the Bois, in Neuilly.

Napoleon III was personally involved in planning the new parks. He insisted that the Bois de Boulogne should have a stream and lakes, like Hyde Park in London. "We must have a stream here, as in Hyde Park," he observed while driving through the Bois, "to give life to this arid promenade".

The first plan for the Bois de Boulogne was drawn up by the architect Jacques Hittorff, who, under King Louis Philippe I, had designed the Place de la Concorde, and the landscape architect Louis-Sulpice Varé, who had designed French landscape gardens at several famous châteaux. Their plan called for long straight alleys in patterns crisscrossing the park, and, as the Emperor had asked, lakes and a long stream similar to the Serpentine in Hyde Park.

Varé bungled the assignment. He failed to take into account the difference in elevation between the beginning of the stream and the end; if his plan had been followed, the upper part of the stream would have been empty, and the lower portion flooded. When Haussmann saw the partially finished stream, he saw the problem immediately and had the elevations measured. He dismissed the unfortunate Varé and Hittorff, and designed the solution himself; an upper lake and a lower lake, divided by an elevated road, which serves as a dam, and a cascade which allows the water to flow between the lakes. This is the design still seen today.

In 1853, Haussmann hired an experienced engineer from the corps of Bridges and Highways, Jean-Charles Adolphe Alphand, whom he had worked with in his previous assignment in Bordeaux, and made him the head of a new Service of Promenades and Plantations, in charge of all the parks in Paris. Alphand was charged to make a new plan for the Bois de Boulogne. Alphand's plan was radically different from the Hittorff-Varé plan. While it still had two long straight boulevards, the Allée Reine Marguerite and the Avenue Longchamp, all the other paths and alleys curved and meandered. The flat Bois de Boulogne was to be turned into an undulating landscape of lakes, hills, islands, groves, lawns, and grassy slopes, not a reproduction of but an idealization of nature. It became the prototype for the other city parks of Paris and then for city parks around the world.

The building of the park was an enormous engineering project which lasted for five years. The upper and lower lakes were dug, and the earth piled into islands and hills. Rocks were brought from Fontainbleau and combined with concrete to make the cascade and an artificial grotto.

The pumps from the Seine could not provide enough water to fill the lakes and irrigate the park, so a new channel was created to bring the water of the Ourcq River, from Monceau to the upper lake in the Bois, but this was not enough. An artesian well 586 meters deep was eventually dug in the plain of Passy which could produce 20,000 cubic meters of water a day. This well went into service in 1861.

The water then had to be distributed around the park to water the lawns and gardens; the traditional system of horse-drawn wagons with large barrels of water would not be enough. A system of 66 kilometers of pipes was laid, with a faucet every 30 or 40 meters, a total of 1600 faucets.

Alphand also had to build a network of roads, paths, and trails to connect the sights of the park. The two long straight alleys from the old park were retained, and his workers built an additional 58 kilometers of roads paved with stones for carriages, 12 kilometers of sandy paths for horses, and 25 kilometers of dirt trails for walkers. As a result of Louis Napoléon's exile in London and his memories of Hyde Park, all the new roads and paths were curved and meandering.

The planting of the park was the task of the new chief gardener and landscape architect of the Service of Promenades and Plantations, Jean-Pierre Barillet-Deschamps, who had also worked with Haussmann and Alphand in Bordeaux. His gardeners planted 420,000 trees, including hornbeam, beech, linden, cedar, chestnut, and elm, and hardy exotic species, like redwoods. They planted 270 hectares of lawns, with 150 kilograms of seed per hectare, and thousands of flowers. To make the forest more natural, they brought 50 deer to live in and around the Pré-Catelan.

The park was designed to be more than a collection of picturesque landscapes; it was meant as a place for amusement and recreation, with sports fields, bandstands, cafes, shooting galleries, riding stables, boating on the lakes, and other attractions. In 1855, Gabriel Davioud, a graduate of Ecole des Beaux-Arts, was named the chief architect of the new Service of Promenades and Plantations. He was commissioned to design 24 pavilions and chalets, plus cafes, gatehouses, boating docks, and kiosks. He designed the gatehouses where the guardians of the park lived to look like rustic cottages. He had a real Swiss chalet built out of wood in Switzerland and transported to Paris, where it was reassembled on an island in the lake and became a restaurant. He built another restaurant next to the park's most picturesque feature, the Grand Cascade. He designed artificial grottoes made of rocks and concrete, and bridges and balustrades made of concrete painted to look like wood. He also designed all the architectural details of the park, from cone-shaped shelters designed to protect horseback riders from the rain to the park benches and direction signs.

At the south end of the park, in the Plain of Longchamp, Davioud restored the ruined windmill which was the surviving vestige of the Abbey of Longchamp, and, working with the Jockey Club of Paris, constructed the grandstands of the Hippodrome of Longchamp, which opened in 1857.

At the northern end of the park, between the Sablons gate and Neuilly, a 20-hectare section of the park was given to the Societé Imperiale zoologique d'Acclimatation, to create a small zoo and botanical garden, with an aviary of rare birds and exotic plants and animals from around the world.

In March 1855, an area in the center of the park, called the Pré-Catelan, was leased to a concessionaire for a garden and amusement park. It was built on the site of a quarry where the gravel and sand for the park's roads and paths had been dug out. It included a large circular lawn surrounded by trees, grottos, rocks, paths, and flower beds. Davioud designed a buffet, a marionette theater, a photography pavilion, stables, a dairy, and other structures. The most original feature was the Théâtre des fleurs, an open-air theater in a setting of trees and flowers. Later, an ice skating rink and shooting gallery were added. The Pré-Catelan was popular for concerts and dances, but it had continual financial difficulties and eventually went bankrupt. The floral theater remained in business until the beginning of the First World War, in 1914.

The garden-building team assembled by Haussmann of Alphand, Barrillet-Deschamps and Davioud went on to build The Bois de Vincennes, Parc Monceau Parc Montsouris, and the Parc des Buttes-Chaumont, using the experience and aesthetics they had developed in the Bois de Boulogne. They also rebuilt the Luxembourg gardens and the gardens of the Champs- Elysees, created smaller squares and parks throughout the center of Paris, and planted thousands of trees along the new boulevards that Haussmann had created. In the 17 years of Napoleon III's reign, they planted no less than 600,000 trees and created a total 1,835 hectares of green space in Paris, more than any other ruler of France before or since. By 1867 the Baedeker Guide described it as "once a forest abounding with game, the resort of duellists and suicides and the haunt of bandits... now a delightful park".

During the Franco-Prussian War (1870–71), which led to the downfall of Napoleon III and the long siege of Paris, the park suffered some damage from German artillery bombardment, the restaurant of the Grand Cascade was turned into a field hospital, and many of the park's animals and wild fowl were eaten by the hungry population. In the years following, however, the park quickly recovered.

The Bois de Boulogne became a popular meeting place and promenade route for Parisians of all classes. The alleys were filled with carriages, coaches, and horseback riders, and later with men and women on bicycles, and then with automobiles. Families having picnics filled the woods and lawns, and Parisians rowed boats on the lake, while the upper classes were entertained in the cafes. The restaurant of the Pavillon de la Grand Cascade became a popular spot for Parisian weddings. During the winter, when the lakes were frozen, they were crowded with ice skaters.

The activities of Parisians in the Bois, particularly the long promenades in carriages around the lakes, were often portrayed in French literature and art in the second half of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th centuries. Scenes set in the park appeared in Nana by Émile Zola and in L'Éducation sentimentale by Gustave Flaubert. In the last pages of Du côté de chez Swann in À la recherche du temps perdu (1914), Marcel Proust minutely described a walk around the lakes taken as a child. The life in the park was also the subject of the paintings of many artists, including Édouard Manet, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, and Vincent van Gogh, and Mary Cassatt.

In 1860, Napoleon opened the Jardin d'Acclimatation, a separate concession of 20 hectares at the north end of the park; it included a zoo and a botanical garden, as well as an amusement park. Between 1877 and 1912, it also served as the home of what was called an ethnological garden, a place where groups of the inhabitants of faraway countries were put on display for weeks at a time in reconstructed villages from their homelands. They were mostly Sub-Saharan Africans, North Africans, or South American Indians, and came mostly from the French colonies in Africa and South America, but also included natives of Lapland and Cossacks from Russia. These exhibitions were extremely popular and took place not only in Paris, but also in Germany, England, and at the Chicago Exposition in the United States; but they were also criticized at the time and later as being a kind of " human zoo ". Twenty-two of these exhibits were held in the park in the last quarter of the 19th century. About ten more were held in the 20th century, with the last one taking place in 1931.

In 1905, a grand new restaurant in the classical style was built in the Pré-Catelan by architect Guillaume Tronchet. Like the cafe at the Grand Cascade, it became a popular promenade destination for the French upper classes.

At the 1900 Summer Olympics, the land hosted the croquet and tug of war events. During the 1924 Summer Olympics, the equestrian events took place in the Auteuil Hippodrome.

The Bois de Boulogne hosted all rowing teams participating in the Inter-Allied Games, held in Paris in 1919 following the end of World War One.

The Bois de Boulogne was officially annexed by the city of Paris in 1929 and incorporated into the 16th arrondissement. In August 1944, it was the scene of a massacre, when German troops shot 35 members of the French Resistance.

Soon after the war, the park began to come back to life. In 1945, it held its first motor race after the war: the Paris Cup. In 1953, a British group, Les Amis de la France, created the Shakespeare Garden on the site of the old floral theater in the Pré-Catelan.

From 1952 until 1986, the Duke of Windsor, formerly King Edward VIII, and his wife, Wallis Simpson, the Duchess of Windsor, lived in the Villa Windsor, a house in the Bois de Boulogne behind the garden of the Bagatelle. The house was (and still is) owned by the City of Paris and was leased to the couple. The Duke died in this house in 1972, and the Duchess died there in 1986. The lease was purchased by Mohamed al-Fayed, the owner of the Ritz Hotel in Paris. The house was visited briefly by Diana, Princess of Wales and her companion, Dodi Fayed, on 31 August 1997, the day that they died in a traffic accident in the Alma tunnel.

In the 21st century, Bois de Boulogne has become known as a crime hotspot.

On weekends, the Bois de Boulogne is full of activities such as biking, jogging, boat rowing, horseback and pony rides, and remote control speed boats. Picnics are permitted in most parts of the park, but barbecues are not allowed.

The Bois de Boulogne hosts several races, like the 10 km (6.2 mi) of Boulogne and the Boulogne half marathon. Since its creation, the last part of the Paris marathon ends by crossing the Bois de Boulogne from 35 km (22 mi). Boulogne Wood is an important place of running in Paris.

The Bois holds a three-day weekend party in the month of July, with over 50 bands and singers, attended mostly by students who camp out overnight.

Though soliciting for prostitution is illegal in France, at night-time parts of the Bois de Boulogne are a popular rendezvous place for prostitutes, usually working in vans parked by the side of the road. The practice persists despite some French government efforts to eliminate this business from the park.

Bois de Boulogne is home to many red squirrels. They are protected by law in France, and dogs are required to be kept on leads in the park to ensure the safety of the squirrels.

The Bois de Boulogne contains two artificial lakes and eight artificial ponds, connected by three artificial streams. They receive their water from a canal drawn from Ourq River and from artesian wells in Passy. The water arrives in the Lac Superieur (Upper Lake), built in 1852 and located near the Hippodrome de Auteil, then flows by gravity to the Grand Cascade and then to the Lac Inferieur, or Lower Lake.

Within the Bois de Boulogne, there are several separate botanical and floral gardens, and gardens of amusement.

There is a seven-hectare campground in the Bois de Boulogne, Camping Indigo Paris, with five hundred and ten sites ("pitches") for travellers with tents, caravans and camping cars. Reservations can be made in advance, online. Mobile home rentals are also available by reservation.

48°49′41.05″N 2°25′58.50″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.8280694°N 2.4329167°E ﻿ / 48.8280694; 2.4329167

The Bois de Vincennes (French pronunciation: [ bwɑ d(ə) vɛ̃sɛn ]), located on the eastern edge of Paris, France, is the largest public park in the city. It was created between 1855 and 1866 by Emperor Napoleon III.

The park is next to the Château de Vincennes, a former residence of the Kings of France. It contains an English landscape garden with four lakes; a zoo ; an arboretum ; a botanical garden ; a hippodrome or horse-racing track; a velodrome for bicycle races; and the campus of the French national institute of sports and physical education. The park is known for prostitution after dark.

The Bois de Vincennes has a total area of 995 hectares (2,460 acres), making it slightly larger than the Bois de Boulogne 846 hectares (2,090 acres), the other great Parisian landscape park located at the western side of the city. It occupies ten percent of the total area of Paris, and is almost as large as the first six arrondissements in the center of the city combined. The Bois de Vincennes is about three times larger than Central Park in New York City (341 hectares / 843 acres), and is slightly larger than Richmond Park in London (955 hectares / 2,360 acres); but is smaller than Griffith Park in Los Angeles (1,170 hectares / 2891 acres). Only about half of the Bois de Vincennes is covered with trees.

The Bois de Vincennes was part of the ancient forest that surrounded the ancient Roman town of Lutetia ; at that time it was called Vilcena, the origin of the present name. In about 1150 King Louis VII (1137 – 1180) built a hunting lodge at the site of the present chateau. King Philippe-Auguste (1180 – 1223) enclosed the forest with a wall, stocked it with game, and began building a castle. King Louis IX, or Saint Louis (1226 – 1270) built a chapel next to the castle to house an important religious relic, which he believed to be the crown of thorns from the Crucifixion of Jesus. He was also famous for holding a royal court of justice under an oak near the chateau.

In 1336 King Philip VI of France (1293 – 1350) began construction of the imposing donjon of the Château de Vincennes. The work was continued by his successor, Jean II of France (1319 – 1364), and finished by Charles V of France (1338 – 1380), who surrounded the donjon with a rectangular wall flanked by nine towers. He also began to rebuild the chapel founded by Saint Louis. The new chapel was called La-Sainte Chapelle, modeled after the Saint-Chapelle in the Palais de la Cité in Paris. It was not finished until the 16th century. A hunting party in the forest is shown as the December scene in the Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry (1412–1416), with the towers of the chateau visible in the background. The forest was also the home of a community of monks of the order of the Minimes ; their presence is remembered by the name of the Lac des Minimes within the park.

In 1654 Cardinal Mazarin commissioned the royal architect Louis Le Vau to build a new palace for King Louis XIV next to the chateau. The new palace featured a pavilion for the King and another for the Queen, separated by a portico and by a wall connected by arcades to the medieval section of the chateau. The donjon had been transformed into prison in the 15th century. The palace was popular with the King for a time, but once Louis XIV established his residence at Versailles, the château of Vincennes was rarely used.

In the 18th century Louis XV (1710 – 1774) opened the park to the public, excepting servants in livery. He had hundreds of trees planted and laid out long straight alleys through the forest in the form of intersecting stars. In 1731 he constructed a pyramid-shaped monument to mark the meeting point of the two main alleys, which can still be seen.

Beginning in 1794, large parts of the Bois de Vincennes were turned into a military training ground. Some of the structures of the old chateau were demolished, and a firing range was built. In 1840 – 43, a new fort was constructed in the park east of the chateau, and a 166 hectare section of the park was cleared and used for military parades and exercises.

In 1854 the Emperor Louis Napoleon, and his new Prefect of the Seine, Georges-Eugène Haussmann, decided to transform the Bois de Vincennes into a public park. Haussmann had three major projects for Paris; to improve the traffic circulation of the city, for both practical and military reasons; to build a new system to distribute water and take away sewage; and to create a network of parks and gardens all over the city. The purpose of the park was to provide green space and recreation to the large working-class population of eastern Paris, similar to the Bois de Boulogne, which Louis Napoleon had begun building in 1852 for the more affluent population of the west side of Paris.

To build the parks, in 1855 Haussmann created a new Service of Promenades and Plantations, led by an engineer, Jean-Charles Adolphe Alphand, who was already at work on the Bois de Boulogne. Alphand was a master organizer, the builder of the most famous Paris parks of the 19th century; besides the Bois de Boulogne and Bois de Vincennes, he built the gardens of the Champs-Élysées, the boulevard of the Paris Observatory, Parc Monceau and the Parc des Buttes Chaumont.

Alphand stated his philosophy of gardens very clearly in his memoir Les Promenades de Paris : "When we say that a garden should preserve a natural appearance, we don't mean that it should be an exact copy of the nature which is around us. A garden is a work of art." While nature and the site gave the general lines, the art consisted of the "combinations of forms, colors, and light." Alphand carefully composed his picturesque landscapes out of lawns, groves of trees, flower beds, streams and lakes, visited by taking winding paths.

Alphand's task was made much more difficult by the nature of the site. In the center of the park was an enormous military training field, completely cleared of trees. Around the base were firing ranges, a factory for making ammunition, and several forts and redoubts, which occupied large tracts of land. Even after the park was created, the Army continued to build; A new military shooting range was opened in 1860, and a school of pyrotechnics was built in 1864.

Alphand solved the problem by annexing addition sections of land at the edges of the park, and by creating three smaller parks around the Bois, each with its own artificial lake and picturesque landscape. Lake Daumesnil, designed like a romantic landscape painting, had two islands, and sloping green lawns. The Lac des Minimes to the north included some of the ruins of the original medieval monastery that once stood there; and the Lac de Saint-Mandė in the northwest completed the park. A fourth lake, the Lac de Gravelle in the south-east, was higher in elevation than the others, on the Plateau de Gravelle, and therefore provided water to the other lakes through artificial streams. Trees, lawns and flower beds were planted by Jean-Pierre Barillet-Deschamps, the chief horticulturist of the city, who had landscaped the Bois de Boulogne.

Alphand saw that the park had popular attractions and concessions to attract visitors and to help pay for the park. A large hippodrome, or horse-racing track, was built in the southeastern corner of the park, similar to the Longchamps hippodrome at the Bois de Boulogne. There were cafe-restaurants at the different lakes. The park was also decorated with picturesque architecture, mostly designed by Gabriel Davioud, the city architect. His works included the grandstands of the hippodrome and the Temple of Love, a round doric temple which was placed on a promontory on the Isle de Reuilly in Lac Daumesnil, above an artificial grotto. On the same island was a Swiss chalet (taken from the Paris Universal Exposition of 1867), a cafe, a bandstand, and buildings for vendors and game concessions. A swinging suspension bridge connected the two islands in the lake.

In 1899, an experimental tropical garden had been established in the far eastern end of the park, where rubber trees, coffee trees, banana trees and other tropical plants were scientifically studied. In 1907, this garden became the site of the first Colonial Exposition held in Paris, designed to showcase the cultures and products of the French colonies. The exposition featured six villages, complete with inhabitants, from the different parts of the French Empire; an emcampment of Tuaregs from North Africa; a farm from Sudan ; a village of Kanaks from New Caledonia ; and villages from Madagascar, French Indochina, and the Congo. The Exposition was seen by two million visitors.

At the 1900 Summer Olympics in Paris, most of events took place in the Bois de Vincennes. The Velodrome, which seats forty thousand spectators, was built for the cycling events. The park hosted the first international cricket match between England and France; England unsurprisingly won.

During the First World War, the Dutch spy Mata Hari was imprisoned in the fortress of Vincennes and executed by firing squad in the moat of the fortress on 15 October 1917. Eyewitnesses reported that her hands were not bound, and that she refused a blindfold. According to the legend (not documented), she is said to have blown a kiss at the firing squad, and to have said, "What a strange custom you French have, to shoot people at dawn."

In 1929, the Bois de Vincennes was officially annexed to the city of Paris and included in the city's 12th arrondissement, similar to the Bois de Boulogne which was attached to its 16th arrondissement.

For six months in 1931, the Paris Colonial Exposition took place in the Bois de Vincennes. Like the earlier 1907 exposition, It was designed to showcase the culture, products and resources of the French empire, but it was much larger. It occupied the side of the park along the length of the Avenue Daumesnil. The features of the exhibit included the Palace of the Colonies. In front of the palace was a large gilded bronze statue by Leon Drivier entitled France bringing peace and prosperity to the colonies. It had pavilions from each colony and from other nations, cafes and theaters, a Senegalese village complete with inhabitants, and a zoo.

The exposition featured eight spectacular fountains, fed with water from Lake Daumesnil. The Grand Signal was a centerpiece of the exposition, a tower forty-five meters high, which spouted water from the top and from jets at nineteen different levels. Two other fountains created a bridge of water forty meters long between the two islands in the lake. A third fountain, called the Theater of Water, was an arc of towers and spouts eighty meters long, which in evening performances produced cascades, jets and curtains of water colored with electric lights. These were early ancestors of today's musical fountains in Dubai and Las Vegas.

Several vestiges of the fair can still be seen. The entrance gate is still standing. After the Fair closed, the Palace of the Colonies became the Museum of the Arts of Africa and the Oceania. In 1934 the zoo was moved to its present location, and embellished with a sixty-five meter high artificial mountain, which became the home of a collection of mountain goats and sheep. The pavilion of Cameroon was preserved and turned into a Buddhist temple and religious center.

During the Battle of France in 1940, the Chateau was the headquarters of the French General Staff. It was heavily damaged and not fully restored until the 1990s. At the end of World War II in 1945, the French army began to move out of the Bois de Vincennes.

The Bois de Vincennes is home to four artificial lakes. The water for the lakes was originally pumped from the Marne River, but today comes from a pumping station near the Pont d'Austerlitz on the Seine.

The Arboretum de l'École du Breuil, in the park's southeast corner, is a municipal arboretum established at this location in 1936. It was created in 1867 by Baron Haussmann as the city's school of horticulture and arboriculture. Today the arboretum contains about 2000 trees, as well as notable collections of shrubs, four hundred varieties of heritage apple and pear trees, and three hundred varieties of lilac.

Several prostitution rings related to human trafficking in West Africa operate in the Bois de Vincennes. As explained by French senator Christian Cambon :

This exploitation... comes from a recent triangular trade that spans from West Africa to Europe, through Maghreb. The victims leave Nigeria by car or bus to Libya and arrive in Italy by boat.

Most prostitutes await customers along the Route de la Pyramide out on the sidewalk or in nearby vans on the curbside parking and signal their presence by illuminating their windshields. As they are intimidated into paying off their journey from Nigeria, they are often subject to sexual or physical violence from their customers.

Bonapartism (French : Bonapartisme [ bɔnapaʁtism ]) is the political ideology supervening from Napoleon Bonaparte and his legacy. The term is used in the narrow sense to refer to people who hoped to restore the House of Bonaparte and its style of government. In this sense, a Bonapartiste was a person who either actively participated in or advocated for imperial political factions in 19th-century France. Although Bonapartism emerged in 1814 with the first fall of Napoleon, it only developed doctrinal clarity and cohesion by the 1840s.

The term developed a broad definition used to mean political movements that advocate for an authoritarian centralised state, with a military strongman and charismatic leader with relatively traditionalist ideology.

Marxism and Leninism developed a vocabulary of political terms that included Bonapartism, derived from analysis of the career of Napoleon Bonaparte. Karl Marx, a student of Jacobinism and the French Revolution, was a contemporary critic of the Second Republic and the Second Empire.

Noted political scientists and historians greatly differ on the definition and interpretation of Bonapartism. Sudhir Hazareesingh 's book The Legend of Napoleon explores numerous interpretations of the term.

Those who ruled are indicated with an asterisk.

In Marxist theory, the term "Bonapartism" was coined to describe the political trajectory of Napoleon III, the nephew of Napoleon I, who was known as Louis (Napoleon) Bonaparte before his coronation as Emperor. Karl Marx was a student of Jacobinism and the French Revolution, as well as a contemporary critic of the Second Republic and Second Empire. He used the term to refer to a situation in which counter-revolutionary military officers seize power from revolutionaries, and use selective reformism to co-opt the radicalism of the masses. In the process, Marx argued, Bonapartists preserve and mask the power of a narrower ruling class. He believed that both Napoleon I and Napoleon III had corrupted revolutions in France in this way. Marx offered this definition of and analysis of Bonapartism in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, written in 1852. In this document, he drew attention to what he calls the phenomenon's repetitive history with one of his most quoted lines, typically condensed aphoristically as: "History repeats itself, first as tragedy, second as farce."

The bonnets rouges (French: [ bɔnɛ ʁuʒ ] ; "red caps") movement began in October 2013 in Brittany. It was a protest movement, largely targeting a new environmental tax on transport by heavy-goods vehicle by the French government. This tax was to be enforced in part by gantries set up on highways to detect vehicles carrying heavy loads and the presence of the required billing apparatuses. Through a combination of demonstrations and violent actions, including the destruction of many of these tax gantries, the movement forced the French government to rescind the tax.

The protesters considered the tax harmful to Breton agriculture, which was already having a difficult time competing with its counterparts in Europe. They wore red caps, in reference to the seventeenth-century revolt of the papier timbré, which was particularly active in Brittany, though the Phrygian cap as a protest symbol goes back much further.

Hundreds of red-cap-wearing demonstrators protested against the highway tax gantry at Pont-de-Buis on 28 October 2013, and during the course of the protest a demonstrator had his hand blown off when he picked up a grenade thrown by law enforcement.

Soon after the French government announced that it would be temporarily suspending the new tax until 2015 at the earliest.

This did not satisfy the demonstrators, who went on to destroy more than two dozen tax gantries and many smaller radar-camera-like outposts, by the first week of November. These would typically be destroyed by fire, often by filling tires stacked at their bases with flammable material and lighting them. Sometimes, less-destructive means were used, such as wrapping the radar cameras in plastic and topping them with bonnets rouges of their own.

By late November 46 tax radars and gantries had been destroyed and other anti-tax groups were beginning their own direct action, including farmers and equestrians, who disrupted traffic in Paris with their tractors and horses.

At the end of November the movement massed in Carhaix and simultaneously used shipping trucks to blockade highways throughout France. At one point the demonstrators held an auction at which they sold off bits and pieces of previously destroyed road tax gantries as souvenirs.

In an amusing moment, a hundred employees of Ecomouv, the quasi-private company responsible for collecting the new tax, held a holiday party in Metz. Posing for a group photo in front of the company offices in their Santa Claus hats, they were mistaken by police for a demonstration of the bonnets rouges, and they quickly intervened.

By January the number of highway tax and radar-ticket machines destroyed had topped 200. This had the desired effect. In 2013, for the first time since ticket-giving radar cameras had been installed in France, the number of tickets issued by the machines declined.

The government made its first big counterattacks in the Spring. Eleven suspected bonnets rouges were arrested and charged with conspiracy in April. The following month, the government convicted Samantha Prime of participating in the destruction of a radar outpost.

Destruction of highway tax gantries, however, continued. The eleven conspirators were convicted and sentenced to between four and 18 months imprisonment, along with a total of about €10,000 in fines. The same day the sentences were declared, farmers in Brittany invaded the city of Morlaix, dumped their produce in big piles in the streets, set fire to the tax office, and blockaded the area to keep fire trucks from responding.

In September and October, three other French tax offices were put to the torch, and French tax officials complained of feeling threatened.

The French government finally decided, in late October, to abandon the hated tax entirely. The cost to the government was enormous. In addition to the loss of anticipated revenue from the tax (€390 million per year) and the property damage and other costs associated with the demonstrations, the government was required to pay compensation to Ecomouv, the quasi-private company that had contracted to administer the tax, and others — nearly one billion euros in all.

The Bordeaux International Festival of Women in Cinema (French: Festival international du cinéma au féminin de Bordeaux), formerly Festival international du cinéma au féminin, was an annual film festival celebrating and promoting the work of women in cinema. After being established and running for several years in Arcachon in 1999, the festival took place each October in Bordeaux, in the French department of Gironde, until 2005.

The festival's first three editions took place in Arcachon, Nouvelle-Aquitaine, from 1999 until 2001, when it was known as Festival international du cinéma au féminin.

The inaugural edition of the festival was held from 17 to 19 September 1999. The festival hosted a special tribute to French actress and screenwriter Bulle Ogier, who was awarded a special "Wave of Honour" for her career, and whose seven films were during the week.

In 2000, it was held in Arcachon from 18 to 24 September, with Philippe Galland as president. The festival screened around 60 films, including tributes and retrospectives. Waves of Honour were given for the actress Miou-Miou, director Catherine Breillat, and producer Christine Gouze-Rénal. There were eight films in competition.

For the fourth edition, the festival took place in Bordeaux in 2002.

The fifth edition took place from 22 to 18 September 2003. It included a retrospective of British films, organised by the British Film Institute, featuring some films by Emily Young, Lynne Ramsay, and Sally Potter.

The sixth edition took place from 27 September to 3 October 2004.

The seventh and last edition was held between 3 and 9 October 2005. Annette Bening won the Golden Wave for Best Actress, for her performance in Being Julia, directed by Hungarian director István Szabó.

The festival screened films written, produced, or directed by women from around the world, screening over 50 films, both short and feature films, unreleased in French cinemas. There was a competition for the feature films, with awards including the Golden Wave, Audience Award, a Special Jury Award, and Special Mention.

Awards offered by the festival were known as "Vagues d'or" ("Golden Waves), and included: Best Film, Best Actress, Best Actor, Best Screenplay, and an Audience Award.

The French/Algerian film Inch'Allah Dimanche, written and directed by Yamina Benguigui, won the Golden Wave, the Audience Award, and a third award at the festival in 2001, when the festival was still in Arcachon.

In 2004, the Danish film In Your Hands, directed by Annette K. Olesen and starring Ann Eleonora Jørgensen, won the Audience Award.

Bossnapping is a form of labor protest in France in which employees detain managers or executives, often in a labor dispute. The practice gained international attention after a series of bossnapping incidents in 2009 and 2010, when workers held executives of companies including Caterpillar, Sony, and 3M, as hostages to demand better severance packages.

These incidents resulted in a public call for an end to the practice by French President Nicolas Sarkozy, despite public opinion polling which showed widespread sympathy for the protesters.

The term "bossnapping" began receiving widespread use in the media following a series of high-profile incidents in France in the spring of 2009 where managers were detained by their workers. In early March 2009, workers in southwestern France held the CEO and HRD of Sony France overnight, demanding a better severance package for workers who had been laid off.

They barricaded the entrance to the facility with tree trunks, and held their hostages until the CEO agreed to a renegotiation of the severance package that laid-off workers were to receive. Later that month, workers at a 3M pharmaceutical factory in Pithiviers held their boss in his office demanding similar concessions for laid-off workers as well as protections for remaining workers whose jobs had not been cut. The workers claimed their actions were not intended to be aggressive, but were rather their "only currency." French police did not intervene in either the Sony or 3M incidents, in the correct expectation that each would be resolved peacefully.

Workers in the 3M incident provided a dinner of mussels and french fries to their kidnapped boss while he was being held.

In July 2009, workers of Azur Chimie (previously Arkéma) plant located in Port Le Bouc took headquarters and majority shareholders as hostages to weigh in the negotiations regarding the layoff of half of the workforce. A snapshot of these negotiations was videotaped.

In May 2010, workers of a Caterpillar Inc. plant in Grenoble took five managers as hostages to enforce negotiations about 733 job losses. They freed the managers after 10 hours when policemen began to record the bossnappers' names.

During the same month, about 300 workers of a Toyota factory in Onnaing (Northern France) blocked all entrances and hindered all trucks from leaving the premises.

Further bossnappings took place in a worksite of Hewlett-Packard in France and a lock-in of managers occurred at market research firm Synovate in Auckland, New Zealand as a part of a labor dispute during a contract renegotiation there. The wave of high-profile incidents led to publication of advice for managers who might be bossnapped, although news reports made clear that the hostages had been treated well by their bossnappers. This advice included the preparation of special bossnapping kits that included a change of clothes and a cell phone pre-programmed with numbers of family members, police, and a psychologist who might assist with the psychological stress caused by being the hostage in such an incident.

These incidents took place in the context of wider French labor unrest related to the recession of the late 2000s, in which many companies in France and across the globe laid off workers during restructuring the companies did in response to falling profits or rising losses. Other labor incidents in France during this period included one in which laid-off workers threw eggs at their manager and burned effigies of him and another in which workers at a car parts factory threatened to blow it up after the factory was closed completely.

In April 2009, in response to the ongoing series of bossnapping incidents, French President Nicolas Sarkozy pledged to end the practice, saying, "We are a nation of laws. I won't allow this sort of thing." However, public opinion polls in France at the time showed significant support for those using the strategy, a majority who disapproved of the tactic but sympathized with those practicing it, and only a small minority who completely opposed it. Thus, observers suggested that any strong action on the part of Sarkozy government to end bossnappings, included more proactive action by police to rescue hostages and arrest bossnappers, might lead to further unrest in other forms.

Bottarga is salted, cured fish roe pouch, typically of the grey mullet or the bluefin tuna (Italian : bottarga di tonno). It is a feature of Italian cuisine ; forms of the dish from other parts of the world include Taiwanese wūyú zǐ, which is softer, and Korean eoran, from mullet or freshwater drum. It has many names and is prepared in various ways. Due to its scarcity and involved preparation it is expensive and regarded as a delicacy.

The English name, bottarga, was borrowed from Italian. The Italian form is thought to have been introduced from the Arabic buṭarḫah (بطارخة), plural form buṭariḫ (‏ بطارخ ‎), itself from Byzantine Greek ᾠοτάριχον (oiotárikhon), a combination of the words ᾠόν ('egg') and τάριχον ('pickled').

The Italian form can be dated to c. 1500, as the Greek form of the word, when transliterated into Latin as ova tarycha, occurs in Bartolomeo Platina 's De honesta voluptate (c. 1474), the earliest printed cookbook. In an Italian manuscript that "closely parallels" Platina's cookbook and dated to shortly after its publication, botarghe is attested in the corresponding passage.

The first mention of the Greek form (oiotárikhon) occurs in the 11th century, in the writings of Simeon Seth, who denounced the food as something to be "avoided totally", although a similar phrase may have been in use since antiquity in the same connotation.

It has been suggested that the Coptic outarakhon may be an intermediate form between the Greek and Arabic, whereas examination of dialectical variants of the Greek ᾠόν 'egg' includes the Pontic Greek ὠβόν (traditionally where the mullets are caught), and ὀβό or βό in parts of Asia Minor. The modern Greek name comes from the Byzantine Greek, substituting the modern word αυγό for the ancient word ᾠóν.

Bottarga production is first documented in the Nile Delta in the 10th century BCE.

In the 15th century, Martino da Como describes the production of bottarga by salting then smoking to dry it.

Bottarga is made chiefly from the roe pouch of grey mullet. Sometimes it is prepared from Atlantic bluefin tuna (bottarga di tonno rosso) or yellowfin tuna. It is massaged by hand to eliminate air pockets, then dried and cured in sea salt for a few weeks. The result is a hard, dry slab. Formerly, it was generally coated in beeswax to preserve it, as it still is in Greece and Egypt.

Orange and molded in wax or vacuum sealed, Tunisian bottarga is made from mullet eggs and is known as a sought-after product. Initially a feature of the Judeo-Tunisian cuisine, it was introduced in Tunisia by Jews from Constantinople during Ottoman rule, as early as the 16th century.

Bottarga is produced in the Port Said area.

In Greece, it is called avgotaraxo or avgotaracho (Greek : αβγοτάραχο-αυγοτάραχο) and is produced primarily from the flathead mullet caught in Greek lagoons. The whole mature ovaries are removed from the fish, washed with water, salted with natural sea salt, dried under the sun, and sealed in melted beeswax.

Avgotaracho Messolonghiou, made from fish caught in the Messolonghi-Etoliko Lagoons, is a European and Greek protected designation of origin, one of the few seafood products with a PDO.

In Italy, it is made from bluefin tuna in Sicily, and from flathead mullet in Sardinia, where it is called Sardinian butàriga.

Its culinary properties may be compared to those of dry anchovies, although it is much more expensive. Often, it is served with olive oil or lemon juice as an appetizer accompanied by bread or crostini. It is also used in pasta dishes.

Bottarga is produced in Mauritania and Senegal.

In Turkey, bottarga is made from grey mullet roe. It is listed in the Ark of Taste. It is produced in Dalyan, on the southwestern coast of Turkey, from the mature fish migrating from Lake Köyceğiz.

There are several producers in Florida.

There are various small producers elsewhere. For example, bottarga from Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) is produced in northern Norway, where it is air-dried.

Boudin (French pronunciation: [ budɛ̃ ]) is a category of sausage - typically blood sausage - found in several French-speaking cultures. The added ingredients vary in French, Luxembourgish, Belgian, Swiss, Québecois, Acadian, Aostan, Louisiana Creole, and Cajun cuisine. Some variations such as boudin blanc contain no blood but retain the name.

The Anglo-Norman word boudin meant ' sausage ', ' blood sausage ', or ' entrails ' in general. Its origin is unclear. It has been traced both to Romance and to Germanic roots, but there is not good evidence for either (cf. boudin). The English word pudding probably comes, via the Germanic word puddek for sausage, from boudin.

Some modern chefs, such as John Folse and Olivier Poels, attribute boudin to ancient Greece by way of Aphtonite, to whom they attribute the first mention of boudin noir in the Apicius.

The journals of the Lewis and Clark Expedition include an early record of boudin blanc in the Louisiana Territory during an encounter with French fur trapper Toussaint Charbonneau on May 9, 1805, who prepared it using buffalo intestine, meat, and kidney suet, boiled the links, and fried them in bear grease.

The term boudin in the Acadiana region of Louisiana is commonly understood to refer only to boudin blanc, and specifically to the regional combination of rice, pork, and seasonings originally made at rural communal hog butcherings since the 18th century. Also popular is seafood boudin, consisting of crawfish or crab, shrimp, and rice.

Cajun boudin is available most readily in the Acadiana region of southern Louisiana, though it may be found nearly anywhere in "Cajun Country" extending along the coast of the Gulf of Mexico from eastern Texas to western Mississippi. Several Louisiana towns and cities stake claims based on their boudin; Scott, Louisiana, was named "Boudin Capital of the World" in 2012, while Jennings was named "Boudin Capital of the Universe" and former "Boudin Capital of the World" Broussard redesignated itself the "Intergalactic Boudin Capital of Positive Infinity".

There are numerous meat markets and Cajun stores devoted to the speciality, though boudin is also sold from many convenience and grocery stores in other towns and areas along Louisiana's portion of Interstate 10, referred to by the Southern Foodways Alliance and some local tourism bureaus as the Southern Boudin Trail. Since Cajun boudin freezes well, it can be shipped outside the region if made and packaged in a federally approved facility.

Boudin noir is available in Illinois in the Iroquois County towns of Papineau and Beaverville, with their Quebecois heritage. The dish is the featured cuisine at the annual Beaverville Founder's Day, held the second weekend of September. People travel from hundreds of miles to partake of the boudin.

Boudin gave rise to " Le Boudin ", the official march of the French Foreign Legion. "Blood sausage" is a colloquial reference to the gear (rolled up in a red blanket) that used to top the backpacks of Legionnaires. The song makes repeated reference to the fact that the Belgians do not get any "blood sausage", since the king of the Belgians at one time forbade his subjects from joining the Legion (the verse says " ce sont des tireurs au cul ").

Broth, also known as bouillon (French pronunciation: [ bujɔ̃ ]), is a savory liquid made of water in which meat, fish, or vegetables have been simmered for a period of time. It can be eaten alone, but it is most commonly used to prepare other dishes, such as soups, gravies, and sauces.

Commercially prepared liquid broths are available, typically chicken, beef, fish, and vegetable varieties. Dehydrated broth in the form of bouillon cubes was commercialized beginning in the early 20th century.

Many cooks and food writers use the terms broth and stock interchangeably. In 1974, James Beard (an American cook) wrote that stock, broth, and bouillon "are all the same thing".

While many draw a distinction between stock and broth, the details of the distinction often differ. One possibility is that stocks are made primarily from animal bones, as opposed to meat, and therefore contain more gelatin, giving them a thicker texture. Another distinction that is sometimes made is that stock is cooked longer than broth and therefore has a more intense flavour. A third possible distinction is that stock is left unseasoned for use in other recipes, while broth is salted and otherwise seasoned and can be eaten alone.

Not every dish with the word broth in its name is, strictly speaking, a broth. For example, Aberaeron Broth is a Welsh soup. Scotch broth is a soup which includes solid pieces of meat and vegetables. Its name reflects an older usage of the term "broth" that did not distinguish between the complete soup and its liquid component. Similarly, Awara broth is a Guianan Creole stew from French Guiana.

Court-bouillon (French for "short broth") is a broth cooked for a short time, mostly used for poaching fish. Rosół is a category of clear Polish soups, primarily made of broth, with a popular version being similar to chicken noodle soup. Canja de galinha is a similar soup from Portuguese-speaking countries.

The bouquet garni (French for "garnished bouquet"; pronounced [ bukɛ ɡaʁni ]) is a bundle of herbs usually tied with string and mainly used to prepare soup, stock, casseroles and various stews. The bouquet is cooked with the other ingredients and removed prior to consumption. Liquid remaining in the bouquet garni can be wrung out into the dish.

There is no standard recipe for bouquet garni, but most French recipes include thyme, bay leaf and parsley. It may also include basil, burnet, chervil, rosemary, peppercorns, savory and tarragon. Vegetables such as carrot, celery (leaves or leaf stalks), celeriac, leek, onion and parsley root are sometimes included in the bouquet.

Sometimes, the bouquet is not bound with string, and its ingredients are filled into a small sachet, a piece of celery stalk, a net, or a tea strainer instead. Traditionally, the aromatics are bound within leek leaves, though a cheesecloth, muslin or coffee filter tied with butcher twine can be used.

A sachet d'épices is a small cheesecloth bag containing peppercorns, other spices and herbs (such as parsley, thyme and bay leaves) which similarly adds aromatic flavor to a soup, stock, casserole or stew. It acts as a tea bag, infusing flavor into a liquid. The bag may be tied or untied; in the case of the latter, the liquid is strained afterwards. Like a bouquet, sachets may undergo no, small, or significant variations, from the small additions of a garlic clove or carrot, to the dramatic additions of spices and flavors of ginger, cardamon or cinnamon. The additions depend on the stock being produced: juniper berries and fennel for instance feature in some brown game and duck stocks, while some brown lamb or pork stocks host caraway seeds.

When in cooking a sachet d'épices is added to a preparation depends on the destination's volume, and timing can vary from 15–30 minutes before completion in stocks or soups smaller than a 1 US gallon (3.8 L), to an hour in larger preparations. When the desired flavor is extracted, cooks may remove them from a stock or soup, even before other ingredients contained have finished cooking. This ability to remove the sachet if the desired flavor has been extracted is why some chefs tie the sachet, regardless of whether they will eventually strain the product. Cooking aromatics contained in sachets for an excessive amount of time is avoided by cooks, as the flavors can become "flat", as the flavor compounds they impart, volatile oils, are delicate.

Dishes made with a bouquet garni include:

Bouygues S.A. (French pronunciation: [ bwiɡ ]) is a French engineering group headquartered in the 8th arrondissement of Paris, France. Bouygues is listed on the Euronext Paris exchange and is a blue chip in the CAC 40 stock market index. The group specialises in construction (Colas Group and Bouygues Construction), real estate development (Bouygues Immobilier), media (TF1 Group), and telecommunications (Bouygues Telecom).

The company was founded in 1952 by Francis Bouygues and quickly secured construction opportunities from the French state, leading to it being involved in social housing (starting in 1955) and the French motorway system (starting in the 1960s). It listed on the Paris Stock Exchange in 1970 and started to diversify and internationalise during the years thereafter. During the 1980s, Bouygues acquired Screg, Sacer, and Colas. On 29 May 1996, it launched Bouygues Télécom. In 2006, the company acquired 23.26 percent of the French conglomerate Alstom. Since 1989, the company has been led by Francis Bouygues's son, Martin Bouygues, while Martin's older brother, Olivier Bouygues, is a board member.

Bouygues was founded in 1952 by Francis Bouygues, amid the reconstruction of France in the aftermath of the Second World War, to construct new buildings. Within its first two decades of operation, the company secured considerable work from the French government across several different reconstruction programmes. These included the construction of new social housing starting in 1955, the building out of the French motorway system during the 1960s, and the securing of several high-profile contracts for specific buildings, including the Parc des Princes stadium, the Palais des congrès de Paris shopping mall, and Charles de Gaulle Airport amongst others.

In 1970, Bouygues was listed on the Paris Stock Exchange. In the following decade, the company endeavoured to develop an international presence as well as to diversify its activities. Furthermore, during the mid 1980s, Bouygues acquired several other domestic engineering and construction companies, including Screg, Sacer, and Colas ; which was later reorganised as Colas Group. In 1987, the company started operating the television channel TF1. One year later, Bouygues moved into its new head office, the Challenger complex, in Saint-Quentin en Yvelines.

On 29 May 1996, the company launched Bouygues Télécom as France's third mobile telephone operator. In the early 2000s, it was decided to refocus Bouygues's activities around the construction, telecoms and media markets. In relation to this strategic direction, the firm divested Bouygues Offshore to the Italian oil services specialist Saipem in 2002, as well as Saur to French private equity company PAI Partners in exchange for €1bn in November 2004. During June 2006, the company acquired 23.26 percent of the French industrial conglomerate Alstom.

In 2008, Bouygues Telecom launched its first fixed line service; at the time, it had 9 million customers and 7,700 employees. In 2010, through its subsidiary Nerem Telecom, Bouygues acquired HGT Telecom in exchange for $170 million from Henri Benezra and his brother Avi.

In June 2014, consecutively to Alstom's cession of its Energy activities to General Electric, Bouygues granted a call option to the French government, allowing it to acquire a maximum of 20 percent of Alstom, currently owned by the group. In June 2015, Bouygues publicly rejected an €10bn bid submitted by the Luxembourg-based telecoms firm Altice to purchase Bouygues Télécom from it.

In May 2018, the company purchased the Australian construction company A. W. Edwards. In December 2019, Bouygues became a shareholder in Flying Whales, a French company developing rigid-structure airships for heavy-lift transport as part of a consortium of industrial investors including Groupe ADP and Air Liquide.

In November 2021, Bouygues acquired the technical services business, Equans from Engie in a transaction worth €7.1bn.

The company carries out the following businesses:

Bouygues has been involved in many major construction projects including

Bouygues is also involved in HS2 lot C1, working as part of joint venture, due to complete in 2031.

The Bouygues head office is located at 32 Avenue Hoche in the 8th arrondissement of Paris. The American architect Kevin Roche worked on this building, as well as the previous head office location, the Challenger complex in Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines. This complex, situated in a 30 hectares (74 acres) tract in Guyancourt, is now occupied by Bouygues Construction, one of the group's subsidiaries.

Since 2006, Bouygues has participated in the United Nations Global Compact. The group sponsors The Shift Project think tank, with several other companies such as EDF, BNP Paribas or Saint-Gobain, which promotes sustainable economic development.

In September 2023, Bouygues Construction Expertises Nucléaires (BCEN) was fined €6.2 million after the French competition regulator found them guilty, along with five other companies, of bid rigging over tenders for work at the Marcoule nuclear site.

In this UK construction adjudication matter, the company's UK subsidiary had terminated the employment of its mechanical sub-contractor, Dahl-Jensen (UK). The adjudicator made a mistake in calculating outstanding payments due to Dahl-Jensen, which led to a Court of Appeal ruling in 2002 which stated that

... when an Adjudicator makes an error in calculating an amount payable to a party, the effect of which is to pay monies which are not due under the contract, that decision would not be void provided the Adjudicator had answered the issue that has been asked of him.

Between 2009 and 2011, Bouygues S.A. was illegally employing workers from Poland and Romania exposing them to inhuman working conditions at the construction site of the Flamanville nuclear power plant in Normandy. The company was later condemned for their practices before the court in Cherbourg and was ordered to pay sanctions of between €25,000 and €29,950.

On 30 January 2020, a ransomware-type virus was detected on Bouygues Construction's computer network although operational activity on the construction sites was disrupted. The "Maze Ransomware Gang" claimed responsibility for the attack and posted a 1.2 GB file that allegedly contained data taken from Bouygues Construction.

Bpifrance also known as the Banque publique d'investissement (lit. ' [French] Public Investment Bank ') is a French public sector investment bank. It is a joint venture of two state owned enterprises : the Caisse des dépôts et consignations and EPIC Bpifrance Group (formerly EPIC OSEO).

The former subsidiary of EPIC OSEO, OSEO S.A., became a subsidiary of Bpifrance known as Bpifrance Financement.

Bpifrance has been designated as a Significant Institution since the entry into force of European Banking Supervision in late 2014, and as a consequence is directly supervised by the European Central Bank.

Bpifrance was established in 2012 as part of a broader effort by the French government to consolidate public financial support for businesses. It brought together three major state-backed bodies: OSEO, which focused on loans and guarantees for small and medium-sized enterprises; the Fonds Stratégique d’Investissement (FSI), created in 2008 to support long-term strategic equity holdings; and CDC Entreprises, the venture capital subsidiary of the Caisse des Dépôts et Consignations.

The new institution became operational in 2013, offering a unified structure for loans, guarantees, equity investments, and export financing. In 2015, Bpifrance expanded its mandate to include innovation funding and support for international business development. In 2017, it launched “Bpifrance Export” to streamline export insurance and trade promotion services, previously managed by Coface.

During the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, Bpifrance played a central role in the French government's economic response by providing state-guaranteed loans to businesses affected by the crisis. In the following years, the institution increased its involvement in strategic sectors such as renewable energy, biotechnology, and industrial decarbonization.

In 2024, Bpifrance provided export credit support for a £5 billion loan arranged by a consortium of 13 commercial banks to finance the construction of the Sizewell C nuclear power station in the United Kingdom.

In early 2026, Bpifrance reached a significant financial milestone by becoming the first French bank to issue an inaugural "European Green Bond" (EuGB), raising €1 billion with a maturity date of 2036 to fund ecological transition projects. This was followed in April 2026 by a targeted investment in the digital health sector, where the bank’s Digital Prevention Fund co-led a €4 million Series A funding round for Axomove, a Lille -based health-tech startup specializing in musculoskeletal rehabilitation.

It is a member of the International Forum of Sovereign Wealth Funds.

EPIC Bpifrance Group (BPI is the acronym of Banque Publique d'Investissement) is a French government agency, previously known as EPIC OSEO. In 2013, the French government reorganized their sovereign funds. OSEO's subsidiary, OSEO S.A., was merged with Fonds stratégique d'investissement and Caisse des dépôts et consignations 's CDC Entreprises to form Banque Publique d'Investissement S.A. (BPI, or Bpifrance).

EPIC OSEO was formed in 2005 by the merger of Agence nationale de valorisation de la recherche, the BDPME (Banque du Développement des PME) and BDPME's subsidiary Sofaris (Société française de garantie des financements des PME).

In 2008, Agence de l'innovation industrielle was absorbed.

In 2010, the subsidiaries of OSEO, OSEO Innovation, OSEO Financement and OSEO Garantie were merged to form OSEO S.A.

In 2012–13 OSEO S.A. was merged with Fonds stratégique d'investissement and Caisse des dépôts et consignations 's CDC Entreprises to form Banque Publique d'Investissement S.A. (BPI or Bpifrance). At the same time EPIC OESO was renamed to EPIC BPI-Groupe (literally Public entity for Industrial and Commercial, Public Investment Bank Group)

Brandade (Occitan : Brandada) is an emulsion made from salt cod, olive oil, and usually potatoes. It is eaten in the winter with bread or potatoes. In French culinary terminology, it is occasionally referred to as brandade de morue ; in Spanish cuisine, it is sometimes known as brandada de bacalao ('morue' and 'bacalao' meaning 'salt cod').

Brandade is a specialty of the Roussillon, Languedoc and Provence regions of Occitanie (in present-day France) and Catalonia, the Balearic Islands and Valencia in Eastern Spain. Similar preparations are found in other Mediterranean countries such as Italy (baccalà mantecato, brandacujun), Portugal, the Greek Cyclades (brantada) and other regions of Spain (for example, atascaburras, made with salt cod, olive oil, potato and chestnut) where dried salt cod is also commonly eaten.

The word "brandada", like paella, matelote and others, has no translation into any language. In French, cod is referred to as morue, while in Occitan, it takes on the name merluça. Baron Brisse published a daily recipe for the entire world in the journal La Liberté in nineteenth-century France, and these recipes were compiled in 1868. One of them explained how to season what he called cod brandade, but in modern French it is called brandade de morue.

In Menorca (Balearic Islands, Spain), sometimes artichokes may be added. In Marseille and Toulon, crushed garlic is added to the dish. Potato is also added to brandade in France and Basque Country, but not in Catalonia. Neither cream nor milk are included in traditional recipes in Occitania or Spain.

The early versions of the recipe contained only cod and oil, but potatoes have long been added. The version with potatoes may be called brandade de morue parmentière, after Antoine-Augustin Parmentier.

In France, Belgium, and parts of the Francophone world, a brasserie (pronounced [ bʁas(ə)ʁi ]) is a type of French restaurant with a relaxed setting that serves dishes and other meals.

The word brasserie is French for " brewery " and, by extension, "the brewing business". Although most brasseries still serve a large selection of beers, most of them offer a wider choice of beverages such as wines and liquors. A brasserie can be expected to have professional service, printed menus, and traditionally white linen—unlike a bistro which may have none of these. Typically a brasserie is open every day and serves the same menu, generally composed of a few traditional French dishes, all day. A classic example of a brasserie dish is steak frites.

The term brasserie is French for " brewery ", from Middle French brasser "to brew", from Old French bracier, from Vulgar Latin braciare, of Celtic origin; braxator = Latin for brewer. Its first usage in English was in 1864.

In 1901 Chambers's Twentieth Century Dictionary of the English Language defined "brasserie" as "in France, any beer-garden or saloon ". In 2000 The New Penguin English Dictionary included this definition of "brasserie": "a small informal French-style restaurant".

Amongst the most renowned places considered to be brasseries, Bouillon Chartier is probably the most emblematic. Located in the 9th arrondissement in Paris, it was opened in 1896 by the brothers Frédéric and Camille Chartier. The brand soon expanded to over ten brasseries in Paris; three remain today: the founding location on Rue du Faubourg-Montmartre, on Boulevard du Montparnasse in the 6th arrondissement, and on Rue du 8-Mai-1945 in the 10th arrondissement. Former locations still operating include

To this day, both locals and tourists visit the Bouillon Chartier establishments, decorated in the Belle Époque style, to eat traditional and cheap dishes.

The Closerie des Lilas, located in the 6th arrondissement, opened in 1847 and has been visited by many creatives such as Pablo Picasso, Jean-Paul Sartre, Oscar Wilde, Louis Aragon, Ernest Hemingway, Émile Zola, Paul Cézanne, and F. Scott Fitzgerald.

La Mère Catherine, a brasserie founded in 1793, is the oldest still-operating restaurant at the Place du Tertre in Montmartre. The Grand Café des Capucines, opened in 1875 on the Boulevard des Capucines in the 9th arrondissement, soon became a well-known place for dinner after shows at the Opéra Garnier nearby.

The Brazil–France border is the line, located in the Amazon rainforest, that demarcates the borders of the Brazilian state of Amapá and French Guiana.

The Oyapock River defines part of the border and is spanned by the Oyapock River Bridge, the only bridge crossing the border, which connects the towns of Saint-Georges (French Guiana) and Oiapoque (Brazil).

At 730 kilometres (450 mi) in length, it is the longest border France shares with another country, despite not being located in metropolitan France. The second longest is the one with Spain, at 623 kilometres (387 mi).

The basis of this border dates back to the Peace Treaty of Utrecht signed between France and Portugal in 1713, which established the border between both the colonial holdings of both kingdoms in South America. Despite the treaty specifying the Japoc River as the border, disagreement between France and Brazil (as the heir of the Portuguese Empire) continued into the following centuries due to uncertainty regarding the river's location. France considered the Japoc River mentioned in the text to correspond to the Araguari River, whereas Brazil considered it to correspond to the Oiapoque River.

The dispute went on for two centuries as France and Brazil set up military posts and religious missions in what would spark the Amapá Question, an event which saw French troops invade Brazilian territory up to the Araguari river occupying approximately 260,000 km (100,000 sq mi) of Brazilian territory.

The territorial dispute was resolved in Brazil's favor in 1900 through an international arbitration in Switzerland. The international court took documents and texts collected by France and Portugal at the time and determined that those collected by the Portuguese gave more credence towards the Brazilian claim of the border being set at the Oiapoque River. Additionally, they took the history of the territory and its inhabitants into consideration. Aside from small coastal French settlements, this region of South America was entirely populated by Brazilians and indigenous peoples who saw themselves as Brazilian nationals.

As a cultural vestige of this period, small Amerindian communities still exist today in Amapá that speak Lanc-Patuá, a French-based Guyanese Creole.

The Beauregard-Bregille Funicular, also known as the Bregille Funicular, is a funicular railway and former tramway line located in Besançon, in the Doubs department of France. Initially proposed in 1899 by Émile Picard, the line was designed to connect the lower and upper sections of Bregille Hill, facilitating access to nearby woodlands and green spaces. It was inaugurated in 1912, after the decline of thermal spa tourism. Despite recurring financial challenges, the line remained in operation until 1987, when a technical failure led to its closure. Listed in the Inventory of Historic Monuments since January 27, 2011, the funicular is currently the subject of a rehabilitation project supported by a local association and the City of Besançon.

The concept for a funicular linking Bregille to Besançon's thermal facilities was proposed by Émile Picard in 1899 to facilitate tourist access to spa treatments and outdoor areas. In the early 20th century, Picard established the Electric Tramway Company of the Beauregard Plateau, and the funicular entered public service in 1912. Following initial success, ridership became inconsistent, and the company faced increasing debt, particularly after Picard died in 1931 and by the late 1930s. The municipality acquired the line and created the Funicular Authority, which recorded peak passenger numbers before experiencing a steady decline, from 222,000 passengers in 1945 to 38,000 in 1979. The decline continued into the 1980s, ultimately leading to the funicular's closure.

In 1987, the Bregille Funicular ceased operations due to technical issues. Although the closure was initially intended to be temporary, high repair costs prevented its reopening, and the site remained inactive. In 2005, the association Friends of the Besançon Funicular was established to promote the preservation and restoration of the infrastructure, including the stations, tracks, and cars. The line was added to the Inventory of Historic Monuments by a decree dated January 27, 2011. In 2022, with support from the City of Besançon and the Regional Council, the association commissioned a technical assessment by a company specializing in cable transport to evaluate the feasibility and cost of rehabilitation. A complete restoration and reopening of the funicular remains the association's long-term objective.

Before its closure, the Bregille Funicular operated daily with varying hours and transported an average of 239 passengers per day, totaling approximately 87,249 annually. Initially, from its opening until the 1930s, its primary users were spa visitors and Bregille residents. In later decades, the service was mainly used by local residents and visitors seeking access to nearby green spaces.

The funicular covered a 73-meter elevation difference over a 423-meter track at a speed of 8 km/h. It featured an Abt passing loop and operated on a single narrow-gauge track measuring 1.05 meters. The line had a maximum gradient of 22% and used Vignole rails with railhead sides shaped in a "V" to prevent the brake jaws from lifting the car during emergency braking.

The Beauregard-Bregille Funicular's motor, manufactured by Alsthom in 1938, was paired with machinery built by the Swiss company Louis de Roll in Bern. Initially equipped with a 28-horsepower motor, it was later upgraded to a 32-horsepower motor located at the upper station, powered by a trackside line that was dismantled upon closure. Communication between the cars and machinery relied on a bell system to signal departures from the stations and engine room.

Since 1981, the Beauregard-Bregille Funicular cars have maintained their current design, with wooden bodies rebuilt on the original chassis, featuring curved Plexiglas windows in the drivers' cabins instead of flat ones. The car roofs, covered with copper-green sheeting over plywood, ensure watertightness. Each car, measuring 8.50 meters and weighing 6.20 tons, has two passenger compartments with sixteen seats, a baggage compartment for eight to ten people, and two driver platforms, with the floor arranged on four levels. The operator monitored movement using a cursor on a ruler, with the cable pulling the cars at 8 km/h. The funicular's operation required four staff members.

The Beauregard-Bregille Funicular included an ungated level crossing before the Abt passing loop, located midway along the line, a rare feature for funiculars in France. The crossing intersected a dead-end road serving a few residences, which has been barricaded and paved over since the funicular's closure. Flashing signals, activated by the passing cars, protected the road.

The Beauregard-Bregille Funicular connects the Mouillère district, near Besançon's city center, with the Beauregard-Bregille plateau, a residential area with views of the old town and its fortifications [ fr ]. It is located near the municipal casino, Besançon-les-Bains thermal center, Micaud Park [ fr ], and Fort Beauregard.

The funicular's lower station is at the intersection of Rue du Funiculaire and Rue des Fontenottes, following the Aiguille Path to the upper station at Chemin des Monts-de-Bregille. It is accessible via Ginko [ fr ] bus lines 24, 27, and C (Funiculaire stop) and the Besançon-la Mouillère train station [ fr ] on the TER line Besançon–Le Locle–La Chaux-de-Fonds.

At the end of the 19th century, the Mouillère district of Besançon and the Bregille plateau, then a small village with approximately 300 inhabitants, underwent significant changes following the construction of the Mouillère train station [ fr ] in 1884 and the thermal complex of the Bains salins de La Mouillère in 1892–1893. The growth of thermal spa activity prompted local authorities to consider developing the surrounding area, particularly the Bregille plateau, to provide complementary facilities such as hotels, air-cure resorts, villas, and apartments. Private initiative was strongly encouraged. During its session of May 20, 1898, the Société de médecine de Besançon expressed the following wish: "To see an agreement established between the public authorities, local interest groups, and the board of directors of the baths, to awaken, advise, and encourage with all their strength private initiative, and to bring about the creation, in the immediate vicinity of the baths, and more specifically on the Bregille plateau, of holiday centers equipped with sufficient and practical means of communication with La Mouillère and the city, thereby allowing spa visitors to combine the benefits of the saline cure with those of a true air cure and a mid-altitude cure." The stated objective was to develop the Bregille area and establish effective transportation. On February 5, 1899, Émile Picard, a landowner in Bregille and a watchmaking industrialist, sent a letter to the city's mayor proposing such a project:

Besançon, February 5, 1899 The undersigned have the honor to request the goodwill of the Municipality in agreeing to the following request. It is a matter of improving access to part of the Beauregard hillside, which is of public interest, since each season, property owners offer spa visitors villas and furnished apartments that cannot be rented due to the poor condition of the Beauregard road. Based on unofficial information, the municipality appears willing to accept a road project and layout plan, at the expense of adjacent landowners, all of whom are willing to donate their land free of charge. While awaiting the realization of the aforementioned project, and to alleviate the accessibility problems of the Beauregard road, these various property owners have already begun to pave and repair it. They request and implore the Municipality to assist in completing this work by granting a few carts of gravel and a few workdays from city road workers familiar with such tasks, so that the road may be accessible during the good season to the many visitors who come to see us. Hoping that our request will receive the support of all our council members, we have the honor to express, along with our greetings, our deepest thanks.

On May 26, 1899, Émile Picard wrote to the mayor of Besançon, requesting a concession to establish a funicular along the sentier de l'Aiguille. His proposal, supported by numerous signatures from Bregille property owners, gained significant credibility. A subsequent letter on June 27, 1899, confirmed the funicular project initially proposed on May 26:

Besançon, June 27, 1899 — To the Mayor of Besançon, I have the honor of confirming my letter of May 26, in which I requested the concession for establishing a funicular. I again request the Municipality's approval of this same proposal. Enclosed, you will find a basic map indicating the departure and arrival points. My project consists of departing from the bottom of the chemin de l'aiguille to reach the summit. I need not emphasize the advantages of this funicular, which will be built with the most advanced improvements. Regarding the procedures within your competence to obtain approval from the Department and the State, I believe that, given the location of this line, which will only cross private lands within Besançon, the Municipality alone has the authority to grant this concession. To facilitate the agreement, I will relinquish operation of this line to the city after 30 years. In exchange for this relinquishment, I ask the Municipality for a subsidy of 40,500 francs, payable in annual installments of 13,500 francs. As for managing the transport fare, I will determine it later, as construction costs have not yet been fully calculated. Hoping you will look favorably upon my request, please accept, Mr. Mayor, the assurance of my highest consideration.

On November 25, 1901, Émile Picard was granted a 75-year concession for the Beauregard-Bregille Funicular, along with an annual subsidy of 1,900 francs. He established the Compagnie des Tramways Électriques au plateau de Beauregard to develop the project. Picard also requested a 6,000-franc subsidy from the Doubs department, citing public utility, but the General Council of the Doubs denied the funding on August 20, 1902: "The request, as presented, does not carry sufficient general interest to justify the financial support of the Department. The issue appears irregular, as it involves a request from an industrialist in support of a business he will operate; thus, it is not a public utility project. Moreover, the entrepreneur himself indicates he expects a return of 3.8% from the operation. Upon the request of Mr. de Moustier, the General Council postpones its decision and asks the Administration to provide a more thorough study." After failing to secure funding from the Doubs department, Émile Picard sought additional financial support from the Compagnie des Bains de la Mouillère, which had agreed to invest in the funicular project. The company, however, declined to provide further funds due to financial constraints.

Following earlier setbacks and in light of technological advancements, Émile Picard proposed a revised project in June 1905: an electric tramway 762 meters in length, terminating at the école des Hauts de Bregille. Unlike previous proposals, this version included detailed plans and technical studies, presenting a more concrete and developed initiative. The project once again attracted municipal interest, enabling Picard to renew his request to the General Council of Doubs. A decree of public utility [ fr ] was signed in August 1908, and a new agreement was established with the city of Besançon to renew the subsidy originally granted six years earlier.

In 1909, a specification document highlighted significant technical challenges for the proposed tramway along the Sentier de l'Aiguille, which had a 22% gradient. The document noted that the tramway's 30- horsepower motors were insufficient, stating: "It would have required a considerable force, a force that the Gas and Electricity Company was powerless to provide to the concessionaire with a current of 440 volts at an intensity of 220 amperes. And even if it had been able to provide it, the operation would have become costly." To address this, a 390-meter rack railway was incorporated for the steepest section with a 21% gradient, while the remaining section used a conventional tramway track with adhesion, featuring an 8% slope.

The final project consisted of two sections: a funicular system powered by an electric motor on the steep slopes of the Sentier de l'Aiguille, and a second section planned as a tramway line. The journey was to take place in two stages, with a transfer station at the Sentier de l'Aiguille. Opposite the upper station, a tramway departure station was built; however, the tramway section was never completed, as the anticipated population growth in the Bregille district did not materialize. The current garage structure corresponds to the foundations of this planned station. The estimated cost of the funicular section was 230,000 gold francs, with a projected annual ridership of 150,000 passengers. The company's capital was 230,000 francs, divided into 460 shares of 500 francs each. Principal shareholders included Charles Krug (mayor of Besançon [ fr ] from 1919 to 1925), Dr. Heintz, and Émile Picard, who held 50 shares (25,000 francs), representing over 10% of the capital. Initial earthworks began in June and July 1911, alongside a public utility inquiry conducted among Besançon residents. Construction of the funicular was assigned to the Louis de Roll company, based in Bern. The cars measured 8.5 meters in length and were equipped with two passenger compartments (16 seats total), a luggage compartment with a capacity for 8 to 10 people, and two platforms for the drivers. The first public trips took place on November 24, 1912. In February 1913, Picard signed a new agreement with the municipality, resulting in a public utility decree on March 6 of the same year. By this time, however, spa activity was already in decline, and the onset of the First World War was approaching. The funicular nonetheless served a diverse group of users, including craftsmen, farmers, workers, and soldiers stationed at Fort of Bregille. In 1912, fares were set at 0.15 franc for a one-way trip, 0.29 franc for a round trip, and 5.50 francs for a book of 50 tickets.

From 1912 to 1918, the funicular's operation was affected by several factors. Annual ridership fell short of the projected 150,000 passengers, as wartime conditions led to reduced tourism and the conversion of the baths into a care center for wounded soldiers. Financial challenges included the municipality's reluctance to provide subsidies and higher electricity rates from the Gas and Electricity Company, which charged the funicular a greater price per kilowatt-hour than the tramway company, despite the funicular's lower energy consumption. Some local residents objected to paying for funicular tickets; these protests prompted petitions but did not significantly alter operations. In 1914, the mobilization of all staff members for military service caused several weeks of interrupted service while replacements were recruited and trained. Although revenues were limited during 1912–1918, the funicular continued to operate throughout this period.

In 1916, a report recounts an accident on January 15 of that same year: "Besançon, January 20, 1916 — Beauregard Funicular, collision with a horse belonging to Mr. Peuteuil — Report of the subdivision officer. Description: In a report dated January 15, Mr. Picard, delegated administrator of the Besançon electric tramway company to the Beauregard plateau, informed the City control services that at six o'clock in the evening, an accident occurred on the funicular track and a horse was caught under one of the company's cars and was strangled. One of Mr. Peuteuil's employees, a coal warehouseman, having a delivery to make to one of the houses on the Beauregard hillside, did not hesitate, to avoid carrying his goods on his back over too long a distance, to enter with his horse and cart into the Vaissier property, whose gate he opened in order to cross the funicular track at the level crossing reserved exclusively for said property. It was nearly six o'clock in the evening, the night was complete, and the cart had no lantern. Upon arriving on the axis of the level crossing, the horse slipped on the rail and fell across the track just as the funicular was starting. The driver tried to remove the horse's harness to pull it more quickly out of danger, but due to the complete darkness, he was unable to do so. So, he left the horse on the track and went in front of the ascending funicular car shouting at the wattman to stop. The latter, at first surprised, hesitated for a moment but finally applied the brakes, but a bit too late, so the car caught the horse sideways and dragged it about two meters before stopping. Additionally, the mechanic at the upper station, seeing his amperage suddenly rise from 12 to 40, understood that an obstacle was on the track and cut the power. Besides the horse that was killed, the material damage consisted of a broken side panel and various minor damages, such as the locks of the doors of car two which were bent or damaged. Repairs took the entire day of the 15th, during which service could not operate."

During the 1920s, the Beauregard-Bregille Funicular saw significant growth, reaching 176,000 passengers in 1929, surpassing the projected 490 passengers per day. In 1927, the Compagnie des Tramways Électriques au plateau de Beauregard recorded a peak profit of 18,500 francs, accounting for one-third of its total historical profits. However, rising prices from 1918 posed challenges, as tariff adjustments required approval from the Municipality and the General Council of Doubs due to the public utility decree, often causing delays and financial losses. In 1921, Émile Picard threatened to request the Council of State to annul the decree to gain freedom in setting tariffs. In April 1926, a staff strike led to wage increases and fare adjustments.

Fares were increased in 1919, 1923, 1925, and 1926. During this period, Picard frequently highlighted the company's financial difficulties, apparently to secure additional subsidies. He also expressed dissatisfaction with the municipality's attitude toward the funicular, as reflected in letters and interviews, including the statement: "I end my letter by once again noting the systematic obstruction against the Funicular Company which nevertheless deserves more goodwill if public authorities realized the importance of the services rendered by this small railway and which has given the Bregille plateau an interesting development to the City through numerous constructions and the visit of thousands of foreigners coming to marvel at the incomparable panorama enjoyed from the heights of this magnificent plateau."

Émile Picard fell seriously ill in 1928 and resigned from his position as Delegated Administrator. Shortly before his resignation, he wrote to the mayor: "Besançon, June 26, 1928 — Mayor of Besançon — Sir, I have the honor to inform you that I have just read in the newspaper of June 26 that the Funicular Administration is requesting a small subsidy. Very tired, and adding my 79 years in two months, I have resigned as Delegated Administrator. This enterprise, which is my work, deserves to be supported; you know the services it renders to the population. To complete my work, I confirm what I have verbally communicated to you, namely that I have bequeathed to the City of Besançon, among other legacies, a sum of twenty-five thousand francs, with the condition that the municipality creates a square on the land of the upper funicular station platform, leaving a passage for travelers. I remain at your disposal, Mr. Mayor, for any further information. Please accept, Mr. Mayor, the assurance of my devoted sentiments. — Émile Picard, still president of the Board of Directors of the Company."

Joseph Billiotte, a shareholder and insurer in Besançon, succeeded Émile Picard as head of the Compagnie des Tramways Électriques au plateau de Beauregard. In 1938, extensive repairs were conducted on the funicular, including wheels, paintwork, and tracks, necessitating a replacement bus service during peak hours—the first major suspension of operations. Ridership remained stable at 150,000–160,000 passengers annually from 1928 to 1935 but declined from 1936 to 1939. The Popular Front government's social laws required hiring three additional staff for 40-hour workweeks, compounding financial strain from a 1937 ridership drop, 1938 repairs, service interruptions, and a staff strike that increased wages by 12%. The company's deficit grew to 3,600 francs in 1936 and reached 52,000 francs in 1938. Billiotte secured 65,000 francs in municipal aid to cover the deficit, though with difficulty.

In 1940, the Compagnie des Tramways Électriques au plateau de Beauregard faced ongoing financial difficulties and sued the city of Besançon before the prefectural council for unpaid debts of 95,000 francs. During World War II, the municipality prioritized other matters, and the lawsuit strained relations with the company. In 1941, the French State 's Minister of Public Works proposed a reconciliation between the city and the company to address the issue.

Following repayment difficulties and a decline in passenger numbers, article 19 of the specifications was invoked: "The city of Besançon shall always have the right to buy back the Company." This option was preferred over alternatives, which included either relinquishing the city's loan—merely postponing the problem—or allowing the Company to go bankrupt, which would have halted the funicular's operation. Consequently, the transport commission decided to proceed with the buyback. In 1941, Jean Minjoz, then deputy mayor responsible for transport, proposed purchasing the Company for 195,500 francs. However, Billiotte deemed this amount unacceptable, noting that when accounting for the deficit, statutory interest, and central administration fees, the total buyout would amount to 445,500 francs.

After several negotiations, a final purchase price of 350,000 francs was agreed upon. The buyout was approved by the municipal council on October 22, 1941, and the city acquired the funicular on January 23, 1942, although its future remained uncertain. The shareholders accepted the decision, and the prefecture of Besançon [ fr ] granted approval in October 1942. The buyout agreement was officially signed on November 20, 1942. Following some deliberation, the municipality provisionally established a management authority on February 25, 1943, initially intended for a three-year period. On April 1, 1943, the city became the definitive owner of the funicular, and the Company of Electric Tramways of the Beauregard-Bregille plateau was dissolved after more than 41 years of operation, succeeded by the Bregille Funicular Management Authority.

On the evening of July 15, 1943, 165 Halifax Pathfinder bombers departed from southwest England, targeting the Peugeot factories in Sochaux. Besançon was selected as an alternative target to divert German night fighters. Around 1 a.m. local time, a scout plane collided with a German Dornier 217-J fighter, resulting in an exchange of fire. The Dornier then struck the English Halifax before crashing into the Besançon-Viotte station.

Subsequently, about fifteen Halifaxes bombed Besançon in a scattered formation, causing approximately fifty casualties, mostly civilians. The Bregille funicular was also bombed by a plane that released its bombs prematurely. It was later determined that nine bombers mistakenly believed they had destroyed the Peugeot factories. A witness reported seeing flashes from the use of flash bombs intended to photograph targets. The central safety device of the funicular was damaged, but the two stations and the cars remained intact. Operations were suspended and did not resume until January 1945.

On August 1, 1945, the city council appointed Mr. Laporte, then head of the road service section, as Director of the Municipal Funicular Authority. In 1944, the authority recorded a profit of 52,000 francs, increasing to 95,000 francs in 1945, with a total of 222,000 passengers that year—a figure that remained unmatched. Despite these profits, financial difficulties persisted due to maintenance work on the cars and lighting, leading to a subsidy of 600,000 francs being granted. In the 1950s, available records indicate 150,467 passengers and significant maintenance on the vehicle traction cables and road surface.

In the early 1960s, passenger numbers remained stable, ranging between 110,000 and 120,000, before declining to 94,000 by the end of the decade. From the 1970s, ridership decreased significantly, dropping from 94,000 passengers in 1969 to 64,000 in 1972, 38,000 in 1979, and slightly increasing to 40,000 in 1980. This decline is attributed to increased automobile use and the introduction of a minibus service in 1976, which provided multiple stops on the Bregille plateau with direct connections to the city center.

During the 1980s, the decline in ridership continued, raising concerns about the funicular's viability due to increasing operational costs. Between 1972 and 1979, the city's contribution per passenger rose from 1.43 francs to 8.39 francs. At the municipal council session on October 22, 1980, a decision was made to refurbish the cars and continue operations. In early 1981, the cars were dismantled sequentially and repaired at the Pelouse workshops in Saint-Ferjeux. The wooden bodies were rebuilt on their original chassis, with curved plexiglass windows replacing the previous flat ones on the motorman's cabin. The roofs were also reconstructed, and the plywood was painted copper-green to modernize the appearance while maintaining waterproofing.

The December 1981 issue of the Journal of Bregille featured a poetic tribute to the funicular's refurbishment: "Ode for the glorious refurbishment of the funicular, pardon we had thought cynically, of the insidious theft of your rolling charms, but now today your mechanical beauty resolutely turns its back on the black death. You reign, already heavy with your future successes, ready to leap to the green summit of the climb, which will soon ring only for you in the blue sky. Your dress has taken the tone of rural sunflowers, with a hint of sparkling copper on the forehead, and your cheek is adorned with the reflections one sees arise on the brilliant plexiglass of your so-round snout. Ah! your half will be happy tomorrow, when at the sweet crossing of parallel tracks, your flanks will brush with a light wingbeat, under the emotional gaze of your human friends, now sung by our melodious choirs, and may joyful corks pop on our tables for your new century that sprouts before our eyes! All this to say that it would be necessary to stop derailing and that a little lively party in honor of this good old beast that has renewed its beauty would not be to be scorned! The Itch."

Despite the refurbishment and updated appearance, ridership declined by 15% in 1981. In response, the city and neighborhood committee adjusted the funicular's schedule in January 1982 to better accommodate tourist use and reduce costs. Operations were limited to Wednesdays, Saturdays, and Sundays during winter, and daily from 1:30 p.m. to 7 p.m. in summer (June 1 to September 15). This change prompted a petition with 200 signatures from Bregille residents, who requested daily service. Following a meeting with the mayor on March 13, 1982, the schedule was revised: the funicular operated Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays from 10:30 a.m. to 12 p.m. and 4:30 p.m. to 7:30 p.m.; Wednesdays from 10:30 a.m. to 12 p.m. and 1:30 p.m. to 7:30 p.m.; and weekends from 1:30 p.m. to 7:30 p.m. However, ridership continued to decline, with 25,191 passengers in 1982 and 22,286 in 1983.

Starting July 1, 1983, the municipality allowed subscribers of CTB buses [ fr ] and holders of bus tickets to use the funicular free of charge, resulting in a 59% increase in ridership that year. In 1984 and 1985, passenger numbers exceeded 30,000, but the funicular remained unprofitable, generating 38,000 francs in revenue against expenses of 485,000 francs, including 413,000 francs for personnel costs. Ridership declined again in 1986 to 25,046 passengers. Although two free rides were offered in a booklet for new residents of Besançon, the funicular remained a marginal tourist attraction and was not included in most brochures about monuments and activities in the city.

On March 12, 1987, the Beauregard-Bregille Funicular suspended operations for track consolidation, including ballast replacement and the installation of 80 metal sleepers, with service resuming by late April 1987. On May 27, 1987, during a routine inspection, the management authority's director identified several issues: approximately 100 meters from the upper station, the track was detached from the ballast over a five-meter section; 30 meters from the lower station, rail alignment was defective due to track slippage; and the switch exhibited significant wear, with outer rails reduced by 14 millimeters. Consequently, the funicular was closed on the day of the inspection, pending expert examination of the defective components.

To reopen the funicular as a tourist attraction, the city requested cost estimates for restoration. Only the Von Roll company submitted a report on July 1, 1987, estimating the restoration cost at 1,083,000 francs. Due to the high cost and lack of sponsors, the Management Authority closed the funicular for safety reasons while seeking funds for repairs. The cars were dismantled and stored, with car number 2 making its final trip on board with a motorman, two city photographers, and two journalists from L'Est Républicain. Although no permanent closure was initially planned, the city integrated the Authority's heritage into its assets and proceeded to liquidate it in January 1989.

In 1989, the Besançon railway modeling club created a scale model of the funicular and part of the Mouillère station. In 1990, the Junior Economic Chamber [ fr ] of Doubs briefly explored the possibility of reopening the line, including development near Fort Beauregard by the upper station. The renovation project proposed by the company Skirail involved replacing the historic line with an automated single glass cabin. This project was abandoned in 1992 due to its estimated cost of 10 million francs and lack of support from local officials and residents, who favored preserving the original line. In 1993, the upper station was converted into social housing by the Municipal Office of Social Housing.

On December 9, 2005, the association Les Amis du Funiculaire de Besançon (The Friends of the Besançon Funicular) was founded by Alexandre Jury, a student interested in preserving this heritage. A campaign for the funicular's rehabilitation was subsequently launched. In 2007, car number 2 was renovated by the municipal workshops of Besançon, and the lower station was restored by the reintegration company Alternative Chantiers. The restored site was presented during the European Heritage Days on September 15 and 16, 2007, attracting over 1,300 visitors who participated in guided tours organized by the association, which had 220 members at the time.

Since 2008, the association has worked on rehabilitating the upper station and developing a broader renovation project. Activities are regularly held at the lower station, particularly during Heritage Days. The association initiated the proposal to list the funicular as a Historic Monument in January 2007. This was approved by the Regional Commission for Heritage and Sites [ fr ] of Franche-Comté following a recommendation from the Regional Directorate of Cultural Affairs in June 2010. The listing was officially signed by the regional prefect [ fr ] on January 27, 2011. The centenary of the funicular was celebrated on September 15 and 16, 2012, in connection with the European Heritage Days, organized by the association and the Bregille-Prés-de-Vaux Residents' Consultative Council.

Since its renovation, the lower station and the entire line have been regularly featured in guided tours organized by the Besançon Tourist Office and the Association, particularly during Heritage Days.

In 2016, Grand Besançon Habitat, successor to the municipal social housing office, lifted rental restrictions on the upper station, allowing occasional public access to the entire site.

In 2022, the association secured funding from the city to commission a technical study estimating the costs of restarting the funicular. The study, conducted by TIM Ingénierie in the latter half of the year, was presented to local authorities in early 2023.

Breton is a Southwestern Brittonic language of the Celtic language group spoken in Brittany, part of modern-day France. It is the only Celtic language still in use on the European mainland.

Breton is an Insular Celtic language that was brought from Great Britain to Brittany by migrating Britons during the Early Middle Ages, which makes Breton most closely related to Cornish, another Southwestern Brittonic language. Welsh and the extinct Cumbric, both Western Brittonic languages, are more distantly related, and the Goidelic languages (Irish, Manx, and Scottish Gaelic) have a slight connection due to their origins being from Insular Celtic.

Having declined from more than one million speakers around 1950 to 107,000 in 2024, Breton is classified as "severely endangered" by the UNESCO Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger. The number of children attending bilingual classes rose 33% between 2006 and 2012 to 14,709.

Breton is spoken in Lower Brittany (Breton: Breizh-Izel), roughly to the west of a line linking Plouha (west of Saint-Brieuc) and La Roche-Bernard (east of Vannes). It comes from a Brittonic language community that once extended from Great Britain to Armorica (present-day Brittany) and had even established a toehold in Galicia (in present-day Spain). Old Breton is attested from the 9th century. It was the language of the upper classes until the 12th century after which it became the language of commoners in Lower Brittany. The nobility, followed by the bourgeoisie, adopted French. The written language of the Duchy of Brittany was Latin until it switched to French in the 15th century. There is a limited tradition of Breton literature. Some philosophical and scientific terms in Modern Breton come from Old Breton. The recognized stages of the Breton language are Old Breton – c. 800 to c. 1100, Middle Breton – c. 1100 to c. 1650, Modern Breton – c. 1650 to present.

The French monarchy was not concerned with the minority languages of France, which were spoken by the lower classes, and required the use of French for government business as part of its policy of national unity. During the French Revolution, the government introduced policies favouring French over the regional languages, which it pejoratively referred to as patois. The revolutionaries assumed that reactionary and monarchist forces preferred regional languages to keep the peasant masses underinformed. In 1794, Bertrand Barère submitted his "report on the patois " to the Committee of Public Safety in which he said that "federalism and superstition speak Breton".

Under the Third, Fourth and early Fifth Republics, the French government attempted to stamp out regional languages - including Breton — in state schools, in an effort to build a unified national culture. Teachers humiliated students for using their regional languages, and such practices prevailed until the late 1960s.

In the early 21st century, the political centralization of France, the influence of the media and the increasing mobility of people have caused only about 200,000 people to be active speakers of Breton, a dramatic decline from more than 1 million in 1950. Most of today's speakers are more than 60 years old, and Breton is now classified as an endangered language.

In the early 20th century, half of the population of Lower Brittany knew only Breton; the other half were bilingual. By 1950, there were only 100,000 monolingual Bretons, and the rapid decline has continued, with likely no monolingual speakers left today. A statistical survey in 1997 found around 300,000 speakers in Lower Brittany of whom about 190,000 were aged 60 or older. Few 15-to 19-year-olds spoke Breton. In 1993, parents were finally legally allowed to give their children Breton names.

In 1925, Professor Roparz Hemon founded the Breton-language review Gwalarn. During its 19-year run, Gwalarn tried to raise the language to the level of a great international language. Its publication encouraged the creation of original literature in all genres, and proposed Breton translations of internationally recognized foreign works. In 1946, Al Liamm replaced Gwalarn. Other Breton-language periodicals have been published, which established a fairly large body of literature for a minority language.

In 1977, Diwan schools were founded to teach Breton by immersion. Since their establishment, Diwan schools have provided fully-immersive primary school and partially-immersive secondary school instruction in Breton for thousands of students across Brittany. This has directly contributed to the growing numbers of school-age speakers of Breton.

The Asterix comic series has been translated into Breton. According to the comic, the Gaulish village where Asterix lives is in the Armorica peninsula, which is now Brittany. Some other popular comics have also been translated into Breton, including The Adventures of Tintin, Spirou, Titeuf, Hägar the Horrible, Peanuts and Yakari.

Some original media are created in Breton. The sitcom Ken Tuch is in Breton. Radio Kerne, broadcasting from Finistère, has exclusively Breton programming. Some movies (Lancelot du Lac, Shakespeare in Love, Marion du Faouet, Sezneg) and TV series (Columbo, Perry Mason) have also been translated and broadcast in Breton. Poets, singers, linguists, and writers who have written in Breton, including Yann-Ber Kalloc'h, Roparz Hemon, Añjela Duval, Xavier de Langlais, Pêr-Jakez Helias, Youenn Gwernig, Glenmor, Vefa de Saint-Pierre and Alan Stivell are now known internationally.

Today, Breton is the only living Celtic language that is not recognized by a national government as an official or regional language.

The first Breton dictionary, the Catholicon, was also the first French dictionary. Edited by Jehan Lagadec in 1464, it was a trilingual work containing Breton, French and Latin. Today bilingual dictionaries have been published for Breton and languages including English, Dutch, German, Spanish and Welsh. A monolingual dictionary, Geriadur Brezhoneg an Here was published in 1995. The first edition contained about 10,000 words, and the second edition of 2001 contains 20,000 words.

In the early 21st century, the Ofis Publik ar Brezhoneg ("Public Office for the Breton language") began a campaign to encourage daily use of Breton in the region by both businesses and local communes. Efforts include installing bilingual signs and posters for regional events, as well as encouraging the use of the Spilhennig to let speakers identify each other. The office also started an Internationalization and localization policy asking Google, Firefox and SPIP to develop their interfaces in Breton. In 2004, the Breton Wikipedia started, which counts just over 90,000 articles as of December 2025. In March 2007, the Ofis ar Brezhoneg signed a tripartite agreement with Regional Council of Brittany and Microsoft for the consideration of the Breton language in Microsoft products. In October 2014, Facebook added Breton as one of its 121 languages after three years of talks between the Ofis and Facebook.

France has twice chosen to enter the Eurovision Song Contest with songs in Breton; once in 1996 in Oslo with " Diwanit bugale " by Dan Ar Braz and the fifty piece band Héritage des Celtes, and most recently in 2022 in Turin with " Fulenn " by Alvan Morvan Rosius and vocal trio Ahez. These are two of five times France has chosen songs in one of its minority languages for the contest, the others being in 1992 (bilingual French and Antillean Creole), 1993 (bilingual French and Corsican), and 2011 (Corsican).

Breton is spoken mainly in Lower Brittany but also in a more dispersed way in Upper Brittany (where it is spoken alongside Gallo and French), and in areas around the world that have Breton emigrants.

The four traditional dialects of Breton correspond to medieval bishoprics, rather than to linguistic divisions. They are leoneg (léonard, of the county of Léon), tregerieg (trégorrois, of Trégor), kerneveg (cornouaillais, of Cornouaille), and gwenedeg (vannetais, of Vannes). Gwerranneg (guérandais, of Guérande) was spoken up to the beginning of the 20th century in the region of Guérande and Batz-sur-Mer. There are no clear boundaries between the dialects because they form a dialect continuum and vary only slightly from one village to the next. Gwenedeg, however, requires a little study to be intelligible with most of the other dialects. Due to this difficulty in intelligibility, the Glottolog project split the Gwenedeg dialects into a separate language entry from the KLT Breton dialects in v5.2 under the name Vannetais.

French is the sole official language of France. Supporters of Breton and other minority languages continue to argue for their recognition and for their place in education, public schools, and public life.

In July 2008, the legislature amended the French Constitution, adding article 75-1: les langues régionales appartiennent au patrimoine de la France (the regional languages belong to the heritage of France).

The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, which obliges signatory states to recognize minority and regional languages, was signed by France in 1999 but has not been ratified. On 27 October 2015, the Senate rejected a draft constitutional law ratifying the charter.

Regional and departmental authorities use Breton to a very limited extent. Some bilingual signage has also been installed such as street name signs in Breton towns.

Under the Toubon Law, it is illegal for commercial signage to be in Breton alone. Signs must be bilingual or only in French. Since commercial signage usually has limited physical space, most businesses have signs only in French.

Ofis Publik ar Brezhoneg, the Breton-language agency, was set up in 1999 by the Brittany region to promote and develop the daily use of Breton. It helped to create the Ya d'ar brezhoneg campaign, to encourage enterprises, organisations and communes to promote the use of Breton, for example by installing bilingual signage or translating their websites into Breton.

In the late 20th century, the French government considered incorporating the independent Breton-language immersion schools (called Diwan) into the state education system. This action was blocked by the French Constitutional Council based on the 1994 amendment to the Constitution that establishes French as the language of the republic. Therefore, no other language may be used as a language of instruction in state schools. The Toubon Law implemented the amendment, asserting that French is the language of public education.

The Diwan schools were founded in Brittany in 1977 to teach Breton by immersion. Since their establishment, Diwan schools have provided fully immersive primary school and partially immersive secondary school instruction in Breton for thousands of students across Brittany. This has directly contributed to the growing numbers of school-age speakers of Breton. The schools have also gained fame from their high level of results in school exams, including those on French language and literature. Breton-language schools do not receive funding from the national government, though the Brittany Region may fund them.

Another teaching method is a bilingual approach by Div Yezh ("Two Languages") in the State schools, created in 1979. Dihun ("Awakening") was created in 1990 for bilingual education in the Catholic schools.

In 2018, 18,337 pupils (about 2% of all students in Brittany) attended Diwan, Div Yezh and Dihun schools, and their number has increased yearly. This was short of the goal of Jean-Yves Le Drian, the president of the Regional Council, who aimed to have 20,000 students in bilingual schools by 2010 and "their recognition" for "their place in education, public schools, and public life"; nevertheless, he described being encouraged by the growth of the movement.

In 2007, some 4,500 to 5,000 adults followed an evening or correspondence one Breton-language course. The transmission of Breton in 1999 was estimated to be 3 percent.

In addition to bilingual education (including Breton-medium education), the region has introduced the Breton language in primary education, mainly in the department of Finistère. The "initiation" sessions are generally one to three hours per week and consist of songs and games.

Schools in secondary education (collèges and lycées) offer some courses in Breton. In 2010, nearly 5,000 students in Brittany were reported to be taking this option. Additionally, the University of Rennes 2 has a Breton-language department, which offers courses in the language, along with a master's degree in Breton and Celtic Studies.

Vowels in Breton may be short or long. All unstressed vowels are short; stressed vowels can be short or long. (Vowel length is not noted in usual orthographies, as it is implicit in the phonology of particular dialects, and not all dialects pronounce stressed vowels as long. The vowels: ⟨ eu, o, e, a ⟩, are pronounced when they are long: /ø, o, e, ɑ/, when they are short: /œ, ɔ, ɛ, a/ and between (most of the time and especially when they are short): /ø̞, o̞, e̞, ä/.

An emergence of a schwa sound occurs as a result of vowel neutralization in post-tonic position in different dialects.

All vowels can also be nasalized, which is noted most commonly by non-ambiguously appending an ⟨ ñ ⟩ letter after the base vowel (this depends on the orthographic variant). But this is not essential for understanding and, in fact, is not always done even by native speakers.

The first extant Breton texts, contained in the Leyden manuscript, were written at the end of the 8th century, 50 years prior to the Strasbourg Oaths, which are considered to be the earliest example of French. Like many medieval orthographies, Old and Middle Breton had an orthography that was at first not standardised, and the spelling of a particular word varied at the author's discretion. In 1499, however, the Catholicon, was published; as the first dictionary written for both French and Breton, it became a point of reference on how to transcribe the language. The orthography presented in the Catholicon was largely similar to that of French, in particular with respect to the representation of vowels, as well as the use of both the Latinate digraph ⟨ qu ⟩, which was a remnant of the sound change /kʷ/ > /k/ in Latin, and the Brittonic ⟨ cou- ⟩ or ⟨ cu- ⟩ to represent /k/ before front vowels.

As phonetic and phonological differences between the dialects began to magnify, many regions, particularly the Vannes country, began to devise their own orthographies. Many of those orthographies were more closely related to the French model albeit with some modifications. Examples of modifications include the replacement of Old Breton - ⟨ z ⟩ with - ⟨ h ⟩ to denote word-final /x~h/ (an evolution of Old Breton /θ/ in the Vannes dialect) and the use of - ⟨ h ⟩ to denote the initial mutation of /k/ (today, this mutation is written ⟨ c'h ⟩).

In the 1830s, Jean-François Le Gonidec created a modern phonetic system for the language.

During the early 20th century, a group of writers known as Emglev ar Skrivanerien elaborated and reformed Le Gonidec's system. They made it more suitable as a super-dialectal representation of the dialects of Cornouaille, Leon and Trégor (known as from Kernev, Leon and Treger in Breton). This KLT orthography was established in 1911. At the same time, writers of the more divergent Vannetais dialect developed a phonetic system, which was also based on that of Le Gonidec.

Following proposals that had been made during the 1920s, the KLT and Vannetais orthographies were merged in 1941 to create an orthographic system to represent all four dialects. This Peurunvan ("wholly unified") orthography was significant for the inclusion of the digraph ⟨ zh ⟩, which represents a /h/ in Vannetais and corresponds to a /z/ in the KLT dialects.

In 1955, François Falc'hun and the group Emgleo Breiz [ fr ; br ] proposed a new orthography, which was designed to use a set of graphemes closer to the conventions of French. This Orthographe universitaire ("University Orthography", known in Breton as Skolveurieg) was given official recognition by the French authorities as the "official orthography of Breton in French education". It was opposed in the region and was only by the magazine Brud Nevez and the publishing house Emgleo Breiz, which disappeared in 2015.

In the 1970s, a new standard orthography was devised: the etrerannyezhel or interdialectale. This system is based on the derivation of the words.

Today, most writers continue to use the Peurunvan orthography, and it is the version taught in most Breton-language schools.

Breton is written in the Latin script. Peurunvan, the most commonly used orthography, consists of the following letters:

The circumflex, grave accent, trema and tilde appear on some letters. The diacritics are used in the following way:

Both orthographies use the above alphabet although ⟨ é ⟩ is used only in Skolveurieg.

Differences between the two systems are particularly noticeable in word endings. In Peurunvan, final obstruents, which are devoiced in absolute final position and voiced in sandhi before voiced sounds, are represented by a grapheme that indicates a voiceless sound. In OU they are written as voiced but represented as voiceless before suffixes: braz "big", brasoc'h "bigger".

In addition, Peurunvan maintains the KLT convention, which distinguishes noun/adjective pairs by nouns written with a final voiced consonant and adjectives with a voiceless one. No distinction is made in pronunciation. e.g., brezhoneg ' Breton language ' vs. brezhonek ' Breton (adj) '.

C (as a single letter), Q and X appear mainly in loanwords. ⟨ks⟩ or ⟨gz⟩ may be used to represent /ks/ or /ɡz/. The digraph ⟨ zh ⟩ represents a variable sound that may exhibit as /s/, /z/, or /h/, and descends from a now-extinct sound /θ/, which is still extant in Welsh as ⟨ th ⟩.

Breton nouns are marked for gender and number. While Breton has a fairly typical gender system for Western Europe, Breton has number markers that demonstrate rarer behaviors.

Breton has two genders: masculine (gourel) and feminine (gwregel). It has largely lost its historic neuter (nepreizh), as has also occurred in the other Celtic languages and in the Romance languages. Certain suffixes (-ach/-aj, -(a)dur, -er, -lec'h, -our, -ti, -va) are masculine, while others (-enti, -er, -ez, -ezh, -ezon, -i, -eg, -ell, and the singulative -enn) are feminine. The suffix -eg can be masculine or feminine.

There are certain non-determinant factors that influence gender assignment. Biological sex is applied for animate referents. Metals, time divisions (except for eur "hour", noz "night" and sizhun "week") and mountains tend to be masculine, while rivers, cities and countries tend to be feminine.

However, gender assignment to certain words often varies between dialects.

Number in Breton is primarily based on an opposition between singular and plural. However, the system is full of complexities in how the distinction is realized.

Although modern Breton has lost the dual number as a productive grammatical category, remnants of its use are preserved in certain nouns referring to paired body parts such as for eyes, ears, cheeks, legs, armpits, arms, hands, knees, thighs and wings. Those forms typically feature a prefix (daou-, di- or div-), which is etymologically derived from the numeral two. The dual number is no longer a productive feature of Breton grammar and survives only in a lexicalized form. Certain words such as daoulagad ('eyes') and divskouarn ('ears') are historically dual in origin. These forms can nevertheless undergo pluralization once more to yield daoulagadoù ('pairs of eyes') and diskouarnoù ('pairs of ears').

Like other Brythonic languages, Breton has a singulative suffix, which forms singulars out of collective nouns for which the morphologically less complex form is the plural. Thus, the singulative of the collective logod "mice" is logod enn "mouse". "Breton exhibits a more complex system than Welsh in this respect. Collective nouns can undergo pluralization, yielding forms with meanings distinct from the base collective. For example, pesk ('fish', singular) forms the collective plural pesked ('fish'), which may then be singulativized as peskedenn to denote an individual fish from a group. This singulative of the plural can in turn be pluralized once more, producing peskedennoù ('fishes')."

"In addition, the Breton plural system is complicated by the existence of two distinct pluralizing functions. Alongside the 'default' plural, there is a second formation used to convey a sense of variety or diversity. As a result, a single noun may yield two semantically different plurals; for example, park ('park') forms parkoù ('parks') and parkeier ('various different parks')." Ball reports that the latter pluralizer is used only for inanimate nouns. Certain formations have been lexicalized to have meanings other than that which might be predicted solely from the morphology: dour "water" pluralized forms dourioù which means not "waters" but instead "rivers", while doureier now has come to mean "running waters after a storm". Certain forms have lost the singular from their paradigm: keloù means "news" and * kel is not used, while keleier has become the regular plural, 'different news items'.

Meanwhile, certain nouns can form doubly marked plurals with lexicalized meanings – bugel "child" is pluralized once into bugale "children" and then pluralized a second time to make bugaleoù "groups of children".

The diminutive suffix -ig also has the somewhat unusual property of triggering double marking of the plural: bugelig means "little child", but the doubly pluralized bug ale ig où means "little children"; bag boat has a singular diminutive bagig and a simple plural bagoù, thus its diminutive plural is the doubly pluralized bag où ig où.

As seen elsewhere in many Celtic languages, the formation of the plural can be difficult to predict, being determined by a mix of semantic, morphological and lexical factors.

The most common plural marker is -où, with its variant -ioù ; most nouns that use that marker are inanimates, but collectives of both inanimate and animate nouns always use it as well.

Most animate nouns, including trees, have a plural in -ed. However, in some dialects the use of this affix has become rare. Various masculine nouns including occupations, as well as the word Saoz ("Englishman", plural Saozon), take the suffix -ien, with a range of variants including -on, -ion, -an and -ian.

The rare pluralizing suffixes -er / -ier and -i are used for a few nouns. When they are appended, they also trigger a change in the vowel of the root: -i triggers a vowel harmony effect in which some or all preceding vowels are changed to i (kenderv "cousin" → kindirvi "cousins"; bran "crow" → brini "crows"; klujur "partridge" → klujiri "partridges"); the changes associated with -er / -ier are less predictable.

Various nouns instead form their plural merely with ablaut : a or o in the stem is changed to e : askell "wing" → eskell "wings"; dant "tooth" → dent "teeth"; kordenn "rope" → kerdenn "ropes".

Another set of nouns have lexicalized plurals that bear little if any resemblance to their singulars. These include plac'h "girl" → merc'hed, porc'hell "pig" → moc'h, buoc'h "cow" → saout, and ki "dog" → chas.

In compound nouns, the head noun, which usually comes first, is pluralized.

Like in other Celtic languages, as well as in English, a variety of verbal constructions can be used to express grammatical aspect such as to show a distinction between progressive and habitual actions:

As in other modern Celtic languages, Breton pronouns are fused into preceding prepositions to produce a sort of inflected preposition. Here are some examples in Breton, Cornish, Welsh, Irish, Scottish Gaelic, and Manx, along with English translations:

In the examples above, the Goidelic languages (Irish, Scottish Gaelic, and Manx) use the preposition meaning at to show possession, and the Brittonic languages use the one meaning with. The Goidelic languages, however, use the preposition with to express "belong to" (Irish is liom an leabhar, Scottish is leam an leabhar, Manx s'lhiams yn lioar, The book belongs to me).

The Welsh examples are in literary Welsh. The order and the preposition may differ slightly in Colloquial Welsh (Formal mae car gennym, North Wales mae gynnon ni gar, South Wales mae car gyda ni).

Breton has four initial consonant mutations. Modern Breton has lost the nasal mutation of Welsh (except for rare words such the word "door": "dor" "an nor"). However it has a "hard" mutation (also present in Cornish but not in Welsh), in which voiced stops become voiceless; it also has a "mixed" mutation, which is a mixture of hard and soft mutations.

Normal word order, like the other Insular Celtic languages, is at its core VSO (verb-subject-object), which is most apparent in embedded clauses. However, Breton finite verbs in main clauses are additionally subject to V2 word order in which the finite main clause verb is typically the second element in the sentence. In fact, starting a sentence with a finite verb is generally ungrammatical in Breton.

Noun phrases, adverbial phrases, verbal nouns and the negative particle ne may stand in sentence-initial position to satisfy the V2 requirement. That makes it perfectly possible to put the subject or the object at the beginning of the sentence, largely depending on the focus of the speaker. The following options are possible (all with a little difference in meaning):

Breton uses much more borrowed vocabulary than its relatives further north; by some estimates a full 40% of its core vocabulary consists of loanwords from French.

Visitors to Brittany may encounter words and phrases (especially on signs and posters) such as the following:

The English words dolmen and menhir have been borrowed from French, which took them from Breton. However, this is uncertain: for instance, menhir is peulvan or maen hir ("long stone"), maen sav ("straight stone") (two words: noun + adjective) in Breton. Dolmen is a misconstructed word (it should be taol- v aen). Some studies state that these words were borrowed from Cornish. Maen hir can be directly translated from Welsh as "long stone" (which is exactly what a menhir or maen hir is). The Cornish surnames Mennear, Minear and Manhire all derive from the Cornish men hyr ("long stone"), as does Tremenheere "settlement by the long stone".

The French word baragouiner ("to jabber in a foreign language or an unintelligible manner") is derived from Breton bara ("bread") and gwin ("wine"). The French word goéland ("large seagull") is derived from Breton gwelan, which shares the same root as English "gull" (Welsh gwylan, Cornish goelann).

Hon Tad, c'hwi hag a zo en Neñv, ra vo santelaet hoc'h anv. Ra zeuio ho Rouantelezh. Ra vo graet ho youl war an douar evel en neñv. Roit dimp hiziv bara hor bevañs. Distaolit dimp hon dleoù evel m'hor bo ivez distaolet d'hon dleourion. Ha n'hon lezit ket da vont gant an temptadur, met hon dieubit eus an Droug.

.bzh is an approved Internet generic top-level domains intended for Brittany and the Breton culture and languages. In 2023, the Breton internet extension.bzh had more than 12,000 registrations. Alongside the promotion of the.bzh internet extension, the www.bzh association promotes other services to develop Brittany's image on the web: campaign for a Breton flag emoji (), and email service.

The Bretons (/ ˈ b r ɛ t ɒ n z, - ən z, - ɒ̃ z / ; Breton : Bretoned or Vretoned, Breton pronunciation: [ breˈtɔ̃nɛt ]) are a Celtic ethnic group native to Brittany, north-western France. Originally, the demonym designated groups of Brittonic speakers who emigrated from southwestern Great Britain, particularly Cornwall and Devon, mostly during the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain. They migrated in waves from the 3rd to 9th century (most heavily from 450 to 600) to the west of Armorica. That western part of Armorica was subsequently named after them, as were the inhabitants.

The traditional language of Brittany is Breton (Brezhoneg), a Celtic language of the Brittonic branch now mostly spoken in Lower Brittany (i.e., the western part of the peninsula). Breton is spoken by around 206,000 people as of 2013. The other principal minority language of Brittany is Gallo, a Romance language ; Gallo is spoken only in Upper Brittany, where Breton used to be spoken as well but it has seen a decline and has been less dominant in Upper Brittany since around the year 900. Currently, most Bretons' native language is standard French.

Historically, Brittany and its people have been counted as one of the six Celtic nations. The actual number of Bretons in Brittany and France as a whole is difficult to assess as the government of France does not collect statistics on ethnicity. The population of Brittany, based on a January 2007 estimate, was 4,365,500. There is reason to believe that this number includes the department of Loire-Atlantique, which the Vichy government separated from historical Brittany in 1941.

It is said that, in 1914, over one million people spoke Breton west of the boundary between the Breton and Gallo-speaking region—roughly 90% of the population of the western half of Brittany. In 1945, Breton speakers consisted about 75% of the population. In 2018, a study commissioned by the administrative region of Brittany (Loire-Atlantique included) revealed that 5.5% of Bretons considered that they spoke the language (around 213,000 people). In 2024, according to a new study, 2.7% of people surveyed said they spoke Breton very well or fairly well (around 107,000 people). However, the average age of Breton speakers has fallen from 70 in 2018, to 58.5 in 2024.

A strong historical emigration has created a Breton diaspora within the French borders and in the overseas departments and territories of France ; it is mainly established in the Paris area, where more than one million people claim Breton heritage. Many Breton families have also migrated to the Americas, predominantly to Canada (mostly Quebec and Atlantic Canada) and the United States. The only places outside Brittany that still retain significant Breton customs are in Île-de-France (mainly Quartier de Montparnasse in Paris), Le Havre and Îles des Saintes, where a group of Breton families settled in the mid-17th century.

In the late fourth century, large numbers of British auxiliary troops in the Roman army may have been stationed in Armorica ; Armorica corresponds with the current Brittany and most of Normandy. The ninth-century Historia Brittonum states that the emperor Magnus Maximus, who withdrew Roman forces from Britain, settled his troops in Armorica.

Nennius and Gildas mention a second wave of Britons settling in Armorica in the following century to escape the invading Anglo-Saxons and Scoti. Modern archaeology also supports a two-wave migration.

It is generally accepted that the Brittonic speakers who arrived gave the west of Armorica its current name as well as the Breton language, Brezhoneg, a sister language to Welsh and Cornish.

There are numerous records of Celtic Christian missionaries migrating from Britain during the second wave of Breton colonisation, especially the legendary seven founder-saints of Brittany as well as Gildas.

As in Cornwall, many Breton towns are named after these early saints. The Irish saint Columbanus was also active in Brittany and is commemorated at Saint-Columban in Carnac.

In the Early Middle Ages, Brittany was divided into three kingdoms— Domnonée, Cornouaille (Kernev), and Bro Waroc'h (Broërec)—which eventually were incorporated into the Duchy of Brittany. The first two kingdoms seem to derive their names from the homelands of the migrating tribes in Britain, Cornwall (Kernow) and Devon (Dumnonia). Bro Waroc'h ("land of Waroch ", now Bro Gwened) derives from the name of one of the first known Breton rulers, who dominated the region of Vannes (Gwened). The rulers of Domnonée, such as Conomor, sought to expand their territory, claiming overlordship over all Bretons, though there was constant tension between local lords.

Bretons were the most prominent of the non-Norman forces in the Norman conquest of England. A number of Breton families were of the highest rank in the new society and were tied to the Normans by marriage.

The Scottish Clan Stewart and the royal House of Stuart have Breton origins. Alan Rufus, also known as Alan the Red, was both a cousin and knight in the retinue of William the Conqueror. Following his service at Hastings, he was rewarded with large estates in Yorkshire. At the time of his death, he was by far the richest noble in England. His manorial holding at Richmond ensured a Breton presence in northern England. The Earldom of Richmond later became an appanage of the Dukes of Brittany.

Many people throughout France claim Breton ethnicity, including a few French celebrities such as Marion Cotillard, Suliane Brahim, Malik Zidi, Patrick Poivre d'Arvor, Yoann Gourcuff, Nolwenn Leroy and Yann Tiersen.

The assertion of Breton identity has sometimes brought Bretons into conflict with the French state. Under the law of 11 germinal an XI (1803), only first names drawn from approved calendars or from ancient history could be entered in the civil registers, and Breton-language names were often rejected, although a 1966 ministerial instruction and later case law allowed names established in local tradition. From the 1950s, the Breton activists Jean-Jacques and Mireille Manrot-Le Goarnig [ fr ] fought a fifteen-year court case after registrars refused to record the Breton first names of their younger children, leaving six of them without civil status; the family was denied family benefits and several of its members were imprisoned. According to later press accounts, a decision at the European level described the six unregistered children as "European citizens of Breton nationality" — a formula that, as Le Figaro noted, was used only once and confers no legal status, since Breton nationality does not exist in French law. In 2016, Jonathan Le Bris sought to renounce French nationality and be recognised as a Breton national, invoking the Goarnig precedent. Disputes over Breton names have continued: in 2019 a child named Fañch [ fr ] definitively won the right to keep the tilde in his first name when the Court of Cassation rejected a final appeal against a Rennes appeal-court ruling in his favour.

The Breton community outside Brittany includes groups of Bretons in France and in others countries. According to data from the administrative region of Brittany, around 400 000 Bretons live in a country other than France, most notably in Canada and the United States.

The Breton community outside Brittany includes groups of Bretons in the Greater Paris area, Le Havre, and Toulon. In Paris, Bretons used to settle in the neighborhood around the Montparnasse train station, which is also the terminus of the Paris- Brest railway. The Paris Metro construction was co-directed by a Breton, Fulgence Bienvenüe. On 30 June 1933, the "Avenue du Maine" station on the Metro was renamed "Bienvenüe" in his honor. Connected by a corridor to the Montparnasse metro station, located beneath the Montparnasse railway station, Bienvenüe station finally merged with Montparnasse station in 1942 to become Montparnasse – Bienvenüe metro station.

Famous Breton Americans and Americans of Breton descent include John James Audubon, Jack Kerouac, Sylvester Stallone and Tina Weymouth.

From 1885 to 1970, several thousand Bretons migrated to the United States, many of them leaving the Black Mountains of Morbihan. In June 2020, a replica of the Statue of Liberty was dedicated in Gourin, Morbihan, to celebrate the legacy of these emigrants.

Bretons have also emigrated to China. A Breton association regularly organises the ‘Fest-noz de Pékin’ (Beijing Fest-Noz).

At the same time as the French emigrated to Chile in the 19th century, many Bretons also emigrated to Chile. Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet is a notable descendant from a Breton immigrant from Lamballe.

The Breton people are predominantly members of the Catholic Church, with minorities in the Reformed Church of France and non-religious people. Brittany was one of the most staunchly Catholic regions in all of France. Attendance at Sunday mass dropped during the 1970s and the 1980s; however, other religious practices, such as pilgrimages, have experienced a revival. This includes the Tro Breizh, which takes place in the shrines of the seven founding saints of Breton Christianity. The Christian tradition is widely respected by both believers and nonbelievers, who see it as a symbol of Breton heritage and culture.

Breton religious tradition places great emphasis on the " Seven Founder Saints ":

A pardon is the patron saint's feast day of the parish. It often begins with a procession followed by mass in honour of the saint. Pardons are often accompanied by small village fairs. The three most famous pardons are:

There is an ancient pilgrimage called the Tro Breizh (tour of Brittany) which involves pilgrims walking around Brittany from the grave of one of the Seven Founder Saints to another. Currently, pilgrims complete the circuit over the course of several years. In 2002, the Tro Breizh included a special pilgrimage to Wales, symbolically making the reverse journey of the Welshmen Paul Aurelian, Brioc, and Samson. According to Breton religious tradition, whoever does not make the pilgrimage at least once in his lifetime will be condemned to make it after his death, advancing only by the length of his coffin every seven years.

Some pagan customs from the old pre-Christian tradition remain the folklore of Brittany. The most powerful folk figure is the Ankou or the "Reaper of Death".

There are four main Breton dialects: Gwenedeg (Vannes), Kerneveg (Cornouaille), Leoneg (Leon) and Tregerieg (Trégor), which have varying degrees of mutual intelligibility. In 1908, a standard orthography was devised. The fourth dialect, Gwenedeg, was not included in this reform, but was included in the later orthographic reform of 1941.

The Breton language is a very important part of Breton identity. Breton itself is one of the Brittonic languages and is closely related to Cornish and more distantly to Welsh. Breton is thus an Insular Celtic language and is more distantly related to the long-extinct Continental Celtic languages, such as Gaulish, that were formerly spoken on the European mainland, including the areas colonised by the ancestors of the Bretons.

In eastern Brittany, a regional langue d'oïl, Gallo, developed. Gallo shares certain areal features such as points of vocabulary, idiom, and pronunciation with Breton, but is a Romance language. Neither language has official status under French law; however, some still use Breton as an everyday language. As of the 1980s, bilingual roadsides have been placed around the department as a way to regain a sense of cultural heritage.

From 1880 to the mid-20th century, Breton was banned from the French school system and children were punished for speaking it. This was similar to Britain's enforcement of English, not Welsh, being used in Welsh schools during the 18th and early 19th centuries. The situation changed in 1951 with the Deixonne Law. This law allowed Breton language and culture to be taught 1–3 hours a week in the public school system on the provision that a teacher was both able and prepared to do so. In modern times, a number of schools and colleges have emerged with the aim of providing Breton-medium education or bilingual Breton/French education.

There are a number of Breton language weekly and monthly magazines. Newspapers, magazines and online journals available in Breton include Al Lanv (based in Quimper), Al Liamm, Louarnig - Rouzig, and Bremañ.

Several radio stations broadcast in the Breton language: Arvorig FM, France Bleu Armorique, France Bleu Breizh-Izel, Radio Bro Gwened, Radio Kerne, and Radio Kreiz Breizh.

Television programmes in Breton are available on Brezhoweb, France 3 Breizh, France 3 Iroise, TV Breizh and TV Rennes.

A fest-noz is a traditional festival (essentially a dance) in Brittany. Many festoù-noz are held outside Brittany, taking regional Breton culture outside Brittany. Although the traditional dances of the fest-noz are old, some dating back to the Middle Ages, the fest-noz tradition is itself more recent, dating back to the 1950s. Fest-Noz was officially registered on Wednesday, December 5, 2012, by UNESCO on the "Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity."

There are many traditional Breton dances, the most well-known being gavottes, An Dro, the hanter dro, and the plinn. During the fest-noz, most dances are practised in a chain or in a circle with participants locking little (pinky) fingers; however, there are also dances in pairs and choreographed dances with sequences and figures.

Two main types of Breton music are a choral a cappella tradition called kan ha diskan, and music involving instruments, including purely instrumental music. Traditional instruments include the bombard (similar to an oboe) and two types of bagpipes (veuze and binioù kozh). Other instruments often found are the diatonic accordion, the clarinet, and occasionally violin as well as the hurdy-gurdy. After World War II, the Great Highland bagpipe (and binioù bras) became commonplace in Brittany through the bagado ù (Breton pipe bands) and thus often replaced the binioù-kozh. The basic clarinet (treujenn-gaol) had all but disappeared but has regained popularity over the past few years.

Nowadays groups with many different styles of music may be found, ranging from rock to jazz such as Red Cardell, ethno-rock, Diwall and Skeduz as well as punk. Some modern fest-noz groups also use electronic keyboards and synthesisers, for example Strobinell, Sonerien Du, Les Baragouineurs, and Plantec.

Breton cuisine contains many elements from the wider French culinary tradition. Local specialities include:

Traditional Breton symbols of Brittany include:

Brice Lalonde (French pronunciation: [ bʁis lalɔ̃d ] ; born 10 February 1946) is a former green party leader in France, who ran for President of France in the Presidential elections, 1981. In 1988 he was named Minister of the Environment, and in 1990 founded the green Ecology Generation party.

Lalonde was born in Neuilly-sur-Seine, Hauts-de-Seine, the son of Alain Lalonde and Fiona Forbes. His maternal grandparents were Americans James Grant Forbes II of the Forbes family and Margaret Tyndal Winthrop of the Dudley–Winthrop family. Through Fiona's sister Rosemary, he is a first cousin of politicians John Kerry and Cameron Kerry. Lalonde's paternal grandfather changed his surname from Lévy to Lalonde, and converted from Judaism to Catholicism. James Grant Forbes II was a poppy botanist and opium dealer in the China trade during the Opium Wars, who wrote a book on Chinese plants.

Lalonde was a student leader during the May 1968 student uprisings in France.

In 1968, Lalonde was a member of Union Nationale des Étudiants de France (UNEF), the French national students' union, and chairman of UNEF-Sorbonne, which brought France to a standstill with protests and riots. Later Lalonde, with David McTaggart, an activist involved in the Greenpeace protests against French nuclear tests at Mururoa atoll, helped create the confrontational strategies of boarding ships at sea in the 1970s. In July 1973, he was arrested by the French Navy during protests against nuclear tests in Mururoa, along with General Jacques Pâris de Bollardière, priest Jean Toulat and writer Jean-Marie Muller.

He was the Mouvement d'écologie politique (MEP) candidate for President of France in 1981 (3.88% of the vote), spokesman for Amis de la Terre in 1982 and later Environment Secretary of France (1988–90) and Environment Minister of France (1990–92). From 1995 to 2008, he was the mayor of Saint-Briac-sur-Mer, a small Breton village where the Forbes family have a villa.

In 1990 Lalonde founded the Ecology Generation party which enjoyed runaway electoral success in 1992 but then declined in face of competition from the French Green Party. He was unable to run for president in the 1995 elections, being unable to obtain the necessary 500 signatures from French mayors or MPs. In 2002, he left the leadership of his party and politics. He became a consultant, working on development projects in Africa.

In 2007 Brice Lalonde was appointed French Ambassador for Climate Change and was heavily involved in multilateral climate change negotiations until the end of 2010, when UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon appointed him Assistant Secretary-General, Executive Coordinator of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20), which was held in Rio de Janeiro in June 2012.

The Nautical Brigades (BN) and Fluvial Brigades (BF) are specialized units of the French Gendarmerie focused on judicial investigations underwater and the control of fluvial transport. These units also carry out other missions related to this environment (fishing control, pollution control, intelligence, rescue, military missions, etc.).

In 2016, the Coastal Nautical Brigades (BNC), distributed along the French coastline [ fr ], the 4 Inland Nautical Brigades (BNI), and the 14 Fluvial Gendarmerie Brigades (BFG), coordinated by the Command of the Gendarmerie for Navigable Waterways (CGVN)., are under the Departmental Gendarmerie Groups (GGD). Their judicial competency zones are distributed by Defense and Security Zone [ fr ].

Departmental gendarmes who pilot these nautical assets, particularly the vessels, must hold the PEG2 (Second-Degree Gendarmerie Vessel Pilot) certification.

This certification is issued by the National Maritime Gendarmerie Instruction Center (CNIGM) in Toulon (Var) after a 5-week course including theoretical and practical sea training. The PEG2 holder receives a diploma and may wear the PEG2 insignia.

The gendarmerie includes two types of divers : underwater investigators from the nautical and fluvial brigades and intervention divers from the GIGN. The core role of underwater investigators is underwater judicial investigation. They are trained at the National Nautical Instruction Center of the Gendarmerie (CNING) in Antibes, where they obtain a “Diplôme de Technicien Investigation Subaquatique” (DTIS)

The gendarmerie’s investigator divers are assigned to the following nautical and fluvial brigades (2017):

Brigitte Grésy, born in Nantes, France on 14 December 1947, is a senior French civil servant, general inspector of social affairs since 2006. She is a specialist on issues of equality between men and women and the author of the report on professional equality submitted in July 2009 to the Minister of Labor. She was appointed Secretary General of the High Council for Professional Equality by order of the Minister for Women's Rights, Najat-Vallaud-Belkacem, on May 6, 2013. She is also a member of the High Council for Equality between Women and Men and has been its president since 24 June 2019.

Brigitte Grésy was born Brigitte Castillon on 14 December 1947 in Nantes. She was the youngest in a family of three children. Her father was a director of tax services and her mother a French teacher. At age 21. after training in literary preparatory classes and French aggregation, she began her career as a teacher of classics in a high school in northern France and then at the Lycée Mansart, in Saint-Cyr-l'École. She married at 26 and then had two children. She entered through the internal competition at the National School of Administration (1987-1989).

She began her new career at the Ministry of Industry, in charge of the international mission, then became Chief of Staff to the Director General of Industrial Strategies.

After six years, she obtained a transfer to the General Inspectorate of Social Affairs.

From 1998-2004, she was head of the women's rights and equality department.

In 2004, she became Chief of Staff to the Minister for Parity and Professional Equality, Nicole Ameline, a position she held until 2005.

Appointed Inspector General of Social Affairs in 2006, she produced numerous reports on equality, such as the report on professional equality in 2009 or that on lifelong parenthood in 2011.

Grésy was appointed Secretary General of the Higher Council for Professional Equality in 2013, a consultative body chaired by Marisol Touraine, Minister of Social Affairs, Health and Women's Rights, who is assisted by Pascale Boistard, Secretary of State in charge of women's rights.

She is also a member of the High Council for equality between women and men, within the commission on the fight against sexist stereotypes and the distribution of social roles. Since June 24, 2019, she has chaired this Board, succeeding Danielle Bousquet.

At her swearing in as president of the High Council for Equality, Grésy said,

“I express the wish that women will no longer be murdered, sexually exploited, harassed or underpaid because they are women, so that they have the right to circulate without danger, to access full autonomy.”

Bruno Durieux (born 23 October 1944) is a French politician.

Durieux is a graduate of the École polytechnique and ENSAE (École nationale de la statistique et de l'administration économique). He served in Algeria under the command of Marcel Bigeard before embarking upon an administrative career. Entering politics, Durieux served in the cabinet of Raymond Barre from 1976 to 1981, and was deputy of the Nord (département) from 1986 to 1990.

In 1990, he became a member of the Michel Rocard administration. With the change in government in 1995, he was named by the defence minister Charles Millon to represent the defence department overseas. In 1997, he was named president of the International Defence Counsel, a company 50% supported by the Ministry of Defence, with a mission of consulting on the use of French weapons in countries employing French defence systems.

He was elected mayor of Grignan in the Drôme in 1995 and was reelected in 2001 and 2008. He is the town's current mayor.

The budget of France, setting revenues and spending levels is set after approval of the National Assembly and the Senate. The French Constitution provides for a maximum of 70 days between the budget being proposed to parliament and it being approved. Article 40 of the Constitution stops the National Assembly and Senate from making any amendments to the total spending and revenue amounts proposed by the government.

Once approved by parliament, the government may make adjustments of up to 2% to the budget without having to seek further parliamentary approval.

In 2011, the government introduced a bill to amend article 34 of the Constitution to ensure a balanced budget.

The French budget concerns only spending and revenue by central government. It thus excludes the Social Security budget and regional and local authorities budgets.

On 20 March 2026, François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France and a policymaker at the European Central Bank, stated that France has limited fiscal capacity to respond to rising energy prices linked to the Middle East conflict. Moreover, In an interview with the French financial website Boursorama, he noted that any government measures addressing the energy shock should be temporary, targeted, and carefully designed, while emphasizing that France’s constrained fiscal position restricts its scope for intervention.

Budgetary universality, also called the principle of budget universality, is a principle of public finance under which the revenue of a government budget finances its expenditure as a whole. Individual revenue streams are generally not earmarked for particular purposes. In French budget law, universality also requires revenue and expenditure to be recorded at their gross amounts, without offsetting one against the other. These two requirements are known as non-affectation and non-compensation or non-contraction, respectively.

The principle supports parliamentary control over public finances by making the amounts received and spent visible and by allowing spending priorities to be considered across the budget. Both French and German law provide exceptions permitting particular receipts to be reserved for specified expenditure.

In France, budgetary universality is one of the principles governing the state budget. Its two rules were set out in article 18 of the organic ordinance of 2 January 1959. They are now expressed in article 6 of the Organic Law on Finance Acts [ fr ] (Loi organique relative aux lois de finances, LOLF) of 1 August 2001.

The gross-budgeting rule requires the full amount of each receipt and expenditure to appear in the budget. A service cannot deduct the revenue it expects to collect from its planned expenditure and present only the difference for parliamentary approval. This allows Parliament to scrutinise the scale of the operations concerned. The rule also prevents a service from using receipts to supplement its spending without the necessary budgetary authority.

Under the rule against earmarking, receipts enter a common pool from which expenditure is financed. Collecting revenue does not, by itself, entitle the service concerned to spend it. The rule has also been applied to the use of state property. In 1940, the Court of Accounts held that using wood from the grounds of the Palace of Versailles to heat its buildings breached budgetary universality. A specific legal provision was subsequently adopted to permit this use. Criticism of non-earmarking has concerned administrative complexity and the difficulty of justifying a tax by linking it to a particular use.

Article 16 of the LOLF allows revenue to be assigned to expenditure through annexed budgets, special accounts and designated accounting procedures.

Article 17 of the LOLF provides three procedures for earmarking within the general budget, an annexed budget or a special account:

An annexed budget (budget annexe) records operations of a state service without separate legal personality whose principal activity is producing goods or supplying services for a fee. A finance act must authorise both its creation and the assignment of revenue to it. Each annexed budget constitutes a budgetary mission and is voted on separately. The two annexed budgets in the 2026 budget documents concern air traffic control and aviation operations (Contrôle et exploitation aériens) and official publications and administrative information (Publications officielles et information administrative).

Special accounts (comptes spéciaux) also require authorisation in a finance act. The LOLF recognises four categories: earmarked accounts (comptes d'affectation spéciale), trading accounts (comptes de commerce), monetary operations accounts (comptes d'opérations monétaires) and financial assistance accounts (comptes de concours financiers). Earmarked accounts finance operations from receipts directly related to the expenditure concerned, while financial assistance accounts record state loans and advances.

Trading and monetary operations accounts are subject to a different form of budgetary authorisation: their revenue and expenditure estimates are indicative, while the authorised overdraft is the binding limit.

Earmarking also occurs through taxes assigned to bodies outside the general state budget. The contribution pour le remboursement de la dette sociale (CRDS) was created in 1996 to finance the Caisse d'amortissement de la dette sociale [ fr ] (CADES), which repays accumulated social security debt. CADES also receives a share of the general social contribution (CSG).

The broadcasting licence fee was another example of revenue reserved for a specific purpose, funding public broadcasting. It was abolished in 2022.

The procedure known as prélèvements sur recettes transfers a specified amount of state revenue directly to local authorities or the European Union. These transfers are deducted from state receipts instead of being recorded as expenditure financed by an appropriation. Article 6 of the LOLF expressly permits them and requires their amounts to be estimated separately and precisely in the finance act.

The Constitutional Council upheld this procedure in its decision of 29 December 1982. It found that listing gross revenue and each deduction in the finance act's schedule A preserved parliamentary scrutiny. The transfers financed obligations of the recipients, rather than expenditure belonging to the state itself. The Council required the amount and destination of each transfer to be clearly identified and adequately explained.

In German budget law, the principle is known as Gesamtdeckungsprinzip, Grundsatz der Gesamtdeckung or Non-Affektationsprinzip.

The principle applies to both cash-basis accounting, traditionally known in Germany as cameral accounting, and double-entry bookkeeping. It is used in preparing federal, state and municipal budgets, as well as the budgets of bodies constituted under public law, including public broadcasters.

The presentation of revenue alongside expenditure in a cash-based budget can suggest that particular receipts finance particular expenses. Governments may also associate a tax with a specific spending programme when explaining it to the public. For example, in presenting West Germany's 1959 federal budget, almost all revenue from the mineral oil tax was associated with road construction, despite the principle of budgetary universality.

A comparison for 2005 put Germany's tax receipts at €48 billion and expenditure on road construction at €17.5 billion. These figures excluded spending on parking spaces, street lighting and street cleaning, as well as the external costs of road transport, such as accidents, noise and air pollution, and its external benefits.

The principle is intended to preserve the discretion of the legislature, or another body responsible for adopting a budget, over the use of public revenue. Pooling receipts leaves room to change spending priorities from one budget to the next. Earmarking can limit that discretion by reserving individual sources of revenue for particular purposes. The rationale is associated with democratic control of public spending and parliament's responsibility for the budget.

In Germany, the rule is set out in section 7 of the Budgetary Principles Act (Haushaltsgrundsätzegesetz, HGrG) and section 8 of the Federal Budget Code (Bundeshaushaltsordnung, BHO). Both provisions establish general coverage of expenditure by revenue while allowing specified exceptions.

Pooling revenue allows spending plans to be made without tying a particular expenditure to the amount collected from a particular tax. It does not prevent revenue and expenditure from being grouped for accounting or analytical purposes. Earmarking, however, restricts the use of the receipts concerned and can make it harder to redirect spending towards higher priorities.

Budgetary universality differs from financing an individual expense through a designated tax or grant. A political statement associating a tax increase with a spending programme does not, by itself, create a binding earmark.

The Budgetary Principles Act and the Federal Budget Code permit revenue to be earmarked where this is prescribed by law or authorised in the budget. Earmarked receipts are then available only for the designated expenditure, rather than forming part of the revenue available to finance the budget as a whole.

Municipal budgets can also contain earmarked revenue. In a 2000 judgment concerning Lower Saxony, the Federal Administrative Court described an exception under section 17(1) of the municipal budget ordinance (Gemeindehaushaltsverordnung, GemHVO) applicable to the case. The court held that a municipality could establish a binding earmark through a note in its budget.

Certain municipal services funded through fees may operate outside the general revenue pool. For example, fees collected by separate municipal bodies responsible for waste disposal or water services may be reserved for the functions assigned to those bodies.

Earmarking can make the relationship between a particular source of revenue and its use easier to trace. Under budgetary universality, a budget identifies expenditure under individual budget items, but does not assign a particular source of revenue to each item. Earmarking is also a feature of public budgeting in the United States.

Governments often present new taxes or tax increases together with proposals for additional expenditure. German examples include:

In the absence of a binding earmark, a change in revenue from a particular tax does not by itself prescribe a corresponding change in the spending programme politically associated with it.

Another debate concerns taxpayers who object to particular uses of public money. The German campaign group Netzwerk Friedenssteuer advocates arrangements under which taxpayers could avoid contributing to military expenditure. In a 2012 decision, the Federal Fiscal Court held that freedom of conscience did not entitle taxpayers to withhold tax payments because they opposed the activities financed by the state. The court distinguished the obligation to pay tax from parliament's authority to decide how the revenue is spent.

BUMIDOM (Bu reau pour le développement des mi grations dans les d épartements d’ o utre- m er, French for "Office for development of migrations within overseas departments") was a French governmental agency between 1963 and 1982 in charge of emigration of the inhabitants of French overseas departments to Metropolitan France.

After World War II, French colonies fell on hard times, with rising birth rates and increasing unemployment, thus many young people were unemployed. On March 19, 1946, the Loi de la départementalisation (Law of Departmentalization) passed, making the colonies of Guadeloupe, Martinique, Reunion and French Guiana overseas departments of France, thus giving the inhabitants French citizenship and equal rights to people living in Metropolitan France. However, for many people, little changed.

There was also an attempt of repopulating the rural departments. In particular, the department of Creuse in Central France, that in its peak had as much at 287,000 residents, saw its population fall below 200,000 after World War II and continued to decline, as approximately 3,000 young people headed for larger cities each year for better employment opportunities. Thus, between 1962 and 1984, more than 2,000 children - some orphans, others not - were forcibly removed from their homes in Reunion and taken to metropolitan France to repopulate declining rural areas, with the department of Creuse receiving the majority of the children, dubbed "enfants de la Creuse" (Creuse Children).

By 1982, with the French economy beginning to stall, the BUMIDOM program was halted, prioritizing family reunification over the recruitment of new workers.

The treatment of the "Creuse Children" went largely unnoticed until the early-2000s, when some sued the French state.

The BUMIDOM experience was depicted in director Christian Faure 's television movie Le rêve français "The French Dream", that premiered on France 2 in March 2018. In addition, author Jessica Oublié, daughter of a Martiniquan father and a Guadeloupean mother, penned the graphic novel "Péyi an nou" ("Our Country" in Creole) in 2017.

Central Tariff Bureau (French : Bureau central de tarification ; BCT) is an independent French administrative authority [ fr ]. The BCT is responsible for regulating the premiums for the compulsory insurance, enabling individuals and companies who are unable to pay otherwise due to a certain conditions. It has been authorized to take measures regarding automobile liability insurance since 1958, construction insurance since 1978, natural disaster insurance since 1982, and medical liability insurance since 2002. The last extension of its powers was in 2015, adding a fifth area of competence in rental liability insurance.

BCT was created around automobile insurance in 1958. It was established by the Law No. 58-208 of February 27, 1958, instituting a compulsory insurance obligation for motor vehicle traffic.

The Central Construction Tariff Bureau (CCTB) was created by the Spinetta Law of 1978.

The Central Tariff Bureau for Natural Disasters (CTB Cat' Nat') was created in 1982.

The Medical Central Tariff Bureau (MCTB) was created by Law No. 2002-303 of March 4, 2002, relating to patient rights and the quality of the healthcare system (Official Journal of March 5, 2003), specifically Article L.252-1 of the Insurance Code.

The CTB for rental liability, co-owners, and condominium associations was created by Decree No. 2015-518 of May 11, 2015, extending it to rental liability, that of co-owners, and condominium associations. This extension follows the establishment of a new insurance obligation by the ALUR Law of 2014.

The composition of the CTB is determined by Article R.250-1 of the Insurance Code, an article modified by the 2015 decree.

Its President is Professor Laurent Leveneur. He is chosen from among Council of State counselors, Court of Cassation counselors, Court of Auditors master counselors, or professors of legal disciplines at universities, whether active or emeritus.

Each branch is represented equally by representatives of those subject to the insurance obligation and insurers, who are appointed for a renewable period of three years.

A government commissioner, appointed by the Minister of Finance, attends all debates.

BRGM is France's public reference institution in Earth Science applications for the management of surface and subsurface resources and risks. It also deals with geological surveys of French territory.

BRGM was founded in 1959. It is a public establishment of an industrial and commercial nature (EPIC). It reports to the ministries in charge of research, ecology, and economical matters. It is based in the French prefecture of Orléans. Michèle Rousseau is its chair and managing director and Christophe Poinssot its deputy managing director.

BRGM's scope covers several activities such as scientific research expertise, innovation and transfer, analysis and experimentation, mining risk prevention and safety, higher education, ongoing vocational training, dissemination of knowledge and open science. It employs more than 1,000 people, including over 700 engineers and researchers, at its 27 regional branches in Metropolitan France and French overseas territories. Its teams operate in about thirty countries.

BRGM's scientific strategy is based on six major scientific and societal challenges: geology and knowledge of the subsurface, management of groundwater, risks and spatial planning, mineral resources and the circular economy, energy transition and underground space, data, digital services and infrastructure.

The French Geological Survey [ Bureau de recherches géologiques et minières (BRGM)] was officially created by a decree on 23 October 1959. It is the result of the merger of several French geological and mining establishments, namely:

BRGM developed its organisation and activities throughout the 1960s. During this decade, it gradually extended its coverage of the national territory, while its scope extended beyond the borders of France. In 1965, all the teams were grouped together at a single site, at Orléans-La Source. This new technical and scientific centre grouped together most of the institution's resources.

In 1968, BRGM absorbed the French geological mapping service, which had been created a century earlier by Napoleon III. This merger allowed it to cover the entire production chain, from field surveying to publishing.

Just as BRGM finished laying the foundations of its organisation and activities, the 1973 oil crisis occurred. The organisation was able to ensure France's supply of oil, and became the key operator in France's prospection strategy. Its expertise and resources were also used for mining operations. In French regions and abroad, BRGM, with its growing reputation as the subsurface specialist, was henceforth increasingly called upon.

After a golden age paradoxically due to the 1973 oil crisis, BRGM faced a series of difficulties throughout the 1980s. Several mining projects failed. The establishment then strengthened its regional proximity and developed its role in renewable energies while focusing on commercial activities, particularly in the field of spatial planning. In the 1990s, mining and engineering activities were assigned to subsidiaries to enable the establishment to focus on its two missions of public service and scientific research.

In 1999, BRGM set up a new organisation to better tailor its offer to meet societal needs and better respond to new environmental challenges like limited groundwater resources. By withdrawing from its activity as a mining investor and transferring most of its engineering work in France to its subsidiary Antea, which was then sold in 2003, BRGM asserted its research and development role. The new focus on the environment and natural hazards was confirmed by a decree of 20 September 2004 which placed BRGM under the triple supervision of the Ministries of Research, Industry and the Environment.

In 2019, BRGM reaffirmed its general public-service mission, combining research, support for public policies and innovation, in France and abroad. It presented its new 10-year scientific strategy, organised around six major scientific and societal issues.

Scientific research at BRGM aims to further geological knowledge and improve our understanding of surface and subsurface processes. It mobilises more than 700 BRGM engineers and researchers, i.e., two-thirds of the workforce.

BRGM's scientific research mission is carried out through:

BRGM participates in two thematic alliances whose aim is to coordinate public research stakeholders: AllEnvi (National Environmental Research Alliance) and Ancre (National Alliance for the Coordination of Energy Research). These programme partnerships coordinate the main actors in a field in order to design research and development programmes that are consistent with the national strategy.

BRGM's expert appraisal activity aims to provide customers with an interpretation, opinion or recommendation in response to a specific question. These assessments are drawn up on the basis of available knowledge and demonstrations accompanied by an objective judgement based on the best applicable practices.

Generating value from innovation is a major focus of BRGM strategy, along with research and expert knowledge. This involves creating as many opportunities as possible for transfer and economic development. For this purpose, BRGM has acquired the means to generate value from its inventions by ensuring that its concepts mature more quickly and promoting their development and innovation jointly with industrial partners.

Within its specific areas of expertise, BRGM designs and develops methodologies for conducting analyses, characterisations, observations and experiments – whether in laboratories or on pilot sites – in gas, water, soil and subsurface environments. BRGM has a wide range of scientific equipment and facilities for performing analyses, characterisations and experiments.

BRGM's laboratories and technological platforms work in particular in the areas of environmental chemistry, metrology, the environment and sensors, isotope geochemistry, mineralogy, and studies in microbiology and molecular biology. BRGM is also involved in multi-scale biogeochemical experimentation and the development of treatment processes.

Since 2006, France has entrusted BRGM with the technical management of surveillance and safety work of former mining sites and the prevention of mine-related risks. BRGM manages: safety work as delegated project owner, supervision of mining site structures, the post-mining information system, (intermediate mining technical archives and mining information).

BRGM has a "Mining Prevention and Safety" department (DPSM). In addition to its central departments based in Orléans, BRGM's mining safety mission is carried out in the regions by the Post-Mining Territorial Units (UTAMs), which cover the major mining basins.

Under the " BRGM Campus " label, BRGM provides support to higher education in geosciences. To do so, it develops collaborative programmes for different academic organisations. The aim is to cater for the needs of industry and society in all fields involving land and the subsurface.

BRGM Campus covers the entire range of higher qualifications (Bachelor's, Master's, doctorate) as well as BRGM's various fields of expertise in the geosciences.

BRGM ensures the development of scientific and technical skills by offering short courses and training courses, in-class or through distance learning, catalogue-based or tailor-made, under the BRGM Formation brand name.

BRGM makes its geological and environmental information available through various digital technologies: via its InfoTerre portal it provides free and open access to its geological reports and maps, data in its databases (on the subsurface, industrial sites, natural hazards, etc.) and a large amount of other geoscientific data.

On request from the public authorities, BRGM also coordinates and manages several dozen websites and databases in the fields of geology, natural hazards (Géorisques), water (ADES), mineral resources (Minéralinfo), geothermal energy (Géothermies), etc.

To ensure easy access to its data from anywhere in the country, BRGM also provides three mobile applications: i-InfoTerre (mobile version of the InfoTerre web portal), InfoNappe (on groundwater) and InfoGéol (on the geology of France).

BRGM's scientific strategy is organised around 6 scientific and societal issues.

Producing reference information on the subsurface is a key role for BRGM as the French National Geological Survey. The sustainable management of land and resources on local and regional levels requires extensive, reliable and current subsurface knowledge. After the geological map of France programme, BRGM designed the French Geological Repository (RGF), a national programme for the acquisition and management of geological data that involves the entire French geoscience community.

Knowledge of the subsurface lays the foundation for improving the use of resources (e.g., water, energy, minerals and metals), adapting to the impacts of climate change, anticipating and mitigating natural risks and taking these into account in spatial planning. This is relevant to planners, economic stakeholders, environmental managers, education providers, civil society and the general public.

Faced with the challenges posed by global changes, one of BRGM's core missions is to further our knowledge of groundwater, by monitoring and anticipating its availability and ensuring its quality.

Groundwater resources are essential for the supply of drinking water and satisfying the needs of agriculture in many countries, and especially in France. Water resources are under increasing pressure from climate change and greater demand for different uses. Demand for groundwater resources may be exceeding supply at the local and regional levels.

For more sustainable spatial planning, BRGM is developing integrated approaches to the management of natural risks that have an impact on land, the subsurface and the coastline, as well as risks resulting from human activity, linked to post-mining, polluted sites and ground.

BRGM conducts research and expertise on natural geological hazards: earthquakes, unstable ground, collapsing cavities, volcanic eruptions, shrinkage and swelling of clays, etc. It is fully involved in the knowledge and management of coastal risks in the context of climate change. Methods and technologies for the decontamination of urban and industrial ground and the rational management of former mining sites also fall within its scope.

Confronted with increasing pressures on mineral resources, BRGM is working to ensure a sustainable supply and a more circular economy.

BRGM develops predictive approaches to facilitate the detection and prospecting of primary mineral resources. It observes mineral life cycles and value chains and is thus able to analyse the flows and dynamics involved, integrating environmental, economic and social factors to support the development of a more circular economy and more responsible mining. It also designs innovative solutions for optimising the processing and recycling of mineral materials, using technologies with reduced environmental impacts and lower energy consumption.

The energy transition implies a shift towards less centralised and more varied renewable and low-carbon energy sources. Similarly, reducing greenhouse gas emissions will require CO 2 capture and storage.

BRGM explores, assesses and exploits subsurface potential as an energy resource (geothermal energy) and a space for storage (energy carriers, CO 2) and confinement.

BRGM collects, hosts and disseminates reliable and long-term geological and environmental data, to which it guarantees access through official and interoperable data repositories.

It also develops applications and innovative tools based on data science and geoscience to model, predict and produce information on the state of the surface and subsurface, their resources and associated risks.

In addition to its head office located in Orléans, BRGM has 13 divisions and 5 regional delegations in mainland France, as well as 5 regional directorates and an Overseas branch, which work closely with its clients and partners throughout the country. BRGM manages its mining safety responsibilities through its 4 regional post-mining units (UTAMs).

BRGM's regional activities include support with policy development as well as expert studies and scientific research.

BRGM's regional divisions work in all BRGM's fields of activity. Water resources, natural risks, climate change impacts and subsurface geothermal potential in France are some of the core themes of BRGM's regional activities.

BRGM is actively engaged at EU level through its sustained involvement in European research programmes, and support for public policy development and international cooperation.

Internationally, as it does in France, BRGM contributes its know-how and expertise in two main areas:

Every year, BRGM is active in around thirty countries in the following fields:

The BRGM Group's subsidiaries and equity interests are controlled through three holding companies (Sageos, Coframines and BRGM SA), corresponding to four branches of activity:

Our publications branch, Editions du BRGM, offers a selection of geological maps, books and popular geosciences material, which is unique in France.

In keeping with its research and expert study missions, BRGM disseminates scientific and technical knowledge for the scientific community, professionals, regional planners and the general public.

Created in 1998 by BRGM, in partnership with the French Institute the Academy of Sciences (Paris), the Prix Dolomieu, named after the geologist Déodat Gratet de Dolomieu, is awarded annually to European researchers or engineers in the fields of mathematics, physics, mechanics, computer science and Earth sciences.

BRGM has given its name to a major legal ruling handed down on 21 December 1987 by the first Civil Chamber of the French Cour de Cassation (court of appeal): this judgment concerns “the general principle of law according to which the assets of public persons may not be seized", a principle that applies even to EPICs (Public establishments of an industrial and commercial nature) and which prohibits the use of proceedings for enforcement from private law against these establishments.

Bureau enquêtes accidents pour la sécurité de l'aéronautique d'État (BEA-É), formerly the Bureau enquêtes accidents défense (BEA Défense or BEAD) and Bureau enquêtes accidents défense air (BEAD-air), is an agency of the French Ministry of Defence. It investigates aviation accidents and incidents occurring on government and military aircraft. The head office is on Vélizy-Villacoublay Air Base (Base 107), in the area around Vélizy-Villacoublay, Yvelines, in the Paris metropolitan area.

It is intended to operate separately and independently from other French government agencies. It is distinct from the Bureau of Enquiry and Analysis for Civil Aviation Safety (BEA), a part of the French Ministry of Transport which investigates accidents and incidents to civilian aircraft.

The Bureau enquêtes accidents défense mer (BEAD-mer) is the equivalent agency for investigating accidents and incidents on government and military sea transport, and the Bureau enquêtes accidents défense de transport terrestre (BEAD-TT) is the equivalent agency for such involving land transport.

It was created on 1 January 2002. It was based at Brétigny-sur-Orge Air Base (Base 217). On 1 January 2003 the BEAD began operations. It changed its name in 2005 when similar agencies were created to investigate accidents and incidents on other modes of military transport. It adopted its current name on 9 May 2018.

The Bureau of Enquiry and Analysis for Civil Aviation Safety (French : Bureau d'enquêtes et d'analyses pour la sécurité de l'aviation civile, BEA) is an agency of the French government, responsible for investigating civil aviation accidents and incidents and making safety recommendations based on what is learned from those investigations.

Its headquarters are at Paris–Le Bourget Airport in Le Bourget, near Paris. The BEA has 96 employees in 2019, including 30 investigators and 12 investigative assistants. It is under the authority of the Ministry of Ecology, Sustainable Development, Transport and Housing.

The BEA was created in 1946. It operates under, amongst other texts, the French civil aviation and transports codes.

Following international rules, French authorities are responsible for investigating all aircraft accidents occurring in French territory or airspace, as well as accidents involving French aircraft occurring in international airspace or in other countries if the local authorities do not open a technical enquiry. They may also assist foreign investigation authorities at their request. They are also the investigating party for all aircraft manufactured by the multinational Airbus.

As of 2025, the head of the BEA is Pierre-Yves Huerre, who began his term on 1 January 2024. Previous BEA heads include Jean-Paul Troadec, and Rémi Jouty, engineer general of the Bridges, Waters and Forests.

It is headquartered in Building 153 on the grounds of Paris–Le Bourget Airport in Le Bourget, near Paris. The BEA building is located in front of the French Air and Space Museum and houses offices and laboratories. The BEA building at Le Bourget has over 5,000 square metres (54,000 sq ft) of space; it had been expanded to that amount in 2002, and to 3,000 square metres (32,000 sq ft) by 1999. Previously the building had 1,000 square metres (11,000 sq ft) of space.

In addition the BEA has facilities at Melun Aerodrome. They include hangars and protected areas with a combined total of 6,000 square metres (65,000 sq ft) of space. The BEA also has hangars and protected areas in Bonneuil-sur-Marne. The BEA has satellite offices in Aix-en-Provence, Bordeaux, Rennes, and Toulouse.

At one time the head office of the Bureau d'Enquêtes-Accidents (as it was known before 2001, and is still frequently if loosely referred to) was in the 15th arrondissement of Paris.

The Burgundian language, also known by French names Bourguignon-morvandiau, Bourguignon, and Morvandiau, is an Oïl language spoken in Burgundy and particularly in the Morvan area of the region.

The arrival of the Burgundians brought Germanic elements into the Gallo-Romance speech of the inhabitants. The occupation of the Low Countries by the Dukes of Burgundy also brought Burgundian into contact with Dutch; e.g., the word for gingerbread couque derives from Middle Dutch kooke (cake).

Dialects of the south along the Saône river, such as Brionnais-Charolais, have been influenced by the Arpitan language, which is spoken mainly in a neighbouring area that approximates the heartland of the original Kingdom of Burgundy.

Eugène de Chambure published a Glossaire du Morvan in 1878.

Apart from songs dating from the eighteenth century, there is little surviving literature from before the nineteenth century. In 1854 the Papal Bull Ineffabilis Deus was translated into the Morvan dialect by the Abbé Jacques-François Baudiau, and into the Dijon dialect by the Abbé Lereuil. The Abbé Baudiau also transcribed storytelling.

Folklorists collected vernacular literature from the mid-nineteenth century and by the end of the century a number of writers were establishing an original literature. Achille Millien (1838–1927) collected songs from the oral tradition in the Nivernais. Louis de Courmont, nicknamed the " Botrel of the Morvan", was a chansonnier who after a career in Paris returned to his native region. A statue was erected to him in Château-Chinon. Emile Blin wrote a number of stories and monologues aimed at a tourist market; a collection was published in 1933 under the title Le Patois de Chez Nous. Alfred Guillaume published a large number of vernacular texts for use on picturesque postcards at the beginning of the twentieth century, and in 1923 published a book in Burgundian, L'âme du Morvan. More recently, Marinette Janvier published Ma grelotterie (1974) and Autour d'un teugnon (1989).

Bushi or Kibosy (Shibushi or Kibushi) is a dialect of Malagasy spoken in the Indian Ocean island of Mayotte. Malagasy dialects most closely related to Bushi are spoken in northwestern Madagascar in the area of Antsiranana (Diego-Suarez) and Mahajanga (Majunga), which is also the closest point in Madagascar to Mayotte. Kibosy and Majunga together are considered one of the Malagasy languages by Glottolog.

Bushi is known as Kibushi on Mayotte and is spoken by 40% of the island's people (1980). It is spoken alongside the Maore dialect (Shimaore), a Bantu language. Historically, Kibushi and Shimaore have been spoken in certain villages but Shimaore tends to be the de facto indigenous lingua franca in everyday life because of the larger Shimaore-speaking population. Only Shimaore is represented on the local television news program by Réseau Outre-Mer 1re. Dialects of Bushi in Mayotte (known as Shibushi in Shimaore) include Kiantalaotsy and Kibushi-Kimaore (Shibushi-Shimaore in Shimaore).

Bushi is spoken along the west coast of the main island (Grande-Terre) including the villages of Bambo Est, M'Boueni, Passy-Kéli, Mronabeja, Kani-Kéli, Chirongui, Poroani, Ouangani, Chiconi, Sohoa, M'Tsangamouji, Acoua, Mtsangadoua, and Handrema.

In Mayotte, Bushi was traditionally written with an informal French -based Latin orthography. On 22 February 2006, the Conseil de la culture, de l'éducation et de l'environnement de Mayotte introduced an official alphabet that utilizes the basic Latin alphabet without c, j, q, and x and uses three extra letters: ɓ, ɗ, and n̈. Here, the letters used in the orthography are bracketed, following their IPA counterparts. On March 3, 2020, the Conseil départemental de Mayotte announced the adoption of official orthographies in both Latin and Arabic scripts for Kibushi.

Business France is a French statutory organization and industry association, founded in January 2015 through a merger between Unifrance and the French Agency for International Investment (InvestInFrance). Its aim is to promote export-led growth by French businesses, as well as foreign investment in France.

Business France has the status of a public institution under the supervision of the Ministry of Economy and Finance, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Development, and the Ministry of Rural Spatial Planning and Territory Development. It is headquartered on Boulevard Saint-Jacques, in the 14th arrondissement of Paris.

Ubifrance was the French agency for export promotion. It succeeded the Centre Français du Commerce Extérieur (French Center for external commerce), or CFCE.

Its headquarters is on Boulevard Saint-Jacques, 14th arrondissement of Paris, but it is also based in the World Trade Center of Grenoble.

UBIFrance has 66 economic missions in 46 countries and more than 1,400 employees in France and abroad responsible for helping French companies in their international development. France's budget bill for 2011 authorized €105,398,000 for the agency.

On 1 January 2015, UBIFRANCE merged with InvestInFrance, and became Business France.

Business France's work is divided into four main pillars:

Priority is given to small innovative companies. Business France has a cooperation agreement with 13 regional agencies.

The agency is run by a sixteen member Board of Directors composed of a National Assembly Député, a Senator, three government representatives, three regional council members, five economic experts, and three staff representatives.

In some legal systems, the bâtonnier is the head of the legal profession (the bar).

In Jersey, the Bâtonnier is head of the profession of advocate. The role includes administering the legal aid system for the island (the day-to-day administration is carried out by an Acting Bâtonnier, while the Bâtonnier decides appeals against the decision of the Acting Bâtonnier). The Bâtonnier formerly had a role in dealing with disciplinary matters involving advocates, but that role was removed in 2005.

In France, the role is primus inter pares (first among equals).

Elected by the members of the bar for a term of two years, the Bâtonnier is the spokesman for lawyers registered in his bar.

But in addition, it has a real function of arbitration between lawyers and a function as mediator when a dispute arises between a lawyer and his client. He is also the one who appoints lawyers for the court. The successor of the Bâtonnier is elected before the end of the term of the latter. For one year, the designated Bâtonnier can increase his competence on various issues that he will have to address upon his entry into service.

The location of the Sainte-Chapelle on the île de la Cité in Paris was in the 10th century a chapel dedicated to Saint Nicholas, who is one of the patron saints of lawyers. It was famously the site for the annual reopening of the parlement of Paris. The members gathered there to form the brotherhood of Saint-Nicolas, which was both a corporation and a religious order. The elected Chief of this brotherhood, at first called the prior, carried the banner of the order suspended from a pole or baston, during processions.

This banner was sometimes decorated with a representation of St. Nicholas or St. Yves (another patron saint of lawyers). An order of 23 October 1274 recognized lawyers as members of a constituent body in Parliament, bound by professional secrecy.

In 1690, the Dictionnaire universel des sciences et des arts stated that the bastonnier (or the bastonniere) is "he or she who carries for a while the baston of a brotherhood, and who carries it or follows it in processions. In terms of the Palace of Justice, it is a former lawyer chosen annually according to the order of the Tableau, to be the head of the community of lawyers and prosecutors, to be the master of their Chapel and their brotherhood, and preside over the tribunal that they hold for maintaining the discipline of the Palace and its regulations. He also manages the commission of inquiry of lower judges during their ban. "

Bécassine is a French comic strip and the name of its heroine, appearing for the first time in the first issue of La Semaine de Suzette on February 2, 1905. She is considered one of the first female protagonists in French comic history.

Bécassine is considered one of the most enduring French comics of all time, iconic in its home country, and with a long history in syndication and publication. Since 1 January 2024, the series has been in the public domain.

The character Bécassine is a young Breton housemaid, usually depicted wearing a green dress pastiching traditional Breton peasant costume, with lace coiffe and clogs. She is said to come from Finistère, the area most associated with traditional Breton culture. However, her clothing has non-Breton elements, reminiscent of the local costume of Picardy. She is usually portrayed without a mouth.

Seen as a stereotype and remnant of the contempt with which the Bretons were long seen, she is the typical provincial girl as seen by the more refined city people of Paris, the target audience of the young girls' magazine La Semaine de Suzette. But over the course of the stories, and coupled with the success she has, she is depicted more and more favourably. "Bécassine" is a nickname, derived from the French word for a number of birds of the family of the snipe, which is also used as a way of saying "fool" in French.

Initially made as filler for a blank page, the story, written by Jacqueline Rivière and drawn by Joseph Pinchon, was such a success that new pages regularly appeared, still in the guise of page fillers.

Only in 1913 did Bécassine become the heroine of more structured stories. Still drawn by Pinchon, the stories were then written by Caumery (pseudonym of Maurice Languereau), one of the associates of Gautier-Languereau, the publisher of La Semaine de Suzette. At that time, the character's real name was revealed to be Annaïck Labornez, her nickname coming from her home village, called Clocher-les-Bécasses.

Between 1913 and 1950, 27 volumes of the adventures of Bécassine appeared. Pinchon drew 25 of them, and Edouard Zier the other two. All 27 were credited as being written by "Caumery", but after Languereau's death in 1941, the pseudonym was used by others.

After Pinchon's death in 1953, the series continued with other artists, most notably Jean Trubert beginning in 1959.

With a first appearance three years before Les Pieds Nickelés, Bécassine is considered the birth of the modern bande dessinée, the Franco-Belgian comic. It marks the transition between the illustrated histories, or text comics, and the true bande dessinée. Its style of drawing, with lively, modern, rounded lines, would inspire the ligne claire style which Hergé 25 years later would popularise in The Adventures of Tintin.

After a decline in popularity, Bécassine regained prominence due to the hit single "Bécassine, c'est ma cousine" ("Bécassine, she's my cousin") by Chantal Goya, which sold over three million copies in 1979. It has been replied to by the Breton guitarist Dan Ar Braz with the song "Bécassine, ce n'est pas ma cousine" ("Bécassine, she's not my cousin").

The popular television show Le Bébête Show, a series that is similar to Spitting Image, showed far right politician Jean-Marie Le Pen in the guise of the puppet Pencassine.

In April 2005, the French Post issued a stamp depicting Bécassine for her centenary. In contemporary Brittany she remains a familiar figure, with Bécassine dolls and ornaments available in tourist shops.

Bérangère Fabienne Maria Abba (French pronunciation: [ beʁɑ̃ʒɛʁ aba ] ; born 22 October 1976) is a French politician who served as Secretary of State for Biodiversity in the government of Prime Minister Jean Castex from 2020 to 2022. As a member of Renaissance (RE), she previously represented the 1st constituency of the Haute-Marne department in the National Assembly from 2017 until 2020.

The owner of a family lingerie shop, Abba was a municipal councillor of Chaumont from 2014 to 2017. In the 2015 departmental election, she ran in the canton of Chaumont-2 as a miscellaneous right candidate, but failed to qualify for the second round.

Abba was elected to the National Assembly in Haute-Marne's 1st constituency in 2017 with 53.4% of the second-round vote for La République En Marche! (later Renaissance). In Parliament, she served on the Committee on Laws from 2017 until 2020. In addition to her committee assignments, she was part of the French-Haitian Parliamentary Friendship Group.

On 26 July 2020, Abba was appointed as Secretary of State for Biodiversity at the Ministry for the Ecological Transition under Minister Barbara Pompili. She left the government on 20 May 2022.

In the 2022 legislative election, this time running for Horizons, she lost her seat to Christophe Bentz of VIA, the Way of the People (supported by the National Rally), with 48.7% of the second-round vote.

Abba was a candidate on the Ensemble list led by Valérie Hayer in the 2024 European election but failed to obtain a seat in the European Parliament, as she was placed 17th. In the 2024 snap legislative election, she ran again in Haute-Marne's 1st constituency, losing again to Bentz with 46.1% of the second-round vote.

In May 2018, Abba co-sponsored an initiative in favour of legalising assisted reproductive technology (ART) for all women (singles, heterosexual couples or lesbian couples). In September 2018, following the appointment of François de Rugy to the government, Abba supported the candidacy of Barbara Pompili for president of the National Assembly.

The Bœuf Gras ("Fat Ox") is a traditional festive figure displayed or paraded by butchers, usually during Carnival celebrations. It may take the form of a live ox or other placid bovine, or a sculpted representation of one.

This article provides a non-exhaustive overview of Bœuf Gras festivities in various countries.

An English cartoon from 1660 depicts Mardi Gras mounted on a fat ox and preparing to do battle with Lent.

The Bœuf Gras competition was held in Anderlecht from 1909 to 1998.

A Boeuf Gras procession took place in Antwerp on Monday March 28, 1910, the day after Easter Sunday.

There is a Bœuf Gras competition in Mouscron, which had its 40th edition in 2023.

In Montreal, on Friday, March 23, 1900, the day after Mi-Carême Thursday, a Bœuf Gras parade was organized for the first time. It took place in the evening on the ice of a skating rink, protected by walls from the aggressive winter cold, and was open to spectators for an entrance fee. The parade featured floats representing, among others, the city of Montreal, England, France and Ireland, with young girls in national costume escorted by halberdiers. Thirty musicians from l'Harmonie de Montréal provide the soundscape against a backdrop of lighting effects.

In the church of Bar-sur-Seine, a 16th-century stained glass window depicts the feast of the Boeuf Gras, which was certainly held in the town at the time.

Bayonne's tradition of bœufs gras is a practice that will be listed as part of France's intangible cultural heritage in 2020.

The Bœufs Gras procession has been held in Bazas every year since the 13th century.

Beaumont-sur-Oise 's "Boeuf Gras" is a long-standing festival that has been held without interruption for many years.

In the cavalcade of May 20, 1907, a Char de la Boucherie, Char du Bœuf Gras, marches past.

The tradition of boeuf gras (fattened beef) was first documented in Bergerac in 1908.

Butchers, who used to walk fat oxen around town, once played a key role in the organization of the Chalon-sur-Saône Carnival. On Mardi Gras, February 12, 1907, the butchers took up the tradition of the Bœuf Gras and paraded a splendid beast around town.

On February 27, 1858, in his article entitled Les Bœufs gras, published in L'Univers illustré, Mr. Vauvert wrote about the Bœuf gras procession at Chapelle Saint-Denis :

Paris was not alone in enjoying the privilege of these ceremonial rides; several neighboring towns had their boeuf phénomène, complete with triumphal float and traditional Indian procession. The solemnity at La Chapelle-Saint-Denis was remarkable not so much for the pomp and circumstance displayed by its organizer, Mr. Baudeau, as for the presence of a hundred-and-seven-year-old man, the venerable Mr. Armand Gérard. Armand Gérard, who had asked to be featured as Le Temps. We have dedicated an engraving to this procession, as to that of the Parisian oxen.

The village of La Chapelle-Saint-Denis was annexed to Paris at the end of 1859; parts of its territory were attached to the communes of Saint-Ouen, Saint-Denis and Aubervilliers.

A Bœuf Gras parades in the Mi-Carême Thursday procession March 21, 1909 in Charleville.

On April 1, 1906, a Bœuf Gras took part in the "Cavalcade Paris-Chartres".

On May 27, 1906, a Bœuf Gras (Fat Ox) float took part in the Fête des Fleurs (Flower Festival).

In his Essai about the organization of work in Poitou from the 11th century to the Revolution, published in 1900, Prosper Boissonnade describes the bœuf gras de Châtellerault :

Since the end of the 16th century, the butchers of Châtellerault, for example, have celebrated Carnival with a competition in which they exhibit the best oxen. After being presented to the officers of the seneschals, the most beautiful steer recognized by the jurors is "viellé", i.e. taken around the town's cantons and crossroads to the sound of popular music, and its lucky owner is granted a monopoly on Lenten butchery.

In Clermont-Ferrand, fat oxen were driven around at Easter until around 1960.

Around 1920, in Créteil, then a village in the Paris region, Mardi Gras and Mi-Carême were important festivals, as they were in Paris at the same time. A Bœuf Gras (fat ox) was paraded, as André Dreux reports in Créteil, mon village! :

Then came Mardi Gras, the butchers' festival. The prize went to the butcher who could show off the most beautiful ox - alive, of course. It was the "bœuf gras" (fat ox), which rarely walked on its legs along the streets of Créteil, but was hoisted onto a float, decked out and beautifully wrapped, surrounded by horsemen and people in fancy dress. The laundresses in particular were part of the festivities, and had the day off: it has to be said that there were quite a few of them since there was a small factory, among other smaller laundries. Créteil's washerwomen, if they knew how to handle the beater, like their 5th-century ancestors who, it is said, knocked out the preachers Agoard and Aglibert, at least handled this professional instrument with good humor and accompanied themselves with song. Wasn't it one of their eldest sisters who, from the wash boat opposite the " Au cochon de lait " where Victor Hugo was staying, charmed Hugo into writing a poem about it? After Mardi Gras, Carnival continued with Mi-Carême; more masquerade costumes, and merry confetti battles. Around 1920, we regularly saw masked balls organized by local societies.

A video of the Bœuf Gras competition held in Dax in February 1963 is available on the Internet.

A description of the Promenade du Boeuf Gras in Dijon is known from 1784. It shows some similarities with the one in Paris:

On Sunday November 28, Dijon's butchers, having been awarded the bounty of the fatted ox at the opening of the Seurre fairs, marched it through the town with great pomp; they rode on horseback, sword in hand, and had the Prince's music.

A postcard shows a float carrying a Bœuf Gras and three costumed people: a toreador and two picadors. It was part of the grand cavalcade organized in Eu on Easter Monday, April 20, 1908. Another postcard shows the Bœuf Gras and Boîte au Sel marching in Eu that day.

A photo from the 1930s shows the Bœuf Gras procession in Issoudun.

Jargeau's carnival, now the largest in the Centre-Val de Loire region, is said to have originated with the Bœuf Gras (Fat Ox) village walk in the 1880s.

On April 4, 1904, Lunéville hosted a cavalcade featuring a Bœuf Gras float.

The tradition of the Promenade du Bœuf Gras is attested to in Lurcy-Lévis by an early postcard.

In 1822, in the Dictionnaire critique des reliques et des images miraculuses by J.-A.-S. Collin de Plancy, we read:

On Corpus Christi (1), the oxen are always taken for a walk in Marseille. It carries a child on its back, representing Saint John the Baptist. Some claim that this is a remnant of paganism, but Ruffi attributes the origin of this ceremony to the confreres of the body of Our Lord "who walked an ox every year, to treat the confreres on Corpus Christi. He quotes documents from 1530, which at least prove that this procession had the use he gives it, but which do not prove that it is not a remnant of paganism (2).

(1) Nannies are careful to have their infants kiss the muzzle of the fat ox. They are convinced that this ceremony will preserve a child forever from toothache. Good women who can let the fatted ox into their homes consider it a good omen when it deposits its digestion in their house or yard.

(2) Histoire de Marseille, book XIV, chap. VI.

A traditional Carnival figure in Martinique used to be the Mardi Gras ox.

The tradition of the Manthelan beef-fat parade took place every year on Mardi Gras. It ended after the centenary celebration in 1989.

A postcard from around 1900 shows the Bœuf Gras float on parade at "La Cavalcade du 9 Avril" in Montargis.

Bœuf Gras is documented in Montbrison until 1962.

The Bœuf Gras festival reappeared in Montluçon in the early 1990s under the name Fête, then Carnaval du Bœuf Villé.

Bœuf gras was once paraded in Nancy. An article illustrated with a photo appeared on the subject in February 2012 in L'Est républicain.

The Bœuf Gras appears to be an old tradition at the Nantes Carnival. It can be seen, for example, in 1907, 1914, 1920, 1921, 1923, 1924.

Photos of the Bœuf Gras at Carnaval de Nantes:

At the Nantes Carnival in 1958, the last horse-drawn carriage in the carnival parade was a Bœuf Gras float.

The Bœuf Gras was traditionally driven through Niort every year.

We still have a description of the 1807 Orléans boeuf gras (fattened ox) walk, which is reminiscent of the Parisian tradition, including the child dressed as a sweetheart perched on the ox:

February 8, 1807. - Orléans butchers' festival and fat ox walk in the city. A huge animal, covered in a scarlet cloak, its horns adorned with flowers and ribbons, carrying on its back a pretty six-year-old child dressed as a lover, with a bow in his hand and a quiver on his back, was followed by more than fifty butcher boys, neatly dressed in white jackets, bonnets and aprons, partly on horseback and partly on foot; The procession traveled a good portion of the city, bursting with noisy joy, and stopped in front of the homes of Orléans' principal inhabitants, as well as at the doors of the best practices, whose generosity was used to make a splendid gala that rounded off the festivities.

A postcard from around 1930 shows the presentation of Bœufs gras in Orléans on Mi-Carême day.

In 19th-century Paris, the prestigious Bœuf Gras festivities took on a gigantic dimension, becoming the de facto Fête de Paris within the framework of the very large Carnaval de Paris. From 1870 onwards, the Parisian Bœuf Gras procession declined due to political and organizational difficulties, including the butchers' crisis associated with the Mathurin Couder affair (1869–1873) and the absence of a mayor of Paris until 1977. It continued to parade in the 20th century, including on a large scale in 1905 and 1936. But it disappeared after the 1951 and 1952 parades.

This was followed by a 45-year hiatus. It was revived in 1998 on the initiative of Basile Pachkoff and has marched every year since. From 2002 onwards, it returned to the traditional Carnival calendar, marching on Dimanche Gras the day before Mardi Gras.

A Bœuf gras float paraded in a 1908 cavalcade in Le Perray-en-Yvelines.

A postcard from 1909 features the Bœuf Gras in Pierrefitte-sur-Seine, then called Pierrefitte.

Louis-François-Marie Bellin de La Liborlière wrote in 1846 about life in Poitiers before 1789:

As the law of quadragesimal abstinence was generally observed, each year a Lenten butcher was appointed, with sole responsibility for the public sale of meat during the period when this type of food became an exception. It was this butcher who, at Carnival time, led the fattened ox through the streets of the town with great pomp and ceremony.

The "boucherie de carême" was the only butcher's shop authorized to sell meat during the forty days of Lent to those dispensed from fasting by the bishop. This was a prestigious and lucrative position.

A Bœuf Gras was paraded at the 1927 Mi-Carême in Rennes and another at the 1930 Mi-Carême.

The first prize in the Rennes student tombola for Mi-Carême 1938 is a Bœuf Gras.

A photo of the Bœuf Gras parade held in Rochefort on Mi-Carême Thursday, March 28, 1935, can be viewed on the Internet. The accompanying commentary states that this parade took place every year at the time.

A postcard shows the presentation of a Bœuf Gras de Pâques in Saint-Germain-des-Fossés in 1925.

Mardi Gras 1929 saw a Bœuf Gras parade in the islands of Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon.

A postcard shows the Bœuf Gras in Sancoins around 1930.

An old postcard shows the bœuf gras float parading through Troyes for Carnaval 1913.

In 1849, the Bœuf Gras Parisien did not parade in Paris, but in Versailles. It was christened Californian, in reference to the California gold rush that began that same year.

La Revue comique wrote about the Versailles parade:

And this is how the Californian, the fat ox of 1849, stripped of his Parisian royalty, found himself reduced to strolling his exiled majesty through the deserted streets of pompous Versailles, under the disdainful eyes of the local dowagers! What a fall! But also what a philosophical lesson! The ox cast melancholy glances at the city of Louis XIV ; the city whose passions, affections and memories lie beyond our frontier, looked with perfect indifference at the Californian.

A Bœuf Gras took place in Versailles in 1895. It was announced on March 21 of that year by the newspaper La Presse:

In Versailles and Saint-Germain-en-Laye, the Mi-Carême festival has been postponed to Sunday March 24.

Preparations in Versailles were underway, and the ox that would be paraded through the streets would also be the main prize in a tombola for the benefit of the poor. As the prize may have been impractical for the winner to keep, it would be bought back for 1,000 francs.

An Internet page devoted to the history of Le Vésinet states:

Before 1900, the Bœuf-Gras parade took place before the Marguerite festival. A huge ox, decorated with flowers and tricolored ribbons, was led through the streets of Le Vésinet by a brass band. The animal belonged to the Filquière butcher's shop, and was driven by Mr. Filquière himself, dressed in the traditional blue smock.

The May 7, 1922 cavalcade featured a Char du Bœuf gras.

In Carrù, the birthplace of the Piedmontese cattle breed, a Bœuf gras fair reserved for Piedmontese cattle that has been held every year since 1910.

For over two centuries, Cavriago has been home to a fattened beef fair.

Moncalvo has had a fattened beef fair for nearly four centuries.

In Nizza Monferrato, in the province of Asti, there has been a Fiera del Bue grasso et del Manzo - Fattened Beef and Beef Fair - since the 17th century.

In 1710, one of the first carnival societies, the Société du Bœuf Gras, was founded in Mobile, French America. The society marched continuously for 150 years on Mardi Gras day, from 1711 to 1861. At the head of the procession, the Boeuf Gras is represented by the head of an enormous bull, pushed alone on wheels by sixteen men. The tradition of the Boeuf Gras, which came to Mobile from France, was interrupted in 1861 due to the Civil War. The Société du Bœuf Gras was revived in 2021. The procession now parades along Dauphin Street on the morning of Mardi Gras, featuring a large papier-mâché bull's head.

New Orleans Carnival once featured a Bœuf Gras procession. An engraving from 1873 shows it. It bears a French name and includes a sacrificer armed with a club taken from a Parisian ceremony. At least in 1873, the New Orleans Carnival paraded a real live ox preceded by the sacrificer carrying a club, a costumed character typical of the Parisian parade. Since 1909, the live animal has been replaced by a float bearing a giant sculpted effigy, featured in the Fat Tuesday parade of the Krewe of Rex ; New Orleans lore has it that seeing the Boeuf Gras on carnival day guarantees a year of good luck.

On the Internet, you can see a photo of a monumental Bœuf gras artificial parading on its float in the Krewe of Centaur (Centaur Carnival Society) procession during Shreveport Carnival 2009.

"C'est Nicolas qui paie" (lit. ' It's Nicolas who pays ') is a French political slogan and viral meme that gained prominence in 2025. It centers on a fictional character, "Nicolas", representing France's urban, university-educated, and middle-class millennials. The slogan is used to express this demographic's feeling of "downward mobility" (déclassement) and frustration that they are being "milked" by high taxes to fund a social model from which they perceive little benefit.

The expression, which emerged around 2020, was adopted by conservative and far-right political figures. It has also been associated with racist remarks online.

The "Nicolas" of the slogan is a fictional character, described as a thirtysomething professional living in a small Paris flat. He is depicted as the "average Frenchman" who, despite having a university degree and a job, feels "crushed" by taxes and social contributions. The core of the sentiment is that "Nicolas" is forced to finance the pensions of " boomers ", represented by "Chantal and Bernard", and social benefits for other groups, while he and his wife struggle to access homeownership.

Some media coverage noted that the "Nicolas" archetype is specifically "white" and is sometimes contrasted with figures like "Karim, the Muslim-African immigrant". The French news service RTL reported that the hashtag had been "hijacked" by some users to spread "racist remarks".

The slogan, which originated from an anonymous X account, NicolasQuiPaie, saw a surge in popularity following budget proposals from Prime Minister François Bayrou 's government.

The expression was brought to the National Assembly on April 29, 2025, by Gérault Verny, a deputy from the Union des droites pour la République (UDR). Verny described "Nicolas" as being "fiscally harassed" and "despoiled" by the state. Other conservative politicians, such as Bruno Retailleau and Jonas Haddad of The Republicans, also used the phrase to criticize the government's fiscal policy.

On June 20, 2025, the phrase was trademarked by Artefakt, a company where Verny is a shareholder. Erik Tegner, the president of Artefakt and director of the far-right media outlet Frontières, stated the purpose was to "sanctuary" the brand from "leftist trolls".

The trend reportedly worried aides of President Emmanuel Macron, as the demographic represented by "Nicolas" was a core part of his initial support base. The government, including the finance ministry (Bercy) and the prime minister's office (Matignon), closely monitored the phenomenon. An advisor to the prime minister told RTL that the government "made the same observation as the Nicolas-supporters: that the social system weighs too heavily on the active population."

Critics on the left, such as former presidential advisor Gaspard Gantzer [ fr ], described the "Nicolas" character as a Trojan horse for "reactionary identity politics."

The creator of the anonymous X account that propelled the meme claimed to be apolitical, but voiced admiration for Javier Milei, the libertarian president of Argentina. The creator also explicitly distanced the "Nicolas" movement from the gilets jaunes.

Political analyst Jérôme Fourquet also distinguished the two, describing the "Nicolas" phenomenon as a right-wing frustration over taxes, in contrast to the gilets jaunes. The slogan has been called a new take on an older French expression, " C'est bibi qui paie " ("I'm the one who pays").

In January 2026, economist Xavier Timbeau published an economic analysis for the Observatoire français des conjonctures économiques (OFCE) examining the economic validity of the Nicolas meme that compares a young active worker to retirees or benefit recipients. Using data from the World Inequality Database, the study identified the "equilibrium point" in the French fiscal system—the income level where an individual's tax contributions equal the value of public benefits and services received. The analysis found that this tipping point is located at the 70th percentile of the income distribution, meaning that net contributors to the system belong to the wealthiest 30% of the population. Specifically, for a single person to be in the fiscal position of Nicolas (a net payer), they must earn approximately €4,200 gross monthly income (excluding pension contributions), which corresponds to a net after-tax income of €2,550. Consequently, the vast majority of the population,including many who might identify with the meme, are actually net beneficiaries of the French redistribution system.

The CAC 40 (French pronunciation: [ kak kaʁɑ̃t ]) (Cotation Assistée en Continu) is a benchmark French stock market index. The index represents a capitalization-weighted measure of the 40 most significant stocks among the 100 largest market caps on the Euronext Paris (formerly the Paris Bourse). It is a price return index. It is one of the main national indices of the pan-European stock exchange group Euronext alongside Euronext Amsterdam 's AEX, Euronext Brussels ' BEL20, Euronext Dublin 's ISEQ 20, Euronext Lisbon 's PSI-20 and the Oslo Bors OBX Index. It is an index without dividends. Cotation operates every working day from 9:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. It is updated every 15 seconds.

The CAC 5 and the CAC 40 take their name from the Paris Bourse 's early automation system Cotation Assistée en Continu (Continuous Assisted Quotation). CAC 5, inaugurated on 23 June 1986, was a version of the Toronto Computer Assisted Trading System, the first fully automated trading system. CAC 5 consisted of Leroy-Somer, LVMH, Synthélabo, Eurocom and UCB. CAC 40's base value of 1,000 was set on 31 December 1987, equivalent to a market capitalisation of 370,437,433,957.70 French francs. On 1 December 2003, the index's weighting system switched from being dependent on total market capitalisation to free float market cap only, in line with other leading indices.

The CAC 40 index composition is reviewed quarterly by an independent Index Steering Committee (French : Conseil Scientifique). If any changes are made, they are effected a minimum of two weeks after the review meeting. At each review date, the companies listed on Euronext Paris are ranked according to free float market capitalisation and share turnover over the prior 12 months. From the top 100 companies in this ranking, forty are chosen to enter the CAC 40 such that it is "a relevant benchmark for portfolio management " and "a suitable underlying asset for derivatives products". If a company has more than one class of shares traded on the exchange, only the most actively traded of these will be accepted into the index (generally this will be the ordinary share).

The CAC 40 is a capitalization-weighted index. The number of shares issued (used to calculate the market cap and hence the index weight) of a company is reviewed quarterly, on the third Friday of March, June, September and December. Since December 2003, the index weightings of companies in the index have been capped at 15% at each quarterly index review, but these range freely with share price subsequently. A capping factor is used to limit the weights to 15% (if necessary), and is reviewed annually by the Index Steering Committee on the third Friday of September.

The index value I of the CAC 40 index is calculated using the following formula: I t = 1000 × ∑ i = 1 N Q i, t F i, t f i, t C i, t ∑ i = 1 N Q i, 0 C i, 0 × 1 K t {\displaystyle I_{t}=1000\times {\frac {\sum _{i=1}^{N}Q_{i,t}\,F_{i,t}\,f_{i,t}\,C_{i,t}\,}{\sum _{i=1}^{N}Q_{i,0}\,C_{i,0}\,}}\times {\frac {1}{K_{t}}}} with t the day of calculation; N the number of constituent shares in the index (usually 40); Q i,t the number of shares of company i on day t ; F i,t the free float factor of share i ; f i,t the capping factor of share i (exactly 1 for all companies not subject to the 15% cap); C i,t the price of share i on day t ; Q i,0 the number of shares of company i on the index base date; C i,0 the price of equity i on the index base date; and K t the "adjustment coefficient for base capitalization" on day t (reflecting the switch from the French franc to the Euro in 1999).

The CAC 40 index is traded as a future on the Euronext Equities & Index Derivatives (EUREID) exchange under the ticker symbol PIL.

Although the CAC 40 is almost exclusively composed of French-domiciled companies, about 45% of its listed shares are owned by foreign investors, more than any other main European index. German, Japanese, American and British investors are amongst the most significant holders of CAC 40 shares. This large percentage is due to the fact that CAC 40 companies are more international, or multinational, than any other European market. CAC 40 companies conduct over two-thirds of their business and employ over two-thirds of their workforce outside France.

The following table shows the annual development of the CAC 40, which was calculated back to 1969.

The index consists of the following companies as of the quarterly update effective September 2024.

The most recent composition can be found on the Euronext website.

In France, within the territorial civil service (fonction publique territoriale) employment frameworks (cadres d'emplois) constitute specific statutes corresponding to various jobs to be filled. They are roughly equivalent to the corps found in the French state civil service.

Article 4 of Law No. 84-53 of 26 January 1984 originally provided that territorial civil servants would be grouped into corps, similar to civil servants of the State and public hospital establishments. However, Law No. 87-529 of 13 July 1987 substituted the concept of the employment framework (cadre d'emplois). Only the agents of the commune-department of Paris were grouped into corps.

The aforementioned law of 26 January 1984 states:

An employment framework groups together civil servants subject to the same specific statute, holding a grade that qualifies them to occupy a set of jobs. Each holder of a grade is qualified to occupy certain jobs corresponding to that grade. The employment framework may group together several grades.

Sociologically, the employment framework is defined less by a specific trade or technical skill and more by the capacity of individuals to hold a specific rank in the administrative hierarchy. Access to a framework often requires passing a competitive examination (concours) which serves to unify the specific employment branch while differentiating it from others (e.g., distinguishing "administrators" from "technicians").

The employment frameworks are structured hierarchically, separating execution tasks from management and conception.

Distinct from the administrative stream, the Technical stream (e.g., Engineers) operates with different professional norms; for instance, competitive exams for engineers value concise, technical expression, whereas administrative exams (like those for attachés) favor "philosophical, journalistic, or legalistic" forms of expression.

Access to the different employment frameworks is conditioned upon passing a competitive examination (concours) or obtaining an internal promotion.

Different examinations are organized for each level of the employment framework. For the framework of territorial administrator [ fr ], the examination is that of the Institut national des études territoriales (INET). For the framework of territorial attachés, examinations are organized at the departmental level by each Management center of the territorial civil service [ fr ]. The City of Paris, which has a specific statute, does not depend on any center as it acts as its own management center. It therefore organizes its own attaché examination for the City of Paris.

Other employment frameworks are filled by specific examinations organized for each stream and each employment framework based on needs. Each year, examinations for territorial engineer, animator, or territorial professors are organized by the management centers or by the National Centre for Territorial Public Service [ fr ].

Employment frameworks are, in turn, grouped into ten job streams (filières). Within the same stream, there are several employment frameworks. Each employment framework is attached to one of three categories: A, B, or C (see French civil service#Grades). For example, the administrative stream includes the employment frameworks of territorial administrator [ fr ], territorial attaché, and secretary of the town hall (secrétaire de mairie) in Category A; territorial editor in Category B; and administrative assistant in Category C (following a law of 22 December 2006, the category of administrative agent was abolished and integrated into the employment framework of administrative assistants). The statute of each employment framework is national and established by a decree in the Council of State.

Family allocations make up the family -oriented sector of the French social security system, through a network known as the Caisse nationale des allocations familiales (National Office for Family Allocations) or CNAF and the 101 Caisse d'allocations familiales (Family Allocations Office, or CAF).

The institution serves more than 10 million beneficiaries.

It was formalized by the decree of October 4, 1945.

Family benefits are not taxable, but subject to the contribution for the reimbursement of social debt with the exception of social minima such as RSA, AAH and formerly API and RMI. Their amount is set by legislative texts as a percentage of the monthly basis for calculating Family Allowances.

They are in principle unassignable and unseizable except:

Without exception, family benefits are paid monthly and in arrears and are due from the first day of the calendar month following the month in which the conditions for entitlement are met. Subject to the rules specific to each service, the prescription is biennial. The end of entitlement is fixed on the first day of the calendar month during which the conditions for opening the entitlement cease to be met, except in the event of death (in this case, the termination of entitlement is the month following the death).

In 2007, the family allowance funds paid the following benefits:

The Caisse des dépôts et consignations (French pronunciation: [ kɛs de depo e kɔ̃siɲasjɔ̃ ] ; CDC ; 'Deposits and Consignments Fund') is an idiosyncratic French public financial institution created in 1816, often referred to as the investment arm of the French State. It is defined in the French Monetary and Financial Code as a "public group serving the public interest" and a "long-term investor". Its governance framework places it under the control of the Parliament.

CDC has sprawling assets, including (as of early 2024) a 66-percent stake in La Poste, France's post office ; 34 percent of Transdev, a public transportation operator; 40 percent of Compagnie des Alpes, a ski resort and theme park operator; 39 percent of Icade, a property company; 39 percent of GRTgaz, France's main gas pipeline system; 34 percent of Egis, an engineering consultancy; 33 percent of Compagnie Nationale du Rhône, a hydroelectricity generator; 30 percent of RTE, France's transmission system operator ; 20 percent of Suez, a major water and waste management company; and a vast portfolio of property assets including Théâtre des Champs-Élysées, a historic entertainment venue in Paris. CDC further has significant banking operations including fully owned SFIL, majority-owned La Banque Postale (through La Poste), and half-owned Bpifrance, even though it is not itself a credit institution under EU law and therefore not within the scope of European Banking Supervision. Its total consolidated balance sheet, not including pension funds under CDC management, reached 1.3 trillion euros at end-2021.

The Caisse des Dépôts et Consignations succeeded the Caisse de garantie et d'amortissement, created by Napoleon and liquidated in 1816 following his demise. It was the brainchild of Louis-Emmanuel Corvetto, Finance Minister under King Louis XVIII, in a context of government debt distress in the aftermath of the Hundred Days turmoil of 1815 and of Louis XVIII's distrust of the Bank of France given its Napoleonic baggage. Article 110 of its founding law of 28 April 1816 reads: "Deposits, consignments and services relating to the Legion of Honour, to the channel company and to pension funds [...] will be administered by a special body under the name Caisse des Dépôts et Consignations." Three executive orders of 3 July 1816 further defined the major areas of activity of the new entity: consignments (French : consignations), namely safekeeping funds or assets that are subject to ongoing legal disputes; voluntary deposits from individuals or public bodies and funds from the legal professions; and pension funds. Additional activities included the management of accounts for the Legion of Honour, and financial services for the French army. By law, the CDC also was directed to use its funds mainly to purchase public "annuities" and therefore contribute to the funding of the French state.

Under Prime Minister Joseph de Villèle, the French government started to leverage the CDC to finance new infrastructure, inaugurating its role as France's development bank. The CDC granted its first local infrastructure loan for the development of the Port of Dunkirk in 1822, and at the same time acquired securities issued by the Compagnie des quatre canaux, a canal investment venture. In 1825, it was tasked with the indemnification of former colonists in Saint-Domingue under the settlement that gave rise to the Haiti Independence Debt.

From 1837, the French parliament decided that the funds collected by the local caisses d'épargne (French savings banks)' savings accounts should be centralised and invested by the CDC. This provision was extended to the postal passbook (later Livret A) upon the creation of the Caisse nationale d'épargne in 1881.

In 1850, the CDC started acquiring stakes in newly created railways companies. That same year, in addition to its mandate to manage the civil service pension fund held since 1816, the CDC was tasked with managing France's first old-age pension fund (French : Caisse des retraites pour la vieillesse, CRV), which extended the personal protection scope to a much broader range of beneficiaries. The first two public life insurance institutions set up in France, the National Insurance Fund in the event of Death (French : Caisse nationale d'assurances en cas de décès, CNAD) and National Insurance Fund in the event of Accidents (French : Caisse nationale d'assurances en cas d'accidents, CNAA), were also managed by the CDC from their creation in 1868.

Since 1890, under a mandate from the French state, the CDC has been receiving funds deposited by individuals at notaries, notably during inheritance or property transactions. This line of operations has subsequently widened to include funds from company administrators and legal representatives, court clerks, and bailiffs. The CDC was further entrusted with the management of new mandates like the Social Cohesion Fund (French : Fonds de cohésion sociale, FCS) which guarantees loans to individuals and legal entities and grants loans to job-seekers or welfare recipients who create their own company.

In 1905, the CDC granted its first loans to social housing out of its own funds. In 1908 the French state entrusted it with the management of its housing loans and the French law of 26 February 1921 authorised loans on savings funds for low-cost housing (HBM), prefiguring the first social housing (French : Habitations à Loyer Modéré, HLM). The French law of 1928, known as "Loi Loucheur", did not change this mission, rather it strengthened the CDC's role through a large scale programme of 200,000 low-cost homes and 80,000 moderate-rent homes.

By the end of 1930, CDC loans to local authorities allowed for the creation of a national telephone network. The next year, the 1931 Finance Act authorised the CDC to invest inflows to the savings funds in corporate shares and bonds.

Under the Vichy regime, the CDC received funds confiscated from the French Jewish community. These funds were later only partially restored to their legitimate owners after France's liberation.

In the afterwar period, the CDC became a main catalyst of France's reconstruction, often in partnership with the General Planning Commission. The CDC's role of funding social housing was also strengthened in that period by the implementation of different regulated saving centralisation systems. Several subsidiaries were founded in the 1950s: Société Centrale Immobilière de la CDC (SCIC), a real-estate company in 1954 (rebranded Icade in 2003); Société Centrale pour l'Équipement du Territoire (SCET) in 1955, a service provider for local infrastructure companies (French : Sociétés d'économie mixte, SEM); Villages Vacances Familles in 1958, specialising in social and family tourism.

In 1959, the CNAD and CNAA merged to form the Caisse Nationale de Prévoyance (CNP), later rebranded CNP Assurances and publicly listed in 1998. CNP Assurances was in 2013 the number one personal insurance company in France.

Since 1960, the CDC has been decentralised into 25 regional management units (French : délégations régionales, later directions régionales), one for each French region, which implement the group's strategy in their respective territorial remit. In 1963, the CDC created the Société Forestière, a forestry company.

In 1966, the CDC created the Local Authority Infrastructure Support Bank (French : Caisse d'aide à l'équipement des collectivités locales, CAECL), which in 1987 became the Crédit Local de France (CLF), itself merged in 1996 with Crédit Communal de Belgique to form Dexia.

In 1970, the CDC created another subsidiary, Scetauroute, for the development of motorway infrastructure. The development of services has since widened to the public transport sector for passengers with Transdev in 1990, to engineering infrastructure with Egis in 1998 (via the merger of Scetauroute and other engineering subsidiaries) and lastly to the business of ski and leisure park operation with the Compagnie des Alpes in 1989.

From 1994, the CDC has invested in SMEs with the SME Innovation programme, to strengthen their equity, encourage innovation and support the risk capital market. CDC Entreprises succeeded CDC PME in 1998.

In 1999, the CDC formed a new subsidiary, CDC IXIS, that took over its commercial banking activities, in order to mitigate competitive distortions associated with its role in the financial sector.

In 2000, the CDC was entrusted with the creation of the cyberbase programme, the aim of which was to deploy digital public spaces over the entire French territory to encourage the development of Internet use and new information technology. Since 2003, it has been investing in the spread of Digital Work Spaces (ENT) which offers digital services to educational institutions (schools, secondary schools and universities).

Also in 2000, the CDC initiated a program of climate research that developed into various projects such as CDC Climat and Novethic. In 2005, it was a sponsor of the European Carbon Fund and of France's national register of greenhouse gas emission quotas. In 2008, it sponsored a "compensation fund for biodiversity" via its specialised subsidiary CDC Biodiversité.

In 2001, the CDC formed Eulia, a joint venture with the Caisse Nationale des Caisses d'Épargne (CNCE), to which it contributed CDC IXIS. In 2004 the CNCE took full control of Eulia and therefore of Ixis, and in 2006 had it merged with Natexis Banques Populaires to form Natixis, which subsequently evolved into a fully owned subsidiary of Groupe BPCE.

In 2004, Caisse des Dépôts acquired all the equity of the Société Nationale Immobilière (SNI), the number one social landlord in France, which it subsequently rebranded as CDC Habitat [ fr ]. Also in 2004, the CDC participated in Qualium Investissement, aimed to support venture capital activity. It was strengthened in 2007 by the creation of the Strategic Investment Fund (French : Fonds Stratégique d'Investissement, FSI). As a consequence of the 2008 financial crisis, the CDC incurred a loss in 2008 for the first time in its history.

In 2013, CDC Entreprises and the FSI merged to form Bpifrance, half-owned by the CDC. That same year, the CDC acquired 20 percent of the newly formed SFIL.

Since 2014, the CDC has been developing its role as trustee and lender on behalf of third parties inherited from its original consignations business, as well as managing the Personal Training Account (French : Compte personnel de formation, CPF), dormant accounts and the Programme of investments for the future (French : Programme d'Investissements d'Avenir, PIA).

In January 2016, following France's 2015 reform of regions, the number of regional CDC units has been reduced to 13.

In 2018, the CDC reorganized its activities supporting France's local governments as a new unit branded the Banque des territoires [ fr ], which is not however a bank in a legal sense. In 2020, a broad restructuring of state-owned assets led to the CDC becoming sole owner of SFIL, with only one residual share kept by the French state, and 66-percent owner of La Poste, with the French state owning the remaining 34 percent. As part of that same restructuring, CNP Assurances became majority-owned by La Banque Postale (LBP), itself fully owned by La Poste. In 2021-2022, LBP acquired all remaining shares to become the sole owner of CNP, which was correspondingly delisted.

As set out within the French Monetary and Financial Code, the Caisse des dépôts et consignations carries out missions of public interest in support of the public policies implemented by the State and local government bodies. It contributes to the development of enterprises in line with its own proprietorial interests, and may also exercise competitive activities. It ensures, on behalf of the State and local authorities, missions of general interest:

Independently of the presence of the operational subsidiaries, the Caisse des Dépôts group ensures an institutional presence internationally. Caisse des Dépôts develops bilateral and multilateral relations with partner institutions which allow for the promotion of long-term investment and the development of investment projects in France and abroad, particularly in projects relating to the energy transition.

The European level takes on a crucial importance for the Caisse des Dépôts group taking into account the drive and influence of the European Union on investments and public interventions in France.

Since the 2008 financial crisis, Caisse des Dépôts, along with other public financial institutions in the European Union, has undertaken the promotion of the specific model of asset management with a long term horizon. In 2009, Caisse des Dépots, Cassa Depositi e Prestiti, the European Investment Bank and Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) created the Long Term Investors Club (LTIC) with the aim of bringing together worldwide institutions to emphasis common identity as long-term investors, to encourage cooperation and to foster appropriate conditions for long-term investments. Today the Long-Term investors Club gathers 18 financial institutions and institutional investors mainly from G20 countries, representing a combined balance sheet total of USD 5.4 trillion. Also in 2011, Caisse des Dépôts and other institutional investors held a national summit on long-term investment in France. From the summit a Report was drafted and it gained momentum in the financial establishment. This led to the creation of the "task force of the Paris stock exchange on long term investment" under the guidance of former financial director of AXA insurance company Gerard de la Martiniere. Still active today, the task force is dedicated to the promotion of the model of long term investment to the institutions of the European Union on a regulatory, fiscal, accounting and prudential level. After the publication of the European Commission Green Paper on the long-term financing of the economy, in July 2013, Caisse des Dépôts, together with the European members of the Long Term investors Club, cofounded the European Long Term investors Association. This association allows for the undertaking of joint actions in order to highlight this specific investor model with public stakeholders and the European Union.The Eltia gathers 27 European long-term financial institutions. With a combined balance sheet of €2.45 trillion, ELTIA's goal is to promote long-term investment in alignment with the objectives and initiatives developed by the European Union. Caisse des Dépôts also contributes to the work of the European Parliament Intergroup on long term investment and reindustrialisation which was implemented at the start of the election of the European Parliament in 2014.

Caisse des Dépôts is one of the investors brought together in the Marguerite Fund which combines the contributions from public institutions (CDC, KfW, CdP, etc.) to create investments in Europe. The first achievements were put into operation from 2014 and the investment programme will be completed in 2016.

As a National Promotional Institution (NPI) from the European Union, Caisse des Dépôts is in partnership with the European Investment Bank and the European Commission in the implementation of the European Commission Investment Plan for Europe. As such Caisse des Dépôts has committed to provide €8 billion in the form of loans, equity and guarantees to projects under financing from the European Fond for Strategic Investment (EFSI), enhancing the leverage potential of the Fund. Also Caisse des Dépôts contributes to the European Investment Advisory Hub (EIAH) and delivers an advisory services model along the EIB.

Caisse des Dépôts maintains bilateral and multi-lateral relationships. These partnerships, historically deployed with its counterparts in Africa and the Maghreb, have also developed with institutions and public banks in China and Brazil. In 2011, with the Moroccan CDG, Caisse des Dépôts organized the Caisse des Dépôts Global Forum which promotes long-term investment and public funding models for economic and social development. The Forum organises a biannual meeting, the last session of which was held in Tunis in April 2015.

Caisse des Dépôts is an investor in the Inframed fund launched in 2010 with other public institutions from the Mediterranean region. Inframed is targeting €385mn of investments into infrastructure development projects.

The CDC Group's principal governing bodies are Commission de surveillance (the Supervisory Board) and Chief Executive Officer (directeur général), as described below.

The 1816's law conferred to CDC a special status designed to guarantee its complete independence by placing it "under the supervision and guarantee of the legislative authorities" through the Supervisory Board (Commission de surveillance) with the aim of protecting CDC against any arbitrary action by the executive powers emanating from the state. Parliament, representing the nation, exercises control over CDC's activities and ensures its autonomy. It exercises this dual mission through the Supervisory Board which acts as guarantor of CDC's independence, provides general oversight and control and carries out the missions entrusted to it by law. Once a year, the Supervisory Board sends its annual report to Parliament. The law on the Modernization of the Economy of 4 August 2008 (PACTE) enlarged and strengthened the role of the Supervisory Board and consolidated parliamentary oversight of the CDC Group. This unique status of the group confers a guarantee of independence to CDC unlike any other entity. Equally, the "PACTE" law (Action Plan for Business Growth and Transformation) of 22 May 2019 expanded the Commission de surveillance ' s mission and responsibilities particularly regarding strategic issues, the adoption CDC's budget and investment decisions.

The missions of the Supervisory Board are set out by the French Monetary and Financial Code in its Articles L. 518-7 to L. 518-9 and were amended in 2018 by the "PACTE" law (Action Plan for Business Growth and Transformation). Pursuant to Article L. 518-7, the Supervisory Board provides for a permanent control over the CDC's management ensured by its chief executive officer. The Supervisory Board can delegate some of its powers to the Chief Executive Officer, who shall report on the decisions he has taken pursuant to this delegation. The Supervisory Board must have sufficient resources to ensure the proper exercise of its functions and of its members' mandates. The Supervisory Board deliberates at least four times a year concerning: (i) the strategic positioning of the public establishment (ie CDC) and of its subsidiaries including the medium-term plan; (ii) the implementation of the public interest functions of CDC; and (iii) the determination of the investment strategy of the public establishment and of its subsidiaries. Article L. 518-7 also provides that the Supervisory Board adopts the CDC budget upon the Chief Executive Officer proposal, such budget being subject to the Minister of Finance's approval. The Commission de surveillance also determines the prudential model and approves the debt instrument issuance program together with the maximum annual volume of the said debt instruments.

The SC approves the guidelines of the internal control system proposed by the chief executive officer. It also deliberates on the CDC's policies relating to professional equality between men and women policies and equal pay. Pursuant to Article L. 518-9, the Supervisory Board carries out every control and verification it requires to perform its functions and obtains any documents it believes necessary. The Supervisory Board can send to the Chief Executive Officer comments and opinions and can decide whether to publish them. A plenary meeting of the Supervisory Board is held at least once a month and the scrutiny and oversight are also currently provided by the following Board committees: Audit and Risks Committee created in 2003; Savings Fund Committee created in 2003; Investment Committee created in 2008; Nominations and Wages Committee created in 2008; the Strategic Committee created in 2018; and CSR (Corporate Social Responsibility) and Ethic Committee created in 2022.

The chairman and members of the Commission de surveillance as of [today] are:

In line with its lifelong principle of parliamentary oversight, chairs of the CDC have been either members of the Chamber of Peers or the Senate, or Deputies of the Chamber of Deputies or National Assembly :

The chief executive officer (French : directeur général) is responsible for administering the institution's funds and assets and is assisted both by Caisse des Dépôts' Management Committee and by the Group Management Committee, both of which are chaired by the CEO. The CEO is appointed for a period of five years by decree of the President of the French Republic, and takes an oath of office before the Supervisory Committee.

The successive CEOs of the CDC have been:

Calais (dated, Cales / ˈ k æ l ə s /) was a former constituency of the Parliament of England.

The Flemish town of Calais was under the English rule from 1347 – 7 January 1558. During part of that time it was represented in the Parliament of England by two members.

In 1360, the Treaty of Brétigny assigned Guînes, Marck and Calais – collectively the " Pale of Cales " – to English rule in perpetuity, but in a daring raid during the rule of Mary I, was retaken by France. In 1363 the town was made a staple port.

King Henry VIII of England decided to modify the arrangements for the government of Calais. A statute (27 Hen. 8. c. 63) made provision for two members to be returned to the Parliament of England. One member was to be nominated, elected and chosen by the Deputy (the king's representative in the town) and his council. The other member was to be nominated, elected and chosen by the mayor and his council.

Under the provisions of the statute, members were elected to ten parliaments. On 6 December 1557, a writ was issued for the election of members to an eleventh parliament, but before it met Calais had fallen to the French.

Calf's liver and bacon is a savoury dish containing veal (calf's liver) and pork (bacon). It is found in British recipes from the eighteenth century and has become popular in anglophone countries, though less so in French and Italian cuisine.

Most modern recipes differ from those of 1733 and 1780 in specifying that the bacon is fried first and the liver is then sautéed in the bacon fat before the two ingredients are combined and served. In a nineteenth-century American variant the liver and bacon are baked in an oven and served with a cream sauce.

A recipe for the dish is given in Sara Harrison's The House-keeper's Pocket Book, published in London in 1733. Her recipe was reproduced, with more detailed cooking instructions, in Eliza Price's The New Book of Cookery, or, Every Woman a Perfect Cook in 1780. The dish is featured in several English cookery books of the nineteenth century, including Cookery Made Easy (1825), and The Domestic Oracle (1826). It appears in cookery books from Ireland (1825), Scotland (1826), the US (1857), and Australia (1864). In the first edition of Mrs Beeton's Book of Household Management (1861), it is mentioned five times in different suggested menus.

Xavier Raskin, in his 1922 The French Chef in Private American Families, suggested that the dish was French in origin, but bacon (lard maigre fumé) does not play a large part in traditional French cookery, and according to Larousse Gastronomique, calf's liver with bacon is known in France as "English style" – foie de veau à l'anglaise. Auguste Escoffier included it under that name in his Le guide culinaire (1903).

Calf's liver (fegato di vitello) is much featured in Italian cooking, but neither Elizabeth David in Italian Food (1954) nor Gillian Riley in The Oxford Companion to Italian Food (2009) includes bacon in any liver dish mentioned. Nonetheless, in the US and Britain, calf's liver with bacon (or with guanciale, an approximate equivalent) is on the menu in some Italian restaurants.

For at least one American restaurant, calf's liver and bacon became a signature dish: in 1925, the Homestead Tea Room in St. Petersburg, Florida, took out a full-page press advertisement extolling its version of the dish. Although usually a lunch or dinner dish, calf's liver and bacon was sometimes served as a breakfast dish, both for upper-class house parties in Britain and in American hotels.

The essentials of the dish have not changed since Sara Harrison's 1733 recipe: slices of bacon and slices of calf's liver (often covered in flour) are fried separately. Early recipes suggest frying the liver first and then the bacon; later recipes recommend frying the bacon first and then cooking the liver in the residual fat. The bacon and slices of liver are placed in a dish and possibly covered with a gravy. Two modern textbooks for trainee chefs recommend either beurre noisette or jus lié. But in The White House Cook Book (1887), Hugo Ziemann and Fanny Gillette, give an alternative: the raw sliced liver has boiling water poured over it and is then put in a pan with slices of salt pork or bacon, pepper and salt and is baked in an oven and served with a cream or milk gravy poured over it. Some recipes suggest garnishing with parsley ; Marco Pierre White recommends deep-fried sage leaves instead.

It is important that the dish is served quickly, as the liver ought to be eaten when hot and tender.

According to a 2014 cookery book, a serving of calf's liver and bacon typically contains 233 calories, 23 g protein, 10 g carbohydrate, 11 g total fat (4 g saturated fat), 358 mg cholesterol and 331 mg sodium.

Caló (English: / k ə ˈ l oʊ / ; Spanish: [ kaˈlo ] ; Catalan: [ kəˈlo ] ; Galician: [ kaˈlɔ ] ; Portuguese: [ kɐˈlɔ ] ; French: [ ka.lo ]) is a mixed language spoken by the gitanos of Spain and the ciganos of Portugal. In Romani linguistics, it is considered a Para-Romani language based on Romance grammar, with an adstratum of Romani lexical items, through language shift by the Romani community. Catalan, Galician, Portuguese, and Spanish caló are closely related varieties that share a common root.

Spanish caló, or Spanish Romani, was originally known as zincaló. Portuguese caló, or Portuguese Romani, also goes by the term lusitano-romani ; it used to be referred to as calão, but this word has since acquired the general sense of jargon or slang, often with a negative undertone (cf. baixo calão, 'obscene language', lit. low-level calão).

The language is also spoken in Brazil, France, Venezuela, Portugal and Colombia.

Some Caló expressions have been borrowed into modern Spanish jerga (slang), such as camelar (to seduce), currar (to work) and dar lache (to cringe in shame or embarrassment).

Calé is the endonym of the Romani people in Iberia, and caló means 'the language spoken by the calé '. However, the calé are commonly known in Portuguese- and Spanish-speaking countries by the exonyms ciganos and gitanos.

In caló and other varieties of Romani, kalo means 'black' or 'absorbing all light', hence closely resembling words for 'black' and/or 'dark' in Indo-Aryan languages (e.g. Sanskrit काल kāla 'black', 'of a dark colour'). Hence caló and calé may have originated as ancient exonyms.

It has the following consonant inventory:

Notable phonological features of Iberian Caló are:

The Lord's Prayer has often been used as a parallel text :

Many Caló terms have been borrowed in Spanish (especially as slangisms and colloquialisms), often through flamenco lyrics and criminal jargon (germanía).

Examples are gachó/gachí ("man/woman", from gadjo/gadji), chaval ("boy", originally "son", also present in English as chav), parné ("money"), currelar or currar ("to work"), fetén ("excellent"), pinreles ("feet"), biruji ("cold"), churumbel ("boy"), gilí ("silly, stupid"), chachi ("outstanding, genuine"), (un)debel or debla ("god/goddess"), mengue ("demon"), chorar or chorrar in Spain ("to steal", also present in English slang as to chaw), molar ("to be appealing to someone"), piltra ("bed"), acais ("eyes"), chola ("head"), jeró ("face"), napia ("nose"), muí ("mouth"), lache ("shame"), pitingo ("vain"), chungo ("bad, nasty, dodgy"), guripa ("cheeky, soldier"), ful ("fake"), paripé ("pretence, white lie"), juncal ("slender, graceful"), pure or pureta ("old"), sobar ("to sleep"), quer or queli ("house"), garito ("house, gambling den"), jalar ("to eat with great apetite"), cate ("hit"), jiñar ("to defecate, to fear"), diñar ("to give, to die"), palmar ("to die"), chinarse ("to get upset"), langui ("lame"), chalado or pirado ("crazy"), pirarse ("to leave", "to make oneself scarce"), changar ("to break"), chivarse ("to denounce sb, to squeal"), chivato ("informer"), hacerse el longuis ("to pretend to be absent-minded"), pringar ("to get sb mixed up, to overdo"), chingar ("to have sexual relations, to bother"), chinorri ("little"), najar ("to flee"), privar ("drink, to drink"), mangar ("to steal"), nanay ("no way, there isn't"), chorizo ("thief"), achantar ("to intimidate"), pispar ("to nick"), birlar ("to nick"), achanta la muí ("shut your mouth"), canguelo or cangueli ("fear"), cañí ("Romani person"), calé ("Romani person"), caló ("language of the Iberian Kale "), calas ("money"), curda ("drunkenness"), menda ("myself"), and galochi ("heart"), payo ("non-Romani person, fool, easy to cheat").

Some words underwent a shift in meaning in the process: camelar (etymologically related to Sanskrit kāma, "love, desire") in colloquial Spanish has the meaning of "to woo, to seduce, to deceive by adulation" (but also "to love", "to want"; although this sense has fallen into disuse), but in Caló it more closely matches the Spanish meanings of querer ("to want" and "to love"). In addition camelar and the noun camelo can also mean either "lie" or "con".

Caló also appears to have influenced Madrid slang cheli and quinqui, the language of another Iberian group of travellers who are not ethnically Romani. Gacería, a cant spoken by makers of agricultural equipment in a village of Segovia, also derives some words from Caló.

To a lesser extent than in Spanish, Caló terms have also been adapted into Catalan as slangisms and colloquialisms, most of which were taken adopted from Spanish slang.

Examples are halar (pronounced [ həˈla ] or [ xəˈla ] ; "to eat"), xaval ("boy"), dinyar(-la) ("to die"), palmar(-la) ("to die"), cangueli ("fear"), paio ("non-Romani person"), calés ("money"), caló ("language of the Iberian Kale "), cangrí ("prison"), pispar ("to nick"), birlar ("to nick"), xorar ("to steal"), mangar ("to steal"), molar ("to like"), pringar ("to get sb mixed up, to overdo"), pirar(-se) ("to leave, to make oneself scarce"), sobar ("to sleep"), privar ("drink, to drink"), ("pleb"), laxe ("shame"), catipén ("stink"), xaxi ("outstanding, genuine"), xivar-se'n ("to denounce sb, to squeal"), xivato ("informer"), xinar(-se) ("to get upset"), fer el llonguis (lit. "Do a long one" fig. "to pretend to be thick/slow") and potra ("luck").

There are a small number of words of Caló (Calão) origin and many of those are indirect loans, borrowed via Spanish.

The examples generally understood by most or all speakers of Portuguese include gajo (pronounced [ ˈɡaʒu ], "man, dude", primarily in Portugal), chavalo ("lad, young boy"), chunga ("bad, nasty, dodgy"), chibar-se ("to denounce sb, to squeal"), chibo ("informer"), baque ([ ˈbaki ], [ ˈbakɨ ], generally "impact", but in this sense "sudden happiness"), pileque ([ piˈlɛki ], [ piˈlɛk(ɨ) ], "drunkenness"), chulé ("bad smell of feet"), pirar-se ("to leave"), pirado and chalado ("crazy").

There is a growing awareness and appreciation for Caló: "...until the recent work by Luisa Rojo, in the Autonomous University of Madrid, not even the linguistics community recognized the significance and problems of Caló and its world." Its world includes songs, poetry and flamenco.

As Iberian Romani proper is extinct and as Caló is endangered, some people are trying to revitalise the language. The Spanish politician Juan de Dios Ramírez Heredia promotes Romanò-Kalò, a variant of International Romani, enriched by Caló words. His goal is to reunify the Caló and Romani roots.

In 1838, the first edition of Embéo E Majaró Lucas translated by George Borrow was published and began to be distributed in Madrid. This was Borrow's translation of the Gospel of Luke into Caló. A revision of this was printed in 1872.

The Camargue (/ k æ ˈ m ɑːr ɡ /, also UK : / k ə ˈ -/, US : / k ɑː ˈ -/, French: [ kamaʁɡ ] ; Provençal : Camarga) is a coastal region in southern France located south of the city of Arles, between the Mediterranean Sea and the two arms of the Rhône river delta. The eastern arm is called the Grand Rhône ; the western is the Petit Rhône.

Administratively, it lies within the department of Bouches-du-Rhône (‘Mouths of the Rhône’); it spans portions of the communes of Arles, Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer and Port-Saint-Louis-du-Rhône. A further expanse of marshy plain, known as the "Petite Camargue" (Little Camargue; Occitan : Pichon Camarga), just to the west of the "Petit Rhône", lies within the department of Gard.

The Camargue was designated a Ramsar site as a " Wetland of International Importance" on 1 December 1986. The Petite Camargue received this designation on 8 January 1996.

With an area of over 930 km (360 sq mi), the Camargue is one of western Europe's largest river deltas. It is a vast plain comprising large brine lagoons or étangs, cut off from the sea by sandbars and encircled by reed -covered marshes. These are in turn surrounded by a large cultivated area.

Approximately a third of the Camargue is either lakes or marshland. The central area around the shoreline of the Étang de Vaccarès has been protected as a regional park since 1927, in recognition of its great importance as a haven for wild birds. In 2008, it was incorporated into the larger Parc naturel régional de Camargue.

The Camargue is home to more than 400 species of birds and has been identified as an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International. Its brine ponds provide one of the few European habitats for the greater flamingo. The marshes are also a prime habitat for many species of insects. Camargue horses (Camarguais) roam the extensive marshlands, along with Camargue cattle.

The native flora of the Camargue have adapted to the saline conditions. Sea lavender and glasswort flourish, along with tamarisks and reeds.

Officially established as a regional park and nature reserve in 1970, the Parc naturel régional de Camargue covers 820 km (320 sq mi). This territory is some of the most natural and most protected in all of Europe. A roadside museum provides background on flora, fauna, as well as the history of the area.

Humans have lived in the Camargue for millennia, greatly affecting it with drainage schemes, dykes, rice paddies and salt pans. Much of the outer Camargue has been drained for agricultural purposes.

The Camargue has an eponymous horse breed, the white Camarguais. Camargue horses are ridden by the gardians (cowboys), who rear the region's cattle for fighting bulls for regional use and for export to Spain, as well as sheep. Many of these animals are raised in semi-feral conditions, allowed to roam through the Camargue within a manade, or free-running herd. They are periodically rounded up for culling, medical treatment, or other events.

Few towns of any size have developed in the Camargue. Arles has been called its "capital", located at the extreme north of the delta where the Rhône forks into its two principal branches. The only other towns of note are along the seafront or near it: Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer, which has also been dubbed its "capital", about 45 km (28 mi) to the southwest. The medieval fortress-town of Aigues-Mortes is located on the far western edge, in the Petite Camargue. Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer is the destination of the annual Romani pilgrimage for the veneration of Saint Sarah.

The Camargue was exploited in the Middle Ages by Cistercian and Benedictine monks. In the 16th–17th centuries, big estates, known locally as mas, were founded by rich landlords from Arles. At the end of the 18th century, they had the Rhône diked to protect the town and their properties from flooding. In 1858, the building of the digue à la mer (dyke to the sea) achieved temporary protection of the delta from erosion, but it is a changing landform, always affected by waters and weather.

The north of the Camargue is agricultural land. The main crops are cereals, grapes and rice. Near the seashore, prehistoric man started extracting salt, a practice that continues today. Salt was a source of wealth for the Cistercian "salt abbeys" of Ulmet, Franquevaux [ fr ] and Psalmody in the Middle Ages. Industrial salt collection started in the 19th century, and big chemical companies such as Pechiney and Solvay founded the "mining" city of Salin-de-Giraud.

The boundaries of the Camargue are constantly altered by the Rhône as it transports huge quantities of mud downstream – as much as 20 million m annually. Some of the étangs are the remnants of old arms and legs of the river. The general trend is for the coastline to move outwards as new earth is deposited in the delta at the river's mouth. Aigues-Mortes, originally built as a port on the coast, is now some 5 km (3.1 mi) inland. The pace of change has been modified in recent years by man-made barriers, such as dams on the Rhône and sea dykes, but flooding remains a problem across the region.

Camille Chautemps (French: [ kamij ʃotɑ̃ ] ; 1 February 1885 – 1 July 1963) was a French Radical politician of the Third Republic, three times President of the Council of Ministers (Prime Minister).

He was the father-in-law of U.S. politician and statesman Howard J. Samuels.

Born into a family of Radical politicians, Camille Chautemps was a lawyer by training and a noted amateur rugby-player in his youth, playing for Tours Rugby and Stade Français. He was inducted into the Grand Orient of France (1906, master 1908), quitting the Freemasons in August 1940 as anti-masonic regulation was adopted by Pétain.

He entered local politics in the fiefdom of his parliamentarian uncle, Alphonse Chautemps, and followed a political career path typical of many Radical-Socialists: first elected town councillor for Tours (1912), then mayor (1919–25), parliamentary deputy (1919–34) and senator (1934–40). Chautemps was considered one of the chief figures of the 'right' (anti-socialist and pro-liberal) wing of the centre-left Radical-Socialist Party. Between 1924 and 1926, he served in the centre-left coalition governments of Édouard Herriot, Paul Painlevé and Aristide Briand.

Renowned as a skilful negotiator with friends from across the party divide, he was called upon on several occasions to attempt to build support for a coalition of the centre-left. He first became President of the Council for a short-lived government in 1930. After the electoral victory of the left in 1934, he served as Interior Minister and became head of government once more in November 1933. The revelations of the Stavisky Affair, a corruption scandal, tarnished two of his ministers, sparking violent protests by the far-right leagues. He resigned his posts on 27 January 1934, when the opposition press attributed Stavisky's suicide to a government cover-up.

In Léon Blum 's Popular Front government of 1936, Chautemps represented the Radical-Socialist Party as a Minister of State and succeeded Blum at the head of the government from June 1937 to March 1938. The franc was devalued, but government finances remained in difficulty. Pursuing the program of the Popular Front, he proceeded in the nationalisation of the railroads to create the SNCF. However, in January 1938, he formed a new government consisting solely of ministers from the nonsocialist republican centre- left. His government fell on 10 March.

Chautemps subsequently served from April 1938 to May 1940 as Deputy Prime Minister in the governments of Édouard Daladier and Paul Reynaud. After the latter resigned, as he was again deputy prime minister, now to Marshal Philippe Pétain.

France declared war on Germany in September 1939, and in May 1940, the German Army invaded and swept aside all opposition. With the fall of Dunkirk on 5 June and the defeat of the French Army imminent, Chautemps dined with Paul Baudouin on the 8th, and declared that the war must be ended and that Pétain saw his position most clearly. On the 11th, during a Cabinet meeting, Chautemps suggested for Churchill to be invited back to France to discuss the hopeless situation; he attended a conference at Tours. The Cabinet met again on the 15th and was almost evenly split on the question of an armistice with Germany. Chautemps now suggested that to break the deadlock, that they should get a neutral authority to enquire what the German terms would be, which if honourable, the Cabinet could agree to study. If not, the Cabinet would agree to fight on. The Chautemps proposal passed by 13 to 6.

On 16 June, Charles de Gaulle, now in London, telephoned Reynaud to give him the British government's offer of joint nationality for French and British in a Franco-British union. A delighted Reynaud put it to a stormy Cabinet meeting and was supported by five of his ministers. Most of the others were persuaded against him by the arguments of Pétain, Chautemps and Jean Ybarnégaray, the last two seeing the offer as a device to make France subservient to Britain as an extra dominion. Georges Mandel, who had a Jewish background, was flinging accusations of cowardice around the room, and Chautemps and others replied in kind. Reynaud clearly would not accept Chautemps's proposal and later resigned.

On 10 July 1940, Chautemps voted as a Senator in favour of granting the cabinet presided by Marshal Philippe Pétain authority to draw up a new constitution, thereby effectively ending the French Third Republic and establishing Vichy France. However, Chautemps broke with Pétain's government after he had arrived in the United States on an official mission and lived there for much of the rest of his life. After World War II, a French court convicted him in absentia for collaborating with the enemy; he was amnestied in 1954.

After his death in Washington, DC, he was laid to rest in the Rock Creek Cemetery.

The Canal du Midi (French pronunciation: [ kanal dy midi ] ; Occitan : Canal de las Doas Mars, Canal del Miègjorn [ ka'nal del mjɛdˈd͡ʒuɾ ]) is a 240 km (150 mi) long canal in Southern France (French : le Midi). Originally named the Canal Royal en Languedoc (Royal Canal in Languedoc) and renamed by French revolutionaries to Canal du Midi in 1789, the canal is considered one of the greatest construction works of the 17th century.

The canal connects the Garonne to the Étang de Thau on the Mediterranean and, along with the 193 km (120 mi) long Canal de Garonne, forms the Canal des Deux Mers, joining the Atlantic to the Mediterranean.

Strictly speaking, "Canal du Midi" refers to the portion initially constructed from Toulouse to the Mediterranean – the Deux-Mers canal project aimed to link together several sections of navigable waterways to join the Mediterranean and the Atlantic: first the Canal du Midi, then the Garonne which was more or less navigable between Toulouse and Bordeaux, then the Garonne Lateral Canal built later, and finally the Gironde estuary after Bordeaux.

Jean-Baptiste Colbert authorized the start of work by royal edict in October 1666, with the aim of developing the wheat trade, under the supervision of Pierre-Paul Riquet, and construction lasted from 1666 to 1681, during the reign of Louis XIV. The Canal du Midi is one of the oldest canals of Europe still in operation (the prototype being the Briare Canal). The challenges in these works are closely related to the challenges of inland water transport today. The key challenge, raised by Pierre-Paul Riquet, was to convey water from the Montagne Noire (Black Mountains) to the Seuil de Naurouze, the highest point of the canal.

The Canal du Midi was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1996, because of its outstanding engineering and artistic design, and it was designated as an International Historic Civil Engineering Landmark in 2016.

The Canal du Midi is located in the south of France, in the departments of Hérault, Aude, and Haute-Garonne. It is 240 kilometres (150 mi) long, starting in the west at Port de l'Embouchure, Toulouse and terminating in the east at Les Onglous, Marseillan, where the canal opens into the étang de Thau (between Agde and Sète).

The Canal du Midi is a summit-level canal, climbing from Toulouse on the Atlantic side over a distance of 52 kilometres (32 mi) to the Seuil de Naurouze or summit level, where the feeder canal enters. The total rise is 57.18 metres (187.6 ft), and the summit level is at an altitude of 189.43 metres (621.5 ft). This difference in level down to the sea is covered over the remaining distance of 188 kilometres (117 mi) from Naurouze to Les Onglous on the Étang de Thau.

The design canal depth is two metres (6.6 ft) with a minimum of 1.80 m (5.9 ft). The draft allowed is 1.50 m (4.9 ft) although regular users advise that even with 1.40 m (4.6 ft) boats will occasionally touch the bottom because of silt deposits in many places. The width on the surface is 20 m (66 ft) on average with variations between 16 m (52 ft) and 20 m (66 ft). Finally, the width of the canal bed is 10 m (33 ft).

This longitudinal profile of the Canal du Midi shows it rising from Toulouse (1) to the Seuil de Naurouze (2), then dropping down to Castelnaudary (3), Carcassonne (4) and Trèbes (5). The canal continues to Béziers after passing through the Fonserannes Locks (6), then Agde (7), to finish at Sète on the étang de Thau (8).

The longest canal pound is 53.87 kilometres (33.47 mi) between Argens Lock and the Fonserannes Locks, while the shortest canal pound is 105 m (344 ft) between the two Fresquel locks.

For historical reasons, the Canal du Midi has a unique legal status, which was codified in 1956 in the Public Code of waterways and inland navigation, then in the General code of the property of public persons. Under Article L. 2111-11 of the Code, public domain of the canal is determined by reference to the fief once granted to Pierre-Paul Riquet and limits were set by an official report in 1772. The staff quarters and warehouses, as well as the Lampy reservoir, were also added. Articles L. 2124-20 to L. 2124-25 set rules for maintenance of the canal, which is generally the responsibility of the public entity that owns it, with the participation of communes and, in some cases, waterside residents.

Under the Act of 27 November 1897, the State of France owns the Canal du Midi and its management is delegated to the public body Voies Navigables de France, attached to the Ministry of Transport.

The building of a canal was an old idea. Numerous and sometimes utopian projects were devised to build a canal between the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea. Leaders such as Augustus, Nero, Charlemagne, François I, Charles IX and Henry IV had dreamed of it, as it is a true political and economic issue. King François I brought Leonardo da Vinci to France in 1516 and commissioned a survey of a route from the Garonne at Toulouse to the Aude at Carcassonne.

The construction of such a structure would save vessels (of trade but also the king's galleys) and goods from sailing around the Iberian Peninsula which could take a month to complete. At that time shipping was fraught with dangers such as piracy and the Barbary pirates.

The most realistic projects were presented to the King in the 16th century. A first draft was presented by Nicolas Bachelier in 1539 to the Estates of Languedoc then a second in 1598 by Pierre Reneau and finally a third project was proposed by Bernard Aribat de Béziers in 1617. These projects were abandoned because they did not give enough thought to the water supply for the canal and provided a system of diversion of water from Pyrénées rivers too complex or impossible to implement. In 1650 another engineer also proposed to divert water from the Ariège to Cintegabelle to bring a non-navigable canal to Pech-David near Toulouse. Again, the question arose of how to carry water to the Seuil de Naurouze at a greater height than that of Toulouse.

The projects were not launched for fear of losing too much money and conviction of the human impossibility to dig such a canal. The major problem was how to supply the summit sections with enough water.

Nevertheless, Pierre-Paul Riquet, a wealthy collector of salt tax in Languedoc proposed a more convincing project than his predecessors. When Louis XIV received his proposal through the Archbishop of Toulouse (Charles-François Anglure of Bourlemont) in 1662 he saw the opportunity to deprive Spain of part of its resources, and the opportunity to mark his reign with an imperishable work.

I wrote you from Perpignan, on the 28th of last month, on the subject of the collection of salt tax in Roussillon and today I am doing the same in this village, but on a subject far removed from that matter there. It is on the design of a canal that could be done in the province of Languedoc for communication between the two seas Océane and Mediterranean, you will be surprised, my lord, that I undertake to tell you about something apparently I do not know and that a collector of salt tax mixes with levelling...

But, you will forgive my enterprise when you know that it is on the order of Monseigneur the Archbishop of Toulouse that I write to you. It was some time ago that the lord did me the honour to come to this place because of the fact that I am his neighbour and servant where to find me the means to make this canal, because he had heard that I had done a particular study of it, I told him that I knew him and promised to visit him at Castres on my return from Perpignan, and to guide him around the area to make him see the possibility. I did this and said in the company of the Lord Bishop of Saint-Papoul and several other persons of substance who visited, all of which was found as I had said, the Lord Archbishop was responsible for drawing up a letter and sending it to you, it is included here but in poor order, because, understanding neither Greek nor Latin, and barely able to speak French, it is not possible for me to explain without stuttering, so what I set out to do is by order and for obedience not of my own volition.

However, my Lord, please take the trouble to read my mail, so that you may truly judge that this canal is feasible, it is truly difficult because of the cost but it can be seen that the good that will come outweighs the consideration of expense. The late King Henry IV, grandfather of our monarch, wished passionately to do this work, the late Cardinal de Joyeuse had started to do some work and Cardinal Richelieu wanted this achievement, in the history of France, the collected works of the said Cardinal de Joyeuse and several other writings warrant the truth; but until today, nobody had thought about how the river can be used to find an easy route for the canal, because it had then been imagined that the use of rivers and machines for raising water were insurmountable obstacles. Also, I believe that these difficulties have always caused distaste which has postponed the execution of the work, but today, my lord, there are easy routes and there are rivers that can be easily diverted from their ancient beds and conducted in this new canal by natural and proper inclination, all difficulties cease, except that of finding the funds to be used for the cost of the work.

You have for that a thousand means, my Lord, and I present to you again two of my memoires attached to help you to consider more that the ease and assurance of this new navigation will make the Straits of Gibraltar cease to be an absolutely necessary passage, that the income of the king of Spain in Cadiz will be reduced and those of our King will rise especially on farms inputs and outputs of goods in this kingdom, in addition the rights received from the said canal will rise to immense sums, and that His Majesty's subjects in general will benefit from a thousand new businesses and will greatly benefit from this navigation, that if I learn that this plan should please you, I will send to you with the number of locks that need to be done and an exact calculation of toises of the said canal, both in length and width.

Compared to canals, managing rivers is difficult but only one canal is required between the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea. Unlike a river, it is easier to manage the flow of a canal to ensure a constant flow of traffic throughout the year.

The Canal du Midi is a summit-level canal because it must pass over a height between two valleys. The construction of this canal required passage through the Seuil de Naurouze or the Seuil de Graissens.

Thirty years passed from the start of planning to the commencement of work: a similar project was also studied by a committee of which Riquet's father was a member.

In 1660, Riquet found the solution to the main problem: the water supply to the summit point to feed both sides of the canal. His idea was to get water flowing from the Montagne Noire. His important knowledge of the hydrography of the Montagne Noire and Sor allowed him to imagine an ingenious irrigation system. He was inspired by the French engineer Adam de Craponne who had implemented the same system for the Craponne Canal.

For this, he planned to recover the mountain waters in dams and reservoirs and then forward them to the Seuil de Naurouze through channels crossing the Seuil de Graissens. The water from the Sor passing near Revel was the main supply envisaged by Riquet. Other rivers from the Montagne Noire were also part of the system such as the Alzeau, the Laudot, the Rieutort, the Bernassonne, and the Lampy [ fr ]. The Montagne Noire is a region with twice the rainfall of the plain of Lauragais with 1400 millimetres per year at around 500–600 m (1,600–2,000 ft) above sea level. To store the river water he planned to create three basins: the Reservoir of Lampy-Vieux, a hexagonal harbour basin at Naurouze, and the Bassin de Saint-Ferréol with a large earth dam across the mouth of the valley of the Laudot stream.

In 1664, during the study of the project, the Estates of Languedoc asked Riquet to put into practice his idea experimentally. He then built a test channel diverting water from the Sor to the Seuil de Naurouze. It was the Rigole de la plaine which he completed in 1665 and used to prove that it is possible to bring water to the highest points of the course of the canal. This was the event that reassured the Committee of Experts that the king had set up on site to inspect the choices and plans prepared by Riquet. From that moment Louis XIV knew that the canal was technically feasible.

Riquet studied in depth the supply of water to the canal at the Seuil de Naurouze. His study appeared rigorous and included a pilot phase with the construction of the Rigole de la plaine to substantiate his claim. The project still remained unclear in many respects especially the route of the canal. This route was not final and was not precise as it would be today for a highway project or high-speed railway. Only the directions of the route were known and plotted on a map. Changes in the route could be made by the Contractor depending on the difficulties he encountered on the ground.

On the Atlantic side, he proposed several layouts: one to pass by Castres and Revel through the Seuil de Graissens and Agout. In fact, this river was already under development for navigation. Another route would pass by the Girou river and avoid Toulouse as in the preceding route. On the Mediterranean side, the route was not set. He would use the Fresquel until the Aude but the arrival on the coast was first intended to be at Narbonne then at Sète.

In 1663 Riquet conducted field studies to finally fix the path on the Atlantic side by the seuil de Naurouze along the valley of the Hers-Vif to Toulouse downstream of the Garonne. The navigable part of the river is downstream of Bazacle which was a ford in the centre of Toulouse, blocking navigation. The canal could not consider not going through the economic heart of the region so therefore the final route was via Castres and the Girou.

Pierre-Paul Riquet had no technical training and learnt on the job. He regularly practised experiments and field observations. His technique remained highly empirical because at that time applied science and hydraulic techniques through laws or concepts had not been mastered. Even so, Riquet had a scientific approach as he systematically took measurements of flow and made calculations of volumes. In addition, to overcome his technical shortcomings, he was surrounded by many technicians such as Hector Boutheroüe, François Andreossy surveyor and cartographer, and Pierre Campmas an expert in water flows.

He set up experiments to prove that it was possible to bring the water to the Seuil de Naurouze from the river Sor in the Montagne Noire. At his own expense, of 200,000 livres, he built a test canal, only two feet wide, and on the 9 November 1665 he opened the flow successfully. When the canal was authorized the next year, this test rigole would become the Rigole de la plaine. He also built on his property in Bonrepos a model of the canal with locks, tunnels, and épanchoirs (spillways) reproducing the slopes and feeding all with water.

The economic situation of the country was quite difficult at the time. When Colbert became minister he believed that domestic and international trade was not in favour of the Kingdom of France. The Dutch could take better advantage of trade and economic activity in the country. The prices of grain dropped a lot and wine production fell in 1660. This crisis caused depreciation of land values and small farms were going bankrupt. In addition, the region of Languedoc experienced religious conflict during the Fronde. It was difficult to implement a policy in this area and in particular to introduce taxes such as the salt tax.

Colbert then saw Pierre-Paul Riquet and his project as a way to pursue a policy of economic expansion in the service of absolutism in Languedoc. In fact, Riquet proposed himself to implement the salt tax and to build the Canal du Midi. Thus, the construction of the canal would permit the creation of a direct passage between the Mediterranean Sea and the Atlantic without passing through the Strait of Gibraltar controlled by the Spaniards, the aim being to destroy the Spanish trade and establish a commercial flow through Languedoc. The Languedoc region had many resources such as wheat, wine from Minervois, woollen cloth, silk, and salt which producers were struggling to export due to lack of trade. By passing through the Canal du Midi, Colbert hoped to distribute goods in the different regions of le Midi to strengthen royal power and open up Toulouse and its region.

Despite a project that seemed precarious, Colbert authorized commencement of work by a royal edict in October 1666 after the approval of a committee of experts that looked at the route of the canal for several months. The project benefited significantly from the appointment of an engineer for fortifications and hydraulics – Louis Nicolas de Clerville – who used his influence with Colbert to start the project. The decree specified the authorization of the construction of the canal, its issuing of invitations to tender, and its awarding to the designer, Pierre-Paul Riquet, and his descendants. It also gave rights of expropriation to Riquet and describes the possibility of creating mills, warehouses and housing for the operation of the canal. The project formed a tax-exempt "fief" whose owner had the rights of fishing and hunting. Finally, it describes the operating procedures including the introduction of tolls, traffic organization, and ownership of vessels. The king decided to cede the ownership and operation of the facility in a particular order to overcome the potential drawbacks of a work so great. This system ensured the continued maintenance and operation of the canal even if the state's finances are at their lowest.

The work was launched in two phases each called an "enterprise". The first enterprise of connecting Toulouse to Trèbes was estimated at 3.6 million livres. The finances of the State, however, were not very sound and the Estates of Languedoc were not willing to fund such a project for fear that their funds would be used for unexpected expenses. So, in exchange for the ownership and operation of the canal, Pierre-Paul Riquet proposed to finance part of the works from his own funds. The rest was to be paid by the State in exchange for profits that Riquet earned from the salt tax. The second enterprise of works between Trèbes and the étang de Thau in December 1668 cost 5.832 million livres plus a million more livres for the resumption of work on the port of Sète.

Ultimately, while the initial budget was six million livres, all the work together would cost between 17 and 18 million livres of the time, 40% was advanced by the King, 40% by the province, and 20% by Riquet himself, who became the owner. His descendants continued to pay two million livres for over 50 years.

At the age of 63, Riquet started his great enterprise, sending his personal engineer, François Andreossy, and a local water expert, Pierre Roux, to the Montagne Noire to work on the water supply. This supply system successfully fed the canal with water where it crossed the continental divide, replacing water that drained toward the two seas. The system was a masterpiece of both hydraulic and structural engineering, and served as an early ratification of Riquet's vision. It was also a major part of the massive undertaking.

Work began on the first "enterprise" on 1 January 1667 with the construction of the trough of the Rigole de la plaine then continued on 15 April 1667 with the laying of the first stone of the Lac de Saint-Ferréol. Originally Riquet wanted to build a dozen reservoirs but the Commissioner General of fortifications, Louis Nicolas de Clerville, asked him to replace them with a single reservoir. This was a great novelty at the time – no reservoir-lake of this magnitude had ever been built before.

Some of Clerville's men with experience in military engineering came, to build the huge dam for the single reservoir, the Bassin de St. Ferréol, on the river Laudot. The Laudot is a tributary of the Tarn in the Montagne Noire some 20 km (12 mi) from the summit of the proposed canal at Seuil de Naurouze. This massive dam, 700 metres (2,300 ft) long, 30 metres (98 ft) above the riverbed and 120 metres (390 ft) thick at its base was the largest work of civil engineering in Europe and only the second major dam to be built in Europe, after one in Alicante in Spain. It was connected to the Canal du Midi by a contoured channel over 25 km (16 mi) long, 3.7 m (12 ft) wide with a base width of 1.5 m (4.9 ft). It was eventually equipped with 14 locks in order to bring building materials for the canal down from the mountains and to create a new port for the mountain town of Revel.

In November 1667 an official ceremony laid the foundation stone of the Garonne lock in Toulouse in the presence of representatives of the Parlement of Toulouse, the Capitouls (sheriffs), and the Archbishop of Toulouse, Charles-François d'Anglure de Bourlemont. A first filling of water was made between the seuil de Naurouze and Toulouse during the winter of 1671–1672 and the first boat traffic could begin. In 1673 the section from Naurouze to Trèbes was completed marking the end of the first "enterprise".

From 1671 the second enterprise began linking Trèbes to the Mediterranean Sea and to build the port of Sète (then called Cette, the location was chosen and the port constructed by Clerville). This part of the canal posed problems at the junction between the étang de Thau and Trèbes because the canal must cross the course of the Hérault and the Libron. To work around the problem, Riquet set up a system of valves and chambers for Libron and a round lock with three doors for the étang de Thau and the Hérault. The round lock at Agde could switch between a reach of the Canal du Midi and the Hérault. This part of the canal was also a problem at the level of the seuil of Ensérune and the descent to Beziers in the valley of the Orb. Riquet solved these problems on the one hand by digging the Malpas Tunnel and secondly by building at Fonserannes a row of eight lock chambers to the Orb. The Malpas Tunnel was the first canal passage ever built through a tunnel. The Canal du Midi passes through a 173-metre (568 ft) tunnel through a hill at the Oppidum d'Ensérune.

In 1681 work on the canal ended at Béziers. However, in October 1680, Riquet died during construction. He did not see the end of the project. It was the king's engineer, La Feuille, who took over.

His sons inherited the canal, but the family's investments were not recovered and debts not fully paid until over 100 years later. The canal was well managed and run as a paternalistic enterprise until the revolution.

The canal was built on a grand scale, with oval shaped locks 30.5 m (100 ft) long, 6 m (20 ft) wide at the gates and 11 m (36 ft) wide in the middle. This design was intended to resist the collapse of the walls that happened early in the project. The oval locks used the strength of the arch against the inward pressure of the surrounding soil that had destabilized the early locks with straight walls. Such arches had been used by the Romans for retaining walls in Gaul, so this technique was not new, but its application to locks was revolutionary and was imitated in early American canals.

Many of the structures were designed with neoclassical elements to further echo the king's ambitions to make France a New Rome. The Canal du Midi as a grand piece of infrastructural engineering in itself was promoted as worthy of Rome and the political dreams behind it were clarified with plaques in Latin, and walls built with Roman features.

In May 1681 the channel was thoroughly inspected by order of the king to check the work and the water-tightness of the canal. It was then officially opened to navigation on 15 May 1681. At the inauguration of the canal at Toulouse on 15 May, the King's steward and the president of the Estates of Languedoc travelled first on the canal followed by many other boats carrying particularly wheat. After the maiden voyage, the canal was drained as the work was not complete; it would not be reopened until December 1682. The canal was opened to traffic in May 1683 and stopped receiving public works in March 1685.

For fifteen years nearly 12,000 workers worked on the construction of the canal. Riquet hired men and women between 20 and 50 years old whom he organized in sections forming workshops led by a controller-general. This rationalization of work permitted the optimisation of tasks and allowed several projects to be performed at the same time. All of the work was manual and the digging of the canal was with shovels and pickaxes. The workforce was made up of farmers and local workers whose number varied from one period to another during the year. Pierre-Paul Riquet appealed to the military to compensate for this fluctuation. He also set up monthly payments of workers for their loyalty. He also offered accommodation for two deniers per day.

The women labourers were surprisingly important to the canal's engineering. Many came from former Roman bath colonies in the Pyrenees, where elements of classical hydraulics had been maintained as a living tradition. They were employed at first to move earth to the dam at Saint Ferréol, but their supervisors, who were struggling to design the channels from the dam to the canal, recognized their expertise. Engineering in this period was mainly focused on fortress construction, and hydraulics was concerned mostly with mining and problems of drainage. Building a navigational canal across the continent was well beyond the formal knowledge of the military engineers expected to supervise it, but the peasant women who were carriers of classical hydraulic methods added to the repertoire of available techniques. They not only perfected the water supply system for the canal but also threaded the waterway through the mountains near Béziers, using few locks, and built the eight-lock staircase at Fonserannes.

The financial and social conditions of employment of the workers were very favourable and unusual for the time. To retain his workforce, Riquet paid his workers well enough. More importantly, he gave benefits never before seen such as non-working rain days, Sundays and public holidays, and finally paid sick leave. The employment contract was individual and done by free recruitment. Pay was, at the beginning, 20 sols (1 livre) per day, double the agricultural wage. Discontent from farm owners, however, forced Riquet to reduce pay to 15, then 12 sols per day. In 1668 he established the monthly payment of 10 livres.

Many trades were found on the work sites of the canal in addition to the seasonal workers who were most often farmers. The masons and stonecutters were responsible for the construction of structures such as bridges, locks, and spillways. The blacksmiths and levellers were responsible for the maintenance of the tools and equipment. Carters and carriers, the Farriers and owners of sawmills were also requisitioned for the works.

Workers were organized into sections controlled by captains and sergeants. Finally, Pierre-Paul Riquet was surrounded by aides as well as auditor-generals and inspector-generals of the canal.

The workers' tools were very limited: picks, hoes and shovels to dig, baskets and stretchers to transport materials. They were provided to workers who must maintain them themselves. Gunpowder was used to blast the rocks.

In 1681 the first inspection took place "dry". The king appointed a commission composed of Henri d'Aguessau, steward of Languedoc, Mr de la Feuille, Father Mourgues a Jesuit professor of rhetoric and mathematics at the University of Toulouse, two sons and two in-laws of Pierre-Paul Riquet, as well as Messrs. Andréossy, Gilade, and Contigny. This commission embarked for Beziers on 2 May 1681 and went up the canal back to Toulouse over six days. The filling with water had been done showing a measure of the progress of checks to Castelnaudary (the section Toulouse-Castelnaudary had water since 1672).

The inauguration itself took place just after the first inspection. The same people re-embarked at Toulouse on 15 May 1681 on a flagship boat followed by dozens of other boats. The Cardinal de Bonzi, Archbishop of Narbonne and President-born of the Estates of Languedoc joined the procession which arrived at Castelnaudary on 17 May. A great religious ceremony took place on 18 May at the Church of Saint-Roch followed by a procession to the canal to bless the work, the convoy, and the people present.

The convoy resumed its progress on 20 May with stops in the evening at Villepinte, on the 21st at Penautier, the 22nd at Puicheric, and the 23rd at Roubia. On 24 May it was the passage through the Malpas Tunnel then crossing the locks of Fonsérannes. The cardinal and the bishops went down to Beziers on the same day.

In 1686, Vauban was made responsible for inspecting the channel which he quickly found was in a dilapidated state. He then ordered Antoine Niquet, the engineer of fortifications for Languedoc, to carry out new work at the Montagne Noire level to drill the Cammazes Tunnel to extend the Rigole de la montagne and strengthen the Bassin de Saint-Ferréol. In his haste, Riquet had underestimated the number of rivers that in case of a flood would silt up and swell the canal. The barrage of Saint-Ferréol was too small and its supply system was inefficient.

Vauban also built many masonry structures to isolate the many rivers that flow into the canal and spillways to regulate the water level. He built 49 culverts and aqueducts, including the Cesse aqueduct, the Orbiel aqueduct and the Pechlaurier culvert. Finally, he reinforced a lot of works and dams originally built by Riquet. This series of works, which lasted until 1694, greatly improved the supply and management of water. Antoine Niquet was responsible for monitoring the canal until 1726.

The Canal du Midi still had shortcomings because it did not pass through Carcassonne nor Narbonne and did not join the Rhône. In addition, to reach Bordeaux, it was necessary to take the Garonne which has variable flow rates and violent floods. The Canal de Jonction or 'junction canal', built in 1776, gave access to Narbonne via the Canal de la Robine de Narbonne. The same year the Canal de Brienne allowed the bypass of Bazacle - the ford on the Garonne in Toulouse which blocked the river. The connection between the étang de Thau and the Rhone was also completed in 1808. In 1810 a diversion canal allowed Carcassonne to be connected. Finally, in 1857 the Canal latéral à la Garonne was opened between Toulouse and Castets-en-Dorthe, completing the link between the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea that Riquet had dreamt of.

Channel management was ensured primarily by the descendants of Riquet. This was through the elder son Jean-Mathias who took control of the fief until 1714, then Victor-Pierre-François until 1760, then Victor-Maurice, and finally Jean-Gabriel. The Riquet family quickly put up a pyramidal organisation structure with a "Director-General of the Canal" who governs a board of directors responsible for specific geographic areas of the channel. Seven zones were defined in the west and the east: Toulouse, Naurouze, Castelnaudary, Trèbes Le Somail, Beziers, and Agde. Each Director is responsible for maintenance of his zone and is supported by a receiver and a controller. Hundreds of lock-keepers are responsible for the locks. This organization facilitates the control and hiring of employees.

In Toulouse, a group of three people form a steering committee: the director general of works, the Receiver General who sets the fees, and the Comptroller General in charge of accounting. Canal management ensures the supply of money to pay for various works and staff hired for the canal. In the 1770s a tax report showed an income of 640,000 livres, half of which went to maintenance and salaries, and half the profits and funds were exceptional works. In 1785 this benefit increased to 950,000 livres which was a very large sum for the time.

The maintenance of the canal was a real problem for the descendants of Riquet. Despite many precautions, the canal silts up with silt from the water supply. In addition, it fills with the branches and leaves of trees. Every winter, a period of closure allows the cleaning of the canal. It is necessary to re-dig the canal bed every year for two months. These works are expensive and two months is not always sufficient. Another problem is the invasion of the canal by weeds in the levels and spillways. There is no way to eradicate this scourge. In 1820 dredging was set up to pull up the weeds and the mud layer.

Finally, rain, frost, and drought forces managers to keep an eye all along the canal to repair leaks and cracks that might open. Today, the channel is subject to the same constraints and managers must perform the same work. They are now mechanized. Approximately 350 employees are made available to the Waterways of France manager by the Ministry of Ecology, Sustainable Development and Energy to maintain the canal.

Once used to transport goods and people, the Canal du Midi is now mainly used by boaters and other tourists.

Initially, the canal appears to have been mainly used by small sailing barges with easily lowered masts, bow-hauled by gangs of men. By the middle of the 18th century, horse towing had largely taken over and steam tugs came in 1834 to cross the Étang. By 1838 273 vessels were regularly working the canal and passenger and packet boats for mail continued a brisk trade until the coming of the railways in 1857.

A "malle-poste" postal service was set up on boats along the canal. As for the Stagecoach for the mail, the boats were pulled by horses on towpaths. This type of transport was considered revolutionary thanks to its regularity, comfort, safety, and speed that were an improvement over the road. In addition, the canal could be travelled throughout the year. The journey takes four days from Toulouse to Sète.

This time was reduced to 32 hours in 1855 which corresponds to a speed of 11 kilometres per hour (6.8 mph) thanks to the replacement of horses every 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) pulling boats. In addition rather than cross multiple locks travellers were transferred from one vessel to another which saved time and saved water used for the opening of the locks. Finally, the journeys also took place at night to save even more time. In 1684, travel from Toulouse to Agde cost one livre and a half. The rate was set per league with the rates displayed on a sign. Thus, a bourgeois paid three sols per league while a valet or a sailor paid one and a half sols per league. Payment offices were located along the route. Each office indicated the rate and provided the distances between each office.

The Canal relied on wheat and wine traffic in Languedoc which was its main purpose. This commercial traffic had the effect of enriching the descendants of Riquet very quickly. The wheat, wine, and alcohol could be exported from Lauragais to Toulouse, Bordeaux, and Marseille. The canal had the effect of broadening the sales area of the producers of Languedoc. In the 1730s commerce thrived and greatly improved agricultural businesses. The canal also allowed the import to Languedoc of products from other regions such as Marseille soap, rice, starch, dried fish, and spices and dyes. However, it was never the grand international route envisaged by the kings of France as its traffic was limited to local and national trade.

Freight rates depend on the cargo. Thus in the 17th century, the transportation of wheat cost 12 deniers per quintal and that of oats 6 deniers per quintal.

At its opening the canal was used by a majority of boats for the transport of goods. These vessels were twenty metres long and were hauled by horses or men. The tonnage of vessels increased over the centuries, from 60 tonnes at the beginning to 120 tonnes at the start of the 19th century. The proper Canal Barges were called "owned barge" or "canal barge" and also plied the route. In 1778 there were about 250 barges. In 1914, there were 126 "owned boats", 70 rented boats, 300 horses, and 75 mules. In the year 1930 motor barges had completely replaced animal traction. They relaunched in part the merchant traffic on the canal but commercial and merchant inland water shipping finally disappeared around the late 1980s. The year 1856 was a record year for merchant activity with more than 110 million tonnes-kilometres of cargo and nearly 100,000 passengers carried.

For 250 years, horses have pulled many boats such as fast barges or long commercial boats. A horse can tow up to 120 times its weight when the load is on the water. Animal traction was then a strategic element in the operation of a canal.

The mail-barges or "post vehicles" which transported passengers were boats many metres long with a simple shelter on the deck. These boats evolved to become faster and more luxurious with lounges and were very large since the largest could reach 30 metres (98 ft) long. Services inside these vessels also evolved with first class in private salons and second class in a common room. During the heyday of the canal some boats included first class lounges where dinner was served.

Curiously, the canal did not really serve its purpose. The economic and political context hindered the economic development that had been expected. After two hundred years of operation, the canal began to suffer from competition from rail and road. It reached its peak in the middle of the 19th century. In 1858 Napoleon III signed a decree entrusting the canal for a period of 40 years to the Chemins de fer du Midi railway company, the owner of the Bordeaux-Narbonne railway line. This act had the effect of amplifying the decline in boat traffic on the canal. The company primarily promoted the railway and placed higher freight rates on commercial traffic in the canal. The Canal du Midi had the highest rates of any of France's waterway. In addition, the railway became smoother and faster than the waterway especially as the Canal du Midi suffered from its limited tonnage.

The period before 1859 corresponded to the canal operating without competition while from 1859 the installation of railways in the south of France began. The effect of rail competition is clearly visible in the table with the halving of freight traffic between 1856 and 1879. The traffic then continued to decline gradually. As for the railway, the Bordeaux–Sète railway carried almost 200 million tonne-kilometres in 1860. Management of the canal was taken over by the State in 1898 who made successive investments to maintain its competitiveness. The state removed taxes and tolls which had the effect of reviving traffic on the canal to which reached 80 million tonne-kilometres in 1909.

The government tried to revive the renovation of the canal by enacting a legal program to lift the channel to the standards of the Freycinet gauge. The canals of northern France were already at this level and had traffic well above the Canal du Midi. However, the law remained unimplemented due to lack of funds.

At the end of the First World War traffic was completely disorganized. In 1920 freight traffic recovered rapidly with the arrival of motorised barges. The HPLM company (Le Havre-Paris-Lyon-Marseille) operated 30 boats on the Canal du Midi. The Second World War saw a slowdown in traffic due to the shortage of oil but recovery was rapid after the conflict and the traffic reached 110 million km. However, the canal suffered from a size too small for later barges with high tonnage. Rail became more and more competitive and road transport also became a second competitor. The Canal du Midi became the third means of transport. Freight traffic ceased in the 1970s. In 1980 there were only two barges (the Bacchus, a wine carrier and the Espérance, a grain carrier) carrying regular traffic between Toulouse and Sète : they definitively ceased their activities in 1989 following the cessation of navigation pronounced by the Prefect of the Region due to drought. In 1991 operation of the canal was assigned to the administration of Voies navigables de France who remain managers today.

From the end of the 20th century, the canal has offered many activities. It can again play its original role in allowing the transit of boats between the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea.

The Canal du Midi is now used primarily by tourists, recreation, and housing.

It attracts more and more river tourism, including sailing on chartered boats, restaurant-boats, or hotel barges such as the Anjodi. Tourism has grown from the 1960s, most significantly from Britain, and then exploded in the 1980s. The canal was featured prominently in the BBC television series Rick Stein 's French Odyssey (2005), further publicising the canal to a British audience. Busier than the Seine, the canal alone accounts for one-fifth of French river tourism and 80% of passengers are foreigners, primarily Germans, Swiss and British. There are approximately 10,000 boat passages per year through the Fonséranes locks, with the most traffic at the Argens lock with 11,000 boats carrying an average of five passengers. The canal directly employs about 1,900 people, and the annual economic impact due to the activity of the canal is about 122 million euros.

Navigation of the channel is open from the third Saturday in March to the first week of November. Outside of this period, navigation can be authorized for individuals who have requested it. The winter period is called the "period of unemployment" and allows the completion of all maintenance work.

The Canal du Midi also allows other sports, mainly in urban areas, such as rowing, canoeing, fishing, cycling, roller-skating, and hiking along the banks. A paved stretch of 50 km (31 mi) from Toulouse to Avignonet-Lauragais and another of 12 km (7.5 mi) between Béziers and Portiragnes are particularly suited to cycling and rollerblading. It is possible to cycle the entire Canal des Deux Mers from Sète to Bordeaux. In addition, many barges have been converted to family housing, theatres, exhibition spaces, and restaurants.

During the dry season, the canal serves as a reservoir for agriculture. Nearly 700 irrigation pumps are installed along the canal. This is one of the fundamental roles of the canal and one of the reasons for its maintenance by the State since the end of commercial traffic. The canal can irrigate up to 40,000 hectares (150 sq mi) of agricultural land.

The Rigole de la plaine carries water from the Sor tapped from an offtake at Pont Crouzet for irrigation before emptying into the Canal du Midi. In addition, individual samples are collected from the water on the area between Revel and the seuil de Naurouze. In 1980 the Lac de la Ganguise was built near Castelnaudary providing a water reserve of 22 million cubic metres. In 2005 the dam was raised to reach a capacity of 44 million cubic metres. Near the old basin of Naurouze the Naurouze pumping station helps to regulate the water in the Canal du Midi and the lake. An underground pipe, the gallery of Mandore, provides the Naurouze with additional water from the Rigole de la plaine to Lake Ganguise. Conversely, during the dry season, Lake Ganguise can supply the Canal du Midi if the water supply of the Rigole de la plaine is not enough.

The canal has also provided a supply of drinking water through the water treatment plants at Picotalen (Picotalen I and Picotalen II) since 1973. They are part of the installations installed by the Institution for Interdepartmental Hydraulic Planning of Montagne Noire (IIAHMN) since its inception in 1948 to meet the water needs of Lauragais. The plant supplies water from the Cammazes channel to nearly 185 communes.

While the canal was once seen as a tool of production, trade, and commerce it is now considered to be architectural and technical heritage as evidenced by the refusal of the mayor of Toulouse, Pierre Baudis, to allow space on the Canal du Midi to be used for an urban expressway. It has not been downgraded and remains open for navigation. On 7 December 1996 the channel and a buffer zone of 2,000 km were included in the list of World Heritage Sites by UNESCO. In the same year, it was classified under French law as a Grand Site of France. This classification was extended to the canals of the plain and the mountain in 1996 and 2001. It caused a very rapid increase in tourist numbers.

Nevertheless, maintenance has not been carried out completely because many players are involved: two Regions, six Departments, and local collective authorities. None wish to bear the cost of restoration and do not always dare to launch development programs. Platanus (plane trees) is a particular source of problems because their roots destroy the banks and the paved cycle paths and their leaves invade the canal. In addition they are weakened by disease (canker of Platanus). The canal is a heavy heritage to maintain and enhance as the manager of French canals, Voies navigables de France (VNF), specializes in the management and maintenance of French canals in a market and commercial economy and not in the tourism market where the Canal du Midi is located. In addition maintenance costs are higher than in a traditional network because of the age of the canal. Also, the operation of the channel generates low levels of earnings. VNF must try to establish local partnerships to develop and maintain the canal since its budget does not allow it to provide the care and supervision of 360 km (220 mi) of canals.

The classification as a World Heritage Site creates an additional level of oversight by the State who must ensure that any changes along the canal and its structures are compatible with the strategic issues of UNESCO. However, a report of the General Inspectorate of Architecture and Heritage in 2003 showed that the channel was in very poor condition with many works and infrastructure devaluing its surroundings and suffering from significant housing pressure evidenced by uncontrolled construction, poorly designed facilities that misrepresent the site, and the construction of marinas in the ports on the canal. Nevertheless, to respect the uniformity of the canal development and support efforts for improvement, the Canal du Midi remains under the management of VNF under the tutelage of the State who want to create a monitoring mission like the Loire and Mont-Saint-Michel.

The Canal du Midi is 240 km (150 mi) long with a total of 328 structures including 63 locks, 126 bridges, 55 aqueducts, 7 aqueducts, 6 dams, 1 spillway, and 1 tunnel.

It takes 90 million cubic metres of water to feed the canal for one year. To do this, Riquet set up a complex system of water supply to the canal. The idea was to capture the waters of the Montagne Noire located several tens of kilometres away and bring it to the Seuil de Naurouze, the highest point of the future canal, through channels.

These channels, called " Rigole de la montagne " (Channel of the Mountain) and " Rigole de la plaine " (Channel of the Plain) connected the upper three reservoirs (Lampy, Cammazes, and Saint-Ferréol) at the seuil de Naurouze. The Rigole de la Montagne measured 24.269 km (15.080 mi) long and has 22 structures between the outlet at Alzeau and the falls of Cammazes. The Rigole de la Plaine measured 38.121 km (23.687 mi) long at 21.45 m (70.4 ft) altitude and included 68 structures between the Crouzet bridge and the seuil de Naurouze.

Initially, two reservoirs fed the highest point of the canal at the seuil de Naurouze: the Bassin de Saint-Ferréol had a capacity of 6.3 million cubic metres and was built between 1667 and 1672. The other reservoir was much smaller - the Bassin de Lampy. Called "Lampy-Vieux", it was quickly replaced by the "Lampy-Neuf" with a capacity of 1,672,000 cubic metres built over a hundred years later between 1777 and 1782.

The Bassin de Saint-Ferréol was and remains the main water reservoir for the canal with a surface of 67 hectares (170 acres). It receives the waters of the Montagne Noire via the Channel of the Mountain which is itself supplied by the basin of Lampy. The lake waters are retained by a dam 786 m (2,579 ft) long and 149 m (489 ft) wide consisting of three parallel walls. The channel surrounds the basin and can evacuate any excess water. A museum is located near the outlets and has displays on the history of the construction of the Lake.

Originally the engineer planned and built a third reservoir, the Naurouze, but it was abandoned in 1680 due to its excessive silting. Pierre-Paul Riquet had dreamed of the construction of a new city around this basin that never saw the day. A floodway was quickly dug to drain the Naurouze basin from the south.

Other reservoirs were also built at Carcassonne to supply the lower part of the canal to the Mediterranean. So the waters of the Fresquel, the Cesse, and the Orbiel augmented those of the canal. On the other hand, the waters of the Orb at Béziers provided additional flow to part of the canal. In 1957 the Cammazes dam with a capacity of 20 million cubic metres of water was filled on the Sor which completed and finalized the supply network. This lake provides drinking water to more than 200 communes in the region. Of the 20 million cubic metres, 4 million are reserved for feeding the Canal du Midi.

The first locks built on the Toulouse plain by Pierre-Paul Riquet were experimental and were not satisfactory. They consisted of rectangular locks with wooden stilts as foundations for the side walls. This form did not properly restrain the lateral material when the lock was empty. They then collapsed on themselves. He redefined the shape of his locks to rounded side walls, thicker, and more resistant to the lateral pressure of the earth. The dimensions of the locks were then large enough for the time. Because of these rounded forms, the architecture of the locks in the Canal du Midi is called Baroque style.

The locks were built in stone and sealed with lime. They are closed by two double leaf doors. The doors, originally timber with the fewest possible metal parts, are subject to severe moisture stress and pressure. They had a "vantelle" (valve) controlled by a rack and pinion that allowed the draining of water from the lock chamber.

The nominal size of the locks built by Pierre-Paul Riquet was 29.2 m (96 ft) long, 5.8 m (19 ft) wide at the door, 11 m (36 ft) wide in the centre of the lock and an average of 2.5 m (8.2 ft) in height. In the 20th century, many locks were changed and therefore no longer have the original features.

At the town of Béziers there is a staircase of eight locks at Fonsérannes to bring it to the river Orb. The locks had to be cut from solid rock, and descended a hillside whose gradient varied. All the locks had to contain the same volume of water, but could not have precisely the same shape. Nonetheless, they were built successfully without a need for repair. This amazing piece of engineering was subcontracted out to two illiterate brothers, the Medhailes, and was built by a workforce composed mainly of women.

Some of the locks on the canal are architectural gems. For instance, the Agde Round Lock has three doors: two doors provide access to each side of the channel and the third provides access to the Hérault going to the Mediterranean. This system allows triple access while protecting the canal from river flooding. Similarly, the canal has several multiple locks – i.e. with multiple locks attached to one another. This system saves doors and foundations in areas where the slope is greatest. The best known of these locks is Fonserannes Lock which has eight chambers.

Today most of the locks are electrified which replaced the manual opening of the sluices and lock gates.

Several ports were built at regular intervals along the route of the canal in order to load and unload goods and also to provide stopping-places for travellers. Toulouse has two ports: the port de l'Embouchure is located at the junction of the Canal du Midi, the Canal de Brienne, and the Lateral canal of the Garonne while Port Saint-Sauveur is located in the centre of town near the Hall of Grains. There were two other ports in Toulouse but they were destroyed for urban development. So the Port des Minimes and the Port Saint-Etienne were replaced by towpaths.

Castelnaudary has a port of 7 hectares (17 acres) called Grand Bassin built between 1666 and 1671. It served as a stopover halfway between Toulouse and Sète. Cybelle island in the middle of the basin was used to protect the barges from the wind. Carcassonne is today a major tourist stop on the canal and has a port built in 1810 at the time when the city was connected to the canal. The port of Trèbes is a major port which has numerous moorings for boats. There are also the ports of Homps which was one of the most important on the canal and Le Somail which was a popular place for rest and recreation. Finally, just before its arrival at the Mediterranean Sea, the canal has two ports: the port of Agde where there is the old hotel of the "Administration of the Canal", and the port of Onglous at Marseillan which is the last port before Sète and its royal canal giving access to the sea.

Newer ports were built such as Ramonville-Saint-Agne, called Port-Sud, which has many residential barges and is set directly overlooking the harbour, and Port-Lauragais located near Avignonet-Lauragais on a service area of the A61 autoroute.

Related article: Aqueducts on the Canal du Midi

Several aqueducts were built along the route of the Canal du Midi. They allow the canal to cross rivers that could disrupt the water flow in the canal. In fact, the rivers flowing into the canal cause an overflow of water during flooding and fill the canal with silt. Some aqueducts date from the time of Pierre-Paul Riquet, but most were built after the completion of the canal in particular due to improvements recommended by Vauban. The canal has the following aqueducts (in order from Agde to Toulouse):

Pierre-Paul Riquet and the engineers who followed him over three centuries built many other structures on the Canal du Midi, of which the most important are listed here:

The canal is a long ribbon of water stretching through the landscape and attracts many animal species. Several species of fish such as bream breed in the canal, and others reproduce in its feeding rivers and spend part of their life in the canal. Molluscs such as anadontes, a kind of freshwater mussel, and corbicules, a kind of freshwater clam, occur in the canal. Invasive Coypu (River rat or nutria) and Muskrats introduced from the Americas burrow into the banks, which they damage. Finally, many animals and birds come to drink water from the canal.

The canal is also a very vegetated place. In the beginning, Pierre-Paul Riquet planted trees to stabilize the banks of the canal especially where it overlooked the surrounding lands. The willow was widely used for its rapid growth. The engineer also planted irises on the side of the canal to reduce subsidence of its banks. In the 18th century, the trees planted along the canal become a source of income. So mulberries were planted for rearing silkworms. Then, with the end of the silk culture in 1772, the mulberry trees were replaced by the poplar from Italy which was the most productive wood. Structures and lock-keepers' houses were decorated with fruit trees. At the time of the French Revolution plantations around the canal had approximately 60,000 trees when there were only 45,000 at the beginning. It was under the First Empire that plane trees began to be planted to replace the cut trees, which are today the dominant variety along the canal.

However, for several years, plane trees have been infected with canker stain, a disease caused by a microscopic fungus called Ceratocystis platani. The first outbreaks were detected in 2006 with the number of infected plane trees reaching 83 in 2008 and 153 in 2009. Selective tree-felling campaigns have been conducted to try to stop the spread but with no effect. In addition, there is no effective treatment against the disease. In 2011, 211 places and 1,338 diseased trees have been identified. In 15 to 20 years all 42,000 plane trees of the Canal du Midi will have to be felled and replaced mainly by other species (ash, lime), after initial experiments with a variety of plane-tree resisting the parasite.

The Canal du Midi was one of the great achievements of the late 17th century. Riquet understood the hydraulic system of the Montagne Noire and had controlled it to serve the Canal du Midi. King Louis XIV, who was the sponsor, also left it as a mark of his commitment to grandeur.

The canal was also magnified by the Encyclopedia or Reasoned Dictionary of Science, Arts, and Crafts by Diderot and D'Alembert in 1765 who highlighted its value and greatness. They compare it to Roman constructions. Another encyclopedia writer, Joseph Jerome Lefrancois Lalande lauded the architectural and hydraulic achievement in his work The navigation canals and especially the Canal de Languedoc in 1778. Similarly, Bernard Forest de Bélidor congratulated the designer in Hydraulic Architecture. The canal became an example in Europe as throughout the Age of Enlightenment it was the only canal of this size in Europe.

The American Thomas Jefferson, politician, architect, and future president of the United States, came to study the Canal du Midi in 1787. As the United States Ambassador to France he envisaged the construction of a similar work to link the Potomac River to Lake Erie.

In the 1820s the Hungarian reformer István Széchenyi visited France and was greatly impressed with the Canal du Midi in France. It inspired him to envision ways to improve navigation on the lower Danube and Tisza, which he implemented later in his career.

Canne de combat is a French combat sport. As weapon, it uses a canne or cane (a kind of walking-stick) designed for fighting. Canne de combat was standardized in the 1970s for sporting competition by Maurice Sarry. The canne is very light, made of chestnut wood and slightly tapered. A padded suit and a fencing mask are worn for protection.

The canne de combat or canne d'arme originated in France in the early 19th century as a self-defence discipline and was particularly used by the upper classes in large, unsafe cities such as Paris. Some classify it as a French martial art although its codification as a sport does not allow this name officially. The history of the discipline is closely linked to the development of the savate boxing techniques, which in earlier forms largely used kicks and later, under the influence of the British, incorporated punches. Gentlemen trained into the savate techniques mastered cane as a way of fighting from a distance as well as close combat kickboxing. The cane was more common in cities, whereas a staff akin to a European quarterstaff was more popular in rural areas. The tactics used were largely interchangeable between these disciplines.

The techniques of savate and canne d'arme increased in popularity up to the point that they were used by military and police forces until World War I. The deaths of many of its practitioners during the war caused the discipline to decline substantially. Its techniques continued, however, to be taught in a few savate boxing clubs that remained after the First World War and managed to survive World War II. There is reputed to be a group who operated during the Nazi occupation who used cane techniques to carry out assassinations. Cane fighting techniques of the late 1950s and 1960s were influenced by revival efforts of enthusiasts.

During the late 1970s, the techniques of the canne d'arme were codified by Maurice Sarry with a view to rehabilitating it as a sport. This led to the discipline which is still today associated with the Federation de Savate Boxe Française ("French Savate Boxing Federation"). Aside from the sport approach, self-defense techniques are still alive; e.g., the "Master Lafond" technique.

Today, the sport canne de combat is practiced by a thousand cannistes, and the French staff by some hundreds of bâtonniers or bâtonnistes.

In the USA Jean-Noel Eynard brought canne de combat to the east coast in combination with Savate. The first real FFBFSDA/ FIS club of Canne de combat/ Savate was open in 1983 on the east coast in Philadelphia, under Dr. Jean-Noel Eynard, FFBFSDA/ FIS Professeur with the assistance of former FFBFSDA/ FIS DTN Bob Alix. Canne de combat was also taught in 1994 in Memphis, Tennessee.

The use of the cane as a weapon, as originally taught in weapons schools, was codified by the masters of savate so that the cane was taught as a weapon of self-defence. The French tradition includes techniques of medieval stick-fighting (bâton français), excepting those techniques considered too dangerous to be used in sport. The medieval stick is too heavy a weapon to be used in competition.

Its use has thus been lost and today canne de combat itself is disappearing. There is, however, a martial tradition passed down to Swiss master Pierre Vigny, which was used for codification of techniques using the Indian cane at the beginning of the 20th century, forming a separate tradition from the more common sporting cane seen in France today. The cane, first used for support and then as a gentleman's accessory, also provided a useful weapon. A normal walking stick is usually within the boundaries of legal self-defence, but the loaded cane (weighted with lead at one end) may be considered a weapon in some jurisdictions.

In the modern sporting canne de combat system found in France, bouts are held inside a ring. The cane is held with one hand but the player can change it from hand to hand during the bout. Strokes are made either horizontally or downward, thrusting or stabbing blows being prohibited. The scoring zones are the calves, the torso and the head.

To count, all strokes must be with the cane, and low blows must have a lunging movement. The bout is won on points, the lightness of the cane and the protective clothing making a knockout impossible. Points are scored for style, according to the correctness of body positions during fighting. Contact with prohibited areas such as the arms are penalized. It is thus possible to win a match without landing a blow on one's adversary, if he or she accumulates penalties.

Canne is the biggest part of canne de combat. When playing canne, the cannistes (competitors) have a stick in their hand, wear a protective suit and a fencing helmet, and try to score more points than their opponent during the match.

During a canne bout, the cannistes must use prescribed defensive and offensive techniques, combined with jumps and vaults. There is no simultaneous attack, meaning that if one of the players has started an attack, the other must parry or evade, and is allowed to counterattack only after the evasion. An evasion can be a step, a jump or a crouch. The stick can be held either in the left or in the right hand, and changing hands during the match is permitted.

During a double canne bout, the cannistes hold sticks in both their right and left hands. They try to score hits with both hands using similar techniques as in canne, whilst they parry and counter-attack. The two stick style allows for much faster attack and defence.

Bâton means long stick techniques and is based on the movements of the medieval longsword and longer countryside walking stick, extended with the movement base of canne.

Canne défense means self-defense with the canne. The basic techniques are similar to those used in basic canne, but are expanded to include thrusts, slashes, parries and counter-attacks, neck- and hand-locks and releases from holds. During canne défense every vulnerable part of the body is considered a legitimate target: the elbow, the knee, the face, etc. It is under heavy development. Because canne défense techniques are more dangerous, there are no canne défense competitions or free sparring, only paired techniques.

Canne chausson combines savate kicks with canne stick attacks.

Canne de combat is based on six techniques, combinations, and other elements (jumps, voltes, hand switches).

Assuming the cane is in your right hand:

Keeping the point of the cane to the front, turn your upper body to the right slightly as you draw back your right hand. There should be a lifting of the left heel at the same time. Once your hand has passed the line of your spine (if viewed from the side), flip the point of your cane out behind you, so that your arm and the cane is now in line, and fully extended out to the rear. Next, bring your arm and the cane around from the rear to the front, along a horizontal line. If the target is the head, remain upright as you deliver your hit. Your arm should remain straight throughout the execution of the strike as the point travels through a 180 degrees arc from the rear to the front.

There is no need to think of delivering the strike with a 'blade edge'. In fact, it's better to deliver the strike with your palm facing down, so that the thumb side of the stick strikes the target (similar to striking with the back edge of your blade). That helps enormously in keeping the arm straight throughout.

Assuming the cane is in your right hand:

Keeping the point of the cane to the front, turn you upper body to the left slightly as you draw back your right hand (palm facing up i.e. towards you) and arm across your chest. Transfer your weight slightly to your back (left) foot and raise your front heel slightly as you do so. Your hand should pass the line of your spine (if viewed from the side). Now turn your hand over (anti-clockwise), in order to flip the point of your cane out behind you, with your hand and forearm over your left shoulder, and extend the cane out to the rear as far as possible. Next, bring your arm and the cane around from the rear to the front, along a horizontal line. If the target is the head, remain upright as you deliver your hit. Your arm should remain straight throughout the execution of the strike as the point travels through a 180 degrees arc from the rear to the front.

Acceptable defenses in canne are the parry and the evasion. An evasion can be a step, a jump or a crouch. There is no simultaneous attack, which means that if one competitor starts an attack, the other has to parry or evade and is allowed to counterattack only after the evasion.

The canne strategy does not accept the theory of "getting a small hit in order to deal a bigger hit". If player A starts to attack and, instead of defending himself, player B also starts an attack, then the following is the rule:

This is similar to the right of way rules of modern sport fencing.

Only valid attacks are counted. An attack is only considered valid if it performed using one of the techniques described above, and:

Bouts are held in a 9-meter diameter circle. The cane is held with one hand but the competitor may change it from hand to hand during the bout. Strokes are made either horizontally or downward, thrusting or stabbing blows being prohibited. The scoring zones are the calves, the torso (only for men) and the head.

To count, all strokes must be with the cane, and low blows must have a lunging movement. The bout is won on points, the lightness of the cane and the protective clothing making a knockout impossible. Points are scored for style, according to the correctness of body positions during fighting. Contact with prohibited areas such as the arms are penalized. It is thus possible to win a match without landing a blow on one's adversary, if they accumulate penalties.

The Cantabrian mixed forests is a temperate broadleaf and mixed forests ecoregion in southwestern Europe. It extends along the coastal Cantabrian Mountains and Galician Massif of Northern Spain, extending south into northern Portugal, and northwards through the westernmost Pyrenees to southwestern France. The ecoregion extends from the seacoast to the highest peaks of the Cantabrian Mountains. The highest peak is Torre Cerredo at 2,648 meters elevation.

The ecoregion is transitional between the Mediterranean climate and Oceanic climate regions of Spain and Portugal and the more humid and temperate forests of Western Europe. The lowlands have mild temperate climates, while the high mountains experience cold winters.

The ecoregion's elevational range supports several plant communities.

The lowlands are characterized by broadleaf deciduous forests, with English oak (Quercus robur), sweet chestnut (Castanea sativa), European ash (Fraxinus excelsior), lindens (Tilia platyphyllos and Tilia cordata), wych elm (Ulmus glabra), and maples (Acer pseudoplatanus and Acer platanoides). Characteristically Mediterranean evergreen trees and shrubs, including holm oak (Quercus ilex), cork oak (Quercus suber), sweet bay (Laurus nobilis), strawberry tree (Arbutus unedo), and Rhamnus alaternus, can be found in warm and well-drained areas like limestone outcrops. Maritime pine (Pinus pinaster) is common on Atlantic coastal dunes in northern Portugal and western Galicia, and further inland on rocky dry slopes.

Middle- and upper-elevation forests are characterized by deciduous oaks (Quercus petraea and Quercus pyrenaica), with European beech (Fagus sylvatica) from the Cantabrian Mountains eastward into France.

Stands of white birch (Betula pubescens) appear below the timber line. Above the timber line (1800 meters), subalpine plant communities including low shrubs (including dwarf juniper and heathers), grasses, peat bogs, and rock outcrops cover the highest peaks.

Large mammals include Cantabrian brown bear (Ursus arctos), Iberian wolf (Canis lupus signatus), Cantabrian chamois (Rupicapra pyrenaica parva), wild boar (Sus scrofa), red deer (Cervus elaphus elaphus), and roe deer (Capreolus capreolus). Feral horses (Equus caballus) roam in Galicia's mountains. The broom hare (Lepus castroviejoi) is an endemic species to the Cantabrian Mountains. The reclusive Pyrenean desman (Galemys pyrenaicus) is a vulnerable small mammal that lives here and in the Pyrenees.

The Cantabrian brown bears number over 200 individuals, who live in the Cantabrian Mountains of southern Asturias and Cantabria and the adjacent portion of Castile and León. The brown bear population has increased in recent decades from fewer than 100 in the 1990s. The Cantabrian population is the larger of the two remaining brown bear populations in southwestern Europe; the other is in the Pyrenees.

The Cantabrian capercaillie (Tetrao urogallus cantabricus) is an endangered subspecies of grouse. Its population and range are declining from habitat destruction, human disturbance, and over-hunting.

9,294 km (10%) of the ecoregion is in protected areas. Another 23% is forested and outside protected areas. Protected areas include Picos de Europa National Park (661.2 km), Somiedo (289.8 km), Redes, (376.98 km), Fuentes del Narcea, Degaña e Ibias (576.34 km), Fuentes Carrionas y Fuente Cobre - Montaña Palentina (781.41 km), Ponga (205.06 km), Fragas do Eume (91.49 km), and Aiako harria (68.95 km) natural parks in Spain, and Peneda-Gerês National Park (695.92 km) in Portugal.

The canton of Valréas, sometimes called the enclave des Papes ("Enclave of the Popes"), is a canton of the Vaucluse department, a part of the Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur (PACA) region in Southern France. It consists of four communes : Grillon, Richerenches, Valréas and Visan.

The Enclave des Papes is surrounded by the Drôme département, separated from the Vaucluse proper by roughly 2.5 km at the closest point. Its four towns, Valréas, Visan, Grillon and Richerenches have a rich history. For the Vaucluse, the Enclave des Papes is an exclave ; for the Drôme, it is an enclave.

From 1305 to 1378, the Popes lived in Avignon, in what is now France, and were under the influence of the French kings. During this period, known as the Avignon Papacy, the city of Avignon and the adjacent Comtat Venaissin were added to the Papal States.

In 1316 the Cardinals chose a sickly man, hoping that his reign as Pope would be short. Pope John XXII surprised them; he died at the age of 89 after 18 years of pontifical reign. All of this, so the story goes, thanks to the excellent wines of the Valréas region. When he had travelled through Valréas, he liked the wine so much that, in 1317, he purchased the estate of Valréas. Pope Clement VI later added the villages of Visan, Grillon and Richerenches. The Enclave des Papes was born.

Papal control persisted until the French Revolution ; in 1791, an unauthorized plebiscite was held, and the inhabitants voted for annexation by France. The papacy did not, however, recognise this formally until 1814. The Enclave des Papes was incorporated first into the département of Drôme but was later joined to the département of Vaucluse.

The cantons of France (French pronunciation: [ kɑ̃tɔ̃ ]) are territorial subdivisions of the French Republic 's departments and arrondissements.

Apart from their role as organizational units in relation to certain aspects of the administration of public services and justice, the chief purpose of the cantons today is to serve as constituencies for the election of members of the representative assemblies established in each of France's territorial departments (departmental councils, formerly general councils). For this reason, such elections were known in France as "cantonal elections", until 2015 when their name was changed to "departmental elections" to match the departmental councils' name.

Most of them group together a number of communes (the lowest administrative division of the French Republic), although larger communes may be included in more than one canton, since the cantons – in marked contrast to the communes, which have between more than two million inhabitants (Paris) and just one person (Rochefourchat) – are intended to be roughly equal in size of population for electoral purposes.

The role of the canton is, essentially, to provide a framework for departmental elections. Each canton elects a woman and a man to represent it at the conseil départemental du département – or departmental council for the department, which is the principal administrative division of the French Republic.

In urban areas, a single commune generally includes several cantons. Conversely, in rural areas, a canton may comprise several smaller communes. In the latter case, administrative services, the gendarmerie headquarters for example, are often situated in the principal town (chef-lieu) of the canton, although there are exceptions, such as cantons Gaillon-Campagne and Sarreguemines-Campagne, which have in common a "chief-town" which does not belong to either canton.

For statistical (INSEE) purposes, the twenty arrondissements of Paris – the administrative subdivisions of that city – are sometimes considered cantons, but they serve no greater electoral function.

Cantons also form legal districts, as seats of Tribunaux d'instance (TI) or Courts of First Instance. Historically, the cantons are called justices de paix or "district courts".

The cantons were created in 1790 at the same time as the départements by the Revolutionary Committee for the Division of Territory (Comité de division). They were more numerous than today (between 40 and 60 to each département). Cantons were, at first, grouped into what were called districts. After the abolition of the district in 1800, they were reorganized by the Consulate into arrondissements. The number of cantons was then drastically reduced (between 30 and 50 units) by the Loi du 8 pluviôse an IX (28 January 1801), or the "Law for the Reduction of the Number of District Courts", or Loi portant réduction du nombre de justices de paix in French. The département prefects were told by the government to group the communes within newly established cantons. The département lists, once approved by the government, were published in the Bulletin des lois in 1801 and 1802; these lists were the basis of the administrative divisions of France from then until 2015, although cantons with small populations were eliminated and new cantons created in areas of strong demographic growth. On the whole, their number increased appreciably.

In May 2013 a law was adopted that reduced the number of cantons drastically. This law came into effect at the French departmental elections in March 2015. Before the cantonal reform, there were 4,032 cantons; afterwards there were 2,054, with the cantons in Martinique and Guyana abolished. The 2013 reform law also changed the representation of the cantons in the departmental councils : each canton is now represented by a man and a woman.

The number of cantons varies from one département to another. The Territoire de Belfort has the fewest at 9, while Nord has the most at 41. The average figure is about 21.

The canuts (French: [ kany ]) were Lyonnais silk workers, often working on Jacquard looms. They were primarily found in the Croix-Rousse neighbourhood of Lyon in the 19th century. Although the term generally refers to Lyonnais silk workers, silk workers in the nearby commune of l'Arbresle are also called canuts.

The word canut may come from an abbreviation of the French expression "Voici les cannes nues!" (Look at those bare canes!), as canes without any charms or ribbons were considered a sign of poverty. It may equally well come from the word canette (spool) referring to the spool on which the silk was kept prior to being used.

The canuts were Lyonnais silk workers in the 19th century, often working on Jacquard looms primarily in the Croix-Rousse neighbourhood.

The canuts were subject to extremely poor working conditions. On account of these conditions, they staged many worker uprisings, known as the Canut revolts. The first revolt, in October 1831 is considered to be one of the first worker uprisings. The canuts occupied Lyon, shouting "Vivre libre en travaillant ou mourir en combattant!" (Live free working or die fighting!) King Louis-Philippe sent 20,000 soldiers and 150 cannons to suppress the "riot". On February 14, 1834, the canuts revolted a second time, occupying the heights of Lyon. The revolt lasted 6 days before being suppressed by 12,000 soldiers. According to historian Gérard Cholvy, the revolts had a profound effect on the French scholar Frédéric Ozanam.

Laurent Mourguet was an unemployed canut when he created the character Guignol and his eponymous puppet show for children, supposedly in his own image.

Cervelle de canut (lit. silk worker's brains) is a cheese spread/dip, a Lyonnais speciality. The dish is a base of fromage blanc, seasoned with chopped herbs, shallots, salt, pepper, olive oil and vinegar.

The canuts were the subject of songs by Aristide Bruant and Éric La Blanche.

In contemporary times, the word canut is often used to talk about citizens of Lyon in general in an affectionate way.

Capgemini SE is a French multinational information technology (IT) services and consulting company. It is headquartered in Paris, France. The business was established as the Société pour la Gestion de l'Entreprise et le Traitement de l'Information (Sogeti) by Serge Kampf in 1974. It adopted the name CAP Gemini Sogeti in 1975, shortly after it acquired the Centre d'Analyse et de Programmation (CAP) and Gemini Computer Systems. The company expanded considerably during the early 1980s, often via the acquisition of other companies.

In 1996, the simplified name Cap Gemini was adopted by the firm. In March 2000, at the height of the dot-com bubble, Cap Gemini purchased Ernst & Young Consulting for roughly $11 billion; the early 2000s proved to be fiscally challenging for the company, compelling it to sell off its North American consulting wing and to restructure its operations. During the mid-to-late 2000s, Cap Gemini embraced offshoring via the expansion of its presence in India, which included the purchase of both Kanbay and Thesys.

In 2015, Cap Gemini acquired the US-based technology and services company iGate for $4 billion. Two years later, the business was reorganised as Capgemini SE. In June 2019, Capgemini acquired the engineering specialist Altran, from which it formed Capgemini Engineering. By the end of the 2010s, Capgemini held over one hundred active contracts with various bodies of the French government. In July 2025, it purchased the technology outsourcing firm WNS Global Services for $3.3 billion. During the 2020s, the company placed considerable resources into the development of quantum computing and generative AI. In February 2026, Capgemini announced plans to sell its US subsidiary, Capgemini Government Solutions, amid public outcry concerning its contract to provide skiptracing services to US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE).

In 1967, the French entrepreneur Serge Kampf founded the Société pour la Gestion de l'Entreprise et le Traitement de l'Information (Sogeti), as an enterprise management and data processing company.

In 1974, Sogeti acquired the American company Gemini Computer Systems. In 1975, having acquired both the French software company Centre d'Analyse et de Programmation (CAP) and Gemini Computer Systems, and having resolved a dispute with the similarly named CAP UK over the international use of the name 'CAP', Sogeti renamed itself as CAP Gemini Sogeti.

In 1981, Cap Gemini Sogeti launched operations in the US, following the acquisition of the Milwaukee-based company DASD Corporation, which specialised in data conversion and employed 500 people in 20 branches throughout the US. Following this transaction, the US Operation was rebranded as Cap Gemini DASD.

In 1990, Cap Gemini Sogeti acquired the Hoskyns Group, a major IT outsourcing and managed services company in the UK. In 1996, the company's name was simplified to Cap Gemini, and the firm launched a new group logo. All operating companies worldwide were re-branded to operate as Cap Gemini.

In March 2000, Cap Gemini bought Ernst & Young Consulting in exchange for around $11 billion, after which it was integrated with Gemini Consulting to form Cap Gemini Ernst & Young. The valuation of this purchase had been inflated by the dot-com bubble that disruptively ended later that same year; in 2001 alone, Cap Gemini's share value dropped by 53 percent while operating losses were recorded during the following year.

During 2003, the company underwent restructuring, reducing its 13 disciplines to four broad ones: consulting, technology services, local professional services, and outsourcing. It also became increasingly focused on offshoring and outsourcing opportunities, while also opting to divest its North American consultancy arm to Accenture. In 2006, Cap Gemini acquired Kanbay for $1.25 billion, which expanded its footprint and capabilities in India. In 2008, the company acquired four former divisions of the Dutch IT company Getronics. In September 2010, Cap Gemini acquired a controlling stake in the Brazilian IT services provider CPM Braxis. That same year, it acquired the Indian IT services specialist Thesys. In April 2015, it acquired the US-based technology and services company iGate for $4 billion. In June 2017, Cap Gemini S.A. became Capgemini SE, and its Euronext ticker name similarly changed from CAP GEMINI to CAPGEMINI.

In February 2018, the company purchased the Philadelphia -based digital customer engagement company LiquidHub for US$500 million to assist Capgemini's digital and cloud growth in North America. In June 2019, Capgemini acquired Altran, a provider of engineering and R&D services. It was the largest acquisition in the company's history, bringing Capgemini's total employee count to over 250,000. As part of the acquisition, Capgemini acquired frog design and Cambridge Consultants, which were integrated into Capgemini Invent; several other recent acquisitions, including staff from Fahrenheit 212, Idean, and June21, have been merged into that group and operate under the frog brand. In 2021, Capgemini grouped the engineering and R&D activities of the Altran brand with Capgemini Digital Engineering Services and formed a new division, Capgemini Engineering.

In June 2021, Capgemini partnered with Sanofi, Orange and Generali to launch Future4care, a European start-up accelerator focused on digital healthcare. In 2021, Capgemini acquired RXP Services and Acclimation in Australia to expand its operations in Australia. Also in 2021, Capgemini acquired Australian company Empired and its New Zealand subsidiary Intergen. In January 2022, the company set up an international quantum computing laboratory, called Capgemini Quantum Lab or Capgemini Q-Lab, in collaboration with IBM. It can be used by Capgemini's clients to build in-house quantum computing applications and licensable technologies. In July 2022, it was reported that Capgemini had, via roughly 250 separate contracts between itself and various elements of the French state, allegedly been paid €1.1 billion by the French government between 2017 and 2022, operating across areas such as the economy, the armed forces, health, the environment, national education, the interior, foreign affairs, labor, agriculture, and culture. In August 2023, Capgemini announced that it was launching its own generative AI offerings.

In 2024, Capgemini acquired the enterprise data management company Syniti, which specialised in data quality, data migration, and regulatory compliance. That same year, it secured a contract worth up to £574 million to run legacy tax management systems for His Majesty's Revenue & Customs. In July 2025, Capgemini acquired technology outsourcing firm WNS Global Services in a $3.3 billion cash deal. The transaction expanded the range of Capgemini's generative AI-based products. In November of that year, it completed its purchase of managed services provider Cloud4C. As of 2025, the company has over 423,400 employees in approximately 50 countries. In March 2026, the company partnered with the US firm OpenAI for the latter's platform for building, deploying, and managing AI coworkers.

Sogeti is a wholly owned subsidiary of Capgemini Group, spun off in 2002. It is an information technology consulting company specialising in technology and engineering professional services.

Capgemini Research Institute is the company's in-house think tank, launched in 2012. It produces reports on current trends and concerns in business and technology, based on research, data, and surveys.

Applied Innovation Exchange (AIE) is Capgemini's network of innovation labs, and was launched in 2016. The labs enable clients to exchange with designers, industry experts, business and technology partners, research organizations, and startups, and Capgemini has AIEs worldwide.

Capgemini Invent was launched in 2018 as the design and consulting subdivision of the Capgemini Group. It is the rebranding and enlargement of Capgemini Consulting. As of 2023, the subdivision had approximately 10,000 employees in 60 locations worldwide. These include staff from frog design, Fahrenheit 212, Idean, and June21.

In 2021, Capgemini grouped the engineering and R&D activities of its Altran brand with Capgemini Digital Engineering Services into Capgemini Engineering.

Capgemini reportedly paid no corporate tax between 2011 and 2020 despite generating €329 million in revenue in France in 2022, according to a Senate report, which calls it "a caricatured example of tax optimization". The appendices to the Senate inquiry report note in particular that Capgemini secured some €7.6 million in various contracts from the French Ministry of Finance between 2018 and 2021. Furthermore, while Capgemini was supposed to be fined €17.3 million, it obtained a rebate reducing the bill to €3.9 million with the withdrawal of adjustments for the years between 2009 and 2014.

Capgemini is a long-standing partner of US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), with contracts, often worth tens of millions of dollars, dating back to at least 2007. The services range from IT support to "detention planning". The company advertised this partnership in the "customer stories" section of its website, boasting that "the Capgemini team works closely to help [ICE] minimize the time and cost required to deport all deportable illegal aliens from the United States".

In November 2025, Capgemini responded to and accepted a new call for tenders to help ICE identify and locate foreigners. The French company was awarded the largest share of the contract, earning some $365 million, with revenue indexed to performance and financial bonuses based on the success rate in verifying the addresses of foreigners. Although the company initially chose to publicize this partnership on its website, all references to it were removed less than a week after journalistic publications on the topic.

In February 2026, Capgemini announced plans to immediately sell its US subsidiary, Capgemini Government Solutions. This came after a public outcry concerning its contract to provide " skip tracing services for enforcement and removal operations" for ICE, which was questioned by finance minister Roland Lescure and condemned by opposition MP Hadrien Clouet. Capgemini determined that the legal restrictions imposed for contracting with federal government entities carrying out classified activities in the United States (including a Special Security Agreement) did not allow it to exercise appropriate control over the subsidiary's operations.

The Capgemini Group Executive Committee consists of 34 members. Aiman Ezzat has been the group's CEO since 2020, having been at the company for more than 20 years, including as COO from 2018 to 2020 and CFO from 2012 to 2018.

Paul Hermelin is chairman of the company's board of directors. He was chairman and CEO from 2012 to 2020, having been appointed CEO in 2002 and having been at the company since 1993. Hermelin succeeded Serge Kampf, the founder and prior head of the company, who stepped down in 2012, thereafter serving as vice chairman of the board until his death in 2016.

The Capitole de Toulouse (Occitan: Capitòli de Tolosa ; lit. ' Capitol of Toulouse '), commonly known as the Capitole, is the heart of the municipal administration and the city hall of the French city of Toulouse. It was designated a monument historique by the French government in 1840.

In 1190, the Capitouls (governing magistrates) of Toulouse commissioned the original structures on the site to provide a seat for the government of a province which was growing in wealth and influence. The site was named the Capitole by the town clerk, Pierre Salmon, in 1522 to recall the Roman Capitol. A dungeon tower, known as le donjon, was completed in 1530 and a renaissance style gateway, designed by Nicolas Bachelier, providing access to the Henri IV courtyard, was completed in 1546.

Only the Henri IV courtyard and the gateway survive from the original medieval buildings. Le donjon was fought over during the 1562 Riots of Toulouse, with Huguenot forces holding it with captured cannons. It was in the Henri IV courtyard that Henri de Montmorency, 4th Duke of Montmorency was decapitated after his rebellion against Cardinal Richelieu in 1632. The Salle du jeu de Spectacle (the room for shows), from which the Théâtre du Capitole Opera Company and the Orchestre national du Capitole de Toulouse later emerged, was created in 1737.

In the mid-18th century, the capitouls decided to commission a municipal palace which would be unique in France. The site they chose was to the immediate west of le donjon and the site enclosed the Henri IV courtyard. The new building, which was 135 meters (443 ft) long, was designed by Guillaume Cammas in the neoclassical style, built in characteristic pink brick and was completed in 1760.

The design involved a central section of the three bays, which was slightly projected forward, wings of six bays on either side, and a pair of end bays, which were projected forward as pavilions. The central section featured a segmental headed doorway with a keystone flanked by a pair of segmental headed windows on the ground floor, a French door flanked by a pair of tall segmental headed windows on the first floor, and a clock flanked by a pair of shorter segmental headed windows on the second floor. The bays in the central section were flanked by eight Corinthian order columns supporting an entablature and a pediment. The wings and end bays were fenestrated in a similar style and flanked by Corinthian order pilasters. The eight columns in the central section were intended to recall the original eight capitouls. Internally, the principal rooms included Le Grand Consistoire, Le Petit Consistoire, L'Arsenal and Le Salle des Illustres. These rooms exhibited some fine paintings, some of which were destroyed during the French Revolution.

Le donjon was the venue for a religiously-biased trial during which a protestant, Jean Calas, was interrogated and broken on the wheel in 1762.

On 24 March 1871, inspired by the establishment of the Paris Commune, a crowd of revolutionary guardsmen stormed the Capitole, seeking the establishment of a similar commune in Toulouse. However, the insurrection only lasted a few days and on 27 March 1871, the revolutionaries left the building peacefully. Le donjon was rebuilt to a design by Eugène Viollet-le-Duc in a style typical of northern France in 1873.

Following the liberation of Toulouse on 19 August 1944, during the Second World War, the Capitole was draped in French tricolour flags. On 19 February 1967, the president of France, Charles de Gaulle, visited the town and delivered a speech from the balcony of the building.

Capitulations of the Ottoman Empire were contracts between the Ottoman Empire and several Christian powers primarily during the 16th century and persisted until 1923. Turkish capitulations, or Ahidnâmes were generally bilateral acts whereby definite arrangements were entered into by each contracting party towards the other, not mere concessions.

The Turkish capitulations were grants made by successive sultans to Christian nations, conferring rights and privileges in favour of their subjects resident or trading in the Ottoman dominions, following the policy towards European states of the Byzantine Empire.

According to these capitulations, traders entering the Ottoman Empire were exempt from local prosecution, local taxation, local conscription, and the searching of their domicile.

The capitulations were initially made during the Ottoman Empire's military dominance, to entice and encourage commercial exchange with Western merchants. However, after military dominance shifted to Europe, significant economic and political advantages were granted to the European powers by the Ottoman Empire.

In the first instance capitulations were granted separately to each Christian state, beginning with the Genoese in 1453, which entered into peaceful relations with the Ottoman Empire. Afterwards new capitulations were obtained which summed up in one document earlier concessions, and added to them in general terms whatever had been conceded to one or more other states; a stipulation which became a most favored nation article. These treaties facilitated the entry of European finished goods into Ottoman markets, granting certain tax and tariff privileges to European merchants, and even some extraterritorial legal rights to allow the French consul to exercise jurisdiction over disputes arising with French merchants instead of the local Islamic Sharia courts. These treaties were generally not disadvantageous to the Ottoman Empire while the Ottomans retained a superior military advantage.

France is generally viewed as having initiated the signature of capitulations. The first well-documented such agreement was concluded in 1569 between Charles IX of France and Selim II. References to earlier agreements between, respectively, Louis XII and Bayezid II in 1500, and Francis I and Suleiman the Magnificent in the mid-1530s, have been questioned by historians, the latter being generally viewed as merely a draft.

The 1673 capitulations renewal between Louis XIV and Mehmed IV established the French Monarchy as protector of all Christians in the Ottoman Empire. That role, however, was never acknowledged by the Pope, and after the Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca of 1774 triggered a competition between France and Russia which eventually played a key role in igniting the Crimean War.

The Ottoman-French Treaty of 1740 marked the apogee of French influence in the Ottoman Empire in the eighteenth century. In the following years the French had an unchallenged position in Levant trade and in transportation between Ottoman ports. Near contemporary Ottoman capitulations to European powers such as Britain and Holland (1737), the Kingdom of Naples (1740), Denmark (1756), and Prussia (1761) were to offset and balance the capitulations granted to France in 1740.

Capitulations signified that which was arranged under distinct headings; the Ottoman Turkish phrase was ahid nameh (عهيد نامه), whereas a "treaty" was mouahede (معاهده). The latter did, and the former did not, signify a reciprocal engagement.

According to capitulations, and treaties confirmatory of them, made between the Porte and other states, foreigners resident in Turkey were subject to the laws of their respective countries.

Thus, although the Turkish capitulations were not in themselves treaties, yet by subsequent confirmation they acquired the force of commercial durable instead of personal nature; the conversion of permissive into perfect rights; questions as to contraband and neutral trade stated in definite terms.

On 8 September 1914, the Ottoman Empire's ruling Committee of Union and Progress unilaterally abrogated the capitulations as part of diplomatic maneuverings with Germany and the United Kingdom as to whether the Ottoman Empire would enter World War I. This action prompted a joint protest from the German, Austro-Hungarian, British, French, and Russian ambassadors. The decision was put into effect in early October.

As far as Turkey is concerned, the capitulations were abolished by the Treaty of Lausanne (1923), specifically by Article 28:

Each of the High Contracting Parties hereby accepts, in so far as it is concerned, the complete abolition of the Capitulations in Turkey in every respect.

Capitulations in Egypt ended in 1949 as stipulated in the Montreux Convention Regarding the Abolition of the Capitulations in Egypt in 1937.

Capitulatory treaties were signed with the following states:

A caquelon (French: [ kaklɔ̃ ]), also called a fondue pot, is a cooking vessel of stoneware, ceramic, enamelled cast iron, or porcelain for the preparation of fondue.

The word caquelon is from a Swiss French term originating in the 18th century derived from the Alsatian word kakel (akin to German Kachel, "glazed tile") referring to an earthenware casserole. The term is in common use throughout Switzerland, and in the Franche-Comté and Provence regions of France.

The bottom of a caquelon requires a thickness sufficient to prevent burning of the melted cheese when the vessel is placed over a spirit burner at the table. Nevertheless, an encrusted layer of cheese forms on the bottom (called Grossmutter in German, religieuse in French) which is released when the fondue has been consumed and is shared between the diners.

The Caquins of Brittany, (also Cacous Kakouz, Caqueux, Caquets, and Caquous) were groups of inhabitants who worked as coopers and ropemakers, subjected to exclusion in their villages located in Brittany, between the thirteenth century and modern times.

The first records of the caquins occur in the statues of Raoul Rolland, Bishop of Tréguier, where they are referred to as "cacosi". A document from 1444 then refers to them as "cacoust", and ducal mandate from 1475 introduces the term "caqueux".

The Caquins were subjected to a variety of laws restricting their actions in society, this included restricting what work they could undertake, and while they could own land they were prohibited from building.

On 12 February 1425, John V, Duke of Brittany in his constitutions forbade the Caquins to engage in trade and demanded their separation from others. However, on 16 April 1447, the duke allowed the Caquins to take leased land in the bishopric of Vannes, as well as elsewhere.

In 1456, mandates from Peter II, Duke of Brittany re-affirmed the separation of "caqueux [caquins], malornez, and ladres" from other people. On 18 December 1456, Peter II issued a long ordinance on fouages (the tax paid by each feu), where he declared that the Caquins were exempted from this tax.

There were also various religious restrictions imposed on the Caquins, such as having to enter churches through special doors separate from other congregants.

It is believed that the exclusion of the Caquins was based on the fear of leprosy, where Caquin ropemakers were believed to be descendants of lepers and could spread leprosy. This potential leprous origin as well as their treatment, until the eighteenth century, mean they are often compared to the Cagots of southwestern France and northern Spain, or the crétins des Alpes of the Swiss Alps, there is however no mention of physical or mental particularities specific to the Caquins.

In parish records of births, they were listed at the end, upside-down with illegitimate children. In Pluvigner in the late 1600s, a funeral cortege for a caquin was attacked by over 200 people for attempting to bury the caquin in the parish churchyard instead of the designated caquin churchyard. Many of the discriminatory beliefs around the caquins were the same as those believed of Jews elsewhere in Europe, such as bleeding from the navel around Good Friday.

Carcassonne is a French fortified city in the department of Aude, region of Occitania. It is the prefecture of the department.

Inhabited since the Neolithic Period, Carcassonne is located in the plain of the Aude between historic trade routes, linking the Atlantic to the Mediterranean Sea and the Massif Central to the Pyrénées. Its strategic importance was quickly recognised by the Romans, who occupied its hilltop until the demise of the Western Roman Empire. In the fifth century, the region of Septimania was taken over by the Visigoths, who founded the city of Carcassonne in the newly established Visigothic Kingdom.

Its citadel, known as the Cité de Carcassonne, is a medieval fortress dating back to the Gallo-Roman period and restored by the theorist and architect Eugène Viollet-le-Duc between 1853 and 1879. It was added to the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites in 1997 because of the exceptional preservation and restoration of the medieval citadel. Consequently, Carcassonne relies heavily on tourism but also counts manufacturing and winemaking as some of its other key economic sectors.

The first signs of settlement in this region have been dated to about 3500 BC, but the hill site of Carsac —a Celtic place-name that has been retained at other sites in the south—became an important trading place in the sixth century BC. The Volcae Tectosages fortified it and made it into an oppidum, a hill fort, which is when it was named "Carsac".

The folk etymology —involving a châtelaine named Lady Carcas, a ruse ending a siege, and the joyous ringing of bells (" Carcas sona")—though memorialized in a neo-Gothic sculpture of Mme. Carcas on a column near the Narbonne Gate, is a modern reconstruction of a 16th-century depiction. The name can be derived as an augmentative of the name Carcas.

Carcassonne became strategically identified when the Romans fortified the hilltop around 100 BC and eventually made it the colonia of Julia Carsaco, later Carcaso, later Carcasum (by the process of swapping consonants known as metathesis). The main part of the lower courses of the northern ramparts dates from Gallo-Roman times. In AD 462 the Romans officially ceded Septimania to the Visigothic king Theodoric II who had held Carcassonne since AD 453.

Theodoric is thought to have begun the predecessor of the basilica that is now dedicated to Saint Nazaire. In AD 508 the Visigoths successfully foiled attacks by the Frankish king Clovis I. In Francia, the Arab and Berber Muslim forces invaded the region of Septimania in AD 719 and deposed the local Visigothic Kingdom in AD 720; after the Frankish conquest of Narbonne in 759, the Muslim Arabs and Berbers were defeated by the Christian Franks and retreated to Andalusia after 40 years of occupation, and the Carolingian king Pepin the Short came up reinforced.

A medieval fiefdom, the county of Carcassonne, controlled the city and its environs. It was often united with the county of Razès. The origins of Carcassonne as a county probably lie in local representatives of the Visigoths, but the first count known by name is Bello of the time of Charlemagne. Bello founded a dynasty, the Bellonids, which would rule many honores in Septimania and Catalonia for three centuries. In 1067, Carcassonne became the property of Raimond-Bernard Trencavel, viscount of Albi and Nîmes, through his marriage with Ermengard, sister of the last count of Carcassonne. In the following centuries, the Trencavel family allied in succession with either the counts of Barcelona or of Toulouse. They built the Château Comtal and the Basilica of Saints Nazarius and Celsus. In 1096, Pope Urban II blessed the foundation stones of the new cathedral.

Carcassonne became famous for its role in the Albigensian Crusades when the city was a stronghold of Occitan Cathars. In August 1209 the crusading army of the Papal Legate, abbot Arnaud Amalric, besieged the city. Viscount Raymond-Roger de Trencavel was imprisoned while negotiating his city's surrender and died in mysterious circumstances three months later in his dungeon. The people of Carcassonne were allowed to leave—in effect, expelled from their city with nothing more than the shirts on their backs. Simon de Montfort was appointed the new viscount and added to the fortifications.

In 1240, Trencavel's son tried unsuccessfully to reconquer his old domain. The city submitted to the rule of the kingdom of France in 1247. Carcassonne became a border fortress between France and the Crown of Aragon under the 1258 Treaty of Corbeil. King Louis IX founded the new part of the town across the river. He and his successor Philip III built the outer ramparts. Contemporary opinion still considered the fortress impregnable. During the Hundred Years' War, Edward the Black Prince failed to take the city in 1355, although his troops destroyed the lower town.

In 1659, the Treaty of the Pyrenees transferred the border province of Roussillon to France, and Carcassonne's military significance was reduced. Its fortifications were abandoned and the city became mainly an economic center of the woollen textile industry, for which a 1723 source quoted by Fernand Braudel found it "the manufacturing center of Languedoc". It remained so until the Ottoman market collapsed at the end of the eighteenth century, then reverted to a country town. The town hall, known as Hôtel de Rolland, was completed in 1761.

During sieges, temporary wooden platforms and walls would be fitted to the upper walls of the fortress through square holes in the face of the wall, providing protection to defenders on the wall and allowing defenders to go out past the wall to drop projectiles on attackers at the wall beneath.

Carcassonne is located in the south of France about 80 kilometres (50 mi) east of Toulouse. Its strategic location between the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea has been known since the Neolithic era. The town's area is about 65 km (25 sq mi), which is significantly larger than the numerous small towns in the department of Aude. The rivers Aude, Fresquel, and the Canal du Midi flow through the town.

Carcassonne has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification : Cfa), though with noticeable hot-summer mediterranean climate influence (Köppen climate classification: Csa), a climate which is more typical of southern France, with moderately wet and mild winters coupled with summers averaging above 28 °C (82 °F) during daytime with low rainfall.

Carcassonne, along with the French Mediterranean coastline, can be subject to intense thunderstorms and torrential rains in late summer and early autumn. The Carcassonne region can be flooded in such events, the last of which happened on 14–15 October 2018.

The newer part (Ville Basse) of the city on the other side of the Aude river (which dates back to the Middle Ages, after the crusades) manufactures shoes, rubber and textiles. It is also the center of a major AOC winegrowing region. A major part of its income comes from the tourism connected to the fortifications (Cité) and from boats cruising on the Canal du Midi. Carcassonne is also home to the MKE Performing Arts Academy. Carcassonne receives about three million visitors annually.

The fortified city consists essentially of a concentric design of two outer walls with 52 towers and barbicans to prevent attack by siege engines. The castle itself possesses its own drawbridge and ditch leading to a central keep. The walls consist of towers built over quite a long period. One section is Roman and is notably different from the medieval walls, with the tell-tale red brick layers and the shallow pitch terracotta tile roofs. One of these towers housed the Catholic Inquisition in the 13th century and is still known as "The Inquisition Tower".

Carcassonne was demilitarised under Napoleon Bonaparte and the Restoration, and the fortified cité of Carcassonne fell into such disrepair that the French government decided that it should be demolished. A decree to that effect that was made official in 1849 caused an uproar. The antiquary and mayor of Carcassonne, Jean-Pierre Cros-Mayrevieille, and the writer Prosper Mérimée, the first inspector of ancient monuments, led a campaign to preserve the fortress as a historical monument. Later in the year the architect Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, already at work restoring the Basilica of Saints Nazarius and Celsus, was commissioned to renovate the place.

In 1853, work began with the west and southwest walls, followed by the towers of the porte Narbonnaise and the principal entrance to the cité. The fortifications were consolidated here and there, but the chief attention was paid to restoring the roofing of the towers and the ramparts, where Viollet-le-Duc ordered the destruction of structures that had encroached against the walls, some of them of considerable age. Viollet-le-Duc left copious notes and drawings upon his death in 1879 when his pupil Paul Boeswillwald and, later, the architect Nodet continued the rehabilitation of Carcassonne.

The restoration was strongly criticized during Viollet-le-Duc's lifetime. Fresh from work in the north of France, he made the error of using slate (when there was no slate to be quarried around) instead of terracotta tiles. The slate roofs were claimed to be more typical of northern France, as was the addition of the pointed tips to the roofs.

The ville basse dates to the Late Middle Ages. Founded as a settlement of the expelled inhabitants of the town sometime after the crusades, it has been the economic heart of the city for centuries. Though once walled, most of the walls in this portion of the town are no longer intact. The Carcassonne Cathedral is in this part of the town.

Another bridge, Pont Marengo, crosses the Canal du Midi and provides access to the railway station. The Lac de la Cavayère has been created as a recreational lake; it is about five minutes from the city centre by automobile.

In the late 1990s, Carcassonne airport started taking budget flights to and from European airports and by 2009 had regular flight connections with Porto, Bournemouth, Cork, Dublin, Frankfurt-Hahn, London-Stansted, Liverpool, East Midlands, Glasgow-Prestwick and Charleroi. The nearest major airport is Toulouse–Blagnac Airport, which is located 105 km (65 mi) north west of Carcassonne. The airport provides most domestic and international destinations.

The Gare de Carcassonne railway station offers direct connections to Toulouse, Narbonne, Perpignan, Paris, Marseille, and several regional destinations. The A61 motorway connects Carcassonne with Toulouse and Narbonne.

French is spoken. Historically, the language spoken in Carcassonne and throughout Languedoc-Roussillon was not French but Occitan.

In July 2025, Carcassonne was the finish city for stage 15 of the Tour de France. Tim Wellens, the 2025 Belgian road race champion, won from a breakaway. This was his first TdF stage win. In July 2021, Carcassonne was the finish city for stage 13, and the starting point of stage 14, of the 2021 Tour de France. It was at the finish in Carcassonne that Mark Cavendish tied the record for most Tour de France stage wins (34) held by Eddy Merckx. Carcassonne was the finish city for stage 15, and the starting point of stage 16, of the 2018 Tour de France. Previously it was the starting point for stage 11 of the 2016 Tour de France, the starting point for a stage in the 2004 Tour de France, and a stage finish in the 2006 Tour de France.

As in the rest of the southwest of France, rugby union is popular in Carcassonne. The city is represented by Union Sportive Carcassonnaise, known locally simply as USC. The club has a proud history, having played in the French Championship Final in 1925, and currently competes in Pro D2, the second tier of French rugby.

Rugby league is also played, by the AS Carcassonne club. They are involved in the Elite One Championship. Puig Aubert is the most notable rugby league player to come from the Carcassonne club. There is a bronze statue of him outside the Stade Albert Domec at which the city's teams in both codes play.

In May 2018, as the project "Concentric, eccentric" by French-Swiss artist Felice Varini, large yellow concentric circles were mounted on the monument as part of the 7th edition of "IN SITU, Heritage and contemporary art", a summer event in the Occitanie / Pyrenees-Mediterranean region focusing on the relationship between modern art and architectural heritage. This monumental work was done to celebrate the 20th anniversary of Carcassonne's inscription on the World Heritage List of UNESCO.

Exceptional in its size and its visibility and use of architectural space, the exhibit extended across the western front of the fortifications of the city. The work could be fully perceived only in front of the Porte d'Aude at the pedestrian route from the Bastide. The circles of yellow colour consist of thin, painted aluminium sheets, spread like waves of time and space, fragmenting and recomposing the geometry of the circles on the towers and curtain walls of the fortifications. The work was visible from May to September 2018 only.

Carrefour Group, S.A. (French : Groupe Carrefour, [ kaʁfuʁ ]), is a French multinational retail and wholesaling corporation headquartered in Massy, France. It operates a chain of hypermarkets, grocery stores and convenience stores. By 2024, the group had 14,000 stores in 40 countries. It is the seventh-largest retailer in the world by revenue.

The first Carrefour shop (not a hypermarket) opened in 1960, within suburban Annecy, near a crossroads (hence the name ― carrefour means crossroads in French). The group was created in 1959 by Marcel Fournier, Denis Defforey and Jacques Defforey, who were influenced by several seminars in the United States led by Bernardo Trujillo.

The Carrefour group was the first in Europe to open a hypermarket: a large supermarket and a department store under the same roof. They opened their first hypermarket on 15 June 1963 in Sainte-Geneviève-des-Bois, near Paris.

In 1969, the company began opening its first stores beyond national borders, starting with neighboring Belgium. During the 1970s, it started developing its retail network across other continents as well.

In 1999, it merged with the Promodès group through a stock swap. On the Italian market, where it had been present since 1972, it acquired the Generale Supermercati (GS) and DìPerDì networks in 2000, progressively replacing their branding; from 2009, it began to focus on the central-northern area of the country. Its presence in the south developed mainly through franchising.

From 2008, Carrefour decided to invest in Eastern European countries (primarily Romania and Bulgaria) and China, reaching over 100 stores, and launched several openings in Russia and China with strategic consultancy from Citigroup. However, the expansion project in Russia was shelved in 2009 after the opening of a megastore in Moscow, an area that boasted a per capita income twice the national average but was, at the same time, a market that had reached the limit of its potential.

In May 2011, Carrefour decided to invest €1.5 billion ($2.22 billion) to introduce the supermarket concept of Carrefour Planet in Western Europe.

On 9 June 2017, the board of directors chose Alexandre Bompard as its new chairman and chief executive officer as of 18 July 2017.

In 2017, Carrefour began working with a small French start-up focused on food recycling, Expliceat, on a trial basis.

In January 2018, Alexandre Bompard announced a strategic plan for the company, entitled "Carrefour 2022" that included measures for improved food and package sustainability, limitation of food waste, development of organic products, e-commerce partnerships, and two billion euros in annual investments from 2018 as well as organisational and cost reduction measures.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, Carrefour was the first retailer to join the C'est qui le Patron? initiative to share its additional incomes related to COVID-19 to support people who were suffering from pandemic.

In November 2024, Carrefour's Operations in Jordan were later changed to Hypermax by the Majid Al Futtaim Group. The same happened to Oman, Kuwait, and Bahrain in January 2025.

In January 2025, the Puig & fils group (92 Petit Casino or Vival supermarkets), then in April 2025 the Magne group (101 Petit Casino or Vival supermarkets), announced that it was leaving the Groupe Casino for Carrefour.

On 12 November 2025, the Saadé family — owners of the shipping-group CMA CGM — acquired a 4% stake in the French retail giant Carrefour, becoming its second-largest shareholder and obtaining a board seat from 1 December 2025.

The headquarters of the Groupe Carrefour is in Massy, in the Paris metropolitan area. In 2019, the former Carrefour head office of Boulogne-Billancourt and the Carrefour France division office of Courcouronnes, Essonne, near Évry, were combined at that major location. A secondary head office is located in Mondeville, near Caen (Normandy), which was until 1999 the former Promodès headquarters.

In France, Carrefour operates under its name over 230 hypermarkets (from 2500 up to 23000 sq m sales area), 1020 Carrefour Market supermarkets (generally from 1000 up to 4000 sq m), and over 2000 smaller supermarkets and convenience stores under the Carrefour City, Carrefour Contact and Carrefour Express banners.

Carrefour also owns the Promocash Cash&Carry chain (130 locations) and supplies 1500 independent small food stores under the Proxi banner.

In 2019, the group launched its first Supeco soft discount stores, which are so far all located in the French Northern region Hauts-de-France.

In December 2023, Carrefour and Uber decided to team up to get access to the French supermarket chain's charging points for electric vehicles. Uber has invested around $323,400 to allow its VTC (tourist vehicle with drivers) drivers using EVs to charge their cars in the Carrefour Énergies' stations in France.

By 2024, the group had 14,000 stores in 40 countries.

Majid Al Futtaim has handled the Carrefour operations in the Middle East and North Africa region since 1995, as the company opened the region's first hypermarket at City Centre Deira – it initially was a Continent-branded store before it converted to Carrefour four years later. As of 2020, Majid Al Futtaim operates over 320 Carrefour stores in 16 countries, serving more than 750,000 customers daily and employing over 37,000 workers.

In 1991, Carrefour established a company in Turkey, and in 1993 it opened its first hypermarket in Istanbul. In 1996, a partnership with the Turkish conglomerate Sabancı Holding was established and all stores were rebranded as CarrefourSA. As of 2025, there are 1,500 stores operating across Turkey.

In 1999, Carrefour entered the Greek market in collaboration with Marinopoulos S.A. Carrefour stopped operating in Greece in 2017 due to its acquisition by the Sklavenitis group. The company reopened in the country in May 2022, and the reactivation of the Carrefour brand in the market will be done in collaboration with Retail & more S.A., a subsidiary of the Teleunicom group.

In 2001, Carrefour entered the Romanian market, expanded into 43 stores. It is one of the top retailers in Romania.

The company operates in Spain under the name of Centros Comerciales Carrefour SA. As of 2019, Carrefour Spain is the 15th most important Spanish company by revenue.

Eight years after bankruptcy (2016), Carrefour returned to Bulgaria under the brands of Carrefour "Market" and "Express". As of June 2024, there are stores open in Varna, Sofia and Burgas.

In December 2023, Carrefour announced the "return of stores and products" of its brand in Bulgaria through the Greek franchisee Retail & More, which will provide "sub-franchising of the Carrefour brand" for at least around 20 stores.

As of February 2026, Carrefour's French division is known to operate 3 stores in Monaco, one each of the standard, Market, and City store types.

On 1 May 2007, more than 30 employees of the now-closed Carrefour Ratu Plaza, Jakarta, Indonesia, were taken to the Pertamina Central Hospital after being poisoned by carbon monoxide. The hypermarket was located in the mall's basement, which offered insufficient ventilation.

On 26 June 2007, the company was convicted in a French court for false advertising. The suit alleged that Carrefour regularly stocked insufficient quantities of advertised products for sale. In addition, the company was convicted of selling products below cost and accepting kickbacks from wholesalers. Carrefour was ordered to pay a fine of €2 million and to prominently and legibly display a notice in all of its French stores disclosing the false advertising.

In Carrefour Mangga Dua Square in Jakarta, Indonesia, a 5-metre high metal rack fell on top of a 3-year-old boy, killing him almost instantly due to internal bleeding. Afterwards, the victim's family claimed that Carrefour has refused to meet with them to settle the case. However, a Carrefour Corporate Affairs Officer denied this allegation.

Carrefour has also received criticism for engaging in sweatshop practices.

On 7 May 2009, the French government asked a tribunal to fine Carrefour some €220,000 for more than 2,500 violations. Meat products lacked proper tracking information (more than 25% of inventory at some locations), and some products had incorrect labels – such as meat products that "shrank" in weight by 15% after receiving labels. The chain sold products that had long since passed their expiration dates, including, in one case, packs of baby formula that had expired six months earlier. Some 1,625 frozen and refrigerated products were found that had been stored in warehouses at ambient temperatures.

On 17 September 2018, images revealed that the municipal slaughterhouse in Boischaut, France, responsible for supplying meat to Carrefour, was killing animals in an extremely cruel way: cutting them up while they were still alive. The mistreatment scandal reverberated around the world and led to the closure of the slaughterhouse.

On 10 January 2019, the French branch made the news after selling zebra meat, Carrefour said it stopped selling the meat.

In April 2008, after the 2008 Olympic torch relay was disrupted by Tibetan independence movement advocates in London and especially in Paris, where some protesters attempted to wrest control of the torch from the torch bearers, Chinese activists promoted boycotting Carrefour because of unsubstantiated rumours that the company gave funds to Tibetan independence groups and the Dalai Lama. In its response, Carrefour China stated that it did support the Beijing Olympics ; and that it would never do anything to harm the feelings of the Chinese people. Protests and calls for the boycott later subsided, partly because of efforts by French officials to apologize for the Paris torch attack.

On 24 April 2013, the eight-story Rana Plaza commercial building collapsed in Savar, a sub-district near Dhaka, the capital of Bangladesh. At least 1,127 people died and over 2,438 were injured. The factory housed a number of separate garment factories employing around 5,000 people, several shops, and a bank and manufactured apparel for brands including the Benetton Group, Joe Fresh, The Children's Place, Primark, Monsoon, and Dressbarn. Of the 29 brands identified as having sourced products from the Rana Plaza factories, only 9 attended meetings held in November 2013 to agree a proposal on compensation to the victims. Several companies refused to sign, including Walmart, Carrefour, Bonmarché, Mango, Auchan and KiK. The agreement was signed by Primark, Loblaw, Bonmarché and El Corte Ingles.

In 2014, The Guardian reported that Carrefour is a client of Charoen Pokphand Foods. During a six-month investigation, The Guardian traced the entire supply chain from slave ships in Asian waters to leading producers and retailers.

Carrefour Brazil has suffered at least four lawsuits against violence, racism and homophobia. Some notable incidents include the killing of Manchinha, an abandoned female mixed-breed dog that was beaten to death by a Carrefour employee, as well as the Killing of João Alberto Silveira Freitas.

According to Mighty Earth, Carrefour is not respecting its commitments to fight deforestation in the Amazon rainforest. In a report at the occasion of the 2022 World Amazon Day, Mighty Earth published a statement criticising the retail group for sourcing from "meat and soy traders with devastating practices." The organisation points to the group's activities in Brazil where, with its 1,000 sales outlets, Carrefour controls 25% of the food distribution market. The NGO found that two-thirds of the 102 meat products inspected in Carrefour stores in Brazil are supplied by JBS, which is "regularly targeted for deforestation cases", according to Mighty Earth. Following the report publication, Carrefour suspended beef supplies from two JBS slaughterhouses in the Amazon.

On 27 October 2022, a man grabbed a knife from a supermarket shelf in Milan, stabbing five people, killing one and wounding four others, including Spanish soccer player Pablo Mari, Italian authorities said.

Police arrested a 46-year-old Italian man suspected in the attack at a shopping centre in Assago (a town near Milan).

Carrefour Mobile is a Mobile Virtual Network Operator (MVNO) owned by Carrefour.

Carrefour offers its mobile telephony services in:

Carrefour first launched its mobile service in Belgium, in partnership with Effortel and using Effortel Technologies as Mobile Virtual Network Enabler (MVNE), on the existing BASE network infrastructure.

In France, this offer was launched by exploiting the infrastructure of the Orange network and using the company Experian as MVNE. This operator first offered prepaid offers, and since September 2007 has offered packages. Carrefour Mobile's offer is in competition with that offered by A-Mobile, of the Auchan group.

Since then, Carrefour has launched a service in several other countries, in particular, Carrefour was the first MVNO in Italy, launching the service in June 2007, in partnership with Effortel.

On 24 September 2012 the MVNO offer stopped in France but the brand maintained a specific offer provided by Orange.

The Carrefour Foundation (Fondation d'Enterprise Carrefour) is a philanthropic fund created by Carrefour in 2000 to support social welfare programmes 'linked to [its] core business as a retailer' in countries the company operates and in countries where its suppliers are located.

Carrot soup (referred to in French as potage de Crécy, potage Crécy, potage à la Crécy, purée à la Crécy and crème à la Crécy) is a soup prepared with carrot as a primary ingredient. It can be prepared as a cream- or broth -style soup. Additional vegetables, root vegetables and various other ingredients can be used in its preparation. It may be served hot or cold, and several recipes exist.

Carrot soup has been described as a "classic" dish in French cuisine.

Carrot soup can be prepared as a cream-style soup and as a broth -style soup. Vegetable stock or chicken stock can be used as ingredients in both styles of soup. Other vegetables may be used in the dish, including root vegetables, the latter of which may include garlic, onion, shallot, potato, turnip and others. Carrot juice and orange juice can be used in its preparation, and some versions are prepared using puréed carrot. After cooking, the dish can be run through a sieve to strain it. The carrots used can be peeled or unpeeled, and the use of peeled carrots can lend to increased smoothness in puréed versions of the dish. Those prepared with puréed carrot may have a thick consistency while also being smooth in texture. The soup's color can vary based upon the coloration of the carrots used. Young carrots tend to make the soup sweeter and imbue it with a bright orange coloration, while older, larger carrots provide less sweetness and may imbue a yellow coloration. The use of old, cracked carrots that have a woody texture in their interior can produce a soup of inferior quality.

Several ingredient variations exist in carrot soup preparations. Some carrot soups are prepared using coconut milk, coconut water, coconut cream, coconut butter or coconut pieces. Some versions include ginger as an ingredient, and some include curry. Green carrot leaves (greens) from the top of carrots can be used as an ingredient in the dish. Chopped mint leaves are used in some versions. It can be served hot or chilled. Salt and pepper can be used to season the dish, and nutmeg is sometimes used as a seasoning. It is sometimes topped with yoghurt, a yoghurt sauce, crème fraîche, sour cream, and other ingredients.

In the United Kingdom, a distinct soup variety much more popular than plain carrot soup is carrot and coriander soup, made with coarsely chopped or grated carrot, garlic and coriander (cilantro) seeds.

The zest of orange can be used as a garnish, as an ingredient within the dish itself, and in both ways. Additional garnishes can include dill, carrot leaves, grated, minced or diced carrot, chives, other fresh, chopped herbs, croutons, and toast squares, among others. Carrot soup can be prepared as a vegan food, and can also be prepared as a bisque.

Carrot soup may contain a significant amount of nitrate.

Carrot soup (potage de Crécy, potage Crécy, etc.) has been described as a "classic" and "famous" dish in French cuisine. Potage is a variety of soups that have a thick consistency. Potage Crécy is named after Crécy-en-Ponthieu, a commune in Northern France that has been purported to produce carrots with the best flavor within the country.

In French cuisine, Crécy soup is typically prepared with rice, which can also be served as a side dish. Rice may be used as an ingredient to thicken the dish, and barley has also been used.

Although the modern sweet orange carrot was not developed until the 16th century, in the Low Countries, it has been represented as a tradition, and it was once customary for English people to eat Crécy soup annually on 26 August in commemoration of the anniversary of the Battle of Crécy, which occurred in Crécy, France on that date in 1346.

Crécy soup was eaten annually by King Edward VII, King of the United Kingdom between 1901 and 1910, on the battle's anniversary day, in honour of his ancestor, Edward, the Black Prince, who led the battle. It has also been suggested that the soup was served to triumphant English soldiers after the battle concluded, using carrots from Crécy. Ernst Moro, an Austrian physician and pediatrician invented Professor Moro's Carrot Soup, which is shown to be effective against diarrhea caused by antibiotic-resistant bacteria.

The Cartel of the Left (French : Cartel des gauches [ kaʁtɛl de ɡoʃ ]) was the name of the governmental alliance between the Radical-Socialist Party, the socialist French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO), and other smaller left-republican parties that formed on two occasions in 1924 to 1926 and in 1932 to 1933. The Cartel des gauches twice won general elections, in 1924 and in 1932. The first Cartel was led by Radical-Socialist Édouard Herriot, but the second was weakened by parliamentary instability and was without one clear leader. Following the 6 February 1934 crisis, President of the Council Édouard Daladier had to resign, and a new Union Nationale coalition, led by the right-wing Radical Gaston Doumergue, took power.

The Cartel des gauches, formed primarily between the Radical-Socialist Party and the SFIO, was created in 1923 as a counterweight to the conservative alliance (Bloc National), which had won the 1919 elections with 70% of the seats (the " Blue Horizon Chamber "). Formed by the conservative Radicals, the conservative-liberal Alliance Démocratique, the conservative-Catholic Fédération Républicaine, Action Liberale (issued from the right-wing members who had "rallied" themselves to the Republic), and far-right nationalists, the Bloc National had played on the red scare following the 1917 October Revolution to win the elections.

The left-wing coalition included four different groups: the independent radicals (a group slightly to the right of the Radical-Socialists); the Radical-Socialists, the Socialist Republicans (slightly to the Radical-Socialists' left) and the SFIO. The Cartel organized a network of committees in the entire country, and started publishing a daily newspaper (Le Quotidien) and a weekly, Le Progrès Civique.

Due to the division of the right-wing, the Cartel won the elections on 11 May 1924, after the French government 's failure to collect German reparations even after occupying the Ruhr. The left-wing obtained 48.3% of the votes, and the right-wing 51.7%, but the Cartel gained the majority of seats thanks to a favorable voting system, with 327 against 254 (the right-wing and the first communist deputies). The new majority was led by Édouard Herriot, and broke up in 1926, with the SFIO passing into the opposition. Despite this majority in parliament, the Cartel didn't enjoy the backing of a majority of the electorate, even when including communist voters, whose party had elected to oppose the government, with the Cartel needing to rely on the shaky support of center-left deputies for its continued survival.

In parliament, a draft law on amnesty submitted in June 1924 was adopted at the cost of six months of a harsh parliamentary battle, whereas legislation aimed at expanding secularism generated virulent opposition and demonstrations soon captured by catholic and right-dominated associations. Capital flight and the failure to retrieve the reparations created a monetary crisis, which led to the creation of a new government by the centre-right Raymond Poincaré. As soon as Poincaré formed his new government, composed of the National Bloc parties plus the Radical-Socialists, the monetary crisis ended.

The right-wing then won the 1928 legislative elections, with 329 right-wing deputies against 258 for the left. As in previous elections, the Radical-Socialists presented themselves with the left.

In 1932 the second Cartel won a majority of seats, but its parties had not agreed upon forming a coalition for government. The socialists asked for specific conditions in exchange for their participation in the government (known as "Huygens conditions"). Several governments fell in quick succession, each led by figures of the republican centre-left This parliamentary majority, distinct from the electoral majority, was weak. This parliamentary instability, coupled with the Stavisky Affair, provided a pretext for the 6 February 1934 riots organized by far right leagues. The following day, the Radical-Socialist president of the Council Édouard Daladier was forced to resign due to pressure by the rioters. It was the first time during the Third Republic (1871–1940) that a government fell because of demonstrations, and the left-wing became convinced that its fall was assisted by a fascist conspiracy to overthrow the Republic. This prompted the creation of left-wing anti-fascist coalitions including the Comité de vigilance des intellectuels antifascistes and other similar groups. This broad left-wing coalition eventually led to the formation of the Popular Front, which won the elections in 1936, bringing to power Léon Blum.

The history of French cartography can be traced to developments in the Middle Ages. This period was marked by improvements in measuring instruments and also by an upgrade of work in registers of all types. What is thought to be the oldest land map in Europe, the Saint-Bélec slab, representing an area of the Odet valley, was found in 1900, and rediscovered in a castle cellar in France in 2014. The Bronze-Age stone is thought to be 4,000 years old.

The first map of France was drawn by Oronce Finé and printed in woodcuts in 1525. It testifies to the will of the political power to mark its presence on the territory; to affirm, to build limits, borders, to arrange its territory, and to consolidate the internal economic markets. In the 16th century, Dieppe appeared as an important school of cartography. Pierre Desceliers allowed the realization of many maps. At the same time, the Portolan maps of the Portuguese sailors had the most recent knowledge obtained by the Dieppois sailors in their exploration of Canada.

Developments in cartography continually progressed, through new techniques and by the expanding will of political powers to amass and control territories. Very powerful companies testify support to some of the cartographic missions at the end of the 19th century. Two major milestones in cartographic study was successfully determining longitude and latitude.

In France, the first general maps of the territory using a measuring apparatus were made by the Cassini family during the 18th century on a scale of 1:86,400 (one centimeter on the chart corresponds to approximately 864 meters on the ground). The map of Cassini is the first geometrical map covering the entire kingdom of France. Before the surveys, it was necessary to carry out a triangulation of the territory.

These maps were, for their time, a technical innovation. They were the first maps based on geodetic triangulation, and took more than fifty years to complete; four generations of the Cassini family were involved in their production. These maps, known as "Cassini Maps" or "maps of the Academy," are still referenced by geographers, historians and genealogists.

The work of the Cassinis left its mark on the world; toponyms known as "Cassini signs" still exist, revealing where triangulated measurements at that time were made. The "map of Cassini" or "map of the Academy" is the first general map of the kingdom of France. It was drawn up by the Cassini family—primarily César-François Cassini de Thury (Cassini III) and his son Jean-Dominique Cassini (Cassini IV)—during the 18th century. The adopted scale is one ligne to 100 toises, or 1:86,400 (the measuring apparatus contained 864 lines).

The map does not pinpoint dwellings or the boundaries of marshes and forests; however, the level of precision of the road networks is such that satellite photographs correspond almost completely with drawn roads more than 200 years later. This map is still consulted today by researchers. It interests historians, in particular those in the fields of geography, genealogy and ecology.

César-François Cassini (Cassini III) began the map:

The surveys were carried out between 1756 and 1789 and the 181 sheets composing the map were published from 1756 to 1815. César-François Cassini died in 1784 with his work unfinished. His son, Jean-Dominique Cassini (1748–1845), later finished the work of his father.

The departments of Savoy, Haute-Savoie and part of the Maritime Alps were not part of the Kingdom of France at the time, and are not represented on the map; neither are the Île d'Yeu and Corsica. Most of the map sheets were published as a new edition in 1815.

In 1808, Napoleon decided to produce a map intended to be more accurate than that of Cassini. However, Napoleon demanded that the primary goal of the work was to produce battlefield maps.

The triangulation for this new map began also from the Paris meridian arc or French meridian line (French: Méridienne de France) surveyed this time by Delambre and Méchain (the meridian arc of Delambre and Méchain). Work on this map took place between 1817 and 1866. During this period several different scales were tested, with the scale 1:80,000 being chosen. This became known as the "Geological Survey" map. The funding for this work was provided by the Department of War. The first work was done by the Dépôt de la guerre, and later by the Geographical Service of the Army, whose first director General François Perrier and his successor General Bassot remeasured the French meridian arc.

It was originally produced as a mosaic of maps, pasted to fabric, folded and protected by a hard case. This allowed it to be transported with the army, and to survive the rigors of ground combat.

At the beginning of the First World War (1914–1918), the difficulties of reading a map on this scale led the generals to request new map drawn to the 1:50 000 scale. This was more convenient, and practical, since one metre on the map equaled 50 kilometres. These new maps formed the basis for the current "Map of Excursion", which is at a scale of 1:25,000.

The Institut géographique national (English: National Geographic Institute) or IGN is a French public state administrative establishment founded in 1940[1] to produce and maintain geographical information for France and its overseas departments and territories.

“Intense cartographic work planned for the beginning of the war was stopped by the defeat of France in June 1940. Shortly afterward the great map service known to the world as the Service Géographique de l’Armée Française was demilitarized and renamed Institut National Géographique. Under this label, which it still bears, it continued to function, its activities including the opening of a new school for cartographers in the famous building of the Hôtel de Rohan in Paris. A few more sheets of the 1:50,000 map of France were published. The main progress was achieved by the African Army Map Service, which was able to pursue field work, particularly in the Sahara. The list of maps of French Africa have lengthened notably."

Casimir-Pierre Périer (11 October 1777 – 16 May 1832) was a French banker, mine owner, political leader and statesman. In business, through his bank in Paris and ownership of the Anzin Coal Co. in the Department of Nord, he contributed significantly to the economic development of France in the early stages of industrialization. In politics, he was a leading liberal member of the Chamber of Deputies throughout the Bourbon Restoration and president of the chamber at the outset of the July Revolution of 1830. He led the liberal-conservative Resistance Party in support of the constitutional monarchy of Louis-Philippe I. He became president of the Council of Ministers and Minister of Interior in the spring of 1831 (13 March 1831 – 16 May 1832). Although his ministry was brief, his strong government succeeded in restoring order at home and keeping peace abroad. He fell victim to the cholera epidemic in France in 1832.

Born in Grenoble, Casimir Perier was the fourth of the eight sons of "Milord" Claude-Nicolas Perier (1742–1801), the rich merchant-manufacturer and banker who opened his Château de Vizille to the famous meeting of the Estates of Dauphiné (21 July 1788) foreshadowing the French Revolution. His mother was the former Marie-Charlotte Pascal (1749–1821), the daughter of a prominent linens manufacturer at nearby Voiron. Both his father and grandfather (Jacques Perier, 1702–82) made their fortunes in the commerce of canvas and linen cloths. Claude added the manufacture of printed cotton cloths (Indiennes) at the Château de Vizille, which he purchased in 1780 from Gabriel Louis de Neufville, duc de Villeroy. The Revolution and Napoleon opened up new opportunities for families of the wealthy "bourgeoisie grenobloise" such as the Periers. Claude Perier shifted the center of his business affairs to Paris, where he took up residence beginning in 1794 (rue Saint-Honoré) and mingled with leading French financiers. In 1795 he invested in and became a director of the largest coal mining company in northern France, the Anzin Company ; in 1796 he helped to found a major investment bank in Paris, the Caisse des Comtes Courants; and in 1799, shortly after Napoleon's coup d’état of Brumaire, he became one of the founders and first directors of the famous Bank of France.

Claude Perier died on 6 February 1801, leaving his remarkably large family of ten children to share his enormous estate valued at 5,800,000 francs. Casimir, who was twenty-four years old at the time, inherited shares in the Anzin Company, land at Grenoble (Department of Isère) and in common with his brother Scipion, the property in Paris on the rue Saint-Honoré. He'd had little experience in business or banking. His father had anticipated that the three eldest brothers, Augustin, Alexandre and Scipion, would carry on the family businesses at Grenoble/Vizille. Casimir himself gave no clear indication of a specific career choice. He was intelligent, energetic, handsome and eager to succeed, but he had spent his life mostly as a student and received a church-school and Jesuit-tutor classical education. During service with the army in Italy from 1799 to 1800, he began to consider a military career, but his father's death and legacy, the lure of Paris, and his close friendship with his older brother Scipion took him in a much different direction.

The two brothers, Casimir and Scipion, founded a bank in Paris (8 June 1801), located at No. 8, Place Vendôme until 1809, and after that year at No. 27, rue Neuve du Luxembourg (now the rue Cambon). Henry Flory and William Sabatier, who were former associates with their father at the Bank of France and the Anzin Company, respectively, helped to get the bank started. The youngest Perier brother, Joseph, joined the bank in 1822, approximately one year after the death of Scipion. The affairs of the older Perier bank at Grenoble were by then administered mainly by another younger brother, Alphonse. The bank of "Perier Frères" in Paris, which played a significant and leading role in the early stages of the industrial revolution in France, would be near the peak of its success in the 1820s, numbering importantly by then among a small and select group of private banking houses known collectively as the Parisian Haute Banque. Scipion became a regent of the Bank of France in 1818, Casimir in 1820. They both became members of the influential Chamber of Commerce of Paris.

The two most important clients of the Perier bank were the Anzin Coal Company (Department of Nord) and the Perier-owned iron foundry and workshops in Paris at Chaillot. The founder-owner of the Chaillot firm, Jacques-Constantin Perier (1742–1818), who was not related to the Paris bankers, was well known for having brought the Watt steam engine to France. Famously, he used a Watt engine at Chaillot to provide Paris with water pumped from the Seine. In 1802 he supplied the Anzin Company with twenty of his engines for winding and drainage at the mines. Casimir and Scipion Perier purchased the Chaillot firm in 1818 and used its workshops to upgrade Anzin with more efficient Cornish high-pressure engines patented in France by Arthur Woolf. Chaillot was an important part of the most notable entrepreneurial achievement of the Periers during the Restoration, namely, the renovation, managerial reorganization and business expansion of Anzin.

The Anzin Coal Company, which was established in 1757 as a closely held, family-owned firm managed by a self-perpetuating board of six directors, fell on hard times during the Revolution until rescued in 1795 by heavy investments from wealthy representatives of la grande bourgeoisie. Thus Claude Perier became a director of the company. The firm did reasonably well after 1795, although most of the new outsiders ("les Parisiens") who joined the founding families looked on Anzin as simply one of many investments. Not so Casimir and Scipion Perier, who determined to become active owner-directors for purposes of renovating and re-energizing the company for increased production and maximization of profits. The Perier bank in Paris became the company bank, regulating Anzin's accounts and contracts and supervising its large reserve funds. The brothers gradually took over making company policies. They were a good team. Scipion had the broad knowledge of the science and technology of the times (he was a long-standing member of the Society for the Encouragement of National Industry, est. 1801); Casimir acted as the determined, driving force for innovation and risk-taking as opposed to the 'old ways' and too cautious decision-making. He was Anzin's ‘ homme fort ’ during the rejuvenation of the company in the 1820s. His much-quoted 1826 general report on Anzin company affairs illustrated the thoroughness of his knowledge of his firm's needs and potential. One measure of success during the Restoration was that output of coal at the mines increased from 250,000 metric tons in 1816 to 509,000 tons in 1830.

In association with other prominent bankers and business leaders, the Periers also engaged in the establishment of new financial institutions of the Restoration. Thus in 1818 Casimir and Scipion were among the founder-directors of the first French savings bank, the Caisse d’Épargne et de Prévoyance de Paris (No. 104, rue Richlieu). Besides the Perier bank, other investors included Jacques Laffitte (governor of the Bank of France, 1814–19) and the banks of Lefebvre, Pillet Will, and Cottier. The same five banking houses helped back the organization during 1816-20 of an important early insurance company, the Compagnie Royale d’Assurances, and in 1823 they would take part in the Compagnie des Quatre Canaux, a joint-stock company for loans to the government to improve the canal system in northern France. Perhaps a best example of the Perier bank's involvement in innovative financial ventures during the Restoration was the case of the ill-starred Société Commanditaire de l’Industrie. Conceived in 1825 mainly by Jacques Laffitte, its prospective president, this joint-stock company capitalized at 100 million francs was intended to help remedy the growing need in France for increased investment capital for large-scale projects in areas such as mining, metallurgy, canal construction and land development. It had the support of the haute banque and foreign banking houses. Casimir Perier and William Ternaux, France's leading woolens manufacturer, were its prospective vice-presidents. But in the end, unfortunately, the conservative Villèle ministry under Charles X refused to authorize the establishment of the Commanditaire.

Casimir Perier's policy as a banker was to spread his capital investment over a wide range of characteristic early nineteenth century business enterprise. He engaged as well in almost continuous investment in land and real estate, calculated most recently at about 15% of his total investments during 1815-30. Most notable were his purchases of highly valued properties on the rue Neuve du Luxembourg, the rue Sainte-Honoré and the Champs-Elysées; a summer residence in the Bois de Boulogne; the Château Saint-Pierre ('le Taillis') in Normandy, near Rouen; and the parkland and ruins of the Château Pont-sur-Seine (Department of Aube), a property owned previously by Napoleon that was destroyed by invading armies in 1814. Casimir's largest investment in Paris real estate during the Restoration was made in 1829-30 when he agreed to pay 744,600 francs for properties on the rue Saint-Honoré owned by Francis Egerton, Duke of Bridgewater. By the time of the Revolution of 1830, Casimir Perier was one of the richest men in Paris. At the age of 55 in 1832, when he died of cholera, his estate was estimated at close to 14 million francs.

Both Casimir and Scipion Perier valued education and believed strongly in the advancement of science and technology. They supported Joseph Degérando's Société pour l’Amélioration de l’Enseignement Élémentaire (est. 1815) and they arranged at Anzin for night-school instruction for workers using courses designed by Charles Dupin. In Paris, they supported the practical education programs provided by the École Spéciale de Commerce, founded in 1816, and the École Centrale des Arts et Manufactures established in 1828. After Casimir was elected to the Chamber of Deputies in 1817, he would vote to protect the budgets of the Conservatory of Arts and Sciences and trade schools in the departments.

Casimir Perier's wide-ranging business interests and investments help to explain his opposition in the Chamber of Deputies to financial policies of Restoration ministries. In 1817, he opposed the policy of the Richelieu ministry for raising loans to pay the war indemnity demanded by the allied coalition after Napoleon's final defeat. In the 1820s, he was a leader in debates (1821–1822) against the policies of the Villèle ministry for financing canal construction and (1824–1825) for indemnifying the nobility for lands confiscated during the Revolution.

Perier entered the Chamber of Deputies for Paris in 1817, taking his seat in the Left Centre with the moderate opposition, and making his first speech in defense of the freedom of the press. Re-elected for Paris in 1822 and 1824, and in 1827 for Paris and for Troyes, he elected to represent Troyes (Department of Aube), and sat for that constituency until his death. Perier's violence in debate was not associated with any disloyalty to the Bourbon Restoration, and he held resolutely aloof from the Republican conspiracies and intrigues which prepared the way for the revolution of 1830. Under the Martignac ministry, there was some prospect of a reconciliation with the court, and, in January 1829, he was nominated a candidate for the presidency of the chamber; but in August with the elevation to power of Jules, Prince de Polignac, the truce ceased, and on 15 March 1830, Perier was one of the 221 deputies who repudiated the Ordinances put forward by Charles X.

Averse by instinct and by interest to popular revolution, Perier nevertheless sat on the provisory commission of five at the Hôtel de Ville during the Three Glorious Days of July 1830, but he refused to sign the declaration of Charles X's dethronement. Perier reluctantly recognized in the government of Louis Philippe 's constitutional monarchy the only alternative to the continuance of the Revolution, but he was no favorite with the new king, whom he scorned for his trucking with the Paris 'mob'. He became President of the Chamber of Deputies, and sat for a few months in the cabinet, though without a portfolio.

During the first years of the July Monarchy of Louis Philippe, following the fall of the weak and discredited ministry of Jacques Laffitte, Perier, who had drifted more and more to the Right, was summoned to power (13 March 1831), and, in the short space of a year, he more or less restored civic order in France and re-established her credit in Europe. Paris was in a constant state of disturbance from March to September, and was only held in check by the premier's determination. The Canut Revolt at Lyon was suppressed after hard fighting; and at Grenoble, in face of the quarrels between the military and the inhabitants, Perier declined to make any concession to the townsfolk. For Perier, the Revolution of 1830 was not the beginning of greater things to come, it was the end of the Revolution of 1789. As he said to Odilon Barrot of Laffitte's "Party of Movement": "No, Monsieur, there has not been a revolution, only a change in the head of state."

As a minister, Perier refused to be dragged into armed intervention in favor of the revolutionary government of Warsaw, but his policy of peace did not exclude energetic demonstrations in support of French interests. He constituted France the protector of Belgium by the prompt expedition of the army of the north against the Dutch in August 1831. French influence in Italy was asserted by the audacious occupation of Ancona (23 February 1832); and the refusal of compensation for injuries to French residents by the Portuguese government was followed by a naval demonstration at Lisbon.

Perier had undertaken the premiership with many forebodings, and overwork and anxiety prepared the way for disease. In the spring of 1832, during the cholera outbreak in Paris, he visited the hospitals in company with Prince Ferdinand Philippe, Duke of Orléans. He fell ill the next day of a violent fever, and died six weeks later.

Casimir Perier married (13 October 1805) Marie Cécile Laurence Loyer, nicknamed "Pauline", the daughter of Laurent-Pouthus Loyer, an old regime magistrate of Lyon who was a victim of the Terror during the Revolution. There were two sons: Auguste Casimir-Perier (1811–1876), deputy for Seine and Aube, and Charles-Paul Perier (1812–1897), deputy and senator for Seine-Inférieur. Auguste-Casimir's son, Jean Casimir-Perier (1847–1907), was elected President of the Third Republic in 1894.

The Cassini Map or Academy's Map is the first topographic and geometric map made of the Kingdom of France as a whole. It was compiled by the Cassini family, mainly César-François Cassini (Cassini III) and his son Jean-Dominique Cassini (Cassini IV) in the 1700s.

It was on a scale of one line to 100 toises, i.e. 1/86,400.

The map was, for the time, a real innovation and a decisive technical advance. It is the first map to be based on a geodesic triangulation. Four generations of the Cassini carried out the work, taking more than 6 decades to complete. The map does not precisely locate dwellings or the boundaries of swamps and forests, but the level of precision of the road network represented is such that by superimposing satellite photos onto map sheets of France, spectacular results are obtained.

The work of the Cassinis even left its mark on the land where today you can still find toponyms such as " Signal of Cassini." Such landmarks correspond to the corners of the triangles that formed the backbone of Cassini's map.

Nowadays, researchers frequently consult the Cassini map sheets, in its paper form in the reading room of the maps and plans department of the Bibliothèque nationale de France, or its digital form online. It is of particular interest to archaeologists, architects, historians, geographers, genealogists, treasure hunters and ecologists who need to retrospect ecology or understand the history of landscape.

The genesis of the Cassini Map came during the reign of Louis XIV, with the creation of the Academy of Sciences alongside the ambitions of Jean-Baptiste Colbert for France's navy, the defence of her coasts and fixing the imprecision of the country's maps. At the time, distances between settlements to be portrayed on maps were often estimated by the time of the journey between them or by measuring the length of the road. Sometimes, triangulation was used - though often relying on the magnetic pin of a compass without concern for one's latitude. This would result in confounded errors when compiling these maps into one.

Cassini, alongside other scientists like Picard, Roëmer and Richer, investigated movement of the planets relative to Earth. Cassini noted such methods were riddled with instrumental errors and were susceptible to parallax. Picard and La Hire write in 1672 that King Louis XIV instructed the Academy of Sciences to, "create a map of all of France with the greatest precision possible.", Cassini writes that in September 1672, M. Vivier had, "come by order of the King" and was, "employed by order of the King to work on the Map of the Kingdom under the direction of the Academy of Sciences."

A cassolette (probably a diminutive form of the French word cassole, "small container") is a small porcelain, glass, or metal oven-proof container used for the cooking and serving of individual dishes. Cossolette might have lugs or a short handle (French : cassolette à manche). The word also refers to dishes served in such a container:

The culinary meaning of the word dates back to the early 19th century. Prior to that (from the 16th century), the same word was used for a vessel to burn incense, or otherwise emit the perfume.

The latter meaning extended to a small pendant with perfumes. Alex Comfort used the term cassolette in The Joy of Sex (1972) for a woman's natural body scent. French dictionaries also record ironic uses for unpleasant odors. A later academic review of human olfaction describes Comfort's use of a woman's "cassolette", glossing the word as "perfume box".

Castellane (French pronunciation: [ kastɛlan ] ; Provençal Occitan : Castelana) is a commune in the Alpes-de-Haute-Provence department in the Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur region in Southeastern France. With a population of 1,472 (2023), it is France's second-least populated subprefecture, after Largentière in Ardèche.

Its inhabitants are referred to as Castellanais (masculine) and Castellanaises (feminine).

Castellane is a very old city located upstream of the Gorges du Verdon. The city is 724 metres (2,375 feet) above sea level.

The Roc, or the Roc of Notre-Dame, overlooks the city from 184 m (604 ft) above. It has been occupied since the High Middle Ages and is a registered historical site. It can be accessed from the centre of town behind the old Church of St. Andrew. The walk takes about 25 minutes.

Two reservoirs are located in the territory of Castellane:

The GR 4 hiking trail crosses through the town. The neighboring municipalities are:

Castellane features a warm-summer mediterranean climate (Köppen : Csb), bordering on a mediterraneran continental climate (Köppen : Dsb). Summers are warm to hot and dry, while winters are cold and snowy.

The commune is part of the Jurassic limestone area of the French Prealps in Provence, formed by the tectonic upheaval of the Alps during the Tertiary. Limestone deposits run the length of the Verdon river, giving rise to spectacular gorges formed through karst erosion. Around Castellane older formations surface, such as gypsum and Triassic black marl.

The commune contains 7,000 acres (2,800 hectares) of wood and forests (about 59% of its surface area). The Massif du Montdenier [ fr ] extends over the western part of the commune (former communes of Taulanne, Chasteuil and Villars-Brandis).

Castellane's name appeared in texts for the first time circa 965–977 as Petra Castellana. The name breaks down into three Occitan terms, pèira, castel and the suffix -ana, which means fortified rock and village, and could be translated as "Castellane rock", in other words, the rock that has a fortified village, or simply the stronghouse or stronghold. Castellane is called Castelana in the Provençal dialect in the classical norm, or Castelano in the Mistralian.

The former commune of Castillon, now beneath the lake, appeared around 1300 as de Castilhone, an Occitan word for a small castle.

The first part of the name "Chasteuil" is obscure, but the second, -ialo, is a Celtic suffix for "clearing".

The village of Robion has the same name as the river that and flows through it into the Jabron River [ fr ] and takes its source from the Massif du Robion to the east of the village. The name in Rubione, which first appeared for it in 1045, is derived from the vulgar Latin robigonem, a distortion of the classical Latin robiginem for rust, according to Ernest Nègre. Charles Rostaing, on the other hand, believed that the name might predate the Gauls and designate a steep-sided ravine.

Taloire [ fr ], was first mentioned in 1095 when the château of Taloire was given to the Abbey of St. Victor, Marseille, which became the lay seigneur of the fief. It derived its name from the Occitan talador, meaning soldiers especially recruited to devastate the land of an adversary. Adding the -ia suffix designates, either a land inhabited by these devastators, or a land devastated by the taladors. Rostaing thought this name also probably also predated the Gauls. Bénédicte and Jean-Jacques Fénié [ fr ] noted a tautology : *Tal- et *Tor-, the teo roots. The name "Taloire" contains two terms designating a mountain.

In 2017, the unemployment rate of the Castellane population was 20.1%, up from 12.4% in 2007. The largest sector of activity in December 2015 was the public sector (administration, education, health, social work) with 45 businesses and 280 paid workers.

The inhabitants of Castellane are known back to a very early date. Neolithic nomads came through the area; the oldest traces date back to 6000 BC. A grotto with cave paintings exists in the commune but its location is kept confidential to protect the artwork; Bronze Age tombs have also been discovered in a cave in Castillon. Ligurian tribes occupied the territory. The Suetrii or Suètres later created an oppidum named Ducelia, near the Roc. They mined salt in the area and sold it. Most of the communes attached to Castellane today were peopled by the Suetrii. Taulanne was the exception, inhabited by the people who had their capital in Senez. (Their name is uncertain and Roman historians differ on the subject.)

The region was conquered by Augustus in 14 BC. Castellane was attached to the Roman province of Alpes-Maritimes and began to grow. Homes were established in the plain, and the city was named Civitas Saliniensum (city of salt merchants). The name of the town later became Salinae.

Several roads left from or passed through the town:

Residents first settled on the bank of the Verdon to mine the saline sources which are still visible today. A treasure of antiquity, 34 gold coins issued by Arcadius and Honorius, were discovered in 1797 in Taloire. A limestone funerary stele for one Julius Trofimus, dating back to Roman times, was discovered near the old chapel of Notre-Dame-du-Plan. Until 1942 it was used in a retaining wall, and can be found today in the public garden of the savings bank. The inscription is included in the Inscriptions latines de Gaule narbonnaise [ fr ] (ILGN) collection of Gallia Narbonensis Roman inscriptions and is listed on the historic register.

A diocese was founded in the fifth century: its seat was transferred to Senez before the 6th century however and despite all attempts to have it return to Castellan it remained there until it was closed in the French Revolution.

In the early ninth century, the area around the current town of Castellane was inhabited by only 84 people. In 812 the area was invaded by Moors, also sometimes called Saracens; they destroyed Salines, the early settlement near the salt marshes. The inhabitants of Salines took refuge on the summit of the Roc and built a stronghold there, building the first Notre-Dame there, inaugurated in 852, in thanks for the refuge. Some vestiges of this site, which was named Sinaca in 813 and Petra Castellana in 965, are still visible at the place now known as Le Signal. People later also settled at the foot of the Roc in the valley bottom.

In 852 a lord of Castellane, possibly named Guillaume won a victory against the Moors and put together a barony of 46 village communities stretching from Cotignac in Var to the south, to Thorame-Haute in the north, and from Soleilhas to Esparron-de-Verdon. The Barony was considered a small sovereign state ruled by hereditary sovereign barons. Over time Castellane came to have three co-existing sites:

In 1189, Baron de Castellane Boniface III was attacked by Alfonso I of Provence. He had refused to do homage, explaining that he was a vassal of the Holy Roman Empire. But in the face of brute force he was forced to bend the knee. Another war broke out in 1227 between the Provence and Boniface of Castellane, presumably the son. In 1257 Charles II—then still just prince of Salernes, gave the castle to the Austinian monks. In 1262, Charles I of Anjou defeated Boniface of Castellane and made Castelle the seat of a baile. In the thirteenth century, the family of Castellane lost possession of the city to the Counts of Provence. To protect themselves from attack, in addition to the protections for the city, Castellane built a series of fortified outposts at Demandolx, La Garde, Chasteuil [ fr ], Rougon, and perhaps Taloire. In 1300 a small Jewish community of eight households was established in the area.

The Black Death reached Castellane in 1348, and was followed by a devastating flood of the Verdon River. The capture and death of Queen Joanna I of Naples created a succession issue in the county of Provence, the cities of the Union of Aix (1382–1387) supporting Charles de Duras against Louis I of Anjou.

Lord of Castellane Louis d'Anduse, also often known as Lord of La Voulte, sided with the Duke of Anjou from the spring of 1382, supporting him on condition he participate in an expedition to rescue the queen. Castellane itself initially also backed the Duke, but changed allegiance in February 1386 after the Duke died, and rallied to the cause of the queen-regent, Marie de Blois. She negotiated with them, hoping to set off a chain of similar declarations of support. Guillaume de Forcalquier and his son Jean Raynaut, lords of Eoulx, submitted to the Duchess in July 1386. In 1390, Raimond de Turenne ravaged the surrounding territory and the village of Taulanne and failed to take the city, but did destroy the wooden bridge over the Verdon River.

The wooden bridge over the Verdon was rebuilt in stone in the 15th century. A monastery took care of its maintenance. The bridge on the Place Castellane put Castellane on the frequently travelled routes between the Mediterranean and the bridge over the Durance river at Sisteron. The bridge toll for the Verdon and the fair began at the end of the Middle Ages. The fair continued until the end of the Ancien Régime, assuring the town relative prosperity.

In the fifteenth century, a community settled on the present site of Taloire. In the middle of the fifteenth century, the upper village was completely abandoned in favor of the lowland site.

At the end of the Middle Ages, the transhumance system developed enormously, herds of sheep from the coast going up into the high Alpine valleys in the summer. Some drailles (herding routes) crossed the Castellane bridge, where a toll was instituted. At the beginning of the 16th century, between 78,000 and 120,000 head were crossing each year during May and June.

The imperial army of Charles V pillaged the town en 1536.

Religious unrest broke out in 1559. Brun de Caille had converted some of the townspeople of Castellane, who gathered at his home for services. A sectarian skirmish took place at his home. Huguenot captain Paulon de Mauvans [ fr ], of another rich Protestant family, sacked the town in the summer of 1560, then established himself there after reaching an armistice with the governor of Provence, the count of Tende, Claude of Savoy. The town was attacked by Protestants on 4 October 1574, but the residents of Castellane and its surroundings chased them off, pursuing them as far as the clue de Taulanne. On 30 January 1586, the Baron of Allemagne [ fr ] and the Duke of Lesdiguières tried to surprise the town. The sneak attack was repulsed and the Baron d'Allemagne was injured by a bullet in his back, which caused the assailants to retreat. The Baron was killed in September of that year trying to lift the siege of his own castle, shot in the head by an arquebus. The end of the siege of Castellane has since been celebrated every year in the last weekend of January with the Pétardiers ceremony reenacting the attack, and notably the episode of Judith André or Andrau, the goodwife of Barrême, who killed pétardier captain Jean Motte by pouring a kettle of boiling peas over him from the top of the porte de l'Annonciade, reputed to be the weak point in the defenses. s1z

The plague struck the town again in 1630.

The Jansenist bishop Jean Soanen tried to make the celebrations of Saint-Sacrement, Saint-Jean and Saint-Éloi more sedate and less unbridled, the youth of the town having a tradition of celebrating with drums, music and gunshots. The youth refused, resisted, made even more noise and even revolted, preventing the procession of the octave du Saint-Sacrement from leaving the church on 22 June 1710. In 1726 the youth of Robion, whom the priest wanted to prevent from dancing on Sunday, also revolted.

The Austrian-Sardinian army briefly occupied the town in 1746 during the war of the Austrian Succession. In December 1746, Provence was invaded by an Austrian-Sardinian army. A troop of 2,000 men took Castellane, then the surrounding villages, as far as the château of Trigance. After some difficulty, the Spanish and French armies coordinated a counteroffensive, which began at the start of January when French soldiers under the orders of the Count of Maulévrier took an Austrian outpost in Chasteuil. The Austrian commander, Maximilian Ulysses Browne, reinforced his right wing with four battalions garrisoned at Castellane, and six on the south bank of the Verdon. Seven other battalions formed a second available squadron. Nine battalions and ten squads of Spaniards were stationed in Riez and 2,500 Swiss paid by Spain were stationed at Senez. On 21 January Hispano-French troops went on the offensive, commanded by the Frenchman Maulévrier and the Spanish Marquis of Taubin. The Spanish left their quarters by night and advanced on Castellane through the clue de Taulanne, while the French passing through the Vodon gorge. The difficult marches necessary to approach in this way nonetheless allowed a coordinated attack around 7am.

The first outposts were taken without difficulty, which allowed Maulévrier to connect on his left with Taubin, and to send a column of dragoons onto the right bank to cut the Austrians' retreat. This assault took the Austrian-Sardinians fortifications without difficulty, the French-Spanish entered the town and did prevent the last Austrians from retreating. In all, they took 287 Austrians prisoner, including the baron de Neuhaus, the lieutenant-general in command. The Austrian-Sardinians also had a hundred-odd dead, versus twenty Franco-Spanish soldiers. The villages of La Garde, Eoulx, Robion, Taloire, Trigance and Comps were evacuated on 22 January.

In 1760, a tax imposed by the king of Piedmont-Sardinia on sales of cloth brought a large reduction in the town's textile production. Production of cadis [ fr ], a local form of wool, and of cordeillat, a coarse woolen fabric, continued until the Revolution, and was used by the local residents.

Until the Revolution salt was produced from two local salt marshes.

On the eve of the French Revolution, several fiefs existed on the actual territory of the commune: Éoulx, Le Castellet-de-Robion (which became a barony in 1755), Chasteuil, Taulanne and Castillon, plus Castellane. On the same territory there were nine parishes : Castillon, La Baume, Taulanne, La Palud, Chasteuil, Taloire, Villars-Brandis, Robion, et Castellane. The parish of Éoulx overlapped the community of La Garde.

The city of Castellane alone paid more tax than Digne ; it was an important rural town, both for its judiciary functions (with eight lawyers and five prosecutors) and for its production, with twelve factories: among which were six hat shops, two wax factories, one faïence works, one tile factory, one silk fabrication works, and the leather industry was also represented. A royal post office was also installed in Castellane near the end of the Ancien Régime.

The cloth industry, already well established in the preceding century, prospered in the first half of the 19th century. But cottage industries were replaced by the Barneaud factory, built in the late 1830s on the model of the Honnorat factory in Saint-André-de-Méouilles. It employed nine workers in 1872, then disappeared in 1878.

The Revolution and the Empire brought social reforms, including proportional taxation based on the assets. In order to put this in place on a precise basis, a land registry was drawn up. The loi de finances du 15 septembre 1807 specified its methods, but its accomplishment took time to get started, since the officials conducting the cadastre dealt with the communes in successive geographic groups. Not until 1834–1835 was the land registry known as the Napoleonic cadastre of Castellane and its associated communes finished.

The coup d'état of 2 December 1851 committed by Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte against the Second Republic provoked an armed uprising in the Basses-Alpes in defense of the Constitution. Insurgent republicans took a number of cities in the center and south of France, including Digne, the prefecture of the Basses-Alpes, and held them for several days. The local fighters held out the longest, almost three weeks. But this allowed Bonaparte to portray himself as the protector of France, and many participants were sent to penal colonies in Lambesa and Cayenne, banished or less permanently exiled. Eight inhabitants of Castellane were brought before the commission mixte ; their most common penalty was deportation to Algeria.

On 10 September 1926, the sous-préfecture was eliminated in the economic plan of Raymond Poincaré, then re-established by the Vichy government in June 1942.

An internment camp was built in Chaudanne during World War II. Seventeen Jews were arrested in Castellane and deported. On 9 December 1943, the French armée secrète (AS) and the Francs-tireurs et partisans (FTP) attacked the construction site at the Castillon dam and seized five tonnes of explosives.

The commune was liberated 18 August 1944 by the 36th division of British infantry.

In the mid-20th century wine growing for local consumption ended.

The Rock which dominates the city, rising to 930 metres (3,051 feet) (over 200 metres (656 feet) above the Verdon), is a listed historical site.

The oldest monument in the territory of the commune is the dolmen of Pierres Blanches Neolithic-Chalcolithic, a registered historical site on private property. The Roc towers 184 metres (604 feet) above the community of Castellane.

The Musée des sirènes et fossiles and the Moyen Verdon are networked with other museums in the Gorges du Verdon, including the home of Pauline Gréoux-les-Bains, the museum of the life of yesteryear Esparron-de-Verdon, home gorges du Verdon in La Palud-sur-Verdon and the Museum of prehistory in Quinson gorges du Verdon.

The bridge of the Roc, which carries the Sisteron - Vence road across the river, was built in the first decade of the fifteenth century, replacing a succession of several wooden bridges, the last spanning the Verdon in 1300 and destroyed by Raymond VIII of Turenne in 1390. The construction of the new bridge parallels that of Nyons (built in 1401, 42 m (138 ft) long), Pont de Claix (built in 1607–13, 45 m (148 ft) long), Tournon (built in the sixteenth century, 49 m (161 ft) long) and Entrechaux (24.5 m (80.4 ft) long). Pope Benedict XIII granted indulgences to anyone who gave alms to finance its construction. The rearguard of the Austrian-Sardinian army was caught there by a sortie from the garrison.

The tympana of the Roc bridge have been restored several times. Metal tie rods were laid in 1697–99. The bridge as a whole was restored in 2008 and closed to traffic. It was decommissioned in 1967 and delisted in 1982. The bridge and its approaches have been a registered historical site since 1940.

The library is in the former convent of the Visitation, founded in 1644. The eighteenth-century castle at Éoulx is richly decorated with plasterwork, including the first floor ceilings, the panels surrounding the doors, the rosette in the second-floor ceilings. Externally, it has two towers, with arched openings. The town hall is housed in the building that used to be the savings bank. It resembles a villa: balconies supported by large corbels and thick balusters, and a façade adorned with a pediment.

Catellane's largest fountain, in the main square, features a pyramid on which is carved a compass crossed by a carpenter's square, two chisels and a mallet, emblems of the Freemasons. At the top of the pyramid is a pedestal with a ball. On National Street, two doors have transoms or capitals with volutes, and one lintel is decorated with carved foliage. In the town, several buildings, mostly dry stone, have been recorded in the inventory of topographic DRAC. One of them, in Rayaup, dates from the eighteenth century (the inscription that says 1586 is very recent).

The Chapel of Our Lady of the Rock, dating from the High Middle Ages, dominates the city from atop the Rock and belongs to the former Convent of Mercy. But only the wall and the south façade date from the twelfth century; the building was half demolished during the wars of religion and rebuilt in 1590.

Crumbling by 1703, the chapel was again rebuilt in the early eighteenth century and once more in 1860. A capital adorned with foliage and scrolls dates from the Renaissance.

It received numerous votive offerings in the 19th and 20th centuries, including:

Parts of the old parish church of Saint-Victor date from the mid-11th century. It is listed as an historical building. It was constructed in a similar manner and on the same plane as the Church of St. Andrew in the old village above the modern-day town, and was formerly the seat of a priory of the Abbey of St. Victor in Marseille.

The apse is decorated with Lombard bands, which have been described as remarkable, each arch carved from a single stone. Unusually for the region, it has a Roman nave, with arches rebuilt in the 17th century. The base of the tower dates from 1445, but its top was rebuilt in the 18th century following damage by Protestants in 1560.

The altar dates from 1724. The choir is adorned with paintings framed in wood, and an Annunciation carved in relief from gilded wood (18th century, on historical register). The wooden furniture, the stalls, the pulpit and the lectern with its hexagonal base, form an interesting 18th and 19th-century set, some of which is on the historic register. The furnishings also include an early 17th-century silver chalice with an unusual multilobed foot, also on the historic register.

The outline of the walls of Petra Castellana, the ancient city beneath the current one, is still visible, and in places they reach seven meters in height. The walls are thought to date from the 12th century, although a June 2016 archeological excavation sought to date them more precisely. Only one tower survives of the fourteen that originally reinforced these walls: the 14th-century pentagonal keep. This keep, which dominates the town center, is on private property but was declared a historic monument in 1921.

Construction on the wall enclosing the lower town began in 1359, with the permission of the Count of Provence, Louis I of Naples. Traces of this wall are still visible in the square towers on the front of the houses on the square. Corbels, which could support defenses (brattices or simple parapets with battlements) are visible on their façades.

Two of the original gates in the wall remain:

One of the towers in the Saint-Michel neighborhood has been home to a dovecote since 1585.

Castellane is twinned with Pescasseroli, Italy.

The Catalan Countries (Catalan : Països Catalans, Eastern Catalan: [ pəˈizus kətəˈlans ]) refers to the territories where the Catalan language is spoken. They include the Spanish autonomous communities of Catalonia, the Balearic Islands, Valencian Community (aka Valencian Country), and parts of Aragon (La Franja) and Murcia (Carche), as well as the Principality of Andorra, the department of Pyrénées-Orientales (aka Northern Catalonia, including Cerdanya, Rosselló, and Vallespir) in France, and the city of Alghero in Sardinia (Italy). It is often used as a sociolinguistic term to describe the cultural-linguistic area where Catalan is spoken. In the context of the Catalan independence movement, the term is sometimes used in a more restricted way to refer to just Catalonia, Northern Catalonia, Valencia and the Balearic Islands. The Catalan Countries do not correspond to any present or past political or administrative unit, though most of the area belonged to the Crown of Aragon in the Middle Ages. Parts of Valencia (Spanish) and Catalonia (Occitan) are not Catalan-speaking.

The "Catalan Countries" have been at the centre of both cultural and political projects since the late 19th century. Its mainly cultural dimension became increasingly politically charged by the late 1960s and early 1970s, as Francoism began to die out in Spain, and what had been a cultural term restricted to connoisseurs of Catalan philology became a divisive issue during the Spanish Transition period, most acrimoniously in Valencia during the 1980s. Modern linguistic and cultural projects include the Institut Ramon Llull and the Fundació Ramon Llull, which are run by the governments of the Balearic Islands, Catalonia and Andorra, the Department Council of the Pyrénées-Orientales, the city council of Alghero and the Network of Valencian Cities. Politically, it involves a pan-nationalist project to unite the Catalan-speaking territories of Spain and France, often in the context of the independence movement in Catalonia, but it is also simply a project for cultural unity, so that the linguistic area can have barriers to communication and interchange removed. The political project of independence under Catalonia does not currently enjoy wide support, particularly outside Catalonia, where some sectors view it as an expression of pancatalanism. Linguistic unity is widely recognized, except for the followers of a political movement known as Blaverism, which understands Valencian as a different language.

Països Catalans has different meanings depending on the context. These can be roughly classified in two groups: linguistic or political, the political definition of the concept being the widest, since it also encompasses the linguistic side of it.

As a linguistic term, Països Catalans is used in a similar fashion to the English Anglosphere, the French Francophonie, the Portuguese Lusofonia or the Spanish Hispanophone territories. However, it is not universally accepted, even as a linguistic concept, in the territories it purports to unite.

As a political term, it refers to a number of political projects as advocated by supporters of Catalan independence. These, based on the linguistic fact, argue for the existence of a common national identity that would surpass the limits of each territory covered by this concept and would apply also to the remaining ones. These movements advocate for "political collaboration" amongst these territories. This often stands for their union and political independence. As a consequence of the opposition these political projects have received –notably in some of the territories described by this concept – some cultural institutions avoid the usage of Països Catalans in some contexts, as a means to prevent any political interpretation; in these cases, equivalent expressions (such as Catalan-speaking countries) or others (such as the linguistic domain of Catalan language) are used instead.

Catalan is the official language of Andorra, co-official with Spanish and Occitan in Catalonia, co-official with Spanish in the Balearic Islands and the Valencian Community—with the denomination of Valencian in the latter—and co-official with Italian in the city of Alghero. It is also part of the recognized minority languages of Italy along with Sardinian, also spoken in Alghero.

It is not official in Aragon, Murcia or the Pyrénées-Orientales, even though on 10 December 2007 the General Council of the Pyrénées-Orientales officially recognized Catalan, along with French, as a language of the department. In 2009, the Catalan language was declared llengua pròpia (with the Aragonese language) of Aragon.

There are several endeavors and collaborations amongst some of the diverse government and cultural institutions involved. One such case is the Ramon Llull Institute (IRL), founded in 2002 by the government of the Balearic Islands and the government of Catalonia. Its main objective is to promote the Catalan language and culture abroad in all its variants, as well as the works of writers, artists, scientists and researchers of the regions which are part of it. The Xarxa Vives d'Universitats (Vives Network of Universities), an association of universities of Catalonia, Valencia, the Balearic Islands, Northern Catalonia and Andorra founded in 1994, was incorporated into the IRL in 2008. Also in 2008, in order to extend the collaboration to institutions from all across the "Catalan Countries", the IRL and the government of Andorra (which formerly had enjoyed occasional collaboration, most notably in the Frankfurt Book Fair of 2007) created the Ramon Llull Foundation (FRL), an international cultural institution with the same goals as the IRL. In 2009, the General Council of the Pyrénées-Orientales, the city council of Alghero and the Network of Valencian Cities (an association of a few Valencian city councils) joined the FRL as well. In December 2012 the government of the Balearic islands, dominated by the conservative and pro-Spain Partido Popular (PP), announced that the representatives of the Balearic islands were withdrawing from the Llull institute.

A number of cultural organizations, specifically Òmnium Cultural in Catalonia, Acció Cultural del País Valencià in Valencia, and Obra Cultural Balear in the Balearic islands (collectively the "Llull Federation"), advocate independence as well as the promotion of Catalan language and culture.

The political projects that centre on the Catalan Countries have been described as a "hypothetical and future union" of the various territories. In many cases it involves the Spanish autonomous communities of Catalonia, Valencia and the Balearics. The 2016 electoral programme of Valencian parties Compromís and Podemos spoke of a "federation" between the Valencian Community, the Balearic Islands and Catalonia. They are to campaign for an amendment to article 145 of the Spanish constitution, which forbids federation of autonomous communities. The territories concerned may also include Roussillon and La Franja.

Many in Spain see the concept of the Països Catalans as regional exceptionalism, counterpoised to a centralizing Spanish and French national identity. Others see it as an attempt by a Catalonia-proper-centered nationalism to lay a hegemonic claim to Valencia, the Balearic Islands or Roussillon, where the prevailing feeling is that they have their own respective historical personalities, not necessarily related to Catalonia's. The Catalan author and journalist Valentí Puig described the term as "inconvenient", saying it has generated more reactions against it than adhesions.

The concept has connotations that have been perceived as problematic and controversial when establishing relations between Catalonia and other areas of the Catalan linguistic domain. It has been characterised as a "phantom reality" and an "unreal and fanciful space". The pro-Catalan independence author Germà Bel called it an "inappropriate and unfortunate expression lacking any historic, political or social basis", while Xosé Manoel Núñez Seixas spoke of the difficulties in uniting a historicist concept linked to common membership of the Crown of Aragon with a fundamentally linguistic construct.

In many parts of the territories designated by some as Països Catalans, Catalan nationalist sentiment is uncommon. For example, in the Valencian Community 's case, the Esquerra Republicana del País Valencià (ERPV) is the most relevant party explicitly supportive of the idea but its representation is limited to a total of four local councilors elected in three municipalities (out of a total of 5,622 local councilors elected in the 542 Valencian municipalities). At the regional level, it has run twice (2003 and 2007) to the regional Parliament election, receiving less than 0.50% of the total votes. In all, its role in Valencian politics is currently marginal.

There are other parties which sporadically use this term in its cultural or linguistical sense, not prioritizing a national-political unity, as in the case of the Bloc Nacionalista Valencià. The Valencian Nationalist Bloc (Valencian : Bloc Nacionalista Valencià, Bloc or BNV ; IPA: [ ˈblɔɡ nasionaˈlista valensiˈa ]) is the largest Valencian nationalist party in the Valencian Country, Spain. The Bloc's main aim is, as stated in their guidelines, "to achieve full national sovereignty for the Valencian people, and make it legally declared by a Valencian sovereign Constitution allowing the possibility of association with the countries which share the same language, history and culture". Since 2011, they are part of the Coalició Compromís coalition, which won six seats in the 2011 Valencian regional elections and 19 in the 2015 elections, becoming the third largest party in the regional parliament.

Some of the most vocal defenders or promoters of the "Catalan Countries" concept (such as Joan Fuster, Josep Guia or Vicent Partal) were Valencian.

The subject became very controversial during the politically agitated Spanish Transition in what was to become the Valencian Community, especially in and around the city of Valencia. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, as the Spanish Autonomous Communities system took shape, the controversy reached its height. Various Valencian right-wing politicians (originally from Unión de Centro Democrático) fearing what was seen as an annexation attempt from Catalonia, fueled a violent Anti-Catalanist campaign against local supporters of the concept of the Països Catalans, which even included a handful of unsuccessful attacks with explosives against authors perceived as flagships of the concept, such as Joan Fuster or Manuel Sanchis i Guarner. The concept's revival during this period was behind the formation of the fiercely opposed and staunch anti-Catalan blaverist movement, led by Unió Valenciana, which, in turn, significantly diminished during the 1990s and the 2000s as the Països Catalans controversy slowly disappeared from the Valencian political arena.

This confrontation between politicians from Catalonia and Valencia very much diminished in severity during the course of the late 1980s and, especially, the 1990s as the Valencian Community's regional government became consolidated. Since then, the topic has lost most of its controversial potential, even though occasional clashes may appear from time to time, such as controversies regarding the broadcasting of Catalan television in Valencia— and vice versa —or the usage by Catalan official institutions of terms which are perceived in Valencia as Catalan nationalistic, such as Països Catalans or País Valencià (Valencian Country).

A 2004 poll in Valencia found that a majority of the population in this region considered Valencian to be a different language to Catalan. This position is especially supported by people who do not use Valencian regularly. Furthermore, the data indicate that younger people educated in Valencian are much less likely to hold these views. According to an official poll in 2014, 52% of Valencians considered Valencian to be a language different from Catalan, while 41% considered the languages to be the same. This poll showed significant differences regarding age and level of education, with a majority of those aged 18–24 (51%) and those with a higher education (58%) considering Valencian to be the same language as Catalan. This can be compared to those aged 65 and above (29%) and those with only primary education (32%), where the same view has its lowest support.

In 2015, the Spanish newspaper ABC reported that the Catalan government of Artur Mas had spent millions of euros to promote Catalanism in Valencia over the previous three years.

As for the other territories, there are no political parties even mentioning the Països Catalans as a public issue neither in Andorra, nor in la Franja, Carche or Alghero. In the Balearic islands, support for parties related to Catalan nationalism is around 10% of the total votes. Reversely, the Popular Party –which is a staunch opponent of whatever political implications for the Països Catalans concept– is the majority party in Valencia and the Balearic islands.

Even though the topic has been largely absent from the political agenda as of late, in December 2013 the regional Parliament of the Balearic islands passed an official declaration in defence of its autonomy and in response to a prior declaration by the Catalan regional Parliament which included reference to the term in question. In the declaration of the Balearic islands parliament, it was stated that the so-called " Països Catalans do not exist and the Balearic islands do not take part in any 'Catalan country' whatsoever".

In August 2018, the ex-mayor of Alghero, Carlo Sechi, defined algherese identity as part of the Catalan culture whilst politically defining Alghero as part of the Sardinian nation.

The Spanish Constitution of 1978 contains a clause forbidding the formation of federations amongst autonomous communities. Therefore, if it were the case that the Països Catalans idea gained a majority democratic support in future elections, a constitutional amendment would still be needed for those parts of the Països Catalans lying in Spain to create a common legal representative body, even though in the addenda to the Constitution there is a clause allowing an exception to this rule in the case of Navarre, which can join the Basque Country should the people choose to do so.

Catalans in the French territory of Northern Catalonia, although proud of their language and culture, are not generally committed to independence. Jordi Vera, a CDC councillor in Perpignan, has said that his party favoured closer trade and transport relationships with Catalonia, and that he believed Catalan independence would improve the prospects of that happening, but that secession from France was "not on the agenda". When Catalans took to the streets in 2016 under the banner of " Oui au Pays catalan " ("Yes to the Catalan Country") to protest the French government's decision to combine Languedoc-Roussillon, the region which contained Northern Catalonia, with Midi-Pyrénées to create a new region to be called Occitanie, the French magazine Le Point said that the movement was "completely unrelated to the situation on the other side of the border", and that it was "more directed against Toulouse [the chief city of Occitanie ] than against Paris or for Barcelona." Oui au Pays catalan, which stood in the 2017 French legislative election, said that's its aim is a "territorial collectivity" within the French Republic on the same lines as Corsica. Every year, though, there are between 300 and 600 people in a demonstration to commemorate the 1659 Treaty of the Pyrenees, that separated Northern Catalonia from the South.

The term Països Catalans was first documented in 1876 in Historia del Derecho en Cataluña, Mallorca y Valencia. Código de las Costumbres de Tortosa, I (History of the Law in Catalonia, Majorca and Valencia. Code of the Customs of Tortosa, I) written by the Valencian Law historian Benvingut Oliver i Esteller.

The term was both challenged and reinforced by the use of the term "Occitan Countries" from the Oficina de Relacions Meridionals (Office of Southern Relations) in Barcelona by 1933. Another proposal which enjoyed some popularity during the Renaixença was "Pàtria llemosina" (Limousine Fatherland), proposed by Víctor Balaguer as a federation of Catalan-speaking provinces; both these coinages were based on the theory that Catalan is a dialect of Occitan.

None of these names reached widespread cultural usage and the term nearly vanished until it was rediscovered, redefined and put in the center of the identity cultural debate by Valencian writer Joan Fuster. In his book Nosaltres, els valencians (We, the Valencians, published in 1962) a new political interpretation of the concept was introduced; from the original, meaning roughly Catalan-speaking territories, Fuster developed a political inference closely associated to Catalan nationalism. This new approach would refer to the Catalan Countries as a more or less unitary nation with a shared culture which had been divided by the course of history, but which should logically be politically reunited. Fuster's preference for Països Catalans gained popularity, and previous unsuccessful proposals such as Comunitat Catalànica (Catalanic Community) or Bacàvia (after Balearics-Catalonia-Valencia) diminished in use.

Today, the term is politically charged, and tends to be closely associated with Catalan nationalism and supporters of Catalan independence. The idea of uniting these territories in an independent state is supported by a number of political parties, the social-democratic Republican Left of Catalonia (ERC) being the most important in terms of representation (20 members in the Parliament of Catalonia) and the socialist Popular Unity Candidacy (CUP) with 4 members. ERPV, PSAN (currently integrated in SI), Endavant, Poble Lliure (both supporting CUP), and Estat Català also support this idea to a greater or lesser extent.

Catalan (català) is a Western Romance language that is native to the eastern Iberian Peninsula. It shares official status with Spanish in three autonomous communities in eastern Spain – Catalonia ; the Balearic Islands ; and the Valencian Community, where it is called Valencian (valencià) – and is the sole official language of Andorra. Catalan also has semi-official status in Alghero, an Italian municipality in Sardinia, and is spoken in the Pyrénées-Orientales department of France and in two further areas in eastern Spain: the eastern strip of Aragon and the Carche area in the Region of Murcia. The Catalan-speaking regions are often called the Catalan Countries (Països Catalans).

The language evolved from Vulgar Latin in the Middle Ages around the eastern Pyrenees. It became the language of the Principality of Catalonia and the kingdoms of Valencia and Mallorca, being present throughout the Mediterranean as the main language of the Crown of Aragon. It was replaced by Spanish as a language of government and literature in the 1700s, but 19th century Spain saw a Catalan literary revival, culminating in the early 1900s. During the Francoist dictatorship (1936–1975), the usage of Catalan was subject to repressive measures, before it entered a relatively successful process of re-normalization between the 1980s and the 2000s. However, during the 2010s, it experienced signs of decline in social use, diglossia and a resurgence in discrimination cases.

The word Catalan is derived from the territorial name of Catalonia, itself of disputed etymology. The main theory suggests that Catalunya (Latin : Gathia Launia) derives from the name Gothia or Gauthia ('Land of the Goths '), since the origins of the Catalan counts, lords and people were found in the March of Gothia, whence Gothland > Gothlandia > Gothalania > Catalonia theoretically derived.

In English, the term referring to a person first appears in the mid 14th century as Catelaner, followed in the 15th century as Catellain (from Middle French). It is attested a language name since at least 1652. The word Catalan can be pronounced in English as / ˈ k æ t ə l ə n, - æ n / KAT -ə-lən, - ⁠ lan or / ˌ k æ t ə ˈ l æ n / KAT -ə- LAN.

The endonym is pronounced [ kətəˈla ] in the Eastern Catalan dialects, and [ kataˈla ] in the Western dialects. In the Valencian Community and Carche, the term valencià [ valensiˈa ] is frequently used instead. Thus, the name "Valencian", although often employed for referring to the varieties specific to the Valencian Community and Carche, is also used by Valencians as a name for the language as a whole, synonymous with "Catalan". Both uses of the term have their respective entries in the dictionaries by the Acadèmia Valenciana de la Llengua (AVL) and the Institut d'Estudis Catalans (IEC). (See also status of Valencian below).

By the 9th century, Catalan had evolved from Vulgar Latin on both sides of the eastern end of the Pyrenees, as well as the territories of the Roman province of Hispania Tarraconensis to the south. From the 8th century onwards the Catalan counts extended their territory southwards and westwards at the expense of the Muslims, bringing their language with them. This process was given definitive impetus with the separation of the County of Barcelona from the Carolingian Empire in 988.

In the 11th century, documents written in macaronic Latin begin to show Catalan elements, with texts written almost completely in Romance appearing by 1080. Old Catalan shared many features with Gallo-Romance, diverging from Old Occitan between the 11th and 14th centuries.

During the 11th and 12th centuries the Catalan rulers expanded southward to the Ebro river, and in the 13th century they conquered the lands that would become the Kingdoms of Valencia and the Majorca. The city of Alghero in Sardinia was repopulated with Catalan speakers in the 14th century. The language also reached Murcia, which became Spanish-speaking in the 15th century.

In the Low Middle Ages, Catalan went through a golden age, reaching a peak of maturity and cultural richness. Examples include the work of Majorcan polymath Ramon Llull (1232–1315), the Four Great Chronicles (13th–14th centuries), and the Valencian school of poetry culminating in Ausiàs March (1397–1459). By the 15th century, the city of Valencia had become the sociocultural center of the Crown of Aragon, and Catalan was present all over the Mediterranean world. During this period, the Royal Chancery propagated a highly standardized language. Catalan was widely used as an official language in Sicily until the 15th century, and in Sardinia until the 17th. During this period, the language was what Costa Carreras terms "one of the 'great languages' of medieval Europe".

Martorell 's novel of chivalry Tirant lo Blanc (1490) shows a transition from Medieval to Renaissance values, something that can also be seen in Metge 's work. The first book produced with movable type in the Iberian Peninsula was printed in Catalan.

With the union of the crowns of Castille and Aragon in 1479, the Spanish kings ruled over different kingdoms, each with its own cultural, linguistic and political particularities, and they had to swear by the laws of each territory before the respective parliaments. But after the War of the Spanish Succession, Spain became an absolute monarchy under Philip V, which led to the assimilation of the Crown of Aragon by the Crown of Castile through the Nueva Planta decrees, as a first step in the creation of the Spanish nation-state ; as in other contemporary European states, this meant the imposition of the political and cultural characteristics of the dominant groups. Since the political unification of 1714, Spanish assimilation policies towards national minorities have been a constant.

The process of assimilation began with secret instructions to the corregidores of the Catalan territory: they "will take the utmost care to introduce the Castilian language, for which purpose he will give the most temperate and disguised measures so that the effect is achieved, without the care being noticed". From there, actions in the service of assimilation, discreet or aggressive, were continued, and reached to the last detail, such as, in 1799, the Royal Certificate forbidding anyone to "represent, sing and dance pieces that were not in Spanish". The use of Spanish gradually became more prestigious and marked the start of the decline of Catalan. Starting in the 16th century, Catalan literature came under the influence of Spanish, and the nobles, part of the urban and literary classes became bilingual.

With the Treaty of the Pyrenees (1659), Spain ceded the northern part of the Principality of Catalonia to France, and soon thereafter the local Catalan varieties came under the influence of French, which in 1700 became the sole official language of the region.

Shortly after the French Revolution (1789), the French First Republic prohibited official use of, and enacted discriminating policies against, the regional languages of France, such as Catalan, Alsatian, Breton, Occitan, Flemish, and Basque.

After the French colony of Algeria was established in 1830, many Catalan-speaking settlers moved there. People from the Spanish province of Alicante settled around Oran, while those from French Catalonia and Menorca migrated to Algiers.

By 1911, there were around 100,000 speakers of Patuet, as their speech was called. After the Algerian declaration of independence in 1962, almost all the Pied-Noir Catalan speakers fled to Northern Catalonia or Alicante.

The French government only recognizes French as an official language. Nevertheless, on 10 December 2007, the then General Council of the Pyrénées-Orientales officially recognized Catalan as one of the départment's languages and seeks to further promote it in public life and education.

In 1807, the Statistics Office of the French Ministry of the Interior asked the prefects for an official survey on the limits of the French language. The survey found that in Roussillon, almost only Catalan was spoken, and since Napoleon wanted to incorporate Catalonia into France, as happened in 1812, the consul in Barcelona was also asked. He declared that Catalan "is taught in schools, it is printed and spoken, not only among the lower class, but also among people of first quality, also in social gatherings, as in visits and congresses", indicating that it was spoken everywhere "with the exception of the royal courts". He also indicated that Catalan was spoken "in the Kingdom of Valencia, in the islands of Mallorca, Menorca, Ibiza, Sardinia, Corsica and much of Sicily, in the Vall d "Aran and Cerdaña".

The defeat of the pro-Habsburg coalition in the War of the Spanish Succession (1714) initiated a series of laws which, among other centralizing measures, imposed the use of Spanish in legal documentation all over Spain. Because of this, use of the Catalan language declined into the 18th century.

However, the 19th century saw a Catalan literary revival (Renaixença), which has continued up to the present day. This period starts with Aribau 's Ode to the Homeland (1833); followed in the second half of the 19th century, and the early 20th by the work of Verdaguer (poetry), Oller (realist novel), and Guimerà (drama). In the 19th century, the region of Carche, in the province of Murcia was repopulated with Valencian speakers. Catalan spelling was standardized in 1913 and the language became official during the Second Spanish Republic (1931–1939). The Second Spanish Republic saw a brief period of tolerance, with most restrictions against Catalan lifted. The Generalitat (the autonomous government of Catalonia, established during the Republic in 1931) made a normal use of Catalan in its administration and put efforts to promote it at the social level, including in schools and the University of Barcelona.

The Catalan language and culture were still vibrant during the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939), but were crushed at an unprecedented level throughout the subsequent decades due to Francoist dictatorship (1939–1975), which abolished the official status of Catalan and imposed the use of Spanish in schools and in public administration in all of Spain, while banning the use of Catalan in them. Between 1939 and 1943 newspapers and book printing in Catalan almost disappeared. Francisco Franco's desire for a homogeneous Spanish population resonated with some Catalans in favor of his regime, primarily members of the upper class, who began to reject the use of Catalan. Despite all of these hardships, Catalan continued to be used privately within households, and it was able to survive Franco's dictatorship.

At the end of World War II, however, some of the harsh measures began to be lifted and, while Spanish language remained the sole promoted one, limited number of Catalan literature began to be tolerated. Several prominent Catalan authors resisted the suppression through literature. Private initiative contests were created to reward works in Catalan, among them Joan Martorell prize (1947), Víctor Català prize (1953) Carles Riba award (1950), or the Honor Award of Catalan Letters (1969). The first Catalan-language TV show was broadcast in 1964. At the same time, oppression of the Catalan language and identity was carried out in schools, through governmental bodies, and in religious centers.

In addition to the loss of prestige for Catalan and its prohibition in schools, migration during the 1950s into Catalonia from other parts of Spain also contributed to the diminished use of the language. These migrants were often unaware of the existence of Catalan, and thus felt no need to learn or use it. Catalonia was the economic powerhouse of Spain, so these migrations continued to occur from all corners of the country. Employment opportunities were reduced for those who were not bilingual. Daily newspapers remained exclusively in Spanish until after Franco's death, when the first one in Catalan since the end of the Civil War, Avui, began to be published in 1976.

Since the Spanish transition to democracy (1975–1982), Catalan has been institutionalized as an official language, language of education, and language of mass media; all of which have contributed to its increased prestige. In Catalonia, there is an unparalleled large bilingual European non-state linguistic community. The teaching of Catalan is mandatory in all schools, but it is possible to use Spanish for studying in the public education system of Catalonia in two situations—if the teacher assigned to a class chooses to use Spanish, or during the learning process of one or more recently arrived immigrant students. There is also some intergenerational shift towards Catalan.

More recently, several Spanish political forces have tried to increase the use of Spanish in the Catalan educational system. As a result, in May 2022 the Spanish Supreme Court urged the Catalan regional government to enforce a measure by which 25% of all lessons must be taught in Spanish.

According to the Statistical Institute of Catalonia, in 2013 the Catalan language is the second most commonly used in Catalonia, after Spanish, as a native or self-defining language: 7% of the population self-identifies with both Catalan and Spanish equally, 36.4% with Catalan and 47.5% only Spanish. In 2003 the same studies concluded no language preference for self-identification within the population above 15 years old: 5% self-identified with both languages, 44.3% with Catalan and 47.5% with Spanish. To promote use of Catalan, the Generalitat de Catalunya (Catalonia's official Autonomous government) spends part of its annual budget on the promotion of the use of Catalan in Catalonia and in other territories, with entities such as Consorci per a la Normalització Lingüística [ ca ; es ] (Consortium for Linguistic Normalization).

In Andorra, Catalan has always been the sole official language. Since the promulgation of the 1993 constitution, several policies favoring Catalan have been enforced, such as Catalan medium education.

On the other hand, there are several language shift processes currently taking place. In the Northern Catalonia area of France, Catalan has followed the same trend as the other minority languages of France, with most of its native speakers being 60 or older (as of 2004). Catalan is studied as a foreign language by 30% of the primary education students, and by 15% of the secondary. The cultural association La Bressola promotes a network of community-run schools engaged in Catalan language immersion programs.

In Alicante province, Catalan is being replaced by Spanish and in Alghero by Italian. There is also well ingrained diglossia in the Valencian Community, Ibiza, and to a lesser extent, in the rest of the Balearic islands.

During the 20th century many Catalans emigrated or went into exile to Venezuela, Mexico, Cuba, Argentina, and other South American countries. They formed a large number of Catalan colonies that today continue to maintain the Catalan language. They also founded many Catalan casals (associations).

One classification of Catalan is given by Pèire Bèc :

However, the ascription of Catalan to the Occitano-Romance branch of Gallo-Romance languages is not shared by all linguists and philologists, particularly among Spanish ones, such as Ramón Menéndez Pidal.

Catalan bears varying degrees of similarity to the linguistic varieties subsumed under the cover term Occitan language (see also differences between Occitan and Catalan and Gallo-Romance languages). Thus, as it should be expected from closely related languages, Catalan today shares many traits with other Romance languages.

Some include Catalan in Occitan, as the linguistic distance between this language and some Occitan dialects (such as the Gascon dialect) is similar to the distance among different Occitan dialects. Catalan was considered a dialect of Occitan until the end of the 19th century and still today remains its closest relative.

Catalan shares many traits with the other neighboring Romance languages (Occitan, French, Italian, Sardinian as well as Spanish and Portuguese among others). However, despite being spoken mostly on the Iberian Peninsula, Catalan has marked differences with the Iberian Romance group (Spanish and Portuguese) in terms of pronunciation, grammar, and especially vocabulary; it shows instead its closest affinity with languages native to France and northern Italy, particularly Occitan and to a lesser extent Gallo-Romance (Franco-Provençal, French, Gallo-Italian).

According to Ethnologue, the lexical similarity between Catalan and other Romance languages is: 87% with Italian; 85% with Portuguese and Spanish; 76% with Ladin and Romansh ; 75% with Sardinian; and 73% with Romanian.

During much of its history, and especially during the Francoist dictatorship (1939–1975), the Catalan language was ridiculed as a mere dialect of Spanish. This view, based on political and ideological considerations, has no linguistic validity. Spanish and Catalan have important differences in their sound systems, lexicon, and grammatical features, placing the language in features closer to Occitan (and French).

There is evidence that, at least from the 2nd century AD, the vocabulary and phonology of Roman Tarraconensis was different from the rest of Roman Hispania. Differentiation arose generally because Spanish, Asturian, and Galician-Portuguese share certain peripheral archaisms (Spanish hervir, Asturian and Portuguese ferver vs. Catalan bullir, Occitan bolir "to boil") and innovatory regionalisms (Spanish novillo, Asturian nuviellu vs. Catalan torell, Occitan taurèl "bullock"), while Catalan has a shared history with the Western Romance innovative core, especially Occitan.

Like all Romance languages, Catalan has a handful of native words which are unique to it, or rare elsewhere. These include:

The Gothic superstrate produced different outcomes in Spanish and Catalan. For example, Catalan fang "mud" and rostir "to roast", of Germanic origin, contrast with Spanish lodo and asar, of Latin origin; whereas Catalan filosa "spinning wheel" and templa "temple", of Latin origin, contrast with Spanish rueca and sien, of Germanic origin.

The same happens with Arabic loanwords. Thus, Catalan alfàbia "large earthenware jar" and rajola "tile", of Arabic origin, contrast with Spanish tinaja and teja, of Latin origin; whereas Catalan oli "oil" and oliva "olive", of Latin origin, contrast with Spanish aceite and aceituna. However, the Arabic element is generally much more prevalent in Spanish.

Situated between two large linguistic blocks (Iberian Romance and Gallo-Romance), Catalan has many unique lexical choices, such as enyorar "to miss somebody", apaivagar "to calm somebody down", and rebutjar "reject".

Traditionally Catalan-speaking territories are sometimes called the Catalan Countries (Catalan : Països Catalans), a denomination based on cultural affinity and common heritage, that has also had a subsequent political interpretation but no official status. Various interpretations of the term may include some or all of these regions.

The number of people known to be fluent in Catalan varies depending on the sources used. A 2004 study did not count the total number of speakers, but estimated a total of 9–9.5 million by matching the percentage of speakers to the population of each area where Catalan is spoken. The web site of the Generalitat de Catalunya estimated that as of 2004 there were 9,118,882 speakers of Catalan. These figures only reflect potential speakers; today it is the native language of only 35.6% of the Catalan population. According to Ethnologue, Catalan had 4.1 million native speakers and 5.1 million second-language speakers in 2021.

According to a 2011 study the total number of Catalan speakers was over 9.8 million, with 5.9 million residing in Catalonia. More than half of them spoke Catalan as a second language, with native speakers being about 4.4 million of those (more than 2.8 in Catalonia). Very few Catalan monoglots exist; virtually all of the Catalan speakers in Spain are bilingual speakers of Catalan and Spanish, with 99.7% of Catalan speakers in Catalonia able to speak Spanish and 99.9% able to understand it.

In Roussillon, only a minority of French Catalans speak Catalan nowadays, with French being the majority language for the inhabitants after a continued process of language shift. According to a 2019 survey by the Catalan government, 31.5% of the inhabitants of Catalonia predominantly spoke Catalan at home whereas 52.7% spoke Spanish, 2.8% both Catalan and Spanish and 10.8% other languages.

Spanish was the most spoken language in Barcelona (according to the linguistic census held by the Government of Catalonia in 2013) and it is understood almost universally. According to 2013 census, Catalan was also very commonly spoken in the city of 1,501,262: it was understood by 95% of the population, while 72.3% over the age of two could speak it (1,137,816), 79% could read it (1,246.555), and 53% could write it (835,080). The share of Barcelona residents who could speak it (72.3%) was lower than that of the overall Catalan population, of whom 81.2% over the age of 15 spoke the language. Knowledge of Catalan has increased significantly in recent decades thanks to a language immersion educational system. An important social characteristic of the Catalan language is that all the areas where it is spoken are bilingual in practice: together with French in Roussillon, with Italian in Alghero, with Spanish and French in Andorra, and with Spanish in the rest of the territories.

(% of the population 15 years old and older).

To calculate the absolute number the figures have been proportioned to the whole population regardless of the age, rounded to the nearest 500.

Catalan phonology varies by dialect. Notable features include:

In contrast to other Romance languages, Catalan has many monosyllabic words, and these may end in a wide variety of consonants, including some consonant clusters. Additionally, Catalan has final obstruent devoicing, which gives rise to an abundance of such couplets as amic ("male friend") vs. amiga ("female friend").

Central Catalan pronunciation is considered to be standard for the language. The descriptions below are mostly representative of this variety. For the differences in pronunciation between the different dialects, see the section on pronunciation of dialects in this article.

Catalan has inherited the typical vowel system of Vulgar Latin, with seven stressed phonemes: /a, ɛ, e, i, ɔ, o, u/, a common feature in Western Romance, with the exception of Spanish. Balearic also has instances of stressed /ə/. Dialects differ in the different degrees of vowel reduction, and the incidence of the pair /ɛ, e/.

In Central Catalan, unstressed vowels reduce to three: /a, e, ɛ/ > [ə] ; /o, ɔ, u/ > [u] ; /i/ remains distinct. The other dialects have different vowel reduction processes (see the section pronunciation of dialects in this article).

The consonant system of Catalan is rather conservative.

Catalan shares features with neighboring Romance languages (Occitan, Italian, Sardinian, French, Spanish).

In contrast with other Romance languages, Catalan has many monosyllabic words; and those ending in a wide variety of consonants and some consonant clusters. Also, Catalan has final obstruent devoicing, thus featuring many couplets like amic ('male friend') vs. amiga ('female friend').

Catalan sociolinguistics studies the situation of Catalan in the world and the different varieties that this language presents. It is a subdiscipline of Catalan philology and other affine studies and has as an objective to analyze the relation between the Catalan language, the speakers and the close reality (including the one of other languages in contact).

The dialects of the Catalan language feature a relative uniformity, especially when compared to other Romance languages; both in terms of vocabulary, semantics, syntax, morphology, and phonology. Mutual intelligibility between dialects is very high, estimates ranging from 90% to 95%. The only exception is the isolated idiosyncratic Algherese dialect.

Catalan is split in two major dialectal blocks: Eastern and Western. The main difference lies in the treatment of unstressed a and e ; which have merged to /ə/ in Eastern dialects, but which remain distinct as /a/ and /e/ in Western dialects. There are a few other differences in pronunciation, verbal morphology, and vocabulary.

Western Catalan comprises the two dialects of North-Western Catalan and Valencian ; the Eastern block comprises four dialects: Central Catalan, Balearic, Roussillonese, and Algherese. Each dialect can be further subdivided in several subdialects. The terms "Catalan" and " Valencian " (respectively used in Catalonia and the Valencian Community) refer to two varieties of the same language. There are two institutions regulating the two standard varieties, the Institute of Catalan Studies in Catalonia and the Valencian Academy of the Language in the Valencian Community.

Central Catalan is considered the standard pronunciation of the language and has the largest number of speakers. It is spoken in the densely populated regions of the Barcelona province, the eastern half of the province of Tarragona, and most of the province of Girona.

Catalan has an inflectional grammar. Nouns have two genders (masculine, feminine), and two numbers (singular, plural). Pronouns additionally can have a neuter gender, and some are also inflected for case and politeness, and can be combined in very complex ways. Verbs are split in several paradigms and are inflected for person, number, tense, aspect, mood, and gender. In terms of pronunciation, Catalan has many words ending in a wide variety of consonants and some consonant clusters, in contrast with many other Romance languages.

Catalan has inherited the typical vowel system of Vulgar Latin, with seven stressed phonemes: /a, ɛ, e, i, ɔ, o, u/, a common feature in Western Romance, except Spanish. Balearic has also instances of stressed /ə/. Dialects differ in the different degrees of vowel reduction, and the incidence of the pair /ɛ e/.

In Eastern Catalan (except Majorcan), unstressed vowels reduce to three: /a, e, ɛ/ > [ə] ; /o, ɔ, u/ > [u] ; /i/ remains distinct. There are a few instances of unreduced [e], [o] in some words. Algherese has lowered [ə] to [a].

In Majorcan, unstressed vowels reduce to four: /a, e, ɛ/ follow the Eastern Catalan reduction pattern; however /o, ɔ/ reduce to [o], with /u/ remaining distinct, as in Western Catalan.

In Western Catalan, unstressed vowels reduce to five: /e, ɛ/ > [e] ; /o, ɔ/ > [o] ; /a, u, i/ remain distinct. This reduction pattern, inherited from Proto-Romance, is also found in Italian and Portuguese. Some Western dialects present further reduction or vowel harmony in some cases.

Central, Western, and Balearic differ in the lexical incidence of stressed /e/ and /ɛ/. Usually, words with /ɛ/ in Central Catalan correspond to /ə/ in Balearic and /e/ in Western Catalan. Words with /e/ in Balearic almost always have /e/ in Central and Western Catalan as well. As a result, Central Catalan has a much higher incidence of /ɛ/.

Catalan dialects are characterized by final-obstruent devoicing, lenition and voicing assimilation. Additionally, many dialects contrast two rhotics (/r, ɾ/) and two laterals (/l, ʎ/).

Most Catalan dialects are also renowned by the usage of dark l (i.e. velarization of /l/ → [ ɫ ]), which is especially noticeable in syllable final position, in comparison to neighbouring languages, such as Spanish, Italian and French (that lack this pronunciation).

There is dialectal variation in regard to:

Western Catalan: In verbs, the ending for 1st-person present indicative is -e in verbs of the 1st conjugation and -∅ in verbs of the 2nd and 3rd conjugations in most of the Valencian Community, or -o in all verb conjugations in the Northern Valencian Community and Western Catalonia. E.g. parle, tem, sent (Valencian); parlo, temo, sento (North-Western Catalan).

Eastern Catalan: In verbs, the ending for 1st-person present indicative is -o, -i, or -∅ in all conjugations. E.g. parlo (Central), parl (Balearic), and parli (Northern), all meaning ('I speak').

Western Catalan: In verbs, the inchoative endings are -isc / -esc, -ix, -ixen, -isca / -esca.

Eastern Catalan: In verbs, the inchoative endings are -eixo, -eix, -eixen, -eixi.

Western Catalan: In nouns and adjectives, maintenance of /n/ of medieval plurals in proparoxytone words. E.g. hòmens 'men', jóvens 'youth'.

Eastern Catalan: In nouns and adjectives, loss of /n/ of medieval plurals in proparoxytone words. E.g. homes 'men', joves 'youth' (Ibicencan, however, follows the model of Western Catalan in this case).

Despite its relative lexical unity, the two dialectal blocks of Catalan (Eastern and Western) show some differences in word choices. Any lexical divergence within any of the two groups can be explained as an archaism. Also, usually Central Catalan acts as an innovative element.

Standard Catalan, virtually accepted by all speakers, is mostly based on Eastern Catalan, which is the most widely used dialect. Nevertheless, the standards of the Valencian Community and the Balearics admit alternative forms, mostly traditional ones, which are not current in eastern Catalonia.

The most notable difference between both standards is some tonic ⟨ e ⟩ accentuation, for instance: francès, anglès (IEC) – francés, anglés (AVL). Nevertheless, AVL's standard keeps the grave accent ⟨ è ⟩, while pronouncing it as /e/ rather than /ɛ/, in some words such as: què ('what'), or València. Other divergences include the use of ⟨ tl ⟩ (AVL) in some words instead of ⟨ tll ⟩ like in ametla / ametlla ('almond'), espatla / espatlla ('back'), the use of elided demonstratives (este 'this', eixe 'that') in the same level as reinforced ones (aquest, aqueix) or the use of many verbal forms common in Valencian, and some of these common in the rest of Western Catalan too, such as subjunctive mood or inchoative conjugation in -ix- at the same level as -eix- or the priority use of -e morpheme in 1st person singular in present indicative (-ar verbs): jo compre instead of jo compro ('I buy').

In the Balearic Islands, IEC's standard is used but adapted for the Balearic dialect by the University of the Balearic Islands 's philological section. In this way, for instance, IEC says it is correct writing cantam as much as cantem ('we sing'), but the university says that the priority form in the Balearic Islands must be cantam in all fields. Another feature of the Balearic standard is the non-ending in the 1st person singular present indicative: jo compr ('I buy'), jo tem ('I fear'), jo dorm ('I sleep').

In Alghero, the IEC has adapted its standard to the Algherese dialect. In this standard one can find, among other features: the definite article lo instead of el, special possessive pronouns and determinants la mia ('mine'), lo sou/la sua ('his/her'), lo tou/la tua ('yours'), and so on, the use of -v- /v/ in the imperfect tense in all conjugations: cantava, creixiva, llegiva ; the use of many archaic words, usual words in Algherese: manco instead of menys ('less'), calqui u instead of algú ('someone'), qual/quala instead of quin/quina ('which'), and so on; and the adaptation of weak pronouns. In 1999, Catalan (Algherese dialect) was among the twelve minority languages officially recognized as Italy's " historical linguistic minorities " by the Italian State under Law No. 482/1999.

In 2011, the Aragonese government passed a decree approving the statutes of a new language regulator of Catalan in La Franja (the so-called Catalan-speaking areas of Aragon) as originally provided for by Law 10/2009. The new entity, designated as Institut Aragonès del Català, shall allow a facultative education in Catalan and a standardization of the Catalan language in La Franja.

Valencian is classified as a Western dialect, along with the North-Western varieties spoken in Western Catalonia (provinces of Lleida and the western half of Tarragona). Central Catalan has 90% to 95% inherent intelligibility for speakers of Valencian.

Linguists, including Valencian scholars, deal with Catalan and Valencian as the same language. The official regulating body of the language of the Valencian Community, the Valencian Academy of Language (Acadèmia Valenciana de la Llengua, AVL) declares the linguistic unity between Valencian and Catalan varieties.

[T]he historical patrimonial language of the Valencian people, from a philological standpoint, is the same shared by the autonomous communities of Catalonia and Balearic islands, and Principality of Andorra. Additionally, it is the patrimonial historical language of other territories of the ancient Crown of Aragon [...] The different varieties of these territories constitute a language, that is, a "linguistic system" [...] From this group of varieties, Valencian has the same hierarchy and dignity as any other dialectal modality of that linguistic system [...]

The AVL, created by the Valencian parliament, is in charge of dictating the official rules governing the use of Valencian, and its standard is based on the Norms of Castelló (Normes de Castelló). Currently, everyone who writes in Valencian uses this standard, except the Royal Academy of Valencian Culture (Real Acadèmia de Cultura Valenciana, RACV), which uses an independent standard for Valencian known as the Norms of El Puig.

Despite the position of the official organizations, an opinion poll carried out between 2001 and 2004 showed that the majority of the Valencian people consider Valencian different from Catalan. This position is promoted by people who do not use Valencian regularly. Furthermore, the data indicates that younger generations educated in Valencian are much less likely to hold these views. A minority of Valencian scholars active in fields other than linguistics defends the position of the Royal Academy of Valencian Culture (Real Acadèmia de Cultura Valenciana, RACV), which uses for Valencian a standard independent from Catalan.

This clash of opinions has sparked much controversy. For example, during the drafting of the European Constitution in 2004, the Spanish government supplied the EU with translations of the text into Basque, Galician, Catalan, and Valencian, but the latter two were identical.

Despite its relative lexical unity, the two dialectal blocks of Catalan (Eastern and Western) show some differences in word choices. Any lexical divergence within any of the two groups can be explained as an archaism. Also, usually Central Catalan acts as an innovative element.

Literary Catalan allows the use of words from different dialects, except those of very restricted use. However, from the 19th century onwards, there has been a tendency towards favoring words of Northern dialects to the detriment of others.

Like other languages, Catalan has a large list of loanwords from Greek and Latin. This process started very early, and one can find such examples in Ramon Llull 's work. In the 14th and 15th centuries Catalan had a far greater number of Greco-Latin loanwords than other Romance languages, as is attested for example in Roís de Corella 's writings. The incorporation of learned, or "bookish" words from its own ancestor language, Latin, into Catalan is arguably another form of lexical borrowing through the influence of written language and the liturgical language of the Church. Throughout the Middle Ages and into the early modern period, most literate Catalan speakers were also literate in Latin; and thus they easily adopted Latin words into their writing—and eventually speech—in Catalan.

The process of morphological derivation in Catalan follows the same principles as the other Romance languages, where inflection is common. Many times, several affixes are appended to a preexisting lexeme, and some sound alternations can occur, for example elèctri c [əˈlɛktri k ] ("electrical") vs. electri c itat [ələktri s iˈtat]. Prefixes are usually appended to verbs, as in pre veure ("foresee").

There is greater regularity in the process of word-compounding, where one can find compounded words formed much like those in English.

Catalan uses the Latin script, with some added symbols and digraphs. The Catalan orthography is systematic and largely phonologically based. Standardization of Catalan was among the topics discussed during the First International Congress of the Catalan Language, held in Barcelona October 1906. Subsequently, the Philological Section of the Institut d'Estudis Catalans (IEC, founded in 1911) published the Normes ortogràfiques in 1913 under the direction of Antoni Maria Alcover and Pompeu Fabra. In 1932, Valencian writers and intellectuals gathered in Castelló de la Plana to make a formal adoption of the so-called Normes de Castelló, a set of guidelines following Pompeu Fabra's Catalan language norms.

The grammar of Catalan is similar to other Romance languages. Features include:

In gender inflection, the most notable feature is (compared to Portuguese, Spanish or Italian), the loss of the typical masculine suffix -o. Thus, the alternance of -o / -a, has been replaced by ø / -a. There are only a few exceptions, such as minso / minsa ("scarce"). Many not completely predictable morphological alternations may occur, such as:

Catalan has few suppletive couplets, like Italian and Spanish, and unlike French. Thus, Catalan has noi / noia ("boy"/"girl") and gall / gallina ("cock"/"hen"), whereas French has garçon / fille and coq / poule.

There is a tendency to abandon traditionally gender-invariable adjectives in favor of marked ones, something prevalent in Occitan and French. Thus, one can find bullent / bullenta ("boiling") in contrast with traditional bullent / bullent.

As in the other Western Romance languages, the main plural expression is the suffix -s, which may create morphological alternations similar to the ones found in gender inflection, albeit more rarely. The most important one is the addition of -o- before certain consonant groups, a phonetic phenomenon that does not affect feminine forms: el pols / els polsos ("the pulse"/"the pulses") vs. la pols / les pols ("the dust"/"the dusts").

The inflection of determinatives is complex, specially because of the high number of elisions, but is similar to the neighboring languages. Catalan has more contractions of preposition + article than Spanish, such as dels ("of + the [plural]"), but not as many as Italian (which has sul, col, nel, etc.).

Central Catalan has abandoned almost completely unstressed possessives (mon, etc.) in favor of constructions of article + stressed forms (el meu, etc.), a feature shared with Italian.

The morphology of Catalan personal pronouns is complex, especially in unstressed forms, which are numerous (13 distinct forms, compared to 11 in Spanish or 9 in Italian). Features include the gender-neutral ho and the great degree of freedom when combining different unstressed pronouns (65 combinations).

Catalan pronouns exhibit T–V distinction, like all other Romance languages (and most European languages, but not Modern English). This feature implies the use of a different set of second person pronouns for formality.

This flexibility allows Catalan to use extraposition extensively, much more than French or Spanish. Thus, Catalan can have m'hi recomanaren ("they recommended me to him"), whereas in French one must say ils m'ont recommandé à lui, and Spanish me recomendaron a él. This allows the placement of almost any nominal term as a sentence topic, without having to use so often the passive voice (as in French or English), or identifying the direct object with a preposition (as in Spanish).

Like all the Romance languages, Catalan verbal inflection is more complex than the nominal. Suffixation is omnipresent, whereas morphological alternations play a secondary role. Vowel alternances are active, as well as infixation and suppletion. However, these are not as productive as in Spanish, and are mostly restricted to irregular verbs.

The Catalan verbal system is basically common to all Western Romance, except that most dialects have replaced the synthetic indicative perfect with a periphrastic form of anar ("to go") + infinitive.

Catalan verbs are traditionally divided into three conjugations, with vowel themes -a-, -e-, -i-, the last two being split into two subtypes. However, this division is mostly theoretical. Only the first conjugation is nowadays productive (with about 3500 common verbs), whereas the third (the subtype of servir, with about 700 common verbs) is semiproductive. The verbs of the second conjugation are fewer than 100, and it is not possible to create new ones, except by compounding.

The grammar of Catalan follows the general pattern of Western Romance languages. The primary word order is subject–verb–object. However, word order is very flexible. Commonly, verb-subject constructions are used to achieve a semantic effect. The sentence "The train has arrived" could be translated as Ha arribat el tren or El tren ha arribat. Both sentences mean "the train has arrived", but the former puts a focus on the train, while the latter puts a focus on the arrival. This subtle distinction is described as "what you might say while waiting in the station" versus "what you might say on the train".

In Spain, every person officially has two surnames, one of which is the father's first surname and the other is the mother's first surname. The law contemplates the possibility of joining both surnames with the Catalan conjunction i ("and").

Selected text from Manuel de Pedrolo 's 1970 novel Un amor fora ciutat ("A love affair outside the city"), with phonetic transcription for Barcelona accent.

Tenia {prop de} divuit anys quan vaig conèixer en Raül, a l'estació de Manresa. El meu pare havia mort, inesperadament i encara jove, un parell d'anys abans, i d'aquells temps conservo un record de punyent solitud. Les meves relacions amb la mare no havien pas millorat, tot el contrari, potser {fins i tot} empitjoraven {a mesura que} em feia gran. No existia, no existí mai entre nosaltres, una comunitat d'interessos, d'afeccions. Cal creure que cercava... una persona en qui centrar la meva vida afectiva.

[təˈni.ə {ˈprɔb də} ðiˈβujt ˈaɲʃ ˈkwam ˈbat͡ʃ kuˈnɛʃə (ə)n rəˈul| ə ləstəˈsjo ðə mənˈrɛzə|| əl ˈmew ˈpaɾə (ə)ˈβiə ˈmɔrt| inəspəˌɾaðəˈmen i əŋˈkaɾə ˈʒoβə| um pəˈɾɛʎ ˈdaɲʒ əˈβans| i ðəˈkɛʎs ˈtems kunˈserβu (u)n rəˈkɔrd də puˈɲen suliˈtut|| ləz ˈmeβəz rələˈsjonz əm lə ˈmaɾə no əˈβiəm ˈpaz miʎuˈɾat| ˈtot əl kunˈtɾaɾi| putˈse {ˈfinz i ˈtot} əmpid͡ʒuˈɾaβən {ə məˈzuɾə kə} (ə)m ˈfɛjə ˈɣɾan|| ˈno əɡzisˈtiə| ˈno əɡzisˈti ˈmaj ˈentɾə nuˈzaltɾəs| ˈunə kumuniˈtad dintəˈɾɛsus| dəfəkˈsjons|| ˈkal ˈkɾɛwɾə kə sərˈkaβə| ˈunə pərˈsonə (ə)ŋ ˈki sənˈtɾa lə ˈmeβə ˈβiðə əfəkˈtiβə||]

{I was having} {close to} eighteen years, when {I go [past auxiliary]} {know (=I met)} the Raül, at {the station} {of (=in)} Manresa. The my father had died, unexpectedly and still young, a couple {of years} before, and {of those} times {I keep} a memory of acute loneliness The my relations with the mother not had {at all} improved, all the contrary, perhaps even {they were worsening} {at step that (=in proportion as)} myself {I was making} {big (=I was growing up).} Not {it was existing}, not {it existed} never between us, a community {of interests}, {of affections}. {It is necessary} {to believe} that {I was seeking...} a person in whom {to center} the my life affective.

'I was about eighteen years old when I met Raül, at Manresa railway station. My father had died, unexpectedly and still young, a couple of years before; and from that time I still harbor memories of great loneliness. My relationship with my mother had not improved; quite the contrary, and arguably it was getting even worse as I grew up. There did not exist, at no point had there ever existed between us shared interests or affection. I guess I was seeking... a person in whom I could center my emotional life.'

Catalans (Catalan, French and Occitan : catalans ; Spanish : catalanes ; Italian : catalani ; Sardinian : cadelanos or catalanos) are a Romance-speaking ethnic group native to Catalonia, who speak Catalan. The current official category of "Catalans" is that of the citizens of Catalonia, a nationality and autonomous community in Spain and the inhabitants of the Roussillon historical region in Southern France, today the Pyrénées Orientales department, also called Northern Catalonia and Pays Catalan in French.

Some authors also extend the word "Catalans" to include all people from all the areas where Catalan is spoken, namely those from Andorra, Valencia, the Balearic Islands, eastern Aragon, and the city of Alghero in Sardinia.

The Catalan government regularly surveys its population regarding its "sentiment of belonging". As of July 2024, results point out that 41.1% of Catalans and other people living in Catalonia identify as only Catalans or more Catalan than Spanish, 44.1% feel both Catalan and Spanish, and 11.6% see themselves as only Spanish or more Spanish than Catalan.

In 1500 BCE the area that is now known primarily as Catalonia was, along with the rest of the Iberian Peninsula, inhabited by Proto-Celtic Urnfield people who brought with them the rite of burning the dead. Much of the Pyrenees mountains was inhabited at the time by peoples related to modern Basques, and today many town names in the western Catalan Pyrenees can be linked to Basque etymologies. These groups came under the rule of various invading groups starting with the Greeks that founded Empúries and the Phoenicians and Carthaginians, who set up colonies along the coast, including Barcino (present-day Barcelona). Following the Punic Wars, the Romans replaced the Carthaginians as the dominant power in the Iberian eastern coast, including parts of Catalonia, by 206 BCE. Rome established Latin as the official language and imparted a distinctly Roman culture upon the local population, which merged with Roman colonists from the Italian Peninsula. An early precursor to the Catalan language began to develop from a local form of popular Latin before and during the collapse of the Roman Empire. Various Germanic tribes arrived following nearly six centuries of Roman rule, which had completely transformed the area into the Roman province of Tarraconensis. The German Visigoths established themselves in the fifth century, making their first capital in the Iberian peninsula Barcelona, and they later would move to Toledo.

This continued until 718 when Muslim Arabs took control of the region in order to pass through the Pyrenees into French territory. The Franks on the other side of the Pyrenees held back the main Muslim raiding army which had penetrated virtually unchallenged as far as central France at the Battle of Tours in 732. Frankish suzerainty was then extended over much of present-day northern half of Catalonia. With the help of the Franks, a land border was created commonly known nowadays as Old Catalonia (which would consist of the counties County of Barcelona, Ausona, County of Pallars, County of Rosselló, County of Empúries, County of Cerdanya and County of Urgell) which faced Muslim raids but resisted any kind of settlement from them. The southern New Catalonia was under Arab/Muslim rule for about 4-5 centuries. As the border between Muslim and Frankish realms stabilized, Barcelona would become an important center for Christian forces in the Iberian Peninsula. In the 10th century, the County of Barcelona and the other neighboring counties became independent from West Francia.

In 1137, the County of Barcelona entered a dynastic union with the Kingdom of Aragon to form what modern historians call the Crown of Aragon in the so-called " Reconquista ". This allowed the conquest of Muslim-dominated lands, eventually establishing the kingdoms of Valencia and Majorca (the Balearic Islands). From the late 12th century onwards, the territory of the County of Barcelona and the other Catalan counties progressively began to be identified as a single political entity and, from the mid-14th century, that state began to be known as the Principality of Catalonia. The crisis of the late Middle Ages, the loss of hegemony within the Crown, as well as urban and feudal internal conflicts led to the Catalan Civil War in 1462. In the last quarter of the 15th century, the marriage of Isabella I of Castile and Ferdinand II of Aragon led to the dynastic union of the Crown of Aragon with the Crown of Castille, in which each of the constitutive realm kept its own laws, policies, power structures, borders and monetary systems.

Continuous unrest led to conflicts on the states of the Crown of Aragon, such as the Revolt of the Germanies in Valencia and Majorca, and the 1640 revolt in Catalonia known as the Reapers' War. This latter conflict embroiled Spain in a larger war with France as the Catalan institutions allied themselves with Louis XIII. The war continued until 1659 and ended with the Treaty of the Pyrenees, which effectively partitioned the Principality of Catalonia as its northern strip came under French rule, while the rest remained under Spanish Crown. The Catalan government took sides with the Habsburg pretender against the Bourbon one during the War of the Spanish Succession that started in 1705 and ended in 1714. The Catalan failure to defend the continuation of Habsburg rule in Spain despite unilaterally prolonging the war against the Bourbons culminated in the capitulation of Barcelona on 11 September 1714 which came to be commemorated as Catalonia's National Day. The surrender led to the imposition of absolutism and the abolition of Catalan political institutions and legal system, thus ending the status of Catalonia as a separate state within a personal union.

During the Napoleonic Wars, much of Catalonia was seized by French forces by 1808, as France ruled the entire country of Spain briefly until Napoleon 's surrender to Allied Armies. In France, strong assimilationist policies integrated many Catalans into French society, while in Spain a Catalan identity was increasingly suppressed in favor of a Spanish national identity. The Catalans regained autonomy during the Spanish Second Republic from 1932 until Francisco Franco 's nationalist forces occupied Catalonia by 1939. It was not until 1975 and the death of Franco that the Catalans as well as other Spaniards began to regain their right to cultural expression, which was restarted by the Spanish Constitution of 1978. Since this period, a balance between a sense of Catalan national identity versus the broader Spanish one has emerged as the dominant political force in Catalonia. The former tends to advocate for even greater autonomy, national recognition and, part of it, independence; the latter tends to argue for maintaining either a status quo or removal of autonomy and cultural identity, depending on the leanings of the current government. As a result, there tends to be much fluctuation depending on regional and national politics during a given election cycle. Given the stronger centralist tendencies in France, however, French Catalans display a much less dynamic sense of uniqueness, having been integrated more consistently into the unitary French national identity.

The vast majority of Catalans reside in the autonomous community of Catalonia, in the northeast part of Spain. At least 100,000 Catalan speakers live in the Pays Catalan in France. An indeterminate number of Catalans emigrated to the Americas during the Spanish colonial period and to France in the years following the Spanish Civil War.

Described by author Walter Starkie in The Road to Santiago as a subtle people, he sums up their national character with a local term seny meaning "common sense" or a pragmatic attitude toward life. The counterpart of Catalan "seny" is "rauxa" or madness, epitomized by "crazy", eccentric and creative Catalan artists like Antoni Gaudí, Salvador Dalí, Joan Miró or Antoni Tàpies. The masia or mas is a defining characteristic of the Catalan countryside and includes a large house, land, cattle, and an extended family, but this tradition is in decline as the nuclear family has largely replaced the extended family, as in the rest of western Europe. Catalonia in Spain is officially recognised as a " nationality " and enjoy a high degree of political autonomy, which has led to reinforcement of a Catalan identity.

The Catalan language is a Romance language. It is the language closest to Occitan, and it also shares many features with other Romance languages such as Spanish, French, Portuguese, Aragonese, and Italian. There are a number of linguistic varieties that are considered dialects of Catalan, among them, the dialect group with the most speakers, Central Catalan.

The total number of Catalan speakers is over 9.8 million (2011), with 5.9 million residing in Catalonia. More than half of them speak Catalan as a second language, with native speakers being about 4.4 million of those (more than 2.8 in Catalonia). Very few Catalan monoglots exist; basically, virtually all of the Catalan speakers in Spain are bilingual speakers of Catalan and Spanish, with a sizable population of Spanish-only speakers of immigrant origin (typically born outside Catalonia or with both parents born outside Catalonia) existing in the major Catalan urban areas as well. In Roussillon, only a minority of French Catalans speak Catalan nowadays, with French being the majority language for the inhabitants after a continued process of language shift. According to a 2019 survey by the Catalan government, 31.5% of the inhabitants of Catalonia have Catalan as first language at home whereas 52.7% have Spanish, 2.8% both Catalan and Spanish and 10.8% other languages.

The inhabitants of the Aran valley count Aranese –an Occitan dialect–rather than Catalan as their own language. These Catalans are also bilingual in Spanish.

In September 2005, the.cat TLD, the first Internet language-based top-level domain, was approved for all web pages intending to serve the needs of the Catalan linguistic and cultural community on the Internet. This community is made up of those who use the Catalan language for their online communication or promote the different aspects of Catalan culture online.

The traditional dress (now practically only used in folkloric celebrations) included the barretina (a sort of woollen, long cap usually red or purple) and the faixa (a sort of wide belt) among men, and ret (a fine net bag to contain hair) among women. The traditional footwear was the espardenya or espadrille.

Other items of clothing typical of Catalan female folk costume include the 'pubilla' dress; the 'catalana' also known as the 'pagesa' and the 'gandalla' as headwear.

The Catalan diet is part of the Mediterranean diet and includes the use of olive oil. Catalan people like to eat veal (vedella) and lamb (xai).

In Catalan gastronomy, embotits (a wide variety of Catalan sausages and cold meats) are very important; these are pork sausages such as botifarra or fuet. In the past, bread figured heavily in the Catalan diet; now it is used mainly in the morning (second breakfast, especially among young students and some workers) and supplements the noon meal, at home and in restaurants. Bread is still popular among Catalans; some Catalan fast-food restaurants don't serve hamburgers, but offer a wide variety of sandwiches.

In the past, the poor ate soup every day and rice on Thursday and Sunday.

The discipline of abstinence, not eating meat during Lent, once was very strong, but today it is only practiced in the rural areas. Spicy food is rare in the Catalan diet but there are quite garlicky sauces such as allioli or romesco.

One type of Catalan dish is escudella, a soup which contains chick peas, potatoes, and vegetables such as green cabbage, celery, carrots, turnips, and meats such as botifarra (a Catalan sausage), pork feet, salted ham, chicken, and veal. In Northern Catalonia, it is sometimes called ollada.

Other Catalan dishes include calçots (a type of onions that are similar in shape to leeks, often grilled and eaten with a romesco sauce) and escalivada.

Catalan music has one of the oldest documented musical traditions in Europe.

The traditional religion in Catalonia is Roman Catholicism. However, in the course of recent history, Catalonia has undergone several waves of secularization.

The first wave of secularization happened during the eighteenth century as a result of the enlightenment influence to the bourgeoisie. The second one happened during the nineteenth century, that had a huge impact on the lower and middle class, but was interrupted by the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939).

The end of the Francoist regime led to a loss of power by the Catholic Church and to another wave of secularization that extends since the 1980s. During the 1990s most of the population of Catalonia was non-practising Catholic. Nowadays 52.4% of Catalans declare themselves Catholic, practising or not, 30.2% of Catalans are agnostic or atheist, and there is also a considerable share of other religions, often connected to recent immigration: 7.3% Muslim, 2.5% Evangelical, 1.3% Buddhism, and 1.2% Orthodox Christians. According to the most recent study sponsored by the government of Catalonia, as of 2016, 61.9% of the Catalans identify as Christians, up from 56.5% in 2014. At the same time, 16.0% of the population identify as atheists, 11.9% as agnostics, 4.8% as Muslims, 1.3% as Buddhists, and a further 2.4% as being of other religions.

Catalonia is one of the richest and most developed regions in Southern Europe. Barcelona is among the most industrialized metropolises. A regional capital, it is a magnet for domestic and foreign migrants.

Fire is the element used in most important traditional festivals, which are derived from pagan roots. These celebrations have a high acceptance of fire between the Catalans, like the Flame of Canigó to the Bonfires of Saint John.

An important and well-known celebration is the Diada de Sant Jordi, held on 23 April, in which men give women roses, and women give men a book.

Historical memory is the second axis of celebrations in Catalonia, where the Catalan people reunite with their date of birth as a people.

Among the religious celebrations, there are St. George's Day and the celebrations of Saint Vincent Martyr and Saint Anthony Abbot. The maximum expressions of this element are the Easter processions and performances of Passion Plays. Some festivals have a complicated relationship with religion, such as Carnival and the Dances of Death, or specific aspects of Christmas such as the Tió de Nadal or the caganer in Nativity scenes.

Other key elements of a Catalan celebration are: food, central to every party and especially to the pig slaughter and harvest festivals; contests such as the castells (human towers), choice of major and festive floats; music, songs and bands; processions; dances; and animals, especially bulls and representations of mythological creatures. The Patum of Berga has been declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO.

Because of their intertwining history, many of the traditional symbols of Catalonia coincide with Aragon, Valencia and the Balearic Islands. The oldest known Catalan symbol is the coat of arms of the King of Aragon and Count of Barcelona, or bars of Aragon, one of Europe's oldest heraldic emblems; in modern times, Catalan nationalists have made it the main symbol of Catalan identity and it is even associated with the Catalan language.

As for anthems, "The Reapers" (Els Segadors) is the official national anthem of Catalonia and is also used in the other lands of the Principality; the Balanguera represents the people from the Balearic Islands and, in the case of Valencia, the official "Anthem of the Exhibition" (Himne de l'Exposició) alongside Muixeranga as symbols of the country.

The catastrophe du Boël (disaster of Boël) was a landslide that occurred on June 6, 1884, in a quarry at a place named Le Boël in Bruz, Ille-et-Vilaine, in the west of France. The landslide killed eight people including two children. Groundwater that weakened the cliff and damage caused by explosives used to remove red shale (found as a construction material in the local churches) from the quarry were the principal causes of the accident. The search to recover the bodies took five days.

At the time, the event left its mark, probably because of the death of the children and because it impacted different social classes. Editors of several newspapers from Rennes collaborated and sold a magazine at 50 cents apiece to benefit the victims. Donation campaigns were also carried out by the local press.

Le Boël is a place situated along the Vilaine River, to the southwest of Rennes, between the municipalities of Guichen and Bruz.

At the end of the 19th century, the quarries in the area worked to extract red shale which can be found in the masonry of local churches, including the churches of Rheu, Saint-Erblon, L'Hermitage, Cesson-Sévigné and La Chapelle-des-Fougeretz. More precisely, it is a siltstone, a micaceous purple Le Boël type which are "massive rocks, sometimes with an eyed structure associated with bioturbation, roughly cut by a fractured schistosity", the red facies being due to the alteration of the chlorite to hematite. To extract this rock, the quarry workers used explosives on the side of a cliff, often risking their lives.

The river Vilaine served as a route to transport the extracted rock by boat and the river traffic was dense. In 1881, more than 61,500 metric tons of freight transported via 2,849 ships passed through the lock at Boël. During this period, due to the numerous town planning works carried out in Rennes, then headed by the mayor Edgard Le Bastard, the General Council of Ille-et-Vilaine saw an 80% increase in river traffic.

At the time, about twenty quarry workers worked in the quarry of Boël, near the mill of Boël. The quarry was the property of a Mr. Ferrand, the miller of Boël, who bought it two or three months before the incident. The workers were under the orders of Monsieur de la Bourdonnaye, châtelain and mayor of Laillé. They earned about two francs per cubic meter of material. According to the tradition of the country, to work faster and earn more money, the quarrymen had the habit of attacking the rock from below rather than mining it from the top layer.

Friday June 6, 1884, was a day whose stormy heat was accompanied by heavy rain. At the end of the morning, near 11 AM, seven quarry workers who were working in the quarry decided to rest a little and, soon after, they were joined by the miller's stepson who brought cider. In search of relief on this hot morning, the eight people decided to settle in the shade of a huge rock that formed a dome. Shortly after, "a crack followed by a tear was heard, then a roll similar to the sound of thunder." Behind the mill located below, near the lock, large blocks of rock broke away from the cliff, crushing the quarry workers who were resting and drinking. The few people who were nearby, as well as quarry workers in the area who were quick to join them, quickly started looking for possible survivors.

According to the June 8, 1884 edition of Le Petit Rennais hebdomadaire, the timing of the incident was different. In fact, during this season, the workers generally worked from 5 AM and took a break around 8 AM to rest and eat. It was then that the landslide would have taken place and, after the alarm was immediately given, the rescue work would have started around 9 AM.

The first bodies to be freed were that of Renaud shortly after the landslide and that of the Chérel Jr. around 7 PM. The search stopped after dark and resumed the next day at dawn. The bodies of Marchand and Josset were found that day before that of Chérel Sr., whose body was removed around 8 PM. On the following days, the excavation work continued and the bodies of Robert, Morin and Grégoire were cleared of the rubble on Sunday evening, Monday and Tuesday morning, respectively.

During the disaster, different social classes were affected. Among the victims were children and adults, but also workers and a family member of the quarry owner.

Groundwater was a danger for the quarry workers because it weakened the cliff. It would thus be one of the causes of the disaster, in addition to the damage caused by the explosives used to extract the shale. Also, around 7:45 AM on the day of the incident, the quarry team leader had a borehole loaded, but although the wick was lit, there was no explosion. It is unclear, however, if the quarry workers loaded a new charge recklessly into the same hole or if a second borehole was put into action.

The funeral for the five deceased that were discovered on Friday and Saturday took place in the church of the village of Pont-Réan on Sunday, June 8. For the last three victims whose bodies were found between Sunday evening and Tuesday morning, their lives were celebrated in the same place on Tuesday. The death certificates were drawn up at the town hall of Bruz, as the Boël quarry is located in Bruz.

On June 29, it was announced in the press that the Minister of the Interior, Pierre Waldeck-Rousseau, sent 500 francs so that the sum could be distributed among the families of the victims. Various initiatives to help the families of the deceased were made. For example, donation campaigns were carried out by the local press to help them. In Rennes, children forfeit the amount they obtained from distribution at their primary municipal school so that a sum of 20 francs could be paid in their name.

In addition, the editors of various Rennes newspapers collaborated to produce a collection of poems with an account of the disaster and engravings, in a single issue, "for the benefit of the victims of the Boël disaster." Collaboration occurred between the republican, monarchist and theatrical press. In support of this initiative, the printers provided the material free of charge. This illustrated newspaper was put on sale at the price of 50 cents on Sunday July 6, 1884.

In June 1891, another landslide killed six workers, who died from being crushed under a 30 metric ton block of rock. However, this incident did not elicit the same response as the incident of 1884, probably due to the fact that children and other social classes were not affected.

Catherine O'Brien (born in 1962) is a British academic, film scholar, linguist and writer. Her main fields are French cinema ; the First World War in French and German cultures in relation to art and comparative literature and the intersections between cinema, theology and religion.

O'Brien obtained a Bachelor of Arts (1985) as well as a Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.;1994) both in French and German from the University of Hull in Kingston upon Hull, a city in the East Riding of Yorkshire, England.

From 1989 to 2017, O'Brien was a senior lecturer at Kingston University, a public research university located within the Royal Borough of Kingston upon Thames, in South West London, United Kingdom. O'Brien was mainly based at the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences (FASS) at the Penrhyn Road Campus. She taught a wide range of courses on both the French and the Film Studies degrees and was a Module Leader for French Cinema, New Wave Cinema, European Cinema, Female Archetypes on Screen and final-year French Language. O'Brien was the Course Director for the Master of Art in Film Studies from 2003 to 2007. As Director of Studies, she has supervised Doctorate theses. She went on to become the co-director of the Center for Marian Studies at the University of Roehampton in England. O'Brien has been a visiting professor at several universities in the West such as the University of Westminster or the University of Notre Dame located in South Bend in Indiana.

Catherine Vautrin (French pronunciation: [ katʁin votʁɛ̃ ] ; born 26 July 1960) is a French politician who has been serving as Minister of the Armed Forces since 2025. She previously served as the Minister of Labour, Health, Solidarity, and Families in the successive governments of Prime Ministers François Bayrou and Sébastien Lecornu from 2024 to 2025.

Vautrin briefly served as Minister of Partnership with Territories and Decentralization in the Barnier government from September to December 2024 and as Minister of Labour, Health, and Solidarity in the Attal government from January to September 2024. Vautrin represented the 2nd constituency of Marne in the National Assembly from 2002 to 2004 and 2007 to 2017.

Vautrin was born in Reims. Her husband, Jean-Loup Pennaforte, whom she married in 2001, is chief of internal medicine at the University Hospital of Reims. They have a daughter, Hortense, born in 2002.

Vautrin holds a Master of Business Law. In 1986, she began her professional career as a product manager at the American insurance company CIGNA, after which she became director of marketing and communications in France and across Europe.

In 1983, at the request of Jean Falala, Vautrin became a municipal councilor in the city of Reims. At the time, she was the youngest of the team. In 1999, she left her job in the private sector to join the Regional Council of Champagne-Ardenne, where she served as Deputy Director General in charge of directions and operational services.

In the 2002 elections, Vautrin became a member of the National Assembly, representing the second district of the Marne and succeeding Jean-Claude Etienne. In parliament, she was a member of the Committee on Economic Affairs, as such, she was:

During the presidency of Jacques Chirac, on 31 March 2004, Vautrin was appointed Secretary of State for Integration and Equal Opportunities under minister Jean-Louis Borloo in the government of Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin. On October 28, 2004, she became Secretary of State for Seniors.

From June 2, 2005, Vautrin served as Minister Delegate for Social Cohesion and Parity in the government of Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin. In this capacity, she led efforts in 2005 to introduce French-language tests for immigrants applying for a 10-year residence permit. After a feud between the government and aid group Médecins du Monde that had been distributing tents to homeless people across Paris in August 2005, she pledged 7 million euros to help 1,000 homeless people get off the city's streets by offering them long-term housing specially adapted to their needs.

In April 2006, Vautrian was elected president of the Federation of the UMP. She was also appointed President of Communication and Initiative Marne, club Jean-Pierre Raffarin, of which she was a member of the National Office.

In the 2007 elections, Vautrin was re-elected with 56.93% of the vote. In the National Assembly, she was elected vice-president of the Commission of Economic Affairs. She was a board member of the UMP in the National Assembly, under the leadership of the group's chair Jean-François Copé.

On July 6, 2007, Vautrin officially announced her candidacy for mayor of Reims, in the context of French municipal elections of 2008. After the first round, March 9, 2008, Vautrin obtained 25.19% of the vote. She campaigned in the second round against the candidate of the Left Union Adeline Hazan, obtaining 43.93% of the vote despite the UMP nomination (given in the first round Renaud Dutreil), and was elected councilor of the opposition.

On June 25, 2008, Vautrin was designated by the members of the UMP group to become, as of October 2008, vice-president of the National Assembly, replacing Marc-Philippe Daubresse, whose peers did not re-elect him.

On January 28, 2010, Vautrin was named president of the French Commission for the Examination of Unfair Commercial Practices, replacing Jean-Paul Charié, who had died.

Vautrin advanced to the 1st Vice-President of the Assembly when Marc Laffineur was appointed to government in June 2011. In 2012, after switching to the left of the National Assembly, Laurence Dumont succeeded her as First Vice-President, and she was appointed the fifth vice-president.

At the UMP's 2012 congress, Vautrin supported the motion Gaullism, a way forward for France, led by Michèle Alliot-Marie, Roger Karoutchi, Henri Guaino, and Patrick Ollier. In December 2012, following the resignation of Dominique Dord, she was appointed national treasurer of the UMP under the leadership of the party's chair Jean-François Copé.

In 2015, Vautrin and Monique Rabin co-authored a report on the financing of consular missions.

Vautrin was one of the MPs who lost their seat in the 2017 French legislative election.

From 2014 to 2024, Vautrin served as president of Grand Reims.

Ahead of the Republicans' 2016 primaries, Vautrin managed former president Nicolas Sarkozy 's campaign for the presidential nomination, alongside Éric Ciotti ; Sarkozy eventually lost against François Fillon. Amid the Fillon affair, she later called on Fillon to resign as the party's candidate.

In the run-up to the 2022 presidential elections, Vautrin endorsed incumbent President Emmanuel Macron for re-election.

Following the 2022 legislative elections, Vautrin was considered by national news media a contender to succeed Jean Castex as Prime Minister of France.

As part of an inquiry into UMP fundraising efforts that began in late 2014, Vautrin was formally placed under investigation in April 2015 on suspicion of illicit funding.

On 11 January 2024, Vautrin was named Minister of Labour, Health and Solidarity in the government of Prime Minister Gabriel Attal. Her return to national politics was widely seen as a move by Macron to broaden his government's appeal amid rising social tensions and fragmented parliamentary dynamics, and to tighten relations between the ruling centrist bloc and traditional conservatives.

On 21 September of the same year, Vautrin was appointed Minister of Partnership with Territories and Decentralization in the government of Prime Minister Michel Barnier. During her time in office, France introduced a ban on smoking in areas where young people socialize including beaches, parks and sports facilities.

On 5 October 2025, Vautrin was reappointed Minister for Labour, Health, Solidarity, Families, Autonomy and Persons with Disabilities in the short-lived first Lecornu government. Her nomination reflected a choice for continuity, as she had already held a similar portfolio in the previous administration. However, the Lecornu government resigned the following day, on 6 October 2025, before any of its members could formally take office. Upon the formation of Sébastien Lecornu's second government, she was appointed Minister of the Armed Forces.

The Catholic Church in France, Gallican Church, or French Catholic Church, is part of the worldwide Catholic Church in communion with the Pope in Rome. Established in the second century in unbroken communion with the bishop of Rome, it is sometimes called the " eldest daughter of the Church " (French : fille aînée de l'Église).

The first written records of Christians in France date from the second century, when Irenaeus detailed the deaths of 90-year-old bishop Saint Pothinus of Lugdunum (Lyon) and other martyrs of the 177 AD persecution in Lyon. In 496 Remigius baptized King Clovis I, who therefore converted from paganism to Catholicism. In 800, Pope Leo III crowned Charlemagne Emperor of the Roman Empire, forming the political and religious foundations of Christendom in Europe and establishing in earnest the French government's long historical association with the Catholic Church. In reaction, the French Revolution (1789–1799) was followed by implicit rejection of the Catholic Church. Since the beginning of the 20th century, Laïcité, absolute neutrality of the state with respect to religious doctrine, is the official policy of the French Republic.

Estimates of the proportion of Catholics in 2020 range between 47% and 88% of France's population, with the higher figure including lapsed Catholics and " Catholic atheists ". The Catholic Church in France is organised into 98 dioceses, which in 2012 were served by 7,000 sub-75 priests. Eighty to 90 priests are ordained every year, although the church would need eight times as many to compensate the number of priest deaths. Approximately 45,000 Catholic church buildings and chapels are spread out among 36,500 cities, towns, and villages in France, but a majority are no longer regularly used for Mass. Notable churches of France include Notre Dame de Paris, Chartres Cathedral, Dijon Cathedral, Reims Cathedral, Saint-Sulpice, Paris, Basilique du Sacre-Coeur, Strasbourg Cathedral, Eglise de la Madeleine, and Amiens Cathedral. Its national shrine, Lourdes, is visited by 5 million pilgrims yearly. The capital city, Paris, is a major pilgrimage site for Catholics as well.

In recent decades, France has emerged as a stronghold for the small but growing Traditionalist Catholic movement, along with the United States, England and other English-speaking countries. The Society of Saint Pius X, a canonically irregular priestly society founded by French Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre has a large presence in the country, as do other traditionalist priestly societies in full communion with Rome such as the Priestly Fraternity of St. Peter, Institute of Christ the King Sovereign Priest and others.

Some of the most famous French saints and blesseds include St. Denis, St. Thérèse of Lisieux, St. Irenaeus, St. John Vianney (the Curé of Ars), St. Joan of Arc, St. Bernadette, St. Genevieve, St. Louis IX of France, St. Elizabeth of the Trinity, St. Vincent de Paul, St. Louise de Marillac, St. Catherine Labouré, St. Louis de Montfort, St. Jean-Baptiste de La Salle, St. Francis de Sales, St. Margaret Mary Alacoque, Bl. Nicholas Barré, and St. Bernard of Clairvaux.

According to long-standing tradition, Mary, Martha, Lazarus (Marie, Marthe and Lazare in French) and some companions, who were expelled by persecutions from the Holy Land, traversed the Mediterranean in a frail boat with neither rudder nor mast and landed at Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer near Arles. Provençal tradition names Lazarus as the first bishop of Marseille, while Martha purportedly went on to tame a terrible beast in nearby Tarascon. Pilgrims visited their tombs at the abbey of Vézelay in Burgundy. In the Abbey of the Trinity at Vendôme, a phylactery was said to contain a tear shed by Jesus at the tomb of Lazarus. The cathedral of Autun, not far away, is dedicated to Lazarus as Saint Lazaire.

The first written records of Christians in France date from the 2nd century when Irenaeus detailed the deaths of ninety-year-old bishop Pothinus of Lugdunum (Lyon) and other martyrs of the 177 persecution in Lyon.

The emperor Theodosius I (r. 379-95) makes Christianity the official state religion of the Roman Empire in 380.

In 496, Remigius baptized Clovis I, who was converted from paganism to Catholicism. Clovis I, considered the founder of France, made himself the ally and protector of the papacy and his predominantly Catholic subjects.

On Christmas Day 800, Pope Leo III crowned Charlemagne Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire, forming the political and religious foundations of Christendom and establishing in earnest the French government's longstanding historical association with the Catholic Church.

The Council of Clermont, a mixed synod of ecclesiastics and laymen led by Pope Urban II in November 1095 at Clermont-Ferrand triggered the First Crusade.

The Kingdom of France and its aristocracy were prominent players in the Crusades in general. Following the Fourth Crusade, a period known as the Frankokratia existed where French Latin Catholics took over parts of the Byzantine Empire. A crusade also took place on French territory in the County of Toulouse (contemporary Languedoc) with the Albigensian Crusade in the 13th century, called by Pope Innocent III. This played out on local level with fighting between the Catholic White Brotherhood and the Cathar Black Brotherhood. The Cathars lost and were subsequently exterminated. In 1312, the French monarch Philip IV of France was involved in the suppression of the Knights Templar by Pope Clement V ; Philip was in deep financial dept to the Templars.

The Avignon Papacy was the period from 1309 to 1377 during which seven French popes, resided in Avignon.

Prior to the French Revolution, the Catholic Church had been the official state religion of France since the conversion to Christianity of Clovis I, leading to France being called "the eldest daughter of the Church". The King of France was known as "His Most Christian Majesty". Following the Protestant Reformation, France was riven by sectarian conflict as the Huguenots and Catholics strove for supremacy in the Wars of Religion until the 1598 Edict of Nantes established a measure of religious toleration.

The French Revolution radically shifted power away from the Catholic Church. Church property was confiscated, and the church crop tax and special clergy privileges were eliminated. With the 1790 Civil Constitution of the Clergy, the clergy became employees of the State, and the Catholic Church became a subordinate arm of the secular French government. During the Reign of Terror, traditional Christian holidays were abolished and Catholic priests were brutally suppressed, locally through mass imprisonment and executions by drowning.

Napoleon Bonaparte negotiated a reconciliation with the Church through the 1801 Concordat, whereby the State would subsidize Catholicism (recognized as the majority religion of the French), as well as Judaism, Lutheranism, and Calvinism. After the 1814 Bourbon Restoration, the ultra-royalist government, headed by the comte de Villèle, passed the 1825 Anti-Sacrilege Act, which made stealing of consecrated Hosts punishable by death. Never enforced, this law was repealed in the July Monarchy (1830–1848).

On 5 October 2021, a report was published by the Independent Commission on Sexual Abuse in the Church (CIASE) which showed that up to 330,000 children had become victims of sexual abuse within the church in France over a period spanning 7 decades (1950–2020). This constitutes 6% of total sexual abuse in France, since the same report notes that there are a total of 5.5 million cases of sexual abuse of people under 18 in France. These crimes were committed by between 2900 and 3200 priests and community members.

A number of alleged Marian apparitions are associated with France. The best known are the following:

The 1905 French law on the separation of Church and State removed the privileged status of the state religion (Catholic Church) and of the three other state-recognised religions (Lutheranism, Calvinism, Judaism), but left to them the use without fee, and the maintenance at government expense, of the churches that they used prior to 1905.

A notable exception is Alsace-Lorraine, which at the time of the separation was part of Germany, and where the pre-1905 status, including the concordat, is still in force. This was negotiated in 1918 when Alsace-Lorraine was returned to France at the end of the First World War, and approved by both France and the Holy See with the Briand-Ceretti Agreement. As a consequence, and although France is one of the countries in the world where the state and church are most separated, the French head of state is paradoxically the only temporal power in the world still nominating Catholic bishops, namely the bishop of Metz and the archbishop of Strasbourg. They are approved by the Pope and in practice selected by him, but formally nominated by the French president following diplomatic exchanges with the Holy See through the nunciature.

During the application of the 1905 law, prime minister Emile Combes, a member of the Radical-Socialist Party, tried to strictly enforce measures which some Catholics considered humiliating or blasphematory, leading to clashes between the Congregationists and the authorities. Anti-clericalism slowly declined among the French left-wing throughout France in the twentieth century, while the question of religion and of freedom of thought seemed to have been resolved. However, it is still present as a defining trait of the left-wing, while most right-wing Frenchmen describe themselves as Catholics (although not necessarily practicing). Thus, the draft laws presented by François Mitterrand 's government in the early 1980s, concerning restrictions on the state funding of private (and in majority Catholic) schools, were countered by right-wing demonstrations headed by the then mayor of Paris, the Gaullist Jacques Chirac, who was to be his prime minister in 1986 and would succeed him in 1995 as president. In the same way, the 2004 law on secularity and conspicuous religious symbols in schools, revived the controversy twenty years later, although the dividing lines also passed through each political side due to the complexity of the subject. On this occasion, several Muslim associations have allied themselves with conservative Catholics to reject the law. One consequences of the law was that some Muslim middle and high school students who refused to remove their veils or "conspicuous religious symbols" withdrew from the public school system in favour of the private, but publicly funded, Catholic schools (where the law does not apply, being restricted to the public education system).

In any case, since the 1905 law on the separation of the Church and State, the prevailing public doctrine on religion is laïcité – that is, neutrality of the state with respect to religious doctrine, and separation of the religious and the public spheres, except in Alsace-Lorraine and in some oversea territories. This state neutrality is conceived as a protection of religious minorities as well as the upholding of freedom of thought, which includes a right to agnosticism and atheism. Although many Catholics were at first opposed to this secular movement, most of them have since changed opinions, finding that this neutrality actually protects their faith from political interference. Only some minority traditionalist Catholic groups, such as the Society of St. Pius X, push for the return to the Ancien Régime or at least pre-separation situation, contending that France has forgotten its divine mission as a Christian country (an argument already upheld by the Ultras presenting the 1825 Anti-Sacrilege Act).

2006 Statistics from the Catholic Church in France:

Of French Catholics, 74% support same-sex marriage and 24% oppose it while 87% of French Catholics believe society should accept homosexuality, while 10% believe society should not accept homosexuality.

Within France the hierarchy consists of:

France is the location of one of the world's major Catholic pilgrim centres at Lourdes.

Growing discontent with the Catholic Church's influence in education and politics led to a series of reforms during the Third Republic reducing this influence, under the protests of the Ultramontanists who supported the Vatican 's influence.

Anti-clericalism was popular among Republicans, Radicals, and Socialists, in part because the Church had supported the counterrevolutionaries throughout the 19th century. After the 16 May 1877 crisis and the fall of the Ordre Moral government led by Marshall MacMahon, the Republicans voted Jules Ferry's 1880 laws on free education (1881) and mandatory and secular education (1882), which Catholics felt was a gross violation of their rights. The 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State established state secularism in France and led to the closure of most Church-run schools.

Since the Fifth Republic, most Catholics in France have supported the Gaullist and Centrist Christian democratic parties.

The government owns approximately 95% of France's more than 42,000 Catholic churches. This includes all parish churches constructed before 1905, which are owned by France's 34,955 communes. Only nine of the country's 149 cathedrals are not publicly owned.

The condition of these buildings varies significantly. According to the November 2024 edition of a survey by the Bishops' Conference of France, 72 churches have been demolished since 2000, and 326 have been deconsecrated since 1905. The restoration efforts following the 2019 fire at Notre Dame Cathedral have focused on the financial challenges of maintaining and restoring these historical structures, particularly the smaller churches.

Cave of Forgotten Dreams is a 2010 3D documentary film by Werner Herzog about the Chauvet Cave in Southern France, which contains some of the oldest human-painted images yet discovered—some of them were crafted around 32,000 years ago. It consists of footage from inside the cave, as well as of the nearby Pont d'Arc natural bridge, alongside interviews with various scientists and historians. The film premiered on 13 September 2010 at the Toronto International Film Festival.

Herzog's interest in Chauvet Cave, and the paintings inside, was prompted by an article in The New Yorker titled "First Impressions" (2008) by Judith Thurman. She became one of the co-producers of the film.

To help preserve the artwork, access to the cave is restricted, and the general public is not allowed to enter. Herzog had to get special permission from the French Minister of Culture to film inside. He was given approval for six shooting days of four hours each, with numerous restrictions. Everyone authorized to enter Chauvet Cave must wear special suits and fresh shoes that have not been worn outside, and, because of near-toxic levels of radon and carbon dioxide in the cave, nobody could stay inside for more than a few hours each day. Herzog was allowed to bring only a four-person crew into the cave, so he was accompanied by cinematographer Peter Zeitlinger, a sound recordist (Eric Spitzer-Marlyn), and an assistant, and worked the lights himself. The crew was limited to battery-powered equipment that they could carry into the cave themselves and lights that gave off no excess heat. The crew had to stay on a 2-foot-wide (0.61 m) walkway, and could not touch any part of the cave's wall or floor.

The production encountered several technical difficulties in working with the 3-D cameras, which were custom-built for the production and often assembled inside the cave itself, in a documentary setting. At the time of production, 3-D films were typically shot on soundstages with strong use of digital manipulation. Often, foreground and background elements would be shot separately and digitally composited into the finished shot. As techniques for 3-D filmmaking in natural environments with a single camera and no compositing were largely undeveloped, the crew had to work these out experimentally in post-production.

Before filming Cave of Forgotten Dreams, Herzog was skeptical of the artistic value of 3-D filmmaking. He had seen only one 3-D film (James Cameron's 2009 film Avatar). Zeitlinger was the first to suggest using a 3-D camera for the film. Even entering the cave, he felt that 3-D might be appropriate to capture the contours of the walls. Herzog initially dismissed the idea, believing 3-D to be (in Zeitlinger's words) "a gimmick of the commercial cinema". But, once he visited the cave, he decided the film had to be shot in 3-D to "capture the intentions of the painters", who incorporated the wall's subtle bulges and contours into their art. After finishing work on Cave, Herzog said he had no plans to film again in 3-D.

The film was finished at the last minute, with only 30 minutes of footage completed on the Wednesday before its debut at the Toronto International Film Festival on Monday, 13 September 2010. It was the first 3-D film to screen at the festival's Lightbox theatre, and the digital projectors jammed five minutes from the end, interrupting the showing. When Herzog was asked why the French Ministry of Culture, who sponsored the film, did not require its premiere to be in France, he replied: "They didn't know it was finished."

Two days after the screening at TIFF, IFC Films announced it had secured the film's US distribution rights in a "mid-six-figure deal"; the television rights were already owned by the History Channel, which partially financed the film's production.

In January 2011, a trailer for the film was released that advertised a release date of Spring 2011. The film premiered in cinemas in the UK on 25 March 2011. Also in March, a second trailer, released for US distribution, announced a US release date of 29 April 2011.

Its opening weekend in the US, the film earned an average of $25,500 from each of the five screens on which it was shown in New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles; this was Herzog's best-ever per-theater opening, and the highest per-theater average of any film in the US that weekend. By 12 June 2011, the film had grossed $3.7 million in the US, making it the highest-grossing independently released documentary of 2011 by a wide margin.

In September 2025, Herzog screened a new 6K restoration of the documentary at the annual Telluride Film Festival, where it was announced the film would be re-released theatrically via Independent Film Company in early 2026. They later revealed the film would get a limited release in IMAX theatres for two days on April 15th and 19th, 2026, followed by a nationwide roll-out beginning April 24th.

Critical reception to the film was positive. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, it has an approval rating of 96%, based on 138 reviews, with an average score of 7.9 out of 10; the site's "critics consensus" states: "Hauntingly filmed and brimming with Herzog's infectious enthusiasm, Cave of Forgotten Dreams is a fascinating triumph." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 86 out of 100, based on 34 reviews, indicating "universal acclaim".

Caviar or caviare is a food consisting of salt-cured roe of the family Acipenseridae (sturgeon). Caviar is considered a delicacy and is eaten as a garnish or spread. Traditionally, the term caviar refers only to roe from wild sturgeon in the Caspian Sea and Black Sea (beluga, ossetra and sevruga caviars). The term caviar can also describe the roe of other species of sturgeon or other fish such as paddlefish, salmon, steelhead, trout, lumpfish, whitefish, or carp.

The roe can be fresh (non-pasteurized) or pasteurized, which reduces its culinary and economic value.

The term caviare or caviar was first introduced into the English language in the late 16th century and appears to have been borrowed contemporaneously from a number of European languages, including French cavial, Italian caviale, Portuguese caviar, and Spanish cabial, all of which are derived from Turkish خاویار khāvyār, or Greek khaviari. The ultimate origin of the word is uncertain; Wilhelm Eilers proposes a contraction of خایه دار khāyeh-dār "egg-bearing" originally in reference to the sturgeons. Up to the 17th century, archaic spellings included chauiale, cavery, and cauiarie, and as early as 1625, it was becoming a three-syllable word, with the final "e" being dropped in speech. In Russian, the term for caviar is икра ikra, once common in English of the 16th and 17th centuries loaned as ikary.

According to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), roe from any fish not belonging to the family Acipenseridae is not caviar, but "substitutes of caviar". In contrast, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) defines caviar more broadly, covering the processed roe of all species within the order Acipenseriformes, which includes both sturgeons and paddlefish.

The term caviar is sometimes used to describe dishes that are perceived to resemble caviar, such as "eggplant caviar" (made from eggplant) and " Texas caviar " (made from black-eyed peas).

Caviar and sturgeon from the Sea of Azov began reaching the tables of aristocratic and noble Greeks in the 10th century, after the commencement of large-scale trading between the Byzantine Empire and Kievan Rus'. The Russians likely learned to process fish eggs with salt from Greek traders who had passed along the Black Sea coast, but it was not until after the Mongol invasions that the caviar industry developed in Astrakhan. Production was for a long time centered on the Caspian Sea, with the Iranians and Russians accounting for most of its output.

In the 16th century, François Rabelais described caviar as the finest item of what is now called hors d'oeuvre. By 1569, the Russians had conquered the entire Volga River to its mouth. The Volga and its tributaries offered a diverse range of fish, including sturgeon and its caviar, as well as sterlets, a type of small sturgeon that pleased both Russian locals and foreigners.

Caviar was eaten differently in the past compared to today. Medieval Russians often ate it hot. The Travels of Olearius in Seventeenth-Century Russia says "they expel the roe from the membrane in which it is contained, salt it, and after it has stood for six to eight days, mix it with pepper and finely chopped onions. Some also add vinegar and country butter before serving it. It is not a bad dish. If one pours a bit of lemon juice over it, instead of vinegar, it gives a good appetite, and has a restorative effect."

The main types of caviar from sturgeon species native to the Caspian Sea are Beluga sturgeon, Sterlet, Russian sturgeon, and Sevruga. White Sturgeon is abundant and native to California and the U.S. Pacific Northwest. The rarest and costliest is from beluga sturgeon that swim in the Caspian Sea, which is bordered by Iran, Kazakhstan, Russia, Turkmenistan, and Azerbaijan. Wild caviar production was suspended in Russia between 2008 and 2011 to allow wild stocks to replenish. Iran allows the fishing of sturgeon off their coasts. Beluga caviar is prized for its soft, extremely large (pea-size) eggs. It can range in colour from pale silver-grey to black. It is followed by the small golden sterlet caviar which is rare and was once reserved for Russian, Iranian and Austrian royalty. Next in quality is the medium-sized, light brown to rich brown Ossetra, also known as Russian caviar. Others in the quality ranking are the grey sevruga caviar, the Chinese Kaluga caviar, and the American white sturgeon caviar. The Siberian variety with black beads is similar to sevruga and is popular because of its reduced (five years) harvest period, but it has a higher brine content than other kinds. The Chinese Kaluga hybrid varies in colour from dark grey to light golden green and is a close cousin of beluga caviar.

An expensive caviar example at 1 kilogram (2.2 lb) sold for £20,000 (then US$34,500) is the Iranian 'Almas' product (from Persian : الماس, "diamond") produced from the eggs of a rare albino sturgeon between 60 and 100 years old from the southern Caspian Sea. Wild beluga sturgeon caviar from the Caspian Sea was priced in 2012 at $16,000 per 1 kilogram (35 oz). Cheaper alternatives have been developed from the roe of whitefish and the North Atlantic salmon.

Conventional sturgeon caviar was priced in 2014 at about $105 per 1 ounce (28 g) and from albino sturgeon up to $800 per ounce. Other quality factors are texture – with firmness having higher quality value – flavour qualities, such as creaminess, butter taste, and brine or mild fish finish, and whether the caviar was taken from the fish by massage (higher value) rather than by killing it. Caviar is generally sold in ounces. An ounce of sturgeon caviar costs between $45 and $1,000, depending on the variety of sturgeon and other factors.

China produces the most caviar of any single country. The largest caviar company in the world is the Chinese brand Kaluga Queen, which cultivates sturgeon at Qiandao Lake in Zhejiang.

In the wake of over-fishing, the harvest and sale of black caviar were banned in Russia in 2007. The ban on sturgeon fishing in the Caspian Sea has led to the development of aquaculture as an economically viable means of commercial caviar production. Russian caviar exports were also banned from 2002 to 2011.

Cristoforo da Messisbugo in his book Libro novo nel qual si insegna a far d'ogni sorte di vivanda, Venice, 1564, at page 110, gave the first recorded recipe in Italy about extraction of the eggs from the roe and caviar preparation "to be consumed fresh or to preserve". The writer and voyager Jérôme Lalande in his book " Voyage en Italie ", Paris, 1771, vol. 8, page 269, noted that many sturgeon were caught in the Po delta area in the territory of Ferrara. In 1753 a diplomatic war broke out between the Papal States, governing the Ferrara territory, and the Venetian Republic about sturgeon fishing rights in the Po River, the border between the two states. From about 1920 and until 1942, there was a shop in Ferrara, named "Nuta" from the nickname of the owner Benvenuta Ascoli, that processed all the sturgeons caught in the Po River for caviar extraction, using an elaboration of the original Messisbugo recipe, and shipped it to Italy and Europe. A new owner sporadically continued production until 1972, when the sturgeon stopped swimming up the Po River. Since 2015, some sturgeon have reappeared in the Po.

Currently, Italian caviar is obtained almost entirely from bred sturgeons. The caviar production is concentrated predominantly in Brescia, which is considered the capital of Italian caviar: in this area, in Calvisano, is located the world's largest sturgeon farm, which produces 25 tonnes of caviar each year. Italy is a top producer of caviar.

In the early 20th century, Canada and the United States were the major caviar suppliers to Europe ; they harvested roe from the lake sturgeon in the North American Midwest, and from the shortnose sturgeon and the Atlantic sturgeon spawning in the rivers of the East Coast of the United States. The American caviar industry started when Henry Schacht, a German immigrant, opened a business catching sturgeon on the Delaware River. He treated his caviar with German salt and exported a great deal of it to Europe. Around the same time, sturgeon was fished from the Columbia River on the West Coast of the United States, also supplying caviar. American caviar was so plentiful at the time that it was given away at bars to induce or prolong patrons' thirst.

Today, the shortnose sturgeon is rated Vulnerable in the IUCN Red List of endangered species and rated Endangered per the Endangered Species Act. With the depletion of Caspian and Black Sea caviar, production of farmed or "sustainable" caviar has greatly increased. In particular, northern California is reported to account for 70% to 80% of U.S. production.

In 2021, a significant illegal sturgeon egg harvesting and selling ring run in part by the former top sturgeon biologist for the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) was discovered and broken up by investigators.

In coastal British Columbia, Fraser River white sturgeon are sustainably farmed to produce caviar.

The 17th-century book Don Quixote mentions "cavial" in a banquet of German pilgrims. Until 1992, sturgeons and caviar were collected at the lower parts of rivers Guadalquivir, Ebro, Duero and Tajo. From 1932 to 1970, the Ybarra family had a factory in Coria del Río. Overfishing, pollution and the Alcalá del Río dam eliminated the wild population of Acipenser naccarii. In Spain, a fish farm called Caviar de Riofrío produces organic caviar at Loja, Granada, Andalusia.

Despite being landlocked, Armenia has developed a caviar industry based on farmed sturgeon, primarily in aquaculture facilities in the Ararat Valley. Estimates indicate approximately 10–20 tonnes of caviar production annually. Their most famous brand of caviar, Petrossian, was founded in 1920 by two Armenian brothers, with headquarters in Paris, France.

As well with Canada and the United States, Uruguay has become a major producer and exporter.

Kibbutz Dan in Israel produces four tons of caviar a year. The farm is fed by the Dan tributary of the Jordan River.

Madagascar is the first African country that produces and exports caviar since 2018, in Lake Mantasoa.

In Malaysia, caviar production is relatively new and smaller in scale. Caviar is harvested from farmed sturgeon fish in Tanjung Malim, Perak. The caviar produced here is marketed as "tropical caviar". The first Malaysian brand of tropical caviar was launched in March 2019.

In France, caviar is produced on a small scale in the Gironde estuary of Nouvelle-Aquitaine.

Overfishing, smuggling and pollution caused by sewage entry into the Caspian Sea have considerably reduced the sea's sturgeon population.

In September 2005, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service banned the import of Caspian Sea Beluga caviar to protect the endangered Beluga sturgeon; a month later, the ban was extended to include Beluga caviar from the entire Black Sea basin. In January 2006, the Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna (CITES) supported an international embargo on caviar export. In January 2007, this ban was partly lifted, allowing the sale of 96 tons of caviar, 15% below the official 2005 level. In July 2010, Russia and some other CIS countries restarted the export of caviar. The 2010 quotas allow for the export of three tons of beluga, 17 tons of sevruga and 27 tons of osetra. In September 2010, Kazakhstan launched a state monopoly brand, Zhaik Balyk, from the Kazakh word for the Ural River. Under the CITES agreement, Kazakhstan was granted the right to produce 13 of the 80 tons allowed up until 28 February 2011.

Commercial caviar production historically involved stunning the fish and extracting the ovaries. Another method of extracting caviar is by removing eggs through a small incision, which allows the female to continue producing roe. Other farmers use a process called "stripping", which extracts the caviar from the fish via a small incision made along the urogenital muscle when the fish is deemed to be ready to be processed. An ultrasound is used to determine the correct timing. Removing the caviar by massage may yield higher quality and a more sustainable source.

Preparation follows a sequence that has not significantly changed over the last century. First, the ovaries are removed from a sedated female sturgeon and passed through a sieve to remove the membrane. Freed roes are rinsed to wash away impurities. Roes are now ready to become caviar by adding a precise amount of salt for taste and preservation. The fresh product is tasted and graded according to quality. Finally, the eggs are packed into lacquer-lined tins that will be further processed or sold directly to customers.

A sturgeon caviar imitation is a black or red-coloured lumpsucker caviar sold throughout Europe in small glass jars.

In Sweden and Finland, the roes of many fish species, including vendace, burbot, salmon and common whitefish, are also commonly eaten in a similar manner as caviar. However, they are not caviar 'substitutes' but are enjoyed in their own right.

Spherification of liquids with alginate (a seaweed polysaccharide) is used to recreate caviar's texture. With liquids flavored to resemble caviar, one obtains kosher and vegan caviar substitutes. They resemble beluga caviar in appearance and are either used as a food prop for television and film or enjoyed by vegetarians and other people worldwide.

In Scandinavia, a type of sandwich spread is available, made from smoked cod roe and other ingredients, which is referred to as smörgåskaviar (meaning "sandwich caviar"). Outside Scandinavia, the product is referred to as creamed smoked roe or in French as Caviar de Lysekil.

Caviar is 48% water, 25% protein, 18% fats, and 4% carbohydrates. In a common serving amount of 16 grams (one tablespoon), caviar supplies 44 kilocalories of food energy, 53% of the Daily Value (DV) of vitamin B12, and moderate amounts (10–19% DV) of sodium, iron, magnesium, and selenium, with no other micronutrients in significant content.

CEA-List (Laboratory for Integration of Systems and Technology ; French : Laboratoire d'Intégration des Systèmes et des Technologies) is one of three institutes of the French CEA technological research division CEA Tech [ fr ]. The institute specializes in digital systems. It has the Carnot label.

Based in Saclay Paris region, France, CEA-List works in partnership with French and foreign industrial companies on applied research projects in four main topics:

CEA-List is situated at the following sites:

CEA-List is involved in various research programs, including:

CEA-List, works towards advanced manufacturing by supporting industry to produce in a more effective and sustainable way and involves exploratory research in emerging technology for smart manufacturing such as, modelling and simulation, knowledge engineering, data processing, vision, information and communication systems.

The main activities in context of advanced manufacturing fall into the following six categories:

CEA-List, works on various development aspect of software and embedded systems and provides methods, tools and components for optimizing systems’ quality and performance.

Papyrus and Frama-C are one of the well known open source tools being used in various industrial and academic context.

The embedded systems labs consist of a large number of research engineers who dedicate their time to enhance the five topics integrating safety, security, reliability and performance requests. The lab works on the following category of activities:

CEA-List, works on development of a global approach for ambient intelligence applications which include HMI (Human Machine Interface) aspects, from perception to user’s restitution.

The research is carried out to addresses various industrial sectors and problems, such as, security (video surveillance, pedestrian detection…), health, energy, transport and digital economy (data filtering and analysis, search engines, etc).

A large number of research engineers work on four main application in this fields:

CEA-List, works towards improving the safety and efficiency of treatments, to reduce the amount of doses and to develop new therapies.

CEA-List, work on radiations control for health is held by two entities of reference:

DOSEO platform is unique in France as it consists of advanced technological equipment for imaging and radiotherapy.

The research is conducted in partnership both with the medical body and the industrial sector where many research engineers work on two big topics:

As a member of Carnot institutes network, CEA-List, works both on technological research and on upstream resourcing research. Resourcing activities are based on historical relations with high level academic partners.

Despite an international economic crisis, there has been a solid growth for CEA-List which testifies its relevant choices concerning its research work priorities and the ability to fulfill the industrial partners’ needs. Concerning large companies, the issue at stake is about designing global industrial solutions within a restricted demanding time to market.

The Ceinture rouge ('Red belt') refers to the communes of the Île-de-France that were dominated by the French Communist Party from the 1920s until the 1980s. These communes are those that are traditionally working-class areas whose residents were employed in the heavy and light industries that once dominated the economic landscape of the Petite Couronne (the departments that border Paris) and large population centers in the outer departments of the Île-de-France.

While the phenomenon is not specific to Paris and can also be seen in Lyon, Turin, Milan or Genoa, for example, "its scale and, most importantly, the length of the communist implantation in these municipalities make it a unique phenomenon in Europe".

The strength of the French Communist Party in these areas also led to this party forming the government at the departmental level in Seine-Saint-Denis from its creation in 1967 up to 2008, when control of the Departmental Council went to the Socialist Party of France.

The idea of a "Red belt" takes its roots in the 1920s.

At the 1919 municipal elections, "a first red wave let municipal socialism take roots in communes with an industrial and working-class tradition, such as Aubervilliers and Saint-Denis. A year later, these towns voted for the newly created Communist Party," notes historian Emmanuel Bellanger.

The phrase itself was coined in an article written by Paul Vaillant-Couturier, "Paris encircled by the revolutionary proletariat" after the legislative elections of 1924 and the municipal elections of 1925.

However, at that time, the PCF's tactics of “class against class” only allowed it to win nine towns in 1925: it kept Bezons, Bobigny and Villetaneuse, took Saint-Denis from SFIO dissidents, and Clichy, Malakoff, Vitry-sur-Seine, Ivry-sur-Seine, Villejuif from the right.

In the 1929 municipal elections, the PCF won Pierrefitte-sur-Seine from the right, while Alfortville and Bagnolet were lost to the SFIO.

The PCF stopped using the "Red belt" as a motto as it engaged in the strategy of the “ Front Populaire ” alliance for the 1935 municipal elections. The alliance between the PCF and the SFIO captured 26 municipalities. However, it lost its fiefdom of Saint-Denis, as Jacques Doriot, who had been excluded from the communist party in 1934, was reelected.

Thanks to the success of the PCF at the 1935 elections, Georges Marrane, communist mayor of Ivry-sur-Seine, became president of the General Council of the department of Seine in 1936.

The communist party was also successful is the neighbouring Seine-et-Oise department: out of 129 municipalities with a population above 2,500, "red" municipalities rose from 8 to 24 at the 1935 elections: Argenteuil, Aulnay-sous-Bois and Blanc-Mesnil all elect communist mayors. This number rose further to 54 in 1945, the year in which even the very bourgeois city of Versailles had a mayor "close to the communists".

This success can be partially attributed to the housing crisis that brought a large working-class population to the suburbs, where the living conditions were particularly poor. The communist party's agenda, which focused on public investment in housing and healthcare, appeared particularly attractive:

The first urban crises contribute to the success of the "red suburbs" - at the time, it is estimated that 800,000 people live in defective housing projects in the suburbs, which do not have access to basic utilities. Communist municipalities promote social policies, including the development of inexpensive housing, the Habitations à Bon Marché (HBM), which will later become the HLM ; the creation of garden cities through the local public housing office; and health centers that democratize access to health services.

The Communist party emerged from World War II as a dominant political force:

The ruptures of the war - the German-Soviet pact, the subsequent banning of the Communist Party and its municipalities, the internal rifts between the party apparatus and elected representatives - did not alter electoral equilibriums. In the first post-war elections, the municipal elections of April 1945, the Communist Party, alone or in association with the SFIO, led the lists of the Patriotic Union of the Resistance and won 60 of the 80 communes of the Seine, 50 of which elected a Communist mayor.

After the second world war, other parties tried to exploit the PCF's political isolation and reduce its stronghold over the Paris suburbs. A 1947 law introduced the proportional allocation of seats in municipal councils for cities with a population above 9,000 inhabitants. Since the PCF could not form alliances with other political parties, it lost 22 communes in Seine-Banlieue to the SFIO and to Charles De Gaulle's RPF in the 1947 elections.

At the end of the 1950s, the PCF's setbacks on the national stage paradoxically illustrated what Pierre Bellanger calls "the resilience of municipal communism". The first of these setbacks was the 1958 constitutional referendum. Despite the PCF's opposition, it was overwhelmingly approved, with a majority in every single département and major city. In the Paris suburbs, Bagnolet was the only "red" city where the "no" was actually ahead. This defeat proved that the PCF was not able to impose its vote, even in its traditional fiefdoms.

Two months later, the PCF was crushed at the 1958 legislatives elections, going from 150 seats to 10. Communist leaders Étienne Fajon, Jacques Duclos and Marie-Claude Vaillant-Couturier lost their seats.

After these two major defeats, the PCF was expected to experience major losses at the 1959 municipal elections. But the opposite happened: revived by the unpopularity of the Pinay-Rueff plan, the PCF won 7 new cities, bringing its total to 31 in Seine-banlieue.

The reinstatement of the majoritarian system from 1959 to 1977 benefited the PCF. In the mid-60's, it formed alliances with the SFIO, which managed to capture 25 of the 39 cities with a population over 30,000 inhabitants.

The strength of the PCF played a central role in the 1964 redistricting of the Ile-de-France region, designed to only leave one General Council to the communists:

Good administration of the territory, the most frequently cited reason for the 1964 redistricting, is not the only reason for it. Political strategy was one of the unofficial arguments that favoured this new departmental map. In the aftermath of the municipal and cantonal elections of 1959, the Communist Party, the leading political force in the Paris agglomeration, was preparing to run for the presidency of the General Council of the Seine, which it had held in 1936 and after the Liberation. After the 1965 municipal elections, the Communist Party led 35 of the 80 municipalities in the Seine suburbs. 1,410,000 suburbanites had a communist mayor. This deep-rooted partisan implantation undoubtedly had a significant impact on the drawing of the new departmental districts in the Paris region. The 1964 law aimed to circumscribe the domination of the Communist Party to the Seine-Saint-Denis department alone, which in 1967 had 21 Communist mayors and held eight of the nine legislative seats of the department. The 1964 division worked; the General Council of Seine-Saint-Denis remained under the communist presidency without interruption from the first cantonal elections of October 1967 to 2008; but the Val-de-Marne, which had been gerrymandered to escape the grip of the communist party, is also presided over by communist elected representatives from 1967 onwards.

This equilibrium functioned until 1977. Despite the considerable progress of the Socialist Party at the National level after the Epinay Congress, voters of the inner suburbs kept favouring municipal communism: there were 46 communist municipalities in the inner suburbs in 1971 - a number that rose to 54 in 1977. In addition, the PCF made new inroads in the outer suburbs, in Poissy, Les Mureaux and Mantes-la-Ville, and confirmed recent wins in cities such as Montereau, Palaiseau or Savigny-sur-Orge. The 1978 legislative elections confirmed that the PCF was the first left-wing party in the Ile-de-France region.

1977 marked the pinnacle of the Red belt. Its following decline has many causes: first, the communist party rapidly lost influence at the national level in the 1980s, after forming an alliance with the Socialist Party and joining the socialist government after the 1981 elections. While Jacques Duclos, the communist candidate, had received 21.7% of the national vote in the 1969 presidential election, André Lajoinie only obtained 6.8% in 1988.

In Ile-de-France, the party also failed to adapt to the changing demographics of working-class cities. As historian Romain Ducoulombier notes:

To improve the condition of the working-class, a distinctive choice of communist towns was to build large housing projects. But the sociological of such neighborhoods has changed, especially with the arrival of immigrant populations, which did not have the same historical loyalty to the PCF.

In the National Assembly, the decline started as early as 1981 : the party lost half of the seats it held (13 out of 27) - a trend confirmed 5 years later with the loss of 4 more seats. After that, the number remained stable until 2002, when it lost 2 more seats in the aftermath of the dismal results of Robert Hue in the presidential election.

In municipal elections, the decline was slower but inexorable: when a city elected a non-communist mayor, it hardly ever made the journey back. As Philippe Subra notes:

In 20 years, the communist party has only captured one city in the Ile-de-France region, Goussainville in 1995, which it lost again to the right six years later; and it has lost 26, including 20 with a population above 20,000: 9 in 1989, 7 in 1995 and 10 in 2001. Among the 16 cities lost in 1989 and 1995, only 2 were ever won back afterwards: Sevran and La Queue-en-Brie.

In the (1988–2004) period, the number of cities held by communists in Ile-de-France went from 67, including 51 with a population over 20,000, to 42, of which 32 have a population above 20,000.

The 2014 municipal elections represented a major defeat for the Communist party: in Seine-Saint-Denis, it lost Bobigny, Saint-Ouen, Bagnolet and Blanc-Mesnil, four cities that it had held for decades. In the Yvelines, it was defeated in Achères, the last city it held in the département. But its most significant setback was the loss of Villejuif, a city that had had a communist since 1925 and in which former communist leader Georges Marchais had been elected to the National Assembly. The communist victories in Montreuil and Aubervilliers appeared as a consolation prize.

The 2020 municipal elections confirmed the slow disappearance of the Red belt: the PCF lost 4 out of 10 cities it held in the département of Val-de-Marne: Villeneuve-Saint-Georges, Choisy-le-Roi, Valenton and Champigny-sur-Marne, but it won back Villejuif. In the département of Seine-Saint-Denis, it lost two of its historical fiefdoms, Saint-Denis and Aubervilliers, but won back Bobigny.

The idea of a Red belt around Paris is not only an electoral phenomenon. It constitutes, in the words of Annie Fourcaut, "a political myth":

It is first and foremost a strategic and political myth, born in the mid-1920s, shortly after the secession of the Tours Congress, that expresses and distorts the encounter between the newly created communist party (SFIC) and a limited share of the working class in the suburbs of Paris. it is also the organization of working-class communities, through the communist municipalities and their networks of associations, around a revolutionary political project - with strong local roots and the development of popular communities. and finally, it is a social construct that lasts between the 1920s to the end of the 1960s and creates an electoral base for the communist party until the end of the 1970s.

As early as the 1920s, the communist party uses these cities as examples of what it could achieve on the national stage. But the image of a "Red Belt" is also used by political opponents to denounce the dangers that communism would represent at the national level. As Emmanuel Bellanger writes:

Since the 1920s, the "red suburbs" have been a subject of passions. For their adversaries, these French "societized" cities brainwashed the communal youth, diverted public funds for partisan purposes and alienated democracy (...) Wasn't the "capital of French communism", Ivry-sur-Seine, described in 1947 as a "Mecca of red secessionism", picked in 1927 to commemorate with fervor the 10-year anniversary of the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution?

To avoid demonization, communist mayors actually stayed clear from radical changes when they won a city: while their party was often isolated nationally, communist mayors collaborated with their left- and right-wing colleagues. Jacques Girault thus writes:

The election of a communist mayors is not a synonym for radical change. The municipal employees are retained and work alongside a minority or political supporters, hired for their political affinity. Without claiming it, communist mayors take advantage of the legacy of the previous administration, while creating new social functions and extending its network of sympathizers. While denouncing institutions, they benefit from their subsidies to build municipal equipment. They do not reject the tradition of collaboration between mayors, and participate in the rationalisation of municipal administration, most notably by promoting alumni of the ENAM. The way communist mayors exercised their responsibilities, including in times of withdrawal or bolshevization, appears at odds with the radicality of manifestos and partisan articles published in opinion newspapers.

Communist cities are used to demonstrate the benefits of the communist platform, with a strong emphasis on social services, collective housing and taxes paid mostly by corporations. These policies are perceived positively, even by people who are not communist sympathizers at the national level:

From the 1960's onwards, the reflection on municipal communism starts replacing the fantasies born before the Second World War, with the broad acknowledgement that communist mayors properly manage their cities. According to a 1964 IFOP poll, 44% of respondents judge the PCF's local action positively, while only 38% do so at the national level. People underscore the originality of communist management, an element that these cities strongly emphasized: direct taxes mostly paid by companies implanted locally through a tax on the professional use of buildings, reduced indirect taxes, redistributive policies that include low-priced summer camps, cafetarias, patronage and social centers, priority given to schools and social welfare, municipal subsidies to associations that are close to the communist party, strong preference for collective housing.

But this model was largely based on the presence of large factories around Paris, which would bring tax revenues and would need factory workers living nearby. In the 1970s, the deindustrialization of the inner suburbs brought its decline: the Plaine-Saint-Denis, which used to be largest industrial zone in Europe, became an industrial wasteland within years, while Renault-Billancourt closed in 1989:

This powerful movement of deindustrialization and restructuring of the industrial apparatus led to the effacement of the worker as the central figure of society in the Paris suburbs. Of course, there are still workers, but they are less numerous and more often foreigners. And their visibility, their social role has considerably diminished.

These constituencies also provide a springboard to the national stage, as well as safe seats for the leadership of the communist party:

The suburbs of Paris, home to some of the largest communist federations along with Paris, the Pas-de-Calais, the Nord and the Bouches-du-Rhône, hosts 21 of the 33 congresses of the PCF between 1920 and 2006, as well as the great Fête de l'Humanité from 1921 onwards - an event which, for long, relied on the technical services of municipal administration of the communist cities for its logistics. From the 1930s to the 2000s, all the general secretaries of the PCF are elected officials from this political territory: Maurice Thorez is Representative for Ivry from 1932 to his death in 1964; his successor, Waldeck Rochet, sits on the departmental council in Nanterre from 1935 onwards, becomes Representative for Colombes in 1936 and, after a stint in Saône-et-Loire, comes back as Representative for Stains, Aubervilliers and la Courneuve from 1958 to 1973. Georges Marchais is no exception to the tradition of being "airdropped" in a red-leaning city: in 1973, he succeeds to Marie-Claude Vaillant-Couturier.

Because of the emphasis communist cities placed on affordable working-class housing, Red belt cities often present "a certain type of urban landscape, with an alternation of modest individual homes and low-rent collective housing projects, the presence of industrial activities and a particular collective culture and sociability".

One ingredient of this collective culture and sociability is the creation of cultural institutions and, in particular, large public theaters:

The report written by Jacques Duclos for the 1956 Havre Congress, "municipalities at the service of the laboring masses", outlines the traditional priorities: elderly, schools, health, housing, youth. In the 1960s, culture is added to the list. Aubervilliers creates its theater; in 1963, Bernard Sobel, invited by the municipality, creates the Karl-Marx theater in Gennevilliers. Through the partisan use of avant-gardes - Karl-Marx School in Villejuif built by Lurçat in 1933, Culture house of contemporary Seine-Saint-Denis - the suburbs become a testing ground for modernity.

These theaters and cultural institutions are the direct result of the communist municipalities' strategy, in the 1960s and 1970s, to use public commissions to create buildings that represent the idea of architectural modernity: another example is provided by the concrete administrative center of the communist municipality of Pantin, built in 1970 by Jacques Kalisz, a communist architect. In other cities, André Lurçat, Paul Chemetov, Serge Magnien and other modernist architects close to the PCF renovated the suburbs. Georges Valbon, mayor of Bobigny, accepted the renovation of the town according to the standards of slab urbanism: he notably entrusted Oscar Niemeyer with the creation of the departmental labor exchange.

As these suburban cities broke with their communist past, newly elected mayors often tried to mark the change by renaming streets that referred to communist leaders. In Argenteuil, Frédéric Says notes:

A few streets from here, less than 15 years ago, the Général Leclerc Boulevard was called Lenin Boulevard. A little further, the Esplanade de l'Europe has replaced the Esplanade Maurice Thorez. The Marcel Cachin Avenue now honors Maurice Utrillo. The Karl Marx Boulevard is now the only reminder that Argenteuil, the biggest city in Val d'Oise, North-West of Paris, was communist from the end of the second World War to the beginning of the 2000 decade and part of the Red belt that encircled Paris.

Based on the départements created in 1964.

The cities whose name is followed by an asterisk have a mayor from the PCF or Front de Gauche since the 2014 municipal elections. Those followed by 2 asterisks (**) have a left-wing majority that includes most of the time the PCF, but which mayor neither belongs to the PCF nor the Front de Gauche.

The Center of Political and Foreign Affairs (abb : CPFA) is a think tank focused on government policies and geopolitics, organizes events and discussions on various geopolitical topics around the world

CPFA has organized numerous events under Chatham House rules and has hosted over a hundred personalities such as: Zbigniew Brzezinski, Kofi Annan, Henry Kissinger, Al Gore, Abdullah Gül, José María Aznar, Sebastián Piñera, Romano Prodi, Brent Scowcroft, Richard Holbrooke, Shimon Peres, Mohamed ElBaradei, Louis Freeh, Turki Al-Faisal since 2007. CPFA has also initiated with the collaboration of Randa Kassis the President of the Astana Platform for peace talks in Syria as well as many other confidential talks on the topics on Syria and Libya.

In 2015 CPFA appealed to the President of Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbayev to launch a peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis and launched a political platform that could assemble moderate Syrian opponents.

The first round of negotiations in Astana was held from 25 to 27 May and chaired by the Kazakh Foreign Minister Erlan Idrissov. The second round of negotiations in Astana from 2 to 4 October 2015 headed by the Secretary of State of Kazakhstan Gulshara Abdykalikova and mediated by Fabien Baussart and the Kazakh Deputy Foreign Minister Askar Mussinov. The meetings resulted in two resolutions being signed by the participants, which created the Astana Platform and helped pave the way for the Astana process with an agreement between Iran, Russia, and Turkey.

In February and July 2017, the CPFA initiated discussions in Geneva with Randa Kassis to develop a preparatory document to reform the Syrian Constitution. This initiative was promoted during the Syrian National Dialogue Congress in Sochi in January 2018 by Randa Kassis despite objections from the Syrian government and part of the opposition.

In 2015, CPFA launched a "Committee of Wise" that would address various issues related to international peace.

The committee gathered several prominent political figures and Nobel Peace Prize laureates, including former Israeli President Shimon Peres, former Vice President of Egypt and the general-director of the International Atomic Energy Agency Mohamed ElBaradei, former President of Poland Lech Wałęsa, Guatemalan human rights activist Rigoberta Menchú and the Chairman of the IPCC Rajendra Pachauri, former President of Colombia Cesar Gaviria and former Spanish Prime Minister Jose Luis Zapatero. The Committee met in Nur Sultan, Kazakhstan, where they were received by the President Nazarbayev in the Presidential Palace.

In 2016, the CPFA organised a conference on nuclear non-proliferation chaired by former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan in the presence of Bronisław Komorowski, Jack Straw, Yaşar Yakış and Giulio Terzi.

The CEDEJ (Centre d'études et de documentation économiques, juridiques et sociales Eng.: Centre for Economic, Judicial, and Social Study and Documentation) is a French sponsored research center located in Cairo, Egypt, created in 1968. The Cedej has the status of a "Joint Entity of French Research Institutes Abroad" (UMIFRE, Unité Mixte des Instituts français de recherche à l’étranger) and is under the aegis of the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the CNRS (National Centre for Scientific Research). Karine Bennafla is its director since September 2015.

It has published numerous books and periodicals in all fields of social sciences in Egypt, the Sudan and the Arabic world. Among these, Egypte/Monde arabe, published from 1990, which is online in full text on the portal revues.org.

It includes a social sciences library of more than 35,000 books, most of them in Arabic; a database of geolocated statistics; and a collection of old and new maps of Egypt and its cities.

The Centre des monuments nationaux (French pronunciation: [ sɑ̃tʁ(ə) de mɔnymɑ̃ nasjɔno ], CMN; 'National monuments centre') is a French government body (établissement public à caractère administratif) which conserves, restores and manages historic buildings and sites that are the property of the French state. It is run by the Ministry of Culture.

The CMN is responsible for the upkeep of around 85 monuments, ranging from the prehistoric megaliths at Carnac, medieval fortifications such as the towers at La Rochelle, and Renaissance châteaux such as Azay-le-Rideau, to Le Corbusier 's Villa Savoye. The CMN is also responsible for making these monuments accessible to the public, and promoting understanding of the heritage they represent through publishing books and guides, under the imprint Éditions du patrimoine.

In 2008, the CMN sites had a total of nearly 8.5 million visitors. The CMN had an annual budget of € 120 million in 2009, which was mainly derived from its own sales, as well as from donations and a subsidy from the Ministry of Culture. The organisation is based at the Hôtel de Sully on rue Saint-Antoine in Paris.

The Centre national de la danse (CND, or National Dance Center) is an institution sponsored by the French Ministry of Culture. It studies dance in all its aspects, and is located in Pantin, in northeastern Paris. The building is known for being a classic example of Brutalist architecture, and in 2004 was awarded the Prix de l'Équerre d'Argent.

Established in 1998 at the initiative of the Ministry of Culture and Communication, the CND is described as being "located at the crossroads of dance culture, creation, dissemination and pedagogy." It was established at Pantin along the Canal de l'Ourcq, and has a permanent office in Rhône-Alpes, Lyon.

The CND provides training and certificate sources for both amateurs and professionals, such as the State diploma of teacher training or dance artists choreographers. It also has an extensive library, open to the public, with different materials including books and videos.

The building was completed in 1972 by the architect Jacques Kalisz for use as the administrative centre of the city of Pantin. It is considered an example of Brutalist architecture.

Antoinette Robain and Claire Gueysse were selected as architects to resume the work of Jacques Kalisz, and transform it into the Centre National de la Danse (inaugurated in and winning the Prix de l'Équerre d'Argent in 2004). They focused on the treatment of materials and colors inside the building to create a horizontal consistency, while respecting its outward appearance.

The Centre national du cinéma et de l'image animée (French pronunciation: [ sɑ̃tʁ nɑsjɔnal dy sinema e də limaʒ anime ] ; CNC ; transl. National Centre for Cinema and the Moving Image) is an agency of the French Ministry of Culture, and is responsible for the production and promotion of cinematic and audiovisual arts in France. The CNC is a publicly owned establishment, with legal and financial autonomy.

It was created by law on 25 October 1946 as the Centre national de la cinématographie (National Centre for Cinematography), it is currently directed by Gaëtan Bruel. The CNC replaced the Office professionnel du cinéma (OPC), its predecessor established during the reign of Vichy France for wartime censorship.

The CNC archives are located in the former Fort de Bois-d'Arcy southwest of Paris. Initially established in 1969 to house combustible nitrate films, the archives now house modern acetate films as well. The CNC has between 700 and 800 million dollars each year to support French projects.

The Centre national du livre (CNL) is a French établissement public à caractère administratif.

The CNL is placed under the administrative supervision of the French Ministry of Culture and Communication (Direction générale des Médias et des Industries culturelles [ fr ], Service du Livre et de la Lecture [ fr ]). Its vocation and mission is to support the entire book chain (authors, publishers, booksellers, libraries, promoters of books and reading), and in particular the creation and dissemination of the most ambitious literary works. It grants loans and scholarships on the advice of specialised committees.

More than 300 professionals (writers, academics, journalists, researchers, translators, critics, publishers, booksellers, etc.) sit on 25 thematic committees. These committees meet one to three times a year to consider applications and give their opinion on the allocation of grants.

The work of these commissions is also supported by an extensive network of external collaborators and readers, whose experience and expertise contribute to the quality of the CNL's work.

These interventions take the form either of direct aid to those who create books (authors or publishers) or of indirect aid by subsidising those who distribute books (booksellers, libraries). For example, the CNL grants aid for the opening or development of certain public libraries or to encourage the creation of specific collections. It also helps university libraries to acquire high-quality scientific documents published in French.

Until 2010, the CNL was chaired ex officio by the Director of Books and Reading and then by the Director General of Media and Cultural Industries. However, a decree of 27 April 2010 provided for the appointment of a president to substitute the ex officio president. Jean-François Colosimo was therefore appointed President on 12 May 2010. He was succeeded in 2013 by Vincent Monadé. Régine Hatchondo, appointed on 18 November 2020, is the current president of the CNL.

Since 2021, thanks to the year of reading as a "great national cause", the National Book Centre (CNL) has undertaken an ambitious programme of national actions to promote books and reading among all French people.

The CNL's actions, which are now permanent, focus on three areas: increasing the number of encounters between authors and different audiences; putting reading at the heart of the lives of the French citizens who are furthest from it; and sharing the pleasure of reading through reading aloud. The CNL's actions, which are now permanent, focus on three areas: increasing the number of encounters between authors and different audiences, placing reading at the heart of the lives of the most excluded French citizens, and sharing the pleasure of reading through reading aloud. By 2022, the CNL will have organised 200 residencies in schools, 500 author masterclasses in secondary schools, supported 1,000 events organised by civil society throughout France and launched new programmes such as the Prix Goncourt des détenus ("Inmate's Goncourt Prize") in some thirty prisons, or the "Quart d'heure national de lecture" (National Quarter-Hour of Reading) on 10 March.

The Reception and Orientation Center ("Centres d'accueil et d'orientation - CAO") is a French government program for asylum seekers that provide migrants with information and temporary accommodation. At the CAOs, migrants have access to health care, social and administrative support by qualified agents and associations. The centers are located in "former gendarme barracks, disused hospitals and training-centres, and out-of-season holiday villages". Currently, there are around 450 CAOs.

The CAOs were created by the Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Housing and Sustainable Housing in 2015, as a response to an increase in asylum applications and the creation of irregular encampments in Calais and Dunkirk. After the evacuation of Calais, 9.000 places were created in the CAOs, bringing it to a total of 12.000.

The reception centers aim to shelter asylum seekers, and to orient them according to their particular situation. The OFII (French Office for Immigration and Integration) is responsible for providing information on the asylum procedure, and to direct migrants towards accommodation in the national system of reception for asylum seekers (e.g. CADA, UTSA, HUDA).

The average cost of a place in the CAOs is €25 per person per day, including accommodation, 3 meals a day and administrative support.

Centrism in France (French : Centrisme politique) has played a major role in French politics over many decades. This page presents the parties, political movements and personalities linked to Centrism in France according to their political traditions or their background. The different families of centrism are presented in the different sections.

The moderates, democrats and Christian democrats constitute the main political family of the center in France, they come from the Orleanist and liberal traditions of the French right, the moderates, democrats and Christian democrats were mainly structured into political parties after the Liberation of France. The Popular Republican Movement (MRP), under the French Fourth Republic, then the Union for French Democracy (UDF), under the French Fifth Republic constituted the two major political forces which brought the ideologies together. The Fifth Republic and the election by direct universal suffrage of the President of the Republic was established in 1962 would make the electoral success of centrist parties more difficult.

The MRP, founded as a party in 1944 by former resistance fighters, quickly became one of the three major parties (with the PCF and the SFIO) who dominated the national political life of the Fourth Republic. The MRP was the second largest party in the Constituent Assembly of 1945 and that the National Assembly elected in November 1946. The MRP was the largest party during the election of the second Constituent Assembly in June 1946 and was part of the two main coalitions of the Fourth Republic : Tripartisme (1946–47) and the Third Force (1947–51). The MRP then became a central political force of the new regime and counted among its ranks three Prime Ministers : Robert Schuman, Georges Bidault et Pierre Pflimlin. The Christian Democrats participated in all the governments of the Fourth Republic and, despite the political instability of their party, their ministers remained in place for many years with Schuman at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (1948–1953), Jean-Marie Louvel at the Ministry of Industry and Commerce (1950–1954). However, the MRP fell back electorally: its vote share was halved during the legislative elections of 1951 and 1956. After the founding of the RPF, the MRP no longer appeared as the party of loyalty to Charles de Gaulle, while the traditional moderate right regrouped around the National Centre of Independents and Peasants (CNI). The MRP supported the return of De Gaulle and the establishment of the Fifth Republic and participated in the beginning of his presidency but disagreements over European politics pushed the MPR into opposition before dissolving in 1965. Jean Lecanuet was inspired to found a new party, the Democratic Centre. The Union for French democracy (UDF) was established in 1978 as a union between a number of centrist parties, including the Democratic Centre (from the MRP), the Republican Party (formerly FNRI) and the Radical Party. Other centrist factions, like the Social Democratic Party (PSD) and the Democratic Convention (PSD) succeeded in establishing itself as a political force of government thanks to the legitimacy of its founder, Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, who was elected President of France in 1974, the first time that the role hadn't been held by a Gaullist or a left winger. However, after the failure of Giscard to be re-elected in the 1981 presidential election, the UDF could only maintain its political influence by allying with right-wing forces, disputing the neo-Gaullist Rally for the Republic for leadership over the conservative electorate. Despite this conflict part of the UDF, mainly members of the Centre of Social Democrats (formerly the Democratic Centre of Jean Lecanuet) nevertheless took part in the government of openness led by Michel Rocard from 1988 to 1991, forming a distinct group (Union of the Centre [ fr ]) of the UDF in the National Assembly. From the mid-1990s onwards, the UDF experienced several splits, seeing the Liberals leave it in 1998 (including the Republican Party, which later became Liberal Democracy), then a majority of its executives and many activists in favour of the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) in 2002 (including the Radical Party). At the same time, the "New-UDF" was created through the merging of most of the remaining components apart from the PPDF.

In 2007, François Bayrou, president of the UDF, reached 18.57% of the votes in the first round of the presidential election. The UDF finally disappeared through its integration into the new party founded by François Bayrou, the Democratic Movement (MoDem), which adopted a position independent of the right and left forces. Party members that refused to abandon the alliance with the right created The Centrists at the same time. In June 2008, Jean Arthuis, who left the MoDem, created a national association, the Centrist Alliance, which brought together elected officials and activists attached to the political heritage of the UDF.

In 2011, Jean-Louis Borloo president of the Radical Party, created the Republican, Ecologist and Social Alliance (ARES) which aimed to bring together the centrist groups that were members of Nicolas Sarkozy 's presidential majority, with the prospect of a common candidacy in the 2012 presidential election. In November 2011, Jean-Louis Borloo decided not to run in the election as a candidate. The members of ARES mainly supported the candidacy of Nicolas Sarkozy after Hervé Morin also did not stand.

In May 2012 Jean-Louis Borloo created the Union of Democrats and Independents (UDI) following the failure of Nicolas Sarkozy to win re-election. He relaunched his intention to bring together center-right political groups under one movement. Under its influence, Members of Parliament who were members of The Centrists, the Radical Party, and the Centrist Alliance (formerly Rassembler les centrists), and various right and center right (including Caledonia Together and the CNIP) form the Union group democrats and independents in the National Assembly, the UDI became a political party in September 2012 joined by the Democratic European Force (FED) under the leadership of Jean-Christophe Lagarde, which was founded by several members of the New Centre who opposed Hervé Morin 's leadership.

In March 2017, the Centrist Alliance provided its support to Emmanuel Macron 's En Marche campaign in the 2017 French presidential election, which led to its exclusion from the UDI as the party and its affiliates supported the candidacy of François Fillon (after having supported Alain Juppé during the primary). After the 2017 French legislative election, two other founding parties left the UDI: the Radical Party, which initiated a process of reunification with the left radicals, which led to the founding of the Radical Movement in December 2017. This was followed by Hervé's movement The Centrists.

Following the presidential election and legislative elections, radical centrism was considered France's dominant political ideology.

Member of the Union of Democrats and Independents from 2012 to 2017, the party has been affiliated with LREM since 2017.

Components : FED, Parti radical (2012–2017), LC (2012–2017), AC (2012–2017), NED (2013–2019)

Movements associated : CPPR, Calédonie ensemble, La Gauche moderne, Canal écologiste républicain, GayLib (2013–2018), Tapura Huiraatira (2016–2019)

Liberalism in France can be considered a right-wing ideology but many centrist movements have claimed to be liberal or have had liberal wings like the UDF.

Liberalism has never been a very popular political movement in France since the 20th century. This was partly due to the fact that liberals took quite a long time to organize themselves in the aftermath of the Second World War.

Even within the National Centre of Independents and Peasants (CNIP), it wasn't until the personalities of Antoine Pinay and Valéry Giscard d'Estaing to gain political stature for the liberals to find national leaders in France.

During the 1960s, the CNIP experienced a split led by Valéry Giscard d'Estaing bringing together supporters of support for Charles de Gaulle within the Independent Republicans. This parliamentary group would quickly transform into a Giscardian political party which embodied the liberal movement until the creation of the UMP. However, this party would never be able to win the elections (legislative or presidential) alone. Suffering from opposition from the Gaullists after the resignation of Jacques Chirac from his post as Prime Minister in 1976, Valéry Giscard d'Estaing quickly allied himself with the centrist parties, resulting from the breakup of the MRP, which it brought together during the 1978 French legislative election within the UDF whose two main components become the Republican Party (PR – heir to the Independent Republicans) and the Centre of Social Democrats (CDS heir to the MPR). The PR would become a strong political force and be an important component of all right-wing majorities until 1997, but its liberal identity became somewhat blurred due to the essentially democratic image of the UDF. In 1997, it changed its name to Liberal Democracy after Alain Madelin became its president. More than symbolic, this new name embodies a change in attitude among liberals who assume for the first time the ideological identity of their political family. In 1998, the UDF broke up and DL became independent, and became an ally of the RPR with which it merged into the UMP in 2002. This anchored the liberals definitively on the right wing, a position widely accepted by most of them since the 1980s–1990s. However, other political parties continue to want to structure an independent liberal political family, beyond the right-left divide, such as Liberal Alternative or the Liberal Democratic Party (former member of the UDI).

In 2017, some of the members of The Republicans (successor party to the UMP), considered the party line as too right-wing and created the Agir party stating to defend "liberal, social, European, humanist and reformist" ideas. Along the same lines, the Horizons party was created in 2021.

En 2019, le PLD est dissous à l'occasion de sa fusion avec Objectif France.

Radicalism is one of the oldest political families that has been structured in France. As supporters of a secular and social republic, they come from the extreme left of the 19th century.

The Radical Party was founded in 1901, even before the law authorizing the creation of associations and political parties existeed. The Republican Party containing radical and radical-socialists gradually evolved towards a central positioning on the political scene. This is most certainly due to its role as a pivotal party under the French Third Republic, and to the structuring of two competing families on the left: the socialists and the communists. Under the French Fifth Republic, the party lost most of its electoral influence and brought together politicians attached to radical values, but for some advocating an alliance with other left-wing forces and for others who wanted an alliance with centrists from the MRP and the Independent Republicans of Giscard d'Estaing.

Finally, in 1971, the party experienced a split, seeing the creation by the minority tendency of the Radical Party of the Left. In 1978, the so-called " Valoisien" Radical Party joined the Union for French Democracy within which it nevertheless retained a strong degree of autonomy. Finally, in 2002, the party left the UDF to join forces with the UMP, which it left in 2011 when its president, Jean-Louis Borloo, formed the Republican, Ecologist and Social Alliance (ARES) which aims to bring together the centrist groups that are members of Nicolas Sarkozy 's presidential majority, with the prospect of a joint candidacy for the 2012 presidential election. Finally Jean-Louis Borloo formed the Union of Democrats and Independents (UDI) in 2012 with the same ambition of bringing together the centrists. The MRG, which became the Radical Left Party, concluded from its creation a lasting programmatic, electoral and financial alliance with the Socialist Party while retaining its legal independence.

De 2017 à 2019, le PRG fait partie du Mouvement radical, qu’il quitte avant d’être dissout en son sein. Redevenu indépendant, il n’envisage des alliances qu’avec des partis de gauche.

En 2019, le PRG quitte le MR. En 2021, le Mouvement radical est dissous au sein du Parti radical, qui est réactivé.

Beyond the radicals, the center-left brings together in France two major currents from moderate socialism : the social democrats and the social liberals.

French social democracy was mainly expressed within the Socialist Party, of which several members claimed to be such during the 2000s. However, they did not claim a centrist position on the political spectrum, but on the contrary an anchoring on the left which remained very majority and embodied in particular by politicians like Dominique Strauss-Kahn. Christian socialists, who were first structured in the trade union sector (French Confederation of Christian Workers) and youth organizations (Jeunesse Étudiante Chrétienne), some participated in the MRP, then in the Socialist Party, like Jacques Delors. Many Protestant socialist figures (or those from Protestant families), such as Michel Rocard, embodied within the " Deuxième gauche [ fr ] " a socialism closer to the forces of the center than to the communist left. In 2020, Territoires of Progress was created, a party claiming to be social democratic and part of Emmanuel Macron 's presidential majority.

A more recent trend, the social liberals come from the social democratic tradition. They gradually structured themselves within the Socialist Party (while remaining an extremely minority) claiming a political line inspired by social democracy and the New Labour project embodied by British prime Minister Tony Blair. Gérard Collomb was a figure of this movement in France. Some took the chance and backed liberal candidate Nicolas Sarkozy in 2007 like Jean-Marie Bockel or Éric Besson. Today, social liberalism is mainly expressed within Renaissance (formerly En Marche) although the movement does not claim to be one and prefers to use the term progressive. As the party founded by Emmanuel Macron, a former minister of the socialist government under François Hollande he has support from figures from the center, right and left.

Even more than the homonymous party of Éric Besson, Renaissance claims a progressive identity which is focused on ecology, social liberalism and Pro-Europeanism which goes beyond any economic considerations. The "progressive" terminology does not refer to this movement, unlike social-liberalism. Progressivism is also defended in France by parties or personalities with various economic positions, ranging from the former liberal minister Nathalie Kosciusko-Morizet to the social-democratic movement Place Publique.

Bonapartism, as identified by René Rémond, was one of the three rights existing in France (Les Droites en France, 1954) and of which Gaullism is a direct heir, has also largely inspired the center and the center-left, by its transpartisan aspect and its social doctrine. A part of the social Gaullists and the left Gaullists thus embody, under the French Fifth Republic, the centrist and center-left branch of French Caesarism.

Unlike the social Gaullists, who have always been members of the right-wing Gaullist parties, the left-wing Gaullists were structured independently, notably within the UDT, until the 1980s. From this turning point, they rallied either to the neo-Gaullism of the RPR, or to the traditional left by rapprochement with the PS during the alternation of 1981, joining the presidential majority without however organizing themselves in a common structure.

The Republican Pole of Jean-Pierre Chevènement can nevertheless be considered as a partisan survival of left-wing Gaullism, at the turn of the 2000s. It was succeeded, after the failure of its founder in the 2002 presidential election, by the Deuxième gauche [ fr ], which still brings together a part of the Republicans, Gaullists and left-wing sovereigntists but whose political audience is more confidential.

Subsequently, the Solidarity Republic party, founded by former Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin in 2010, wants to embody a social Gaullism anchored to the center-right.

From the beginnings of environmental movements, political ecology has been divided into two currents of thought, the first claiming to be left-wing, the second claiming to be independent of the right/left divide or even like centrist movements: this is ecology centrist. The main French environmentalist political party, the Greens, initially adhered to this second school of thought until 1994 when they chose to break with "neither right nor left" to ally themselves with the Socialist Party and then to enter the government of Plural left in 1997. This change of political line caused the departure of Antoine Waechter in 1994 who left to found the Independent Ecological Movement : it was then the beginning of the division between the centrist ecologists and the left ecologists who would impose themselves with The Greens then with The Ecologists as the first political ecological force in France.

In 2015, a new split tore the ecologists of EELV between supporters of a return to the government of Manuel Valls, they were rather center-left ecologists led by Jean-Vincent Placé and François de Rugy, and ecologists favorable to alliances electoral with the Left Front, they are rather left-wing or even radical left ecologists, led by Cécile Duflot.

Jean-Vincent Placé and François de Rugy then founded the Ecologist Party, which allied itself with the Socialist Party and returned to the presidential majority. The movement therefore moved towards La République en marche and joined the new presidential majority formed in 2017.

Le conseil national de Génération écologie appelle à voter pour Jacques Chirac à l’élection présidentielle de 1995, avant de signer un accord avec Démocratie libérale en 1998. Le mouvement glisse alors vers la droite. À partir de 2011, il s'ancre de nouveau davantage au centre gauche en se rapprochant notamment du PRG puis d’EELV, en rejoignant le pôle écologiste en 2021.

It is also possible to place at the centre of the political spectrum certain "thematic" movements and parties such as the Federalist Party or regionalist-nationalist parties such as the Breton Party.

In the royalist movement, the Democratic Rally (RD) is a small centrist group bringing together the center left and the center right as well as the royalist Gaullists.

Cerisy Forest (forêt de Cerisy or forêt de Balleroy) is a 2,127-hectare (5,260-acre) beech woodland (75% of the land), located in the French Calvados and Manche departments.

Since 1976 it has been a national nature reserve managed by the National Forests Office. Its goals include conservation of an endemic golden sub-species of carabus auronitens, which is protected at national level.

Fauna in the woodland includes roe deer, boars, badgers and foxes.

Bird species include black woodpecker, middle spotted woodpecker and long-eared owl. Amphibians and insects include the golden carabus auronitens (Chrysocarabus auronitens ssp cupreonitens), Alpine newt, palmate newt, agile frog and salamanders. There are also butterflies and reptiles including the adder and common lizard.

Cerisy Forest is made up 75% of beech, 12% oak and 3% Scots pine. Other trees and shrubs include birch, chestnut, black alder, holly, knee holm, walnut. Plant species include wood spurge, foxglove and thimbleweed.

In France, the President of the Council, officially President of the Council of Ministers, was the head of government under several political regimes of the 19th and 20th centuries. Since the establishment of the Fifth Republic, the role of head of government has been fulfilled by the Prime Minister (Article 21 of the Constitution of 4 October 1958).

This title was first held by Talleyrand in 1815 during the Restoration. Constitutionally, it is the King who presides over the Council of Ministers: the minister "President of the Council" replaces him when necessary. In practice, he already played a leading role, as Louis XVIII declared in a letter to Decazes in 1821:

It is not the King who is the keystone. It is the President of the Council.

The record for longevity in this position (9 years, 3 months, and 17 days – of which 6 years, 10 months, and 20 days were continuous) is held by Jean-de-Dieu Soult, who headed the government three times under the July Monarchy.

The first President of the Council of the Third Republic was Jules Dufaure in 1876. From 1871 to 1876, the head of government held the title of Vice-President of the Council, with the Council presided over by the President of the Republic (Adolphe Thiers, then Marshal Mac Mahon). The legislative elections of 1876 led to a political crisis between the government and the President of the Republic. The position of President of the Council was then created. It was not official, as the constitutional laws of the Third Republic granted all executive power to the President of the Republic. Curiously, it was the latter who continued to preside over the Council of Ministers held at the Élysée Palace, while another government member held the title of "President of the Council of Ministers" and guided the discussions. Until 1934, the President of the Council had to combine government leadership with another ministerial portfolio, as, being the "unofficial" head of government, he had neither offices nor staff. The President of the Council presented to the President of the Republic a list of ministers from parties that formed a coalition for the occasion (the program was rather brief). This coalition remained fragile, vulnerable to the defection of one of its components over a specific aspect of government policy. The ministry then appeared before the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate, which voted to grant it confidence. The Constitution of 1946 formalized the creation of a President of the Council vested with executive power but still specified that "the President of the Republic presides over the Council of Ministers." The Constitution of 1958 clearly expressed the primacy of the President of the Republic by assigning the title of Prime Minister to the head of government and reserving the presidency of the Council of Ministers to the President of the Republic.

Under the Vichy regime, the head of government was called Vice-President of the Council and later simply Head of Government, with the presidency of the Council of Ministers held by the head of state.

The title of Vice-President of the Council was again given from 1926 to 1958 to certain prominent ministers.

The Chamber of Peers (French : Chambre des pairs) was the upper house of the French parliament from 1814 to 1848.

The Peerage of France was recreated by the Charter of 1814 at the same time as the Bourbon Restoration, albeit on a different basis from that of the ancien regime before 1789. A new Chamber of Peers was created which was similar to the British House of Lords, and it met at the Palais du Luxembourg. This new Chamber of Peers acted as the upper house of the French parliament. Like the House of Lords, the Chamber of Peers also had a judicial function, being authorized to judge peers and other prominent people. As such, it sentenced Marshal Ney to death.

To begin with, the Chamber had 154 members, including the holders of all surviving pre-Revolutionary ecclesiastical (Reims, Langres, and Châlons) and lay peerages, except for the Duchy of Aubigny, which was held by a foreigner, the British Duke of Richmond. Thirteen peers were also prelates.

New members were appointed by the French king, without limit on their numbers. Such a peerage was either granted for life or was heritable, at the king's will. All men of the royal family and all descendants in the male line of previous kings (princes du sang) were members of the chamber by birth (pairs-nés), but nevertheless needed explicit permission from the king to sit at each session of the chamber.

At the outset comprising only hereditary peers and certain prelates of the church, the Chamber became a body to which men were appointed for life following the July Revolution of 1830. In the Revolution of 1848, the Chamber of Peers was disbanded and the peerage of France was abolished.

A chambre de bonne (literally, "maid's room"), is a type of French apartment consisting of a single room in a middle-class house or apartment building. It is generally found on the top floor and only accessible by a staircase, sometimes a separate "service staircase". Initially, these rooms were intended as the bedroom for one of the family's domestics, and the name originates from the colloquial name for such maids: a "bonne à tout faire" (literally, "maid of all work"). Today, chambres de bonne are usually the cheapest rung on the Parisian letting market, and are primarily rented by low-income workers and students. They are also in high demand among workers who wish to maintain a small room or postal address in a big city, especially Paris.

Due to the social level of the envisaged occupants, chambres de bonne are characterised by their tight proportions. The rooms usually have a floor area of around 6–12 m (65–129 sq ft), which is sometimes diminished by being located in a garret with sloping ceilings. They tend to offer minimal facilities: toilets are usually shared with the neighbouring rooms, and located on the landing.

Chambres de bonne have nevertheless been the object of legislation to preserve their occupants' quality of life and health. In the twentieth century, the French government stipulated that all rental properties must have a minimum floor area of 9 m (97 sq ft), a volume of 20 m (710 cu ft), and openings (windows, doors, etc.) equivalent to an eighth of the surface area.

In recent years, landlords have attempted to rebrand their chambres de bonne by advertising them as studettes, a hitherto-unknown category of housing for smaller studios (broadly, those of 12 m (130 sq ft) or less). Since most listings agencies do not recognise a firm distinction between "studios" and "studettes", chambres de bonne may also simply be advertised as studios. Parisian apartment-hunters are, nevertheless, often able to infer that a studio is a chambre de bonne from its listing, due to the distinctive features described above.

A 1993 guidebook for young people wishing to live and work in Paris, gave the following advice about accommodation in the city: "Accomodation in Paris is hard to find. The main types are, chambre de bonne (maid's room), studio/ studette (one room flat), flat (two or more rooms), hostels/ foyers, hotels, or a room with a family."

The Champagne fairs were an annual cycle of trade fairs which flourished in different towns of the County of Champagne in Northeastern France in the 12th and 13th centuries, originating in local agricultural and stock fairs. Each fair lasted about two to three weeks. The Champagne fairs, sited on ancient land routes and largely self-regulated through the development of the Lex mercatoria ("merchant law"), became an important engine in the reviving economic history of medieval Europe, "veritable nerve centers" serving as a premier market for textiles, leather, fur, and spices. At their height, in the late 12th and the 13th century, the fairs linked the cloth-producing cities of the Low Countries with the Italian dyeing and exporting centers, with Genoa in the lead, dominating the commercial and banking relations operating at the frontier region between the north and the Mediterranean. The Champagne fairs were one of the earliest manifestations of a linked European economy, a characteristic of the High Middle Ages.

The towns in which the six fairs of the annual circuit were held had some features in common, but none that would have inexorably drawn the commerce of the fairs: each was situated at an intersection or former way-station of Roman roads and near a river, but only Lagny-sur-Marne had a navigable one. Troyes and Provins had been administrative centers in Charlemagne 's empire that developed into the central towns of the County of Champagne and the Brie Champenoise ; the fair at Bar-sur-Aube was held just outside the precincts of the Count's castle there, and that at Lagny in the grounds of a Benedictine monastery. The self-interest and the political will of the counts of Champagne was the overriding factor.

The series of six fairs, each lasting more than six weeks, were spaced through the year's calendar: the fair of Lagny-sur-Marne began on 2 January: the fair at Bar-sur-Aube on the Tuesday before mid- Lent ; the "May fair" of Provins on the Tuesday before Ascension ; the "fair of St. John" or the "hot fair" of Troyes on the first Tuesday after the fortnight of St. John's Day (24 June); the fair of St. Ayoul of Provins on the Exaltation of the Cross (14 September); the "fair of St. Remi" or the "cold fair" of Troyes on the day following All Saints' Day (that is, on 2 November). Each fair began with the entrée of eight days during which merchants set up, followed by the days allotted for the cloth fair, the days of the leather fair, and the days for the sale of spices and other things sold by weight (avoirdupois). In the last four-day period of the fairs, accounts were settled.

In actual practice, arrivals and departures were more flexible and efficient, relying on flexibly formed and dissolved partnerships, which freed the "silent" partners from actually undertaking the arduous journey on each occasion, delegated agents (certi missi) who could receive payment and undertake contracts, and factors, integrated with communications and transportation, and the extensive use of credit instruments in the trade.

The towns provided huge warehouses, still to be seen at Provins. Furs and skins traveled in both directions, from Spain, Sicily, and North Africa in the south via Marseille, and the highly prized vair, rabbit, marten and other skins from the north. From the north also came woolens and linen cloth. From the south came silk, pepper and other spices, drugs, coinage and the new concepts of credit and bookkeeping. Goods converged from Spain, travelling along the well-established pilgrim route from Santiago de Compostela and from Germany. Once the cloth sales had been concluded, the reckoning of credit at the tables (banche) of Italian money-changers effected compensatory payments for goods, established future payments on credit, made loans to princes and lords, and settled bills of exchange (which were generally worded to expire at one of the Champagne fairs). Even after trade routes had shifted away from the north-south axis that depended on the Champagne commodities fairs, the fairs continued to function as an international clearing house for paper debts and credits, as they had built up a system of commercial law, regulated by private judges separate from the feudal social order and the requirements of scrupulously maintaining a "good name", prior to the third-party enforcement of legal codes by the nation-state.

To cross the Alps, the caravans of pack mules made their way over the Mont Cenis Pass, a journey that took more than a month from Genoa to the fair cities, along one of the varied options of the Via Francigena. Professional freight-handlers sometimes made the trek while under contract to merchants. P. Huvelin documented the existence, by the second half of the thirteenth century, of a faster courier service that facilitated the transfer of letters and market information between north and south for the particular advantage of the Arte di Calimala, the cloth-merchants' guild of Florence, the cities of Siena and Genoa, as well as the mercantile houses. R. D. Face noted that in early February, 1290, it took a courier no more than twenty days to make the journey from Lagny to Florence. Alternatively, north Italian goods were shipped to Aigues-Mortes then up or along the Rhone, Saône and Seine.

The fairs were also important in the spread and exchange of cultural influences — the first appearance of Gothic architecture in Italy was the result of merchants from Siena rebuilding their houses in the Northern style. The phrase "not to know your Champagne fairs" meant not knowing what everyone else did.

It was in the interest of the Count of Champagne, virtually independent of his nominal suzerain, the King of France, to extend the liberties and prerogatives of the towns, which were founded in the increased security of the feudal settlement following the feudal disorders of the tenth century. The predominance of the Champagne fairs over those of other cities has been attributed to the personal role of the Counts in guaranteeing the security and property rights of merchants and trading organisations attending the fairs, and in ensuring that contracts signed at the fairs would be honoured throughout Western Christendom. The Counts provided the fairs with a police force, the "Guards of the Fair", who heard complaints and enforced contracts, excluding defaulters from future participation; weights and measures were strictly regulated. Historian Jean Favier has written "the success of the Champagne fairs can be attributed solely to this intelligent policy of applying public order to business." The Counts' concern for protection of this profitable trade extended beyond their borders: Thibaut II negotiated a treaty in which the kings of France pledged themselves to take under royal protection all merchants passing through royal territory on their way to and from the Champagne fairs. Eventually even the king became involved; in 1209 Philip Augustus granted safe conduct within France to merchants traveling to and from the Champagne fairs, increasing their international importance.

Traditional historians have dated the decline of the Champagne fairs to the subordination of Champagne to the Royal Domain brought about by the marriage alliance of Philip the Fair in 1284. In 1285 Champagne became an integral part of France. "When the special motivation was removed in 1285", Janet Abu-Lughod observes, "the Champagne fairs lost their edge." The effect of the Little Ice Age and population-diminishing black plague took a toll also. Around the same time, a series of wars in Italy, most significantly the conflicts between the Guelphs and Ghibellines, disrupted the overland trade routes that connected the Italian cities with France, and Genoese and Venetian merchants opened up direct sea trade with Flanders, diminishing the importance of the fairs. Fernand Braudel also saw the decline as due to the increasing sophistication of communications and distance credit, changing the medieval merchant from a person engaged in constant arduous travel to one who mostly controlled his affairs by correspondence.

Table 1. Total yield of the taxes levied at the Champagne fairs, c. 1275–1341 (in livres tournois).

The above table shows a spike in tax yields in 1296 followed by an immediate decline, providing useful data on when the faires began to decline. Edwards offers an explanation for the decline of the faires. "Philip IV was ambitious to centralize the French monarchy and expand its military and fiscal capacities. The tactics he used– war with Flanders, despoiling and excluding Flemish merchants, arresting and taxing Italian merchants, and barring exports of raw wool and undyed cloth from France– all affected trade at the Champagne fairs within 15 years of their coming under French governance. Conflicts between France and Flanders restricted the ability of Flemish merchants to attend the fairs, confiscatory taxation and incarceration encumbered and deterred Italian merchants from operating in France, and prohibitions on the export of wool and woolen cloth reduced the attractiveness of the fairs to all."

As the Champagne fairs dwindled to insignificance, their place was assumed by the fairs of Bruges, to which the Genoese ships sailed, Cologne, a Hansa town, Frankfurt-am-Main, Geneva and, more locally, Lyon.

Champenois (lou champaignat) is a Romance language among the langues d'oïl spoken by a minority of people in Champagne and Île-de-France provinces in France, as well as in a handful of towns in southern Belgium (chiefly the municipality of Vresse-sur-Semois).

While it is classified as a regional language of France, it also has recognized status as a regional language in Wallonia, a region of Belgium. Champenois is considered an endangered language by the UNESCO Red Book of Endangered Languages.

The language of Chrétien de Troyes is marked by Champenois traits and Rashi used Champenois in his commentaries, but the earliest literature to survive consciously written in Champenois is noted from the end of the 16th century. Le Bontemps de Carnaval de Chaumont was updated and republished in 1660. The language used contrasts the French spoken by the king's messengers with the Champenois of the local inhabitants. A feature of 18th-century Champenois literature was the noëls (Christmas chants), which wove contemporary and local references into pious texts.

The Channel Ports are seaports in southern England and northern France, which allow for short crossings of the English Channel. There is no formal definition, but there is a general understanding of the term. Some ferry companies divide their routes into "short" and "long" crossings. The broadest definition might be from Plymouth east to Kent and from Roscoff to Zeebrugge although a tighter definition would exclude ports west of Newhaven and Dieppe. A historic group of such ports is the Cinque Ports of south-east England, most of which have ceased to be commercial ports.

The ports vary in size and their relative importance has fluctuated during recent history. Dover has established a lead in the cross-Channel ferry routes through its geographic position and development of its facilities and hinterland. This business has been sustained despite competition from the Channel Tunnel. Other minor ports in Kent and Sussex have retained some trade but these tend to be single routes, such as Newhaven – Dieppe.

Longer routes mainly radiate from Portsmouth but there are lesser ports at Poole and Plymouth, with routes to Normandy, Brittany and Spain.

The major French port with cross-Channel connections is Calais, with frequent sailings to Dover. Other close French channel ports include Dunkirk and Dieppe.

Longer routes are served from Le Havre, Caen, Cherbourg, Roscoff and St Malo. There are services to Ireland (Rosslare and Cork).

The ports are important commercial facilities, reinforcing connections between the British and European road systems. They are also vulnerable to industrial action such as strikes by port employees or blockades by disgruntled fishermen.

Their importance as military facilities was demonstrated during two World Wars.

During World War I the British and French Channel ports were major conduits for British materiel and troops.

The Belgian ports of Ostend and Zeebrugge were considered a major threat by British Admiral Admiral Jellicoe. He was concerned by their use not only as German U-boat ports, but also as torpedo boat bases and even possible departure points for a cross-Channel attack. This concern was transmitted via Whitehall to the British chief of staff on the Western Front, General Haig, for whom it merely confirmed the need for an offensive in Flanders, and eventually led to the Battle of Passchendaele (also known as the Third Battle of Ypres).

During World War II, likewise, the Channel ports provided major supply routes which had to be reopened in 1944. Dunkirk was the route from which British and Allied troops were evacuated in 1940 ; see Dunkirk evacuation. Dunkirk was left under siege until the general German surrender.

In September 1944, the First Canadian Army (Canadian, British, Polish, Czechoslovak and other national units) was to capture the ports from Le Havre to Zeebrugge. Dieppe and Ostende were undefended but major military actions were required for Le Havre (Operation Astonia), Boulogne (Operation Wellhit) and Calais (Operation Undergo). It took several weeks to bring the ports back into use at a time when Allied armies badly needed supplies.

Chantal Jouanno (French pronunciation: [ ʃɑ̃tal ʒwano ] ; née Paul ; born 12 July 1969 in Vernon, Eure, France) is a French politician who served as Minister of Sports in the government of Prime Minister François Fillon from 14 November 2010 and 26 September 2011, succeeding to Roselyne Bachelot and being replaced by David Douillet, before taking office as senator on 1 October 2011. She was a close ally of president Sarkozy and former president of ADEME.

Jouanno is a former karate champion, being a twelve-time French champion in her category. On 7 March 2010, she became karate French Team Champion together with her teammates Véronique Mesnil De Vido and Léna Pyrée.

From 21 January 2009 to 14 November 2010, Jouanno served as Minister for Ecology in the second government of François Fillon, succeeding Nathalie Kosciusko-Morizet.

As Minister of Sports, Jouanno launched two inquiries with the French Football Federation (FFF) into allegations that the national team coach, Laurent Blanc, and others from the federation had discussed introducing racial quotas at training academies for young French players with dual nationality.

In addition to her roles in national government, Jouanno served as regional councillor of Île-de-France from 2010 until 2017.

In response to public outrage over a photo display in Vogue that featured under-age girls in sexy clothes and postures, Minister of Health Nora Berra commissioned Jouanno to write a report on the "hypersexualization" of children in 2011.

During the 2012 Presidential election, Jouanno suggested if she had to choose between a Socialist candidate and a National Front one, she would vote Socialist. This comment was interpreted by Sarkozy supporters such as Francois Fillon as being critical of Sarkozy's attempts to woo National Front supporters.

In October 2012, Jouanno announced leaving the UMP party to join the newly created centre-right party UDI, led by Jean-Louis Borloo, as vice-president. In 2013, Borloo included Jouanno in his shadow cabinet ; in this capacity, she served as opposition counterpart to Minister of Foreign Affairs Laurent Fabius.

In the Republicans' 2016 presidential primaries, Jouanno endorsed Nathalie Kosciusko-Morizet as the center-right parties' candidate for the 2017 French presidential election but later switched to Alain Juppé.

In 2017, Jouanno announced her intention to resign from active politics.

In March 2018, Jouanno became President of the Commission nationale du débat public (CNDP). In January 2019, she announced that she was stepping down from one of her roles associated with this position due to compensation issues – that of guiding the national debate in response to the gilet jaunes movement. This announcement came prior to the commencement on 15 January of the great national debate, which was initiated by Emmanuel Macron. As of January 2019, she received 14,666 euros a month in salary, almost equal to the president's salary. Her mandate ended in 2023.

Charcuterie (/ ʃ ɑːr ˈ k uː t ər i /, shar- KOO -tər-ee, also US : / ʃ ɑːr ˌ k uː t ə ˈ r iː /, - ⁠ EE ; French: [ ʃaʁkyt(ə)ʁi ] ; from chair, ' flesh ', and cuit, ' cooked ') is a branch of French cuisine devoted to prepared meat products, such as bacon, ham, sausage, terrines, galantines, ballotines, pâtés, and confit, primarily from pork.

Charcuterie is part of the garde manger chef 's repertoire. In larger restaurants, a dedicated specialist known as a charcutier may prepare charcuterie instead of the garde manger. Originally intended as a way to preserve meat before the advent of refrigeration, meats are prepared today for their flavors derived from the preservation processes.

The French word for a person who practices charcuterie is charcutier. The etymology of the word is the combination of chair and cuite, or cooked flesh. The Herbsts in Food Lover's Companion say, "it refers to the products, particularly (but not limited to) pork specialties such as pâtés, rillettes, galantines, crépinettes, etc., which are made and sold in a delicatessen -style shop, also called a charcuterie." Montagné in his 1938 edition of Larousse Gastronomique defines it as "[t]he art of preparing various meats, in particular pork, in order to present them in the most diverse ways".

Forcemeat is a mixture of ground, lean meat emulsified with fat. The emulsification can be accomplished by grinding, sieving, or puréeing the ingredients. The emulsification may either be smooth or coarse in texture, depending on the desired consistency of the final product. Forcemeats are used in the production of numerous items found in charcuterie. Meats commonly used in the production of forcemeats include pork, fish (pike, trout, or salmon), seafood, game meats (venison, boar, or rabbit), poultry, game birds, veal, and pork livers. Pork fatback is often used for the fat portion of forcemeat, as it has a somewhat neutral flavor.

In US usage, there are four basic styles of forcemeat. Straight forcemeats are made by progressively grinding equal parts pork and pork fat with a third dominant meat, which can be pork or another type of meat. The proteins are cubed, and then seasoned, cured, rested, ground and finally placed into the desired vessel. Country-style forcemeats combine pork, pork fat (often with the addition of pork liver) and garnish ingredients, resulting in a coarse texture. The third style is gratin, which involves browning a portion of the main protein; the French term gratin implies a "grated" product that is browned. The final style is mousseline, which are very light in texture using lean cuts of meat usually from veal, poultry, fish, or shellfish. The resulting texture comes from the addition of eggs and cream to this forcemeat.

The word sausage is derived through French from the Latin sal, ' salt ', as the sausage-making technique involves placing ground or chopped meat along with salt into a tube casing. The tube casings can vary, but the more common animal-derived casings include sheep, hog, or cattle intestinal linings. Additionally, animal stomachs and bladders, as well as edible artificial casings produced from collagen and inedible plant cellulose or paper, are used. Inedible casings are primarily used to shape, store, and age the sausage. The two main variants of sausage are fresh and cooked. Fresh sausages involve the production of raw meat placed into casings to be cooked at a later time, whereas cooked sausages are heated during production and are ready to eat at the end of production.

Emulsified sausages are cooked sausages with a very fine texture, using the combination of pork, beef, or poultry with fat, salt, cure, flavorings, and water. These ingredients are emulsified at high speed in a food processor or blender. During this process, the salt dissolves the muscle proteins, which helps to suspend the fat molecules. Temperature is an important part of the process: if the temperature rises above 60 °F (16 °C) for pork or 70 °F (21 °C) for beef, the emulsion will not hold and fat will leak from the sausage during the cooking process.

Pâté and terrines are often cooked in a pastry crust or an earthenware container. Both the earthenware container and the dish itself are called a terrine. Pâté and terrine are very similar; the term pâté often suggests a finer-textured forcemeat using liver, whereas terrines are more often made of a coarser forcemeat. The meat is chopped or ground, along with heavy seasoning, which may include fat and aromatics. The seasoning is important, as they will generally be served cold, which mutes the flavors.

The mixture is placed into a lined mold, covered, and cooked in a water bath to control the temperature, which will keep the forcemeat from separating, as the water bath slows the heating process of the terrine. Pâté and terrine are generally cooked to 160 °F (71 °C), while terrine made of foie gras are generally cooked to an internal temperature of 120 °F (59 °C). After the proper temperature is reached, the terrine is removed from the oven and placed into a cooling unit topped with a weight to compact the contents of the terrine. It is then allowed to rest for several days to allow the flavors to blend.

Galantine is a chilled poultry product created after the French Revolution by the chef to the Marquis de Brancas. The term galant connotes urbane sophistication. Other origins are suggested: the older French word for chicken géline or galine or the word gelatin. Sources suggest the spelling of gelatin transformed into the words galentyne, galyntyne, galandyne, and galendine.

The galantine is prepared by skinning and boning a chicken or other poultry. The skin is laid flat, with the pounded breast laid on top. A forcemeat is then placed on top of the pounded breast. The galantine is then rolled with the ends of the breast meeting one another. The galantine is then wrapped in cheesecloth and poached in poultry stock until the proper internal temperature is reached.

Roulade is similar to a galantine. The two major differences are instead of rolling the poultry evenly for the ends of the breasts to meet, the bird is rolled into a pinwheel shape, and the roulade is cooled by chilling it after it has been removed from the poaching liquid.

Salt serves four main purposes in the preservation of food in the charcuterie kitchen. The first is inducing osmosis : this process involves the movement of water outside of the membranes of the cells, which in turn reabsorb the salted water back into the cell. This process assists in the destruction of harmful pathogens. The second is dehydration, which means the salt pulls excess water from the protein, which aids in the shelf life of the protein, as there is less moisture present for bacterial growth. Fermentation is the third, in which salt assists in halting the fermentation process which would otherwise completely break the meat down. Finally, salt assists in denaturing proteins, which in essence means the structure of the proteins is effectively shifted, similar to the effects of cooking.

Before the discovery of nitrates and nitrites by German chemists around 1900, curing was done with unrefined salt and saltpeter. As saltpeter gives inconsistent results in preventing bacterial growth, nitrate and nitrite (in the forms of sodium nitrite and sodium nitrate) have increased in popularity for their consistent results. Nitrates take a considerably longer period of time to break down in cured foods than nitrites. Because of this, nitrates are the preferred curing salts for lengthy curing and drying periods. Nitrites are often used in foods that require a shorter curing time and are used for any item that will be fully cooked. Eventually, a portion of the nitrates will be converted into nitrites by bacterial action.

Nitrite has multiple purposes in the curing process. One purpose is flavor, the nitrites giving a sharp, piquant flavor to the meat. Second, the nitrites react with substances in the meat to produce nitric oxide. Nitric oxide prevents iron from breaking down the fat in the meat, thus halting rancidity. The binding also creates the characteristic reddish color found in most cured meat. Finally, the nitrite inhibits the growth of botulism -causing organisms that would ordinarily thrive in the oxygen-deprived environment in the sausage casing. German scientists originally named botulism poisoning Wurst vergiftung ('sausage poisoning'). The term botulism derives its name from the Latin term for "sausage".

Eating cured and processed meat products has been linked to a small increase in gastric cancer, as well as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and colorectal cancer. The negative effects are presumed to be caused by nitrates and nitrites, as well as nitrosamines which are formed by nitrites reacting with meat. These risks are generally regarded as minimal, and regulations in the United States limit ingoing nitrites to 156 parts per million (0.0156%) (less for bacon) as a precautionary measure.

Two main types of curing salt mixture are used by the charcutier. The first is known by multiple names, including "tinted cure mix", "pink cure", "prague powder", or "insta-cure #1". The mixture is 93.75% sodium chloride and 6.25% sodium nitrite. When used, the recommended amount is a ratio of 4 oz for each 100 lb (1 kg for each 400 kg) of meat or 0.25% of the total weight of the meat. This blend is colored bright pink to keep the charcutier from confusing the mixture with regular salt.

The second curing salt blend is called "prague powder II" or "insta-cure #2". Also colored pink to differentiate it from table salt, it contains 6.25% sodium nitrite, 4% sodium nitrate, and 89.75% table salt. This mixture is used for dry sausages that require a longer drying period which requires the presence of nitrate.

Sweeteners and other flavoring agents are necessary in the production of many cured products due to the harsh flavors of the salt. A number of sweeteners can be used in curing foods, including dextrose, sugar, corn syrup, honey, and maple syrup. Dextrose is seen often in cured meat, as it not only mellows the harshness, but it also increases the moisture content of the cured product while adding less sweetness to the cured meat. The sweeteners also assist in stabilizing the colors in meat and help the fermentation process by giving a nutrient to the bacteria.

Numerous spices and herbs are used in the curing process to assist with the flavor of the final product. The sweet spices regularly used include cinnamon, allspice, nutmeg, mace, and cardamom. Other flavoring agents may include dried and fresh chilies, wine, fruit juice, or vinegar.

Fermented sausages are created by salting chopped or ground meat to remove moisture, while allowing beneficial bacteria to break down sugars into flavorful molecules. Bacteria, including Lactobacillus species and Leuconostoc species, break down these sugars to produce lactic acid, which not only affects the flavor of the sausage, but also lowers the pH from 6.0 to 4.5–5.0, preventing the growth of bacteria that could spoil the sausage. These effects are magnified during the drying process, as the salt and acidity are concentrated as moisture is extracted.

A charcuterie board is of French origin and typically served as an appetizer on a wooden board or stone slab, either eaten straight from the board itself or portioned onto tableware. In the USA, 'charcuterie' is a misnomer, featuring a selection of preserved foods, especially cured meats or pâtés, as well as cheeses and crackers or bread. Of European origin, 'charcuterie' refers to cold meats (e.g. salami, ham etc.) and the term 'charcuterie board' would not be widely used for a board with cheese, fruit and a small amount of meat as is the case in North America. Instead the term cheese board might be used for a dish with largely cheese or some other descriptive title used for a board with a large variety of different cold foodstuffs.

Charcuterie is cured meat, derived from the French chair, ' flesh ', and cuit, ' cooked ' and was coined in 15th century France. The owners of shops specializing in charcuterie (charcutiers) became popular for their detailed preparation of cured meats and helped establish stylized arrangements of food as part of French culinary culture.

However, according to food historian Sarah Wassberg Johnson, charcuterie also has its roots in the simple meals that had been eaten by laborers of the working class throughout Europe since the medieval period, often consisting of meats, cheeses, bread, local produce, and wine or beer. Moreover, these meals evolved and found their way to higher society with the cheese course of formal dinners in 18th and 19th century France, Great Britain, and colonial America. The cheese course remained common at these formal dinners before they were rapidly replaced by the dessert course by the end of the 19th century.

Throughout the 19th and 20th centuries in the United States, the practice of hosting dinners became increasingly informal as time went on, especially by the 1910s, when formal dinners were largely replaced by cocktail parties where a variety of finger foods served throughout the night was preferred over scheduled meal courses. During World War II, American soldiers were introduced to regional charcuteries and cheeses of France, Italy, Germany, and Greece and helped proliferate an interest in European cuisines when they returned home. However, it wasn't until the 1990s that charcuterie boards had a resurgence in popularity as American grocery stores diversified their offerings and specialty food stores became more common.

While charcuterie boards are common appetizers in restaurants today, they continue to find popularity in private gatherings like house and dinner parties due to their ease of preparation. Even so, with the advent of social media in the 2010s, especially image-based apps like Instagram, charcuterie boards also became incredibly complex and expensive, featuring dozens of meats, cheeses, and accompaniments on display for followers and monetization. Chicago-based IRI reported sales of charcuterie types of packaged lunch meats reached $561 million in 2019, up 8.1% from the previous year.

It is generally recommended to diversify the items on a charcuterie board in terms of type (e.g. sausage vs. ham vs. forcemeat), texture (e.g. firm vs. spreadable vs. crumbly cheese), flavor (e.g. sweet vs. salty vs. spicy), origin (e.g. cow vs. sheep vs. goat), and nationality (e.g. French vs. Italian vs. British), among other characteristics. Beyond meats, cheeses, and breads, other components are often included to complement the flavors and textures of these foods. Examples include fresh or dried fruits, olives and olive oil, nuts, vinegars, pickled or fresh vegetables/ crudités, fresh herbs, chocolates, edible flowers, and a variety of spreads such as mustards, honey, and fruit preserves. Charcuterie boards may also be accompanied by different varieties of wines.

In addition to the food components, charcuterie boards themselves are typically made of either wood or stone (typically slate or marble) in order to keep foods cool during service. Other equipment present on the board may include cheese knives for guests to serve themselves, spoons and ramekins for portioning and holding spreads, and labels for the various meats and cheeses to help inform guests.

Charles Cochon Lapparent (24 January 1750 – 17 July 1825) was a French politician and Minister of Police.

He was born 24 January 1750 in Champdeniers-Saint-Denis.

He was born into a bourgeois family that was formerly Protestant, a religion they were required to recant. Lapparent was elected deputy of the Third Estate, and he held important functions in the National Convention, in the armies of the Republic and the committee of public health. On 9 Thermidor, he participated in the fall of Robespierre. During a meeting of the French Directory he was appointed minister of police. However, he was accused of being royalist and deported. During the time of the Consulate and the First French Empire, he held important posts, but in 1815 he was forced to leave France, being allowed to return to Poitiers after a year of exile.

Charles Joseph Tillon (3 July 1897 – 13 January 1993) was a French metal worker, Communist, trade union leader, politician and leader of the French Resistance during World War II (1939–1945).

Tillon was born into a working-class family and trained as a metal worker. During World War I (1914–18) he was conscripted into the navy. He was a leader in a naval mutiny in 1919, and was sentenced to five years hard labor. Released after two years, he returned to factory work. He became active in the French Communist Party and in the trade union movement, rising to senior positions in both. In 1936, he was elected a Deputy in the National Legislature. He lost this position when the Communist Party was outlawed early in 1940, and went underground. After the German occupation of France in June 1940, Tillon became one of the three leaders of the Communist Party and head of the Communist armed Resistance forces. Following the war he was again elected a deputy, and between 1944 and 1946 was in turn Minister of Air, Minister of Armaments, and Minister of Reconstruction and Town Planning.

Tillon was born in Rennes in the Ille-et-Vilaine department on 3 July 1897 to a working-class family. He apprenticed in metallurgy at the Rennes vocational school until 1913, then found work as a fitter. During World War I (1914–18), he was drafted into the navy in 1916, and assigned to the cruiser Guichen, which carried troops to the east. He became a quartermaster and was one of the leaders of the mutiny aboard the Guichen, Jean Bart and France, on the Black Sea, on 26 June 1919. He was arrested in Greece, tried by a military court in Brest and sentenced to five years of hard labor, part of which he served in the Dar Bel Hamri Penitentiary in Morocco.

Tillon was released following a general pardon in 1921. Tillon returned to Rennes and worked as a fitter in different factories making agricultural machinery and chemical products. He joined the French Communist Party, and was active in the Confédération générale du travail unitaire (CGTU) trade union movement. He organized the local metalworkers union, became secretary of the departmental union, then secretary of the regional union of unitary trade unions.

Tillon initiated the successful 1924–25 strike of the sardine packers of Douarnenez.

In 1925, Tillon was elected a municipal Councillor of Douarnenez. In 1928, Tillon was made head of the regional union of Nantes unions. In 1930, he was appointed to the secretariat of the unitary federation of chemical products in Paris. He entered the central committee of the party in 1932 and was made a member of the Politburo. In 1934, he was assigned to reorganizing the unitary federation of harbors, docks and transport. On 26 May 1935, Tillon was elected General Councillor of the Seine for the canton of Aubervilliers. In the parliamentary elections of 1936 he was elected deputy of the Seine for the third district of Saint-Denis. In the Chamber of Deputies, he was vice-president of the merchant marine committee, and for the last two years of his term, he was on the insurance and social welfare committee. He called for action against politicians who had fraudulently enriched themselves during their mandate.

During the Spanish Civil War (1936–39), Tillon raised questions on the treatment of Spanish refugees and on the delivery of gold to General Francisco Franco that had been deposited with the Bank of France by the Spanish government. He traveled to Spain and was taken prisoner in Alicante in April 1939 with the last remaining Republican leaders.

Tillon lost his mandate in the chamber of deputies when the law of 2 January 1940 outlawed the party. He remained loyal to the party and went underground. He was one of the nine Communist deputies who avoided arrest but was sentenced in absentia to five years in prison. He reorganized the party in the southwestern departments both before and after the German occupation of France. After the armistice of 22 June 1940 Tillon took a different line from the other PCF leaders, who denounced the imperialist war, called for peace, and concentrated on opposition to the Vichy government. Instead, in public statements in June and July 1940, Tillon spoke out for fighting for national liberation from the Germans. He became the third member of the clandestine PCF secretariat, with Jacques Duclos and Benoît Frachon.

Germany attacked the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941 in Operation Barbarossa. PCF policy switched to support for armed struggle against the German occupiers. Tillon was put in charge of military matters. Rather than limit armed action to Communists, it was decided to create a non-Communist organization, the Francs-Tireurs et Partisans Français (FTPF), under the Front national. It was the mass organization of the PCF even if it was theoretically independent of the PCF. The National Military Committee of the FTP was set up in March–April 1942, headed by Tillon, who thus became the leader of the Communist resistance. Duclos became effective leader of the party, but in theory, Tillon and Frachon shared authority.

Tillon remained a Communist leader after the Liberation of France and played an important role in politics as mayor, deputy and then minister. In 1944, Tillon was made temporary head of the municipality of Aubervilliers. He became mayor after the municipal elections of April–May 1945 and was reelected in 1947. He was also named a member of the Provisional Consultative Assembly, resuming the seat he had won in 1936. Charles de Gaulle wanted a representative of the Communist Resistance in his cabinet. Tillon was Air Minister under de Gaulle from 10 September 1944 to 21 November 1945. In October 1945, he was elected a member of the Constituent Assembly for the 6th district of the Seine. He was Minister of Armaments from 21 November 1945 to 20 January 1946. Tillon remained Minister of Armaments under the governments of Félix Gouin and Georges Bidault from 23 January to 16 December 1946. In the government of Paul Ramadier, he was Minister of Reconstruction and Urbanism from 22 January 1947 to 4 May 1947.

Tillon remained a loyal member of the central committee, political bureau and secretariat of the party. After the communist ministers were dismissed from Ramadier's government he and Laurent Casanova were made responsible for the PCF's military policy. Tillon was in charge of the "Fight for Peace" section. In 1947, Tillon lost his wife, Colette with whom he had two sons, Claude (1928) and Jacques (1942). In 1951, he married Raymonde Barbé with whom he had two children, Itea (1950) and Nadia (1952). Tillon was reelected to the Assembly in 1951.

At a meeting of the party secretariat on 26 May 1952, André Marty was accused of opposition to the party line. On 1 September 1952, Marty was accused of factional activity, and Tillon was said to represent the other half of the faction. On 7 December 1952, the Central Committee threw Marty out of the party and deprived Tillon of all responsibilities. The purge seems to have been associated with Stalin's purge of "nationalists" in the Eastern European Soviet satellites. Tillon was accused of supporting them, a charge he denied. He retained his party membership.

In June 1970, Tillon coauthored a paper titled "It is no longer possible to remain silent" with Roger Garaudy, Maurice Kriegel-Valrimont and Jean Pronteau. The paper condemned the party's policy during the upheavals in Czechoslovakia and France in 1968, the " normalization " in Czechoslovakia in January 1970 and the suppression of the extreme left. Tillon was thrown out of the PCF.

Later, he concentrated on writing his memoirs, published as On chantait rouge ("We Sang Red") in 1977. Tillon was made a Commander of the Legion of Honour. He died in 1993 in Marseille at age 95.

Tillon held the following ministerial posts during the French Fourth Republic :

In the Middle Ages, Charles's Cross (Latin : Crux Caroli Regis), high in the Pyrenees, marked the frontier between the Kingdom of Navarre and the Duchy of Gascony, specifically the boundary between the Diocese of Bayonne and the Diocese of Pamplona. It was located in the Col de Cize just north of Roncesvalles on the Way of Saint James.

According to legend, owing primarily to the Liber peregrinationis of Aymeric Picaud, the cross was planted by Charlemagne when he first crossed the Pyrenees on his way to Zaragoza in 778. He reportedly said a prayer to Saint James at the site, thus inaugurating the cult of James in Spain some thirty six years before his relics were rediscovered. The first reference to a cross named after Charles is in an episcopal charter of Bayonne, dated 980. A bull of Pope Paschal II in 1106 refers to the limits of the French kingdom as the vallis que Cirsia dicitur usque Caroli crucem (valley called Cizes as far as Charles's cross). José María Lacarra (1907 – 1987) affirmed that the cross was originally only a diocesan boundary, of Carolingian provenance, and was associated with the Way of Saint James. The famous Spanish historian Ramón Menéndez Pidal argued that the cross was an important stage in the pilgrim's journey because it marked their entrance into Spain.

The cross named after Charles was in fact only one of many crosses, known as the croix bornales, that once marked the diocesan (and international) boundary in the Pyrenees between the eleventh and sixteenth centuries. Crosses sited near settlements were usually of stone. Those located further up in the mountains were usually of iron, because they were easier to transport and cheaper to manufacture. The ferrous landmarks explain the Basque toponym gurutzgorris and the Spanish cruces rojas, both meaning "red crosses".

In 1160 the Vézelay Chronicle recorded the cross as the southern boundary of the domain of Eleanor of Aquitaine when she married Louis VII of France. The twelfth-century Liber mentions not only the cross, but also the hospice called Rotolandus, Charlemagne's chapel, and the rock split by Durendal, the sword of Roland, and his tomb at Blaye. The cross is mentioned in Ralph of Diceto, who says that as a result of Richard I's campaigns in 1194 "from the castle of Verneuil until one arrives at Charles's Cross no rebels exist" (a castello Vernolii quousque veniatur ad crucem Karoli nullus ei rebellis existat). The Annales sancti Albini andegavensis (or Annales de Saint- Aubin) record that when John became king of England in 1199 he "acquired all the kingdom which was his father's as far as the cross of King Charles" (adquisivit totum regnum quod erat patris sui usque ad crucem Caroli regis).

Researchers have proposed various interpretations of the evidence for the cross's location for centuries. In 1637, the Basque Arnauld de Oihenart, in his Notitia utriusque Vasconie, concluded that Charles's Cross had occupied a site that was then under the chapel of San Salvador de Ibañeta. The Béarnais Pierre de Marca followed in him in this identification. Around the turn of the twentieth century, two canons of Bayonne, Victor Pierre Dubarat (1849 – 1912) and Jean-Baptiste Daranatz (1869 – 1937), wrote that in the twelfth century the site of San Salvador de Ibañeta had been covered by nothing but Charles's Cross and the thousands of other crosses placed there by pilgrims on the Way of Saint James. According to Lacarra, this conclusion is based on a misinterpretation of the Liber peregrinationis.

Other historians around the turn of the twentieth century placed the cross on the Roman road that passed through the mountains. The historian Jean de Jaurgain (1842 – 1920) believed the cross was located near Arnéguy and Valcarlos, and even identified it with the now lost "Capeyron Roge", in fact a pilgrim hospital. The historical cross which confused him was a diocesan marker, which he found labeled "Curutchegorry" on an eighteenth-century map. Louis Colas (1869 – 1929) was so convinced that Charlemagne had planted the cross atop the summit of Orzanzurieta, the highest peak in the region, when he repaired the road to Zaragoza, then he climbed the Pyrenees in search of its remains in 1910. The remains of a cross he did report, but these were shown to be the remains of a trigonometric column used by the military.

Others have differed in their readings of Aymeric Picaud. Piarres Narbaitz Caillava (1910 – 1984) denied that the cross could have been as high up as Colas suggested and still be accessible to pilgrims. He interpreted Picaud as saying it was in a "marvellous mount", which he identified with the Col de Cizes, but still on the Roman road. Pidal proposed the peak of Astobizcar, the highest point of the route through Lepoeder, but Jimeno Jurío demonstrated that this was a misreading of Picaud, who said not that the cross was located at the fastigium (highest point) but was visible from it in summitate eiusdem monti (on a lesser summit of its mountains).

A cross outside Roncesvalles was placed in the fifteenth century by a prior of the collegiate church.

The Charte d'Alaon is a spurious and fraudulent charter purporting to provide a genealogy of the house of Odo the Great, Duke of Aquitaine (715 – 735). The 19th-century French historian Joseph-François Rabanis proved it to be a hoax fabricated in the 17th century. His research thus rendered a good deal of "known" Gascon and Navarrese genealogy meaningless.

Among the many otherwise unattested claims of the Charte are the descent of the dukes of Aquitaine and Gascony from the Merovingian king Charibert II. The younger sons, if there were younger sons, of Charibert are in fact unknown; as is the parentage of Odo the Great. Likewise, the parentage of Lupus II of Gascony is unknown and no relationship between him and the house of Odo or the Merovingians can be proven.

The Jiménez dynasty that ruled Navarre from the 10th through 13th centuries was also purported to descend from one of the sons of Lupus. Though a relation between Lupus and Seguin I can be posited reasonably, no relationship between either and the Basques of Spain can be shown. In fact, the Basque ethnicity of neither the Aquitainian or Gascon dukes can be demonstrated conclusively. In response to such Spanish genealogies, Higounet attacked them as "phantasmagorical." Historian Jules Villain even proposed a connection between the comital dynasties of Comminges and Foix and Lupus II. His whole thesis, however, is incoherent. In the end analysis, neither the parents, wives, nor children of Lupus II are known. Though a few reasonable surmises can be made.

The Charter for the Environment (French : Charte de l'environnement) is a constitutional law of France approved in 2005, forming part of the constitutional block (bloc de constitutionnalité) of French law having the same force as the Constitution.

The Charter recognizes some fundamental rights and duties relating to the protection of the environment and introduces three major principles into the Constitution of France : the principle of prevention (in Art. 3), the precautionary principle, and the polluter pays principle.

The charter project was initiated by the President of the French Republic Jacques Chirac and prepared by a Commission headed by Yves Coppens, professor of anthropology at the Collège de France.

In changing the Constitution, the Charter is one of the Constitutional amendments under the French Fifth Republic.

Jacques Chirac announced the Charter for the Environment project on 3 May 2001, in a speech in Orléans. He was nearing the end of his first seven-year term as President, and the Charter became one of his policy promises in his campaign at the 2002 French presidential election. Chirac was re-elected, with some 80 per cent of the votes in the second round, beating Jean-Marie Le Pen.

Chirac then appointed a special commission, chaired by Professor Yves Coppens, which took some two years to draft the text of the charter. This commission also included:

This Commission appointed two committees, one legal, the other scientific, to test some hypotheses it wished to consider. Public opinion was also gathered in a series of public meetings held throughout France.

The Commission submitted its report in April 2003, with a proposed text of the charter, which was later reworked by the General Secretariat of the Government and by the cabinet of the President of the Republic. As well as the charter itself, in its final form it includes a change to the preamble of the Constitution of France, inserting into it the ten elements of the Charter, and also to Article 34 of the Constitution.

The draft charter was presented as a constitutional bill to the National Assembly and then to the Senate and was approved in 2004. On 28 February 2005, Parliament met in Congress at Versailles and ratified the charter by 531 votes to 23. Jacques Chirac promulgated it on 1 March 2005.

The Charter of Amiens (French : Charte d'Amiens) was adopted at the 9th Congress of the Confédération générale du travail (CGT) French trade-union, which took place in Amiens in October 1906. Its main proposal was the separation between the union movement and the political parties. The CGT was then dominated by anarcho-syndicalists who preferred the constitution of an alternate system through the elaboration of workers' unions rather than moderate reforms through the electoral path. The motion for the Charter was drafted by Victor Griffuelhes, general secretary of the CGT, and Émile Pouget. The Charter was adopted by 830 participants, eight having voted "no" and one abstained, and marked the victory of the current of revolutionary syndicalism in the CGT of the time.

The Charter of Amiens assigned two aims to the workers' movement : the "defense of immediate and daily demands" and the "struggle for a global transformation of society in complete independence from political parties and from the state." By this Charter, the CGT explicitly recognized class struggle. Immediate goals included reduction of worktime (the 8 hours day) and increase of wages. But the longer-term goal was nothing less than "expropriation of the capitalists" through the means of a general strike. It considered the trade-union to be the future group of production and of social repartition and the basis for a social reorganization — a main view of the syndicalism movement.

The Charter of Amiens has become a cornerstone of the unions' tradition in France and the guarantee of their autonomy from political parties, although after World War II and the creation of the social-democrat Force Ouvrière (FO) trade-union, close to the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO) and then to the French Socialist Party (PS), the CGT has maintained unofficial links with the French Communist Party (PCF). The CGT, FO, the Union nationale des syndicats autonomes (UNSA), the Union syndicale Solidaires, the Confédération nationale du travail (CNT), the FGAAC and the Fédération syndicale unitaire (FSU) today all claim as theirs the Charter of Amiens. The CNT -AIT, founded in 1922, is the only one to reject the Charter, alleging that by proclaiming an autonomy between trade-unions and political parties it organizes the submission of the workers' union to parties. Furthermore, the CNT-AIT — French section of the International Workers' Association (IWA) — which qualifies itself as an anarchist communist organization, also criticizes the formulation according to which the trade-union will become the future cell of social organization: in its views, in the event of an overhaul of Capitalism, the trade-unions will be called to disappear lest they become organizations of control.

Chartres Cathedral (French : Cathédrale Notre-Dame de Chartres, lit. ' Cathedral of Our Lady of Chartres ') is a Catholic cathedral in Chartres, France, about 80 km (50 miles) southwest of Paris, and is the seat of the Bishop of Chartres. Dedicated in honour of the Virgin Mary ('Our Lady'), it was mostly constructed between 1194 and 1220. It stands on the site of at least five cathedrals that have occupied the site since the Diocese of Chartres was formed as an episcopal see in the 4th century. It is one of the best-known and most influential examples of High Gothic and Classic Gothic architecture. It was built above earlier Romanesque basements, while its north spire is more recent (1507–1513) and is built in the more ornate Flamboyant style.

"[O]ne of the most beautiful and historically significant cathedrals in all of Europe," it was designated a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1979, which called it "the high point of French Gothic art " and a "masterpiece".

The cathedral has been well-preserved and restored: the majority of the original stained glass windows survive intact, while the architecture has seen only minor changes since the early 13th century. The building's exterior is dominated by heavy flying buttresses which allowed the architects to increase the window size significantly, while the west end is dominated by two contrasting spires – a 105-metre (349 ft) plain pyramid completed around 1160 and the 113-metre (377 ft) Flamboyant (late Gothic) spire on top of an older tower. Its three great façades are adorned with hundreds of sculpted figures illustrating key theological themes and narratives.

Since at least the 12th century the cathedral has been an important destination for travellers. It attracts large numbers of Christian pilgrims, many of whom come to venerate its famous relic, the Sancta Camisa, said to be the tunic worn by the Virgin Mary at Christ's birth, as well as large numbers of secular tourists who come to admire the cathedral's architecture and art. A venerated Black Madonna statue enshrined within was crowned by Pope Pius IX on 31 May 1855.

At least five cathedrals have stood on this site, each replacing an earlier building damaged by war or fire. The first church dated from no later than the 4th century and was located at the base of a Gallo-Roman wall; this was put to the torch in 743 on the orders of the Duke of Aquitaine. The second church on the site was set on fire by Danish pirates in 858. This was then reconstructed and enlarged by Bishop Gislebert, but was itself destroyed by fire in 1020. A vestige of this church, now known as Saint Lubin Chapel, remains, underneath the apse of the present cathedral. It took its name from Lubinus, the mid-6th-century Bishop of Chartres. It is lower than the rest of the crypt and may have been the shrine of a local saint, prior to the church's rededication to the Virgin Mary.

In 962, the church was damaged by another fire and was reconstructed yet again. A more serious fire broke out on 7 September 1020, after which Bishop Fulbert (bishop from 1006 to 1028) decided to build a new cathedral. He appealed to the royal houses of Europe, and received generous donations for the rebuilding, including a gift from Cnut the Great, King of Norway, Denmark and England. The new cathedral was constructed atop and around the remains of the 9th-century church. It consisted of an ambulatory around the earlier chapel, surrounded by three large chapels with Romanesque barrel vault and groin vault ceilings, which still exist. On top of this structure he built the upper church, 108 meters long and 34 meters wide. The rebuilding proceeded in phases over the next century, culminating in 1145 in a display of public enthusiasm dubbed the " Cult of Carts " – one of several such incidents recorded during the period. It was claimed that during this religious outburst, a crowd of more than a thousand penitents dragged carts filled with building supplies and provisions including stones, wood, grain, etc. to the site.

In 1134, another fire in the town damaged the façade and the bell tower of the cathedral. Construction had already begun on the north tower in the mid-1120s, which was capped with a wooden spire around 1142. The site for the south tower was occupied by the Hotel Dieu that was damaged in the fire. Excavations for that tower were begun straight away. As it rose the sculpture for the Royal Portal (most of which had been carved beforehand) was integrated with the walls of the south tower. The square of the tower was changed to an octagon for the spire just after the Second Crusade. It was finished about 1165 and reached a height of 105 metres or 345 feet, one of the highest in Europe. There was a narthex between the towers and a chapel devoted to Saint Michael. Traces of the vaults and the shafts which supported them are still visible in the western two bays. The stained glass in the three lancet windows over the portals dates from some time before 1145. The Royal Portal on the west façade, between the towers, the primary entrance to the cathedral, was probably finished a year or so after 1140.

On the night of 10 June 1194, another major fire devastated the cathedral. Only the crypt, the towers, and the new façade survived. The cathedral was already known throughout Europe as a pilgrimage destination, due to the reputed relics of the Virgin Mary that it contained. A legate of the Pope happened to be in Chartres at the time of the fire, and spread the word. Funds were collected from royal and noble patrons across Europe, as well as small donations from ordinary people. Reconstruction began almost immediately. Some portions of the building had survived, including the two towers and the Royal Portal on the west end, and these were incorporated into the new cathedral.

The nave, aisles, and lower levels of the transepts of the new cathedral were probably completed first, then the choir and chapels of the apse; then the upper parts of the transept. By 1220, the roof was in place. The major portions of the new cathedral, with its stained glass and sculpture, were largely finished within just twenty-five years, extraordinarily rapid for the time. The cathedral was formally re-consecrated in October 1260, in the presence of King Louis IX of France, whose coat of arms can be seen painted on a boss at the entrance to the apse, although this was added in the 14th century.

Relatively few changes were made after this time. An additional seven spires were proposed in the original plans, but these were never built. In 1326, a new two-storey chapel, dedicated to Saint Piatus of Tournai, displaying his relics, was added to the apse. The upper floor of this chapel was accessed by a staircase opening onto the ambulatory. (The chapel is normally closed to visitors, although it occasionally houses temporary exhibitions.) Another chapel was opened in 1417 by Louis, Count of Vendôme, who had been captured by the English at the Battle of Agincourt and fought alongside Joan of Arc at the siege of Orléans. It is located in the fifth bay of the south aisle and is dedicated to the Virgin Mary. Its highly ornate Flamboyant Gothic style contrasts with the earlier chapels.

In 1506, lightning destroyed the north spire, which was rebuilt in the ' Flamboyant ' style from 1507 to 1513 by architect Jean Texier. When he finished this, he began constructing a new jubé or Rood screen that separated the ceremonial choir space from the nave, where the worshippers sat.

On 27 February 1594, King Henri IV of France was crowned in Chartres Cathedral, rather than the traditional Reims Cathedral, since both Paris and Reims were occupied at the time by the Catholic League. The ceremony took place in the choir of the church, after which the King and the Bishop mounted the rood screen to be seen by the crowd in the nave. After the ceremony and a mass, they moved to the residence of the bishop next to the cathedral for a banquet.

In 1753, further modifications were made to the interior to adapt it to new theological practices. The stone pillars were covered with stucco, and the tapestries which hung behind the stalls were replaced by marble reliefs. The rood screen that separated the liturgical choir from the nave was torn down and the present stalls were built. At the same time, some of the stained glass in the clerestory was removed and replaced with grisaille windows, greatly increasing the light on the high altar in the center of the church.

Early in the French Revolution a mob attacked and began to destroy the sculpture on the north porch, but was stopped by a larger crowd of townspeople. The local Revolutionary Committee decided to destroy the cathedral via explosives and asked a local architect to find the best place to set the explosions. He saved the building by pointing out that the vast amount of rubble from the demolished building would so clog the streets it would take years to clear away. The cathedral, like Notre Dame de Paris and other major cathedrals, became the property of the French State and worship was halted until the time of Napoleon, but it was not further damaged.

In 1836, due to the negligence of workmen, a fire began which destroyed the lead-covered wooden roof and the two belfries, but the building structure and the stained glass were untouched. The old roof was replaced by a copper-covered roof on an iron frame. At the time, the framework over the crossing had the largest span of any iron-framed construction in Europe.

The Second World War, in France, was fought between the Allies and Axis powers of Germany and Italy. In July 1944, the British and Canadians found themselves restrained just south of Caen. The Americans and their five divisions planned an alternative route to the Germans. While some Americans headed west and south, others found themselves in a sweep east of Caen that led them behind the frontline of the German forces. Hitler ordered the German commissioner, Kluge, to head west to cut off the Americans. This ultimately led the Allies to Chartres in mid-August 1944.

On 16 August 1944, the cathedral was saved from destruction thanks to the American colonel Welborn Barton Griffith Jr. (1901–1944), who questioned the order he was given to target the cathedral. The Americans believed that the steeples and towers were being used as an observation post for German artillery.

Griffith, accompanied by a volunteer soldier, instead decided to go and verify whether or not the Germans were using the cathedral. Griffith could see that the cathedral was empty, so he had the cathedral bells ring as a signal for the Americans not to shoot. Upon hearing the bells, the American command rescinded the order to fire. Colonel Griffith died in combat action that same day, in the town of Lèves, near Chartres. He was posthumously decorated with the Croix de Guerre avec Palme (War Cross 1939–1945), the Légion d'Honneur (Legion of Honour) and the Ordre National du Mérite (National Order of Merit) of the French government and the Distinguished Service Cross of the American government.

In 2009, the Monuments Historiques division of the French Ministry of Culture began an $18.5-million program of works at the cathedral, cleaning the inside and outside, protecting the stained glass with a coating, and cleaning and painting the inside masonry creamy-white with trompe-l'œil marbling and gilded detailing, as it may have looked in the 13th century. This has been a subject of controversy (see below).

The cathedral is the seat of the Bishop of Chartres of the Diocese of Chartres. The diocese is part of the ecclesiastical province of Tours.

Every evening since the events of 11 September 2001, Vespers are sung by the Chemin Neuf Community.

The plan, like other Gothic cathedrals, is in the form of a cross and was determined by the shape and size of the 11th-century Romanesque cathedral, whose crypt and vestiges are underneath it. A two-bay narthex at the western end opens into a seven bay nave leading to the crossing, from which wide transepts extend three bays each to north and south. East of the crossing are four rectangular bays terminating in a semicircular apse. The nave and transepts are flanked by single aisles, broadening to a double-aisled ambulatory around the choir and apse. From the ambulatory three deep semi-circular chapels radiate (overlying the deep chapels of Fulbert 's 11th-century crypt).

While the floor plan was traditional, the elevation was bolder and more original, thanks to the use of the flying buttress to support the upper walls. This was the first known use in a Gothic cathedral. These heavy columns of stone were joined to the walls by double stone arches, and reinforced by columns, like the spokes of a wheel. Each of these columns is made from a single piece of stone. The arches press against the walls, counterbalancing the outward thrust from the rib vaults over the cathedral interior. These vaults were also innovative, having just four compartments, unlike the six-part vaults of earlier Gothic churches. They were lighter and could cross a greater distance. Since the flying buttresses were experimental, the architect prudently added additional buttresses concealed under roofs of the aisles.

The elevations of earlier Gothic cathedrals usually had four levels to give them solidity; an arcade of massive columns on the ground floor, supporting a wide arched tribune gallery or tribune, below a narrower arcade triforium ; then, under the roof, the higher and thinner walls, or clerestory, where the windows were. Thanks to the buttresses, the architects of Chartres could eliminate the gallery entirely, make the triforium very narrow, and have much more room for windows above. Chartres was not the first cathedral to use this innovation, but it used it much more consistently and effectively throughout. This buttressing plan was adopted by the other major 13th-century cathedrals, notably Amiens Cathedral and Reims Cathedral.

Another architectural innovation at Chartres was the design of the massive piers or pillars on the ground floor which receive the weight of the roof through the thin stone ribs of vaults above. The weight of the roof is carried by the thin stone ribs of the vaults outwards to the walls, where it is counterbalanced by the flying buttresses, and downwards, first through columns made of ribs joined, then by alternating round and octagonal solid cored piers, each of which bundles together four half-columns. This pier design, known as pilier cantonné, was strong, simple, and elegant, and permitted the large stained glass windows of the clerestory, or upper level.

Although the sculpture on the portals at Chartres is generally of a high standard, the various carved elements inside, such as the capitals and string courses, are relatively poorly finished (when compared for example with those at Reims or Soissons) – the reason is simply that the portals were carved from the finest Parisian limestone, or ' 'calcaire' ', while the internal capitals were carved from the local " Berchères stone ", that is hard to work and can be brittle.

The two towers were built at different times, during the Gothic period, and have different heights and decoration. The north tower was begun in 1134, to replace a Romanesque tower that was damaged by fire. It was completed in 1150 and originally was just two stories high, with a lead-covered roof. The south tower was begun in about 1144 and was finished in 1150. It was more ambitious, and has an octagonal masonry spire on a square tower, and reaches a height of 105 meters. It was built without an interior wooden framework; the flat stone sides narrow progressively to the pinnacle, and heavy stone pyramids around the base give it additional support.

The two towers survived the devastating fire of 1194, which destroyed most of the cathedral except the west façade and crypt. As the cathedral was rebuilt, the famous west rose window was installed between the two towers (13th century), and in 1507, the architect Jean Texier (also sometimes known as Jehan de Beauce) designed a spire for the north tower, to give it a height and appearance closer to that of the south tower. This work was completed in 1513. The north tower is in a more decorative Flamboyant Gothic style, with pinnacles and buttresses. It reaches a height of 113 meters, just above the south tower. Plans were made for the addition of seven more spires around the cathedral, but these were abandoned.

At the base of the north tower is a small structure which contains a Renaissance-era twenty-four-hour clock with a polychrome face, constructed in 1520 by Jean Texier. The face of the clock is eighteen feet in diameter.

A fire in 1836 destroyed the roof and belfries of the cathedral, and melted the bells, but did not damage the structure below or the stained glass. The timber beams under the roof were replaced with an iron framework covered with copper plates.

The tower contains 6 swinging bells and 1 clock bell. The 2 largest swinging bells or bourdons were cast in 1840 by the brothers Alexandre and Jean-Baptiste Cavillier, bell founders in Amiens. The other four were cast in 1845 by the Petitfour brothers, foundrymen in Arbot (Haute-Marne): The clock bell was cast in 1520 by Pierre Savyet, is the only bell to have survived from the pre-revolutionary era, it is the oldest bell in the cathedral.

The cathedral has three great portals or entrances, opening into the nave from the west and into the transepts from north and south. The portals are richly decorated with sculptures, which rendered biblical stories and theological ideas visible for both the educated clergy and layfolk who may not have had access to textual learning. Each of the three portals on the west façade (made 1145–1155) focuses on a different aspect of Christ's role in the world; on the right, his earthly Incarnation, on the left, his Ascension or his existence before his Incarnation (the era "ante legem"), and, in the center, his Second Coming, initiating the End of Time. The statuary of the Chartres portals is considered among the finest existing Gothic sculpture.

One of the few parts of the cathedral to survive the 1194 fire, the Portail royal was integrated into the new cathedral. Opening on to the parvis (the large square in front of the cathedral where markets were held), the two lateral doors would have been the first entry point for most visitors to Chartres, as they remain today. The central door is only opened for the entry of processions on major festivals, of which the most important is the Adventus or installation of a new bishop. The harmonious appearance of the façade results in part from the relative proportions of the central and lateral portals, whose widths are in the ratio 10:7 – one of the common medieval approximations of the square root of 2.

As well as their basic functions of providing access to the interior, portals are the main locations for sculpted images on the Gothic cathedral and it is on the west façade at Chartres that this practice began to develop into a visual summa or encyclopedia of theological knowledge. Each of the three portals focuses on a different aspect of Christ's role in salvation history; his earthly incarnation on the right, his Ascension or existence before the Incarnation on the left, and his Second Coming (the Theophanic Vision) in the center.

Above the right portal, the lintel is carved in two registers with (lower) the Annunciation, Visitation, Nativity, Annunciation to the Shepherds and (upper) the Presentation in the Temple. Above this the tympanum shows the Virgin and Child enthroned in the Sedes sapientiae pose. Surrounding the tympanum, as a reminder of the glory days of the School of Chartres, the archivolts are carved with some very distinctive personifications of the Seven Liberal Arts as well as the classical authors and philosophers most closely associated with them.

The left portal is more enigmatic and art historians still argue over the correct identification. The tympanum shows Christ standing on a cloud, apparently supported by two angels. Some see this as a depiction of the Ascension of Christ (in which case the figures on the lower lintel would represent the disciples witnessing the event) while others see it as representing the Parousia, or Second Coming of Christ (in which case the lintel figures could be either the prophets who foresaw that event or else the 'Men of Galilee' mentioned in Acts 1:9–11). The presence of angels in the upper lintel, descending from a cloud and apparently shouting to those below, would seem to support the latter interpretation. The archivolts contain the signs of the zodiac and the labours of the months – standard references to the cyclical nature of time which appear in many Gothic portals.

The central portal is a more conventional representation of the End of Time as described in the Book of Revelation. In the center of the tympanum is Christ within a mandorla, surrounded by the four symbols of the evangelists (the Tetramorph). The lintel shows the Twelve Apostles while the archivolts show the 24 Elders of the Apocalypse.

Although the upper parts of the three portals are treated separately, two sculptural elements run horizontally across the façade, uniting its different parts. Most obvious are the jamb statues affixed to the columns flanking the doorways – tall, slender standing figures of kings and queens from whom the Portail royal derived its name. Although in the 18th and 19th century these figures were mistakenly identified as the Merovingian monarchs of France (thus attracting the opprobrium of Revolutionary iconoclasts) they almost certainly represent the kings and queens of the Old Testament – another standard iconographical feature of Gothic portals.

Less obvious than the jamb statues but far more intricately carved is the frieze that stretches all across the façade in the sculpted capitals on top of the jamb columns. Carved into these capitals is a lengthy narrative depicting the life of the Virgin and the life and Passion of Christ.

The statuary of the north transept portals is devoted to the Old Testament, and the events leading up to the birth of Christ, with particular emphasis on the Virgin Mary. The glorification of Mary in the center, the incarnation of her son on the left and Old Testament prefigurations and prophecies on the right. One major exception to this scheme is the presence of large statues of St Modesta (a local martyr) and St Potentian on the north west corner of the porch, close to a small doorway where pilgrims visiting the crypt (where their relics were stored) would once have emerged.

As well as the main sculptural areas around the portals themselves, the deep porches are filled with other carvings depicting a range of subjects including local saints, Old Testament narratives, naturalistic foliage, fantastical beasts, Labours of the Months and personifications of the 'active and contemplative lives' (the vita activa and vita contemplativa). The personifications of the vita activa (directly overhead, just inside the inside of the left hand porch) are of particular interest for their meticulous depictions of the various stages in the preparation of flax – an important cash crop in the area during the Middle Ages.

The south portal, which was added later than the others, in the 13th century, is devoted to events after the Crucifixion of Christ, and particularly to the Christian martyrs. The decoration of the central bay concentrates on the Last Judgment and the Apostles; the left bay on the lives of martyrs; and the right bay is devoted to confessor saints. This arrangement is repeated in the stained glass windows of the apse. The arches and columns of the porch are lavishly decorated with sculpture representing the labours of the months, the signs of the zodiac, and statues representing the virtues and vices. On top of the porch, between the gables, are pinnacles in the arcades with statues of eighteen Kings, beginning with King David, representing the lineage of Christ, and linking the Old Testament and the New.

While most of the sculpture of the cathedral portrayed saints, apostles and other Biblical figures, such as the angel holding a sundial on the south façade, other sculpture at Chartres was designed to warn the faithful. These works include statues of assorted monsters and demons. Some of these figures, such as gargoyles, also had a practical function; these served as rain spouts to project water far away from the walls. Others, like the chimera and the strix, were designed to show the consequences of disregarding Biblical teachings.

The nave, or main space for the congregation, was designed especially to receive pilgrims, who would often sleep in the church. The floor is slightly tilted so that it could be washed out with water each morning. The rooms on either side of Royal Portal still have traces of construction of the earlier Romanesque building. The nave itself was built after the fire, beginning in 1194. The floor of the nave also has a labyrinth in the pavement (see labyrinth section below). The two rows of alternating octagonal and round pillars on either side of the nave receive part of the weight of the roof through the thin stone ribs descending from the vaults above. The rest of the weight is distributed by the vaults outwards to the walls, supported by flying buttresses.

The statue of Mary and the infant Christ, called Our Lady of the Pillar, replaces a 16th-century statue which was burned by the Revolutionaries in 1793.

One of the most distinctive features of Chartres Cathedral is the stained glass, both for its quantity and quality. There are 167 windows, including rose windows, round oculi, and tall, pointed lancet windows. The architecture of the cathedral, with its innovative combination of rib vaults and flying buttresses, permitted the construction of much higher and thinner walls, particularly at the top clerestory level, allowing more and larger windows. Also, Chartres contains fewer plain or grisaille windows than later cathedrals, and more windows with densely stained glass panels, making the interior of Chartres darker but the colour of the light deeper and richer.

These are the oldest windows in the cathedral. The right window, the Jesse Window, depicts the genealogy of Christ. The middle window depicts the life of Christ, and the left window depicts the Passion of Christ, from the Transfiguration and Last Supper to the Resurrection. All three of these windows were originally made around 1145 but were restored in the early 13th century and again in the 19th.

The other 12th-century window, perhaps the most famous at Chartres, is the "Notre-Dame de la Belle-Verrière", or "The Blue Virgin". It is found in the first bay of the choir after the south transept. Most windows are made up of around 25 to 30 individual panels showing distinct episodes within the narrative; only Notre-Dame de la Belle-Verrière includes a larger image made up of multiple panels. This window is actually a composite; the upper part, showing the Virgin and Child surrounded by adoring angels, dates from around 1180 and was probably positioned at the center of the apse in the earlier building. The Virgin is depicted wearing a blue robe and sitting in a frontal pose on a throne, with the Christ Child seated on her lap raising his hand in blessing. This composition, known as the Sedes sapientiae ("Throne of Wisdom"), which also appears on the Portail royal, is based on the famous cult figure kept in the crypt. The lower part of the window, showing scenes from the infancy of Christ, dates from the main glazing campaign around 1225.

The cathedral has three large rose windows. The western rose (c. 1215, 12 m in diameter) shows the Last Judgment – a traditional theme for west façades. A central oculus showing Christ as the Judge is surrounded by an inner ring of twelve paired roundels containing angels and the Elders of the Apocalypse and an outer ring of 12 roundels showing the dead emerging from their tombs and the angels blowing trumpets to summon them to judgment.

The north transept rose (10.5 m diameter, c. 1230), like much of the sculpture in the north porch beneath it, is dedicated to the Virgin. The central oculus shows the Virgin and Child and is surrounded by twelve small petal-shaped windows, four with doves (the 'Four Gifts of the Spirit'), the rest with adoring angels carrying candlesticks. Beyond this is a ring of twelve diamond-shaped openings containing the Old Testament Kings of Judah, another ring of smaller lozenges containing the arms of France and Castille, and finally a ring of semicircles containing Old Testament Prophets holding scrolls. The presence of the arms of the French king (yellow fleurs-de-lis on a blue background) and of his mother, Blanche of Castile (yellow castles on a red background) are taken as a sign of royal patronage for this window. Beneath the rose itself are five tall lancet windows (7.5 m high) showing, in the center, the Virgin as an infant held by her mother, St Anne – the same subject as the trumeau in the portal beneath it. Flanking this lancet are four more containing Old Testament figures. Each of these standing figures is shown symbolically triumphing over an enemy depicted in the base of the lancet beneath them – David over Saul, Aaron over Pharaoh, St Anne over Synagoga, etc.

The south transept rose (10.5 m diameter, made c. 1225–30) is dedicated to Christ, who is shown in the central oculus, right hand raised in benediction, surrounded by adoring angels. Two outer rings of twelve circles each contain the 24 Elders of the Apocalypse, crowned and carrying phials and musical instruments. The central lancet beneath the rose shows the Virgin carrying the infant Christ. Either side of this are four lancets showing the four evangelists sitting on the shoulders of four prophets – a rare literal illustration of the theological principle that the New Testament builds upon the Old Testament. This window was a donation of the Mauclerc family, the Counts of Dreux-Bretagne, who are depicted with their arms in the bases of the lancets.

Each bay of the aisles and the choir ambulatory contains one large lancet window, most of them roughly 8.1m high by 2.2m wide. The subjects depicted in these windows, made between 1205 and 1235, include stories from the Old and New Testament and the Lives of the Saints as well as typological cycles and symbolic images such as the signs of the zodiac and labours of the months. One of the most famous examples is the Good Samaritan parable.

Several of the windows at Chartres include images of local tradesmen or labourers in the lowest two or three panels, often with details of their equipment and working methods. Traditionally it was claimed that these images represented the guilds of the donors who paid for the windows. In recent years however this view has largely been discounted, not least because each window would have cost around as much as a large mansion house to make – while most of the labourers depicted would have been subsistence workers with little or no disposable income. Furthermore, although they became powerful and wealthy organisations in the later medieval period, none of these trade guilds had actually been founded when the glass was being made in the early 13th century. Another possible explanation is that the cathedral clergy wanted to emphasise the universal reach of the Church, particularly at a time when their relationship with the local community was often a troubled one.

Because of their greater distance from the viewer, the windows in the clerestory generally adopt simpler, bolder designs. Most feature the standing figure of a saint or Apostle in the upper two-thirds, often with one or two simplified narrative scenes in the lower part, either to help identify the figure or else to remind the viewer of some key event in their life. Whereas the lower windows in the nave arcades and the ambulatory consist of one simple lancet per bay, the clerestory windows are each made up of a pair of lancets with a plate-traceried rose window above. The nave and transept clerestory windows mainly depict saints and Old Testament prophets. Those in the choir depict the kings of France and Castile and members of the local nobility in the straight bays, while the windows in the apse hemicycle show those Old Testament prophets who foresaw the virgin birth, flanking scenes of the Annunciation, Visitation and Nativity in the axial window.

On the whole, Chartres' windows have been remarkably fortunate. The medieval glass largely escaped harm during the Huguenot iconoclasm and the religious wars of the 16th century although the west rose sustained damage from artillery fire in 1591. The relative darkness of the interior seems to have been a problem for some. A few windows were replaced with much lighter grisaille glass in the 14th century to improve illumination, particularly on the north side and several more were replaced with clear glass in 1753 as part of the reforms to liturgical practice that also led to the removal of the jubé (rood screen). The installation of the Vendôme Chapel between two buttresses of the nave in the early 15th century resulted in the loss of one more lancet window, though it did allow for the insertion of a fine late-Gothic window with donor portraits of Louis de Bourbon and his family witnessing the Coronation of the Virgin with assorted saints.

Although estimates vary (depending on how one counts compound or grouped windows) approximately 152 of the original 176 stained glass windows survive – far more than any other medieval cathedral anywhere in the world.

Like most medieval buildings, the windows at Chartres suffered badly from the corrosive effects of atmospheric acids during the Industrial Revolution and thereafter. The majority of windows were cleaned and restored by the famous local workshop Atelier Lorin at the end of the 19th century, but they continued to deteriorate. During World War II most of the stained glass was removed from the cathedral and stored in the surrounding countryside to protect it from damage. At the close of the war the windows were taken out of storage and reinstalled. Since then, an ongoing programme of conservation has been underway and isothermal secondary glazing was gradually installed on the exterior to protect the windows from further damage.

The small Saint Lubin Crypt, under the choir of the cathedral, was constructed in the 9th century and is the oldest part of the building. It is surrounded by a much larger crypt, the Saint Fulbert Crypt, which was completed in 1025, five years after the fire that destroyed most of the older cathedral. It is U-shaped and 230 meters long, next to the crypts of St. Peter's Basilica in Rome and Canterbury Cathedral. It is the largest crypt in Europe and serves as the foundation of the cathedral above.

The corridors and chapels of the crypt are covered with Romanesque barrel vaults, groin vaults where two barrel vaults meet at right angles, and a few more modern Gothic rib-vaults.

One notable feature of the crypt is the Well of the Saints-Forts. The well is thirty-three metres deep and is probably of Celtic origin. According to legend, Quirinus, the Roman magistrate of the Gallo-Roman town, had the early Christian martyrs thrown down the well. A statue of one of the martyrs, Modeste, is featured among the sculpture on the North Portico.

Another notable feature is the Our Lady of the Crypt Chapel. A reliquary here contains a fragment of the reputed veil of the Virgin Mary, which was donated to the cathedral in 876 by Charles the Bald, the grandson of Charlemagne. The silk veil was divided into pieces during the French Revolution. The largest piece is shown in one of the ambulatory chapels above. and the small Shrine of Our Lady of the Crypt. The altar of the chapel is carved from a single block of limestone from the Berchères quarry, the source of most of the stone of the cathedral. The fresco on the wall dates from about 1200 and depicts the Virgin Mary on her throne. The Three Kings are to her left, and the Apostles Savinien and Potentien to her right. The chapel also has a modern stained glass window, the Mary, Door to Heaven Window, made by Henri Guérin, made by cementing together thick slabs of stained glass.

The high ornamental stone screen that separates the choir from the ambulatory was put in place between the 16th and 18th century, to adapt the church to a change in liturgy. It was built in the late Flamboyant Gothic and then the Renaissance style. Over 6 metres tall and around 100 metres long, the screen has forty niches along the ambulatory filled with statues by prominent sculptors telling the life of Christ. The last statues were put in place in 1714.

The buffet, or wooden case of the grand organ of the cathedral is among the oldest in France. It was first built in the 14th century, rebuilt in 1475, and enlarged in 1542. Both the organ and the tribune have been classified as separate historic monuments since 1840.

The organ is placed in the nave at the crossing of the south transept, sixteen meters above the floor of the nave, in close proximity to the choir, to assure the best sound quality throughout the cathedral. The whole case is fifteen meters high, with the top of its central tower thirty meters above the floor of the nave. The case was rebuilt during the Renaissance, and largely took its present form. Closer study of the case by the Ministry of Culture showed that the early case was covered with polychrome painting; yellow ochre under a varnish of reddish brown in earlier layer, and later by a brighter yellow on white. This study also showed that the mechanism was in very poor condition, and urgently needed reconstruction.

A major rebuilding and enlargement of the organ instrument took place in 1969–71, both to restore the ageing mechanism, and to add new keys and functions. The case was also restored, with the cost paid entirely by the French State, as was part of the cost of restoring the organ itself. As a result of this, and after further work on the organ in 1996, the instrument has 70 stops, totaling of over 4000 pipes.

The labyrinth (early 1200s) is a famous feature of the cathedral, located on the floor in the center of the nave. Labyrinths were found in almost all Gothic cathedrals, though most were later removed since they distracted from the religious services in the nave. They symbolized the long winding path towards salvation. Unlike mazes, there was only a single path that could be followed. On certain days the chairs of the nave are removed so that visiting pilgrims can follow the labyrinth. Copies of the Chartres labyrinth are found at other churches and cathedrals, including Grace Cathedral, San Francisco. Artist Kent Bellows depicts a direct reference to the labyrinth, which he renders in the background of at least one of his artworks; Mandala, 1990, Pencil on paper, 18 x 19 1/2 in.

The Chapel of Saint Piatus of Tournai was a later addition to the cathedral, built in 1326, close to the apse at the east end of the cathedral. It contained a collection of reputed relics from the saint, who was bishop of Tournai in modern-day Belgium in the third century. Martyred by the Romans, who cut off the top of his skull, he is depicted in stained glass and sculpture holding the fragment of his skull in his hands. The chapel has a flat chevet and two circular towers. Inside are four bays, in a harmonious style, since it was built all at the same time. It also contains a notable collection of 14th-century stained glass. The lower floor was used as a chapter house, or meeting place for official functions, and the top floor was connected to the cathedral by an open stairway.

The sacristy, across from the north portal of the cathedral, was built in the second half of the 13th century. The bishop's palace, also to the north, is built of brick and stone, and dates to the 17th century. A gateway from the period of Louis XV leads to the palace and also gives access to the terraced gardens, which offer of good view of the cathedral, particularly the chevet of the cathedral at the east end, with its radiating chapels built over the earlier Romanesque vaults. The lower garden also has a labyrinth of hedges.

Work was begun on the Royal Portal with the south lintel around 1136 and with all its sculpture installed up to 1141. Opinions are uncertain as the sizes and styles of the figures vary and some elements, such as the lintel over the right-hand portal, have clearly been cut down to fit the available spaces. The sculpture was originally designed for these portals, but the layouts were changed by successive masters, see careful lithic analysis by John James. Either way, most of the carving follows the exceptionally high standard typical of this period and exercised a strong influence on the subsequent development of Gothic portal design.

Some of the masters have been identified by John James, and drafts of these studies have been published on the web site of the International Center of Medieval Art, New York.

On 10 June 1194, another fire caused extensive damage to Fulbert's cathedral. The true extent of the damage is unknown, though the fact that the lead cames holding the west windows together survived the conflagration intact suggests contemporary accounts of the terrible devastation may have been exaggerated. Either way, the opportunity was taken to begin a complete rebuilding of the choir and nave in the latest style. The undamaged western towers and façade were incorporated into the new works, as was the earlier crypt, effectively limiting the designers of the new building to the same general plan as its predecessor. In fact, the present building is only marginally longer than Fulbert's cathedral.

One of the features of Chartres cathedral is the speed with which it was built – a factor which helped contribute to the consistency of its design. Even though there were innumerable changes to the details, the plan remains consistent. The major change occurred six years after work began when the seven deep chapels around the choir opening off a single ambulatory were turned into shallow recesses opening off a double-aisled ambulatory.

Australian architectural historian John James, who made a detailed study of the cathedral, has estimated that there were about 300 men working on the site at any one time, although it has to be acknowledged that current knowledge of working practices at this time is somewhat limited. Normally medieval churches were built from east to west so that the choir could be completed first and put into use (with a temporary wall sealing off the west end) while the crossing and nave were completed. Canon Delaporte argued that building work started at the crossing and proceeded outwards from there, but the evidence in the stonework itself is unequivocal, especially within the level of the triforium: the nave was at all times more advanced than ambulatory bays of the choir, and this has been confirmed by dendrochronology.

The builders were not working on a clean site; they would have had to clear back the rubble and surviving parts of the old church as they built the new. Work nevertheless progressed rapidly: the south porch with most of its sculpture was installed by 1210, and by 1215 the north porch and the west rose window were completed. The nave high vaults were erected in the 1220s, the canons moved into their new stalls in 1221 under a temporary roof at the level of the clerestory, and the transept roses were erected over the next two decades. The high vaults over the choir were not built until the last years of the 1250s, as was rediscovered in the first decade of the 21st century.

From 1997 until 2018, the exterior of the cathedral underwent an extensive cleaning, that also included many of the interior walls and the sculpture. The statement of purpose declared, "the restoration aims not only to clean and maintains the structure but also to offer an insight into what the cathedral would have looked like in the 13th century." The walls and sculpture, blackened by soot and age, again became white. The celebrated Black Madonna statue was cleaned, and her face was found to be white under the soot. The project went further; the walls in the nave were painted white and shades of yellow and beige, to recreate an idea of the earlier medieval decoration. However, the restoration also brought sharp criticism. The architectural critic of the New York Times, Martin Filler, called it "a scandalous desecration of a cultural holy place." He also noted that the bright white walls made it more difficult to appreciate the colours of the stained glass windows, and declared that the work violated international conservation protocols, in particular, the 1964 Charter of Venice of which France is a signatory. The president of the Friends of Chartres Cathedral Isabelle Paillot defended the restoration work as necessary to prevent the building from crumbling.

At the beginning of the 11th century, Bishop Fulbert besides rebuilding the cathedral, established Chartres as a cathedral school, an important center of religious scholarship and theology. He attracted important theologians, including Thierry of Chartres, William of Conches and the Englishman John of Salisbury. These men were at the forefront of the intense intellectual rethinking that culminated in what is now known as the twelfth-century renaissance, pioneering the Scholastic philosophy that came to dominate medieval thinking throughout Europe. By the mid-12th century, the role of Chartres had waned, as it was replaced by the University of Paris as the leading school of theology. The primary activity of Chartres became pilgrimages.

As with any medieval bishopric, Chartres Cathedral was the most important building in the town – the center of its economy, its most famous landmark and the focal point of many activities that in modern towns are provided for by specialised civic buildings. In the Middle Ages, the cathedral functioned as a kind of marketplace, with different commercial activities centred on the different portals, particularly during the regular fairs. Textiles were sold around the north transept, while meat, vegetable and fuel sellers congregated around the south porch. Money-changers (an essential service at a time when each town or region had its own currency) had their benches, or banques, near the west portals and also in the nave itself. Wine sellers plied their trade in the nave to avoid taxes until, sometime in the 13th century, an ordinance forbade this. The ordinance assigned to the wine-sellers part of the crypt, where they could avoid the count's taxes without disturbing worshippers. Workers of various professions gathered in particular locations around the cathedral awaiting offers of work.

Although the town of Chartres was under the judicial and tax authority of the Counts of Blois, the area immediately surrounding the cathedral, known as the cloître, was in effect a free-trade zone governed by the church authorities, who were entitled to the taxes from all commercial activity taking place there. As well as greatly increasing the cathedral's income, throughout the 12th and 13th centuries this led to regular disputes, often violent, between the bishops, the chapter and the civic authorities – particularly when serfs belonging to the counts transferred their trade (and taxes) to the cathedral. In 1258, after a series of bloody riots instigated by the count's officials, the chapter finally gained permission from the King to seal off the area of the cloître and lock the gates each night.

Even before the Gothic cathedral was built, Chartres was a place of pilgrimage, albeit on a much smaller scale. During the Merovingian and early Carolingian eras, the main focus of devotion for pilgrims was a well (now located in the north side of Fulbert's crypt), known as the Puits des Saints-Forts, or the 'Well of the Strong Saints', into which it was believed the bodies of various local Early-Christian martyrs (including saints Piat, Chéron, Modesta and Potentianus) had been tossed.

Chartres became a site for the veneration of the Blessed Virgin Mary. In 876 the cathedral acquired the Sancta Camisa, believed to be the tunic worn by Mary at the time of Christ's birth. According to legend, the relic was given to the cathedral by Charlemagne who received it as a gift from Emperor Constantine VI during a crusade to Jerusalem. However, as Charlemagne's crusade is fiction, the legend lacks historical merit and was probably invented in the 11th century to authenticate relics at the Abbey of St Denis. In fact, the Sancta Camisa was a gift to the cathedral from Charles the Bald and there is no evidence for its being an important object of pilgrimage prior to the 12th century. In 1194, when the cathedral was struck by lightning, and the east spire was lost, the Sancta Camisa was thought lost, too. However, it was found three days later, protected by priests, who fled behind iron trapdoors when the fire broke out.

Some research suggests that depictions in the cathedral, e.g. Mary's infertile parents Joachim and Anne, harken back to the pre-Christian cult of a fertility goddess, and women would come to the well at this location in order to pray for their children and that some refer to that past. Chartres historian and expert Malcolm Miller rejected the claims of pre-cathedral, Celtic, ceremonies and buildings on the site in a documentary. However, the widespread belief that the cathedral was also the site of a pre-Christian druidical sect who worshipped a "Virgin who will give birth" is purely a late-medieval invention.

By the end of the 12th century, the church had become one of the most important popular pilgrimage destinations in Europe. There were four great fairs which coincided with the main feast days of the Virgin Mary: the Presentation, the Annunciation, the Assumption and the Nativity. The fairs were held in the area administered by the cathedral and were attended by many of the pilgrims in town to see the cloak of the Virgin. Specific pilgrimages were also held in response to outbreaks of disease. When ergotism (more popularly known in the Middle Ages as "St. Anthony's fire") afflicted many victims, the crypt of the original church became a hospital to care for the sick.

Today Chartres continues to attract large numbers of pilgrims, many of whom come to walk slowly around the labyrinth, their heads bowed in prayer – a devotional practice that the cathedral authorities accommodate by removing the chairs from the nave on Fridays from Lent to All Saints' Day (except for Good Friday).

Orson Welles famously used Chartres as a visual backdrop and inspiration for a montage sequence in his film F For Fake. Welles' semi-autobiographical narration spoke to the power of art in culture and how the work itself may be more important than the identity of its creators. Feeling that the beauty of Chartres and its unknown artisans and architects epitomized this sentiment, Welles, standing outside the cathedral and looking at it, eulogizes:

Now this has been standing here for centuries. The premier work of man perhaps in the whole western world and it's without a signature: Chartres.

A celebration to God's glory and to the dignity of man. All that's left most artists seem to feel these days, is man. Naked, poor, forked radish. There aren't any celebrations. Ours, the scientists keep telling us, is a universe, which is disposable. You know it might be just this one anonymous glory of all things, this rich stone forest, this epic chant, this gaiety, this grand choiring shout of affirmation, which we choose when all our cities are dust, to stand intact, to mark where we have been, to testify to what we had it in us, to accomplish.

Our works in stone, in paint, in print are spared, some of them for a few decades, or a millennium or two, but everything must finally fall in war or wear away into the ultimate and universal ash. The triumphs and the frauds, the treasures and the fakes. A fact of life. We're going to die. "Be of good heart," cry the dead artists out of the living past. Our songs will all be silenced – but what of it? Go on singing. Maybe a man's name doesn't matter all that much.

Rudyard Kipling took the stained glass at Chartres as the inspiration for his poem "Chartres Windows".

Joseph Campbell references his spiritual experience in The Power of Myth :

I'm back in the Middle Ages. I'm back in the world that I was brought up in as a child, the Roman Catholic spiritual-image world, and it is magnificent... That cathedral talks to me about the spiritual information of the world. It's a place for meditation, just walking around, just sitting, just looking at those beautiful things.

Joris-Karl Huysmans includes detailed interpretation of the symbolism underlying the art of Chartres Cathedral in his 1898 semi-autobiographical novel La cathédrale.

Chartres was the primary basis for the fictional cathedral in David Macaulay 's Cathedral: The Story of Its Construction and the animated special based on this book.

Chartres was an important setting in the religious thriller Gospel Truths by J. G. Sandom. The book used the cathedral's architecture and history as clues in the search for a lost Gospel.

The cathedral is featured in the 2003 television travel series The Naked Pilgrim ; presenter Brian Sewell explores the cathedral and discusses its famous relic – the nativity cloak said to have been worn by the Virgin Mary.

Popular action-adventure video game Assassin's Creed features a climbable cathedral modelled heavily on the Chartres Cathedral.

Chartres Cathedral and, especially, its labyrinth are featured in the novels Labyrinth and The City of Tears by Kate Mosse, who was educated in and is a resident of Chartres' twin city Chichester.

One of the attractions at the Chartres Cathedral is the Chartres Light Celebration, when not only is the cathedral lit, but so are many buildings throughout the town, as a celebration of electrification.

A chartreuse is a French dish comprising vegetables such as cabbage, chicory or carrot (and sometimes also meat) that are wrapped tightly in a decorative layer of salad or vegetable leaves and cooked within a dome mould. Variations of the dish have been in existence since at least the eighteenth century.

In classic French cuisine it is cooked in a bain-marie and served hot. Chef Marie-Antoine Careme described Chartreuse as the "queen of entrees". Nowadays it is usually a dish of partridge with cabbage and is called chartreuse of partridge.

It was the non-meat diet of the monastic order of Carthusians that had been founded at Chartreuse that gave the dish its name as, originally, it was made just with vegetables. The appearance of the chartreuse may be varied according to the colours, cut, and arrangement of the external vegetables.

42°53′17.7″N 0°33′38″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.888250°N 0.56056°W ﻿ / 42.888250; -0.56056 Located in the French Pyrenees mountains, the Chemin de la Mâture is a 1,200-metre (3,900 ft) path cut into a sheer rock face rising over 200 metres (660 ft) above the river Gave d'Aspe. Completed by the engineer Paul-Marie Leroy in 1772, the Chemin de la Mâture (literally "The Mast Road") was originally created to transport timber from the nearby Pacq forest to be used in constructing masts for French naval vessels. The path has since been incorporated into the GR 10, a long-distance footpath running along the Pyrenees from the Atlantic Ocean to the Mediterranean Sea.

The Chemin de la Mâture overlooks the Fort du Portalet and lies near the village of Etsaut, in the department of Pyrénées-Atlantiques. The area is popular for rock climbing.

Chenard-Walcker, also known as Chenard & Walcker, was a French automobile and commercial vehicle manufacturer from 1898 to 1946. Chenard-Walcker then designed and manufactured trucks marketed via Peugeot sales channels until the 1970s. The factory was at first in Asnières-sur-Seine moving to Gennevilliers in 1906. The make is remembered as the winner of the first Le Mans 24 Hours Race in 1923.

Ernest Chenard (1861–1922) was a railway engineer and maker of bicycles with a factory in the rue de Normandie at Asnières-sur-Seine, then just outside Paris on its north side. He joined with mining engineer Henri Walcker (1877–1912) in 1898 to make motor tricycles. Together they founded their automobile business on 19 January 1899, with Chenard in charge of design and Walcker sales and finance. The business was formally registered as Chenard, Walcker et Compagnie in 1900. In order to ensure short-term commercial viability they started out producing a quadricycle, but in 1900 their "first true automobile", the "Chenard et Walcker Type A" was homologated with the authorities. This had a two-cylinder, 1,160 cc (71 cu in) engine of their own design which drove the rear wheels through a four-speed gearbox and an unusual transmission system. From the gearbox there were two drive shafts, one to each rear hub, with the hubs driven by gear teeth cut on the inside. The car was shown at the 1901 Paris Salon. The "Chenard et Walcker Type B" followed in 1901 and a fuller range was very soon on offer.

In March 1906 the company went public, in the process being renamed as the Société Anonyme des Anciens Étabissements Chenard et Walcker, and moved to a new factory at Gennevilliers in 1908. The new name has caused confusion over the years as to whether the cars should be called Chenard-Walcker or Chenard et Walcker. Both names seem to have been used. Annual production steadily increased with a major market being the supply of taxis especially in Paris. In 1910 they made over 1500 cars making them the ninth largest car maker in France. A six-cylinder car of 4.5-litre (270 cu in) joined the line up in 1913 and at the outbreak of war in 1914 the model range consisted of the six-cylinder and fours of 2.0-litre (120 cu in), 2.6-litre (160 cu in) and 3-litre (180 cu in) capacities.

During World War I Hispano-Suiza aircraft engines were made as well as military versions of the Type U car. With peace, only production of the six-cylinder, now called the Model UU, was resumed but in 1920 a brand new 2,648 cc (161.6 cu in) four, the 12CV, was added. FAR commercial vehicles were also made. Following the death of Ernest Chenard in 1922, his son Lucien Chenard (1896–1971) took over.

The 3-litre car of 1922, designed by Henri Toutée (1884–1943) who had been with the company since 1906, with overhead camshaft engine was the winner of the first Le Mans 24 Hours Race, in 1923 driven by René Léonard and André Lagache, both engineers employed by Chenard et Walcker. A 2-litre version, the 10/12 was subsequently sold to the public.

In 1925 Chenard et Walcker was the fourth largest car maker in France. In 1927 the company entered into a tripartite "consortium" (collaboration) with Delahaye and Rosengart, sharing designs and components. Unic were also offered a place in the consortium but declined the offer. The "entente" was advertised in 1929 with the slogan "L'Union fait la force" The arrangement lasted almost four years, until 1931, when it would be Chenard et Walcker that broke with the other partners. In a letter dated 13 June 1930 to Delahaye, the company's president stated that it seemed quite impossible to continue the collaboration as it was then working, and the collaboration was formally dissolved at the end of September 1931, the fifteen intervening months having been used by the partners to configure their separate model ranges, although some "run-out" models from the period of the collaboration continued to appear after 1931.

Front independent suspension was introduced on some 1934 models and also front-wheel drive using Grégoire designs on the Super Aigle models but this was not a great success as it was launched at the same time as the Citroën Traction Avant but was considerably more expensive. In the same year the Aigle 8 with V-8 engine was launched.

The company never had sufficient capital to modernise and the cars remained largely hand-built leaving them unable to compete on price. As a result, they went bankrupt in 1936 and were taken over by body maker Chausson. The 1938 models shared bodies with Matford, distinguishable only by the radiator grilles and were powered by Citroën or Ford V-8 engines. There were plans to rejuvenate (again) the appearance of the big Chenard & Walcker "Aigle 22CV" model for 1939, giving it a raked grille, but this came to nothing and car production finally ceased in 1939 or 1940. In April 1940, an advertisement for the company's Matford -based passenger cars appeared in the French-language version of a leading Swiss -based motor magazine but, by this time, the company appears to have been finishing up existing stocks of new cars rather than building more.

In September 1939 France declared war on Germany and in June 1940 the German Army rapidly invaded and occupied Northern France. The war years were characterised by a desperate shortage of raw materials for civilian industry and of petrol. In 1940 Chenard & Walcker presented the prototype for a light van based ambulance intended for the army, and this vehicle turned out to be the first in a long line of forward control light vans. By 1941 the van was listed for civilian use, powered by a compact 720 cc (44 cu in) two-stroke water-cooled engine which occupied a central position between the driver's right leg and the left leg of his passenger. Power output was in the region of 20 hp (15 kW) which seems to have been barely compatible with the stated 1,500 kg (3,300 lb) of carrying capacity. By 1942 fuel for civilian use had become virtually unobtainable and an electric-powered version of the little van was offered by a company called Sovel. Although the success of the little van was not sufficient to ensure the manufacturer a long-term future in vehicle production, the van itself endured. Towards the end of the 1940s Chausson (the company which by now had acquired Chenard & Walcker) itself fell into the hands of Peugeot, and the van acquired the engine from the Peugeot 202. A few years later, in 1950, it was rebranded as the Peugeot D3 van. The last ones to carry the Chenard name were made in 1950.

Chenard-Walcker won the inaugural 1923 24 Hours of Le Mans with one of three cars entered. Car number 9, driven by André Lagache and René Léonard, won the race by completing 128 laps. Four laps behind, in second place, came car number 10 driven by Raoul Bachmann and Christian Dauvergne. Their third entry, car number 11 driven by Fernand Bachmann and Raymond Glaszmann, completed 110 laps and finished in seventh place overall. All three cars were Type U 15CV Sport models competing in the 3.0 classification, within which they finished first, second, and fourth. Collectively they completed 362 laps, more than any other manufacturer in the race.

FAR was a French truck manufacturer, affiliated with Chenard-Walcker. It was founded in 1919 and ceased manufacture in 1970. André Lagache, winner of the inaugural 24 Hours of Le Mans in 1923 driving a Chenard Walcker, was one of the founders of Tracteurs FAR and was denoted by the "A" in FAR.

Among the company's products was the 'Pony Mécanique', developed by the Napier motor company and improved in design by Oliver Danson North. It was a three-wheeled articulated tractor unit fitted with automatic coupling gear to enable rapid change of trailers. These vehicles were built under licence from Scammell (Scammell Mechanical Horse) from 1937 to 1970, but the FAR production used the Citroën Traction Avant engine.

49°39′33″N 1°36′42″W ﻿ / ﻿ 49.659072°N 1.611729°W ﻿ / 49.659072; -1.611729

Cherbourg Harbour (French: rade de Cherbourg ; literally, the " roadstead of Cherbourg ") is a harbour situated at the northern end of the Cotentin Peninsula, on the English Channel coastline, in Normandy, northwestern France. With a surface area of 1,500 hectares, it is the second largest artificial harbour in the world, after the 4,500 hectare Ras Laffan Harbour in Qatar. As well as Cherbourg Naval Base, it has been used for mercantile shipping.

It was begun in 1783, with its central harbour breakwater completed in 1853 – this was 3.64 km long, an average of 100 m wide at its base and an average of 12 m wide at its top, and sited 4 km from the coast. Three forts were added to its central wall in 1860. This and the two other breakwaters stretch for more than 6 km. The eastern opening into the harbour is 950 m wide and the western one 2.3 km wide. The harbour's maximum depth is 13 m at low tide.

Cherbourg had been a strategic stronghold for several centuries - its castle was first built in the 5th century to protect the whole width of the Cotentin. In the 17th century Vauban, Marshal of France, launched a project to fortify the town, but they were finally razed shortly afterwards. In 1692 several naval ships under Amiral de Tourville put into the port at Cherbourg after the opening battle of the Battles of Barfleur and La Hougue —the port's lack of adequate defences were revealed when fire ships destroyed many of the French ships under repair, including the Triomphant at the entry point into the port, the Admirable on the Mielles, and the Soleil Royal, the admiral's flagship, on the pointe du Hommet.

The long-planned fortification of the town was finally set in motion by King Louis XVI. In 1776, he set up a commission to choose between Cherbourg, Ambleteuse or Boulogne as France's main strategic port for defence of the English Channel - this was headed by Suffren and also including Dumouriez (later governor of Cherbourg) and La Bretonnière. La Bretonnière's report considered that only Cherbourg had a harbour large enough for 80 warships at once. Exceeding Vauban's designs, he planned the construction of a 4 km long harbour wall between île Pelée and pointe de Querqueville. Dumouriez and Decaux, head of the engineers, advised that Louis build a shorter harbour in a straight line between île Pelée and pointe du Hommet, as foreseen by Vauban, with a single central entry point, with the emphasis on military defences. In the end La Bretonnière's plan won, but during the construction phase Decaux argued for the merits of concrete masonry caissons whereas La Bretonnière preferred sinking old warships and building up rock around them. However, the engineer Louis-Alexandre de Cessart 's plans were chosen, which involved constructing a mole from 90 tree trunks 20m by 20m, filled in with stones and linked by iron chains.

Construction began in 1783 and was completed in 70 years, by three architects - Louis-Alexandre de Cessart, La Bretonnière and Joseph Cachin. The first trunk was laid on 6 June 1784, one kilometre from Île Pelée, and the harbour was filled with 300 to 400 boats ferrying stone from the port at Becquet to the mole to build against the trunks. However, the first trunks were severely damaged by storms. On 22 June 1786 Louis XVI made his only trip away from Paris and Versailles to see how far work on the harbour had progressed and assisted in sinking the ninth stone section. Cessart's plans were finally scotched in 1788, with funding having run out and the French Revolution imminent. This marked a return to La Bretonnière's plan, but in the period between 1789 and 1790 Dumouriez and Cessart left Cherbourg. Subsidies for the project were cut in 1790 and La Bretonnière was forced to hand in his resignation in 1792. Despite a law passed on 1 August 1792 ordering the construction of the military outer port, all works were suspended from 1792 to 1802.

In 1802, intending to make Cherbourg one of his main military ports in preparation for his invasion of the United Kingdom, Napoleon I ordered that work on the harbour wall be resumed to La Bretonnière's plans, by building up the central section to mount cannon. A decree of 25 germinal year XI (1803) ordered the engineer Cachin to excavate the military outer harbour at lac de Moeris - this was opened on 27 August 1813 in the presence of empress Marie-Louise of Austria. That decree also ordered the construction of a new arsenal at the port. 1803 also saw Cherbourg's harbour fend off British attacks and become a base for privateers.

Works on the central wall were again interrupted between 1813 and 1832 and were only finally completed in 1853 under Napoleon III, with the western and eastern harbour walls only completed in 1895. The period also saw the opening of two basins in the naval base—the Charles X basin (begun in 1814; 290×220×18 metres) on 25 August 1829 in the Dauphin's presence, and the Napoléon III basin (begun in 1836; 420×200×18 metres) on 7 August 1858 by Napoleon III and his wife. Work on the harbour was fully completed under the French Third Republic, with the addition of the eastern (1890–1894) and western (1889–1896) walls and the construction of a 'Petite rade' (digue du Hommet, 1899–1914, and digue des Flamands, 1921–1922). Charles Maurice Cabart Danneville made an entry point in the harbour's eastern breakwater, the digue Collignon, so that fishing boats could get out of the harbour rapidly, in case of emergency. That entry point later became the passe Cabart-Danneville. The breakwaters also resisted demolition by the Germans in 1944 during the Battle of Cherbourg.

On April 10, 1912, the British ocean liner RMS Titanic stopped at Cherbourg Harbour on its maiden voyage. The ship was too large to be properly docked there, so passengers were transported to Titanic with the smaller vessels SS Traffic and SS Nomadic. Among these passengers were John Jacob Astor IV and his wife Madeline. The ship would later sink on its voyage.

Chestnut pie is a pie prepared with chestnuts as a primary ingredient. It is a part of the French cuisine (known as a Tarte à la châtaigne or Gâteau Ardéchois) and Italian cuisine (known as Castagnaccio) where it has been documented as dating back to the 15th century. It is also a part of the cuisine of the Southern United States. Shelled whole or chopped chestnuts may be used, which may be boiled or roasted. A chestnut purée may also be used. It may be prepared as a savory or sweet pie.

Chestnut pie has been documented back to the Middle Ages in French cookbooks and to the 15th century in Italy, in the book De honesta voluptate et valetudine ("On honourable pleasure and health") written by the gastronomist Bartolomeo Platina. Platina's recipe, titled torta ex castaneís, called for the use of boiled and ground chestnuts in the pie. The chestnuts were ground using a mortar and pestle, milk was added and then the mixture was strained. After this step, the ingredients for a spelt tart were added. The use of saffron was recommended to add coloration to the dish.

In the 16th century, the pie was prepared and documented by Bartolomeo Scappi in his 1570 book Opera dell'arte del cucinare, which was focused upon Italian Renaissance cuisine. The recipe included the use of dried and fresh chestnuts in the pie. Scappi's recipe recommended using chestnuts that were not entirely ripened, gathered in August.

An 1858 recipe for sweet chestnut pie uses chestnuts glazed with orange flowers, in the dish's preparation, which are placed inside the pie.

A 1908 recipe for a savory chestnut pie uses shelled chestnuts, Spanish onion, haricot stock, salt and pepper.

Savory chestnut pie may be prepared with various additional ingredients such as mushrooms, garlic onion, celery, leeks and butternut squash, among others. A 1915 recipe uses boiled and shelled chestnuts, canned mushrooms, a white sauce and a biscuit dough in preparation of the dish.

In the US, sweet chestnut pie may be prepared as a cream pie. Chocolate may be used as an ingredient in sweet chestnut pie. It may be served topped with whipped cream. In France, tarte à la châtaigne is eaten as a dessert.

Chicken chasseur (lit. ' hunter's chicken ', but unrelated to the British dish of that name) is a French dish, known in France as poulet chasseur, poulet à la chasseur or poulet sauté chasseur. It consists of fried chicken served hot, with sauce chasseur, which is based on mushrooms, onions or shallots, tomatoes and wine, and may also contain stock and various herbs.

Chasseur is the French for 'hunter', and sauce chasseur shares a multilingual connection with other cuisines. In The Oxford Companion to Food, Alan Davidson writes that the phrase, meaning 'huntsmen-style', occurs in many languages: "Italians say alla cacciatora, Poles say bigos and the French chasseur." The term, according to Davidson, usually indicates the presence of forest mushrooms. The Dictionnaire de l'Académie française dates the term chasseur to the 12th century; the dictionary refers to its culinary use, but does not give any indication of when it was first used in that context. The earliest citation of the culinary use of the word in English given by the Oxford English Dictionary dates from the 1880s.

In 1865 Bailey's Magazine recorded a dish of poulet à la chasseur served in a Parisian restaurant and costing the equivalent of half a guinea a head. In Le Figaro in 1870 Eugène Morand recorded a lunch eaten by a group of army officers at which—after two types of sausage, York and Bayonne ham, fried eggs, fillet steak, and macaroni with Parmesan —they concluded the savoury part of the meal with poulet à la chasseur (" Ah! quel plaisir d'être soldat! " (lit. ' Ah! What a pleasure to be a soldier '), commented Morand). The dish is mentioned in the American and British press during the later years of the 19th century.

Chicken chasseur is prepared using sautéed chicken, served with a chasseur sauce. All the following writers specify chopped or sliced mushrooms, and shallots or other types of onion, but vary as to the other ingredients of the sauce. Most recipes call for the addition of herbs: the most frequently specified are parsley and tarragon ; others are basil, bay leaf, chervil, and thyme.

A dish with the English name "hunter's chicken" exists, but is unrelated to chicken chasseur. It consists of skinless and boneless chicken breasts wrapped in bacon, baked, and covered with barbecue sauce and melted cheese.

The chief minister of France or, closer to the French term, chief minister of state (French : principal ministre d'État), or prime minister of France were and are informal titles given to various personages who received various degrees of power to rule the Kingdom of France on behalf of the monarch during the Ancien Régime ('Old Regime'). The appellation was not a position (nobody was ever appointed to the role of chief minister), but rather a job description for a royal favourite given wide-ranging powers as head of government. The chief minister was always a high official, often a secretary of state, or sometimes chancellor of France. When the monarch was a minor, the regent held this role.

Like the title of chief minister was unofficial, the monarch maintained all his powers, giving to the chief minister the task to make effective his orders. However, during moments where the king was absent from the country, highly sick, indifferent or unfit to govern, the chief minister had a strong role, becoming the real mind behind the state's operating.

Usually, the chief ministers were members of the King's Council (the archaic form of cabinet) or high members of the French nobility or the Catholic clergy.

From 1661, Louis XIV and his successors, with varying degrees of success, sought to prevent any of their ministers from achieving supremacy over the others. The title of 'First Minister of State' was used, however the old title was not brought back after Louis XIV.

With the eruption of the French Revolution in 1789, the first minister of state progressively lost importance and influence inside national politics. Finally, with the coming of the constitutional monarchy in 1791, the title of first minister ceased to exist; executive power was vested elsewhere.

The Chief of the Naval Staff (French : Chef d’état-major de la Marine, pronounced [ ʃɛf deta maʒɔʁ də la maʁin ], abbr. CEMM) is a French general officer, adviser to the Chief of the Defence Staff for the French Navy and responsible to the Minister of the Armed Forces for preparing the Navy for its engagement. Since 1 September 2023, the Chief of the Naval Staff has been Admiral Nicolas Vaujour [ fr ].

The Chief of the Naval Staff is the top representative of the French Navy.

He advises and assists the Chief of the Defence Staff. He provides him with Navy -specific expertise.

He maintains bilateral relations with foreign navies. He participates in inter-administrative bodies in the field of State action at sea.

He has authority over the Navy General Staff (French: Etat-major de la Marine, acronym: EMM), over the Navy Military Personnel Directorate (French: Direction du personnel militaire de la Marine, acronym: DPMM), as well as over all the commands, directorates and services that make up the French Navy.

He ensures the preparation of the naval forces. As such, he is responsible for instruction and training, as well as maintenance of operational readiness. He develops the concepts and doctrines for the employment of naval forces. He reports to the Chief of the Defence Staff on the availability of assets and the operational readiness of the naval forces.

Regarding capabilities, the Chief of the Naval Staff develops the French Navy's military requirements. He defines support and infrastructure needs. He is responsible for the operational evaluation of new equipment. He decides their commissioning and their withdrawal from service at the end of their life.

In terms of human resources, regarding the military personnel of the French Navy, he is responsible for their recruitment, initial and continuous training, discipline, morale and wellbeing, professional and career paths, as well as management of the workforce, jobs and skills. Regarding civilian personnel under his authority, he expresses the needs in terms of employment, manpower and skills. He takes part in the implementation of the ministerial policy concerning civilian personnel and participates in social dialogue bodies.

He has responsibilities in terms of risk management and nuclear safety.

The authority of the Chief of the Naval Staff is exercised over several bodies:

He chairs the board of directors of the Hydrographic and Oceanographic Service of the Navy (French: Service hydrographique et océanographique de la Marine, acronym: SHOM) and supervises the French Naval Academy on behalf of the Minister of the Armed Forces.

Before the First World War, the Chief of the Naval Staff was above all the head of the military cabinet of the Minister of the Navy, and this mode of operation is the source of the name used; the officer who had effective authority over the Navy was then the admiral commanding the naval army, sometimes unofficially referred to as " amiralissime ", in reference to the title of " généralissime " used at the time in the Army.

The First World War called all this into question, because an immense work of reorganisation had to be carried out at the headquarters in " rue Royale "a to conduct a long-lasting industrial maritime war and to be able to face the new threats posed by German submarines and underwater mines: a sort of "second staff" was even created, called the "directorate general for underwater warfare" (French: Direction générale de la guerre sous-marine, acronym: DGGSM) with sometimes overlapping areas of action; this observed redundancy logically led to the dissolution of the DGGSM at the end of the war and the attribution of its many prerogatives to the offices of the Navy General Staff.

In order to have a system allowing a flexible transition between peacetime — period of preparation — and wartime — period of action — the Vice-Admiral Chief of the Navy General Staff becomes, in the 1920s, the designated commander of the French maritime forces in the event of war, and the staff tasks fall in such circumstances to the Major General of the Navy, his first deputy in time of peace.

From 26 August 1939 to 6 June 1943, the organisation of the French Navy no longer included a general staff, but instead a "staff of the French maritime forces" which acted as such for the time of war. Admiral Darlan thus became commander-in-chief of the French maritime forces before being called to other functions in February 1941 in Vichy France.

After the Second World War, the gradual disappearance of the portfolio of Minister of the Navy led to entrusting part of the Minister's prerogatives to the Chief of the Naval Staff. However over time these prerogatives were taken over at the "joint" level by the staff of the armed forces and its chief: the Chief of the Defence Staff. The Chief of the Naval Staff thus lost his responsibilities for directing maritime operations to the Chief of the Defence Staff in 1971b.

In the 2000s, a large part of the organic prerogatives – force preparation – was again transferred to the Chief of the Defence Staff, but the Chief of the Naval Staff remained his main adviser regarding the preparation and employment of the Navy.

Admiral Bernard Louzeau decided at the end of the 1980s to replace the emblem of the French Navy, "a gold anchor intertwined with a cable", by a logo representing "a white ship’s bow with two blue and red waves". Admiral Pierre-François Forissier decided to provide the Navy with an anthem whose lyrics were written in 2011 by Lieutenant Christian Beauval and the music by the Chief of Music of the Armed Forces Didier Descamps, Chief of Music of the Brest fleet crews.

The following is a list of chiefs that served under the Third Republic, the French State, the Fourth Republic and the Fifth Republic :

Chileans in France consist mostly of refugees, but also other migrants such as students or economic workers, from Chile and their descendants in France.

The overthrow of Salvador Allende on 11 September 1973, by a military junta, constitutes a major rupture in Chilean contemporary history. The violence of the Pronunciamento and the implementation of the tenets of the national security doctrine, supplemented by an ad hoc legislation, caused an enormous political, then economic migration, quite extraordinary for a Latin American country. In Europe, France as well as Sweden were part of the main host countries. The exiles were given a particularly good reception in France because of the positive echo of the Popular Unity experience. Yet, banishment was an additional act of violence for these people who were seriously weakened by the events they had experienced. The effects of the temporality of exile and the individual reconstruction imposed by its extension will lead these Chileans to redefine the roles of each member of the family unit and accept a long denied reality, in order to try to achieve the integration process. Thus, even if the conditions of reception were favorable, the exiles had to rebuild their social connections, adapt to an unknown form of socialization and to often consent to be deskilled and resign themselves to remaining outsiders.

The Chizerots are a historic group of people living in a small locality in Burgundy, France, who are somewhat different in appearance and customs to their neighbours. Their origins are uncertain.

North of Mâcon and south of Tournus, on both banks of the Saône, there are, on one side, the villages of Boz, Ozan, Arbigny and Sermoyer, whose inhabitants call themselves Burkins, and on the other side, the village of Uchizy, whose inhabitants go by the name of Chizerots. In contradiction to M. Reboud, M. Reinaud seems to doubt their Saracen origin: "In 1862 I went to Uchizy and Arbigny; several persons there told me themselves that they were of Arabian or Saracenic origin. In the midst of numerous individuals, having apparently no very distinct anthropological characters, some very black haired women differed from the inhabitants of the neighbourhood by their tall and slender figure; their elongated faces, without malar prominences, by their uniform and dark complexion, by their large eyes, long eyelashes, black, thick and arched eye- brows, by their physiognomy, melancholy, yet regular and beautiful; for one of these young Chizerotes, when the French empress passed through Macon, had been appointed, as the most beautiful girl of the whole district, to offer a bouquet to her sovereign. That type seems more Arabian than Berberic."

"On the border between the mediæval dukedom and the principality of Dombes, to-day the Départements of the Saône et Loire and the Ain, is a race apart from other mankind hereabouts. In numerous little villages, notably at Boz and Huchisi (Uchizy), one may still observe the dark Saracen features of the ancients mingled with those of to-day. A monograph has recently appeared which defines these peoples as something quite unlike the other varied races now welded into the citizens of twentieth century France. Modern vogue, style, fashion, or whatever you may choose to call it, is everywhere fast changing the old picturesque costume into something of the ready-made, big-store order, but to stroll about the highways and byways in these parts and see men in baggy Turkish trousers with their coats and waistcoats tied together by strings or ribbons in place of conventional buttons, is as a whiff of the Orient, or at least a reminder of the long ago. The women dress in a distinct, but perhaps not otherwise very remarkable, manner, save that an occasional 'Turk's-Head' turban is seen, quite as Oriental as the culotte of the men. A blend of Spain, of Arabia, of Persia and of Turkey could not present a costume more droll than that of the 'Chizerots,' as these people are known."

"The Burhin and Chizerot tribes on either bank of the Saône in Burgundy were thought to be Saracen because they were short and dark, and because they treated illnesses with a special form of 'oriental' massage. (Reports that they wore turbans and Turkish trousers and swore by Allah are not entirely reliable)."

A chocolaterie is a type of business which both manufactures chocolate confections and sells them, at the same location. It is usually a small family business, often operating at only one location. The word is of French origin, and shops named as such are common in France and Belgium. The term is also used to designate larger chocolate production companies, such as Chocolaterie Guylian, many of which started as smaller shops. This type of store operates in other countries, such as the US, Canada, the UK and Germany, sometimes using the French term. Stores which sell candies and chocolate but do not produce their own brand are called confectionery stores, or other names depending on the region. The related occupational term is chocolatier, though this term is also used sometimes to describe chocolateries, such as Godiva Chocolatier.

Until the discovery of the New World, the cacao tree was unknown to Europeans. The Spanish were the first to bring cocoa beans to Europe along with cocoa grinding equipment. In the 18th century, the invention of the hydraulic press by Doret and the steam-driven chocolate mill by Dubuisson allowed for the beginning of mass production of chocolate.

The first chocolaterie opened in Paris in 1659.

As an example of the term's usage, the novel Charlie and the Chocolate Factory was entitled Charlie et la Chocolaterie in France. The novel and 2000 film Chocolat are set in a chocolaterie.

Cholent or Schalet (Yiddish : טשאָלנט, romanized : tsholnt) is a traditional slow-simmering Sabbath stew in Jewish cuisine that was developed by Ashkenazi Jews first in France and later Germany, and is first mentioned in the 12th century. It is closely related to the French cassoulet and is believed to have been derived from hamin, a similar Sabbath stew that emerged in Spain among Sephardic Jews and made its way to France by way of Provence.

Max Weinreich traces the etymology of cholent to the Latin present participle calentem (an accusative form of calēns), meaning "that which is hot" (as in calorie), via Old French chalant (present participle of chalt, from the verb chaloir, "to warm"). One widely quoted folk etymology derives the word from French chaud ("hot") and lent ("slow"). Another folk etymology derives cholent (or sholen) from שלן, which means "that rested [overnight]", referring to the tradition of Jewish families placing their individual pots of cholent into the town baker's ovens that always stayed hot and slow-cooked the food overnight.

Shabbat stews were developed over the centuries to conform with Jewish laws that prohibit cooking on the Sabbath. The pot is brought to a boil on Friday before the Sabbath begins, and sometimes kept on a blech or hotplate, or left in a slow oven or electric slow cooker, until the following day. Cholent originated as a barley porridge in ancient Judea as a type of " harisa ". Over the centuries various Jewish diaspora communities created their own variations of the dish based on local food resources and neighborhood influence.

There are many variations of the dish, which is standard in both the Ashkenazi and Sephardi kitchens and among other communities. The basic ingredients of cholent are meat, potatoes, beans, and barley though all shabbat stews contain some type of grain and meat or featured vegetable. Slow overnight cooking allows the flavors of the various ingredients to permeate and produces the characteristic taste of each local stew.

In traditional Ashkenazi, Sephardi, and Mizrahi families, stew is the hot main course of the midday Shabbat meal served on Saturdays typically after the morning synagogue services for practicing Jews. Secular Jewish families also serve stews like cholent or eat them in Israeli restaurants. For practicing Jews, lighting a fire and cooking food are among the activities prohibited on Shabbat by the written Torah. Therefore, cooked Shabbat food must be prepared before the onset of the Jewish Shabbat at sunset Friday night.

Cholent was first mentioned by name 1180 CE by R. Yitzhak ben Moshe of Vienna who says "I saw in France in the home of my teacher R. Yehuda bar Yitzhak that sometimes their cholent pots were buried. And on Shabbat before the meal, the servants light the fire near the cauldrons so that they warm well, and some remove them and bring them close to the fire".

The origins of cholent date back to the 11th century, to the Christian Reconquista of Al-Andalus or Islamic Spain, when culinary techniques from the Moorish period spread northwards into Europe through Provence. In the late 12th or early 13th century, the Sephardic Sabbath stew known as hamin became a part of the traditions of the Jews of France.

Among the French Ashkenazi Jewish population, the traditional stew was renamed tsholnt, cholent or schalet, likely from the old French for warm, chald or chalt (the antecedent of today's chaud), or from chald-de-lit ("warmth of the bed").

By the 13th century, the stew is described as having become widespread in Bohemia and Germany. Originally made with fava beans, the cholent of the French Ashkenazi was substituted with dried haricot beans from the Americas in the sixteenth century. Since then, white beans, red kidney beans, pinto beans, and dried lima beans have all become common ingredients. Some Romanians add chickpeas in "a remnant of the Sephardic influence due to Ottoman control of the area".

Since European agriculture favoured bread wheat instead of durum, substitutions were made. In Germany, spelt became common in cholent, while in Eastern Europe, the grain of choice became barley. The usual choice of meat in cholent is beef, either flank or brisket, or, occasionally in Western and Central Europe, goose or duck.

In the mid-19th century, Polish cholent featured generous amounts of potato, while Hungarian cholent used no potato at all. German variations added root vegetables. Onions might be added fried or raw, alongside garlic. The stew might also be sweetened with honey, sugar, or fruit, and spiced with cloves, paprika, or bay leaves.

As the Jewish diaspora grew with Jewish migrations into Europe, North Africa, and elsewhere in the Middle East and Central Asia, Jewish diaspora communities developed their own variations of the dish based on the local climate, available ingredients and local influence. John Cooper argues that shabbat stews like cholent would have spread from Jerusalem east towards Babylon and simultaneously across the Mediterranean by North Africa into Iberia and eventually Italy and France while Marks cites Persian, Yemen, and Italian communities to predate Sephardim in Iberia.

The most accessible foods to Jews living in Israel before the destruction of the Second Temple are likely to have been the Mediterranean triad : grain, oil and wine, which were available at low cost and vast amounts. While both wheat and barley were grown in Israel, barley was more likely to supplement inland diets. Cooper argues wheat would have been twice as expensive as barley which could grow in rougher soils closer to Jerusalem. Barley could also be harvested earlier ensuring multiple crops in the same season.

Meats were considered luxury goods that few could afford, except on special occasions like Shabbat and other holidays. Lamb and goat would have been more common as they grazed in arid climates, and provided supplementary products like wool and milk, while cattle were more expensive to maintain and prized as sacrificial offerings.

Chicken was likely domesticated in Southeast Asia and popularized in Ur around 2100 BCE, though the Israelites would have been less likely to eat it due to association of Roman sacrifice. Until the 8th century, the upkeep for chickens meant they could only be raised in small numbers, making them a delicacy few could afford outside of Shabbat. Olla podrida rose in popularity in the 13th century featuring a porridge of vegetables, spices, and meat, usually beef. A famine in the 14th century in Northern Europe caused a rise in cattle prices near Western Europe and North Africa, where most Jews were living under Moorish rule. This led to chicken replacing cattle as livestock, and resulted in many recipe alterations to accommodate these changes in Iberia and Northern Africa.

The increase in chicken led to a surplus of eggs as a renewable resource. "Huevos haminados" began to describe the long process of long roasting eggs in hamin pots overnight that produced a signature aroma. The concept of "re'ach nicho'ach" describes the direct line of spiritual connection of scents from the nose to the soul. giving the egg an extra spiritual strength for Jews. In Kabbalah, the eggs are even watched over by an angel.

The rise of the Spanish conquest of Iberia, known as the Reconquista, stretched from as early as the establishment of Christian Kingdom Asturias in the early 8th century until the surrendering of Granada in 1492 by the ruling Moorish Kingdom. Jews were faced with limited options after the Alhambra Decree expelled non-Christian religious practices or face expulsion. Jews who migrated east across the Mediterranean after the Alhambra Decree became known as " Sephardic " Jews (literally Spanish Jews) and often reintegrated themselves to well established Jewish communities in North Africa or even the Ottoman Empire where the Ladino language, an Iberian language heavily influenced by Hebrew, began to explode in popularity.

Jewish " conversos " who had converted to Christianity, either sincerely or as a ruse, began to mainstream Jewish practices into Iberian culture. Sephardim who remained religious learned to hide observation of shabbat by "hiding" or "concealing" their pots in the embers of household fires or underground ovens from their Christian neighbors. Hamin became known as adafina or dafina as local ingredients changed hamin's base to a rice and chicken dish to match local practices. Stews like "Gallina a la Vinagreta" began to rise in popularity nationally around the same making the ingredients almost indistinguishable.

The slow warming of the embers inspired an extra layer of precaution to the prohibition of cooking on shabbat, the blech. The blech covers a fire or modern stovetops to prevent cooking while allowing heat to transfer from one item to another indirectly as a warm source without "kindling". Hamin, scheena and cholent all commonly use a blech pinpointing their distinctions to a similar time period. The unique cooking requirements of hamin were later the inspiration for the invention of the slow cooker.

Even in ancient Israel, it is likely that vegetables supplemented stews with native vegetables like leek, garlic, and onions, which were more accessible to poorer communities like future Ashkenazi. Historians have little proof other than modern economic trends; these recipes were not well-documented at the time, and the decomposition of vegetables makes it difficult to find conclusive archaeological evidence of their presence in any given period.

After the Columbian Exchange, new vegetables like potatoes, tomatoes, and beans rose in popularity. They offered more substantial nutrients at lower costs than meats but with more flavor than barley, wheat, or rice. In the Maghreb, a South American hot chili pepper called "harissa" thrived in the region's soil. Slow cooking crushed wheat, tomatoes, and harissa created a spicy sauce that added new flavors to classic rice dishes.

Beans from the New World rapidly replaced barley and rice used in North Africa and Europe. In Greece and Turkey, "avicas" substituted the rice in hamin with white beans and even smaller haricot beans left over from Shabbat's Friday night dinner.

In Israel, cholent has become a dish widely available in restaurants. In 2013, cholenterias, casual restaurants specializing in cholent, emerged in Bnei Brak and the Haredi neighborhoods of Jerusalem, and became the premier night hangout areas for Haredi men. Soon afterwards, cholent dishes spread to restaurants in secular areas.

Sephardim in Tel Aviv originated "sofrito" made of beef, potatoes, and various spices eaten at Friday night shabbat dinners and added to the main meal the next day.

In Germany, the Netherlands, and other western European countries the special hot dish for the Shabbat lunch is known as schalet, shalent, or shalet.

The Jewish people of Hungary adapted the Hungarian dish sólet to serve the same purpose as cholent. Sólet was likely modified by the Jewish people living in Pannonia when the Magyars arrived. This pork version of solet became so popular that it is sold across the country as a canned good in grocery stores.

In Italy, pasta is a common substitute for beans or rice in shabbat stews and is called "hamin macaron" when sampled in Iberia. The rise of Chassidism in the late 18th century popularized black beans in Eastern Europe as the Baal Shem Tov 's favorite bean while Alsatian Cholent in France featured lima beans.

To honor the tradition of eggs in cholent, some American Jews long roast meatloaves for Friday night and place whole eggs to be peeled and eaten. The Kosher Cajun Cookbook features New Orleans-style Cajun food with kosher substitutes like gumbo and jambalaya. Puerto Rican hamin is considered a stewed "arroz con pollo."

In the shtetls of Europe before the advent of electricity and cooking gas, a pot with the assembled but uncooked ingredients was brought to the local baker before sunset on Fridays. The baker would put the pot with the cholent mixture in his oven, which was always kept fired, and families would come by to pick up their cooked cholent on Saturday mornings. The same practice was observed in Morocco, where black pots of s'hina were placed overnight in bakers' ovens and then delivered by bakers' assistants to households on Shabbat morning. Jewish stews were characterized by flour paste used to seal pots to prevent cooking and tampering which could cause the meal to become treif (not kosher).

The Chopin Alveograph (originally named Extensimeter) is an empirical tool for wheat flour quality measurement. It measures the properties of the dough produced from the flour, by inflating a bubble in a thin sheet of the dough until it bursts. This process is supposed to simulate the natural bubble growth during the fermentation and in the early stages of baking. An analysis of the recorded graph of pressure vs. bubble volume yields about ten values that characterize the suitability of the flour for different uses. As of the 2020s, the device is manufactured by Chopin Technologies (since 2016, a part of KPM Analytics). A similar device for bubble inflation, D/R Dough Inflation System, is made by Stable Micro Systems.

The idea of wheat grain classification by using a bubble made of dough dates back to 1905, when a Hungarian, Jenö von Hankoczy, created a " gluten tester". The tester measured only the maximum expansion of the bubble before bursting and, like other early devices, had no temperature control.

Developed independently in the late 1920s in France by Marcel Chopin [ fr ], the Chopin Alveograph performs the alveographic test that enables to measure the tenacity (resilience), extensibility, and elasticity of a dough (standardized mix of flour and water). This measurement, known as dough strength, is considered a good index of the baking quality of baking flours.

The original "extensimeter" design by Chopin was created in 1921 and tested the tenacity of dough (then defined as time it took to change the shape of a cylinder made of dough) and the ability of the sample to be stretched into a thin membrane by pushing air into the sample. The extensimeter had temperature control since the original model, a version with a better recorder came out in 1927. By the mid-1930s, an integrated dough mixer was added. In 1982, an air pump was introduced to pump up the bubble instead of using the gravity of a column of water to expel the air. In 1987, a timer and temperature display were added, bubble blowing was automated in the 1995 model. A completely new design, so called "NG", was introduced in 1995 and included a consistograph.

In France it has been used in regulations since at least 1963 as a criterion in milling for the composition of flours destined to the "french" type bread-baking.

KPM Analytics produces a derivative device called the Mixolab which, among other uses, measures the degree of degradation due to pest and fungus, and the protection provided by insecticides and fungicides.

The Chopin alveograph is composed of four parts:

The test is performed by slowly inflating the bubble and recording the pressure H (expressed in mm of water) vs. abscissa L (that is also expressed in millimeters, but in reality is just time from the start of the test in seconds converted into mm at a fixed rate of 5.5 mm/s). The correction coefficients are applied for compatibility with the earlier models.

Originally, the following results were collected from the pressure graph: maximum overpressure (P), average abscissa to rupture (L), swelling index (G), configuration ratio (P/L) and deformation energy (W). After the introduction of computerized processing, more parameters were added, like the elasticity index (Ie), and minimum and maximum of first derivative (Dmin/Dmax). Pressure curve was converted into the stress–strain curve, yielding the strain hardening index (SH) and the strength coefficient (K).

Jødal & Larsen (2021) suggest that G, Dmax, SH and K are near-perfectly correlated to L, P, Ie and P respectively, thus the basic set of parameters obtained on the alveograph contains just six values: P, L, W, P/L, Ie and Dmin.

The measurements are typically repeated multiple times and averaged.

The maximum overpressure is the highest pressure that occurs during the test, multiplied by 1.1 (the coefficient accommodates the measurement error introduced by a water manometer of the earliest models). P is called the dough "tenacity", often used, but has no corresponding rheological value and thus is interpreted in multiple ways.

The bursting of the bubble is manifested by a rapid decline in pressure (right side of the graph). The corresponding abscissa point, L, is called "extensibility", and characterizes the maximum stretch that dough can experience without breaking. It is an important parameter in breadmaking, as high values of L make possible breads with high volume and fine crumb structure.

The swelling index G expresses the volume of air (in milliliters) needed to rupture the bubble. Since the air is fed at a constant rate, G is a square root of L (in mm) with a scaling coefficient that, depending on the version of the manual, is either 2.22 or 2.226: G = 2.226 L {\displaystyle G=2.226{\sqrt {L}}}. It has the same significance as L, yet also is considered to be affecting the "shortness" and "spring" of the dough.

The product of force (pressure) and time is energy, thus the area under the pressure curve is proportional to the energy used to inflate the bubble, or deformation energy W. W factor is one of the most used values for the characterization of wheat (separating wheat cultivars), and is referred to as "strength" (dough strength, flour strength, baking strength, flour protein strength, gluten strength, etc). W is closely related to the percentage and quality of gluten in the dough, but is also affected by other factors, including the water absorption. Strong dough can withstand the mechanical stress of the breadmaking process through a balanced combination of viscosity and elasticity.

The value is typically expressed in Joules (J) units. Due to numbers being low, a scaling factor is frequently used (the practical units are J ⋅ 10 − 4 {\displaystyle J\cdot 10^{-4}}), bringing the typical values into a three-digit range.

The ratio of P to L is called the configuration ratio. The high ratio reflects a strong and inextensible dough, while low values correspond to a weak and extensible one. While P/L seems to characterize a balance between tenacity and extensibility, the P/L requirements frequently do not change across the areas of use, and it is less frequently used.

The elasticity index Ie is defined as ratio of pressure corresponding to the 40 mm abscissa and the maximum overpressure P, expressed as percentage: I e = H 40 m m P ⋅ 100 % {\displaystyle Ie={\frac {H_{40mm}}{P}}\cdot 100\%}. Since the volume of air pumped into the bubble at this point in time is about 200 ml, the 40 mm pressure is also denoted as P 200, so I e = P 200 P ⋅ 100 % {\displaystyle Ie={\frac {P_{200}}{P}}\cdot 100\%} For more extensible doughs, the pressure might never reach 40 mm, and Ie cannot be determined. The 40 mm abscissa is selected to reflect the moment when the resistance to deformation is expected to no longer depend on the thickness of dough and thus reflect the internal bonding force. There is a positive correlation had been found between the Ie and the bread volume.

A first derivate can be taken of the pressure curve, the minimum and maximum values of the derivative are denoted Dmin and Dmax respectively. Dmin thus defined is negative, so sometimes an absolute value is used. Lower Dmin values correlate to higher volume of bread. Dmax, while reported by the alveograph, is apparently not used in practice.

The relationship between stress σ {\displaystyle \sigma } and Hencky strain ϵ {\displaystyle \epsilon } can be described by a stress-strain curve σ = K ⋅ e S H ⋅ ϵ {\displaystyle \sigma =K\cdot e^{{SH}\cdot \epsilon }}, where SH and K are empirical coefficients best-fit using the alveograph curve. The exponential part of the equation reflects the strain hardening caused by the properties of gluten network. High SH improves the condition for inflation of dough bubbles in the bread. K defines the stress when there is no strain. It is higher for more stiff or viscous dough and, probably due this mixing of two different properties in one value, used less frequently than SH.

Chris Ely is a professional English butler and estate manager and the former Dean of the Bespoke Institute at The French Culinary Institute in New York City. He began his career as a footman at Buckingham Palace, where he was a member of Queen Elizabeth II's household staff. After leaving in 1984, he worked as a butler and an estate manager for employers including Joel Schumacher and Brooke Astor.

Chris Ely was born February 10, 1963, at the Royal Air Force (R.A.F.) Hospital Wegberg in West Germany. His father was based at Rheindahlen Military Complex during the 'Cold War', and the family led the typical military life, moving to a new base every two and a half years. The family returned to England in 1969.

Ely attended Kent College, Canterbury, England from 1976-1979 studying Arts and Humanities, and from 1979-1981 attended Thanet Technical College, Broadstairs, Kent, U.K., completing the General Catering Course, where he studied food service, French cuisine, and housekeeping.

Recognized for his work at Thanet Technical college, Ely was invited to interview for a vacant footman position at Buckingham Palace. He became a member of Queen Elizabeth II's household in 1981, starting as an apprentice, moving up into the role of Senior Footman, performing his duties at Buckingham Palace, Windsor Castle and Sandringham House in England, and Balmoral Castle and The Palace of Holyroodhouse in Scotland.

Leaving royal service in 1984, Ely later held positions as a houseman, valet, butler, personal assistant, and estate manager for employers in the diplomatic, business, and entertainment field, including director/producer/screenwriter Joel Schumacher, and philanthropist Brooke Astor. In 2010, he joined The French Culinary Institute as Dean of the Estate Management Studies Program, where he designed and introduced the Bespoke Institute.

As of 2011 Ely was an in-home consultant and domestic staff trainer for private clients, also publishing on social media.

Christian Paul Gilbert Estrosi (French: [ kʁistjɑ̃ ɛstʁozi ] ; born 1 July 1955) is a French sportsman and former politician. He was the Mayor of Nice from 2008 to 2026. A former professional motorcyclist, he served as a government minister under Presidents Jacques Chirac and Nicolas Sarkozy. Estrosi also served as President of the Regional Council of Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur from 2015 to 2017 and First Deputy Mayor of Nice from 2016 until 2017. He is a former member of The Republicans, which he left in 2021 to join Horizons.

Estrosi was born on 1 July 1955 in Nice. His grandparents were immigrants from Italy.

Estrosi was a professional motorcycle racer and competed at the world championship level in Grand Prix motorcycle racing from 1976 to 1983. He won the French round of the 1976 Formula 750 season at the Circuit Paul Armagnac. He also had a fourth-place finish in the 1978 500cc French Grand Prix. He repeated this result in 1979 with a fourth place at the 1979 250cc Spanish Grand Prix. He received the Youth and Sports gold medal.

Estrosi was a member of the municipal council of Nice from 1983 to 1990, when he resigned.

Estrosi served as a member of the National Assembly of France for the 5th constituency of Alpes-Maritimes from 1988 to 1993, then from 1997 to 2005, from 2008 to 2009, then from 2010 to 2016. In 1993, he briefly served as the MP for the department's 2nd constituency but his election was ruled invalid. In Parliament, he served on the Committee on Cultural Affairs (1998–1993, 1996–2002), the Committee on Finance (2012–2016) and the Committee on Legal Affairs (2002–2005, 2008–2012).

In addition, Estrosi held several ministerial positions in the national government in Paris. He was appointed on 2 June 2005 as Deputy Minister of Spatial Planning in the government of Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin, serving under Minister of the Interior Nicolas Sarkozy. He was then appointed on 19 June 2007 as Secretary of State for the Overseas French territories (DOM-TOM), this time serving under Michèle Alliot-Marie. From 2009 to 2010, he served as Deputy Minister of Industry. During his time in office, he was widely seen as a close ally of Sarkozy.

Estrosi was a regional councillor of Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur from 1992 to 2002 and served as a regional council vice president from 1992 to 1998 under the presidency of Jean-Claude Gaudin. He later served as one of the vice presidents of the General Council of Alpes-Maritimes from 2001 to 2003 and as its president from 2003 to 2008. He was first elected a general councillor in the canton of Nice-8 in 1985.

Estrosi was reelected to the municipal council of Nice in the 2008 election, when he was also elected Mayor of Nice. In addition, he has served as president of the Urban community of Nice Côte d'Azur from 2008 and president of Métropole Nice Côte d'Azur from 2012 to 2024. In 2013, he rejected a plan to build a mosque funded by a businessman from Saudi Arabia in Nice.

As part of a reorganization of the Union for a Popular Movement (later Republicans) leadership under their chairman Jean-François Copé in January 2013, Estrosi became – alongside Henri de Raincourt, Jean-Claude Gaudin, Brice Hortefeux, Roger Karoutchi and Gérard Longuet – one of the party's six vice-presidents. Ahead of the UMP's leadership election in 2014, he led a group supporting Nicolas Sarkozy as the party's leader.

In The Republicans' 2016 primary, Estrosi also endorsed Sarkozy as the party's candidate for the 2017 presidential election. Ten months ahead of the election, he and other local conservatives aggressively criticised Socialist Minister of the Interior Bernard Cazeneuve for the lack of strength of the National Police force presence on the night the 2016 Nice truck attack. Amid the Fillon affair, in March 2017, Estrosi joined Xavier Bertrand, Valérie Pécresse and others in calling for Alain Juppé to replace François Fillon as the party's candidate. Also, he met with Emmanuel Macron during his campaign.

On 8 May 2017, the day after the second round of the presidential election, Estrosi announced his resignation from the presidency of the Regional Council of Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur to become Mayor of Nice again, succeeding his former first deputy, Philippe Pradal. Estrosi is still managing the region as one of Regional Council President Renaud Muselier 's vice presidents. Overseeing the local authorities' response to the COVID-19 pandemic in France, Estrosi called in early 2021 for a weekend lockdown in the area to reduce the flow of tourists; at the time, Nice had a level of COVID-19 infections triple the national rate.

In 2021, Estrosi left The Republicans to join Édouard Philippe 's Horizons party, after Toulon Mayor Hubert Falco. Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur Regional Council President Renaud Muselier also left The Republicans that year, marking a loss of elected officials in the area for the party. L'Obs nicknamed the three politicians the "infernal trio of the Provençal right". He withdrew from political life after failing to be re-elected in March 2026 and announced he would focus on his family.

Estrosi was among conservative politicians in France who backed calls for a ban on the body-covering burkini swimsuit that some Muslim women wear on the beach, which was later invalidated by French courts. In 2016, he threatened to sue people who distributed photographs of an incident in which Nice police ordered a Muslim woman to remove her burkini, saying that circulating the photographs would "provoke defamatory remarks and threats against police agents". In 2017, Estrosi distanced himself from his earlier decision to vote in favour of an unsuccessful 1988 bill on the reinstatement of the death penalty.

Estrosi is a supporter of Israel. In 2021, he hung the Israeli flag outside the city hall in Nice after supporting a ban on pro-Palestine protests. In December 2023, Estrosi faced backlash after claiming that mothers in Gaza use "dolls" as "dead bodies". In June 2025, a French court ordered Estrosi to remove Israeli flags from the city hall, deciding that the gesture violated the "principle of neutrality" in public services since it constituted a political message.

Estrosi was a main supporter of the implementation in Nice of the Israeli security application Carbyne, sharply criticizing CNIL 's decision to ban it on the grounds that it was "too intrusive" and its legal basis was fragile. Estrosi commented the decision would only benefit the terrorists. In the Carnival of 2019, Estrosi implemented the facial recognition technology from the similarly Israeli Anyvision.

Estrosi is the recipient of a Doctorate Honoris Causa from the University of Haifa in Israel. He is a Knight of the Legion of Honour from the French Republic, an Officer of the Order of Merit of the Republic of Poland, and a Commander of the Order of Saint-Charles from Monaco.

In 2017, Estrosi filed a defamation suit against Marine Le Pen for accusing him of being in league with Islamist militants; as a consequence, the European Parliament lifted Le Pen's immunity from prosecution.

Estrosi was married to Dominique Sassone, daughter of Jean Sassone (1931–2006), who served as Deputy Mayor of Nice from 1977 to 1998. Early on during the COVID-19 pandemic in France, Estrosi tested positive for the SARS-CoV-2 virus.

Christiane Scrivener (née Fries ; 1 September 1925 – 8 April 2024) was a French politician who was a member of Valéry Giscard d'Estaing 's Republican Party (now replaced by Alain Madelin 's Liberal Democracy).

Christiane Scrivener was born in Mulhouse, France on 1 September 1925.

Scrivener was Secretary of State of Trade for Consumers' protection between 1976 and 1978, first in Jacques Chirac 's and then in Raymond Barre 's cabinet. In this capacity she spearheaded several legislative changes, including an Act to protect the information of consumers on products and services (loi sur la protection et l'information des consommateurs de produits et de services, 1978), well known under the name of loi Scrivener.

Scrivener was then elected a Member of the European Parliament (1979–1984).

In 1989, she became the European Communities Commissioner for Taxes, Revenue Harmonization and Consumer Policies in the Delors Commission, a position she retained until 1995.

Scrivener died on 8 April 2024 in Paris, aged 98.

Christine Boutin (French pronunciation: [ kʁistin butɛ̃ ], born 6 February 1944) is a French former politician leading the small French Christian Democratic Party. She served as a member of the French National Assembly representing Yvelines, from 1986 until 2007, when she was appointed Minister of Housing and Urban Development by President Nicolas Sarkozy. She was a candidate in the 2002 French presidential election, in which she scored 1.19% on the first round of balloting.

Boutin was the leader of the Christian Democratic Party (Parti Chrétien-démocrate), a socially conservative Christian-democratic party, which is associated with the greater UMP union party. She is best known for her very vocal opposition to civil unions in 1998 and same-sex marriage later on.

She announced on 21 October 2017 that she was leaving politics, resigning as departmental councillor for Yvelines.

Boutin was born in Levroux, Indre. She married her cousin Louis Boutin in 1967 with whom she had three children (the contradiction between her strong advocacy of Catholic dogmas and marrying one's first cousin remaining strictly forbidden by canon law is often pointed out). She entered politics in 1977 as a city council member of the village of Auffargis. In 1980 she was elected its mayor. Boutin was elected to the National Assembly in 1986.

In 1993, Boutin founded the anti-abortion NGO Alliance pour les droits de la vie (ADV) (English: Alliance for Human Life), considered the largest anti-abortion organization in France. The same year, she became a consultant for the Pontifical Council for the Family headed by Cardinal Lopez-Trujillo. In 1998, Boutin became somewhat famous because of a five-hour speech in opposition to the PACS domestic partnership plan, arguing that its adoption by the government would encourage homosexuality. She held a Bible during the speech, an image which would later become associated with her.

In 2002, Boutin who had been a member of the UDF party, joined the UMP when it was founded. In a UMP rally that same year, where Boutin spoke, ACT UP Paris protested with a banner calling Boutin homophobic.

In 2006, Boutin supported the "global license" flat-fee authorization for sharing of copyrighted files over the Internet in a heated parliamentary debate on the DADVSI law. She also has been an advocate for a guaranteed minimum income, as well as expanded housing rights (Droit au logement). She has considered the situation of prisons in France to be a scandal and has argued for a drastic reduction of inmates as well as improving their life-conditions.

In December 2006, Boutin announced that she would not be a candidate for the 2007 French Presidential election and pledged her support for the Conservative candidate Nicolas Sarkozy.

In a November 2006 interview, published in 2007, Boutin stated that President of the United States George W. Bush might have been behind the September 11 attacks. When asked if she believed that the Bush administration was behind the 9/11 attacks, Boutin replied: "I think that it's possible... I think it is possible. I think it more especially as I know that the sites that speak of this problem are the sites that have the greatest numbers of visits.... And so, I tell myself, I who am extremely sensitive... to the new techniques of information and communication, that this expression of the mass of the people cannot be without any truth. I'm not telling you that I adhere to that position, but let's say that, nevertheless, I'm questioning myself a bit on this question."

On 18 May 2007, after Sarkozy's victory in the presidential election, Boutin was named Minister of Housing and the City in the government of Prime Minister François Fillon. She has taken as advisors the anti-abortion activist Christine de Chefdebien, controversial for a 1992 anti-abortion occupation of a hospital, and the priest Jean-Marie Petitclerc.

Boutin has a liberal view on condom use in Africa to prevent AIDS, saying that contraceptives were necessary, appearing to contradict an earlier view by Pope Benedict XVI. She has however been critical of contraception outside of the AIDS context in Africa. In October 2012, Christine Boutin stated that she remained strongly opposed to same-sex marriage, claiming that it would lead to polygamy. Around the same time, it was also revealed that she received €800,000 from the UMP before deciding not to run for the forthcoming presidential election against its candidate, Nicolas Sarkozy. On a tweet of 14 May 2013 she derided Angelina Jolie 's cancer prevention treatment as a sex reassignment procedure; her tweet was widely criticized, but she has not apologized.

In 2014, Christine Boutin launched the "Force Vie" list for the 2014 European elections, and failed to secure the 3% of votes required for reimbursement of campaign expenses in any constituency.

In a judgement dated 18 December 2015 the correctional court of Paris condemned Boutin to a fine of €5000 and €2000 for legal damages for having said that homosexuality was an abomination. The verdict is being appealed.

In the second round of the 2017 French presidential election, she supported Marine Le Pen.

In 2022, Christine Boutin announced that she was supporting Éric Zemmour and had joined Reconquête.

Minister of Housing and Urban : 2007–2009.

Member of the National Assembly of France for Yvelines : 1986–2007 (Became minister in 2007). Elected in 1986, reelected in 1988, 1993, 1997, 2002, 2007.

President of the General Council of Yvelines (interim) : May–July 2009.

Vice-president of the General Council of Yvelines : 1994–2009 (Resignation). Reelected in 2001, 2008.

General councillor of Yvelines : 1982–2009 (Resignation). Reelected in 1988, 1994, 2001, 2008.

Municipal councillor of Auffargis : 1977–1983

Deputy-mayor of Rambouillet : 1983–2001. Reelected in 1989, 1995.

Municipal councillor of Rambouillet : 1983–2001. Reelected in 1989, 1995.

Christmas in France is a major annual celebration, as in most countries of the Christian world. Christmas is celebrated as a public holiday in France on December 25.

Public life on Christmas Day is generally quiet. Post offices, banks, stores, restaurants, cafés, and other businesses are closed. Many people in France put up a Christmas tree, visit a special church service, eat an elaborate meal, and open gifts on Christmas Eve. Other activities include walking in the park, participating in city life, and sharing a meal with family and close friends.

Père Noël (French pronunciation: [ pɛʁ nɔ.ɛl ]), "Santa", sometimes called “Papa Noël” ("Father Christmas"), is a legendary gift-bringer at Christmas in France and other French-speaking areas, identified with the Father Christmas or Santa Claus of English-speaking territories. According to tradition, on Christmas Eve children leave their shoes by the fireplace filled with carrots and treats for Père Noël's donkey, Gui (French for "Mistletoe") before they go to bed. Père Noël takes the offerings and, if the child has been good, leaves presents in their place. Presents are traditionally small enough to fit in the shoes; candy, money, or small toys.

Some typical French Christmas foods include:

Traditional French Christmas food includes a lot of meats (ham, turkey, chicken and beef) with sides like mashed potatoes, beans, salad, peas and carrots. Soup and bread is also very popular. Desserts include Yule log cake, cupcakes, muffins and other cakes along with small sweet and chocolate candies.

Decorating for Christmas is very common in France. Christmas markets usually begin in late November or early December and last until Christmas, spreading across various regions of France. The Christmas market in Strasbourg is the most famous, attracting visitors from all over the world. These markets offer Christmas decorations, handmade crafts, delicious food, and warm drinks such as mulled wine.Many households, public spaces, and businesses are decorated with lights and Christmas trees. Advent wreaths (Couronnes de l'Avent) are also common, they are made up of fir and pine tree branches for the first Sunday of Advent. The Advent wreath is topped by four candles, symbolizing the four Sundays leading up to Christmas. Each candle is lit on each successive Sunday before Christmas.

Trees can either be decorated or can have a simple homely and traditional décor. Instead of putting up ornamental Christmas decorations on the trees, often red ribbons are used for decorating the trees. Glass or plastic ornaments that resemble the apples that were traditionally hung from Christmas trees in France are also used for decorating the trees. Small white candles are also used. The use of mistletoe is considered to bring good luck and every household in France hangs mistletoe on the doors during Christmas. Some French people decorate their Christmas trees (Sapin de Noël) and set up a Nativity scene (Crèche) with small clay figurines or wooden figures to recreate the scene of Jesus' birth. It is kept till New Year and there is a belief that if you kiss it at midnight, luck will favour you and you'll be filled with happiness and prosperity in the coming year.

Some other popular decorations include shoes instead of stockings. The use of candles is very popular and they are typically set on tables during Christmas meals or set on window sills. Many French households, especially Christian ones, have nativity scenes. Also known as the crèche, it is kept in the living room and can be elaborate or simple, depending on individual preference.

Churchyards in northwestern France are often much older than the church itself. The shape and the height are both indicators of age. Churches often sit on sites of great antiquity, long predating Christianity.

The general rectangular shape of today's churchyard began in the Early Middle Ages, so sometimes older grounds are indicated by oval or round forms. Selection of a location by the church involved commandeering pagan holy places, which were linked to landscape features. Springs were particularly important as they were thought of as points of contact between the underworld and the surface world. These locations were associated with particular pre-Christian gods and goddesses, sometimes Roman gods had previously replaced Gallic or Celts ones. Christian missionaries were specifically instructed to take over sites of pagan worship, thus depriving the old gods of their perches, but also enabling the Christian religion to inherit some of the sanctity that native people associated with the site.

Another broad indication of greater antiquity is the height of the churchyard earth in relation to the ground outside the walls. Centuries of repeated burials in the same location resulted in the gradual elevation of terrain.

Today a churchyard looks quiet and somber but in medieval times, despite protests by generations of bishops, the church grounds were popular sites for games, gatherings, dancing and dalliances. The church grounds being the only public grounds available. News and gossip brought out an audience, often after mass. Before the 17th century gravestones were rare with most country churches having none before the 18th century.

The churchyard cross usually was the only obstacle for the frequent activities on the church grounds. This cross was always found on the sunlite side mounted on stepped base, and indicated that the churchyard was consecrated ground. Sunny southern side of the church was the favored spot for burials. The northern exposure, associated with the devil, was designated for the graves of strangers, unbaptised children, outcasts and suicides. During the 18th and 19th centuries, the increased use of stone monuments, brought pressure to use these shadow realms. Archery sometimes was practiced on these northern sides as well because less activity happened there.

The origins of the Château de l'Hers, in Châteauneuf-du-Pape on the banks of the Rhône, go back to the beginning of the 10th century. Until the French Revolution it was an enclave of Languedoc in the Comtat Venaissin. Protected as a historic monument since 1973, it has given its name to a winery.

Various elements of the château de l'Hers attest to the occupation of this strategically important location as a control point for river traffic, since late Antiquity at the latest. Several tombs with saddleback roofs form a small 6th-7th necropolis not far from the first known chapel of the château, dedicated to Saints Cosmas and Damian. An excavation of this ruined church found lithic industries, and sherds from antiquity and the Iron Age, fragments of Tegula tiles and a cipolin cladding probably dating to Antiquity were re-used in the masonry. A large number of weapons, coins and medals were found in the area. The tollgate on the Rhône was put in place in 79 AD under Vespasian, according to V. Millet (1864).

There must have been a Roman castrum, probably destroyed in the great invasions. This appeared under the name of castellum de Leri in a 913 charter. It was signed by Louis the Blind and ceded it to Foulques, Bishop of Avignon.

In 1077, his successor Rostaing granted the fief to Pierre d'Albaron, who built a keep there. The first mention of a Castro Novo (new fortified village), which led to the name Châteauneuf-du-Pape, does not appear until 1094 It became the château de l'Hers after it was expanded in the 12th century and then was renovated for the first time during the 13th century. Certain historians have said that the Knights Templar used it at the end of the 12th century. This legend was disproven by the historians in the 20th century.

L'Hers (or Lair, or Lers), become an enclave of Languedoc on the right bank of the Rhône, the château and its village were in ruins during the 12th century. Historical texts say that the parish had two places of worship, the parish church named Sainte-Marie and the château's chapel dedicated to Saints Cosmas and Damian

Jacques d'Euze, formerly bishop of Avignon, was elected pope in 1316 and took the name John XXII. Châteauneuf fell directly under his authority. Barely pope for three months, he had construction undertaken at l'Hers. The accounts of the Apostolic Camera say that he allocated 3,000 florins to the restoration of the old 12-century château.

During the Middle Ages, the old château was a watch post and toll station on the Rhône which passed to different families allied to the Albaron family.

The Albaron kept their fief until 1360, when it was transferred to the de Roquefeuil [ fr ] family as a dowry. Around 1400, it came back to the Albaron de Laudin des Baux family, who kept it until the 1420s. The last heiress of this family brought it as a dowry to an Allemand. That family then took the name Allemand de Laudun Albaron. During the 16th century its toll rights fell in turn to the Arpajon Cardaillac, Monteynard and Montmorency families, then to the Duke of Lévis Ventadour. Hercule de Rohan, prince of Soubise, inherited it and his family still owned it when the French Revolution broke out.

The tolls were abolished with the abrogation [ fr ] of aristocratic privileges during the French Revolution, and the enclave of l'Hers was attached to the new department of Vaucluse.

Today the château is private property. At the winery that takes its name, Marcel Georges elaborates a red Châteauneuf-du-pape with a base of Syrah, Mourvèdre, Muscardin, Counoise, Cinsault, Grenache, Vaccarese and Terret, and a white Châteauneuf-du-pape which blends Picardan, Roussanne, Clairette, Picpoul and white Grenache. With an area of 14 hectares, it's one of the rare wineries allowed to use the name, which is an appellation d'origine controllée, to offer the full array of the thirteen Châteauneuf-du-Pape varieties.

Although the winery kept the name of the château it does not include the name in its business since the château lies outside the Appellation d'origine contrôlée terroir. Only the lower chamber of the medieval keep and the 14th-century round tower remain of the château, along with a few vestiges of the ramparts. The site was registered as a monument historique in 1973.

The Château de la Paluelle is a large estate manor located in the town of Saint-James, Normandy. Built as early as the 11th century during the reign of William the Conqueror, the chateau is a listed historical monument of the French Republic.

The Château de la Paluelle is privately owned and closed to the public. Its grounds are the site of the annual competitive-level horse jumping competition.

While the date of the construction of the chateau has not been authenticated, it was in existence by 1389 and known as Le Manoir de Granges. Around 1530, it came into the possession of the La Paluelle family through a dowry, and the chateau has carried the family's moniker ever since.

During the latter half of the Hundred Years' War the immediate area saw heavy military activity between the opposing English and French forces. The siege of Saint-James took place between February 27 and March 6, 1426, resulting in English victory and during the chaotic retreat, hundreds of French soldiers drowned trying to cross the flooded Bouvron river valley below the chateau.

In 1638, the Chateau de la Paluelle was elevated to barony through the royal letters patent to Jean de La Paluelle.

During the French Revolution the area was the site of heavy clashes between the Republican forces and the Chouan rebels. The chateau's 17th-century chapel was destroyed during this period, and today only the foundation wall of the chapel remains.

Marie-François-Renée (known as Mathilde) de Carbonnel-Canisy was orphaned at an early age, and was raised by her paternal grandmother Charlotte de La Paluelle. Upon Charlotte's death in 1735, Mathilde inherited the Château de La Paluelle.

By 1742, through her husband's strong connections to Versailles, Mathilde entered the court of King Louis XV and maintained a short but well-documented affair with the king. She left the court in 1774, following a year in the service as the lady-in-waiting to Princess Maria Theresa of Savoy, wife of the future Charles X of France. During the French Revolution, Mathilde was detained between April and October of 1794, but survived and died two years later at the age of seventy-one.

Mathilde de Carbonnel-Canisy is famously depicted in a 1738 oil on canvas portrait by Jean-Marc Nattier, the official French court painter. The portrait is permanently exhibited at the Musée Jacquemart-André in Paris.

Following the Allied landing on D-Day, Saint-James was liberated on August 1, 1944. By August 4, General George S. Patton established the Third Army 's field headquarters at the Chateau de la Paluelle. On August 6, the meeting of the Chiefs of Staff was held at the chateau. It was during this time that the strategy to repel the German counter-attack at Mortain was developed.

General Phillipe Leclerc's 2nd Armored Division was attached to General Patton’s Third Army, and set up the encampment on the chateau grounds as well.

The oldest part of the chateau, called the Petit chateau or Le Manoir, features the original round tower, windows and overhanging machicolations dating from the Louis XI era.

The main building, flanked by the stables and service buildings, was completed in its current form between 1615 and 1635, and the mansard roofs were added sometime after 1650. Interestingly, the structure retains a fully preserved and functional 17th-century kitchen. The front courtyard is enclosed by granite balustrade with pilasters locally known as "abbot's calves". Behind the chateau, a park features a large fountain and the double spiral staircase covering a 16th-century grotto.

The facades and roofs of the chateau and its outbuildings, the main courtyard terrace, and its park (ie A 1232 to 1234) are listed as historical monuments of the French Republic by the decree of January 30, 1967.

Château Gaillard (French pronunciation: [ ʃɑto ɡajaʁ ]) is a medieval castle ruin overlooking the River Seine above the commune of Les Andelys, in the French department of Eure, in Normandy. It is located some 95 kilometres (59 mi) north-west of Paris and 40 kilometres (25 mi) from Rouen. Construction began in 1196 under the auspices of Richard the Lionheart, who was simultaneously King of England and feudal Duke of Normandy. The castle was expensive to build, but the majority of the work was done in an unusually short period of time. It took just two years and, at the same time, the town of Petit Andely was constructed. Château Gaillard has a complex and advanced design, and uses early principles of concentric fortification; it was also one of the earliest European castles to use machicolations. The castle consists of three enclosures separated by dry moats, with a keep in the inner enclosure.

Château Gaillard was captured in 1204 by the king of France, Philip II, after a lengthy siege. In the mid-14th century, the castle was the residence of the exiled David II of Scotland. The castle changed hands several times in the Hundred Years' War, but in 1449 the French king captured Château Gaillard from the English king definitively, and from then on it remained in French ownership. Henry IV of France ordered the demolition of Château Gaillard in 1599; although it was in ruins at the time, it was felt to be a threat to the security of the local population. The castle ruins are listed as a monument historique by the French Ministry of Culture. The inner bailey is open to the public from March to November, and the outer baileys are open all year.

Richard the Lionheart inherited Normandy from his father, Henry II, in 1189 when he ascended the throne of England. There was a rivalry between the Capets and the Plantagenets, Richard as the Plantagenet king of England was more powerful than the Capetian king of France, despite the fact that Richard was a vassal of the French king and paid homage for his lands in the country. From 1190 to 1192, Richard the Lionheart was on the Third Crusade. He was joined by Philip II of France as each was wary that the other might invade his territory in his absence. Richard was captured and imprisoned on the return journey to England, and he was not released until 4 February 1194. In Richard's absence, his brother John revolted with the aid of Philip; amongst Philip's conquests in the period of Richard's imprisonment was the Norman Vexin and a few towns around such as Le Vaudreuil, Verneuil and Évreux. It took Richard until 1198 to reconquer a part of it.

Perched high above the River Seine, an important transport route, the site of Château Gaillard, in the manor of Andeli, was identified as a naturally defensible position. In the valley below the site was the town of Grand Andely. Under the terms of the Treaty of Louviers (January 1196) between Richard and Philip II neither king was allowed to fortify the site; despite this, Richard intended to build a castle at Andeli. Its purpose was to protect the duchy of Normandy from Philip II —it helped fill a gap in the Norman defences left by the fall of Château de Gisors and above all Château de Gaillon, a castle which belonged to Philip and used as an advanced French fortification to block the Seine valley—and to act as a base from which Richard could launch his campaign to take back the Norman Vexin from French control. Indeed, Les Andelys is located just in front of Gaillon on the other side of the Seine valley. Richard tried to obtain the manor through negotiation. Walter de Coutances, Archbishop of Rouen, was reluctant to sell the manor as it was one of the diocese's most profitable, and other lands belonging to the diocese had recently been damaged by war. When Philip besieged Aumale in northern Normandy, on the border with Picardy, Richard grew tired of waiting and seized the manor, although the act was opposed by the Church.

In an attempt to get Pope Celestine III to intercede, Walter de Coutances left for Rome in November 1196. Richard sent a delegation to represent him in Rome. One of the parties, Richard's Lord Chancellor William Longchamp (who was also Bishop of Ely), died during the journey, although the rest, including Philip of Poitou, Bishop of Durham, and Guillaume de Ruffière, Bishop of Lisieux, arrived in Rome. Walter de Coutances meanwhile issued an interdict against the duchy of Normandy which prohibited church services from being performed in the region. Roger of Howden detailed "the unburied bodies of the dead lying in the streets and square of the cities of Normandy". Construction began with the interdict hanging over Normandy, but it was later repealed in April 1197 by Celestine, after Richard made gifts of land to Walter de Coutances and the diocese of Rouen, including two manors and the prosperous port of Dieppe. The site of Château Gaillard had not been fortified before, and the town of Petit Andely was constructed at the same time; together with the historical Grand Andely, the two are known as Les Andelys. The castle sits on a high limestone promontory, 90 m above Les Andelys and overlooking a bend in the River Seine. The castle was connected with Les Andelys through a series of contemporary outworks.

During King Richard's reign, the Crown 's expenditure on castles declined from the levels spent by Henry II, Richard's father, although this has been attributed to a concentration of resources on Richard's war with the king of France. However, the work at Château Gaillard cost an estimated £12,000 between 1196 and 1198. Richard only spent an estimated £7,000 on castles in England during his reign, similar to his father Henry II. The Pipe rolls for the construction of Château Gaillard contain the earliest details of how work was organised in castle building and what activities were involved. Amongst those workmen mentioned in the rolls are miners, stone cutters, quarrymen, masons, lime workers, carpenters, smiths, hodmen, water carriers, soldiers to guard the workers, diggers who cut the ditch surrounding the castle, and carters who transported the raw materials to the castle. A master mason is omitted, and military historian Allen Brown has suggested that it may be because Richard himself was the overall architect; this is supported by the interest Richard showed in the work through his frequent presence.

Not only was the castle built at considerable expense, but it was built relatively rapidly; construction of large stone castles often took the better part of a decade; for instance, the work at Dover Castle took place between 1179 and 1191 (at a cost of £7,000). Richard was present during part of the construction to ensure construction proceeded at a rate he was happy with. According to William of Newburgh, in May 1198 Richard and the labourers working on the castle were drenched in a " rain of blood ". While some of his advisers thought the rain was an evil omen, Richard was undeterred:

the king was not moved by this to slacken one whit the pace of work, in which he took such keen pleasure that, unless I am mistaken, even if an angel had descended from heaven to urge its abandonment he would have been roundly cursed.

After just a year, Château Gaillard was approaching completion and Richard remarked "Behold, how fair is this year-old daughter of mine!" Richard later boasted that he could hold the castle "were the walls made of butter". By 1198, the castle was largely completed. At one point, the castle was the site of the execution of three soldiers of the king of France in retaliation for a massacre of Welsh mercenaries ambushed by the French; the three were thrown to their deaths from the castle's position high above the surrounding landscape. In his final years, the castle became Richard's favourite residence, and writs and charters were written at Château Gaillard, bearing " apud Bellum Castrum de Rupe " (at the Fair Castle of the Rock). Richard did not enjoy the benefits of the castle for long, however, as he died in Limousin on 6 April 1199, from an infected arrow wound to his shoulder, sustained while besieging Châlus.

After Richard's death, King John of England failed to effectively defend Normandy against Philip's ongoing campaigns between 1202 and 1204. The Château de Falaise fell to Philip's forces, as well as castles from Mortain to Pontorson while Philip simultaneously besieged Rouen, which capitulated to French forces on 24 June 1204, effectively ending Norman independence. Philip laid siege to Château Gaillard, which was captured after a long siege from September 1203 to March 1204. The main source for the siege is Philippidos, a poem by William the Breton, Philip's chaplain. As a result, modern scholars have paid little attention to the fate of the civilians of Les Andelys during the siege.

The local Norman population sought refuge in the castle to escape from the French soldiers who ravaged the town. The castle was well supplied for a siege, but the extra mouths to feed rapidly diminished the stores. Between 1,400 and 2,200 non-combatants were allowed inside, increasing the number of people in the castle at least fivefold. In an effort to alleviate the pressure on the castle's supplies, Roger de Lacy, the castellan, evicted 500 civilians; this first group was allowed to pass through the French lines unhindered, and a second group of similar size did the same a few days later. Philip was not present, and when he learned of the safe passage of the civilians, he forbade further people being allowed through the siege lines. The idea was to keep as many people as possible within Château Gaillard to drain its resources. Roger de Lacy evicted the remaining civilians from the castle, at least 400 people, and possibly as many as 1,200. The group was not allowed through, and the French opened fire on the civilians, who turned back to the castle for safety, but found the gates locked. They sought refuge at the base of the castle walls for three months; over the winter, more than half their number died from exposure and starvation. Philip arrived at Château Gaillard in February 1204, and ordered that the survivors should be fed and released. Such treatment of civilians in sieges was not uncommon, and such scenes were repeated much later at the sieges of Calais in 1346 and Rouen in 1418–1419, both in the Hundred Years' War.

The French gained access to the outermost ward by undermining its advanced main tower. Following this, Philip ordered a group of his men to look for a weak point in the castle. They gained access to the next ward via the chapel. After ambushing several unsuspecting guards, and setting fire to the buildings, Philip's men then lowered the movable bridge and allowed the rest of their army into the castle. The Anglo-Norman troops retreated to the inner ward. After a short time, the French successfully breached the gate of the inner ward, and the garrison retreated finally to the keep. With supplies running low, Roger de Lacy and his garrison of 20 knights and 120 other soldiers surrendered to the French army, bringing the siege to an end on 6 March 1204. In drawn-out medieval sieges, contemporary writers often emphasised the importance of dwindling supplies in the capitulation of the garrison, as was the case with the Siege of Château Gaillard. With the castle under French control, the main obstacle to the French entering the Seine valley was removed; they were able to enter the valley unmolested and take Normandy. Thus, for the first time since it had been given as a duchy to Rollo in 911, Normandy was directly ruled by the French king. The city of Rouen surrendered to Philip II on 23 June 1204. After that, the rest of Normandy was easily conquered by the French.

In 1314, Château Gaillard was the prison of Margaret and Blanche of Burgundy, who both later became queens of France; they had been convicted of adultery in the Tour de Nesle Affair, and after having their heads shaved they were locked away in the fortress, where they remained, including throughout their respective reigns. Following the Scottish defeat at the Battle of Halidon Hill in 1333, during the Second War of Scottish Independence, the child-king David II and certain of his court were forced to flee to France for safety. At the time, southern Scotland was occupied by the forces of King Edward III of England. David, then nine years old, and his bride Joan, the twelve-year-old daughter of Edward II, were granted the use of Château Gaillard by Philip VI. It remained their residence until David returned to Scotland in 1341. The archaeologists Gordon Ewart and Dennis Gallagher suggest that David may have been influenced by Château Gaillard's keep when building a great tower at Edinburgh Castle. David did not stay out of English hands for long after his return; he was captured after the Battle of Neville's Cross in 1346 and was imprisoned for eleven years in the Tower of London.

During the Hundred Years' War between the English and French crowns, possession of the castle switched several times. Château Gaillard—along with Château de Gisors, Ivry-la-Bataille, and Mont Saint-Michel —was one of four castles in Normandy which offered resistance to Henry V of England in 1419, after the capitulation of Rouen and much of the rest of the Duchy. Château Gaillard was besieged for a year before it was surrendered to the English in December 1419; all the resisting castles except Mont Saint-Michel eventually fell, and Normandy was temporarily returned to English control. Étienne de Vignolles, a mercenary (routier) known as La Hire, then recaptured Château Gaillard for the French in 1430. However, the English were revived by the capture and execution of Joan of Arc, and although by then the war was turning against them, a month later they captured Château Gaillard again. When the French gained ascendancy again between 1449 and 1453, the English were forced out of the region, and in 1449 the castle was taken by the French for the last time.

By 1573, Château Gaillard was uninhabited and in a ruinous state, but it was still believed that the castle posed a threat to the local population if it was repaired. Therefore, at the request of the French States-General, King Henry IV ordered the demolition of Château Gaillard in 1599. Some of the building material was reused by Capuchin monks who were granted permission to use the stone for maintaining their monasteries. In 1611, the demolition of Château Gaillard came to an end. The site was left as a ruin, and in 1862 was classified as a monument historique. In 1962, a conference on the contributions of the Normans to medieval military architecture was held at Les Andelys. Allen Brown attended the conference and remarked that the castle was "in satisfying receipt of skilful care and attention". The conference has taken place since on a two year cycle with the proceedings published in as Château Gaillard: Études de Castellogie Médiévale. In the 1990s, archaeological excavations were carried out at Château Gaillard. The excavations investigated the north of the fortress, searching for an entrance postulated by architect Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, but none was found. The excavation did reveal was that there was an addition to the north of the castle to enable the use of guns. Typologically, the structure has been dated to the 16th century. The conclusion of the excavations was that the site had "enormous archaeological potential", but that there were still unanswered questions about the castle. After Philip II took Chateau Gaillard, he repaired the collapsed tower of the outer bailey that had been used to gain access to the castle. The archaeological investigation examined the tower generally thought to be the one collapsed by Philip, and although it did not recover any dating evidence, the consensus is that he completely rebuilt the tower. In conjunction with the archaeological work, efforts were made to preserve the remaining structures. Today, Château Gaillard's inner bailey is open to the public from March to November, while the outer baileys are open all year round.

Château Gaillard consists of three baileys—an inner, a middle, and an outer with the main entrance to the castle—and a keep, also called a donjon, in the inner bailey. The baileys, which were separated by rock-cut ditches, housed the castle's stables, workshops, and storage facilities. It is common for extant castles to be the result of several phases of construction, adapted and added to over the period of their use; however, Château Gaillard essentially is the result of one period of building. The division into three wards bears similarities with the design of Château de Chinon, built by Henry II in the mid-12th century on a promontory overlooking a town.

The outer bailey is the southernmost feature of the castle; it is pentagon shaped and there are five towers spaced along the wall, three of which are at corners. North of the outer bailey is the middle bailey which is an irregular polygon; like the outer bailey, the wall of the middle bailey is studded with towers. The towers allowed the garrison to provide enfilading fire. In the fashion of the time, most of the towers in the curtain walls of the middle and outer baileys were cylindrical. Château Gaillard was one of the first castles in Europe to use machicolations —stone projections on top of a wall with openings that allowed objects to be dropped on an enemy at the base of the wall. Machicolations were introduced to Western architecture as a result of the Crusades. Until the 13th century, the tops of towers in European castles had usually been surrounded by wooden galleries, which served the same purpose as machicolations. An Eastern innovation, they may have originated in the first half of the 8th century.

Within the middle bailey was the inner bailey. The gatehouse from the middle of the inner bailey was one of the earliest examples of towers flanking the entrance to remove the blind spot immediately in front of the gate. This was part of a wider trend from around the late 12th or 13th century onwards for castle gateways to be strongly defended.

The design of the inner bailey, with its wall studded with semicircular projections, is unparalleled. This innovation had two advantages: firstly, the rounded wall absorbed the damage from siege engines much better as it did not provide a perfect angle to aim at; secondly, the arrowslits in the curved wall allowed arrows to be fired at all angles. The inner bailey, which contained the main residential buildings, used the principles of concentric defence. This and the unusual design of the inner bailey's curtain wall meant that castle was advanced for its age, since it was built before concentric fortification was fully developed in Crusader castles such as Krak des Chevaliers. Concentric castles were widely copied across Europe; for instance, when Edward I of England —who had himself been on Crusade—built castles in Wales in the late 13th century, four of the eight he founded were concentric.

The keep was inside the inner bailey and contained the king's accommodation. It had two rooms: an antechamber and an audience room. While Allen Brown interpreted the audience room as the king's chamber, historian Liddiard believes it is probably a throne room. A throne room emphasises the political importance of the castle. In England there is nothing similar to Château Gaillard's keep, but there are buildings with a similar design in France in the 12th and 13th centuries.

Allen Brown described Château Gaillard as "one of the finest castles in Europe" and the military historian Sir Charles Oman wrote that:

Château Gaillard, as we have already had occasion to mention, was considered the masterpiece of its time. The reputation of its builder, Coeur de Lion, as a great military engineer might stand firm on this single structure. He was no mere copyist of the models he had seen in the East, but introduced many original details of his own invention into the stronghold.

Despite Château Gaillard's reputation as a great fortress, Liddiard highlights the absence of a well in the keep as a peculiar weakness, and the castle was built on soft chalk, which would have allowed the walls to be undermined. But other sources evoke the presence of three wells in the three different baileys and the soft chalk does not really weaken the very thick walls. Its weakness is more the result of its location (higher hill behind), its extension (more than 200 metres (660 ft)) on a long narrow ridge and the difficulties in linking up the different baileys to allow a good communication and to secure an efficient defence without a large garrison.

Château Gaillard was important not solely as a military structure, but as a salient symbol of the power of Richard the Lionheart. It was a statement of dominance by Richard, having reconquered the lands Philip II had taken. Castles such as Château Gaillard in France, and Dover Castle in England, were amongst the most advanced of their age, but were surpassed in both sophistication and cost by the works of Edward I of England in the latter half of the 13th century.

Châtelain was originally the French title for the keeper of a castle.

With the growth of the feudal system, the title gained in France a special significance which it never acquired in England since the Norman conquest, as implying the jurisdiction of which the castle became the centre. The châtelain was originally, in Carolingian times, an official of the comte (count); with the development of feudalism the office became a fief, and so ultimately hereditary. In this as in other respects the châtelain was the equivalent of the viscount. Sometimes the two titles were combined, but more usually there were no viscounts in provinces where châtelains existed and no châtelains in those with viscounts.

The title châtelain continued also to be applied to the inferior officer, or concierge châtelain, who was merely a castellan in the English sense. The power and status of châtelains necessarily varied greatly at different periods and places. Usually their rank in the feudal hierarchy was equivalent to that of the "Sire" (medieval French) or lord (Latin : dominus), between the baron and the chevalier; but occasionally they were great nobles with an extensive jurisdiction, as in the Low Countries (see Burgrave).

This variation was most marked in the cities, where in the struggle for power that of the châtelain depended on the success with which he could assert himself against his feudal superior, lay or ecclesiastical, or, from the 12th century onwards, against the rising power of the communes. The châtellenie (casteliania), or jurisdiction of the châtelain, as a territorial division for certain judicial and administrative purposes, survived the disappearance of the title and office of the châtelain in France, and continued until the Revolution.

The feminine form, châtelaine, refers to the mistress of a castle or château, or the mistress of any large medieval household. It can also refer to a woman's ornamental chain worn around the waist, with keys, a purse, timepiece, or other household attachments.

In Canada, the wife of the Governor General (the Viceregal consort of Canada), is referred to by the nominal and symbolic title "Châtelaine of Rideau Hall ", in diplomatic and ceremonial protocol for Canadian and British government ceremonies and special events.

While the CIA cooperates with its French counterpart, the DGSE, the countries do collect information on one another, especially in the economic and scientific areas.

Illegal heroin labs were first discovered near Marseille, France, in 1937. These labs were run by Corsican gang leader Paul Carbone. For years, the Corsican underworld had been involved in the manufacturing and trafficking of heroin, primarily to the United States. It was this heroin network that eventually became known as "the French Connection". The Corsican Gang was protected by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and the SDECE after World War II in exchange for working to prevent French communists from bringing the Old Port of Marseille under their control.

CIA forms the French branch of Operation Gladio.

The CIA is suspected to have infiltrated the French Communist party and worked to support the growth of non-revolutionary communists within France to offset the Soviet influence on the more radical elements within the French Communist Party.

The CIA is suspected to have been involved in supporting the student riots against Charles DeGaulle to retaliate against his withdrawal from NATO and his Francophile policies.

"Charles De Gaulle undertook covert operations in Quebec using nationalist and separatist movements in Quebec, under the rubric of "Assistance et Cooperation Technique" or "Operation Ascot." Jacques Foccart dispatched SDECE agents to Quebec to develop and foment the growth of separatist movements."

Admiral Pierre Lacoste stated that the CIA supported the French Gladio and the OAS right-wing extremist organization to attack Charles de Gaulle.

According to the Director of Central Intelligence, Bob Gates, at least 20 nations from Europe, Asia, the Middle East, and Latin America are involved in intelligence activities that are detrimental to our economic interests. Some of the specific cases are shocking. According to a recent New York Times article by Peter Schweizer, "between 1987 and 1989, French intelligence planted moles in several U.S. companies, including IBM. In the fall of 1991, a French intelligence team attempted to steal 'stealth' technology from Lockheed." Other accounts report that French intelligence units conduct 10 to 15 break-ins every day at large hotels in Paris to copy documents that belong to businessmen, journalists, and diplomats. According to other accounts, the French have been hiding listening devices on Air France flights in order to pick up useful economic information from business travelers.

In 1993, R. James Woolsey, then a new Director of Central Intelligence, publicly announced that economic intelligence focused on European corrupt practices and bribery was now a CIA program. French intelligence had been aggressively going after information from American executives. Woolsey said "No more Mr. Nice Guy."

Shortly afterwards, the CIA Paris station had at least five officers working on understanding French national trade policy, and countering French economic espionage against the US. Four were under diplomatic and one under nonofficial cover.

The CIA Inspector General delivered a report on CIA clandestine service work on economic intelligence, which is likely to end the careers of several officers, including Paris station chief Dick Holm, European CS division chief Joseph DeTrani, and at least four case officers.

France's Interior Minister, Charles Pasqua, revealed the problem in February 1995. The officer under nonofficial cover as a foundation representative made two errors in posing as a foundation representative: communicating too openly with the CIA station and communing too secretly with her target, a French official. Mr. Holm, the station chief, found out about the love affair she was conducting with the official. It was clear that the romance could compromise the operation. Holm convinced his chief to continue the operation.

The French, however, broke the usual agreement among Western services and announced what they had learned, expelling the embassy-based officer "incompatible with their diplomatic status". Controversy flared over questions about whether spying on allies for economic data is a worthy pursuit for the CIA, even if the allies do it to the US, or if other missions have a higher priority. While there were tragicomic aspects, the issue of what espionage is tolerable among nominal allies remains complex, especially when involving clear security issues as with Jonathan Pollard.

The International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) and the League of Human Rights (LDH) filed a complaint urging the French Public Prosecutor to investigate the alleged use of French airports by secret CIA flights transporting terrorist suspects.

Cilcare is a French biotechnology company founded in 2014, specialized in the development of therapies for auditory pathologies. Headquartered in Montpellier, France, with operations in Boston, the company focuses on addressing underdiagnosed hearing disorders such as cochlear synaptopathy and tinnitus. '

Cilcare conducts research on hearing disorders, including cochlear synaptopathy and tinnitus, using technologies like AI and biotech. The company is developing treatments, such as CIL001, to restore neural connections and identify auditory biomarkers. Its research aims to improve the diagnosis and treatment of hearing-related conditions. '

Cilcare was founded in 2014 by three former Sanofi executives: Célia Belline, Marie-Pierre Pasdelou, and Sylvie Pucheu. '

In 2017, the company established a subsidiary in Boston and partnered with Cbset, a biomedical research firm, to commercialize regulatory toxicology services for hearing-related treatments. Cilcare also collaborated with Draper to develop an intracochlear drug delivery system.

In 2020, Cilcare expanded its activities to Denmark and acquired 4 proprietary drug candidates from Sanofi 's portfolio.

In 2021, the company signed a partnership with Knotus, a South Korean non-clinical CRO, to develop therapies for preventing and treating hearing loss.

In 2023, Cilcare, collaborated with SATT AxLR and the Laboratory of Bioengineering and Nanosciences at the University of Montpellier, to launch OrgaEar. This project uses induced pluripotent stem cells and 3D cultures to create cochlear organoids, enabling the study and development of treatments for deafness without animal testing. '

In June 2024, Cilcare and Shionogi announced an exclusive option agreement, granting Shionogi worldwide licensing rights to two drug candidates, CIL001 and CIL003, for treating hearing disorders such as hidden hearing loss and tinnitus.

In December 2024, Cilcare raised €21 million from investors, including Shionogi, Multi Invest VCC, and SPRIM Global Investments, bringing its total funding to €40 million.

In early 2025, Cilcare initiated the SAPHIR study (early Stage of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases, HearIng Relevance) in collaboration with the University Hospitals of Montpellier and Nîmes, exploring the link between hearing loss and neurodegenerative diseases.

In early 2026, Cilcare announced the opening of a subsidiary in Japan. In June 2026, the company revised its licensing agreement with Sanofi, which became a minority shareholder, and received funding from the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF).

In October 2022, the company, in collaboration with CBSET, won the Hearing Technology Innovator Award in the "Therapeutics" category. In May 2023, Cilcare was awarded the Women in Business Award by the French-American Chamber of Commerce of New England (FACCNE). The company was also selected for the ScaleUp Excellence program in July 2023.

In June 2024, Cilcare secured €4.2 million in funding through the i-Démo Call for Projects under France’s Plan France 2030 initiative. Later that year, in September 2024, the company received its second Hearing Technology Innovator Award for its drug candidate CIL001. In 2025, Cilcare won EEN (Enterprise Europe Network) Award.

In France, Italy, Belgium, and some other civil law countries, a circulaire (French), circolare (Italian) or omzendbrief (Dutch) consists of a text intended for the members of a service, of an enterprise, or of an administration.

Within the French and Belgian civil service, a circulaire originates from a ministry with the aim of giving an interpretation of a legal text or of a regulation (a decree, arrêté or Royal Order), with a view to applying such a regulation consistently. As such, a circulaire depends on the general principles of law, but carries more weight than mere administrative acts.

Circulaire provide recommendations: they apply only to employees of the civil service. In certain cases, circulaires introduce new rules (circulaires réglementaires); such that under certain conditions one can appeal against abuse of power.

The body of jurisprudence relating to circulaires has developed extensively. In principle, circulaires exist only to comment on existing law and to explain its application in concrete terms.

The contentious side of circulaires, of notes de services and of instructions has brought about several legal responses, varying according to several criteria and according to the type of text involved:

The Référendum d'initiative Citoyenne (abbreviated RIC) is the name given to the proposal for a constitutional amendment in France to permit consultation of the citizenry by referendum concerning the proposition or abrogation of laws, the revocation of politicians' mandates, and constitutional amendment.

The proposed process is a direct democracy mechanism that allows citizens to petition for a referendum without needing the consent of the parliament or president. Similar referendums are used in around forty other countries, including Italy, Switzerland, Taiwan, Venezuela, New Zealand and in the US state of Oregon.

In Manifeste au service du personnalisme (1936), Emmanuel Mounier proposed that popular-initiative referendums should counterbalance the parliamentary will in periods between elections. In the 1981, the idea was part of the platform for two Left presidential candidates: Huguette Bouchardeau (United Socialists Party) and Brice Lalonde. In 1983, Charles Pasqua (RPR) introduced a bill in the Senate. In 1987, Yvan Blot (RPR) introduced one in the lower house to permit popular-initiative referendums. The measure has also been advocated since the 1990s by Yvan Bachaud [ fr ], a dentist, who coined the acronym "RIC" and unsuccessfully presented candidates in numerous elections. It was later taken up by Étienne Chouard in the 2000s.

During the French presidential elections in 2022, candidate Jean Lassalle made a commitment before a notary to implement the RIC for constitutional matters if he was elected.

Citizens' initiative referendums around the world are based on petitions. To have an effect, a sufficient number of signatures must be gathered within a given time period. In France, these four types of popular referendums are being proposed: legislative (propose a law), abrogatory (repeal a law), recall (revoke the mandate of a sitting politician), and constitutional amendment.

In France, yellow vests propose that these referendums should be applicable to four types of procedures:

The modalities for implementing this type of referendum vary significantly from one country to another. In Taiwan, for example, the signatures of 0.01 and then 1.5% of the population registered on the electoral rolls, collected over a six-month period, make it possible to trigger a referendum on a proposed law. The result, if positive, must reach a quorum of 25% of the registered members to be legally binding. In contrast, in New Zealand, the signatures of 10% of registrants are required within a year, and the result is not legally binding.

Being able to oppose the entry into force of a new law is an existing possibility in several countries, including Italy, Slovenia, Uruguay, Taiwan, Switzerland or Liechtenstein. In the latter two, it is known as optional referendum.

This procedure exists in very few countries at the national level: at the local level, in some states of the United States as well as in several countries in the Americas, including Peru, where it has become commonplace. At the national level, only Ecuador and Venezuela allow it against the Head of State through a popular initiative. In Venezuela, a consultation can only be held once half of the presidential term has elapsed, requires the signatures of 20% of those registered, and is validated by referendum only by a higher number of votes for revocation than the one obtained by the president during his election, provided that a quorum of 25% of the vote is also reached. In Ecuador, the signatures of 15% of those registered within six months are required. An absolute majority of the voters is sufficient, but it cannot be organised during the first or last year of the elected representative. In both cases, it can only be organised once per mandate.

The importance of a constitutional change means that few countries allow it to have a popular origin, or subject it to stricter conditions. In Uruguay, the collection of signatures from ten per cent of registered voters makes it possible to hold such a referendum, but it is only valid if the "yes" vote receives an absolute majority and at least 35 per cent of the total number of registered voters, which implies a participation of at least 70 per cent. In 2004, Uruguayans used this mechanism to enshrine the right to water and sanitation in their constitutions.

For supporters of the recall referendum, if elected officials are revocable, they will no longer be able to betray their campaign promises with impunity, which could also reduce abstention.

Some personalities criticize the very principle of repeal or revocation referendums, considering that they represent a danger of instability or paralysis and would thus hinder the freedom of action of elected representatives by imposing on them an imperative mandate which is nevertheless contrary to the principle of Article 27 of the Constitution of the Fifth French Republic. Some criticize these proposals as « poujadism », or as demagogy.

The Musée nationale de l'histoire de l'immigration (French pronunciation: [ site nɑsjɔnal də listwaʁ də limiɡʁaɑsjɔ̃ ]) is a museum of immigration history located in the 12th arrondissement of Paris at 293, avenue Daumesnil. The nearest métro station is Porte Dorée. It is open Tuesday through Friday from 10 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. and weekends from 10 a.m. to 7 p.m.; there is an admission fee.

The museum was conceived in 1989 by Algerian immigrant Zaïr Kédadouche, supported initially by historians including Pierre Milza and Gérard Noiriel, but the idea was paused in 1993. The 1998 French World Cup win reunified the people of France, and former Prime Minister Lionel Jospin approved its creation almost immediately. Years passed and hope for the Museum to come to fruition faded until President Jacques Chirac was reelected in 2002. He put Jacques Toubon in charge of bringing the Museum to life with a mission to "contribute to the recognition of the integration of immigrants into French society and advance the views and attitudes on immigration in France". It opened without public ceremony in late 2007 under his successor, President Nicolas Sarkozy, amid political controversy in which eight of the twelve academics involved in the project resigned.

The museum occupies the Palais de la Porte Dorée, a historical monument in Paris, which was built in 1931 to serve as the Colonial International Exhibition's museum dedicated to the colonies. Owing to the Palais de la Porte Dorée's colonial history and deep ties to the French Empire, space in the museum is dedicated to informing guests of its history, and one of the first temporary exhibits was of the year 1931. However, there is also some controversy surrounding the theme of reducing all immigration to colonialist origin which can be seen as demeaning and confusing to some. The museum was also formerly the home of the Musée national des Arts d'Afrique et d'Océanie, on the edge of the Bois de Vincennes. Its tropical aquarium is still located in the cellar and remains open to the public. It contains over 1100 m of exhibition space devoted primarily to the history and culture of immigration in France from the early nineteenth century to the present. A permanent installation, "Benchmarks", contains interactive exhibits presenting immigrant stories in multimedia form. The Abdelmalek Sayad multimedia library house, which is located in the museum, contains a diverse collection of books, films, and other types of media related to the themes of the museum. The collection is accessible online through the museum's portal.

The museum's collections are organized by three main themes: images including photography by Eugène Atget, Gérald Bloncourt, Robert Capa, Yves Jackson, Jean Jacques Pottier, etc., as well as prints, posters, drawings press, cartoons, comic books, audiovisual materials; objects of daily life; and works of art concerning immigration, territory, borders, and roots.

In May 2019 it hosted an event with the artist Adelaide Damoah during Museum Week.

The Civic Alliance for Democracy in Europe (Alliance Citoyenne pour la Démocratie en Europe, ACDE) is a liberal political party in France.

It was launched in January 2008 by Jean-Marie Cavada, Claire Gibault and Janelly Fourtou, three MEPs elected for Union for French Democracy. The goal of the party is to unite all those liberals who disagreed with the creation of the Democratic Movement and support President Nicolas Sarkozy.

The party was a member of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party for a few months until November 2009.

In the 2009 European Parliament election, Cavada was re-elected under the Union for a Popular Movement - New Centre etiquette, and seems to have become a member of the New Centre. Claire Gibault and Janelly Fourtou were not re-elected. The future of the organization is unknown.

Claude Goasguen (12 March 1945 – 28 May 2020) was a French politician who served as a member of the National Assembly for Paris from 1993 to 1995 and again from 1997 until his death in 2020. A member of The Republicans, he also briefly was Minister of Reform of the State, Decentralisation and Citizenship in 1995 under Prime Minister Alain Juppé.

Claude Goasguen was born in Toulon, Var. He received a Doctorate in Law from Panthéon-Assas University. From 1976 to 1986, he taught at Paris 13 University, and he served as the Dean of the Law School from 1982 to 1984. From 1986 to 1988, he served as advisor to the Minister of National Education, René Monory, with regards to the links between universities and the private sector, and professional training. From December 1987 to January 1991, he served as university rector.

From May to November 1995, Goasguen served as Minister of State Reforms, Decentralisation and Citizenship under Prime Minister Juppé. From April 1996 to May 1998, he was secretary general of the now-defunct FD and its successor the UDF ; from June 1998 to April 2002, he was vice-president and spokesperson of the now-defunct Liberal Democracy. From 2003, he also worked as a lawyer in Paris.

He was well known for his controversial comments on the Palestinian people and on the Muslim community living in France.

Goasguen was a vigorous supporter of oppressed Christian minorities in the Near East and has spoken prominently at public meetings concerning them in Autumn 2015. He was a recipient of the Legion of Honour. He died on 28 May 2020 in Issy-les-Moulineaux at the age of 75 from a heart attack after having contracted COVID-19 earlier in March during the COVID-19 pandemic in France. He was replaced in the Assembly by Sandra Boëlle.

In France, climate change has caused some the greatest annual temperature increases registered in any country in Europe. The 2019 heat wave saw record temperatures of 46.0 °C. Heat waves and other extreme weather events are expected to increase with continued climate change. Other expected environmental effects include increased floods due to both sea level rise and increased glacier melt. These environmental changes will lead to shifts in ecosystems and affect local organisms. Climate change will also cause economic losses in France, particularly in the agriculture and fisheries sectors.

The Paris Agreement on climate change, under France's presidency, was negotiated and agreed in 2015 at COP21. France subsequently set a law to have a net zero atmospheric greenhouse gas emission (carbon neutrality) by 2050. Recently, the French government has received criticism for not doing enough to combat climate change, and in 2021 was found guilty in court for its insufficient efforts.

France strives to have reduced its greenhouse gas emissions to 40% below what it was in 1990 by 2030. The French government hopes to reach a net emission of zero by 2040.

The table below shows the annual total emission of greenhouse gas in France in Megatonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (Mt CO 2). Values for EU27 with the United Kingdom (previously EU28) as well as the values for the world are included to compare trends in emission.

The four main emitting sectors in France are transport, agriculture, buildings and industry. In 2017, the French industry (including energy supply and other manufacturing) was responsible for 46% of the total CO 2 emission, a number that has been fairly steady since around 2014. The industries and agriculture are responsible for just 20% each of France's CO 2 emissions.

For the total CO 2 emission in 2018, France ranked number 19 in the world with a total of 330Mt CO 2 emitted, just below Poland with 340Mt CO 2 emitted and the United Kingdom with 370Mt CO 2 emitted.

The table below shows the annual emission of greenhouse gas in France in tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent per capita (tCO 2 /capita).

The per capita emission of France in 2019 was just below the average for the world. In 2018, France ranked number 17 in the world with 5.19 tonnes CO 2 emitted per capita. Its neighbouring countries the United Kingdom (5.62T CO 2 /capita) and Germany (9.12T CO 2 /capita) ranked 14 and 9, respectively.

The current rise in temperature is changing the natural environment in France, from more precipitation during spring and winter to heat waves and fast melting glaciers. All these effects are only expected to get worse with the increasing temperature.

During the 20th century, the average annual temperature in mainland France rose by 0.95 °C. Meanwhile, the average annual global temperature rose by 0.74 °C during that same time period. Meaning that France saw an average temperature increase that was around 30% higher compared to the average global temperature rise. If this trend continues by the time the average global temperature has reached 2 °C it would mean that the average temperature in France has increased with almost 3 °C. In present day, warmer summers and cooler winters are already getting more pronounced leading to an increase of 5–35% in autumn and winter rainfall as well as a decrease in summer rainfall, the latter combined with an increase in temperature, could increase the risk for more severe drought events. The Mediterranean part of the country saw an increase of around 0.5 °C per decade in the period of 1979–2005, making it the part of the country that is experiencing the highest increase in temperature and highest decrease in annual precipitation.

Temperature rise in the French Alps is even more extensive than in the rest of the country, and by 2018 approached a 2 °C average increase compared to the industrial revolution with an accelerating increase in the past few decades.

The hottest year in France on record was in 2020 with an average temperature of 14.0 °C which beat the last record of 13.9 °C in 2018. The all-time hottest day was recorded on the 28th of June 2019, a day that saw a lot of new records during the 2019 European heat wave. With the hottest place being in Gallargues-le-Monteux in Southern France with a staggering 45.9 °C. Due to an increase in global average temperature France has been hit by several extreme heat waves over the past few years, this is because of hot air passing over Europe from North Africa.

With a decrease in summer precipitation and a global increase of average temperature, heat wave events like the 2018 European heat wave and the 2019 European heat wave set new summer temperature records and are only expected to get more intense and common due to climate change.

With an increase in glacier and polar ice cap melting, sea level rise is expected to increase, affecting both the Atlantic and the Mediterranean coasts. Future climate projections predict that sea levels around France will increase by at least 1 meter by the year 2100. Low coasts will be in danger of erosion and being permanently submerged, heavily threatening coastal infrastructure, new coasts will be under threat from temporal flooding, an estimated 140,000 homes and 80,000 people are located in the zone that is at risk for permanent submersion by 2100.

An increase in mean annual temperature causes glacial retreat. In the European Alps it is estimated that around half of glacial ice had disappeared between 1850 and 1975. Another 30–40% from what remained was estimated to have disappeared between the time period 1980–2005. According to future climate models, what remains of the glaciers in the Alps as of the year 2100 compared to 2017, could be nothing more than one-third in a best case scenario regardless if the global carbon emission hits zero. If these emissions continue to rise those glaciers will be gone by 2100. At the Mont Blanc altitudes between 1500 and 2500 meters saw a total of 25 more snow-free days when comparing the years 1964–75 and 2005–2015. An increasing temperature is the primary cause of this rapid snow melting from glaciers, making more ground become exposed to sunlight which changes the albedo of the surrounding area. This secondary cause creates in its turn a positive feedback effect of more extensive heat and therefore promoting even more glacial and snow melt.

A rapid rise in melting glaciers increases the risk of avalanches, floods, mudslides and landslides. A reduction in melting glacial water causes problems for local water reservoirs used for energy, agriculture and daily use of water. This causes high risk as parts of the Alps are densely populated.

France is in present-day not under serious threat of flooding because of climate change. However, with an expected sea-level rise, coastal regions are likely to be affected by coastal flooding. Other than that future climate projections have difficulties estimating where and when an increase in flooding events might occur due to high uncertainties in weather patterns. High altitude areas, like the French Alps, are most likely to see more flooding events due to melting glaciers and because of mountains being good at capturing rain from the air.

More than half of all land in France belongs to agriculture or urban areas, both of which are generally biodiverse poor ecosystems. The most numerous naturally occurring ecosystem is forests. In France around 27% of land and 36% of marine environments fall under some form of protection, like Natura 2000 or the Habitats directive. Current conservation plans to help existing organisms and ecosystems cope with a changing climate is to reduce any other forms of pressure like human interference in order to promote the resilience in those ecosystems as well as more protected areas and stricter rules, legislation and management.

Plant communities affect the biophysical properties of their surrounding soil through interactions with both microbial communities and animals as well as through adding soil from decaying plant matter and root growth which holds both water and soil in place. With a shift in climate these communities will have to move as well. For plant communities living in the Alps, this is more problematic as according to one source a roughly 100 meter change in altitude corresponds to a difference of 0.5 °C.

A higher winter temperature could also be devastating for many forms of hibernating wildlife, as an early spike in temperature would promote hibernating organisms like cold-blooded reptiles and amphibians to wake up, as well as cause plants to flower early. Most of these organisms would not survive if a late winter cold snap were to hit the area. An example is the blueberry, which is sensitive to frost and can therefore become severely damaged if its productivity starts to early.

Climate change is expected to bring longer, warmer summers and less precipitation to France, which will severely affect many of the crops used in agriculture. Due to the warmer weather, the evaporation will be higher and less rain is expected. As most crops currently grown in France are to some extent sensitive to drought, there will likely be a higher need for irrigation, leading to a higher cost of crop production. Extreme weather events and droughts can also eliminate crop yields for some years. The warm weather, although it will prolong the growing season, will also shorten the crop growth phases and crops such as oilseed and cereal will hence experience a shorter grain filling phase, resulting in smaller size. The smaller size also means a smaller yield volume, resulting in the need to expand current agriculture or import additional crop.

Livestock will also be affected by the warmer climate. Animals kept indoors will have a higher need for ventilation and cooling systems, and animals let outdoors will need shelter to protect from the sun during grazing, and likely need a higher water supply available, increasing the cost of production. The biggest effect on livestock production will possibly be through fodder yield reduction. The warmer weather will alter the seasonal growth, decreasing the summer yields, while likely giving an increase in spring and autumn yields, resulting in a skewed and variable fodder availability. Due to the effects of climate change on livestock, and the effect of livestock on climate change, it is likely necessary to rethink the livestock system.

Along with Italy and Spain, France is one of the largest wine producers in the world, with vineyards found in all regions of France. Wine production is the second largest trade in France, after aeronautics. In 2017, French wine production had a profit of 8.24 billion Euros (9.97bn USD).

High temperatures during the grape maturation period can lead to a reduced quality of the grapes. Drier weather also causes a decreased annual yield, unless more efficient irrigation systems are implemented on vineyards, with the effect of increasing the production costs. The quality of the wine may also decrease, as the warmer temperature-effects on the grapes gives it a higher sugar content, and hence higher alcohol degree, but also a lower acid content.

But the warmer climate also allows for new opportunities, for example moving wine production further north. Existing vineyards located in the north of France, such as those in Champagne, are expected to experience optimal conditions for wine production.

There are a lot of uncertainties about how the future fish stocks along the French coasts will behave. Changes in migratory patterns, trophic interactions, vulnerability to fishing pressure and general fish stock production are difficult to predict as they depend on more factors than just the changing climate. More recent observations report variable effects on different species. In the Bay of Biscay, for example, the anchovy catches are increasing due to a warmer climate, whereas catches of pollack and monkfish are declining. Conversely, France has a fish consumption that exceeds their catch volumes, and already import fish to sustain their demand. With altered future catches, the need for imported fish may increase, imposing a bigger expense than currently.

France is one of the biggest producers of marine molluscs in Europe, farming both oysters and mussels. With climate change, the ocean will take up increased quantities of CO 2, resulting in ocean acidification. Calcifying organisms, such as shellfish, will have a harder time producing their skeletal structures, hence decreasing growth rates and potentially increasing mortality. This could lead to significant economic loss for France. For all of Europe, the predicted economic losses due to mollusc production damage is calculated to annually be almost 0.9 billion Euro (1bn USD) by 2100.

Climate change, bringing increased temperatures and more frequent extreme weather events, will strongly affect the French infrastructure. Temperature increases the degradation of asphalt, and flooding and big rain events cause the risk of dislodging parts of the road. Railways may also be dislodged, and high temperatures may further make the tracks expand and buckle, causing the need for reparation. Tunnels and other low infrastructures will also be severely affected by extreme rain events and flooding. All together, this will slow down transports while increasing operating maintenance and costs.

Flooding due to sea-level rise will further affect infrastructure in coastal areas. The water rise will cause loss of roads and buildings, and further cause people to lose their houses and jobs. Increased expenses will come either from building structures to increase flood protection, or from redeveloping and rebuilding transport infrastructures and relocating people in the affected areas.

France is one of the countries worst affected by European heat waves. During the heat wave of 2003, where big parts of France measured over 40 °C (104 °F), closer to 15,000 people died due to the elevated temperatures. Up until that year, heat wave events had been underestimated as a threat to the French public health. Since then, local authorities have undertaken measures to be more prepared. During the heat waves of 2018 and 2019, despite the latter reaching record high temperatures of 45.9 °C (114.6 °F), fatalities reached approximately 1,500 people each year. With climate change, heat waves are expected to get more intense and frequent in France, and the number of fatalities with it.

Deaths due to air pollution has likely been undervalued in France. Premature deaths due to pulmonary diseases and stroke were previously estimated to 16,000 fatalities annually. More recently, the premature deaths due to the levels of particulate matter (PM2.5), nitrous oxide (NO 2) and ozone (O 3) were calculated to be over 40,000 people annually. Climate change affects the flow and development of air pollutants and is likely to decrease the over-all health of the population, though it is very difficult to predict what the exact effects will be.

With a warmer climate, like that brought about by climate change, there is a risk of an increase in vector- borne diseases such as yellow fever, dengue fever and malaria. Leishmaniasis, a disease transmitted by sandflies, is currently found only in the Mediterranean area, but could spread northwards with a warmer climate. While a warmer climate will likely bring more favourable conditions for the vectors, the exact effects or the extent of the spread also depend on factors such as socioeconomic status and land-use as well as available treatments.

In 2017, the industrial sectors were responsible for 17.6% of the French total energy consumption, with the non industrial sectors standing for the remaining 82.4% of the total energy consumption.

The total energy supply of France in 2019 relied mainly on nuclear power (just over 40%) and oil (30%). The use of coal accounted for only 5% of the total energy supply and natural gas for just over 15%. The rest came from renewable sources, such as biofuel and hydropower.

The Energy Transition Ministry is increasing wind power. Solar power is also being increased so the country will depend on both nuclear and renewables.

France has set a goal to get 32% of its total consumed energy from renewable sources by 2030. They also hope to reduce the share of nuclear power for generating electricity from 70% to 50% until 2030 (in 2020, it is still approximately 70%). France further intends to close its last coal plant by 2022, which would make them the fourth coal-free state in Europe, following after Belgium, Austria and Sweden. All efforts are in line with a target of carbon neutrality law, which France hopes to reach by 2050.

France has made an effort to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions in the power and transport sector, where they have almost phased out their coal usage and reduced the number of gas cars. Unfortunately, about 90% of all road traffic still runs on oil products, and they have not managed to reduce the number of vehicles in favour of public transportation, or biking. Within the building sector, new houses are built to be low-consuming of energy, and France hopes that the construction of energy-plus houses will be standard after 2021. The industry sector is doing a good job in reducing its carbon emissions, but are still not able to keep their limit when it comes to for example energy usage in installations for metals, minerals and the waste management industry.

The Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) are set by the European Union, as an implementation of the Paris Agreement. The overall goal is to reach a 43% reduction in carbon emissions by 2030 compared to 2005. According to this, France should carry out adaptive measures to reduce its emissions by 37% until 2030, compared to 2005. Further, France has set a law to achieve climate neutrality in 2050.

France is currently insufficient in its efforts to reach the goal, which led to a government lawsuit in 2021.

In December 2022 the European Commission approved a law forbidding short-haul flights in France, if people can pass the distance on a train in 2.5 hours. Greenpeace demanded to extend the law, by following the advice of the European Commission to include connecting flights. Greenpeace cited a report according to which, if it will be 6 hours instead of 2.5, it will cut global greenhouse gas emissions by an amount equivalent to 3.5 million tonnes CO 2 annually.

According to the French president Emmanuel Macron France will end sales of petrol and diesel vehicles by 2040 to meet its targets under the Paris climate accord. The Netherlands is expected to have the same ban by 2025 and some parts of Germany will have a phase-out by 2030. In 2021, French lawmakers also set out to ban domestic flights where train rides taking under two and a half hours are available, in an effort to reduce CO 2 emissions.

France hosted the 2015 United Nations Climate Change Conference, where the landmark Paris Agreement was negotiated and agreed. The agreement forms a key international framework for climate change mitigation and adaptation.

To adapt to climate change, France has made a National Adaptation Plan. They are currently on the second one, called The Second National Adaptation Plan for Climate Change (NAP-2 or PNACC-2), which is in place from 2018 until 2022. The plan is based on the first plan that was in place from 2011 to 2015, and was revised with a national consultation involving 300 representatives and experts. The plan includes adaption strategies for the main economic and social sectors in the country as well as for the different territories in France.

In 2021 the French government was found guilty of not keeping its pledges to reduce greenhouse gases. A court in France convicted the government after four non-governmental organizations (NGO's) had collected 2.3 million signatures from the French people for their petition, which is the largest amount of collected signatures in history. NGO's include Greenpeace France and Oxfam France. The petition was created to counteract the current lack of action the French government was doing to reduce greenhouse gas emissions despite having promised to reduce its GHG emission with 40% by the year 2030 and going carbon neutral by 2050. The NGO's accused the government of currently dealing with the climate problem in a pace that is going twice as slow. Between the years 2018-19 the GHG emission in France dropped by 0.9% instead of the annual target of 1.5% until the year 2025. Each organisation was awarded a symbolic €1 by the French government.

In August 2019 a summit of the G7 members convened in Biarritz, France. In protest of the country doing too little to stop their carbon emissions, protesters marched in the nearby city of Bayonne, as Biarritz had been under lockdown due to the summit. The protesters held portraits of Emmanuel Macron upside down to highlight the gap between the president's climate goals and the lack of action thereof. The more than 100 portraits of the president had been stolen from French town halls all over the country, many activists were held responsible for "group theft by deceit". Despite the trials, more than 9,000 protesters showed up and marched with the inverted portraits. The protests were eventually broken up with tear gas and water cannons and around 70 people were arrested.

The Yellow vest movement was initially started in France due to a public wide outrage over the increase in fuel prices. In 2018 the price of diesel saw an increase by 20%, the added on carbon tax and the overall increase of the price of fuel was done by the government to take climate action and reduce the number of times people would use cars or other forms of personal transportation. The only problem was that the people who got affected the most by this were also the once that could not afford it and only had their cars as means of transportation. The increased price was done in favour of people living in the city where public transportation is plentiful, but this is not the case in rural regions and on the countryside, thus starting the movement.

A nationwide survey in 2017 containing answers from 3,480 French citizens looked at how the general public perceived climate change. According to the study 85% of people believe climate change is happening with only 1.9% being absolutely not sure. A total of 90% of participants believed that human activity is completely or partly responsible for climate change and only 2.5% were found to be climate change deniers. Around 85% showed concern about the effects of climate change. Most concerned were younger people, students and those who are full-time employed. On the other hand, the number of people that believed that their actions could mitigate climate change was found to only be moderate. With many people not knowing what actions to take or believing that their actions would not make any difference. The survey also found that the public's knowledge about climate change was low to moderate, while being high in mid-range educational qualifications, students, the full-time employed and those that had experienced the direct effects of climate change through droughts, floods or extreme storms.

In February 2023, 2 state TV channels, France 2 and France 3 have begun to enter information regarding climate change in their weather forecasts. This will make the forecasts 1.5–2 minutes longer. The climate related information will rely on experts. The channels will also provide information about climate change and the ways stopping it to their workers. In France, except in case of breaking news they will ask reporters to take the train instead of a plane.

The climate of France is the statistical distribution of conditions in the Earth's atmosphere over the national territory, based on the averages and variability of relevant quantities over a given period, the standard reference period defined by the World Meteorological Organization being 30 years. Climate characterization is based on annual and monthly statistical measurements of local atmospheric data: temperature, atmospheric pressure, precipitation, sunshine, humidity, wind speed. Recurrence and exceptional events are also taken into account.

Located between latitudes 41° 19' N and 51° 04'N, metropolitan France is currently in the temperate zone, characterized by warm summers and moderately cold winters. This classification distinguishes between oceanic (cool summers, mild winters, high precipitation), continental (hot summers, cold winters, low precipitation), Mediterranean (hot, dry summers, mild winters, autumn precipitation), mountain (colder and wetter than the surrounding plains) and altered oceanic (a transition zone between oceanic and mountain climates and semi-continental climate). Extreme temperatures recorded in mainland France are 46.0 °C in Vérargues on 28 June 2019 and −36.7 °C in Mouthe on 13 January 1968.

The climates of France's overseas territories are many and varied, depending on their position on the globe, ranging from the cold oceanic type for the subantarctic islands, to the tropical maritime type for the French West Indies, the equatorial type for French Guiana and the polar maritime type for Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon. French Polynesia, which extends over 20 degrees of latitude, is divided into 5 types.

These climates have varied greatly in the past, with warm periods (optimums) and cold periods (ice ages). Paleoclimates, which date back to geological times, have been marked by alternating ice ages (around 80,000 years) and warm periods (around 20,000 years) at intervals of around 100,000 years. The last Ice Age was a period of global cooling, or glaciation, which marked the end of the Pleistocene on the entire planet. It began 115,000 years ago and ended 11,700 years ago, when the Holocene, the current interglacial period, began. The latter is characterized by the Roman climatic optimum (−300 to +200), the Medieval climatic optimum (900–1300) and the Little Ice Age (1300–1860). The contemporary period (1860 to the present) is marked by the end of the Alpine Little Ice Age (1860-1900-1910), followed by the onset of global warming.

The IPCC's sixth assessment report confirms with certainty the anthropization origin of the global warming already observed. Temperatures in mainland France today are 1.66 °C higher than those measured between 1900 and 1930, with 1.63 °C attributable solely to human activity. Analysis of more precise temperature data between 2010 and 2019 shows that, over this short period, France is warming by 0.1 °C every 3 years. To meet the two objectives of the Paris climate agreement (warming well below 2 °C and preferably limited to 1.5 °C), a sharp and immediate reduction in CO 2 emissions is essential, until we reach carbon neutrality, the only way to halt global warming. Reducing emissions of other greenhouse gases, particularly methane, is also relevant. To meet this objective, France, through its climate policy, is deploying various mitigation and adaptation strategies, with specific targets such as reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 40% between 1990 and 2030 (20% in 2019) or reducing final energy consumption by 50% in 2050 compared with the 2012 baseline, with an intermediate target of 20% in 2030.

The notion of climate has evolved considerably, and it's now easier to define what the "climate system" is, i.e. all the very different components that make up the atmosphere, the oceans, the continental surface, and all their physical, chemical and biological interactions. The word "climate" thus goes beyond the usual strictly atmospheric definition to designate the characteristics of the climate system in a given place, characteristics established over a period, often 30 years, known as the Climate Norm. The parameters used to describe a region's climate are many and varied, from temperature, wind and air humidity to soil water content, river conditions, atmospheric composition and ocean salinity. They are most often analyzed in terms of annual, monthly or seasonal averages. But characterizing climate also means describing rarer and more irregular events, such as violent storms or persistent drought.

France is a transcontinental sovereign state whose metropolitan territory extends across Western Europe, and whose overseas territories stretch across the Indian, Atlantic and Pacific oceans, as well as Antarctica and South America. It is thus characterized by a wide variety of climates, which have also been highly variable over time.

Life appeared on Earth between 3.8 and 3.5 billion years ago, in the form of the first cells. It was the first living organisms capable of recovering carbon from atmospheric CO 2 dissolved in water and progressively enriching the atmosphere with oxygen (photosynthesis) that set in motion the dynamic cycle of water and climate. The first hominids appeared around 4 million years ago. Ice core records provide a good understanding of the climate over the last million years. It is marked by alternating ice ages (around 80,000 years) and warm periods (around 20,000 years) with a periodicity of around 100,000 years. Since the appearance of man, the average temperature at the Earth's surface has been relatively constant, varying by only a few degrees from an average of around 15 °C.

The regular alternation of warm and cold periods can be explained by astronomy. In 1924, Serbian geophysicist Milutin Milanković demonstrated that three independent parameters characterize the Earth's orbit around the sun and modulate the amount of solar energy according to the seasons: eccentricity, obliquity, the inclination of the Earth's axis of rotation on itself in relation to the plane of rotation around the sun (currently close to 23°) and climatic precession, a term defining variations in the Earth's axis of rotation. Each of these parameters varies over time with independent periods, and their conjunction makes the construction, or disappearance, of icecaps in the Northern Hemisphere more or less favorable, and these icecaps play a decisive role in climate. In France, the South-East basin, considered part of the Alpine domain, stands out from other French geological basins for the very great thickness of its sedimentary layer. Alternating marl and limestone deposits are particularly well exposed in the Vocontian Basin, where Lower Cretaceous formations are mostly in the form of alternating limestone banks and marl interbanks. These alternating sedimentary successions perfectly reflect the interlocking Milanković cycles, providing one of the best proofs of astroclimatic control of sedimentation.

The Last Ice Age is a period of global cooling, or glaciation, that marks the end of the Pleistocene on the entire planet. It began 115,000 years ago and ended 11,700 years ago, when the Holocene began.

Abrupt changes of millennial cyclicity punctuated this last glacial period and had a strong impact on terrestrial and marine ecosystems, as well as on atmospheric composition and temperature. Periods characterized by rising water temperatures in the North Atlantic, Greenland and greenhouse gas concentrations were contemporary with the development of forest in Europe below 50°N, and alternated with cold periods of steppe vegetation. During the changes observed around 40,000 years before present, Neanderthal man disappeared and modern man colonized Europe.

These changes, known as the Dansgaard-Oeschger cycles after their discoverers, have given rise to some forty very rapid climatic pulsations. These phases are associated with variations in North Atlantic surface water temperature and changes in climate on the European continent. These pulses lasted for several millennia, and the transition from a cold episode (stage) to a temperate episode (interstage) seems to have been very rapid, on the order of a few decades, sometimes less! Some of these cold episodes were accompanied by a massive influx of icebergs into the Bay of Biscay from the ice cap covering Canada. These iceberg break-ups, known as Heinrich events, were brutal: each would have lasted on the order of a century, or even a few millennia. Studies of Bay of Biscay sediments have shown that each Heinrich event is synchronous with the rapid development (< 100 years) of a "Central European-type" grass steppe at the expense of pine forest.

The glacial maximum was reached around 21,000 years ago. One of the consequences of this cooling was a marine regression (a general drop in sea level) of around 120 meters at its maximum, and the establishment of a periglacial climate in Europe, North Asia and North America, leading to profound changes in flora and fauna. At the time of this glacial maximum, the Arctic ice cap covered northern Europe, the glaciers of the Alps descended as far as Lyon, and those of the Pyrenees as far as Arudy (Pyrénées-Atlantiques). Sea level was around 120 m below present, and the shoreline was pushed ~50 km offshore. In southern Aquitaine, deglaciation of the high Pyrenean mountains must have ended around 15,000 years ago. During the last glacial episode, the Landes was a vast sandy expanse dotted with 'fields of small crescent-shaped dunes of metric height. Beyond the Garonne to the east and the Adour to the south, finer particles (loess) carried by storms to higher altitudes were deposited to form accumulations on the relief, where steppe vegetation then developed.

The Tardiglacial is the period between the Last Glacial Maximum, which ended around 19,000 years ago, and the beginning of the Holocene, 11,700 years ago, during which there was an irregular rise in temperatures, interspersed with relapses. The beginning of the Tardiglacial period in Europe was marked by the disappearance from our latitudes of certain "archaic" animal species (mammoths, woolly rhinoceroses, cave bears). Reindeer and horses (Equus caballus gallicus), sometimes combined with Bovinae (bison or aurochs), became the dominant species of the early Interstadial period, judging by the hunting records of human societies.

The Alleröd (13,900 to 12,900 years ago) is characterized by an increase in tree cover. In the Paris Basin and in Belgium, pollen analyses enable us to distinguish two phases in this episode: the first is characterized by the establishment of an open birch forest (afforestation rate of around 45%); the second, which may be separated by a slight retreat in tree cover, sees the expansion of an open pine-dominated forest. Arctic species are partly replaced by woodland species: aurochs and horses – occasionally present – are joined by deer, roe deer, wild boar, elk and beaver.

Cave paintings can also provide clues to the climate, but these must be interpreted with care. Plants are rare in cavern art, but the animals depicted can help us to understand the climate outside, even if the species depicted on the cave walls represent only a selection. The compositions do not constitute a photograph of the external landscape. The presence of a saiga antelope on a wall in Rouffignac (Dordogne) betrays cold, dry steppe conditions. The fact that there is only one reindeer and no mammoth depicted at Lascaux may indicate milder temperatures (or perhaps the artists weren't interested in these animals).

The question is: did the artists reproduce images of animals that actually lived in their territory? As Jean-Loïc Le Quellec points out, elephants can be found sculpted on Romanesque churches, even though this pachyderm did not really frequent our forests. The large bulls in the Rotonde de Lascaux are well known, but certain chronological attributions of the cave mean that its decoration began at a time when aurochs (lovers of wooded environments) were not very present in the immediate environment. According to François Djindjian, mammoths had disappeared from the Périgord by the Middle Magdalenian, and were only found further north, in the Loire and Saône basins and in the Paris Basin. Yet Rouffignac was decorated at this time! He therefore proposes that the artists drew them from memory, having gone to contemplate them in a sort of safari avant la lettre. However, new research indicates that mammoths still existed on the banks of the Vézère at this time. Moreover, as Florian Berrouet points out: "The addition of numerous details indicating seasonality or the extreme naturalistic rigor of the artists (anal flap, eye contour, triangular lower lip) and making each animal unique, endowed with a real personality, forces us to believe that man must have rubbed shoulders with, or even observed, these mammoths for a long time." During colder periods, the big beasts migrated in herds southwards, towards hospitable territories. It is perhaps the memory of such a vision that the Magdalenians of Rouffignac immortalized on stone.

At the end of the period (Dryas III), a very severe cold snap led to a return of arctic species, a further retreat of forest and an extension of steppe and tundra landscapes. It ends abruptly with a rapid rise in temperatures.

The current Holocene interglacial period began some twelve thousand years ago, at the end of the Last Glacial Period (known as the Würm for its Alpine component). In the mountains of Europe, small glaciers also formed in the Vosges, Black Forest, Massif Central, Carpathians, Pyrenees, Apennines, Balkans and Sierra Nevada, as well as in northwest Spain, Crete and Corsica. The deglaciation that preceded it lasted around 10,000 years and resulted in a rise in temperature of around 4 °C and a rise in sea level of around 130 metres.

A study tracing mean annual surface air temperatures across Europe over the last 12,000 years was published in 2003. It is based on quantitative climate reconstructions from over 500 pollen sites assimilated using an innovative four-dimensional gridding procedure. It appears that the Holocene climatic optimum was only observed in northern Europe, and therefore did not affect France. This warming was offset by a mid-Holocene cooling in southern Europe. Trends in mean annual temperatures for the whole of Europe suggest an almost linear increase in the heat budget up to 7800 BC, followed by stable conditions for the rest of the Holocene. This warming at the beginning of the Holocene, followed by an equilibrium, was mainly modulated by rising winter temperatures in the west, which have continued to rise at a progressively decreasing rate to the present day.

Southern Europe and the Mediterranean have experienced almost linear warming since around 8,000 BC. This warming preceded the onset of any major human impact and continued at the same rate until the end of the Holocene, a period of anthropogenic significance. This suggests not only that the Mediterranean climate has an essentially natural origin, but also that the pollen-climate calibration method has remained independent of human impact on vegetation.

The study divides Europe into six parts, delimited in latitude by the 45°N and 55°N parallels and in longitude by the 15°E meridian. France, crossed by the 45°N parallel (Bordeaux latitude), is represented by two parts: the part north of 45°N is in Central-Western Europe, and the part to the south is in Southwestern Europe. The graphs representing temperature variations in mainland France over the Holocene, reconstructed from pollen data, are shown below.

In southern France (below latitude 45°N), the climate changed around 8,000 BC. From this date onwards, we can distinguish a phase known as Boreo-Atlantic, which ends with a cold episode, which appears to be worldwide, centered on 6,250 BC. This phase seems to have been marked by a relatively uncertain climate, or at least one of great contrasts. Then, for around half a millennium, we witness the return of an Atlantic ensemble – towards which the sequence preceding this episode was already tending. This is defined by high, very regular rainfall from Spain and North Africa to the Balkans. In addition, average temperatures (and particularly average summer temperatures, the most favorable for vegetation) are said to have been 1.5° to 2 °C higher than in the 1970–1980 period. They may even have exceeded them by 2° to 2.5 °C during what are known as climatic optimum sequences (the first of which occurred around 5700 BC).

Comparing these major climatic sequences with the major cultural sequences may reveal a link between certain sequences. The following table shows such a timeline for Haute-Provence. While the cultural sequences are identical throughout France, the years separating them vary from region to region. This is particularly true of the Neolithic period, when the first groups settled in Provence, Languedoc and Corsica around 5500 BC, but only reached certain other parts of France several hundred years later.

climatic optimum around 5700 (2 °C-2.5 °C higher than present, regular and mild precipitation)

progression of temperatures and precipitation (at least 8000-7000) tending towards an Atlantic character warmer than the present (1.5 °C-2 °CC) with regubliere precipitation, but persistence at least during certain phases of powerful thunderstorms (major fires).

very rapid rise in temperatures at the start (second Great Warming), followed by gradual coolness relatively dry, but periods of heavy rain in some regions (Southern Pre-Alps), perhaps partly of a stormy nature

cold and dry sometimes and very heavy rainfall

The period between 300 B.C. and A.D. 200 witnessed the development and rise to power of the Roman Empire. This prosperous period is considered socially stable. It corresponds precisely to the period of the Roman Climatic Optimum (RCO), when summers are warm and rather humid. These climatic conditions favored the development of agriculture, as well as the establishment of ornamental gardens. This situation is linked to greater solar activity, linked to the activity of ocean currents, and low volcanic activity. The OCR would therefore have been particularly beneficial to the strong development of viticulture, which expanded in the three Gauls during the 1st. century, reaching as far as southern England. Generally speaking, since agriculture was the Roman Empire's primary source of wealth, it is now clearer that this climatic change was a powerful driving force behind economic development until the 1st. century.

The settlement and development of the city of Lyon in a flood zone benefited from a favorable climatic context linked to the Little Roman Optimum, corresponding to a period of moderate hydrology. A reconstruction of the hydrosedimentary variability of the Rhône at Lyon from 1000 BC to 2000 AD shows the approximate fluctuation of solid and liquid flows over the period. In particular, these curves describe an oscillation during the period between the end of the 1st century BC and the 1st century AD. This was a short period of climatic oscillation, with several episodes of flooding characterized by greater intensity and frequency than in earlier and later periods. The main floods have been dated to the reigns of Augustus, Tiberius and Claudius, between 27 BC and 54 AD. Another climatic oscillation can be seen in the early Middle Ages

This ancient hydrosedimentary crisis within the Roman Petit Optimum can be identified in other areas of Gallia Narbonensis. For example, during the same period, the Saint-Ferréol branch of the Rhône, in the delta, continued to advance. Elsewhere, the port of Narbonne (Narbo Martius) experienced accelerated silting in the 1st century. In Lyon, archaeological digs have shown that the urban society of the city's riverside adapted to this crisis through a series of developments designed to occupy the peninsula between the Rhône and Saône rivers.

The impact of climatic degradation during Late antiquity on the end of the Roman Empire in the West has long been widely discussed in scientific literature. It has been seen as the cause of the great barbarian invasions, of a drop in cereal yields causing famine, of a change in land use, with a conversion of arable land to pasture in Western Europe, and so on. It has also been suggested that the development of rye cultivation in Gaul in late Antiquity was an adaptation of agriculture to the colder climate, which would be an example of resilience. This period of climatic change would thus have affected agricultural production and played a role in historical upheavals, in particular the fall of the Western Roman Empire. But climate was certainly not the sole cause of the fall of the Roman Empire. By the end of the Empire, Roman society was certainly more vulnerable or more exposed to environmental conditions. North American historian Kyle Harper insists on the role of pandemics in the Empire's weakening, due in particular to several periods of plague.

The medieval Little Optimum Period (POM) took place in Western Europe between 900 and 1250–1300 AD, with seasons that were slightly milder or warmer, and perhaps drier, than those of the following period. The Little Medieval Optimum may have seen average temperatures of 0.5 °C higher than those of the Little Ice Age that followed, which was itself 0.7 to 0.8 °C lower than those of the end of the 20th century.

Climatologists have drawn up a number of classifications to reflect the diversity of situations on the planet. Overall, they delineate three main zones according to latitude (cold, temperate and hot climates). France is in the temperate zone, characterized by hot summers and moderately cold winters. This classification distinguishes between oceanic (cool summers, mild winters, high precipitation), continental (hot summers, cold winters, low precipitation) and Mediterranean (hot, dry summers, mild winters, autumn precipitation) climates. Within these three climatic zones, a variety of nuances emerge, depending on parameters such as altitude (mountain climate, colder and wetter than in the surrounding plains).

The Köppen classification is a climate classification based on precipitation and temperature. It was invented in the 1920s by botanist Wladimir Peter Köppen, who combined the world vegetation map published in 1866 by Hermann Griesbach and the division of climate into five zones by de Candolle. A climate is thus identified by a two- or three-letter code. This is the most common climatic classification, in the version presented by Rudolf Geiger in 1961. The Köppen-Geiger map remains a reference today, thanks to its frequent updates, in the fields of hydrology, geography, agriculture, biology and climatology through its research into the evolution of climates.

A large part of mainland France lies in the oceanic domain (Cfb), while the plains and hills bordering the Mediterranean basin have a climate designated by Csa.

Climate parameters can be used to predict the type of vegetation in an area, just as examining flora can deduce the climate. The UNDP and the WWF use these bioclimatic criteria to define ecozones. This type of classification describes biomes and not strictly climates, with the climate being deduced from the biome. In green, temperate deciduous and mixed forests; in brown, Mediterranean forests, woodlands and scrub

A 2010 study by Daniel Joly, Thierry Brossard, Hervé Cardot, Jean Cavailhes, Mohamed Hilal and Pierre Wavresky classified metropolitan France's climates into eight major types. Based on station measurements of precipitation and temperature provided by Météo-France, a set of 14 variables incorporating a 30-year time series (1971–2000) was defined to characterize climates and their distinctive modes of variation. An original method known as local interpolation was used to reconstitute the continuous spatial fields of the variables in question, and to express them in the form of information layers manageable by GIS. The result is 8 types of climate

Climate characterization has also been the subject of various types of representation, notably umbrothermal diagrams (climatograms, climograms or climate maps). These graphical representations show precipitation and temperature for each month of the year. The etymology of the word ombrothermique is in fact linked to the Greek ombros (storm rain) and thermique (relating to heat, temperature). The temperatures and precipitation used in these diagrams correspond to average monthly data for a given location, recorded over thirty years. This type of visual representation makes it possible to compare the temperature and precipitation of different climates in relation to each other. For example, the French territory is made up of several climates: oceanic (Brest), altered oceanic (Cambrai), semi-continental (Lons-le-Saunier), Mediterranean (Marseille) and mountain (Chamonix Mont-Blanc).

The map of these five major climate types in mainland France published by Météo-France in 2022, together with the characterization of these climates and the representative umbrothermal diagrams, are as follows

Type 3. Semi-continental climate. Summers are hot and winters harsh, with many days of snow or frost. Annual rainfall is relatively high, except in Alsace, which benefits from the protective effect of the Vosges mountains (föhn effect). Rainfall is heaviest in summer, often with thunderstorms. The city of Besançon is representative of this climate

Type 4. Mountain climate. Temperature decreases rapidly with altitude. There is minimal cloud cover in winter and maximum in summer. Winds and precipitation vary considerably according to location. The town of Bourg-Saint-Maurice (altitude: 865 m) is representative of this climate.

Type 5. The Mediterranean climate is characterized by mild winters and hot summers, plenty of sunshine and frequent strong winds. There are few rainy days, irregularly distributed over the year. Dry winters and summers are followed by very wet springs and autumns, often in the form of thunderstorms (40% of the annual total in 3 months). In just a few hours, this precipitation can bring 4 times more water than the monthly average to a given location, particularly near the relief (Mediterranean episode). The city of Marseille is representative of this climate.

In 2020, Météo-France is also publishing a map showing a breakdown into 29 climatic regions, taking into account the many factors that can influence climate on a regional scale, such as latitude, altitude, distance from the sea or major mountain ranges, etc.

Overseas France, with its widely scattered territories, has a wide variety of climates.

Saint-Pierre and Miquelon has a cold, humid oceanic climate. According to Köppen's classification, Saint-Pierre and Miquelon is in category Dfb (humid continental climate) / Dfc (subarctic climate with no dry season).

To the east of the large North American continental landmass, the climate is strongly influenced by it. Prevailing westerly quadrant winds originating on the continent come into contact with the ocean, often resulting in significant temperature contrasts. In winter, these winds are very cold and come into contact with milder oceanic air masses, creating or activating vigorous disturbances that generate intense snowfalls and sharp temperature drops. In summer, the flow is slightly different: warm and sometimes humid continental air masses from the Gulf of Mexico, upwelling via the American continent, come into contact with cold ocean waters (cold polar downwelling, also known as the " Labrador Current "), often resulting in thick, tenacious fog. The air is stabilized by the cold water, and rainfall is lower at this time of year.

This is a semi-continental climate, with fairly cold winters (average February temperature of −3.5 °C in Saint Pierre), though milder than on the American mainland, and very cool summers (15.5 °C in Saint Pierre in August, cooler than in mainland France at the same latitude) due to the presence of cold oceanic water. At the heart of this clash of air masses with very different characteristics, rainfall is abundant (1,312 mm per year in Saint-Pierre), with a winter maximum.

These islands, whose latitude extends a little beyond the Tropics (Rapa 27° 37 ′ S) and less than ten degrees towards the equator (Hiva-Oa 9° 49 ′ S), are located in the flow of the trade winds that blow regularly at these latitudes. These disturbances are moderate during the dry season, which corresponds to the winter at higher latitudes, and much more frequent and abundant during the summer and especially autumn periods of the year, as a result of the higher ocean temperatures at this time and the growing instability due to the proximity of the ITCZ (Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone), which rises in latitude in the summer hemisphere. There is a clear contrast between the "windward" slope exposed to the trade winds, which receives between 1,500 and 2,500 mm of rain annually (up to 4,634 mm annually at Plaine des Palmistes in La Réunion, at an altitude of 1,032 m), and the "leeward" slope (980 mm annually at Koumac in New Caledonia), which is much drier and even arid in places. The months with the least rainfall have between 30 and 90 mm (the dry season is relative), while the months with the most rainfall have between 200 and 400 mm.

In addition to the upsurge in rainfall in late summer/autumn, these islands are exposed to devastating tropical cyclones at this time of year, both in terms of the amount of rain dumped in a few hours and the stormy winds associated with them.

Due to the oceanic environment and low latitude, annual averages are high (Ile des Pins 22.5 °C, Saint Denis 24 °C, Le Lamentin 26.2 °C) and temperature differences are not very marked in these regions. Differences from one day to the next and from one season to the next are not very marked. The annual amplitude increases slightly as you move away from the equator, ranging from 1.9 °C in Hiva-Oa to 6.3 °C in Rapa, further away from the equator, via 3.1 °C in Pointe à Pitre. Differences between seasons are much more due to differences in rainfall than to differences in temperature.

Unlike temperate zones, the mountains in these regions have a higher annual amplitude than low-lying areas.

French Guiana has a humid equatorial climate. Close to the equator, French Guiana is characterized by high temperatures all year round (annual average 26.3 °C in Cayenne and 26.5 °C in Saint-Laurent), with very little difference from one month to the next (less than 2 °C difference between the warmest and warmest months in Cayenne and Saint-Laurent), and very abundant rainfall (3,674 mm per year in Cayenne, 2,595 mm per year in Saint-Laurent) spread over almost every month of the year. In Cayenne, only the months of September and October have less than 150 mm of rainfall (75 and 80 mm respectively), and some months have rainfall close to 500 mm (May or June). In Saint-Laurent, with its more uniform rainfall pattern, all months have more than 100 mm, with September and October being the least rainy and the only two months with less than 150 mm, and the wettest months totalling around 400 mm. Permanently bathed in equatorial air, with little seasonal variation, the temperature records are only slightly accentuated: 17.5 °C and 36.4 °C in Saint-Laurent. Close to the equator, French Guiana is not visited by cyclones.

The latitude of these islands means they are permanently swept by the intense westerly flow of the southern hemisphere. However, being relatively far from the pole (between 37° S and 39° S), their climate is not too cold, with an annual average of 14.1 °C in New Amsterdam. Bathed by an immense ocean, whose waters are stirred up by disturbances, these regions experience a fairly small amplitude between winter and summer. The climate is windy, with a temperate summer (average February temperature of 17.6 °C at Saint-Martin-de-Viviès in New Amsterdam) for the latitude, and a mild winter (average August temperature of 11.5 °C at New Amsterdam). Frost is unknown.

These islands are affected by regular, vigorous storms, and enjoy abundant rainfall (around 1,100 mm/year) throughout the year, with a marked increase in autumn and early winter (April to August). Summer (November to March) is calmer and less rainy as the tropical anticyclone moves up in latitude. The extremes are 72 mm in February and 119 mm in June.

These islands, like the previous ones, are permanently swept by the intense circumpolar westerly flow in the immense southern hemisphere ocean. However, closer to the pole, their climate is even windier and much colder. Well supplied with polar air by the very cold Antarctic continent, disturbances are vigorous and frequent, windy and with little respite from one season to the next, generating rainfall evenly distributed throughout the year, moderately abundant at Port-aux-Français (800 mm/year) in a sheltered position on the east coast, much more intense on the west coast.

Because the environment is even more turbulent than in the previous area, the temperature range between winter and summer is very small for the latitude, around 6 °C (between 8 and 45 °C in the northern hemisphere at the same latitudes). Apart from the wind, winter is relatively mild, with an average temperature of 2.2 °C in August in Port-aux-Français, while summer is very cool, with an average of 8.3 °C in February in Port-aux-Français, already polar despite the latitude (between 46° S and 49° S). It can freeze almost every month on Kerguelen and 10 months out of 12 on Crozet, but records (cold or hot) are not very marked (absolute extremes −8.6 °C and 25.8 °C on Port-aux-Français).

A narrow sector of the enormous Antarctic ice mass, Adélie Land has an extreme polar climate, within the coldest continent on earth, with a very low average winter temperature (−16.5 °C in July at Dumont d'Urville, which is relatively cooler because it's by the sea, but can approach −70 °C in the heart of the continent) and a consistently negative average summer temperature, even along the coast (−0.8 °C in January at Dumont d'Urville, but around −20/−30 °C inland). In winter, intense cooling is caused by permanent night-time conditions over a continental mass centered on the pole and relatively isolated from thaw by the vigorous westerly flow that prevails in the southern hemisphere's mid-latitudes. In summer, the permanent sunshine is unable to warm these regions, due to the thermal inertia of the enormous glacial mass, the persistent snow cover with its high albedo, and the cold ocean mass surrounding the continent.

This is the domain of the very violent katabatic wind that blows from the interior of the continent towards the coast, caused by the descent of the icy air that forms on the summit of the Antarctic Plateau (over 3,000 m) towards sea level. Through adiabatic compression, however, this air "warms up" considerably during this journey, reaching the ocean much less cold than it was in the interior of the continent (record cold of −37 °C at Dumont d'Urville, which is "mild" compared with the −90 °C sometimes reached in winter in the heart of Antarctica).

The wind is also caused by disturbances circulating around the edge of the continent.

Precipitation, although not measured, is estimated to be fairly low in this permanently icy environment, as the cold is not conducive to it.

Contemporary classifications are based on objective measurements of measurable parameters at the origin of climate: temperature, humidity, hydrometry, rainfall, sunshine, wind speed, etc.; and on statistical analysis. Indices derived from these measurements can be created, such as the aridity index and evapotranspiration. These objective measurements are supplemented by more empirical assessments, such as Köppen's classification, designed to match climatic zones with biomes.

Observation systems were set up as early as the Age of Enlightenment, on the initiative of learned societies. Systematic operational practice followed in the 19th century, with the creation of meteorological services in several countries. In 1854, the maritime disaster in the Crimea led to the creation of observation and warning services in France and Great Britain. In 1856, 24 measuring points manned by employees of the telegraph administration were in operation in France: they formed the telegraphic meteorological network of the Paris Observatory, which began publishing its International Bulletin daily in November 1857. In 2014, France was covered by a dense network of more than 5,500 weather stations, with an average of 1 station every 11 km, recording actual field observations of climatic parameters such as temperature, precipitation, wind and humidity. These data are generally controlled and validated to limit bias.

Climate models play a key role in estimating past and future climate variations. They rely on the laws of fluid mechanics to numerically reconstruct the main features of atmospheric and/or ocean dynamics. The first global atmospheric models were developed using a grid resolution of around 500 kilometers, and by the 1970s it was already possible to describe the main features of atmospheric circulation using numerical. Climate models differ from one another in terms of their objectives, their resolution, the temporality of the spatialized data and the climate data provided.

The Aurelhy (Analyse Utilisant le RELief pour l'HYdrométéorologie) model, developed by Météo-France, provides 30-year normals (1951–1980; 1961–1990; 1971–2000; 1981–2010; 1991–2020) and annual statistics for temperature and precipitation parameters. When the Aurelhy normals for the 1981–2010 period were updated, an important development was the use of a new digital terrain model and better consideration of the quality of measurement stations. The 1991–2020 normals were published in June 2022. Mesh resolution is one kilometer.

The ETPQ (Daily Potential Evapotranspiration) model was built to meet the need for real-time monitoring of potential evapotranspiration over the whole country by users in the agronomy sector. Six climatic parameters are used, including global radiation, temperature, humidity and wind speed. The grid resolution is twelve kilometers.

The Safran model (Système d'Analyse Fournissant des Renseignements Atmosphériques à la Neige) is an analysis of atmospheric data (by analysis we mean an estimate of recent or present conditions, depending on the time step considered) built during the 1990s by Météo-France. At the time, its aim was to forecast avalanche risk in mountain areas (hence its name) by providing data on an hourly time step. The model is based on a division of the French national territory into 615 climatically homogeneous regions. These regions are irregular in shape, and normally cover an area of less than 1,000. In each homogeneous region, Safran then estimates the variation in 8 climatic parameters by 300 m altitude class, based on all available climate data (weather stations, but also analyses of large-scale weather forecasting models such as Météo-France's ARPEGE model). The mesh resolution is eight kilometers.

The Digitalis model, developed by AgroParisTech in Nancy, involves modeling the climatic parameters required to calculate the water balance: solar radiation, average temperatures at the top of the forest canopy, precipitation and evapotranspiration according to Turc's formula. Evapotranspiration and temperature are spatialized at 50 m intervals, based on the IGN digital terrain model (DTM), and therefore take into account the topo climate at a resolution level fin

The ARPEGE-Climat model, developed in the 1990s, is the climate version of the ARPEGE numerical model, a global and spectral general circulation model developed by the Centre national de recherches météorologiques in collaboration with the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF). The ARPEGE grid can be tilted to change the pole position and stretched to increase resolution in an area of interest, enabling regional studies to be developed. The operational short-range ensemble forecasting system, known as PEARP (Prévision d'Ensemble ARPege), is also based on the Arpège model. This system aims to capture and quantify the uncertainty inherent in any weather forecast. Its horizontal resolution is around 7.5 km over France, and 36 km in the antipodes.

The AROME model, operational since 2008, is the fine-mesh numerical weather prediction model used operationally by Météo-France to improve short-term forecasting of dangerous phenomena such as heavy Mediterranean rainfall (Cévennes episodes), violent thunderstorms, fog or urban heat islands during heatwaves.

The Institut Pierre-Simon Laplace (IPSL) is a federation of research laboratories dedicated to the study of the climate system and the global environment. Since 1995, the IPSL Climate Modeling Center (IPSL-CMC) has been developing and using climate models to improve our understanding and knowledge of the climate system, its current characteristics and its past and future changes. IPSL's Earth System Model (ESM) represents the various components of the climate system and their interactions. It includes the LMDz model for the atmosphere, the INCA and REPROBUS models for atmospheric composition, the NEMO model for the ocean, including ocean dynamics (NEMO-OCE), sea ice (NEMO-LIM) and ocean biogeochemistry (NEMO-PISCES), and the ORCHIDEE model for land surfaces. A new dynamical core for the atmosphere, known as DYNAMICO, is now coupled to atmospheric physics and constitutes a new-generation model. The Laboratoire de météorologie dynamique (LMD), set up in 1968, is one of the laboratories working on these models and on models of its own, notably the LMDZ, an atmospheric general circulation model developed since the 1970s.

Climate normals, calculated over 30 years, are used to characterize the climate at a given location, for a given period. Normals are calculated for all climate variables (temperature, precipitation, wind, sunshine, etc.), as well as for numerous indicators illustrating the statistical distribution of these parameters: average, quintiles (what happens one year in five), records, number of days above a threshold, etc.

Temperatures in mainland France are on the rise. Warming is between +0.19 °C and +0.40 °C per decade for the minimum temperature (Tn) and between +0.22 °C and +0.45 °C per decade for the maximum temperature (Tx) for metropolitan France. These trends are all statistically significant, and are associated with an uncertainty of around ±0.1 °C per decade. On average, over all available series, warming is +0.29 °C per decade for Tn and +0.32 °C per decade for Tx. However, this difference in trend between Tn and Tx (0.03 °C) is not significant.

Average temperature (Tm) is defined as the average of minimum and maximum temperatures. Tm series show significant trends, ranging from +0.21 °C to +0.39 °C per decade. Consistent with Tn and Tx, the average trend is +0.31 °C per decade, and there are no significant spatial contrasts between the different regions.

The map on the right shows the 1981–2010 temperature normals spatialized on a grid of kilometric resolution.

A similar trend can be observed in the French overseas departments. In French Guiana, for example, the increase is in the order of 0.24 degrees per decade over the period 1955–2009. Warming has accelerated in recent decades. The increase in mean annual temperature reached 0.34 degrees per decade over the period 1979–2005. In Martinique, the increase was around 0.28 degrees per decade over the period 1965–2009. Warming reached 0.33 degrees per decade over the period 1979–2005.

Average annual precipitation totals for mainland France have been relatively stable since the 1970s (932 mm for 1971–2000, 935 mm for 1981–2010, 935 mm for 1991–2020). However, this observation masks major seasonal and regional disparities, as follows Meteo France, Sénat:

The range of average annual precipitation is very broad, from less than 600 mm in the eastern half of the Eure-et-Loir, the Rhône delta and the Aude valley, to over 2000 mm in the Cantal mountains, Mount Aigoual and the Chartreuse. Precipitation remained below 800 mm throughout the Paris Basin.

The regions of France most exposed to torrential downpours that can bring more than 200 mm (and in some cases considerably more) in a single day are those bordering the Mediterranean. In some cases, these amounts are recorded in just a few hours. The departments of Ardèche, Gard and Hérault are the most exposed to torrential downpours. In 50 years, there have been more than 50 occurrences of more than 200 mm in 1 day at at least one measuring point in the department. In other words, this type of rainfall occurs on average at least once a year. Among the most remarkable "Cevennes" episodes in south-eastern France, those recording more than 200 mm per day for 2 consecutive days occurred on 17 and 18 December 1997, 11 and 12 November 1996, 3 and 4 November 1994, 7 and 8 November 1982, 31 October and November, 1968, 24 and 25 September 1965, and 30 and 31 October 1963. These extreme daily rains are becoming increasingly intense around the Mediterranean. They are also characterized by great variability from one year to the next.

The table below shows the main climatic parameters for the period 1991–2020 for the 30 stations used to calculate the national heat indicator.

The highest temperature recorded by Météo-France in metropolitane France was 46.0 °C, measured in Vérargues, Hérault, on 28 June 2019, making France the sixth-highest-temperature country in Europe.

The lowest temperature recorded by Météo France in mainland France was −36.7 °C, measured at Mouthe in Doubs on 13 January 1968.

Precipitation records are set during Mediterranean episodes, some of which exceed 600 mm of rain per 24 hours. For example, the 1940 aiguat reached 840 mm in 24 hours, the European record for rainfall intensity, and extreme events of over 600 mm per 24 hours were recorded in 1827 in the Ardèche, in 1900 in the Gard, in 1982 in the Pyrénées-Orientales, in 1993 in Corsica, in 1999 in the Corbières and in 2002 in the Gard.

Mount Aigoual (1,565 meters above sea level) in the Gard region of France holds the record for average annual precipitation, with 2,280 mm per year, and for the highest total annual precipitation, with 4,014 mm in 1913.

The year 2022 is the hottest ever recorded in the country.

In August 2023, records were set at a large number of stations: 43.2 °C at Carcassonne, 42.4 °C at Toulouse, 30.4 °C at Mont Aigoual.

Meteorology is a science with a much shorter time scale than climatology. Its aim is to study atmospheric phenomena such as clouds, precipitation and wind, to understand how they form and evolve as a function of measured parameters such as pressure, temperature and humidity. An overview of some meteorological situations and phenomena is given below.

The most frequent weather situations and associated weather types in mainland France are as follows:

Wind direction and speed are largely determined by highs and lows. In the Northern Hemisphere, the wind blows counter-clockwise around a low-pressure system and clockwise around a high-pressure system. Its speed is proportional to the pressure difference between two points. The terrain can also channel the airflow. As a result, winds appear more frequently in certain regions and are more sustained: these are regional winds.

Some regional wind denominations actually coincide with a large-scale wind. For example, la bise is a common regional name for the cold, fairly dry north-to-northeasterly wind in central and eastern France and Switzerland, blowing mainly at high altitude. Other regional winds, on the other hand, have peculiarities of speed and direction that distinguish them from the large-scale wind: they reveal the existence of an interaction between certain topographical factors and the large-scale meteorological situation. These include the mistral (a cold, generally dry wind, blowing during the day at an average speed of 50 km/h with gusts in excess of 100 km/h across the lower Rhône valley and Provence, and invading the Mediterranean coastline from the Camargue onwards), the tramontane (a violent, cold, west to north-westerly wind crossing the foothills of the Pyrenees and the southern Massif Central mountains) or the marin (a south-easterly wind blowing across the entire Mediterranean coastal area).

In meteorology, a cloud is a visible mass initially made up of a large number of water droplets (sometimes ice crystals combined with chemical aerosols or minerals) suspended in the atmosphere above the surface of a planet. The appearance of a cloud depends on its nature, its size, the light it receives, and the number and distribution of its constituent particles. Clouds in the International Cloud Atlas are classified into ten genera, illustrated in the image opposite.

Météo-France distinguishes three main types of precipitation: Episodes of great geographical extent, affecting one or more departments, with heavy rainfall, usually of long duration (up to several days), but with no remarkable intensity; episodes of great geographical extent, affecting one or more departments, with very high intensities; and localized thunderstorms, which can, over a short period of time and within a limited perimeter, dump huge quantities of water.

According to a survey published in 2019 by the German association Germanwatch, France ranks 15th (out of 183 countries) among the nations most exposed to extreme weather events worldwide. The NGO estimates that nearly 500,000 people died worldwide over the period 1999–2018 as a result of one of the 12,000 exceptional climatic events that affected the globe. France would be the eighth most exposed country in terms of the number of deaths for the period 1999–2018 in relation to its total population, mainly due to several deadly heatwaves: that of 2003 (15,000 deaths), 2006 (1,800) and 2018 (1,500). Météo France states that, to date, global warming "has not been accompanied by any notable changes in the frequency and intensity of storms across France, nor in the number and intensity of heavy rainfall events in the South-East". According to meteorologist Guillaume Séchet, "as a result of global warming, it is estimated that by 2100 France will experience around 20% more Mediterranean episodes ", with more dramatic consequences due to increasing soil sealing and demographic pressure in the regions concerned.

Every year, several storms hit mainland France, each with its own specific characteristics (trajectory, size, speed, stage of development, etc.). The areas affected and the damage caused are highly variable, but two main types of storm can be distinguished.

The most notable recent storms are Lothar (25 and 26 December 1999), Martin (27 and 28 December 1999), Klaus (24 January 2009), Xynthia (27 and 28 February 2010) and Alex (1 and 2 October 2020).

Since 1930, 17 disastrous floods have caused more than 5 deaths, 7 of them more than 20.

Three heat waves were recorded between 1976 and 2003. The summer of 1976 is remembered for the drought that caused the worst agricultural damage, but it was above all a major heatwave in which some twenty départements saw their mortality rates rise by more than 10% above seasonal norms, representing 6,000 excess deaths that went unnoticed at the time. The July 1983 heatwave in south-eastern France resulted in 4,700 excess deaths across the whole of France. 1994 was the second hottest summer in the 50-year period preceding 2003.

After 2003, seven notable heatwaves can be counted: 2006, 2015, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020 and 2022. With three heatwaves, the summer of 2022 was the deadliest since 2003, with 2,816 deaths, compared with more than 15,000 in 2003.

The drought of 1976, described by then President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing as a "national calamity", was one of the worst in France's history. A 2.2 billion franc aid package for farmers was decided. It was partly financed by an exceptional drought tax based on income tax, paid by over 3 million taxpayers, 9.5 million of whom were exempt. The total amount of drought aid was set at 6 billion euros on 22 September 1976, 90% of which went to livestock farmers, according to departmental distribution.

The drought of 2022 has also been described as historic. The temperature anomaly reached +3.8 °C over the months of May, June, July and August, compared with the 1960–1990 period. July 2022 was the second driest month on record in France, after March 1961, with a precipitation deficit of around 84% compared with the 1991–2020 period. As of 4 August 2022, 62 departments, mainly in the western and southern halves of the country, were at maximum drought "crisis" alert level, with significant restrictions on water abstraction.

The average temperature in mainland France in 2022 was 14.5 °C, the highest on record. This is 1.66 °C higher than temperatures measured between 1900 and 1930, with 1.63 °C attributable solely to human activity. Analysis of more precise temperature data between 2010 and 2019 shows that, over this short period, France is warming by 0.1 °C every 3 years. Climate projections produced by Météo-France in 2021 predict a temperature rise of 2.2 degrees in France by 2100, based on the RCP 4–5 intermediate scenario of the IPCC's Sixth Assessment Report. However, according to a study published in October 2022 by several scientific institutions, including the Centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS) and Météo-France, the temperature rise in France could reach 3.8 degrees in 2100 on the basis of this scenario, i.e. up to 50% more intense over the course of the century than previous estimates showed.

The impacts of global warming are already visible and are set to intensify, whether they be environmental (coastal erosion and flooding, species migration or extinction, increases in invasive species, adaptation, migration or extinction of marine species or mangroves), societal (agricultural model under severe threat, heat islands in certain cities), health (drinking water supply, new risks such as chikungunya or dengue fever) or economic (conversion of certain winter sports resorts).

To meet the two objectives of the Paris climate agreement (warming well below 2 °C and preferably limited to 1.5 °C), a sharp and immediate reduction in CO 2 emissions is essential, until carbon neutrality is achieved in 2050, the only way to halt global warming. Reducing emissions of other greenhouse gases, particularly methane, is also relevant. To meet this objective, France, through its climate policy, is deploying various mitigation and adaptation strategies), with specific targets such as reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 50% between 1990 and 2030 (20% in 2019) or reducing final energy consumption by 50% in 2050 compared with the 2012 baseline, with an intermediate target of 20% in 2030.

Paris has a typical oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification : Cfb), affected by the North Atlantic Current. The overall climate throughout the year is mild and moderately wet. Summer days are usually warm and pleasant with average temperatures between 15 and 25 °C (59 and 77 °F), and a fair amount of sunshine. Each year, however, there are a few days when the temperature rises above 32 °C (90 °F). Longer periods of more intense heat sometimes occur, such as the heat wave of 2003 when temperatures exceeded 30 °C (86 °F) for weeks, reached 40 °C (104 °F) on some days and seldom cooled down at night. Spring and autumn have, on average, mild days and cool nights but are changing and unstable. Surprisingly warm or cool weather occurs frequently in both seasons. In winter, sunshine is scarce; days are cool, nights cold but generally above freezing with low temperatures around 3 °C (37 °F). Light night frosts are however quite common, but the temperature will rarely dip below −5 °C (23 °F) and not every year. Snow falls every year, but rarely stays on the ground. The city sometimes sees light snow or flurries with or without accumulation. However, heat generated by buildings and traffic in the city also contributes to the disappearance of snow in the city center. The most likely time of the snowfall is between December and March. But it does not snow significantly for so many days. Paris has an average annual precipitation of 64.1 cm (25.2 in), and experiences light rainfall distributed evenly throughout the year. However the city is known for intermittent abrupt heavy showers.

Paris has a rich history of meteorological observations, with some going back as far as 1665. The highest recorded temperature is 42.6 °C (108.7 °F) on 25 July 2019, and the lowest is −23.9 °C (−11.0 °F) on 10 December 1879. Furthermore, the warmest night on record is 27.5 °C (81.5 °F) on 27 June 1772 and the coldest day is −13.0 °C (8.6 °F) on 30 December 1788.

The Club des Hashischins (sometimes also spelled Club des Hashishins or Club des Hachichins, "Club of the Hashish-Eaters") was a Parisian group dedicated to the exploration of drug-induced experiences, notably with hashish. Members included Victor Hugo, Alexandre Dumas, Charles Baudelaire, Gérard de Nerval and Honoré de Balzac.

The Club was started as a research experiment. Unknown members included Charles Baudelaire's muse and lover Jeanne Duval (known as, Black Venus), the owner of the Hotel Lauzun (Pimodan) Jerome Pichon, Fernand Broissard who hosted the initial events in his room, and Louis-Remy Aubert Roche who worked with Jacques Joseph Moreau growing cannabis on the grounds of Bicetre Mental Asylum.

Several drugs like hashish and opium were increasingly well known in Europe by the beginning of the nineteenth century. At that time, recreational use of these drugs was widespread among scientific and literary circles.

The Armée d'Orient, along with a contingent of 151 scientists and anthropologists from the Commission des Sciences et des Arts, brought quantities of hashish home with them from Napoleon 's expedition to Egypt. The French conquest of Algeria of 1830 to 1847 further increased the popular consumption of hashish.

Occasional visitors included Honoré de Balzac, Gustave Flaubert and Victor Hugo.

The club was active from about 1844 to 1849 and counted the literary and intellectual elite of Paris among its members, including Dr. Jacques-Joseph Moreau, Théophile Gautier, Charles Baudelaire, Gérard de Nerval, Eugène Delacroix and Alexandre Dumas. Monthly "séances" were held at the Hôtel de Lauzun (at that time Hôtel Pimodan) on the Île Saint-Louis.

Gautier wrote about the club in Revue des Deux Mondes in February 1846, where he described his first visit:

"One December evening, obeying a mysterious summons, drafted in enigmatic terms understood by affiliates but unintelligible for others, I arrived in a distant quarter, a sort of oasis of solitude in the middle of Paris that the river, surrounding it with its two arms, seems to defend against the encroachments of civilization. It was in an old house on the island of Saint-Louis, the Hotel Pimodan, built by Lauzun, that the bizarre club of which I was a member recently held its monthly sittings where I was to attend for the first time."

While he is often cited as the founder of the club, in the article Gautier says he was attending their séances for the first time that evening and made clear that others were sharing a familiar experience with him. The club members often consumed Dawamesc, a greenish paste made from cannabis resin mixed with fat, honey, and pistachios.

During this period Jacques-Joseph Moreau, who specialized in the sociological concept of social alienation, studied the effects of regularly consuming hashish. Moreau studied this product according to his travels between 1837 and 1840 in Egypt and Syria, and Asia Minor. Back in France, he continued to experiment on himself and published an 1845 book entitled Hashish and mental alienation in which he establishes an equivalence between dream, hallucination, and hashish delirium. This book was the first written by a scientist about a drug.

Gautier and Baudelaire eventually stopped attending the sessions. Gautier writes: "After a dozen experiments, we gave up forever this intoxicating drug, not that it hurt us physically, but the true writer needs only his natural dreams, and he does not like his thought to be influenced by any agent."

Clémence Isaure [ kle.mɑ̃s i.zɔʁ ] is a legendary Occitan medieval figure credited with founding or restoring the Acadèmia dels Jòcs Florals or Academy of the Floral Games. She is supposed to have left a legacy to fund awards in the form of gold and silver flowers that the city of Toulouse would award annually to the best poets.

As the mythic founder of the games she is celebrated principally in Toulouse, where poems, sculptures, and paintings have been dedicated to her and a variety of places and institutions bear her name. In order to provide her with a realistic outline, she has been identified as a member of the Yzalguier family of Toulouse. In 1806 the rue des Yzalguier there was renamed the rue Clémence-Isaure. A tower at 7 de la rue Cujas was named the Tour Clémence Isaure. (It was demolished in 1817.)

For example, Charles Cros wrote in 1888:

Toulouse! ville antique où fleurissent encore Pour les poètes, vos fleurs d’or, Clémence Isaure

Toulouse! ancient city where flourish still For poets your golden flowers, Clémence Isaure

CNP Assurances S.A. is a multinational French insurance company based in Paris, France. Its name, CNP, stands for Caisse Nationale de Prévoyance. It is the leader in creditor insurance and the second-largest in life insurance in France, as well as one of the largest insurers in Europe and Brazil. A regular on the Fortune Global 500 list, the company's global operations covered 36 million policyholders in personal risk and protection and 13 million in savings and pensions at the end of 2024.

In France, CNP Assurances distributes its products through La Banque Postale and the Caisses d'Epargne, as well as its own CNP Trésor network. In Brazil, its second-largest market, the group's partner is Caixa Econômica Federal.

The company originated in 1959 within the framework of the French public financial institution, Caisse des Dépôts et Consignations (CDC). Following a 1992 privatization law, it operated for many years as a publicly listed company with a consortium of public-sector shareholders, including CDC, La Banque Postale, and Groupe BPCE. In 2022, La Banque Postale finalized a takeover bid, acquiring 100% of the company's shares. As a result, CNP Assurances was delisted from the Euronext Paris stock exchange and now operates as a wholly-owned subsidiary of La Banque Postale.

The origins of CNP Assurances date back to the mid-19th century, with the creation of three funds within the Caisse des Dépôts : the Caisse nationale d'assurance en cas de décès (National Death Insurance Fund) in 1868, the Caisse de retraite pour la vieillesse (Retirement Fund for the Elderly) in 1850, and the Caisse nationale d'assurance en cas d'accident (National Accident Insurance Fund) in 1868.

The first two funds merged in 1949 to form the Caisse nationale d'assurance sur la vie (National Life Insurance Fund), which itself merged ten years later with the Caisse d’assurance en cas d’accident to create the Caisse nationale de prévoyance (National Providence Fund) in 1959.

In 1992, CNP became a public limited company (société anonyme) and changed its name.

CNP Assurances acquired Compania de Seguros de Vida in Argentina in 1995.

It is now called CNP Assurances and was listed on the stock exchange in 1998.

It then established itself in Portugal in 1999, and then in Brazil in 2001, where it holds 51.75% of Caixa Seguradora. It has been present in Italy since 2005 and in Spain since 2006. CNP Assurances is also present in Ireland, Cyprus, and Greece through its subsidiaries.

In December 2014, CNP sold its 50% stake in CNP Barclays Vida Y Pensiones to Barclays for 453 million euros.

In 2018, CNP Assurances was in discussions with Caixa Seguridade (Brazil) with a view to concluding a new distribution agreement, which was ratified in September 2018.

In August 2018, the Minister of Economy and Finance, Bruno Le Maire, formalized the merger between Banque Postale and CNP Assurances, to allow La Poste to develop in banking and insurance.

On 15 November 2018, Antoine Lissowski was appointed CEO of CNP Assurances. Previously Deputy CEO and Chief Financial Officer, he had been serving as interim head of CNP since September 2018. He succeeds Frédéric Lavenir.

On 4 March 2020, CNP Assurances' shareholding was modified as part of a public financial holding project, following which the company became primarily owned by La Banque Postale (62.13%). The remainder of the shareholding was divided between BPCE (16.11%) and the free float (21.76%).

In August 2020, Véronique Weill was appointed chairwoman of CNP Assurances by the board of directors.

In April 2021, Stéphane Dedeyan was appointed CEO of CNP Assurances, replacing Antoine Lissowski.

On 16 December 2021, La Banque Postale announced that it had acquired the entire stake held by BPCE. Following a takeover bid and then a mandatory buyout of the company's shares not yet held by the bank, on June 3 and 20, 2022, respectively, La Banque Postale acquired the remaining 21.1%, delisting the CNP Assurances share from the market.

In 2022, CNP Assurances concluded a record year with a net profit of 1.94 billion euros.

In January 2024, Marie-Aude Thépaut was appointed CEO of CNP Assurances, replacing Stéphane Dedeyan.

In July 2024, CNP Assurances sold its subsidiary operating in Greece and Cyprus (CNP Cyprus Insurance Holdings) to the Cypriot bank Hellenic Bank. In June 2025, CNP Assurances finalized the sale of its stake (51%) in the joint venture CNP UniCredit Vita to UniCredit for 619 million euros.

In France, CNP Assurances' products are distributed by La Banque Postale and the BPCE group (Banques Populaires and Caisses d’Epargne), under long-term distribution agreements, until 2036 and 2030 respectively. These two historical partners were also shareholders of CNP Assurances until December 16, 2021, when La Banque Postale acquired the stake held by BPCE.

Internationally, CNP Assurances partners in joint ventures with major banks in their markets: Caixa Econômica Federal in Brazil, UniCredit in Italy, and Santander Consumer Finance in 11 European countries.

Coderc Plaza is a town square in Périgueux, in the Dordogne department, France.

The square's history dates back to the Middle Ages. Since then, it has been home to the city's most important buildings, including the Maison de la Commune from the Ancien Régime onwards. When the first market hall was built around 1400, Coderc Plaza became an important location for the traditional market.

Over the following centuries, a succession of mainly wealthy families settled on and around the square, leaving behind traces of their heritage. After the French Revolution, the Coderc was the main executioner's square for around half a century. Later, commerce developed, and by the 1970s, there were around thirty stores in the area.

Coderc Plaza is located in the preserved area of downtown Périgueux, in the immediate vicinity of the old town hall.

The word coderc (or couderc) comes from the Gallic word coderc or coterico, meaning a common space. In Old Occitan, codèrc means "communal enclosure, courtyard, square, lawn or pasture".

Coderc Plaza dates back to the Middle Ages when it was much smaller than the present-day square, and was home to the most important buildings in the town of Puy-Saint-Front.

During the Ancien Régime, the town hall was built on this square. The consulate is mentioned in the 1240 Treaty of Union between Puy-Saint-Front and the Cité. Located on the boundary between the parishes of Saint-Silain and Saint-Front, the consulate also served as a prison. Comprising a three-story building, it was towered over by a six-story belfry with a machicolated allure, topped by a lantern and weather vane. A clock is mentioned on the building dating back to 1390.

In the 14th century, following the tradition of the Périgueux carnival, banquets paid for by the consulate were organized on the Place du Coderc, in the presence of the town's three main religious communities (Order of Saint Clare, Order of Friars Minor, and the Dominican Order). The main dishes served are salt pork, of Limoges origin, and beef, in Bœuf Gras tradition. The distribution of these meals in the context of constant famine often led to outbursts and violent jostling.

Around 1400, the first marketplace was built on the square.

From 1400 to 1448, a well was dug in the middle of the square; partly filled in, it was drained in 1490–1491. Then, in 1528, the square was paved.

The marketplace was covered over in 1557, then expanded in 1570, before being destroyed on 29 March 1650, to dislodge the Picardy regiment occupying it.

In the 17th century, the Coderc Plaza was the center of the district, where wealthy families built their homes.

As a result of dissatisfaction with wine taxes, a riot broke out in 1635: Jean Seguin, the mayor's secretary, was massacred and his corpse thrown into the well. The well was sealed in 1679, but not adequately enough, and in 1839 the town council voted to subscribe for its permanent filling.

In 1739, a new clock with a jacquemart (bellstriker) made of two wooden figures was installed at the top of the consulate belfry.

In 1793, a liberty tree was planted in the middle of the Coderc Plaza. Originally the site of the pillory, between 1800 and 1840 the square became the public space for the guillotine and numerous executions.

The consulate was demolished in 1829, to be replaced by a new marketplace, and the remains of the building collapsed during a powerful storm on 23 May 1830. During excavations of the consulate cellars on 26 August of the same year, a culverin dated 1588 was discovered.

Part of Prefect Charles de Chastenet's major urban planning project for Périgueux, the new covered marketplace was built in 1832–1833 on the site of the former consulate by architect Louis Catoire. Opened to the public on 15 December 1833, it was used until 1875 for the grain market, and later for open outcry sales.

On 25 March 1908, priest Noé Chabot opened a bar-tabac on the square, which regularly welcomed railway workers from the Compagnie du Paris-Orléans.

In 1953, a project was launched to replace the marketplace with a new round marketplace on the same site, with triple the capacity.

In September 1979, during works on the Coderc Plaza, two cannons were discovered in the former consulate cellars; they are now on display in the Thouin garden.

On 17 July 2013, a plaque in honor of Jean Boussuges (1938–2013), the famous "poet of the Coderc", was officially inaugurated at the corner with rue de la Sagesse.

In early October 2014, the cobblestones of the square were rejointed by municipal workers.

In early 2015, the town decided to limit parking on the square, from May to September, to people with reduced mobility and delivery vehicles.

According to the newspaper Sud Ouest, Coderc is the place for the "traditional market" in Périgord on Wednesdays and Saturdays. In addition, the marketplace is open every morning. Au 9 bis, a former post office, closed on 30 November 2016, and was replaced on 15 April 2017, by the new premises of the municipal tourist office.

With its irregular polygonal shape, the square's layout corresponds to two adjoining trapezoids, a small one to the east and a large one to the west. With a surface area of 1,927 m and an average width of 34 m, the square is 66 to 70 m long and 20 to 46 m wide.

The main architectural feature is the Coderc hall, built in 1832–1833, a rectangular building that occupies the entire western side of the square.

To the north, at no. 11, is the Hôtel de Lestrade, whose entrance is at 1 rue de la Sagesse. While the exterior reveals no particular architectural detail, its interior Renaissance staircase with coffered ceilings was listed as a historic monument in 1928 and classified in 2005, while the entire building was listed in 2003.

In the northeast corner, at 17 place du Coderc, the "maison Lapeyre" (named after the pharmacist who occupied it from the late 18th and early 19th centuries) or the "maison Pouyaud" (named after his successor), stands at the corner of 1 rue Limogeanne, the main pedestrian crossing in Périgueux's historic center. The corbelled polygonal corner turret dates back to the 17th century. The building was partly destroyed by fire in 1719 and subsequently restored.

To the east of the square, No. 10 features 13th-century columns and capitals.

The north facade of the former town hall faces the south-west corner of the square. Adjacent to the former town hall, no. 2 lies remains of three 11th or 13th-century windows.

The square is mentioned at the start of chapter III of Jacquou le Croquant, the social novel written by Eugène Le Roy : "The next day at the appointed hour, we were in front of the building of the former Présidial, which was still called by that name and which was on the Coderc Plaza, just opposite the prisons, where number 8 is today".

Jean Boussuges (1938–2013), locally nicknamed the "poet of the Coderc", wrote a collection of poems, most of which relate to encounters and observations he made on this square.

Cohabitation is a system of divided government that occurs in semi-presidential systems, such as France, whenever the president is from a different political party than the majority of the members of parliament. It occurs because such a system forces the president to name a prime minister who will be acceptable to the majority party within parliament. Thus, cohabitation occurs because of the duality of the executive: an independently elected president and a prime minister who must be acceptable both to the president and to the legislature.

Cohabitation took place in France in 1986–1988, 1993–1995, and 1997–2002. The president faced an opposition majority in the National Assembly and had to select his government from them.

Cohabitation was a product of the French Fifth Republic, albeit an unintended one. This constitution brought together a president with considerable executive powers and a prime minister, an executive responsible before Parliament. The president's task was primarily to end deadlock and act decisively to avoid the stagnation prevalent under the French Fourth Republic ; the prime minister, similarly, was to "direct the work of government", providing a strong leadership to the legislative branch and to help overcome partisan squabbles.

Since 1962, French presidents have been elected by popular vote, replacing the electoral college, which was only used once. This change was intended to give Fifth Republic presidents more power than they might have had under the original constitution. While still seen as the symbol and embodiment of the nation, the president also was given a popular mandate. Of course, the majority party of the National Assembly retained power as well, but since the popularly elected president appointed the prime minister, the former was seen as having the upper hand in any conflict between executive and legislature. Furthermore, the imbalance is further illustrated by the fact that the president can dissolve the Assembly at any time (but not more than once in a year), whereas the legislature has no powers of removal against the president.

The sole caveat to this position of presidential pre-eminence was that the president's selection to the premiership required approval by the National Assembly, the lower house of parliament: because the assembly can dismiss the government by a vote of no confidence, it follows that the prime minister must command a majority in the assembly. This was not a problem whilst the legislative majority was aligned with the president, and indeed, de Gaulle, who was responsible for inspiring much of the Constitution, envisioned that the president would resign if the people disavowed him in an assembly election, and would then elect a new president (there is no vice-president in France) and a new election takes places less than two months after a resignation, a new president being elected for a new, full term; that happened in 1969, when de Gaulle resigned because the people voted against a referendum proposed by him.

The first "near miss" with cohabitation occurred with the election of Socialist President François Mitterrand in 1981. A right-wing coalition headed by the Gaullist Rally for the Republic controlled the assembly at the time. Almost immediately, Mitterrand exercised his authority to call assembly elections, and the electorate returned an assembly with an absolute majority of Socialists, ending the presumed crisis.

However, when assembly elections were held as required in 1986, five years later, the Socialists lost their majority to the right. Mitterrand decided to remain president, beginning the first cohabitation.

There have been only three periods of cohabitation, but each is notable for illustrating the oscillation of powers between the president and prime minister.

After the 1986 assembly elections, Mitterrand was forced to nominate as a Prime Minister Jacques Chirac, the leader of Rally for the Republic (RPR), the largest party in the majority coalition. Throughout the cohabitation between Mitterrand and Chirac, the president focused on his foreign duties and allowed Chirac to control internal affairs. Since Mitterrand was distanced from these policies, Chirac began to reverse many of Mitterrand's reforms by lowering taxes and privatising many national enterprises. There were, however, tense moments, such as when Mitterrand refused to sign ordonnances, slowing down reforms by requiring Chirac to pass his bills through parliament. This lasted for two years until 1988 when the newly reelected Mitterrand called for new legislative elections that were won by a leftist majority, which lasted five years.

In 1993, President Mitterrand found himself in a similar position when the right won an 80% majority in the National Assembly elections. Once again, he was forced to appoint an opposition member from the RPR and Union for French Democracy (UDF) parties. This time he appointed Édouard Balladur to the post of prime minister, because Chirac was focused on running for president instead of being prime minister for the third time. Balladur maintained this post through the cohabitation until May 18, 1995 when Jacques Chirac took office as president.

In 1995, rightist leader Jacques Chirac succeeded Mitterrand as president, and, since the right had a majority in the assembly, he was able to appoint his fellow RPR member Alain Juppé as his prime minister, ending cohabitation by a change in the presidency. This alignment of president and assembly should have lasted until at least the normally scheduled 1998 assembly elections.

However, in 1997, President Chirac dissolved parliament and called for early legislative elections. This ended the right-wing assembly majority, and Chirac was forced to appoint Socialist Lionel Jospin to the premiership. Jospin remained prime minister until the elections of 2002, making this third term of cohabitation the longest ever, one of five years. Chirac called this a state of 'paralysis', and found it particularly difficult to arrange campaign activities for the National Assembly.

With Jospin holding the premiership, Chirac's political influence was constrained and he had no say over certain major reforms being instituted by the left-wing majority. This included the 1998 legislation to shorten the working week from 39 to 35 hours, which came into effect in 2000.

Arend Lijphart contends that the French Fifth Republic usually operates under a presidential system, but when in cohabitation, this effectively changes, at least in terms of domestic policy, to a parliamentary system, in which the prime minister controls the legislative agenda and the president's powers are limited to foreign policy and defence.

A common problem during cohabitation is that each leader wants his or her own policies to be carried out so that the public is positive toward their strategies, and he or she will be elected when the time comes. Because each party is in competition, there is little room for progression since the friction between both sides holds each other back. Whilst leaders of the same political spectrum help each other in decision-making when in power concurrently, cohabitation can lead to a decline in national authority and make the country appear outwardly insecure.

Although originally believed to be improbable, France was governed under a cohabitation of leaders for almost half the period from 1986 to 2006, suggesting that French people no longer fear the prospect of having two parties share power.

In 2000, at the initiative of prime minister Lionel Jospin and against the will of president Jacques Chirac, the term of a president was shortened from seven years to five years, a change accepted by a referendum. Furthermore, since 2002, legislative elections were now held roughly a month after presidential ones, thus creating a coattail effect that encourages those who won the presidential election to confirm their vote in the legislative elections.

The near-simultaneity of presidential and legislative elections makes cohabitation less likely by reducing the prospect of major changes in public opinion between the two elections, but cohabitation remains a possibility even if public opinion remains stable. For example, a group of voters (e.g. voters on the left) may be split between two or more presidential candidates, thus making it unlikely that any of this group's candidates wins the presidential election, but these coordination problems may be resolved in the legislative election, leading to a different outcome in the two elections. Alternatively, a party that wins a majority of support in both the presidential and legislative elections may nonetheless fail to control the National Assembly because that support is distributed unequally across legislative districts. In another scenario, a presidential candidate from a new party may win the presidency despite his party not having the candidates or the party apparatus to win legislative elections.

Cohabitation can also occur if the presidential and legislative elections occur at different times due to extraordinary circumstances. For example, the president can dissolve the Assembly and call for new elections mid-term, as Emmanuel Macron did in 2024, which could theoretically lead to a different party winning. The president could also die, be incapacitated, resign, or be impeached during his term, leading to a new presidential election. Cohabitation could result, although the new president would then be likely to call new assembly elections.

While the framers of the Constitution of the Czech Republic intended to set up a parliamentary system, with the prime minister as the country's leading political figure and the de facto chief executive and the president as a ceremonial head of state (and indeed, the Czech president was initially indirectly elected by Parliament), the stature of the first president, Václav Havel, was such that the office acquired greater influence than the framers intended. This presidential influence was further increased after the introduction of direct presidential elections in 2013, and the resulting attempts by the first directly-elected president, Miloš Zeman, to form governments of his own liking irrespective of the balance of power in Parliament, and thus, the political dynamics which allow for cohabitation emerged even though the presidency remained formally weak.

There have been two periods of cohabitation in the Czech Republic, involving two presidents and two prime ministers:

The Constitution of Finland, as written in 1918, was originally similar to the French system of 40 years later. It included explicit provisions that the president focuses on national security and international relations. The arrangement was a compromise between monarchists and parliamentarians. In essence, a strong presidency was adopted instead of a constitutional monarchy. The new constitution of 2000 reduced the power of the president by transferring the power to choose a prime minister to the parliament. Cohabitation has occurred frequently, as Finland has multiple powerful parties which are not highly polarized between left and right, and also since the terms of a parliament are shorter (four years) than the presidential terms (six years). Theoretically, the president should remain strictly non-partisan, and presidents have usually formally renounced party membership while in office.

Georgia underwent a period of cohabitation from 2012 to 2013, occasioned by the defeat of the ruling United National Movement party by the opposition Georgian Dream coalition in the 2012 parliamentary election. At the same time, a new constitutional system came into effect and the leader of the defeated party, the incumbent President Mikheil Saakashvili, had to appoint the Georgian Dream leader, Bidzina Ivanishvili, as prime minister. According to the European Commission report, with the expiration of Saakashvili's two terms as president and the victory of the Georgian Dream candidate, Giorgi Margvelashvili, in the 2013 presidential election, Georgia completed a complex and peaceful transition from a presidential to a parliamentary system. The period of cohabitation was assessed in the same report as "uneasy but functioning."

There have been seven periods of cohabitation in Poland, involving six presidents and seven prime ministers:

The 2012 Romanian political crisis was a major political conflict between Prime Minister Victor Ponta of the Social Democratic Party and the centre-right President Traian Băsescu, after the former was asked to form a government in May 2012. The dispute degenerated into civil disobedience and alleged democratic backsliding, lasting until the two sides signed an agreement on institutional cohabitation in December.

There have been four periods of cohabitation in Romania, involving two presidents and five prime ministers.

In Russia, the State Duma has to approve a prime minister chosen by the president. However, if the State Duma rejects the president's candidate(s) three times in a row the President has the right to dissolve the State Duma and call legislative elections, but he cannot do so within a year after the last election, which in this period may lead to cohabitation.

A cohabitation in a semi-presidential system also existed in Ukraine between 2006 and 2010. After 2006 Ukrainian parliamentary election, Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko had to appoint Viktor Yanukovych, his rival from the 2004 presidential election, as prime minister in August 2006.

The Palestinian National Authority, a quasi-governmental organization responsible for administering the Palestinian territories, has operated within the framework of a semi-presidential republic since the creation of the office of prime minister in the spring of 2003. While the president has the power to appoint anyone as prime minister, there was an unspoken agreement upon the establishment of the office that the prime minister would be appointed from the majority party in the Legislative Council. This arrangement led to a period of cohabitation after the 2006 legislative election, in which Fatah President Mahmoud Abbas appointed Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh prime minister after Hamas' victory in the elections. The cohabitation did not last long, however, as funds were withheld from the Palestinian Authority and hostilities between Fatah and Hamas broke out in December 2006, leading to the appointment of a caretaker government led by Salam Fayyad on June 14, 2007.

Sri Lankan politics for several years witnessed a bitter struggle between the president and the prime minister, belonging to different parties and elected separately, over the negotiations with the LTTE to resolve the longstanding civil war. Since 1978, Sri Lanka transferred from parliamentary system to semi-presidential system, which the president has more executive power.

Cohabitation does not occur within standard presidential systems. While a number of presidential democracies, such as the United States, have seen power shared between a president and legislature of different political parties, this is another form of divided government. In this situation, the executive is directed by a president of one party who serves for a fixed term of years, even if and while the legislature is controlled by another party; in cohabitation, by contrast, executive power is divided between a president of one party and a cabinet of another party. Cohabitation thus only occurs in systems that have both parliamentary government (i.e. ministers accountable to parliament) and a directly elected executive president, i.e., semi-presidential systems. In a true parliamentary system, the head of state, whether president or constitutional monarch, has no significant influence over the government.

As seen above, the theory of cohabitation is no longer limited to France. However, there are not many countries where the constitutional structure exists in which it could occur. Since some of the new democracies of eastern Europe have adopted institutions quite similar to France, cohabitation may become more common, but if those countries elect their executives and legislature at or near the same time, as France is now doing, then cohabitation will be less likely.

Colbertism (French : Colbertisme) is the economic and political doctrine of Jean-Baptiste Colbert. Colbert was the Controller-General of Finances from 1665 to 1683 under Louis XIV of France. Colbertism is a variant of mercantilism, and is sometimes seen as its synonym.

The simplified objectives of mercantilism in terms of Colbertism were to improve the structure of taxes in the fiscal administration, or in the burden of taxes can enhance the nation's wealth, and of all the devices for increasing royal revenues in the king's fiscal arsenal the best is to improve trade and industry.

Colbert's central principle was that the wealth and the economy of France should serve the state. Drawing on the ideas of mercantilism, he believed state intervention was needed to secure the largest part of limited resources. To accumulate gold, a country always had to sell more goods abroad than it bought.

Colbert's main idea was a "favorable balance of trade " in which goods were exported for gold, versus an "unfavorable balance of trade" in which gold would flow out of the country. Colbert intended to get rid of internal tariffs, and to tax the nobility, but failed. Colbert did build a French economy that sold abroad and bought domestically.

By the 17th century, European powers had colonized much of the world. England had holdings in North America, India, and various other areas. Spain had holdings in South America and North America, and the Dutch had successful outposts in Indonesia. The French were beginning to colonize parts of North America, but did not have permanent settlements like the Spanish and British colonies.

In 1628, Quebec became controlled by the Company of One Hundred Associates, a merchant-run joint-stock enterprise founded by Cardinal Richelieu. The company received a monopoly over fur trade, and title to all the lands in New France, in trade for 4,000 settlers to the new colony, as well as supplies and priests. Like all other colonies, French influence in the New World led to problems with the natives: war for control of the fur trade and novel diseases killed off large portions of First Nations tribes.

France not only had colonies in North America, but also controlled the French West Indies, in the Caribbean Sea. During the 17th century, France colonized several of the West Indian Islands because of competition with the Spanish, English, and Dutch. Despite controlling very many of the West Indian Islands, only Martinique, Guadeloupe, and some nearby small islands survived as the French West Indies.

In 1663, Louis XIV asked the Company of One Hundred Associates to relinquish its charter, and declared New France a royal province under his direct rule. The decision to make New France a royal province was motivated by mercantile ambitions. Colbert advised the king that revenues from the fur trade could be used to finance plans to push France to its “natural frontiers” in Europe. But if New France was to have a thriving fur trade and a self-sustaining economy, the Iroquois “menace” had to be addressed.

Louis XIV and Colbert took several steps to ensure the survival of New France. Alexandre de Prouville de Tracy was commissioned Lieutenant Général of the Americas and tasked with ending the Iroquois threat. Daniel de Remy de Courcelle was appointed Governor General to replace Augustin de Saffray de Mézy, and Jean Talon was appointed Intendant of New France. In a 1664 letter to Bishop Laval, Colbert wrote: "His Majesty has resolved to send a good regiment of infantry at the end of the year, or in the month of February next, in order to destroy these barbarians completely".

The French West India Company was the brainchild of Colbert. It was part of an ambitious strategy to compete with the colonial ventures of the Dutch Republic on a global stage, but did not survive the turmoil associated with the Franco-Dutch War in the early 1670s. In Africa, it was succeeded by the Compagnie du Sénégal, and by private traders' operations in America.

Colbert moved quickly to reform France’s financial system by targeting corruption and inefficiency in tax collection. At his request, the Crown established a judicial council in 1665 to investigate financial abuses, embezzlement, and irregularities committed by tax officials and revenue collectors, leading to punishments ranging from imprisonment to harsher penalties.

Colbert then focused on restructuring taxation. At the time, the Crown derived a significant portion of its revenue from the taille, a direct tax that fell disproportionately on the lower and middle classes, while the nobility retained exemptions. Rather than simply increasing taxes, Colbert sought to improve the efficiency and fairness of collection by tightening oversight, removing dishonest officials, and redistributing the tax burden through increased reliance on indirect taxes levied on goods. These measures significantly increased state revenues, which nearly doubled over the following decade, although the underlying inequalities of the tax system, including exemptions for privileged groups, largely remained in place.

Colbert also reorganized the French tariff system in 1664 as part of a broader effort to strengthen royal fiscal capacity and promote economic integration within France. Prior to these reforms, the French fiscal system was highly fragmented, with numerous internal customs duties (traites foraines) levied at provincial and local boundaries, applying to a wide range of goods and reflecting the legacy of feudal privileges. Colbert’s reforms sought to address these problems by consolidating and standardizing indirect taxation. Most notably, he established the Cinq Grosses Fermes, an internal customs zone in which the monarchy was more successful in imposing centralized fiscal institutions and reducing the autonomy of local authorities. Tariffs under Colbert were relatively limited in scope and often served administrative or fiscal purposes rather than forming a comprehensive protectionist system. In practice, they functioned alongside broader mechanisms of regulation and revenue extraction, reflecting a transitional stage in the development of French economic policy.

From April 1667 to June 1668, Colbert imposed punitive tariffs on the Dutch during the War of Devolution. Franco-Dutch trade declined by 30% due to French tariffs.

He spent a lot of energy trying to reorganize industry and commerce. He believed that in order to increase French power it would be essential to grow France's share of international trade and reduce the commercial hegemony of the Dutch.

He stressed the production of high-quality goods that could compete with foreign products abroad but also the building up of a merchant fleet to carry them.

He tried to encourage foreign workers to bring their trade skills to France. To guarantee the standard of workmanship, he made regulations for every sort of manufacture and imposed fines and pillory for counterfeiting and shortcomings

He encouraged the formation of companies dedicated to building ships and attempted to obtain monopolies for French commerce abroad through the formation of trading companies. His system of control was resented by traders and contractors, who wanted to preserve their freedom of action and to be responsible to themselves alone. Thrifty people preferred land, annuities and money lending instead of investing in industry.

In May 1665, the king established monopoly privileges for a group of French lace manufacturers. The point of this was to prohibit anyone other than the privileged licensees from making lace.

Protective tariffs were levied on imported lace, so it could only be made in France. And then in 1667 they prohibited all foreign lace.

They next enforced quality standards on production and trade, which meant that the French economy was frozen at the level of the early or mid-17th century. This act prevented or slowed down innovation in new products, new technologies, and new methods of handling production and exchange.

He granted monopolies, subsidized luxury and the privilege of cartels, and built up a system of central bureaucracy. He created a formidable system of inspection, marks and measurements to be able to identify all those who were straying from the detailed list of state regulations.

He created a system of spies to make sure nobody was differing from the system, with punishments rating from heavy fines, public mockery or the inability to keep working in the industry.

Colbert achieved a remarkable short-term transformation of French industry: his policies stimulated the creation of state-sponsored manufactories, standardised production practices, and expanded key sectors such as textiles, glassworks, and armaments. This bolstered France to the preeminent European power under Louis XIV. However his heavy-handed regulation, reliance on centralised state monopolies, and enforcement of strict guild systems also introduced structural rigidities into the French economy and its industry. These constraints, though effective for maintaining quality and state oversight, later these constraints contributed to a lack of adaptability in French industry and a hostility to technological innovation. However it would be inaccurate to blame solely Colbert for the later French industrial lag.

In 1670, Colbert made one of his most important single policy statements, in his famous memoire on finances. They can be expressed as follows: the object of economic statesmanship is to provide the monarch with the funds he needs for order and glory. Colonies can be planted and nurtured, home manufacturing improved in quality, internal transportation strengthened, the shipping industry expanded and the idle forced to work. Budgetary control must be put on a sound basis and the dominant revenues must be built up as much as possible. At the heart of this policy was the effort to increase royal revenues indirectly, through economic improvements. The universal rule according to Colbert is to control the economy and the fiscal system so that a sufficient quantity of cash will circulate in every corner of the country, giving all French the opportunity to make profits and pay taxes. His idea on how to lighten taxes was to "increase the cash available for general commerce [that is, all transactions] by attracting cash from other countries, keeping it inside the kingdom, and hindering its export, thus giving men the means to profit from it".

A cold drop is a term used in Spain and France that has commonly come to refer to any high impact rainfall event occurring in the autumn along the Spanish Mediterranean coast or across France. In Europe, cold drops belong to the characteristics of the Mediterranean climate.

The Spanish-language name of gota fría was directly adapted from the term Kaltlufttropfen introduced by German meteorologists, and became very popular in 1980s Spain as a blanket term to refer to any high-impact rainfall event.

In the eastern regions of the Iberian Peninsula, these events are typically caused by the interaction of upper-level low pressure systems strangled and ultimately detached from the zonal (eastward) circulation displaying stationary or retrograde (westward) circulation with humid warmer air masses that form over an overheated Mediterranean Sea in the Autumn. The Spanish equivalent of cut-off low is known as an "isolated depression at high levels" (depresión aislada en niveles altos) and is often abbreviated to the acronym DANA. Such recurring synoptic configurations are not necessarily associated to cold drop events.

If a sudden cut off in the jet stream takes place (particularly on the Atlantic Ocean), a pocket of cold air detaches from the main jet stream, moving southward over the Pyrenees into the warm air over Spain, causing its most dramatic effects in the southeast of Spain, particularly along the Spanish Mediterranean coast, especially in the Valencian Community. The torrential rain from a cold drop can result in devastation from torrents and flash floods.

This phenomenon is associated with extremely violent downpours and storms, but not always accompanied by significant rainfall. For this, high atmospheric instability in the lower layers of the atmosphere needs to be combined with a significant amount of moisture.

The great Valencia flood on 14 October 1957 was the result of a three-day-long cold drop and caused the deaths of at least 81 people.

The Vallès floods on 25 September 1962 in the province of Barcelona were caused by a cold drop (gota fría), producing heavy rain, overflowing the Llobregat and Besòs rivers. The official death toll was 617.

A DANA event on 29 October 2024 caused considerable loss of life and extensive damage, especially in the Valencian Community and the provinces of Albacete, Almería, and Málaga.

The Collectif Némésis (French: [ kɔlɛktif nemezis ] ; lit. 'Nemesis Collective') is a far-right political organisation for women aged 18 to 30, describing itself as feminist and Identitarian. The organisation was founded in France and expanded to Switzerland and Belgium. The organisation is named after Nemesis, the Greek goddess of revenge, and was founded by Alice Cordier [ fr ] in 2019. The organisation believes in a connection between immigration and crime. It believes that non-European immigrants, particularly Muslims, are more likely to commit violence towards women. The organisation has been condemned as racist by other feminist organisations, such as Collectif NousToutes in France and the Grève féministe du 14 juin [ fr ] in Switzerland.

The organisation first appeared on 23 November 2019 at the " Collectif NousToutes " (All of us Women) demonstration in Paris, in which it carried placards saying that 52% of rapists in Île-de-France were foreign, and ones reading " Cologne, Rotherham, soon [Paris]". After the event, the group said that other feminist groups are run by the extreme left and "prefer to focus on anecdotal themes (inclusive writing, sexism in advertising, etc.). And they only deal with the violence that women suffer daily (such as street harassment) by drowning it in abstract concepts such as that of patriarchy, to hide the fact that our attackers are massively of non-European origin".

In January 2021, the group wore niqabs at the Eiffel Tower to promote a "No Hijab Day" in opposition to World Hijab Day. In November 2021, the group infiltrated the NousToutes annual demonstration with several members of the far-right Cocarde étudiante to stage a protest against Afghan refugees.

On 9 June 2024, the group infiltrated the 2024 French protests against the National Rally to stage a protest against the left-wing New Popular Front. In an Instagram post later that day, the group declared that it had "used our freedom of expression to remind the country what the New Popular Front really is: a collection of violent abusers, terrorist supporters, and antisemites." In November 2024, Cordier applauded the victory of Donald Trump in the 2024 United States presidential election. Later that month, Le Monde reported that the group had used the Le Pen family manor in Montretout to plan an attempt to disrupt the annual NousToutes demonstration. Cordier denied knowledge of the manor's history, saying that the meeting had been organised by a member of the collective. Further reporting by Libération indicated that the group had previously organised other meetings in the manor.

In January 2025, the group staged a protest interrupting the inauguration of Anne Vignot (The Ecologists) as Mayor of Besançon, unveiling a banner reading "foreign rapists welcome" and releasing a statement accusing Vignot of being "clearly unwilling to protect the women of her city against the dangers brought by immigration." Later that month, French Minister of the Interior Bruno Retailleau sparked controversy when he applauded the group at a conference hosted by the Centre de Réflexion sur la Sécurité Intérieure. During a Q&A session, Cordier asked Retailleau about a possible judicial dissolution of the Jeune Garde Antifasciste, to which he expressed support for the idea and told Cordier "thank you for your efforts, you know it means a lot to me."

In March 2026, the group announced that it would not participate in the International Women's Day demonstrations in Paris organised by the Collectif national pour les droits des femmes (CNDF) after the CNDF and other feminist groups asked Parisian police to ban the group from participating. Anne Leclerc of the CNDF told the press that Némésis "are absolutely not feminists," accusing the group of "disturbing our demonstrations to perpetuate messages of hate against immigrants, perpetuating disinformation, and going after our members." Later that month, controversy was sparked after a photo of Cordier from 2022 showing posing with two neo-Nazis resurfaced on Twitter. Cordier denied knowingly making a neo-Nazi pose, saying that "the far-left's obsession with Nazism is becoming suspicious... [when the photo was taken] I was a kid, in a bar, and a stranger was showing a rap group's pose."

On 12 February 2026, the Collectif Némésis organised a protest against a speech to be given by La France Insoumise MEP Rima Hassan at the Institut d'études politiques de Lyon in Lyon, unfurling a banner outside the venue declaring " Islamo-leftists, out of our universities." A clash subsequently broke out between two opposing groups of demonstrations, after which 23-year-old far-right activist Quentin Deranque, who was there to provide security for Némésis, was beaten and killed. Many of the arrested individuals were linked to the outlawed far-left collective Jeune Garde Antifasciste. Several subsequent journalistic investigations revealed that Némésis had repeatedly coordinated with far-right groups in Lyon to provoke clashes with left-wing activists.

In 2021, the group launched in Romandy, the French-speaking part of Switzerland. The Swiss group has tried to gain attention at the Grève féministe du 14 juin [ fr ] (Feminist strike), whose representatives responded that "This group is riding the purple bandwagon and uses it not to promote the freedom of women, but rather the discrimination towards its targets, notably foreigners". By June 2022, Némésis had been expelled three times from events organised by Grève feministe. In April 2022, it was expelled from a social event organised by the University of Geneva. In October 2023, it was reported that some members of the Swiss People's Party, the country's leading party at federal level, had joined Némésis.

Since 2025, the organisation has been active in Belgium.

In December 2025, a man attacked Cordier with flour when she visited MCC Bruxelles [ fr ], the branch of the Hungarian state-funded university Mathias Corvinus Collegium.

The Collège of Bernardins, or Collège Saint-Bernard, located no 20, rue de Poissy in the 5th arrondissement of Paris, is a former Cistercian college of the University of Paris. Founded by Stephen of Lexington, abbot of Clairvaux, and built from 1248 with the encouragement of Pope Innocent IV, it served until the French Revolution as the residence for the Cistercian monks who were studying at the University of Paris.

After an overall renovation completed in September 2008, it is now a place for meetings, dialogues, training and culture. It offers a program of public conferences and symposia, exhibitions, concerts, activities for young people and a theological and biblical studies center. The Ecole Cathédrale offers coursework on Christian thought and every year enrolls over 3,000 students in its courses. Since 2009, it has housed the Académie catholique de France.

The college was listed as a French historical monument on 10 February 1871. The Foundation des Bernardins, which operates the college, is placed under the control of the Notre-Dame cathedral foundation, both of which are supervised by the government of France. In 2023, 28.8% of the college's budget was paid by the catholic Diocese of Paris.

The Commission de régulation de l'énergie (CRE, [ kʁø ] or French Energy Regulatory Commission under its official English title) is an independent body that regulates the French electricity and gas markets. It is a member of the European Union organisation ACER and the all-European CEER (Council of European Energy Regulators).

The commission was established by the laws of February 10, 2000, related to the modernization and development of the public electricity service, originally named "Commission de régulation de l'électricité" (Electricity Regulatory Commission), and by the law of January 3, 2003, concerning the gas and electricity markets and the public energy service. These laws transposed into French legislation the European directives of December 19, 1996, and June 22, 1998. The second law opened the gas market and extended to this sector the powers that the (CRE) already had over the electricity market.

These directives, making up the "energy package," organize the liberalization of the energy market at the European Community level by ensuring:

To ensure transparency and non-discrimination in access to public electricity networks, the commission decided on April 7, 2004, to set up a technical reference framework for the managers of public electricity networks.

According to the law of December 7, 2006, "the Energy Regulatory Commission contributes, for the benefit of final consumers, to the proper functioning of the electricity and natural gas markets. It ensures, in particular, that the conditions of access to electricity and natural gas transport and distribution networks do not hinder the development of competition. It monitors, for electricity and natural gas, the transactions carried out between suppliers, traders, and producers, the transactions carried out on organized markets, as well as exchanges across borders. It ensures the consistency of the offers from suppliers, traders, and producers with their economic and technical constraints."

At its inception, the CRE was composed of six members appointed for a non-renewable six-year term: three, including the president, appointed by decree—therefore by the government—and the other three appointed respectively by the president of the Senate, the president of the National Assembly, and the president of the Economic, Social, and Environmental Council. The law of January 3, 2003, increased this number to seven: two members, including the president, appointed by decree, two others appointed by the president of the National Assembly, two by the president of the Senate, and the last by the president of the Economic and Social Council.

The law of December 7, 2006, altered the board of commissioners by appointing two vice-presidents from among the commissioners designated by the presidents of the National Assembly and the Senate, and by adding two new commissioners representing consumers, appointed by decree, which then brought the number of members to nine.

The new board of the Energy Regulatory Commission (CRE), established by the law on the new organization of the electricity market (NOME law), now consists of five members, one president, and four commissioners who serve full-time:

Thus, Emmanuelle Wargon was appointed president of the CRE by Emmanuel Macron on August 16, 2022, for a six-year term. She is accompanied on the board by four commissioners:

The presidents of the CRE since its creation are:

The Commission nationale de l'informatique et des libertés (CNIL, French pronunciation: [ knil ] ; English: National Commission on Informatics and Liberty) is an independent French administrative regulatory body whose mission is to ensure that data privacy law is applied to the collection, storage, and use of personal data. It is the national data protection authority for France. Its existence was established by the French loi n° 78-17 on Information Technology, Data Files and Civil Liberty of 6 January 1978. From September 2011 to February 2019, the CNIL was chaired by Isabelle Falque-Pierrotin. Its chair is Marie-Laure Denis.

The CNIL was created partially in response to public outrage against the SAFARI program, which was an attempt by the French government to create a centralized database allowing French citizens to be personally identified by different government services. On 21 March 1974, an article in the newspaper Le Monde, " SAFARI ou la chasse aux Français " (SAFARI; or, Hunting Frenchmen) brought public attention to the project. Interior Minister Jacques Chirac, freshly appointed following the events of May 1968, had to face the public uproar. Chirac was the successor to Raymond Marcellin, who had been forced to resign in the end of February 1974 after having attempted to place wiretaps in the offices of the weekly newspaper Le Canard enchaîné. The massive popular rejection of the government's activities in this domain prompted the creation of the CNIL.

At the beginning of 1980, when the CNIL began its main activities, news anchorman Patrick Poivre d'Arvor announced that the CNIL had registered 125,000 files. By the end of 1980, Poivre d'Arvor counted 250,000 files (public and private).

The CNIL is composed of seventeen members from various government entities, four of whom are members of the French parliament (Assemblée nationale and Sénat); twelve of these members are elected by their representative organisations in the CNIL.

The CNIL's status as an administrative regulatory body gives it total independence to choose its course of action. However, its power is limited and defined by law. The CNIL is financed by the budget of the French Republic.

The CNIL registers the setup of information systems that process personal data on French territories. By September 2004, more than 800,000 declarations of such systems had been made. Additionally, CNIL checks the law to be applied in this domain as well as in about 50 annual "control missions". CNIL can warn organisations or people who are found to be non-compliant with the law, and also report them to the Parquet.

The main principles for regulation of personal data processing are as follows (non-exhaustive list):

The archival of sensitive information can result in a five-year prison term and a €300,000 fine.

Germany in 1971, Sweden in 1973, and France in 1978 were the first three states to vote for a "Computers and Liberty" law; these work with an independent control authority.

International, economic, and political structures have been created or assigned to apply CNIL directives. Amongst these are the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) in 1980, the Council of Europe in 1981 and the United Nations (UN) in 1990. In 1995, the European Commission voted through a directive in this manner. As of 2004, 25 countries have applied this directive.

The CNIL is the target of various criticisms, alleging its lack of action and tendency to support governmental legislation, forgetting its original aims of protecting data privacy and citizens' rights. It is regularly criticised for its lack of administering proper sanctions to data privacy violations. It was criticized, for instance, for having authorized "ethnic statistics", forbidden in official demographic statistics.

The CNIL has been criticized for attempting to enforce right to be forgotten rulings on search results globally. In 2016, Google appealed a CNIL right to be forgotten ruling on the grounds that it could set a precedent for abuse by "less open and democratic" governments.

The Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress (CMEPSP), generally referred to as the Stiglitz-Sen-Fitoussi Commission after the surnames of its leaders, is a commission of inquiry created by the French Government in 2008. The inquiry examined how the wealth and social progress of a nation could be measured, without relying on the uni-dimensional gross domestic product (GDP) measure. The Commission was formed in February 2008 and Joseph E. Stiglitz was named as the Chair. Amartya Sen was the Economic Adviser and the French Economist Jean-Paul Fitoussi was the Coordinator. The Final Report was published in September 2009. An additional contribution from the aforementioned three main organizers which specifically addresses the Financial Crisis (as of 2007) is also available.

The Commissioners of the Committee of Public Safety (French : Commissions exécutives) were appointed by the French Committee of Public Safety to oversee the various administrative departments between 1 April 1794 and 1 November 1795.

On 12 Germinal year II (1 April 1794) Lazare Carnot proposed suppressing the Executive Council and the six ministers, replacing the ministers with twelve committees reporting to the Committee of Public Safety. The proposal was unanimously adopted by the National Convention.

The commissioners were dismissed when a new set of ministers was named by the French Directory on 3 November 1795.

Twelve committees were appointed, each composed of two members and one assistant, reporting to the Committee of Public Safety. The commissions were:

The committee members, or commissioners, were:

A communauté de communes (French pronunciation: [ kɔmynote də kɔmyn ] 'community of communes ') is a federation of municipalities (communes) in France. It forms a framework within which local tasks are carried out together. It is the least-integrated form of intercommunalité (intercommunality).

As of 1 January 2007, there were 2,400 communautés de communes in France (2,391 in metropolitan France and 9 in the overseas departments), with 26.48 million people living in them. Since then many communautés de communes have been merged or have joined a communauté d'agglomération, a communauté urbaine or a métropole. Whereas there were 2,409 communautés de communes in January 2010 and 1,842 in January 2016, there were only 989 communautés de communes left in January 2025. The population of the communautés de communes (2022 population data, 2025 borders) ranged from 106,433 inhabitants (Communauté de communes Le Grésivaudan, covering the area between Grenoble and Chambéry), to 3,986 inhabitants (Communauté de communes du Causse de Labastide-Murat, Lot department).

The communauté de communes was created by a statute of the French Parliament enacted on 6 February 1992. The statute was modified by the Chevènement law of 1999.

Unlike the communautés d'agglomération and the communautés urbaines, communautés de communes are not subject to a minimum threshold of population to come into existence. The only constraint is geographical continuity.

According to the Code général des collectivités territoriales [ fr ] (CGCT; general law over regional administrative structures), a communauté de communes is an établissement public de coopération intercommunale (EPCI; public establishment of inter-communal cooperation) formed by several French municipalities that cover a connected territory without enclave.

When the Chevènement law regulatory modifications came into force in 1999 communautés de communes already in existence that did not meet the criterion of geographical continuity were left untouched.

The communes involved build a space of solidarity with a joint project for development, infrastructure building, etc.

The communautés de communes are currently funded by local taxes:

The taxe professionnelle unique [ fr ] is a modified version of the tax whereby a proportion of the monies levied by the communautés des communes is paid back to the individual communes. The taxe professionnelle [ fr ] is sometimes presented as an unfair burden on the economy or even as a device for exporting jobs outside France, and it has been subject to a series of reforms over the years but central government undertakings to abolish it (and presumably to replace it) have yet to come to fruition. If they do, funding of the communautés de communes will change fundamentally.

A communauté de communes is administered by a council (conseil communautaire) made up of delegates from the municipal councils of each member commune. The number of seats allocated to each commune reflects the size of the commune. A member commune must have at least one seat on the council and no individual commune may have more than half of the seats on the conseil communautaire.

Article 5214-16 of the CGCT requires the communauté de communes to exercise its responsibilities in the following policy areas:

The communauté de communes may also choose to exercise its responsibilities in at least one of the following six policy areas:

The communauté de communes may define its own personnel requirements and appoint appropriately qualified employees. In addition, and subject to départemental agreement, it may exercise direct powers and responsibilities in certain social policy areas that are more normally handled at the départemental level.

Subject to these requirements, it is for the communes themselves to determine precisely which responsibilities they will delegate to the communauté de communes based on their view of the individual commune's best interests. Once powers and responsibilities have been delegated to the communauté de communes, they shall be exercised collectively through the communauté de communes and may no longer be exercised independently by individual member communes.

Communauté urbaine (French pronunciation: [ kɔmynote yʁbɛn ] ; French for "urban community") is the second most integrated form of intercommunality in France, after the Metropolis (French: métropole). A communauté urbaine is composed of a city (commune) and its independent suburbs (independent communes).

The first communautés urbaines were created by the French Parliament on 31 December 1966. Originally there were only four, found in the metropolitan areas of Bordeaux, Lille, Lyon and Strasbourg. Later, others were created in other metropolitan areas. The purpose of the communautés urbaines was to achieve cooperation and joint administration between large cities and their independent suburbs. This step often followed failed attempts to merge the communes within a metropolitan area. The status of the communauté urbaine was modified by the Chevènement Law of 1999. Since the creation of the métropoles in 2011, several former communautés urbaines have become métropoles, for instance Nice, Strasbourg, Marseille, Nancy and Dijon.

Unlike the case in either a communauté d'agglomération or communauté de communes, communes cannot leave a communauté urbaine freely.

As of January 2025, there are 14 communautés urbaines in France (all in metropolitan France), with a combined population of 3.17 million inhabitants (as of 2022, in 2025 limits). All of the urban areas in France with more than half a million inhabitants are a communauté urbaine or a métropole. Some communautés urbaines are relatively small; smaller than many communautés d'agglomération.

The communautés urbaines are each administered by a council called a "conseil communautaire" (community council), composed of a proportional representation of members of municipal councils of member towns. The council is headed by an executive composed of a president and vice-presidents elected by the council. The president is in many cases the mayor of the main or most populous city. The mayors of the others cities are often also vice-presidents of the executive, the deputies-mayors are often members of the council, as are some members of the towns' councils.

A commune (French pronunciation: [ kɔmyn ]) is a level of administrative division of France. French communes are analogous to civil townships and incorporated municipalities, and particularly to the New England towns, in Canada and the United States; Gemeinden in Germany; comuni in Italy; municipios in Spain; or civil parishes in the United Kingdom. Communes are based on historical geographic communities or villages and are vested with significant powers to manage the populations and land of the geographic area covered. The communes are the fourth-level administrative divisions of France.

Communes vary widely in size and area, from large sprawling cities with millions of inhabitants like Paris, to small hamlets with only a handful of inhabitants. Communes typically are based on pre-existing villages and facilitate local governance. All communes have names, but not all named geographic areas or groups of people residing together are communes (lieu dit or bourg), the difference residing in the lack of administrative powers. Except for the municipal arrondissements of its largest cities, the communes are the lowest level of administrative division in France and are governed by elected officials including a mayor (maire) and a municipal council (conseil municipal). They have extensive autonomous powers to implement national policy.

A commune is the smallest and oldest administrative division in France.

The French word commune appeared in the 12th century, from Medieval Latin communia, for a large gathering of people sharing a common life; from Latin communis, 'things held in common'.

As of 1 January 2025, France comprises approximately 34,000 communes, including 129 overseas communes, reflecting a continuing trend of mergers and occasional separations since the 2010s. This is a considerably higher total than that of any other European country, because French communes still largely reflect the division of France into villages or parishes at the time of the French Revolution.

(1) Within the current limits of metropolitan France, which existed between 1860 and 1871 and from 1919 to today. (2) Within the current extent of overseas France, which has remained unchanged since the independence of the New Hebrides in 1980.

The median population of metropolitan France's communes at the 1999 census was 380 inhabitants. Again this is a very small number, and here France stands absolutely apart in Europe, with the lowest communes' median population of all the European countries (communes in Switzerland or Rhineland-Palatinate may cover a smaller area, as mentioned above, but they are more populated). This small median population of French communes can be compared with Italy, where the median population of communes in 2001 was 2,343 inhabitants, Belgium (11,265 inhabitants), or even Spain (564 inhabitants).

The median population given here should not hide the fact that there are pronounced differences in size among French communes. As mentioned in the introduction, a commune can be a city of 2 million inhabitants such as Paris, a town of 10,000 inhabitants, or just a hamlet of 10 inhabitants. What the median population tells us is that the vast majority of the French communes only have a few hundred inhabitants, but there are also a small number of communes with much higher populations.

In metropolitan France 57 percent of the 36,683 communes have fewer than 500 inhabitants and, with 4,638,000 inhabitants, these smaller communes constitute just 7.7 percent of the total population. In other words, just 8 percent of the French population live in 57 percent of its communes, whilst 92 percent are concentrated in the remaining 43 percent.

Alsace, with an area of 8,280 km (3,200 sq mi), and now part of the Région Grand Est, used to be the smallest of the regions of metropolitan France, and still has no fewer than 904 communes. This high number is typical of metropolitan France but is atypical when compared with other European countries. It shows the distinctive nature of the French commune as a geo-political or administrative entity.

With its 904 communes, Alsace has three times as many municipalities as Sweden, which has a much larger territory covering 449,964 km (173,732 sq mi) and yet is divided into only 290 municipalities (kommuner). Alsace has more than double the total number of municipalities of the Netherlands which, in spite of having a population nine times larger and a land area four times larger than Alsace, is divided into just 390 municipalities (gemeenten).

Most of the communes in Alsace, along with those in other regions of France, have rejected the central government's calls for mergers and rationalization. By way of contrast, in the German states bordering Alsace, the geo-political and administrative areas have been subject to various re-organizations from the 1960s onward. In the state of Baden-Württemberg, the number of Gemeinden or communities was reduced from 3,378 in 1968 to 1,108 in September 2007. In comparison, the number of communes in Alsace was only reduced from 946 in 1971 (just before the Marcellin law aimed at encouraging French communes to merge with each other was passed, see Current debate section below) to 904 in January 2007. Consequently, the Alsace region—despite having a land area only one-fifth the size and a total population only one-sixth of that of its neighbor Baden-Württemberg—has almost as many municipalities. The small Alsace region has more than double the number of municipalities compared to the large and populous state of North Rhine-Westphalia (396 Gemeinden in September 2007).

Despite differences in population, each of the communes of the French Republic possesses a mayor (maire) and a municipal council (conseil municipal), which jointly manage the commune from the municipal hall (mairie), with exactly the same powers no matter the size of the commune. This uniformity of status is a legacy of the French Revolution, which wanted to do away with the local idiosyncrasies and tremendous differences in status that existed in the kingdom of France.

French law makes allowances for the vast differences in commune size in a number of areas of administrative law. The size of the municipal council, the method of electing the municipal council, the maximum allowable pay of the mayor and deputy mayors, and municipal campaign finance limits (among other features) all depend on the population echelon into which a particular commune falls.

Since the PLM Law of 1982, three French communes also have a special status in that they are further divided into municipal arrondissements : these are Paris, Marseille, and Lyon. The municipal arrondissement is the only administrative unit below the commune in the French Republic but exists only in these three communes. These municipal arrondissements are not to be confused with the arrondissements that are subdivisions of French départements : French communes are considered legal entities, whereas municipal arrondissements, by contrast, have no official capacity and no budget of their own.

The rights and obligations of communes are governed by the Code général des collectivités territoriales (CGCT) which replaced the Code des communes (except for personnel matters) with the passage of the law of 21 February 1996 for legislation and decree number 2000-318 of 7 April 2000 for regulations.

From 1794 to 1977—except for a few months in 1848 and 1870–1871—Paris had no mayor and was thus directly controlled by the departmental prefect. This meant that Paris had less autonomy than certain towns or villages. Even after Paris regained the right to elect its own mayor in 1977, the central government retained control of the Paris police. In all other French communes, the municipal police are under the mayor's supervision.

French communes were created at the beginning of the French Revolution in 1789–1790.

Before the revolution, France's lowest level of administrative division was the parish (paroisse), and there were up to 60,000 of them in the kingdom. A parish consisted of a church building, the village, the cultivated land around the village. In the late 18th century, with 25 million inhabitants France was the most populous in Europe. By comparison, England had 6 million inhabitants. French kings ruled proudly over a "realm of 100,000 steeples".

Parishes lacked the municipal structures of post-Revolution communes. Usually, one contained only a building committee (conseil de fabrique), made up of villagers, which managed the buildings of the parish church, the churchyard, and the other numerous church estates and properties, and sometimes also provided help for the poor, or even administered parish hospitals or schools. Since the Ordinance of Villers-Cotterêts of 1539 by Francis I, the priest in charge of the parish was also required to record baptisms, marriages, and burials. Except for these tasks, villages were left to handle other issues as they pleased. Typically, villagers would gather to decide over a special issue regarding the community, such as agricultural land usage, but there existed no permanent municipal body. In many places, the local feudal lord (seigneur) still had a major influence in the village's affairs, collecting taxes from tenant-villagers and ordering them to work the corvée, controlling which fields were to be used and when, and how much of the harvest should be given to him.

Additionally, some cities had obtained charters during the Middle Ages, either from the king himself or from local counts or dukes (such as the city of Toulouse chartered by the counts of Toulouse). These cities were made up of several parishes (up to c. 50 parishes in the case of Paris), and they were usually enclosed by a defensive wall. They had been emancipated from the power of feudal lords in the 12th and 13th centuries, had municipal bodies which administered the city, and bore some resemblance with the communes that the French Revolution would establish except for two key points:

In the north, cities tended to be administered by échevins (from an old Germanic word meaning judge), while in the south, cities tended to be administered by consuls (in a clear reference to Roman antiquity), but Bordeaux was administered by jurats (etymologically meaning "sworn men") and Toulouse by capitouls ("men of the chapter"). Usually, there was no mayor in the modern sense; all the échevins or consuls were on equal footing, and rendered decisions collegially. However, for certain purposes, there was one échevin or consul ranking above the others, a sort of mayor, although not with the same authority and executive powers as a modern mayor. This "mayor" was called provost of the merchants (prévôt des marchands) in Paris and Lyon; maire in Marseille, Bordeaux, Rouen, Orléans, Bayonne and many other cities and towns; mayeur in Lille ; premier capitoul in Toulouse; viguier in Montpellier ; premier consul in many towns of southern France; prêteur royal in Strasbourg ; maître échevin in Metz ; maire royal in Nancy ; or prévôt in Valenciennes.

On 14 July 1789, at the end of the afternoon, following the storming of the Bastille, the provost of the merchants of Paris, Jacques de Flesselles was shot by the crowd on the steps of Paris City Hall. Although in the Middle Ages the provosts of the merchants symbolized the independence of Paris and even had openly rebelled against King Charles V, their office had been suppressed by the king, then reinstated but with strict control from the king, and so they had ended up being viewed by the people as yet another representative of the king, no longer the embodiment of a free municipality.

Following that event, a "commune" of Paris was immediately set up to replace the old medieval chartered city of Paris, and a municipal guard was established to protect Paris against any attempt made by King Louis XVI to quell the ongoing revolution. Several other cities of France quickly followed suit, and communes arose everywhere, each with their municipal guard. On 14 December 1789, the National Assembly (Assemblée Nationale) passed a law creating the commune, designed to be the lowest level of administrative division in France, thus endorsing these independently created communes, but also creating communes of its own. In this area as in many others, the work of the National Assembly was, properly speaking, revolutionary: not content with transforming all the chartered cities and towns into communes, the National Assembly also decided to turn all the village parishes into full-status communes. The Revolutionaries were inspired by Cartesian ideas as well as by the philosophy of the Enlightenment. They wanted to do away with all the peculiarities of the past and establish a perfect society, in which all and everything should be equal and set up according to reason, rather than by tradition or conservatism.

Thus, they set out to establish administrative divisions that would be uniform across the country: the whole of France would be divided into départements, themselves divided into arrondissements, themselves divided into cantons, themselves divided into communes, no exceptions. All of these communes would have equal status, they would all have a mayor at their head and a municipal council elected by the inhabitants of the commune. This was a real revolution for the thousands of villages that never had experienced organized municipal life before. A communal house had to be built in each of these villages, which would house the meetings of the municipal council as well as the administration of the commune. Some in the National Assembly were opposed to such a fragmentation of France into thousands of communes, but eventually Mirabeau and his ideas of one commune for each parish prevailed.

On 20 September 1792, the recording of births, marriages, and deaths also was withdrawn as a responsibility of the priests of the parishes and handed to the mayors. Civil marriages were established and started to be performed in the mairie with a ceremony not unlike the traditional one, with the mayor replacing the priest, and the name of the law replacing the name of God (" Au nom de la loi, je vous déclare unis par les liens du mariage. " – "In the name of the law, I declare you united by the bonds of marriage."). Priests were forced to surrender their centuries-old baptism, marriage, and burial books, which were deposited in the mairies. These abrupt changes profoundly alienated devout Catholics, and France soon was plunged into the throes of civil war, with the fervently religious regions of western France at its center. It would take Napoleon I to re-establish peace in France, stabilize the new administrative system, and make it generally accepted by the population. Napoleon also abolished the election of the municipal councils, which now were chosen by the prefect, the local representative of the central government.

Today, French communes are still very much the same in their general principles as those that were established at the beginning of the Revolution. The biggest changes occurred in 1831, when the French Parliament re-established the principle of the election of municipal councils, and in 1837 when French communes were given legal "personality", being now considered legal entities with legal capacity. The Jacobin revolutionaries were afraid of independent local powers, which they saw as conservative and opposed to the revolution, and so they favored a powerful central state. Therefore, when they created the communes, they deprived them of any legal "personality" (as they did with the départements), with only the central state having legal "personality." By 1837 that situation was judged impractical, as mayors and municipal councils could not be parties in courts. The consequence of the change, however, was that tens of thousands of villages which had never had legal "personality" (contrary to the chartered cities) suddenly became legal entities for the first time in their history. This is still the case today.

During the revolution, approximately 41,000 communes were created, on territory corresponding to the limits of modern-day France (the 41,000 figure includes the communes of the departments of Savoie, Haute-Savoie and Alpes-Maritimes which were annexed in 1795, but does not include the departments of modern-day Belgium and Germany west of the Rhine, which were part of France between 1795 and 1815). This was fewer than the 60,000 parishes that existed before the revolution (in cities and towns, parishes were merged into one single commune; in the countryside, some very small parishes were merged with bigger ones), but 41,000 was still a considerable number, without any comparison in the world at the time, except in the empire of China (but there, only county level and above had any permanent administration).

Since then, tremendous changes have affected France, as they have the rest of Europe: the Industrial Revolution, two world wars, and the rural exodus have all depopulated the countryside and increased the size of cities. French administrative divisions, however, have remained extremely rigid and unchanged. Today about 90 percent of communes and departments are exactly the same as those designed at the time of the French Revolution more than 200 years ago, with the same limits. Countless rural communes that had hundreds of inhabitants at the time of the French Revolution now have only a hundred inhabitants or fewer. On the other hand, cities and towns have grown so much that their urbanized area is now extending far beyond the limits of their commune which were set at the time of the revolution. The most extreme example of this is Paris, where the urbanized area sprawls over 396 communes.

Paris in fact was one of the very few communes of France whose limits were extended to take into account the expansion of the urbanized area. The new, larger, commune of Paris was set up under the oversight of Emperor Napoléon III in 1859, but after 1859 the limits of Paris rigidified. Unlike most other European countries, which stringently merged their communes to better reflect modern-day densities of population (such as Germany and Italy around 1970), dramatically decreasing the number of communes in the process – the Gemeinden of West Germany were decreased from 24,400 to 8,400 in the space of a few years – France only carried out mergers at the margin, and those were mostly carried out during the 19th century. From 41,000 communes at the time of the French Revolution, the number decreased to 37,963 in 1921, to 36,569 in 2008 (in metropolitan France).

Thus, in Europe, only Switzerland has as high a density of communes as France, and even there an extensive merger movement has started in the last 10 years. To better grasp the staggering number of communes in France, two comparisons can be made: First, of the original 15 member states of the European Union there are approximately 75,000 communes; France alone, which comprises 16 percent of the population of the EU-15, had nearly half of its communes. Second, the United States, with a territory fourteen times larger than that of the French Republic, and nearly five times its population, had 35,937 incorporated municipalities and townships at the 2002 Census of Governments, fewer than that of the French Republic. The number of barangays in the Philippines, villages of Indonesia, and muban in Thailand also have a higher number than the French communes.

There have long been calls in France for large-scale mergers of communes, including from prominent voices such as the president of the Cour des comptes (the national audit office). In 1971, the Marcellin law offered financial incentives to encourage voluntary mergers, but had limited success—only about 1,300 communes agreed to merge. Many rural communes with small populations struggle to provide basic services such as running water, garbage collection, and road maintenance.

Mergers remain difficult to achieve. One reason is that they reduce the number of elected positions, which can make them unpopular with local politicians. In some cases, residents are reluctant to let their local services be managed by officials based in another village, especially if they feel their specific needs may not be well understood.

In December 2010, the law n° 2010-1563 created the legal framework for the communes nouvelles ("new communes"). A commune nouvelle can be created when several communes merge, either at the request of their municipal councils or at the initiative of the prefect. The new commune may choose to establish communes déléguées ("delegated communes") to preserve some local representation through a delegated mayor and council.

Between 2012 and 2021, around 820 communes nouvelles were created, replacing about 2,550 former communes. The trend has continued in recent years. As of 1 January 2024, a total of 1,078 communes nouvelles had been created since 2010, replacing more than 3,000 former communes.

In 2024 alone, 46 communes nouvelles were created, formed from the merger of 110 existing communes. In rare cases, a few communes that had previously merged chose to regain their independence—such as four communes in the Cantal department in 2024—following local referendums and prefectural approval.

The expression "intercommunality" (intercommunalité) denotes several forms of cooperation between communes. Such cooperation first made its appearance at the end of the 19th century in the form of a law on 22 March 1890, which provided for the establishment of single-purpose intercommunal associations. French lawmakers have long been aware of the inadequacy of the communal structure inherited from the French Revolution for dealing with a number of practical matters. The so-called Chevènement law of 12 July 1999 is a relatively recent and thoroughgoing measure aimed at strengthening and simplifying this principle.

In recent years it has become increasingly common for communes to band together in intercommunal consortia for the provision of such services as refuse collection and water supply. Suburban communes often team up with the city at the core of their urban area to form a community charged with managing public transport or even administering the collection of local taxes.

The Chevènement law tidied up all these practices, abolishing some structures and creating new ones. In addition, it offered central government finance aimed at encouraging further communes to join in intercommunal structures. Unlike the only partially successful statute enacted in 1966 and enabling urban communes to form urban communities or the more marked failure of the Marcellin law of 1971, the Chevènement law met with a large measure of success, so that a majority of French communes are now involved in intercommunal structures.

There are two types of these structures:

In exchange for the creation of a community, the government allocates money to them based on their population, thus providing an incentive for communes to team up and form communities. Communities of communes are given the least money per inhabitant, whereas urban communities are given the most money per inhabitant, thus pushing communes to form more integrated communities where they have fewer powers, which they might otherwise have been loath to do if it were not for government money.

The Chevènement law has been extremely successful in the sense that a majority of French communes now have joined the new intercommunal structures. On 1 January 2007, there were 2,573 such communities in metropolitan France (including five syndicats d'agglomération nouvelle, a category currently being phased out), made up of 33,327 communes (91.1 percent of all the communes of metropolitan France), and 52.86 million inhabitants, i.e., 86.7 percent of the population of metropolitan France.

In urban areas, the new intercommunal structures are much more a reality, being created by local decision-makers out of genuine belief in the worth of working together. However, in many places, local feuds have arisen, and it was not possible to set up an intercommunal structure for the whole of the urban area: some communes refusing to take part in it, or even creating their own structure. In some urban areas like Marseille there exist four distinct intercommunal structures! In many areas, rich communes have joined with other rich communes and have refused to let in poorer communes, for fear that their citizens would be overtaxed to the benefit of poorer suburbs.

Moreover, intercommunal structures in many urban areas are still new, and fragile: Tensions exist between communes; the city at the center of the urban area often is suspected of wishing to dominate the suburban communes; communes from opposing political sides also may be suspicious of each other.

Two famous examples of this are Toulouse and Paris. In Toulouse, on top of there being six intercommunal structures, the main community of Toulouse and its suburbs is only a community of agglomeration, although Toulouse is large enough to create an Urban Community according to the law. This is because the suburban communes refused an urban community for fear of losing too much power, and opted for a community of agglomeration, despite the fact that a community of agglomeration receives less government funds than an urban community. As for Paris, no intercommunal structure has emerged there, the suburbs of Paris fearing the concept of a "Greater Paris", and so disunity still is the rule in the metropolitan area, with the suburbs of Paris creating many different intercommunal structures all without the city.

One major often raised problem with intercommunality, is the fact that the intercommunal structures are not subject to direct election by the people, so it is the representatives of each individual commune that sit in the new structure. As a consequence, civil servants and bureaucrats are the ones setting up the agenda and implementing it, with the elected representatives of the communes only endorsing key decisions.

INSEE (Institut National de la Statistique et des Études Économiques) gives numerical indexing codes to various entities in France, notably the communes (which do not coincide with postcodes). The complete code has eight digits and three spaces within, but there is a popular simplified code with five digits and no space within:

The whole territory of the French Republic is divided into communes; even uninhabited mountains or rain forests are dependent on a commune for their administration. This is unlike some other countries, such as the United States, where unincorporated areas directly governed by a county or a higher authority can be found. There are only a few exceptions:

Furthermore, two regions without permanent habitation have no communes:

Each commune has a municipal council (conseil municipal) composed of municipal councilors (conseillers municipaux). The municipal council is the legislative and deliberative organ of the commune. The municipal councilors are elected by the inhabitants of the commune for a 6-year term. Each commune is governed by a mayor (maire) elected for a 6-year term.

In areas where languages other than French are or were spoken, most place-names have been translated into a French spelling and pronunciation, such as Dunkerque (Duinkerke in Dutch), Toulouse (Tolosa in Occitan), Strasbourg (Straßburg in German), Perpignan (Perpinyà in Catalan), and many place names derived from Gaulish or Latin. However, many smaller communes have retained their native name. Other examples of retained names in the languages once spoken, or still spoken, on French territory:

Communism has been a part of French politics since the early 20th century at the latest. It has been described as "an enduring presence on the French political scene" for most of the 20th century.

In 1920, the French Section of the Communist International was founded. This organization went on to become the French Communist Party (Parti communiste français, PCF). Following World War II, the French Communist Party joined the government led by Charles de Gaulle before being dropped by the coalition. From November 1946 to 1956, the French Communist Party won more votes than any other party in the French national elections. After 1956, their share of the vote gradually declined.

In addition to the main French Communist Party, there have been multiple other communist parties in France, and some of these are still in operation today.

During the early modern period in Europe, various groups supporting communist ideas appeared. In the 18th century, the French philosopher Jean Jacques Rousseau in his hugely influential The Social Contract (1762) outlined the basis for a political order based on popular sovereignty rather than the rule of monarchs. His views proved instrumental during the French Revolution of 1789 in which various anti-monarchists, particularly the Jacobins, supported the idea of redistributing wealth equally among the people, including Jean-Paul Marat and Gracchus Babeuf. The latter was involved in the Conspiracy of the Equals of 1796 intending to establish a revolutionary regime based on communal ownership, egalitarianism and the redistribution of property. However, the plot was detected and he and several others involved were arrested and executed. Despite this setback, the example of the French Revolutionary regime and Babeuf's doomed insurrection was an inspiration for radical French thinkers such as Henri de Saint-Simon, Louis Blanc, Charles Fourier and Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, who declared that " property is theft! "

By the 1830s and 1840s, the egalitarian concepts of communism and the related ideas of socialism had become widely popular in French revolutionary circles thanks to the writings of social critics and philosophers such as Pierre Leroux and Théodore Dézamy, whose critiques of bourgeoisie liberalism led to a widespread intellectual rejection of laissez-faire capitalism on both economic, philosophical and moral grounds. Importantly, Philippe Buonarroti, one of Babeuf's co-conspirators, survived the crackdown on the Conspiracy of the Equals and went on to write the influential book History of Babeuf's Conspiracy for Equality first published in 1828. Buonarroti's works and teachings went on to inspire early Babouvist communist groups, such as the Christian communist League of the Just in 1836 led by Wilhelm Weitling, which would later be merged with the Communist Correspondence Committee in Brussels. This merger of the two groups in 1847 formed the Communist League, headed by German socialist labour leader Karl Schapper, who then that same year tasked two founding members, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, to write a manifesto laying out the principles of the new political party.

During the latter half of the 19th century, various left-wing organisations across Europe continued to campaign against the many autocratic right-wing regimes that were then in power. In France, socialists set up a government known as the Paris Commune after the fall of Napoleon III in 1871, but they were soon overthrown and many of their members executed by counter-revolutionaries.

In Europe, front organizations were especially influential in France, which became the base for communist front organizer Willi Münzenberg in 1933.

During the Sino-Soviet split, the French Communist Party aligned with the Soviet perspective.

By the middle of the 1960s, the French Communist Party lost members and sympathizers due to its ambivalent positions during the Algerian war and its perceived excessive focus on class and inadequate focus on imperialism and race.

French Maoism developed after the Sino-Soviet split and particularly between 1966 and 1976. After May 68, the cultural influence of French Maoists increased. Maoists became the first group of French intellectuals to emphasize gay and lesbian rights in their publications and contributed to the nascent feminist movement in France.

Eurocommunism, a revisionist trend in the 1970s and 1980s within various Western European communist parties, was especially prominent in France. They claimed to be developing a theory and practice of social transformation more relevant for Western Europe. During the Cold War, they sought to undermine the influence of the Soviet Union and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.

Rives & Eaux du Sud-Ouest formerly Compagnie d'aménagement des coteaux de Gascogne (CACG) (lit. ' Shores & Waters of the Southwest ') is a French semi-public development company based in Tarbes (Hautes-Pyrénées). It has around 220 employees. In 2024, it changed its name to “Rives & Eaux du Sud-Ouest” (Rives & Eaux).

It designs, builds, and implements water projects with the aim of contributing to regional development. The main customers of the company are local authorities, farmers and private companies. The company is based in Occitanie, Nouvelle-Aquitaine, and Pays de la Loire.

While its management was criticized by the regional audit office in 2019, a public recapitalization enabled it to avoid bankruptcy in 2023.

CACG was created in 1959. Its aim was to develop "modern" agriculture in Gascony, in particular hybrid maize, which had just been invented by the Institut National de Recherche pour l'Agriculture [ fr ].

The Neste canal was used for the intended agriculture purposes. Irrigation hydrants were distributed free of charge to farmers. With the support of the PAC, water from the Pyrenees reached the cornfields of Gascony.

Its head office is in Tarbes. It has seven branches: Toulouse, Bruch, Verdun-sur-Garonne, Castelnau-Magnoac, Tarbes, Cazères and Benet.

In 2023, CACG will be in charge of 80 dams and 3,500 km (2,200 mi) of rivers. It supplies water to 280,000 inhabitants, the Arkema plant in Lannemezan, and 200,000 hectares of irrigated crops.

The Mirandette farm works, in particular, on soil conservation (plant cover, direct seeding, etc.) and customized irrigation.

The Neste canal feeds the Neste system. Since 1990, it has been managed by CACG under a state concession.

Built between 1848 and 1862, it guarantees the water supply to Gascony. A territory of 8,400 km (3,200 sq mi) straddling 5 departments : Hautes-Pyrénées, Gers, Haute-Garonne, Lot-et-Garonne, and Tarn-et-Garonne.It transports water from the Aure valley to users via a vast network comprising 1,350 km (840 mi) of rivers, 90 km (56 mi) of ditches, several lakes. The water for the canal and the 17 rivers it feeds comes from the Neste, from the Sarrancolin water intake at Beyrède-Jumet. (65).

This structure, which straddles the communes of Mailhoc and Cagnac-les-Mines, was built and operated in the Tarn region by CACG from 1998 to 2020. Its construction was attacked by its opponents and condemned in 1997 by the administrative court. Although the ruling required the work to be stopped, the Albi public prosecutor refused to stop the work. The prefect issued a stop-work order, but did not enforce it. In the end, the illegality of the construction was confirmed by the Bordeaux Administrative Court of Appeal [ fr ] in 2005.

It was the subject of a new public inquiry in 2015, and of upgrading work in 2018–2019, before being handed back to the departmental council of Tarn in 2020.

In 2014, the strong protest by opponents to the construction of the Sivens dam drew attention to CACG. On November 5, le Canard enchaîné noted that the majority of its board members were elected representatives from the general and regional councils of Nouvelle-Aquitaine and Occitanie, which is likely to constitute a conflict of interest, as the same people "ayant l'idée d'un projet, en étudient la faisabilité, le votent et en possèdent la maîtrise d'ouvrage" ("have the idea for a project, study its feasibility, vote on it and are in charge of it") through different structures.

In 2001 and 2009, CACG carried out feasibility studies for the Sivens dam. Following these studies, the Tarn General Council appointed the same CACG to act as project manager for the Sivens dam. On September 29, 2014, the French Ministry of Ecology, Sustainable Development and Energy asked two experts, Corps of Bridges, Waters and Forests, to write a report on the subject. This report, without calling into question the need to store water in the Tescou valley, recommends several improvements in particular to update water demand and study storage variants. Since then, a territorial project has been underway to reconcile agricultural and environmental issues.

The Puydarrieux dam was opened in 1987, forming the lac de Puydarrieux. In addition to the uses common to the Neste system (environment, economy, drinking water), it is also a passover and wintering area for some 240 bird species.

CACG's business model, based essentially on corn irrigation, is structurally loss-making and dependent on public subsidies. Its debt is high, and the organization was on the verge of bankruptcy in 2023. This was averted by a bailout from local authorities and a massive recapitalization of €24,000,000 (US$25,950,447.06) of public money. In 2019, Occitanie's Regional Chamber of Accounts [ fr ] warned of the company's poor management.

As early as 1998, it was behind the promotion of irrigation reservoirs, or controversial replacement reservoirs in the Poitevin marshlands.

The company was condemned in 2016 for having taken samples from the Gimone river in excess of authorized standards., and in 2019 for the Midou.

In 2021, the company was condemned on the same grounds. CACG had unsuccessfully challenged the prosecution in its entirety, implicating the French Office for Biodiversity and bringing a case of legitimate suspicion against the public prosecutor's office.

The Compagnie française des expositions (French pronunciation: [ kɔ̃paɲi fʁɑ̃sɛːz dez‿ɛkspozisjɔ̃ ] ; "French Exhibition Company"), founded on 17 January 2018 by decree of the State, is the official French company responsible for organizing and promoting France 's participation in World Expos and Specialised Expos.

Before the Compagnie française des expositions (Cofrex) was established, France 's participation in World Expos and Specialised Expos was organized by different entities for each event, who were selected following a public call for tenders.

Cofrex was created with the aim of ensuring long-term development and continuity for these events. It is a sustainable project that uses experience of previous exhibitions in order to organize France's future participation in World Expos and Specialised Expos in the best possible way, for the general public as well as for the sponsors.

The first World Expos were held in London in 1851, and then in France in 1853. Since 1931, the World Expos have been governed and overseen by BIE (Bureau of International Expositions). BIE is an intergovernmental organization in charge of regulating these global events and ensuring that they are successful.

The Expo 2020 will be held in Dubai (United Arab Emirates) from 20 October 2020 until 10 April 2021. The theme of the expo is “Connecting Minds, Creating the future”, which is then divided into three sub-themes: Mobility, Durability, Opportunity. This is the first edition that Cofrex is overseeing as France's official organizer.

With 25 million visits expected by the Expo 2020 organizers, tickets should go on sale in October 2019.

At the unveiling of the Louvre Abu Dhabi which took place on 8 and 9 November 2017, Emmanuel Macron, the President of France, officially announced France's participation in the Expo 2020 in Dubai. He also revealed that the theme selected for France would be “Mobility”, a key topic for French technology and innovation. On 9 November, together with His Highness Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, he attended the signing of the contract for France's participation to the Expo 2020 by Reem Al Hashimi, the Minister for International Cooperation, and Erik Linquier, the President of Cofrex and France's Commissioner General for Expo 2020 Dubai.

Located in the heart of the Expo 2020 in Dubai South, the French Pavilion Dubai 2020 was designed with a special theme: “Light, Enlightenment”. It is a dual reference to the humanist century (Enlightenment) and also evokes movement (the speed of light):

The French Pavilion official film was produced by Sonia Rolland, artistic director and former Miss France 2000.

The architecture, design and architects for the French Pavilion were selected following a public call for tenders in 2018. The Pavilion was officially unveiled on 19 March 2019 during a lecture at the Ministry for Ecological and Inclusive Transition, which was attended by Brune Poirson, Secretary of State to the Minister for Ecological and Inclusive Transition. “The Expo 2020 Dubai will be an important opportunity to demonstrate that the choices we have made in support of ecological and inclusive transition represent solutions for the future,” said the Secretary of State.

The French Pavilion was designed by two architecture firms: Atelier du Prado and Celnikier & Grabli Architectes, and, more specifically, by Jean-Luc Perez from l'Atelier du Prado and Jacob Celnikier and Pascal Grabli from CGA. A scenographer was also appointed to work on the design of the French Pavilion in accordance with the “Light, Enlightenment” theme. The person chosen was Jean-Marie Priol, artistic director of the Immersive(s) group.

The French Pavilion boasts an impeccable environmental record. Cofrex has presented a sustainable and responsible building, which is 80% self-sufficient in terms of energy. Photovoltaic panels will be installed on the Pavilion to produce solar energy. The French Pavilion can be completely dismantled, and it can therefore be re-used after the Expo 2020. It will also be equipped with a purification microstation. Protecting local biodiversity is also one of the objectives, which takes the form of a garden made up of 15 varieties of endemic plants and trees.

“The French Pavilion aims to showcase the fastest possible mobility there can be, but also to embody the Enlightenment, which has been a symbol of the sharing and spreading of knowledge since the eighteenth century”, stated Erik Linquier, President of Cofrex and France's Commissioner General for the Expo 2020 Dubai. “In keeping with the ecological ambition of the One Planet Summit, this pavilion will be the most sustainable ever built,” he said.

On 2 May, the Minister for Transport, Élisabeth Borne, unveiled the site where the French Pavilion for the Expo 2020 Dubai was to be established. The following people were also in attendance: Najeeb Al-Ali, executive director of the 2020 Exhibition Office, Ludovic Pouille French ambassador to the United Arab Emirates and Joëlle Garriaud-Maylam, senator representing French citizens living abroad.

In her statements to the press, the Minister stressed France's commitment to an ecological transition and combatting global warming.

To organize France's participation to the Expo 2020 in the best possible way, Cofrex is seeking public and private sponsors in the digital and urban services fields. Several French companies and institutions have already announced that they are sponsoring the French Pavilion:

The other sponsors of the French Pavilion are: Orange, Renault, EDF, Lacoste, Accor, la Région Île-de-France, Suez, Akuo Energy, Axa, Schneider Electric, A.T. Kearney, Radio France, France Médias Monde, France Télévisions, INA, Médiatransports, JCDecaux, French Business Council Dubaï and Northern Emirates, IDATE DigiWorld, Business France, Paris Ile-de-France Capitale Économique, Alliance française Dubaï, IFF, la Guilde.

On 23 November 2018, the Member States of the BIE chose Japan as the host country for the World Expo in 2025. The event will be held in Osaka and the theme will be “Designing Future Society for Our Lives.”

The next Specialised Expo will be held in Buenos Aires (Argentina) in 2023. It will have the following theme: “Creative Industries in Digital Convergence”. This will be the first Specialised Expo organized by Cofrex.

Erik Linquier has served as the president of Cofrex since it was established in 2018. In this capacity, he has been appointed as the General Commissioner of the French Pavilion for the Expo 2020 in Dubai.

A graduate of Sciences Po and ENA, Erik Linquier began his career as an auditor at the Court of Auditors. He then joined the Ministry of Finance where he worked as an economic advisor at the French Embassy in Canada. He later worked as a French negotiator for European Union free trade agreements, and finally as Secretary-General for the French Treasury. He also held the position of Deputy Secretary-General at Enedis, the world's leading energy group. Until 2017, Erik Linquier was the executive director at Accenture.

The Compte rendu (full name Compte rendu au Roi, translated as " Report to the King ") was a document published in February 1781 by Jacques Necker, finance minister to King Louis XVI, in which he presented the state of France 's finances.

The Compte rendu came about in the context of an impending war and in the ascendancy of Jacques Necker as Director-General of Finances (having been unable to take up the traditional title of Controller General, being a Protestant). An outsider, in the words of Simon Schama, public opinion "saw Necker as a banking wizard: someone who could pull rabbits out of hats and money out of thin air." During Necker's time as Director-General, the ministry was dominated by Vergennes, with funding being required for France's ambition to assist the American revolutionaries in their struggle against the British.

The mere release of the Compte was eventful. Panckoucke and the royal printers in Paris printed an unprecedented 20,000 copies of the Compte, and even then the report had been sold out in weeks and was translated into Dutch, German, Danish, Italian and English. The Napoleonic Marshal Marmont claimed to have been taught to read from the Compte rendu.

The report stated that ordinary revenues in France were exceeding royal expenditures by over 10 million livres, i.e., that the French ministry was running a massive surplus. The health of the accounts as reported in the Compte rendu boosted confidence among lenders. As a consequence, the French government was able to raise new loans to pay for the costs of continued assistance in the American War of Independence on the side of the Americans.

However, Necker's reporting of the accounts obscured the financial problems which the country was facing. Namely, it did not report the "extraordinary" accounts, where the real cost of the war was to be found and which showed France in a significant deficit — between 1777 and 1781, Necker had raised 520 million livres in new loans. Had these been reported, lenders would have been unlikely to continue to lend money for the war.

Despite the initial popularity and importance of the Compte rendu, Necker's ascendancy in the ministry did not last. His financial reforms, including attempts to rein in the practice of selling venal offices, had created a large number of enemies intent on causing Necker's downfall. Equally, within the ministry itself, Necker had alienated other key ministers including Vergennes through pursuing his policies. In May 1781, Necker decided to test the King's confidence in him, requesting to be brought into the royal council despite the fact he was a Protestant. When both Vergennes and Jean Frédéric Phélypeaux, Count of Maurepas told Louis they would resign if he acceded to Necker's request, Necker resigned on May 19.

After Necker left his position as Director-General, there was a succession of ministers under whom the true financial situation came to light. The Compte rendu was also arguably a factor in causing resistance to attempts in 1787 by then-finance minister Calonne to reform the financial system. Calonne argued that the state finances were in an emergency and thus required overhaul to ensure greater efficiency in taxation. Calonne characterized the Compte as a fraud, using it as a scapegoat for the poor financial position in which the ministry now found itself, following the reversal of Necker's reforms. The Assembly of Notables, to whom the reforms were initially proposed, were skeptical of this explanation, possibly as a consequence of the belief that France remained in a strong position from the time of Necker.

In the study of the revolution, the Compte rendu has been criticised by modern historians and has been seen as an important link in the chain of events leading ultimately to the crisis that precipitated the events of 1789 and beyond. Equally, it has been argued that the Compte was responsible for popularizing the idea of good financial management as a classical political virtue and enshrining this idea in the Revolution.

Confit (/ k ɒ n f i /, French pronunciation: [ kɔ̃fi ] ; Occitan : Confisat) (from the French word confire, literally 'to preserve') is any type of food that is cooked slowly over a long period as a method of preservation.

Confit, as a cooking term, describes the process of cooking food in fat, whether it be grease or oil, at a lower temperature compared to deep frying. While deep frying typically takes place at temperatures of 160–230 °C (325–450 °F), confit preparations are done at a much lower temperature, such as an oil temperature of around 90 °C (200 °F), or sometimes even cooler. The term is usually used in modern cuisine to mean long, slow cooking in fat at low temperatures, many having no element of preservation, such as in dishes like confit potatoes.

For meat, this method requires the meat to be salted as part of the preservation process. After salting and cooking in fat, confit can last for several months or years when sealed and stored in a cool, dark place. Confit is a specialty of southwestern France.

The word comes from the French verb confire (to preserve), which in turn comes from the Latin word (conficere), meaning "to do, to produce, to make, to prepare." The French verb was first applied in medieval times to fruits cooked and preserved in sugar.

Fruit confit is candied fruit (whole fruit, or pieces thereof) preserved in sugar. The fruit must be fully infused with sugar to its core; larger fruit takes considerably longer than smaller ones to candy. Thus, while small fruit such as cherries are confits whole, it is quite rare to see whole large fruit, such as melon confits since the time and energy involved in producing large fruit confits makes them quite expensive.

Confit of goose (confit d'oie) or duck (confit de canard) is usually prepared from the legs of the bird. The meat is salted and seasoned with herbs and slowly cooked submerged in its own rendered fat (never to exceed 85 °C [185 °F]), in which it is then preserved by allowing it to cool and storing it in the fat. Turkey and pork may be treated in the same manner. Meat confit is a specialty of the southwest of France (Toulouse, Dordogne, and other areas) and is used in dishes such as cassoulet. Confit preparations originated as a means of preserving meat without refrigeration.

In a restaurant context, confit is usually served after further preparation. Whole confit leg is baked to crisp the skin or added to a casserole-type dish. Confit duck leg is used to make rillettes.

The traditional meat for confit includes waterfowl such as goose and duck, and pork. Duck gizzards are also commonly cooked in the confit method. Varying forms of this delicacy thrive throughout southern France.

"Confit country" is the area of Occitan France, where goose fat is used for cooking, as opposed to olive oil, which is used in Provence, where olives were plentiful and thus cheap.

Confit country is divided roughly into regions where one type of meat predominates the confit preparations. Goose confit is associated with the Béarn and Basque regions with their classic specialties of cassoulet and garbure, hearty and earthy dishes of confit and beans. Saintonge and Brantôme feature duck confit, often with potatoes and truffles.

Non-waterfowl meats are frequently treated to the confit process but are not classically considered true confits. The French refer only to duck and goose confits as true confits; other meats poached in duck or goose fat are considered en confit ("in confit"). For example, chicken cooked in goose fat is called poulet en confit. Pork is often confit and shredded to create rillettes.

Italian cooking uses several "condiment confits", such as onion confit, chili confit, and garlic confit.

Confit byaldi (French pronunciation: [ kɔ̃fi bjaldi ]) is a variation on the traditional French dish ratatouille by the French chef Michel Guérard.

The name is a play on the Turkish dish " İmam bayıldı ", which is a stuffed eggplant.

The original ratatouille recipe has the vegetables fried before baking. Since at least 1976, some French chefs have prepared the ratatouille vegetables in thin slices instead of the traditional rough-cut. Michel Guérard, in his book founding cuisine minceur (1976), recreated lighter versions of the traditional dishes of nouvelle cuisine. His recipe, confit bayaldi, differed from ratatouille by not frying the vegetables, removing peppers and adding mushrooms.

American celebrity chef Thomas Keller first wrote about a dish he called "byaldi" in his 1999 book The French Laundry Cookbook. Keller's variation of Guérard's added two sauces: a tomato and pepper sauce at the bottom (piperade), and a vinaigrette at the top. He served as food consultant to the Pixar film Ratatouille, allowing its producer, Brad Lewis, to shadow for two days in the kitchen of his restaurant, the French Laundry. Lewis asked Keller how he would cook ratatouille if the most famous food critic in the world were to visit his restaurant. Keller decided he would make the ratatouille in confit byaldi form, and fan the vegetable rounds accordion-style with a palette knife.

According to Thomas Keller's recipe, a piperade is made of peeled, finely chopped, and reduced peppers, yellow onions, tomatoes, garlic, and herbs. The piperade is spread thinly in a baking tray or casserole dish, then layered on top with evenly sized, thinly sliced rounds of zucchini, yellow squash, Japanese eggplant, and roma tomatoes, covered in parchment paper, then baked slowly for several hours to steam the vegetables. The parchment is removed so that the vegetables roast, acquiring additional flavor through caramelization. To serve, the piperade is formed into a small mound, and the rounds arranged in a fanned-out pattern to cover the piperade base. A balsamic vinaigrette is drizzled on the plate, which may be garnished.

La Confrérie de la Chaîne des Rôtisseurs (French pronunciation: [ la kɔ̃fʁeʁi d(ə) la ʃɛːn de ʁotisœʁ ]) is an international gastronomic society founded in Paris in 1950. It is one of the oldest gastronomic societies in the world.

The organization is named after the French Royal Guild of Goose Roasters, whose authority gradually expanded to the roasting of all poultry, meat, and game, and which disbanded in the late 1700s.

The organization takes its name from a historic organization of French culinary guilds.

The written history of the guild of " Les Oyers " or "Goose Roasters" has been traced back to 1248. At that time, King Louis IX assigned Étienne Boileau, the Provost of Paris, with the task of bringing order into the organization of trades and guilds, developing young apprentices and improving the technical knowledge of guild members. He gathered the charters of more than 100 of these trades, among them the Goose Roasters.

Over the years, the activities and privileges of the Goose Roasters Guild were extended to preparing and selling all kinds of meat, including poultry and venison.

In 1509, during the reign of King Louis XII, some new statutes were introduced, which resulted in the change of the name of the guild to "Rôtisseurs" and the restriction of its activities to poultry, game birds, lamb and venison. In 1610, under King Louis XIII, the guild was granted a royal charter and its own coat of arms.

For over four centuries, the "Confrérie", or brotherhood of the Roasters, cultivated and developed culinary art and high standards of professionalism and quality—standards befitting the splendor of the "Royal Table"—until the guild system collapsed in the 18th century during the French Revolution.

The name was revived in Paris in 1950 by a group of friends interested in food and wine. Since forming, the society has established bailliages, or chapters, internationally. As of 2022 the organization had bailliages in 80 countries.

Local bailliages host dinners for members. Membership is by invitation. In the United States, first year membership dues in 2016 ranged to $625, including a $275 induction fee. The original organization and most current chapters do not require members to be culinary professionals. Members receive ribbons designating their type and level of membership at the induction ceremony and may earn pins, medallions, and other indications of their service and participation in bailliage events.

La Chaîne des Rôtisseurs organizes a cooking competition for young chefs under 27, the Jeunes Chefs Rôtisseurs, sponsored by a professional Chaîne member.

The competition is a "black box" competition, where the competitors do not know ahead of time the ingredients they will use. Competitors have 30 minutes to write a menu and three and a half hours to prepare a three-course dinner for four people.

The organization also organizes competitions for young sommeliers, the Jeunes Sommeliers.

In the USA only, chapters also present Brillat awards, named for gastronome Jean Anthelme Brillat-Savarin, to local chefs.

The Congress of the French Parliament (French : Congrès du Parlement français) is the name given to the body created when both houses of the present-day French Parliament — the National Assembly and the Senate — meet at the Palace of Versailles to vote on revisions to the Constitution or to listen to an address by the President of the French Republic.

Historically, during the Third Republic, the reunion of both houses of the French Parliament — the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate — was called the National Assembly (Assemblée nationale) and gathered in Versailles to elect the President of France and to amend the Constitution. During the Fourth Republic, the Congress of the French Parliament was the reunion of the National Assembly and the Council of the Republic (Conseil de la République); it used to gather to elect the President of France. The last president elected this way was René Coty who was elected on 23 December 1953.

The Congress is composed of senators and deputies who come together in the meeting hall (salle des séances) of the southern wing of the Château of Versailles. Its officers and its president are those of the National Assembly.

According to Article 89 of the Constitution of the Fifth Republic, revisions to the constitution may be instigated by either deputies or senators (this is called "proposition de révision"), or by the President of the Republic through proposals submitted by the Prime Minister (this is called "projet de révision").

The normal procedure of constitutional revision is through national referendum. However, in the case of "projet de révision", the President may turn to a more flexible and less demanding procedure. The constitution stipulates that However, a Government Bill to amend the Constitution shall not be submitted to referendum where the President of the Republic decides to submit it to Parliament convened in Congress; the Government Bill to amend the Constitution shall then be approved only if it is passed by a three-fifths majority of the votes cast. The Bureau of the Congress shall be that of the National Assembly.

The Congress traditionally takes place in Versailles.

Since the Constitutional revision of 2008, Article 18 states that the President "... may take the floor before Parliament convened in Congress for this purpose. His statement may give rise, in his absence, to a debate without vote." This Congress, like the Constitutional one, is convened in Versailles.

The first President to use this new Constitutional right was Nicolas Sarkozy on 22 June 2009. The previous presidential speech to France's parliament was in 1873, before lawmakers banned the practice to protect the separation of powers and keep the president in check.

François Hollande made a speech to Congress under this provision on 16 November 2015 regarding the November 2015 Paris attacks.

Emmanuel Macron made a speech to Congress on July 3, 2017 and plans to do it every year.

The meeting of the French Congress is the occasion for the creation of a temporary post office and a special cancellation mark. Mail sent from this office is highly sought after by stamp collectors who often ask their senator or deputies to send them mail from the Congress.

Conseil d'arrondissement (transl. Arrondissement council) can have different meanings depending on the country.

In France, conseil d'arrondissement can refer to one of the former departmental arrondissement councils or to one of the municipal arrondissement councils (in Paris, Lyon or Marseille).

Each French department is subdivided into arrondissements, each having its sub-prefecture and being headed by a sub-prefect. During the Third Republic, the arrondissement council was formed by councilors elected from the cantons, using a two-round majoritarian voting system, similar to that used for general councilors. The council had to have at least nine councilors, corresponding to nine cantons. If there were not enough cantons, the most populated cantons were divided into two constituencies. Councilors were elected for six years, with half being renewed every three years.

Like general councilors, candidates had to be at least 25 years old to be elected. Arrondissement councilors were part of the electoral college that elected senators, along with deputies, general councilors, and delegates from municipal councils. Their functions were unpaid and could be combined with a parliamentary mandate. Their responsibilities were limited, primarily involving the allocation of direct taxes.

The arrondissement councils were suspended by the law of October 12, 1940, and were never reactivated.

Three cities in France—Lyon, Marseille, and Paris—have municipal arrondissements. The arrondissement council (or sector council in Marseille, where a sector includes several arrondissements) is elected according to the voting system for municipalities with more than 1,000 inhabitants. One-third of the elected members also sit on the city's municipal council, while the other two-thirds serve only on the arrondissement council. The council elects an arrondissement mayor from among its members who also serve on the municipal council.

The functions of the arrondissement council and the mayor are as follows:

In Quebec, large cities are divided into arrondissements, which are managed by arrondissement councils composed of local elected officials. Each arrondissement has a president or mayor and councilors elected within the arrondissement.

Arrondissement councils are responsible for urban planning, fire prevention, waste management, local economic development support, parks, sports and cultural facilities, road maintenance, and permits.

Arrondissement councils in Senegal were established by Law No. 96-09 of March 22, 1996. According to Article 2, arrondissement councilors are elected by direct universal suffrage.

In France, the Conseil d'État ([ kɔ̃sɛj deta ] ; Council of State) is a governmental body that acts both as legal adviser to the executive branch and as the supreme administrative court (one of the two branches of the French judiciary system). Established in 1799 by Napoleon as a successor to the King's Council (Conseil du Roi), it is located in the Palais-Royal in Paris and is primarily made up of top-level legal officers. The Vice President of the Council of State ranks as the most important civil servant in France.

Members of the Council of State are part of a Grand Corps of the French State (Grand corps de l'État). The Council of State mainly recruits from among the top-ranking students graduating from the École nationale d'administration, which has been renamed as the Institut national du service public.

A General Session of the Council of State is presided over by the Prime Minister or, in their absence, the Minister of Justice. However, since the real presidency of the Council is held by the Vice-President, the Vice President of the Council of State usually presides at all but the most ceremonial assemblies. This is also done for obvious reasons pertaining to the separation of powers.

Other members of the Council include, in decreasing order of importance:

The Vice-President of Council of State is appointed by Order-in-Council on the recommendation of the Minister of Justice and is selected from among the Council's department heads or councillors ordinary. Division heads are similarly appointed and selected from among the councillors ordinary.

Councillors ordinary, masters of requests, and senior masters are appointed based on seniority from the preceding rank. Appointees from outside the Council may include administrative law judges or may come from outside the justice system. Masters are recruited from among the graduates of France's National Administration Academy. The Council sits in the Palais Royal located in Paris.

The Council is divided into 7 divisions:

The Council of State originates from the 13th century, by which time the King's Court (Curia regis) had split into three sections, one of which was the King's Council (Curia in consilium, later Conseil du roi), which too broke up into three distinct parts: the Conseil secret 'Privy Council', the Conseil privé 'Private Council', and Conseil des finances 'Council of Finances'. Reorganized under Louis XIV into two major groupings, the Conseil d'État privé, finances et direction was the direct ancestor of the Council of State. It brought together legal advisors and experts to advise the King on claims against the Crown. Officially established in 1557, this was the largest of the King's Councils made up of France's High Chancellor, lords of peerage, Ministers and Secretaries of State, the Comptroller-General, 30 Councillors of State, 80 masters of requests, and the Intendants of Finance. The judicial portion of the Council was known as the Conseil d'État privé or Conseil des parties.

French kings had the power to dispense justice and hand down judgments as the court of last resort and delegated this judicial power to royal courts and parlements. But the French king still retained the power to override them at will. Specifically, French kings maintained their privilege to decide major issues and hand down judgment when administrative acts were in dispute. The judgments of the King's Council of State were regarded as being issued under the King's residual proper jurisdiction (justice retenue), that is, the sovereign's reserved power to dispense justice in certain matters. Legal advisors also assisted the King in developing new laws and, by delegated jurisdiction, directly exercised sovereign rights (jura regalia).

For more on French government administration during the Old Regime, see Ancien Régime in France.

The French Consulate government established the current Council of State in 1799 as a judicial body to adjudicate claims against the State and assist in the drafting of important laws. The First Consul (later Emperor) presided over Council sessions, and the Council performed many of the functions of a Cabinet. After the Bourbon Restoration, the Council was retained as an administrative court but without its former prominence. Its role was more precisely defined by an 1872 Act of Parliament.

The Council of State was originally a court of first instance and last instance, but since the creation of the tribunaux administratifs [ fr ] in 1953 and the cours administratives d’appel [ fr ] in 1987, it has increasingly become a supervisory court, with a role as an appeal court in a small number of areas. The Council of State hears appeals on questions of law from lower courts and gives advisory opinions on the law on reference from lower courts. Below it are 42 administrative courts of first instance (tribunaux administratifs) and 8 administrative courts of appeal (cours administratives d'appel).

Certain types of statutory instruments must be examined by the Council and receive its advisory approval, including:

The Council's advisory workload is divided between its administrative sections with respect to the ministry or department affected by the government order.

The Council acts as the supreme court of appeal for administrative law courts. It hears both claims against national-level administrative decisions (notably orders, rules, regulations and decisions of the executive branch) and appeals from lower administrative courts. The Council's decisions are final and unappealable.

While strictly speaking the Council of State is not a court, it functions as a judicial body by adjudicating suits and claims against administrative authorities. Plaintiffs are represented by barristers drawn from the Senior Court bar whose members are licensed to argue cases before the Council and Court of Cassation ; any such barrister bears the title of Counsel at Senior Court (Avocat aux Conseils).

The Council hears cases against decisions of the national government, notably government orders, ministerial rules and regulations, judgments handed down by committees, commissions, and boards with nationwide jurisdiction, as well as suits concerning regional and EU electoral matters.

The Council has judged that such acts are restricted to:

In this role, the Council provides a powerful check on the actions of the executive.

The Council of State has appellate jurisdiction over local election judgments from any of the 37 administrative courts.

It acts as a final court of cassation for decisions originating from any of the eight appellate administrative courts, meaning that it hears cases in which the plaintiff argues that the appellate court ignored or misinterpreted the law. Should it decide that the original appellate court took the wrong decision, the Council of State will in most situations transfer the case to a different administrative court of appeal, to be re-judged. However, in the interest of swifter decision-making and correct interpretation of the law (bonne administration de la justice), it also has the right to rule on the case without transferring it, thus acting as an appellate court of last resort (jugement en dernier ressort).

Like nearly all French courts, the Council's court system is inquisitorial, and proceedings are initiated by a statement of claim detailing the factual background of the case and why the appellant should be granted relief. The Council then begins a formal investigation, asking the appellee, i.e., the government or a government agency or office, to satisfy the Council with a detailed statement of defense. Burden of proof does not lie with the plaintiff ; instead, the Council decides whether or not the appellant has cause to bring suit and whether the government was in error if information provided by the appellant is sufficient to locate previously undisclosed evidence. Of course, both parties may submit additional pleadings and information until the case is ready for final judgment.

The formation of judgement depends on the importance of the case, for the jurisprudence and the interest of the law. All of the formations belong to the Administrative Claims department.

The smaller cases (without new legal issues) are treated by one chamber (known as under-departments, i.e. sous-section, prior to their reorganization in 2016). There are 10 chambers. The bigger cases are attributed to united chambers (chambres réunies), a configuration made up of two chambers, although, for some important fiscal cases, three or four chambers can be concerned, coalescing into an ad hoc formation, the "full fiscal" (plénière fiscale) chamber. The more important cases are for the administrative claims department judgement formation (Section). Only the very important cases, with hard, new and/or important legal issues are concerned. There are about between 20 and 40 cases per year into this specific formation, which includes the president of the ten chambers, the three assistant-presidents of the administrative claims department and the president of the department, which, in addition to the magistrate responsible of the investigation about the case, reaches 15 members.

The major cases are resolved by the administrative claims assembly (Assemblée du contentieux). All the presidents of departments are there, under the presidency of the Vice-President of the Council of State. Less than 10 cases per year are concerned.

All the cases, even the ones eventually resolved by the Assemblée du contentieux, are first studied by a chamber.

Although, as is the general rule in French administrative law, the procedure is written, one of its highlights are the oral conclusion of the rapporteur public (public magistrate), giving his personal vision of the case, totally impartial and free, on a pure legal point of view. Reading the conclusions from past cases is often useful to understand the mindset of the judges and the reason of the solution given to the case. Nonetheless, and unlike in common law jurisdictions operating under stare decisis, those former judgements do not constitute a binding precedent for French judges, who remain free to adapt or overturn them (in a so-called renversement de jurisprudence).

Since an order of 2009 (n° 2009–14, 7 January 2009), there is a possibility for the parties to speak after the rapporteur public' s conclusions. Lawyers use this possibility only for major cases, when it can make a significant difference (e.g. for the Hoffmann-Gleman case – 16 February 2009 – concerning the compensation of the daughter of a deported Jew during the World War II, involving the French state's responsibility).

In some cases, there may be some confusion as to whether a case should be heard before an administrative law court or judicial court, in which case the Court of Jurisdictional Disputes, or tribunal des conflits, made up of an even number of State councillors and Supreme Judicial Court justices, is convened to decide to whom the matter shall be vested. Until 2015, this Court was chaired by the Minister of Justice, whose vote would break any potential tie. As of 2015, court members elect a president amongst themselves for 3 years, and, in case of a tie, the court's composition can be modified to include several more judges.

Exercising judicial review over almost all acts of the executive branch, the Council of State's judgments may be of considerable importance, often not for the actual case judged, but for their importance in shaping legal interpretation. While France is a civil law country and there is no formal rule of precedent (stare decisis), lower courts follow the jurisprudence constante doctrine with regard to the Council of State. The Council's major rulings are collected into law reports and commented on by scholars; the Council's official website carries a list of comments on important decisions. The Council has shaped its own legal doctrine which consists mostly of principles deduced from cases but incorporates considerable jurisprudence derived from statutes.

Rulings are named for the moving parties (appellants) in the cases and under highly formal courtesy titles. Men's names used to be preceded by Sieur, women's names by Dame or Demoiselle, and widows were referred to as Dame veuve.

About 10,000 rulings per year are given by the Council of State.

The most important rulings are collected in a publication called "G.A.J.A" (i.e. Les Grands Arrêts de la Jurisprudence Administrative – The major rulings of the administrative jurisprudence -), published by Dalloz editions and written by some of the most influential authors or judges of the time in France (e.g. Bruno Genevois or Prosper Weil). The GAJA explains about 120 rulings, from 1873 to now, and quotes several hundreds of other important rulings.

The Council of State is linked to the French Institute of Administrative Sciences (IFSA). The vice-president of the Council of State is the president of the IFSA and its main members are state counselors. In 2009, the Council of State hosted IFSA's annual conference which was organized on the theme: "public security: partnership between public power and private sector."

The Conseil du roi (French pronunciation: [ kɔ̃sɛj dy ʁwa ] ; ' King's Council'), also known as the Royal Council, is a general term for the administrative and governmental apparatus around the King of France during the Ancien Régime designed to prepare his decisions and to advise him. It should not be confused with the role and title of a " Conseil du Roi ", a type of public prosecutor in the French legal system at the same period.

One of the established principles of the French monarchy was that the king could not act without the advice of his council. Under Charles V, it was put forward that the king made decisions only after "good and careful deliberation" (French: bonne et mûre délibération), and this principle was maintained by his successors; the closing formula of royal acts "le roi en son conseil" expressed this deliberative aspect. Even during the period of French absolutism, the expression " car tel est notre bon plaisir " ("as such is our pleasure") applied to royal decisions made with consultation.

The administration of the French state in the early modern period went through a long evolution, as a truly administrative apparatus – relying on old nobility, newer chancellor nobility (" noblesse de robe ") and administrative professionals – replaced the feudal clientele system. The exact divisions and names of these councils varied over time.

The kings of France traditionally always sought the advice of their entourage (vassals, clerics, etc.) before making important decisions (in the early Middle Ages, this entourage was sometimes called the familia), but only in the 12th century did this deliberation take the form of a specific institution called the King's Court (Latin : Curia Regis).

The council had only a consultational role: the final decision was always the king's. Although jurists frequently praised (especially in the 16th century) the advantages of consultative government (with the agreement of his counsellors, the king could more easily impose the most severe of his decisions, or he could have his most unpopular decisions blamed on his counsellors), mainstream legal opinion never held that the king was bound by the decisions of his council. The opposite was however put forward by the States General of 1355–1358, and by the Huguenots and by the Catholic League in the second half of the 16th century.

The council's purview concerned all matters pertaining to government and royal administration, both in times of war and of peace. In his council, the king received ambassadors, signed treaties, appointed administrators and gave them instructions (called, from the 12th century on, mandements), elaborated on the laws of the realm (called ordonnances). The council also served as a supreme court and rendered royal justice on those matters that the king reserved for himself (so-called " justice retenue ") or decided to discuss personally.

Council meetings, initially irregular, took on a regular schedule which became daily from the middle of the 15th century.

In addition to the King's Council, the consultative governing of the country also depended on other intermittent and permanent institutions, such as the States General, the Parlements (local appellate courts) and the Provincial Estates. The Parliament of Paris – as indeed all of the sovereign courts of the realm – was itself born out of the King's Council: originally a consultative body of the Curia Regis, later (in the thirteenth century) endowed with judicial functions, the Parliament was separated from the King's Council in 1254.

The composition of the King's Council changed constantly over the centuries and according to the needs and desires of the king.

The feudal aristocracy would maintain great control over the king's council up until the 14th and 15th centuries. The most important positions in the court were those of the Great Officers of the Crown of France, headed by the constable and the chancellor. Certain kings were unable to reduce their importance (Louis X, Philip VI, John II, Charles VI), while others were more successful (Charles V, Louis XI, Francis I). In the 16th century, those "grands" with administrative or governmental competencies (religious dignitaries, presidents of provincial courts, etc.) were called to the council by a special certificate (or " brevet ") and were termed " conseillers à brevet ".

Over the centuries, the number of jurists (or " légistes "), generally educated by the université de Paris, steadily increased as the technical aspects of the matters studied in the council mandated specialized counsellers. Coming from the lesser nobility or the bourgeoisie, these jurists (whose positions sometimes gave them or their heirs nobility, as the so-called noblesse de robe or chancellor nobles) helped in preparing and putting into legal form the king's decisions. They formed the early elements of a true civil service and royal administration which would – because of their permanence – provide a sense of stability and continuity to the royal council, despite its many reorganizations. These counsellors, called conseillers d'État from the reign of Henry III on, were aided in their tasks by the maître des requêtes.

In their attempts at greater efficiency, the kings tried to reduce the number of counsellors or to convoke "reduced councils". Charles V had a council of 12 members. Under Charles VIII and Louis XII the king's council was dominated by members of twenty or so noble or rich families. Under Francis I the total number of councillors increased to roughly 70 individuals (the old nobility was proportionally more important than in the previous century).

The most important matters of state were discussed in a smaller council of 6 or fewer members (3 members in 1535, 4 in 1554), while the larger council was consulted for judicial or financial affairs. Francis I was sometimes criticized for relying too heavily on a small number of advisors, while Henry II, Catherine de' Medici, and their sons found themselves frequently unable to negotiate between the opposing Guise and Montmorency families in their council. In periods of crisis, the number of members of the Council tended to increase: 100 councillors under Charles IX, during the worst moments of the Wars of Religion.

From 1661 to the French Revolution, royal administration was divided between the various sections of the King's Council (roughly 130 people) and a small group of ministers and secretaries of state. The royal governmental councils (see below) were the most important and were presided by the king personally. Despite popular opinion, the king did in fact listen to his counsellors and often adopted the opinion of the majority: according to Saint-Simon (whose distrust of Louis XIV makes this statement all the more believable), Louis XIV only went against the advice of his council six times.

Over time, the council began progressively to divide itself into separate subcouncils according to the affairs to be discussed. As early as the 13th century, one can distinguish a small council of a few members – the Conseil étroit ("narrow council") or Conseil secret – and a much larger council which came thus to be called the Grand Conseil.

Under Charles VII, a subcouncil appeared to handle particularly contentious judicial affairs. An ordinance by Charles VIII in 1497, and reaffirmed by Louis XII in 1498, removed this body from the king's council and established it as an autonomous court with the institutional name Grand Conseil. The Grand Conseil became thus a superior court of justice (that the king did not attend) with its own legal and judicial personnel and with a purview over contentious affairs submitted directly to the king (affairs of " justice retenue ", or "justice reserved" for the king). This removal of the Grand Conseil from the council apparatus permitted the remaining sections of the council to focus on political and administrative affairs, but the need for further subsections continued.

Francis I created a Conseil des Affaires – a small informal group reuniting the chancellor, a secretary of commandments and several other close confidants – to deal with political and diplomatic issues, including war. The remaining large council (of 50–60 members) took the name of Conseil ordinaire ("Regular Council") or Conseil d'État ("Council of State"), but lost in its prestige, all the more so given that the king no longer regularly attended its sessions; in his absence the large council was presided by the chancellor.

Beginning in 1560, a separate council was created to handle financial affairs: the Conseil des finances ; around 1600 this council was reunited with the state council as the Conseil d'État et des finances. Further sections followed for judicial affairs (the Conseil d'État privé or Conseil des parties) and for notices and administrative reports from the provinces (the Conseil des Dépêches); these are detailed below.

Despite these divisions into subcouncils, from a judicial point of view these various sections were all aspects of the same Council, and the decisions of the various sections were all considered to reflect the king's wishes. Even when the king was not in fact present as his councils, there were still considered to be presided over by him, and only the closing formula of their decisions changed: the expression " le Roi en son Conseil " was used when the king was not present at the meeting, the expression " le Roi étant en son Conseil " when he was.

The subcouncils of the King's Council can be generally grouped as "governmental councils", "financial councils" and "judicial and administrative councils". With the names and subdivisions of the 17th – 18th century, these subcouncils were:

The King's Council also included various commissions and bureaus. In addition to the above administrative institutions, the king was also surrounded by an extensive personal and court retinue (royal family, valets, guards, honorific officers), regrouped under the name Maison du Roi.

At the death of Louis XIV, the Regent Philippe II, Duke of Orléans abandoned several of the above administrative structures, most notably the Secretaries of State, which were replaced by councils. This system of government, called the Polysynody, lasted from 1715 to 1718.

Governmental councils were always presided by the King in person. Decisions made in these councils were called arrêts en commandement.

These councils met in the King's Apartment, in a room called the Cabinet du Conseil (present in all royal residences). Members were informed of meeting times by the king and the cabinet bailiffs, and at the beginning of the session the doors of the cabinet were closed and were guarded from outside, to prevent any interruptions or spies, as the meetings were secret. The meetings took place around an oval table with the king at one end, seated in an armchair; all other members were seated on folding stools (these folding chairs were symbolic of the council's itinerant nature, as the council was held to follow the king wherever he went).

The king opened sessions by raising questions or by giving the floor to one of the members. Each member added to the discussion in the ascending order of their rank. Discussions concluded with a vote of the council's opinion (in the same ascending order; the vote was called " aller aux opinions "). In the end, the king made the final decision. Louis XV followed the same general rules but frequently interrupted discussion when it seemed to be going in a direction he disagreed with, rather than choose to go against the final opinion of the council. Meetings were typically longer than two hours and could go far longer.

Known variously as the Conseil des affaires, Conseil d'en haut ("Upper Council") or Conseil d'État ("State Council"), this was the most important of the royal councils and discussed the most important affairs of state. It was more or less the equivalent of today's Council of Ministers. The name Conseil d'en haut by which it was known from 1643 on (replacing the " Conseil des Affaires " of the 16th century) came from the fact that the council met in the "Cabinet of Council" on the second floor of the Château of Versailles next to the king's chamber.

Before the reign of Louis XIV, it was an extremely small council bringing together the first minister (when one existed), the chancellor, the superintendent of finances, one secretary of state and the ministers of state (counsellors appointed by the king). The council's purview was very large. At the beginning of Louis XIV's reign, the number of members was increased: in addition to the ministers of state, the council included members of the royal family, princes of the royal bloodline (" princes du sang ") and dukes with peerage (" duc et pair ").

From 1661 on, Louis XIV reorganized the council and eliminated the use of regular or open membership to its meetings. Henceforth, no one, not even the crown prince (the "dauphin"), could attend without an invitation, and attendance to the council meetings was given on a per-meeting basis with members needing to be reinvited to attend any subsequent meetings. The most frequent members of the council were the secretaries of state. In the beginning, Louis XIV admitted only three members regularly to the council (Michel le Tellier, Hugues de Lionne, Jean-Baptiste Colbert), and later increased this to five members. Louis XV increased it to 7 members and Louis XVI increased it to eight members.

During the reign of Louis XV, the council, commonly called the Conseil d'État, was generally focused on foreign affairs, naval and military affairs and, during times of war, military operations.

The council was held on Sundays and Wednesdays, but additional meetings were frequent, especially in times of war. In all, the council met on an average 120 to 130 times a year, and more in some years.

The Conseil des Dépêches ("Council of Messages") oversaw the notices and administrative reports from the provinces sent by the governors and intendants, and thus dealt with domestic affairs coming under the purview of all four Secretaries of State. Created in 1650, it was originally presided by the Chancellor, but the King began to preside it himself from 1661 on. This council was made up of ten to twelve members: the first minister (when one existed), the crown prince, the chancellor, the ministers of state and the secretaries of state, the contrôleur général des finances. Other councillors of state or maîtres des requêtes attended according to the issues discussed.

The council met originally twice a week. Under Louis XIV, the schedule was slowed down, as the king had gotten into the habit of discussing these matters with his one-on-one meetings with his ministers; decisions taken were presented as " arrêts en commandement " even if they had not been officially deliberated in council.

Under Louis XV, the Conseil des Dépêches was very active and became, for domestic affairs, the equivalent of the Conseil d'En-haut for foreign affairs. The council met every Saturday, and sometimes on Friday, but also came together for additional meetings, some for several days in a row, as was the case during the Fronde parlementaire under Louis XV. In this way, the council met fifty times a year, and more than seventy times a year during periods of crisis.

The Conseil de Conscience was created in 1720 by the Regent Philippe II, Duke of Orléans to oversee implementation of the clauses of the papal bull Unigenitus. The council was kept after 1723 and met on Thursdays. Very busy until 1730, this council saw its influence decrease with the rise to power of Cardinal de Fleury, and the council disappeared finally in 1733. Presided by the king, it brought together the first minister (when one existed) and several cardinals and bishops, but no other ministers.

The Conseil royal des finances was created by Louis XIV in September 1661 to help the king oversee the functions of Superintendent of Finances after the removal from power of Nicolas Fouquet. Before 1661, fiscal matters were treated in the Conseil de direction des finances, created in 1615, under Louis XIII.

The Council of Finances' purview was large; it dealt with the royal budget, taxation, industry, commerce, money, contracts to the Farmers General, etc. In this council, the overall size of the taille was set, and financial and taxation disputes were judged.

The council was made up of the king, the chef du conseil des finances (an honorary, but well-paid, post), the crown prince, occasionally the chancellor, the contrôleur général des finances and (generally) two of his counsellors, and the intendants of finance.

Until 1715, the council met twice a week. After this date, financial decisions were made by the king in one-on-one meetings with the contrôleur général des finances, and the council merely rubber-stamped their decisions without much debate. Under the Regent Philippe II, Duke of Orléans and then under Louis XV, the council met every Tuesday. From around 1728–1730, its rhythm slowed to less than once a week, and during the years 1730–1740, it met only once every two weeks.

The Conseil royal de commerce was created in 1664 as an equivalent to the Council of Finances, but it disappeared in 1676, and reappeared in 1730. This council was never fully able to stand out from the other councils and its influence was minor. In 1787, it was reunited with the Council of Finances.

The divisions of the King's Council concerning contentious legal, administrative and judicial affairs were generally presided by the Chancellor of France, and the king himself rarely attended their meetings, although all acts of these councils were considered to derive from him and the chancellor was considered the "king's mouthpiece" (la bouche du Roi).

The Council of State and Finances (Conseil d'État et des finances or Conseil ordinaire des finances) was created in the beginning of the 17th century with various governmental oversight functions, including over financial matters. The council lost in its prestige during the reign of Louis XIII and ended as a supreme court for legal disputes concerning royal administration and appeals on decisions from sovereign courts concerning finances and taxation. The council had the same members as the Conseil privé (see below), but the contrôleur général des finances played a greater role.

The council began to fall out of use in 1665 and it disappeared entirely between 1680 and 1690. With the chancellor removed from the direction of financial affairs, Colbert was able to replace the maîtres des requêtes in the council by his own intendants of finances, and financial decisions were de facto decided in the collegial atmosphere at the Control General and in the Conseil des finances, thus dispensing of debates in the Conseil d'État et des finances.

By the late 17th century, the council's role as adjudicator in administrative disputes was subsumed by the Conseil d'État privé (see below).

Known variously as the Conseil privé or Conseil d'État privé, or Conseil des parties, the Privy Council was the main body for decisions on France's judicial system, and as such it was roughly the equivalent of today's Conseil d'État.

It was first created in 1557. With the Grand Conseil being a completely autonomous court of justice separated from the king's council, the need was seen for certain judicial affairs to be discussed and judged within the king's council, especially those in which the impartiality of the courts was called into question. These special session trials gave rise to a new section of the king's council overseeing contentious issues, which took the name Conseil privé ("Privy Council") or Conseil des parties ("Council of Parties", i.e. the party in a legal suit). In theory, the king exercised justice in this council with his regular counsellors, but in fact the council was presided by the chancellor and was furnished with a corps of legal personnel (the five presidents of the Parlement of Paris, the maîtres des requêtes who brought affairs before the court, lawyers and prosecutors who represented the parties).

The main area of jurisdiction of the Conseil privé was civil trials between individuals (especially in cases involving the prestigious families and possible conflicts of interest among parlementary judges) and conflicts of judicial or administrative jurisdiction. Like the Grand Conseil, the Privy Council acted as a supreme court, pronounced judgements on the various sovereign courts of the realm (including the parlements and the Grand Conseil), and provided final judicial review and interpretation of law (the process of so-called évocation), oversight of the judicial corps, and judged disputes on royal offices, church benefices and problems between Catholics and Protestants.

Before the late 17th century, the Conseil privé was solely a judicial council, but at that time it took over affairs of administrative disputes from the "Conseil d'État et des finances" (which ceased to exist as such). This new council, called the Conseil d'État privé, finances et direction, was divided into three sections which met separately: the Conseil des parties, the Grande direction des finances and the Petite direction des finances.

The king rarely attended the Privy Council. Louis XIV came occasionally at the start of this reign, but Louis XV only attended two meetings (in 1762 and 1766). The king's empty armchair symbolized his presence. The council was presided by the chancellor seated to the right of the royal chair.

The council was the largest of the royal councils, and was composed of the chancellor, princes of the royal bloodline (princes du sang), dukes with peerage (ducs et pairs), the ministers and secretaries of state, the contrôleur général des finances, the 30 councillors of state, the 80 maître des requêtes and the intendants of finance. In general however, only the counsellors of state, the maîtres des requêtes and (at times) the intendants of finances attended regularly. Meetings were composed of generally 40 or so members, and rarely more than 60 members.

The Privy Council met on Mondays in a special room, the salle du Conseil which was outside the King's apartment. At Versailles, this room was on the ground floor of the "Old Wing" and gave out on to the Marble Courtyard (Cour de Marbre) and the Prince's Courtyard. Counsellors sat on armchairs of black leather, while the maîtres des requêtes remained standing. After each session, the chancellor dined with the counsellors (called " Messieurs du Conseil "). The Privy Council was on vacation from October to the feast of Saint Martin. It held roughly 40 to 45 sessions per year and issued 350 to 400 acts.

Before coming before a judicial session, affairs were submitted to the council by a maître des requêtes and studied by a group of state counsellors. Special offices were created according to the matters discussed (there was thus a bureau of ecclesiastical affairs) or the type of judicial action requested (there was a bureau of "cassation" or appeals). In the case of matters concerning the acts of sovereign courts, the council generally began by asking the parlementary prosecutor or judge who had written the lower court decision to first present his reasons before the council.

These two regular commissions (commissions ordinaires) took over the purview of the Conseil d'État et des finances on fiscal legal disputes. They were composed of consellors of state and maîtres des requêtes. The Grand Direction was overseen by the chancellor and the Petite Direction by the chef du conseil des finances.

The Grande Direction was the direct successor to the Conseil de direction des finances (supra), but had a minor role and only met 6 to 12 times a year.

The Petite Direction consisted of roughly ten people and was created to prepare the work of the Grand Direction and to reduce its case load by judging the simplest of cases. It met irregularly, and disappeared around 1767.

Meetings of the King's Council were first planned by ministerial services, and then by the king with his secretaries and ministers. But for a time in the 18th century, agendas and meetings came to be planned in a committee called the "Committee of ministers", consisting of the members of the Conseil d'En-haut or of the Conseil des Dépêches meeting without the king. Although there had been antecedents of this committee during the reign of Louis XIV and the Regency, it became a regular institution in 1737 under the Cardinal de Fleury. These committees were held every Monday until the death of Cardinal Fleury.

Louis XV knew the risk of this committee, and in 1747 he mandated that the committee could not meet without his express permission, and generally to prepare decisions already decided on in council. In this way, meetings of the committee of ministers became far less frequent.

Under Henry IV and Louis XIII the administrative apparatus of the court and its councils was expanded and the proportion of the " noblesse de robe " increased, culminating in the following positions during the 17th century:

Royal administration in the provinces had been the role of the bailliages and sénéchaussées in the Middle Ages, but this declined in the early modern period, and by the end of the 18th century, the bailliages served only a judicial function. The main source of royal administrative power in the provinces in the 16th and early 17th centuries fell to the gouverneurs (who represented "the presence of the king in his province"), positions which had long been held by only the highest ranked families in the realm.

With the civil wars of the early modern period, the king increasing turned to more tractable and subservient emissaries, and this was the reason for the growth of the provincial intendants under Louis XIII and Louis XIV. Indendants were chosen from among the maître des requêtes. Intendants attached to a province had jurisdiction over finances, justice and policing.

The Conseil supérieur de l'audiovisuel (French: [ kɔ̃sɛj sypeʁjœʁ də lɔdjɔvizɥɛl ], lit. ' Superior Audiovisual Council '), abbreviated CSA, was a French institution created in 1989 whose role was to regulate the various electronic media in France, such as radio and television. The creation of the Haute Autorité de la Communication Audiovisuelle (High Authority for Audiovisual Communication) was a measure founded in the Socialist Party 's electoral program of 1981, called 110 Propositions for France.

The CSA replaced the Commission Nationale de la Communication et des Libertés (CNCL), which itself replaced the High Authority for Audiovisual Communication, created in 1982 to supervise the attribution of radio frequencies to the private radio sector, which was judged better than allowing the anarchic creation of the radios libres ("free radios"), mainly composed of amateurs and NGOs.

The CSA always acted after content was shown on a TV channel or heard on a radio, so it was not an instance of preventative censorship. Notably, the CSA asked the Government of France to forbid Al-Manar TV in 2005 because of charges of hate speech ; it also claimed that MED TV was close to the Kurdish PKK, on grounds not of "evidences" but of "concording elements".

On 24 September 2019, Franck Riester announced that the bill relating to audiovisual communication and cultural sovereignty in the digital age examined by the National Assembly in the first half of 2020 would include the merger of the CSA and HADOPI to form the Regulatory Authority for Audiovisual and Digital Communication (Autorité de régulation de la communication audiovisuelle et numérique ; ARCOM). The bill is put on hold until 8 April 2022 when it is presented to the Council of Ministers under the name "bill relating to the regulation and protection of access to cultural works in the digital age". The merger became effective on 1 January 2022.

The following pictograms are proposed to the different TV channels. Channels are responsible for displaying the right pictogram depending on the show and its time of broadcast. Note that –18 can be either non-pornographic (like the movie Ken Park) or pornographic.

In France, a Councillor of State (French : conseiller d'État ， pronounced [ kɔ̃sɛje deta ]) is a high-level government official of administrative law in the French Council of State.

Councillors of State were among the highest dignitaries of the French monarchy during the Ancien Régime. Being thirty in total, the Councillors of State included three clergymen, three from the old nobility (nobility "of the sword" or d'épée), and twenty-four from the noblesse de robe, or "administrative nobility". Ninety percent of the Councillors of State de robe were promoted from among the Masters of Requests, while the rest were chosen from among judges of the prerogative courts ; often they had prior experience working as intendants. In 1789, their number was increased to 42: 25 full-time Councillors ordinary, 16 part-time consellors who functioned on a semester schedule, and the eldest of the Masters of Requests.

Their title gave them great power, and in the administrative hierarchy they were considered directly below Princes of the royal family ("princes du sang"), cardinals, and Dukes or Peers ("Ducs et pairs"). The pay was minimal, i.e., 3,300 to 5,100 French pounds per year, depending on the duration of service, but could be augmented by an additional 4,000 pounds per year through pensions or by service on financial commissions.

Councillors held commissions (i.e. not purchased and hereditary offices) appointed by the king by letters patent. The prestigious position conferred immediate nobility on the commission-holder, if not already a member of the nobility. Their official job description stated that they were to be "consulted by the King on any matter and on any occasion as the King saw fit". In practice, their role was a combination of the duties of present-day Councillors of State and justices of the French Supreme Court.

Commissions were not limited by age, although the King generally appointed men of lawful age. René-Louis de Voyer de Paulmy d'Argenson became Councillor of State at the age of 24 and Marc-Pierre de Voyer de Paulmy d'Argenson at 22. Councillors often combined their function with other administrative positions such as ambassador, President of the High Court, and so forth

All the Councillors of State sat on the King's Council of State ("Conseil privé", "Conseil des parties" or "Conseil d'État"). As part of the judicial system and officially established in 1557, this was the largest of the King's Councils, composed of the Lord Chancellor, Dukes and Peers, the Ministers and Secretaries of State, the Controller-General, the 30 Councillors of State, the 80 Masters of Requests, and the Intendants of finance. The State councillors could also be called before other of the King's Councils on affairs under their charge.

Councillors of State became high-level government officials serving in the Council of State. A Councillor of State is one of the six ranks of the Council's members, namely, Master, Senior Master, Master of Requests, Councillor of State, Department Head, and Vice-Chairman.

Conservatism in France refers to the political philosophy and ideology of conservatism as it has developed in France. It is usually based on upholding French culture, social hierarchy, and tradition. It stresses nationalism and has historically been associated with monarchism. It originated as a reactionary and counter-revolutionary movement in the Bourbon Restoration period following the French Revolution, and it has been a prominent ideology in France ever since.

Early conservatism in France focused on the rejection of the secularism of the French Revolution, support for the role of the Catholic Church, and the restoration of the monarchy. After the first fall of Napoleon in 1814, the House of Bourbon returned to power in the Bourbon Restoration. Louis XVIII and Charles X, brothers of the executed King Louis XVI, successively mounted the throne and instituted a conservative government intended to restore the proprieties, if not all the institutions, of the Ancien Régime. The Ultra-royalists were members of the nobility who strongly supported Roman Catholicism as the state religion of France, the Bourbon monarchy, social hierarchy, and census suffrage against popular will and the interests of the bourgeoisie and their liberal and democratic tendencies.

After the July Revolution of 1830, Louis Philippe I, a member of the more liberal Orléans branch of the House of Bourbon, proclaimed himself as King of the French. The Second French Empire saw an Imperial Bonapartist regime of Napoleon III from 1852 to 1870. The Bourbon monarchist cause was on the verge of victory in the 1870s, but then collapsed because the proposed king, Henri, Count of Chambord, refused to fly the tri-coloured flag.

The turn of the century saw the rise of Action Française —an ultraconservative, reactionary, nationalist, and royalist movement that advocated a restoration of the monarchy. Its ideology was dominated by the precepts of Charles Maurras, following his adherence and his conversion of the movement's founders to royalism. The movement supported a restoration of the House of Bourbon and, after the 1905 law on the separation of Church and State, the restoration of Roman Catholicism as the state religion—all as rallying points in distinction to the Third Republic of France, which was considered corrupt and atheistic by many of its opponents.

Tensions between Christian rightists and secular leftists heightened in the 1890–1910 era, but moderated after the spirit of unity in fighting World War I.

An authoritarian form of conservatism characterised the Vichy regime of 1940–1944 under Marshal Philippe Pétain with heightened antisemitism, opposition to individualism, emphasis on family life, and national direction of the economy. Révolution nationale was the official ideology promoted by the regime, which despite its name was reactionary rather than revolutionary as the program opposed almost every change introduced by the French Revolution.

Conservatism has been the major political force in France since World War II, although the number of conservative groups and their lack of stability defy simple categorisation. Following the war, conservatives supported Gaullist groups and parties, espoused nationalism, and emphasised tradition, social order, and the regeneration of France. Unusually, post-war conservatism in France was formed around the personality of a leader—army general and aristocrat Charles de Gaulle who led the Free French Forces against Nazi Germany—and it did not draw on traditional French conservatism, but on the Bonapartist tradition.

Gaullism in France continues under The Republicans (formerly Union for a Popular Movement), a party previously led by Nicolas Sarkozy, who served as President of France from 2007 to 2012 and whose ideology is known as Sarkozysm.

In 2021, the French intellectual Éric Zemmour founded the nationalist party Reconquête, which has been described as a more rightist version of Marine Le Pen 's National Rally.

The Conservatoire du littoral ("Coastal protection agency") (official name: Conservatoire de l'espace littoral et des rivages lacustres) is a French public organisation created in 1975 to ensure the protection of outstanding natural areas on the coast, banks of lakes and stretches of water of 10 square kilometres or more. The Conservatoire is a member of the World Conservation Union.

Its creation was inspired by the work of the British National Trust, though the National Trust is a private charity, whereas the Conservatoire du littoral is mainly government funded. Its remit covers all French départements, départements d'outre-mer, Mayotte, and, recently, Saint-Pierre and Miquelon.

The Conservatoire acquires land by private agreement, by pre-emption in or, from time to time, by expropriation. Land may also be given to the Conservatoire by donation or legacy. The Conservatoire acquires 20 to 30 km of land yearly.

After ensuring all the restoration work, the Conservatoire entrusts the management of its lands to local authorities or other local groups or organisations. The Conservatoire uses specialists to decide how the sites should be managed and what activities (such as agricultural or recreational activities) can take place.

As of 31 January 2005, the Conservatoire cared for an area of 732 km spread over 300 sites, for 861 km of shoreline and 700 sites in 2015 for 1500 km, or 13 percent of French seacoast (the objective is to reach one third in 2050). Its annual budget is approximately €30 million, €25 M of which is earmarked for acquisitions and development. Most of its budget is provided by the national government, but local authorities and the European Union also contribute, as do corporations and private donors. The Conservatoire national du littoral employs 100 people in Rochefort, in Paris, and in its regional offices.

Conspirateurs (lit. ' Conspirators ') is a two- or four-player strategy board game said to have been invented in 18th-century France. Robert Charles Bell believes the game to date from after 1789, following the French Revolutionary Wars, "a period of feverish political activity with factions conspiring against each other".

Conspirateurs resembles other games such as Halma, Ugolki, Chinese Checkers, and Salta in that pieces jump without capturing over friendly or enemy pieces, to move more quickly to their destinations.

The gameboard consists of 17×17 gridded lines. At the centre is a specially marked or coloured area made up of 5×9 intersection points representing a "secret meeting place". On the board's perimeter, 39 points are specially marked or coloured to identify sanctuaries.

The game pieces (men) are always placed on the points, using either marbles or pegs in holes, or flat-bottom pieces. In two-player games, each side has 20 men; in four-player games, each side has 10 men. The sets of men are distinctively coloured.

Play begins with an empty board. Players choose colour, with Black having the first turn. Players alternate turns. The game proceeds in two phases:

After the drop phase is completed, one of the players shouts a warning that they have been discovered, and the conspirateurs scatter to hide in sanctuaries. A sanctuary may hold at most one man. The first to bring all his men to sanctuary wins the game.

The Constitutional Council (French : Conseil constitutionnel, [ kɔ̃sɛj kɔ̃stitysjɔnɛl ]) is the highest constitutional authority in France. It was established by the Constitution of the Fifth Republic on 4 October 1958 to ensure that constitutional principles and rules are upheld. It is housed in the Palais-Royal in Paris. Its main activity is to rule on whether proposed statutes conform with the Constitution, after they have been voted by Parliament and before they are signed into law by the president of the republic (a priori review), or passed by the government as a decree, which has law status in many domains, a right granted to the government under delegation of Parliament.

Since 1 March 2010, individual citizens who are party to a trial or a lawsuit have been able to ask for the council to review whether the law applied in the case is constitutional (a posteriori review). In 1971, the council ruled that conformity with the Constitution also entails conformity with two other texts referred to in the preamble of the Constitution, the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen and the preamble of the constitution of the Fourth Republic, both of which list constitutional rights.

Members are referred to as les sages ("the wise") in the media and the general public, as well as in the council's own documents. Legal theorist Arthur Dyevre notes that this "tends to make those who dare criticise them look unwise". Since 2025, Richard Ferrand has served as President of the Constitutional Council (Président du Conseil constitutionnel) following his appointment by President Emmanuel Macron and subsequent confirmation.

The Council has two main areas of power:

Examination of laws by the council is compulsory for some acts, such as for organic bills, those which fundamentally affect government, and treaties, which need to be assessed by the council before they are considered ratified (Article 61-1 and 54). Amendments concerning the rules governing parliamentary procedures need to be considered by the council as well. Guidance may be sought from the council in regard to whether reform should come under statute law (voted by Parliament) or whether issues are considered as règlement (regulation) to be adopted with decree of the prime minister. The re-definition of legislative dispositions as regulatory matters initially constituted a significant share of the (then light) caseload of the council.

In the case of other statutes, seeking the oversight of the council is not compulsory. However, the president of the republic, the president of the Senate, the president of the National Assembly, the prime minister, 60 members of the National Assembly, or 60 Senators can submit a statute for examination by the council before its signing into law by the president. In general, it is the parliamentary opposition that brings laws that it deems to infringe civil rights before the council.

Another task, of lesser importance in terms of number of referrals, is the reclassification of statute law into the domain of regulations on the prime minister's request. This happens when the prime minister and his government wish to alter law that has been enacted as statute law, but should instead belong to regulations according to the Constitution. The prime minister has to obtain reclassification from the council prior to taking any decree changing the regulations. This, however, is nowadays only a small fraction of the council's activity: in 2008, out 140 of decisions, only 5 concerned reclassifications.

The Government of France consists of an executive branch (President of the Republic, prime minister, ministers and their services and affiliated organisations); a legislative branch (both houses of Parliament); and a judicial branch.

The judicial branch does not constitute a single hierarchy:

For historical reasons, there has long been political hostility in the nation to the concept of a "Supreme Court"—that is, a powerful court able to quash legislation, because of the experience of citizens in the pre-Revolutionary era.

Whether the Constitutional Council is a court is a subject of academic discussion, but some scholars consider it effectively the supreme court of France.

The Constitution of the French Fifth Republic distinguishes two kinds of legislation: statute law, which is normally voted upon by Parliament (except for ordonnances), and government regulations, which are enacted by the prime minister and his government as decrees and other regulations (arrêtés). Article 34 of the Constitution exhaustively lists the areas reserved for statute law: these include, for instance, criminal law.

Any regulation issued by the executive in the areas constitutionally reserved for statute law is unconstitutional unless it has been authorized by a statute as secondary legislation. Any citizen with an interest in the case can obtain the cancellation of these regulations by the Council of State, on grounds that the executive has exceeded its authority. Furthermore, the Council of State can quash regulations on grounds that they violate existing statute law, constitutional rights, or the "general principles of law".

In addition, new acts can be referred to the Constitutional Council by a petition just prior to being signed into law by the president of the republic. The most common circumstance for this is that 60 opposition members of the National Assembly, or 60 opposition members of the Senate request such a review.

If the prime minister thinks that some clauses of existing statute law instead belong to the domain of regulations, he can ask the council to reclassify these clauses as regulations.

Traditionally, France refused to accept the idea that courts could quash legislation enacted by Parliament (though administrative courts could quash regulations produced by the executive). This reluctance was based in the French revolutionary era: pre-revolutionary courts had often used their power to refuse to register laws and thus prevent their application for political purposes, and had blocked reforms. French courts were prohibited from making rulings of a general nature. Also, politicians believed that, if courts could quash legislation after it had been enacted and taken into account by citizens, there would be too much legal uncertainty: how could a citizen plan his or her actions according to what is legal or not if laws could a posteriori be found not to hold? Yet, in the late 20th century, courts, especially administrative courts, began applying international treaties, including law of the European Union, as superior to national law.

A 2009 reform, effective on 1 March 2010, enables parties to a lawsuit or trial to question the constitutionality of the law that is being applied to them. The procedure, known as question prioritaire de constitutionnalité, is broadly as follows: the question is raised before the trial judge and, if it has merit, is forwarded to the appropriate supreme court (Council of State if the referral comes from an administrative court, Court of Cassation for other courts). The supreme court collects such referrals and submits them to the Constitutional Council. If the Constitutional Council rules a law to be unconstitutional, this law is struck down from the law books. The decision applies to everyone and not only to the cases at hand.

While since the 19th century the judicial review that the Constitutional Council brings to bear on the acts of the executive branch has played an increasingly large role, the politicians who have framed the successive French institutions have long been reluctant to have the judiciary review legislation. The argument was that un-elected judges should not be able to overrule directly the decisions of the democratically elected legislature. This may also have reflected the poor impression resulting from the political action of the parlements – courts of justice under the ancien régime monarchy: these courts often had chosen to block legislation in order to further the privileges of a small caste in the nation. The idea was that legislation was a political tool, and that the responsibility of legislation should be borne by the legislative body.

Originally, the council was meant to have rather technical responsibilities: ensuring that national elections were fair, arbitrating the division between statute law (from the legislative) and regulation (from the executive), etc. The council role of safekeeping fundamental rights was probably not originally intended by the drafters of the Constitution of the French Fifth Republic : they believed that Parliament should be able to ensure that it did not infringe on such rights. However, the council's activity has considerably extended since the 1970s, when questions of justice for larger groups of people became pressing.

From 1958 to 1970, under Charles de Gaulle 's presidency, the Constitutional Council was sometimes described as a "cannon aimed at Parliament", protecting the executive branch against encroachment by statute law voted by Parliament. All but one referral to the Constitutional Council came from the prime minister, against acts of Parliament, and the council agreed to partial annulments in all cases. The only remaining referral came from the president of the Senate, Gaston Monnerville, against the 1962 referendum on direct election of the President of the Republic, which Charles de Gaulle supported. The Council ruled that it was "incompetent" to cancel the direct expression of the will of the French people.

In 1971, however, the Council ruled unconstitutional (Decision 71-44DC) some provisions of a law changing the rules for the incorporation of private nonprofit associations, because they infringed on freedom of association, one of the principles of the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen ; they used the fact that the preamble of the French constitution briefly referred to those principles to justify their decision. For the first time, a statute was declared unconstitutional not because it infringed on technical legal principles, but because it was deemed to infringe on personal freedoms of citizens.

In 1974, authority to request a constitutional review was extended to 60 members of the National Assembly or 60 senators. Soon, the political opposition seized that opportunity to request the review of all controversial acts.

The Council increasingly has discouraged " riders " (cavaliers) – amendments or clauses introduced into bills that have no relationship to the original topic of the bill; for instance, "budgetary riders" in the Budget bill, or "social riders" in the Social security budget bill. See legislative riders in France. In January 2005, Pierre Mazeaud, then president of the Constitutional Council, announced that the council would take a stricter view of language of a non-prescriptive character introduced in laws, sometimes known as "legislative neutrons". Instead of prescribing or prohibiting, as advocated by Portalis, such language makes statements about the state of the world, or wishes about what it should be.

Previously, such language was considered devoid of juridical effects and thus harmless; but Mazeaud contended that introducing vague language devoid of juridical consequences dilutes law unnecessarily. He denounced the use of law as an instrument of political communication, expressing vague wishes rather than effective legislation. Mazeaud also said that, because of the constitutional objective that law should be accessible and understandable, law should be precise and clear, and devoid of details or equivocal formulas. The practice of the Parliament putting into laws remarks or wishes with no clear legal consequences has been a long-standing concern of French jurists.

In 2004, one law out of two, including the budget, was sent to the council at the request of the opposition. In January 2005, Pierre Mazeaud, then president of the council, publicly deplored the inflation of the number of constitutional review requests motivated by political concerns, without much legal argumentation to back them on constitutional grounds.

The French constitutional law of 23 July 2008 amended article 61 of the Constitution. It now allows for courts to submit questions of unconstitutionality of laws to the Constitutional Council. The Court of Cassation (supreme court over civil and criminal courts) and the Council of State (supreme court over administrative courts) each filter the requests coming from the courts under them. Lois organiques, and other decisions organizing how this system functions, were subsequently adopted. The revised system was activated on 1 March 2010.

On 29 December 2012, the council said it was overturning an upper income tax rate of 75% due to be introduced in 2013. The council ruled on 28 March 2025 that politicians can be barred from office immediately if convicted of a crime, meaning opposition leader Marine Le Pen could be barred from the 2027 presidential election due to a embezzlement trial.

In 1995, Roland Dumas was appointed president of the Council by François Mitterrand. Dumas twice attracted major controversy. First, he was reported as party to scandals regarding the Elf Aquitaine oil company, with many details regarding his mistress, Christine Deviers-Joncour, and his expensive tastes in clothing being published in the press.

In this period, the council issued some highly controversial opinions in a decision related to the International Criminal Court, in Decision 98–408 DC, declaring that the sitting president of the republic could be tried criminally only by the High Court of Justice, a special court organized by Parliament and originally meant for cases of high treason. This, in essence, ensured that Jacques Chirac would not face criminal charges until he left office. This controversial decision is now moot, since the Parliament redefined the rules of responsibility of the president of the republic by the French constitutional law of 23 July 2008. In 1999, because of the Elf scandal, Dumas took official leave from the Council and Yves Guéna assumed the interim presidency.

In 2005, the council again attracted some controversy when Valéry Giscard d'Estaing and Simone Veil campaigned for the proposed European Constitution, which was submitted to the French voters in a referendum. Simone Veil had participated in the campaign after obtaining a leave of absence from the council. This action was criticized by some, including Jean-Louis Debré, president of the National Assembly, who thought that prohibitions against appointed members of the council conducting partisan politics should not be evaded by their taking leave for the duration of a campaign. Veil defended herself by pointing to precedent; she said, "How is that his [Debré's] business? He has no lesson to teach me."

In 2025, council president Richard Ferrand ’s nomination by Emmanuel Macron was met with widespread criticism from the opposition and legal scholars due to his particularly close relationship with the president and limited legal training. He was confirmed by one vote.

The council is made up of former Presidents of the Republic who have chosen to sit in the Council (which they may not do if they become directly involved in politics again) and nine other members who serve non-renewable terms of nine years, one third of whom are appointed every three years, three each by the president of the republic, the president of the National Assembly and the president of the Senate. The president of the Constitutional Council is selected by the president of the republic for a term of nine years. If the position becomes vacant, the oldest member becomes interim president.

Following the 2008 constitutional revision, appointments that the president of the republic makes to the council are subject to a parliamentary approval process, where the relevant committee in the Senate and the National Assembly votes on the appointee. If greater than three-fifths of the members of either committee vote against confirming the appointee, then the appointee must be withdrawn by the president of the republic.

A quorum of seven members is imposed unless exceptional circumstances are noted. Votes are by majority of the members present at the meeting; the president of the council has a casting vote in case of an equal split. For decisions about the incapacity of the president of the republic, a majority of the members of the council is needed.

The members of the Constitutional Council are sworn in by the president of the republic. Former presidents have the option to sit if they choose to do so. The members of the Constitutional Council should abstain from partisanship. They should refrain from making declarations that could lead them to be suspected of partisanship. The possibility for former presidents to sit in the council is a topic of moderate controversy; some see it as incompatible with the absence of partisanship. René Coty, Vincent Auriol, Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, Jacques Chirac and Nicolas Sarkozy are the only former Presidents of France to have sat in the Constitutional Council.

As of 2025, the current sitting members of the Constitutional Council are:

As of 2020, the following members do not sit but can if they choose to:

As of 2025, the following individuals have served as President of the Constitutional Council:

The council created a periodical in 1996, Les Cahiers du Conseil constitutionnel, from October 2010 (No. 29) Les Nouveaux Cahiers du Conseil constitutionnel.

This was done in view of a better communication over the council's decisions, especially following the 1993 controversy over the decision to strike down a government bill on the right of asylum, during which Prime Minister Édouard Balladur had publicly attacked the institution. Decisions of the council traditionally include an extremely short and purely formal judicial opinion, often relying of plain statements if not tautologies, leaving its rationale and its use of principles and precedents open to interpretation. Before 1996, secretaries general occasionally contributed articles in law reviews in order to clarify the council's intents. Starting in 1996, the Cahiers "Decisions and Documents of the Constitutional Council" section included analyses of recent decisions, formally called "commentaries" from November 2008.

Commentaries became extensive, widely read and used by the legal community and the media. They are written by the council's Legal Office and secretary general, and unsigned; they are not approved by the council itself, although the office and secretary general assist with the bulk of the legal research for its decisions. They do not have the force of law, although they are increasingly mentioned in arguments before the council, and occasionally in lower courts. Since 2010, they are no longer published in the subsequent issue of the periodical, but online at the same time as the decision. They are however still commonly referred to as the " Cahiers commentaries" (commentaires aux Cahiers).

The purpose of the Cahiers, as summed up by its then-editor, was also to "express the policy of dialogue of the Constitutional Council with academia as well as with foreign courts". Each issue included a special feature, as well as an article on a foreign constitutional court, authored by legal scholars and researchers. With the separate publication of commentaries from 2010, it was more clearly turned into a law journal, upon which it became the Nouveaux Cahiers. It ran until April 2018, with two to four issues every year, published both in print and online.

In September 2018, it was succeeded by Titre VII, named after title VII of the Constitution, which establishes the council. Publication is exclusively digital, on the council's website and on the Cairn.info portal. Two issues are published every year, in the spring and autumn.

The council has released annual reports (rapports d’activité) since 2016, in French and English.

The council sits in the Palais-Royal (which also houses the Ministry of Culture) in Paris near the Council of State.

The French constitutional Law of 2 November 1945 was an interim, transitional constitutional law that set a legal basis for government in France under the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF) for one year until a new constitution was approved.

The law was adopted by popular referendum as part of the 1945 French legislative election on 21 October 1945. Results were promulgated on 3 November 1945. The law provided a provisional constitutional structure for republican government in France which had been re-established in Metropolitan France in June 1944 under the aegis of the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF) led by General Charles de Gaulle. It lasted for a year, until the Assembly drafted a new constitution which became the foundation for the new, Fourth Republic in October 1946.

In the latter part of the nineteenth century and first part of the twentieth, France was a republic that was governed by the constitutional Laws of 1875 that established the Third Republic. It consisted of a Chamber of Deputies and a Senate as the legislative branch of government, and a president to serve as head of state. This republican governmental structure lasted through the first half of 1940, until the German invasion of France in World War II precipitated the downfall of the Third Republic in July 1940.

During World War II, France was invaded by Nazi Germany in 1940. Defeat was imminent, and France's military situation was dire. Paul Reynaud resigned as prime minister, rather than sign an armistice with Germany, and was replaced by Marshal Philippe Pétain, a hero of World War I. Shortly thereafter, Pétain signed the Armistice of 22 June 1940. Under terms of the armistice, France was carved up into two sectors, the north and west under direct German military occupation, and the south and east under the control of the nominally independent but repressive rump state under Marshall Philippe Pétain known as the Vichy regime.

On 10 July 1940 the National Assembly, comprising both the Senate and Chamber of Deputies, met in joint session in the spa town of Vichy and voted by 569 to 80 to grant full and extraordinary powers to Marshal Pétain. By the same vote, they also granted Pétain the power to write a new constitution. By Act No. 2 on the following day, Pétain defined his own powers and abrogated any Third Republic laws that were in conflict with them. By these acts, the National Assembly dissolved itself, the Third Republic was over, and in its place was the Vichy regime, a repressive, German client state under the autocratic control of Marshal Pétain.

The Allies invaded France in June 1944 and within a year had liberated the country with the support of the Free French Forces which were based in London under General Charles de Gaulle. Looking ahead to victory and the future reconstitution of France as a constitutional republic after the war, de Gaulle formed the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF) on 3 June 1944 in order to help organize the continuing Free French armed opposition to Germany, and to provide some sort of legal structure for governing France during and after the final phase of the war.

Establishment of the Provisional Government marked the official restoration and re-establishment of a provisional French Republic, assuring continuity with the defunct French Third Republic. It succeeded the French Committee of National Liberation (CFLN), which had been the provisional government of France headquartered in the overseas territories and metropolitan parts of the country (Algeria and Corsica) that had been liberated by the Free French. As the provisional wartime government of France in 1944–1945, the main purposes of the GPRF were to handle the aftermath of the occupation of France and continue to wage war against Germany as one of the Allies. Its other chief objective was to prepare the ground for a new constitutional order that resulted in the Fourth Republic. It also made several important reforms and political decisions, such as granting women the right to vote.

By May 1945, France was liberated, Germany was defeated, Vichy leaders were in jail or on the run, and the war in Europe was over. The GPRF was now in charge of the territory of Metropolitan France, and turned to the task of organizing elections which would decide the future path of the country.

Legislative elections were organized by the GPRF and set for 21 October 1945 with two goals: to elect a parliament, and to hold a referendum to decide on a constitutional order for the country. The referendum asked voters about whether France should return to the constitution of 1875 (which would have restored the Third Republic), to give the new Assembly unlimited constituent power to draw up a new constitution, or to give limited and temporary constituent power to the Assembly and charge it with drawing up a new constitution in a limited timeframe. The voters, including women for the first time ever in parliamentary elections, chose the third option.

The voters overwhelmingly chose to empower the newly elected Assembly as a constituent assembly tasked with writing a new constitution, and in the meantime to adopt the constitutional law listed on the back of the ballot as the organizing law of the land until a new constitution could be drafted. Because of laws passed earlier by the CFLN and the Provisional Government, this election was the second election in France in which women were able to vote, the first being the municipal elections of 1945.

The constitutional law of 1945 remained in effect for a year, until the assembly drafted and passed the new Constitution of 27 October 1946, establishing the Fourth Republic.

In French criminal law, a contravention is the least serious among three categories of offenses. It includes non-criminal offenses, such as parking tickets, trespassing, minor violence, or destruction of property. The penalty is a fine stipulated by regulation, sometimes augmented with a supplementary penalty such as a remedial driving workshop.

Criminal offenses (French: infraction) are divided into three categories, according to increasing severity: contravention, délit and crime. The latter two categories are determined by the legislature, while contraventions are the responsibility of the executive branch. This tripartite division is matched by the courts responsible for enforcing criminal law: the Police court for contraventions; the Correctional court for délits ; the cour d'assises for crimes.

Each type of offense has a court with jurisdiction (compétence) over it, and each type has a different statute of limitations that applies to it; ten years for a crime, three years for a délit, and one year for a contravention. Limitation periods are longer for offenses against minors.

A τontravention is a non-criminal offense (such as a parking ticket) and is handled by the Police court (tribunal de police). They are mainly related to violations of traffic law, and low-grade violence.

Examples: defamation, defacing or destruction of property ; failure to respond to a summons; minor violence; trespassing on school property, or selling alcohol to minors.

Contraventions are handled in Police court, and are tried by a single judge.

Contraventions are divided into five classes according to their severity, with class 1 being the least serious, and class 5 the most serious. The least serious offenses are also the most common ones, for example not wearing your seatbelt, failing to use your turn signal when required, speeding, and not having the proper papers with you while driving. Most contraventions are driving offenses, but there are others, such as not having proper permits for hunting, or wearing a veil in a public place.

Contraventions are subject to fines based on written regulations, and are not determined by the judge. Fines for contraventions range from 38 euros for the least serious, up to 1,500 euros for class five, which is doubled for repeat offenders (récidive).

Fines (amende) are the chief method of punishment for contraventions, but may be accompanied by supplementary penalties (peine complémentaire), such as suspension of one's driving license, immobilization of the vehicle, obligatory safe-driving or citizenship workshop, or forfeiture of one's hunting license.

The majority of traffic offenses are handled administratively and automatically (suspension of driver's license or adjustment of "points", in particular), but judges are sometimes required to issue fines. The fine incurred does not exceed €3,000.

The patente (or contribution des patentes) is a form of direct tax historically levied on individuals or entities engaged in economic, commercial, industrial, or professional activities. It is calculated as a fixed amount or as a percentage of the taxpayer's revenue, depending on the jurisdiction and the type of business activity.

The patente was first introduced in France by the Allarde Decree of March 2 and 17, 1791, which abolished the guilds and established the principle of freedom of commerce and industry. Initially, the tax was levied on presumed income based on industrial rents. The tax calculation was modified multiple times by subsequent legislation.

In 1844, a major reform split the tax into a fixed component based on the size of the municipality and a proportional component tied to the rental value of the premises.

The patente was adopted in other parts of the world, particularly in former French colonies, where the French fiscal system was replicated.

In France, the patente was abolished in 1975 by Law No. 75-678 and replaced by the Professional Tax starting January 1, 1976. The professional tax itself was replaced in 2010 by the Contribution économique territoriale (CET) under the Finance Act of 2010.

The patente was replaced by the professional tax in mainland France and the overseas departments and regions. The professional tax was further replaced in 2010 by the CET and the IFER (Imposition Forfaitaire des Entreprises de Réseaux).

The patente remains in force in some French overseas collectivities, such as French Polynesia and New Caledonia. Its structure mirrors the reformed patente system of 1844, consisting of a fixed charge based on geographical location and a variable charge proportional to the rental value of the establishment.

These fees are determined by general or special tariffs depending on the profession and are detailed in annexed schedules. Activities not specifically listed are still subject to the tax based on analogous professions.

In Cameroon, the patente is calculated based on the previous year’s turnover. It is collected for the benefit of local authorities and the CRTV. Special rules apply to transportation companies and gas station operators, with the tax determined by criteria such as vehicle capacity or profit margins.

In Djibouti, the patente comprises a fixed charge (varying by location and establishment size) and a variable charge proportional to the rental value. Special provisions exist for taxis.

Copernic project is undergoing a major modernisation programme in France that will recast and upgrade the entire fiscal information system in the country. Copernic project is set to run over 10 years (2001–2009) by "Direction générale des Impôts" and "Direction générale de la Comptabilité publique". It covers 70 individual IT projects, employs over 600 personnel and has a budget of almost 1 billion euros.

Its objective is to enable the French tax administration to offer new, citizen-centered services and to boost the efficiency of its internal processes. Copernic will provide a simplified unique fiscal account for all French taxpayers, both individuals and businesses. They will be provided with 24/7 online access to their fiscal account and will be able to trace and follow-up processed data. Ultimately, users will be able to check their fiscal account at any time and execute all fiscal transactions and declarations online, while the tax administration will be able to provide new services such as payment reminders and information alerts. In addition to the Internet, e-tax services will be delivered through a variety of channels, including call centers and traditional physical service. The Copernic program will also open the possibility of implementing a new income tax recovery system as of 2007.

Copernic wanted a service-oriented architecture (SOA) featuring complete control of IT systems, long-term sustainability and vendor independence. To cover all the fiscal information and its processing for 55 million citizens and 3 million enterprises, it decided to use free and open-source software.

Copernic deployed 4000 Linux servers and application architecture is based upon Java EE. It has full FOSS system monitoring (Nagios, Multi Router Traffic Grapher (MRTG)) and software development platform (Eclipse). The presenter added, "FOSS is now our standard policy even for critical applications." They also needed a unique Enterprise JavaBean (EJB) reference implementation. After a tough competition between many candidates (Oracle Weblogic Server, IBM WebSphere, Oracle Database, JBoss application server), they finally chose an open source middleware, JBoss. This is due to its known reliability, modularity, security and more importantly its independence from traditional industry constraints.

A cordon bleu consists of a thin cutlet of meat (typically veal, chicken, or pork) that is pounded thin, stuffed with ham and cheese, rolled, then breaded and pan-fried or deep-fried. Veal cordon bleu is the traditional version, while chicken cordon bleu is the most popular modern variant.

The French term cordon bleu is translated as " blue ribbon ". According to Larousse Gastronomique, the cordon bleu "was originally a wide blue ribbon worn by members of the highest order of knighthood, L'Ordre des chevaliers du Saint-Esprit, instituted by Henri III of France in 1578. By extension, the term has since been applied to food preparation to a very high standard and by outstanding cooks. The analogy no doubt arose from the similarity between the sash worn by the knights and the ribbons (generally blue) of a cook's apron."

The exact origin of cordon bleu is unclear. The most accepted theory is that a female Valaisian cook in Switzerland created the recipe out of necessity to serve a large number of guests in one shift. However, its origin can also be traced back to a cooking competition in France in 1930, where the winning dish was named " le Cordon Bleu ".

Another theory suggests that a Swiss cook prepared a dish on the SS Bremen in 1933 to celebrate the achievement of a new record. Having just won a blue ribbon for his new record, the captain decided to ask the cook for a new dish: the cordon bleu, which the cook may have brought back from France or Switzerland.

The cordon bleu was first mentioned in a cookbook from 1949. The earliest reference to "veal Cordon Bleu" is in the Los Angeles Times in 1958, while similar veal recipes are found from at least 1955.

There are many variations of the recipe involving cutlet, cheese, and meat. A popular way to prepare chicken cordon bleu is to butterfly a chicken breast, place a thin slice of ham inside, along with a thin slice of a soft, easily melted cheese. The chicken breast is then rolled into a roulade, coated in bread crumbs, and then deep-fried. Other variations exist with the chicken baked rather than fried.

Other common variations include omitting the bread crumbs, wrapping the ham around the chicken, or using bacon in place of ham.

A similar dish popular in the Asturias province of Spain is cachopo, a deep-fried cutlet of veal, beef or chicken wrapped around a filling of Serrano ham and cheese. In Spain, a version made usually with just two slices of ham and cheese, although it can also be found with chicken or pork loin added, is often called san jacobo.

A common variant in Uruguay and Argentina is the milanesa rellena. It consists of two beef or chicken fillets passed through beaten egg, later, stuffed with cooked ham and mozzarella cheese and superimposed like a sandwich. Once this is done, they are again passed through beaten eggs and breadcrumbs, to be fried or baked. It is usually served with papas fritas (french fries) as a garnish.

In Muslim-majority countries, halal versions of cordon bleu are popular, with beef or mutton replacing ham.

The seminal use of cordon sanitaire (French: [ kɔʁdɔ̃ sanitɛʁ ] ; lit. ' sanitary cordon ') as a metaphor for ideological containment referred to "the system of alliances instituted by France in interwar Europe that stretched from Finland to the Balkans " and which "completely ringed Germany and sealed off Russia from Western Europe, thereby isolating the two politically 'diseased' nations of Europe."

French Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau is credited with coining the usage, when, in March 1919, he urged the newly independent border states (also called limitrophe states) that had formed in Eastern Europe after World War I to form a defensive union. Such a system would both isolate the Soviet Union from Western Europe, and thus quarantine the spread of communism, while simultaneously threatening Germany's eastern border in the event of war, guaranteeing French security. He called such an alliance a cordon sanitaire. France subsequently put this policy into practice by creating an alliance with Poland in 1921, followed by alliances with each member of the French-backed Little Entente alliance (Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and Romania) starting in 1924. The alliance was further reinforced by bilateral treaties among Eastern European states such as the Polish–Romanian alliance. This is still probably the most famous use of the phrase, though it is sometimes used more generally to describe a set of buffer states that form a barrier against a larger, ideologically hostile state.

Corinne Dominique Marguerite Lepage (French pronunciation: [ kɔʁin dɔminik maʁɡəʁit ləpaʒ ] ; born 11 May 1951) is a French environmental lawyer and politician. She served as French Minister of the Environment in the Alain Juppé cabinets 1 and II 1995–1997 and as Member of the European Parliament (MEP) 2009–2014 for the North-West constituency.

She is the founder and President since 1996 of the Citizenship, Action, Participation for the 21st Century Party (CAP 21). She is also co-founder of the centrist Mouvement démocrate and served as Vice-President for the party until March 2010, when she announced that she was leaving the movement.

Lepage was born in 1951 into a Jewish family in Boulogne-Billancourt, in the department of Hauts-de-Seine. She attended Sciences Po in Paris, where she obtained her law diploma and began practising law in 1975. At the same time, she was appointed Maître de conférences (the equivalent of a university lecturer), and later a Professor at Sciences-Po and Panthéon-Assas University from 1982 to 1986, and then at the Université de Paris at Val-deMarne from 1984 to 1990. She has taught at the Université de Paris at St.-Quentin-en-Yvelines since 2005. She is married and the mother of two children.

As a young lawyer, Lepage married Christian Huglo in 1983 and joined the latter's law firm, the first one specialising in environmental rights. In 1987 she joined the Conseil de l'Ordre des avocats.

In 1978, during the Amoco Cadiz disaster, when an American oil tanker caused a huge oil spill near the coast of Brittany, Lepage's law firm sided with the local authorities of Finistère and the Côtes-du-Nord against the American oil company Amoco. After a 15-year-long trial, Lepage's firm and the local authorities won, setting a precedent and giving greater protection to individuals, towns and regions victim of serious pollution.

She then worked on many cases concerning the environment, along with local associations, groups, companies or local government. Since 2006, Lepage has sided with the victims of the MV Erika oil spill of 12 December 1999 against Total among others. Since 2010, she supports the "Movement for the Rights and the Respect of Future Generations". She also works as a lawyer for the Association of the Victims of the Floods of La Faute-sur-Mere in wake of Hurricane Xynthia.

Lepage has also defended environmental interests outside of her political career, such as in the Paris and Brussels bar associations and by involvement in numerous NGOs. She is also the co-founder with Michèle Rivasi of the Observatory for Environmental Vigilance and Alertness.

With Gilles-Éric Séralini, she co-founded CRIIGEN (Committee for Research and Independent Information on Genetic Engineering), an organization that opposes genetically modified food.

According to Lepage, politics cannot create on its own, without the mobilisation of NGOs and civil society, the solutions and changes necessary to our economic system. In 1996 she said in an interview that "the growing involvement of civil society is essential for the environment and sustainable development". Following the Copenhagen Summit in 2009 she asserted that: "Civil society can now only count on itself to ensure its own future."

Between November 2007 and February 2008, Lepage wrote a report for the French Minister of the Environment, Jean-Louis Borloo on "environmental governance". This report, according to the official of the Grenelle Environnement "makes over 80 propositions, including 10 flagship measures, aimed at restoring the confidence of the French in information on the environment" and "proposes notably measures to improve this information, to reinforce rules regarding expertise and clarify liability in case of pollution".

Lepage also teaches at Versailles Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines University and Institut d'Études Politiques de Paris as a professor of Sustainable Development.

Since her participation in the Alain Juppé government (1995–97), Lepage has sometimes been considered by the media as a right-wing environmentalist, a characterization she does not accept: "they tell me that I am a right-wing environmentalist, no. [...] I am not of the right [...] but I fight for what seems to me to be fundamental for us all in the coming years. [...] The social question was the great debate of the 20th century, I believe the environmental question will be the great debate of the 21st."

Lepage associates herself above all with green and environmentalist politics, attempting to combine ideas of both left and right on environmental issues. From her participation in Ecology Generation in 1990 up to the creation of her own think tank Terre Démocrate in 2009, she shows a desire to "transcend political differencecs" and overcome traditional left/right opposition, in order to "bring people together, beyond their political colors, on the environment". Close at once to Daniel Cohn-Bendit and François Bayrou, she works for the emergence of "a genuine pragmatic effort, based on fair and sustainable development, democratic and humanist". She notably wants a rapprochement between centrists and environmentalists.

Lepage says that "I got into environmentalism very early, in the 1960s. As an environmentalist candidate in 1981, and elected in 1989". She became Deputy Mayor of Cabourg in Calvados in March 1989. In the early 1990s, she became a founding member of Ecology Generation. She ran in the 1993 under this party label for the legislative elections in the fourth district of Calvados. However, she only received 6.17% of the vote.

In 1995 she responded affirmatively to a proposal by Alain Juppé to head the Ministry of the Environment in a center-right government. She was then not a member of any political party. According to the left-wing newspaper Libération, her nomination was harshly criticised by the right in Normandy as she had just recently been beaten severely in elections there.

Lepage was one of twelve women in the first Juppé government. On 7 November 1995, during a cabinet reshuffle leading to the second Juppé government, she was the only woman to remain a full Minister. While she says she did not suffer any particular difficulties as a woman in the government, she considers that she was subjected to insults in the National Assembly "which would have never have been hurled against a man".

As Minister of the Environment, Lepage made a priority objective of showing that environmentalism can "contribute to the struggle against unemployment". She also made progress in the area of prevention with the adoption of a Clean Air Law, the creation of the Committee on Prevention and Precaution and, at the end state participation with the Professional Committee on Asbestos.

The controversial relaunch of the Superphénix nuclear reactor, which experienced numerous technical difficulties, led to an open struggle between Lepage and the Minister of Industry Franck Borotra. Because of legal irregularities, Lepage refused to sign the decree authorizing the relaunch of the reactor, implicitly threatening Alain Juppé with resignation. The trade unionist Christian Moesl said during a parliamentary hearing that "Corinne Lepage put Superphénix on the edge of the precipice and Dominique Voynet pushed it over".

A consensus politician, Lepage has been subject to criticism for her silence during the president of Jacques Chirac on certain major environmental issues: the resumption of nuclear tests, the relaunch of the Superphénix nuclear reactor in September 1995, the reduction of the environmental budget, difficulties in implementation the Nature 2000 EU directive.

Lepage used her experiences as a Minister to write a book in which she attacks industrial lobbies, hunters and technocrats in the upper levels of the civil service.

On the subject of her political leanings, she said "I do not feel that I am woman of the right, but I do not deny in any way my participation in the governments of Alain Juppé." She ran in the May 1997 legislative elections, in Paris' seventh district. She lost in the second round to Patrick Bloche with almost a 10% gap between the two candidates (54.50% to 45.50%).

The dissolution of the government in 1997 put an end to her ministerial position. She then transformed CAP 21 into a political movement. As Administrator of Transparency International France [tr. note: a non-governmental organisation which fights government corruption in 80 national sections], she is involved in the fight against political and financial corruption.

In 2002, Lepage entered the Presidential race and received 1.88% of the vote in the first ballot. In the regional elections of 2004, she was at the top of the list of the Paris department on the slate of André Santini (Union for French Democracy, UDF). She did not participate in the second ballot run-off on the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) roster of Jean-François Copé. In the European elections of June 2004, her list for the constituency of Île-de-France would receive 3.6%. She was elected to the European Parliament elected in the 2009 European election in North-West constituency as the MoDem 's top candidate.

On March 10, 2007, she chose not run in the 2007 presidential elections, in order to support François Bayrou. She said that Bayrou "represents today genuine change in this country, which can allow political ecology to have the place it needs." Cap21 was then one of the founding groups of the François Bayrou's new political party, the MoDem.

In May 2007, after Bayrou's defeat in the first round of the presidential elections, and the victory of Nicolas Sarkozy over Ségolène Royal, Lepage refused to participate in the Fillon government [ fr ] because of "loyalty to her convictions". Running as a MoDem candidate in the March 2008 municipal elections of the 12th arrondissement of Paris, she got 9.95% of the vote.

Lepage became Vice-President of the MoDem on 15 June 2008. In February 2009, Bayrou made her head of the Modem list for the Northwest district for the 2009 European elections. She was elected as an MEP with 8.67% of the vote.

Serious tensions emerged between the MoDem and Cap21 when the latter decided to ally itself with Europe Ecologie in many regions for the March 2010 regional elections.

After having criticized Bayrou's strategy and that of the MoDem, which she called "closed in on itself", she announced that she had left the MoDem on 17 March 2010. At the second round of the regional elections, she called on people to vote for the left, except in Acquitaine where a MoDem candidate was viable. During its party congress of 29 May 2010, Cap21 presents itself as an "autonomous party" and its members vote overwhelmingly to leave the MoDem.

Lepage was elected to the European Parliament in the 2009 election. After the poor score of the MoDem in these elections (8.46%) she called for an alliance in the Parliament between the MoDem and Europe Ecologie.

As an MEP of Cap21, she is part of the ALDE group which includes the MoDem. In July 2009, she became the first vice president of the ENVI Committee (Environment, Public Health and Food Safety) and a substitute member of the ITRE Commission (Industry, Research and Energy) in the European Parliament.

In December 2009, she was the only French MEP in the European Parliament's delegation to the Copenhagen Summit. She expressed dismay at the results of the summit which she considered "a collective failure" to the benefit of "climatoskeptics" and lobbies linked to oil.

Her experience on maritime issues led her to create the "Seas and Coastal Areas" intergroup in the European Parliament. She has presided this intergroup since January 2010.

In June 2009, she protested in front of the Iranian Embassy against the regime alongside UNEF, SOS Racisme, Jack Lang, Nicole Guedj and Marek Halter. With numerous other personalities, she signed a petition "Stop the Burqa and the Veil, Symbols of the Submission of Women and the Islamist Offensive".

After launching the movement "Rassemblement Citoyen" (Citizen Rally), she presented lists under the banner of "Europe Citoyenne" (Citizen Europe) in the 2014 European elections ; however, she was not re-elected to the European Parliament, with her list securing only 2.28% of the vote.

On February 8, 2024, Corinne Lepage and Yann Wehrling announced the launch of the "Positive Ecology & Territories" collective, for the 2024 European elections.

Also in 2024, she opened a case in the European Court of Justice against the European Union's "astonishing" 2023 decision to allow the weedkiller glyphosate to continue to be sold in Europe for another 10 years. The World Health Organization (WHO) had classified the weedkiller as "probably carcinogenic" in 2015, following a study by the International Agency for Research on Cancers.

Corporate tax in France deals with the tax payable in France on the profits earned by companies. In 2024, the corporate tax rate (Impôt sur les Sociétés) is 25%.

A company is subject to French corporate tax on profits generated in France, in addition to any profit allocated to France by virtue of international tax treaties, after taking into account tax deductible costs.

The 2017 French corporate tax rate was 15% of the taxable income up to and including €38,120, 28% up to €75,000 and above which the rate is 33.3%. By 2020, the whole taxable income of all companies will be taxed at 28%.

On 7 November 2017 the French National Assembly approved a new corporate tax exclusively for the year 2017. Business with more than €1 billion in sales a year are subject to pay a tax rate with 38.3% instead of 33.3%. If a firm makes more revenue than €3 billion the rate will be 43.3%.

In 2012 a new tax credit was introduced to make France more competitive. Companies get a tax credit of 7% of total wage & salary costs up to a limit of 2.5 times the minimum salary (in 2017 the minimum salary was €1,460). The effect is to substantially reduce the effective rate of corporation tax. The tax credit amounts to 19 billion euros (about 40% of gross corporate tax take).

Certain items of income are exempt from corporate tax:

The Corps des ingénieurs de l'armement (French pronunciation: [ kɔʁ de ɛ̃ʒenjœʁ də laʁməmɑ̃ ]) ([ kɔʁ dez‿ɛ̃ʒenjœʁ də laʁməmɑ̃ ]) is a Technical Grand Corps of the French State (grand corps de l'Etat [ ɡʁɑ̃ kɔʁ də leta ]), aimed at providing the French Armed Forces with all appropriate equipment and supervising the French Aerospace & Defence industry.

The corps members are the ingénieurs de l'armement ([ ɛ̃ʒenjœʁ də laʁməmɑ̃ ]) nicknamed IA in French. They are high level engineers and public servants with military status, originating for most of them (more than 2/3 by decree) from Ecole polytechnique and trained at Institut supérieur de l'aéronautique et de l'espace (ISAE) (formation SUPAERO), ENSTA Paris, or other French or international universities.

The Corps des ingénieurs de l'armement's main employer (50%) is the Direction générale de l'armement (General Directorate for Armament). The second half are employed in other bodies of the Ministry of Defence, in international Defence organizations (NATO, OCCAR,...), can be detached in French administrative bodies (CNES, CEA, ESA,...), or the French and European industry (EADS, Safran, Thales Group, MBDA, DCNS...).

The Corps was created in 1968 as a fusion of previous Corps of military engineers recruiting at Ecole polytechnique.

In 1743, the "Ecole des constructeurs de vaisseaux royaux" was created to train Naval engineers. The school is known today as ENSTA ParisTech.

The role played by the Corps of Armament in the development of the French aerospace and defence industry, in particular with the logic of Grands Projets (Concorde, Airbus, Ariane,...), can be compared with the role of the Corps des télécommunications in the development of the French telecom industry (telephone, Minitel,...), the role of the Corps des mines, or the Corps des ponts with their respective Grands Projets (Nuclear industry, TGV,...). They illustrate Colbertism, a French version of mercantilism.

Colbertism dates back to the 17th century, influenced at that time by the Chinese system. French high public servants are nicknamed " mandarins ", referring to their Chinese counterparts.

The French economist Elie Cohen described the effects of French Colbertism in the field of High tech in a book entitled " High tech Colbertism - Economics of the Grand Projet" (1995).

High tech Colbertism can be characterized by a prevalent role played in France by the Administration and the Grand Corps. A typical Colbertist mechanism is the " pantouflage " where top civil servants become Heads of French public companies. The word " pantouflage " cannot be directly translated in English nor in any Western language but can be translated in Japanese where a comparable mechanism exists. The Japanese word is " amakudari " ("fallen from the sky").

The Corps des Ingénieurs des Ponts, des Eaux et des Forêts (French pronunciation: [ kɔʁ dez‿ɛ̃ʒenjœʁ de pɔ̃ dez‿o e de fɔʁɛ ], in English "Corps of the Engineers of Bridges, Waters and Forests") is a technical Grand Corps of the French State (grand corps de l'État). Its members, called ingénieurs des ponts, des eaux et des forêts (nicknamed IPEF), are senior civil servants and top-level engineers, mainly employed by the French Ministry of Ecological Transition and by the French Ministry of Agriculture, but they can also work for every French Ministries, public establishments, or public compagnies. Thanks to its history and its selective recruitment policy, the Corps des IPEF enjoys considerable prestige within France's senior civil services, as the Corps des mines and the Corps de l'armement.

Most of the IPEF are recruited from École polytechnique (around 50%), where they are selected based on their final ranking, and there exist several competitive entrance exams for former students from AgroParisTech, from the Écoles normales supérieures, or from other French Grandes écoles such as École des ponts ParisTech, CentraleSupélec and École des mines. A special entrance exam was recently opened for PhD holders but it offers a limited number of places. In addition, it is possible for other civil servants to join the Corps des IPEF after passing internal exams so as to widen their career perspectives.

People entering the Corps des IPEF (around 60 each year) are mostly trained at AgroParisTech and École des ponts ParisTech, but some members also attend formation in specific fields in French or abroad universities. After 1 or 2 years of training including an Executive Master in public affairs, several engineers start a PhD during 3 years in a French laboratory, while the others take their first operational position in the French administration.

Many executive positions in France's industries and administration are held by these engineers. Being admitted to the Corps des IPEF is still considered a significant fast-track for executive careers.

According to the Corps statutes, every IPEF participate, under the authority of the competent ministers, in the design, development, implementation and evaluation of public policies, particularly in areas relating to:

They may perform management, supervisory, monitoring, inspection, study, expert appraisal, public policy evaluation, teaching and research functions, including in international organizations.

In particular, they can be in charge of research and teaching activities in these areas. In this case, they are assimilated as permanent researchers.

The C orps is led by the chef de corps ("chief of corps"). All members are divided into 3 grades, corresponding to career advancement and levels of responsibility:

There also exist a temporary grade for newly recruited engineers still in training: ingénieur-élève ("engineer-student").

The Corps des IPEF resulted from the merger in 2009 of two Grands Corps, namely the Corps des Ingénieurs des Ponts et Chaussées (IPC) (in English "Corps of the engineers of Bridges and Roads") and the Corps des Ingénieurs du Génie rural, des Eaux et des Forêts (IGREF) (in English "Corps of the engineers of Rural Engineering, Waters and Forests"). They used to recruit their members in École polytechnique, AgroParisTech and École des ponts ParisTech.

Even before, the Corps des IPC absorbed several formers Corps including civil aviation engineers, geography engineers and meteorological engineers, while the Corps des IGREF absorbed the Corps of the engineers of rural engineering and the Corps of the engineers of waters and forests.

The various toponyms in the historical region of Lorraine are often known by very different names depending on the language in which they are expressed. This article provides an understanding of the linguistic and historical origin of this diversity and lists a number of correspondences for communes and lesser localities in the four departments of the former region: Meuse, Meurthe-et-Moselle, Moselle, and Vosges.

In the context of toponyms, and with regard to the scope of this article, exonyms and endonyms are the differing external and internal names, respectively, used by different languages or cultures for a specific geographic place. For the people that speak German and live in Germany, for example, Deutschland is their endonym for that country. Conversely, Allemagne is the exonym in French, 'Germany' is the exonym in English, and so on.

The same idea can apply within a country too, between regions having vastly different linguistical and cultural histories. The emphasis in this article is on those toponyms that began as Gallo-Roman endonyms in some cases, but more often as endonyms following the Germanic migrations, and particularly what emerged from the Merovingian and Carolingian dynasties. Now, more than a millennium later, many of these toponyms have three different names—in Lorraine Franconian, French, and German—due to shifts in culture and language and changes in land possession.

The origin of toponyms, of which exonyms are a certain type, is sometimes controversial, especially in Lorraine where successive or simultaneous occupations by different peoples and changes in culture have often influenced toponymy more than elsewhere.

As in all regions marked by Germanic influence, adjectives or appellatives often precede nouns. Many toponyms are formed with the name of a local lord or land owner. In some cases, however, a particular topographical, religious, or historical aspect may have played a more important role, which is difficult to determine in Gallo-Romance formations in particular. While Gallic toponyms are often poorly clarified due to insufficient knowledge of the language, Romanesque toponyms often play the role of those older Celtic toponyms that have been redesigned in the Romanesque style.

The Ripuarian and Salian Franks, and for some time also the Alemanni in eastern Lorraine, introduced Germanic toponyms. A patronymic practice of the Romano-Francs that developed from the Merovingian Dynasty was to merge Roman and Germanic habits. The Germanic rule of word composition from right to left (i.e. the decisive-determined order), largely governs the formation of Lorraine toponyms, both in Germanic and in Roman dialect.

For example, the Lorraine dialect places the adjective epithet before the noun it describes. A "white rupt" is a "white stream" (clear and transparent meaning). This is especially true for oronyms and toponyms in localities that make extensive use of local dialect. Gerardmer (Giraumouè) is the "Lake of Gerold", which can therefore be translated in the same order in German language: Geroldsee. The use of Geroltzsee is attested locally as early as 1484.

This information is fundamental in Romanesque toponymy and the determining-defined order, sometimes misunderstood, is the rule in Normandy (except Avranchin), Picardy, Nord-Pas-de-Calais, Champagne-Ardenne, northern Franche-Comté and Île-de-France, so it is not surprising that this method of composition is present in Romanesque Lorraine.

In the west and south, the reverse order — determined-determinant — is more dominant. Thus, for example, names like Neufchâteau, Neufchâtel, Neuville, and Neubourg du nord have opposite construction to Chateauneuf, Castelnau, Villeneuve, and Bourgneuf further south. Even if a Lorrain does not feel completely at home in Flanders because of the Flemish forms (-kerque, -em, -hem, -hout, -brouck, -berghe, -dorp) largely different from German forms, and even more so in Normandy with the Anglo-Norroese appellatives (-crique-, -ham, -londe, brique- [?], hougue / hogue, Torp(s) / -tour(ps)), they can easily feel a common practice (-kirch, -om, -heim, -holtz, -bruck, -berg, -troff / -droff).

In German-speaking Lorraine, the word dorf (for 'village') is often passed to troff by hardening from / d / to / t / and metathesis from / r /.

The toponyms in -angel (Common Germanic -ing) are typically Lorrainian and correspond to a relatively recent decline in Germanic speaking in Lorraine. Elsewhere this form is exceptional except in Luxembourg and the Luxembourgish part of Wallonia. In Flanders and Artois, -inge, -in, -ain, its correspondents, are also the expression of a decline in the Flemish language or at least a desire to make toponyms more Gallicized. In the Romanesque area, where Germanic speakers disappeared very early, the suffix is found in the forms -ans in Franche-Comté or Burgundy, in the southwest and a little in Languedoc in the forms -eins, -ens, -ein and sometimes also -ans. This suffix is much rarer in the west, where it sometimes takes the form of -an or -angles. Its absence is remarkable in northern Picardy, a region where Romanesque toponymy is the most "Germanized" in France.

Paradoxically, in Romanesque Lorraine, there is no common series of calls in the north and northwest, whose Germanic origin is proven. Thus, these types are not frequently found:

You can find toponyms in short from the Doubs to Normandy, from Ile-de-France to Walloon Belgium. The -court toponyms have been chronologically replaced by the -ville toponyms, of which Romanesque Lorraine is the second 'provider' after Normandy and before the exceptional area of Beauce. There are also some in the Charentes and in the southwest around Toulouse.

Independent ducal Lorraine included a Bailiwick of Germany [ fr ; de ] that crossed the current Moselle border to the north. The Lorraine Romans referred to all those who spoke a Germanic dialect as 'Germans' as opposed to their Romance language. So a German (or Ollemand) for a Romanesque Lorrain can also be a Lorrain of the Bailiwick of Germany or an Alsatian, or any person living beyond that. Conversely, neighbouring German-speaking people often called the Welsches romanophones [ fr ; de ]. This is also the case in Switzerland.

Lorraine's toponymy is not only a back-and-forth between the German and French forms more specific to the last two centuries. It is older, and shows a sensitivity common to all of eastern France where the 'determinant-determined' pair largely dominates while respecting habits and rules that ignore the heritage language.

In the Lorraine under the social structure of the Ancien Regime the coexistence of a Romanesque and Germanic form for the same place was not uncommon. It was only with the integration into France under Stanislaus and then under the Jacobin regime and Prussian imperialism that both language and toponyms took on a political, patriotic, symbolic and identity value. Previously, the Duke of Lorraine recognized the official existence of German and French on his lands at the risk of having to have the most important acts and charters translated one way or the other. In the regions of passage between the Germanic area and the Romanesque basin, the same place was named in the language of the respective speaker. This is the case for the toponym, Hautes Chaumes, in the Vosges, which is in a Vosges dialect [ fr ; de ] and differs from the initial Alsatian dialect.

More than standard French, the Lorraine dialect allows a cross-reading of the region's toponyms and makes it possible to establish a correspondence between the two families of languages present on Lorraine's territory. This is one of Lorraine's unique characteristics, its function as a language buffer region, or space between.

The subject of terms is very sensitive. It is linked to recent history, therefore the definition of terms is important.

Since that which is Germanic cannot be 'Germanized', the term "Germanization" for the periods 1870-1918 and 1940-1945 should be understood as an adaptation of form or graphics to standard German as intended by the heads of state of the last German empires. The Anglo-Saxons speak here rather of 'prussification' to avoid confusion. Moreover, many Moselle toponyms, characteristic of the Franconian Lorraine dialect, also exist in Germany or Austria. For a Francophone, Merlebach is objectively no less Germanic than Merlenbach.

The phenomenon is not specific to Moselle, a large part of Germany, especially in the south, had to willingly adopt standard German names for their official signs, but on the ground, the inhabitants continued to designate their village in the local form. No one is expecting to see 'Stuegert' on a city sign instead of Stuttgart today. Even today, an Alsatian and a Mosellan have their local form to designate their agglomeration. This also applies to village names in Lorraine dialect and beyond for all regions of France in local languages and dialects.

The difference is that Moselle suffered the arrival of 'prussification' as a denial of its specificity in view of the brutality of certain measures that followed the de facto annexation after the abandonment of the territories by the parliament meeting in Bordeaux in May 1871. This annexation was difficult to experience throughout the annexed Moselle because of the desire to 'prussify' Moselle by erasing its specificities. This was experienced as a constraint even in the Lorraine-Franco-speaking (Germanic) areas. It must also be said that part of the annexed Moselle known as Bezirk Lothringen, has always been Romanesque, mainly Metzgau and Saulnois [ fr ; de ] except formerly the Dieuze region. Here, the Germanization of the toponym is an indisputable fact (Fresnes - Eschen). The locals were forced to change their names. This is why it must always be borne in mind that the phenomenon of "Germanization" does not cover the same thing depending on whether you start from an original Romanesque or historically Germanic toponym.

French and Lorraine Franconian (and Alsatian in Alsace) serve to make an ideological and political break with everything that sounds 'Prussian' or 'standardized German', because the occupants forbade or fought them. Thus, a simple 'n' at the end of a local toponym is enough to "Germanize" it when it is Germanic: Thedinge becomes Thedingen. At the same time, French Francizes the name by removing the dialectal 'e' to give Théding. The accent adds a little more gallicity. As well, it frequently reverses the names from -er to -re. Diacritical signs such as accents and umlauts have indeed played a role in francization or Germanization (e.g. Buding / Büdingen). Similarly, the accentuation of names is central. Lorraine Franconian and German emphasize the same linguistic relationship, placing a tonic accent at the initial of words, in general. On the other hand, the French name is unemphasized and is characterized by an increase in tone on the final part of the word. The difference between the Germanic and French form is audible.

In the south of the Pays de Nied, there are current toponyms using -court that were formerly -troff / -torff. For example, Arraincourt from Armestroff, Thicourt from Diederstroff, Thonville from Oderstroff, Hernicourt (in Herny) from Hermerstorf.

At the time of the Ancien Régime, referring to the sociopolitical system that prevailed in France for the two centuries preceding and up to the French Revolution, several Lorraine towns were recognized by two names, one in French and one in German. The following name-pair examples are found the dictionaries of Henri Lepage [ fr ] and Ernest de Bouteiller, respectively, and noted as recognized in 1594:

These were certainly not the only spellings before or after 1594. The history for Pontigny, for example, a locality (or hamlet) in the commune Condé-Northen since 1810, is attested as:

There were further name or spelling differences in the centuries prior, after localities were formed under the Frankish dynasties up to when first attestations are known.

The names of many communes in Moselle were Francized at the end of the Revolution, in particular those having the suffix -engen or -ingen, which was sometimes simplified into -ing or definitively replaced by the Romanesque form in -ing (e.g. -ingen was Romanized into -ingas and -inges since the Middle Ages, hence -ang). While in Bas-Rhin -ingen was preserved. To a lesser extent, this suffix has also been Francized over the centuries in other forms, including -ang, -in, -court, -gny, and so forth.

The toponyms in German-speaking Moselle [ fr ] were often spelled -willer (sometimes -weiller) in the Bulletins des lois and several dictionaries from the 19th century until 1870. This form subsequently disappeared in the 20th century, after the World Wars. While in Alsace, the -willers were preserved, although they were sometimes mentioned -viller and -viler in 1793–1801.

Some municipalities had a standard German name between 1793 and 1802, such as Folschviller (Folschweiler 1793), Ébersviller (Ebersweiler 1793), Berviller-en-Moselle (Berweiler 1793), Schmittviller (Schmittweiler 1793), Bisten-en-Lorraine (Bisten im Loch 1793), Château-Rouge (Rothdorf 1793), Mouterhouse (Mutterhausen 1801), Soucht (Sucht 1801), Rodalbe (Rodalben 1801), Merlebach (Merlenbach 1801), Dalem (Dalheim 1801), Altrippe (Altrippen 1793).

The dictionaries of Henri Lepage on the Meurthe and Ernest de Bouteiller on the Moselle, written before 1871, prove that many municipalities still had an alias in German during the 19th century. For example, Hagondange, Haute-Vigneulles, and Lorquin cited 'in German' as Hagelingen, Oberfillen and Lœrchingen in these same dictionaries, most recently written in 1868. The Germanization of names by the Prussians from 1871 onwards is therefore not an invention (except in certain cases), which used old Germanic references, sometimes the latest one. For example Argancy Germanized in Argesingen during the World War II, refers to an old Germanic mention Argesinga dating from 848. and Chicourt Germanized as Diexingen (1915-1918) from the Diekesinga mention from 1121 and 1180 (-inga being the primitive form of -ingen).

All the toponyms in the department had been gradually Germanized in the German period of the Alsace-Lorraine. The place names of German-speaking Lorraine were first Germanized, adjectives (top, bottom...) were then translated, then the names of villages close to the linguistic boundary of Moselle and the last ones, including all those of French-speaking Moselle [ fr ] were Germanized on 2 September 1915 (e.g. Augny).

At the end of the First World War in 1918, these place names reverted to their pre-1870 version.

All toponyms are Germanised after the annexation of 1940, most of the time using their 1918 form or another more or less different one. They were re-Francized in 1945.

The reorganization of territory is a common occurrence throughout history, thus an important consideration in toponymy. Counties and cantons can be broken apart. New communes can be formed by joining several localities together. And sometimes through these changes a given name can migrate to a different locality that where it was originally used. Records of such territorial changes are increasingly scarce with the centuries, thus territorial histories tend to obscure with time. Few attestations are available for the founding or change of territory through the late first millennium, but records gradually improve, and by the late second millennium, scholars like Cassini, Lepage, and Boutilleir have largely collated all the toponyms attested in charts concerning the history of Austrasia into dictionaries and other tombs of reference.

Consider Condé-Northen in Moselle, which began as the ancient commune, Condé (specifically Condium or Condicum), attested as existing in 787. In 1804, a neighboring commune, Northen, was attached to Condé and the new territory became known by the name it bears today. But the growth did not stop there. In 1810, Pontigny was attached, and finally Loutremange was attached in 1979 by order of a prefectoral decree (arrêté préfectoral). While Northen, Pontigny, and Loutremange are no longer communes, thus no longer considered territorial collectivities, they are still recognized as localities within Condé-Northen.

Today communes increasingly join around large cities, where suburban communes grow into each other. For this to be possible, the communes must be adjacent and within the same department. Officials from both communes must jointly request the merger. The new municipality is typically named by hyphenating the two former toponyms together (seemingly in alphabetical order). Examples include Ancy-Dornot (formerly the communes of Ancy and Dornot) and Freyming-Merlebach (formerly Freyming and Merlebach), both in Moselle. Others certainly exist, and more likely will in the future. Municipalities of this kind are formed in the historical region of Alsace as well.

Yet another situation, though more rural and rare, is a large commune originally formed around multiple hamlets, farms, or other lesser localities that are nevertheless on the map. An example here concerns Métairies-Saint-Quirin, a relatively new commune formed around 1790 when the jurisdiction of the priory of Saint-Quirin was partially changed, possibly in relation to the National Convention. The distributed commune's domain originally encompassed eleven large farms, called censes : Craon (then Créon), Cubolot, Fontaine aux Chênes, Halmoze, Heille (or Helde), L'hor, Le Jardinot (became Haute-Gueisse during the Revolution), Jean Limon, La Petite Maladrerie, Rond-Pré, and Viller (or Courtegain). Of the original eleven properties making up the commune, only six still remain: Cubolot, Halmoze, Heille, Haute-Gueisse, Jean Limon, and Rond-Pré. The town hall of Métairies-Saint-Quirin has been located in Cubolot since 1920.

Corruption in France describes the prevention and occurrence of corruption in France.

France has ratified several important international anti-corruption conventions such as the OECD Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions and the United Nations Convention against Corruption. In general, investors do not consider corruption a problem for doing business in France, and companies operating in France generally have a good reputation for corporate social responsibility.

The French National Assembly have passed two bills for combating tax evasion. However, in recent years there have been several corruption scandals involving high-ranking public officials. Public works and the defence industry are considered the most affected by corruption.

Transparency International 's 2025 Corruption Perceptions Index scored France at 66 on a scale from 0 ("highly corrupt") to 100 ("very clean"). When ranked by score, France ranked 27th among the 182 countries in the Index, where the country ranked first is perceived to have the most honest public sector. For comparison with regional scores, the best score among Western European and European Union countries was 89, the average score was 64 and the worst score was 40. For comparison with worldwide scores, the best score was 89 (ranked 1), the average score was 42, and the worst score was 9 (ranked 181, in a two-way tie).

In 2011, Transparency International concluded in its annual report 2011 that France does not do enough to stop corruption. A TNS Sofres poll in October 2011 indicated that 72% of the French public had the perception that politicians are corrupt.

In France, in 2009 all major foreign investors and exporters and more than 80 per cent of surveyed executives admitted to 'not being familiar at all' with one of the most important legal frameworks in global business. A cartel constitutes a crime punishable by imprisonment and/or fines. Staff and budgets for public enforcement of securities regulation was one third in France compared to the UK in 2008.

Political corruption studies include the presidential campaign 2007 finance investigation in the value of €150,000 from Liliane Bettencourt to Nicolas Sarkozy. The maximum individual support is €4,600. Jacques Chirac was accused of using public funds for his election campaign in Paris in the 1990s. On 15 December 2011, Chirac was found guilty and given a suspended sentence of two years. He was convicted of diverting public funds, abuse of trust and illegal conflict of interest.

The suspended sentence meant he did not have to go to prison and took account of his age, health, and status as a former head of state. He did not attend his trial since medical doctors deemed that his neurological problems damaged his memory.

Bribery investigations spanning from Africa to France are ongoing, including allegations involving Jacques Chirac, Dominique de Villepin, and Jean-Marie Le Pen, who were allegedly linked to bribery claims made by former Gabonese President Omar Bongo. In September 2011, Bernard Granié was tried for accepting a €300,000 bribe from Provence Recyclage.

Alstom has been under investigation in France and Switzerland for allegedly making improper payments of US$200 million for contracts for Brazil's Itá hydroelectric plant, for São Paulo's subway expansion and for other major works in Venezuela, Singapore and Indonesia. The Mexican government has penalised Alstom and in 2007 the European Commission's antitrust authority fined Alstom €65 million for price fixing with competitors.

In 2021, former president Nicolas Sarkozy was convicted of corruption in two separate trials.

In the 1980s and 1990s, there were in the Paris region (Île-de-France) multiple instances of alleged and proved political corruption cases, as well as cases of abuse of public money and resources. Almost all involved were members of the conservative Rally for the Republic (RPR) ruling party, which became the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) in 2002.

Jacques Chirac was mayor of Paris from 1977 to 1995 and has been named in several cases of alleged corruption and abuse, some of which have already led to felony convictions.

Chirac, as president of France (until 16 May 2007), enjoyed virtual immunity from prosecution for acts preceding his tenure as president, following from decision 98-408 DC of the Constitutional Council on 22 January 1999. This decision itself was highly controversial: the council was consulted on the treaty establishing the International Criminal Court, not about the status of the president with respect to the national criminal justice system. At the time, the president of the council was Roland Dumas, who later had to retire from his functions because of his implication in the Elf Aquitaine scandal.

Chirac refused to testify before investigating magistrate Éric Halphen, arguing that this would be incompatible with his presidential functions.

On 10 October 2001, the Court of Cassation ruled that, while the president cannot be prosecuted by normal judicial means during his mandate, such an impossibility suspends the delays of prescription (statute of limitation). If Chirac does not run for office again in 2007 or is not re-elected, he may then be prosecuted on the several affairs he is involved in. This might explain why in 2003 some in the presidential entourage floated around the idea of Chirac running for a third term.

Chirac's foremost critic was deputy Arnaud Montebourg of the Socialist Party, who filed a motion to bring him in front of the High Court of Justice (a procedure similar to impeachment, which has never been applied).

In several districts of Paris, people were allegedly illegally registered on the electoral rolls in an attempt to modify the outcome of elections. In some egregious cases, significant numbers of people were registered at the address of a hotel or of a shop.

There was a shock when a videocassette of businessman Jean-Claude Méry was disclosed after his death in 1999, with Le Monde publishing its full contents in September 2000. In the tape, Méry gave details of kickback schemes in the Paris region; in particular, he said that he delivered FRF 5 million in cash to Michel Roussin, chief of staff of then prime minister Jacques Chirac, "in Chirac's presence". "We only work on Mr. Chirac's orders," Méry said in the video. It was on these grounds that investigating magistrate Éric Halphen summoned president Jacques Chirac in March 2001 as witness, declaring that there were sufficient "clues" to warrant a full investigation. In September 2001, the Paris Appeal Court cancelled part of the proceedings on procedural vices, and removing the affair from judge Halphen's hands. In February 2005, investigating magistrate Armand Riberolles, who succeeded Halphen, abandoned charges against Jean Tiberi (who succeeded Chirac as mayor of Paris), who as former president of the OPAC (Office Public d'Aménagement et de Construction) of Paris, was prosecuted for "complicity in corruption" (complicité de traffic d'influence).

As of January 2006, several CEOs had been prosecuted in the trial, but not one politician. Forty-nine businessmen were prosecuted, among them Francis Poullain [ fr ], CEO of Société d’application et de revêtement [ fr ] company and close to Chirac. According to Le Monde, this trial was met with "relative indifference". The previous investigations had led to the resignation of magistrate Éric Halphen after several cases of intimidation and a tight struggle against the executive power. Personalities such as Michel Roussin, Robert Pandraud or Jean Tiberi, former mayor of Paris, had all been previously acquitted. The investigating magistrate Armand Riberolles, who succeeded Eric Halphen, wrote that the "instruction hadn't been able to formally establish the personal involvement of responsible members of the higher echelons of the RPR", while noting that "a large number of testimonies, cross-checked by various factual elements, show that Jean-Claude Méry had been commissioned to ensure the financing of the RPR's political activities by collecting funds, in particular through the firms working with the OPAC." All proceedings leading to president Chirac had been thrown out in September 2001 by the Paris Court of Appeal, leading to the resignation of judge Halphen.

About 40 are under investigation for the alleged corruption at the Île-de-France regional council. Inquiries showed that 2% of the payments from the Île-de-France council to companies involved in building or repairs on the region's high schools were to be channeled as kickbacks to political parties, either through legal contributions (permitted under the 15 January 1990 law then in force), or through cash deliveries of fictitious employment (i.e. staff of political parties or politicians being paid by the involved companies). According to the enquiry, 1.2% went to the RPR, 0.8% to the French Socialist Party. Michel Giraud, then president of the Île-de-France region, was one of the prime suspects. The following companies admitted to such practices: Sicra [ fr ], Baudin Châteauneuf [ fr ], Grands Travaux de Marseille [ fr ] (GTM), Bouygues, CBC, Nord France, Dumez, Chagnaud, Fougerolle, SAEP, SCGPM, Société parisienne pour l'industrie électrique [ fr ] (SPIE). The investigations were conducted by investigating judges Armand Riberolles and Marc Brisset-Foucault

In March 2005, the case went to trial before the Paris correctional court In October 2005, former president of the Île-de-France region Michel Giraud was condemned to four years of prison on probation and to pay an 80 000 euros fine; Michel Roussin, former chief of staff of Jacques Chirac, was also condemned to four years of prison on probation and to a 50 000 euros fine. These sentences were accompanied by a 5 years suspension of civil and familial rights. Louise-Yvonne Cassetta and Guy Drut were also condemned on probation. Among the 47 persons prosecuted, only Gérard Longuet, former president of the republican party, was acquitted. Libération could state that: "Only one - big - absence in this trial and judgment: Jacques Chirac, whose shadow has constantly towered [over] this four months debate".

During the tenure of Jacques Chirac as mayor of Paris, some people paid by the city government actually worked (full-time) for the RPR party.

Alain Juppé, former secretary-general of the RPR (1988–1995) and former deputy mayor in charge of finances of the City of Paris (1983–1995) and had served as prime minister in 1995-97 was convicted along with accomplices Louise-Yvonne Casetta [ fr ] and Patrick Stefanini [ fr ] of abuse of public funds when he employed people on the city's payroll to perform tasks wholly for the benefit of his party. On 31 January 2004, Alain Juppé was sentenced by the correctional court of Nanterre to 18-month suspended sentence, as well as the deprivation of the right to vote for five years and the right to run for national office for 10 years (reduced on appeal to one year). On 1 December 2004, the Versailles court of appeals reduced the sentence to a 14-month suspended sentence and a deprivation of the right to hold political office for one year. Juppé did not go to the Court of Cassation over this sentence, and had to resign from his position as mayor of Bordeaux.

Another scandal erupted after the ruling when the judges of the Nanterre court alleged that their offices and computers had been searched. President Chirac ordered an administration inquiry commission, composed of high-level magistrates (the vice-president of the Council of State, and the first presidents of the Court of Cassation and the Court of Auditors), to investigate the matter. This decision was criticized because there was no legal nor constitutional basis for it: normally, questions of judicial honesty are handled by the Conseil Supérieur de la Magistrature (CSM), which (politely) protested Chirac's action. The Nanterre judges refused to be heard by the commission, arguing they should see the CSM. The commission concluded that there had been security lapses at the Nanterre court, but did not conclude that there was any wrongdoing. A criminal investigation has also been opened.

On 3 December 2004, the Court of Cassation ruled that a court of appeals had incorrectly ruled that some cases of employment by or payments received from the City of Paris (under the Chirac and Tiberi administrations) for fictitious work fell under prescription (statute of limitations). The court announced that the cases were now referred to the Versailles Court of Appeals. The current administration of the City of Paris, led by Socialist mayor Bertrand Delanoë, had appealed the prescription ruling before the Court of Cassation. Among the suspects are the deputy of Paris Jean de Gaulle, former minister Robert Pandraud etc.

Xavière Tiberi, the spouse of mayor of Paris Jean Tiberi, received FRF 200,000 (approx. €30,000) for a report on francophonie for the general council of the Essonne département. This 36-page report, possibly written after the payment as a justification, was extremely poorly written and contained numerous spelling and grammatical mistakes.

In 2004, mayor Bertrand Delanoë filed a complaint for the past abuse of City of Paris gardening services for private purposes, estimating the public losses to at least €700,000. Individuals close to the RPR allegedly enjoyed free gardening services from City of Paris employees in their houses of the upscale areas of Paris and suburbs. City supplies were allegedly also taken for private usage.

François Fillon who held the position of Prime Minister from 2007 to 2012, was convicted in 2020 for falsely claiming a parliamentary salary for his wife. This conviction highlighted Fillon's wrongdoing in improperly utilizing public funds by allegedly paying his spouse for work she did not actually perform.

Corsican (corsu, pronounced [ ˈkorsu ], or lingua corsa, pronounced [ ˈliŋɡwa ˈɡorsa ]) is a Romance language of the Italo-Romance group, spoken on the Mediterranean island of Corsica, a territory of France, and in the northern part of the island of Sardinia, an autonomous region of Italy. Its northern varieties result from an intense medieval Tuscanisation and are closely related to, and largely mutually intelligible with, Standard Italian, whereas its southern varieties preserve features of an older stratum shared with Sardinian and show affinities with the Extreme Southern Italian dialects.

On the sociolinguistic level, since the 1970s Corsican has increasingly been treated as an autonomous language in its own right rather than an Italian dialect, a status captured by the notion of polynomic language developed by Jean-Baptiste Marcellesi.

Under the long-standing influence of Tuscany's Pisa, and the historic Republic of Genoa, over Corsica, the Corsican language once filled the role of a vernacular, with Italian functioning as the island's official language until France acquired the island from the Republic of Genoa (1768); by 1859, French had replaced Italian as Corsica's first language so much so that, by the time of the Liberation of France (1945), nearly every islander had at least a working-knowledge of French. The 20th century saw a vast language shift, with the islanders adapting and changing their communications to the extent that there were no monolingual Corsican-speakers left by the 1960s. By 1995, an estimated 65% of islanders had some degree of proficiency in Corsican, and a minority of around 10% used Corsican as a first language.

Corsican is classed as a regional language under French law. It is almost universally agreed that Corsican is typologically and traditionally Italo-Romance, but its specific position therein is more controversial. Some scholars argue that Corsican belongs to the Centro-Southern Italian dialects, while others are of the opinion that it is closely related to, or as part of, Italy's Tuscan dialect varieties. Italian and the dialects of Corsican (especially Northern Corsican) are in fact very mutually intelligible. Southern Corsican, in spite of the geographical proximity, has as its closest linguistic neighbour not Sardinian (a separate group with which it is not mutually intelligible), but rather the Extreme Southern Italian dialects like Siculo - Calabrian. It has been theorised, on the other hand, that a Sardinian variety, or a variety very similar to Sardo-Romance, might have been originally spoken in Corsica prior to the island's Tuscanisation under Pisan and Genoese rule.

Corsican's affinities with the central and centro-southern Italian dialects had already been noted in earlier scholarship: Diez (1874) and Meyer-Lübke (1941) grouped Corsican with the central Italian dialects (the centro-southern macro-group, as opposed to the northern one), and Clemente Merlo, in his study "Concordanze corse-italiane-centromeridionali" (1925), pointed to phonetic and morphosyntactic features shared by Corsican and the dialects spoken "from the southern Marche and Umbria down to Apulia, Calabria and Sicily".

The matter is controversial in light of the historical, cultural and particularly strong linguistic bonds that Corsica had traditionally formed with the Italian Mainland from the Middle Ages until the 19th century: in contrast to the neighbouring Sardinia, Corsica's installment into a diglossic system with Italian as the island's prestige language ran so deep that both Corsican and Italian might be even, and in fact were, perceived as two sociolinguistic levels of a single language. Corsican and Italian traditionally existed on a spectrum, and the dividing lines between them were blurred enough that the locals needed little else but a change of register to communicate in an official setting. "Tuscanising" their tongue, or as the Corsican elites would have once said, parlà in crusca ("speaking in crusca ", from the name of the Academy dedicated to the standardisation of the Italian language), allowed for a practice not of code-switching, but rather of code-mixing which is quite typical of the Mainland Italian dialects. Italian was perceived as different from Corsican, but not as much as the differences between the two main isoglosses of Northern and Southern Corsican, as spoken by their respective native speakers. When Pasquale Paoli found himself exiled in London, he replied to Samuel Johnson 's query on the peculiar existence of a "rustic language" very different from Italian that such a language existed only in Sardinia; in fact, the existence of Corsican as the island's native vernacular did not take anything away from Paoli's claims that Corsica's official language was Italian.

Today's Corsican is the result of these historical vicissitudes, which have morphed the language to an idiom that bears a strong resemblance to the medieval Tuscan once spoken at the time of Dante and Boccaccio, and still existing in peripheral Tuscany (Lucca, Garfagnana, Elba, Capraia). The correspondence of modern Corsican to ancient Tuscan can be seen from almost any aspect of the language, ranging from the phonetics, morphology, lexicon to the syntax. One of the characteristics of standard Italian is the retention of the - re infinitive ending, as in Latin mittere "send"; such infinitival ending is lost in Tuscan as well as Corsican, resulting in the outcome mette / metta, "to put". Whereas the relative pronoun in Italian for "who" is chi and "what" is che / (che) cosa, it is an uninflected chì in Corsican. The only unifying, as well as distinctive, feature which separates the Corsican dialects from the mainland Tuscan ones, with the exception of Amiatino, Pitiglianese, and Capraiese, is the retention of word-final o - u. For example, the Italian demonstrative pronouns questo "this" and quello "that" become in Corsican questu or quistu and quellu or quiddu : this feature was also typical of the early Italian texts during the Middle Ages.

Even after the acquisition of Corsica by Louis XV, Italian continued to be the island's language of education, literature, religion and local affairs. The affluent youth still went to Italy to pursue higher studies. (It has been estimated that Corsican presence in Pisa amounted to a fourth of the University 's total student body in 1830.) Local civil registers continued to be written in Italian until 1855; it was on 9 May 1859, that Italian was replaced by French as the island's official language, although the latter would start to take root among the islanders from 1882 onwards, through the Jules Ferry laws aimed at spreading literacy across the French provinces. Even so, a specifically homegrown Corsican (rather than Italian) literature in Corsica only developed belatedly and, in its earliest phase, there were no autonomous cultural instances; Corsican writers, such as Salvatore Viale, even prided themselves on their affiliation to the broader Italian sphere, considering Corsican "one of the lowest, impure dialects of Italy".

It was the Italian Fascist aggressive claims to the island in the 20th century, followed by their invasion, that provoked a popular backlash, estranging the native islanders from standard Italian and, if anything, only accelerated their shifting to the French even further. By the Liberation of France, any previously existing link between the two linguistic varieties and with Italy altogether had been severed; any promotion of Corsican, which had been politicized by the local collaborators with the regime, would be met with popular criticism and even suspicion of potentially harboring irredentist sentiments. From then on, Corsican would grow independently of Italian to become, later in the 1970s, a centerpiece of the Riacquistu ("reacquisition") movement for the rediscovery of Corsican culture. Nationalist calls for Corsican to be put on the same footing as French led the French National Assembly, in 1974, to extend the 1951 Deixonne Law, which initially recognized only a few languages (Breton, Basque, Catalan and Occitan), to including Corsican as well, among others, not as a dialect of Italian, but as one of France's full-fledged regional languages. (See governmental support.)

The common relationship between Corsica and central Italy can be traced from as far back as the Etruscans, who asserted their presence on the island in as early as 500 BC. In 40 AD, the natives of Corsica reportedly did not speak Latin. The Roman exile, Seneca the Younger, reported that both coast and interior were occupied by natives whose language he was not able to understand. More specifically, Seneca claimed that the island's population was the result of the stratification of different ethnic groups, such as the Greeks, the Ligures (see the Ligurian hypothesis) and the Iberians, whose language had long since stopped being recognizable among the population due to the intermixing of the other two groups. The occupation of the island by the Vandals around the year 469 marked the end of authoritative influence by Latin speakers. (See Medieval Corsica.) If the natives of that time spoke Latin, they must have acquired it during the late empire.

Modern Corsican has been influenced by the languages of the major powers taking an interest in Corsican affairs; earlier by those of the medieval Italian powers, such as the Papal States (828–1077), the Republic of Pisa (1077–1282) and the Republic of Genoa (1282–1768), and finally by France which, since 1859, has promulgated the official Parisian French. The term " gallicised Corsican" refers to the evolution of Corsican starting from about the year 1950, whereas "distanciated Corsican" refers to an idealized variety of Corsican following linguistic purism, by means of removing any French-derived elements.

The two most widely spoken forms of the Corsican language are the groups spoken in the Bastia and Corte area (generally throughout the northern half of the island, known as Haute-Corse, Cismonte or Corsica suprana), and the groups spoken around Sartène and Porto-Vecchio (generally throughout the southern half of the island, known as Corse-du-Sud, Pumonti or Corsica suttana). The dialect of Ajaccio has been described as in transition. The dialects spoken at Calvi and Bonifacio (Bonifacino) are dialects of the Ligurian language.

This division along the Girolata-Porto Vecchio line was due to the massive immigration from Tuscany which took place in Corsica during the lower Middle Ages: as a result, the northern Corsican dialects became very close to a central Italian dialect like Tuscan, while the southern Corsican varieties could keep the original characteristics of the language which make it much more similar to Sicilian and, only to some extent, Sardinian.

The Northern Corsican macro variety (Supranacciu, Supranu, Cismuntincu or Cismontano) is the most widespread on the island and standardised as well, and is spoken in North-West Corsica around the districts of Bastia and Corte. The dialects of Bastia and Cap Corse belong to the Western Tuscan dialects; they being, with the exception of Florentine, the closest to standard Italian. All the dialects presenting, in addition to what has already been stated, the conditional formed in -ebbe (e.g. (ella) amarebbe "she would love") are generally considered Cismontani dialects, situated north of a line uniting the villages of Piana, Vico, Vizzavona, Ghisoni and Ghisonaccia, and also covering the subgroups from the Cap Corse (which, unlike the rest of the island and similarly to Italian, uses lu, li, la, le as definite articles), Bastia (besides i > e and a > e, u > o: ottanta, momentu, toccà, continentale ; a > o: oliva, orechja, ocellu), Balagna, Niolo and Corte (which retain the general Corsican traits: distinu, ghjinnaghju, sicondu, billezza, apartu, farru, marcuri, cantaraghju, uttanta, mumentu, tuccà, cuntinentale, aliva, arechja, acellu).

Across the Northern and Southern borders of the line separating the Northern dialects from the Southern ones, there is a transitional area picking up linguistic phenomena associated with either of the two groups, with some local peculiarities. Along the Northern line are the dialects around Piana and Calcatoggio, from Cinarca with Vizzavona (which form the conditional as in the South), and Fiumorbo through Ghisonaccia and Ghisoni, which have the retroflex [ ɖ ] sound (written -dd-) for historical -ll- ; along the Southern line, the dialects of Ajaccio (retroflex -dd-, realized as - ghj -, feminine plurals ending in i, some Northern words like cane and accattà instead of ghjacaru and cumprà, as well as ellu / ella and not eddu / edda ; minor variations: sabbatu > sabbitu, u li dà > ghi lu dà ; final syllables often stressed and truncated: marinari > marinà, panatteri > panattè, castellu > castè, cuchjari > cuchjà), the Gravona area, Bastelica (which would be classified as Southern, but is also noted for its typical rhotacism: Basterga) and Solenzara, which did not preserve the Latin short vowels: seccu, peru, rossu, croci, pozzu.

The Southern Corsican macro variety (Suttanacciu, Suttanu, Pumuntincu or Oltramontano) is the most archaic and conservative group, spoken in the districts of Sartène and Porto-Vecchio. Unlike the Northern varieties and similarly to Sardinian, the group retains the distinction of the Latin short vowels ĭ and ŭ (e.g. pilu, bucca). It is also strongly marked by the presence of the voiced retroflex stop, like Sicilian (e.g. aceddu, beddu, quiddu, ziteddu, famidda), and the conditional mood formed in -ìa (e.g. (idda) amarìa "she would love"). All the Oltramontani dialects are from an area located to the South of Porticcio, Bastelica, Col di Verde and Solenzara. Notable dialects are those from around Taravo (retroflex - dd - only for historical -ll- : frateddu, suredda, beddu ; preservation of the palatal lateral approximant : piglià, famiglia, figliolu, vogliu ; does not preserve the Latin short vowels: seccu, peru, rossu, croci, pozzu), Sartène (preserving the Latin short vowels: siccu, piru, russu, cruci, puzzu ; changing historical -rn- to -rr- : forru, carri, corru ; substituting the stop for the palatal lateral approximant: piddà, famidda, fiddolu, voddu ; imperfect tense like cantàvami, cantàvani ; masculine plurals ending in a : l'ochja, i poma ; having eddu/edda/eddi as personal pronouns), the Alta Rocca (the most conservative area in Corsica, being very close to the varieties spoken in Northern Sardinia), and the Southern region located between the hinterlands of Porto-Vecchio and Bonifacio (masculine singulars always ending in u : fiumu, paesu, patronu ; masculine plurals always ending in a : i letta, i solda, i ponta, i foca, i mura, i loca, i balcona ; imperfect tense like cantàiami, cantàiani).

Sassarese derives from the Italian language and, more precisely, from ancient Tuscan, which by the 12th century had slowly grown to become the parlance of the commoners, at a time when the bourgeois and nobles still spoke Logudorese Sardinian. During the age of the Free Commune (1294–1323), the Sassarese dialect was nothing more than a contaminated Pisan, to which Sardinian, Corsican and Spanish expressions had been added; it is therefore not an indigenous dialect, but rather a continental one and, to be more specific, a mixed Tuscan dialect with its own peculiarities, and different from the Corsican-imported Gallurese.

— Mario Pompeo Coradduzza, Il sistema del dialetto, 2004, Introduzione

Some Italo-Romance varieties that originated from Southern Corsican, though also influenced by the Sardinian language, are spoken on the neighbouring island of Sardinia ; Gallurese in particular is described as Corsican imported from the far south of the island.

Gallurese is spoken in the extreme north of the island, including the region of Gallura, while Sassarese is spoken in Sassari and in its neighbourhood, in the northwest of Sardinia. Their geographical position in Sardinia has been theorised to be the result of different migration waves from the already tuscanized Corsicans and the Tuscans, who then proceeded to settle in Sardinia and slowly displace the indigenous Logudorese Sardinian varieties spoken therein (at present, Luras is the only town in the middle of Gallura that has retained the original language).

On the Maddalena archipelago, which was culturally Corsican but had been annexed to the Savoyard Kingdom of Sardinia a short while before Corsica was ceded by Genoa to France in 1767, the local dialect (called isulanu or maddaleninu) was brought by fishermen and shepherds from Bonifacio over a long period of immigration in the 17th and 18th centuries. Though influenced by Gallurese, it has maintained the original characteristics of Southern Corsican. In the dialect of maddalenino, as it is known in Italian, there are also numerous words of Genoese and Ponzese origin.

Although Gallurese and Sassarese both belong to Italo-Dalmatian, which is a group typologically different from Sardinian, it has long been a subject of debate whether the two should be included as dialects either of Corsican or of Sardinian or, in light of their historical development, even considered languages of their own. It has been argued that all these varieties should be placed in a single category, Southern Romance, but such classification has not garnered universal support among linguists.

On 14 October 1997, Article 2 Item 4 of Law Number 26 of the Autonomous Region of Sardinia granted "the Sassarese and Gallurese dialects" (« al dialetto sassarese e a quello gallurese ») equal legal status with the other languages indigenous to Sardinia. Thus, even though they would technically not be covered by the national law pertaining to the historical linguistic minorities, among which is Sardinian, Sassarese and Gallurese are nonetheless recognized by the Sardinian government on a regional level.

The situation of Corsican with regard to French as the country's national language is analogous to that of many other French regions and provinces, which have or used to have a traditional language of their own, even though the islanders' switch from their local idiom to regional French has happened relatively later and the presence of Corsican, albeit declining, is still strongly felt among the population. In 1980, about 70 percent of the island's population "had some command of the Corsican language." In 1990, out of a total population of about 254,000, the percentage had declined to 50 percent, with 10 percent of the island's residents using it as a first language. The language appeared to be in serious decline when the French government reversed its unsupportive stand and initiated some strong measures to save it.

The January 2007 estimated population of Corsica was 281,000, whereas the figure for the March 1999 census, when most of the studies—though not the linguistic survey work referenced in this article—were performed, was about 261,000. Only a fraction of the population at either time spoke Corsican with any fluency.

According to an official survey run on behalf of the Territorial Collectivity of Corsica which took place in April 2013, in Corsica, the Corsican language had a number of speakers between 86,800 and 130,200, out of a total population amounting to 309,693 inhabitants. 28% of the overall population was able to speak Corsican well, while an additional 14% had a capacity to speak it "quite well." The percentage of those who had a solid oral understanding of the language varies between a minimum of 25 percent in the 25–34 age group and the maximum of 65 percent in the over-65 age group: almost a quarter of the former age group reported that they were not able to understand Corsican, while only a small minority of the older people did not understand it. While 32 percent of the population of Northern Corsica was reported to speak Corsican quite well, this percentage dropped to 22 percent for Southern Corsica. Moreover, 10 percent of the population of Corsica spoke only French, while 62 percent code-switched between French and at least some Corsican. 8 percent of the Corsicans knew how to write correctly in Corsican, while about 60 percent of the population did not know how to write in Corsican. While 90 percent of the population was in favor of a Corsican-French bilingualism, 3 percent would have liked to have only Corsican as the official language in the island, and 7 percent would have preferred French to have this role.

A 2022 estimate by the Collectivity of Corsica put the number of Corsican speakers on the island at about 105,000, with roughly a further 30,000 in mainland France and abroad, for a total of some 125,000; the island's population had by then reached about 350,000.

UNESCO classifies Corsican as a "definitely endangered language." The Corsican language is a key vehicle for Corsican culture, which is notably rich in proverbs and in polyphonic song.

When the French Assembly passed the Deixonne Law in 1951, which made it possible for regional languages to be taught at school, Alsatian, Flemish and Corsican were not included on the ground of being classified as dialectes allogènes of German, Dutch and Italian respectively, i.e. dialects of foreign languages and not languages in themselves. Only in 1974 were they too politically recognized as regional languages for their teaching on a voluntary basis.

The 1991 Joxe Statute, in setting up the Collectivité Territoriale de Corse, also provided for the Corsican Assembly, and charged it with developing a plan for the optional teaching of Corsican. The University of Corsica Pasquale Paoli at Corte, Haute-Corse took a central role in the planning.

At the primary school level Corsican is taught up to a fixed number of hours per week (three in the year 2000) and is a voluntary subject at the secondary school level, but is required at the University of Corsica. It is available through adult education. It can be spoken in court or in the conduct of other government business if the officials concerned speak it. The Cultural Council of the Corsican Assembly advocates for its use, for example, on public signs.

In 2023, in a judgement initiated by local prefect and going in opposite direction of recent trends, usage of the Corsican language in French public offices and the regional parliament was legally banned, the existence of the "Corsican people" was also deemed unconstitutional.

According to the anthropologist Dumenica Verdoni, writing new literature in modern Corsican, known as the Riacquistu, is an integral part of affirming Corsican identity. Some individuals have returned from careers in continental France to write in Corsican, including Dumenicu Togniotti, director of the Teatru Paisanu, which produced polyphonic musicals, 1973–1982, followed in 1980 by Michel Raffaelli's Teatru di a Testa Mora, and Saveriu Valentini's Teatru Cupabbia in 1984. Modern prose writers include Alanu di Meglio, Ghjacumu Fusina, Lucia Santucci, and Marcu Biancarelli.

There were writers working in Corsican in the 1700s and 1800s.

Ferdinand Gregorovius, a 19th-century traveller and enthusiast of Corsican culture, reported that the preferred form of the literary tradition of his time was the vocero, a type of polyphonic ballad originating from funeral obsequies. These laments were similar in form to the chorales of Greek drama except that the leader could improvise. Some performers were noted at this, such as the 1700s Mariola della Piazzole and Clorinda Franseschi. However, the trail of written popular literature of known date in Corsican currently goes no further back than the 17th century. An undated corpus of proverbs from communes may well precede it (see under External links below). Corsican has also left a trail of legal documents ending in the late 12th century. At that time the monasteries held considerable land on Corsica and many of the churchmen were notaries.

Between 1200 and 1425 the monastery of Gorgona, which belonged to the Order of Saint Benedict for much of that time and was in the territory of Pisa, acquired about 40 legal papers of various sorts related to Corsica. As the church was replacing Pisan prelates with Corsican ones there, the legal language shows a transition from entirely Latin through partially Latin and partially Corsican to entirely Corsican. The first known surviving document containing some Corsican is a bill of sale from Patrimonio dated to 1220. These documents were moved to Pisa before the monastery closed its doors and were published there. Research into earlier evidence of Corsican is ongoing.

Corsican is written in the standard Latin script, using 21 of the letters for native words, like in Italian. The letters j, k, w, x, and y are found only in foreign names, still like in Italian, but also in French vocabulary. The digraphs and trigraphs chj, ghj, sc and sg are also defined as "letters" of the alphabet in its modern scholarly form (compare the presence of ch or ll in the old Spanish alphabet) and appear respectively after c, g and s.

The primary diacritic used is the grave accent, indicating word stress when it is not penultimate. In scholarly contexts, disyllables may be distinguished from diphthongs by use of the diaeresis on the former vowel (as in Italian and distinct from French and English). In older writing, the acute accent is sometimes found on stressed ⟨ e ⟩, the circumflex on stressed ⟨ o ⟩, indicating respectively (/e/) and (/o/) phonemes.

Corsican has been regarded as a dialect of Italian historically, similar to the Romance lects developed on the Italian peninsula, and in writing, it also resembles Italian (with the generalised substitution of - u for final - o and the articles u and a for il/lo and la respectively; however, both the dialect of Cap Corse and Gallurese retain the original articles lu and la). On the other hand, the phonemes of the modern Corsican dialects have undergone complex and sometimes irregular phenomena depending on phonological context, so the pronunciation of the language for foreigners familiar with other Romance languages is not straightforward.

As in Italian, the grapheme ⟨ i ⟩ appears in some digraphs and trigraphs in which it does not represent the phonemic vowel. All vowels are pronounced except in a few well-defined instances. ⟨ i ⟩ is not pronounced between ⟨ sc/sg/c/g ⟩ and ⟨ a/o/u ⟩ : sciarpa [ˈʃarpa] ; or initially in some words: istu [ˈstu]

Vowels may be nasalized before ⟨ n ⟩ (which is assimilated to ⟨ m ⟩ before ⟨ p ⟩ or ⟨ b ⟩) and the palatal nasal consonant represented by ⟨ gn ⟩. The nasal vowels are represented by the vowel plus ⟨ n ⟩, ⟨ m ⟩ or ⟨ gn ⟩. The combination is a digraph or trigraph indicating the nasalized vowel. The consonant is pronounced in weakened form. The same combination of letters might not be the digraph or trigraph but might be just the non-nasal vowel followed by the consonant at full weight. The speaker must know the difference. Example of nasal: ⟨ pane ⟩ is pronounced [ˈpãnɛ] and not [ˈpanɛ].

The Northern and central dialects in the vicinity of the Taravo river adopt the Italian seven-vowel system (the Italo-Western type and a unique type where the short high vowels of Latin are uniquely reflected as mid-low vowels), whereas all the Southern ones around the so-called "archaic zone" with its centre being the town of Sartène (including the Gallurese dialect spoken in Northern Sardinia) resort to a five-vowel system without length differentiation, like Sardinian.

The vowel inventory, or collection of phonemic vowels (and the major allophones), transcribed in IPA symbols, is:

Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Corsican:

Nascinu tutti l'omi libari è pari di dignità è di diritti. Pussedinu a raghjoni è a cuscenza è li tocca ad agiscia trà elli di modu fraternu.

Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in English:

All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.

The Corsican montane broadleaf and mixed forests ecoregion, in the Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub biome, are on the island of Corsica. The ecoregion includes the high-elevation areas of Corsica's mountainous interior.

The ecoregion covers an area of 3,600 square kilometers (1,400 sq mi), approximately 40% of the area of the island. The montane forests are surrounded at lower elevations by the Tyrrhenian-Adriatic sclerophyllous and mixed forests. The highest elevations in the ecoregion are Monte Cinto (2,710 m) and Monte Rotondo (2,625 m).

The ecoregion is home to several distinct forest communities, which vary with elevation and exposure.

Lower elevations are occupied by forests of evergreen sclerophyll oaks, including holm oak (Quercus ilex) and cork oak (Quercus suber).

Middle elevations are predominantly forests of maritime pine (Pinus pinaster) interspersed with forests of mixed broadleaf deciduous trees, including downy oak (Quercus pubescens), sessile oak (Quercus petraea), English oak (Quercus robur), European hop-hornbeam (Ostrya carpinifolia), Italian alder (Alnus cordata) and sweet chestnut (Castanea sativa).

At the higher elevations, forests of Corsican pine (Pinus nigra subsp. salzmannii var. corsicana) predominate on the warmer south-facing slopes, while silver fir (Abies alba) and European beech (Fagus sylvatica) predominate on the cooler north-facing slopes. The highest elevations are subalpine shrublands, with green alder (Alnus viridis), juniper (Juniperus communis subsp. alpina), sycamore maple (Acer pseudoplatanus), and stands of silver birch (Betula pendula).

2829 km (78%) of the ecoregion's area is protected, mostly in the Regional Natural Park of Corsica.

Founded in the mid-1980s, the Corsican Workers’ Trade Union (STC, Syndicat des Travailleurs Corses), an offshoot of the island's nationalist movement, quickly became the island's most popular organization for workers on the island. Besides agitating for the economic agenda one would expect of a labour union the STC has an agenda pushing for greater cultural autonomy from France.

In late February 2004, the STC declared a campaign on the state owned maritime transport firm National Corsican Mediterranean Company (Société Nationale Corse Méditerranée, SNCM). STC demanded that the company, which provides a great deal of the sea borne transport to and from the island, hire more Corsicans as well as raise their wages. An initial compromise was reached at the time, but a court struck it down on grounds of discrimination.

STC renewed their effort September 3 of that year, much to the chagrin of the financially destitute company. The strike was brought to a close September 19 with SCNM agreeing to, "Rebalance the numbers of new crew members recruited in Corsica and in other regions, using equal competence criteria and within the normal parameters of the company’s recruitment" in addition to 'island resident' bonuses for Corsican employees. It is likely SCNM was motivated to compromise by competition from Corsica Ferries, a Swiss company that, nevertheless, is headquartered in Bastia and has "A management structure comprised of young Corsicans". Although employing only 290 islanders, as opposed to SCNM's 816, Corsica Ferries had a bill of 50 million euros and was a likely contributor to SCNM's 11% decline in profits from Corsican services between 1996 and 2003 (72% to 61%).

The agreement served to highlight the tensions between STC and the mainland General Confederation of Labour (Confédération générale du travail, CGT). SNCM ships were blockaded for four days as a protest against what mainland unions feel is a political agenda, namely Corsican nationalism that threatens French principles of non-discrimination. The French government, however, ruled the compromise, "Does not infringe the principle of non-discrimination in employment" and the Corsican CGT branch joined local business and political leaders in what they saw as an important step against the disparity in Corsican employees in a business receiving substantial subsidies from the Corsican regional authority.

By 2005 SCNM was in even worse financial condition. When plans for a Butler Capital Partners of the firm were announced sometimes violent STC protests erupted in Bastia (there were protests in Marseille as well, but these were not affiliated with STC but the CGT). Commandos were brought in to recapture the Pasquale Paoli, an SCNM ship hijacked in Marseille by 30 STC members, when it attempted to enter the Bastia port. An investigation into "hijacking a ship" was launched, if found guilty the ring leaders may be faced with 30 years in prison. More demonstrators attempted to seal the port and stop two ships from leaving. They clashed violently with riot police for four hours injuring a photographer before the ships were free to leave.

Contrary to the earlier disagreement with SCNM, the STC and the CGT were united in their condemnation of the privatization plans; "The government bears the entire responsibility for the conflict... The workers are raising their heads and have decided to fight against the consequences of intensive liberalism" read the joint statement released by France's main trade unions who were joined by the French Socialist Party in their condemnation of the military response to the strikes.

The Corsicans (Corsican, Italian : Corsi ; French : Corses) are a Romance ethnic group native to the Mediterranean island of Corsica, a territorial collectivity of France.

The island was populated since the Mesolithic (Dame de Bonifacio) and the Neolithic by people who came from the Italian Peninsula, especially the modern regions of Tuscany and Liguria. An important megalithic tradition developed locally since the 4th millennium BC. Reached, like Sardinia, by Polada culture influences in the Early Bronze Age, in the 2nd millennium BC Corsica, the southern part in particular, saw the rise of the Torrean civilization, strongly linked to the Nuragic civilization.

The modern Corsicans are named after an ancient people known by the Romans as Corsi. The Corsi, who gave their name to the island, also inhatibed the Northeastern part of Nuragic Sardinia (Gallura). According to Ptolemy, the Corsi were made up of a large number of tribes that dwelt in Corsica (namely the Belatones or Belatoni, the Cervini, the Cilebenses or Cilibensi, the Cumanenses or Cumanesi, the Licinini, the Macrini, the Opini, the Subasani, the Sumbri, the Tarabeni, the Titiani and the Venacini) as well as in the far north-east of Sardinia (the Lestricones, Lestrigones or Lestriconi / Lestrigoni, the Longonenses or Longonensi). These Corsi shared the island with the Tibulati, who dwelt at the extreme north of Sardinia near the ancient town of Tibula.

According to several scholars, they may have been a group of tribes affiliated to the ancient Ligures, like the Ilvates in the neighboring Ilva island (today's Elba in Italy), and may have spoken the old Ligurian language. Seneca claimed that the Corsi were of mixed origin, resulting from the continuous mingling of various ethnic groups of foreign origin, like the Ligures, the Greeks and the Iberians. In the aftermath of the battle of Alalia, Corsica was occupied by the Etruscans. At the beginning of our era, Corsica underwent Romanization. In the Middle Ages, the local population of Corsica mixed with a minority of Byzantines, Germanic Ostrogoths, Franks and Lombards. In the 9th century, the established Holy Roman Empire continually warred with the Saracens for control of the island. In 807, Charlemagne's constable Burchard defeated an invading force from Al Andalus. In the 11th and 18th centuries the Pisans and the Genoese dominated the island. The indigenous population preferred to live in the central part of the island, which contributed to relative security and prevented them from mingling with foreigners.

Strabo says that when the Roman captains did some errands in Corsica and took a large number of slaves to Rome, one looked with admiration at the fact that the Corsicans were all savages and were more beast than man: for either they hunted each other to death in every way possible to them, or else they annoyed their masters so greatly with their impatience and lack of wit, that the said masters were angry for having put their money into it, although they would have cost them very little.

For several centuries the Corsicans suffered raids from the Barbary and many captured Corsicans were enslaved in North Africa. Some of these slaves converted to Islam and became renegades in the service of the Ottoman Empire, they in turn captured other Corsicans. Among these renegades are Hasan Corso, Mami Corso and Murad I Bey (born Giacomo Senti) who founded the Muradid dynasty, of Corsican origin and who reigned over the Regency of Tunis from 1613 to 1702.

At the end of the Middle Ages and at the beginning of the Renaissance, the Corsicans distinguished themselves in combat in many conflicts, many of them were then mercenaries (or Condottieri) and fought for sometimes rival Kingdoms. Corsicans distinguished themselves in particular during the Battle of Lepanto alongside the Holy League against the Ottoman Empire, others were mercenaries in the service of the Kingdom of France (including Sampiero Corso who also served the Kingdom of Naples and returned to his native land with the support of France, Naples, and the Ottoman Empire to confront the Genoese occupiers).

At the beginning of the 17th century, according to Pierre Davity, the Corsicans were hardly civilized for the most part and there was not in them that politeness that one sees among the Italians. They are "extremely cruel" and still retain what Caesar said of them for this look, nevertheless there are some very good soldiers and brave strong men among them. Moreover, they are so vindictive that the Italians have a common proverb which says that one should not trust a Corsican, neither alive nor dead, because as soon as someone has been killed, suddenly all his relatives come together to kill the murderer if it is possible for them.

In subsequent centuries, Corsica was ruled and settled by Pisans (from 1050 to 1295) and the Genoese (from 1295 to 1755, when the island broke free from La Superba): this is reflected in the fact that around 80% of the modern Corsican surnames (Casanova, Luciani, Agostini, Colonna, Paoli, Bartoli, Rossi, Albertini, Filippi, Cesari, etc.) is found in Italy, as well as in the fact that the modern Corsican varieties, especially the Northern ones, are linguistically considered part of Tuscan. Because the island has been historically and culturally related to the Italian mainland up until then, the Italian populations from Northern and Central Italy have contributed to a significant degree to the modern Corsican ancestry.

In 1891 Roland Bonaparte wrote in Une excursion en Corse that the Corsicans particularly abhor injustice and since the Genoese who ruled the island for 500 years had erected the denial of justice into a principle of government, it followed that the Corsica was reduced to taking justice into his own hands: hence the vendetta.

Throughout the 19th century many Corsicans sympathized with the Bonapartist doctrine and French nationalism while other Corsicans took part in French political and military life.

Corsica has a population of 322,120 inhabitants (Jan. 2013 estimate). At the 2011 census, 56.3% of the inhabitants of Corsica were born on the island and 28.6% in Continental France, while 0.3% were natives of Overseas France and 14.8% hailed from foreign (non-French) countries.

The majority of the foreign population in Corsica comes from the Maghreb (particularly Algerians, who made up 33.5% of all immigrants in Corsica at the 2011 census), and from Southern Europe (particularly Portuguese, 22.7% of all immigrants, followed by the Italians, 13.7%).

During the 19th century and the first part of the 20th century, Corsican emigration was significant. Large numbers of Corsicans left the island for the French mainland or foreign countries. During the 19th century, the favorite destinations of migrants were the French colonies and South America (for more details, see Corsican immigration to Puerto Rico and Corsican immigration to Venezuela).

Then, between the 1920s and the 1950s, the major destination became the French mainland, primarily Marseille, which today is considered as the "first Corsican city of the world" with around 100,000 Corsicans in the city. Causes of this emigration are various; poverty is the main reason (the French laws for restriction of exportations, the Second Industrial Revolution and the agricultural crisis had an adverse effect on the local economy). Later, the departures have become more considerable owing to the demographic strain caused by First World War.

Notes: Essentially Pieds-Noirs who resettled in Corsica after the independence of Tunisia, Morocco and Algeria, many of whom had Corsican ancestry. An immigrant is by French definition a person born in a foreign country and who didn't have French citizenship at birth. Note that an immigrant may have acquired French citizenship since moving to France, but is still listed as an immigrant in French statistics. On the other hand, persons born in France with foreign citizenship (the children of immigrants) are not listed as immigrants. Morocco, Tunisia, Algeria Portugal, Italy, Spain, Andorra, Gibraltar, Monaco Source: INSEE

Corsican society is a militarized society, during the Middle Ages, many Corsican men had been part of Condottiere troops in the service of various kingdoms and empires in Europe. This was probably due to the fact that Corsica, deprived of wealth resources, could only enrich itself at the time through its inhabitants waging war. In the history of France, since the Conquest of Corsica, the Corsicans were the national ethnic group most involved in armed forces in proportion to their population. After the French Conquest of Corsica, many Corsicans refusing the French yoke took up arms, harassing the new authorities. A large number of generals in the French army during the First French Empire were also Corsicans.

At the beginning of the 21st century, Corsica holds the record number per capita of people with authorized gun ownership. With 341 declared weapons per 1,000 inhabitants, the island is at the top of the French regions with a level of weaponry comparable to Texas.

The vendetta is one of the key points of Corsican society. The Corsicans have for a very long time, due to the absence of state and cult of honor, preferred to use the Vendetta in cases of dishonor of oneself or towards a member of one's family, or to avenge a murder committed by a reckless one.

Among Corsicans, the permanent invocation of honour for the most serious and the most trivial things is an attitude which allows one to settle scores.

In some cases, the vendetta can be settled by a mediator, thus allowing the vengeance to end, or end with the death of the guilty person.

The Corsicans are in the extreme majority Roman Catholics, although with their own pre-Christian contributions. Catholicism, beyond religion, is at the very source of Corsican culture, it is traditional music, symphonies or songs, Catholicism and liturgical songs have directly impacted the way of singing traditional music.

Previously, some Corsicans were Muslims, followers of Sunni Islam, but this did not concern the majority, Corsican Muslims were established in North Africa and were often freed slaves.

The Corsicans had within their culture their own supernatural myths and legends. Historically superstitious, the Corsican population had its own beliefs passed down from generation to generation.

« L'ochju » is the Corsican version of Evil Eye. To remove «l'ochju» you need a «signatore» (a kind of faith healer) who exorcise the affected person by dint of prayers and rituals.

The "Mazzeru" is a kind of sorcerer who predicts the death of human beings in his dreams. He hunts and kills the first wild beast he finds, turns it over and sees on its face the face of a loved one who will soon die. After this period, their lifespan cannot exceed one year and 3 days. The "Mazzeru" would be someone strange and mysterious but not necessarily evil, since he kills against his will during his dreams.

Native Corsican first names differ very widely from French and Italian first names, so that a bearer of a native first name is easily recognizable. Here are some examples:

Due to the possibility for certain people who do not speak Corsican to mispronounce these first names, some are not used in civil registration but can be used as pseudonyms by people with the equivalent of these first names to assert their identity.

Alongside French (Français), the official language throughout France, Corsican (Corsu) is the other most widely spoken language on the island: it is a Romance language pertaining to the Italo-Dalmatian branch and akin to medieval Tuscan. Corsican was long the vernacular language besides Italian (Italiano), which retained official status in Corsica until 1859. Since then, Italian as the island's traditional prestige language has been replaced by French due to the annexation of the island by France in 1768. Over the next two centuries, the use of French grew to the extent that, by the Liberation in 1945, all islanders had a working knowledge of French. The twentieth century saw a wholesale language shift, with islanders changing their language practices to the extent that there were no monolingual Corsican speakers left by the 1960s. By 1990, an estimated 50% of islanders had some degree of proficiency in Corsican, and a small minority, perhaps 10%, used Corsican as a first language. Fewer and fewer people speak also a Ligurian dialect in what has long been a language island, Bonifacio : it is locally known by the name of bunifazzin.

Gallurese dialect is a variety of Corsican spoken in the extreme north of Sardinia, including the region of Gallura and the archipelago of La Maddalena. In the Maddalena archipelago, the local dialect (called Isulanu, Maddaleninu, Maddalenino) was brought by shepherds from Alta Rocca and Sartène in southern Corsica during immigration in the 17th to 18th centuries. Though influenced by Gallurese, it has maintained the original characteristics of Corsican. There are also numerous words of Genoese and Ponzese origin.

The January 2007 estimated population of the island was 281,000, while the figure for the March 1999 census, when most of the studies – though not the linguistic survey work referenced in this article – were performed, was about 261,000 (see under Corsica). Only a fraction of the population at either time spoke Corsican with any fluency. The 2001 population of 341,000 speakers on the island given by Ethnologue exceeds either census and thus may be considered questionable, like its estimate of 402,000 speakers worldwide.

The use of Corsican over French has been declining. In 1980 about 70% of the population "had some command of the Corsican language." In 1990 out of a total population of about 254,000 the percentage had declined to 50%, with only 10% using it as a first language. The language appeared to be in serious decline when the French government reversed its non-supportive stand and began some strong measures to save it. Whether these measures will succeed remains to be seen. No recent statistics on Corsican are available.

UNESCO classifies the Corsican language as a potentially endangered language, as it has "a large number of children speakers" but is "without an official or prestigious status." The classification does not state that the language is currently endangered, only that it is potentially so. Often acting according to the current long-standing sentiment unknown Corsicans cross out French roadway signs and paint in the Corsican names. The Corsican language is a key vehicle for Corsican culture, which is notably rich in proverbs and in polyphonic song.

From the mountains to the plains and sea, many ingredients play a role. Game such as wild boar (Cignale, Singhjari) is popular, and in old times mouflon (muvra) were consumed. There also is seafood and river fish such as trout. Delicatessen such as figatellu, coppa, ham (prizuttu), lonzu are made from Corsican pork (porcu nustrale). Cheeses like Brocciu, casgiu merzu (the Corsican version of the Sardinian casu marzu), casgiu veghju are made from goat or sheep milk. Chestnuts are the main ingredient in the making of pulenta. A variety of alcoholic drinks also exist, ranging from aquavita (brandy), red and white Corsican wines (Vinu Corsu), muscat (plain or sparkling), and the famous "cap corse" produced by Mattei.

Due to the culture of Vendetta, the presence of mafiosi of Corsican origin in 1920s-1990s, the hostility to the migration of non-Corsicans in Corsica and the multiple attacks in Corsica by local activists, the Corsicans have often been portrayed as a dangerous, intimidating, racist and criminal population by many individuals but also by states, notably the Republic of Genoa or the Kingdom of France.

For example, in 1890, the trip of President Sadi Carnot to Corsica was recounted in Le Petit Journal, with a circulation of more than a million copies, in an article entitled: «The President among the savages.»

The anarchist writer Georges Darien did not hesitate to write that the Corsicans were "a filthy race."

Some stereotypes of Corsicans include that they don't like tourists, that they are racist or lazy, or that they are terrorists or members of mafia groups.

Genetic research has revealed that the Corsican samples presented affinities with people from the French region of Provence and the Italians from Tuscany, Liguria, Campania, Sicily and Latium. Several studies on Y-chromosome haplogroup frequencies support close genetic affinities between Northwestern Corsicans and continental Europeans, while Eastern and Southern Corsicans share genetic similarities with Western Mediterranean populations.

In 2019, analysis of the genome of the Corsican population also reveals a close genetic affinity with the populations of northern and central Italy, while sharing with the Sardinians a notable proportion of ancestry, demographic processes and similar isolations. The analysis revealed that the Corsican population shares several genomic characteristics with Sardinia and north-central Italy, creating a unique blend of genomic ancestry. Overall, the Corsican samples have been found to be genetically closer to the Northern and Central Italian populations than to the neighboring Sardinians. The same study estimate that the genome of the modern Corsicans derive from Anatolia Neolithic: 33%, Europe Middle Neolithic/Chalcolithic: 34%, Steppe EMBA: 19% and Iran Neolithic: 14%.

The Cosmetic Valley or pôle cosmétique sciences de la beauté et du bien-être (in English, cosmetic science of beauty and well-being business cluster) is a technopole, the most important French business cluster specialized in the production of consumer goods in the industry of perfumes and cosmetics in France.

The Cosmetic Valley stretches across three regions and seven departments : Centre-Val de Loire (Eure-et-Loir, Indre-et-Loire, Loiret and Loir-et-Cher), Île-de-France (Yvelines and Val-d'Oise) and Normandy (Eure). The headquarters of the cluster are located on the site of the Chartres Cathedral.

Eure-et-Loir has nearly 70% of companies in the sector. To department officials, the Cosmetic Valley is an essential element of the attractiveness of the territory, which would particularly illustrated by the introduction of foreign groups such as Reckitt Benckiser, but also small and medium enterprises (SMEs/SMBs) who joined the sector. Cosmetic Valley boasts the creation of over 1,500 jobs in the department in ten years.

Cosmetic Valley has been founded in 1994 on the initiative of Jean-Paul Guerlain in the region of Chartres. This is the first industrial sector emerged in Eure-et-Loir.

In 2005, the industries of Eure-et-Loir come together with those of the Loiret to be labeled "national competitiveness cluster" under the supervision of the government of Jean-Pierre Raffarin.

The 25th of August 2006, a decree defines the area of research and development of the cluster. Municipalities of the department of Eure, Eure-et-Loir, Indre-et-Loire, Loiret and Yvelines are concerned.

In 2007, stands at Orleans the first edition of Cosm'innov, a convention describing the progress of scientific disciplines in the field of cosmetology.

The second edition of Cosm'innov takes place in March 2010 at Orléans.

In the early 2013, the cluster has 800 companies for approximately 70,000 jobs and €11 billion in revenue, seven universities, 136 colleges, 200 public research laboratories for 8,600 researcher, 100 research projects with a budget of approximately 200 million.

Among the major companies represented include L'Oréal (via its subsidiaries Maybelline and Yves Saint Laurent Opium), Shiseido (via Jean-Paul Gaultier, Issey Miyake, Serge Lutens), LVMH (via Christian Dior and Guerlain), Caudalie.

Cotentinais (French pronunciation: [ kɔtɑ̃tinɛ ] ; le normand du Cotentin) is the variety of the Norman language spoken on the Cotentin Peninsula, in the Manche department of Normandy, France. Together with Cauchois in the east, it is one of the best-preserved mainland forms of Norman. It belongs to the northern group of Norman, spoken north and west of the Joret line, and is closely related to the insular Norman of the Channel Islands (Jèrriais and Guernésiais).

Like Norman generally, Cotentinais descends from the Gallo-Romance speech of Neustria, overlaid from the 10th century with a Norse element left by Scandinavian settlers, which is especially visible in its maritime and rural vocabulary. After the incorporation of continental Normandy into the French crown in 1204 and the later standardisation of French, Norman declined to the status of a spoken patois ; a literary revival began in the Cotentin in the later 19th century. The language is today classified as severely endangered, with transmission largely broken and its survival dependent on cultural associations.

The dialect is named after the Cotentin, the peninsula that forms the northern part of the Manche. The name of the region derives ultimately from the city of Coutances (Latin Constantia ; the surrounding district was the pagus Constantinus), whose older French form Costentin was used by the 12th-century Norman poet Wace.

Cotentinais is a dialect of Norman, itself a langue d'oïl within the Gallo-Romance branch of the Romance languages. Norman is conventionally divided into insular Norman, spoken in the Channel Islands, and continental or mainland Norman; the continental dialects are in turn separated by the Joret line into a northern group (also called the domaine normanno-picard) and a southern group. Cotentinais belongs to the northern group and therefore shares its defining features with Cauchois in the Pays de Caux and with the insular varieties, from which it is separated only by the sea. The southern Norman of the Avranchin and the Orne, by contrast, is transitional towards Gallo and the dialects of Maine.

Cotentinais is spoken across the Cotentin, essentially the northern two-thirds of the Manche. The Joret line runs across the base of the peninsula, from around Granville towards Villedieu-les-Poêles and eastward through the bocage, so that nearly all of the Cotentin proper lies within the conservative northern zone.

There is no standardised written form of Norman, and descriptions of the internal variation of Cotentinais are impressionistic rather than the result of a single agreed classification. Local speech is usually grouped by pays : the Haguais of La Hague in the north-west, noted for its strongly guttural aspirated h ; the parler of the Val de Saire in the north-east; the Coutançais around Coutances; and the Baupteis of the marshland around Bauptois, between Carentan and La Haye-du-Puits. The dialectologist René Lepelley, who made the fullest modern study of the Val de Saire, regarded that district and La Hague as among the most conservative Norman parlers anywhere in Normandy. The urban speech of Cherbourg is effectively extinct.

The single most important feature setting Cotentinais apart from standard French is the absence of the palatalisation described by the Joret line, an isogloss first traced by Charles Joret in 1883. It is in fact a bundle of related sound-correspondences. North of the line, Latin /k/ and /g/ before /a/ remain unpalatalised, where French has /ʃ/ and /ʒ/ :

The same conservatism accounts for a number of Norman-derived words in English, such as cat, candle, catch, cauldron and garden, which entered English from Norman rather than central French. Two further isoglosses in the bundle give /ʃ/ for Latin /k/ before front vowels where French has /s/ (chent for cent "hundred", rachine for racine "root"), and /v/ for Germanic /w/ where French has /g/ (viquet for guichet "wicket", vêpe for guêpe "wasp").

Cotentinais shares several conservative features of the wider "Grand Ouest". Latin stressed free /e/ gives /e/ rather than the French /wa/ (mé "me", dret "right", fei "faith"), and Latin /oː/ and /u/ give /u/ (coue "tail", goule "mouth, gob"). A consonant followed by /l/ is palatalised (kios for clos "enclosure", pieum for plume "feather"), and in the north-west the sequence /je/ advances to /i/ (cachi "to hunt", muchi "to hide"). The nasal vowels /ã/ and /õ/ are strongly and closely articulated.

The dialect preserves a markedly aspirated, sometimes guttural, /h/, at its strongest in La Hague, whose name is pronounced /χɑːɡ/ ; the same pronunciation was formerly heard much further east, surviving around Honfleur into the early 20th century. Scholars are divided over whether the aspiration reflects the Germanic (Frankish and Norse) settlement or later contact with English in the Anglo-Norman period.

Several outcomes vary across the peninsula, one of the clearest markers of its internal division. The group written -ien reduces to /i/ in the Nord-Cotentin, where byin "well" is pronounced [bi] and quyin "dog" [tʃi], but keeps a nasal vowel elsewhere; -aun is roughly [ã] (maunté "coat") except in the Centre-Cotentin around Carentan, Portbail and Périers, where it is [ɛ̃] ; -oun is a long [õ] (quétoun "donkey"); and the indefinite article eun "a" is [ɛ̃] (eun cat "a cat"). Unaccented final e is silent, and in connected speech the plural article merges with a following vowel (les houmes "the men" is pronounced roughly [lzum]).

The most distinctive part of the Cotentinais lexicon is the layer of words inherited from the Old Norse of the Scandinavian settlers, concentrated in the vocabulary of the sea, the coast and the land. Examples include:

The maritime and rural vocabulary of Norse origin has been the subject of dedicated study, and the grammatical gender assigned to these Norse loanwords in Norman was analysed by Albert Sjögren. The same Norse stratum is visible in Cotentin place-names, in elements such as -tot (a homestead, from topt), -bec (a stream, from bekkr), -hou and -homme (an islet, from holmr) and -dal (a valley, from dalr). Alongside the Norse layer, Cotentinais keeps many words of the wider Grand Ouest and of Old French that have vanished from standard French; conversely, a number of words now felt to be ordinary French, such as itou ("likewise"), were themselves borrowed from Norman.

Like the rest of Norman, Cotentinais nouns have two genders, masculine and feminine, and no case inflection. A widespread Norman trait is the use of the subject pronoun nos for the first person plural, conjugated like the third person singular. Verbs have infinitives in -er and -i (cachi "to hunt", muchi "to hide"), and a characteristic haplology affects common interrogatives, so that avez-vous ("do you have") becomes avous and voulez-vous ("do you want") becomes voulous. As generally in the langues d'oïl, negation may be reinforced by a noun denoting a small quantity: besides ne...pas, Cotentinais uses ne...mie and ne...mèche, and the emphatic ne...pièche ("not at all", literally "not a scrap"), which in some local speech extends to the sense "nothing" or "no one".

Verbs are grouped by their infinitive ending, chiefly -er and -i (happer "to catch", muchi "to hide"). In the normalised spelling many first-conjugation infinitives are written -aer, a convention for an ending pronounced differently from one district to another, so that acataer "to buy" is realised [akato] in the Val de Saire and [akatâé] in the Coutançais. The subject pronouns are je "I", tu "you", i "he" (il before a vowel), o "she" (ol before a vowel), no (the indefinite "one", also used for "we"), vos "you" (plural) and i / o "they"; characteristically for Norman, the first person plural is expressed with je together with a plural verb ending, so that je soumes means "we are" and j'avouns "we have". The present indicative of the two auxiliaries is:

Fuller conjugations, in the imperfect, preterite, future, conditional and subjunctive, appear in teaching materials and community grammars, but no complete paradigm specific to Cotentinais, as distinct from Norman generally, has been established in the scholarly literature.

Norman has never possessed a single traditional orthography, and 19th-century authors each spelled the language in their own way. From the late 1940s the Cotentin scholar Fernand Lechanteur devised a "normalised" spelling (orthographe normalisée) for continental Norman. Its purpose was not to merge the various parlers into one standard but to supply consistent, rationalised conventions within which each locality could still be read in its own pronunciation and retain its own words. Three standardised orthographies are in use today: the Lechanteur system for continental Norman, including Cotentinais; the spelling of the Jèrriais dictionaries (Le Maistre, 1966; Société Jersiaise, 2005); and the Guernésiais spelling of the De Garis dictionary (1982).

The phrases below illustrate the dialect, with a standard-French equivalent and an English gloss.

The features of the Joret line can be heard in a sentence such as marchez trachier la pouque (French allez chercher le sac, "go and fetch the sack"), which keeps the verb trachier "to fetch" and the unpalatalised velar of pouque "sack"; compare the pairs cat (chat "cat"), vaque (vache "cow"), quyin (chien "dog"), câté (château "castle") and vêpe (guêpe "wasp").

Norman took shape when the Old Norse -speaking settlers who founded the Duchy of Normandy from 911 adopted the Gallo-Romance speech of the country, adding to it a superstrate of Norse words together with some Old English elements along the coast. Norse is reported to have survived on the Norman coast into the 12th century. After the Norman Conquest of 1066 the dialect was carried to England as Anglo-Norman, but the loss of continental Normandy to the French crown in 1204, and the growing prestige of the French of Paris, gradually reduced Norman to an unwritten regional patois.

A literary revival began in the Cotentin in the later 19th century, somewhat later than, and partly inspired by, the parallel movement in the Channel Islands. The Cherbourg songwriter Alfred Rossel (1841–1926) published Norman songs from 1872, and in 1896 the review Le Bouais-Jan was founded by Louis Beuve and François Énault. In 1968 Fernand Lechanteur founded the society Parlers et traditions populaires de Normandie, whose review was renamed Le Viquet in 1986; it published a generation of Cotentin writers, including the poet-priest Côtis-Capel (Albert Lohier, 1915–1986) of La Hague, Lechanteur himself (under the pen name Gires-Ganne), André Louis and Aundré Smilly (Hippolyte Gancel). From about 1950 Lechanteur devised a "normalised" spelling intended to serve all the Norman parlers while allowing each to be read in its own pronunciation.

The best-known work in Cotentinais is Alfred Rossel's song Sus la mé ("On the sea"), which is often treated as an unofficial anthem of the Cotentin. Louis Beuve's poem La Graind' Lainde de Lessay ("The great heath of Lessay") is another celebrated piece, and the collections of Côtis-Capel, among them Rocâles (1951) and À Gravage (1965), are regarded as the peak of 20th-century Cotentin poetry. Since 1989 the association Magène has set many of these poems, including much of Côtis-Capel's work, to newly composed music.

There is no reliable count of Cotentinais speakers specifically. Estimates for Norman as a whole vary widely and are mostly undated: Ethnologue gives about 19,000, the association Magène cites around 25,000 speakers in Normandy, and a figure of 50,000 is sometimes quoted without a source. The only official survey, the 1999 enquête famille conducted by INSEE and INED, counted the langues d'oïl only as a group, and gives no separate figure for Norman.

UNESCO classifies Norman as severely endangered, a status the Normandy regional council renders as the language being "in great danger". Transmission within families is largely broken, and the language is maintained chiefly by enthusiasts and cultural bodies. Norman has no official status in France: it appears among the langues d'oïl in Bernard Cerquiglini 's 1999 report on the languages of France and is covered by the patrimonial recognition of regional languages added to the Constitution in 2008, but it is not part of the ordinary school curriculum. Its promotion rests with associations such as Magène and the federation FALE, the review Le Viquet, and the Université populaire normande du Cotentin; the University of Caen Normandy offers a diploma including instruction in Norman dialectology, and a weekly programme in Norman is broadcast on France Bleu Cotentin.

The Coulée verte René-Dumont or Promenade plantée René-Dumont is a 4.7 km (2.9 mi) elevated linear park built on top of obsolete railway infrastructure in the 12th arrondissement of Paris, France. It was inaugurated in 1993.

Promenade plantée means "planted walkway". Coulée verte traslates to "green corridor". The park memorializes René Dumont, a French engineer and environmentalist.

This Promenade plantée in Paris is an extensive green belt that follows the old Vincennes railway line. Beginning just east of the Opéra Bastille with the elevated Viaduc des Arts, it follows a 4.7-kilometre (2.9 mi) path eastward that ends at a spiral staircase leading to the boulevard Périphérique beltway. At its west end near the Bastille, the parkway rises 10 metres (33 ft) above the surrounding area and forms the Viaduc des Arts, over a line of shops featuring the work of specialized craftsmen. The shops are located in the arches of the former elevated railway viaduct, with the parkway being supported atop the viaduct. This portion of the parkway runs parallel to the Avenue Daumesnil [ fr ]. The parkway crosses the Jardin de Reuilly [ fr ] near the Rue Montgallet [ fr ] and descends to street level. At that point, it becomes a grassy mall and then follows the old railway direction below street level towards the east, passing through several tunnels. As it reaches the Rue du Sahel [ fr ], it splits, with one portion continuing to the beltway, and the other terminating in the Square Charles-Péguy [ fr ] along the former path of a branch line that once linked to the Petite Ceinture railway.

The elevated part of the route, on the viaduct, has some enclosed sections, as when it passes between modern buildings, and some open sections with expansive views. In addition to the Jardin de Reuilly and the square Charles-Péguy, the Promenade plantée also includes the Jardin de la Gare-de-Reuilly [ fr ], with its preserved but repurposed railway station, and the Square Hector-Malot [ fr ]. The western portion of the parkway may be accessed via stairways and elevators leading up to the elevated viaduct. This portion is reserved for pedestrians. The eastern portion of the parkway is accessible via ramps and stairways and is open to both pedestrians and cyclists. The west end can be reached from Bastille by walking 300 metres (980 ft) south on Rue de Lyon [ fr ], then left on Avenue Daumesnil. The staircase entrance is immediately on the left where Avenue Daumesnil enters Rue de Lyon.

This Promenade Plantée is built on the former tracks of the Vincennes railway line, which, beginning in 1859, linked the Gare de la Bastille train station to Verneuil-l'Étang, after passing through Vincennes. It ceased operation on December 14, 1969; part of the line beyond Vincennes was integrated into Line A of the RER, while the Paris-Vincennes section was completely abandoned.

Beginning in the 1980s, the area was renovated. In 1984, the Bastille station was demolished to make way for the Opéra Bastille. The Reuilly section was designed in 1986; it incorporates the old commercial rail depot of Reuilly into a group of park areas. The Promenade Plantée was put into place at the same time in order to reuse the rest of the abandoned line between the Bastille and the old Montempoivre gate to the city. Landscape architect Jacques Vergely and architect Philippe Mathieux designed the parkway, which was inaugurated in 1993. The arcades of the Viaduc des Arts were renovated in 1989 by architect Patrick Berger, as was the new Square Charles-Péguy [ fr ].

Paris' promenade was the first project in the world to repurpose elevated old railway lines into urban gardens. Other repurposing projects have now been completed or are underway. The first phase of the High Line, a similar park on an old railway viaduct in the West Side of Manhattan in New York City, was completed in 2009. The second phase was completed in 2011, bringing the total length of the High Line to 1.6 kilometres (1 mi); the third phase opened in September 2014, completing the park. In 2015 Chicago opened the nearly 4.8-kilometre (3.0 mi) Bloomingdale Trail, which runs through several city neighborhoods and allows bicycles.

The Promenade Plantée appears in the film Before Sunset, directed by Richard Linklater in 2004 with Ethan Hawke and Julie Delpy. It is also mentioned in the science fiction novel Olympos, by Dan Simmons.

The Council of Lillebonne was a meeting of the nobles and clergy of Normandy where, among other things, the expedition of William the Conqueror, then Duke of Normandy, was approved. It was held at Lillebonne, in the northeast of Normandy. Wace, the 12th-century historian, wrote of the council, convened shortly before the actual invasion, likely in January 1066. William of Poitiers, a chronicler of the Norman invasion, claims that the duke also obtained the consent of Pope Alexander II for the invasion, along with a papal banner.

The council, also called the Norman Council and Assembly of Lillebonne, began with the refusal of Harold to relinquish the crown of England. Two such councils were held, a smaller council of trusted advisors and a larger council to discuss the planned conquest. Relatives and allies of William participated including many of the proven Companions of William :

Cajoled by William FitzOsbern, the council approved the invasion plans. William of Poitiers nevertheless describes the council and gives an account of a debate that took place between among the nobles and supporters over whether to risk an invasion of England. Although some formal meeting probably was held, it is unlikely that there was significant debate, as the duke had by then established control over his nobles, and those assembled would want to secure their share of the rewards from the conquest of England.

The Council of the Republic (French : Conseil de la République, [ kɔ̃sɛj d(ə) la ʁepyblik ]) was the upper house of the French Parliament under the Fourth Republic, with the National Assembly being the lower house. It was established by the Constitution of 1946, dissolved by the Constitution of 1958 and replaced with the current-day Senate.

The constitution of the Fourth Republic, which came into force in 1946, stipulated that parliament was bicameral. The upper house was named the "Council of the Republic" (as opposed to the Senate of the Third Republic) and was granted greatly diminished powers.

The council did not have the power to make laws, which was the responsibility of the National Assembly. The council was mainly consultative, and bills were only given a single reading at the council before being passed.

However, it did share responsibility should the need arose to amend the constitution in matters regarding the election of the President of the Republic. A formal notice to the council was required to declare war.

In 1954, the Constitution was amended to provided that all bills would be examined successively by the National Assembly and the Council of the Republic, essentially restoring full legislative powers to the latter.

Members of the Council were known as '"councillors" (conseiller) from 1946 to 1948, and then "senators" from 1948 onwards. The number of senators had to be between 250 and 320. Senators were elected by indirect universal suffrage: five-sixths were elected by communes and departments ; the other one-sixth were elected by the National Assembly, the lower house. They served six-year terms.

The President was the presiding officer of the council.

The countesses of the Gestapo (French : Les comtesses de la Gestapo) were elite adventuresses of the Paris demimonde protected by the French Gestapo and large-scale black marketeers during the German occupation of France. The Gestapo countesses led extravagant lives despite the misery prevalent in Vichy France at the time. They were French or foreign former actresses or runway models, sometimes in fact truly aristocratic, who engaged in a variety of lucrative practices such as the confiscation of Jewish assets, espionage or black market operations.

An actress known by her stage name, Illa Meery, Tchernycheff in 1934 was one of several pretty girls with improbable names, displaying her tanned curves and platinum blondness as an extra in a soft-porn pot-boiler filmed on the Cote d'Azur, Les aventure du roi Pausole, based on the novel by Pierre Louys. She later appeared topless in Zouzou as a foil to années folles sensation Josephine Baker.

Zouzou is a French film by Marc Allégret released in 1934. Josephine Baker plays the title character.

It was shot at the Joinville Studios in Paris, with sets designed by the art directors Lazare Meerson and Alexandre Trauner.

A Russian countess, Tchernycheff ran a black market network specializing in cognac and fine wine, and moved shared an apartment with a homosexual socialite from Odessa named Vladimir Barjansky [ fr ], intimate friend of Philippe de Rothschild. Barjanski, an illustrator known for his movie posters, fled to Hollywood after French police wrongly accused him of being a spy.

She married a gambler named Garat and spent some time with him on the beaches of Brazil. But she had an affair and he left her. When she returned to France her former allies had all left for safer places. But other Russian emigres whispered of fortunes to be made selling to the Germans, who were on a monumental buying spree with the "occupation costs" extracted from the Vichy government. Paul Metchersky, Andre Galitzine and Yvan Shapochnikoff were rich now, the whispers said, Soumarakoff, Lazare Mailoff and Michel Szkolnikoff. She joined a salon on avenue Iena and then at the George V hotel made up of entrepreneurs who had no objection to supplying the German war effort, since these former aristocrats were in favor of the Germans taking care of the Soviets for them and perhaps making it possible for them to return to past glories. The Germans did business at what were known as bureaux d'achat, known as Amt Otto, Pimetex, ZKW or SS-Essex, where she ran across old friends and former accomplices such as Stephan Djanoumoff, Serge Landchewsky, Boris Ivanowski and the Baron of Osten-Sacken.

She became the mistress of Henri Lafont, who ran the Paris underworld with the help of the French police.

As the mistress of Hans Leimer, an SS officer tasked with shipping requisitioned artwork and other goods to Germany, she was arrested in July 1944 by the Gestapo, and her lover was sent to the Russian front. She herself was sent to Germany to be judged in Berlin.

Princess Euphrosine Mourousi, a Greek addict who trafficked in cigarettes and informed on Jewish and Russian émigré families, was sentenced in 1950 to three years in prison and 20 years of banishment from France for informing to both the French police and the Gestapo about several Russian Jews. Her son Yves became a well-known French journalist.

Most of these women were not prosecuted after the Liberation of France.

The titles of the count of Savoy, and then duke of Savoy, are titles of nobility attached to the historical territory of Savoy. Since its creation, in the 11th century, the House of Savoy held the county, the ruler of which was originally styled "count," then later as "duke"; several of these rulers were called " king " at one point in history or another.

The origins of the family are obscured by time. The first history of the House of Savoy appeared in 1660 and was written by a Frenchman Samuel Guichenon. At that time, Christine of France, the widow of Duke Victor Amadeus I, had conceived the idea of elevating the house of Savoy to the imperial throne. She was the one who requested Guichenon to write the history of the house, but insisted that Widukind, the famous leader of the Saxons, be its founder. Guichenon, being a courtier and also as a Frenchman always courteous to the fairer sex, promoted the princess's view in his book. Another opinion that gained traction at a certain point was that the Dukes of Savoy descended from the ancient Marquises of Ivrea, from whom descended also the last national kings of Italy, who, fighting for Italian independence against the German emperors were defeated. That opinion was once championed by historian Lodovico della Chiesa. The French authors Nicolas Chorier and Salvaing were, on the other hand, of the opinion, that the Dukes of Savoy had their origins in Burgundy. Therefore, the exact origins of this family, as of many noble families of Europe is unknown.

The County of Savoy was elevated to a duchy at the beginning of the 15th century, bringing together all the territories of the Savoyard state under Amadeus VIII, Duke of Savoy. In the 18th century, Victor Amadeus II annexed the Kingdom of Sardinia to the historical possessions of the Duchy, and from then on, the Savoyard dukes also held the title of King of Sardinia. The House of Savoy later went on to rule the Kingdom of Italy from 1861 to 1946, when the Italian monarchy was abolished after an institutional referendum.

Victor Amadeus II was the longest reigning monarch of Savoy, followed by Charles Emmanuel I, and Charles III or Amadeus VIII.

Amadeus of Piedmont left no male heirs, and was succeeded by his brother Louis.

After the death of Umberto II in 1983, Prince Vittorio Emanuele succeeded him. On 7 July 2006, Amadeo claimed that Vittorio Emanuel had lost his royal rights when he married without Umberto II's permission in 1971, in which Amadeo declared himself the Head of the Royal House on the same day.

The County of Savoy was a feudal state of the Holy Roman Empire which emerged, along with the free communes of Switzerland, from the collapse of the Burgundian Kingdom in the 11th century. It was the cradle of the future Savoyard state.

Sapaudia, stretching south of Lake Geneva from the Rhône River to the Western Alps, had been part of Upper Burgundy ruled by the Bosonid duke Hucbert from the mid-9th century. Together with the neighbouring Free County of Burgundy (today's Franche Comté), it became part of the larger Kingdom of Burgundy under King Rudolph II in 933.

Humbert the White-Handed was raised to count by the last king of Burgundy, Rudolph III, in 1003. He backed the inheritance claims of Emperor Henry II and in turn, was permitted to usurp the county of Aosta from its bishops at the death of Anselm. Following his support of Conrad II in annexing Arles upon Rudolph's death and suppressing the revolts of Count Odo and Bishop Burchard, he also received the county of Maurienne (formerly held by the archbishops of Vienne) and territories in Chablais and Tarentaise, formerly held by its archbishops at Moûtiers.

While the Arelat remained a titular kingdom of the Holy Roman Empire, Humbert's descendants—later known as the House of Savoy —maintained their independence as counts. In 1046, his younger son Otto married Adelaide, daughter of Ulric Manfred II, marquis of Susa. When she inherited her father's lands in preference to other, male, relatives, he thereby acquired control of the extensive March of Turin. This was then united with Savoy upon his inheritance from his elder brother.

The counts further enlarged their territory when, in 1218, they inherited the Vaud lands north of Lake Geneva from the extinct House of Zähringen. In 1220, Count Thomas I occupied the towns of Pinerolo and Chambéry (Kamrach), which afterwards became the Savoy capital. In 1240, his younger son Peter II was invited to England by King Henry III, who had married Peter's niece Eleanor of Provence. He was appointed Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports and Earl of Richmond and had the Savoy Palace erected in London.

In 1313, Count Amadeus V the Great officially gained the status of Imperial immediacy from Emperor Henry VII. What was left of the Kingdom of Burgundy effectively ceased to be entirely under the authority of the emperor after the Dauphiné had passed to the future King Charles V of France in 1349 and Amadeus VI of Savoy was appointed Imperial vicar of Arelat by Emperor Charles IV in 1365.

Amadeus VII gained access to the Mediterranean Sea by the acquisition of the County of Nice in 1388, and his son Amadeus VIII purchased the County of Geneva in 1401. The extended Savoy lands were finally raised to a duchy in 1416 by the German king Sigismund (see Duchy of Savoy 1416–1718).

The Cour des Comptes (French pronunciation: [ kuʁ de kɔ̃t ], "Court of Accounts") is France 's supreme audit institution, under French law an administrative court. As such, it is independent from the legislative and executive branches of the French Government. However, the 1946 and 1958 French constitutions made it the Court's duty to assist the Cabinet and Parliament in regulating government spending. The Court thus combines functions of a court of exchequer, comptroller general's office, and auditor general 's office in common-law countries. It is also a Grand Corps of the French State and mainly recruits among the best-ranked students graduating from the Ecole nationale d'administration.

The Court traces its origins back to the Middle Ages and views itself as succeeding the Court of Auditors of Paris, permanently established in the early 14th century. It was re-established in 1807 by Napoleon.

Its three duties are to conduct financial audits of accounts, conduct good governance audits, and provide information and advice to the French Parliament and Administration. The Court verifies the good form of accounting and the proper handling of public money. Its mandate covers most public institutions and some private institutions, including the central Government, national public corporations, social security agencies (since 1950), and other public services (since 1976).

During the Ancien Régime, the Court of Auditors was located in the French monarchy's ancestral Palais de la Cité, between the Sainte-Chapelle and the Conciergerie. In 1740 it moved to a new building in the same complex, designed by Jacques Gabriel, which is no longer extant.

The Cour des Comptes was reorganized by Napoleon through the Law of September 16, 1807. In 1842, it eventually moved away from the Île de la Cité into the Palais d'Orsay. In May 1871 at the end of the Paris Commune, the Palais d'Orsay was entirely destroyed by fire and the Cour des Comptes was temporarily relocated in the Palais-Royal. Its relocation in the aile de Marsan of the Louvre Palace was considered but only some of its archives were moved there, and in 1897 the Marsan Wing was attributed to what is now the Musée des Arts Décoratifs. Instead, it was decided to build a new office specifically for the Cour des Comptes.

The new building on rue Cambon was designed by architect Constant Moyaux, and after the latter's death in October 1911 by Paul Guadet [ fr ], on the site of a former convent whose church survives nearby as Notre-Dame-de-l'Assomption. It was inaugurated in 1912 by President Armand Fallières. The Cour des Comptes remains located there after more than a century.

The president (premier président) of the Court of Audit is appointed by Order-in-Council of the Cabinet. Once appointed, the president of the Court and division presidents have security of tenure. The Court has its own Office of the Prosecutor - with a Chief Prosecutor, Chief Deputy Prosecutor, and two deputy prosecutors - that represents the Government before the Court. The Court is split into seven divisions, each with nearly 30 judges ordinary and deputy judges and headed by a division president. Jurisdiction is split between the seven divisions generally by subject matter, e.g., finance, health and social security, and so forth. The Court's president is Pierre Moscovici since June 2020. He took over Didier Migaud who himself took over in 2010 following the death of Philippe Séguin. Other judicial officers are generally split into three groups by rank:

All judicial officers are graduates from the National Administration Academy (École nationale d'Administration) or recruited from the Office of the Comptroller-General (inspection générale des Finances).

The French Court of Audit has original jurisdiction to audit and adjudicate accounts made by public, management, and government accountants. The Court also has authority to audit persons acting but not certified as a public accountant. If an account is found to be correct, then the Court issues a quietus to discharge the accountant. If, however, the account is found to be in error, then a debit order is issued against the defaulter. Either order is subject to appeal in the Court or final appeal at the French Supreme Court.

A decision from a lower audit court may be appealed at the main Court of Audit within two months of its being handed down. Afterwards, if the parties are still not satisfied, the Council of State will hear the case on final appeal.

The French Court of Audit puts together its auditing program entirely independently and is vested with very broad powers of review and examination. It publishes and submits an annual audit report to the French President and to Parliament. The report provides a detailed account of the government's poor, or possibly fraudulent, practices and criticizes poor governance and use of public funds. The Court also audits authorizing officers (ordonnateurs) and their expenditures.

In addition to reporting poor practices, the Court judges the accounting of public financial and budgetary officials, collection agencies, or treasury departments, e.g., treasurers, paymasters-general, tax collectors, certified public accountants, and can fine them for late reporting. In such cases, the Court fines public accounting officials for the exact amount of any sum of money that, due to an error on their part, they have unduly paid or failed to recover on behalf of the State. A debet (débet), from Latin "he owes" and not limited in amount, is entered against a defaulting person, and the defaulter becomes the State's debtor. Public and government accountants must therefore have performance liability insurance. Often, however, the Ministry of Finance alleviates a defaulter by granting an abatement of his arrears as the full amount is likely too much to ever pay out of pocket. If an account is audited and found not to be in default, then the Court issues a quietus (arrêt de quitus or arrêt de décharge) acquitting and discharging the official and settling the account.

The Court of Audit of France stands above and heads 27 regional inferior financial courts referred to in French as Chambres régionales des comptes, or regional audit courts. The Court of Audit acts as the administrative head and court of appeal for the financial stream, hearing appeals from regional courts and issuing rule promulgation orders and administrative directives. Regional audit courts were established in 1982 to help unburden the main Court of Audit of its heavy caseload. Since their creation, they have original jurisdiction for most local, county, and regional accounting matters in continental France and its overseas dependencies. This means they audit accounts as well as public institutions to check for fraud, embezzlement, or misappropriation. In case of budgetary discrepancies, the Court can ask the local prefect to intervene and oversee the handling of public funds until budget problems have been corrected.

Each court is divided into divisions and includes a judge-in-Charge - who is also either a puisne or deputy judge at the main Court of Audit - and two associate judges. Judges have security of tenure and some also serve as Commissioners-in-Council with prosecutorial duties under the Office of the Prosecutor at the Court of Audit of France. The regional courts focus on:

Accounts found to be in error are entered into debit and accounts in default or fictitious are referred to the local prefect.

Accounts for towns of fewer than 3,500 inhabitants and receipts totalling less than 750,000 euros are automatically referred to the local county or regional treasurer. A regional audit court's ruling may be appealed in the same court or to the Court of Audit of France.

The Cours de Civilisation Française de la Sorbonne (CCFS) is a private French civilisation and language institution founded in Paris in 1919 with the goal of contributing to peace between peoples by supporting international student exchanges.

It is certified to teach French as a foreign language (français langue étrangère). The CCFS welcomes nearly 160 nationalities. About 5,000 students attend the institution each year.

The CCFS provides French courses for students of all levels, from complete beginners to those who seek to become a professor of French as a foreign language. These courses prepare students to pass various national and international exams such as the TCF or DELF, or to obtain the school's own certificates.

Various kinds of courses are proposed according to the student's needs. These include:

The CCFS also prepares students to obtain the diplomas issued by the Minister of National Education that certify the French skills of non-native speakers. Some of these tests are required to study at French universities. Exams that the CCFS coursework prepares students for includes:

These courses are designed for students with a good level of French. Some of them help prepare students for the tests required to receive a diploma from the Paris Chamber of Commerce and Industry.

The Business French specialisation prepares students for both the Sorbonne's French language certificate and the Paris Chamber of Commerce and Industry's diploma by teaching French business language (composition of business documents, the study of economics articles, etc.).

Through a partnership agreement signed in 2006, the TCF CIEP-Sorbonne Centre is the only centre affiliated with the International Centre of Pedagogical Studies that can administer the Test de connaissance du français (TCF) in Paris. Since 2014, students are able to take the TCF on a computer (TCF-SO).

In September 2010, the International Centre for Educational Studies (Centre international d'études pédagogiques - CIEP) and the CCFS signed a partnership agreement that founded the DELF-DALF Exam Centre.

The DELF-DALF Exam Centre is allowed to administer the exams for the Diploma of French Language Studies (Diplôme d'Études en Langue Française - DELF) and the Advanced Diploma of French Language (Diplôme Approfondi de Langue Française - DALF).

CCFS courses are organized into sessions of various duration:

The course landaise (Occitan : Curs landés) is an ancient form of bullfighting and bull-leaping held in oval or rectangular arenas covered in sand, that involves no bloodshed. Experienced cows, with large horns, aged generally from 2 to 14 years old, are used instead of bulls. They are athletic but (by modern standards) small animals selected from the same breed as the bulls used for the Spanish corridas. In Gascony, it is a major spectator sport, counting as many as 600 events each year.

The course landaise is one of various forms of entertainment involving a bull or a cow found throughout the south of France, and the Iberian peninsula. The course landaise is for the most part the main attraction of the yearly celebrations held in villages of western Gascony (Bas-Armagnac, Chalosse, and Bearn) and as far west as Bayonne. Other forms of related entertainments are the running of the bulls made famous in the neighboring Spanish Basque Country by the Ferias of Pamplona, but also enjoyed in Bayonne and smaller towns of Gascony such as Nogaro. The course landaise can in a way be compared with the steer-wrestling events in American rodeos to the extent that they are related expressions of a rural culture that can be traced to the ancient Basque tradition of Iberia. of running in front of bulls.

This form of bullfighting is a traditional game of cow or bull dodging and leaping. One needs courage, composure and agility to participate in this dangerous sport. Deaths of toreros or écarteurs, although rare, do happen occasionally. The écarteurs are well-respected professionals but never earn enough to support themselves with the sport alone. However, their passion for this dangerous sport allows them to benefit from the full support of the aficionados throughout the region.

A cuadrilla or team of toreros landais faces, in a traditional and precisely prescribed game, vigorous fighting cows of Spanish breeds, such as the toro bravo or toro de lidia. The teams come from stock farms and wear, like any other team of sportsmen, their own colours. Each écarteur wears an embroidered suit, which makes him recognizable to fans.

The cows are specially bred and grow up in the wild, on rural ganaderias (cattle farms or ranches) and are of a considerable size (300 to 500 kg or 660 to 1,100 lb and 125 to 130 cm or 49 to 51 in). They are extremely quick and can easily leap 2-metre (6 ft) fences. They are specially trained to defend themselves in their own natural way, and benefit from years of fighting in the arenas. The Ganaderias are mainly located in the Landes, in the region of Chalosse, essentially between Dax and Aire-sur-l'Adour.

The cows (or coursayres in the Gascon dialect of Occitan) all have their own name and are classified for pugnacity. Before the game starts they are all put in their own private cabin, called a loge. A rope is fixed around their horns in order to be able bring them during the game to their starting position.

During the course the cows leave their loge in a predetermined order and are led by the cordier, the man who holds the rope and two entraîneurs, to the position in front of the torero placed roughly in the middle of the arena. The torero challenges the cow and to allow her to attack, calling out "Hup, hup!" The cordier lets out the rope, enabling the cow to attack.

The enthusiastic public continuously gives financial premiums for courage and audacity; these are announced between the festive music which is constantly playing.

The toreros are divided in two categories:

The cows are judged on their enthusiasm for the fight, agility and reliability to produce spectacular charges and the ganaderos compete for the honor of producing the best coursayres.

The athletes are supported by a cast of very experienced handlers who advise them and protect them from severe injury or humiliation... The Teneur de corde or cordier controls the dangling rope attached to cow's horns while the entraîneur positions the cow to face and attack the player. They are generally former toreros, and their skill is very much appreciated and recognized by the knowledgeable fans.

The participants to this game are excellent athletes and generally peak in their early thirties since a lot of experience is necessary to dominate the wild cows.

The courses Landaises are held year round with the majority of events occurring from June to early October. The most prized events are usually held in Nogaro, Bas-Armagnac in the Gers, (Corne d'Or, Championnat de France final), but the nearby region of Chalosse in the Landes is generally regarded as the cradle of the Course Landaise and hosts events year-round.

This form of bullfighting has been popular with Gascons for centuries. For example, in Saint-Sever as early as 1457 during the Celebration of Saint John cows were released in the streets for a free run.

In La Teste-de-Buch it was tradition to brand the cows in the dunes. In sand the animal are less dangerous and there arose a game which existed in jumping over cows.

The course landaise was regulated in the 19th century and transmitted to special arenas. The centralized government attempted repeatedly to forbid the courses landaises, viewed as dangerous and a mild proof of rural and regional resistance to the integration of Gascony to the French State, but the Gascons, well known for their free spirit, ignored the administrative rulings and persisted with their favorite entertainment. Nowadays the course landaise are still very fashionable in the Landes and the west of the Gers where almost every village of more than 200 souls maintains its permanent or semi-permanent arena. Closer to Bordeaux, the tradition has mainly been lost, except in Floirac (Lot), La Brède and Captieux.

Everything happens in style according to the ancient regulations. The participants to these courses are all professionals. It lasts approximately 2 h 15 min with a pause. It always starts on the music of the " Marche cazérienne [ fr ] ", a tune composed for the sport in 1900 by Fernand Tassine of the Mont-de-Marsan orchestra; with the écarteurs marching into the arena to the tune and formally saluting the public.

A jury stipulates a score which counts for the annual national competition.

The rules of the formal course Landaise are respected, but the classification in the national competition is individual. Here too its participants are all professionals.

The mixed courses are open for amateurs. The first part is formal and in the second part the public can participate.

In the popular resorts on the Atlantic coast of the Landes many events are organized in which the tourists can take part.

Sometimes the game is also played as part of a challenge to another village. In this case, only amateurs participate, and the event is mostly centered on daring acts similar to those performed by the clowns in the rodeos. Usually, younger, lighter animals are preferred to minimize injuries. These challenges are called intervilles ('inter-villages'), and the events can also incorporate other activities, such as swimming pools, seesaws, soccer or rugby games, caterpillar races, etc.

The Court of Cassation (French : Cour de cassation, [ kuʁ d(ə) kasɑsjɔ̃ ]) is the supreme court for civil and criminal cases in France. It is France's highest court, and one of the country's four superior courts, along with the Council of State, the Constitutional Council and the Jurisdictional Disputes Tribunal.

It primarily hears appeals against the decisions of courts of assizes and courts of appeal (appeals-in-cassation). The Court only reviews questions of law (but not questions of fact) and bears ultimate responsibility for a uniform interpretation and application of statutory law throughout France. It also filters out appeals challenging the constitutionality of statutes before forwarding them to the Constitutional Council, reviews lower court verdicts on request of the European Court of Human Rights and hears several other types of cases.

The Court is organized into three civil chambers, a commerce chamber, a labour chamber, a criminal chamber, a prosecutorial service and various other bodies. The Court usually rules in panels of three or five judges; the most significant cases are adjudicated by plenary sessions.

The Court was established in 1790 as the Tribunal of Cassation during the French Revolution ; its original purpose was to act as a court of error with revisory jurisdiction over lower provincial prerogative courts (parlements). However, much about the Court continues the earlier Paris Parlement. Several other countries have courts of cassation based on the French model.

The Court is located in the Palace of Justice in the 1st arrondissement of Paris.

The Court is made up of justices, the Public prosecutor's office, and an Administrative Office of Courts. In addition, a separate bar of specially certified barristers exists for trying cases at the French Court.

Overall, the Court consists of nearly 85 trial judges (conseillers) and about 40 deputy judges (conseillers référendaires), each divided among six different divisions (chambres):

Each division is headed by a presiding justice referred to in French as a président, or President of Division. The Chief Justice bears the title of the premier président, or President of the Court, who supervises the presiding justices of the various divisions. The Chief Justice is the highest-ranking judicial officer in the country and is responsible for administration of the Court and the discipline of justices. The current Chief Justice is Christophe Soulard. The Court also includes 12 masters (auditeurs), the lowest rank of justice, who are primarily concerned with administration.

There is, in addition to the abovementioned six divisions, a separate organization known as the Divisional Court (chambre mixte). The Divisional Court adjudicates where the subject matter of an appeal falls within the purview of multiple divisions. The Bench of the Divisional Court seats the Chief Justice and a number of other judges from at least three other divisions relevant to a given case. Any participating division is represented by its Presiding Justice and two puisne judges.

Finally, a full court (Assemblée plénière) is called, presided over by the Chief Justice or, if he is absent, by the most senior presiding justice. It also seats all divisional presiding justices and senior justices, assisted by a puisne judge from each division. The full court is the highest level of the Court.

The prosecution, or parquet général, is headed by the Chief Prosecutor (procureur général). The Chief Prosecutor is a judicial officer, but does not prosecute cases; instead, his function is to advise the Court on how to proceed, analogous to the Commissioner-in-Council's role within the Conseil d'État (lit. Council of State, but function may vary). Duties include filing motions to bring cases before the Court "in the name of the law" and bringing cases before the French Court of Justice (Cour de justice de la République), which tries government officials for crimes committed while in office. The Chief Prosecutor is assisted by two Chief Deputy Prosecutors (premiers avocats généraux) and a staff of about 22 deputy prosecutors (avocats généraux), and two assistant prosecutors (substituts).

Barristers (avocats), though not technically officers of the court, play an integral role in the justice system. Except for a few types of actions, advocate counsel in the form of a barrister is mandatory for any case heard at the Court or Council of State. Barristers with exclusive rights of audience and admitted to practice law in either senior court are titled avocat au Conseil d'État et à la Cour de Cassation, or avocats aux Conseils ("Counsel at Senior Court") for short. Admission to the Supreme Court bar is particularly difficult, requiring special training and passing a notoriously stringent examination. Once admitted, bar members can advise litigants on whether their actions are justiciable, that is, issuable and exceeding de minimis requirements—an important service since the court hears appeals only on points of law and not issues of fact. Membership is restricted to 60 total positions and is considered a public office.

In May 2019, Jean-François Ricard was appointed General Counsel at the Court of Cassation to exercise the function of anti-terrorism public prosecutor at the Tribunal de grande instance de Paris, heading a new National Terrorism Prosecution Office (Parquet national antiterroriste [ fr ] ; PNAT), beginning on 25 June 2019. He leads a team of 25 magistrates.

The Court's main purpose is to review lower court rulings on the grounds of legal or procedural error. As the highest court of law in France, it also has other duties.

The Court has inherent appellate jurisdiction for appeals (called pourvois en cassation) from courts of appeal or, for certain types of small claims cases not appealable to appellate courts, from courts of record. The Supreme Court reviews the appeal on the record and may affirm or set aside lower court rulings; if set aside, the ruling is said to be cassé (French for "quashed"), hence the French name of Cour de cassation, or "Quashing Court". The Court adjudicates by strict appeal, or appeal stricto sensu, which is limited to review of the decision and of the decision-making process on a point of law, and may only allow the appeal in cases of serious error; fresh evidence is not admissible. The typical outcome of a successful appeal is setting aside of the lower court's decision and remittal for reconsideration.

An intermediate appellate court, the Cour d'appel, hears general appeals de novo on points of law and procedure as well as errors of fact and reasoning. The Court of Cassation only decides matters of points of law or procedure on the record, as opposed to factual errors. Lower courts may petition the Court for an interlocutory order during the proceedings on any new and complex point of law; any such order, however, is not final or conclusive.

A case is heard by a bench of three or five relevant divisional justices. For either civil or criminal appeals, the bench seats by three judges unless the Chief Justice or the divisional presiding justice orders a full bench of five judges. Furthermore, any one of the three judges originally assigned to the bench may order it expanded to five. If the case falls in the legal areas handled by more than one division, the Chief Justice may order the divisional court, rather than a Bench, to consider the case.

The Court can affirm a decision from below by dismissing the appeal (rejet du pourvoi) or overturn or amend the decision by allowing the appeal (accueil du pourvoi). If it finds that the lower court erred, it sets aside the lower court decision and remits the case with its opinion to an appellate court for reconsideration (cassation avec renvoi). If only a portion of a ruling is overturned, it is called cassation partielle, or partial setting aside. Sometimes, the Court may overturn a lower court ruling and judge the case ex proprio motu without being petitioned (cassation sans renvoi), as long as the merits and facts of the case are on record.

When overturned, the case is remanded to a second appellate court, in other words not the appellate court whose decision is being appealed; never to the same judges. The decision of the Bench of the Court of Cassation or Divisional Court is not binding on the lower court, and the appellate court has full discretion to decide the case, but the higher court's ruling has persuasive authority. The appellate court's ruling may again be appealed to the Court of Cassation. If so, the Full Court hears and judges the case. It may, again, uphold an earlier decision or reverse it and remand the case to another appellate court. In the latter case, the determination of the Full Court is binding; the facts, however, may be reviewed by the court retrying the case.

Published judgments are extremely brief, containing a statement of the case—citing relevant statutory authorities—and a summary of ruling. The ruling does not contain a ratio decidendi in the style of common-law jurisdictions. Instead, it is left to legal experts to explain the importance of rulings. The Court often drastically changes the way the Civil Code or other statutory laws are interpreted. Legal digests, such as the Recueil Dalloz, and treatises written by legal scholars analyze and explain rulings through precedents. Much of this information is available through online databases.

Unlike common-law jurisdictions, there is no doctrine of binding precedent (stare decisis) in France. Therefore, previous decisions of higher courts do not bind lower courts in the same hierarchy, though they are often followed and have persuasive authority. Instead, the French legal system subscribes to the legal doctrine of jurisprudence constante according to which courts should follow a series of decisions that are in accord with each other and judges should rule on their own interpretation of the law.

Major felonies (indictable offences), called crimes in French, are tried by jury in a county Court of Assizes. In the past, their decisions were not open to appeal in an intermediate appellate court, and before 2001, could only be appealed to the Supreme Court. The Court would review the case on points of procedure and law only, and when handing down a reversal, which was uncommon except for capital punishment cases, vested a second Court of Assizes to retry the case. An argument in favor of this system was that allowing appeals to be tried by active judges after having been decided by a jury would in essence deny popular sovereignty. Since 2001, Assize court rulings may be appealed on points of fact to a Court of Assizes in another county, vested by the Court, and before a larger jury. The case is then fully retried. For procedural issues, appeals to the Supreme Court are still possible since assize courts, which operate by jury trial, would not be competent to hear them.

Where no appeal has been made but the government disagrees with the lower court's interpretation of the law, it may order the Chief Prosecutor to "lay an appeal before the Court in the interest of law" (former un pourvoi dans l'intérêt de la loi), i.e., appeal to certify a question of general public importance. The Chief Prosecutor may do so sua sponte or at the Court's behest in either civil or criminal cases. The Court will then issue an advisory opinion which has no bearing on the lower court's ruling since it was satisfactory to all parties involved and no motion was made to appeal. If the government is dissatisfied with the law as stated by the courts, it may ask Parliament to rewrite the law, as long as no constitutional issue is involved.

The Court publishes an annual report on the French court system. The report includes a section with suggested changes to laws concerning the legal system, including criminal procedure. The Court awards damages to defendants exonerated after incarceration. Some high-level members of the court are ex officio members of special ad hoc courts; the investigatory commission of the High Court of Justice (Haute Cour de Justice), which may be convened to try the French President for high treason ; the French Court of Justice (Cour de Justice de la République), which may be convened to try current or former cabinet ministers for crimes committed while in office; and the National Judicial Council (Conseil supérieur de la magistrature), which serves as a court of judicial discipline and disciplinary counsel. The High Court of Justice has never been convened during the Fifth Republic and the French Court of Justice, only rarely.

The Court is not the only court of last resort in France. Cases involving claims against government bodies, local authorities, or the central government, including all delegated legislation (e.g., statutory instruments, ministerial orders), are heard by the administrative courts, for which the court of last resort is the Conseil d'État. In cases where there appears to be concurrent jurisdiction or a conflict of laws between the judicial and administrative courts, whether both retain jurisdiction ("positive dispute") or decline jurisdiction ("negative dispute"), the Jurisdictional Disputes Court (Tribunal des Conflits) decides the issue. The Court is composed of 4 members from both senior courts and occasionally, to break a tie, the justice minister who, if present, presides.

Neither court has the power to strike down primary legislation, such as acts of Parliament. The courts can, however, refuse to apply any statutory provision they consider inconsistent with France's international treaty obligations. Constitutional review lies in the Constitutional Council, which can strike down any law that it deems unconstitutional. Before a law is enacted, the French President, the speaker of either house of Parliament, or, more commonly, 60 parliamentarians from the same house may petition the Council for review. Some laws, mostly constitutional laws (loi organique), come before the Constitutional Council for review without first being petitioned. Courts may adopt a restrictive approach to applying statute. A 2009 reform, effective on 1 March 2010, enables parties to a lawsuit or trial to question the constitutionality of the law that is being applied to them. The procedure, known as question prioritaire de constitutionnalité, is broadly as follows: the question is raised before the trial judge and, if it has merit, it is forwarded to the appropriate supreme court (Council of State if the referral comes from an administrative court, Cour de Cassation for other courts). The supreme court collects such referrals and submits them to the Constitutional Council. If the Constitutional Council rules a law is unconstitutional, the law is struck down and no longer has legal force; this decision applies to everybody and not just the appelant in the case at hand.

The European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) has jurisdiction over claims of government violations in breach of the European Convention on Human Rights in any ECHR member country, which includes all EU member countries. Before the ECtHR grants appeal, a claimant must have exhausted all available judicial recourse in the violating country; in France this means following the appeals process to either of the senior courts. Even so, the ECtHR has original jurisdiction, not appellate jurisdiction.

Additionally, French courts may petition the European Court of Justice to certify a question of law concerning EU law.

Court-bouillon or court bouillon (in Louisiana, pronounced coo-bee-yon) is a quickly-cooked broth used for poaching other foods, most commonly fish or seafood. It is also sometimes used for poaching vegetables, eggs, sweetbreads, cockscombs, and delicate meats. It includes seasonings and salt but lacks animal gelatin.

Court bouillon loosely translates from French as "short broth" because the cooking time is brief in comparison with a rich and complex stock, and generally is not served as part of the finished dish. Because delicate foods do not cook for very long, it is prepared before the foods are added. Typically, cooking times do not exceed 60 minutes.

Although a court bouillon may become the base for a stock or fumet, in traditional terms it is differentiated by the inclusion of acidulating ingredients such as wine, vinegar, or lemon juice. In addition to contributing their own flavor, acids help to draw flavors from the vegetable aromatics during the short preparation time prior to use.

Traditionally, court bouillon is made from water, salt, white wine, vegetable aromatics (mirepoix of carrot, onion, and celery), and flavored with bouquet garni and black pepper.

Court-bouillon need not be elaborate. Court bouillon used to prepare lobster may be as simple as water, salt, lemon juice, and perhaps thyme and bay leaf ; that for poached eggs may be salt, water, and vinegar.

In Louisiana Creole and Cajun cuisines, court-bouillon — often spelled "courtbouillon" — refers to a thick, rich fish stew most often prepared with redfish and thickened with roux.

Couscous (Tamazight : ⵙⴽⵙⵓ seksu or ⴽⵙⴽⵙⵓ keskesu), is a traditional North African dish of small steamed granules of rolled semolina that is often served with a stew spooned on top. Pearl millet, sorghum, bulgur, and other cereals are often cooked in much the same way in West Africa, and the resulting dishes are sometimes called couscous in English, French, and Hassaniya Arabic.

Couscous is a staple food throughout the Maghrebi cuisines of Algeria, Tunisia, Mauritania, Morocco, and Libya. It was integrated into French and European cuisine at the beginning of the twentieth century, through the French colonial empire and the Pieds-Noirs of Algeria.

In 2020, couscous was added to UNESCO 's Intangible Cultural Heritage list.

The word "couscous" (alternately cuscus or kuskus) was first noted in early 17th century French, from Arabic kuskus, from kaskasa 'to pound', and is probably of Berber origin. The term seksu is attested in various Berber varieties such as Kabyle and Riffian, while Saharan Berber varieties such as Touareg and Ghadames have a slightly different form, keskesu. This widespread geographical dispersion of the term strongly suggests its local Berber origin, lending further support to its likely Berber roots as Algerian linguist Salem Chaker suggests.

The Berber root *KS means "well formed, well rolled, rounded." Numerous names and pronunciations for couscous exist around the world.

According to María Teresa Santamaría Hernández, the Arabic name kuskūs, first recorded in the 13th century in Al-Andalus, can be better explained from Latin adjective *coscosus. The Latin noun coscus had an ancient Mediterranean origin, and referred to small rounded or curved objects, and hence to small animals such as worms, ants, termites and woodworms. This word coscus and its variant cossus appear in Latin veterinary treatises and in glossaries, and might have been very common in North Africa, and perhaps also in southern Spain. Therefore, *coscosus meant ‘full of worms’, also in a metaphorical sense referring to this dish of granules or rolled semolina. In medieval Spanish, the word cozcucho, from Andalusi Arabic, is recorded in the 13th century, and alcuzcuzu, alcuzcuçu, cuzcuz and other variants referred since the first half of the 15th century to this dish considered typical of Moors and Moriscos. This same dish was also called formigos, hormigos and hormiguillos (‘resembling ants’) from the 15th century onwards in a metaphorical sense, since the original meaning of cuzcuz had not been lost.

It is unclear when couscous originated. Objects that may be couscoussiers have been found at Tichitt culture sites in southern Mauritania dated to 700-400 BCE, where millet was grown and perhaps made into couscous. Food historian Lucie Bolens believes couscous originated millennia ago, during the reign of Masinissa in the ancient kingdom of Numidia in present-day Algeria. Traces of cooking vessels akin to couscoussiers have been found in graves from the 3rd century BC, from the time of the Berber kings of Numidia, in Kabylia, Algeria. Cooking utensils that closely resemble couscoussiers dating back to the 9th century were found in Tiaret, Algeria. Couscoussiers dating back to the 12th century were found in the ruins of Igiliz, located in the Sous valley of Morocco.

According to food writer Charles Perry, couscous originated among the Berbers of Algeria and Morocco between the end of the 11th-century Zirid dynasty, modern-day Algeria, and the rise of the 13th-century Almohad Caliphate. The historian Hady Idris noted that couscous is attested to during the Hafsid dynasty, but not the Zirid dynasty. Historian Marianne Brisville stated that couscous could be recognised in the 11th century under the word taam, the oldest mention is in Ouargla, Algeria.

In the 12th century, Maghrebi cooks were preparing dishes of non-mushy grains by stirring flour with water to create light, round balls of couscous dough that could be steamed.

The historian Maxime Rodinson found three recipes for couscous from the 13th century Arabic cookbook Kitab al-Wusla ila al-Habib, written by an Ayyubid author, and the anonymous Arabic cooking book Kitab al tabikh and Ibn Razin al-Tujibi's Fadalat al-khiwan also contain recipes. Ibn Battuta described a couscous made from fonio in the Niger river valley in the 14th century. Millet couscous was one of the main staple foods of Senegambia until at least the 19th century.

Couscous is believed to have been spread among the inhabitants of the Iberian Peninsula by the Berber dynasties of the 13th century, though it is no longer found in traditional Spanish or Portuguese cuisine. In modern-day Trapani, Sicily, the dish is still made to the medieval recipe of Andalusian author Ibn Razin al-Tujibi. Ligurian families that moved from Tabarka to Sardinia brought the dish with them to Carloforte in the 18th century.

The earliest mention of couscous in French dates to the 16th century, but it was only brought into French cuisine at the beginning of the 20th century via the French colonial empire and the Pieds-Noirs.

Couscous is traditionally made from semolina, the hardest part of the grain of durum wheat (the hardest of all forms of wheat), which resists the grinding of the millstone. The semolina is sprinkled with water and rolled with the hands to form small pellets, sprinkled with dry flour to keep them separate, and then sieved. Any pellets that are too small to be finished granules of couscous fall through the sieve and are again rolled and sprinkled with dry semolina and rolled into pellets. This labor-intensive process continues until all the semolina has been formed into tiny couscous granules. In the traditional method of preparing couscous, groups of people come together to make large batches over several days, which are then dried in the sun and used for several months. Handmade couscous may need to be rehydrated as it is prepared; this is achieved by a process of moistening and steaming over stew until the couscous reaches the desired light and fluffy consistency.

In some regions, couscous is made from farina or coarsely ground barley or pearl millet.

In modern times, couscous production is largely mechanized, and the product is sold worldwide. This couscous can be sauteed before it is cooked in water or another liquid. Properly cooked couscous is light and fluffy, not gummy or gritty.

Traditionally, North Africans use a food steamer (called a taseksut in the Berber language, a كِسْكَاس kiskas in Arabic or a couscoussier in French). The base is a tall metal pot shaped like an oil jar, where the meat and vegetables are cooked as a stew. On top of the base, a steamer sits where the couscous is cooked, absorbing the flavours from the stew. The steamer's lid has holes around its edge so steam can escape. It is also possible to use a pot with a steamer insert. If the holes are too big, the steamer can be lined with damp cheesecloth.

The couscous that is sold in most Western grocery stores is usually pre-steamed and dried. It is typically prepared by adding 1.5 measures of boiling water or stock to each measure of couscous and then leaving it covered tightly for about five minutes. Pre-steamed couscous takes less time to prepare than regular couscous, most dried pasta, or dried grains (such as rice). Packaged sets of quick-preparation couscous and canned vegetables, and generally meat, are routinely sold in European grocery stores and supermarkets. Couscous is widely consumed in France, where it was introduced by Maghreb immigrants and voted the third most popular dish in a 2011 survey.

In December 2020, Algeria, Mauritania, Morocco, and Tunisia obtained official recognition for the knowledge, know-how, and practices pertaining to the production and consumption of couscous on the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO. The joint submission by the four countries was hailed as an "example of international cooperation."

Couscous proper is about 2 mm in diameter, but there also exists a larger variety (3 mm more) known as berkoukes, as well as an ultra-fine version (around 1 mm). In Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, and Libya, it is generally served with vegetables (carrots, potatoes, and turnips) cooked in a spicy or mild broth or stew, usually with some meat (generally, chicken, lamb, or mutton).

Algerian couscous is a traditional staple food in Algeria, and it plays an important role in Algerian cuisine. It is commonly served with vegetables, meat, or fish. In Algeria, there are various types of couscous dishes.

In Egypt, couscous (Egyptian Arabic : كسكسي, koskosi) is traditionally prepared and consumed as a sweet dish, differing notably from the savory couscous dishes commonly associated with other North African cuisines. It is typically served for breakfast, as a light evening meal, or as a dessert. The preparation involves steaming or soaking the couscous with melted butter and hot water, after which it is topped with a variety of sweet ingredients. Common toppings include sugar (white, brown, or powdered), cinnamon, grated coconut, raisins, and assorted nuts such as almonds, walnuts, or hazelnuts. In some variations, sweetened condensed milk may also be used.

In Libya, couscous is mostly served with lamb (but sometimes camel meat or, rarely, beef) in Tripoli and the western parts of Libya, but not during official ceremonies or weddings. Another way to eat couscous is as a dessert; it is prepared with dates, sesame, and pure honey and is locally referred to as maghrood.

In Malta, small round pasta slightly larger than typical couscous is known as kusksu. It is commonly used in a dish of the same name, which includes broad beans (known in Maltese as ful) and ġbejniet, a local type of cheese.

In Mauritania, the couscous uses large wheat grains (mabroum) and is darker than the yellow couscous of Morocco. It is cooked with lamb, beef, or camel meat together with vegetables, primarily onion, tomato, and carrots, then mixed with a sauce and served with ghee, locally known as dhen.

In Morocco, couscous is a cultural staple traditionally served on Fridays following midday prayers. One of the most iconic preparations is couscous with seven vegetables, which typically features a broth of beef, lamb, or chicken, piled high with a variety of slow-cooked vegetables such as carrots, turnips, pumpkin, zucchini, and cabbage, alongside chickpeas. Another celebrated variation is couscous tfaya, a sweet and savory dish where the steamed semolina and meat are topped with a caramelized garnish of onions, raisins, cinnamon, and toasted almonds. It is often served in a large communal clay platter known as a gsaa.

In Tunisia, couscous is usually spicy, made with harissa sauce, and served commonly with vegetables and meat, including lamb, fish, seafood, beef, and sometimes (in southern regions) camel. Fish couscous is a Tunisian specialty and can also be made with octopus, squid or other seafood in a hot, red, spicy sauce. Couscous can also be served as a dessert. It is then called masfuf. Masfuf can also contain raisins, grapes, or pomegranate seeds.

In the Sahel, couscous made from pearl millet or sorghum is a very popular, traditional staple food. It is frequently prepared with okra or baobab leaves mixed in to improve digestibility and texture. Couscous can also be mixed with yogurt to create Chakery, a dessert or snack.

Couscous is made from crushed wheat flour rolled into its constituent granules or pearls, making it distinct from pasta, even pasta such as orzo and risoni of similar size, which is made from ground wheat and either molded or extruded. Couscous and pasta have similar nutritional value, although pasta is usually more refined.

Several dishes worldwide are also made from granules, like those of couscous rolled from flour from grains or other milled or grated starchy crops.

Cuscuz (Portuguese pronunciation: [ kusˈkus ]) is a couscous-like dish from the Northeast Region of Brazil. It is made out of cornmeal and eaten hot with meat and cold with milk. In the state of São Paulo, a speciality known as cuscuz-paulista [ pt ] is made with cornmeal, tomato sauce, tomato pieces, olive oil, boiled egg and other ingredients, such as peas, sweet corn, hearts of palm and sardines. It is also possible to find the dish made with shredded chicken, tuna or shrimp. All the ingredients are cooked in a pan and then placed and left to set in a mould with a hole in the middle. The mould is then inverted onto a serving dish.

In the Levant, the dish known as moghrabieh (Arabic : مغربية, lit. ' Maghrebi ', a reference to the Maghreb region) uses the same durum-based semolina flour but rolled into larger (5–6 mm or 3 ⁄ 16 – 1 ⁄ 4 in in diameter) 'pearls' to create a dish that is commonly served across Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. The pearls are either cooked as part of a stew or flavored with cinnamon and served alongside a chicken and chickpea broth.

Palestinian maftoul (Arabic : مفتول, also romanized as maftool) uses granules that are larger than the North African variety but smaller than moghrabieh pearls (2–3 mm or 1 ⁄ 16 – 1 ⁄ 8 in in diameter) and made by hand-rolling bulgur into flour, the bulgur is soaked in water before its rolled. After the pearls are rolled, they are steamed then sun-dried for preservation. Some varieties use fine semolina, white, or whole flour, oil is also commonly added. The hand-rolling makes the grains uneven in shape and size compared to moghrabieh and similar foods. It is similarly served alongside a chicken and chickpea broth. "Maftoul" is an Arabic word derived from the root "fa-ta-la," which means to roll or to twist, describing the hand-rolling method used to make the granules. It is attested as early as 1907, in Elihu Grant 's The Peasantry of Palestine.

Israeli couscous is an extruded and toasted pasta and does not share main ingredients or method of production with couscous.

The Couvent et Basilique Saint-Bernard (Saint Bernard's Convent and Basilica) is a group of buildings in Fontaine-lès-Dijon, France, including a convent, basilica and church set in a public park. The complex contains the birthplace of Saint Bernard of Clairvaux (1090–1153), the main reformer of the Cistercians. The present buildings date no further back than the Late Middle Ages, and have been greatly modified since then, with a major renovation in the late 19th century.

The Couvent et Basilique Saint-Bernard is in Fontaine-lès-Dijon, Côte-d'Or, Burgundy, France. It is dedicated to Saint Bernard of Clairvaux, who was born there. The two buildings are at the top of the Butte de Fontaine, a small hill overlooking the town of Dijon and the surrounding countryside. The buildings today are surrounded by a park crisscrossed by pedestrian paths, some leading through the woods. At one time there was a monument to the dead of World War I and World War II, but this has been moved towards the monument to the Franco-Prussian War. An old reservoir has also been demolished, as have all the buildings against the wall of the former monastery garden, opening up the view of Dijon and the plain before the foothills of the Jura Mountains.

A strong house was built on the Butte de Fontaine in the 11th century, entrusted by the Duke of Burgundy to Tescelin le Roux, father of the future Saint Bernard. Saint Bernard was born in what is now the large tower. A village emerged at the foot of the butte to serve the castle. The church of Saint-Ambrosinien, beside the château, would become the Église Saint-Bernard in the 19th century. In 1376 the villagers brought stone to rebuild this church. The church was again remodelled in the 15th and 16th centuries, and took its present aspect.

In the 17th century the reformed community of the order of Cîteaux, the congregation of the Feuillants, acquired the birthplace of Saint Bernard. The château was converted into a royal monastery and decorated using donations from King Louis XIII (1601–43) and Anne of Austria (1601–66). During the French Revolution (1789–99) ecclesiastical property was confiscated and sold by the state. The monastery of the Feuillants was destroyed. The land was purchased by winegrowers.

In the later 19th century the Congregation of the Most Holy Redeemer redeemed part of the property of the Feuillants, and transformed it into a wooded park with paths that converge on a cave of Lourdes, created artificially using features of the terrain, Pilgrimages to Saint Bernard's birthplace were resumed in 1873. The park was open only for religious processions. The birthplace was restored and transformed from 1881 to 1897. The architect Paul Selmersheim of the commission for historic monuments participated in the restoration. This gave the building its present appearance. The site was registered as a monument historique (historical monument) on 21 March 1988.

The complex includes an old entrance tower, the Saint Bernard basilica, and the building that connects them, which includes 17th century chapels and a 19th-century gallery. The 17th century door comes from the former convent of the Feuillants in the park. Protected elements are the chapel, tower, gallery and door. The configuration of the castle has changed significantly since the birth of Saint Bernard over nine centuries ago, and the present remnants of fortifications are from the late Middle Ages. For the sake of the pilgrims, the 19th century restorers tried to give the birthplace of Saint Bernard the appearance of a medieval fortress. They raised the entrance tower higher, and added battlements. They also moved the curtain wall some distance from that described in the 15th century charter.

The Canal de Craponne (French pronunciation: [ kanal də kʁapɔn ], Craponne canal) is a canal in the Pélissanne commune of the Bouches-du-Rhône department of France. It was originally conceived and built between 1554 and 1559 by the engineer Adam de Craponne to bring fresh water 25km from the river Durance at La Roque-d'Anthéron, via Alleins and Lamanon, to Salon-de-Provence and the desertified plain of Crau.

The canal was such a success that it was expanded by Craponne, and was subsequently enhanced and expanded to connect to the river Rhône at Arles and the Etang de Berre, a lagoon on the Mediterranean coast, at Istres.

The canal is now renowned in French Contract Law. In 2016 an 1876 decision by the Cour de cassation was over-ruled, such that even a 300-year-old contract (circa 1559) could not be modified to accommodate a change of circumstances whereby it has become wholly unfavourable to one of the parties.

On 17 August 1554 Adam de Craponne obtained a licence to extract water from the river Durance and channel it to Salon-de-Provence. He commenced the task in 1554, starting from the Lower Durance near La Roque-d'Anthéron, from where it followed the south side of the valley and crossed the drainage channel (pertuis) at Lamanon.

By completion in 1559 the canal water supplied the fountains of Salon-de-Provence and began to irrigate the arid soils on the flat alluvial plain of the Crau. The first extension was a sinuous route to the Etang de Berre lagoon at Istres.

The canal project was so successful that it became critical to the local economy, forcing Craponne to several phases of enlargement.

Adam de Craponne personally funded the project with the help of private partners such as Nostradamus who, along with his wife Anne Ponsard, acquired a one-thirteenth share in the canal.

Adam de Craponne died in 1576, but on May 3 1581 his former colleagues (anniveleurs), the Ravel brothers, obtained a licence from the councillors of Arles, enabling them to extend across the plain of Crau. They had requested, and obtained, the support of Robert de Montcalm, councillor of king Henry III of France and president of his court at the Parlement of Aix-en-Provence. De Montcalm used his own money to purchase a two-ninths share of the Arles project on 29 August 1583.

In 1584 the associates built the Pont-de-Crau, a bridge and aqueduct across a fetid, foul-water, swamp south east of Arles. This was a significant cost and was commenced on 22 August 1585. Two consuls of Arles had opposed the project and energised a following among the local population, so De Montcalm called them to appear before the Parliament of Aix in November 1585, but he died on 20 October 1585, before the hearing.

The original investors formally undertook to maintain the canal against a payment of three French sols for every two hectares irrigated by the farmers. Slowly this payment became derisory and out of proportion to the cost of maintenance, so the heirs of Adam de Craponne were granted an increase by the lower court. But in 1876 the farmers sought legal review and the decision of the Court of Appeal of Aix-en-Provence was quashed.

After more than a century of further academic debate, the reform of French contract law (10 February 2016) overruled the Cour de cassation ’s infamous decision on Canal de Craponne, according to which even a 300-year-old contract could not be modified to accommodate a change of circumstances that had rendered performance significantly more onerous for one of the parties.

The Creusot steam hammer is a giant steam hammer built in 1877 by Schneider and Co. in the French industrial town of Le Creusot. With the ability to deliver a blow of up to 100 tons, the Creusot hammer was the most powerful in the world until 1891, when the Bethlehem Iron Company of the United States purchased patent rights from Schneider and built a steam hammer of almost identical design but capable of delivering a 125-ton blow.

The Creusot hammer is no longer operational, and is a tourist attraction in the town of Le Creusot, where it was built. With few remaining rivals, the hammer today is once again the largest of its kind in the world.

The Creusot steam hammer was named a Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmark by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers in 1981.

In 1836, Joseph Eugène Schneider and his brother Adolphe Schneider purchased a derelict ironworks in Burgundy, near the town of Le Creusot, and founded Schneider Brothers & Co. (later renamed Schneider & Co.). Two years later the company produced the first steam locomotive to be built in France. Eugène Schneider along with the company's chief engineer, François Bourdon, developed the world's first true steam hammer at the Schneider works in 1841. Schneider and Co. went on to build 110 steam hammers of all sizes between 1843 and 1867, 26 of which were employed by the firm itself. As the jobs grew more demanding, the hammers grew correspondingly larger, and the Schneiders eventually saw a need for a hammer of colossal proportions.

The Creusot steam hammer was completed in 1877, and with its ability to deliver a blow of up to 100 tons, eclipsed the previous record set by the German firm Krupp, whose steam hammer "Fritz", with its 50-ton blow, had held the title as the world's most powerful steam hammer since 1861. In celebration of this technological achievement, a full-scale wooden replica of the Creusot hammer was built and displayed at the Paris Universal Exposition of 1878.

The hammer is composed of four distinct parts — the foundation including the anvil, the legs, the steam cylinder and its valves and linkages, and finally, the active mass itself — the piston, piston rod, hammerhead and die.

The anvil weighed a massive 750 tons, and in order to support the weight and the hammer blows, the machine's foundations were built of solid masonry resting on bedrock 11 meters below the soil. A one-metre thick bed of oak timber topped the masonry foundation and provided the immediate floor for the giant anvil.

The four legs are hollow cast and rectangular in cross-section. They were originally bolted to plates embedded in the masonry. The legs are 10.25 meters high and connected to one another at the top in a rigid A-frame design by a 30-ton "table", that in its working life both guided the hammerhead and distributed the shock of its blows. One leg supports the operator's platform from which the machine was controlled.

The steam cylinder itself is 6 meters high and has an inside diameter of 1.9 meters. Steam pressure averaging 5 kg/cm or 71 psi drove the cylinder upwards through two balanced single-acting slide valves, after which the force of gravity would allow the hammer to fall and deliver a blow.

The piston had a maximum travel of 5 meters and the piston rod was 35 centimeters in diameter. The hammerhead or tup was interchangeable, with a number of differently shaped dies which may account for the hammer's reported variable force of between 75 and 100 tons. The actual energy delivered may have been in the order of 3.3 million foot-pounds (or 500,000 kilogram-metres).

Four separate furnaces provided steam power to four adjacent swan-necked cranes, which were used for manipulating the massive 120-ton iron and steel ingots delivered to the hammer for forging. Six Bessemer converters supplied the steel for the ingots, which were transported on a railway line built expressly for the purpose through the works.

For a comparison of scale, the world's largest modern hydraulic forging presses can apply force of about 80,000 tons.

In its heyday, the hammer would sometimes give public demonstrations of its accuracy. It could be used to cork a bottle, crack a nut without damaging the contents, or tap a watch glass without breaking it. With such demonstrations, steam hammers for a time became symbols of industrial precision.

Steam hammers were eventually made redundant with the introduction of hydraulic and mechanical steel presses, which could apply force more evenly and create better quality product. The giant American hammer built by Bethlehem Iron which had superseded the Creusot hammer in 1891 was demolished by 1902, but the Creusot hammer itself had a much longer service life, in use for 54 years until its final retirement in 1930.

In 1969 the Creusot hammer was dismantled and reassembled in Le Creusot town square. Unfunctional, it serves as a tourist attraction and a reminder of a bygone era of technological achievement.

Crime in France is combated by a range of French law enforcement agencies.

Though France's homicide rate fluctuated substantially in recent years, it tended to increase between 2020 - 2023 period beginning at 1.21 cases per 100,000 inhabitants in 2020, 1.3 cases per 100,000 in 2021 and 1.4 cases per 100,000 in 2022 and 1.5 cases per 100,000 in 2023.

Drug Trafficking has been a growing concern in France for the past few years, due to the fact that a significant portion of murders in France is tied to the drug trade.

In 2024, 367 murders and attempted murders related to drug trafficking (compared to 418 in 2023) were recorded with a high proportion of young people involved in these crimes.

This decline is linked to the end of the war between two rival criminal groups in Marseille (DZ Mafia and Yoda), which were responsible for a significant proportion of drug homicides in 2023. This was a particularly bad year for Marseille as 49 people were shot dead and 118 were wounded, giving Marseille a murder rate of 5.5 per 100,000 inhabitants. About 80% of the murders were related to the rivalry between the two gangs.

In 2024, of the 176 people imprisoned for murder and attempted murder, "a quarter" were "under 20 years old," and 16 were minors. This phenomenon "particularly affects the southern half of France”.

Terror attacks have occurred in France, especially from the mid-1970s onwards. These include the 1995 France bombings, January 2015 Ile-de-France attacks, the November 2015 Paris attacks, the 2016 Magnanville stabbing, the 2016 Nice truck attack, the 2016 Normandy church attack, and the 2018 Paris knife attack. These attacks have been one of the reasons for the homicide rate fluctuation after 2014.

In September 2018, a police chief was stabbed to death in the city of Rodez. "The attacker was known to police. He had defaced the city hall door on 11 April," said Christian Teyssèdre, the Mayor of Rodez.

On 31 August 2019, a 19-year-old man was stabbed to death and eight others wounded, in Villeurbanne, Lyon. Two men, armed with a knife and a skewer, carried out the attack.

On 29 October 2020, Mayor Christian Estrosi said that 3 people were killed and several more were wounded in a suspected terror attack inside the Notre Dame Basilica church in the French city of Nice. Officials claim that this was a terror attack.

In 1971, the rape rate stood at 2.0 per 100,000 people. While in 1995, it was 12.5. In 2009, it stood at 16.2. According to a 2012 report, about 75,000 rapes take place each year.

According to a 2014 article, about 5,000 to 7,000 of the rapes are gang rapes.

Le Milieu is a category of organized crime in France. Criminal groups associated with the Milieu work in every major city in France, but are mostly concentrated in Marseille, Grenoble, Paris, and Lyon.

In 2011, Transparency International concluded in its annual report for 2011 that France does not do enough to stop corruption. A TNS Sofres poll in October 2011 indicated that 72% of the French public had the perception that politicians are corrupt.

In August 2012, the French Government announced the creation of fifteen "Priority Security Zones"' in an effort to target crime hotspots. Extra police, riot police, detectives and members of the intelligence services are to be mobilised. Social services, educational bodies and charities also put extra resources into the selected areas.

The Neuhof area of Strasbourg was selected because of a need to tackle violent crime, and the historic rural town of Chambly to the north of Paris is being focused on because of rising burglary rates and car theft. The northern quarter of Amiens in the Somme region and areas of Seine-Saint-Denis to the north of Paris, which witnessed fierce rioting in 2005, are priority zones because of widespread drug dealing and a rampant black market.

Violent crime is relatively uncommon in the city centre. Pickpockets are the most significant problem and are commonly children under the age of 16 because they are difficult to prosecute. Pickpockets are very active on the rail link from Charles de Gaulle Airport to the city centre.

The Paris Police Prefecture publishes a pamphlet entitled "Paris in Complete Safety" that provides practical advice and useful telephone numbers for visitors. In an emergency, dialling 17 will connect the caller to the police. You can also dial the Europe-wide emergency response number 112 to reach an operator for any kind of emergency service (similar to the U.S. and Canadian 911 system). Non-French speakers may experience a delay while an English speaker is located.

Criminal responsibility in French criminal law is the obligation to answer for infractions committed and to suffer the punishment provided by the legislation that governs the infraction in question.

In a democracy citizens have rights but also duties: with freedom comes responsibility.

Unlike civil liability, the obligation to answer for damage one has caused, either by repairing it or paying damages and interest for it, criminal responsibility implies legal recourse for the state against a disturbance of the peace. This includes three major factors:

The penal code declares that the authorship of a crime includes not just the person who commits the incriminating act, but also he who in the cases provided by the law, only attempts to commit it.

An attempt is constituted when a beginning of execution has manifested and only was suspended or failed to have an effect because of circumstances independent of the author's will (Article 121-5)

A person is an accomplice who knowingly offers aid or assistance to the preparation or commission of an infraction. A person is equally an accomplice a person who by gift, promise, threat order abuse of authority or of power provokes into an infraction or who gives instructions for committing it (Article 121-7)

Article 121-4 of the penal code says that trying to commit a crime is punishable, but attempting to commit a misdemeanor is not, unless a law specifically so provides. Attempting to commit an infraction is never an offense. The author of an attempt is considered an author of the actual infraction of the penal code, and incurs the same penalties as if his attempt had succeeded.

An attempt must manifest through the beginning of the commission of the infraction. The actor is no longer at the stage of preparatory actions, yet has not yet entirely found himself involved in the principal infraction. Jurisprudence defines the beginning of execution as the act or acts that "directly tend to the consommation of the infraction" (tendant directement à la consommation de l'infraction).

Example: arrêt Lacour, crim. 25 October 1962: Mr Lacour paid an individual to murder the adopted son of his mistress. The hired killer pretended to kidnap the adopted son, then collected his payment before reporting Lacour to the police. Lacour was prosecuted, notably, for attempted murder.

He was acquitted however, on the theory that his actions did not tend either directly or immediately towards the death of the victim. In reality, his actions were not attempted murder; they amounted to attempted conspiracy to commit murder. No matter what, Lacour would never have been a murderer, just an accomplice. Without having acted immediately and directly to commit the crime, he did not have a punishable attempt under the law of intent (although his actions could nonetheless be sanctioned under other criteria).

Attempted insurance fraud has given place to an important piece of jurisprudence: simply simulating a fire is merely a non-punishable act of preparation, because it does not result immediately and directly in disbursement of the policy amount. On the other hand, submitting a claim to the insurance company after making a false statement to the police would constitute the beginning of execution for the crime of fraud. A false declaration or statement, accompanied by fraudulent manoeuvers, or by staging or manipulating the evidence, have also been considered to amount to a beginning of execution.

An attempt is a failed crime and the failure of that crime was contrary to the will of its author. On the other hand, preparing then voluntarily desisting from the criminality before the crime is committed halts any prosecution.

This mechanism can be explained differently. The person who voluntarily renounces his criminal business has shown that he wasn't dangerous. The law encourages future wrongdoers to renounce their path and offers impunity as a reward. One can equally explain the mechanism by justifying its prevention of criminal attempts: the idea is to punish the person whose irrevocable criminal intention has not yet led him to carry out the crime in question. So the person who renounces his criminal intentions proves by doing so that they were not irrevocable, and therefore in law there was no attempted crime.

If the attempt failed for reasons beyond the intentions of its author, such as a missed shot, an unexpected passerby or the arrival of law enforcement, a stooge unexpectedly quitting, or sometimes the actions of the victim (a rapist fleeing because of victim's screams), the attempted crime is punishable.

The failure to voluntarily desist does not necessarily require the intervention of an outside force: Crim. 10 janvier 1996 held that an attempted rape which could not be completed due to the criminal's sexual dysfunction was nevertheless an attempted rape.

The problem may arise where the causes of the criminal stopping before he commits a crime was are mixed; for example, a moralizing friend dissuades an offender from committing a planned burglary.(Crim. 20 mars 1974). Circumstances in such cases have not forced him to desist but he hasn't independently or spontaneously opted not to commit the crime either.

The letter of the law, article 121-5 of the penal code, specifies that an attempted crime has occurred when the criminal action did not succeed solely because of circumstances independent of the defendant's actions.

The problem of an offender who flees in fear, for example, perhaps because he heard a noise, must be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Jurisprudence generally seems to lean towards impunity when the fear was spontaneous.

Voluntarily desisting must come before the action is taken in order to absolve the defendant of responsibility. Some specialized statutes reward active repentance after an offense is committed, the conspiracy statutes for example, but these remain the exception. Penal law does not as such take into account voluntarily desisting from further offenses after a crime has been committed, seeing this as remorse with no judicial value.

The author of the attempted crime must have had the intent to carry it out. This element, which does not seem particularly remarkable at first glance, is nonetheless essential. This criminal intent justifies preventing attempted crime, regardless of any disturbances of the public order.

Impossible offenses are those which were not carried out, not because of clumsiness or a chance intervening event, but because of an objective impossibility to commit the offence.

Some impossibilities are legislated into criminality: for example, the old penal code defined a crime of aborting a woman believed to be pregnant. This can be compared to provisions that refer to real or supposed attributes of certain persons, especially in matters of discrimination (article 225-1) of the penal code. It might seem impossible to be guilty of antisemitism towards a person who isn't Jewish, but this putative infraction is nonetheless outlawed.

Hypothetical impossible infractions unanticipated by legislators remain. Initially, 19th-century jurisprudence considered that if an offense was impossible it was also impossible to outlaw it. Since the offense had not been committed, the only possible grounds to prosecute it would be as an attempted crime.

The reasoning that leads to impunity relies on the very definition of an attempt: starting to execute the criminal action means performing the individual physical movements that lead directly and immediately to the criminal act. When the action is impossible there can exist no actions that tend to lead to it either directly or immediately. Therefore, no punishable attempted crime takes place; what does occur is a disturbance in the public peace.

This reasoning, which has legality going for it as well as a certain rationality, however, allowed offenders to escape prosecution who had nonetheless demonstrated their dangerousness and the irrevocability of their criminal determination. Faced with this reproach, jurisprudence took a middle path, seeking inspiration in doctrinal propositions which notably sought to distinguish between absolute and relative impossibility.

The former occurs when the object of the infraction does not exist, such as in the murder of a corpse, or when the means are intrinsically ineffective, such as poisoning with a non-toxic substance. Relative impossibility exists when the object of it exists but cannot for the moment be reached, or when the means used could have succeeded, a badly-aimed bullet for example. The doctrine also proposed a distinction between impossibility in fact (prosecutable) vs impossibility in law, where a critical element of the infraction is missing.

None of these criteria proved intellectually or judicially satisfactory. The Court of cassation, the French court of final appeal, eventually elected to systematically prosecute impossible infractions within its jurisdiction; see the Perdereau decision of 16 January 1986. In this case the crime was the attempted murder of a cadaver.

The Court of cassation underlined that the prior demise of the victim was a circumstance beyond the author's control, which could be analyzed as a failure to voluntarily desist, leading to the failure of the planned criminality. The court added that the violence done to the cadaver constituted a beginning to execute the murder. This interpretation does not correspond to the classic definition of beginning to execute; in no case can striking a cadaver lead directly or immediately or in the long term for that matter to the death of a human being.

It is a putative crime, which exists only in the mind of its author, but which is prosecuted because the blows that were struck were struck in the intention of committing the crime. The beginning of execution was not the primary element of this attempt; the attempted crime is used here more as a means to prove irrevocable intention.

Since this decision one may ask about the survival of classical solutions to imaginary infractions:

The doctrine excludes from proceedings the hypotheses about motive that they cannot attribute to any crime, contrary to the attempted commission of an impossible infraction it considered sufficient proof of intent to commit a crime. Still, a perceptible difference still separates a murderous attack that would have succeeded if the person had been alive from an allegedly sorcerous assassination, assuming that you don't believe in sorcerous assassination.

The danger is falling into mindless prosecution of simple thoughts and possibly of the desires or craving to do things the justice system would consider criminal, which would essentially amount to thought crime.

An accomplice furnishes help or assistance that facilitates the preparation or execution of a crime or other offence:"whoever by gift, promise, threat, order, or abuse of authority or power gives instructions to commit an infraction."

Complicity may be defined as a temporary, even momentary, understanding between individuals who are going to commit or try to commit one or more infractions. More simply, an accomplice participates in the action without himself needing to meet each element of the criteria that make up the infraction. As with the infraction itself, assessing the extent of complicity will depend in each case on legal, material and moral elements.

Legislators have narrowly and precisely defined the behaviors that can be charged as complicity:

Legislators have also provided for a number of cases where complicity is not punishable:

In principle, abstention is never punishable and this has been fairly consistent in case law. In some cases however the judge decided that inaction was punishable, especially where the person had a protective role towards the author, his parents for example, or people whose work this is, such as policemen or guards. Thus in 1989 a mother was found guilty of leaving a weapon available to her son, who used it to kill his father. This theory holds that an accomplice by abstention is punishable if he knew about the offense, and had the means to prevent it but refrained, so that the crime was committed.

In principle help given after the primary act has been performed is not criminalized, but here too legislators have enacted exceptions, criminalizing certain behaviors such as concealing the fruit of a crime, or its author, for example. Case law holds that help after the fact constitutes complicity if it results from a prior agreement. (Although one might suppose that the help is actually constituted by the agreement itself; in effect, promising the offender assistance after the crime is what made up his mind to take action.) The Court of cassation seems to also endorse guilty findings when the offender is an habitual delinquent and the help encourages him to repeat his bad behavior.

The material element cannot be the only criteria as this would engender a climate of suspicion harmful to society. So, therefore, a person can only become an accomplice willingly, and must be aware of the offender's plans and agree with them. Also, if the project described to the accomplice differs from the one that is carried out, the accomplice will only be held to account for the project of which he had knowledge. Therefore, if he loaned a firearm to intimidate and not to kill, he cannot be held responsible for the murder, although this requires also that the difference between the plan and the reality be noticeable. so if simple theft was intended and this became theft with breaking and entering this breaking and entering will be taken into account. Normally there can be no complicity in unintentional offenses but in certain cases, especially faults of imprudence, such as inciting someone to run a red light or to drive while drunk, complicity may be retained.

Criminal law, unlike civil law, allows very little freedom of interpretation to the judge and the legislator must foresee that which is legally an act of complicity, and in particular the theory of borrowing criminality.

Procedurally, the statute of limitations for an accomplice runs from the same day as for the principal author, and the withdrawal of a victim's complaint puts an end to prosecution of the accomplice as well. Amnesty for the infraction also benefits the accomplice.

Another question is whether complicity in complicity is punishable. Article 121-7 specifies that a second-degree complicity is only legally punishable with respect to knowing or informed help or assistance, even through the intermediary of another accomplice in the case of fraud, but the jurisprudence is rather severe and generally finds complicity even in the third degree.

In addition, while it is necessary that the infraction be punishable for complicity to be punishable, the infraction need not necessarily be punished. A guilty verdict for the accomplice is not tied to the sanction of the principal author of the crime. Thus if the principal author is not prosecuted for reasons of dementia, the accomplice can still be prosecuted, and the same if the principal author has died or could not be arrested.

The principle in the old pernal code was that the accomplice and the author incur the same penalties,

In the new code, the co-author does not necessarily face the same penally as the principal author. Also, he must have been able to commit the primary offense to be sentenced for it. For example, an individual cannot be charged with an offense that can only be committed by a member of law enforcement; he can at most be an accomplice.

Henceforth any personal circumstances that might play in the favor of a principal author no longer do the same for an accomplice, the same real circumstances of the act (break-in, provocation, carrying a weapon) that could be held for or against the principal author will do sa as well for the accomplice.

For example, in the case of a homicide committed by two persons, one of whom is the son of the victim, the latter, even if only an accomplice to the murder of his father, can receive as heavy a sentence as the principal author, since parricide constitutes a mixed aggravating circumstance.

Normally the attributes of the person do not affect his criminal responsibility, except for the one case where the person is a minor. This distinction is based in part on a difference between the abilities of children and of adults to understand mistakes. Minors, therefore, benefit from dedicated courts, but procedures and penalties also differ.

Until 1912, there were no court procedures specifically geared to minors. It was generally understood that if a sentence were to be imposed on a minor, he benefitted from the "excuse of youth", which generally reduced the penalty by half.

The law of 22 July 1912 transformed the system by putting juvenile courts into place, along with an absolute presumption of non-responsibility for minors 13 and under. Special penalties were also created in the law, such as supervised freedom, which allowed the minor to be placed in an institution and thus to be re-educated.

Then came the ordonnance du 2 février 1945 on delinquent childhood [ fr ], which, while reworked several times, remains in effect today. In this system it is the personality of the author more than the act itself which enters into account. The system is above all preventive and more geared to avoiding recidivism than to sanctioning a mistake.

In France, a minor of 13 cannot be sentenced to a penalty, but is nonetheless responsible for his actions. Article 122-8 of the code pénal provides that "Minors capable of discernment are penally responsible for the crimes, misdemeanors or offences of which they have been found guilty.

Article 122-8 is without possible appeal: a minor who has discernment is responsible for his actions. Still, the many measures that apply to him tend to sow doubt among legal practitioners and some works still speak of the non-responsibility of delinquent juveniles.

The ordonnance n° 45-171 of 2 February 1945 considers the following categories of minor and the measures it envisages for them:

To ensure that certain legal and regulatory provisions are complied with, legislators have over the 20th century accompanied them with penal sanctions. Generally these have been obstructive offenses destined to prevent serious damage, for example in the case of hygiene and workplace security, of the environment, finance, union rights a collective framework: regulation of some economic activities, of paid work, of public open spaces.

For an infraction to be described as preventive it should not so much incriminate the damaging behavior as the omission of a behavior that is required by law.

How to impute a crime of omission to a person while respecting the principle of personal responsibility?

An offender will, logically, be a person that regulation had exhorted to act, only the person who has an obligation to act can be reproached with not acting.

Some legal obligations to act weigh individually on every citizen: assistance to persons in danger, refraining from homicides and wounding through carelessness.

Others have the specific trait of not being possible to commit except in a social framework: for example, regulation of certain economic activities, of salaried work, of public spaces.

The law addresses an injunction to leaders and decision-makers of the collective: whether corporate president, mayor of a municipality, chairman of the general council or manager of a business, the decision-maker must use his powers to monitor the respect of laws in place, either by obeying legal obligations or by monitoring the compliance of his subordinates.

If the moral element of the infraction no doubt belongs to the person who commits it, since the delegate has no autonomy, the perception of the material element is more problematic. If the decider had respected the law, he would have ordered the subordinate to act or not to act in a certain way; he would not have respected the restrictions of regulation but he would have had them respected by a subaltern. When they have not been respected, the decision-maker appears not as a material author of the infraction but as a moral author, almost an accomplice. Often applied to infractions of omission, nonetheless, the distinction between a material author and one who simply had an offending desire is tenuous.

This is why one can reproach the director who was to respect and enforce the applicable rules of failing to do so. If the infraction was apparently committed by a third subordinate, the decider is indeed responsible for not having acted. This responsibility of the decider does not violate the principle of responsibility for personal actions. It also does not exonerate the subordinate of his own responsibility, if the elements of an infraction can be imputed to him.

As well, the decider in principle must submit proof of his absence of fault, even if this proof would in practice be difficult to produce: the decider is assumed to know the rules that apply to his activity and is most often blamed for not respecting them or ensuring they are respected. Example: a mayor is personally guilty of favoritism because he set the agenda and presided over the meeting of the municipal council that violated legal restrictions (Crim. 19 novembre 2003).

When the decision-maker in fact is not the decision-maker in law, the Court of cassation adopts a solution similar to that of the civil jurisdictions in similar circumstances: the decision-makers are co-authors of the infraction, and each can be pursued as if he were the only decider (Crim. 12 septembre 2000).

The judicial administrator of a company, invested with the powers of the executive, also assumes his responsibility and qualities.

It has nonetheless appeared that in large hierarchies the decider is not in practice responsible for the entirety of the business' activities. Worse, the decider cannot materially meet all the obligations that weigh on him: the head of an enterprise should constantly pay heed that safety instructions are being followed by workers, the rules of accounting and billing by the accounting department, labor laws are followed by the personnel office, and the rules of sanitation by the maintenance and upkeep departments… it does not seem either just or opportune to impute to him an infraction when the power of decision lay with a third party.

This is the mechanism of delegation of power.

The criminal responsibility of the decision-maker is tied to the powers he holds over the functioning of the enterprise: these are the powers which allow him to be reproached with not acting, or with allowing an infraction to be committed.

One cannot disassociate this responsibility from the qualities of the powers of the decision-maker. As a result, the delegation of power also carries with it onto this third party the attendant criminal responsibility. This logical solution was endorsed by the Cour de cassation from the very start of the 20th century (28 juin 1902).

Delegation of power is a consensual act between a delegating decision-maker and a delegatee subordinate; writing is useful only as proof. One can imagine subdelegations with the same conditions of validity and effectiveness as the initial delegation. On the other hand, any co-delegation is ruled out: the delegate must enjoy an autonomy and power incompatible with the collective exercise of delegation.

The validity and effectiveness of the delegation of powers depend on several criteria brought out in the case law:

a. Delegation only exonerates of the responsibility in that capacity: in no case can a decider who personally took part in the consummation of an infraction avail himself of the delegation defense. The decision-maker who personally takes part in the infraction is responsible for his personal actions and, like any material author of the infraction, he can be punished. Only the responsibility incurred by failing to fulfil the obligations specifically incumbent on his functions can benefit from delegation of powers. Example : Crim. 17 septembre 2002, aggressive sales strategies, an element of fraud, remain imputable to the decision-maker despite the delegation of power, since he conceived and organized the strategies himself.

b. Delegation of powers is made necessary by the structure of the enterprise: only the decision-maker who cannot effectively assume his legal obligations can delegate his responsibilities to a third party. The mechanism of delegation of powers is not a means for the decision-maker to escape his criminal responsibility, but a mechanism to assure the effectiveness of legal limitations. It's when the scale or material organization of an enterprise do not allow a decision-maker to confront his obligations that delegation of power is authorized and even desirable. In the same spirit delegation cannot be general but must concern a precise sector of activity. This special character of the delegation is strictly interpreted by judges.

Example: Crim. 14 octobre 2003, the delegation of power in hygiene and security to an administrator, president of the Committee of Hygiene Security and Work Conditions (CHSCT), the mandated committee in every workplace, does not transfer the responsibility for not consulting CHSCT: an interference has been committed by the company decision-maker. The Court of Cassation seems to distinguish "technical" delegation in matters of hygiene and security, concrete, and a delegation of judicial or administrative obligations tied to the functioning of the CHSCT.

c. The delegate is a member of the enterprise provided with the competence, authority, and necessary means: the decision-maker must designate one of his subordinates or possibly the head of a daughter organization in a group of companies who has the technical competence, authority and material means permitting him, in practice, to bring to a successful conclusion the mission assigned to him by the delegation.

These conditions are to avoid fictitious delegations. For a subordinate to assume the criminal responsibility attached to certain responsibilities, the decision-maker must have put him in a position to effectively ensure the respect of the law. The decider who proceeds to a judicial delegation without effectively transmitting his powers will remain responsible in that capacity for the delegated matter.

The finding of the existence and regularity of a delegation of powers assures stems from the sovereign power of lower-court judges, who often show themselves rather severe with deciders, distrusting fictive delegations: Crim 10 septembre 2002, for example, in a matter of asbestos which finds the general delegation of organization and supervision of construction site safety.

The effect of this responsibility in that capacity associated to the mechanism of the delegation of power is to give decision-makers a real duty to delegate their responsibilities as soon as they cannot assume them themselves, which ensures maximum effectiveness of the regulation of their activity.

To trigger the criminal responsibility of a corporation as author, the infraction must have been committed on behalf of the corporation by its agent or representative.

It's the mechanism for criminal responsibility by ricochet.

The corporation is not considered in criminal law as an autonomous person endowed with his or her power of decision and methods of action, but rather an abstract person incarnated by its representatives or agents.

RPPM is a mechanism that imputes to the corporation the offenses of one or more physical persons: the representative or the agent, in other words persons with the legal, statutory of conventional power to engage the corporation, and notably the delegate of a representative with the ability, authority and means necessary to perform this mission.

An infraction committed by a stranger to the corporation, and sometimes by acts foreign to the scope of representation, or a crime which is not committed on behalf of the corporation (i.e. in its interest or in its name) cannot be imputed to it.

Imputation of an infraction to a corporation supposes the elements of the crime are present, and is more often done to physical people à une personne morale suppose la réunion de tous les éléments de l'infraction, le plus souvent sur la tête d'une personne physique identifiée, organe ou représentant de la personne morale. Les juges ne peuvent en aucun cas établir l'existence des éléments de l'infraction directement dans le chef de la personne morale (Crim. 29 avril 2003).

A finding of non-responsibility for a representative or an agent in theory prevents the prosecution of corporations, even, it seems, in the case of a subjective cause of non-responsibility, a personal attributes of the agent such as demential, even though the solution is unclear in law.

A corporation constitutes an autonomous entity with a different judicial personality from that of its constituent parts. As, in theory, nothing allows applying to a person a subjective cause of non-responsibility applicable to a third party, il ne semble pas opportun de contrevenir à ce mécanisme dans l'hypothèse d'une personne morale, sauf à rompre l'égalité des justiciables devant la loi pénale.

The disappearance of the corporation naturally puts an end to prosecution, this even in the case of merger or acquisition. The principle of responsibility for personal actions runs counter to the acquiring entity or person of responsibility for infractions committed by the acquired business (Crim. 14 octobre 2003).

If the author of an infraction has a cause for a finding of non-responsibility, he will not be condemned due to his absence of responsibility, even if the facts that constitute the infraction are established and guilt recognized.

Doctrine, like jurisprudence, operates a distinction that does not appear in the penal code among the objective causes of not-responsible findings, or justifying facts, or the subjective causes of non-responsibility, or non-imputability.

Objective causes of penal non-responsibility, also called justifying facts, erase the punishable nature of the act. The impunity of the principal actor extends thereafter to the accomplice as well as the corporation.

The authorisation of law or regulation reveals a contradiction between a criminal law text and another law text, whether it contains civil, administrative or penal law. Authorisation of regulation can only justify regulatory contraventions and not violations of criminal law, as much because of the hierarchy of norms as because of the separation of the executive, legislative and judicial powers.

The liberal principle holds that interdiction is always the exception when it comes to liberty, so authorisation in law must always weigh heavier than the prohibitions of a different law of the same type.

The most recent applications of the justifying facts concern use of force by the police and by the gendarmerie, and medical acts, which are not qualified as violent if they are the acts of physicians and have a therapeutic motive. Also article 73 of the Code of penal procedure allows any citizen to arrest the author of a crime or misdemeanor punishable by a sentence of imprisonment, and to restrain that person until police arrive.

On January 5, 2000, the Cour de c Cour de cassation indicated that the justifying facts defense of authorization under law extends to involuntary infractions committed in the course of the execution of an act authorized by law, for example, clumsiness of a gendarme causing the death of the person he was lawfully pursuing.

This assumes, of course that the criteria to apply that authorization to the given situation were all in place, and that it was absolutely necessary for example for the gendarme to use his weapon, Crim. 18 February 2003.

This decision confirms that authorisation of law is not a subjective cause of non-responsibility; authorization does not make the moral element disappear, or else imprudence would remain punishable.

Authorisation under low can only cover exactly the facts detailed as authorized in the legislation. Also, the duty of cohabitation which mandates spouses to maintain sexual relations doesn't authorize one of them to impose sexual relations on the other. The right to arrest and restrain the author of a flagrant misdemeanor does not permit molesting, searching or questioning him before the police arrive.

Nor does an administrative notice, or authorisation to perfourrm an activity justify a violation of criminal law. Apparently the administrative authorities do not have the power to allow a behavior to escape from the scope of criminal law.

The Cour de cassation has found that the duty to assist a person in danger described in article 223-6 of the Code pénal did not justify the assistance given a miscreant by a nurse, once the services provided to him went beyond strictly necessary assistance required by the endangerment of the miscreant (Crim. 17 septembre 2003).

In addition to authorization under law, it is customary to allow minor actions on persons qui permet des atteintes without their author being troubled: thus, parents have a right to correct their children, people can practice violent sports or perform piercings or tatoos without being pursued for voluntary violence.

Legitimate defense is provided by article 122-5 of the penal code. This justifying fact benefits the person who, faced with an unjust and current attack against a person or a good, carries out a necessary, simultaneous and proportionate act in defense of that person or that good.

The elements of a legitimate defense are as follows:

Jurisprudence has been able to clarify the conditions for laying a legitimate defense argument.

The actual and unjust character of the attack poses no serious application problem. When the attack is an action of a public authority, its injustice may be perceived in cases of manifest illegality (beatings and night raids).

The necessary and proportionate character of the response is itself subject to the assessment of lower-court juges, and in function of the entirety of the circumstances of fact. The Court of Cassation decisions of 6 December 1995 et 21 February 1996 reveal a victim seized by the collar found guilty for having responded with blows from sharp claws but recognized as a legitimate defense for shooting a bullet into heart of the aggressor.

In many affairs that take place at night, it can be seen that determining the necessary and proportionate character of the response does not depend on the reality of the aggression, but rather on its gravity as perceived by the author of the riposte.

Rather than ponder the balance of interests that are really in play, the penal judge asks himself whether a reasonable person placed in the same situation would have reacted in the same way.

This subjective approach, which can lead to a finding of an admissibility for a purely putative claim of legitimate defense, in reaction to an imaginary aggression, explains the refusal to justify as legitimate defense involuntary infractions. A prudent man can control his actions and responds in a proportionate manner to an aggression of which he is victim; he will not commit any imprudent or negligeant acts bringing about the wounding or death of his aggressor.

This approach also justifies denying the benefit of legitimate defense to one who does not know he is in a defensive position: for example, a person who joins a brawl for the pleasure of fighting and who by chance becomes part of a group of victims in a state of legitimate defense. Legitimate defense would protect someone who while committing an illicit act does not commit a fault, or who reveals his lack of social dangerousness.

A state of necessity is a true justifying fact, which covers even involuntary infractions: Crim. 16 juillet 1986 found a gendarme not criminally responsible for a bullet shot into the ground because he needed to intimidate someone, which wounded that person in a ricochet.

The determining criteria for the state of necessity to enter into play may be the balance between the protected interest and the sacrificed interest, as two arrests in the criminal chamber on May 11, 2004. In this case (appeal n° 03-80.254), the guilty verdict of trial court judges of Sangachali-Duvanni on theft charges was overturned because the fraudulently-seized documents were to be used to defend the accused in litigation with her employer. The upper court (Haute jurisdiction) effectively found that on the one hand the strictly necessary character of the documents to the defense of the prosecuted person was not researched by the lower-court judges, given that the theft of the documents was carried out only in the intention of "legitimately preserving proofs" in the context of a lawsuit. The appeals court confirmed the same day in another case (appeal n° 03-85.521) the acquittal of a person prosecuted on a charge of theft.

Coercion is the penal equivalent of force majeure. It is an irresistible force. As in civil law, a debate exists concerning unforeseeability—is this a condition for the implementation of the idea or is it a corollary of irresistibility, foreseeable events being by nature resistible? The criminal chamber has required that the constraint be unforeseeable and irresistible. The law, however, mentions only irresistibility.

Coercion can be physical or moral; the important criteria are its irresistible characture and its causal tie to the crime. Coercion is a cause of non-imputability, but it must have abolished the discernment of the victim to be taken into account.

This could take the form of a natural disaster or an illness of the actor: a driver who becomes unwell due to an illness he did not know he had, is exonerated of all criminal responsibility for the consequences of the accident he may have caused.

The classical example of a moral coercion is coercion which results from pressure or blackmail which has abolished the discernment of the victim. The Court of cassation has been able to find that the alleged pressure of the German authorities on the person of Maurice Papon did not abolish his free will and he, therefore, remained responsible for his complicity in crimes against humanity (Crim. 23 janvier 1997).

The coercion will not be taken into account if it results from a fault or an imprudence of the person who acts. Thus, a person who knows himself subject to unwellness but who drives anyway, or who dozes off after starting a trip in an advanced state of fatigue, are responsible for homicide or involuntary wounding if they cause an accident.

"Nemo censetur ignorare legem" (None should be ignorant of the law): the adage supplies a legal fiction (not a presumption or simple proof) which is necessary to the functions of all judicial systems.

Law rests on its compulsory character and one cannot envisage a judicial system in which individuals could avail themshelves of their ignorance of the law to escape its application.

When the penal code was reformed the lawmakers attempted to satisfy the imperatives of clarity and accessibility and list possible infractions hors code, outside the code, in the fifth book of the penal code. It appears that it was impossible to enumerate the entirety of the offenses extant and active in French law, but their numbers are estimated at 10,000.

This impossibility to know the exact contours of criminal law has led legislators to attenuate the fiction of knowledge of law by the introduction of error of law as a cause of non-responsibility. Article 122-3 of the penal code provides for the non-responsibility of a person who can prove having believed, by an error of law he could not avoid, that he could legitimately carry out the action in question. It is not so much a matter of proving one's ignorance of criminal law as it is of proving one's belief in the legality of the action in question.

The Court of Cassation has applied this cause of non-responsibility in a very restricted manner, finding for example that the error on the scope of a court decision caused by the legal counsel of the party is not necessarily an invincible defense, since the judge could be asked to interpret it (Crim. 11 octobre 1995). It has equally found that a company which had expanded its market after a (ministériel) indicated that it did not need an authorization had not committed an invincible error, because it could have consulted qualified jurists (Crim. 19 mars 1997). It later formulated the principle that simple advice from a law professional does not constitute an error of law (Crim. 7 janvier 2004).

The court has accepted the non-responsibility of a head of an enterprise who merely applies a collective bargaining agreement signed under the aegis of a mediator designated by the government (Crim. 24 novembre 1998).

This cause of non-responsibility is used more widely by lower courts, generally censured by the Court of cassation, due to equity concerns. For example, the Paris Court of Appeals held that the mismatch between the case law of the business and criminal chambers of the Court of cassation as to the legality of the documents photocopied by employees in order to produce them in justice had led the employee to an error of law preventing a guilty verdict for theft (CA Paris, 9 novembre 2000, Crim.11 mai 2004).

Beyond these three subjective causes of non-responsibility, immunities exist that stem from the personal qualities of the defendant, such as the application of Article 311-12 of the Code pénal, immunity of spouses, ascendants and descendants in matters of theft. Such immunities are personal causes of non-responsibility which do not apply to the accomplice or to the corporation; they are nonetheless not the same as a lack of moral elements and in this they approach the objective causes of non-responsibility.

Article 122-1 of the Code pénal says that a person "afflicted at the moment in question by a psychic or neuropsychic disturbance that abolishes his discernment or his control of his actions" will not be found criminally responsible.

Depending on the moment when the psychic or neuropsychic trouble declared itself, the person's charges could be dismissed by the French, or receive an acquittal or not-guilty verdict in the trial court. If the person is considered a danger to society because of his mental disturbance, he can be committed to a mental institution. The prefect (préfet) decides what to do with the person in this case.

In France, deputies and senators have parliamentary immunity which comes down to non-responsibility (fundamental immunity) and inviolability (immunity of procedure).

Local elected officials in 1974 gained a jurisdictional privilege, notably prefects and magistrates. Instituted following the 5/7 dance hall fire and the subsequent sentencing of then-mayor of Saint-Laurent-du-Pont, which made a powerful impression on the political class. This privilege allowed the investigation of crimes and misdemeanors of elected officials in another jurisdiction than their own, to avoid any partiality on the part of the judge, and was abolished with the reform of the penal code in 1993.

The implementation of decentralization has led to significant growth in 20-some years of the body of standards (more than 5,000 texts spread through 18 Codes) to which elected officials are subject, sometimes without having the means, especially in small municipalities, of applying them in practice. The areas of urban design, the environment, and the security of the financial markets are so many "infraction niches". Also, legislators have created unintentional misdemeanors, a straying from the principle that says "there is no crime of offence without the intention of committing it" (art. 121-3 of penal code). Finally, in the context of an economic crisis and of competition between towns to attract businesses, some mayors have been brought to make perilous judicial combinations (montages).

Mayors may have felt like the "scapegoats of proximity democracy," in the words of Senator Hubert Haenel, forced to limit their initiatives. So legislation therefore attempted to better frame the phenomenon, notably with the Fauchon law of July 10, 2000, on unintended misdemeanors (…). Deputy Étienne Mourrut introduced a law concerning the criminal liability of elected local officials in sports or cultural demonstrations.

The crown lands, crown estate, royal domain or (in French) domaine royal (from demesne) of France were the lands, fiefs and rights directly possessed by the kings of France. While the term eventually came to refer to a territorial unit, the royal domain originally referred to the network of "castles, villages and estates, forests, towns, religious houses and bishoprics, and the rights of justice, tolls and taxes" effectively held by the king or under his domination. In terms of territory, before the reign of Henry IV, the domaine royal did not encompass the entirety of the territory of the kingdom of France and for much of the Middle Ages significant portions of the kingdom were the direct possessions of other feudal lords.

In the tenth and eleventh centuries, the first Capetians —while being the kings of France—were among the least powerful of the great feudal lords of France in terms of territory possessed. Patiently, through the use of feudal law (and, in particular, the confiscation of fiefs from rebellious vassals), conquest, annexation, skillful marriages with heiresses of large fiefs, and even by purchase, the kings of France were able to increase the royal domain. By the time of Philip IV, the meaning of "royal domain" began to shift from a mere collection of lands and rights to a fixed territorial unit, and by the sixteenth century the "royal domain" began to coincide with the entire kingdom. However, the medieval system of appanage (a concession of a fief with its land rights by the sovereign to his younger sons, which reverts to the crown upon the extinction of the male line of the original holder) alienated large territories from the royal domain and sometimes created dangerous rivals (especially the Burgundian State from the 14th to the 15th centuries).

During the Wars of Religion, the alienation of lands and fiefs from the royal domain was frequently criticized. The Edict of Moulins (1566) declared that the royal domain (defined in the second article as all the land controlled by the crown for more than ten years) could not be alienated, except in two cases: by interlocking, in the case of financial emergency, with a perpetual option to repurchase the land; and to form an appanage, which must return to the crown in its original state on the extinction of the male line.

Traditionally, the king was expected to survive from the revenues generated from the royal domain, but fiscal necessity, especially in times of war, led the kings to enact "exceptional" taxes, like the taille, upon the whole of the kingdom (the taille became permanent in 1439).

At the beginning of Hugh Capet 's reign, the crown estate was extremely small and consisted mostly of scattered possessions in the Île-de-France and Orléanais regions (Senlis, Poissy, Orléans), with several other isolated pockets, such as Attigny. These lands were largely the inheritance of the Robertians, the direct ancestors of the Capetians.

From the reign of Francis I, the concept of "royal domain" begins to coincide with the French kingdom in general; the appanage of the House of Bourbon however remains alienated.

Crème fraîche (English: / ˌ k r ɛ m ˈ f r ɛ ʃ /, French: [ kʁɛm fʁɛːʃ ], lit. ' fresh cream ') is a dairy product similar to sour cream ; it is a soured cream containing 10–45% butterfat, with a pH of approximately 4.5. It is soured with a bacterial culture. European labeling regulations specify the two ingredients must be cream and bacterial culture. It is served over fruit and baked goods, as well as being added to soups and sauces. It is used in a variety of other recipes. Sour cream is a similar foodstuff, except that crème fraîche is less sour and has a higher fat content. Sour cream may contain thickening agents not permitted in crème fraîche in many jurisdictions.

The name crème fraîche is French, but similar soured creams are found in much of northern Europe, and a traditional soured cream (crema fresca in Spanish) used in Central America resembles it. A literal translation of crème fraîche is "fresh cream". However, in French-speaking countries, crème fraîche may refer to either: (A) the thick fermented product, crème fraîche épaisse or fermentée, or (B) a liquid cream, crème fraîche liquide or fleurette. In these countries, crème fraîche without qualification normally refers to liquid cream, with the thick form usually called crème épaisse (thick cream). In other countries, however, crème fraîche without qualification usually refers to the thick, fermented product.

Crème fraîche is produced by adding a starter culture to heavy cream and allowing it to stand at an appropriate temperature until it thickens. The culture is made up of a mix of bacteria including, Lactococcus species L. cremoris, L. lactis, and L. lactis biovar diacetylactis. These bacteria give it the taste that distinguishes it from similar dairy products such as sour cream. Recipes for cooks making crème fraîche at home may substitute cultured buttermilk with active cultures for the starter culture.

In some places in Europe, the fat content of crème fraîche is regulated, and it may not contain ingredients other than cream and starter culture.

In North America and the UK, products labeled "low-fat crème fraîche" with approximately 15% butterfat and with added stabilizers such as xanthan gum or starch from maize or corn, are commercialized. This product is less stable than crème fraîche when heated.

Crème fraîche consists of double cream and a starter culture. In most places in Europe, strict regulation is placed on the production of crème fraîche, prohibiting the addition of any stabilizers, bulking agents, or emulsifiers. Standard crème fraîche contains around 30–45% milkfat while low-fat crème fraîche contains closer to 15% milkfat. During processing, the acidification of the casein micelle begins at around a pH of 6.7; however, the pH of the cream must drop to below 4.6, the isoelectric point of milk, for the casein micelles to fully precipitate out of solution.

The structure of crème fraîche consists of an acid gel composed of milk protein-covered fat globules that tend to agglomerate. This gives the crème fraîche its stability as a highly viscous thixotropic fluid. This gel is only stable in higher fat cultured creams, around 30%, and therefore is not stable nor ubiquitous in low-fat crème fraîche. This is partly the reason why it is impossible to make a low-fat crème fraîche without the addition of stabilizers and bulking agents to generate the same texture as found in regular crème fraîche. Around 50% of the triglycerides in milk fat are long-chain triglycerides (LCT), which at refrigerator temperatures are solid. These triglycerides will tend to crystallize inside the fat globule adding to the gel's stiffness.

The crème fraîche from Normandy is famous, and the crème fraîche from a defined area around the town of Isigny-sur-Mer in the Calvados department of Normandy is highly regarded. As of 2018, it is the only cream to have an appellation d'origine contrôlée (AOC), which was awarded in 1986. It also is produced in many other parts of France, with large quantities coming from the major dairy regions of Brittany, Poitou-Charentes, Lorraine, and Champagne-Ardenne.

Crème fraîche is used both hot and cold in French cuisine. It often is used to finish hot savory sauces, and with its fat content greater than 30%, curdling is not a problem. It is also the basis of many desserts and dessert sauces.

Crema Mexicana is a similar cultured sour cream that may contain several other ingredients.

Smetana from Eastern Europe and Russia is very similar also. In Romania and Moldova, the product is called smântână.

Crédit Agricole Group (French: [ kʁedi aɡʁikɔl ]), sometimes called La banque verte (pronounced [ la bɑ̃k vɛʁt ], lit. ' The green bank ', due to its historical ties to farming), is a French international banking group and the world's largest cooperative financial institution.

In 2026, Crédit Agricole is the ninth-largest bank in the world in terms of assets, and the second-largest in France after BNP Paribas. It is also Europe's 3rd largest bank by assets, with $3.149 trillion in assets.

It consists of a network of Crédit Agricole local banks, 39 Crédit Agricole regional banks and a central institute, the Crédit Agricole S.A.. It is listed through Crédit Agricole S.A., as an intermediate holding company, on Euronext Paris ' first market and is part of the CAC 40 stock market index. Local banks of the group owned the regional banks, in turn the regional banks majority owned the S.A. via a holding company, and in turn the S.A. owned part of the subsidiaries of the group, such as LCL, the Italian network and the CIB unit. It is considered to be a systemically important bank by the Financial Stability Board.

Since 1974, Crédit Agricole has been the sponsor of Coupe de France. It was also the title sponsor of the Crédit Agricole professional road cycling team from 1998 to 2008.

Crédit Agricole has been designated as a Significant Institution since the entry into force of European Banking Supervision in late 2014, and as a consequence is directly supervised by the European Central Bank.

In the second half of the 19th century, French farmers struggled to obtain long-term, flexible, reasonably-priced credit. There were several attempts to set up farming banks, including Crédit Foncier de France in 1861, but none were successful.

Crédit Agricole can trace its history back to the end of the 19th century, specifically to the Act of 1884 establishing the freedom of professional association, which authorised, among other things, the creation of syndicat agricoles (farm unions) and the foundation of local mutual banks. Société de Crédit Agricole was created on 23 February 1885 at Salins-les-Bains in the district of Poligny in the Jura region. It was the first of its kind in France.

Drawing on this experience to promote lending to small family farms, the Act of 5 November 1894, which had the support of the Minister for Agriculture Jules Méline, paved the way for the creation of Crédit Agricole's local banks. The first local banks were set up by local elites, including agronomists, teachers, and property owners, with farmers playing a minority role.

In the early years, business consisted exclusively of short-term loans provided as advances on harvests, enabling farmers to live more comfortably. Medium-term and long-term loans were added later, making it possible to buy equipment and livestock.

The 1894 Act did not confer any financial advantages, and the local banks soon faced financial problems, such as a lack of capital and insufficient collateral from small farmers. It was not until 1897 that the government addressed these problems by requiring the Banque de France to fund Crédit Agricole through an endowment of 40 million gold francs and an annual fee of 2 million francs. A year later, the Act of 1898 resolved the collateral issues. Meanwhile, the Act of 31 March 1899 instituted a commission within the Ministry for Agriculture to distribute the government advances between the regional banks, which were also created at this time. These cooperative entities brought together the local banks in their catchment area and acted as their clearing organisations.

More and more local and regional banks were established from the turn of the century. Every region had at least one by the eve of the First World War. However, the government continued to provide three-quarters of the funding, and short-term lending still accounted for the lion's share of business despite the authorisation to issue long-term loans granted by the Acts of 29 December 1906 and 19 March 1910. With some regions becoming isolated owing to the War, the need for a central bank to regulate business became more apparent, especially as Crédit Agricole was asked to provide financing to rebuild farming operations damaged during the conflict.

New legislation of 5 August 1920 established a public central clearing organisation for the regional banks: the Office National de Crédit Agricole (ONCA), with Louis Tardy as its chief executive officer, merging two services that were previously embedded in the Ministry of Agriculture. In 1926, the institution was renamed Caisse Nationale de Crédit Agricole (CNCA).

In the 1920s, the bank continued to build its nationwide coverage and expand its business activities, notably by introducing loans to small-scale rural craftsmen in 1920, financing rural electrification, and financing local authorities in rural areas from 1923.

Local and regional banks did not emerge from the 1930 crisis unscathed. The Caisse Nationale took on a greater role and aided the most heavily exposed banks. A joint deposit guarantee fund was set up in 1935. The following year, Crédit Agricole provided additional support by financing wheat stocks through discounting when the National Cereals Board (ONIC) was established. The payment mechanisms used helped to make cheques and bank accounts more popular in the countryside.

Between 1939 and 1945, the Vichy regime imposed stricter state supervision on Crédit Agricole. Major financial developments also took place at this time, including the creation of the five-year note.

To finance the post-war reconstruction and encourage the mechanisation of farming, CNCA stepped up deposit-taking to supplement the funds provided by the government. The regional banks opened many offices, with the total increasing from 1,000 in 1947 to 2,259 by 1967.

In 1959, Crédit Agricole was authorised by decree to finance property loans for primary residences in rural areas, irrespective of the status of the owner (even non-farmers).

Crédit Agricole continued to modernise, with an influx of new managerial talent both in the regional banks and at CNCA. In 1960, Paul Driant [ fr ] became the first Chairman of CNCA to come from a farming background. He remained in this position for 14 years.

In 1966, as part of efforts to boost savings and remove Crédit Agricole from its budget, the government gave CNCA financial autonomy. Savings inflows no longer passed through the Treasury, and CNCA was now responsible for balancing the surpluses and deficits of the regional banks. The 1971 "Rurality Act" extended Crédit Agricole's potential financing sources to rural zones and to new types of customers, such as craftsmen and food producers. Lending to SMEs and mid-tier firms followed after.

The Banking Reform of 1966 allowed the organisation to offer households the same products as those provided by competitors, including passbook accounts and home savings plans.

The first subsidiaries were set up at the end of the 1960s to address the specific needs of CNCA: Union d'études et d'investissements (UI) was created in 1967 to make equity investments, followed by Segespar for asset management in 1968, and Unicrédit to grant loans to food producers in 1971. Crédit Agricole began distributing home purchase savings products from 1967, government-regulated mortgages from 1972 and first-time-buyer loans in 1977.

In 1976, the group adopted the slogan "le bon sens près de chez vous" ("common sense close to home").

Crédit Agricole opened its first foreign branch, in Chicago, in 1979.

The group's business diversification started in the 1980s. The Predica [ fr ] life insurance subsidiary was set up in 1986, while property & casualty unit Pacifica [ fr ] was created in 1990. The group expanded into bancassurance, offering the first retirement savings plans. At this time, many local bank directors were also directors of Groupama, an insurer from the farming sector. There was talk of a merger between the two, but this did not come to pass.

On 18 January 1988, the CNCA Mutualisation Act came into force. CNCA was reincorporated into a public limited company, with a 90% stake sold to the regional banks and 10% to staff. Crédit Agricole became fully independent of the government, putting an end to the latter's practice of skimming off surplus funds. In 1990, Crédit Agricole lost the monopoly on granting low-interest loans to farmers and one year later, in 1991, the "normalisation" process was completed as it was allowed to begin financing large corporations.

International expansion continued with the acquisition of stakes in Banco Ambrosiano Veneto in Italy in 1989 and Banco Espírito Santo in Portugal in 1991.

Consolidation among the regional banks began officially in 1990, with the aim of reducing costs. The aim was to halve the number of regional banks, and that objective had been surpassed by the turn of the 21st century.

In 1993, Lucien Douroux, who led the plan to mutualise FNCA, became CNCA's first chief executive officer, having been appointed by Crédit Agricole from existing staff.

In 1996, the group bought Banque Indosuez and then created Indocam, an asset management subsidiary (renamed Crédit Agricole Asset Management in 1999), and Crédit Agricole Indosuez for corporate and investment banking. In 1999, diversification continued as the group took a stake in the newly privatised Crédit Lyonnais, and acquired leading consumer finance company Sofinco.

CNCA was listed on the stock market in 2001 under the name Crédit Agricole S.A. This gave the regional banks a listed vehicle through which to carry out major acquisitions.

The group's acquisitions enabled it to strengthen its leadership in French retail banking, expand its position in corporate and investment banking and build up its international network of branches and subsidiaries. By now, the group was the number-one bank in France with 28% of the domestic market, the global number-two by revenues and number-ten by profits, according to Fortune magazine, and number-15 worldwide according to Forbes rankings.

Although less negatively impacted than some rivals by the 2008 financial crisis, when the interbank lending market seized up, Crédit Agricole was forced in January 2008 to sell its long-standing stake in Suez for €1.3 billion and then in May 2008 to organise a €5.9 billion rights issue to which all regional banks subscribed to meet Basel II regulatory requirements. It also undertook a €5 billion programme of non-strategic asset disposals.

At the end of 2008, the government decided to loan France's six largest banks €21 billion in two tranches, at an interest rate of 8%, to enable them to continue to play their role in the economy. Crédit Agricole did not take part in the second tranche and repaid the government in October 2009. Crédit Agricole's crisis exit strategy was well received by the markets, with the share price gaining more than 40% over 2009.

In 2012, Crédit Agricole continued to report negative results, posting a loss of around €3 billion in the third quarter. The Greek branch Emporiki was separated from its profitable wealthy parts in Albania, Bulgaria and Romania which were integrated into the Crédit Agricole group. The whole investment into Emporiki cost around €9 billion. The remaining Greek part was sold off to Alpha Bank for €1. Crédit Agricole also withdrew totally from Spanish bank Bankinter, resulting in a book loss of €193 million, and took a massive €600 million write-down on consumer credit, notably owing to difficulties in Italy. Furthermore, Crédit Agricole had to write down the goodwill on its balance sheet. Goodwill amounted to €17.7 billion in September 2012, well above the actual value. In early February 2013, the bank announced that it would book €3.8 billion in writedowns and costs – a record amount according to the media.

In March 2014, the Crédit Agricole Group unveiled its medium-term strategic plan, which put the emphasis on retail banking, insurance and saving. Internationally, the group decided to refocus on its core markets, starting with Italy, the group's second-largest market.

The Crédit Agricole Group sold its Bulgarian subsidiary to Corporate Commercial Bank for €160 million. On 22 April 2014, Crédit Agricole S.A., Crédit Agricole Nord and Crédit Agricole Nord-Est announced that they would sell 50% of their stake in Crelan S.A., a Belgian bank created out of the merger of Crédit Agricole Belgique and Centea, to Caisses coopératives belges by June 2015.

In 2017, the group bought three small Italian independent saving banks (Banca Carim, Cassa di Risparmio di Cesena and Cassa di Risparmio di San Miniato), in addition to Banca Leonardo through Indosuez Wealth Management.

The effects of the third industrial revolution on the digital management of banks are considered. On 28 January 2020, Crédit Agricole announced an 85% stake acquisition in the fintech Linxo for its budget management app.

In 2021, the Crédit Agricole group entered the neobank market by launching Blank, a mobile app tailored for self-employed workers, offering them a professional account and an ecosystem of management tools. The group continued expanding in the sector in 2022, announcing the launch of two new professional accounts: Propulse by CA and LCL Essentiel Pro through its subsidiary LCL. Both offerings were developed in partnership with Blank via the startup studio La Fabrique by CA.

During the coronavirus crisis, the group was one of the leading contributors to the implementation of the state-guaranteed loan (PGE) program, accounting for over a quarter of PGEs in France. In February 2022, Generali announced the acquisition of La Médicale, Crédit Agricole's medical insurance subsidiary, for €435 million.

On 7 April 2022, Crédit Agricole announced the acquisition of a 9.18% stake in Banco BPM, Italy's third-largest bank. In August 2023, Crédit Agricole announced its intent to purchase a majority stake in Belgian private bank Degroof Petercam via its subsidiary Indosuez Wealth Management, the acquisition was finalised in 2024 with Crédit Agricole owning a 65% stake in Degroof Petercam.

In July 2023, CACEIS, previously jointly owned by Crédit Agricole and Banco Santander at that time, purchased RBC Investor Services ' activities in Europe. The acquisition expanded CACEIS's geographic footprint in Europe and included an operations centre in Malaysia with over 1,200 staff. Following the acquisition, CACEIS provided custody for approximately €5 trillion in client assets.

For the entirety of 2023, the group reported over €8 billion in net profit for the third consecutive year. Its insurance division alone grew by 12.6% compared to the previous year, achieving a net result of €1.65 billion.

In January 2024, Crédit Agricole acquired a 7% stake in Worldline. In December 2024, Crédit Agricole increased through derivatives its stake in Banco BPM up to 19.8%, the increase was authorized by the ECB in April 2025.

In December 2024, Crédit Agricole agreed to buy Banco Santander 's 30.5% stake in custody and asset servicing entity CACEIS, giving the French lender full control of the business. The transaction, expected to complete in 2025, excludes CACEIS's Latin American joint venture, which remains jointly controlled. Credit Agricole had previously expanded its asset servicing business with the acquisition of RBC Investor Services' operations in 2023.

In April 2025, Crédit Agricole (through its subsidiary Indosuez Wealth Management) signed an agreement to purchase Swiss private bank Banque Thaler. In May 2025, Crédit Agricole announced the acquisition of a 9.9% minority stake in Crelan. In July 2025, Credit Agricole announced that it would seek the ECB's approval to increase its stake in Banco BPM beyond the threshold of 20%.

In January 2026, Crédit Agricole launched Indosuez Corporate Advisory, a corporate finance advisory firm focused on providing advisory services to French SMEs and mid-sized companies, including mergers and acquisitions. In July 2026, Crédit Agricole increased its stake in Banco BPM to 29.3%, just below the 29.9% threshold that would require Crédit Agricole to launch a full bid on the Italian lender.

Crédit Agricole has a three-tier structure, comprising the local banks, the regional banks (and their branches and equity investments) and Crédit Agricole S.A. (and its subsidiaries). The local and regional banks are cooperative companies. Crédit Agricole S.A. is a société anonyme. Crédit Agricole is one of the leading cooperative companies in the world.

Through an association set up to promote the employment of people with disabilities within Crédit Agricole (HECA), the Crédit Agricole regional banks devote resources to the recruitment, integration and continued employment of disabled workers. Measures include workstation modifications, transport facilities and training. Since a lack of training makes it harder for people with disabilities to get work, Crédit Agricole has set up work/study training programmes to enable people who have their high school diploma to receive post-secondary qualifications. The goal was to recruit more than 800 disabled persons between 2006 and end-2010, and by end-2009, more than 360 permanent contracts and 670 work/study contracts had been signed. Former Miss France runner-up Sophie Vouzelaud, who has been deaf from birth, is HECA's official ambassador.

The regional banks help to promote the cooperative model locally through a variety of initiatives, such as the Perspectives Mutualistes conference series (Pau in 2006, Angers in 2007, Reims in 2008, Orléans in 2009), and by issuing special bank cards for stakeholders.

The Board is made up of members elected by the annual general meeting, representatives of trade organisations, members elected by employees, a non-voting member and a representative of the Works Council.

The regional banks own 54% of Crédit Agricole S.A., which in turn holds 25% of their capital in the form of non-voting cooperative securities (certificats coopératifs d'associés). An internal debate is continually underway on striking a balance between growing activities that serve the regional banks directly and promoting businesses that lie outside their sphere. Institutional investors, particularly in the UK and US, are not always at ease with this approach.

Crédit Agricole established its presence in Italy in 1961 with the opening of a Crédit Lyonnais representative office in Rome, followed by the expansion of Banque Indosuez during the 1970s. In 1993, Crédit Agricole became the largest shareholder of Banco Ambrosiano Veneto and developed close ties with Cassa di Risparmio delle Province Lombarde. The two institutions merged in 1997 to form Banca Intesa, of which Crédit Agricole became the leading shareholder. This alliance ended in 2006 when Banca Intesa merged with Sanpaolo IMI to create Intesa Sanpaolo. Crédit Agricole subsequently established its own banking network in Italy by acquiring several regional banks, including Cariparma and FriulAdria in 2007, followed in 2017 by Cassa di Risparmio di Cesena, Cassa di Risparmio di Rimini, and Cassa di Risparmio di San Miniato. In 2019, these entities were consolidated under the brand Crédit Agricole Italia, which later acquired Credito Valtellinese in 2021.

Crédit Agricole entered the Polish market in 2001 by acquiring a majority stake in Lukas Bank and taking over Europejski Fundusz Leasingowy. In September 2011, Lukas Bank was renamed Crédit Agricole Bank Polska.

In 1876, Crédit Lyonnais opened its first branch in Geneva. This establishment marked the origin of Crédit Agricole's Swiss presence following the acquisition of Crédit Lyonnais in 2003. The Swiss retail banking subsidiary changed its name in 2017 to Crédit Agricole next bank.

In 1993, Crédit Lyonnais opened a subsidiary in Kyiv, becoming one of the first foreign-owned banks to operate in the country following the declaration of independence of Ukraine. This entity joined Crédit Agricole following its takeover of Crédit Lyonnais in 2003. The group expanded in 2006 by acquiring Index Bank, which was renamed Crédit Agricole Ukraine in March 2011. Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the subsidiary maintained its banking operations in the country. In March 2026, Crédit Agricole signed an agreement to acquire Bank Lviv.

The cooperative investment certificates of 15 regional banks, and the shares of Crédit Agricole S.A., the group holding company, are listed on the Paris stock exchange. Crédit Agricole S.A. is also a member of the Dow Jones, Euro Stoxx 50, SBF 120, Euronext 100, ASPI Eurozone and FTSE4Good Index.

The Crêtois was a nickname given to the remaining Montagnard deputies of the National Convention during Year III of the French First Republic (1794–1795). Dwindling in number, they attempted to oppose the Thermidorian Reaction during the French Revolution.

They participated in the insurrection of 12 Germinal Year III (1 April 1795) and the insurrection of 1 Prairial Year III (20 May 1795), attempting to regain power from The Plain and, more broadly, from the Thermidorians.

The Crêtois were expelled from the National Convention and faced harsh treatment, including executions and deportations. Some, such as Gilbert Romme, Ernest Dominique François Joseph Duquesnoy, and Jean-Marie Goujon, committed suicide.

The term "Crêtois" appeared in Year III, used pejoratively by Thermidorians and other Reactionaries. The expression "la Crête de la Montagne" ("the Crest of the Mountain") is also found, referring to the highest benches on which these deputies sat in the Salle des Machines of the Tuileries Palace, where the National Convention met at the time.

Historians' estimates of the number of Crêtois have long ranged between 30 and 76. Based on the Memoirs of René Levasseur, Eugène Tarlé mentioned about thirty deputies. Albert Mathiez counted 60 deputies excluded from the Convention. François-Auguste Mignet referred to 76 deputies arrested or sentenced to death. Françoise Brunel estimates their number at around one hundred, based on the request for a roll-call vote made by Laurent Lecointre on 12 Germinal Year III (1 April 1795) (supported by 50 deputies), and the arrests that occurred in Germinal, Prairial, and Thermidor of Year III (April to July 1795). During this period, 74 Convention members were arrested, deported, or executed, including 25 who had signed Lecointre's request.

Dispersed after the Law of 22 Prairial, the Montagnards only reformed as a relatively cohesive group in the winter and spring of 1795. Most of them had been Thermidorians (excluding representatives on mission and alternates admitted to the Convention after the events of 9 Thermidor). They initially viewed the fall of Robespierre as a repetition of the days of 31 May – 2 June 1793, expecting the revolutionary government to be maintained until peace, followed by the implementation of the Constitution of Year I. During the offensive against popular societies in Vendémiaire, only a minority defended the Jacobin Club.

The turning point occurred in Frimaire with the indictment of Jean-Baptiste Carrier ; 14 deputies opposed it. Others shifted their stance during the ensuing subsistence crisis and widespread popular misery. They began to denounce what they termed a "retreat" (French: recul) or a "step backward" (French: regard en arrière) from the principles of 1793. This perceived shift became known as the "reaction" (French: réaction) in the autumn of 1794 and early spring of 1795.

During the insurrection of 12 Germinal Year III (1 April 1795), the crowd invaded the National Convention ; only the Crêtois deputies remained in session. However, the hall was evacuated by troops, assisted by royalist sectionnaires, and twenty Crêtois were arrested. Barère, Vadier, Billaud-Varenne, and Collot d'Herbois were sentenced to deportation to Guiana.

During the Jacobin-led insurrection of 1 Prairial Year III (20 May 1795), the crowd again seized the Assembly. On this occasion, Convention member Féraud, who attempted to block their passage, was killed, and his head was paraded on a pike.

The Crêtois deputies present had Pierre-Amable de Soubrany elected commander of the Army of the Interior and established a commission. This commission decreed an amnesty for those deported after Germinal (who were already embarked at Île d'Oléron [ fr ]), the reinstatement of price controls (the Maximum), and other measures.

Soldiers under General Menou and Murat, summoned by Tallien, restored order. Twelve Crêtois deputies were arrested, including the session's secretary, Thirion de la Moselle [ fr ].

Imprisoned at the Château du Taureau [ fr ] in Morlaix, Brittany, six of these deputies were condemned to death in Paris after an unjust trial. As they left the tribunal, they stabbed themselves with concealed daggers. Duquesnoy, Goujon, and Romme succeeded in killing themselves. Bourbotte, Duroy, and Soubrany, who only managed to wound themselves, were subsequently guillotined.

The Nord-Pas-de-Calais cuisine is a French regional cuisine, whose specialties are largely inherited from the county of Flanders. The region has always been at an intersection of Europe, and traces of its history can be found in its specialties, such as the English influence on the Côte d'Opale, or dishes of Polish origin in the mining basin.

Nord-Pas-de-Calais is a major agricultural and dairy farming region, and a producer of cheeses, including the most famous, Maroilles, which is used in a variety of flamiche. Its coastline is home to France's largest fishing port, Boulogne.

Between land and sea, its primary products are herring, rabbit, potatoes and beer. Historically, this is a cuisine based on butter or lard, with little use of oil. It is characterized, among other things, by bitter-sweet flavors, such as those of braised chicory, beer cooking, or coffee chicory.

In 2023, Hauts-de-France was awarded the "European Region of Gastronomy" label.

The region was already known for its agriculture when it was part of Gallia Belgica. Pliny cites the great variety of vegetables grown: onions, cabbages, and broad beans, as well as different varieties of apple trees. Vast expanses of einkorn wheat and barley were used to make bread, as well as cervoise. Sea salt works along the coast produced this product used to preserve meat and fish: Menapii ham, salted or smoked, was renowned and imported as far away as Rome.

In the Middle Ages, the region was Christianized, and the abbeys became the owners of much of the land and organized its exploitation. Tithes were paid in goods - for example, in Maroilles cheese, created around 960 A.C. by the abbey of the same name, whose "edict of the pastures" imposed affinage on every cow owner.

As early as the 11th century, the construction of dykes protected the coastline and created the first polders ; in the 12th century, their drainage through the waterings system enabled new land to be reclaimed from the sea for livestock breeding, cultivation, and fish farming.

The Catholic Church required the practice of Lent on about 166 days a year; as a result, herring was abundantly consumed by the people, making Boulogne-sur-Mer an important fishing port. The regular size of the fish meant that it was used as a unit of payment for seigniorial rents or royalties, or for tithe payment.

The grapevine, acclimatized by the Romans, remained cultivated until the Little Ice Age, but its production was very uneven; it also provided verjuice to accompany dishes. Beer remained the popular drink, while the courts of Flanders and Artois imported wine from Burgundy and Arbois, and abbeys owned vineyards in other regions.

In the Middle Ages, Artois was the region's granary, and bread remained an important part of the diet. After the Black Death of the 14th century, during the crisis of the late Middle Ages, the population was reduced by a third, and agriculture began a slow transformation. New crops were introduced (peas, turnips, etc.), with some regional specialization and diversification into bocage and grazing activities.

From the 9th to the 17th century, the region was part of the Kingdom of France, the Burgundian, and then the Spanish Netherlands, with some towns passing from one to the other on several occasions or, like Calais, being English possessions. Cuisine, like regional culture, has therefore been influenced by many factors.

The Counts of Artois and the Dukes of Burgundy held memorable feasts such as the 1454 Feast of the Pheasant in Lille, or those at Château d'Hesdin, featuring roast poultry in multicolored jellies, fountains of fruit juices, and live entertainment. Their cooks left no cookery books, but Vivendier was used, inspired by Viandier de Taillevent, which already contained the recipe for potjevleesch.

In the major cloth-producing towns, the bourgeoisie also held banquets of this kind, such as those held annually on the Fête de l'Épinette in Lille.

Some recipes by Hotin, cook to the "seigneur de Roubaix", appear in a version of Le Ménagier de Paris. Both sweet and savory tarts feature prominently; in the 16th century, flamiches were cheese tarts made with bread dough, while goyère was a sweet white cheese tart.

According to La Bruyère Champier, during the 16th century, "in Artois and Hainault, ordinary food was dairy and butter, because the country has abundant pastures; and pork, because it is easy to fatten this animal; as well as pastries, which excel in diversification and are the main table honors".

After the discovery of the New World, new vegetables were slowly introduced and, at first, tomatoes were only cultivated as an ornamental plant; turkeys, on the other hand, were appreciated from the outset, with the Premonstratensians of Licques Abbey raising them as early as the 17th century.

Coffee was introduced in the 17th century and became a popular product with the Industrial Revolution, as a hot drink to keep you awake during a long working day. In Germinal, Zola describes it as a basic necessity, second only to bread.

In the early 19th century, continental blockage led to the development of sugar beet cultivation to compensate for the lack of cane sugar. It was also at this time that chicory began to be roasted, in the absence of coffee. Around 1850, the city of Lille began to grow barbe de capucin, the ancestor of chicory.

Beer production in the abbeys gradually declined in the region, with Trappists settling instead just over the border in Chimay, Westvleteren, and Orval. It gave way to numerous artisanal breweries, reaching about a thousand in the early 19th century, and almost two thousand in the first half of the 20th. The number of estaminets also increased, as they were the ideal places for workers to relax. To distract them, allotment gardens were created at the instigation of Lemire abbey ; the corons also had gardens, where miners grew vegetables and raised poultry or rabbits for feast days.

Despite rapid industrialization, agriculture remained dynamic. Potato cultivation developed to cope with the population boom; the popular diet consisted of soups, vegetable stews, and dairy products since meat was too expensive. By the end of the 19th century, working-class children were chronically undernourished, especially those in the textile industry. Hygienists encouraged the consumption of horsemeat, which was presented as healthy and inexpensive. Meat, particularly in the form of charcuterie, only became more common on the working-class table at the end of the 1920s, between the rationing of the two world wars.

For wealthier circles, the standard of gastronomy at the time remained Parisian cuisine: when tourism began to develop on the Opal Coast, regional cuisines were not popular, hence special trains were used to transport cooks and other hotel staff to holiday resorts such as Le Touquet.

Just as in the rest of France, eating habits in Nord-Pas-de-Calais changed from the late 1960s onwards. Cradle of modern French mass retailing, the region also saw the emergence of fast-food chains such as Flunch in 1971, and Paul bakeries, which aimed for a higher standard of quality. Most meals, however, were eaten at home, with the family.

In family cooking, oil was still used very little, but margarine, which has long been held in low esteem, replaced lard as a substitute for butter. The habit of eating soup in the evening fell into disuse; the region produces many vegetables, but Northerners eat very little of them: less than two fruits or vegetables a day among two-thirds of young adults.

French fries are widely consumed, and the baraque à frites remains a regional specialty. In the 2000s, there were around 300 in the region, compared with almost 8,000 previously. In the 21st century, despite some communes prohibiting them, the business was integrated into buildings in certain neighborhoods. In Lens, France 's first drive-through friterie opened in 2012.

The region remains one of the world's leading beer consumers, but young people are turning away from this beverage, which was mainly enjoyed by adults, and turning to sodas and, occasionally, premixes. Daily consumption remains high, however, particularly among men over 55.

Culinary traditions persist to a greater extent during the festive season: pastries for the end-of-year festivities, or croustillons for ducasses. They have also renewed: the tradition of mussels and French fries at the Lille braderie dates from the 1970s, as does that of herring throwing at the Dunkirk carnival in 1962. One of the most recent is the International Soup Festival in Wazemmes, a reminder of the region's multiculturalism.

Nord-Pas-de-Calais remains a major agricultural region, characterized by highly intensive farming and large-scale crops (cereals, beet, potatoes, etc.) that take up a large part of the landscape.

The region supplies one third of France's potato production :

The region ranks third in France for vegetable production:

In 2012, the port of Boulogne-sur-Mer was still France's leading fishing port, handling just over 36,000 tonnes of fish. Herring, which has made Boulogne-sur-Mer such a success, comes in a wide range of specialties, originally used to preserve herring: salted and smoked (kippers and buckling), pickled (rollmops) or canned (pilchards).

Meat is also preserved in various charcuterie specialties, including horsemeat, consumed in large quantities in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region, where the flagship product is horse sausage.

Chicken from Licques has been a Label Rouge since 1979.

Made famous by the film Bienvenue chez les Ch'tis, frikandel is a meatball shaped like a sausage, characteristic of friteries.

The Nord-Pas-de-Calais region offers a wide range of cheeses, most of them made from cow's milk. The most famous are:

The sugar used in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region comes from beets ; production began in the early 19th century, following the continental blockage, and expanded rapidly, enabling chocolate factories to diversify.

Even today, the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region is not left behind when it comes to confectionery: one in every four French sweets comes from this region. This is thanks largely to Lutti, the second biggest brand in France, which has its main production site in Bondues.

In addition to the specialities already mentioned, some are less well known outside the region, such as :

There are three meals a day in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region; similar to Belgium and some French provinces, they are called "déjeuner" (breakfast), "dîner" (lunch), and "souper" (dinner).

Breakfast often consists of a cup of coffee, black or with milk, with a slice of bread. For example, faluche, a soft bread from Nord-Pas-de-Calais, is eaten at lunchtime, or as a snack, with butter or brown sugar. Mont des Cats, a mild cheese, can also be eaten first thing in the morning, while Maroilles is less common.

Nord-Pas-de-Calais cuisine is based on butter, with oil rarely used except for vinaigrette. Lard, which was used for cooking, is also sometimes eaten simply spread on bread, under the Flemish name of smout.

Maroilles cheese is also used in cooking. A dish often found in the region is a piece of beef (steak or entrecôte), accompanied by a Maroilles sauce. Other typical dishes include tarte au maroilles and goyère de Valenciennes.

Potatoes are often served alongside dishes; French fries are prepared in the Belgian style, cooked twice in beef fat or oil.

Regional cuisine includes many Flemish dishes, such as waterzooï, hochepot or potjevleesch, a typical Dunkirk dish made with a mixture of meats in jelly. Endive (called "chicon" in the region) is also one of the region's emblematic vegetables, representing 90% of national production, and is used in the recipe for chicon au jambon.

Sweet and savory flavors are appreciated here: prunes or baked apples can accompany white meats; reinette apples are used with light brown sugar in Flemish-style red cabbage, while flemish stew is cooked with brown sugar and pain d'épices.

The Flemish influence can be seen in beer-flavored dishes such as coq à la bière, where the bitterness of the beer is often softened by a sweet taste, like the pain d'épices in Flemish stew, or the fruit in lapin à la tournaisienne (rabbit with prunes). These dishes, especially those featuring rabbit, are typical of festive occasions.

Other influences are also present: in Boulogne-sur-Mer or Calais, welsh rarebit, originating in Wales, has become a regional specialty.

Beer is also used as yeast in beignets and couquebaques, Flanders' crêpes à la bière, as well as in the dough used to make flamiches.

Besides herring, which we've already mentioned, seafood is a major component of Côte d'Opale coastal cuisine.

Mussels are a speciality of the Boulonnais and Calais regions, prepared in marinara or with a dash of vinegar, and often accompanied by French fries as in Belgium. Mussels can be found in fish recipes "à la boulonnaise", in caudière (a fish soup made by the fishermen of Étaples), and in cream of cauliflower with mussels (a speciality of Audomar).

Fish is generally served with steamed potatoes. Chicon is also popular, served raw in a salad with buckling, or braised in a casserole with fish and scallops.

The origins of Dunkirk's specialties are Flemish. Grey shrimps are prepared as croquettes, but more often served plain, with a buttered toast. Finally, waterzooï is a fish and vegetable dish with a cream sauce, which can also be prepared with chicken.

One of the most popular family desserts in the North of France is the tart, traditionally made with yeast dough. It can be a simple apple, prune or rhubarb tart, but local specialties include:

Northerners are avid consumers of coffee, enjoyed as a strong beverage, often containing chicory ; coffee that is too light is known by the pejorative term "chirloute". It is consumed sweetened "à la sucette", i.e. by taking a lump of sugar in the mouth and drinking the coffee over it.

There are around 25 coffee roasters in the region, and the local taste is of a medium roast, "monk's robe" color.

Consumption of chicory coffee developed in the early 19th century, following the continental blockade ; Nord-Pas-de-Calais supplies 95% of French production, and the Leroux chicory company is the world's leading producer. Chicory is usually added to ground coffee for breakfast, but can also be consumed without the addition of coffee.

Along with Alsace, Nord-Pas-de-Calais is one of two French regions where locally produced beer remains a traditional beverage. Northerners drink regional or Belgian beers, whose distinctive feature is that they generally have a fairly high alcohol content (around 7-10% vol.).

The region still hosts around twenty breweries, whose best-known beers are the " bière de garde ": Jenlain, 3 Monts, Goudale and Ch'ti. Other beers with more local distribution are also well known: these include Grain d'Orge, Abbaye de Lille, Angelus, Munsterbräu, Page 24, Hommelpap, La Choulette, Moulins d'Ascq, Bavaisienne and Bracine, as well as extra-strong beers such as Bière du Démon and Belzébuth. Beer is also used as an ingredient in numerous culinary recipes.

Picon, the bitter-sweet aperitif liqueur that accompanies beer, is not a regional product, but the Nord region is one of its main consumers, along with Alsace. It is often drunk mixed with beer (Picon-bière as an aperitif).

Jenever, a strong liquor made from eau de vie and flavored with juniper berries, is also typical of the region: "sweet, strong and spicy", in the words of food critic Gilles Pudlowski. In the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region, the custom of pouring a little into coffee is known as "bistouille".

Many local producers have obtained recognition for the quality of their products through Label Rouge, AOC or PDO certification.

Licques poultry, for example, has been a Label Rouge since 1979. Smoked garlic from Arleux has benefited from PGI since 2013.

Following the disappearance of the Nord-Pas-de-Calais regional label in 2002, a regional collective brand called Saveurs en'Or was created in September 2004, to promote products from the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region. It distinguishes products with both Label Rouge and Protected Geographical Indication (PGI) status.

Nord-Pas-de-Calais cuisine is often overlooked in French gastronomy, even though certain products such as Houlle jenever and Cambrai bêtises have been listed among Trésors gourmands de la France.

Estaminets, which were very numerous before World War I, have experienced a revival since the 1990s. Once simple cafés, they remain convivial places where regional specialties are revisited.

Ghislaine Arabian, for example, earned two stars from the Michelin Guide for Restaurant à Lille, which features a menu devoted to cuisine à la bière, before moving to Paris to offer this regional cuisine.

In Busnes, Marc Meurin's cuisine based on regional products at his restaurant Le Meurin also earned him two macaroons in 2013.

In 2023, Hauts-de-France was awarded the "European Gastronomy Region" label by the International Institute of Culture, Gastronomy, Art, and Tourism.

In French gastronomy, cuisine bourgeoise is the home cooking of middle class (bourgeoisie) families as distinguished from elaborate restaurant cooking, haute cuisine, and from the cooking of the regions, the peasantry, and the urban poor.

The cuisine bourgeoise has been documented since the 17th century: Nicolas de Bonnefons, Le Jardinier françois (1651) and Les delices de la campagne (1684); François Menon, Cuisinière bourgeoise (1746); and Louis Eustache Audot, Cuisinière de la campagne et de la ville (1818). Starting in the 19th century, a series of cookbooks go beyond simply listing recipes to teaching technique: Jule Gouffé, Livre de cuisine (1867); Félix Urbain Dubois, École des cuisinières (1887).

In the late 19th century, cooking schools such as Le Cordon Bleu and magazines such as La Cuisinière Cordon Bleu and Le Pot-au-feu, emerged in Paris to teach cooking technique to bourgeois women. Pellaprat 's La Cuisine de tous les jours (1914) and Le Livre de cuisine de Madame Saint-Ange (1927) come from those cooking schools.

Cuisine minceur (French: [ kɥizin mɛ̃sœʁ ] ; lit. ' "slimming cooking" ') is a style of cooking created by French chef Michel Guérard, which recreated lighter versions of traditional nouvelle cuisine dishes. Contemporary critics acknowledged that the minceur versions by Guérard tasted better and were less filling than their nouvelle cuisine originals.

In the 1960s, along with Paul Bocuse, Alain Chapel, and Jean and Pierre Troisgros, "Guérard was a nouvelle cuisine pioneer who... disrupted restaurant culture... Breaking away from the long-established rules of French haute cuisine, the group pushed for food to look and taste more like the stuff it’s actually made from, to be leaner and lighter and brighter."

In 1974 chef Guérard arrived in Eugénie-les-Bains and, with his wife Christine Barthelemy, began renovating a spa resort which Barthelemy had been running, and which was owned by Guérard's father-in-law. Guérard began thinking about how he could persuade Parisians to make the 500-mile trek to the spa and his restaurant. The spas were for health benefits and his creation - cuisine minceur - became the logical avenue for his new form of low- calorie cooking.

Guerard stated he created "great slimming cuisine" when he moved to Eugénie in 1974, an area where patients with metabolic diseases used its hot springs. Guerard wanted cuisine that was more appealing than diet food but low in extra fat, sugar, and salt, saying he "realized the extent of despair towards food" that overweight patients at the spa were facing. On February 9, 1976, the method received new attention in the press when Guerard was featured on the cover of Time with a cartoon of Guerard, and the line "The new gourmet law: hold the butter."

The cuisine of Picardy, also known as Picard cuisine (French: la cuisine Picarde) refers to foods and food products from different departments of the Picardy region of France, including Aisne, Oise, and Somme. While sharing many similarities (like Maroilles cheese) with the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region, with which Picardy merged into Hauts-de-France in 2016, its cuisine remains unique and is quite different.

Given the presence of lush pastures in the region, dairy products play a prominent role in the local cuisine. Many well-known dishes such as ficelle Picarde, flamiche aux Poireaux, and tarte au Maroilles use cheese, cream, and milk as their main ingredients.

While Picardy is not particularly famous for its seafood, mussels, shrimp, and fish are commonly used in ragouts and gratins. Poultry, pork, and beef are staples of the region and are commonly prepared as stews or roast.

Some of the specialties from this cuisine include Maroilles cheese, Picardy champagne, and Prés salés de la baie lamb. The specialties of the south of Picardy such as pommeau, Calvados, and Neufchâtel cheese are better known outside of the region. The widely known Chantilly cream is also from the Chantilly region of Picardy.

The cooking of Provence is based around fresh, local produce including garlic, olive oil, tomatoes, fish, vegetables, fruit, and goat's cheese. Meat and poultry also feature, but are generally of secondary importance.

The cuisine of Provence is long established but has changed considerably over the centuries. Traditional rural life depended on three major crops – wheat, grapes and olives – which, with sheep farming, together with a variety of other local products such as almonds and herbs, sustained an agricultural economy of small farms. Although this traditional polyculture has largely disappeared, replaced by modern, large-scale agriculture, Provence remains, in the words of the Michelin Guide, "the garden of France".

With a sunny climate and suitable soil, Provence produces a wide diversity of vegetables and fruits throughout the year, providing the basis for a varied and seasonal cuisine. The Michelin Guide lists as Provençal specialities strawberries from Carpentras, cherries from Venasque, melons from Cavaillon ; figs from Caromb, potatoes from Pertuis, garlic from Piolenc and asparagus, tomatoes, peaches and apricots from all over Provence. Other prominent ingredients in Provençal cooking include aubergines, courgettes, grapes, mushrooms, olives, parsley, peppers, and saffron. Along the Mediterranean coast of Provence there is plentiful fish and other seafood, including anchovies, bass, crayfish, dab, eel, grey mullet, octopus, red mullet, sardines, sea bream, skate, sole, spider crab, squid and tuna.

In The Oxford Companion to Food, Alan Davidson comments, "it is fairly safe to assume that à la provençale portends the presence of tomato and garlic". Provence 's eponymous sauce provençale consists of tomatoes concassées (skinned and deseeded), tossed in boiling oil with chopped parsley and garlic, mixed with sliced fried mushrooms and tomato sauce.

Other dishes described as à la provençale include:

Provençal dishes and culinary specialities without the " à la provençale " tag include:

Cultural exception (French : l'exception culturelle) is a political concept introduced by France in General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations in 1993 to treat culture differently from other commercial products. In other words, its purpose is to consider cultural goods and services as exceptions in international treaties and agreements especially with the World Trade Organization (WTO). Its goals are to point out that States are sovereign as far as limitation of culture free trade is concerned in order to protect and promote their artists and other elements of their culture. Concretely, it can be seen through protectionist measures limiting the diffusion of foreign artistic work (quotas) or through subsidies distributed according to the country's cultural policy.

In 1992, some countries had voiced their concerns during the final negotiations of the Uruguay Round that implementation of the GATT principles on cultural goods and services "would undermine their cultural specificity (and unique status), in favour of their commercial aspects".

The purpose of Cultural exception is to treat cultural goods and services differently from other traded goods and services because of the intrinsic differences of such goods and services. Many countries defended the fact that cultural goods and services "encompass values, identity and meanings that go beyond their strictly commercial value". It notably allowed France to maintain quotas and subsidies to protect its cultural market from other nation's cultural products, most notably American, on television and radio. South Korean policy in favor of its movie industry is another example of how cultural exception is used to protect the audiovisual market.

First the debate concerned mainly audiovisual products. Secondly, in the WTO liberalization process, every country decides which sectors it will deregulate. Audiovisual services is one of the sectors where the number of WTO members with commitments is the lowest (30, as of 31 January 2009) (Source: WTO)

In 1994, Canada included a cultural exemption clause in the North American Free Trade Agreement.

Draft agreement negotiated between members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) in 1995–1998, The Multilateral Agreement on Investment or MAI's ostensible purpose was to develop multilateral rules that would ensure international investment was governed in a more systematic and uniform way between states. After an intense global campaign was waged against the MAI by the treaty's critics, the host nation France announced in October 1998 that it would not support the agreement, effectively preventing its adoption due to the OECD's consensus procedures. The French government had identified respect for cultural differences as a requirement for French support for the agreement.

France has been especially notable in pursuing the policy of cultural exception and its stance has sometimes attracted criticism. It was pursued by André Malraux in the post-second world war period when he was French minister of culture. In each branch of culture there is an automatic subsidy system for creative works. One example of these measures is the National Center of Cinematography and the moving image, which taxes cinema ticket sales and uses those funds to help the production or distribution of French cinema. Another example of protectionist measures is the audiovisual law (Loi sur l'audiovisuel) which specified for instance that "radio has to broadcast 40% French songs and, within this quota, 20% new talents."

The effects of this policy in France is suggested by the fact that between 2005 and 2011, between 45% and 55% of its film products were American imports, compared to 60 to 90% American imports in other European film markets.

Cultural exception has been gradually replaced by the more consensual concept of cultural diversity as shows the adoption in October 2005, of UNESCO 's Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions (which followed the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity). Sponsored by France and Canada, the convention was passed 148-2, with four nations abstaining from voting. The United States and Israel voted against the proposal.

The UNESCO Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions is a legally binding international agreement that supports Member-States' wills to assert their right in applying cultural policies and measures that exclude cultural goods and services from international trade agreements.

The United States claims that cultural exception is a form of protectionism that harms global trade and that the UNESCO Convention deals with such protectionism rather than cultural diversity. In addition, it claims that the UNESCO Convention allows for oppressive governments to suppress minority cultural voices. The film industry and other cultural industries in the United States are also against the concept of cultural exception, as it harms their export market, and have lobbied the United States to take its current position against cultural exception.

The culture of France has been shaped by geography, by historical events, and by foreign and internal forces and groups. France, and in particular Paris, has played an important role as a center of high culture in the late Middle-Ages and again since the 17th century and from the 19th century on, worldwide. France and in particular Paris was viewed during the 19th and early 20th century as the capital of Western art and culture. From the late 19th century, France has also played an important role in cinema, fashion, cuisine, literature, technology, the social sciences, and mathematics. The importance of French culture has waxed and waned over the centuries, depending on its economic, political and military importance. French culture today is marked both by great regional and socioeconomic differences and strong unifying tendencies. A global opinion poll for the BBC saw France ranked as the country with the fourth most positive influence in the world (behind Germany, Canada and the UK) in 2014.

The Académie Française sets an official standard of linguistic purism ; however, this standard, which is not mandatory, is occasionally ignored by the government itself: for instance, the left-wing government of Lionel Jospin pushed for the feminisation of the names of some functions (madame la ministre) while the Académie pushed for some more traditional madame le ministre.

Some action has been taken by the government to promote French culture and the French language. For instance, they have established a system of subsidies and preferential loans for supporting French cinema. The Toubon law, from the name of the conservative culture minister who promoted it, makes it mandatory to use French in advertisements directed to the general public. Note that contrary to some misconceptions sometimes found in the Anglophone media, the French government neither regulates the language used by private parties in commercial settings, nor makes it compulsory that France-based WWW sites should be in French.

France counts many regional languages, some of them being very different from standard French, such as Breton (a Celtic language close to Cornish and Welsh) and Alsatian (an Alemannic dialect of German). Some regional languages are Roman, like French, such as Occitan. The Basque language is completely unrelated to the French language and to any other language in the world; it is spoken in an area that straddles the border between the southwest of France and the north of Spain.

Many of these languages have enthusiastic advocates; however, the real importance of local languages remains subject to debate. In April 2001, the Minister of Education, Jack Lang, admitted formally that for more than two centuries, the political powers of the French government had repressed regional languages. He announced that bilingual education would, for the first time, be recognised, and bilingual teachers recruited in French public schools to support teaching these other languages. In French schools, pupils are expected to learn at least two foreign languages, the first of which is typically German or English.

A revision of the French constitution creating official recognition of regional languages was implemented by the Parliament in Congress at Versailles in July 2008.

France is a secular country where freedom of thought and of conscience which encompasses and supersedes freedom of religion is preserved, by virtue of the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen. The Republic is based on the principle of laïcité, which relies on the division between private life, where adherents believe religion belongs, and the public sphere, in which each individual should appear as a simple citizen who is equal to all other citizens, not putting the emphasis on any ethnic, religious, or other particularities. French secularism also includes freedom of conscience i.e. the freedom to believe or not to believe and even to change one's faith across one's life (including of agnosticism and atheism) enforced by the Jules Ferry laws and the 1905 law on the separation of the State and the Church, enacted at the beginning of the Third Republic (1871–1940). A 2011 European poll found that a third (33%) of the French population "does not believe there is any sort of spirit, God or life force". In 2011, in a poll published by Institut français d'opinion publique 65% of the French population describes itself as Christians, and 25% as not adhering any religion.

According to Eurobarometer poll in 2012, Christianity is the largest religion in France accounting 60% of French citizens. Catholics are the largest Christian group in France, accounting for 50% of French citizens, while Protestants make up 8%, and other Christians make up 2%. Non believer/Agnostic account for 20%, Atheist 13%, and Muslim 7%.

France guarantees freedom of religion as a constitutional right, and the government generally respects this right in practice. A long history of violent conflict between groups led the state to break its ties to the established Catholic Church early in the last century, which previously had been the state religion. The government adopted a strong commitment to maintaining a totally secular public sector.

Long the established state religion, the Catholic Church has historically played a significant role in French culture and in French life. Kings were prominent members as well as head of the state and social order. Most French people are Catholics; however, many of them are secular but still place high value on Catholicism.

The Catholic faith is no longer considered the state religion, as it was before the 1789 Revolution and throughout the various, non-republican regimes of the 19th century (the Restoration, the July Monarchy and the Second Empire). The institutional split of the Catholic Church and French State ("Séparation de l'Eglise et de l'Etat") was imposed by the latter in 1905 and represented the crest of a wave of the laicist and anti-clericalist movement among French Radical Republicans in this period.

At the beginning of the 20th century, France was a largely rural country with conservative Catholic mores, but in the hundred years since then, the countryside has become depopulated as people have become urbanized. The urban populations have become more secular. A December 2006 poll by Harris Interactive, published in The Financial Times, found that 32% of the French population described themselves as agnostic, some 32% as atheist, and only 27% believed in any type of God or supreme being. according to the French Market research Ipsos, Catholics today constitute 57.5% of the French population.

France was touched by the Reformation during the 16th century; some 30% of the population converted to Protestantism and became known as French Huguenots. Some princes joined the reform movement. But the national monarchy felt threatened by people who wanted to leave the established state religion. Protestants were discriminated against and suppressed. On 24 August 1572, the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre took place in Paris and the French Wars of Religion are considered to have begun. this French civil war took place between Catholics, led by Henry I, Duke of Guise, and Protestants, led by Henri de Navarre. Henri de Navarre became king after converting to Catholicism in 1589.

Louis XIII, Henri IV's son, began to suppress Protestants in violent attacks, such as the Siege of La Rochelle. After Louis XIV revoked the Edit de Nantes in 1685, Protestants who did not leave the country were generally suppressed. Thousands of Protestant Huguenots emigrated from France for their safety and to gain religious freedom, generally going to Protestant nations such as the Netherlands, England, South Africa, and the North American colonies. Their exile continued during the 17th century and until 1787, when religious freedom was re-established by Louis XVI.

The current Jewish community in France numbers around 600,000, according to the World Jewish Congress and 500,000 according to the Appel Unifié Juif de France. It is concentrated in the metropolitan areas of Paris, Marseille and Strasbourg.

The history of the Jews in France dates back over 2,000 years. In the early Middle Ages, France was a center of Jewish learning, but persecution increased as the Middle Ages wore on. France was the first country in Europe to emancipate its Jewish population during the French Revolution, but despite legal equality anti-Semitism remained an issue, as illustrated in the Dreyfus affair of the late 19th century. However, through the 1870 Décret Crémieux, France secured full citizenship for the Jews in then French-ruled Algeria. Despite the death of a quarter of all French Jews during the Holocaust, France currently has the largest Jewish population in Europe.

Following emancipation In the 19th century, Jews would come to play a larger role in French culture. Jewish artists were a major part of the School of Paris and included artists such as Marc Chagall, Amedeo Modigliani, Yitzhak Frenel, Chaim Soutine, Jules Pascin and others. Frenkel said the Jewish artists were "members of the minority characterized by restlessness whose expressionism is therefore extreme in its emotionalism". Camille Pissaro was also a major figure in the Impressionism movement.

In the early 21st century, French Jews are mostly Sephardic and of North African origins. More than a quarter of the historic Ashkenazi Jewish community was destroyed during the Holocaust of World War II after German forces occupied France and established the Vichy Regime. Jewish religious affiliations range from the ultra-Orthodox Haredi communities to the large segment of Jews who are secular and identify culturally as Jews.

Islam is the third-largest faith in France in the early 21st century. The Grand Mosque was constructed in Paris in 1929 in honour of French colonial troops from North Africa who fought in the First World War. Arabs from North Africa started to settle in France. In the early 21st century, France had the largest Muslim population (in percentage) of any Western European country. This is a result of immigration and permanent family settlement in France, from the 1960s on, of groups from, principally, former French colonies in North Africa (Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia), and, to a lesser extent, other areas such as Turkey and West Africa. The government does not collect data on religious beliefs in census records, but estimates and polls place the percentage of Muslims at between 4% and 7%.

Buddhism is widely reported to be the fifth largest religion in France, after Christianity, atheism, Islam, and Judaism. France has over two hundred Buddhist meditation centers, including about twenty sizable retreat centers in rural areas. The Buddhist population mainly consists of Chinese and Vietnamese immigrants, with a substantial minority of native French converts and "sympathizers". The rising popularity of Buddhism in France has been the subject of considerable discussion in the French media and academy in recent years. The Plum Village Tradition school of Buddhism was developed in France with the Plum Village Monastery located in the Dordogne.

France created in 2006 the first French parliamentary commission on cult activities which led to a report registering a number of cults considered as dangerous. Supporters of such movements have criticized the report on the grounds of the respect of religious freedom. Proponents of the measure contend that only dangerous cults have been listed as such, and state secularism ensures religious freedom in France.

Modern France is the result of centuries of nation building and the acquisition and incorporation of a number of historical provinces and overseas colonies into its geographical and political structure. These regions all evolved with their own specific cultural and linguistic traditions in fashion, religious observance, regional language and accent, family structure, cuisine, leisure activities, industry, and including the simple way to pour wine, etc.

The evolution of the French state and culture, from the Renaissance up to this day, has however promoted a centralization of politics, media and cultural production in and around Paris (and, to a lesser extent, around the other major urban centers), and the industrialization of the country in the 20th century has led to a massive move of French people from the countryside to urban areas. At the end of the 19th century, around 50% of the French depended on the land for a living; today French farmers only make up 6–7%, while 73% live in cities. Nineteenth century French literature abounds in scenes of provincial youth "coming up" to Paris to "make it" in the cultural, political or social scene of the capital (this scheme is frequent in the novels of Balzac). Policies enacted by the French Third Republic also encouraged this displacement through mandatory military service, a centralized national educational system, and suppression of regional languages. While government policy and public debate in France in recent years has returned to a valorization of regional differences and a call for decentralization of certain aspects of the public sphere (sometimes with ethnic, racial or reactionary overtones), the history of regional displacement and the nature of the modern urban environment and of mass media and culture have made the preservation of a regional "sense of place or culture" in today's France extremely difficult.

The names of the historical French provinces – such as Brittany (Bretagne), Berry, Orléanais, Normandy (Normandie), Languedoc, Lyonnais, Dauphiné, Champagne, Poitou, Guyenne and Gascony (Gascogne), Burgundy (Bourgogne), Picardy (Picardie), Provence, Touraine, Limousin, Auvergne, Béarn, Alsace, Flanders, Lorraine, Corsica (Corse), Savoy (Savoie)... (please see individual articles for specifics about each regional culture) — are still used to designate natural, historical and cultural regions, and many of them appear in modern région or département names. These names are also used by the French in their self-identification of family origin.

Regional identification is most pronounced today in cultures linked to regional languages and non-French-speaking traditions – French language itself being only a dialect of Langue d'oïl, the mother language of many of the languages to-be-mentioned, which became a national vehicular language, like (in alphabetical order): Alsatian, Arpitan, Basque, Brezhoneg (Breton), Burgundian, Corsu (Corsican), Català (Catalan), Francique, Gallo, Lorrain, Norman, Occitan, Picard, Poitevin, Saintongeais, etc., and some of these regions have promoted movements calling for some degree of regional autonomy, and, occasionally, national independence (see, for example, Breton nationalism, Corsica and Occitania).

There are huge differences in life style, socioeconomic status and world view between Paris and the provinces. The French often use the expression "la France profonde " ("Deep France", similar to " heartland ") to designate the profoundly "French" aspects of provincial towns, village life and rural agricultural culture, which escape the hegemony of Paris. The expression can however have a pejorative meaning, similar to the expression "le désert français" ("the French desert") used to describe a lack of acculturation of the provinces. Another expression, " terroir " is a French term originally used for wine and coffee to denote the special characteristics that geography bestowed upon these products. It can be very loosely translated as "a sense of place" which is embodied in certain qualities, and the sum of the effects that the local environment (especially the "soil") has had on the growth of the product. The use of the term has since been generalized to talk about many cultural products.

In addition to its metropolitan territory, France also consists of overseas departments made up of its former colonies of Guadeloupe, Martinique and French Guiana in the Caribbean, and Mayotte and Réunion in the Indian Ocean. (There also exists a number of " overseas collectivities " and " overseas territories ". For a full discussion, see administrative divisions of France. Since 1982, following the French government 's policy of decentralisation, overseas departments have elected regional councils with powers similar to those of the regions of metropolitan France. As a result of a constitutional revision which occurred in 2003, these regions are now to be called overseas regions.) These overseas departments have the same political status as metropolitan departments and are integral parts of France, (similar to the way in which Hawaii is a state and an integral part of the United States), yet they also have specific cultural and linguistic traditions which set them apart. Certain elements of overseas culture have also been introduced to metropolitan culture (as, for example, the musical form the biguine).

Industrialization, immigration and urbanization in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries have also created new socioeconomic regional communities in France, both urban (like Paris, Lyon, Villeurbanne, Lille, Marseille, etc.) and the suburban and working class hinterlands (like Seine-Saint-Denis) of urban agglomerations (called variously banlieues ("suburbs", sometimes qualified as "chic" or "pauvres" or les cités " housing projects ")) which have developed their own "sense of place" and local culture (much like the various boroughs of New York City or suburbs of Los Angeles), as well as cultural identity.

Paris has traditionally been associated with alternative, artistic or intellectual subcultures, many of which involved foreigners. Such subcultures include the " Bohemians " of the mid-nineteenth century, the Impressionists, artistic circles of the Belle Époque (around such artists as Picasso and Alfred Jarry), the Dadaists, Surrealists, the " Lost Generation " (Hemingway, Gertrude Stein) and the post-war "intellectuals" associated with Montparnasse (Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir).

France has an estimated 280,000–340,000 Roma, generally known as Gitans, Tsiganes, Romanichels (slightly pejorative), Bohémiens, or Gens du voyage ("travellers").

There are gay and lesbian communities in the cities, particularly in the Paris metropolitan area (such as in Le Marais district of the capital). Although homosexuality is perhaps not as well tolerated in France as in Spain, Scandinavia, and the Benelux nations, surveys of the French public reveal a considerable shift in attitudes comparable to other Western European nations. As of 2001, 55% of the French consider homosexuality "an acceptable lifestyle." The past mayor of Paris, Bertrand Delanoë, is gay. A 2017 Pew Research Center poll found that 73% of French people were in favour of same-sex marriage, while 23% were opposed. The 2019 Eurobarometer found that 79% of French respondents thought same-sex marriage should be allowed throughout Europe, 15% were against. Additionally, 85% believed gay, lesbian and bisexual people should enjoy the same rights as heterosexual people. See also LGBT rights in France.

Growing out of the values of the Catholic Church and rural communities, the basic unit of French society was traditionally held to be the family. Over the twentieth century, the "traditional" family structure in France has evolved from various regional models (including extended families and nuclear families) to, after World War II, nuclear families. Since the 1960s, marriages have decreased and divorces have increased in France, and divorce law and legal family status have evolved to reflect these social changes.

According to INSEE figures, household and family composition in metropolitan France continues to evolve. Most significantly, from 1982 to 1999, single parent families have increased from 3.6% to 7.4%; there have also been increases in the number of unmarried couples, childless couples, and single men (from 8.5% to 12.5) and women (from 16.0% to 18.5%). Their analysis indicates that "one in three dwellings are occupied by a person living alone; one in four dwellings are occupied by a childless couple."

Voted by the French Parliament in November 1999 following some controversy, the pacte civil de solidarité ("civil pact of solidarity") commonly known as a PACS, is a form of civil union between two adults (same-sex or opposite-sex) for organizing their joint life. It brings rights and responsibilities, but less so than marriage. From a legal standpoint, a PACS is a "contract" drawn up between the two individuals, which is stamped and registered by the clerk of the court. Individuals who have registered a PACS are still considered "single" with regard to family status for some purposes, while they are increasingly considered in the same way as married couples are for other purposes. While it was pushed by the government of Prime Minister Lionel Jospin in 1998, it was also opposed, mostly by people on the right-wing who support traditionalist family values and who argued that PACS and the recognition of homosexual unions would be disastrous for French society.

As of 2013, same-sex marriage is legally recognized in France. Same-sex marriage was an important factor in the presidential election of 2012 between François Hollande and Nicolas Sarkozy. Sarkozy, who represents the right-wing UMP party, opposed gay marriage, while François Hollande, of the left wing socialist party, supported it. Hollande was elected in May 2012 and his government proposed the law known as "Marriage pour tous" ("marriage for all") to the parliament in November 2012. The law was passed in April 2013 and validated by the Conseil constitutionnel (the constitutional council, tasked with insuring that the new laws passed do not contradict the French constitution) in May 2013. The first French same-sex marriage took place on 29 May 2013 in Montpellier.

The French state has traditionally played an important role in promoting and supporting culture through the educational, linguistic, cultural and economic policies of the government and through its promotion of national identity. Because of the closeness of this relationship, cultural changes in France are often linked to, or produce, political crisis.

The relationship between the French state and culture is an old one. Under Louis XIII 's minister Richelieu, the independent Académie française came under state supervision and became an official organ of control over the French language and seventeenth-century literature. During Louis XIV 's reign, his minister Jean-Baptiste Colbert brought French luxury industries, like textile and porcelain, under royal control and the architecture, furniture, fashion and etiquette of the royal court (particularly at the Château de Versailles) became the preeminent model of noble culture in France (and, to a great degree, throughout Europe) during the latter half of the seventeenth century.

At times, French state policies have sought to unify the country around certain cultural norms, while at other times they have promoted regional differences within a heterogeneous French identity. The unifying effect was particularly true of the "radical period" of the French Third Republic which fought regionalisms (including regional languages), supported anti-clericalism and a strict separation of church from state (including education) and actively promoted national identity, thus converting (as the historian Eugen Weber has put it) a "country of peasants into a nation of Frenchmen". The Vichy Regime, on the other hand, promoted regional "folk" traditions.

The cultural policies of the (current) French Fifth Republic have been varied, but a consensus seems to exist around the need for preservation of French regionalisms (such as food and language) as long as these don't undermine national identity. Meanwhile, the French state remains ambivalent over the integration into "French" culture of cultural traditions from recent immigrant groups and from foreign cultures, particularly American culture (movies, music, fashion, fast food, language, etc.). There also exists a certain fear over the perceived loss of French identity and culture in the European system and under American "cultural hegemony".

The French educational system is highly centralized. It is divided into three different stages: primary education, or enseignement primaire, corresponding to grade school in the United States; secondary education, or collège and lycée, corresponding to middle and high school in the United States; and higher education (l'université or les Grandes écoles).

Primary and secondary education is predominantly public (private schools also exist, in particular a strong nationwide network of primary and secondary Catholic education), while higher education has both public and private elements. At the end of secondary education, students take the baccalauréat exam, which allows them to pursue higher education. The baccalauréat pass rate in 2012 was 84.5%.

In 1999–2000, educational spending amounted to 7% of the French GDP and 37% of the national budget.

France's performance in math and science at the middle school level was ranked 23 in the 1995 Trends in International Math and Science Study. France was ranked 22 in 2019.

Since the Jules Ferry laws of 1881–2, named after the then Minister of Public Instruction, all state-funded schools, including universities, are independent from the (Roman Catholic) Church. Education in these institutions is free. Non-secular institutions are allowed to organize education as well. The French educational system differs strongly from Northern-European and American systems in that it stresses the importance of partaking in a society as opposed to being responsibly independent.

Secular educational policy has become critical in recent issues of French multiculturalism, as in the " affair of the Islamic headscarf ".

The Minister of Culture is in the Government of France, the cabinet member in charge of national museums and monuments; promoting and protecting the arts (visual, plastic, theatrical, musical, dance, architectural, literary, televisual and cinematographic) in France and abroad; and managing the national archives and regional "maisons de culture" (culture centres). The Ministry of Culture is located on the Palais Royal in Paris.

The modern post of Minister of Culture was created by Charles de Gaulle in 1959 and the first Minister was the writer André Malraux. Malraux was responsible for realizing the goals of the "droit à la culture" ("the right to culture") – an idea which had been incorporated in the French constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) – by democratizing access to culture, while also achieving the Gaullist aim of elevating the "grandeur" ("greatness") of post-war France. To this end, he created numerous regional cultural centres throughout France and actively sponsored the arts. Malraux's artistic tastes included the modern arts and the avant-garde, but on the whole he remained conservative.

The Ministry of Jacques Toubon was notable for a number of laws (the " Toubon Laws ") enacted for the preservation of the French language, both in advertisements (all ads must include a French translation of foreign words) and on the radio (40% of songs on French radio stations must be in French), ostensibly in reaction to the presence of English.

The Académie Française (English: French Academy) is the pre-eminent French learned body on matters pertaining to the French language. The Académie was officially established in 1635 by Cardinal Richelieu, the chief minister to King Louis XIII. Suppressed in 1793 during the French Revolution, it was restored in 1803 by Napoleon Bonaparte (the Académie considers itself having been suspended, not suppressed, during the revolution). It is the oldest of the five académies of the Institut de France.

The Académie consists of forty members, known as immortels (immortals). New members are elected by the members of the Académie itself. Académicians hold office for life, but they may be removed for misconduct. The body has the task of acting as an official authority on the language; it is charged with publishing an official dictionary of the language. Its rulings, however, are only advisory; not binding on either the public or the government.

Until 1996, France had compulsory military service of young men. This has been credited by historians for further promoting a unified national identity and by breaking down regional isolationism.

In France, the first labour laws were Waldeck Rousseau's laws passed in 1884. Between 1936 and 1938 the Popular Front enacted a law mandating 12 days (2 weeks) each year of paid vacation for workers, and a law limiting the work week to 40 hours, excluding overtime. The Grenelle accords negotiated on 25 and 26 May in the middle of the May 1968 crisis, reduced the working week to 44 hours and created trade union sections in each enterprise. The minimum wage was also increased by 25%. In 2000 Lionel Jospin 's government then enacted the 35-hour workweek, down from 39 hours. Five years later, conservative prime minister Dominique de Villepin enacted the New Employment Contract (CNE). Addressing the demands of employers asking for more flexibility in French labour laws, the CNE sparked criticism from trade unions and opponents claiming it was lending favour to contingent work. In 2006 he then attempted to pass the First Employment Contract (CPE) through a vote by emergency procedure, but that it was met by students and unions' protests. President Jacques Chirac finally had no choice but to repeal it.

The French are profoundly committed to the public healthcare system (called "sécurité sociale") and to their "pay-as-you-go" social welfare system.

In 1998, 75% of health payments in France were paid through the public healthcare system. Since 27 July 1999, France has a universal medical coverage for permanent residents in France (stable residence for more than three months). Using five performance indicators to measure health systems in 191 member states, it finds that France provides the best overall health care followed among major countries by Italy, Spain, Oman, Austria and Japan (The World Health Report).

Traditional French culture places a high priority on the enjoyment of food. French cuisine was codified in the 20th century by Georges Auguste Escoffier to become the modern version of haute cuisine. Escoffier's major work, however, left out much of the regional character to be found in the provinces of France. Gastro-tourism and the Guide Michelin helped to bring people to the countryside during the 20th century and beyond, to sample this rich bourgeois and peasant cuisine of France. Basque cuisine has also been a great influence over the cuisine in the southwest of France.

Ingredients and dishes vary by region (see: Regional cuisine). There are many significant regional dishes that have become both national and regional. Many dishes that were once regional, however, have proliferated in different variations across the country in the present day. Cheese (see: List of French cheeses) and wine (see: French wine) are also a major part of the cuisine, playing different roles both regionally and nationally with their many variations and Appellation d'origine contrôlée (AOC) (regulated appellation) laws, (lentils from Le Puy-en-Velay also have an AOC status). Another French product of special note is the Charolais cattle.

The French typically eat only a simple breakfast ("petit déjeuner") which consists of coffee, tea or hot chocolate with milk, served traditionally in a large handleless "bol" (bowl) and bread or breakfast pastries (croissants). Lunch ("déjeuner") and dinner ("dîner") are the main meals of the day. Formal four course meals consist of a starter course ("entrée"), a salad, a main course ("plat principal"), and finally a cheese or dessert course. While French cuisine is often associated with rich desserts, in most homes dessert consists of only fruit or yogurt.

Food shopping in France was formerly done almost daily in small local shops and markets, but the arrival of the supermarket and the even larger "hypermarchés" (large-surface distributors) in France have disrupted this tradition. With depopulation of the countryside, many towns have been forced to close shops and markets.

Rates of obesity and heart disease in France have traditionally been lower than in other north-western European countries. This is sometimes called the French paradox (see, for example, Mireille Guiliano 's 2006 book French Women Don't Get Fat). French cuisine and eating habits have however come under great pressure in recent years from modern fast food, such as American products and the new global agricultural industry. While French youth culture has gravitated toward fast food and American eating habits (with an attendant rise in obesity), the French in general have remained committed to preserving certain elements of their food culture through such activities as including programs of taste acquisition in their public schools, by the use of the appellation d'origine contrôlée laws, and by state and European subsidies to the French agricultural industry. Emblematic of these tensions is the work of José Bové, who founded in 1987, the Confédération Paysanne, an agricultural union that places its highest political values on humans and the environment, promotes organic farming and opposes genetically modified organisms; Bové's most famous protest was the dismantling of a McDonald's franchise in Millau (Aveyron), in 1999.

In France, cutlery is used in the continental manner (with the fork in the left hand, prongs facing down and the knife in the right hand). French etiquette prohibits the placing of hands below the table and the placing of elbows on it.

The legal drinking age is officially 18 (see: Legal drinking age).

France is one of the oldest wine producing regions of Europe. France now produces the most wine by value in the world (although Italy rivals it by volume and Spain has more land under cultivation for wine grapes). Bordeaux wine, Bourgogne wine and Champagne are important agricultural products.

The cigarette smoking age is 18 years. According to a widespread cliché, smoking has been part of French culture – actually figures indicate that in terms of consumption per capita, France is only the 60th country out of 121.

France, from 1 February 2007, tightened the existing ban on smoking in public places found in the 1991 Évin law: Law n°91-32 of 10 January 1991, containing a variety of measures against alcoholism and tobacco consumption.

Smoking is now banned in all public places (stations, museums, etc.); an exception exists for special smoking rooms fulfilling drastic conditions, see below. A special exemption was made for cafés and restaurants, clubs, casinos, bars, etc. which ended, 1 January 2008. Opinion polls suggest 70% of people support the ban. Previously, under the former implementation rules of the 1991 Évin law, restaurants, cafés etc. just had to provide smoking and non-smoking sections, which in practice were often not well separated.

Under the new regulations, smoking rooms are allowed, but are subjected to very strict conditions: they may occupy at most 20% of the total floor space of the establishment and their size may not be more than 35 m ; they need to be equipped with separate ventilation which replaces the full volume of air ten times per hour; the air pressure of the smoking room must constantly be lower than the pressure in the contiguous rooms; they have doors that close automatically; no service can be provided in the smoking rooms; cleaning and maintenance personnel may enter the room only one hour after it was last used for smoking.

Popular brands of cigarettes in France include Gauloises and Marlboro.

The possession, sale and use of cannabis (predominantly Moroccan hashish) is illegal in France. Since 1 March 1994, the penalties for cannabis use are from two months to a year and/or a fine, while possession, cultivation or trafficking of the drug can be punished much more severely, up to ten years. According to a 1992 survey by SOFRES, 4.7 million French people ages 12–44 have smoked cannabis at least once in their lives.

France hosts "the world's biggest annual sporting event", the annual cycling race Tour de France. Other popular sports played in France include: football, judo, tennis, rugby union and pétanque. France has hosted events such as the 1938 and 1998 FIFA World Cups, the 2007 Rugby World Cup, and the 2023 Rugby World Cup. The country also hosted the 1960 European Nations' Cup, UEFA Euro 1984, UEFA Euro 2016 and 2019 FIFA Women's World Cup. The Stade de France in Saint-Denis is France's largest stadium and was the venue for the 1998 FIFA World Cup and 2007 Rugby World Cup finals. Since 1923, France is famous for its 24 Hours of Le Mans sports car endurance race. Several major tennis tournaments take place in France, including the Paris Masters and the French Open, one of the four Grand Slam tournaments. French martial arts include Savate and Fencing.

France has a close association with the Modern Olympic Games ; it was a French aristocrat, Baron Pierre de Coubertin, who suggested the Games' revival, at the end of the 19th century. After Athens was awarded the first Games, in reference to the Olympics' Greek origins, Paris hosted the second Games in 1900 (see: France at the Olympics). Paris was the first home of the International Olympic Committee, before it moved to Lausanne. Since 1900, France has hosted the Olympics on 5 further occasions: the 1924 and 2024 Summer Olympics, both in Paris and three Winter Games (1924 in Chamonix, 1968 in Grenoble and 1992 in Albertville). Similar to the Olympics, France introduced Olympics for deaf people (Deaflympics) in 1924 with the idea of a French deaf car mechanic, Eugène Rubens-Alcais who paved the way to organise the inaugural edition of the Summer Deaflympics in Paris.

Both the national football team and the national rugby union team are nicknamed " Les Bleus " in reference to the team's shirt colour as well as the national French tricolour flag. Football is the most popular sport in France, with over 1,800,000 registered players and over 18,000 registered clubs. While football is the most popular, rugby union and rugby league takes dominance in the southwest, especially around the city of Toulouse (see: Rugby union in France and Rugby league in France). The national rugby union team has competed at every Rugby World Cup ; it takes part in the annual Six Nations Championship.

The French Open, also called Roland-Garros, is a major tennis tournament held over two weeks between late May and early June at the Stade Roland-Garros in Paris. It is the premier clay court tennis championship event in the world and the second of four annual Grand Slam tournaments.

Professional sailing in France is centred on singlehanded and shorthanded ocean racing with the pinnacle of this branch of the sport being the Vendée Globe singlehanded around the world race which starts every four years from the French Atlantic coast. Other significant events include the Solitaire du Figaro, Mini Transat 6.50, Tour Voile and Route du Rhum transatlantic race. France has been a regular competitor in the America's Cup since the 1970s.

Like other cultural areas in France, sport is overseen by a government ministry, the Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports, which is in charge of national and public sport associations, youth affairs, public sports centers and national stadia (like the Stade de France). Sport is encouraged in school, and local sports clubs receive financial support from the local governments.

Along with Milan, London and New York, Paris is center of an important number of fashion shows. Some of the world's biggest fashion houses (e.g. Chanel) have their headquarters in France.

The association of France with fashion (la mode) dates largely to the reign of Louis XIV when the luxury goods industries in France came increasingly under royal control and the French royal court became, arguably, the arbiter of taste and style in Europe. France renewed its dominance of the high fashion (couture or haute couture) industry in the years 1860–1960 through the establishing of the great couturier houses, the fashion press (Vogue was founded in 1892; Elle was founded in 1945) and fashion shows. The first modern Parisian couturier house is generally considered the work of the Englishman Charles Frederick Worth who dominated the industry from 1858 to 1895. In the early twentieth century, the industry expanded through such Parisian fashion houses as the house of Chanel (which first came to prominence in 1925) and Balenciaga (founded by a Spaniard in 1937). In the post-war years, fashion returned to prominence through Christian Dior 's famous "new look" in 1947, and through the houses of Pierre Balmain and Hubert de Givenchy (opened in 1952). In the 1960s, "high fashion" came under criticism from France's youth culture while designers like Yves Saint Laurent broke with established high fashion norms by launching prêt-à-porter ("ready to wear") lines and expanding French fashion into mass manufacturing and marketing. Further innovations were carried out by Paco Rabanne and Pierre Cardin. With a greater focus on marketing and manufacturing, new trends were established in the 1970s and 1980s by Sonia Rykiel, Thierry Mugler, Claude Montana, Jean Paul Gaultier and Christian Lacroix. The 1990s saw a conglomeration of many French couture houses under luxury giants and multinationals such as LVMH.

Since the 1960s, France's fashion industry has come under increasing competition from London, New York, Milan and Tokyo, and the French have increasingly adopted foreign (particularly American) fashions (such as jeans, tennis shoes). Nevertheless, many foreign designers still seek to make their careers in France.

In 2006, 52% of French households had at least one pet: In total, 9.7 million cats, 8.8 million dogs, 2.3 million rodents, 8 million birds, and 28 million fish were kept as pets in France during this year.

The first paintings of France are those that are from prehistoric times, painted in the caves of Lascaux well over 10,000 years ago. The arts were already flourishing 1,200 years ago, at the time of Charlemagne, as can be seen in many hand made and hand illustrated books of that time.

Gothic art and architecture originated in France in the 12th century around Paris and then spread to all of Europe. In the 13th century, French craftsmen developed the stained glass painting technique and sophisticated illuminated manuscripts for private devotion in the new gothic style. The final phase of gothic architecture, known as Flamboyant, also began in France in the 15th century before spreading to the rest of Europe.

The 17th century was one of intense artistic achievements: French painting emerged with a distinct identity, moving from Baroque to Classicism. Famous classic painters of the 17th century in France are Nicolas Poussin and Claude Lorrain. French architecture also proved influential with the Palace of Versailles, built for the powerful king Louis XIV, becoming the model of many European royal palaces. During the 18th century the Rococo style emerged as a frivolous continuation of the Baroque style. The most famous painters of the era were Antoine Watteau, François Boucher and Jean-Honoré Fragonard. At the end of the century, Jacques-Louis David and Dominique Ingres were the most influential painters of the Neoclassicism.

Géricault and Delacroix were considered the most important painters of the Romanticism. Afterwards, the painters were more realistic, describing nature (Barbizon school). The realistic movement was led by Courbet and Honoré Daumier. Impressionism was developed in France by artists such as Claude Monet, Edgar Degas, Pierre-Auguste Renoir and Camille Pissarro. At the turn of the century, France had become more than ever the center of innovative art. The Spaniard Pablo Picasso came to France, like many other foreign artists, to deploy his talents there for decades to come. Toulouse-Lautrec, Gauguin and Cézanne were painting then. Cubism is an avant-garde movement born in Paris at the beginning of the 20th century.

In the early 20th century, a group of mostly foreign born artists who converged in Paris were dubbed the School of Paris by Andre Warnod. Amongst these artists, many of whom were Jews from Eastern Europe was an affinity for Expressionist art. Amongst the artists were Marc Chagall, Amedeo Modigliani, Yitzhak Frenel, Chaim Soutine, Jules Pascin and others.

The Louvre in Paris is one of the most famous and the largest art museums in the world, created by the new revolutionary regime in 1793 in the former royal palace. It holds a vast amount of art of French and other artists, e.g. the Mona Lisa, by Leonardo da Vinci, and classical Greek Venus de Milo and ancient works of culture and art from Egypt and the Middle East.

France has a long and varied musical history. It experienced a golden age in the 17th century thanks to Louis XIV, who employed talented musicians and composers in the royal court. The most renowned composers of this period include Marc-Antoine Charpentier, François Couperin, Michel-Richard Delalande, Jean-Baptiste Lully and Marin Marais, all of them composers at the court. After the death of the "Roi Soleil", French musical creation lost dynamism, but in the next century the music of Jean-Philippe Rameau reached some prestige, and he is still one of the most renowned French composers. Rameau became the dominant composer of French opera and the leading French composer of the harpsichord.

In the field of classical music, France has produced a number of notable composers such as Gabriel Fauré, Claude Debussy, Maurice Ravel, and Hector Berlioz. Claude Debussy and Maurice Ravel are the most prominent figures associated with Impressionist music. The two composers invented new musical forms and new sounds. Debussy was among the most influential composers of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and his use of non-traditional scales and chromaticism influenced many composers who followed. His music is noted for its sensory content and frequent usage of atonality. Ravel's piano compositions, such as Jeux d'eau, Miroirs, Le tombeau de Couperin and Gaspard de la nuit, demand considerable virtuosity. His mastery of orchestration is evident in the Rapsodie espagnole, Daphnis et Chloé, his arrangement of Modest Mussorgsky 's Pictures at an Exhibition and his orchestral work Boléro (1928). Erik Satie was a key member of the early-20th-century Parisian avant-garde. Francis Poulenc 's best-known works are his piano suite Trois mouvements perpétuels (1919), the ballet Les biches (1923), the Concert champêtre (1928) for harpsichord and orchestra, the opera Dialogues des Carmélites (1957) and the Gloria (1959) for soprano, choir and orchestra. More recently, in the middle of the 20th century, Maurice Ohana, Pierre Schaeffer and Pierre Boulez contributed to the evolution of contemporary classical music.

French music then followed the rapid emergence of pop and rock music in the middle of the 20th century. Although English-speaking creations achieved popularity in the country, French pop music, known as chanson française, has also remained very popular. Among the most important French artists of the century are Édith Piaf, Georges Brassens, Léo Ferré, Charles Aznavour and Serge Gainsbourg. Modern pop music has seen the rise of popular French hip hop, French rock, techno / funk, and turntablists /DJs. Although there are very few rock bands in France compared to English-speaking countries, bands such as Noir Désir, Mano Negra, Niagara, Les Rita Mitsouko and more recently Superbus, Phoenix and Gojira, or Shaka Ponk, have reached worldwide popularity.

The Fête de la Musique was created in France (first held in 1982), a music festival, which has since become celebrated worldwide as world music day. It takes place every 21 June, on the first day of summer.

France has historical and strong links with cinema, with two Frenchmen, Auguste and Louis Lumière (known as the Lumière Brothers) credited with creating cinema in 1895. The world's first female filmmaker, Alice Guy-Blaché, was also from France. Several important cinematic movements, including the late 1950s and 1960s Nouvelle Vague, began in the country. It is noted for having a strong film industry, due in part to protections afforded by the Government of France. Philippe Binant realized, on 2 February 2000, the first digital cinema projection in Europe, with the DLP CINEMA technology developed by Texas Instruments, in Paris.

France remains a leader in filmmaking, as of 2015 producing more films than any other European country. The nation also hosts the Cannes Festival, one of the most important and famous film festivals in the world. Additionally, France is an important Francophone film production country. A certain amount of the movies created share international distribution in the western hemisphere thanks to Unifrance. Although French cinema industry is rather small in terms of budget and revenues, it enjoys qualitative screenplay, cast and story telling. French cinema is often portrayed as more liberal in terms of subjects (e.g. sex, society, politics, historical, etc.).

Apart from its strong and innovative film tradition, France has also been a gathering spot for artists from across Europe and the world. For this reason, French cinema is sometimes intertwined with the cinema of foreign nations. Directors from nations such as Poland (Roman Polanski, Krzysztof Kieślowski, Andrzej Żuławski), Argentina (Gaspar Noé, Edgardo Cozarinsky), Russia (Alexandre Alexeieff, Anatole Litvak), Austria (Michael Haneke) and Georgia (Géla Babluani, Otar Iosseliani) are prominent in the ranks of French cinema. Conversely, French directors have had prolific and influential careers in other countries, such as Luc Besson, Jacques Tourneur or Francis Veber in the United States. Although the French film market is dominated by Hollywood, France is the only nation in the world where American films make up the smallest share of total film revenues, at 50%, compared with 77% in Germany and 69% in Japan. French films account for 35% of the total film revenues of France, which is the highest percentage of national film revenues in the developed world outside the United States, compared to 14% in Spain and 8% in the UK. In 2013 France was the second greatest exporter of films in the world, after the United States.

French major cinema operators are UGC and Pathé, mainly located in city suburbs due to the number of screens and seating capacity. Many "small" cinemas are located in the downtown parts of a city, resisting the big cinema operators nationwide. Paris has the highest density of cinemas in the world, and in most downtown Paris cinemas, foreign movies, which would be secluded to "art houses" cinemas in other places, are shown alongside "mainstream" works. The Cinémathèque Française holds one of the largest archives of films, movie documents and film-related objects in the world. Located in Paris, the Cinémathèque holds daily screenings of films unrestricted by country of origin.

As part of its advocacy of cultural exception, a political concept of treating culture differently from other commercial products, France succeeded in convincing all EU members to refuse to include culture and audiovisuals in the list of liberalised sectors of the WTO in 1993. Moreover, this decision was confirmed in a vote by UNESCO in 2005: the principle of "cultural exception" won an overwhelming victory with 198 countries voting for it and only 2 countries, the United States and Israel, voting against it.

Just like many other European countries, France has public and private television channels. The public broadcasting corporation France Télévisions comprises the channels France 2, France 3, France 4, France 5 and France Info.

France Télévisions is also a shareholder of TV5Monde, Arte and the multilingual pan-European news channel Euronews. TV5Monde is a French-language common channel of France, Belgium and the French-speaking areas of Canada and Switzerland and, after the BBC, CNN and MIV, the fourth largest television network in the world. Arte is a German-French channel controlled by Arte France together with the German public broadcasting corporations ARD and ZDF.

The private broadcasting corporation TF1 is the largest television channel in France. TF1 was public until 1987. The corporation also controls the sports channel Eurosport. Other major private channels include M6 and Canal +.

BFM TV is an independent private news channel, which is also broadcast on the Internet – just like the French and English language news channel France 24, which has been broadcasting since December 2006 and is controlled by TF1 and France Télévisions.

France has the reputation of being a "literary culture", and this image is reinforced by such things as the importance of French literature in the French educational system, the attention paid by the French media to French book fairs and book prizes (like the Prix Goncourt, Prix Renaudot or Prix Femina) and by the popular success of the (former) literary television show " Apostrophes " (hosted by Bernard Pivot).

Although the official literacy rate of France is 99%, some estimates have placed functional illiteracy at between 10% and 20% of the adult population (and higher in the prison population).

While reading remains a favorite pastime of French youth today, surveys show that it has decreased in importance compared to music, television, sports and other activities. The crisis of academic publishing has also hit France (see, for example, the financial difficulties of the Presses universitaires de France (PUF), France's premier academic publishing house, in the 1990s).

Literary taste in France remains centered on the novel (26.4% of book sales in 1997), although the French read more non-fiction essays and books on current affairs than the British or Americans. Contemporary novels, including French translations of foreign novels, lead the list (13% of total books sold), followed by sentimental novels (4.1%), detective and spy fiction (3.7%), "classic" literature (3.5%), science fiction and horror (1.3%) and erotic fiction (0.2%). About 30% of all fiction sold in France today is translated from English (authors such as William Boyd, John le Carré, Ian McEwan, Paul Auster and Douglas Kennedy are well received).

An important subset of book sales is comic books (typically Franco-Belgian comics like The Adventures of Tintin and Astérix) which are published in a large hardback format; comic books represented 4% of total book sales in 1997. French artists have made the country a leader in the graphic novel genre and France hosts the Angoulême International Comics Festival, Europe's preeminent comics festival.

Like other areas of French culture, book culture is influenced, in part, by the state, in particular by the "Direction du livre et de la lecture" of the Ministry of Culture, which oversees the "Centre national du livre" (National Book Center). The French Ministry of Industry also plays a role in price control. Finally, the VAT for books and other cultural products in France is at the reduced rate of 5.5%, which is also that of food and other necessities (see here).

In terms of journalism in France, the regional press (see list of newspapers in France) has become more important than national dailies (such as Le Monde and Le Figaro) over the past century: in 1939, national dailies were 2/3 of the dailies market, while today they are less than 1/4. The magazine market is currently dominated by TV listings magazines followed by news magazines such as L'Obs, L'Express and Le Point.

During the Middle Ages, many fortified castles were built by feudal nobles to mark their powers. Some French castles that survived are Chinon, Château d'Angers, the massive Château de Vincennes and the so-called Cathar castles. During this era, France had been using Romanesque architecture like most of Western Europe.

Gothic architecture, originally named Opus Francigenum meaning "French work", was born in Île-de-France and was the first French style of architecture to be imitated throughout Europe. Northern France is the home of some of the most important Gothic cathedrals and basilicas, the first of these being the Saint Denis Basilica (used as the royal necropolis); other important French Gothic cathedrals are Notre-Dame de Chartres and Notre-Dame d'Amiens. The kings were crowned in another important Gothic church: Notre-Dame de Reims.

The final victory in the Hundred Years' War marked an important stage in the evolution of French architecture. It was the time of the French Renaissance and several artists from Italy were invited to the French court; many residential palaces were built in the Loire Valley, from 1450 as a first reference the Château de Montsoreau. Examples of such residential castles include the Château de Chambord, the Château de Chenonceau, or the Château d'Amboise.

Following the Renaissance and the end of the Middle Ages, Baroque architecture replaced the traditional Gothic style. However, in France, Baroque architecture found greater success in the secular domain than in the religious one. In the secular domain, the Palace of Versailles has many Baroque features. Jules Hardouin Mansart, who designed the extensions to Versailles, was one of the most influential French architects of the Baroque era; he is famous for his dome at Les Invalides. Some of the most impressive provincial Baroque architecture is found in places that were not yet French such as Place Stanislas in Nancy. On the military architectural side, Vauban designed some of the most efficient fortresses in Europe and became an influential military architect; as a result, imitations of his works can be found all over Europe, the Americas, Russia and Turkey.

After the Revolution, the Republicans favoured Neoclassicism although it was introduced in France before the revolution with such buildings as the Parisian Pantheon or the Capitole de Toulouse. Built during the first French Empire, the Arc de Triomphe and Sainte Marie-Madeleine represent the best example of Empire-style architecture. Under Napoleon III, a new wave of urbanism and architecture was given birth; extravagant buildings such as the neo-Baroque Palais Garnier were built. The urban planning of the time was very organised and rigorous; most notably, Haussmann's renovation of Paris. The architecture associated with this era is named Second Empire in English, the term being taken from the Second French Empire. At this time there was a strong Gothic resurgence across Europe and in France; the associated architect was Eugène Viollet-le-Duc. In the late 19th century, Gustave Eiffel designed many bridges, such as the Garabit viaduct, and remains one of the most influential bridge designers of his time, although he is best remembered for the Eiffel Tower.

In the 20th century, French-Swiss architect Le Corbusier designed several buildings in France. More recently, French architects have combined both modern and old architectural styles. The Louvre Pyramid is an example of modern architecture added to an older building. The most difficult buildings to integrate within French cities are skyscrapers, as they are visible from afar. For instance, in Paris, since 1977, new buildings had to be under 37 metres (121 ft). France's largest financial district is La Défense, where a significant number of skyscrapers are located. Other massive buildings that are a challenge to integrate into their environment are large bridges; an example of the way this has been done is the Millau Viaduct. Some famous modern French architects include Jean Nouvel, Dominique Perrault, Christian de Portzamparc and Paul Andreu.

There are significant differences in lifestyles with respect to transportation between very urbanized regions such as Paris, and smaller towns and rural areas. In Paris, and to a lesser extent in other major cities, many households do not own an automobile and simply use efficient public transport. The cliché about the Parisien is rush hour in the Métro subway. However, outside of such areas, ownership of one or more cars is standard, especially for households with children.

France has a number of traditional road naming conventions.

Despite the principles of laïcité and the separation of church from state, public and school holidays in France generally follow the Roman Catholic religious calendar (including Easter, Christmas, Ascension Day, Pentecost, Assumption of Mary, All Saints Day, etc.). Labor Day and the National Holiday are the only business holidays determined by government statute; the other holidays are granted by convention collective (agreement between employers' and employees' unions) or by agreement of the employer.

The five holiday periods of the public school year are:

On 1 May, Labour Day (La Fête du Travail) the French give flowers of Lily of the Valley (Le Muguet) to one another.

The National holiday (called Bastille Day in English) is on 14 July. Military parades, called Défilés du 14 juillet, are held, the largest on the Champs-Élysées avenue in Paris in front of the President of the Republic.

On 2 November, All Souls Day (La Fête des morts), the French traditionally bring chrysanthemums to the tombs of departed family members.

On 11 November, Remembrance Day (Le Jour de la Commémoration or L' Armistice) is an official holiday.

Christmas is generally celebrated in France on Christmas Eve by a traditional meal (typical dishes include oysters, boudin blanc and the bûche de Noël), by opening presents and by attending the midnight mass (even among Catholics who do not attend church at other times of the year).

Candlemas (La Chandeleur) is celebrated with crêpes. The popular saying is that if the cook can flip a crêpe singlehandedly with a coin in the other hand, the family is assured of prosperity throughout the coming year.

The Celtic holiday Halloween, which is popular throughout the English-speaking world, has grown in popularity following its introduction in the mid-1990s by the trade associations. The growth seems to have stalled during the following decade.

Wherever one comes from, "culture" consists of beliefs and values learned through the socialization process as well as material artifacts. "Culture is the learned set of beliefs, values, norms and material goods shared by group members. Culture consists of everything we learn in groups during the life course-from infancy to an old age."

The conception of "French" culture however poses certain difficulties and presupposes a series of assumptions about what precisely the expression "French" means. Whereas American culture posits the notion of the " melting-pot " and cultural diversity, the expression "French culture" tends to refer implicitly to a specific geographical entity (as, say, " metropolitan France ", generally excluding its overseas departments) or to a specific historico-sociological group defined by ethnicity, language, religion and geography. The realities of "Frenchness" however, are extremely complicated. Even before the late 18th–19th century, "metropolitan France" was largely a patchwork of local customs and regional differences that the unifying aims of the Ancien Régime and the French Revolution had only begun to work against, and today's France remains a nation of numerous indigenous and foreign languages, of multiple ethnicities and religions, and of regional diversity that includes French citizens in Corsica, Guadeloupe, Martinique and elsewhere around the globe also in America.

The creation of some sort of typical or shared French culture or " cultural identity ", despite this vast heterogeneity, is the result of powerful internal forces – such as the French educational system, mandatory military service, state linguistic and cultural policies – and by profound historic events – such as the Franco-Prussian war and the two World Wars — which have forged a sense of national identity over the last 200 years. However, despite these unifying forces, France today still remains marked by social class and by important regional differences in culture (cuisine, dialect/accent, local traditions) that many fear will be unable to withstand contemporary social forces (depopulation of the countryside, immigration, centralization, market forces and the world economy).

In recent years, to fight the loss of regional diversity, many in France have promoted forms of multiculturalism and encouraged cultural enclaves (communautarisme), including reforms on the preservation of regional languages and the decentralization of certain government functions, but French multiculturalism has had a harder time of accepting, or of integrating into the collective identity, the large non-Christian and immigrant communities and groups that have come to France since the 1960s.

The last 70 years has also seen French cultural identity "threatened" by global market forces and by American " cultural hegemony ". Since its dealings with the 1943 GATT free trade negotiations, France has fought for what it calls the exception culturelle, meaning the right to subsidize or treat favorably domestic cultural production and to limit or control foreign cultural products (as seen in public funding for French cinema or the lower VAT accorded to books). The notion of an explicit exception française however has angered many of France's critics.

The French are often perceived as taking a great pride in national identity and the positive achievements of France (the expression " chauvinism " is of French origin) and cultural issues are more integrated in the body of the politics than elsewhere (see "The Role of the State", above). The French Revolution claimed universalism for the democratic principles of the Republic. Charles de Gaulle actively promoted a notion of French "grandeur" ("greatness"). Perceived declines in cultural status are a matter of national concern and have generated national debates, both from the left (as seen in the anti-globalism of José Bové) and from the right and far right (as in the discourses of the National Front).

According to Hofstede's Framework for Assessing Culture, the culture of France is moderately individualistic and high Power Distance Index.

Now, the interracial blending of some native French and newcomers stands as a vibrant and boasted feature of French culture, from popular music to movies and literature. Therefore, alongside mixing of populations, exists also a cultural blending (le métissage culturel) that is present in France. It may be compared to the traditional US conception of the melting-pot. The French culture might have been already blended in from other races and ethnicities, in cases of some biographical research on the possibility of African ancestry on a small number of famous French citizens. Author Alexandre Dumas possessed one-fifth black Haitian descent, and Joséphine de Beauharnais, Empress to Napoleon, who was born and raised in the French West Indies from a plantation estate family. We can mention as well, the most famous French-Canadian singer Celine Dion whose grandmother was a North African from Kabylie.

For a long time, the only objection to such outcomes predictably came from the far-left schools of thought. In the past few years, other unexpected voices are however beginning to question what they interpret, as the new philosopher Alain Finkielkraut coined the term, as an "Ideology of miscegenation " (une idéologie du métissage) that may come from what one other philosopher, Pascal Bruckner, defined as The Tears of the White Man (le sanglot de l'homme blanc). These critics have been dismissed by the mainstream and their propagators have been labelled as new reactionaries (les nouveaux réactionnaires), even if racist and anti-immigration sentiment has recently been documented to be increasing in France at least according to one poll.

French culture, language, and education have been mobilized to further French imperial interests up to the mid-20th century The concept of mission civilisatrice or 'civilizing mission' figured in France's politique indigène throughout its colonies, with its goal fluctuating between assimilation and association [ fr ] of colonial subjects with French culture. Aspects of French cultural influence—as embodied in the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie or Françafrique —have endured beyond the decolonization period.

Transformations in French ethnographic museums since the early 2000s have been met with criticism of their alleged political role: reconciling increasing ethnic diversity among the nation's population within its republican model of assimilation, and even homogeneity. These criticisms have also included allegations of an erasure of France's colonial past as well as an erasure of the history of the collections.

Culture within European France and Overseas France differs. Overseas France consists of 13 French-administered territories outside Europe, mostly the remains of the French colonial empire that remained a part of the French state under various statuses after decolonization. Overseas French cultures include the cultures of Martinique and Guadeloupe in the Caribbean, the Culture of French Guiana in South America, the blend of European, African, Indian, Chinese and insular traditions in Reunion, the East African, Comorian and Malagasyian traditions in Mayotte, the Polynesian cultures of French Polynesia, and the mix of indigenous Kanak, European, and Polynesian cultures of New Caledonia.

A dual mandate occurs when an official serves in or holds multiple public positions simultaneously. This practice is sometimes known as double jobbing in Britain, double-dipping in the United States, and cumul des mandats in France. Thus, if someone who is already mayor of a town or city councillor becomes elected as MP or senator at the national or state legislature and retains both positions, this is a dual mandate.

Political and legal approaches toward dual mandate-holding vary widely. In some countries, dual mandates are a well-established part of the political culture; in others they may be prohibited by law. For example, in federal states, federal office holders are often not permitted to hold state office. In most states, membership of an independent judiciary or civil service generally disqualifies a person from simultaneously holding office in the executive or the legislature. In states with a presidential or dualist parliamentary system of government, members of the executive cannot simultaneously be members of the legislature and vice versa. In states with bicameral legislatures, one usually cannot simultaneously be a member of both houses. The holder of one office who wins election or appointment to another where a dual mandate is prohibited must either resign the former office or refuse the new one.

A member of the European Parliament (MEP) may not be a member of the national legislature of a member state. This dates from a 2002 European Union decision, which came into effect at the 2004 European elections in most member states, at the 2007 national election in the Republic of Ireland, and at the 2009 European elections in the United Kingdom.

Originally, MEPs were nominated by national parliamentarians from among their own membership. Prior to the first direct elections in 1979, the dual mandate was discussed. Some advocated banning it, arguing that MEPs who were national MPs were often absent from one assembly in order to attend the other (indeed, the early death of Peter Michael Kirk was blamed by his election agent on overwork resulting from his dual mandate). Others claimed that members with a dual mandate enhanced communication between national and European assemblies. There was a particular interest in the dual mandate question in Denmark: Eurosceptic Danish Social Democrats supported a compulsory dual mandate, to ensure that the state's MEPs expressed the same views as the national legislature, and the government of Denmark supported a compulsory dual mandate when the other eight member states supported an optional dual mandate. However, a 1976 European Parliament law preparing for the 1979 elections expressly permitted a dual mandate. In 1978 the German politician Willy Brandt suggested that one third of MEPs should be national MPs.

Dual mandates are rare in Australia. It is not permitted to be a member of any state parliament and the Australian Parliament simultaneously. A member of a state parliament seeking federal office must resign before seeking election to the Federal Parliament. It is possible but unusual to be a member of a local government and another parliament. A recent example is Dr Kerryn Phelps who maintained her position as a Councillor on the City of Sydney Council while sitting in Federal Parliament as the Member for Wentworth between 2018 and 2019.

Ben Chifley, prime minister from 1945 to 1949, was a long-serving member of the Abercrombie Shire Council in regional New South Wales. He continued to attend council meetings after his appointment as prime minister. However, he was defeated in his bid for re-election in 1947, receiving 220 votes on a turnout of less than 900 voters.

In 2004 Clover Moore became the independent member for Sydney in the NSW Parliament without resigning as Lord Mayor of Sydney. The issue of Moore holding both positions had brought the issue to the forefront in Australia and led the premier of New South Wales in 2012 to propose a new law, dubbed in the media as the "Get Clover bill", which banned this dual mandate. The proposed law was adopted and in September 2012 Moore resigned her state seat soon after she was reelected as mayor.

As in neighboring France, the culture of dual mandates is very strong in Belgium and that country currently has one of the highest percentage of dual mandate holders (MPs, aldermen, municipal councilors) in the world. During the 2003–2009 period, 87.3% of members of the Walloon (French-speaking) Parliament held dual mandates, followed by 86.5% in the Flemish (Dutch-speaking) Parliament, 82.0% in the Chamber of Representatives (the Federal lower house) and 68.9% in the Senate. During that same period, 76.5% of all European Parliament MPs from Belgium held dual mandates.

More than one-fifth of all Belgian MPs were mayor at the same time with, by far, by the highest proportion (40%) to be found in the Walloon Parliament.

In Canada dual mandates are rare and are frequently barred by legislation at the federal, provincial, or territorial level. At the federal level, section 39 of the Constitution Act, 1867 prevents a Senator from being elected as a Member of Parliament ; similarly, s. 65(c) of the Canada Elections Act makes members of provincial or territorial legislatures ineligible to be candidates to the House of Commons. At the provincial level, the situation varies from one province to another.

In most circumstances, an elected official almost always resigns their first post when elected to another. Dual representation has occurred occasionally when the member was elected to a second office shortly before their other term of office was due to expire anyway and whereby the short time frame would not merit the cost of a special by-election. In 1996, for example, Jenny Kwan continued to be a Vancouver city councillor after being elected to the provincial legislature. The British Columbia legislature had debated a "Dual Elected Office Prohibition Act" which failed to pass second reading. In 2024, Misty Van Popta continued serving as a Langley Township city council member after being elected an MLA for Langley-Walnut Grove and in 2025 Chak Au, stayed on as a Richmond City Councillor after being elected an Member of Parliament for Richmond Centre—Marpole stating that he didn't want to trigger a by-election that cost money and that he would still participate in City Council meetings and donate his salary to charities.

In the first few years after Confederation in 1867, however, double mandates were common. In the first House of Commons, there were fifteen Members of Parliament from Quebec who simultaneously held seats in the Legislative Assembly of Quebec, including the Premier Pierre-Joseph-Olivier Chauveau. There were also four members of Parliament from Ontario who also held seats in the Legislative Assembly of Ontario, including the first two Premiers, John Sandfield Macdonald and Edward Blake. Other prominent federal politicians with double mandates included George-Étienne Cartier, Christopher Dunkin, Hector Langevin, the second Premier of British Columbia, Amor de Cosmos, and two members from Manitoba, Donald Smith and Pierre Delorme. Another famous example is that of the de facto leader of the Liberals, George Brown, who ran for both federal and provincial seats in 1867. Brown lost both elections, and soon thereafter began campaigning for the prohibition of double mandates.

The double mandate was prohibited from the start in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick ; it was abolished in Ontario in 1872, in Manitoba in 1873, and in 1873 the federal parliament passed a law against it; Quebec passed its own law abolishing it in 1874.

However, dual mandates within a province remained legal. From 1867 to 1985, 305 mayors were also members of the Quebec legislative assembly (MLA). The two best-known cases were those of S.N. Parent who was simultaneously mayor of Quebec City (1894–1906), MLA and Premier of Quebec (1900–1905). Longtime Montreal Mayor Camilien Houde (1928–32, 1938–40) was also simultaneously MLA for a total of 2 ½ years during his mandates as mayor. However, that type of dual mandate had virtually ceased when laws adopted in 1978 and 1980 prohibited MNAs from holding any local mandate.

It is common for members of the Finnish Parliament to hold a mandate as a member of their local municipal council as well. 79 percent of MPs elected to parliament in 2011 were also municipal council members.

The cumul des mandats (French: [ kymyl dɛ mɑ̃da ], lit. accumulation of mandates) is a common practice in the Fifth French Republic (1958–present). It consists of simultaneously holding two or more elective offices at different levels of government — local, regional, national and European — as mayors, MPs, senators, Members of the European Parliament, and President of the General Council in their home regions. Sometimes, officials hold as many as four positions. While officials may not be elected to more than one office at the same level (such as being both an MP and a senator), they may hold offices in any combination at the municipal, departmental, regional, national and European levels. The cumul des mandats is controversial in France, being accused of fostering absenteeism and cronyism.

Several laws to limit the practice have been introduced in recent decades. By far the most coveted local mandate is that of mayor, traditionally a highly prestigious function in France.

A hotly debated law to prohibit all dual mandates, to take effect in 2017, was adopted in July 2013. Following the adoption of the law, former President Sarkozy and other members of the opposition UMP party have declared that if elected in 2017, their party would revise or even revoke that law. Many Socialist Party MPs and senators have also expressed their unease with the law imposed by President Hollande and might welcome a review of the law. In the meantime, the ubiquitous 'député-maire' (MP and mayor) and 'sénateur-maire' are still familiar figures of the French political scene.

The President of France cannot hold any other office during their tenure, except for the position of co-prince of Andorra, which they hold ex officio with the Bishop of Urgell. In practice, each send a personal representative, the equivalent of a viceroy, to Andorra to act on their behalf.

Multiple mandates at the legislative level

Parliamentary mandates are incompatible with each other:

The 2022 election in Pas-de-Calais's 8th Assembly constituency was annulled because the winner's substitute was already substitute for a senator.

A member from one of the above assemblies cannot combine its mandate with more than one of the following mandates:

Exceptions: They can hold a third office in a town of less than 3,500 inhabitants.

They may also hold a third office as a councillor, vice-president or president of an urban community, an agglomeration community or a communauté de communes, as these terms are elected by indirect universal suffrage, by municipal councils from among the councillors.

For example, a member of the National Assembly has the right to be general/regional councillor or President of a regional/general council. They cannot hold a third office unless they are the mayor, deputy mayor or municipal councillor of a city of less than 3,500 inhabitants.

In 2008, 85% of members of parliament held multiple posts Following the June 2012 legislative elections, it was still the case that 75% of all National Assembly members (438 deputies out of 577) held a double mandate (often as mayor of a mid- to large-size city) and 33 have four mandates. In August 2013, out of 348 senators, 152 are also mayors.

They cannot have more than two local mandates.

The following mandates are incompatible each other:

For example, an elected official cannot be mayor and president of the Regional Council. However, all other local mandates are cumulative. A mayor can also be a general councillor and a president of a Regional Council can also be deputy-mayor of a city.

Exceptions are the same as those for parliamentarians (Cities of less than 3,500 inhabitants and the intercommunalities)

Accumulation of mandates and governmental functions

A member of the French government cannot be a member of any assembly. However, the member of government may retain any local mandate they hold. A cabinet minister can exercise a maximum of two local mandates in addition to their government function.

For example, the prime minister, a minister or secretary of state can be mayor, or president of a general, regional or intercommunal council or sit in one of these assemblies.

Currently, over two-thirds of the members of the French government are engaged in one or two more local mandates.

The rationales for holding multiple offices are varied. Holding a seat in the Senate, National Assembly, or European Parliament gives local mayors a valuable method of tapping funds to develop their home cities and regions. It also can give opportunities to curry favor with other important officials, with opportunities at each level. Salaries for positions can be combined (to a point) as well. For politicians with national ambitions, retaining a position in a local town can give them a down-to-earth aura that can appeal to voters. These advantages have made politicians very wary of reducing the practice of the cumul with legislation despite other moves to end perceptions of favoritism and corruption among politicians.

It has been common practice in France since the Third Republic (1870). But there are also many cases of "cumul" before this period, for example, the writer Alexis de Tocqueville was a member from 1839 to 1851. In 1849 he was appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs and at the same time he was elected President of the General Council of Manche from 1849 to 1851 (councillor from 1842 to 1852).

There are several reasons for this phenomenon, and one of them is that France has a long tradition of centralization, compared to countries such as Germany, Italy, and Spain. Local governments have fewer powers and resources than those possessed by the Länder of Germany, or Autonomous Communities of Spain. The local mandates in France are less important than in other countries, and therefore politicians have more time to devote to a parliamentary mandate.

The cumul is a widespread practice and has grown much more prevalent in modern France. In 1946, 36 percent of deputies in the National Assembly held an additional office. By 1956, this number had already increased to 42 percent and by 1970, 70 percent of deputies held an additional elected office; in 1988, 96 percent did.

Many of the most prominent politicians in France make use or have made use of the cumul. Jacques Chirac served as Mayor of Paris between 1977 and 1995. During this same time, Chirac also served as a deputy in the National Assembly from Corrèze, briefly as Member of the European Parliament, and even as Prime Minister between 1986 and 1988. Former Prime Minister Pierre Bérégovoy served concurrently as mayor of Nevers and deputy of Nièvre in the mid-1980s.

According to French law against accumulation of electoral mandates, Yves Jégo should have resigned from one of the following mandates before 21 April 2010 (one month after the Regional elections):

But giving as a pretext a legal complaint from the Front National 's candidates, he held the three of them for more than a year, plus his local mandate of president of the communauté de communes des deux fleuves (CC2F).

Lionel Jospin (Prime Minister from 1997 to 2002) imposed on his government ministers an unwritten rule of having no local office. For example, Catherine Trautmann stepped down as Mayor of Strasbourg (while remaining a member of the city council) to become Minister of Culture ; conversely, Martine Aubry stepped down from the Ministry of Labour when elected Mayor of Lille in 2001. This rule was more or less upheld by Jacques Chirac during the governments of Jean-Pierre Raffarin and Dominique de Villepin for the 2002–2007 term, with a few notable exceptions (Jean-François Copé was mayor of Meaux, Nicolas Sarkozy was President of the Hauts-de-Seine General Council); for instance, Philippe Douste-Blazy had to step down from the Toulouse mayorship upon joining the government.

As of 2007, no such rule was stated for the François Fillon government: Alain Juppé, former Minister for Development was mayor of Bordeaux, and was defeated in his National Assembly constituency (a third cumulative mandate) by 50.9% to 49.1% of the votes by the Socialist candidate. Additionally, Hervé Morin, the Minister of Defense, is mayor of Épaignes, and Éric Besson, Minister of Immigration and National Identity, is the mayor of Donzère.

The dual mandate is a common phenomenon in Greek politics. Some Members of Parliament, by tradition, become members of the government, and appointing technocrats to ministerial offices is unusual. As a result, the executive branch, and particularly the Prime Minister, has direct control of the legislative one. Although there are some limitations. For instance, the President is prohibited from being an MP or holding any other office. To be inaugurated, the President's resignation is required. For mayors, governors or members of municipality councils it is unclear if they can hold other offices simultaneously with their current one. One example of a politician being an MP (1974–1989) and MEP (1984–1989) is that of Georgios Mavros, although traditionally MPs who were elected MEPs resigned first.

In Hong Kong, dual mandate is common for members of the territory's Legislative Council, who serve concurrently as members of one of the territory's eighteen district councils. Before the abolition of the two municipal councils in the territory in 1999, it was common for politicians to serve concurrently at all three levels.

It is also normal for Legislative Council members and District Concil's members to hold position with China's National People's Congress and Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, with those positions appointed by the Chinese Government.

The instability caused by the close result of the 1981 general election was exacerbated by the number of government TDs who also served as MEPs and for whom the opposition refused pairing when they were abroad. This led to further elections in February 1982 and again in November.

In 1991, cabinet ministers and junior ministers were prohibited from serving as local councillors. The prohibition was extended to other Oireachtas members by the Local Government (No. 2) Act 2003, an amendment to the Local Government Act 2001. Attempts to include it in the 2001 Act failed after a rebellion by Fianna Fáil backbenchers ; the 2003 Act passed after a compensation package was agreed for those losing out.

The 2001 Act prohibited being a member of multiple county or city councils, or multiple town councils, or both a town and city council. Brian O'Shea was a member of both Waterford City Council and Waterford County Council until 1993. County councillors were allowed to sit on a town council, and many did so. The 2003 Act provided that a candidate elected simultaneously to a forbidden combination of local councils has three days to choose which seat to take up, with the other or others then being considered vacant. The Local Government Reform Act 2014 abolished town councils and instead subdivided most counties into municipal districts ; the county council's members are the district councillors for all districts within the county.

Dual mandate is common in Malaysia. According to the Federal Constitution, a Member of Parliament (MP), whether elected to the Dewan Rakyat or appointed to the Dewan Negara, cannot hold membership in both houses of the Parliament. However, an MP may be elected as member of a State Legislative Assembly (MLA) at the same time. Consequently, an MP may be appointed to the State Cabinet through appointment as a nominated MLA while an MLA may be appointed as Minister or Deputy Minister in the Federal Government due to having membership in the Parliament.

Dual mandates are banned in the Philippines, based on Article VI, sections 13 and 14, and Article VII, section 13 of the constitution. As elections are synchronized, politicians run on just one position. In cases where a politician is elected or appointed to a new office while serving, the politician will have to vacate the prior office before taking office to the new one. An example includes Mark Villar who vacated his newly won congressional seat in order to become Secretary of Public Works and Highways in 2016.

In Poland, dual mandate is mostly limited to combining the role of a member of parliament with positions of minister or vice-minister (state secretary).

According to Art. 102-108 of the Polish Constitution, members of both houses of parliament are barred from holding employment in government administration (with the exception of roles as members of the Council of Ministers and state secretaries), in the Chancellery of the Sejm, the Chancellery of the Senate and the Chancellery of the President of the Republic of Poland. Moreover, judges, public prosecutors, civil servants, soldiers in active military service, police officers and state security service officers may not hold a parliament mandate. Members of both houses of parliament are also barred from holding the office of president of the National Bank of Poland, the President of the Supreme Audit Office, the Ombudsman, the Ombudsman for Children and their deputies, a member of the Monetary Policy Council, a member of the National Broadcasting Council, or an ambassador.

On a statutory level, members of both houses of parliament are also barred from being members of councils of local government on all levels, or from holding the position of voivode or vice-voivode. They are also barred from running a business which makes use of public or communal property.

Per the Spanish Constitution, legislators in the regional assemblies of the Autonomous Communities are barred from being elected to a seat in the Congress of Deputies, the lower house of the Cortes Generales. More precisely, regional legislators can run for the seat, but if elected they must choose between the regional and national parliaments. Nevertheless, members of lower tiers of the Spanish decentralized structure, such as provincial councillors or members of local councils, including mayors, can and have held seats in the Congress of Deputies. The rule barring regional legislators does not apply to the upper house of the Cortes, the Senate : in fact, regional legislatures are entitled to appoint a varying number of members from their ranks to the Senate, according to the population of the region. Currently, the Autonomous Communities appoint 56 Senators, the other 208 being directly elected in general elections.

Government ministers exercised dual mandate as sitting members of the Grand National Assembly until the Turkish constitution was amended to replace the parliamentary system following the 2017 Turkish constitutional referendum. The new presidential system prohibits cabinet ministers and other members of the executive branch from sitting in the Grand National Assembly.

At the EU level, prior to the 2009 European Parliament elections, there were a small number of members of the European Parliament who were also members of the House of Lords. However, it is now European law that a member of the European Parliament (MEP) may not be a member of the legislature of a member state. This, with regard to the United Kingdom, therefore applied to the House of Commons and the House of Lords, as the constituent bodies forming that member state's legislature. As it is impossible to disclaim a life peerage, it was ruled that peers (who sit as members of the House of Lords) had to take a "leave of absence" from the Lords in order to be an MEP; this was also the procedure for when a peer is the UK's European Commissioner, which was in recent times usually the case. The UK withdrew from the EU on 31 January 2020, ending British representation in the European Parliament.

There were members of the House of Commons also holding seats in the Scottish Parliament, Welsh Parliament, or Northern Ireland Assembly.

The November 2009 report by the Committee on Standards in Public Life into the controversy surrounding MPs' expenses noted that "double jobbing" was "unusually ingrained in the political culture" of Northern Ireland, where 16 of 18 MPs were Stormont MLAs, compared to one Scottish MP being an MSP (First Minister Alex Salmond), and no Welsh MPs being AMs. The 2009 report recommended a ban with effect from the 2011 Stormont elections, which Northern Ireland parties vetoed. In 2012 Sinn Féin committed to end dual jobbing, with Deputy First Minister Martin McGuinness resigning his Westminster seat in 2013. Stormont parties agreed to the Northern Ireland (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2014 's prohibiting MLAs holding seats in the Westminster Commons, or Dáil Éireann in Dublin, with effect from the next Stormont election (postponed from 2015 to 2016). In January 2022 the UK government planned to suspend the prohibition from the 2022 Assembly election until the 2024 United Kingdom general election ; when the other Stormont parties objected that this favoured DUP leader Jeffrey Donaldson, the plan was withdrawn. Donaldson won a seat at Stormont but nominated Emma Little-Pengelly to fill it, while he kept his Westminster seat instead.

The Wales Act 2014 also applied a similar restriction on the then National Assembly for Wales (now the Senedd or Welsh Parliament) as from the Assembly election in 2016.

It remained possible for members of the Scottish Parliament to be members of the UK Parliament: prominent MSPs including Alex Salmond, John Swinney, Margaret Curran, and Cathy Jamieson simultaneously held seats in Holyrood and Westminster. The system came under scrutiny in the 2020s, with former leader of the Scottish Conservatives Douglas Ross facing criticism for double jobbing as the MP for Moray and the MSP for the Highlands and Islands from 2021 to 2024. The Scottish National Party Westminster leader Stephen Flynn stated in November 2024 that he would aim to hold a dual mandate by seeking election as MSP for Aberdeen South and North Kincardine while still serving as MP for Aberdeen South. However, due to internal party opposition, he announced he would not seek election to the Scottish Parliament while also being an MP. In December 2024, the Scottish Parliament unanimously backed an amendment to the Scottish Elections (Representation and Reform) Bill that would prohibit MSPs from also sitting as MPs or peers. The bill was enacted in 2025 and restricts MPs or life peers elected to Holyrood after that year. Flynn was elected MSP for Aberdeen Deeside and North Kincardine in 2026 and required him to vacate his Westminster seat within 49 days post-election. Secondary legislation for the 2025 act provides that in case of an MSP who holds a life peerage, there is a 14-day period to resign from the House of Lords.

English Devolution and Community Empowerment Act 2026, section 16 prohibits a member of the House of Commons, but not a peer in the House of Lords, from being simultaneously a mayor or council leader. They are also not allowed to serve as a councillor for a constituent council if elected as a directly elected mayor. Previously this prohibition applied only in circumstances other than the Greater Manchester and West Yorkshire mayoralties. Thus Ken Livingstone remained MP for Brent East until the dissolution of Parliament despite his election as Mayor of London a year before. Boris Johnson resigned his seat as MP for Henley on being elected mayor in 2008, but became an MP again in 2015, a year prior to the end of his second term as mayor (he did not seek a third term). Sadiq Khan, elected as the Labour mayor in the 2016 election, resigned his seat as MP for Tooting soon after his election to the mayoralty. Numerous members of the House of Lords however hold positions in local government.

At a lower level, it is common for people to hold seats on both a district council and a county council. Several MPs have also retained their council seats, most often until the expiration of their terms; Mike Hancock simultaneously held a council seat and a seat in Parliament between his election to Parliament in 1997 and his defeat in the local elections in 2014.

In Scotland, councillors elected to the Scottish Parliament since 2026 can remain MSPs if the next council election is due to occur within 372 days following the Holyrood election, otherwise an MSP has to relinquish a council seat during the 49-day grace period.

The United States Constitution prohibits members of the Senate or House from holding positions within the Executive Branch (Art. I, Sec. 6, cl. 2), and limits the president to his salary as chief executive, saying he may not "receive... any other Emolument from the United States, or any of them" (Art. II, Sec. 1, cl. 7). However, the Constitution places no restrictions that would prevent state or local office holders from simultaneously holding office in any branch of the federal government.

Historically, the U.S. inherited many basic political traditions from Great Britain, which in the eighteenth century tolerated several different forms of dual mandate. Following the establishment of the original Continental Congress and later Confederation Congress, the states possessed absolute discretion in regards to how delegates were chosen to serve, and it became common for state legislatures to appoint members from within their own ranks to Congress. At the time, this was a largely uncontroversial practise since it was widely assumed that the Congress would have relatively little to do (especially in peacetime) and that most of the consequential decision-making would take place at the state and local levels. A ban on dual mandates would therefore have been widely seen as unnecessary and unwelcome as it would have effectively barred Congressional delegates from what were perceived to be more important political posts, thus making election to the national Congress (already seen as a considerable burden due to the difficulties of eighteenth century travel) quite undesirable.

During the convention that established the present U.S. constitution, attention was primarily given to designing a federal government with branches that would be able operate independently of each other and free of undesirable foreign influence, which resulted in the aforementioned prohibitions. Barring state and local officials from federal office was not seriously debated. If it had been, it would likely have been fiercely opposed especially by the nascent anti-Federalist movement, many of whose members were keen to ensure that state officials with a vested interest in defending states' rights would be allowed to also serve simultaneously at the federal level, especially in Congress.

For the first few decades after the First United States Congress convened in 1789, Congress met infrequently and some states endeavored to accommodate dual mandates by holding their legislative sessions at times that would not conflict with Congressional sessions. Eventually, as the federal government grew in importance, Congress came to be seen as a source of great power. This created the potential for conflicts of interest and made it increasingly difficult to justify the holding of mandates at different levels of government to voters. In a closely related development, Congress began meeting more frequently than originally intended, which eventually made it impractical in most states for one person to serve simultaneously in the state and federal governments.

In time, the vast majority of states banned dual state and federal mandates. Today, the practice is forbidden by many state constitutions of many U.S. states, but as of January 2018 it was still legal in Connecticut, only for municipal offices. Unlike many other attempts at the state level intended to place additional restrictions besides those in the U.S. Constitution regarding who can represent them in Congress, most of which have been ruled unconstitutional by the United States Supreme Court, state-originated bans on dual mandates are constitutional because their prohibitions technically restrict who is allowed to serve at the state and/or local level (i.e. they typically place some sort of de jure prohibition barring federal officials from simultaneously serving at the state and/or local levels, resulting in a de facto prohibition on the reverse arrangement occurring).

Unlike many federations, U.S. states do not generally restrict state or federal officials from seeking office at another level of government without resigning their existing offices first. For example, in the four U.S. presidential elections contested from 1988 to 2000 inclusive, three sitting state governors were nominated for the presidency. These were Michael Dukakis in 1988, Bill Clinton in 1992 and George W. Bush in 2000. Dukakis remained Governor of Massachusetts following his defeat in the presidential election while Clinton and Bush, once elected president, promptly resigned their respective Arkansas and Texas governorships. Elsewhere, serving state officials often seek federal office, one prominent example being Illinois State Senator Barack Obama 's election to the United States Senate in 2004 – Obama quickly resigned from the Illinois Senate after being elected to the U.S. Senate despite not being legally required to do so, and served as a U.S. senator until 2008 when he was elected president. Also, it is not uncommon for sitting federal officials to contest election to state offices, although in these cases the office sought is usually one of the state's highest political posts, typically governor – one such recent example being Mike Pence, who was a sitting U.S. Representative when he was first elected to the office of Governor of Indiana.

Also typically permitted is for one person to seek multiple offices at the same level of government in the same election, although attempting to simultaneously seek multiple offices in the same branch of government (e.g. a sitting U.S. Representative seeking re-election to the House and election to the U.S. Senate) is severely frowned on and prohibited in many states (the constitutionality of these prohibitions is uncertain). Recent examples include the 2000, 2008, and 2012 presidential elections where Senators Joe Lieberman, Joe Biden and Representative Paul Ryan respectively sought re-election and election to the vice presidency – only Biden was successfully elected vice president, but all three were re-elected to the offices in which they were the incumbents.

In August 2008, Governor of Illinois Rod Blagojevich proposed legislation that would prohibit dual-office holding as part of changes to the state's ethics bill, stating that "dual government employment creates the potential for a conflict of interest because a legislator's duties to his or her constituents and his or her public employer are not always consistent." Critics, such as Representative Susana Mendoza, called the actions "spite" on the part of the governor.

Fulfilling a campaign pledge that he had made when first running for the New Jersey Legislature, Jack Sinagra sponsored a bill passed by the New Jersey Senate in 1992 that would ban the practice. At the time that the legislation first passed, there were some twenty elected officials who served in the New Jersey Legislature and another elected office, including Assemblyman Bill Pascrell, who was also mayor of Paterson, New Jersey ; State Senator Ronald Rice, who also served on the Newark City Council; and Assemblyman John E. Rooney, who was also mayor of Northvale. These officials protested the proposed ban as interfering with the will of voters to elect officials as they see fit. A newspaper called former State senator Wayne R. Bryant the "king of double dipping" because he was collecting salaries from as many as four public jobs he held simultaneously.

Governor of New Jersey Jon Corzine signed legislation in September 2007 that banned the practice statewide, but those holding multiple offices as of 1 February 2008, including 19 state legislators, were grandfathered into the system and allowed to retain their positions. As of January 2024, only three of the nineteen (listed in bold) continue to hold a dual mandate.

In February 2001, Jean Schmidt introduced legislation in the Ohio House of Representatives that would forbid public officials from receiving a government pension while still serving in office.

The Custom of Paris (French : Coutume de Paris) was one of France's regional custumals of civil law. It was the law of the land in Paris and the surrounding region in the 16th–18th centuries and was applied to French overseas colonies, including New France. First written in 1507 and revised in 1580 and 1605, the Custom of Paris was a compilation and systematization of Renaissance -era customary law. Divided into 16 sections, it contained 362 articles concerning family and inheritance, property, and debt recovery. It was the main source of law in New France from the earliest settlement, but other provincial customs were sometimes invoked in the early period.

The Custom of Paris was introduced in 1627 by the Company of One Hundred Associates. In 1664, under the royal charter of the French West India Company, Louis XIV made the Custom of Paris the only legitimate source of civil law in any French colony. In Quebec, however, it was not replaced until the Civil Code of Lower Canada entered into force in 1866.

The Custom first originated in 16th-century France as part of a larger project of centralization of law. French law was not unified; multiple regions with distinct laws stemming from each region's unique blend of jus commune and customary law. The Custom of Paris was just one of 360 uncodified custumals in effect across the different regions of 15th-century France.

The customary law of Paris was viewed as prestigious since it was the capital, so it began to be refined between the 13th and 15th centuries as part of a project of codification of all French custumals decreed by King Charles VII in the Ordinance of Montil-les-Tours [ fr ] in 1453. It was first compiled in 1510 and subsequently revised in 1580 by order of King Henry III, following a period of disuse. A symptom of the time in which it was written, the Custom's 362 articles attempted to merge feudal land tenure with the nascent town-centered commercialization of the Ancien Régime.

In 1663, upon the dissolution of the Company of One Hundred Associates, New France came under direct rule by the French crown. The Custom was officially introduced in New France by Article 33 of the royal charter establishing the French West India Company in May 1664. The company retained control of the colony for a decade thereafter.

The Custom had been a part of the justice system of Canada since the 1627 founding of the Company of One Hundred Associates, which previously managed French holdings in North America. The unilateral application of the Custom to the colonies was a solution imposed by the French monarchy after 1664. Despite the judicial unity, customary practice varied across regions.

Institutionally, the colony found itself governed by a three-part government in 1665. The Intendant, who represented one third of this body, was charged with the policy areas of justice, police, and finance, for which the Custom of Paris was relevant. The Custom evolved rapidly in New France, to the extent that in 1760 it was, as applied in Montreal and Quebec City, the "law of Canada", and on certain points had diverged significantly from its origins in France.

Under the Custom of Paris, property was divided into movables (biens meubles : chattels, emblements, debts or 'obligations') and immovables (biens immeubles : land, buildings, fixtures, etc.).

In the interest of encouraging trade, movable property could not be mortgaged and was not considered separate property (biens propre s), that is, property in severalty external to the marital community unless specified in the marriage contract. Immovables such as land, offices, and rentcharges (rentes constituées) were considered separate property if acquired by one of the spouses prior to the marriage or inherited directly by either spouse.

Immovable property purchased during the marriage was considered to be after-acquired property (conquêts) and incorporated into the marital property but would become separate property as soon as the estate went into succession. The distinction between separate property (biens propres) and community property (biens communs, or biens de communauté) was very important; many limitations were imposed on the alienation of separate property.

Land was subject to feudal tenure and could be held in allod or fief, the latter coming in two distinct forms—either free socage (seigneurie) or villein socage (roture). Free socage was considered 'noble' (but the owner did not have to be a member of the nobility) and the latter 'peasant'.

Under feudal tenure, a fief could not be owned outright but was instead divided into competing interests known as estates in land ; thus, a single tract of land could be held both in villein socage by a tenant and in free socage by the lord of the manor. Villein socage was subject to a number of real burdens and feudal incidents owed to the manorial landlord. For example, the Custom provided for the payment of an annual feu -duty (the cens) by villein socagers to the landlord as both revenue and as a token of submission. The entry fine (lods et ventes [ fr ]) was another mandatory payment, a conveyance fee for villein socages and amounting to a twelfth of the sales price, derived from the feu-duty, as were other fees and the right of laudatio (retrait lignager [ fr ]).

Additionally, the Custom of Paris accorded a number of privileges to lords over villein socagers who were their tenants. They included the right of soke (right to hold court), restrictions, as well as astrictions such as a monopoly over mills and milling (thirlage), water power, hunting, and fishing (piscary). Peasants also had to pay a fixed quitrent for land as specified in their deeds of enfeoffment, and tenants were not permitted to run down their tenancy to the point that the revenue it generated would fail to cover their annual feu-duties. The Custom also contained the equivalent of a building code, outlining rules for property held in common, but in general, police regulations were more important for construction, fire prevention, and public hygiene in New France.

Under the Custom, when a couple got married in New France, the couple married in community of property (communauté de biens), which means that the couple's marital property was co-owned. However, any immovable property purchased prior to marriage or directly inherited remained separate property (biens propres); all other property acquired after the marriage was concurrently owned by the spouses as community property (biens communs, or biens de communauté).

The husband was the "head and master" (seigneur et maître) of the community property; the wife could not alienate property or conduct any other property transactions without her husband's approval. However, the husband was also required to get his wife's consent to undertake a transaction involving any of their community property. Essentially, the community as a legal entity, rather than either spouse separately, was the owner of the marital property. It was possible to marry out of community of property if both prospective spouses elected in a marriage contract to separation of property. Alternatively, the right to administer the community property could be awarded by a court to a wife who could prove that her husband was unfit in some way to administer their property.

Marriage contracts were often used to alter the rules of inheritance and to provide the surviving spouse and family with one or more financial safeguard(s). The most important such safeguard was dower (douaire), a fixed sum set aside for the wife to live on in the event of her husband's death and drawn from half of the marriage community reserved for the minor heirs.

The dower could take two forms: dower by custom (douaire coutumier), the income drawn from half of the husband's estate that could not be alienated during the husband's life or claimed by creditors after his death unless the wife formally renounced her rights, or contractual dower (douaire préfix), a sum of money stipulated in a marriage contract by the spouses’ respective families, with the wife's same rights applying. Dower by custom was more common among upper-class families in which both spouses held extensive assets, and contractual dower was much more common in general and used almost always by lower-class families.

Ultimately, the couple's children would inherit the dower property, but a widow had the right to live on its income for the duration of her life. Additionally, a widow could elect to walk away from the marital community on the death of her husband and therefore not be responsible for any of its assets or liabilities. This was done if the liabilities outweighed the value in the property that she was inheriting. Under such an agreement, the widow also retained control of her dower, which then became quite valuable and important for her to be able to get back on her feet. It was unavailable to widowers as they were typically the partners that incurred and held marital debt.

Both spouses had the option to put aside a certain amount of property (usually, a sum of money, certain movable property, or a combination of both) that was untouchable by creditors and did not belong to the community for the other spouse to claim in the event of the death of their partner. This was the jointure (préciput) and typically came to half the dower's value. Almost all married couples of the time created a jointure in their marriage contracts, and the vast majority of jointures were reciprocal.

In practice, the jointure allowed a widow to remove her bed, clothes, and personal effects from the marital community prior to the estate inventory, partition of the community, and payment of liabilities.

The nature of the socio-economic environment in rural Quebec was conducive to marriage. In contrast to France, the social pressures for marriages into affluent and prestigious households was not as pronounced in the new colony, which allowed for greater leniency in gaining parental consent. Sailors and soldiers from France required the approval of their superiors to marry in the colony. Parental consent as required under the Custom became problematic when parents were unwilling to consent to young marriages.

The imbalance of the sexes in the new colony led to a great number of marriages between youths, which was especially pronounced in the early years of settlement: the average age for girls was 12, boys 14. Furthermore, the vast availability of land acted as an incentive for marriage. Local administrators facilitated young marriages despite the lack of parental consent and reprimands from the central government and the local Sovereign Council. The Sovereign Council would punish clandestine marriages by either exiling the married couple to Île Royale or annulling the marriage.

Marriage contracts, while not required under the Custom, were a form of protecting economic interests and a form of security in the New World. Contracts of marriage community (communauté de biens) were significant as they contained important safeguards for widowed men and women as well as their children and orphans.

Legal separations were uncommon in 18th-century rural Quebec. Typically, couples desiring to separate would circumvent the legal process and have a notary draw up a contract to dissolve the marriage community by dividing their movable and immovable assets. It was difficult for women to obtain legal separation; if separation was obtained, women lacked full freedom, as they could not mortgage or alienate their fixed assets without the approval of the justice or their estranged husbands.

Upon the death of a spouse, remarriage was common and frequently occurred without great delay, which created additional complications for inheritance and property principles under the Custom.

According to the Custom, a married woman was a feme covert subject to marital power, meaning she was legally considered to be a minor and so was under the guardianship of her husband. As for the husband, he was the legal "head and master" of the marital community property. As such, the wife was unable to make transactions without the permission of her husband.

She was, however, protected from egregious control of her affairs by her husband by the customary provision that he had to secure her consent before mortgaging, selling, or alienating any of the couple's community property. Empirical evidence suggests that while this provision was strictly obeyed, it was largely a formality, and there is no evidence that a wife ever officially exercised her power of veto over a transaction initiated by her husband. Of the importance of the marriage community to the implications of the Custom of Paris for early modern women living in New France, historian Allan Greer says:

The relationship between the spouses was clearly unequal, but the comunauté de biens, the fundamental principle governing marital property arrangements, gave women legal protection and a stake in family possessions that could not be ignored by any male 'head of household'.

The implications of the Custom regarding property were particularly important for widows. Under the Custom, the surviving spouse (husband or wife) had a right to half of the marital community property, but the deceased's separate property acquired prior to the marriage as well as the other half of the community property was inherited by the couple's children. Marriage contracts, however, often specified the conditions of inheritance for a widow in such a way that their financial future was prioritized over that of the family as a whole.

The husband's role as "head of household" and his effective control over the couple's marital property meant that he would have a significant impact on the material well-being of the family in the event of his death. Thus, the wife largely depended on the managerial abilities and good faith of her husband in according her sufficient material holdings on which to live and support her family in her potential widowhood.

A married woman was not allowed to manage her own inheritances, but the usual (largely nominal) rules about asking her permission applied. Marriage contracts could not be used to overcome the Custom's doctrines of male marital power and the coverture of married women. The best that an egalitarian-minded couple could do was to stipulate in their marriage contract that the wife would have the right of administration over her own goods (benefit from their returns), but then, she did not have the right to alienate those goods freely and unilaterally. The essential point of the option was to protect the woman's fortune from the possible incompetence or malfeasance of her future husband. It also made the wife's nominal veto right over transactions more real in practice. However, contracts including such provisions were quite rare.

The Custom included some clauses that allowed wives to evade their apparent legal and economic subjugation by their husbands, if they were inclined to permit such a state of affairs. Once married, the husband could, as head of household, explicitly authorize his wife to manage (though not to dispose of) her inheritances, give her general or special power of attorney, or recognize her as a public merchant capable of transacting independently.

However, contemporary husbands were not commonly predisposed to initiating such measures.

The Custom of Paris provided for several specific measures for evening out the balance of power; the most important among these were the dower and the right of renunciation to an indebted community; also important was jointure. The Custom stated that if such a right was specified in the marriage contract, a widow could choose between taking a legal or contractual dower. The vast majority of early modern marriage contracts in New France provided for dowers, and in Quebec City and Montreal, the vast majority of wives with dower rights also had the right to choose their form. However, the principle that such transactions involving the dower could not be carried out by the husband without the wife's presence or written permission was not always respected.

One of the most important protective mechanisms for a widow under customary law was her right to renounce community property plagued by insurmountable debt and effectively walk away with her dower. A widower did not have that right to renounce the community's liabilities. The 18th-century Canadian lawyer François-Joseph Cugnet [ fr ] explained the principle as demonstrating inherent fairness in the treatment of women:

The husband being the master of the community and being able to dispose of it at will, it is necessary to afford the wife the privilege of renouncing the community, and to give her by this means the ability to rid herself of debts incurred during the marriage and transacted by the husband, as he alone could incur debts, without her consent, and the wife being unable to do so at all, without being so permitted by her husband, it must be the choice of the wife to accept or renounce the community.

Accordingly, almost all marriage contracts stipulated that a widowed woman renouncing her indebted marital community could not be held accountable for any liabilities of that community. Normally, the widowed woman could not be held accountable for debts on her own personal property unless she had an independent business separate from her husband's and was recognized as an independent public merchant by her husband or if she decided to continue to manage the community as an undivided entity with her minor children.

Therefore, it was in a creditor's best interest to insist that the wife be present for and participate meaningfully in all transactions involving the community property. That clause acted not only to protect women in widowhood but also to enhance their stature and involvement in family finances during the marriage.

Most marriage contracts stipulated that the spouses would not be held accountable for debts incurred by their partners prior to the marriage, so if such a debt was paid off using the community property, the spouse that did not incur the debt would have to be compensated for that payment upon the dissolution of the marriage. It was customarily permissible for a couple to stipulate in the marriage contract that the widow would have the right, if she renounced the indebted community, to retake her material input to the marriage free from any debt claims. That clause de reprise was included in the majority of relevant marriage contracts. As previously mentioned, the widow who renounced the community could walk away with her dower, but unless the marriage contract explicitly specified otherwise, did not have the right to also retain her jointure in the case of renunciation. Therefore, almost all relevant marriage contracts contained such a specification.

Finally, according to customary law, the widowed woman could claim from the community, prior to its partition, the value of any of her separate property that had been alienated during the marriage without the profits of that alienation being used to purchase other property. While technically this clause applied to both spouses, it existed to protect the wife from the abuses of the husband-administrator, who would benefit from the returns on such a transaction at the dissolution of the marriage when, as part of the community, it would be divided between the spouses even if it was the profit from the alienation of an item of the wife's separate property. If the community property's value was insufficient to provide compensation for such a transaction, the widow could lay claim to her deceased husband's separate property. The husband, if he was attempting to benefit from this clause on the death of his wife, had no such option.

The Custom also provided widows with other specific benefits. The husband's heirs were obligated to provide her with mourning clothes paid for out of their inheritance, whereas a widower had to pay for his mourning clothes personally. Somewhat amusingly, the explanation for the clause was that it compensated a widow for the fact that she would be reviled if she did not formally mourn her husband for at least a year, but no such expectation constrained a widower.

Divorce was uncommon in New France. While the Custom of Paris did not specify any hard and fast rules for such a situation, there is empirical evidence of a notary drawing up a separation agreement for an early modern Quebecois couple (Félicité Audet and Étienne Ledoux) that specified a fairly egalitarian custody arrangement regarding the couple's children and provided the wife with a perpetual material settlement in the form of agricultural provisions. The agreement also dissolved their community of property, enabling the wife to sell land and purchase a farm and a loom in order to support herself and her children. However, Audet likely counted herself lucky, as such a favourable settlement depended on the goodwill of the husband.

The evidence from notarial instruments suggests that while the value of movable goods bequeathed to children leaving the family hearth was about equal for both sexes, land was endowed in a very discriminatory fashion. While departing sons sometimes received a piece of land when they married, that was not the case for daughters in the same position. Customary law accorded women a share in property, including land, upon the deaths of their parents, such that in the mid-18th century, they received a part of the family estate. However, when parents created specific distributions of family property to come into effect if they should die, they prioritized getting their sons established and assumed that the families of their future sons-in-law would do the same, thus taking care of their daughters. Daughters were often left out of the inheritance of land.

Throughout the history of New France, peasant farmers increasingly disposed of their property while they were still living so transmission of land through the female line had practically disappeared by the end of the 18th century. Truly egalitarian distributions of land had been possible and occurred in the early period because farmers were often able to acquire huge tracts of land, with the express intention of providing future farms for a large family. However, sons were prioritized over daughters despite the Custom's equitable inheritance principles.

One final interesting implication of the Custom of Paris for women in New France was that customarily, daughters who entered religious orders were excluded from any inheritance of the community property of their families. These daughters were instead granted one-time dowries. Thus, it became quite economically practical and common for daughters of typically large, financially strained upper-class families to enter religious orders.

The Custom of Paris also set out what happened to a deceased's property on death, so wills were fairly rare. Since it was a legal matter, it was important to have a notary take inventory of the family estate in the event of the death of either spouse. To have some control over the process of inheritance and to provide safeguards for the widow and surviving family (to deviate somewhat from customary provisions as would best suit the family's needs and preferences), the couple could choose to specify the structure of family inheritance, to an extent, in their marriage contract. If no marriage contract was made, on the death of either the husband or wife, the surviving spouse would retain half of the assets and liabilities of the marital community.

The other half would be split evenly among the surviving children. Children were entitled to a legitime, whether they were male or female, and could access their inheritances at 25, the legal age of majority. They could not be disinherited. Estates in free socage (seigneuries) were subject to different rules of inheritance, and estates in villein socage had to be partitioned equally. A free socage was inherited unequally with half going to the eldest son and the rest being divided equally among his siblings.

In the case of the death of one spouse in a childless couple, the Custom stipulated that the half of the marital community normally reserved for the children of the family could go to a male cousin, a brother, or even the manorial landlord.

The financial well-being of a deceased person's children was safeguarded in the Custom by the legitime, a sum equal to half of what each child would have received in an equitable division of the marital community property if no gifts or bequests had previously diminished it. Every child heir of the deceased parent had a right to that minimum amount of inheritance, and children who had been previously gifted from the family estate to the detriment of the legitime of one of their siblings would have to compensate that sibling appropriately. Accordingly, a parent had the right to bequeath property in a written will only if such action did not infringe on the legitimes of heirs-at-law and only for the value of movable property and one fifth of immovable property.

The community property could remain unpartitioned after the death of one spouse if all interested parties consented so that the estate could be dissolved and its components divided later, usually after the death or remarriage of the surviving parent. In the various transactions involved in the case of the death of both parents, a legal guardian, who was usually a relative, would protect the rights of minor orphans.

Depending on whether the estate was dissolved after the death of one or both parents, the minor heirs would share equally in either half of the community, minus the dower and often the jointure, or the whole community.

The Custom of Paris turned the family into a body corporate that usually co-owned property. That arrangement contributed to egalitarian family structures and a preoccupation with "fairness" in family matters in New France.

While technically property was divided into separate property and community property upon solemnizing of the marriage, early settlers often had no separate property, or brought plots of land that were virtually worthless into their marriages and reaped the benefit of such land only after years of combined labour. Thus, in practice, much separate property was incorporated into the marital community to avoid future disputes about added values and so forth. Even in subsequent generations, when land was more developed and children each inherited a portion of the family estate, inheritances of family land were often treated as movable property and therefore incorporated into subsequent marital communities, complicating patterns of inheritance and linking families together in intricate ways.

The strict rules set out for inheritance by the Custom of Paris commonly forced early modern families in New France (especially those of the first colonists) to act outside the law in the interest of self-preservation. Given that upon the death of half of a childless couple, the half of the community property customarily reserved for the children would revert to the relevant manorial lord, most contemporary marriage contracts specified a reciprocal gift (don mutuel) so if the couple in question was childless, the entire community of property would be inherited by the surviving spouse in the event of the death of either the husband or the wife. That was an especially crucial practice for the earliest settlers, who had no family around to support them if their spouse was to die, and it became increasingly common throughout subsequent generations. Customary law prohibited such gifts, but notaries still drew them up, as they were recognized to be key to the survival of individuals living in New France.

The inheritance rules of the Custom of Paris, which stipulated that children would inherit significant and equal portions of their parents’ community property, often served to keep these families tight-knit, as parents frequently opted to "set up" their children for their adult lives or ensure that their children would remain close at hand to care for them in their old age by providing them with advancements on their inheritance in the form of inter vivos gifts rather than dowries.

Parents (in practice, fathers) could also favour their heirs through testamentary gifts in their wills (common only in cases of divorce known as the separation of property, which occurred more among the upper classes). If parents married in community of property wished to favour one particular heir, customary inheritance laws necessitated an inter vivos gift since after the death of the parents, an egalitarian division of property would apply. Even examples of contemporary marriage contracts demonstrate that the ideals of the Custom with regards to family, inheritance, and marriage imbued families with a closeness and collaborative spirit in setting up the marital communities of their children and protecting them as best they could.

The Custom also had implications for blended families, which were extremely common in New France (approximately 1/4 to 1/3 of marriages involved at least one spouse who had been previously married, but that proportion decreased over time). In the case of a widowed mother who remarried, the Custom called for the dissolution of her former marital community after having been inventoried. Her half of the community property, in addition to her dower and possibly her jointure, became movable property that was incorporated into her new marital community, which was managed by her new husband. Her children from her first marriage would have no rights to their inheritances until they reached the age of majority (25). Any children born to the new couple would inherit from their community property.

However, when couples wanted each of their respective children and children together to receive an equal inheritance upon death (which was common, especially among the lower classes), they circumvented the complications by adopting each other's children (or having the husband adopt the wife's children from a previous marriage). Thus, customary inheritance laws enhanced and facilitated the economic and social blending of families.

The general historiographic consensus based on case studies in Quebec is that egalitarian inheritance practices, as stipulated in the Custom of Paris, were observed in the early period of the colony in the 16th and the 17th centuries. However, by the mid-18th century, there were various qualifications favouring preferential treatment.

In the early settlement of New France, settlers would practice equality of the division of property post mortem in its purest form so they were frequently more egalitarian than what the Custom prescribed. Between the 17th and the 18th centuries, qualifiers such as inter vivos gifts, dowries, and wills were rare. Wills were primarily a form of demonstrating religious piety through their spiritual rhetoric, as opposed to temporal concerns for the division of property.

Equitable settlements stemmed from a familial interest in preventing an excessive fragmentation of land.

During this period of early settlement, families profited from the abundance of virgin land and frequently purchased vast plots with the intention of providing for their offspring post mortem. Despite the fact that many plots remained unfarmed during the parents’ lifetime, farmers were willing to pay their feudal incidents for the land.

At this time, the law for the equitable distribution of land among both female and male offspring was observed so girls received their due portion of the estate in conjunction with their allocation of movable assets. Egalitarianism took on many forms so if children did not receive an inheritance of land, they would be compensated with additional movable assets.

The 18th century marked a progressive shift from egalitarian practices to more discriminatory forms of inheritance. French Canadians increasingly used inter vivos gifts to transfer land to a single heir before death. They thus were able to circumvent the division of the property post mortem. That led to inequality among heirs, and most inheritances by the 19th century did not provide compensation for those disadvantaged.

The shift from an egalitarian system to inequality was motivated by numerous factors including the introduction of English freedom of testation in 1774, the development of the grain market, and the increased bond between man and land. The rise of rural population density was a major catalyst of this shift, as it led to the saturation of land so that familial interests shifted from the preparation of all children for a productive life through individual landholdings to the preservation of the family estate. Some historians, such as Sylvie Dépatie who carried out a case study of Île Jésus, argued that rather than the changing man-to-land ratio, the primary use of inter vivos gifts stemmed from concerns for the productive capacity of property. Notably, gifts were not limited to French Canada or the jurisdiction of the Custom of Paris, and they occurred in areas that were primarily based on cultivation such as Andover, Massachusetts.

That shows a pattern of preferential treatment not in the fashion of primogeniture or ultimogeniture and suggests that the primary concern was pragmatic, the preservation of estates, but emotional considerations are assumed to have been a motivating factor. Parents tried to retain a degree of control following the conveyance of legal title to the land and property from the maintenance of younger siblings and the guarantee of their endowment upon marriage to the supply of food requirements and basic necessities for parents. Some children found the exactions so onerous that they annulled the right following a year or two. Though notaries drew up the gift deeds, they fundamentally represented the concerns and desires of the farmers.

Throughout the centuries of its existence in New France, the inheritance system under the Custom was complicated by internal family conditions. Sons who married before the death of their parents typically wanted their portion of land and would receive it by way of inter vivos gift.

The Custom of Paris contained four titles regarding debt collection and commercial transactions that were greatly influenced by the canon-law ban on interest-bearing loans. For instance, with the exception of rentcharges that allowed interest, notaries were forbidden to include interest charges within their contracts. Notaries played a significant role in the French legal tradition, as opposed to English practice; notaries drew up most agreements and served as mediators. Performing the function of magistrates in non-contentious matters, notaries facilitated amicable settlements through transactions, accords and désistements. Most of a notary's work concerned property law, primarily in the areas of conveyancing, inheritance, indebtedness, and investment.

Evidence of efficient notarial work that prevented civil conflict is found in the fact that few cases concerning real property went to courts; typically, such issues were resolved between the parties.

In order to encourage business within the colony, movable property could not be mortgaged under the Custom. In cases of bankruptcy, certain creditors held a statutory preference (preferential creditors) including women, officers of the court, and feudal lords. Depending on the object and extent of indebtedness, debt claims had to be filed within a given amount of time. Debts were secured by all the debtor's property.

When lawsuits led to a court order to recover debts, creditors had three options for lawful seizure in cases of debts in default:

The Custom of Paris was understood to apply to all of the French colonies of the Ancien Régime including the French West Indies and America. The application of the Custom of Paris in the territories of New France varied periodically, as France lost and won back colonies. At its peak, the Custom applied to the colonies of Canada, Acadia, Newfoundland, Louisiana, and Île Royale. The Custom was practiced in the St. Lawrence Valley in the colony of Canada. To the east, the Superior Councils of Louisburg and Cape Breton, like those of the southern colonies of New Orleans and Louisiana, observed the same body of law. The absence of comparably formal administrative structures in continental Acadia and the western fur-trading territories led to a different pattern of legal development in these areas. English common law was practiced in the adjacent territories of New England.

The French West India Company envisioned a system of judicial unity within a framework of institutional diversity that was to be facilitated by the judges in all the colonies. The Company wanted judges in the colonies to observe the Custom of Paris. Given the nature of the 17th and 18th-century governance and arbitration, there was considerable regional variation within the practice of the law, even within a colony. From 1665, the colony's governor-general controlled foreign relations and the military, while the intendant and the Sovereign Councils of Quebec and Louisbourg operated as judicial bodies, among other things.

The Custom of Paris was not a comprehensive body of law, as its provisions did not deal with commerce or criminal law. In those areas that the Custom of Paris did not cover, judges were free to interpret any custom that they felt best relevant, although, in theory, the jus commune was meant to prevail. The flexibility of judicial interpretation was qualified by the Ordinance of 1673, also known as the "Savary Code", that regulated commercial law, and the Criminal Ordinance of 1670.

After the conquest of New France by the British, the Royal Proclamation of 1763 introduced English common law in the former French colony. The new French Canadian subjects that Britain had just acquired were reluctant to accept this reality, and the Royal Proclamation of 1764 subsequently allowed for French law to be used in legal business between natives of New France.

However, French Canadians continued to protest even that, particularly by continuing to use notaries to handle their legal affairs, as it had been done under the Custom of Paris. In 1774, wary of the rebellion brewing in the Thirteen Colonies, the British sought to appease French Canadians and co-opt their support by the provisions of the Quebec Act, which reinstated French private law pertaining to property and civil rights (the Custom of Paris) by allowing "Canadians" to cite the "laws and customs of Canada". The Quebec Act thereby contributed to the survival in Canada of French civil law under the Custom of Paris while affirming the overarching influence of English common law and its hegemony in criminal matters.

The partition of the colony into Upper Canada (largely English) and Lower Canada (largely French) in the Constitutional Act 1791 ensured the constitutional survival of French civil law in Canada. Even after the adoption of the Act of Union (which affirmed that the law of each Canadian province would remain in force unless amended by a law of the United Canadas) in 1840, legislators preserved the civil law tradition in Lower Canada (then known as Canada East). Among the reforms undertaken after 1840 was the codification of laws governing private law in Canada East, which had over the years moved away from historic French customary law (the tenets of the Custom of Paris as applied in New France) to better meet the changing needs of the French Canadian population, and had also incorporated elements of English common law. The result of the project, the Civil Code of Lower Canada, came into force in 1866, and the Code of Civil Procedure followed it in 1867. The codes symbolically confirmed that Quebec belonged to a civil law tradition with roots in the Custom of Paris, and the province is unique in Canadian history in entering into Canadian Confederation with a codified private law and a system of civil law statutes.

Thus, the legacy of the Custom of Paris in New France is that its evolved successor, Quebec's modern system of civil private law, laid the foundation for Canadian bijuralism, which has been a distinct and important feature of justice in Canada since its inception.

Cécile Duflot (French pronunciation: [ se.sil dy.flo ] ; born 1 April 1975) is a French non-governmental organisation (NGO) leader and former politician. She has been a government minister, a member of the National Assembly, and political party leader.

She served as the National Secretary of the green parties (2006-2010) and Europe Ecology – The Greens (2010-2012). Following the victory of François Hollande in the 2012 presidential election, she was appointed Minister of Territorial Equality and Housing (French : Ministre de l'Egalité des Territoires et du Logement) in the Ayrault Cabinet from 2012 to 2014. Until June 2012, she was Party Secretary (i.e. leader) of Europe Ecology – The Greens, a position she held from November 2006; with Jean-Luc Bennahmias, she was the only Green leader to have served two consecutive terms. In May 2012, she announced her resignation from this role.

On 5 April 2018, she announced her departure from politics to lead Oxfam France starting on 15 June. In 2022, she was appointed to the National Consultative Ethics Committee (Comité consultatif national d'éthique) for life sciences and health.

Duflot was born in Villeneuve-Saint-Georges, Val-de-Marne, the eldest daughter of a railway unionist and a physics and chemistry teacher (who was herself also a unionist). Duflot spent her childhood and adolescence in the district of Montereau-Fault-Yonne, specifically in the Montereau-Surville district, where she attended the Lycée André-Malraux, before returning to her native town, Villeneuve-Saint-Georges, in the early 1990s. She is a town planner by profession, a graduate of the ESSEC Business School (French Business School), and holds a master's degree in geography.

Her first activist commitments were in the Jeunesse ouvrière chrétienne ("Young Christian Workers") and the Ligue pour la protection des oiseaux ("Birds' Protection League").

A divorcée, Cécile Duflot is the mother of three girls and a boy in a step-family. Also, she shared the life of Jean-Vincent Placé, a French Senator and once Secretary of State.

After joining The Greens in 2001, she stood in the municipal elections at Villeneuve-Saint-Georges that same year. She became an opposition municipal councillor in the town in June 2004.

In 2003, she joined the electoral college of the Greens; she organised the acquisition of their national headquarters. She became spokesperson for the party in January 2005. That same year on World Water Day, she swam in the Seine in Paris with three other members of the electoral college to denounce river pollution in France and to match Jacques Chirac 's promise, when he was Mayor of Paris, to swim in the Seine.

On 16 November 2006 she was elected National Secretary of the Conseil National Inter Régional, succeeding Yann Wehrling. At the age of 31, she was the youngest-ever National Secretary of the Greens.

At the end of 2006, she stood for the party's primary to nominate its presidential candidate for the 2007 French presidential election. Earning 23.29% of the vote, she came third after Dominique Voynet and Yves Cochet, and did not qualify for the second round.

In the 2007 legislative elections, she was the Green Party candidate in the third district of Val-De-Marne and gained 3.55% of the vote.

In March 2008 during the municipal elections at Villeneuve-St-Georges, she came in second place on a unified ticket of the PS, the MRC, the PRG and the Greens after socialist Laurent Dutheil. The ticket earned 24.36%.

On 6 December 2008, introducing a motion synthesizing four of the six activists' voting slips three weeks earlier, she was re-offered the post of National Secretary of the Greens with 70.99% of the votes. With Jean-Luc Benhamias, she is the only secretary to be offered a second consecutive term, Dominique Plancke having completed three terms of one year.

During her first term, she worked to establish Europe Écologie for the European Elections of 2009. She is not eligible as a candidate for this now, preferring instead to focus on her mandate as National Secretary.

In 2010, she along with Monica Frassoni, Renate Künast, and Marina Silva were named by Foreign Policy magazine to its list of top global thinkers, for taking Green mainstream.

In August 2014, she voiced criticisms of the French government, particularly of President François Hollande, stating that, "...wanting to be a leftist president, he never found his social base nor his supporters. This is not a question of temperament, rather it is the result of a succession of often unexpected choices, which are sometimes inconsistent with each other."

She is a member of the Advisory Panel of DiEM25.

The position of Minister of Housing was offered to her in the Ayrault government of the Hollande presidency, which began in May 2012. One of her tasks was to promulgate a law on social housing. Her first effort, announced 11 September of that year, failed in October, causing embarrassment to the Prime Minister. The loi Duflot replaced the fr:Loi Scellier on 18 January 2013.

The loi Alur (Accès au logement et urbanisme rénové) restricted landlord-tenant relations in exchange for favourable financial treatment. It passed on 20 February 2014.

In June 2017 she was for the Green Party a candidate for Parliament. She was eliminated in the first round.

Since June 2018 she is the executive director of the NGO Oxfam France, member of the confederation Oxfam International.

She is a member of the board of Paris 1 Pantheon Sorbonne University for 2020-2024.

On 22 April 2022, she was appointed by decree to the National Consultative Ethics Committee for Life Sciences and Health on the proposal of the Defender of Rights

The French political system allows one person to hold multiple political offices. The electoral promise of François Hollande to terminate what is known as Dual mandate has not, as of March 2014, been fulfilled.

Céline Marthe Ratsiraka (née Velonjara ; 30 January 1938 – 22 August 2025) was a Malagasy politician, political figure and wife of former President Didier Ratsiraka. She was the longest tenured First Lady of Madagascar in the country's history, having held the position from 1975 to 1993 and from 1997 until 2002. She was an influential figure within the ruling Association for the Rebirth of Madagascar (AREMA) from the 1970s to the 1990s, especially within the party's left-wing.

Ratsiraka was born on 30 January 1938. She was the daughter of Pascal Velonjara, a parliamentarian during the French colonial period and founder of the Parti des déshérités de Madagascar (PADESM).

In 1964, she married Didier Ratsiraka, at the time a young naval officer, at a Catholic ceremony presided over by Father Armand Gaëtan Razafindratandra. The couple had four children: three daughters—Olga, Sophie, Annick—and one son, Xavier.

Didier Ratsiraka took power in 1975 as President of the Supreme Revolutionary Council. During the rule of her husband from 1975 until 1993, Céline Ratsiraka became an influential figure in Malagasy politics and the regime's AREMA party as first lady and wife of the president. Céline Ratsiraka and her sister, Hortense Raveloson Mahasampo, led the left wing of the AREMA party, which acted as a counterbalance to figures within the party's right flank, such as Pascal Rakotomavo and Rakotovao Razakaboana. Ratsiraka and her sister also organized and led the party's women's wing, known as AREMA Women. Additionally, Céline Ratsiraka also headed AREMA's cooperative movement, including an investment bureau called the PROCOOP.

Didier and Céline Ratsiraka went into exile in France in July 2002, ending a seven month political crisis following the disputed 2001 presidential election between Ratsiraka and the eventual winner, Marc Ravalomanana.

In April 2013, the Ratsirakas returned to Madagascar after living in exile in France for eleven years so her husband could contest the 2013 presidential election. Didier Ratsiraka was removed from the race by the electoral court in August 2013 for missing the six-month residency deadline.

On 22 March 2021, both Céline Ratsiraka and her husband were admitted to Soavinandriana Military Hospital (CENHOSOA) in Antananarivo, for treatment of a "small flu", according to their relatives. Didier Ratsiraka died at the hospital from cardiac arrest several days later on 28 March 2021, at the age of 84. Céline Ratsiraka died on 22 August 2025, at the age of 87.

The Dame du Palais (French pronunciation: [ dam dy palɛ ], lit. ' Lady of the Palace '), originally only Dame, was a historical office in the royal court of France. It was a title of a lady-in-waiting holding the official position of personal attendant on a female member of the French royal family. The position was traditionally held by a female member of a noble family. They were ranked between the dame d'atours and the Fille d'honneur. They had previously been styled 'Dames'.

The equivalent title and office has historically been used in most European royal courts (Dutch: Dames du Palais ; English: Lady of the Bedchamber ; German: Hofstaatsdame or Palatsdame ; Italian: Dame di Corte ; Russian: Hofdame or Statsdame ; Spanish: Dueña de honor ; Swedish: Statsfru). The same title has been used for the equivalent position in the courts of Belgium, Greece and the Netherlands.

Initially, the married ladies-in-waiting who attended the queen of France had the title Dame. This was simply the title of a married lady-in-waiting, who was not the principal lady-in-waiting.

From 1523, the group of 'Dame', (married) ladies-in-waiting who attended the court as companions of the queen had the formal title Dame d'honneur ('Lady of Honour', commonly only 'Dame'), hence the title ' Première dame d'honneur ' ('First lady of honour') to distinguish between the principal lady-in-waiting and the group of remaining common (married) ladies-in-waiting. They were third in rank below the Dame d'atours, and above the unmarried Fille d'honneur (' maid of honour ').

In 1674, the position of Fille d'honneur was abolished, and the 'Dames' were renamed Dame du Palais.

The Dame du Palais were appointed from the highest ranked nobility of France. Only married women were selected. Their task was function as companions to the queen and attend functions as a part of her entourage. The number were in 1674 set at twelve.

The position was abolished with the introduction of the Republic in 1792. It was revived during the First Empire, with the same original position as the title of a married lady-in-waiting below the 'Première dame d'honneur'. It was last used during the Second Empire.

This is an incomplete list of those who have served as Dame du Palais to the Queen or Empress of France. They also include those prior to 1674, who had the title Dame (formally Dame d'honneur), because it was the same position under different names. The office was normally shared between twelve women, who served in parallel. If additional Dame du Palais was appointed above the number twelve, they were normally named Dame du palais surnuméraire.

Mary Stuart is recorded to have a household of 290 people, 44 of whom were women, 27 of whom had the status of ladies-in-waiting; all French but two and appointed because they were her relatives or had succeeded from the household of her predecessor. Mary Stuart left France for Scotland in 1561, after which almost all of her ladies-in-waiting chose to remain in France.

The Dame (-d'honneur) were renamed Dame du Palais in January 1674.

Many of the Dame du Palais of Marie Leszczyńska were transferred to the court of Marie Antoinette in 1770 with the title Dame pour accompanger, and became Dame du Palais again when Marie Antoinette became queen in 1774.

Many of the Dame du Palais of Marie Antoinette were transferred to her from the former court of Marie Leszczyńska in 1770. They had the title Dame pour accompanger when Marie Antoinette was Dauphine, and became Dame du Palais again when Marie Antoinette became queen in 1774.

Damien Abad (French pronunciation: [ damjɛ̃ abad ] ; born 5 April 1980) is a French politician who briefly served as Minister of Solidarity in the government of Prime Minister Élisabeth Borne in 2022.

Abad previously served as Member of the National Assembly for Ain's 5th constituency from 2012 to 2024, where he was the president of The Republicans group from 2019 to 2022.

As part of the Union for French Democracy, New Centre and then the Union for a Popular Movement, which was later renamed The Republicans, Abad also served as municipal councilor of Vauvert from 2008 to 2010, Member of the European Parliament for South-East France from 2009 to 2012, regional councilor of Rhône-Alpes from 2010 to 2015 and president of the departmental council of Ain from 2015 to 2017.

Abad's parents live in Aubord in the department of Gard. His father works as a purchasing manager in a large company and comes from a family that had fled Francoist Spain, while his mother is a social worker and gymnastics teacher.

In secondary school, Abad attended the Vallée Verte college and the Lycée Alphonse-Daudet before beginning his university education at Sciences Po Bordeaux. He graduated from Sciences Po in Paris in 2004 and then became a lecturer for the school.

Abad has arthrogryposis, a rare disease and physical disability. Many media outlets consider him the first member of the National Assembly to be disabled.

In 2006, Abad was put in charge of budgetary and fiscal studies in the Union for French Democracy (UDF) group and then the New Centre group in the National Assembly. He was a candidate for Yvelines' 5th constituency in the 2007 French legislative elections, where he won 3.17% of the vote. In 2008, Abad founded the Young Centrists movement, which was affiliated with the New Centre, and was virtually unanimously elected its first president in May. He left this position to become joint General Secretary of New Centre in 2010.

In 2008, Abad was elected to the municipal council of Vauvert on the list of mayor Gérard Gayaud. He then resigned after winning a seat on the regional council of Rhône-Alpes, where he sat on the Employment, Economy, Social and Solidarity Economy, and Social Innovation Committee as well as the Sports and Youth Committee.

In the 2009 European elections, Abad was elected Member of the European Parliament on the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) list in the South-East France constituency, with the UMP having formed an alliance with New Centre for the elections. At the age of 29, Abad became the youngest French MEP, the youngest French parliamentarian in office and one of the youngest elected members of the European Parliament. During his time in parliament, he frequently spoke about economic issues, especially in terms of industrial policy, social services and consumer protection. He also founded the youth intergroup and served on the Committee on Budgets (2009–2012) and on the Committee on International Trade (2012). In addition to his committee assignments, he was part of the parliament's Delegation for relations with the Palestinian Legislative Council. Abad's MEP office was located in Bourg-en-Bresse.

On 2 April 2015, Abad was elected as the President of the departmental council of Ain. Due to the limitation of the plurality of the mandates, he resigned from his position on 10 July 2017.

In the 2012 French legislative elections, Abad ran to represent Ain's 5th constituency as a member of the Union for a Popular Movement. He was elected with 28.79% of the vote in the first round and 56% in the second round against Socialist candidate Josiane Exposito. During that year's election of the President of the National Assembly, Abad was chosen as secretary of the session as one of the six youngest members.

Abad was reelected to the National Assembly in the 2017 French legislative elections. He subsequently stood as a candidate for the presidency of The Republicans group in the Assembly against Christian Jacob, who won with 62 votes against Abad's 32. Abad was then appointed as the group's first vice-president, serving from 2017 to 2019.

Abad serves on the National Defence and Armed Forces Committee, the European Affairs Committee and the Working Group on the Legislative Procedure, Parliamentary Organization and the Rights of the Opposition. He is also vice-president of the France - China Friendship Group.

In addition to his work in parliament, Abad has served as member of the French delegation to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe from 2014 until 2017 and since 2017. In this capacity, he is a member of the Committee on Social Affairs, Health and Sustainable Development.

In The Republicans' 2016 presidential primaries, Abad endorsed Bruno Le Maire as the party's candidate for President of France. In the party's 2017 leadership election, he endorsed Laurent Wauquiez.

Following Christian Jacob's election as president of The Republicans, Abad again ran for the leadership of the party's parliamentary group in November 2019. He won by 64 votes over Olivier Marleix, who received 37 votes. The news website Contexte commented that the result represented an end to the "old divisions between " Sarkozystes," " Fillonistes " and " Juppéistes,"" with Abad being able to present "a profile that reassures members of the National Assembly of the old generation without cutting off those who were newly elected in 2017, who form half of the party's parliamentary group." It also noted Abad's "positioning as an independent man" who "owes nothing to Christian Jacob," while Marleix had suffered from a report in Le Canard enchaîné portraying him as the previous leader's handpicked candidate.

At The Republicans' national convention in December 2021, Abad was part of the 11-member committee which oversaw the party's selection of its candidate for the 2022 presidential elections. He himself endorsed Xavier Bertrand for Republican nominee.

He was reelected in the 2022 election. In the 2024 election, he came third in the first round, and lost his seat.

In July 2019, Abad voted against the French ratification of the European Union 's Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) with Canada.

In a joint letter initiated by Norbert Röttgen and Anthony Gonzalez ahead of the 47th G7 summit in 2021, Abad joined some 70 legislators from Europe and the US in calling upon their leaders to take a tough stance on China and to "avoid becoming dependent" on the country for technology including artificial intelligence and 5G.

According to an investigation published by Mediapart on May 21, 2022, Abad has been implicated by two women, unrelated to each other, for acts of rape which they believe occurred in 2010 and 2011. A report was sent on May 16 to those responsible for the two parties Les Républicains and Renaissance by the Observatory of sexist and sexual violence in politics. Prime Minister Élisabeth Borne assured that she discovered the existence of the report in Mediapart. On May 20, Christophe Castaner denied having received the report. The Paris prosecutor's office confirmed the existence of two complaints filed by the same complainant and dismissed in 2012 and 2017.

In a letter also published by Mediapart, Abad rejected the accusations and "strongly affirms that the sexual relations that [he has] been able to have always been based on the principle of mutual consent". He affirmed that his handicap makes impossible a certain number of the acts which are reproached to him, the presumed victims affirming for their part that he uses his handicap to make them feel guilty.

In June 2022, the Paris prosecution office opened an investigation into Abad, on suspicion of attempted rape.

Damien Saez (French pronunciation: [ damjɛ̃ sɛz ] ; born 1 August 1977) or just Saez, is a French singer-songwriter and musician.

Damien Saez was born in Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne, Savoie, on 1 August 1977, where he lived until the age of three or four years before his family moved to Marseille. Saez spent most of his childhood in Marseille until he moved to Dijon when he was about eight years old, where he was raised by his Algerian mother, after she divorced her Andalusian husband. Later, she met a director of documentaries who worked for the French channel 'France 3' and gave birth to Damien's two younger brothers.

At the age of eight, Saez started taking piano lessons with Boris Nedeltchev at the Conservatoire National de Région de Dijon and graduated nine years later. He then took an interest in playing the guitar. His career as a singer began in 1995 when he let his interest in writing come out. He stopped playing in bands that sang covers of more famous bands like Pink Floyd. He wanted to work on his own songs that he had written and try to attract a new audience.

In 1999, a record company became interested in his compositions, and he signed a record contract with Island and began to record his first album Jours étranges ("Strange Days", a tribute to the album of the same name by The Doors) which went double platinum. His first single Jeune et con was broadcast on many radio stations and reached the general public, which earned him a nomination for the Newcomer of the Year award at the Victoires de la Musique in 2001.

In December 2001 his first poetry collection was published entitled À ton nom. In March 2002, he released his second album God Blesse/Katagena. In the meantime he released a piece of instrumental work called Katagena. It was available online via non-official web-sites and downloadable free of charge.

Brian De Palma contacted him and asked him to contribute to the original soundtrack of the movie Femme Fatale that was released in April 2003. The song that was chosen, Sexe, caused a lot of commotion due to its vulgar lyrics. Many radio stations refused to broadcast it, and the music video was banned from television.

On 22 April 2002, the day after the first round of presidential elections, he wrote the song Fils de France online, which was meant to be against French right-wing politician Jean-Marie Le Pen who qualified for the second ballot. The song was written and recorded in about 10 hours, then made available for free on the website of Universal Music.

His third album, Debbie, was released in 2004 with a more rock style than his previous albums.

In 2005 Saez quit Universal Music and went on the Damien Saez: Piano and Voice Tour. His musical style underwent a profound transformation from alternative rock to acoustic ballads, as his singing was accompanied only by three guitars and a piano.

At the end of 2006 and the beginning of 2007, Saez released four new songs in English (Killing the Lambs, Numb, Jessie and Yellow Tricycle) for free on his MySpace page. He performed all of them, except for Jessie, at five acoustic concerts in Paris and Lyon, in June and July 2007, respectively.

On 8 December 2007, Saez released Jeunesse, leve-toi, a song that was written in March during the presidential elections. The song became the first track and also the first single from his next album, Varsovie, Alhambra, Paris. Edited by the independent quality-label Cinq7, it was released on 21 April 2008 as a triple album (Paris was also sold separately), consisting of 29 acoustic songs. The album mainly deals with Saez's breakup with his Polish girlfriend, Katarzyna. The first two discs, Warsaw and Alhambra, bear a similar sound and were meant to pay homage to Jacques Brel, Léo Ferré, Barbara, Georges Brassens and other classic French songwriters. The third disc, Paris, has a richer and more diverse sound and, despite little advertising, was certified gold.

In June and July 2008, accompanied for the first time by a string trio (violin, viola and violoncello), Saez launched, as part of various festivals, a new acoustic tour which was very short-lived: emotionally exhausted by the intimate nature of his songs, Saez decided to cancel his big summer tour and dedicated himself to writing new material.

On 23 January 2009 Saez launched a new website, dedicated entirely to his new project, consisting of songs written entirely in English. The songs available for free download were "Killing the Lambs", "Numb" and "Yellow Tricycle", which had been released on his MySpace page two years earlier, with the addition of a new song called "White Noise". Their dark rock sound was very different from his previous acoustic album, and marked Saez's return to rock music.

In February 2009 Saez was nominated in the category "Pop-rock Album of the Year" at Victoires de la Musique, where he performed an unpublished song called "Embrassons-nous", which he performed without any rehearsals.

His fifth album, A Lovers Prayer, was released on 16 March 2009 under the pseudonym Yellow Tricycle. The 12 tracks on the album were written entirely in English and Saez's name did not appear anywhere on the cover. It received little advertising and was not backed up by a live tour.

At the end of 2009 Saez released a new track, Police, followed in February 2010 by " J'accuse " as a preview of his next rock album, bearing the same name. When the album J'accuse was released, it ranked 3rd in the charts, with 21,229 copies sold in the first week. J'accuse also sparked a controversy and a media debate when the posters with the cover of the album (depicting a nude woman in a shopping cart) were banned from the Paris subway.

In September 2012, Saez released the album Messina, a triple album with the separate titles Les Échoués (CD1), Sur les quais (CD2) and Messine (CD3).

In March 2013, Saez released Miami. This rock album includes 10 tracks, including the lead title "Miami". The song deals with addiction and mixes religion, drugs and fascism on a dance music.

An 8-minute video posted on the website www.culturecontreculture.fr, replacing the official website "saez.mu", is published on the evening of 16 June 2016 revealing a vast artistic project entitled "Le Manifeste". In this video Saez announces a long one-year journey, from 31 July 2016 to 31 July 2017, during which songs, photos and texts recounting the journey will be published from city to city over the days, in the image of a notebook combining music, poetry and all forms of art. He describes this art as "Nouvel Art". He presents Mélancolie in this short film: a sad clown, a mime dressed in black "populating the earth with flowers".

"Le Manifeste" begins on 31 July 2016. This trip will take place to the day from the first to the last day of his 40th year.

The first album of the Manifesto is entitled L'oiseau liberté, released in December 2016. This is a short album of 7 songs and a second album of 3 tracks. Two of them will be present on the next album. The second album, Lulu, released on 10 March 2017, is a triple 29-track album. Two excerpts from the album are published free of charge on 22 February for those who participated in the manifesto project. These are Bonnie and Rue d'la soif as well as Château de brume, a new piece. On 24 February, Saez announced via requiem the release of a third album entitled Le Dernier Disque for the fall of 2017, the eleventh album in the artist's discography.

On the eve of 1 May, Damien Saez releases a new song for free download on his website culturecontreculture.fr entitled Premier Mai, in which he denounces both the presence of the far right in the second round of the 2017 presidential election and that of the "banker" Emmanuel Macron.

During the discovery of the Manifesto, videos are shown throughout the tour. First concert first paintings, second concert second paintings, etc. The videos are unveiled at the same time in several places.

as Yellow Tricycle (pseudonym used by Damien Saez)

Danone (French pronunciation: [ danɔn ]) is a French multinational food-products corporation based in Paris. It was founded in 1919 in Barcelona, Spain. It is listed on Euronext Paris, where it is a component of the CAC 40 stock market index. In 2020, Danone became the first listed company to adopt the status of société à mission, as introduced by France's PACTE law of 2019.

Danone was formed through the 1973 merger of two French groups: Gervais Danone and Boussois-Souchon-Neuvesel (BSN). Gervais Danone itself resulted from the 1967 merger of Danone—founded by Isaac Carasso in Barcelona, Spain, in 1919—and Gervais. BSN was created in 1966 through the merger of the glass manufacturer Boussois and the glassworks company Souchon-Neuvesel. In 1994, the group adopted the name of its flagship fresh dairy brand, Danone. Under the leadership of Antoine Riboud, the company had become France's largest food manufacturer and the third-largest food group in Europe.

Over time the company organized its activities around three main business segments: fresh dairy and plant-based products, bottled water, and specialized nutrition, including medical and infant nutrition. Present in more than 120 markets in 2025, Danone reported sales of €27.283 billion, making it the world's tenth-largest food company. The group employs approximately 90,000 people worldwide across more than 180 production sites.

In 2025 dairy and plant-based products represented 48% of total group sales; specialized nutrition (medical and infant), 34%; and water, 18%. Danone is the 4th largest dairy processing company globally, behind Nestlé, Dairy Farmers of America, and Lactalis.

At the end of World War I in Europe, many children suffered from intestinal disorders linked to poor hygiene conditions. Isaac Carasso, a merchant, took an interest in the research of Élie Metchnikoff, a researcher at the Pasteur Institute and Nobel laureate in 1908. This research focused on the benefits of yoghurts and lactic ferments on health, highlighting in particular their use in treating intestinal disorders. Isaac Carasso was already familiar with the virtues of : in Thessaloniki, where he was from, the product was widely available and sold in the streets by the kilogram. He decided to introduce it in Spain, incorporating lactic cultures on the advice of doctors. The Pasteur Institute supplied the cultures.

In 1919 in a small workshop in Barcelona, Isaac Carasso launched yoghurt production. The yoghurts were made with fresh milk and delivered the following day. The brand was initially called "Danon", after the Catalan nickname of his son "petit Daniel". However, a proper name could not serve as a trade name under Spanish law. The founder added an "e" to register the brand, which became "Danone". In 1923, the Barcelona College of Physicians officially recognized the properties of yoghurt. The pots were sold in pharmacies on doctors' recommendations, and later in dairy shops.

After commercial studies in Marseille and a bacteriology placement at the Institut Pasteur, Daniel Carasso, then aged 20, launched the brand in France in 1929 by founding the Société Parisienne du yoghourt Danone. The first factory opened in 1932 in Levallois-Perret. The company progressively developed its distribution network in the Paris region, contributing to the spread of yoghurt into everyday consumption. The product range expanded rapidly. In 1937, Dany, the first fruit yoghurt, was launched. Fruit-flavored yoghurts were commercialized in 1953, smooth-style yoghurts in 1963, and gelled varieties in 1966.

In 1942 the occupation of France forced Daniel Carasso to take refuge in the United States. He continued developing the brand, acquired a yoghurt manufacturer, and launched Dannon Milk Products. On the advice of French publicist Raymond Loewy, the brand's spelling was Americanized to avoid mispronunciation. Dannon Inc. was incorporated in the United States.

Back in France, Daniel Carasso sold his American company to Beatrice Foods (it would be repurchased by Danone France in 1981) and sought to strengthen Danone. The company merged in 1967 with Fromageries Gervais [ fr ] to form Gervais-Danone.

In the early 1970s Gervais-Danone acquired numerous pasta and canned food brands: Milliat Frères, Panzani, Garbit, Petitjean, and Lhuissier, thereby becoming the leading pasta producer in France.

At the same time Boussois-Souchon-Neuvesel (BSN), initially present in the packaging market, saw its attempted takeover of glassmaker Saint-Gobain fail. Its chairman Antoine Riboud decided to reorient the company's strategy by diversifying into the food industry, with the objective of moving from packaging production to food products. BSN took control of the Évian and Badoit bottled mineral water brands, Blédina, and the Kanterbräu and Kronenbourg breweries, becoming a major player in the beer, mineral water, and infant nutrition sectors.

In 1973 BSN merged with Gervais Danone. The new entity was named BSN-Gervais-Danone. The group's main activities at that point were fresh products, beverages, pasta, and prepared meals. Antoine Riboud, who initiated the operation, took over its leadership.

In 1978 BSN-Gervais Danone acquired the Belgian brewery Alken. The following year, in the wake of the oil crisis, the company divested its flat glass activities and refocused on food. The group expanded and extended its activities across Europe. In 1980, it acquired the food branch of Générale Occidentale, specializing in grocery and confectionery, and owner of numerous brands including Carambar, Liebig, Vandamme, La Pie qui Chante, and Maille. BSN-Gervais Danone became France's leading food company.

In 1983 the group dropped the BSN-Gervais Danone name and simplified it to BSN. Despite this change, the fresh dairy products inherited from Gervais Danone remained a core activity.

In 1987 BSN entered the biscuit market by acquiring Générale Biscuit, owner of the LU brand and present in several European countries. Two years later, the group acquired several European subsidiaries of the American company Nabisco, including Belin. It thereby became the leading biscuit producer in Europe and one of the principal global players. The group's turnover at that time stood at 48.7 billion francs.

In 1993 BSN acquired Vivagel and combined its food activities with those of the Saint-Louis group (Marie, William Saurin, La Belle Chaurienne) within a joint subsidiary named Panzalim. Following Saint-Louis's withdrawal in 1996, BSN recovered its full portfolio of brands.

As its international presence grew, the BSN name remained little-known to the general public – particularly as it was already used by a bank in Spain, a textile company in the United States, and a television channel in Japan. In a context of globalization, the group chose to leverage its most visible brand, Danone, which alone accounted for a quarter of turnover. In 1994, BSN changed its name to "Groupe Danone", represented by "the child with a star". The company at that point owned nearly 300 brands.

Franck Riboud, CEO of Danone from 1996 to 2014, chairman of the board of directors from 2014 to 2017, and honorary chairman since 2017.

In 1996 Antoine Riboud, chairman of the Danone group, retired at the age of 77 and stepped down from his position. His son Franck succeeded him. This year marked the beginning of a period of refocusing for the company around health and healthy eating, and an acceleration of its international development.

Following several acquisitions in emerging markets, the Danone group acquired 51% of Hangzhou Wahaha Group, the leading non-alcoholic beverage producer in China. Zong Qinghou, the company's founder, became chairman of Danone-Wahaha, which held nearly 39 joint ventures. All products were marketed under the Wahaha brand. Through this partnership, the Danone group generated three-quarters of its Chinese activity and 10% of its global sales.

In the years that followed, the company divested more than half of its grocery activities and all of its confectionery: Panzani, Amora Maille, and William Saurin were sold to Paribas Affaires Industrielles ; Marie to Uniq plc ; Liebig to Campbell's ; and La Pie qui Chante, Carambar, and Vandamme to Cadbury.

At the same time the company accelerated its internationalization strategy in emerging markets and listed on the New York Stock Exchange in 1998. That same year, the group was the official supplier of dairy products at the FIFA World Cup. Three brands were highlighted: Danone, Évian, and LU. In 1999, the group divested its packaging and beer operations, including the sale of Kronenbourg and Alken-Maes breweries to Scottish & Newcastle in 2000. That same year, Danone chose to establish a research and development center in Palaiseau, in the Paris-Saclay scientific and technology cluster.

In the years that followed, Danone continued its development in emerging markets, notably in Latin America (Uruguay, Chile), Asia (China, Malaysia, Singapore, South Korea, and Vietnam), North Africa (Morocco, Algeria, Egypt), and the Middle East (Israel, Saudi Arabia), as well as in North America with the acquisition of Stonyfield Farm, a global leader in organic yoghurt.

On 10 January 2001 the newspaper Le Monde revealed the forthcoming closure of two LU factories. On 29 March, Danone announced the reorganization of its biscuit operations in Europe, aimed at rationalizing industrial capacity. The plan provided in particular for the closure of two LU factories in France, in Calais and Ris-Orangis, as well as the elimination of 1,780 jobs across Europe, including 570 in France. This decision provoked significant social and political mobilization in France, even as the company was profitable. Strikes, demonstrations, and calls to boycott Danone products were organized, relayed by certain elected officials, trade unions, and associations. The movement attracted considerable public attention, though it also generated divisions. The affair gave rise to a notable media controversy in spring 2001, affecting the group's image. It was also accompanied by legal proceedings related to the creation of critical websites against Danone: after an initial conviction, a court of appeal reaffirmed in 2003 the primacy of freedom of expression in this context.

Antoine Riboud died on 5 May 2002, aged 83.

In July 2005 a rumor spread about a possible hostile takeover of Danone by PepsiCo. The story, broken by Challenges magazine, claimed that PepsiCo had acquired 3% of Danone's capital. Politicians from both left and right, as well as trade unions, rallied to defend the Danone group, describing it as "an industrial jewel". Pepsi denied any such intention, but the affair caused a significant stir, and the French government announced it would do everything possible to protect the Danone group. The Financial Markets Authority (AMF) announced that PepsiCo had certified on 24 July that it was not preparing a bid for the group.

At the same time Danone found that alongside the 39 joint-venture structures, some sixty factories and distribution companies were producing and selling beverages illegally under the Wahaha brand. The French group accused its Chinese partner of failing to respect the non-compete clauses. It then attempted to take control of these subsidiaries, but was rebuffed by Zong Qinghou, who denounced the intrusion of foreign companies in China. Wahaha alleged that the French company was aware of the situation and accused it of seeking too large a share in the joint ventures. Danone entered into negotiations and then took the matter to court in 2007. French President Nicolas Sarkozy even raised the case with Chinese President Hu Jintao during an official visit. In 2009, an amicable agreement was reached between the two parties. The Danone group exited the joint venture and sold its shares to its former partner. Following this separation, Danone left the non-alcoholic beverage market in China.

In 2006 Franck Riboud refocused Danone's activities on its three most promising businesses: fresh dairy products, bottled mineral water, and biscuits. These three sectors alone represented 85% of sales.

In 2007 Danone refocused once again and divested its biscuit activity — which included the Tuc, Belin, and LU brands – selling it to Kraft (subsequently renamed Mondelēz International). 7 July marked the end of the cooperation between Eden and Danone around the Château d'eau business.

Having divested all of the LU assets, the group launched a takeover bid for the Dutch company Numico on 8 July.

Danone thus acquired one of the global leaders in infant nutrition and medical nutrition. The transaction was completed for €12.3 billion. On 29 October, the Danone board of directors approved the sale of its Biscuits and cereal products division to Kraft Foods for €6.3 billion. From that point on, the company organized itself around four activities: fresh dairy products, water, infant nutrition, and medical nutrition.

Daniel Carasso, then honorary chairman of the company, died on 17 May 2009 at the age of 103.

On 18 June 2010 Danone partnered with Unimilk, one of Russia's leading milk producers. Together, they merged their fresh dairy product activities in Russia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, and Belarus. This joint venture gave rise to the number one dairy products company in that region. Russia became the fifth most important market for the French company.

In 2010 the group also acquired Immédia, the third-largest smoothie producer in France, as well as the American company Medical Nutrition. With its $16 million in turnover, Medical Nutrition joined Danone's nutrition division, which that same year generated $70 million in North America. The objective was to strengthen Danone's position in health products and medical nutrition in particular, a fast-growing market. In April 2012, Danone was a candidate to acquire Pfizer's infant nutrition business, but that activity was ultimately sold to Nestlé. Like medical nutrition, infant nutrition was growing strongly in emerging markets.

In 2011 the share of sales achieved in emerging markets crossed a milestone, reaching 51%.

In June 2012 the group announced that it was raising its stake in Centrale Laitière, the Moroccan leader in dairy products – with whom Danone had worked since 1953 – to 67%.

In October 2012 Danone partnered with the Abraaj investment fund to acquire 49% of Fan Milk, a company that manufactures and distributes frozen dairy products and juices in Ghana, Nigeria, Togo, Burkina Faso, Benin, and Ivory Coast.

On 18 July 2014 Danone announced the acquisition of 40% of the capital of the Kenyan group Brookside, the leading dairy products group in East Africa.

On 20 May 2013 Danone announced a 4.0% strategic stake in Mengniu, the number one dairy products company in China, through an agreement with COFCO (China's leading state-owned food company and principal shareholder of Mengniu). In February 2014, Danone announced that it had raised its stake in Mengniu from 4.0% to 9.9%, for €486 million. Danone became the company's second largest shareholder. In parallel, in May 2013, a joint venture was created between Danone and Mengniu to develop the fresh dairy product category.

In August 2013 a false alert regarding the toxicity of ingredients in infant milks sold in Asia created a climate of panic.

In February 2014 Danone mandated investment bank JP Morgan with a view to divesting its medical nutrition division, valued at approximately €3 billion, before reaffirming its four core businesses (Fresh Dairy Products, Water, Infant Nutrition, and Medical Nutrition) in December 2014.

On 1 October 2014 Franck Riboud handed over the general management of the company to Emmanuel Faber.

On 31 October 2014 Danone, Mengniu, and Yashili announced that they had signed an agreement under which Danone participated in a reserved capital increase of the Chinese company Yashili for an amount of €437 million. Danone then held 25.0% of Yashili's capital.

In November 2015 Danone announced that it had concluded a definitive agreement with the Chinese group Yashili and its parent company Mengniu for the sale of the Dumex infant nutrition brand, for a price of €150 million. Dumex's sales in China had been significantly below their early 2013 levels, and the brand had been subject to a value write-down of €398 million.

In June 2016 Danone announced the acquisition of a 40% stake in Michel et Augustin. In July 2016, Danone announced the acquisition of WhiteWave Foods for $12.5 billion including assumed debt. This American company, specializing in organic dairy products and plant-based products, owns the Horizon Organic, Silk, and Earthbound Farm brands. In April 2017, to obtain competition authority clearance for the WhiteWave acquisition, Danone announced the sale of Stonyfield. In July 2017, Danone sold Stonyfield to Lactalis for $875 million (€768 million), to comply with requirements from US competition authorities.

In February 2018 Danone sold a 14% stake in Yakult for €1.5 billion, retaining only a 7% interest.

In April 2019 Danone announced the sale of Earthbound Farm, an American brand specializing in organic salads, to Taylor Farms.

In October 2020 Danone announced the sale of its residual 6.6% stake in Yakult Honsha for approximately €500 million, while retaining its joint ventures and partnership with the company.

In November 2020 management announced, as part of its Local First plan, the elimination of 1,500 to 2,000 positions, including nearly 500 in France, to increase profitability and achieve €1 billion in savings by 2023. This prompted sharp criticism as the group simultaneously announced that it was highly profitable and had just returned €1.4 billion to shareholders.

In late January 2021 the arrival of investment fund Bluebell Capital as a shareholder of Danone called into question the presence of Emmanuel Faber at the head of Danone. In a letter sent to all shareholders in November 2020, Bluebell Capital deplored the "disappointing" stock market performance and argued that under Emmanuel Faber's chairmanship, "the right balance between shareholder value creation and sustainability issues" had not been respected.

In February 2021 Danone announced the acquisition of Earth Island, an American company specializing in plant-based products.

On 1 March 2021 the decision to once again separate the roles of chairman and chief executive was taken by the group's board of directors following pressure from Bluebell Capital and Artisan Partners. Both funds called on 3 March 2021 for Faber's removal from the chairmanship.

In March 2021 Emmanuel Faber was dismissed from his position, with shareholders considering that the company was becoming less profitable due to its corporate social and environmental responsibility policy.

In early April 2021 Danone's reorganization plan was launched: it provided for the elimination of 1,850 positions worldwide, including 458 in France. A few weeks later, the general meeting approved the payment of a dividend of €1.94 per share for 2020 results, representing a total of €1.3 billion returned to shareholders. By end of June 2021, the full scope of the redundancy plan was revealed: 1,200 positions were eliminated, notably among senior management, managers, sales staff, and assistants. In parallel, 770 positions were to be created.

In September 2021 Antoine de Saint-Affrique was officially appointed chief executive officer of Danone. This appointment came a few months after that of Gilles Schnepp as chairman of the board of directors. This governance change came in the context of performance deemed insufficient by a portion of shareholders and financial markets.

In March 2022 de Saint-Affrique presented his Renew Danone plan, which he intended to enable the company to return to profitable and sustainable growth. The plan rested notably on more active portfolio management, stronger financial discipline, and a refocusing on categories identified as priorities, particularly specialized nutrition, health, and certain high-value-added proteins. This strategic direction translated into several asset reallocation decisions during the year. In May in particular, Danone announced the end of its partnership with the Chinese group Mengniu, while recovering control of the Dumex Baby Food infant nutrition brand.

During the same period the group temporarily increased its deliveries of infant formula to the United States to address a national shortage, at the request of US authorities.

In February 2023 Danone inaugurated a new international research and innovation center on the Paris-Saclay plateau at a cost of €100 million. The construction of the site was part of a property and industrial project aimed at consolidating research and development activities previously spread across multiple sites.

Alongside its restructuring, the group faced major geopolitical developments. In October 2022, Danone announced its intention to disengage from Russia, where it employed more than 7,000 people, following Russia's invasion of Ukraine in 2022 and the associated sanctions. In July 2023, the Russian state took control of Danone's assets in the country, leading the group to deconsolidate these activities, which represented approximately 5% of its global turnover. In March 2024, these activities were ultimately sold to a close associate of Ramzan Kadyrov for the equivalent of €177 million. Asset write-downs related to this disposal are estimated at more than €1 billion.

Still a priority for the group, portfolio rotation accelerated in early 2024 with the announcement of the disposal of its organic dairy product activities in the United States, comprising the Horizon Organic and Wallaby brands, to the American investment firm Platinum Equity. These activities represented approximately 3% of the group's turnover. The sales of these brands was presented in the financial press as a concrete application of the Renew strategic plan, aimed at concentrating investments on segments considered more promising in terms of growth and profitability, while focusing more squarely on health and medical nutrition. In February 2024, Danone announced an investment of €43 million in the refitting of its factory in the Gers, at Villecomtal-sur-Arros, now dedicated to the production of plant-based proteins.

In June the group declared its intention to focus further on health and medical nutrition to increase its sales. This direction translated into several targeted acquisitions. In May 2025, Danone announced the acquisition of a majority stake in the American company Kate Farms, specializing in medical nutrition, for an undisclosed amount. On 25 June 2025, the group also acquired the Belgian company The Akkermansia Company, specializing in research on biotics and gut microbiota.

In March 2026 Danone announced the signing of an agreement to acquire the British company Huel, specializing in ready-to-consume meal solutions and nutritionally balanced products, marketed primarily through direct-to-consumer online sales. This acquisition is part of the group's continued recentering toward functional nutrition and health-related consumption segments. In August 2026, the deal was cleared by the Competition and Markets Authority.

From 1966 to 2014, Danone was led by a single chairman and chief executive officer:

On 1 September 2014, Danone's governance evolved with the separation of the chairman and chief executive roles and the establishment of a strengthened chairmanship:

In 2017, Emmanuel Faber was appointed chairman and chief executive officer, succeeding Franck Riboud, who became honorary chairman.

In March 2021 the board of directors of Danone decided once again to separate the roles of chairman and chief executive, on the proposal of Emmanuel Faber who was to retain the chairmanship but hand over the chief executive function. On 14 March, however, the board decided to remove Emmanuel Faber with immediate effect and to replace him on an interim basis by Gilles Schnepp, former chairman and chief executive officer of Legrand.

In May 2021 a report in Le Figaro announced the appointment of Antoine Bernard de Saint-Affrique to succeed Emmanuel Faber as the group's chief executive officer from September 2021.

As of 14 December 2024 the 11 members of the board of directors are as follows:

Ownership of Danone is split as follows: 43% is owned by American investors, 19% by French investors, followed by the UK (10%), Switzerland (6%), Germany (5%) and the rest of Europe (17%).

In some areas, Danone has adopted a strategy of growth through joint ventures, particularly in fast-growing emerging markets which represent over 50% of its sales.

Danone signed joint ventures with Al Safi in Saudi Arabia (2001), Yakult in India (2005) and Vietnam (2006), Alquería in Colombia (2007), and Mengniu in China (2013–2014).

Danone Murray Goulburn is a joint Saputo Dairy Australia venture with French food company Danone – to market yoghurt and other fresh dairy products in Australia. Danone-MG dairy foods are produced at Kiewa in north east Victoria and are sold throughout Australia.

In November 2005 Franck Riboud met Muhammad Yunus, founder of the Grameen Bank and later winner of the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize. The two men discussed at length their ideas on the development of poor countries and found that their areas of expertise were complementary. As a result, in 2006, the Grameen Bank and Danone formed a company called Grameen Danone Foods, a social business in Bangladesh.

Grameen Danone Foods Ltd produces a yoghurt called Shokti Doi containing protein, vitamins, iron, calcium, zinc, and other micronutrients aimed to fill nutritional deficits of children in Bangladesh. Shokti Doi is sold for six euro cents, a price that studies found to be affordable for the poorest families. Its pursuit of profitability is based solely on criteria such as improving public health, creating jobs, reducing poverty and protecting the environment. Profits earned by the company are re-invested in expanding and running the business.

Danone started its nutrition business in India in 2012 through the acquisition of the nutrition portfolio from Wockhardt Group. Danone India offers a range of specialized products across life stages that includes pregnancy, infants, young children as well as adults, under Indian and global brands like Aptamil, Neocate, Farex, Protinex, Dexolac and Nusobee. Headquartered in Mumbai. In 2018, Danone reduced its product portfolio and discontinued some dairy SKUs to bring a sharper focus on its nutrition offerings.

In March 1996 Danone signed an agreement to purchase 20 percent of the Strauss Group, Israel's second largest food manufacturer. Since the 1970s, Strauss Dairies had a series of partnership and knowledge agreements with Danone.

In 2001 Al-Safi and Danone formed a partnership.

Danone has invested in China since 1987 with the joint venture with Fengxing Milk in Guangzhou. It is one of Danone's top 5 markets.

In 2001 Danone acquired a 5% stake in Bright Dairy and, in March 2005, doubled its shareholding, and again, to 20%, in April 2006, becoming the third largest shareholder after Shanghai Milk Group and S.I. Food.

The parties announced in October 2007 that Danone would divest its stake by selling it to the other two main shareholders at a small profit. Bright Dairy said Danone would pay 330m yuan (€31m) to terminate the existing distribution and production agreement with it.

The Hangzhou Wahaha Group, the largest beverage producer in China, and Danone entered into a dairy products joint venture in 1996, in which Danone held 51%. It was hailed by Forbes magazine as a "showcase" joint venture.

Yet in 2005 Danone noted that alongside the 39 structures of the joint venture, 60 factories and distribution companies produce and sell beverages illegally under the Wahaha brand. Danone made several attempts to take a stake in the Wahaha companies external to the joint venture, but was rebuffed by Wahaha's general manager Zong Qinghou. Danone and Zong Qinghou had signed a deal in December 2006 allowing Danone to buy a majority stake in these non-JV operations. However, Zong had second thoughts about the deal and reneged, claiming the offer was underpriced and held out for a higher price from Danone.

The dispute took on the shape of a trademark dispute, and Danone filed for arbitration in Stockholm on 9 May 2007. On 4 June, Danone filed suit in Los Angeles Superior Court against Ever Maple Trading and Hangzhou Hongsheng Beverage Co Ltd, companies controlled by Zong, his wife, and daughter.

In 2009 an agreement was reached between the two parties. Danone left the Danone–Wahaha joint venture and sold its shares (51%) to its former Chinese partner.

On 20 May 2013 Danone announced a strategic investment (4.0%) in Mengniu, the top dairy products company in China, through an agreement with COFCO (the state-owned largest food company in China a majority shareholder in Mengniu). Later on, Danone raised its interest in Mengniu from 4.0% to 9.9%. In 2016, Danone is Mengniu's second shareholder.

In addition, in May 2013 a joint-venture was created between Danone and Mengniu to grow the fresh dairy product category.

On 31 October 2014 Danone, Mengniu and Yashili announced that they had signed an agreement allowing Danone to take part in a private placement by Yashili totalling €437 million, at a price of HK$3.70 per share. Upon completion of the subscription, Mengniu and Danone respectively held 51.0% and 25.0% equity interest in Yashili.

On 18 June 2010 Danone partnered with Unimilk, one of Russia's main milk producers. Danone and Unimilk merged their fresh dairy products activities in Russia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus. The joint-venture gave birth to the number one dairy products company in this region. Russia became one of the five most important markets for Danone.

In October 2022 Danone announced the start of the process of transferring its Russian segment to new owners. By this point, Russia provided about 5% of the company's total revenue. The company considered about two dozen possible applicants for its assets, but as of July 2023, the "successor" has not been decided. In the meantime, Danone rebranded one of its top brands: Activia in the Russian market becoming Aktibio. The company said that this will allow renewed investment in the Russian dairy industry. In July 2023, the Russian government seized the shares in Danone Russia and placed it under the control of the Russian Federal Agency for State Property Management. On 18 July, Ibragim Zakriev, the Minister of Agriculture of Chechnya and the nephew of its President Ramzan Kadyrov, was appointed General Director of the Russian Danone. As of 26 July 2023 Danone has provided €700 million for the loss of Russian business, plus €500 million exchange loss due to the fall in the ruble.

In June 2012 Danone raised its interest in Centrale Laitière (leader of the dairy products market in Morocco) to 67.0%. Centrale Laitière is Danone's first franchise ever: the companies have worked together since 1953.

In October 2013 Danone teamed up with Abraaj Group to acquire FanMilk International, the leading manufacturer and distributor of frozen dairy products and juices in Ghana, Togo, Nigeria, Burkina Faso, Benin and Ivory Coast.

In July 2014 Danone announced the acquisition of a 40% interest in Kenya's Brookside, East Africa's leading dairy products group.

In October 2014 Danone partnered with Universal Robina to build a beverage production and distribution business in the Philippines.

The Danone Institute is a nonprofit organization established to promote research, information and education about nutrition, diet and public health. One of the organization's main objectives was to increase nutrition knowledge amongst medical professionals, educators and parents.

The company set up its first Institute in 1991 in Paris, France, and officially launched as a private nonprofit organization in 1997.

The institute is led by nutrition experts and Danone company executives.

By 2007 Danone had set up 18 institutes in countries around the world to develop programs that address local public health issues. The institutes are located in Belgium, Canada, China, the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Poland, Russia, Spain, the United States, and Turkey.

They operate under the aegis of the Danone Institute International. The Danone Institute International is responsible for steering the network, and encouraging a continual exchange between the various countries.

Since 2018 more than 200 experts in diet and nutrition are involved in this international network.

Each institute is composed of a board of directors and a scientific council. Each board includes 8 members. The board members are responsible for setting the strategic direction and budget for the organization. The scientific council that is composed of from 6 to 10 members, takes future programmatic decisions.

The institutes develop educational programs in their countries to deal with local health and nutrition issues. Each institute therefore develops its own program to be relevant in their environment. For instance, the Czech Danone Institute provides a fund to support research, development and education in nutrition, and scholarships abroad.

Each local Danone Institute develops specific programs including:

Throughout the world the Danone Institutes continue to be nonprofit organizations.

The Danone Institutes gather internationally renowned scientists in diet and nutrition from independent organizations (e.g.: universities, research centers).

From 1991 to 2006 more than 40 prizes and awards have been attributed for more than €600,000. Over 140 events have gathered more than 30,000 health care professionals. And 75 publications have been published. More than 70 programs towards the public have been organized.

To date Danone Institutes have funded more than 900 research projects. This represents a global budget of €16 million. They have set up dozens of educational programs. 100 symposia have been launched.

The Danone Institute International was established in 2004 to gather together the 18 Danone Institutes. Its goal is to develop large-scale international programs. It also aims at encouraging the sharing of the knowledge between the local institutes. It facilitates cooperation, collaboration and exchange between scientists.

Danone Institute International is a nonprofit organization originally established with funding from Danone. The association promotes the exchange of information related to the relationship between diet, nutrition and health.

The Danone Institute International comprises more than 220 scientific experts, and may be considered as a think tank. This international network gathers renowned scientists from various fields such as clinical nutrition, pediatric medicine, microbiology, gastroenterology, and psychology.

The Danone Institute International produces publications, supports research via grants, programs and a prize. The DII also organizes international academic conferences and symposia.

The Danone International Prize For Nutrition is a cornerstone in the work of the Danone Institute International.

The Danone International Prize for Nutrition is an award established in 1997 by the Danone Institute International, presented every two years to honour individuals or teams that have advanced the science of human nutrition.

The prize aims at encouraging nutrition research and promoting the public's understanding of the importance of this field.

This award is one of the most respected awards within the field of nutritional research. Many leading scientists received this award, that recognizes their accomplishments.

The Danone International Prize for Nutrition is worth €120,000. The prize is awarded every two years by the Danone Institute International and organized with the support of the French organization Fondation pour la recherche médicale.

The Danone International Prize for Nutrition recognizes a single researcher or a research team as leading a major step in nutrition, developing novel concepts, including research fields with potential application for populations.

The jury consists of up to nine members, including one member of the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale. 50% of the jury members come from the Danone Institute International or the Danone Institutes. The jury selects one winner by a secret vote. In case of a tie, the chair's vote counts as two votes.

Danone Institute International selected in 2007 Friedman through a process involving more than 650 applicants worldwide. Candidates must be employed by a not-for-profit institution and actively involved in research. Laureates are chosen after an independent and international selection procedure.

This prize has been renamed the Danone International Prize for Alimentation in 2018.

Prize winners: Source: Danone International

In 2012 the Danone Institute International in collaboration with the American Society for Nutrition (ASN) organized an international working group to examine the health effects of yogurt. They communicated their scientific conclusion to health care professionals and the public. One year later, the ASN and the Danone Institute International joined forces to launch the first global summit on the health effects of yogurt.

This event aims at evaluating the state of science as concerns yogurt consumption and public health.

The first summit took place in 2013 in Boston. It featured international experts in medicine and nutrition. Since that time, summits have been held every year.

In 2013 the Danone Institute International, the American Society for Nutrition (ASN) and the Nutrition Society (NS) launched the Yogurt in Nutrition Initiative for a balanced diet. This program aims at examining the health effects of yogurt, encouraging research around yogurt as part of a healthy diet and communicating scientific information toward health care professionals and the public.

Through this project, the Danone Institute International plans to organize worldwide conferences to share researchers' findings. From 2013, the Yogurt in Nutrition Initiative for a balanced diet co-organizes every year Global Summit on the Health Effects of Yogurt.

The Danone Institute International in collaboration with the American Society for Nutrition and the International Osteoporosis Foundation also organizes the Yogurt in Nutrition Award. This prize is offered by the Yogurt in Nutrition Initiative for a balanced diet. This award, valued at US$30,000, supports projects focused on the role of yogurt in the prevention and management of diseases. It finances research programs for two years. It recognizes individuals or research teams from public organizations, universities or hospitals.

Danone operates several funds including: danone.communities, created in 2007 to finance social business, the Danone Ecosystem Fund, created in 2009 to provide support to Danone partners including farmers, subcontractors, and vendors, and Livelihoods, created in 2011 to finance environment-related projects (such as peasant agriculture, deforestation, access to energy in emerging countries) and in return provide investors with carbon credits with strong social intensity.

Danone's corporate social responsibility programs were influenced by former CEO, Antoine Riboud, and a speech he gave on 25 October 1972 known as the "Marseilles speech".

In this speech he stated that growth should not take place without corporate social responsibility. He was the first CEO to publicly state that human and environment aspects of a company should be taken into account. These ideas laid the ground to Danone's dual project (economic and social).

Danone has set a target to reduce its methane emissions from fresh milk by 30% by 2030, including by increasing its plant milk portfolio. However, it has been criticized by environmental researchers for overstating its progress and overrelying on greenhouse gas removal.

In 2020 Danone announced that it would source 100% of its eggs from cage-free suppliers by 2025.

Due to its narrow focus and relatively small size, Danone was an attractive takeover target for its competitors, namely Nestlé and Kraft Foods. In mid-July 2005, the share price of Danone rose 20% within two weeks on rumours of a bid approach by PepsiCo, although this intention was denied. Upon realising that a takeover of a national treasure such as Danone by a foreign company was indeed possible in the capital markets, the " economically patriotic " French government stepped in by drafting a law to protect companies in "strategic industries" such as Danone from takeover. This has been dubbed the "Danone Law".

Speculation was renewed once again in mid-2006, when PepsiCo declared its intention to grow significantly in France through a sizeable non-hostile acquisition, and Kraft was also reported in Le Figaro, a French daily newspaper, as not having ruled out an acquisition in France. The stock market apparently marked down the possibility of a bid by PepsiCo following Danone's acquisition of Numico.

In 2008 Skeletons, a Danone owned yoghurt product marketed towards Russian children, was removed from sale after complaints about the use of skeleton characters in its marketing materials causing children psychological trauma.

In the 2010s reports indicated that Danone engaged in unethical marketing of infant formula in China, Indonesia, Turkey and India.

In the early 2010s Nutricia India (Danone) purchased Wockhardt 's nutrition business, which thereby provided Danone with an entry to India's infant nutrition market. Nutricia later ordered and scheduled an external audit of payments made and invoices received from March through August 2013 and found no payments to doctors. However, critics contended the company directed the course of the audit, and more importantly, scheduled the audit so that it did not cover the crucial handover period. In fact, it was scheduled nearly a year after the purchase. A policy director for Baby Milk Action stated that Nutricia "seems to be using the audit as a cover".

India passed a law pertaining to Infant Milk Substitutes (IMS) in 1992 and strengthened this law in 2003. These prohibit any kind of advertisement of infant formula for children 0–2, as well as prohibit monetary benefits to doctors for recommending formula. Still, major companies including Danone have been criticized for sponsoring such things as nutritional conferences and web platforms for doctors. (Other companies include Nestle, Abbott, and Mead Johnson.)

Dexolac is the name of Danone's infant milk substitute product. Overall in India, approximately 50% of infants under six months of age are exclusively breastfed, and 50% are not.

In October 2012 a Save the Children survey was conducted in the cities of Hohhot, Beijing, Jinan, Shanghai, Nanjing, and Shenzhen. Sixty mothers of infants 0–6 months were interviewed in each city. 40% of the mothers interviewed said they had received formula samples. Of these, 60% were provided by company representatives, and over one-third by healthcare workers. The mothers reported that samples were provided by (in order of frequency): Dumex (Danone, and since May 2016 Yashili), Enfamil (Mead Johnson), Wyeth, Abbott, Nestlé, Friso, Ausnutria and Bei-yin-mei. The overall 2013 Save the Children report which includes this 2012 survey states, "If new mothers are given free samples to feed to their babies it can start a vicious circle that undermines their own ability to breastfeed. An infant satiated with formula may demand less breast milk, so the mother produces less, and that can result in her losing confidence in her ability to breastfeed."

In February 2013 The Guardian reported that up until 2011, Danone subsidiary Sari Husada had midwives sign contracts to receive financial payments for selling a certain number of boxes of baby formula. According to Danone, this no longer happens, and has been replaced by a scheme which runs training for midwives. However, the main difference appears to be a change from cash to merchandise such as televisions or laptops, and often including items which are needed in the midwives' practices, such as oxygen canisters, TENS machines, and nebulisers. The Guardian has seen a spreadsheet detailing the number of new mothers contacted, the amount of 0–6 months formula sold, and the proportion of their target this represents. Danone commented: "That may still be happening, that's something we need to address."

This same article reported that Sari Husada (Danone) had links throughout the Indonesian medical system. For example, Sari Husada sponsored professional associations, paid doctors for running seminars for midwives, and even sponsored midwifery awards which were then presented by the Indonesian Minister for Women's Empowerment and the Protection of Children.

There are two potential harms to promoting infant formula in poorer communities: (1) the parents and families may not have dependable access to clean water, and (2) the ongoing cost is such a significant part of the family budget that parents are highly motivated to attempt to "stretch" the product, with risk of malnourishment to infant or child. An Indonesian paediatrician stated, "Selling formula is like the killing fields, in my opinion. The babies will die of diarrhoea and they will die of malnutrition."

In June 2013 the organisation was accused in Turkey of "misleading mothers with a marketing campaign that warned they might not be providing enough breast milk to their babies [and suggesting] mothers use its powdered baby milk to make up any shortfall". Danone responded that it "based its advice on WHO guidance" and claimed that both the WHO and UNICEF "endorsed the campaign." The WHO said Danone did not have permission to use its logo and asked Danone to remove its name from the company's marketing materials within 14 days while Ayman Abulaban, the UNICEF representative for Turkey, said: "The Unicef Turkey office has not endorsed this campaign." UNICEF also requested that their name be removed from marketing materials.

Following a statement by the New Zealand government and Fonterra on 2 August 2013 warning that batches of ingredients supplied by Fonterra to four Danone plants in Asia-Pacific might be contaminated with Clostridium botulinum bacteria, Danone recalled selected infant formula products from sale in eight markets (New Zealand, Singapore, Malaysia, China, Hong Kong, Vietnam, Cambodia and Thailand) as a precautionary measure.

The alert was lifted on 28 August when New Zealand Ministry for Primary Industries concluded after several weeks of tests that there was no Clostridium botulinum in any of the batches concerned. None of the many tests conducted by Danone before and after this period showed any contamination.

On 8 January 2014 Danone announced its decision to terminate its existing supply contract with Fonterra and make any further collaboration contingent on a commitment by its supplier to full transparency and compliance with the food safety procedures applied to all products supplied to Danone. Danone won damages of €105 million from Fonterra.

In 2019 the Spanish regulator Comisión Nacional de los Mercados y la Competencia fined Danone 929,644 euros for forming a cartel with other dairy companies to avoid competition when buying milk from Spanish farmers between 2000 and 2013. In February 2024, the Spanish Audiencia Nacional annulled the fine as the statute of limitations has passed for Danone.

In October 2025 it was discovered that Aqua, a bottled water brand from Danone in Indonesia, actually sources its water from drilled groundwater wells, contrary to its advertising claims of using mountain spring water. This revelation came to light during a surprise inspection by West Java Governor Dedi Mulyadi at Aqua's facility in the Subang Regency area. The news quickly went viral, prompting widespread shock and disapproval among netizens. In response, Danone released a statement asserting that Aqua water is safe for consumption.

Dassault Systèmes SE (French pronunciation: [ daso sistɛm ]) (abbreviated 3DS) is a French multinational software corporation which develops software for 3D product design, simulation, manufacturing and other 3D related products.

Founded in 1981, it is headquartered in Vélizy-Villacoublay, France, and has 25,000 employees across 184 global offices.

Dassault Systèmes (also known as 3DS) grew out of the aerospace industry's search for more sophisticated drafting tools to streamline the development process and aid in the increasing complexity of aviation design. Dassault Systèmes spun out in 1981 (as part of Dassault Group) to develop and market their 3D surface design software CATI, later renamed CATIA. That same year, Dassault Systèmes signed a sales and marketing agreement with IBM, allowing IBM to resell the CATIA CAD software.

In the 1990s, Dassault Systèmes' software was used to develop seven out of every ten new airplanes and four out of every ten new cars worldwide. Major players in the aviation and automotive industries, including Honda, Mercedes-Benz, BMW and Boeing, were able to design and mock-up their products in CATIA rather than using CAD programs and physical prototypes. The Boeing 777, the Falcon 2000 business jet, and the Rafale jet fighter were designed using CATIA.

Dassault Systèmes launched an initial public offering (IPO) on both the Paris Bourse and Nasdaq in 1996. Following its success, the next year, the company acquired SolidWorks and Deneb Robotics, which later became part of the DELMIA brand, and additional software to build toward product lifecycle management (PLM). The SolidWorks acquisition strengthened Dassault Systèmes' 2D drafting capacity and provided entry into the Microsoft market, while other acquisitions added digital manufacturing software to the product lineup. These acquisitions paved the way for Dassault Systèmes to introduce a total manufacturing system with their subsidiary brand, DELMIA, in 1998. The new offering enabled access to data across the spectrum of manufacturing processes, while remaining independent of the CAD environment.

By the end of 1998, the CAD software industry vendors were devising strategies to become internet-enabled. The main focus was to enable the viewing of 3D models in web browsers and build interfaces to product data management (PDM) systems. Dassault Systèmes was one of the leaders in enabling these functions for its users. The company benefited from their experience integrating CAD software across networks for the Boeing 777 project, and had already made moves toward internet-enabled CAD software in 1996 with CATIA Conferencing Groupware; which enabled review and annotation of models using the internet. The introduction of ENOVIA further marked their industry-leading place by providing internet-enabled PDM and 3D product lifecycle management. Dassault Systèmes' acquisitions continued into 1999, when two CAD software vendors were purchased: Matra Datavision and Smart Solutions. Also in 1999, Dassault Systèmes released CATIA Version 5, which was the first version to be fully implemented in the Microsoft Windows environment.

As the demand for digital and virtual experiences increased in 2000, Dassault Systèmes launched DELMIA, which provides digital manufacturing tools for virtual planning, simulating, and modeling of production processes.

The mid-2000s heralded a series of acquisitions for Dassault Systèmes to improve their product offerings and expand their market reach, and Dassault Systèmes launched new software and tools. In 2005, Dassault Systèmes sought to improve the quality of 3D interactions and simulations. First they acquired Abaqus, a US-based company specializing in software that allows engineers to simulate and observe the performance of components in products.

Then they acquired Virtools, software that enables companies to create 3D applications. The following year, the company extended its market reach into high-tech, consumer products, and medical devices through the acquisition of MatrixOne, which would be linked with ENOVIA. In 2007, subsidiary brand 3DVIA was launched to create a social network and content community for 3D artists and modelers.

As the 2000s progressed, Dassault Systèmes began to enter online applications and build toward more online applications for product data management, collaboration, realistic simulation and more. Examples of this strategy include the purchase or launch of brands such as EXALEAD for information intelligence, NETVIBES for business analytics, 3DEXCITE for marketing, and GEOVIA for modeling the planet. In 2012, the company launched the 3DEXPERIENCE platform to connect its software applications.

CATIA under the 3DEXPERIENCE platform enables users to go beyond physical product definition to model any product in the context of its real-life behavior. Systems, architects, engineers, designers and all contributors collaborate on fit, form, function, and customer experience.

Dassault Systèmes also began to offer its version of digital twins, which the company calls virtual twin experiences and are powered by the 3DEXPERIENCE platform. Virtual twins help companies visualize, model and simulate an entire environment to explore how a product or process will behave when assembled, operated or subjected to a range of events.

To expand their capabilities and industries served through the 3DEXPERIENCE platform, Dassault Systèmes completed additional acquisitions, including:

Throughout the decade, Dassault Systèmes advanced into the life sciences and healthcare industry, including launching the Living Heart Project for simulating heart function in 2014 and acquiring subsidiary brand MEDIDATA for managing clinical trials, in 2019.

In 2020, Dassault Systèmes expanded its focus from “Things to Life” by applying what they have learned over the past four decades and applying it to the human body. By developing a virtual twin experience of the human body, they can model, search, test and treat a human body as precisely, safely and effectively as cars, buildings or airplanes and customize the care of each individual.

To expand the capabilities served through the 3DEXPERIENCE platform, Dassault Systèmes completed additional acquisitions, including:

In late 2022, Dassault Systèmes, along with French companies Docaposte, Bouygues Telecom and Banque des Territoires, announced plans to create Numspot, a joint effort to build a European sovereign cloud service for the financial, health and public sectors that would rely on the infrastructure of 3DS Outscale.

In 2022, the company named Philippine de T'Serclaes as its chief sustainability officer.

In 2024, Korea Fair Trade Commission fined Dassault Systèmes Korea 738 million KRW for imposing policies between October 2016 to December 2020 that disallowed its dealers from prospecting customers already involved in a sales consultation with a different dealer.

In January 2026, Turkey has opened investigation into the company for possible anti competitive practices.

Dassault Systèmes' currently supported roster of brands and industries served (as of May 2024):

Dassault Systèmes is led by Chief Executive Officer Pascal Daloz. He succeeded Bernard Charlès on January 1, 2024. Charlès, who had held the position since 1995, remained as executive chairman of the board until February 2026, when he stepped down citing personal reasons. Pascal Daloz took the position of board chairman upon Charlès's departure.

Groupe Industriel Marcel Dassault owned 39.91 percent of shares in 2025, making it the company's main shareholder; public shares were at 49.38 percent. Other major shareholders included Charles Edelstenne, Bernard Charlès and Pascal Daloz.

Dassault Systèmes has 25,000 employees worldwide. It is headquartered in Vélizy-Villacoublay, France.

France most commonly records the date using the day-month-year order with an oblique stroke or slash (”/”) as the separator with numerical values, for example, 31/12/1992. The 24-hour clock is used to express time, using the lowercase letter " h " as the separator in between hours and minutes, for example, 14 h 05.

In France, the all-numeric form for dates is in the order "day month year", using an oblique stroke or slash as the separator. Example: 31/12/1992. Years can be written with two or four digits, and numbers may be written with or without leading zero. Since three months have four-letter names, the nomenclature of months in the French language most often uses three- to four-lettered abbreviations as follows: jan., fév., mars, avr., mai, juin, juil., août, sept., oct., nov., déc. When months are strictly limited to three letters, juin (June) and juillet (July) are sometimes abbreviated as JUN and JUL respectively, in Canada.

The expanded form is " 22 décembre 2010 ", optionally with the day of the week: " le mercredi 22 décembre 2010 ". The first day of the month is a special case: a suffix is added to the number, " le 1 avril 2001 ", where 1 is spoken " premier ", meaning "first".

The first day of the week in France is Monday.

The 24-hour notation is used in writing with an h as a separator (h for heure, meaning "hour"). Example: 14 h 05 (1405 [14:05] hours or 2:05 pm). Though the correct form includes spaces on both sides of the h, it is common to see them omitted: 14h05. The minutes are usually written with two digits; the hour numbers can be written with or without leading zero.

Generally speaking, French speakers also use the 24-hour clock when they speak. Sometimes the 12-hour clock is used orally, but only in informal circumstances. Since there is no one-to-one equivalent of "am" and "pm" in French, context must be relied on to figure out which one is meant. To clarify, people may use some sentences like " 9 heures du matin " (literally "9 o'clock in the morning") or " 9 heures du soir " (literally "9 o'clock in the evening")... but most French speakers would still find using the 24-hour clock a more convenient way of expressing time clearly.

The Daughters of Jesus (French : Filles de Jésus) is a French Roman Catholic congregation of religious sisters, founded in 1834 at Kermaria-Sulard, Brittany, in the Diocese of Vannes. Its goal is the care of the sick poor, and the education of girls. Today their motto is "Following Jesus on the road of human life."

The roots of the congregation lay in the vision of Pierre Noury (1743–1804), who had studied at a Jesuit college, then in a seminary run by the Vincentian Fathers. He was appointed pastor of Bignan, Morbihan, in Brittany in 1771. There he preached to the population frequently, gaining such a positive reputation among the townspeople that, after many years as pastor, he was elected mayor of the town in 1790.

During this time, Noury conceived of establishing a small community of women who would lead lives in common of prayer and charitable works. His vision, however, could not be realized as he had to flee France due to the French Revolution. During his time in exile, Noury composed many works in the Breton language, including a book of sermons and a Bible.

Noury returned to Bignan after the end of the French Terror, only to find a populace shattered and impoverished. He was soon transferred by the bishop to the cathedral in Vannes, where he died in 1804. He left his belongings to two women who had shared his vision and who ran a small school for years after his death.

A new pastor, Coëffic, came to Bignan in 1821. He learned of Noury's envisioned community and began to commit himself to implementing it. He came to know Perrine Samsom (1790–1847) who had been born in a rural hamlet of the parish. Samsom was a member of the Third Order of St. Francis, who committed herself to the service of the needy about her, nursing the sick, teaching young children the Breton language, leading prayer in the hamlet when no priest had been available during the troubled times of the Revolution.

In 1829 Coëffic invited Samsom to come to the town and direct a school for boys, with the hope that she might fully embrace Noury's vision of a dedicated community of women serving the needs of the town. Samsom accepted the challenge, eventually being joined by four other women who wished to share in this. In December 1831, they began a formal novitiate under Coëffic's supervision. The five women made their profession on 25 November 1834, thereby establishing the Daughters of Jesus as a religious institute in the Catholic Church.

Soon other women joined them, and new communities of Sisters were established in the neighboring parishes of Morbihan, in answer to the requests for them. Samsom, who had taken the religious name of Sainte Angèle, was appointed as the first Superior General of the new congregation, and is considered the founder of the congregation. She did not care for the authority entrusted to her, and as soon as a suitable replacement was found, she retired as Superior, sharing the ordinary duties of the community until her death.

The congregation received recognition by the French government on 31 October 1842. The year prior to that, Angelique Perigualt (1820–1887) had entered the congregation, taking the name of Marie of Saint Charles. She was elected as Superior General in 1846, a position in which she would serve until her death. She established the principles of service in community and a true simplicity of life which allowed for the freedom to serve.

Under her leadership, the congregation grew from 60 sisters to over 600. A new and larger motherhouse was established in a neighboring town. Additional communities were established throughout France.

The Daughters of Jesus then began to establish themselves outside France. In 1893 a provincial house for Canada was founded at Trois-Rivières, Quebec. The sisters of the Congregation of the Daughters of Jesus, whose influence was limited in France by the law on congregations of 1880, were forced into exile at the beginning of the twentieth century by virtue of the law of 1901. The congregation then counted in France around a thousand sisters spread over 80 communities and 134 schools7. In 1903, for example, more than 100 nuns left Brittany for Canada, settling in Alberta in Saint-Albert, Calgary, Edmonton; in New Brunswick to Chatam, Bathurst and Dalhousie; in Nova Scotia in Arichat and Sidney; in Prince Edward Island in Charlottetown, etc., but mainly in Quebec (around twenty foundations, for example in Trois-Rivières: Cap-de-la-Madeleine, Batiscan, Saint-Prosper, Saint-Narcisse, Shawinigan, etc.).

In the United States, for many years they conducted an academy and hospital at Lewistown, Montana, and ran the school connected with the French-speaking Parish of St-Jean-Baptiste in Waltham, Massachusetts.

This pattern of growth was interrupted in 1904, when an anti-clerical French government forced many religious communities into exile. The Daughters of Jesus were not spared, and communities were also established in Belgium, England and Canada as places of refuge.

Later, in the 1950s, in response to the appeals of the bishops of the developing world, the Daughters opened houses in Africa, the Antilles and South America.

Currently, the Daughters of Jesus serve in France, Belgium, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Dominica, England and Honduras. A community of Daughters was opened in Northern Ireland in 1968 and closed in 2011.

That same year, on 1 July, the Daughters of Jesus of Brittany merged with an older congregation of the same name founded in 1820 in Vaylats in southern France. The motherhouse of the other congregation lies on the ancient pilgrimage route to Santiago de Compostela, and is one of the sites which has given hospitality to the pilgrims making this journey for a millennium.

David Donald Hubert Roger Douillet (French: [ david dɔnald ybɛʁ ʁɔʒe dujɛ ] ; born 17 February 1969, Rouen) is a French politician and retired judoka.

Douillet won two consecutive gold medals at the 1996 and 2000 Summer Olympics in Atlanta and Sydney competing in the heavyweight division. He is also a four-time judo world champion and one-time European champion. These achievements make him one of the most decorated judoka in history. After his sporting career, he was involved alongside Bernadette Chirac in the charity Opération Pièces Jaunes. He also became a consulting sportsman for Canal+. He was elected deputy to the French National Assembly on 18 October 2009 and on 26 September 2011 became the new Sports Minister until May 2012.

David Douillet began judo at age 11, in the commune of Neufchâtel-en-Bray, near his birthplace of Rouen. Having exceptional physical size for someone his age (1,80 m and 80 kg), he was instructed by Jacques Lemaître who taught him the rudiments of the sport. Quickly becoming attracted to the Japanese martial art, he distinguished himself on the tatamis, and thanks to his good academic results, integrated the study of the sport at the school Victor et Hélène Basch, near the University of Rennes. In 1986, when Douillet was 17, he was noticed during a demonstration by Jean-Luc Rougé who brought him into the INSEP.

He was already heads above the others, and after what was seen on the mat, I immediately reserved a place for him; at INSEP, the center of the elite of the French athletics.

Consequently, the young David could devote himself to his passion, while continuing his education in the Paris region, Maisons-Alfort, and involving himself at the INSEP facility of Bois de Vincennes, the coterie of elite and promising French judokas. There, he met his idol Fabien Canu, double world champion in 1987 and 1989. With strength and drive, Douillet obtained his first awards in his age class. In 1988, he became French junior champion, then obtained fifth place at the European championships. Rising again to the top of the national standings in 1989, he captured the European bronze medal in Athens, again as a junior.

After a period of adaptation, he won his first Senior French championship in 1991, imposing himself in the final against Georges Mathonnet, another hope for French judo, born two years before Douillet. Thanks to this first national title, David qualified for his first senior European championships in Prague, where he finished in third place, a real achievement for a 22-year-old at his first selection. A few weeks later, he disputed the military world championships, where he earned two medals. At the beginning of 1992, he successfully defended his national title in the heavyweight category. Selected for the European Championships, which were held in Paris, in May 1992, he shone in a decisive competition obtaining a qualification for the Barcelona 1992 Summer Olympics, which took place in July of the same year: during these European championships, he obtained the bronze medal, synonymous with an Olympic ticket for Spain.

He faced a hard bracket during the Olympic tournament with the German Henry Stöhr (Olympic vice-champion in 1988), and the Japanese Naoya Ogawa (quadruple world champion). Not succeeding in carrying a frank attack on the Frenchman, Stöhr, neutralized, was disqualified for uncombativeness. However, a movement of the legs by Ogawa, in the next fight, put Douillet ippon, and the French judoka out for the gold medal race. He could, however, still hope for bronze. Facing the Cuban Franck Moreno Garcia, in the bout for third place, the Frenchman imposed himself. The judoka won the bronze medal at 23 years old.

In search of confirmation after his Olympic bronze medal, David Douillet ambitiously approached his first participation in a world championship. It was in Hamilton, Ontario, that the French judoka hoped to carry out a winning performance. Having defeated several experienced judokas, like the Polish Rafał Kubacki, he finally beat the Olympic champion and champion of Europe David Khakhaleishvili, then ranked #1 in the world and logical favourite of the tournament. He then took his revenge on the Georgian who, a few months earlier, had beaten him at the European championships. Thanks to this title acquired at 24 years, he becomes the first French world champion in this weight class, regarded by some as the premier category of judo. It is in this same weight class that he gained his first European title the following year in the 1994 European Judo Championships at Gdańsk, Poland, by defeating Rafał Kubacki in the final bout.

In view of the Atlanta 1996 Summer Olympics, the 1995 World Judo Championships in Chiba, Japan constituted an obligatory preparatory stage to participate in the American Olympics. A good performance being a great step towards an Olympic medal, Douillet was planning to defend his world title gained two years earlier in Canada. But this time, he competed at the same time in his weight class (heavyweight, in +95 kg) and in the open category (a category without weight limit). In the first, the Frenchman made a display of his class, by winning each of his fights by ippon. Having beaten the Japanese quadruple world champion Naoya Ogawa, then the Spaniard Ernesto Pérez in the semi-final, he finally triumphed over the German Frank Möller by ippon, after less than 2 minutes of fighting, and retained his title.

Three days later, Douillet repeated his performance in the open category, by beating in the final the Russian Sergei Kossorotov by an pin. Thanks to the heavyweight title, he became the second Frenchman to preserve his world title after Fabien Canu in 1980, and placed himself as the legitimate favourite for the Olympic Games. Furthermore, with his double win, Douillet entered the history books of judo, becoming the third judoka to carry out this exploit after Yasuhiro Yamashita in 1981 and Naoya Ogawa in 1989. Carrying out this exploit in Japan, and equalling the performances of two native stars, made him an instant icon in Japan.

Selected for Atlanta the 1996 Summer Olympics, he was the favourite due to the three world titles won since his inaugural Olympic participation in 1992. Douillet passed the first matches without difficulties by eliminating the Belgian Van Barneveld, the Luxembourger Müller, and the Austrian Krieger. The Frenchman then fought the semi-final against the Japanese Naoya Ogawa, who had beaten him at the same stage of the 1992 Olympic tournament. This tight fight, styled as the "final before the final" by the French, was won by Douillet, who punched his ticket for the Olympic final against the Spaniard Ernesto Pérez Lobo. Against a judoka that he had already overcome during the last world championships, the world champion took the contest in hand, and, thanks to an Uchi-mata (mowing by the interior of the thigh), obtained an irreversible advantage which enabled him to take the Olympic title. Thus, he became the first French judoka to win the gold medal in the reigning category of judo, and the fourth Olympic champion to do it within all categories. During the award ceremony it was the Dutch Anton Geesink, Olympic champion in 1964, who gave the medal to Douillet.

Douillet had to wait until 1997 to claim his proper Olympic medal that he won the previous year. The American organizers of the Atlanta Games had reversed the ceremonies of handing-over of the medals for the male and female competitions. Thus Dutch Anton Geesink, Olympic champion of the Open category in 1964, gave to the French judoka the medal intended for the Chinese judokate Fuming Sun, Olympic champion of the women heavyweights. It was in Paris, at the time of the 1997 World Judo Championships, that the various actors were brought together once again to receive the right medals.

On 30 September 1996, two months after the Olympic title captured in Atlanta, Douillet was seriously injured in the calf and the right shoulder in a motorbike accident. The long convalescence, and eight months of rehabilitation, actually reinvigorated the Frenchman and gave him new motivation after his gold medal:

This accident rekindled my desire. After Atlanta, I had the impression of having made it. I had gained a lot... Then, after the accident, I had a new challenge: to become again first an athlete, then a performing athlete.

Thus, he returned gradually to his ideal shape (approximately 125 kg) and joined again the competition, at the time of the Mediterranean Games, which took place in June 1997 in Bari, Italy. He made a good show and earned a medal by defeating the European champion, Selim Tataroğlu. More than this victory, it was the prospect of the world championships, organized in Paris, which intensified Douillet's return to the foreground. The judoka carried out serious preparations in hopes of obtaining a fourth world title. In the competition, Douillet qualified for the final by defeating once again the Turkish Selim Tataroğlu in the semi-finals. In the finals, he beat the Japanese Shinichi Shinohara by disqualification. This victory, giving him a third world crown (fourth with the Open title in 1995), tied Douillet with another Japanese athlete, Yasuhiro Yamashita, and closed a difficult post-Atlanta period marked not only by his motorbike accident, but also by financial problems related to bad investments. However, a pain in the shoulder forced him to withdraw once again from the tatamis after the world championship in Paris, and in August 1998, he was the victim of a distortion of the wrist, and withdrew from competition for several months.

In spite of almost two years of inactivity in competition, he was selected for the 1999 European Judo Championships in Bratislava. He had a sub-par performance there, taking only seventh place, letting his main competitors gain the podium. Nevertheless, the Frenchman started his preparation for a historic second Olympic title at the Sydney 2000 Summer Olympics. The principal stage of this preparation was the participation in the 1999 World Judo Championships in Birmingham. However, Douillet underwent a disappointment, being forced to withdraw two days before the beginning of the competition because of a groin strain. The months that followed were troubled by new physical problems with his back. While this was not the ideal way to prepare for his return, one and half months before the Olympic event he participated in a competition in Bonn, where he was beaten in the semi-final by the German Frank Möller and took third place. This was a competition in his road back to high-level, a comeback considered encouraging by his trainer Marc Alexandre, who did not entirely hide his concerns, however, due to the delay in his preparation caused by David's repetitive injuries.

In spite of the doubts concerning his physical condition, Douillet was present in Sydney, Australia, for the opening ceremonies of the 2000 Summer Olympics. Even more, the judoka was nominated to be the flag carrier of the French delegation by the CNOSF (Olympic and sporting National committee French), thus succeeding the athlete Marie-José Pérec.

On 22 September 2000, the judo tournament started, and Douillet entered the heavyweight competition to try to become the most titled Judoka in history. After winning his first match on a no-show from the Venezuelan Douglas Cardozo (he was not present at the weighing before the competition), the Frenchman faced the Turk Selim Tataroğlu, recent vice-champion of Europe (Open), and multiple medal-holder in the World Judo Championships. The Frenchman, however, beat him by ippon thanks to an o-uchi-gari (great interior mowing), and qualified for the quarter-finals where he faced the Belgian Harry van Barneveld, bronze medal winner four years before in Atlanta. Again Douillet passed this round thanks to the disqualification of his adversary (hansoku-make). Next, he went to fight against the Estonian Indrek Pertelson with a shot at the final. Pertelson, the world vice-champion, was quickly dispatched by the Frenchman on an ippon in less one minute.

In the final, his adversary was the Japanese Shinichi Shinohara, double champion of the world in 1999. That game is seen as a revenge of the 1997 World Judo Championships finals, where Douillet had beaten the Japanese heavyweight. The confrontation between the two judokas was extremely tactical, and it was only after one and a half minutes that the Frenchman took the lead thanks to a mowing by the interior of the thigh (uchi-subdued). The referee decision allotted a yuko to Douillet, a decision disputed by Shinohara, who argued that he dodged and then countered the Frenchman. However, the head referee was not moved, and Shinohara did not manage to make up for this lost time. After five minutes of fight, Douillet was finally able to win his second Olympic gold medal. This was also a victory for the Judo history books as he became the fighter with the most international titles. With six major international titles (2 Olympic titles, 4 world titles), he passed the Japanese Yasuhiro Yamashita (1 Olympic title, 4 world titles) who won his titles in the seventies. The Olympic tournament in Sydney, however, marked the end of the road for the French judoka, who immediately announced his retirement after the competition, he won 88 matches and lost 21.

The French judoka is no longer the record Olympic title-holder, since the Japanese Tadahiro Nomura won his third consecutive title in 2004 in Athens. However, he retains a dominating place at the top of the world's judo. He is one of the five male judokas (except Nomura) to have gained two Olympic titles, but thanks to his bronze medal obtained in 1992 in Barcelona, he is the only one besides Nomura and Angelo Parisi to have gained three Olympic medals. With regard to the World Judo Championships, Douillet is now the 3rd most titled judoka along with three other Japanese athletes. He is also one of the only two judokas who own three world champion titles in the heavyweight class, the other being Yasuhiro Yamashita (both are far behind Teddy Riner 's 7 titles). These achievements make the Frenchman one of the greatest judoka in history.

Thanks to his second Olympic title acquired in Sydney, he was proclaimed for the second time in 2000 Champion of the champions français by the French sporting daily newspaper L'Équipe. This recognition is all the more remarkable because it came ahead of both Brahim Asloum, the first French Olympic champion of boxing since 1936, and the leader of the France national football team Zinedine Zidane, who just won the European championship.

In 2005, he was one of the flag carriers for the unsuccessful bid of Paris 2012 for the organization of the 2012 Summer Olympics. Douillet also fought against doping and joined, in 1999, the council of martial arts and prevention against doping. Recognized on the international scene, he is one of the forty sporting personalities, members of the academy, of the Laureus World Awards' Sports since its founding in 1999.

Generous as a sportsman, Douillet put his popularity at the service of charitable operations. Close to the Chirac couple, he became godfather of the charity operation "Operation Yellow Coins" with then First French lady Bernadette Chirac. Each year David "drives" an SNCF TGV La Poste to go and collect funds for his "operation pieces jaunes", and he is the main sponsor, via public appearances, for this operation. In 1996 he started the foundation of the hospitals of Paris to improve the daily life of hospitalized children and teenagers. In addition, after his second Olympic title, he was named a UNESCO ambassador for youth in 2001. His medals and his generosity are held in high regard amongst the French, who ranked him the second most popular personality in France. Sometimes invited onto television programs, the judoka has his puppet with Les Guignols de l'info, a popular satirical broadcast on Canal+.

Having concluded his competitive career, Douillet ventured into business activities. In 1997, Travelsport, a travel agency where he was a shareholder, declared bankruptcy. Soon afterward, he won his fourth World Championship. Upon winning his second Olympic gold medal, Douillet concluded various commercial deals. After collaborating with TV production companies, he created brand partnerships for different types of products, such as sport equipment and outdoor adventure gear, a line of judo uniforms with his personal brand DD, and a video game called David Douillet Judo.

On television, after a short passage on French television, he joined Canal+ where he is regularly present as a sporting consultant when international Judo events are broadcast. He also participates in the preparation of rebroadcasts of events like the Olympic Games, or the 24 Hours of Le Mans, on premium cable television. Moreover, he appears occasionally in commercials. While he is currently focusing on the business side of his career, he has not entirely given up on judo: he was named to the management committee of the French federation of judo in 2005.

David Douillet took part in Season 12 of the French adaptation of " Dancing with the Stars " where he was teamed up with professional dancer Katrina Patchett. Unfortunately, their time on the show was short-lived, as they were both eliminated during the first live episode on September 9, 2022.

David Douillet was a candidate for the UMP center-right political party in the by-election of 11 and 18 October 2009 in the 12th constituency of the Yvelines department. He won 52,10% of the ballots cast and was elected member of the National Assembly. In the 2010 French regional elections, he was elected in the Council of Île-de-France.

On 29 June 2011, Douillet was appointed Secretary of State in charge of French nationals abroad in the François Fillon cabinet. On 26 September 2011, he was appointed Minister of Sports, a mandate that lasted until the next presidential elections that took place in May 2012.

The Dawes Plan temporarily resolved the issue of the reparations that Germany owed to the Allies of World War I. Enacted in 1924, it ended the crisis in European diplomacy that occurred after French and Belgian troops occupied the Ruhr in response to Germany's failure to meet its reparations obligations.

The Plan set up a staggered schedule for Germany's payment of war reparations, provided for a large loan to stabilise the German currency and ended the occupation of the Ruhr. It resulted in a brief period of economic recovery in the second half of the 1920s, although it came at the price of a heavy reliance on foreign capital. The Dawes Plan was superseded by the Young Plan in 1929.

Because the Plan resolved a serious international crisis, the American Charles G. Dawes, who headed the group that developed it, received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1925.

At the end of World War I, the Allied Powers included in the Treaty of Versailles a plan for the reparations for which Germany would be liable. It established an interim 20 billion Reichsmarks to be paid through April 1920 and left the full details to be determined by an Inter-Allied Reparation Commission. In April 1921, the Allies adopted the London Schedule of Payments that the Commission had developed. It established the total German reparations figure at 132 billion gold marks (US $442 billion in 2023 dollars). The schedule was separated into three classes, of which only the first two, amounting to 50 billion gold marks, were expected to be paid.

On 5 May 1921 the Allies delivered an ultimatum to Germany demanding that it accept the London Schedule within six days and threatening to occupy the heavily industrialized Ruhr district if it did not. The Reichstag voted to accept on 11 May, following which the government began to implement its fulfilment policy (Erfüllungspolitik), an effort to show the impossibility of meeting the payments by attempting to fulfil them. Germany made its first payment of one billion gold marks in the summer of 1921 but after that paid little in cash and fell behind in its deliveries of materials such as coal and timber. After Germany was declared in default in January 1923, French and Belgian troops occupied the Ruhr. Germany responded with passive resistance to the occupation. The government printed money in order to pay the idled workers, which fuelled the hyperinflation that all but wrecked the German economy.

Ensuing events led the Allies to decide that the London Schedule needed to be re-examined. The Ruhr occupation had heightened tension between France and Germany. The acceptance of the London Schedule by Germany's government increased political instability. Chancellor Joseph Wirth 's fulfilment policy angered many on the right, who called it traitorous. Radical right-wing groups instigated a hate campaign against representatives of the Republic that included the assassination in August 1921 of Matthias Erzberger, one of the signers of the Armistice of 11 November 1918, and in June 1922 of Foreign Minister Walther Rathenau. The United States feared a coup from either the right or the left and that if one did take place, the large amount of money it had loaned to France and England during the war – the repayment of which was in large part dependent on the receipt of German reparations – might never be recovered.

In 1923 the new German chancellor Gustav Stresemann ordered an end to passive resistance, implemented a currency reform that brought an end to the hyperinflation and sought discussions with the Allied Powers which would take into consideration what Germany was financially capable of paying. The Reparations Commission set up the Dawes committee, consisting of ten expert representatives nominated by their respective countries: two each from Belgium (Baron Maurice Houtart, Emile Francqui), France (Jean Parmentier, Edgard Allix), Britain (Sir Josiah C. Stamp, Sir Robert M. Kindersley), Italy (Alberto Pirelli, Federico Flora) and the United States (Charles G. Dawes and Owen D. Young). Dawes, the head of the committee, was a former army general, banker and politician. His committee was tasked with examining the stabilization of Germany's currency, its budget and its resources. Based on the studies, the committee was to recommend a realistic schedule of payments – one taking into account Germany's ability to pay – that would replace the London Schedule.

The Dawes Report stressed in its introduction that "the guarantees we propose are economic and not political in nature". The resulting Dawes Plan covered payment amounts and timing, sources of revenue, loans to Germany, currency stabilization and ending the Ruhr occupation:

The debate over the Dawes Plan in the Reichstag affected the formation of a new government following the May 1924 Reichstag election. The Communist Party of Germany (KPD) saw the Dawes Plan as economic imperialism, and the Nazi Party objected altogether to paying reparations. Many on the political right objected to it because of the limits it placed on German sovereignty (control of the Reichsbank and the national railroad). The right-wing nationalist German National People's Party (DNVP) had campaigned against the Dawes Plan and gained 24 additional seats, making it the second strongest party in the Reichstag after the Social Democrats. The party's refusal to change its stance on the Dawes Plan resulted in Chancellor Wilhelm Marx of the Centre Party remaining in office presiding over a centrist minority cabinet. Since the clause in the Dawes Plan regarding the German National Railway required a change in the Weimar Constitution and therefore a two-thirds majority in the Reichstag to pass, it was necessary for some DNVP members to vote for acceptance. A number of influential industrial and agricultural interest groups urged the DNVP to accept the Plan, with the result that it passed on 29 August 1924 with the help of 48 DNVP votes. The Dawes Plan formally went into effect on 1 September 1924.

The influx of foreign credit led to the upswing in the German economy that underpinned the " Golden Twenties " of 1924–1929. Overall economic production increased 50% in five years, unemployment fell sharply and Germany's 34% share of world trade was higher than it had been in 1913, the last full year before the outbreak of World War I. By the start of the world economic crisis in 1929, Germany had received 29 billion Reichsmarks in loans. In spite of the stronger economy, Germany was unable to achieve the trade surpluses necessary to finance reparations. It met almost all of its payments under the Dawes plan but could do so only on the basis of its large foreign debt. Most loans were short term, which meant that they could be quickly called in if the creditor nation experienced an economic downturn. Germany found itself heavily reliant on foreign capital.

The occupation of the Ruhr ended on 25 August 1925.

Germany considered the Dawes Plan to be a temporary measure and expected a revised solution in the future. In 1928 German Foreign Minister Gustav Stresemann, the former chancellor, called for a final plan to be established, and the Young Plan was enacted in 1929.

Dawes, who was the U.S. vice president at the time, received the Nobel Peace Prize of 1925 for "his crucial role in bringing about the Dawes Plan", specifically for the way it reduced the state of tension between France and Germany resulting from Germany's missed reparations payments and France's occupation of the Ruhr. British foreign minister Austen Chamberlain shared the prize with Dawes, although his award was for the Locarno Treaties, which dealt with post-war territorial settlements.

De Dion-Bouton was a French automobile manufacturer and railcar manufacturer, which operated from 1883 to 1953. The company was founded by the Marquis Jules-Albert de Dion, Georges Bouton, and Bouton's brother-in-law Charles-Armand Trépardoux.

The company was formed in 1883 after de Dion saw a toy locomotive in a store window in 1881 and asked the toymakers to build another. Engineers Bouton and Trépardoux had been eking out a living with scientific toys at a shop in the Passage de Léon, near the rue de la Chapelle in Paris. Trépardoux had long dreamed of building a steam car, but neither he nor Bouton could afford it.

De Dion, already inspired by steam in the form of railway locomotives, and with ample money, agreed to back them, and Trépardoux et Cie was formed in Paris in 1883. That became the De Dion-Bouton automobile company, the world's largest automobile manufacturer for a time, well known for the quality, reliability, and durability of their vehicles.

Before 1883 was over, the company had set up shop in larger premises in the Passage de Léon, Paris, tried and dropped steam engines for boats, and produced a steam car. With the boiler and engine mounted at the front, driving the front wheels by belts and steering with the rear, it burned to the ground on trials. A second, La Marquise, was built the next year, with a more conventional steering and rear-wheel drive, capable of seating four.

The Marquis de Dion entered one of them in an 1887 trial, "Europe's first motoring competition", the brainchild of one M. Fossier of cycling magazine Le Vélocipède. Evidently, the promotion was insufficient, because De Dion was the sole entrant. It completed the course, with de Dion at the tiller, and was clocked at 60 km/h (37 mph). That figure must be viewed with considerable care, because the first official land speed record, set in 1898, was 63.15 km/h (39.24 mph). The vehicle survives, is in road-worthy condition, and has been a regular entry in the London to Brighton Veteran Car Run.

Following that singular success, the company offered steam tricycles, with boilers between the front wheels and two-cylinder engines. They were built in small numbers, and were evidently a favorite of young playboys. They were later joined by a larger tractor, able to pull trailers (sometimes called a "steam drag"). That larger vehicle introduced the so-called De Dion or "dead" axle. An axle beam carried the weight of the vehicle with the non-weight-bearing driveshafts or drive chains articulated separately alongside it.

On 22 July 1894, during the Paris–Rouen race, it averaged 18.7 km/h (11.6 mph) over the 126 km (78 mi) route, but was disqualified because it needed both a driver and a stoker.

Two more cars were made in 1885, followed by a series of lightweight two-cylinder tricars which, from 1892, had Michelin pneumatic tyres. In 1893, steam tractors were introduced which were designed to tow horse-drawn carriages for passengers or freight (sometimes called "steam drags") which used an innovative axle design that became known as the De Dion tube, where the location and drive function of the axle are separated.

The company manufactured steam buses and trucks until 1904. Trépardoux, a staunch supporter of steam, resigned in 1894 as the company turned to internal combustion vehicles. However, the steam car remained in production more or less unchanged for ten years more.

By 1889, de Dion was becoming convinced the future lay in the internal combustion engine, and the company had built a ten-cylinder two-row rotary engine. After Trépardoux resigned in 1894, the company became De Dion, Bouton et Compagnie. For 1895, Bouton created a new 137 cc (8.4 cu in) one-cylinder engine with trembler coil ignition. Proving troublesome at its designed speed of 900 rpm (throwing bearings and running rough), when Bouton increased the revs, the problems vanished. In trials, it achieved an unprecedented 3500 rpm, and was usually run at 2,000 rpm, a limit imposed by its atmospheric valves and surface carburettor. Inlet and exhaust valves were overhead, and a flywheel was fitted to each end of the crankshaft.

This engine was fitted behind the rear axle of a tricycle frame bought from Decauville, fitted with the new Michelin pneumatic tires. It showed superb performance, and went on the market in 1896 with the engine enlarged to 1¼ CV (horsepower) (932 W) 185 cc (11.3 cu in), with 1¾ CV (1.3 kW) in 1897. By the time production of the petite voiture tricar stopped in 1901, it had 2¾ CV (2 kW), while racers had as much as 8 CV (6 kW).

In 1898, Louis Renault had a De Dion-Bouton modified with fixed drive shaft and ring and pinion gear, making "perhaps the first hot rod in history".

The same year, the tricar was joined by a four-wheeler and in 1900 by a vis a vis voiturette, the Model D, with its 3¾ CV (2.8 kW) 402 cc (24.5 cu in) single-cylinder engine under the seat and drive to the rear wheels through a two-speed gearbox. This curious design had the passenger facing the driver, who sat in the rear seat. The voiturette had one inestimable advantage: the expanding clutches of the gearbox were operated by a lever on the steering column. The Model D was developed through Models E, G, I, and J, with 6 CV (4.5 kW) by 1902, when the 8 CV (6 kW) Model K rear-entry phaeton appeared, with front-end styling resembling the contemporary Renault. Until World War I, De Dion-Boutons had an unusual decelerator pedal which reduced engine speed and ultimately applied a transmission brake. In 1902, the Model O introduced three speeds, which was standard for all De Dion-Boutons in 1904.

A small number of electric cars were also made in 1901.

De Dion-Bouton supplied engines to vehicle manufacturers such as Hanzer and Société Parisienne who mounted a 2.5 horsepower (1.9 kW) unit directly on the front axle of their front-wheel-drive voiturette the 'Viktoria Combination'.

The De Dion-Bouton engine is considered the first high-speed lightweight internal combustion engine. It was licensed to more than 150 manufacturers and was a popular choice among assemblers of motor bicycles. The small, lightweight four-cycle engine used a battery and coil ignition that was less trouble than hot tube ignition. The bore of 50 mm (2.0 in) and stroke of 70 mm (2.8 in) gave the engine an output of 1 kW (1.3 hp). It was used on many pioneering motor bicycles, and was widely copied by makers including US Brands Indian and Harley-Davidson.

In 1900, the De Dion-Bouton Motorette Company began manufacturing De Dion-Bouton automobiles under license in Brooklyn, New York. A small quantity of American De Dion Motorettes were made. They had either two-seater vis-a-vis or closed coachwork, and were powered by a 3.5 horsepower (2.6 kW) American-made engines.

The venture was in operation for only one year, and the cars gained a reputation for unreliability during that time. Representatives of De Dion in the United States claimed that the licensee had violated the contract and advertised for a new licensee.

In 1900, De Dion-Bouton was the second largest automobile manufacturer in the world after Locomobile, producing 400 cars and 3,200 engines. The company soon began producing engines and licenses for other automobile companies, with an estimate of 150 makes using them. Production was so great, that it proved impossible to test every engine. If one failed on the bench, it was simply disassembled. Every engine was being made by hand because the assembly line had not yet been introduced. By 1904, some 40,000 engines had been supplied across Europe. That year, De Dion-Bouton's factory at Quai National (now Quai de Dion-Bouton), Puteaux, employed 1,300 people and produced more than 2,000 cars, all hand-made.

The engine moved to the front in 1903 in the Populaire, which had a 700 or 942 cc (42.7 or 57.5 cu in) engine, the latter being powerful enough to allow trucks to be added to cars, and by the end of the year, a reverse gear had also appeared. It was joined by the 6 CV (4 kW) 864 cc (52.5 in) Types N and Q (the latter a low-priced K), the 8 CV (6 kW) R, and their first multi-cylinder model, the two-cylinder 1728 cc (105 in) 12 CV (8 kW) S, followed in 1904 by the four-cylinder 2,545 cc (155.3 cu in) 15 CV (11 kW) Type AD and 24 CV (18 kW) AI. The cars were also becoming more and more conventional in styling, with the radiator moving in front of the engine and the clutch changing from a hand lever to a pedal.

A pair of works 10 CV (7.5 kW) De Dion-Boutons, in the hands of Cormier and Collignon, ran in the 1907 Peking to Paris rally, without success. Bouvier St. Chaffray did no better in the New York to Paris in 1908. That year, De Dion-Bouton peaked as a manufacturer.

The company became the first to make a successful mass-produced V8 engine, a 35 CV (26 kW) 6,107 cc (372.7 cu in) CJ in 1910, followed by a 7.8 liter and a 14.7 liter for the U.S., as well as by a 3,534 cc (215.7 cu in) Type CN in 1912. (They trailed Ader in racing the 1906 Adams, which used an Antoinette aircraft engine.) This would be the company's last innovation.

During World War I, the company made gun parts, armoured vehicles, and aircraft engines, as well as cars and trucks. Between 1913 and 1918, it produced an anti-aircraft weapons system for the French Army, consisting of a Canon de 75 modèle 1897 field gun mounted on a V8-powered De Dion-Bouton truck.

In Dublin, during the Easter Rising of 1916, which began the Irish War of Independence, The O'Rahilly drove his De Dion Bouton up to the Irish HQ in O'Connell Street and, discovering that the Rising he had planned and trained soldiers for, and then tried to prevent, was actually happening, he drove it into a barricade, walked into the GPO and said: "I've helped to wind the clock, I've come to hear it strike." He was killed in a charge against a machine gun nest in Moore Street days later. A famous photograph shows the skeleton of the car in its barricade.

The company stagnated after World War I. The V8 continued to appear until 1923 and, in spite of new models with front-wheel brakes, the factory closed for much of 1927. On reopening, two models were listed, the Type LA, with a 1,982 cc (120.9 cu in) four-cylinder overhead valve, aluminium-piston engine, and the Type LB, with a 2,496 cc (152.3 cu in) straight-8. The latter was very expensive and sales were few, despite an increase in engine size growth to 3 litres (180 cu in) in 1930. A rumored takeover by Peugeot or Mercedes did not materialize, leading to the end of passenger car production in 1932.

Small numbers of commercial vehicles were made until 1950, and the last vehicles to carry the De Dion badge were license-made Land Rovers in the early 1950s. The company name was bought by a motorcycle maker in 1955.

De Dion-Bouton built railcars and railcar trailers used on many of the metre gauge railways in France and abroad. The first railcars were produced in the early 1920s, with the Chemin de Fer des Côtes-du-Nord receiving its first vehicles in 1923.

Deafness in France covers the experiences, education, and community of deaf and hard of hearing (DHH) people in France. The history of deaf and hard of hearing (DHH) people in France is long. As of 2014, there were about 10,000,000 (10 million) hearing impaired people in France (16.1% of the population), of whom about 360,000 (0.6% of the population) had "very serious or total" functional limitations, meaning they were unable to hear a conversation with multiple people and who identified as deaf or hard of hearing. While French Sign Language (LSF) is the main sign language in France, American Sign Language (ASL) is also used and studied. French Cued Speech, a mixture of spoken French and LSF, is also not uncommon.

DHH individuals in France sometimes take steps in early and mid-life to integrate themselves into hearing society. One of the most common steps is using cochlear implants, devices affixed to ear structures that transmit sounds to the auditory nerve. This allows certain types of hearing loss to be bypassed. Many children born in France are screened for deafness within a week of birth, and when deafness is found, many doctors immediately recommend a cochlear implant for the child. This is controversial, with many parents believing it is too early to apply the procedure. France is recognized for identifying DHH children earlier than most other countries, and many people say that cochlear implantation is undertaken too early, potentially alienating DHH children. Speech therapy, which some associate with alienation, is also commonplace. In speech therapy, DHH people are trained to speak. This gives a sense of abnormality to many involved, but it is carried out because it eases functioning for many DHH individuals outside DHH communities and in predominantly non-signing communities.

Communities and structures exist to prevent DHH individuals from being alienated and to celebrate them. Small, informal communities of DHH individuals are common; in these relatively close-knit circles, cochlear implants, speech therapy, and other methods of conforming are unnecessary. Associations exist to represent the needs of and celebrate DHH individuals. Examples include performances and classes at the IVT theater; the political advocacy of FNSF for DHH people; and the bi-yearly Festival Clin d'Oeil. This festival celebrates arts, parties, movies, and conversation, entirely signed and geared toward DHH individuals. These structures help form communities around deafness, and many individuals shy away from the societally enforced conformist practices in favor of this independent community and their various subsets across the DHH spectrum.

Since 1989, French law has standardized second-language education during primary school; however, unlike in some other countries, it prohibits DHH students ’ primary or secondary language from being a sign language. This presents major obstacles. A 2005 law, designed as an equal rights policy, integrated DHH students into mainstream schools, removing much of the support they previously had. As a result, many DHH students attend schools with staff not trained or funded to effectively teach them. These students tend to fall behind. 99.6% of DHH students take English as their first foreign language; the majority who take a second foreign language choose French Sign Language, as this is the earliest opportunity to study their native language. DHH students therefore must generally take two foreign language courses before their native LSF. Many withdraw from their second languages and put themselves behind academically in order to master French; this strategy was popularized by a 2003 study by Ivani Fuselier‐Souza. Some schools teach French cued speech, or "signed French"—a mixture of LSF and spoken French—to mixed classes of hearing and DHH students, but the use of this technique is limited by low levels of training and funding.

While some schools are geared toward DHH students specifically, not all DHH children have access to them, so many language-deficient DHH individuals go through their education without tools to succeed. One 2020 study on spelling errors made by DHH French students showed that while the number of spelling errors did not vary much, the severity of each spelling error ran deeper due to fundamental misunderstandings of the language and, as a result, was significantly harder to understand.

In 1755, a French priest, Abbe Charles-Michel de L'Épée, opened a school for the deaf using his own funds. This school produced LSF, which is generally considered the first complete sign language directly traceable to a modern sign language.

Around this time, with the advent of French Sign Language, caretakers of DHH people shifted from being primarily educators to being doctors. Due to new forms of communication, many diseases and injuries became quicker and easier to diagnose. The amount of care DHH people receive from doctors and educators is now greater. However, there are issues with the rate of identification of deadly diseases and infections, particularly cancer, for DHH people; in that case, the average stage of identification is roughly a full stage later than typical identification.

A particularly tense time in deaf history was during World War II, during which many deaf people were killed as part of population culling under Nazi orders. France was a place where this was practiced, and while no specific numbers are available, the effects were not insignificant.

There were conflicts in France itself, where many deaf people applied to work in factories to aid the war effort but were turned away unlawfully. In the wake of this, letters were written and published in popular newspapers such as the Gazette, and policies that made it illegal to turn away deaf workers were put into place. However, these policies affected only French deaf males due to other policies in place.

In 1942, the French Prime Minister Pierre Laval conducted a worker-prisoner exchange with Germany. For every three French workers he sent to Germany, a prisoner of war would be freed and released back to France. Deaf workers were primarily sent, and many ended up becoming prisoners of war themselves, mainly those who could not quickly learn to interpret spoken German; these were the majority.

Perhaps as a result of the active ways that DHH individuals made themselves prominent and heard in wartime France, more deaf characters appeared in French media, leading to a flourishing of deaf arts and a fight for individuality.

The FNSF (Fédération Nationale des Sourds de France, National Federation of Deafness in France) is a federation involved in 89 different organizations, comprising a wide array of topics in which the views of the DHH community are underrepresented. This federation seeks to ensure that the rights and views of DHH individuals in France are more fully considered and helps oversee some legal processes. As of 2021, this federation was involved in meetings with the Ministries of National Education and Social Affairs, the National Consultative Committee for People with Disabilities, the High Authority of Health, the National Institute of Prevention for Education and Health, the National Monuments Center, and the Superior Audiovisual Council, among others. The predominant values of the federation are culture, unity, participation, self-representation, consistency, patrimony, and solidarity. These values are upheld in its decisions. They are the values placed at the center of education in the camps that it hosts across Europe to facilitate the education of LSF for underprivileged DHH children. It is a member of the European Union of the Deaf and the World Federation of the Deaf.

IVT (International Visual Theater) is based in Paris, where it has been stationed since 1981. The organization is run by Emmanuelle Laborit and Jennifer Lesage-David, who use the theater as an educational and community-building center for individuals in the DHH community. Many attend the theater to take classes, participate in performances, and be in a setting where LSF is the standard. Dozens of shows run annually, and hundreds attend classes over the same period. Classes on language, culture, various arts, and more are held within the building and online, as the theater contributes as broadly as it can to the educational facilitation of DHH people in France.

DEAFI, founded in 2009, is a French communication organization that helps the deaf community by improving communication. To broaden education and communication, the company specializes in communication and connections and is known for webcams that aid in the remote use of LSF. The company assists in online communication, especially during the COVID-19 outbreak. Its overall goal is to give clients the tools to become independent. The company further specializes in connecting its clients with specialized education and job opportunities to facilitate future independence.

Dear Future Mom (originally in French: Chère Future Maman) is a television campaign created by 15 European associations active in the field of Down syndrome, advocating for an inclusive and welcoming society for people with this condition through a message that is intended to be anti- eugenics.

The campaign was widely broadcast on 21 March 2014, during the World Down Syndrome Day, across all of Europe.

This campaign led to controversy in France, where the broadcast of the clip was suspended by the French Conseil supérieur de l'audiovisuel due to its impact on mothers who had opted for a medical termination of pregnancy (MTP).

The Dear Future Mom campaign was initially created by 15 European associations in the field of Down syndrome, including in France, Les Amis d’Éléonore, which is secular and pro-choice, and the Fondation Jérôme-Lejeune [ fr ], which is controversial for its anti-abortion stance. The Italian association CoorDown, which advocates for the integration of people with Down syndrome into society, supervised the production of the clip.

The campaign, lasting 2 minutes and 30 seconds, was broadcast on the occasion of World Down Syndrome Day on 21. It features young people with Down syndrome (of European origin, including some French) expressing their happiness in life, and was described as simple and touching on the LCI website. The clip is addressed, as its title suggests, to a mother expecting a child diagnosed with Down syndrome. The people with Down syndrome explain:

"Dear Future Mom, don't be afraid. Your son will be able to do many things. He will be able to hug you, run towards you, speak and tell you that he loves you."

The message of this clip aims to comfort all future parents and raise awareness about prenatal screening, as 96% of fetuses diagnosed with Down syndrome are aborted in France.

In France, a 30-second excerpt from this campaign was broadcast on television channels such as TF1, M6, Direct 8, and Canal+, between March and April 2014. On YouTube, the French version of the video garnered more than 4.5 million views in six days, eventually reaching over 7 million views, according to the French newspaper Le Monde.

In June 2014, the French Conseil supérieur de l'audiovisuel (CSA) requested the suspension of the broadcast of the campaign excerpt by French channels, arguing that it is unlikely to elicit spontaneous support, and that its message is not of public interest as it is likely to distrurb women who have undergone a Medical termination of pregnancy.

The CSA claimed to have received complaints regarding the message conveyed by the clip, which motivated its negative opinion on the broadcast. In December 2014, the president of the Superior Council of Audiovisual provided an anonymized copy of these complaints.

Seven young adults with Down syndrome appealed to the Council of State to contest the censorship by the CSA, citing their freedom of expression. A hearing was granted to them on 7 September 2016, without the presence of a lawyer, in what the newspaper Le Monde described as an unprecedented move. Later on, the Council of State published its decision to reject the appeals of the Down syndrome associations. In its decision, it ruled that the portrayal of a positive view of the personal and social life of young people with Down syndrome serves a public interest, but also that the CSA did not make any legal or factual error in classifying the broadcast of the campaign as inappropriate.

The European Court of Human Rights (ECHR), seized by several associations, declared their application inadmissible in 2022.

In France, the policy of decentralisation was initiated by acts of the French Parliament known as Gaston Defferre laws in 1982. Prior to the new laws French municipalities and departments enjoyed a limited autonomy under laws passed in 1871 and 1884.

Decentralisation in France can be divided into three categories: institutional, territorial and functional decentralisation.

This is the process of transferring power to newly created institutions and is different from the act of deconcentration of power, which is the transfer of power within the same institution. This decentralisation is general in nature and affects all policies or powers related to the territory or targeted to specific areas of public policy and government. A further manifestation of this category is the decentralisation of the Banque de France and other public bodies (French : Groupement d'intérêt public).

This aspect of decentralisation is geared to giving the territorial collectivities in France separate defined responsibilities and resources and to provide for the election of representatives by the inhabitants of those territories. Again this is different from deconcentration, which is when the central government aims to improve efficiency by delegating certain policy and powers to a centrally nominated representative (Prefect).

The decentralisation laws passed on 10 August 1871 and 5 April 1884 saw the attribution of powers to departmental councils and municipal councils. Until the 1982 laws the departmental councils had very limited powers and were effectively under the stewardship of the departments’ prefects.

The 1982 law passed by the government of Pierre Mauroy introduced three new elements:

The 1983 Laws (Gaston Defferre Laws) dating from 7 January and 22 July defined the responsibilities of the new bodies and how they would be financed.

These laws followed the first failed attempt at decentralisation (referendum to reform the senate and regionalisation) in 1969 by General De Gaulle.

In 2002 and 2004 the second stage of territorial decentralisation was set in motion by Jean-Pierre Raffarin. The 2003 change to the Constitution introduced the principle of financial autonomy of territorial Collectivities and saw the introduction of the words Region and Decentralisation in the French Constitution. The changes also introduced the possibility of holding local referendums and the right to petition.

The changes to the Constitution put in place the financial autonomy of the three levels of local government (commune, department and region) and the transfer to the regions of new responsibilities in 2004 and 2005.

This aspect of decentralisation takes place when central or local government decides not to directly carry out one of its powers but to transfer the power to a public body or quango.

In such a case the body has a clearly defined function and budget to carry out the function. Examples could be Universities or the RATP transport authority in Paris.

In 2006 47% (89 billion euros) of local spending was covered by taxes and duties set and raised locally. The main direct taxes are:

In 2006 this represented 33% (62 billion Euro) of local spending. The grants cover the increased spending of local authorities due to the transfer of responsibilities from the central to local government due to decentralisation.

The grants and transfers fall into 3 categories:

The local authorities are free to spend these resources as they decide, however due to ever increasing costs of these grants a Stability Pact was put in place in 1996 and later replaced by a Growth and Solidarity pact in 1999.

Borrowing is the third biggest source of resources for local government in France. In 2006 it represented 9% (17 billion euros) of spending and has been in constant decline since 1997.

Local authorities do not need to seek central government authorisation in order to borrow money but all resources from borrowing can only be spent on investment (not current spending).

The remainder of local Government resources (11%) come from rents, duties and European structural funds.

Between 1982 and 2007 total spending by Local Government grew from 56 billion euros to 168 billion euros.

In 2007 66% of total spending by Local Government was to cover current expenses, including:

Totaling 68 billion euros in 2007, it includes:

The Decize Coal Mines were a significant coal mining operation within the Decize-La Machine coal basin, located in the Nièvre department of Bourgogne-Franche-Comté, France. Coal extraction in the region is documented from the 15th century, with industrial operations peaking in the 19th and 20th centuries under the Schneider Company from 1869 to 1946. Nationalized in 1946 under Charbonnages de France, the mines were integrated with the Blanzy Coal Mines until their closure in 1974 after five centuries of activity. The mining legacy endures through preserved remnants such as mine entrances, slag heaps, railways, ruins, workers' housing, and repurposed buildings, profoundly shaping the region's economic, social, environmental, and cultural landscape.

The coal basin is situated in La Machine, north of Decize, in southern Nièvre, within the Bourgogne-Franche-Comté region of eastern France. The mining operations were centered in La Machine, a key industrial hub in the region.

The town of La Machine derives its name from a baritel, a horse-powered winch installed in 1689 by workers from Liège. These workers had gained renown for constructing the Machine de Marly, the largest mechanism of its time, at Versailles. Engineer Daniel Michel, a cousin of the Machine de Marly's builder Rennequin Sualem, arrived in Nièvre in 1689 to install the baritel, later settling in the region. His descendants continued his work, and a street in La Machine still bears his name.

Coal mining in Decize is first recorded in a 1488 contract, marking the earliest evidence of surface coal extraction. Initially, mining involved shallow pits or hillside excavations to supply local forges, managed by the Dukes of Nevers, the Saint Pierre de Decize Priory, and the Lord of Écots. Before the 13th century, little documentation exists, but land was divided among the Lordship of Écots (under the Bailliage of Nevers), the Dukes of Nevers, and the Minimes Priory of Saint Pierre. These landowners permitted charcoal burners to extract coal from their forests. In 1489, a charcoal burner named Loison was authorized to extract ten cartloads of coal weekly. Over a hundred small pits, known as “crots,” were dug in the woodlands.

In 1669, Jean-Baptiste Colbert noted the region's mining potential during a visit, prompting financier Henry Landry to lease the lands (except those of the Duke of Nevers) for exploitation. Landry employed 200 Liège miners and engineer Daniel Michel, who introduced baritels, pumps, and drive wheels, and dug new mine shafts. Over 200 mules transported coal to the Loire River at Decize. However, operations declined after Louis XIV ’s wars and naval defeats, leading to successive entrepreneurs abandoning the mines. In 1776, the Duke of Nevers leased coal operations under the Glénons forest to Pinet and Gounot, who already worked the Minimes and Écots forests. By a decree of 13 May 1780, they gained rights to exploit the entire region's mines, which were transferred to Boudart in 1784. A steam engine was installed in 1782, but the unprofitable mine was abandoned. The French Revolution exacerbated the situation, with the mine's owner fleeing to England, leading to its sequestration. It passed through several owners, becoming state property by 1794, before returning to Mallevault in 1806. By 1801, the mine had eight shafts reaching 80 metres (260 ft) and produced 8,000 tonnes (7,900 long tons; 8,800 short tons) annually.

In 1816, a Société anonyme des mines de houille de Decize (Decize Coal Mines Limited Company) was created. It performed major works, installed several steam engines, and ordered over 300 miners' lamps. Rolling mills were installed in what became an industrialized coal mine. It employed 56 people in 1835. Considering their entourage, it is estimated that over 1,700 people were already dependent on the operation. The town was home to 80 housing units and barracks with around ten apartments. The Loire at Decize became the main hub for transporting coal to the French arsenals. Local industries (glassworks) used this fuel to heat their products. By 1842, production had risen to 40,000 tons, and the coal mine was ranked 11th among French coal mines. This attracted new investors.

After 1860, demand for coal increased. The development of industrial basins benefited the coal mines of Saint-Étienne, Commentry, and Blanzy. The factories at Le Creusot needed more and more coal for their blast furnaces. It was for this reason that the La Machine coal mine was bought out in 1869 by the Schneider company, then France's largest (over 10,000 employees). Eugène I Schneider and his brother Adolphe Schneider acquired the 8,000-hectare Decize coal concession. After a few adjustments, production soon rose to over 150,000 tons a year, all of which was absorbed by the Creusot iron and steel industry. The financial and industrial resources of the Schneiders enabled the modernization of equipment and the construction of roads, churches, schools, marshalling yards, workers' housing estates, locks, and forges. The paternalism of the company's managers improved living conditions for miners' families in their housing estates. In this way, the mine lived quietly for almost 80 years under the reign of the Schneiders.

At the time of nationalization, the town had a population of over 6,000, a quarter of whom worked in the mine. Most of the latter were housed in workers' housing estates built by the Company near the shafts:

On February 18, 1890, a coal dust explosion devastated the Marguerite shaft. Two mine blasts, fired too close together, were a long time coming. The first raised a cloud of coal dust; the second set the dust ablaze, and the fire spread like lightning through the galleries. All the workers in the gallery from which the blast had originated were burned, more or less severely, or asphyxiated. Fifteen workers were pulled out dead. Three more corpses were later discovered under a landslide. Eight men who had been brought up alive were to die that evening or the following day. Unfortunately, as the Zagots well was partly ventilated by the Marguerite well, toxic gases spread through it, claiming seventeen victims. In all, 43 people died in this disaster—the worst disaster in the basin's history. The disaster's toll was mitigated as the day was a holiday, reducing the number of workers present.

In 1943, under Schneider's ownership, the mines were managed by director D. Charroux. Miners were divided into two categories: Category 1 (over 30 hours weekly) and Category 2 (under 30 hours). These conditions reflected the company's structured labor management during wartime.

After World War II, France's “Battle of Coal” led to the nationalization of all mines. On 28 June 1946, the Decize mines were acquired by Charbonnages de France and integrated with the Blanzy Coal Mines. Miners gained improved conditions, including early retirement at 50, healthcare, social protections, and paid leave. However, detachment from Le Creusot weakened the mine, reducing it to a minor satellite of Blanzy, ranking ninth in central France's production. Investments in mechanization and infrastructure continued until 1957, but the shift to oil, gas, and nuclear energy sealed coal's decline. By 1961, pits like Henri-Paul and Zagots closed, and production fell to 0.5% of national output by 1967. The final pit closed in 1974.

Upon closure in 1974, Charbonnages de France managed miner reconversion: 507 of 800 workers retired, about 100 were reassigned to Montceau-les-Mines, and others sought work elsewhere. La Machine lost over half its population and its sole industry, leaving the town economically devastated.

On 3 May 1970, former miners founded the Association Machinoise pour la Conservation du Souvenir Minier (Machinese Association for the Conservation of Mining Remembrance) to preserve mining heritage. Their efforts saved the Glénons pit from demolition, collecting artifacts, documents, and testimonies. The miners’ school was converted for public visits, and a museum opened in 1983 in former administrative buildings, attracting over 250,000 visitors.

Post-1869, Schneider constructed key surface buildings, including a large courtyard with administrative offices, forges, and stables, near the directors’ château. The Glénons pit retains its headframe, built in Le Creusot and relocated in 1938, alongside the miners’ school, now a visitor site. Former washing and sorting facilities were demolished, replaced by the Grénetier pond and surrounding forest.

In 1841, La Machine pioneered a unique horse-drawn railway with five dry locks or wagon elevators, replacing donkey transport. These used a counterweight system where loaded wagons descending hills raised empty ones, eliminating external power needs. This system, inspired by canal navigation, was replaced in 1873 by steam locomotives and a gently sloped railway.

The mines closed on 1 August 1974. The Glénons pit, preserved with its headframe, shaft station, and winding engine building, houses the Museum of the Mine of La Machine, alongside other mining structures.

Remaining mining relics include abandoned or repurposed slag heaps, industrial buildings, and structures like the Minimes and Chapelle pits, some sealed or in ruins.

Henri-Paul shaft extraction machine building

The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (French: Déclaration des droits de l'Homme et du citoyen de 1789), set by France's National Constituent Assembly in 1789, is a human and civil rights document from the French Revolution ; the French title can be translated in the modern era as "Declaration of Human and Civil Rights". Inspired by Enlightenment philosophers, the declaration was a core statement of the values of the French Revolution and had a significant impact on the development of popular conceptions of individual liberty and democracy in Europe and worldwide.

The declaration was initially drafted by Marquis de Lafayette with assistance from Thomas Jefferson, but the majority of the final draft came from Abbé Sieyès. Influenced by the doctrine of natural right, human rights are held to be universal : valid at all times and in every place. It became the basis for a nation of free individuals protected equally by the law. It is included at the beginning of the constitutions of both the French Fourth Republic (1946) and French Fifth Republic (1958) and is considered valid as constitutional law.

The content of the document emerged largely from the ideals of the Enlightenment. Marquis de Lafayette prepared the principal drafts in consultation with his close friend Thomas Jefferson. In August 1789, Abbé Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès and Honoré Mirabeau played a central role in conceptualizing and drafting the final Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen.

The last article of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen was adopted on 26 August 1789 by the National Constituent Assembly, during the period of the French Revolution, as the first step towards writing a constitution for the Kingdom of France. Inspired by the Enlightenment, the original version of the declaration of rights of man was discussed by the representatives based on a 24-article draft proposed by the sixth bureau, one of thirty conference groups in the Assembly, led by Jérôme Champion de Cicé. The draft was later modified during debates. A second and longer declaration, also known as the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen of 1793, was written out in 1793 but never formally adopted.

The concepts in the declaration come from the philosophical and political duties of the Enlightenment, such as individualism, the social contract as theorized by the Genevan philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and the separation of powers espoused by the Baron de Montesquieu. As can be seen in the texts, the French declaration was heavily influenced by the political philosophy of the Enlightenment and principles of human rights, as was the U.S. Declaration of Independence which preceded it (4 July 1776).

These principles were widely shared throughout European society, rather than confined to a small elite as in the past. This took different forms, such as ' English coffeehouse culture ', and extended to areas colonised by Europeans, particularly British North America. Contacts between diverse groups in Edinburgh, Geneva, Boston, Amsterdam, Paris, London, or Vienna were much greater than often appreciated.

Transnational elites who shared ideas and styles were not new; what changed was their extent and the numbers involved. Under Louis XIV, Versailles was the centre of French culture, fashion and political power. Improvements in education and literacy over the course of the 18th century meant larger audiences for newspapers and journals, with Masonic lodges, coffee houses and reading clubs providing areas where people could debate and discuss ideas. The emergence of this " public sphere " led to Paris replacing Versailles as the cultural and intellectual centre, leaving the Court isolated and less able to influence opinion.

Assisted by Jefferson, then American diplomat to France, Lafayette prepared a draft which echoed some of the provisions of the U.S. declaration. However, there was no consensus on the role of the Crown, and until this question was settled it was impossible to create political institutions. When presented to the legislative committee on 11 July 1789, it was rejected by pragmatists such as Jean Joseph Mounier, President of the Assembly, who feared creating expectations that could not be satisfied.

Conservatives like Gérard de Lally-Tollendal wanted a bicameral system, with an upper house appointed by the king who would have the right of veto. On 10 September, the majority led by Sieyès and Talleyrand rejected this in favour of a single assembly, while Louis XVI retained only a " suspensive veto "; this meant he could delay the implementation of a law but not block it. With these questions settled, a new committee was convened to agree on a constitution; the most controversial remaining issue was citizenship, itself linked to the debate on the balance between individual rights and obligations. Ultimately, the 1791 Constitution distinguished between active citizens and passive citizens. As a result, it was never fully accepted by radicals in the Jacobin club.

After editing by Mirabeau, it was published on 26 August as a statement of principle. The final draft contained provisions then considered radical in any European society, let alone France in 1789. French historian Georges Lefebvre argues that combined with the elimination of privilege and feudalism, it "highlighted equality in a way the (American Declaration of Independence) did not". More importantly, the two differed in intent; Jefferson saw the U.S. Constitution and Bill of Rights as fixing the political system at a specific point in time, claiming they 'contained no original thought...but expressed the American mind' at that stage. The 1791 French Constitution was viewed as a starting point, the declaration providing an aspirational vision, a key difference between the two revolutions. Attached as a preamble to the French Constitution of 1791, and that of the 1870 to 1940 French Third Republic, it was incorporated into the current Constitution of France in 1958.

The declaration defines a single set of individual and collective rights for all men. Influenced by the doctrine of natural rights, these rights are held to be universal and valid in all times and places. For example, "Men are born and remain free and equal in rights. Social distinctions may be founded only upon the general good." They have certain natural rights to property, to liberty, and to life. According to this theory, the role of government is to recognize and secure these rights. Furthermore, the government should be carried on by elected representatives.

When it was written, the rights contained in the declaration were only awarded to men. Furthermore, the declaration was a statement of vision rather than reality. The declaration was not deeply rooted in either the practice of the West or even France at the time. The declaration emerged in the late 18th century out of war and revolution. It encountered opposition, as democracy and individual rights were frequently regarded as synonymous with anarchy and subversion. This declaration embodies ideals and aspirations towards which France pledged to struggle in the future.

The declaration is introduced by a preamble describing the fundamental characteristics of the rights, which are qualified as "natural, unalienable and sacred" and "simple and incontestable principles" on which citizens could base their demands. In the second article, "the natural and imprescriptible rights of man" are defined as "liberty, property, security and resistance to oppression ". It called for the destruction of aristocratic privileges by proclaiming an end to feudalism and to exemptions from taxation, freedom, and equal rights for all "Men" and access to public office based on talent. The monarchy was restricted, and all citizens had the right to participate in the legislative process. Freedom of speech and press were declared, and arbitrary arrests were outlawed.

The declaration also asserts the principles of popular sovereignty, in contrast to the divine right of kings that characterized the French monarchy, and social equality among citizens, "All the citizens, being equal in the eyes of the law, are equally admissible to all public dignities, places, and employments, according to their capacity and without distinction other than that of their virtues and of their talents," eliminating the special rights of the nobility and clergy.

Article I – Men are born and remain free and equal in rights. Social distinctions may be founded only upon the general good.

Article II – The goal of any political association is the conservation of the natural and imprescriptible rights of man. These rights are liberty, property, safety and resistance against oppression.

Article III – The principle of any sovereignty resides essentially in the Nation. No body, no individual may exercise any authority which does not proceed directly from the nation.

Article IV – Liberty consists of doing anything which does not harm others: thus, the exercise of the natural rights of each man has only those borders which assure other members of the society the fruition of these same rights. These borders can be determined only by the law.

Article V – The law has the right to forbid only actions harmful to society. Anything which is not forbidden by the law cannot be impeded, and no one can be constrained to do what it does not order.

Article VI – The law is the expression of the general will. All the citizens have the right of contributing personally or through their representatives to its formation. It must be the same for all, either that it protects, or that it punishes. All the citizens, being equal in its eyes, are equally admissible to all public dignities, places, and employments, according to their capacity and without distinction other than that of their virtues and of their talents.

Article VII – No man can be accused, arrested nor detained but in the cases determined by the law, and according to the forms which it has prescribed. Those who solicit, dispatch, carry out or cause to be carried out arbitrary orders, must be punished; but any citizen called or seized under the terms of the law must obey at once; he renders himself culpable by resistance.

Article VIII – The law should establish only penalties that are strictly and evidently necessary, and no one can be punished but under a law established and promulgated before the offense and legally applied.

Article IX – Any man being presumed innocent until he is declared culpable if it is judged indispensable to arrest him, any rigor which would not be necessary for the securing of his person must be severely reprimanded by the law.

Article X – No one may be disquieted for his opinions, even religious ones, provided that their manifestation does not trouble the public order established by the law.

Article XI – The free communication of thoughts and of opinions is one of the most precious rights of man: any citizen thus may speak, write, print freely, but shall be responsible for such abuses of this freedom as shall be defined by law.

Article XII – The guarantee of the rights of man and of the citizen necessitates a public force: this force is thus instituted for the advantage of all and not for the particular utility of those in whom it is trusted.

Article XIII – For the maintenance of the public force and for the expenditures of administration, a common contribution is indispensable; it must be equally distributed to all the citizens, according to their ability to pay.

Article XIV – Each citizen has the right to ascertain, by himself or through his representatives, the need for a public tax, to consent to it freely, to know the uses to which it is put, and of determining the proportion, basis, collection, and duration.

Article XV – The society has the right of requesting an account from any public agent of its administration.

Article XVI – Any society in which the guarantee of rights is not assured, nor the separation of powers determined, has no constitution.

Article XVII – Property being an inviolable and sacred right, no one can be deprived of private usage, if it is not when the public necessity, legally noted, evidently requires it, and under the condition of a just and prior indemnity.

While the French Revolution provided rights to a larger portion of the population, there remained a distinction between those who obtained the political rights in the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen and those who did not. Those who were deemed to hold these political rights were called active citizens. Active citizenship was granted to men who were French, at least 25 years old, paid taxes equal to three days work, and could not be defined as servants. This meant that at the time of the declaration, only male property owners held these rights. The deputies in the National Assembly believed that only those who held tangible interests in the nation could make informed political decisions. This distinction directly affects articles 6, 12, 14, and 15 of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, as each of these rights is related to the right to vote and to participate actively in the government. With the decree of 29 October 1789, the term active citizen became embedded in French politics.

The concept of passive citizens was created to encompass those populations excluded from political rights in the declaration. Because of the requirements set down for active citizens, the vote was granted to approximately 4.3 million Frenchmen out of a population of around 29 million. These omitted groups included women, the poor, domestic servants, enslaved people, children, and foreigners. As the General Assembly voted upon these measures, they limited the rights of certain groups of citizens while implementing the democratic process of the French First Republic. This legislation, passed in 1789, was amended by the creators of the Constitution of the Year III to eliminate the label of an active citizen. The power to vote was then, however, to be granted solely to substantial property owners.

Tensions arose between active and passive citizens throughout the revolution. This happened when passive citizens started to call for more rights or openly refused to listen to the ideals set forth by active citizens. Women in particular were strong passive citizens who played a significant role in the revolution. Olympe de Gouges penned her Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen in 1791 and drew attention to the need for gender equality. By supporting the ideals of the French Revolution and wishing to expand them to women, she represented herself as a revolutionary citizen. Madame Roland also established herself as an influential figure throughout the revolution. She saw women of the French Revolution as holding three roles; "inciting revolutionary action, formulating policy, and informing others of revolutionary events." By working with men, as opposed to working apart from men, she may have been able to further the fight for revolutionary women. As players in the French Revolution, women occupied a significant role in the civic sphere by forming social movements and participating in popular clubs, allowing them societal influence, despite their lack of direct political power.

The declaration recognizes many rights as belonging to citizens (who could only be male). This was despite the fact that after the Women's March on Versailles on 5 October 1789, women presented the Women's Petition to the National Assembly in which they proposed a decree giving women equal rights. In 1790, Nicolas de Condorcet and Etta Palm d'Aelders unsuccessfully called on the National Assembly to extend civil and political rights to women. Condorcet declared "he who votes against the right of another, whatever the religion, color, or sex of that other, has henceforth abjured his own". The French Revolution did not lead to a recognition of women's rights, and this prompted de Gouges to publish her Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen in September 1791, modeled after the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen. It is ironic in the formulation and exposes the failure of the French Revolution, which had been devoted to equality. It states: "This revolution will only take effect when all women become fully aware of their deplorable condition, and of the rights, they have lost in society."

The Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen follows the 17 articles of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen point for point. Camille Naish has described it as "almost a parody... of the original document". The first article of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen proclaims that "Men are born and remain free and equal in rights. Social distinctions may be based only on common utility." The first article of the Declaration of the Rights of Woman and the Female Citizen replies: "Woman is born free and remains equal to man in rights. Social distinctions may only be based on common utility". De Gouges also draws attention to the fact that under French law, women were fully punishable yet denied equal rights, declaring, "Women have the right to mount the scaffold, they must also have the right to mount the speaker's rostrum".

The declaration did not revoke the institution of slavery in the French colonies, as lobbied for by Jacques-Pierre Brissot's Les Amis des Noirs and opposed by the group of colonial planters called the Club Massiac, because they met at the Hôtel Massiac. Despite the lack of explicit mention of slavery in the declaration, it inspired the slave uprisings in Saint-Domingue in the Haitian Revolution, as discussed in C. L. R. James 's history of the Haitian Revolution, The Black Jacobins. In Louisiana, the organizers of the Pointe Coupée Slave Conspiracy of 1795 also drew information from the declaration.

Deplorable conditions for the thousands of enslaved people in Saint-Domingue, the most profitable slave colony in the world, led to the uprisings known as the first successful slave revolt in the New World. Free persons of color were part of the first wave of revolt, but later formerly enslaved people took control. In 1794, the convention was dominated by the Jacobins and abolished slavery, including in the colonies of Saint-Domingue and Guadeloupe. However, Napoleon Bonaparte reinstated it in 1802 and attempted to regain control of Saint-Domingue by sending in thousands of troops. After suffering the losses of two-thirds of the men, many to yellow fever, the French withdrew from Saint-Domingue in 1803. Napoleon gave up on North America and agreed to the Louisiana Purchase by the United States. In 1804, the leaders of Saint-Domingue declared it an independent state, the Republic of Haiti, the second republic of the New World. Napoleon abolished the slave trade in 1815. Slavery in France was finally abolished in 1848.

The vast amount of personal freedom given to citizens by the document created a situation where homosexuality was decriminalized by the French Penal Code of 1791, which covered felonies; the law simply failed to mention sodomy as a crime, and thus no one could be prosecuted for it. The 1791 Code of Municipal Police did provide misdemeanor penalties for "gross public indecency," which the police could use to punish anyone having sex in public places or otherwise violating social norms. This approach to punishing homosexual conduct was reiterated in the French Penal Code of 1810.

In 2003, UNESCO added the 1789 version of the declaration (the first printed version) to its Memory of the World International Register, recognising it as documentary heritage of global importance.

The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 1793 (French: Déclaration des droits de l'Homme et du citoyen de 1793) is a French political document that preceded that country's first republican constitution. The Declaration and Constitution were ratified by popular vote in July 1793, and officially adopted on 10 August; however, they never went into effect, and the constitution was officially suspended on 10 October. It is unclear whether this suspension was thought to affect the Declaration as well. The Declaration was written by the commission that included Louis Antoine Léon de Saint-Just and Marie-Jean Hérault de Séchelles during the period of the French Revolution. The main distinction between the Declaration of 1793 and the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 1789 is its egalitarian tendency: equality is the prevailing right in this declaration. The 1793 version included new rights, and revisions to prior ones: to work, to public assistance, to education, and to resist oppression.

The text was mainly written by Hérault de Séchelles, whose style and writing can be found on most of the documents of the commission that also wrote the French Constitution of 1793 ("Constitution of the Year I") that was never implemented. The first project of the Constitution of the French Fourth Republic also referred to the 1793 version of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen. The 1793 document was written by Jacobins after they had expelled the Girondists. It was a compromise designed as a propaganda weapon and did not fully reflect the radicalism of the Jacobin leaders. It was never put in force.

Equality is the most important aspect of the Declaration of 1793. In its second article, equality is the first right mentioned (followed by liberty, security, and property). In Article 3 states "All men are equal by nature and before the law ". As such, for the authors of this declaration equality is not only before the law but it is also a natural right, that is to say, a fact of nature.

There was already at that time a school of thought that stated that liberty and equality can quickly become contradictory; liberty does not solve social inequalities since there exist some natural inequalities (of talent, intelligence, etc.). That school of thought considered that the government had only to protect liberty and to only proclaim natural equality, and eventually liberty would prevail over social equality since all people have different talents and abilities and are free to exercise them.

The question raised by this declaration is how to solve social inequalities. Article 21 states that every citizen has a right to public help, that society is indebted to each citizen, and therefore has the duty to help them. Citizens have there a right to work and society has a duty to provide relief to those who cannot work. Article 22 declares a right to education. These rights are considered the " second generation rights of Man ", economic and social rights (the first ones would be natural or political). These rights entail a greater government intervention in order to reach society's goal as stated in Article 1: common welfare.

Individual liberty is still a primary right and some aspects are more precisely defined than in Declaration of 1789. The declaration explicitly states the freedom of religion, of assembly, and of the press (Article 7), of commerce (Article 17), and of petition (Article 32). Slavery is prohibited by Article 18, which states: "Every man can contract his services and his time, but he cannot sell himself nor be sold: his person is not an alienable property."

If in a way, this declaration has a more liberal bent in the modern American sense, since it states that there ought to be public policies for the general welfare, it also contains some very strong libertarian aspects. Article 7 states, "The necessity of enunciating these rights supposes either the presence or the fresh recollection of despotism." Article 9: "The law ought to protect public and personal liberty against the oppression of those who govern." Article 33 states that resisting tyranny is a logical consequence of the rights of man: "Resistance to oppression is the consequence of the other rights of man". Article 34 states that if one is oppressed, everyone is. Article 27 states, "Let any person who may usurp the sovereignty be instantly put to death by free men." Although the usurpation of sovereignty is not detailed, sovereignty is explained in article 25 as residing "in the people". There is no doubt that this way of thinking deeply influenced the revolutionary government during the Reign of Terror. Article 35 states, "When the government violates the rights of the people, insurrection is for the people and for each portion of the people the most sacred of rights and the most indispensable of duties." Although this declaration was never enforced (like the Constitution of 1793), history has shown that the French people have followed this advice with many successful (1830, 1848) and unsuccessful (1832, 1870) revolutions throughout the 19th century.

The second decree abolishing slavery in France was signed on April 27, 1848, by the Provisional Government of the Second Republic.

The decree was issued 46 years after the reinstatement of slavery under Napoleon. Promoted by Victor Schœlcher, it definitively abolished slavery in French territories, freeing 251,019 people, and provided compensation to former slave owners for the financial losses resulting from emancipation.

In France, slavery was abolished in the continental kingdom by Louis X through the edict of 3 July 1315 [ fr ], which declared that all individuals are born free and that servants within the kingdom were to be freed. Under this edict, any enslaved person entering the kingdom was granted freedom.

In 1642, King Louis XIII authorized the trade of enslaved Africans, limited to the French Antilles and not applicable to metropolitan France. In 1671, Louis XIV explicitly permitted the triangular trade, allowing the ports of Bordeaux, Nantes, and La Rochelle to participate in the transatlantic slave trade to the colonies. This regulation did not affect the prohibition of slavery in metropolitan France.

The principle of the “ Privilege of the Land of France [ fr ] ” was challenged in the 18th century, as planters opposed legal precedents granting freedom to enslaved people arriving in metropolitan France. In response to lobbying, declarations issued in 1716, 1738, and 1777 allowed owners to bring enslaved individuals into metropolitan France while retaining their status, provided certain administrative requirements were met, including payment of a tax and registration with the Admiralties.

In 1791, the Constituent Assembly reinstated the principle of the privilege of the land of France through the law of 28 September, which declared that all individuals were free upon entering France.

The first emancipation of enslaved people in the colonies occurred in Saint-Domingue on 29 August 1793, initiated by Civil Commissioner Sonthonax.

The law of 4 February 1794 (16 Pluviôse Year II) was the first decree to abolish slavery throughout the French colonies, although its implementation was uneven.

The law of 4 February 1794 was repealed by the law of 20 May 1802. Napoleon Bonaparte did not reinstate slavery in Guadeloupe or Guyana immediately, although separate consular decrees later restored it in these colonies on 16 July and 7 December 1802, respectively. Slavery was not reinstated in Saint-Domingue, where abolition was already in effect. However, it was maintained in colonies where the 1794 law had not been enforced due to local opposition, including the Mascarenes (Réunion, Île de France [ Mauritius ], Rodrigues) and several Caribbean islands recently returned to France by the British under the Peace of Amiens (Martinique, Tobago, Saint Martin, and Saint Lucia).

Following the revolt of enslaved people in Saint-Domingue, Haiti became the first state to officially abolish slavery on its territory.

At the Congress of Vienna on 8 February 1815, the slave trade —defined as the commerce, purchase, and transport of enslaved people in the colonial empires —was theoretically abolished by the United Kingdom, France, Austria, Prussia, Portugal, Russia, Spain, and Sweden, under British influence from the Quadruple Alliance. The participating countries declared that “the slave trade is repugnant to the general principles of morality and humanity.”

Following his return from Elba in 1815, Napoleon issued a decree abolishing the slave trade, aligning France with the Congress of Vienna ’s decision. This resolution was confirmed by the Treaty of Paris on 20 November 1815. Subsequently, the ordinance of 8 January 1817 [ fr ], signed by Louis XVIII, prohibited the slave trade in the French colonies.

The prohibition of the slave trade faced opposition in France, particularly from Atlantic ports such as Bordeaux and Nantes, which sought to resume the trade disrupted since 1793. Although French laws formally prohibited the trade, enforcement was inconsistent. Between 1819 and 1828, officials including the Minister of the Navy, Count Portal, and Prime Minister Count Joseph de Villèle, both with connections to colonial planters, were notably lax in applying the legislation.

Despite official prohibitions, the transatlantic slave trade continued clandestinely in French, Spanish, and Portuguese colonies. In 1820, an estimated 40,000 enslaved people were transported from Africa to the southern United States and Brazil, which imported approximately 20,000 per year between 1820 and 1823, and around 10,000 per year between 1823 and 1852. Because the trade was illegal, conditions during transport were often severe, and enslaved individuals were sometimes thrown overboard to avoid interception by British warships. Awareness of the trade’s human cost grew in Europe, influenced by anti-slavery societies, writers such as André-Daniel Laffon de Ladebat, and organizations like the Committee for the Abolition of the Slave Trade and Slavery. In response, several European governments granted Britain the right to inspect ships in 1831 and 1833, enabling the legal policing of the seas against the slave trade.

In 1831, the government of Jacques Laffitte, which included members of the Society of Christian Morals [ fr ], an organization of liberal opponents engaged in the fight against the slave trade, passed the law of 4 March 1831 [ fr ], aimed at its definitive abolition. The law provided for twenty to thirty years of forced labor for those responsible, imprisonment for the ship’s crew, and a seven-year commitment in the colonies for enslaved people freed during the capture of a ship.

Moderates argued that enslaved people needed to be “prepared for freedom” through education and religious instruction before full emancipation could be granted. Following the adoption of the Mackau laws in 1845, the Duke of Broglie described the legislation as a preparatory measure aimed at improving the conditions of enslaved people in anticipation of eventual freedom.

The Mackau laws represent the final legislative measures before the abolition of 1848. Passed in July 1845, they continued the approach of earlier legislation without signaling a direct move toward emancipation. The laws mandated a minimum period of instruction for enslaved people, limited the number of lashes an owner could administer without judicial authorization to fifteen, and allowed married enslaved individuals with different owners to reunite.

In July 1846, King Louis-Philippe I abolished slavery in the royal domains of Martinique and Guadeloupe, as well as on the island of Mayotte, recently acquired by France. Chief Minister François Guizot did not pursue further measures at that time.

The implementation of these measures in the colonies was uneven. During sessions of the Chamber of Deputies, Ledru-Rollin and Agénor de Gasparin opposed the Mackau law project, criticizing successive legislations for remaining largely unenforced. In the colonies, the opening of new schools, for instance, was accompanied by student selection by local authorities, which often excluded enslaved individuals.

As early as 1831, after a trip to Cuba, Victor Schœlcher argued in the Revue de Paris that enslaved people are human and therefore entitled to freedom. In 1833, in De l'esclavage et de la législation coloniale, he proposed gradual emancipation to prevent potential social unrest and to allow enslaved people to gain economic and intellectual autonomy. In 1838, participating in a literary competition organized by the Société de morale chrétienne, he advocated immediate emancipation without a transitional period. Following his journey to the Antilles in 1840–1841, he published Colonies françaises, abolition immédiate de l'esclavage, addressing planters and proposing the substitution of beet sugar for cane sugar.

The abolitionist movement was also reflected in cultural works, including the 1842 comic opera Le Code noir [ fr ].

In April 1847, the Société de morale chrétienne conducted a petition campaign that collected 11,000 signatures, including those of three bishops, nineteen vicars general, over 850 priests, nearly ninety consistory presidents or pastors, and approximately 6,000 merchants.

At the end of February 1848, during an investigative trip to Senegal, Victor Schœlcher learned of the fall of King Louis-Philippe. He returned to Paris and contacted François Arago, Minister of the Navy and Colonies, who appointed him Under-Secretary of State in charge of the colonies and measures relating to slavery. On 4 March 1848, the provisional government of the Second Republic signed the decree appointing Schœlcher as president of the Commission for the Abolition of Slavery, responsible for preparing emancipation. The commission was established on 5 March, chaired by Schœlcher, and included, among others, Auguste-François Perrinon, a marine artillery battalion chief and future deputy; the Director of the Colonies; Adolphe Gatine [ fr ], lawyer at the Court of Cassation; and Charles Jean-Baptiste Gaumont, a clockmaker. The commission held its first meeting on 6 March. On 27 April, it proposed a series of twelve decrees that emancipated enslaved people, granting them citizenship status—they were henceforth referred to as “new citizens” or “newly free”—and organized the administration of the colonies. The decrees established national workshops in the colonies, created disciplinary workshops to address begging along with a savings fund, structured personal taxation and taxes on tafias, wine, and spirits, and instituted a Labor Day celebration in the colonies. Additional measures organized mortgages, appointed general commissioners of the Republic to enforce the decrees, extended press freedom to the colonies, regulated military recruitment, maritime registration, and the National Guard, provided care for the elderly, infirm, and orphans, and established cantonal juries.

Decree of the Provisional Government Creating the Commission for the Abolition of Slavery, March 4, 1848 “The Provisional Government of the Republic, Considering that no French land can any longer hold slaves; Decrees: A commission is instituted under the provisional Minister of the Navy and Colonies to prepare, as quickly as possible, the act of immediate emancipation in all the colonies of the Republic. The Minister of the Navy will ensure the execution of this decree. Paris, March 4, 1848. F. Arago ”

Decree of the Abolition of Slavery in the French Colonies, April 27, 1848 “Ministry of the Navy and Colonies – Directorate of the Colonies French Republic Liberty – Equality – Fraternity In the Name of the French People The Provisional Government, Considering that slavery is an attack on human dignity; That by destroying man’s free will, it suppresses the natural principle of right and duty; That it is a flagrant violation of the republican motto: ‘Liberty – Equality – Fraternity’; Considering that if effective measures do not closely follow the already proclaimed principle of abolition, the most deplorable disorders could result in the colonies; …” Decrees: Article 1 Slavery shall be entirely abolished in all French colonies and possessions, two months after the promulgation of this decree in each of them. From the date of the decree’s promulgation in the colonies, all corporal punishment and all sales of unfree persons shall be prohibited. Article 2 The system of fixed-term engagement established in Senegal is abolished. Article 3 The governors or General Commissioners of the Republic are charged with implementing all measures necessary to ensure freedom in Martinique, Guadeloupe and their dependencies, the island of La Réunion, Guyana, Senegal and other French establishments on the west coast of Africa, the island of Mayotte and its dependencies, and in Algeria. Article 4 Former slaves convicted of afflictive or correctional penalties for acts that, if committed by free men, would not have incurred such punishment, are amnestied. Individuals deported by administrative order are recalled. Article 5 The National Assembly shall determine the amount of compensation to be granted to the colonists. Article 6 The colonies freed from servitude and the possessions in India shall be represented in the National Assembly. Article 7 The principle “that the soil of France frees the slave who touches it” is applied to the colonies and possessions of the Republic. Article 8 From now on, even in foreign countries, it is forbidden for any French citizen to own, buy, or sell slaves, or to participate, either directly or indirectly, in any trafficking or exploitation of this kind. Any violation of these provisions shall result in the loss of French citizenship. However, French citizens affected by these prohibitions at the time of the decree’s promulgation shall have a period of three years to comply. Those who acquire slaves in foreign countries by inheritance, gift, or marriage must, under the same penalty, emancipate or dispose of them within the same period from the date of acquisition. Article 9 The Minister of the Navy and Colonies and the Minister of War are each responsible, in their respective areas, for enforcing this decree. Done in Paris, in government council, April 27, 1848. Signed: Members of the Provisional Government: DUPONT (de l’Eure), LAMARTINE, CRÉMIEUX, GARNIER-PAGÈS, A. MARRAST, Louis BLANC, ALBERT, FLOCON, LEDRU-ROLLIN, ARAGO, MARIE. Secretary General of the Provisional Government: PAGNERRE

News that the Republic had abolished slavery, following the provisional government ’s decision of 4 March, reached the French colonies a few weeks later and caused significant reaction. By the time the decrees of 24 April arrived, the situation was tense. Although the decrees allowed for a two-month implementation period, events accelerated the process.

On 21 May, in Saint-Pierre, Martinique, a slave named Romain was arrested for playing a drum, a form of communication among enslaved people. The incident triggered an uprising that spread across the island, leading the governor to declare the abolition of slavery on 23 May, prior to the arrival of the envoy carrying the 27 April decree.

On 27 May, once the situation in Guadeloupe had stabilized, Governor Jean-François Layrle [ fr ] proclaimed the general abolition of slavery. By the end of May, the decrees reached La Réunion, but the governor implemented them only on 20 December. In French Guiana, the governor issued the decree on 10 June, with effect from 10 August.

The implementation of the abolition decree was more complex in Algeria and Senegal, as some enslaved people were held by indigenous communities. In Algeria, enforcement was limited in rural areas. In Senegal, to avoid conflict with the Moors, who were slaveholders and provided colonial supplies, the governor instructed local authorities to deny refuge to enslaved individuals seeking asylum in French-controlled areas.

A total of 251,019 enslaved people were freed, including 87,087 in Guadeloupe, 74,447 in Martinique, 60,651 in Réunion, 12,251 in French Guiana, 10,350 in Senegal (9,800 freed and 550 on full-time engagement), 2,733 in Mayotte, and 3,500 in Nosy Bé and Sainte-Marie, based on indemnity claims submitted by former owners.

From the first French colonial settlements in the 16th century until the decree of 27 April 1848, approximately four million enslaved people lived under French rule, including about two million born in Africa and two million in the colonies.

Between 1848 and 1870, the enforcement of abolition decrees was inconsistent, and local authorities reestablished structures reminiscent of slavery through regulations such as “labor police,” which included measures like internal passports.

Article 8 of the 1848 decree prohibited French citizens from owning or trafficking in enslaved people, under penalty of loss of citizenship. Individuals in violation at the time of promulgation, or who later became so through inheritance, gift, or marriage, were given three years to comply. The law extended this prohibition to all French citizens residing in countries where slavery remained legal, affecting approximately 20,000 people, including around 10,000 slave owners, roughly half of whom were concentrated in Louisiana.

The article and the severity of its penalty, which involved loss of citizenship rather than a fine as in the 1843 British legislation, reflected the abolitionist principles of the 1848 republican government. Its aim was to make every French citizen abroad a symbolic protest against slavery and to promote the cause of abolition, encouraging slaveholding societies to follow the example.

Article 8 generated the strongest opposition in Louisiana. By July 1848, the French consul in New Orleans reported that residents might seek American naturalization if the article remained in effect and recommended its repeal. While the leaders of the Second Republic initially rejected compromise, from 1849 onward, some officials became more receptive to these concerns.

Article 8 granted French citizens residing abroad who owned enslaved people a three-year period to divest themselves of this property. As the deadline approached, an amendment supported by the government on 11 February 1851 extended this period to ten years, setting the expiration date at 27 April 1858. Some French slaveholders abroad remained dissatisfied with the prospect of compliance after this period. In Louisiana, the consul reported a local law requiring owners to transport emancipated enslaved people at their own expense to Liberia, which made compliance financially difficult; this position was acknowledged by the relevant French ministers.

The establishment of the Second Empire shifted government priorities, and no measures were taken before the expiration of the extended deadline. In 1858, the law of 28 May, while not repealing Article 8, introduced exceptions for French citizens who owned enslaved people before 1848 or who acquired them through marriage, inheritance, or gift. In practice, these provisions largely limited the effect of Article 8, particularly due to the vague definition of “gift.” As a result, French citizens in Louisiana were able to retain enslaved people until the abolition of slavery in the United States following the Civil War.

As provided in the decree of 27 April 1848, a law passed on 30 April 1849, during the presidency of Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte and the government of Odilon Barrot, provided compensation to former slave owners. A total of 126 million francs in gold was paid for the emancipation of approximately 250,000 enslaved people.

The monetary compensation for former enslaved people was determined by colony. The highest valuations were in La Réunion at 711 francs per person, followed by French Guiana (624 francs), Guadeloupe (469 francs), Martinique (425 francs), Senegal (225 francs), and Madagascar (69 francs).

This compensation law was symbolically repealed in June 2016 by an amendment stating:

Without claiming any intent to compensate the victims of slavery, this amendment proposes moral reparation for the harm suffered by the slaves by repealing the provisions concerning compensation to colonists contained in the aforementioned texts.

During the 19th century, several states that practiced the slave trade and slavery enacted abolition measures. The United States prohibited the slave trade in its 1787 Constitution, with implementation beginning in 1807, while slavery itself continued. The United Kingdom passed legislation on 6 February 1807 to end the trade by 1 January 1809, and abolished slavery on 15 August 1833, effective 1 August 1834. In 1835, the liberal Spanish government abolished the slave trade in its colonies, followed by Portugal in 1836, although enforcement was limited and the decree was not published in some regions, including Mozambique. On 3 December 1837, Pope Gregory XVI condemned the slave trade and slavery in his papal brief In suprema apostolatus fastigio.

On 28 July 1847, Denmark, which had prohibited the slave trade in 1802, abolished slavery in its Caribbean colonies, initially with a twelve-year transitional period, but granted immediate freedom on 3 July 1848. In 1850, Brazil took measures to suppress the slave trade. From 1854, Portugal gradually emancipated enslaved people in its possessions, including those in municipalities and charitable institutions in 1856, and later those owned by churches. On 5 July 1856, enslaved people in Angola were freed, followed by those in the Portuguese Indies on 25 August 1856. The Netherlands abolished slavery in Malaysia on 1 January 1860, and in its Caribbean colonies and Suriname in 1863. In the United States, President Abraham Lincoln signed a decree on 1 January 1863 freeing enslaved people in the Southern states during the Civil War (1861–1865); the law was passed by the House of Representatives on 8 April 1864, by the Senate on 31 January 1865, and ratified by three-quarters of the states on 18 December 1865. Brazil was the last country in the Americas to abolish slavery, doing so in 1888 through the Lei Áurea (Golden Law) without compensation to owners. Mauritania was the last country worldwide to formally abolish slavery, in 1981.

The law recognizing the slave trade and slavery as crimes against humanity [ fr ] established a day of commemoration for the abolition. The date was set four years later, on 10 May, corresponding to the day the law was adopted.

The decree on the goods of the clergy placed at the disposal of the Nation (French - décret des biens du clergé mis à la disposition de la Nation) was a decree passed by the National Constituent Assembly of France on 2 November 1789, during the French Revolution. Proposed by Talleyrand, bishop of Autun, it was carried by 568 votes against 346.

It forced Roman Catholic clergy to give their lands and goods to the French state to pay its debts. Clergy's belongings and lands became ' biens nationaux ' (state goods) and were partly sold off to replenish the state's coffers (assignats). In return the state paid for maintenance of churches and hospitals, poor relief, and other costs incurred for religious purposes, as well as paying priests salaries (initially set at 1200 livres a year, although most - reduced to a 'portion congrue' from tithes - only received 750). Those salaries ceased by another decree of 18 September 1794 suppressing the budget of the Constitutional Church.

In France, the Defender of Rights (DDD) (French : Défenseur des droits) is an independent administrative authority of the Government of France, created by the constitutional revision of July 23, 2008 and instituted by the organic law of March 29, 2011.

The Defender of Rights is an independent administrative authority enshrined by the Constitution of France.

The current Defender of Rights is journalist Claire Hédon.

The expression “Defender of Rights” was used by Gracchus Babeuf in the subtitle of his newspaper Le Tribun du peuple from 1795: “The Defender of Human Rights”.

In 2007, the Reflection and Proposal Committee on the Modernization and Rebalancing of Institutions, known as the “Balladur Committee”, proposed the creation of a “Defender of Fundamental Rights” to replace the Mediator of the Republic, an institution created in 1973 but which is not mentioned by the Constitution. According to the report, the Defender of Fundamental Rights, inspired by the Defender of the People in Spain, should be appointed by the National Assembly.

The organic law of March 29, 2011, amended by the law of December 9, 2016, established four other additional missions for the Defender of Rights:

Dégustation is the careful, appreciative tasting of various food, focusing on the gustatory system, the senses, and high culinary art. Dégustation is more likely to involve sampling small portions of all of a chef's signature dishes in one sitting. Usually consisting of many courses, it may be accompanied by a matching wine degustation which complements each dish.

The French term dégustation is still commonly used in English-language contexts. Modern dégustation probably comes from the French kitchens of the early 20th century and is different from earlier meals with many courses because these meals were served as full-sized meals at each course.

Sampling a selection of cheeses, at home or in a restaurant, may also be called a dégustation. Three to four varieties are normally chosen, generally including a semi-soft cheese, a goat's cheese, and a blue cheese. The stronger varieties are normally tasted last.

A six course dégustation may include two seafood, red meat and dessert items with matching wines while the same menu could have added a vegetarian item, and any other types of dish to expand the menu to (for example) a nine-course dégustation menu.

The popular Spanish style of tapas is similar to the dégustation style, but is not in itself a complete set menu offering the chefs' signature dishes, but instead offers a variety from which the diner can choose.

Delphine Batho (French pronunciation: [ dɛlfin bato ] ; born 23 March 1973 in Paris) is a French politician of Ecology Generation who has been serving as member of the National Assembly. She is a former Minister of Ecology, Sustainable Development and Energy. As a candidate in the 2021 ecologist primary, she came in third place with 22.32% of the vote, advocating degrowth. She was re-elected as a member of parliament in the 2022 legislative elections.

Batho is the daughter of French photographers Claude Batho and John Batho. She attended the Lycée Henri-IV in Paris.

Batho began her militant activity in the high-school students' union FIDL (Fédération indépendante et démocratique lycéenne) while attending the Lycée Henri-IV in Paris. She was elected president of the union in 1990 and became well known for her activism on behalf of students' rights and for the means to study. Following nearly two months of strikes the movement obtained from Lionel Jospin, the Minister for Education, a pledge to spend 4.5 million francs on renovating high schools and to protect certain student rights. In 1992 she left high school, and thus the FIDL, to study history.

Batho joined the anti-racist movement SOS Racisme and when its leadership was renewed in September 1992 Fodé Sylla, aged 29, became president and Batho, a representative of the "second generation SOS" in the words of Le Monde, was elected vice-president.

Batho joined the French Socialist Party (Parti Socialiste – PS) in the mid-1990s as a militant in the Grigny (Essonne) section. She participated, together with Julien Dray, in the party's Socialist Left tendency. At the party's Grenoble Congress she was elected to the national executive committee of the PS. In 2003, during the breakup of the socialist left, she remained loyal to Dray, who employed her at the Île-de-France Regional Council, where she was responsible for security matters. In 2004 she became National Secretary of the PS in charge of security, where she defended the policy of preventative sanctions.

Her thoughts on security matters were taken into account by Ségolène Royal, the PS 's candidate in the French Presidential Election of 2007, who incorporated them into her "just order".

Batho declared her intention to be a candidate for the leadership of the Socialist Party at the Aubervilliers Congress in 2018, but her application was ultimately rejected due to a lack of support. Batho announced in an interview published on 2 May 2018 that she was quitting the Socialist Party to become president of Ecology Generation, and would also quit the New Left group in the National Assembly.

In the parliamentary elections of 2007, Batho was the PS 's candidate in the 2nd constituency of Deux-Sèvres, which Ségolène Royal had represented before running in the presidential election of that year. In the PS internal nomination contest, she received 54.75% of the vote as against 45.25% for Éric Gauthier, Royal's former substitute.

In the first round of the elections, held on 10 June, she received 20,690 votes (a 44.55% share), ahead of the second-placed Jean-Pierre Griffault, who received 16,131 votes (34.73%) for the UMP. In the second, run-off round, Griffault gained a 42.58% share (19,669 votes), and Batho was elected with 57.42% of the total ballot (26,524 votes).

Batho served as Royal's spokesperson in 2009 for the 2011 French Socialist Party presidential primary, alongside Najat Vallaud-Belkacem.

In the legislative elections of 2012, Batho was re-elected in the first round with 53.18% of the votes cast in the 2nd constituency of Deux-Sèvres, modified following the redistribution of the French legislative constituencies in 2010. After her election as president of Ecology Generation, she left the New Left group in the National Assembly and joined the non-registered.

On 16 May 2012, Batho was appointed Minister Delegate for Justice. During the legislative elections, she was re-elected as a deputy in the first round. Without sufficiently precise attributions within the Ayrault I government, and after a month of difficult relations with her supervising minister, she obtained the full-service portfolio of Minister of Ecology, Sustainable Development and Energy on 21 June 2012 in the Ayrault government composed after the legislative elections.

Under Batho's leadership, a law was revised to revise the mining lawon the exploitation of conventional hydrocarbons, as well as another giving the State, like EDF, the power to decide the closure of nuclear power plants, the first to be that of Fessenheim. She supports the decision to continue building an airport at Notre-Dame-des Landes.

On 2 July 2013 the President of the Republic announced that he was terminating Batho's duties as Minister of Ecology, Sustainable Development and Energy following an interview in which she described as "bad "The 2014 budget of his ministry and admitted" [his] disappointment with the government ".

On 4 July 2013, at a press conference, she said: I did not make a mistake or a mistake. The government, she adds, marks a turning point in terms of the desire to complete the ecological transition. It is the turning point of rigor which does not say its name and which prepares the march to power for the extreme right in our country. [...] Certain economic forces [...] did not accept the level of ambition set for the energy transition. [...] Is it normal that the CEO of Vallourec, Philippe Crouzet, announced my upcoming fall weeks ago in the United States.

During the 2017 French legislative election, Batho was re-elected with 56.94% of the vote against the LREM 's candidate, Christine Heintz (43.06%), who had preceded her during the first round and had received the support of Ségolène Royal. In parliament, she serves on the Committee on Economic Affairs.

In 2018, Batho initiated the amendment to ban glyphosate with a term in 2021; his proposal is massively rejected, and she denounces the acts of lobbyists in the National Assembly.Indeed, Agrochemical interests were able to obtain the Batho's amendment before the members of the National Assembly.

In November 2019, Batho's amendment to the anti-waste bill, aimed at banning Black Friday promotions by including them as "aggressive commercial practices", was adopted in committee.

On 2 May 2018, Batho announced that she would be leaving the Socialist Party and that she will take over the helm of Ecology Generation in September, succeeding Yves Piétrasanta. She also left the New Left group in the National Assembly and joined the non-registered. She is elected new president of Ecology Generation on 10 September 2018.

In May 2020, Batho joined and became vice-president of the new group Ecology Democracy Solidarity, essentially composed of former members of the group La République en Marche; however, the group was dissolved later that year.

Batho pleads for an alliance of environmentalists for the 2022 presidential election.

Delphine Gény-Stephann, (French pronunciation: [ dɛlfin ʒeni stefan ] ; née Gény, born 19 November 1968 in Paris) is a French politician, senior civil servant and business executive. She served as Secretary of State to the Minister of the Economy and Finance, Bruno Le Maire, from 24 November 2017 to 16 October 2018.

Gény-Stephann is an engineer from the École Polytechnique and the École Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées. She is also a graduate of the MBA of the College of Engineers.

In 1994, Gény-Stephann joined the General Directorate of the Treasury of the Ministry of the Economy and Finance. Between 1999 and 2005, she headed the office at the Agence des participations de l'État. As part of her role in the General Directorate of the Treasury, she sat on the board of directors of several public companies.

In 1999, Gény-Stephann was appointed to represent the State on the board of directors of the Guarantee and Participation Management Company, the Euroméditerranée public development institution and the Défense Conseil International (DCI). From 1999 to 2001, she sat on the board of directors of the Defence region development board.

In 2001, Gény-Stephann represented the state on the board of directors of several companies in the defense sector, including SNPE, SNECMA, GIAT Industries and CIVI.POL Conseil. She is also appointed to the Board of Directors of La Française des Jeux.

In 2002, Gény-Stephann joined the board of directors of Arte, and in 2003, of France 3 before being replaced in 2004. Until her appointment to the government, she was Vice President of Planning and Strategy for Saint-Gobain.

On November 24, 2017, Gény-Stephann was appointed Secretary of State to the Minister of the Economy and Finance Bruno Le Maire, in Édouard Philippe 's second government. She was unknown to the general public at the time of her appointment.

In 2018, Gény-Stephann's net worth was reported to be at 16 million euros.

The Democratic and Republican Left group (French : Groupe de la Gauche démocrate et républicaine or GDR) is a parliamentary group in the National Assembly including representatives of the French Communist Party (PCF) as well as leftist parties with bases in Overseas France. Since 1 April 2025, the group has been co-presided by Stéphane Peu (PCF, Seine-Saint-Denis) and Emeline K/Bidi (Le Progrès, Réunion), succeeding André Chassaigne, who led the group from 2012 to 2025.

The group comprises 17 deputies following the 2024 French legislative election : eight members of the PCF and nine deputies representing overseas territories including Réunion, Martinique, French Guiana, and French Polynesia. The GDR has consistently advocated for social justice, public services, territorial equality, and the interests of both working-class communities and France's overseas departments and territories.

The electoral record of the French Communist Party (PCF) in 2007 was marked by dismal performances, first in the presidential election in which the party's national secretary Marie-George Buffet stood as a candidate supported by the PCF within the framework of an anti-liberal alliance; she was routed in the first round, receiving just 1.93% of the overall vote, a result deemed "catastrophic" for the party. The party's result in the subsequent legislative elections was similarly middling: though it outpaced the projections of pollsters, which placed it between only 5 and 15 seats, it still fell short of the threshold of 20 deputies, then required for the formation of a parliamentary group in the National Assembly. As a result, Alain Bocquet, outgoing leader of the preceding communist group in the assembly, demanded on 18 June that the requirement for the number of deputies to form a political group be lowered to 15 from 20 then needed, with a total of 15 deputies elected under the PCF label in the legislative elections (not counting PCF dissident Maxime Gremetz or PCF associate deputies Jean-Pierre Brard and Jacques Desallangre). Bocquet, referring to the recent election of Nicolas Sarkozy in the presidential election, added "if the president of the Republic is a democrat, he will prove it", further arguing that "contrary to all predictions, the conditions for the constitution of a communist group in the National Assembly have been met, and their recognition is only a regulatory formality".

During the evening of 17 June, the second round of the legislative elections, Buffet issued an appeal to form an "open" group to carry the "people's voice" in the National Assembly, singling out the Greens (VEC) as a potential target. PCF spokesperson Olivier Dartigolles speculated that the party could secure an alliance "with the non-inscrits, with the elected officials of the DOM-TOM, with the progressive elected officials of the left", believing that the other forces on the left were sufficient to constitute a parliamentary group. Recognizing the predicament of the PCF, ecologist deputy Noël Mamère proposed that evening that the four members of the Greens elected in the legislative elections join the communist deputies in order to provide the necessary support to form a political group in the National Assembly, saying that he believed that the Green deputies accept the opening proposed by Buffet, hoping to sit along the PCF and others on the left in an "autonomous group" in the National Assembly, independent of the Socialist Party (PS); he later added that his invitation was also extended the Movement of Citizens of Jean-Pierre Chevènement, the Radical Party of the Left (PRG), and miscellaneous left. Bocquet on 18 June indicated that "the group was open to the world" but did not signify that it would accept the support of the Greens in order to establish a group.

Despite this initial outreach to the Greens, however, Buffet's initiative to form a common group with the Greens was ultimately rebuffed, ending the possibility of a "communist, republican and ecologist" group as envisaged by Mamère. Discussions between Mamère, PCF deputy Patrick Braouezec, and miscellaneous left deputies including Gérard Charasse were briefly initiated with the apparent support of the leadership of the PCF, which sought to strengthen its position in the assembly and diminish troublemakers within it ranks; however, these ultimately came to no avail, with Bocquet believing that an alliance with the Greens would be unfeasible during the debates of the Grenelle de l'environnement and legislation proposed as a result. Maxime Gremetz, ousted from the communist federation in the Somme and antagonistic towards the national party, made conditional his membership of a parliamentary group contingent on his demand that he and the other communists in the Somme excluded from the departmental federation be permitted to rejoin. With 18 communist deputies, it was necessary to secure two additional deputies to form the group.

Unable to pass the threshold of 20 deputies on their own, however, the communists – Bocquet in particular – were eventually forced to reopen the door to the Greens and PRG, with Mamère proposing a "radical, communist, and green" group. Though the PCF continued to petition for a lowering of the bar for a parliamentary group from 20 to 15 deputies, the necessary change of regulation required the assent of a majority of the National Assembly, then controlled by the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP). There being no guarantee that this would happen, Bocquet said that the communists needed to act with "pragmatism". The Democratic and Republican Left group (groupe de la Gauche démocrate et républicaine) was ultimately formed on 26 June with 24 deputies, Jean-Claude Sandrier becoming its first president; it included the deputies of the PCF (with the exception of André Gerin, who refused to join), four Greens, and two miscellaneous left deputies: Alfred Marie-Jeanne for Martinique and Huguette Bello for Réunion.

After leaving the PS along with Jean-Luc Mélenchon to co-found the Left Party, Marc Dolez left the Socialist, Radical, Citizen and Miscellaneous Left group to join the GDR group as an associate deputy before becoming a member on 27 January 2009. On 11 July 2010, Anny Poursinoff of the Greens was elected in a by-election in Yvelines's 10th constituency, defeating Jean-Frédéric Poisson, thus becoming the 26th member of the GDR group. On 1 September 2010, the Green deputy Yves Cochet took over the presidency of the GDR group. Maxime Gremetz was expelled from the group on 12 April 2011 after interrupting a parliamentary meeting about the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster, and subsequently resigned from his seat on 16 May. Cochet left the GDR group on 6 December after being designated as an MEP, and was replaced by Roland Muzeau ; this decision reflected the dissatisfaction of the Left Front at the decision of their ecologist partners, now known as Europe Ecology – The Greens (EELV), to present a common candidate with the PS against incumbent François Asensi in Seine-Saint-Denis's 11th constituency. The four ecologist deputies subsequently left the GDR group, Cochet departing on 6 December to take his seat as an MEP and the three others quitting on 7 December. Jacques Desallangre left the group on 17 February 2012.

Following the 2012 legislative elections, André Chassaigne was designated by the 10 deputies of the Left Front to form a parliamentary group, with only 15 deputies now required to form a parliamentary group, again raising the possibility of seeking support from "progressive" deputies representing Réunion, Martinique, and Guadeloupe. With the support of two such deputies already confirmed, as previous members of the group, the support of two newly elected deputies in Martinique, Jean-Philippe Nilor and Bruno Nestor Azerot, was sought out. The search for the fifteenth deputy proved difficult; though Ary Chalus of Guadeloupe, another newly minted deputy, was expected to join the group, the situation was complicated by Chalus's statement on 21 June that he would associate with the Socialist group. The continued existence of the group was finally assured with the confirmation that Gabriel Serville of the Guianese Socialist Party (PSG) would sit with the GDR in the assembly, the group now reduced to 15 deputies.

In the 2017 legislative elections, the PCF and la France Insoumise, the movement founded by Jean-Luc Mélenchon prior to the presidential election, failed to establish an alliance to run common candidates in the legislative elections. Both subsequently decided to form separate parliamentary groups; Chassaigne declared that the GDR would continue on 21 June, including 11 of its own deputies and 4 from overseas France, but would not oppose the initiatives of the la France Insoumise group. Mélenchon's insistence on voting discipline respecting his movement's program proved an obstacle in any potential alliance between the two. At the time of its formation on 27 June, the parliamentary group included 16 deputies.

Pour La Réunion MP Karine Lebon sits in the group.

Following the 2022 French legislative election, the GDR group was reconstituted with 22 deputies—12 from the PCF and 10 from overseas territories representing Réunion, Martinique, French Guiana, and French Polynesia. André Chassaigne was reelected president for a third consecutive term. The group participated in the New Ecological and Social People's Union (NUPES) intergroup alongside La France Insoumise, Socialist, and Ecologist groups.

The 2024 French legislative election proved challenging for the PCF, which lost several prominent deputies including national secretary Fabien Roussel in Nord, Sébastien Jumel in Seine-Maritime, and Pierre Dharréville in Bouches-du-Rhône —all three defeated by National Rally candidates. Roussel was eliminated in the first round in Nord's 20th constituency, which had been held by communists for 62 years. Despite these losses, the group survived by maintaining strong representation from overseas territories.

On 15 July 2024, André Chassaigne was reelected president of the GDR group, now comprising 17 deputies. On 18 July 2024, Emeline K/Bidi, deputy from Réunion, was elected co-president alongside Chassaigne. The co-presidency reflected the group's composition, with roughly equal numbers of PCF deputies and overseas deputies.

The summer of 2024 also saw Chassaigne stand as the New Popular Front 's candidate for President of the National Assembly, but he was narrowly defeated by incumbent Yaël Braun-Pivet by 220 votes to 207.

On 30 January 2025, at age 74 and after 23 years in the Assembly, Chassaigne announced his intention to leave Parliament, stating: "It is time for me to give my place to a deputy from another generation." On 14 March 2025, he was elected deputy mayor of Saint-Amant-Roche-Savine in Puy-de-Dôme, which he had previously served as mayor from 1983 to 2010. Under French anti-cumul laws, this required him to resign his parliamentary seat within 30 days. He officially left the Assembly on 31 March 2025, replaced by his substitute Julien Brugerolles.

On 1 April 2025, Stéphane Peu, deputy for Seine-Saint-Denis, succeeded Chassaigne as president, continuing the co-presidency arrangement with K/Bidi. Peu, a member of the "refondateur" (reformist) tendency within the PCF, had advocated for broader left-wing alliances, placing him in internal opposition to national secretary Fabien Roussel during the party's 2023 congress.

As of February 2026, the GDR group comprises 17 deputies: 8 from the French Communist Party and 9 from overseas territories. The group includes three deputies from Réunion (K/Bidi, Karine Lebon, Frédéric Maillot), representatives from Martinique, French Guiana, French Polynesia, and New Caledonia, alongside PCF deputies primarily from metropolitan France.

The group holds three secretary positions in the Bureau of the National Assembly and participates in the New Popular Front parliamentary coordination, though it maintains its independence from La France Insoumise.

The demography of France is monitored by the Institut national d'études démographiques (INED) and the Institut national de la statistique et des études économiques (INSEE). As of 1 January 2026, in Metropolitan France 66,792,845 people lived, while 2,289,151 lived in overseas France, for a total of 69,081,996 inhabitants in the French Republic. In the 2010s and until 2017, the population of France grew by 1 million people every three years – an average annual increase of 340,000 people, or +0.6%.

France was historically Europe's most populous country. During the Middle Ages, more than one-quarter of Europe's total population was French ; by the seventeenth century, this had decreased slightly to one-fifth. By the beginning of the nineteenth century, other European countries, such as Germany and Russia, had caught up with France and overtaken it in number of people. The country's population sharply increased with the baby boom following World War II, as it did in other European countries.

According to INSEE, from the year 2004, 200,000 immigrants entered the country annually. One out of two was born in Europe and one in three in Africa. Between 2009 and 2012, the number of Europeans migrating to France increased sharply (an annual increase of 12%), but this percentage decreased steadily until 2022, supplanted by a rise in the number of immigrants from Africa.

The national birth rate, after dropping for a time, began to rebound in the 1990s, and the country's fertility rate was close to the replacement level until about 2014. According to a 2006 INSEE study, the natural increase was close to 300,000 people a year, a level that had "not been reached in more than thirty years." With a total fertility rate of 1.59 (for France métropolitaine) in 2024, France remains one of the above-average fertile countries in the European Union, but it is now far from the replacement level.

In 2021, the total fertility rate of France was 1.82, and 7.7% was the percentage of births, where this was a women's 4th or more child.

Among the 802,000 babies born in metropolitan France in 2010, 80.1% had two French parents, 13.3% had one French parent, and 6.6% had two non-French parents.

Between 2006 and 2008, about 22% of newborns in France had at least one foreign-born grandparent (9% born in another European country, 8% born in the Maghreb and 2% born in another region of the world). Censuses on race and ethnic origin were banned by the French government in 1978.

Starting around 1800, the historical evolution of the population in France has been atypical in Europe. Unlike the rest of Europe, there was no strong population growth in France in the 19th and first half of the 20th century. The birth rate in France diminished much earlier than in the rest of Europe in part because from the late 18th century inheritance laws dictated equal distribution of estates between heirs. The country's large population gave Napoleon a seemingly limitless supply of men for the Grande Armée, but the birth rate began to fall in the late 18th century; thus population growth was quite slow in the 19th century, and the nadir was reached in the first half of the 20th century when France, surrounded by the rapidly growing populations of Germany and the United Kingdom, had virtually zero growth. The slow growth of France's population in the 19th century was reflected in the country's very low emigration rate.

The French population only grew by 8.6% between 1871 and 1911, while Germany's grew by 60% and Britain's by 54%.

French concerns about the country's slow population growth began after its defeat in the Franco-Prussian War. For four years in the 1890s, the number of deaths exceeded the number of births. The National Alliance for the Growth of the French Population (ANAPF) was formed in 1896, and the Cognacq-Jay and other prizes were created for the parents of large families. Émile Zola 's 1899 novel Fécondité [ fr ] is representative of contemporary concerns about the birthrate. France lost 10% of its active male population in World War I; the 1.3 million French deaths, along with even more births forgone by potential fathers being off at war, caused a drop of 3 million in the French population, and helped make Dénatalité a national obsession; by 1920 ANAPF had 40,000 members, and in July that year a new law strictly regulated abortion and contraception.

ANAPF proposed that parents of large families receive extra votes, and the belief that women's suffrage in other countries caused birth rates to decline helped defeat proposals before World War II to permit women to vote. The birth rate declined again after a brief baby boom from 1920 to 1923, and reached an all-time low during peacetime in the late 1930s. During the "hollow years" of the decade, the number of new conscripts declined because of the lack of births during World War I. From 1935 deaths exceeded births; the press widely discussed the country's decreasing population. Both left and right supported pro-natalist policies; even the French Communist Party ended its opposition to anti-birth control and anti-abortion laws in 1936, and its leader, Maurice Thorez, advocated for the "protection of family and childhood".

New laws in November 1938 and July 1939, the code de la famille, provided enough financial incentives for large families to double the income of a family with six children. The Vichy government approved of the laws and implemented them as part of its Travail, famille, patrie national motto, as did the postwar Provisional Government of the French Republic. Also, France encouraged immigration, chiefly from other European countries such as Italy, Poland, and Spain. (In fact, with its low birth rate, stagnating or declining native-born population, and role as a destination for migrants from other parts of Europe, France's situation before World War II was not unlike that of Germany today.)

France experienced a baby boom after 1945; it reversed a long-term record of low birth rates. The government's pro-natalist policy of the 1930s, however, does not explain this sudden recovery, which was often portrayed in France as a "miracle". It was also atypical of the Western world: although there was a baby boom in other Western countries after the war, the baby boom in France was much stronger, and lasted longer than in most other Western countries (the United States was one of the few exceptions). In the 1950s and 1960s, France's population grew at 1% per year: the highest growth in the history of France, higher even than the high growth rates of the 18th or 19th century.

Since 1975, France's population growth rate has significantly diminished, but it still remains slightly higher than that of the rest of Europe, and much higher than at the end of the 19th century and during the first half of the 20th century. In the first decade of the third millennium, population growth in France was the highest in Europe, matched only by that of the Republic of Ireland, which, until recently, has also historically undergone stagnant growth and even decline relative to the rest of Europe. However, population growth of France is still lower than that of the United States, largely because of the latter's higher net migration rate.

The following compares the past, present, and future size of the French population with other entities in Europe and in the world. All statements refer to France as understood in its modern borders; this pertains also to other countries. Historians suggest that France was the most populous state in Europe from at least the period of Charlemagne and the Frankish Empire, if not earlier, to the 19th century. Population statistics prior to the modern era are historical estimates as official counts were not made.

In the above list, Turkey is not considered a European country. Turkey was less populous than metropolitan France until 1992 but in 2024 was more populous than France, the UK and Germany.

Demographic statistics according to the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.

Life expectancy in Metropolitan France from 1818 to 1950. Source: Our World In Data.

Death rate 9.6 deaths/1,000 population (2021 est.)

Age structures of the France métropolitaine from the year 1740 to 2021. Source: Louis Henry and Yves Blayo.

France has a high fertility rate compared to other European countries; this rate has increased after reaching a historic low in the early 1990s.

The table below gives the average number of children according to the place of birth of women. An immigrant woman is a woman who was born outside France and who did not have French citizenship at birth.

In 2021 there was 11.8 births/1,000 population. Total fertility rate (2020 data by INSEE) 1.83 children born/woman.

The total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman. It is based on fairly good data for the entire period. Sources: Our World In Data and Gapminder Foundation.

About 22% of newborns in France between 2006 and 2008 had at least one foreign-born grandparent (9% born in another European country, 8% born in the Maghreb and 2% born in another region of the world).

As of 2022, 32.4% of newborns in France had at least one foreign-born parent and 28.5% had at least one parent born outside of Europe (EU 28) (parents born in overseas territories are considered as born in France).

The table below gives the number of children born in metropolitan France according to the place of birth of both parents.

As of 2022, 74.0% of newborns in France had two parents with French citizenship, 14.4% had one French parent, and 11.5% had two non-French parents.

The table below gives the number of children born in metropolitan France according to the citizenship of both parents.

The population of France is projected to hit the 70 million mark between the year 2025/2030 and to overtake Germany's between 2050/2060, with 75.6 million French for 71 million Germans in 2060, while the UK is predicted to overtake France by 2030. By 2080, the population of France is estimated to reach 78.8 million (including the overseas departments, but not the overseas territories).

Figures from eurostat for metropolitan France and the overseas departments:

The vital statistics below refer to Metropolitan France and do not include the Overseas France, territories and New Caledonia. Source:

For the purpose of compatibility, all data refers to Metropolitan France.

As of 2025, 421,871 (65.5%) newborn babies had both parents born in France, 15.1% had one foreign-born parent, and 19.4% had two foreign-born parents. In the same year, 461,422 (71.7%) newborn babies had both parents with French citizenship, 14.7% had one French and one foreign parent, and 13.7% had both parents with foreign citizenship.

INSEE counts individuals born alive in mainland France according to the detailed place of birth of the parents:

Note: In 2010 some foreigners not declared country : father – 17,536; mother – 3,754

In 2020, there was a total of 154,581 marriages in France.

In recent years, communitarianism has become more prevalent in France. Some suburbs, such as La Courneuve, Sarcelles, and Toulouse-Le Mirail, are almost exclusively populated by people from sub-Saharan Africa and North Africa. These housing projects, built by architects such as Le Corbusier, Aillaud, and Candilis, have become communal ghettos.

Note: people born outside of France (including the overseas departments) are referred to as immigrants regardless of their nationality (French or foreign). People without French nationality are referred to as foreigners regardless of their birthplace (France or abroad).

The last national census based on religion occurred in 1872 at the start of the Third Republic. After that, except for the antisemitic census of the Vichy government, the state of France stopped collecting data on people's religion or ethnicity. In 1978, a law banned the collection of individual data concerning someone's race, religion, trade union or political and philosophical opinion. However, estimates have been made of the ethnic and racial demography of the country in the present.

Some organizations, such as the Representative Council of Black Associations of France (French: Conseil représentatif des associations noires de France, CRAN), have argued in favour of the introduction of data collection on minority groups but this has been resisted by other organizations and ruling politicians, often on the grounds that collecting such statistics goes against France's secular principles and harks back to Vichy -era identity documents. During the 2007 presidential election, however, Nicolas Sarkozy, polled on the issue, stated that he favoured the collection of data on ethnicity. Part of a parliamentary bill that would have permitted the collection of data for the purpose of measuring discrimination was rejected by the Conseil Constitutionnel in November 2007.

However, that law does not concern surveys and polls, which are free to ask those questions if they wish. The law also allows for an exception for public institutions such as the INED or the INSEE whose job it is to collect data on demographics, social trends and other related subjects, on condition that the collection of such data has been authorized by the National Commission for Computer-stocked data and Freedom (CNIL) and the National Council of Statistical Information (CNIS).

The modern ethnic French are the descendants of Celts, Iberians, Ligurians, Italic peoples (including Romans), and Greeks in southern France, later mixed with large groups of Germanic peoples arriving at the end of the Roman Empire such as the Franks, Burgundians, Alamanni, and Goths, Moors and Saracens in the south, and Scandinavians, Vikings, who became, by mixing with the local population, the Normans and settled mostly in Normandy in the 9th century.

However, genome-wide analyses of both ancient and present-day DNA indicate that the genetic make-up of modern French populations is overwhelmingly derived from groups already living in Gaul during the Late Bronze and Iron Ages; post-Roman inputs from Germanic, Scandinavian, North-African or other peoples account for only minor fractions, invalidating the notion of any massive later admixture.

In 1960 there was approximately 500,000 'coloured' people present in France, constituting 1.2% of the population. In 2004, French conservative think-tank Institut Montaigne estimated that there were 51 million (85%) people of European ethnic origin, 6 million (10%) North African people, 2 million (3.5%) West African and Central African peoples and 1 million (1.5%) people of Asian origin in Metropolitan France, including all generations of immigrant descendants. TIME magazine in 2009 estimated that there was an estimated range of 4 to 7 million Arabs, 3 to 5 million Africans, 1.5 million Asians and around 600,000 Jewish people. Solis, a marketing company, estimated the numbers for ethnic minorities (immigrants and 2nd generation) in France in 2009 as 3.26 million Maghrebis (5.23%), 1.83 million black people (2.94%) (1.08 million West Africans and 757,000 French from French West Indies), and 250,000 Turkish (0.71%).

In 2015, Michèle Tribalat released a paper estimating population of ethnic minorities in France in 2011 to constitute 30% if ancestry retracted to 3 generations but with age limit of 60. 15% were of other European origin and another 15% rest.

Newly released figures from France's national statistical agency, which pulled census data from 2019–2020, revealed that nearly one-third of children aged four years and below are of non-European origin, a number which stands in sharp contrast with those recorded in older generations.

The data, published by the National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE), indicates that among those aged four and below living in ordinary housing (all residences excluding those for students, the elderly, and asylum seekers) in metropolitan France, 41.6% were born outside of France themselves, or are descendants of non-French parents or grandparents, with 29.6% having origins outside of Europe.

By comparison, a mere 7.6% of 60 to 64-year-olds and 3.1% of those over the age of 80 were of non-European origin over three generations, meaning they themselves, their parents, or grandparents were born outside of Europe.

Figures also revealed that 16.2% of all children aged four and below living in France are of Maghreb descent—a term used to describe the predominately Arab regions of northwest Africa, including Morocco, Libya, Algeria, Mauritania, and Tunisia. Out of every ten same-agegroup children in France, one is an immigrant or the child of immigrants from elsewhere in Europe, with 7.3% having originated from sub-Saharan Africa, 4% from Asia, and 1.7% from the rest of the world.

The Paris region is a magnet for immigrants, hosting one of the largest concentrations of immigrants in Europe. As of 2006, about 45% of people (6 million) living in the region were either immigrant (25%) or born to at least one immigrant parent (20%).

Of European ethnic groups not indigenous to France, the most numerous are people of Italian family origin and it is estimated that about 5 million citizens (8% of the population) are at least partly of Italian origin if their parentage is retraced over three generations. This is due to waves of Italian immigration, notably during the late 19th century and early 20th century. Other large European groups of non-native origin are Spaniards, Portuguese, Romanians, Poles, and Greeks. Also, due to more recent immigration, between five and six million people of Maghrebi origin and approximately 800,000 Turks inhabit France.

An influx of Maghrebi Jews immigrated to France in the 1950s and after the Algerian War due to the decline of the French empire. Subsequent waves of immigration followed the Six-Day War, when some Moroccan and Tunisian Jews settled in France. Hence, by 1968, Maghrebi Jews were about 500,000 and the majority in France. As the majority of these new immigrants were already culturally French they needed little time to adjust to French society. Black people come from both the French overseas territories (French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Réunion, and former colony Haiti) and Sub-Saharan Africa (especially Côte d'Ivoire, Mali, and Senegal). France has the largest black population in Europe.

There is a substantial Romani population in France. There is approximately 400,000 Roma living in France.

Since the 19th century, France has continued being a country of immigration. During the Trente Glorieuses (1946–1975), the country's reconstruction and steady economic growth led to the labor-immigration of the 1960s, when many employers found manpower in villages located in Southern Europe and North Africa. In 2008, the French national institute of statistics INSEE estimated that 11.8 million foreign-born immigrants and their direct descendants (second generation) lived in France representing 19% of the country's population. About 5.5 million are of European origin and 4 million of Maghrebi origin.

Immigration to France exceeded 200,000 in recent years, as shown in table below.

In the 20th century, France experienced a high rate of immigration from other countries. The immigration rate was particularly high during the 1920s and 1930s. France was the European country which suffered the most from World War I, with respect to the size of its population, losing 1.3 million young men out of a total population of 40 million. France was also at the time the European country with the lowest fertility rate, which meant that the country had a very hard time recovering from the heavy losses of the war. France had to open its doors to immigration, which was the only way to prevent population decline between the two world wars.

At the time, France was the only European country to permit mass immigration. The other major European powers, such as the UK or Germany, still had high fertility rates, so immigration was seen as unnecessary, and it was also undesirable to the vast majority of their populations. The majority of immigrants in the 1920s came from Italy and Poland, though from the 1930s, some also came from elsewhere in southern and eastern Europe, and the first wave of colonial French subjects from Africa and Asia. This mass immigration was ended and partially reversed by the economic problems of the 1930s. By the end of the Spanish Civil War, some half-million Spanish Republican refugees had crossed the border into France.

Local populations often opposed immigrant manpower, leading to occasional outbursts of violence. The most violent was a pogrom against Italian workers who worked in the salt evaporation ponds of Peccais, erupted in Aigues-Mortes in 1893, killing at least nine and injuring hundreds on the Italian side.

After World War II, the French fertility rate rebounded considerably, as noted above, but economic growth in France was so high that new immigrants had to be brought into the country. Most immigrants were Portuguese as well as Arabs and Berbers from North Africa. The first wave arrived in the 1950s, but the major arrivals happened in the 1960s and 1970s. One million European pieds-noirs also migrated from Algeria in 1962 and the following years during the chaotic independence of Algeria. France has over three million French of Algerian descent, a small percentage of whom are third-or fourth-generation French.

French law facilitated the immigration of thousands of French settlers (colons in French language), ethnic or national French from former colonies of North and West Africa, India and Indochina, to mainland France. 1.6 million European pieds noirs settlers migrated from Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco. In the 1970s, over 30,000 French settlers left Cambodia during the Khmer Rouge regime as the Pol Pot government confiscated their farms and land properties. However, after the 1973 energy crisis, laws limiting immigration were passed. In addition, the country's birth rate dropped significantly during this time.

Between 1956 and 1967, about 235,000 Sephardic North African Jews from Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco also immigrated to France because of the decline of the French colonial empire and following the Six-Day War. Hence, by 1968, Sephardic North African Jews were the majority of the Jews in France. As the new immigrants were already culturally French, they needed little time to adjust to French society.

In the late 1970s, the end of high economic growth in France caused immigration policies to be considerably tightened, starting with laws by Charles Pasqua passed in 1986 and 1993. New immigrants were allowed only through the family reunion schemes (wives and children moving to France to live with husbands or fathers already living in France), or as asylum seekers. Illegal immigration thus developed as immigration policy became more rigid. In 2006, The French Ministry of the Interior estimated clandestine immigrants in France amounted to anywhere between 200,000 and 400,000 and expected between 80,000 and 100,000 people to enter the country illegally each year.

The Pasqua laws are a significant landmark in the shift in France's immigration policy through the course of the 20th century. They are a sign of the securitization aspect of immigration, giving more power to the police, allowing them to perform random identity checks and deport immigrants without legal papers. The rise in anti-immigration sentiments was reinforced by a series of terrorist bombs in Paris in 1986, linked to Muslim immigrants in France.

Tightening immigration laws, as well as notions of "zero immigration", reflected national views that arose within the discussion around immigrant family reunification and national identity. Institut français des relations internationales (IFRI) immigration expert, Christophe Bertossi, states that stigmatized as both a challenge to social cohesion and a "burden" for the French economy, family immigration is increasingly restricted and constructed as a racial issue. The "immigration choisie" policy strives consequently to select migrants according to their profile, skills and, still indirectly, origins.

Nonetheless, immigration rates in the 1980s and 1990s were much lower than in the 1960s and 1970s, especially compared to other European countries. The regions of emigrations also widened, with new immigrants now coming from sub-Saharan Africa and Asia. In the 1970s, a small but well-publicized wave of Chilean and Argentine political refugees from their countries' dictatorships found asylum in France.

Ethnic Vietnamese started to become a visible segment of society after the massive influx of refugees after the end of the Vietnam War in 1975. The expulsions of ethnic Chinese from Vietnam in the 1970s led to a wave of immigration and the settlement of the high-rise neighbourhood near the Porte d'Italie, where the Chinatown of Paris is located. Located in the 13th arrondissement, the area contains many ethnic Chinese inhabitants.

According to the distinguished French historian of immigration Gérard Noiriel, in 1989 one third of the population currently living in France was of "foreign" descent.

According to Michèle Tribalat, researcher at INED, there were, in 1999, approximately 14 million persons of foreign ancestry (about a quarter of the population), defined as either immigrants or people with at least one immigrant parent or grandparent. Half of them were of European ancestry (including 5.2 million from South Europe (Italy, Spain, Portugal and former Yugoslavia)). The rest were from Maghreb (3 million), Sub-Saharan Africa (680,000), Turkey (320,000) and other parts of the world (2.5 million). Immigrants from the Maghreb are commonly referred to as beur, a verlan slang term derived from the word arabe (French for Arab).

The large-scale immigration from Islamic countries has sparked controversy in France. Nevertherless, according to Justin Vaïsse, in spite of challenges and setbacks like the riots in November 2005, in Parisian suburbs, where many immigrants live secluded from society with very few capabilities to live in better conditions, the integration of Muslim immigrants is happening as part of a background evolution and recent studies confirmed the results of their assimilation, showing that "North Africans seem to be characterized by a high degree of cultural integration reflected in a relatively high propensity to exogamy " with rates ranging from 20% to 50%. According to Emmanuel Todd, the relatively high exogamy among French Algerians can be explained by the colonial link between France and Algeria. One illustration of this growing resentment and job insecurity can be drawn from related events, such as the 2005 riots, which ensued in former President Chirac declaring a state of emergency. Massive demonstrations to express frustration over unemployment took place in March 2009. The importance of integration was brought to the forefront of the political agenda in Sarkozy's 2007 presidential campaign. Upon being elected, he symbolically created the French Ministry of Immigration, Integration, National Identity and Codevelopment. Integration is one of the pillars of its political aims.

In 2014, the National Institute of Statistics (INSEE is its acronym in French) published a study, according to which the numbers of Spanish, Portuguese and Italians in France had doubled between 2009 and 2012.

According to the French Institute, the increase due to the euro area crisis pushed up the number of Europeans in France. Statistics on Spanish immigrants in France show a growth of 107% between 2009 and 2012, from 5300 to 11,000 people.

Of 229,000 foreigners in France in 2012, nearly 8% were Portuguese, British 5%, Spanish 5%, Italians 4%, Germans 4%, Romanians 3%, Belgians 3% and Dutch 2%.

With the increase of Spanish, Portuguese and Italians in France, in 2012 46% of immigrants were European, while the percentage for Francophone African immigrants reached 30%, of which Moroccans were 7%, Algerians 7%, and Tunisians 3%. Meanwhile, 14% of all immigrants who settled in France in that year were from Asian countries: 3% from China, 2% from Turkey, 10% from America and Oceania, Americans and Brazilians accounting for 2% each.

As of 2008, the French national institute of statistics INSEE estimated that 11.8 million foreign-born immigrants and their direct descendants (limited to second-generation born in France) lived in France representing 19% of the country's population. More than 5.5 million are of European origin and about 4 million of Maghrebi origin (20% of Algerian origin and 15% of Moroccan or Tunisian origin). Immigrants aged 18 to 50 count for 2.7 million (10% of population age 18–50) and 5 million for all ages (8% of population). The second-generation immigrants aged 18 to 50 make up 3.1 million (12% of 18–50) and 6.5 million for all ages (11% of population). Without considering citizenship at birth, people not born in metropolitan France and their direct descendants made up 30% of the population aged 18–50 in metropolitan France as of 2008.

The region with the largest proportion of immigrants is the Île-de-France (Greater Paris), where 40% of immigrants live. Other important regions are Rhône-Alpes (Lyon) and Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur (Marseille). The most important individual countries of origin as of 2007 were Algeria (702,000), Morocco (645,000), Portugal (576,000), Italy (323,000), Spain (262,000) and Turkey (234,000). However, immigration from Asia (especially China), as well as from Francophone Sub-Saharan Africa (Senegal, Mali) is gaining in importance.

42% of the immigrants are from Africa (30% from Maghreb and 12% from Francophone Sub-Saharan Africa), 38% from Europe (mainly from Portugal, Italy and Spain), 14% from Asia and 5% from America and Oceania. Outside Europe and North Africa, the highest rate of immigration is from Vietnam, Cambodia and Senegal.

The following table shows immigrants and second-generation immigrants by origin as of 2008 according to a study published by Insee in 2012. Third-generation immigrants, illegal immigrants, as well as ethnic minorities like black people from the French overseas territories residing in metropolitan France (800,000), Roms (500,000) or people born in Maghreb with French citizenship at birth (1 million Maghrebi Jews, Harkis and pieds-noirs) and their descendants, who are French by birth and not considered as immigrants or immigrant descendants, are not taken into account.

Net migration rate 1.06 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2021 est.) Country comparison to the world: 61st

Immigrants by country of birth as of 2022:

In 2004, a total of 140,033 people immigrated to France. Of them, 90,250 were from Africa and 13,710 from Europe. In 2005, immigration levels fell slightly to 135,890. The European Union allows free movement between the member states. While the UK (along with Ireland and Sweden and non-EU members Norway and Switzerland) did not impose restrictions, France put in place controls to curb Eastern European migration.

As at 1 January 2006, INSEE estimated that there were 3.5 million foreigners living in metropolitan France. Two out of five foreigners are from Portugal, Algeria or Morocco. Thus, EU nationals immigrating to France account for 1.2 million people, and 1.1 million people are from the three Maghreb countries of Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia. Immigrants are concentrated in Île-de-France, Rhone-Alpes, Provence and Côte d'Azur regions, accounting for 60% of the total immigrant population. Furthermore, there appears to be a lower rate of immigrants arriving from the EU since 1975 as opposed to an increase in African immigrants.

In the first decade of the 21st century, the net migration rate was estimated to be 0.66 migrants per 1,000 population a year. This is a very low rate of immigration compared to other European countries, the United States or Canada. Since the beginning of the 1990s, France has been attempting to curb immigration, first with the Pasqua laws, followed by both right-wing and socialist-issued laws. This trend is also demonstrated in anti-immigrant sentiments among the public. For example, the Pew Research Center in Washington, D.C. conducted a public opinion poll in February 2004 among French nationals. This poll measured the extent of support for restricting immigration among French nationals, by age cohort. 24% of individuals 18 to 29 were restricting immigration, with 33% of individuals 30 to 49 and 53% for both 50 to 64 and 65 and over. Nearly nine years later, a January 2013 poll conducted in France by Ipsos found that 70% of respondents said that there were "too many immigrants in France".

The immigration rate is currently lower than in other European countries such as United Kingdom and Spain; however, some say it is unlikely that the policies in themselves account for such a change. Again, as in the 1920s and 1930s, France stands in contrast with the rest of Europe. Back in the 1920s and 1930s, when other European countries had a high fertility rate, France had a low fertility rate and opened its doors to immigration to avoid a population decline. Today, it is the rest of Europe that has very low fertility rates, and countries like Germany or Spain avoid population decline only through immigration. In France, however, the fertility rate is still fairly high for European standards. It is, in fact, the highest in Europe after Ireland (the EU) and Albania (perhaps higher than Ireland's) and so most population growth is due to natural increase, unlike in the other European countries.

The difference in immigration trends is also because the labour market in France is currently less dynamic than in other countries such as the UK, Ireland or Spain. One reason for this could be France's relatively high unemployment, which the country has struggled to reduce for the past two decades. There is also a parallel dynamic between immigration and unemployment. Immigrants tend to be subjected to higher rates of unemployment. In 2008, the immigrant unemployment rate in France was a startling 13%, twice as high as for the national population (6%). One can further analyse the trend in relation to education. In the ministry's 2010 report on professional inclusion for immigrants, 19.6% of immigrants without any education were unemployed while 16.1% of immigrants who had graduated high school were unemployed. Only 11.4% of immigrants with an undergraduate degree or higher were unemployed.

For example, according to the UK Office for National Statistics, between July 2001 and July 2004, the population of the UK increased by 721,500 inhabitants, of which 242,800 (34%) was due to natural increase, 478,500 (66%) to immigration. According to the INSEE, between January 2001 and January 2004 the population of Metropolitan France increased by 1,057,000 inhabitants of which 678,000 (64%) was due to natural increase, 379,500 (36%) from immigration.

The latest 2008 demographic statistics have been released, and France's birth and fertility rates have continued to rise. The fertility rate increased to 2.01 in 2012 and, for the first time, surpasses the fertility rate of the United States.

Americans total more than 100,000 permanent residents in France, Canadians 11,931, followed by Latin Americans, a growing subgroup, the most numerous of which are Brazilians, at 44,622, followed by Colombians, at 40,000, Venezuelans, at 30,000, Peruvians, at 22,002, Argentineans, at 11,899, and Chileans, 15,782.

In 2014 The National Institute of Statistics (INSEE, for its acronym in French) published a study, according to which has doubled the number of Spanish immigrants, Portuguese and Italians in France between 2009 and 2012.

According to the French Institute, the increase due to the euro area crisis pushed up the number of Europeans installed in France.

Statistics on Spanish immigrants in France show a growth of 107% between 2009 and 2012, i.e. in this period went from 5300 to 11,000 people.

Of the total of 229,000 foreigners in France in 2012, nearly 8% were Portuguese, British 5%, Spanish 5%, Italians 4%, Germans 4%, Romanians 3%, 3% Belgians.

With the increase of Spanish, Portuguese and Italian in France, the weight of European immigrants arrived in 2012 to 46%, while this percentage for African reached 30%, with a presence in Morocco (7%), Algeria (7%) and Tunisia (3%).

Meanwhile, 14% of all immigrants who settled in France that year were from Asian countries: 3% of China and 2% in Turkey, while in America and Oceania constitute 10% of Americans and Brazilians accounted for higher percentage, 2% each.

People of Maghrebi origin form the largest ethnic group in the country after those of European origin.

According to Michèle Tribalat [ fr ], a researcher at INED, there were 3.5 million people of Maghrebi origin (with at least one grandparent from Algeria, Morocco or Tunisia) living in France in 2005 corresponding to 5.8% of the total French metropolitan population (60.7 million in 2005). Maghrebis have settled mainly in the industrial regions in France, especially in the Paris region. Many famous French people like Edith Piaf, Isabelle Adjani, Arnaud Montebourg, Alain Bashung, Dany Boon and many others have Maghrebi ancestry.

Below is a table of population of Maghrebi origin in France, numbers are in thousands:

In 2005, the percentage of young people under 18 of Maghrebi origin (at least one immigrant parent) was about 7% in Metropolitan France, 12% in Greater Paris and above 20% in French département of Seine-Saint-Denis.

According to other sources, between 5 and 6 million people of Maghrebin origin live in France corresponding to about 7–9% of the total French metropolitan population.

As mentioned above, the French Ministry of Immigration, Integration, National Identity and Codevelopment was created immediately following the appointment of Nicolas Sarkozy as president of France in 2007. Immigration has been a relevant political dimension in France's agenda in recent years. Sarkozy's agenda has sharpened the focus placed on integration of immigrants living in France as well as their acquisition of national identity. The state of immigration policy in France is fourfold. Its pillars of immigration policy are to regulate migratory flows in and out of France, facilitate immigrants' integration and promote French identity, honor the French tradition's principle of welcoming political asylum and promote solidarity within the immigrant population (principle of co-development). In its 2010 Budget report, the Ministry of Immigration declared it would fund €600 million for its immigration policy objectives, a figure representing 60 million more than in 2009 (otherwise an 11.5% increase from 2009 figures).

In July 2006, President Sarkozy put into effect a law on immigration based upon the notion of "chosen immigration", which allows immigration into France to a restricted field of employment sectors, notably the hotel and restaurant industries, construction and seasonal employment. The following summer of 2007, Sarkozy amended the law to require the acquisition of the French language as a pre-condition. According to Christophe Bertossi, immigration expert in France's Institut français des relations internationales (IFRI), "there is a dominant trend in the French policy to stem family migration, notably conditioned after the 2007 law by a minimum level of French language tested and by the demonstration that he/she endorses the main French constitutional principles".

Despite Sarkozy's law, immigration from former colonies in the Maghreb and West Africa would end up steadily increasing under the presidencies of Nicolas Sarkozy, François Hollande and Emmanuel Macron.

France, along with other EU countries, have still not signed their agreement to the United Nations Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families of 1990. This convention is a treaty to protect migrant workers' rights, in recognition of their human rights.

Alternative policies have been discussed in formulating immigration policy, such as a quota system. At the beginning of 2008, as the government was rethinking its orientation on immigration policy with the creation of the new ministry, the idea of a quota system was introduced as a possible alternative. In early 2008, a proposal was made to Parliament to decide each year how many immigrants to accept, based on skill and origin. However, this quota policy contradicts the French Constitution. A commission was formed in February 2008 to study how the Constitution could be changed to allow for a quota system. The main difficulty is the origin principle of establishing a quota "constituting a breach in the universalistic ideology of the French Republic".

On 18 January 2008, the government published a list of 150 job titles that were encountering difficult supply of labour. Most immigrants living in France today are reported to cover the following sectors: agriculture, service to persons in need (childcare, the elderly), construction, education, health and services to businesses. Thus, the government is seeking to match immigrants with the economic makeup of France. The current administration could also seek to integrate migrants and their families through education and training, making them more competitive in the job market. To tackle critical labour shortages, France also decided to participate in the EU Blue Card.

Therefore, the outlook towards immigrants in France is shifting as unemployment continues to dominate the political agenda, along with political incentives to strengthen French national identity. Recent incidents, such as the 2005 civil unrest and Romani repatriation have shed light on France's immigration policies and how these are viewed globally, especially in congruence or discontinuity with the EU. A longitudinal study has been conducted since March 2010 to provide qualitative research regarding the integration of new immigrants. The report is being finalized at the end of December 2010 and will be most relevant to provide insight into further immigration policy analysis for the French government.

French is the only official language of France, and is constitutionally required to be the language of government and administration. There is a rising cultural awareness of the regional languages of France, which enjoy no official status. These regional languages include the Langues d'oïl, Occitan, Franco-Provençal, Corsican, Catalan, Basque, Breton, Germanic languages like Alsatian, and several languages spoken in Overseas France. Immigrant groups from former French colonies and elsewhere have also brought their own languages.

France has not collected religious or ethnic data in its censuses since the beginning of the Third Republic. France guarantees freedom of faith and religion via the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen and by the principle of laïcité (or "freedom of conscience") enforced by the 1880s Jules Ferry laws and the 1905 law on the Separation of the Churches and the State. France does not have a state religion.

Church attendance is fairly low, and the proportion of the population that is not religious has grown over the past century. A 2011 IFOP survey found that 44% of the French people did not believe in God, contrasted to 20% in 1947. Another IFOP survey of 18–30 year-olds in 2020 found that 36% agree with the statement that "Religion represents something very important in my daily life."

Christianity is the largest religion in France, comprising roughly half of the population. France's predominant faith has been Catholicism since the early Middle Ages. According to a poll conducted in 2009 for the French Catholic magazine La Croix, 64% of the population is Catholic and 3.1% is Protestant.

Islam is the 2nd largest religion in France. A 2016 survey held by Institut Montaigne and IFOP found that 5.6% of the French population had an Islamic background, while 5.3% declared they were Muslims by faith.

The other religions make up less than 5% of the population. As of 2015, Buddhism has around 1 million adherents, Judaism has around 500,000 adherents, with approximately 40% identifying as Sephardic, 26% as Ashkenazi, and 14% as a mix from both communities. Jehovah's Witnesses estimate they have approximately 120,000 members. Orthodox Christians number between 80,000 and 100,000; most are associated with the Greek or Russian Orthodox Churches. The Church of Scientology estimates it has 45,000 members. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons) estimates its membership at 36,000 in metropolitan France and 22,000 in overseas departments and territories. According to the Sikh community, there are 30,000 Sikhs, with the largest concentration in the Parisian suburbs.

The following is a list of the twenty largest aires urbaines (metropolitan areas) in France, based on their population at the 2015 census. Population at the 2006 census is indicated for comparison.

Between 2006 and 2011, Toulouse, Rennes, Montpellier, Nantes, Bordeaux and Lyon had the fastest-growing metropolitan areas in France.

The city of Paris (also called the Commune or Department of Paris) had a population of 2,047,602 people within its administrative city limits as of 1 January 2026. It is surrounded by the Paris unité urbaine, or urban area, the most populous urban area in the European Union.

In 2023 the unité urbaine had a population of 11,013,774 in 2,824 km (1,090 sq mi). The Paris Region, or Île-de-France, covers 12,012 km (4,638 sq mi), and has its own regional council and president. It has a population of 12,463,067 as of January 2023, or 18.3 percent of the population of France. The metropolitan or functional area (aire d'attraction) of Paris covers 18,941 km (7,313 sq mi) and has 13,320,752 inhabitants (2023).

The population of the city of Paris reached a historic high of 2.9 million in 1921 but then declined; between 1954 and 1999 it declined at every census, falling to 2,125,246 in 1999. After that it began to climb again, reaching 2,240,621 in 2012, but falling to 2,103,778 in 2023.

The city's population loss reflected the experience of most other core cities in the developed world that have not expanded their boundaries. The principal factors in the process were a significant decline in household size, and a dramatic migration of residents to the suburbs between 1962 and 1975. Factors in the migration included deindustrialisation, high rent, the gentrification of many inner quarters, the transformation of living space into offices, and greater affluence among working families. The city's population loss was one of the most severe among international municipalities and the largest for any that had achieved more than 2,000,000 residents. Since then, an influx of younger residents and immigrants has contributed to the growth of the city.

According to Eurostat, the EU statistical agency, in 2012 the Commune of Paris was the most densely populated city in the European Union, with 21,616 people per square kilometre within the city limits (the NUTS-3 statistical area), ahead of Inner London West, which had 10,374 persons per square kilometre. According to the same census, three departments bordering Paris, Hauts-de-Seine, Seine-Saint-Denis and Val-de-Marne, had population densities of over ten thousand persons per square kilometre, ranking among the ten most densely populated areas of the EU.

Paris is one of the most densely populated cities in the world. Its density, excluding the outlying woodland parks of Boulogne and Vincennes, was 24,448 inhabitants per square kilometre (63,320/sq mi) in the 1999 official census, which could be compared only with some Asian megapolises and the New York City borough of Manhattan. Even including the two woodland areas, its population density was 20,755/km (53,760/sq mi) in 2017, the sixth-most-densely populated commune in France after Levallois-Perret, Vincennes, Le Pré-Saint-Gervais, Saint-Mandé and Montrouge, all of which border the city proper.

The most sparsely populated quarters are the western and central office and administration-focused arrondissements. The city's population is densest in the northern and eastern arrondissements; the 11th arrondissement had a density of 40,672 inhabitants per square kilometre (105,340/sq mi) in 1999, and some of the same arrondissement's eastern quarters had densities close to 100,000/km (260,000/sq mi) in the same year.

The city of Paris covers an area much smaller than the urban area of which it is the core. At present, Paris's real urbanisation, defined by the pôle urbain (urban cluster) statistical area, covers 2,845 km (1,098 sq mi), or an area about 27 times larger than the city itself. The administration of Paris's urban growth is divided between itself and its surrounding departments: Paris's closest ring of three adjoining departments, or petite couronne ("small ring") are fully saturated with urban growth, and the ring of four departments outside of these, the grande couronne departments, are only covered in their inner regions by Paris's urbanisation. These eight departments form the larger administrative Île-de-France région; most of this region is filled, and overextended in places, by the Paris functional area, which, in 2023, was populated by over 13 million people.

The Paris agglomeration has shown a steady rate of growth since the end of the late 16th century French Wars of Religion, save brief setbacks during the French Revolution and World War II. With 13.3 million inhabitants in 2023, the annual population growth rate of the Paris functional area was between 0.4% and 1.0% over the past 55 years.

By law, French censuses do not ask questions regarding ethnicity or religion, but do gather information concerning one's country of birth. From this it is still possible to determine that Paris and its metropolitan area is one of the most multi-cultural in Europe: According to the 2011 census, 456,105 residents of the municipality of Paris, or 20.3 percent, and 2,117,901 residents of the Paris Region (Île-de-France), or 17.9 percent, were born outside France. At the 1999 census, 4.2% of the population in Paris metropolitan area were recent immigrants (people who had immigrated to France between 1990 and 1999), the majority from Asia and Africa. 37 % of all immigrants in France live in the Paris region.

The first wave of international migration to Paris started as early as 1820, with the arrivals of German peasants fleeing an agricultural crisis in their homeland. Several waves of immigration followed continually until today: Italians and central European Jews during the 19th century; Russians after the revolution of 1917 and Armenians fleeing genocide in the Ottoman Empire; colonial subjects during World War I and later; Poles between the two world wars; Spaniards, Italians, Portuguese, and North Africans from the 1950s to the 1970s; North African Jews after colonies in that region gained independence; Africans and Asians since then.

The Paris metropolitan region, or aire urbaine, is estimated to be home to some 1.7 million Muslims, who comprise between 10–15 per cent of the area's population. However, without official data, the margin of error of these estimates is extremely high as it is based on one's country of birth (someone born in a Muslim country or born to a parent from a Muslim country is considered as a "potential Muslim"). According to the North American Jewish Data Bank, an estimated 310,000 Jews also live in Paris and the surrounding Île-de-France region, an area with a population of 11.7 million. Paris has historically been a magnet for immigrants, and it hosts one of the largest concentrations of immigrants in Europe today.

According to the National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies, responsible for the production and analysis of official statistics in France, 20 per cent of people living in the city of Paris are immigrants, and 41.3 per cent of people under 20 have at least one immigrant parent. Among the young people under 18, 12.1 per cent are of Maghrebi origin, 9.9 per cent of Subsaharan African origin, and 4.0 per cent of South European origin. In 2020–2021, about 6 million people, or 49% of the population of Paris, are either immigrants (21%) or have at least one immigrant parent (28%). These figures do not include French people born in Overseas France and their direct descendants.

(source: Insee, EAR 2006) Reading: 436 576 immigrants live in Paris, representing 20% of Parisians and 22.4% of immigrants in Île-de-France. 162 635 children under 20 with at least one immigrant parent live in Paris, representing 41.3 per cent of the total of children under 20 in Paris, and 15.4 per cent of the total of children under 20 with at least one immigrant parent in Île-de-France.

As of 2005 many expatriates settle in the western portion of Paris. Western Paris is in close proximity to many international schools and the La Défense area.

Many international students living in Paris live in the large dormitory complex of Cité Université Internationale de Paris, located just on the edge of the city in the 14th arrondissement.

As of 2012 tens of thousands of people of African origins live in Paris. This group includes those born in France who had African parents and naturalized French citizens born in Africa. The majority come from the Maghreb, including Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia. Other countries with populations in Paris include Burkina Faso, the Congo, Guinea, Mali, and Senegal.

As of 1998 Île-de-France has half of the Asian population of France. As of 1990 the majority of Asians living in France are ethnic Chinese originating from several countries.

In 1974 France stopped allowing foreign workers into its borders. The Asian population of France increased despite the closure. In 1975 there were 20,000 Asians in Île-de-France. In 1982 the region had 59,000. This increased to 108,000 in 1990.

In France the "Asians" are defined as people originating from the East Asian cultural sphere. The term does not include people from the Indian subcontinent.

For the entire Île-de-France region, there were a total of 108,511 persons who held or formerly held Cambodian, Chinese, Laotian, Taiwanese, and Vietnamese citizenships as of 1990. This included 64,361 current citizens of those countries and 44,150 former citizens who became naturalized as French citizens.

As of 1990, there were a combined total of 31,773 persons who held or formerly held Cambodian, Chinese, Laotian, Taiwanese, and Vietnamese citizenships in the City of Paris. This included 21,655 current citizens of those countries and 10,118 former citizens who became naturalized as French citizens.

As of 1990 fewer than 10,000 persons of East/Southeast Asian origin resided in six communes of Marne-la-Vallée. 26% of the population of Lognes was Asian, and other percentages were 8% in Noisiel, 5–6% in Noisy-le-Grand, and 5–6% in Torcy. In 1982 there were 6,000 Asians in Marne-la-Vallée, making up 3–4% of the area's population. In 1987 the number increased to 9,000.

As of circa 1998 Ivry-sur-Seine and Vitry-sur-Seine had a combined Asian population of 3,600.

As of circa 1998 there were about 6,000 East/Southeast Asians in and around Aulnay-sous-Bois, and there were 3,000 persons of East and Southeast Asian origin in Aulnay proper. Most of them were of Cambodian origin, including those with and without Cambodian citizenship. The commune also had an above-average number of persons of Laotian origin, including those with and without Laotian citizenship. Ethnicities included Khmer people, Lao people, and Overseas Chinese.

As of 1990, in the City of Paris there were 7,950 Cambodian citizens and 3,279 former Cambodian citizens who became naturalized as French. The combined total is 11,229.

That year, in the Île-de-France region there were 26,553 Cambodian citizens and 13,068 former Cambodian citizens naturalized as French. The combined total was 39,421.

As of 1990 the majority of Asians living in the Paris area are ethnic Chinese originating from several countries. The largest group includes ethnic Chinese from Indochina, and a smaller group originates from Zhejiang.

As of 2013 the official number of Japanese residents in Paris was 16,277.

As of 1990, in the City of Paris there were 2,185 Laotian citizens and 1,376 former Laotian citizens naturalized as French, making a combined total of 3,561.

As of that year, in the Île-de-France region there were 10,110 Laotian citizens and 8,177 former Laotian citizens, making a combined total of 18,287.

In periods before 1975 several Vietnamese arrived in Paris, including intellectuals, those who worked as civil servants in colonial times, and those who came to Paris to study and did not return home. Ethnic Vietnamese arriving after 1975 became a part of an ethnic network established by those that came before them. Many Vietnamese achieved proficiency in the medical, scientific, and computer science fields.

As of 1990, in the City of Paris there were 3,802 Vietnamese citizens and 4,155 former Vietnamese citizens naturalized as French, making a total of 7,957.

As of that year, in the Île-de-France region there were 16,387 Vietnamese citizens and 20,261 former Vietnamese citizens naturalized as French, making a total of 36,648.

Romani people first arrived in Paris in 1427.

Paris rose from 4.9% of the French population in 1801, to 8% in 1861, to 11.5% in 1901 to then 14.5% in 1921.

The French demonstration of 15 May 1848 was an event played out, mostly, in the streets of Paris. It was intended to reverse the results of a Second Republic election of deputies to the Constituent Assembly. It is difficult to say, with any precision, whether this phenomenon should be called a demonstration, a riot, an invasion, a rebellion, or an attempted coup d'état. Nonetheless, it seems to have been largely unplanned, not particularly bloody, and indisputably a failure.

The election results of 23 April 1848, which chose deputies to serve in the national Constituent Assembly, were very unfavorable to republican progressives, a party that held strong socialistic views such as wanting the government to be the "supreme regulator of production" and led by the "utopian socialist" Louis Blanc. Universal male suffrage, applied for the first time since 1792, resulted in the election of an Assembly with a majority composed of a group calling themselves "tomorrow's republicans". A new government was elected by the Assembly, called the Commission exécutive de la République française (executive committee of the French Republic), which was composed largely of moderate Republicans who were opposed to the socialistic agenda enacted by the provisional government that had been in place since the February 1848 revolution.

Once assembled, the deputies tried to insulate themselves from the inevitable popular pressure engendered by meeting in Paris. Nonetheless, on 10 May, the new assembly spurned the proposal of Louis Blanc concerning the establishment of a "Ministry of Labor and Progress", a bold measure that aimed to implement Blanc's socialist agenda. Blanc was opposed to the free markets and market competition and wanted the "Ministry of Labor and Progress" to establish communal "workshops" in various industries that all supported each other. The goal was to have government backed labor "workshops" so everyone could have a job and make government the "supreme regulator of production". Blanc claimed that "in destroying competition we strangle at the same time the evils which it brings forth", to which Blanc believed would lead to the downfall of capitalism. The urban laborers behind Blanc were unnerved by the measures taken against him. On 12 May, the Assembly banned political parties and special-interest groups from sending delegations to read petitions to the Assembly, an old practice from revolutionary Paris (1792–1794) and the so-called Sans-culottes, which had been resumed in February 1848. This action was seen by Parisians as undemocratic.

The progressives in the Assembly were also unhappy about the inaction of the Department of Foreign Affairs and its provisional minister, Jules Bastide, who refused to help the Poles then under the occupation of Prussian and Austrian troops. The newly elected government, it seemed, was only continuing the foreign policy of the provisional government, a timid and feckless platform, which, under the leadership of Alphonse de Lamartine, had, on 4 March, passed a resolution denying support to all popular revolutions (in Italy, Poland, Germany, and elsewhere in Europe.) The progressive Republicans had difficulty in understanding this passivity when, within human memory, France had been a "great nation" which marched to the aid of those "oppressed by their rulers". This was the standard of greatness established by the Revolution of 1792, and many 1848 progressives found France's current passivity painfully disconcerting.

A ceremony of flags had been scheduled for 14 May 1848, and Paris was full of National Guards, many from the provinces. The ceremony had been suddenly canceled because of the refusal of the delegation of workers sitting in the Luxembourg Palace to participate in the ceremony. Delegates from Poland (specifically, Poznań and Lemberg, now known as Lviv) prevailed upon a sympathetic deputy from the department of the Seine, a naturalized Pole, Louis Wolowski, to have the Assembly discuss the Polish question on 15 May. Also on 15 May, Parisian militants, mostly progressive Republicans and socialists, held a demonstration in support of the Polish cause. This happened despite the reluctance of Republican leaders, such as François-Vincent Raspail, Armand Barbès, and Louis Auguste Blanqui, to support it.

The event started at the Bastille and headed through the boulevards toward the Place de la Concorde, at the western end of the Tuileries Gardens. Many foreign delegations (Irish, Italian, Polish) participated. Provocative behavior by fiery old revolutionaries, like Aloysius Huber, and a general failure by Courtois, the commander of the National Guard, to respond appropriately caused the situation to degenerate.

Protesters headed for the Palais Bourbon, where the Assembly was meeting, and forced their way into the chamber. In the hubbub, someone read the petition in favor of Poland. Then Aloysius Huber exclaimed: "The National Assembly is dissolved." The crowd then marched to the City Hall of Paris, where it proclaimed an "insurrectionary government" with Blanqui, Ledru-Rollin, Alexandre Martin, Louis Blanc, Aloysius Huber, Thoré, Pierre Leroux, and Raspail to serve as ministers. Elements of the National Guard, joined by Lamartine, Ledru-Rollin, and members of the five-day-old Executive Committee, besieged the city hall and dislodged the protesters.

The assembly and the executive committee resumed control of the situation. The Republican leaders were arrested. They were brought before the High Court of Justice of Bourges on 7 March to 3 April 1849. Marc Caussidière was dismissed from his position as prefect of police, and he was replaced by a banker from Le Mans, Ariste Jacques Trouvé-Chauvel. General de Courtois, commandant of the National Guard of Paris, who had shown some sympathy for the protesters, was arrested and replaced by General Clément Thomas. Jules Favre tried in vain to get the Assembly to indict Louis Blanc. Philippe Buchez, who had shown no reaction to the demonstrators, lost the presidency of the Assembly, and he was succeeded by the former attorney, Antoine Sénard. The Conservatives were, after these events, free to carry on the offensive against their great nemesis: the national workshops associated with Louis Blanc.

Baron Denys Marie Pierre Augustin Cochin (1 September 1851 in Paris – 24 March 1922 in Paris) was a French writer and Catholic right-wing politician.

Denys Cochin was the son of Pierre-Suzanne-Augustin Cochin, also a politician and writer. After graduating from the school Louis-le-Grand, he joined the military as a quartermaster in the eight cuirassier, before becoming flag carrier for General Charles Denis Bourbaki. After the end of the Franco-Prussian War in 1871, he was an attache in the embassy in London for a year. Returning to France in 1872, he undertook studies in chemistry in the laboratory of Louis Pasteur. During World War I, he worked on the development of explosives and chemical weapons.

In 1881 he was elected councilman of the 7th arrondissement of Paris. From 1893 to 1919, he represented Seine in the French National Assembly. He was the principal spokesman of the Catholic party defending the religious educational liberties and congregations against the attacks of the administrations of Pierre Waldeck-Rousseau and Émile Combes.

Symbolizing the alignment of L'union sacrée, he was Minister of State in Aristide Briand 's fourth administration from 29 October 1915 to 12 December 1916, and then under-secretary for foreign policy matters responsible for dealing with the blockade of Germany under Alexandre Ribot from 20 March to August 1917. He resigned predicting the breakup of L'union sacrée.

He was elected to Seat 11 of the Académie française on 16 February 1911.

As an art collector, Cochin bought several impressionist paintings together with Paul Durand-Ruel including one by Claude Monet.

Denys Cochin was the father of the historian Augustin Cochin.

The Departmental Council of Vaucluse (French : Conseil départemental de Vaucluse) is the deliberative assembly of the French department of Vaucluse. The president of the council is Dominique Santoni (LR), since 2021.

The departmental council includes 34 departmental councilors from the 17 cantons of Vaucluse.

The Vaucluse departmental council manages 16 Espaces Départemental des Solidarités (EDeS or transl. Departmental Spaces of Solidarity). These EDeS have four essential tasks: prevention of exclusion; maternal and infantile protection (medical, psychological, social and educational prevention for the health of future parents and children, actions for children at risk and prevention of ill-treatment, prevention actions, screening for disabilities in children aged 0 to 6, approval and training of childminders); assistance for the elderly and disabled; and health prevention and health actions.

All the services of the Vaucluse departmental council are relayed to 5 Houses of the Department in the municipalities of Apt, Orange, L'Isle-sur-la-Sorgue, Carpentras and Sault where help and information are offered to facilitate the daily life of the inhabitants.

In the administrative divisions of France, the department (French : département, pronounced [ depaʁtəmɑ̃ ]) is one of the three levels of government under the national level (" territorial collectivities "), between the administrative regions and the communes. There are a total of 101 departments, consisting of ninety-six departments in metropolitan France, and five overseas departments, which are also classified as overseas regions. Departments are further subdivided into 333 arrondissements and 2,054 cantons (as of 2023). These last two levels of government have no political autonomy, instead serving as the administrative basis for the local organisation of police, fire departments, and, in certain cases, elections.

Each department is administered by an elected body called a departmental council (sing. conseil départemental, pl. conseils départementaux). From 1800 to April 2015, these were called general councils (sing. conseil général, pl. conseils généraux). Each council has a president. Their main areas of responsibility include the management of a number of social and welfare allowances, of junior high school (collège) buildings and technical staff, and local roads and school and rural buses, and a contribution to municipal infrastructures. Local services of the state administration are traditionally organised at departmental level, where the prefect represents the government; however, regions have gained importance since the 2000s, with some department-level services merged into region-level services.

The departments were created in 1790 as a rational replacement of Ancien Régime provinces with a view to strengthen national unity; the title "department" is used to mean a part of a larger whole. Almost all of them were named after physical geographical features (rivers, mountains, or coasts), rather than after historical or cultural territories, which could have their own loyalties, or after their own administrative seats. The division of France into departments was a project particularly identified with the French revolutionary leader the Abbé Sieyès, although it had already been frequently discussed and written about by many politicians and thinkers. The earliest known suggestion of it is from 1665 in the writings of d'Argenson. They have inspired similar divisions in many countries, some of them former French colonies. The 1822 territorial division of Spain (reverted due to the 1823 French intervention ending the trienio liberal) and the 1833 territorial division of Spain, which forms the basis of the present day provinces of Spain with minor modifications, are also based on the French model of departments of roughly equal size.

Most French departments are assigned a two-digit number, the Official Geographical Code, allocated by the Institut national de la statistique et des études économiques (Insée). Overseas departments have a three-digit number. The number is used, for example, in the postal code and was, until the introduction of the SIV scheme in 2009, part of the vehicle registration plate number. Residents commonly use the numbers to refer to their own department or a neighbouring one, for example inhabitants of Loiret may refer to their department as "the 45". More distant departments are generally referred to by their names, as few people know the numbers of all the departments.

In 2014, President François Hollande proposed abolishing departmental councils by 2020, which would have maintained the departments as administrative divisions, and transferring their powers to other levels of governance. This reform project has since been scrapped.

The first French territorial departments were proposed in 1665 by Marc-René d'Argenson to serve as administrative areas purely for the Ponts et Chaussées (Bridges and Highways) infrastructure administration.

Before the French Revolution, France gained territory gradually through the annexation of a mosaic of independent entities. By the end of the Ancien Régime it was organised into provinces. During the Revolution they were dissolved, partly in order to weaken old loyalties. The National Constituent Assembly decided to create a more uniform division into departments (département) and districts in late 1789. The process began on 4 August 1789 with the elimination of provincial privileges, and a 22 December 1789 decree (with letters patent in January 1790) provided for the termination of the provincial governments.

The modern department system, as all-purpose units of the government, was decreed on 26 February 1790 (with letters patent on 4 March 1790) by the National Constituent Assembly. Their boundaries served two purposes:

The old nomenclature was carefully avoided in naming the new departments. Most were named after an area's principal river or other physical features. Even Paris was in the department of Seine. Savoy, during its temporary occupation, became the department of Mont-Blanc. The provinces continued to exist administratively until 21 September 1791.

The number of departments, initially 83, had been increased to 130 by 1809 with the territorial gains of the Republic and of the First French Empire. Following the defeats of Napoleon in 1814–1815 the Congress of Vienna returned France to its pre-war size and the number of departments was reduced to 86 (three of the original departments having been split). In 1860 France acquired the County of Nice and Savoy, which led to the creation of three new departments. Two were added from the new Savoyard territory, while the department of Alpes-Maritimes was created from Nice and a portion of the Var department. The 89 departments were given numbers based on the alphabetical order of their names.

The department of Bas-Rhin and parts of Meurthe, Moselle, Vosges and Haut-Rhin were ceded to the German Empire in 1871 following France's defeat in the Franco-Prussian War. A small part of Haut-Rhin, however, remained French and became known as the Territoire de Belfort ; the remaining parts of Meurthe and Moselle were merged into a new Meurthe-et-Moselle department. When France regained the ceded departments after World War I, the Territoire de Belfort was not reintegrated into Haut-Rhin. In 1922 it became France's 90th department. Likewise the Lorraine departments were not changed back to their original boundaries, and a new Moselle department was created in the regained territory, with slightly different boundaries from the pre-war department of the same name.

The reorganisation of Île-de-France in 1968 and the division of Corsica in 1975 added six more departments, raising the total in Metropolitan France to 96. By 2011, when the overseas collectivity of Mayotte became a department, joining the earlier overseas departments of the Republic (all created in 1946) – French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique and Réunion – the total number of departments in the French Republic had become 101. In 2015 the Urban Community of Lyon was split from Rhône to form the Métropole de Lyon, a sui generis entity, with the powers of both an intercommunality and those of a department on its territory, formally classified as a "territorial collectivity with particular status" (French : collectivité territoriale à statut particulier) and as such not belonging to any department. As of 2019 Corse-du-Sud and Haute-Corse are still administrative departments, although they no longer have the status of departmental " territorial collectivities ": region and department functions have been managed by a " single territorial collectivity " since 2018.

Despite the intention to avoid the old nomenclature, often the names of pre-1790 provinces remained in use. For example, the name of Berry, though no longer having an official status, remains in widespread use in daily life.

The departmental seat of government is known as the prefecture (préfecture) or chef-lieu de département and is generally a town of some importance roughly at the geographical centre of the department. This was determined according to the time taken to travel on horseback from the periphery of the department. The goal was for the prefecture to be accessible on horseback from any town in the department within 24 hours. The prefecture is not necessarily the largest city in the department: for instance, in Saône-et-Loire department the capital is Mâcon, but the largest city is Chalon-sur-Saône. Departments may be divided into arrondissements. The capital of an arrondissement is called a subprefecture (sous-préfecture) or chef-lieu d'arrondissement.

Each department is administered by a departmental council (conseil départemental), an assembly elected for six years by universal suffrage, with the President of the Departmental Council as executive of the department. Before 1982, the chief executive of the department was the prefect (préfet), who represents the Government of France in each department and is appointed by the President of the French Republic. The prefect is assisted by one or more sub-prefects (sous-préfet) based in the subprefectures of the department. Since 1982, the prefect retains only the powers that are not delegated to the department councils. In practice, their role has been largely limited to preventing local policy from conflicting with national policy.

The departments are further divided into communes, governed by municipal councils. As of 2025, there were 34,746 communes in France. In the overseas territories, some communes play a role at departmental level. Paris, the country's capital city, is a commune as well as a department.

In mainland France (metropolitan France, excluding Corsica), the median land area of a department is 5,965 km (2,303 sq mi), which is two-and-a-half times the median land area of the ceremonial counties of England and the preserved counties of Wales and slightly more than three-and-half times the median land area of a county of the United States. At the 2001 census, the median population of a department in continental France was 511,000 inhabitants, which is 21 times the median population of a United States county, but less than two-thirds of the median population of a ceremonial county of England and Wales. Most of the departments have an area of between 4,000 and 8,000 km (1500 to 3000 sq. mi), and a population between 320,000 and 1 million. The largest in area is Gironde (10,000 km (3,900 sq mi)), while the smallest is the city of Paris (105 km (41 sq mi)). The most populous is Nord (2,550,000) and the least populous is Lozère (74,000).

The departments are numbered: their two-digit numbers appear in postal codes, in INSEE codes (including "social security numbers") and on vehicle registration plates. Initially the numbers corresponded to the alphabetical order of the names of the departments, but several changed their names and some have been divided, so the correspondence became less exact. Alphanumeric codes 2A and 2B were used for Corsica while it was split but it has since reverted to 20. The two-digit code "98" is used by Monaco. Together with the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 country code FR, the numbers form the ISO 3166-2 country subdivision codes for the metropolitan departments. The overseas departments have three digits.

Originally, the relationship between the departments and the central government was left somewhat ambiguous. While citizens in each department elected their own officials, the local governments were subordinated to the central government, becoming instruments of national integration. By 1793, however, the revolutionary government had turned the departments into transmission belts for policies enacted in Paris. With few exceptions, the departments had this role until the early 1960s.

These maps cannot be used as a useful resource of voter preferences, because Departmental Councils are elected on a two-round system, which drastically limits the chances of fringe parties, if they are not supported on one of the two rounds by a moderate party. After the 1992 election, the left had a majority in only 21 of the 100 departments; after the 2011 election, the left dominated 61 of the 100 departments. (Mayotte only became a department after the election.)

The removal of one or more levels of local government has been discussed for some years; in particular, the option of removing the departmental level. Frédéric Lefebvre, spokesman for the UMP, said in December 2008 that the fusion of the departments with the regions was a matter to be dealt with soon. This was soon refuted by Édouard Balladur and Gérard Longuet, members of the committee for the reform of local authorities, known as the Balladur Committee.

In January 2008, the Attali Commission recommended that the departmental level of government should be eliminated within ten years.

Nevertheless, the Balladur Committee has not retained this proposition and does not advocate the disappearance of the departments, but simply "favors the voluntary grouping of departments", which it suggests also for the regions, with the aim of reducing the number of regions to 15. This committee advocates, on the contrary, the suppression of the cantons.

Each department has a coat of arms and a flag with which it is commonly associated, though not all are officially recognised or used.

Unlike the rest of the French possessions in Africa, Algeria was divided into departments just like Corsica and Normandy from 1848 until its independence in 1962. These departments were supposed to be "assimilated" or "integrated" into France sometime in the future.

There are a number of former departments in territories conquered by France during the French Revolution and Napoleonic Empire that are now not part of France:

Imperial Free City of Wesel (after 1805)

Deputies (French : députés and députées, pronounced [ depyte ]), also known in English as members of Parliament (MPs), are the legislators who sit in the National Assembly, the lower house of the French Parliament. The 17th and current legislature of the Fifth Republic has a total of 577 deputies, elected in single-member constituencies across metropolitan (539) and overseas France (27), as well as for French residents overseas (11).

The term "deputy" is associated with the legislator's task to deputise for the people of his or her constituency.

There are currently 577 legislative seats in the National Assembly. They are elected through the two-round system in single-member constituencies.

The number of deputies is codified in the Constitution of France.

In 2019, it was reported that the Government of France wanted to cut the number of deputies by 25%. This reform was later abandoned due to a lack of support in the Senate.

Deputies have parliamentary immunity. They enjoy total freedom of expression within the National Assembly chamber, although they can be sanctioned by a majority of deputies for not complying with the rules of procedure. The maximum penalty is a 15-day suspension from sitting in Parliament. As of 2023 and since 1958, the maximum penalty has been voted three times; the most recent was against La France Insoumise deputy Thomas Portes, who pictured Labour Minister Olivier Dussopt decapitated on social media. A deputy cannot be removed from office by other deputies.

Like senators and members of the executive, deputies have to submit a declaration of interests and assets to the Haute Autorité pour la transparence de la vie publique (HATVP). Such declarations are then verified and made publicly accessible. Like senators, deputies hold various privileges. They can inspect – without having to announce their visit prior to arrival – a number of sites managed on behalf the executive to verify compliance with laws voted by Parliament.

It is common for deputies, wearing their distinctive sash, to place themselves at the front of demonstrations, with the aim of being recognisable to police forces and protecting individuals behind them. At a 2023 demonstration in Sainte-Soline, Deux-Sèvres, deputies formed a line in front of police on site to allow medical teams to evacuate wounded participants who had clashed with police forces. Wearing an official sash without the proper rights constitutes a punishable offence.

Deputies, like senators, can have a dual mandate at the local level (most notably municipal, departmental, regional councillor) but a new law that entered in application in 2017 has limited the practice's extent by restricting national officials' ability to serve in local executives. Deputies are paid 5,782.66 euros per month.

Candidates can run for a seat in the National Assembly when they hold French citizenship, are at least 18 years old, as well as not have been declared incompetent in court or sentenced to a loss of civic rights.

The deputy prime minister of France was a position which existed at times in the government of France between 1870 and 1958. It was titled vice president of the Council of Ministers (French : vice-président du Conseil des ministres) from 1871, or vice president of the Council for short.

It was in itself a sinecure, used to grant seniority immediately after the prime minister to one important member of the government, later up to three at the same time, but without specific duty or power, or any role as designated acting prime minister. However, in 1871–1876 and 1940–1942, it was actually used for the de facto prime minister, as the position was nominally held by the head of state.

The position of deputy prime minister existed only occasionally during the Third Republic (1870–1940, starting only in the 1910s), the Provisional Government of the French Republic (1944–1946), and the Fourth Republic (1946–1958).

As for all other members of the government, the appointment, or removal, was formally by the head of state, but bowing to the decision of the prime minister.

Although it implied a role of deputy head of government, the position was in itself a sinecure, which brought seniority right after the prime minister (president of the Council), but came without any specific duty or power unless arranged by separate decisions, or any role as designated acting prime minister. The holder sometimes concurrently served as minister for a specific government department, as did the prime minister at the end of the Third Republic, but was otherwise a top-ranking minister without portfolio, with informal responsibilities. A responsibility was however directly assigned to the vice presidency on two occasions, in 1938–1940 when Camille Chautemps was put in charge of coordination of the recently established Office of the Prime Minister, and in 1951 when Guy Mollet was in charge of the Council of Europe. There was initially only one holder at a time, while a position of minister of state, which ranked higher than ordinary ministers, could be granted to several members, also with or without portfolio; there were however up to three vice presidencies in later governments.

Depending on the political situation, it could reflect the personal standing of the holder, especially if he was a former prime minister, or his role as leader or representative of an important party of the government combination, especially for the two junior parties of the tripartisme in 1946–1947. Positions of minister of state were already used for the same purpose since the 19th century; deputy prime ministers ranked above these when both existed at the same time, making it possible for the prime minister to draw up a subtle order of seniority.

The first holder was Aristide Briand in 1914, chosen at the start of World War I by René Viviani ; as the government had partially transferred from Paris to Bordeaux, this enabled him to deputize for Vivani, or for the foreign and war ministers, when they came and went between the two cities. Viviani was also the first prime minister not holding a specific portfolio in order to concentrate on the coordination of an expanding state apparatus. The last was Guy Mollet in 1958.

An equivalent position had also existed in a provisional government, the Government of National Defence (1870–1871), which had a vice president (vice-président du Gouvernement de la défense nationale).

In two short periods, the title was however used for the de facto head of government himself, because the head of state formally held the position of prime minister as well.

In 1871, for lack of a permanent constitution, Adolphe Thiers was installed as chief executive of the French Republic in February; while the Rivet Law granted him the title of president of the Republic in August, this was in compensation for a restriction of his powers by the National Assembly, under which ministers were made responsible to the assembly. As he wanted to maintain a direct involvement in government business and kept the additional position of prime minister, the minister to whom he delegated the leadership of the quasi-national government formed in February on 2 September, the minister of justice Jules Armand Dufaure, received the title of vice president of the Council. His successor Patrice de MacMahon left a larger degree of autonomy to his deputy. After republicans won the 1876 legislative election, MacMahon, a monarchist, accepted to appoint a republican ministry, but on 9 March transferred the title of president of the Council to its leader, Dufaure again, in order to stress that he took no responsibility for it. In his government statement, Dufaure defined his new position by declaring that he had been “chosen by the President of the Republic to exercise in his name the powers conferred on him by the Constitution”.

At the start of the Vichy Regime (1940–1944), Philippe Pétain, the last prime minister of the Third Republic who proclaimed himself head of the French State, made Pierre Laval the leading minister when he re-appointed him as his deputy on 12 July. Pétain dismissed and replaced Laval a few months later, but he was eventually forced by the German occupation authorities to recall him with increased prerogatives on 18 April 1942, upon which he granted him the title of head of the Government (chef du Gouvernement), even though he himself nominally kept the title of president of the Council.

The meetings of the Council of Ministers have always been chaired by the head of state (emperor, king, president); when the role of head of government emerged in the late 1810s under the Restoration, the title of “president” of that body came to be used, because it included the responsibility to prepare the agenda and the business to be dealt with. This was initially only by convention, and the position or title of head of government had no legal existence until 1830; some other ministers were informally considered second-in-command, but were not commonly called vice president.

During the Second Empire (1852–1870), the position of prime minister had been pointedly abolished by Napoleon III, who led government business in person, but the minister of state, who was ranked first and was close to the Emperor, came to be seen as the primus inter pares, especially when speaking in the name of the Emperor in important parliamentary business.

Although the position of prime minister came in legal existence when it re-emerged in the 1870s, the office did not appear in a French constitution before 1946 ; that of deputy never did.

A position of deputy prime minister under the Fifth Republic (1958–present), which would be titled vice-Premier ministre to reflect the change in name of the prime ministerial position, has never been granted. The Constitution simply provides that the prime minister "may delegate certain of his powers to ministers" (article 21). Nicolas Hulot, who served as minister for the ecological and solidary transition with the rank of minister of state in the first year of Emmanuel Macron 's presidency, had long publicly called for a position of deputy prime minister in charge of the environment, and said that Macron had considered his elevation, but determined that it would be "not constitutional".

Dexia N.V./S.A., or the Dexia Group, is a Franco-Belgian financial institution formed in 1996. At its peak in 2010, it had about 35,200 members of staff and a core shareholders' equity of €19.2 billion.

In 2008, the bank entered severe financial difficulties and received taxpayer bailouts for €6 billion, and it became the first big casualty of the 2011 European sovereign debt crisis. Due to big losses, suffered among others from the debt haircut on Greek government bonds, its Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital ratio became negative during the second half of 2011, and an orderly resolution process began in October 2011.

As part of the resolution, Dexia Bank Belgium was bought out from the Dexia group by the Belgian state and has continued to operate, since March 2012 under the new name Belfius. The French bank focused on local government lending was restructured as SFIL. The remaining part of the Dexia group was left in a "bad bank", still called Dexia, to be gradually wound down.

In the 2010 Fortune Global 500 (which lists companies by total income) Dexia was ranked 49th, the top-ranked Belgian company.

The company was founded in 1996 through the merger of Crédit Communal de Belgique (founded in 1860) and Crédit Local de France (founded in 1987). The Dexia Group was founded as a dual-listed company, but in 1999 the Belgian entity took over the French entity to form one company. The company is headquartered in Brussels, Belgium. France and Belgium just injected another combined €5.5 billion ($7 billion) into Dexia.

On 29 September 2008, Dexia came under pressure due to the 2008 financial crisis. Other banks and financial institutions refused to provide further credit to Dexia because of potential losses at its U.S. subsidiary FSA and from a multi-billion loan to troubled German bank Depfa. The price of the Dexia share, having peaked above €20 in the previous years, but gradually fallen to around €10, dropped in one day to €6.62.

The next day the rating agency Moody's downgraded Dexia's long term debt and deposits ratings from Aa1 to Aa3, and downgraded the individual banks' strengths to C− ("adequate intrinsic financial strength") with a negative outlook.

Dexia was quickly forced to apply for a taxpayer bailout. This support was assured within days, taking two forms:

The three states have the potential to make a profit from their intervention:

Since Dexia had a New York banking office they were eligible for various bailouts from the US Federal Reserve. At its peak Dexia had borrowed $58.5 billion.

On 30 September 2008 the company's chairman Pierre Richard and CEO Axel Miller were dismissed, and were replaced on 7 October 2008 by former Belgian prime minister Jean-Luc Dehaene and Pierre Mariani respectively. On 24 October 2008, Francois Rebsamen, the socialist Mayor of Dijon and a French Senator, vacated his place on the board of Dexia Credit Local, while Antoine Rufenacht, UMP mayor of Le Havre, Philippe Duron, socialist mayor of Caen, and Christophe Bechu, president of Maine-et-Loire province stayed.

At the end of 2008 Dexia sold the healthy parts of FSA, ceased its trading activities in Paris and trading on its own account in the financial markets.

Further losses are still possible on the remaining FSA portfolio. On 19 January 2009 Moody's lowered the credit rating for Dexia's long term obligations and saving accounts of the three banking parts of Dexia (Dexia Credit Local in France, Dexia Bank Belgium and Dexia Banque Internationale in Luxembourg) from Aa3 to A1. The rating agency also downgraded the Bank Financial Strength Rating for the three banks from C− to D+.

On 5 March 2009 Dexia's share price fell to an all-time low of €1.21, a loss of over 90% in a year. A further restructuring plan was announced, with the firm aiming to concentrate on its primary activities, and to avoid risks on the financial markets. A total of 1,500 job cuts were announced, of which more than half were in Belgium, 260 in France, and the rest worldwide. Dexia's share price subsequently increased over the rest of 2009, largely varying between €4 and €7.50.

On 31 March 2010 Bloomberg reported that Dexia was one of the largest borrowers from the discount window of the United States Federal Reserve, having outstanding loans of over $30 billion.

In February 2009 the bank announced net losses of 3.3 billion euros (approximately 4.2 billion US dollars) for 2008. The Dexia 2008 annual report mentions among others losses of €1.6 billion from selling FSA, €600 million on portfolios and €800 million on counterparties (including Lehman Brothers, Icelandic banks, and Washington Mutual)

According to the financial services provider Bloomberg Dexia lost €78 million through the Ponzi scheme of Bernard Madoff.

On 6 February 2010 Dexia could announce that the European Commission had, under certain conditions, approved of the restructuring plan that was necessary to justify the government support for Dexia and to prevent unfair competition:

Vintage retail activities represented a bigger share in profits again in 2010; apart from Belgium and France, Turkey became very promising in this area. So much so that predictions were that Turkish staff would account for half of the Dexia employees by 2014. At the same time, outgoing cashflows were diminished by reducing the bonds portfolio; even selling bonds at a loss, if necessary, which explained to a large extent the lesser profits in 2010.

More incoming funds from private saving accounts and less outgoing capital through bonds and loans to public institutions meant that Dexia could already worry a bit less about finding sufficient short term funding. The greater international trust in the company also showed when it announced an early retirement from the State Guarantee in 2010.

Dexia and La Banque postale, the bank subsidiary of the French postal services, reached an agreement in January 2011 about a cash transaction involving covered bonds worth €3 billion. This was presented for La Banque Postale as an investment at market conditions, and as an extra source of liquidity for Dexia.

Alleged differences of opinion were reported at the top of Dexia. More specifically about tensions between Belgian directors and the French CEO, Pierre Mariani, concerning on the one hand the deficitary investments that had been mostly done in the French division of Dexia, and the liquid funds that were above all present in Belgium.

On 15 July the European Banking Authority, as part of its European bank stress tests, gave Dexia a clean bill of health, reporting that its tier 1 capital was 12.1 percent, and would fall to 10.4 percent in 2012 under its "adverse scenario". This would make it one of Europe's safest banks.

Dexia posted a €4 billion loss for the second quarter, the biggest in its history, after writing down the value of its Greek debt. On 4 October its shares fell 22% to €1.01 in Brussels, cutting its market value to €1.96 billion. Discussions were taking place about a possible breakup, with a plan to place its "legacy" division into a bad bank with government guarantees.

On 10 October, it was announced that the Belgian banking arm will be purchased for €4 billion by the Belgian federal government. Some units such as DenizBank and the Luxembourg retail bank will be put up for sale. Part of its French operations are likely to be purchased by Caisse des dépôts et consignations and La Banque Postale. The remaining troubled assets, including a €95 billion bond portfolio would remain in a "bad bank" that would receive funding guarantees of up to €90 billion provided by the governments of Belgium (60.5%), France (36.5%) and Luxembourg (3%).

On 27 July, Dexia confirms the sale of its 50% share in RBC Dexia Investor Services. The business moves under the sole ownership of Royal Bank of Canada (RBC) and is renamed RBC Investor Services.

In the same year Banque Internationale à Luxembourg (for €730 million) and DenizBank were sold.

In January 2013 Dexia Municipal Agency was sold. It was reported in September 2013 that Dexia had entered into talks with New York Life Investment Management to sell Dexia Asset Management, which was completed on 3 February 2014. In 2013 SFIL was sold.

ECB officials agreed on Thursday 22 May 2014 that Franco-Belgian bank Dexia would not have to demonstrate it could bear a financial crisis in a Europe-wide stress test, reducing the chances of it needing further state aid. The ECB had already acknowledged Dexia's "specific situation", with an assessment of its finances carried out over its 2011 wind-down plan. That EU-approved plans makes Dexia unique among the 128 major euro zone banks being reviewed by the European Central Bank (ECB) and the 124 EU banks that are being subjected to stress tests by the European Banking Authority (EBA). The Comprehensive Assessment completed in October 2014 ahead of the entry into force of European Banking Supervision suggested Dexia had a capital shortfall of €340 million. However, as the bank was guarantee by States, the bank was not required to capital increases.

A subsidiary, Dexia Asset Management changed its name to Candriam following its acquisition by New York Life Investments on 3 February 2014.

In 2015 Dexia announced that it would suffer from the possible default of Heta Asset Resolution, a bad bank from the residual of Hypo Alpe-Adria-Bank International. Via the subsidiary Dexia Kommunalbank Deutschland A.G. (DKD), Dexia had a loan of €417 million to former Hypo Bank. Carinthia state government offered to buy back the senior bonds for 75% par value and 30% for subordinated bonds of Heta. Previously Carinthia had guaranteed the subordinated bond but later Austrian central government, as instructed by European Union, could not provide any more state aid. Moreover, Financial Market Authority of Austria used the power given by EU Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, which bail-in the shareholders and subordinated bond holders.

On the subsidiaries, Crediop would be run-off, Dexia Credito Local Mexico had been placed in a trust, Dexia Kommunalkredit Bulgaria was liquidated, Dexia Nederland and Dexia Luxembourg (ex-Dexia LdG Banque) abandoned their banking licenses.

Dexia sells its 58.9% interest in Dexia Israel Bank in March 2018. In December 2018, German subsidiary Dexia Kommunalbank Deutschland (DKD) was sold to Helaba for €352 million.

Dexia was a member of the BEL20 and CAC Next 20 indices. Dexia is also one of the components of the Euro STOXX and Euro STOXX Banks indices.

Dexia had ambitious plans in the Netherlands, and took over Bank Labouchère from the Dutch insurer Aegon in August 2000 at the height of the market. On top of this, in 2001 the business bank Kempen & Co was bought and removed from the stock market for about €1 billion. The two acquired companies Labouchère and Kempen & Co were merged into Dexia Netherlands. This merger had to be undone however, because of an asset leasing affair that threatened to damage the reputation of Kempen & Co.

The asset leasing affair left Dexia in The Netherlands in the end with so much negative publicity that it decided to reduce its Dutch activities. In 2004 Kempen & Co was sold for about €85 million, a fraction of the buying price, to its management, the Friesland Bank, NPM Capital and HAL Investments.

Dexia Bank Netherlands still continues to unwind asset leasing contracts under the commercial name of Legio Lease, and the corresponding agreements and court cases. Dexia suffered a substantial loss in March 2008, after a ruling from the Supreme Court on the legality of leasing contracts, in which contracts were considered invalid for married couples of which both partners had not signed the contract. Dexia as a consequence had to repay these debts plus accrued interests. Luckily for Dexia many customers had previously agreed to a less favourable Duisenberg-agreement and could not revoke this. Eventually only 3,000 of the hundreds of thousands of Legiolease customers profited from this ruling of the High Council.

According to research of Netwerk Vlaanderen Dexia in 2005 together with AXA, Fortis, ING and KBC invested over €6.6 billion in companies that were involved in human rights violations. The companies and projects in which banks invest are controversial because of their support for dictatorial regimes, forced displacements and forced labour. The criticism concerns among others investments in a gas pipe line in Myanmar and the BTC pipe line through Turkey, Azerbaijan and Georgia. In 2005 Dexia announced a new policy concerning the weapons industry. Companies involved in the production of anti-personnel mines will be completely barred from banking services. For investment funds there is no limitation of investments in the weapons industry.

Dexia did on the other hand rank 17th in 2011 on the list of ' The Global 100 Most Sustainable Corporations in the World'. Dexia was the third company from the financial sector on the list.

Through its Israeli subsidiary, Dexia operates in certain Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territories. Several Belgian and French NGOs mounted campaigns to attract attention to this. Leading ultimately in 2011 to concrete plans to sell the Israeli division, Dexia Israel Bank [ he ].

After his forced departure in October 2008, CEO Axel Miller was contractually entitled to a 'golden parachute' of €3.7 million. This provoked protest from the French president Nicolas Sarkozy, and Miller subsequently renounced his bonus, leaving the matter to "the wisdom of the Board of Directors". The board eventually decided to pay him one year's salary (€825,000), thus ignoring Sarkozy's remarks.

The French Ministry of Finance stated in April 2009 that it had voted against the payout, but that its representatives on the board were outnumbered.

Axel Miller's successor, Pierre Mariani, close to Nicolas Sarkozy, obtained a salary that is 30% higher than that of Miller.

The board of directors unanimously accepted on 13 November 2008 to upgrade the yearly salary of the CEO to €1 million, and to fix the maximum bonus at €2.25 million. Miller's salary was €825,000, with a maximum bonus of €1.8 million.

Within Dexia Crédit Local, the French component of Dexia group, a pool of €8 million was dedicated to the bonuses of the leading managers, mainly directors. The management indicated that the sum would be shared among 400 to 765 employees.

Philippe Rucheton, the financial director appointed by Dexia in April 2009, coming from Société Générale, received a welcome bonus of €500,000.

In 2010 Dexia announced its plan to provide CEO Pierre Mariani with a bonus of €600,000. For Jean-Luc Dehaene a remuneration was planned of €88,000. The allotment of high bonuses at Dexia and competitor KBC caused some commotion in Belgium. Leading the city of Ghent to remove some €30 million in short term investments from Dexia and KBC.

The Dexia Tower, the firm's new head office in Brussels, is with its height of 137m an icon in the business district of Brussels-North. In December 2006 the tower was equipped with LED lighting. A total of 126,000 programmable LED strips have been fitted. From 22 December 2006 to 15 January 2007, the colours of the tower could be chosen by the public from a touchscreen. It was spin-off and occupied by Belfius (ex-Dexia Bank Belgium).

The Tour Dexia at La Défense, previously known as the CBX tower, is the bank's Parisian headquarter since 2007.

The Diamonds affair, known in France as "l'affaire des diamants ", was a political scandal in the 5th French Republic. In 1973, the French Minister of Finance, future president Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, was offered two diamonds from the President (and future Emperor) of the Central African Republic, Jean-Bédel Bokassa. The affair was unveiled by the satiric newspaper Le Canard Enchaîné on October 10, 1979, towards the end of Giscard's presidency.

In order to defend himself, Giscard d'Estaing claimed to have sold the diamonds and donated the proceeds to the Central African Red Cross. He expected CAR authorities to confirm the story. However, the head of the local Red Cross society, Jeanne-Marie Ruth-Rolland, publicly denied the French claims. Ruth-Rolland was quickly dismissed from her post by in what she described as a "coup de force" by David Dacko.

The saga contributed to Giscard losing his 1981 bid for reelection.

Didier Ignace Ratsiraka (Malagasy: [ raˈtsirəkə̥ ] ; 4 November 1936 – 28 March 2021) was a Malagasy politician and naval officer who was the third president of Madagascar from 1975 to 1993 and the fifth from 1997 to 2002. At the time of his death, he was the longest-serving president of Madagascar.

He was first appointed president in 1975 by the military leadership, he was then reelected twice in 1982 and 1989. While he lost to Albert Zafy in 1992, Ratsiraka returned to office after winning the 1997 election. After the 2001 election, he and his opponent Marc Ravalomanana engaged in a lengthy standoff after the latter refused to participate in a runoff election; Ratsiraka eventually stepped down.

Didier Ratsiraka was born in Vatomandry, Atsinanana Region, French Madagascar, on 4 November 1936. His father, Albert Ratsiraka, was a member of the Parti des déshérités de Madagascar in the Moramanga District and a Malagasy official in the French colonial administration.

Ratsiraka attended Lycée Henri-IV, a prestigious public secondary school in Paris. He then graduated from École navale, the French naval academy, as a naval officer with a bachelor's degree in 1962. He returned to Madagascar, where he began his career as a naval ensign at the French naval and military base in Diego-Suarez.

In 1964, Ratsiraka married Céline Velonjara in a Roman Catholic wedding ceremony. The couple had four children, namely Olga, Sophie, Annick and Xavier.

Ratsiraka initially served as a military attaché at the Embassy of Madagascar in Paris, before being appointed as Minister of Foreign Affairs with President Gabriel Ramanantsoa 's transitional government from 1972 until 1975. As foreign minister, Ratsiraka renegotiated the Franco-Malagasy cooperation agreements, which had originally been signed in 1960. He also oversaw Madagascar's departure from the CFA franc zone in 1972.

Known as the "Red Admiral", he was made head of state, as President of the Supreme Revolutionary Council, by the military leadership on 15 June 1975. He was also nicknamed "Deba", a Malagasy word which translates in English to "the Big Man". He began setting up a socialist system, guided by the Charter of the Malagasy Socialist Revolution, which was approved in a referendum held on 21 December 1975, establishing the Second Republic ; Ratsiraka was also elected President for a seven-year term in this referendum, which received the backing of 95% of voters according to official results. The political party AREMA was founded in 1976 with Ratsiraka as its secretary-general; together with five other parties, AREMA formed the political alliance called the Vanguard of the Malagasy Revolution (FNDR). All politicians were required to be members of FNDR; AREMA was the dominant party in election results.

In the midst of a poor economic situation, Ratsiraka abandoned socialist policies after a few years in power and implemented reforms recommended by the International Monetary Fund. He was re-elected as president with 80% of the vote in 1982 and with 63% of the vote in 1989. The latter election was condemned as fraudulent by the opposition, which protested, and at least 75 people were killed in the resulting violence.

Ratsiraka faced intense opposition to his rule in 1991. On 10 August 1991, tens of thousands people marched on the Presidential Palace, The government placed the death toll at 11, although other reports placed the toll higher. The incident severely undermined his already precarious position. On 31 October, he signed the Panorama Convention, which established a provisional government and stripped him of most of his powers; although he remained President, opposition leader Albert Zafy became head of the newly established High Authority of the State.

Ratsiraka ran in the multiparty November 1992 presidential election, placing second behind Zafy in the first round. In the second round, held in February 1993, Ratsiraka lost to Zafy, taking about one-third of the vote, and left office on 27 March. Zafy was impeached by the National Assembly of Madagascar in 1996, and Ratsiraka, who had been in exile in France, mounted a political comeback in late 1996 when he won that year's presidential election, running as the candidate of the AREMA party. He came in first place in the first round with 36.6% of the vote, ahead of his three main opponents: Zafy, Herizo Razafimahaleo, and Prime Minister/Acting President Norbert Ratsirahonana. He narrowly defeated Zafy in the runoff with 50.7% of the vote and took office again on 9 February 1997.

Members of the opposition, including Zafy, unsuccessfully attempted to impeach Ratsiraka in February 1998, accusing him of violating the constitution through decentralizing reforms that would increase his own power at the expense of that of the National Assembly. The impeachment motion also accused him of perjury, nepotism, and failing to act as supreme arbiter of disputes, and it cited his ill-health. In the National Assembly vote on 4 February 60 deputies voted for the impeachment motion, well short of the required 92.

On 15 March 1998, a constitutional referendum was held and approved by a narrow majority of voters; this resulted in a major increase in the president's powers, enabling him to dissolve the National Assembly and appoint the prime minister and government without the National Assembly's agreement. It also provided for decentralization, with the provinces gaining autonomy.

Ratsiraka announced on 26 June 2001 that he would be a candidate for the presidential election to be held in December of that year. In the election, he took second place; according to the government, Marc Ravalomanana won first place with 46% of the vote, while Ratsiraka took 40%. Because, according to the official results, no candidate won a majority, a runoff was to take place, but due to disputes over the election it was never held. Ravalomanana claimed to have won over 50 percent of the vote, enough to win the presidency in a single round. Ravalomanana was sworn in as president by his supporters on 22 February 2002, and the two governments fought for control of the country. By the end of February 2002, Ravalomanana had control over the capital, which had always been his base, but Ratsiraka largely maintained control over the provinces and established himself at Toamasina, his primary support base. However, within a few months Ravalomanana had gained the upper hand in a struggle. In mid-June Ratsiraka went to France, leading many to believe he had fled into exile and lowering the morale of his supporters, although Ratsiraka said he would return. He did return to Madagascar after more than a week, but his position was continuing to weaken militarily. On 5 July, Ratsiraka fled Toamasina, taking a flight to the nearby Seychelles. Two days later he arrived in France.

On 6 August 2003, Ratsiraka—who was accused of stealing nearly eight million dollars in public funds from the annex of the central bank in Toamasina in June 2002, just before going into exile—was sentenced to ten years of hard labor in Madagascar. Because he was living in France, he was tried in absentia. The lawyer appointed for Ratsiraka by the court accepted the verdict and sentence as "fair" and said he would not appeal.

On 4 August 2009, Ratsiraka met with President of the High Authority of Transition of Madagascar Andry Rajoelina, as well as Ravalomanana (who had himself been ousted and forced into exile) and former president of the Malagasy Republic Albert Zafy, in crisis talks mediated by former Mozambican President Joaquim Chissano and held in Maputo. Ratsiraka's amnesty issue, related to the court sentence that prevented him from returning to Madagascar, was resolved at the talks.

Ratsiraka's nephew Roland Ratsiraka is also a politician. He became the mayor of Toamasina and ran unsuccessfully in the 2006 presidential election, placing third.

Ratsiraka returned from exile on 24 November 2011, a move that was welcomed by the Rajoelina government as well as by former presidents (and former opponents) Ravalomanana and Zafy. Ratsiraka called for resolution of the political crisis through direct talks between all four political leaders, talks that should also involve other parties and civil society groups according to him.

Ratsiraka wrote a book with Cécile Lavrard-Meyer, a lecturer at Sciences Po in Paris, which was published by Éditions Karthala in July 2015.

On 22 March 2021, Ratsiraka and his wife, Celine, were both admitted to the Soavinandriana Military Hospital (CENHOSOA) in Antananarivo, for treatment of a "small flu", according to their relatives. Ratsiraka had received a PCR diagnostic test for COVID-19, but the results were negative for coronavirus, according to relatives cited by Jeune Afrique. Several days later, Ratsiraka died from cardiac arrest at CENHOSOA hospital in the early morning of 28 March 2021, at the age of 84.

Ratsiraka was buried in the Ambohitsaina Mausoleum (Mausolée d'Ambohitsaina) in Antananarivo on 29 March 2021. President Andry Rajoelina also declared 29 March as a national day of mourning.

Dijon mustard (French : Moutarde de Dijon) is a traditional mustard from France. It is named after the city of Dijon in Burgundy, which was the center of mustard making in the late Middle Ages and was granted exclusive rights in France in the 17th century. First used in 1336 for the table of King Philip VI, it assumed its current form in 1856 when Jean Naigeon of Dijon replaced the vinegar usually used in prepared mustard with verjuice, the acidic juice of unripe grapes.

The main ingredients are brown mustard seeds (Brassica juncea) and a mixture of white wine, vinegar, water, and salt designed to imitate the original verjuice. It can be used as an accompaniment to all meats, or mixed with other ingredients to make a sauce.

In 2008, multinational packaged goods company Unilever, which had several mustard plants in Europe, closed the Amora manufacturing plant. Since July 15, 2009, Amora's Dijon mustard is no longer manufactured and packaged in the town of Dijon, but in the neighbouring town of Chevigny-Saint-Sauveur. The Grey Poupon mustard brand available in the United States originated in Dijon in 1866.

France requires 35,000 tonnes of mustard seed to make Dijon mustard and 80% of the seed is imported from Canada, mainly from Alberta and Saskatchewan where most of Canada's mustard seeds are grown. Canadian production experienced a smaller crop in 2022 caused by a heatwave. The 2022 drought resulted in halving its usual harvest. The 2022 shortage was exacerbated by consumer stockpiling.

Dijon mustard does not have a protected geographical indication (PGI). A 1937 decree ruled that "Dijon mustard" can be used as generic designation and has no link to a specific terroir. However, "moutarde de Bourgogne" (a variant of Dijon mustard from the Bourgogne region) has a PGI, and its seeds have to be produced in Bourgogne.

The Interministerial Directorate for Digital Affairs (Direction interministérielle du numérique, DINUM) is a directorate of the French government. A service of the Prime Minister, it is placed under the joint authority of the Prime Minister and the Minister of Public Action and Accounts, and is also at the disposal of the Ministry of the Economy, Finance and Industrial and Digital Sovereignty. Its mission is to develop the State's digital strategy and to oversee its implementation, acting as the information systems directorate of the State.

The first administrations dealing with digital affairs were the interministerial technical support mission for the development of information and communication technologies in the administration (created in 1998), the Agency for Information and Communication Technologies in the Administration (created in 2001), then the Agency for the Development of Electronic Administration (ADAE, created in 2003) within the framework of ADELE.

The General Directorate for State Modernisation (DGME) was created in 2005. It brought together several structures dealing with issues related to State reform and modernisation (budget reform directorate, delegation for users and administrative simplifications, delegation for the modernisation of public management and State structures, and the agency for the development of electronic administration).

The Interministerial Directorate for State Information and Communication Systems (DISIC) was created on 21 February 2011. It took on the role of overseeing the general interoperability framework (RGI), the general accessibility framework for administrations (RGAA), and the general security framework (RGS, a role shared with ANSSI). In 2012, the Interministerial Directorate for the Modernisation of Public Action and the Interministerial Directorate for State Information and Communication Systems formed the Secretary-General for the Modernisation of Public Action (SGMAP).

On 21 September 2015, the Interministerial Directorate for Digital Affairs and State Information and Communication Systems (DINSIC) was created by bringing together the DISIC, Etalab and a small SGMAP mission that would become the State start-up incubator (beta.gouv.fr), still within the Secretary-General for the Modernisation of Public Action until the latter's abolition on 20 November 2017. The interministerial directorate was then placed, by delegation of the Prime Minister, under the authority of the minister responsible for digital affairs and attached to the Secretary-General of the Government. The minister responsible for State reform had authority over it.

On 25 October 2019, the Interministerial Directorate for Digital Affairs (DINUM) was created. Still attached to the Secretary-General of the Government, the Minister of Public Action and Accounts had authority over it, and the Minister of the Economy and Finance and the Secretary of State responsible for Digital Affairs had use of it. This reorganisation resulted in a reduction of the institution's prerogatives, such as the power to "requisition" information from administrations, the obligation to publish an annual report, and its status as a "national competence service". It followed the departures of prominent figures including Henri Verdier, former director of the DINSIC, as well as Christian Quest and several senior staff, who lamented the new strategic directions of the DINUM. Trade unions also noted numerous departures of staff or collaborators, which can also be explained by the institution's historically high staff turnover rate.

Since 2022, under the leadership of Stéphanie Schaer, the DINUM, through its new roadmap, has undertaken a transformation of the State's digital projects.

The director of DINUM also serves as the General Administrator of Data, Algorithms, and Source Codes (AGD), a role created in 2014, making France the first European country to appoint a Chief Data Officer to its government.

In May 2026, Prime Minister Sébastien Lecornu announced the transformation of the DINUM into "Ariane", an AI and Digital Authority of the State, placed under the joint supervision of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of the Budget. A portion of its staff would be transferred to the Interministerial Directorate for Public Transformation, particularly those working on accessibility, public service procedures, and services for public service users. The goal of this restructuring is to refocus the agency on its role as the "architect" of the State's digital infrastructure, ensuring cybersecurity and standardising technical protocols across ministries.

The DINSIC designed and has managed the FranceConnect service since 2016. It allows users to connect to various public services (tax authority, health insurance, etc.) or private services (banks, telecoms, etc.), while guaranteeing to those services that the user's legal identity has been verified in advance. FranceConnect acts as a trusted third party between users, public services and private companies.

Etalab is a department within DINUM that coordinates the government's action on open data. It develops and maintains the data.gouv.fr platform, the official French government open data portal launched in 2011, which hosts tens of thousands of public datasets from various organisations.

Tchap is a secure instant messaging application, based on the open-source Matrix protocol and Element, intended primarily for public servants. It aims to replace widely-used applications up to the highest levels of the State, notably Telegram and WhatsApp, which are considered insecure and whose developers and servers are not subject to French sovereignty. In August 2025, a circular from the Prime Minister made the use of Tchap mandatory for work communications in public administrations starting September 2025.

LaSuite is a collection of free software assembled by the DINUM, some developed in-house, intended for the public administration, including:

These applications are freely downloadable, and are also made available to municipalities of fewer than 3,500 inhabitants and communities of fewer than 15,000 inhabitants by the National Agency for Territorial Cohesion (ANCT), under the name Suite territoriale.

Launched in September 2024 within the Etalab department, ALLiaNCE is the public AI incubator and community for State agents. It aims to support administrations in the emergence and adoption of AI to improve public services. The incubator coordinates the State's AI strategy and operates an interministerial generative AI foundation.

Albert API is an interministerial generative AI inference platform developed by DINUM. Launched in July 2024, it provides French government entities with access to open-source large language models (LLMs), such as those from Mistral AI and Llama 2, hosted on secure government infrastructure. Albert is designed to assist civil servants with tasks like document analysis, summarization, and administrative drafting, and is integrated into tools like LaSuite.

To address the lack of French-language preference data for training and evaluating LLMs, DINUM and the French Ministry of Culture launched compar:IA in October 2024. It is an open-source digital public service functioning as a "chatbot arena" where users blindly compare responses from different AI models. This tool generates datasets of human preferences in French, which are then made available under open licenses to the academic and industrial community to improve the cultural alignment and performance of AI models in European languages.

The April 2025 Liberation Day tariffs, imposed 25% duties on technology components. CLOUD Act compels American companies to hand over data from anywhere in the world. LiMux (2004-2017) was a similar project launched by the city of Munich.

In April 2026, the DINUM announced a major initiative to reduce the French government's reliance on non-European technology, particularly American software. As part of this digital sovereignty push, DINUM announced its departure from Microsoft Windows in favour of Linux on its workstations. The plan requires all French ministries to create a strategy by autumn 2026 to adopt non-American tech for PC operating systems, collaboration tools, antivirus software, artificial intelligence, databases, virtualization, and network equipment.

To support this transition, DINUM's Interministerial Products Operator (OPI) department is developing Sécurix, a highly secure, reproducible operating system base built on NixOS. Published on GitHub under an MIT License, Sécurix is designed to meet the strict security recommendations of the ANSSI, incorporating features like TPM2 management, YubiKey -based encryption (LUKS FIDO2), and centralized enrollment for Secure Boot. Alongside it, Bureautix serves as a demonstrator and practical implementation of Sécurix tailored for administrative office use, managing configurations declaratively as code via Git rather than relying on traditional centralized directories like Active Directory.

As of 18 April 2026, deployment is limited to 250 workstations within DINUM. Other initiatives include the State Procurement Department to plan for reducing dependence on American hardware and enlisting France's private sector join the sovereign tech initiative.

In January 2026, the DINUM detected an intrusion on HubEE, a document exchange platform it operates for several administrations. The breach, which occurred between January 9 and January 12, resulted in the exfiltration of approximately 160,000 documents from 70,000 files, some containing personal data. The data compromised included information relating to the Family Allowance Fund, specifically concerning Active Solidarity Income recipients, such as social security numbers, names, phone numbers, and email addresses.

Direction de l'immobilier de l'Etat (DIE), formerly known as Service France Domaine, is a French government administration, which plays a central role in the property management of state-owned real estate in France. DIE acts as the owner of the state real estate, and advises various public administrations in activities related to real estate, for instance by coordinating the real estate strategy for all ministries. DIE functions under the ministry for budget (Ministère de l'Action et des Comptes Publics).

DIE is tasked with disposing property that is no longer used by the administrations, and which has become too costly or outdated to maintain. All in all, its real estate operations include buying, selling, renting, and development. Together with approximately 100 regional and local offices under the tax administration services, it performs all activities relating to the management of state property assets. The aims for DIE include to ensure that state property is efficiently managed, increasing the quality of public services, while at the same time reducing costs ; and also improving the working environment for government employees.

The state is the largest owner of real property in France with nearly 100 million square meters and 200 000 properties (offices, houses, lands, hangar, training centers...). In 2018, the French state property assets were valued at approximately 65 billion EUR.

Since 2006, the French government formed a strategy for state-owned real estate. One of the goals was to reduce government debt by selling state-owned real estate on the market. Each year, the sales yielded between 200 ans 500 million EUR. The larger part of the returns would be used as an economic incentive to economise on real estate holdings, by being partly returned to the ministries that previously occupied the property.

The Direction générale de l'armement (French pronunciation: [ diʁɛksjɔ̃ ʒeneʁal də laʁməmɑ̃ ], lit. ' Directorate General of Armament ', abbr. DGA), established in 1961, is the French Government defence procurement and technology agency, responsible within the Ministry of Armed Forces for project management, development, and purchase of weapon systems for the French military. The DGA's mission is to prepare the future of French defence systems, equip the French Armed Forces, as well as to promote French defence industry exports.

The DGA coordinates armament projects with the industry in France, within Europe, but also with customers for export. Together with the Europe of Defence organisation, the DGA promotes the development of armament projects in co-operation and contributes to the development of the European Defence Agency. Fifteen cooperative armament projects are under way. The OCCAr (Joint Organisation of Co-operation as regards Armament) ensures the control of six projects intended to equip the French force, inter allia: combat Tiger helicopter, ground-to-air missiles short Roland /Frole range, Cobra counter-battery radar, family of ground-to-air systems future (FSAF), A400M military transport aircraft, PAAMS anti-aircraft system.

The DGA also undertakes the testing and assessment of equipment and military technologies. Test centres are distributed across France to carry out studies in advanced technologies: DGA Hydrodynamics, DGA Aero-engine Testing, DGA CBRN Defence, DGA Information superiority, DGA Land Systems, DGA Missiles Testing, DGA Naval Systems, DGA Flight Testing, DGA Aeronautical Systems, DGA Engineering & Integration. These services contribute to the validation of industrial equipment, but also to the proving of military systems for the programme directorates. Since 2004 DGA, has been organised into two sub-directorates for the coordination of projects dealing respectively with the inter-systems technical approach (Service of architecture inter-systems) and with technological developments (responsible for domains).

In addition, the DGA supervises engineering schools that operate under the scrutiny of the Ministry of defence (École polytechnique, ENSTA ParisTech, Supaéro, ENSTA Bretagne, ENSICA). The high-level military staff of DGA, the Corps of Armament whose members are the ingénieurs de l'armement (IA, literally, " Armament Engineers "), are commissioned officers, who are generally graduates of the École polytechnique, then the ENSTA or Institut supérieur de l'aéronautique et de l'espace. The main part of the engineers, the ingénieurs des études et techniques d'armement (IETA, literally, "weaponry studies and technics engineers") are graduates of the ENSIETA or ENSICA.

The DGA also formerly had a division for building warships, the Direction des constructions navales ("Directorate of Naval Construction"), now formed into a partly state-owned corporation, initially named DCNS in 2007 and rebranded Naval Group in 2017.

Officers of the Corps de l'armement have a unique rank structure.

Officers of the Corps des ingénieurs des études et techniques de l'armement have also a unique rank structure.

The Direction Générale de la Gendarmerie nationale (French pronunciation: [ diʁɛksjɔ̃ ʒeneʁal də la ʒɑ̃daʁməʁi nɑsjɔnal ] ; transl. General Directorate of the National Gendarmerie ; DGGN) is the department of Interior Ministry (France) with responsibility for operational management of the National Gendarmerie in coordination with the Chef d'État-Major des Armées (CEMA).

The DGGN administrative responsibilities cover:

The DGGN is headed by the Director General of the National Gendarmerie, who is nominated by the Interior minister and can be:

The DGGN shares responsibilities with the DGPN (Directorate-General of the National Police) in the following areas:

In addition since 2014 a further department is under the joint control of the DGGN, DGPN and the DGSCGC (Directorate-General for Civil Protection and Crises);

The Direction générale du Trésor (DG Trésor, English : Directorate General of the Treasury, or French Treasury) is the flagship Directorate General of the French Ministry of the Economy and Finance. It holds an advisory role within the French Government on matters ranging from domestic to international economic policy. Its main offices are located in Paris, in the building of Bercy. The DG Trésor also represents and defends French economic interests abroad by overseeing the economic departments of embassies (French : service économique), and by providing permanent representations at international organizations (IMF, World Bank Group, OECD, WTO, G20, G7, specific comities of the European Commission, etc.).

The Direction générale du Trésor should not be confused with the Trésor public, a national administration responsible for France's governmental accounting.

The Direction générale du Trésor is tasked with

The DG Trésor falls under the authority of the Minister of the Economy and Finance, Bruno Lemaire since May 2017, and is headed by a Director General, Emmanuel Moulin since November 2020. Additionally, the French Treasury provides the chief economist of the ministry, Agnès Bénassy-Quéré since June 2020.

The Directorate General is composed of five departments and one secretariat general:

The Agence France Trésor is an autonomous department of the DG Trésor, created in 2001, tasked with managing French government debt and state participations. Its staff is composed mostly of agents from the French Treasury.

La direction nationale de la police aux frontières (DNPAF ; English: National Directorate of the Border Police) is a directorate of the French National Police that is responsible for border control at certain border crossing points in France.

It was established in 1973 as police de l'air et des frontières. On 29 January 1999, it was given its current name, and its existing organisational character was determined in 2011.

It works alongside its British counterpart, the UK Border Force, at the juxtaposed controls in Calais and along the Channel Tunnel Rail Link with British Transport Police ; and at the Port of Dover with Kent Police and Port of Dover Police.

Since 1995, customs have replaced the border police in carrying out immigration control at smaller border checkpoints, in particular at maritime ports and regional airports.

DNPAF is headed by a central director assisted by a deputy central director and includes 2 different commands:

DNPAF has 10,088 agents as of January 1, 2013.

The central command of DNPAF, headed by a central director and senior police officers from the design and management body, is composed of:

The DNPAF extends its action throughout the national territory of France and overseas through a territorial network based on 7 zonal directorates (DZPAF North, DZPAF East, DZPAF South East, DZPAF South, DZPAF South West, DZPAF West, DZPAF Antilles-Guyane), 2 airport directorates (Charles De Gaulle Airport / Paris–Le Bourget Airport), 4 directorates (DPAF New Caledonia, French Polynesia, St Pierre and Miquelon and Mayotte), 45 departmental directorates (DDPAF), 7 railway brigades, 7 poles of analysis and operational management, 10 brigades of aeronautical police. 15 administrative detention centres are controlled by the DNPAF.

The Directorate General for Civil Aviation (French : Direction générale de l'aviation civile, DGAC) is the French civil aviation authority. Its headquarters are in the 15th arrondissement of Paris, 50 Henry-Farman. It is subordinate to the Ministry of Ecology, Sustainable Development and Energy.

The DGAC levies a civil aviation tax on several flights operating from France.

The Secretariat General for Civil and Commercial Aviation (SGACC) was formed on 12 September 1946 by the Ministry of Transport and Public Works. The first secretary general of the newly-formed organisation was Max Hymans (1900-1961), who had been named to the post nine months previously in December 1945.

The SGACC then formed the Light and Sport Aviation Office (SALS) to cover flying clubs and instructors. In 1955 SALS became the Aeronautic Instruction and Aerial Sport Service (SFASA).

From 1971 to 1976 the secretary general was Maurice Grimaud.

In 1976, following the removal of the post of secretary general across the French Civil Service, the SGAC was renamed the DGAC. Subsequent directors general include Michel Bernard (1993) and Michel Wachenheim (2002-7).

In 1993 the headquarters of the organisation moved from 93 Boulevard du Montparnasse, that had been its home since its foundation in 1946, to its present site on Rue Henry-Farman.

In 2013, together with ENAC, DGAC created DSNA Services, which became France Aviation Civile Services in 2019, an expertise office to sell French know-how in the field of regulations, air transport safety and air navigation.

The Directorate general for Maritime affairs, Fisheries and Aquaculture (DGAMPA) (La direction générale des affaires maritimes, de la pêche et de l'aguaculture) is a French executive agency created in 2022. It comes under the authority of the State Secretariat for the Sea and the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Sovereignty. The DGAMPA merges the two main directorates dealing with the maritime sector at the central level of the government, namely the Directorate of maritime affairs (DAM) and the Directorate of maritime fisheries and aquaculture (DPMA), but also the staff of the captaincies of the state ports. Éric Banel was appointed the first Director General of Maritime Affairs, Fisheries and Aquaculture by the Council of Ministers.

The creation of the DGAMPA aims to consolidate the means allocated to the sea and to improve the visibility of maritime issues within the government. The goal of the new organization is to meet the challenges of maritime planning and the sustainable development of the blue economy, but also to support the ecological and energy transition of maritime activities, promote knowledge of the marine environment and encourage innovation. The purpose of this new agency is to make it possible to better support changes in maritime transport, fishing and aquaculture as well as the shipbuilding industry. The objective is also to improve the development of data and maritime services, consolidate surveillance capacities, increase the efficacy of rescue and control at sea and, more generally, to support territorial projects, promote maritime employment and more effectively defend the French maritime interests domestically and internationally. DGAMPA is a pariticipating agency of the coast guard function.

The 300 employees of the central organization of DGAMPA are mainly located at the Séquoia tower in La Défense, but they are also present in Saint-Malo (information systems and pleasure tax desk), Marseille (one-stop shop for the French international register), Nantes (office of maritime examinations), Brest (maritime pollution national center of expertise), Le Havre (ENSAM), Quimper (maintenance of lighthouses and beacons), Toulouse and Gris-Nez (search and rescue at sea).

The 2,800 employees in charge of maritime activities in the decentralized services will have a unified management at the central level, whether they serve in the interregional directorates for the sea, the sea and coast delegations of the departments of France, or overseas. The DGAMPA will also oversee Ifremer, FranceAgriMer, the National Establishment for Marine Invalids (ENIM), the French Maritime Academy (ENSM) and vocational maritime schools. The DGAMPA will in addition have authority over the National School for Maritime Security and Administration (ENSAM).

The Corps of Maritime Affairs Administrators is a military corps of senior government officials belonging to the French Navy, responsible for designing and implementing all maritime public policies. The corps comprises 335 administrators, posted in Paris, throughout the French coastline and overseas territories, in French embassies abroad, in community bodies and agencies, or in cooperation with foreign administrations.

Within the Maritime Administration, members of the Public Works Engineering Corps (a corps category A) primarily serve as ship safety inspectors and managers of lighthouse and beacon service. Senior technicians of sustainable development (TSDD) (category B) serves within the Maritime administration as Controllers of Maritime Affairs; as such they man the control and surveillance system (patrol boats and coastal units), they ensure the implementation of regulations on marine cultivation and the protection of the environment at sea, and they can also act as ship safety inspectors, particularly to monitor technical and environmental standards on ships flying the French flag. Secretaries of administration and control of sustainable development (SACDD) (category B) can be assigned to all administrative departments of the maritime administration. They can deal with matters of maritime training, management of sailors and ships, pleasure boating, maritime economics, fisheries management, management of the maritime public domain, marine environment and more. The Corps of Seafarer's Syndics (category C) is the historic basic category of the maritime administration. Its members hold technical or administrative functions in the same services as those listed for the TSDD and the SACDD.

The Directorate of Cooperation of Security and Defence (in French : Direction de la coopération de sécurité et de défense) is a structure belonging to the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Development, intended to develop international structural cooperation in the fields of defense, internal security, and civil protection.

With an overall budget of €100 million over 105 programs and 209, the DCSD falls within the General Secretariat and is integrated into the General Directorate of Political Affairs and Security, Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Appearing in the 1960s with the independence of the territories of the former French colonial empire, defense cooperation has long been driven by two separate institutions: the Sub-Directorate of Military Assistance and the Military Cooperation Mission. Having become out of date after the end of the Cold War and globalization, this system was reformed and strengthened in December 1998 with the creation of the Department of Military and defense cooperation (DCMD), which unified these outdated structures under the responsibility of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Since the 60s, the cooperation of Homeland Security was led by SCTIP (Department of International Technical Cooperation of Police), an entity belonging to the Ministry of the Interior. In 1998, during the creation of the DGCID (General Directorate for International Cooperation and Development) in Foreign Affairs, the latter managed the structural police cooperation and civil security in close coordination with the SCTIP.

Taking into account the White Papers of Foreign Affairs and Security and Defence which highlighted the necessity of a global approach linking the concepts of security and defense, the March 16 2009 decrees about the organization of the central administration of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs established the DCSD, which officially replaced the DCMD and expanded its expertise in the fields of internal security (police and gendarmerie) and civil protection.

As a tool for diplomatic influence, the DCSD is responsible for implementing training, advice, and expertise for which it ensures strategic leadership and comprehensive management within the realms of security and defense via cooperative bilateral or multilateral projects. It operates in all areas of security, defense, or Homeland Security (restructuring tools of defense, disarmament, crisis emergency preparedness, export support, demobilization, reintegration, etc.).

In a concern of policy coherence beyond the bilateral level, the DCSD follows and develops French policy in structural cooperation through regional and sub-regional approaches. The objectives of the DCSD are part of a global framework that aims to maintain peace, uphold the Rule of law and Human Rights, and ensure internal security and stability for their partners in a relationship based on equality.

Thus, the DCSD participates in supporting structural reforms of the armed and security forces of partner countries, provides advice and high-level expertise, and concentrates most of its activities on the training of personnel of the requesting country. Furthermore, the DCSD offers various technical and language training programs at international peacekeeping training centers, regional-focused national schools (ENVR) and different French military schools. These 17 ENVR and training centers provide a wide range of sixty programs, covering areas such as general military training, law enforcement, demining operations, and combating maritime insecurity. While the DCSD operates globally, its primary focus is on Africa, particularly sub -Saharan where 70% of its activities are carried out. The shared history and challenges faced by the region, along with the Francophone connection, explain the prioritization of cooperation activities in Africa. France aims to contribute to the strengthening of the African Peace and Security Architecture (APSA) and the capacity of African nations to engage in peacekeeping efforts (RECAMP).

To implement its training and advice actions, the DCSD has about 350 cooperation volunteers (military, gendarmes, police and firefighters)posted to the French embassies' defense attached or Homeland Security in 56 beneficiary countries, or line item within major sub-regional organizations (ECCAS, ECOWAS, EASFCOM, IOC...). So, nearly 130 partner countries and international organizations benefit from French co-operation activities of security and defense.

At headquarters, which stay at 57, Boulevard des Invalides in Paris, sixty people work for the definition of operations management. It is a complete interministerial collaboration, including diplomats but also policemen, gendarmes and officers. They are divided into offices and sub-directions following: Sub-Saharan Africa; World; Multilateral and sectoral issues; Means; Conferences and agreements; Overflights and naval stops.

The DCSD works closely with the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of the Interior (through the Department for International Cooperation) and Staff armies (all three in charge of Operational Cooperation) and addresses security issues with a comprehensive approach.

DCSD's relations with its occidental partners are building first through the European Union, but also in collaboration with some third states (United States, Canada, Japan Brazil). Its efforts naturally intended to be carried out in synergy with those made by the UN system and the European Union.

The DCSD bases its actions on bilateral conventions and aims to ensure the success of cooperative actions through gradual project implementation for partner countries to take ownership. Additionally, these projects contribute to expanding France's influence and international outreach by promoting French expertise, logistics, and know-how.

In sub-Saharan Africa, the approach of the DCSD is organized around three pillars : "safety, emergency and development", maintaining the logic of "African solutions to African problems." A safe continuum that allows both to protect populations, territory, wealth and areas of partner countries while countering threats from terrorism, illegal trafficking or socio-economic difficulties they may encounter.

Currently, the Department manages more than 200 cooperation projects around the world. Each year, the DCSD form over 3,500 students and reaches over 65,000 listeners. It contributes annually to the elaboration of a dozen of treaties or intergovernmental agreements on cooperation in defense. Every year, the IHEDN and the DCSD jointly organize international sessions about Asia (Middle East, South America, the euro-Mediterranean area, and the International Forum on Africa) at civilian and military high levels. Moreover, DCSD's actions aim to promote the teaching of French in military and security domains. It has elaborated the French military method titled "En Avant," in coordination with the International Organization of la Francophonie and the General Directorate of Globalization. Thus, in Ghana, six French centers were opened between 2003 and 2013, allowing the Lusophone countries to maintain a true decision-making capacity and influence in the planning and the conduct of joint operations with their francophone African partners, the practice of the French language being considered as a real vector of interoperability.

In the field of Homeland security, the DCSD relies on the financing programme "the Priority Solidarity Fund " (SPF). It has launched a project to fight against cocaine trafficking in Africa (ALCAO) and support civil protection services in Africa (APCA). Following intervention in Mali in 2013 which showed the importance of the search for a global response to contain the spread of armed radicalization. ALCAO interacts with the project "Justice and security in Sahel-Saharan region" (Jussec) whose DCSD controls the internal security component. It has enabled the Mauritanian police to seize 6.4 tons of cannabis in 2012.

Then, the action of the DCSD is translated into local projects, looking for an inter-donor complementarity, as evidenced by the Support Project to strengthen internal security in Benin (PARSIB) which created the first center operational IT shared between customs, gendarmerie and police in Africa. In the field of civil aviation security and the fight against false documents, the project "Support to the security of civil aviation in Africa" (ACASA) was initiated in March 2011 and aims to build the capacity of 22 States with regard to security of civil aviation. The same year was realized the project "Support to the Formation of Internal Security Forces in Africa" (AFORMA) which combines the police, gendarmerie and the national guards from 10 African countries. Finally, to support partner countries facing emerging issues, the DCSD has continued its commitment to the development of the State action at sea using the FSP ASCEMAR, including Cameroon. It supports the Civic Service Development Assistance (SCAD) in Madagascar Côte d'Ivoire and Guinea. In order to strengthen the capacity of developing countries' civil defense, whether institutional or human, the DCSD participated in the equipment and training of the first Civil Protection Units (UPC) in Guinea Conakry. End of 2013, the DCSD was associated with the development of the project "Support for the fight against trafficking in human beings" (THB) in the Gulf of Guinea, which combines internal capacity building and structuring regional cooperation. The future prospects of the DCSD are aligned with the main theme of Elysée summit on 6 and 7 December 2013, "Peace and Security in Africa" by wearing emphasis on the link between security and development and establishing the following three priorities:

The DCSD publishes an issue of its magazine Partners Defense Security three times a year in order to compile the balance sheets, projects and prospects of cooperation activities. Formerly " Brothers of weapons ", the magazine changed its name in June 2011 in line with the reform which includes defense cooperation, police, gendarmerie and civil protection within a single entity.

Dirigisme (French: [ diʁiʒism ]), or dirigism (from French diriger ' to direct '), refers to an economic system in which the state takes an active and directive role in shaping and guiding the economy, rather than limiting itself to a purely regulatory or hands-off approach within a market economy. As an economic doctrine, dirigisme stands in contrast to laissez-faire, highlighting the constructive role of market intervention in addressing inefficiencies and market failures. Dirigiste policies typically include indicative planning, state-guided investment, and the strategic use of market instruments such as taxes and subsidies to encourage economic actors to align with national development goals. Dirigisme is not synonymous with a state-controlled command economy but a market economy and big public sector is required for dirigisme; hence the public sector becomes an instrument for altering the market.

The term emerged in the post–World War II era to describe the economic policies of France which included substantial state-directed investment, the use of indicative economic planning to supplement the market mechanism and the establishment of state enterprises in strategic domestic sectors. It coincided with both the period of substantial economic and demographic growth, known as the Trente Glorieuses which followed the war, and the slowdown beginning with the 1973 oil crisis.

The term has subsequently been used to classify other economies that pursued similar policies, such as Japan, the East Asian tiger economies of Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan ; the economy of China after the reform and opening up, Indonesia and India after the opening of its economy in 1991. Outcomes associated with dirigisme differ across these cases, with some economies achieving sustained growth and structural transformation, while others recorded more limited or uneven results. Dirigisme is not strictly tied to any single political ideology or philosophy, as variations of dirigiste policy have been implemented under both left and right leaning governments.

According to the heterodox economist Mariana Mazzucato, most modern economies of the world can be characterized as dirigiste to some degree as the state may exercise directive action by performing or subsidizing research and development of new technologies through government procurement (especially military) or through state-run research institutes.

Before the Second World War, France had a relatively fragmented capitalist economic system. The many small companies, often family-owned, were often not dynamic and efficient in comparison to the large industrial groups in Germany or the United States. The Second World War laid waste to France. Railroads and industries were destroyed by aerial bombardment and sabotage ; industries were seized by Nazi Germany; in the immediate postwar years loomed the spectre of long years of rationing (such as the system enforced in that period in the United Kingdom). Some sections of the French business and political world lost authority after collaborating with the German occupiers.

Post-war French governments, from whichever political side, generally sought rational, efficient economic development, with the long-term goal of matching the highly developed and technologically advanced economy of the United States. The development of French dirigisme coincided with the development of meritocratic technocracy : the École Nationale d'Administration supplied the state with high-level administrators, while leadership positions in industry were staffed with Corps of Mines state engineers and other personnel trained at the École Polytechnique.

During the 1945–1975 period, France experienced unprecedented economic growth (5.1% on average) and a demographic boom, leading to the coinage of the term Trente Glorieuses (the "Glorious Thirty [years]").

Dirigisme flourished under the conservative governments of Charles de Gaulle and Georges Pompidou. In those times, the policy was viewed as a middle way between the American policy of little state involvement and the Soviet policy of total state control. In 1981, Socialist president François Mitterrand was elected, promising greater state enterprise in the economy; his government soon nationalised industries and banks. However, in 1983 the initial bad economic results forced the government to renounce dirigisme and start the era of rigueur ("rigour"). This was primarily due to the Inflation of the French Franc and the Keynesian policies taken by François Mitterrand. Dirigisme has remained out of favour with subsequent governments, though some of its traits remain.

The main French tool under dirigisme was indicative planning through plans designed by the Commissariat général du plan ("Commission for the Plan"). Indicative planning used various incentives to induce public and private actors to behave in an optimal fashion, with the plan serving as a general guideline for optimal investment. During this period France never ceased to be a capitalist economy directed by the accumulation of capital, profit-maximizing enterprise and market-based allocation of producer goods.

In contrast to Soviet-type central planning practiced in the former Soviet bloc, where economic planning substituted private profit incentivized investment and operated the factors of production according to a binding plan, the French state never owned more than a minority of industry and did not seek to replace private profit with central planning. The idea of dirigisme is to complement and improve the efficiency of the market through indirect planning intended to provide better information to market participants. This concept is held in contrast to a planned economy, which aims to replace market-based allocation of production and investment with a binding plan of production expressed in units of physical quantities.

Because French industry prior to the Second World War was weak due to fragmentation, the French government encouraged mergers and the formation of " national champions ": large industry groups backed by the state.

Two areas where the French government sought greater control were in infrastructure and the transportation system. The French government owned the national railway company SNCF, the national electricity utility EDF, the national natural gas utility GDF, the national airline Air France ; phone and postal services were operated as the PTT administration. The government chose to devolve the construction of most autoroutes (freeways) to semi-private companies rather than to administer them itself. Other areas where the French government directly intervened were defence, nuclear and aerospace industries (Aérospatiale).

This development was marked by volontarisme, the belief that difficulties (e.g. postwar devastation, lack of natural resources) could be overcome through willpower and ingenuity. For instance, following the 1973 energy crisis, the saying "In France we don't have oil, but we have ideas" was coined. Volontarisme emphasized modernization, resulting in a variety of ambitious state plans. Examples of this trend include the extensive use of nuclear energy (close to 80% of French electrical consumption), the Minitel, an early online system for the masses, and the TGV, a high-speed rail network.

Dirigisme is seen in India after the end of British rule from 1947 with domestic policy tending towards protectionism, a strong emphasis on import substitution industrialisation, economic interventionism, a large government-run public sector, business regulation and central planning. While according to some authors trade and foreign investment policies were relatively liberal. However, in regard to trade and foreign investment, other authors disagree stating that high tariff barriers were maintained, with import duties of 350% not being uncommon, and there was also severe restrictions on the entry of foreign goods, capital, and technology. Although a mixed economy, the share of investment in public sector enterprises was 60%. India's economic policies during this period were more akin to Soviet economic planning rather than the French dirigisme model. Socialist economic planning, was especially prevalent in the form of the Planning Commission, Licence Raj and Five-Year plans. However, India during this period was also not a fully socialist economy with a private sector although heavily regulated.

After liberalisation in 1991, India shifted from a mixed planned led Soviet type model to a more market-oriented dirigisme economy with indicative planning. The 1991 reforms led to formation of pseudo-state owned companies by Government of India such as NSE, NSDL, CRISIL, IL&FS, IDFC etc. which were joint-venture of public sector companies and controlling stake(>25%) owned by PSUs as a protectionist policy to lead the market reforms instead of invisible free-hand of free market. The Indian state has complete control and ownership of railways, ports, highways ; majority control and stake in banking, insurance, farming, dairy, fertilizers & chemicals, airports, nuclear, mining, digitization, defense, steel, rare earths, water, electricity, oil and gas industries and power plants, and has substantial control over digitalization, Broadband as national infrastructure, telecommunication, supercomputing, space, port and shipping industries, among other industries, were effectively nationalised in the mid-1950s. In essence, the Indian Government has indirect control on all sectors except technology and consumer goods.

Economic dirigisme has been described as an inherent aspect of fascist economies by Hungarian author Iván T. Berend in his book An Economic History of Twentieth-Century Europe. However, the fascist systems created in Italy, Portugal, Spain, Japan, or Germany were a varied mix of elements from numerous philosophies, including nationalism, authoritarianism, militarism, corporatism, collectivism, totalitarianism, and anti-communism.

Dirigisme has been brought up as a politico-economic scheme at odds with laissez-faire capitalism in the context of French overseas holdings. To varying degrees throughout the post-colonial period, countries such as Lebanon and Syria have been influenced by this motif.

Approximately 12 million French citizens are affected by disability. The history of disability activism in France dates back to the French Revolution when the national obligation to help disabled citizens was recognized, but it was "unclear whether or not such assistance should be public or private." Disabled civilians began to form the first associations to demand equal rights and integration in the workforce after the First World War. Between 1940 and 1945, 45,000 people with intellectual disabilities died from neglect in French psychiatric asylums. After the Second World War, parents of disabled children and charities created specialized institutions for disabled children for whom school was not accessible. In 2018, the French Government began to roll out a disability policy which aimed to increase the allowance for disabled adults to €900 per month, improve the digital accessibility of public services, and develop easy-to-read and understand language among other goals.

According to the Institut national de la statistique et des études économiques (National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies), in 2007 there were 9.6 million disabled people living in France. In 2023, 140,000 people with disabilities aged 16 and older are living in specialized institutions.

Disability is defined in article 114 of the Disability Law 2005 as "any limitations in participating in society because of a substantial, permanent condition affecting a person's physical, sensory or mental functioning, which includes cognitive and psychiatric disorders and disabling chronic illnesses". The United Nations (UN) has requested that France updates its legal definition of disability as it does not take into account society's limitations through the human rights -based approach to disability.

France ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) in 2010.

When he was elected in May 2017, the President of France, Emmanuel Macron, declared that disability would be a priority of his five-year term of office.

France has been the subject of much criticism for its use of the medical approach to disability rather than the human rights-based approach as set out in the CRPD., and the persistent use of psychoanalysis in the treatment of autism.

The United Nations (UN) condemned France in 2015 for placing a 16-year-old autistic boy in a psychiatric hospital without his or his mother's consent. This type of institutionalization, which took place a few days after the teenager was sent to an institut médicoéducatif (IME), is considered a deprivation of freedom and a violation of his security under international law. On 4 February 2016, the UN further expressed its concern regarding cases of ill-treatment of children with disabilities in institutions and the lack of independent monitoring of such institutions. It was also concerned that the "packing" technique (wrapping a child in cold, wet sheets), which amounts to ill‑treatment, has not been legally prohibited in France, even though it was banned by the health authorities, and was reportedly still being practiced on some children with autistic spectrum disorders.

In 2017, the UN special rapporteur, Catalina Devandas Aguilar, visited France from 3 to 17 October. She observed that France's legislation, particularly the 2005 disability law as well as the law on mental health, were not in alignment with the CRPD, notably Article 12 (legal capacity). She called for legislative authorities to undertake a comprehensive review of the entire legal framework in order to complete the process of legal harmonization, in accordance with Article 4 (general obligations) of the convention. Ms. Devandas noted that France had failed to implement and take into account the change of paradigm required by the convention, and the majority of officials she had met with during her trip to France had not been aware of the changes brought about by the CRPD, solely referring to the local 2005 law. She was also concerned with France's approach to institutionalization which runs contrary to the CRPD and the goal of social inclusion. The Committee noted in their report that children with disabilities enrolled in mainstream schools "face multiple barriers to access education on an equal basis with others. This is not only due to the lack of accessible infrastructure, but also because there is no specialized training for regular teachers and school assistants, and no curricular adaptations and accommodation in the classrooms, which affects the quality of education." She expressed "grave concern" about the situation of around 81,000 children placed in segregated medico-educative institutions, recommending that France shut them down and transform them into non-residential resource centers. "Even more worrisome, according to unofficial estimates, there are reportedly some 12,000 so-called 'children without a solution' in France, and up to 40,000 autistic students, who receive no education at all."

In 2021, the UN visited France again, and Jonas Ruskus, UN special rapporteur for disability rights, raised the same concerns about France's medical approach to disability, issues related to consent, and the education of children with disabilities. The crux of the problem remained the 2005 law on disability which was still not harmonized with the CRPD and which sets out the medical model, particularly Article 1 of the 2005 law, which creates confusion between medical associations and organizations of persons with disabilities. This leads to systemic discrimination against persons with disabilities and to a conflict of interest since these medical associations also run and manage institutions. Mr Ruskus stated that he was disappointed to see such high levels of structural discrimination in France regarding people with disabilities "expressing doubt that the French motto of Liberté, Égalité, Fraternité was really applied to people with disabilities."

In 2022, the UN wrote a letter to France expressing its concern of threats of intimidation towards a special educator in an institut médicoéducatif (institution for children with intellectual disabilities), Olivier Paolini. He stated that the institution did not adhere to the minimum requirements of schooling as it did not deem it important. As no official reply was provided by the French government, the UN made the letter public.

During its examination of the rights of children in France, in April 2023, the UN reminded France of the "very large" work it needed to do to ensure the rights of disabled children. Those children "without a solution" were of particular concern as well as those living in Belgium, many kilometers away from their families. It remains concerned at the high levels of children institutionalized and the discrimination children with disabilities face in mainstream schools. The committee also deplored the fact that the average autism diagnosis in the country is too late, on average at 7 years old.

On 17 April 2023, the Council of Europe unanimously ruled that France had violated four articles (11.1, 15.1, 15.3, and 16) of the European Committee of Social Rights (ECSR) charter on disabled people. Inaccessibility, lack of education opportunities and lack of access to healthcare were the main areas of concern. The Council noted that many people with disabilities and their families live in precarious financial situations due to the barriers they face.

Allocation d'éducation de l'enfant handicapé (disabled children's education allowance) is paid to the parents or guardians of some children with disabilities. To be eligible, the child must be under the age of 20 and:

In 2022, over 430,000 children with disabilities attended mainstream schools, with or without one-on-one or mutualized aid, and/or with technical or other adaptations. Some of these students may be a part of Unités localisées pour l'inclusion scolaire (ULIS) of which there were 10,272 in 2022. Both mainstream classes and ULIS are run by the Education Ministry.

The conditions to attend a mainstream class, in both primary and secondary education, depend on the seriousness of the disability.

The ULIS program allows children with disabilities to learn at their own pace and with an adapted curriculum in a group of around 12 students. The amount of classes or activities that are to be attended in the mainstream classroom depends on the student's personalized plan.

If a child or young adult cannot attend a mainstream school, they will be redirected toward a medical-social institution, such as an institut médicoéducatif for children with intellectual disabilities aged 3 to 20 years old, where they can also get different types of therapy based on their disability. Medical-social institutions are run by the Health Ministry, financed by French Social Security and managed by private parent associations or charities, such as the French Red Cross.

During the 2022–2023 school year, there were around 203 teams from the medical-social sector that can be mobilized to support children with disabilities in mainstream schools.

Since 2018, the national strategy for autism has created 180 nursery school autism classes and 90 primary school autism classes within mainstream schools. These classes are contained and are part of the medical-social sector.

The three leading pieces of legislation for disabled workers in France are; The French Labour Law ("Code du Travail"), the 1987 Disability Employment Act ("Loi n° 87-517 du 10 juillet 1987 en faveur de l'emploi des travailleurs handicapés") and The 2005 Disability Act ("Loi numero 2005-102 du 11 février 2005 pour l'égalité des droits et des chances, la participation et la citoyenneté des personnes handicapées"). The Employment of Disabled Workers Act 1987 outlined a quota system for the employment of disabled persons. It stipulated that any company with a workforce of more than 20 employees must ensure that at least 6% of their personnel are disabled workers.

Quota objectives are achieved by a combination of sanction and incentive: employers evade paying the penalty as far as possible and are encouraged to recruit and retain people with disabilities through the prospect of financial support. Evidence suggests that many employers prefer to pay the contribution rather than consider employing a person with a disability. EU SILC data for 2009, compiled by ANED, illustrated that the employment rate for disabled people (aged 20–64) in France was 49.8%, in comparison to 72.1% for non-disabled people (51.5% for disabled men and 48.4% for disabled women)

Sheltered workshops (Établissement(s) et service(s) d'accompagnement par le travail - ESAT) are run by the Health Ministry. According to a report by the French Senate in 2023, sheltered workshops act as a safety net allowing people with disabilities to "have both a professional and social life". Only 3,1% of the private sector in France hires people with disabilities. Public policy for disability was late to arrive in France which meant that before the 1970s, it was up to private individuals in the form of associations and charities to organize themselves. The current structure of sheltered workshops falls under the Disability Law of 2005. Sheltered workshops in France fall under the medical-social sector and employment law does not apply (as of 2023).

Adapted enterprises (entreprises adaptées) are companies in the private sector which hire up to 55% of disabled people to help with their production. In order to become an adapted enterprise, an agreement must be made with local authorities. These companies can receive several types of financial aids per disabled person employed. Employees of adapted enterprises fall under employment law and have temporary contracts.

There are a few regular disability arts events in France.

France participated in the inaugural Paralympic Games in 1960 in Rome, and has taken part in every edition of the Summer and Winter Paralympics since then. France was the host country of the 1992 Winter Paralympics.

Eugène Rubens-Alcais introduced the Deaflympics in 1924 in Paris. France has competed in every Deaflympics.

According to French parent groups and associations, France is "50 years behind" when it comes to the treatment of autism. A long-held belief in autism being a psychosis and the reliance on Freudian psychoanalysis as an adequate form of treatment has meant that many autistic children go undiagnosed or are placed in psychiatric hospitals; some are even taken away from their parents.

In 2011, Le Mur (in English, The Wall), a documentary film by Sophie Robert about the use of psychoanalysis to treat autism in France, was the subject of a court case. The film argues that while the rest of the world considered autism as a neuro-developmental disorder, in France the sector remained dominated by psychoanalysis, which sees autism as a psychosis caused by difficulties in relationships and ultimately caused by the actions of the mother (see: Refrigerator Mother Theory). Therapy often consists of mother-child psychotherapy sessions with the goal of fixing said relationship. Three of the psychoanalysts featured in the film sued Ms Robert and won their case; the film was banned. The following year, in 2012, the court of appeal overturned the ruling.

In 2012, the French High Health Authority (Haute autorité de santé) publicly stated that psychoanalysis and the use of institutional psychotherapy are not consensual forms of treatment of autism. The same year, an article was published by Le Monde newspaper by Yehezkel Ben-Ari, a neurobiologist, Nouchine Hadjikhani, a neuroscientist and Eric Lemonnier, a child psychiatrist, denouncing the use of psychoanalysis in the treatment of autism due to the lack of scientific evidence of its efficacy.

The United Nations got involved in the case of a 16-year-old boy, Timothée D., who has autism. In 2016, they condemned his placement in a psychiatric hospital where his mother was prohibited from seeing him (after a few days spent in an institut médicoéducatif where he was redirected after having spent his entire schooling in mainstream school, and after a European arrest warrant was filed after the family had fled to Ireland). The special rapporteur for the rights of people with disabilities, Catalina Devandas-Alguilar, stated: "The institutionalization of Timothée D. in a psychiatric unit is a serious violation of the right of freedom and security, and with respect to his physical and mental health." The rapporteur on the right to health, Dainius Pûras, reiterated the statement.

The same year, the UN stated in its report of France that autistic children "continue to be subjected to widespread violations of their rights". They condemned the use of "packing" (wrapping cold, wet sheets around an individual during a psychotic episode) which is considered as ill-treatment. Although packing has been banned since 2012 in France, it is still used to treat psychosis, with some studies on packing continuing.

In 2017, the 'Rachel Case' was a high-profile court battle of an autistic mother whose children who also have autism were removed from her and placed in foster homes. Several associations launched petitions who claim the lack of understanding of autism by authorities is to blame.

The University of Cambridge argued in an article entitled " Psychoanalysis in the treatment of autism: Why is France a cultural outlier? " from December 2020, that French supporters of psychoanalysis say it is a matter of cultural preference. However, the authors of the article state that psychoanalysis in France is protected from criticism by powerful educational and political networks.

If autism is suspected, it is recommended to get a diagnosis from a regional Autism Resource Centre (Centre ressource autisme) which were created in 2005. In 2022, 44,000 students with autism were enrolled in mainstream schools.

Diversitas (the Latin word for “diversity”) was an international research programme aiming at integrating biodiversity science for human well-being. In December 2014 its work was transferred to the programme called Future Earth, which was sponsored by the Science and Technology Alliance for Global Sustainability, comprising the International Council for Science (ICSU), the International Social Science Council (ISSC), the Belmont Forum of funding agencies, the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the United Nations University (UNU) and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO).

Biodiversity underpins the life-support system of our planet. Both natural and managed ecosystems deliver important ecological services such as the production of food and fibre, carbon storage, climate regulation and recreation opportunities. The program was established to address the complex scientific questions posed by the loss in biodiversity and ecosystem services and to offer science-based solutions to this crisis.

The program is an international programme of biodiversity science with a dual mission:

The international Secretariat is based in Paris, France (hosted by the French National Museum of Natural History - Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle (MNHN)), while the different core projects are based all around the world.

The program was established in 1991 by three international organizations: the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the Scientific Committee on Problems of the Environment (SCOPE) and the International Union of Biological Science (IUBS), at the time the need to address the complex scientific questions posed by the loss of and change in global biodiversity was identified. The goal of the initiative was to develop an international, non-governmental umbrella program for research projects.

In 1996, the program welcomed two new sponsors, the International Council for Science (ICSU) and the International Union of Microbiological Societies (IUMS).

The key findings during its first decade were synthesised in a series of books and laid the groundwork for experimental and theoretical research carried out by the program and the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP). These findings also contributed to the Global Biodiversity Assessment, an initiative of the World Resources Institute (WRI), and to the work of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), established in 1992, and with which Diversitas has a Memorandum of Understanding.

In 2001, the program organised an international consultation of its stakeholders on the need to launch a second phase of the programme. The conclusions of this consultation were in favour of launching a second phase, which would be more integrative and inter-disciplinary, and more policy relevant.

The new science Plan was published in 2002. To implement this science plan, nine projects were established embracing a cycle of discovery, observation, analysis, and information sharing, on overarching scientific questions on biodiversity and related ecosystem services:

In addition to these scientific projects, the program has been strongly engaged in the Earth System Science Partnership (ESSP), a partnership for the integrated study of the Earth System, the ways that it is changing, and the implications for global and regional sustainability. During this second phase, the program continued its engagement in serving policy fora, and the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), in particular. The program organized its first Open Science Conference in Oaxaca, Mexico, in October 2005, where the scientific community reiterated its support for the establishment of a scientific panel on biodiversity that included an intergovernmental component (cf. International Mechanism of Scientific Expertise on Biodiversity (IMoSEB)) and its second Open Science Conference in Cape Town, South Africa, in October 2009; the Cape Town conference attracted an international audience of 700 scientists and policy makers from about 70 countries representing many facets of biodiversity science and policy.

Since mid-2009, and in the light of the changes in the biodiversity science-policy landscape, the program has been engaged in a phase of reviewing its activities and revising its 2002 Science Plan. The new science Plan was published in 2012. During this on-going phase, the program has been or is being strongly involved in:

The domestic policy of the Nicolas Sarkozy administration was led by François Fillon 's government as soon as Nicolas Sarkozy won the 2007 French presidential election and the government appointed by the president. According to the French constitution, the government and the Prime Minister "determine and conduct the policy of the nation", that is to say, deal with the domestic policy, while the President of the Republic focuses on foreign relations; however, a modification of the constitution in 2001 shortened the presidential mandate from seven to five years, so that the presidency lasts the same time as the government's mandate. Therefore, the president can be more implicated in the governmental policy. It was the case with Sarkozy, who has been accused of being a "hyper-president" by his opponents. François Fillon appeared as too much submitted to the president.

Sarkozy had promised during the presidential campaign many reforms. He announced the government would be very dynamic. He pledged to completely revamp the higher education system, to overhaul the judiciary system, judged as too ancient, to lead profound fiscal and economic reforms, and to revise the integration and social benefits system. He pledged to create ministries dedicated to the environment and to immigration and national identity. He also announced a complete reform of the health system, and various measures concerning culture.

On 6 May 2007, Nicolas Sarkozy was elected President of the Republic of France at the second round of the presidential elections, with 53,06% of the votes. Few days later, on 18 May, he appointed François Fillon as Prime Minister. The first government comprised 15 ministers, 4 secretaries and one high commissary, but this government was to be transitional, because legislative elections were to be led. On 17 June, the UMP obtained the majority in the second round of the legislative elections, but less large than expected. The day after, a new government was therefore formed, with 15 ministers, 14 secretaries and 1 high commissary. Six members of the government come from the Socialist Party.

One week later, in the first Council of Ministers, the first bills were prepared. On 20 and 27 June, the Council of ministers began to prepare and examine the TEPA law, the General Review of Public Policies, and the reform of the judiciary map. Meanwhile, the government presented to "social representatives" a first draft on social negotiations and minimum service in transports. On 3 July, Prime Minister François Fillon presented to deputies of the National Assembly the broad lines of his domestic policy: modernization of institutions, social negotiations, reform of high school system, reform of the judiciary map, reform of the labour market, reform of the illness assurance, creation of a social TVA, policy on public debt. The Council of Ministers continued to examine bills pledged by Nicolas Sarkozy during the presidential campaign: bill on immigration and integration, LRU bill, draft on social negotiations. On 7 July, they plan the organization of the Grenelle Environment. In August, an extraordinary session of the Parliament allowed various laws to be enacted in a hurry: LRU law, law on recidivists, TEPA law (enacted after the Constitutional council modified it), law on social dialogue and minimum service in transport, adoption of the RSA (implemented for experimentation in November).

Reforms continued to be prepared and examined after the summer holidays, with the creation of commissions, releasing of reports and discussions. Nicolas Sarkozy also prepared the pledged reform of secondary education and high school by writing to every teacher a « Letter to teachers » in which he recalled the missions and the values conveyed by school and teachers. He also created, soon after, a Commission for the evolution of the teacher job. On 7 September, a first round of negotiations between social representatives on the modernization of the labour market was launched. The Grenelle Environment lasted from September to October, and led to a plan designed by the Minister of the Environment Jean-Louis Borloo. The negotiations led to a first law, on GMOs. The reform of the judiciary system also began, but was subject to many debates. In November, the minister of Justice Rachida Dati unveil the reform of the judiciary map for the next three years, causing the discontentment of magistrates and judges. The reform began with a law on dangerous criminals (enacted in February 2008, after validation by the Constitutional Council). On 20 November, the law on immigration and integration was enacted after the constitutional council approved the possibility to resort to DNA tests, controversial point of the bill.

Major economical reforms were also underway, with the release of other major discussions were led to prepare two contradictory reports on social TVA, ordered by the President, the preparation on a law on competition on the sector of distribution, and a first budget bill for 2008 with a prevision growth between 2 and 2,5% and a 41,7 bn euros deficit, reduction of public debt to 64% of GDP, and suppression of 22 921 civil servants jobs. The budget bill for Social Security was also ambitious, with a reduction of the deficit to à 9 billion euros. On 30 August, a "Commission for the liberation of the French growth", presided by Jacques Attali, had been created. The commission was asked to release a report, ordered by the President, to revive the French economy. The Conseil d’orientation des retraites (COR) released a report stating the pension reform of 2003 did not allow improve the situation. It said the measures to improve employment of seniors failed. The preparation of the Grenelle Insertion, that would take place in May 2008, was also announced, in November. Finally, on 19 December, the government unveiled its plan for social reforms in 2008, including the reform of the labour market, of social negotiations, further training, and status of civil servants.

Reform of the central government and the institutions was also underway at the end of 2007, as part of the RGPP In September, the Home Minister announced the creation of a direction of domestic information, resulting from the merge between the direction of supervisory of the territory (DST) and the branch of the French police force dealing with political security (RG). In October, the minister du Budget officially announced the merger between the general direction of taxation (DGI) and the general direction of public accounts (DGCP). On 29 October, the "Comité on the modernization and rebalance of the institutions of the Fifth Republic", presided by Édouard Balladur, released a report, ordered by the President; it was to prepare a major reform of the constitution and of the parliamentarian system. Finally, the bill merging the ANPE and the UNEDIC/ASSEDIC was presented (enacted in February 2008).

However, at the end of the year 2007, political life was troubled by a growing contestation of certain groups strongly affected by some reforms. Between October and December, university students at the beginning of November, a growing discontentment of university students, protesting against the LRU law, led to two months of strikes and blockades. The movement also extended to high school students. On 28 November, the Prime Minister and the Minister of Higher Education Valérie Pécresse signed an agreement guaranteeing a 50% increase in the universities budget within five years. The agreement aimed at satisfying the students and putting an end to the movement. The reform of the judiciary map also caused a month of protestations of magistrates and judges, but the law was finally enacted on 27 December, despite the opposition of trade-unions. Economic reforms were also highly controversial. The Minister of Labour unveiled a controversial plan for the special retirement plan. The Minister proposed a deadline to trade unions to engage negotiations. Discussions open with RATP and SNCF, but national strikes are organized to oppose the law. In November, national negotiations between patronal organizations and trade unions on the modernization of the labour market. They fail to reach an agreement. In December negotiations on the special retirement plan continue, but failed.

At the beginning of 2008, various laws previously announced were voted by the Parliament and enacted: merger ANPE-Unedic, law on dangerous criminals, fusion DST-RG, implementation of the RGPP.

Preparations of other laws continued. On 11 January a third round of negotiations on the modernization of the labour market was led, with at last an agreement achieved and signed by the participants. A week after, discussions on social dialogue and representation of workers in companies were launched. Preparation of education reforms continued, with the "green book on the evolution of the teacher job" published. In February, the minister of Education presented the reform of education programs. Meanwhile, debates on the reform of the judiciary map engaged in February. The highly expected report by the Commission for the liberation of the French growth was published on 30 January. The expected plan "Espoir banlieues" was unveiled by the president.

The month February was marked by a strike of public television channels, protesting against the suppression of advertising on France Télévisions. A commission for the new public television was created to design the law. In March, negotiations on pensions between trade unions and patronal organizations, also with various strikes and demonstrations.

Following the regional and local elections in France, the government was modified on 18 March; however, the first cabinet underwent few changes, and that did not modify the reforms to be led. Soon after the cabinet change, the law on the modification of institutions was presented by the Prime Minister himself, and the law on the modernization of the labour market was at last voted and enacted, after several months of negotiations.

Meanwhile, various reforms were launched with publications of reports and creation of special commissions. In April, a report was released by the Commission Larcher, allowing debates on the reform of hospitals to be engaged. A commission to examine the reform of laws on minors delinquency was created by the Minister of Justice. A report to plan the modification of civil servants' statute was released.

May was dominated by debates on social reforms, amid various national demonstrations and strikes.

The last months of 2008 were dominated by the fight against the financial and economic crisis. In October, the President unveiled plans to support the real-estate sector (purchase of 30.000 buildings by the government), the PME (French small-and-middle-sized companies), with 20 billion euros, and the written press, very affected by the crisis. The President himself launched on 2 October the General States of the Press to provide financial aids to newspapers. Financial help was also provided by the State to the banking sector. The government had to intervene jointly with Luxembourg and Belgium to save the ailing bank Fortis. The French government was committed with other European countries to recapitalize banks, and participated to the Eurogroup plan signed in October.

At the end of the year, the government also began to fight against the social effects of the crisis. On 28 October, the President unveiled to support employment, with significant aids by the government. On 20 November, Nicolas Sarkozy created the " Fonds stratégique d'investissement ", a sovereignty fund with 20 billion euros to help French companies and banks fighting the crisis. The budget bill was revised down several times, with falling tax revenues, a growing deficit, and exploding debt. Finally, on 4 December, President Nicolas Sarkozy announced a 26 billion euros stimulus package to fight the economic crisis. The day after, Patrick Devedjian was appointed Minister of the economic revival. The 2009 budget bills were adopted at the very end of the year. The Social Security deficit amounts to 10,5 milliards euros, while the government deficit amounts to 66,986 billion euros, with a GDP growth prevision between 0,2% and 0,5%.

The necessity to fight against the crisis caused the rhythm of reforms to slow, especially economic reforms. However, laws previously planned in other fields were adopted: RSA (extension to the whole territory after a period of experimentation), enforcement of the modernization of the institutions, preparation of the law on regions, presentation of the law on the appointment of the President of Frances Television by the President of the Republic, plan for numerical television on the territory, preparation of the modification of laws on bioethics, and above all official presentation of the law on hospitals on 22 October.

The end of the year was also marked by the growing opposition to the government of university and school teachers. They led various strikes and demonstrations in November to protest against job cuts, the funding and management of research and teaching in university and higher education, and the modification of the statute of teachers.

In April 2011, France became the first European country to impose a ban on full-face veils in public areas.

The French Parliament began an initial inquiry on the issue shortly after President Nicolas Sarkozy stated in June 2009 that religious face veils were "not welcome" within France. Sarkozy had stated that the law is to protect women from being forced to cover their faces and to uphold France's secular values. A poll carried out by Pew Research Center leading up to the vote indicated that 80% of French voters supported the ban.

Fadela Amara, who had recently served as a junior minister in the French government and is a Muslim, had previously declared: "The veil is the visible symbol of the subjugation of women, and therefore has no place in the mixed, secular spaces of France's state school system."

The bill was passed by the National Assembly by a vote of 335–1. The sole vote against the ban in the National Assembly was cast by Daniel Garrigue, who warned that "to fight an extremist behavior, we risk slipping toward a totalitarian society." It was passed by the Senate by a vote of 246–1, with 100 abstentions.

Prime Minister François Fillon himself was asked to lead the announced reform of the constitution. The reform was held on article 49 of the text.

The popularity of the President and the Prime minister reached a climax at the beginning of their mandates.

Nicolas Sarkozy had a maximum popularity between August and October 2007: during this period, the number of people trusting him was higher than 55% according to BVA and CSA, higher than 60% for Ipsos, and reaching almost 65% for TNS Sofres. His popularity began to fall rapidly from October and November 2007. From February and June 2008, it maintained at very low levels, between 30 and 40 according to all opinions studies. In summer 2008, it rose again until the end of the year, when the popularity level was close to 50% (40% only for TNS Sofres). In 2009, it maintained between 40 and 45%.

The popularity of Francois Fillon was also very high at the beginning of his mandate, with more than 55% for CSA, TNS Sofres and Ipsos (45% only for BVA). It began to decrease slightly, but increase to reach a peak in April 2008 (49% for TNS Sofres, 51 for BVA, 55 for CSA, 59 for Ipsos). However, it fell again but stayed between 40 and 50% until the end of the year.

Dominique Venner (French: [ vɛnɛʁ ] ; 16 April 1935 – 21 May 2013) was a French journalist and essayist. Venner was a member of the Organisation armée secrète and later became a European nationalist, founding the neo-fascist Europe-Action, before withdrawing from politics to focus on a career as a historian. He specialized in military and political history. At the time of his death, he was the editor of the La Nouvelle Revue d'Histoire, a bimonthly history magazine.

On 21 May 2013, Venner, outraged by the recent legalization of same-sex marriage in France, killed himself inside the cathedral of Notre Dame de Paris. In a suicide note, he said his death was an act in "defence of the traditional family" and in the "fight against illegal immigration". Venner believed that the far-right had become too soft and that peaceful demonstrations against same-sex marriage were not enough to prevent a "total replacement of the population of France, and of Europe". The leader of the far-right National Front, Marine Le Pen, described the suicide as the act of a broken man desperately seeking to "re-awaken" his countrymen.

The son of an architect who had been a member of Doriot's Parti populaire français (the PPF), Venner volunteered to fight in the Algerian War, and served until October 1956. Upon his return to France he joined the Jeune Nation (Young Nation) movement. Following the violent suppression of the 1956 Hungarian Revolution he participated in the ransacking of the office of the French Communist Party on 7 November 1956. In 1959, he and a group of Jeune Nation militants were arrested after violently assaulting a group of Black students from Martinique near the Gare du Nord, for which Venner was sentenced to three months in prison. Along with Pierre Sidos, he helped found the short-lived Parti Nationaliste (Nationalist Party) and was involved with the Mouvement populaire du 13-Mai (Popular Movement of May 13) led by General Chassin. As a member of the Organisation armée secrète, he was jailed for 18 months in La Santé Prison as a political undesirable. He was freed in 1962.

Upon his release from prison in the autumn of 1962, Venner wrote a manifesto entitled Pour une critique positive (Towards a positive critique), which became a "foundational text of a whole segment of the ultra-right". In the manifesto, Venner explored the reasons for the failure of the April 1961 coup and the divide that existed between "nationals" ("nationaux") and "nationalists" ("nationalistes") and called for the creation of a single revolutionary and nationalist organisation, which would be "monolithic and hierarchical" and composed of young, "disciplined and devoted" nationalist militants who would be ready for combat.

In January 1963, he created with Alain de Benoist a movement and magazine called Europe-Action, which he later led. He went on to found the Éditions Saint-Just, which operated in tandem with Europe-Action, and which was composed of nationalists, Europeanists, members of the Fédération des étudiants nationalistes ("Federation of Nationalist Students"), former OAS members, young militants and former collaborators like Lucien Rebatet. He was a member of Groupement de recherche et d'études pour la civilisation européenne (GRECE) (Research and Study Group for European Civilization) from its beginning until the 1970s. He also created, with Thierry Maulnier, the Institut d'études occidentales (IEO) (Institute of Western Studies), and its revue, Cité-Liberté (City-Liberty), founded in 1970. The IEO was an enterprise that worked in parallel and in tandem with GRECE, and the organisation attracted numerous intellectuals, including Robert Aron, Pierre Debray-Ritzen, Thomas Molnar, Jules Monnerot, Jules Romains, Louis Rougier, Raymond Ruyer and Paul Sérant. The IEO was anti-communist, pitted itself against what it saw as "mental subversion" and supported Western values. The IEO dissolved in 1971, the same year Venner ceased all political activities in order to focus on his career as an historian.

Venner was a specialist regarding weaponry and hunting and wrote several books on these subjects. His principal historical works were: Baltikum (1974), Le Blanc Soleil des vaincus (The White Sun of the Vanquished) (1975), Le Cœur rebelle (The Rebel Heart) (1994), Gettysburg (1995), Les Blancs et les Rouges (The Whites and the Reds) (1997), Histoire de la Collaboration (History of the Collaboration) (2000) and Histoire du terrorisme (History of Terrorism) (2002). His Histoire de l'Armée rouge (History of the Red Army) won the Prix Broquette-Gonin of history awarded by the Académie française in 1981.

In 1995, and with the advice of his friend François de Grossouvre, Venner published Histoire critique de la Résistance (Critical History of the Resistance), which highlighted the strong influence and presence of French nationalists in the Resistance (often called "vichysto-résistants"). The work was criticised by some for failing to probe Marshal Philippe Pétain 's attitude towards the Resistance.

In 2002, Venner wrote Histoire et tradition des Européens (History and Tradition of the Europeans), in which he set out what he believed to be the common cultural bases of European civilisation, and outlined his theory of "traditionalism" (a concept that, inter alia, assesses the specificities of each society and civilisation).

Venner served as editor in chief of the revue Enquête sur l'histoire (Study of History, or Historical Inquest) until its dissolution in the late 1990s. In 2002, he created La Nouvelle Revue d'Histoire (The New Historical Revue, temporarily renamed the NRH in 2006), a bimonthly magazine devoted to historical topics. The Revue has featured Bernard Lugan, Jean Tulard, Aymeric Chauprade, Jean Mabire, François-Georges Dreyfus, Jacqueline de Romilly and former ministers Max Gallo and Alain Decaux. He was a co-host of a radio program on Radio Courtoisie.

Some of his books have been translated into English, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, Russian, Ukrainian and Serbian.

As noted above, Venner has been awarded a prestigious prize by l'Académie française for one of his historical works.

When it appeared that the NRH might be dissolved, journalist Christian Brosio (among others) sprang to its defence, claiming the revue was unique in its aesthetic presentation, in its originality in the treatment of subjects covered, the depth of its analysis and the quality of its contributors. Political scientist Gwendal Châton has claimed that Venner has "integrated himself in the strategy of seeking out a newfound respectability: that of an intellectual", which he has used to "instrumentalise history to put history at the service of cultural struggle" and that Venner's "traditionalism" and adherence to "European history and tradition" are a mere "rhetorical screen" designed to "mask" an "ideological continuity" from his earlier political activism. Châton also alleges that Venner uses his historical revues to "manipulate history" in the guise of various rhetorical techniques.

University Professor Christopher Flood has noted that the revue generally adheres to a right-wing outlook, commenting: "[...] the overall flavour has been persistently, if subtly, revisionist". While adhering to Chauprade's views on the conflict of civilisations, the NRH does not contain explicitly racist themes. In an editorial Venner commented that "The Japanese, the Jews, the Hindus and other peoples possess that treasure that has permitted them to confront the perils of history without disappearing. It is their misfortune that the majority of Europeans, and especially the French, are so impregnated with universalism that this treasure is lacking"

On 21 May 2013, about 16:00, Venner committed suicide by firearm in the cathedral of Notre Dame de Paris, which led to the evacuation of approximately 1,500 people from the cathedral. He had been an opponent of Muslim immigration to France and Europe, as well as what he believed to be the Americanization of European values and — most recently — the legalization of same-sex marriage in France. Despite the choice of Notre Dame as the place of his suicide, Venner was not a Christian. He was a practicing pagan but also an admirer of Christian civilization.

Only hours earlier, he had left a post on his blog, on the subject of forthcoming protests against the legalization of same-sex marriage. In the post, Venner approves of the demonstrators' outrage at an "infamous law", but expresses doubt as to the efficacy of street protests to effect social change. He rebukes the protesters for ignoring the threat of "Afro-Maghreb immigration", which he predicts will lead to a "total replacement of the population of France, and of Europe". He warns, "Peaceful street protests will not be enough to prevent it. [...] It will require new, spectacular, and symbolic actions to rouse people from their complacency [...] We enter into a time when words must be backed up by actions."

In a letter sent to his colleagues at Radio Courtoisie, he characterizes his suicide as a rebellion "against pervasive individual desires that destroy the anchors of our identity, particularly the family, the intimate base of our multi-millennial society". He explains his decision to commit suicide inside the cathedral: "I chose a highly symbolic place that I respect and admire." According to the rector of Notre Dame de Paris, Venner left behind a letter for investigators. It was subsequently reported that Venner was suffering from a serious illness at the time of his suicide.

Shortly after his death was reported, a number of far-right personalities paid tribute to Venner and commended his public suicide. Marine Le Pen issued a tweet : "All our respect to Dominique Venner, whose final gesture, eminently political, was to try to awaken the people of France." Bruno Gollnisch described him as an "extremely brilliant intellectual" whose death was "a protest against the decadence of our society".

Others sought to distance themselves from Venner. Frigide Barjot, spokesperson for the anti-gay marriage movement " La Manif pour tous ", told reporters that Venner had never been a member of her movement: "This gentleman belonged to a movement known as the French Spring, which has nothing to do with us, and which we condemned long ago." She described his suicide as "an isolated personal act, very violent, ostentatious, and desperate".

Dominique Voynet (born 4 November 1958) is a French politician who is a member of Europe Écologie–The Greens. She is the former mayor of Montreuil and was a French senator for the département of Seine-Saint-Denis.

Dominique Voynet trained as a doctor, specifically as an anesthetist. During her studies in the late 1970s, she began participating in environmental activism. She fought against the establishment of nuclear reactors in Fessenheim and Malville, and the deforestation of the Vosges area on behalf of the Belfort Association for the Protection of Nature.

She also became a member of Amnesty International and the French Democratic Confederation of Labour (CFDT). In her student years, she was a broadcaster for an independent radio station, "Radio ondes rouges" (Red Radio Waves). Her pacifist and environmental efforts continued with her membership of Front de lutte antimilitariste (FLAM, "Front for the Antimilitarist Struggle") and Friends of the Earth.

Politics tempted her at this time, however the issues that were dear to her – social efforts, peace and environmentalism – were not represented in France by any party at the time. For this reason, she became one of the founding members of The Greens in France.

In 1989 she was elected a Member of the European Parliament. From 1992 to 1994 she was a member of the conseil régional (regional council) of Franche-Comté.

She contested the 1995 presidential election which raised her public profile across all of France. In the first round of voting, she won 3.32% of the vote.

She was elected mayor of Montreuil sous bois in the Seine Saint Denis on the second round of Municipal elections, 16 March 2008, defeating Jean Pierre Brard longstanding communist mayor since 1984.

From 1997 to 2001 she was Minister of the Environment and Regional Planning under the Lionel Jospin government, she resigned on 9 July 2001 and was replaced by Yves Cochet. In 2004, she was elected senator for the Seine-Saint-Denis département. Since the 2008 French municipal elections she is the elected mayor of Montreuil.

Dominique Voynet was designated the Green candidate for the 2007 presidential election on 19 July 2006. In the first round of the election, she garnered 576,666 votes (1.57%), failing to reach the second round.

On 25 November 2013 Voynet announced she would not seek a second term as mayor of Montreuil, complaining of the "degradation of political life" in Montreuil and elsewhere.

On 1 January 2020, Voynet became the Director of Mayotte Regional Health Agency.

In a 2016 op-ed published by Sunday newspaper Le Journal du Dimanche, Voynet joined sixteen other high-profile women from across the political spectrum – including Élisabeth Guigou, Christine Lagarde, and Valérie Pécresse – in making a public vow to expose "all sexist remarks, inappropriate gestures and behaviour."

Minister of Planning and Environment : 1997–2001.

Member of European Parliament : 1989–1991 (Resignation). Elected in 1989.

Senator of Seine-Saint-Denis : 2004–2011. Elected in 2004.

General councillor of Jura (department) : 1998–2004.

Regional councillor of Franche-Comté : 1992–1994 (Resignation).

Mayor of Montreuil, Seine-Saint-Denis : 2008–2014.

Municipal councillor of Dole, Jura : 1989–2004 (Resignation). Reelected in 1995, 2001.

Donkeys in France have been employed primarily for companionship and tourism purposes since the 1970s. They were first introduced during the Gallo-Roman period and later in the late Merovingian era, becoming integrated into medieval animal symbolism. Historically, donkeys were primarily employed as pack and draught animals for modest farmers, and until the mid-20th century, they were essential for any job requiring the transport of goods. The species experienced a decline with the mechanization of agriculture, leading to the near-extinction of French donkey breeds and the implementation of conservation measures.

The Manche department of Normandy currently hosts the largest population of donkeys in France. France breeds a diverse and widely dispersed donkey population, with seven officially recognized breeds. Currently, donkeys are predominantly bred for conservation, with their utilization in market gardening becoming increasingly uncommon. Additionally, there is a commercial sector for donkey milk.

Donkeys have left a significant imprint on French culture, featuring prominently in proverbs, popular songs, games, tales, legends, and novels. Despite the frequent portrayal of donkeys in proverbs as foolish creatures, traditional beliefs often depict them as pious and virtuous animals, as well as symbols of wealth. This is exemplified in the popular fairy tale of Donkeyskin.

Donkeys are not native to France; they originally came from the Horn of Africa. They were sporadically and limitedly imported during the Gallo-Roman era, then more widely introduced to northern France in the late Merovingian period (7th and 8th centuries). According to archaeozoologists Benoît Clavel and Jean-Hervé Yvinec, donkeys were present on 12% of studied rural sites during the early Middle Ages. The donkeys spread throughout France, especially in rural areas, within two to three centuries. Clavel and Yvinec estimate that 5 to 10% of equid remains from this period belong to hybrids between donkeys and horses. Veterinarian Anne-Caroline Chambry highlights that donkeys “were long a part of the French landscape, seen everywhere from markets to roads and farms ”.

The donkey acquired a prominent symbolic place from the Middle Ages, like other exotic animals such as the lion, by becoming, especially in medieval encyclopedias, a symbol of stupidity and foolishness. According to medievalist and art historian Michel Pastoureau, the existence of the dunce cap is attested as early as the 12th century in cathedral schools. During the medieval period, donkey skin was utilized to create parchment, and various parchment festivals were held on these occasions, particularly at the Abbey of Saint-Denis.

The donkey is referenced by the philosopher Jean Buridan in his parable of Buridan's Donkey, illustrating the difficulty of deciding. Although the donkey in question was, according to Pastoureau, purely symbolic and never existed outside of a verbal jousting, this paradox illustrates the proverbial stupidity of the animal. It was later often referenced and commented on, notably by Voltaire.

The donkey also appears in medieval and Renaissance animal trials. The archives of the provost of Dijon mention that in 1405, a donkey was put to death as punishment for killing a child. These sources also mention trials for bestiality, such as an ass-driver from Villeneuve-l'Archevêque (Champagne) who was condemned on January 8, 1558, to be hanged and then burned with his donkey for having sexual relations with it. A similar trial in the Parliament of Paris on November 24, 1542, resulted in the condemnation of a man from Loudun (Anjou) to be strangled and burned with his donkey. Similar trials existed, with judges in the 17th century being more lenient towards the animal.

In the 17th century, the "infamous" donkey ride, called "asinade" or "asouade", is mentioned in France as part of the charivari. This practice possibly originated from ancient Greek traditions that sought to highlight the ridiculous and highly sexualized aspects associated with the donkey. British historian Martin Ingram, in a study of historical social control mechanisms in Europe, notes that the "asouade", which was organized during the French charivari, was a form of punishment for women who beat their husbands. From the second half of the 18th century onwards, the "asinade" became a public humiliation punishment, adopted particularly in Paris and southern France. This punishment was inflicted on brothel-keepers from 1760 in Toulouse. In Mémoires manuscrites, Toulouse chronicler Pierre Barthès provides a detailed account of the public humiliation and punishment of brothel-keepers. Barthès writes that a brothel keeper was "condemned to be paraded through the whole city, with a rope around her neck, held by the executioner, and wearing a feathered helmet adorned with bells, a small mantlet over her shoulders in a similar fashion, mounted on a donkey facing its tail, escorted by the entire watch, with the executioner 's assistant leading the donkey by the halter." This form of humiliation was reserved exclusively for women, while men convicted of pimping were required to follow the procession on foot.

Buffon 's description of the donkey in the encyclopedia Histoire Naturelle reflects, according to Anne-Caroline Chambry, the contempt in which this animal was held at the time. Before the French Revolution, some postal services, particularly in the South, were only served by donkeys.

While it is challenging to ascertain the precise number of French donkeys in the 19th century, the pervasiveness of cultural production referencing them is evidence of their prominent presence in society at the time. In 1862, most donkeys were in the Paris Basin, with a density of approximately 10 donkeys per 1,000 inhabitants. Thirty years later, they were mostly found in the Berry region. Some French regions maintained a tradition of donkey breeding, particularly Normandy, Poitou, Berry, Bourbonnais, the Pyrenees, and Provence. Agricultural practices in plain regions likely favored the donkey's rarity.

Historically, the donkey was utilized for agricultural purposes, particularly in the transportation of heavy loads such as milk cans in Normandy and young lambs in Provence. In the southern Alps and Haute-Loire, donkeys were bred for export to other French regions or Italy. Families that utilized the donkey's labor often developed a close relationship with the animal, as the donkey represented an exception to the traditional spatial separation between humans and animals in Provence. It was not uncommon for the stable housing of the donkey to be situated on the ground floor of the domicile, near the wood and food supplies.

It is a lesser-known fact that donkeys played an important role during World War I. Initially, in 1914, only horses and mules were requisitioned, with donkeys excluded from the requisition plan. The advent of trench warfare led to their mobilization.

The French Armed Forces then enlisted the assistance of these donkeys, which were primarily imported from North Africa, particularly Algeria, for logistical purposes. The exact number of these animals remains unknown. Their diminutive size allowed them to navigate the trenches, avoiding enemy fire. They were mobilized in the Somme, Flanders, Artois, and Aisne to provide supplies to the infantry, engineers, and artillery. These donkeys, equipped with indigenous packs, were notably mobilized during the Battle of Verdun in 1916.

To prevent them from braying and alerting the enemy, their nostrils were slit vertically. Their reputation among soldiers was generally good. Of all the French equids mobilized, donkeys suffered the most from food shortages, according to Éric Baratay. This was because they were fed only after horses were maximally protected by their riders, while donkeys had no assigned caretakers.

Following the war conclusion surviving donkeys whose owners could be located were returned to them. However, those that could not be reclaimed by civilian owners, particularly the "small African donkeys", were slaughtered despite their contributions. With the advent of animal studies, Raymond Boissy gathered testimonies from veterans and civilians about the donkeys that served at Verdun. Statistical data does not permit a number estimation of French donkeys that perished during the Great War, as only horses and mules were counted. In his analysis, Jean-Michel Derex posits that this phenomenon represents a form of hierarchy among animals.

The gradual motorization of activities in the 20th century led to a generalized decline in the use and breeding of donkeys. Motor vehicles competed with donkeys in their economic transport functions. The general motorization of agricultural activities also contributed to their decline. For example, donkeys were historically used to operate olive presses, but these tools increasingly ran on internal combustion or electric motors. Dr. Anne-Caroline Chambry attributes the decline of donkeys in part to rural exodus, as the animals remained in rural areas while disappearing from large French cities.

The decline of the French donkey population commenced in the early decades of the 20th century and became particularly pronounced in the 1950s, with a drastic reduction in numbers. Following the conclusion of World War II, the French donkey density dropped to a mere two or three donkeys per thousand inhabitants. The evolution of the purchasing price of donkeys reflects the collapse of their labor value. In 1892, the purchase price of a donkey equated to approximately one and a half months of a worker's wages. Between 1950 and the early 20th century, the relative purchasing cost of a donkey halved, with the average price of a donkey now equivalent to one-third of a worker's monthly salary.

The associated agricultural skills and culture also disappeared. Donkeys persisted slightly longer in sharecropping regions, such as Berry and Bourbonnais, and in small agricultural areas. In 1977, an INRA survey concluded that the Poitou donkey would have entirely disappeared by the century's end if no preservation efforts were undertaken.

While horses have been the subject of numerous scientific studies in France, donkeys have been relatively understudied since the 1980s. Facing the risk of extinction of donkey breeds, various actors from the 1990s onwards mobilized to preserve this living heritage. Annick Audiot was a pioneer in this field, conducting a study on the Poitou donkey in 1977, which found only 44 individuals at the time. In 1978, a new profession of donkey trekking guides emerged, gradually becoming professionalized.

This was accompanied by the creation of studbooks to manage French donkey breeds and combat inbreeding. The Haras Nationaux, now the French Institute of Horse and Riding [ fr ] (IFCE), supported this preservation effort by officially recognizing French donkey breeds. Donkey centers were established in Lignières, Braize, and Dampierre-sur-Boutonne. The number of French donkeys increased from 23,000 to 35,000 between 1985 and 1994.

Nevertheless, the criteria for defining French donkey breeds were established relatively late. These criteria, which define the breeds, led to the selection of well-characterized animals and the elimination of the "common donkey of old rural France," which resulted from random crossbreeding and did not meet any breed standards. The Berry and Pyrenean donkeys were influenced by individuals from outside France to reduce inbreeding. To reduce inbreeding in herds, breeder associations began searching for donkeys meeting their breed standards in neighboring regions. The most recently characterized breed is the Corsican donkey, which has not yet been officially recognized.

The 2008 financial crisis had a detrimental impact on donkey breeding, resulting in a consistent decline in numbers and new births between 2006 and 2015. The emergence of novel applications for donkeys has prompted inquiries within the social sciences regarding the evolving relationship between these animals and the rupture they represent with past uses. Michel Lompech and colleagues have identified this phenomenon as a transformation of the domestication system within a post-modern society.

The population of donkey owners in France is highly diverse and fragmented. The majority of these owners are amateurs who acquire a donkey as a pet or to conserve endangered breeds. Donkeys are then used as ecological lawn mowers in peri-urban areas. Economic activities involving them are most common in economically disadvantaged regions, linked to initiatives promoting local production.

The transformation in the utilization of donkeys has been accompanied by a transformation in the social group of owners, which has become exceedingly heterogeneous. Lompech et al. identify three principal social groups of donkey owners:

Another noteworthy aspect is the growing number of women among donkey owners. Retired farmers sometimes keep donkeys for leisure and pleasure. This sociological diversity among donkey owners has led to tensions between amateurs and professionals within breeding associations.

Donkey breeding has minimal economic significance, as it is primarily for conservation purposes. The market value of a donkey is significantly low in France, with some amateurs even offering their donkeys for free, which devalues the work of selection and dressage by professional breeders. Donkeys have the advantage of being frugal and able to graze on small, inaccessible plots. However, they are not genuinely integrated into French agro-industrial production chains. Some associations take care of elderly donkeys to avoid slaughter and provide them with a retirement home. Cases of donkey abuse are handled by associations that find new owners for them.

Donkeys are employed in eco-grazing in France, particularly in the Pyrenees. They are utilized in active mobility, for school transport, and waste collection. Additionally, donkeys are employed in donkey-assisted therapy, which fosters social connections, generally for the elderly or disabled.

Historically, the donkey has been associated with subsistence farming, particularly among small peasants, laborers, and sharecroppers. While it was once primarily employed in agricultural activities, this use has become rare and secondary.

It is still used by market gardeners, especially in the Southwest. In 2020, the French Society for Working Equines (SFET) recorded market gardeners working with donkeys. A survey of 80 French market gardening operations, primarily small farms of a few hectares located in Western France and engaged in organic farming, revealed that donkeys are used in this context. On average, each farm employs two donkeys, which complement the use of motorized agricultural machinery. It is therefore evident that improving available traction equipment is crucial for sustaining the agricultural use of donkeys.

In France, the dairy industry is well-developed, producing and selling a variety of products, including donkey milk soap and various cosmetic and medicinal goods. The similarity between donkey milk and human breast milk is often highlighted in the marketing of these products.

The industry began in 1998, mainly involving female farmers. It is a delicate activity to manage due to the low milk productivity of donkeys. Furthermore, these farms must also address the sale of male foals and devise solutions for retired donkeys, as the practice of sending donkeys to slaughter is socially frowned upon. One challenge is the selection of a dairy breed, as no French donkey breed is specifically bred for this purpose.

According to Tristan Sicard and Yanis Varoutsikos, donkey meat was consumed by the poor population during the Middle Ages, but it is now rarely eaten. Breeding donkeys for this purpose is not among the stated goals of breeders at the birth of their animals. Furthermore, there is no selection of French donkeys based on meat production. However, some French donkeys can be sold to dealers and thus sent to the slaughterhouse. Lompech et al.. note in their study that some industry players wish to revive sausage production, which currently requires the importation of meat. A production sector for " donkey sausage " exists in Ardèche (a product often mistakenly perceived as typically Corsican), for which donkey meat is imported from South America.

Chambry observes that the donkey, once a common sight, has "practically acquired the status of an exotic animal," attracting urban populations, especially children, who enjoy donkey rides.

Since the 1980s, donkey trekking has developed in certain regions, notably along the Camino de Santiago. Despite the necessity for extensive training of the animals and good organizational skills, this activity is lucrative. Furthermore, it has increased the value of trained donkeys.

These activities are generally run by professional donkey handlers in mountainous regions, particularly in the Pyrenees, Auvergne, and the Cévennes. The selection of donkeys for their ability to carry loads has been a consideration in the context of the tourism economy.

In 1996, the "Parc du Fou de l'ne" was established in Amboise, showcasing fourteen donkey breeds on a four-hectare site with educational exhibits. It ceased operations at the beginning of 2011.

In the same year, the "Pôle du Cheval et de l’ ne" opened the Sitazin museum, located between Lignières and La Celle-Condé, which is dedicated to the history and physiology of the donkey, and the donkey paddock, which is a conservation area that presents the seven French breeds. There are also numerous educational farms dedicated to donkey breeds, such as the Maison de l' ne in Beauvoir-sur-Mer and Océ'âne in Lanvéoc.

The seven recognized donkey breed associations in France are federated within the "France Nés et Mulets" federation, based in Paris, which represents and defends French donkey and mule breeders and users registered in a breed registry. Additionally, the SFET defends the use of donkeys and represents it to the French Ministry of Agriculture.

As is the case in other countries, French donkeys can hybridize with horses to produce mules or hinnies. There was a well-known mule industry in Poitou, from where Poitevin mules were exported to numerous countries.

The French donkey population is in a state of decline, with the National Institute of Donkeys and Mules (INAM) reporting 78,000 donkeys in France in 2010, and the agricultural census indicating 31,583 asinine equines (including hinnies and mules). This decline is a cause for concern concerning generational renewal. The dispersed population also presents a challenge, as donkey owners frequently have to travel long distances to breed their animals.

Donkeys are not precisely counted by French and European statistical tools, often being mixed with horses in these data sources. Moreover, animals owned by individuals and amateurs are not always counted, with most of these animals not found on professional farms.

There are a few large breeding farms or donkey farms in France, which can have several dozen donkeys. Their activities are diversified, combining dairy and tourism. In 2019, the largest donkey farm in France was located in Vauroux, Oise. Outside of dairy farms, it is uncommon for donkey breeding to be the sole activity of professional agricultural structures, as most are diversified, such as cattle /donkey or beekeeping /donkey farms.

In 2018, a study by Michel Lompech and colleagues utilized cross-referenced data sources to conclude that donkeys are notably prevalent in the French department of Manche, which boasts the largest herd with 1,100 heads. This is followed by Seine-Maritime (800) and Calvados (600), collectively establishing Normandy as the leading French donkey breeding region. Other regions with a notable presence of donkeys include the Massif Central and its northern bocage regions, as well as the Alps, Provence, Pyrenees, and Corsica. Conversely, donkeys are notably scarce in cereal plain regions, Brittany, the North, the Centre, and all regions east of the Paris Basin. The Berry and Bourbonnais regions have long been associated with this breeding, as have the Pyrenees.

France has a diverse donkey population, comprising seven officially recognized breeds. Each breed is the subject of an association dedicated to its preservation and promotion. As of 2019, selection is primarily focused on maintaining breed standards and work aptitude, particularly for tourism and working with children. Historically, French donkey breeds did not all have the same selection goal. The Poitou donkey is associated with mule production, while the Grand Noir du Berry was selected for field, vineyard, and barge traction.

Donkeys have a profound influence on French culture, as evidenced by their frequent appearance in proverbs and sayings, popular songs, games, tales, legends, and French literature. They continue to engage the interest of French scholars and amateur historians, who collect and interpret old postcards depicting them. Michel Pastoureau notes that, since Antiquity, donkeys have been symbolically associated with a range of negative traits, including folly, ignorance, stubbornness, laziness, lewdness, and the opposite of these, humility, sobriety, and patience. Their role as a suffering victim working for their master imbues them with a Christ-like value, as evidenced by their portrayal in the Nativity and as Jesus ' mount.

In the field of dream interpretation, the inhabitants of the Vosges region of France once believed that dreaming of a donkey portended mental sorrow and misfortune. Throughout the 19th century, donkeys were associated with the hardworking populace or innocent children, as well as humility and virtue. This is evident in the works of Achille Lemot, published by Le Pèlerin, and Émile Souvestre.

According to various authors, the symbolic value of the donkey is likely to change in the 21st century, as its modern uses are far removed from its former laborious work. It is no longer a symbol of hard agricultural labor and is gradually joining the category of companion animals. Additionally, there is a form of heritage recognition, notably through donkey festivals in various French regions.

Historically, there are numerous terms for "donkey" in the French language. The French word âne is derived from the Old French asne. In 1881, French ethnologist Eugène Rolland cited a wide variety of phrases used to name the donkey, including bête asine, asine in the Morvan, aine in the Berry, aune in the Mâconnais, asé and its variant azé in Provençal Occitan, asou Additionally, it is worth noting that the variant azou is used in Béarnais, aë in Nice, bourri in Allier, bourricot and its variants (such as bourriquet) in various French regions (names Rolland attributes to the presence of fuzz on the donkey's coat), azen in Breton, and asto in Basque. Additionally, various nicknames for the donkey have been documented, including " Baudouin " in the 15th and 16th centuries (which gave rise to "Baudet") and " Martin " since then. According to folklorist Paul Sébillot, the practice of nicknaming donkeys "Martin" can be traced back to the 18th century. Before this, the nickname " Bernars li asne " was prevalent.

Pastoureau notes that the proper name "Aliboron," which may be a corruption of the Islamic philosopher Al-Biruni 's name, was attributed to the donkey from the 15th century (notably by Rabelais) to describe a pedantic and narrow-minded person. This eventually led to the name becoming a common epithet for any donkey in the 18th century.

Historically, certain parts of the donkey were utilized in the preparation of remedies. In the 16th century, a burned and powdered donkey hoof was reputed to cure St. John's disease (an old name for epilepsy). A list of 16th-century witch 's aphrodisiacs cites donkey brain in a preparation. Saint-Simon reports that Louis XIV 's physician prescribed him a tonic made from the ashes of a donkey penis.

As observed by Sylvie H. Brunet, the donkey is "overrepresented" in French proverbs and sayings. For instance, it is the most frequently mentioned animal in Ardèche proverbs, surpassing the wolf in frequency. Michel Pastoureau observes that in both Latin and the vernacular languages that succeeded it, numerous proverbs, puns, expressions, and insults highlight the foolishness and stubbornness of the donkey, originating from antiquity and still in use in the 21st century.

In his 1881 work Faune populaire de la France, Eugène Rolland dedicates approximately fifty pages to the donkey. He notes that the animal is often associated with stupidity and ignorance. This is evidenced by the use of the term " donkey " to describe someone who is unintelligent or lacks education. The phrase "donkey-like foolishness" is also used to convey this idea. At the time, it was common practice in France to punish students who were perceived to be lazy by forcing them to wear a dunce cap and threatening that they would grow donkey ears if they did not work harder. Rolland cites several dozen proverbs or sayings that emphasize this symbolic aspect of the donkey. For example, something that is despised is said to be "not worth the fart of a dead donkey" or that it is "not worth the skin of a donkey." René Volot notes that the donkey is associated with the scapegoat and the fool who believes the moon has fallen into the water upon seeing its reflection, both in a pedagogical text by Claude Augé and in a Cévenol tale.

In 1876, Charles-Alexandre Perron included two proverbs from Franche-Comté in his compilation of French proverbs: Quand le foin manque au râtelier, les ânes se battent (When hay is lacking in the manger, the donkeys fight), and Un âne court au chardon et laisse la bonne herbe (A donkey runs to the thistle and leaves the good grass).

The 1932-1935 edition of the French Academy Dictionary cites the proverb: À laver la tête d'un More, à laver la tête d'un âne, on perd sa lessive, which can be translated as "one takes great pains in vain to make a man understand something beyond his reach or to correct an incorrigible man." In Rouergue and Gard, two proverbs in Occitan say that les petites mouches font regimber les gros ânes (small flies make big donkeys balk).

Michel Pastoureau notes that Buridan's donkey paradox, which dies of hunger and thirst between a bucket of water and a bucket of food due to indecision, gave rise to the proverbial expression être comme l'âne de Buridan (To sit on the fence), though "it would be absurd to believe that, placed in such a situation, an animal or a human being could let themselves die of hunger or thirst."

The French idiom faire tourner quelqu'un en bourrique signifies the act of tormenting and exhausting someone. Additionally, numerous sayings and tales underscore the donkey's vengeful nature. In several French regions, a prevalent tradition holds that it is considerably more perilous to fall from a donkey than from a horse. In the Pyrenean foothills, the month of May, which is observed as the month of souls, is regarded as the donkey's month.

In 1853, Pierre-Alexandre Gratet-Duplessis, a bibliophile, cited the saying Amour apprend les ânes à danser (Love makes donkeys able to dance) in La Fleur des proverbes français. He specified that "love-struck donkeys remain donkeys." Other traditions praise the donkey's laborious courage, such as "no one knows better than the donkey where the saddle sore is". In the Auvergne region, a proverb states "in the absence of oxen, plow with a donkey". Additionally, some proverbs praise the donkey's patience.

A frequently used expression can suggest a certain cunning in the donkey, or at least in the person imitating it for benefits. The expression "to play the donkey to get bran", likely originated with Rabelais in Gargantua, where it is written "gargantua played the donkey to get bran" (bran being husk).

Specific faults are associated with certain coat colors of the donkey, as evidenced by the adage "as wicked as a red donkey". This saying is attested in French, Norman, and the Creuse. In Languedoc and Aude, the black donkey is reputed to be mean, bad, and stubborn.

The donkey is referenced in French popular songs and nursery rhymes, including Le Testament de l'âne in Eure-et-Loir, L'âne mangé au moulin (featuring a girl named Margoton or Marianne), L'âne et le Loup, and Notre âne, a nursery rhyme whose first verse in a known variant begins as follows:

Notre âne, nôtre âne A bien mal à la têt' Madame lui fit faire Un bonnet pour ses fêt' Un bonnet pour ses fêt' Et des souliers lilas, la-la Et des souliers lilas.

Our donkey, our donkey Has a bad headache Madame made it make A cap for his parties A cap for his parties And lilac shoes, la-la And lilac shoes.

The donkey is a prominent figure in French folklore, often depicted in opposition to the horse. According to a Breton dualistic popular tale, God created the horse, while the Devil created the donkey. In Rouergue, a tale compares the horse and the donkey, with the former deriding the latter for its inferiority. This confrontation between horse and donkey is also evident in La Fontaine 's 1668 fable Le Mulet se vantant de sa généalogie, as well as in Barthélemy Imbert 's 1773 fables, where the horse represents the aristocracy and the donkey the working class.

According to a Nivernais legend, it was the donkey that taught humans to prune vines. The animal had nibbled on vine pieces to feed itself during winter, and the vineyard owners observed in the spring that the plant had grown back more vigorously.

The donkey is also presented as a pious animal in several traditions. In a Basque tale, for instance, it asks the wolf who just captured it to let it hear a mass before dying. Several French traditions emphasize that its back is marked with a cross, which is interpreted as a sign given in reward for the services it rendered to the Savior, protecting it from the Devil. In Berry, the fact that its hair is not tangled by elves, unlike horses', is explained by its role in the Nativity. In Le Folklore de France, Paul Sébillot notes that the medieval tale of the donkey thief forced to do penance gained some popularity, leading to various derivative tales, including a Burgundian version from the mid-18th century. He also notes a tradition, long since fallen into disuse by the late 19th century, that allowed donkeys to enter churches and recite ceremonial prose in their honor. In the Breton legend of Saint Envel, a donkey plays a pivotal role. After the wolf that had previously been his mount was eaten by the predator, Saint Envel forced the predator to serve as his mount.

In Pyrenean folklore, the donkey is associated with the Drac, a shape-shifting demon that lures lost travelers to their demise by offering them a ride on its back. The Drac then drowns them in a torrent and sends them to hell.

According to Olivier de Marliave, the Drac appears as a large red donkey that emerges at night, often near a bridge. It can swell enormously to scare passersby and throw them into the river, where they drown. In other instances, the red donkey assumes a tranquil demeanor, with children ascending its back. Its body expands to accommodate a considerable number of children (typically seven), after which it leaps into the water of a pond or river, drowning them all. These legends were pervasive in Catalonia and Bigorre.

A similar legend is referenced in Pas-de-Calais by Claude Seignolle in Les Évangiles du Diable. A gray donkey appeared in Vaudricourt 's square during Midnight Mass and permitted children fleeing the church to ride on its back, extending its body to accommodate twenty of them. When the mass concluded, it accelerated and plunged into a watering trough, drowning all of its passengers. Since that time, the creature reappears every Christmas night, bearing the souls of the damned, traversing the village, returning to its starting point at midnight, and entering the aforementioned pond from which it emerged. Pierre Dubois references a similar account in La Grande Encyclopédie des fées, wherein the creature is described as a "magnificent white horse " that drowns its young riders in a bottomless pond.

Additionally, numerous French tales feature a character who claims to have been transformed into a donkey. One such tale, L' ne et le Fils du magicien, is set in Pontoise. In this narrative, two thieves steal a merchant 's donkey while he is asleep on his way back from the fair. One of the thieves, having woken the merchant, convinces him that he is the donkey turned back into a man due to a spell. A comparable narrative is found in the Cévennes and the Southern Alps, where two thieves sever the rope of a donkey led by a peasant. One of them assumes the animal's role and claims to have been enchanted.

According to a Basque tale from La Rhune, a witch can assume the form of this animal. In another Basque tale, the sotré, a Vosges sprite, transforms a man who took his zucchetto into a donkey.

The donkey is also among the animals attributed with marvelous powers, notably that of defecating gold. This association with gold is unique to the donkey and the ram. In Contes et légendes des pays de France, Claude Seignolle collected two stories about donkeys that defecate gold: in the first story, the owner finds wealth, and in the second, the owner is ridiculed.

The most renowned French (and, more broadly, European) narrative featuring a donkey that defecates gold is Donkeyskin. As recounted by storyteller Michèle Bortoluzzi, "The tale of Donkeyskin was once so popular that people would refer to any fairy tale as 'a Donkeyskin tale.'" There are numerous versions of this tale, but it was not until the 16th century that the donkey assumed a significant role within it.

In this narrative, which originally revolved around the incest taboo, a king falls in love with his daughter and requests her hand in marriage. To avoid detection, she requests that the king kill the animal he holds most dear, his donkey that defecates gold. She then hides beneath the donkey's skin to flee the royal castle. Claude Mettra posits that “the central figure of the narrative is the donkey, which transforms manure into gold. Upon being skinned, the donkey will eternally watch over the young girl, whose grace will make gold a sparkling symbol of love.”

According to René Volot, there are approximately fifty versions of the tale of the donkey's egg in France, with half of these originating from Occitania. In the most prevalent version of this tale, a somewhat foolish teenage boy from the Cévennes is sent to work as a farmhand in Gard. As a reward for his labor, the farm owner presents him with a large gourd, a vegetable the boy has never encountered before. Upon inquiring about the nature of the object, the farmer reveals that it is a donkey's egg and that his mother will be able to guide its utilization. On his return journey, the boy experiences a loss of balance, resulting in the squash rolling downhill and into a bush, where a hare emerges. Upon discovering the squash to be broken open, the boy experiences profound emotional distress, believing that he has lost the potential for a friendship with the donkey.

Chambry highlights the enduring presence of the donkey in literary representations, dating back to the earliest translated texts in antiquity (the Bible, Aesop's fables, etc.) and continuing through classic authors (Jean de La Fontaine, Victor Hugo, Alphonse Daudet, etc.) to the present day, even though donkeys have disappeared from the daily lives of the French. While many of La Fontaine's fables mention the donkey, few make it a central figure. Chambry observes that one of the most illustrative fables of the donkey's symbolic role as a victim is The Animals Sick of the Plague. The fable The miller, his son and the donkey portrays a wise and passive donkey.

In his lengthy philosophical poem, L' ne, Victor Hugo personifies patience through the character of the donkey. The donkey also features Les Contes du chat perché (1934-1946) by Marcel Aymé, a collection of short stories set on a traditional farm. Joseph Kessel, a French novelist, published Le Petit ne blanc in 1973, a children 's novel set in Tangier, Morocco.

Since 2000, French author and illustrator Bénédicte Guettier has published books about Trotro the donkey for very young children. These books illustrate small events, such as getting dressed or riding a bike, which have been adapted into various formats.

In 1860, Countess of Ségur published Mémoires d'un âne, an autobiographical account in which the donkey Cadichon recounts his adventures. According to Chambry's analysis, Cadichon serves as a model of virtue for young readers. He is humanized by his ability to speak and his act of repentance after seeking revenge on his various owners, yet he still reminds readers of his status as an enslaved animal to these same owners.

In 1960, Paul Ladmirault adapted the work for piano. An animated series adaptation, titled Cadichon, was broadcast on French television from 1986 onwards.

Scottish novelist Robert Louis Stevenson undertook a journey with a donkey named Modestine through the Cévennes region of France, which he subsequently chronicled in his travelogue, Travels with a Donkey in the Cévennes. This travel literature was first published in English in 1879, but it was not until 1901 that it was translated into French. It was subsequently popularized by the Cévennes Club during its centenary celebrations.

This inspired the tourism development along the path Stevenson took, including donkey rental services. Annually, approximately six to seven thousand people hike this trail, with or without a donkey.

In 2020, the French film My Donkey, My Lover & I, selected for the Cannes Film Festival, drew inspiration from Stevenson's periplus. A donkey named Patrick participated in the filming and photo sessions.

Chambry cites Henri Bosco 's 1937 novel L'Ane Culotte as an example of a work that is "impossible to overlook". She includes it among children's works that encourage their readers to mature. The novel is set in a small village in Provence, where a donkey regularly carries groceries for its master, dressed in pants on its front legs. The donkey plays a pivotal role in the narrative, initiating the protagonist on their rite of passage.

A television series adapted from this novel was broadcast on ORTF from 1967 onwards.

The donkey has been a source of inspiration for a vast array of iconographic representations, spanning from medieval religious paintings to contemporary manifestations, such as graffiti. It has been employed in caricature creation, particularly those portraying Protestant ministers during the 18th century.

Claude Seignolle notes the statue of L'âne qui vielle, on the western door of Chartres Cathedral (a donkey standing on its hind legs playing the hurdy-gurdy or harp), as being as famous as Manneken Pis in Brussels. The theme of the musical donkey, illustrated by this sculpture, is already attested in the fables of Antiquity.

The donkey is the subject of a celebrated French hoax from 1910, in which a landscape painting attributed to the artist Joachim-Raphaël Boronali (an anagram of Aliboron) was exhibited. The painting, titled Et le soleil s'endormit sur l'Adriatique, was accompanied by a "manifesto of excessivism ". The canvas elicited diverse responses from art enthusiasts until Roland Dorgelès revealed that the painting was created by Lolo, the donkey belonging to the proprietor of the cabaret Au Lapin Agile, with a brush attached to its tail.

A dotation (French pronunciation: [ dɔtɑsjɔ̃ ]) was a grant of revenues from territory conquered by the First French Empire. The dotations were made by Emperor Napoleon to family members, government figures and military officers as a means of securing their support. Those granted land were known as donataires. The system saw almost 6,000 donataires holding dotations worth, in theory, 30 million francs per year by the time of the Empire's collapse in 1814. The loss of revenue to the conquered states was significant; the Kingdom of Westphalia was never financially solvent under French rule because of the dotation system taking 20% of its income.

Napoleon's First French Empire acquired, by conquest, significant land in Europe. As part of Napoleon's transition into Empire, from the French First Republic, he granted various titles of nobility to his supporters. To supplement the titles and to secure support from other figures the dotation system was introduced.

The revenue from part of some conquered states was assigned to the recipient, known as a donataire. The revenues were able to be passed down to the donataire's male heirs, though the recipient was supposed to have sold half of the holding within 20 years and all of it within 40 years (the intention being that the proceeds would be used to buy lands in Metropolitan France).

The lands taken would be land belonging to feudal lords, deposed monarchs or the Catholic Church. Much of the revenue assigned came from dues previously paid to feudal lords. Such a system was against the principles of the French Revolution and even against some parts of the Napoleonic Code but its value in shoring up support for Napoleon led to its widespread use. English-Italian historian Stuart Woolf said of the dotation system "no better example could be given of the unresolvable contradictions between the modernizing ideals of integration of the French administrative class and the practice of exploitation that accompanied the expansion of the Empire". The abolition of the feudal system would have reduced the value of the dotations significantly so any proposed reform was vigorously opposed by the donataires.

The dotation system was supervised by French officials known as superintendents of the extraordinary domains. The land supporting the dotations was not directly administered by the donataire but the dues were collected by French agents on their behalf. Donataires had to swear a personal oath to Napoleon. Most donataires were military officers.

The dotations varied significantly in value. The French government recorded dotations as one of eleven grades. The top grade consisted of 10 donataires whose dotations ranged in value from 400,000 to 1.5 million francs per year (between 1806 and 1813) including Napoleon's sisters Pauline and Elisa, senior generals Michel Ney, André Masséna, Louis-Nicolas Davout, Jean-de-Dieu Soult and Jean-Baptiste Bessières and senior ministers including Armand-Augustin-Louis de Caulaincourt. Eight donataires in the next grade held dotations worth between 200,000 and 400,000 (with a total combined revenue of 2.8 million). Other dotations were comparatively small; the lowest grade held revenues of 5,000–10,000 each and included 248 individuals with a total income of less than 2 million francs.

Non-land related dotations were also known, with the donataire holding an entitlement to a portion of the loot taken by Napoleon's armies in the field. In many cases revenues fell far short of their theoretical value and were the subject of complaints from a large number of donataires.

As much as half of the feudally-held land seized by the French was granted in dotations. The toll on the Kingdom of Westphalia, which lost almost 20% of its revenue, meant that it failed to develop as an independent state and was never fiscally solvent. Some 1,844 dotations were made from land in Italy alone. Only 27 dotations were made from the Duchy of Warsaw in 1807 but these, worth 930,000 francs per year, reduced the duchy's income by a fifth. The 1809 Treaty of Schonbrunn, following the defeat of Austria, allowed a significant increase in dotations from the duchy. By 1814 some 6,000 donataires held dotations worth, on paper, 30 million francs per year.

The system collapsed with the loss of territory during the 1813-14 War of the Sixth Coalition and the dotations were effectively annulled by Napoleon's abdication.

The douk-douk is a French-made pocket knife of simple sheet-metal construction. It has been manufactured by the M. C. Cognet cutlery firm in Thiers, France, since 1929.

The external engraving of the douk-douk was created in 1929 by Gaspard Cognet of Cognet, Antoine & Gaspard for sales to France's colonies in Oceania. The handle depicts a " douk-douk ", or Melanesian spirit incarnation. Cognet based the design on an engraving he found in an illustrated dictionary. To promote sales in other regional markets where the Melanesian design was either unknown or even offensive for cultural or religious reasons, the douk-douk was inscribed with new designs such as "El-Baraka" (blessing : French Algeria), "Le Tiki" (ancestor : Polynesia), and ("L'écureuil" squirrel : French Canada).

Originally intended as an inexpensive utility knife for the ordinary working man, the widespread popularity of the douk-douk soon caused it to be utilized as a weapon. During the 1954-1962 FLN -led revolt in Algeria, the douk-douk was used as weapon of assassination and terror. Algerians who ran afoul of the FLN frequently had their noses removed with locally-obtained El-Baraka douk-douk knives. When used as weapon, users sometimes converted the douk-douk into a fixed-blade dagger by the simple expedient of hammering the ends of the sheet-metal handle together behind the blade's bolster, locking the blade into open position.

The douk-douk is a very simple slipjoint knife, having no locking mechanism, but only a very strong backspring to bias it towards the open, closed and 90 degree positions. This intermediate position is to help prevent the blade from snapping shut on the users fingers if the user accidentally folds the blade while cutting. The knife consists of only six parts:

The cutlery firm of M.C. Cognet has continued to produce the knife up to the present day, using the same simple methods. Today they are offered with several decorative designs, stainless or carbon steel blades, in three different sizes.

Doulon is a former commune in the Loire-Atlantique department (formerly Loire-Inférieure), bordering Nantes (to the east), which was annexed to the latter in 1908. Its territory largely corresponded to that of one of Nantes's 11 current districts, called Doulon-Bottière (part of which is now also part of Malakoff-Saint-Donatien).

On the eve of its annexation in 1908, the territory of the former commune was roughly bounded:

Most etymologists in the past traced the name “Doulon” back to the pre-Indo-European root Tull, meaning “height” or “elevation,” which was corrupted to give Dol. However, given the topology of the area, it would be more logical to see it as a derivative of the Celtic place name Dola, which refers to a meadow, valley, or any low-lying area prone to flooding (such as a marsh).

Archaeological excavations carried out by Léon Maître in the early 20th century show that at the beginning of the Christian era, there was already a Gallo-Roman settlement on this site, located on a road leading from Nantes between the Loire River and the road to Angers.

Doulon first appeared in history during the reign of Charlemagne. In 786 or 787 he authorised the Abbey of Saint-Médard in Soissons to establish a monastery in this area, which was then part of the parish of Saint-Donatien in Nantes. A Benedictine abbey was therefore established, with the usual privileges. Its history is not well known, but it is mentioned in a bull issued by Pope Eugene II in 824, in a charter issued by King Odo in 893 (confirming its privileges), and in a charter issued by Duke Alan Barbetorte in 945 : control over Doulon Abbey was then transferred to Landévennec Abbey.

Documentation only resumes at the end of the 11th century with a charter from Harscoët I of Saint-Pierre, Lord of Retz. At that time, he owned one-third of the abbey's tithes. It took the threat of excommunication, following the decisions of the Council of Rome in 1049, for Harscouët to return Doulon to Bishop Benoît de Cornouaille in 1104.

During the second half of the 11th century, Constance of Normandy, Duchess of Brittany, owned the manor of Petit-Blottereau (next to that of Grand-Blottereau) in Doulon, since, according to legend, she was responsible for the foundation of a chapel dedicated to the Virgin Mary called " Notre-Dame de Toutes-Aides " (Our Lady of All help), following a vow she made and which was fulfilled.

However, the chapter of Nantes Cathedral, being unable to manage its possessions, ceded them under pressure from the Duke of Brittany to wealthy families. Seigneuries were thus created, such as those of Grand-Blottereau, Petit-Blottereau, la Papotière, Bois-Briand, les Perrines-Chamballan, and La Colinière.

The parish of Doulon was divided into two distinct sections: " Haut Doulon " (Upper Doulon) and " Bas Doulon " (Lower Doulon):

The parish of Saint-Médard became the commune of Doulon during the administrative reform of France at the beginning the Revolution.

In the 19th century, it benefited from the economic development of Nantes, notably with the creation of the Grand-Blottereau marshalling yard and the establishment of the Brissonneau et Lotz factory in Rue Bellier, which specialized in the construction of railway equipment (the site is currently occupied by the main tram depot and the headquarters of Semitan).

It experienced demographic growth, particularly in the districts bordering Nantes, which benefited from their proximity to the tobacco factory and the Gare d’Orléans train station. In 1873, a new parish, "Notre-Dame de Toutes-Aides", was created, and a new church was built starting in 1878 next to the 17th-century chapel, under the direction of architect François Bougoüin. The inauguration took place in 1881.

The two parishes were inhabited by very different, often antagonistic populations:

This social situation sometimes fuels a certain rivalry between parish clubs and secular or workers' associations (particularly in sports). In 1887, a petition from the inhabitants of Vieux Doulon even called for the division of the commune into two electoral sections intended to become independent, but the Prefecture rejected their request two years later.

In the minds of the people of Douillon, only Toutes-Aides would sooner or later be brought together with its Nantes neighbor. Ultimately, the entire commune was annexed in 1908, along with Chantenay to the west of Nantes. The annexation of the two communes was prepared during the term of Nantes mayor Paul-Émile Sarradin and decided by a law passed on April 3, 1908. The municipalities of Nantes, Doulon, and Chantenay were then dissolved and replaced by a municipal commission headed by Joseph Canal (from April 4 to May 17), until the election of the new unified municipality headed by Gabriel Guist'hau.

Doulon, like Chantenay, retained a specific administrative status within the city of Nantes through the presence of a branch town hall and the appointment of a “special deputy.” Since the 2008 municipal elections, no special deputy has been appointed.

The first mayor, Jean-Baptiste Lainé, elected in February 1790, was the parish priest. Having refused to swear allegiance to the Civil Constitution of the Clergy, voted by the Constituent Assembly on July 12 of the same year, he was ordered by the authorities to leave the commune. From then on, for a year, the people of Doulon appear to have had no declared mayor.

The Dover–Dunkerque train ferry was one of two regular rail freight train ferries that operated between the United Kingdom and Europe. The route connected the English port of Dover, with the French port of Dunkerque. After rationalisation of other Anglo-European train ferries, the Dover to Dunkerque sailing was the last to survive, though it ended its days on freight carryings only after the Night Ferry passenger service ended in 1980. The last Dover to Dunkerque wagon-freight ferry service became redundant upon the opening of the Channel Tunnel when freight was carried directly through the Channel Tunnel.

Before the First World War, freight being shipped between the Channel ports led to a time-consuming process of shipping from source, unloading onto a ship, re-loading onto rail wagons and then onward delivery on the continent. This ran a significant cost of finance, time and also was detrimental in the amount of labour required to handle the transhipment. During the First World War, despite many innovative efforts to get military supplies to the front (such as small barges sailing across the Channel), the British military established a train ferry at Richborough to enable trains and wagons to be taken onto a ferry without having to transfer the goods from wagons. Other crossings were also established at Southampton, Dover, Newhaven and Liverpool.

Whilst this process was by no means unique in Britain (at least two water crossing train ferries were in operation across the Firths of Forth and Tay until their respective bridges were built), train ferries on the open sea was new to the British railway system.

The London and North Eastern Railway established a Harwich to Zeebrugge train ferry in 1924, using the former ferries and docking equipment as produced for the British military at Southampton and Richborough during the First World War. In 1933, the Southern Railway started on a train ferry terminal in the port at Dover to allow a ro-ro ferry service for trains across the channel to Dunkerque. Dunkerque was chosen above other French ports because of its recently refurbished docks. Initial lightly loaded freight services started in 1936, but a full service for freight did not begin in earnest until 1937, with the Night Ferry passenger service starting a year earlier in 1936.

Due to the height difference between high and low tides, which could be as much as 23 feet (7 m) in Dover Harbour, a separate dock was created which was protected against the extremes of tidal difference. Additionally, the dock was specially constructed with concrete in the water and a substrate of chalk removed from beneath it. The geological problems of building on the grey chalk (which was found to be riddled with cavities) was a problem that presented itself to the builders of the Channel Tunnel, a venture which brought the train ferry service to an end.

The Night Ferry service last ran in September 1939 due to the onset of the Second World War, and during the war, the three ships that plied the route were redeployed in use by the Royal Navy as mine-laying ships as the advantage of having rails set into the deck, allowed for easy transport onto the ship of the mines.

Competition first came from vehicle only ro-ro ferries in 1952 when a Dover to Boulogne service was started.

In 1988, a new dock and linkspan were installed at Admiralty Pier at Dover. This allowed loading and unloading of the ferry whatever the water level as the linkspan was adaptable for the height variances of the tide. At the same time, a single ship was introduced, the MS Nord Pas-de-Calais, which was capable of a two-hour journey time between the two ports, which resulted in the possibility of up to four sailings each way per day. Loading and unloading at both terminals was undertaken with two locomotives each drawing a train of railway wagons on or off at the same time. This was to prevent the ship shifting under the weight change when wagons were taken away or added. The Nord Pas-de-Calais was built with an open section at the stern of the ship (as were most other train ferry vessels); this allowed for the transport of dangerous goods which could dissipate fumes if they leaked, but also that the wagons that contained the dangerous goods were more accessible in case of emergencies.

Freight arriving and departing from the Dover ferry terminal was brought into Dover, or forwarded on, via British Rail 's wagonload network (labelled as Speedlink from 1977 to 1991, and as Railfreight Distribution between 1991 and 1995. Traffic imported into Dover via the train ferry included, fruit, chemicals and nuclear fuels between the continent and the BNFL complex at Sellafield.

Exports included china clay from the south west of England to Switzerland and steel products from Teesside to France and Spain. Total tonnage of freight carried between Germany, France, Spain and the United Kingdom in 1993 was almost 706,000 tonnes (778,000 tons). A further 200,000 tonnes (220,000 tons) was transferred between the UK and other countries in Europe.

The train ferry route utilised a number of ships in its near 60-year history. For the purposes of TOPS (British Rail's numbering system), all the ships were given Class 99 status, except Hampton Ferry which was withdrawn before TOPS was introduced.

Interchangeability with other train ferries was not common; the Harwich to Zeebrugge train ferry used other ships (Suffolk Ferry, Cambridge Ferry, Essex Ferry, and Speedlink Vanguard) which were not used on the Dover to Dunkerque route.

The train ferry carried its last cargo in December 1995. The opening of the Channel Tunnel prompted the demise of the train ferry to and from Dover, as most flows were re-routed through the tunnel, though its freight loadings have seen lower tonnages than the train ferry carried. Part of the reason for the lower tonnages was down to uncertainty with illegal immigrants, but also crucially, the dangerous goods that the train ferry carried were banned from travelling through the tunnel, so these loads were lost to road transport.

The train ferry dock at Dover has since been partially infilled and was in use as an aggregate terminal in the late 1990s/early 2000s.

As for the Dover-Dunkerque service in general, the railway ferry shut down in 1995, however in 2000 Maersk subsidiary Norfolkline revived the service. However, whilst the old service was tailored to the needs of the rail freight market, this new service was instead aimed at lorries and road freight. The new service operated by Norfolkline quickly proved to be a breakout success, as the initial one-ship operation expanded to four vessels within five years of the new service opening.

However, even by 2003 Norfolkline forecast a sharp increase in demand for transport on this route, especially with tourists, and as a result sought to aim at a more passenger-oriented market with the route, and ordered three newbuild ships. By 2005 four ships – the Midnight, Dawn, Brave and Northern Merchant were on charter from Norse Merchant Ferries to Norfolkline, however these were heavily oriented towards road freight, as shown by their high lane metres but low pax capacity. It was in October 2005 that the first of the three newbuilds – the Maersk Dunkerque – entered service between Dover and Dunkerque, and slowly, one by one the Merchants were phased out. In 2006, the other two newbuilds – Maersk Delft and Maersk Dover – entered service, and with the triplets in service, the Merchant quad were phased out completely.

In 2010 DFDS bought Norfolkline, and subsequently inherited the Norfolkline network, including the Dover-Dunkerque service. The triplets were then renamed, ditching the Maersk prefix and gaining the Seaways suffix, alongside being repainted into DFDS' house livery. Today, the service continues as a three-ship service under the DFDS banner, as one of two routes operated by the company across the Dover Straits – the other ending in Calais. The service occasionally has seen additional vessels operate to Dunkerque, chiefly when industrial action shuts down the neighbouring Port of Calais, like in 2015 when Calais suffered from strike action around the closure of MyFerryLink.

The Dover to Dunkerque train ferry has appeared in TV, films and books;

A droit (French for right or Law) is a legal title, claim or due.

The term is used in English law in the phrase " droits of admiralty ". This refers to certain customary rights or perquisites, formerly belonging to the Lord High Admiral, but now to the crown, for public purposes and paid into the Exchequer. These droits (see also wreck) consisted of flotsam, jetsam, ligan - (goods or wreckage on the sea bed that is attached to a buoy so that it can be recovered), treasure, deodand, derelict (maritime), within the admiral's jurisdiction; all fines, forfeitures, ransoms, recognizances and pecuniary punishments; all sturgeons, whales, porpoises, dolphins, grampuses and such large fishes; all ships and goods of the enemy coming into any creek, road or port, by durance or mistake; all ships seized at sea, salvage, etc., with the share of prizes such shares being afterwards called "tenths", in imitation of the French, who gave their admiral a droit de dixième. The droits of admiralty were definitely surrendered for the benefit of the public by Prince George of Denmark, when Lord High Admiral of England in 1702. American law does not recognize any such droits, and the disposition of captured property is regulated by various acts of Congress.

The term droit is also used in various legal connexions (i.e., French law), such as the droit of angary, the droit d'achat (right of pre-emption) in the case of contraband, the feudal droit de bris (see wreck), the droit de regale or ancient royal privilege of claiming the revenues and patronage of a vacant bishopric, and the feudal droites of seignory generally.

In French, droit can mean the whole body of the Law, as in the motto " dieu et mon droit ", which is to say "God and my whole body of Law." Droit d'auteur is a term for French copyright law.

Droit de suite (French for "right to follow") or Artist's Resale Right (ARR) is a right granted to artists or their heirs, in some jurisdictions, to receive a fee on the resale of their works of art. This should be contrasted with policies such as the American first-sale doctrine, where artists do not have the right to control or profit from subsequent sales.

The droit de suite was first proposed in France around 1893, in response to a decrease in the importance of the salon, the end of the private patron, and to champion the cause of the "starving artist". France enacted the right into law in 1920, seemingly because many artists, and their families, had suffered from the First World War, and droit de suite was seen as a means to remedy socially difficult situations.

According to Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres, droit de suite was created in France following the sale of Millet 's 1858 painting, the Angélus, in 1889 at the Secretan sale. The owner of the painting made a huge profit from this sale, whereas the family of the artist lived in poverty.

The Berne Convention of 1971 enshrines authors' and artists' "inalienable right to an interest" in a resale of their work, but has no legal force in the absence of national legislation implementing it.

The 2001/84/EC directive mandates a somewhat uniform system of droit de suite across the European Union. This directive is controversial in the United Kingdom.

In France, this system has been in force since 1920 through article L122-8 of the Code of intellectual property. It will be reformed by article 48 of the DADVSI law, which implements directive 2001/84/EC. During discussions in the French Parliament leading to this law, it was argued that in practice, the droit de suite is only paid at auctions, and that it thus disfavors the Paris art marketplace compared to London or New York City. Following DADVSI, a government regulation (through a decree) is to set degressive rates and maximal fees so that the Paris marketplace is not hindered.

As a result of the Artists Campaign for Resale Right (ACfRR) that represented up to 80,000 British Artists through 23 affiliated Artist representative organisations and led by Anya Elizabeth Patel, Visual Artist & Artist Rights Advocate of the National Artists Association and Rachel Duffield, CEO of the Design & Artists Copyright Society (DACS) and their team, the Artist's Resale Right (ARR) was enacted in the UK in 2006 to implement the EU Directive.

The first proposal to amend the Copyright Act in the Canadian parliament to make resale right mandatory in Canada took place in 2013 but the bill was defeated. Second attempt was made in 2019. The Canadian House of Commons Standing Committee on Industry, Science and Technology recommended further study and consideration to implement national artist's resale right. The Canadian House of Commons Standing Committee on Canadian Heritage took this one step further, recommending that the Canadian Government should establish artist's resale right. In 2021, Canadian Artists' Representation also began to explore amending the Copyright Act rather than drafting a new legislative bill to speed up the legislation process.

The 1977 California Resale Royalties Act (CRRA), (Civil Code section 986), applied to all works of fine art resold in California, or resold anywhere by a California resident, for a gross sale of $1000 or more. It had mandated a five percent royalty on the resale price of any work of fine art. An artist was able to waive this right "by a contract in writing providing for an amount in excess of five percent of the amount of such sale." It was the only law of its kind implemented in the United States. At least one scholar has proposed that this law is unconstitutional in that it effects a Fifth Amendment taking of private property.

The California Resale Royalty Act, was struck down as unconstitutional on May 17, 2012, because it violated the US Constitution Interstate Commerce clause, ending a 35-year run that entitled artists to a royalty payment upon the resale of their works of art under certain circumstances. The ruling by Judge Jacqueline H. Nguyen of the U.S. District Court, Central District of California, is pending appeal in the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals. Judge Nguyen added:

The Court finds that the CRRA explicitly regulates applicable sales of fine art occurring wholly outside California [emphasis added]. Under its clear terms, the CRRA regulates transactions occurring anywhere in the United States, so long as the seller resides in California. Even the artist---the intended beneficiary of the CRRA---does not have to be a citizen of, or reside in, California....Therefore, the CRRA violates the Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution.

In September 2012, the U.S. Copyright Office published a "Notice of Inquiry" regarding establishing an artist "resale royalty right" in the US. The Notice was published in response to a request by Representative Jerrold Nadler and Senator Herb Kohl, who had introduced droit de suite legislation in 2011. The Copyright Office's subsequent report endorsed "congressional consideration of a resale royalty right, or droit de suite, which would give artists a percentage of the amount paid for a work each time it is resold by another party." A follow-up bill was introduced in 2014, the American Royalties Too Act, and was vigorously opposed by auction houses. The bill died in committee.

On July 6, 2018, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled that the California Resale Royalties Act is preempted by the federal Copyright Act —which does not recognize an artist's right to resale royalties. Now, only works resold from January 1, 1977 to January 1, 1978, when the Copyright Act became effective, are eligible for the royalty payment.

The Resale Royalty Right for Visual Artists Act 2009 gives the creator of an artwork the right to receive a royalty when their work is resold on the commercial art market. For artworks already in existence at 9 June 2010, the royalty applies only to the second and subsequent resales after that date. Under clauses 22 and 23 of the act artists have a case by case right to instruct the appointed government agency the Copyright Agency Ltd, to not collect and/or make their own individual collection arrangements.

The royalty is calculated as 5% of the sale price, but does not apply where that price is less than $1,000. It is payable, via an official collecting agency, or if the creator chooses (on a case by case basis) it can be paid directly to the creator, on resales made during their lifetime and to their heirs for resales made up to 70 years after the creator's death. The primary legal obligation to pay the royalty rests on the seller. However, in economic terms, it may effectively be passed on to the purchaser.

Eligible artworks include original works of graphic or plastic art, including pictures, collages, paintings, drawings, engravings, prints, lithographs, sculptures, tapestries, ceramics, glassware, photographs, fine art textiles, installations, fine art jewellery, artists' books, carvings and multi-media artworks.

The royalty is restricted to Australian citizens or residents, though there is provision for reciprocal rights to be extended in the future to persons resident in other jurisdictions with compatible royalty schemes.

The introduction of the scheme was controversial, as it has been elsewhere. During the first three years of its operation, royalty payments totaling $1.5m were made to about 650 artists for 6,800 transactions, with about 50% going to Indigenous artists. The highest individual royalty was A$50,000. Most recipients have received amounts ranging from A$50 to A$500. The average transaction cost is reportedly $30 AU.

A review of the scheme was announced in June 2013.

The Intellectual Property Code of the Philippines (Republic Act 8293) gives the author/artist or his heirs a 5-percent share in the gross proceeds of the sale or lease of the original painting, sculpture, or manuscript, subsequent to its first disposition by the creator. This right exists during the lifetime of the author or artist and fifty years after his/her death.

Duchess potatoes (French : pommes de terre duchesse) consist of a purée of mashed potato, egg yolk, and butter, which is forced from a piping bag or hand-moulded into various shapes which are then baked in a high temperature oven until golden. They are typically seasoned similarly to mashed potatoes with salt, pepper, and nutmeg. They are a classic item of French cuisine, and are found in historic French cookbooks.

The first known recipe for the dish was published in La Nouvelle Cuisinière Bourgeoise in 1746. The phrase à la duchesse became an appellation in French cuisine for any dish incorporating a mashed potato/egg yolk mixture. Recipes for duchess potatoes have been published in American cookbooks since at least 1878. In her 1896 cookbook, Fannie Farmer described the creative potential of duchess potatoes, writing: "Shape, using pastry bag and tube, in form of baskets, pyramids, crowns, leaves, roses, etc. Brush over with beaten egg diluted with one teaspoon water, and brown in a hot oven." In 1902, the Boston Cooking School published a duchess potatoes recipe in its magazine. French cookbook author Auguste Escoffier described duchesse potatoes in his highly influential cookbook Le Guide Culinaire, first published in 1903.

During the Great Depression, the U.S. federal government cooperated with a dozen state agricultural agencies to improve potato breeding. The U.S. Bureau of Home Economics encouraged consumers to try less common potato dishes, such as duchess potatoes. World War II led to domestic food shortages in the U.S., especially of butter, meat and canned foods. In January 1943, first lady Eleanor Roosevelt released menus for nine family meals served at the White House. One dinner included meatloaf and duchess potatoes. In 1949, the New York Times was promoting duchess potatoes surrounding roast chicken or roast fish as an elegant but inexpensive dining alternative to beef. When Craig Claiborne graduated eighth in his class from the École hôtelière de Lausanne in 1954, his final examination included preparing fish in white wine, with velouté sauce, hollandaise sauce and duchess potatoes.

In September 1959, US President Dwight Eisenhower had a meeting with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev at Camp David. The dinner included prime rib and baked red snapper. Duchess potatoes were among the side dishes. When Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, the Shah of Iran, visited Washington, D.C., in April 1962, he hosted a six-course dinner for President John F. Kennedy at the Iranian embassy. The main course was pheasant, and duchess potatoes were also part of the meal. In June 1966, King Faisal of Saudi Arabia visited Washington, D.C. President Lyndon Johnson hosted a state dinner at the White House, and the menu included filet of sole almondine, roast sirloin and duchess potatoes.

The Duchy of Orléanais (French : Duché d'Orléans) is a former royal duchy, which was created during reign of Hugh Capet by elevating the former County of Orléans. In 1498, as part of a centralisation of France under Louis XII, the duchy was dissolved and replaced by the Province of Orléanais which was informally still known as the 'Duchy of Orléanais'.

The Duchy of Orléanais was created in 1344 by raising the former County of Orléans to a Dukedom under King Philip VI for his second son Philip de Valois. With the creation of the duchy, several localities around the former county were also integrated, they included the County of Beaugency and the Seigneurities of Neuville-aux-Bois, Yèvre-le-Châtel, Châteauneuf-en-Thymerais, Lorris, and Boiscommun. In 1375, Prince Philip died without a legitimate heir, the title of 'Duke of Orléans' and the duchy itself were merged into the royal domain (crown lands) of the King of France.

In 1392, the duchy was re-created by King Charles VI for his younger brother Louis de Valois-Orléans. The duke was later succeeded by his son Charles de Valois-Orléans who reigned until 1465 when he died of natural causes. He was succeeded by his own son Louis de Valois-Orléans, who became King Louis XII in 1498 and the title was merged into the crown once more.

In 1498, as part of a centralisation of the different regions of France, the duchy was dissolved and replaced by the new Province of Orléanais.

In cooking and gastronomy, duck or duckling is the meat of any of several species of bird in the family Anatidae, found in both fresh and salt water. It is found in domestic and wild forms and is a very calorie dense food, containing high fat, protein, and iron. Duck has been hunted in the wild for thousands of years, and has been domesticated and bred for more than two thousand years, resulting in several breeds with varying characteristics.

Duck is eaten in many cuisines around the world. It features in dishes from many parts of Africa; in Asian cooking it is familiar in Peking duck in China and several Indian dishes and it features in the food of the Near East. In Europe it has an important role in French cuisine, in which there are numerous recipes for cooking it, and is well known in the cuisines of Britain, Poland and Russia. It is less central to the cuisines of Italy and Spain. It is also consumed in Australia and New Zealand.

Wild duck breeds have been hunted and cooked through thousands of years. They include the mallard – the commonest wild duck (the canard sauvage of France) and the one most eaten worldwide, because it is abundant and generally understood to be of first-class table quality. Other wild ducks commonly eaten in Europe are the pintail (Anas acuta), the teal (Anas crecca), the scaup (Aythya marila), the shoveler (Spatula (or Rhynchaspis) clypeata), the widgeon (Anas penelope) and the pochard (Aythya ferina).

In North America the most highly rated wild duck is the Canvasback (Aythya valisinaria), named for the light canvas colour of its back; it is said to derive its flavour from the wild celery it gets by diving. In addition to the wild ducks familiar in Europe, other breeds highly prized in the Americas are the Black duck (Anas rubripes), the Carolina or Wood duck (Aix sponsa), the Redhead (Nyroca americana), the Ring-neck (Aythya collaris), and the Masked duck (Nomonyx dominicus), from Dominica.

Wild duck is usually served rare – The Oxford Companion to Food (OCF) quotes an old saying that a mallard should walk through the kitchen, a widgeon should run slowly through and a teal should rush through.

Domestication began over 2,000 years ago in China, and was practised in classical Rome, recorded by Lucius Columella in the first century AD. In Europe and North America almost all domesticated breeds descend from the mallard duck, although they differ greatly in size and appearance. A duck is usually six months old or more, and a duckling is younger. The French terms are canard and caneton.

Ducks have been domesticated for so long that breeding has altered them greatly from their original form, as they have been selected for special characteristics. Some, such as Indian Runners and Khaki Campbells were bred for egg-laying. The principal breeds for cooking are:

Laurens van der Post recorded a duck dish favoured in East Africa: the bird is browned in the oven and then slowly casseroled with stock made from the minced liver of the duck, stock, chili and cloves. Served with lemon juice and finely chopped red pepper added to a sauce thickened with cassava, accompanied by rice. In some versions of this duck dish, green bananas or plantains are either added to the braising liquid or served separately as a side dish.

Duck tagine with pears is from North African cuisine. Duck breasts are browned before being braised in chicken stock with sliced pears, onions, garlic, cinnamon, saffron and coriander. In a Ghanaian duck dish the bird is stuffed with shredded chicken or other meat, yam or cassava, tomatoes and onions, roast and served with rice. A South African dish of duck stuffed with mixed dried fruit braised in chicken stock and apple juice is thought to have originated with the Malay cooks whom the Dutch settlers employed.

A recipe for wild mallard, Doohwee in plantain poponda sauce, is common to several African countries. The bird may be braised either in coconut milk or stock and the cooking liquid may also contain some or all of plantain, onions, ginger, garlic, tomatoes, sweet peppers, chili peppers, basil (poponda) and mint.

In the view of Tom Stobart in The Cook's Encyclopaedia (1998):

For Peking duck, fattened birds are killed, plucked, gutted and rinsed with water. Air is pumped under the skin through the neck cavity to separate the skin from the fat. The duck is then briefly blanched in boiling water and hung up to dry; this tightens the skin. The duck is glazed with a layer of syrup with honey. A second layer of glaze of soy sauce, five-spice powder, and maltose is applied inside and out, and the duck is left to stand for 24 hours in a cool, dry place (or a refrigerator). It is then roast in an oven until the skin turns shiny brown.

Duck meat is part of Indian cuisine, especially important in Northeast India, such as in the Assamese cuisine. Popular dishes include duck with white gourd, duck with laixak and duck with bamboo shoots. Duck meat and squab pigeon are also cooked with banana blossoms.

Oritang is a variety of guk, Korean soup made with duck and various vegetables.

In Bali, duck (bebek) is variously made into duck soup with banana stem (jukut ares bebek), duck parcels wrapped in banana leaf (tum bebek), minced with spices and coconut cream (lawar), or are smoked whole in one of Bali's best-known dishes (bebek betutu).

Balut is a bird embryo boiled and eaten from the shell. It is sold as street food in the Philippines and around Southeast Asia.

Thai cusine includes a roast duck soup, with the meat shredded into a mixture of chicken stock, lime juice, hot chili, lemongrass, Thai basil and fish sauce.

According to Dorothy Hartley 's Food in England, although a chicken with green peas is traditional for Easter Sunday, duck with green peas takes its place for Whitsuntide. She says it is given a delicate sage and onion stuffing, and the roast bird is served with apple sauce, green peas and new potatoes, with possibly small pork sausages or hot boiled bacon served alongside.

In The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy (first published in 1747), Hannah Glasse printed a recipe for duck braised in broth or water with bacon and covered with lean beef, with the optional addition of chopped veal sweetbreads, truffles and oysters. From the next century, Elizabeth David cites Lady Llanover 's "Welsh Salt Duck": soaked in brine for three days and then poached slowly and served hot with white onion sauce.

Stobart comments, "Many British restaurants go in for a sloppy version of the French Caneton à l'orange, which too often means duck with a dollop of marmalade in the gravy".

Duck plays a major role in French cuisine. Among the dishes traditionally made with it are:

Duck does not play a major part in the cuisine of Italy, but there are several original Venetian recipes for stuffed duck such as anatra col pien, including in the stuffing veal, sausage, bread soaked in Marsala, bitter-almond biscuits and Parmesan cheese. While roasting, the bird is basted with wine and rosemary. Another traditional Venetian recipe marinates joints of wild duck in vinegar and water, and then browns them together with capers, anchovies, olives, rosemary and sage, to finish cooking slowly in white wine, lemon juice, and grappa. Anatra ripiena is another Venetian recipe for duck, sometimes boned, stuffed with a mixture of breadcrumbs soaked in milk sopressa (a soft local salumi), the bird’s liver, parmesan, parsley, sage, rosemary, nutmeg and sometimes some tuna and roast.

Anatra con le lenticchie, a Genoese dish, is cooked in wine in a casserole with celery, onion, carrot, garlic and bay leaves, and finished with some partly cooked lentils added towards the end of cooking. A duck dish from Basilicata combines a bird braised with black olives, served with penne in a highly seasoned tomato sauce.

Duck dishes in Polish cuisine include Kaczka z jabłkami – roast duck stuffed with apples, and Dzika kaczka – wild duck braised with red cabbage and onions. Czernina is a Polish soup made with duck blood, broth and vinegar.

In Russian cuisine duck dishes include zharyenaya s vishnyami, zharyenaya s yablokami, and tushonnaya s gribami – respectively, roast with cherries, roast with baked apples and braised with mushrooms.

Davidson comments that although ducks are so valued in France, they are much less so in Spain: "Perhaps one reason is that the French roast duck for rather a short time (as the British do with wild duck) and eat it pink though not bloody... whereas Spanish recipes advocate roasting a duck for 2 hours. They also say that the meat is dry and inferior to chicken, which is not surprising". Spanish recipes for braised duck include Pato estofado, slowly cooked in white wine with onions and bay leaf.

Iranian cuisine includes Khoresht-e Fesenjan, described by the food writer Margaret Shaida as "that most aristocratic of all Persia's stews". It consists of a duck casseroled in duck stock with onions, minced walnuts and pomegranate juice or paste. It is customarily served with plain white rice, and may be garnished with meatballs made of minced lamb or veal.

Barvaz be tapooz is a dish eaten in Israel of duck stuffed with oranges and then roast in a very hot oven. It is served with a sauce of white wine, light stock and orange juice.

Sweet potatoes were introduced to Lebanon from Central Africa and have been absorbed into Lebanese cuisine. A local duck recipe braises the bird with carrots, celery and onion and serves it with a sweet-sour sauce of duck stock, honey and vinegar poured over the duck and the sweet potatoes which have been separately boiled and then sautéed.

Ördek dolmasi is a Turkish duck dish: the bird is braised in duck stock and then roast, stuffed with rice, pistachios, cinnamon, cloves and raisins.

Duck meat is very high in cholesterol and fat, particularly saturated fat. It is also very high in protein and iron. An article in The New York Times in 1981 reported that ducks caught in the wild may be contaminated from pollution of rivers and other bodies of water. Other such reports have followed.

Duck confit (French : confit de canard [ kɔ̃.fi d(ə) ka.naʁ ]) is a French dish made with whole duck. In Gascony, according to the families perpetuating the tradition, all of the duck is used to produce the dish. Each part can have a specific destination in traditional cooking, the neck being used for example in an invigorating soup, the garbure. Duck confit is also a traditional ingredient in many versions of cassoulet.

While it is made across France, it is seen as a specialty of Gascony. The confit is prepared in a centuries-old process of preservation that consists of salt curing a piece of meat (generally goose, duck, or pork) and then cooking it in its fat.

The meat is rubbed with salt (which acts as a preservative), garlic, and sometimes herbs such as thyme, covered, and refrigerated for up to 36 hours, then slowly poached, generally for four to ten hours, until at least cooked or meltingly tender.

The cooked meat can be transferred to a container and completely submerged in the fat. Skipping the salt curing stage greatly reduces the shelf life. Confit is also sold in cans, which can be kept for several years. The flavourful fat from the confit may also be used in many other ways, as a frying medium for sautéed vegetables (e.g., green beans and garlic, wild or cultivated mushrooms), savory toasts, scrambled eggs or omelettes, and as an addition to shortcrust pastry for tarts and quiches.

A classic finishing recipe is to fry or grill the legs in some of the fat until they are well-browned and crisp, and use more of the fat to roast potatoes and garlic as an accompaniment. The potatoes roasted in duck fat to accompany the crisped-up confit are called pommes de terre à la sarladaise.

Duck à l'orange, orange duck, or canard à l'orange is a French dish in cuisine bourgeoise consisting of a roast duck with a bigarade sauce.

According to some historians, the dish traces its roots to the Middle East, particularly, ancient Persia, where meats were cooked with various fruits. The original French dish was known as canard à la bigarade referring to bitter Seville oranges. Other historians suggest a version of the dish was introduced to France by Catherine de' Medici 's accompanying cooks when she married King Henry II of France in 1533. However, this claim is debated among food historians.

The first officially published recipe of the dish appeared in chef Louis Eustache Ude 's 1813 book The French Cook, under the name Ducklings à la bigarade. The dish was later formally codified by Auguste Escoffier in his book Le Guide Culinaire where he describes the under canard sauvage à la bigarade. Duck à l'orange gained popularity in the United States in the 1960s partly due to Simone Beck, Louisette Bertholle and Julia Child 's Mastering the Art of French Cooking.

By the early 21st century the dish was often considered tacky and outdated; food writer Olivia Potts described it as "hard to believe [duck à l'orange] wasn't always a byword for naff", and chef Gordon Ramsay described the dish as "the culinary equivalent of flared trousers".

Duxelles (French: [ dyksɛl ]) is a French cuisine term that refers to a mince of mushrooms, onions, herbs (such as thyme or parsley), and black pepper, sautéed in butter and reduced to a paste. Cream is sometimes used, and some recipes add a dash of madeira or sherry.

It is a basic preparation used in stuffings and sauces (notably, beef Wellington) or as a garnish. It can also be filled into a pocket of raw pastry and baked as a savoury tart.

The flavor depends on the mushrooms used. For example, wild porcini mushrooms have a much stronger flavor than white or brown mushrooms.

Duxelles is said to have been created by the 17th-century French chef François Pierre La Varenne (1615–1678) and to have been named after his employer, Nicolas Chalon du Blé, marquis d'Uxelles, maréchal de France.

Some classical cookbooks call for dehydrated mushrooms. According to Auguste Escoffier, dehydration enhances flavor and prevents water vapor from building up pressure that could cause a pastry to crack or even explode.

A déclaration d'utilité publique (French pronunciation: [ deklaʁasjɔ̃ dytilite pyblik ]), or declaration of public utility, is a formal recognition in French law that a proposed project has public benefits. The declaration must be obtained for many large construction projects in France or its old colonies, especially for infrastructure, before work can begin.

The first part of the declaration is a public inquiry, usually started by a prefect, to collect the views of all affected parties. Responses from affected parties are considered by a commissioner, who assesses whether the proposal has an overall benefit for the public.

If the finding is favourable, the declaration is granted by decree.

The déclaration d'utilité publique was initially required by article 545 of the Civil Code, which stipulates that property cannot be confiscated except for public purposes and with fair compensation.

The public inquiry, when it enables informed debate, is considered one of the means of participatory democracy.

But one of the main criticisms levelled at the DUP (Declaration of Public Utility) procedure is that it comes at the end of the process, often when the decision is considered to have already been taken. Opponents of projects have accused prefectures of " salami-slicing " investigations, preventing a global vision of the project, or even providing misleading data.

Dédiabolisation (lit. ' de-demonisation ') is a term used in French politics to describe the normalisation of the National Rally (RN), a far-right party formerly known as the National Front (FN), since the late 1980s.

The term was coined by journalist Olivier Biffaud in a 1989 article in Le Monde, where he wrote that "the National Front has been 'demonised' [ diabolisé ] for several years. It is now undertaking its dédiabolisation. This, in essence, is the message that the leaders of the far-right movement have been trying to get across to their cadres since the start of the summer university they are holding in La Baule."

Upon assuming the FN leadership in 2011, Marine Le Pen made dédiabolisation a key plank of her leadership, particularly by expelling openly pro- Vichy France members from the party (including her father, Jean-Marie Le Pen) and by changing the party's name in 2018. The term was first entered into the Larousse Dictionary in 2015. Dédiabolisation has continued into the 2020s, as the RN began to compete for the largest party in French politics. This latest phase has included the election of 28-year-old Jordan Bardella as party president in 2022 and with Le Pen distancing herself from Éric Zemmour in the 2022 French presidential election.

Historian Andrew Hussey said that dédiabolisation has "largely been a success" for the RN, adding that "a new generation has emerged... which doesn't care about the RN’s murky past – which is well beyond their lifetime anyway – and who will be very soon be shaping the future of France."

Robert Zaretsky of the University of Houston called the term "misleading", saying that it was "a public relations effort to change the public's view of the party" instead of a change in the party's values. Itay Lotem of the University of Westminster described the strategy as keeping the traditional FN "strategy of channelling nationalistic, anti-Muslim sentiment " but with a "polished, media savvy focus on eradicating any overt racism."

Safia Dahani of the Université Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne stated that established political institutions and media have played key roles in dédiabolisation, pointing towards centre-right politicians who have defected to the RN, the election of RN MPs as vice-presidents of the National Assembly, and the frequency with which RN figures have been invited to participate in media programmes, while the media has at the same time softened its descriptions of the RN as far-right.

In France, the Operational Defence of the Territory (Défense opérationnelle du territoire, DOT) is according to the Code of Defence, the participation of the French Armed Forces "To maintain the freedom and continuity of action of the Government, as well as to safeguard the organs essential to the defense of the nation."

The integrated civil-military concept was first put in place in 1959. It is defined as the mission entrusted to the Armed Forces on French territory:

During the Cold War, in addition to being a concept, it was a command, for some years, being disbanded in the 1970s. In 1984, Isby and Kamps wrote that the Défense Opérationnelle du Territoire term remained in use despite the command having been disbanded in the 1970s.

The Défilé de la Victoire (French: [ defile də la viktwaʁ ] ; " Victory Parade ") of 14 July 1919 in Paris was the first to be held after the end of the First World War, following the Armistice of 11 November 1918. The procession passed beneath the Arc de Triomphe at Place de l’Étoile (now Place Charles de Gaulle), as the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier was not installed there until the following year. The parade was organized at the initiative of Georges Clemenceau, then head of government, to commemorate the approximately 1.5 million French soldiers who had died during the war. Held on the occasion of the first Bastille Day celebrations after the conflict, the parade proceeded from Porte Maillot to Place de la République. The route followed the Avenue de la Grande Armée, passed under the Arc de Triomphe, continued along the Avenue des Champs-Élysées, crossed the Place de la Concorde, and extended through the Rue Royale and the Grands Boulevards.

At its head marched approximately one thousand wounded French soldiers, led by André Maginot, himself an amputee. They were followed by marshals Joseph Joffre, Ferdinand Foch, and Philippe Pétain on horseback, and by Allied forces marching in alphabetical order: the United States contingent led by General John J. Pershing, Belgian, British troops under Sir Douglas Haig, Greek, Indian, Italian, Japanese, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Serbian, Siamese, and Czechoslovak forces. French forces also participated, including units of the Army of Africa, Zouave regiments, and other formations. Renault FT tanks brought up the rear of the procession.

A gilded cenotaph, weighing approximately 30 tonnes and measuring 17.5 metres in height and 8 metres in width, created under the direction of the sculptor Antoine Sartorio, was initially installed beneath the Arc de Triomphe. It was subsequently moved to the entrance of the Champs-Élysées to allow the parade to pass under the arch. Each side of the monument featured a representation of Victory with stylized wings resembling those of an aircraft. The structure, designed as a temporary installation, was later dismantled. It consisted of a wooden framework covered with plaster panels approximately 3 centimetres thick. Nearby stood a pyramid composed of captured German cannons, surmounted by a Gallic rooster.

The délégation interministérielle à l'aménagement du territoire et à l'attractivité régionale (English: Interministerial Delegation of Land Planning and Regional Attractiveness) or DATAR was a French administration working for the Minister of Territorial Development. It applied decisions taken by the Interministerial Committee of Land Planning and Development (CIADT).

It was created in 1963 by Georges Pompidou 's government.

In 2009, DATAR handed over its missions to the Commissariat général à l’égalité des territoires (English: General Commission for Equal Territories).

When created in 1963, the DATAR is named "Délégation à l'aménagement du territoire et à l'action régionale" (Land Development and Regional Action Delegation). In 2005, it changed to "Délégation interministérielle à l'aménagement et à la compétitivité des territoires" (DIACT; Interministerial Delegation of Planning and Territorial Competitiveness). In 2009, it became DATAR.

The DATAR insisted in the 70's that the SNCF build a new railway station on the LGV Sud-Est, near Montchanin : this station would become the Gare du Creusot TGV.

In the 70's, the DATAR gives funds Matra Transport to launch the development of ARAMIS, a personal rapid transit project.

In the 80's, the DATAR launches a Mission photographique, whose goal is to know better the French territory by taking thousands of photographs. Most of those photographs are stored in the Bibliothèque nationale de France.

In 1965, the DATAR gives funds to Jean Bertin to help him create his company, the "Société d'Etude de l' Aérotrain ", which aims to build a new hovercraft train.

The E2 European long distance path or E2 path is a 4850 km (3010-mile) series of long-distance footpaths that is intended to run from Galway in Ireland to France 's Mediterranean coast and currently runs through Scotland, England, Belgium, Luxembourg and France, with an alternative mid-section equally designated via the Netherlands and east coast of England and (since 2025) an alternative starting point at John o'Groats in Scotland. It is one of the network of European long-distance paths.

The paths are aimed at walkers ; alternative routes exist in some parts for horse riders and cyclists.

The route has two alternative midsections, reuniting in north-east England and northern Belgium: the first devised route includes Oxford, Reading, Bruges and Antwerp and does not include the southern part of the Dutch coast. The corollary midsection, listed as the alternative route, includes Hull, Lincoln, Cambridge and Bergen op Zoom.

In Belgium the route starts from Ostend on the GR5A (Grote Route 5A) via Bruges and Antwerp. For the convenience of ferries there is an alternative starting point at Calais, France. After a few kilometres in the mid-northern municipality (district) of Zoersel in Belgium it joins the GR 5 (Grande Randonnée 5), which continues to Luxembourg at Ouren. In Luxembourg the E2 follows a series of paths to Schengen after which it joins the GR5 in France. At La Cure a short section in Switzerland begins, where the route is signposted to Nyon, or La Cure if heading north. From Nyon ferries cross Lake Geneva to St Gingolph where the GR5 forms the remainder of the route through the French Alps to finish at Nice.

The highest point of the route is at Col de l'Iseran at 2,770 metres (9,090 ft).

The Irish section of the route is not yet open.

In Scotland the route starts from Stranraer and follows the Southern Upland Way, to Melrose and St. Cuthbert's Way, from Melrose to Kirk Yetholm, and on to the Anglo-Scottish border via the Pennine Way. An alternative route to Melrose has also been developed starting at John o'Groats, following the John o'Groats Trail, Great Glen Way, West Highland Way, John Muir Way, Water of Leith Walkway, Pentland Way and Cross Borders Drove Road.

In England the western route continues on the Pennine Way from the border to Standedge, the Oldham Way from Standedge to Mossley, the Tameside Trail from Mossley to Broadbottom, the Etherow /Goyt Valley Way from Broadbottom to Compstall, the Goyt Way from Compstall to Disley, the Peak Forest Canal from Disley to Marple, the Gritstone Trail from Disley to Rushton Spencer, the Staffordshire Way from Rushton Spencer to Cannock Chase, the Heart of England Way from Cannock Chase to Bourton on the Water, the Oxfordshire Way from Bourton on the Water to Kirtlington, the Oxford Canal from Kirtlington to Oxford, the Thames Path from Oxford to Weybridge, the Wey Navigation Path from Weybridge to Guildford, and the North Downs Way from Guildford to Dover.

In England, the alternative midsection begins on the Pennine Way at Middleton-in-Teesdale. It then follows the Teesdale Way, the Cleveland Way, the Yorkshire Wolds Way, the Viking Way, the Hereward Way, the Fen Rivers Way, the Icknield Way Path, the Stour Valley Path and the Essex Way to Harwich International Port. Urban highlights are Lincoln and Cambridge.

In the Netherlands the eastern route begins at the ferry port of Hook of Holland (where ferries from Harwich International Port arrive) and passes over islands and dams and through Bergen op Zoom on the LAW 5-1 Nederlands Kustpad. This corollary section picks up the main route at Sint Antonius, Zoersel in northern Belgium.

In Luxembourg the E2 follows four paths: Sentier de l’ Our, Sentier Maurice Cosyn, Sentier de la Basse Sûr and Sentier de la Moselle. Apart from the Sentier Maurice Cosyn, they all follow river valleys. Unlike the GR5 and LAW 5-1 which are waymarked by red and white stripes, the paths in Luxembourg are marked with yellow circles in the north and yellow rectangles in the south.

The E3 European long distance path, or just E3 path, is a 6,950-kilometre (4,320 mi) long-distance footpath that is planned to run from the Portuguese coast to the Black Sea in Bulgaria. It is part of the network of European long-distance paths.

The completed sections of the route pass through Spain, France, Luxembourg, Belgium, Germany, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, a short stretch in Poland, Hungary, Romania, Serbia and Bulgaria. It is planned to extend the route into Portugal, ending at Cape St. Vincent.

The currently marked route runs through the following places:

The E4 European long distance path or E4 path is one of the European long-distance paths. Starting at Tarifa Andalusia, located at the southernmost end of the Iberian Peninsula, across the Strait of Gibraltar facing Morocco, it continues through Spain, France, Switzerland, Germany, Austria, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria and Greece to end in Cyprus. It also visits the Greek island of Crete.

It is more than 10,000 kilometres (6,200 mi) long, but the route through Romania and part of Bulgaria is not yet completely defined. An alternative route through Serbia, instead of Romania, has been defined.

Follows the Jura ridgeway through the north of the country ending at village Dielsdorf (300 km).

From Dielsdorf, the E4 continues along the southern shores of Lake Constance via the following settlements to the village of Rheineck on the German border (150 km):

Niederglatt – Bülach – Freienstein-Teufen – Irchel – Buch am Irchel – Dorf – Andelfingen – Truttikon – Oberstammheim – Stein am Rhein – Mammern – Steckborn – Berlingen – Mannebach – Ermatingen – Gottlieben – Kreuzlingen – Münsterlingen – Güttingen – Uttwil – Romanshorn – Egnach – Arbon – Steinach – Tübach – Goldach – Rorschacherberg – Buchberg – Rheineck

Alternative 1: On the route of Nordalpine Weitwanderweg 01 (Nordalpine route 01) are exposed stretches - for experienced mountain walkers only

1. Western section of the route – 495 km through Bregenzer Wald, Lechquellengebirge, Lechtaler Alps, Wetterstein-gebirge, Karwendelgebirge and Rofangebirge:

Bregenz (440 m) – Lustenauer Hut (1250 m) – 22 km, moderately difficult Lustenauer Hut (1250 m) – Damüls (1428 m) – 33 km, difficult Damüls (1428 m) – Biberacher Hut (1846 m) – 18 km, very difficult Biberacher Hut (1846 m) – Göppinger Hut (2245 m) – 16 km, difficult Göppinger Hut (2245 m) – Ravensburger Hut (2234 m) – 31 km, very difficult Ravensburger Hut (2234 m) – Stuttgarter Hut (2303 m) – 20 km, difficult Stuttgarter Hut (2303 m) – Ansbacher Hut (2376 m) – 28 km, very difficult Ansbacher Hut (2376 m) – Memminger Hut (2242 m), 25 km, very difficult Memminger Hut (2242 m) – Steinsee Hut (2040 m) – 20 km, very difficult Steinsee Hut (2040 m) – Anhalter Hut (2040 m) – 25 km, difficult Anhalter Hut (2040 m) – Fernpass (1209 m) – 35 km, difficult Fernpass (1209 m) – Ehrwald (994 m) – 20 km, moderately difficult Ehrwald (994 m) – Meiler Hut (2366 m) – 39 km, difficult Meiler Hut (2366 m) – Scharnitz (964 m) – 30 km, moderately difficult Scharnitz (964 m) – Falken Hut (1846 m) – 30 km, moderately difficult Falken Hut (1846 m) – Maurach am Achensee (958 m) – 35 km, moderately difficult Maurach am Achsensee (958 m) – Steinberg am Rofan (1010 m) – 25 km, difficult Steinberg am Rofan (1010 m) – Kufstein (504 m) – 43 km, easy

2. Middle section of the route – 441 km through Kaisergebirge, Chiemgau Alps, Loferer Steingebirge, Hochkönig and Steinernes Meer, Tennengebirge, Dachstein Mountains and Totes Gebirge :

Kufstein (504 m) – Stripsenjoch Haus (1580 m) – 19 km, moderately difficult Stripsenjoch Haus (1580 m) – Straubinger Haus (1598 m) – 35 km, moderately difficult Straubinger Haus (1598 m) – Schmidt-Zabierow Hut (1966 m) – 39 km, difficult Schmidt-Zabierow Hut (1966 m) – Lofer (626 m) – 16 km, moderately difficult Lofer (626 m) – Ingolstatter Haus (2199 m) – 31 km, moderately difficult Ingolstatter Haus (2199 m) – Riemann Haus (2177 m) – 8 km, moderately difficult Riemann Haus (2177 m) – Franz-Eduard-Matras Haus (2941 m) – 25 km, very difficult, on glacier Franz-Eduard-Matras Haus (2941 m) – Werfen (548 m) – 27 km, difficult, on glacier Werfen (548 m) – Lungötz (828 m) – 33 km, moderately difficult Lungötz (828 m) – Adamek Hut (2196 m) – 29 km, very difficult Adamek Hut (2196 m) – Simony Hut (2206 m) – 12 km, very difficult, on glacier Simony Hut (2206 m) – Bad Goisern (500 m) – 32 km, moderately difficult Bad Goisern (500 m) – Loser Hut (1497 m) – 34 km, moderately difficult Loser Hut (1497 m) – Pühringer Hut (1638 m) – 25 km, moderately difficult Pühringer Hut (1638 m) – Priel Refuge Hut (1422 m) – 20 km, difficult Priel Refuge Hut (1422 m) – Vorderstoder (660 m) – 18 km, moderately difficult Vorderstoder (660 m) – Spital am Pyhrn (647 m) – 38 km, moderately difficult

3. Eastern section of the route – 478 km Through Rax, Semmeringgebiet, Bucklige Welt and Rosaliengebirge

Spital am Pyhrn (647 m) – Admont (641 m) – 24 km, moderately difficult Admont (641 m) – Hess Hut (1699 m) – 35 km, moderately difficult Hess Hut (1699 m) – Radmer an der Stube (702 m) – 20 km, difficult Radmer an der Stube (702 m) – Eisenerz (769 m) – 20 km, moderately difficult Eisenerz (769 m) – Sonnschien Hut (1525 m) – 25 km, moderately difficult Sonnschien Hut (1525 m) – Voisthaler Hut (1660 m) – 17 km, moderately difficult Voisthaler Hut (1660 m) – Turnaueralm (1570 m) – 25 km, moderately difficult Turnaueralm (1570 m) – Neuberg, Krampen im Mürztal (756 m) – 31 km, moderately difficult Neuberg, Krampen im Mürztal (756 m) – Schneealpen Haus (1788 m) – 31 km, moderately difficult Schneealpen Haus (1788 m) – Karl-Ludwig Haus (1803 m) – 21 km, difficult Karl-Ludwig Haus (1803 m) – Waxriegel Haus (1361 m) – 12 km, moderately difficult Waxriegel Haus (1361 m) – Maria Schutz (760 m) – 30 km, moderately difficult Maria Schutz (760 m) – Hochwolkersdorf (625 m) – 48 km, easy Hochwolkersdorf (625 m) – Mattersburg (256 m) – 17 km, easy

After town Mattersburg the route of the E4 leaves the Nordalpine Weitwanderweg 01, and goes on other paths further.

Mattersburg (256 m) – Rust (123 m) – 32 km, easy Rust (123 m) – Drassburg (234 m) – 20 km, easy Drassburg (234 m) – Kobersdorf (320 m) – 28 km, easy Kobersdorf (320 m) – Hochstrass (421 m) – 25 km, easy Hochstrass (421 m) – Köszeg (271 m, border crossing point in Hungary) – 17 km, easy

Remark: Generally there are detours on the route of E4 to avoid the very difficult sections. You can find map sketches and description about the whole route in the book „Vom Neusiedler See zum Bodensee – Nordalpiner Weitwanderweg 01” in German.

Subalpine route to: Salzburg Through Allgäu and Upper Bavaria via Neuschwanstein, Unterammergau, Bavarian Lakes (04) 550 km to: Wienerwald via Salzkammergut (04) 550 km to: Hainburg an der Donau E Austrian border path (07) 150 km

On the route of the Országos Kéktúra (National Blue Trail) – 1118 km Through the Little Hungarian Plain and along the Transdanubian Mountains and the North Hungarian Mountains.

Town Kőszeg (border crossing point) – peak of Irottkő – town Sárvár through the Mountains of Kőszeg and the Little Hungarian Plain – 70 km Town Sárvár – town Sümeg through the Little Hungarian Plain – 70 km Town Sümeg – town Keszthely and Lake Balaton through the Highland of Balaton – 47 km Town Keszthely – town Tapolca – village Nagyvázsony through the Basin of Tapolca and the Highland of Balaton. On the basin the path climbs almost every spent volcano: Badacsony, Gulács, Csobánc and Szent György Mountain – 83 km Village Nagyvázsony – village Városlőd – town Zirc – village Bodajk through the Bakony Mountains – 118 km Village Bodajk – village Szárliget through the Vértes Mountains – 48 km Village Szárliget – town Dorog through the Hilly Country of Gerecse – 67 km Town Dorog – Budapest through the Pilis Mountains and Mountains of Buda – 40 km Budapest – peak of Dobogókö (700 m) – village Visegrád, Danube Bend through the Buda and Pilis Mountains – 61 km Village Visegrád – village Nagymaros – with ferry across the Danube Village Nagymaros – peak of Hegyes-kö (centre mountain of Danube Bend) – village Kóspallag – peak of Csóványos (938 m) – village Nógrád through the Börzsöny Mountains – 38 km Village Nógrád – village Becske – village Hollókő, it is a World Heritage Site – village Mátraverebély through the Hilly Country of Cserhát – 119 km Village Mátraverebély – peak of Galyatetö – peak of Kékestető, 1014 m, the highest point of Hungary – village Sirok – village Szarvaskő through the Mátra Mountains – 65 km Village Szarvaskő – village Bélapátfalva – village Bánkút – village Putnok – through the Bükk Mountains – 55 km Village Putnok – village Aggtelek, its stalactite cave is a World Heritage Site – village Bódvaszilas through the Hilly Country of Aggtelek – 62 km Village Bódvaszilas – village Boldogkőváralja through the Hilly Country of Cserehát – 65 km Village Boldogkőváralja – town Sátoraljaújhely through the Zemplén Mountains – 55 km

In Sátoraljaújhely the route of the E4 leaves the path of the National Blue Trail and goes further on the route of Blue Tour of the Plain

On the route of Alföldi Kéktúra (Blue Tour of the Plain) – 262 km Through the Great Hungarian Plain

Town Sátoraljaujhely – town Kisvárda – 63 km Town Kisvárda – town Nyirbátor – 46 km Town Nyirbátor – town Bánk – 75 km Town Bánk – village Nagykereki – 78 km

After village Nagykereki the E4 leaves the path of Alföldi Kéktúra and goes to village Ártánd (border crossing point) – appr. 6 km

Remark: You can find detailed hiker maps and travelogues about the section of the Országos Kéktúra in Hungarian in the following books: Az Országos Kéktúra Írottkötöl Budapest, Hüvösvölgyig Az Országos Kéktúra Budapest, Hüvösvölgytöl Hollóházáig

There are websites of Hungarian hikers about the completion of the Országos Kéktúra:

The route of the E4 through Romania is not yet clearly defined. No organization is responsible for the trail's upkeep in Romania.

As an alternative to Romania a route for the E4 through Serbia has been described by the Serbian Mountain Association (Planinarski Savez Srbije). This starts from border post from Hungary at the Serbian village of Dala. To reach this point in Hungary the route continues along the Alföldi Kéktúra from Nagykereki to Szeged. In Serbia the E4 crosses Vojvodina to reach Belgrade then follows the River Danube and various mountain ranges to the Bulgarian border at Dimitrovgrad, Serbia. The E4 has not been defined between the Serbian border and Sofia but the Sultans Trail route can be followed. The trail in Serbia is not waymarked and the published booklet does not describe the route in detail.

In Bulgaria, the marked trail begins on the village square of the Sofia suburb of Dragalevtsi. It passes the terminals of the Dragalevtsi chairlift, the ski resort Aleko and the highest peak of the Vitosha mountains, Cherni Vrah, and then leads down the other side of Vitosha, through the Verila hills to Rila.

In the Rila and Pirin Mountains, it is not marked as such, but the main trail leading through those mountains, marked in red, should be followed. Coming from Verila, the trail enters Rila following the Saparevska Vada irrigation ditch. It passes through the Seven Rila Lakes area and then climbs onto the ridge passing Malyovitsa peak. It continues via the shelter Kobilino Branishte, the hut at Ribni Ezera and the hut Macedonia towards the Predel saddle which separates Rila from Pirin.

From Predela, it reaches the main ridge of Pirin via the hut Yavorov and follows it via the three highest peaks of Pirin (Banski Suhodol, Kutelo and Vihren) and the ridge Koncheto, before descending to the Vihren refuge. It continues on the ridge until the Vinarska Porta saddle, and then runs along Tevno Lake and down the Zhelezina stream towards Pirin hut. From there it is the only marked trail leading through the Central Pirin range, passing the peak Orelyak and the hut Popovi Livadi. It ends at Gotsev Vrah of the Slavyanka mountain at the Greek border, where trails lead down to Petrovo, where a bus to Kulata on the border can be taken (via Sandanski). Total length within Bulgaria is 250 km.

An overview of walking in Greece, including sections of E4, can be found in Trekking in Greece (2018) by Tim Salmon and Michael Cullen and there is a guide book in German to the E4 in the Peloponnese by Rolf Roost (see bibliography). However, additional, current local information should be sought whenever possible and while a route exists from the Bulgarian border to the foot of the Peloponnese peninsula, it may be inadequately marked. E4 continues, via ferry from Yithio (Gythio), through Crete. E4 had originally been planned to start out from North Macedonia rather than Bulgaria.

The Greek National Tourist Office suggest that: "The E4 is ideal for hiking from May 15 until early October". However, spring comes to the Peloponnese in April, and "in northern parts and at the higher altitudes... in June and even July". The north can still be rainy in May, but it should be more settled in Central Greece and the Peloponnese by early May. "There can be snow above 1600-1800m and on north-facing slopes until mid- to late May, [though] not enough to trouble experienced winter hill-walkers". Snow may be a problem on Mount Olympus until mid-June. The Tourist Office comments further: "The areas have a typical Mediterranean climate, with warm dry summers and considerable differences in day and night temperatures. Snowfall starts in November and snow is likely to linger into June".

A walk can take longer than anticipated because of poor way marking, or because paths are blocked, or dangerously eroded, and streams and rivers may be impassable. Walkers should therefore be prepared for long diversions, and never presume that you will reach the intended destination, including the final one, on time, or on a specific day. Flexible planning is advisable. Some sections follow paved roads, but there should be little traffic, in the spring and autumn.

Accommodation is not available every night, so that lightweight camping, or bivouac gear, is necessary, as well as several days supply of food. The Peloponnese "has the advantage of board and lodging for every night of the 14 days that it takes". Bears and wolves are found in the far north of Greece, "but you are much more likely to see signs of their presence than ever catch a glimpse of them". However, the safely guidelines for hiking in bear country should be followed, especially with regard to the storing of food. The Cicerone guide offers invaluable advice on sleeping and eating. In spring, in some areas, there may be springs and/or fast flowing streams, though ample reserves of water should still be carried. With regard to accommodation maps should not be trusted and even if there is a hotel it may only open in July and August, or at weekends. Mountain refuges may not be open. Coffee shops may provide simple meals. Some mountain villages are uninhabited in the winter and will only begin to come alive again after Easter, and not fully until high summer.

The Hellenic Federation of Mountaineering and Climbing is the organisation, along with associated clubs, which has established and maintains E4, and it has published a leaflet about E4 with text in English, French and German, as well as descriptions of E4 and E6, with maps, in English and German.

Maps from Anavasi cover much of the route and some can be bought with a guide book, including the Taygetos 1:25,000 sheet. Moreover Anavasi Edition contains a lot of hiking maps for Pindus Range, Mt. Olympus, Gramos and Smolikas and the Mountains of Central Greece.

From Kulata (Bulgaria) the way crosses the border to Promachon (Promachonas). The route was originally planned to cross from North Macedonia to Florina.

Aluminum signs: on white background a yellow rhombus with black outline, with the words E4/6 in black. Coloured signs on rocks and trees: white background, a yellow parallelogram on the left and a black on the right.

Because of the transliteration from the Greek alphabet, the spelling of place names can be confusing (some places also have an official and a local, or old, name).

Promachon (Promachonas), Rodhopoli, Doirani, Archangelos, Pella, Loutraki, Skopos, Florina (300 km).

Nymphaeo, Amyntaeo (Amyndeo), Rizomata, Dion, Litochoro (Litohoro), Olympus, Kokkinopilos, Meteora, Agrafa, Krassochori, Viviani (Viniani).

Karpenissi, Artotina, Kaloskopi, Delfi (Delphi), Itea (900 km, from Florina)

Diakofto, Kalavryta, Lykouria, Daras, Vytina, Tripoli, Ano Doliana, Sparti, Mystras, Refuge of Taygetos, Kastania, Gythio [n] (Yithio) (300 km). Ferry to Kastelli Kissamou, Crete.

The first organized mapping and signage effort of the whole E4 in Crete was made by Giorgis N. Petrakis (Architect - Spatial Planner - Cartographer), and some indicative information on the segments of the trail can be found at : https://www.destinationcrete.gr/en/explore-the-island/e4-at-crete

This new section of the E4 was inaugurated in 2005, and is 539 km long. It connects Larnaka and Pafos international airports, traversing the Troodos mountain range and Akamas peninsula. A brochure has been published by the Cyprus Tourist Organisation (for online information, see external links above).

In 2014 the Orientaction club produced 1/25000 hiking maps of the mountainous region of Cyprus which include a large part of the E4 trail.

The E5 European long distance path or E5 path is one of the European long-distance paths from the French Atlantic coast in Brittany through Switzerland, Austria and Germany over the Alps to Venice in Italy. It is waymarked over the whole 3200 km (1988 mi) distance. The heaviest used section is the last part, which crosses Europe’s highest mountains from Lake Constance to Italy (600 km, around 30 days). Even this part does not require climbing experience.

The E5 route starts at Pointe du Raz in the north-west of France. It initially follows the Channel coast, then runs inland past Versailles and follows the Seine to Dijon. After traversing the Vosges the trail reaches Lake Constance.

The E5 passes the Rhine Falls, then follows the southern shore of Lake Constance to Rheineck.

The trail heads east from Bregenz, then ascends to the Staufner hut and the German border.

Most E5 walkers start from Oberstdorf, where the Alpine section begins. After 50 km the trail crosses the Austrian border after the Kemptner hut.

The most strenuous and spectacular part of the track (175 km) crosses the Allgäu, Lechtal and Ötztal Alps. The route leads the traveller past the Memminger hut towards Zams and afterwards over Geigenkamm and Kaunergrat to Pitztal. Beyond Mittelberg the route crosses Pitztaler Joch, the highest point of the trail (2995m), before reaching the Italian border near the Timmelsjoch.

The E5 now goes past the Heilig Kreuz Spitze and the Hohe Warte to Merano and Bolzano. The trail is then less mountainous and less crowded, but there are still more than 12 hard days of walking to Verona. The track leads the traveller along the west flank of the Dolomites past the health resort of Levico Terme and over the history-charged Pasúbio massif towards the final destination, Verona.

The E9 European long distance path, E9 path or European Coastal Path (French: Sentier européen du Littoral) is one of the twelve European long-distance paths, running for 9880 km from Tarifa, Spain to Narva-Jõesuu in Estonia. In 2019, the southern terminus was extended from Cabo de São Vicente in Portugal to Tarifa in Spain, the southern-most point of continental Europe, and also the starting point of E4 and E12.

The path follows the western coasts of Portugal from Cabo de São Vicente and is known in Portuguese as Caminho do Atlântico or Trelho Europeu de Grande Rota 11-E9. There are also some sections around Lisbon and it's possible that the Camino Portuguese Coastal Way could also become part of the E9.

The path, known in Spanish as Camino Costero europeo or Sendero Europeo E-9, follows the western coasts of Spain. often including the GR footpaths in Spain.

The path follows the northern and western coasts of France starting at Bray-Dunes on the Belgian border. The GR 120 runs from Dunkerque to Pas d'Authie, the GR 21 from Le Tréport to Le Havre, GR 223 from Le Havre via Cherbourg to Avranches where it divides into several smaller local trails. The GR 34 then continues from Mont St-Michel to Le Tour-du-Parc. The GR 8 re-starts the trail further south from Saint-Brevin-les-Pins to Sare in the Pyrenees incorporating a short coastal section of the GR 4.

The path follows the southern coast to Plymouth in England, continuing on the English south coast as far as Dover, where another ferry crossing returns the route to Calais in France. In England the path follows parts of the South West Coast Path, the Solent Way, the South Downs Way and the Saxon Shore Way paths. The British route itself includes an alternative route via the Isle of Wight.

The path then follows the coast of Belgium.

The path follows the coast of the Netherlands. Here it follows the Dutch North Sea Trail, which includes 5 successive trails:

The path crosses the base of the Jutland peninsula, before following the coast of the Baltic Sea.

The E9 route follows the Baltic Coastal Hike through Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia. In Lithuania, the trail is known as Jūrų takas and is 216 km long. The route through Lithuania takes about 10–12 days to walk and is divided into stages of about 20 km each. The highest point of the trail in Lithuania is Curonian Spit. Other highlights along the route are the Nemunas Delta, Seaside regional parks, and the coastal resorts of Nida and Palanga. The trail is marked with white-blue-white signs on stones, trees, and other natural objects. See more here

In Latvia, the trail is known as Jūrtaka and is 581 km long. This part of the E9 route takes about 30 days to walk and is divided into stages of about 20 km. Highlights along the route are the Slitere National Park, Kemeri National Park, and the coastal resort Jurmala. The trail is marked with white-blue-white signs on stones, trees, and other natural objects. See more here.

In Estonia, the trail is known as Ranniku matkarada and is 622 km long. It takes about 30 days to complete and is divided into stages of about 20 km. The highest point of the trail in Estonia is the Rannamõisa cliff. Other highlights along the route are Matsalu National Park, the coastal resorts of Pärnu and Haapsalu, and the Western Estonian islands. The trail is marked with white-blue-white signs on stones, trees, and other natural objects. See more here and at the External links below.

The Eawy Forest is one of the biggest forests of the Pays de Bray in Normandy, France. It covers an area of 6550 hectares between the communes of Saint-Saëns and Dampierre-Saint-Nicolas, about 20 km south-east of Dieppe and not far from Neufchâtel-en-Bray. The village of Ventes-Saint-Rémy is located in the centre of a clearing.

Eawy (pronounced [eavi], but previously [evi]) is an Old French term, derived from the noun eve, ewe an old form of the French word eau, meaning here "wet".

The forest borders a large ridge which separates the Varenne in the SW from the Béthune in the NE; it is a small limestone plateau, varying in altitude between 130 and 230 metres, descending in a convex slope to the Varenne. Although the forest is not crossed by any watercourse, the flint clay which covers the limestone retains a fair amount of moisture.

Previously an oak plantation, it was transformed into a beech grove in the 19th century by the forestry workers. Thus it now mainly comprises beeches (Fagus sylvatica); there are also some oaks, hornbeams, ashes, wild cherry and sycamore maples. The forest is crossed, at its centre, by the Allée des Limousins, a mostly straight clearing 14 km long and 20 to 30 metres wide, cut in the 16th century by Gabriel de Limoges.

There is an oceanic climate, with mean annual precipitation of 950 mm and a mean annual temperature around 10.1 °C and a narrow temperature range (4.5 °C in January, 16.5 °C in August).

The Eawy Forest is a vestige of the large forests which covered the region in the first millennium AD, but has suffered great clearances. Owned by the Dukes of Normandy, it was seriously damaged during the Hundred Years' War. During World War II, the forest sheltered launching pads for the German V1 rockets targeting London. The forest was further damaged by these military installations and by Allied bombing. The damaged areas were replanted with conifers after the war.

The Eawy forest was long a source of wealth for the inhabitants of the region, providing wood for many sawmills and glassworks. The quality of the oak wood drew many wood workers to settle in the nearby villages, starting in the Middle Ages, making wooden chests. In the 16th century, these wood workers constructed recreational houses for the nobility. The desire for luxury furniture in the Italian style led to a heavy demand for their services.

Nowadays, families use the forest for walks and cycle rides. It is also used for hunting and for wood. It is well stocked with game (hunting), including red deer, wild boar and roe deer.

A Natura 2000 zone covers a part of the plateau, at the north (Croc massif) and south (Cusson camp) extremities, with an area of 692 ha.

The forests of Eawy and Arques and the Varenne valley are within a zone naturelle d'intérêt écologique, faunistique et floristique.

The forest is crossed by the Allée des Limousins, a straight line for a motorable part of 14 km from Maucomble to Muchedent (Pubel farm). The Saint-Etienne chapel is a chapel of 12m² located in the middle of the wood in the town of Rosay, Seine-Maritime.

The Père Antoine is a hundred year old beech with an exceptional circumference located at Les Grandes-Ventes.

Econocom Group SE is a European business-to-business (B2B) digital services provider specialized in digital transformation for private and public organizations. Founded in 1974 by Jean-Louis Bouchard under the name Europe Computer Systèmes (ECS), the group operates across the digital value chain, including workplace solutions, IT and audiovisual infrastructure, and technology asset financing.

The company operates in 16 countries, employs approximately 8,680 people as of 2025, and reported revenue of €2.9 billion in 2025. It is listed on Euronext Brussels.

Econocom provides digital transformation services to private companies and public sector organizations. Its activities include the supply, integration, management and financing of IT and audiovisual equipment, as well as associated services such as maintenance, user support and refurbishment.

Since 2023, the group has organized its activities into four main areas: workplace solutions, IT infrastructure and networks, audiovisual solutions, and technology asset financing.

Jean-Louis Bouchard founded the group in France in 1974 as Europe Computer Systèmes (ECS). In 1986, he sold his stake in ECS France to Société Générale but reacquired all foreign subordinate companies to merge them with Econocom, an American company he had recently acquired. The subsidiaries and the group were renamed Econocom. That same year, Econocom Belgium was listed on the secondary market of the Brussels Stock Exchange. Econocom Distribution acquired Asystel Belgium in 1993, adding IT distribution operations in the Benelux region.

Econocom was listed on the primary market of the Brussels Stock Exchange in 1996. Four years later, it was listed on the secondary market of the Paris Stock Exchange. The group established Econocom Telecom and made an offer for InfoPoint. By 2001, the group employed 2,000 people.

In 2002, Econocom acquired Comdisco-Promo data in France, which focused on administrative and financial IT asset management. This was followed two years later by the acquisition of Signal Service France. By 2005, the group operated in Belgium, France, the Netherlands, Spain, and Italy. Econocom later sold its Swiss subsidiary and closed its financing operations in the United States.

The company entered the telecommunications sector in 2006 by acquiring Avenir Telecom 's business division. The following year, Econocom expanded this division by acquiring the business division of Carphone Warehouse France. It also acquired Tecnolease, an Italian IT leasing company. In 2008, it acquired Data bail, a French IT infrastructure funding company. The next year, it opened a nearshore remote service facility in Rabat, Morocco, employing 300 people.

In October 2010, Société Générale sold ECS. Jean-Louis Bouchard, who had founded ECS in 1974, purchased the company and merged it with Econocom. That same year, the group launched "7 Remote Services," a service for migrating IT infrastructure to Microsoft operating systems.

In 2011, Véronique di Benedetto, former Deputy Managing Director of ECS, was appointed Deputy Managing Director of the new group and managing director of Econocom France. Di Benedetto, an ESCP Business School graduate who began her career at IBM, joined the management board alongside Jean-Louis Bouchard, Jean-Philippe Roesch, and Bruno Lemaistre.

Econocom expanded its virtualisation and cloud computing operations in 2012 by acquiring Ermestel in Spain, as well as a stake in the Belgian company Centix. That same year, the group acquired Tactem, a telecom expense management provider, and France Systèmes, an Apple reseller for the education and research sectors. It also acquired Cap Synergy, a French systems integrator focused on network and IT security.

In 2013, Econocom acquired the French systems integrator Exaprobe and announced its "MUTATION 2013 – 2017" strategic plan. In September, the group finalized the acquisition of a majority stake in Osiatis, an infrastructure service provider. This transaction created a digital services entity with about 8,000 employees and €2 billion in revenue. Following the acquisition, Jean-Maurice Fritsch and Bruno Grossi joined the Econocom Executive Board. By November, Econocom had finalized the purchase of the entire share capital of Osiatis.

On 6 January 2014, Georges Croix and Econocom founded Digital Dimension, a cloud and digital services provider. In 2017, the group invested in the venture capital firm Educapital. That same year, they partnered with Microsoft to distribute HoloLens in the European market.

Robert Bouchard became CEO of the Econocom Group in 2018, and Louise Beveridge was appointed Head of Brand. In 2018 Econocom also acquired a majority stake in Altabox, a Spanish omnichannel marketing firm, and introduced "e-vigilante," a robot allegedly used for monitoring industrial sites.

From 2020, Econocom initiated a refocus on its core activities.

In 2023, the group launched its strategic plan "One Econocom", aimed at strengthening synergies between its business units and improving overall profitability.

The company now structures its operations around four main areas: workplace solutions, infrastructure and networks, audiovisual solutions, and financial services.

In 2025, Econocom expanded its audiovisual activities in Europe through acquisitions including AVANZIA (Spain), ISS AV (Ireland), Smartcomm (United Kingdom), and ICT (Germany). In May 2025, Econocom completed a €225 million Schuldschein private placement.

In December 2025, the group launched shop.econocomfactory.com, an e-commerce website for refurbished IT equipment aimed at professional customers.

Econocom employs approximately 8,680 people as of 2025. The group manages 7 million digital assets.

The company expanded into the "smart solutions" sector in 2012 by launching a joint research and development program with Istituto Superiore Mario Boella in Turin, Italy.

Since 2023, Econocom has structured its activities around four main areas:

Econocom operates in 16 countries across Europe, supporting both private and public sector organisations.

As of 1 April 2026, Econocom's Executive Committee is composed of the following members:

As of 31 December 2025, the Board of Directors consists of:

The economic history of France involves major events and trends, including the elaboration and extension of the seigneurial economic system (including the enserfment of peasants) in the medieval Kingdom of France, the development of the French colonial empire in the early modern period, the wide-ranging reforms of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Era, the competition with the United Kingdom and other neighboring states during industrialization and the extension of imperialism, the total wars of the late-19th and early 20th centuries, and the introduction of the welfare state and integration with the European Union since World War II.

Medieval and early modern France experienced periods of economic growth, as well as challenges such as wars, plagues, and social inequality. The economy relied heavily on agriculture, trade, and the production of luxury goods, and the power and influence of the monarchy played a significant role in shaping economic policies and development. In the late 18th century, French industries faced challenges from competition with England, leading to an industrial depression. The American War of Independence had mixed effects on trade, while the French economy experienced setbacks, including agricultural price reductions and debt accumulation.

France experienced a mix of growth, stagnation, and setbacks during the period from 1789 to 1914. It faced economic challenges related to the French Revolution, Napoleonic wars, protectionism, and industrialization. While France made some advancements in banking and finance, it fell behind other nations in terms of industrial development. Colonialism played a complex role in France's economic and geopolitical landscape. While it provided economic benefits and resources, it also had consequences for the colonized peoples, including exploitation, cultural assimilation, and the suppression of local autonomy.

In 1914-1944, World War I, the interwar period, and the German occupation during World War II had significant impacts on the French economy, resulting in economic challenges, inflation, labor unrest, and hardship for the population.

During the Trente Glorieuses, from 1947 to 1973, France experienced a booming period with an average annual growth rate of 5%. The population grew rapidly, fueled by a high birth rate and declining mortality rate. The economy's growth was driven by productivity gains and increased working hours, as well as investment in targeted industries, regions, and products through indicative planning. The government played a significant role in directing investment and supporting industries of strategic national importance.

During the 1980s France faced economic troubles including a short recession. This led to a shift away from dirigisme, or state intervention, towards a more pragmatic approach. Economic growth resumed later in the decade but was hindered by the economic depression in the early 1990s, which affected the Socialist Party. Jacques Chirac 's liberalization measures in the late 1990s strengthened the economy. However, the global economic stagnation after 2005 and the 2008 global crisis had adverse effects on France and the Eurozone, causing difficulties for Nicolas Sarkozy 's conservative government.

The collapse of the Roman Empire unlinked the French (Franks) economy from Europe. Town and city life and trade declined and society became based on the self-sufficient manor. What limited international trade existed in the Merovingian age — primarily in luxury goods such as silk, papyrus, and silver — was carried out by foreign merchants such as the Radhanites.

Agricultural output began to increase in the Carolingian age as a result of the arrival of new crops, improvements in agricultural production, and good weather conditions. However, this did not lead to a revival of urban life; in fact, urban activity further declined in the Carolingian era as a result of civil war, Arab raids, and Viking invasions. The Pirenne hypotheses posits that this disruption brought an end to long-distance trade, without which civilization retreated to purely agricultural settlements, and isolated military, church, and royal centers. When trade revived these centers became the nucleus of new towns and cities around which suburbs of merchants and artisans grew.

The High Middle Ages saw a continuation of the agricultural boom of the Carolingian age. In addition, urban life grew during this period; cities such as Paris expanded dramatically.

The 13 decades from 1335 to 1450 spawned a series of economic catastrophes, with bad harvests, famines, plagues, and wars that overwhelmed four generations of the French. The population had expanded, making the food supply more precarious. The bubonic plague (" Black Death ") hit Western Europe in 1347, killing a third of the population, and it was echoed by several smaller plagues at 15-year intervals. The French and English armies during the Hundred Years War marched back and forth across the land; they ransacked and burned towns, drained the food supply, disrupted agriculture and trade, and left disease and famine in their wake. Royal authority weakened, as local nobles became strongmen fighting their neighbors for control of the local region. France's population plunged from 17 million to 12 million in 130 years. Finally, starting in the 1450s, a long cycle of recuperation began.

Figures cited in the following section are given in livre tournois, the standard "money of account" used in the period. Comparisons with modern figures are extremely difficult; food items were comparatively cheap, but luxury goods and fabrics were very expensive. In the 15th century, an artisan could earn perhaps 30 livres a year; a great noble could have land revenues from 6,000 to 30,000 livres or more. A late seventeenth-century unskilled worker in Paris earned around 250 livres a year, while a revenue of 4,000 livres a year maintained a relatively successful writer in modest comfort. At the end of the 18th century, a well-off family could earn 100,000 livres by the end of the year, although the most prestigious families could gain twice or three times that much, while, for provincial nobility, yearly earnings of 10,000 livres permitted a minimum of provincial luxury.

The economy of Renaissance France was, for the first half-century, marked by dynamic demographic growth and developments in agriculture and industry. Until 1795, France was the most populated country in Europe and the third most populous country in the world, behind only China and India. With an estimated population of 17 million in 1400, 20 million in the 17th century, and 28 million in 1789, its population exceeded that of even Russia and was twice the size of Britain and the Dutch Republic. In France, the Renaissance was marked by a massive increase in urban populations, although on the whole, France remained a profoundly rural country, with less than 10% of the population located in urban areas. Paris was one of the most populated cities in Europe, with an estimated population of 650,000 by the end of the 18th century.

Agricultural production of a variety of food items expanded, including olive oil, wine, cider, woad (Fr. "pastel", a source of blue dye), and saffron. Southern France grew artichokes, melons, romaine lettuce, eggplant, salsifies, celery, fennel, parsley, and alfalfa. After 1500 New World crops appeared such as beans, corn (maize), squash, tomatoes, potatoes, and bell peppers. Production techniques remained attached to medieval traditions and produced low yields. With the rapidly expanding population, additional land suitable for farming became scarce. The situation was made worse by repeated disastrous harvests in the 1550s.

Industrial development greatly affected printing (introduced in 1470 in Paris, 1473 in Lyon) and metallurgy. The introduction of the high-temperature forge in northeast France and an increase in mineral mining were important developments, although it was still necessary for France to import many metals, including copper, bronze, tin, and lead. Mines and glasswork benefited greatly from royal tax exemptions for a period of about twenty years. Silk production (introduced in Tours in 1470 and in Lyon in 1536) enabled the French to join a thriving market, but French silk remained of lesser quality than Italian silks. Wool production was widespread, as was the production of linen and of hemp (both major export products).

After Paris, Rouen was the second largest city in France (70,000 inhabitants in 1550), in large part because of its port. Marseille (French since 1481) was France's second major port: it benefited greatly from French trading agreements signed in 1536 with Suleiman the Magnificent. To increase maritime activity, Francis I founded the port city of Le Havre in 1517. Other significant ports included Toulon, Saint Malo and La Rochelle.

Lyon was the center of France's banking and international trade markets. Market fairs occurred four times a year and facilitated the exportation of French goods, such as cloth and fabrics, and importation of Italian, German, Dutch, and English goods. It also allowed the importation of exotic goods such as silks, alum, glass, wools, spices, and dyes. Lyon also contained the houses of most of Europe's banking families, including Fugger and Medici. Regional markets and trade routes linked Lyon, Paris, and Rouen to the rest of the country. Under Francis I and Henry II, the relationships between French imports and the exports to England and to Spain were in France's favor. Trade was roughly balanced with the Netherlands, but France continually ran a large trade deficit with Italy due to the latter's silks and exotic goods. In subsequent decades, English, Dutch and Flemish maritime activity would create competition with French trade, which would eventually displace the major markets to the northwest, leading to the decline of Lyon.

Although France, initially more interested in the Italian Wars, arrived late to the exploration and colonization of the Americas, private initiative and piracy brought Bretons, Normans and Basques early to American waters. Starting in 1524, Francis I began to sponsor exploration of the New World. Significant explorers sailing under the French flag included Giovanni da Verrazzano and Jacques Cartier. Later, Henry II sponsored the explorations of Nicolas Durand de Villegaignon who established a largely Calvinist colony in Rio de Janeiro, 1555–1560. Later, René Goulaine de Laudonnière and Jean Ribault established a Protestant colony in Florida (1562–1565) (see French colonization of the Americas).

By the middle of the 16th century, France's demographic growth, its increased demand for consumer goods, and its rapid influx of gold and silver from Africa and the Americas led to inflation (grain became five times as expensive from 1520 to 1600), and wage stagnation. Although many land-owning peasants and enterprising merchants had been able to grow rich during the boom, the standard of living fell greatly for rural peasants, who were forced to deal with bad harvests at the same time. This led to reduced purchasing power and a decline in manufacturing. The monetary crisis led France to abandon (in 1577) the livre as its money of account, in favor of the écu in circulation, and banning most foreign currencies.

Meanwhile, France's military ventures in Italy and (later) disastrous civil wars demanded huge sums, which were raised with through the taille and other taxes. The taille, which was levied mainly on the peasantry, increased from 2.5 million livres in 1515 to 6 million after 1551, and by 1589 the taille had reached a record 21 million livres. Financial crises hit the royal household repeatedly, and so in 1523, Francis I established a government bond system in Paris, the "rentes sure l'Hôtel de Ville".

The French Wars of Religion were concurrent with crop failures and epidemics. The belligerents also practiced massive "scorched earth" strategies to rob their enemies of foodstuffs. Brigands and leagues of self-defense flourished; transport of goods ceased; villagers fled to the woods and abandoned their lands; towns were put to the torch. The south was particularly affected: Auvergne, Lyon, Burgundy, Languedoc. Agricultural production in those areas fell roughly 40%. The great banking houses left Lyon: from 75 Italian houses in 1568, there remained only 21 in 1597.

In the 17th century rich peasants who had ties to the market economy provided much of the capital investment necessary for agricultural growth, and frequently moved from village to village (or town). Geographic mobility, directly tied to the market and the need for investment capital, was the main path to social mobility. The "stable" core of French society, town guildspeople and village laborers, included cases of staggering social and geographic continuity, but even this core required regular renewal. Accepting the existence of these two societies, the constant tension between them, and extensive geographic and social mobility tied to a market economy holds the key to a clearer understanding of the evolution of the social structure, economy, and even political system of early modern France. Collins (1991) argues that the Annales School paradigm underestimated the role of the market economy; failed to explain the nature of capital investment in the rural economy, and grossly exaggerated social stability.

After 1597, the French economic situation improved and agricultural production was aided by milder weather. Henry IV, with his minister Maximilien de Béthune, Duc de Sully, adopted monetary reforms. These included better coinage, a return to the livre tournois as account money, reduction of the debt, which was 200 million livres in 1596, and a reduction of the tax burden on peasants. Henry IV attacked abuses, embarked on a comprehensive administrative reform, increased charges for official offices, the " paulette ", repurchased alienated royal lands, improved roads and funded the construction of canals, and planted the seed of a state-supervised mercantile philosophy. Under Henry IV, agricultural reforms, largely started by Olivier de Serres were instituted. These agricultural and economic reforms, and mercantilism, would also be policies of Louis XIII 's minister Cardinal Richelieu. In an effort to counteract foreign imports and exploration, Richelieu sought alliances with Morocco and Persia, and encouraged exploration of New France, the Antilles, Sénégal, Gambia and Madagascar, though only the first two were immediate successes. These reforms would establish the groundwork for the Louis XIV 's policies.

Louis XIV's glory was irrevocably linked to two great projects, military conquest and the building of Versailles — both of which required enormous sums of money. To finance these projects, Louis created several additional tax systems, including the "capitation" (begun in 1695) which taxed every person including nobles and the clergy, though exemption could be bought for a large one-time sum, and the "dixième" (1710–1717, restarted in 1733), which was a true tax on income and on property value and was meant to support the military. The taille remained the chief direct tax, but its weight fell differently depending on the fiscal status (généralité) of the province. The pays d'états were at a great advantage because they paid the taille réelle, which was based on a fixed percentage of a property's value. The pays d'élection enjoyed no such privileges; their taille rate was assessed behind closed doors by the Council of State, which raised the taille arbitrarily to try and close the widening government deficit. The differences in terms of material prosperity between the two types of province was noticeable. To exacerbate the burden of the taille, it was levied quarterly rather than annually, and was a heavy burden on rural peasants, tending to fall heaviest on the poorest généralités and parishes. This acted as a disincentive on farmers to increase their productivity, since a larger yield was inevitably offset by a higher taille assessment.

Louis XIV's minister of finances, Jean-Baptiste Colbert, started a mercantile system which used protectionism and state-sponsored manufacturing to promote the production of luxury goods over the rest of the economy. The state established new industries (the royal tapestry works at Beauvais, French quarries for marble), took over established industries (the Gobelins tapestry works), protected inventors, invited workmen from foreign countries (Venetian glass and Flemish cloth manufacturing), and prohibited French workmen from emigrating. To maintain the character of French goods in foreign markets, Colbert had the quality and measure of each article fixed by law, and severely punished breaches of the regulations. This massive investment in (and preoccupation with) luxury goods and court life (fashion, decoration, cuisine, urban improvements, etc.), and the mediatization (through such gazettes as the Mercure galant) of these products, elevated France to the role of arbiter of European taste.

Unable to abolish the duties on the passage of goods from province to province, Colbert did what he could to induce the provinces to equalize them. His régime improved roads and canals. To encourage companies like the important French East India Company founded in 1664, Colbert granted special privileges to trade with the Levant, Senegal, Guinea and other places, for the importing of coffee, cotton, dyewoods, fur, pepper, and sugar, but none of these ventures proved successful. Colbert achieved a lasting legacy in his establishment of the French royal navy; he reconstructed the works and arsenal of Toulon, founded the port and arsenal of Rochefort, and the naval schools of Rochefort, Dieppe and Saint-Malo. He fortified, with some assistance from Vauban, many ports including those of Calais, Dunkirk, Brest and Le Havre.

Colbert's economic policies were a key element in Louis XIV's creation of a centralized and fortified state and in the promotion of government prestige. They had many economic failures: they were overly restrictive on workers, they discouraged inventiveness, and had to be supported by unreasonably high tariffs.

The Revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685 created additional economic problems: of the more than 200,000 Huguenot refugees who fled France for Prussia, Switzerland, England, Ireland, United Provinces, Denmark, South Africa and eventually America, many were highly educated skilled artisans and business-owners who took their skills, businesses, and occasionally even their Catholic workers, with them. Both the expansion of French as a European lingua franca in the 18th century, and the modernization of the Prussian army have been due to the Huguenots.

The wars and the weather at the end of the century brought the economy to the brink. Warfare accounted for three quarters of government expenditure between 1689 and 1697, while overall government expenditure doubled. Conditions in rural areas were grim from the 1680s to 1720s. To increase tax revenues, the taille was increased, as too were the prices of official posts in the administration and judicial system. The government also resorted to currency devaluation - there were around 40 changes in the legal value of French coinage, while the Livre tournois lost one third of its metal value over a 20-year period. There was also a short-lived experiment with a paper currency, billets de monnaie, issued in 1701. They immediately declined in value and were withdrawn in 1710.

With the borders guarded due to war, international trade was severely hindered. The economic status of the vast majority of the French population — predominantly simple farmers — was extremely precarious, and the Little Ice Age resulted in further crop failures. Bad harvests caused starvation, killing a tenth of the population in 1693–94. Unwilling to sell or transport their much-needed grain to the army, many peasants rebelled or attacked grain convoys, but the state put these rebellions down. Meanwhile, wealthy families with stocks of grains survived relatively unscathed; in 1689 and again in 1709, in a gesture of solidarity with his suffering people, Louis XIV had his royal dinnerware and other objects of gold and silver melted down.

An economic divergence between Britain and France began in the second half of the 17th century.

France was large and rich and experienced a slow economic and demographic recovery in the first decades following the death of Louis XIV in 1715. Birth rates were high and the infant mortality rate was in steady decline. The overall mortality rate in France fell from an average of 400 deaths per 10,000 people in 1750, to 328 in 1790, and 298 per 10,000 in 1800.

Monetary confidence was briefly eroded by the disastrous paper money system introduced by John Law from 1716 to 1720. Law, as Controller General of Finances, established France's first central bank, the Banque Royale, initially founded as a private entity by Law in 1716 and nationalized in 1718. The bank was entrusted with paying down the enormous debt accumulated through Louis XIV's wars and stimulating the reeling French economy. Initially a great success, the bank's pursuit of French monopolies led it to land speculation in Louisiana through the Mississippi Company, forming an economic bubble in the process that eventually burst in 1720. The collapse of the Banque Royale in the crisis and the paper currency which it issued left a deep suspicion of the idea of a central bank; it was not until 80 years later that Napoleon established the Bank of France. In 1726, under Louis XV 's minister Cardinal Fleury, a system of monetary stability was put in place, leading to a strict conversion rate between gold and silver, and set values for the coins in circulation in France. The amount of gold in circulation in the kingdom rose from 731 million livres in 1715 to 2 billion in 1788 as economic activity accelerated.

The international commercial centers of the country were based in Lyon, Marseille, Nantes, and Bordeaux. Nantes and Bordeaux saw phenomenal growth due to an increase in trade with Spain and Portugal. Trade between France and her Caribbean colonies (Saint-Domingue, Guadeloupe, and Martinique) grew ten-fold between 1715 and 1789, with Saint Domingue the single richest territory in the world by 1789. Many of the lucrative imports from the Caribbean were re-exported to other European countries. By the late 1780s, 87% of the sugar, 95% of the coffee, and 76% of the indigo imported to Bordeaux from the Caribbean was being re-exported. Cádiz was the commercial hub for export of French printed fabrics to India, the Americas and the Antilles (coffee, sugar, tobacco, American cotton), and Africa (the slave trade), centered in Nantes. The value of this export activity amounted to nearly 25% of the French national income by 1789.

Industry continued to expand, averaging 2% growth per year from the 1740s onwards and accelerating in the last decades before the Revolution. The most dynamic industries of the period were mines, metallurgy, and textiles (in particularly printed fabrics, such as those made by Christophe-Philippe Oberkampf). The advances in these areas were often due to British inventors. For example, John Kay's invention of the flying shuttle revolutionized the textile industry, and James Watt 's steam engine changed industry as the French had known it. Capital remained difficult to raise for commercial ventures, however, and the state remained highly mercantilistic, protectionist, and interventionist in the domestic economy, often setting requirements for production quality and industrial standards, and limiting industries to certain cities.

In 1749, a new tax, modeled on the "dixième" and called the "vingtième" (or "one-twentieth"), was enacted to reduce the royal deficit. This tax continued until the end of the Ancien Régime. It was based solely on revenues, requiring 5% of net earnings from land, property, commerce, industry and from official offices, and was meant to touch all citizens regardless of status. However, the clergy, the regions with "pays d'état" and the parlements protested; the clergy won exemption, the "pays d'état" won reduced rates, and the parlements halted new income statements, effectively making the "vingtième" a far less efficient tax than it was designed to be. The financial needs of the Seven Years' War led to a second (1756–1780), and then a third (1760–1763), "vingtième". In 1754, the "vingtième" produced 11.7 million livres.

Improvements in communication, like an expanding network of roads and canals, and the diligence stagecoach services which by the 1780s had sharply reduced travel times between Paris and the provincial cities, went a long way towards expanding trade within France. However, most French markets were overwhelmingly local in character (by 1789 only 30% of agricultural produce was being sold in a place other than where it was produced). Price discrepancies between regions and heavy internal customs barriers, which made for exorbitant transportation costs, meant that a unified national market like that of Britain was still far off. On the eve of the Revolution, a shipment of goods travelling from Lorraine to the Mediterranean coast would have been stopped 21 times and incurred 34 different duties.

Starting in the late 1730s and early 1740s, and continuing for the next 30 years, France's population and economy underwent expansion. Rising prices, particularly for agricultural products, were extremely profitable for large landholders. Artisans and tenant farmers also saw wage increases but on the whole, they benefited less from the growing economy. The ownership share of the peasantry remained largely the same as it had in the previous century, with around 1/3 of arable land in the hands of peasant smallholders in 1789. A newer trend was the amount of land which came into the hands of bourgeois owners during the 18th century: fully 1/3 of the arable land in France by 1789. The stability of land ownership made it a very attractive investment for the bourgeois, as did the social prestige which it brought.

Pivotal developments in agriculture such as modern techniques of crop rotation and the use of fertilizers, which were modeled on successes in Britain and Italy, began to be introduced in parts of France. It would, however, take generations for these reforms to spread throughout all of France. In northern France the three-field system of crop rotation still prevailed, and in the south the two-field system. Under such methods, farmers left either one third or half of their arable land vacant as fallow every year to restore fertility in cycles. This was both a considerable waste of land at any one time which might otherwise have been cultivated, and an inferior way of restoring fertility compared to planting restorative fodder crops.

Farming of recent New World crops, including maize (corn) and potatoes, continued to expand and provided an important supplement to the diet. However, the spread of these crops was geographically limited (potatoes to Alsace and Lorraine, and maize in the more temperate south of France), with the bulk of the population over-reliant on wheat for subsistence. From the late 1760s onwards harsher weather caused consistently poor wheat harvests (there were only three between 1770 and 1789 which were deemed sufficient).

The hardship bad harvests caused mainly affected the small proprietors and peasants who constituted the bulk of French farmers; large land owners continued to prosper from rising land prices and strong demand. Bread shortages could cause steep price rises, which in turn might lead to mass disruption and rioting. The average wage earner in France, during periods of abundance, might spend as much as 70% of his income on bread alone. During shortages, when prices could rise by as much as 100%, the threat of destitution increased dramatically for French families. The French government experimented unsuccessfully with regulating the grain market, lifting price controls in the late 1760s, re-imposing them in the early 1770s, then lifting them again in 1775. Abandoning price controls in 1775, after a bad harvest the previous year, caused grain prices to skyrocket by 50% in Paris; the rioting which erupted as a result, known as the Flour War, engulfed much of northeastern France and had to be put down with force.

The slaving interests were based in Nantes, La Rochelle, Bordeaux, and Le Havre from 1763 to 1792. The 'négriers' were merchants who specialized in funding and directing cargoes of black captives to the Caribbean colonies, which had high death rates and needed a continuous fresh supply. The négriers intermarried with each other's families; most were Protestants. Their derogatory and patronizing approach toward blacks immunized them from moral criticism. They strongly opposed to the application of the Declaration of Rights of Man to blacks. While they ridiculed the slaves as dirty and savage, they often took black mistresses. The French government paid a bounty for each captive sold to the colonies, which made the business profitable and patriotic. They vigorously defended their business against the abolition movement of 1789.

The agricultural and climatic problems of the 1770s and 1780s led to a large increase in poverty: in some cities in the north, historians have estimated the poor as reaching upwards of 20% of the urban population. Displacement and criminality, mainly theft, also increased, and the growth of groups of mendicants and bandits became a problem. Overall about one third of the French population lived in poverty, approximately 8 million people. This could increase by several million after bad harvests and the resulting economic crises. Although nobles, bourgeoisie, and wealthy landholders saw their revenues affected by the depression, the hardest-hit in this period were the working class and the peasants. While their tax burden to the state had generally decreased in this period, feudal and seigneurial dues had increased.

In these last decades of the century, French industries continued to develop. Mechanization was introduced, factories were created, and monopolies became more common. However, this growth was complicated by competition from England in the textile and cotton industries. The competitive disadvantage of French manufactures was sorely demonstrated after the 1786 Anglo-French commercial treaty opened the French market to British goods beginning in mid-1787. The cheaper and superior quality British products undercut domestic manufacturers, and contributed to the severe industrial depression underway in France by 1788. The depression was worsened by a catastrophic harvest failure during the summer of 1788, which reverberated across the economy. As peasants and wage earners were forced to spend higher proportions of their income on bread, demand for manufactured goods evaporated.

The American War of Independence had led to a reduction of trade (cotton and slaves), but by the 1780s Franco-American trade was stronger than before. Similarly, the Antilles represented the major source for European sugar and coffee, and it was a huge importer of slaves through Nantes. Paris became France's center of international banking and stock trading in these last decades, like Amsterdam and London, and the Caisse d'Escompte was founded in 1776. Paper money was re-introduced, denominated in livres ; these were issued until 1793.

The later years of Louis XV 's reign saw some economic setbacks. While the Seven Years' War, 1756–1763, led to an increase in the royal debt and the loss of nearly all of France's North American possessions, it was not until 1775 that the French economy began to truly enter a state of crisis. An extended reduction in agricultural prices over the previous twelve years, with dramatic crashes in 1777 and 1786, further complicated by climatic events such as the disastrous winters of 1785-1789, contributed to the problem. With the government deeply in debt, King Louis XVI was forced to permit the radical reforms of Turgot and Malesherbes. However, the nobles' disaffection led to Turgot's dismissal and Malesherbes' resignation 1776. Jacques Necker replaced them. Louis supported the American Revolution in 1778, but the Treaty of Paris (1783) yielded the French little, excepting an addition to the country's enormous debt. The government was forced to increase taxes, including the "vingtième." Necker had resigned in 1781, to be replaced temporarily by Calonne and Brienne, but was restored to power in 1788.

French economic history after the late-18th century Revolution was tied to three major events and trends: the Napoleonic era, competition with Britain and its other neighbors in industrialization, and the 'total wars' of the late-19th and early 20th centuries. Quantitative analysis of output data shows the French per capita growth rates were slightly smaller than Britain's. However the British population tripled in size, while France grew by only a third, so the overall British economy grew much faster. François Crouzet has succinctly summarized the ups and downs of French per capita economic growth in 1815-1913 as follows: 1815-1840: irregular, but sometimes fast growth; 1840-1860: fast growth; 1860-1882: slowing down; 1882-1896: stagnation; 1896-1913: fast growth

For the 1870-1913 era, Angus Maddison gives growth rates for 12 Western advanced countries—10 in Europe, plus the United States and Canada. In terms of per capita growth, France was about average. However again its population growth was very slow, so as far as the growth rate in total size of the economy France was in next to the last place, just ahead of Italy. The 12 countries averaged 2.7% per year in total growth in output, but France only averaged 1.6%. Crouzet argues that the average size of industrial undertakings was smaller in France than in other advanced countries; that machinery was generally less up to date, productivity lower, costs higher. The domestic system and handicraft production long persisted, while big modern factories were for a long time exceptional. Large chunks of the Ancien Régime economy survived. On the whole, the qualitative lag between the British and French economy persisted, and later a similar lag developed between France and Belgium, Germany, and the United States. France did not succeed in catching up with Britain, and was overtaken by several of her rivals.

The French Revolution abolished many of the constraints on the economy from the Ancien Régime. It "abolished the guild system as a worthless remnant of feudalism." It also abolished the highly inefficient system of tax farming, whereby private individuals would collect taxes for a hefty fee. The government seized the foundations that had been set up (starting in the 13th century) to provide an annual stream of revenue for hospitals, poor relief, and education. The state sold the lands but typically local authorities did not replace the funding, and so most of the nation's charitable and school systems were massively disrupted.

The economy did poorly in 1790-96 as industrial and agricultural output dropped, foreign trade plunged, and prices soared. The government decided not to repudiate its legacy debt. Instead, it issued more and more paper money (called "assignats") that supposedly were grounded in seized lands. The result was escalating inflation. The government imposed price controls and prosecuted speculators and traders in the black market. People increasingly refused to pay taxes as the annual government deficit increased from 10% of gross national product in 1789 to 64% in 1793. By 1795, after the bad harvest of 1794 and the removal of price controls, inflation reached 3500%. Throughout January and February 1795, the Seine River (the main source of import and export of goods at the time) froze, making it impossible to transport food, luxury goods, and materials that factories depended on in order to keep running. Many factories and workshops were forced to close because they had no way to operate. This led to increased unemployment. Many of the poor (most of the population) were forced to sell their belongings. On the other hand, the very few who were wealthy, could afford anything they needed. "The markets were well stocked, but the food could only be bought at excessive prices".

The value of the assignats "had plunged from 31 percent of that of the silver currency in July 1794 to 8 percent in March 1795" The main cause of assignat depreciation was over-issuance by successive revolutionary governments, who turned to printing more and more paper notes to fund escalating expenditure, especially after the advent of war in 1792. Some 45 billion livres worth of paper had been printed by 1797, which collectively were worth less than one seventh that amount based on 1790 prices. The depreciation of the assignat not only caused spiraling inflation, but had knock-on effects across the entire economy. Because assignats were legal tender, they could be used to service debt repayments at face value, although their real value stood at only a fraction of this. The losses that lenders suffered as a result led them to tighten credit and raise interest rates. Likewise the real value of national lands, which the assignats were pegged to, sank to only 25% of their face value. The assignats were withdrawn in 1796 but the replacements also fueled inflation. Inflation was finally ended by Napoleon in 1803 with the gold franc as the new currency.

The diminution of the economic power of the nobility and the clergy also had serious disruptive effects on the French economy. With the closure of monasteries, chapters, and cathedrals in towns like Tours, Avignon and Bayeux, thousands were deprived of their livelihoods as servants, artisans, or tradesmen. Likewise, the exodus of nobles devastated the luxury trades and led to still greater hardship for servants, as well as industries and supply networks dependent on aristocratic consumption. For those nobles who remained in France, the heated anti-aristocratic social environment dictated more modest patterns of dress and consumption, while the spiraling inflation of the assignats dramatically reduced their buying power. The plunging market for silk, for example, meant that output in the silk capital of Lyons fell by half between 1789 and 1799, contributing to a loss of almost one-third of Lyons' pre-revolutionary population.

In the cities entrepreneurship on a small scale flourished, as restrictive monopolies, privileges, barriers, rules, taxes, and guilds gave way. However, the British blockade that began in 1793 severely damaged overseas trade. The wartime exigencies enacted that year by the National Convention worsened the situation by banning the export of essential goods and embargoing neutral shipping from entering French ports. Although these restrictions were lifted in 1794, the British had managed to usurp transatlantic shipping lanes in the meantime, further reducing markets for French goods. By 1796, foreign trade accounted for just 9% of the French economy, compared to 25% in 1789.

Agriculture was transformed by the Revolution. It abolished tithes owed to local churches as well as feudal dues owed to local landlords. The result hurt the tenants, who paid both higher rents and higher taxes. It nationalized all church lands, as well as lands belonging to royalist enemies who went into exile. The government in Paris planned to use these seized lands to finance expenditure by issuing assignats. With the breakup of large estates controlled by the Church and nobility and worked by hired hands, rural France became permanently a land of small independent farms. The rural proletariat and nobility both gave way to the commercial farmer. Cobban says the revolution "bequeathed to the nation "a ruling class of landowners." Most of these new landowners were bourgeois in origin, as the economic uncertainties of the 1790s and the abolition of venal office made land ownership an attractive and safe investment.

However, the recruitment needs of the wartime French Republic between 1792 and 1802 led to shortages of agricultural workers. Farmers were also subject to requisition of their livestock by passing armies; the consequent losses of manure negatively impacted the fertility and productivity of the land.

Overall the Revolution did not greatly change the French business system and probably helped freeze in place the horizons of the small business owner. The typical businessman owned a small store, mill or shop, with family help and a few paid employees; large-scale industry was less common than in other industrializing nations.

After 1799 Napoleon paid for his expensive wars by multiple means, starting with the modernization of the rickety financial system. He conscripted soldiers at low wages, raised taxes, placed large-scale loans, sold lands formerly owned by the Catholic Church, sold Louisiana to the United States, plundered conquered areas and seized food supplies, and carried out requisitions on countries he controlled, such as Italy.

The constant war footing of the Napoleonic Era, 1795–1815, stimulated production at the cost of investment and growth. Production of armaments and other military supplies, fortifications, and the general channeling of the society toward establishing and maintaining massed armies, temporarily increased economic activity after several years of revolution. The rampant inflation of the Revolutionary era was halted by not printing the new currency quite as fast. The maritime Continental Blockade, implemented by Napoleon's opponents and very effectively enforced by the Royal Navy, gradually cut into any economic arena in which the French economy was not self-sufficient. 1815 saw the final defeat and collapse of the French forces. This gave rise to a relatively peaceful period across Europe until 1914, during which important institutional reforms such as the introduction of a highly rationalized legal system could be implemented.

Napoleon's impact on the French economy was of modest importance in the long run. He did sweep away the old guilds and monopolies and trade restrictions. He introduced the metric system and fostered the study of engineering. Most important, he opened up French finance by the creation of the indispensable Bank of France. However, entrepreneurs had little opportunity to take advantage of these reforms. Napoleon provided a protected continental market by systematic exclusion of all imports from Britain. This had the effect of encouraging innovation in Britain, where the Industrial Revolution was well underway, and diverting the need for innovation in France. What innovation took place focused on armaments for the army, and was of little value in peacetime. In France the business crisis in 1810-1812 undermined what successes entrepreneurs had achieved.

With the restoration of the Bourbons in 1814, the reactionary aristocracy with its disdain for entrepreneurship returned to power. British goods flooded the market, and France responded with high tariffs and protectionism to protect its established businesses especially handcrafts and small-scale manufacturing such as textiles. The tariff on iron goods reached 120%.

Agriculture had never needed protection but now demanded it from the lower prices of imported foodstuffs, such as Russian grain. French winegrowers strongly supported the tariff – their wines did not need it, but they insisted on a high tariff on the import of tea. One agrarian deputy explained: "Tea breaks down our national character by converting those who use it often into cold and stuffy Nordic types, while wine arouses in the soul that gentle gaiety that gives Frenchmen their amiable and witty national character." The French government falsified statistics to claim that exports and imports were growing – actually there was stagnation and the economic crisis of 1826-29 disillusioned the business community and readied them to support the revolution in 1830.

Perhaps the only successful and innovative economic sector was banking. Paris emerged as an international center of finance in the mid-19th century, second only to London. It had a strong national bank and numerous aggressive private banks that financed projects all across Europe and the expanding French Empire. Napoleon III had a goal of overtaking London to make Paris the premier financial center of the world, but the war in 1870 reduced the range of Parisian financial influence. One key development was the establishment of one of the main branches of the Rothschild family.

In 1812, James Mayer Rothschild arrived in Paris from Frankfurt, and set up the bank "De Rothschild Frères". This bank funded Napoleon's return from Elba and became one of the leading banks in European finance. The Rothschild banking family of France funded France's major wars and colonial expansion. The Banque de France founded in 1796 helped resolve the financial crisis of 1848 and emerged as a powerful central bank. The Comptoir National d'Escompte de Paris (CNEP) was established during the financial crisis and the Republican revolution of 1848. Its innovations included both private and public sources in funding large projects and the creation of a network of local offices to reach a much larger pool of depositors.

The Péreire brothers founded the Crédit Mobilier. It became a powerful and dynamic funding agency for major projects in France, Europe and the world at large. It specialized in mining developments; it funded other banks including the Imperial Ottoman Bank and the Austrian Mortgage Bank; it funded railway construction. It also funded insurance companies and building contractors. The bank had large investments in a transatlantic steamship line, urban gas lighting, a newspaper and the Paris Métro public transit system. Other major banks included the Société Générale, and in the provinces the Crédit Lyonnais. After its defeat in 1871, France had to pay enormous reparations to Germany, with the German army continuing its occupation until the debt was paid. The 5 billion francs amounted to a fourth of France's GNP – and one-third of Germany's – and was nearly double the usual annual exports of France. Observers thought the indemnity was unpayable and was designed to weaken France and justify long years of military occupation. However France paid it off in less than three years. The payments, in gold, acted as a powerful stimulus that dramatically increased the volume of French exports, and on the whole, produced positive economic benefits for France.

The Paris Bourse or stock exchange emerged as a key market for investors to buy and sell securities. It was primarily a forward market, and it pioneered in creating a mutual guarantee fund so that failures of major brokers would not escalate into a devastating financial crisis. Speculators in the 1880s who disliked the control of the Bourse used a less regulated alternative the Coulisse. However, it collapsed in the face of the simultaneous failure of a number of its brokers in 1895–1896. The Bourse secured legislation that guaranteed its monopoly, increased control of the curb market, and reduced the risk of another financial panic.

France in 1815 was overwhelmingly a land of peasant farms, with some handicraft industry. Paris, and the other much smaller urban centers had little industry. At the onset of the nineteenth century, GDP per capita in France was lower than in Great Britain and the Netherlands. This was probably due to higher transaction costs, which were mainly caused by inefficient property rights and a transportation system more geared towards to military needs than to economic growth. Industry was dominated by small and medium-sized firms, which continued using traditional techniques of production because transportation barriers protected their local markets from outside competition. According to Roger Price, "modern forms of concentrated production were exceptional and coexisted with the typical establishments of a pre-industrial economy." In 1851, only 1.5 million people worked in firms which employed more than ten people, while 3 million were employed in smaller workshops. Restraints on the growth of heavy industry included poor transportation infrastructure, the slow growth of agricultural production, of demand from the agricultural population, and a lack of raw materials and power sources.

Historians are reluctant to use the term "Industrial Revolution" for France because the slow pace seems an exaggeration for France as a whole. The Industrial Revolution was well underway in Britain when the Napoleonic wars ended, and soon spread to Belgium and, to a lesser extent to northeastern France. The remainder remained little changed. The growth regions developed industry, based largely on textiles, as well as some mining. The pace of industrialization was far below Britain, Germany, the United States and Japan. The persecution of the Protestant Huguenots after 1685 led to a large-scale flight of entrepreneurial and mechanical talents that proved hard to replace. Instead French business practices were characterized by tightly held family firms, which emphasized traditionalism and paternalism. These characteristics supported a strong banking system, and made Paris a world center for luxury craftsmanship, but slowed the building of large factories and giant corporations. Napoleon had promoted engineering education, and it paid off in the availability of well-trained graduates who developed the transportation system, especially the railways after 1840. '

The only period in the 19th century in which economic growth accelerated at the rate of other industrializing nations was 1852–1857, during which modern industry gained preeminence over smaller, artisanal production. The advent of the railway integrated previously isolated markets, facilitated easy transportation of raw materials and finished products, and facilitated the development of mechanization and financing systems. By removing transportation barriers, the railways eliminated the limits on growth for industries like coal and metallurgy. Railway construction also provided a massive stimulus in itself to metallurgy, coal and engineering, "stimulating the further concentration of production by which capitalism became industrial rather than commercial." Small firms which had dominated local markets with their products made using small-scale, artisanal methods, now had to compete with mass-produced, cheaper, and often higher quality products coming from factories.

Paris became world-famous for making consumerism a social priority and economic force, especially through its upscale arcades filled with luxury shops and its grand department stores. These were "dream machines" that set the world standard for consumption of fine products by the upper classes as well as the rising middle class. Paris took the lead internationally in elaborate department stores reaching upscale consumers with luxury items and high quality goods presented in a novel and highly seductive fashion. The Parisian department store had its roots in the magasin de nouveautés, or novelty store; the first, the Tapis Rouge, was created in 1784. They flourished in the early 19th century, with La Belle Jardiniere (1824), Aux Trois Quartiers (1829), and Le Petit Saint Thomas (1830). Balzac described their functioning in his novel César Birotteau. In the 1840s, the new railroads brought wealthy consumers to Paris from a wide region. Luxury stores grew in size, and featured plate glass display windows, fixed prices and price tags, and advertising in newspapers.

The entrepreneur Aristide Boucicaut in 1852 took Au Bon Marché, a small shop in Paris, set fixed prices (with no need to negotiate with clerks), and offered guarantees that allowed exchanges and refunds. He invested heavily in advertising, and added a wide variety of merchandise. Sales reached five million francs in 1860. In 1869 he moved to larger premises; sales reached 73 million in 1877. The multi-department enterprise occupied fifty thousand square meters with 1788 employees. Half the employees were women; unmarried women employees lived in dormitories on the upper floors. The success inspired numerous competitors all vying for upscale customers.

The French gloried in the national prestige brought by the great Parisian stores. The great writer Émile Zola (1840–1902) set his novel Au Bonheur des Dames (1882–83) in the typical department store. Zola represented it as a symbol of the new technology that was both improving society and devouring it. The novel describes merchandising, management techniques, marketing, and consumerism.

Other competitors moved downscale to reach much larger numbers of shoppers. The Grands Magasins Dufayel featured inexpensive prices and worked to teach workers how to shop in the new impersonal environment. Its advertisements promised the opportunity to participate in the newest, most fashionable consumerism at reasonable cost. The latest technology was featured, such as cinemas and exhibits of inventions like X-ray machines (used to fit shoes) and the gramophone. Increasingly after 1870 the stores' work force included greater numbers of young women. Despite the low pay and long hours they gained access to the newest and most fashionable merchandise and to interactions with upscale customers.

By the 21st century, the grand Paris department stores had difficulty surviving in the new economic world. In 2015, just four remained; Au Bon Marché, now owned by the luxury goods firm LVMH ; BHV ; Galeries Lafayette and Printemps.

In France, railways became a national medium for the modernization of backward regions, and a leading advocate of this approach was the poet-politician Alphonse de Lamartine. One writer hoped that railways might improve the lot of "populations two or three centuries behind their fellows" and eliminate "the savage instincts born of isolation and misery." Consequently, France built a centralized system that radiated from Paris (plus lines that cut east to west in the south). This design was intended to achieve political and cultural goals rather than maximize efficiency.

The development of the railways was "one of the major achievements of the Second Empire in the area of economic policy." In the first few months of 1852, more than 1,500 kilometers of new track were approved by the French state, and the average rate of construction grew to 1,000 kilometers of new track per year. The Second Empire was responsible for over half of the network at its maximum extent, in terms of the concessions granted. Over one third of the network was constructed during the Second Empire. Investment in railways grew dramatically to average 300 million francs per year in the four years between 1852 and 1856. This was three times the rate of investment per year for the period between 1848 and 1852.

After some consolidation, six companies controlled monopolies of their regions, subject to close control by the government in terms of fares, finances, and even minute technical details. The central government department of Ponts et Chaussées (bridges and roads, or the Highways Department) brought in British engineers and workers, handled much of the construction work, provided engineering expertise and planning, land acquisition, and construction of permanent infrastructure such as the track bed, bridges and tunnels. It also subsidized militarily necessary lines along the German border, which were considered necessary for the national defense. In 1878, the Minister of Public Works Charles de Freycinet launched an ambitious public works program, often called the Freycinet Plan, to counter an economic downturn. The plan involved the purchaser of railroads by the state and the financing of new railways, waterways, and roads. Around 150 lines were constructed under this program, which was nearly complete by 1914.

Private operating companies provided management, hired labor, laid the tracks, and built and operated stations. They purchased and maintained the rolling stock—6,000 locomotives were in operation in 1880, which averaged 51,600 passengers a year or 21,200 tons of freight. Much of the equipment was imported from Britain and therefore did not stimulate machinery makers. Although starting the whole system at once was politically expedient, it delayed completion, and forced even more reliance on temporary exports brought in from Britain. Financing was also a problem. The solution was a narrow base of funding through the Rothschilds and the closed circles of the Bourse in Paris, so France did not develop the same kind of national stock exchange that flourished in London and New York. The system did help modernize the parts of rural France it reached, but it did not help create local industrial centers. Critics such as Émile Zola complained that it never overcame the corruption of the political system, but rather contributed to it.

The railways helped the industrial revolution in France by facilitating a national market for raw materials, wines, cheeses, and imported manufactured products. Yet the goals set by the French for their railway system were moralistic, political, and military rather than economic. As a result, the freight trains were shorter and less heavily loaded than those in such rapidly industrializing nations such as Britain, Belgium or Germany. Other infrastructure needs in rural France, such as better roads and canals, were neglected because of the expense of the railways, so it seems likely that there were net negative effects in areas not served by the trains.

In 1870 the relative decline in industrial strength, compared to Bismarck 's Germany, proved decisive in the Franco-Prussian War. The total defeat of France, in this conflict, was less a demonstration of French weakness than it was of German militarism and industrial strength. This contrasted with France's occupation of Germany during the Napoleonic wars. By 1914, however, German armament and general industrialization had out-distanced not only France but all of its neighbors. Just before 1914, France was producing about one-sixth as much coal as Germany, and a quarter as much steel.

From the 1850s onwards, French agriculture underwent dramatic structural change, underpinned by several factors. Agriculture became more productive due to increased use of fertilizers and greater availability of manure. Grain yields increased by 50% between 1850 and 1880. Farmers replaced the fallowing of land with fodder crops and sugar beets, which permitted more livestock to be raised. In the south, the three-stage system used in northern France replaced the two-stage system, with fodder crops substituted for fallowing. More livestock provided more income for farmers and more manure. In the Paris basin, the introduction of the sugar beet after 1850 drastically increased the productivity of the land; the turnover of a hectare of land in this region rose from 150 to 200 francs in 1840 to 400 francs in 1880.

Better equipment was also introduced, with the horse plow replacing the swing plow and the scythe replacing the sickle. In areas like the Paris basin with large-scale farming operations, capital-intensive tedding machines, reapers, threshers, and mowing machines were introduced between 1873 and 1882.

Investment in agriculture, previously a sector of the economy starved for capital, also rose. This was in part due to the migration of peasants to the towns, motivating employers to introduce improved tools and harvesting machinery to offset the tightening labor market. The damaging economic effects of poor harvests were also eliminated in the 1850s, as prices were stabilized. This was due substantially to the development of the railways, which provided fast, cheap, and bulk transport for grain and other foodstuffs which helped ensure demand was met across the country. This was first demonstrated after the harvest failure of 1846, when the Paris-Orléans line distributed food quickly to the areas it reached, shielding those areas from the catastrophic effects of the harvest failure suffered in other parts of the country. By the 1850s the railways had developed to such an extent that they were able to minimize the effects of the poor harvests in 1853 and 1855 throughout the country.

Grain could be transported from regions with surplus harvest to those with shortages, or imported from abroad. Merchants were encouraged to expand their markets by the low cost of rail transport. A sliding scale of tariffs on grain imports discouraged merchants from importing sufficient quantities of grain, since they could be subject to higher tariffs if prices decreased at home. This came to an end when the tariffs were repealed in 1860, not to be reintroduced until 1885. Imports jumped from 3 to 5 million hectoliters in 1846 following the poor harvest, and the next year stood at 10 million. In 1855, 10 million hectoliters were imported, but because the railway network was not yet mature and because of the discouraging effect of the tariffs, it took eight months to distribute this grain throughout the country. By 1861, 13.5 million hectoliters were imported, but this time distribution was much faster because of the progress of the railway network. In 1879, 29.8 million hectoliters were imported following several years of poor harvests.

Winemaking regions like the former province of Languedoc and the Côte-d'Or benefited greatly from the railways, with a “frenzy” of vine-planting taking place in the former region after 1850, and the productive output of the Côte-d'Or rising from 400,000 to 800,000 hectoliters of wine.

France was a rural nation as late as 1840, but a major change took place after railways started arriving in the 1850s–60s. In his seminal book Peasants Into Frenchmen (1976), historian Eugen Weber traced the modernization of French villages and argued that rural France went from backward and isolated to modern and possessing a sense of French nationhood during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. He emphasized the roles of railroads, republican schools, and universal military conscription. He based his findings on school records, migration patterns, military service documents and economic trends. Weber argued that until 1900 or so a sense of French nationhood was weak in the provinces. Weber then looked at how the policies of the French Third Republic created a sense of French nationality in rural areas. The book was widely praised, but was criticized by some, such as Ted W. Margadant, who argued that a sense of Frenchness already existed in the provinces before 1870.

French national policy was protectionist with regard to agricultural products, to protect the very large agricultural population, especially through the Méline tariff of 1892. France maintained two forms of agriculture, a modern, mechanized, capitalistic system in the Northeast, and in the rest of the country a reliance on subsistence agriculture on very small farms with low income levels. Modernization of the subsistence sector began in the 1940s, and resulted in a rapid depopulation of rural France, although protectionist measures remained national policy.

In the 1880s, increasing competition amongst the great European powers for territory overseas led France to acquire new colonies. By 1912, the French colonial empire constituted 3.4 million square miles and 55 million inhabitants. While some of these territories had little to no economic value (they were instead valuable for geopolitical/strategic reasons), others possessed lucrative raw materials and were exploited as markets for French goods. The development of the new colonies spurred a demand for equipment, machinery, and other goods which could only be sourced in France. The railroads and other infrastructure projects required French engineering expertise and a whole range of machinery/tools for their construction. Farmers and miners turned to France for the tools, chemicals, seed, etc. needed for their new enterprises.

Some colonies were exporters of key raw materials to France. French West Africa was the primary source of coffee for the French market and a major source of cocoa. Sugar was supplied from Martinique, Réunion, and Guadeloupe. The colonies in north Africa, West Africa, and the Caribbean provided a range of tropical fruits like bananas, citrus, pineapples, and coconuts.

Although the French government encouraged investment and development of the nation's overseas possessions, the government itself was reluctant to commit funds beyond their initial conquest and establishment. In 1900, the French parliament passed a law requiring the colonies to be fiscally self-sufficient. There was an active imperial lobby in France promoting greater investment and closer trading links between France and her colonies. This lobby argued for exclusionary tariff policy which would favor colonial trade. As protectionism returned in the 1870s and 1880s, subjecting imports to high tariffs, steps were taken to exempt the colonies. A customs union was established with Algeria in 1884, and with French Indochina in 1887. In 1892, a tariff-exemption zone was established between France and Algeria, Indochina, the old Caribbean colonies of the ancien régime, Gabon, Tunisia, and Madagascar. This allowed France and the chosen colonies to trade freely with one another. Another category of colonies exempted French imports from tariffs, but had to pay most favoured nation tariff rates when exporting their goods to France. This category included much of French West Africa, New Caledonia, Saint Pierre and Miquelon. Through this "highly preferential system", France was able to supply around 65.5% of the imports to her colonies.

By the time the First World War broke out, the French overseas empire had become an important economic asset to the mother country. The empire absorbed 13% of French exports in 1913 and constituted 9.4% of her imports. This increased the national income by 5 to 6%. From 1902 the share of colonial trade was larger than France's trade with Germany, Belgium, and Luxembourg combined. The imperial markets were especially important as a prop for French industries which were in decline, like textile, candle and soap manufacture. The preferential colonial markets compensated for the weakness of French exports elsewhere.

France, like other industrializing countries of the time, suffered the effects of a worldwide economic downturn in the late 19th century. Depressions and periods of recovery characterized the entire epoch between 1880 and 1914. By the time full recovery began at the end of the century, French industrialization was behind 15 years and the long period of crisis had scarred entrepreneurs and investors.

France recovered better from the Panic of 1873 than other countries like Germany, and resumed strong growth on a par with that of the 1850s until the end of 1881. There was a severe business depression in England, France, Belgium and Germany lasting from 1882 to 1885 or 1886. The failure of the French bank Union Générale in early 1882 had reverberations throughout Europe. According to Alan Sorkin, "Nearly £3 million were withdrawn from the Bank of England for France between 30 January 1882 and 15 February 1882. Stock prices fell dramatically, affecting not only France but other neighboring countries." There was an uptick in growth in the economy 1887–1889, but it wasn't until 1897-98 that full recovery took place."

The worldwide downturn was particularly severe in France, because of demand problems like slow demographic growth and the large proportion of the population employed in agriculture (45% in 1891). This was a sector whose already low-paid workers suffered even greater losses of income from the downturn. The distribution of the national income left workers with little extra money to spend, and also ensured that bourgeois demand continued to be “highly individualistic”. These characteristics limited the development of mass consumption. Scourges like the Great French Wine Blight, caused by the Phylloxera insect, and the parasitic disease known as pébrine which affected silkworms and the silk industry, made the depression of 1882 worse and more prolonged. The importance of wine production to the economy was such that around 37% of French GDP was lost between 1885 and 1894 due to phylloxera. Other factors contributing to the length and seriousness of the depression were the debt defaults of a number of foreign governments, railway company bankruptcies, a trade war between Italy and France between 1887 and 1898, new French tariffs on imports, and the general adoption of protectionism throughout the world. Between 1881 and 1892, the French government adopted tariff protection, including the Méline tariff of 1892. The Méline tariff was levelled on grain imports and stopped the fall of prices, leading to a substantial rise in agricultural wages.

From the 1860s agricultural prices began to stagnate, and the general fall of prices caused a “great depression” in agriculture between 1874 and 1895. The strong growth in worldwide agricultural output of previous decades culminated in a glut of foodstuffs on world markets once transportation costs, hitherto prohibitively high, fell. Cereal prices, the first to experience price declines, were 27% lower in 1895 compared to their 1871-75 levels. Land lost about one third of its value between 1879 and 1913, not just because of the agricultural crisis also declining population densities in the countryside. Production stagnated, with the mean annual growth in agricultural production at 0.26% between 1865 and 1900. Mean annual production fell by 0.8% in the years 1874-8 and 1889–93.

The phylloxera outbreak ravaged French vineyards, reducing French wine output by two thirds between 1875 and 1889. In 1878, one quarter of French vineyards were affected by phylloxera. Wine production, which stood at 84 million hectoliters in 1875, declined sharply to below 40 million for a period of 15 years. Local vineyards perished and the market for table wines was overtaken by producers of low quality wine in Lower Languedoc, and Algeria. The industry recovered as resistant varieties of grape vine were gradually introduced from North America.

From 1897, healthy economic growth on a par with that of 1815-1848 resumed. It was aided by the expansion of iron mining in Lorraine and the birth of new industries like automobile manufacture, electricity, aluminum and nickel mining.

The overall growth rate of the French economy shows a very strong performance in the 1920s and again in the 1960s, with poor performances in the 1910s, 1930s, and 1990s.

The economy was critically hurt by the German seizure of major industrial areas in the northeast. While the occupied area in 1913 contained only 14% of France's industrial workers, it produced 58% of the steel, and 40% of the coal. Considerable relief came with the massive influx of American food, money and raw materials in 1917–1928. The Dalbiez Law of August 1915 set the number of workers required for the different sectors of the war economy, in an attempt to balance the labor needs of industry with the conscription requirements of the army. Individual examinations were established to keep workers in factories, and under the Dalbiez Law "military workers" under the control of the war ministry were deployed away from the front to work in the war economy.

Agricultural productivity fell precipitously due to the German occupation, the requisitioning of draught animals, as well as the loss of manpower and fertilizer, and machinery shortages. At its lowest point in 1917, the grain harvest was 40% below pre-war levels. The high prices for agricultural products which resulted were a boon for farmers, incentivizing "superhuman efforts" to cultivate by those who remained on farms. Separation allowances provided to the dependents of soldiers also gave an unexpected boost to the income of poor, rural families. Many peasants were able to pay off debts, purchase more land, and enjoy a higher quality of living. Conversely, the urban population and industrial workers became increasingly discontented with rising food prices, and the failure of their wages to keep pace.

French credit collapsed in 1916 and Britain began lending large sums to France. The J.P. Morgan & Co bank in New York assumed control of French loans in the fall of 1916 and relinquished it to the U.S. government when the U.S. entered the war in 1917. On the other hand, the economy was helped by American loans which were used to purchase food and manufactured goods to allow a decent standard of living. The arrival of over a million American soldiers in 1918 brought heavy spending for food and construction materials. Labor shortages were in part alleviated by the use of volunteer and forced labor from the colonies.

The war damages amounted to about 113% of the GDP of 1913, chiefly the destruction of productive capital and housing. 91% of settlements across ten départements in the north and northeast suffered material damage, and 620 communes were destroyed. The national debt rose from 66% of GDP in 1913 to 170% in 1919, reflecting the heavy use of bond issues to pay for the war. Inflation was severe, with the franc losing over half its value against the British pound. the GDP Per Capita in 1914 was 2,880$

The war effort and the occupation of French territory by Germany had dealt a heavy blow to the French economy. Overall French industrial and agricultural production was down 45% in 1919 compared to 1913. Infrastructure in the occupied region - towns, villages, factories, mines, and railways - suffered extensive destruction and/or over-exploitation in the case of mines and factories, reducing their output. Prime agricultural land had been ruined and livestock lost, and 27% of young men between the ages of 18 and 27 were killed, with a consequent negative impact on marriages and births which would impact the labor force in the 1930s. Fertility rates sharply declined during the First World War, with the deficit of births estimated to be 1.4 million. Combined with an equivalent number of casualties, the French population was 2.8 million people smaller than it otherwise would have been, due to the war.

At the Paris Peace Conference, 1919, vengeance against defeated Germany was the main French theme. France demanded full payment by Germany of the damages it created in German-occupied areas. It also wanted the full cost of postwar veterans benefits. Prime Minister Clemenceau was largely effective against the moderating influences of the British and Americans. France obtained large (but unspecified) reparations, regained Alsace-Lorraine and obtained mandates to rule parts of former German colonies in Africa.

In January 1923 as a response to the failure of the Germans to ship enough coal as part of its reparations, France (and Belgium) occupied the industrial region of the Ruhr. Germany responded with passive resistance, printing vast amounts of money to support idled workers, thereby causing runaway inflation. Inflation heavily damaged the German middle class (because their bank accounts became worthless) but it also damaged the French franc. France fomented a separatist movement pointing to an independent buffer state, but it collapsed after some bloodshed. The intervention was a failure, and in summer 1924 France accepted the solution to the reparations issues as expressed in the Dawes Plan.

Industrial productivity returned to pre-war levels by 1924 and by 1929 it was 40% above 1913 levels. The French government eased immigration rules to offset the manpower shortage and some 2 million workers arrived in France as a result. Inflation was a serious problem, fueled by high government borrowing and a huge increase in the amount of money in circulation (37,900 million francs were in circulation at the end of 1920, compared to 6000 million in 1914). Consumer prices doubled between 1922 and 1926, and the franc suffered continual devaluation (in 1914 one British Pound was worth 25 francs, by July 1926 one Pound was worth 243 francs). The devaluation of the franc was a boon for exports, while inflation reduced the debt burden. As a result, "most social groups seem to have enjoyed rising real incomes, in the case of workers for example by somewhere between 9 and 26 per cent." The government of Raymond Poincaré, which came to power in July 1926, managed to stabilize France's financial situation by reducing government expenditure, raising interest rates, raising taxes, and returning in part to the gold standard in June 1928. This placed the value of the franc at one-fifth of its pre-war level, which kept French goods competitive internationally.

The worldwide decline after 1929 affected France a bit later than other countries, hitting around 1931. The depression was relatively mild: unemployment peaked under 5%, the fall in production was at most 20% below the 1929 output; and there was no banking crisis like the panics in other countries. But the depression also lasted longer in France than in most other countries. Like many other countries, France had introduced the gold standard in the nineteenth century, meaning that it was generally possible to exchange bank notes for gold. Other countries abandoned the gold standard, like Great Britain in 1931, but France stuck to it until 1936, which caused a number of problems in times of recession and deflation. France lost competitiveness relative to Great Britain, because the latter was able to offer its products at a cheaper price due to the devaluation of its currency after leaving the gold standard. Furthermore, terminating fixed exchange rate regimes opened up opportunities for expansive monetary policy and thus influenced consumers’ expectations of future inflation, which was crucial for domestic demand. The French economy only started to recover when France abandoned the gold standard.

However, the depression had some effects on the local economy, and partly explains the February 6, 1934 riots and even more the formation of the Popular Front, led by SFIO socialist leader Léon Blum, which won the elections in 1936.

France's relatively high degree of self-sufficiency meant the damage was considerably less than in nations like Germany.

Hardship and unemployment were high enough to lead to rioting and the rise of the socialist Popular Front, which won the 1936 elections with a coalition of Socialists and Radicals, and support from the Communists. Léon Blum became the first Socialist prime minister.

The election brought a massive wave of strikes, involving two million workers, who seized many factories and stores. The strikes were spontaneous and unorganized, but nevertheless the business community panicked and met secretly with Blum, who negotiated a series of reforms, and then gave labor unions the credit for the Matignon Accords. The new laws:

Blum persuaded the workers to accept pay raises and go back to work. Wages increased sharply; in two years the national average was up 48 percent. However inflation also rose 46%. The imposition of the 40-hour week proved highly inefficient, as industry had a difficult time adjusting to it. The economic confusion hindered the rearmament effort, and the rapid growth of German armaments alarmed Blum. He launched a major program to speed up arms production. The cost forced the abandonment of the social reform programs of the popular front had counted heavily on.

Economic historians point to numerous bad financial and economic policies, such as delayed devaluation of the franc, which made French exports uncompetitive. Economists especially emphasize the bad effects of the 40-hour week, which made overtime illegal, forcing employers to stop work or to replace their best workers with inferior and less experienced workers when that 40-hour limit was reached. More generally the argument is made that France could not afford the labor reforms, in the face of poor economic conditions, the fears of the business community and the threat of Nazi Germany.

Some historians have judged the Popular Front a failure in terms of economics, foreign policy, and long-term political stability. "Disappointment and failure," says Jackson, "was the legacy of the Popular Front." However, it did inspire later reformers who set up the modern French welfare state.

Conditions in Vichy France under German occupation were very harsh. The Germans stripped France of millions of workers (as prisoners of war and "voluntary" workers), and of the food supply, while also demanding heavy cash payments. It was a period of severe economic hardship under a totalitarian government.

Vichy rhetoric exalted the skilled laborer and small businessman. In practice, however, the needs of artisans for raw materials were neglected in favor of large businesses. The General Committee for the Organization of Commerce (CGOC) was a national program to modernize and professionalize small business.

In 1940 the government took direct control of all production, which was synchronized with the demands of the Germans. It replaced free trade unions with compulsory state unions that dictated labor policy without regard to the voice or needs of the workers. The centralized, bureaucratic control of the French economy was not a success, as German demands grew heavier and more unrealistic, passive resistance and inefficiencies multiplied, and Allied bombers hit the rail yards; however, Vichy made the first comprehensive long-range plans for the French economy. The government had never before attempted a comprehensive overview. De Gaulle's Provisional Government in 1944–45, quietly used the Vichy plans as a base for its own reconstruction program. The Monnet Plan of 1946 was closely based on Vichy plans. Thus both teams of wartime and early postwar planners repudiated prewar laissez-faire practices and embraced the cause of drastic economic overhaul and a planned economy.

Nazi Germany kept nearly a million French Army POWs as forced laborers throughout the war. They added workers from occupied nations, especially in metal factories. The shortage of volunteers led the Vichy government to pass a law in September 1941 that effectively deported workers to Germany, where they constituted 17% of the labor force by August 1943. The largest number worked in the giant Krupp steel works in Essen. Low pay, long hours, frequent bombings, and crowded air raid shelters added to the unpleasantness of poor housing, inadequate heating, limited food, and poor medical care, all compounded by harsh Nazi discipline. They finally returned home in the summer of 1945. The forced labour draft encouraged the French Resistance and undermined the Vichy government.

Civilians suffered shortages of all varieties of consumer goods. The rationing system was stringent but badly mismanaged, leading malnourishment, black markets, and hostility to state management of the food supply. The Germans seized about 20% of French food production, which caused severe disruption to the household economy of the French people. French farm production fell in half because of lack of fuel, fertilizer and workers; even so the Germans seized half the meat, 20 percent of the produce, and 2 percent of the champagne. Supply problems quickly affected French stores which lacked most items. The government answered by rationing, but German officials set the policies and hunger prevailed, especially affecting youth in urban areas. The queues lengthened in front of shops. Some people—including German soldiers—benefited from the black market, where food was sold without tickets at very high prices. Farmers especially diverted meat to the black market, which meant that much less for the open market. Counterfeit food tickets were also in circulation. Direct buying from farmers in the countryside and barter against cigarettes became common. These activities were strictly forbidden, however, and thus carried out at the risk of confiscation and fines. Food shortages were most acute in the large cities. In the more remote country villages, however, clandestine slaughtering, vegetable gardens and the availability of milk products permitted better survival rates. The official ration provided starvation level diets of 1300 or fewer calories a day, supplemented by home gardens and, especially, black market purchases.

The hardships of wartime and the immediate post-war period were succeeded by a period of steady economic development, in France, now often fondly recalled there as The Thirty Glorious Years (Les Trente Glorieuses). Alternating policies of "interventionist" and "free market" ideas enabled the French to build a society in which both industrial and technological advances could be made but also worker security and privileges were also established and protected. In 1946 France signed a treaty with US that waived a large part of its debt. Known as The Blum-Byrnes agreement (French: accord Blum-Byrnes) a French-American agreement signed May 28, 1946 by Secretary of State James F. Byrnes and Léon Blum and Jean Monnet. This agreement erased part of the French debt to the United States after the Second World War (2 billion dollars).

By the end of the 20th century, France was once again among the leading economic powers of the world, although by the year 2000 there was some fraying around the edges: people in France and elsewhere were asking whether France alone, without becoming even more an integral part of a pan-European economy, would have sufficient market presence to maintain its position, and worker security and privileges, in an increasingly globalized and transnational economic world.

Reconstruction began at the end of the war in 1945, and confidence in the future came back. With the baby boom (which had started as soon as 1942) the birthrate surged rapidly. It took several years to repair the damage caused by the war – battles and bombing had destroyed several cities, factories, bridges, and railway infrastructure. Some 1,200,000 buildings were destroyed or damaged.

In 1945, the provisional government of the French Republic, led by Charles de Gaulle and made up of communists, socialists and gaullists, nationalized key economic sectors (energy, air transport, savings banks, assurances) and big companies (e.g. Renault), with the creation of Social Security and of works councils. A welfare state was set up. Economic planning was initiated with the Commissariat général du Plan in 1946, led by Jean Monnet. The first "Plan de modernisation et d’équipement", for the 1947-1952 period, focused on basic economic activities (energy, steel, cement, transports, agriculture equipment); the second plan (1954–1957) had broader aims: housing construction, urban development, scientific research, manufacturing industries.

The debts left over from the First World War, whose payment had been suspended since 1931, were renegotiated in the Blum-Byrnes agreement of 1946. The U.S. forgave all $2.8 billion in debt, and gave France a new loan of $650 million. In return French negotiator Jean Monnet set out the French five-year plan for recovery and development. American films were now allowed in French cinemas three weeks per month.

The nationalization of major industries took place in the 1930s and 1940s but was never complete. The railways were nationalized in 1937 because they were losing money, but were strategically important. Likewise, the aeronautics and armaments industries were nationalized. During the war, the Vichy government froze wages, froze prices, controlled external trade, and supervise the distribution of raw materials to the manufacturing sector. The French economy accepted increasing levels of nationalization without major political opposition. After the war, the power industry, gas, and electricity were nationalized in 1946, with the goal of bringing increased efficiency. Banking and insurance were nationalized along with iron and steel. However, oil was not considered so important and was not nationalized. The enlarged role of government necessitated systematic national planning, which was a key feature of the postwar industries.

Although the economic situation in France was very grim in 1945, resources did exist and the economy regained normal growth by the 1950s. The US government had planned a major aid program, but it unexpectedly ended Lend Lease in late summer 1945, and additional aid was stymied by Congress in 1945–46. However, there were $2 billion in American loans. France managed to regain its international status thanks to a successful production strategy, a demographic spurt, and technical and political innovations. Conditions varied from firm to firm. Some had been destroyed or damaged, nationalized or requisitioned, but the majority carried on, sometimes working harder and more efficiently than before the war. Industries were reorganized on a basis that ranged from consensual (electricity) to conflictual (machine tools), therefore producing uneven results. Despite strong American pressure through the Marshall Plan (officially, the European Recovery Plan), there was little change in the organization and content of the training for French industrial managers. This was mainly due to the reticence of the existing institutions and the struggle among different economic and political interest groups for control over efforts to improve the further training of practitioners.

The Monnet Plan provided a coherent framework for economic policy, and it was strongly supported by the Marshall Plan. It was inspired by moderate, Keynesian free-trade ideas rather than state control. Although relaunched in an original way, the French economy was about as productive as comparable West European countries.

The United States helped revive the French economy with the Marshall Plan whereby it gave France $2.3 billion with no repayment. France agreed to reduce trade barriers and modernize its management system. The total of all American grants and credits to France, 1946–53, came to $4.9 billion, and low-interest loans added another $2 billion. The Marshall Plan set up intensive tours of American industry. France sent 500 missions with 4700 businessmen and experts to tour American factories, farms, stores and offices. They were especially impressed with the prosperity of American workers, and how they could purchase an inexpensive new automobile for nine months' work, compared to 30 months in France. Some French businesses resisted Americanization, but others seized upon it to attract American investments and build a larger market. The industries that were most Americanized included chemicals, oil, electronics, and instrumentation. They were the most innovative, and most profitable sectors.

Between 1947 and 1973, France went through a booming period (5% per year in average) dubbed by Jean Fourastié Trente Glorieuses, title of a book published in 1979. Between 1946 and the end of the 1960s, the population grew by a record 30%. By 1967, one in three adults was under the age of 20. Population growth was due not only to a higher birth rate, but to a declining mortality rate fueled by improvements in medical care, housing, and nutrition. The infant mortality rate fell from 52.0 in 1950 to 18.2 in 1970. The economic growth was mainly due to productivity gains and to an increase in the number of working hours. Indeed, the working population was growing very slowly, the baby boom being offset by the extension of the time dedicated to studies. Investment as a percentage of GNP rose from around 20% per annum in the 1950s to a peak of 24.7% in 1974, the highest in Europe. Because of currency controls and "the limited mobility of international capital", lenders invested at home and not abroad. Investment fueled continual improvements in production methods, making products like automobiles more affordable for average people.

Through "indicative planning" the French government used its power to direct investment towards targeted industries, regions, and specific products. The state was concerned with stimulating continuous modernization and restructuring, which it encouraged through communication improvements, tax policy, export credits, and ensuring access to cheap loans for firms. Projects and industries considered to be of "strategic national importance" could also count on support from the French state. These included the nuclear power program, the armaments industry, infrastructure, and the aerospace industry.

During the 1950s agricultural productivity soared. France went from being an importer of food to meet the needs of its population, to self-sufficiency and surplus output. The third Modernization Plan of 1957-1961 put an emphasis on investing in the staple agricultural products of Northern France and the Paris region: meat, milk, cheese, wheat, and sugar. The desire to find export markets for this surplus was an important factor in the French decision to join the European Economic Community in 1957. France won concessions like price supports, income supports for farmers, and a commitment from its fellow member nations to buy up French agricultural surpluses. In exchange, the country eliminated tariffs and opened its market to German non-agricultural exports. Tariffs between EEC nations were eliminated in practice by 1968, and the economy and French consumers benefited from imports of Italian domestic appliances like refrigerators and washing machines, or machine tools from West Germany. EEC membership resulted in structural change, high levels of growth, soaring levels of trade between France and her EEC partners, and high levels of investment. Businessmen and farmers experienced some difficulty in adapting to the greater competition and homogeneity of the common market. The "stimulus to change" from membership was most effective in industries with a comparative advantage: agriculture, food processing, aircraft and automobile manufacturing. The importance of third-world markets in the French colonial Empire waned as the economy restructured to meet the demands of a more dynamic European market for high quality goods. In the late 1950s, the "franc area" was the destination for over 25% of French exports, twenty years later it was only 5%.

Productivity gains came from the catching up with the United States. In 1950, the average income in France was 55% of an American and reached 80% in 1973. Between 1960 and 1975, income per capita almost doubled. Among the major nations, only Japan and Spain had faster growth in this era than France. The national government's industrial policy was used to bolster French industries.

Insisting that the period was not that of an economic miracle, but a mere catching up following an economic lag, French historian Jacques Marseille noted that if the economy had constantly grown at the same rate as that of the « Belle Époque », the wealth would have been the same at the beginning of the 1970s as that actually reached after the Trente glorieuses.

With government support, active farmers bought out their neighbors, enlarge their properties, and use the latest in mechanization, new seeds, fertilizers, and new techniques. The result was a revolution in agricultural output, as well as a sharply reduced number of active farmers from 7.4 million in 1946 to only 2 million in 1975. It also resulted in millions of empty old farm houses. They were promptly purchased and upgraded by Frenchmen who wanted a rural retreat away from the frenzy of their primary work in the cities. For many it was in nostalgia for family memories of rural living that drew the city dwellers back to the countryside. By 1978, France was the world leader in per capita ownership of second homes and L’Express reported an "irresistible infatuation of the French for the least Norman thatched house, Cévenol sheep barn or the most modest Provençal farmhouse."

By the late 1960s, France's economic growth, while strong, was beginning to lose steam. Due to the impact of the 1968 social upheaval on the French economy, speculators bet against the French franc. The financial pressure from currency outflows led the government to devalue the franc against the German mark and the US dollar in 1969.

The Trente glorieuses era ended with the worldwide 1973 oil crisis, which increased costs in energy and thus on production. Economic instability marked the Giscard d'Estaing government (1974-1981). Giscard turned to Prime Minister Raymond Barre in 1976, who advocated numerous complex, strict policies ("Barre Plans"). The first Barre plan emerged on 22 September 1976, with a priority to stop inflation. It included a 3-month price freeze; a reduction in the value added tax; wage controls; salary controls; a reduction of the growth in the money supply; and increases in the income tax, automobile taxes, luxury taxes and bank rates. There were measures to restore the trade balance, and support the growth of the economy and employment. Oil imports, whose price had shot up, were limited. There was special aid to exports, and an action fund was set up to aid industries. There was increased financial aid to farmers, who were suffering from a drought, and for social security. The package was not very popular, but was pursued with vigor.

Economic troubles continued into the early years of the presidency of François Mitterrand. A recession in the early 1980s, which led to the abandonment of dirigisme in favour of a more pragmatic approach to economic intervention. Growth resumed later in the decade, only to be slowed down by the economic depression of the early 1990s, which affected the Socialist Party. Liberalisation under Jacques Chirac in the late 1990s strengthened the economy. However, after 2005 the world economy stagnated and the 2008 global crisis and its effects in both the Eurozone and France itself dogged the conservative government of Nicolas Sarkozy, who lost reelection in 2012 against Socialist Francois Hollande.

France's recent economic history has been less turbulent than in many other countries. The average income in France, after having been steady for a long time, increased elevenfold between 1700 and 1975, which constitutes a 0.9% growth rate per year, a rate which has been outdone almost every year since 1975: By the early Eighties, for instance, wages in France were on or slightly above the EEC average.

France, like a number of countries, was affected by the 2008 financial crisis. However, during the worst part of the crisis, between 2008 and 2010, France fared better than other industrialized countries. For example, the Euro zone's overall GDP decreased by 4 percent, while France's GDP only decreased by 2.2 percent. This resilience is linked to France's social protection system, which, through the transfers it organizes (47 percent of gross disposable household income in 2007) equips France with strong economic stabilizers. However, these stabilizers weigh inversely on recovery. Starting in 2012, many countries experienced economic recoveries, where the analysis of the indicators of economic activity in France do not show a clear recovery, or rather do not show an increased growth during this time.

In April and May 2012, France held a presidential election in which the winner François Hollande had opposed austerity measures, promising to eliminate France's budget deficit by 2017. The new government stated that it aimed to cancel recently enacted tax cuts and exemptions for the wealthy, raising the top tax bracket rate to 75% on incomes over a million euros, restoring the retirement age to 60 with a full pension for those who have worked 42 years, restoring 60,000 jobs recently cut from public education, regulating rent increases; and building additional public housing for the poor.

In June 2012, Hollande's Socialist Party won an overall majority in the legislative elections, giving it the capability to amend the French Constitution and allowing immediate enactment of the promised reforms. French government bond interest rates fell 30% to record lows, less than 50 basis points above German government bond rates.

Hollande's successor as President of France, Emmanuel Macron, a centrist politician, took office in May 2017. His aim was to revive the euro zone's second-largest economy.

In July 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the French government issued 10-years bonds which had negative interest rates, for the first time in its history (which means that investors buying French bonds will pay, rather than receive, interest for owning French sovereign debt).

France possesses in 2020 the fourth-largest gold reserves in the world. In April 2022, France's incumbent president, Emmanuel Macron, was re-elected.

President Macron vowed in May 2023 to build factories, boost job creations and make France more independent, shaked by pension protests. The background of the pension reform was about 14% of GDP pension spending in France compared to OECD average of just over 9%. The aim of the 2023 pension reform was to reduce cost by increasing the minimum legal retirement age from 62 years to 64 years in 2030. In April 2023, president Emmanuel Macron signed the pension reforms into law.

Economic planning in France, overseen by the General Planning Commission (French: Commissariat Général du Plan), was initiated in 1946 under the leadership of Jean Monnet. It continued for nearly half a century, evolving through various approaches.

The concept of economic planning in France did not emerge immediately after World War II. It was shaped by diverse political movements during the interwar period and contributed to the 1933 split between the SFIO and the PSdF, influenced by the planisme of Henri de Man, leader of the Belgian Labour Party. A minority within the SFIO, the Révolution constructive group, remained supportive of planisme.

In 1934, a proposed plan brought together politicians and trade unionists from varied political backgrounds, both left and right. Some historians note that the 1930s saw a proliferation of planning proposals, though none were implemented at the state level.

Jacques Sapir traces French planning back to World War I, when ammunition shortages and mass conscription necessitated organized economic management.

The Vichy regime introduced the first state-led economic planning instruments in France, concurrent with similar discussions by the National Council of the Resistance 's Comité Général d'Étude from 1942–1943 and the French Committee of National Liberation in Algiers in 1944. The Vichy regime established the Délégation Générale à l'Équipement National (DGEN). It adopted the principle of a plan (law of April 6, 1941). In May 1942, the DGEN presented a 600-page, ten-year plan for reconstruction, industrial and technological catch-up, and controlled urbanization. The plan avoided nationalization, with the state's role limited to stimulating, guiding, and financing private investment.

Achievements under the Vichy plan were modest. Notable projects included land development in Sologne and La Crau, early work on the Tancarville Bridge, the Tunnel de la Croix-Rousse in Lyon, and several hydroelectric dam projects.

Only the plan's two-year "initial phase" was launched, later adopted by the De Gaulle government in 1944. The DGEN, with much of its staff retained, served as the foundation for the future General Planning Commission.

Post-1945 French planning, managed by the Commissariat au Plan, was indicative and incentivizing, unlike Soviet planning. The General Planning Commission (CGP) relied on two forecasting bodies: Insee and the SEEF (Service des Études Économiques et Financières of the Ministry of Finance).

French planning was distinctive in several ways. It represented the state's most unique effort to steer the market. By setting quantitative or qualitative goals agreed upon by social partners, the plan guided investments toward priority sectors for growth. In this sense, it acted as a "reducer of uncertainties," as described by Pierre Massé.

The positions regarding the First Plan of Modernization and Equipment and the means to ensure its execution include the following:

The 1947–1950 Plan of Modernization and Equipment, submitted to the Council, aimed primarily to:

This created the foundation for a second phase focused on transforming living conditions, especially housing.

The First Plan of Modernization and Equipment is remembered as the one that, in the aftermath of World War II, quantified and translated into action the dilemma of "modernization or decline."

Its goals addressed economic lag and shortages, restarting production and meeting the population's essential needs, raising the standard of living, and improving housing and collective living conditions. The Plan extended to restoring public and private infrastructure and equipment damaged or destroyed by the war.

It focused selectively on six core sectors: coal, electricity, cement, agricultural machinery, transport, and steel. With a limited number of objectives and broad consensus, the First Plan was executed.

The plan fostered a new mindset among business leaders without undermining private initiative. The state's strengthened role in production, bolstered by post-war nationalizations and price controls, supported effective economic management.

The Marshall Plan significantly aided the Monnet Plan by financing much of the investment in core sectors.

The plan's initial duration was extended to 1952 to align with other schedules.

The Second Plan coincided with the final years of the Fourth Republic. It retained quantitative production targets, covering more sectors. Planning expanded to public investments, particularly in schools and hospitals. Multi-year programs were initiated, not at the request of relevant ministers but by the Budget Director, who sought to prioritize amid growing funding demands.

From the Second Plan, planning shifted from core sectors to actions enhancing resource efficiency—research and development, agricultural market organization, business restructuring, and workforce retraining.

Approved by law two years later, the Second Plan was reasonably well-executed despite severe financial difficulties caused by the Algerian War. Its completion saw a growing trade deficit, forcing the French government in January 1958 to send Jean Monnet to Washington for $600 million in emergency aid.

The Third Plan aimed to sustain growth amid three key changes:

The Third Plan's development, tied to General Charles de Gaulle 's vision for national and state recovery, introduced two significant changes: the use of national accounting to set a gross domestic product growth target and test internal consistency, and a forward-looking approach with long-term projections (1955–1965).

Execution of the Third Plan was marked by the 1959 Rueff stabilization plan [ fr ].

Recovery occurred faster than anticipated, but at the cost of slowed growth, largely offset by the 1960–1961 interim plan.

By 1960, the French economy was clearly on a path of sustained growth, transitioning from scarcity to relative abundance, with mass consumption emerging.

In this new economic context, the original principles of planning expanded. The focus shifted from directing production to priority sectors to ensuring optimal conditions for economic and social development. The Fourth Plan targeted modernization of "lagging" sectors (hospital sector, motorways, telecommunications, and national education).

Planning became more indicative, setting goals not solely dependent on the state. While increasingly macroeconomic, it incorporated social considerations.

The law of August 4, 1962, approving the Plan for Economic and Social Development, defined parliamentary approval procedures for plan legislation for the first time.

This applied to the Fourth Plan, a high point in French planning history.

Its development benefited from favorable conditions: the leadership of the new Commissioner General, Pierre Massé ; the 1960–1962 economic climate and steady global growth; and the commitment of Charles de Gaulle and the government to the "ardent obligation" of planning as a key tool for asserting economic policy choices. Procedural innovations, such as the creation of the Conseil Supérieur du Plan, consultation with the Conseil Économique et Social on major directions, and the reintegration of the CGT into modernization commissions, fostered a consensual atmosphere.

The Fourth Plan revolved around three objectives:

Strong growth while maintaining major economic balances;

A doubling of the growth rate of collective infrastructure compared to GDP; Efforts to address social and regional inequalities, focusing on distributing the benefits of expansion, or, in Pierre Massé 's words, "sharing the surplus," particularly for collective services.

The Fourth Plan was the most successfully executed of all plans. However, two events stood out: the failure of the 1964 Conference des Revenus and the beginning of a decline in France's fertility rate in the same year.

The Fifth Plan aimed to balance rapid industrial growth with social progress through expanded collective infrastructure, amid increased competition due to open borders. It set indicative price and wage guidelines to curb inflation. To prevent economic overheating, its growth target was slightly lower than that of the Fourth Plan.

Enhancing production competitiveness and controlling income and price trends became primary concerns.

The May 1968 unrest disrupted the Fifth Plan's execution. While growth remained unaffected, prices surged, leading to a slowdown in collective infrastructure development. The French economy's performance was constrained by inadequate vocational training and poor management of workplace social relations.

The Sixth Plan prioritized industrial imperatives, with nuclear programs and the TGV championed by Charles de Gaulle and continued by President Georges Pompidou after the 1969 referendum. For the first time, the concept of fonction collective emerged, broadening the scope of collective infrastructure planning.

The development of the turbotrain, precursor to the TGV, connecting Paris to Lyon in two hours, was confirmed in 1972 by Transport Minister Robert Galley, following trials at 220 km/h in spring 1972 and 300 km/h that summer.

Initially abandoned due to "opposition from aircraft manufacturers and Air Inter " and high costs (1.41 billion francs), the project was revived after a March 26, 1971, interministerial council approved a Paris-Lyon link by 1978 or 1979, costing over 1.5 billion francs and deemed profitable.

Olivier Guichard, Minister of Regional Planning and Equipment [ fr ], favored enhanced air links or an aérotrain, but Galley reaffirmed the decision in 1972. On March 23, the SNCF unveiled the turbotrain à grande vitesse, or TGV 001, at Alsthom 's Belfort plant.

A third-generation successor to the gas-turbine ETG [ fr ] trains, operating successfully since March 16, 1970, at 160 km/h on the Paris-Caen-Cherbourg line, the TGV held export potential, attracting interest from the United States, where the Federal Department of Transportation commissioned Sofrerail for high-speed rail expertise in June 1972.

Meanwhile, EDF accelerated nuclear deployment during the Sixth Plan, commissioning six new reactors. In May 1969, Ambroise Roux outlined a rationalization agreement with his former partner Alstom, in which Thomson-Brandt [ fr ] held an 18% stake. By November 1969, the CGE acquired 50% of Alstom's capital. This followed the purchase of boiler and steam turbine assets from Stein et Roubaix and Rateau, despite earlier mentions of a 40% stake.

Facing intensifying global competition and an increasingly specialized international division of labor, the Sixth Plan addressed structural constraints on the French economy: the significant agricultural population, the need for better enterprise management and social relations, and housing shortages hindering workforce mobility.

The Sixth Plan aligned with President Georges Pompidou 's priorities—strong growth and industrial focus—while aiming for low inflation, faster growth in collective infrastructure than in production, and improved living conditions.

In regional planning, the Sixth Plan granted medium-sized cities [ fr ] (20,000 to 100,000 inhabitants) greater political autonomy in territorial development for the first time.

However, the 1973 first oil crisis halved growth rates within OECD countries, despite advanced nuclear and TGV programs. The Trente Glorieuses ended as France completed post-war reconstruction and bridged major infrastructure gaps. Most households now owned cars, appliances, and televisions.

The combination of these unforeseen yet predictable events caused a sharp growth slowdown, revealing the limits of political control over the economy.

The Sixth Plan's execution was consequently compromised. The Cultural Development Council [ fr ] was established.

The difficulty of forecasting amid major global crises, such as the oil crises of 1973 and 1979, soaring oil prices, and dollar fluctuations, made planning increasingly challenging. The Seventh Plan marked a questioning of planning's relevance, prepared during a period of slowed global growth. Initial international scenarios, deemed too pessimistic, were revised to set more ambitious growth and employment targets.

The unpredictable external context was considered for collective infrastructure, with 25 priority action programs (PAPs) allocated 110 billion francs across ministry budgets, achieving satisfactory execution and reflecting heightened public finance selectivity.

During execution, the Commissariat Général du Plan produced a report on adapting the Seventh Plan, highlighting themes that shaped later plans: adapting industry to global competition and addressing the financial fragility of French firms.

In 1978, Commissioner Michel Albert described the economic crisis as "not a cyclical break but a structural rupture," emphasizing tighter constraints. He noted the Plan's role in reminding that not everything is possible simultaneously.

Projections, however, downplayed the second oil crisis's impact.

Prepared with input from foreign experts Wassily Leontief and Sir Andrew Shonfield, the Eighth Plan employed the DMS macroeconomic model to craft an employment-focused economic policy within external constraints. Various policy options were computer-analyzed, which Pierre Massé called "mathematics in the service of democracy."

Ultimately, the Eighth Plan was neither presented to Parliament nor implemented, as a change in majority suspended it.

Following François Mitterrand 's election in May 1981, the government under Pierre Mauroy sought to revive planning while modernizing its methods. The interim plan (1982–1983), a consumption-driven stimulus, fell short of expectations. The law of July 29, 1982, reforming planning, introduced a complex framework: an 80-member national planning commission, a two-phase plan, priority execution programs (PPEs) succeeding PAPs, state-region contracts [ fr ], and contracts with public enterprises.

The five-year fixed-horizon plan persisted but adopted a decentralized, contractual approach, empowering regions, which gained development responsibilities under decentralization laws. State-public enterprise relations were governed by multi-year conventions and contracts.

The July 29, 1982, law and January 21, 1983, decree established state-region contracts, emphasizing partnership in planning and regional partnership in planning and regional development.

Post-rigour policy, the Ninth Plan aimed to curb inflation through wage cost control, keeping net wage growth below productivity gains. Investment was to return to pre-1975 levels, technological gaps in competitive industries were to be closed, and open borders were prioritized, with the franc anchored in the European Monetary System. Restoring corporate financial health was a key focus.

In the Tenth Plan, the international context was as prominent as during the Monnet Plan. Its horizon, initially 1993, was set to 1992 to align with the single market 's launch. Macroeconomic analysis relied on the European Commission 's 1988–1992 European scenario.

Planning served three functions: long-term foresight via the " Entrer dans le XXIe siècle " report by the Horizon 2000 group; medium-term economic projections by the Perspectives Économiques group, involving public and private forecasting teams, CEE, and OECD experts; and coherence in plan preparation.

The plan, now termed "strategic," shifted from forecasting to defining key actions for the period.

Its commitment level differed from past plans. Less binding in programmed sections, as PAPs and PPEs were phased out, it was strengthened in contractual state-region contracts, retaining financial programming. It focused on structural orientations and qualitative goals: high employment, social cohesion, and adaptation to the European market.

The second generation of contracts (1989–1993) improved on the first (1984–1988) with greater selectivity, simplified procedures, and enhanced decentralization, with regional prefects playing a larger role. Regions like Brittany, Limousin, Rhône-Alpes, and Basse-Normandie conducted medium- and long-term studies, leading to development plans.

The European dimension included contributions to EU structural funds.

Contract funding rose by 25% (52 billion francs from the state, nearly 46 billion from regions). State priorities supported regions with industrial conversion challenges (Lorraine, Nord, Champagne-Ardenne) and rural areas (Auvergne, Poitou-Charentes).

Public awareness grew of evaluation's importance, more advanced in Anglo-Saxon countries, providing citizens with policy impact data, optimizing resource allocation, and enhancing state accountability.

The January 22, 1990, decree defined evaluation as assessing whether legal, administrative, or financial means achieved a policy's intended effects and objectives. It established an interministerial evaluation framework, with the CIME (comité interministériel de l'évaluation), chaired by the Prime Minister, and the CSE (conseil scientifique de l'évaluation), comprising 11 independent experts consulted on funded studies.

Prepared in 1992 through consultative commissions, the Eleventh Plan project, intended for 1993–1997, was not adopted by the government following the March 1993 elections, which favored quinquennial laws for economic policy. The crisis of French planning became evident.

Nevertheless, the third generation of state-region contracts (1994–1998) emerged. The 1991 Université 2000 plan, involving all local authorities to assess higher education trends and set five-year programs, strengthened consultation practices. The CIAT [ fr ] of October 3, 1991, endorsed the contractual approach, tasking regional prefects with drafting strategy proposals for state action. These informed ministerial budget drafts, while regional council presidents were encouraged to develop regional plans through broad consultation.

The state's total commitment reached 67.5 billion francs, a 32% increase from the previous generation.

With urban contract funds, the state allocated over 76 billion francs to this generation, supporting rural development, education, research, transport infrastructure, and economic competitiveness. An evaluation system for contracts was established, with dedicated funding.

The CIAT [ fr ] in Mende on July 12, 1993, planned a territorial development law and national debate. Contracts were defined as key territorial planning tools, with state interventions tailored to regional economic conditions to promote solidarity.

In December 1993, Prime Minister Édouard Balladur tasked Jean de Gaulle, a Paris deputy, with a mission to reflect on "the future of the Plan and the role of planning in French society," resulting in a report titled " L'avenir du Plan et la place de la planification dans la société française."

France has a highly developed social market economy with strong state participation in strategic sectors. It is the world's seventh-largest economy by nominal GDP and the ninth-largest economy by PPP, constituting around 3% of world GDP. France has a diversified economy, that is dominated by the service sector (which in 2017 represented 78.8% of its GDP), whilst the industrial sector accounted for 19.5% of its GDP and the primary sector accounted for the remaining 1.7%. In 2024, France was the largest Foreign Direct Investment recipient in Europe, and Europe's second-largest spender in research and development. It was ranked among the 10 most innovative countries in the world by the 2020 Bloomberg Innovation Index, as well as the 15th most competitive nation globally according to the 2019 Global Competitiveness Report (up 2 notches compared to 2018). It was the fifth-largest trading nation in the world (and second in Europe after Germany). France is also the most-visited destination in the world, as well as the European Union 's leading agricultural power.

According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), in 2025, France was the world's 25th country by GDP per capita with $48,981 per inhabitant. In 2023, France was listed on the United Nations's Human Development Index with a value of 0.920 (indicating very high human development) and 25th on the Corruption Perceptions Index in 2024. Among OECD members, France has a highly efficient and strong social security system, which comprises roughly 31.7% of GDP.

Paris is a leading global city, and has one of the largest city GDP in the world. It ranks as the first city in Europe (and 3rd worldwide) by the number of companies classified in Fortune ' s Fortune Global 500. Paris produced US$738 billion (or US$882 billion at market exchange rates) or around 1/3 of the French economy in 2018 while the economy of the Paris metropolitan area —the largest in Europe with London—generates around 1/3 of France's GDP or around $1.0 trillion. Paris has been ranked as the 2nd most attractive global city in the world in 2019 by KPMG. La Défense, Paris's Central Business District, was ranked by Ernst & Young in 2017 as the leading business district in continental Europe, and fourth in the world. The OECD is headquartered in Paris, the nation's financial capital. The other major economic centres of the country include Lyon, Toulouse (centre of the European aerospace industry), Marseille and Lille.

France's economy entered the recession of the late 2000s later and appeared to leave it earlier than most affected economies, only enduring four-quarters of contraction. However, France experienced stagnant growth between 2012 and 2014, with the economy expanding by 0% in 2012, 0.8% in 2013 and 0.2% in 2014. Growth picked up in 2015 with a growth of 0.8%. This was followed by a growth of 1.1% for 2016, a growth of 2.2% for 2017, and a growth of 2.1% for 2018.

According to INSEE (2021), non-financial and non-agricultural medium-sized firms employed 3 million full-time equivalent employees (24.3% of the workforce), accounted for 27% of investment, 30% of turnover, and 26% of value added, despite accounting for only 1.6% of total firms in France.

The economic history of France involves major events and trends, including the elaboration and extension of the seigneurial economic system (including the enserfment of peasants) in the medieval Kingdom of France, the development of the French colonial empire in the early modern period, the wide-ranging reforms of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Era, the competition with the United Kingdom and other neighboring states during industrialization and the extension of imperialism, the total wars of the late-19th and early 20th centuries, and the introduction of the welfare state and integration with the European Union since World War II.

Medieval and early modern France experienced periods of economic growth, as well as challenges such as wars, plagues, and social inequality. The economy relied heavily on agriculture, trade, and the production of luxury goods, and the power and influence of the monarchy played a significant role in shaping economic policies and development. In the late 18th century, French industries faced challenges from competition with England, leading to an industrial depression. The American War of Independence had mixed effects on trade, while the French economy experienced setbacks, including agricultural price reductions and debt accumulation.

France experienced a mix of growth, stagnation, and setbacks during the period from 1789 to 1914. It faced economic challenges related to the French Revolution, Napoleonic wars, protectionism, and industrialization. While France made some advancements in banking and finance, it fell behind other nations in terms of industrial development. Colonialism played a complex role in France's economic and geopolitical landscape. While it provided economic benefits and resources, it also had consequences for the colonized peoples, including exploitation, cultural assimilation, and the suppression of local autonomy.

In 1914-1944, World War I, the interwar period, and the German occupation during World War II had significant impacts on the French economy, resulting in economic challenges, inflation, labor unrest, and hardship for the population.

During the Trente Glorieuses, from 1947 to 1973, France experienced a booming period with an average annual growth rate of 5%. The population grew rapidly, fueled by a high birth rate and declining mortality rate. The economy's growth was driven by productivity gains and increased working hours, as well as investment in targeted industries, regions, and products through indicative planning. The government played a significant role in directing investment and supporting industries of strategic national importance.

During the 1980s France faced economic troubles including a short recession. This led to a shift away from dirigisme, or state intervention, towards a more pragmatic approach. Economic growth resumed later in the decade but was hindered by the economic depression in the early 1990s, which affected the Socialist Party. Jacques Chirac 's liberalization measures in the late 1990s strengthened the economy. However, the global economic stagnation after 2005 and the 2008 global crisis had adverse effects on France and the Eurozone, causing difficulties for Nicolas Sarkozy 's conservative government.

With 31 companies that are part of the world's biggest 500 companies, France was in 2020 the most represented European country in the 2020 Fortune Global 500, ahead of Germany (27 companies) and the UK (22).

As of August 2020, France was also the country that weighed the most on the Eurozone's EURO STOXX 50 (representing 36.4% of all total assets), ahead of Germany (35.2%).

Several French corporations rank amongst the largest in their industries such as Axa in insurance and Air France in air transportation. Luxury and consumer goods are particularly relevant, with L'Oreal being the world's largest cosmetic company while LVMH and Kering are the world's two largest luxury product companies. In energy and utilities, GDF-Suez and EDF are amongst the largest energy companies in the world, and Areva is a large nuclear-energy company; Veolia Environnement is the world's largest environmental services and water management company; Vinci SA, Bouygues and Eiffage are large construction companies; Michelin ranks in the top 3 tire manufacturers; JCDecaux is the world's largest outdoor advertising corporation; BNP Paribas, Credit Agricole and Société Générale rank amongst the largest banks in the world by assets. Capgemini and Atos are among the largest technology consulting companies.

Carrefour is the world's second-largest retail group in terms of revenue; Total is the world's fourth-largest private oil company; Lactalis is the world's largest dairy products group; Sanofi is the world's fifth-largest pharmaceutical company; Publicis is the world's third-largest advertising company; Groupe PSA is the world's 6th and Europe's 2nd largest automaker; Accor is the leading European hotel group; Alstom is one of the world's leading conglomerates in rail transport.

In 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in France is Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate with 2,656,178 companies followed by Services and Retail Trade with 2,090,320 and 549,395 companies respectively.

France embarked on a programme of modernisation under state coordination. This programme of dirigisme, mostly implemented by governments between 1944 and 1983, involved the state control of certain industries such as transportation, energy and telecommunications as well as various incentives for private corporations to merge or engage in certain projects

The 1981 election of president François Mitterrand saw a short-lived increase in governmental control of the economy, nationalizing many industries and private banks. This form of increased dirigisme, was criticised as early as 1982. By 1983, the government decided to renounce dirigisme and start an era of rigueur ("rigor") or corporation. As a result, the government largely retreated from economic intervention; dirigisme has now essentially receded, though some of its traits remain. The French economy grew and changed under government direction and planning much more than in other European countries.

Despite being a widely liberalised economy, the government continues to play a significant role in the economy: government spending, at 56% of GDP in 2014, is the second-highest in the European Union. Labor conditions and wages are highly regulated. The government continues to own shares in corporations in several sectors, including energy production and distribution, automobiles, aerospace industry, shipbuilding, the arms industry, electronics industry, machine industry, metallurgy, fuels, chemical industry, transportation, and telecommunications.

France has a mixed market economy, with the majority of market activity driven by competitive private firms. However, a significant share of the market is owned by the state. According to France’s National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE), 1,751 French companies were state-controlled by the end of 2017. OECD identified the state-owned primary sectors as energy, transportation, finance, and manufacturing. The state maintains ownership of key sectors to ensure strategic control and prevent private monopolies.

In April and May 2012, France held a presidential election in which the winner François Hollande had opposed austerity measures, promising to eliminate France's budget deficit by 2017. The new government stated that it aimed to cancel recently enacted tax cuts and exemptions for the wealthy, raising the top tax bracket rate to 75% on incomes over a million euros, restoring the retirement age to 60 with a full pension for those who have worked 42 years, restoring 60,000 jobs recently cut from public education, regulating rent increases; and building additional public housing for the poor.

In June 2012, Hollande's Socialist Party won an overall majority in the legislative elections, giving it the capability to amend the French Constitution and allowing immediate enactment of the promised reforms. French government bond interest rates fell 30% to record lows, less than 50 basis points above German government bond rates.

Hollande's successor as President of France, Emmanuel Macron, a centrist politician, took office in May 2017. His aim was to revive the euro zone’s second-largest economy.

In July 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the French government issued 10-years bonds which had negative interest rates, for the first time in its history (which means that investors buying French bonds will pay, rather than receive, interest for owning French sovereign debt).

France possesses in 2020 the fourth-largest gold reserves in the world.

Macron vowed in May 2023 to build factories, boost job creations and make France more independent, shaked by pension protests.

In March 2026, the Bank of France reported that it had completed a program to upgrade 129 metric tons of its gold reserves—approximately 5% of the total—by selling non-standard gold held in New York and purchasing compliant bars now stored in Paris, generating a one-off capital gain of nearly €13 billion due to high gold prices. The transaction occurred during the 2026 Iran war, which drove gold prices to record highs. The Bank of France stated that the decision was not politically motivated but was based on European market standards for gold trading.

The Government of France has run a budget deficit each year since the early 1970s. As of 2021, French government debt reached an equivalent of 118.6% of French GDP.

Under European Union rules, member states are supposed to limit their debt to 60% of output or be reducing the ratio structurally towards this ceiling, and run public deficits of no more than 3.0% of GDP.

In late 2012, credit-rating agencies warned that growing French government debt levels risked France's AAA credit rating, raising the possibility of a future credit downgrade and subsequent higher borrowing costs for the French government. In 2012 France was downgraded by ratings agencies Moody's, Standard & Poor 's (S&P), and Fitch to an AA+ credit rating.

In December 2014 France's credit rating was further downgraded by Fitch and S&P to AA.

Macron, shaken by pension protests, vowed in May 2023 to build factories, boost job creations and make France more independent.

The Government of France experienced a significant shift in its bond market position on September 26, 2024, when its bond yield surpassed that of Spain for the first time since 2007. The yield on 10-year French bonds reached 2.97%, slightly exceeding the yield on Spanish bonds of similar maturity, despite France's typically higher credit rating. This development raised concerns among investors about France's ability to manage its public finances effectively. France's bond yields were reported to be higher than those of Portugal and approaching levels seen in Italy and Greece, countries traditionally viewed as having higher economic risks in the Eurozone.

Furthermore, France faces a budget crisis in 2024, with the deficit at risk of exceeding 6% of GDP, significantly higher than the previous government's estimate of 5.1%. Newly appointed Finance Minister Antoine Armand and Budget Minister Laurent Saint-Martin pledged to focus on spending cuts before considering tax increases to address the fiscal shortfall. Prime Minister Michel Barnier was tasked with finalizing the 2025 budget within days, amidst pressure to present realistic plans for deficit reduction.

In September 2026, French 10-year government bond yields rose above 4.13% reaching their highest level since 2008, amid concerns over France's rising public debt, political deadlock and uncertainty surrounding the 2027 budget.

Welfare in France (also known as social protection, from French : Protection sociale) includes all systems whose purpose is to protect people against the financial consequences of social risks (illness, maternity, old age, unemployment).

Social welfare refers to all the mechanisms of collective foresight, enabling individuals to cope with the financial consequences of "social risks". These are situations that could jeopardize the economic security of the individual or their family (defined as a group of people bound by ties of lineage and alliance), causing a decline in its resources or increase its expenditure (old age, sickness, disability, unemployment, maternity, family responsibilities, etc.). In France, the welfare system make up for about 500 billion euros annually, or more than 30% of GDP.

The origin of social protection in France dates back to medieval times, with fraternal benefit societies. In the second half of the nineteenth century, systems of social assistance developed gradually, often launched by employers marked by social Catholicism, then relayed by the first laws. In 1930, modern social insurance was created, offering employees protection against certain risks: accidents, sickness, disability, maternity, old age, death... During the Second World War, the National Council of Resistance designed the system of social security, now at the heart of social protection. It was created just after the Liberation, by an order of 4 October 1945, followed by other texts. Gradually, protection has covered the entire population, while the benefits extend.

When creating Social Security, France imitated more the Bismarckian system (insurance for workers) than the Beveridge one (widespread solidarity). Over the years, the solidarity (as opposed to a system of contributions) has gradually developed in the French system, which the foundation remains the concept of insurance. However, the desire to establish a universal system has faced opposition. This explains why the French welfare system is plural, with a wide variety of actors. The most important is the general scheme for employees of industry, commerce and services.

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2021 (with IMF staff estimates in 2022–2027). Inflation below 5% is in green.

In 2019, France was the world's 8th largest manufacturer in terms of value added, according to the World Bank.

The leading industrial sectors in France are telecommunications (including communication satellites), aerospace and defence, ship building, pharmaceuticals, construction and civil engineering, chemicals, textiles, and automobile production. The chemical industry is a key sector for France, helping to develop other manufacturing activities and contributing to economic growth.

Research and development spending is also high in France at 2.26% of GDP, the fourth-highest in the OECD.

Industry contributes to French exports: as of 2018, the Observatory of Economic Complexity estimates that France's largest exports "are led by planes, helicopters, and spacecraft ($43.8 billion), cars ($26 billion), packaged medicaments ($25.7 billion), vehicle parts ($16.5 billion), and gas turbines ($14.4 billion)."

In December 2023, industrial production in France experienced its most significant change since May of the same year, with a notable increase of 1.1%.

France is the world-leading country in nuclear energy, home of global energy giants Areva, EDF and GDF Suez : nuclear power now accounts for about 78% of the country's electricity production, up from only 8% in 1973, 24% in 1980, and 75% in 1990. Nuclear waste is stored on site at reprocessing facilities. Due to its heavy investment in nuclear power, France is the smallest emitter of carbon dioxide among the seven most industrialised countries in the world. Due to its overwhelming reliance on nuclear power, renewable energies have seen relatively little growth compared to other Western countries.

In 2006, electricity generated in France amounted to 548.8 TWh, of which:

In November 2004, EDF (which stands for Electricité de France), one of the world's largest utility company and France's largest electricity provider, was floated with huge success on the French stock market. However, the French state still retains 70% of the capital. Other electricity providers include Compagnie nationale du Rhône (CNR) and Endesa (through SNET).

France is the world's sixth-largest agricultural producer and EU's leading agricultural power, accounting for about one-third of all agricultural land within the EU. In the early 1980s, France was the leading producer of the three principal grains of wheat, barley, and maize. Back in 1983, France produced around 24.8 million tonnes, ahead of the United Kingdom and West Germany, the next two largest wheat producers.

Northern France is characterised by large wheat farms. Dairy products, pork, poultry, and apple production are concentrated in the western region. Beef production is located in central France, while the production of fruits, vegetables, and wine ranges from central to southern France. France is a large producer of many agricultural products and is currently expanding its forestry and fishery industries. The implementation of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) and the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) have resulted in reforms in the agricultural sector of the economy.

As the world's second-largest agricultural exporter, France ranks just after the United States. The destination of 49% of its exports is other EU members states. France also provides agricultural exports to many poor African countries (including its former colonies) which face serious food shortages. Wheat, beef, pork, poultry, and dairy products are the principal exports.

Exports from the United States face stiff competition from domestic production, other EU member states, and third-world countries in France. US agricultural exports to France, totaling some $600 million annually, consist primarily of soybeans and soybean products, feeds and fodders, seafood, and consumer products, especially snack foods and nuts. French exports to the United States are much more high-value products such as its cheese, processed products and its wine.

The French agricultural sector receives almost €11 billion in EU subsidies. France produced in 2018 39.5 million tons of sugar beet (2nd largest producer in the world, just behind Russia), which serves to produce sugar and ethanol ; 35.8 million tons of wheat (5th largest producer in the world); 12.6 million tons of maize (11th largest producer in the world); 11.2 million tons of barley (2nd largest producer in the world, only behind Russia); 7.8 million tons of potato (8th largest producer in the world); 6.2 million tons of grape (5th largest producer in the world); 4.9 million tons of rapeseed (4th largest producer in the world, behind Canada, China and India); 2.2 million tons of sugarcane ; 1.7 million tons of apple (9th largest producer in the world); 1.3 million tons of triticale (4th largest producer in the world, only behind Poland, Germany and Belarus); 1.2 million tons of sunflower seed (9th largest producer in the world); 712 thousand tons of tomatoes ; 660 thousand tons of linen ; 615 thousand tons of dry pea ; 535 thousand tons of carrot; 427 thousand tons of oats ; 400 thousand tons of soy ; in addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.

Mining in France is based solely on the nature of the material, whether extracted from the surface or underground. These include fuels (coal, hydrocarbons, gas), metals (iron, copper) and a few other minerals (salt, sulfur).

The inventory of mining resources is relatively well known for surface and subsurface deposits. It is less well known for deep-seated resources, and needs to be regularly updated to take into account the discovery of new resources and the depletion of certain deposits.

Products not included in the list of mines are referred to as quarries, and include building materials such as sand, clay, gypsum and limestone. They are subject to ICPE (installations classées pour la protection de l'environnement) legislation.

While, under the French Civil Code, the subsoil belongs to the owner of the soil, the management of the mining subsoil is the responsibility of the State, which may grant a concession to a mining company.

Mining always leaves its mark on the environment and human health, particularly when it comes to metal and metalloid deposits, and especially in naturally acidic regions prone to runoff, and even more so in the case of acid mine drainage.

Major mines and deposits also exist overseas, including in French Guiana and New Caledonia.

The French government is the French arms industry's main customer, mainly buying warships, guns, nuclear weapons and equipment.

During the 2000–2015 period, France was the fourth largest weapons exporter in the world.

French manufacturers export great quantities of weaponry to Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Brazil, Greece, India, Pakistan, Taiwan, Singapore and many others. It was reported that in 2015, French arms sales internationally amounted to 17.4 billion U.S. dollars, more than double the figure of 2014.

According to 2017 data compiled by Deloitte, Louis Vuitton Moet Hennessey (LVMH), a French brand, is the largest luxury company in the world by sales, selling more than twice the amount of its nearest competitor. Moreover, France also possesses 3 of the top 10 luxury goods companies by sales (LVMH, Kering SA, L'Oréal), more than any other country in the world.

Paris is considered one of the world's foremost fashion capitals, or even "the world's fashion capital". The French tradition for haute couture has been estimated to start as early as the era of Louis XIV, the Sun King.

Social housing in France is housing intended, following a public or private initiative, for people whose income does not exceed certain limits within the working and middle classes. The term encompasses the construction, occupancy, and management of this housing stock. It contributes to public housing policy and social economy policies that govern its administration. In other countries, social housing has similar objectives.

Social housing is a compromise between a precursor to “Fordism” outlined from the late 19th century to ease tensions in the labor world, the realization of a republican project to ensure greater de facto equality among citizens through legislation, and a modern project in the fields of urban planning, architecture, construction, and social engineering in the 20th century.

Social housing accounts for 17% of France’s total housing stock in 2013:.

According to a study by the Banque des Territoires in 2025, building new or renovated social housing seems impossible given the budgetary equation in France.

Education in France is organised in a highly centralised manner, with many subdivisions. It is divided into the three stages of primary education (enseignement primaire), secondary education (enseignement secondaire), and higher education (enseignement supérieur). In French higher education, the following degrees are recognised by the Bologna Process (EU recognition): Licence and Licence Professionnelle (bachelor's degrees), and the comparably named Master and Doctorat degrees.

The Programme for International Student Assessment coordinated by the OECD currently ranks the overall knowledge and skills of French 15-year-olds as 26th in the world in reading literacy, mathematics, and science, near the OECD average of 493. France's performance in mathematics and science at the middle school level was ranked 23 in the 1995 Trends in International Math and Science Study.

The OECD also found that students in France reported greater concern about discipline and behaviour at school and in classrooms, much more than the rest of Europe. This was higher than all OECD countries. School principals reported higher staff and material shortage in France, higher than OECD averages. About 7% of French teachers believe the teaching profession is highly valued in France and in society. School principals noted regular acts of violence and bullying among their students, higher than averages. The time spent of teaching time spent on keeping classes in good order is one of the largest in France, among all OECD countries studied. France also has a high drop out rate.

Pupils can take apprenticeships to enter the labour market with the Baccalauréat Technologique. It allows pupils pursue short and technical studies (laboratory, design and applied arts, hotel and restaurant, management etc).

Higher education in France was reshaped by the student revolts of May 1968. During the 1960s, French public universities responded to a massive explosion in the number of students (280,000 in 1962–63 to 500,000 in 1967–68) by stuffing approximately one-third of their students into hastily developed campus annexes (roughly equivalent to American satellite campuses) which lacked decent amenities, resident professors, academic traditions, or the dignity of university status. This is why the French higher education economy performs poorly compared with other high-performing countries such as England or Australia. France also hosts various catholic universities recognised by the state, the largest one being Lille Catholic University, as well branch colleges of foreign universities. They include Baruch College, the University of London Institute in Paris, Parsons Paris School of Art and Design and the American University of Paris. Eighteen million pupils and students are in the education system, over 2.4 million of whom are in higher education.

The French health care system is one of universal health care largely financed by government national health insurance. In 2017, France spent 11.3% of GDP on health care, or US$5,370 per capita, a figure higher than the average spent by rich countries (OECD average is 8.8%, 2017), though similar to Germany (10.6%) and Canada (10%), but much less than in the US (17.1%, 2018). Approximately 77% of health expenditures are covered by government-funded agencies.

Most general physicians are in private practice but draw their income from the public insurance funds. These funds, unlike their German counterparts, have never gained self-management responsibility. Instead, the government has taken responsibility for the financial and operational management of health insurance (by setting premium levels related to income and determining the prices of goods and services refunded). The French government generally refunds patients 70% of most health care costs, and 100% in case of costly or long-term ailments. Supplemental coverage may be bought from private insurers, most of them nonprofit, mutual insurers. Until 2000, coverage was restricted to those who contributed to social security (generally, workers or retirees), excluding some poor segments of the population. The government of Lionel Jospin put into place universal health coverage and extended the coverage to all those legally resident in France. Only about 3.7% of hospital treatment costs are reimbursed through private insurance, but a much higher share of the cost of spectacles and prostheses (21.9%), drugs (18.6%) and dental care (35.9%) (figures from the year 2000). There are public hospitals, non-profit independent hospitals (which are linked to the public system), as well as private for-profit hospitals.

The large-scale retail sector in France consists of "hypermarkets and companies classified as large specialized retailers."

In 2014, the food retail industry employed 603,137 people.

In France, the hypermarket chains include: E.Leclerc, Carrefour, Intermarché Hyper, Hyper U, Auchan, and Casino. As of 2016, there were more than 2,000 hypermarkets and 10,000 supermarkets in the country, generating approximately €110 billion in revenue.

The distribution channels in this sector are highly diverse. In addition to supermarket operators like Intermarché Super, Carrefour Market, E.Leclerc Express, Super U, Casino Supermarché, SPAR Supermarché, Match, or Auchan Supermarché, other players operating in the hard-discount segment, such as Lidl, Aldi Nord, Netto, Leader Price, Supeco, and Norma, as well as shopping malls, generalist chains, and specialized brands.

Science and technology in France has a long history dating back to the Académie des Sciences, founded by Louis XIV in 1666, at the suggestion of Jean-Baptiste Colbert, to encourage and protect the spirit of French scientific research. France 's achievements in science and technology have been significant throughout the past centuries as France's economic growth and industrialisation process was slow and steady along the 18th and 19th centuries. Research and development efforts form an integral part of the country's economy.

Scientific research in the country is supported by industry, by the network of French universities and by higher education establishments outside the main framework, Grandes écoles.

France ranked 13th in the 2025 Global Innovation Index.

Telecommunications in France are highly developed. France is served by an extensive system of automatic telephone exchanges connected by modern networks of fiber-optic cable, coaxial cable, microwave radio relay, and a domestic satellite system; cellular telephone service is widely available, expanding rapidly, and includes roaming service to foreign countries.

France remained the world's most visited tourist destination in 2025, receiving 102 million international tourists, up from 100 million in 2024. International tourism revenue reached a record €77.5 billion, while more than 5 million visitors came from the United States.

According to figures from 2003, some popular tourist sites include (in visitors per year): Eiffel Tower (6.2 million), Louvre Museum (5.7 million), Palace of Versailles (2.8 million), Cité des Sciences et de l'Industrie (2.6 million), Musée d'Orsay (2.1 million), Arc de Triomphe (1.2 million), Centre Pompidou (1.2 million), Mont-Saint-Michel (1 million), Château de Chambord (711,000), Sainte-Chapelle (683,000), Château du Haut-Kœnigsbourg (549,000), Puy de Dôme (500,000), Musée Picasso (441,000), Carcassonne (362,000). However, the most popular site in France is Disneyland Paris, with 9.7 million visitors in 2017

Transportation in France relies on one of the densest networks in the world with 146 km of road and 6.2 km of rail lines per 100 km. It is built as a web with Paris at its centre. The highly subsidised rail transport network makes up a relatively small portion of travel, most of which is done by car. However, the high-speed TGV trains make up a large proportion of long-distance travel, partially because intercity buses were prevented from operating until 2015.

With 3,220 kilometers of high-speed train lines, France boast the 2nd most expansive network in the world, only after China. Charles de Gaulle Airport is one of the busiest airports in the world by passenger traffic. Charles de Gaulle airport is third globally in the number of destinations served, and first in the number of countries served with non-stop flights.

France also boasts a number of seaports and harbours, including Bayonne, Bordeaux, Boulogne-sur-Mer, Brest, Calais, Cherbourg-Octeville, Dunkerque, Fos-sur-Mer, La Pallice, Le Havre, Lorient, Marseille, Nantes, Nice, Paris, Port-la-Nouvelle, Port-Vendres, Roscoff, Rouen, Saint-Nazaire, Saint-Malo, Sète, Strasbourg and Toulon. There are approximately 470 airports in France and by a 2005 estimate, there are three heliports. 288 of the airports have paved runways, with the remaining 199 being unpaved. The national carrier of France is Air France, a full service global airline which flies to 20 domestic destinations and 150 international destinations in 83 countries (including Overseas France) across all 6 major continents.

Water supply and sanitation in France is universal and of good quality. Salient features of the sector compared to other developed countries are the high degree of private sector participation using concession and lease contracts (gestion déléguée) and the existence of basin agencies that levy fees on utilities in order to finance environmental investments. Water losses in France (26%) are high compared to England (19%) and Germany (7%).

According to a study conducted by Ernst & Young, France was in 2020 the largest Foreign Direct Investment recipient in Europe, ahead of the UK and Germany. EY attributed this as a "direct result of President Macron ’s reforms of labor laws and corporate taxation, which were well received by domestic and international investors alike."

France scored 5th in the 2019 AT Kearney FDI Confidence Index, up 2 notches from its 2017 ranking.

According to a 2011 report by the American Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), France's GDP per capita at purchasing power parity is similar to that of the UK, with just over US$35,000 per head. To explain why French per capita GDP is lower than that of the United States, the economist Paul Krugman stated that "French workers are roughly as productive as US workers", but that the French have a lower workforce participation rate, and "when they work, they work fewer hours". According to Krugman, the difference is due to the French making "different choices about retirement and leisure".

France has long suffered a relatively high unemployment rate, even during the years when its macroeconomic performances compared favourably with other advanced economies. The employment rate of the French working-age population is one of the lowest of the OECD countries: in 2020, only 64.4% of the French working-age population were in employment, compared to 77% in Japan, 76.1% in Germany, 75.4% in the UK, but the French employment rate was higher than that of the US, which stood at 62.5%. This gap is due to the low employment rate of those 15–24 years old: 38% in 2012, compared to 47% in the OECD.

Since his election in 2017, Emmanuel Macron has introduced several labour market reforms which proved successful in decreasing the unemployment rate before the global COVID-19 recession struck. In late 2019, the French unemployment rate, though still high compared to other developed economies, was the lowest in a decade.

During the 2000s and 2010s, classical liberal and Keynesian economists sought out different solutions to the unemployment issue in France. Keynesian economists's theories led to the introduction of the 35-hour workweek law in 1999. Between 2004 and 2008, the government attempted to combat unemployment with supply-side reforms, but was met with fierce resistance; the contrat nouvelle embauche and the contrat première embauche (which allowed more flexible contracts) were of particular concern, and both were eventually repealed. The Sarkozy government used the revenu de solidarité active (in-work benefits) to redress the negative effect of the revenu minimum d'insertion (unemployment benefits which do not depend on previous contributions, unlike normal unemployment benefits in France) on the incentive to accept even jobs which are insufficient to earn a living. Neoliberal economists attribute the low employment rate, particularly evident among young people, to high minimum wages that would prevent low productivity workers from easily entering the labour market.

A December 2012 New York Times article reported on a "floating generation" in France that formed part of the 14 million unemployed young Europeans documented by the Eurofound research agency. This floating generation was attributed to a dysfunctional system: "an elitist educational tradition that does not integrate graduates into the work force, a rigid labour market that is hard to enter for newcomers, and a tax system that makes it expensive for companies to hire full-time employees and both difficult and expensive to lay them off". In July 2013, the unemployment rate for France was 11%.

In early April 2014, employers' federations and unions negotiated an agreement with technology and consultancy employers, as employees had been experiencing an extension of their work time through smartphone communication outside of official working hours. Under a new, legally binding labour agreement, around 250,000 employees will avoid handling work-related matters during their leisure time and their employers will, in turn, refrain from engaging with staff during this time.

Every day, about 80,000 French citizens commute to work in neighbouring Luxembourg, making it the biggest cross-border workforce group in the whole of the European Union. They are often attracted by much higher wages for the different job groups than in their own country and the lack of skilled labour in the Luxembourgish economy.

The background of the 2023 pension reform was about 14% of GDP pension spending in France compared to OECD average of just over 9%. The aim of the pension reform was to reduce cost by increasing the minimum legal retirement age from 62 years to 64 years in 2030. In April 2023, president Emmanuel Macron signed the pension reforms into law.

In 2018, France was the 5th largest trading nation in the world, as well as the second-largest trading nation in Europe (after Germany). Its foreign trade balance for goods had been in surplus from 1992 until 2001, reaching $25.4 billion (25.4 G$) in 1998; however, the French balance of trade was hit by the economic downturn, and went into the red in 2000, reaching a US$15bn deficit in 2003. Total trade for 1998 amounted to $730 billion, or 50% of GDP—imports plus exports of goods and services. Trade with European Union countries accounts for 60% of French trade.

In 1998, US–France trade stood at about $47 billion – goods only. According to French trade data, US exports accounted for 8.7% – about $25 billion – of France's total imports. US industrial chemicals, aircraft and engines, electronic components, telecommunications, computer software, computers and peripherals, analytical and scientific instrumentation, medical instruments and supplies, broadcasting equipment, and programming and franchising are particularly attractive to French importers.

The principal French exports to the US are aircraft and engines, beverages, electrical equipment, chemicals, cosmetics, luxury products and perfume. France is the ninth-largest trading partner of the US.

In August 2023, the French current account deficit shrank by €29.7 billion in the past six months, from −€39.3 billion to −€9.6 billion, primarily due to a fall in energy prices.

The economic disparity between French regions is not as high as that in other European countries such as the UK or Italy and higher than in countries like Sweden or Denmark, or even Spain. However, Europe's wealthiest and second-largest regional economy, Ile-de-France (the region surrounding Paris), has long profited from the capital city's economic hegemony.

The most important régions are Île-de-France (Europe's 4th regional economy), Rhône-Alpes (Europe's 5th largest regional economy thanks to its services, high-technologies, chemical industries, wines, tourism), Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur (services, industry, tourism and wines), Nord-Pas-de-Calais (European transport hub, services, industries) and Pays de la Loire (green technologies, tourism). Regions like Alsace, which has a rich past in industry (machine tool) and currently stands as a high income service-specialised region, are very wealthy without ranking very high in absolute terms.

The rural areas are mainly in Auvergne, Limousin, and Centre-Val de Loire, and wine production accounts for a significant proportion of the economy in Aquitaine (Bordeaux (or claret)), Burgundy, and champagne produced in Champagne-Ardennes.

In terms of income, important inequalities can be observed among the French départements.

According to the 2008 statistics of the INSEE, the Yvelines is the highest income department of the country with an average income of €4,750 per month. Hauts-de-Seine comes second, Essonne third, Paris fourth, Seine-et Marne fifth. Île-de-France is the wealthiest region in the country with an average income of €4,228 per month (and is also the wealthiest region in Europe) compared to €3,081 at the national level. Alsace comes second, Rhône-Alpes third, Picardy fourth, and Upper Normandy fifth.

The poorest parts of France are the French overseas departments, French Guiana being the poorest department with an average household income of €1,826. In Metropolitan France it is Creuse in the Limousin region which comes bottom of the list with an average household income of €1,849 per month.

Huge inequalities can also be found among cities. In the Paris metropolitan area, significant differences exist between the higher standard of living of Paris Ouest and lower standard of living in areas in the northern banlieues of Paris such as Seine-Saint-Denis.

For cities of over 50,000 inhabitants, Neuilly-sur-Seine, a western suburb of Paris, is the wealthiest city in France with an average household income of €5,939, and 35% earning more than €8,000 per month. But within Paris, four arrondissements surpass wealthy Neuilly-sur-Seine in household income: the 6th, the 7th, the 8th and the 16th ; the 8th arrondissement being the wealthiest district in France (the other three following it closely as 2nd, 3rd and 4th wealthiest ones).

OECD data from 2021 estimate that 8.4% of the French population lived in poverty, compared with 18% in the United States, 11.6% in Canada, and 9.8% in Germany. In 2016, the poverty rate in France stood at 14%, compared to 12.8% in 2004. The northern districts of Marseille represent one of the poorest and unequal areas in France, where poor neighbourhoods rub shoulders with wealthier pockets. The share of people living below the poverty line (949 euro per month) was 28.8% in 2008 in sensitive urban zones (ZUS) compared to 12% in the rest of the territory.

In comparison with the average French workers, foreign workers tended to be employed in the hardest and lowest-paid jobs. They also live in poor conditions. A 1972 study found that foreign workers earned 17% less than their French counterparts, although this national average concealed the extent of inequality. Foreign workers were more likely to be men in their prime working years in the industrial areas, which generally had higher rates of pay than elsewhere.

In 2010, the French had an estimated wealth of US$14.0 trillion for a population of 63 million.

France has the third-highest number of millionaires in Europe as of 2017. There were 1.617 million millionaire households (measured in US dollars) living in France in 2017, behind the UK (2.225 million) and Germany (1.637 million).

The wealthiest man in France is the LVMH CEO and owner Bernard Arnault.

By 2022, the combined wealth of France's 500 richest people will be worth 1,170 billion euros, or 45% of GDP. In 2009, this figure was just 194 billion, representing 10% of GDP at the time.

The economy of Rhône-Alpes is the second most dynamic economy in France and the 6th region in Europe. The economy of this region based on three major cities, Lyon, Grenoble and Saint-Étienne.

The primary sector employs 4.9% of regional assets (France: 6.8%) for 3.5% of regional gross domestic product (GDP). It is a sector in decline, particularly in mountain areas, as it fails to provide farmers with sufficient incomes, since their incomes are below a quarter of the average national income. Nevertheless, the region remains a large agricultural region. This sector is divided evenly between crops and livestock. The latter is varied: Ain, the Alps and the Rhone raise 1.2 million cattle (ranked 7th nationally) and produce 15.5 million hectoliters of milk (ranked 5th nationally), in the Drome region and the ardeche region pigs and sheep are prominent, whilst the Bresse region is famous for its poultry. Crops produced in the Ain region and the left bank of the Rhone are mostly grain, including maize (700 000 tons, with a national ranking of 5th). However, in the south (Drôme, Ardèche), fruit and vegetables are grown in the Rhone valley (the Valencia region in particular). The Rhône-Alpes is the largest producer of apricots and the second largest producer of peaches, raspberries, walnuts, cherries and tinned tomatoes. Milk and wine production are the second most important agricultural produce in the Rhône-Alpes. The Coteaux du Beaujolais (whose wine sales in the start of November is greatly influenced by the media) and the Côtes du Rhône provide 3.6 million hectoliters per year (see wines of Côtes du Rhône). These vineyards allow the Region to be the fourth largest producer of wine in France. AOC vineyard covers 42 454 ha and produces 2 347 hl per year, or 10% of national production. Minerals are exploited in Bois Noirs (uranium), Hauterive (salt), Hostun (kaolin), Bois Feuillet (fluorine) and Largentière (lead, zinc, silver).

There are hydro-electric plants on the river Isère (three plants), Arc (five plants), Drac and Romanche (two plants), Loire (two plants) and of course the Rhône (nine plants). A thermal power plant is located south of Lyon, and four nuclear power plants are located along the Rhône Saint-Vulbas (Bugey), Saint-Maurice, to Cruas and Pierrelate-Tricastin. Wind energy is also being developed in the Rhone Valley. All these electricity producing plants mentioned allow Rhône-Alpes to be the biggest electricity-producing region of France with 100 billion kilowatt hours, approximately 18% of total French production, despite the failure of the nuclear plant at Creys Malville.

The region has many companies transforming the region's products (meats, cheese, meat cutting, biscuit...) who may rely on research and development centers as Alimentec in Bourg-en-Bresse.

Grenoble is the second research center in France after Paris. Research centres in or near Grenoble include the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF), the Institut Laue-Langevin (ILL), the European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), the Institut de radioastronomie millimétrique, one of the main research facilities of the Commissariat à l'Énergie Atomique (Nuclear Energy Commission, CEA), the French National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS), the LNCMI and the European branch of Xerox Research. Leti in the Polygone Scientifique and the recent development of Clinatec and mostly Minatec, a centre for innovation in micro- and nano-technology, only increases Grenoble's position as a European scientific centre.

Mainly textile, mechanical, pharmaceutical and chemical, around Lyon, Saint-Étienne, in the Savoie and Ain. The industry compressors and pumps gas / vacuum is particularly well represented with more than 40% of national activity in this area [1]. The main applications are focused on the refrigeration / air conditioning, automotive, microelectronics, gas transportation and industrial processes. With companies such as Tecumseh, Danfoss and Alcatel Vacuum Technology sector contributes significantly to earnings in the region to export.

The refrigeration industry is also well represented by the designer as CIAT (Culoz), manufacturers of components Frigabohn (heat exchangers).

The city of Saint-Étienne possessed a center of research in the design important. Of the textile industry, once specialized in the tape emerged a medical textile activity.

The economy of the French city of Toulouse is mainly linked to the industries of aeronautics and aerospace. The agglomeration's GDP is approximately 30 billion euros. In 2003, Toulouse was also characterized by a debt rate that was one of the lowest in Europe for a city of its size.

In 1999, the total number of people working in Toulouse was 216,480.

The unemployment rate was 9.9% in 2005 and was estimated in December 2006 at 9.1%, slightly higher than the national average (8.6%).

Like most large cities located on the alluvial plain, Toulouse has developed a market garden culture that allows it to have a regular supply of fresh produce. Thus, the southeast and north of the city are areas traditionally devoted to this type of cultivation. However, this practice is tending to diminish, as the available surface area is being reduced by the pressure of land ownership. Toulouse is also known for the cultivation of violets, for their flowers and perfume.

Unlike other large cities in France, Toulouse did not experience the Industrial Revolution in the 18th and 19th centuries. This specificity kept it away from the major political and strategic decisions for many decades until the arrival of aeronautics in the early 20th century, which reversed the situation. Today, there are few traditional industries in Toulouse, such as the chemical, metallurgical or textile sectors. The AZF factory explosion contributed to the disappearance of one of the city's few factories. What kept Toulouse on the sidelines of major French cities has, over the course of the 20th century, become one of its main assets. In the absence of traditional sectors, the city did not experience crises like Lille and so many other northern European cities after World War II.

The city has a long history linked to aviation, because well before the First World War, Clément Ader (a native of Muret, south of Toulouse) invented, in 1890, several airplanes: Éole (Avion), the Zephyr (Avion II) and the Aquilon (Avion III). With the First World War, aeronautical activities were relocated to Toulouse because the city was considered far enough from the front lines.

On July 31, 1963, the State began a policy of decentralisation, and the Toulouse region took on a central role as the centre of aeronautics in France, by CNES to Rangueil (south of the city). Following the establishment of the CNES, engineering schools and laboratories began to set up in Toulouse, such as Sup'Aéro, CERT, ENAC, IPSA and the Laboratory for Analysis and Architecture of Systems (LAAS), to provide the CNES with researchers. A subsidiary of the Lagardère-Matra group, now Airbus Defence and Space, is located on the Palays site in the southeast of the city. This company, linked to Airbus Group (Airbus parent company) is a leader in the field of observation satellites and is involved in the SPOT satellite and its military version, Helios. Airbus Defence and Space is also involved in ERS, which monitors the planet's environment, and the SoHO program, which conducts research on the sun. Electronic control systems for the Ariane launches vehicle are also produced in Toulouse.

In 1998, at the other end of the city, in the Candie area, the aerospace company Thales Alenia Space was established. In 2002 nearly 10,000 people, roughly half of the personnel in France working in the space sector, worked in Toulouse. Many small-to-medium enterprises (SMEs) and SMIs have joined the industrial fabric of the large aerospace and aeronautics firms.

Toulouse is the European centre of aeronautics and aerospace, and the headquarters of Airbus Industries. Along with Hamburg (Germany), Toulouse is one of the two European centers chosen by Airbus for the design, assembly and testing of its aircraft, including the A380. The plant is located to the west of Toulouse, straddling the Saint-Martin-du-Touch district and the neighboring town of Blagnac. In 2004, this site was confirmed with the installation of the AéroConstellation, which houses the assembly hangars for the wide-body aircraft. In a few years, the new Toulouse Aerospace will open on a 40-hectare site (120,000 m) on the site of the old Montaudran runways, with the headquarters of the Galileo navigation system.

Located mainly in the southern part of the city, the chemical cluster includes companies in the heavy chemicals (SNPE, Groupe Etienne Lacroix, Isochem and Raisio), pharmaceutical and paint sectors in Auterive. Toulouse's chemical cluster was very active until the disaster of September 21, 2001: the explosion at the AZF plant killed 30 people and injured about 2,500, as well as causing considerable material damage (in particular to the University of Toulouse-Le Mirail, the Mirail, Empalot, La Reynerie and Rangueil neighborhoods and the Marchand psychiatric hospital). However, chemistry is an old industry in Toulouse with the SNPE, which was originally called the Poudrerie and was located on the Ile du Ramier. This activity has since tended to reorient itself towards fine chemistry and pharmaceutical chemistry.

Numerous companies in the sector are located in Toulouse, including Altran, Atos Origin, Capgemini, IBM, Neo-Soft Services, Osiatis, Sopra Group, Steria and Unilog. The American microprocessor manufacturer Intel opened a European research and development center for smartphone development in early 2012.

Since the end of 2001, the Toulouse Métropole urban community has had a metropolitan telecommunications infrastructure (IMT). Composed of 5 loops totaling 77 km of optical fiber, the ITM extends over the Toulouse Métropole area from north to south and from east to west around Toulouse, from Blagnac to Labège and from L'Union to Tournefeuille. Passing mainly through the Toulouse metro, the ring road and the Canal du Midi, each cable is made up of 144 dark optical fibers, each pair of fibers offering a capacity of 2.5 Gbit/s in both directions.

The city is an important center of tertiary activities. A regional business district, Compans-Caffarelli, was created to meet the demand for offices in the city. This district includes 200,000 square meters of office space, a shopping center with 40 boutiques, a 4-star hotel, a convention center, and an administrative center.

The creation of a new multimodal hub in the Marengo-Périoles-Raynal sector is being studied. This hub will become the city's international business district.

The district has seen the establishment of regional branches of banks and insurance companies such as Crédit Lyonnais or AXA. Many national and international banks and insurance companies are present in Toulouse. The Courtois Bank is a Toulouse bank and the Mutuelle du Rempart is also a Toulouse insurance company. This sector of activity is taking an increasing part in the economic activity of the city, representing in 2021 some 14,410 jobs (including the real estate sector).

Stores in the city center include both typical Toulouse shops and those of major brands. The most popular shopping areas in the city center include rue d'Alsace-Lorraine, rue Saint-Rome, rue des Changes, rue du Taur, rue Saint-Antoine-du-T, rue des Filatiers, and the Saint-Georges district, which is home to a renovated shopping mall with more than 50 stores that opened in 2006. There are luxury boutiques in the Victor-Hugo district and in the Saint-Etienne district (antiques district). Other neighborhoods are also undergoing commercial change, such as the Bourse district. The pedestrianization of the city center due to the arrival of the metro aims to encourage the commercial development of the historic center.

The agglomeration is surrounded by numerous shopping centers such as the Grand Porte shopping center in Toulouse-Portet-sur-Garonne, the Labège 2 shopping center in Toulouse-Labège (80 stores), the Carrefour Toulouse Purpan shopping center with 45 stores in the Purpan district, the Espace Gramont shopping center with 100 stores the Roques shopping center in Roques-sur-Garonne, the Blagnac shopping center in Blagnac, the Saint-Orens shopping center in Saint-Orens-de-Gameville, the Fenouillet shopping center in Fenouillet, the Basso-Cambo shopping center (with 30 stores including Hyper Casino and Giga Store) in the Reynerie district, as well as a Val Tolosa project in Plaisance-du-Touch.

By 2010, 100,000 square meters of additional commercial space were planned to be added to the plethora already present in the entire agglomeration. A 30,000 square meter shopping center is to be created in the Toulouse area, a brand village in Nailloux, about 30 kilometers away, as well as the expansion of existing commercial zones are also planned.

The city has numerous museums and festivals (including Marathon des mots, Rio Loco, and gay pride) known throughout France and Europe. In 2006, 5 million tourists came to visit the city each year, including a little over 2.5 million for business tourism, making Toulouse the seventh most visited city in France after Paris, Lyon, Lourdes, Nice, Strasbourg and Bordeaux. Toulouse became the fourth most visited city in France in 2013

Business tourism and conventions account for 80% of this activity, but in recent years, leisure tourism has grown. The city applied for the title of European Capital of Culture for 2013, but in the end Marseille won the title by one vote.

The opening in August 2007 of the Casino-théâtre de Toulouse, the largest in southwestern France, contributed to the city's tourism development.

The Ecosocialist Left (French : Gauche écosocialiste, GES) is a French left-wing political organisation formed by activists from Ensemble! and the New Anticapitalist Party. Founded as Ensemble Insoumis·e in 2017, it adopted its current name in 2022.

The Ecosocialist Left was created as a rebranding of the Ensemble Insoumis·e current to highlight eco-socialism as its central ideology. In May 2023, GES held a congress to formalize its internal structure, while remaining part of La France Insoumise with political and financial autonomy. In 2024, it expanded locally in the Basque Country, absorbing Ensemble Pays Basque.

GES identifies as eco-socialist, anti-capitalist, and soft Eurosceptic. It advocates for feminist, antiracist, LGBTQI rights, and disability justice as part of its broader anti-capitalist and ecological program. The party seeks systemic change combining ecological and social revolutions.

The GES operates autonomously within La France Insoumise and has focused on regional development, particularly in the Basque Country.

It is also connected to the initiative L'Après, founded by Clémentine Autain, focused on social and ecological experimentation.

Edenred, formerly known as Accor Services, is an international payment service provider based in France. The company focuses on payment services used in the workplace, including employee benefits such as Ticket Restaurant meal vouchers, as well as other business-to-business payment solutions. The company was created following Accor’s split and has been listed on Euronext Paris since 2010. Edenred operates internationally, with activities in 46 countries.

Jacques Borel created a meal voucher in France called Ticket Restaurant in 1962. He was inspired by the original Luncheon Voucher, a concept launched in the United Kingdom in 1954 and the Luncheon Vouchers Company founded by John Hack in 1955. A French government decree, passed in 1967, officially recognized the meal voucher as an employee benefit. The concept was launched outside France starting in 1976. Ticket Restaurant and its local variant Ticket Alimentación began spreading to other countries in Europe and Latin America, including Brazil and Mexico.

The Ticket Restaurant entity, which had been a subsidiary of Accor since 1983, became Accor Services in 1998. Accor had also acquired Luncheon Vouchers one year prior. Thus the two entities were merged under the new name of Accor Services.

In September 2007, Accor Services acquired a 98.3% stake UK pioneer and market leader in prepaid cards, PrePay Technologies Ltd, for €55M.

Ticket Restaurant was introduced to Türkiye in 1992, marking Accor Services' entry into the Turkish employee benefits market. The operation initially launched under the "Ticket Restaurant" brand and later continued as Accor Services Türkiye following the group's global restructuring in 1998.

Following the split of Accor's hotel and prepaid services businesses, Accor Services became Edenred in June 2010. The group was listed on NYSE Euronext Paris on July 2, 2010. Jacques Stern was appointed chairman and chief executive officer.

Edenred also launched the Ticket Plus Card in Germany (staple goods: food, fuel, meals), Ticket Cultura in Brazil (cultural goods and services), and Fides Cloud Loyalty Software in India, managed by its subsidiary Accentiv India Pvt. Ltd.

In 2014, Edenred acquired C3, a leader in the employee payroll cards market in the United Arab Emirates. The Group also acquired 34% of UTA, Europe’s second largest fuel card issuer, before increasing its stake to 51% in January 2017 to 66% in 2018 and 100% in 2020.

Bertrand Dumazy became chairman and chief executive officer of Edenred on October 26, 2015.

The group shifted focus to digital products and launched the Ticket Restaurant card in France in April 2014. As of 2021, 90% of the group's business volume around the world was generated from digital products.

In 2016, the Group began a far-reaching transformation as part of its Fast Forward strategic plan (2016-2019). In that year, Edenred also launched its Corporate Payment Services business and acquired Embratec's operations in Brazil. In November 2018, Edenred announced the acquisition of Corporate Spending Innovations, an electronic B2B payments company, for $600 million.

In May 2023, Edenred acquired Reward Gateway, a UK-based employee engagement platform, to extend its Employee Benefits solutions for an enterprise value of GBP 1.15 billion.

Edenred’s operations are organised around three business lines. In employee benefits, the group issues meal and food benefits under brands such as Ticket Restaurant/Ticket Alimentación and also offers gift and incentive solutions as well as employee engagement platforms, a segment it expanded by acquiring Reward Gateway in 2023. In mobility solutions, Edenred provides fleet and fuel cards and related services in Europe through UTA Edenred, following its purchase of a stake in Union Tank Eckstein (UTA) in 2014. In corporate payments, Edenred develops virtual cards, accounts‑payable automation and other B2B payment services, strengthened by its 2018 acquisition of U.S. based Corporate Spending Innovations (CSI).

Key product families include Ticket Restaurant meal benefits in markets such as France and Latin America, which can be used in restaurants and approved food retailers subject to national rules (for example, in France a daily spending ceiling and defined acceptance categories apply). In Europe, UTA Edenred issues fuel cards accepted across multi‑brand networks and has added services for road payments and, more recently, electric‑vehicle charging via its UTA eCharge offer. In the United Kingdom and other European markets, Reward Gateway provides employee engagement tools including benefits portals and recognition programmes.

Edenred operates in 46 countries and has over 10,000 employees. The group has moved into new countries since 2010: Finland in 2011, Japan in 2012, Russia, the United Arab Emirates in 2014 and Moldova in 2018.

Second; 1567–1568 Saint-Denis ; Chartres

Third; 1568–1570 Jarnac ; La Roche-l'Abeille ; Poitiers ; Orthez ; Moncontour ; Saint-Jean d'Angély ; Arney-le-Duc

Fourth; 1572–1573 Mons ; Sommières ; Sancerre ; La Rochelle

Sixth; 1577 La Charité-sur-Loire ; Issoire ; Brouage

War of the Three Henrys (1585–1589) Coutras ; Vimory ; Auneau ; Day of the Barricades

Succession of Henry IV of France (1589–1594) Arques ; Ivry ; Paris ; Château-Laudran ; Rouen ; Caudebec ; Craon ; 1st Luxembourg ; Blaye ; Morlaix ; Fort Crozon

Franco-Spanish War (1595–1598) 2nd Luxembourg ; Fontaine-Française ; Ham ; Le Catelet ; Doullens ; Cambrai ; Calais ; La Fère ; Ardres ; Amiens

The Edict of Nantes (French : édit de Nantes) was an edict signed in April 1598 by King Henry IV of France that granted the Calvinist Protestants of France, also known as Huguenots, substantial rights in the nation, which was predominantly Catholic. While upholding Catholicism as the established religion, and requiring the re-establishment of Catholic worship in places where it had lapsed, it granted certain religious tolerance to the Protestant Huguenots, who had been waging a long and bloody struggle for their rights in France.

The Edict of Saint-Germain, promulgated 36 years earlier by Catherine de Médici, had granted limited tolerance to Huguenots but was overtaken by events, as it was not formally registered until after the Massacre of Vassy on 1 March 1562, which triggered the first of the French Wars of Religion. The Edict of Nantes helped to end the Wars of Religion in France, which had been raging for decades. It also ensured that the Protestant minority in France would have a measure of religious and political freedom, and helped to establish France as a more tolerant and pluralistic society. However, the Edict was eventually revoked by King Louis XIV in 1685, leading to a mass exodus of Huguenots from France and a loss of talent and resources for the country.

In this edict, Henry aimed primarily to promote civil unity. The edict separated civil from religious unity, treated some Protestants for the first time as more than mere schismatics and heretics and opened a path for secularism and tolerance. In offering a general freedom of conscience to individuals, the edict offered many specific concessions to the Protestants, such as amnesty and the reinstatement of their civil rights, including the right to work in any field, even for the state, and to bring grievances directly to the king. It successfully marked the end of the French Wars of Religion, which had afflicted France during the second half of the 16th century.

The Edict of Fontainebleau, which revoked the Edict of Nantes in October 1685, was promulgated by Louis XIV, the grandson of Henry IV. This act drove an exodus of Protestants and increased the hostility of Protestant nations bordering France.

The edict aimed primarily to end the longrunning French Wars of Religion.

King Henry IV also had personal reasons for supporting the edict. Prior to assuming the throne in 1589, he had espoused Protestantism, and he remained sympathetic to the Protestant cause. It was widely believed that he converted to Catholicism in 1593 only to secure his position as king. The edict succeeded in restoring peace and internal unity to France but pleased neither party. Catholics rejected the apparent recognition of Protestantism as a permanent element in French society and still hoped to enforce religious uniformity. Protestants aspired to full parity with Catholics, which the edict did not provide. George A. Rothrock wrote : "Toleration in France was a royal notion, and the religious settlement was dependent upon the continued support of the crown".

Re-establishing royal authority in France required internal peace, which was based on limited toleration enforced by the crown. Since royal troops could not be everywhere, Huguenots needed to be granted strictly-limited possibilities of self-defense.

The Edict of Nantes that Henry IV signed had four basic texts, including a main text made up of 92 articles that was largely based on unsuccessful peace treaties signed during the recent wars. The edict also included 56 "particular" (secret) articles dealing with Protestant rights and obligations. For example, the French state guaranteed protection of French Protestants travelling abroad from the Inquisition. "This crucifies me", protested Pope Clement VIII upon hearing of the edict. The last two parts consisted of brevets (letters patent), which contained the military clauses and pastoral clauses. Both brevets were withdrawn in 1629 by Louis XIII after a final religious civil war.

The two letters patent supplementing the edict granted the Protestants safe havens (places de sûreté), which were military strongholds such as La Rochelle, in support of which the king paid 180,000 écus a year, along with a further 150 emergency forts (places de refuge), to be maintained at the Huguenots' own expense. Such an act of toleration was unusual in Western Europe, where standard practice forced subjects to follow the religion of their ruler under the application of the principle of cuius regio, eius religio.

The edict granted religious toleration to the Protestant Huguenots, who had been waging a long and bloody struggle for their rights in France. The main contents were:

The edict also upheld Catholicism's position as the established religion of France. Protestants gained no exemption from paying the tithe and had to respect Catholic holidays and restrictions regarding marriage. The authorities limited Protestant freedom of worship to specified geographic areas. The edict dealt only with Protestant and Catholic coexistence and made no mention of Jews or Muslims, who were offered temporary asylum in France when the Marranos and Moriscos were expelled from Spain.

The original document that promulgated the edict has disappeared. The Archives Nationales in Paris preserves only the text of a shorter document modified by concessions extracted from the King by the clergy and the Parlement of Paris, which delayed ten months before finally signing and setting seals to the document in 1599. A copy of the first edict, sent for safekeeping to the Protestant Geneva, survives. The provincial parlements resisted the edict. The most recalcitrant of them was the Parlement of Rouen, which unreservedly registered the edict only in 1609.

The location of the signing is uncertain. The edict itself stated merely that it was "given at Nantes, in the month of April, in the year of Our Lord one thousand five hundred and ninety-eight". By the late 19th century the Catholic tradition cited the signing in the Maison des Tourelles, the home of the prosperous Spanish trader André Ruiz, which was destroyed by bombing during the Second World War.

The Edict remained unaltered in effect, registered by the parlements as "fundamental and irrevocable law", with the exception of the brevets, which had been granted for a period of eight years, and were renewed by Henry in 1606 and in 1611 by Marie de' Medicis, who confirmed the Edict within a week of the assassination of Henry, stilling Protestant fears of another St. Bartholomew's Day massacre. The subsidies had been reduced by degrees, as Henry gained more control of the nation. By the Peace of Montpellier in 1622, concluding a Huguenot revolt in Languedoc, the fortified Protestant towns were reduced to two, La Rochelle and Montauban. The brevets were entirely withdrawn in 1629, by Louis XIII, following the Siege of La Rochelle, in which Cardinal Richelieu blockaded the city for fourteen months.

During the remainder of Louis XIII's reign, and especially during the minority of Louis XIV, the implementation of the Edict varied year by year, voiced in declarations and orders, and in case decisions in the Council, fluctuating according to the tides of domestic politics and the relations of France with powers abroad.

In October 1685, Louis XIV, the grandson of Henry IV, renounced the Edict and declared Protestantism illegal with the Edict of Fontainebleau. This act, commonly called the ' revocation of the Edict of Nantes,' had very damaging results for France. While the wars of religion did not re-ignite, intense persecution of Protestants took place. All Protestant ministers were given two weeks to leave the country unless they converted to Catholicism and all other Protestants were prohibited from leaving the country. In spite of the prohibition, the renewed persecution – including many examples of torture – caused as many as 400,000 to flee France at risk of their lives. Most moved to Great Britain, Prussia, the Dutch Republic, Switzerland, South Africa and the new French colonies and the Thirteen Colonies in North America. Some moved to Denmark, where the city of Fredericia, laid waste after the Swedish conquest in 1656, needed new settlers and a specific clause in the city ordinance allowed Protestants other than Lutheran to live in the city. This exodus deprived France of many of its most skilled and industrious individuals, some of whom thereafter aided France's rivals in the Netherlands and in England. The revocation of the Edict of Nantes also further damaged the perception of Louis XIV abroad, making the Protestant nations bordering France more hostile to his regime. Upon the revocation of the edict, Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg issued the Edict of Potsdam, which encouraged Protestants to come to Brandenburg-Prussia.

Freedom to worship and civil rights for non-Catholics in France were not restored until the signing of the Edict of Versailles, also known as the Edict of Tolerance, by Louis XVI 102 years later, on 7 November 1787. This edict was enacted by parlement two months later, less than two years before the end of the Ancien Régime and the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen of 1789 would fully eliminate religious discrimination in France.

These are the principal and most salient provisions of the edict as promulgated in Nantes, Brittany, probably on 30 April 1598:

Henri, by the grace of God king of France and of Navarre, to all to whom these presents come, greeting: Among the infinite benefits which it has pleased God to heap upon us, the most signal and precious is his granting us the strength and ability to withstand the fearful disorders and troubles which prevailed on our advent in this kingdom. The realm was so torn by innumerable factions and sects that the most legitimate of all the parties was fewest in numbers. God has given us strength to stand out against this storm; we have finally surmounted the waves and made our port of safety,—peace for our state. For which his be the glory all in all, and ours a free recognition of his grace in making use of our instrumentality in the good work.... We implore and await from the Divine Goodness the same protection and favor which he has ever granted to this kingdom from the beginning.... We have, by this perpetual and irrevocable edict, established and proclaimed and do establish and proclaim: I. First, that the recollection of everything done by one party or the other between March, 1585, and our accession to the crown, and during all the preceding period of troubles, remain obliterated and forgotten, as if no such things had ever happened.... III. We ordain that the Catholic Apostolic and Roman religion shall be restored and reëstablished in all places and localities of this our kingdom and countries subject to our sway, where the exercise of the same has been interrupted, in order that it may be peaceably and freely exercised, without any trouble or hindrance; forbidding very expressly all persons, of whatsoever estate, quality, or condition, from troubling, molesting, or disturbing ecclesiastics in the celebration of divine service, in the enjoyment or collection of tithes, fruits, or revenues of their benefices, and all other rights and dues belonging to them; and that all those who during the troubles have taken possession of churches, houses, goods or revenues, belonging to the said ecclesiastics, shall surrender to them entire possession and peaceable enjoyment of such rights, liberties, and sureties as they had before they were deprived of them.... VI. And in order to leave no occasion for troubles or differences between our subjects, we have permitted, and herewith permit, those of the said religion called Reformed to live and abide in all the cities and places of this our kingdom and countries of our sway, without being annoyed, molested, or compelled to do anything in the matter of religion contrary to their consciences,... upon condition that they comport themselves in other respects according to that which is contained in this our present edict. VII. It is permitted to all lords, gentlemen, and other persons making profession of the said religion called Reformed, holding the right of high justice [or a certain feudal tenure], to exercise the said religion in their houses.... IX. We also permit those of the said religion to make and continue the exercise of the same in all villages and places of our dominion where it was established by them and publicly enjoyed several and divers times in the year 1597, up to the end of the month of August, notwithstanding all decrees and judgments to the contrary.... XIII. We very expressly forbid to all those of the said religion its exercise, either in respect to ministry, regulation, discipline, or the public instruction of children, or otherwise, in this our kingdom and lands of our dominion, otherwise than in the places permitted and granted by the present edict. XIV. It is forbidden as well to perform any function of the said religion in our court or retinue, or in our lands and territories beyond the mountains, or in our city of Paris, or within five leagues of the said city.... XVIII. We also forbid all our subjects, of whatever quality and condition, from carrying off by force or persuasion, against the will of their parents, the children of the said religion, in order to cause them to be baptized or confirmed in the Catholic Apostolic and Roman Church; and the same is forbidden to those of the said religion called Reformed, upon penalty of being punished with especial severity.... XXI. Books concerning the said religion called Reformed may not be printed and publicly sold, except in cities and places where the public exercise of the said religion is permitted. XXII. We ordain that there shall be no difference or distinction made in respect to the said religion, in receiving pupils to be instructed in universities, colleges, and schools; nor in receiving the sick and poor into hospitals, retreats, and public charities.

The Edict of Paris (in Latin: Chlotarii II Edictum, in French: Édit de Clotaire II) was promulgated 18 October 614 in Paris by Chlothar II, the Merovingian king of the Franks. It is a body of legislation focused on administering justice and ensuring the rights of the church, aristocracy, and people of Francia. The 24-article Edict was issued directly after the Council of Paris ; many of its clauses were based on the canons of the church council. It is the last of the Merovingian capitularia, a series of legal ordinances governing church and realm.

Civil war had dominated the Frankish kingdom due to a feud between two Merovingian queens, Brunhild and Fredegund, and their descendants. Due to her supposed autocratic rule, the aristocracy of Austrasia and Burgundy switched their loyalties from Brunhild, and her great-grandson Sigibert, to Fredegund’s son Chlothar II. In 613, these dukes aided Chlothar in capturing both Brunhild and Sigibert. Sigibert, his brother Corbus, and Brunhild were all executed. Chlothar II assumed full kingship and united all of Francia under his rule. In 614, Chlothar II held the Council of Paris, followed by issuing the Edict of Paris. Both were meant to correct the abuses and injustices incurred by the previous regime of Brunhild and restore peace.

The Edict throughout attempts to establish order by standardising orderly appointments to offices, both ecclesiastic and secular, and by asserting the responsibilities of all — the magnates, bishops, and the king — to secure the happiness and peace of the realm: the felicitas regni and pax et disciplina in regno. The twenty-four articles in the Edict address issues related to clergy, criminal matters, the administration of justice, and fiscal concerns. Fourteen of the articles drew directly from the canons issued at the previous week's Council of Paris.

The election and replacement of a bishop would be chosen by the clergy and the people, then ordained by the king. A bishop could not name his own successor. Clergy could only be tried by a public judge in the case of criminal issues and a bishop must be present. Otherwise, they were judged by ecclesiastical courts. Virgins and widows who had committed themselves to God could not be forced into marriage; forcing them to do so would be a capital offense.

Cases that involved both public and ecclesiastical people should be presided over by both secular and church officials. No one, whether free or slave, could be punished without being tried and judged. Jews could not make charges against Christians.

Property lost during the civil war was to be returned to its owner. Property of the deceased was to go to legitimate heirs, not the king. Swineherds could only enter church or private property with permission of the landlord. Only tolls dating back to the reigns of King Guntrum, Chilperic, and Sigibert were to be collected.

The most famous of the twenty-four articles is number twelve, which states judges could only be appointed in the region in which they held property. No judge from one region, or province, could be appointed in another. Historically, this had been interpreted as Chlothar II making concessions to the aristocracy (which had sided with him against Brunhild), decreasing royal authority, and increasing the power and influence of the regional magnates. In The State in the Middle Ages, Heinrich Mitteis compared the Edict to the English Magna Carta. Mitteis claimed the Edict was the price Chlothar II had to pay for aristocratic support in the civil war. Chlothar's concessions slowly redirected power from the throne to the magnates. Historians linked this transfer of power from the Edict to the rise of the Carolingians, who eventually supplanted the Merovingians.

Now, Article Twelve is understood differently. Attention has been drawn to the second clause, which states a judge was to be attached to the region they were governing through their own property, which would act as a safeguard against any unlawful property seizes. A judge's property was to be used to ensure fair governing. Thus, Article Twelve was aimed at restraining local officials, not giving them more power.

Latin: Et nullus iudex de aliis provinciis aut regionibus in alia loca ordinetur; ut, se aliquid mali de quibuslibet condicionibus perpetraverit, de suis propriis rebus exinde quod male abstolerit iuxta legis ordine debeat restaurare.

English Translation: and no judge from other provinces or regions shall be assigned to other places; so that, if he has done something wrong in any situation, he must restore from his own things what he has wrongly taken away according to the order of the law.

The Edict of Paris is now widely understood as merely a modest concession to regional landholders, a sign of the 'intensely local character of Francia', and Chlothar II establishing his authority over the realm, but also pledging to respect the privileges and customs of the provinces in order to restore peace and order.

The Edict of Paris remained in force during the reign of his successor, Dagobert.

The Edict of Pîtres (Medieval Latin : Edictum Pistense) was a capitulary promulgated at Pîtres on 25 June 864. It is often cited by historians as an example of successful government action on the part of Charles the Bald, king of West Francia.

At the time Vikings more than annually ravaged not only the Frankish coastlands but, with the aid of Europe's numerous navigable rivers, much of the interior also. A king was most valued who could defeat them in the field and prevent their attacks in the future. The purpose and primary effect of the Edict was long thought to be the protection of the cities and countryside from Viking raids.

Charles created a large force of cavalry upon which he could call as needed. He ordered all men who had horses or could afford horses to serve in the army as cavalrymen. This was one of the beginnings of the French chivalry so famous for the next seven centuries. The intention of Charles was to have a mobile force with which to descend upon the raiders before they could up and leave with their booty.

To prevent the Vikings from even attaining a great booty, Charles also declared that fortified bridges should be built at all towns on rivers. This was to prevent the dreaded longships from sailing into the interior. Simon Coupland believes that only two bridges, at Pont-de-l'Arche (near Pîtres) on the Seine and at Les Ponts-de-Cé on the Loire, were ever fortified, though a few others that had fallen into disrepair were rebuilt "in times of crisis in order to increase troop mobility". Charles also prohibited all trade in weapons with the Vikings, in order to prevent them from establishing bases in Gaul. The penalty for selling horses to the Vikings was death. Since the prohibition on the sale of horses was new, it is probable that mounted Viking raids were on the rise.

Aside from its auspicious military reforms, the Edict had political and economic consequences. King Pepin II of Aquitaine, against whom Charles had been fighting for decades, had been captured in 864 and was formally deposed at Pîtres. Economically, besides the prohibitions on commerce with the enemy, Charles tightened his control of the mints and regulated the punishment for counterfeiting. Prior to this edict at least nine places in France had the right of minting but these were reduced to three.

There are twelve surviving manuscripts of the Edict across various collections: three in the Bibliothèque nationale de France, three in the Vatican Library, two in the Bavarian State Library, and one in each of the British Library, the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library in Yale University Library, the Stiftsbibliothek, and the Biblioteca Vallicelliana in Rome.

The Turgot Edict of 1776 (officially titled "Edict of the King Abolishing the Guilds") was a French law enacted under Louis XVI that abolished the guild system of the Ancien Régime. It was proposed by Anne Robert Jacques Turgot, the Controller-General of Finances, and implemented via a forced lit de justice to compel the Parlement of Paris to register the edict on 12 March 1776. The edict faced widespread opposition and was partially repealed by a subsequent edict in August 1776, which restored some guilds under revised conditions.

The guild system had regulated trades and crafts in France since at least the Middle Ages. By the 18th century, trades were classified into:

Guilds were granted collective rights by letters patent and controlled training, trade practices, and market access. Critics, including Turgot, argued that guilds restricted economic freedom, hindered innovation, and inflated consumer costs.

The preamble of the Turgot Edict summarized these criticisms, emphasizing that guilds:

These practices limited competition, discouraged technical innovation, and restricted the mobility of workers. Advocates of laissez-faire economics supported the abolition of guilds to promote competition and economic growth.

The Turgot Edict abolished all guilds and declared:

All persons, of any rank or condition, including foreigners, may freely engage in any trade or profession throughout our kingdom, provided they declare their intent to the local police authorities.

The edict faced significant resistance. Guild Members feared a loss of professional identity and economic security with local guilds publicly protesting by resisting the inventorying assets to liquidate the guilds. The Parlement of Paris objected to liberalization, claiming it threatened social order. A lit de justice was required to enforce the edict.

These challenges contributed to Turgot's dismissal on 12 May 1776, and the edict was partially repealed in August 1776. The subsequent edict restored certain guilds under revised rules.

Although short-lived, the Turgot Edict marked a significant step toward economic liberalization. The guild system was permanently abolished by the Allarde Decree (March 1791) and the Le Chapelier Law (June 1791) during the French Revolution.

Egg and chips is a popular dish in the United Kingdom, consisting simply of chips served with fried eggs.

Egg and chips became popular in Britain during the First World War due to a shortage of meat. It was a favourite food of Tommies behind the lines on the Western Front in northern France and Belgium, eaten at establishments " estaminet ", which also sold cheap wine and beer.

Egg and chips is associated with a working class diet. In an article on moving from the working class to the middle class, a British journalist recounted that "There are things I grew up with that I still love— pub life, darts, egg and chips". Jack Charlton, after playing in the World Cup -winning England football team in 1966, remarked: "We stopped the car for egg and chips in a transport cafe. We'd eaten nothing but the best food for weeks and I was dying for some ordinary grub." The image of British people insisting on ordering egg and chips while on holiday abroad has also been used as a stereotype.

In a study on the perceptions of social inequality of people in North West England, "Beer, fags, egg and chips" was highlighted by the researchers as an example of individual behaviour thought to be connected to poor health.

Food writer Mary Cadogan says that "Egg and chips for me is a marriage made in heaven. Whenever I feel the need of a bit of comfort eating this is the dish I usually turn to." Heston Blumenthal, owner of the Michelin star award-winning restaurant The Fat Duck in Bray, Berkshire, wrote in The Guardian that "You can't get much more British a dish than fried egg and chips."

The dish features in art as well as in real life. Egg and chips occupies a pivotal moment in the suffocating life of a working class Liverpool housewife in the one-character play Shirley Valentine (1986). "Because it's Thursday, Shirley knows that Joe expects steak and chips for his tea. He is getting egg and chips instead... But Joe... is not pleased at his meatless meal. He pushes his plate into her lap. That settles it. Two weeks later he comes home and finds an empty house."

The dish's status as a cornerstone of authentic British cuisine is solidified by its regular inclusion in modern popular culture. It features regularly in television depictions of British life, such as the long-running soap opera series Coronation Street, where it constitutes part of recurring character Johnny "Doc" Docherty's infamous catch phrase, "You've just had your tea, Lesley – Egg and Chips!"

In the video game Final Fantasy VII Remake (2020), on the back wall of the bar 7th Heaven, there is a neon sign which reads "EGGS & CHIPS".

A plate of egg and chips is featured on the front cover of the English musical duo Big Special 's second studio album National Average (2025).

The Eiffel Tower (/ ˈ aɪ f əl / EYE -fəl ; French : Tour Eiffel [ tuʁ ɛfɛl ]) is a lattice tower on the Champ de Mars in Paris, France. It is named after the engineer Gustave Eiffel, whose company designed and built the tower from 1887 to 1889.

Locally nicknamed " La dame de fer " (French for "Iron Lady") for its use of wrought iron, it was constructed as the centrepiece of the 1889 World's Fair, and to crown the centennial anniversary of the French Revolution. Although initially criticised by some of France's leading artists and intellectuals for its design, it has since become a global cultural icon of France and one of the most recognisable structures in the world. The tower received 5,889,000 visitors in 2022. The Eiffel Tower is the most visited monument with an entrance fee in the world: 6.91 million people ascended it in 2015. It was designated a monument historique in 1964, and was named part of a UNESCO World Heritage Site ("Paris, Banks of the Seine") in 1991.

The tower is 330 metres (1,083 ft) tall, about the same height as an 81- storey building, and the tallest structure in Paris. Its base is square, measuring 125 metres (410 ft) on each side. During its construction, the Eiffel Tower surpassed the Washington Monument to become by far the tallest human-made structure in the world, a title it held for 41 years until the Chrysler Building in New York City was finished in 1930. It was the first structure in the world to surpass both the 200-metre and 300-metre mark in height. Due to the addition of a broadcasting aerial at the top of the tower in 1957, it is now taller than the Chrysler Building by 11 metres (36 ft). Excluding transmitters, the Eiffel Tower is the second tallest free-standing structure in France after the Millau Viaduct.

The tower has three levels for visitors, with restaurants on the first and second levels. The top level's upper platform is 276 m (906 ft) above the ground—the highest public observation deck in the European Union. Tickets can be purchased to ascend by stairs or lift to the first and second levels. The climb from ground level to the first level is over 300 steps, as is the climb from the first level to the second, making the entire ascent a 600-step climb. Although there is a staircase to the top level, it is usually accessible only by lift. On this top, third level, is a private apartment built for Gustave Eiffel, who decorated it with furniture made by Jean Lachaise and invited friends such as Thomas Edison.

The design of the Eiffel Tower is attributed to Maurice Koechlin and Émile Nouguier, two senior engineers working for the Compagnie des Établissements Eiffel. It was envisaged after discussion about a suitable centrepiece for the proposed 1889 Exposition Universelle, a world's fair to celebrate the centennial of the French Revolution. In May 1884, working at home, Koechlin made a sketch of their idea, described by him as "a great pylon, consisting of four lattice girders standing apart at the base and coming together at the top, joined together by metal trusses at regular intervals". Eiffel initially showed little enthusiasm, but he did approve further study, and the two engineers then asked Stephen Sauvestre, the head of the company's architectural department, to contribute to the design. Sauvestre added decorative arches to the base of the tower, a glass pavilion to the first level, and other embellishments.

The new version gained Eiffel's support: he bought the rights to the patent on the design which Koechlin, Nouguier, and Sauvestre had taken out, and the design was put on display at the Exhibition of Decorative Arts in the autumn of 1884 under the company name. On 30 March 1885, Eiffel presented his plans to the Société des Ingénieurs Civils ; after discussing the technical problems and emphasising the practical uses of the tower, he finished his talk by saying the tower would symbolise

[n]ot only the art of the modern engineer, but also the century of Industry and Science in which we are living, and for which the way was prepared by the great scientific movement of the eighteenth century and by the Revolution of 1789, to which this monument will be built as an expression of France's gratitude.

Little progress was made until 1886, when Jules Grévy was re-elected as president of France and Édouard Lockroy was appointed as minister for trade. A budget for the exposition was passed and, on 1 May, Lockroy announced an alteration to the terms of the open competition being held for a centrepiece to the exposition, which effectively made the selection of Eiffel's design a foregone conclusion, as entries had to include a study for a 300 m (980 ft) four-sided metal tower on the Champ de Mars. (A 300-metre tower was then considered a herculean engineering effort.) On 12 May, a commission was set up to examine Eiffel's scheme and its rivals, which, a month later, decided that all the proposals except Eiffel's were either impractical or lacking in details.

After some debate about the exact location of the tower, a contract was signed on 8 January 1887. Eiffel signed it acting in his own capacity rather than as the representative of his company, the contract granting him 1.5 million francs toward the construction costs: less than a quarter of the estimated 6.5 million francs. Eiffel was to receive all income from the commercial exploitation of the tower during the exhibition and for the next 20 years. He later established a separate company to manage the tower, putting up half the necessary capital himself.

A French bank, the Crédit Industriel et Commercial (CIC), helped finance the construction of the Eiffel Tower. During the period of the tower's construction, the CIC was acquiring funds from predatory loans to the National Bank of Haiti, some of which went towards the financing of the tower. These loans were connected to an indemnity controversy that saw France force Haiti's government to financially compensate French slaveowners for lost income as a result of the Haitian Revolution, and required Haiti to pay the CIC and its partner nearly half of all taxes collected on exports, "effectively choking off the nation's primary source of income". According to The New York Times, "[at] a time when the [CIC] was helping finance one of the world's best-known landmarks, the Eiffel Tower, as a monument to French liberty, it was choking Haiti's economy, taking much of the young nation's income back to Paris and impairing its ability to start schools, hospitals and the other building blocks of an independent country."

The proposed tower had been a subject of controversy, drawing criticism from those who did not believe it was feasible and those who objected on artistic grounds. Prior to the Eiffel Tower's construction, no structure had ever been constructed to a height of 300 m, or even 200 m for that matter, and many people believed it was impossible. These objections were an expression of a long-standing debate in France about the relationship between architecture and engineering. It came to a head as work began at the Champ de Mars: a "Committee of Three Hundred" (one member for each metre of the tower's height) was formed, led by the prominent architect Charles Garnier and including some of the most important figures of the arts, such as William-Adolphe Bouguereau, Guy de Maupassant, Charles Gounod and Jules Massenet. A petition called "Artists against the Eiffel Tower" was sent to the Minister of Works and Commissioner for the Exposition, Adolphe Alphand, and it was published by Le Temps on 14 February 1887:

We, writers, painters, sculptors, architects and passionate devotees of the hitherto untouched beauty of Paris, protest with all our strength, with all our indignation in the name of slighted French taste, against the erection... of this useless and monstrous Eiffel Tower... To bring our arguments home, imagine for a moment a giddy, ridiculous tower dominating Paris like a gigantic black smokestack, crushing under its barbaric bulk Notre Dame, the Tour Saint-Jacques, the Louvre, the Dome of les Invalides, the Arc de Triomphe, all of our humiliated monuments will disappear in this ghastly dream. And for twenty years... we shall see stretching like a blot of ink the hateful shadow of the hateful column of bolted sheet metal.

Gustave Eiffel responded to these criticisms by comparing his tower to the Egyptian pyramids : "My tower will be the tallest edifice ever erected by man. Will it not also be grandiose in its way? And why would something admirable in Egypt become hideous and ridiculous in Paris?" These criticisms were also dealt with by Édouard Lockroy in a letter of support written to Alphand, sardonically saying, "Judging by the stately swell of the rhythms, the beauty of the metaphors, the elegance of its delicate and precise style, one can tell this protest is the result of collaboration of the most famous writers and poets of our time", and he explained that the protest was irrelevant since the project had been decided upon months before, and construction on the tower was already under way.

Garnier was a member of the Tower Commission that had examined the various proposals, and had raised no objection. Eiffel pointed out to a journalist that it was premature to judge the effect of the tower solely on the basis of the drawings, that the Champ de Mars was distant enough from the monuments mentioned in the protest for there to be little risk of the tower overwhelming them, and putting the aesthetic argument for the tower: "Do not the laws of natural forces always conform to the secret laws of harmony?"

Some of the protesters changed their minds when the tower was built; others remained unconvinced. Guy de Maupassant supposedly ate lunch in the tower's restaurant every day because it was the one place in Paris where the tower was not visible.

By 1918, it had become a symbol of Paris and of France after Guillaume Apollinaire wrote a nationalist poem in the shape of the tower (a calligram) to express his feelings about the war against Germany. Today, it is widely considered to be a remarkable piece of structural art, and is often featured in films and literature.

Work on the foundations started on 28 January 1887. Those for the east and south legs were straightforward, with each leg resting on four 2 m (6.6 ft) concrete slabs, one for each of the principal girders of each leg. The west and north legs, being closer to the river Seine, were more complicated: each slab needed two piles installed by using compressed-air caissons 15 m (49 ft) long and 6 m (20 ft) in diameter driven to a depth of 22 m (72 ft) to support the concrete slabs, which were 6 m (20 ft) thick. Each of these slabs supported a block of limestone with an inclined top to bear a supporting shoe for the ironwork.

Each shoe was anchored to the stonework by a pair of bolts 10 cm (4 in) in diameter and 7.5 m (25 ft) long. The foundations were completed on 30 June, and the erection of the ironwork began. The visible work on-site was complemented by the enormous amount of exacting preparatory work that took place behind the scenes: the drawing office produced 1,700 general drawings and 3,629 detailed drawings of the 18,038 different parts needed. The task of drawing the components was complicated by the complex angles involved in the design and the degree of precision required: the position of rivet holes was specified to within 1 mm (0.04 in) and angles worked out to one second of arc. The finished components, some already riveted together into sub-assemblies, arrived on horse-drawn carts from a factory in the nearby Parisian suburb of Levallois-Perret and were first bolted together, with the bolts being replaced with rivets as construction progressed. No drilling or shaping was done on site: if any part did not fit, it was sent back to the factory for alteration. In all, 18,038 pieces were joined using 2.5 million rivets.

At first, the legs were constructed as cantilevers, but about halfway to the first level construction was paused to create a substantial timber scaffold. This renewed concerns about the structural integrity of the tower, and sensational headlines such as "Eiffel Suicide!" and "Gustave Eiffel Has Gone Mad: He Has Been Confined in an Asylum" appeared in the tabloid press. Multiple famous artists of that time, Charles Garnier and Alexandre Dumas, thought poorly of the newly made tower. Charles Garnier thought it was a "truly tragic street lamp". Alexandre Dumas said that it was like "Odius shadow of the odious column built of rivets and iron plates extending like a black blot". There were multiple protests over the style and the reasoning of placing it in the middle of Paris. At this stage, a small "creeper" crane designed to move up the tower was installed in each leg. They made use of the guides for the lifts which were to be fitted in the four legs. The critical stage of joining the legs at the first level was completed by the end of March 1888. Although the metalwork had been prepared with the utmost attention to detail, provision had been made to carry out small adjustments to precisely align the legs; hydraulic jacks were fitted to the shoes at the base of each leg, capable of exerting a force of 800 tonnes, and the legs were intentionally constructed at a slightly steeper angle than necessary, being supported by sandboxes on the scaffold. Although construction involved 300 on-site employees, due to Eiffel's safety precautions and the use of movable gangways, guardrails and screens, only one person died.

The main structural work was completed at the end of March 1889 and, on 31 March, Eiffel celebrated by leading a group of government officials, accompanied by representatives of the press, to the top of the tower. Because the lifts were not yet in operation, the ascent was made by foot, and took over an hour, with Eiffel stopping frequently to explain various features. Most of the party chose to stop at the lower levels, but a few, including the structural engineer, Émile Nouguier, the head of construction, Jean Compagnon, the President of the City Council, and reporters from Le Figaro and Le Monde Illustré, completed the ascent. At 2:35 pm, Eiffel hoisted a large Tricolour to the accompaniment of a 25-gun salute fired at the first level.

There was still work to be done, particularly on the lifts and facilities, and the tower was not opened to the public until nine days after the opening of the exposition on 6 May; even then, the lifts had not been completed. The tower was an instant success with the public, and nearly 30,000 visitors made the 1,710-step climb to the top before the lifts entered service on 26 May. Tickets cost 2 francs for the first level, 3 for the second, and 5 for the top, with half-price admission on Sundays, and by the end of the exhibition there had been 1,896,987 visitors.

After dark, the tower was lit by hundreds of gas lamps, and a beacon sent out three beams of red, white and blue light. Two searchlights mounted on a circular rail were used to illuminate various buildings of the exposition. The daily opening and closing of the exposition were announced by a cannon at the top.

On the second level, the French newspaper Le Figaro had an office and a printing press, where a special souvenir edition, Le Figaro de la Tour, was made.

At the top, there was a post office where visitors could send letters and postcards as a memento of their visit. Graffitists were also catered for: sheets of paper were mounted on the walls each day for visitors to record their impressions of the tower. Gustave Eiffel described the collection of responses as "truly curious".

Famous visitors to the tower included the Prince of Wales, Sarah Bernhardt, "Buffalo Bill" Cody (his Wild West show was an attraction at the exposition) and Thomas Edison. Eiffel invited Edison to his private apartment at the top of the tower, where Edison presented him with one of his phonographs, a new invention and one of the many highlights of the exposition. Edison signed the guestbook with this message on September 10, 1889:

To M Eiffel the Engineer the brave builder of so gigantic and original specimen of modern Engineering from one who has the greatest respect and admiration for all Engineers including the Great Engineer the Bon Dieu, Thomas Edison.

Eiffel made use of his apartment at the top of the tower to carry out meteorological observations, and also used the tower to perform experiments on the action of air resistance on falling bodies.

Originally commissioned as a temporary structure for the 1889 Exposition Universelle, Eiffel was slated for dismantling in 1909, at which point ownership would have reverted to the City of Paris. While the original design contest necessitated that the tower be easily disassembled, the structure was spared from scheduled demolition due to its demonstrated utility in early 20th-century scientific and technological advancements, specifically radio telegraphy. Following the expiration of the original concession, the tower was permitted to remain, subsequently becoming an integral part of the International Time Service in 1910.

For the 1900 Exposition Universelle, the lifts in the east and west legs were replaced by lifts running as far as the second level constructed by the French firm Fives-Lille. These had a compensating mechanism to keep the floor level as the angle of ascent changed at the first level, and were driven by a similar hydraulic mechanism as the Otis lifts, although this was situated at the base of the tower. Hydraulic pressure was provided by pressurised accumulators located near this mechanism. At the same time the lift in the north pillar was removed and replaced by a staircase to the first level. The layout of both first and second levels was modified. The original lift in the south pillar was removed 13 years later.

On 19 October 1901, Alberto Santos-Dumont, flying his No.6 airship, won a 100,000-franc prize offered by Henri Deutsch de la Meurthe for the first person to make a flight from St. Cloud to the Eiffel Tower and back in less than half an hour.

From 1910, the astronomical clocks of the Paris Observatory sent the time to sea daily through the Eiffel Tower within a radius of 5 000 km. The development of wireless telegraphy allowed unifying Universal Time. On 9 March 1911, France adopted Greenwich Mean Time by law. However, the law did not refer to Greenwich Prime Meridian, but to the local mean time of Paris delayed by 9 minutes and 21 seconds. In 1912, following a report by Gustave Ferrié, the Bureau des Longitudes organized at the Paris Observatory a Conférence internationale de l'heure radiotélégraphique (International Radiotelegraph Time Conference). The International Time Bureau was created and installed in the premises of the Paris Observatory. However, due to World War I, the International Convention was never ratified. In 1919, the existence of the International Time Bureau was formalized under the authority of an International Time Commission, under the aegis of the International Astronomical Union, created by Benjamin Baillaud.

In 1910, Father Theodor Wulf measured radiant energy at the top and bottom of the tower. He found more at the top than expected, incidentally discovering what are known today as cosmic rays. Two years later, on 4 February 1912, Austrian tailor Franz Reichelt died after jumping from the first level of the tower (a height of 57 m) to demonstrate his parachute design. In 1914, at the outbreak of World War I, a radio transmitter located in the tower jammed German radio communications, seriously hindering their advance on Paris and contributing to the Allied victory at the First Battle of the Marne.

During World War I, the Eiffel Tower's wireless station played a crucial role in intercepting enemy communications from Berlin. In 1914, French forces successfully launched a counter-attack during the Battle of the Marne after gaining critical intelligence on the German Army's movements. In 1917, the station intercepted a coded message between Germany and Spain that referenced 'Operative H-21.' This information contributed to the arrest, conviction, and execution of Mata Hari, the famous dancer accused of working for Germany as a spy.

From 1925 to 1934, illuminated signs for Citroën adorned three of the tower's sides, making it the tallest advertising space in the world at the time. In April 1935, the tower was used to make experimental low-resolution television transmissions, using a shortwave transmitter of 200 watts power. On 17 November, an improved 180-line transmitter was installed.

On two separate but related occasions in 1925, the con artist Victor Lustig "sold" the tower for scrap metal. A year later, in February 1926, pilot Leon Collet was killed trying to fly under the tower. His aircraft became entangled in an aerial belonging to a wireless station. A bust of Gustave Eiffel by Antoine Bourdelle was unveiled at the base of the north leg on 2 May 1929. In 1930, the tower lost the title of the world's tallest structure when the Chrysler Building in New York City was completed. In 1938, the decorative arcade around the first level was removed.

Upon the German occupation of Paris in 1940, the lift cables were cut by the French. The tower was restricted to German visitors during the occupation and the lifts were not repaired until 1946. In 1940, German soldiers had to climb the tower to hoist a swastika-centred Reichskriegsflagge, but the flag was so large it blew away just a few hours later, and was replaced by a smaller one. When visiting Paris, Hitler chose to stay on the ground. When the Allies were nearing Paris in August 1944, Hitler ordered General Dietrich von Choltitz, the military governor of Paris, to demolish the tower along with the rest of the city. Von Choltitz disobeyed the order. On 25 August, before the Germans had been driven out of Paris, the German flag was replaced with a Tricolour by two men from the French Naval Museum, who narrowly beat three men led by Lucien Sarniguet, who had lowered the Tricolour on 13 June 1940 when Paris fell to the Germans.

A fire started in the television transmitter on 3 January 1956, damaging the top of the tower. Repairs took a year, and in 1957, the present radio aerial was added to the top. In 1964, the Eiffel Tower was officially declared to be a historical monument by the Minister of Cultural Affairs, André Malraux. A year later, an additional lift system was installed in the north pillar.

According to interviews, in 1967, Montreal Mayor Jean Drapeau negotiated a secret agreement with Charles de Gaulle for the tower to be dismantled and temporarily relocated to Montreal to serve as a landmark and tourist attraction during Expo 67. The plan was allegedly vetoed by the company operating the tower out of fear that the French government could refuse permission for the tower to be restored in its original location.

In 1982, the original lifts between the second and third levels were replaced after 97 years in service. These had been closed to the public between November and March because the water in the hydraulic drive tended to freeze. The new cars operate in pairs, with one counterbalancing the other, and perform the journey in one stage, reducing the journey time from eight minutes to less than two minutes. At the same time, two new emergency staircases were installed, replacing the original spiral staircases. In 1983, the south pillar was fitted with an electrically driven Otis lift to serve the Jules Verne restaurant. The Fives-Lille lifts in the east and west legs, fitted in 1899, were extensively refurbished in 1986. The cars were replaced, and a computer system was installed to completely automate the lifts. The motive power was moved from the water hydraulic system to a new electrically driven oil-filled hydraulic system, and the original water hydraulics were retained solely as a counterbalance system. A service lift was added to the south pillar for moving small loads and maintenance personnel three years later.

Robert Moriarty flew a Beechcraft Bonanza under the tower on 31 March 1984. In 1987, A. J. Hackett made one of his first bungee jumps from the top of the Eiffel Tower, using a special cord he had helped develop. Hackett was arrested by the police. On 27 October 1991, Thierry Devaux, along with mountain guide Hervé Calvayrac, performed a series of acrobatic figures while bungee jumping from the second floor of the tower. Facing the Champ de Mars, Devaux used an electric winch between figures to go back up to the second floor. When firemen arrived, he stopped after the sixth jump.

For its "Countdown to the Year 2000" celebration on 31 December 1999, flashing lights and high-powered searchlights were installed on the tower. During the last three minutes of the year, the lights were turned on starting from the base of the tower and continuing to the top to welcome 2000 with a huge fireworks show. An exhibition above a cafeteria on the first floor commemorates this event. The searchlights on top of the tower made it a beacon in Paris's night sky, and 20,000 flashing bulbs gave the tower a sparkly appearance for five minutes every hour on the hour.

The lights sparkled blue for several nights to herald the new millennium on 31 December 1999. The sparkly lighting continued for 18 months until July 2001. The sparkling lights were turned on again on 21 June 2003, and the display was planned to last for 10 years before they needed replacing.

The tower received its 200,000,000 th guest on 28 November 2002. The tower has operated at its maximum capacity of about 7 million visitors per year since 2003. In 2004, the Eiffel Tower began hosting a seasonal ice rink on the first level. A glass floor was installed on the first level during the 2014 refurbishment.

The puddle iron (wrought iron) of the Eiffel Tower weighs 7,300 tonnes, and the addition of lifts, shops and antennae have brought the total weight to approximately 10,100 tonnes. As a demonstration of the economy of design, if the 7,300 tonnes of metal in the structure were melted down, it would fill the square base, 125 metres (410 ft) on each side, to a depth of only 6.25 cm (2.46 in) assuming the density of the metal to be 7.8 tonnes per cubic metre. Additionally, a cubic box surrounding the tower (324 m × 125 m × 125 m) would contain 6,200 tonnes of air, weighing almost as much as the iron itself. Depending on the ambient temperature, the top of the tower may shift away from the sun by up to 18 cm (7 in) due to thermal expansion of the metal on the side facing the sun.

When it was built, Eiffel was accused of trying to create something artistic with no regard to the principles of engineering. However, Eiffel and his team were experienced bridge builders. In an interview with the newspaper Le Temps published on 14 February 1887, Eiffel said:

Is it not true that the very conditions which give strength also conform to the hidden rules of harmony?... Now to what phenomenon did I have to give primary concern in designing the Tower? It was wind resistance. Well then! I hold that the curvature of the monument's four outer edges, which is as mathematical calculation dictated it should be... will give a great impression of strength and beauty, for it will reveal to the eyes of the observer the boldness of the design as a whole.

He used graphical methods to determine the strength of the tower and empirical evidence to account for the effects of wind, rather than a mathematical formula. Close examination of the tower reveals a basically exponential shape. All parts of the tower were overdesigned to ensure maximum resistance to wind forces. The top half was assumed to have no gaps in the latticework. After it was completed, some have put forward various mathematical hypotheses in an attempt to explain the success of the design. A one devised in 2004 after letters sent by Eiffel to the French Society of Civil Engineers in 1885 were translated into English described it as a non-linear integral equation based on counteracting the wind pressure on any point of the tower with the tension between the construction elements at that point.

The Eiffel Tower sways by up to 9 cm (3 + 1 ⁄ 2 in) in the wind.

The four columns of the tower each house access stairs and lifts to the first two floors, while at the south column only the lift to the second floor restaurant is publicly accessible.

The first floor is publicly accessible by lift or stairs. When originally built, the first level contained three restaurants—one French, one Russian and one Flemish —and an "Anglo-American Bar". After the exposition closed, the Flemish restaurant was converted to a 250-seat theatre. Today there is the Le 58 Tour Eiffel restaurant and other facilities.

The second floor is publicly accessible by lift or stairs and has a restaurant called Le Jules Verne, a gourmet restaurant with its own lift going up from the south column to the second level. This restaurant has one star in the Michelin Red Guide. It was run by the multi- Michelin star chef Alain Ducasse from 2007 to 2017. As of May 2019, it is managed by three-star chef Frédéric Anton. It owes its name to the famous science-fiction writer Jules Verne.

The third floor is the top floor, publicly accessible by lift.

Originally there were laboratories for various experiments, and a small apartment reserved for Gustave Eiffel to entertain guests, which is now open to the public, complete with period decorations and lifelike mannequins of Eiffel and some of his notable guests.

From 1937 until 1981, there was a restaurant near the top of the tower. It was removed due to structural considerations; engineers had determined it was too heavy and was causing the tower to sag. This restaurant was sold to an American restaurateur and transported to New York and then New Orleans. It was rebuilt on the edge of New Orleans' Garden District as a restaurant and later event hall.

Today there is a champagne bar on the third floor of the Eiffel Tower.

The arrangement of the lifts has been changed several times during the tower's history. Given the elasticity of the cables and the time taken to align the cars with the landings, each lift, in normal service, takes an average of 8 minutes and 50 seconds to do the round trip, spending an average of 1 minute and 15 seconds at each level. The average journey time between levels is 1 minute. The original hydraulic mechanism is on public display in a small museum at the base of the east and west legs. Because the mechanism requires frequent lubrication and maintenance, public access is often restricted. The rope mechanism of the north tower can be seen as visitors exit the lift.

Equipping the tower with adequate and safe passenger lifts was a major concern of the government commission overseeing the Exposition. Although some visitors could be expected to climb to the first level, or even the second, lifts had to be the main means of ascent.

Constructing lifts to reach the first level was done by making the legs wide enough at the bottom and so nearly straight that they could contain a straight track. A contract was given to the French company Roux, Combaluzier & Lepape for two lifts to be fitted in the east and west legs. Roux, Combaluzier & Lepape used a pair of endless chains with rigid, articulated links to which the car was attached. Lead weights on some links of the upper or return sections of the chains counterbalanced most of the car's weight. The car was pushed up from below, not pulled up from above: to prevent the chain buckling, it was enclosed in a conduit. At the bottom of the run, the chains passed around 3.9 m (12 ft 10 in) diameter sprockets. Smaller sprockets at the top guided the chains.

Installing lifts to the second level was more of a challenge because a straight track was impossible. No French company wanted to undertake the work. The European branch of Otis Brothers & Company submitted a proposal, but this was rejected: the fair's charter ruled out the use of any foreign material in the construction of the tower. The deadline for bids was extended, but still no French companies put themselves forward, and eventually the contract was given to Otis in July 1887. Otis were confident they would eventually be given the contract and had already started creating designs.

The car was divided into two superimposed compartments, each holding 25 passengers, with the lift operator occupying an exterior platform on the first level. Motive power was provided by an inclined hydraulic ram 12.67 m (41 ft 7 in) long and 96.5 cm (38.0 in) in diameter in the tower leg with a stroke of 10.83 m (35 ft 6 in) : this moved a carriage carrying six sheaves. Five fixed sheaves were mounted higher up the leg, producing an arrangement similar to a block and tackle but acting in reverse, multiplying the stroke of the piston rather than the force generated. The hydraulic pressure in the driving cylinder was produced by a large open reservoir on the second level. After being exhausted from the cylinder, the water was pumped back up to the reservoir by two pumps in the machinery room at the base of the south leg. This reservoir also provided power to the lifts to the first level.

The original lifts for the journey between the second and third levels were supplied by Léon Edoux. A pair of 81 m (266 ft) hydraulic rams were mounted on the second level, reaching nearly halfway up to the third level. One lift car was mounted on top of these rams: cables ran from the top of this car up to sheaves on the third level and back down to a second car. Each car travelled only half the distance between the second and third levels and passengers were required to change lifts halfway by means of a short gangway. The 10-ton cars each held 65 passengers.

Gustave Eiffel engraved on the building of the tower the names of 72 French scientists, engineers and mathematicians as a recognition of their contributions. Eiffel chose this "invocation of science" because of his concern over the artists' protest. At the beginning of the 20th century, the engravings were painted over, but they were restored in 1986–87 by the Société Nouvelle d'exploitation de la Tour Eiffel, a company operating the tower.

The tower is painted in three shades: lighter at the top, getting progressively darker towards the bottom to complement the Parisian sky. It was originally reddish brown; this changed in 1968 to a bronze colour known as "Eiffel Tower Brown". In 2010 the tower was re-painted yellow-brown.

Following the 2024 Summer Olympics held in Paris, Mayor Anne Hidalgo proposed keeping the Olympic rings on the tower permanently. The rings, which measure 95 feet (29 m) wide and 43 feet (13 m) high, were initially installed for the Games and were scheduled for removal after the Paralympics. Hidalgo's decision faced criticism from the Eiffel family and some residents concerned about altering the protected monument. The original 30-ton rings would be replaced with lighter versions for long-term display.

The only non-structural elements are the four decorative grill-work arches, added in Sauvestre's sketches, which served to make the tower look more substantial and to make a more impressive entrance to the exposition.

A pop-culture movie cliché is that the view from a Parisian window always includes the tower. In reality, since zoning restrictions limit the height of most buildings in Paris to seven storeys, only a small number of tall buildings have a clear view of the tower.

Maintenance of the tower includes applying 60 tons of paint every 7 years to prevent it from rusting. The tower has been completely repainted at least 19 times since it was built, with the most recent being in 2010. Lead paint was still being used as recently as 2001 when the practice was stopped out of concern for the environment.

The tower has been used for making radio transmissions since the beginning of the 20th century. Until the 1950s, sets of aerial wires ran from the cupola to anchors on the Avenue de Suffren and Champ de Mars. These were connected to longwave transmitters in small bunkers. In 1909, a permanent underground radio centre was built near the south pillar, which still exists today. On 20 November 1913, the Paris Observatory, using the Eiffel Tower as an aerial, exchanged wireless signals with the United States Naval Observatory, which used an aerial in Arlington County, Virginia. The object of the transmissions was to measure the difference in longitude between Paris and Washington, D.C. Today, radio and digital television signals are transmitted from the Eiffel Tower.

A television antenna was first installed on the tower in 1957, increasing its height by 18.7 m (61 ft). Work carried out in 2000 added a further 5.3 m (17 ft), giving a total height of 324 m (1,063 ft). Analogue television signals from the Eiffel Tower ceased on 8 March 2011.

Since 31 March 2005, digital terrestrial television (DTT) has been broadcast from the Eiffel Tower.

The pinnacle height of the Eiffel Tower has changed multiple times over the years as described in the chart below.

The Eiffel Tower was the world's tallest structure when completed in 1889, a distinction it retained until 1929 when the Chrysler Building in New York City was topped out. The tower also lost its standing as the world's tallest tower to the Tokyo Tower in 1958 but retains its status as the tallest freestanding (non-guyed) structure in France.

The nearest Paris Metro station is Bir-Hakeim and the nearest RER station is Champ de Mars-Tour Eiffel. The tower itself is located at the intersection of the quai Branly and the Pont d'Iéna.

More than 300 million people have visited the tower since it was completed in 1889. In 2015, there were 6.91 million visitors. The tower is the most-visited paid monument in the world. An average of 25,000 people ascend the tower every day (which can result in long queues).

The tower and its image have been in the public domain since 1993, 70 years after Eiffel's death. In June 1990, a French court ruled that a special lighting display on the tower in 1989 to mark the tower's 100th anniversary was an "original visual creation" protected by copyright. The Court of Cassation, France's judicial court of last resort, upheld the ruling in March 1992. The Société d'Exploitation de la Tour Eiffel (SETE) now considers any illumination of the tower to be a separate work of art that falls under copyright. As a result, the SNTE alleges that it is illegal to publish contemporary photographs of the lit tower at night without permission in France and some other countries for commercial use. For this reason, it is often rare to find images or videos of the lit tower at night on stock image sites, and media outlets rarely broadcast images or videos of it.

The imposition of copyright has been controversial. The Director of Documentation for what was then called the Société Nouvelle d'exploitation de la Tour Eiffel (SNTE), Stéphane Dieu, commented in 2005: "It is really just a way to manage commercial use of the image, so that it isn't used in ways [of which] we don't approve". SNTE made over €1 million from copyright fees in 2002. However, it could also be used to restrict the publication of tourist photographs of the tower at night, as well as hindering non-profit and semi-commercial publication of images of the illuminated tower.

The copyright claim itself has never been tested in courts to date, according to a 2014 article in the Art Law Journal, and there has never been an attempt to track down millions of people who have posted and shared their images of the illuminated tower on the Internet worldwide. However, the article adds that commercial uses of such images, like in a magazine, on a film poster, or on product packaging, may require prior permission.

French doctrine and jurisprudence allows pictures incorporating a copyrighted work as long as their presence is incidental or accessory to the subject being represented, a reasoning akin to the de minimis rule. Therefore, SETE may be unable to claim copyright on photographs of Paris which happen to include the lit tower.

The author of the 1989 lighting display, lighting director Pierre Bideau, died in 2021; this makes the said display under artistic copyright until 2092, 70 full years after the director's death.

As one of the most famous landmarks in the world, the Eiffel Tower has been the inspiration for the creation of many replicas and similar towers. An early example is Blackpool Tower in England. The mayor of Blackpool, Sir John Bickerstaffe, was so impressed on seeing the Eiffel Tower at the 1889 exposition that he commissioned a similar tower to be built in his town. It opened in 1894 and is 158.1 m (519 ft) tall. Tokyo Tower in Japan, built as a communications tower in 1958, was also inspired by the Eiffel Tower. Well known is the Petřín Lookout Tower in Prague too.

There are various scale models of the tower in the United States, including a half-scale version at the Paris Las Vegas, Nevada, one in Paris, Texas built in 1993, and two 1:3 scale models at Kings Island, located in Cincinnati, Ohio, and Kings Dominion, located in Richmond, Virginia, amusement parks opened in 1972 and 1975 respectively. Two 1:3 scale models can be found in China, one in Durango, Mexico that was donated by the local French community, and several across Europe.

In 2011, the TV show Pricing the Priceless on the National Geographic Channel speculated that a full-size replica of the tower would cost approximately US$480 million to build. This would be more than ten times the cost of the original (nearly 8 million in 1890 francs; around US$40 million in 2018 dollars).

This is a regrouping of the election results for cabinet ministers during the 2022 French legislative election.

On 20 May 2022, President Emmanuel Macron and Prime Minister Élisabeth Borne composed a government of 27 members. The Élysée announced in stride that all ministers which presented themselves in the legislative elections on 12–19 June 2022 would have to resign from their posts if they were not elected. 15 members of government are candidates include the Prime Minister, who is a candidate for the first time in Calvados's 6th constituency.

Ministers who did not present themselves during the election included:

Following the first round of voting on 12 June 2022, none of the candidates were elected or eliminated. Three ministers arrived in the second position of their respective constituencies and therefor entered the second round in an unfavourable position, they were: Clément Beaune, Stanislas Guerini and Amélie de Montchalin. The minister which obtained the best result was Gabriel Attal, with 48.06% of the vote.

During the second round, Justine Benin was beaten in Guadeloupe's 2nd constituency by the NUPES candidate, Christian Baptiste (58.65% versus 41.35%), Brigitte Bourguignon was beaten by 56 votes in the Pas-de-Calais's 6th constituency by the RN candidate, Christine Engrand (50.06% versus 49.94%), and Amélie de Montchalin was beaten in Essonne's 6th constituency by the NUPES candidate, Jérôme Guedj, deputy of the slingers faction of the PS between 2012 and 2014 and losing candidate in the 2017 legislative elections (53.36% versus 46.63%). It was the first time since the defeat of Alain Juppé in 2007 that ministers in office lost a legislative election. According to the rule decreed by the Élysée, they were all required to resign their government portfolios.

Electoral abstention occurs in French elections, French referendums and local consultations in France.

"Registration on the electoral roll is mandatory" under Article L9 of the Electoral Code [ fr ], but no sanctions are provided for. Since 1997, the law provides for the automatic registration on the electoral roll of the municipality of residence of persons who meet the required age conditions.

In France, voting is not mandatory in the legal sense: "voting is a right, it is also a civic duty" is written on the voter invitation card. It is only mandatory in senatorial elections for major electors (deputies and municipal, departmental and regional councillors) who are fined 100 euros in the event of abstention, since a law passed in 2004.

The abstention rate can be calculated in different ways. In France, the ratio is established by comparing the number of citizens who abstained from voting to the number of those registered on the electoral lists, on the date of the election. People who are not registered on the electoral lists are therefore not counted in the abstention figures. Blank and invalid votes are also not counted.

"Registration on the electoral roll is mandatory" under Article L9 of the Electoral Code, but no sanctions are provided for. Since 1997, the law provides for the automatic registration on the electoral roll of the municipality of domicile of persons who meet the required age conditions. This concerns young people in the year following their electoral majority.

According to several INSEE studies, around 4.9 million French people are not registered on the electoral rolls or believe they are not (2004 data), a figure which varies between 10% and 13.3% of the electorate over the last nine years.

In 2007, the electorate [ fr ] was estimated to comprise 44.5 million voters for 62 million inhabitants.

In 2016, the electorate was estimated to consist of 44.834 million voters for 66 million inhabitants.

In 2018, the electoral body was estimated to include 45.448 million voters for 67 million inhabitants.

At 14 April 2019, the electoral body comprised 47.148 million voters for 67 million inhabitants.

The abstention rate has varied considerably since the introduction of direct universal (male) suffrage [ fr ] in France. The enthusiasm perceptible at the 1848 French Constituent Assembly election (18.3% abstention) quickly gave way to disenchantment, especially after the June Days uprising and the 45 centime tax [ fr ]. From the summer, abstentionism soared during local elections: around 37% in municipal elections, then 62% for general councils, and finally 73% for district councils. The presidential election in December regained some favour, with only 25% abstention. But from 1849, the legislative elections experienced a decline: 32% abstentionism, or 14 points more than a year earlier. The sequel was mixed: the very low abstention rates observed in each plebiscite of 1851, 1852 and 1870 were contrasted by a civic languor in the legislative elections, against which the Second Empire tried to fight. The liberalization [ fr ] of the regime would allow a return to civic life; abstentionism fell to barely more than 25% in the municipal elections of 1865, and to 22% in the last legislative elections, those of 1869.

The French Third Republic saw the triumph of civic-mindedness in the main election, the legislative elections, but also, a much more counterintuitive phenomenon, in the municipal elections. With ups and downs for the former, while participation in the latter never weakened (from 74.5% in 1874 to 78% in 1912).According to the expression dedicated to the legislative elections, the combat elections (1876, 1877, 1885, 1889, 1902, 1906) contrasted with the appeasement elections (1881, 1893, 1898, 1910, 1914) among other things by their better participation. On the other hand, participation in the two other types of election practiced at the time (that of the district and departmental councils) fell until the turn of the century, then remained stable. Within the Third Republic, the interwar period was the golden age of participation. As early as 1924, the legislative elections saw abstentions drop to less than 17% of registered voters; the municipal elections followed very closely, at less than 17.5%. Finally, the 1930s saw an exacerbation of political life, to the point of reaching an absolute record for participation in legislative elections in France in 1936 (only 15.8% abstention in metropolitan France in the first round, 15.6% in the second round), while participation in the election of district councils tended to catch up with that of general councils, which itself approached that in the legislative elections (22.5% in 1937, the absolute record for participation in departmental elections in France).

The rest is much more eventful. The repetition of political elections in 1946 is considered by all historians to have tired public opinion. However, the abstentions in the legislative elections of November 1946 did not reach 22%. On the other hand, the disappearance of the district councils did not prevent the departmental elections, now called cantonal, from gradually returning to their cruising speed of the Third Republic, with more than 40% abstention.

The repeated consultations from 1958 to 1962 ended up causing a real civic decline, with a very notable 31.3% abstention rate in the legislative elections of November 1962 - as would be all rates in legislative elections exceeding 30%. But it was the introduction of direct suffrage in the election of the President of the Republic that would end up widening the gaps in participation between the different types of ballot. Not immediately, but after the legislative elections of 1986, the last to be above 70% participation. In the subsequent period, there would sometimes be more than double the abstention rate in cantonal, regional or European elections compared to the main election of the French Fifth Republic, the presidential election.

From 1833 to 2014, this ballot was called “cantonal elections”, then “departmental elections” from 2015 following the cantonal redistricting of 2014 [ fr ].

In France, abstention would be influenced by a feeling of political non-representation, on four points:

The level of socio-professional category would affect abstentionism in France : the people with “low” socioeconomic status abstain more while the people with a high level of education are more involved in politics.

In a study published in early 2015, political science researcher Vincent Pons states that: "We often tend to overestimate the political motives for abstention, while the sociological component is also very strong." While participation was homogeneous in 2012, participation fluctuated at the national level between 64% and 94% (a range of 30%), in 2014, the spectrum widened to between 34% and 82% (a range of 48%) based on the 2012 presidential election and the 2014 European elections. Using the non-specific case of Perpignan and the Pyrénées-Orientales department, he observed that the range is all the greater when overall participation is low, particularly in urban areas. Thus, the differential goes from 4 points in 2012 to 9 points in 2014 for the Pyrénées-Orientales. In the case of the city of Perpignan, he observes that in 2014 the decline particularly hit the areas where the winning party in the 2012 presidential election had won.

While the second round of the 2017 legislative elections set a new record for abstention for this type of vote, Céline Braconnier believes that she was helped by the previously un-divisive profile of President Emmanuel Macron: "Many tell us they expect to be 'hit hard'. But Emmanuel Macron is not divisive enough to mobilize them against him. These abstainers are in a state of indifference tinged with apprehension, but not in the opposition. Abstention is particularly high among those under 30: " Young people no longer vote when they don't understand why they are being asked to go to the polls. Older people still go out of duty and can't bring their children to vote. For the presidential election [2017], we saw families vote. There, only parents voted". In 2023, Jean Massiet [ fr ], a political popularization streamer on the Twitch platform, estimates that "young people love politics […], on the other hand [they] shun traditional forms of politics, that is to say the good old ballot paper, membership cards to a party or a union".

In 2017, abstention during the presidential election amounted to 22.23% on April 23 (first round) and at 25.44% the May 7 (second round) or more than one in four French voters.

Voters were able to vote in four elections: two for the presidential election and two for the legislative elections. Insee analysed abstentions in these elections: 14% of voters abstained in all rounds of voting and 86% voted in at least one of the four rounds; 35% voted in all rounds of the elections and 51% voted intermittently. Two out of ten registered voters only voted in the two rounds of the presidential election. The legislative elections mobilize much less than the presidential elections: 85% of registered voters voted at least once in the presidential election compared to 58% in the legislative elections. Registered voters who systematically abstain in the 2017 elections are more often young (under 30) or old (80 or over), they are also more often without qualifications, they have a lower standard of living and are more often inactive or workers than other registered voters.

Political science researchers Céline Braconnier and Jean-Yves Dormagen noted that during the 2017 presidential election, the two test polling stations they studied over the long term, one in the Parisian district of The Marais and the other in the Cosmonautes district of Saint-Denis, that participation reached 85.3% in the first and only 65.2% in Saint-Denis. They noted that a retired person with a higher education qualification, aged between 65 and 70, had a 98% probability of having voted in the first round of the 2012 presidential election, while a non-qualified worker, aged between 18 and 24, had a 33% probability of having abstained. Youth, lack of education, as well as belonging to the working classes are all factors that encourage abstention. If the office studied in Saint-Denis placed Jean-Luc Mélenchon in the lead with 48.5% of the votes and that of Paris Emmanuel Macron with 46.1% of the votes, the researchers note that the difference in participation benefits the candidate of En Marche!.

In 2022, a presidential election (2 rounds) and legislative elections (2 rounds) took place. INSEE devoted a study to abstention during these elections, which revealed:

Céline Braconnier and Jean-Yves Dormagen have studied over a long period the city of Cosmonauts in Saint-Denis, in the northern suburbs of Paris.

In the second round of the 2017 French legislative election, not one of the fifteen registered voters in the Drôme village of Pennes-le-Sec cast a ballot, representing an abstention rate of 100%. On the contrary, all the voters, around forty people, in the village of Le Champ-de-la-Pierre in Orne have taken to voting in every election, representing a participation rate of 100%.

Emphyteusis (Greek, 'implanting') or emphyteutic lease is a contract for land that allows the holder the right to the enjoyment of a property, often in perpetuity, on condition of proper care, payment of tax, and rent. This type of real estate contract specifies that the lessee must improve the property for the nation or for its population, for example through construction of a railway service perhaps or by farming the land to create produce, as happened in Mauritius where the population was starving. The term is commonly used in France and its ex-colonies, in Quebec, and in Belgium. This kind of lease is usually associated with government lands or government properties.

Emphyteusis originated in Ancient Greece. In the early Roman Empire, it was initially granted by the state for the purposes of agriculture or development. In essence, it was a long-term lease of an imperial domain for a rental in kind. The title existing before emphyteusis was ius in agro vectigali. The emphyteusis gave the lease-holder (emphyteuta) rights similar to those of a proprietor, although the real owner remained the person to whom the rent (canon or pensio) was paid. The tenant gained most of the rights of the owner. Accordingly, he could maintain actio vectigalis in rem against any one to recover possession of the land thus leased. Under certain circumstances, the land returned to the owner, as in the case of the death of the emphyteuta intestate, non-payment of the rent or taxes for three years (or two years in case of land held of the Church), lapse of time if a term was fixed in the original agreement, contractus emphyteuseos, which was a specific contract and neither an ordinary lease nor a sale. The rights of the emphyteuta embraced the full use of the land and its products and were alienable and transferable by testament or ab intestato.

Emphyteusis is still in use in countries such as Sri Lanka, Germany, Belgium, Canada, Portugal, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Malta and Spain and, until relatively recently, in Scotland. Rwanda adopted an emphyteutic leasing system in 2013, offering 99-year leases for agricultural land to its citizens, and 20-year leases for residential land.

The Empire Defense Council (French : Conseil de défense de l'Empire) was a deliberative body established within Free France in 1940. It was subsequently replaced by the French National Committee.

On 26 June 1940, four days after the Pétain government requested the armistice, General de Gaulle submitted a memorandum to the British government notifying Churchill of his decision to set up a Council of Defense of the Empire and formalizing the agreement reached with Churchill on 28 June, which allowed the Free French forces to be recognized as a fully-fledged French authority by the British government: in the eyes of the British government, General de Gaulle was then the "Head of the French who are continuing the war". This memorandum led to an agreement on 7 August, but provided for the creation of a French Committee or Council as of 26 June.

The agreement of 7 August between de Gaulle and the UK, known as the " Chequers agreement", gave General de Gaulle all the financial independence and resources of a government in exile. The British government considered it to have taken effect 11 July 1940, the day Marshal Pétain took full powers and signed into law the end of the Third Republic. By this act, the British government wished to indicate that it recognized that Free France, still being formed at the time, was the legitimate successor to the Republic that had just died, and was an ally of the United Kingdom in the war. It also undertook to reconstitute the entire French territory and "the greatness of France" after the war was over.

The formal recognition of the Empire Defense Council as a de facto government in exile by the United Kingdom took place on 6 January 1941; recognition by the Soviet Union was published in December 1941, by exchange of letters.

In his view, General de Gaulle was ensuring the continuity of the rule of law and national defense against the Axis powers. This was made possible by the legitimacy he obtained from his appeal of 18 June, as well as by the rapid rallying of military units and French territories that wished to continue the fight (from 22 June, in the case of the Franco-British territory of New Hebrides).

De Gaulle's support grew out of a base in colonial Africa. In the fall of 1940, the colonial empire largely supported the Vichy regime. Félix Éboué, governor of Chad, switched his support to General de Gaulle in September. Encouraged, de Gaulle traveled to Brazzaville in October, where he announced the formation of the Empire Defense Council in the Brazzaville Manifesto, and invited all colonies still supporting Vichy to join him and the Free French forces in the fight against Germany, which most of them did by 1943.

At the time, Free France had the bulk of its territorial base in its colonial empire, thanks to the rallying of various colonies : French India was the first to rally, followed by most of the territories of French Equatorial Africa, followed by the New Hebrides Condominium, French Polynesia and New Caledonia. Félix Éboué, governor of Chad, announced his support on August 26. He quickly received the support of Edgard de Larminat, Pierre Koenig and Philippe Leclerc. At the end of the summer, most of French Equatorial Africa, newly designated " Free French Africa ", was in support of Free France.

On 27 October 1940, General de Gaulle announced the creation of the Empire Defense Council as the decision-making body of Free France in the "Brazzaville Manifesto", from the capital of French Equatorial Africa. This was part of his strategy to give the movement a political as well as a military character, both to attract supporters, and to provide support for his claim as a political as well as military leader of the French resistance.

In the ordinances of 27 October 1940, De Gaulle defined the powers of the council, including: external and internal security, economic activity, negotiating with foreign powers (in article 2), as well as the "establishment of organs that would exercise the powers of jurisdiction normally devolved to the Council of State and the Court of Cassation " (article 4). However, the decision-making power rested with the head of the Free French (article 3), the Council exercising only an advisory role. Ministerial powers were exercised "by agency directors appointed by the Head of the Free French". This gave the Defense Council the nature of a consultative and representative body in the territories that joined with it. The Administrative Conference of the Free French (Conférence administrative de la France Libre), created by decree of 29 January 1941, served as the government, bringing together all the agency directors and the members of the Empire Defence Council.

The members of the council were chosen by Charles de Gaulle because they "already exercise authority on French lands or symbolize the highest intellectual and moral values of the nation." (Brazzaville Manifesto)

The empty diagonal (French : diagonale du vide) is a band of low-density population that stretches from the French department of the Landes in the southwest to the Meuse in the northeast. The diagonal's population density is very low compared to the rest of France.

The low population density (less than 30/km or 78/sq mi) is caused largely by the rural exodus and urbanisation of the 19th and 20th centuries. Some commentators prefer to speak of a "low-density diagonal" (diagonale des faibles densités) and regard the term "empty diagonal" as both pejorative and exaggerated. Still, DATAR used the term and it remains the most common term.

The pattern is more readily apparent at the departmental level than at the regional level. It is part of a broader pattern of low population density that extends into Spain and Portugal and is known as the continental diagonal [ es ].

Before the emergence of the empty diagonal, an earlier demographic feature was the Saint-Malo – Geneva line that ran from the northwest to the southeast and divided the industrial northeast from the agrarian southwest. Charles Dupin identified it in his 1837 treatise Forces productives et commerciales de la France.

In 1947, the geographer Jean-François Gravier wrote of a "French desert" that corresponds, more or less, to the modern notion of the empty diagonal.

Hervé Le Bras and Emmanuel Todd argue that the concept is no longer valid in the 21st century because of growth that is observed in some departments like Indre and Gers. According to their analysis, the zone of negligible or negative population growth extends only from the Massif Central to Lorraine. However, an analysis at the level of cantons and communes indicates that the zone of decline extends beyond the Massif–Lorraine axis and that the growth observed by Le Bras and Todd is fragile and driven by a temporary influx of retirees.

La diagonale du vide is the title of a 2009 novel by Pierre Péju in which an urban businessman seeks solitude in a cottage in Ardèche.

From 2015 to 2016, the author and blogger Mathieu Mouillet spent 18 months exploring the empty diagonal and meeting its inhabitants. His "exotic voyage" is presented by notes and photographs on his blog.

Empègues are small images stencilled on doorways in the Occitania region of southern France. The empègue symbolizes that the household has contributed to groups of youths gathering funds for celebrations each August.

The drawings are made by the youths of a village and are said to date from the early part of the twentieth century when the local male youths would be conscripted into the military. Conscription is no longer practiced in France, but the tradition continues. The images are of traditional subjects which symbolize the local area. In the Petite Camargue the images frequently involve horses, flamingoes and, of, course, bulls because of the local version of bullfighting (Course camarguaise). In the version of bullfighting licensed in France, the bull is merely decorated with prizes which youths attempt to steal from the long-horned bull. The bull gets to fight another day.

The word is said to have derived from a word in Occitan, empeguar, which means "stick". In Spanish the meaning is to mark with pitch. Another suggestion is that it comes from Pegare - the word for paste. The original Empègues were made from a mixture of soot and paste.

The images frequently include the abbreviation V.L.J. which stands for Vive La Jeunesse and the year of creation. In this way, it is possible to date the development of the designs over many years. The samples included here date back over 40 years to 1964 (when conscription was still practiced). Many of these images are from the village of Beauvoisin, but they could have come from any of the villages in Southern France where many of the smallest villages will have their own arena for bullfighting.

Groups are formed which fundraise for the season of celebrations of youth called the aubade in August. Groups will form to support their teams, to gather funds and to place their empègues around their area and at their base.

The purpose of the images is to record which houses have contributed to the funds for the festival. This is why the images vary from year to year and why the design is important. The Empègue is the brand of the group that collected money from you.

En vessie refers to a cooking method in which a meat or other dish is cooked in a (pig) bladder. A well-known application is with Bresse chicken : Poularde de Bresse en vessie ; a prepared chicken is stuffed with foie gras, truffles, and other flavorings, then enclosed in the bladder and poached in chicken broth. The roots of the recipe go back to Auguste Escoffier, and this preparation was made famous by Paul Bocuse among other Lyonnais chefs.

The advantage of the method is that the meat does not come into contact with the cooking liquid; in Poularde de Bresse en vessie, the juices from the chicken all stay in the chicken, and turn into a flavorful jelly if the dish is served cold. The meat remains extremely moist. It has been likened to the cooking method of sous vide where meat is vacuum packed and cooked slowly in a water bath. A similar effect can be achieved by wrapping chicken in aluminum foil.

The origins of slavery in France can be traced back to the Merovingian dynasty in the 4th century. At least five Frankish queens during that period were former slaves: Ingund, Fredegund, Bilichild, Nanthild, and Balthild. Slavery continued under the Carolingian Empire and was successively abolished by the French Republic amid the French Revolution.

In 1198, the Trinitarians were founded, with the purpose of redeeming war captives. This was one of the earliest steps towards eliminating slavery in France.

In 1315, Louis X published a decree, known as the Ordonnance royale du juillet, 1315 abolishing slavery and proclaiming that "France signifies freedom", with the effect that any slave setting foot on French soil should be freed. However, slavery continued until the 17th century in some of France's Mediterranean harbours in Provence, as well as until the 18th century in some of France's overseas territories. Most aspects of serfdom were also de facto abolished between 1315 and 1318. Louis X died two years after this event. In 1318, King Philip V abolished serfdom on his domain.

The Society of the Friends of the Blacks was founded in Paris in 1788, and remained active until 1793, during the midst of the French Revolution. It was led by Jacques Pierre Brissot, who frequently received advice from British abolitionist Thomas Clarkson, who led the abolitionist movement in Great Britain. At the beginning of 1789, the Society had 141 members.

A series of events took place from 1791 which led to the abolition of institutionalized slavery in France, including the establishment of the national convention and the election of the first Assembly of the First Republic (1792–1804), on 4 February 1794, under the leadership of Maximilien Robespierre, culminating in the passing of the Law of 4 February 1794, which abolished slavery in all French colonies.

The Abbé Grégoire and the Society of the Friends of the Blacks were part of the abolitionist movement, which had laid important groundwork in building anti-slavery sentiment in Metropolitan France. The first article of the law stated that "slavery was abolished" in the French colonies, while the second article stated that "slave-owners would be indemnified" with financial compensation for the value of their slaves. The French constitution promulgated in 1795 declared in its Declaration of the Rights of Man that slavery was abolished.

The abolition of slavery in France was enacted with the Decree of the Abolition of Slavery of April 27, 1848.

In particular Martinique was the first French overseas territory in which the decree for the abolition of slavery actually came into force, on 23 May 1848.

Gabon was founded as a settlement for emancipated slaves.

At about the same time, France started colonizing Africa and gained possession of much of West Africa by 1900. In 1905, the French abolished slavery in most of French West Africa. The French also attempted to abolish Tuareg slavery following the Kaocen Revolt. In the region of the Sahel, slavery has long persisted.

The abolition wasn't strictly enforced. Several French territories kept practicing slavery until 1904 as was the case in Senegal or 1894 in French Sudan.

Passed on 10 May 2001, the Taubira law officially acknowledges slavery and the Atlantic slave trade as a crime against humanity. 10 May was chosen as the day dedicated to recognition of the crime of slavery.

Since the abolition of slavery proclamation in 1848, additional efforts were made to eliminate other forms of slavery. In 1890, the Brussels Conference Act (a collection of anti-slavery measures aimed at ending the slave trade on land and sea, especially in the Congo Basin, the Ottoman Empire, and the East African coast) was signed, followed in 1904 by the International Agreement for the suppression of the White Slave Traffic. Only France, the Netherlands and Russia applied the treaty to the entirety of their colonial empires with immediate effect. In 1926, the Slavery Convention was ratified by France and other nations.

Although slavery has been outlawed for over a century, many criminal organizations still practice human trafficking. For this reason, on July 25, 2013, France recognized modern-day slavery as a crime punishable by up to 30 years in jail.

According to the International Energy Agency, France has historically generated a very low level of carbon dioxide emissions compared to other G7 economies due to its reliance on nuclear energy. Energy in France was generated from five primary sources: nuclear power, natural gas, liquid fuels, renewables and coal. In 2020, nuclear power made up the largest portion of electricity generation, at around 78%. Coal energy is declining and due to cease. Renewables accounted for 19.1% of energy consumption in 2020. France has the largest share of nuclear electricity in the world. The country is also among the world's biggest net exporters of electricity. The country is increasingly investing in renewable energy and has set a target of 32% by 2030.

In its 2021 Country report on France, the International Energy Agency warned that the country is recording delays in terms of meetings its own energy and climate goals. The IEA pointed to the rising level of carbon emissions due to the reliance on fossil fuels in transport in particular and to concerns related to the aging nuclear fleet.

The electricity sector in France is dominated by nuclear power, which accounted for 72.3% of total production in 2016, while renewables and fossil fuels accounted for 17.8% and 8.6%, respectively. France has the largest share of nuclear electricity in the world. The country is also among the world's biggest net exporters of electricity. The French nuclear power sector is almost entirely owned by the French government and the degree of the government subsidy is difficult to ascertain because of a lack of transparency.

In 2010, as part of the progressive liberalisation of the energy market under EU directives, France agreed the Accès régulé à l'électricité nucléaire historique (ARENH) regulations that allowed third party suppliers access up to about a quarter of France's pre-2011 nuclear generation capacity, at a fixed price of €42/MWh from 1 July 2011 until 31 December 2025.

France uses nuclear to produce around 70% of its electricity needs from 56 active reactors in 2023. A 2014 plan to reduce the nuclear supply was reversed in 2019 and in 2022 plans to build six new reactors were announced.

France has 20 GW of installed capacity and supplies around 10% of France's electricity needs.

Renewable energy includes wind, solar, biomass and geothermal energy sources.

In 2009 a target for 2020 was set of 23% of all energy used would be renewable energy, this was not met as only 19.1% was achieved. France was refusing to pay the possible €500 million penalty fine.

With growing installed wind and solar power capacity, on top of preexisting hydroelectric facilities, renewable energy rose to provide 26% of France's national electricity consumption in 2022.

Government policy aims to increase renewable energy use; in 2015, the French parliament passed a comprehensive energy and climate law that includes a mandatory renewable energy target requiring 40% of national electricity production to come from renewable sources by 2030.

In 2022 around 15.8 GW of Solar capacity was in operation, short of the 2023 target of 20 GW.

An ambitious target of 50 offshore wind farms with a capacity of 40 GW by 2050 has been set by the government, the first farm near St Nazaire came online in 2022, with the fourth offshore wind farm approved in March 2023, a 1 GW farm of 47, 300m tall, turbines off Normandy called Centre Manche 1, scheduled to come online in 2031.

Biomass provides around 2% of electricity capacity.

Électricité de France (EDF) is the main electricity generation and distribution company in France. It was founded on 8 April 1946 as a result of the nationalisation of a number of electricity producers, transporters and distributors by the Communist Minister of Industrial Production Marcel Paul. Until 19 November 2004 it was a government corporation, but it is now a limited-liability corporation under private law (société anonyme). The French government partially floated shares of the company on the Paris Stock Exchange in November 2005, although it retained almost 85% ownership at the end of 2007.

EDF held a monopoly in the distribution, but not the production, of electricity in France until 1999, when the first European Union directive to harmonize regulation of electricity markets was implemented.

EDF is one of the world's largest producers of electricity. In 2003, it produced 22% of the European Union 's electricity, primarily from nuclear power :

A report was published in 2011 by the World Energy Council in association with Oliver Wyman, entitled Policies for the future: 2011 Assessment of country energy and climate policies, which ranks country performance according to an energy sustainability index. The best performers were Switzerland, Sweden, and France.

In 2009, France detailed a carbon tax with a levy on oil, gas, and coal consumption by households and businesses that was supposed to come into effect on 1 January 2010. The tax would affect households and businesses, which would have raised the cost of a litre of unleaded fuel by about four euro cents (25 US cents per gallon). The total estimated income from the carbon tax would have been between €3 and 4.5 billion annually, with 55 percent from households and 45 percent from businesses. The tax would not have applied to electricity, which in France comes mostly from nuclear power.

On 30 December 2009, the bill was blocked by the French Constitutional Council, which said it included too many exceptions. Among those exceptions, certain industries were excluded that would have made the taxes unequal and inefficient. They included exemptions for agriculture, fishing, trucking, and farming. French President Nicolas Sarkozy, although he vowed to "lead the fight to save the human race from global warming", was forced to back down after mass social protests led to strikes. He wanted support from the rest of the European Union before proceeding.

In 2014, a carbon tax was implemented. Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault announced the new Climate Energy Contribution (CEC) on 21 September 2013. The tax would apply at a rate of €7/tonne CO 2 in 2014, €14.50 in 2015 and rising to €22 in 2016. As of 2018, the carbon tax was at €44.60/tonne. and was due to increase every year to reach €65.40/tonne in 2020 and €86.20/tonne in 2022.

After weeks of protests by the " Gilets Jaunes " (yellow vests) against the rise of gas prices, French President Emmanuel Macron announced on 4 December 2018, the tax would not be increased in 2019 as planned.

Petroleum products accounted for 28.1% of energy use in France in 2022, having dropped from 37% in 1990 and 66% in the 1970's.

Engie SA (stylised in all caps as ENGIE) is a French multinational electric utility company, headquartered in La Défense, Courbevoie. Its activities cover electricity generation and distribution, natural gas, nuclear power, renewable energy, district energy, and the petroleum industry. It is involved in both upstream (engineering, sale, operation, maintenance) and downstream (waste management, dismantling) activities.

Engie supplies electricity to 27 countries in Europe and 48 countries worldwide. The company, formed on 22 July 2008, by the merger of Gaz de France and Suez, traces its origins to the Universal Suez Canal Company founded in 1858 to construct the Suez Canal. As of 2022, Engie employed 96,454 people worldwide with revenues of €93.86 billion.

Engie is listed on the Euronext exchanges in Paris and Brussels and is a constituent of the CAC 40 index. The company was headed from 2016 to 2020 by Isabelle Kocher, who significantly transformed it, notably by deciding to exit coal activities and by investing in renewable energy and energy transition services. Despite the company's commitment to diversification, the majority of its primary activities still revolve around fossil fuels.

Prior to the GDF Suez merger plans in 2006, the company existed as two separate French multinational corporations – Suez S.A. and Gaz de France.

Suez was (and still remains, through GDF Suez) one of the oldest continuously existing multinational corporations in the world as the result of nearly two centuries of reorganisation and corporate mergers. Its corporate history dates back to the 1822 founded Algemeene Nederlandsche Maatschappij ter begunstiging van de volksvlijt (literally: General Dutch Company for the favouring of industry) by King William I of the Netherlands (see Société Générale de Belgique). The origin of its name 'Suez' traces back to its other founding entity – the Compagnie universelle du canal maritime de Suez founded in 1858 to build the Suez Canal. Suez S.A. was the result of a 1997 merger between the Compagnie de Suez and Lyonnaise des Eaux [ fr ].

Gaz de France was created in 1946 along with its sister company Électricité de France (EDF) by the French Government. After the liberalisation of Europe's energy markets, Gaz de France also entered into the electricity sector, having developed combined natural gas-electricity offerings. The company's capital was partially floated on the Paris Stock Exchange in July 2005, raising €2.5 billion for the French Government.

On 25 February 2006, French Prime minister Dominique de Villepin announced the merger of water supply and treatment, waste management and energy company Suez and power firm Gaz de France, with the aim of creating the world's largest liquefied natural gas company. Since the French state owned over 80% of Gaz de France, it was necessary to pass a new law in order to make the merger possible. Whilst Nicolas Sarkozy was for several months opposed to the Villepin government's plans for a merger of the two companies, preferring a three-way deal with Italy's Enel which would maintain a controlling stake for the state, he subsequently accepted the government proposal.

The plan for a merger between Gaz de France and Suez came under fire from the whole of the political left, which feared the loss of one of the last ways of preventing the price rises experienced over the previous three years, and by the social Gaullists and trade unions. In August 2006, the left-wing opposition submitted a record-breaking 137,449 amendments to the proposed legislation. Under normal procedure, parliament would have been required to vote on the amendments, which would have taken 10 years. The French Constitution does give the government options to bypass such a filibuster, but in the end these were not used.

Law No. 2006-1537 of December 7, 2006, on the energy sector authorised the privatisation of Gaz de France. On September 3, 2007, Gaz de France and Suez announced agreed terms of merger, on the basis of an exchange of 21 Gaz de France shares for 22 Suez shares via the absorption of Suez by Gaz de France. Various holdings of Gaz de France and Suez had to be divested in order to satisfy the concerns of the European Commissioner for Competition : GDF agreed to sell its approximate 25% stake in Belgian electricity producer SPE for €515 million. The stake was purchased by fellow SPE shareholder Centrica which exercised its right of first refusal, blocking a previous agreement to sell the stake to Électricité de France. Suez, meanwhile, was forced to reduce its shareholding in natural gas distributor Fluxys and sell its Belgian gas supply subsidiary Distrigas to Eni.

The newly created GDF Suez came into existence on July 22, 2008; the world's second-largest utility with over €74 billion in annual revenues. The deal resulted in the conversion of the French state's 80% stake in GDF into just over 35% of shares of the new company. The water and waste assets which formerly formed part of Suez were spun off into a new publicly traded company, Suez Environment, in which GDF Suez retains a stake.

In 1975, Ruhrgas and Gaz de France concluded a deal according to which they agreed not to sell gas in each other's home market. The deal was abandoned in 2005.

In July 2009, the European Commission fined GDF Suez and E.ON €553 million both over arrangements on the MEGAL pipeline. It was the second biggest fines imposed by the European Commission and the first one on the energy sector.

In October 2009, GDF Suez placed 6th in an A.T. Kearney / BusinessWeek ranking of the "World's Best Companies", the highest-placed European firm.

On August 10, 2010, the company announced a merger of its GDF SUEZ Energy International business unit, along with its operations within the United Kingdom and Turkey, with International Power. The acquisition created the world's biggest independent power producer, and the enlarged company retained International Power's listing on the London Stock Exchange and was 70% owned by GDF Suez.

In December 2010, GDF SUEZ became the key founding member of the 'Medgrid' company – a consortium of twenty plus utilities, grid operators, equipment makers, financing institutions and investors; which will implement the Medgrid project, a French renewable energy initiative within the framework of the Union for the Mediterranean (UfM). The project, planned in North Africa, aims to promote and develop a Euro-Mediterranean electricity network of 20 GW installed generating capacity, with 5 GW being devoted for exports to Europe. The Medgrid together with the German initiated Desertec project would serve as the backbone of the European Supergrid.

On April 16, 2012, the purchase of the remaining 30% of International Power was announced by GDF Suez, and the transaction completed in July 2012. GDF Suez was advised by Rothschild and Ondra Partners, while Barclays, Morgan Stanley and Nomura advised International Power.

On August 9, 2013, GDF Suez, through its Energy Services business line, announced the purchase of Balfour Beatty 's UK Facilities Management business – Balfour Beatty WorkPlace. The legacy Cofely business incorporated the legacy Balfour Beatty Workplace Business which went on to acquire Lend Lease FM in 2014 from Lendlease giving the new business a substantial platform in the operation of PFI assets in the UK.

On April 24, 2015 GDF Suez announced it was changing its name to "eNGie", in an effort to further expand the company's international footprint. CEO and chairman Gérard Mestrallet said the new name was a symbol to meet the challenges of the energy transition and accelerate the group's development. The subsidiary International Power became Engie Energy International.

In July 2015, Engie acquired 95% of Solairedirect, raising its photovoltaic production from 125 to 486 MW.

On March 2, 2017, Engie acquired Keepmoat Regeneration for £330m to form the places and communities division, headed up by Keepmoat LTD's former CEO Dave Sheridan. The new division is focused on three key activities; energy, services and regeneration.

GDF Suez has been ranked as among the 13th best of 92 oil, gas, and mining companies on indigenous rights and resource extraction in the Arctic.

In April 2019, Engie announced the acquisition of 90% of Transportadora Associada de Gás (TAG), Brazil's largest natural gas transmission system owner (2,800 miles of pipeline, 47% of the country's gas infrastructure), for €7.7 billion.

It is the largest acquisition since International Power in 2010. The operation allows Engie to develop on its strategic axis of energy infrastructure as well as in Brazil, one of the priority countries.

In February 2020, the board of directors announces that it will not propose the reappointment of Isabelle Kocher at the next shareholders' meeting, which will bring to an end of her chief executive officer position.

In 2021, Engie was ranked fiftieth in the Arctic Environmental Responsibility Index (AERI) that covers 120 oil, gas, and mining companies involved in resource extraction north of the Arctic Circle.

In July 2021, the company re-organised its structure to create four businesses: Renewables, Energy Solutions, Networks and Thermal & Supply, together with a new entity, Equans, which would bring together its technical services (including electrical, heating, ventilation & air conditioning, cooling, mechanical & electrical, digital & IT and facilities management) under one entity.

In November 2021, Engie sold its technical services business, Equans, to Bouygues in a transaction worth €7.1bn.

In August 2023, it was announced Engie had acquired the Houston -based battery storage company, Broad Reach Power.

Engie's relationship with Russian energy giant Gazprom has faced scrutiny, particularly in light of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine and subsequent European sanctions. In 2021, long-term contracts with Gazprom represented approximately 20% of Engie's global gas sales and consumption, raising concerns about the company's reliance on Russian energy. Following disruptions in gas supply, Engie initiated arbitration proceedings against Gazprom Export LLC in late 2022, citing Gazprom's failure to meet contractual obligations and seeking penalties and damages.

Since 2014, Engie has operated a strategic shift, by reducing future exploration in fossil fuels and investing massively in renewable energies (solar, wind, geothermal, biomass, hydroelectric, and nuclear) and energy efficiency services.

In 2015, Engie announced its decision to stop new investments in coal plants and to dispose of €15 billion in assets in order to reinvest into projects that promote low-carbon, distributed-energy. Engie also announced it will invest €22bn in renewable energies, energy services such as heating and cooling networks, and decentralized energy technology.

In 2016, Isabelle Kocher defined the strategy of Engie as follows: to promote decarbonized energy (oil and coal replaced by renewables and natural gas that emit less greenhouse gases), decentralized energy (energy produced and stored as close as possible to its place of consumption), and digitized energy (big data and digital tools for energy efficiency and network management). The group created Engie Digital and planned to invest €1.5 billion on digital and new technologies related to energy.

Engie also started promoting an open innovation approach with a dedicated entity named "Engie Fab" focused on the development of intelligent networks (smart grids), Internet of objects, green mobility, energy storage, and hydrogen.

Between 2016 and 2018, Engie invested €15 billion in new activities, financed by the sale of coal and upstream oil and gas.

In 2019, Isabelle Kocher announces the strategic plan of the company for the 2019 – 2021 period, with an ambition to become the world leader in the zero-carbon transition. The strategic shift includes accelerating its investments in renewable energies.

Isabelle Kocher announces the definitive exit of coal activities. Engie plans to invest another €12 billion in renewable activities, partly financed by the sale of €6 billion assets (including the last coal plants).

The 12 billion break down as follows: 3 to 3.3 billion into gas infrastructure; 4 to 5 billion into client services and solutions ; and 2.3 to 2.8 billion into renewable energies, adding a 9 GWh production capacity, to reach a renewable installed capacity of 52 to 64 GW by 2026.

As far as the services are concerned, Isabelle Kocher's plan is to develop "energy transition as a service" for large companies and metropolises, who she says are driving the "second wave of energy transition" by searching ways to reduce their carbon emissions (the first wave having been driven by the states). She also says it might be "the invention of a new industry" of a 1 billion dollar potential value.

Engie also announces its intention to leave 20 of the 70 countries where it is active, and focus its activities on 20 countries and 30 metropolitan areas, mainly in Southeast Asia and Africa.

Thanks to former Suez subsidiaries such as Compagnie Nationale du Rhône (CNR), Electrabel and Société hydroélectrique du Midi [ fr ] (SHEM), GDF Suez is the second-largest generator of electricity in France behind EDF. The company indicated in December 2011 that 3 ⁄ 4 of the group's production comes from sources that emit no CO 2 principally hydroelectricity (through CNR and SHEM) and wind power, the latter of which both Gaz de France and Suez moved aggressively into in 2007 and 2008. Recently acquired subsidiaries include Compagnie du vent [ fr ] (majority stake), the wind farm business of Nass & Wind and Erelia. The company also operates a natural gas-fired combined cycle power plant (DK6) in Dunkirk. With the stated aim of reaching a total production capacity of 10 GW by 2013, three gas-fired thermal power plants at Fos-sur-Mer, Montoir-de-Bretagne and Saint-Brieuc are currently in various stages of development, as is a solar panel project in Curbans.

Engie also generates electricity in a number of countries outside France. Most notably, the company is the leading producer in both Belgium and the Netherlands through Electrabel (and the fifth-largest generator in Europe overall), as well as the largest non- state owned generator in both Brazil and Thailand (thanks to majority stakes in Engie Brasil and Glow Energy respectively).

The company also operates in North and Latin America through its Suez Energy International unit, as well as in other European and Asian countries. The company generates electricity through various types of plants, including thermal power, nuclear power, combined heat and power, wind farms, hydroelectric and biomass. Engie is currently developing a $15.8 billion nuclear power plant in Sinop, Turkey in partnership with Itochu and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries.

Since 2012, Engie is also an Australian energy retailer, initially operating as Simply Energy and later Engie Australia.

In November 2016, Engie signed an agreement with Moroccan energy company Nareva. The two companies are planning to develop energy assets in North and Western Africa that will produce 5,000 and 6,000 megawatts. The plans will take place between 2020 and 2025.

In December 2016, Engie announced that Azzour North One Independent Water & Power Project (IWPP) has started full commercial operations. The power and water plant is Kuwait's most efficient source of electricity.

In January 2017, Engie was awarded the contract and achieved financial closing for the greenfield Fadhili independent power project (IPP) in Saudi Arabia, the most efficient cogeneration plant in the country.

In October 2015, Engie announced that it will no longer build coal-fired power plants. Gérard Mestrallet said projects for which Engie had already entered into firm commitments would be honored, but projects, where contracts had not yet been signed, will de facto be suspended. As a result, Engie abandoned two coal-fired power plants projects in Ada Yumurtalik (Turkey) and in Thabametsi (South Africa). In February 2016, Engie announced the selling of its stakes in the Paiton power plant located in Indonesia and in the Meenakshi power plant located in India. Engie also announced the closing of the Rugeley power station in England.

In May 2016 Engie CEO Isabelle Kocher told a French Senate committee that it was planning a gradual withdrawal from coal-fired generation over the coming years. This could include closure of, or sale of its stake in, the lignite-fired Hazelwood Power Station in Victoria, Australia. Hazelwood power plant closed at the end of March 2017.

Engie sold to Enea its Polaniec power plant, in Poland.

In February 2019, Engie announced the definitive exit of all coal activities.

Engie's renewable installed capacity represented 19.5% of its energy mix at the end of 2016. The Group's renewable energy mix is composed of hydropower, solar energy, onshore and offshore wind power, biomass, and geothermal sources.

Engie has won bids for several solar and wind projects since 2016: a 338 MW solar project in India (April 2017), 209 MW in contracts for solar and wind projects in Mexico, and a 40 MW solar project in Peru. It has begun construction of the 100 MW Kathu solar park in South Africa.

Engie invested in Heliatek, a German company pioneering technologies in organic photovoltaics, in September 2016. The Group also assumed 100% control of La Compagnie du Vent in March 2017, and a 30% stake in Unisun, a Chinese solar photovoltaics company, in April 2017.

In Brazil, Engie's largest international hydroelectric project, and the fourth largest power plant in the country (3,750 MW) was inaugurated in December 2016.

Engie built its first international geothermal power generation plant in Indonesia. In October 2016, Engie developed France's first marine geothermal power station in Marseilles. In May 2017, Mexico's ministry of energy awarded Engie three geothermal exploration permits.

In February 2019, Engie announced plans to add 9 gigawatts (GW) of renewable energy generation capacity to its portfolio by 2021, as part of its plan to accelerate the investments in renewable and low carbon energies.

In May 2019, Engie and Portuguese power company EDP announced the future creation of a 50-50 joint venture in offshore wind, starting with a total of 1.5 gigawatts (GW) under construction and 4 GW under development.

Engie's Willogoleche Wind Farm (119 MW) opened in South Australia on 30 July 2019. It also owns Pelican Point (500 MW) and Dry Creek (156 MW) gas-fired power stations and Canunda Wind Farm (46 MW) in South Australia.

Belgium and Engie agreed to extend the use of the country's nuclear reactors by 10 years after Russia's invasion of Ukraine prompted Belgium's governing coalition to rethink plans to rely more on natural gas in june 2023.

Engie covers the whole biomethane chain, from project development with farmers to distribution to the final clients. The group has announced that, by 2030, it would have invested 2 billion euros in renewable gas, 10% of which will be injected into the networks, and that it will produce 5 TWH a year of biomethane.

In its historic activity of gas, Engie covers the whole gas chain, from exploration and production to distribution. It is the:

In November 2016, Engie and Statoil reached an agreement on the renegotiation of their long-term gas supply contracts to adapt them to the evolution of European natural gas markets and to better reflect current market rates.

In 2016, Engie negotiated new contracts for gas supply around the world: an agreement with UkrTransGaz, Ukrainian transmission system operator, on gas transmission and storage; an agreement with AES Andres to foster growth in LNG and natural gas sales in the Caribbean. Engie also committed the Neptune, one of the two FSRU (floating storage and regasification units) of its fleet, to deliver LNG to the first floating LNG import terminal in Turkey.

In China, after an LNG supply agreement with Beijing Gas, Engie is looking at opportunities in the underground gas storage to hold stocks to meet seasonal demand. The bunkering vessel Engie Zeebrugge performed for the first time in the port of Zeebrugge, Belgium, in June 2017. It was the first to provide ship-to-ship supplies for LNG as fuel.

In March 2017, Engie sold its licenses for shale gas exploration in the UK to petrochemicals firm Ineos, as part of its decarbonized strategy In May 2017, Engie enters into exclusive negotiations with Neptune Energy for the sale of its 70% interest in Exploration & Production International ("EPI").

In 2016, Engie signed a technical and commercial cooperation contract with Göteborg Energi to push further the industrialization of the dry biomass-to-gas production approach. Engie is also involved in the Ambigo project, the first dry biomass-to-gas project which will be located in Alkmaar, Netherlands. As a co-investor in the canceled Nord Stream 2 project, Engie wrote off €987 million in April 2022.

Engie provides energy efficiency and environmental services. 90,000 of the group's employees are dedicated to these services.

In March 2017, Engie acquired the Dutch EVBox, one of the suppliers in electric vehicle charging.

Engie (50%) and Axium Infrastructure US (50%) won a 50-year concession to ensure the sustainable energy management of the Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio, one of the largest university campuses in the United States with 485 buildings.

In 2019, Engie won a contract from the University of Leicester to oversee the development of 1,164 new student homes and the refurbishment of a grade II listed building to be used as office and study space, and the construction of a multi-storey car park and the creation of a new teaching and learning centre.

In April 2019, as part of its strategic project to develop zero-carbon transition "as a service", Engie announced the organization of its businesses around four business lines: Thermal, Infrastructures, Customer Solutions and Renewables. Engie also announces the creation of Engie Impact, a business entity in charge of strategy for the largest clients.

Engie is also organised in geographic and transverse business units:

GrDF is the distribution subsidiary of gas, major gas distributor in France and Europe. GRDF builds, operates, and maintains the distribution network. It transports natural gas to customers. It has around 12000 employees and the actual CEO (2017) is senior executive Edouard Sauvage.

Engie Cofely is a subsidiary of energy efficiency and environmental services. It employs 12000 collaborators and generates a turnover of €2,5 billion. The CEO is Jean-Pierre Monéger.

Engie IT or Engie Information & Technologies is the IT subsidiary of Engie group, founded in 2012 by CEO Jean-Michel Carboni (2012–15). Originally Engie's IT departments were managed by the DSI (€1.35bn of revenue in 2012); Carboni pooled IT departments to create a single subsidiary named Engie IT (Information & Technologies). In 2013 the turnover is around 600 million of EUR.

Capacity of installed power production : 104,3 GW in 2018, of which:

The members of the group executive committee are:

Engie is administered by a board of directors of 13 members:

The board is backed by the recommendations of four specialized committees (audit; appointments and compensations; ethics, environment and sustainable development; strategy, investment, and technology).

Ensemble!, officially Ensemble – Movement for a Leftist, Ecologist, and Solidary Alternative (French : Ensemble – Mouvement pour une Alternative de Gauche, Écologiste et Solidaire), was a French left-wing political party, defining itself as anti-capitalist, anti-racist, feminist and eco-socialist. It was launched in November 2013 by several smaller groupings.

The movement was launched through the merge of Les Alternatifs, the Federation for a Social and Ecological Alternative (Fédération pour une alternative sociale et écologique, FASE), former factions of the NPA (Convergences et alternative and the Anti-Capitalist Left), a large majority of members from the Unitary Left (Gauche unitaire), and individuals who were not previously members of any political organization. ·

It became the third-largest component of the Left Front (Front de gauhce) with 2.500 members. The grouping was founded on several shared objectives : the strengthening, broadening, and democratization of the Left Front; the fight against austerity, productivism, and all forms of oppression; self-organization and a new relationship with social movements; and the development of a project for the social and ecological transformation of society to break with capitalism.

In 2017, Ensemble endorsed La France insoumise (LFI) candidate Jean-Luc Mélenchon in the presidential election. A number of activists were elected in the legislative elections on LFI tickets, notably Clémentine Autain.

In the following years, two internal currents emerged within Ensemble : Ensemble Insoumis and Ensemble Autogestion et Emancipation (Seld-management and Emancipation). A large portion of the membership did not align with either group. The pro-Insoumis half eventually split to form the Ecosocialist Left (Gauche écosiocialiste) in 2023, taking with it all of the movement's national elected officials. Two years later, a majority of the remaining members initiated a merger with L'Après, a party launched by several former figures of La France insoumise. A significant part of the Autogestion et Emancipation current refused to join L'Après and regrouped in the Réseau pour l'alternative (Network for the Alternative).

The Anticapitalist Left (Gauche Anticapitaliste), a group formed in 2011 as a tendency within the Trotskyist-influenced New Anticapitalist Party (which it left in 2012) advocating an electoral strategy based on unity with other anti-neoliberal and anti-capitalist forces, in particular the Left Front; The Alternatives [ br ; cs ; fr ], a "red-green" organisation founded in 1988, some of whose roots go back to the Unified Socialist Party (French: Parti Socialiste Unifié, PSU), and influenced by the movement for workers' control or self-management (French: "autogestion"). The Federation for a Social and Ecological Alternative [ eo ; fr ] (Fédération pour une Alternative Sociale et Ecologique, FASE), a group formed in 2008, including many former members of the French Communist Party, and including the association Communistes Unitaires.

The membership of Ensemble is thus made up of activists coming from various left-wing and radical political traditions: altercommunist, trotskyist, feminist, "red-green", ecologist, etc., as well as trade unionists and global justice activists (alterglobalists).

Paid-up membership in June 2015 was approximately 1,200 (internal sources), with several hundred sympathisers.

The movement is a member of the Left Front (French: Front de Gauche), which also includes the French Communist Party and the Left Party (French: (Parti de Gauche)). The candidate of the Left Front, Jean-Luc Mélenchon of the Left Party, obtained 11.1% of the votes in the first round of the 2012 French presidential election.

Ensemble aims towards strengthening the Left Front by building a broad movement against austerity. It opposes all forms of inequality, racism, and oppression, including homophobia, islamophobia, and antisemitism, and seeks to develop links with anti-capitalist groupings outside the Left Front, including more left-wing members of Europe Ecology - The Greens (French: Europe Ecologie-Les Verts). Internationally, it has been involved in discussions and joint activities with the Party of the European Left, Podemos (Spain), Syriza (Greece), Sinn Féin (Ireland), the Left Bloc (Portugal), and others.

Ensemble was formally constituted at a conference held 31 January-1 February 2015 in Saint-Denis (Seine-Saint-Denis). Considering that the merger process had been successfully completed, most of its founding groups then decided to dissolve themselves.

A national delegate meeting takes place in principle 3 times per year. A national coordinating committee ("Equipe d'Animation Nationale, EAN") meets weekly. Its spokespersons include Myriam Martin, Clémentine Autain and Jean-François Pellissier.

Two former Members of Parliament, Jacqueline Fraysse and François Asensi, both former communists who left the French Communist Party in 2010, were, until it was dissolved in 2015, members of the FASE, one of the original constituent groups of Ensemble. An unknown number of local elected officials (including Mayors) and councillors are also members or associates of Ensemble.

Philippe Marlière, professor of political science at University College London, and a long-standing member of the French Socialist Party, and later of the New Anticapitalist Party, joined Ensemble in February 2015.

The headquarters of the movement is in Bagnolet (Seine-Saint-Denis), near Paris.

Ensemble! has a website which is regularly updated, and publishes bulletins, leaflets, and occasional brochures. Members of the movement are free to publish articles on the website, using a blog facility.

The movement holds an annual summer school (French: 'université d'été') in August. The first was held in Pau, with approximately 300 participants. The second took place at the university of Bordeaux from 22 to 26 August 2015, attracting approximately 420 participants.

In the 2017 legislative elections, three Ensemble! activists were elected under the banner of La France Insoumise (LFI), joining its parliamentary group : Clémentine Autain (then co-spokesperson of the movement) in Sevran, Danièle Obono in Paris, and Caroline Fiat in Meurthe-et-Moselle. Elles prennent leurs distances avec le mouvement par la suite They later took their distance form the movement. Muriel Ressiguier, an LFI MP elected in Hérault, joined Ensemble! in 2020.

During a National Collective meeting in mid-October 2017, members voted on three motions to define their relationship with LFI: a rapprochement maintaining two entities, a "search for convergences" while keeping total independence, or a full merger. These proposals obtained 46%, 47% and 16% of the vote respectively, marking a close proximity between the two organizations.

In May 2022, the centrist coalition Ensemble Citoyens (supporting President Emmanuel Macron) shortened its name to Ensemble. This provoked a legal reaction from the party Ensemble!, whose militants and leaders, including Clémentine Autain, launched a lawsuit for trademark infringement. The Judicial Court of Paris declared itself incompetent on 8 June 2022, inviting the party to refer the matter to the Constitutional Council.

Ten members of Ensemble! stood as candidates in the 2022 French legislative election. Four were elected: Clémentine Autain, Hendrik Davi, Michel Sala, and Marianne Maximi. All sat in the La France Insoumise - NUPES group.

In June 2022, the Ensemble Insoumis current renamed itself the Ecosocialist Left (Gauche écosocialiste). This evolution led to Ensemble! withdrawing from La France Insoumise. The Gauche écosocialiste subsequently became an autonomous party in March 2023, causing a split within Ensemble. As a result, the mouvement lost all of its national elected officials.

On 25 May 2025, following months of negotiations and a consultation of members, the party's General Assembly voted to merge with L'Après, a new party launched by several former figures of La France Insoumise.

In France, various environmental responsibilities (living environment, water, air, soil, biodiversity), energy, waste, and sustainable development have progressively been assigned by the legislator to local authorities. These responsibilities are either sovereign and mandatory, or, in some cases, optional. In all cases, they are primarily governed by the General Code of Local Authorities [ fr ] and the French Environmental Code [ fr ].

These responsibilities have evolved and will continue to evolve, within the framework of ongoing decentralization through successive reforms of municipal responsibilities and decentralization laws, as well as within the framework of the French local government reform [ fr ].

Within the framework of new decentralization laws expected to be implemented between 2010 and 2020, certain local authorities will be designated as "lead authority" for specific responsibilities to improve the coherence and complementarity of their actions within the same environmental field, particularly through Local Agenda 21 initiatives. Local authorities account for an increasing share of expenditure related to environmental protection.

Overseas collectivities may have specific responsibilities due to their isolated geopolitical situation and their rich environmental heritage.

The environmental responsibilities of local authorities were formalized with the emergence of environmental law, generally with a focus on subsidiarity and complementarity. They have evolved in response to growing awareness of emerging issues or even global crises, requiring local and differentiated solutions and/or adaptations to global problems (e.g., energy crises, biodiversity crises, acid rain, climate crisis, seismic risks, eutrophication, and general environmental acidification, widespread pesticide pollution, etc.).

The transfer of responsibilities and the emergence of new responsibilities have led to, according to the IFEN from 2000 to 2007:

the share of public local administration contributions to environmental protection expenditure—that is, the financial effort to prevent, reduce, or eliminate environmental degradation—has steadily increased since 2000. It rose from 22% to 25% in 2005, primarily involving municipalities and their groupings (68%), followed by water agencies (13%), departments (11%), and regions (8%).

The majority of these expenditures are made by municipalities and general councils for wastewater management and waste.

The region primarily has responsibility for spatial planning, translated through the development and periodic revision of a Regional Plan for Spatial Planning and Sustainable Development [ fr ]. It is supported in this field (and others) by the Regional Economic, Social, and Environmental Council [ fr ] (CERESE).

The Regions must adhere to two main types of plans.

On 17, the Minister for the Environment, Nathalie Kosciusko-Morizet, established a national plan for the prevention and management of waste; it aims to prevent and reduce, where possible at the source, the production and harmfulness of waste, promote their reuse (circular economy), reduce the overall impacts of resource use, and improve the efficiency of their use. Each region must establish its regional and interregional plan for the prevention and management of hazardous waste.

The draft plan is developed at the initiative and under the responsibility of the President of the Regional Council, made available to the public for two months, then approved by a resolution of the regional council and published.

Each region is covered by a Regional Plan for the Disposal of Industrial and Special Waste [ fr ] (PREDIS).

The Île-de-France must manage, in addition to these two plans, the disposal of household waste and similar waste.

The region must participate in the Water Development and Management Plan [ fr ] (SAGE) and the Schéma directeur d'aménagement et de gestion des eaux (SDAGE). The region must manage the development, maintenance, and operation of watercourses, canals, lakes, and bodies of water.

To reduce pollution and congestion during peak hours, the region manages the organization of regional rail transport with SNCF, a French public company. It develops a Regional Transport Plan [ fr ], which became the Regional Infrastructure and Transport Plan (SRIT) in 1983.

The region has several responsibilities related to natural spaces. It must conduct inventories of natural heritage and local inventories (e.g., through a regional biodiversity observatory [ fr ]). It is responsible for regional nature parks (PNR) and national nature reserves (RNR).

Through the Regional Ecological Coherence Plan [ fr ] (SRCE), it ensures the landscape ecology coherence of the Green and Blue infrastructure (Regional committees develop, monitor, and update regional ecological coherence plans, prefiguring future green and blue frameworks, ensuring consistency with the national Green and Blue Framework guidelines and the SDAGEs).

The department has limited environmental responsibilities. One of its mandatory responsibilities is the management of Sensitive Natural Areas [ fr ] (ENS). It also primarily acts in the field of waste. Alongside these few responsibilities, the general council may also undertake voluntary actions in the field of environment and sustainable development.

The department can act in the field of environment and sustainable development through and with its heritage. These are referred to as departmental estates. Thus, it may choose to enhance, protect, or even have this heritage labeled or ecocertified, possibly as part of a departmental Agenda 21 by incorporating environmental awareness. These actions concern departmental parks (Parc Départemental du Morbras in Sucy-en-Brie), leisure bases (the three departmental bases in Tarn), lakes (the lakes of Cher), and sites and estates with specific characteristics (Domaine de Restinclières in Hérault).

The department can also contribute to the preservation of forest resources through departmental forests.

Departmental household and similar waste disposal plans [ fr ] were made mandatory by the law of 13. Their development is the responsibility of the Prefect or the Departmental Council. Their purpose is to encourage and coordinate actions to modernize the management of household and similar waste by local authorities. The plan, as defined at the departmental level, generally includes four elements:

These plans are significant because, once approved, they are binding on public entities and their concessionaires in the department's territory. All actions undertaken by them must be compatible with the plan. Thus, it holds genuine legal and environmental value.

Since the circular of 24 from the Ministry of Spatial Planning and Environment, a general revision of the oldest plans has been sought. Indeed, while these initial plans demonstrated the departments' willingness to act for the environment through waste management, they placed too much emphasis on incineration

When the department decides to invest in protecting one of the world's most precious resources, this can involve its sanitation, drinking water, the management of watersheds, or the construction of hydraulic structures.

Sanitation, like drinking water, is not a responsibility of the departments. It falls under the jurisdiction of municipalities, which may transfer this responsibility to an EPCI (particularly with regard to road infrastructure [ fr ]) or a mixed syndicate. However, this does not prevent the department from taking action in this area. It can intervene to provide expertise and utilize its capabilities. Thus, it can technically and financially support municipalities in the construction and management of sewage collection networks and wastewater treatment plants (STEP).

Additionally, there is participation, alongside the water agency, in financing the Technical Assistance Service for Wastewater Treatment Plant Operators (SATESE), a departmental service of the General Council. E.g.: Service d'Assistance Technique aux Exploitants de Stations d'Épuration (SATESE) of the Hérault department.

The department's sanitation service is present to meet the needs of municipalities in the aforementioned areas (expertise, assistance, etc.). It also fulfills a general coordination role with the various authorities responsible for Non-Collective Sanitation (ANC), in collaboration with water agencies. It promotes coordination among different stakeholders, encourages exchanges, and ensures technical and regulatory oversight.

The department may also develop departmental charters. These are less binding than departmental plans and are based on voluntarism, in the spirit of sustainable development and stakeholder engagement to implement certain international commitments of France.

Finally, through departmental sanitation plans, the department can initiate studies to better understand the future needs of its territory. Several General Councils have opted for the drafting of such plans: Deux-Sèvres department.

The special case of the Petite Couronne departments in Paris:

The Hauts-de-Seine (92), Seine-Saint-Denis (93), and Val-de-Marne (94) departments own the sanitation network and handle the collection and transport of effluents (but not the management of wastewater treatment plants). This is a special case that constitutes an exception to the principle that only municipalities are responsible for sanitation. Wastewater treatment in the Paris region is a critical issue due to the high population density: the quality of the entire network is paramount and justifies direct intervention by the departments.

Thus, municipalities exercise their sanitation responsibilities only with regard to local collection and transport. The effluents collected in the municipalities' territories are transported to the facilities of the Interdepartmental Syndicate for the Sanitation of the Paris Agglomeration (SIAAP) via the departmental network.

The departmental level also acts in the management of watersheds and hydraulic structures, whether as a local authority or as a deconcentrated administrative level.

Departments regularly act in the field of water by participating in watershed management, particularly when they are part of Mixed Syndicates. Finally, as part of a policy of risk prevention and balanced water management, departmental authorities may own large dams, the operation of which may be delegated to a private company (Barrage des Olivettes in Vailhan) or small dams that they directly own (Jeantou dam in Saint-Mathieu-de-Tréviers).

Finally, the department contributes to the development of SDAGEs and SAGEs [ fr ], whether through state services for the drafting and organization of public consultations or through the General Council for informing populations during the implementation of these two plans or ensuring their effective application.

In terms of energy, the department also has a role to play since the Grenelle Environment Forum. Indeed, it required departments and municipalities with more than 50,000 inhabitants to draft and adopt Territorial Climate-Energy Plans [ fr ] (PCET) by the end of 2012. These documents are action plans at the departmental level. They start with an assessment of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and aim to reduce them.

The Departmental Council may also provide grants to individuals, local authorities, or actors in non-competitive sectors (e.g., medico-social establishments) to encourage them to develop and adopt renewable energy production systems.

Finally, in addition to national regulations, it may draft texts to guide various actors (public or private) in encouraging the development of renewable energy production systems and the adoption of eco-responsible behavior.

Municipalities hold major responsibilities in environmental matters. In addition to the mayor's inherent public health authority, municipalities are responsible for drinking water supply, wastewater sanitation, waste collection and treatment, air pollution control through local transport plans, and coastal enhancement.

Waste collection and treatment are concerns at the municipal or intermunicipal level, with potential interactions with the department (household waste) and the region (toxic waste, circular economy).

Public water distribution and sanitation. This responsibility may also involve the operation of watercourses. Finally, its responsibility may manifest through participation in the Local Water Commission [ fr ] regarding SDAGEs.

Municipal responsibility for energy is exercised through participation in the Electricity and Gas Distribution Authority. It may also involve Energy Demand Management in public energy distribution.

The municipality has numerous tools to implement this responsibility while promoting the environment.

Examples include: SCOT [ fr ], the Local Urban Plan, and the municipal map. These urban planning instruments are used within the framework of spatial planning, taking the environmental component into account. Through building permits, the municipality can also distribute the impact of environmental considerations across its territory.

Given the size of the territory or the population, the environmental stakes (particularly in terms of biodiversity) are often significant in overseas territories, and some elected officials prefer that the State (more distant but presumably less exposed to local lobby pressures) retain environmental responsibilities.

Overseas territorial collectivities, primarily departments and regions, have broader responsibilities than metropolitan collectivities due to their specific characteristics and local context. Furthermore, recognizing the specificities of these territorial collectivities assumes state acknowledgment to ensure genuine operational efficiency, particularly regarding the environment.

Overseas regions (Martinique, Réunion, Guadeloupe, and French Guiana) have the same responsibilities as metropolitan regions, but there are some specificities due to the significant biodiversity of their natural spaces, as well as climatic and geological characteristics, and high seismic and volcanic activity in these overseas territorial collectivities.

In environmental matters, the regions, in collaboration with other territorial collectivities and the State, promote respect, protection, and maintenance of the knowledge, innovations, and practices of indigenous and local communities based on their traditional lifestyles that contribute to the conservation of the natural environment and the sustainable use of biological diversity. Additionally, they define the actions to be taken regarding the environment and living conditions after consultation with local authorities and the council for culture, education, and the environment.

Regarding the sea, the regions are consulted on any draft international agreement concerning the exploration, exploitation, conservation, or management of natural, biological, and non-biological resources in the exclusive economic zone (EEZ) off their coasts. For the Réunion region specifically, it is informed annually about the development and implementation of high seas fishing [ fr ] programs (artisanal fishing or deep-sea high seas fishing [ fr ]) by shipowners.

Regarding energy, due to their high energy dependency, overseas regions aim to improve their territories' energy autonomy by promoting renewable energies (wind energy, solar energy, geothermal energy, and hydropower).

Regarding urban planning, due to strong tropical cyclone, seismic risk, and volcanic activity, particularly in Guadeloupe, Martinique, and Réunion, the regions subsidize the construction of individual houses and collective buildings that comply with anti-seismic and anti-cyclonic standards to prevent human and environmental disasters.

Regarding water and sanitation, the regions subsidize the construction of rainwater harvesting systems. They ensure funding for major sanitation works and compliance upgrades.

Regarding natural spaces, the regions manage regional natural parks, such as, for example, the French Guiana Regional Natural Park, whose forest is considered by the scientific community to be one of the last on the globe with such high density.

The environmental responsibilities of overseas departments are broadly similar to those of metropolitan French departments. They promote and may sometimes manage, for example, the remarkable natural spaces of their territories, particularly forests or marine areas, which are global biodiversity hotspots. They are responsible for implementing the departmental household and similar waste disposal plan (PDEDMA [ fr ]). Since the territorial collectivity "Region of Mayotte " does not exist, the Mayotte department consolidates the specific responsibilities of overseas regions and the standard responsibilities of departments with regard to the environment.

Overseas Collectivities (COM) have been, since the constitutional revision of 28, territories of the French Republic governed by Article 74 of the Constitution. This category includes former Overseas Territories (TOM) and other collectivities with special status.

There are five such collectivities: French Polynesia, Wallis and Futuna, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Saint Martin, and Saint Barthélemy. These collectivities have extensive responsibilities and autonomous organization, unlike the Overseas Departments. This is also the case for environmental matters; French Polynesia : This Overseas Collectivity has a government, led by the President of French Polynesia (in 2013: Gaston Flosse), with a Minister of Ecology (in 2013: Geffry Salmon). The government of French Polynesia can submit so-called "country laws" to the Polynesian Assembly for a vote, which may allow non-compliance with the urban planning or environmental codes. In such cases, these "country laws" must be approved by the Council of State. The Polynesian Assembly thus has legislative authority, and the Polynesian government has executive authority to enact laws to promote environmental and sustainable development policies

The government of French Polynesia is responsible, in particular, for the protection of coral reefs (notably within the framework of the Initiative française pour les récifs coralliens) and terrestrial sites of the Polynesian islands. The municipalities of French Polynesia have the following mandatory responsibilities: waste treatment, sanitation, and water distribution (a significant issue, as only 10% of the collectivity's population had access to drinking water in 2007), and electricity supply. The municipalities have environmental responsibilities. Their main objectives are combating climate change and improving their carbon footprint through the increasing use of renewable energies. Numerous initiatives can be observed, such as the construction of a geothermal power plant (Tahiti) or wind turbines (Municipality of Makemo), for example. However, municipalities, lacking the means to equip themselves with sanitation or waste treatment infrastructure, for instance, may receive financial and human support from the Government of Polynesia.

The specificity of this collectivity in terms of responsibility distribution is that there are no municipalities. It is divided into three constituencies, each led by a King (Uvea, Alo, and Sigave), elected councilors, and State representatives. In these constituencies, the kings and their councils manage the equivalent of departmental and municipal environmental responsibilities. Environmental responsibility in this territory falls to the territorial environmental service, managed by the State in cooperation with the constituencies, tasked with ensuring and overseeing the management of the natural or artificial physical environment and improving living conditions. It defines and proposes the elements necessary for developing a coherent environmental policy. It coordinates, organizes, and utilizes studies, works, research, and conferences on the protection and enhancement of natural spaces and resources, as well as the treatment of pollution, risks, and nuisances. The constituencies are responsible for waste collection, while waste storage and treatment fall under the territorial environmental service. Water and electricity distribution are managed by the Wallis and Futuna Water and Electricity Company (EEWF), a subsidiary of GDF Suez, although infrastructure investment funding is the responsibility of the Territory.

The collectivity of Saint Pierre and Miquelon consists of two municipalities (Saint Pierre and Miquelon-Langlade) and a Territorial Council, with the department prioritizing sustainable development. In environmental matters, the municipalities have the same responsibilities as metropolitan municipalities, and the Territorial Council has the same responsibilities as metropolitan departments and regions. The only specificity is that the "Territorial Council" is responsible for urban planning. The collectivity is not subject to the fishing quotas of the European Union, except in cases of restrictions imposed by the State. The Territorial Council manages energy policy and finances the establishment of a wind farm on both islands and, thanks to its customs authority, enables the reduction of customs duties on the import of firewood, for example. Finally, the Council manages the protection of the coastlines and forests of the collectivity. Waste management in Saint Pierre and Miquelon falls under the responsibility of a mixed syndicate (Saint Pierre and Miquelon Waste Management Syndicate). Waste collection, however, is the responsibility of the collectivity's two municipalities

The collectivity of Saint Martin has no municipalities. Thus, environmental responsibility falls to the Territorial Council, which has the same responsibilities as regions, departments, and municipalities. It therefore has responsibilities in urban planning and energy. The protection of the collectivity's ponds and lagoons is managed by the Territorial Council. Waste management is handled by the Saint Martin collectivity, but the treatment of recyclable waste is managed by a private company, VERDE SXM, while household waste is sent to a household waste landfill. Water and sanitation are managed by the Saint Martin Water and Sanitation Establishment, an autonomous public entity.

The collectivity of Saint Barthélemy has no municipalities. Environmental responsibility falls to the Territorial Council, which has the same responsibilities as regions, departments, and municipalities. This Council is therefore responsible for environmental matters (including the protection of wooded areas), urban planning, and waste management. It also manages waste treatment, with the collectivity operating an incineration plant. As a result, 80% of waste is energetically recovered (incinerated to supply steam to the thermal power plant that provides electricity to the entire island, as well as a desalination plant that produces drinking water for the entire island).

Equitax (Équitaxe or Équi-taxe) is the term used to describe the attempt to move equestrian activities in France from a reduced VAT rate to the standard rate, i.e. from 7% to 20%. The European Union and France are at loggerheads, as France has been applying reduced VAT rates to several equestrian activities since 2004. In January 2013, VAT on the sale of horses was raised to the standard rate. At the end of 2013, Jean-Marc Ayrault's second government proposed that the entire equestrian sector be brought under the standard VAT rate. The amendment was passed by the National Assembly on the night of October 22, then published in the Journal Officiel de la République française on November 13, with implementation scheduled for January 2014 under the authority of the Minister of Agriculture, Food and Forestry, Stéphane Le Foll, and the Minister Delegate for the Budget, Bernard Cazeneuve.

The government says it has been forced to implement this measure by the E.U. and does not support it, as do many elected representatives from all sides of the political spectrum. A hundred MEPs believe horse-riding is a French cultural exception and the use of sports facilities, and can continue to benefit from a reduced rate. The announcement of this future VAT increase has provoked strong reactions from the equestrian community and horse professionals in France. They demonstrated in most major cities, including Paris on November 24, with ponies. They are demanding the repeal of the decree, supported by their official institutions. The Fédération nationale du cheval (FNC) and the Fédération française d'équitation (FFE) are actively lobbying. A French delegation travels to Brussels on December 13, but the European Commission states that an overall reduced rate for equestrian activities is not possible. On January 1, 2014, VAT in the equestrian sector was switched to the standard rate. After various European negotiations, on January 31, 2014, reduced-rate VAT exceptions were created for the sports sector, including the use of equestrian center buildings.

Critics point to the corporatist aspect of the anti-equitax protests, in particular the desire of horse professionals to preserve their “privileges” in a difficult economic context. A year after the introduction of the modified equitax, in January 2015, the French equestrian sector is in recession. A decline in the number of licensees and breeders, and an increase in horse abandonment, have been noted. While VAT is cited as the reason, other factors are also at play, in particular the reform of school rhythms.

On October 26, 2023, Bruno Le Maire, French Minister of the Economy, announced that the VAT rate on equestrian center activities would be reduced to 5.5% from January 1, 2024.

The name “equitax” is not official. It was adopted spontaneously by the equestrian community and journalists. The name was chosen by analogy with the heavy goods vehicle tax, nicknamed the “ ecotax,” which raised controversy at the same time (and also affected horse professionals when transporting their Equidae). The “ La Horde française ” collective adopted a horse wearing a red bonnet as its logo, about the Bonnets Rouges movement in Brittany, which was opposed to the ecotax. Some equestrian center managers, notably in Loire-Atlantique, have chosen this symbol to cap their ponies. Other demonstrators, in Périgueux and elsewhere, wear red helmets.

Several foreign journalists, including Kim Willsher for The Guardian, see the anti-equitax demonstrations as part of a wave of French protests against fiscal pressure, which started in Brittany with the Bonnets Rouges movement.

The anti-equitax protests were not the only ones in France at the end of 2013; in addition to the Bonnets rouges movement, teachers of preparatory classes for the grandes écoles, school principals, and some craftsmen and tradesmen (the “Sacrificed” campaign) were protesting against taxes, their workload, or the number of their salaries, deemed too low. The movement against the VAT increase for equestrian centers takes place in a context where demands are breaking away from political parties and trade unions, notably through the use of social networks. With the VAT rate in France rising from 19.6% to 20%, with increases in certain sectors of activity, the political majority feared a tax slingshot for January 1, 2014.

Interviewed on France 3 about the equitax, David Boéri mentions the very particular situation of horse riding in France, which unlike other sports is not taught mainly by associations, but by small private companies. Changing the status of riding schools to that of associations would prevent them from making any commercial profit. These private riding schools are self-financing and are not subsidized. According to legal expert Nicolas Masson, they made around 5% in 2013. The spokesman for the “Equitation in Peril” collective estimates this margin at 7%.

The introduction of the “equitax” is the result of a long-running dispute between the French government and the European Union over the equestrian industry. According to the President of the French Riding Federation, the teaching of horseback riding in France represents a European exception: this sporting pastime has become highly democratized, taking its place among the mass sports leisures, unlike in other European countries where horseback riding is more traditional or elitist. In the 1980s, riding was still a military activity reserved for a minority. Private initiatives led to the creation of riding schools whose activities were part agriculture, part sport, and part business. In 2005, they were granted farmer status. Between 2005 and 2011, according to the Groupement Hippique National, a thousand jobs were created annually in the equestrian sector thanks to the introduction of a reduced VAT rate. The breeding of racehorses and sport horses then benefited from a tax allowance costing €2 million in revenue to the State, making it look like a tax exemption. This advantage was abolished in 2011.

The European Union relies on the legal basis provided by articles 96 to 99 of the VAT directive. It is calling for all equestrian activities to be subject to the standard VAT rate, except for those involving the human consumption of horsemeat. France is not the only country concerned, as Germany, the Netherlands, and Ireland have also been called to order by the EU regarding their equestrian sectors. Austria, Italy, Luxembourg, and the Czech Republic have, like the previous countries, changed their horse tax rules to comply with European legislation.

On March 8, 2012, a few months after the Netherlands, France was fined by the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) for the reduced taxation it applied to sales of Equidae intended for sport or leisure. The government announced that a return to the normal VAT rate on equine transactions is to be applied at the request of the European Commission in Brussels, leading to an initial protest movement, the “Insurgents Campaign,” as well as concern in the equestrian world from December 2012. In the equestrian sports sector, Jérôme Cahuzac is studying the issue of small owners. A drop of 1,500 racehorses in training is expected.

In January 2013, the VAT rate was raised to the standard rate on equine transactions and winnings in equestrian sports, but equestrian activities (notably those of riding schools) remain at the reduced rate, which rises from 5.5% to 7%. In August 2013, the French government announced that this rate would be raised by three points to the intermediate level (i.e. 10%) in January 2014.

While riding schools should theoretically have had another year to join the standard VAT rate, on October 22, 2013, an amendment was proposed to the National Assembly by Bernard Cazeneuve to raise the VAT applicable to the equestrian sector by 13 points from January 2014, i.e. from 7% to 20%. The vote passed with just a few MPs present, at 5 a.m., despite the opposing opinions of two MPs, Hervé Mariton (UMP) and Charles de Courson (UDI). This amendment nicknamed the “equitax,” provoked reactions from the equestrian community and official representatives of the industry, who feared job losses, the closure of riding schools, and the scrapping of horses.

On November 13, 2013, despite the initial protests, the government published the official decree repealing the reduced VAT on equestrian activities. On the same day, Pierre Moscovici announced several adjustments, including the possibility that contracts concluded before December 31, 2013, could continue at the same VAT rate until they expire. He proposed the creation of a “horse fund” to help professionals, particularly riding schools, absorb the VAT increase. He also believes that the tax credit for competitiveness and employment (CICE), from which they already benefit, will offset the effect. The following day, despite a blockade operation at Vincennes by angry riders, he declared on RTL that the government would not go back on the VAT hike in the sectors concerned for January 2014.

Although Jean-Marc Ayrault's government has announced that the VAT increase to 20% is necessary to avoid further European condemnation, this view is not shared by all politicians. Around a hundred MEPs (including former sports minister Chantal Jouanno and ecologist senator Jean-Vincent Placé) sent a letter to Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault on November 15, arguing that measures could be taken at the European level to avoid the increase. MP Sophie Auconie received a response from the European Commission concerning the right to use sports facilities, including equestrian facilities, which are eligible for the reduced VAT rate. This concerns points 13 and 14 of Annex III of the current European Directive (2006). This European law was reiterated by Mr. Šemeta on October 25, 2011.

Several equestrian collectives and specialists in equine law, in particular “ Équitation en péril,” believe that the government is not under threat of imminent European condemnation for breach upon breach and that the dispute only concerned horse transactions and the equestrian sports sector, not teaching in riding schools. One of its spokesmen, Loïc Caudal, claims to have received confirmation of this from Brussels. What's more, maintaining a reduced rate would theoretically be possible if Europe recognized French horse riding as a cultural exception.

On November 22, following several other demonstrations and snail operations by professional and amateur riders across France, Budget Minister Bernard Cazeneuve asserted that the government “will fight within the framework of the VAT directive to reintroduce riding schools into the reduced rate scheme.” Sports Minister Valérie Fourneyron talks of “activating all levers,” and “revising this (European) VAT directive.” Agriculture Minister Stéphane Le Foll promises to visit Brussels the following week to defend the French equestrian industry. Valérie Fourneyron, on the other hand, believes that a revision of the European directive is impossible in such a short space of time and that the government will have to limit the impact of the increase.

Chantal Jouanno had an amendment to the 2014 Finance Bill adopted by the Senate, restoring the reduced rate of 5.5% for “services corresponding exclusively to the right to use equestrian facilities used for physical and sporting activities,” during the night of November 23. Although “unlikely to hold up in front of the National Assembly,” it testifies to “the strength of this usually discreet industry.” Following this announcement, the mobilization of riders was stepped up, in the hope that the National Assembly would adopt this amendment.

On November 27, 2013, the senators of the Horse section called for a consultation with the government, believing that “the impact of this tax change will be catastrophic for the entire industry, which represents nearly 70,000 jobs,” and that the government was giving “insufficient” reasons to justify this VAT increase. Jacques Myard, deputy mayor (UMP) of Maisons-Laffitte, told the National Assembly of the “catastrophic situation” into which the VAT increase could plunge the horse industry, and of the difficulties already encountered in the equestrian sports sector, where many owners are ceasing their activity. He called for an urgent moratorium. Valérie Fourneyron replied that the conflict dates back to 2007 and that since France was condemned for its failure to comply, no lasting solution has been found by the industry to maintain the reduced rate for equestrian centers. On November 29, Agriculture Minister Stéphane Le Foll declared himself in favor of a 7% VAT rate for equestrian centers.

On December 4, 2013, the Senate amendment was presented to the National Assembly. Jacques Myard points out that “never has such a brutal increase in VAT been applied in this country.” Charles de Courson defends the possibility of reduced VAT for owners of horses in training. However, the amendment was not adopted.

On November 29, Stéphane Le Foll announced on BFM TV / RMC that work was underway to apply different VAT rates to different sectors of the equestrian industry. Teaching (riding lessons) could be subject to a different rate than boarding and half-boarding services for horses. The government is basing its position on European regulations, which stipulate that access to sports facilities is eligible for the reduced VAT rate.

On December 2, ministers Stéphane Le Foll (agriculture), Valérie Fourneyron (sport), and Bernard Cazeneuve (budget) announced during a press briefing that “the Government intends to actively defend the possibility of applying a reduced VAT rate to equestrian sports activities,” i.e. 10%, from January 1, 2014, for “certain activities offered in riding schools,” linked to the “right to use sports facilities.” To this end, they announce their intention to write to the European Commissioner for Taxation, Algirdas Šemeta. Harlem Désir in return confirms this objective on BFM TV.

Following the announcement of the government's intention to defend the equestrian sector in Brussels, several anti-equitax demonstrations were canceled, notably in front of the Ministry of the Economy and Finance on December 9 and on Sunday, December 15 in Lille, where 2,000 people were expected.

On December 13, a delegation of ministers, trade unionists, and equestrian professionals (GHN, FFE, and Coordination rurale) travels to Brussels to negotiate the VAT rate applicable to equestrian center activities with Kestutis Sadauskas, Algirdas Šemeta 's chief of staff. The European Commission replies that the VAT rate will not be renegotiated and applies in the same way to all European countries, mentioning the possibility of releasing aid for rural development. France Télévisions considers that the demonstrators against the equitax are “rather losers,” and that their demands have not been heard. The government states that it remains “determined” to obtain a reduced VAT rate for equestrian centers.

On January 1, 2014, the VAT applicable to the equestrian sector was switched to the standard rate, as provided for in the decree of November 13. Various journalists write as protests and appeals to the government go unheeded. On January 31, Bernard Cazeneuve signed a modification to VAT rates in the equestrian sector, reintroducing a reduced rate for the use of sports facilities, as proposed in the amendment previously voted by the Senate. It confirms the application of the reduced rate to all contracts concluded in 2013. Boarding horses, dressage, and equine sales, in particular, are at full rate. Édouard de Mareschal, for Le Figaro, believes that the government has done its utmost to spare equestrian centers. According to France Bleu, “Riders and equestrian centers ended up having the skin of the equitaxes.”

On February 4, 2014, Marie-Thérèse Sanchez-Schmid and Sophie Auconie met with European Commissioner Androulla Vassiliou to have horse riding officially recognized as a sporting activity, which would enable it to be included in the 2014 VAT directive. The aim of French equestrian institutions is now to obtain lower taxation from the European Union for equestrian activities in the 28 member countries.

The equestrian world as a whole is protesting against this VAT increase at the end of 2013, an event “perhaps unprecedented in French history.”

Shortly after the announcement of the abolition of the reduced VAT rate, spontaneous demonstrations and escargot operations were organized all over France by young riders and equestrian center managers, with horses and ponies, with no prior call for demonstrations from official bodies (such as the French Equestrian Federation). The main demand was to “let the industry live.” The equestrian world is usually discreet, and most of these people are demonstrating for the first time on this occasion. All generations were present, with a majority of young women. Many equestrian center managers in associations under the law of 1901, unaffected by VAT which they do not pay, are supporting the equestrian sector by organizing petitions, for example. These operations reflect a desire to “remain respectful and well-behaved” (according to Cheval Magazine), but some equestrian center managers (notably in the Lys plain) say they are ready for civil disobedience. The slogans evoke the presidency of François Hollande — “ Hollande, t'es foutu, les poneys sont dans la rue ” ("Hollande, you're screwed, the ponies are in the street") —, but also the Findus affair — " TVA en plus, on finit chez Findus " (“VAT plus, we end up at Findus”).

The first demonstrations take place over the All Saints' weekend in Lyon during the Equita'Lyon 2013 trade show. This was followed by movements in Fontainebleau and Rouen on November 6, which brought together 500 people and 130 ponies. In Nancy, on the 7th, 60 horses gathered in Place Stanislas. The same day, in Metz, the demonstration came close to a serious incident, with tear gas being thrown at three riders and a pony. On November 8, 120 people, including 60 riders, marched in Melun and around thirty in Meaux. The demonstration in Dijon on the 9th resulted in another incident: one or two ponies took the tramway with their young riders.

The first Paris demonstration was organized on November 11, with 4,000 people and 200 ponies marching. The towns of Toulouse (600 riders), Tarbes, and Montpellier also hosted demonstrations on the 12th, and 2,000 riders and over 500 horses gathered in Montpellier, creating a 15-kilometer traffic jam on the A9 autoroute. On November 14, another escargot operation blocked the A6 and A10 to the ring road at Cours de Vincennes, where demonstrators organized free pony rides. On November 16, 300 people, including several riders, marched through the streets of Mâcon, and 400 in Strasbourg. On the same day, thousands of demonstrators mobilized in the west of France (Quimper, Brest, Rennes, and Nantes), including 2,000 people in Nantes with 300 ponies and 2,500 in Rennes, where a flash mob was organized for the occasion. The following day, 1,000 to 1,500 people marched through Caen. On November 18, the riders blocked Route Nationale 137 between Rochefort and La Rochelle.

Laurent Cremaschi, manager of an equestrian center in the Vosges, created a crusade against taxes by riding to Paris on November 4, to question the government. He was welcomed at the Haras de Jardy on November 19, along with a group of protesting riders. On the same day, the demonstration in Périgueux attracted 200 riders.

A national demonstration called by official organizations (FFE, FNC, GHN, and FNSEA) was held in Paris on November 24. It attracted 5,000 people according to the police, 15,000 according to the organizers, and 20,000 (and 1,000 ponies) according to the French Equestrian Federation. Former UMP minister Chantal Jouanno, also a keen equestrian, joined the movement. The mobilization continued during the Paris Horse Show and in Bordeaux on November 29, with 300 riders participating. On the same day, riders attempted to blockade the Chiesi factory in La Chaussée-Saint-Victor, where Arnaud Montebourg was visiting. On the 30th, Angoulême hosted a demonstration that was attended by almost 500 people.

On Reunion Island, where VAT would rise from 2.2% to 8.5%, mobilization was organized in early December, led by La Horde réunionnaise, which was calling for demonstrations in Saint-Denis. The horse professionals on the island feared a loss of riders and the death of their industry, exacerbated by the reform of school rhythms, which has reduced their clientele, and the rising price of horse feed. Representatives of the 37 clubs on the island, which account for 300 jobs, demonstrated on the 19th and organized a double escargot operation from L'Éperon and Saint-Benoit.

On December 1, 600 people and 170 horses marched through the streets of Nice. To mark the occasion, the mayor of the city, Christian Estrosi, joined the demonstrators on horseback. The following day, the escargot operation occurred in the Paris region to mark the opening of the Paris Horse Show and disrupted the Boulevard Périphérique without, however, blocking it with 40 km of slowdowns in three sectors towards Paris. The mobilization was stronger than the truckers against the ecotax on the same day, with 120 trucks. According to the spokesman for the " L'équitation en péril " collective, the mobilization is growing stronger. Another escargot operation took place on the same day in the Drôme, Ardèche, and Haute-Savoie regions, near Annemasse. Ministers Bernard Cazeneuve, Stéphane Le Foll, and Valérie Fourneyron organized an emergency press briefing on the evening of December 2, to reiterate “their commitment to the equestrian industry.”

On the 3rd, the demonstration in Strasbourg attracted just fifteen vehicles and a delegation of thirteen professionals. On the 5th, demonstrators dumped manure in front of the sub-prefecture in Gex, Ain. On the 8th, several thousand demonstrators gather in Orléans : 2,000 according to the police, and 5,000 according to the organizers, with 1,500 ponies. On the 9th, demonstrators in Pau, led by La Horde, attempted to meet with Mayor Martine Lignières-Cassou and the Prefect. On the 11th, it was Grenoble's turn to host a demonstration: 500 people and 57 horses according to the police, and between 700 and 1000 according to journalists from the Dauphiné Libéré. A demonstration took place in the streets of Annecy on Wednesday, December 11. On the same day, an operation escargot on the Chambéry expressway caused 7 km of traffic jams between 8 and 10 a.m. In Saint-Étienne on the same day, 200 demonstrators marched. On the 12th, a further 200 people gathered in Divonne-les-Bains with around thirty equines. On the 15th, 600 riders demonstrated in Limoges.

On December 19, Pascal Mulet-Querner, spokesman for the “ Équitation en péril ” collective, and Serge Lecomte, President of the French Equestrian Federation, rode in a horse-drawn carriage to the Élysée Palace to hand over a petition, a letter, and some of the 50,000 letters written by visitors to the Paris Horse Show in response to the VAT hike. With Sports Minister Valérie Fourneyron 's visit to Moselle, an operation escargot takes place on the freeway near Metz.

As part of the “ crottin pour tous ” operation (a reaction to François Hollande 's statement, quoted in Le Canard enchaîné on December 3, likening demonstrators against the “equitax” to the “indestructible right”), 20 tons of horse manure were deposited in front of the Public Treasury in Bellegarde-sur-Valserine, Ain, on December 20. On the same day, horse-riding professionals tied their horses to the gates of the Chambéry prefecture, letting it be known that they would leave them there “for lack of means to maintain them.” On December 21, around Dijon, demonstrators carry out escargot operations at shopping malls.

On December 23, a European demonstration was organized in several cities, with 500 trucks setting off from Brussels, Luxembourg, Stuttgart, Turin, Barcelona, and The Hague. There were 60 riders in Ajaccio, but only a hundred or so at Mont-Saint-Michel, probably due to bad weather. In Paris and Nantes, balloon releases were organized during these events. In Strasbourg, some fifty vehicles brought the demonstrators.

On Christmas Day, December 25, 5 ponies were tied to the gates of the Chambéry prefecture. As part of the “manure for all” operation, a hundred liters of horse manure were deposited in front of the Domfront tax center on the night of December 26, following similar operations across the country.

Protests against the equitax became rare in January 2014. Leaders of equestrian centers in the Rhône-Alpes region are received by elected officials at the Lyon regional council's 2014 greetings on January 10. On January 13, demonstrators set up a roadblock in Rochefort, distributing leaflets. On Thursday, January 16, an equestrian center manager already known for his anti-equitax actions dumped 15 tons of manure in front of the French National Assembly. A few anti-equitaxers joined the “ Day of Anger ” demonstration in Paris on January 26.

The “equitax” has provoked reactions from French equestrian institutions, politicians (mostly in opposition), MEPs, riders, and other personalities. La France Agricole polled on November 15, showed that 60% of Internet users consulting their site did not understand the VAT increase, compared with 36% who did.

The creation of the “horse fund” has been “coolly received” by professionals, who refer to it as a “gas factory.” Some professional riders have publicly stated their opposition to the equitax. Patrice Delaveau wore an armband of support at Equita'Lyon 2013, and Hervé Godignon, who co-founded the movement “ indignés de la politique fédérale ” (outraged by federal policy), marched in Paris on November 11. Interviewed by RTL on November 22, rider Pierre Durand considers the protest movement to be legitimate and “dignified.” Véronique Oury, director of the Paris Horse Show, publicly announced her support for the movement.

Serge Lecomte, President of the FFE, considers that his sector is a “collateral victim” of a European measure that essentially targeted horse betting. He initially denounced the creation of the “horse fund” as a “gimmick.” However, in an interview given on Equidia the day before the meeting in Brussels, he thanked “the unfailing support of the political classes and the government.” Henry Moreigne, for Le Monde, believes, however, that the origins of the crisis in the French equestrian world lie in “the responsibility and incompetence of the FFE's leaders, more concerned with their interests than those of their licensees,” and in the existence of conflicts of interest due to “the absence of democracy within the FFE,” resulting in a lack of credibility for the entire industry.

“ La Horde Française,” a movement opposed to equitax created by Bérengère d'Espeuilles, has organized itself into regional delegations. Ludovic Roy, owner of the Haras de Boisemont, heads the Normandy Horde, which organized the Rouen event. It is also behind numerous demonstrations in the provinces and on the island of La Réunion.

Pascal Mulet-Querner is the spokesman for the “ Equitation en péril ” collective. It brings together the Fédération française d'équitation (FFE), the Groupement hippique national (GHN), the Fédération nationale du cheval (FNC), and the Chambre syndicale du commerce des chevaux de France (CSCCF). Its representatives believe that the increase in VAT on all equestrian activities was decided by François Hollande 's government without any European pressure. Pascal Mulet-Querner sees equestrian centers as “the last places of life in the countryside,” and says that the President of the Republic can go as far as the procedure of failure upon failure with Europe, then use the 20 million euros of the horse fund to pay the fine.

In a press release, the Groupement hippique national said that “the finance administration is lying to the government, which then does the same to Parliament, the equestrian industry, and millions of French people,” denouncing “the government's doublespeak and the possibility of maintaining a reduced rate in riding schools, even in the opinion of the European Commission.” Coordination rurale, for its part, denounced a “sham of consultation” between the government and representatives of the equestrian industry: the implementing decree abolishing the reduced rate was dated the same day as the consultation, November 12, which means that “the Minister for the Budget already had it in his pocket when he pretended to listen to representatives of the industry.”

Opposition politicians were quick to speak out. David Douillet, former Sports Minister under François Fillon's government and UMP deputy, wrote to François Hollande on November 14 to point out that the 6,000 jobs and 80,000 horses condemned represent “the biggest social plan in France, which is being implemented before our very eyes.” Marine Le Pen considers this VAT increase to be an “unacceptable decision” for equestrian centers and that “we have to know how to say no to the injunctions of the European Union.” Nicolas Dupont-Aignan is also opposed to the European aspect of this “equitax.” Interviewed on France 5 on November 27, François Bayrou spoke of a death sentence for the industry and said he supported the equestrian centers' approach, adding that “it's shameful that horse-riding should be a sport for the rich, because the horse is formidably educational, including for young disabled people.”

Front de gauche president Pascal Savoldelli points to “the absence of an official request from the European Commission” and “the absence of a procedure for failure to fulfill an obligation,” arguing that the VAT increase is a “preventive measure taken in anticipation,” which cannot be justified. The French Communist Party announces its support for the equestrian clubs' action on December 2. On December 4, Jean-Luc Mélenchon mentioned the existence of a reduced rate for the use of sports facilities on a European scale.

Some elected representatives have voiced their concerns about this VAT in regions where the equestrian sector has a strong presence. Calvados General Council President Jean-Léonce Dupont (UDI-UC) has written to Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault to call for the reduced VAT rate to be maintained as a matter of urgency, adding that “4,400 direct jobs” depend on it in his department, which will host the 2014 World Equestrian Games. Pau mayor Martine Lignières-Cassou (PS) also called on the government to reverse this decision, arguing that the Pau equestrian industry employs 800 people. Côte d'Or Senator Alain Houpert (UMP) made the same request to Bernard Cazeneuve. On December 3, Frédéric Meura, a UMP politician from Thiérache, spoke of a major blow to the 1,500 companies, 5,000 employees, and 26,000 horse-riding licensees in the Picardie region, which together generate annual sales of over 145 million euros, “making Picardie the leading equestrian region in France.” The Association des maires de France (French Mayors' Association) also brought the concerns of the equestrian community to the attention of Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault. Following a meeting with equestrian industry professionals in Brittany on December 7, PS politician Pierrick Massiot sent a letter to Stéphane Le Foll expressing the risks facing this “very present” industry.

According to the " L'équitation en péril " collective, by December 3, Communist MPs, Greens, and some Socialists had sided with the anti-equitax protesters. On the same day, Le Canard enchaîné picked up on remarks made by French President François Hollande. On the sidelines of a PS rally, he was quoted as saying of the anti-equitax protesters: “It's the same clientele that demonstrated against same-sex marriage in France. It's the stubborn right. It's all manipulation.” This statement caused quite a stir and led to the “manure for all” operation in retaliation.

With the responsibility of the European Union under discussion, several MEPs believe that the decision to raise the VAT rate was taken in advance by the French government. Philippe Boulland denounces “the use, as always easy, of Europe as a scapegoat,” while MP Agnès Le Brun sees it as overzealousness on the part of the French government. Gilbert Collard, for his part, denounces the government's interpretation of the EU injunction, and this measure applied to a sector “which generates 900 million euros in sales” and “creates jobs” while being “very poorly subsidized.” According to Franck Proust, “This decision — to increase VAT — is a preventive measure, not based on any obligation.”

Rachida Dati is astonished by this desire to impose higher taxes on a sector that cannot be relocated and does not create competition on the European market and regrets that this appears to be pointless interference from Brussels, fueling a feeling of Euroscepticism.

Comedian Nicolas Canteloup, a former riding school instructor, made several references to the anti-equitax demonstrations in his “ revue de presque ” on Europe 1 on November 14. He was back in the news at the Gucci Masters at the Horse Show on December 8, arriving at the famous show jumping competition in disguise and wearing a red bonnet to talk about the difficulties facing the equestrian sector in France. Jean Rochefort, actor, and horse breeder, calls for the human aspect of the problem to be examined, given the threat to the lives of 80,000 horses, as well as the economic aspect.

In a press release published on November 14, Brigitte Bardot denounced “the French government, the servant of scandalously unfair and inhumane European directives, which overtax the activity of riding schools while allowing horse dealers to benefit from reduced VAT to send horses to slaughter.”

Several critics denounce the corporatist aspect of the demonstrations and the lobbying carried out by horse professionals. In an article in Les Échos, Leïla de Comarmond warns of the danger of this movement, with everyone protesting against their tax during a difficult financial period. She adds that the professionals protesting are forgetting the public financial windfall from which their activities benefit. In his Figaro blog, sports specialist Frank Pons denounces the effective lobbying carried out by horse professionals to sweep away regulatory constraints likely “to slow down or limit their development.” Not content with having obtained tax instruction from the French parliament, the equestrian industry's lobbyists are trying to get horse riding included in the forthcoming European VAT directive. The Union Patronale Fitness Bien être et Santé (UFBS) has denounced the privileged position of sports associations and equestrian centers, which it associates with tax exemption, compared with active non-competitive leisure businesses (such as dog-sledding, canoeing, sailing, hiking, and karting), which are subject to normal VAT.

The Vegan movement, opposed to animal exploitation, denounces not only the risk of horse slaughter but also the commercial nature of equestrian centers, for whom “only profit is sought because if a horse is not profitable, we simply kill it.” He pinpoints the statement made by a breeder, Xavier Lerond, who, to lighten his industry's tax burden “threatens to slaughter 80,000 horses.”

The consequences of applying the equitax were initially anticipated, assuming that a generalized VAT rate of 20% would have been applied.

According to the Fédération Nationale du cheval (FNC), the Groupement hippique national (GHN), and the Fédération française d'équitation (FFE), a generalized VAT rate of 20% would have jeopardized 2,000 equestrian centers and 6,000 salaried jobs and threatened 80,000 to 100,000 horses with slaughter. Serge Lecomte, president of the FFE, points out that the increase in horse boarding costs penalizes the most modest riders (those who ride in riding schools and have their horses boarded or half-boarded) while sparing the wealthiest, who can afford to keep their horses at home. The HLG adds that this will put an end to the democratization of horse riding, making the sport once again inaccessible to part of the population. The cost to the companies concerned is estimated at around 100 million euros. The horse fund, which would be topped up by 20 million euros, would not be sufficient to compensate for this.

In addition to the difficulties posed by the VAT hike, equestrian center professionals point out that the reform of school rhythms penalizes them, as 30 to 40% of their activity takes place on Wednesday mornings. This represents around 20% fewer registrations.

For much of January, professionals in the equestrian sector were “balancing between vagueness and a wait-and-see attitude.” After the provisional increase in the VAT rate, the Villeveyrac riding school in the Hérault region of France closed down because, according to its manager, it was necessary to raise the price of an hour's riding from €13 to €20. However, this increase is much higher than the rise in the VAT rate. In Limousin, some professionals are choosing not to increase their rates despite their low margins.

Thanks to the tax instruction published on January 31, the overall VAT borne by the equestrian sector is estimated at around 10%, instead of the 20% initially planned: equestrian center services have been divided between access to sports facilities, horse boarding or half-boarding and teaching. According to France Bleu journalists, “We can no longer speak of an equitax,” and the price of certain services could even fall. However, this decision complicates the accounting of the establishments concerned.

According to some industry professionals, five months on, prices for lessons and courses have risen slightly. One year after the protests, the equestrian sector is showing a drop in the number of licensees. According to Serge Lecomte, interviewed in November 2014, the equestrian sector is “on life support,” but he rules out organizing further events. The industry's economic statistics are proving quite poor, with a drop in breeding, a decline in licensees, and the number of customers for French riding schools. The direct consequences are an increase in the number of abandoned horses, and more animals being sent to slaughter. As of January 1, 2015, the situation has become even more precarious, as the reduced rates can no longer be applied at all to boarding and teaching services. The French equestrian and horse-breeding sector is now much less advantageous, in terms of taxation than in Ireland, where legislation makes it possible to circumvent European tax rules on racehorse breeding, leading this country to be described as a “ tax haven for horses.”

In September 2019, professional horse breeders are calling for VAT to be stopped, due to competition with amateur breeders, who sell their horses 20% cheaper.

Eranove is a French company active in the management of public services and the production of electricity and drinking water in Africa. The company was formerly known as Finagestion.

Eranove has been present in Côte d'Ivoire for several decades, in Senegal (SDE) since 1996, in the Democratic Republic of Congo since 2012 (service contract with Regideso), and in Benin since 2021 (through its subsidiary, Omilayé in the water sector in Benin). The company has also been developing projects in Mali since 2015 (Kénié Énergie Renouvelable), Gabon (Louetsi Hydro, Asokh Energy, Orélo), Madagascar (Sahofika), and Togo (Kékéli Efficient Power). It generated revenues of €576 million in 2017.

Eranove operates at a capacity of over 1,250 MW, employs over 8,700 people, and serves 1.9 million customers for electricity, 1.8 million for water, and 470,000 for sanitation. The majority shareholder of the Eranove Group is ECP Finagestion FII S.a.r.l., affiliated with Emerging Capital Partners, a private equity firm.

The board of directors decided to rename Finagestion "Eranove" in July 2014 following a consultative process within the group's subsidiaries.

Prior to renaming, between 2005 and 2006, the Bouygues Group sold its public services subsidiary, Saur, while retaining its African and Italian assets. The African assets were housed in Finagestion, a holding company 100% owned by the Bouygues Group.

Between July 2008 and October 2009, ECP FII Finagestion S.a.r.l., an affiliate of Emerging Capital Partners (ECP), gradually acquired a 60% stake in this entity from Bouygues. ECP FII Finagestion S.a.r.l. currently owns 53.3% of the Eranove group. ECP gradually transformed Eranove (at the time Finagestion) into a pan-African industrial platform.

Since 1960, the Eranove Group has been present in Côte d'Ivoire (Société de Distribution d'Eau de Côte d'Ivoire; Compagnie Ivoirienne d'électricité; Compagnie Ivoirienne de Production d'électricité; Awale). It began operations in Senegal in 1996 (Sénégalaise des Eaux). Since 2013, it has been active in the Democratic Republic of Congo through a service contract with the Régidéso. The group is also developing other projects across Africa, notably in Mali (Kenié Renewable Energy), Gabon (Louetsi Hydro, Asokh Energy, Orélo), Madagascar (Sahofika), Côte d'Ivoire (Atinkou and Cavally), and Togo (Kékéli Efficient Power).

In the summer of 2015, the 18.6% still held by Bouygues were sold to French insurance company AXA.

A power generation company operating in Côte d'Ivoire since 1994, Compagnie Ivoirienne de Production d'Electricité (CIPREL) has a thermal power plant consisting of seven combustion turbines, which use natural gas extracted off the Ivorian coast as their main fuel, as well as a steam turbine.

CIPREL operates a concession contract, running until 2035, with the State of Côte d'Ivoire. It is 83.3% owned by Eranove.

The entire CIPREL perimeter is HSE certified: ISO 9001, OHSAS 18001, ISO 14001. CIPREL has reached the confirmed stage of the ISO 26 000 standard for its commitment to corporate social responsibility (CSR) throughout its scope.

The company began its activities in March 1995 with CIPREL I (100 MW). The second 111 MW unit (CIPREL II) was commissioned in June 1997. Then, in December 2009, 111 MW (CIPREL III) were commissioned, bringing the total production capacity to 321 MW.

In December 2011, CIPREL was entrusted with a new extension to support Côte d'Ivoire's economic recovery, CIPREL IV.

CIPREL IV represents a total investment (including financing) of CFAF 222.9 billion (€339.8 million) for an additional 222 MW using combined cycle technology. This fourth unit consists of a new 111 MW combustion turbine commissioned on 1 January 2014 and a 111 MW steam turbine. The steam turbine adds 111 MW of production capacity without additional natural gas consumption and thus avoids the release into the atmosphere of 500,000 tons of CO 2 per year, while optimizing the cost of electricity production through improved thermal efficiency.

Auxiliary works were completed at the end of 2015, making CIPREL IV's the largest gas-fired power plant in Côte d'Ivoire with a total production capacity of 556 MW and an estimated total annual production of 3,810 GWh.

CIE (Compagnie Ivoirienne d'Électricité) is a private operator linked to the State of Côte d'Ivoire by a concession agreement since 1990 to operate production, transmission and distribution facilities, and market, import and export on behalf of the Ivorian State of electricity throughout the national territory and in the wider region. CIE serves 1.9 million customers, operates a production capacity of 704 MW as well as 50,000 km of the electricity grid.

Since the end of 2014, CIE has been implementing, in collaboration with the ministry, a program to facilitate access to electricity for a large number of people, the Electricity for All Program (Programme Électricité pour Tous - PEPT). It has connected 359,000 households to electricity.

CIE is listed on the Bourse régionale des valeurs mobilières (BRVM). It was rated AA+ (long-term) by the financial rating agency Bloomfield Investment in 2016 and is 55.53% owned by Eranove. The scope of CIE's interconnected production, energy movements, and transport are HSE certified according to ISO and OHSAS standards and have reached the confirmed stage according to ISO 26 000.

Through CIE, the Eranove Group also operates the Centre des Métiers de l'Éléctricité (CME), a training center specializing in electricity and management based in Bingerville, near Abidjan. The CME has obtained the HR Excellence certification and the "center of excellence" label from the Association of Power Utilities of Africa (APUA). In 2017, in addition to the 230 students in the BTS/DUT cycle, 4,416 people were enrolled in training and 220 in initial training. In May 2018, the CME signed a partnership agreement with the Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers (CNAM) to deliver the first French professional bachelor's degree of this kind in West Africa.

Created in 1960 as the first privatized water distribution company in Africa, SODECI (Société de distribution d’eau de la Côte d'Ivoire [Côte d'Ivoire Water Distribution Company]) produces, transports and distributes clean drinking water in the urban areas of Côte d'Ivoire. Since 1999, SODECI also operates and maintains sanitation facilities for the city of Abidjan. SODECI provides services to 1.1 million customers for water, while providing sanitation to 470,000 customers. SODECI operates through a lease contract.

46.07% owned by Eranove, SODECI is a company listed on the Regional Transferable Securities Exchange (BRVM). SODECI was rated AA− (long-term) and A1− (short term by the financial rating agency Bloomfield Investments in 2016). SODECI was the first private company in the public infrastructure space in Africa to be certified ISO 9001.

SDE, the Senegalese water company, has been producing, transporting, and distributing drinking water in Senegal's main cities since 1996. SDE's lease contract with the State of Senegal has been renewed three times since 1996.

Between 1996 and 2017, the rate of access to the service increased from 80% to 98%, and the number of customers more than doubled (from 241,167 to 743,859). Network efficiency increased by more than 10 points (1%). These performances have contributed to Senegal's achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in the field of drinking water services, along with other actors in the urban water sector. SDE supplies consumers through individual connections and standpipes. It had 1209 employees at the end of 2017.

SDE is a member of the African Water Association (AAE), the International Water Association (IWA), the World Federation of Private Water Operators (AQUAFED) and the World Water Council (WWC). In 2018, SDE obtained the "Water Utility of the Year" award from African Utility Week. The SDE is QSE certified throughout its scope: ISO 9001, OHSAS 18001, ISO 14001. SDE has reached the exemplary stage of the ISO 26 000 standard for its commitment to corporate social responsibility (CSR).

Eranove and SDE, following an international bidding process, signed a three-year service contract, renewed in 2017, with REGIDESO (Democratic Republic of Congo), financed by the World Bank.

An affiliate of CIE and the Eranove Group created in 2017, Smart Energy helps businesses with energy efficiency.

AWALE (affiliate of CIE and the Eranove Group) provides high-speed data transmission capacity via the electrical network of Côte d'Ivoire. In 2010, AWALE signed a 20-year agreement with Côte d'Ivoire to construct and operate communication networks via fiber optic lines and on-line electric currents. AWALE is 77.13% owned by Eranove (Eranove + CIE).

On October 23, 2018, the Republic of Togo and the Eranove Group signed a concession agreement for an electric power plant of 65 MW. The concession agreement for the production of electricity includes design, financing, construction, commissioning, operation and maintenance of an electric power plant located in the port district of Lomé.

On September 5, 2016, the Eranove Group signed an agreement protocol with Côte d'Ivoire for the financing, design, construction, operation, and maintenance of a thermal combined cycle power plant of 390 MW, followed by the signing of a concession agreement on 19 December 2018. The Atinkou power plant will use natural gas as its main fuel and will be located on the edge of Abidjan.

In October 2018, the signing of the concession agreement for the Orélo water treatment plant followed the agreement protocol signed in March 2017 by the Republic of Gabon, the FGIS, and the Eranove Group. This contract deals with the financing, design, construction, operation, and maintenance of a new clean drinking water production plant with a production capacity of 140,000 m3 per day, situated in the Estuaire Province, more specifically in the district of Komo-Kango.

Through its affiliate Kénié Énergie Renouvelable (Kénié Renewable Energy), the Eranove Group signed on June 18, 2015, with the government of the Republic of Mali a concession agreement with a duration of 30 years for the financing, design, construction and operation of the 42MW Kénié hydroelectric power plant, 35 km east of Bamako in Baguinéda on the Niger River.

On 21 October 2016, the Eranove Group and the Fonds Gabonais d'Investissements Stratégiques (FGIS) signed a concession contract with the Gabonese State for the design, financing, construction and operation of the Asokh Energy hydroelectric power plant (Ngoulmendjim site, 73 MW) on 26 October 2018. This hydroelectric power plant, located on the Komo River, is going to supply Libreville.

On 21 October 2016, the Eranove group and the Fonds Gabonais d'Investissements Stratégiques (FGIS) signed a concession contract with the Gabonese State for the design, financing, construction and operation of the Louetsi Hydro (15 MW) hydroelectric power plant and on 26 October 2018, the contract for the sale of electricity. This run-of-river hydroelectric power plant, located 450 km from the capital on the Louetsi River, on the Dibwangui site, is dedicated to supplying the southwestern part of the country.

In 2014, the Eranove Group signed an agreement protocol related to hydroelectric planning for the Cavally River. This protocol commits Eranove to the design, financing, construction and operation of hydroelectric facilities on the Cavally River, within the framework of a BOO (Build-Own-Operate) contract.

A consortium made up of the Eranove, Eiffage and Themis Groups on December 2, 2016, signed a project agreement with the Republic of Madagascar for the construction and operation of a 200 MW capacity hydroelectric power plant.

Through its subsidiaries, the group is committed to all the facets of ISO 26 000 CSR and to ISO 9001 quality, OHSAS 18001 safety and ISO 1400160 environmental certification.

Ericka Bareigts (French pronunciation: [ eʁika baʁɛtʃ ] ; born 16 April 1967) is a French politician of the Socialist Party (PS) who served as Minister of Overseas France in the governments of successive Prime Minister Manuel Valls and Bernard Cazeneuve from 30 August 2016 to 10 May 2017. She was a member of the National Assembly from 2012 until 2016 and from 2017 until 2020. Since 4 July 2020 she has been serving as Mayor of Saint-Denis, Réunion.

Bareigts was born on 16 April 1967 in Saint-Denis, Réunion. She graduated from the University of La Réunion, where she received a bachelor of laws, followed by the Pantheon-Sorbonne University, where she received a master of law.

Bareights joined the Socialist Party at the age of thirty. She was elected as second vice mayor of her hometown, Saint-Denis, in 2008. She initiated many projects for the city, in particular the global educational project (PEG) which promotes the teaching of English in large section of kindergarten, the learning of chess games during the lunch break or the work of sports educators with young students on "self-esteem".

The same year, Bareigts was elected president of the intercommunal community of Northern Reunion (CINOR), becoming the first woman to manage an intercommunal of Reunion. CINOR brings together the municipalities of Saint-Denis, Sainte-Marie and Sainte-Suzanne, representing more than 190,000 inhabitants, constituting the largest urban community in Réunion and Overseas.

Bareigts was chosen as head of the PS 's list for the 2009 European elections in the Overseas Territories of France. This list obtained 20.3% of the votes behind the UMP 's list of Marie-Luce Penchard (29.7%) and the Alliance of the Overseas 's list of Élie Hoarau (21%).

Bareigts won a seat as a regional councilor in the 2010 regional elections in Reunion, the list on which she appeared obtaining 18% of the votes cast.

In 2012, Bareigts ran for legislative elections in Réunion's 1st constituency. In the second round, she was elected member of the National Assembly with 52.8% of the votes cast.

In February 2014, Bareigts presented a resolution relating to Reunionese children placed in metropolitan France in the years 1960-1970, which was voted in the National Assembly. This resolution recognizes the moral responsibility of the French State. From 1963 to 1982, at least 2,150 children from Réunion, "abandoned or not" and forcibly registered by the French authorities with the Departmental Directorate of Health and Social Affairs, were deported by the authorities in order to repopulate the metropolitan departments victims of the rural flight.

In 2015, Bareigts proposed a bill to replace traditional Roman Catholic holidays like Christmas and Easter with local holidays in La Reunion The bill was rejected.

In September 2015, Bareigts was applauded in the National Assembly for her response to the words of Nadine Morano who had described France as a “white race country”. She declares thus: "For me, black deputy of the Republic, France described by Mrs. Morano is not mine".

In the Socialist Party's 2017 presidential primaries Bareigts endorsed Manuel Valls as the party's candidate for that year's presidential election and worked on his campaign team. When Benoît Hamon emerged as the primaries' winner, she joined his campaign team.

Bareigts was re-elected on 18 June 2017 as deputy for the Réunion's 1st constituency, with almost 66% of the vote in the second round.

On 12 September 2018, following the appointment of François de Rugy to the government, Bareigts was the Socialist group 's candidate for the President of the National Assembly and collected 31 votes.

On 3 March 2018, during a visit to the Cimendef media library in Saint-Paul, recently bought by the Réunion region, Bareigts and Huguette Bello were refused access to part of the building. The elected officials then forced the passage to be able to enter, accompanied by the Cimendef collective. Denouncing the assault on a guard by the two deputies, the Regional Council of Réunion filed a complaint for breach of domicile. The Reunionese media then talk about the Cimendef case.

On 1 June 2018 Bareigts succeeds in bringing the government back to public session, which wanted to derogate Overseas and Corsica from the application of the 1986 coastal law (law on the development, protection and enhancement of the coastline), by allowing the construction of public or private collective facilities nearby ocean or beaches.

Bareigts served as Secretary of Real Equality under Prime Minister Manuel Valls from February 2016 to 20 March 2016. She was in charge of economic equality between Metropolitan France and the French Overseas regions. Shortly after her appointment, Le Monde published an article suggesting her official title was unclear.

Bareigts was appointed Minister of Overseas France on 30 August 2016 and replaced in the National Assembly by her substitute, Phillipe Naillet. The fourth Minister since 1958 to come from an overseas department and the first Reunion Islander to accede to the post of Minister, aware of her lack of notoriety, she spoke to Libération, who dedicated a portrait to her: "No one knows me enough at the national level, but I am a field politician, engaged for thirty years on the island of Reunion". When she was appointed, she declared that she wanted to implement the real equality of these territories with the metropolis and promote "territorialized growth" and went for her first trip to Mayotte, the poorest department in France. She will go there again while the department is experiencing an unprecedented drought since the meteorological records of 1941.

On 28 March 2017, during the 2017 social unrest in French Guiana, Bareigts and fellow minister Matthias Fekl were sent to the overseas department by Prime Minister Cazeneuve, pledging a €1 billion investment in infrastructure.

in the 2020 municipal elections, Bareigts was head of the union of the left in Saint-Denis, Réunion. Her list topped the first round with 42.7% of the vote, ahead of the right list led by the president of the Regional Council of Réunion Didier Robert (24.9%) and the center list of Senator of France Nassimah Dindar (13%), and she became mayor of Saint-Denis.

The Ermenonville Forest (French : Forêt d'Ermenonville, pronounced [ fɔʁɛ dɛʁmənɔ̃vil ]) is a state-owned forest in Oise, France. With the Chantilly Forest and Forest of Halatte, it comprises the bulk of the Massif des Trois Forêts [ fr ]. The 3,319 hectares (12.81 sq mi) of the national forest itself is the core of a larger unit, made up of numerous privately owned forests including the Chaalis and Morrière woods, with a total area of 6,500 hectares (25 sq mi).

On 3 March 1974, Turkish Airlines Flight 981 crashed in the forest and in the commune of Fontaine-Chaalis, killing all 346 people on board. A memorial to the victims of the flight stands in the forest.

The Ermenonville Forest is located in the northern Paris Basin and belongs to the Valois and Vielle France ecoregion as defined by the French National Forest Inventory. It extends to the Nonette river valley in the north; the Chantilly Forest and the A1 autoroute in the west; the Thève [ fr ] river valley, Mortefontaine, and Ermenonville in the south; and the Valois Plateau in the east. The national forest includes eight communes : Mont-L'Évêque [ fr ], Borest, Fontaine-Chaalis, Montlognon, Baron, Ermenonville, Ver-sur-Launette, and Mortefontaine.

The forest occupies hills ranging from 70 to 120 metres (230 to 390 ft) in altitude, and includes occasional shallow ponds and rivers. The forest floor is almost entirely sandy, with some sandstone and limestone strata and some areas of periglacial loess. In some areas, the sandstone has been eroded into tablelike formations or even chaotic rockpiles like those found in the Forest of Fontainebleau. Some such formations have names: the Pierre Sorcière (Witch Rocks), the Bruyères de Frais Vent (Fresh Air Heath), and the Grès Sainte-Marguerite (St. Margaret Sandstone).

Few watercourses cross the forest due to its sandy substrate. The main surface stream is the Launette, a tributary of the Nonette, which in turn joins the Oise. Human activity has created ponds on the Launette at the Ermenonville Park and at the level of the Chaalis abbey. Other ponds in the Vallière estate in Mortefontaine, which lies in the Thève watershed, inspired the painter Camille Corot.

Several major roads, including the N 330 and A1 autoroutes, cross or border the Ermenonville Forest. No railway lines serve the forest itself; the Plessis-Belleville station is only 5 kilometres (3.1 mi) from Ermenonville, but no foot-accessible routes connect it to the town.

Several bus lines serve localities on the forest outskirts, including Senlis, Othis-Beapré, Beaumarchais, Plailly, and Pontarmé.

The oldest mentions of forest in the current unit's area date back to the founding of the Chaalis Abbey in 1136. King Louis VI granted the abbey the use, and later full ownership, of the surrounding woods. Other woods, in the south of the current area, were purchased by the abbey or donated by local lords in the 13th century. In 1641, an inventory of the abbey's lands included roughly 3,000 acres (1,200 ha) of woods, although that land mostly consisted of heathland and poor-quality groves, which funded the abbey mostly through grazing rights. Around this time, the forest's other primary owners were the Victoire Abbey, founded in 1225 near Senlis, which owned 200 acres (81 ha) between Senlis and Chaalis; the priory at Borest dependent on the Abbey of Saint Genevieve, which owned 280 acres (110 ha) ; and the bishop of Senlis, who owned 500 acres (200 ha) around his summer residence at Mont-L'Èvêque. Secular authorities owned little or none of the Ermenonville Forest. The ecclesiastical landowners were free to manage their woods without reference to the waters and forests of Senlis, unlike the Halatte and Chantilly Forests. However, several contemporary reports mention poor maintenance of these lands.

In the 17th century, the royal hunting captaincy of Halatte and Carnelle covered all of today's Ermenonville Forest. In the course of various royal land grants to various abbeys in the medieval period, the kings of France always reserved hunting rights, especially for large game. The princes of Condé, who held this captaincy from 1674, built a dense star-shaped route network, defined in the letters patent of 25 January 1718 and 30 November 1721.

All church forest-lands were nationalized under the French Revolution. Together, they comprise a single forest unit of 6,000 hectares (15,000 acres). Under the First French Empire, they were divided between Joseph Bonaparte, who owned the southern part near his domain at Mortefontaine, and François Christophe de Kellermann, who acquired the eastern part near his domain at the Fontaine-Chaalis chateau. Another part was returned to the lords of Ermenonville after the fall of the Empire. Under the Restoration, the remainder was made a national forest. Until then, the forest's territory consisted of fragmentary woods surrounded by moors and heathlands used for grazing. In 1825, the water and forestry administration began replanting these gaps with Scots pine and maritime pine, although the maritime pines were mostly killed off by the winter frosts of 1879-1880.

In June 1940, a forest fire burned over 800 hectares (2,000 acres) of the forest, one of the most serious disasters in its history. The previous March, a tornado had caused more significant damage, as did large-scale sampling for military use during World War II.

On 3 March 1974, a McDonnell Douglas DC-10 operating Turkish Airlines Flight 981 crashed in the Ermenonville Forest after its rear baggage door opened in mid-flight, explosively decompressing the aircraft and causing total loss of control, killing all 346 passengers and crew. At the time, this was the deadliest ever plane crash. Today, a monument to the victims of the Ermenonville air disaster stands near the accident site.

The Ermenonville Forest is managed by the National Forestry Office (ONF)'s Trois Forêts unit office, based out of Chantilly, which is responsible for implementing the current (2000-2014) forest management plan.

The national forest is largely composed of Scots pine (43% surface area, 1412 ha) and oaks (1434 ha), mixed with small amounts of beech (105 ha, 3% of the forest) and alder (4 ha). For a long time, the forest was treated half as deciduous coppiced forest and half as coniferous high forest. In 1970, the ONF decided to convert the whole area to high forest. Six species have been selected as priority: sessile oak, Scots pine, chestnut, maritime pine, Corsican black pine, and common alder. The forest produces 15 000 –18 000 m of PEFC -certified wood annually.

The forest of the Chaalis estate, owned by the Institut de France, is managed and forested by the ONF. A development plan was established for the 2001-2020 period. It includes three main types of plots: hardwood high forest, softwood high forest, and poplar groves. This forest produces 1500 m of wood annually.

Due to its dry sandy soils, heather undergrowth, and pine needle litter, the Ermenonville Forest is subject to frequent wildfires. To limit fire spread, the forest roads have been laid out for accessibility to emergency vehicles and are wide enough to serve as firebreaks; red oaks have been planted along the edges of resinous conifer plots; and the ONF actively removes fire-carrying undergrowth.

Erromintxela (Basque pronunciation: [ eromintʃela ]) is the distinctive language of a group of Romani living in the Basque Country, who also go by the name Erromintxela. It is sometimes called Basque Caló or Errumantxela in English ; caló vasco, romaní vasco, or errominchela in Spanish ; and euskado-rromani or euskado-romani in French. Although detailed accounts of the language date to the end of the 19th century, linguistic research began only in the 1990s.

The Erromintxela are the descendants of a 15th-century wave of Kalderash Roma, who entered the Basque Country via France. Both ethnically and linguistically, they are distinct from the Caló -speaking Romani people in Spain and the Cascarot Romani people of the Northern Basque Country. Erromintxela is a mixed language (referred to as Para-Romani in Romani linguistics), deriving most of its vocabulary from Kalderash Romani but using Basque grammar, similar to the way the Angloromani language of the Roma in England mixes Romani vocabulary and English grammar. The development of the mixed language was facilitated by the unusually deep integration of the Erromintxela people into Basque society and the resultant bilingualism in Basque. The language is in decline; most of the perhaps 1000 remaining speakers live on the coast of Labourd and in the mountainous regions of Soule, Navarre, Gipuzkoa and Biscay.

The origin of the name Erromintxela is unclear and may be of relatively recent origin; Basque speakers had previously grouped the Erromintxela under more general terms for Romani such as ijitoak "Egyptians", ungrianok "Hungarians", or buhameak " Bohemians ". However, a number of authors believe it to be a Basque rendering of the French name romanichel or romané-michel, a name attested primarily in the vicinity of the Pyrenees and in particular the Northern Basque Country. Romanichel is in turn a French rendering of the Romani phrase Romani čel "Romani person". Though now uncommon in France, it is found in the names of the British Ròmanichal and the Scandinavian Romanisæl, all descendants, like the Erromintxela, of a group of Roma who had migrated to France.

Early attestations of the name in Basque include Errama-itçéla, Erroumancel, later errumanzel and erremaitzela. The initial e- is the Basque prosthetic vowel, which was added at a time that no Basque word was allowed to begin with an r-. The final -a is the absolutive case suffix, which is used when citing a name. If that etymology is correct, it is a rare case of a native Romani name for themselves (an endonym) being borrowed by another language.

The people identify themselves as ijitoak, Basque for "gypsies", but more specifically as Erromintxela, in contrast to the Caló Romani, whom they refer to as the xango-gorriak, Basque for "red-legs".

There are currently an estimated 500 speakers in the Southern Basque Country in Spain, approximately 2% of a population of 21,000 Romanis, and another estimated 500 in France. In Spain the remaining fluent speakers are elderly people mostly over the age of 80; some are equally fluent in Spanish, Basque, or Caló. Middle-aged Erromintxela are mostly passive bilinguals, and the youngest speak only Basque or Spanish. In the Northern Basque Country, however, the language is still being passed on to children. The percentage of speakers among Spanish Erromintxela are higher than 2%, as large numbers of Caló-speaking Romanis moved to the Basque Country in the intense period of industrialisation in the 20th century.

To date, there has been little literary production in the language. The most notable works are a poem by Jon Mirande entitled "Kama-goli" in his 1997 anthology Orhoituz and the 1999 novel Agirre zaharraren kartzelaldi berriak by Koldo Izagirre Urreaga with the main character using the language.

The Erromintxela arrived in the Basque Country in the 15th century speaking Kalderash Romani. They integrated much more deeply into Basque society than other Romani groups. In the process, they acquired the Basque language and adopted aspects of Basque culture such as increased rights of women and important traditions such as bertsolaritza (extemporaneous poetic song) and pelota (the national Basque ballgame). Muñoz and Lopez de Mungia suspect that the morphological and phonological similarities between Romani and Basque facilitated the adoption of Basque grammar by the bilingual Romanis.

It appears that many Romanis chose to stay in the Basque Country to escape persecution elsewhere in Europe. Nonetheless, even here they were not safe from persecution. For example, the Royal Council of Navarre in 1602 passed an edict to round up all "vagabonds" (meaning Romani), who were to be condemned to 6 years of galley duty. By the 18th century however attitudes had changed, and the emphasis shifted towards integration. In 1780 – 1781 the Courts of Navarre passed Law 23, which called for "the authorities to take care of them, find them locations for settlement and honest occupations and ways of living..."

The oldest account of the language dates to 1855, when the French ethnographer Justin Cenac-Moncaut located the Erromintxela primarily in the Northern Basque Country. The oldest coherent Erromintxela text, a poem entitled Kama-goli, published by Basque writer Jon Mirande in a collection of Basque poetry, only dates to ca. 1960.

Alexandre Baudrimont 's 40-page study Vocabulaire de la langue des Bohémiens habitant les pays basques français of 1862, the most extensive of the early accounts, covers both vocabulary and aspects of grammar. He worked with two female informants, a mother and her daughter from the Uhart-Mixe area near Saint-Palais, whom he describes as highly fluent. Unfortunately, he was only able to conduct a single session as the women were then told not to cooperate further for the fear of outsiders prying into the secrets of the Romani. There is a certain degree of confusion in Baudrimont's publication—he himself states that he could not always be certain the correct forms were elicited. For example, most of the verb forms he tried to elicit lack the verbal -tu ending and appear to be participles.

The French sociologist Victor de Rochas refers to the Romani in the Northern Basque Country speaking Basque, rather than French, in his 1876 Les Parias de France et d'Espagne (cagots et bohémiens). The Canon Jean-Baptiste Daranatz published a wordlist in the periodical Eskualdun Ona in 1906 and in 1921 Berraondo and Oyarbide carried out some research. Although labelled gitano (Spanish for 'gypsy') or bohémien / gitan (French for 'gypsy'), some data can also be found in Azkue's 1905 dictionary and Pierre Lhande 's 1926 dictionary, both of which list a number of words identifiable as Erromintxela.

Little more was done until the late 20th century. In 1986 Federico Krutwig published a short article in the Revista Internacional de Estudios Vascos entitled "Los gitanos vascos", with a short word list and a brief analysis of the language's morphology. However, the most detailed research to date was carried out by Basque philologist Josune Muñoz and historian Elias Lopez de Mungia, who began their work in the Southern Basque Country in 1996 at the behest of the Romani organisation Kalé Dor Kayiko, with support from the Euskaltzaindia and the University of the Basque Country. Kalé Dor Kayiko, who had been working to promote the Romani language, was alerted to the existence of Erromintxela in the 1990s through an article by the historian Alizia Stürtze, Agotak, juduak eta ijitoak Euskal Herrian " Agotes, Jews, and Gypsies in the Basque Country". Kalé Dor Kayiko intends to continue research into the language, attitudes, identity, and history of the Erromintxela people in the less well researched provinces of Navarre and the Northern Basque Country.

The research by Muñoz and Lopez de Mungia has confirmed that Erromintxela is not derived from Caló, the mixed Spanish-Romani language spoken throughout Spain, but is instead based on Kalderash Romani and the Basque language. The vocabulary appears to be almost exclusively Romani in origin; the grammar however, both morphology and syntax, derives from various Basque dialects. Few traces appear to remain of Romani grammatical structures. The language is incomprehensible to speakers of both Basque and of Caló.

Typologically, Erromintxela displays the same features as the Basque dialects it derives its grammatical structures from. Its case marking follows the ergative–absolutive pattern where the subject of an intransitive verb is in the absolutive case (which is unmarked), the same case being used for the direct object of a transitive verb. The subject of a transitive verb is marked with the ergative case. Similarly, auxiliary verbs agree with the subject and any direct object and indirect object present and verb forms are marked for allocutive (i.e. a marker is used to indicate the gender of the addressee).

Since both Erromintxela and Caló derive from Romani, many Erromintxela words are similar to Spanish Caló and Catalan Caló.

According to Baudrimont's description of 1862 and modern southern sources, Erromintxela appears to have, at maximum, the sound system below. Southern speakers appear not to have the rounded vowel / y / or the consonant / θ /, in line with north–south differences in Basque, and it is not clear if the northern distinction between / ɡ / and / ɣ / also exists in the south.

Baudrimont uses a semi-phonetic system with the following diverging conventions:

Examples of morphological features in Erromintxela:

Most verbs have a Romani root plus the Basque verb forming suffix -tu. Examples of Erromintxela verbs are given below. (Forms given in angle brackets indicate spellings in the sources which are no longer in use. Basque is included for comparison.)

Most Erromintxela verbal inflections are virtually identical to those found in Basque dialects:

Negations are formed with na/nagi (Romani na/níči); cf Basque ez/ezetz. The word for "yes" is ua (Romani va); cf Basque bai/baietz.

The majority of nouns have Romani roots, but frequently attested with Basque suffixes. The variation of nouns cited with or without a final -a is likely due to informants supplying them with or without the absolutive ending. (Forms given in angle brackets indicate spellings in the sources which are no longer in use.)

According to Baudrimot, the Erromintxela have adopted the Basque names of the months. Note that some of the Basque names represent pre-standardisation names of the months, e.g. August is Abuztua in Standard Basque rather than Agorrila.

Baudrimont claims that subdivisions of the year (apart from the months) are formed with the word breja (bréχa) "year": breja kinua "month" and breja kipia "week".

Numerals (Basque included for contrasting purposes):

Adjectives and adverbs are also mostly derived from Romani forms:

Pronouns are derived from both languages:

Much of Baudrimont's wordlist is easily related to other Erromintxela sources. However, some of the material collected by Baudrimont deserves a more detailed overview due to its peculiarities. Most of these relate to the verbs and verb forms he collected but some include nouns and other items.

His material contains a relatively high number of Basque-derived items.

Certain items are peculiar. Baudrimont lists mintxa as "tooth". The Kalderash term is dand (daní in Caló) but the term given is immediately more reminiscent of Northern Basque mintzo "speech" or mintza "skin" (with expressive palatalization). This, and other similar items, raise the question of whether Baudrimont was simply pointing at items to elicit forms.

The forms he attempted to elicit are questionable in some cases as well. For example, he attempted to agricultural terms such as plough, harrow and aftermath from his (female) informants and records the suspiciously similar sasta "plough" and xatxa (shatsha) "harrow".

The verb systems and pronouns recorded by Baudrimont is peculiar in several ways. Apart from his problem of eliciting the citation form of verbs as opposed to participles, he lists pronouns and possessive pronouns that appear to contain Romani roots and an unexpected auxiliary.

The verb ajin for "to have" attested elsewhere although Basque derived forms appear more common overall. Kalderash Romani employs the 3rd person of "to be" and a dative pronoun to express ownership:

Note that forms like duk (3rd pers-have-2nd per (male)) are the verbal part whereas Erromintxela tuk is a pronoun.

The negative particle na is fairly clear in the forms above. Buter, as Baudrimont notes, is the word for "much, many" and may not be a true pronoun. Kalderash uses the accusative pronouns to express possession but the forms above are more reminiscent of wrongly parsed Kalderash dative forms mangé, tuké, léske, léke etc. and perhaps a different case of "to be" (the full Kalderash paradigm being sim, san, si, si, sam, san/sen, si).

On the whole, it raises questions about the level of communication between Baudrimont and his informants and the quality of (some of the) material elicited.

Examples with interlinear versions (lexical items of Romani origin marked in bold):

ABS. 3SG - PRE DAT - FEM. ALLOC - ERG. 1SG

your(informal)-BEN song make-NMZ-LOC ABS.3SG- PRE DAT -FEM.ALLOC-ERG.1SG

xau -a, goli keau za-k, mol buterr -ago aji -n-en d-u-k

boy-ABS sing make have-ERG.FAM.MASC wine much-COMP have-PFV-FUT ABS.3SG-have-ERG.MASC.ALLOC

masa -k eta barki -txu-ak pangu -an d-a-o-z

meat-ABS.PL and sheep-DIM-ABS.PL meadow-LOC ABS.3SG-PRES-go-PL

"The sheep and lambs are on the meadow."

nire kera zure-a-ren pali -an d-a-o, hemen-dik obeto-ao dika -tu-ko d-u-zu

my house your-ABS-GEN proximity-LOC ABS.3SG-PRES-locate here-ABL better-COMP see-PFV-FUT ABS.3SG-have-ERG.2SG

"My house is next to yours, you can see it better from here."

EssilorLuxottica SA is a Franco-Italian vertically integrated multinational holding company registered in Charenton-Le-Pont and headquartered both in Paris and Milan. It designs, produces and markets ophthalmic lenses, equipment and instruments, prescription glasses and sunglasses. It was founded on 1 October 2018, and its name is an amalgamation of the two major corporations which merged to create it; the French Essilor and the Italian Luxottica. The two companies have, since the merger, been restructured as subsidiaries of the new entity.

Under the terms of the merger agreement, Essilor would purchase Luxottica, but Luxottica's leadership would be guaranteed prominent positions in the newly-formed corporation as well as some seats on its board of directors ; the Luxottica founder, Leonardo Del Vecchio, was notably designated chairman. The first few years of EssilorLuxottica post-merger were marred by disputes over leadership roles, but Del Vecchio was able to bring them to a satisfactory end.

Essilor and Luxottica were respectively the world's leading manufacturers of ophthalmic lenses and of eyeglasses; upon the merger, EssilorLuxottica thus became a monopoly.

Essilor contributed its numerous proprietary lens technologies as well as its subsidiaries to the new company. Meanwhile, the latter gained through Luxottica ownership of numerous eyewear brands including Ray-Ban, Oakley, Persol, Oliver Peoples, and Vogue Eyewear; the eyewear retailers LensCrafters, Pearle Vision, and Sunglass Hut, the eyewear insurance company EyeMed, and exclusive eyewear licensing deals with numerous fashion houses. The company is listed on the Euronext Paris stock exchange under the trading symbol "EL" and is part of the CAC 40 share index, which includes the 40 largest capitalized companies traded on the Paris Stock Exchange, and the Euro Stoxx 50, which includes the 50 largest companies in the Eurozone. In 2025, the company generated €28.491 billion in revenue.

In January 2017, Essilor and Luxottica announced the merger of their activities. After having received the necessary authorizations from the competition authorities of the United States, the European Union, Brazil, Canada and China, EssilorLuxottica was created on 1 October 2018. On a technical level, Essilor acquired Luxottica, though Luxottica founder and executive chairman Leonardo Del Vecchio became co-leader of the new conglomerate, which would change its name to contain both companies. Luxottica proceeded to delist its American depositary receipts from the New York Stock Exchange upon announcement of the merger.

Del Vecchio's holding company, Delfin, then held 62.42% of Luxottica, a share that it contributed to EssilorLuxotica. Delfin also became a plurality shareholder of the new group with 38.9% of the capital.

This merger gives birth to a giant of the optical industry, generating a turnover of more than €16 billion and a market capitalization of €57 billion. The merger did not occur without controversy from anti-trust researchers, however, and Turkish authorities, accusing the company of not fulfilling anti-trust obligations it had agreed to during the merger, fined EssilorLuxottica €17 million in late August 2023.

Despite the merger being completed in 2018, the company still faced an internal leadership battle for control of the company, fought between old Essilor leadership and Del Vecchio, who went on to state in a March 2019 interview with Le Figaro that Essilor CEO Hubert Sagnières "only listened to himself", and had cost the company up to €600 million in savings from the merger. Sagnières responded to Del Vecchio by accusing the Luxottica founder of attempting to take control of the newly formed conglomerate without offering "a premium to shareholders" of EssilorLuxottica. Del Vecchio further accused Sagnières of inexperience when running an eyewear company. The terms of the merger provided that old Essilor leadership as well as Luxottica's officers would have equal control over the merged entity, though the company would select a new CEO, internally or externally, by the end of 2020.

Ultimately, Del Vecchio won with the backing of EssilorLuxottica shareholders. Del Vecchio chose to appoint Francesco Milleri as CEO and Paul du Saillant [ fr ] as deputy CEO. Saginères ultimately departed EssilorLuxottica after the feud, and Del Vecchio, who previously agreed to limit his voting rights to control the company, regained the full weight of such voting rights. A company statement to the Financial Times reflected the settled nature of the conflict, stating that the resolution of the leadership battle represented "the victory of a vision, the creation of an extraordinary business that is at the beginning of what it can achieve". Del Vecchio further reflected the new company's leadership by going on to state that his "life-long dream" of creating a dominant vertically integrated company in eyewear has "finally come true".

At the beginning of 2019, EssilorLuxottica acquired German-based Brille24 GmbH. Essilor's partner Shamir acquired Union Optic, a prescription laboratory that also distributes optical instruments. Essilor also acquired a majority stake in Indulentes, one of Ecuador's leading prescription laboratories, and a majority stake in Metalizado Optico Argentino S.A. (MOA), one of Argentina's leading prescription laboratories.

EssilorLuxottica acquired a 75% stake in the Dutch opticians group GrandVision, which owns Vision Express in the UK and For Eyes in the US, in 2019 for €28 per share, which would value the entirety of GrandVision at Euro 7.2 billion.

Del Vecchio died in June 2022, leaving $350 million in shares to Milleri.

In August 2022, Essilor bought the remaining 50 percent stake in Shamir Optical Industry. Additionally, the company announced it would acquire Israeli startup Nuance Hearing for an undisclosed amount. This was the first major strategy shift and industry expansion for the company after Del Vecchio's 2022 death, and it accompanied reports that the firm was planning to introduce hearing aid technology into its lenses.

In July 2024, EssilorLuxottica agreed to buy US streetwear brand Supreme for US$1.5 billion, expanding its brand portfolio beyond eyewear and lenses for the first time. Days later, it was reported that Meta was in talks to purchase a 5% stake in EssilorLuxottica.

In July 2024, EssilorLuxottica acquired an 80% shareholding in Heidelberg Engineering. The Germany-headquartered Heidelberg specializes in ophthalmic diagnostic instruments based around optical coherence tomography (OCT), confocal microscopy, and scanning lasers.

May 2023 saw EssilorLuxottica confirm that it had suffered a data breach two years earlier in 2021; upon noticing the breach, the company immediately alerted the FBI and Italian law enforcement. A spokesperson for the company stated that the company was first aware of the data breach in November 2022, and the owner of the website Have I Been Pwned? stated that around 77 million accounts were released.

The company dominates the global eyewear market as the largest single player in that market.

EssilorLuxottica is the largest company in retail sales, owning many of the largest eyewear retail chains in the world. By number of locations, EssilorLuxottica's largest store chain is Sunglass Hut, with 3,131 locations as of 2025. Its second largest and third largest chains are Óticas Carol with 1,425 locations and LensCrafters with 1,098 locations. Online, the company further owns Clearly, Eyebuydirect, FramesDirect.com, and online properties under its brand names such as Ray-Ban and Oakley.

The company, inherited mostly from the Luxottica side, has control over some of the most recognized brands in eyewear. Previous acquisitions from Luxottica include Vogue Eyewear in 1990, Persol in 1995, Ray-Ban and Arnette in 1999, Oakley and Oliver Peoples in 2007, Alain Mikli in 2012, and Bolon eyewear owner Xiamen Yarui Optical in 2013. Essilor also brought some eyewear brands to the combined company, the largest of which being Foster Grant, acquired in 2010, and Costa Del Mar, a part of Essilor since 2014.

Despite ownership of brands, Luxottica also brought over exclusive eyewear manufacturing deals to the company, mostly with major European fashion houses. Armani was Luxottica's first major licensing deal in 1989, one that remains intact to this day, and the company additionally manufactures eyewear for many companies, including but not limited to brands owned by Tapestry, Capri Holdings, Ralph Lauren Corporation, and Ferrari.

In addition to the brands it owns, EssilorLuxottica presently has exclusive manufacturing licensing for Armani, Brooks Brothers, Burberry, Chanel, Coach, Dolce & Gabbana, Ferrari (through a Ray-Ban partnership), Michael Kors ' eyewear, Miu Miu, Prada, Ralph Lauren, Swarovski, Tiffany & Co., Tory Burch, and Versace. EssilorLuxottica also signed new licensing deals with Jimmy Choo and Kodak in 2023, though did not renew its license with LVMH -owned Bulgari, which expired at the end of 2023.

According to its website, it owns the following lens technologies:

An estaminet is—in Picardy, French Flanders, Luxembourg, and Brussels —an establishment that serves various types of drinks, sells tobacco, and offers traditional games. The estaminets are part of the cultural heritage of these regions. In Brussels, a three-hundred-year-old estaminet is still open.

The word estaminets has also been in use in Paris in the 19th century, as Jules Lovy wrote about them on 18 April 1858 in Le Tintamarre.

In modern usage, estaminet refers to taverns, bistrots, inns, and brasseries typical of Nord Département in France that make use of ancient tools and typical rural, or traditional, decorations, and serve dishes and drinks from the region.

In 1802, the Académie française defined the estaminet in a very short description: "Assemblée de buveurs et de fumeurs" (An assembly of drinkers and smokers).

The word has a Picard origin and comes from "estamet", which refers to the pillar supporting the roof of a room, and, by extension, the room itself.

At the beginning of the 19th century, in the more elegant cafés, tobacco was forbidden, but smoking was permitted in the estaminets. The word "estaminet" was in common use before World War I and referred to an establishment where one could have a drink and smoke. There could be, at the same place, a grocery or a farrier facility, like today's multi-service cafés.

A place to socialize for workers, the estaminet was also the meeting point for local societies, like pigeon-keeping club members or feather-bowling players.

Some singing societies also included in their name the one of the estaminet where they are gathering. For instance, in Flers, there is a society called Les Amis-Réunis de l'estaminet du Pont du Breucq (the friends of Pont du Breucq estaminet). In Lambersart, there is a Société des Rigolos Réunie à l'Estaminet de la Carnoy à Lambersart (Society of amusing people gathered at la Carnoy estaminet in Lambersat). In Lille, there are several societies called Les Amis-Réunis à l'Estaminet du Grand Quinquin, Les Amis-Réunis à l'Estaminet du Réveil-Matin, Les Bons Buveurs de l'Estaminet de l'Alliance. In Roubaix, there are Les Amis-Réunis à l'Estaminet du Bas Rouge à Pile, Les Amis-Réunis Estaminet Bauwens, Les Amis Réunis à l'Estaminet du Poète de Roubaix, Les Amis-Réunis à l'Estaminet tenu par Augustin Roger. In Tourcoing, there is the Société des Amis Réunis, Estaminet du Lion-Blanc, à Tourcoing.

In Lille, on the eve of the First World War, the people were more likely to enjoy their hard lives in the estaminets, where they could relax, meet up with friends, sing patois refrains, and play a variety of games. These games included jeu du beigneau (throwing shuffles into a hole), jeu du bouchon (knocking down corks 9 meters apart), skittles, darts, and strength competitions.

Egg and chips became popular in Britain during World War I due to a shortage of meat. It was a favourite food of Tommies behind the lines on the Western Front in northern France and Belgium, eaten at estaminets, which also sold cheap wine and beer.

Nowadays, the name "estaminet" is given to different taverns, bistrots, or inns that make use of ancient tools as ornaments and typical, rustic, and traditional decorations. Hop is hanging from the ceiling, and old pictures are on the walls. Old bottles and "Vierpots" (ember pots) to light one's pipe are gathered on the fireplace. The menu shows dishes with Flemish names like " Waterzoï " or " Potjevleesch ". Above the entry door, a placard is placed, with a depiction of the scrutiny of God, and is a warning to the customers against cursing (in Flemish: Hier vloekt men niet).

Victor Hugo used the word "estaminet," among other Walloon words, in his naturalistic novels set in the north of his country.

"Estaminet" is also the title of a short story by Gerard Walschap.

"The Estaminet" is a poem by Ivor Gurney published in Selected Poems about comradeship between soldiers during World War I.

Estaminet 'In 't Spinnekopke' is one of the recipients of the Bronze Zinneke, an award handed out by the cabinet of the Brussels Region to individuals, personalities, organisations, or companies that perform a role as informal ambassadors of the Brussels Region.

The Eu forest (French : Forêt d'Eu) is one of the great forests of Seine-Maritime, in Normandy. Covering an area of 9,300 hectares (23,000 acres), this beech forest, located in Le Petit Caux in the north-east of the department and the region, has close historical links to the Orléans family.

A narrow band more than 30 km long and 5 to 6 km wide, the Eu Forest covers the easternmost part of the chalk plateau that separates the Yères and Bresle rivers to the south-east of the town of Eu. This area extends from Saint-Pierre-en-Val, near Eu to the surroundings of Aumale and Mortemer.

The Eu forest is made up of several distinct zones. Immediately to the south-east of Eu is the Triage d'Eu (1,600 hectares (4,000 acres)), a slender-looking forest covering a small ridge bordering the Bresle Valley and the slopes of the dry Incheville valley. Further south, the Upper Eu Forest (3,500 hectares (8,600 acres)), is more massive, covering a tabular ridge of about 200m altitude. In the vicinity of Aumale, the Lower Eu Forest (2,800 hectares (6,900 acres)) occupies the southern end of the plateau, which is more tabular in appearance. These three massifs are separated by relatively large cultivated spaces, formerly wooded. Nearby isolated woodlands may also be included (adding a further total surface of 1,400 hectares (3,500 acres)): the woods of Tôt, Gomard, Cuverville, Saint-Martin-le-Gaillard along the Yères, and the wood of Guimerville from the Grand-Marché to the south-east of Blangy-sur-Bresle.

It is a naturally deciduous forest, but conifers were planted in the "voids" of the forest from 1900 to 1912, before this policy was extended to other Normandy forests (generally maintaining at least 90% hardwood). The National Forest Fund then further encouraged the re - encroachment of the coppice areas under single forest and coppice of private forests (throughout France).

One of the curiosities of the forest of Eu has long been the Quesne à Leu (or wolves' oak), 27 meters high and planted in the seventeenth century; still living despite having fallen.

The Eu forest and the adjacent grasslands are a ' Natura 2000 ' site.

The Upper Eu forest and Yères and Bresle valleys are in a Natural zone of ecological interest, fauna and flora (French : Zone naturelle d'intérêt écologique, faunistique et floristique or ZNIEFF).

The Lower Eu forest is also in a Natural zone of ecological interest, fauna and flora.

The history of this forest begins with the abandonment, in the third century, of the Gallo-Roman city, 'Briga', built on the Beaumont plateau at a place called Bois l'Abbé, current excavations showing that this city was not surrounded by forested areas.

In 1036, Robert, Count of Eu, granted the monks of the Abbey of Saint-Michel du Tréport the tithe of pannage of the forest of Eu and all the sartage of this same forest. By a charter of August 1282, Jean 1st of Brienne, Count of Eu, undoubtedly at the instigation of his viscounts, limited the monks' pannage in the forest of Eu to eight free-range pigs, while maintaining free pasture for all their animals in the forest.

It seems that the forest covered, until the year 1000, the whole plateau separating the valleys of Yères and Bresle; large clearances were then undertaken from the 11th century to the 13th century. It was the time of initial fragmentation of the forest by cultivated fields which still divide the current forest of Eu into three massifs. Land clearing slowed in the 14th century with the start of the Hundred Years' War, the invasions of the troops of the King of England put an end to the prosperity of Normandy. This reduction of clearance continued despite the return to peace due to the development of regular logging. The Counts of Eu, landowners, found it more advantageous to sell the trees to charcoal burners, woodworkers and glassmakers than to cultivate low-paying lands.

The exploitation of the forest contributed to the establishment of many glass factories in the surroundings, in particular in the Bresle valley.

After belonging to the Dukes of Normandy, then to the Counts of Eu, the forest was confiscated during the French Revolution but it was returned to its former owner in 1814: Louise Marie Adélaïde de Bourbon, widow of Philippe Égalité and mother of Louis Philippe I, future king of France. The forest remained a possession of the Orleans family for a long time. In 1852, the forest became nationalised before being returned, once again, to its former owners, in 1872.

It was after this restitution that the 28 cast iron posts were installed across the forest, to mark the intersections of the paths. The best known of them is the Pole Maître Jean.

At the beginning of the 20th century, the forest passed into the hands of a civil society founded by friends of the Duke of Orleans to avoid state control. Finally, after the failure of an amicable acquisition by the authorities, the expropriation was decided by the law of August 13, 1913, allocating 90% to the state and 10% to the department of Seine-Inférieur (modern Seine-Maritime) on August 15, 1915.

Despite its political failure under the Third Republic, eugenics in France experienced early and thorough theoretical development. This medical eugenics ideology advocated for the formation of a human elite under the guidance of the French state as early as the late 18th century. Subsequent awareness of the theories of British anthropologist and statistician Francis Galton, the first theorist of eugenics, led to the creation of the French Society of Eugenics in 1913.

Despite the numerous calls from French eugenics theorists for interventionist measures that persisted until the first half of the 20th century, this ideology exerted a negligible influence on French citizens, in contrast to its impact on those in Anglo-Saxon countries and the Third Reich. France's adoption of a single law inspired by eugenics was limited to the establishment of a mandatory prenuptial certificate under the Vichy regime. The reasons for this failure are numerous and are particularly linked to the influence of Catholicism, neo- Lamarckism, and depopulation resulting from wars.

The most prominent proponents of eugenics included Nobel Prize-winning physician Charles Richet, who served as president of the French Society of Eugenics and advocated for the elimination of disabled children, and Alexis Carrel, who directed the French Foundation for the Study of Human Problems during the Vichy regime. In the late 19th century, Paul Robin personified the neo- Malthusian branch of French eugenics. Pediatrician Adolphe Pinard developed an ambitious project for controlling reproduction, and military doctor Charles Binet-Sanglé proposed the creation of a "human stud farm." Notwithstanding the subsequent trial of Nazi doctors in Nuremberg for crimes against humanity, the eugenics ideology continued to be defended, albeit briefly, by biologist Jean Rostand during the 1950s. This defense was facilitated by a lack of awareness regarding the atrocities committed in the name of eugenics on German soil, which resulted in a paucity of official condemnations of these practices in France.

The advent of a novel form of eugenics in France, akin to that observed in other Western countries, has given rise to a series of ethical dilemmas concerning medical practices since the 1990s, particularly in the aftermath of the Perruche case [ fr ]. Following the enactment of the inaugural bioethics legislation in 1994, France formally denounced all forms of collective eugenic selection as "crimes against the human species." Nevertheless, the nation permits the practice of individual choice of births. The discourse surrounding eugenics has been reinvigorated by inquiries concerning medical practices such as prenatal diagnosis (PND), preimplantation diagnosis (PGD), and selective abortion, formally recognized as medical termination of pregnancy (MTP) in French legislation, which is authorized at any stage in instances of suspected severe genetic diseases or disabilities. This has led to a discourse surrounding the ethical considerations of preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD), a process that involves the screening of embryos for specific genetic abnormalities, and selective abortion, defined as the termination of a pregnancy to avoid giving birth to a child with a suspected or detected disability, such as Down syndrome or dwarfism. This has prompted extensive deliberations among medical professionals, ethicists, philosophers, association leaders, and political figures, leading to the refinement of bioethical legislation in France.

In France, in particular, eugenics is a taboo subject, described as "shameful, long stigmatized after World War II," according to historian Anne Carol, and "anathematized in French historiography," according to historian Valentine Hoffbeck. This field of research was opened by Jacques Léonard, a historian specializing in medicine and health, who officially led a postgraduate program (D.E.A.) in 1984 dedicated to the origins of eugenics in France at the University of Rennes-II. It has only attracted the attention of historians—mostly French—since the 1990s. Previously, it was approached through the lens of political science.

Anne Carol [ fr ], whose thesis focuses on French eugenics, highlights the difficulties posed by this subject, particularly in terms of anachronism (reinterpreting the past in light of knowledge about the Nazi genocide). According to her, this creates two major methodological pitfalls: “systematically denouncing the worst” and praising French eugenics because France did not experience ‘criminal excesses.’

The promotion of eugenics in French society was primarily carried out by doctors, leading it sometimes to be labeled as “medical eugenics.” Most defenders of historical eugenic ideology came from the Faculty of Medicine in Paris and, more rarely, from General Statistics. According to Anne Carol, the strong involvement of doctors in this movement represents a French specificity compared to the development of eugenics in other countries, particularly the United Kingdom, where statisticians mainly drove its defense. At first glance, the association between "eugenics" and "medical" seems contradictory—the former referring to the physical elimination of individuals, and the latter to care, healing, ethics, and the duty of assistance.

The definition of eugenics proposed by its British theorist, Francis Galton, remains a subject of considerable debate. The concept encompasses any influence on "human selection," whether through genetic or environmental factors. Additionally, Galton's definition underwent a gradual evolution. In 1904, he characterized eugenics as "the science that deals with all influences that improve the innate qualities of a race." It is imperative to discern between the "positive" form of eugenics, which prioritizes the selection of "superior" individuals, and the "negative" form, which involves the physical removal of those deemed to be "dysgenic."

A terminological challenge emerges when exploring the history of eugenics in France. The English word "eugenics," first translated into French in 1886, has been introduced to the French language in two forms, both channelled by the racist theorist Georges Vacher de Lapouge. The first, "eugénique," was used to denote individuals who exhibited above-average intellectual abilities, while the second, "eugénisme," was employed to describe the inverse phenomenon of degeneration.

There are families of degenerates …. There are families of criminals. In others, talent is inherited by birthright, like health, strength, and beauty …. These are the eugeniques, and eugenics is the smile of heredity, just as degeneration is its curse.

Before 1914, the term eugénisme was seldom used in French. Initially, publications advocating human selection employed a variety of expressions or neologisms, including "human breeding," "viriculture," "hominiculture," "anthropogenetics," and "biocracy." Adolphe Pinard, in particular, preferred the term " puériculture," which he described as the pursuit of "knowledge related to reproduction, preservation, and improvement of the human species" over eugénique or eugénisme. Pediatricians could thus conceal their eugenic objectives. In his doctoral thesis in medicine, Dr. Louis Simon proposed the term eugénétique.

According to the historian and sociologist Pierre-André Taguieff, eugenics is an inherently interventionist ideology that is state-based. The ideology of eugenics traditionally draws from the ideology of Thomas Malthus (Malthusianism), who believed that the poor were responsible for their plight because they reproduced despite lacking the material means to support themselves. Additionally, it draws from interpretations of Charles Darwin 's theories, known as social Darwinism, which argue that only the strongest and best-adapted individuals survive. Eugenics theorist Francis Galton drew from both of these ideologies to assert that humanity 's natural tendency to help the poor and " weak " must be counteracted to reduce the number of unfit individuals and increase those capable of improving the human species.

Pierre-André Taguieff identifies three distinct eugenic currents in France: a Darwinian, socialist, and Aryanist current championed by the racial anthropologist Georges Vacher de Lapouge ; a natalist, Lamarckian, and patriotic current followed The first current, as identified by Taguieff, is a Darwinian, socialist, and Aryanist current championed by the racial anthropologist Georges Vacher de Lapouge. The second current is a natalist, Lamarckian, and patriotic current followed by hygienists, physicians (including pediatrician Adolphe Pinard), and educators, who opposed birth control. The third current is a neo- Malthusian, pacifist, and libertarian eugenics influenced by feminism and particularly promoted by educator Paul Robin.

Ethicist Gwen Terrenoire identifies five ideological currents: a medical current led by Adolphe Pinard, a racist current led by Vacher de Lapouge and later by Charles Richet, a neo-Malthusian current promoted by Paul Robin and continued by Édouard Toulouse, an interventionist current advocating sterilizations and marriage controls promoted by the French Eugenics Society [ fr ] during the 1930s, and a biocratic current led by Alexis Carrel.

Taguieff's observations reveal that certain currents within these movements were characterized by mutual exclusivity. In contrast to the predominantly Darwinian approach found in Anglo-Saxon eugenics, French ideology exhibited a stronger inclination towards Lamarckian principles. This neo-Lamarckism, which emerged as a response to the prevailing hereditary theories of the era, significantly influenced the development of French eugenics by emphasizing the concept of environmental degeneration and the role of social influences. This distinctive approach marked a notable distinction between French eugenics and other European movements within the same period.

Historian and sociologist Alain Drouard examined the neo-Malthusian eugenics current more closely, highlighting significant overlaps between neo-Malthusianism and negative eugenics, as well as continuity in the associative commitments of proponents of both ideologies.

France's implementation of eugenic principles within its legal framework was comparatively modest when evaluated against other nations. For instance, France did not adopt legislation authorizing voluntary or compulsory sterilization for mental disability or criminality, a practice that was prevalent in numerous Western countries. According to Taguieff, the adoption of eugenics in France might be perceived as a non-introduction, given its distinct historical and social context. The contrast with Britain and, more notably, the United States is particularly salient: France did not witness a comparable eugenics movement that influenced significantly its political policies. Historian of science Alexandre Moatti [ fr ] offers a nuanced perspective on this observation, highlighting that despite the limited practical applications, the theoretical development of eugenic ideas in France was both early and highly sophisticated.

According to Anne Carol [ fr ], a distinct form of eugenics emerged in France that was distinct from Galton's thought. This eugenics addressed unrelated issues and emerged as a by-product of the evolution of medicine itself. The primary motivation behind this development was to combat "human degeneration" and regulate unions and procreation. Notwithstanding the absence of a specific term for this concept during this period, the late 19th century French medical literature advocated theories that could be classified as "incipient eugenics." William Max Nelson, a lecturer at the University of Toronto, in collaboration with historians Richard S. Fogarty and Michael A. Osborne from the University of California, opts to characterize this phenomenon as "proto-eugenics."

According to Anne Carol, the earliest contributions to French eugenics can be traced back to the 17th century. During this period, treatises on the "art of procreation" began to be published, primarily intended for parents in private. These treatises contain extensive lists of factors believed to contribute to "good offspring" and introduce the concept of "degeneration" of the human species. The Latin poem La Callipédie [ fr ], first published in 1655, offers counsel on the selection of progenitors, underscoring the importance of physical integrity.

Beginning in the late 18th century, treatises began to address legislators, proposing collective measures in the "public interest." For example, Charles-Augustin Vandermonde 's Essay on the Way to Perfect the Human Species (1756) is an illustration of this phenomenon. In 1801, Robert Le Jeune published his Essay on Megalanthropogenesis, a neologism of his creation. In this essay, he advocated for forming a human elite under state guidance through marriage incentives. In that same year, physician P. Mahon articulated his opposition to the union of individuals afflicted with "contagious or hereditary" ailments, proposing explicitly eugenic measures of avoidance. Another source of concern lay in the French colonial empire, where racialists like Guillaume Poncet de la Grave (1725–1803) led active campaigns against interracial marriages between Black men and French women, claiming this would expose French blood to "corruption" and produce "disfigured" children. In Supplement to Bougainville's Voyage (1796), Denis Diderot describes a fictional Tahitian chief, Orou, who promotes sexual relations between Tahitian women and French men to strengthen his people and "regenerate" their intelligence. During the first half of the 19th century, pre-eugenic manuals emphasized Love within the couple, which was believed to produce beautiful and healthy children.

During the first half of the nineteenth century, pre-eugenic manuals placed significant emphasis on the concept of love within couples, positing that this emotional bond was instrumental in yielding offspring who were both aesthetically pleasing and robust. Arthur de Gobineau 's influential Essay on the Inequality of Human Races (1853–1855) introduced a racial dimension to this discourse, establishing classifications and unveiling what Catherine Bachelard-Jobard, a legal scholar, has termed "conceptual articulations characteristic of eugenics." The notion of human degeneration was revived by psychiatrist Bénédict Morel in his 1857 Treatise on Degeneration, which advocated for the establishment of public health programs to prevent it. His alienist disciples expanded on this notion within their field. In 1863, Dr. Rey published Degeneration of the Human Species and its Regeneration, recommending the elimination of sick progenitors and incentives for "regenerative" unions. The theory of degeneration gained significant traction among journalists, politicians, and the general public, fostering a milieu conducive to the emergence of a medical approach to deviant behavior in the mid-nineteenth century. Medicine was positioned as the sole bulwark against these so-called deviations.

One of the earliest French texts that can be considered truly eugenic is Clémence Royer 's preface to Charles Darwin 's work in 1862, in which she expressed a desire to eliminate the weak and infirm. In 1863 and 1864, the young physician Eugène Dally argued that the criminal nature of some individuals could not be changed. Dally introduced the legal concept of moral responsibility and proposed the establishment of asylums to confine incurable deviants for life. The innate or acquired nature of criminality fueled debates of the time, which gradually radicalized toward preventing criminals from being born and reproducing due to the "ineffectiveness" of imprisonment.

The objective of reducing infant mortality constituted a significant concern, thereby enabling medical professionals to intervene during pregnancy and subsequently with very young children. This led to the conceptualization of puericulture, initially formulated as a medical science focused on the hygienic upbringing of young children, which was introduced by A. Caron in 1865 to reduce the number of "degenerate" children. A third source contributing to eugenics lay in venereology, as the desire to prevent the spread of syphilis inspired proposals for premarital screening tests. After France's defeat by Germany in 1870, military medicine entered these debates, promoting a hygienist discourse. According to Anne Carol, individuals advancing these convergent arguments regarded eugenics as the ultimate solution to the problems they raised. The advances in horticulture and animal breeding likely influenced these ideas.

In this context Jacques Léonard asserts that "Galton's eugenics did not fall on virgin soil in France." William H. Schneider, the emeritus professor of history, perceives it as a response to social concerns regarding degeneration and the decline of the population. This perspective is informed by slower population growth compared to Germany following the defeat in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870.

The French eugenics movement, which emerged from the 1880s onward, was founded based on publications and medical concerns, drawing upon the theories of Francis Galton (and his definition of eugenics, formulated in 1883) and Charles Darwin. It was influenced by various national specificities, particularly the influence of natalists, Malthusians, socialists, and hygienists. During the 1890s, these ideas were influenced by the rise of nationalist anti-Semitism, and from the 1900s, the principles of Mendelian genetics were incorporated. A central tenet of this movement was the pursuit of control over human reproduction, marking a departure from the laissez-faire approach. According to Schneider, this movement was not as organized as a eugenic one, but rather a converging of efforts in the fight against "degeneration."

In 1884, Alfred Naquet achieved legal recognition of eugenics as a valid grounds for divorce, presenting it as a health concern that threatened loved ones (e.g., drunkenness, madness). Between 1886 and 1888, the racist theorist Georges Vacher de Lapouge introduced the terms "eugenic" and "eugenics" into French in his publications, which were featured in the Revue d'anthropologie. The neo-Malthusian movement was significantly influenced by Paul Robin, who established the "League for Human Regeneration" in 1896, along with the journal Régénération. In that same year, Maurice Barrès also employed the term "eugenics" in his Cahiers. The establishment of the National Alliance Against Depopulation [ fr ] in 1896 gave rise to recurrent ideological conflicts between neo-Malthusians and natalists. The neo-Malthusians engaged in intense propaganda, disseminating posters, poems, and labels, even affixing them to churches, as reported by the natalists.

At the beginning of the 20th century, concerns regarding eugenics in France were initially provoked by discourse concerning the nation's declining population. This discourse was subsequently reinforced by prominent demographers. Eugenicists expressed concern that marital decisions might be influenced by factors such as commercial interests and financial status, rather than by love and physical attraction.

In 1901, retired medical professor J. Servier proposed in the Archives d'anthropologie criminelle that criminals undergo castration to eliminate "degenerate procreators." In 1902, Paul Robin shocked attendees at a family assistance congress by suggesting the sterilization of parents who "burden humanity with degenerates." Eugenic law proposals met with limited success, particularly the proposed therapeutic abortion for "bad heredity" submitted in 1909. In 1907, Professor Edmond Desbonnet and Dr. Rouhet published L'Art de créer le Pur-Sang humain, a work that constituted an ode to a "neo-Lamarckian eugenic art," according to art professor Fae Brauer. This work praised Western beauty, juxtaposed with the concept of the "Pure-Blooded Body" and Greek statuary. The authors lauded romantic unions between "strong and beautiful" men and women, aligning with a prevailing ethos of eugenics and the glorification of physical beauty. This work is part of a broader series of publications that equated the breeding of humans with the breeding of animals, particularly horses. Examples include L'élevage humain by Maurice Boigey [ fr ] in 1917 and Le haras humain by Charles Binet-Sanglé in 1918.

The inaugural international eugenics congress, convened in London in 1912, attracted a French delegation of 40 individuals, predominantly medical professionals, who constituted the "founding core" of the French Society of Eugenics [ fr ] (SFE). Upon their return to France, several participants were convinced of the necessity to organize their forces. The official establishment of the SFE transpired on 29 January 1913, with approximately 60% of its constituents being medical professionals, including the pediatrician Adolphe Pinard and the Nobel Prize-winning physician Charles Richet. Statistician Lucien March engaged in government commissions dedicated to depopulation with Adolphe Pinard. Justin Sicard de Plauzoles [ fr ], president of the French National League Against Venereal Danger, was also a member of the SFE. De Plauzoles was alarmed by the supposed higher reproduction rate of the "lower classes." Most of the pioneering members of the SFE were "strongly anticlerical, and for some, violently anti-Christian." Richet, along with other eugenics theorists, opposed the concept of Christian charity.

Two conflicting perspectives emerge: one advocating for public and authoritarian intervention, and the other promoting private and incentive-based action. The SFE proposes a preventive and "scientific" approach to address social issues. Given the horrors associated with sterilization practices in other countries, proponents of French eugenics generally favor measures involving the spatial separation of criminals, the "insane," and alcoholics. The SFE exerts considerable ideological influence, and eugenic discourse deeply permeates French medicine. The discourse encompasses a range of contentious subjects, including the castration of criminals, the "reproductive duty" of men considered superior, and recommendations to deploy the least fit individuals, including those with physical and mental disabilities, to the front lines during World War I, a practice euphemistically referred to as "purging" the French population. Eugène Apert, who served as president of the SFE from 1934, placed immigration at the forefront of his concerns.

The French Society of Eugenics encountered limited success due to a lack of financial resources. In 1926, it was absorbed by a division of the International Institute of Anthropology, subsequently leading to the society's dissolution in June 1940.

A sexological movement, supported by its association, scholarly society, and publication, aimed to "rationalize social and sexual life through science" and was created in the 1930s on the initiative of psychiatrist Édouard Toulouse, an active member of the French Society of Eugenics. Toulouse sought to limit procreation among "mentally deficient" individuals.

The association was established in response to the Catholic Church and conservative parties' opposition to the dissemination of information regarding this "rationalization." Its membership included psychoanalysts and prominent feminist figures, who believed that "the science of human reproduction can only accelerate female emancipation." Even though sexologists "placed significant emphasis on feminist demands," notable disagreements within the association emerged, such as "contraceptive prophylaxis," which only gained the support of a minority of feminists, while for sexologists, birth control was the sine qua non of eugenics and marital happiness. Despite the support of prominent figures, including members of the French psychoanalytic movement (Paul Schiff and Marie Bonaparte), the association had very little impact.

Schneider identifies an ideological turning point in the 1930s, with the expression of much harsher ideas, as negative eugenic measures (forced sterilizations, etc.) began to be discussed among the French medical elites. He attributes the cause of this to the economic crisis.

According to Alexandre Moatti, the eugenics of the 1930s foreshadowed transhumanism, particularly through the writings of engineer Jean Coutrot in 1937, and those of Alexis Carrel in 1935.

The Vichy regime was predicated on eugenic ideology, as evidenced by its racist policies, family program, and the multidisciplinary research program of the French Foundation for the Study of Human Problems. The use of IQ tests increased significantly during this period. Renowned eugenicist Dr. René Martial, a lecturer at the Institute of Hygiene at the Paris Faculty of Medicine, furthered his eugenic theories by incorporating Mendelian genetics. These theories influenced racist policies, leading to significant advancements in the study of "many developments on the French race, miscegenation, and the 'unassimilable' Jews."

In 1941, Alexis Carrel was appointed "regent" of the recently established French Foundation for the Study of Human Problems. This foundation adopted a cautious approach, opting to discontinue the proposed establishment of a "genetics and eugenics" section in the fall of 1942. Nevertheless, it engaged in a collaborative endeavor with the prevailing regime, investigating the "genetic qualities" of immigrant families residing in the Paris suburbs during the deportations to Drancy.

The only eugenics-inspired law passed during the Vichy era was a diluted version of the 1926 prenuptial certificate [ fr ], which was adopted in 1942. This law mandated a medical examination before marriage, though its implications were limited to the absence of any binding value based on any pathologies noted by the doctor. The preamble to the law noted that "for the first time, a measure of eugenics appears in French legislation: the medical examination certificate before marriage."

A relatively obscure fact is that thousands of people interned in French psychiatric asylums died of starvation under the Vichy regime due to food restrictions. This excess mortality affected between 40,000 and 50,000 people across France: 40,000 according to Max Lafont and Lucien Bonnafé [ fr ] ; while according to Claude Quétel and Olivier Bonnet, their number is closer to 50,000. The majority of these deaths occurred between 1941 and 1943. Among the artists who perished were Sylvain Fusco [ fr ], Léona Delcourt [ fr ], Séraphine de Senlis, and Camille Claudel.

Jewish victims found themselves "at the intersection of eugenics, Christian anti-Judaism, and Nazi racist and anti-Semitic policies." In the single Vinatier hospital [ fr ], 6,000 victims perished from these restrictions, which were deliberately imposed, as other hospitals received larger food rations.

According to Max Lafont, this cannot be regarded as a purely eugenics policy, as these individuals did not perish as a consequence of a systematic eradication program. Rather, they succumbed to negligence or oversight, which elicited minimal resistance. However, Catherine Bachelard-Jobard contends that this phenomenon may be rooted in a eugenic ideology, which relegates these individuals to "beyond the normality" established by medical professionals and the regime.

The knowledge of the horrors perpetrated by the Nazi regime led to the discrediting of eugenics as a crime against humanity following World War II. However, most researchers at the French Foundation for the Study of Human Problems evaded the purges and were subsequently employed by the National Institute for Demographic Studies (INED). Notably, Paul Schiff, who had firmly condemned eugenics in an article published in 1946 in ‘’Les Temps modernes’’, denounced "the somewhat disdainful silence" of his colleagues (psychoanalysts and alienists) in the face of Nazi practices.

According to science historians Patrick Tort [ fr ] and Alexandre Moatti, a robust ideological denial of the inhuman character of eugenics itself enabled prominent figures who promoted this ideology, most notably biologist Jean Rostand, to persist in its defense during the " Trente Glorieuses "; the notion of enhancing the human genetic heritage remained pervasive. Historian and Inserm research director Jean-Paul Gaudillière further asserts that the careers of Eugène Apert and Raymond Turpin underscore the historical accuracy of a nuanced perspective, one that acknowledges the complexity of the rupture caused by World War II and the consequences of the criticism of Nazi eugenics. The historiography of eugenics in France is characterized by the emergence of a heredity-based medicine that is intertwined with "natalist" pediatrics, which privileges the mother-child complex.

Raymond Turpin, a Parisian and active member of the French Society of Eugenics before the war, was one of the French geneticists responsible for the discovery of the cause of Down syndrome. In 1956, Turpin expressed concern about the survival rates of handicapped babies:

Progressive improvements in general hygiene and nutrition, increasing possibilities in the fight against sterility, in utero mortality, and neonatal mortality, counteract natural selection, and one is right to expect a better survival rate for fragile eggs and embryos, which provide a significant contingent of malformed newborns.

During the 1970s, a logic informed by scientific progress and eugenics, which sought to "track chromosomal anomalies as errors of nature requiring correction," gradually gained traction in France. Concurrently, various far-right political movements continued to assert their affiliation with Alexis Carrel. Gwen Terrenoire posits that the impetus to diverge from eugenic ideology was more pronounced in Germany and the United States than in France. The reality of Nazi eugenics remains largely unknown in France, though it is frequently cited in bioethics debates.

Eugenics theorists largely failed in their attempts to establish their ideas politically and implement them under the Third Republic.

The reasons for this failure are varied, but they are particularly linked to neo-Lamarckism, fears of depopulation (a pro-natalist movement), and the influence of Catholicism. Humanist doctors opposed their eugenicist counterparts, and French doctors adhered to the tradition of liberal medical practice and rejected interventionism. The application of eugenics in Nazi Germany during the 1930s further discredited the movement, partly due to the historic rivalry with Germany.

According to the philosopher Jean Gayon [ fr ], the ease with which eugenics was implemented in other countries can be attributed to different social fears. In the United States, eugenics was linked to immigration, while in England, it was associated with the working classes. In France, however, the primary concern was the health and development of children, which was more compatible with a hygienist intervention policy than with eugenics. Schneider and Taguieff posit that the prevailing concern regarding depopulation represented the primary impediment to the adoption of eugenics measures. In addition, Carol's research underscores how the depopulation that ensued in the aftermath of World War I engendered a societal environment that proved to be incongruent with the pursuit of sterilization and abortion policies. Consequently, the penalization of abortion was further strengthened in 1923, while a series of incentives for parenthood were instituted during the 1930s.

Ethicist Gwen Terrenoire posits that the disaffection of Catholic doctors, who were once regarded as the "first allies" of the French eugenics movement, and the subsequent official condemnation of eugenics by Catholic institutions, largely account for its political failure in France. Pierre-André Taguieff observes that the failure of eugenics is pervasive in all Latin Catholic countries, where Catholicism generally condemns birth control and non-reproductive sexual acts. French doctors align with Catholic values that prioritize family, morality, and social virtues. In contrast, Protestant countries were more receptive to the concept of eugenic sterilization. The emergence of eugenics discourse at the close of the 19th century posed a challenge to Christian moral doctrine, as the Church feared that science would supersede it.

In May 1930, the Christian Marriage Association convened a national congress in Marseille, to deliberate on the relationship between the Church and eugenics. The conclusions of this congress affirmed eugenics, but only under the condition that it served to "ensure the multiplication of humanity" (i.e., "pro-life eugenics"), and firmly condemned birth control. Subsequently, in December 1930, Pope Pius XI officially condemned eugenics in Casti Connubii. This papal condemnation effectively curtailed the potential support that French Catholics might have previously extended to the eugenics ideology. Subsequently, in the following year, the Holy Office issued a similar condemnation, further solidifying the Church's stance on the matter. Jesuit theologian René Brouillard vehemently opposed eugenic sterilization, denouncing it as "absolutely repugnant" in his 1931 Causerie de morale. From 1934 onward, numerous Catholic doctors also voiced their disapproval, denouncing the application of eugenics in Germany.

French Catholics similarly rebuffed the eugenic proposal for a prenuptial examination law. Nevertheless, a handful of marginal figures, including Alexis Carrel, endeavored to harmonize their faith with eugenic convictions. Catholic representatives persisted in their opposition to any manifestation of eugenics and birth selection in France, predicated on the tenet of the sanctity of human life.

Pierre-André Taguieff and science historian Patrick Tort [ fr ] identify two primary proponents of historical eugenic ideology in France: Charles Richet and Alexis Carrel. Tort also contends that these two figures should not overshadow the sustained advocacy of eugenics after World War II by prominent figures such as Jean Rostand.

Georges Vacher de Lapouge is recognized as the inaugural theorist and propagandist of eugenics in France. He introduced a doctrine that integrated elements of Darwinism, socialism, and Aryanism, a term denoting racial prejudice. Vacher de Lapouge conceptualized eugenics as a social science and was the first to disseminate the ideas of Francis Galton. Through his publications in Revue d'anthropologie, he introduced the terms "eugenic" and "eugenics," and subsequently promoted his theories based on social Darwinism, notably in his 1896 book Les Sélections Sociales. In this work, he advocated for the selective reproduction of certain physical traits, such as those exhibited by the Aryan, dolichocephalic, and blonde populations. He theorized that this "elite" group would serve to "perpetuate the race," effectively replacing "inferior races" with "superior races." Vacher de Lapouge regarded eugenics as the sole means to avert potential interracial conflicts. However, his views were met with skepticism due to his perceived pro-German stance, which led to his marginalization within France. Vacher de Lapouge initially developed his theory without being privy to the principles of Mendelian genetics. The racist premise on which he based his ideas was scientifically discredited by 1935.

The anthropo-sociology movement he created later influenced Charles Richet and Alexis Carrel.

Adolphe Pinard, a founding vice-president of the SFE, emerged as a prominent proponent of a "positive" and natalist eugenic ideology. He reinterpreted the concept of puericulture (childcare) as part of an "ambitious project of medical control over procreation," to exert influence over the child from the moment of conception. Pinard, who concurrently held the position of deputy, undertook the initiative of assembling a cadre of SFE-affiliated medical professionals to develop a certification program, the objective of which was to empower these individuals with substantial regulatory authority over marital unions and the selection of prospective parents. The proposed legislation, introduced by Pinard in 1926, was never deliberated in the Chamber of Deputies.

In 1913, Charles Richet published ‘’La Sélection humaine’’, a text that has been characterized as one of the "most violently eugenic" works ever published in France. In this work, Richet advanced several controversial proposals, including the execution of "abnormal children," the prohibition of marriage for the "incurable" and other "degenerates," the deportation of the dysgenics to Corsica or Ireland, and the implementation of forced sterilizations:

The first step in selection is the elimination of the abnormal. By resolutely proposing the suppression of the abnormal, I will certainly offend the sensitivities of our time. I will be called a monster because I prefer healthy children to sickly ones, and I see no social necessity in keeping these sickly children alive. [...] There is bad living material that deserves no respect or compassion. Eliminating them decisively would be doing them a service, for they can only lead miserable lives.

He also defends a racist ideology, decrying the mixing of "superior human races with inferior human races." In his 1922 article La Sélection humaine, he lists a long list of individuals to be excluded: "too tall, too short, hunchbacked, lame, weak, ugly, born criminals, epileptics, lazy, clumsy..."

In L'Art de mourir, Charles Binet-Sanglé advanced a defense of suicide and proposed a technique for its execution. Specifically, he advocated for the use of gassing on individuals deemed to be "deformed," following a period of persuasion regarding their perceived social harm. In 1918, Binet-Sanglé proposed the establishment of a "human stud farm," a concept aimed at facilitating the impregnation of 103 women annually by elite reproductive men. This proposal was met with ridicule and mockery in the press.

Alexis Carrel, awarded the 1912 Nobel Prize in Medicine, gained significant influence and notoriety. Influenced by American ideas, he advocated for the establishment of a voluntary eugenic aristocracy. In his 1935 work Man, The Unknown, Carrel proposed the gassing of criminals and the mentally ill. This book, a major success in France, was translated into approximately twenty languages:

A naive effort is made by civilized nations to preserve useless and harmful beings. Abnormals hinder the development of normals. It is necessary to face this problem.

For Carrel, confronting the issue entailed the implementation of a form of "salvational eugenics," which entailed the state's interventionist role, guided by the principles of medicine and biology. Carrel was among the first to introduce transhumanist concepts such as "biocracy" and "androtechnics," advocating for the elimination of tens of thousands of individuals considered to be detrimental to humanity's future through forced sterilization or euthanasia. Carrel's philosophical standpoint was characterized by an exclusive focus on what he considered to be the "normal" man—in both biological and moral terms—as being deserving of inclusion in society.

The demise of the subject in November 1944 effectively insulated him from allegations of collaboration. During the 1990s, a concerted effort was initiated by researchers, associations, and political parties to rename French streets that had been dedicated to Alexis Carrel, citing his eugenic perspectives. This initiative frequently invoked the reductio ad Hitlerum argument.

Dr. Jean Sutter, a renowned figure in the field of population genetics, was a disciple of Alexis Carrel and a former collaborator of the French Foundation for the Study of Human Problems. In 1946, Sutter published an article titled The Quality Factor in Demography, which was followed by his seminal 1950 book Eugenics: Problems, Methods, and Results. This publication coincided with the Nuremberg trials of Nazi doctors, a significant event in the history of medicine and society. In this book, Sutter criticized Nazi ideology, asserted the disappearance of eugenics as a scientific methodology, and its survival as an ideology, while avoiding the term "race" and preferring "population."

Despite the probable awareness of Nazi Germany's eugenics practices, the biologist and philosopher Jean Rostand published the following in 1953:

[...] One may wonder if, sooner or later, humanity will not take control of its physical and moral progress by practicing on itself an 'artificial selection' similar to what it applies to domestic animals when aiming to reinforce traits deemed advantageous. Whether through negative eugenics, by eliminating the defective, or positive eugenics, by favoring the reproduction of the best, the collective conscience remains quite resistant. For now, any control over human reproduction would provoke social discomfort disproportionate to any potential benefit. It is possible, however, that in the future, such scruples may weaken. Undoubtedly, a 'eugenic awareness' is forming, and humans will gradually come to illuminate their sense of responsibility toward their offspring or the species.

Patrick Tort's interpretation of this text is that it firmly established the notion of distinguishing between desirable eugenics and criminal eugenics, the latter of which is associated with Nazi atrocities.

The discourse surrounding eugenics underwent a resurgence in the 1990s, coinciding with significant advancements in molecular biology and biotechnology. A substantial portion of this discourse revolves around divergent interpretations of the term "eugenics." Historically, eugenics was founded on racist principles, positing heredity and the biological incompatibility of social classes —two concepts that have since been wholly repudiated.

According to the definition of eugenics as a practice aimed at optimizing the human genetic heritage, none of the contemporary biotechnologies can be classified as such. However, if the definition is broadened to encompass the control of human reproduction to avert the birth of children with medical conditions or disabilities, then the aforementioned biotechnologies can be considered eugenic. Physician Jacques Milliez [ fr ] contends that any practice involving the selection of human beings before birth constitutes a eugenic approach and that contemporary thinking has introduced a distinction between two forms of eugenics. The first form is deemed unacceptable, having been implemented by the Nazis and considered a criminal act. The second form is regarded as a medical act and is considered morally acceptable. In contrast, Henri Atlan reserves the term "eugenics" for practices before 1945. The debate also encompasses the question of the unity and continuity between the historical, authoritarian form of eugenics and modern medical practices.

The Perruche case [ fr ] is a protracted legal proceeding involving Nicolas Perruche, a child born in 1989 with severe disabilities resulting from rubella contracted by his mother. This case has ignited a discourse surrounding the notion of "prejudice of being born," ableism, and eugenics. The Perruche ruling established that a disabled child could be subject to prejudice due to their birth and be deemed a medical error. This ruling has been interpreted by some authors as a form of encouragement regarding abortion. In particular, it has been suggested that specialists in prenatal diagnosis may be prompted to recommend medical termination of pregnancy "at the slightest doubt regarding the normality of the child."

The question of the possibility of sterilizing people with mental disabilities has repeatedly arisen in France, with such requests almost always originating from a third party, typically a parent. In 1994, the European Union prohibited any irreversible harm to the reproductive organs of individuals, a prohibition that was incorporated into the French Civil Code during the same period. While forced sterilization was imposed in various countries in the early 20th century for eugenic reasons, the motivations of parents requesting it at the end of the 20th century in France are not based on eugenics. However, the French Association of Handicap People [ fr ] (APF) denounced the lack of a clear ban on these practices in 1996 and 1997, stating that "each adjustment with ethics is ultimately a further step toward de facto eugenics. The recent history of eugenics should nonetheless make us vigilant."

A survey conducted in Gironde reveals that, in the 1990s, one in three mentally disabled women underwent sterilization, with a further two in three residing in specialized care facilities. In 1997, the satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo reported, citing researcher Nicole Dietrich, that 15,000 women in French institutions for mentally disabled individuals had been sterilized under duress, either at the request of their families or on the initiative of the institution's medical staff. Therefore, the practice of sterilizing mentally disabled individuals has been "largely tolerated" in France, due to issues of managing promiscuity and sexuality in specialized facilities:

Thus, in France, sterilizations of mentally disabled women are a reality.

— Catherine Bachelard-Jobard, Eugenics, Science, and Law

Following the enactment of the Law of 4 July 2001, which imposed stringent regulations on the practice, and despite the absence of an official assessment since that time, a 2006 La Croix survey indicated that "illegal sterilizations appear to be improbable." Nevertheless, it remains feasible for parents to undergo this procedure in a foreign nation where it is permissible. While the cited rationale is ostensibly the well-being of the disabled individual, in practice, the procedure is more frequently undertaken for the convenience of the parents or the institution that has assumed their care.

The concept of a novel form of eugenics, occasionally referred to as "liberal eugenics," is predicated on the autonomy of parents to elect to deliver a child, or not, if said child is identified as potentially disabled or ill before birth. According to the French philosopher Jean Gayon, this "new eugenics" emerges from the convergence of advancements in prenatal screening techniques and the decriminalization of abortion, which enables pregnant French women to terminate their pregnancy if a "serious, proven or presumed anomaly" is detected in the fetus.

More than with fashion trends, the freedom space for citizens will be very limited if it becomes possible to choose one's child: who wants to procreate a child with Down's syndrome? Who prefers a small, asthmatic, or myopic child? It is easier to accept a social norm than to demand difference, especially when it concerns a child for whom one already feels responsible.

Ethics professor Gregory Katz-Bénichou posits that "the nascent orthogenics of the 21st century extends the eugenic theses of previous centuries." He asserts the existence of an uninterrupted lineage between the historical eugenic ideology espoused by Georges Vacher de Lapouge and the preventive medicine of the 21st century, particularly concerning the establishment of a medical boundary between the normal and the pathological. This boundary is often conflated with a moral boundary between what is considered good (normal) and what is regarded as bad (abnormal). This conflation results in the elimination of the abnormal being perceived as morally acceptable. Jacques Milliez [ fr ] postulates a continuity between the writings of Charles Richet, who advocated for the "elimination of the abnormal," and the arguments justifying medical abortion for disability or illness, despite a difference in intentionality. In contrast, Pierre-André Taguieff argues that eugenics is inherently incompatible with liberalism.

Jurist Catherine Bachelard-Jobard posits that the question of whether modern medical practices are eugenic "seems unsolvable." She asserts that the issues involved pertain more to clarifying the concepts of normality, severity (of illness or disability), quality of life, exclusion and discrimination, the place of disabled people, the possibility of giving birth to a disabled child, and finally, the protection of the embryo.

During the 2010s, a technophilic discourse inspired by eugenics and marked by an advocacy for new technologies capable of manipulating living beings emerged within the French public sphere. Noted urologist-surgeon Laurent Alexandre has been a vocal proponent of genetic selection, citing Israel as a paradigm of a "eugenic country" that has successfully eradicated Tay-Sachs disease as an example. Gaïa Lassaube, a sociology PhD student, has critiqued Alexandre's arguments, labeling them as "pseudoscientific," and suggesting that they serve to "liberate a relaxed eugenic discourse." In his column titled "Gifted Women Have Fewer Children," published in L'Express on 31 January 2018, Laurent Alexandre advocated for easier access to gamete preservation and assisted reproductive technology for women with doctorates. This column was heavily criticized by child psychiatrist Patrick Ben Soussan [ fr ], who compared Alexandre's transhumanist ideas to those of Francis Galton.

The concept of eugenics was introduced in the French law of 29 July 1994, the first French bioethics law, in the section concerning respect for human bodies (Chapter III, Section I, Article L 511-1). The adoption of this law sparked long debates aimed at defining the concept of eugenics in a way that would prevent its abuses while not hindering biomedical research. This law was revised in 2003, with the 214-1 amendment to Article 28 of Book II of the criminal code, adopted as part of the bioethics law, which introduced the notion of "eugenics crime." The current Penal Code addresses the issue of eugenics in Subtitle II of Title I, Book II, entitled "Crimes Against the Human Species ":

The Civil Code, Article 16-4, states that "no one can harm the integrity of the human species. Any eugenic practice aimed at organizing the selection of people is prohibited." European laws (European Bioethics Convention) and texts from supranational organizations (UNESCO) influence French bioethics laws, although they are not legally binding. The National Consultative Ethics Committee (CCNE) is regularly consulted.

Although the prohibition of eugenics appears to be solemn and unquestionable, the French position is more ambiguous. French law also provides incentives and legal exceptions to avoid giving birth to children with malformations or presumed disabilities.

The legislation under scrutiny prohibits the implementation of collective eugenic selection, yet it does not extend to the prohibition of eugenic ideology or individual eugenic practices. Catherine Bachelard-Jobard posits the hypothesis that the legislation may be aimed at Galtonian and Nazi eugenics, that is, state-planned selection, a scenario that would be difficult to implement in France. She concludes that "The scope of this principle text is ultimately very limited. The legislator articulates a principle that prohibits state eugenics, while permitting all prevailing practices, contingent upon the autonomy of parents and their aspiration to procreate a healthy offspring." The formulation "organization of the selection of people" is strategically employed to forestall any conflation of the practice of medical abortion (IMG) with eugenics. Moreover, the concept of "protection of the genetic heritage of humanity" is devoid of any constitutional significance.

The fundamental inquiries concerning contemporary eugenic hazards are contingent upon the establishment of criteria to delineate between what is "normal" and "pathological," in addition to the societal rejection of those deemed abnormal. A further inquiry pertains to the universal consideration of certain mutated genes within the human species as defective and therefore subject to elimination, given the potential for genetic diseases to confer a situational selective advantage. It is imperative to acknowledge the inherently subjective nature of these definitions (disability, normality, etc.).

According to the bioethics study published by the French Council of State in 2009, eugenics "can also be the collective result of a series of converging individual decisions made by future parents, in a society where the search for the 'perfect child,' or at least one free from many serious afflictions, prevails." Doctor in law (CNRS) Marie-Angèle Hermitte [ fr ] discusses the creation of criteria for the legitimacy of abortion defined in prenatal screening centers in France, which anthropologist Charles Gardou [ fr ] describes as "the broad outlines of a doctrine of tolerable or desirable eugenics." For Gregory Katz-Bénichou, "Everyone will opt for the advantage of eugenic exemption. Theoretically, the choice remains individual, but in practice, it tends to become collective and systematic […]. 21st-century eugenics spreads in a peaceful medico-parental consent, protected by democratic values."

French law aims to limit eugenics by applying birth selection only to embryos with 'serious diseases.' But what is a 'serious disease'? How should the disabling nature of a pathology be ranked? By reserving eugenic practices only for 'diseases of particular gravity,' French law seeks to introduce a firm restriction on normative abuses. But doesn't it, on the contrary, introduce an elastic concept that time and customs will eventually stretch?

— Gregory Katz-Bénichou, L'inepte et l'inapte

French society's acceptance of birth selection, a practice aimed at avoiding certain genetic disorders and disabilities, such as Down syndrome, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, and cystic fibrosis, has given rise to a series of profound ethical questions. Among these is the potential extension of this practice to other diseases or disabilities in the future. Additionally, it has led to inquiries into the expectations of future parents regarding medical interventions, particularly the demand for embryo selection based on predetermined criteria, such as the prevention of diseases like asthma or diabetes. This ethical question also touches on the association between happiness and health, the hypothesis that an individual without disease or disability would, by nature, be happy, potentially leading to practices such as embryo selection and the euthanasia of elderly individuals. Finally, eugenic birth selection based on the search for normality raises the question of its compatibility with the very notion of natural selection, since the regular birth of "abnormal" individuals constitutes the norm in the absence of medical interventions.

Another salient question in the French discourse on eugenics is economic. In January 1994, the High Council of Public Health articulated its position on the matter, stating, "A cost-benefit analysis, when it merely contrasts the collective cost of amniocentesis and karyotyping with the cost of caring for disabled children who would not have been screened — and under the assumption that a positive diagnosis is always followed by medical abortion — shows that prenatal diagnostic (DPN) activity is fully justified for the community."

A social debate has emerged surrounding the ethical implications of screening for Down syndrome in France, with concerns that it could constitute negative eugenics. In his 18 October 1996 progress report, ‘’Screening for Down syndrome using maternal serum markers’’, Jean-François Mattei stated that pregnant women undergoing Down syndrome screening may enter a medical pathway with unclear implications and potentially unbeknownst to them. Unless they explicitly consent to an abortion, the procedure may take on an "eugenic essence, even under the guise of the doctor's desire to do good." When the future mother is adequately informed of the non-obligatory nature of screening and the option of pregnancy termination, this screening for Down syndrome is regarded as not having a eugenic objective.

In 2009, two decrees were issued, followed by the 2011 revision of the bioethics law in July. These legal developments led to the incorporation of the obligation for healthcare professionals to inform pregnant women about the existence of Down syndrome screening into French law. This screening is systematically offered in a social context of the growing acceptability of medical abortion, both among healthcare professionals and the general population.

The number of births of children with Down syndrome is challenging to estimate due to the fragmented nature of the data. According to F. Goujard, the average number of births decreased from 800 to 900 children in 1990 to an average of 500 to 600 children in 2001, following the adoption of the nuchal translucency and serum markers diagnostic method. This change represented a reduction of approximately one-third in births. According to Gregory Katz-Bénichou, in 1999, 1,335 trisomic fetuses were aborted (95% of those screened), 357 children with Down syndrome were born, including 287 who were not screened, and 70 from couples who chose to give birth to a child diagnosed with Down syndrome (5%). In 2009, France had the highest abortion rate for Down syndrome detection in Europe. During the 2018 bioethics debates, Professor Israel Nisand [ fr ] mentioned 22 births of children with Down syndrome in Alsace and stated that approximately 2,000 embryos or fetuses with Down syndrome are detected each year, and more than 96% of these pregnancies are terminated. In 2020, individuals with Down syndrome in France, encountering difficulties in locating peers, perceived themselves to be victims of eugenics.

A variety of associations and public figures have articulated their perspectives on France's policy concerning Down syndrome. The intricacies of this discourse are further compounded by the political and religious commitments of the primary actor, the Jérôme-Lejeune Foundation [ fr ]. This foundation asserts that France is "at the forefront of eugenics" due to its bioethical legislation, which it contends results in "the elimination of an entire population of individuals selected based on their genome," a practice that it deems synonymous with the very definition of eugenics.

"It is impossible to avoid the Lejeune Foundation when working on the subject of Down syndrome [...] with its eternal obsession: abortion, prenatal tests [...] the rhetoric of the pro-life far-right, its inappropriate comparisons, frequently made in speeches, to the Nazi Reich’s Aktion T4 program for the elimination of the disabled," says Yann Barte critically in Les Triso, les Catho, Éléonore et moi.

For jurist Catherine Bachelard-Jobard, in the context of screening and reducing the birth of children with Down syndrome, "we are undoubtedly very close to the definition of eugenics." Jacques Milliez refers to a "doubtful eugenics," as systematic screening aims to "eliminate a targeted human category." Israel Nisand declares that he is "not far from thinking that France is practicing state-sponsored eugenics in this regard."

According to Gregory Katz-Bénichou, "eugenics is gradually gaining ground in a biomedicine ensuring the filtering of births," and "this diagnosis, which was meant to remain individual and freely consented to by the future mother, has transformed into mass screening whose systematic logic leads mothers to abort nearly all trisomic fetuses." Writer Bruno Deniel-Laurent [ fr ] argues, in his work Éloge des phénomènes [ fr ], that this situation constitutes "state-sponsored eugenics" against people with Down syndrome. For Jacques Testart, who calls it a "sly and consensual desire for eugenics," it "reveals a growing intolerance among populations towards physical or mental marginalities grouped under the term 'disabilities'." Physician Didier Sicard [ fr ] adds that "parents who wish for the birth of these children must, in addition to the suffering associated with the disability, expose themselves to the community's judgment and a form of social cruelty born from the fact that they did not accept the proposal made by science and ratified by law."

In 1996, the French physician Pierre Maroteaux published a scathing critique of eugenics as it pertains to individuals with short stature. In his article, Maroteaux compellingly argued that the prevailing societal attitudes concerning height, weight, and social status have led to a situation where individuals who do not conform to these standards face significant challenges, including the denial of basic rights. In her 1997 thesis, Corinne Assouline observes that the detection of pseudoachondroplasia, a condition marked by very short stature and a distinctive facial appearance without intellectual disability, is accepted in 80% of cases as grounds for medical abortion. This practice gives rise to ethical concerns, as the primary motivations for abortion are aesthetic (morphotype), which could potentially result in "complete eradication." In 2001, philosopher Alain Etchegoyen highlighted the widespread prescription of growth hormones to children with a form of dwarfism, a practice that he argued was influenced by advertising and eugenic drift in France.

Psychoanalyst André Meynard challenges the notion of liberal eugenics about individuals born deaf. He contends that selective abortion and the use of cochlear implants after birth can lead to the gradual extinction of individuals whose first language is sign language. This phenomenon, he argues, can be viewed as a form of eugenics that favors the extinction of non-verbal individuals and the predominance of those who can speak.

Since the mid-20th century, there has been an increasing medicalization of pregnancies and births in France. France has been recognized as the first country to adopt genetic science as a tool to assist in procreation, through the use of medically assisted reproduction (MAR), which facilitates the selection of sperm donors. Jacques Testart [ fr ], a vocal critic of the eugenic implications of certain medical techniques, particularly preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD), has long warned against the role of doctors and scientists as mere "executors of the normative fantasy." This position contrasts with that of Pierre-André Taguieff, who opposes eugenics based on a divergent definition of the term.

According to French law, prenatal diagnosis "aims to detect in utero a serious condition in the embryo or fetus" (Article L. 162-16, first paragraph, in the Public Health Code [ fr ]). This 1994 law excludes personal convenience diagnoses aimed at knowing the characteristics of the unborn child. However, this approach is not without its limitations, as it can result in false positives, leading to diagnoses of diseases or disabilities that are non-existent, and false negatives, failing to detect diseases or disabilities. Jurist Catherine Bachelard-Jobard challenges the eugenic intentions of prenatal diagnosis, asserting that its primary objective is not to enhance the genetic composition of the French population but rather to prevent serious diseases. Nevertheless, it must be acknowledged that this practice also enables the selective birth of children, thereby attaining a eugenic objective.

The amniocentesis technique was introduced in France in the 1970s, with its primary application being the detection of Down syndrome. This development marked a significant revolution in the field of genetic counseling, as it enabled the identification of fetuses suspected of being disabled or diseased before their birth. In the subsequent years, the scope of prenatal screening expanded to encompass a range of additional conditions, including sickle cell disease, thalassemia, hemophilia, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, and fragile X syndrome, among others. Following the diagnosis, a medical abortion is typically offered to the expectant mother.

According to Didier Sicard, president of the National Consultative Ethics Committee in 2007, "The primary objective of prenatal screening is the elimination of fetal anomalies, not their treatment. This underscores a disconcerting prospect: the potential for eradication. This phenomenon may be particularly salient in France compared to other nations."He further elaborates that "in France, the widespread adoption of screening is predicated on the notion of 'proposition,' yet in practice, it has effectively evolved into a near-obligatory procedure." During the 2018 bioethics debates, Israel Nisand, drawing on his experience with prenatal screening, asserted that France is engaging in eugenics to a degree that no other liberal state has previously reached. He further elaborated that this practice is chiefly employed to prevent the birth of children with malformations, of which 50% are considered severe, thereby ensuring the well-being of the population.

In 2013, the prenatal diagnostic unit at the American Hospital of Paris, a private facility, began offering prenatal blood screening for Down syndrome, despite lacking approval from French health authorities. This action has been described by medical journalist Jean-Yves Nau as a form of "democratic eugenics," which he believes accelerated the arrival of a world reminiscent of the film Gattaca. Since at least 2018, the unit has also offered screening for certain mutations associated with autism, followed by a proposed medical abortion for the future mother.

In France, the regulatory framework surrounding medical abortion (IMG) differs from that of voluntary abortion (IVG). This distinction arises because medical abortion, most commonly initiated following a prenatal diagnosis, is authorized at any point during the pregnancy, as outlined under Article L. 162-12 of the Public Health Code.

According to the views expressed by historian and sociologist Alain Drouard, therapeutic abortion can be considered a form of eugenics.

The decision of future parents to pursue IMG is not driven by eugenic intentions; rather, it is informed by their capacity and readiness to embrace a child with disabilities or health challenges. The eugenic implications emerge as a result of the criteria that influence parents' decisions to opt for IMG, with this choice being shaped by their personal preferences (along with their economic and social circumstances), rather than those of the unborn child. This shift in criteria is evidenced by the increasing number of abortions performed on fetuses deemed to have conditions that do not meet the criteria for severe and incurable diseases, such as cleft lip or limb shortening, which may indicate a form of dwarfism. Additionally, there has been a discernible shift in the use of IMG in cases of curable diseases, such as phenylketonuria.

Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) has been authorized in France since 1994, within a strictly regulated medical framework, for couples at risk of transmitting a genetic disease to their future child. It involves taking one or two cells from an embryo resulting from in vitro fertilization, on the third day. PGD is the medical practice with the most threatening eugenic potential.

According to the Biomedicine Agency, three-quarters of the 918 PGD requests it examined in 2016 were approved, with 774 embryo transfers, 251 pregnancies, and 199 live births.

Deputy Philippe Berta proposed preimplantation screening for aneuploidies (and thus trisomies) during the 2019 bioethics law revision, which sparked debate over its eugenic nature but was not adopted.

Doctors Pierre Jalbert and Georges David have posited that techniques based on sperm and egg donation give rise to a eugenic question, given the selection process that occurs among donors under medical supervision, encompassing factors such as fertility and "genetic quality," with matching criteria. This eugenic question assumes particular relevance in the context of "genetic defects," which result in the exclusion of certain donors. Jacques Testart has characterized this selection as a "practice [that] subtly resumes the improvement project of Galtonian eugenics." The position of the Center for the Study and Conservation of Human Eggs and Sperm (CECOS) in France is to exclude only "serious and incurable diseases."

Germline therapy, a procedure that was initially studied and promoted by geneticist Daniel Cohen [ fr ] in 1993 and subsequently by physician Jacques Milliez in 1999, involves the correction of genetic defects directly in the father's sperm. This approach holds the potential for orthogenic effects prior to the sorting of embryos.

The recent development of tools for editing the human genome (termed "genetic scissors"), with the most notable example being CRISPR-Cas9, has given rise to a novel ethical concern. These tools could potentially become "privileged instruments for a form of eugenics." Genome editing techniques are particularly associated with "positive" eugenics, enabling the selection of individuals based on the expression of genes associated, for instance, with intelligence.

Eugène Guérin (French pronunciation: [ øʒɛn ɡeʁɛ̃ ] ; 27 July 1849 - 25 April 1929) was a French politician who served twice as Minister of Justice and served as a member of the French Senate for Vaucluse for nearly 30 years.

Guérin was born on 27 July 1849 in Carpentras, France to Pierre Barthélemy Guérin (1808-1868) and Rose Dupuy (1815-1855). He studied in Grenoble before enrolling at the Faculty of Law of Paris. His studies however were interrupted by the Franco-Prussian War of 1870. Guérin temporarily halted his studies and joined the Vaucluse mobiles, seeing action at the Loire and during the Eastern campaigns of the war. Following the end of the war in 1871, Guérin resumed his studies and graduated that same year with a doctorate in law. Guérin was admitted to the bar in Paris and Carpentras in 1875. He married Césarée Madeleine Marie Thérèse Pascal (1859-1936) on 20 October 1880 in Aubagne. The couple went on to have seven children.

Guérin first ran for office in the Carpentras municipal elections in 1875, succeeding in being elected municipal councillor and even becoming deputy mayor. Guérin later served as Mayor of Carpentras from October 1881 to December 1886. Following the resignation of Senator Alfred Joseph Naquet in 1890, the position of Senator for Vaucluse was now up for grabs in the upcoming by-election. Guérin ran for the senate seat and won the election on 1 June 1890, being confirmed as a Senator after winning again in the general election on 4 January 1891.

During his time in the senate, Guérin was promoted to the position of secretary of the Senate from 1892 to 1893. He resigned as secretary following his appointment by Prime Minister Charles Dupuy to be Minister of Justice and Keeper of the Seals in April 1893. He held this position until December 1893, before being reinstated as Justice Minister during the second cabinet of Prime Minister Charles Dupuy in May 1894. It was during Guérin's second mandate that the Dreyfus affair occurred shortly before the end of his term in January 1895

Guérin ran for re-election to the Senate in 1900 and won his bid on 23 January 1900. During this Senate term, Guérin was named Vice President of the Senate from 1905 to 1908. Guérin won re-election again on 3 January 1909, but lost his next re-election bid on 11 January 1920.

Following his election defeat in 1920, Guérin retired from politics. He died in the 16th arrondissement of Paris, France on 25 April 1929, aged 79.

Doctor Eugène Adolf Ricklin (12 May 1862 – 4 September 1935) was an Alsatian politician. He was known for his fiery opposition both to German and French assimilationist policies in Alsace.

Eugène Ricklin was born in Dannemarie (German: Dammerkirch) from a sundgauvian hotelier father and an Alsatian mother, Catherine Kayser. After his secondary education in Belfort, he attended the gymnasia of Altkirch and Colmar. He then went to Germany east of the Rhine, to Regensburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Munich and Erlangen where he studied medicine.

From a young age, he showed a great interest in justice and defence of the common man, and was already noticed at 29 years old when it was suggested to him he might join the municipal council of his home town. At the age of 34, he succeeded Flury, and became mayor of Dannemarie in 1898.

He was relieved of his duties as mayor in 1902 following a complaint about an insult to the Kaiser and as a sanction for having claimed the status of Bundesstaat (federal state) for Alsace-Lorraine. He was disliked by the German authorities and was replaced by the notary Centlivre, a supporter of the Germans. Nevertheless, Ricklin remained a member of the municipal council until 1908.

In 1896, as Flury's successor, he joined the Bezirkstag of Upper Alsace of which he became president during World War I. In 1900, the Bezirkstag delegated him to the Landesausschuss - Alsace-Lorraine's quasi-parliament - in Strasbourg, in place of deselected Anton Cassal of Ferrette. In 1903, he was elected to the Reichstag in Berlin, having been elected deputy for the constituency of Thann - Altkirch.

His rise continued. His authority, rectitude and competence earned him respect and acknowledgement within his party, the Catholic Zentrum (Centre Party), so that he was elected with some of his colleagues of the Zentrum (which obtained a relative majority) in the first election by universal suffrage for the Landtag in 1911. He subsequently became its first president. The Landtag of Alsace-Lorraine has been the only parliamentary institution in Alsatian history, elected by universal suffrage and representing the region as a whole, and succeeded the only indirectly-elected, partly appointed Landesausschuss.

However, his relations with the Germans were problematic. Within his own family he spoke French. He stayed faithful to his fellow Alsatians for whom he did not cease to defend energetically their interests against the imperial administration. At this time he earned the nickname the Sundgau Lion (als: D’r sundgauer Leeb). He even refused the Roter Adlerorden from the imperial government.

Before war broke out, he tirelessly worked for the preservation of peace and, in 1913 and 1914, went with Abbot Haegy to the interparliamentary peace conferences of Bern and Basel where he met again other active pacifists like Jean Jaurès.

During the war, he was charged and transferred to northern France because he strenuously defended his friend Médard Brogly who had been accused of being francophile by a German military court.

At the end of the war, he saw that the full autonomy granted by the Germans in 1918 had arrived too late and, on the abdication of the Kaiser, formed the Nationalrat (National Council) to try to save Alsatian political gains by means of negotiation with the French. He took the initiative and convened the council on 12 November 1918. Elected president of the Nationalrat, he proposed to the French authorities that they accept an agreement guaranteeing those Alsatian rights he knew were threatened by French Jacobinism. But the winds had changed and, with it, many coats within the veterans of the Landtag. He found himself in a minority, and a major part of the Zentrum parliamentarians, with the Social Democrats, didn't want to provoke France and opted to rely on the promises of the French generals such as Joffre. The Nationalrat became the National Council for Alsace-Lorraine shortly before its abolition. For the rest of his life, Ricklin reproached the other Nationalrat members for having acted too late to preserve Alsatian autonomy.

With the arrival of the French on November 22, 1918, Ricklin knew he would face challenges. It was certain that they considered him as the man to be most feared in Alsace. So, they tried by all means to eliminate him from the political scene so as to give themselves a free hand in their policy of francization, which had already been prepared in Paris during the war years. They also tried to prevent him playing a role in the reconstruction of the Zentrumspartei Elsass-Lothringen for which debates began in February 1919. As a result, he was dragged in front of the Commissions de Triage (people sorting commissions) and, during March, this latter president of the Landtag of Alsace-Lorraine was sent into forced residence in the occupied zone near Kehl (at some point, he was even put in prison). In spite of the protest of every mayor and priest of Dannemarie and the French-speaking communes which he always defended during the German period, he was only permitted to return in November 1919, after the parliamentary elections in which he was prevented from standing. When he returned from exile to his native town, ruined, he had moreover to face a plot meant to bring him down professionally.

But Ricklin was a fighter and didn't give up the political struggle. Disappointed, like many, in December 1925 by the behaviour of the French towards Alsace, he returned to public life, first by joining the editorial committee of the Zukunft, then by joining the team that initiated the manifest of the Heimatbund on 7 June 1926. Under his management, the committee of the Heimatbund went into relations with the Breton and Corse autonomists and developed the strategy of the Einheitsfront (unity front).

With parliamentary elections of May 1928 approaching, Poincaré tried to prevent the autonomists participating. Six autonomists newspapers were then banned and the leaders arrested: among them, Joseph Rossé, Karl Hauss and Ricklin. On 16 March 1928, Ricklin, 66 years old, was led handcuffed through Mulhouse to be imprisoned.

But Rossé and Ricklin fought back and whilst in prison applied as candidates for the Union populaire républicaine (Republican Popular Union). Their popularity had not declined; they were duly elected.

After a show trial, they were sentenced, but owing to public outcry, released on 14 July on receiving a presidential pardon. Ricklin was triumphantly welcomed back to the whole of his native Sundgau where the people joined forces behind him, to the point of electing him again to the conseil général in October 1928.

The French government tried again to block them, working for the invalidation of the mandate of the deputies Rossé and Ricklin, on the pretext that the presidential pardon had not granted their complete civic rights. The French deputies agreed with the government and voted for the invalidation with 195 votes for and 29 against with 416 abstentions. The government did the same for their departmental mandate which the Conseil d’État (State Council) invalidated on 22 March 1929. But Ricklin and Rossé struck back. They applied again as candidates and, one more time, were comfortably re-elected on 2 June 1930. The Conseil d’État had then to revive an organic decree dated 2 February 1852 to be able to pronounce a new invalidation. However, under constant public pressure, Ricklin was then promised an amnesty.

During the election of the president of the Republic of May 1931, six Alsatian autonomist deputies voted for "Doctor Eugène Ricklin, last president of the Parliament of Alsace-Lorraine" as a protestation to effect a final pardon and rehabilitation for Ricklin.

However, while he continued to enjoy enormous popularity, Ricklin never recovered from not being granted a full official pardon.

Ricklin died on Wednesday 4 September 1935 at 20:20 after a long stay in the hospital of his native town, Dannemarie.

Eurocommunism was a trend in the 1970s and 1980s within various Western European communist parties, which said they had developed a theory and practice of social transformation more relevant for Western Europe. During the Cold War, they sought to reject the influence of the Soviet Union and its Communist Party. The trend was prominent in Italy, Spain, and, to a lesser extent, France. It is commonly considered to have been prompted by the Prague Spring. Although the various parties converged against the Soviet factor, their own doctrines remained as different at the dissolution of the movement as they originally were before 1968.

The origin of the term Eurocommunism was subject to great debate in the mid-1970s, being attributed to Zbigniew Brzezinski and Arrigo Levi, among others. Jean-François Revel once wrote that "one of the favourite amusements of 'political scientists' is to search for the author of the term Eurocommunism". In April 1977, Deutschland Archiv decided that the word was first used in the summer of 1975 by Croatian journalist Frane Barbieri, former editor of Belgrade 's NIN news magazine. Outside Western Europe, it is sometimes referred to as neocommunism. This theory stresses greater independence from the Soviet Union.

According to Perry Anderson, the main theoretical foundation of Eurocommunism was Antonio Gramsci 's writing about Marxist theory which questioned the sectarianism of the left and encouraged communist parties to develop social alliances to win hegemonic support for social reforms. Early inspirations can also be found in Austro-Marxism and the democratic road to socialism.

Eurocommunist parties expressed their fidelity to democratic institutions and attempted to widen their appeal by embracing public sector middle-class workers, new social movements such as feminism and gay liberation and more publicly questioning the Soviet Union. However, Eurocommunism did not go as far as the Anglosphere-centred New Left movement which had originally borrowed from the French nouvelle gauche, but in the course of the events went past their academic theorists, largely abandoning Marxist historical materialism, class struggle and its traditional institutions such as communist parties.

The Prague Spring and particularly its crushing by the Soviet Union in 1968 became a turning point for the communist world. Romania's leader Nicolae Ceaușescu staunchly criticized the Soviet invasion in a speech, explicitly declaring his support for the Czechoslovak leadership under Alexander Dubček. While the Portuguese Communist Party, the South African Communist Party and the Communist Party USA supported the Soviet position, the Italian Communist Party (PCI) and the Communist Party of Spain (PCE) firmly denounced the occupation.

The leadership of the Communist Party of Finland (SKP), the Swedish Left Communist Party (VPK) and the French Communist Party (PCF) which had pleaded for conciliation expressed their disapproval about the Soviet intervention, with the PCF thereby publicly criticizing a Soviet action for the first time in its history. The Communist Party of Greece (KKE) suffered a major split over the internal disputes regarding the Prague Spring, with the pro-Dubček faction breaking ties with the Soviet leadership and founding the KKE Interior. KKE's legal branch United Democratic Left (EDA) adopted a more moderate and democratic line over the years and was also described as eurocommunist.

The emergence of eurocommunism is often linked to the events in 1968. However this fails to explain the realignment between european communist parties and the Soviet Union from 1968 up to the early 1970s.

At least one mass party, the French PCF, as well as many smaller parties opposed Eurocommunism and stayed aligned to the positions of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union until the end of the Soviet Union, although the PCF did make a brief turn toward Eurocommunism in the mid-to-late 1970s. Some communist parties with strong popular support, notably the PCI and the PCE, adopted Eurocommunism most enthusiastically. The SKP was dominated by Eurocommunists.

The Finnish SKP changed its leadership in 1965 with leadership post changing from the Stalinist Aimo Aaltonen, who had even a picture of Lavrentiy Beria in his office, to a revisionist, quite popular trade unionist Aarne Saarinen. The same happened even more drastically when the Finnish People's Democratic League also changed its leadership with the reformist Ele Alenius leading it. In 1968, these were the only parties to directly oppose the actions of the Soviet militarship in Prague in 1968, therefore the two organizations split de facto into two different parties, with one reformist and one hard-line Soviet. The latter movement was also called Taistoism after its leader Taisto Sinisalo.

Progress was hard to make as the party accorded that the Taistoist movement had equal rights of power in the party, although it was a minority and the vast majority of the party was Eurocommunist. In 1984, with a strong Eurocommunist majority the hard-line organizations were massively expelled from the already weakened party. The Taistoist faction broke away, calling the main party revisionist and founded the Communist Party of Finland (Unity) (SKPy). Pro-Soviet hard-liners from SKPy formed their own cover-organization called Democratic Alternative. In 1990, the new Left Alliance integrated the parties, but Alenius chose not to be member of it because they also took hard-line Taistoists.

The Spanish PCE and its Catalan referent, the United Socialist Party of Catalonia, had already been committed to the liberal possibilist politics of the Popular Front during the Spanish Civil War. The PCE's leader Santiago Carrillo wrote Eurocommunism's defining book Eurocomunismo y estado (Eurocommunism and the State [1977]) and participated in the development of the liberal democratic constitution as Spain emerged from the dictatorship of Francisco Franco. The People's Alliance in Iceland, the Sammarinese Communist Party, the Communist Party of Austria, the Communist Party of Belgium, the Communist Party of Great Britain, the Socialist Party of Ireland and the Communist Party of the Netherlands also turned Eurocommunist to varying degrees.

The Danish Socialist People's Party, which already broke away from the Communist Party of Denmark after the Hungarian Revolution of 1956, was also sometimes described as Eurocommunist. The eurocommunist wing of NKP leader Reidar T. Larsen joined the Socialist Left Party. The Communist Party of Belgium flirted with Eurocommunism in the 1970s, but did not want to explicitly reject the Soviet model and engaged in a polemic with Carrillo for this reason. It also remained more critical towards the idea of a Western European power bloc. The main radical-left force in Belgium that rejected the Soviet model at the time was AMADA [ nl ] (the forerunner of the PVDA-PTB), but it did this from a Maoist viewpoint about Soviet " social imperialism ", while also denouncing Eurocommunism.

The Italian PCI in particular had been developing an independent line from Moscow for many years prior which had already been exhibited in 1968, when the party refused to support the Soviet invasion of Prague. In 1975, the PCI and the PCE had made a declaration regarding the "march toward socialism" to be done in "peace and freedom". In 1976, the PCI's leader Enrico Berlinguer had spoken of a "pluralistic system" (sistema pluralistico translated by the interpreter as "multiform system") in Moscow and in front of 5,000 communist delegates described the PCI's intentions to build "a socialism that we believe necessary and possible only in Italy". The Historic Compromise (compromesso storico) with the Christian Democracy, stopped by the kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro in 1978, was a consequence of this new policy.

Western European communists came to Eurocommunism via a variety of routes. For some, it was their direct experience of feminist and similar action, while for others it was a reaction to the political events of the Soviet Union at the apogee of what Mikhail Gorbachev later called the Era of Stagnation. This process was accelerated after the events of 1968, particularly the crushing of the Prague Spring. The politics of détente also played a part. With war less likely, Western communists were under less pressure to follow Soviet orthodoxy, yet also wanted to engage with a rise in Western proletarian militancy such as Italy's Hot Autumn and Britain's Shop Stewards Movement.

Eurocommunism was in many ways only a staging ground for changes in the political structure of the European left. Some, like the Italians, became social democrats, with the Democratic Party of the Left, while others, like the Dutch, moved into green politics and the French party during the 1980s reverted to a more pro-Soviet stance. Eurocommunism became a force across Europe in 1977, when the PCI's Enrico Berlinguer, the PCE's Santiago Carrillo and the PCF's Georges Marchais met in Madrid and laid out the fundamental lines of the "new way".

Eurocommunist ideas won at least partial acceptance outside of Western Europe. Prominent parties influenced by it outside of Europe were the Israeli Communist Party, the Communist Party of Australia, the Japanese Communist Party, the Mexican Communist Party, their successor the Unified Socialist Party of Mexico, and the Venezuelan Movement for Socialism. Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev also referred to Eurocommunism as a key influence on the ideas of glasnost and perestroika in his memoirs.

The breakup of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War put practically all leftist parties in Europe on the defensive and made neoliberal reforms the order of the day. Many Eurocommunist parties split, with the right factions (such as the Democrats of the Left or the Initiative for Catalonia Greens) adopting social democracy more whole-heartedly while the left strove to preserve some identifiably communist positions (the Communist Refoundation Party or the PCE and the Living Unified Socialist Party of Catalonia). The successors of KKE Interior, Renewing Communist Ecological Left (AKOA) and Greek Left (EAR), alongside other left-wing groups and politicians including EDA's last leader Manolis Glezos would go on and form Synaspismos.

In 2017, the Communist Party of Spain nominally returned to Marxism–Leninism.

Several criticisms have been advanced against Eurocommunism. First, it is alleged by critics that Eurocommunists showed a lack of courage in sufficiently and definitively breaking off from the Soviet Union (for example, the Italian Communist Party took this step in 1981 after the repression of Solidarność in Poland). This has been explained as the fear of losing old members and supporters, many of whom admired the Soviet Union, or with a pragmatic desire to keep the support of a strong and powerful country.

Other critics point out the difficulties the Eurocommunist parties had in developing a clear and recognisable strategy. They observe that Eurocommunists have always claimed to be different—not only from Soviet communism, but also from social democracy —while in practice they were always very similar to at least one of these two tendencies. As a result, critics argue that Eurocommunism does not have a well-defined identity and cannot be regarded as a separate movement in its own right.

From a Trotskyist point of view in From Stalinism to Eurocommunism: The Bitter Fruits of 'Socialism in One Country ', Ernest Mandel views Eurocommunism as a subsequent development of the decision taken by the Soviet Union in 1924 to abandon the goal of world revolution and concentrate on social and economic development of the Soviet Union, the doctrine of socialism in one country. According to this vision, the Eurocommunists of the Italian and French communist parties are considered to be nationalist movements, who together with the Soviet Union abandoned internationalism.

From an anti-revisionist point of view, Enver Hoxha argued in Eurocommunism is Anti-Communism that Eurocommunism is the result of Nikita Khrushchev 's policy of peaceful coexistence. Khrushchev was accused of being a revisionist who encouraged conciliation with the bourgeoisie rather than adequately calling for its overthrow by the dictatorship of the proletariat. He also stated that the Soviet Union's refusal to reject Palmiro Togliatti 's theory of polycentrism encouraged the various pro-Soviet communist parties to moderate their views in order to join cabinets which in turn forced them to abandon Marxism–Leninism as their leading ideology.

Henry Kissinger opposed the idea that communist parties in power in western Europe could be acceptable for the United States if they are independent from Moscow stating how " Tito is not under Moscow's control, yet his influence is felt all over the world" warning how a West European, communist ruled country, may potentially lead to "total redefinition" of the post-World War II order.

Eurofins Scientific SE is a French group of laboratories headquartered in Luxembourg, providing testing and support services to the pharmaceutical, food, environmental, agriscience and consumer products industries and to governments.

Eurofins Group has an international network of over 900 laboratories in 62 countries and a portfolio of over 200,000 validated analytical methods for characterizing the safety, identity, purity, composition, authenticity and origin of products and biological substances. Eurofins also provides clinical diagnostic testing services and in-vitro diagnostic products.

Eurofins Scientific was founded in 1987 with 4 employees. Eurofins derived the "fins" of its name from the French version of SNIF-NMR: Fractionnement Isotopique Naturel Spécifique par Résonance Magnétique Nucléaire or FINS-RMN. During this start up period (1987 to 1997), the SNIF-NMR patent was registered.

From 1997, Eurofins' strategy was to acquire state-of-the-art laboratories with unique technologies, scientific expertise and potential for global growth. As Eurofins' revenues reached €7 million, its IPO on the Paris Stock Exchange helped fund the organization's rapid geographic expansion. The network expanded to eight new countries and grew to include over 50 laboratory sites. Leading positions were built up in core markets (Food Testing, BioPharma Product Testing and Environment Testing) and key segments such as genomics and contaminant testing.

In 2001, Eurofins developed Eurofins TAG, a system that uses genetic markers to trace meat products to individual animals to ensure consumer products are free of BSE.

From 2002, Eurofins started developing its infrastructure. It structured its laboratories as independent, entrepreneur-led companies, which eventually achieved global leadership positions in several key areas.

Eurofins completed close to 60 acquisitions in 2017 and close to 50 acquisitions in 2018, and became a €4 billion company.

In September 2021, Eurofins announced that Eurofins Scientific would be included in the CAC 40 Index.

On 1 July 2014, Eurofins purchased Viracor-IBT Laboratories from Ampersand Capital Partners for $255 million. The company is now known as Eurofins Viracor.

In May 2015, Eurofins acquired QC Laboratories in the USA and Experchems in Canada as part of its North American expansion strategy.

In June 2015, Eurofins announced the acquisition of Biomnis in France for €220 million. In September 2017, Eurofins Scientific acquired EAG Laboratories (Evans Analytical Group), a scientific services company that serves technology and life-science-related industries. On 5 March 2018, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection announced to collect a $600,000 penalty from Eurofins QC, LLC (Eurofins QC in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania) for falsifying whole effluent toxicity test (WETT) results.

Eurofins purchased Nanolab Technologies Inc, a service laboratory for the Silicon Valley industry, on 2 August 2018.

Eurofins acquired MET Labs on 11 January 2018, which enabled the network to have a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory as established by OHSA. At the end of 2018, a deal was finalized between Eurofins and the JSTI Group for the acquisition of TestAmerica Environmental Services, LLC, adding 24 laboratories and 40 service centers to the Eurofins environmental testing network.

On 3 June 2019, Eurofins reported that some of its IT systems were infected with ransomware and many servers and systems were taken offline. Eurofins paid the ransom after heavy disruption to their services. Court hearings were postponed as the forensics division was unable to take new samples.

Eurofins acquired Japanese genetics analysis company GeneTech, a leader in the specialist field of non-invasive pre-natal testing in August 2020.

In September 2020, Eurofins announced the acquisition of SunDream Group in Taiwan, which specialises in environmental analyses. The acquisition allowed Eurofins to become the leading player in the environmental analyst market in the country.

In February 2021, Eurofins acquired Beacon Discovery, a California-based company specialising in drug research. The group focuses on “G protein coupled receptors,” a major class of proteins in human cells, on which many molecules can act.

Eurofins announced the acquisition of the American DNA Diagnostics Centers, a group specializing in genetic testing, in June 2021.

In September 2022, Eurofins launched Eurofins Sustainability Solutions.

In August 2024, Eurofins acquired Orchid Cellmark a UK based DNA and forensic testing company.

In September 2024, Eurofins acquired Infinity Laboratories, Inc., based in Castle Rock, Colorado. This increased Eurofins' biopharmaceutical and medical device network in the USA.

On October 28, 2024, the French Eurofins buys the clinical analysis division of Synlab in Spain.

In early August 2025, a hack of the Dutch Clinical Diagnostics NMDL lab in Rijswijk, one of the companies purchased in 2018 was reported. During the hack sensitive personal data was stolen, including medical and address details as well as national identification numbers of 485,000 participants of the national early cervical cancer screening program. The laboratory reportedly paid the hacker group Nova after personal details of 53,000 people, including those of a Dutch cabinet minister and member of parliament were published on the dark web.

The company has developed an exclusive method of food analysis, testing and authentication that has thwarted the counterfeiting of food goods, and also cigars. The company's testing can also detect food contaminants.

CAPJPO-Europalestine is a French non-governmental organization (NGO), founded by Olivia Zemor, dedicated to the ending of "the occupation of the Palestinian territories " in compliance with UN Security Council Resolution 242 passed after the Six-Day War in 1967. According to the organization, it was formed by the Coordination des Appels pour une Paix Juste au Proche-Orient, created in February 2002 and signed in less than three months by more than 12,000 people.

Europalestine's aim is to pressure the European Union and the French government to force Israel "to respect the resolutions of UN, Geneva Conventions, and the recent ruling by the International Court of Justice of the Hague" declaring the construction of the Israeli West Bank barrier as illegal. The group argues that any "aid or assistance in maintaining the situation created by such construction" of the barrier is illegal for all states which recognize the International Court of Justice, while parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention are also obliged "to ensure compliance by Israel with international humanitarian law".

The European Collectivity of Alsace (French : Collectivité européenne d'Alsace, pronounced [ kɔlɛktivite øʁɔpeɛn dalzas ], abbr. CEA) is a territorial collectivity in the Alsace region of France. On 1 January 2021, the territorial collectivities of the Bas-Rhin and Haut-Rhin departments merged to form a new territorial collectivity, but remained part of the Grand Est region. The creation of this new entity was approved by the French Parliament on 25 July 2019 and Law 2019-816, which delimits its powers, was promulgated on 2 August 2019.

Alsatian voters had already voted in favour of the creation of a single territorial collectivity in a referendum in 2013 ; however, in the less populous of the two departments, Haut-Rhin, a majority of voters had rejected the proposal.

On April 8, 2026, a bill to withdraw the CEA from the Grand Est region and grant it the competences of both a department and a region was passed by the French National Assembly.

The original Region of Alsace, created in 1956, ceased to exist on 1 January 2016, when the French parliament voted to merge several administrative regions, reducing their number from 22 to 18.

Alsace has an intermediary status: its competencies are those of a department, plus some of the competencies of a region. As a result, Alsace is less autonomous than Corsica or the overseas departments and regions.

While French is the sole official language of the country according to Article 2 of the Constitution of France, Law 2019-816 contains provisions to promote regional languages in schools. The collectivity will also be tasked with creating a Committee related to the Alsatian language and culture, with a focus on the German language spoken in Alsace. This last provision is closely related to Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 of the Aachen Treaty.

The A35 motorway runs through Alsace from south to north, covering approximately 180 km. This non-toll motorway was transferred from the state to the European Collectivity of Alsace on January 1, 2021, except for the section passing through the Strasbourg Eurometropolis. Alsace is also served by two major east-west axes: the A4 motorway (Paris - Strasbourg), operated by Sanef, and the A36 motorway (Beaune - Mulhouse), operated by APRR.

Alsace was one of the pioneering regions in railway development, with Nicolas Koechlin beginning the construction of the first railway lines as early as 1839. Today, the rail network offers dense coverage of the region. The Strasbourg to Basel line, known as the "Plain of Alsace Line", is serviced by regional trains (TER) running at speeds of up to 200 km/h. This line, along with the Alsatian portion of the Paris-Strasbourg line, forms part of an important transport corridor connecting Switzerland, Luxembourg, and Belgium. Alsace is also strategically positioned at the intersection of two high-speed rail lines, thanks to the LGV Est européenne and the LGV Rhin-Rhône. The European Collectivity of Alsace could play a role in reopening cross-border rail lines between Haguenau and Rastatt, and between Colmar and Vieux-Brisach.

The Rhine River is Europe's primary navigable waterway. The Central Commission for the Navigation of the Rhine has been headquartered in Strasbourg since 1920. The ports of Strasbourg and Mulhouse are the second and third largest river ports in France.

Alsace is home to two airports: the Basel-Mulhouse airport, the only bi-national airport in the world, and Strasbourg-Entzheim airport.

The European Financial data Institute (Institut européen de données financières), known as EUROFIDAI is an academic institute of the CNRS (French National Center for Scientific Research) and ESSEC Business School. Its mission is to develop financial and ESG databases for academic researchers.

The EUROFIDAI website makes available European, Asian, Middle-Eastern, Oceanian, African and Latin American market databases for stocks, benchmark indices, global/market indices, mutual funds, corporate events and spot exchange rates.

The institute works to create verified, controlled and homogeneous databases, and maintain them over the long periods necessary for academic research.

EUROFIDAI provides ESG data powered by Clarity AI. 105 ESG Raw Data metrics on more than 70 000 corporations worldwide are available to academic researchers. Historical annual data with monthly updates.

The EUROFIDAI High Frequency database covers various aspects of market data, including orders, trades, and reference data. They provide data with precision ranging from nanoseconds to milliseconds, depending on the specific market. Additionally, these databases include computed variables such as liquidity and realized variance. Markets included are London Stock Exchange, Turquoise, CBOE Europe BXE/CXE/DXE, Deutsche Boerse Xetra, Euronext Paris and Eurex (derivatives markets).

Every December, EUROFIDAI and ESSEC organize the EUROFIDAI-ESSEC Paris December Finance Meeting, gathering finance researchers from all over the world. The event gives the opportunity for researchers to present their latest research in all areas of finance. In recent years, the conference has gained recognition for its selectivity, with only one in six submitted papers accepted. The EUROFIDAI-ESSEC Paris December Finance Meeting is notable for its global standing, ranking 2nd in Europe and 8th in the world among large conferences, as measured by papers published in the Top 3 Finance and Top 5 Economics journals.

The European School of Political and Social Sciences (referred to as ESPOL) is a non-profit private higher education institution located in Lille, France, and a member institution of Lille Catholic University, France's largest private university.

Founded in 2012, ESPOL is dedicated to the study and research of political and social sciences, and awards state-recognized bachelors and master's.

ESPOL is based in the Vauban neighborhood in Lille, Hauts-de-France, France, on the premises of Lille Catholic University 's campus, and within walking distance to the Citadel of Lille.

In 2019 and 2022, ESPOL inaugurated two new buildings on its campus, dedicated to housing administrative offices, several amphitheaters, and a classroom inspired by the House of Commons.

The nearest Lille Metro stations are Gambetta and Cormontaigne.

Admission to ESPOL is competitive: for undergraduate programmes the admission rate ranges from 10 to 20%. All undergraduate applications are made through Parcoursup, the online admission platform hosted by the Ministry of Higher Education, Research and Innovation. In 2016–17, entry qualifications of first-year undergraduate students averaged 14.74 (out of a possible 20) in the French Baccalauréat. In 2024, 6400 students applied for an undergraduate program.

Postgraduate students at ESPOL are required to have an undergraduate level degree (180 ECTS) at the time of entry and provide proof of English language proficiency. Master's applications are made through the university's admission platform. The admission rate ranges from 10 to 15%.

In the 2021–22 academic year, ESPOL had a domicile breakdown of 81:19 of French:non-French students respectively in the undergraduate programmes, of 30:70 of French:non-French students respectively in the master's programmes, and with a female to male ratio of 71:29. In the same year, 20% of ESPOL students were scholarship holders.

Tuition fees at ESPOL vary according to household income, household composition and a needs-based evaluation index. Tuition fees for both bachelors and masters range from 2885 € to 9500 €. Merit-based scholarships are also available, ranging from €1000 to €2000.

The School offers 3 bachelor's degrees and 4 master's degrees. Its bachelor's programmes are bilingual (French/English) whereas its master's programmes are taught only in English.

ESPOL students have access to the BU Vauban network of 9 libraries: 6 in Lille, 2 in Paris and 1 in Nice, totalling 400,000 books. The library network is a member of Couperin, a consortium representing more than 250 academic institutions in France, which facilitates and negotiates access to academic journals, databases, e-books and other online resources offered by academic publishers.

Recent prominent speakers at the school have included Raphaël Glucksmann, Michel Sapin, Thomas J. Biersteker, Christian de Boissieu, Cyril Dion, Bernard Kouchner, Chantal Mouffe, Karima Delli, Jeremy Rifkin, Aurélien Pradié, Gilles Pargneaux, Luuk van Middelaar, Violette Spillebout, Johan C. Verbeke, Muhammad Yunus, Vadim Omelchenko and Pierre-Yves Neron.

ESPOL boasts a special research centre known as ESPOL-LAB.

The research at ESPOL-LAB is structured around three primary areas:

Europe serves as a central theme cutting across all these research areas, influencing and shaping investigations.

ESPOL has established academic partnerships in teaching and research with 140 universities worldwide. These partnerships facilitate student exchange programs, allowing ESPOL students to study for a semester at partner schools, while students from these schools also have the opportunity to study at ESPOL for a semester. These universities include:

There are over 30 student clubs under the umbrella of the ESPOL students' union, including ESPOMUN, the Model United Nations delegation, the Alumni network, the debating society Le Serment d'ESPOL, ESPOL DEFENSE dedicated to promoting the diversity of defense and security professions, the Bureau Des Arts in charge of artistic activities, and Le Bureau des Médias, the school's student newspaper. The student life is coordinated by the BDE, changing every year, and sporting activity is coordinated by the ESPOL sports office (BDS, Bureau des Sports), with two exceptions, with the sailing club Vent d'ESPOL and the petanque club named Le cochonnet Espolien.

Euskaltzaindia (lit. ' group of keepers of the Basque language ' ; Spanish : Real Academia de la Lengua Vasca, lit. ' Royal Academy of the Basque Language ' ; French : Académie de la Langue Basque, lit. ' Academy of the Basque Language ') is the official academic language regulatory institution which watches over the Basque language. It conducts research, seeks to protect the language, and establishes standards of use. It is under the patronage of the Spanish monarchy (like the Real Academia Española) and has the status of a public non-profit organisation in France.

The Euskaltzaindia was established within the context of the Basque Renaissance (Euskal Pizkundea, 1876–1936) in the framework provided by the Congress of Basque Studies held in Oñati in 1918, at a time when the Basque language was being proclaimed as a central cultural value to be protected and promoted. Important figures from the 19th century had already demanded the setting-up of an academy in defence of the language (Ulibarri, 1832; Aizkibel, 1856; d'Abbadie and Duvoisin, 1862; Jose Manterola, 1880 and Artiñano, 1886), and it was during the first two decades of the 20th century when various entities – some scientific and others more popular ones – also emphasized the need for its immediate creation. The scientific contributions of major foreign figures (Louis Lucien Bonaparte, Van Eys, Hugo Schuchardt, Dodgson, Gavel, etc.) and from within the country (Arturo Campión, Azkue, Urquijo, etc.), as well as the express demand on the part of Basque language loyalist organisations (for example, Eusko Esnalea) created a favourable climate for the public authorities to take on the task of setting up the academy.

The first initiative in this direction came from the provincial government of Biscay, which the other three provincial governments in the peninsular part of the Basque Country subsequently joined (1918), with articles of association being approved and Euskaltzaindia being legally constituted in October 1919. One year later its journal Euskera was launched, the official organ for the publication of its rules and research work, which has survived to the present day.

The current internal structure and organisation can be summarised as follows: the academy is governed by a ruling body composed of the chairman, deputy chairman, secretary and treasurer. The heads of the Research and Watchdog Sections are also members. Plenary sessions must be held at least once a month. Under current rules the academy has 24 full members and an unlimited number of associate members. The academy is present throughout the area where Basque is used, with a head office in Bilbao and regional offices in Bayonne, San Sebastián, Pamplona and Vitoria-Gasteiz.

In the decade and a half prior to the Spanish Civil War (1919–1936), the academy managed to consolidate itself as an institution and set about its project of promoting the birth of a standard literary language, although it was unable to provide a precise, solid academic formulation for that aim. On the other hand, its work in that period contributed decisively to a better understanding of the language through Resurrección María de Azkue 's studies (Euskal Morfologia, 1923–1934) and far reaching surveys among speakers of the language (Erizkizundi Irukoitza, from 1922 onwards). The journal "Euskera" is a faithful witness to the work carried out at the time.

In 1936 and the years which followed, under the language politics of Francoist Spain the academy's previous activities were reduced to silence until Azkue, with the collaboration of Federico Krutwig, was able to timidly reinitiate academic life at the beginning of the 1950s. The articles of association were reformed in 1954, new full members were elected and from 1956 on the academy started to enjoy a more settled existence both in its internal affairs and in its public conferences and open meetings (first postwar congress: Arantzazu, 1956).

The following decade (1956–1968) coincided with a new generation of collaborators, the increasing introduction of Basque in bilingual non-state schools (ikastolak), the revival of the Basque language press and the first attempts at teaching basic literacy in Basque, among other initiatives.

In 2019, the academy published the Euskal Hiztegi Historiko-Etimologikoa, the first comprehensive historical and etymological Basque dictionary.

The Euskaltzaindia has been a vocal and active advocate of the introduction of a unified standard of the Basque language, known as " Euskara Batua ", or Unified Basque. Basque has been usually divided into 8 different dialects, varying in their level of mutual intelligibility. The first detailed dialectical analysis was by Louis Lucien Bonaparte. However, many people have seen this as a weakness in the language's fight for survival in a world in which minority languages spoken in states are wiped out by the states' official language. Having been for centuries pressured on both sides by Spanish and French, and under the rule of Franco coming close to extinction, the academy felt the need to create a unified dialect of Basque, so as to give the language a greater chance of survival. Unified Basque was heavily based on the Gipuzkoan dialect, which had the richest literary heritage.

The 1968 Arantzazu Congress laid down the basic guidelines for achieving that objective in a systematic way (lexicon, morphology, declension and spelling). A further step was taken in 1973 with a proposal to establish a standard conjugation.

The debate arising from this new set of standard language rules (1968–1976) did not prevent it from becoming increasingly accepted in teaching, the media, and administration (1976–1983), within the context of burgeoning regional government (Statute of Autonomy in Euskadi, 1979; Improvement of the Charter of Navarre, 1982). Many people, however, continue to oppose the imposition of a single created dialect of Basque.

Euskaltzaindia counsels the Basque administrations wishing to officialize Basque place names. It is funded by the Biscayne, Gipuzkoan, Alavese, Navarrese, Spanish, and French authorities for culture.

The eusko is a local currency released by the non-profit organization "Eusko Moneta erakundea", and is one of a number of currencies that are active in the Basque Country. It is mainly used in the Northern Basque Country, France, with plans to extend its use to certain areas of Upper Navarre and Gipuzkoa in the Southern Basque Country. The currency was created on 31 January 2013.

As of 2025, with 4.5 million euskos in circulation, it is the biggest local currency in Europe.

The smallest value of the eusko is the one eusko format, so it can not be separated in less than that amount. The eusko has a value that is equal to the euro, so the price of an article can be totally paid in euskos, but if the article doesn't have a round price, the difference will be paid in regular euro cents. (Example: if an article costs 3,50 euros, it can be paid with 3 euskos and 50 euro cents).

There also exists a credit card system since 2017, as well as an app for payments and the transfer of euskos between accounts.

Its motto is "Euskoa denen esku", which means "The eusko in the hands of everyone".

The eusko has a note based format that enables the user to trade with values that go from the one eusko note to the twenty eusko note. The appearance of the notes varies according to the value of the note:

Several security systems protect the notes from forgery, similar to the ones euro has. Those include:

The aim of the eusko is to encourage the community to buy from local traders. This potentially strengthens the local economy and reduce ecological damage caused by long supply chains. Additionally, it aims to promote solidarity.

The idea of the eusko starts when the AMBES (from French Association pour la création d’une Monnaie locale Basque, Ecologique et Solidaire) took the example of another currency that was running in France, and thought that could be profitable and applicable to the Basque country. The choice of the name came up when the AMBES asked citizens to choose a name for their optimal currency.

The eusko gave its first steps 31 January 2013, with the initial number of 126,500 eusko copies. From the very beginning the eusko was accepted in all the establishments that were associated. According to the creators of the eusko, 310 businesses and enterprises accept the eusko as a form of paying, and the eusko has spread to more than 1500 users. The AMBES said that eusko would have a credit card system in 2015.

There are plans for the end of 2026 to introduce another local currency, provisionally known as Gure Moneta, "our currency", in the Spanish Basque Country, initially in Oiartzualdea (Guipuscoa) and Baztan (Navarre). It will also exchange for 1 euro. Participating businesses should show the goals of promoting local economy, defending the environment and the Basque language. A further goal is compatibility with the eusko.

France has, due to its overseas departments and regions that are scattered in all the oceans of Earth, the largest exclusive economic zone in the world. The total EEZ of France is 10,911,921 km (4,213,116 mi).

It covers approximately 7% of the surface of all the EEZs of the world, while the French Republic is only 0.45% of the world's land surface.

Monaco's waters are enclaves in the French EEZ. The situation is more unclear for the Channel Islands. Some maps show the EEZ being enclaved by the French EEZ, while others show the Guernsey EEZ extending to the border with the UK EEZ.

Outside of mainland France and overseas departments or communities (Guadeloupe, Guyane, Martinique, Mayotte, Réunion and Saint Martin), none of the territories below, and therefore their EEZ, is part of the European Union.

The geography of France consists of a terrain that is mostly flat plains or gently rolling hills in the north and the west and mountainous in the south (including the Massif Central and the Pyrenees) and the east (the country's highest points being in the Alps). Metropolitan France has a total size of 551,695 km (213,011 mi) (Europe only). It is the third-largest country in Europe by area (after Russia and Ukraine) and the largest in Western Europe.

Metropolitan France's territory is relatively large and so its climate is not uniform and gives rise to the following climate nuances:

Climate change in France includes above average heating.

Total renewable water resources: 211 km (2011)

Freshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural): 31.62 km /yr (19%/71%/10%) (512.1 m /yr per capita) (2009)

Coal, iron ore, bauxite, zinc, uranium, antimony, arsenic, potash, feldspar, fluorspar, gypsum, timber, fish, gold, clay, petroleum, silver

Flooding, Hailstorms, avalanches, midwinter windstorms, drought, forest fires in the south near the Mediterranean

The region that now comprises France consisted of open grassland during the Pleistocene Ice Age. France gradually became forested as the glaciers retreated starting in 10,000 BC, but clearing of these primeval forests began in Neolithic times. These forests were still fairly extensive until the medieval era.

In prehistoric times, France was home to large predatory animals such as wolves and brown bears, as well as herbivores such as elk. The larger fauna have disappeared outside the Pyrenees Mountains where bears live as a protected species. Smaller animals include martens, wild pigs, foxes, weasels, bats, rodents, rabbits, and assorted birds.

By the 15th century, France had largely been denuded of its forests and was forced to rely on Scandinavia and their North American colonies for lumber. Significant remaining forested areas are in the Gascony region and north in the Alsace-Ardennes area. The Ardennes Forest was the scene of extensive fighting in both world wars.

The northcentral part of the region is dominated by the Paris Basin, which consists of a layered sequence of sedimentary rocks. Fertile soils over much of the area make good agricultural land. The Normandy coast to the northwest is characterized by high, chalk cliffs, while the Brittany coast (the peninsula to the west) is highly indented in places that deep valleys were drowned by the sea, and the Biscay coast to the southwest is marked by flat, sandy beaches.

A recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 1,433 km of tidal flats in France, making it the 23rd ranked country in terms of tidal flat area.

France has several levels of internal divisions. The first-level administrative division of Metropolitan France is regions. Also the French Republic has sovereignty over several other territories, with various administrative levels.

This is a list of the extreme points of France; the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.

These are the extreme temperatures in France.

FAB Link is a proposed HVDC Interconnector, spanning the 220 kilometres (140 mi) between France and Great Britain, running close to the island of Alderney.

As of March 2022, project planning has tentatively re-started after a five-year pause.

In 2017, the French energy regulator said it needed more clarity on the conditions of the UK’s exit from the European Union, putting the whole project in doubt.

In March 2022, the project promoters, FAB Link Limited and RTE, agreed to "review and reassess the project." The aim is to seek regulators' support to restart the project.

In July 2022 the proposed route was announced and it would avoid landfall in Alderney.

On 1 June 2023 the project announced a reduction in the interconnector capacity to 1,250 MW with the construction due to be completed in 2030/31.

According to plans, 25 km AC land cables in France (L'Étang-Bertrand, lieu-dit Menuel), landfall will be made at Siouville-Hague, 30 km HVDC submarine cables between France and Alderney. 1 km land cables across Alderney, 140 km HVDC submarine cables with landfall at Budleigh Salterton with 20 km HVDC land cables to a converter station planned to be located near Exeter Airport with some AC land cables to connect to the grid in England.

Within Alderney, The FAB Link is a set of cables, each 5 inches in diameter, buried 1–2 metres deep crossing Alderney at Longis Common. It connects to the undersea cables from France to Alderney and from Alderney to England.

The final proposed route will not make landfall in Alderney.

Twin 700 MW cables giving a capacity of 1,400 MW.

Land cables carry 400 kV AC Voltage, The submarine voltage will be 320 kV DC Voltage.

Voltage Sourced Converters (VSC) are the preferred converter technology.

The FAB project has received funding from the European Commission through the Connecting Europe Facility of €7.235m

FAB is unlikely to facilitate the export of electricity from Tidal Turbines in Alderney’s waters, due to the cable bypassing the Island.

Submarine power cables need to incorporate fibre optic cables to monitor performance, which gives an excess capacity that can be used for high-speed communications.

Alderney will not now receive rent of around £70,000 per annum for the facilities they would have provided together with a possible reduction in electricity prices paid by consumers, following the cool response from Alderney and the change in the final route to bypass the Island.

A European project, part of a series of grid ‘interconnectors’ between mainland Europe and UK, part of the High-voltage direct current (HVDC) power interconnector system.

As of 2021, two other links (IFA 2000MW and IFA-2 1000MW) connect France with the United Kingdom. In 2022, ElecLink was completed and provides 1000MW capacity between the countries.

In January 2017 applications for licences from the Marine Management Organisation, East Devon District Council and the States of Guernsey were submitted.

Approval for the project is expected after Ofgem give their final project assessment decision in July 2017 with the final investment decision made in late 2017.

The project was scheduled to commence construction in 2018 with a proposed completion by 2022. However, this schedule was delayed, with construction now planned to start in 2021 and completion in 2025.

The project is being jointly developed by Réseau de Transport d'Électricité (RTE) and FAB Link Limited.

FAB Link Limited is a joint venture between Alderney Renewable Energy Limited and Transmission Investment LLP. Transmission Investment is a leading independent transmission business spanning origination, project development, acquisition management, financial structuring and asset management. It is doubtful whether a connection is possible to the cable following the decision to bypass Alderney, making it unlikely to be viable to connect any renewable system to the cable.

Unresolved conflicts about the appropriateness of this project to the island resulted in the delaying of controversial planning law changes in 2016. The unprecedented change of law would open the area known as the "Green Belt" to industrial utility development, granting FAB Link permission to lay cables across a rural part of Alderney. The retention of the preservation laws would result in the cables having to by-pass Alderney altogether.

Some Alderney residents believe the character of Alderney would be ruined, damaging the island's seasonal tourism industry; protest demonstrations took place in 2016 and in July 2017 to this end. Others believe the link will assist future tidal turbine projects and financially benefit construction and energy production contractors.

Fabrice Pothier (born 24 August 1975) is a French political expert and CEO of geopolitical consultancy, Rasmussen Global. He is a regular media speaker, appearing in the Economist, CNN and BBC news. He was a former NATO director of policy planning and founding director of Carnegie Europe, an organisation which became one of Europe's leading think-tanks on foreign policy and strategic issues.

Pothier was a candidate at the European elections of 2019, for Emmanuel Macron 's La République En Marche. He became known in the summer of 2018 for his unconventional way of promoting Europe, when he cycled 700 km through south-west France and northern Spain to engage with the French electorate and talk about the future of Europe.

According to Politico Europe, Pothier was a candidate to watch on the En Marche list for the 2019 European Parliament election, running on a ticket of increasing transparency for technology firms, bridging the gap between technology and security and toughening sanctions on malign states engaging on cyber aggression.

Since Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine, Pothier, as chief executive of Rasmussen Global, has been involved in advising the Office of the President of Ukraine on long-term security guarantees and the Kyiv Security Compact, an initiative launched by Anders Fogh Rasmussen and Andriy Yermak at the request of President Volodymyr Zelenskyy. In this capacity he has written publicly on security guarantees for Ukraine and the Kyiv Security Compact and has joined Rasmussen Global delegations to Kyiv that met Zelenskyy to discuss these proposals.

In the early 2000s, Pothier co-founded the Senlis Council, (later renamed the International Council on Security and Development), a project founded by the Network of European Foundations and led a global advocacy campaign calling for a more progressive drugs policy. He established a partnership with the International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent and worked in Afghanistan advocating against the ' war on drugs ' and working with the Afghan Red Crescent in developing better health facilities for drug addicts. He is credited to having been the first to publish a report on the insurgency in the province of Helmand.

Within NATO, Pothier is credited to have been behind some of the Alliance's most consequential initiatives launched at the 2014 NATO Summit including the Readiness Action Plan, the Defence Capacity Building Initiative, and Smart Defence at the Chicago Summit in May 2012. He advised the NATO Secretary General on a wide range of strategic issues and on his communication strategy, including by drafting landmark speeches and articles for the Munich Security Conference and Foreign Affairs.

Since 2015, Pothier has been a senior director at Rasmussen Global and CEO since 2022. He regularly features in the Financial Times, Wall Street Journal, Politico Europe, Survival, Washington Post and Euronews. He has been a contributor to BBC World, France24, Al-Jazeera, CNBC, Bloomberg, and has testified before the UK Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee. He writes on strategic affairs for the London-based International Institute of Strategic Studies.

Pothier co-founded the Transatlantic Commission on Election Integrity co-chaired by Anders Fogh Rasmussen and Michael Chertoff. The commission includes Joe Biden, (formerly) Nick Clegg, and Marietje Schaake. In the Commission, Pothier raised awareness about the risks of foreign interference and was one of the first to point out the dangers of deepfakes. He has been an avid advocate that just as technology can be a source of evil, it can also be used as a force for good – to develop and deploy technology tools to better monitor and prevent disinformation campaigns from foreign countries. He played a key role exposing interference in the 2018 Mexico elections, the Macedonia name referendum and the Ukraine elections.

The Loi n°96-588 of 1 July 1996 on the fairness and balance of commercial relations, commonly known as the Galland Law, is a French law aimed at regulating relationships between large-scale retailers and their suppliers, while protecting small businesses and suppliers. It prohibited large retailers from fully passing on discounts and commercial service fees received from suppliers to consumer sale prices.

Promulgated on 1 July 1996 under the second Juppé government, the law took effect on 1 January 1997.

The law is named after Yves Galland, the Minister Delegate for Finance and Foreign Trade.

The legislation amended Ordinance No. 86-1243 of 1 December 1986, known as the "Balladur Ordinance," which had liberalized pricing rules and penalized selling below cost. As the growing dominance and concentration of large retailers disrupted the balance of commercial relationships to the detriment of suppliers, the Galland Law introduced the concept of "abusively low prices" and redefined the calculation of the selling-below-cost threshold by distinguishing between front margins, which could be reflected in sale prices, and back margins.

The law faced criticism soon after its implementation. In 1997, several politicians highlighted price increases on over a thousand products, particularly branded goods. By 1999, manufacturers accused retailers of abusive practices, prompting parliamentarians to call for an inquiry. In 2002, Leclerc stores launched an advertising campaign blaming the Galland Law for rising prices.

In June 2004, under the leadership of Nicolas Sarkozy, then Minister of the Economy, major retailers agreed to curb inflation observed earlier that year on everyday consumer goods. The agreement allowed greater flexibility in commercial negotiations under the Galland Law while maintaining the prohibition on selling below cost. Signed on 17 June 2004, the agreement mandated a 2% price reduction in hypermarkets on approximately 5,000 consumer goods starting in September 2004, followed by a further 1% reduction in 2005, with both large manufacturers and retailers required to reduce their commercial margins.

Subsequently, the Canivet Commission, a panel of experts, was tasked with reviewing existing legislation to improve professional relationships and strengthen price-based competition mechanisms.

Following the Canivet Commission's analysis and reform proposals, the "SME Law," also known as the "Dutreil II Law," was enacted on 2 August 2005. This law built upon and expanded the Galland Law. Its implementing decrees, effective from 1 January 2006, amended Article L. 442-2 of the French Commercial Code, allowing retailers to incorporate all financial benefits (back margins) exceeding 20% in 2006 and 15% in 2007 into their cost prices. However, these provisions were complex to implement, with Michel-Édouard Leclerc describing them as "Kafkaesque."

A 2007 study by Philippe Askenazy estimated that the Galland Law led to a 7% increase in prices, raised the operating margin of affected companies from 3.5% to 6%, and prevented the creation of 50,000 jobs.

The Faithful Companions of Jesus Sisters (FCJ Sisters, French: Fidèles compagnes de Jésus) is a Christian religious institute of the Roman Catholic Church directly subject to the Pope. It was founded in Amiens in France in 1820 by Marie Madeleine de Bonnault d'Houët.

The FCJ sisters can be found in the Americas, Asia, Australia and Europe.

The FCJ sisters first arrived in Australia in 1882 and soon founded a school in Richmond, an inner suburb in Melbourne. Vaucluse College FCJ was soon at capacity, so land was purchased in Kew. They built a new convent and boarding school which marked the establishment of Genazzano FCJ College. In 1900 the Sisters set up a school in Benalla called FCJ College and in 1968 founded Stella Maris Convent and boarding school in Frankston, Victoria. The Stella Maris Convent and Vaucluse College FCJ have since closed.

Today, FCJ communities exist around the country.

In 2002 the Sisters joined with those in Indonesia and the Philippines to form a new province—the Province of Asia-Australia. New foundations are to be established elsewhere in South East Asia.

An interesting perspective on the FCJ sisters is given in God's Callgirl, the autobiography of Carla van Raay (Australia, 2004) in which the author describes joining the institute at the age of 18 in 1956, and her subsequent 12 years as a novice and sister, before voluntarily leaving at the age of 30. Vaucluse College FCJ, Genazzano FCJ College and Benalla are all mentioned in the book. This period coincided with Vatican II, which resulted in a number of strict rules being relaxed.

The Falloux Laws promoted Catholic schools in France in the 1850s, 1860s and 1870s. They were voted in during the French Second Republic and promulgated on 15 March 1850 and in 1851, following the presidential election of Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte as president in December 1848 and the May 1849 legislative elections that gave a majority to the conservative Parti de l'Ordre. Named for the Minister of Education Alfred de Falloux, they mainly aimed at promoting Catholic teaching. The Falloux Law of 15 March 1850 also extended the requirements of the Guizot Law of 1833, which had mandated a boys' school in each commune of more than 500 inhabitants, to require a girls' school in those communes. The 1851 law created a mixed system, in which some primary education establishments were public and controlled by the state and others were under the supervision of Catholic congregations.

The new law created an association between Church and state that lasted until the anti-clerical Jules Ferry laws in the early 1880s established free and secular education in the Third Republic. The Falloux laws provided universal primary schooling in France and expanded opportunities for secondary schooling. In practice, the curricula in Catholic and state schools were similar. Catholic schools were especially useful in schooling for girls, which had long been neglected.

The main objectives of the Falloux Laws was to replace the revolutionary and imperial system, which had placed the whole of the education system under the supervision of the University and of state-trained teachers, who were accused of spreading Republicans and anti-clerical ideas, by a system giving responsibility for education back to the clergy. This aim was largely achieved: the Falloux Law created a mixed system, public (and mostly secular) on one hand, and private and Catholic on the other.

This law allowed the clergy and members of ecclesiastical orders, male and female, to teach without any further qualifications. This exemption was extended even to priests who taught in secondary schools, where a university degree was demanded from lay teachers. The primary schools were put under the management of the curés.

The Falloux Law created one academy for each department, decentralising the University and thus strengthening the notables' local influence. It reorganised the Superior Council of Education and academic councils, specifically by giving a large number of places to representatives of various religions, above all of Roman Catholicism. Eight University members had seats at the Superior Council of Public Instruction, alongside seven religious representatives (including four Catholics), three state counsellors, three members of the Institute, and three members representing "free" (i.e. private) teaching establishments. Similarly, bishops were included in the academic councils.

Primary and secondary education were divided between state establishments, and private establishments, headed by non-profit organisations or religious congregations. Supervision of schools was the joint responsibility of the mayor and the priest. The law more strictly regulated teacher training colleges (écoles normales) and teachers were provided with a guaranteed minimum wage. Any town could transfer its public collège to the Catholic system. All schools were inspected by government officials and the state alone had the right to award the baccalauréat. The law worked as intended to increase the Catholic role. The growth in Catholic schools 1854 to 1867 was 75 percent, as opposed to 34 percent for the secondary school system as a whole.

The Falloux Law was promulgated in a context in which French Catholics were worried about the increasing role of the state in education since the Revolution of 1789 and the reorganisation of the imperial University. They thought that the imperial education system, inherited from the First Empire 's reforms, excessively diffused Enlightenment, republican and socialist ideas. Thus, they wanted the education system to return to its basis during the Ancien Régime.

The Bourbon Restoration had in part satisfied these wants, by tolerating teaching by religious congregations, although it still theoretically remained prohibited, and had also granted more weight to bishops in the education system, enabling schooling programs to give more attention to Catholicism.

However, the July Monarchy was much less friendly to this reactionary trend. Although the Guizot Law of 1833 partially satisfied Catholics by authorising private teaching in primary education, it kept secondary and higher education under the University's supervision. Guizot also generalised the écoles normales primaires, which were responsible for the training of teachers. First created by the National Convention in 1794, these schools, related to the écoles normales supérieures, were organised on the basis of the 1808 decree organising the University of France, and were accused by conservatives of promoting Republicanism, Socialism and anti-clericalism.

After the 1848 Revolution, Lazare Hippolyte Carnot was named Minister of Public Instruction and prepared a draft reform. He named the Republican Jules Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire president of the parliamentary commission which would write the draft. The latter would have made education mandatory for children of both sexes, as well as a three years of training for teachers, subsidised by the state. Although it favoured public schools, it still allowed private teaching establishments. Carnot's draft was however set aside after his resignation on 5 July 1848.

Thus, parliamentary debates were resumed. The newly elected President Louis Napoléon Bonaparte replaced Carnot with Alfred de Falloux as Minister of Public Instruction in December 1848, the latter remaining in Odilon Barrot 's government until May 1849. The decree of 11 December 1848 made the upcoming law on education an organic law, which should thus be reserved to the Constituent Assembly's initiative.

A Legitimist (i.e. a conservative Royalist), Falloux officially withdrew Carnot's draft bill on 4 January 1849 and dissolved the Scientific and Literary Study Commission named by Carnot. Falloux clearly aimed at restoring Roman Catholicism to the forefront of French schooling and society, describing his program in his Memoirs : "God in education. The Pope at the head of the Church. The Church at the head of civilisation."

Having dissolved Carnot's commission, Falloux created two new ministerial commissions, dedicated to preparing the draft laws for primary and secondary education, which quickly merged. Both were composed by a majority of conservative Catholics. Presided by the Minister Falloux himself, it had as vice-president Adolphe Thiers, and included Catholics such as the archbishop of Paris Mgr Sibour, the abbot Dupanloup (who later became bishop of Orléans), etc. Surprisingly, Thiers, formerly a critic of the Church's involvement in education, was one of those who most supported Catholics' influence in the education system, being ready to hand over to the clergy the whole of the primary education establishments, whilst bishop Dupanloup and others strong Catholics calmed his excessive claims.

Upset by this measure, in part because the December 1848 decree had given the initiative for the legislative process, concerning organic laws, to the Assembly, the latter nominated a new parliamentary Commission to re-establish its prerogatives following a proposition by the moderate Republican Pascal Duprat. This parallel Commission was presided by the Minister of Public Instruction de Vaulabelle and had as secretary the Republican Jules Simon.

Parliamentary debates focused on Article 9 of the new Constitution concerning education. Catholic deputy Charles de Montalembert then described the University's monopoly in the education system as "intellectual communism" and claimed the system was "inferior to that of the Ancien Régime". Article 9 proclaimed that "education is free" (" L'enseignement est libre ")" while adding that this "freedom of education" was determined by legislation and exercised "under state supervision." While authorising private establishments, this article thus ensured that education in general was placed under the watch of the state. The extent of the latter would be determined by forthcoming laws.

On 5 February 1849, Jules Simon presented to the Assembly the draft law, composed of 23 articles. However, Barrot's government claimed that the Constituent Assembly's mandate was coming to an end and that further proposed laws would have to be examined by the succeeding National Assembly. Pressed for time, the Constituent Assembly thus decided to examine the most pressing laws. The deputy Nérée Boubée, a scientist and university lecturer, proposed that the draft education law be one of those scrutinised, but his motion was rejected by 458 votes against 307.

Discussion of the new law would thus have to wait the May 1849 legislative election. But these ones gave an absolute majority to the conservative Parti de l'Ordre, mainly composed of Catholic monarchists, whether Orleanists or Legitimists, such as Falloux who was elected deputy.

Despite having been dissolved, the Commission presided by Barthélémy Saint-Hilaire and named by Carnot submitted its draft and report to the Assembly on 10 April 1849. This work was ignored during further discussions. On 18 June 1849, Falloux submitted to the Assembly the draft bill elaborated by the ministerial commission which he had himself named. Falloux thus resumed his plans: "Instruction has remained too much isolated from education; education has remained too much isolated from religion."

The Assembly hereby named another parliamentary commission, where Catholics had again the upper-hand. It included Salomon (from the Meuse), the Protestant theologian Coquerel, Baze, the theologian Armand de Melun (who had been a collaborator of late Denys Affre, former archbishop of Paris), de l'Espinay, Sauvaire-Barthélemy (a grandnephew of the marquis de Barthélémy), Dufougeray, Barthélémy Saint-Hilaire, de Montalembert, Rouher, Thiers, Beugnot, Fresneau, Janvier, Parisis (bishop of Langres). The Commission chose Thiers as president and Beugnot as " rapporteur " (in charge of presenting the draft bill to the Assembly). Falloux also managed to bypass the Conseil d'Etat 's examination of the law, the latter being composed of several Republicans.

In September 1849, Falloux fell sick and was replaced in October as Minister of Public Instruction by Félix Esquirou de Parieu. On 11 January 1850, a minor law (named Parieu Law) was passed, simplifying procedures of suspension and revocation of teachers. The draft was discussed again starting on 14 January 1850. During these debates, Victor Hugo, although member of the Parti de l'Ordre, criticised the renewed influence of the clergy. The law was finally adopted on 15 March 1850, by 399 votes against 237.

The Third Republic abrogated or reformed most dispositions of the Falloux Laws. The 27 February 1880 law reduced the clergy's representation in educational councils. The Jules Ferry Laws established mandatory, free and laic education. The Goblet Law abrogated the first and second section of the Falloux Law. In 1904, among increasing voices to repeal entirely the Falloux Law, the Minister Emile Combes prohibited religious congregations from teaching, including in private schools.

However, Catholics responded by creating "lay private schools", where religious education was maintained, although teaching was done by lay people, and not clergy.

Vichy France allowed religious congregations to teach again and strongly subsided private Catholic schools. Although these subsidies were interrupted following the Liberation, the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF) did not repeal the teaching authorisation given to congregations. The Debré Law of 1959 went further, by having private schools' teachers paid by the state.

Although the Falloux Laws have formally been repealed since the promulgation of the Education Code in 2000, several of their dispositions have been retained in the Code and form the main legislative framework for private schools.

The far-right leagues (French : ligues d'extrême droite) were several French far-right movements opposed to parliamentarism, which mainly dedicated themselves to military parades, street brawls, demonstrations and riots. The term ligue was often used in the 1930s to distinguish these political movements from parliamentary parties. After having appeared first at the end of the 19th century during the Dreyfus affair, they became common in the 1920s and 1930s, and famously participated in the 6 February 1934 crisis and riots which overthrew the second Cartel des gauches, the center-left coalition government led by Édouard Daladier.

In the decades following the crisis, the French Left generally believed that these riots represented an attempted coup d'état against the French Republic. Contemporary historians have shown that, despite the riots and their impact on the ruling coalition, the leagues and their leaders had not made organized plans to overthrow Daladier's government. The widespread concern over fascist organizing led to the mobilization of the anti-fascist movement in France, and the dissolution of the leagues in 1936 by the Popular Front government headed by Léon Blum ; this was met by an intensification of violence by prominent far-right organizations.

The debate on a "French Fascism" is closely related to the existence of these anti-parliamentary leagues, of which many adopted at least the exterior signs and rituals of fascism (Roman salute, etc.) and explicitly imitated on one hand Mussolini's squadristis or, on the other hand, Hitler 's Nazi party 's organization — one should bear in mind, when analyzing "French fascism", international relations : in the 1930s, conservative president of the Council Pierre Laval initiated relations with Mussolini's Italy and the USSR against Germany, seen as the " hereditary enemy " of France (see French–German enmity). After Laval's meeting with Mussolini in Rome on 4 January 1935, this policy led to the signature of the Stresa front in 1935. Thus, the French far-right was split between Italian fascism, Nazism and nationalism, which forbade them from allying themselves with Hitler and pushed towards an alliance with Mussolini. Individual trajectories during Vichy France, when some far-right members ultimately chose the Resistance against the German occupant, illustrate these ideological conflicts.

Leagues created in the 1920s from veterans ' associations are usually distinguished from those created in the 1930s, such as Marcel Bucard 's Francisme, which were more explicitly influenced by Fascism or Nazism — one of these reasons being the common anti-militarism, pacifism and opposition to colonial expansion present in several veterans' associations of the 1920s. Leagues however quickly broke with this left-wing anti-militarism and anti-colonialism. Both Cartels des Gauches (Left Wing Coalition, the first from 1924 to 1926 and the second from 1932 to the 6 February 1934 riots) saw the appearance of many leagues intent on overthrowing them through street demonstrations. Thus, Pierre Taittinger 's Jeunesses Patriotes (JP) were founded during the first Cartel, headed by Édouard Herriot, in 1924, as well as Georges Valois 's Faisceau (1925) and colonel de la Rocque 's Croix-de-Feu, founded a year after Herriot's fall. On the other hand, François Coty 's Solidarité française and Marcel Bucard's Francisme were both founded in 1933, during Édouard Daladier's left-wing government. Daladier was replaced after the 6 February 1934 riots by conservative Gaston Doumergue, who included in his cabinet many right wing personalities close to the far-right leagues, such as Philippe Pétain and Pierre Laval.

Most of the debate on the existence of a "French fascism" in between the two wars period has focused on these paramilitary leagues, although most French historians agree in stating that as Fascism is by definition a "mass movement", these leagues do not qualify as such. This, of course, has been debated, since some of them, such as colonel de la Rocque 's Croix-de-Feu were very popular and had a quite large membership. De la Rocque, however, who later went on to found the Parti Social Français (PSF, the first French mass party of the right-wing, which would be later imitated by Gaullism), has often been said not to be fascist, an assertion which based itself in particular on his respect for constitutional legality during 6 February 1934 riots. Others observers argue that both Fascism and Nazism formally respected legality, and that this factor, in itself, does not sufficiently set de la Rocque's movement aside from other types of fascism.

Far-right leagues in France were characterized by their nationalist, militarist, anti-Semitic, anti-parliamentarist and anti-Communist opinions. In addition – and in particular in the 1930s – they were often modelled after Benito Mussolini 's paramilitary Blackshirts and favored military parades, uniforms, and displays of their physical might.

The most famous far-right leagues included:

This context of street agitation led Pierre Laval 's government to outlaw paramilitary organizations on 6 December 1935, and then to pass the 10 January 1936 law on militias and combat groups. This law limited the right of association (resulting from the 1901 law on associations) if these groups organized armed demonstrations in the streets, if they presented a paramilitary or militia aspect or if they attempted to overthrow the Republic or threatened the integrity of the national territory. The 10 January 1936 law was however only partially implemented, and only the monarchist Action Française was dissolved as a result of the law, on 13 February 1936.

The Popular Front thus included the dissolution of the leagues in its 12 January 1936 electoral program. This proposition was implemented after the May 1936 election which brought Léon Blum to power. Marceau Pivert publicly called for the dissolution of the leagues on 27 May 1936 in the newspaper Le Populaire.

On 19 June 1936, interior minister Roger Salengro had President Albert Lebrun sign a decree outlawing the major leagues, which were soon dissolved (these included Croix-de-Feu, Solidarité Française, Jeune Patrie and Francistes). Three days later, La Rocque bypassed the dissolution of his Croix-de-Feu association by creating the Parti Social Français (PSF). Salengro's initiative led the far-right newspaper Gringoire (which at the time had a circulation of 500,000 issues per week) to initiate a defamation campaign against him, which finally drove him to commit suicide on 18 November 1936.

Whilst the leagues have been dissolved, far-right parties still exist in France. Here is a list of the current far-right parties in the national assembly as of 2026:

The far-right (French : Extrême droite) tradition in France finds its origins in the Third Republic with Boulangism and the Dreyfus affair. In the 1880s, General Georges Boulanger, called "General Revenge" (Général Revanche), championed demands for military revenge against Imperial Germany as retribution for the defeat and fall of the Second French Empire during the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871). This stance, known as revanchism, began to exert a strong influence on French nationalism. Soon thereafter, the Dreyfus affair provided one of the political division lines of France. French nationalism, which had been largely associated with left-wing and Republican ideologies before the Dreyfus affair, turned after that into a main trait of the right-wing and, moreover, of the far right. A new right emerged, and nationalism was reappropriated by the far-right who turned it into a form of ethnic nationalism, blended with antisemitism, xenophobia, anti-Protestantism and anti-Masonry. The Action française (AF), first founded as a journal and later a political organization, was the matrix of a new type of counter-revolutionary right-wing, which continues to exist today. During the interwar period, the Action française and its youth militia, the Camelots du Roi, were very active. Far-right leagues organized riots.

After World War II, the Organisation armée secrète (OAS) was created in Madrid in 1961 by French military personnel opposed to the independence of Algeria. Jean-Marie Le Pen founded the Front National (FN) party in 1972. At the 1986 legislative elections, the FN managed to obtain 35 seats, with 10% of the votes. Mark Frederiksen, a French Algeria activist, created in April 1966 a neo-Nazi group, the FANE (Fédération d'action nationaliste et européenne, Nationalist and European Federation of Action). However, in 1978, neo-Nazi members of the GNR-FANE broke again with the FN. During the 1980s, the National Front managed to gather, under Jean-Marie Le Pen 's leadership, most rival far-right tendencies of France, following a succession of splits and alliances with other, minor parties, during the 1970s.

The French Third Republic (1871–1940) was established after France's defeat in the 1870 Franco-Prussian War and the subsequent Paris Commune of 1871. From 1894 to 1906, French society became deeply divided by the Dreyfus affair, a major political scandal that proved to be a turning point in the history of France. The modern "far right", or radical right, formed as a distinct political current during the Dreyfus affair. However, it had some antecedents in earlier years of the Third Republic.

Many French nationalists came to oppose the Third Republic soon after its founding, believing that it had adopted an "English" constitution by creating a strong parliament and a weak presidency ; in place of this, nationalists favored a political system led by a strong ruler, originally a presidential republic, although some eventually came to support the idea of a restored monarchy. Across French society, there was also a common feeling of pride in the army and resentment about its defeat by the Germans. This defeat was blamed on the politicians who later became leaders of the Third Republic, and there were increasing antisemitic tendencies that accused Jewish politicians and officers of disloyalty to the nation. For the nationalists, the army was "the people armed", the truest representative of the nation, and any criticism of the army was seen as an attack on France itself. Thus, they rallied to "defend the army" when they felt it was under threat from internal enemies, such as first during the Boulanger affair and later during the Dreyfus affair. The political coalitions originally built to support the army during these affairs, provided the foundations for the 20th century radical right.

The "Boulanger Affair", which culminated in 1889, championed the vague demands of the former Minister of War, General Georges Boulanger. Boulanger had earlier attracted popular support by ordering lenient treatment of strikers when the army was called upon to suppress strikes. He also rattled his saber against Germany, which pleased French patriots intent on taking revenge. But this alarmed the other ministers, who dropped Boulanger from the government. When his champions mounted an electoral campaign to have him elected to the Chamber of Deputies, the government reacted by forcing him out of the army. Violent agitation in Paris on the election night in 1889 convinced the government to prosecute Boulanger in order to remove him from the political scene. Instead of facing trumped up charges, Boulanger fled to Belgium. His supporters, called "Boulangists", afterward nursed an intense grievance against the Republic and reunited during the Dreyfus affair to oppose the Republic and "back the army" once again.

In 1894, a Jewish officer, Alfred Dreyfus, was arrested on accusations of treason and sharing intelligence with the German Empire. The Dreyfus affair provided one of the political fault lines of France. Before the Dreyfus affair, Nationalism had been a left-wing and Republican ideology; after, it became a main trait of the right-wing and, moreover, of the far-right.

Émile Zola entered the political scene with his open letter " J'Accuse…! ", followed by other writers, artists and scholars supporting him with a "Manifesto of the Intellectuals", helping to define the meaning of the term " intellectual ", while the left and right were at loggerheads, mainly over the questions of militarism, nationalism, justice and human rights. Until then, nationalism was a Republican, left-wing ideology, related to the French Revolution and the Revolutionary Wars. It was a liberal nationalism, formulated by Ernest Renan 's definition of the nation as a "daily plebiscite" and as formed by the subjective "will to live together". Related to "revanchism", the belligerent will to take revenge against Germany and retake control of Alsace-Lorraine, nationalism could then be sometimes opposed to imperialism. In the 1880s, a debate thus opposed those who opposed the " colonial lobby ", such as radical Georges Clemenceau, who declared that colonialism diverted France from the "blue line of the Vosges " (referring to Alsace-Lorraine), socialist Jean Jaurès and nationalist Maurice Barrès, against Moderate Republican Jules Ferry, republican Léon Gambetta and Eugène Etienne, the president of the parliamentary colonial group.

However, in the midst of the Dreyfus affair, a new right emerged, and nationalism was appropriated by the far right who turned it into a form of ethnic nationalism, itself blended with antisemitism, xenophobia, anti-Protestantism and anti-Masonry. Charles Maurras (1868–1952), founder of " integralism " (or "integral nationalism"), created the term "Anti-France" to stigmatize "internal foreigners", or the "four confederate states of Protestants, Jews, Freemasons and foreigners" (his actual word for the latter being the far less polite métèques). A few years later, Maurras would join the monarchist Action française, created by Maurice Pujo and Henri Vaugeois in 1898. Maurras, who was an agnostic, spearheaded a monarchist and Catholic revival. He pragmatically conceived of religion as an ideology useful to unify the nation. Most French Catholics were conservatives, a trait that continues today. On the other hand, most Protestants, Jews and atheists belonged to the left. Henceforth, the republicans' conception was, to the contrary, that only state secularism could peacefully bind together diverse religious and philosophical tendencies, and avoid any return to the Wars of Religion. Furthermore, Catholic priests were seen as a major reactionary force by the republicans, among whom anti-clericalism became common. The Ferry laws on public education had been a first step for the Republic in rooting out the clerics' influence: they would be completed by the 1905 law on the separation of Church and State.

Action française, first founded as a review, was the matrix of a new type of counter-revolutionary right-wing, and continues to exist today. Action française was quite influential in the 1930s, in particular through its youth organization, the Camelots du Roi, founded in 1908, and which engaged in many street brawls. The Camelots du Roi included such figures as Catholic writer Georges Bernanos and Jean de Barrau, member of the directing committee of the National Federation, and particular secretary of the duc d'Orléans (1869–1926), the son of the Orléanist count of Paris (1838–1894) and hence Orléanist heir to the throne of France. Many members of the OAS terrorist group during the Algerian War (1954–1962) were part of the monarchist movement. Jean Ousset, Maurras' personal secretary, created the Catholic fundamentalist organization Cité catholique, which would include OAS members and founded a branch in Argentina in the 1960s.

Apart from the Action française, several far-right leagues were created during the Dreyfus affair. Mostly antisemitic, they also represented a new right-wing tendency, sharing common traits such as anti-parliamentarism, militarism, nationalism, and often engaged in street brawls. Thus, the nationalist poet Paul Déroulède created in 1882 the antisemitic Ligue des patriotes (League of Patriots), which at first focused on advocating 'revanche' (revenge) for the French defeat during the Franco-Prussian War. Along with Jules Guérin, the journalist Edouard Drumont created the Antisemitic League of France in 1889. Also anti-Masonic, the League became at the start of the 20th century the Grand Occident de France [ fr ], a name chosen in reaction against the Masonic lodge of the Grand Orient de France.

During the interwar period, the Action française (AF) and its youth militia, the Camelots du Roi, were very active in Paris. Apart from the AF, various far-right leagues were formed and opposed both Cartel des gauches (Coalition of the left) governments. Pierre Taittinger thus formed the Jeunesses Patriotes in 1924, which imitated the style of the Fascists, although it remained a more traditional authoritarian movement. The following year, Georges Valois created Le Faisceau, heavily inspired by Benito Mussolini 's Fascism. In 1933, the year Adolf Hitler gained power in Germany, perfumer François Coty founded Solidarité française and Marcel Bucard formed the Francisme, which was subsidised by Mussolini. Another important league was François de la Rocque 's Croix de Feu, which formed the base for the Parti Social Français (PSF), the first mass party of the French right-wing. Mussolini was much more popular in right-wing circles than Hitler due to the negative reaction many French conservatives had to Hitler's repression of dissident German conservatives and Catholics in 1933 and 1934.

Apart from the leagues, a group of Neosocialists (Marcel Déat, Pierre Renaudel, etc.) were excluded in November 1933 from the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO, the socialist party) because of their revisionist stances and admiration for fascism. Déat would become one of the most ardent collaborationists during World War II.

Another major player in France's right-wing world between the wars was Jacques Doriot. Doriot had been expelled by the French Communist Party after proposing a Popular Front with other leftist parties, which at that time was seen as heresy by his party's hierarchy. Personally hurt and embittered by his expulsion, Doriot would slowly change sides, eventually openly denouncing communism and going on to found the Parti Populaire Francais or PPF, the largest pre-war right wing party. Other important figures of the 1930s include Xavier Vallat, who would become General Commissioner for Jewish Affairs under Vichy, members of the Cagoule terrorist group (Eugène Deloncle, Eugène Schueller (the founder of L'Oréal cosmetic firm), Jacques Corrèze, Joseph Darnand, who later founded the Service d'ordre légionnaire militia during Vichy, etc.). To obtain arms from fascist Italy, the group assassinated two Italian antifascists, the Rosselli brothers, on June 9, 1937, and sabotaged aeroplanes clandestinely supplied by the French government to the Second Spanish Republic. They also attempted a coup against the Popular Front government, elected in 1936, leading to arrests in 1937, ordered by Interior Minister Marx Dormoy, during which the police seized explosives and military weapons, including anti-tank guns.

Far right leagues organised major riots on 6 February 1934. The groups did not coordinate their efforts and the riots were suppressed by the police and military. Elements on the left were convinced that unity was essential to suppress fascism, and in 1936 they formed the Popular Front and dissolved the leagues. However the right-wing leagues promptly reorganized as political parties and continued vocal attacks on the left.

The Organisation armée secrète (OAS) was created in Madrid by French military officers opposed to the independence of Algeria. Many of its members would later join various anti-communist struggles around the world. Some, for example, joined the Cité catholique fundamentalist group and went to Argentina, where they were in contact with the Argentine Armed Forces. Jean Pierre Cherid, former OAS member, took part in the 1976 Montejurra massacre against left-wing Carlists. He was then part of the Spanish GAL death squad, and participated in the 1978 assassination of Argala, one of the ETA members who had killed Franco 's Prime minister, Luis Carrero Blanco, in 1973.

Jean-Louis Tixier-Vignancour was the far-right candidate at the 1965 presidential election. His campaign was organised by Jean-Marie Le Pen. Charles de Gaulle said of Tixier-Vignancourt: "Tixier-Vignancour, that is Vichy, the Collaboration proud of itself, the Milice, the OAS".

Jean-Marie Le Pen founded the Front National (FN) party in 1972, along with former Occident member Jacques Bompard, former Collaborationist Roland Gaucher, François Duprat, who introduced the negationist thesis to France, and others nostalgics of Vichy France, Catholic fundamentalists, etc. Le Pen presented himself for the first time in the 1974 presidential election, obtaining 0.74%. The electoral rise of the FN did not start until Jean-Pierre Stirbois 's victory, in 1983, in Dreux. The FN became stronger throughout the 1980s, managing to unite most far-right tendencies, passing electoral alliances with the right-wing Rally for the Republic (RPR), while some FN members quit the party to join the RPR or the Union for a French Democracy (UDF). At the 1986 legislative elections, the FN managed to obtain 35 seats, with 10% of the votes.

Meanwhile, other far-right tendencies gathered in Alain de Benoist 's Nouvelle Droite think-tank, heading a pro-European and neopagan line. Some radical members of the "national revolutionary" tendency quit the FN to form other minor parties (Party of New Forces, PFN, and French and European Nationalist Party, PNFE).

Mark Frederiksen, a French Algeria activist, created in April 1966 a neo-Nazi group, the FANE (Fédération d'action nationaliste et européenne, Nationalist and European Federation of Action). The FANE boasted at most a hundred activists, including members such as Luc Michel, now leader of the Parti communautaire national-européen (National European Communautary Party), Jacques Bastide, Michel Faci, Michel Caignet [ fr ] and Henri-Robert Petit, a journalist and former Collaborationist who directed under the Vichy regime the newspaper Le Pilori. The FANE maintained international contacts with the British group the League of Saint George.

The FANE rallied Jean-Marie Le Pen 's National Front in 1974, gathered around François Duprat and Alain Renault [ fr ] 's Revolutionary Nationalist Groups (GNR), which represented the nationalist revolutionary tendency of the FN.

But in 1978, neo-Nazi members of the GNR-FANE broke again with the FN, taking with them sections of the FN youth movement, the Front National de la Jeunesse. On the other hand, GNR activists closer to the Third Position (Jacques Bastide and Patrick Gorre) joined Jean-Gilles Malliarakis to found, on February 11, 1979, the Revolutionary Nationalist Movement [ fr ] (Mouvement nationaliste révolutionnaire), which became in 1985 Third Way (Troisième Voie).

After this brief passage at the National Front, Mark Fredriksen created the Faisceaux nationalistes européens (FANE) in July 1980. These would eventually merge with the Mouvement national et social ethniste in 1987, and then with the PNFE (French and European Nationalist Party) in January 1994, which also gathered former National Front members.

Dissolved first in September 1980 by Raymond Barre 's government, Fredriksen's group was recreated, and dissolved again in 1985 by Laurent Fabius ' government. Finally, it was dissolved a third time in 1987 by Jacques Chirac 's government, on charges of "violent demonstrations organised by this movement, which has as one of its expressed objective the establishment of a new Nazi regime", the " paramilitary organisation of this association and its inciting of racial discrimination ".

In the 1980s, Alain de Benoist became chief theorist of the Nouvelle Droite movement, creating the think-tank GRECE in 1968, some of whose members were involved with the formation of the Club de l'Horloge in 1974. They advocated an ethno-nationalist stance focused on European culture, which advocated a return of paganism. Members of the GRECE quit the think tank in the 1980s, such as Pierre Vial who joined the FN, or Guillaume Faye who quit the organisation along with others members in 1986. Faye participated in 2006 in a conference in the US organised by American Renaissance, a white separatist magazine published by the New Century Foundation.

Alain de Benoist occasionally contributed to the Mankind Quarterly review, which supports hereditarianism and is associated with the US think tank the Pioneer Fund, headed by J. Philippe Rushton, the author of Race, Evolution and Behavior (1995), which argues in favour of a biological conception of " race ". GRECE and the Pioneer Fund are actively involved in the race and intelligence debate, postulating that there is an identifiable link between levels of intelligence and distinct ethnic groups.

The Club de l'horloge itself had been founded by Henry de Lesquen, a former member of the conservative Rally for the Republic, which he quit in 1984. Others members of the Club de l'horloge, such as Bruno Mégret, later joined the FN after a short time in the RPR.

During the 1980s, the National Front managed to gather, under Jean-Marie Le Pen 's leadership, most rival far-right tendencies of France, following a succession of splits and alliances with other, minor parties, during the 1970s.

One of those parties, the Party of New Forces (PFN, Parti des forces nouvelles), was an offshoot of the National Front, formed from a 1973 split headed by Alain Robert and François Brigneau who first organised the Comité faire front which subsequently merged into the PFN.

The PFN was formed mainly by former members of New Order (Ordre nouveau, 1969–1973), who had refused to merge into the FN at its 1972 creation. New Order, dissolved by Interior Minister Raymond Marcellin in 1973, was itself a successor to Occident (1964–1968) and of the Union Defense Group (GUD, Groupe union défense).

Close to the Third Position and supporting a "national-revolutionary" thesis, this tendency maintained links with the FN, despite some tensions. The GUD, in particular, had published the satiric monthly Alternative with the Youth Front (Front de la jeunesse), the youth organisation of the FN. They also had attempted alliances with other far-right parties in Europe, with New Order organising the alliance "A Fatherland for Tomorrow" (Une patrie pour demain) with the Spanish Falange, the Italian Social Movement (MSI) and the German National Democratic Party.

This European strategy was continued by the PFN, who launched the Euroright alliance, with the MSI, the Spanish New Force and the Belgian PFN, for the 1979 European elections. Headed by Jean-Louis Tixier-Vignancour, the PFN won 1.3% of the vote. This electoral failure prompted Roland Gaucher and François Brigneau to quit the party and join Le Pen's National Front.

The French far-right was divided in the 1981 presidential election, with both Pascal Gauchon (PFN) and Le Pen (FN) attempting, without success, to secure the 500 signatures from mayors necessary to stand as candidates. François Mitterrand (Socialist Party) won those elections, competing against Jacques Chirac (Rally for the Republic, RPR).

These succeeding electoral defeats prompted the far-right to unify itself. In 1983, the FN managed to make its first electoral breakthrough, taking control of the town of Dreux : Jean-Pierre Stirbois obtained 17% of the votes in the first round, for the FN municipal list. In the second round, he merged his list with Chirac's RPR list (headed by Jean Hieaux), enabling the right to claim a victory against the left. Chirac supported the alliance with the far-right, claiming that the Socialist Party, allied with the Communist Party in government, had no lessons to give.

This first electoral success was confirmed at the 1984 European elections, the FN obtaining 10% of the votes. Two years later, the FN gained 35 deputies (nearly 10% of the votes) at the 1986 legislative elections, running under the label of " Rassemblement national ". Those elected included the monarchist Georges-Paul Wagner.

Internal disputes continued however to divide the far-right. Following the 1986 elections, which brought Jacques Chirac to power as Prime Minister, some hardliners inside the FN broke away to create the French and European Nationalist Party (PNFE, Parti Nationaliste Français et Européen), along with members of Mark Frederiksen 's Third Position FANE. Three former members of the PNFE were charged of having desecrated, in 1990, a Jewish cemetery in Carpentras. The PNFE was also implicated in the 1988 Cannes and Nice attacks.

The most important split was headed by Bruno Mégret in 1999. Taking many FN elected representatives and party officials with him, he then created the National Republican Movement (MNR). However, with an eye to the 2007 legislative elections, he supported Le Pen's candidacy for the presidential election.

During these presidential elections, Jean-Marie Le Pen only took 10.4% of the vote, compared to his 16.9% first round result in 2002, qualifying him for the second round, where he achieved 17.79% against 82.21% for Jacques Chirac (Rally for the Republic, RPR).

With only 1.85% in the second round of the 2002 legislative elections, the FN failed to gain any seats in the National Assembly. In the 2007 presidential election, Le Pen finished fourth, behind Nicolas Sarkozy, Ségolène Royal and François Bayrou. Philippe de Villiers, the Catholic traditionalist candidate of the Movement for France (especially strong in the conservative Vendée region), was sixth, obtaining 2.23% of the vote.

This electoral slump for the FN was confirmed at the 2007 legislative elections, the FN obtaining only 0.08% of the votes in the second round, and therefore no seats.

These electoral defeats, which contrasted with the high score obtained at the 2002 presidential elections, caused financial problems for the FN, which was forced to sell its headquarters, the Paquebot, in Saint-Cloud. Le Pen then announced, in 2008, that he would not compete again in presidential elections, leaving the way for contest for the leadership of the FN between his daughter, Marine Le Pen, whom he favoured, and Bruno Gollnisch. The latter had been condemned in January 2007 for Holocaust denial, while Marine Le Pen attempted to follow a slicker strategy to give the FN a more "respectable" image.

Since her election as the leader of the party in 2011, the popularity of the FN continued to grow apace as the party won several municipalities at the 2014 municipal elections ; it topped the poll in France at the 2014 European elections with 25% of the vote; and again won more votes than any other party in the 2015 departmental elections. The party once again came in first place in the 2015 regional elections with a historic result of just under 28% of the vote. By 2015, the FN had established itself as one of the largest political forces in France, unusually being both most popular and most controversial political party.

For the 2012 presidential election, Le Pen came third in the first round, scoring 17.9% – the partys then best showing ever for the FN.

For the 2017 presidential election, Le Pen came second in the first round, scoring 21.3% – the best showing ever for the FN. in the second round she came second with 33.9% a best for NF.

In 2018, the National Front was renamed National Rally.

Far right parties have never enjoyed such a big popularity as they have done since the results of the 2017 and 2022 elections. For the 2022 presidential election, Le Pen came second in the first round, scoring 23.15% – the best showing ever for the RN. Eric Zemmour got 7.07%. Total Far Right vote was 32%, the highest vote ever in a French election. Marine Le Pen may have lost in the second round, but nonetheless her defeat had a taste of victory: the score of 41.46% was the best showing ever for the RN or for a Far Right candidate.

The main reason of the success of the Rassemblement National lies with the political strategies of normalisation and dediabolisation led by Marine Le Pen and her fellow members of the party, to rally votes of right wing centrists, and to sweep away the extremism her father had cast upon the party.

However, the most radical fraction of the Rassemblement National accused Marine Le Pen of not being radical enough. In parallel, Éric Zemmour, a far-right pundit with no previous party affiliation or political experience, created his own party, Reconquête. His views, as a former journalist, in topics such as immigration are much more outspoken and radical than Le Pens. He even overtook Le Pen in one of the polls in the early days of the creation of his party.

Le Pen's niece, Marion Maréchal Le Pen, former member of RN became a member of Reconquête in 2021 while arguing herself and her aunt had "ideological differences". She was excluded of the party on the 18th June, accused of high treason by the head-of-party Eric Zemmour after she showed support for the Central- Far Right coalition between Eric Ciotti's Party The Republicans (France) and Rassemblement National.

In the June 2022 Assemblée Nationale election, the RN gained 89 seats in the national assembly, winning the party enough seats to form a parliamentary group for the first time since 1986.

The result of the European election was a long-awaited result for Le Pen. Arriving ahead of all other parties, Jordan Bardella's party " La France revient! " (lit. "France is coming back") cumulated 31,37% of votes. Turnout rate reached 51.49% and was 1.37 points higher than in 2019.

To this, President Emmanuel Macron dissolved the French Assembly and called for anticipated legislative elections on 30th and 3 July, acknowledging "that he wouldn't act as is nothing had happened." and arguing that far right parties are the impoverishment of French people.

On the night of June 9, following the announcement of new elections, Marion Maréchal called for a "coalition of the rights" in the hopes of forming a union between the RN, LR, Reconquête! and DLF, mixing right-wing and far-right parties. In the following days, Marion Maréchal met with RN officials to discuss the modalities of a potential RN and Reconquête! coalition. However, on June 11, talks between the two parties failed as Jordan Bardella refused "any direct or indirect association with Éric Zemmour". Despite not reaching an agreement, Marion Maréchal exhorted her followers to vote for the RN-LR alliance the next day. Éric Zemmour denounced Marion Maréchal 's declaration, calling her out for her "treason" and excluding her from Reconquête!.

On June 11, Éric Ciotti, the president of LR, announced during an interview on TF1 that he intended to form an alliance between his party and the RN, triggering The Republicans crisis. This announcement broke the historical cordon sanitaire between the French republican right and the far-right. However, many figures of LR criticized Éric Ciotti 's decision to ally with the RN. In an interview in the evening on France 2, Jordan Bardella, president of the RN, confirmed the alliance between the RN and LR, declaring that a "deal" has been made between the two parties and that the RN will support multiple candidates of LR. On June 12, a political committee composed of influential members of LR declared the exclusion of Éric Ciotti from the party. Éric Ciotti contested this decision, claiming that he was still president of the party. This issue was brought to justice, where a judge temporarily invalidated the political committee's decision. However, a second political committee again excluded Éric Ciotti from LR on June 14.

In response to the threat of a potential RN government, France's 4 major leftist parties, the PS, LFI, Les Écologistes and the PCF, announced a union of the lefts, forming the New Popular Front. Moreover, around 640 000 people mobilized against the far-right in a nationwide protest on June 15; 75 000 or 250 000 of which, depending on sources, were in Paris.

Other minor groups that are or have been active in the Fifth Republic include:

Farcidure, literally "firm stuffing", is a French dish, variously described as a dumpling or pancake. It is a speciality of Limousin and has many variants. The main carbohydrate was once millet and now may be potato, wheat flour or buckwheat flour. Many recipes include chopped bacon or salted pork. Farcidure may be served as a side dish with a salad, or with meat or poultry stew, or as the main item.

The dish is most closely associated with the Corrèze part of the Limousin region. There are many varying altitudes, climates, towns and cultures in Corrèze, each with its own farcidure, and to distinguish one from the other almost all of them bear a second name. Argentat 's farcidure is called poule sans os (boneless chicken); that from Brive is mique ; that from Treignac, mounassou. Others are called farcidure milhassou, picart or chien d' égletons. Only the variant from Tulle is referred to simply as farcidure.

Limousin was one of the first areas of France in which the potato was popular long before Parmentier popularised it throughout the country. Many variants of farcidure from Curnonsky onwards, including those by Michel Guerard and Pierre Koffmann, have grated potato as the base. Larousse Gastronomique stipulates buckwheat flour or wheat flour. Anne Willan writes that the dish can be made with "potatoes, bread dough or even crêpe batter and flavoured with whatever meats or vegetables happen to be available". According to Koffmann the dish is traditionally served with poule au pot, also known as Poularde Henri IV.

Fashoda syndrome or Fashoda complex is the name given to a tendency within French foreign policy in Africa, giving importance to asserting French influence in areas which might be becoming susceptible to British influence. It refers to the Fashoda Incident, which is considered the climax of the imperial territorial disputes between the United Kingdom and France in Eastern Africa, drawing these two nations to the brink of war in their bid to control the African Upper Nile region.

The term was coined by Gerard Prunier in his work on the 1898 confrontation between the British and French troops in southern Sudan, which he also cited as the cause for the latter's swift and deep intervention in the Rwanda crisis. It has been named after the Fashoda Incident. On 4 November 1898, a contingent of French troops occupied the fort in Fashoda (now Kodok in South Sudan). They were forced to withdraw, however, after a larger Anglo-Egyptian army led by Lord Kitchener took over and the conflict resolved by the Anglo-French Declaration of 21 March 1899. The incident was seen as a diplomatic victory for the British and, as a result, French foreign policy began emphasizing an aggressive pursuit of French influence in areas in Africa that are susceptible to British influence. This policy defined the so-called Fashoda syndrome and did not only denote the Anglo-French tussle in Africa but also the balance of power between these two, which was considered redolent of realpolitik.

In The State of Africa, the British historian Martin Meredith explained:

Meredith also concluded that the 1990 French intervention in Rwanda was an expression of the "syndrome". Rwanda lies on the border between " Francophone " and " Anglophone " Africa. In 1990, there was a short-lived invasion by the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), a coalition of Tutsi exiles and those advocating democratic reform. Many of the RPF had grown up in Tutsi refugee camps in formerly British-controlled Uganda and had learned to fight in the Ugandan army, and Uganda was seen by Paris as being, at that time, within the British sphere of influence.

The Fashoda complex has been used in connection with foreign policies of other countries, particularly Egypt and Sudan. It was also the basis for the French interpretation of Laurent-Desire Kabila 's rebellion.

" Faubourg " (French: [ fo.buːʁ ]) is an ancient French term historically equivalent to "fore-town" (now often termed suburb or banlieue). The earliest form is forsbourg, derived from Latin forīs, 'out of', and Vulgar Latin (originally Germanic) burgum, 'town' or 'fortress'. Traditionally, this name was given to an agglomeration forming around a throughway leading outwards from a city gate, and usually took the name of the same thoroughfare within the city. As cities were often located atop hills (for defensive purposes), their outlying communities were frequently lower down. Many faubourgs were located outside the city walls, and "suburbs" were further away from this location (sub, "below"; urbs urbis, "city").

Faubourgs are sometimes considered the predecessor of European suburbs, into which they sometimes evolved in the 1950s and 1960s, while others underwent further urbanisation. Although early suburbs still preserved some characteristics related to faubourgs (the back alleys with doors, little break margins for houses, etc.), later suburbs underwent major changes in city planning, primarily in residential density.

Besides many French cities, faubourgs can still be found outside Europe in such places as the Canadian province of Quebec and the American city of New Orleans. The cities of Quebec and Montreal contain examples, but Montreal, with its far greater divergences in banlieues, has more similarity to Ontarian and American suburbs.

Faubourgs were prominent around Paris from the 16th century. At that time, Paris was surrounded by a city wall. But even outside the Louis XIII wall there were urbanised areas, and those were called faubourgs. In 1701, these faubourgs were annexed to the city, and at about the same time, the wall was demolished; where it once stood, there is now the chain of Great Boulevards that leads from Place de la Bastille via Place de la République and Place de la Madeleine to Place de la Concorde. The border of the city was transferred a few kilometers outwards, and the new borderline, which was in force until 1860, is now marked by the outer circle of boulevards passing through Place Charles de Gaulle in the west and Place de la Nation in the east.

In 1860, the border of the city was once more transferred a few kilometers outwards to where it still is. Haussmann's renovation of Paris erased many traces of ancient faubourgs and the term banlieue was then coined.

Many Parisian streets have retained their ancient denomination in spite of city growth; today it is still possible to discern pre-1701 delimitations in Paris by marking the point where a thoroughfare's name changes from rue to rue du faubourg. For instance, the rue du Faubourg Saint-Denis used to be located outside of the city wall and was an extension of the rue Saint-Denis within the walls. The rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré came about in a similar manner.

The term was also used in the early expansion of New Orleans beyond the original city plan, when French was still a common language in the colonial city. Faubourg Tremé and Faubourg Marigny, two of the oldest neighborhoods outside of the French Quarter, are persistent examples. Another examples are Faubourg Ste. Marie, originally (late 18th century) a residential area, which was overtaken by commerce, developing into the modern Central Business District, as well as Duplantier, Saulet, La Course, Annunciation, Nuns, Lafayette, Livaudais, Delassize, Plaisance, Delachaise, Bouligny, Avart, Daunois, Montegut, Montreuil, Duralde, Macarty, Caraby, Lesseps, Andry, and Ursulines

Greater Montreal no longer has any actual faubourgs on the main island, as the suburb now refers to the North and South Shores. However, place names such as le Faubourg St-Laurent are still occasionally used to refer to the sections of Ville-Marie.

Furthermore, the term des faubourgs de Montréal ("the Montreal suburbs") is preserved in some place names in the city proper, such as the annexes (branches) of the École des Métiers des Faubourgs-de-Montréal. There was also a Caisse des Faubourgs de Montréal in The Village, which in 2003 was closed down.

The term faubourg is still alive in Quebec City, where it is mostly used to designate the Saint-Jean-Baptiste neighbourhood, often called Faubourg Saint-Jean-Baptiste or even le faubourg by its inhabitants. The term also applies to the Saint-Roch and Saint-Sauveur areas, and the three neighbourhoods were, between the 2001 and 2013 municipal elections, comprised in the municipal district of les Faubourgs. The term also refers to the particular urbanistic features of these pre-industrial neighborhoods (like very narrow streets), compared to the other central, but much more recent, neighborhoods of Limoilou and Montcalm, that were mainly developed as 20th century streetcar suburbs.

La Française des Jeux (French pronunciation: [ la fʁɑ̃sɛːz de ʒø ] ; FDJ) is the operator of France's and the Republic of Ireland's national lottery games, and the title sponsor of the FDJ cycling team. The name of the company loosely translates as The French Company of Games. The company was previously owned and operated by the French government. In July 2018, the French government, which owned 72% of FDJ, took the company public and sold off 50% of its ownership to bolster public finances.

In addition to lottery games, the company also provides online games and sports betting markets, such as association football, cycling, rugby union, and track and field.

The company sponsors two professional cycling teams: Groupama–FDJ in the UCI World Tour since 1997, and FDJ Suez Futuroscope in the UCI Women's World Tour since 2017.

The French National Lottery, established in 1933, is the precursor to the current organization. Initially known as the "Société de la Loterie nationale et du Loto national" (SLNLN) in 1979, it was later renamed "France Loto" in 1989. This name change coincided with a significant restructuring of the company. The government's ownership stake increased from 51% to 72%, while ticket issuers' stake decreased from 49% to 20%. Employees and brokers were allowed to acquire stakes of 5% and 3% respectively. The capital was increased from 20 million to 500 million francs (equivalent to € 3 million to 76 million), enabling significant investments. In 1991, the organization underwent another name change and became "la Française des jeux". The success of the Loto in 1976, facilitated by advancements in computer technology and televised drawings, greatly contributed to the company's revival.

Traditionally, most lotteries around the world operated within their respective territories. However, European integration and the rise of the internet disrupted this monopoly situation in European Union countries. To address this, the Française des Jeux initiated cooperation with other European state lotteries, leading to the launch of a joint drawing game called Euro Millions in collaboration with the British and Spanish lotteries. In 2004, six more countries joined the collaboration: Austria, Belgium, Ireland, Luxembourg, Portugal, and Switzerland. The missions entrusted to the Française des Jeux impose management responsibilities. In 2005, the Française des Jeux contributed €2.33 billion to public finances and provided risk coverage through deductions from bets, benefiting the state, sports, and social finances.

In 2011, its subsidiary LB POKER, jointly owned with the Barrière Group, reported a loss of €30 million.

Beginning in 2006, FDJ implemented a program called "Responsible Gaming" as part of its Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) policy.

On 28 October 2009, the Française des Jeux announced its decision to use a shorter commercial brand name, "FDJ," in order to simplify and strengthen its image, ahead of the opening of the French online gambling market to competition. Alongside the name change, a new logo featuring a modernized four-leaf clover was unveiled.

In June 2011, Tracfin, the anti-money laundering unit of the French Ministry of Economy and Finance, reported that it had received 300 reports from the Française des Jeux for the year 2010.

In July 2015, the FDJ Board of Directors unanimously approved the strategic project for 2015–2020. The FDJ planned to invest over €400 million in technology and its physical network to accommodate the new digital usage patterns of its 27 million customers. By 2017, digital bets accounted for 11% of the total bets, a three and a half times increase compared to 2014. Over three years, bets increased by 17%, reaching €15.1 billion in 2017.

In December 2017, the French government initiated the privatization process of the Française des Jeux under the supervision of the banking group BNP Paribas. An initial public offering (IPO) was considered to take the company public, with the government retaining a "blocking minority" to ensure a minimum level of state ownership in the management. The sale of shares began in November 2019, with the state retaining a stake of approximately 20% after previously holding 72% of the capital.

In late March 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown in France, the Française des Jeux announced significant financial losses for the upcoming year. The company anticipated a monthly loss of €55 million due to a 50% decrease in bets caused by a sharp decline in attendance.

In 2022, as lockdown measures were lifted, the Française des Jeux experienced an 8.7% increase in bets, totaling €20.6 billion. The revenue also increased by 9.1% to €2.46 billion.

On 3 November 2023 La Française des Jeux purchased Premier Lotteries Ireland DAC, the operator of the Irish National Lottery, from Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan Board, An Post and An Post Pension Plan.

On 22 January 2024, the Française des Jeux proposed to acquire online betting firm Kindred for 27.95 billion Swedish kronor, aiming to become Europe's second-largest gaming operator and significantly expand its digital and international presence.

On 3 October 2024 the tender offer is accepted by more than 90% Kindred shareholders, thus starting a "squeeze out" process in Nasdaq Stockholm to delist Kindred.

In 2017, out of the €15.1 billion generated, nearly 95% was redistributed, with 6% allocated to the retail network (€0.9 billion). This distribution includes payouts to players (66.8%, equivalent to €10.1 billion in 2017), the retail network (6%, equivalent to €0.9 billion in 2017), and the community (21.8%, equivalent to €3.3 billion). The retail network comprises 30,800 points of sale, including tobacco shops, bars, and newsagents in mainland France, as well as village grocery stores and service stations in overseas territories.

In November 2019, FDJ announced the acquisition of Bimedia, a software publisher specializing in payment and point-of-sale solutions, with the aim of supporting the development and modernization of its retail network.

The Feast of the Pheasant (French : Banquet du Vœu du faisan, lit. ' Banquet of the Oath of the Pheasant ') was a banquet given by Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy on 17 February 1454 in Lille, now in France. Its purpose was to promote a crusade against the Turks, who had taken Constantinople the year before. The crusade never took place.

There are contemporary accounts of the banquet (notably the Memoirs of Olivier de la Marche, and the Chroniques of Mathieu d'Escouchy), which name and describe in much detail the lavish entertainments staged during the meal and even the various pieces of music performed, perhaps including Dufay 's motet Lamentatio sanctae matris ecclesiae Constantinopolitanae. At one point in the entertainment, according to the chronicles, an actor dressed as a woman in white satin clothes, personifying the Church of Constantinople (according to one hypothesis, played by Olivier de la Marche himself) entered the hall of the banquet riding on an elephant, led by a giant Saracen, to recite a "complaint and lamentation in a piteous and feminine voice" (" commença sa complainte et lamentacion à voix piteuse et femmenine "), requesting aid from the Knights of the Golden Fleece. It has been surmised that this was the moment when Dufay's motet would have been performed; other authors have conjectured that it was merely a moment of inspiration and that the motet was actually written later.

Also recounted is which music by Gilles Binchois was performed, that 24 musicians played inside an enormous pie, and a trick with a horse riding backwards.

The oath taken by the participants, the Vœux du faisan (lit. ' oath of the pheasant ') was in the tradition of the "bird oaths" of late medieval France, as popularized in the 14th century romance of the Voeux du paon.

Federation for a Democratic China (FDC; Chinese : 民主中國陣線) is a Canada-based political group that advocates the democratization of China through opposition of the Chinese Communist Party and the support of human rights. It was founded on September 22, 1989, in Paris, France, following the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests.

The group has members all over the world, including mainland China. Active members are located in Hong Kong, Taiwan, Canada, the United States, Australia, New Zealand, Britain, France, Germany, Japan, Thailand and other European and Asian countries.

The group was very active in the five years following the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 and was then substantially reinvigorated after 2003, with large congresses attracting a broad cross-section of leading Chinese democracy activists and exiles.

In 2005, Chen Yonglin, then Chinese consulate-general working in Sydney, defected to Australia in a formal claim for political asylum. Chen claimed that a network of 1,000 Chinese government spies was operating in Australia, leading the chairman of the Australian branch of the FDC to comment that such claims could "lead to [an] atmosphere of distrust and even antagonism towards the Chinese community."

On October 8, 2012, during the 11th Congress of the FDC, Sheng Xue, who lives in Canada, was elected as the president of the FDC. She was the first female president of the FDC, and the first female president of any major organization in the overseas Chinese pro-democracy movement.

On March 24, 2017, during the 13th Congress of the FDC, Chin Jin, who lives in Australia, was elected as president. Jin Xiuhong of the United States, Sheng Xue of Canada, Wang Dai of Japan and Zhang Jian of France were all elected as vice-presidents, and Luo Le from Canada was elected as the Chair of the Supervisory Committee.

Other former presidents of the FDC include Yan Jiaqi and Wan Runnan, who both lived in France during the FDC's initial stages and later moved to the United States. Wan Runnan later moved to Paris.

The group had 3000 members at its peak. By 2017, membership was reduced to 100. The group split in 2017.

Feminism in France is the history of feminist thought and movements in France. Feminism in France can be roughly divided into three waves: First-wave feminism from the French Revolution through the Third Republic which was concerned chiefly with suffrage and civic rights for women. Significant contributions came from revolutionary movements of the French Revolution of 1848 and Paris Commune, culminating in 1944 when women gained the right to vote.

Second-wave feminism began in the 1940s as a reevaluation of women's role in society, reconciling the inferior treatment of women in society despite their ostensibly equal political status to men. Pioneered by theorists such as Simone de Beauvoir, second wave feminism was an important current within the social turmoil leading up to and following the May 1968 events in France. Political goals included the guarantee of increased bodily autonomy for women via increased access to abortion and birth control.

Third-wave feminism since the 2000s continues the legacy of the second wave while adding elements of postcolonial feminism, approaching women's rights in tandem with other ongoing discourses, particularly those surrounding racism.

In November 1789, at the very beginning of the French Revolution, the Women's Petition was addressed to the National Assembly but not discussed. Although various feminist movements emerged during the Revolution, most politicians followed Rousseau 's theories as outlined in Emile, which confined women to the roles of mother and spouse. The philosopher Condorcet was a notable exception who advocated equal rights for both sexes.

The Société fraternelle de l'un et l'autre sexe ("Fraternal Society of Both Sexes") was founded in 1790 by Claude Dansart. It included prominent individuals such as Etta Palm d'Aelders, Jacques Hébert, Louise-Félicité de Kéralio, Pauline Léon, Théroigne de Méricourt, Madame Roland, Thérésa Cabarrús, and Merlin de Thionville. The following year, Olympe de Gouges published the Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen. This was a letter addressed to Queen Marie Antoinette which requested actions in favour of women's rights. Gouges was guillotined two years later, days after the execution of the Girondins.

In February 1793, Pauline Léon and Claire Lacombe created the exclusively-female Société des républicaines révolutionnaires (Society of Revolutionary Republicans—the final e in républicaines explicitly denoting Republican Women), which boasted two hundred members. Viewed by the historian Daniel Guérin as a sort of "feminist section of the Enragés ", they participated in the fall of the Girondins. Lacombe advocated giving weapons to women. However, the Society was outlawed by the revolutionary government in the following year.

The feminist movement expanded again in Socialist movements of the Romantic generation, in particular among Parisian Saint Simonians. Women freely adopted new lifestyles, inciting indignation in public opinion. They claimed equality of rights and participated in the abundant literary activity, such as Claire Démar 's Appel au peuple sur l'affranchissement de la femme (1833), a feminist pamphlet. On the other hand, Charles Fourier 's Utopian Socialist theory of passions advocated " free love." His architectural model of the phalanstery community explicitly took into account women's emancipation.

The Bourbon Restoration re-established the prohibition of divorce in 1816. When the July Monarchy restricted the political rights of the majority of the population, the feminist struggle rejoined the Republican and Socialist struggle for a "Democratic and Social Republic," leading to the 1848 Revolution and the proclamation of the Second Republic. The 1848 Revolution became the occasion of a public expression of the feminist movement, who organized itself in various associations. Women's political activities led several of them to be proscribed as the other Forty-Eighters.

During the culturally thriving times of the Belle Époque, especially in the late nineteenth century, feminism and the view of femininity experienced substantial shifts evident through acts by women of boldness and rejection of previous stigmas. The most defining characteristic of this period shown by these actions is the power of choice women began to take hold of. Such acts included these women partaking in nonstandard ways of marriage—as divorce during this time had been legally reinstalled as a result of the Naquet Laws —practicing gender role-defying jobs, and profoundly influencing societal ideologies regarding femininity through writings.

Feminist newspapers quickly became more widespread and took a role in transforming both the view of women and their rights. As this era held promise of equality, proceeding after the French Revolution, women still had yet to gain the title of equal citizens, making it a difficult and dangerous venture to publicize opinions promoting the advancement of women's rights. Among these newspapers, the most notable is Marguerite Durand's La Fronde, run entirely by women.

Some women organized a feminist movement during the Commune, following up on earlier attempts in 1789 and 1848. Nathalie Lemel, a socialist bookbinder, and Élisabeth Dmitrieff, a young Russian exile and member of the Russian section of the First International (IWA), created the Union des femmes pour la défense de Paris et les soins aux blessés ("Women's Union for the Defense of Paris and Care of the Injured") on 11 April 1871. The feminist writer André Léo, a friend of Paule Minck, was also active in the Women's Union. The association demanded gender equality, wage equality, right of divorce for women, and right to secular and professional education for girls. They also demanded suppression of the distinction between married women and concubines, between legitimate and natural children, the abolition of prostitution in closing the maisons de tolérance, or legal official brothels.

The Women's Union also participated in several municipal commissions and organized cooperative workshops. Along with Eugène Varlin, Nathalie Le Mel created the cooperative restaurant La Marmite, which served free food for indigents, and then fought during the Bloody Week on the barricades. On the other hand, Paule Minck opened a free school in the Church of Saint Pierre de Montmartre, and animated the Club Saint-Sulpice on the Left Bank. The Russian Anne Jaclard, who declined to marry Dostoievsky and finally became the wife of Blanquist activist Victor Jaclard, founded with André Léo the newspaper La Sociale. She was also a member of the Comité de vigilance de Montmartre, along with Louise Michel and Paule Minck, as well as of the Russian section of the First International. Victorine Brocher, close to the IWA activists and founder of a cooperative bakery in 1867, also fought during the Commune and the Bloody Week.

Famous figures such as Louise Michel, the "Red Virgin of Montmartre" who joined the National Guard and would later be sent to New Caledonia, symbolize the active participation of a small number of women in the insurrectionary events. A female battalion from the National Guard defended the Place Blanche during the repression.

In 1909, French noblewoman and feminist Jeanne-Elizabeth Schmahl founded the French Union for Women's Suffrage to advocate for women's right to vote in France.

Despite some cultural changes following World War I, which had resulted in women replacing the male workers who had gone to the front, they were known as the Années folles and their exuberance was restricted to a very small group of female elites. Victor Margueritte 's La Garçonne (The Flapper, 1922), depicting an emancipated woman, was seen as scandalous and caused him to lose his Legion of Honour.

During the Third Republic, the suffragettes movement championed the right to vote for women, but did not insist on the access of women to legislative and executive offices. The suffragettes, however, did honour the achievements of foreign women in power by bringing attention to legislation passed under their influence concerning alcohol (such as Prohibition in the United States), regulation of prostitution, and protection of children's rights.

Despite this campaign and the new role of women following World War I, the Third Republic declined to grant them voting rights, mainly because of fear of the influence of clericalism among them, echoing the conservative vote of rural areas for Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte during the Second Republic. After the 1936 Popular Front victory, although he had defended voting rights for women (a proposition included in the program of the French Section of the Workers' International party since 1906), left-wing Prime Minister Léon Blum did not implement the measure, because of the fear of the Radical-Socialist Party.

Women obtained the right to vote only after the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF) confirmed, on 5 October 1944, the ordinance of 21 April 1944 of the French Committee of National Liberation. Following the November 1946 elections, the first in which women were permitted to vote, sociologist Robert Verdier refuted any voting gender gap : in May 1947 in Le Populaire, he showed that women do not vote in a consistent way but divide themselves, as men, according to social classes.

Olga Petit, born Scheina Lea-Balachowsky and also referred to as Sonia Olga Balachowsky-Petit, became the first female lawyer in France on 6 December 1900.

Marital power (puissance maritale) was abolished in 1938. However, the legal repeal of the specific doctrine of marital power does not necessarily grant married women the same legal rights as their husbands (or as unmarried women) as was notably the case in France, where the legal subordination of the wife (primarily coming from the Napoleonic Code) was gradually abolished with women obtaining full equality in marriage only in the 1980s.

The Union des femmes françaises had its origins in France during the Second World War. Women's committees of the French Resistance were born of the grassroots Resistance committees created by Danielle Casanova. These women's committees gradually took shape at local levels, then at the regional and inter-regional level. They were regrouped within the Union des femmes françaises in the zone occupée and the Union des femmes de France in the zone libre. The leaders were Josette Dumeix, then Maria Rabaté for the northern zone, after the arrest of Danielle Casanova and Marcelle Barjonet. and Simone Bertrand in the zone libre.

Women were not allowed to become judges in France until 1946.

During the baby boom period, feminism became a minor movement, despite forerunners such as Simone de Beauvoir, who published The Second Sex in 1949.

The Second Sex is a detailed analysis of women's oppression and a foundational tract of contemporary feminism. It sets out a feminist existentialism which prescribes a moral revolution. As an existentialist, de Beauvoir accepted Jean-Paul Sartre 's precept that existence precedes essence ; hence "one is not born a woman, but becomes one". Her analysis focuses on the social construction of Woman as the Other, this de Beauvoir identifies as fundamental to women's oppression. She argues that women have historically been considered deviant and abnormal, and contends that even Mary Wollstonecraft considered men to be the ideal toward which women should aspire. De Beauvoir argues that for feminism to move forward, this attitude must be set aside.

Married French women obtained the right to work without their husband's consent in 1965. The Neuwirth Law legalized birth control in 1967, but the relative executive decrees were blocked for a couple years by the conservative government.

A strong feminist movement would only emerge in the aftermath of May 1968, with the creation of the Mouvement de libération des femmes (Women's Liberation Movement, MLF), allegedly by Antoinette Fouque, Monique Wittig and Josiane Chanel in 1968. The name itself was given by the press, in reference to the US Women's Lib movement. In the frame of the cultural and social changes that occurred during the Fifth Republic, they advocated the right of autonomy from their husbands, and the rights to contraception and to abortion.

The paternal authority of a man over his family in France was ended in 1970 (before that parental responsibilities belonged solely to the father who made all legal decisions concerning the children).

From 1970, the procedures for the use of the title " Mademoiselle " were challenged in France, particularly by feminist groups who wanted it banned. A circular from François Fillon, then Prime Minister, dated 21 February 2012, called for the deletion of the word "Mademoiselle" in all official documents. On 26 December 2012, the Council of State approved the deletion.

In 1971, the feminist lawyer Gisèle Halimi founded the group Choisir ("To Choose"), to protect the women who had signed "Le Manifeste des 343 Salopes" (in English " Manifesto of the 343 Sluts " or alternately "Manifesto of the 343 Bitches"), written by Simone de Beauvoir. This provocative title became popular after Cabu's drawing on a satirical journal with the caption: « Who got those 343 whores pregnant? »); the women were admitting to have had illegal abortions, and therefore exposing themselves to judicial actions and prison sentences. The Manifesto had been published in Le Nouvel Observateur on 5 April 1971. The Manifesto was the inspiration for a 3 February 1973, manifesto by 331 doctors declaring their support for abortion rights:

We want freedom of abortion. It is entirely the woman's decision. We reject any entity that forces her to defend herself, perpetuates an atmosphere of guilt, and allows underground abortions to persist....

Choisir had transformed into a clearly reformist body in 1972, and their campaign greatly influenced the passing of the law allowing contraception and abortion carried through by Simone Veil in 1975. The Veil Act was at the time hotly contested by Veil's own party, the conservative Union for French Democracy (UDF).

In 1974, Françoise d'Eaubonne coined the term " ecofeminism."

A new reform in France in 1985 abolished the stipulation that the father had the sole power to administer the children's property.

In 1999, Florence Montreynaud launched the Chiennes de garde NGO.

In the English-speaking world, the term " French feminism " refers to a branch of theories and philosophies by and about women that emerged in the 1970s to the 1990s. These ideas have run parallel to and sometimes in contradistinction to the political feminist movement in France but is often referred to as "French feminist theory," distinguished by an approach which is more philosophical and literary. Its writings tend to be effusive and metaphorical being less concerned with political doctrine and generally focused on theories of "the body". The term includes writers who are not French, but who have worked substantially in France and the French tradition.

In the 1970s, French writers approached feminism with the concept of écriture féminine (which translates as female, or feminine writing). Hélène Cixous argues that writing and philosophy are phallocentric and along with other French feminists such as Luce Irigaray emphasize "writing from the body" as a subversive exercise. The work of psychoanalyst and philosopher Julia Kristeva has influenced feminist theory in general and feminist literary criticism in particular. From the 1980s onwards the work of the artist and psychoanalyst Bracha Ettinger has influenced literary criticism, art history and film theory.

Through their own concept of French feminism, American academics separated and ignored the already marginalized self-identifying feminists, while focusing on the women theorists associated with Psych et po and other academics who did not always identify as feminists themselves. This division ended up placing more importance on the theories of the French feminists than the political agenda and goals that groups such as radical feminists and the MLF had at the time.

In the 2000s, some feminist groups such as Ni putes, ni soumises (Neither Whores, Nor Submissives) denounced an increased influence of Islamic extremism in poor suburbs of large immigrant population, claiming they may be pressured into wearing veils, leaving school, and marrying early. On the other hand, a " third wave " of the feminist movement arose, combining the issues of sexism and racism, protesting the perceived Islamophobic instrumentalization of feminism by the French Right.

After Ni Putes Ni Soumises activists were received by Prime Minister Jean Pierre Raffarin and their message incorporated into the official celebrations of Bastille Day 2003 in Paris, various left-wing authors (Sylvie Tissot, Elsa Dorlin, Étienne Balibar, Houria Bouteldja, etc.) as well as NGOs such as Les Blédardes (led by Bouteldja), criticized the racist stigmatization of immigrant populations, whose cultures are depicted as inherently sexist.

They underline that sexism is not a specificity of immigrant populations, as if French culture itself were devoid of sexism, and that the focus on media-friendly and violent acts (such as the burning of Sohane Benziane) silences the precarization of women. They frame the debate among the French Left concerning the 2004 law on secularity and conspicuous religious symbols in schools, mainly targeted against the hijab, under this light.

They claimed that Ni Putes Ni Soumises overshadowed the work of other feminist NGOs. After the nomination of its leader Fadela Amara to the government by Nicolas Sarkozy, Sylvie Tissot denounced a "state feminism" (an instrumentalization of feminism by state authorities) while Bouteldja qualified the NGO as an Ideological State Apparatus (AIE).

In January 2007, the collective of the Féministes indigènes launched a manifesto in honour of the Mulatress Solitude. Solitude was a maroon heroine who fought with Louis Delgrès against the re-establishment of slavery (abolished during the French Revolution) by Napoleon. The manifesto stated that "Western Feminism did not have the monopoly of resistance against masculine domination" and supported a mild form of separatism, refusing to allow others (males or whites) to speak in their names.

A few women held public office in the 1930s, although they kept a low profile. In 1936, the new Prime Minister, Léon Blum, included three women in the Popular Front government: Cécile Brunschvicg, Suzanne Lacore and Irène Joliot-Curie. The inclusion of women in the Popular Front government was unanimously appreciated: even the far-right candidate Xavier Vallat addressed his "congratulations" to Blum for this measure while the conservative newspaper Le Temps wrote, on 1 June 1936, that women could be ministers without previous authorizations from their husbands. Cécile Brunschvicg and Irène Joliot-Curie were both legally "under-age" as women.

Wars (both World War I and World War II) had seen the provisional emancipation of some, individual, women, but post-war periods signalled the return to conservative roles. For instance, Lucie Aubrac, who was active in the French Resistance —a role highlighted by Gaullist myths—returned to private life after the war. Thirty-three women were elected at the Liberation, but none entered the government, and the euphoria of the Liberation was quickly halted.

Women retained a low profile during the Fourth and Fifth Republic. In 1949, Jeanne-Paule Sicard was the first female chief of staff, but was called "Mr. Pleven 's (then Minister of Defence) secretary." Marie-France Garaud, who entered Jean Foyer 's office at the Ministry of Cooperation and would later become President Georges Pompidou 's main counsellor, along with Pierre Juillet, was given the same title. The leftist newspaper Libération, founded in 1973 by Jean-Paul Sartre, would depict Marie-France Garaud as yet another figure of female spin-doctors. However, the new role granted to the President of the Republic in the semi-presidential regime of the Fifth Republic after the 1962 referendum on the election of the President at direct universal suffrage, led to a greater role of the "First Lady of France". Although Charles de Gaulle 's wife Yvonne remained out of the public sphere, the image of Claude Pompidou would interest the media more and more. The media frenzy surrounding Cécilia Sarkozy, former wife of the former President Nicolas Sarkozy, would mark the culmination of this current.

Of the 27 cabinets formed during the Fourth Republic, only four included women, and never more than one at a time. SFIO member Andrée Viénot, widow of a Resistant, was nominated in June 1946 by the Christian democrat Georges Bidault of the Popular Republican Movement as undersecretary of Youth and Sports. However, she remained in office for only seven months. The next woman to hold government office, Germaine Poinso-Chapuis, was health and education minister from 24 November 1947 to 19 July 1948 in Robert Schuman 's cabinet. Remaining one year in office, her name remained attached to a decree financing private education. Published in the Journal officiel on 22 May 1948 with her signature, the decree had been drafted in her absence at the Council of Ministers of France. The Communist and the Radical-Socialist Party called for the repealing of the decree, and finally, Schuman's cabinet was overturned after failing a confidence motion on the subject. Germaine Poinso-Chapuis did not pursue her political career, encouraged to abandon it by Pope Pius XII.

The third woman to hold government office would be the Radical-Socialist Jacqueline Thome-Patenôtre, appointed undersecretary of Reconstruction and Lodging in Maurice Bourgès-Maunoury 's cabinet in 1957. Nafissa Sid Cara then participated in the government as undersecretary in charge of Algeria from 1959 till the end of the war in 1962. Marie-Madeleine Dienesch, who evolved from Christian-Democracy to Gaullism (in 1966), occupied various offices as undersecretary between 1968 and 1974. Finally, Suzanne Ploux was undersecretary for the Minister of National Education in 1973 and 1974. In total, only seven women acceded to governmental offices between 1946 and 1974, and only one as minister. Historians explain this rarity by underlining the specific context of the Trente Glorieuses (Thirty Glorious Years) and of the baby boom, leading to a strengthening of familialism and patriarchy.

Even left-wing cabinets abstained from nominating women: Pierre Mendès-France (advised by Colette Baudry) did not include any woman in his cabinet, neither did Guy Mollet, the secretary general of the SFIO, nor the centrist Antoine Pinay. Although the École nationale d'administration (ENA) elite administrative school (from which a lot of French politicians graduate) became gender-mixed in 1945, only 18 women graduated from it between 1946 and 1956 (compared to 706 men).

Of the first eleven cabinets of the Fifth Republic, four did not count any women. In May 1968, the cabinet was exclusively male. This low representation of women was not, however, specific to France: West Germany 's government did not include any women in any office from 1949 to 1961, and in 1974–1975, only 12 countries in the world had female ministers. The British government had exclusively male ministers.

In 1974, Valéry Giscard d'Estaing was elected President, and nominated 9 women in his government between 1974 and 1981: Simone Veil, the first female minister, Françoise Giroud, named Minister of the Feminine Condition, Hélène Dorlhac, Alice Saunier-Seité, Annie Lesur and Christiane Scrivener, Nicole Pasquier, Monique Pelletier and Hélène Missoffe. At the end of the 1970s, France was one of the leading countries in the world with respect to the number of female ministers, just behind Sweden. However, they remained highly under-represented in the National Assembly. There were only 14 female deputies (1.8%) in 1973 and 22 (2.8%) in 1978. Janine Alexandre-Derbay, 67-year-old senator of the Republican Party (PR), initiated a hunger strike to protest against the complete absence of women on the governmental majority's electoral lists in Paris.

This new, relative feminisation of power was partly explained by Giscard's government's fears of being confronted with another May 1968 and the influence of the MLF: "We can therefore explain the birth of state feminism under the pressure of contest feminism [ féminisme de contestation ]", wrote Christine Bard. Although the far-left remained indifferent to the feminisation of power, in 1974, Arlette Laguiller became the first woman to present herself at a presidential election (for the Trotskyist party Workers' Struggle, LO), and integrated feminist propositions in her party. Giscard's achievements concerning the inclusion of women in government has been qualified by Françoise Giroud as his most important feat, while others, such as Evelyne Surrot, Benoîte Groult or the minister Monique Pelletier, denounced electoral "alibis". The sociologist Mariette Sineau underlined that Giscard included women only in the low-levels of the governmental hierarchy (state secretaries) and kept them in socio-educative affairs. Seven women in eighteen (from 1936 to 1981) had offices related to youth and education, and four (including two ministers) had offices related to health, reflecting a traditional gender division. The important Ministry of Finances, Defence, Foreign Affairs and Interior remained out of reach for women. Only six women in eighteen had been elected through universal suffrage. The rest were nominated by the Prime Minister. Hélène Missoffe was the only deputy to be named by Giscard.

After the election of the socialist candidate François Mitterrand in 1981, a law sponsored by Yvette Roudy, called the "Roudy Law", was passed. This law had in it a ban on refusing promotion, training, or employment based on sex, and put the burden of proof on the employer (rather than the employee as it had previously been) regarding any conflict between the employee and their employer. The law also required employers to make a written report of "the measures taken during the past year to ensure gender equality in the workplace, the objectives planned for the coming year, and the definition of… the actions to be taken in this regard."

Left and right-wing female ministers signed the Manifeste des 10 in 1996 for equal representation of women in politics. It was opposed by feminist historian and psychoanalyst Elisabeth Roudinesco, who believed the existing legislation was sufficient.

Socialist Ségolène Royal was the first female presidential candidate to pass the first round of the French presidential election in 2007, confronting the conservative UMP candidate Nicolas Sarkozy. Sarkozy won in a tight contest, but one year later, polls showed voters regretted not sending Royal to the Élysée Palace and that she would win a 2008 match up with Sarkozy easily. She was a front-runner in their leadership election, which took place 20 November 2008 but was narrowly defeated in the second round by rival Martine Aubry, also a woman.

Joan Scott, a professor at the Institute for Advanced Study, stated: "There is a longstanding commitment to the notion that the French do gender relations differently – especially from prudish Americans – and that has to do with the French understanding of seduction. Seduction is the alternative to thinking about [sexual harassment] as sexual harassment." Christine Bard, a professor at the University of Angers, echoed those thoughts, saying that there is an "idealization of seduction à la Française, and that anti-feminism has become almost part of the national identity" in France.

The Court of Cassation authorized prosecution of spouses for rape or sexual assault in 1990. In 1992, the Court of Cassation convicted a man of the rape of his wife, stating that the presumption that spouses have consented to sexual acts that occur within marriage is only valid when the contrary is not proven. In 1994, Law 94-89 criminalised marital rape ; a second law, passed 4 April 2006, makes rape by a partner an aggravating circumstance in prosecuting rape. In 2025, the European Court of Human Rights ruled in H.W. v. France that under French law and the European Convention on Human Rights, "marital duties" do not and cannot include an obligation to have sex with one's spouse without one's consent (which is not presumed to exist within marriage), overruling earlier case law from lower courts in France.

Sexual harassment in the workplace was made subject to legal sanction in France starting only in 1992. The reach of those laws was not matched by vigorous enforcement, labor lawyers say. France's "reluctance to move more aggressively against sexual harassment reflects deeply rooted ideas about sexual relations and the relative power between men and women", said Scott.

France outlawed street sexual harassment in 2018, passing a law declaring catcalling on streets and public transportation is subject to fines of up to €750, with more for more aggressive and physical behavior. The law also declared that sex between an adult and a person of 15 or under can be considered rape if the younger person is judged incompetent to give consent. It also gives underage victims of rape an extra decade to file complaints, extending the deadline to 30 years from their turning 18.

Femmes solidaires (French pronunciation: [ fam sɔlidɛʁ ], "Women in solidarity") is a French feminist organisation in France, founded during the Second World War under the name Union des femmes françaises (UFF). The movement works for the defense and advancement of women's rights, gender equality, the liberal movement and international solidarity.

The origins of Femmes solidaires date to 1941, in the grass roots women's committees of the French Resistance, created by Danielle Casanova. These women's committees gradually took shape at local levels, then at the regional and inter-regional level. They were regrouped within the Union des femmes françaises in the zone occupée and the Union des femmes de France in the zone libre. Following the arrest of Danielle Casanova and Marcelle Barjonet, the leaders in the northern zone were Josette Dumeix, then Maria Rabaté with Simone Bertrand taking the lead in the southern zone libre.

The UFF was consolidated around 1943 within the communist resistance movement during the occupation of France by Nazi Germany. This organisation took a long time to establish itself, mainly due to arrests of its members by the Nazis or by the French Vichy regime.

In April 1944, the Francs-Tireurs et Partisans asked the UFF for help with its auxiliary services, requesting their members act as intelligence or liaison officers or as quartermasters. A steering committee composed of Yvonne Dumont, Françoise Leclercq, Irène Joliot-Curie, and Eugénie Cotton met on June 11 to evaluate the proposal. The UFF became a nationwide movement, which then applied to the National Council of the Resistance for recognition.

Before liberation, all of the individual committees had been unified by the French Communist Party (PCF) under the name of Union des femmes françaises pour la Zone nord (the Union of French Women for the northern Zone) and the Union des femmes françaises pour la Zone nord et d'Union des femmes de France de la Zone sud (Union of French Women for the southern Zone).

After liberation, they merged and were formally registered under the name " Union des femmes françaises ", becoming one of the main organisations of the PCF, and became official at a congress on 21 December 1944.

After the Liberation and during the Cold War years, Femmes solidaires was a "Communist mass-movement organisation" led by Jeannette Vermeersch and Claudine Chomat. Their magazine Femmes françaises was a key communication tool during that era.

Femmes solidaires is a national feminist movement of popular education made up of more than 190 local associations, established throughout France and its overseas departments.

The organisation's founding values are based on secularism, social diversity (:fr:mixité sociale), equal rights for women, peace, and freedom. It currently has almost 30,000 members and publishes the monthly Clara Magazine. Its social objectives were to combat all forms of discrimination and domination, particularly in the fields of employment rights, equality between men and women in the workplace, parity, and the fight against violence against women.

Femmes solidaires has special consultative status with the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations. The association is also involved in international solidarity campaigns and works with numerous feminist organisations in different countries around the world.

The term "feu" (French for "fire" from the Latin focus meaning hearth) meant, especially in the Middle Ages, the hearth, first in the strict sense (the place where the fire burns) and figuratively: the family home (cf. the expression "without fire or place") or the family itself. Very quickly, it was used as the basic unit for assessment, calculation, and collection of tax and it was called the "feu fiscal" meaning "fire tax".

For tax allocation, the principle was to divide the total amount required to be collected by the number of fires, which necessitated a census of fires which was called "réel". The task was relatively simple to perform to the level of an urban district, however it took on a whole different scale in a rural area or across a kingdom. Thus, the king of France only made a single fire census in his territory – in 1328. Yet the result was incomplete as it excluded the great fiefs (e.g. Guyenne and Flanders) and some Appanages. In addition, it became quickly outdated due to the Black Death. In 1426, the duke of Brittany made a "reformation of taxes" to limit exemptions (noble families had to prove their nobility) in all the provinces.

There were no records of fires by urban community or territorial division (bailliage or sénéchaussée in France). Yet their accuracy should be put in perspective: the provinces did not stop asking the central government for revisions, always for reduction, due to famine or epidemic. The total number of fires was therefore subject to hard bargaining between the central government and municipalities, regardless of the reality on the ground. In addition, the poorest families were grouped at the parish level as a single fire for joint taxation. This led to rounded off counts cut off from reality.

The "feu fiscal" became a purely theoretical unit, as distinguished from the "feu allumant" (fire lights) which corresponded to the family home. Its value varied depending on the year or on social status even within the same city. It could even be set arbitrarily. Thus, in 1426, the duke of Brittany decreed that a "fire" corresponded to three "estagiers" (heads of households).

The Taille roles were updated regularly during "visites de feu" (fire visits).

The population counts were, for the most part of the " Ancien Régime ", counted in fires, not real people. The French monarchy continued to focus on the counts by fire until 1726.

To estimate the number of inhabitants according to the given fires, some people applied a multiplier of 5. Thus for a population of 34 fires, 170 inhabitants are obtained. However, the conversion factor from fires to inhabitants is still under discussion among historians. The State of fires in 1328 counted 61,098 fires for Paris. The calculations on the numbers of population varied from 80,000 to 240,000 inhabitants. The coefficient of 5 was not a rule but an average indicator.

Across regions and eras, the multiplier varied. Serge Dontenwill: for the current department of the Loire under Louis XIV, using a coefficient of 4.5 (and following Jacques Dupâquier in his French population in the 17th and 18th centuries, PUF, 1993).

The Fichier des personnes décédées (transl. Register of deceased persons) is a central register of persons who have died in France since 1970. It is maintained by the national statistics bureau Institut national de la statistique et des études économiques (Insee). Since October 2019, the register has been accessible online free of charge and without registration.

The register contains deaths since 1970, inclusively. For the current year, there are monthly and quarterly files. For past years, the data are summarised in one file per calendar year.

Each entry concerns one person and contains the surname, first names, sex, date of birth, the Insee code of the place of birth (or country of birth for those born abroad), the name of the place of birth (for those born abroad also the name of the country of birth), the date of death, the Insee code of the place of death and the number in the death register of the respective municipality. The text fields contain only capital letters without diacritics.

Each data set is included in the file that corresponds to its date of processing at the Insee, not the date of death. The law gives French civil registry offices one week to report deaths to the Insee. For reports submitted in paper form by traditional mail, postal delivery and processing at the statistics bureau will cause an additional delay before the data are recorded. Public holidays or other circumstances affecting the work of the authorities involved may also cause delays. A file of the register published by Insee for a given period therefore usually contains a significant number of entries for previous reporting periods; conversely, not all deaths occurring during the reporting period are included in the file for that period. For example, the monthly file for March 2020 contained about 8,700 entries concerning deaths before 1 March, but the file was missing 9,500 cases of deaths in March that were not recorded until April.

For this reason, the numbers of deaths listed in the monthly files of the death register do not correspond to consolidated death statistics per period, such as the figures published by the Insee since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic in France, broken down by département.

Until 2017, access to the central death register was available only to certain commercial genealogy services, which Insee charged about 7,000 euros per year. Access subsequently became free of charge, but remained restricted to authorized companies bound by a licensing agreement with Insee.

However, on 17 May 2019, the French state's commission in charge of questions related to freedom of information and access to official data, CADA (Commission d'accès aux documents administratifs), decided at the request of a genealogical association that the central death register must immediately be made publicly accessible. The commission argued that the register was a set of administrative documents not containing any personal data in need of protection, since the persons concerned were not alive anymore. This sets the register apart from other civil status databases such as birth and marriage registers, for which a protection period of 75 years applies in France. For the same reason, the European Union 's General Data Protection Regulation was not applicable, according to CADA.

Following this decision, the Insee made the data freely available in October 2019 under the Open License for French government data. Today, they are accessible from at least two official web portals: the French state's open data portal data.gouv.fr and the Insee website, insee.fr. There is no legal guarantee for the correctness of the data.

On data.gouv.fr and on insee.fr the data can be downloaded as text files, although the file formats are not identical on both sites. Neither of the two sites offers search and display functionality for the data, and the Insee encoding of places is not resolved. However, since the further use of the data is not significantly restricted by the license terms, several genealogy services and other web service providers, such as Geneanet or Filae, offer all this functionality on their web portals. Some of these services require registration and/or a subscription, while others, such as deces.matchid.io, can be accessed free of charge and without registration.

Figun, also known as Figon and Figoun, is an extinct dialect of Ligurian that was spoken from 1470 to the 1920s in Provence, especially in the hinterland of Cannes and the surroundings of Grasse.

According to Frédéric Mistral, writer and poet in the Occitan, the name comes from the village of Figonia, a hamlet of Ventimiglia in the Province of Imperia. The first emigrants (20 families) from Figonia would have settled in Mons in 1461, and subsequently expanded – thanks to a prolific demographic growth – to Escragnolles in 1562. However, Figonia is believed to be a fictional place.

The origin of the word figun probably dates back to the Middle Ages and in Liguria referred to a segment of the poor, marginalized, and often nomadic population who consumed dried figs, a fruit abundant in the region that served as a substitute for sugar and honey among the poor. Some Figouns sold these fruits as itinerant vendors. Like all itinerant and nomadic people, dried fig sellers were not well-regarded; the term figun is therefore rather pejorative. It seems that the word figun was exported from the very region where those defined as such by the rest of the local population lived. In Provence, the word, borrowed from Ligurian, subsequently came to designate all the poor emigrants who came from Liguria in the 15th and 16th centuries, as well as their descendants who had preserved their dialect.

The Figouns of Mons were welcomed (in exchange for paying privileges) in two periods: 1260 and 1468.

After the Saracen raids of the Middle Ages and a plague, much of the area near the coast of Provence was uninhabited, so after the Saracens were defeated by William I of Provence, some areas remained uninhabited.

Between 1470 and 1562 the local feudal lords repopulated the area of Cannes and Grasse with inhabitants coming from the Diocese of Albenga–Imperia and the Diocese of Ventimiglia-Sanremo in the Riviera di Ponente and a part of the Republic of Genoa.

The Figouns mainly came from the Ventimiglia region (Nervia Valley, Pigna). As skilled masons, they participated extensively in the construction of the city and its ramparts. It was during their time that the olive tree was introduced to the region. They are often associated with the cultivation, trade, and preparation of figs (frigoule or frigoure), hence their name.

The settlers settled in Biot, Vallauris, Escragnolles and Mons near Cannes and Grasse. The dialect died out in Mons in the 1920s and has left very few written records.

The figoun dialect is an unstructured mix of Ligurian and Provençal, similar to that found in Escragnolles or Biot. Surnames such as Bosio, Brosco, Bruzon, Canille, Chappory, Chiappe, Chichon, Durante, Galliano, Machiavello, Massa, Monteverde, Olivero, Parody, Passano, Pisarello, Poggio, Porro, Restano, Risso, Sanguinetti, and Traverso are very common there.

Abbot Jean-Pierre Papon in 1780 reported one of the first accounts of this dialect and said "It is believed to be the language of the Saracens: this is a mistake, it is the old patois of Genoa."

The only example of Figun literature is the story E doue bessoune (Le due gemelle) by Rebuffel Pons, published in 1889, with the only existing copy of the story is still preserved at the Bibliothèque nationale de France in Paris. The extract from a probable Figun-French manuscript lexicon found in the archives of the Château de Beauregard in Mons and identified by Fiorenzo Toso as having similarities with an old patois from the northern region of Genoa.

Fin Gras du Mézenc is an appellation of origin for a French cattle-breeding product. It is protected at European level by a AOP ("Appellation d'Origine Contrôlée").

Its origins lie in an old practice of the farmers along the Mézenc massif, consisting of slowly fattening rigorously selected heifers and steers in their cowsheds with natural hay, also carefully picked, hay mowed in the high meadows, in order to sell them at Easter fairs. Fin gras probably owes its unique character to the hay used, which comes from a very specific mountain flora that includes plants such as Meum ("cistre" in common usage), which perfumes the meat. In addition, the hay is carefully harvested, sorted and distributed according to age-old local know-how. The animals - steers over 30 months old and heifers over 24 months old from various suckler breeds or from crosses between suckler and dairy breeds - are marketed by local butchers and restaurateurs, mainly located in the Haute-Loire and Ardèche regions.

The determination of farmers and elected representatives to preserve this tradition led, in 1994, to the creation of a scope statement including specifications with the aim of obtaining an AOC, which became a reality in 2006. The aim was to revitalize the region and preserve the intangible heritage of Mézencole agriculture.

This agricultural product is an integral part of the Mézenc culture, and helps to consolidate the coherence of this territory. As a result, a museum has been created to describe this agricultural product to tourists, and a Rural Excellence Project ("Pôle d'excellence Rurale") has been based since 2007 on the momentum created by the AOC recognition.

Fin gras du Mézenc is produced on the Mézenc massif, which rises to an average altitude of 1,100 meters. Located in the Haute-Loire and Ardèche départements, this massif also marks the boundary between the Loire basin, which flows into the Atlantic Ocean, and the Rhône basin, which flows into the Mediterranean Sea. The Loire also flows through this massif, at Mont Gerbier de Jonc.

From the 17th century onwards, the massif's farmland, often owned by nobles or religious communities, was farmed by local farmers or rented out to transhumant herds from Southern France. The lack of land for cultivation became more and more of a problem as the population grew, and the rent brought in by the herders was not sufficient. It was probably for these reasons that the intensification of work around hay to compensate for the lack of grazing developed in the Mézenc, giving rise to the fin gras.

The production of bœufs gras at Easter is a very old tradition in this massif. In 1680, the inventory of a wealthy farmer mentions his recipe for selling bœufs gras at Easter. Moreover, in 1760, the massif's breeders asked the authorities to build roads to enable them to sell their fattened animals at the Fay-sur-Lignon and Saint-Agrève fairs, the main outlets for their production. Manuscripts mention trade relations with the towns of Saint-Étienne, Lyon, Avignon, Marseille, and Montpellier. By 1724, Mézenc farmers were also supplying butchers in Valence, Crest, and Montélimar.

These oxen, generally aged between 12 and 15 years and too old for ploughing, were fattened all winter with unlimited hay before being sold at Easter. Their production became widespread in the 18th century. The quality of the hay was an essential factor in the success of this type of fattening, which is why the finest hay was set aside for distribution to the fattening animals. Numerous authors have praised the particular quality of this hay, such as Giraud-Soulavie as early as the end of the eighteenth century:

"The quality of the hay in these mountains is very suitable for fertilizing animals; the meadows nourish many aromatic plants, the grass is loose and fine; it never grows very high; this hay is carted into the barns with sledges that the oxen tread and carry up to the roof of the barn; and when this hay has fermented, it forms nothing more than a mass that is cut with an axe. Take some of this hay, make an infusion of it, and you'll have a very fragrant Eau vulnéraire, and much healthier than all those decoctions that starve the stomach."

Most of the animals used for this production were oxen that were too old for ploughing and belonged to the mézine breed, dominant on the massif at the time. This breed had a great aptitude for depositing the marbled intramuscular fat characteristic of fine fat. It has been extinct since 1978. In addition to locally raised beef, farmers also bought Aubrac cattle from the Laguiole region to fatten in the Mézenc.

The term "fin gras" ("fine fat") to designate the finely marbled meat produced in the Mézenc was used from the 19th century onwards by certain zootechnicians. At the time, however, the term did not find its way into everyday farming parlance, where it was more commonly referred to as "bœuf de Pâques" (Easter beef). The term became popular in the countryside much later, with the AOC recognition.

Recognition of this long-standing tradition was sought in 1995, when the area was awarded the AOC (Appellation d'Origine Contrôlée) label. The AOC guarantees consumers a link between an agricultural product and its associated terroir, in this case, the Mézenc massif. This notion of terroir encompasses both natural conditions such as climate, soils, and the flora that grows there; along with human dimensions, through the know-how and traditions that have been developed in this region. So it's more the specificity of the product that is claimed than a superior quality as in the case of a red label. To become official, an AOC must be approved by the Institut national de l'origine et de la qualité (INAO), and it is then necessary to prove, sometimes scientifically, the link between the terroir and the agricultural product in question. Finally, the AOC is the subject of a decree proposed by the INAO, which sets out all the specifications to be respected by the various players in the sector (production zone, practices, feed, breeds, etc.).

The AOC initiative was born in the 1990s out of a desire to revitalize the region's agriculture, which was suffering from a decline in the number of farmers, and consequently in local demographics, since agriculture is the region's main activity. The traditional production of fin gras was quickly identified as a tradition common to the Mézenc, and one that could become a unifying element for the region. So, in 1995, the Association des élus du Mézenc, now the Association Mézenc-Gerbier, brought together local Mézenc elected officials from the two administrative regions concerned, to set up a development project for the area, one of whose first objectives was to gain recognition for fin gras as an AOC. Initial tests were carried out between November 1995 and March 1996 on 150 animals, with the participation of INRA Theix and the two Regional Chambers of Agriculture. In 1996, a group of breeders set up the Fin Gras du Mézenc association. This association is responsible for supporting the project. In 1997, the dossier requesting recognition of the "Fin Gras du Mézenc" appellation as an AOC was submitted to the INAO. Between 1997 and 2001, various steps were taken to demonstrate the product's specificity, in which INRA took part in collaboration with the Association pour le développement de l'institut de la viande (ADIV) to characterize the meat's organoleptic properties. The specifications were refined between 2002 and 2005, before the INAO finally validated the project by passing the decree on March 27, 2006. The decree was published in the Journal Officiel on September 2, 2006.

The Mézenc massif has a rich tradition of haymaking and hay-drying on meadows, following in the footsteps of the other Massif Central mountain ranges. The combination of altitude, soil, and climate makes it possible to mow and dry hay. A distinctive flora has developed in these regularly mown high-altitude meadows. There are 68 plant species, including numerous Poaceae such as Alopecurus, triset, Festuca, bentgrass, and sweet vernal grass ; a significant proportion of Fabaceae such as clover and trefoil, and various plants characteristic of high-altitude meadows such as Meum, Viola, bistort, and broadleaf bluegrass. Mézenc hay owes its quality to the good forage quality of the species used in its composition, to the presence of particularly palatable plants such as Alpine fennel or Lady's mantle, to the high proportion of Fabaceae, and to the many medicinal plants (nearly 40) it contains, which may facilitate assimilation.

Meum, commonly known in this country as "cistre", is of particular importance. "Meat grass", as some farmers call it, is not eaten by animals when it is green in the pasture, but once dried it becomes very palatable and the animals eat a large quantity of the scented hay. As it is almost exclusively mown in the Mézenc, only animals from this region regularly consume it. It has been noted that the terpene composition of cistre, which gives it its fragrant properties, is close to that of Mézenc hay. What's more, a number of these terpenes are also found in the fat tissue of animals fed on this hay, linking the Mézenc terroir to the meat produced there.

The hay produced in Mézenc requires special attention because of its importance for the production of fattened livestock. That's why the region's livestock farmers pay particular attention to the quality of their hay meadows and to good harvesting and drying conditions, selecting the hay when it is distributed to the animals. The hay produced is easy to digest and has a good energy density of 0.7 forage units (FU) per kilogram of dry matter. The high proportion of Fabaceae results in a high nitrogen content, and a balanced forage from this point of view for the animals, with just over 100 PDI (digestible intestinal proteins) per UF. These values are higher than those obtained with most other mountain hays.

The meat produced weighs a minimum of 280 kg for heifers and 320 kg for steers. They feature a thin layer of white to creamy-white fat. The meat is red to purple in color. Tender to very tender, with fine marbling. It is a seasonal agricultural product, marketed from March to June.

Studies have been carried out to characterize the organoleptic properties of Mézenc fin gras meat. The Association pour le Développement de l'Institut des Viandes (ADIV), for example, has determined that in terms of tenderness, but above all taste and color, fin gras stands out from other meats taken as reference. Other taste tests have shown that it is the pot au feu that best displays the characteristics of fin gras meat, thanks to its gentle cooking and the absence of side dishes. It is the "animal" (tawny) aromatic note that best characterizes this meat. Grilled and braised meats, on the other hand, are much less distinguishable from other meats.

This particular agricultural product is well valued by farmers, who sell their animals for an average of €4.55 per kilogram of carcass in 2007, i.e. 30% more than outside the AOC. In fact, this price is on the rise, with an increase of 6% in 2007.

The AOC Fin Gras du Mézenc production zone covers 28 communes in the Mézenc massif, 14 of them entirely (Les Vastres, Saint-Clément, La Rochette, Borée, Lachamp-Raphaël, Sagnes-et-Goudoulet, Sainte-Eulalie, Fay-sur-Lignon, Chaudeyrolles, Freycenet-la-Tour, Freycenet-la-Cuche, Moudeyres, Les Estables and Le Béage) and 14 partially (Mazet-Saint-Voy, Araules, Champclause, Montusclat, Saint-Front, Laussonne, Monastier-sur-Gazeille, Présailles, Issarlès, Le Lac-d'Issarlès, Cros-de-Géorand, Usclades-et-Rieutord, Saint-Andéol-de-Fourchades and Saint-Martial).

These communes have been split up for various reasons. In particular, low-lying plains in valleys (less than 1,100 m), areas beyond the basaltic flows of the Mézenc, the wooded areas of the Meygal, and areas whose geology differs from the basalt of the Mézenc were excluded. This zone lies between the AOC Le Puy green lentil zone and the AOC chestnut zone of Ardèche, but does not overlap with either of these zones. The abattoir area is slightly larger, and includes the abbatoirs of Privas, Aubenas, Lamastre, Annonay, Langogne, Romans, Valence, Yssingeaux, and Le Puy-en-Velay.

Label-eligible animals are heifers aged no less than 24 months and castrated males aged no less than 30 months, raised in the above-mentioned communes. In the past, the bœufs gras produced in the Mézenc belonged to the mézine breed, a local breed that disappeared in the 1960s. But the particularity of the production comes more from the flora of the Mézenc and its hay rather than from the animals, and today most animals of meat or mixed breeds are accepted. For example, the specifications stipulate that animals used for fattening can belong to the Aubrac, Charolais, Limousin and Salers cattle breeds. Animals resulting from crosses between these breeds and crosses between a female Abondance or Montbéliarde and a Limousin or Charolais male are also authorized. Culard-type animals are not accepted by the AOC.

In 2007, the average age of the animals was 33 months, with an estimated carcass weight of 379 kg, two-thirds of which were classified R on the EUROP grid.

The animals fattened to produce fin gras come from both suckler and dairy farms, in similar proportions. Meat production on dairy farms is made possible by cross-breeding practices that are well established in the region. As a result, it's not uncommon for some very good crossbred animals to be fattened for fin gras.

One of the first stages in the production of fin gras after the birth of the animals is their selection. This is based on different criteria, depending on whether the farm is dedicated to meat or milk production. On suckler farms, males are selected according to their build at an early stage, as they are usually sold young as grazers, and males that are not kept should not remain on the farm for too long, at the risk of losing their value. Moreover, males should be castrated no later than 15 months of age. Heifers can be selected later. In general, selection takes place after the second wintering, before breeding. Here again, the animals' physical conformation is of prime importance. On dairy farms, calvings are often spread throughout the year, whereas on suckler farms, they are grouped together over the winter. The first sorting criterion is the age of the animals when they leave the barn, which must correspond to the criteria set for commercialization (just over 24 months for females and just over 30 months for males). The breeder's choice is ratified by the association's commission, which carries out checks on the selected animals to guarantee production quality.

The animals are raised consecutively in the meadow in summer, from June 21 to September 21 at least, and in the barn in winter, from November 30 to March 30 at least. The animals return for fattening before November 1. The fattening period lasts a minimum of 110 days, after which the animal can be finally slaughtered. During the winter, the animals are either tethered in the barn, or in animal stall. They are then kept on the feed fence for some time, due to the special feeding practices they undergo.

Certain feeding conditions must also be respected. These include a maximum stocking density of 1.4 UGB ("Unité de Gros Bétail") per hectare of forage area, and at least 0.7 ha of mown or grazed land for each animal qualifying for the label.

During their breeding period, the animals are fed in summer on natural pastures and the regain from hay meadows, and in winter on hay, which is distributed as much as they want. Both the pastures and the meadows from which the hay comes must be located in the AOC production zone. Protein and energy supplements may also be provided. Silage is prohibited throughout the production process, as are transgenic plants and growth promoters.

Meadows must have been planted at least ten years prior to use, and fertilized at least once every three years with organic fertilizers (manure, slurry or liquid manure), with mineral fertilization not to exceed 30 units per hectare per year. Only freshly mown hay may be used. It must be meadow-dried.

Fattening takes place in the barn for a minimum of 110 days. The animals are mainly fed unlimited amounts of hay, distributed at least four times a day (twice in the morning and twice in the evening), with the farmer having to remove the residue between each distribution. In this way, the cattle ingest a large quantity of hay, and a male can consume up to 15 kg a day. Most farmers say they reserve the best hay for fattening animals, giving them the bales in the center of the barn, but only the core of these bales. A supplement can be given to the animals if necessary, taking care not to fatten them too quickly. It must not exceed 700 g per 100 kg live weight daily, with a maximum of 4 kg for females and 5 kg for steers. At least four raw materials must be used in its composition, including two cereals. Only cereals, soybean, rapeseed, sunflower or linseed meal, peas, faba beans, lupins and molasses are accepted as raw materials, with mineral and vitamin supplements. Concentrates must contain at least 19% nitrogen, 1 FMU (meat forage unit) and have a PDI/ FMU ratio of 130.

Introduced at the time of the mad cow crisis, the AOC Fin Gras du Mézenc is now highly traceable. Animals destined for fattening are marked with tags that remove a fragment of cartilage from the ear. The DNA of the sample can be compared with that of a piece of meat at any time during the marketing process, thus guaranteeing perfect traceability from the farm to the butcher's stall.

In the slaughterhouse, carcasses are not sawed, instead they are cut in half using a cleaver that does not heat up the carcass or disperse sawdust. The carcasses must be well preserved so that the maturing process lasts longer. The ban on fat removal contributes to this objective by leaving a good covering layer of fat. Maturation lasts a minimum of ten days for quarters and half-carcasses, and three days for pieces of meat to be braised or boiled.

After slaughter, approved carcasses are stamped with the words "FGM" (for Fin gras du Mézenc). The meat is only to be cut up for final consumption.

Nowadays, nearly a hundred breeders in the Ardèche and Haute-Loire regions of France produce fin gras du Mézenc. They distribute their production to over 40 butchers and nearly 30 restaurants in the massif, as well as in the Loire, Drôme and Rhône regions. Among them is Régis Marcon, a restaurateur in Saint-Bonnet-le-Froid with three Michelin stars. Fin gras du Mézenc is not sold in supermarkets, where meat is sold under the name "bœuf de Pâques" (Easter beef), which does not comply with AOC specifications.

The AOC Fin Gras du Mézenc is managed by an association in charge of monitoring and controlling production, as well as communication initiatives around this agricultural product. A full-time technician is employed by the association to help breeders with their practices. He follows the animals on the farm, visiting them at least four times before they are slaughtered: during the first two wintering periods and twice during fattening. At each visit, the technician rates the animals according to an internal grid that focuses on their muscular development, state of fattening, and general appearance. This score is used to approve animals for fin gras production. The association is accredited as an "organisme de défense et de gestion" and can therefore carry out all these checks itself, and is sometimes inspected by a certifying body responsible for validating these procedures. The time spent on these visits is financed by the farmer-producers through their membership fees, which averaged €0.43 per kilogram in 2007.

Fin gras production is associated with many traditional events in its region of origin. Breeders, for example, are accustomed to presenting the live animal in front of the butcher before it is slaughtered. The production season is also marked by fairs, which have been held on specific dates for over a century. The first is at Le Béage, on the third Saturday before Easter Sunday, followed by the fair at Les Estables on the second Thursday before Easter Sunday. At these fairs, the breeders wear the traditional black habit and red scarf, to which they sometimes add the AOC logo. These fairs, some of which already existed in the 18th century, such as the one in Saint-Agrève, are an opportunity for breeders to present their products, and for butchers and restaurateurs to taste and promote them to consumers. Finally, the Fin Gras season comes to an end on the first Sunday in June with the Fête du Fin Gras, when the animals get ready to leave the cowshed. It's an opportunity to see farmers and animals parade around, as well as to enjoy street performances, a local produce market, and themed walks. The festival is also the occasion for a gathering of the Cercle International des Sources de grands fleuves, which includes the Rhône in Switzerland, the Danube in Germany, and the Po in Italy.

In February 2009, the Maison du Fin Gras was opened in Chaudeyrolles in the Haute-Loire department. This museum introduces visitors to the tradition of fin gras production and its links with the local terroir, showing the various stages in the farmer's work. In addition, markers made mainly of flagstones mark the entrance to the appellation zone along the main roads. Each of the villages in the area has been presented with one of these markers by the Fin Gras du Mézenc association, which intends to further emphasize the link between the region and its signature product.

Fin gras is one of the emblems of the Mézenc region, and has helped to unite the area, which is split between the Auvergne and Rhône-Alpes administrative regions. Indeed, it is at the heart of the Pôle d'Excellence Rural (rural excellence project), which was started here in December 2005.

The American Revolutionary War inflicted great financial costs on all of the combatants, including the United States, France, Spain and the Kingdom of Great Britain. France and Great Britain spent 1.3 billion livres and 250 million pounds, respectively. The United States spent $400 million in wages for its troops. Spain increased its military spending from 454 million reales in 1778 to over 700 million reales in 1781.

Tensions between Great Britain and the Thirteen Colonies began over rights and taxation. Regulations from the crown were met with fierce opposition from the colonists. After lobbies and petitions proved ineffective, the colonists turned to boycotting imported English goods. Boycotting proved to be successful in crippling British trade. After the first colonial boycott in 1765, Parliament overturned the Sugar and Stamp Acts, and after a second boycott in 1768 Parliament overturned all of the Townshend duties except for the tax on tea. The colonists persisted, and the American boycott of tea ultimately culminated in the Boston Tea Party of 1773. Despite the Revolution's widespread association with the colonists' aversion to higher taxes, it has been claimed that the colonists actually paid far less tax compared to their British counterparts.

British efforts to weaken the colonies included isolating their economy from the rest of the world by cutting off trade. With a navy that was many times more powerful than its American counterpart, the British had complete control over the American ports. The British took control of major port cities along the colonial east coast, and as a result, British warships were able to drastically reduce the number of ships that could successfully travel from the colonies. Consequently, the U.S. saw a fall in exported goods due to the relentless British blockade. Furthermore, Britain's naval strength was great enough to intimidate other nations and scare them away from exporting goods to the colonies, so smuggled and inexpensive imports became costly and rare.

The Continental Army under the direction of George Washington sought to engage in a war of attrition. Because the fight was on colonial soil, Washington aimed to take advantage of the lack of trade with Great Britain by cutting them off from necessary resources, hoping that eventually, the British army in North America would grow sick and tired. Under the Articles of Confederation, however, the Continental Congress did not have the power to impose taxes or regulate commerce in the colonies, and thus could not generate sufficient funds for a war of attrition.

To solve this problem, the Continental Congress sent diplomats including Benjamin Franklin to Europe in search of foreign support for the American cause. For the first two years of the war, the colonists received secretive private and public loans from the French, who held a lingering resentment for the British after the Seven Years' War. After the British defeat at Saratoga, however, foreign support for the Continental Army increased, and in 1778 the colonies signed a treaty with France, officially bringing them into the war with Great Britain. By the end of the war, the colonies had received loans from several different European nations, including a significant contribution from France, Spain and the Netherlands. In addition, the colonies received much private funding, most notably from the Marquis de Lafayette and the Baron of Kalb, both Frenchmen. This funding ultimately enabled them to fight the war of attrition that General Washington hoped for.

Because the French possessed a powerful navy, their entrance into the war weakened the British blockade on colonial ports and further cut off the British army from its Atlantic supply route. The British forces recognized that they would not last long without shipping in supplies, so in retaliation, the British redeployed some of their forces to the French Caribbean. Their hope was to capture French sugar islands and cut the French financial supply line. The new war in the Caribbean added to Britain's already large financial costs, yet unlike the colonies, the British were not successful in their attempts to garner foreign loans or armaments. Without economic assistance from other nations, the financial strain on Parliament and British taxpayers became increasingly burdensome and ultimately had a hand in wearing down the British forces and ending the war for independence.

As the war progressed, the Americans' deteriorating financial stability quickly became Britain's greatest asset. Because it did not possess the power to tax the colonists, the Continental Congress printed money at a rapid rate to fund the army's expenses and pay off its loans from foreign nations. As a result, the colonies experienced severe inflation and depreciation of the Continental dollar. The colonists also had great difficulty in financing a wartime effort against the British southern campaign, not effectively halting the British destruction until the battle of Yorktown in 1781. When the war ended in 1783, American negotiations, monetary policies, and government restructuring all contributed to paying off the American national debt.

The thirteen American states flourished economically at the beginning of the war. The colonies could trade freely with the West Indies and other European nations, instead of just Britain. Due to the abolition of the British Navigation Acts, American merchants could now transport their goods in European and American ships rather than only British ships. British taxes on expensive wares such as tea, glass, lead, and paper were forfeited, and other taxes became cheaper. Plus, American privateering raids on British merchant ships provided more wealth for the Continental Army.

As the war went on, however, America's economic prosperity began to fall. British warships began to prey on American shipping, and the increasing upkeep costs of the Continental Army meant that wealth from merchant ships decreased. As cash flow declined, the United States of America had to rely on European loans to maintain the war effort; France, Spain and the Netherlands lent the United States over $10 million during the war, causing major debt problems for the fledgling nation. Coin circulation had also begun to wane. Because of this, the United States began to print paper money and bills of credit to raise income. This proved unsuccessful, inflation skyrocketed, and the new paper money's value diminished. A popular saying circulated in the colonies because of this: anything of little value became "not worth a continental."

According to a 2010 Congressional Research Service report on the "Costs of Major U.S. Wars", the Revolution cost the United States the 2011 equivalent of $2.4 billion.

By 1780, the United States Congress had issued over $400 million in paper money to troops. Eventually, Congress tried to stop inflation by imposing economic reforms. These failed, and only further devalued the American currency. There is, however, some disagreement over the amount of currency issued. Between 1775 and 1783 the colonies experienced an average annual inflation rate of approximately 4.3%. The rate of inflation peaked at 29.78% in 1778. Numerous food riots were recorded as discontent grew over rapidly rising prices. The destruction of property and the continued issuing of Continentals by the Congress was another cause of currency devaluation. In addition, counterfeiting of American dollars was carried out by the British Government as an intentional means of sabotaging the war effort.

Late in the war, Congress asked individual colonies to equip their own troops and pay upkeep for their own soldiers in the Continental Army. When the war ended, the United States had spent $37 million at the national level and $114 million at the state level. The United States finally solved its debt problems in the 1790s when Alexander Hamilton founded the First Bank of the United States in order to pay off war debts and establish good national credit.

The American Revolutionary War took a heavy toll on Great Britain. The average cost for the war was £ 12 million a year (equivalent to 1.75 billion in 2018 terms by GDP). The UK spent 80 million on the war. When the war ended Britain had a national debt of £250 million (36.57 billion in 2018 about 20 pounds debt per capita vs. 11 pounds per capita average income) which generated a yearly interest of over £9.5 million (3.8 percent).

This debt was piled on to the already outstanding debt from the Seven Years' War 73 million in 1755 to 137 million in 1763. Servicing the debt cost 5 million annually when government revenue was 8 million. gobbling up 60% of the budgets in some of the years during the 1760s (relief from this burden is the main reason why Parliament wanted the Americans to pay for 7,500 troops to be permanently stationed in the Colonies from taxes levied on them): this only seemed fair since the British taxpayer was paying an average of 26 shillings a year during the Seven Years War while the Americans were paying one shilling The Treasury estimated the cost at 225,000 pounds but it was actually averaged 384,000 between 1763 and 1775 (about 5 shillings per annum per European settler (2 million) in 1775 in the Colonies and earlier. The Colonials, Whigs and Tories and neutrals, balked at these revenue-raising measures as an attack on traditional local autonomy.

Taxes on the British population increased during the war years, 1776–1783, and duties on some items such as glass and lead were also added, the average tax for the British public being four shillings in every pound (20 percent). Furthermore, the Royal Navy was not able to 'rule the waves' as it had done in the Seven Years' War.

Great Britain's trade with the thirteen American colonies fell apart once the American Revolution started, causing British businessmen, especially from the tobacco industry, to suffer. Income from the sale of woolen and metal products dropped sharply and export markets dried up. British merchant sailors also felt the pinch: it is estimated that 3,386 British merchant ships were seized by enemy forces during the war. However, Royal Navy warships did make up these losses somewhat, due to their own privateering efforts on enemy shipping, particularly Spanish and French merchant ships.

During the war, France shouldered a financial burden similar to that of Great Britain, as debt from the American Revolutionary War was piled upon already existing debts from the Seven Years' War. The French spent 1.3 billion livres on war costs equivalent to 100 million pounds sterling (at 13 livres to the pound). After the war ended, France had a debt of 3,315.1 million livres, a colossal sum of money at the time which put an enormous strain on the country's total fortune in terms of usable assets and productive capacity. The French tax collection system was highly inefficient. Large sums were lost to the Treasury. Indirect taxes were farmed out to private syndicates which made a sweet profit. In 1780 tax revenue was 585 million livres (43 million pounds) and the deficit was 25 million (3.3 million). Debt service was 43% of the budget (251 million livres = 18.8 million pounds). In 1788 this had grown to more than 50 million which provoked a crisis in Europe's most populous nation (not counting Russia) with a population almost 3 times that of Great Britain's, 9 million vs. 28 million.

The debt caused major economic and political problems for France, and, as the country struggled to pay its debts, eventually led to the Financial Crisis of 1786 and the French Revolution in 1789.

Spain's economic losses were not as great as those of the other belligerents in the American Revolutionary War. This was because Spain paid off her debts quickly and efficiently. However, Spain had nearly doubled her military spending during the war, from 454 million reales in 1778 to over 700 million reales in 1779. Spain's revenue loss was similar to Britain's since she lost a lot of income from her American colonies due to the war. To make up for the shortfall, Spanish governors introduced higher tax rates in the South American colonies, with little success. Spain's next move was to issue royal bonds to her colonies, also with limited success. Finally, in 1782 the first national bank of Spain – the Banco Nacional de San Carlos – was created to improve and centralize monetary policies.

The Seven Years' War (1756-1763) brought great financial burdens on Great Britain, Kingdom of Prussia, Austria, France, and Sweden. The costs of fighting a protracted war on several continents meant Britain's national debt almost doubled from 1756 to 1763, and this financial pressure which Britain tried to alleviate through new taxation in the Thirteen Colonies helped cause the American Revolution.

On the eve of the conflict, British statesmen feared war would increase Britain's national debt to dangerous levels, which by 1756 was £74.6 million. Philip Stanhope wrote a letter to a friend in 1756 warning that "our greatest danger arises from our expense, considering the present immense National Debt." Britain's national debt was already quite large by the start of the war: near the beginning of the 18th century it had around 80% of Gross National Product. Given that Britain had already spent substantial amounts of money on warfare throughout the late 17th and early 18th century, the Seven Years' War would exacerbate Britain's indebtedness (military spending as a percentage of central government spending averaged 74.6% between 1685 and 1813).

Great Britain spent more than £45 million on the navy during the war - around a quarter of its entire war expenditure.

By the end of the war, Britain's national debt stood at £132.6 million. Interests payments on the debt exceeded half of the British Government's budget. By December 1762, British naval debt had increased to £5,929,125 from £3,072,472 in 1749.

Commercial activity boomed in the Thirteen Colonies during the early years of the conflict. American merchants sold war supplies to British troops, and bought large stocks of materiel through cheap credit provided by British financiers. Imports into the American Colonies increased substantially. In 1757 there were £168,246 worth of imports; in 1758, £260,953; in 1759, £498,161; and in 1760, £707,998.

Once the British war effort started to focus more on the Caribbean and less on Canada in the 1760s, however, the American colonies' economies started to decline. American merchants had become over-supplied with consumer goods which they had bought with credit from British financiers. When the war effort in Canada eased up, the merchants found they could no longer sell the surplus goods so easily. American merchants found it difficult to repay the loans when the market for war materiel dried up. Additionally, merchants' operating costs rose when shipping insurance firms increased premiums to factor in the risks after Spain entered the war.

In 1766, Benjamin Franklin said in an address to Parliament that American colonists had spent millions of pounds contributing to the war effort.

France gave financial support to its allies. It gave a total of 11 million silver riksdalers (sd.) in subsidies to Sweden during the war.

France lost thousands of livres worth of shipping during the war. Royal Navy ships and British privateers took 1,165 French merchant ships as prizes. Great Britain did not make any substantial fiscal gains taking French ships during the war, however. According to Larry Neal, the taking of prizes "contributed a derisory share to the country's foreign trade" which peaked at 10% of Britain's international trade in 1757. France's shipping loses caused a sharp rise in maritime insurance costs. Before the war maritime insurance for merchant ships crossing the Atlantic Ocean costed roughly 3% of the declared value. During the first year of the war insurance rates costed ten times that and went up to 60% by the end of the war. The conflict prevented France from importing as much raw materials from its colonies as it had prior to 1756, which resulted in increased unemployment as French industry halted due to a lack of raw materials.

British forces captured French enclaves in Senegal and Gambia in 1758 which dealt two blows to the French economy: France lost its gum senega reserves necessary for its silk industry, and it lost a key trading station used for exporting slaves to the Caribbean, which gradually weakened France's sugar production in Guadeloupe and Martinique.

Great Britain annexed nearly all of French Canada during the war, but allowed France to keep its Caribbean colonies. The Duc de Choiseul, who was involved in the post-war negotiations which stripped France of its Canadian colonies, believed that the profits from the sugar trade in France's Caribbean colonies would make up for the loss of Canada, especially given that the fur trade had already collapsed earlier. Guadeloupe, for instance, produced more sugar than all of Britain's Caribbean possessions. See: A few acres of snow.

Nevertheless, the war did disrupt France's trade income. The lucrative sugar and molasses trade between France's Caribbean colonies and Britain's North American colonies fell apart when the war broke out, leading many merchants to turn to smuggling. French colonial trade declined by 81% following the Seven Years' War, according to one estimate. Another estimate puts France's colonial trade losses at 90%.

The following table shows France's average yearly value of overseas trade (in millions of livres) indicating a significant decline in trade during the Seven Years' War, especially from its American colonies.

Spain's international wars in the second half of the 18th century evidenced the empire's difficulties in reinforcing its colonial possessions and provide them with economic aid. This led to an increased local participation in the financing of the defense and an increased participation in the militias by the Chilean-born. Such development was at odds with the ideals of the centralized absolute monarchy. The Spanish did also formal concessions to strengthen the defense: In Chiloé Spanish authorities promised freedom from the encomienda those indigenous locals who settled near the new stronghold of Ancud (founded in 1768) and contributed to its defense. The increased local organization of the defenses would ultimately undermine metropolitan authority and bolster the independence movement.

Prior to the war Sweden's government ran yearly deficits financed by the National Bank of Sweden, so it had inadequate cash reserves upon the outbreak of hostilities. Sweden continued to take loans from the National Bank during the war and these accounted for 44% of its income. The Swedish East India Company lent 2 million sd. to the government in 1762 and 1763.

Inflation increased during the war. In 1755 there were 13.8 million sd. in circulation and 44 million sd. in circulation by 1763, affecting prices for all goods. A barrel of herring in Uppsala, for instance, costed 12 sd. in 1756 and 27 sd. by 1763.

Sweden also relied on war subsidies from its ally France. France paid subsidies to Sweden eight times between 1757 and 1761. The largest single subsidy was that of 1759 when France paid 3,797,699 sd. In total, France paid over 11 million sd. during these years.

Sweden's government established a nation-wide public lottery to raise funds in 1758 and 1759 which raised 5,800,000 sd. The winnings from the lottery were paid as government bonds rather than cash.

Fines herbes (French: [ fin.z‿ɛʁb ]) designates an important combination of herbs that forms a mainstay of French cuisine. The canonical fines herbes of French haute cuisine comprise finely chopped parsley, chives, tarragon, and chervil. These are employed in seasoning delicate dishes, such as chicken, fish, and eggs, that need a relatively short cooking period; they may also be used in a beurre blanc sauce for seasoning such dishes. Fines herbes are also eaten raw in salads.

The Mediterranean region, Western and Central Asia, the Indian subcontinent, South America, and East Asia are especially rich in these species.

In 1903, the renowned chef Auguste Escoffier noted that dishes labeled aux fines herbes were sometimes being made with parsley alone. In his Culinary Guide, Escoffier insisted that:

It is a mistake to serve, under the name Omelette aux fines herbes, an omelette in which chopped parsley furnishes the only aromatic note. This error is too widespread for us to hope to overturn it. Nevertheless, it should be stressed that an omelette aux fines herbes must contain: parsley, chives, and a little chervil and tarragon.

Thirty-five years later, under the entry "Fines Herbes", the authoritative Larousse Gastronomique of 1938 conceded that, generally speaking, an Omelette aux fines herbes was still most frequently being seasoned only with chopped parsley, but repeated Escoffier's admonition that it ought to contain a combination of fragrant herbs, "such as, parsley, chervil, tarragon, and also chives". For in former times this was the traditional practice (la pratique ancienne), when "to the aforementioned herbs, chopped mushrooms, and even truffles, would be added".

Julia Child also echoes Escoffier: "A mixture of fresh parsley, chives, tarragon, and chervil is called fines herbes ", while Alan Davidson, author of The Oxford Companion to Food, identifies chopped fresh parsley as the minimum basis of the fines herbes mix, with the addition of "any (or all) of: chervil, tarragon, chives", noting that the number of different herbs to be used is not fixed. Food scientist Harold McGee 's definition limits the number to tarragon, chervil, chive, and omits parsley. McGee also recommends that the herbs be finely chopped using a sharp knife rather than a food processor, "since food processors slice into herbs and introduce a lot of air and therefore aroma-altering oxygen".

A living tradition, such as cooking, is always subject to variation and re-creation. For example, in his memoirs, the late Pierre Franey, former chef at Le Pavillon and long-time New York Times columnist, vividly recalled his trepidation when as a teenaged apprentice chef, he was ordered to prepare a simple " omelette aux fines herbes —three eggs, chervil, parsley, tarragon, chives—the first omelette I was assigned to prepare for paying guests, after a considerable amount of practicing on others." In his anxiety he almost spoiled the dish. Yet, in his accompanying recipe for Americans printed in the same book, Franey substitutes basil for the chervil, doubtless because, especially in the United States, chervil, unless home-grown, can be very hard to obtain when fresh and is nearly useless when dried.

In general, definitions of the fines herbes group in American cook books have tended to be somewhat elastic. James Beard's Fireside Cookbook (1949), for example, contains a recipe for what he calls a "Fines Herbes Bowl", a dip featuring chopped parsley, chives, dill, chopped green pepper and salt, mixed into a pint of sour cream. In his subsequent discussion of "Salad Herbs", Beard lists: 1) Tarragon: "The most pleasant salad herb.... Use the fresh if you can"; 2) Chervil, which he calls "delicate and subtle"; 3) Fresh Dill, which Beard recommends especially for salads containing cucumber or cabbage; and 4) Sweet Basil: a "a natural complement to tomatoes". Beard identifies these four herbs (tarragon, chervil, dill, and basil) as, "the noblest of the salad herbs", noting parenthetically, however, that "some people like to use a little thyme or rosemary". Finally, the basis of the French fines herbes lineup: parsley, although not one of Beard's aforementioned "noble" salad herbs, yet "adds much to many salad mixtures, although in a green salad it has perhaps less place". The Mediterranean region, Western and Central Asia, the Indian subcontinent, South America, and East Asia are especially rich in these species

The "fines herbes" are sometimes contrasted with the more pungent or resinous "robust herbs" that appear in a bouquet garni and which, unlike fines herbes, release their flavour in long cooking. However, there is some inconsistency and overlap in terminology.

The fire service in France is organised into local fire services which mostly cover the Departments of France, with a few exceptions. There are two types of fire service:

There are approximately 246,900 fire service personnel in France operating 15,642 emergency vehicles out of 6,894 emergency centres. In addition to providing fire protection and rescue, the French fire service is also one of the providers of emergency medical services.

In French, firefighters are known as sapeurs-pompiers or informally as pompiers. The former originally refers to the military-based Paris Fire Brigade. Pompier (pumper) comes from the word for pump (pompe), referring to the manual pumps originally used for firefighting. Sapeur means sapper and refers to the first official firefighting unit created by Napoleon I, which was part of the military engineering arm. Firefighters in the Marseille Marine Fire Battalion are known as marins-pompiers (sailor-firefighters). The usual name of a civilian fire services is a service départemental d'incendie et de secours (SDIS) (Departmental Fire and Rescue Service). Young French citizens can fulfill the mandatory service Service national universel (SNU) in one of the fire brigades.

The Directorate General for Civil Defence and Crisis Management (DGSCGC) is the central administrative structure responsible for risk management in France, whether it concerns everyday accidents or major disasters. It includes several directorates:

The DGSCGC has at its disposal a civil defence headquarters (EMSC) and the general inspectorate for civil defence (IGSC). It employs approximately 3,000 civilian and military personnel spread over 60 sites.

The fire service is organized based on various departments. Each department has a Service Départemental d'Incendie et de Secours (SDIS, Departmental Fire and Rescue Service) responsible for operations within its territory, with a few exceptions:

Local fire departments also respond to medical calls and can send an ambulance, a multi-purpose response vehicle or even a fire apparatus. Here the cross-trained firefighters will provide care at the scene and transport for injuries or illness but are usually backed up by a SMUR unit for more serious or complex cases. Firefighters are trained to provide basic life support (BLS) care.

Although they also transport casualties and are, in any practical sense, ambulances, their vehicles are instead called a VSAV (véhicule de secours et d'assistance aux victimes – rescue and casualty assistance vehicle). Volunteer-staffed ambulances may be called VPS (véhicules de premiers secours – first aid vehicle). The VSAV and VPS are considered to be means of bringing rescue workers and equipment to the scene, with the evacuation of patients being the logical result of the response but not the primary duty of these response resources.

As of December 2015 there were 246,900 firefighters in France:

In addition they employed 11,910 medical responders and 10,900 administrative and support personnel. The jeunes sapeurs-pompiers (Junior fighters) and cadets numbered 27,800.

Civilian professional fire fighters are local government civil servants of class A, B, and C. Civil servants class A and B, and their volunteer counterparts, are trained at the National Fire College, École nationale supérieure des officiers de sapeurs-pompiers. Given their military origin, rank insignia follow those of the French Army.

Professional fire fighters class C are recruited from volunteer fire fighters or youth fire fighters, age 18 or above, with three years service as Sapper without a civil service exam. Corporals can be recruited with a civil service exam open to direct entry candidates who passed middle school, and through a civil service exam open to volunteer fire fighters or youth fire fighters, with three years service. In 2017, Sapeur de 1re classe was abolished and Sapeur de 2e classe was replaced by the rank of Sapeur, except for volunteers whose grades remained unchanged.

Promotion to Corporal can occur after three years as Sapper; to Chief Corporal after five years as Corporal. Sergents are selected through a civil service exam open to team leaders. Promotion to Adjudant and Chief Adjudant can occur after four years as Sergeant/Chief Sergeant.

Since 2013, Chief Adjutant is the highest NCO rank of most departments as the rank of Major has been abolished.

Professional fire fighters class B are recruited through civil service exams open to direct entry candidates with a foundation degree in engineering, and to fire fighters class C with four years service, leading to employment as Lieutenant 1st class; and through a civil service exam open to fire fighters class C qualified as senior crew commanders, leading to employment as Lieutenant 2nd class. 75% of the promotions from Lieutenant 2nd class to Lieutenant 1st class are through a civil service exam open to Lieutenants 2nd class with three years in the grade; 25 % through selection from Lieutenants 2nd class with five years in the grade. 75 % of the promotions from Lieutenant 1st class to Lieutenant above class are through a civil service exam open to Lieutenants 1st class with three years in the grade; 25 % through selection from Lieutenants 1st class with five years in the grade. Direct entry lieutenants 1st class are undergoing a 32 weeks course at the French Fire College (Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Officiers de Sapeurs-Pompiers). Lieutenants 2nd class are undergoing a 12-week course at the Fire College, while Lieutenants 1st class promoted from 2nd class, are in addition undergoing a course of 6 weeks.

Professional fire fighters class A are recruited through civil service exams open to direct entry candidates with a bachelor's degree in engineering, and to fire fighters class B qualified as sector commanders. Commandants are selected through a civil service exam from captains with three years in the grade; lieutenant-colonels from commandants with five years in the grade. Direct entry captains are undergoing a 42-week course, and internal entry captains a 10-week course, at the National Fire College.

Professional fire fighters class A+ hold senior management positions, such as brigade manager, deputy brigade manager, or senior expert for the government.

Colonels are recruited through civil service exams open to fire fighters class A qualified as area managers. They undergo a 32-week course at the National Fire College.

Colonels hors-classe are selected from colonels with four years in the grade; contrôleurs généraux from colonels hors-classe with at least 8 years’ experience as brigade manager, senior manager for the government, or similar positions that are listed by a decree.

The contrôleur général insignia has 2 pyres. However some officers who handle special responsibilities within the government have a 3 pyres insignia.

In 2015, the French fire services responded to 4,453,300 incidents, most of which were medical:

Paris and Marseille comprise 10% of the national total.

To buy a firearm in France, in line with the European Firearms Directive, a hunting license or a shooting sport license is necessary depending on the type, function and magazine capacity of the weapon.

In 1563, King Charles IX of France made an address to the Rouen parliament about forbidding firearms in which he made the following statement:

D'auantage cõsiderant que les meurtres, volleries, assassinats, & autres entreprinses, qui troublent le commun repos de nosdicts subects, s'exercent plus par les armes à feu, que nuls aultres : Défendons tresestroictement sur mesmes peines à toutes personnes, de quelque estat, dignité & qualité qu'ils soyent, porter ne faire porter par leurs gens & seruiteurs dedans les villes, ne par les champs, aucune hacquebute, pistolle ne pistolet, ne d'icelles tirer: sinon (...).

Considering that murders, robberies, killings & other enterprises, which disturb regularly the rest of our subjects, are more caused by firearms than any others: we forbid very strictly with the same punishment for everyone, of any state, dignity & quality they may be, to carry or have carried by their people & servitors neither within any town, nor in the countryside, any hacquebute, pistol nor pistolet, nor to use them: except (...)

Gun ownership was restricted until the Farcy law (Loi Farcy) of 1885, which liberalized gun ownership and production. This regime continued until 1939, when weapons were divided into categories and ownership of military calibre weapons was strictly regulated, almost prohibited. Political instability after WWII led to further regulation.

As of September 2015, classification has been simplified to 4 categories:

Any handgun ammunition is classified as Category B, for example, someone who owns a lever-action carbine in Category C chambered for.357 magnum needs to have a B-categorized weapon in order to buy.357 magnum ammunition.

Some exceptions exist for calibers like in Category C-6°.

Exceptions exist for children and teenagers with a shooting or clay pigeon licence and parental approval. A child aged between 9 and 12 can own D categorized weapon that shoot projectiles in a non-pyrotechnic way between 2 and 20 joules. Individuals between the ages of 12 and 16 can own C and D-categorized weapons. They can also own one-shot, rimfire Category B firearms if they participate in international shooting competitions (only with a shooting sport licence).

Individuals between the ages of 16 and 18 who have a shooting, hunting, or clay pigeon license can own C and D-categorized weapons. They can also own Category B firearms if they participate in international shooting competitions (only with a shooting sport licence).

Carrying a gun is defined as having a gun by one's side in a public place ready to use. Transporting a gun is defined as having an unloaded, locked or disassembled gun and having a legitimate reason for doing so in a public place. Some legitimate reasons to transport a firearm are activities such as hunting, sports shooting, collecting, or clay pigeon shooting. Personal defense, however, does not qualify as a legitimate reason. A special form allows a civilian to apply for a 1-year carry licence, which allows them to carry a handgun and a maximum of 50 rounds if they are "exposed to exceptional risks to their life". In practice, these licences are only issued to politicians. Hunting, collector, and clay pigeon licences only allow the transportation of D- and C-categorized weapons. A shooting sport licence allows transportation of all categories of weapons. Since the November 2015 Paris attacks, police officers are allowed to carry their service firearms while off duty.

Brandishing a firearm in public can result in charges for public disorder.

Fireworld is a French company that marketed "Invisible PC spy software" based on browser history and Facebook profile. It received international attention after the launch of software that allows parents to spy on their children to discover their sexual orientation.

The company received international media attention, including Gay Times and BBC News, Léa Marie translated the advertisement for Konbini: "How to be certain my son is gay. While most children are heterosexual, that's not the case for everyone, and while some are loud and proud about their homosexuality, some prefer to remain discreet. This article will help you determine whether or not your son is gay." French Secretary of State for Equality, Marlène Schiappa retweeted a post by L'Amicale des Jeunes du Refuge's, commenting that it showed that " homophobia and sexism have their roots in the same gender stereotypes. We will fight them together". Other "warning signs" listed by the company were: Taking good care of himself, preferring reading and the theater to sports, shyness, piercings and liking female singers and divas. Using software to spy on your child and to hack into his or her Facebook account is illegal under French law. A blog post from the company about the software states: "Family is fundamental... That’s why the sexual orientation of your children, directly responsible for the continuation of your family, is very important to you." The article makes no mention of female homosexuality.

The article was deleted following significant public backlash. In response to the criticism, Fireworld stated that the article had been created solely for search engine optimization (SEO) purposes and was not intended to be read by humans. They went on to say, "We regret not having reflected on the consequences of this type of content...". "We sincerely apologise to all those who may have felt offended by this content," they added.

Fireworld’s spyware allowed users to view and control computer activity remotely, log keystrokes, and capture screenshots.

The article listed clues that might cause a parent to suspect that their son might be gay. Some methods suggested by the article include "monitoring his Facebook use", seeing "if he has visited gay forums" and "spying on his private messages".

It is illegal in France to install spyware on a person's device in order to monitor it, without their knowledge.

The French Empire (French : Empire français ; Latin : Imperium Francicum), known retroactively as the First French Empire, and colloquially as Napoleonic France, was the empire ruled by Napoleon Bonaparte, who established French hegemony over much of continental Europe at the beginning of the 19th century. It lasted from 18 May 1804 to 6 April 1814 and again briefly from 20 March 1815 to 7 July 1815, when Napoleon was exiled to Saint Helena.

Historians refer to Napoleon's regime as the "First Empire" to distinguish it from the restorationist Second Empire (1852–1870) ruled by his nephew Napoleon III. Neither should be confused with the French colonial empire, which refers to France's various colonies, protectorates and mandate territories.

On 18 May 1804, Napoleon was granted the title Emperor of the French (Empereur des Français, pronounced [ ɑ̃pʁœʁ de fʁɑ̃sɛ ]) by the French Sénat conservateur and was crowned on 2 December 1804 (11 Frimaire year XIII), signifying the end of the French Consulate and of the French First Republic. Despite his coronation, the state continued to be formally called the " French Republic " until October 1808. The empire achieved military supremacy in mainland Europe through the War of the Third Coalition, where French armies scored a string of decisive victories against Austrian and Russian forces, most notably at the Battle of Austerlitz in 1805. French dominance was reaffirmed during the War of the Fourth Coalition, at the Battle of Jena–Auerstedt in 1806 and the Battle of Friedland in 1807, before Napoleon’s 1812 invasion of Russia led to the near complete loss of his army, and the French empire started to collapse in 1814 amidst the severe depletion of its army and a mounting invasion from all sides by several countries. French forces fought with stiff resistance and Napoleon held off coalition forces with a series of successive victories in February and March 1814 before he was eventually defeated in April. The following year, Napoleon managed to briefly restore the French empire before he was finally defeated at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815.

A series of wars, known collectively as the Napoleonic Wars, extended French influence to much of Western Europe and into Poland. At its height in 1812, the French Empire had 130 departments, a population over 44 million people, ruled over 90 million subjects throughout Europe, maintained an extensive military presence in Germany, Italy, Spain, and Poland, and counted Austria and Prussia as nominal allies. Early French victories exported many ideological features of the Revolution throughout Europe: the introduction of the Napoleonic Code throughout the continent increased legal equality, established jury systems and legalised divorce, and seigneurial dues and seigneurial justice were abolished, as were aristocratic privileges in all places except Poland. France's defeat in 1814 (and then again in 1815) marked the end of the First French Empire and the beginning of the Bourbon Restoration.

In 1799, Napoleon Bonaparte was confronted by Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès —one of five Directors constituting the executive branch of the French government—who sought his support for a coup d'état to overthrow the Constitution of the Year III. The plot included Bonaparte's brother Lucien, then serving as speaker of the Council of Five Hundred, Roger Ducos, another Director, and Charles Maurice de Talleyrand. On 9 November 1799 (18 Brumaire VIII under the French Republican Calendar) and the following day, troops led by Napoleon Bonaparte seized control. They dispersed the legislative councils, leaving a rump legislature to name Bonaparte, Sieyès, and Ducos as provisional Consuls to administer the government. Although Sieyès expected to dominate the new regime, the Consulate, he was outmaneuvered by Bonaparte, who drafted the Constitution of the Year VIII and secured his own election as First Consul. He thus became the most powerful person in France, a power that was increased by the Constitution of the Year X, which made him First Consul for life.

The Battle of Marengo (14 June 1800) inaugurated the political idea that was to continue its development until Napoleon's Russian campaign. The Peace of Amiens, which cost him control of Egypt, was a temporary truce. He gradually extended his authority in Italy by annexing the Piedmont and by acquiring Genoa, Parma, Tuscany, and Naples, and added this Italian territory to the Cisalpine Republic. Then he laid siege to the Roman state and initiated the Concordat of 1801 to control the material claims of the Pope. When he recognised his error of raising the authority of the Pope from that of a figurehead, Napoleon produced the Articles Organiques (1802) with the goal of becoming the legal protector of the papacy, like Charlemagne. To conceal his plans before their actual execution, he aroused French colonial aspirations and the memory of the 1763 Treaty of Paris, worsening British relations with France, whose borders now extended to the Rhine and beyond, to Hanover, Hamburg, and Cuxhaven. Napoleon would have ruling elites from a fusion of the new bourgeoisie and the old aristocracy.

On 12 May 1802, the French Tribunat voted unanimously, with the exception of Lazare Carnot, in favour of the Life Consulship for the leader of France. This action was confirmed by the Corps Législatif. A general plebiscite followed thereafter resulting in 3,653,600 votes aye and 8,272 votes nay. On 2 August 1802 (14 Thermidor, An X), Napoleon Bonaparte was proclaimed Consul for life. Pro-revolutionary sentiment swept through Germany aided by the "Recess of 1803", which brought Bavaria, Württemberg, and Baden to France's side. Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger, back in power in Britain, appealed once more for an Anglo-Austro-Russian coalition against France to counter French expansionism.

On 18 May 1804, Napoleon was given the title of " Emperor of the French " by the Senate ; finally, on 2 December 1804, he was solemnly crowned, after receiving the Iron Crown of the Lombard kings, and was consecrated by Pope Pius VII in Notre-Dame de Paris. In four campaigns, the Emperor transformed his " Carolingian " feudal republican and federal empire into one modelled on the Roman Empire. The memories of imperial Rome were for a third time, after Julius Caesar and Charlemagne, used to modify the historical evolution of France.

Although Napoleon’s planned invasion of Britain was abandoned after the defeat at Trafalgar, the army assembled at Boulogne became La Grande Armée, which went on to win decisive victories in the Ulm campaign and at Austerlitz.

In the War of the Third Coalition, Napoleon swept away the remnants of the old Holy Roman Empire and created in southern Germany the vassal states of Bavaria, Baden, Württemberg, Hesse-Darmstadt, and Saxony, which were reorganised into the Confederation of the Rhine. The Treaty of Pressburg, signed on 26 December 1805, extracted extensive territorial concessions from Austria, on top of a large financial indemnity. Napoleon's creation of the Kingdom of Italy, the occupation of Ancona, and his annexation of Venetia and its former Adriatic territories marked a new stage in the French Empire's progress.

To create satellite states, Napoleon installed his relatives as rulers of many European states. The Bonapartes began to marry into old European royal families, gaining sovereignty over many states. Older brother Joseph Bonaparte replaced the dispossessed Bourbons in Naples ; younger brother Louis Bonaparte was installed on the throne of the Kingdom of Holland, formed from the Batavian Republic ; brother-in-law Marshal Joachim Murat became Grand-Duke of Berg ; youngest brother Jérôme Bonaparte was made son-in-law to the King of Württemberg and King of Westphalia ; adopted son Eugène de Beauharnais was appointed Viceroy of Italy; and adopted daughter and second cousin Stéphanie de Beauharnais married Karl (Charles), the son of the Grand Duke of Baden. In addition to the vassal titles, Napoleon's closest relatives were also granted the title of French Prince and formed the Imperial House of France.

Met with opposition, Napoleon would not tolerate any neutral power. On 6 August 1806 the Habsburgs abdicated their title of Holy Roman Emperor in order to prevent Napoleon from becoming the next Emperor, ending a political power which had endured for over a thousand years. Prussia had been offered the territory of Hanover to stay out of the Third Coalition. With the diplomatic situation changing, Napoleon offered Great Britain the province as part of a peace proposal. To this, combined with growing tensions in Germany over French hegemony, Prussia responded by forming an alliance with Russia and sending troops into Bavaria on 1 October 1806. During the War of the Fourth Coalition, Napoleon destroyed the Prussian armies at Jena and Auerstedt. Successive victories at Eylau and Friedland against the Russians finally ruined Frederick the Great 's formerly mighty kingdom, obliging Russia and Prussia to make peace with France at Tilsit.

The Treaties of Tilsit ended the war between Russia and France and began an alliance between the two empires that held as much power as the rest of Europe. The two empires secretly agreed to aid each other in disputes. France pledged to aid Russia against the Ottoman Empire, while Russia agreed to join the Continental System against Britain. Russia also agreed to recognize the Confederation of the Rhine, as agreed on by the treaty. Napoleon also forced Alexander to enter the Anglo-Russian War and to instigate the Finnish War against Sweden in order to force Sweden to join the Continental System.

More specifically, Alexander agreed to evacuate Wallachia and Moldavia, which had been occupied by Russian forces as part of the Russo-Turkish War. The Ionian Islands and Cattaro, which had been captured by Russian admirals Fyodor Ushakov and Dmitry Senyavin, were to be handed over to the French. In recompense, Napoleon guaranteed the sovereignty of the Duchy of Oldenburg and several other small states ruled by the Russian emperor's German relatives.

The treaty removed about half of Prussia's territory: Cottbus was given to Saxony, the left bank of the Elbe was awarded to the newly created Kingdom of Westphalia, Białystok was given to Russia, and the rest of the Polish lands in Prussian possession were set up as the Duchy of Warsaw. Prussia was ordered to reduce its army to 40,000 men and to pay an indemnity of 100,000,000 francs. Observers in Prussia viewed the treaty as unfair and as a national humiliation.

Talleyrand had advised Napoleon to pursue milder terms; the treaties marked an important stage in his estrangement from the emperor. After Tilsit, instead of trying to reconcile Europe, as Talleyrand had advised, Napoleon wanted to defeat Britain and complete his Italian dominion. To the coalition of the northern powers, he added the league of the Baltic and Mediterranean ports, and to the bombardment of Copenhagen by the Royal Navy he responded with a second decree of blockade, dated from Milan on 17 December 1807.

The application of the Concordat and the taking of Naples led to Napoleon's first struggles with the Pope, centred around Pius VII renewing the theocratic affirmations of Pope Gregory VII. The emperor's Roman ambition was made more visible by the occupation of the Kingdom of Naples and of the Marches, and by the entry of General Sextius Alexandre François de Miollis into Rome; while General Jean-Andoche Junot invaded Portugal, Marshal Murat took control of formerly Roman Spain as Regent. Soon after, Napoleon had his brother, Joseph, crowned King of Spain and sent him there to take control.

Napoleon tried to succeed in the Iberian Peninsula as he had done in Italy, in the Netherlands, and in Hesse. However, the exile of the Spanish Royal Family to Bayonne, together with the enthroning of Joseph Bonaparte, turned the Spanish against Napoleon. After the Dos de Mayo riots and subsequent reprisals, the Spanish government began an effective guerrilla campaign, under the oversight of local Juntas. The Iberian Peninsula became a war zone from the Pyrenees to the Straits of Gibraltar and saw the Grande Armée facing the remnants of the Spanish Army, as well as British and Portuguese forces. General Pierre Dupont capitulated at Bailén to General Francisco Castaños, and Junot at Cintra, Portugal to General Arthur Wellesley.

Spain used up the soldiers needed for Napoleon's other fields of battle, and they had to be replaced by conscripts. Spanish resistance affected Austria, and indicated the potential of national resistance. The provocations of Talleyrand and Britain strengthened the idea that the Austrians could emulate the Spanish. On 10 April 1809, Austria invaded France's ally, Bavaria. The campaign of 1809, however, would not be nearly as long and troublesome for France as the one in Spain and Portugal. Following a short and decisive action in Bavaria, Napoleon opened up the road to the Austrian capital of Vienna for a second time. At Aspern, Napoleon suffered his first serious tactical defeat, along with the death of Marshal Jean Lannes, an able commander and dear friend of the emperor. The victory at Wagram, however, forced Austria to sue for peace. The Treaty of Schönbrunn, signed on 14 October 1809, resulted in the annexation of the Illyrian Provinces and recognised past French conquests.

The Pope was forcibly deported to Savona, and his domains were incorporated into the French Empire. The Senate's decision on 17 February 1810 created the title "King of Rome", and made Rome the capital of Italy. Between 1810 and 1812 Napoleon's divorce of Joséphine, and his marriage with Archduchess Marie Louise of Austria, followed by the birth of his son, shed light upon his future policy. He gradually withdrew power from his siblings and concentrated his affection and ambition on his son, the guarantee of the continuance of his dynasty, marking the high point of the Empire.

Undermining forces, however, had already begun to impinge on the faults inherent in Napoleon's achievements. Britain, protected by the English Channel and its navy, was persistently active, and rebellion of both the governing and of the governed broke out everywhere. Napoleon, though he underrated it, soon felt his failure in coping with the Peninsular War. Men like Baron von Stein, August von Hardenberg, and Gerhard von Scharnhorst had begun secretly preparing Prussia's retaliation.

The alliance arranged at Tilsit was seriously shaken by the Austrian marriage, the threat of Polish restoration to Russia, and the Continental System. The very persons whom he had placed in power were counteracting his plans. With many of his siblings and relations performing unsuccessfully or even betraying him, Napoleon found himself obliged to revoke their power. Caroline Bonaparte conspired against her brother and against her husband Murat; the hypochondriac Louis, now Dutch in his sympathies, found the supervision of the blockade taken from him, and also the defence of the Scheldt, which he had refused to ensure. Jérôme Bonaparte lost control of the blockade on the North Sea shores. The very nature of things was against the new dynasties, as it had been against the old.

After national insurrections and family recriminations came treachery from Napoleon's ministers. Talleyrand betrayed his designs to Klemens von Metternich and suffered dismissal. Joseph Fouché, corresponding with Austria in 1809 and 1810, entered into an understanding with Louis and also with Britain, while Louis Antoine de Bourrienne was convicted of speculation. By consequence of the spirit of conquest Napoleon had aroused, many of his marshals and officials, having tasted victory, dreamed of sovereign power: Marshal Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte, who had helped him to the Consulate, played Napoleon false to win the crown of Sweden. Marshal Jean-de-Dieu Soult, like Murat, coveted the Spanish throne after that of Portugal, thus anticipating the treason of 1812.

The country itself, though flattered by conquests, was tired of self-sacrifice. The unpopularity of conscription gradually turned many of Napoleon's subjects against him. Amidst profound silence from the press and the assemblies, a protest was raised against imperial power by the literary world, against the excommunicated sovereign by Catholicism, and against the author of the Continental Blockade by the discontented bourgeoisie, ruined by the crisis of 1811. Even as he lost his military principles, Napoleon maintained his gift for brilliance. His Six Days' Campaign, which took place at the very end of the War of the Sixth Coalition, is often regarded as his greatest display of leadership and military prowess. But by then it was the end (or "the finish"), and it was during the years before when various European states conspired against France. While Napoleon and his holdings idled and worsened, the rest of Europe agreed to avenge the revolutionary events of 1792.

Napoleon had hardly succeeded in putting down the revolt in Germany when the emperor of Russia himself headed a European insurrection against Napoleon. To put an end to this, ensure his own access to the Mediterranean, and exclude his chief rival, Napoleon invaded Russia in 1812. Despite his victorious advance, the taking of Smolensk, the victory on the Moskva, and the entry into Moscow, he was defeated by the country and the climate, and by Alexander's refusal to make terms. After this came the terrible retreat in the harsh Russian winter, while all of Europe was turning against him. Pushed back, as he had been in Spain, from bastion to bastion, after the crossing of the Berezina, Napoleon had to fall back upon the frontiers of 1809, and then—having refused the peace offered to him by Austria at the Congress of Prague (4 June – 10 August 1813), from fear of losing Italy, where each of his victories had marked a stage in the accomplishment of his dream—on those of 1805, despite the victories at Lützen and Bautzen, and on those of 1802 after his disastrous defeat at Leipzig, when Bernadotte —now Crown Prince of Sweden—turned upon him, General Jean Moreau also joined the Allies, and longstanding allied states, such as Saxony and Bavaria, forsook him as well.

Following his retreat from Russia, Napoleon continued to retreat, this time from Germany. After the loss of Spain, reconquered by an Allied army led by the Duke of Wellington, the uprising in the Netherlands preliminary to the invasion, and the manifesto of Frankfurt (1 December 1813) which proclaimed it, he was forced to fall back upon the frontiers of 1795; and was later driven further back upon those of 1792—despite the forceful campaign of 1814 against the invaders. Paris capitulated on 30 March 1814, and the Delenda Carthago, pronounced against Britain, was spoken of Napoleon. The empire briefly fell with Napoleon's abdication at Fontainebleau on 11 April 1814.

After less than a year's exile on the island of Elba, Napoleon escaped to France with a thousand men and four cannons. King Louis XVIII sent Marshal Michel Ney to arrest him. Upon meeting Ney's army, Napoleon dismounted and walked into firing range, saying "If one of you wishes to kill his emperor, here I am!" Instead of firing, the soldiers went to join Napoleon's side shouting " Vive l'Empereur! "; " Long live the Emperor! " Napoleon retook the throne temporarily in 1815, reviving the empire in the " Hundred Days ". However, he was defeated by the Seventh Coalition at the Battle of Waterloo. He surrendered himself to the British and was exiled to Saint Helena, a remote island in the South Atlantic, where he remained until his death in 1821. After the Hundred Days, the Bourbon monarchy was restored, with Louis XVIII regaining the French throne, while the rest of Napoleon's conquests were disposed of in the Congress of Vienna.

Napoleon gained support by appealing to some common concerns of the French people. These included dislike of the emigrant nobility who had escaped persecution, fear by some of a restoration of the Ancien Régime, a dislike and suspicion of foreign countries that had tried to reverse the Revolution—and a wish by Jacobins to extend France's revolutionary ideals.

Napoleon attracted power and imperial status and gathered support for his changes of French institutions, such as the Concordat of 1801 which confirmed the Catholic Church as the majority church of France and restored some of its civil status. Napoleon by this time, however, thought himself more of an enlightened despot. He preserved numerous social gains of the Revolution while suppressing political liberty. He admired efficiency and strength and hated feudalism, religious intolerance, and civil inequality.

Although a supporter of the radical Jacobins during the early days of the Revolution, Napoleon became increasingly autocratic as his political career progressed, and once in power embraced certain aspects of both liberalism and authoritarianism—for example, public education, a generally liberal restructuring of the French legal system, and the emancipation of the Jews—while rejecting electoral democracy and freedom of the press.

France justified the spread of her empire as one of spreading her superior culture, bringing Enlightenment thinking and modern civilisation to what they viewed as backwards peoples. However this consequently led to attitudes of contempt against many of the nations France conquered and repression against recalcitrant populations.

The flag of the Kingdom of France was one of the symbols of France under the Monarchy. Before the French Revolution, there was no single flag that legally and practically served all the roles of the modern tricolour flag – especially that of representing the nation or state itself, rather than the king personally. Public buildings did not fly a national flag; instead, they displayed the coat of arms of the relevant authority (royal, ducal, comital, episcopal, etc.), depending on who controlled the building.

That said, banners were the portable version of coats of arms and used the same colors and designs. As a result, many different flags were used by the army and navy, either to represent the identity of individual regiments or ships or to show which authority was in command. The same colors and symbols also appeared in servants’ liveries and military uniforms.

However, white gradually became the pre-eminent royal and “French” colour, especially from the Hundred Years’ War onwards. By the later centuries of the monarchy, a plain white flag was widely seen – though never formally declared – as the personal emblem of the king and, by extension, of the French state itself.. The tricolour flag, adopted during the Revolution and the Empire, was abandoned under the Restoration and replaced by a white flag, usually bearing the royal arms. It was itself abolished in 1830, and the tricolour was permanently restored.

The term " flag " dates from the 16th century and, under the Ancien Régime, was reserved for the colours of French and foreign infantry in the king's service. Before the French Revolution, France was characterised by the existence of several flags and ensigns. The blue flag with golden fleurs-de-lis was traditionally the flag that represented France.

In 1328, the coat of arms of the House of Valois was a blue field strewn with golden fleurs-de-lis and bordered in red. From that point on, French kings were commonly shown in illustrations and manuscripts wearing a red robe under a blue cloak covered with golden fleurs-de-lis. Around 1376, Charles V simplified the design by reducing the countless fleurs-de-lis to just three. In heraldic terms, the older version (with fleurs-de-lis scattered across the whole field) is called France ancien, while the newer, three- fleur-de-lis version is known as France moderne.

As early as 1339, the portolan chart made by the Majorcan Angelino Dulcert showed the Kingdom of France represented by a nearly square blue banner covered with golden fleurs-de-lis. The same symbol appeared on the Catalan Atlas commissioned by Charles V.

Banners displaying the royal arms of France were carried by the king’s armies and flown on his warships and merchant ships alike. Another important royal standard was the oriflamme of Saint-Denis a revered symbol of French kingship. Over time, however, the colour white began to play a larger role in royal and national symbolism, and this shift also affected the flags that were used.

In the 14th century two paintings show white standards atop the mast of a royal ship and a castle sheltering the royal family.

At the Battle of Mons-en-Pévèle on 18 August 1304, the French, at the request of Philip IV, adopted the white scarf.

The white cross first appeared as a French symbol during the early years of the Hundred Years’ War (1337–1453). It is not known whether the king himself or someone in the royal administration chose it. The earliest clear record of its use comes from 1355, when Count Jean d'Armagnac ordered everyone in his town and lands to wear a white cross when they went to fight against Prince of Wales, son of Edward III. The symbol might be even older. A later story about the famous French commander Bertrand du Guesclin says that he once killed an English knight, took the man’s equipment, and replaced the red cross of St George with a white one. If the story is true, the French historian Georges Minois believes it happened in 1347 or 1348.

During the reign of King Charles VI, the royal stables produced three large standards—one blue, one white, one red. The white standard showed a large golden sun in the centre, surrounded by many smaller golden suns. It was carried together with 1,500 white pennons, each decorated on both sides with a golden sun, for the king’s men-at-arms. The official inventory of the royal stables also lists white pennons scattered with shields of France, as well as white velvet banners embroidered with the French coat of arms and decorated with parrots.

The white cross, which by this time clearly stood for the French side in contrast to the red cross of the English and the red saltire of the Burgundians, was praised in a poem written for the coronation of Charles VII at Reims in 1429: “Long live the noble, white and proud cross of the beautiful garden of the noble fleurs-de-lis”. Joan of Arc 's famous white standard, which was dedicated to Jesus Christ and did not carry the royal arms of France, further helped make the colour white a sacred and national symbol in the Kingdom of France.

By the end of the Hundred Years’ War, the colour white had taken on a strong patriotic meaning for the French. Historian Philippe Contamine notes that on 25 June 1429, people in Talmont-sur-Gironde, saw a rider carrying a large white scarf. The sight terrified the local Bretons, who were fighting on the English side under Henry VI of England, because they took it as a sign of French victory. Likewise, Jean de Dunois, later recalled that on the morning of 20 August 1451, just before the English garrison of Bayonne surrendered to Charles VII’s army, a white cross was seen in the sky above the city.

During the Italian Wars, white was once again identified with the king and the Kingdom of France. Charles VIII descended into Italy with white silk standards bearing the shield of France. Upon entering Rome, he ordered the Jews to wear a white cross in order to protect them. When Charles VIII and Louis XII entered Italian cities, the people welcomed them by shouting "France" and wearing white clothes. In France, as in Italy, the reading of the royal entries indicates that the king's equipment was marked with the color white.

A royal cornette was worn during the Battle of Fornovo on 6 July 1495, by Charles du Mesnil-Simon, valet tranchant to Louis XI and Charles VIII. However, we know from Philippe de Commynes that this cornette was white. We also know that the cutler carried the pennant of France, made of purple velvet strewn with golden fleurs-de-lis, which suggests that the white cornette had replaced it before 1495. Father Anselme claims that the white cornette appeared during the Battle of Pavia in 1525.

This identification of white with France is evident, for example, in a text addressed to Henry II by an author in the early second half of the 16th century. Placed beneath the equestrian statue believed to be that of Philip VI in Notre-Dame de Paris (actually of Philip IV the Fair), it extolled the immaculate whiteness of the Gallic banners.

During the French Wars of Religion, Protestants wore the white scarf as a symbol of the purity of their faith, while Catholics wore the red scarf of the Spanish. Henry III resumed the white scarf to thank the troops of the then-Protestant Henry of Navarre for saving him on 8 May 1589.

Subsequently, Henry IV imposed white through multiple decisions: an ordinance of July 18, 1590, required the king's loyalists to wear a white sash, and another of June 1, 1594, prohibited anyone from going to the king's camp without a white cross sewn on their clothing or a white scarf. Earlier, during the Battle of Ivry on 14 March 1590, did not the same Henry IV, on horseback, shout to his troops the famous rallying cry: “Rally to my white plume!”? And isn't this referred to when we “bring out” the famous playful riddle: “What color was Henry IV's white horse?”?

The term "drapeau" appeared in France in the 16th century, in 1578, for the colours of foot soldiers. It came from Italy.

The companies of foot soldiers created by Charles VII and Louis XI were first called "bandes", then regiments in 1569. They were issued flags, most bearing the white cross. However, great diversity of colours characterised them, and after the Battle of Fleurus (1690) on 1 July 1690—when French artillery fired on French regiments—all flags, standards, and guidons were given a white cravat attached to the top of the staff beneath the spearhead.

A peculiarity of French infantry was that each regiment carried two flags: the drapeau colonel (white with a white cross) and the drapeau d'ordonnance (variable colours with a white cross).The white cross remained on infantry flags until 1794, and the white scarves or cravats became tricolour from 1790.

Under Louis XIII, the white cockade appeared, though it coexisted with the black cockade of certain units.

While blue flags with golden fleurs-de-lis were used until the end of the Ancien Régime, French ships carried red flags with white crosses from the 15th century onwards. In the 16th century blue ensigns with a white cross became general for the merchant navy. This blue flag with a white cross can be seen at the top of the mast of a ship in a painting from the Ursuline monastery in Quebec City in 1650. Francis I and Henry III legislated to impose this blue flag with a white cross.

After Louis XIII abolished the title of Admiral of France France in January 1627, French warships replaced the former white cornette (a long pennant) with a plain white flag, which then became the standard ensign of the royal navy. Later, in an ordinance dated 9 October 1661, Louis XIV ordered that warships should fly a white flag bearing the royal coat of arms of France, while merchant vessels were required to use a blue flag with a white cross.

Then, by a decision of March 25, 1765, the white flag was generalized to the merchant navy, making white the sole representative of the French nation at sea. King Charles III of Spain abandoned the white ensign with Spanish arms and by decree of 28 May 1785 ordered the red-and-yellow ensign that became the modern Spanish flag.

The white ensign was celebrated by Jean de La Varende : "The extraordinary ensign, the immaculate ensign, the foremost ensign in the world and the most august, the one that needed no decoration, no heraldic device: the white ensign!"

While the French army had its own flags, there was no official flag flown over public buildings to indicate the king’s presence or the seat of royal authority—though white standards were sometimes displayed during celebrations.

However, the white flag was sometimes used for festive purposes in the 17th and 18th centuries. For example, the Palais de la Félicité, built for the Parisian carousel in April 1612, was decorated with seven long white banners with two tails, as shown in an anonymous painting in the Musée Carnavalet. During the Parisian celebrations for the marriage of Madame Élisabeth, daughter of Louis XV, to the Infante Philip, there was a spectacle on the Seine, where a column was topped with a white flag.

Toward the end of the Ancien Régime, the only places on land where the white ensign was regularly seen were ports, where it marked the entry point into French territory. On 3 March 1781 Louis XVI issued an ordinance that formally extended the use of the white ensign on land to signify royal jurisdiction on foreign soil. Merchants soon adopted the practice as well, hoisting plain white flags over their warehouses.

By the ordinance of 12 May 1814, the white ensign was restored during the First Restoration (1814–1815) and then for fifteen years during the Second Restoration (1815–1830), and it was given functions it had not possessed under the Ancien Régime.

During the 1814 Campaign of France, white cockades were worn in several places as a spontaneous show of support for the Bourbon monarchy, even before the Allied powers had officially decided France’s future. For example, when Austrian troops entered Dijon, locals displayed white cockades in defiance of Allied instructions.

On 12 February 1814, when the Duc d'Angoulême arrived in Bordeaux, Mayor Jean-Baptiste Lynch greeted the prince wearing the white scarf and hoisting the white flag. Then, on 31 March 1814, as Allied troops entered Paris, tens of thousands of French people put on white cockades to welcome them and signal their loyalty to the returning royal family.

On 13 April 1814 the provisional government decreed that the white cockade was the French cockade, to be worn throughout the army, and that the white ensign would be flown by warships and merchant vessels.,.

After the Hundred Days, Marshal Masséna urged Louis XVIII to allow the use of the tricolour cockade in order to secure a warmer popular welcome. The king declined, yet he was greeted with even greater enthusiasm than in 1814.

On 9 November 1815, a law on the suppression of seditious shouts and incitement to rebellion made it a criminal offence (among other acts) to remove or damage the white flag.

From May 1814 the king issued new flags to the army: a white field charged with the shield of France (the crowned escutcheon) formed the basis of the new symbolism. On 7 September 1814 the flags of the Paris National Guard were distributed at the Champ de Mars.

Several royal ordinances specified army flags under the Restoration.

On December 3, 1817, a regulation specified the flags of the merchant navy: in accordance with an ordinance of 1765, shipowners could add a mark of recognition to the French flag, which was entirely white with no ornamentation. The French flag had to be flown at the stern, and, in the absence of a flagpole, at the mizzenmast.

In 1819 the first official French album appeared under the title Pavillons des puissances maritimes. For France it showed:

The ordinance on service aboard of the royal navy, signed 31 October 1827 at the Tuileries Palace, specified that the ship commanded by the Admiral of France flies the white square flag with the arms of France crossed in saltire from the mainmast.

On 11 June 1828 the king specified ensigns to be flown aboard vessels visited by royal family members:

At the start of the Restoration, with no official land flag defined, public buildings flew the plain white naval ensign. Many found it too plain, so white flags decorated with fleurs-de-lis or the full royal arms soon became common. For example:

The Restoration also used the banner and pennon of France, both square, of violet velvet semé of golden fleurs-de-lis, for certain ceremonies such as the funeral of Louis XVIII.

The absence of the white flag on the flagpole of the Tuileries clock tower, which signaled the king's absence, contributed to the discouragement of the soldiers fighting the riot. The last white flag flying over Paris was that of the royal Hôtel des Invalides, whose governor, Lieutenant-General Marquis de Latour-Maubourg, refused to surrender and only did so after the king's departure for Rambouillet on 31 July 1830. The four companies of bodyguards who accompanied the king handed over their four standards to him on August 15 before his departure into exile. The government of Louis Philippe I, titled King of the French, restored the tricolour

Since 1830 legitimists have remained attached to the white flag, which to them symbolises the tradition of the Most Christian Kings, Eldest Sons of the Church.

Flamiche (French: [ fla.miʃ ]) is a French savoury tart, originating in north-west France. It dates to medieval times and originally was a kind of galette, but in its modern version is a tart made with leeks and cream.

Two possible derivations have been advanced for the word flamiche : either that it comes from flamme, 'flame', as the dish was traditionally cooked in a wood-burning oven, or that it is a corruption of vlamiche – Flemish (the dish being native to north-west France, close to the border with Flanders).

The term dates from medieval times. Jean Froissart 's Chronicles, dating from the 14th century, mention people eating "a little torte in the manner of a flamiche or beignet to comfort their stomachs". In his Dictionarie of the French and English Tongues (1611), Randle Cotgrave applies the term to "a cake made of butter, cheese, flower, and yolkes of egges".

The 18th-century scholar Legrand d'Aussy described the flamiche as it was made in his time: "It is a kind of galette made with baker's dough. It is rolled out with a rolling pin and put in the oven while the wood is burning. As soon as it has been thoroughly heated, it is taken out of the oven and spread with butter. It is eaten as soon as it comes out of the oven". In his Encyclopédie méthodique (1782) Jacques Lacombe describes a flamiche as "A kind of pastry made with salty fatty cheese, butter, eggs, flour & seasoning. The dough is cut into thick pieces of two fingers, and baked in the oven".

As late as the 1880s there is no mention of leeks in the definition in the Dictionnaire de la langue française : "Name, in some provinces, of a pastry made of cheese, butter and eggs", but in 1910 a French journal described a flamiche as "a flour dough, buttered inside with leeks cut into small pieces", originating in Péronne, Somme. In Larousse Gastronomique (1938), Prosper Montagné wrote, "Nowadays the name flamiche is given to a kind of leek tart made in Burgundy and Picardy." In 1998, Simon Hopkinson wrote of "La Flamiche aux Poireaux: a buttery leek pie – a famed speciality of Alsatian cookery". Montagné does not specify the type of pastry to be used; Hopkinson uses puff ; Elizabeth David suggests a crumbly shortcrust ; Anne Willan uses a yeast dough similar to that used in pizzas. Clarissa Dickson Wright specifies a brioche dough, and although her recipe contains leeks, she comments that flamiche "can be filled with whatever you like".

Flemish people or Flemings (Dutch : Vlamingen [ ˈvlaːmɪŋə(n) ] ; French : Flamands) are the Dutch-speaking inhabitants of Flanders. They constitute the largest linguistic and cultural community in Belgium, accounting for about 60% of the country's population.

Flemish was historically a geographical term, as all inhabitants of the medieval County of Flanders in modern-day Belgium, France and the Netherlands were referred to as "Flemings" irrespective of their ethnicity or language. The contemporary region of Flanders comprises a part of this historical county, as well as parts of the medieval Duchy of Brabant and the medieval County of Loon, where the modern national identity and culture gradually formed.

The sense of "Flemish" identity increased significantly after the Belgian Revolution. Prior to this, the term " Vlamingen " in the Dutch language was in first place used for the inhabitants of the former County of Flanders. Flemish, however, had been used since the 14th century to refer to the language and dialects of both the peoples of Flanders and the Duchy of Brabant.

In 1830, the southern provinces of the United Netherlands proclaimed their independence. French-dialect speaking population, as well as the administration and elites, feared the loss of their status and autonomy under Dutch rule while the rapid industrialization in the south highlighted economic differences between the two. Under French rule (1794–1815), French was enforced as the only official language in public life, resulting in a Francization of the elites and, to a lesser extent, the middle classes. The Dutch king allowed the use of both Dutch and French dialects as administrative languages in the Flemish provinces. He also enacted laws to reestablish Dutch in schools. The language policy was not the only cause of the secession; the Roman Catholic majority viewed the sovereign, the Protestant William I, with suspicion and were heavily stirred by the Roman Catholic Church which suspected William of wanting to enforce Protestantism. Lastly, Belgian liberals were dissatisfied with William for his allegedly despotic behaviour.

Following the revolt, the language reforms of 1823 were the first Dutch laws to be abolished and the subsequent years would see a number of laws restricting the use of the Dutch language. This policy led to the gradual emergence of the Flemish Movement, that was built on earlier anti-French feelings of injustice, as expressed in writings (for example by the late 18th-century writer, Jan Verlooy) which criticized the Southern Francophile elites. The efforts of this movement during the following 150 years, have to no small extent facilitated the creation of the de jure social, political and linguistic equality of Dutch from the end of the 19th century.

After the Hundred Years War many Flemings migrated to the Azores. By 1490 there were 2,000 Flemings living in the Azores. Willem van der Haegen was the original sea captain who brought settlers from Flanders to the Azores. Today many Azoreans trace their genealogy from present day Flanders. Many of their customs and traditions are distinctively Flemish in nature such as windmills used for grain, São Jorge cheese and several religious events such as the imperios and the feast of the Cult of the Holy Spirit.

Within Belgium, Flemings form a clearly distinguishable group set apart by their language and customs. Various cultural and linguistic customs are similar to those of the Southern part of the Netherlands. Generally, Flemings do not identify themselves as being Dutch and vice versa.

There are popular stereotypes in the Netherlands as well as Flanders which are mostly based on the 'cultural extremes' of both Northern and Southern culture. Alongside this overarching political and social affiliation, there also exists a strong tendency towards regionalism, in which individuals greatly identify themselves culturally through their native province, city, region or dialect they speak.

Flemings speak Dutch (specifically its southern variant, which is often colloquially called ' Flemish '). It is the majority language in Belgium, being spoken natively by three-fifths of the population. Its various dialects contain a number of lexical and a few grammatical features which distinguish them from the standard language. As in the Netherlands, the pronunciation of Standard Dutch is affected by the native dialect of the speaker. At the same time East Flemish forms a continuum with both Brabantic and West Flemish. Standard Dutch is primarily based on the Hollandic dialect (spoken in the northwestern Netherlands) and to a lesser extent on Brabantic, which is the most dominant Dutch dialect of the Southern Netherlands and Flanders.

Approximately 75% of the Flemish people are by baptism assumed Roman Catholic ; however, a still-diminishing minority of less than 8% attends Mass on a regular basis and nearly half of the inhabitants of Flanders are agnostic or atheist. A 2006 inquiry in Flanders showed 55% chose to call themselves religious and 36% believe that God created the universe.

The official flag and coat of arms of the Flemish Community represents a black lion with red claws and tongue on a yellow field (or a lion rampant sable armed and langued gules). A flag with a completely black lion had been in wide use before 1991 when the current version was officially adopted by the Flemish Community. That older flag was at times recognized by government sources (alongside the version with red claws and tongue). Today, only the flag bearing a lion with red claws and tongue is recognized by Belgian law, while the flag with the all-black lion is mostly used by Flemish separatist movements. The Flemish authorities also use two logos of a highly stylized black lion which show the claws and tongue in either red or black. The first documented use of the Flemish lion was on the seal of Philip d'Alsace, count of Flanders of 1162. As of that date the use of the Flemish coat of arms (or a lion rampant sable) remained in use throughout the reigns of the d'Alsace, Flanders (2nd) and Dampierre dynasties of counts. The motto "Vlaanderen de Leeuw" (Flanders the lion) was allegedly present on the arms of Pieter de Coninck at the Battle of the Golden Spurs on July 11, 1302. After the acquisition of Flanders by the Burgundian dukes the lion was only used in escutcheons. It was only after the creation of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands that the coat of arms (surmounted by a chief bearing the Royal Arms of the Netherlands) once again became the official symbol of the new province East Flanders.

The first sizeable wave of Flemish migration to Canada occurred in the 1870s, when Saint Boniface proved a popular destination for work in local flour mills, brick yards and railway yards. Similarly, Flemish were drawn to smaller villages in Manitoba, where jobs in farming were available. In the early 20th century, Flemish settled in significant numbers across Ontario, particularly attracted by the tobacco-growing industry, in the towns of Chatham, Leamington, Tillsonburg, Wallaceburg, Simcoe, Sarnia and Port Hope.

The original County of Flanders encompassed areas which today belong to France and the Netherlands, but are still host to people of Flemish descent and some continued use of Flemish Dutch. Namely, these are Zeelandic Flanders and the Arrondissement of Dunkirk (historically known as French Westhoek). The people of North Brabant also share related ancestry.

There were migrations of Flemish people to medieval and early modern Poland. The Flemming noble family of Flemish origin first settled in Pomerania and modern Poland in the 13th century with the village of Buk becoming the first estate of the family in the region. The family reached high-ranking political and military posts in Poland in the 18th century, and Polish Princess Izabela Czartoryska and statesman Adam Jerzy Czartoryski were their descendants. There are several preserved historical residences of the family in Poland.

Flemish architects Anthonis van Obbergen and Willem van den Blocke migrated to Poland, where they designed a number of mannerist structures, and Willem van den Blocke also has sculpted multiple lavishly decorated epitaphs and tombs in Poland.

Flemish people also emigrated at the end of the fifteenth century, when Flemish traders conducted intensive trade with Spain and Portugal, and from there moved to colonies in America and Africa. The newly discovered Azores were populated by 2,000 Flemish people from 1460 onwards, making these volcanic islands known as the "Flemish Islands". For instance, the city of Horta derives its name from Flemish explorer Josse van Huerter.

Prior to the 1600s, there were several substantial waves of Flemish migration to the United Kingdom. The first wave fled to England in the early 12th century, escaping damages from a storm across the coast of Flanders, where they were largely resettled in Pembrokeshire by Henry I. They changed the culture and accent in south Pembrokeshire to such an extent, that it led to the area receiving the name Little England beyond Wales. Haverfordwest and Tenby consequently grew as important settlements for the Flemish settlers.

In the 14th century, encouraged by King Edward III and perhaps in part due to his marriage to Philippa of Hainault, another wave of migration to England occurred when skilled cloth weavers from Flanders were granted permission to settle there and contribute to the then booming cloth and woollen industries. These migrants particularly settled in the growing Lancashire and Yorkshire textile towns of Manchester, Bolton, Blackburn, Liversedge, Bury, Halifax and Wakefield.

Demand for Flemish weavers in England occurred again in both the 15th and 16th centuries, but this time particularly focused on towns close to the coastline of East Anglia and South East England. Many from this generation of weavers went to Colchester, Sandwich and Braintree. In 1582, it was estimated that there could have been around 1,600 Flemish in Sandwich, today almost half of its total population. London, Norwich and North Walsham, however, were the most popular destinations, and the nickname for Norwich City F.C. fans, Canaries, is derived from the fact that many of the Norfolk weavers kept pet canaries. The town of Whitefield, near Bury, also claims to owe its name to Flemish cloth weavers that settled in the area during this era, who would lay their cloths out in the sun to bleach them.

These waves of settlement are also evidenced by the common surnames Fleming, Flemings, Flemming and Flemmings.

In the United States, the cities of De Pere and Green Bay in Wisconsin attracted many Flemish and Walloon immigrants during the 19th century. The small town of Belgique was settled almost entirely by Flemish immigrants, although a significant number of its residents left after the Great Flood of 1993.

The fleur-de-lis, also spelled fleur-de-lys (plural fleurs-de-lis or fleurs-de-lys), is a common heraldic charge in the (stylized) shape of a lily (French fleur ' flower ' and lis ' lily '). Most notably, the fleur-de-lis is depicted on multiple flags of Quebec and on the traditional coat of arms of France that was used from the High Middle Ages until the French Revolution in 1789, and then again in brief periods in the 19th century. This design still represents France and its royal dynasty in the form of marshalling on the arms of other countries and jurisdictions, including Spain, Quebec and Canada.

Other European nations have also employed the symbol. The fleur-de-lis became "at one and the same time, religious, political, dynastic, artistic, emblematic, and symbolic", especially in French heraldry. The Virgin Mary and Saint Joseph are among saints often depicted with a lily.

Some modern usage of the fleur-de-lis reflects "the continuing presence of heraldry in everyday life", often intentionally, but also when users are not aware that they are "prolonging the life of centuries-old insignia and emblems".

Fleur-de-lis is the stylized depiction of the lily flower. The name itself derives from ancient Greek leírion (λείριον) > Latin lilium > French lis.

The lily has always been the symbol of fertility and purity, and in Christianity it symbolizes the Immaculate Conception.

According to Pierre-Augustin Boissier de Sauvages, an 18th-century French naturalist and lexicographer :

The old fleurs-de-lis, especially the ones found in our first kings' sceptres, have a lot less in common with ordinary lilies than the flowers called flambas [ in Occitan ], or irises, from which the name of our own fleur-de-lis may derive. What gives some colour of truth to this hypothesis that we already put forth, is the fact that the French or Franks, before entering Gaul itself, lived for a long time around the river named Lys in the Flanders. Nowadays, this river is still bordered with an exceptional number of irises —as many plants grow for centuries in the same places—: these irises have yellow flowers, which is not a typical feature of lilies but fleurs-de-lis. It was thus understandable that our kings, having to choose a symbolic image for what later became a coat of arms, set their minds on the iris, a flower that was common around their homes, and is also as beautiful as it was remarkable. They called it, in short, the fleur-de-lis, instead of the flower of the river of lis. This flower, or iris, looks like our fleur-de-lis not just because of its yellow colour but also because of its shape: of the six petals, or leaves, that it has, three of them are alternatively straight and meet at their tops. The other three on the opposite, bend down so that the middle one seems to make one with the stalk and only the two ones facing out from left and right can clearly be seen, which is again similar with our fleurs-de-lis, that is to say exclusively the one from the river Luts whose white petals bend down too when the flower blooms.

The heraldist François Velde is known to have expressed the same opinion:

However, a hypothesis ventured in the 17th c. sounds very plausible to me. One species of wild iris, the Iris pseudacorus, yellow flag in English, is yellow and grows in marshes (cf. the azure field, for water). Its name in German is Lieschblume (also gelbe Schwertlilie), but Liesch was also spelled Lies and Leys in the Middle Ages. It is easy to imagine that, in Northern France, the Lieschblume would have been called 'fleur-de-lis'. This would explain the name and the formal origin of the design, as a stylized yellow flag. There is a fanciful legend about Clovis which links the yellow flag explicitly with the French coat of arms.

Another (debated) hypothesis is that the symbol derives from the angon or sting, a typical Frankish throwing spear.

It has consistently been used as a royal emblem, though different cultures have interpreted its meaning in varying ways. Gaulish coins show the first Western designs which look similar to modern fleurs-de-lis. In the East it was found on the gold helmet of a Scythian king uncovered at the Ak-Burun kurgan and conserved in Saint Petersburg 's Hermitage Museum.

See also the very similar lily symbol on coins from the Achemenid and Ptolemaic province of Yehud (c. 350-200 BC) and Hasmonean-ruled Judah (2nd and 1st century BC).

Among the pre-Columbian Maya of Central America, the water lily represented the watery surface of the underworld and the Earth's regenerative power, being depicted as a fleur-de-lis in Maya art. The fleur-de-lis also appears alongside some depictions of the rain god Chaac, the Maya counterpart of the Aztec Tlaloc or Zapotec Cocijo.

For the transition from religious to dynastic symbolism and the beginning of European heraldic use of the fleur-de-lis, see France section, chronologically followed by England through claims to the French crown.

In Albania, fleur-de-lys (Albanian : Lulja e Zambakut) has been associated with the noble house of Topia. After the Ottoman invasion of Albania, the symbol was removed by the Toptani family, a branch of the Topia family.

The fleurs-de-lis was the symbol of the House of Kotromanić, a ruling house in medieval Bosnia during the medieval Kingdom of Bosnia, adopted by the first Bosnian king, Tvrtko I in recognition of the Capetian House of Anjou support in assuming the throne of Bosnia. The coat of arms contained six fleurs-de-lis, where the flower itself is today interpreted by some to be a representation of the autochthonous golden lily, Lilium bosniacum.

The emblem was revived in 1992 as a national symbol of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and was part of the flag of Bosnia-Herzegovina from 1992 to 1998. The state insignia were changed in 1999. The former flag of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina contains a fleur-de-lis alongside the Croatian chequy. Fleurs also appear in the flags and arms of many cantons, municipalities, cities and towns. Today, it is a traditional symbol of the Bosniak people. It is still used as official insignia of the Bosniak Regiment of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Fleurs-de-lis today also appear in the flags and arms of many cantons, municipalities, cities and towns of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Royal Banner of France or "Bourbon flag" symbolizing royal France, was the most commonly used flag in New France. The "Bourbon flag" has three gold fleurs-de-lis on a dark blue field arranged two and one. The fleur-de-lys was also seen on New France's currency often referred to as "card money". The white Royal Banner of France was used by the military of New France and was seen on naval vessels and forts of New France. After the fall of New France to the British Empire the fleur-de-lys remained visible on churches and remained part of French cultural symbolism. There are many French-speaking Canadians for whom the fleur-de-lis remains a symbol of their French cultural identity. Québécois, Franco-Ontarians, Franco-Ténois and Franco-Albertans, feature the fleur-de-lis prominently on their flags.

The fleur-de-lys, as a traditional royal symbol in Canada, has been incorporated into many national symbols, provincial symbols and municipal symbols, the Canadian Red Ensign that served as the nautical flag and civil ensign for Canada from 1892 to 1965 and later as an informal flag of Canada before 1965 featured the traditional number of three golden fleurs-de-lys on a blue background. The arms of Canada throughout its variations has used fleur-de-lys, beginning in 1921 and subsequent various has featuring the blue "Bourbon Flag" in two locations within arms. The Canadian royal cypher and the arms of Canada feature St Edward's Crown that displays four crosses pattée and four fleurs-de-lys. The fleur-de-lis is featured on the flag of Quebec, known as the fleurdelisé, as well as the flags of the cities of Montreal, Sherbrooke and Trois-Rivières.

The fleur-de-lis symbolic origins with French monarchs may stem from the baptismal lily used in the crowning of King Clovis I (r. c. 481–509). The French monarchy may have adopted the fleur-de-lis for its royal coat of arms as a symbol of purity to commemorate the conversion of Clovis I, and a reminder of the fleur-de-lis ampulla that held the oil used to anoint the king. So, the fleur-de-lis stood as a symbol of the king's divinely approved right to rule. The thus "anointed" kings of France later maintained that their authority was directly from God. A legend enhances the mystique of royalty by informing us that a vial of oil—the Holy Ampulla —descended from Heaven to anoint and sanctify Clovis as King, descending directly on Clovis or perhaps brought by a dove to Saint Remigius. One version explains that an angel descended with the fleur-de-lis ampulla to anoint the king. Another story tells of Clovis putting a flower in his helmet just before his victory at the Battle of Vouillé. Through this propagandist connection to Clovis, the fleur-de-lis has been taken in retrospect to symbolize all the Christian Frankish kings, most notably Charlemagne.

The graphic evolution of crita to fleur-de-lis was accompanied by textual allegory. By the late 13th century, an allegorical poem by Guillaume de Nangis (d. 1300), written at Joyenval Abbey in Chambourcy, relates how the golden lilies on an azure ground were miraculously substituted for the crescents on Clovis' shield, a projection into the past of contemporary images of heraldry.

In the 14th century, French writers asserted that the monarchy of France, which developed from the Kingdom of the West Franks, could trace its heritage back to the divine gift of royal arms received by Clovis. This story has remained popular, even though modern scholarship has established that the fleur-de-lis was a religious symbol before it was a true heraldic symbol. Along with true lilies, it was associated with the Virgin Mary, and when the 12th-century Capetians, Louis VI and Louis VII, started to use the emblem, their purpose was of connecting their rulership with this symbol of saintliness and divine right.

Louis VI (r. 1108–1137) and Louis VII (r. 1137–1180) of the House of Capet first started to use the emblem, on sceptres for example. Louis VII ordered the use of fleur-de-lis clothing in his son Philip's coronation in 1179, while the first visual evidence of clearly heraldic use dates from 1211: a seal showing the future Louis VIII and his shield strewn with the "flowers".

Until the late 14th century the French royal coat of arms was Azure semé-de-lis Or (a blue shield "sown" (semé) with a scattering of small golden fleurs-de-lis), the so-called France Ancient, but Charles V of France changed the design to a group of three in about 1376 (see next section for France Modern).

In the reign of King Louis IX (St. Louis) the three petals of the flower were said to represent faith, wisdom and chivalry, and to be a sign of divine favour bestowed on France. During the next century, the 14th, the tradition of Trinity symbolism was established in France, and then spread elsewhere.

In 1328, King Edward III of England inherited a claim to the crown of France, and in about 1340 he quartered France Ancient with the arms of Plantagenet, as "arms of pretence ". After the kings of France adopted France Modern, the kings of England adopted the new design as quarterings from about 1411. The monarchs of England (and later of Great Britain) continued to quarter the French arms until 1801, when George III abandoned his formal claim to the French throne.

On 29 December 1429, King Charles VII ennobled the family of Joan of Arc, seen as a French hero in the ensueing Hundred Years' War, with an inheritable symbolic denomination. The Chamber of Accounts in France registered the family's designation to nobility on 20 January 1430. The grant permitted the family to change their surname to du Lys.

In about 1376, Charles V changed the design from the all-over scattering of flowers to a group of three, thus replacing what is known in heraldic terminology as the France Ancient, with the France Modern.

France moderne remained the French royal standard, and with a white background was the French national flag until the French Revolution, when it was replaced by the tricolor of modern-day France. The fleur-de-lis was restored to the French flag in 1814, but replaced once again after the July Revolution against Charles X in 1830.

After the end of the Second French Empire, Henri, comte de Chambord, was offered the throne as King of France, but he agreed only if France gave up the tricolor and brought back the white flag with fleurs-de-lis. Curiously the French tricolore with the royal crown and fleur-de-lys was possibly designed by the count in his younger years as a compromise. His condition that his country needed to abandon the red and blue colors that it had adopted to symbolize the ideals of the French Revolution of 1789 was rejected and France became a republic.

It remains an enduring symbol of France which appears on French postage stamps, although it has never been adopted officially by any of the French republics, that unlike other republican nations, never officially adopted a coat of arms.

Although the origin of the fleur-de-lis is unclear, it has retained an association with French nobility and associated cities and regions. It is widely used in French city emblems as in the coat of arms of the city of Lille, Saint-Denis, Brest, Clermont-Ferrand, Boulogne-Billancourt, and Calais. Some cities that had been particularly faithful to the French Crown were awarded a heraldic augmentation of two or three fleurs-de-lis on the chief of their coat of arms; such cities include Paris, Lyon, Toulouse, Bordeaux, Reims, Le Havre, Angers, Le Mans, Aix-en-Provence, Tours, Limoges, Amiens, Orléans, Rouen, Argenteuil, Poitiers, Chartres, and Laon, among others. The fleur-de-lis was the symbol of Île-de-France, the core of the French kingdom. It has appeared on the coat-of-arms of other historical provinces of France including Burgundy, Anjou, Picardy, Berry, Orléanais, Bourbonnais, Maine, Touraine, Artois, Dauphiné, Saintonge, and the County of La Marche. Many of the current French departments use the symbol on their coats-of-arms to express this heritage.

The fleur-de-lis appears for instance on the coat-of-arms of Guadeloupe, an overseas département of France in the Caribbean, Saint Barthélemy, an overseas collectivity of France, and French Guiana. The overseas department of Réunion in the Indian Ocean uses the same feature. It appears on the coat of Port Louis, the capital of Mauritius which was named in honour of King Louis XV. On the coat of arms of Saint Lucia it represents the French heritage of the country.

While the fleur-de-lis has appeared on countless European coats of arms and flags over the centuries, it is particularly associated with the French monarchy in a historical context and continues to appear in the arms of members of the Spanish branch of the French House of Bourbon, including the king of Spain and the grand duke of Luxembourg.

According to French historian Georges Duby, the three petals represent the three medieval social estates : the commoners, the nobility, and the clergy.

In Italy, the fleur de lis - called giglio bottonato (it) - is mainly known from the crest of the city of Florence. In the Florentine fleurs-de-lis the stamens are always posed between the petals. Originally argent (silver or white) on gules (red) background, the emblem became the standard of the imperial party in Florence (parte ghibellina), causing the town government, which maintained a staunch Guelph stance, being strongly opposed to the imperial pretensions on city states, to reverse the color pattern to the final gules lily on argent background. This heraldic charge is often known as the Florentine lily to distinguish it from the conventional (stamen-not-shown) design. As an emblem of the city, it is therefore found in icons of Zenobius, its first bishop, and associated with Florence's patron Saint John the Baptist in the Florentine fiorino.

The design of the arms of Jurbarkas is believed to originate from the arms of the Sapieha house, a Lithuanian noble family which was responsible for Jurbarkas receiving city rights and a coat of arms in 1611.

The three fleurs-de-lis design on the Jurbarkas coat of arms was abolished during the final years of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, but officially restored in 1993 after the independence of present-day Lithuania was re-established. Before restoration, several variant designs, such as using one over two fleurs-de-lis, had been restored and abolished. The original two over one version was briefly readopted in 1970 during the Soviet occupation, but abolished that same year.

Three fleurs-de-lis appeared in the personal coat of arms of Grandmaster Alof de Wignacourt who ruled the Malta between 1601 and 1622. His nephew Adrien de Wignacourt, who was Grandmaster himself from 1690 to 1697, also had a similar coat of arms with three fleurs-de-lis.

The town of Santa Venera has three red fleurs-de-lis on its flag and coat of arms. These are derived from an arch which was part of the Wignacourt Aqueduct that had three sculpted fleurs-de-lis on top, as they were the heraldic symbols of Alof de Wignacourt, the Grand Master who financed its building. Another suburb which developed around the area became known as Fleur-de-Lys, and it also features a red fleur-de-lis on its flag and coat of arms.

The fleur-de-lis was the symbol of the House of Nemanjić (12th century), a ruling Serbian Orthodox house in medieval Serbia during the medieval Grand Principality of Serbia, Kingdom of Serbia and Serbian Empire, adopted by the Serbian king, Stefan Nemanjić. The coat of arms contained two fleurs-de-lis. Today, the fleur-de-lis is, alongside the Serbian Cross, Serbian eagle and Serbian Flag, national symbols of the Serb people.

Fleurs also appear in the flags and arms of many municipalities like Šabac, Valjevo, Tutin, Prijepolje, Despotovac, Lebane and Čoka.

Fleurs-de-lis feature prominently in the Crown Jewels of England and Scotland. In English heraldry, they are used in many different ways, and can be the cadency mark of the sixth son. Additionally, it features in a large number of royal arms of the House of Plantagenet, from the 13th century onwards to the early Tudors (Elizabeth of York and the de la Pole family).

The tressure flory – counterflory (flowered border) has been a prominent part of the design of the Scottish royal arms and Royal Standard since James I of Scotland.

The treasured fleur-de-luce he claims To wreathe his shield, since royal James —Sir Walter Scott, The Lay of the Last Minstrel

In the United Kingdom, a fleur-de-lis has appeared in the official arms of the Norroy King of Arms for hundreds of years. A silver fleur-de-lis on a blue background is the arms of the Barons Digby.

In English and Canadian heraldry the fleur-de-lis is the cadence mark of a sixth son.

A fleur-de-lis can also be seen on the flag of Monmouthshire, Wales: Per pale azure and sable three fleurs-de-lys or.

It can also be found on the arms of the Scottish clan chiefs of both Carruthers; gules two engrailed chevrons between three fleur-d-lis or and the brouns/browns: gules a chevron between three fleur d-lis or.

In the US, the fleur-de-lis symbols tend to be along or near the Mississippi and Missouri rivers. These are areas of strong French colonial empire settlement. It appears on the flag or seal of the cities of Baton Rouge, Detroit, Lafayette, Louisville, Mobile, New Orleans, Ocean Springs and St. Louis. On 9 July 2008, Louisiana governor Bobby Jindal signed a bill into law making the fleur-de-lis an official symbol of the state. Following Hurricane Katrina on 29 August 2005, the fleur-de-lis has been widely used in New Orleans and throughout Louisiana, as a symbol of grassroots support for New Orleans' recovery. The coat of arms of St. Augustine, Florida has a fleur-de-lis on the first quarter, due to its connection with Huguenots. Several counties have flags and seals based on pre-1801 British royal arms also includes fleur-de-lis symbols. They are King George County, Virginia and Prince George's County, Somerset County, Kent County, and Montgomery County in Maryland. It has also become the symbol for the identity of the Cajuns and Louisiana Creole people, and their French heritage.

Fleurs-de-lis are featured in the military heraldry of various nations.

The British Army 's 63rd Regiment of Foot started using the fleur-de-lis as a regimental symbol from the mid-18th century onwards, supposedly to commemorate their role in Britain's capture of Guadeloupe from France in 1759. In 1881, the 63rd Regiment was reorganised into the Manchester Regiment, which also used the fleur-de-lis as a regimental symbol, and in 1923 it was officially approved as the regiment's cap badge. The regiment's successor unit, the King's Regiment, continued to use the same cap badge from 1958 until its amalgamation into the Duke of Lancaster's Regiment in 2006.

It is also the formation sign of the 2nd (Independent) Armored Brigade of the Indian Army, known as the 7th Indian Cavalry Brigade in First World War, which received the emblem for its actions in France.

In the United States, the New Jersey Army National Guard unit 112th Field Artillery (Self Propelled) —part of the much larger 42nd Infantry Division Mechanized—has the fleur-de-lis in the upper left side of their distinctive unit insignia ; the U.S. Army 's 2nd Cavalry Regiment, 319th Airborne Field Artillery Regiment, 62nd Medical Brigade, 256th Infantry Brigade Combat Team ; and the Corps of Cadets at Louisiana State University. The U.S. Air Force 's Special Operations Weather beret flash also used a fleur-de-lis in its design, carried over from its Vietnam War -era commando weatherman beret flash.

It is also featured by the Israeli Intelligence Corps established in the 1970s, and the First World War Canadian Expeditionary Force.

The Foreign Intelligence Service of Ukraine used the emblem with the coat of arms of Ukraine in conjunction with four golden fleurs-de-lis, along with the motto "Omnia, Vincit, Veritas".

In the Middle Ages, the symbols of lily and fleur-de-lis overlapped considerably in Christian religious art. The historian Michel Pastoureau says that until about 1300 they were found in depictions of Jesus, but gradually they took on Marian symbolism and were associated with the Song of Solomon 's "lily among thorns" (lilium inter spinas), understood as a reference to Mary. Other scripture and religious literature in which the lily symbolizes purity and chastity also helped establish the flower as an iconographic attribute of the Virgin. It was also believed that the fleur-de-lis represented the Holy Trinity.

In medieval England, from the mid-12th century, a noblewoman's seal often showed the lady with a fleur-de-lis, drawing on the Marian connotations of "female virtue and spirituality". Images of Mary holding the flower first appeared in the 11th century on coins issued by cathedrals dedicated to her, and next on the seals of cathedral chapters, starting with Notre Dame de Paris in 1146. A standard portrayal was of Mary carrying the flower in her right hand, just as she is shown in that church's Virgin of Paris statue (with lily), and in the centre of the stained glass rose window (with fleur-de-lis sceptre) above its main entrance. The flowers may be "simple fleurons, sometimes garden lilies, sometimes genuine heraldic fleurs-de-lis". As attributes of the Madonna, they are often seen in pictures of the Annunciation, notably in those of Sandro Botticelli and Filippo Lippi. Lippi also uses both flowers in other related contexts: for instance, in his Madonna in the Forest.

The three petals of the heraldic design reflect a widespread association with the Holy Trinity, with the band on the bottom symbolizing Mary. The tradition says that without Mary no one can understand the Trinity since it was she who bore the Son. A tradition going back to 14th-century France added onto the earlier belief that they also represented faith, wisdom and chivalry. Alternatively, the cord can be seen as representing the one divine substance (godhood) of the three persons, which binds them together.

"Flower of light" symbolism has sometimes been understood from the archaic variant fleur-de-luce (see Latin lux, luc- = 'light'), but the Oxford English Dictionary suggests this arose from the spelling, not from the etymology.

The emblem appears in coats of arms and logos for universities (like Washington University in St. Louis, Saint Louis University in Spain, Rossall School in England (where it appears in the namesake Mitre Fleur De Lys boarding house), University of Lincoln in England and University of Louisiana at Lafayette) and schools such as in Hilton College (South Africa), Adamson University and St. Paul's University in the Philippines. The Lady Knights of the University of Arkansas at Monticello have also adopted the fleur de lis as one of the symbols associated with their coat of arms. The flag of Lincolnshire, adopted in 2005, has a fleur-de-lis for the city of Lincoln. It is one of the symbols of the American sororities Kappa Kappa Gamma and Theta Phi Alpha, the American fraternities Alpha Epsilon Pi, Sigma Alpha Epsilon and Sigma Alpha Mu, as well as the international co-ed service fraternity Alpha Phi Omega. It is also used by the high school and college fraternity Scouts Royale Brotherhood of the Philippines.

The fleur-de-lis is the main element in the logo of most Scouting organizations. The symbol was first used by Sir Robert Baden-Powell as an arm- badge for soldiers who qualified as scouts (reconnaissance specialists) in the 5th Dragoon Guards, which he commanded at the end of the 19th century; it was later used in cavalry regiments throughout the British Army until 1921. In 1907, Baden-Powell made brass fleur-de-lis badges for the boys attending his first experimental "Boy Scout" camp at Brownsea Island. In his seminal book Scouting for Boys, Baden-Powell referred to the motif as "the arrowhead which shows the North on a map or a compass" and continued; "It is the Badge of the Scout because it points in the right direction and upward... The three points remind you of the three points of the Scout Promise ", being duty to God and country, helping others, and keeping the Scout Law. The World Scout Emblem of the World Organization of the Scout Movement has elements which are used by most national Scout organizations. The stars stand for truth and knowledge, the encircling rope for unity, and its reef knot or square knot, service.

The fleur-de-lis is used by a number of sports teams, especially when it echoes a local flag. This is true with the teams from Quebec (Nordiques (ex- NHL), Montreal Expos (ex- MLB) and CF Montréal (MLS)), the teams of New Orleans, Louisiana (Saints (NFL), Pelicans (NBA), and Zephyrs (PCL)), the Louisiana Ragin' Cajuns (NCAA Division I), the Serie A team Fiorentina, the Bundesliga side SV Darmstadt 98 (also known as Die Lilien – The Lilies), the Ligue 1 team Paris Saint-Germain, the rugby league team Wakefield Trinity Wildcats, the NPSL team Detroit City FC.

Marc-André Fleury, a Canadian ice hockey goaltender, has a fleur-de-lis logo on his mask. The UFC Welterweight Champion from 2006 to 2013, Georges St-Pierre, has a tattoo of the fleur-de-lis on his right calf. The IT University of Copenhagen's soccer team ITU F.C. has it in its logo. The official emblem for the 2019 FIFA Women's World Cup, which was hosted by France, included the symbol.

Architects and designers use it alone and as a repeated motif in a wide range of contexts, from ironwork to bookbinding.

In building and architecture, the fleur-de-lis is often placed on top of iron fence posts, as a pointed defence against intruders. It may ornament any tip, point or post with a decorative flourish, for instance, on finials, the arms of a cross, or the point of a gable. The fleur-de-lis can be incorporated in friezes or cornices, although the distinctions between fleur-de-lis, fleuron, and other stylized flowers are not always clear, or can be used as a motif in an all-over tiled pattern, perhaps on a floor. It may appear in a building for heraldic reasons, as in some English churches where the design paid a compliment to a local lord who used the flower on his coat of arms. Elsewhere the effect seems purely visual, like the crenellations on the 14th-century Muslim Mosque-Madrassa of Sultan Hassan. It can also be seen on the doors of the 16th-century Hindu Padmanabhaswamy Temple.

During the reign of Elizabeth I of England, known as the Elizabethan era, it was a standard name for an iris, a usage which lasted for centuries, but occasionally refers to lilies or other flowers.

The lilly, Ladie of the flowring field, The Flowre-deluce, her louely Paramoure

— Edmund Spenser, The Faerie Queene, 1590

A heavily stylized fleur de lis symbol can be recognized as the symbol of the protagonist, Agent 47, and his genetic father/creator, Dr. Orth-Meyer, in the Hitman series of video games.

In the Saints Row franchise, the fleur de lis is the Logo (called "Fleur De Saints") for the Third Street Saints.

In the Warhammer 40,000 franchise, the Fleur De Lis is the faction icon for the Adepta Sororitas.

The Pokémon villain Lysandre, whose debut game was Pokémon X and Y, is known in Japan as フラダリ Furadari meaning fleur-de-lis. Pokémon X and Y are inspired by France. Many locations and landmarks across Kalos have real-world inspirations, including Prism Tower (Eiffel Tower), the Lumiose Art Museum (the Louvre) and the stones outside Geosenge Town (Carnac stones).

The second form of Wuthering Waves character Cartethyia is named "Fleurdelys".

New Orleans Louisiana sludge metal bands like Crowbar and Eyehategod have used Fleur De Lis as a logo for their bands and also as a logo mostly for the whole NOLA metal scene.

In the French colonial empire, the Code Noir, a slave code drafted by Jean-Baptiste Colbert, stipulated that enslaved people should be branded with the fleur-de-lis as punishment for a variety of crimes, including attempting to escape enslavement or theft. French officials in the colony of Isle de France (modern-day Mauritius), which adopted the Code Noir in 1685, punished slaves who attempted to escape or stole property by branding them with the fleur-de-lis. In the French colony of Louisiana, which adopted the Code Noir in 1724, slaves who attempted to escape and were recaptured would be branded on one shoulder with the fleur-de-lis along with having their ears cut off. If they attempted to escape a second time, they would be punished by being branded with the fleur-de-lis again and have their hamstrings cut. Capital punishment was used for those who attempted to escape a third time.

Louisiana's version of the Code Noir stated:

XXXII. The runaway slave, who shall continue to be so for one month from the day of his being denounced to the officers of justice, shall have his ears cut off, and shall be branded with the fleur-de-lis on the shoulder: and on a second offence of the same nature, persisted in during one month from the day of his being denounced, he shall be hamstrung, and be marked with the fleur-de-lis on the other shoulder. On the third offence, he shall suffer death.

Branding slaves with the fleur-de-lis was also a punishment used in the French colony of Saint-Domingue.

Being branded with the fleur-de-lis was also a punishment used in Metropolitan France. In his 1577 biography of French Protestant reformer John Calvin, Jérôme-Hermès Bolsec claimed that Calvin had committed sodomy in his hometown of Noyon in 1527, and he only at the last minute escaped the standard punishment of death by burning, instead being branded with a fleur-de-lis on his shoulder. Bolsec's claims are today viewed as libellous slander, but they offer a window into what seemed a plausible punishment in his time. Alexandre Dumas used the motive of branding thieves with the fleur-de-lis when he created the character of Milady de Winter in his 1844 novel The Three Musketeers. He set the branding episode in 1619 France.

Florentine or à la Florentine is a term from classic French cuisine that refers to dishes that typically include a base of cooked spinach, a protein component and Mornay sauce. Chicken Florentine is the most popular version. Because Mornay sauce is a derivation of béchamel sauce which includes roux and requires time and skill to prepare correctly, many contemporary recipes use simpler cream-based sauces.

The term dates back to 1533, when Catherine de Medici of Florence married Henry II of France. She supposedly brought a staff of chefs, lots of kitchen equipment and a love of spinach to Paris, and popularized Florentine-style dishes. Food historians have debunked this story, and Italian influence on French cuisine long predates this marriage. Pierre Franey considered this theory apocryphal, but embraced the term Florentine in 1983.

Auguste Escoffier included a recipe for sole Florentine in his 1903 classic Le guide culinaire, translated into English as A Guide to Modern Cookery. It is recipe 831 in that translation. Escoffier called for poaching the fish in butter and fumet, a stock made of fish bones, cooking the spinach in butter, covering the dish with Mornay sauce, garnishing it with grated cheese, and finishing it in an oven or salamander. In his 1936 cookbook L'Art culinaire moderne which was first translated for American cooks in 1966 as Modern French Culinary Art, Henri-Paul Pellaprat included five recipes for spinach-based Florentine dishes with Mornay sauce. The protein components were chicken breasts, cod fillets, sweetbreads, stuffed lamb breast and oysters. Craig Claiborne published a recipe for oysters Florentine with Mornay sauce in The New York Times in 1958.

A quiche containing spinach is often called "quiche Florentine". Poached or soft-cooked eggs served on spinach with a Mornay sauce or equivalent is often called "eggs Florentine".

Chicken Florentine gained popularity in the United States as early as 1931, although the quality of the dish was uneven. Canned mushroom soup was sometimes used as a quick sauce in the years that followed. By the 1960s and 1970s, the general quality of the dish had deteriorated to "casserole" and "wedding banquet" food.

Writing in The New York Times in 1971, Claiborne praised a restaurant version of chicken Florentine, describing the chicken as "batter‐cooked and served with mushrooms in a lemon sauce". Contemporary cookbook authors are attempting to "restore" the dish to "its elegant roots", with "clearer, brighter flavors".

The Florentine Tower of Buire (French : Tour Florentine de Buire), located in the commune of Buire in the Aisne department in Picardy in northern France, is a former 45.76 meter tall signal box. Since November 6, 1995, it has been classified as a monument historique (National Heritage Site of France). It is the work of French architect Gustave Umbdenstock and the engineer Raoul Dautry employed by the Compagnie des chemins de fer du Nord. The decision to build the tower was made following the development of the railway station of Hirson, which, due to the development of the local mining and metallurgical industry, became the second most important French rail junction (after Paris) in the early twentieth century.

It was built in 1920-1921, in reinforced concrete, and based on the traditional brick Art déco style of northern belfries.

The top of the tower was equipped with four clocks (one for each cardinal direction), each 3.20 meters in diameter.

The name Florentine is explained by reference to typical buildings of Florence or the fact that the contractor who built the Tower of Lens was Florentine.

Foie gras (lit. ' fat liver ' ; French: [ fwa ɡʁɑ ], English: / ˌ f w ɑː ˈ ɡ r ɑː / ; Occitan : foiè grass) is a specialty food product made of the liver of a duck or goose. According to French law, foie gras is defined as the liver of a duck or goose fattened by gavage (force feeding).

Foie gras is a delicacy in French cuisine. Its flavour is rich, buttery, and delicate, unlike an ordinary duck or goose liver. It is sold whole or is prepared as mousse, parfait, or pâté, and may also be served as an accompaniment to another food item, such as steak. French law states, " Foie gras belongs to the protected cultural and gastronomical heritage of France."

The technique of gavage dates as far back as 2500 BC, when the ancient Egyptians began confining anatid birds to be forcedly fed to be fattened as a food source. Today, France is by far the largest producer and consumer of foie gras, though there are producers and markets worldwide, particularly in other European nations, the United States, and China.

Gavage -based foie gras production is controversial due mainly to animal welfare concerns about force-feeding, intensive housing and husbandry, and enlarging the liver to 10 times its usual volume. Several countries and jurisdictions have laws against force-feeding and the production, import, or sale of foie gras.

As early as 2500 BC, the ancient Egyptians learned that many birds could be fattened through forced overfeeding and began this practice. Whether they particularly sought the fattened livers of birds as a delicacy remains undetermined. In the necropolis of Saqqara, in the tomb of Mereruka, an important royal official, there is a bas-relief scene wherein workers grasp geese around the necks to push food down their throats. Tables are positioned to one side, piled with food pellets and a flask for moistening them before feeding the geese.

The practice of goose fattening spread from Egypt to the Mediterranean. The earliest reference to fattened geese is from the 5th-century BC Greek poet Cratinus, who wrote of geese-fatteners, yet Egypt maintained its reputation as the source for fattened geese. When the Spartan king Agesilaus visited Egypt in 361 BC, he noted that Egyptian farmers fattened geese and calves.

It was not until the Roman period, however, that foie gras is mentioned as a distinct food, which the Romans named iecur ficatum ; iecur means liver, and ficatum derives from ficus, meaning fig in Latin. The emperor Elagabalus fed his dogs foie gras during the four years of his reign. Pliny the Elder (1st century AD) credits his contemporary Roman gastronome Marcus Gavius Apicius with feeding dried figs to geese to enlarge their livers:

"Apicius made the discovery that we may employ the same artificial method of increasing the size of the liver of the sow, as of that of the goose; it consists in cramming them with dried figs, and when they are fat enough, they are drenched with wine mixed with honey and immediately killed."

— Pliny the Elder, Natural History, Book VIII. Chapter 77

Hence the term iecur ficatum, fig-stuffed liver; feeding figs to enlarge a goose's liver may derive from Hellenistic Alexandria, since much of Roman luxury cuisine was of Greek inspiration. Ficatum was closely associated with animal liver and it became the root word for "liver" in each of these languages: foie in French, hígado in Spanish, fígado in Portuguese, fegato in Italian, fetge in Catalan and Occitan, and ficat in Romanian, all meaning "liver"; this etymology has been explained in different manners.

After the fall of the Roman empire, goose liver temporarily vanished from European cuisine. Some claim that Gallic farmers preserved the foie gras tradition until the rest of Europe rediscovered it centuries later, but the medieval French peasant's food animals were mainly pigs and sheep. Others claim that the tradition was preserved by the Jews, who learned the method of enlarging a goose's liver during the Roman colonisation of Judea or earlier from Egyptians. The Jews carried this culinary knowledge as they migrated farther north and west to Europe.

As Jews became established in Western and Central Europe, they encountered difficulties finding suitable cooking fat for use in dishes containing meat or to be served with meat. Lard was widely available, but Judaic dietary law, Kashrut, completely forbids it because it comes from an animal considered unclean. Butter, also commonly available, was not in itself proscribed, but it could not be used with or in meals containing meat because kashrut also prohibited mixing meat and dairy products. Jewish cuisine used olive oil in the Mediterranean and sesame oil in Babylonia, but neither cooking medium was readily available in Western and Central Europe. Jews in these regions therefore turned to poultry fat (known in Yiddish as schmaltz), which could be abundantly produced by overfeeding geese, where fat was needed with meat.

The delicate taste of the fattened goose's liver was soon appreciated; Hans Wilhelm Kirchhof of Kassel wrote in 1562 that the Jews raise fat geese and particularly love their livers. Some rabbis were concerned that eating forcibly overfed geese violated Jewish food restrictions. Some rabbis contended that it is not a forbidden food (treyf) as none of its limbs are damaged and the geese do not feel any pain in their throats from the process. This matter remained a debated topic in Jewish dietary law until the Jewish taste for goose liver declined in the 19th century. Another kashrut matter, still a problem today, is that even properly slaughtered and inspected meat must be drained of blood before being considered fit to eat. Usually, salting achieves that; however, as the liver is regarded as "(almost) wholly blood", broiling is the only way of kashering. Properly broiling foie gras while preserving its delicate taste is difficult, and therefore rarely practised. Even so, there are restaurants in Israel that offer grilled goose foie gras. Foie gras also resembles the Jewish food staple, chopped liver.

Appreciation of fattened goose liver spread to gastronomes outside the Jewish community, who could buy in the local Jewish ghetto of their cities. In 1570, Bartolomeo Scappi, chef de cuisine to Pope Pius V, published his cookbook Opera, wherein he writes that "the liver of [a] domestic goose raised by the Jews is of extreme size and weighs [between] two and three pounds". In 1581, Marx Rumpolt of Mainz, chef to several German nobles, published the massive cookbook Ein Neu Kochbuch, describing that the Jews of Bohemia produced livers weighing more than three pounds; he lists recipes for it, including one for goose liver mousse. János Keszei, chef to the court of Michael Apafi, the prince of Transylvania, included foie gras recipes in his 1680 cookbook A New Book About Cooking, instructing cooks to "envelop the goose liver in a calf's thin skin, bake it and prepare [a] green or [a] brown sauce to accompany it. I used goose liver fattened by Bohemian Jews; its weight was more than three pounds. You may also prepare a mush of it."

Foie gras became a significant part of French culinary tradition during the 17th and 18th centuries, particularly under the reigns of Louis XV and Louis XVI. It was served at royal courts as a symbol of luxury and refinement. In 1779, French chef Jean-Joseph Clause elevated foie gras to new heights by creating pâté de foie gras. His innovation earned him a patent in 1784, and he later established a business supplying this delicacy to the French aristocracy. By the early 19th century, Strasbourg had become renowned as the "goose-liver capital of the world".

After the French Revolution, foie gras transitioned from being an exclusive royal delicacy to one enjoyed by the middle class. Its production and consumption became particularly associated with Southwest France, including regions like Dordogne and Alsace, where traditional methods of preparation flourished. Today, these regions remain central to foie gras production in France, with over 90% of producers located in the Dordogne Valley.

Foie gras is so deeply embedded in French culture that it is protected under French law, which declares it part of the country's "protected cultural and gastronomical heritage."

The legacy of foie gras in France reflects its evolution from a courtly luxury to an enduring emblem of French gastronomy, celebrated at festivals such as the Fest’Oie in Sarlat and enjoyed during holidays and special occasions.

In the late 1980s, the Chernobyl disaster produced radioactive clouds over France and Hungary, then the large producers of foie gras. In their stead, areas of northeast Spain began producing fois gras, establishing a local industry.

In 2019, the New York City Council passed a law prohibiting stores and restaurants from selling foie gras, due to animal welfare concerns. As of September 2026, the legislation has not been implemented due to a court challenge on the basis that the local law is inconsistent with New York state legislation.

In the 21st century, France is the largest producer and consumer of foie gras, though it is produced and consumed in several other countries worldwide, particularly in some other European nations, the United States, and China. Approximately 30,000 people work in the French foie gras industry, with 90% of them residing in the Périgord (Dordogne), Aquitaine in the southwest, and Alsace in the east. The European Union recognizes the foie gras produced according to traditional farming methods (label rouge) in southwestern France with a protected geographical indication.

Hungary is the world's second-largest foie gras (libamáj) producer and the largest exporter (although Bulgaria sometimes had a higher production in recent years, see table above). France is the principal market for Hungarian foie gras – mainly exported raw. Approximately 30,000 Hungarian goose farmers are dependent on the foie gras industry. French food companies spice, process, and cook the foie gras so it may be sold as a French product in its domestic and export markets.

In 2005, France produced 18,450 tonnes of foie gras (78.5% of the world's estimated total production of 23,500 tonnes), of which 96% was duck liver and 4% goose liver. Total French consumption of foie gras this year was 19,000 tonnes. In 2005, Hungary, the world's second-largest foie gras producer, exported 1,920 tonnes, and Bulgaria produced 1,500 tons of foie gras.

The demand for foie gras in the Far East is such that China has become a sizeable producer. Madagascar is a small but rapidly growing producer of high-quality foie gras.

In 2011, in Bulgaria (which started production in 1960), five million mule ducks were raised for foie gras on 800 farms, making Bulgaria the second-largest European producer.

In 2012, France produced approximately 19,000 tonnes of foie gras, representing 75% of the world's production in that year. This required the force-feeding of around 38 million ducks and geese. World production in 2015 is estimated as 27,000 tonnes.

In 2014, the whole of the EU produced approximately 25,000 tonnes of foie gras – 23,000 tonnes of duck foie gras and 2,000 tonnes of goose foie gras. The same year, France was producing 72% of world foie gras production, of which 97% was from ducks.

In 2014, France produced 19,608 tons of foie gras (74.3% of the world's estimated total production).

In 2015, it was reported that in France, sales of foie gras may be waning, and an OpinionWay poll found that 47% of the French population supported a ban on force-feeding.

In 2016, it was reported that France produces an estimated 75% of the world's foie gras and southwestern France produces approximately 70% of that total. In 2016, it could retail for upwards of $65 a pound.

In late 2015, there were several outbreaks of the highly contagious H5N1 bird flu in France, which escalated in 2016. This led to Algeria, China, Egypt, Japan, Morocco, South Korea, Thailand and Tunisia banning French poultry exports, including foie gras, and France to initiate increased bio-security protocols which cost an estimated 220 million euros. One of these measures was the halting of production in southwestern France from early April 2016 for an anticipated period of three months to reduce the spread of the virus. Exports of foie gras from France are expected to decrease from 4,560 tonnes in 2015 to 3,160 in 2016.

The largest producer in the United States is Hudson Valley Foie Gras in New York, which processes approximately 350,000 ducks annually. ∂

In France, foie gras exists in different, legally defined presentations, ordered by expense:

Additionally, there is pâté de foie gras, mousse de foie gras (either must contain 50% or more foie gras), parfait de foie gras (must contain 75% or more foie gras), and other preparations (no legal obligation established).

Fully cooked preparations are generally sold in either glass containers or metal cans for long-term preservation. Whole, fresh foie gras is usually unavailable in France outside Christmas, except in some producers' markets in the producing regions. Frozen whole foie gras sometimes is sold in French supermarkets.

Whole foie gras is readily available from gourmet retailers in Canada, the United States, Hungary, Argentina and regions with a sizeable market for the product. In the US, raw foie gras is classified as Grade A, B or C. Grade A is typically the highest in fat and especially suited for low-temperature preparation because the veins are relatively few and the resulting terrine will be more aesthetically appealing because it displays little blood. Grade B is accepted for higher temperature preparation because the higher proportion of protein gives the liver more structure after being seared. Grade C livers are generally reserved for making sauces as well as other preparations where a higher proportion of blood-filled veins will not impair the appearance of the dish.

Traditionally, foie gras was produced from special breeds of geese. However, by 2004, geese accounted for less than 10% of the total global foie gras production and by 2014 only 5% of total French production. Goose breeds used in modern foie gras production are primarily the grey Landes goose (Anser anser) and the Toulouse goose.

In 2016, Hungary was producing 80% of the world's goose foie gras; however, production rates are likely to drop in 2017 due to outbreaks of bird flu.

In 2014, ducks accounted for 95% of foie gras production. The breeds primarily used are the Muscovy duck (Cairina moschata) (also called the Barbary duck) and the hybrid cross of a male Muscovy duck and a female Pekin duck (Anas platyrhynchos domestica) called the Mulard duck. This hybrid is sterile and is, therefore, sometimes referred to as a "mule" duck. Mulards are estimated to account for about 35% of all foie gras consumed in the US. About 95% of duck foie gras production from France comes from force-fed Mulards and the remaining 5% from the Muscovy duck.

After hatching, the Mulard ducklings are sexed. Males put on more weight than females, so the females are slaughtered. A new method has been recently developed, allowing to identify the sex of the duck in the egg, based on its eye colour. This new method should replace the slaughter of females after hatching within a few years.

The basis of foie gras production is the ability that some waterfowl have to expand their esophagus and to gain weight, particularly in the liver, in preparation for migration. Wild geese may consume 300 grams of protein and another 800 grams of grasses per day. Farmed geese allowed to graze on carrots adapt to eating 100 grams of protein but may consume up to 2500 grams of carrots per day. The increasing amount of feed given before force-feeding and during the force-feeding itself cause the expansion of the lower part of the esophagus. However, the primary birds used for foie gras, the Mulard and Muscovy duck, cannot fly well and therefore do not migrate.

The pre-force feeding phase consists of three stages.

The next production phase, which the French call gavage or finition d'engraissement, or "completion of fattening", involves forced daily ingestion of controlled amounts of feed for 10 to 12 days for ducks (10.5 on average) and 15 to 18 days with geese. During this phase, ducks are usually fed twice daily, while geese are usually fed three times daily. To facilitate the handling of ducks during gavage, these birds are housed throughout this phase in one of the following systems:

Individual cages ("épinettes" in French) have been banned in Europe.

Typical foie gras production involves force-feeding birds more food than they would eat in the wild, and much more than they would voluntarily eat domestically.

In modern production, the bird is typically fed a controlled amount of feed, depending on the stage of the fattening process, the bird's weight, and the amount of feed the bird last ingested. At the start of production, a bird might be fed a dry weight of 250 grams (9 oz) of food per day and up to 1,000 grams (35 oz) (in dry weight) by the end of the process. The actual amount of food force-fed is much greater because water is added to the dry feed. For pellets, the typical composition is about 53% dry and 47% liquid (by weight). This is the equivalent of around 1,900 grams per day in total mass. For whole grain, the cooked weight is about 1.4 times the dry weight.

The feed is administered using a funnel fitted with a long metal or plastic tube (20–30 cm long), which forces the feed into the bird's esophagus. If an auger is used, the feeding takes about 45 to 60 seconds, however, modern systems usually use a tube fed by a pneumatic pump with an operation time of 2 to 3 seconds per duck. During feeding, efforts are made to avoid damaging the bird's esophagus, which could cause injury or death, although researchers have found evidence of inflammation of the walls of the proventriculus after the first session of force-feeding. There is also an indication of inflammation of the esophagus in the later stages of fattening. Several studies have also demonstrated that mortality rates can be significantly elevated during the gavage period.

The feed, usually corn boiled with fat (to facilitate ingestion), deposits large amounts of fat in the liver, thereby producing the buttery consistency sought by some gastronomes.

Ducks reared for foie gras are typically slaughtered at 100 days of age, although modern production methods with shortened pre-feeding and force feeding phases allow for an earlier slaughter, around 93 days. For geese, slaughter typically takes place at 112 days. The bird's liver is 6 to 10 times its ordinary size at this time. Storage of fat in the liver produces steatosis of the liver cells.

Ethical concerns have driven a recent interest in alternative production methods that produce fattened liver without gavage, and, as of June 2023, at least 16 producers offered a meat-based foie gras alternative. The resulting products do not conform to the French legal standard for "foie gras", but can be labeled "fatty goose liver" inside France. Outside France, they may be marked as "ethical foie gras" or "humane foie gras", although these terms also describe gavage-based foie gras production tempered by concern with the animal's welfare (e.g., feeding through rubber hoses instead of steel pipes).

These alternative methods are controversial, in part because substitutes for gavage do not produce the same results.

The current method, developed in Extremadura, Spain, involves timing the slaughter to coincide with the winter migration, when the livers naturally fatten. Prior to slaughter, the birds are allowed to eat freely, termed ad libitum. For this innovation, the producer, Patería de Sousa, won the Coup de Coeur award at the Salon International d'Alimentation 2006. Because gavage fattens goose livers to substantially larger than their natural size, de Sousa's technique is less efficient at producing a fixed mass of foie gras, and composes a small fraction of the market.

To achieve similar efficiency per mass to gavage, the British supermarket chain Waitrose sells a product which it calls faux gras (but see § Vegan alternatives), made from free-range British goose or duck liver blended with additional fat. Subsequently, researchers at the German Institute of Home Economics (DIL) [ de ] and the company GMT developed a process to apply additional fat to duck liver meat at high pressure. Even trained chefs struggle to distinguish the result from traditional foie gras.

More radical approaches are possible. A duck or goose with damaged ventromedial nucleus in the hypothalamus will feel less satiety after eating and therefore eat more. In lesioning experiments, this effect more than doubled the bird's ad libitum food consumption. Alternatively, human microbiome studies on obesity led French researchers at Aviwell develop a probiotic preparation that produces fatty livers in geese over six months without gavage.

A Spanish company began selling a vegan alternative to foie gras called Fuah, in 2022. The product is made from cashew nuts, coconut oil, and beetroot. The American product Faux Gras is a vegan, nut-based spread. In June 2023, an animal welfare non-governmental organization found at least 14 producers of vegetarian or vegan alternatives to foie gras.

Generally, French preparations of foie gras are made over low heat, as fat melts faster from the traditional goose foie gras than the duck foie gras produced in most other parts of the world. American and other New World preparations, typically employing duck foie gras, have more recipes and dish preparations for serving foie gras hot rather than cool or cold.

In Hungary, goose foie gras is traditionally fried in goose fat, which is then poured over the foie gras and left to cool; it is also eaten warm, after being fried or roasted, with some chefs smoking the foie gras over a cherry wood fire.

In other parts of the world, foie gras is served in dishes such as foie gras sushi rolls, in various forms of pasta or alongside steak tartare or atop a steak as a garnish.

Traditional low-heat cooking methods result in terrines, pâtés, parfaits, foams, and mousses of foie gras, often flavored with truffle, mushrooms, or brandy such as cognac or armagnac. These slow-cooked forms of foie gras are cooled and served at or below room temperature.

In a very traditional form of terrine, au torchon ("in a towel"), a whole lobe of foie is molded, wrapped in a towel and slow-cooked in a bain-marie. For added flavor (from the Maillard reaction), the liver may be seared briefly over a fire of grape vine clippings (sarments) before slow-cooking in a bain-marie; afterwards, it is pressed and served cold, in slices.

Raw foie gras is also cured in salt (" cru au sel ") and served slightly chilled.

A pastry containing fatty goose liver and other ingredients is known as the " Strasburg pie" since Strasbourg was a major producer of foie gras.

The Strasburg pie is mentioned in William Makepeace Thackeray 's novel Vanity Fair as being popular with the diplomatic corps.

T. S. Eliot 's poem "The Ad-Dressing of Cats", part of Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats and also the last song in its musical adaptation Cats, contains the line "And you might now and then supply/Some caviar or Strasbourg pie".

A Strasburg pie is enjoyed in two of the novels in Patrick O'Brian 's Aubrey/Maturin series. Captain Aubrey and his officers find one a welcome addition to an otherwise sub-par dinner in The Far Side of the World, and he and Dr. Maturin also share one in The Letter of Marque.

Given the increased internationalization of cuisines and food supply, foie gras is increasingly found in hot preparations in the United States, France, and elsewhere. Duck foie gras (" foie gras de canard ") has a slightly lower fat content and is generally more suitable in texture to cooking at high temperatures than goose foie gras (" foie gras d'oie "), but chefs have been able to cook goose foie gras employing similar techniques developed for duck, albeit with more care.

Raw foie gras can be roasted, sauteed, pan-seared (poêlé), or (with care and attention) grilled. As foie gras has high-fat content, contact with heat needs to be brief and, therefore, at a high temperature, lest it burns or melts. Optimal structural integrity for searing requires the foie gras to be cut to a thickness between 15 and 25 mm (½ – 1 inch), resulting in a rare, uncooked center. Some chefs prefer not to devein the foie gras, as the veins can help preserve the integrity of the fatty liver. It is increasingly common to sear the foie gras on one side only, leaving the other side uncooked. Practitioners of molecular gastronomy such as Heston Blumenthal of The Fat Duck restaurant first flash-freeze foie gras in liquid nitrogen as part of the preparation process.

Hot foie gras requires minimal spices, typically black pepper, paprika (in Hungary) and salt. Chefs have used fleur de sel as a gourmet seasoning for hot foie gras to add an "important textural accent" with its crunch.

Foie gras is regarded as a gourmet luxury dish. In France, it is mainly consumed on special occasions, such as Christmas or New Year's Eve réveillon dinners, though the recent increased availability of foie gras has made it a less exceptional dish. In some areas of France, foie gras is eaten year-round.

Duck foie gras is the slightly cheaper and, since a change of production methods in the 1950s to battery, by far the most common kind, particularly in the US. The taste of duck foie gras is often referred to as musky with a subtle bitterness. Goose foie gras is noted as less gamey and smoother, with a more delicate flavour.

Gavage-based foie gras production is controversial due to the animal welfare consequences of the force-feeding procedure, intensive housing and husbandry, an enlarged liver and the potential for being detrimental to human health. Some countries find foie gras to be "morally objectionable". One EU committee report noted that up to 1998, there was only a small number of scientific studies on the welfare of birds used for foie gras production; however, the Committee found sufficient evidence to conclude that "force-feeding, as currently practised, is detrimental to the welfare of the birds". The industry repeatedly faces accusations of torture and cruelty.

The production of foie gras occurs on the argument that migrating wildfowl seasonally eat such that their liver naturally enlarges. However, the bird used predominantly in foie gras production is a hybrid of a male Muscovy duck and a female Pekin duck. It has been noted that the Muscovy duck is non-migratory, and both the Pekin and the mulard hybrid cannot fly. Domestic ducks (including the Pekin) are derived from the mallard duck, which is sometimes migratory and sometimes not. Therefore, although the domestic goose might be adapted to store food before migration, it is less likely that the Mulard hybrid duck has the same potential.

Geese and ducks show avoidance behaviour (indicating aversion) toward the person who feeds them and the feeding procedure. The AVMA (Animal Welfare Division) when considering foie gras production stated "The relatively new Mulard breed used in foie gras production seems to be more prone than its parent breeds to fear of people". Although in 1998 the EU Scientific Committee on Animal Health and Animal Welfare reported seeing this aversion, they noted that at the time, there was no "conclusive" scientific evidence on the aversive nature of force-feeding.

That same EU Scientific Committee also reported that there was usually clear evidence of tissue damage in the esophagus of birds which had been gavage fed, although one 1972 study cited by the report observed no alteration of the esophageal tissue. More recent scientific studies have shown that the esophagus of birds can be injured or inflamed by gavage feeding.

After measuring a range of physiological parameters in male Mulard ducks, it was concluded in one study that the acute stress caused by force-feeding is similar at the beginning and end of the commercial production of foie gras. A similar study on Muscovy ducks found that gavage feeding was related to an increase in panting behaviour and serum corticosterone levels, indicating increased stress attributable to this feeding method.

In France, at the end of 2015, individual cages were prohibited to improve animal welfare. They were to be replaced by cages housing 4 to 5 birds.

During the force-feeding period, the birds are kept in individual cages with wire or plastic mesh floors or sometimes in small groups on slatted floors. Individual caging restricts movements and behaviours by preventing the birds from standing erect, turning around, or flapping their wings. Birds cannot carry out other natural waterfowl behaviours, such as bathing and swimming. Ducks and geese are social animals, and individual cages prevent such interactions. According to a 2023 European food safety authority (EFSA) report, even the collective cages and pens currently in use in Europe do not offer enough space to the birds for them to express their natural behaviour.

During the force-feeding period, when the birds are not being fed, they are sometimes kept in near-darkness; this prevents normal investigatory behaviour and results in poor welfare.

Lesions can occur on the sternum of the birds due to necrosis of the skin. This is observed more frequently in birds reared in cages rather than on the floor. The prevalence is higher in Mulard ducks (40–70%) compared to under 6% in Muscovy ducks. This is due to the larger pectoralis profundus major and minor muscles in Muscovy ducks compared to Mulards. The relatively new Mulard breed used in foie gras production seems more prone to developing lesions in the area of the sternum when kept in small cages and to bone breakage during transport and slaughter.

Where ducks are fattened in group pens, it has been suggested that the increased effort required to capture and restrain ducks in pens might cause them to experience more stress during force-feeding. Injuries and fatalities during transport and slaughter occur in all types of poultry production; fattened ducks are more susceptible to conditions such as heat stress.

Foie gras production results in the bird's liver being swollen. In some ducks, liver size changes seasonally, increasing by as much as 30% to 50%, with more pronounced changes in females. However, foie gras production enlarges the livers ten times their normal size. This impairs liver function due to the obstruction of blood flow and expands the abdomen, making it difficult for the birds to breathe. Death occurs if the force-feeding is continued.

The mortality rate in force-fed birds varies from 2% to 4%, compared with approximately 0.2% in age-matched, non-force-fed drakes. Mortality rates do not differ between the force-feeding period and the previous rearing phase, with both being approximately 2.5%.

The controversial nature of foie gras production was identified in a paper that juxtaposed the views of "foie gras production as the apotheosis of murderous meat production, and those who consider it to be a co-production between humans and animals".

Animal rights and welfare advocates such as Animal Equality, PETA, Viva!, the Humane Society of the United States, and FOUR PAWS contend that foie gras production methods, and force-feeding in particular, constitute cruel treatment of animals.

An Ipsos MORI poll found that 63% of the UK population would like to see a complete ban on the sale of foie gras in the UK.

In 2011 and 2012, Animal Equality conducted investigations inside four foie gras farms in France and five in Spain, exposing the cruelty of force-feeding. The footage collected reveals ducks covered in blood with broken and torn beaks, birds kept in small metal cages with no room to turn around, and ducks and geese desperately struggling to avoid force-feeding.

In April–May 2013, an investigator from Mercy for Animals recorded an undercover video at Hudson Valley Foie Gras farm in New York state. The footage showed workers forcefully pushing tubes down ducks' throats. One worker said of the force-feeding process: "Sometimes the duck doesn't get up, and it dies. There have been times that 20 ducks were killed." Hudson Valley operations manager Marcus Henley replied that the farm's mortality statistics are not above average for the poultry industry. Because Hudson Valley provides foie gras to Amazon.com, Mercy for Animals began a campaign urging Amazon to stop selling foie gras, a move that has already been made by Costco, Safeway, and Target.

In November 2013, the Daily Mirror published a report based on the video they obtained depicting cruelty towards ducks in a farm owned by French firm Ernest Soulard, which is a supplier to celebrity chef Gordon Ramsay 's restaurants. The restaurant chain suspended purchasing from the supplier following the exposé.

The process of force-feeding can make animals sick by stressing the liver. If the stress is prolonged, excess protein may build up and clump together as amyloids, consumption of which has been found to induce amyloidosis in laboratory mice. It has been hypothesized this may be a route of transmission in humans too, and so may be a risk for people with inflammatory complaints such as rheumatoid arthritis.

Several countries and regions have laws against force-feeding or the sale or importation of foie gras; even where it is legal, some retailers have ceased selling it.

In Switzerland, foie gras production has been prohibited since 1978 and force-feeding is explicitly banned since 2008.

In the European Union, force-feeding is only legal in 5 of the 27 member states: France, Belgium, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Spain. In 2017, foie gras production was banned in Brussels, a largely symbolic measure because of the small number of producers within the city limits.

In 2019, New York City instituted a foie gras ban but was struck down in 2022 by an order from the New York's Agriculture and Markets Department. However, the court ruling against New York City's foie gras ban has been overturned in 2026.

In November 2022, the Buckingham Palace household wrote to the PETA campaign group that foie gras was not bought or served in royal residences.

Force-feeding is also prohibited in Israel, Turkey, Australia, and Brazil. Foie gras import is prohibited in India. Foie gras production and sale is prohibited in California.

The production of foie gras (the liver of a duck or a goose that has been specially fattened) involves the force-feeding of birds with more food than they would eat in the wild, and more than they would voluntarily eat domestically.

In modern gavage-based foie gras production, force feeding takes place 10.5 –15 days or more before slaughter, depending on species (duck or goose) and production methods. The feed, usually corn boiled with fat (to facilitate ingestion), deposits large amounts of fat in the liver, thereby producing the fatty consistency sought by some gastronomes.

Animal rights and welfare activist groups such as the Humane Society of the United States, the Animal Legal Defense Fund, L214 and FOUR PAWS contend that foie gras production methods, and force-feeding in particular, constitute cruel and inhumane treatment of animals. Specific complaints include livers swollen to up to ten times their normal size, impaired liver function, expansion of the abdomen making it difficult for birds to walk, death if the force feeding is continued, and scarring of the esophagus.

In 2001, the Director of the New York State Government Affairs & Public Policy Dept. for the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, which is one of America's leading environmental activist groups, wrote a letter to then NYS Attorney General, Eliot Spitzer, asking that the state's foie gras producers be prosecuted for violating animal cruelty statutes.

Late in 2003, the French group Stopgavage ("Citizens' Initiative for the banning of force-feeding") published the Proclamation for the Abolition of Force Feeding, which asks justices to find foie gras production practices a violation of existing animal welfare laws. For this manifesto Stopgavage claims the support of over eighty French animal rights and welfare associations, over a hundred such associations from 25 other countries, and over 20 thousand individual signatories.

Stopgavage, through its president Antoine Comiti, has criticized the INRA (a French public research institute) for allowing its researchers to receive grants from the foie gras industry for conducting research aimed at contradicting the EU report conclusions. Robert Dantzer, a retired INRA researcher, calls the INRA studies "pseudoscience" and "convenience research".

In 2005, the Animal Protection and Rescue League (APRL), In Defense of Animals (IDA) and People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) jointly released a video narrated by Sir Roger Moore showing footage the groups took inside the three U.S. foie gras farms and several in France.

PETA wants this practice, which it says is cruel, stopped. Various American celebrities have lent their voices to this public campaign. Most recently in April 2009 PETA released a letter written by television and stage actor Bea Arthur to TV chef Curtis Stone deploring the practice of foie gras.

In 2014 Compassion in World Farming partners with other organizations such as the German Albert-Schweitzer Foundation and the French organization L214 to pressure the EU Commission and EU Agriculture Council to take action against the production of foie gras.

The report of the European Union 's Scientific Committee on Animal Health and Animal Welfare, Welfare Aspects of the Production of Foie Gras in Ducks and Geese, adopted on December 16, 1998, is an 89-page review of studies from several producing countries. It examines several indicators of animal welfare, including physiological indicators, liver pathology, and mortality rate.

The committee concluded that "the management and housing of the birds used for producing foie gras have a negative impact on their welfare." Its overall conclusion was that "force feeding, as currently practised, is detrimental to the welfare of the birds."

The report noted a lack of scientific literature concerning injuries resulting from force feeding and liver hypertrophy, so it relied on biochemical and histological measurements, general aspects of health, and mortality. It observed that birds with expanded livers had difficulty standing and their ability to walk was severely impaired. The report explained that the "widespread use of small cages in which the birds usually cannot stand in a normal standing position makes it difficult to recognise leg problems and leg pain." It further stated that hypertrophied livers cause discomfort in a variety of other species.

The report explained that birds have a wide range of pain receptors and an elaborate pain recognition system, with a particularly sensitive oropharyngeal area.

On physiology, the report finds that based on studies available, "no definite conclusions can be drawn concerning the physiological activity of birds in response to force feeding" because although "force feeding induced hepatic steatosis in the duck or goose", "hepatic steatosis in the waterfowl is a normal metabolic response" and there was a low incidence of lesions. If gavage is stopped the "return to normal took approximately four weeks". As an economic indicator the report states "it is strongly in the interest of the farmer" to avoid disease as the "resulting fat liver is of no commercial value". It summarizes that "some pathologists consider this level of steatosis to be pathological but others do not" and recommends that research "should be carried out into methods of producing fat liver which do not require the use of force feeding".

The EU report notes that continued force feeding leads to early death of the animal, and the birds are typically slaughtered just at the point that mortality would drastically increase from the force feeding. In the studies it examined, "the mortality rate in force fed birds varies from 2% to 4% in the two week force feeding period compared with around 0.2% in comparable ducks".

On the force-feeding process, the EU committee examined several experiments carried out by INRA (Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique) to detect pain or distress by looking at blood hormones, and found that no definite conclusions can be drawn from these studies. Other studies looked at behavioral aversion to the feeding process and found that force fed ducks avoided the feeding pen when given a choice, whereas a majority of the control group not being force fed would enter the feeding pen voluntarily. Daily hand-feeding of ducks and geese is normally associated with a positive response by the animals towards the person feeding them; in contrast, the working group observed that ducks and geese in a pen kept away from their force feeder when he entered the room. Members of the committee observed and described how geese and ducks show "avoidance behaviour indicating aversion for the person who feeds them and the feeding procedure," but the committee noted a lack of conclusive scientific evidence on the aversion. In an unpublished pilot experiment by INRA, ducks in cages reportedly displayed less avoidance behaviour to the force feeder's visit than to the visit of a neutral person coming along the cages later. However, in the working group's own observations, "Ducks in cages had little opportunity to show avoidance but sometimes moved their heads away from the person who was about to force feed them."

The report also recommends collection of additional data regarding the health of the animals, feeding methods, animal housing, and socio-economic factors.

In 2023, a new report titled "Welfare of ducks, geese and quail on farm" was published by the Panel on Animal Health and Animal Welfare (AHAW Panel) of the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) to serve as guidance for the EU animal welfare law revision. The report evaluated the most common husbandry systems (HS) in the European Union for Muscovy ducks, Mule ducks, and Domestic geese used for foie gras production, among other birds. The practice of force-feeding itself was not evaluated in this report, which focused largely on restriction of movement, various injuries, group stress, inability to perform comfort behaviors, inability to perform exploratory or foraging behaviors, and inability to express maternal behaviors.

During the overfeeding phase of foie gras production, Mule ducks and Domestic geese are typically kept in indoor pen systems. The cages and pens currently in use during the force-feeding phase are typically 2-3 times too small for the birds to exhibit their natural behaviours. Moreover, extra space on open water should be provided to guarantee good welfare conditions.

In 2004 and 2005, the American Veterinary Medical Association House of Delegates, the US accrediting body of veterinary medicine, was forwarded resolutions from its Animal Welfare Committee to oppose the production methods for foie gras. After hearing testimony from 13 delegates, the HOD declined to take a position and left a simple statement: "Limited peer-reviewed, scientific information is available dealing with the animal welfare concerns associated with foie gras production, but the observations and practical experience shared by HOD members indicate a minimum of adverse effects on the birds involved."

The HOD sent delegates to visit foie gras farms. One delegate, Robert P. Gordon of New Jersey, indicated his personal position changed drastically after the visit. He also testified tube feeding is less distressing than taking the rectal temperature of a cat and urged the AVMA to take a position based on science, not emotion, while cautioning against anthropomorphism. The New York delegation offered their opinion that opponents of foie gras were intending to create a wedge issue ; that the arguments used against foie gras would be modified to be used against other livestock production. The testimony of the delegate from the Association of Avian Veterinarians was that medicating and feeding sick birds via tube was a normal practice that birds accepted without stress. Another delegate who toured the farms stated that the birds appeared to be well cared for and better off than other poultry raised in factory farming. The overall position of the House of Delegates was that "observations and practical experience shared by HOD members indicate a minimum of adverse effects on the birds involved." The closing comments in the HOD were that the AVMA should be taking positions on facts and science, make broad policy positions on general animal welfare, and support positions that created oversight of controversial practices for fear that prohibition would cause production to move to countries without animal welfare regulation.

Critics of the AVMA have stated that the organization tends to defend the economic interests of agribusiness over animal welfare, and that it has also declined to take a position against other controversial practices such as forced molting and gestation crates.

In June 2005, New York Times editor Lawrence Downes was invited to a visit of the same farm, including specifically the gavage process, and he "saw no pain or panic...The birds submitted matter-of-factly to a 15-inch tube inserted down the throat for about three seconds, delivering about a cup of corn pellets. The practice...seemed neither particularly gentle nor particularly rough."

Dr. Ward Stone, wildlife pathologist with the NYSDEC and adjunct professor at SUNY has on several occasions conducted post-mortems on ducks that died from force feeding, including from the same farm a few months after Downes' visit. In September 2005, he writes: "the short tortured lives of ducks raised for foie gras is well outside the norm of farm practice. Having seen the pathology that occurs from foie gras production, I strongly recommend that this practice be outlawed."

In 2005, the delegates from New Jersey and Vermont of the American Veterinary Medical Association gave testimony to the organization after touring tube-feeding farms. Dr. Robert Gordon had visited a farm in New York on July 5. He noted, "After being on the premises, my position changed dramatically. I did not see animals I would consider distressed, and I didn't see pain and suffering." As written at AVMA news, Dr. Thomas Munschauer visited a New York farm at the request of "both sides." "I didn't see exploding esophaguses... and it didn't seem like the birds were distressed. For the most part, they appear to be well-cared-for. That's what I saw."

In January 2009, The National Advertising Division (NAD) of the Council of the Better Business Bureau recommended that New Jersey–based foie gras producer D'Artagnan cease advertising claims that their product is made from "enlarged" rather than "diseased" livers, and that the animals were "hand-raised with tender care". D'Artagnan voluntarily modified their advertising to remove the claims which the agency said had not been "adequately substantiated."

Most foie gras producers do not consider their methods cruel, insisting that it is a natural process exploiting the animals' natural features. Producers argue that wild ducks and geese naturally ingest large amounts of whole food and gain weight before migration. They claim that geese and ducks do not have a gag reflex in their throats the same way that humans do, and therefore do not appear to find force feeding uncomfortable. Michael Ginor, owner of Hudson Valley Foie Gras, author of Foie Gras... A Passion (1998), claims his birds come to him to be fed and says this is important because "a stressed or hurt bird won't eat and digest well or produce a foie gras."

Mirepoix USA, a top provider of goose and duck foie gras, alleges that the animal rights activists attack is a form of prohibition against a cuisine item. Mirepoix claims that the use of the term "diseased" to refer to fatted liver is inaccurate and that geese and ducks naturally store dead fish in their esophagi for long periods. The ducks used in foie gras production, however, are a hybrid of Pekin (a type of Mallard) and Muscovy ducks, both of which are dabbling ducks and as such, subsist mainly on a diet of underwater vegetation, larvae, and various insects.

Chef Anthony Bourdain and chef/writer Michael Ruhlman have both opposed proposed bans on foie gras, and stated that although the videos showing traditional foie gras production are disturbing and cruel, no reputable chef would buy such product. However, other celebrity chefs, such as Wolfgang Puck and Albert Roux, are against the use of foie gras. Roux has argued that foie gras should come with a warning so that "people know what's being done to the animals." He states that "More humane methods should be used that allow the animal to gorge themselves naturally." Chicago chef Charlie Trotter maintained that the production of foie gras is "too cruel to be served." However, Trotter refused to be associated with animal rights groups stating "These people are idiots. Understand my position: I have nothing to do with a group like that. I think they're pathetic."

The controversy over foie gras has been the subject of several lawsuits. The 1985 case Lovenheim v. Iroquois Brands was a shareholder suit regarding ethical concerns about a company selling foie gras.

In 2003, the Animal Protection and Rescue League and In Defense of Animals filed suit against Sonoma Foie Gras in California under the state's unfair business practices law, alleging animal cruelty. The farm also sued the two groups and four activists who documented conditions at the farm for trespass. The Legislature then intervened with a law allowing the farm to continue force feeding until the year 2012, after which point both the sale and production of foie gras has been illegal in California.

In 2006, Sonoma Foie Gras sued Whole Foods Market for intentional interference with contract for influencing Grimaud Farms to stop supplying ducklings and marketing for Sonoma. The suit was settled for an undisclosed amount, though the jury returned a judgement of $5.2 million.

Also pending is a 2006 lawsuit filed by the Humane Society of the United States against the New York Department of Agriculture and Markets, alleging that foie gras qualifies as an adulterated food that should not be sold.

In 2011, the Animal Legal Defense Fund filed a legal petition with the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), urging that foie gras bear a consumer warning label stating "NOTICE: Foie gras products are derived from diseased birds." ALDF argues that because the USDA is responsible for ensuring that poultry products are wholesome and for approving only products from healthy animals, stamping foie gras products with the USDA seal without disclosing that those products are derived from diseased birds misleads consumers, contravening the Poultry Products Inspection Act. Regularly eating foie gras can harm the health of predisposed people. Patients with Alzheimer's, rheumatoid arthritis, type 2 diabetes and other amyloid -related diseases should not eat it.

In 2012, the Animal Legal Defense Fund sued Hudson Valley Foie Gras over its advertising as "the humane choice" for foie gras. Hudson Valley settled the case and dropped this advertising campaign after a federal judge in California indicated that he would allow the parties to present evidence and decide whether Hudson Valley could prove that its "humane" claims were truthful.

In February 2013, the Animal Legal Defense Fund filed an appeal in a lawsuit against the New York Department of Agriculture and Markets for allowing the ongoing sale of foie gras. The original lawsuit, which was dismissed in February for lack of standing, alleges that the Department violates its own Agriculture and Markets Law by allowing the sale of foie gras. New York's state law requires the Department to declare "the product of a diseased animal" an adulterated product. In the appeal, the Animal Legal Defense Fund will defend its legal standing to bring the case, noting it has diverted substantial resources to warn the public of the dangerous health risks posed by foie gras and, will assert that the Department's failure to regulate has resulted in the slaughter of hundreds of thousands of diseased birds whose organs are distributed into the human food supply.

In July 2014, India banned the import of foie gras. The managing director of the Humane Society International of India called this "a triumph for animal welfare in India as well as across the globe", and said that it "sets a precedent for other countries to follow".

In Australia, the production of foie gras is forbidden, though it is legal to import it.

In August 2003, Argentina banned foie gras production as it is considered a mistreatment or an act of cruelty to animals.

In June 2015, the production and sale of foie gras was banned in São Paulo restaurants. In February 2016, the law was overturned.

On April 28, 2026, the Brazilian National Congress approved Bill 90/20, banning the production and sale of food products derived from the force-feeding of animals, including foie gras. The bill was signed into law by President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva on July 24 and published in the official gazette.

Since 1997, the number of European countries producing foie gras has halved. As of 2016, only five European countries still produce foie gras: Belgium, Bulgaria, France, Hungary and Spain.

Foie gras production is banned in several countries, including most Austrian provinces, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Norway, Poland, Turkey, and the United Kingdom.

The force feeding of animals for non-medical purposes, essential to current foie gras production practices, is explicitly prohibited by specific laws in Austria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Norway, Poland, or following interpretation of general animal protection laws in Ireland, the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, and the United Kingdom. However, foie gras can still be imported into and purchased in these countries. Most of these countries do not currently produce foie gras, nor have they in the past. Thus, these bans have stopped foie gras production in very few countries. In 2021, the UK planned to become the first European nation to extend its ban on production to imports but this did not materialise before the Conservative government lost the 2024 General Election. The Labour Party pledged in the run-up to the 2024 General Election to implement the ban but dropped this pledge, citing the impact it would have on U.K.-E.U relations.

In France, the fattening is achieved through gavage (force-feeding corn), according to French law. French law states that "Foie gras belongs to the protected cultural and gastronomical heritage of France."

In 2012, eight members of the European Parliament called for foie gras to be banned across the EU.

"Until new scientific evidence on alternative methods and their welfare aspects is available", the production of foie gras is prohibited by treaty except for "where it is current practice" among 35 countries bound by the Council of Europe 's European Convention for the Protection of Animals kept for Farming Purposes.

In 2023 foie gras production was banned in the Flemish Region of Belgium.

In August 2003, the Supreme Court of Israel ordered the Israeli Ministry of Agriculture to ban the force feeding of geese, effective 31 March 2005. The last appeal was withdrawn in October 2005, but the law was left unenforced until February 2006. Most protest activities were conducted by Animals Now, which also tracks the enforcement of the ban, and files complaints against farms that conduct illegal force feeding. In May 2013, a bill proposed by Knesset Member Dov Lipman plans to prohibit all sales of the delicacy due to the controversial methods.

Sections 25980-25984 of the California Health and Safety Code, enacted in 2004 and effective from July 1, 2012, prohibits "force feed[ing] a bird for the purpose of enlarging the bird's liver beyond normal size" and the sale of products that are a result of this process. On January 7, 2015, Judge Stephen V. Wilson held that the California law was preempted by the federal Poultry Products Inspection Act, and enjoined the California Attorney General from enforcing it. The case was appealed to the Ninth Circuit and on September 15, 2017, the District Court's ruling was reversed and law was upheld.

San Diego: On January 8, 2008, the San Diego City Council unanimously passed a resolution that "commends the Animal Protection and Rescue League (APRL) for raising awareness of the cruel practice of force-feeding ducks and geese to produce foie gras, commends the many San Diego restaurants that have stopped selling foie gras before the California statewide ban goes into effect, and encourages San Diegans to avoid supporting this extreme form of animal cruelty." The resolution also cites an independent Zogby poll finding that 85% of San Diegans favor an immediate ban on foie gras.

Chicago: On 26 April 2006, the Chicago City Council voted to ban the sale of foie gras, effective 22 August 2006. Breaches of the ban were punishable with fines of $250–500. Alderman Joe Moore, who proposed the ban, described the method by which foie gras is produced as "clearly animal cruelty".

In response, several Chicago chefs filed suit and deliberately violated the law by continuing to sell foie gras. Furthermore, a handful of chefs served foie gras without charge, which they considered not to be against the law. Even for establishments that were violating the law, the City issued warning letters but, until February 17, 2007, no citations were given. On that date, Doug Sohn, owner of a gourmet hot dog shop was charged with a violation. Although the fine could have been as high as $500, Sohn agreed to pay a $250 fine on March 29. Several unusual dishes, including foie gras pizza, have been created in Chicago, in defiance of the City Council's banning of foie gras. 46,000 pounds of foie gras were sold in Chicago in 2006.

In December 2006, Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley referred to the ban as "the silliest law" the City Council has ever passed. As a result of the ban, Chicago restaurants Spiaggia and Tru developed dishes designed to simulate the foie gras experience. Chicago Tribune restaurant critic Phil Vettel found Tru's "Faux Gras" "close to the real thing", and Spiaggia's " terrina de fagato grasso vegetariano" "undeniably rich and indulgent", but "[lacking] the characteristic foie-gras intensity".

In response to Mayor Daley's objections on the foie gras ban, the City Council overwhelmingly repealed Chicago's ban on May 14, 2008.

On October 30, 2019, the City Council of New York City voted to ban foie gras involving force feeding by 2022. The ban was not enforced, as it was not compatible with New York State law. However, the court ruling against New York City's foie gras ban has been overturned in 2026.

A number of retailers have ceased the sale of foie gras produce following campaigns and protests over production methods. These include Amazon UK, Waitrose, Sainsbury's, Lidl, House of Fraser, and Harvey Nichols.

Fondue (UK : / ˈ f ɒ n dj uː / FON -dew, US : / f ɒ n ˈ dj uː / fon- DEW, French: [ fɔ̃dy ], Swiss Standard German: [ fɔ̃ːˈdyː ] ; Italian : fonduta) is a Swiss dish of melted cheese and wine served in a communal pot (caquelon or fondue pot) over a portable stove (réchaud) heated with a candle or spirit lamp, and eaten by dipping bread and sometimes vegetables or other foods into the cheese using long-stemmed forks. As a way to increase cheese consumption, it was promoted as a Swiss national dish by the Swiss Cheese Union (Schweizerische Käseunion) in the 1930s.

Since the 1950s, the term "fondue" has been generalized to other dishes in which a food is dipped into a communal pot of liquid kept hot in a fondue pot.

The word fondue is the feminine passive past participle, used as a noun, of the French verb fondre 'to melt', and thus means 'melted'. It is first attested in French in 1735, in Vincent La Chapelle 's Cuisinier moderne, and in English in 1878.

Although fondue is widely recognized as a Swiss tradition, its dates and influences reflect a broader European exchange of ideas, especially involving melted cheese dishes made with varieties such as Raclette and Gruyère.

The term “fondue” appears in written sources that predate the first widely recognized recipe from 1699, suggesting that the practice itself existed long before it was formally recorded. In the Alpine regions of Switzerland, where harsh winters and geographic isolation limited access to fresh foods, communities relied heavily on preserved staples such as aged cheese and stale bread. Rather than letting these ingredients go to waste, people developed practical methods of making them more edible. By melting cheese and blending it with wine, they created a warm, flavorful dish that softened hardened bread and provided a source of calories during colder months. This approach was not initially about culinary issues, but about necessity and resourcefulness. Over time, however fondue took on social and cultural meaning. The act of sharing a communal pot encouraged interaction and became associated with hospitality and togetherness. As recipes became more standardized in later centuries—especially following the earliest documented cheese-and-wine preparation in a 1699 Zürich cookbook —the dish evolved beyond its rural origins. Eventually, fondue came to be embraced as a symbol of Swiss identity, reflecting both the country’s agricultural traditions and its emphasis on communal dining. By melting cheese and combining it with wine, communities were able to create a warm, shared meal using available resources. What began as a practical solution eventually evolved into a cultural symbol of Switzerland.

Fondue today represents more than just a meal; it reflects social traditions and shared experiences. In particular, there has long been debate over what beverages should accompany it, highlighting how food customs are shaped not only by taste but also by cultural beliefs and habits. The earliest known recipe for the modern form of cheese fondue comes from a 1698 book published in Zürich, under the name "Käss mit Wein zu kochen" 'to cook cheese with wine'. It calls for grated or cut-up cheese to be melted with wine, and for bread to be dipped in it.

However, the name "cheese fondue", until the late 19th century, referred to a dish composed of eggs and cheese, as in la Chapelle's 1735 Fonduë de Fromage, aux Truffes Fraiches ; it was something between scrambled eggs with cheese and a cheese soufflé. Variations included cream ("à la genevoise") and truffles ("à la piémontaise") in addition to eggs, as well as what is now called " raclette " ("fondue valaisanne").

The first known recipe for the modern cheese fondue under that name, with cheese and wine but no eggs, was published in 1875, and was already presented as a Swiss national dish. Despite its modern associations with rustic mountain life, it was a town-dweller's dish from the lowlands of western, French-speaking, Switzerland: rich cheese like Gruyère was a valuable export item which peasants could not afford to eat.

With the introduction of corn starch to Switzerland in 1905, it became easier to make a smooth and stable emulsion of the wine and cheese, and this probably helped contribute to the success of fondue.

Fondue was popularized as a Swiss national dish by the Swiss Cheese Union (Schweizerische Käseunion) in the 1930s as a way of increasing cheese consumption. The 1939 New York World's Fair was the first international stage that the Swiss Cheese Union used to promote fondue. The Swiss Cheese Union also created pseudo-regional recipes as part of the "spiritual defense of Switzerland". After World War II rationing ended, the Swiss Cheese Union continued its marketing campaign, sending fondue sets to military regiments and event organizers across Switzerland. Fondue is now a symbol of Swiss unity. Fondue is also often associated with mountains and winter sports.

The extension of the name "fondue" to other dishes served in a communal hot pot dates to 1950s New York. Konrad Egli, a Swiss restaurateur, introduced fondue bourguignonne at his Chalet Suisse restaurant in 1956. In the mid-1960s, Egli invented chocolate fondue as part of a promotion for Toblerone chocolate. The original recipe featured melted chocolate, heavy cream, and brandy. This took off in the 1970s in New York which prompted many people to buy a fondue pot for at home which increased popularity.

Fondue was again promoted to Americans at the Swiss Pavilion's Alpine restaurant at the 1964 New York World's Fair. Its popularity in the United States peaked in the 1960s and 1970s, along with other foods made in chafing dishes. Fondue was most often served at social gatherings and dinner parties.

Following fondue's international success, the Swiss Cheese Union continued to aggressively promote fondue in Switzerland with slogans like "La fondue crée la bonne humeur" 'fondue creates a good mood' and (1981, in Swiss German) "Fondue isch guet und git e gueti Luune" 'fondue is good and creates a good mood' – abbreviated as "figugegl".

The decades long cheese campaign in Switzerland ended in 1999 when the Swiss Cheese Union was disbanded due to corruption scandals and economic changes in Switzerland. The legacy of fondue as a symbol of national unity, however, is woven tightly into the modern Swiss identity.

Cheese fondue consists of some variation of a blend of grated cheeses that are melted, usually wine (but sometimes beer as an alternative), a thickening agent such as cornstarch or flour, and seasonings. The proportion of cheeses to wine is typically in a 2-to-1 ratio by weight (e.g., 800 g of cheese to 400 ml or 400 g of wine).

Traditionally, the caquelon is rubbed with a cut garlic clove, white wine is added and heated with cornstarch, and then grated cheese is added and gently stirred until melted, although in practice all the ingredients can be combined and heated together at once. Some kirsch is often added. Fondue is very easy to prepare, even in large quantities.

The cornstarch or other starch stabilizes and thickens the mixture. Additional wine may be added if the fondue is too thick; its acid and ethanol decrease the fondue's viscosity. A fondue can curdle if the protein separates from the fat, which is usually the result of not enough liquid in the mixture and an insufficiently acid mixture, so lemon juice is sometimes added. (Lemon juice and wine both contain organic acids that chelate calcium ions, allowing casein to break down into smaller particles.)

A cheese fondue mixture should be kept warm enough to keep the fondue smooth and liquid but not so hot that it burns. A typical target temperature is in the neighborhood of 65 C (150 F) as measured with a cooking thermometer. If maintained until the fondue is finished, a thin crust of toasted (not burnt) cheese will naturally develop at the bottom of the caquelon. This is called la religieuse (French for "the nun"). It has the texture of a cracker and is almost always lifted out and eaten.

Note that the regional names used for some of these variants are factitious, and do not reflect genuine regional traditions.

Fondue is eaten by spearing a piece of bread on a fork, swirling it in the pot, and putting it into the mouth. Some writers recommend that the dipping fork be used only to transport the food from the pot to one's plate, not to eat from.

Losing a piece of bread in the caquelon is said to be penalized by buying a round of drinks, singing a song, or running around in the snow naked. This is parodied in Asterix in Switzerland, where a character is sentenced to be drowned in Lake Geneva after losing his third piece of bread. Other fondue etiquette rules include 'always stirring in a figure of 8', 'not scratching the bottom of the caquelon with a fork that has no side on it' and 'adding an egg and kirsch schnapps to the caquelon when the cheese is almost finished'.

There are various recommendations on the choice of accompanying beverage: some say white wine, others specify black tea. Some drink spirits during or after the meal, which supposedly helps digestion. Indeed, alcohol may provide short-term relief, but overall, it delays gastric emptying and prolongs perceived fullness. The delayed, strong feeling of fullness after eating fondue may be caused by phase separation in the stomach, the cheese fat initially floating in the stomach not being released into the duodenum, delaying fat sensing and satiation.

Food Social Security (from the French Sécurité sociale de l'alimentation) is a socio-economic initiative drawing on the French Social security system and aiming to extend it to the food system, thus advocating multiple rights linked to the right to food, farmers' rights, and environmental protection. Funded through social contributions, each person would receive a fixed sum (e.g., 150€ monthly) to be spent only with food producers and retailers who have been democratically contracted, ensuring they meet social and environmental criteria. Carried by various actors from the civil society, it is currently being experimented at local scale in various places in France, Belgium, Switzerland.

The idea of Food Social Security stemmed from noticing various flaws inherent to the current food system such as malnutrition, food insecurity, farmers' precarity and environmental concerns. Globally, while enough food is produced to feed ten billion people, food systems are threatening both human health and environmental sustainability. Food bank demand is soaring throughout the world, and is in itself not seen as a long-term response to food insecurity. Poor nutrition is generally linked to lower incomes, causing one of the largest public health challenges for children, and a significant strain on healthcare systems.

The three fundamental principles of Food Social Security are:

In 2022 an experiment inspired from Food Social Security was launched in Dieulefit (Drôme). In 2023, other experiments started in Gironde, Toulouse, Strasbourg, Clermont-Ferrand, Valencia (Spain), Montpellier, Paris, Cadenet (Vaucluse), followed by dozens of other municipalities across France which prepared experiments or reflection groups listed by the collective. The idea has also been taken up in Belgium since 2021, with pilot projects notably in Schaerbeek (Brussels Region) and in Wallonia, and in Switzerland since 2024.

As of 2025, the French collective's website lists more than 30 local experiments. Details of implementation vary across the trials, including the selection criteria for food shops and products, their quality, sustainability or geographic and economic accessibility. Although every experiment has been local, their main purpose is to gather enough momentum for the project to be adopted and implemented at the national scale.

The foreign alliances of France have a long and complex history spanning more than a millennium. One traditional characteristic of the French diplomacy of alliances has been the "Alliance de revers" (i.e. "Rear alliance"), aiming at allying with countries situated on the opposite side or "in the back" of an adversary, in order to open a second front encircling the adversary and thus re-establish a balance of power. Another has been the alliance with local populations, against other European colonial powers.

Over the centuries, France has constantly been looking for Eastern allies, as a counterbalance to Continental enemies. Throughout French history, this was especially the case against Austria-Hungary, Spain or Prussia : the Abbasid–Carolingian alliance (against the Umayyad Caliphate and the Byzantine Empire), the Franco-Hungarian alliance and Franco-Ottoman alliance (against the Habsburg Empire), the Franco-American alliance (against Great Britain), the Franco-Russian Alliance (against Germany). In particular, since 1870 the desire to counter German power has been a major motivating force leading France to create Eastern alliances.

France also has a strong tradition of alliance with autochthonous populations in order to resist a powerful opponent. In the American continent, France was the first to identify that cooperation with local tribes would be strategically significant, before England also started to adopt this strategy. An important Franco-Indian alliance centered on the Great Lakes and the Illinois country took place during the French and Indian War (1754–1763). The alliance involved French settlers on the one side, and the indigenous peoples such as the Abenaki, Ottawa, Menominee, Winnebago, Mississauga, Illinois, Sioux, Huron, Petun, and Potawatomi on the other.

The French easily mixed and inter-married with the Indians, which greatly facilitated exchanges and the development of such alliances. Through these alliances with the Indians, the French were able to maintain for over 150 years a strong position in the New World at the expense of the British, who had much more difficulties in making Indian allies.

In India, the French General Dupleix was allied to Murzapha Jung in the Deccan, and Chanda Sahib in the Carnatic Wars, in the conflict against Robert Clive. The French succeeded in the 1746 Battle of Madras, and the French and Indians fought together and vanquished Anwaruddin in 1749, but failed in the Battle of Arcot in 1751 and finally surrendered in 1752. The French again had a success at the capture of Fort St. David in 1758 under Lally, but were finally defeated at Masulipatam (1759) and Wandewash (1760).

In 1782, Louis XVI sealed an alliance with the Peshwa Madhu Rao Narayan. As a consequence Bussy moved his troops to Isle de France (now Mauritius) and later contributed to the French effort in India in 1783. Suffren became the ally of Hyder Ali in the Second Anglo-Mysore War against the British from 1782 to 1783, fighting the Royal Navy on the coasts of India and Ceylon. From February 1782 until June 1783 Suffren fought the English admiral Sir Edward Hughes and collaborated with the rulers of Mysore. Suffren fought in the Battle of Sadras on 17 February 1782, the Battle of Providien on 12 April near Trincomalee and the Battle of Negapatam (1782) on 6 July off Cuddalore, after which he seized upon the anchorage of Trincomalee, compelling its small British garrison to surrender. An army of 3,000 French soldiers collaborated with Hyder Ali to capture Cuddalore. Finally the Battle of Trincomalee took place near that port on 3 September. These battles can be seen as the last battles of the Franco-British conflict that encompassed the American War of Independence, and would cease with the signature of the Treaty of Versailles (1783) establishing peace and recognizing America independence.

Some French alliances were purely tactical and short term, especially during the period of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. Napoleon Bonaparte had launched the French invasion of Egypt in 1798 and fought against the Ottomans to establish a French presence in the Middle East, with the ultimate dream of linking up with the ruler of Mysore, Tipu Sultan, in order to attack British possessions in India. After having failed a first time, Napoleon entered into a Franco-Ottoman alliance and a Franco-Persian alliance in order to create an overland access for his troops to India. Following the visit of the Persian Envoy Mirza Mohammad-Reza Qazvini to Napoleon, the Treaty of Finkenstein formalized the alliance on 4 May 1807, in which France supported Persia's claim to Georgia, promising to act so that Russia would surrender the territory. In exchange, Persia was to declare war on Britain, and to allow France to cross the Persian territory to reach India.

The foreign policy of France under the July Monarchy from 1830 to 1840 was characterized by two primary elements: a new system of alliances, notably the rapprochement with the United Kingdom within the " Entente Cordiale," and the French conquest of Algeria. This policy aimed to maintain peace with European neighbors, as summarized by Casimir Perier 's statement: "peace without compromising honor."

The July Revolution of 1830 in France caused concern among European powers, who feared a resurgence of revolutionary fervor similar to that following Napoleon 's return from Elba in 1815. This concern led to a united front among European monarchies against the perceived threat of a republican France, particularly as vocal republican factions in France expressed a desire to avenge the defeat at Waterloo. However, France in 1830 lacked the capacity to engage in a major conflict with European powers. The economic crisis had strained finances, and the army was weakened: key forces had been deployed to Greece and Algeria, and the revolution had disrupted military discipline.

Thiers argued to Adélaïde d'Orléans on 30 July 1830 that foreign powers would likely view the new monarchy as a means to prevent a republic and contain internal agitation, provided it did not expand beyond France's borders. The accession of Louis-Philippe, constrained by legitimacy issues and focused on peace with neighbors, was seen as advantageous by European powers, who had grown wary of Charles X's independent actions. As Guy Antonetti observed: "The European sovereigns pretended to regret Charles X, but they recognized Louis-Philippe!"

Upon ascending the throne, Louis Philippe I prioritized obtaining recognition from foreign powers. After confirming that Charles X and his family had left France on 19 August, the king sent letters to European monarchs via personal emissaries, justifying the regime change and notifying them of the new reign. The letters described the July Revolution as an unavoidable event and expressed the king's regret for the "misfortunes" of the elder branch of his family. Louis-Philippe emphasized that he had reluctantly accepted the throne to prevent anarchy in France.

The United Kingdom, having grown frustrated with Charles X, welcomed the new monarchy, particularly given the Duke of Orléans' pro-British stance. Before receiving Louis-Philippe's letter, British Foreign Secretary Lord Aberdeen informed Metternich that the UK would remain neutral regarding France's political changes, provided France maintained stability. On 31 August, British ambassador Charles Stuart presented his letters of credence to Louis-Philippe, and on 3 September, Talleyrand was appointed ambassador to London. The UK's neutrality, signaling a break from the Holy Alliance, ensured that European powers would not interfere in French affairs.

In Austria, Emperor Francis I expressed disapproval of the events in France but recognized the July Monarchy on 5 September after assurances that the new regime would respect the 1815 treaties and not pursue territorial expansion. Austria's ambassador, Count Apponyi, presented his credentials to Louis-Philippe on 24 October.

Prussia 's King Frederick William III followed Austria's lead in recognizing the new regime. Similarly, the July Monarchy received recognition from Spain's Ferdinand VII, whose ambassador presented credentials on 13 October, as well as from the kings of Sardinia and Denmark.

Russia 's Emperor Nicholas I was less accommodating, though his ambassador in Paris, Pozzo di Borgo, had supported the July Revolution. Nicholas I, sensitive to issues of legitimacy due to his own ascension, recognized Louis-Philippe's government but used formal language that implied a lack of full sovereign recognition. Relations normalized in 1831 after the appointment of the Duke of Mortemart as ambassador to Saint Petersburg, but remained cool.

In Portugal, Dom Miguel ignored the new French regime. In response, France sent Admiral Roussin 's squadron, which forced the Tagus on 11 July 1831 and compelled Portugal to accept French conditions on 14 July. In July 1833, Dom Pedro, supported by the British fleet, deposed Miguel and established a liberal regime, which Paris and London immediately recognized. The Duke of Modena, Francis IV, refused to recognize the July Monarchy, reflecting his hostility toward Louis-Philippe, despite familial ties through the king's maternal lineage. Modena never recognized the July Monarchy, and the legitimist pretender, the " Count of Chambord," married a princess from Modena in 1846.

By the end of October 1830, Louis-Philippe had secured recognition from all European powers by pledging to respect the 1815 borders and positioning his regime as a safeguard against anarchy in France.

European monarchies recognized the July Monarchy as a bulwark against republicanism and the spread of revolutionary ideas. Their support was contingent on France maintaining internal stability and not exporting revolution. However, disturbances in Belgium, Poland, and Italy soon challenged the new regime.

Occupied by French revolutionary armies in 1794 and annexed in 1795, the Départements réunis [ fr ], or Belgian provinces, were separated from France in 1814. The Congress of Vienna in 1815 united them with the former United Provinces to form the Kingdom of the Netherlands under the House of Nassau. The UK financed fortresses along the French border to prevent French expansion.

Dissatisfaction with William I of the Netherlands 's rule led to unrest in Belgium by the late 1820s. On 25 August 1830, Brussels rose in rebellion, and Belgian militias halted Dutch troops on 27 September, pushing them back to the former border of the Austrian Netherlands. On 4 October, Belgium proclaimed independence, and a provisional government was formed, including Catholics Félix de Mérode and Emmanuel d'Hoogvorst [ fr ] and liberals Alexandre Gendebien and Charles Rogier.

In France, nationalist and revanchist factions saw the Belgian uprising as an opportunity to reclaim what was considered a lost French province. They advocated for military intervention, supported by liberal Catholics, patriots like Armand Carrel, republicans like Godefroy Cavaignac, Bonapartists like General Lamarque, and the petty bourgeoisie aligned with the "movement party" of Laffitte and Thiers.

However, such intervention risked provoking Prussian support for the Dutch king, who was the brother-in-law of Frederick William III. Prussia, having acquired Rhine territories in 1815, feared that French intervention in Belgium could lead to further territorial claims.

Louis-Philippe, following the policy of Louis XV in 1748, rejected the idea of reclaiming Belgium, as it would be unacceptable to the United Kingdom, which opposed French control over the Scheldt estuary. By reassuring the UK, Louis-Philippe sought support for a neutral Belgian state under European guarantee.

The Netherlands, Louis-Philippe explained to Guizot, have always been a source of conflict in Europe: no great power can tolerate their control by another. Let them be an independent and neutral state by general consent; this state will become the keystone of European order.

This approach also aimed to dismantle the fortified "barrier" established by the UK along the Belgian border.

The King of the French first informed Prussia and Russia that France would not intervene in Belgium but would not tolerate intervention by other powers. On 31 August, Foreign Minister Molé conveyed this to the Prussian ambassador, and the king told the Russian ambassador, Pozzo di Borgo: "If the Prussians enter Belgium, it is war, for we will not tolerate it." This introduced the "principle of non-intervention." Talleyrand then proposed to the UK that France renounce Belgium in exchange for its neutrality. The British government agreed and suggested discussing the Belgian question at the conference of the five powers (UK, Austria, Prussia, Russia, and France) in London, originally convened for Greek affairs.

The Belgian provisional government convened a National Congress, which decided in late November 1830 that Belgium would be a constitutional monarchy and excluded members of the House of Nassau from the throne. However, the London powers considered installing the Prince of Orange, son of the King of the Netherlands, to minimize disruption to the 1815 treaties.

The Tory government of Wellington, committed to the 1815 treaties, was replaced on 22 November by a Whig government under Lord Grey, with Lord Palmerston as Foreign Secretary, who was more flexible. Additionally, the Russian army was occupied with the Polish uprising that began on 29 November, preventing support for William I. Palmerston and Talleyrand then directed the London conference, which imposed an armistice on the Dutch and Belgians, recognized Belgium's independence (20 December), and declared Belgium a perpetually neutral state under the powers' guarantee. However, the conference awarded the King of the Netherlands control over Luxembourg and Limburg (20 January 1831), which the Belgians contested, leading to further conflict.

Starting in late December 1830, the Belgians sought a king. Louis-Philippe noted to Marshal Maison on 11 November that the Belgian National Congress resembled the 1790 assembly under Vandernoot and Van Enpen, being largely aristocratic and clerical. This made it unlikely for a Protestant prince to be elected.

Louis-Philippe also stated that neither a French nor an Austrian prince could become King of the Belgians: "It is believed that the Belgians would be inclined to ask for one of my sons, but this idea must be dismissed, and it must not even be discussed, since in the current state of Europe, this discussion would be dangerous and would present no chance of success. The same can be said of all the archdukes of Austria."

Talleyrand negotiated with the UK to ensure that France would decline the Belgian throne for Nemours if the powers agreed not to recognize Leuchtenberg. On 17 February 1831, Louis-Philippe informed the Belgian delegation that he could not accept their offer due to his commitment to European peace and lack of dynastic ambition. The Belgians then appointed Surlet de Chokier as regent and resumed their search for a king.

The candidacies of John of Saxony, Otto of Bavaria, and Charles Ferdinand of the Two Sicilies were reconsidered. Louis-Philippe officially supported the latter, a nephew of Queen Maria Amalia, but his chances were slim due to his ties to the reactionary House of Bourbon of the Two Sicilies.

The UK proposed Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg, widower of Princess Charlotte and uncle of Queen Victoria. Despite personal ties with Leopold, Louis-Philippe was cautious about this candidacy, which was backed by the UK and the Holy Alliance. Talleyrand, however, supported it and envisioned a marriage between Leopold and a princess of Orléans.

On 4 June 1831, the Belgian National Congress elected Leopold with 152 votes out of 196. He accepted the crown on 9 July and was enthroned in Brussels on 21 July.

Leopold conditioned his acceptance on the National Congress recognizing the " Eighteen Articles " from the London Conference, which favored Belgian claims on Limburg and Luxembourg. The King of the Netherlands, William I, rejected the Eighteen Articles and invaded Belgium on 2 August 1831.

Leopold immediately requested aid from the UK and France. Casimir Perier ordered Marshal Gérard, commanding 50,000 men in the Northern Army, to assist the Belgians. Louis-Philippe sent his sons, the Duke of Orléans and the Duke of Nemours, to join the expedition. By 6 August, French troops were prepared to enter Belgium, but the Belgian government hesitated, citing constitutional requirements for parliamentary approval. On 8 August, Leopold authorized Marshal Gérard to enter Belgium. French forces reached Brussels on 12 August, prompting William I to withdraw to avoid conflict with France. The French army returned to France by mid-September at the request of the London Conference.

This intervention demonstrated France's military capability and commitment to its pledges. France had promised not to reclaim lost territories and honored this by ensuring Belgium's independence and neutrality, while dismantling the fortified barrier. Domestically, the outcome was favorable for Louis-Philippe: patriots celebrated, and revolutionaries took pride in "liberating" an oppressed people. France also succeeded in fracturing the Holy Alliance, forming a liberal Western alliance with the UK and Belgium against the absolute monarchies of Austria, Prussia, and Russia, thereby ending its isolation in Europe.

The London Conference developed the Treaty of the Twenty-Four Articles on 15 October 1831, granting Belgium parts of Limburg and Luxembourg, as well as control over the Scheldt estuary. Belgium accepted it on 15 November, but the Netherlands refused.

On 14 December 1831, the four powers signed a secret agreement with Belgium regarding secure places, excluding France. Louis-Philippe was angered, but Talleyrand reassured him with a note from the plenipotentiaries: "H.M. will find in this note expressed reasons to be completely reassured about the fear of a renewal of the Holy Alliance, with which the government seemed a little too preoccupied. When the United Kingdom and France march together on all major issues, and Europe knows and sees it, there is no possible Holy Alliance." This laid the foundation for the "Entente Cordiale," a key principle of the July Monarchy's foreign policy.

In 1830, Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg had sought a marriage alliance with Louis-Philippe's daughter but was initially rejected due to his uncertain status, a liaison with a dancer, and his Lutheran faith. These issues were resolved upon his accession to the Belgian throne: his position was secure, he ended his liaison, and he agreed to raise his children as Catholics. For Louis-Philippe, the marriage set a precedent for his children's future alliances.

Leopold visited Louis-Philippe at the Château de Compiègne from 29 May to 1 June 1832, where marriage terms were arranged between Leopold and Princess Louise d'Orléans, Louis-Philippe's eldest daughter.

The wedding took place in Compiègne on 9 August 1832. Bishop Gallard of Meaux officiated the Catholic ceremony, followed by Pastor Goepp of the Augsburg Confession for the Lutheran rite.

Despite Louise's initial reluctance due to the age difference, the marriage was successful and strengthened ties between France and Belgium. Leopold, close to the British court and uncle to Queen Victoria, helped reinforce the "Entente Cordiale" between France and the UK.

The Netherlands, refusing the Treaty of the Twenty-Four Articles, occupied Antwerp, prompting France and the UK to propose coercive measures at the London Conference on 1 October 1832. On 22 October, Talleyrand and Palmerston signed a convention for joint action.

Prussia moved troops to the Belgian border, but France dismissed these as symbolic gestures.

When the Dutch refused to evacuate Antwerp, Leopold I requested French intervention. On 14 November, the French Council of Ministers, with support from the king, Broglie, and Thiers, decided to act. The British government concurred that night.

Marshal Gérard, leading 70,000 men, including Louis-Philippe's sons, crossed into Belgium. On 19 November, French forces besieged Antwerp's citadel, which surrendered on 23 December. Louis-Philippe promptly handed the fortress to the Belgians and withdrew French troops, demonstrating France's reliability in the European concert.

In March 1838, William I accepted the Treaty of the Twenty-Four Articles, requiring Belgium to evacuate parts of Limburg and Luxembourg and repay its share of the common debt. Belgium resisted, but Palmerston, without consulting France, agreed with Austria, Prussia, and Russia to enforce the treaty. Louis-Philippe persuaded Leopold to comply, securing a reduction in Belgium's debt. An agreement was reached on 11 December 1838, ratified by the treaty of 19 April 1839, which resolved the Belgian question.

France-Poland relations have historically been marked by mutual sympathy but limited practical support. France was unable to prevent the Partitions of Poland in the late 18th century. Emperor Nicholas I viewed the 1830 revolution in Paris as a threat to the European order established by the Congress of Vienna and considered intervening to restore Charles X. However, the November Uprising in Poland on 29 November 1830 diverted Russian forces, garnering widespread support in France from figures like Montalembert and La Fayette, who established a Franco-Polish Committee.

When the Polish Diet formed a provisional government under Prince Czartoryski and declared independence on 25 January 1831, French republicans called for military intervention, hoping to destabilize the monarchy. Louis-Philippe, however, deemed the French army incapable of sustaining a major conflict, with only 78,000 men available, including 40,000 in metropolitan France. During debates in the Chamber on 27 and 28 January 1831, Foreign Minister Sébastiani stated that while France sympathized with Poland, it could not intervene and that doing so would disrupt European peace.

In December 1830, Louis-Philippe sent the Duke of Mortemart, Charles X's former ambassador to Russia, to reassure Nicholas I of the July Monarchy's intentions. En route through Poland in January 1831, Mortemart informed Polish emissaries that France would not intervene militarily.

France limited its support to encouraging the spread of the revolt to Lithuania, Volhynia, Podolia, and Ukraine to distract Russian forces. However, after initial setbacks, the Russian army resumed its offensive in July 1831. In Paris, debates on Poland during the address to the throne in late July saw deputies like Baron Bignon advocate for intervention, but Council President Casimir Perier resisted, securing vague language in the address. On 16 August, the Chamber adopted the address by 282 votes to 73.

The Polish insurgents were soon confined to Warsaw, which fell to Russian forces on 8 September 1831. News of the defeat reached Paris on 15 September, sparking protests and attacks on Russian and Austrian embassies. On 16 September, the left criticized the government in the Chamber, with Sébastiani's statement that "tranquility reigned in Warsaw" drawing ire. A debate from 19 to 22 September saw François Mauguin challenge Casimir Perier, but the Chamber moved to the order of the day by 221 votes to 136, effectively closing the Polish question.

At a court ball in February 1832, La Fayette attempted to discuss Poland with Louis-Philippe, who responded that he had fulfilled his duty by protecting France from war and Europe from conflict: "I consider that I have fulfilled my duty by protecting my country from the scourge of war and Europe from a general conflagration."

In 1836, France again refused to aid Poland when Russia, Austria, and Prussia invaded the Free City of Cracow, a refuge for Polish patriots. The powers occupied Cracow in February 1836, with Austria maintaining a garrison until 1841. France offered asylum to Polish exiles but took no further action, while the UK protested in vain.

In early 1831, Italy experienced unrest. Following the election of Pope Gregory XVI on 2 February 1831, the Carbonari movement incited insurrections in the Papal States and the Duchy of Modena, forcing the duke to flee. The unrest spread across northern Italy.

The Pope, the Duke of Modena, and the Duchess of Parma requested Austrian assistance. Louis-Philippe and his government invoked the "principle of non-intervention," demanding that Austria refrain from intervening in Italy, as France would. However, France's domestic instability—marked by riots in Paris on 14 and 15 February 1831 —weakened its position. Austria proceeded to cross the Po in March 1831.

Despite public statements, Louis-Philippe was content to allow Metternich to suppress the Italian insurrection, as it included Louis Bonaparte 's sons, Napoleon-Louis and Louis-Napoleon, whose success could strengthen Bonapartism in France.

In late 1831, unrest resumed in the Papal States, with Romagna and the Legations refusing papal troops. The papal legate called in Austrian forces, who occupied Bologna on 28 January 1832.

In response, Casimir Perier dispatched the ship " Suffren " and two frigates with 1,100 troops to Ancona, which they occupied despite protests from Pope Gregory XVI and Metternich. The operation's forceful execution raised questions about France's intentions.

In Paris, the left celebrated, and Guizot claimed the action demonstrated the dissolution of the Holy Alliance and France's independent policy. Louis-Philippe publicly expressed displeasure, but Perier affirmed France's stance: France would not tolerate foreign intervention in other states and would occupy Ancona as long as Austria occupied Bologna. Gregory XVI accepted the "temporary" occupation of Ancona on 17 April, which lasted until 1839 when Austria withdrew from Bologna.

The July Monarchy was established in 1830 with the support of the United Kingdom, which quickly recognized the new regime, preventing intervention by the Holy Alliance. This relationship was strengthened through the Belgian question, allowing France and the UK to neutralize the Holy Alliance and place a British-backed candidate on the Belgian throne, while France secured Belgium's independence and neutrality and married a princess of Orléans to the new king.

However, tensions arose as the UK sought to limit France's influence in the Middle East, where France supported Muhammad Ali, whose growing power concerned the UK. On 15 April 1834, the UK concluded an alliance with Spain and Portugal without informing France (see " The Quadruple Alliance of 1834 "). Louis-Philippe recognized the risks of relying solely on the UK as an ally.

To counterbalance the UK, Louis-Philippe sought closer ties with the Holy Alliance, particularly Austria, aiming to signal to the British that France had alternatives and to find a suitable marriage for the Crown Prince, who was 25 in 1835.

Throughout 1835, France accommodated Metternich 's interests:

In Poland, France tolerated the invasion of Kraków, isolating the UK, which protested the violation of the 1815 Congress of Vienna resolutions.

In Switzerland, where the July Revolution had inspired challenges to oligarchic cantonal constitutions, France replaced its ambassador, the Marquis de Rumigny, who was sympathetic to Swiss democrats, with the Duke of Montebello, who aligned with Austrian interests. Adolphe Thiers further pressured Switzerland in April 1836 to expel political refugees, threatening war if it did not comply, pleasing Metternich and Russian Foreign Minister Nesselrode.

Although Austria ultimately rejected the marriage proposal for the Crown Prince, the rapprochement temporarily softened British Foreign Secretary Lord Palmerston 's stance. At the end of 1835, the UK proposed a triple alliance with France and the Ottoman Empire to maintain the territorial status quo in the East. Louis-Philippe conditioned acceptance on resolving disputes with the United States, as France could not risk conflict in both the East and America. On 8 December 1835, Louis-Philippe requested William IV 's mediation with the US, which resolved the issues by February 1836.

The Rhine Crisis of 1840 was a diplomatic confrontation between Kingdom of France and the German Confederation, sparked by French demands to re-establish the Rhine River as France’s eastern border. amplifying German unification sentiments and underscoring the Rhine's geopolitical centrality as a potential flashpoint for Franco-German rivalry.

Relations between France and the UK deteriorated in 1837-1838 due to the unpopularity of Foreign Minister Count Molé in London and Palmerston's hostility. France's refusal to intervene in Spanish affairs, contrary to UK wishes, further strained ties.

To improve relations, Louis-Philippe sent Marshal Soult as ambassador extraordinary to London for Queen Victoria 's coronation on 28 June 1838. Despite some reservations about Soult's imperial background, he was well-received.

In the 1840 sulfur affair in Sicily, Adolphe Thiers prioritized UK interests over those of Marseille. Sulfur, essential for producing sulfuric acid and soda, was primarily sourced from the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. A Marseille company had secured an exclusive concession from King Ferdinand II, which the UK opposed due to its industrial reliance on sulfur. With François Guizot 's assistance, Thiers negotiated an agreement on 7 July to revoke the concession.

Britain continued to assert its strategic interest in European balance and peace. British diplomatic posture and its naval presence, particularly its alliance and coordination with Austria and other European powers, served as a check against French expansionism during the Rhine Crisis, effectively reinforcing the threat of a collective response should France militarily pursue its Rhine claims. Prime Minister Adolphe Thiers adopted an aggressive posture that strained diplomatic trust between France and Great Britain, invoking historical precedents from the Napoleonic era to justify territorial revisionism amid domestic pressures after a diversionary failed pro-Egyptian policy.

Upon the death of Ferdinand VII on 20 September 1833, the Spanish crown passed to his three-year-old daughter Isabella II, with her mother, Maria Christina of Bourbon-Sicily, as regent. Ferdinand VII had abolished the Salic law to allow female succession, but his brother Don Carlos contested this, claiming the throne and leading the Carlist movement.

The Spanish succession posed challenges for Louis-Philippe:

Maintaining the Spanish crown in the male line of Louis XIV was seen as crucial for securing the Pyrenéan border since the Peace of Utrecht in 1713. Female succession raised the risk of a foreign dynasty unfriendly to France ascending the Spanish throne.

The Carlist pretender, Don Carlos, represented absolutism and was allied with Charles X and French legitimists, supported by absolute monarchies like Austria. His victory would establish a legitimist stronghold south of France, threatening the July Monarchy.

Louis-Philippe and the British government recognized Isabella II, but her future marriage became a diplomatic concern.

Regent Maria Christina sought to eliminate the Portuguese usurper Dom Miguel to weaken Spanish Carlists. Under UK auspices, Spain negotiated military aid to Portugal, leading to the Triple Alliance treaty on 15 April 1834 between Spain, Portugal, and the United Kingdom, without informing France.

When notified, Talleyrand protested to Palmerston, who then invited France to join, forming the Quadruple Alliance on 22 April 1834.

While the treaty maintained appearances, it placed France in a subordinate position. The UK pledged naval support to Maria II of Portugal and Isabella II of Spain, while France committed to act only "by common agreement" with its allies if military assistance was needed.

In May 1835, Spain requested military aid under the Quadruple Alliance due to the Carlist rebellion. Thiers supported intervention, but Louis-Philippe I, Duke of Broglie, and Palmerston opposed it.

By March 1836, Palmerston proposed joint intervention, with the UK acting at sea and France on land. Louis-Philippe, seeking to avoid displeasing Austria, refused, with Thiers' support.

In spring 1836, France considered intervention, forming a volunteer legion under General Jean-Louis Baux [ fr ] in Pau. On 13 August, following the La Granja pronunciamiento, which forced the regent to accept the liberal Constitution of 1812, General Lebeau announced imminent intervention. Thiers, then Council President, supported this to counter Austria's rejection of a marriage alliance and bolster his popularity. However, Louis-Philippe, opposed to intervention in Spain, clashed with Thiers, leading to his resignation on 16 August. On 24 August, the king clarified in " Le Moniteur " that General Lebeau's actions were not authorized by the crown. Louis-Philippe also ordered the dissolution of Lebeau's legion, but the government resisted.

The issue resurfaced in the Chamber of Deputies during the 1838 address debate. Louis-Philippe's speech on 18 December 1837 stated: "I continue to faithfully execute the clauses of the Quadruple Alliance treaty." The Doctrinaires, led by Guizot, proposed amending the address to implicitly endorse non-intervention. Despite Thiers' opposition, the amended address was adopted on 13 January, approving the policy but straining relations with the UK, which supported Spanish radicals while France backed constitutionalists.

Sultan Mahmud II aimed to restore Ottoman power after Greece's independence but faced challenges from Muhammad Ali, supported by France.

In 1832, Muhammad Ali's son Ibrahim Pasha conquered Syria, defeating Ottoman forces at Konya on 21 December 1832, threatening Constantinople. Mahmud II sought Russian aid, leading to Russian troops landing in Constantinople in February 1833, which alarmed France and the UK.

To secure Russian withdrawal, France and the UK imposed the Treaty of Kütahya on 8 April 1833, granting Muhammad Ali hereditary rule over Egypt and sovereignty over Syria for life. However, before withdrawing, Russia forced the Sultan to sign the Treaty of Hünkâr İskelesi on 8 July 1833, establishing a military protectorate over the Ottoman Empire, giving Russia dominance in the eastern Mediterranean.

France and the UK allied to counter Russian influence over the Bosphorus, though they competed in Egypt and the Middle East, where the UK sought to limit French power.

Between 1833 and 1839, relative calm prevailed. In 1839, Mahmud II attacked Syria but was defeated at Nezib on 24 June. Mahmud II died a week later, and the Ottoman fleet defected to Muhammad Ali in Alexandria. Egypt sought hereditary sovereignty over Syria and the creation of an Arab Empire.

The UK advocated for Ottoman territorial integrity to prevent an Arab Empire or Russian control over the Straits. Austria, historically opposed to the Ottomans, favored their weakening, provided Russia did not benefit.

France and the UK, allied in Spain, were at odds in the East, while Russia, potentially aligned with France, was deterred by Nicholas I 's hostility toward the July Monarchy. The Tsar aimed to exploit Franco-British rivalry to advance Russian interests.

Louis-Philippe sought to preserve the alliance with the UK and believed Muhammad Ali's position was unassailable. He supported Austria's proposal for consultation among powers, which maintained ties with the UK and isolated Russia.

Upon returning to power in 1840, Thiers attempted to broker a Franco-Ottoman-Egyptian agreement, excluding other powers, while Palmerston secretly negotiated a four-power agreement excluding France. Despite warnings from ambassador Guizot, Thiers proceeded, but Palmerston concluded the treaty on 15 July, presenting France with a fait accompli.

The treaty confirmed Muhammad Ali's hereditary rule over Egypt and offered him the pashalik of Acre for life, contingent on acceptance within 10 days. Failure to accept would reduce the offer to Egypt alone, and further refusal would allow the Sultan to depose him with military support from the four powers.

News of the treaty sparked outrage in France, fueling patriotic sentiment. Louis-Philippe's sons — Orléans, Nemours, and Joinville — were open to war. Louis-Philippe publicly aligned with popular sentiment while privately opposing conflict.

While taking preparatory measures—mobilizing troops from 1836 to 1839 (29 July) and beginning work on Paris's fortifications (13 September)—Thiers advised Muhammad Ali to be conciliatory. However, Palmerston escalated, and on 2 October, the British fleet bombarded and captured Beirut, leading the Sultan to depose Muhammad Ali. France faced further humiliation.

After negotiations, a compromise was reached on 7 October: France would abandon support for Muhammad Ali's claims to Syria but insist that Egypt remain untouched. This was communicated in a note on 8 October to the four powers. The UK eventually recognized Muhammad Ali's hereditary rule over Egypt, reverting to the 1832 status quo.

Subsequent negotiations led to the Straits Convention, signed in London on 13 July 1841, by the five European powers, including France. The convention barred foreign warships from the Straits but confirmed Muhammad Ali's hereditary pashalik over Egypt. The UK thus excluded Russia from the Bosphorus and Egypt from the Orontes.

In the 19th century France built a new French colonial empire second only to the British Empire. It was humiliated in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71, which marked the rise of Germany to dominance in Europe. France allied with Great Britain and Russia and was on the winning side of the First World War. Although it was initially easily defeated early in the Second World War, Free France, through its Free French Forces and the Resistance, continued to fight against the Axis powers as an Allied nation and was ultimately considered one of the victors of the war, as the allocation of a French occupation zone in Germany and West Berlin testifies, as well as the status of permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. It fought losing colonial wars in Indochina (ending in 1954) and Algeria (ending in 1962). The Fourth Republic collapsed and the Fifth Republic began in 1958 to the present. Under Charles de Gaulle it tried to block American and British influence on the European community. Since 1945, France has been a founding member of the United Nations, of NATO, and of the European Coal and Steel Community (the European Union 's predecessor). As a charter member of the United Nations, France holds one of the permanent seats in the Security Council and is a member of most of its specialized and related agencies.

France is also a founding member of the Union for the Mediterranean and the La Francophonie and plays a key role, both in regional and in international affairs.

On February 14, 2023, as part of their foreign policy in human rights, France showed its support for international justice by signing the Ljubljana-Hague Convention on International Cooperation in the Investigation and Prosecution of Genocide, Crimes against Humanity, War Crimes, and other International Crimes.

François Mitterrand, a Socialist, emphasized European unity and the preservation of France's special relationships with its former colonies in the face of " Anglo-Saxon influence." A part of the enacted policies was formulated in the Socialist Party 's 110 Propositions for France, the electoral program for the 1981 presidential election. He had a warm and effective relationship with the conservative German Chancellor Helmut Kohl. They promoted French-German bilateralism in Europe and strengthened military cooperation between the two countries.

According to Wayne Northcutt, certain domestic circumstances helped shape Mitterrand's foreign policy in four ways: he needed to maintain a political consensus; he kept an eye on economic conditions; he believed in the nationalistic imperative for French policy; and he tried to exploit Gaullism and its heritage that is on political advantage.

Chrirac's foreign policy featured continuity. His most prominent move was a break with Washington. Along with his friend Vladimir Putin of Russia, Hu Jintao of China, and Gerhard Schröder of Germany, Chirac emerged as a leading voice against the Iraq War of 2003. They opposed George W. Bush (U.S.) and Tony Blair (Britain) during the organisation and deployment of a " Coalition of the willing " to forcibly remove the government of Iraq controlled by the Ba'ath Party under the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein. Despite British and American pressure, Chirac threatened to veto a resolution in the UN Security Council that would authorise the use of military force to rid Iraq of alleged weapons of mass destruction. He rallied other governments to his position. "Iraq today does not represent an immediate threat that justifies an immediate war", Chirac said on 18 March 2003. Future Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin acquired much of his popularity for his speech against the war at the United Nations (UN).

Shortly after taking office, President Sarkozy began negotiations with Colombian president Álvaro Uribe and the left-wing guerrilla FARC, regarding the release of hostages held by the rebel group, especially Franco-Colombian politician Íngrid Betancourt. According to some sources, Sarkozy himself asked for Uribe to release FARC's "chancellor" Rodrigo Granda. Furthermore, he announced on 24 July 2007, that French and European representatives had obtained the extradition of the Bulgarian nurses detained in Libya to their country. In exchange, he signed with Gaddafi security, health care and immigration pacts – and a $230 million (168 million euros) MILAN antitank missile sale. The contract was the first made by Libya since 2004, and was negotiated with MBDA, a subsidiary of EADS. Another 128 million euros contract would have been signed, according to Tripoli, with EADS for a TETRA radio system. The Socialist Party (PS) and the Communist Party (PCF) criticized a "state affair" and a "barter" with a " Rogue state ". The leader of the PS, François Hollande, requested the opening of a parliamentary investigation.

On 8 June 2007, during the 33rd G8 summit in Heiligendamm, Sarkozy set a goal of reducing French CO 2 emissions by 50% by 2050 in order to prevent global warming. He then pushed forward the important Socialist figure of Dominique Strauss-Kahn as European nominee to the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Critics alleged that Sarkozy proposed to nominate Strauss-Kahn as managing director of the IMF to deprive the Socialist Party of one of its more popular figures.

Sarkozy normalised what had been strained relations with NATO. In 2009, France again was a fully integrated NATO member. François Hollande has continued the same policy.

Socialist François Hollande won election in 2012 as president. He adopted a generally hawkish foreign-policy, in close collaboration with Germany in regard to opposing Russian moves against Ukraine, and in sending the military to fight radical Islamists in Africa. He took a hard line with regard to the Greek debt crisis. François Hollande launched two military operations in Africa: Operation Serval in Mali (the French armed forces stopped an Islamist takeover of Bamako, the nation's capital city); and Operation Sangaris (to restore peace there as tensions between different religious communities had turned into a violent conflict). France was also the first European nation to join the United States in bombing the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. Under President Hollande, France's stances on the civil war in Syria and Iran's nuclear program have been described as " hawkish ".

On 31 May 2022, due to the reforms pushed by the president and perceived lack of recognition, the French diplomats went on a strike for the first time in 20 years. This was bad timing for President Emmanuel Macron as France was holding the EU Presidency until the end of June.

Sophie Meunier in 2017 analyzed the causes of decline in France's former reputation as a major player in world affairs:

France does not have as much relative global clout as it used to. Decolonization... diminished France's territorial holdings and therefore its influence. Other countries acquired nuclear weapons and built up their armies. The message of "universal" values carried by French foreign policy has encountered much resistance, as other countries have developed following a different political trajectory than the one preached by France. By the 1990s, the country had become, in the words of Stanley Hoffmann, an "ordinary power, neither a basket case nor a challenger." Public opinion, especially in the United States, no longer sees France as an essential power....[However in 2015 France] mattered in world environmental affairs with....the Paris Agreement, a global accord to reduce carbon emissions.

ACCT, AfDB, AsDB, Australia Group, BDEAC, BIS, CCC, CDB (non-regional), CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECA (associate), ECE, ECLAC, EIB, EMU, ESA, ESCAP, EU, FAO, FZ, G-5, G-7, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, International Maritime Organization, Inmarsat, InOC, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, ITUC, MINURSO, MIPONUH, MONUC, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, SPC, UN, UN Security Council, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMIK, UNOMIG, UNRWA, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WADB (nonregional), WEU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, Zangger Committee

France established relations with the Middle East during the reign of Louis XIV. To keep Austria from intervening into its plans regarding Western Europe he lent limited support to the Ottoman Empire, though the victories of Prince Eugene of Savoy destroyed these plans. In the nineteenth century France together with Great Britain tried to strengthen the Ottoman Empire, the now " Sick man of Europe ", to resist Russian expansion, culminating in the Crimean War.

France also pursued close relations with the semi-autonomous Egypt. In 1869 Egyptian workers -under the supervision of France- completed the Suez Canal. A rivalry emerged between France and Britain for control of Egypt, and eventually Britain emerged victorious by buying out the Egyptian shares of the company before the French had time to act.

After the unification of Germany in 1871, Germany successfully attempted to co-opt France's relations with the Ottomans. In World War I the Ottoman Empire joined the Central Powers, and was defeated by France and Britain. After the collapse of the Ottoman Empire France and Britain divided the Middle East between themselves. France received Syria and Lebanon.

These colonies were granted independence after 1945, but France still tried to forge cultural and educational bonds between the areas, particularly with Lebanon. Relationships with Syria are more strained, due to the policies of that country. In 2005, France, along with the United States, pressured Syria to evacuate Lebanon. In the post-World War II era French relations with the Arab Middle East reached a very low point. The war in Algeria between Muslim fighters and French colonists deeply concerned the rest of the Muslim world. The Algerian fighters received much of their supplies and funding from Egypt and other Arab powers, much to France's displeasure.

Most damaging to Franco-Arab relations, however, was the Suez Crisis. It greatly diminished France's reputation in the region. France openly supported the Israeli attack on the Sinai Peninsula, and was working against Nasser, then a popular figure in the Middle East. The Suez Crisis also made France and the United Kingdom look again like imperialist powers attempting to impose their will upon weaker nations. Another hindrance to France's relations with the Arab Middle East was its close alliance with Israel during the 1950s.

This all changed with the coming of Charles de Gaulle to power. De Gaulle's foreign policy was centered around an attempt to limit the power and influence of both superpowers, and at the same time increase France's international prestige. De Gaulle hoped to move France from being a follower of the United States to becoming the leading nation of a large group of non-aligned countries. The nations de Gaulle looked at as potential participants in this group were those in France's traditional spheres of influence: Africa and the Middle East. The former French colonies in eastern and northern Africa were quite agreeable to these close relations with France. These nations had close economic and cultural ties to France, and they also had few other suitors amongst the major powers. This new orientation of French foreign policy also appealed strongly to the leaders of the Arab nations. None of them wanted to be dominated by either of the superpowers, and they supported France's policy of trying to balance the US and the USSR and to prevent either from becoming dominant in the region. The Middle Eastern leaders wanted to be free to pursue their own goals and objectives, and did not want to be chained to either alliance bloc. De Gaulle hoped to use this common foundation to build strong relations between the nations. He also hoped that good relations would improve France's trade with the region. De Gaulle also imagined that these allies would look up to the more powerful French nation, and would look to it in leadership in matters of foreign policy.

The end of the Algerian conflict in 1962 accomplished much in this regard. France could not portray itself as a leader of the oppressed nations of the world if it still was enforcing its colonial rule upon another nation. The battle against the Muslim separatists that France waged in favour of the minority of French settlers was an extremely unpopular one throughout the Muslim world. With the conflict raging it would have been close to impossible for France to have had positive relations with the nations of the Middle East. The Middle Eastern support for the FLN guerillas was another strain on relations that the end of the conflict removed. Most of the financial and material support for the FLN had come from the nations of the Middle East and North Africa. This was especially true of Nasser's Egypt, which had long supported the separatists. Egypt is also the most direct example of improved relations after the end of hostilities. The end of the war brought an immediate thaw to Franco-Egyptian relations, Egypt ended the trial of four French officers accused of espionage, and France ended its trade embargo against Egypt.

In 1967 de Gaulle completely overturned France's Israel policy. De Gaulle and his ministers reacted very harshly to Israel's actions in the Six-Day War. The French government and de Gaulle condemned Israel's treatment of refugees, warned that it was a mistake to occupy the West Bank and Gaza Strip, and also refused to recognize the Israeli control of Jerusalem. The French government continued to criticize Israel after the war and de Gaulle spoke out against other Israeli actions, such as the operations against the Palestine Liberation Organization in Lebanon. France began to use its veto power to oppose Israel in the UN, and France sided with the Arab states on almost all issues brought to the international body. Most importantly of all, however, de Gaulle's government imposed an arms embargo on the Israeli state. The embargo was in fact applied to all the combatants, but very soon France began selling weaponry to the Arab states again. As early as 1970 France sold Libya a hundred Dassault Mirage fighter jets. However, after 1967 France continued to support Israel's right to exist, as well as Israel's many preferential agreements with France and the European Economic Community.

In the second half of the 20th century, France increased its expenditures in foreign aid greatly, to become second only to the United States in total aid amongst the Western powers and first on a per capita basis. By 1968 France was paying out $855 million per year in aid far more than either West Germany or the United Kingdom. The vast majority of French aid was directed towards Africa and the Middle East, usually either as a lever to promote French interests or to help with the sale of French products (e.g. arms sales). France also increased its expenditures on other forms of aid sending out skilled individuals to developing countries to provide technical and cultural expertise.

The combination of aid money, arms sales, and diplomatic alignments helped to erase the memory of the Suez Crisis and the Algerian War in the Arab world and France successfully developed amicable relationships with the governments of many of the Middle Eastern states. Nasser and de Gaulle, who shared many similarities, cooperated on limiting American power in the region. Nasser proclaimed France as the only friend of Egypt in the West. France and Iraq also developed a close relationship with business ties, joint military training exercises, and French assistance in Iraq's nuclear program in the 1970s. France improved relations with its former colony Syria, and eroded cultural links were partially restored.

In terms of trade France did receive some benefits from the improved relations with the Middle East. French trade with the Middle East increased by over fifty percent after de Gaulle's reforms. The weaponry industries benefited most as France soon had lucrative contracts with many of the regimes in the Middle East and North Africa, though these contracts account for a negligible part of France's economy.

De Gaulle had hoped that by taking a moderate path and not strongly supporting either side France could take part in the Middle East peace process between Israel and the Arab nations. Instead it has been excluded from any major role.

Nicolas de Rivière, the Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations, thanked to Mesdames Bahous, Russell and Kanem for their briefings in Gaza war, and to reiterate France's full support for UN Women, UNICEF and UNFPA in their engagement to help the people of Gaza. Furthermore, France welcomed the agreement, which led to the release of dozens of hostages and a truce.

The Middle East has been a major factor of France's foreign policy. Over a decade since 2000, France successfully built an influential presence across the MENA region where the major focus had been on Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Qatar. The Middle East policy of France was essential from the strategic, cultural and economic point of view, where the focus remained on proving itself as an international power. The country invested years in maintaining a strong foothold in the region on the lines of trade, security interests, and cultural and social exchanges. As Emmanuel Macron became the president in 2017, he gave a clear picture about the French relations with the Middle East and its importance, both in his foreign policy speeches and his initiatives. His predecessors, on the other hand, had mostly picked the option of "reassurance" with the region's governments. Gradually, France began to show increasing interest in Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, particularly. The country became actively supportive towards the two Arab nations in their involvement in the Yemen civil war, becoming one of the crucial arms suppliers. There had been a number of calls from the human rights organizations for France to halt their arms sales to both Saudi and the UAE, which were known for causing a humanitarian crisis in Yemen. Even in 2021, Macron continued taking initiatives towards strengthening relations with the Kingdom and the Emirates. During his visit to the region in November 2021, Macron signed a weapons deal worth 16 billion euros with the UAE. The agreement involved transfer of 80 upgraded Rafale warplanes, along with 12 Airbus-built combat helicopters. While France viewed it as a way to deepen ties with the Emirates, rights organizations criticized and raised concerns around the UAE's involvement in the Yemen and Libyan wars. They objected the deal stating that the Gulf leaders have reflected a constant failure in improving their human rights records.

Despite the improving relations between the Emirates and France, the UAE made extensive efforts towards to showcase its image in a positive light. In light of it, a Franco-Tunisian businessman, Elyes Ben Chedly reportedly ran promotion for two of the Emirates' cultural campaigns. Reports revealed that the middleman worked to promote the UAE's "Year of Tolerance" campaign, and was also involved in running the "year Zayed" program in Paris. Reports also revealed that Ben Chedly also used his network of arms contracts to mediate weapons deal between the UAE and other nations.

A report in March 2023 by Mediapart revealed that the UAE had been interfering in France by the means of a Switzerland-based intelligence firm Alp Services. A French journalist, Roland Jacquard connected Alp's head Mario Brero with the Emirati secret services client, identified as Mohammed. Jacquard maintained a close contact with a network of politicians and diplomats. He was directly in contact with Mohammed, whose emails revealed that Jacquard was supplying the UAE with information from the security services, Emmanuel Macron and the Élysée.

France and Qatar have maintained diplomatic relations since Qatar declared independence in 1971. The bilateral partnership began to flourish in the early 1990s, focusing on security and hydrocarbon cooperation. TotalEnergies, present in Qatar since 1936, quickly emerged as a key collaborator with QatarEnergies in the extraction and development of the nation's hydrocarbon reserves. Additionally, various agreements have been executed between Qatar and France to bolster security measures for 2024 Summer Olympics in Paris. In preparation for the significant security demands of the event, Poland has pledged to contribute troops, including sniffer dog handlers, to support international efforts aimed at ensuring the safety of the Olympic Games in France.

List of countries which France maintains diplomatic relations with:

France plays a significant role in Africa, especially in its former colonies, through extensive aid programs, commercial activities, military agreements, and cultural impact. In those former colonies where the French presence remains important, France contributes to political, military, and social stability. Many think that French policy in Africa – particularly where British interests are also involved – is susceptible to what is known as ' Fashoda syndrome '. Others have criticized the relationship as neocolonialism under the name Françafrique, stressing France's support of various dictatorships, among others: Omar Bongo, Idriss Déby, and Denis Sassou Nguesso. The Defense Agreements between France and French-speaking African countries established close cooperation, particularly in defense and security matters. Often accompanied by secret clauses, they allowed France to intervene militarily: to rescue regimes in order to establish the legitimacy of political powers favorable to its interests, to fight jihadism, particularly in the Sahel, or to put an end to civil wars. The departure of French troops from the African continent signals the end of a world, that of interventions in Chad, Togo, Gabon, Rwanda, Djibouti, Zaire, Somalia, Ivory Coast, Mali, Libya, and Cameroon. It also marks the end of Françafrique.

Relations between post-colonial Algeria and France have remained close throughout the years, although sometimes difficult. In 1962, the Évian Accords peace treaty laid the foundations of a new Franco-Algerian relationship. In exchange for a generous coopération regime (massive financial, technical and cultural aid), France secured a number of economic and military privileges. Economically, France enjoyed a preferential treatment vis-à-vis the Saharan wealth of hydrocarbons. Militarily, it could keep the Mers-el-Kébir base for 15 years and use the Saharan nuclear test-sites for another five years. France had used these sites to carry out its first nuclear tests (Gerboise bleue) in 1960. 90% or more of the Europeans established in Algeria (pieds-noirs) left the country in a massive exodus creating a difficult void in the bureaucratic, economic and educational structure of Algeria. On the other hand, the issue of the harkis, the Arabs who had fought on the French side during the war, was still to be resolved at the turn of the 21st century, being somehow ignored by the French while seen as outright traitors by the Algerian people. On the economical level, Algeria remained for some time the fourth largest importer of French goods, conducting all its transactions with France in the Franc zone. Many Algerians were encouraged by French authorities and businessmen to migrate to France in order to provide workforce during the Trente Glorieuses (Thirty Glorious) growth. Relations between France and Algeria have remained closely intertwined, and France could not entirely escape from the chaos which threatened Algeria during the civil war in the nineties.

Ahmed Ben Bella, the first President of Algeria was reported in a 2001 interview as saying that "The Algerian people have lived with blood. We brought de Gaulle to his knees. We struggled against French rule for 15 years under the leadership of Emir Abdel-Kader Al-Jazairi. The Algerian population was then four million. French repression cost us two million lives. It was genocide. We survived as a people. Barbaric French atrocities did not subdue our fighting spirit."

On 23 February 2005, the French law on colonialism was an act passed by the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) conservative majority, which imposed on high-school (lycée) teachers to teach the "positive values" of colonialism to their students (article 4). The law created a public uproar and opposition from the whole of the left-wing, and was finally repealed by president Jacques Chirac (UMP) at the beginning of 2006, after accusations of historical revisionism from various teachers and historians.

Algerians feared that the French law on colonialism would hinder the task the French confronting the dark side of their colonial rule in Algeria because article 4 of the law decreed among other things that "School programmes are to recognise in particular the positive role of the French presence overseas, especially in North Africa,..." Benjamin Stora a leading specialist on French Algerian history and an opponent of the French law on colonialism, said "France has never taken on its colonial history. It is a big difference with the Anglo-Saxon countries, where post-colonial studies are now in all the universities. We are phenomenally behind the times." In his opinion, although the historical facts were known to academics, they were not well known by the French public and this led to a lack of honesty in France over French colonial treatment of the Algerian people.

During the period that the French law on colonialism was in force, several Algerians and others raised issues and made comments to emphasise that there were many aspects of French colonial rule that were not widely known in France. A senior Algerian official Mohamed El Korso said that "[French] repentance is seen by the Algerian people as a sine qua non before any Franco-Algerian friendship treaty can be concluded." and with reference to the Setif massacre that "French and international public opinion must know that France committed a real act of genocide in May 1945" The Algerian president Abdelaziz Bouteflika said Algeria had "never ceased waiting for an admission from France of all the acts committed during the colonial period and the war of liberation." and drew comparisons between the burning of the bodies of the victims of the Setif massacre with the crematoria in the Nazi death camps. More recently on 17 April 2006, Bouteflika emphasised Algeria's point of view when said in a speech in Paris that "Colonization brought the genocide of our identity, of our history, of our language, of our traditions".

French authorities responded to the claims by President Bouteflika and others by playing down the comments, urging "mutual respect" French Foreign Minister Michel Barnier told Algeria in an official visit to make a common effort to search history "in order to establish a common future and overcome the sad pages". In an interview with El Vatan, an Algerian newspaper, Barnier said that "Historians from two sides must be encouraged to work together. They must work on the common past". French authorities asked president Abdelaziz Bouteflika to study with France the disarmed 150,000 Harkis killed without another reason that revenge, by his party, the National Liberation Front (FLN).

French President Jacques Chirac, upon harsh reactions to the law encouraging the good sides of the French colonial history, made the statement, "Writing history is the job of the historians, not of the laws." According to Prime Minister, Dominique de Villepin, "speaking about the past or writing history is not the job of the parliament."

The issue of the French human rights record in Algeria is also politically sensitive in Turkey. France recognized Armenian genocide by the Turks in 1998. In response to the action of the French parliament, making it an offense to deny the existence of such a genocide, the Grand National Assembly of Turkey drafted a bill in October 2006 to make it illegal to deny that the French committed genocide in Algeria. Turkish party leaders, including CHP, MHP, BBP and ANAP called on France to recognize what they called "Algerian genocide". However, the draft never became an official law.

Relations between the two countries have not always been cordial due to the former French government's policy of supporting militant separatists in Angola's Cabinda Province and the international Angolagate scandal embarrassed both governments by exposing corruption and illicit arms deals. Following French President Nicolas Sarkozy 's visit in 2008, relations have improved.

Present day Burkina Faso was formerly part of a French colony called French Upper Volta. France has special forces stationed in Burkina Faso.

In January 2023, Burkina Faso's military junta asked France to recall its ambassador amid a surge of anti-French sentiment as the country moved to develop closer ties to Russia

The French military has been present in Chad since 1986 in the frame of Operation Epervier.

In 2013, France's then president on his visit to DRC suggested that prisoners Joshua French and Tjostolv Moland should be moved out of the situation of their six-man prison cell; five days later the two prisoners shared a cell of their own.

Since independence, Gabon has been "one of France's closest allies in Africa". As of 2008, around 10,000 French nationals lived and worked in Gabon, while the 6th Marine Infantry Battalion of the French military is also stationed there.

In 2002 and 2003, France participated in military interventions in Côte d'Ivoire in Opération Licorne and UNOCI. Liberia and the Democratic Republic of Congo helped in the evacuation of foreign residents and the protection of civilians from warring factions.

In the 1980s, Libyan-French discord centered on the situation in Chad. As mentioned, the two countries found themselves supporting opposite sides in the Chadian Civil War. In late 1987, there were some French troops in Chad, but French policy did not permit its forces to cross the sixteenth parallel. Thus, direct clashes with Libyan soldiers seemed unlikely.

On 10 March 2011, France was the first country in the world to recognise the National Transitional Council as the legitimate government of Libya, in the context of the 2011 Libyan civil war against Muammar Gaddafi.

The relations date back to the colonial era when Mauritania was part of French West Africa.

The relations between France and the Republic of Niger are based on a long shared history and the more than sixty year rule of Niger by French colonial empire beginning with the French conquest in 1898. Niger obtained independence from France in 1960, and a history of French influenced culture and French language have been a point of commonality in the creation of a distinctive Nigerien culture from the diverse pre-colonial nationalities which make up modern Niger. France benefited economically from their time as a colonial power, and still relies on imports from Niger for elements of their economy.

In the period from 1990, until the Rwandan genocide, France (under Mitterrand) took a role sympathetic to the Habyarimana government.

Bilateral relations between France and Somalia were established shortly after Somalia's independence. The French government opened an embassy in Mogadishu, and its Somalian counterpart likewise maintained an embassy in Paris. Following a significantly improved security situation, the Government of France in January 2014 appointed Remi Marechaux as the new French ambassador to Somalia.

France has recognized Brazil as its special partner in South America and as a global player in international affairs. The two countries are committed to strengthening their bilateral cooperation in the areas for which working groups have been created: nuclear energy, renewable energies, defence technologies, technological innovation, joint cooperation in African countries and space technologies, medicines and the environment. Recently, France announced its support to the Brazilian bid for a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council.

Relations with Colombia have been dimmed, by the Ingrid Betancourt issue from 2002 to 2008; in 2002, Ingrid Betancourt, a Colombian and French citizen and the green party candidate to the presidency of Colombia, was kidnapped by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), France pushed the Colombian government to free FARC prisoners to get Mrs Betancourt back; Colombia once consented with these efforts and on 4 June 2007; 30 FARC members were liberated, including the leader Rodrigo Granda.

On 2 July 2008 Ingrid Betancourt was rescued by the Colombian authorities in Operation Jaque. France had urged Colombia not to attempt to free Betancourt.

Bilateral relations between the countries France and Trinidad and Tobago have existed for about two hundred years. Currently, France has an embassy in Port of Spain. Trinidad and Tobago is represented in France through its embassy in Brussels (Belgium). Trinidad and Tobago also has bilateral investment agreements with France.

Relations between the United States and France are active and cordial. Mutual visits by high-level officials are conducted on a regular basis and bilateral contact at the cabinet level is active. France and the United States cooperate closely on some issues (such as anti-terrorism) but differ on others (such as the Israeli–Palestinian conflict and a number of trade issues). Differences are discussed frankly. The largest current fallout between the United States and France involves the Iraq War, and some aspects of the post- 11 September war on terror, e.g., CIA " extraordinary renditions ".

France has extensive political and economical relations with Asian countries, including China, India, Japan, South Korea and Southeast Asia as well as an increasing presence in regional fora. France was instrumental in launching the Asia–Europe Meeting (ASEM) process which could eventually emerge as a competitor to APEC. France is seeking to broaden its commercial presence in China and will pose a competitive challenge to U.S. business, particularly in aerospace, high-tech, and luxury markets. In Southeast Asia, France was an architect of the Paris Peace Accords.

France does not have formal diplomatic relationships with North Korea. North Korea however maintains a delegation (not an embassy nor a consulate) near Paris. As most countries, France does not recognize, nor have formal diplomatic relationships with Taiwan, due to its recognition of China; however, Taiwan maintains a representation office in Paris which is similar to an embassy. Likewise, the French Institute in Taipei has an administrative consular section that delivers visas and fulfills other missions normally dealt with by diplomatic outposts.

During the 1990s, France and the PRC repeatedly clashed as a result of the PRC's One China Policy. France sold weapons to Taiwan, angering the Beijing government. This resulted in the temporary closure of the French Consulate-General in Guangzhou. France eventually agreed to prohibit local companies from selling arms to Taiwan, and diplomatic relations resumed in 1994. Since then, the two countries have exchanged a number of state visits. Today, Sino-French relations are primarily economic. Bilateral trade reached new high levels in 2000. Cultural ties between the two countries are less well represented, though France is making an effort to improve this disparity.

The bilateral investment relationship between France and China has been a key component of their economic partnership, with more than 50 agreements signed in sectors like nuclear energy, aerospace, and finance during Xi Jinping's 2015 visit to France. Emmanuel Macron's 2018 trip to Beijing further reinforced this partnership with €13 billion in contracts. Recent initiatives include collaboration in green energy and technology, significant investments in the automotive industry, infrastructure cooperation, aerospace industry developments, energy sector investments, and luxury goods market collaborations.

In April 2024, French Foreign Minister Stephane Sejourne emphasized that France didn't plan to "decouple" from China but instead aimed for an "economic rebalancing" to establish a durable and fair trade partnership. He confirmed that ongoing discussions on "de-risking" with China would be maintained by France and the European Union, with no allusion to potential protectionist measures from the EU.

France and India established diplomatic relationships soon after India achieved independence in 1947. India's strong diplomatic ties with France resulted in the peaceful cession of Pondichéry to India on 1 November 1954 without any military opposition from France.

France was the only country that did not condemn India's decision to go nuclear in 1998. In 2003, France became the largest supplier of nuclear fuel and technology to India and remains a large military and economic trade partner. India's permanent member aspirations in the UN Security Council have found very strong support from former French President Chirac. The decision by the Indian government to purchase French Scorpène-class submarines worth US$3 billion and 43 Airbus aircraft for Indian Airlines worth US$2.5 billion has further cemented the strategic, military and economic co-operation between India and France. France also became the first country to do nuclear trade with India after NSG waiver on 30 September 2008.

The relations between France and Indonesia have been increasing of late, while Indonesia has become increasingly strategic to the government and people of France. Not only because of economic development (there are 110 French multinational companies operated in Indonesia), it also because France viewed Indonesia has been playing an increasingly significant international role.

The relations between two nations are important as both are democratic republics and both holds significant geopolitical influences in each regions, France is indispensable member of European Union, as well as Indonesia for Association of Southeast Asian Nations. The diplomatic relation between France and Indonesia is also a key element for developing relations between Indonesia and the European Union and between France and the ASEAN. Both nations are the member of G-20 major economies.

Iran has generally enjoyed a friendly relationship with France since the Middle Ages. The travels of Jean-Baptiste Tavernier are particularly well known to Safavid Persia. Relations between France and Iran also remained friendly under French President Jacques Chirac. Recently however, relations have soured over Iran's refusal to halt uranium enrichment and France supporting the referral of Iran to the United Nations Security Council.

Before Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1991, France enjoyed friendly relations with former Iraqi president Saddam Hussein, however the relationship turned sour once Iraq entered Kuwaiti soil and soon France cut off ties with Iraq. Following thirteen years, France resumed relations with Iraq in 2003. France and Germany opposed the American-British invasion of 2003 to 2011.

Recently France has been very involved in trade and cultural exchange initiatives with Japan. Some people see this as being a result of French leader Jacques Chirac being a Japanophile. Chirac has visited Japan over 40 times, probably more than any other world leader outside Japan, and is an expert on the country. France has started the export promotion campaign "Le Japon, c'est possible" and the international liaison personnel exchange JET Programme. Together they built the Japanese cultural House in Paris (French : Maison de la culture du Japon à Paris).

France and Japan have also worked together to improve dire health situations from AIDS and underdevelopment in Djibouti, Madagascar, Uganda, and other countries.

Japan and France are also known to share ideas with each other in the realms of art and cooking. Japan has been heavily influenced by French cuisine within the past few decades, as seen on the television show Iron Chef. Anime is popular in France, and French historical figures and settings from medieval, Renaissance, Napoleonic, and World War eras have served as models for certain popular stories in Japanese entertainment. The purity of Japanese painting and illustration, and likewise the modernity and elegance of French visual arts has resulted in hybrid styles in those creative fields.

Following the end of World War II, ambassador-level diplomatic relationships between France and Burma were established in 1948, soon after the Burmese nation became an independent republic on 4 January 1948, as Union of Burma, with Sao Shwe Thaik as its first President and U Nu as its first Prime Minister.

Relations between the France and North Korea are officially non-existent. France is one of the two European Union members not to recognise North Korea, the other being Estonia. France therefore officially recognises South Korean sovereignty over the Korean peninsula. There is no French embassy, nor any other type of French diplomatic representation, in Pyongyang, and no DPRK embassy in Paris. There is, however, a North Korean diplomatic office in Neuilly sur Seine, near Paris.

Pakistan and France have high levels of diplomatic meetings and enjoy very friendly bilateral relations. However, these good relations haven't been around very long due to a variety of reasons. Trade between the two countries is generally increasing with time. See also Pakistanis in France, Musa Javed Chohan : former ambassador of Pakistan to France and recipient of the Ordre National du Merite for the promotion of bilateral cooperation between France and Pakistan.

The France–Philippines relations refers to the foreign relations between France and the Philippines. In 1947, France and the Philippines signed a Treaty of Amity which established diplomatic relations with the two countries.

Qatar is dependent on France for around 80% of its military imports. The first bilateral agreement between the two countries was signed in 1974. A defense pact was signed in 1994. Qatar's sovereign wealth fund has stakes in numerous French companies, including Paris Saint-Germain, Vivendi, and Vinci SA.

The establishment of diplomatic relations between France and South Korea began on 4 June 1886. France and South Korea maintain very good relations. They collaborate on many topics and issues that are facing the world today. This was seen especially on the question of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) which is of course a matter of great importance for both countries Besides bilateral cooperation France and South Korea also work together in international organizations such as the United Nations, UNESCO, the OECD, etc. On the matter of North Korea, France is one of the few European countries (EU/ EEA) to not have official diplomatic relations with North Korea. France has supported the Six-party talks as well as the role of the IAEA in finding solutions to the nuclear issue. The French Government had made an agreement of the Working Holiday Visa program with South Korea.

France recognized the SNC on 21 November 2011.

France–Thailand relations cover a period from the 16th century until modern times. Relations started in earnest during the reign of Louis XIV with numerous reciprocal embassies, and a major attempt by France to Christianize Siam (modern Thailand) and establish a French protectorate, which failed when the country revolted against foreign intrusions in 1688. France would only return more than a century and a half later as a modernized colonial power, engaging in a struggle for territory and influence against Thailand in the Indochinese Peninsula, which would last until the 20th century.

France–Vietnam relations started as early as the 17th century with the mission of the Jesuit father Alexandre de Rhodes. Various traders would visit Vietnam during the 18th century, until the major involvement of French forces under Pigneau de Béhaine to help establish the Nguyễn dynasty from 1787 to 1789. France was heavily involved in Vietnam in the 19th century under the pretext of protecting the work of Catholic missionaries in the country. France progressively carved for itself a huge colony, which would form French Indochina in 1887. France continued to rule Vietnam as a colony until France's defeat in the First Indochina War and the proclamation of Vietnam's independence in 1954.

France has maintained its status as key power in Western Europe because of its size, location, strong economy, membership in European organizations, strong military posture and energetic diplomacy. France generally has worked to strengthen the global economic and political influence of the EU and its role in common European defense and collective security.

France supports the development of a European Security and Defence Identity (ESDI) as the foundation of efforts to enhance security in the European Union. France cooperates closely with Germany and Spain in this endeavor.

See Bosnia and Herzegovina-France relations

France was the first country to open embassy in besieged Sarajevo in January 1993. Centre André Malraux and French primary school are located in Sarajevo and French Institute and French Cultural Centre offices are present in Banja Luka, Mostar and Tuzla. Since October 2010 Bosnia and Herzegovina is an observer on the Francophonie.

French president Nicolas Sarkozy, has been essential for the liberation of the Bulgarian nurse in the HIV trial in Libya.

Franco-German cooperation is widely seen as the engine of European integration.

Embassy level relations were established in 1833 (only three years after the Greek independence). The two countries share membership of the European Union and NATO and maintain special relations. They were allies during both World Wars, Korean War and the Cold War and have never been adversaries of each other. Greece is a member of La Francophonie.

When Kosovo declared its independence from Serbia on 17 February 2008, France became one of the first countries to announce official recognition of sovereign Kosovo.

Polish-French relations date several centuries, although they became really relevant only with times of French Revolution and reign of Napoleon I. Poles have been allies of Napoleon ; large Polish community settled in France in the 19th century, and Poles and French were also allies during the interwar period. The official relations, having cooled down during the Cold War, have improved since the fall of communism. Currently both countries are part of the European Union and NATO.

After the breakup of the USSR in 1991, bilateral relations between France and Russia were warm. On 7 February 1992, France signed a bilateral treaty, recognizing Russia as a successor of the USSR. Good relations ended in 2022 as France gave strong support to Ukraine when Russia invaded.

France established diplomatic relations with the United Kingdom in 1396.

Both countries share common membership of the Council of Europe, European Court of Human Rights, G7, G20, the International Criminal Court, NATO, OECD, OSCE, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have the Combined Joint Expeditionary Force, a Double Taxation Convention, and the Lancaster House Treaties.

In August 2009, Nicolas Sarkozy became the first serving French leader to visit Australia. The Courier Mail reported that "serious bilateral issues" for Sarkozy and Kevin Rudd to discuss included "the war in Afghanistan and global warming ".

Relations between France and Fiji are currently strained, due to France's condemnation of the coup d'état in Fiji in December 2006. Previously, Franco-Fiji bilateral relations had primarily been centred on military cooperation, with France assisting Fiji in surveiling its maritime zone, and on development aid. French military assistance was suspended after the coup. French aid to Fiji includes the providing of equipment for poor and isolated areas, and assistance in the development of renewable energy. France also provides Fiji with translations into English of French scientific documents pertaining to the Pacific area. France promotes French culture and the French language in Fiji through the presence of the Alliance Française and by encouraging the teaching of French in schools and at the University of the South Pacific. The French embassy in Suva is accredited to Kiribati, Nauru, Tonga and Tuvalu.

The two countries maintain official diplomatic relations, but no diplomatic presence on each other's territory; the French embassy in Suva is accredited to Kiribati.

In 1995, Nauru broke off relations diplomatic relations with France to protest French nuclear testing in the Pacific. Relations were resumed in 1997. Nauruan President Ludwig Scotty paid a State visit to Paris in June 2006, when he attended a France-Oceania multilateral summit.

Relations between France and New Zealand have been rocky at the best of times, but more recently become much closer. Bilateral relations have been good since World War I and World War II, with both countries working extremely closely during either conflicts, but the relationship was severely jeopardised by the sinking of the Rainbow Warrior in Auckland on 10 July 1985 by French Direction Générale de la Sécurité Extérieure (DGSE) agents. New Zealand was put under fierce economic strain by France following the attack with French Government demanding the agents who carried out the attack to be released by the New Zealand government. Since then there has been some animosity among New Zealanders towards the French, but since the 20th anniversary of the bombing in 2005, there were signs that New Zealand had begun to warm to the French. There has been speculation that this acceptance of the French by the New Zealand people has a lot to do with the historic rivalry between both countries' Rugby teams.

Relations between the French Republic and the Independent State of Papua New Guinea are limited but cordial. Papua New Guinea is a member of the United Nations' Special Committee on Decolonization. The French government has noted what it calls Port Moresby's "moderate" attitude on the issue of the decolonisation of New Caledonia – which, like Papua New Guinea, is located in Melanesia. The French National Assembly maintains a Friendship Group with Papua New Guinea.

Relations between both countries are very limited.

As a semi-autonomous overseas department of France, France is responsible for New Caledonia 's defence, foreign relations, law and order, monetary policy and tertiary education. Under the framework of the Nouméa Accord, New Caledonia and France share responsibility for managing the territory's regional relations, allowing New Caledonia to join some regional and international organisations. New Caledonia is a member of the Pacific Islands Forum, the South Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP), the Pacific Community (PC) and the South Pacific Tourism Organisation (SPTO). New Caledonia is also an associate member of La Francophonie and is a non-voting member of the World Health Organization 's Western Pacific Regional Committee.

New Caledonia is a French overseas territory in the southwest Pacific. It has a population of about 270,000; with the indigenous Kanak people constituting, according to the 2019 census, 41% of the population, the Europeans (Caldoche and metropolitan French) 28%, those of mixed race 11%, with other ethnic minorities (including Wallisians, Tahitians, Polynesians Ni-Vanuatu, Indonesians, Vietnamese and Chinese) constituting the remainder. New Caledonia became a French overseas territory in 1946 and has representatives in both houses of the French Parliament, while the President of France serves as the territory's head of state. France maintains jurisdiction over New Caledonia's justice system, defense, and internal security.

In 1988, following widespread political violence between Caldoches and indigenous Kanaks — a period referred to as "the Events" (French : Les Événements) — the Matignon Agreements were signed, establishing a transition to its current large autonomy as a sui generis collectivity within the French state. This was followed in 1998 by the Nouméa Accord. As part of the Accord, New Caledonia was allowed to hold three referendums to decide on the future status of the territory, with voting rights restricted to indigenous Kanak and other inhabitants living in New Caledonia before 1998. The Nouméa Accord also established the groundwork for a 20-year transition that gradually transferred competences to the local government.

Following the timeline set by the Nouméa Accord which stated a vote must take place by the end of 2018, the groundwork was laid for a referendum on full independence from France at a meeting chaired by the French Prime Minister Édouard Philippe on 2 November 2017, to be held by November 2018. The first referendum was held on 4 November 2018, with 56.7 percent of voters choosing to remain part of France. The second referendum was held in October 2020, with 53.4 percent of voters choosing to remain a part of France. The third referendum was held on 12 December 2021. The referendum was boycotted by pro-independence forces, who argued for a delayed vote due to the impact caused by the COVID-19 pandemic ; when the French government declined to do so, they called for a boycott. This led to 96% of voters choosing to stay with France.

In May 2024, rioting broke out over a proposed French electoral reform legislation to extend voting rights to long-term residents who had resided in New Caledonia for at least ten years. In October 2024, then- French Prime Minister Michel Barnier scrapped the bill, citing the need to restore calm and telling the French National Assembly that "avoiding further unrest" was a priority. On 2 December 2024, curfew was officially lifted as the riots were over.

In 2002, New Caledonia entered into a cooperation agreement with Vanuatu. Since 2019, New Caledonia has appointed official representatives who are embedded at the French Embassies in Australia, Fiji, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea and Vanuatu. These officials represent New Caledonia's interest in these five countries.

Australia, Indonesia, New Zealand and Vanuatu maintain consulate-generals in Nouméa. In December 2021, Japan announced plans to open a consulate office in Nouméa.

Since 2016, New Caledonia has been a full member of the Pacific Islands Forum. New Caledonia is also a member of the Pacific Community, the South Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP) and the South Pacific Tourism Organisation (SPTO).

New Caledonia is also an associate member of La Francophonie and is a non-voting member of the World Health Organization 's Western Pacific Regional Committee.

The Kanak and Socialist National Liberation Front (FLNKS), a pro-independence political party, is a member of the Melanesian Spearhead Group.

The Forest of Argonne (French pronunciation: [ aʁɡɔn ]) is a long strip of mountainous and wild woodland in northeastern France, approximately 200 km (120 mi) east of Paris. The forest measures roughly 65 km (40 mi) long and 15 km (9 mi) wide filled with many small hills and deep valleys formed by water run-off from the Aire and Aisne rivers rarely exceeding more than 200 m (650 ft) in elevation. Following the First World War, the landscape of the forest was forever changed as trench warfare led to parts of the forest being riddled with deep human-made trenches along with craters from explosives. The forest is bordered by the Aisne river on the west and rolling farmland and creeks to the east. The forest is largely oak, chestnut, and pine trees, and ferns cover much of the forest floor. Common animal life consists of wild boar, red deer, roe deer, hares, rabbits, foxes, and wildcat.

In 1792, Charles François Dumouriez outmaneuvered the invading forces of the Duke of Brunswick in the forest before the Battle of Valmy.

During World War I, the forest again became the site of intense military action. Bitter fighting between German and Allied units took place here in fall and winter 1914, summer 1915, and fall 1918. During the Meuse–Argonne offensive (1918), several United States Army soldiers earned the Medal of Honor there, including Colonel Nelson Miles Holderman, Major Charles White Whittlesey, Sergeant Alvin C. York, Corporal Harold W. Roberts and William Henry Johnson (a.k.a. "Black Death"), most of them part of the " Lost Battalion ". The World War I Montfaucon American Monument consists of a large granite Doric column surmounted by a statue symbolic of Liberty. The monument is located 32 km (20 mi) northwest of Verdun, not far from the Meuse–Argonne American Cemetery and Memorial.

The Forest of Compiègne (French : Forêt de Compiègne, French pronunciation: [ fɔʁɛ də kɔ̃pjɛɲ ]) is a large forest in the region of Picardy, France, near the city of Compiègne and approximately 80 kilometres (50 mi) north of Paris.

The forest is notable as the site of the Armistice of 11 November 1918 between the Allies and Germany which marked the end of fighting in World War I, as well as the Armistice of 22 June 1940 after the Battle of France in World War II.

The forest of Compiègne is roughly circular with a diameter of about 14 kilometres (9 miles) ; it is approximately 93 kilometres (58 miles) in circumference and its area is roughly 14,414 hectares (35,620 acres). The forest is lushly irrigated, being adjacent to the rivers Oise and Aisne, as well as many smaller tributaries and streams.

On its northwest, the forest hugs its small namesake city, and to its north and northeast, beyond the Aisne, lies the large national forest of Laigue (Forêt Domaniale de Laigue). Around its remaining perimeter, it contains or is adjacent to numerous communes including Vieux-Moulin, Lacroix-Saint-Ouen, Saint-Sauveur, Béthisy-Saint-Pierre, Saint-Jean-aux-Bois, and Pierrefonds. On its south it borders the Forest of Halatte.

Just outside the city of Compiègne, a grand entrance to the forest begins at the resplendent Château de Compiègne, a former royal residence on the city's western edge. Stretching forward from the château, the Avenue de Beaux Monts scales the heights of the same name, providing a scenic promenade into the woods.

The forest of Compiègne is noted for its natural features, and was described in an 1893 Littell's Living Age account as having a "noble and ordered beauty".

The most prominent tree species are oak (Quercus robur), beech (Fagus sylvatica) and hornbeam (Carpinus betulus). Much of the oak was heavily harvested over the centuries but was replanted aggressively in the nineteenth century when fears of deforestation began to be addressed. Since the late twentieth century, the North American black cherry tree (Prunus serotina) has spread vigorously throughout the forest, eliciting mixed reactions from local arborists.

Numerous flowering plants thrive in the woods, notably large numbers of Lily of the Valley (Convallaria majalis). Small lakes, ponds, brooks and springs abound throughout the forest, including the Spring of Saint-Sauveur, which is actually a pair of therapeutic mineral water springs running both hot and cold.

The forest sustains a great number of game animals including deer, rabbit and wild boar, and the varied terrain – plateaus cut by valleys and gorges, hills, streams and ponds – makes for challenging hunting. For centuries the Compiègne forest has been a prized hunting ground for virtually all the kings of France. Some 350 roads and pathways cross it adding up to over six hundred miles of trail with stately vintage signposts marking most of the intersections. The oldest ones include a small red mark which shows the direction to the château, relics of an imperial order given during the Second French Empire after the Empress Eugénie found herself lost in the thick woods.

The forest of Compiègne is a popular destination for all types of tourists. Horse-riders and bicyclists particularly enjoy the forest; a long-running bicycle event, the Paris- Roubaix race, has an established path through the forest.

The forest of Compiègne area shows evidence of prehistoric habitation, and continuous forest cover has been definitively proven since at least the end of the Roman Empire. Gallic-Roman edifices have been discovered there, and it is traversed on its south and east sides by an ancient Roman road now called by the French the Chaussée Brunehaut. During the Gallic Wars, Julius Caesar won a decisive victory in the forest, defeating one of the larger tribes of north-eastern Gaul, the Bellovaci. A multitude of the forest's classical-era artifacts are on display at the Château's museum.

The earliest Frankish kings established the forest as their privileged hunting grounds, and Clothaire the Great built the first royal residence there in the 7th century, and there he died of a fever. The small palace, fitted cozily among the trees, was named Cusia and for some time thereafter the forest itself went by the name Forêt de Cuise that is memorialized in the village of Cuise-la-Motte that lies to the east of the forest boundaries. A battle between the Merovingian-era kingdoms of Austrasia and Neustria took place in the forest in the year 715.

As Empress Eugénie's signposts attest, the thick and heavy forest can be a disorienting and potentially fatal place. In the twelfth century, at the age of fourteen, the future King Philip II of France found himself lost in the forest: he came so close to tragedy that his father, Louis VII, felt compelled to make a pilgrimage to the shrine of St. Thomas of Canterbury in England to offer thanks for his recovery. In the sixteenth century, King Francis I commanded the construction of eight hard-surfaced roads through the forest, all of which converge on a single point called the King's Well (Puits du Roi).

Further avenues connected by an octagonal ring were opened through the woods for the formal hunting parties of Louis XIV, and under the Ancien Régime the number of rides was increased to 200. Napoleon opened the avenue of Beaux-Monts (illustration). Prior to the Industrial Revolution, the lush woodlands provided lumber for a thriving woodworking community around Compiègne. One of the most popular products supplied by the forest was beech oil, used for cooking and folk medicines: it was bottled in prodigious quantities and sold worldwide from Compiègne through the 19th century, until its marketshare was supplanted by newer, more refined oils.

The forest of Compiègne witnessed much activity during the reign of the Emperor Napoleon III, for whom the abundant forest was a personal favorite retreat. The Emperor was an avid huntsman, and he reconstituted the forest as grand hunting grounds, even going so far as to revive the age-old office of Grand Veneur to oversee it. The Emperor had a deep affection for the forest and frequently organized his hunting parties at the King's Well. In addition to hunting parties and competitions, the forest of Compiègne was the scene of extravagant receptions, parties and even theatrical performances.

The forest of Compiègne was the site of the Armistice between the Allies and Germany which marked the end of fighting in World War I on 11 November 1918. The French commander-in-chief Marshal Foch convened the armistice talks deep in the forest beside the tiny village of Rethondes, with an eye towards secrecy because he wanted to shield the meeting from intrusive journalists, as well as spare the German delegation any hostile demonstrations by French locals.

During World War II, a second treaty was signed in the forest, this time arranging the Armistice between France and Nazi Germany (22 June 1940). With an unmistakable desire to humiliate his defeated enemy, German dictator Adolf Hitler gave orders that the surrender should be received in exactly the same spot, even the same railway car, where the Germans had surrendered in 1918.

A memorial site called Clairière de l'Armistice ("Glade of the Armistice", or "Armistice Clearing") covers the historic treaty area. Additions include a statue of Marshal Foch and the large Alsace-Lorraine Memorial, which depicts an Allied sword pinning down an Imperial German eagle. A famous memorial tablet placed at the precise location of the cease-fire signing reads (in French), "Here on the eleventh of November 1918 succumbed the criminal pride of the German Reich... vanquished by the free peoples which it tried to enslave." The original tablet was destroyed by the Nazis, but a new one was emplaced after the war.

For bringing the German delegation to the 1918 meeting, the French had assembled the train with a special saloon car which had once belonged to Napoleon III. The car was decorated with old Imperial emblems, redolent of past glories and mutely confirming the resurgence of French power after its defeat in the Franco-Prussian War in 1870. The two sides then met in a newer railcar, supplied by Compagnie Internationale des Wagons-Lits, to sign the armistice. After the fall of France in World War Two, this same railway carriage was specifically used by the Germans for the armistice of 1940; it was remanded to Germany where it was eventually destroyed by SS troops in Crawinkel, Thuringia, in 1945, and the remains were buried. In 1950, a faithful replica of this original railcar was installed at the site. Decades later, some vestiges of the original car were discovered in Germany and returned to France: the pieces were added to the memorial display in 1995.

The Armistice Clearing remains open to the public six days a week. Visitors routinely leave photographs and other mementos to be displayed or stored in the museum, making it "an ever-changing place of pilgrimage".

The forest of customary rights of La Teste-de-Buch, also known as the Grande Montagne de La Teste, has covered part of the current territory of the commune of La Teste-de-Buch in Gironde since the beginning of the Christian era. In the 21st century, it remains the last user forest in France: private landowners, known as ayant-pins, hold the exclusive right to exploit pine resin on their plots but are not the owners of the trees; meanwhile, the inhabitants of the former Captal de Buch territory, known as common forests (or usagers in French), are entitled to use the wood for their personal heating and construction needs.

Growing on ancient stabilized dunes, this two thousand year old pine - oak forest boasts a unique ecological diversity within the Landes de Gascogne. This precious ecosystem results from the unique exploitation methods maintained for centuries due to its specific legal status. Since synthetic chemistry rendered resin tapping obsolete in the 1970s and the demand for construction wood dwindled, interest from both owners and users in their shared heritage has waned. Stakeholders (owners, user defense groups, municipalities, nature conservation associations, hunters, public authorities, etc.) have failed to reach an agreement, leaving the forest neglected and poorly maintained.

In July 2022, a massive wildfire [ fr ] nearly destroyed it entirely.

The Forest of La Teste, documented since Roman times, grows along a coastal strip between the Arcachon Basin to the north and the Cazaux Lake to the south. It covers a series of parabolic dunes that accumulated in the region between 2000 and 500 BCE. These modest but rugged reliefs (seven dunes exceed 50 meters in height, with the highest— Truc de la Truque —peaking at 76 meters) juxtapose hills (trucs) and pseudo-valleys (bats) in a puzzling disarray, earning it the nickname "Grande Montagne."

Throughout the current era, new dune formations—of the barchan type, which formed the Pilat Dune —have isolated the forest from the ocean and progressively eroded its western and northern edges. Due to the encroachment of these modern dunes and urbanization around Arcachon, the Grande Montagne’s area has gradually decreased from around 4,600 hectares at the time of the Revolution to about 3,700 hectares at the start of the 21st century.

The forest is bordered to the southeast by Cazaux Lake, to the north by La Teste-de-Buch and Arcachon, to the northwest by the Pilat Dune, and otherwise by private or state-owned forests. Its position downwind likely contributes to maintaining the Pilat Dune’s height.

Nowadays, the Grande Montagne is crossed by the D218 departmental road, which clips its northwest corner while connecting Arcachon and Biscarosse, and by Route 214, a paved state-owned road cutting east to west through its northern third. This route links the D218 near the Pilat Dune to the D112 departmental road, which serves the Cazaux hamlet from La Teste’s main urban area. In the forest’s southern half, a network of dead-end roads provides access to oil wells established in 1959. Finally, forest paths crisscross the area, less maintained since resin tapping ceased.

The earliest accounts of pine exploitation in the Grande Montagne date back to the 17th century.

The sought-after raw material was the tree’s oleoresin : Throughout the adult life of the pine, it was harvested by gemmage —the practice of making successive incisions in the bark. The exudate, mixed with rainwater and solid impurities and collected in a hole dug at the tree base or in a clay pot, was then called “gemme.” Every two to three weeks from spring to mid-autumn, the resin tapper would refresh the cut and gather the oozing resin. Collected in barrels, the gemme was transported to a distillery where the volatile fraction, turpentine oil, was separated from a solid residue, colophony (also known as arcanson or rousine). Turpentine oil was used to produce solvents, paints, varnishes, polishes, waxes, and medicines, while colophony was used to make paper adhesives, soaps, and printing ink.

Once the tree was dead, the pyrolysis of its trunk and stump produced pine tar (also known as pitch or tar), carbon black, and charcoal. The forest operator constructed on-site kilns (hourns), mounds of stones covered with clay: the wood burned inside releases a viscous liquid collected through an outlet. This liquid was used for caulking boats, waterproofing containers, waxing ropes, and even treating rheumatism and certain skin diseases. These practices persisted until the 1970s, gradually replaced by the rise of industrial synthetic chemistry.

The fundamental principles governing the ownership and use of the Grande Montagne are based on texts, the oldest preserved dating back to 1468, which have been updated several times since then: baillettes (unilateral decisions by the lord) and transactions (formalized agreements between parties):

In the Middle Ages, the Grande Montagne belonged to local lords, the Captals of Buch. These lords, from an undetermined time, granted ("leased") various rights to their vassals in exchange for compensation. Each lord who inherited the captalat freely revised these rights and their costs.

The first text (now lost) of which there is a record dates back to the first half of the 15th century: Gaston I de Foix-Grailly granted the inhabitants of the seigneury the paid rights to harvest gemmed resin (gema, galipot) and process it into pitch (rouzina), and the free right to collect firewood (busca) and construction wood (fusta). On October 19, 1468, the baillette of his son Jean de Foix-Grailly-Candale confirmed and reevaluated these rights, which were granted to around forty local families. In 1500, Gaston II de Foix-Grailly-Candale sold, for an annual lump sum, the rights to pasture (herbage) and to gather acorns (glandage) for feeding pigs.

In 1535, the baillette of Gaston III de Foix-Grailly-Candale [ fr ] introduced the appointment of syndics representing the inhabitants, prohibited the sale or transport of wood outside the captalat, and emphasized the importance of managing the forest responsibly.

In 1601, a crisis arose with the new captal, Jean-Louis d’Épernon : a new act was not signed until after three years of "closure" of the forest. It clarified that the ayant-pins acquired ownership of resin extraction concessions, but neither of the land nor the trees. His son Bernard d’Épernon reaffirmed these principles in 1645.

In 1746, François-Alain Amanieu de Ruat signed a transaction granting ayant-pins ownership of the land and limiting the rights of usagers. Following protests from the usagers, a new agreement was made on June 16, 1759: the ayant-pins retained ownership of the land, as well as their cabins and resin, but still not the trees, while the usagers regained their free rights to wood. The captal kept the rights to acorn gathering and grazing, along with the privilege of using wood for his château—despite it being located outside the territory, in Le Teich.

It was under this contractual state that the French Revolution occurred. Some usagers then sought to have the forest, a former seigneurial property, become communal land. However, the arbitral tribunal, convened on 8 Fructidor Year II (August 25, 1794), dismissed their claim, arguing that the forest had not belonged to a noble since 1746. The tribunal confirmed the ownership of the ayant-pins and the servitudes imposed on them in favor of the usagers, which were inseparable from their ownership title. At that time, there were 104 parcels held by 38 families.

In 1917, a new agreement was signed to govern the conditions for exploiting trees killed by natural disasters. This decision followed disputes between ayant-pins and usagers after a hurricane in 1897 and a fire in 1898. The agreement stipulated that the revenue from wood sales would be shared among the owners (50%), the municipalities of La Teste-de-Buch and Gujan (33%), and a syndical fund responsible for managing common affairs between usagers and ayant-pins (17%).

Finally, various revisions were enacted in 1952, 1955, and 1977, the latter limited to a five-year duration.

Recurrent conflicts between the involved parties have marked the 20th and 21st centuries, stirring debates in the La Teste municipal council, the columns of the regional press, and the courts of Bordeaux.

The question of whether usagers can cut down oaks for firewood remains controversial. The agreements limit the felling of live oaks to construction work, but oak wood, being a higher-quality fuel than pine, was not favored by owners during the resin-tapping era. Consequently, unauthorized cuts have often occurred.

Another debate centers around if the right of use extends to the inhabitants of Cap Ferret. Until 1976, the end of the Cap Ferret peninsula was part of the commune of La Teste, before a referendum joined it to Lège for practical reasons. As residents of the former captalat territory, the approximately 2,000 year-round residents are entitled to usager rights in the forest. But it was still questioned if this privilege should be limited to those who lived there ten years before the affiliation change. The debate remains unresolved, and in 2008, a resident of Cap Ferret organized a high-profile tree felling and transport by pinasse [ fr ] to Cap Ferret—avoiding the wood leaving the "former boundaries of the captalat."

A similar debate concerns the residents of Arcachon, a city separated from La Teste in 1857 to facilitate urban expansion. At the time, the few inhabitants explicitly renounced their right of use in exchange for full ownership of parcels.

The stakeholders also struggle to agree on how to represent the usagers. According to the transactions, usagers are supposed to organize themselves into a union. However, under state pressure and after several legal proceedings, it was decided in 1976 that the municipal councils of La Teste and Gujan-Mestras would represent the usagers. Nevertheless, a users’ association, the ADDU-FU, tends to fill this role.

The rights of access to the forest massif are also regularly questioned: the transactions prohibit owners from blocking paths or fencing off their plots. However, motor vehicle traffic and the organization of hikes or other events are regulated.

Finally, controversies occasionally arise regarding the possibility of building or improving the structures of the hundred resin workers’ cabins identified in 1901, beyond the renovations conditionally authorized by the land use plan, in a context where land and real estate speculation is a proven temptation.

The 3,895.52 hectares registered in 2016 are divided into 388 parcels, grouped into 161 properties.

The exact owners of approximately 875 hectares cannot be identified due to incomplete titles, undefined properties, or complex co-ownerships. This situation hinders the achievement of a quorum of ayant-pins landowners.

Fifty properties cover more than 25 hectares, together representing 71% of the forest's area; the rest is very fragmented, with some properties being less than one hectare. Owners of at least 51% of the forest reside within the former captalat; owners of at least 82% live in the departments of Gironde or Landes.

Land partitioning (cantonnement) is the act of granting a community full ownership of a portion of the forest in exchange for the rights it exercised over the entire massif. This type of act, common in France during the Second Empire, ended all other forest user statuses nationwide.

Starting in the 1970s, several voices were raised to end the user status of the Grande Montagne by partitioning it.

On one side, ayant-pins landowners argued that their land holdings no longer provided income since the commercial market for resin-tapping had disappeared. Only those living in the former captalat territory had user rights over the wood, and all were subject to the usual responsibilities of landowners (including property tax, obligation for proper forest management and DFCI [ fr ] tax). On the other side, state services were alarmed by the low productivity of the forest and its progressive degradation due to lack of maintenance.

Opposition to this initiative came from environmental protection associations such as SEPANSO [ fr ], convinced that the massif’s valuable ecosystem was due to its unique status, as well as from user associations and a significant portion of the owners—particularly those living year-round in the affected communes.

In September 1977, partitioning advocates simultaneously filed a lawsuit against the two concerned communes and a proposal for an amicable settlement, offering full ownership of 745 hectares to the municipalities. Thirteen of the plaintiff owners would cede part of their parcels. In March 1981, the Bordeaux Court of Appeal rejected the request. An appeal to the Court of Cassation failed because the request was not supported by all owners - seventy-nine owners had not endorsed the initiative.

Taking advantage of a 1985 amendment to the Forest Code that relaxed the required quorum—an amendment pushed by a Girondin senator specifically to address the case of the Grande Montagne—some owners made a new offer for an amicable cantonnement in 1987, proposing 120 hectares to the communes. However, the initiative failed once again.

In 2010, a ruling by the Bordeaux Court of Appeal ended all attempts at cantonnement, acknowledging the impossibility of identifying all the owners.

The vegetation is typical of the Landes de Gascogne and shaped by the user status of the forest, which was exploited for resin production. Over the centuries, this status has had multiple direct and collateral effects:

However, since the end of resin tapping, the incentive to maintain the understory has diminished, and a very dense vegetation has developed.

The forest is a natural pine - oak grove (maritime pines and pedunculate oaks) arranged in an irregular high forest. The shrub layer consists of holly, hawthorn, medlar, plum, blackthorn, dog rose, wild pear, rowan, service tree, and viburnum. It harbors bracken fern, honeysuckle, butcher’s broom, rockrose, buckthorn, green heather, bell heather, heather, and gorse. The herbaceous layer is rich in cinquefoil, bentgrass, germander, and madder. The vegetation on the southwest slopes of the old parabolic dunes is more lush and diverse than on the northeast slopes, which are sparsely populated by pedunculate oaks, some holly, and bracken fern.

To the northwest, sheltered from prevailing winds by the Dune of Pyla, strawberry trees and sage-leaved rockrose become more abundant.

On the eastern edge of the forest, particularly near the Étang de Cazaux, there are approximately 290 hectares of wetlands or marshy areas. These zones are predominantly covered with alders, willows, and birches, under which grow buckthorn, swamp sawgrass, purple moor-grass, grasses, bog myrtle, water naval, loosestrife, royal fern, Portuguese heath, and more.

The forest is scattered with clearings around the cabins of former resin workers, which once served as vegetable gardens or grazing areas and are now more or less closed off. At the start of the 21st century, these covered 138 hectares. It is also punctuated by natural gaps caused by the spread of a cryptogamic pine disease due to honey fungus (Armillaria).

In 1943, the portion of the forest located west of RD218 was listed in the inventory of sites [ fr ]. The entire Grande Montagne was listed in 1977 and then classified in June 1994.

A proposal to classify it as a protected forest did not succeed, as it was incompatible with the presence of oil wells. Such a classification would have ended the user status by subjecting the management of the massif to the Forest Code [ fr ]. However, it is classified as a special conservation area in the National Natural Heritage Inventory, and as a natural area of ecological, floristic, and faunal interest.

It has benefited from the Natura 2000 label since late 2005.

Two types of maritime pine specimens, altered by human activity, centuries-old, and endangered, are protected by a prefectural decree: "bottle pines," so heavily tapped for resin that healing ridges caused a significant widening of the base of their trunks and the formation of cavities that shelter many bird species, and "boundary pines," tall and smooth because they were never tapped, which landowners allowed to grow at the corners of their parcels to mark property boundaries.

The main dunes, valleys, resin workers' cabins, and even cadastral plots bear Gascon names often dating back to the Middle Ages. Examples include Hourn Laurès ("the laurel oven"), Lartigon (from Gascon artigue ' cleared land '), lous Broustics ("places covered with brush"), Batsegrette ("the secret valley"), or Lauga (from Gascon augar ' marshy terrain ').

In 1901, 123 cabins were recorded in the forest, where resin workers lived. These cabins often featured a well, beehives, a kitchen garden, and an orchard. A 2020 survey identified 85 remaining cabins. Some are used as permanent residences (32 in 1976), and a few have their own electricity. The 2022 fire destroyed about fifty of these cabins.

Since 1948, the Natus Necropolis has housed, at the edge of the forest, the remains of more than 950 Senegalese Tirailleurs, eleven Russian soldiers, and two French servicemen who died at the nearby Courneau military camp [ fr ], established during World War I for the "wintering" of colonial units from sub-Saharan Africa stationed on the front. Many succumbed to pneumonia epidemics during the winter of 1916-1917.

In the southern part of the forest, Esso drilled ninety-three oil wells starting in 1959; forty-seven were still operational in 2021, operated by Vermilion REP. The 30 km² deposit, buried between 2,500 and 3,200 meters deep, is the second-largest oil field in France, with a daily production of 250 cubic meters of crude oil. The opening of eight additional wells received a favorable opinion in 2023 after a public inquiry but faced strong opposition.

Historical archives record that a hurricane in 1799 felled more than 40,000 pines, causing a 90% drop in resin production. Two centuries later, the Martin storm’s [ fr ] 166 km/h winds toppled many trees in the southwest of the usager forest.

Parts of the Grande Montagne have fallen prey to multiple fires, notably in 1708 (one death), in 1716 (2,700 hectares in the south), in 1811, in 1822 (140 hectares in the southern third of the forest, of human origin), in 1843, 1863, 1865, in the spring of 1893 (277 hectares in the northwest of the massif, over several months), in 1898 (755 hectares in the southern third of the forest), in July 1912 (300 hectares), in 1929, in September 1943 after a bombing (535 hectares in the southern third of the massif), in July 1952 (190 hectares), and in 1973 (62 hectares). Since then, fires have been limited (500 to 700 pines in total in 1981, 0.8 hectares in 2001 after a rave party, and 2 hectares twice in 2003). The resilience of the usager forest to fires is a subject of debate: some argue that the lack of maintenance of undergrowth and forest paths complicates the work of firefighters; others believe that botanical diversity, the proportion of deciduous trees, and the terrain are capable of slowing the spread of a potential blaze.

From July 12 to 23, 2022, a fire [ fr ] devastated the massif. It broke out around 3:00 p.m. on July 12, when a utility vehicle suffered a severe electrical problem on Route Fueled by the heatwave, the fire rapidly moved southward until July 17, when a shift in the winds drove it back north. In total, 7,000 hectares of forest— usager, state-owned, or prand te—were affected, and 20,000 people were evacuated before firefighters managed to contain the flames.

Aerial mapping conducted in December 2022 identified the majority of areas where photosynthesis is still active at the tops of conifers and those where the trees are dead. Although it will take several decades to restore a mature forest, nature has gradually reclaimed its territory in the months following the disaster, with the regrowth of ferns, understory plants, and the germination of young pines.

However, the immediate priority was to remove the dead pines: INRAE fears the proliferation of the stenographer beetle, a half-centimeter-long insect that primarily targets damaged conifers. The challenge is to protect the spared trees and, above all, the adjacent forests. Delayed by disagreements among stakeholders, unfavorable weather, and an unprofitable timber market, logging did not begin until January 2023. By the end of October, half of the deadwood had been removed, and numerous piles of infested trunks remained stored on-site; the felling operations were completed in June 2024, with 570,000 tons of wood evacuated and 10% of the trees left standing. The sale of the felled pines generated 9 million euros.

During these operations, and for safety reasons, a municipal decree—contested by the association of forest users —prohibited public access to the forest. Access was fully restored on July 1, 2024.

Several options are being considered for the forest’s reforestation. In September 2022, scientists, particularly from INRAE, launched a petition calling for the cessation of the systematic felling of the remaining trees and the reforestation of the massif through natural regeneration to preserve its uniqueness and diversity. This option is also favored by the association of forest users. A collection of approximately one million seeds from the primary forest is expected to facilitate this restoration.

Another point of debate is whether to allow owners of burned-down cabins to rebuild them. The state has opposed this, a stance contested by the ayant-pins and the mayor of La Teste.

The forest of Fontainebleau (French : Forêt de Fontainebleau, or Forêt de Bière, meaning, in old French, "forest of heather ") is a mixed deciduous forest lying sixty kilometres (37 mi) southeast of Paris, France. It is located primarily in the arrondissement of Fontainebleau in the southwestern part of the department of Seine-et-Marne. Most of it also lies in the canton of Fontainebleau, although parts of it extend into adjoining cantons, and even as far west as the town of Milly-la-Forêt in the neighboring department, Essonne. Several communes lie within the forest, notably the towns of Fontainebleau and Avon. The forest has an area of 250 km (97 sq mi).

Forty thousand years ago, nomadic populations settled around the forest. Various traces of their presence have been discovered: carved stone tools, bones of such animals as bears, elephants, rhinos, and giant stags. More than 2,000 caves with rock carvings are scattered across the forest. They are attributed to all periods between the Upper Paleolithic (around 12000 BC) and modern times. However, the majority of the carvings are from the Mesolithic (between 9000 and 5500 BC). They often take the form of geometric etchings (lattices), though some are figurative.

The fourth century BC saw the arrival of Celt and Ligurian tribes. The Celtes settled the region in the fifth century BC. A Celtic necropolis was discovered in Cannes-Écluse, along with arms and auroch horns. Near Bouray (Seine-et-Oise), a bronze Celtic statuette called the God of Bouray was dredged up, while in Bossy-aux-Cailles, a Celtic tintinnabulum was discovered.

Around the year 1000, the human occupation of the forest consisted of a series of enclaves controlled by petty lords and wealthy landowners.

In 1067, Philippe I acquired the county of Gâtinais, which gave the crown control over the entire territory of the current forest. For the kings of France, the forest had several uses, including hunting and forestry, but also a military interest, as Fontainebleau was a strategic location on the road to Sens and Burgundy. In 1137, Louis VI began construction of a hunting castle consisting of a dungeon, moat, and chapel. It is during this period that the first use of the word 'Fontainebleau' appears.

In 1400, Charles VI initiated the first reform of forest policy; that is, he ordered the complete closure of the forest area for several months in order to verify the rights and uses of each user of the forest. This exceptional procedure was repeated many times under the Ancien Régime.

The castle was rebuilt from 1527 by François I, as a base from which to hunt "the red and black beasts" which abounded in the forest. At the time, the forest covered only 13,365 hectares, but the kings of France extended it through acquisitions and forfeitures. Also under François I, the office of Grand Forestier was created. He was responsible for officers and horse guards, each having the supervision and management of a canton of the forest. It was at this time, during the 16th century, that the administration responsible for managing the forest took shape. It retained this responsibility until the French Revolution.

At the time of Louis XIV, less than 20 percent of the forest area was wooded. Jean-Baptiste Colbert launched a reform from June to September 1664 as well as a tree-planting campaign. In 1716, following the severe winter of the year 1709, 6,000 hectares were planted with deciduous trees, but this turned out to be an almost total failure. In 1750, the 90 km perimeter of the forest was delimited by 1050 boundary markers, some of which are still visible today. In 1786, Scotch pines were introduced. After the Revolution, following numerous illegal cuts and the proliferation of game due to lack of hunting, Napoleon I reformed the forestry administration and that of the castle in 1807.

In 1830, the planting of another 6,000 hectares of pine provoked the anger of artists who came to seek inspiration in the forest.

The Forest of Fontainebleau is famous worldwide for having inspired 19th-century artists, including painters of the Barbizon School and the Impressionists. The Barbizon painters, led by Théodore Rousseau and including Charles-François Daubigny, Jules Dupré, Édouard Manet, Edgar Degas, Constant Troyon, Charles Jacque, and Narcisse Virgilio Díaz, militated against the planting of softwoods which had been carried out at a pace of several hundred hectares per year since 1830. They objected on the grounds that the plantings distorted the landscapes. The artists also opposed the planned regeneration cuts in old forests in 1837 and founded the Society of Friends of the Forest of Fontainebleau to protect it.

In 1839, Claude-François Denecourt published his first forest guide and laid out the first paths in 1842. From 1849, the railway arrived in Fontainebleau, which enabled Parisians to visit Fontainebleau on day trips. This relatively easy access helped to create public support for the protection of the forest.

At the request of the painters of the Barbizon School, hardwood cuts were suspended in certain cantons appreciated by artists. In 1853, "nature sanctuaries" covering over 624 hectares of old forests and rocky areas (Bas Bréau, Cuvier Châtillon, Franchard, Apremont, La Solle, Mont Chauvet) were withdrawn from wood harvesting. For the first time in France, concern for “the protection of nature” became one of the objectives of forest management. By the imperial decree of April 13, 1861, the “artistic reserve” was increased to 1,094 hectares and finally to 1,693 hectares from 1892 to 1904. The director general of forests, Henri Faré, explained that the setting aside of 1,600 hectares was tantamount to losing an income of 300,000 gold francs. However, the Forest of Fontainebleau thus became the first nature reserve in the world.

Thirty five million years ago, during the Oligocene age, the area now occupied the Fontainebleau forest was a sea that deposited sediments of fine, white sand about fifty meters thick. This sand is one of the purest in the world and is used for glassware (Murano glass in Venice) and for optical fiber.

The sand later formed the large banks of sandstone boulders – consisting of grains of quartz cemented by a silica gel – that characterise the current landscape of the forest. The boulders often have surprising shapes reminiscent of animals or objects and they are favored by bouldering enthusiasts.

The rocks occupy an area of nearly 4,000 hectares and form long banks of almost parallel boulders oriented East South-East, West North-West, and separated by open valleys at both ends.

The forest floor contains up to 98% sand and is therefore very permeable. As a result, nowhere in the forest, except on the eastern slope between Veneux-Nadon and Samois-sur-Seine, are there any permanent sources of water. The ponds come from the capture of rainwater in the depressions of the rocky plateaus, except in the vicinity of the pond at Les Evées where clay dominates.

The most common trees in the forest are: oak (44%), Scots pine (40%), and European beech (10%). Three thousand species of mushrooms have been discovered. The forest is also home to approximately seven thousand animal species, five thousand of which are insects.

The hills of Jean de Paris are part of the forest "known for its stark plateaus and rough terrain". It was a popular theme for painters and photographers of the Barbizon School.

The Forest of Halatte (Forêt d'Halatte, French pronunciation: [ fɔʁɛ dalat ]) in Picardy is one of the largest remaining blocks of natural old-growth forest in France. Situated in the département of Oise near Senlis and Pont-Sainte-Maxence, it currently encompasses 43 square kilometres (17 sq mi). Together with the Forest of Chantilly and the Forest of Ermenonville it forms the Massif des Trois Forêts. On the north it borders the Forest of Compiègne. Halatte is still a source of oak and beech timber.

The forest, a fragment separated from the ancient Silva Cotia (forêt de Cuise) cited in the 6th century CE, which became the Forest of Compiègne, bears numerous traces of its prehistoric habitation, in the form of menhirs and dolmens and late Iron Age burials. In the commune of Ognon are the remains of a Gallo-Roman temple dedicated to a curative deity, built in the mid-1st century CE and abandoned during the 4th century. The temple's stones were then quarried for reuse, and the site became overgrown by the forest. the temple was discovered and excavated in 1873-74 and more professionally examined in 1996–99. The objects discovered over the course of the excavation, including coins, votive offerings, fibulae and other jewellery, are exhibited at the Art and Archeology museum of Senlis.

The inexplicable name Halatte first appears in a document of 1165, as Locus Halachius. A hunting accident in the Forest of Halatte claimed the life of King Philip IV of France in November 1314. At a meeting at St-Christophe-en-Halatte, Edward III of England made his last act of homage for Gascony, to Philip VI, in April 1331. The forest was in part a royal domaine and otherwise divided among clerics and nobles. To this day, boundary markers carved with coats-of-arms mark the old divisions. During the French Revolution, the whole forest was declared domaniale, a national property.

An obelisk raised to commemorate Napoleon II, the King of Rome, Napoleon 's heir, stands in the forest, south of Pont-Sainte-Maxence. The Forest of Halatte is traversed by a network of walking and bicycling trails maintained by the French government.

Forest of Orléans (French : Forêt d'Orléans) is a French national forest for the most part and makes up 70% of a French natural region, located in the department of Loiret in the Centre-Val de Loire region.

Forest of Orléans ranges over 50,000 hectares, including 35,000 hectares which make up the national forest, the remainder being privately owned. It is in fact the largest French national forest. Thirty-five communes take part in it. The forest is surrounded by the natural regions of Beauce, Gâtinais, and Loire Valley ; it extends along the North of Loire river in an arc which is 60 km in length, from Orléans to Gien, and 5 to 20 km in width.

The national routes 60 and 152 cross the forest of Orléans. It is bordered to the West by the national route 20 and the highway A10, to the East by national route 7 and Highway A77, and to the North by Highway A19.

Two railroads cross the forest, between Orléans and Neuville-aux-Bois via Rebréchien, and between Orléans and Bellegarde via Vennecy and Vitry-aux-Loges.

Two GR footpaths cross the forest of Orléans, GR 3 and GR 32.

These communes are partly or entirely in the forest of Orléans:

The forest is more or less flat, the maximum altitude being 177 m and the lowest 107 m, hence an altitude difference of 70 meters across 50 000 hectares.

This absence of relief, joined with the impermeability of the soil prevents the natural flow of rainwater and explains the humidity of the terrain and abundance of ponds.

The forest is mixed. Among the species, common oak makes up over the half of the trees. The resinous trees are mainly Scots pine, which make up a third. Other than these two species, there are equal amounts of birch, hornbeam, European beech, hazel, Corsican black pine, wild apple trees, and lime trees. Many bird species nest in the forest of Orléans. There can be observed ospreys (returned in 1984), booted eagles, short-toed snake eagles, European honey buzzards, hen harriers, European nightjars, black woodpeckers, middle spotted woodpeckers, grey-headed woodpeckers, woodlarks, and Dartford warblers. Others, such as great egrets and common cranes, sojourn in the forest in course of their migration. Numerous other species of animals can be encountered: red deer, roe deer, hares, pheasants, tree squirrels, wild boars, and common frogs.

An area of 28 ha of the forest of Orléans was designated a natural zone of ecological interest, fauna and flora. It is mainly of conifers and is of ornithological interest hence the presence of ospreys, nightjars, Eurasian woodcocks, and Eurasian hobbies.

Furthermore, an area of 36,086 ha of the forest north of Loire was designated a natural zone of ecological interest, fauna and flora.

An area of 32,177 ha is under special protection by Natura 2000. It is an Important Bird Area (IBA) that hosts ospreys, booted eagles, middle spotted woodpeckers, and European nightjars.

The forest of Rambouillet (French : Forêt de Rambouillet, pronounced [ fɔʁɛ də ʁɑ̃bujɛ ]), also known as the forest of Yveline (Forêt de l'Yveline [ fɔʁɛ də livlin ]) is a large forest covering some 200 km² (77 square miles), located to the west of Paris, in the Île-de-France region of France. The town of Rambouillet, after which it is named, lies on its southern edge.

On 26 December 1999, cyclone Lothar hit the northern half of France, wreaking havoc to forests and parks. The forest of Rambouillet lost hundreds of thousands of trees.

In the southern part of the forest, there is a wild group of up to 150 Bennett's wallabies. This population has been present since the 1970s, when some individuals escaped from the zoological park of Émancé after a storm or due to vandalism in the park.

The Forest of Retz (French Forêt de Retz, French pronunciation: [ fɔʁɛ də ʁɛts ]) is one of the largest forests of France, covering some 13,000 hectares in the Aisne about 80 km northeast of Paris. It is a national forest (forêt domaniale) in the former Picardy region.

One characteristic that sets the Forest of Retz apart from other French national forests, in which the actual forested area has fluctuated, is that the forest here has scarcely changed since it was set apart, en futaie, in 1672.

The forest is a relict of the ancient forested cover, though as deforestation progressed, this was not identified as a distinct unity until the 12th century. when it formed part of the vast tracts belonging to the counts of Valois, an immense forested expanse that reached from Retheuil, Chaudin and Buzancy as far as the river Marne, but was reduced and fragmented by increasing agricultural uses during the Middle Ages.

In 1214 Philip Augustus attached the forest to the royal domain and dictated the first ordonnances to guide its maintenance by foresters called sergents du roi, under the governor of royal châteaux of Villers-Cotterêts and of Vivières.

The period of the Hundred Years' War (1337–1453) marked depredations on the woodlands.

In 1346, the Valois King Philip VI of France promulgated the first codified forestry law, the ordonnance de Brunoy, which gave birth to the designated Maître des Eaux et Forêts, a member of the Maison du Roi. The kingdom's first Maître des Eaux et Forêts was installed at the château de Villers-Cotterêts in the Forest of Retz.

In 1499, the Forest of Retz returned to a royal apanage, held by François de Valois, soon to be King François I. The King expressed his appreciation of this forest in numerous works and improvements that included the piercing of rides suited to the hunt now overseen by a Capitaine de chasses, and rebuilding the château de Villers-Cotterêts, for which new sources of water were tapped, which also served the village. A more rational forestry was established and poachers of the king's game were apprehended.

On 8 January 2015, the forest became the center of an extensive manhunt for brothers Saïd and Chérif Kouachi, who were the two main suspects of a terrorist attack against the French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo. The following day, both suspects were found at a signage production company in Dammartin-en-Goële. After an hours-long standoff, the Kouachi brothers were fatally shot by police.

On November 16, 2019, Elisa Pilarski, who was six months pregnant, was killed in a dog attack in the Forest of Retz.

The Forest of Saint-Germain-en-Laye or Forêt de Saint-Germain-en-Laye, is a dominial forest of 35 km (14 sq mi) in area which lies in a meander of the River Seine, France. Situated 20 km (12 mi) West of Paris, between Saint-Germain-en-Laye, Maisons-Laffitte, Achères and Poissy, It is situated entirely within the commune of Saint-Germain. Essentially composed of oak (53%) and beech (18%), it is now a forest bordered by built up areas and divided by communication links: route nationales, A14 and the railway line from Paris to Caen. The Fête des Loges is, every year, organised in an open space near Saint-Germain.

The Forest of Laye is a relic of the ancient Forest of Yveline. Very early it became a royal domain and hunting grounds of the Kings of France who resided at the Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye. Kings Henry IV and Louis XIII often used the forest for fox hunting. Louis XIV also walked the forest and hired an architect, André Le Nôtre, to build a terrace bordering the forest dominating the valley of the River Seine in 1663. He also built a high wall, finished by Napoléon, encircling the forest to prevent game from escaping the woods. After the abandonment of the forest of Saint-Germain in 1682 by Louis XIV, Charles X resumed the hunting tradition of Saint-Germain. Napoléon III purchased land to the South to link the forest of Saint-Germain with the Forest of Marly. The arrival of the railway in 1835, then the development of the car, considerably increased use of the forest.

Since the middle of the 19th century, the forest has lost 8 km (3.1 sq mi) of its surface area.

The Forest of Sénart (French : Forêt de Sénart, French pronunciation: [ fɔʁɛ də senaʁ ]) is located in the French department of Essonne. It covers 3,000 hectares in area, this forest is very important to the local population. The local government has kept roads and agricultural companies from cutting down parts of this forest. There are roughly 2-3 million visitors a year, and the government spends 1.2 million euros a year maintaining the forest.

The forest inspired the 1826 pasticcio La forêt de Sénart by Parisian Castil-Blaze, where he openly incorporated music from the opera Euryanthe against the protests of composer Carl Maria von Weber. The experience drove Weber to lobby German theaters and sovereigns to control the distribution of his next opera, Oberon – an important incident in the creation of modern copyright law.

The Forest of Tronçais (French : Forêt de Tronçais, IPA: [ tʁɔ̃sɛ ]) is a national forest comprising 10,600 hectares (26,000 acres) in the Allier department of central France. It is managed by the National Forests Office (ONF). Its oaks, planted by Louis XIV 's minister Jean-Baptiste Colbert to supply the French Navy, constitute one of the principal stands of oaks in Europe.

Within the forest boundaries are the communes of Braize, Cérilly, Isle-et-Bardais, Le Brethon, Meaulne-Vitray, Saint-Bonnet-Tronçais, Urçay and Valigny. It is mainly made up of sessile oak. It also contains 130 hectares (320 acres) of ponds and is deemed by many as the most beautiful oakwood in Europe.

The Forest of Tronçais is located in the inventaire forestier national [ fr ] (INF) sylvoecoregion [ fr ] of Boischaut et Champagne Berrichonne. The forest constitutes the most part of the massif du Tronçais, a highland region which spans about 12,000 ha (30,000 acres) and is part of the Massif Central.

The massif is located in the Allier department of the Bourbonnais region. The oakwood spans the communes of Braize (776 ha), Cérilly, Allier (1,788 ha), Couleuvre (405 ha), Isle-et-Bardais (2,788 ha), Le Brethon (1,400 ha), Meaulne (112 ha), Saint-Bonnet-Tronçais (1,176 ha), Urçay (343 ha), Valigny (17 ha) and Vitray (1,728 ha).

The massif has a general north–west orientation, with slight slopes, except in the massif de La Bouteille and stream hollows. Altitudes vary from 205 m (673 ft) in the northwest to 360 m (1,180 ft) in Bois Laid.

Annual rainfall is between 800 and 900 mm (31 and 35 in), with an average temperature of 10 °C (50 °F).

There are four main parts of the forest: l'Armenanche (east), la Réserve (centre), les Landes blanches (north-west) and la Bouteille (south-west). Several enclaves have created " open areas ". The contours of the écotone/lisières massif are very rugged.

The forest is located on the southern limit of the Paris Basin, on varied substrates (from the primary to the quaternary eras). Most of the forest is located on sandstone or clay from the triassic period.

Two rivers cross the massif: the Marmande [ fr ] and its tributary the Sologne [ fr ]. The Marmande is a tributary of the Cher which feeds the Loire. There are also five ponds (French: l'étang):

There are about 100 spring sources in the forest:

The principal trees are sessile oak (Quercus petraea) (73%), whose ancient name in French, tronce, gave its name to the district. Other dominant species are beech (Fagus sylvatica) (9%) and pedunculate oak (Q. robur) (8%), with hornbeam and Scots pine planted in the poorer soils. Trees are harvested on a rotation averaging 250 years.

The massif plays an important role for biodiversity for many species on a national level. It also hosts many grove-like landscapes or paysages bocagers (bocage bourbonnais, seasonal agropastoral bocage and permanent grassland landscape).

A number of oak specimens have been preserved for heritage. Among these are (pictured below):

There are predators such as common buzzard, booted eagle, northern goshawk, hen harrier, etc., and many breeds of bats. The diversity of insects is also very important, notably in the parcels of the old wood (i.e.: the Colbert Forest). Important populations of stag, roe and wild boar are regulated by hunting.

The land was cleared and intensively cultivated under the Roman Empire. 108 Roman habitations that have been discovered in the forest, most during recent decades. Roman manuring and fertilizing practices created a pocket of increased biodiversity, which has remained self-sustaining over two millennia and can be detected today.

Tronçais is first recorded from the 13th century, in a document relating to the priory de la Bouteille.

The forest was first owned by 14 nearby parishes, then yielded in 1327 to the Duke of Bourbon. The Forest of Tronçais has belonged to central power since 1527, when all land possessions were confiscated from the Constable of Bourbon by royal power.

The forest is not a relic of the primeval forest that once covered most of France, but was organized by Jean-Baptiste Colbert in 1670. With forethought for the requirements of the French Navy two hundred years hence, the Colbert Forest was planted as an oak grove. The oaks were interplanted with beeches and larches to encourage their growth for favourable timber for ship's masts: straight, tall, and free of knots.

By the time the trees were fully mature, the navy was rapidly switching from sail to steam. The forest was diminished by the creation in 1788 of iron forges fed by charcoal from the forest, and by urgent cutting during the French Revolution and the Napoleonic period. The forest regenerated during the 19th century.

The forest is divided into 442 parcels of sessile oak (95% of the surface) and Scots pine or black pine (5%). Beech and hornbeam are also present, along with cherry and checker tree.

It is the only forest in France which is managed with harvesting of timber on a cycle exceeding 200 years.

The oldest trees are in the Colbert forest (French: la futaie Colbert). It is a 13 ha (32 acres) parcel, in two pieces, the main stand in a regeneration from the end of the 17th century. These are classified as a directed biological reserve; lumber is no longer taken in order to favour biodiversity around deadwood and senescent trees.

The Colbert high forest spanned 73 ha (180 acres) in 1976, of which 60 ha were regenerated from 1976 to 2001.

The oaks of Tronçais, representing some 80% of timber production, are prized for the barrels coopered for cognac and the great wines of Bordeaux. This is linked to several elements, found in other national forests of the Loire basin:

Amongst the more famous coopers using the oaks of Tronçais is Dominique Laurent, who makes what are widely regarded as some of the world's finest barrels. These have been nicknamed "magic casks", by wine taster Michel Bettane. Laurent goes into the Tronçais forest to select the trees (typically around 300 years of age) and transports them to the cooperage himself, thus guaranteeing provenance. He uses the top section of the trunk, the staves are split by hand and air dried for 52 months. Due to hand splitting, the staves have a thickness of 40–45 mm (1.6–1.8 in) compared to commercial barrels at 25–30 mm (0.98–1.18 in). The barrels were developed for Dominique Laurent, and Tardieu Laurent's top cuvees, but a few of the barrels are sold to French and international producers including DRC, Zind Humbrecht, Clos Mogador, Pingus and Beau Fréres. A limited number of barrels are exported to Australia where they are used by the boutique winemaker Torbreck for the making of shiraz.

Sculpted trunks have been installed in the forest's clearings by the National Forests Office (ONF) and the communes of Pays de Tronçais in 2008, 2010 and 2012.

The Fort-Crampel Affair or Gaud-Toqué Affair was a legal scandal in France in 1905 after two colonial officials were accused of arbitrarily executing several native people. This included one execution performed with a cartridge of dynamite at Fort Crampel, in what is now the Central African Republic. Both officials accused, Georges Toqué and Fernand Gaud, were sentenced to five years in prison.

Georges Toqué was a 24-year-old civil servant trained by the Colonial School. In September 1901, he was assigned to Upper Shari (Haut-Chari) as a 3rd class colonial administrator and was in charge of the post.

Fernand Gaud was born in 1874. He was a former pharmacy student from Carpentras. He was sent to the French Congo as part of his military service in September 1900. He held various positions in Bangui, Brazzaville, and then Fort-Crampel, where he was a 1st class clerk for indigenous affairs. Gaud was known to be especially authoritarian and violent the with native people, whom he called niamagounda (“bush beast”). According to him this nickname meant nothing in the Yakoma language and he invented it to call his native subordinates "dirty beasts."

On July 14, 1903, three native people were being held as prisoners at the post of Fort-Crampel in a grain silo which served temporarily as a cell. One of them was Pakpa, who had been arrested two days earlier. He had worked as a guide for Georges Toqué, but the administrator suspected him of treason after an ambush and ordered Fernand Gaud to capture and shoot him. After the arrest, Toqué did not follow through with the execution and locked Pakpa in the silo instead.

Gaud asked if he should release the prisoners in honor of Bastille Day to his superior, Toqué. Toqué ordered the first two to be released. Concerning Pakpa, he said, "Do what you want with him." Believing this implied approval, Gaud decided to execute him. Rather than form a firing squad, he took a cartridge of dynamite intended for blast fishing from his box. He then strapped it to Pakpa with the help of a regional guard, and detonated it. Gaud said during his trial that the dynamite was tied to Pakpa's neck, but other accounts report that it was strapped to the victim's back or anus. Gaud then reported the execution to Toqué, who disapproved of the method of execution but did not punish his subordinate.

At the trial, the defendants recalled that they said before the execution: “It looks stupid; but it will stun the natives. If they don't keep quiet after that, fire from Heaven will rain on the black who did not want to befriend the white." Fernand Gaud went on to say that he wanted those around him to see the absurdity of this death: "No trace of a rifle shot, no trace of an assegai blow. It's by a kind of miracle that the man who didn't want to make friends with the whites died."

The Ministry of Colonies decided that the trial of Gaud and Toqué should be held in Brazzaville in order to minimize its media coverage. The only journalist present was the correspondent for Le Temps Félicien Challaye. He accompanied Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza in his investigation of the crimes. The hearing opened on August 21, 1905.

Gaud remained apathetic and claimed to be ill during the trial. Toqué defended himself aggressively and openly denounced the conditions of colonization. He admitted to subjecting natives to forced labor for portage or tax collection and detaining their families to ensure their obedience. This mistreatment led many native people to die of starvation or disease. As there was no judicial institution in Fort-Crampel, Toqué felt he had the power to dispense justice with the approval of his superiors. The charges were numerous. The court only seriously considered the facts for which Gaud and Toqué had mutually accused each other during the investigation. Toqué wholly blamed Gaud for the execution of Pakpa; Gaud accused Toqué of ordering the murder of the porter Ndagara by throwing him in the falls of the Nana River. Toqué defended himself by pointing out inconsistencies in Gaud's account and by asserting that Ndagara was assassinated by a regional guard acting on his own. Toqué's account was contradicted by correspondence he exchanged with Gaud where he joked about Ndagara's death.

On August 26, 1905, the two defendants were each sentenced to five years in prison, benefiting from lenient sentencing. Fernand Gaud was found guilty of the non-premeditated murder of Pakpa, as well as the beatings several native people; Georges Toqué was found to be an accomplice in the murder of Ndagara. These penalties were perceived as harsh by the white settlers of Brazzaville, who were surprised that so much value was given to the native population.

When news of the events reached Paris in early 1905, the French public and press became engrossed by the scandal. The Journal des Débats proposed an administrative inquiry, and a commission chaired by Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza was appointed. Also appointed were: Charles Hoarau-Desruisseaux, Inspector General of the Colonies; Félicien Challaye, a young philosophy professor representing the Ministry of Education; a member of the Colonial Cabinet; and a delegate of the Minister of Foreign Affairs. The commission received an extraordinary budget of 268,000 francs. On April 5, 1905, Brazza left Marseille and arrived in Libreville to begin the investigation on April 29. Brazza discovered the horrors of the Congo, especially in Ubangi-Shari.

The only written account of what he found comes from Félicien Challaye: women and children were abducted and held in prison camps until the husband or father harvested enough rubber. In Bangui, the hostages were locked up in the garrison and forced to clean. When the men brought the rubber and the quantity seemed insufficient, the hostages are not released. The women paddled alone in canoes, and the Ndris auxiliaries and the regional guards beat them harshly when they stopped. Sixty-six prisoners in Bangui were locked in a six-meter-long hut without light. It was said to reeking of excrement. In the first twelve days, twenty-five died and their bodies were thrown into the river. A newly arrived doctor heard screams and moans, had the hut opened and protested against this brutality. Only twenty-one hostages remained. The twenty-one remaining survivors were sent back to their villages, but several were so weak that they died soon after their release. Near Fort Crampel, Brazza found an abandoned body lying by the side of the path and ordered that it be buried according to custom. When he discovered a concentration camp in Fort Crampel, he collapsed – his moral pain was compounded by diarrhea.

During this time, Hoarau-Desruisseaux was not allowed to meet with Brazza on the false grounds that there was not enough money for travel. This was reflected in Brazza's report No. 148, date August 21, 1905: “I have already expressed serious reservations. I hereby confirm them. They were not motivated by the observation of an isolated fact. During my trip, I acquired the very clear feeling that the Department was not kept informed of the real situation in which the native populations find themselves and of the procedures employed in their regard. Everything was done during my visit to this region to prevent me from learning about it." The young Félicien Challaye was even more severe, feeding the newspaper Le Temps raw, unvarnished articles. The Colonial Administration pretended to ignore Brazza out of embarrassment. Administrator Émile Gentil considered returning to France to defend himself, but the minister asked him to remain and supervise Brazza.

Feeling weaker and deciding that he has seen enough, Brazza himself decided to return after five months. On the return journey, the severity of his fever finally forced Brazza to stop at the hospital in Libreville. He disembarked the boat after making his recommendations to Charles Hoarau-Desruisseaux in order to save “his” Congo and France from shame. Watched over by his wife and by Captain Mangin, doctors determined Brazza did not have long. At his request, a photograph of his son Jacques who died two years earlier at the age of five, was placed on the bedside table. He died around six o'clock in the evening, September 14, 1905, after receiving his last rites.

General Charles de Gaulle held Brazza in high esteem. When France was liberated in 1944, one of his first acts was to significantly increase his family's pension, who had been living in poverty in Algiers. Only two French people have received a life pension for themselves and their direct descendants: Louis Pasteur and Brazza.

The Forêt d'Écouves (French pronunciation: [ fɔʁɛ dekuv ] ; transl. Écouves Forest) is a large area of woodland in the Normandy region of northern France.

The forest is located in the Orne département of France, north of Alençon, between the communes of Carrouges in the west and Sées in the east. It covers an area of approximately 15,000 hectares (58 sq mi), being 18 kilometres (11 mi) east to west and between 8 and 10 kilometres (5.0 and 6.2 mi) wide. It is generally between 100 and 400 metres (330 and 1,310 ft) above sea level, although at one point the elevation rises to 417 metres (1,368 ft) above sea level, which is the highest point in all of Normandy.

The forest comprises part of the Normandie-Maine Regional Natural Park, founded in 1975, along with the Andaines and Perseigne forests.

Approximately 8,200 hectares (20,000 acres) of the land covered by the forest is varied planting of broad-leaved (mainly sessile oak and beech) and pine (mainly Scots pine) trees. It is well known for its varied wildlife, particularly deer and birds. Gray wolves were historically a common feature of the forest, the last recorded capture being in 1882.

The Lothar Storm hit the forest on 26 December 1999, with recorded gusts reaching 166 km/h (103 mph). This devastated 838 hectares (2,070 acres), felling 180,000 m (6,400,000 cu ft) of woodland (approximately 40% deciduous and 60% coniferous trees). The Office national des forêts authorities implemented a replanting programme shortly afterwards to restore the forest habitat.

A significant skirmish took place in the forest in August 1944 as part of the wider battle of the Falaise Pocket. The 2nd French Armoured Division had landed at Utah Beach in Normandy on 1 August 1944, about two months after the D-Day landings, and served under General Patton 's Third Army. Following the recapture of Alençon on 12 August 1944, the Division, led by General Leclerc, proceeded north towards Argentan. The armoured column entered the forest by the south in order to tackle the 9th Panzer Division, which was hidden in the forest. In Le Gateys, on the only road, a Sherman tank was hit by a German anti tank missile, resulting in the death of Colonel Rémy 's eighteen-year-old son, Roger. At La Croix de Medavy, Sherman and Panzers clashed but the French were reinforced by the Putz armoured column which had recently set out from Sées. The following day, on 13 August 1944, the two French armoured columns, named Roumiantzoff and Putz, triumphed.

The small Les Gateys National Cemetery contains 19 soldiers from the 2nd French Armoured Division killed during the battle.

The Écouves Forest is particularly present in the work of artists Georges Lacombe (1868–1916) and Charles Maundrell (1860-?1924)

On the first Sunday of September each year, the forest is host to the Trans Écouves mountain biking event. This meeting of VTT (vélo tout terrain) enthusiasts has been part of the all-terrain biking scene since 1990. The event is usually based from Radon, a small commune in the south-east of the forest.

The Forêt de Bouconne is located in southwest France, on the border of the departments of Gers and Haute-Garonne about thirty kilometres west of Toulouse. The forest has an area of 27 km (10 sq mi) and is managed primarily by the National Forests Office (20 km (7.7 sq mi)). It also includes privately owned woods and woods belonging to the local communes of L'Isle-Jourdain, Lévignac-sur-Save, Montaigut-sur-Save. It is the only large forest near Toulouse. It hosts a leisure centre and outdoor recreation areas.

The Forêt de Bouconne is traversed by many paths used by walkers, mountain bikers and horse riders.

Up until the Middle Ages, the forest extended much further than its present boundaries. To the south it reached the Forêt de Fabas and the Forêt de Mauboussin near Esparron., still-existing fragments of the once much larger forest.

The dominant tree species in the forest are sessile oak, pine and sweet chestnut. Among the other trees present are pedunculate oak, cork oak, alder, hornbeam, lime, service tree, ash, Nordmann fir, red oak and Scots pine.

It is home to wild boar and roe deer. Other smaller mammal species are present such as the genet, fox and badger. The short-toed eagle hunts on its periphery.

The forêt de Brotonne (French pronunciation: [ fɔʁɛ də bʁɔtɔn ], Brotonne forest), in Normandy, France, is situated to the west of Rouen in a vast meander of the Seine, accessible by the pont de Brotonne.

It is a part of the Parc naturel régional des Boucles de la Seine normande (Regional natural parc of Boucles de la Seine normande), which allows for the safeguarding of a large natural space stretching from the banlieue of Rouen to the commune of Marais-Vernier.

Today the forest encompasses an area 12 kilometres (7.5 mi) in length and 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) in width, and is divided by multiple forest roads. It contains more than ninety species of trees, notably oaks and beech. The state-owned section covers more than 6,700 hectares (17,000 acres) (out of a total 7,200 hectares (18,000 acres)). The forest is one of the largest beech forests in France, with 62% of its area of its surface covered in beech. In addition to beech and oaks, the forest also contains Scots Pines and Hornbeams. In addition to the trees, the forest also contains a windmill (the moulin-tour de Hauville) and a communal cottage (four à pain) of La Haye-De-Routot. The forest's western edge is bordered by the A131 autoroute.

During the Ancient Roman period, the remainder of the primary forests were cleared (as deforestation had already most likely begun during the Neolithic Period in order to build large domains consisting of several farms). These were linked to new cities which were growing along the banks of the Seine, along with a new palace named le palais d' Arelaune. Some of the houses constructed during this period measured up to 150 metres (160 yd) long and 80 metres (87 yd) wide and were elegantly decorated.

At the entrance of the forest on the other side of the Seine, the Fontenelle Abbey was constructed during the reign of Clovis II, which marked the beginning of evangelicalism in the area. Later, during the reign of Thierry III, Condède, a Breton recluse saint moved to an island by the forest where he lived for fifteen years, attracting a number of pilgrims who continued to come even after his death to visit his tomb.

The Forêt de Mormal (Forest of Mormal) is a forest in France, near the Franco-Belgian border. Spanning over 9,100 hectares, it is the largest forest in the Nord department.

It is best known historically for its role during the British Expeditionary Force's retreat from Mons in August 1914. Its dense terrain and perceived lack of passable roads forced I and II Corps of the British army to divide, keeping the two corps separated for several days. Despite this, some British units did navigate the forest, while elements of the advancing German army passed through it as well, taking Haig 's I Corps by surprise.

It is the largest forest in the Nord area, at 9135 hectares. It features extensive forest cover, primarily composed of oak, beech, and hornbeam trees. A network of small streams flows from a central ridge, contributing to the forest's biodiversity. This area is a significant reservoir of wildlife, including the department's only deer population, wild boar, and various bird species.

The once vast Forêt de Rouvray (French pronunciation: [ fɔʁɛ də ʁuvʁɛ ], "Forest of Rouvray", from Gallo-Romance ROBORETU “oak wood″ or more probably French rouvre “sessile oak” and old suffix -ey (ill spelled as -ay, modern -aie), meaning a “collection of the same trees”) was a forest that extended from west of Paris in the Île-de-France region westwards into Normandy, virtually unbroken, threaded by the winding loops of the River Seine, traversed by forest traces and dotted with isolated woodland hamlets, as far as Rouen. A rural relict is the 5 100 ha of the protected Forêt Domaniale de la Londe-Rouvray, at Les Essarts, Normandy, near Saint-Étienne-du-Rouvray, south of Rouen, on an upland massif above the left bank of the Seine, which makes a wide arc enclosing it. On the right bank, to the west, is what is left of the Forêt de Roumare (the Rouennais), another former royal forest.

According to his early biographers, it was while riding in the forest of Rouvray that William the Conqueror decided to assert his rights to the throne of England.

The old-growth forest that extended to the floodplain of the Seine was incrementally cleared by the monks of a congregation established about 1154 at the priory of Grammont, facing the city from the left bank of the Seine. Forest was cleared also at the abbey of Saint-Julien and others. At the end near Paris, in 1424 the abbess of Montmartre defended the abbey's traditional right to forest products in the stretch of "forêt de Rouvray" that is now the Bois de Boulogne.

In February 1389, Hector de Chartres was named maître des eaux et des forêts in Normandy and Picardy by Charles VI of France and was charged with verifying and authentifying the old customs of the king's forests users. Along with Jean de Garancières, who was also maître des eaux et forêts at the time, he began in 1402 the general inspection of the king's forests in Normandy. According to a recent publication by Ch. Maneuvrier, D. Gardelle and B. Nardeux, it was Jean de Garancières, and not Hector de Chartres, who visited Rouvray, along with most forest in the region.

However, by the beginning of the sixteenth century, the forest had been decimated: a municipal decree of Rouen, of 24 April 1506, estimated, perhaps with some exaggeration, that if demands were met, within the space of three years the forest of Rouvray would be gone; the pressures came from timber needed for house construction and shipbuilding downstream, and for charcoal. In 1613 a decree from the Conseil du Roi specified that the products of Rouvray and other woods nearby should be limited to the uses of Rouen, but in the seventeenth century, tile-works and pottery kilns set up round the edges of the forest were consuming its timber for fuel. The oaks were replaced by birch ; but fern, bracken and broom invaded the depleted soils, and the aristocratic owners were replaced by local bourgeois who saw the woodlands as a resource.

At the time of the reordering of the badly cut-over forest in 1669, it was estimated that the oldest of the trees was about twenty years old, with most growth ranging from eight to fourteen years. Little was done to stem the erosion of the forests; the wars of Louis XIV took their share of timber of any size, and the cold winters of the " Little Ice Age " required firewood for Rouen. By 1750, three of every eight arpents (3 ha) of "forest" was actually irremediably turned to open wasteland and heath on the impoverished soils. That was the year that Nicolas Roneau, Grand maître des eaux et de forêts began planting open heath with chestnuts and pines— the first planted pine woodlands in Normandy— as a first step towards a managed forest.

The Revolution saw the woodlands informally exploited once more, as a "public good". In 1803, engineer Phillipe Lebon was granted a concession of a section of pine forest to produce tar for the French Navy, which later passed to his widow Cornélie Lebon-de Brambilla.

The introduction of British coal for industrial purposes in the nineteenth century was what really saved the remaining reserves of woodland. In the twentieth century, the Second World War, the construction of highways, the new phenomena of forest fires and acid rain, which selectively weakened conifers, have also taken their toll. Nevertheless, a third of the territory of the Rouennais (12,150 hectares or 30,000 acres) is wooded, in one of the most densely forested regions of northwest France.

Today the remnant termed the forêt de La Londe-Rouvray, "La Londe" reserved for the western section, is protected by a decree of 18 March 1993, supplemented by a decree of 14 September 2006.

A public, informative demonstration Maison des forêts, built by Agglo de Rouen (the agglomération rouennaise) to Haute qualité environnementale (HQE, "High environmental quality") standards, was opened in March 2008.

The Forêt des écrivains combattants (transl. forest of fighting writers) is a forest in the French department of Hérault, named in honor of writers who died during the World Wars.

The forest is situated in the mountainous massif of Caroux-Espinouse. It spans the territories of Combes and Rosis (Hérault). It is currently included within the Haut-Languedoc Regional Nature Park.

In 1930 floods devastated much of southwestern France, including the department of Hérault. Deforestation was blamed, prompting public authorities to advocate replanting. The Association of Combatant Writers, led by Claude Farrère, decided in 1931 to contribute to this effort by establishing the Forêt des écrivains combattants, planted with pine and cedar trees across 135 hectares. They partnered with the Touring Club de France (TCF).

The project was initiated by Emmanuel Bourcier, a writer and veteran, supported by nurseryman Francisque Lacarelle, who personally funded the planting of ten thousand trees. The aim was to preserve the memory of writers who died during the First World War.

In July 1938 alleys and markers bearing the names of deceased writers were inaugurated, along with monumental works by sculptor Paul Moreau-Vauthier (1871–1936): a stele and, in the center of a clearing, a six-meter table depicting a Croix de Guerre. Writer and future collaborator Paul Chack, association president since 1936, welcomed two serving ministers: Auguste Champetier de Ribes (veterans) and Henri Queuille (agriculture).

On 13 July 1952 Pierre Chanlaine, president of the Association of Combatant Writers, transferred forest ownership to the state. It became a state forest and was developed as a recreational site. Names of writers who died during the Second World War were added.

In 1983 wildfires devastated nearly a quarter of the forest. Subsequent replanting and new visitor facilities were implemented.

On 18 November 2010, a convention for enhancing the massif was signed at the Croix de Guerre in the Forêt des écrivains combattants between the Hérault General Council, the National Forestry Office, and the communes of Combes and Rosis.

On 30 September 2016 the rehabilitated site was inaugurated by senior officials involved in the 2010 protocol. All old scattered steles in the forest were replaced with new ones made of local stone, Madale stone, and are now grouped on either side of a newly concreted loop path through the undergrowth, about 1.7 km in length. Thirty steles have, since the inauguration, experimentally featured a sticker with a Flash code, or QR code, allowing access to specific information about the writers (biography, literary works, and for some, an excerpt from their major work). Panels by the National Forestry Office around the monumental Croix de Guerre provide visitors with information on the forest's origin, the Association of Combatant Writers, and the layout of the steles. Officially, this forest is known as the Forêt domaniale des écrivains combattants (FDEC).

Among the 757 writers who died for France (560 during the First World War and 197 during the Second), and whose names are inscribed at the Panthéon, sixty-six have their names on a stele in the forest, including three women, Bertie Albrecht, Marietta Martin, and Irène Némirovsky.

Prominent honored writers include French figures Paul Drouot, Charles Péguy, Alain-Fournier, Pierre Brossolette, Pierre Leroy-Beaulieu, Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, Robert Desnos, Jacques Decour, Émile Détanger (Émile Nolly)...

Several foreign writers from allied countries are also named, including poets John McCrae (Canada) and Alan Seeger (United States), as well as novelist Gabriele D'Annunzio (Italy).

Some alleys in the forest are named after unknown authors. Roland Dorgelès wrote that it seemed "right to honor the young, the unrecognized, the beginners, who left behind only a few scattered pages: those of whom I once said they spilled little ink, but all their blood".

The Fouchet Plan (French: Plan Fouchet) was an unsuccessful plan written by Christian Fouchet, France's ambassador to Denmark, and proposed by French President Charles de Gaulle in 1961 as part of de Gaulle's grand design for Europe at the time. The idea was to form a new 'Union of States' between France, Italy, Germany and the Benelux countries, an intergovernmental alternative to the European Communities which had been created a few years prior. De Gaulle feared a loss of French national influence in the Communities, which were becoming increasingly supranational so the plan was an attempt to keep the balance of power in France's favor. The success of the European Communities and the lack of enthusiasm of other states for the idea stopped the implementation of the Fouchet Plan.

The first draft of The Fouchet Plan was proposed in 1961. The plan called for a "Union of the European peoples" "without supranational institutions." It is divided into five sections ("Titles I – V"), summarized below. Title I outlines the "aims" of the Union. Title II describes the institutions, their composition, and their various powers and relationships to one another. Title III describes the "Obligations of Member States". Title IV describes the Finances of the Union, and Title V describes General provisions.

The plan set forth two major aims of the Union: a common foreign policy and a common defence policy. Other aims of the Union were the development of the "common heritage" of the Member States and "the protection of the values on which their civilization rests".

The plan proposed three institutions of the Union: a "Council", a "European Parliament", and a "European Political Commission."

The Council would deliberate on questions posed by Member States and adopt decisions unanimously. However, if one or two members are absent, it would "not prevent a decision from being taken." The Council would meet twice every four months, once at the Head of State or Government level and once at the Foreign Minister level. De Gaulle proposed that the decisions of the council be binding on Member States, but did not propose a method of enforcement. Should a Member State abstain from the adoption of a decision, that decision would not be enforced on that state. However, these states would be able to opt in at any time.

The parliament would deliberate "on matters concerning the aims of the Union", as outlined in Title I, Article II. It would submit recommendations and would address oral or written questions to the Council. The Council would be free to act independently of the parliament, but must reply to parliament recommendations within four months.

The main role of the Political Commission of the Union would be to assist the Council by preparing its deliberations, carrying out its decisions, and performing the duties the Council entrusts to it. The Commission would consist of "senior officials of the Foreign Affairs departments of each Member State."

Title III called for cooperation between the Member States, mandating that they work towards the aims of the Union.

The budget of the Union would be "drawn up by the Council each year", and would be funded by contributions from the Member States. Article 13 lays out the proportional contribution of each Member State at the time.

Title V lays out how amendments should be made to the Plan, how they would be ratified, provisions for admission of new Member states, and other standard details.

A second draft of the Fouchet plan was proposed when it appeared that the first would prove unsuccessful. Some concessions would have to be made in terms of what de Gaulle wanted for the union, its structure, and the French role. Much like the original Fouchet plan, the second draft continued to push for intergovernmental structures. It highlighted the importance of the individual member states. The second draft aimed at common interests among certain states, rather than ensuring their close cooperation in predetermined fields. The second draft also called for a structural change through the addition of Committees of Ministers. Two committees are explicitly mentioned: a committee for foreign affairs and a committee for education. These two groups were to meet four times a year and would be under the supervision of the proposed council. The council would also be able to create new committees when they deemed it necessary. Lastly, although it is not emphasized, France's role was slightly diminished and the European Political Commission would no longer meet in Paris.

The driving political force behind the Fouchet Plan was French President Charles de Gaulle. Concerned about the growing supranational tendencies of the European Economic Community, he sought to implement a new intergovernmental vision of cooperation which would put decision-making power back into the hands of the nation-states. After convincing the other five heads of state to agree to regular meetings, de Gaulle pushed the idea of further political cooperation. Headed by the French ambassador to Denmark, Christian Fouchet, a committee assembled to discuss the French recommendations. All of the suggestions put forward increased the intergovernmental nature of the organization, but the first draft of the plan also included a provision for a common foreign policy. This last aspect is especially telling: while the rest of "The Six" valued their membership in NATO, de Gaulle made no effort to hide his hostility towards it and what he considered to be undue American influence in Europe.

In 1959, when de Gaulle began to focus his attention away from France and Algeria and more on Europe as a whole, he began to propose more regular meetings of the six member states. He also suggested that the meetings be backed by a secretariat. West Germany and Italy in particular looked favourably on these proposals. However, when de Gaulle first introduced the Fouchet Plan in 1961, it faced opposition from many of the member states. Adenauer and de Gaulle had a close relationship and during de Gaulle's term in office, Franco-German relations improved significantly. However Adenauer and his Dutch counterparts were worried that the Fouchet Plan would divert power from the EEC and NATO.

West Germany was also opposed to de Gaulle's idea that the plans be ratified by popular referendum on the grounds that it was not constitutional. Despite Adenauer's friendship with de Gaulle, West Germany was never convinced that the Fouchet Plan was the best course of action. However, though the plan fell through, Adenauer and de Gaulle were able to establish the Treaty of Friendship in 1963 to strengthen ties between France and West Germany. This agreement would not only be beneficial to the French and West Germans, but also the entire EEC.

Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg, collectively known as Benelux, were against the Fouchet Plan. They were afraid that the proposal removed too much power from the Commission, the supranational governing body, and would rely heavily on intergovernmentalism. They worried that the Fouchet Plan would weaken the Treaty of Rome and would be a step away from integration. The downgrade in power would have afforded France more opportunity to influence the other nations. Benelux feared that this would allow de Gaulle and France to dominate the EEC and push issues important to their own national interests.

A second main issue was the speed with which France was trying to force the plan through. The Benelux countries thought that a decision of this magnitude should be deferred until after Britain's accession talks, which started in 1961, were completed. De Gaulle had been speaking closely with German Chancellor Adenauer at this time and Benelux worried that the collaboration of the two countries would shift the power of an intergovernmental organization towards France and West Germany. British accession would have balanced the power structure within the EEC more equally and would not have allowed France to dominate the talks.

The Netherlands in particular thought that the Fouchet Plan was an attempt to subvert the power of NATO. The Plan's common defence policy would have directly conflicted with NATO's mission and directives, so the Netherlands worried that the plan was an attempt to weaken NATO's influence and to reassert France as a military power.

The Foundation for Strategic Research (Fondation pour la recherche stratégique or FRS) is an independent French think-tank. It was founded by Pierre Joxe (then Minister of Defence) in 1992-1993 by merging the FED (Fondation pour les Études de Défense or Foundation for Defence Studies) and the CREST (Centre de Recherches et d'Études sur les Stratégies et les Technologies or Centre for Study of Strategies and Technologies).

Its missions are to analyze strategic and international security issues, notably military and defense-related issues, and to contribute to the strategic debate in France as well as to the diffusion of French ideas abroad. It is the only major independent French think-tanks to work exclusively on these questions. It has furthermore been described by Hadrien Desuin as having a neoconservative orientation.

Its experts (44 researchers including 22 permanent ones) cover the whole range of security and defense issues, from international relations to scientific, technological and operational questions, as well as defense industry and economy, the analysis of cross-cutting threats (terrorism, cyberattacks, NBC proliferation …) as well as health and environmental risks.

Its partners are public and private: French government partners include the Ministry of Armed Forces, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Development, Prime Minister’s Office, Atomic Energy Commission, National Space Studies Center, National Air & Space Research Office, National Institute for Health and Medical Research ; European Union institutions include the European Commission, European External Action Service, European Parliament, European Space Agency, and the European Defense Agency ; international organizations include the United Nations and North Atlantic Treaty Organization. The Foundation also works with French and European private sector firms, as well as, for specific projects, the governments of some foreign countries Australia, Finland, Japan, Poland, the United Kingdom, etc.

In 2016, the Foundation's resources amounted to 3.68 million euros. Research funding originated from ministries (64%), EU and international organizations (14%), public agencies (10%), private sector firms (9%), and various sources (3%: projects with other think-tanks).

In November 2019, foundation researcher Valerie Niquet was sued by Huawei after she made comments relating to the company in two television programs in February of that year. Huawei took issue with Niquet asserting that Huawei had ties with the Chinese government. Suits were also filed as defamation lawsuits in March 2019 against a broadcast journalist and a wireless network expert, all of whom commented on television.

The chairman of the board is Bruno Racine.

Fourierism (/ ˈ f ʊər i ə r ɪ z əm /) is the systematic set of economic, political, and social beliefs first espoused by French intellectual Charles Fourier (1772–1837). It is based on a belief in the inevitability of communal associations of people who work and live together as part of the human future. Fourier's supporters called his doctrines associationism. Political contemporaries and subsequent scholarship have identified Fourier's set of ideas as a form of utopian socialism.

Never tested in practice at any scale in Fourier's lifetime, Fourierism enjoyed a brief boom in the United States during the mid-1840s owing largely to the efforts of his American popularizer, Albert Brisbane (1809–1890), and the American Union of Associationists, but ultimately failed as a social and economic model. The system was briefly revived in the mid-1850s by Victor Considerant (1808–1893), a French disciple of Fourier's who unsuccessfully attempted to relaunch the model in Texas in the 1850s.

In contrast to the thoroughly secular communitarianism of his contemporary Robert Owen (1771–1858), Charles Fourier 's thinking starts from a presumption of the existence of God and a divine social order on Earth in accordance with the will of God. Fourier saw himself as a figure of world-historical importance akin to Isaac Newton for having identified the fundamental force driving social development, which he called "passional attraction" (attraction passionelle).

Fourier believed that the structure of the world—its economic, political, and social system—inhibited humanity from the pursuit of its God-given individual passions, thereby preventing it from achieving universal harmony. Rather than seeking to mold individuals to fit the existing form of economic, political, and social life, as had been the traditional goal of the educational and what we today call the socialization process, Fourier believed that instead the form of economic, political, and social life should itself be altered to fit the inherent passions of the individual, since these economic and social structures were manmade and not God-given.

Through conscious understanding of this process, which Fourier called "social science", new economic and social formations called "associations" could be created, structured so as to allow people to follow their passions and thereby advance toward universal harmony.

Fourier listed 12 basic passions of humanity grouped around three branches of a "passional tree": "luxurious passions" of the five senses; "affective passions" of love, friendship, and parenthood; and "distributive passions", such as the need for political intrigue, the need for variety, and the pure enthusiasm of spiritual pursuits. The sum of all these passions Fourier called "unityism", characterized as a universal feeling of benevolence and fraternity. Although fettered and mutated by Civilization, the free development of these passions would be allowed in the bright future world, Fourier believed.

Fourier believed himself the discoverer of the universal laws of societal evolution, theorizing the existence of 32 distinct periods beginning with Edenism and continuing through Savagery, Patriarchate, and Barbarism. Each of these stages was held to have distinctive material and ideological features, with the treatment afforded to women a particular marker of one stage from the next. Of far greater concern to Fourier and his disciples was the current 5th form of society, Modern Society, as well as three emerging forms believed to be just around the corner: 6 (Guarantism), 7 (Simple Association), and 8 (Compound Association).

"Modern Society", from the Fourierist perspective, was based upon capital and labor and the buying and selling of goods through a network of useless middlemen. With a sneer, Fourier called contemporary society "Civilization", deeming it the cause of fraud, waste, and human unhappiness. The "isolated family" he deemed inefficient, the wage system demoralizing and exploitative, and organized religion corrupt. An entire book was written detailing 36 types of bankruptcy and 76 sorts of "cuckoldry" to which humanity was subjected by its system of so-called Civilization, which Fourier saw as wholly unacceptable.

Fourier believed that, fortunately for humanity, Civilization was a fleeting economic formation, soon to vanish. The emerging socioeconomic structure of "Guarantism" would be based upon the fundamental principle of universal insurance, Fourier believed, which was to guarantee the security of capital and the right of labor to gainful employment. Petty traders and speculative profiteers would be eliminated from the economy in this new system of organized production and distribution.

The next stage in the Fourierist schema, "Simple Association", was to be based upon the cooperative enterprise of like bodies of farmers or artisans or industrial workers as distinct groups. Farmers would associate with other farmers, artisans with other artisans, industrial producers with other industrial producers, producing and selling their goods collectively. Simultaneously, these economic organizations would for the first time include the association of family living and domestic labor, thereby eliminating the economic waste and social isolation of individual living. Wage labor would be eliminated, as the members of these associations would be co-proprietors, producing in tandem and sharing alike in the proceeds of their efforts.

Subsequently, the Fourierists believed, there would emerge "Compound Association" or "Harmonism". Under Compound Association all pursuits would join in large associations that would shatter all economic lines. One Fourierian enthusiast described the system of Compound Association in the following terms:

Every interest is provided for, by an organization which embraces all details of production and distribution; and a system of natural and integral education is instituted—that is, a complete system of physical, mental, and emotional development, intimately connected with daily pursuits, provided for; that art and the science which underlies art may be taught together; that theory and practice may go hand in hand and that the individual may have the command of his whole personal power and enjoy the conditions of expressing it.

Every individual in these Compound Associations would be free to take part in the labor of a dozen or more different work groups, according to their interests and pleasure, over the course of any year. What Marxists called alienation of labor would thereby be eliminated and production boosted, since "a man having himself on his own side works with more force, greater skill, and better effect than one who works against his inclinations," in the words of one Fourierian.

Fourier believed that economic output was the product of three factors: labor, capital, and talent. Each of these, he argued, was important to production and needed to be compensated as such for the general prosperity of the organized association. The communal associations based upon Fourier's ideas were generally formed as joint stock companies, and their investor-members were compensated separately on the basis both of amount of capital invested and amount of labor performed, with labor time given a range of values based on both the necessity and difficulty of the work and the degree of talent and skill with which it was performed.

Fourier's prescription was the establishment of communities called Phalanxes or Associations in the countryside. Housed inside gigantic serpentine edifices called " phalanstries " would be 1620 people of various occupations and social classes. The residents were to be arranged in occupational "series"—major divisions such as between agrarians and industrial producers and artisans—that would be further divided into smaller "groups" to cooperatively conduct specific aspects of the work. Mobility of the individual between various groups and even sections according to personal desires was to be allowed.

Fundamental to the Fourierian ideal was the notion of collective living and the rational performance of domestic duties. Individual households were seen as both wasteful in terms of duplicated effort performed and isolating of individuals—standing in the way of true cooperation and social harmony.

Remaining in unpublished manuscript form until 1967 were Fourier's imaginative predictions about degrees of sexual promiscuity and the institutions and moral codes that would emerge to govern love and interpersonal relationships in the harmonious world of Compound Association.

The Fourierian system of associations was based on voluntary participation and expansion through the force of example. Once founded, associations would demonstrate their practical merits and inspire emulation, with the first model communities replicating and spreading from localities to regions to nations and internationally. Never in his writings does Fourier appeal to governmental legislation or coercive power of any sort, instead believing association to be a natural and wholly voluntary structure, part of a Divine Social Code.

Moreover, the achievement on an international scale would eliminate war. Instead, industrial armies would form to engage in gigantic reclamation projects, irrigating deserts, restoring vegetation, draining marshes and cultivating the land. The elimination of disease would follow, as such banes as cholera, typhus, and yellow fever would vanish with the unhealthful places whence they originated before society's restorative efforts. Through the planting of vast swaths of timber, cropland would be protected and the Earth's climate would be slowly transformed, Fourier believed.

Fourier's theoretical system, described by one scholar as "vast and eccentric", was only part of the output of what another called "a most riotous and unpruned imagination". Fourier believed that in the new world people would live for 144 years, that new species of friendly and pacifistic animals such as "anti-lions" would emerge, and that over time human beings would develop long and useful tails. Fourier also professed a belief in the ability of human souls to migrate between physical and "aromal" worlds. Such thinking was set aside during the last 15 years of Fourier's life, when he instead began to concentrate on testing his economic and social ideas.

Fourier's disciples, including Albert Brisbane and Victor Considerant, later pared down his writings into a comprehensible system for economic and social organization, with the Fourierist movement experiencing a brief boom in the United States during the mid-1840s, when some 30 Fourierist associations were established.

The Fourierist doctrine of attractions, correspondences, and analogies was identified with esoteric doctrines like Martinism by Fourierists like Just Muiron from an early point on. Louis Reybaud, the author of the first study of the socialists, perceived Fourierism and other early socialist schools in the context of mysticism, magic, kabbalah, or the occult sciences. Fourierism exerted a decisive influence on new religious movements like Spiritualism and Occultism after 1848. Before that, Fourierism had already coined the ideas of US-American spiritualist thinkers such as Andrew Jackson Davis. Eliphas Lévi, who is regarded as the founder of modern occultism, was an adherent of Fourierism in the 1840s. Until the early 20th century, there was a strong Fourierist presence in French socialist-spiritualist circles.

Frainc-Comtou (French : franc-comtois) is a Romance language of the langues d'oïl language family spoken in the Franche-Comté region of France and in the Canton of Jura and Bernese Jura in Switzerland.

Jean Priorat 's Li abrejance de l'ordre de chevalerie is written in Old French with Frainc-Comtou features.

Although Franc-Comtois remained primarily a spoken language for centuries, written texts in the language are known from the 17th century, and some date back to the 16th century. The oldest known text in Franc-Comtois is the Chant du Rosemont, a ballad dating from 1525. It commemorates Généry, also called Jean Neury, and Richard Prévôt, the leader of a group of peasants who took part in the German Peasants' War that affected the German-speaking world that year. Another early example is the Dialogue de Porte Noire et de Pilory sur la prise de Besançon par les Français, dating from 1668, which concerns the capture of Besançon by French forces.

Contrary to the common image of Franc-Comtois as an exclusively oral language, it was therefore also written. Nevertheless, French imposed itself early among the elites in Franche-Comté, while Franc-Comtois remained for many centuries the principal language of the common people.

The 19th and 20th centuries were marked by a major decline of the language, both in Franche-Comté and in the canton of Jura. This decline was due in particular to school policies that promoted French over the other languages spoken in France. In written texts, Franc-Comtois was often influenced lexically by French.

By the late 20th and early 21st centuries, the language had largely disappeared from public life. It survived mainly among small groups of speakers, often active in associations, for some of whom it remained a mother tongue.

In 2021, Antoine de Saint-Exupéry 's novel The Little Prince was translated into Franc-Comtois by the Comtois writer Billy Fumey under the title Lou péquignot prïnce. The edition was printed and sold in 600 copies, making it one of the best-selling books in the Franc-Comtois language. In 2024, another Franc-Comtois translation was published by the Swiss writer Michel Choffat under the title Lo Ptét Prïnce.

Today, the number of people who understand or speak Franc-Comtois is estimated at up to 5,000, including about 4,000 in Switzerland and 1,000 in Franche-Comté.

The Franc-Comtois language area is bounded:

Like all regional and minority languages of France, Franc-Comtois has no institutional status in France. The association Union des Patoisants en Langue Romane organises courses for teaching Franc-Comtois.

Several groups and associations work on a small scale to make the language better known, especially through contributions to reviews and through the organisation of courses.

According to a linguistic map of Alsace in 1910, the language area extended in the arrondissement of Altkirch over ten communes of the canton of Dannemarie, Bellemagny, Bretten, Chavannes-sur-l'Étang, Eteimbes, Magny, Montreux-Jeune, Montreux-Vieux, Romagny, Saint-Cosme and Valdieu-Lutran, and over two communes of the canton of Ferrette, Courtavon and Levoncourt.

Today, Franc-Comtois speakers are still active in Alsace.

The General Council of Haut-Rhin adopted a policy in favor of bilingualism by signing a four-party agreement for 2007–2013. One of its aims was to make the Écomusée d'Alsace an experimental example of a bilingual model, with signage representing all the dialects of Alsace. The agreement referred to names in French, in Hochdeutsch, and, depending on the area, in Elsasserditsch or Alsatian, in Roman for the Montreux-Jeune, Montreux-Vieux and Valdieu-Lutran area, in Welche for the Lapoutroie and Le Bonhomme area, or in Alsatian Yiddish.

This initiative represented an early recognition of a Franc-Comtois dialect, called Roman in Alsace, and could potentially be extended at departmental level.

In Franche-Comté, the Franc-Comtois language area extends over Doubs in its northern part, Haute-Saône, the northern part of Jura, and the Territoire de Belfort.

The boundary between Franco-Provençal and Franc-Comtois corresponds approximately to the historical frontier between the Bailliage du Milieu and the Bailliage d'Aval, in the territorial organisation that existed before 1790.

Franc-Comtois remains little known even among people from Franche-Comté themselves. It is relatively uncommon in local toponymy. Only one village in Haute-Saône, Anjeux, has a motto in Comtois: Ai Anjeux lo diale y cueut, meaning “At Anjeux the devil cooks”. The motto alludes to the 17th-century witchcraft trials in which many alleged witches were burned.

Although regional French expressions remain widely used in Franche-Comté, the region seems largely to have forgotten its own language. Nevertheless, an increasing number of groups have emerged to defend local dialects.

On 7 December 2018, the Federal Council approved Switzerland's seventh report on the implementation of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. Following a recommendation by the Council of Europe to recognise Franco-Provençal, to which most dialects of Romandy historically belong, as a regional or minority language, the Federal Council extended this recognition to Franc-Comtois. Both Franco-Provençal and Franc-Comtois are now officially recognised in Switzerland as minority languages.

Franc-Comtois is the traditional language of the north-east of the Bernese Jura, the French-speaking region of the canton of Bern, more specifically the northern part of the former Moutier District. In the south-eastern part of the region, Franco-Provençal is the traditional idiom, while in the central part there is a transitional dialect between Franc-Comtois and Franco-Provençal.

The language has relatively significant activity in the canton of Jura, especially through the existence of several associations that protect and keep Franc-Comtois alive. Nevertheless, the language was neglected for almost two centuries. It developed differently from the other dialects of Romandy because of the historical polarisation between the Germanic language imposed by Bern and French, becoming a symbol of resistance.

According to Andres Kristol, at the end of the 20th century 3.1% of the population of the canton still spoke Franc-Comtois. According to Radio Télévision Suisse, in 2018, when the language was officially recognised, up to 4,000 people were Franc-Comtois speakers, representing about 5.5% of the canton's population.

Article 42.2 of the Constitution of the Republic and Canton of Jura refers to the language under the term “patois” :

They shall ensure and contribute to the conservation, enrichment and enhancement of Jura heritage, especially patois.

On 26 April 1997, Jean-Marie Moine proposed considering the creation of a study circle for Comtois within the Société jurassienne d'émulation (SJE). Moine has been responsible for the circle since its creation. The circle was not founded until 28 April 2001. Named Voiyïn, meaning “regrowth” in French, it meets regularly four times a year.

In 1956, Joseph Badet, better known as Djôsèt Barotchèt, founded the Réton di Ciôs-di-Doubs, or “Echo of Clos-du-Doubs”, an association of Franc-Comtois speakers. He was committed to the defence and preservation of Comtois and wrote nineteen plays, as well as many poems and songs set to music by Paul Montavon and Ernest Beuchat. He also gave Comtois courses, took part in radio programmes and wrote many newspaper articles. In 1983, he received the Jura Literary Prize.

The Franc-Comtois language is composed of several dialects:

In the canton of Jura, six local speech varieties are distinguished by geographical area, four of which may be attached to the Franc-Comtois dialect area: the Franches-Montagnes, the Delémont valley, Ajoie and the former provostry of Moutier-Grandval. This observation makes it possible to add a seventh dialect area in the Bernese Jura.

A Besançon speech variety may also be distinguished, or more specifically a Bousbot variety, named after the inhabitants of the Battant district. It developed in literature from the end of the 17th century with the Noëls, the Crèche and the Jacquemardade. This typical speech of Besançon is characterised by great closeness to French and by a vocabulary much less influenced by Germanic languages.

France has been a member of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) since December 27, 1945. A key milestone occurred when France received the first IBRD loan on May 9, 1947, receiving $250 million to rebuild its infrastructure ravaged by the Second World War. Currently, France is a member of all five World Bank Group institutions.

As a result of World War II, the economy of France was shattered. The conflict had claimed the lives of over half a million French citizens, leaving entire cities in ruins and critical infrastructure devastated. In addition to labor shortages, the country was unable to produce coal due to the lack of modern machinery forcing the country to import it.

Charles de Gaulle, Chairman of the Provisional Government of the French Republic, set up the General Planning Commission on January 3 and appointed Jean Monnet as its first commissioner, in response to the dire situation. Monnet remained undeterred by the war's devastation and developed a compelling vision to revitalize France's economy. A key component of Monnet's Modernization and Re-equipment Plan was the rebuilding and modernization of key infrastructure sectors, including coal, electricity, cement, agricultural machinery, transport, and steel. The ambitious goal was to increase productivity by 30% above the pre-war levels of 1938 within just four years.

The French Ambassador to the United States, Henri Bonnet, requested a $500 million loan from Acting IBRD President Emilio Collado on May 31, 1946. Along with this request, France submitted a detailed outline of the Plan Monnet. The loan's primary purpose was to provide funds for the import and purchase of equipment and materials that are essential for the extensive reconstruction and modernization of the country.

Since France is now considered a high-income country, it is not eligible for funding but instead plays a large role in financial contributions. France provides money to the World Bank as a member nation. These donations are necessary for the institution to function and be able to help and financially assist developing nations. Their monetary payments, infrastructure, energy, agriculture, health care, and education are just a few of the industries in which France is renowned for its prowess. The nation frequently works with the World Bank on a range of initiatives and projects, offering technical support, exchanging knowledge, and helping to plan and implement development programs.

One example of France's partnership efforts is involvement in strengthening West African coastal areas' to the impacts of climate change. The World Bank and the French Ministry of Environment, Energy, and the Sea unveiled a joint initiative to aid West African nations in increasing the climate change resilience of their coastal regions and in identifying investment opportunities for the sustainable growth of their "blue" economies. The partnership is a response to calls from West African nations for assistance from other nations in resolving a variety of difficulties, including coastal erosion and floods, overexploitation of natural resources, marine and coastal pollution, increasing urbanization, and unsustainable land use. In order to gather money for climate resilience in coastal zones, it relies on promises and awareness-raising initiatives put out by the World Bank and France during the Paris climate change summit.

In the history of France, the period from 1789 to 1914, dubbed the " long 19th century " by the historian Eric Hobsbawm, extends from the French Revolution to the brink of World War I.

Throughout this period, France underwent significant transformations that reshaped its geography, demographics, language, and economic landscape, marking a period of profound change and development. The French Revolution and Napoleonic eras fundamentally altered French society, promoting centralization, administrative uniformity across departments, and a standardized legal code. Education also centralized, emphasizing technical training and meritocracy, despite growing conservatism among the aristocracy and the church. Wealth concentration saw the richest 10 percent owning most of the nation's wealth. The 19th century saw France expanding to nearly its modern territorial limits through annexations and overseas imperialism, notably in Algeria, Indochina, and Africa. Despite territorial gains, France faced challenges, including slow population growth, compared to its European neighbors, and a late industrialization that saw a shift from rural to urban living and the rise of an industrial workforce. The loss of Alsace and Lorraine to Germany in the Franco-Prussian War further fueled nationalistic sentiments and set the stage for future conflicts.

The period was also marked by significant linguistic and educational reforms, which sought to unify the country through language and secular education, contributing to a stronger national identity. Economically, France struggled to match the industrial growth rates of other advanced nations, maintaining a more traditional economy longer than its counterparts. Politically, the century was characterized by the end of the ancien régime, the rise and fall of the First and Second Empires, the tumultuous establishment of the Third Republic, and the radical experiment of the Paris Commune, reflecting the ongoing struggle between revolutionary ideals and conservative restoration. The Third Republic embarked on modernizing France, with educational reforms and attempts to create a unified national identity. Foreign policy focused on isolation of Germany and forming alliances, leading to the Triple Entente. Domestically, issues like the Dreyfus affair highlighted the nation's divisions, while laws aimed at reducing the Catholic Church's influence sparked further controversy.

Cultural and artistic movements, from Romanticism to Modernism, mirrored these societal changes, contributing to France's rich cultural legacy. The Belle Époque emerged as a period of cultural flourishing and peace, overshadowed by the growing threats of war and internal discord. The long 19th century set the foundations for modern France, navigating through revolutions, wars, and social upheavals to emerge as a unified nation-state near the front of the global stage, by the early 20th century.

By the French Revolution, the Kingdom of France had expanded to nearly the modern territorial limits. The 19th century would complete the process by the annexation of the Duchy of Savoy and the County of Nice (first during the First Empire, and then definitively in 1860) and some small papal (like Avignon) and foreign possessions. France's territorial limits were greatly extended during the Empire through Revolutionary and Napoleonic military conquests and re-organization of Europe, but these were reversed by the Vienna Congress. Savoy and Nice were definitively annexed following France's victory in the Franco-Austrian War in 1859.

In 1830, France invaded Algeria, and in 1848 this north African country was fully integrated into France as a department. The late 19th century saw France embark on a massive program of overseas imperialism – including French Indochina (modern day Cambodia, Vietnam and Laos) and Africa (the Scramble for Africa brought France most of North-West and Central Africa) – which brought it in direct competition with British interests.

With the French defeat in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, France lost Alsace and portions of Lorraine to Germany (see Alsace-Lorraine); these lost provinces were not regained until the end of World War I.

Between 1795 and 1866, metropolitan France (that is, without overseas or colonial possessions) was the second most populous country of Europe, behind Russia, and the fourth most populous country in the world (behind China, India, and Russia); between 1866 and 1911, metropolitan France was the third most populous country of Europe, behind Russia and Germany. Unlike other European countries, France did not experience a strong population growth from the middle of the 19th century to the first half of the 20th century. The French population in 1789 is estimated at 28 million; by 1850, it was 36 million and in 1880 it was around 39 million. Slow growth was a major political issue, as arch-rival Germany continued to gain an advantage in terms of population and industry. Ways to reverse the trend became a major political issue.

Until 1850, population growth was mainly in the countryside, but a period of slow urbanization began under the Second Empire. Unlike in England, industrialization was a late phenomenon in France. France's economy in the 1830s had a limited iron industry, under-developed coal supplies, and the great majority lived on farms. The systematic establishment of primary education and the creation of new engineering schools prepared an industrial expansion which would blossom in the following decades. French rail transport only began hesitantly in the 1830s, and would not truly develop until the 1840s, using imported British engineers. By the revolution of 1848, a growing industrial workforce began to participate actively in French politics, but their hopes were largely betrayed by the policies of the Second Empire. The loss of the important coal, steel and glass production regions of Alsace and Lorraine would cause further problems. The industrial worker population increased from 23% in 1870 to 39% in 1914. Nevertheless, France remained a rather rural country in the early 1900s with 40% of the population still farmers in 1914. While exhibiting a similar urbanization rate to the U.S. (50% of the population in the U.S. was engaged in agriculture in the early 1900s), the urbanization rate of France was still well behind that of the UK (80% urbanization rate in the early 1900s).

In the 19th century, France was a country of immigration for peoples and political refugees from Eastern Europe (Germany, Poland, Hungary, Russia, Ashkenazi Jews) and from the Mediterranean (Italy, Spanish Sephardic Jews and North-African Mizrahi Jews). Large numbers of Belgian migrant workers laboured in French factories, particularly in the textile industry in the Nord.

France was the first country in Europe to emancipate its Jewish population during the French Revolution. The Crémieux Decree of 1870 gave full citizenship for the Jews in French Algeria. By 1872, there were an estimated 86,000 Jews living in France (by 1945 this would increase to 300,000), many of whom integrated (or attempted to integrate) into French society, although the Dreyfus affair would reveal antisemitism in certain classes of French society (see History of the Jews in France).

Alsace and Lorraine were lost to Germany in 1871. Some French refugees moved to France. France suffered massive losses during World War I — roughly estimated at 1.4 million French dead including civilians (see World War I casualties) (or nearly 10% of the active adult male population) and four times as many wounded (see World War I § Aftermath).

Linguistically, France was a patchwork. People in the countryside spoke various languages. France would only become a linguistically unified country by the end of the 19th century, and in particular through the educational policies of Jules Ferry during the French Third Republic. From an illiteracy rate of 33% among peasants in 1870, by 1914 almost all French could read and understand the national language, although 50% still understood or spoke a regional language of France (in today's France, only an estimated 10% still understand a regional language).

Through the educational, social and military policies of the Third Republic, by 1914 the French had been converted (as the historian Eugen Weber has put it) from a "country of peasants into a nation of Frenchmen". By 1914, most French could read French and the use of regional languages had greatly decreased; the role of the Catholic Church in public life had been radically diminished; a sense of national identity and pride was actively taught. The anti-clericalism of the Third Republic profoundly changed French religious habits: in one case study for the city of Limoges comparing the years 1899 with 1914, it was found that baptisms decreased from 98% to 60%, and civil marriages before a town official increased from 14% to 60%.

French economic history since its late 18th century Revolution was tied to three major events and trends: the Napoleonic Era, the competition with Britain and its other neighbors in regards to 'industrialization', and the 'total wars' of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Quantitative analysis of output data shows the French per capita growth rates were slightly smaller than Britain. However the British population tripled in size, while France grew by only third – so the overall British economy grew much faster. François Crouzet has summarized the cycles of French per capita economic growth in 1815–1913 as:

For the 1870–1913 era, Angus Maddison gives growth rates for 12 Western advanced countries – 10 in Europe plus the United States and Canada. In terms of per capita growth, France was about average. However again its population growth was very slow, so as far as the growth rate in total size of the economy France was in next to the last place, just ahead of Italy. The 12 countries averaged 2.7% growth per year in total output, but France only averaged 1.6% growth. Crouzet concludes that the

average size of industrial undertakings was smaller in France than in other advanced countries; that machinery was generally less up to date, productivity lower, costs higher. The domestic system and handicraft production long persisted, while big modern factories were for long exceptional. Large lumps of the Ancien Régime economy survived.... On the whole, the qualitative lag between the British and French economy... persisted during the whole period under consideration, and later on a similar lag developed between France and some other countries—Belgium, Germany, the United States. France did not succeed in catching up with Britain, but was overtaken by several of her rivals.

The reign of Louis XVI (1774–1792) had seen a temporary revival of French fortunes, but the over-ambitious projects and military campaigns of the 18th century had produced chronic financial problems. Deteriorating economic conditions, popular resentment against the complicated system of privileges granted the nobility and clerics, and a lack of alternate avenues for change were among the principal causes for convoking the Estates-General which convened in Versailles in 1789. On May 28, 1789, the Abbé Sieyès moved that the Third Estate proceed with verification of its own powers and invite the other two estates to take part, but not to wait for them. They proceeded to do so, and then voted a measure far more radical, declaring themselves the National Assembly, an assembly not of the Estates but of "the People".

Louis XVI shut the Salle des États where the Assembly met. The Assembly moved their deliberations to the king's tennis court, where they proceeded to swear the Tennis Court Oath (June 20, 1789), under which they agreed not to separate until they had given France a constitution. A majority of the representatives of the clergy soon joined them, as did 47 members of the nobility. By June 27 the royal party had overtly given in, although the military began to arrive in large numbers around Paris and Versailles. On July 9 the Assembly reconstituted itself as the National Constituent Assembly.

On July 11, 1789, King Louis, acting under the influence of the conservative nobles, as well as his wife, Marie Antoinette, and brother, the Comte d'Artois, banished the reformist minister Jacques Necker and completely reconstructed the ministry. Much of Paris, presuming this to be the start of a royal coup, moved into open rebellion. Some of the military joined the mob; others remained neutral. On July 14, 1789, after four hours of combat, the insurgents seized the Bastille fortress, killing its governor and several of his guards. The king and his military supporters backed down, at least for a short time.

After this violence, nobles started to flee the country as émigrés, some of whom began plotting civil war within the kingdom and agitating for a European coalition against France. Insurrection and the spirit of popular sovereignty spread throughout France. In rural areas, many went beyond this: some burned title-deeds and no small number of châteaux, as part of a general agrarian insurrection known as "la Grande Peur" (the Great Fear).

On August 4, 1789, the National Assembly abolished feudalism, sweeping away both the seigneurial rights of the Second Estate and the tithes gathered by the First Estate. In the course of a few hours, nobles, clergy, towns, provinces, companies, and cities lost their special privileges. The revolution also brought about a massive shifting of powers from the Catholic Church to the State. Legislation enacted in 1790 abolished the Church's authority to levy a tax on crops known as the dîme, cancelled special privileges for the clergy, and confiscated Church property: under the ancien régime, the Church had been the largest landowner in the country. Further legislation abolished monastic vows. The Civil Constitution of the Clergy, passed on July 12, 1790, turned the remaining clergy into employees of the State and required that they take an oath of loyalty to the constitution. The Civil Constitution of the Clergy also made the Catholic Church an arm of the secular state.

Looking to the United States Declaration of Independence for a model, on August 26, 1789, the Assembly published the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen. Like the U.S. Declaration, it comprised a statement of principles rather than a constitution with legal effect. The Assembly replaced the historic provinces with eighty-three départements, uniformly administered and approximately equal to one another in extent and population; it also abolished the symbolic paraphernalia of the ancien régime — armorial bearings, liveries, etc. — which further alienated the more conservative nobles, and added to the ranks of the émigrés.

Louis XVI opposed the course of the revolution and on the night of June 20, 1791 the royal family fled the Tuileries. However, the king was recognised at Varennes in the Meuse late on June 21 and he and his family were brought back to Paris under guard. With most of the Assembly still favouring a constitutional monarchy rather than a republic, the various groupings reached a compromise which left Louis XVI little more than a figurehead: he had perforce to swear an oath to the constitution, and a decree declared that retracting the oath, heading an army for the purpose of making war upon the nation, or permitting anyone to do so in his name would amount to de facto abdication.

Meanwhile, a renewed threat from abroad arose: Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor, Frederick William II of Prussia, and the king's brother Charles-Phillipe, comte d'Artois issued the Declaration of Pillnitz which considered the cause of Louis XVI as their own, demanded his total liberty and the dissolution of the Assembly, and promised an invasion of France on his behalf if the revolutionary authorities refused its conditions. The politics of the period inevitably drove France towards war with Austria and its allies. France declared war on Austria (April 20, 1792) and Prussia joined on the Austrian side a few weeks later. The French Revolutionary Wars had begun.

In the Brunswick Manifesto, the Imperial and Prussian armies threatened retaliation on the French population should it resist their advance or the reinstatement of the monarchy. As a consequence, King Louis was seen as conspiring with the enemies of France. He was arrested on August 10, 1792. On September 20, French revolutionary troops won their first great victory at the battle of Valmy. The First Republic was proclaimed the following day. By the end of the year, the French had overrun the Austrian Netherlands, threatening the Dutch Republic to the north, and had also penetrated east of the Rhine, briefly occupying the imperial city of Frankfurt am Main. January 17, 1793 saw the king condemned to death for "conspiracy against the public liberty and the general safety" by a weak majority in Convention. On January 21, he was beheaded. Shortly afterwards, France declared war on Great Britain and the Dutch Republic.

The first half of 1793 went badly for the new French Republic, with the French armies being driven out of Germany and the Austrian Netherlands. In this situation, prices rose and the sans-culottes (poor labourers and radical Jacobins) rioted; counter-revolutionary activities began in some regions. This encouraged the Jacobins to seize power through a parliamentary coup, backed up by force effected by mobilising public support against the Girondist faction, and by utilising the mob power of the Parisian sans-culottes. An alliance of Jacobin and sans-culottes elements thus became the effective centre of the new government. Policy became considerably more radical. The government instituted the "levy-en-masse", where all able-bodied men 18 and older were liable for military service. This allowed France to field much larger armies than its enemies, and soon the tide of war was reversed.

The Committee of Public Safety came under the control of Maximilien Robespierre, and the Jacobins unleashed the Reign of Terror. At least 1200 people met their deaths under the guillotine — or otherwise — after accusations of counter-revolutionary activities. In October, the queen was beheaded, further antagonizing Austria. In 1794 Robespierre had ultra-radicals and moderate Jacobins executed; in consequence, however, his own popular support eroded markedly. Georges Danton was beheaded for arguing that there were too many beheadings. There were attempts to do away with organized religion in France entirely and replace it with a Festival of Reason. The primary leader of this movement, Jacques Hébert, held such a festival in the Cathedral of Notre Dame, with an actress playing the Goddess of Reason. But Robespierre was unmoved by Hébert and had him and all his followers beheaded.

On 27 July 1794 (9 Thermidor Year II), a coalition of deputies in the National Convention turned against the leading members of the Committee of Public Safety, most notably Robespierre, who had come to personify the excesses of the Reign of Terror. Supported by factions within the Convention opposed to further purges and by officials concerned for their own safety, the coup resulted in the arrest of Robespierre, Louis Antoine de Saint-Just, Georges Couthon, and their associates. They were executed without trial the following day. The fall of Robespierre marked the end of Jacobin dominance and the radical phase of the French Revolution.

In its aftermath, the Convention dismantled many institutions associated with the Terror and relaxed political repression. In the months that followed, reprisals against former Jacobins and sans-culottes occurred in what became known as the First White Terror. On 17 August 1795, the Convention adopted the Constitution of the Year III, which was ratified by plebiscite in September and came into effect on 26 September.

The new constitution installed the Directoire and created France's bicameral legislature. It was markedly more conservative, dominated by the bourgeoise, and sought to restore order and exclude the sans-culottes and other members of the lower classes from political life.

By 1795, the French had once again conquered the Austrian Netherlands and the left bank of the Rhine, annexing them directly into France. The Dutch Republic and Spain were both defeated and made into French satellites. At sea however, the French navy proved no match for the British, and was badly beaten off the coast of Ireland in the Glorious First of June.

Napoleon Bonaparte was given command of an army in 1796 that was to invade Italy. The young general defeated the Austrian and Sardinian forces and he negotiated the Treaty of Campo Formio without the input of the Directory. The French annexation of the Austrian Netherlands and the left bank of the Rhine was recognized, as were the satellite republics they created in northern Italy.

Although the War of the First Coalition ended in 1797, a second coalition was formed in May 1798 when France invaded the Swiss Confederation, the Kingdom of Naples, and the Papal States. Napoleon convinced the Directory to approve an expedition to Egypt, with the purpose of cutting off Britain's access to India. He got approval for this, and set off in May 1798 for Egypt with 40,000 men. But the expedition foundered when the British fleet of Horatio Nelson caught and destroyed most of the French navy that had accompanied Napoleon in the Battle of the Nile. The army had no way to return to France and faced the hostility of the Ottoman Empire.

Napoleon himself escaped back to France, where he led the coup d'état of November 1799, making himself First Consul (his hapless troops remained in Egypt until they surrendered to a British expedition in 1801 and were repatriated to France).

By that point, the War of the Second Coalition was in progress. The French suffered a string of defeats in 1799, seeing their satellite republics in Italy overthrown and an invasion of Germany beaten back. Attempts by the allies on Switzerland and the Netherlands failed however, and once Napoleon returned to France, he began turning the tide on them. In 1801, the Peace of Lunéville ended hostilities with Austria and Russia, and the Treaty of Amiens with Britain.

By 1802, Napoleon was named First Consul for life. His continued provocations of the British led to renewed war in 1803, and the following year he proclaimed himself emperor in a huge ceremony in the Cathedral of Notre Dame. The pope was invited to the coronation, but Napoleon took the crown from him at the last minute and placed it on his own head. He attracted more power and gravitated towards imperial status, gathering support on the way for his internal rebuilding of France and its institutions. The French Empire (or the Napoleonic Empire) (1804–1814) was marked by the French domination and reorganization of continental Europe (the Napoleonic Wars) and by the final codification of the republican legal system (the Napoleonic Code). The Empire gradually became more authoritarian in nature, with freedom of the press and assembly being severely restricted. Religious freedom survived under the condition that Christianity and Judaism, the two officially recognized faiths, not be attacked, and that atheism not be expressed in public. Napoleon also recreated the nobility, but neither they nor his court had the elegance or historical connections of the old monarchy. Despite the growing administrative despotism of his regime, the emperor was still seen by the rest of Europe as the embodiment of the Revolution and a monarchial parvenu.

By 1804, Britain alone stood outside French control and was an important force in encouraging and financing resistance to France. In 1805, Napoleon massed an army of 200,000 men in Boulogne for the purpose of invading the British Isles, but never was able to find the right conditions to embark, and thus abandoned his plans. Three weeks later, the French and Spanish fleets were destroyed by the British at Trafalgar. Afterwards, Napoleon, unable to defeat Britain militarily, tried to bring it down through economic warfare. He inaugurated the Continental System, in which all of France's allies and satellites would join in refusing to trade with the British.

Portugal, an ally of Britain, was the only European country that openly refused to join. After the Treaties of Tilsit of July 1807, the French launched an invasion through Spain to close this hole in the Continental System. British troops arrived in Portugal, compelling the French to withdraw. A renewed invasion the following year brought the British back, and at that point, Napoleon decided to depose the Spanish king Charles IV and place his brother Joseph on the throne. This caused the people of Spain to rise up in a patriotic revolt, beginning the Peninsular War. The British could now gain a foothold on the Continent, and the war tied down considerable French resources, contributing to Napoleon's eventual defeat.

Napoleon was at the height of his power in 1810–1812, with most of the European countries either his allies, satellites, or annexed directly into France. After the defeat of Austria in the War of the Fifth Coalition, Europe was at peace for 2 + 1 ⁄ 2 years except for the conflict in Spain. The emperor was given an archduchess to marry by the Austrians, and she gave birth to his long-awaited son in 1811.

Ultimately, the Continental System failed. Its effect on Great Britain and on British trade is uncertain, but the embargo is thought to have been more harmful on the continental European states. Russia in particular chafed under the embargo, and in 1812, that country reopened trade with Britain, provoking Napoleon's invasion of Russia. The disaster of that campaign caused all the subjugated peoples of Europe to rise up against French domination. In 1813, Napoleon was forced to conscript boys under the age of 18 and less able-bodied men who had been passed up for military service in previous years. The quality of his troops deteriorated sharply and war-weariness at home increased. The allies could also put far more men in the field than he could. Throughout 1813, the French were forced back and by early 1814, the British were occupying Gascony. The allied troops reached Paris in March, and Napoleon abdicated as emperor. Louis XVIII, the brother of Louis XVI, was installed as king and France was granted a quite generous peace settlement, being restored to its 1792 boundaries and having to pay no war indemnity.

After eleven months of exile on the island of Elba in the Mediterranean, Napoleon escaped and returned to France, where he was greeted with huge enthusiasm. Louis XVIII fled Paris, but the one thing that would have given the emperor mass support, a return to the revolutionary extremism of 1793–1794, was out of the question. Enthusiasm quickly waned, and as the allies (then discussing the fate of Europe in Vienna) refused to negotiate with him, he had no choice but to fight. At Waterloo, Napoleon was completely defeated by the British and Prussians, and abdicated once again. This time, he was exiled to the island of Saint Helena in the South Atlantic, where he remained until his death in 1821.

Louis XVIII was restored a second time by the allies in 1815, ending more than two decades of war. He announced he would rule as a limited, constitutional monarch. After the Hundred Days in 1815 when Napoleon suddenly returned and was vanquished, a more harsh peace treaty was imposed on France, returning it to its 1789 boundaries and requiring a war indemnity in gold. Allied troops remained in the country until it was paid. There were large-scale purges of Bonapartists from the government and military, and a brief "White Terror" in the south of France claimed 300 victims. Otherwise the transition was largely peaceful. Although the old ruling class had returned they did not recover their lost lands, and were unable to reverse most of the dramatic changes in French society, economics, and ways of thinking.

In 1823, France intervened in Spain, where a civil war had deposed king Ferdinand VII. The French troops marched into Spain, retook Madrid from the rebels, and left almost as quickly as they came. Despite worries to the contrary, France showed no sign of returning to an aggressive foreign policy and was admitted to the Concert of Europe in 1818.

Louis XVIII, for the most part, accepted that much had changed. However, he was pushed on his right by the Ultra-royalists, led by the comte de Villèle, who condemned the Doctrinaires ' attempt to reconcile the Revolution with the monarchy through a constitutional monarchy. Instead, the Chambre introuvable elected in 1815 banished all Conventionnels who had voted Louis XVI's death and passed several reactionary laws. Louis XVIII was forced to dissolve this Chamber, dominated by the Ultras, in 1816, fearing a popular uprising. The liberals thus governed until the 1820 assassination of the duc de Berry, the nephew of the king and known supporter of the Ultras, which brought Villèle's ultras back to power.

Louis died on September the 16th in the year 1824 and was succeeded by his brother. Charles X of France followed the "ultra" conservative line but was a much less effective coalition builder than Louis XVIII. In May 1825 he staged a grand coronation ceremony in Reims which harked back to the pre-1789 era. Freedom of the press was severely restricted. He compensated the families of the nobles who had had their property taken during the Revolution. In 1830 the discontent caused by these changes and Charles X's authoritarian nomination of the Ultra prince de Polignac as prime minister led to his overthrow.

The Restoration did not try to resurrect the ancien régime. Too much had changed for that. The egalitarianism and liberalism of the revolutionaries remained an important force and the autocracy and hierarchy of the earlier era could not be fully restored. The economic changes, which had been underway long before the revolution, had been further enhanced during the years of turmoil and were firmly entrenched by 1815. These changes had seen power shift from the noble landowners to the urban merchants. The administrative reforms of Napoleon, such as the Napoleonic Code and efficient bureaucracy, also remained in place. These changes produced a unified central government that was fiscally sound — for example, the indemnities imposed by the victors were quickly paid off, and the occupation troops left quietly. The national government did not face strong regional parliaments or power centers and had solid control over all areas of France in sharp contrast with the chaotic situation the Bourbons had faced in the 1770s and 1780s. Restoration did not lessen inequality in France, and it did not promote industrialisation. On the whole, however, there was more wealth, and more political freedom for all classes. The parliamentary system worked well. Restrictions on the press resembled those in most of Europe. Frequent parliamentary transitions took place, but the losers were not executed or exiled. France regained its place among the respected major powers, and its voice was heard in international diplomacy. There was a new sense of humanitarianism, and popular piety. France began, on a small scale, to rebuild the overseas empire it had lost in 1763.

Charles X was overthrown in an uprising in the streets of Paris, known as the 1830 July Revolution (or, in French, "Les trois Glorieuses" - The three Glorious days - of 27, 28 and July 29). Charles was forced to flee and Louis-Philippe d'Orléans, a member of the Orléans branch of the family, and son of Philippe Égalité who had voted the death of his cousin Louis XVI, ascended the throne. Louis-Philippe ruled, not as "King of France" but as "King of the French" (an evocative difference for contemporaries). It was made clear that his right to rule came from the people and was not divinely granted. He also revived the Tricolor as the flag of France, in place of the white Bourbon flag that had been used since 1815, an important distinction because the Tricolour was the symbol of the revolution. The July Monarchy (1830–1848) saw the political dominance of the high middle class (haute bourgeoisie). Louis-Philippe clearly understood his base of power: the wealthy bourgeoisie had carried him aloft during the July Revolution and he kept their interests in mind.

Louis-Philippe, who had flirted with liberalism in his youth, rejected much of the pomp and circumstance of the Bourbons and surrounded himself with merchants and bankers. The July Monarchy, however, remained a time of turmoil. A large group of Legitimists on the right demanded the restoration of the Bourbons to the throne. On the left, Republicanism and, later Socialism, remained a powerful force. Late in his reign Louis-Philippe became increasingly rigid and dogmatic and his President of the Council, François Guizot, had become deeply unpopular, but Louis-Philippe refused to remove him. The situation gradually escalated until the Revolutions of 1848 saw the fall of the monarchy and the creation of the Second Republic.

However, during the first several years of his regime, Louis-Philippe appeared to move his government toward legitimate, broad-based reform. The government found its source of legitimacy within the Charter of 1830, written by reform-minded members of Chamber of Deputies upon a platform of religious equality, the empowerment of the citizenry through the reestablishment of the National Guard, electoral reform, the reformation of the peerage system, and the lessening of royal authority. And indeed, Louis-Phillipe and his ministers adhered to policies that seemed to promote the central tenets of the constitution. However, the majority of these policies were veiled attempts to shore up the power and influence of the government and the bourgeoisie, rather than legitimate attempts to promote equality and empowerment for a broad constituency of the French population. Thus, though the July Monarchy seemed to move toward reform, this movement was largely illusory.

During the years of the July Monarchy, enfranchisement roughly doubled, from 94,000 under Charles X to more than 200,000 by 1848. However, this represented less than one percent of population, and, as the requirements for voting were tax-based, only the wealthiest gained the privilege. By implication, the enlarged enfranchisement tended to favor the wealthy merchant bourgeoisie more than any other group. Beyond simply increasing their presence within the Chamber of Deputies, this electoral enlargement provided the bourgeoisie the means by which to challenge the nobility in legislative matters. Thus, while appearing to honor his pledge to increase suffrage, Louis-Philippe acted primarily to empower his supporters and increase his hold over the French Parliament. The inclusion of only the wealthiest also tended to undermine any possibility of the growth of a radical faction in Parliament, effectively serving socially conservative ends.

The reformed Charter of 1830 limited the power of the King – stripping him of his ability to propose and decree legislation, as well as limiting his executive authority. However, the King of the French still believed in a version of monarchy that held the king as much more than a figurehead for an elected Parliament, and as such, he was quite active in politics. One of the first acts of Louis-Philippe in constructing his cabinet was to appoint the rather conservative Casimir Perier as the premier of that body. Perier, a banker, was instrumental in shutting down many of the Republican secret societies and labour unions that had formed during the early years of the regime. In addition, he oversaw the dismemberment of the National Guard after it proved too supportive of radical ideologies. He performed all of these actions, of course, with royal approval. He was once quoted as saying that the source of French misery was the belief that there had been a revolution. "No Monsieur", he said to another minister, "there has not been a revolution: there is simply a change at the head of state."

Further expressions of this conservative trend came under the supervision of Perier and the then Minister of the Interior, François Guizot. The regime acknowledged early on that radicalism and republicanism threatened it, undermining its laissez-faire policies. Thus, the Monarchy declared the very term republican illegal in 1834. Guizot shut down republican clubs and disbanded republican publications. Republicans within the cabinet, like the banker Dupont, were all but excluded by Perier and his conservative clique. Distrusting the National Guard, Louis-Philippe increased the size of the army and reformed it in order to ensure its loyalty to the government.

Though two factions always persisted in the cabinet, split between liberal conservatives like Guizot (le parti de la Résistance, the Party of Resistance) and liberal reformers like the aforementioned journalist Adolphe Thiers (le parti du Mouvement, the Party of Movement), the latter never gained prominence. After Perier came count Molé, another conservative. After Molé came Thiers, a reformer later sacked by Louis-Philippe after attempting to pursue an aggressive foreign policy. After Thiers came the conservative Guizot. In particular, the Guizot administration was marked by increasingly authoritarian crackdowns on republicanism and dissent, and an increasingly pro-business laissez-faire policy. This policy included protective tariffs that defended the status quo and enriched French businessmen. Guizot's government granted railway and mining contracts to the bourgeois supporters of the government, and even contributing some of the start-up costs. As workers under these policies had no legal right to assemble, unionize, or petition the government for increased pay or decreased hours, the July Monarchy under Perier, Molé, and Guizot generally proved detrimental to the lower classes. In fact, Guizot's advice to those who were disenfranchised by the tax-based electoral requirements was a simple " enrichissez-vous " – enrich yourself. The king himself was not very popular either by the middle of the 1840s, and due to his appearance was widely referred to as the "crowned pear". There was a considerable hero-worship of Napoleon during this era, and in 1841 his body was taken from Saint Helena and given a magnificent reburial in France.

Louis-Philippe conducted a pacifistic foreign policy. Shortly after he assumed power in 1830, Belgium revolted against Dutch rule and proclaimed its independence. The king rejected the idea of intervention there or any military activities outside France's borders. The only exception to this was a war in Algeria which had been started by Charles X a few weeks before his overthrow on the pretext of suppressing pirates in the Mediterranean. Louis-Philippe's government decided to continue the conquest of that country, which took over a decade. By 1848, Algeria had been declared an integral part of France.

The Revolution of 1848 had major consequences for all of Europe: popular democratic revolts against authoritarian regimes broke out in Austria and Hungary, in the German Confederation and Prussia, and in the Italian states of Milan, Venice, Turin and Rome. Economic downturns and bad harvests during the 1840s contributed to growing discontent.

In February 1848, the French government banned the holding of the Campagne des banquets, fundraising dinners by activists where critics of the regime would meet (as public demonstrations and strikes were forbidden). As a result, protests and riots broke out in the streets of Paris. An angry mob converged on the royal palace, after which the king abdicated and fled to England. The Second Republic was then proclaimed.

The revolution in France had brought together classes of wildly different interests: the bourgeoisie desired electoral reforms (a democratic republic), socialist leaders (like Louis Blanc, Pierre Joseph Proudhon and the radical Auguste Blanqui) asked for a "right to work" and the creation of national workshops (a social welfare republic) and for France to liberate the oppressed peoples of Europe (Poles and Italians), while moderates (like the aristocrat Alphonse de Lamartine) sought a middle ground. Tensions between groups escalated, and in June 1848, a working class insurrection in Paris cost the lives of 1500 workers and eliminated once and for all the dream of a social welfare constitution.

The constitution of the Second Republic which was ratified in September 1848 was extremely flawed and permitted no effective resolution between the President and the Assembly in case of dispute. In December 1848, a nephew of Napoléon Bonaparte, Charles Louis Napoléon Bonaparte, was elected as President of the Republic, and pretexting legislative gridlock, in 1851, he staged a coup d'état. Finally, in 1852 he had himself declared Emperor Napoléon III of the Second Empire.

France was ruled by Emperor Napoleon III from 1852 to 1870. The regime was authoritarian in nature during its early years, curbing most freedom of the press and assembly. The era saw great industrialization, urbanization (including the massive rebuilding of Paris by Baron Haussmann) and economic growth, but Napoleon III's foreign policies would be catastrophic.

In 1852, Napoleon declared that "L'Empire, c'est la paix" (The empire is peace), but it was hardly fitting for a Bonaparte to continue the foreign policy of Louis-Philippe. Only a few months after becoming president in 1848, he sent French troops to break up a short-lived republic in Rome, remaining there until 1870. The overseas empire expanded, and France made gains in Indo-China, West and central Africa, and the South Seas. This was helped by the opening of large central banks in Paris to finance overseas expeditions. The Suez Canal was opened by the Empress Eugénie in 1869 and was the achievement of a Frenchman. Yet still, Napoleon III's France lagged behind Britain in colonial affairs, and his determination to upstage British control of India and American influence in Mexico resulted in a fiasco.

In 1854, the emperor allied with Britain and the Ottoman Empire against Russia in the Crimean War. Afterwards, Napoleon intervened in the questions of Italian independence. He declared his intention of making Italy "free from the Alps to the Adriatic ", and fought a war with Austria in 1859 over this matter. With the victories of Montebello, Magenta and Solferino France and Austria signed the Peace of Villafranca in 1859, as the emperor worried that a longer war might cause the other powers, particularly Prussia, to intervene. Austria ceded Lombardy to Napoleon III, who in turn ceded it to Victor Emmanuel; Modena and Tuscany were restored to their respective dukes, and the Romagna to the pope, now president of an Italian federation. In exchange for France's military assistance against Austria, Piedmont ceded its provinces of Nice and Savoy to France in March 1860. Napoleon then turned his hand to meddling in the Western Hemisphere. He gave support to the Confederacy during the American Civil War, until Abraham Lincoln announced the Emancipation Proclamation in the autumn of 1862. As this made it impossible to support the South without also supporting slavery, the emperor backed off. However, he was conducting a simultaneous venture in Mexico, which had refused to pay interest on loans taken from France, Britain, and Spain. As a result, those three countries sent a joint expedition to the city of Veracruz in January 1862, but the British and Spanish quickly withdrew after realizing the extent of Napoleon's plans. French troops occupied Mexico City in June 1863 and established a puppet government headed by the Austrian archduke Maximilian, who was declared Emperor of Mexico. Although this sort of thing was forbidden by the Monroe Doctrine, Napoleon reasoned that the United States was far too distracted with its Civil War to do anything about it. The French were never able to suppress the forces of the ousted Mexican president Benito Juárez, and then in the spring of 1865, the American Civil War ended. The United States, which had an army of a million battle-hardened troops, demanded that the French withdraw or prepare for war. They quickly did so, but Maximilian tried to hold onto power. He was captured and shot by the Mexicans in 1867.

Public opinion was becoming a major force as people began to tire of oppressive authoritarianism in the 1860s. Napoleon III, who had expressed some liberal ideas prior to his coronation, began to relax censorship, laws on public meetings, and the right to strike. As a result, radicalism grew among industrial workers. Discontent with the Second Empire spread rapidly, as the economy began to experience a downturn. The golden days of the 1850s were over. Napoleon's reckless foreign policy was inciting criticism. To placate the Liberals, in 1870 Napoleon proposed the establishment of a fully parliamentary legislative regime, which won massive support. The French emperor never had the chance to implement this, however - by the end of the year, the Second Empire had ignominiously collapsed.

Napoleon's distraction with Mexico prevented him from intervening in the Second Schleswig War in 1864 and the Seven Weeks' War in 1866. Both of those conflicts saw Prussia establish itself as the dominant power in Germany. Afterwards, tensions between France and Prussia grew, especially in 1868 when the latter tried to place a Hohenzollern prince on the Spanish throne, which was left vacant by a revolution there.

The Prussian chancellor Otto von Bismarck provoked Napoleon into declaring war on Prussia in July 1870. The French troops were swiftly defeated in the following weeks, and on September 1, the main army, which the emperor himself was with, was trapped at Sedan and forced to surrender. A republic was quickly proclaimed in Paris, but the war was far from over. As it was clear that Prussia would expect territorial concessions, the provisional government vowed to continue resistance. The Prussians laid siege to Paris, and new armies mustered by France failed to alter this situation. The French capital began experiencing severe food shortages, to the extent where even the animals in the zoo were eaten. As the city was being bombarded by Prussian siege guns in January 1871, King William of Prussia was proclaimed Emperor of Germany in the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles. Shortly afterwards, on January 28, 1871, Paris surrendered. The subsequent peace treaty was harsh; France ceded Alsace and Lorraine to Germany and had to pay an indemnity of 5 billion francs. German troops were to remain in the country until it was paid off. Meanwhile, the fallen Napoleon III went into exile in England where he died in 1873.

The birth of the Third Republic would see France occupied by foreign troops, the capital in a popular socialist insurrection — the Paris Commune — and two provinces (Alsace-Lorraine) annexed to Germany. Feelings of national guilt and a desire for vengeance (" revanchism ") would be major preoccupations of the French throughout the next two decades. Yet by 1900, France had resumed many economic and cultural ties with Germany, and few French still dreamed of a "revanche". No French political party even mentioned Alsace-Lorraine any more on its program.

The Third Republic was to last until the military defeat of 1940 (longer than any government in France since the Revolution).

A revolt broke out on 18 March when radicalised soldiers from the Paris National Guard killed two French generals. French government officials and the army withdrew quickly to Versailles, and a new city council, the Paris Commune, dominated by anarchists and radical socialists, was elected and took power on March 26, and tried to implement an ambitious and radical social programme.

The Commune proposed the separation of Church and state, made all Church property state property, and excluded religious instruction from schools, including Catholic schools. The churches were only allowed to continue their religious activity if they kept their doors open to public political meetings during the evenings. Other projected legislation dealt with educational reforms which would make further education and technical training freely available to all. However, for lack of time and resources, the programs were never carried out. The Vendôme Column, seen as a symbol of Napoleon 's imperialism was pulled down, at the suggestion of Commune member Gustave Courbet, who was later briefly jailed and required to pay for putting it back up.

Nathalie Lemel, a religious workwoman, and Elisabeth Dmitrieff, a young Russian aristocrat, created the Union des femmes pour la défense de Paris et les soins aux blessés ("Women Union for the Defense of Paris and Care to the Injured") on April 11, 1871. They demanded gender equality, wage equality, right of divorce for women, right to laïque instruction (non-clerical) and for professional training for girls. They also demanded suppression of the distinction between married women and concubins, between legitimate and natural children, the abolition of prostitution — they obtained the closing of the maisons de tolérance (legal unofficial brothels). The Women Union also participated in several municipal commissions and organized cooperative workshops.

The Paris Commune held power for only two months. Between May 21 and 28 the French army reconquered the city in bitter fighting, in what became known as " la semaine sanglante " or "bloody week". During the street fighting, the Communards were outnumbered four or five to one; they lacked competent officers; and they had no plan for the defence of the city, so each neighbourhood was left to defend itself. Their military commander, Louis Charles Delescluze, committed suicide by dramatically standing atop a barricade on May 26. In the final days of the battle the Communards set fire to the Tuileries Palace, the Hotel de Ville, the Palais de Justice, the Palace of the Legion of Honor, and other prominent government buildings, and executed hostages they had taken, including Georges Darboy, the archbishop of Paris.

Army casualties from the beginning April through Bloody Week amounted to 837 dead and 6,424 wounded. Nearly seven thousand Communards were killed in combat or summarily executed by army firing squads afterwards, and buried in the city cemeteries, and in temporary mass graves. About ten thousand Communards escaped and went into exile in Belgium, England, Switzerland and the United States. Forty-five thousand prisoners were taken after the fall of the Commune. Most were released, but twenty-three were sentenced to death, and about ten thousand were sentenced to prison or deportation to New Caledonia or other prison colonies. All the prisoners and exiles were amnestied in 1879 and 1880, and most returned to France, where some were elected to the National Assembly.

Thus, the Republic was born of a double defeat: before the Prussians, and of the revolutionary Commune. The repression of the commune was bloody. One hundred forty-seven Communards were executed in front of the Communards' Wall in Père Lachaise Cemetery, while thousands of others were marched to Versailles for trials. The number killed during La Semaine Sanglante (The Bloody Week) had been estimated by some sources as high as twenty thousand; recent historians, using research into the number buried in the city cemeteries and exhumed from mass graves, now put the most likely number at between six and seven thousand. Thousands were imprisoned; 7,000 were exiled to New Caledonia. Thousands more fled to Belgium, England, Italy, Spain and the United States. In 1872, "stringent laws were passed that ruled out all possibilities of organizing on the left." For the imprisoned there was a general amnesty in 1880, and many of the Communards returned to France, where some were elected to the Parliament. Paris remained under martial law for five years.

Beside this defeat, the Republican movement also had to confront the counterrevolutionaries who rejected the legacy of the 1789 Revolution. Both the Legitimist and the Orléanist royalists rejected republicanism, which they saw as an extension of modernity and atheism, breaking with France's traditions. This lasted until at least the May 16, 1877 crisis, which finally led to the resignation of royalist Marshal MacMahon in January 1879. The death of Henri, comte de Chambord in 1883, who, as the grandson of Charles X, had refused to abandon the fleur-de-lys and the white flag, thus jeopardizing the alliance between Legitimists and Orleanists, convinced many of the remaining Orleanists to rally themselves to the Republic, as Adolphe Thiers had already done. The vast majority of the Legitimists abandoned the political arena or became marginalised, at least until Pétain 's Vichy regime. Some of them founded Action Française in 1898, during the Dreyfus affair, which became an influent movement throughout the 1930s, in particular among the intellectuals of Paris' Quartier Latin. In 1891, Pope Leo XIII 's encyclical Rerum novarum was incorrectly seen to have legitimised the Social Catholic movement, which in France could be traced back to Hugues Felicité Robert de Lamennais ' efforts under the July Monarchy. Pope Pius X later condemned these movements of Catholics for democracy and Socialism in Nostre Charge Apostolique against the Le Síllon movement.

The initial republic was in effect led by pro-royalists, but republicans (the " Radicals ") and bonapartists scrambled for power. The period from 1879 to 1899 saw power come into the hands of moderate republicans and former "radicals" (around Léon Gambetta); these were called the " Opportunists " (Républicains opportunistes). The newly found Republican control on the Republic allowed the vote of the 1881 and 1882 Jules Ferry laws on a free, mandatory and secular education.

The moderates however became deeply divided over the Dreyfus affair, and this allowed the Radicals to eventually gain power from 1899 until the Great War. During this period, crises like the potential "Boulangist" coup d'état (see Georges Boulanger) in 1889, showed the fragility of the republic. The Radicals' policies on education (suppression of local languages, compulsory education), mandatory military service, and control of the working classes eliminated internal dissent and regionalisms, while their participation in the Scramble for Africa and in the acquiring of overseas possessions (such as French Indochina) created myths of French greatness. Both of these processes transformed a country of regionalisms into a modern nation state.

In 1880, Jules Guesde and Paul Lafargue, Marx 's son-in-law, created the French Workers' Party (Parti ouvrier français, or POF), the first Marxist party in France. Two years later, Paul Brousse 's Possibilistes split. A controversy arose in the French socialist movement and in the Second International concerning "socialist participation in a bourgeois government", a theme which was triggered by independent socialist Alexandre Millerand 's participation to Radical-Socialist Waldeck-Rousseau 's cabinet around the start of the 20th century, which also included the marquis de Galliffet, best known for his role as repressor of the 1871 Commune. While Jules Guesde was opposed to this participation, which he saw as a trick, Jean Jaurès defended it, making him one of the first social-democrats. Guesde's POF united itself in 1902 with the Parti socialiste de France, and finally in 1905 all socialist tendencies, including Jaurès' Parti socialiste français, unified into the Section française de l'Internationale ouvrière (SFIO), the "French section of the Second International ", itself formed in 1889 after the split between anarcho-syndicalists and Marxist socialists which led to the dissolving of the First International (founded in London in 1864).

Bismarck had supported France becoming a republic in 1871, knowing that this would isolate the defeated nation in Europe where most countries were monarchies. In an effort to break this isolation, France went to great pains to woo Russia and the United Kingdom to its side, first by means of the Franco-Russian Alliance of 1894, then the 1904 Entente Cordiale with the U.K, and finally, with the signing of the Anglo-Russian Entente in 1907 this became the Triple Entente, which eventually led France and the UK to enter World War I as Allies when Germany declared war on Russia.

Distrust of Germany, faith in the army and antisemitism in parts of the French public opinion combined to make the Dreyfus affair (the unjust trial and condemnation of a Jewish military officer for treason) a political scandal of the utmost gravity. The nation was divided between "dreyfusards" and "anti-dreyfusards" and far-right Catholic agitators inflamed the situation even when proofs of Dreyfus' innocence came to light. The writer Émile Zola published an impassioned editorial on the injustice, and was himself condemned by the government for libel. Once Dreyfus was finally pardoned, the progressive legislature enacted the 1905 laws on laïcité which created a complete separation of church and state and stripped churches of most of their property rights.

The period and the end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century is often termed the Belle Époque. Although associated with cultural innovations and popular amusements (cabaret, cancan, the cinema, new art forms such as Impressionism and Art Nouveau), France was nevertheless a nation divided internally on notions of religion, class, regionalisms and money, and on the international front France came sometimes to the brink of war with the other imperial powers, including Great Britain (the Fashoda Incident). Yet in 1905–1914 the French repeatedly elected left-wing, pacifist parliaments, and French diplomacy took care to settle matters peacefully. France was caught unprepared by the German declaration of war in 1914. The human and financial costs of World War I would be catastrophic for the French.

Starting with its scattered small holdings in India, West Indies and Latin America, France began rebuilding its world empire. It took control of Algeria in 1830 and began in earnest to rebuild its worldwide empire after 1850, concentrating chiefly in North and West Africa, as well as South-East Asia, with other conquests in Central and East Africa, as well as the South Pacific. Republicans, at first hostile to empire, only became supportive when Germany started to build her own colonial empire In the 1880s. As it developed the new empire took on roles of trade with France, especially supplying raw materials and purchasing manufactured items, as well as lending prestige to the motherland and spreading French civilization and language, and the Catholic religion. It also provided manpower in the World Wars.

It became a moral mission to lift the world up to French standards by bringing Christianity and French culture. In 1884 the leading exponent of colonialism, Jules Ferry declared: "The higher races have a right over the lower races, they have a duty to civilise the inferior races." Full citizenship rights – assimilation – was a long-term goal, but in practice colonial officials were reluctant to extend full citizenship rights. France sent small numbers of white permanent settlers to its empire, in sharp contrast to Britain, Spain and Portugal. The notable exception was Algeria, where the French settlers nonetheless always remained a powerful minority.

The Suez Canal, initially built by the French, became a joint British-French project in 1875, as both saw it as vital to maintaining their influence and empires in Asia. In 1882, ongoing civil disturbances in Egypt prompted Britain to intervene, extending a hand to France. The government allowed Britain to take effective control of Egypt.

Under the leadership of expansionist Jules Ferry, the Third Republic greatly expanded the French colonial empire. Catholic missionaries played a major role. France acquired Indochina, Madagascar, vast territories in West Africa and Central Africa, and much of Polynesia.

In the early 1880s, Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza was exploring the Kongo Kingdom for France, at the same time Henry Morton Stanley explored it in on behalf of Leopold II of Belgium, who would have it as his personal Congo Free State (see section below). France occupied Tunisia in May 1881. In 1884, France occupied Guinea. French West Africa (AOF) was founded in 1895, and French Equatorial Africa in 1910.

During the Scramble for Africa in the 1870s and 1880s, the British and French generally recognised each other's spheres of influence. The Suez Canal, initially built by the French, became a joint British–French project in 1875, as both saw it as vital to maintaining their influence and empires in Asia. In 1882, ongoing civil disturbances in Egypt (see Urabi Revolt) prompted Britain to intervene, extending a hand to France. France's expansionist Prime Minister Jules Ferry was out of office, and the government was unwilling to send more than an intimidatory fleet to the region. Britain established a protectorate, as France had a year earlier in Tunisia, and popular opinion in France later put this action down to duplicity. It was about this time that the two nations established co-ownership of Vanuatu. The Anglo-French Convention of 1882 was also signed to resolve territory disagreements in western Africa.

In the 1875–1898 era, serious tensions with Britain erupted over African issues. At several points war was possible, but it never happened. One brief but dangerous dispute occurred during the Fashoda Incident when French troops tried to claim an area in the Southern Sudan, and a British force purporting to be acting in the interests of the Khedive of Egypt arrived. Under heavy pressure the French withdrew securing Anglo-Egyptian control over the area. The status quo was recognised by an agreement between the two states acknowledging British control over Egypt, while France became the dominant power in Morocco. Ultimately, the Fashoda incident resulted in a major diplomatic defeat and a national humiliation for France. French nationalists argued the incident was clear evidence that the army had been severely weakened by Dreyfusards, along with claiming that Britain might be preparing to attack France. Meanwhile, Britain relished in its success, although remaining wary of French retaliation.

France had colonies in Asia and looked for alliances and found in Japan a possible ally. At Japan's request Paris sent military missions in 1872–1880, in 1884–1889 and in 1918–1919 to help modernise the Japanese army. Conflicts with China over Indochina climaxed during the Sino-French War (1884–1885). Admiral Courbet destroyed the Chinese fleet anchored at Foochow. The treaty ending the war, put France in a protectorate over northern and central Vietnam, which it divided into Tonkin and Annam.

France's intellectual climate in the mid to late 19th century was dominated by the so-called "Realist" Movement. The generation that came of age after 1848 rejected what it considered the opulence and tackiness of the Romantic Movement. Realism was in a sense a revival of 18th-century Enlightenment ideas. It favored science and rationality and considered the Church an obstruction to human progress. The movement peaked during the Second Empire with writers and artists such as Flaubert and Courbet. After the establishment of the Third Republic, it had coalesced into a unified system of thought known as Positivism, a term coined by the philosopher Auguste Comte. The two most notable writers of the 1870s-80s, Hippolyte Taine and Ernest Renan rejected the Positivist label, but most of their ideas were similar in content. Writers such as Émile Zola and artists like Édouard Manet and Pierre-Auguste Renoir epitomized the spirit of Positivism.

In addition, France produced a large body of prominent scientists during the late 19th century such as Louis Pasteur and Marcellin Berthelot. Social sciences were less well-developed, but Gustave Le Bon and Emile Durkheim were notable figures in this field.

Positivism survived as a movement until at least World War I, but beginning in the 1890s was challenged by a rival school of thought that saw the return of Romantic ideas. A number of artists came to disagree with the cold rationalism and logic of the Positivists, feeling that it ignored human emotions. The so-called Symbolists included the poets Paul Verlaine and Stéphane Mallarmé and an assortment of composers such as Georges Bizet and Camille Saint-Saëns who then gave way to the more experimental music of Claude Debussy and Maurice Ravel.

Symbolist writers and philosophers included Paul Bourget, Maurice Barres, and Henri Bergson plus the painters Paul Cézanne and Paul Gauguin. Bourget denounced Positivist ideas and proclaimed that man's salvation did not come from science, but by the more traditional values of God, family, and country. He espoused what he called "integral nationalism" and that traditional institutions, reverence for one's ancestors, and the sacredness of the French soil were what needed to be taught and promoted. Henri Bergson, whose lectures at the college de France became major social gatherings among Parisians, criticized scientific rationalism and exalted man's irrational drives, especially what he dubbed élan vital, distinguishing heroic men and nations from the plodding masses.

The Symbolist Movement also affected the political climate of the nation: in the syndicalist beliefs of Georges Sorel, in labor activism, and also a resurgent nationalism among French youth in the years immediately preceding World War I. This new spirit brought a revival of belief in the Church and a strong, fervent sense of patriotism. Also a new school of young artists emerged who completely broke with Impressionism and favored a deep, intense subjectivism. Inspired by Cézanne and Gauguin, Georges Braque, Pablo Picasso, Henri Matisse, and Georges Rouault entered the art scene so abruptly that they came to be known as the Fauves (Wild Ones).

Romanticism emerged in the early 19th century as a vibrant period in the arts, influenced by the French Revolution and Napoleonic wars. It marked a departure from classicism, embracing Orientalism, tragic anti-heroes, wild landscapes, and themes from the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. This era saw a debate between the proponents of line, exemplified by Jean Auguste Dominique Ingres, and those favoring violent colors and curves, like Eugène Delacroix. Romanticism emphasized a literary language rooted in feelings. It laid the groundwork for later movements, including Naturalism and Symbolism, influencing artists like Gustave Courbet, the Barbizon School, and Gustave Moreau.

The birth of Modernism in the late 19th century, centered in Paris, was marked by artistic innovation across domains including music, dance, architecture, and literature. It was characterized by the dynamism of café culture, the impact of Haussmannization on the cityscape, and a blend of social classes and radical art movements. Édouard Manet 's work bridged 19th-century art with modernism, leading the way to Impressionism. Claude Monet and his contemporaries advanced this movement by capturing transient light effects outdoors, inspired partly by J.M.W. Turner and the advent of paint in tubes.

Impressionism set the stage for further experimentation. Vincent van Gogh introduced expressionism; Georges Seurat developed pointillism; Paul Cézanne explored geometric perceptions; Paul Gauguin sought symbolism and primitivism in exotic locales; and Henri Rousseau exemplified naïve art. This era of artistic exploration laid the foundations for many modern art movements, reflecting a continuous dialogue between past traditions and innovative techniques, including the emerging influence of photography. Many of the developments in French arts in this period parallel changes in 19th-century French literature.

France Médias Monde (English: France Media World) is a French state-owned holding company which supervises and co-ordinates the activities of the major public media organizations broadcasting or publishing internationally from France.

The company's subsidiaries are the radio broadcasters Radio France Internationale (RFI) and Monte Carlo Doualiya (MCD), and the television news broadcaster France 24. The company also has a 11.97% stake in the general entertainment and news network TV5Monde.

France Monde was the name of the initial project to house the various international branches of French external broadcasting under one roof, including Radio France International, France 24 and the French State's holdings in TV5Monde.

The shares that were in question were 100% of Radio France Internationale, 66.61% of TV5Monde (the remaining capital is held by the partner channels and some private investors) and 50% of France 24 (with the remainder held by TF1).

On 21 February 2008, it was announced the CEO of the network was appointed by French president Nicolas Sarkozy, as Alain de Pouzilhac, the former president of France 24, with Christine Ockrent, a journalist, serving as 'directrice générale déléguée' or 'Vice President'.

The appointment of Alain de Pouzilhac was met with strong hostility of the unions of the companies concerned. On Wednesday 17 September 2008, the director of France 24, Grégoire Deniau, quit his post and France 24's editor Bertrand Coq was made redundant. This inflamed the already tense atmosphere created over de Pouzilhac's role in the network.

Once the idea had been solidified, it was renamed the 'Society of Exterior Audiovisual of France' (SAEF). The former French president Nicolas Sarkozy stated that the SAEF would serve as an alternative to the BBC, CNN or Al Jazeera. It was expected that the combined funding, plus additional advertising revenue, would total €400 million.

At the end of 2010, the internal conflict between the two leaders de Pouzilhac and Ockrent broke out during an internal spying affair revealed by French newspaper Le Point. Christine Ockrent was therefore massively repudiated by the management teams at both SAEF and France 24. Two years later, de Pouzilhac tended his resignation on 12 July 2012. After the announcement, he was replaced by Marie-Christine Saragosse. After his resignation, Ockrent demanded €650,000 in severance payments, due to her being removed from vice-presidency as a result.

On 27 June 2013, AEF became France Médias Monde. With the rebrand, the holding company began to market itself explicitly for the first time, with new websites and branding created for all companies in the group, with 'A France Médias Monde channel' featured on France 24 press releases under its logo, and France Médias Monde links featured on each of its websites to emphasise the grouping of the different broadcasters.

The company was backed up by the signature of the first contract of objectives and means between the French State and the newly coined 'France Médias Monde' on 9 April 2014.

The France Pavilion is a French -themed pavilion that is part of the World Showcase within Epcot at Walt Disney World in Bay Lake, Florida. Its location is between the Morocco and United Kingdom pavilions.

The France Pavilion is themed to look like a Parisian neighborhood with a pool and fountains and with a view of the Eiffel Tower in the distance. Most of the shops on the streets are actual shops selling French goods such as Guerlain perfume. The attraction effects France's cities and historical structures. It also includes two French restaurants, Monsieur Paul (formerly the Bistro de Paris) and Les Chefs de France; as well as the eateries Les Halles Boulangerie and Patisserie and L'artisan des Glace ice-cream parlour.

As with many of the pavilions located within the World Showcase section of the Epcot park, a key aspect of the France Pavilion is its panoramic film Impressions de France. The film, which has been playing since the opening day of the Epcot park in 1982, offers a visual tour of the nation, set against a musical score written by Buddy Baker, encompassing the music of classical French composers such as Claude Debussy and Camille Saint-Saëns. The film itself is the work of director Rick Harper and produced by two-time Academy Award nominee Bob Rogers. The film's visual tour includes some of the nation's most stunning and romantic landmarks such as the cliffs of Étretat in the Haute-Normandie region, Mont Saint-Michel in Normandy, Château de Chambord in the Loire Valley, Notre Dame de Paris and the Eiffel Tower.

The country was previously a participant in the "Kim Possible World Showcase Adventure". The interactive scavenger hunt type attraction, which ran between January 2009 and June 2012, was played across the numerous themed lands of Epcot's "World Showcase". It was replaced by "Agent P's World Showcase Adventure" in June 2012.

On July 15, 2017, Disney announced that Remy's Ratatouille Adventure would be coming to the France Pavilion.

On January 16, 2020, a Beauty and the Beast sing-along show premiered in Palais du Cinéma, which alternates showtimes with Impressions de France. On December 12, 2022, EPCOT announced that the France Pavilion would participate in DuckTales World Showcase Adventure beginning on December 16; the opening date had been postponed since 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

Belle and the Beast from the 1991 Disney animated film Beauty and the Beast, Cinderella and Prince Charming from the 1950 Disney animated film Cinderella and Aurora and Prince Philip from the 1959 Disney animated film Sleeping Beauty, meet guests at the France Pavilion. In addition, the comedy chair climbing and balancing show "Serveur Amusant" performs on a daily basis outside Les Chefs de France. Also, adding to the themed land's atmosphere, are advertisements for Disneyland Paris and souvenirs featuring it.

La France profonde (" Deep France ") is a phrase that denotes the existence of "deep" and profoundly "French" aspects in the culture of French provincial towns, of French village life and rural agricultural culture, which escape the "dominant ideologies" (Michel Dion's expression) and the hegemony of Paris (as well as other major cities).

The term was made more familiar to Anglophone readers as a result of Dion's 1988 radical critique La France profonde, predicting a union of de-communised socialism with a reformed Catholic Church. Although he used the historical regions of Lorraine and Mayenne as examples in his book, the term can be applied more widely. It was further popularised in Celia Brayfield 's Deep France: A Writer's Year in La France profonde (2004) retitled in paperback Deep France: A Writer's Year in the Béarn. "Deep France" is seen to be profoundly localist in outlook and to be receding in the face of international mass culture. The term remains used in national politics, especially since the first election of Emmanuel Macron as President of France, which led to the subsequent yellow vests movement, which demanded, among other goals, an improved standard of living and improved government services for rural areas.

Albert Kahn 's photographic and cinematographic studies at the beginning of the 20th century possibly for the first time helped depict French provincial life and in doing so gave some vision into "Deep France".

France Travail (English: France Employment), previously Pôle emploi (French pronunciation: [ pol ɑ̃plwa ] ; English: Employment Centre), is a French governmental agency which registers unemployed people, helps them find jobs and provides them with financial aid.

In December 2007, Christine Lagarde, Minister of the Economy, unveiled the law to merge the Agence nationale pour l'emploi (" National Employment Agency ") and the Assédic to the government.

The merger was an electoral pledge of candidate Nicolas Sarkozy during the 2007 presidential election to cut the unemployment rate to 5% by 2012 while aiming at improving the efficiency of public services provided to unemployed people.

On February 13, 2008, the law implementing the fusion was officially voted on.

On December 18, 2023, it has been renamed to France Travail which the name change became effective on January 1, 2024.

The missions the agency is entrusted with are ANPE and Assedic's missions combined.

France Travail receives those that have declared unemployment and provides them with social benefits, while helping companies to find candidates for a job.

France Travail publish job offers, select themselves candidates and follow their first months in the job. They develop partnerships with companies to advise them.

France Travail focuses on people notably affected by long-term unemployment, young people, seniors, and RSA-beneficiaries (state funded welfare).

France Travail collects workers' contributions to finance unemployment benefits, paid by salaries. However, the government of François Fillon said this mission would be entrusted to the URSSAF.

France Travail provides advice and supervises job hunting, as well as providing a platform to help companies find and hire workers.

France Travail has a single phone number (39.49) to get information on registration and benefits. There is also a single web page (pole-emploi.fr, now redirected to francetravail.fr).

Once a candidate is enrolled into France Travail, they're appointed a personal adviser who:

The agency employs 45,000 civil servants.

Former ANPE and Assedic agents adapted to the fusion as 30,000 out of 45,000 agents followed a one-year training course.

The ANPE and Assedic logos have disappeared from every branch. While Unedic (or Unédic) remained in existence, it became an independent agency managed by the "social partners" (trade unions and company representatives).

Pole Emploi publish monthly statistics of job-seekers. It takes into account only people registered with Pole Emploi, and distinguishes between various categories of job-seekers.

The concept of job seekers registered at Pole Emploi is different from that of uses by the ILO.

Some registered job-seekers are not unemployed according to the ILO. Conversely, some unemployed according to the ILO definition are not registered to Pole Emploi. Data on unemployed people are based on administrative records in center jobs.

The statistics are legal rules: the Pole Emploi centers can accept people according to their availability and their activity.

According to the ILO definition, an unemployed person is a person of working age (i.e. aged 15 years or older) who does not work, not even one hour during the week, who is available to take a job within 15 days and who actively sought a job in the previous month.

In each country, a statistical survey is conducted to check whether these criteria are met.

In France, the INSEE is the body responsible for this survey, it publishes it every three months, while Pole Emploi delivers monthly statistics. There are always more people registered by Pole Emploi than people officially recognized as unemployed by the ILO.

48°50′20″N 2°16′17″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.83889°N 2.27139°E ﻿ / 48.83889; 2.27139

France Télévisions (French pronunciation: [ fʁɑ̃s televizjɔ̃ ] ; stylised since 2018 as france·tv) is the French national public television broadcaster. It is a state-owned company formed from the integration of the public television channels France 2 (formerly Antenne 2) and France 3 (formerly France Régions 3), later joined by the legally independent channels France 4 (formerly Festival), France 5 (formerly La Cinquième) and France Info.

France Télévisions is currently funded by the French Treasury and the revenue from commercial advertising. When advertising after 20:00 was abolished on France Télévisions in 2009, the French government initially planned to extend the ban to all daytime advertising. However, this measure was never implemented. In September 2010, Culture Minister Frédéric Mitterrand confirmed a two-year moratorium on the planned removal of daytime advertising, postponing the ban on commercials between 06:00 and 20:00 until at least 2014. As a result, France Télévisions continued to broadcast advertising during daytime hours, and the full abolition of advertising on public television was effectively abandoned.

France Télévisions is a supporter of the Hybrid Broadcast Broadband TV (HbbTV) initiative that is promoting and establishing an open European standard for hybrid set-top boxes for the reception of broadcast TV and broadband multimedia applications with a single user interface, and has selected HbbTV for its interactive news, sports and weather service, and plans to add catch-up TV and social media sharing capability.

From 1964 to 1975, French radio and television was monopolised through an organisation known as the Office de Radiodiffusion Télévision Française. In an effort to stimulate competition, the organisation was split in 1975 so that France's three television channels— TF1, Antenne 2, and FR3, would still be owned by the French government, but be operated independently from each other. However, the sale of TF1 to Bouygues in 1987 and increased competition from other new private broadcasters (such as Canal+ and La Cinq, the latter having been replaced by public channel La Cinquième after it ceased transmissions in April 1992) led to a decline in viewership for the two remaining public channels, which lost 30% of their market share between 1987 and 1989. The channels were however saved when a single director-general was appointed to manage both Antenne 2 and FR3, becoming part of a joint entity known as France Télévision. They were renamed in 1992 as France 2 and France 3, respectively.

In August 2000, France Télévisions S.A. was formed as a holding company for France's public television channels, absorbing control of France 2, France 3, and La Cinquième (later renamed France 5). In 2004, Réseau France Outre-mer was absorbed by France Télévisions. Beginning in 2008, the President of France took the duty of naming the presidents for the French public broadcasters; they were previously nominated by the Conseil supérieur de l'audiovisuel. In 2013, under Francois Hollande, the previously adopted law was modified to return the power to nominate the presidents or French public broadcasters to the Conseil supérieur de l'audiovisuel.

Okoo [ fr ] was launched on 9 December 2019 as the new children's television brand of France Télévisions, consisting of a programming block on France 3, France 4 and France 5 and a digital platform on France.tv. This new brand was considered for replacing France 4. Programming and content for teens and young adults would be moved to the new digital offer France.tv Slash.

France 4 and France Ô were threatened with closure as early as 2018, while President Macron had announced that they would be kept during the 2017 presidential elections. With the arrival of the COVID-19 pandemic and lockdown, France 4 transformed into a giant classroom by offering courses of all levels. Then, seeing this interest from 3–17-year olds, France 4, after the lockdown, transformed into a youth channel, offering cartoons all day long, like Gulli. As a result, it was decided to keep it, while France Ô closed down in August 2020. A few months later, its former EPG position, channel 19, was taken over by Culturebox, a channel focused on entertainment financed by France Télévisions, which would eventually go on channel 14, as an evening programming block on France 4. On 6 June 2025, France 4 took over Canal+ 's EPG position, channel 4, while the Culturebox name was removed, but some of its programming remain broadcast on France 4.

On 1 January 2022, France’s audiovisual regulator changed institutional form when the Conseil supérieur de l’audiovisuel (CSA) and the Haute Autorité pour la diffusion des œuvres et la protection des droits sur Internet (Hadopi) were merged into a single authority: the Autorité de régulation de la communication audiovisuelle et numérique (ARCOM).

ARCOM retained the CSA ’s powers regarding the governance of French public service media. In particular, Article 47-4 of the Law of 30 September 1986 provides that ARCOM appoints (for fixed terms) the presidents of France Télévisions, Radio France and the company responsible for France’s external public broadcasting (France Médias Monde).

France Télévisions took an interest in a number of thematic cable/satellite channels in France:

The channel Planète+ Crime was recently sold.

France Télévisions holds 100% of France Télémusique SAS.

The thematic channel Planète Juniors (formerly Ma Planète) ceased operations in March 2009, and Planète+ Thalassa closed on 31 December 2015.

France.tv is France Télévisions' streaming platform. Launched in 2010 as the catch-up service Pluzz, it offers live feeds of the France Télévisions channels, as well as on-demand streaming of their programmes, and acquired programmes from other broadcasters (such as a 2019 agreement with Canadian broadcaster Ici Radio-Canada Télé). The service was relaunched in 2017 under the France.tv branding, as part of an effort to promote it as the main digital platform of France Télévisions.

In July 2025, France Télévisions announced a partnership with Amazon Prime Video, under which France.tv's on-demand library and live streaming of all France Télévisions channels would become available on the Prime Video platform. The agreement, which took effect immediately, came shortly after commercial rival TF1 Group announced a similar partnership with Netflix to begin in 2026.

France Télévisions holds 45% of the Arte France holding company together with the French state (25%), Radio France (15%) and INA (15%). Arte France and Arte Deutschland form the Arte Consortium that manages the bilingual French-German channel (Arte shared its analogue channel with France 5, but both channels have separate full-time services on cable, satellite and digital broadcasts).

France Télévisions also controls the new R1 digital multiplex that currently hosts France 2, France 3, France 5, Arte and La Chaîne parlementaire. France 4 was originally on the R1 multiplex but was moved to R2 to allow space for regional channels on R1.

The 35-hour workweek is a labour reform policy adopted in France in February 2000, under Prime Minister Lionel Jospin 's Plural Left government. Promoted by Minister of Labour Martine Aubry, it was adopted in two phases: the Aubry 1 law in June 1998 and the Aubry 2 law in January 2000. The previous legal working week was 39 hours, established by President François Mitterrand, also a member of the Socialist Party. The 35-hour working week had been on the Socialist Party's 1981 electoral program, titled 110 Propositions for France, but was not pursued because of the poor state of the economy.

Time worked after the standard legal limit of 35 hours is considered overtime. The reform's aim is primarily to lower the unemployment rate, then at a record high of 12.5%, by encouraging the creation of jobs with work sharing.

The main stated objectives of the law were to create new jobs, by making it more cost effective to hire an additional worker than to pay current staff overtime, and the pursuit of decommodification of France's citizens, by lowering the amount of time dedicated to work without lowering their standard of living. Additionally, the Jospin government was able to advantage of the changes introduced with the 35-hour workweek to relax other workforce legislation.

The Aubry 1 law was passed in 1998. It served as an encouragement for businesses to transition voluntarily to a 35-hour workweek. It did so by offering a reduced payroll tax for all businesses that lowered their current employees' working hours and hired additional workers before January 2000.

The Aubry 2 law was adopted in January 2000. It legally lowered the standard hours worked per week from 39 to 35 for companies with more than 20 employees. Small businesses had until January 2002 to prepare for the shift. Additional hours worked after 35 then had to be paid at the overtime premium of 25% for the first eight hours, and then at a 50% premium for any further hours.

Businesses were required to sign an agreement with unions to bargain over the hourly wage increase, to make up for the potential loss of income by the employees' decreasing work time. Unions wanted to ensure that the reduced weekly hours would not result in a reduced income. Their slogan was "35 hours pays 39".

To motivate companies to compromise with unions, the government offered social security rebates to all firms that signed contracts with unions agreeing to a 35-hour workweek and wage increases. The legislation explicitly stated that monthly income must stay at the same level, however this only applied to minimum wage workers. To help small companies make the transition, the government increased the annual limit on overtime hours for small companies and set their overtime premiums at a lower rate.

The Raffarin government, some members of which were vocal critics of the law, gradually pushed for further relaxation of the legal working time requirements. On 22 December 2004, the French Parliament extended the maximum number of overtime hours per year from 180 to 220 under the Fallon laws. The reforms also reduced the payroll tax cuts given to companies that implemented the 35-hour workweek.

On 31 March 2005, another law extended the possibilities of overtime hours.

In August 2016, the El Khomri law reduced overtime payments.

Professor Fabrice Gilles at the University of Lille studied the impact of the Aubry laws, by analyzing data on capital operating time (the average time that capital equipment is in use at firms) from the Bank of France and administrative files on work time regulation agreements from the French Ministry of Labour. He found that capital operating time has not decreased in shift-work firms, because they responded by increasing the intensity of night-shift work and adding some additional overtime. In fact, shift-work companies have expanded scheduled hours to preserve output and increase productivity. Non-shift-work companies have decreased their capital operating costs.

There has not been a significant rise in dual jobholding as a result of the reduction of full-time employment work hours.

Even though the standard hours worked in a week has been lowered to 35, some occupations demand more. The French bar association (CNB) says that 44% of lawyers in the country worked 55 hours or more a week in 2008. Part-time workers work an average 23.3 hours a week in France, compared to the European average of 20.1 hours.

After being implemented, the Aubry reforms were credited with lowering unemployment and expanding the economy, although they have been met with legislative proposals for additional reforms.

Businesses have overhead costs such as training, rent and employment taxes that do not adjust with operating hours. The expenses and higher wages cause the cost benefit of hiring an extra worker to go down, and raise the incremental cost of each additional worker.

Generally speaking, left-wing parties and trade unions support the reduction, while right-wing parties and the MEDEF employer federation oppose it. Critics of the 35-hour working week have argued that it has failed to serve its purpose because an increase in recruitment has not occurred. In their view, the reluctance of firms to take on new workers has instead simply increased hourly production quotas. According to right-wing parties and economic commentators, the main reason that French firms avoid hiring new workers is that French employment regulations on labour flexibility make it difficult to lay off workers during poor economic periods.

The international border between the modern states of France and Germany has a length of 450 km (280 mi). The southern portion of the border, between Saint-Louis at the border with Switzerland and Lauterbourg, follows the River Rhine (Upper Rhine) in a south-to-north direction through the Upper Rhine Plain. The border then turns westward until it reaches the tripoint between France, Germany and Luxembourg.

The Franco-German border can be traced back to the 17th century, and the various treaties following the Thirty Years' War (1618–1648), starting with the Treaty of Westphalia (1648) and the Treaty of Nijmegen (1678–1679), marking the Rhine as the frontier between the Kingdom of France, and the different German states. The actual border was determined in the Congress of Vienna in 1815. The border then changed after the French defeat during the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871), where the French Third Republic was forced to yield Alsace-Lorraine to the new German Empire in 1871. The territory was then returned to France 48 years later after the Treaty of Versailles in 1919. The border changed again in 1941 when Nazi Germany de facto annexed the region (without international legal recognition, or treaty). The current border was re-established after the defeat of Nazi Germany in World War II.

In 2019, German authorities instituted extended border checks. These checks resulted in 178 people who had been banned from entering Germany being denied entry. 1,177 people on the wanted list were arrested, there were 1,235 breaches of residency laws, 406 breaches against narcotics laws, 205 breaches of weapons laws, 47 cases of falsified documents, and 19 people with extremist backgrounds were hindered from entering Germany. Most of these were along the borders to France and Austria.

The border follows the Upper Rhine from the tripoint (Dreiländereck) with the French-Swiss and the German-Swiss borders at Basel (47°35′24″N 7°35′20″E ﻿ / ﻿ 47.590°N 7.589°E ﻿ / 47.590; 7.589), passing between Strasbourg and Offenburg. The Rhine forms the eastern border of Alsace on the French side and the western border of Baden-Württemberg on the German side.

Upstream of Karlsruhe (48°58′01″N 8°14′02″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.967°N 8.234°E ﻿ / 48.967; 8.234), the border leaves the Rhine, cutting westward to forming the northern border of Alsace and Lorraine on the French side, and the southern border of Rhineland-Palatinate and Saarland on the German side. It passes Saarbrücken, Petite-Rosselle, Freyming-Merlebach, Creutzwald (where it follows the Bist for a short stretch), Überherrn, and meets the E29 before it terminates at the French-Luxembourgish-German tripoint on the Moselle, near the village of Schengen, Luxembourg (49°27′36″N 6°22′08″E ﻿ / ﻿ 49.460°N 6.369°E ﻿ / 49.460; 6.369 ; chosen as the symbolic site for the signing of the Schengen Agreement between France, Germany, and the Benelux countries in 1985).

The France–Luxembourg border stretches 73 kilometers (45 miles) in length, to the northeast of France and to the south of Luxembourg.

It begins in the west at the Belgium-France-Luxembourg tripoint (49°32′47″N 5°49′07″E ﻿ / ﻿ 49.54639°N 5.81861°E ﻿ / 49.54639; 5.81861), at the junction of the Belgian municipality of Aubange, the French commune of Mont-Saint-Martin and the Luxembourgish commune of Pétange. This point is located on the Chiers.

It then follows a general easterly direction to the Germany-France-Luxembourg tripoint (49°28′10″N 6°22′02″E ﻿ / ﻿ 49.469444°N 6.367222°E ﻿ / 49.469444; 6.367222), at the junction of the German municipality of Perl, the French commune of Apach and the Luxembourgish commune of Schengen. This point is located on the Moselle.

When the province of Trois-Évêchés was created in 1552, a first Franco-Luxembourgish border came into existence: it was located between the north of the arrondissement of Metz and the south of that of Thionville.

Under a treaty concluded at Marville in 1602, the Dukes of Luxembourg and Bar exchanged numerous villages along the border. Among these were Rédange, which was ceded to Bar, and Signeulx, Saint-Remy, Grandcourt, and Ruette-la-Petite, which were ceded to Luxembourg.

After the Treaty of the Pyrenees in 1659, despite the changes that occurred in the dynasties of its sovereigns, the territorial surface of Luxembourg experienced no variation until 1795, except for those agreed by Marie-Thérèse and the King of France Louis XV, recounted in the two boundary treaties of 1769 and 1779.

The convention of 16 May 1769 put an end to the existence of several enclaves in France and Austrian Netherlands (of which Luxembourg was a part at the time), this convention also formed a new boundary line: "The Ruisseau of Frisange (Gander) will serve as Limits in this part, from the place where it leaves the Territory of Frisange, as far as that where it enters the Territory of Ganderen, and from this point, pulling as far as the Moselle, the Limit will remain as it is now, so that Ganderen, Beyern and all that currently belongs below the said Limit to the Empress Queen, will henceforth belong to France”.

The King ceded to the Empress-Queen, via Article XVIII, his rights, claims and possessions over the villages and places located to the left of the Frisange stream. Her Majesty the Empress Queen for her part renounced, via article XIX, all claims to the seigniories that France has so far claimed to possess as dependencies of Thionville, insofar as they are located to the right of the said Frisange stream and the limit marked by article XVIII.

The King of France ceded to the Empress-Queen, on the border of Luxembourg, the village, land and seigneury of Sommethonne [ fr ], as well as the property of Haillon with their belongings, dependencies and annexes (article XXIX). The Empress-Queen ceded to the King, in the same province, the villages of Gernelle and Rumelle, together with their belongings, dependencies and annexes (article XXX).

The communes of Évrange and Hagen were united by decree of 12 April 1811 in Frisange (at the time in the Department of Forests); then reintegrated into the Moselle, under the treaty of 1814.

Before the Revolution, the village of Manderen, landlocked in Lorraine, belonged to the Austrian Netherlands as a dependent of Luxembourg. Following the conquests of France, this village was classified in the department of Forests (canton of Remich). Occupied by Prussia in 1815, the village was finally ceded by it to France in 1829.

From 1871 to 1918, following the German annexation, the Franco-Luxembourg border was reduced to a line that ran from Mont-Saint-Martin to Hussigny-Godbrange.

The last modification of the course of the border dates from 2007 with the exchange of land with a total area of 87,679 square metres (943,770 sq ft) between the French municipality of Russange and that of Luxembourg Sanem, west of Esch-sur-Alzette, as part of a brownfields project to reconvert steel wastelands into tertiary and university hubs.

There are currently four open rail crossings:

There are many road crossing points crossing the border, the major one being European route E25 from Strasbourg via Saint-Avold and Metz (A 31) to Luxembourg city (A 3), crossing the border at Zoufftgen.

The France–Spain border was formally defined in 1659. It separates the two countries from the Basque cities of Hendaye and Irun in the west, running through the Pyrenees to Cerbère and Portbou on the Mediterranean Sea. It runs roughly along the drainage divide defined by the Pyrenees, though with several exceptions.

The Franco-Spanish border runs for 685.42 kilometres (425.90 mi) between southwestern France and northeastern Spain. It begins in the west on the Bay of Biscay at the French city of Hendaye and the Spanish city of Irun (43°22′32″N 01°47′31″W ﻿ / ﻿ 43.37556°N 1.79194°W ﻿ / 43.37556; -1.79194). The border continues eastward along the Pyrenees to the sovereign nation of Andorra (42°36′13″N 1°26′30″E ﻿ / ﻿ 42.60361°N 1.44167°E ﻿ / 42.60361; 1.44167). At this point, the small country interrupts the border between Spain and France for 63.7 kilometres (39.6 mi) on the Spanish side and 56 kilometres (35 mi) on the French side. Then the border continues eastward (42°30′09″N 01°43′34″E ﻿ / ﻿ 42.50250°N 1.72611°E ﻿ / 42.50250; 1.72611) to the Mediterranean Sea at Cerbère in France and Portbou in Spain (42°26′09″N 03°10′26″E ﻿ / ﻿ 42.43583°N 3.17389°E ﻿ / 42.43583; 3.17389). The perimeter of the Llívia enclave is also included.

Spain has an exclave in France, Llívia, in the Pyrénées-Orientales.

Near the western end of the border, following the course of the river Bidasoa, Pheasant Island (located in the middle of the river) has an unusual border regime: the island is a condominium whose sovereignty is shared between the two countries: one country in January–June each year, and the other country in July–December.

The formal layout of the Franco-Spanish border dates back to the signing of the Treaty of the Pyrenees between the kingdoms of Spain and France in 1659. This was followed by the Treaty of Llivia the following year, which transferred to France the sovereignty of several villages in the valley of Querol.

Later there were some further agreements covering specific areas:

The final definition, which for the most part is still in force, is set out in the Bayonne Treaties between 1856 and 1868. During the mandates of Queen Isabel II and the French emperor Napoleon III, several agreements were signed between the two countries by which the border was established:

Later both countries concluded agreements under the same point. In 1980 an agreement was signed to define the border into the Bielsa-Aragnouet tunnel, and 1984, during the construction of the road linking the Roncal Valley with Arette, a mutual transfer of land of 2710 m (29,170 sq ft) was agreed.

In 1995, with the entry into force of the Schengen Agreement, border controls for people and goods were abolished, thus ensuring freedom of movement across the border. A number of disused border stations remain.

Following the provisions of the treaties of Bayonne, the border is physically marked on the ground by 602 cairns showing the division between the two countries. These markers are numbered from west to east: the first located on the Bidasoa and the last in Cap Cerbère, marked with consecutive numbers and letters.

Another 45 cairns mark the border around Llivia; they are numbered anticlockwise from the number 1 at the entrance of the French road RD-68 into the enclave. Maintaining this signaling runs either on behalf of both states.

The France–Suriname or French Guiana–Suriname border is a roughly 520-kilometer line that internationally separates French Guiana (an overseas department of France) and Suriname. In 1915, the border was decided upon, following the Maroni River for its northern portion, but the southernmost section of the border remains disputed despite numerous attempts to officially and formally demarcate it. Particularly, the debate is over which Lawa River sub-tributary should be considered the international border between the two nations. In addition to the land border, France, through its overseas department, and Suriname, share an approximately 200-nautical mile maritime border that was fully demarcated in 2017.

There exists a dispute between France and Suriname about the tributary that forms the southern extension of the border, the Itany, a sub-tributary of the Lawa River, or the more eastern Marouini, another sub-tributary of the Lawa. Many maps depict the border along the Itany River, the easternmost tributary favored by France. However, Suriname disagrees with this decision, and recognizes the border as following the Marouini. The area between these two rivers is an approximately 5,000 square mile disputed territory commonly referred to as the Marouini River Tract, a rural and forested area with a small population; it is believed to hold potentially valuable mineral deposits despite neither government formally surveying the natural resources present in the area. Prior to 1975, Suriname was a Dutch colony.

In 1836, Dutch and French officials sat down to determine the border between their colonies. The Maroni was decided upon as the border from the Caribbean Sea to the now tripoint border with Brazil. However, the headwaters of the river were unknown to them, so it was to be decided between the Tapahoni or the Lawa tributaries as the southernmost portion of the border. This went unaddressed for 30 years until in 1861 another meeting was held to determine the dividing tributary. The Lawa was decided upon after the colonists' exploration into the river. However, this was only agreed upon by the colonists, and the governments of both nations disagreed with this resolution. 13 years later, in 1874 (and throughout the next couple decades), gold was discovered in the Marouini River Tract, leading to further attention to the area by the French and the Dutch, the latter requesting a third-party arbitrator to put an end to the dispute. Tsar Alexander III decided to take action, and in May of 1891 the Tsar ruled in favor of the Dutch government, stating the Lawa shall be the official border. However, a new question was to be answered; whether or not the Marouini or Itany sub-tributaries of the Lawa should act as a border, the dispute still partially unresolved to this day.

A major development in the dispute occurred in 2021, when both governments agreed upon two-thirds of the river boundary, from the mouth of the Maroni to the village of Antécume-Pata. However, a portion of the disputed territory remains uncertain as of 2025, specifically most of the Lawa dispute.

The France–Switzerland border is 572 km (355 mi) long. Its current path is mostly the product of the Congress of Vienna of 1815, with the accession of Geneva, Neuchâtel and Valais to the Swiss Confederation, but it has since been modified in detail, the last time being in 2002. Although most of the border, marked with border stones, is unguarded, several checkpoints remain staffed, most notably on busy roads.

The tripoint where the border meets the Germany–Switzerland border and France–Germany border is in the river Rhine (at 47°35′23″N 7°35′20″E ﻿ / ﻿ 47.5898°N 7.5890°E ﻿ / 47.5898; 7.5890) north of Basel. A monument has been built near it, known as the Dreiländereck.

The border follows the Upper Rhine for about 1.5 km (0.93 mi). It then runs south of EuroAirport Basel Mulhouse Freiburg and then towards the southwest, separating the villages of Schönenbuch (Switzerland), Neuwiller (France), Leymen (France) and Rodersdorf (Switzerland).

It then enters the Jura chain, rising above 800 m (2,600 ft) of altitude before meeting the La Lucelle river at 460 m (1,510 ft), between Roggenburg, Basel-Country and Kiffis (France). It follows the Lucelle as far as Lucelle municipality, running across the grounds of Lucelle Abbey. It then turns north to include the Swiss canton of Jura ; it crosses the Doubs river at Brémoncourt, to include the Clos du Doubs region in Switzerland. It meets the Doubs a second time further upstream, at 481 m (1,578 ft). From here, it follows the winding course of the river as far as the Lac des Brenets, north of Le Locle, at 756 m (2,480 ft).

After passing the Col des Roches at 920 m (3,020 ft), the border runs in a south-westerly direction, generally following the Jura ridge, reaching an altitude of 1,288 m (4,226 ft) (Le Meix Musy). It turns towards the south to include Pontarlier in France and again to the southwest to include Vallorbe and the Lac de Joux in Switzerland. Here it reaches an altitude of 1,377 m (4,518 ft), before crossing the Orbe river upstream of Bois-d'Amont.

South of Les Rousses it turns to the south and then southeast, running towards Lake Geneva, rising to 1,400 m (4,600 ft) at 46°24′41″N 6°05′12″E ﻿ / ﻿ 46.4113°N 6.0866°E ﻿ / 46.4113; 6.0866, passing south of La Dôle peak. Some 3 km (1.9 mi) before reaching the lake, the border runs parallel to the shore of Lake Geneva, forming the strip of land ceded by France to Switzerland in 1815 as the canton of Geneva, so that the City of Geneva has a land bridge connecting it to the rest of Switzerland.

The border now encircles the City of Geneva. West of the city, it follows the Rhône for some 6 km (3.7 mi), until the westernmost point of Switzerland, at 46°07′57″N 5°57′21″E ﻿ / ﻿ 46.1324°N 5.9559°E ﻿ / 46.1324; 5.9559. The border passes between Geneva and Annemasse, heading east towards Saint-Cergues ; it finally finds Lake Geneva from the south, at Hermance.

The border runs along the centre of Lake Geneva, but makes landfall before reaching the mouth of the Rhône, at Saint-Gingolph, which marks the western end of the Saint-Gingolph–Saint-Maurice railway in Switzerland. A project exists to reuse a now-abandoned line to Évian-les-Bains in France and thereby reconnect the two countries by train on the south shore of Lake Geneva. From here, the border runs south and southeast into the High Alps, forming the western border of the Valais. It passes Les Cornettes de Bise (2,431 m (7,976 ft)), the Dent de Barme (2,759 m (9,052 ft)), Petit Ruan (2,846 m (9,337 ft)), the Pointe des Rosses (2,965 m (9,728 ft)), the Pointe de la Fenive (2,838 m (9,311 ft)) and Le Cheval Blanc (2,830 m (9,280 ft)), placing the Lac du Vieux Émosson in Switzerland. From Grand Perrond (2,672 m (8,766 ft)), the border descends to 1,130 m (3,710 ft), crossing the road from Martigny to Chamonix, before ascending to Les Grandes Otanes (2,656 m (8,714 ft)), the Aiguille du Tour (3,541 m (11,617 ft)), the Aiguille d'Argentière (3,898 m (12,789 ft)), Tour Noir (3,837 m (12,589 ft)) and finally to the tripoint with the French–Italian and Swiss–Italian borders, at a point just west of Mont Dolent, 45°55′22″N 7°02′39″E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.9227°N 7.0441°E ﻿ / 45.9227; 7.0441 and at 3,752 metres (12,310 ft) altitude.

Since Switzerland's accession to the Schengen Area in 2008, there have been no permanent passport controls along the border, although there can be customs controls.

There are two airports near the border which have both Swiss and French passport and customs controls; passengers are free to choose one. These are: EuroAirport Basel Mulhouse Freiburg which is located in France, but passengers can go to Switzerland without going through French border controls; and Geneva Airport which is located in Switzerland, but passengers arriving on flights from France can go to France without going through Swiss border controls. The Geneva Airport runway was extended in 1960 after France and Switzerland swapped territories to make this possible.

An incomplete list of Customs stations from northeast to south:

There are several other roads which cross the border, but most are without staffed customs controls.

As of the December 2023 timetable change, cross-border services between France and Switzerland exist on the following railway lines (from North to South):

As of the December 2023 timetable change, the following tram lines operate on cross-border routes:

The Large Hadron Collider (LHC), the world's largest and highest-energy particle accelerator, built by the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), extends across the border near the Swiss city of Geneva.

Francisque Gay (2 May 1885 – 22 October 1963) was a French editor, politician and diplomat. He was committed to the Catholic Church and to Christian democracy. He ran the Bloud et Gay publishing house for many years, and edited the influential journals La Vie Catholique (Catholic Life) and l'Aube (The Dawn). He helped publish clandestine journals during the German occupation of France in World War II (1939–45). After the war he was a deputy from 1945 to 1951, and participated in three cabinets in 1945–46.

Francisque Gay was born on 2 May 1885 in Roanne, Loire, son of a plumbing contractor. He was educated by the Marists of Charlieu, then by the Lazarists of Lyon. In 1903, when he was aged 18, Gay helped at the national congress of the Cercles d'études (Study Circles) in Lyon. There he was impressed by the views of Marc Sangnier, founder of Le Sillon (The Furrow). He went to Paris to visit Sangnier at his home on the boulevard Raspail and to offer his help with Le Sillon. He was deeply influenced by Sangnier's views on Social Catholicism, and founded a branch of Le Sillon in Roanne. He contributed to Le Sillon's journal, Démocratie.

Gay became more deeply involved in Catholicism, and in 1905 entered the Major Seminary of Francheville. He left when the seminary closed in December 1906 and moved to Paris, where he studied at the Sorbonne faculty of letters. He then moved to Montpellier where he was accepted as an English teacher by a religious college.

In 1909 Gay abandoned teaching and obtained a job with Bloud & Cie, a publisher. He had met one of the owners, Edmond Bloud, through Le Sillon. Henri Bloud, Edmond's brother and co-owner of the publishing house, retired on 29 April 1911. He sold part of his share to Edmond Bloud, who now owned 60% of the enterprise, and part to Francisque Gay, who now owned 40%. The company name was changed to "Bloud et Gay". On 20 May 1911 Gay married Blanche Marie Fromillon. They would have six children. On 30 December 1922 Bloud & Gay became a société anonyme, a publicly held company. Edmond Bloud was active in politics, and from 1924 reduced his involvement in the company to one day per week.

In the 1920s and 1930s Gay was one of the leading polemicists for the Christian democratic movement. In 1924 he joined the Popular Democratic Party (Parti démocrate populaire, PDP). That year he launched the weekly La Vie Catholique (Catholic Life). In 1926 La Vie Catholique defended Pope Pius XI 's condemnation of the far-right Action Française. On 1 January 1927 the Pope sent a telegram to Gay thanking him for the courage of La Vie catholique. In 1927 Gay founded the Volontaires du Pape (Volunteers of the Pope) to disseminate Social Catholicism throughout Europe, and arranged a large pilgrimage to Rome with this organization in 1929.

Gay also founded L'Almanach catholique, then in 1932 L'Aube (The Dawn). L'Aube presented Christian democratic views, and was notable for the editorials of Georges Bidault. In 1938 Gay and Bidault, who also belonged to the PDP, founded the New French Team (Nouvelles Equipes Françaises, NEF). The purpose was to pull together Christian Democrats against the rising dangers of Fascism. Gay's journalistic activity was reduced with the approach of World War II (1939–45). La Vie catholique was closed in 1938 and L'Aube closed in June 1940.

Francisque Gay became active in the French Resistance, using the Lyon and Paris premises of his publishing house as a base. He helped publish the clandestine reviews La France continue and Les cahiers politiques. In March 1944 he escaped arrest by the Gestapo and went into hiding until the Liberation of Paris in August 1944. L'Aube reappeared on 23 August 1944 during the height of the Paris uprising. In November 1944 Gay, Georges Bidault and others founded the Popular Republican Movement (Mouvement Républicain Populaire, MRP). Also in November 1944 Gay was appointed to the Provisional Consultative Assembly and was made a member of the committees on National Education and on Information and Propaganda. Gay was appointed head of the Press department of the Ministry of Information.

Gay was elected to the first National Constituent Assembly on the MRP platform for the first district of the Seine. He voted against the draft constitution of 19 April 1946. He was reelected to the second National Constituent Assembly and voted for the draft constitution of 28 September 1946, which was ratified by a popular referendum. Gay was deputy for the Seine from 1946 to 1951. He was Minister of State from 21 November 1945 to 26 January 1946 in the cabinet of Charles de Gaulle. He was Vice-President of the Council (Deputy Prime Minister) from 26 January 1946 to 24 June 1946. He was again Minister of State from 24 June 1946 to 16 December 1946 in the cabinet of Georges Bidault. Gay was ambassador to Canada from April 1948 to October 1949.

Gay became disillusioned with politics. He felt that the MRP was too conservative, particularly on colonial issues. He did not stand for reelection in July 1951, but returned to his publishing business, He sold this business in 1954 to Desclée et Cie. He died in Paris on 23 October 1963 after suffering a heart attack.

Francium is a chemical element ; it has symbol Fr and atomic number 87. It is extremely radioactive ; its most stable isotope, francium-223 (originally called actinium K after the natural decay chain in which it appears), has a half-life of only 22 minutes. It is the second-most electropositive element, behind only caesium, and is the second rarest naturally occurring element (after astatine). Francium's isotopes decay quickly into astatine, radium, and radon. The electronic structure of a francium atom is [Rn] 7s ; thus, the element is classed as an alkali metal.

As a consequence of its extreme instability, bulk francium has never been seen. Because of the general appearance of the other elements in its periodic table column, it is presumed that francium would appear as a highly reactive metal if enough could be collected together to be viewed as a bulk solid or liquid. Obtaining such a sample is highly improbable since the extreme heat of decay resulting from its short half-life would immediately vaporize any viewable quantity of the element.

Francium was discovered by Marguerite Perey in France (from which the element takes its name) on January 7, 1939. Before its discovery, francium was referred to as eka - caesium or ekacaesium because of its conjectured existence below caesium in the periodic table. It was the last element first discovered in nature, rather than by synthesis. Outside the laboratory, francium is extremely rare, with trace amounts found in uranium ores, where the isotope francium-223 (in the family of uranium-235) continually forms and decays. As little as 1 ounce (28 g) exists at any given time throughout the Earth's crust ; aside from francium-223 and francium-221, its other isotopes are entirely synthetic. The largest amount produced in the laboratory was a cluster of more than 300,000 atoms.

Francium is one of the most unstable of the naturally occurring elements: its longest-lived isotope, francium-223, has a half-life of only 22 minutes. The only comparable element is astatine, whose most stable natural isotope, astatine-219 (the alpha daughter of francium-223), has a half-life of 56 seconds, although synthetic astatine-210 is much longer-lived with a half-life of 8.1 hours. All isotopes of francium decay into astatine, radium, or radon. Francium-223 also has a shorter half-life than the longest-lived isotope known of each element up to and including element 105, dubnium.

Francium is an alkali metal whose chemical properties mostly resemble those of caesium. A heavy element with a single valence electron, it has the highest equivalent weight of any element. Liquid francium—if created—should have a surface tension of 0.05092 N /m at its melting point. Francium's melting point was estimated to be around 8.0 °C (46.4 °F) ; a value of 27 °C (81 °F) is also often encountered. The melting point is uncertain because of the element's extreme rarity and radioactivity ; a different extrapolation based on Dmitri Mendeleev 's method gave 20 ± 1.5 °C (68.0 ± 2.7 °F). A calculation based on the melting temperatures of binary ionic crystals gives 24.861 ± 0.517 °C (76.750 ± 0.931 °F). The estimated boiling point of 620 °C (1,148 °F) is also uncertain; the estimates 598 °C (1,108 °F) and 677 °C (1,251 °F), as well as the extrapolation from Mendeleev's method of 640 °C (1,184 °F), have also been suggested. The density of francium is expected to be around 2.48 g/cm (Mendeleev's method extrapolates 2.4 g/cm). Another calculation gives a much higher value of 3.57 g/cm. Francium is predicted to have a bulk modulus of 2.1–2.6 GPa.

Linus Pauling estimated the electronegativity of francium at 0.7 on the Pauling scale, the same as caesium; the value for caesium has since been refined to 0.79, but there are no experimental data to allow a refinement of the value for francium. Francium has a slightly higher ionization energy than caesium, 392.811(4) kJ/mol as opposed to 375.7041(2) kJ/mol for caesium, as would be expected from relativistic effects, and this would imply that caesium is the less electronegative of the two. Francium should also have a higher electron affinity than caesium and the Fr ion should be more polarizable than the Cs ion.

As a result of francium's instability, its salts are only known to a small extent. Francium coprecipitates with several caesium salts, such as caesium perchlorate, which results in small amounts of francium perchlorate. This coprecipitation can be used to isolate francium, by adapting the radiocaesium coprecipitation method of Lawrence E. Glendenin and C. M. Nelson. It will additionally coprecipitate with many other caesium salts, including the iodate, the picrate, the tartrate (also rubidium tartrate), the chloroplatinate, and the silicotungstate. It also coprecipitates with silicotungstic acid, and with perchloric acid, without another alkali metal as a carrier, which leads to other methods of separation.

Francium perchlorate is produced by the reaction of francium chloride and sodium perchlorate. The francium perchlorate coprecipitates with caesium perchlorate. This coprecipitation can be used to isolate francium, by adapting the radiocaesium coprecipitation method of Lawrence E. Glendenin and C. M. Nelson. However, this method is unreliable in separating thallium, which also coprecipitates with caesium. Francium perchlorate's entropy is expected to be 42.7 e.u (178.7 J mol K).

Francium halides are all soluble in water and are expected to be white solids. They are expected to be produced by the reaction of the corresponding halogens. For example, francium chloride would be produced by the reaction of francium and chlorine. Francium chloride has been studied as a pathway to separate francium from other elements, by using the high vapour pressure of the compound, although francium fluoride would have a higher vapour pressure.

Francium nitrate, sulfate, hydroxide, carbonate, acetate, and oxalate, are all soluble in water, while the iodate, picrate, tartrate, chloroplatinate, and silicotungstate are insoluble. The insolubility of these compounds are used to extract francium from other radioactive products, such as zirconium, niobium, molybdenum, tin, antimony, the method mentioned in the section above. Francium oxide is believed to disproportionate to the peroxide and francium metal. The CsFr molecule is predicted to have the heavier element (francium) at the negative end of the dipole, unlike all known heterodiatomic alkali metal molecules. Francium superoxide (FrO 2) is expected to have a more covalent character than its lighter congeners ; this is attributed to the 6p electrons in francium being more involved in the francium–oxygen bonding. The relativistic destabilisation of the 6p 3/2 spinor may make francium compounds in oxidation states higher than +1 possible, such as [Fr F 6 ] ; but this has not been experimentally confirmed.

There are 37 known isotopes of francium ranging in atomic mass from 197 to 233. Francium has seven metastable nuclear isomers. Francium-223 and francium-221 are the only isotopes that occur in nature, with the former being far more common.

Francium-223 is the most stable isotope, with a half-life of 21.8 minutes, and it is highly unlikely that an isotope of francium with a longer half-life will ever be discovered or synthesized. Francium-223 is a fifth product of the uranium-235 decay series as a daughter isotope of actinium-227 ; thorium-227 is the more common daughter. Francium-223 then decays into radium-223 by beta decay (1.149 MeV decay energy), with a minor (0.006%) alpha decay path to astatine-219 (5.4 MeV decay energy).

Francium-221 has a half-life of 4.8 minutes. It is the ninth product of the neptunium decay series as a daughter isotope of actinium-225. Francium-221 then decays into astatine-217 by alpha decay (6.457 MeV decay energy). Although all primordial Np is extinct, the neptunium decay series continues to exist naturally in tiny traces due to (n,2n) knockout reactions in natural U. Francium-222, with a half-life of 14 minutes, may be produced as a result of the beta decay of natural radon-222 ; this process has nonetheless not yet been observed, and it is unknown whether this process is energetically possible.

The least stable ground state isotope is francium-215, with a half-life of 90 ns: it undergoes a 9.54 MeV alpha decay to astatine-211.

Due to its instability and rarity, there are no commercial applications for francium. It has been used for research purposes in the fields of chemistry and of atomic structure. Its use as a potential diagnostic aid for various cancers has also been explored, but this application has been deemed impractical.

Francium's ability to be synthesized, trapped, and cooled, along with its relatively simple atomic structure, has made it the subject of specialized spectroscopy experiments. These experiments have led to more specific information regarding energy levels and the coupling constants between subatomic particles. Studies on the light emitted by laser-trapped francium-210 ions have provided accurate data on transitions between atomic energy levels which are fairly similar to those predicted by quantum theory. Francium is a prospective candidate for searching for CP violation.

As early as 1870, chemists thought that there should be an alkali metal beyond caesium, with an atomic number of 87. It was then referred to by the provisional name eka-caesium.

In 1914, Stefan Meyer, Viktor F. Hess, and Friedrich Paneth (working in Vienna) made measurements of alpha radiation from various substances, including Ac. They observed the possibility of a minor alpha branch of this nuclide, though follow-up work could not be done due to the outbreak of World War I. Their observations were not precise and sure enough for them to announce the discovery of element 87, though it is likely that they did indeed observe the decay of Ac to Fr.

Soviet chemist Dmitry Dobroserdov was the first scientist to claim to have found eka-caesium, or francium. In 1925, he observed weak radioactivity in a sample of potassium, another alkali metal, and incorrectly concluded that eka-caesium was contaminating the sample (the radioactivity from the sample was from the naturally occurring potassium radioisotope, potassium-40). He then published a thesis on his predictions of the properties of eka-caesium, in which he named the element russium after his home country. Shortly thereafter, Dobroserdov began to focus on his teaching career at the Polytechnic Institute of Odesa, and he did not pursue the element further.

The following year, English chemists Gerald J. F. Druce and Frederick H. Loring analyzed X-ray photographs of manganese(II) sulfate. They observed spectral lines which they presumed to be of eka-caesium. They announced their discovery of element 87 and proposed the name alkalinium, as it would be the heaviest alkali metal.

In 1930, Fred Allison of the Alabama Polytechnic Institute claimed to have discovered element 87 (in addition to 85) when analyzing pollucite and lepidolite using his magneto-optical machine. Allison requested that it be named virginium after his home state of Virginia, along with the symbols Vi and Vm. In 1934, H.G. MacPherson of UC Berkeley disproved the effectiveness of Allison's device and the validity of his discovery.

In 1936, Romanian physicist Horia Hulubei and his French colleague Yvette Cauchois also analyzed pollucite, this time using their high-resolution X-ray apparatus. They observed several weak emission lines, which they presumed to be those of element 87. Hulubei and Cauchois reported their discovery and proposed the name moldavium, along with the symbol Ml, after Moldavia, the Romanian province where Hulubei was born. In 1937, Hulubei's work was criticized by American physicist F. H. Hirsh Jr., who rejected Hulubei's research methods. Hirsh was certain that eka-caesium would not be found in nature, and that Hulubei had instead observed mercury or bismuth X-ray lines. Hulubei insisted that his X-ray apparatus and methods were too accurate to make such a mistake. Because of this, Jean Baptiste Perrin, Nobel Prize winner and Hulubei's mentor, endorsed moldavium as the true eka-caesium over Marguerite Perey 's recently discovered francium. Perey took pains to be accurate and detailed in her criticism of Hulubei's work, and finally she was credited as the sole discoverer of element 87. All other previous purported discoveries of element 87 were ruled out due to francium's very limited half-life.

Eka-caesium was discovered on January 7, 1939, by Marguerite Perey of the Curie Institute in Paris, when she purified a sample of actinium -227 which had been reported to have a decay energy of 220 keV. Perey noticed decay particles with an energy level below 80 keV. Perey thought this decay activity might have been caused by a previously unidentified decay product, one which was separated during purification, but emerged again out of the pure actinium-227. Various tests eliminated the possibility of the unknown element being thorium, radium, lead, bismuth, or thallium. The new product exhibited chemical properties of an alkali metal (such as coprecipitating with caesium salts), which led Perey to believe that it was element 87, produced by the alpha decay of actinium-227. Perey then attempted to determine the proportion of beta decay to alpha decay in actinium-227. Her first test put the alpha branching at 0.6%, a figure which she later revised to 1%.

Perey named the new isotope actinium-K (it is now referred to as francium-223) and in 1946, she proposed the name catium (Cm) for her newly discovered element, as she believed it to be the most electropositive cation of the elements. Irène Joliot-Curie, one of Perey's supervisors, opposed the name due to its connotation of cat rather than cation ; furthermore, the symbol coincided with that which had since been assigned to curium. Perey then suggested francium, after France. This name was officially adopted by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) in 1949, becoming the second element after gallium to be named after France. It was assigned the symbol Fa, but it was revised to the current Fr shortly thereafter. Francium was the last element discovered in nature, rather than synthesized, following hafnium and rhenium. Further research into francium's structure was carried out by, among others, Sylvain Lieberman and his team at CERN in the 1970s and 1980s.

Fr is the result of the alpha decay of Ac and can be found in trace amounts in uranium minerals. In a given sample of uranium, there is estimated to be only one francium atom for every 1 × 10 uranium atoms. Only about 1 ounce (28 g) of francium is present naturally in the earth's crust.

Francium can be synthesized by a fusion reaction when a gold-197 target is bombarded with a beam of oxygen-18 atoms from a linear accelerator in a process originally developed at the physics department of the State University of New York at Stony Brook in 1995. Depending on the energy of the oxygen beam, the reaction can yield francium isotopes with masses of 209, 210, and 211.

The francium atoms leave the gold target as ions, which are neutralized by collision with yttrium and then isolated in a magneto-optical trap (MOT) in a gaseous unconsolidated state. Although the atoms only remain in the trap for about 30 seconds before escaping or undergoing nuclear decay, the process supplies a continual stream of fresh atoms. The result is a steady state containing a fairly constant number of atoms for a much longer time. The original apparatus could trap up to a few thousand atoms, while a later improved design could trap over 300,000 at a time. Sensitive measurements of the light emitted and absorbed by the trapped atoms provided the first experimental results on various transitions between atomic energy levels in francium. Initial measurements show very good agreement between experimental values and calculations based on quantum theory. The research project using this production method relocated to TRIUMF in 2012, where over 10 francium atoms have been held at a time, including large amounts of Fr in addition to Fr and Fr.

Other synthesis methods include bombarding radium with neutrons, and bombarding thorium with protons, deuterons, or helium ions.

Fr can also be isolated from samples of its parent Ac, the francium being milked via elution with NH 4 Cl–CrO 3 from an actinium-containing cation exchanger and purified by passing the solution through a silicon dioxide compound loaded with barium sulfate.

In 1996, the Stony Brook group trapped 3000 atoms in their MOT, which was enough for a video camera to capture the light given off by the atoms as they fluoresce. Francium has not been synthesized in amounts large enough to weigh.

Franco-Provençal, also known as Francoprovençal, Arpitan or Patois, is a Gallo-Romance language that originated and is spoken in eastern France, western Switzerland, and northwestern Italy ; since the 13th century a Franco-Provençal language island in southern Italy has survived too.

Franco-Provençal has several distinct dialects and is separate from but closely related to neighbouring Romance dialects (the langues d'oïl and the langues d'oc, in France, as well as Rhaeto-Romance in Switzerland and Italy).

Even with all its distinct dialects counted together, the number of Franco-Provençal speakers has been declining significantly and steadily. According to UNESCO, Franco-Provençal was already in 1995 a "potentially endangered language" in Italy and an " endangered language " in Switzerland and France. Ethnologue classifies it as "nearly extinct".

The designation Franco-Provençal (Franco-Provençal: francoprovençâl ; French : francoprovençal ; Italian : francoprovenzale) dates to the 19th century. In the late 20th century, it was proposed that the language be referred to under the neologism Arpitan (Franco-Provençal: arpetan ; Italian : arpitano), and its areal as Arpitania. The use of both neologisms remains very limited, with most academics using the traditional form (often written without the hyphen: Francoprovençal), while language speakers refer to it almost exclusively as patois or under the names of its distinct dialects (Savoyard, Lyonnais, Gaga in Saint-Étienne, etc.).

Formerly spoken throughout the Duchy of Savoy, Franco-Provençal is nowadays spoken mainly in the Aosta Valley as a native language by all age ranges. All remaining areas of the Franco-Provençal language region show practice limited to higher age ranges, except for Evolène and other rural areas of French-speaking Switzerland. It is also spoken in the Alpine valleys around Turin and in two isolated towns (Faeto and Celle di San Vito) in Apulia.

In France, it is one of the three Gallo-Romance language families of the country (alongside the langues d'oïl and the langues d'oc). Though it is a regional language of France, its use in the country is marginal. Still, organizations are attempting to preserve it through cultural events, education, scholarly research, and publishing.

Although the name Franco-Provençal suggests it is a bridge dialect between French and the Provençal dialect of Occitan, it is a separate Gallo-Romance language that transitions into the Oïl languages Burgundian and Frainc-Comtou to the northwest, into Romansh to the east, into the Gallo-Italic Piemontese to the southeast, and finally into the Vivaro-Alpine dialect of Occitan to the southwest.

The philological classification for Franco-Provençal published by the Linguasphere Observatory follows:

A philological classification for Franco-Provençal published by Ruhlen (1987) is as follows:

Franco-Provençal emerged as a Gallo-Romance variety of Latin. The linguistic region comprises east-central France, western portions of Switzerland, and the Aosta Valley of Italy with the adjacent alpine valleys of the Piedmont. This area covers territories once occupied by pre-Roman Celts, including the Allobroges, Sequani, Helvetii, Ceutrones, and Salassi. By the fifth century, the region was controlled by the Burgundians. Federico Krutwig has also suggested a Basque substrate in the toponyms of the easternmost Valdôtain dialect.

Franco-Provençal is first attested in manuscripts from the 12th century, possibly diverging from the langues d'oïl as early as the eighth–ninth centuries (Bec, 1971). However, Franco-Provençal is consistently typified by a strict, myopic comparison to French, and so is characterized as "conservative". Thus, commentators such as Désormaux consider "medieval" the terms for many nouns and verbs, including pâta "rag", bayâ "to give", moussâ "to lie down", all of which are conservative only relative to French. As an example, Désormaux, writing on this point in the foreword of his Savoyard dialect dictionary, states:

The antiquated character of the Savoyard patois is striking. One can note it not only in phonetics and morphology, but also in the vocabulary, where one finds numerous words and directions that clearly disappeared from French.

Franco-Provençal failed to garner the cultural prestige of its three more widely spoken neighbors: French, Occitan, and Italian. Communities where speakers lived were generally isolated from each other because of the mountains. In addition, the internal boundaries of the entire speech area were divided by wars and religious conflicts.

France, Switzerland, the Franche-Comté (part of the Spanish Monarchy), and the duchy, later kingdom, ruled by the House of Savoy politically divided the region. The strongest possibility for any dialect of Franco-Provençal to establish itself as a major language died when an edict, dated 6 January 1539, was confirmed in the parliament of the Duchy of Savoy on 4 March 1540 (the duchy was partially occupied by France since 1538). The edict explicitly replaced Latin (and by implication, any other language) with French as the language of law and the courts (Grillet, 1807, p. 65).

The name Franco-Provençal (franco-provenzale) is due to Graziadio Isaia Ascoli (1878), chosen because the dialect group was seen as intermediate between French and Provençal. Franco-Provençal dialects were widely spoken in their speech areas until the 20th century. As French political power expanded and the "single-national-language" doctrine was spread through French-only education, Franco-Provençal speakers abandoned their language, which had numerous spoken variations and no standard orthography, in favor of the culturally prestigious French.

Franco-Provençal is an extremely fragmented language, with scores of highly peculiar local variations that never merged over time. The range of dialect diversity is far greater than that found in the langue d'oïl and Occitan regions. Comprehension of one dialect by speakers of another is often difficult. Nowhere is it spoken in a "pure form" and there is not a "standard reference language" that the modern generic label used to identify the language may indicate. This explains why speakers use local terms to name it, such as Bressan, Forèzien, or Valdôtain, or simply patouès ("patois"). Only in recent years have speakers who are not specialists in linguistics become conscious of the language's collective identity.

The language region was first recognized in the 19th century during advances in research into the nature and structure of human speech. Graziadio Isaia Ascoli (1829–1907), a pioneering linguist, analyzed the unique phonetic and structural characteristics of numerous spoken dialects. In an article written about 1873 and published later, he offered a solution to existing disagreements about dialect frontiers and proposed a new linguistic region. He placed it between the langues d'oïl group of languages (Franco) and the langues d'oc group (Provençal) and gave Franco-Provençal its name.

Ascoli (1878, p. 61) described the language in these terms in his defining essay on the subject:

Chiamo franco-provenzale un tipo idiomatico, il quale insieme riunisce, con alcuni caratteri specifici, più altri caratteri, che parte son comuni al francese, parte lo sono al provenzale, e non proviene già da una confluenza di elementi diversi, ma bensì attesta sua propria indipendenza istorica, non guari dissimili da quella per cui fra di loro si distinguono gli altri principali tipi neo-latini.

I call Franco-Provençal a type of language that brings together, along with some characteristics which are its own, characteristics partly in common with French, and partly in common with Provençal, and are not caused by a late confluence of diverse elements, but on the contrary, attests to its own historical independence, little different from those by which the principal neo-Latin [Romance] languages distinguish themselves from one another.

Although the name Franco-Provençal appears misleading, it continues to be used in most scholarly journals for the sake of continuity. Suppression of the hyphen between the two parts of the language name in French (francoprovençal) was generally adopted following a conference at the University of Neuchâtel in 1969; however, most English-language journals continue to use the traditional spelling.

The name Romand has been in use regionally in Switzerland at least since 1424, when notaries in Fribourg were directed to write their minutes in both German and Rommant. It continues to appear in the names of many Swiss cultural organizations today. The term "Romand" is also used by some professional linguists who feel that the compound word "Franco-Provençal" is "inappropriate".

A proposal in the 1960s to call the language Burgundian (French : burgondien) did not take hold, mainly because of the potential for confusion with an Oïl language known as Burgundian, which is spoken in a neighbouring area, known in English as Burgundy (French: Bourgogne). Other areas also had historical or political claims to such names, especially (Meune, 2007).

Some contemporary speakers and writers prefer the name Arpitan because it underscores the independence of the language and does not imply a union to any other established linguistic group. "Arpitan" is derived from an indigenous word meaning "alpine" ("mountain highlands"). It was popularized in the 1980s by Mouvement Harpitanya, a political organization in the Aosta Valley. In the 1990s, the term lost its particular political context. The Aliance Culturèla Arpitana (Arpitan Cultural Alliance) is advancing the cause for the name "Arpitan" through the Internet, publishing efforts, and other activities. The organization was founded in 2004 by Stéphanie Lathion and Alban Lavy in Lausanne, Switzerland, and is now based in Fribourg. In 2010 SIL adopted the name "Arpitan" as the primary name of the language in ISO 639-3, with "Francoprovençal" as an additional name form.

Native speakers call this language patouès (patois) or nosta moda ("our way [of speaking]"). Some Savoyard speakers call their language sarde. This is a colloquial term used because their ancestors were subjects of the Kingdom of Sardinia ruled by the House of Savoy until Savoie and Haute-Savoie were annexed by France in 1860. The language is called gaga in France's Forez region and appears in the titles of dictionaries and other regional publications. Gaga (and the adjective gagasse) comes from a local name for the residents of Saint-Étienne, popularized by Auguste Callet's story " La légende des Gagats " published in 1866.

The historical linguistic domain of the Franco-Provençal language are:

The Aosta Valley is the only region of the Franco-Provençal area where this language is still widely spoken as native by all age ranges of the population. Since 1948 several events have combined to stabilize the language (Valdôtain dialect) in this region. The constitution of Italy was amended to change the status of the former province to an autonomous region. This gives the Aosta Valley special powers to make its own decisions about certain matters. This resulted in growth in the region's economy and the population increased from 1951 to 1991, improving long-term prospects. Residents were encouraged to stay in the region and they worked to continue long-held traditions.

The language was explicitly protected by a 1991 Italian presidential decree and a national law passed in 1999. Further, a regional law passed by the government in Aosta requires educators to promote knowledge of Franco-Provençal language and culture in the school curriculum. Several cultural groups, libraries, and theatre companies are fostering a sense of ethnic pride with their active use of the Valdôtain dialect as well (EUROPA, 2005).

Paradoxically, the same national laws do not grant the language the same protection in the Province of Turin because there Franco-Provençal speakers make up less than 15% of the population. Lack of jobs has resulted in their migration from the Piedmont's alpine valleys, and contributed to the language's decline.

Switzerland does not recognize Romand (not be confused with Romansh) as one of its official languages. Speakers live in western cantons where Swiss French predominates; they converse in the dialects mainly as a second language. The use in agrarian daily life is rapidly disappearing. However, in a few isolated places the decline is considerably less steep. This is most notably the case for the Evolène dialect.

Franco-Provençal has had a precipitous decline in France. The official language of the French Republic has been designated as French (article 2 of the Constitution of France). The French government officially recognizes Franco-Provençal as one of the " languages of France ", but its constitution bars it from ratifying the 1992 European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (ECRML) that would guarantee certain rights to Franco-Provençal. This language has almost no political support in France and it is associated with generally low social status. This situation affects most regional languages that comprise the linguistic wealth of France. Speakers of regional languages are aging and live in mostly rural areas.

Franco-Provençal is currently most spoken in Aosta Valley, with Valdôtain having the greatest population of active daily speakers. A 2001 survey of 7,250 people by the Fondation Émile Chanoux revealed that 15% of all Aosta Valley residents claimed Franco-Provençal as their mother tongue, a substantial reduction to the figures reported on the Italian census 20 years earlier (and used in the 2001 European Commission report).

At the time, 55.77% of residents said they knew Franco-provençal and 50.53% said they knew French, Franco-provençal and Italian. This opened a discussion about the concept of mother tongue when concerning a dialect. The Aosta Valley was confirmed as the only area where Franco-provençal is actively spoken in the early 21st century. A report published by Laval University in Quebec City, which analyzed this data, reports that it is "probable" that the language will be "on the road to extinction" in this region in ten years.

In 2005, the European Commission wrote that an approximate 68,000 people spoke the language in the Aosta Valley region of Italy, according to reports compiled after the 2003 linguistic survey conducted by the Fondation Chanoux. In 2010, anthropologist and ethnologist Christiane Dunoyer proposed a much more conservative estimate of speakers in Aosta Valley at 40,000, with 20,000 using the language on a daily basis.

In 2018, other linguistic academics estimated the number of speakers of Franco-provençal in Aosta Valley to be between 21,000 and 70,000, depending on whether one would choose the number of speakers designating Franco-provençal as their native language, or whether one included all those declaring they knew the language, irrespective of native language considerations. That same year, academic Riccardo Regis calculated that there were 50,000 Franco-provençal speakers in Aosta Valley.

The 2009 edition of ethnologue.com (Lewis, 2009) reported that there were 70,000 Franco-Provençal speakers in Italy. However, these figures are derived from the 1971 census. Outside of Aosta Valley, the alpine valleys of the adjacent province of Turin were estimated to be the home of another 22,000 speakers. Regis estimated the number of speakers in Piedmont in 2019 to be around 15,000. The Faetar and Cigliàje dialect was thought to be spoken by 1,400 people in an isolated pocket of the province of Foggia, in the southern Italian Apulia region. Beginning in 1951, strong emigration from the town of Celle Di San Vito to Canada established the Cigliàje variety of this dialect in Brantford, Ontario. At its peak, the language was used daily by several hundred people. As of 2012 this community has dwindled to fewer than 50 daily speakers across three generations.

In rural areas of the cantons of Valais and Fribourg in Switzerland, various dialects are spoken as a second language by about 7,000 residents (figures for Switzerland: Lewis, 2009). In the other cantons of Romandie where Franco-Provençal dialects used to be spoken, they are now all but extinct.

Until the mid-19th century, Franco-Provençal dialects were the most widely spoken language in their domain in France. Today, regional vernaculars are limited to a small number of speakers in secluded towns. A 2002 report by the INED (Institut national d'études démographiques) states that the language loss by generation was 90%, made up of: "the proportion of fathers who did not usually speak to their 5-year-old children in the language that their own father usually spoke in to them at the same age". This was a greater loss than undergone by any other language in France, a loss called "critical". The report estimated that fewer than 15,000 speakers in France were handing down some knowledge of Franco-Provençal to their children (figures for France: Héran, Filhon, & Deprez, 2002; figure 1, 1-C, p. 2).

Note: The overview in this section follows Martin (2005), with all Franco-Provençal examples written in accordance with Orthographe de référence B (see "Orthography" section, below).

Franco-Provençal has grammar similar to that of other Romance languages.

In general, inflection by grammatical gender (masculine and feminine) is the same as for French nouns; however, there are many exceptions. A few examples follow:

la besogne (fem.), le travail (masc.), le labeur (masc.)

The consonants and vowel sounds in Franco-Provençal:

There is no single official standard that covers Franco-Provençal as a whole. The orthographies in use include the following:

The table below compares a few words in each writing system, with French and English for reference. (Sources: Esprit Valdôtain (download 7 March 2007), C.C.S. Conflans (1995), and Stich (2003).

Franco-Provençal uses a decimal counting system. The numbers "1", "2", and "4" have masculine and feminine forms (Duplay, 1896; Viret, 2006).

0) zérô ; 1) yon (masc.), yona / yena (fem.) ; 2) dos (masc.), does / doves / davè (fem.) ; 3) três ; 4) quatro (masc.), quat / quatrè (fem.) ; 5) cinq ; 6) siéx ; 7) sèpt ; 8) huét ; 9) nô ; 10) diéx ; 11) onze' ; 12) doze ; 13) trèze ; 14) quatôrze ; 15) quinze ; 16) sèze ; 17) dix-sèpt ; 18) dix-huét ; 19) dix-nou ; 20) vengt ; 21) vengt-yon / vengt-et-yona ; 22) vengt-dos... 30) trenta ; 40) quaranta ; 50) cinquanta ; 60) souessanta ; 70) sèptanta ; 80) huétanta ; 90) nonanta ; 100) cent ; 1000) mila ; 1,000,000) on milyon / on milyona.

Many western dialects use a vigesimal (base-20) form for "80", that is, quatro-vingt /katroˈvɛ̃/, possibly due to the influence of French.

The chart below compares words in Franco-Provençal to those in selected Romance languages, with English for reference.

Between vowels, the Latinate " p " became " v ", " c " and " g " became " y ", and " t " and " d " disappeared. Franco-Provençal also softened the hard palatized " c " and " g " before " a ". This led Franco-Provençal to evolve down a different path from Occitan and Gallo-Iberian languages, closer to the evolutionary direction taken by French.

Classification of Franco-Provençal dialect divisions is challenging. Each canton and valley uses its own vernacular without standardization. Difficult intelligibility among dialects was noted as early as 1807 by Grillet. The dialects are divided into eight distinct categories or groups. Six dialect groups comprising 41 dialect idioms for the Franco-Provençal language have been identified and documented by Linguasphere Observatory (Observatoire Linguistique) (Dalby, 1999/2000, pp. 402–403). Only two dialect groups – Lyonnaise and Dauphinois-N. – were recorded as having fewer than 1,000 speakers each. Linguasphere has not listed any dialect idiom as "extinct", however, many are highly endangered. A seventh isolated dialect group, consisting of Faetar (also known as "Cigliàje" or "Cellese"), has been analyzed by Nagy (2000). The Piedmont dialects need further study.

Several modern orthographic variations exist for all dialects of Franco-Provençal. The spellings and IPA equivalents listed below appear in Martin (2005).

Other than in family names, the Franco-Provençal legacy survives primarily in placenames. Many are immediately recognizable, ending in -az, -o(t)z, -uz, -ax, -ex, -ux, -ou(l)x, -aulx, and -ieu(x). These suffixes are vestiges of an old medieval orthographic practice indicating the stressed syllable of a word. In polysyllables, 'z' indicates a paroxytone (stress on penultimate syllable) and 'x' indicates an oxytone (stress on last syllable). So, Chanaz [ ˈʃɑnɑ ] (sha na) but Chênex [ ʃɛˈne ] (shè né). The following is a list of all such toponyms:

A long tradition of Franco-Provençal literature exists, although no prevailing written form of the language has materialized. Alberic of Besançon 's early 12th-century fragment containing 105 verses from a poem about Alexander the Great may be the earliest known work in the language. Girart de Roussillon, an epic with 10,002 lines from the mid-12th century, has been asserted to be Franco-Provençal. It certainly contains prominent Franco-Provençal features, although the editor of an authoritative edition of this work claims that the language is a mixture of French and Occitan forms. A significant document from the same period containing a list of vassals in the County of Forez also is not without literary value.

Among the first historical writings in Franco-Provençal are legal texts by civil law notaries that appeared in the 13th century as Latin was being abandoned for official administration. These include a translation of the Corpus Juris Civilis (known as the Justinian Code) in the vernacular spoken in Grenoble. Religious works also were translated and conceived in Franco-Provençal dialects at some monasteries in the region. The Legend of Saint Bartholomew is one such work that survives in Lyonnais patois from the 13th century.

Marguerite d'Oingt (c. 1240 – 1310), prioress of a Carthusian nunnery near Mionnay (France), composed two remarkable sacred texts in her native Lyonnais dialect, in addition to her writings in Latin. The first, entitled Speculum ("The Mirror"), describes three miraculous visions and their meanings. The other work, Li Via seiti Biatrix, virgina de Ornaciu ("The Life of the Blessed Virgin Beatrix d'Ornacieux "), is a long biography of a nun and mystic consecrated to the Passion whose faith lead to a devout cult. This text contributed to the beatification of the nun more than 500 years later by Pope Pius IX in 1869. A line from the work in her dialect follows:

Religious conflicts in Geneva between Calvinist Reformers and staunch Catholics, supported by the Duchy of Savoy, brought forth many texts in Franco-Provençal during the early 17th century. One of the best known is Cé qu'è lainô ("The One Above"), which was composed by an unknown writer in 1603. The long narrative poem describes l'Escalade, a raid by the Savoyard army that generated patriotic sentiments. It became the unofficial national anthem of the Republic of Geneva. The first three verses follow below (in Genevois dialect) with a translation:

Several writers created satirical, moralistic, poetic, comic, and theatrical texts during the era that followed, which indicates the vitality of the language at that time. These include: Bernardin Uchard (1575–1624), author and playwright from Bresse ; Henri Perrin, comic playwright from Lyon; Jean Millet (1600?–1675), author of pastorals, poems, and comedies from Grenoble; Jacques Brossard de Montaney (1638–1702), writer of comedies and carols from Bresse; Jean Chapelon [ frp ] (1647–1694), priest and composer of more than 1,500 carols, songs, epistles, and essays from Saint-Étienne ; and François Blanc dit Blanc la Goutte [ fr ] (1690–1742), writer of prose poems, including Grenoblo maléirou about the great flood of 1733 in Grenoble. 19th century authors include Guillaume Roquille (1804–1860), working-class poet from Rive-de-Gier near Saint-Chamond, Joseph Béard dit l'Élyeudo [ fr ] (1805–1872), physician, poet, and songwriter from Rumilly, and Louis Bornet [ frp ] (1818–1880) of Gruyères. Clair Tisseur (1827–1896), architect of Bon-Pasteur Church in Lyon, published many writings under the pen name "Nizier du Puitspelu". These include a popular dictionary and humorous works in Lyonnaise dialect that have reprinted for more than 100 years.

Amélie Gex (1835–1883) wrote in her native patois as well as French. She was a passionate advocate for her language. Her literary efforts encompassed lyrical themes, work, love, tragic loss, nature, the passing of time, religion, and politics, and are considered by many to be the most significant contributions to the literature. Among her works are: Reclans de Savoué ("Echos from Savoy", 1879), Lo cent ditons de Pierre d'Emo ("One Hundred Sayings by Pierre du Bon-Sens", 1879), Poesies ("Poems", 1880), Vieilles gens et vieilles choses: Histoires de ma rue et de mon village ("Old people and old things: Stories from my street and from my village", 1889), Fables (1898), and Contio de la Bova ("Tales from the Cowshed").

The writings of the abbé Jean-Baptiste Cerlogne (1826–1910) are credited with reestablishing the cultural identity of the Aosta Valley. His early poetry includes: L'infan prodeggo (1855), Marenda a Tsesalet (1856) and La bataille di vatse a Vertosan (1858); among his scholarly works are: Petite grammaire du dialecte valdotain (1893), Dictionnaire du dialecte valdôtain (1908) and Le patois valdotain: son origine littéraire et sa graphie (1909). The Concours Cerlogne Archived 9 January 2006 at the Wayback Machine – an annual event named in his honor – has focused thousands of Italian students on preserving the region's language, literature, and heritage since 1963.

At the end of the 19th century, regional dialects of Franco-Provençal were disappearing due to the expansion of the French language into all walks of life and the emigration of rural people to urban centers. Cultural and regional savant societies began to collect oral folk tales, proverbs, and legends from native speakers in an effort that continues to today. Numerous works have been published.

Prosper Convert [ fr ] (1852–1933), the bard of Bresse; Louis Mercier (1870–1951), folk singer and author of more than twelve volumes of prose from Coutouvre near Roanne ; Just Songeon (1880–1940), author, poet, and activist from La Combe, Sillingy near Annecy ; Eugénie Martinet [ fr ] (1896–1983), poet from Aosta ; and Joseph Yerly [ de ] (1896–1961) of Gruyères whose complete works were published in Kan la têra tsantè ("When the earth sang"), are well known for their use of patois in the 20th century. Louis des Ambrois de Nevache, from Upper Susa Valley, transcribed popular songs and wrote some original poetry in local patois. There are compositions in the current language on the album Enfestar, an artistic project from Piedmont

The first comic book in a Franco-Provençal dialect, Le rebloshon que tyouè! ("The cheese that killed!"), from the Fanfoué des Pnottas series by Félix Meynet, appeared in 2000. Two popular works from The Adventures of Tintin and one from the Lucky Luke series were published in Franco-Provençal translations for young readers in 2006 and 2007.

The Franco-Turkish War (1798–1801) was a conflict between Revolutionary France and the Ottoman Empire, forming a part of the wider French Revolutionary Wars. It began with the French invasion of Egypt under Napoleon Bonaparte but lasted until 1802. Its other fronts included Palestine, Syria, Albania, the Ionian Islands, Sicily and mainland Italy. The Ottomans also allied themselves with the Russian Empire and Great Britain.

Bonaparte conquered northern Italy in 1796-1797 on behalf of the French Directory. He secured these territorial gains with the Treaty of Campo Formio, signed on 18 October 1797 with the Holy Roman Empire. This also abolished the Republic of Venice, with France annexing its territories of Dalmatia, the Ionian Islands, Parga, Preveza, Butrint, and Narda along the eastern Adriatic coast and thus gaining land borders with the Ottoman Empire.

Bonaparte returned to France in 1797 after signing the Treaty. Although the French Directory proposed the invasion of Great Britain in February 1798, Napoleon Bonaparte suggested that a more realistic enterprise might be invading the Ottoman province of Egypt to block British access to India. This was also on the advice of the French foreign minister Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord who believed that such an invasion could also enable France to send aid via Suez to Tipu Sultan, an enemy of the British in India.

To this end 13 ships of the line, 14 frigates, 40,000 soldiers, and 10,000 sailors were assembled in Toulon. To avoid an attack by the British Mediterranean Fleet under Admiral Horatio Nelson, the expedition's objective was kept secret. The French fleet departed Toulon under Bonaparte's command on 19 May 1798, and occupied Malta between June 10-12. After leaving Malta, the fleet reached the Egyptian coast and landed in Alexandria on 1 July 1798. That city had been evacuated and so the French occupied it before setting off on 19 July into the interior. On 21 July they defeated the weak Mamluk cavalry of the Egyptian provincial army in the Battle of the Pyramids and occupied Cairo later the same day.

Despite these successes on land, the French suffered a defeat at sea. A fleet under Nelson, sailing in the Eastern Mediterranean, arrived in Alexandria before the French fleet, but the Empire rejected its offer to anchor there. After the French navy landed in Alexandria, they anchored their transport ships, frigates, and small warships in Alexandria harbour, while their larger ships (23 vessels) were anchored off the Abu Hur fortress. In the Battle of the Nile, which took place between the British and French navies on 1-2 August 1798, the British almost annihilated the French fleet.

In response to this victory, Ottoman Sultan Selim III sent Admiral Nelson a diamond-encrusted aigrette and his soldiers 2,000 gold coins as gifts. As a result of the loss of their main fleet, the French army, just a week after their landing at Alexandria, was left stranded on land without naval support, though they did manage to repress the Cairo Revolt on 20-22 October, resulting in the deaths of 2,000 French and 5,000 Egyptians.

News of the invasion reached Istanbul on 27 July through reports from Ottoman officials on Rhodes, an unexpected attack given that the Empire had had a treaty and good relations with France since 1536. Between 30 July and 2 August the Empire sent orders to its provinces of Egypt, Palestine and Syria before on 2 August declaring war on France. Cezzar Ahmed Paşa, Ottoman governor of Palestine, refused Bonaparte's letter of 28 August.

On 28 July the Empire also opened negotiations with two of France's enemies, the Russian Empire and Great Britain. They granted permission for fourteen Russian naval ships to anchor off Büyükdere on 5 September 1798. Finally, on 23 December 1798, the first alliance in history between the Ottoman Empire and the Russian Empire was signed in Istanbul, followed by an alliance signed with Great Britain on 5 January 1799.

France had taken over the four mainland ports of Butrinto, Preveza, Vonitsa, and Parga from the extinct Republic of Venice after the Treaty of Campo Formio. The Sultan ordered Ali Pasha, governor of Ioannina, to capture all four for the Empire. In October 1798 Ali Pasha's troops captured all but Parga, which also surrendered on hearing of the arrival of a joint Ottoman-Russian fleet. This completely eliminated the French presence on the Albanian mainland.

The Russian Navy set off from Büyükdere on 19 September and joined up with the Ottoman fleet under the command of Mehmed Kadir Pasha (Kadir Bey) in Çanakkale on September 25. The joint force left the Dardanelles on 1 October and reached Kythira eight days later. They captured the Kapsali fortress from its French garrison. From there the Ottoman-Russian fleet headed towards the Ionian Islands which France had taken over from the Venetian Republic, capturing Zante on 25 October, Kefalonia on 3 November, and Lefkada (Ayamavra) on 14 November after a fifteen day siege. The last two small islands in the region, Ithaca and Paxos, surrendered in mid-November.

The Ottoman-Russian fleet then turned towards Corfu, which had the largest French garrison (3,000 soldiers and 630 cannons), and besieged the main fortress. However, due to the strong resistance of the garrison, the fortress's fortified position, the small number of besieging troops, and the winter conditions, the siege came to a halt in late 1798. With the signing of the Ottoman-Russian Alliance Treaty (1799) on 3 January 1799, additional warships were sent to the waters of Corfu. Ali Pasha had successfully completed his operations in Albania and part of his force also landed on Corfu. The offensive resumed on 1 March 1799 and the French garrison finally surrendered on 3 March after suffering heavy losses.

Having achieved a decisive victory in the Ionian Islands, the Ottoman-Russian fleet targeted the French presence in Italy. The Kingdom of Naples signed a defensive pact with Austria on 19 May 1798, joining the Second Coalition against France, and also pacts with the Russian Empire (29 November 1798), Great Britain (1 December 1798) and the Ottomans (21 January 1799). France captured all the kingdom's territories on the Italian mainland and converted them into the Parthenopean Republic, a French satellite state. Ferdinand IV of Naples took refuge on Sicily and successfully requested military support from Russia then from the Ottomans.

In accordance with orders from Istanbul dated 29 April 1799, Kadir Bey dispatched seven Ottoman and two Russian ships to Otranto and Brindisi. It captured Brindisi on 17 April and seized Bari, Barletta and Manfredonia between 4 and 19 May. Advancing inland from the coast with reinforcements, the Ottoman-Russian force captured Foggia on 21 May and - after joining forces with Neapolitan rebels at Ariano on June 5 and with assistance from the Royal Navy under Nelson - besieged and captured Naples on 22 June.

At the same time five Ottoman and six Russian ships began besieging Ancona, which the French were using as a base, on 14 May. They then captured Pesaro, Fano and Senigallia to the north from 10 to 18 June. Consolidating its presence on these coasts in July against a French counterattack, the Ottoman-Russian fleet tightened the siege of Ancona on August 12th. With an Austrian corps under General Frölich also attacking from the land, Ancona finally surrendered on 13 November 1799.

Meanwhile, the Ottoman-Russian fleet that had left Corfu on 4 August anchored in Messina on 14 August and then in Palermo, but left the region to return to the Dardanelles in September. With the arrival of the ships returning from Ancona at the end of November, the Ottoman fleet returned to its bases after more than a year of operations.

With his fleet largely destroyed, Bonaparte was in a difficult situation in Egypt and - when his envoy to the Sultan was captured by the British - he turned his attentions to Palestine. He set out from Egypt on 22 December 1798 with around 25,000 men, arrived before the fortress of El-Arish on 7 February and captured it on 20 February. Continuing its advance, the French army occupied Gaza on 25 February and Jaffa on 7 March, massacring 2,500 prisoners in Jaffa. The Ottomans evacuated Haifa and the French occupied it. On 19 March 1799 they arrived before Acre, defended by Cezzar Ahmed Pasha, and besieged it. However, after suffering 7 to 8 thousand casualties in 44 attacks until 20 May against a garrison greatly strengthened by 3,000 Nizam-i Cedid soldiers brought in by the Ottoman navy on May 8, they retreated with difficulty to Cairo.

The victory at Acre laid the groundwork for operations to expel the French from Egypt. 80-100 Ottoman ships under the command of Köse Mustafa Pasha attempted a landing in Alexandria on 16 July 1799 but encountered resistance. In response, with the support of the Royal Navy, 9,000 soldiers were landed at Abukir. In the Battle of Abukir on 25 July, the French army under General Joachim Murat defeated this Ottoman force and subsequently recaptured the Abukir fortress. Although the Ottoman land and sea forces withdrew from Abukir and then landed at Damietta, they were defeated by another French army under Jean-Antoine Verdier, thus losing their offensive capabilities.

Bonaparte learned that the Grand Vizier Kör Yusuf Ziyaüddin Pasha was marching on Egypt with the main Ottoman army. Without a fleet he realised he could not permanently occupy Egypt and began planning his return to France. He made a show of peace negotiations through Köse Mustafa Pasha (who had been captured at Abukir) but escaped to France by secretly boarding a small squadron of three ships on 23 August 1799 and leaving Jean-Baptiste Kléber behind as his deputy.

The 15,000-strong Ottoman army under the command of Yusuf Ziyaüddin Pasha (also known as Blind Yusuf Ziyaüddin Pasha) departed from Üsküdar on 3 June 1799 and arrived in Damascus on 13 September, by which time it had grown to 24,000 soldiers. The French offer to evacuate Egypt through a unilateral agreement with the Ottomans was rejected in accordance with alliance agreements with Russia and Britain. Negotiations, this time involving British Admiral Smith, almost reached an agreement on ceasefire terms, but at the same time the Ottoman army continued its advance. Following the siege of El-Arish on 17-21 December 1799, Yusuf Ziyauddin Pasha's force accepted the armistice terms and signed the Evacuation Agreement on 24 January 1800.

As the Ottoman army moved to take Egypt, leaving behind its baggage and heavy artillery, the French also directed their forces toward Damietta, Rashid, and Alexandria to evacuate Egypt. In accordance with the evacuation agreement, the Ottoman government sent 45 ships to Alexandria to transport the French back to France. However, the British government announced that it did not accept the evacuation agreement, which had been spearheaded by Admiral Smith.

Upon receiving this news, just as Cairo was to be handed over to the Ottoman army on 12 March 1800, General Kléber asked Yusuf Ziya Pasha to halt his march and intercede with the British to persuade them to accept the agreement. Yusuf Ziya Pasha refused to stop his army and demanded that the French board the ships and leave Egypt. Upon this, General Kléber decided to resume fighting. The French army captured El Matareya from the Ottoman forces under the command of Nasuh Pasha and then inflicted a major defeat on the Ottoman army at the Battle of Ain Shams on 20 March 1800. While the Ottoman army retreated to El-Arish, General Kléber returned to Cairo on 27 March.

In order to force the French army to surrender completely, the Ottoman-British alliance decided on a land and sea offensive in 1801. To this end a 30,000-strong Ottoman army under the command of Grand Vizier Yusuf Ziya Pasha was assembled in Jaffa, while a 6,000-strong Ottoman unit (Nizam-ı Cedid and Albanian soldiers) under the command of Admiral Küçük Hüseyin Pasha and a 24,000-strong British force (composed of British, German, Swiss, Maltese, and Indian soldiers) prepared for the attack. In contrast, France had approximately 30,000 well-trained soldiers in Cairo and Alexandria.

Grand Vizier Yusuf Ziya Pasha set out from Jaffa towards El-Arish on 12 March 1801. Despite the strong fortifications at Salihiye the French force there could not withstand the Ottoman offensive and retreated to Bilbis. It could not hold its ground there either and joined the main army in Cairo. Similarly, the French forces in Suez also retreated to Cairo, fearing that their retreat route might be cut off. Continuing his advance, Yusuf Ziya Pasha inflicted a major defeat on the French army under General Beliard, who came against him from Cairo with 8,000 men, in the Battle of Haneke on 17 May 1801. This Ottoman victory was one of the most important turning points in ending the French presence in Egypt. Upon the defeated French's retreatto Cairo, Yusuf Ziya Pasha sent word to the Ottoman-British force that had landed at Abukir to march on Cairo, while he sent troops under the command of Ibrahim Pasha, the Beylerbey of Aleppo, to capture Damietta.

The British navy arrived at Fethiye in January 1801 and, after departing in early March, reached the waters off Alexandria. However, upon discovering that the French had fortified the port, they landed 5,000 soldiers with cannon at Abukir harbour on 8 March 1801. Although the 500-man French unit defending Abukir was defeated, the 5,000-man French unit sent from Rahmaniye and Alexandria managed to stop the British forces at the Madiye hills.

Then, on 23 March 1801, the Ottoman fleet of 70 ships under the command of Küçük Hüseyin Pasha landed 6,000 soldiers under the command of Kethüda Hüsrev Ağa at Abukir. The Ottoman forces, reinforced by British soldiers, advanced eastward towards Rashid, while the British forces, reinforced by Ottoman soldiers, advanced westward towards Alexandria. These forces repelled the French and blockaded Alexandria.

Simultaneously, the 6,000-strong Ottoman force (reinforced by British troops) under Hüsrev Ağa defeated a 5,000-strong French force on the Miyadiye hills. On 19 April 1801, the Ottoman fleet made another landing at Cape Rashid and, joining forces with the British, besieged Rashid. After a four-day siege, unable to withstand the heavy artillery fire from land and river, the French forces surrendered. Advancing south from Miyadiye, the Ottoman-British force (two British cavalry squadrons, two British infantry regiments, the Süleyman Ağa unit, the Halil Ağa unit, and the Ali Ağa unit) reached the banks of the Nile on 4 May. In the Battle of Rahmaniye on 9 May the French forces were defeated and on the following day the allied forces entered Rahmaniye. Thus, with the French forces in Alexandria under siege and the French forces in Rahmaniye defeated, there was no obstacle left for the Ottoman-British army to advance to Cairo.

On 13 June 1801, Ottoman forces under the command of Hüsrev Ağa, along with the British force, advanced from the west bank of the Nile and established contact with the Ottoman army on the east bank under the command of Grand Vizier Yusuf Ziya Pasha. Indeed, while Yusuf Ziya Pasha was advancing on the French defensive positions north of Cairo, Hüsrev Ağa and British troops captured Inbaba on the same day, besieging Giza. General Beliard, commander of the French army in Cairo, realizing he could not defend the city when surrounded on two sides, convened a committee composed of Ottoman, British, and French representatives to begin ceasefire negotiations. The terms agreed upon on 27 June defined the conditions for the French army's evacuation of Cairo. The evacuation, which began on 9 July, was completed the following day, and the Ottoman army under Yusuf Ziya Pasha entered Cairo on 11 July 1801, ending the three-year French occupation.

Although the Ottoman-British army offered the French army under General Menou, whom they had besieged in Alexandria, the same terms as in Cairo, General Menou, still hoping for French assistance, decided to resist. However, battered by heavy artillery and bombardment, the French army was forced to agree to evacuate the city. On 8 September 1801, the French forces in Alexandria also left the city, and all of Egypt was liberated from French occupation.

Franconian or Frankish is a collective term traditionally used by linguists to refer to many West Germanic languages, some of which are spoken in what formed the historical core area of Francia during the Early Middle Ages.

Linguistically, it has no common typological features for all the various dialects conventionally grouped as Franconian. As such, it forms a residual category within the larger historical West Germanic dialect continuum and not a homogeneous group of closely related dialects. For most of the varieties grouped under the term "Franconian", the diachronical connection to the Frankish language, which was spoken by the Franks, is unclear.

High German consonant shift, with Low Franconian (including Dutch and Afrikaans) not participating whereas the Central Franconian (which includes Luxembourgish) did, to varying degrees, divides the varieties having received the epithet Franconian.

Both the term Franconian and its further delineations are restricted in their use to linguists and are not used as an endonym by any speakers of the Franconian group; except for East Franconian.

The term Frankish or Franconian (Standard High German : Fränkisch, Dutch: Frankisch) as a modern linguistic category was used by the German linguist Wilhelm Braune (1850–1926) to designate historical West Germanic texts which he could not readily classify as belonging to either Low Saxon, Alemannic or Bavarian.

The practice of alluding to tribal names from the Migration Period when naming dialect groups during the early stages of Germanic Philology was not restricted to Germany : 19th-century Dutch linguists also conventionally divided the Germanic varieties spoken in the Netherlands and Belgium into Frisian, Saxon, and Frankish varieties. In both cases, linguistic borders of historical ancestor dialects were, at the time, thought to closely mirror the supposed tribal duchies of the Frankish Empire at the start of the Early Middle Ages.

Earlier use of "Franconian/Frankish" as a linguistic category can be found. For example, Dutch linguist Jan van Vliet (1622–1666) used Francica or Francks. According to van Vliet, Franconian descended from oud Teuts (ancient German[ic]). Similarly, the scholar Franciscus Junius was said by Jo(h)annes Georgius Graevius in 1694 to have collected fragments of the old Frankish and other languages for the elucidation of the mother tongue ("[...] ad illustrandam linguam patriam [...] ex lingua vetere Francica, Saxonica, Gothica, Cimbrica, Frisi[c]a, [...]").

The term "Franconian" refers to a collection of dialects, and not to a language. While a descriptive definition of Franconian as a whole does not exist, its internal subdivisions can be defined and contrasted, both with one another and other large dialect groupings.

Low Franconian, Low Frankish, or Netherlandic is a linguistic category used to classify many historical and contemporary West Germanic varieties closely related to, and including, the Dutch language (or Netherlandish). Most dialects and languages included within the category are spoken in the Netherlands, northern Belgium (Flanders), in the Nord department of France, in western Germany (Lower Rhine), as well as in Suriname, South Africa, and Namibia.

The Central Franconian dialects are spoken in the German states of South-Western North Rhine-Westphalia, most of Rhineland-Palatinate, Saarland, the bordering French Moselle department, and in Luxembourg, as well as by the Transylvanian Saxons in Romania.

The Rhine Franconian dialects are spoken in the German states of Rhineland-Palatinate, Saarland, northern Baden-Württemberg, southern Hesse, northern Bavaria, in the bordering French Moselle department, as well as by the Pennsylvania Dutch in North America.

The East Franconian dialects are transitional dialects between Central- and Upper German.

The East Franconian dialect branch is one of the most spoken dialect branches in Germany. These dialects are mainly spoken in the region of Franconia. Franconia consists of the Bavarian districts of Upper-, Middle-, and Lower Franconia, the region of South Thuringia (Thuringia), and the eastern parts of the region of Heilbronn-Franken (Tauber Franconia and Hohenlohe) in Baden-Württemberg. The easternmost Franconian-speaking areas are the Saxon parts of Vogtland, in whose central parts East Franconian (Core Vogtlandian), and in whose eastern parts transitional dialects (North Vogtlandian and Southeast Vogtlandian) are spoken. The East Franconian dialects are the only Franconian dialects that are referred to as "Franconian" by their speakers. It is called Fränkisch (Standard High German) or Fränggisch (East Franconian) by its speakers, though this is due to the region of Franconia where the dialect is spoken. Only the speakers in Saxon Vogtland refer to their dialects as "Vogtlandian" rather than "Franconian". The largest cities in the East Franconian dialect area are Nuremberg and Würzburg.

South Franconian is mainly spoken in northern Baden-Württemberg in Germany, but also in the northeasternmost part of the region of Alsace in France. While these dialects are considered as dialects of German in Baden-Württemberg, they are considered as dialects of Alsatian in Alsace (the other dialects in Alsace are either Alemannic or Rhine Franconian). The South Franconian dialects are colloquially referred to by their speakers as "Badian" in the Badian parts, and as "Unterländisch" (the Unterland being the region around Heilbronn) or "Swabian" (because of strong influences from the capital Stuttgart, where Swabian dialects are spoken) in the Württembergian parts of Baden-Württemberg. The largest cities in the South Franconian dialect area are Karlsruhe and Heilbronn.

A Francophile is a person who has a strong affinity or appreciation for the people, culture, language, history, or government of France. The term "Francophile" can be contrasted with Francophobe (or Gallophobe), someone who shows hatred or other forms of negative feelings towards all that is French.

A Francophile may enjoy French artists (such as Claude Monet, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Edgar Degas, Paul Cézanne, and Henri Matisse); authors and poets (such as Victor Hugo, Alexandre Dumas, Voltaire, Honoré de Balzac, and George Sand), musicians (such as Daft Punk, Jean-Michel Jarre, Serge Gainsbourg, Édith Piaf, Johnny Hallyday, and Carla Bruni), filmmakers (such as Jean-Luc Godard, François Truffaut, Robert Bresson, and Jean-Pierre Melville), and cuisine (such as baguettes, croissants, frog legs, French cheeses, and French wine). Francophilia often arises in former French colonies, where the elite spoke French and adopted many French habits. In other European countries such as Romania and Russia, French culture has also long been popular among the upper class. Historically, Francophilia has been associated with supporters of Enlightenment philosophy during and after the French Revolution, where democratic uprisings challenged the autocratic regimes of Europe, as well as liberalism and opposition to absolute monarchy and authoritarian governments in general.

The Armenians of Cilicia welcomed the Frankish, or French, Crusaders of the Middle Ages as fellow Christians. There was much exchange, and the last dynasty to rule Armenian Cilicia, the Lusignans (who ruled Cyprus), was of French origin.

During the reign of Louis XIV, many Armenian manuscripts were taken into the National Library of France. Armenia and Armenian characters are featured in the works of Montesquieu, Voltaire, and Rousseau. The first instance of Armenian studies began with the creation of an Armenian department in the School of Oriental languages, at the initiative of Napoleon.

An important figure of Armenian Francophilia was that of Stepan Vosganian (1825–1901). Arguably the first Armenian "intellectual" and literary critic, Vosganian "represents the prototype of a long line of Armenian intellectuals nurtured in and identified with European, and particularly French, culture". Educated in Paris, he was a champion of liberalism and the positivist philosophy of Auguste Comte, and even took part in the French Revolution of 1848.

The French political classes were on the whole supportive of the Armenian national movement. The French–Armenian Agreement (1916) was a political and military accord to create the Armenian Legion in the French Army to fight on the Allied side of World War I, in return for promises of recognition of Armenian independence. The Armenian Legion engaged successfully in Anatolia and Palestine during World War I, particularly at the Battle of Arara and during the Franco-Turkish War.

Francophilia or Rattachism is a revancist marginal political ideology in some parts of Belgium. Rattachism would mean the incorporation of French-speaking Belgium, Wallonia (and sometimes Brussels –more rarely of the entirety of Belgium) into Metropolitan France. This movement has existed in some form or another since the Belgian state itself came into existence in 1830. The Manifesto for Walloon culture of 1983, relaunched in 2003, and a series of discussions are the sole contemporary remnants.

The establishment of the Crusader Kingdom of Cyprus, in 1192, was the beginning of intense French influence on the island throughout the next three centuries. Touching almost every aspect of life, it would endure even after the end of Lusignan domination, and remains a strong component of Cypriot culture. In this wise the Republic of Cyprus became an associate member of the Francophonie in 2006.

In the 18th century, French was the language of German elites. A notable Francophile was King Frederick the Great of Prussia, or Frédéric as he preferred to call himself. Frederick spoke and wrote notably better French than he did German, and all of his books were written in French, a choice of language that was of considerable embarrassment to German nationalists in the 19th and 20th centuries when Frederick became the preeminent German national hero. One source noted: "Nor did Frederick have any time for German cultural chauvinism. As an ardent Francophile in matters literary and artistic, he took a low view of the German language, spoke it imperfectly himself, and once boasted that he had not read a book in German since his early youth. His preferences in music, art and architecture were overwhelmingly Italian and French". The French philosophe Voltaire when he visited Berlin to meet his admirer noted that everyone at the Prussian Court spoke the most exquisite French, and that German was only used when addressing servants and soldiers.

Another ardent German Francophile was King Ludwig II of Bavaria, a.k.a. "Mad King Ludwig". Ludwig felt a great deal of affinity for King Louis XIV of France, the "Sun King" and liked to call himself the "Moon King" to suggest a parallel between himself and his hero. Ludwig collected Louis XIV memorabilia, Linderhof Palace was modeled after the Palace of Trianon. An even more striking example of Ludwig's architectural Francophilia was the Palace of Herrenchiemsee, a copy of the Palace of Versailles.

The Norman conquest of southern Italy lasted from 999 to 1139.

Romania has a long and deeply entrenched tradition of Francophilia beginning after the Enlightenment and Revolutionary periods. One of the most famous Romanian Francophiles is Eugen Weber (1925–2007), a prodigious author and lecturer in Romania on French history. In his book "My France: politics, culture, myth", he writes: "Social relations, manners, attitudes that others had to learn from books, I lived in my early years. Romanian francophilia, Romanian francophony.... Many Romanians, in my day, dreamed of France; not many got there".

With the efforts to build Romania into a modern nation-state, with a national language and common national heritage, in the 19th century, the Romanian language was deliberately reoriented to its Latin heritage by a steady import of French neologisms suited to contemporary civilization and culture. "For ordinary Romanians, keen on the idea of the Latin roots of their language, 'Romance' meant 'French.'" An estimated 39% of Romanian vocabulary consists of borrowings from French, with an estimated 20% of "everyday" Romanian vocabulary.

Boia writes: "Once launched on the road of Westernization, the Romanian elite threw itself into the arms of France, the great Latin sister in the West. When we speak of the Western model, what is to be understood is first and foremost the French model, which comes far ahead of the other Western reference points." He quotes no less than the leading Romanian politician Dimitrie Drăghicescu, writing in 1907: "As the nations of Europe acquire their definitive borders and their social life becomes elaborated and crystallized within the precise limits of these borders, so their spiritual accomplishments will approach those of the French, and the immaterial substance of their souls will take on the luminous clarity, the smoothness and brilliance of the French mentality." Bucharest was rebuilt in the style of Paris in the 19th century, giving the city the nickname the "Paris of the East".

Other notable Romanian Francophiles include Georges Enesco, Constantin Brâncuși, Emil Cioran, Mircea Eliade, Eugène Ionesco and Nobel Peace Prize winner Elie Wiesel.

18th and 19th century Russian Francophilia (also known as "Gallomania") is familiar to many from Tolstoy 's War and Peace and Anna Karenina, and his characters from the Russian aristocracy converse in French and give themselves French names. At the time, the language of diplomacy and higher education across much of Europe was French. Russia, recently "modernized", or "Westernized", by the rule of sovereigns from Peter the Great to Catherine the Great was no exception. The Russian elite, in the early 18th century, was educated in the French tradition and made a conscious effort to imitate the manners of France. Their descendants, a generation or two later, were no longer "imitating" French customs but grew up with them, and the strong impact of the French culture on Russian upper and even middle classes was evident, on a smaller scale than in the 18th century, until the Revolution of 1917.

The oldest documented possible contact between the two sides was the marriage of Stephen Uroš I of Serbia and Helen of Anjou in the 13th century.

The first important contacts of French and Serbs came only in the 19th century, when the first French travel writers wrote about their travels to Serbia. At that time Karađorđe Petrović, the leader of the Serbian Revolution, sent a letter to Napoleon expressing his admiration. On the other hand, in the French parliament, Victor Hugo asked France to assist in protecting Serbia and the Serbian population from Ottoman crimes. Diplomatic relations with France were established on 18 January 1879. Rapid development of bilateral relations done that people in Serbia in "mighty France" seen great new friend that will protect them from the Ottomans and Habsburgs. Relations between Serbia and France would go upwards until the First World War, when the "common struggle" against a common enemy would reach its peak. Before the war, France would win sympathy of local population by building railways by opening of French schools and a consulate and a Bank. Several Serbian kings were at universities in Paris as well as a large part of the future diplomats. Serbs have built a sense of Francophilia because the activities moved them away from the Ottoman and Habsburg Empires. For Serbs until 1914, French have become major allies what were even a threat for traditional inclination towards Russia. The great humanitarian and military assistance that France sent to Serbia during First World War, assistance in the evacuation of children, civilians and military at the end, and the support of French newspaper headlines even today are deeply ingrained in the collective consciousness of large number of Serbs.

Notable Serbian Francophiles include Ilija Garašanin and Sava Šumanović.

Between 1700 and the mid 20th century, francophilia played a major role in Spain both culturally and politically, comparable to the Atlanticism - Americanophilia that emerged in the second half of the 20th century. Francophilia was closely linked both to a cultural appreciation for French civilisation, but also to a desire to see France (or a certain interpretation of France) as a political model. Often rival groups in Spain, clashing over their desired political vision, would each turn to a different French example to legitimise their arguments.

Francophilia in Spain can be documented from at least the establishment of the Bourbon monarchy in 1700, when the political model associated with Louis XIV, that of the centralised Catholic absolute monarchy, was developed under his grandson king Philip V of Spain. During this period France served as a model for the monarchy's political and administrative reforms, as well as cultural and intellectual inspiration: the Real Academia for instance, was founded on the model of the Académie Française.

During the second half of the 18th century, Spanish supporters of the Enlightenment were inspired by ideas from France earning them the name " Afrancesado " (lit. "turned-French"). These sought to remake Spanish institutions, society and culture on humanist, rationalist and constitutionalist grounds, drawing strongly from the example of the Philosophes. The term later acquired a political dimension following the French Revolution and Napoleon Bonaparte 's First French Empire, as reformers sought to implement their goals through two rival political models: a constitutional liberalism and Jacobinism inspired by the First French Republic, giving rise to the Constitution of Cádiz (1812) or a more Napoleonic Enlightenment monarchy during the French occupation of Iberia and the Constitution of Bayonne (1808). A third group, seeking to restore the absolute monarchy under Ferdinand VII, also looked to counterrevolutionary France for inspiration and encouragement, culminating in the military assistance of Louis XVIII and the Hundred Thousand Sons of Saint Louis.

In the mid 19th century, francophiles such as Javier de Burgos introduced liberal administrative reforms of the restored Spanish monarchy, modelled on the French administrative reforms of Napoleon and of the July Monarchy. During the 19th century, Spanish political movements were also strongly inspired by ideologies popular in France, such as republicanism, radicalism, socialism and anarchism on the left, as well as right-wing ideologies such as doctrinaire liberalism, Constitutional monarchism, bonapartism and Carlism - Legitimism.

During the Second Republic the democratic regime's governing class were in general strongly francophile and inspired by French republicanism, with the cultural and political attachment of figures such as Manuel Azaña, Alejandro Lerroux or Niceto Alcalà-Zamora making Spain a close diplomatic ally of the French Third Republic.

Growing disappointments in French democrats' support and a sense of French political and cultural decline, during the period of the Spanish Civil War, Second World War and Francoism, meant that francophilia in Spain generally declined. Consequently, from the mid-20th-century Spanish elites were generally more likely to express political Atlanticism and cultural Americanophilia than francophilia.

Cambodia was the French protectorate back in 1863, which signed a treaty between King Norodom of Cambodia and Marc Louis de Gonzague approved by Napoleon III, Emperor of the French will later become part of French Indochina in 1887. French is also a significant discipline in schools as the royal family and the Khmer people continued to learn French as a primary language. The French began widely introduced Cambodian education, initially being limited to the elite class before spreading to the masses nationwide as the economy grew significantly by the 1920s.

As with much of the Western world and the Middle East at the time, Francophilia was quite common in Iran in the 19th century, and even so more in the 20th century. In Iran, many key politicians and diplomats of the 20th century were French-educated or avid Francophiles. Among them Teymur Bakhtiar, the founder of the Iranian intelligence agency, SAVAK ; Amir-Abbas Hoveida, Prime Minister of Iran from 1965 to 1977; Hassan Pakravan, a diplomat and intelligence figure; Nader Jahanbani, General under the last Shah ; and Abdullah Entezam-Saltaneh, another famous diplomat to the West.

Maharaja Jagatjit Singh of Kapurthala (1872–1949) was India's most famous Francophile who was Captivated by French language, art, and culture, he styled his kingdom as the "Paris of Punjab". He spent decades traveling to France, employed French architects for his royal estate, and patronized top Parisian jewelers.

Prince Saionji Kinmochi, a genro (elder statesmen) was educated in France, where he received a law degree at the Sorbonne. In words of the Canadian historian Margaret Macmillan, Saionji "...loved the French, their culture and their liberal traditions. He even spoke French in his sleep. To the end of his life, he drank Vichy water and wore Houbigant cologne, which had to be imported specially for him". Prince Saionji was merely an extreme case of the Francophilia that characterized Meiji Japan. The Justice Minister, Etō Shimpei was an admirer of the French who modeled the legal and administrative systems together with the police force after that of France. A French lawyer Gustave Boissonade was recruited to draft the Japanese legal code, which is why the Japanese legal code today very closely resembles the Napoleonic Code. Another French lawyer, Prosper Gambet-Gross served as the special advisor to Kawaji Toshiyoshi who created a French-style police force for Japan. The Japanese educational system from 1872 onward was modeled after the French educational system and in the same year Japan was divided into prefectures as the French administrative system was considered by the Japanese to be the best in Europe. The Japanese received a French military mission in 1870 to train their army as the French Army was considered the best in the world. After France's defeat in the war of 1870–71, the Japanese sent the French military mission home, to be replaced by a German military mission.

The Japanese writer Kafū Nagai wrote after visiting France:

"No matter how much I wanted to sing Western songs, they were all very difficult. Had I, born in Japan, no choice but to sing Japanese songs? Was there a Japanese song that expressed my present sentiment -- a traveler who had immersed himself in love and the arts in France but was now going back to the extreme end of the Orient where only death would follow monotonous life?... I felt totally forsaken. I belonged to a nation that had no music to express swelling emotions and agonized feelings."

In Lebanon, Francophilia is very common among the Christian Maronites who have since the 19th century viewed the French as their "guardian angels", their special protectors and friends in their struggles against the Muslims. In 1860, the French intervened to put a stop to the massacres of the Maronites by the Muslims and the Druze which were being permitted by the Ottoman authorities, earning them the lasting thanks of the Maronites. Starting in the 19th century, much of the Maronite elite was educated at Jesuit schools in France, making the Maronites one of the most ardently Francophile groups in the Ottoman Empire. The Lebanese writer Charles Corm in a series of poems in French published after World War I portrayed the Lebanese as a "Phoenician" people whose Christianity and Francophilia made them part of the West and who had nothing to do either with the Arabs or Islam.

Orientalism first arose in Early Modern France with Guillaume Postel and the French Embassy to the court of the Ottoman Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent. Later, when Mehmed IV sent the ambassador Müteferrika Süleyman Ağa to the court of Louis XIV in 1669, it caused a sensation that triggered the Turquerie fashion craze in France and then the rest of Western Europe, which lasted until well into the 19th century.

The Ottoman Empire granted France special privileges on account of the Franco-Ottoman alliance. French mercantilism was protected, French subjects were exempt from the taxes and tributes normally required of Christian residents of the Empire, no French subjects could be taken into Ottoman slavery and French subjects were granted full freedom of worship. Thus, France became the unofficial protector of all Catholics in the East.

In the late 18th and 19th centuries, French influence increased in Anatolia and the Middle East, and the French language and customs penetrated deep into the Ottoman learned classes and aristocracy; French was the preferred second language, rich Ottomans sent their children to school and universities in France and the Western " Enlightenment " was associated with French culture. Modern Turkish continues to have many French loanwords that were adopted in this period, and 5,350 Turkish words are of French origin, according to the Turkish Language Society, one eighth of a standard dictionary (See List of replaced loanwords in Turkish#Loanwords of French origin.). Francophilia still exists to a rather limited extent in modern Turkey. Vestiges of the 19th and early 20th century Francophilia include the famous Pera Palace hotel in Istanbul.

The French Revolution and its ideals of "Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity" inspired many secular and progressive movements in Ottoman Turkey, including the Young Turk movement that would go on to create the Republic of Turkey. Napoleon 's breaking of the age-old Franco-Ottoman alliance by conquering Ottoman -controlled Egypt also had an effect. Muhammad Ali the Great, who became the Ottoman vali (governor) of Egypt in 1805 and ruled as a de facto independent ruler until his death in 1848 had been strongly impressed with the Napoleon's Armée d'Orient, and imported French veterans of the Napoleonic wars to train his army. Egypt was very much in the French sphere of influence politically, economically and culturally in the 19th century, and French was the preferred language of Egypt's elites right up to the 1952 revolution. At the court of the Khedive Isma'il Pasha of Egypt, better known as Isma'il the Magnificent the languages used were French and Turkish. Reflecting his Francophilia, the French-educated Isma'il emulated Baron Haussmann by tearing down much of Cairo to rebuild it in the style of Paris. Even today, the architecture of downtown Cairo closely resembles that of downtown Paris.

Ho Chi Minh learned to speak, write and to read French through his education in Saigon, French Indochina and his travels outside of Vietnam into the French merchant steamer, the Amiral de Latouche-Tréville to work as a kitchen helper. The ship departed on 5 June 1911 and arrived in Marseille, France on 5 July 1911, before continuing to Le Havre and Dunkirk, returning to Marseille in mid-September of that year. He began to show an interest in politics while living in France, he joined the Groupe des Patriotes Annamites (The Group of Vietnamese Patriots) in Paris where he became a member of the French Communist Party.

Colonel Jean-Bédel Bokassa of the Army of the Central African Republic seized power in 1965 and ruled until he was deposed by French troops in 1979. Bokassa was a great Francophile who maintained extremely close relations with France, often going elephant hunting with the French President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing. In 1977, Bokassa in imitation of his hero Napoleon crowned himself Emperor and renamed his nation the Central African Empire. Bokassa was also notorious as one of Africa's most brutal dictators, engaging in cannibalism, becoming so vicious that even the French could not stand supporting his regime anymore and thus the French Foreign Legion deposed the Emperor in 1979. Bokassa once nonchalantly told a French diplomat after his overthrow about the banquets he used to organize with the French style cooking that: "You never noticed it, but you ate human flesh."

Patrice Lumumba was also a great francophile as well as Joseph-Désiré Mobutu because of its relations between Belgium and the Democratic Republic of the Congo which was ruled by Leopold II, King of the Belgians when he claimed the Congo Free State before it was reconstituted as a new territory, the Belgian Congo in 1908. On 30 June 1960, after 75 years of Belgian colonial rule in Central Africa, The Congo achieved its independence from Belgium, which later renamed as Zaire in 1971, before returning to its original name in 1997 with the First Congo War, nicknamed as (Africa's First World War). About half of Kinshasa residents feel solidarity towards Francophone countries, and French is seen as important for education and relations with the government. French is the sole official language of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Omar Bongo, the long time dictator of Gabon from 1967 until his death in 2009 was described by The Economist in 2016 as "every inch the Francophile" who was very close to successive governments in Paris from the time he came to power until his death. In 2012, the country declared an intention to add English as a second official language, as Ali Bongo who succeeded his father as president does not share his father's Francophilia. However, it was later clarified that the country intended to introduce English as a first foreign language in schools, while keeping French as the general medium of instruction and the sole official language.

President Félix Houphouët-Boigny of the Côte d'Ivoire was described as a "staunch Francophile" who maintained very close links with France, and successfully insisted that the French name for his country be used instead of the Ivory Coast. It was Houphouet-Boigny who coined the term France-Afrique (later shortened to Françafrique) to describe the "special relationship" between France and its former African colonies, in which Francophone African nations were in the French political, cultural, military and economic sphere of influence, something which Houphouet-Boigny welcomed, though France's influence in Africa has been highly controversial given that most of the African regimes the French supported have been dictatorships.

Léopold Sédar Senghor was the first African to become the member of the Académie Française in Paris after he wrote the memoirs of his native country of Senegal as its leader of Francophone Africa since it was colonized by France in 1677 that has located the oldest colonial city of Saint-Louis as a trading post. Dakar became the capital of French West Africa in 1902, with Louis Faidherbe and his black soldiers that once recruited by the French have created Senegalese Tirailleurs and transforming the African populations within its sphere into French citizens. Following the end of both World War I and World War II which led the liberation of Paris from the Nazi regime in August 1944, Senghor became the first President of Senegal on 6 September after the country gained independence from France on 4 April 1960, with Dakar as its capital remain. Senghor wrote the national anthem of Le Lion rouge, meaning (The Red Lion). French is the sole official language of Senegal while Wolof became the most spoken language in the country, the RTS were broadcast in French and even the money of CFA franc which was created by France as its former colony that is located in Dakar being the sole capital of Francophone Africa as Senegal and France have become both friendships with the currency of West African CFA franc and Central African CFA franc remained.

In Canada, the term has two distinct meanings, that of "appreciation of, or support for, France" and, more commonly, "appreciation of, or support for, French as an official language of Canada". With the expansion of French immersion programs in many schools following the passage of Official Languages Act of 1969 which elevated French to an equal official language of the national bureaucracy, many Anglophone Canadians have developed a greater appreciation for the French culture that is a part of the Canadian identity. Graduates of such programs (and others who speak French as an additional language) are called francophiles in Canada, as opposed to francophones which is the term typically reserved for native speakers or near-native fluent speakers of French.

The Republic of Haiti was once the French colony of Saint-Domingue until a successful slave revolt drove the French out. Despite this history, the Haitian elite was traditionally very Francophile to the point that the Haitian writer Jean Price-Mars published a book in 1928 Ainsi Parla l'Oncle (So Spoke the Uncle) accusing the elite of bovarysme, of intentionally neglecting and ignoring traditional Haitian folk culture as it had too many West African elements and was not French enough for the elite. About 10% of Haiti's population speak French as their first language while the other 90% speak Kréyol (a mixture of French and various West African languages) that has often been mocked by the Francophile Haitian elite as a bastardized French. In Haiti, the question of whatever one speaks French or Kréyol is racially charged as the elite tended to be of Afro-European ancestry while the masses are black.

General Antonio López de Santa Anna liked to call himself the "Napoleon of the West", and during his rule, the Mexican Army wore uniforms that closely resembled the uniforms of Napoleon's Grande Armée.

In the United States, there is great interest in French culture, including French food, art, philosophy, politics, as well as the French lifestyle in general. Historically, French style, particularly that of Paris, has long been considered the height of sophistication by Americans of all social classes.

French support of the American Revolution was a significant factor in shaping American's feelings towards France. Prior to that, the French had been seen as rivals for control of North America until their defeat in the French and Indian War. With the elimination of France as a major colonial power in North America, the rivalry between American colonists and Parliament back home came into focus, and France's role switched to that of a potential ally.

The pro-French sentiment was probably strengthened by the overthrow of the French monarchy and the creation of a "brother-republic" in France. Notwithstanding the turmoil of the French Revolution and certain disputes between the two countries (such as the Quasi-War), generally good relations continued. During the Napoleonic era, the Louisiana Purchase, and the entry of the United States into the War of 1812, concurrent with the Napoleonic Wars, gave the two nations common interests and diplomatic relations blossomed.

Among the most famous early American Francophiles was Thomas Jefferson. Even during the excesses of the Reign of Terror, Jefferson refused to disavow the revolution because he was, as Jean Yarbrough wrote, "convinced that the fates of the two republics were indissolubly linked. To back away from France would be to undermine the cause of republicanism in America." Commenting on the continuing revolutions in the Netherlands and France, Jefferson predicted that "this ball of liberty, I believe most piously, is now so well in motion that it will roll round the globe, at least the enlightened part of it, for light & liberty go together. it is our glory that we first put it into motion." Jefferson would often sign his letters "Affectionately adieu" and commented late in life "France, freed from that monster, Bonaparte, must again become the most agreeable country on earth." The 1995 film Jefferson in Paris by James Ivory, recalls the connection. The "staunchly Francophile" Jefferson and, by extension, his adherents or " Jeffersonians ", were characterized by his political enemies, the Federalists, as "decadent, ungodly and immoral Francophiles".

Benjamin Franklin, who spent seven years as the popular United States Ambassador to France was also a Francophile. Massachusetts Republican Senator Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. spent his first three grades in a Parisian school and majored in Romance Languages and Literatures at Harvard. Henry Cabot Lodge Sr., his grandfather, was also a Francophile and befriended Jean Jules Jusserand, the French Ambassador to the US.

Thomas Paine was another American Founding Father that was also a Francophile. He was broadly sympathetic to both the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars.

Many Americans have studied at art schools in France, including the Beaux Arts academy in Paris, the premier institution of its kind in the country. The students and graduated alumni have been deeply influential on American style, particularly during the 19th and the early 20th centuries. Mark Twain was a Francophile to such an extent that he wrote the historical novel Personal Recollections of Joan of Arc (1896).

In the 1920s, many American intellectuals and writers, such as Hemingway and Fitzgerald, moved to Paris, a city that they linked to an idea of happiness. Other Americans, including several women, did so as well for various reasons. Josephine Baker is one of the most prominent of them all, as witnessed in her song " J'ai deux amours ", in which she proclaimed her love for both USA and Paris. After WWII, another generation of Americans were attracted by Paris or southern France as well, including painters such as Jackson Pollock and Sam Francis or future celebrities such as Jackie Kennedy who used to live in Paris and are still beloved by French people. Some American politicians have also proclaimed their love for France, and even speak the language. Among them are John Kerry and Antony Blinken.

Francophile sentiment in the US was deeply influential on American public opinion and involvement in both World Wars. The Francophile filmmaker Preston Sturges always considered France his "second home" where he spent much of his childhood, was fluent in French and was greatly influenced by the films of his close friend René Clair. On the subject of cuisine, Julia Child is probably the most famous of many Francophile-American chefs and of many American graduates of French cooking-schools.

After WWII, Jean Seberg moved to Paris and eventually reached stardom while working there, married two Frenchmen and is buried there. Other notable francophile actors include Bradley Cooper, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Matt Groening, Sam Simon, James L. Brooks, Trey Parker, Matt Stone, Seth MacFarlane, Bill Hicks, George Carlin, Bill Maher, Blake Lively, Natalie Portman, Molly Ringwald, Steven Gabrielle and Robert Crawford. The director and actor Woody Allen is a Francophile whose films often made references to French cinema, philosophy and novels. A recurring theme in Allen's films is the celebration of Paris as the ideal place for romantic love. Allen's 1982 film A Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy frequently pays homage to the work of Jean Renoir while Allen has described François Truffaut as his favorite director. The Francophile hero of Allen's 2011 film Midnight in Paris Gil Pender bears striking similarities with Allen, leading to reviewers to suggest that the character of Pender is a stand-in for the director-writer.

The French-American Chamber of Commerce organization has worked to promote business ties between the two countries. A Dallas Morning News interview has described the Beaujolais Wine Festival, the largest such festival in the US, as a major event for those interested in French culture to mix.

Australia is tied to France through history: visit from Lapérouse and assistance during World War I. Australian also appreciate and look up to French culture and cuisine. Shops often try to make their name sound French and a trip to Paris is a common prize in games or often pictured in advertisements.

Bastille Day is celebrated in Sydney though a 4-days festival, drawing up to 500,000 people.

In international relations, Françafrique (French pronunciation: [ fʁɑ̃safʁik ]) is France's sphere of influence (or pré carré in French, meaning 'backyard') over former French and Belgian colonies in sub-Saharan Africa. The term was derived from the expression France-Afrique, notably used by the first president of Ivory Coast, Félix Houphouët-Boigny, in 1955 to describe his country's close ties with France. It was later pejoratively renamed Françafrique by François-Xavier Verschave in 1998 to criticise the alleged corrupt and clandestine activities of various Franco-African political, economic and military networks, also defined as France's neocolonialism.

Following the independence of its African colonies beginning in 1959, France continued to maintain influence over the region, which was essential for then President Charles de Gaulle 's vision of France as a global power (or grandeur in French) that could rival British and American influence in the post-colonial world.

The United States supported France's continuing presence in Africa to prevent the region from falling under Soviet influence during the Cold War.

Françafrique was defined by several features that emerged during the Cold War. The first was the African cell, consisting of the French President and his close advisors, which made policy decisions on Africa with the collaboration of powerful business networks and the French secret service. Another feature was the CFA franc, a currency union that pegged the currencies of most francophone African countries to the French franc. Françafrique was also largely based on the concept of institutional Coopération, which was implemented through a series of political, economic, military and cultural treaties between France and its former African colonies. France also saw itself as a guarantor of stability in the region, adopting an interventionist approach that culminated in military operations averaging one a year between 1960 and the mid-1990s. Finally, a defining feature of Françafrique was the network of personal, informal and familial links between French and African leaders. These networks often lacked oversight and scrutiny, which led to corruption and state racketeering.

Education was used as a tool to reinforce this system. France facilitated the arrival of young African executives who wished to pursue higher education in France: once graduated, fluent in French and imbued with European values, these young Africans returned to their countries. With the unofficial support of France, they would often become senior executives or join the state apparatus as senior civil servants.

Another tool was military cooperation. The defense agreements between France and francophone African countries were often accompanied by secret clauses allowing France to intervene militarily: to rescue regimes favorable to French interests, to fight jihadism, particularly in the Sahel, or to put an end to civil wars. Since 2022, several former French colonies in the Sahel have denounced their defense agreements with France, prompting the withdrawal of most French military forces in the region, some of which had been present since the 1960s. A notable example of this is the end of Operation Barkhane in 2022.

Since the end of the Cold War, the Françafrique regime has been progressively weakened by France's budgetary constraints, greater public scrutiny, the deaths of pivotal Françafrique actors (Foccart, Mitterrand, Pasqua and members of Elf), and the integration of France into the European Union. Economic liberalisation, high indebtedness, and political instability of the former African colonies, as well as the increase in African trade with other countries, have led France to slowly adapt its relations with former colonies.

The term Françafrique was derived from the expression France-Afrique. The first known usage is in a 1945 editorial from the pro-colonial politician and journalist Jean Piot [ fr ] in the newspaper L'Aurore. It has often been mistakenly attributed to a 1955 speech by President Félix Houphouët-Boigny of Ivory Coast, who advocated maintaining a close relationship with France even after independence. Close cooperation between Houphouët-Boigny and Jacques Foccart, chief advisor on African policy in the Charles de Gaulle and Georges Pompidou governments (1958–1974) is claimed by supporters to have contributed to the " Ivorian miracle " of economic and industrial progress.

The term Françafrique was subsequently used by François-Xavier Verschave as the title of his 1998 book, La Françafrique : le plus long scandale de la République ("Françafrique: the longest-lasting scandal in the Republic"), which criticises French policies in Africa.

Successive French governments in the past decades have repeatedly declared the end of Françafrique, which only goes to show how decolonization is still an unfinished process.

Verschave also noted the pun in the term Françafrique, as it sounds like " France à fric " (a source of cash for France; fric is French slang for 'cash'), and that " Over the course of four decades, hundreds of thousands of euros misappropriated from debt, aid, oil, cocoa... or drained through French importing monopolies, have financed French political-business networks (all of them offshoots of the main neo-Gaullist network), shareholders' dividends, the secret services' major operations and mercenary expeditions ".

When Charles de Gaulle returned to power as French President in 1958, France had already been severely weakened by World War II and by the conflicts in Indochina and Algeria. He proceeded to grant independence to France's remaining colonies in sub-Saharan Africa in 1960 in an effort to maintain close cultural and economic ties with them and to avoid more costly colonial wars. Compared to the decolonisation of French Indochina and Algeria, the transfer of power in sub-Saharan Africa was, for the most part, peaceful. Nevertheless, de Gaulle was keen on preserving France's status (or grandeur) as a global power rivalling British and American influence. Thus, he saw the close links with France's former African colonies as an opportunity to enhance France's image on the world stage, both as a major power and as a counterbalancing force between the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War. The United States supported France's continuing presence in Africa to prevent the region from falling under Soviet influence. Similarly, the United Kingdom had little interest in West Africa, which left France as the only major power in that region.

On 24 August 1958, in Brazzaville, President Charles de Gaulle recognized that African states had legitimate demands in terms of independence, but that they should go through a period of political learning in the French Community, an organization encompassing France and its colonies. A referendum was organized on 28 September 1958, to decide on the fate of the African states in question. Voting "Yes" meant joining the French Community and engaging on a path to independence, while voting "No" meant immediate independence. De Gaulle also warned that states voting "No" would commit secession, and that France would pull out all financial and material aid. All voted yes but Guinea, led by Ahmed Sékou Touré, head of the Democratic Party of Guinea.

On 2 October 1958, Guinea proclaimed its independence, and Sékou Touré became its first President. At the time, France was still processing its defeat in Indochina and feared that Guinea would incite uprisings in the region. Though Sékou Touré had sent a letter to de Gaulle on 15 October 1958, asking for Guinea to stay in the CFA franc zone, France banished them from the monetary union and engaged in economic retaliation. This prompted Guinea to seek aid from Eastern Bloc experts in order to build a new currency, which was seen as a further threat to French influence. Among the methods of destabilization used, " Opération Persil " involved introducing a large quantity of fake bills into the country to cause inflation and disturb the economy. Nevertheless, with the help of the USSR and China, Sékou Touré's regime held on to power until his death in 1984.

To further implement his vision of France's grandeur in Africa, de Gaulle appointed Jacques Foccart, a close adviser and former intelligence member of the French Resistance during World War II, as Secretary-General for African and Malagasy Affairs. Foccart played a pivotal role in maintaining France's sphere of influence in sub-Saharan Africa by negotiating a wide range of cooperation treaties. These treaties included France's former colonies in sub-Saharan Africa (Benin, Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Djibouti, Gabon, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Republic of the Congo and Senegal), former United Nations trust territories (Cameroon and Togo), former Belgian colonies (Rwanda, Burundi and Democratic Republic of Congo) and ex-Portuguese (Guinea-Bissau) and Spanish (Equatorial Guinea) territories. France's relationships with these countries was managed by the Ministry of Cooperation, which was created in 1961 out of the previous, colonial, Ministry for Overseas France. The Ministry of Cooperation served as a focal point for France's new system of influence in Africa until it was merged with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 1999. Jacques Foccart also built a dense web of personal networks between French and African leaders, which underpinned the institutional structures of Françafrique.

Foccart continued to serve as chief adviser for Africa until French President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing replaced him with René Journiac. Upon becoming President of France in 1995, Jacques Chirac again sought Foccart's counsel and even brought him on his first trip to Africa as French President. Foccart continued to play a role in Franco-African relations until his death in 1997.

During his five years in power, Georges Pompidou did not break with the Gaullist tradition. Françafrique continued to be strengthened under the leadership of Foccart, who consolidated the system of networks between France, French companies, and African elites.

When Valéry Giscard d'Estaing came to power in 1974, he intended to break with the practices of de Gaulle and modernize relations between France and Africa. Despite these intentions, the networks of Françafrique endured thanks to Journiac, who maintained strong ties with South Africa despite apartheid, but also with Congo, Gabon and Niger, whose raw materials were essential to France. Giscard-d'Estaing was also confronted with the political instability of African states, which led him to play the role of "policeman of Africa", i.e. to intervene militarily, notably in Chad and Zaire. Finally, Giscard-d'Estaing was involved in corruption cases revealed by the Canard Enchainé in October 1979. Jean-Bedel Bokassa, emperor of the Central African Republic, was alleged to have sent him suitcases of diamonds on several occasions. Silent at first, Giscard-d'Estaing finally spoke out as new evidence emerged, declaring that the gifts received had all been sold, with all proceeds going to NGOs. The affair was nevertheless a hit to his legitimacy.

François Mitterrand 's 14 years in power were marked by two opposing trends. The imperative remained to defend French interests in Africa, which was in line with the choices of Mitterrand's predecessors despite his political differences with them (Mitterrand was a socialist, unlike the three previous Presidents). Nevertheless, he instituted a shift in doctrine regarding Françafrique. In particular, French public financial aid was made conditional on the democratization of recipient African countries, which was in direct contradiction with the previous policy of open support for local strongmen.

Additionally, unlike his predecessors who maintained strong ties with South Africa, Mitterrand denounced the crimes of apartheid.

Upon his election in 1995, Jacques Chirac once again consulted with Jacques Foccart on African matters, going as far as to bring him on his first official visits to African countries. Chirac generally continued French diplomatic efforts to maintain special ties with Africa, opposing the devaluation of the CFA franc as well as the proposed reform of the African cooperation framework. The issue of human rights, which was a priority under Mitterrand, was far less prevalent in his foreign policy, as shown by his proximity with the authoritarian regime of Mobutu Sese Seko in Zaire.

Elected in 2007, Nicolas Sarkozy merged the "African cell" of the French state into the official diplomatic cell, signaling a shift away from the neocolonial networks once woven by Foccart. However, Sarkozy also caused indignation in his Dakar address on 26 July 2007 at the Cheikh Anta Diop University, when he declared that " The tragedy of Africa is that the African has not fully entered into history... They have never really launched themselves into the future," and " The African peasant only knew the eternal renewal of time, marked by the endless repetition of the same gestures and the same words... In this realm of fancy... there is neither room for human endeavour nor the idea of progress. "

The five-year term of François Hollande was marked by an ambivalence in French foreign policy on Africa. Upon coming to power, Hollande promised the end of Françafrique, declaring " the time of Françafrique is over: there is France, there is Africa, there is the partnership between France and Africa, with relations based on respect, clarity and solidarity. " However, he also oversaw Operation Serval and the beginning of Operation Barkhane, two successive large-scale counterinsurgency operations in the Sahel. His personal visits to several African dictators such as Idriss Déby or Paul Biya drew criticisms that recalled the difficulty of France to break clearly with Françafrique ever since Mitterrand instituted the shift in the 1980s.

In August 2017, Emmanuel Macron founded the Presidential Council for Africa, an advisory body composed of people from civil society, mostly members of the African diaspora. While its supporters see the institution as a way of promoting civil society organisations, rather than officials or business leaders, others see it as a new bridge between African elites, the african diaspora in France, and French interests in the Africa.

In April 2021, President Macron visited Chad for the funeral of President Idriss Déby, who died while commanding a counterinsurgency against the Front for Change and Concord in Chad (FACT). Déby had ruled Chad from 1990 to his death and was succeeded by his son and army general Mahamat Déby. The official visit of the French head of state contributed to legitimize the "Déby clan" at the head of Chad.

During the 2020s in the Coup Belt, the military juntas of Burkina Faso, Mali, and Niger withdrew from military agreements with France and removed French as an official language. In 2023, they signed a mutual defense pact called the Confederation of Sahel States (CES). Guinea's military junta also expressed support for the CES in spite of the formal position of ECOWAS, weakening the international organization's denunciation of the coups.

On 31 January 2025, a report adopted by the French Defense and Armed Forces Commission noted the failure of the attempted renewal of Franco-African relations, initiated by Emmanuel Macron in during his first term, and a deterioration of France's image in Africa.

In April 2025, the parliamentary intelligence delegation expressed its concerns over the repeated occurrence of unanticipated coups, revealing a flaw in French intelligence.

In June 2025, according to French President Emmanuel Macron, "The solution Russia is proposing directly, or through Wagner, is neocolonialism. It secures your position as leader. And then it takes your mines, it takes your information system, and it puts the country under lockdown. This is not development aid". Russian forces have been in the region since 2017, and the government relations date back to the Cold War. Wagner forces have been sent to fight in the Sahel, and they were first deployed to fight in Mali in December 2021, in exchange for reserves of gold and other resources. The Mali government had officially requested help from Wagner after the military junta took power. Russian forces have also provided training and expertise in countries like Sudan, Burkina Faso, CAR, Chad, Niger, and Libya with the stated role of cementing the local government's influence and fighting jihadists. They have also committed numerous atrocities, and far from decreasing violence, it seems violence has only increased in the region, further cementing their need.

Russia is also working to decrease access of Western powers to mineral resources in the countries.

In July 2025, a conference is being organized in France by the Association of Grand Orient Lodges, entitled "Africa and France at the Crossroads: An Essential Dialogue to Rethink Franco-African Relations".

In May 2026, France held its Africa summit, named "Africa Forward," in Nairobi, Kenya – the first time the summit took place in a non-francophone country. President Macron announced a new strategy focused on co-investment rather than aid, stating that "the days of offering assistance are behind us." At the same summit, Macron announced €23 billion ($27bn) in investments from French and African companies, aiming to create 250,000 jobs.

Decisions on France's African policies have been the responsibility (or domaine réservé in French) of French presidents since 1958. They along with their close advisors formed the African cell, which made decisions on African countries without engaging in broader discussions with the French Parliament and civil society actors such as non-governmental organisations. Instead, the African cell worked closely with powerful business networks and the French secret service.

The African cell's founding father, Jacques Foccart, was appointed by President Charles de Gaulle. He became a specialist on African matters at the Élysée Palace. Between 1986 and 1992, Jean-Christophe Mitterrand, the son of President François Mitterrand and a former AFP journalist in Africa, held the position of chief advisor on African policy at the African cell. He was nicknamed Papamadi (translated as 'Daddy told me'). He was appointed as a diplomatic advisor on Africa but the difference in titles was only symbolic. Subsequently, Claude Guéant served as Africa Advisor to President Sarkozy. In 2017, President Macron appointed Franck Paris to the same role.

The franc zone, a currency union in sub-Saharan Africa, was established when the CFA franc (or franc de la Communauté Financière Africaine) was created in 1945 as a colonial currency for over a dozen of France's African colonies. The zone continued to exist even after the colonies had achieved their independence in the early 1960s, with only three African countries ever leaving the zone, mostly for reasons of national prestige. One of the three countries, Mali, rejoined the zone in 1984. The CFA franc was pegged to the French franc, and now the euro, and its convertibility is guaranteed by the French Treasury. Despite sharing the same exchange rate, the CFA franc is actually two currencies, the Central African CFA franc and the West African CFA franc, which are run by their respective central banks in Central and West Africa. The foreign exchange reserves of member countries are pooled and each of the two African central banks keeps 65% of its foreign reserves with the French Treasury.

The franc zone was intended to provide African countries with monetary stability, with member countries such as Ivory Coast experiencing relatively low inflation at an average rate of 6% over the past 50 years compared to 29% in neighboring Ghana, a non-member country. Moreover, the fixed exchange rate between the CFA Franc and the French franc has changed only once in 1994 when the CFA franc was considered overvalued. However, this monetary arrangement has enabled France to control the money supply of the CFA franc and to influence the decision-making process of the African central banks through their boards.

The parity of the CFA franc to the euro has allowed French companies and French people to buy African resources (e.g., cocoa, coffee, gold, uranium, etc.) without having to pay any foreign currency. It also serves as a guaranty for French investments in the region as the CFA franc is pegged on the euro which means that there is little risks of monetary fluctuations. Many French corporations such as TotalEnergies, Orange, or Bouygues have used this free movement of capital to bring back profits made in these 14 countries, without any typical risks associated to foreign currency exchanges.

Critics of the CFA franc also point to the structure of the CFA franc to euro convertibility as being unfair since the economic cycles happening inside the Eurozone differ from those happening in the UEMOA and the CEMAC. This indirectly leaves the 14 African states subject to EU dynamics in terms of monetary policy. Nonetheless, while the European Central Bank 's main mission is to control inflation in the EU, most African states' present priorities are creating jobs and investing in infrastructures, which are policies driving inflation. Therefore, some say that the convertibility of the CFA franc is a disservice to the development of African nations.

Experts also denounce the CFA franc as a symbol of persistent French monetary dominance in Africa.

In May 2025, activists, economists and civil society representatives opposed to the use of the CFA franc will organize conferences and meetings across African capitals.

On 16 May 2025, a demonstration dubbed "5,000 young people march for Cheikh Anta Diop" brought thousands of protesters to the streets of Dakar, Senegal. The demonstration was led by pan-Africanist movements, which made demands, including the abandonment of the CFA franc, as "a neocolonial currency and a demand for financial reparations from France for centuries of exploitation of Africa".

In the early 1960s, French governments had developed a discourse around the concept of coopération, or "post-independence relationship". This concept was linked to the effort of spreading French influence across the world such as promoting French language and culture, securing markets for French goods and projecting French power. It was to be achieved outside of a traditional colonial context whereby sovereign states such as France and the newly independent African countries would work together for mutual benefit. The concept of coopération also appealed to France's sense of historic responsibility to advance the development of its former colonial "family". To that end, France signed cooperation accords with its former colonies, which provided them with cultural, technical and military assistance such as sending French teachers and military advisors to work for the newly formed African governments. The accords also allowed France to maintain troops in Chad, Djibouti, Gabon, Ivory Coast and Senegal, and to establish a framework that would allow France to intervene militarily in the region. The French presence abroad has long been manifested by military bases in various partner countries or former French African colonies. Thanks to these military bases in Africa, France can claim a free extraterritorial zone.

In the aftermath of World War Two, France took steps to create a military nuclear program. In principle, this would have allowed it to protect itself from the Soviet threat in the East, but also to guarantee peace in Europe and a certain independence from the United States. However, in order to do this, France needed a stable supply of uranium, and so they signed a cooperation agreement with Niger in the early 1960s to get access to the African state's uranium reserves. This agreement was a priority for then President Charles de Gaulle who wished to compete with the largest nuclear powers.

From 1970 to 1981, the French military cooperation budget constituted 11 to 19% of the entire coopération budget. Under President de Gaulle, French aid and assistance were made contingent on the signing of these accords. For example, when Guinea refused to sign the accords, France immediately withdrew its personnel from Guinea and terminated all assistance to that country. The implementation of these accords was the responsibility of Jacques Foccart, Secretary-General for African and Malagasy Affairs under Presidents Charles de Gaulle and Georges Pompidou. In 1987, France was the largest source of development aid to sub-Saharan Africa, providing up to 18% of total aid to the region, followed by the World Bank (13%), Italy (8.5%), United States (6.8%), Germany (6.8%), and the European Community (6.4%). All French aid was provided through the Ministry of Cooperation. France has benefited from its aid, trade and investments in Africa, which has consistently generated a positive balance of payment in France's favour.

Defense cooperation agreements were renegotiated after 2008. Only Djibouti retained the clause stipulating that France "undertakes to contribute to the defense of the territorial integrity" of the country. In contrast, the other West and Central African countries adopted partnership or cooperation agreements.

After decolonisation, France established formal defence agreements with many francophone countries in sub-Saharan Africa. These arrangements allowed France to establish itself as a guarantor of stability and hegemony in the region. France adopted an interventionist policy in Africa, resulting in 122 military interventions that averaged once a year from 1960 to the mid-1990s and included countries such as Benin (Operation Verdier in 1991), Central African Republic (Operation Barracuda in 1979 and Operation Almandin in 1996), Chad (Opération Bison in 1968–72, Opération Tacaud in 1978, Operation Manta in 1983 and Opération Épervier in 1986), Comoros (Operation Oside in 1989 and Operation Azalee in 1995), Democratic Republic of Congo (Operation Léopard in 1978 and Operation Baumier in 1991 when it was Zaire, and Operation Artemis in 2003), Djibouti (Operation Godoria in 1991), Gabon (1964 and Operation Requin in 1990), Ivory Coast (Opération Licorne in 2002), Mauritania (Opération Lamantin in 1977), Republic of Congo (Opération Pélican in 1997), Rwanda (Operation Noroît in 1990–93, Operation Amaryllis in 1994 and Opération Turquoise in 1994), Togo (1986), Senegal (prevent a coup d'état in 1962) and Sierra Leone (Operation Simbleau in 1992). France often intervened to protect French nationals, to put down rebellions or prevent coups, to restore order or to support particular African leaders.

A central feature of Françafrique was that state-to-state relations between French and African leaders were informal and family-like and were bolstered by a dense web of personal networks (or réseaux in French), whose activities were funded from the coopération budget. Jacque Foccart put in place these networks, which served as one of the main vehicles for the clientelist relations that France had maintained with its former African colonies. The activities of these networks were not subjected to parliamentary oversight or scrutiny, which led to corruption as politicians and officials became involved in business activities that resulted in state racketeering.

The blurring of state, party and personal interests made it possible for the informal, family-like relationships of the Franco-African bloc to benefit specific interest groups and small sections of French and African populations. For example, major French political parties have received funding from the recycling of part of the coopération budget, which secretly made its way to the party's coffers via Africa and from Elf, a French state-owned oil company, when it achieved its strategic objectives in Africa. African leaders and the small French-speaking elites to which they belonged also benefited from this informal relationship as it provided them with political, economic and military support.

The French press, long seen as a bastion of freedom of expression, has often played a much less noble role when it comes to Africa. Behind a veneer of neutrality and objectivity, it has established itself as a strategic tool in the service of French neocolonial policy. By shaping narratives, amplifying certain voices and silencing others, it contributes to keeping Africa under the yoke of insidious domination. The French press has often been accused of being an extension of the economic and geopolitical interests of the French state. According to journalist and essayist François-Xavier Verschave, author of "La Françafrique: Le plus long scandale de la République," "the French media participate in the construction of a narrative that legitimizes economic predation and military interventions in Africa." This narrative is carefully crafted to justify the French presence on the continent under the guise of "stabilization" or "fighting international crime".

The Françafrique regime was at its height from 1960 to 1992 but after the Cold War, it has weakened due to France's budgetary constraints, greater public scrutiny at home, the deaths of pivotal Françafrique figures and the integration of France into the European Union. Economic liberalisation, high indebtedness and political instability of the former African colonies have reduced their political and economic attractiveness, leading France to adopt a more pragmatic and hard-nosed approach to its African relations. Furthermore, many of the dense web of informal networks that bound France to Africa have declined.

The pre-1990 aid regime of the old Françafrique, which has made the sub-Saharan African countries economically dependent on France has now given way to a new regime that is supposed to promote self-sufficiency as well as political and economic liberalism. France has also adopted the Abidjan doctrine, which has internationalised the economic dependency of African countries by having them first reach an agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) before receiving French aid. This in turn has decreased the French government's ability to manoeuvre freely to pursue its own distinctive African policy. As a result, the old Franco-African bloc has now splintered, with France adopting a new style of relationship with its former African colonies.

France has made efforts to reduce its military footprint in Africa by making multilateral arrangements with African and European states. French President François Hollande started his tenure with a commitment to non-interventionism. However, a year later, France intervened in Mali at the request of the Malian government, sending 4,000 troops (see Operation Serval, then Operation Barkhane). According to a 2020 study, "France's commitment to multilateralism is genuine yet not absolute—meaning that French policy-makers do not shy away from operational unilateralism if conditions on the ground seem to require swift and robust military action, as long as they can count on the political support of key international partners."

The French Development Agency (AFD) and Caisse des Dépôts et des Consignations (CDC) signed a strategic alliance charter in December 2016, one of the financial drivers of which is the creation of a €500 million investment fund. This fund is used to finance infrastructure projects in Africa, in various sectors (energy, telecommunications, etc.). Some critics, however, point to the fund's strategy of creating opportunities and opening the market to mostly French companies, thus feeding capital transfer bridges that are the roots of Françafrique.

The arrest of Senegalese opposition leader and member of Parliament Ousmane Sonko for allegations of rape, in Senegal, in March 2021, shook the country. Senegalese people, especially young ones, critiqued the lack of transparency of the proceedings, and saw this as a political maneuver orchestrated by President Macky Sall to suppress the opposition before the next presidential elections in Senegal. Protesters took to the streets, and days of chaos ensued. Among their grievances, people blamed Sall for leaning too much towards France, giving too many opportunities to French companies when local businesses could step in. To manifest this frustration protesters targeted French corporate symbols such as Auchan supermarkets, Orange stores, and TotalEnergies gas stations. Some protesters also committed looting and destroyed property. These companies were accused by protesters of reaping benefits from the hands of Senegalese people.

On 21 December 2019, French President Emmanuel Macron and Ivorian President Alassane Ouattara announced in a press conference that they had signed a new cooperation accord replacing that of 1973. This agreement replaced the West African CFA franc with the Eco, the new currency for the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). This will only apply to countries belonging to the West African Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA) which includes Benin, Burkina Faso, Guinea-Bissau, Ivory Coast, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo, and not to member states of the Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa (CEMAC from its French appellation), which use the Central African CFA franc and includes Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and the Republic of the Congo.

A bill approving the new cooperation accord was ratified on 10 November 2020, by the French National Assembly, and then by the French Senate on 28 January 2021. The text is composed of three main reforms: the change of currency from the CFA franc to the Eco, the abolition of the obligation to centralize 50% of the CFA franc reserves at the Banque of France, and the withdrawal of French representatives from the UEMOA's governing bodies (e.g., BCEAO's board, UMOA's banking commission, etc.).

In June 2021, Emmanuel Macron announced that Operation Barkhane was drawing down to be gradually replaced by the international Takuba Task Force. As of 2021, France retains the largest military presence in Africa of any former colonial power. The French presence has been complicated by other expanding spheres of influence in Africa such as those of Russia and China. In 2016, China's investment in Africa was $38.4 billion versus France's $7.7 billion. Russia has been seen as expanding opportunistically in Africa, with both the mercenary Wagner Group, with which the Kremlin has denied links, and official military agreements. Macron has accused Moscow and Ankara of fueling anti-French sentiment in the Central African Republic. One of the main emphases of France's continuing links in Africa is opposing Islamist militants in the Sahel.

Many former French colonies have experienced a growing anti-French sentiment in the past 30 years. This feeling, particularly present among the younger generations who have not experienced colonization or the period of independence, is also reinforced by events such as the genocide of the Tutsi in Rwanda, the civil war in Côte d'Ivoire or the crisis in Libya. While the older generation is more likely to support strong ties with France because they believe it brings stability, the younger generation sees it as a brake on the development of African states and businesses.

The Sahel is an area of land that serves as a demarcation line between Western and Central Africa. It is situated between the nations of Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Chad, and Burkina Faso, which are all former French colonies. In 2012, militant groups affiliated with Al-Qaeda attempted to seize parts of Mali with the intent to take control of other areas within the region. Due to these pertinent issues, the involvement of France has increased in order to provide military assistance to Sahelian countries. This is defined by Operation Serval, which was a French effort under the leadership of former president François Hollande in order to prevent Islamist militants from seizing Bamako, Mali. The success of this operation was short-lived as militant groups began to appear in neighboring nations, including Chad and Burkina Faso. By 2014, the French military sent over 5,000 troops to the Sahel under Operation Barkhane as a means to support governments throughout the region in their struggle against Islamist groups. As a result of these operations, French forces have only expanded their oversight throughout the Sahel.

The ongoing conflict between French-backed forces and Jihadist militant groups continues to have detrimental consequences, which have led to increased rates of death and displacement within the Sahel territories. In 2021 alone, almost 6,000 people died due to conflict-related deaths in Niger, Mali, and Burkina Faso. There are also increasing security concerns for coastal nations such as Benin and Senegal as militant groups advance further within the region's borders.

In November 2024, the special politician for French operations in Africa, Jean-Marie Bockel, submitted a report to President Emmanuel Macron on the reconfiguration of the French military presence in Africa. This report advocates a "renewed" and "rebuilt" partnership. France plans to reduce the pre-positioned forces it has on its military bases. The new terms of France's military presence in Africa provide for a significant reduction to maintain only a permanent liaison detachment and at the same time adapt the offer of military cooperation to the needs expressed by African countries.

Pro-Russian Pan-Africanist activists are a vent for anti-French sentiment in Africa.

In April 2025, the "Ancrages" forum, organized by France, aims to renew relations between Africa and France. The forum focuses exclusively on economic diplomacy, territorial diplomacy, and the concrete promotion of the various State support mechanisms for creation and entrepreneurship in France and Africa.

While the support of the French military continues to be a source of protection for countries in the Sahel, recent developments suggest that this reality may soon change. Despite the initial demand for military backing and aid in 2013 and 2014, public opinion has shown less enthusiasm for France's current involvement in the Sahel. People have grown increasingly critical of the French government's action, or lack thereof, in preventing further casualties and attacks by Islamic militant forces. Many have also opposed the strategy of the French military and its lasting presence, which echoes its former colonial past in these territories.

In February 2022, French President Emmanuel Macron announced the official withdrawal of military forces within Mali. His decision follows escalating tensions between the French and Malian governments, the latter of which rose to power through a series of military coups in both 2020 and 2021, respectively. Colonel Assimi Goïta is currently serving as interim president of Mali, with the intention to not hold elections until 2024, with the initial goal of not holding elections until 2027. Under Goïta's rule, Mali has signed a deal with the Wagner Group, a Russian military contractor, which has only heightened France's desire to distance itself from the area. These issues, alongside the removal of the French ambassador in the midst of electoral controversy, played a significant role in the nation's decision to remove its officials from Mali.

While a complete withdrawal of French troops in Mali is now evident, it raises further questions regarding the social and political instability within the Sahel region. Many governments, including Mali and Burkina Faso, lack the infrastructure necessary to combat militant groups from advancing their agendas, which leaves the ability to secure their borders in tandem. Subsequently, the French government is now searching for a means to continue its military presence in a neighboring country as a way to address military concerns while simultaneously furthering its influence upon the region.

On 28 November 2024, Chad terminated the defense and security cooperation agreement that has linked them since Chad's independence. On 10 December, France began the process of withdrawing its armies from Chad. On 10 January 2025, the Abéché military base was returned to Chad by France. In January 2025, the N'Djamena air military base begins to be emptied. The last air base in Chad, the Sergent Adji Kossei base, or commonly 172 Fort-Lamy, is being handed over, starting 31 January 2025.

On 31 December 2024, Senegal and Ivory Coast announced that they would end the presence of foreign forces in their country, particularly French forces, and would terminate their military cooperation and defense-security agreements with France. The status of the end of the presence of French forces in Senegal is planned for September 2025. On 7 March 2025, France returned several facilities used by the French army in Senegal, the first transferred as part of its military withdrawal from Senegal, where it had been present since 1960.

On 20 February 2025, France officially handed over its sole military base in Ivory Coast to local authorities, marking a significant shift in their bilateral relations. This decision aligns with France's broader strategy to reduce its military footprint in West Africa, following similar withdrawals from countries like Chad, Senegal, Mali, Niger, and Burkina Faso. The base, previously home to the 43rd Marine Infantry Battalion (43rd BIMA), has been transferred to Ivorian control and renamed Camp Thomas d'Aquin Ouattara, in honor of the nation's first army chief. This move reflects Ivory Coast's growing emphasis on national sovereignty and the modernization of its armed forces. France had occupied the Port-Bouët military base for more than 50 years.

On 1 July 2025, France handed over the Rufisque joint station to Senegal. This station, active since 1960, was responsible for communications on the southern Atlantic coast. It also served as a listening station in the fight against maritime trafficking. The handover was carried out without ceremony, limited to the signing of a report. The handover of the last remaining military infrastructure in Senegal to the Senegalese authorities occurred later that month. The two military sites were returned to the Senegalese government: the airport base and Camp Geille, a 5-hectare site located in Ouakam. Four villas located in Plateau, near the port, were also transferred. On 14 July 2025, Christine Fages, French Ambassador to Senegal, declared, "In accordance with the guidelines established in 2022 by President Macron, France will return to Senegal the military bases of the French elements in Senegal." The transfer occurred on 17 July.

Following the French military withdrawal from Africa, private military companies quickly offered their services to states wishing to outsource a wide range of missions ranging from logistical support, securing sites, training, and the protection of personalities.

France's economic interests in Africa have remained important since the end of the Cold War. More than 40,000 French companies are active in Africa, dozens of which are large multinationals such as TotalEnergies, Areva, or Vinci. In fact, France's exports to Africa have increased from 13 billion dollars to 28 billion in the last 20 years, while French foreign direct investment has increased tenfold, from 5.9 billion euros in 2000 to 52.6 billion in 2017. However, while these investments and economic flows have increased, France's market share has drastically decreased since the early 2000s. Indeed, while French exports to Africa have doubled, the total size of the market has quadrupled (from 100 billion dollars to 400); France's market share has therefore been divided by 2 in 20 years.

While France remains a crucial player in the African market, its position has been compromised by other foreign investors such as China, who have recently showcased their interest in the continent. From 2010 to 2015, Chinese investors granted $2.5 billion in loans for infrastructure to Côte d'Ivoire alone. And their sights are set on the entirety of Francophone Africa as they seek new opportunities for development in the private sector. By the end of 2017, China's capital increased at a rate of 332% throughout the region. This leaves China in an economically advantageous position, thereby making their monetary gain a legitimate threat to French investors.

Although France's influence may be weakening throughout Francophone Africa, there also remains strong social and economic ties that link these nations together. One prime example can be displayed through the already established business deals with the French private sector in order to increase development in West Africa. An additional factor that connects France to its former colonies is their usage of the French language. Francophone African nations are placed at an economic advantage within European countries such as France, Switzerland, and Belgium due to their shared linguistic identities.

With increasingly younger populations, African countries are viewed as the ideal candidates for long-term investment by international actors. This sentiment directly reflects France's approach to its former colonies, which comprise over half of its primary trade exports. This includes West African countries such as Senegal and Cameroon, which continue to play an integral role in supplying natural resources, hardware, and manufactured goods. Despite these staggering numbers, France remains in a vulnerable position as it renounces its title as the top investor in the region. The prospect of foreign backers and the appeal of Intra-African trade opportunities have encouraged West African nations to reclaim their economic agency from their former occupiers. Ultimately, these circumstances have contributed to France's declining economic influence.

Currently, French companies are less linked to Africa, or at least to the countries that were formerly colonies of France. France's main economic partners in Africa are indeed the Maghreb countries (Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia), Nigeria, South Africa, and Angola. Some critics of French foreign policy in Africa question the deep commitment that France has with the former French colonies, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, given the low financial and commercial interest that the countries of the CFA franc zone represent for French companies.

On 6 June 2023 French Foreign Minister Catherine Colonna said France wants to remain a "relevant partner" in Africa despite " anti-French rhetoric " while presenting the country's foreign policy in Africa to the Senate.

The Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean are partially claimed by the Comoros, Madagascar, and Mauritius. The Malagasy and Mauritian claims, however, are significantly later than their access to independence. However, the agreement reached in October 2024 between the United Kingdom and Mauritius to transfer the British Indian Ocean Territory to Mauritian sovereignty has relaunched the debate in Madagascar.

François, marquis de Barbé-Marbois (French pronunciation: [ fʁɑ̃swa baʁbe maʁbwa ] ; 31 January 1745 – 12 February 1837) was a French civil servant, diplomat, and politician.

He was ambassador of France to the United States (1784 – 1785), where he married the daughter of the Governor of Pennsylvania, William Moore. He then became Napoleon 's Minister of the Treasury (1801 – 1806), before Napoleon appointed him First President of the Cour des Comptes, ("Court of Accounts"), France's supreme audit institution (1807 – 1814).

Born in Metz, where his father was director of the local mint, Barbé-Marbois tutored the children of the Marquis de Castries. In 1779, he was made secretary of the French legation to the United States. In 1780, Barbé-Marbois sent a questionnaire to the governors of all thirteen former American colonies, seeking information about each state's geography, natural resources, history, and government. Thomas Jefferson, who was then finishing his final term as Virginia's governor, responded to this query with a manuscript that later became his famous Notes on the State of Virginia.

Barbé-Marbois was elected a Foreign Honorary Member to both the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the American Philosophical Society in 1781. When the minister Chevalier de la Luzerne returned to France in 1783, Barbé-Marbois remained in America as chargé d'affaires in 1784. That year he married Elizabeth Moore, the daughter of William Moore, former governor of Pennsylvania.

In 1785, he became intendant of the colony of Saint-Domingue under the Ancien Régime.

At the close of 1789, he returned to France, and then placed his services at the disposal of the French Revolutionary government. In 1791 he was sent to Regensburg to help the Marquis de Noailles, the French ambassador. Suspected of treason, he was arrested on his return but soon freed.

In 1795, he was elected to the Council of Ancients, where the general moderation of his attitude, especially in his opposition to the exclusion of nobles and the relations of émigrés from public life, brought him under suspicion of being a royalist, though he pronounced a eulogy on Napoleon Bonaparte for his success in Italy.

During the anti- Royalist coup d'état of the 18th Fructidor (4 September) 1797, he was arrested and transported to French Guiana. Transferred to the island of Oléron in 1799, he was set free by Bonaparte after the Coup of 18 Brumaire. In 1801, under the Consulate, he became councillor of state and director of the Trésor public (Treasury), and in 1802 a senator.

In 1803 he negotiated the Louisiana Purchase treaty by which Louisiana was ceded to the United States, and was rewarded by the First Consul with a gift of 152,000 francs.

Loyal to the First Empire, he was made grand officer of the Legion of Honour and a count in 1805, and in 1808 he became president of the Cour des Comptes. His career as Head of the Treasury ended in 1806. In return for these favours, he heaped praise upon Napoleon; yet, in 1814, he helped to draw up the act of abdication of the emperor, and declared to the Cour des Comptes, with reference to the invasion of France by the Sixth Coalition :

In June of that year, under the First Restoration, Barbé-Marbois was made Peer of France by King Louis XVIII, and confirmed in his office as president of the Cour des Comptes. Deprived of his positions by Napoleon during the Hundred Days, he was appointed Minister of Justice under the Duc de Richelieu (August 1815), tried unsuccessfully to gain the confidence of the Ultra-Royalists, and withdrew at the end of nine months (10 May 1816).

In 1830, when the July Revolution brought Louis Philippe I and the Orléans Monarchy, Barbé-Marbois went, as president of the Cour des Comptes, to compliment the new king, and was confirmed in his position. He held his office until April 1834.

In 1829, he wrote the book Histoire de la Louisiane et la cession de cette colonie par la France aux Etats-Unis de l'Amérique septentrionale; précédée d'un discours sur la constitution et le gouvernement des Etats-Unis ("History of Louisiana and of Its Cession to the United States of Northern America; Preceded by a Discourse on the Constitution and Government of the United States").

Written in 1780, while secretary to the French legation to the US Army: "D'Complot du Benedict Arnold & Sir Henri Clinton contre Eunas` States du America General George Washington", one of the first accounts of Arnold's treason, was not published until 1816.

François Billoux (21 May 1903 – 14 January 1978) was a French communist politician.

Billoux was born in Saint-Romain-la-Motte. He was a member of the Central Committee of the French Communist Party (PCF) from 1926, and a member of the Politburo from 1936. From 1928 until 1931, he was also General Secretary of the Young Communist Movement of France (MJCF), the youth wing of the PCF.

Billoux served as a member of the Chamber of Deputies from 1936 to 1940, and the National Assembly from 1945 to 1978, representing Bouches-du-Rhône. During World War II, Billoux was interned in France and Algeria from 1940 until he was freed after Operation Torch in 1943. In the post-war years, he served as Minister of Public Health (1944–1945), Minister of National Economy (1945–1946), Minister of Reconstruction and Urban Development (1946) and Minister of National Defence (1947). He died in Menton, and is buried in Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.

François Bluche (17 September 1925 – 28 June 2018) was a French historian.

He painted a largely positive portrait of Louis XIV in his biography, attributing to him substantial cultural and political achievements. Bluche saw Louis as a precursor to enlightened despotism and argued that his reign witnessed the birth of modern France. In his view both Louis' creation of a centralised, powerful monarchy and his wars of conquest benefited the French people. The book was translated into English by Mark Greengrass and published in 1990. Peter Burke labelled Bluche a "neo-traditionalist" who had written a "moderate but firm apologia for Louis XIV, a reaction against what the author calls the 'black legend' of the reign".

During the 1960s he was arrested for suspected involvement in an assassination plot against President de Gaulle.

Bluche was awarded the Grand prix Gobert in 1961 for his book Les magistrats du Parlement de Paris au XVIIIe siècle, the Prix Feydeau de Brou for Les magistrats du Grand Conseil au XVIIIe siècle (1968), the Prix Broquette-Gonin (literature) for Le despotisme éclairé médaille (1970), the Prix Feydeau de Brou for La vie quotidienne de la noblesse française au XVIIIe siècle (1974) and the Prix d’Académie for the Dictionnaire du Grand Siècle médaille de vermeil in 1991.

François Charles Amand Fillon (French: [ fʁɑ̃swa ʃaʁl amɑ̃ fijɔ̃ ] ; born 4 March 1954) is a French retired politician who served as Prime Minister of France from 2007 to 2012 under President Nicolas Sarkozy. He was the nominee of The Republicans (previously known as the Union for a Popular Movement), the country's largest centre-right political party, for the 2017 French presidential election in which he ranked third in the first round of voting.

Fillon became Jean-Pierre Raffarin 's Minister of Labour in 2002 and undertook controversial reforms of the 35-hour workweek law and of the French retirement system. In 2004, as Minister of National Education he proposed the much debated Fillon law on Education. In 2005, Fillon was elected senator for the Sarthe department. His role as a political advisor in Sarkozy's successful race for president led to his becoming prime minister in 2007. Fillon resigned upon Sarkozy's defeat by François Hollande in the 2012 French presidential elections.

Running on a platform described as conservative, he won the 2016 The Republicans presidential primary, defeating Alain Juppé. Following his victory in the primary, opinion polls showed Fillon as the frontrunner for the 2017 presidential election. In March 2017, he was formally charged in an embezzlement investigation in a case that became known as " Penelopegate " due to the involvement of his wife. In April, he finally came third in the first round with 20%, and was therefore excluded from the runoff between the top two finishers.

In 2020, Fillon was convicted of fraud and misuse of funds, and sentenced to five years in prison (three of them suspended). He has appealed against the sentence. In May 2022, the sentence was shortened to four years in prison (three of them suspended). In June 2025, Fillon was given a four-year suspended sentence for corruption. In December 2021, Fillon was named as a member of the Board of Directors of SIBUR Holding, the largest integrated petrochemical company in Russia. He resigned from this position in February 2022, following the Russian invasion of Ukraine.

Fillon was born on 4 March 1954 in Le Mans, Sarthe, France. His father, Michel, is a civil law notary, while his mother, Anne Soulet Fillon [ fr ], is a history professor of Basque descent. His younger brother, Pierre [ fr ] is the president of Automobile Club de l'Ouest, responsible for the organization and management of the 24 Hours of Le Mans auto race. His youngest brother, Dominique [ fr ], is a pianist and jazz musician.

Fillon received a baccalauréat in 1972. He then studied at the University of Maine in Le Mans where he received a master's degree in public law in 1976. He subsequently received a master of Advanced Studies (diplôme d'études approfondies) in public law from Paris Descartes University.

The day after Nicolas Sarkozy became president he appointed Fillon as Prime Minister of France, charging him with the task of forming a new cabinet, which was announced on 18 May 2007. By appointing as Secretary of State André Santini, who had been indicted in the Fondation Hamon affair on charges of corruption, Fillon made the first break since 1992 with the " Balladur jurisprudence ", according to which an indicted governmental personality should resign until the case is closed. On 13 November 2010, Fillon resigned, paving the way for a cabinet reshuffle. One day later Sarkozy reappointed Fillon as prime minister, allowing Fillon to formally name a new cabinet.

Following the defeat of Sarkozy to François Hollande in the 2012 French presidential election, Fillon resigned on 10 May. Following the inauguration of Hollande as president on 15 May 2012, Jean-Marc Ayrault, Mayor of Nantes, was appointed to succeed Fillon as prime minister.

Aiming at building consensus within the diverging views at the UMP after Francois Hollande's victory in the French presidential elections in 2012, Fillon declared his candidacy to become the President of the UMP party. On the day of the vote, both candidates (Fillon and Jean-François Copé) claimed victory and accused the other of cheating. This led to a major political crisis within the party with votes being recounted twice and Copé finally being declared winner.

Fillon threatened to split from UMP unless new elections were organised. He formed a new parliamentary faction, the Rassemblement-UMP group. In December 2012, Copé agreed to organising elections in 2013, thus putting an end to the crisis.

Fillon entered the 2016 The Republicans presidential primary, held on 20 November 2016, and seemed a likely third as late as a week before the vote. In early counting, Fillon emerged as the clear frontrunner, with Alain Juppé in second place. Third place Sarkozy conceded, bringing his support to Fillon, and Fillon and Juppé went into the runoff on 27 November 2016. Juppé conceded to Fillon, pledging his support for him as The Republicans' nominee in the 2017 French presidential election.

As of November 2016, Fillon was seen as the frontrunner for the presidency against the Socialist candidate Benoît Hamon, Emmanuel Macron and Marine Le Pen. However, revelations of series of political scandals at the end of January shattered his presidential bid, with polls rapidly showing him behind both Marine Le Pen and Emmanuel Macron and out of the runoff. Fillon's visits on the ground attracted protesters who further destabilised his campaign. The news provoked consternation in Germany where Fillon was seen as a serious and trusted candidate. On 23 April 2017, he secured 20.0% of the votes at the first round of the French presidential election, arriving third, and therefore failing to enter the runoff.

Fillon has been described as economically liberal and fiscally conservative. For many observers, he is more liberal than his mentor Philippe Séguin. A few months after taking office as prime minister, he declared that he was "at the head of a state that is bankrupt financially,... which for 15 years has been in chronic deficit,... that has not voted a balanced budget for 25 years." He then committed publicly to "bring the state budget to balance by the end of the five-year", and reiterated this promise in 2012, and proposed a referendum on registration of the fiscal golden rule in the Constitution. In defending a policy of controlling the deficit, Fillon is in favour of abolishing the wealth tax, which he considers one of the causes of the debt of France. According to him, this tax discourages foreign entrepreneurs. This tax would be offset by the creation of a top slice of income tax to 50%, which would be included in the CSG.

As a presidential candidate, Fillon aimed to reduce the public sector and cut 500,000 civil-service jobs. Fillon was compared to Margaret Thatcher due to his ambition to reduce the size of the state. He said in 2016 that he wanted the state healthcare program (securité sociale) to work better with fewer payments. Fillon also said that he was in favour of increasing the retirement age to 65. During the 2012 presidential election, he proposed that each job seeker should be offered vocational training and be forced to accept the employment offered to them after training.

Fillon' stances on domestic and social issues are mostly perceived as conservative. As member of the National Assembly, he voted against the equalisation of the age of consent for homosexual relations in 1982, against civil solidarity pacts in 1999, and against the legalisation of same-sex marriage in 2013; however, he said he would not ban the same-sex marriage law if elected president. He expressed opposition to adoption by same-sex couples. Fillon also stated that he is personally opposed to abortion but would not vote to ban it. Fillon blamed the 2017 social unrest in French Guiana on President Hollande's policies, which he said had failed.

Fillon is an advocate of cracking down on Salafism and Muslim Brotherhood -linked groups and has stridently warned against the threat of " Islamic totalitarianism ". He has called for dialogue with Syria under Bashar al-Assad, as well as with the Russian Federation under Vladimir Putin. Putin has been described as a friend of Fillon, although Fillon himself rejects that description.

Fillon lives with his wife, Penelope, and five children, Marie, Charles, Antoine, Édouard and Arnaud, in the 12th-century Manoir de Beaucé, set in 20 acres (8 ha) of woodland on the banks of the River Sarthe 4 km east of the monastery village of Solesmes, near Sablé-sur-Sarthe, and about halfway between Le Mans and Angers. They had lived in various other properties, always in the Sarthe, throughout their marriage, before buying Beaucé in 1993.

Fillon is an Anglophile. His wife Penelope Kathryn Fillon, née Clarke, was born in Llanover in Wales, the daughter of a solicitor. They met while she was teaching English during her gap year in Le Mans, and they were married in the bride's family church in June 1980.

Fillon has spoken at a wide variety of universities in Britain, notably King's College London and the London School of Economics. On 1 September 2017, Fillon became a partner at asset manager Tikehau Capital. Fillon's younger brother, Pierre, an ophthalmic specialist (and now President of the Automobile Club de l'Ouest), later married Penelope Fillon's younger sister, Jane.

In January 2017, Le Canard enchaîné published an article in which Penelope Fillon was accused of alleged fictitious employment, as her husband's " assistante parlementaire " for a total salary of €500,000 over eight years on the one hand, and as a "literary adviser" of Revue des deux Mondes on the other, with a monthly salary of €5,000, amounting to a total of another €100,000. A preliminary hearing immediately opened. The public outcry around this so-called "Penelopegate" was such that doubts were voiced about François Fillon himself, who was the frontrunner for the 2017 presidential election, with an immediate sharp decline in the opinion polls.

On 31 January, new reporting by Le Canard enchaîné found that Penelope Fillon was actually paid €300,000 more than previously reported, for a total sum of €831,440 for 15 years of her parliamentary assistant work. It also reported that Fillon had paid two of his children €84,000 for little apparent actual work. On 6 February 2017 Fillon held a press conference. He said "It was a mistake and I apologize to the French [people]" but also said that the salary of his wife was "perfectly justified".

On 3 March 2017, the OCLCIFF (Central office for the fight against corruption and financial and fiscal crime) executed a search at the Manoir de Beaucé where François and Penelope Fillon reside in the Sarthe department. This followed a search by the same agency on 2 March 2017 at the Fillons' Paris residence in the 7th arrondissement. On 6 March 2017, the inner circle of Fillon's party had a crisis meeting. Beforehand, Alain Juppé had definitively excluded becoming a replacement candidate. Fillon continues his candidacy, despite his promise (given on 26 January on TV) to withdraw from the race if subjected to criminal prosecution. On 23 March, Fillon said on national television that Bienvenue Place Beauvau, a book co-authored by Didier Hassoux of Le Canard enchaîné, suggested President Hollande ran a shadow cabinet to spread rumours about his opponents. Hassoux denied this was the case.

On 24 February 2020, Fillon became one of the few prime ministers to ever go on trial. On 29 June 2020, he was convicted of fraud and misuse of funds, and sentenced to five years in prison, three of them suspended. Their lawyers appealed against the sentence and he remains free pending the outcome of the appeal. On 9 May 2022, a French appeals court reduced Fillon's prison sentence shortened to four years with three years suspended. His wife Penelope was given a suspended two-year prison sentence for the embezzlement charge, down from three years suspended. The court maintained fines of €375,000 for each of them. The sentence was overruled by the Court of Cassation, which ordered a new sentencing trial. On 17 June 2025, Fillon was given a suspended four-year prison term.

In its 22 March 2017 issue, satirical weekly Le Canard enchaîné reported that Fillon had introduced a Lebanese billionaire to Russian President Vladimir Putin at a business forum in St. Petersburg in 2015 as part of a $50,000 contract for Fillon's 2F Conseil consulting firm.

Having lived his whole life in the Le Mans area and having represented it politically, Fillon is an enthusiastic supporter of the 24 Hour of Le Mans sportscar race, which he has attended nearly every year since he was a small child. He is a member of the Automobile Club de l'Ouest, which stages the event, and is on the race's organisation committee. He has also competed in the Le Mans Legend historic sportscar races on the full 24-hour circuit and in a number of other classic road rallies. Fillon's younger brother Pierre currently serves as the President of the ACO, having been elected in 2013.

François Pierre Guillaume Guizot (English: / ɡ ɪ ˈ z oʊ / gih-ZOH, French: [ fʁɑ̃swa pjɛʁ ɡijom ɡizo ] ; 4 October 1787 – 12 September 1874) was a French historian, orator and statesman. Guizot was a dominant figure in French politics between the July Revolution and the Revolution of 1848.

A conservative liberal who opposed the attempt by King Charles X to usurp legislative power, he worked to sustain a constitutional monarchy following the July Revolution of 1830. He then served the "citizen king" Louis Philippe I, as Minister of Education 1832–37, ambassador to London 1840, Foreign Minister 1840–1847, and finally Prime Minister of France from 19 September 1847 to 23 February 1848.

Guizot's influence was critical in expanding public education, which under his ministry saw the creation of primary schools in every French commune. As a leader of the " Doctrinaires ", committed to supporting the policies of Louis Phillipe and limitations on further expansion of the political franchise, he earned the hatred of more left-leaning liberals and republicans through his unswerving support for restricting suffrage to propertied men and supposedly advised those who wanted the vote to "enrich yourselves" (enrichissez-vous) through hard work and thrift.

As Prime Minister, it was Guizot's ban on the political meetings (called the campagne des banquets or the Paris Banquets, which were held by moderate liberals who wanted a larger extension of the franchise) of an increasingly vigorous opposition in January 1848 that catalyzed the revolution that toppled Louis Philippe in February and saw the establishment of the French Second Republic. He is mentioned in the famous opening paragraph of the Communist Manifesto ("a spectre is haunting Europe...") as a representative of the more liberal faction of the counter-revolutionary forces of Old Europe, contrasted with that of the more reactionary forces, Klemens von Metternich. Marx and Engels published that book just days before Guizot's overthrow in the 1848 Revolution.

Guizot was born at Nîmes to a bourgeois Protestant family.

On 8 April 1794, when François Guizot was 6, his father was executed on the scaffold at Nîmes during the Reign of Terror. From then on, the boy's mother was completely responsible for his upbringing.

Driven from Nîmes by the Revolution, Madame Guizot and her son went to Geneva, where he was educated. In spite of her decided Calvinistic opinions, the theories of Jean-Jacques Rousseau influenced Madame Guizot. A strong Liberal, she even adopted the notion inculcated in Emile that every man ought to learn a manual trade or craft. Guizot learnt carpentry, and succeeded in making a table with his own hands, which is still preserved.

In 1805, he arrived in Paris and he entered at the age eighteen as tutor into the family of M. Stapfer, formerly Swiss minister in France. He soon began to write in a journal edited by Jean-Baptiste-Antoine Suard, the Publiciste. This connection introduced him to the literary society of Paris.

In October 1809, aged twenty-two, he wrote a series review of François-René de Chateaubriand 's Martyrs, which won Chateaubriand's approbation and thanks, and he continued to contribute largely to the periodical press. At Suard's he had made the acquaintance of Pauline de Meulan (born 2 November 1773), a contributor to Suard's journal.

Her contributions were interrupted by illness, but immediately resumed and continued by an unknown hand. It was discovered that François Guizot had substituted for her. In 1812 Mademoiselle de Meulan married Guizot. She died in 1827. (An only son, François, born in 1819, died in 1837 of consumption.) In 1828 Guizot married Elisa Dillon, niece of his first wife, and also an author. She died in 1833, leaving two daughters, Henriette (1829–1908), a co-author with her father and prolific writer herself, and Pauline (1831–1874) and a son, Guillaume (1833–1892), who attained some reputation as a scholar and writer. François Guizot and historian François Mignet invented the concept of the bourgeois revolution.

On 15 June 1837, Guizot sat next to the Princess Lieven at a dinner given by the Duc de Broglie. After twenty years as Russian Ambassadress to London, she had separated from her husband and sought refuge in Paris, where from 1835 she had held an increasingly influential salon occasionally attended by Guizot. She had sympathised with him over his son's death earlier in 1837. From 15 June, they formed a close and loving friendship, exchanging over 5000 letters. He was present at her death in Paris in 1856. Her role in supporting and influencing his aims in aristocratic, political and diplomatic circles was considerable, aided by her retaining many contacts in England and her brother being Chief of Secret Police in Russia and a confidant of the Tsar.

During the First French Empire, Guizot, entirely devoted to literary pursuits, published a collection of French synonyms (1809), an essay on the fine arts (1811), and a translation of Edward Gibbon 's The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, with additional notes, in 1812. These works recommended him to the notice of Louis-Marcelin de Fontanes, grand-master of the University of France, who selected Guizot for the chair of modern history at the Sorbonne in 1812.

He delivered his first lecture (reprinted in his Memoirs) on 11 December of that year. He omitted the customary compliment to the all-powerful emperor, in spite of the hints given him by his patron, but the course which followed marks the beginning of the great revival of historical research in France in the 19th century. He had now acquired a considerable position in Paris society, and the friendship of Royer-Collard and leading members of the liberal party, including the young duc de Broglie.

Absent from Paris at the moment of the fall of Napoleon in 1814, he was at once selected, on the recommendation of Royer-Collard, to serve the government of King Louis XVIII, in the capacity of secretary-general of the ministry of the interior, under the abbé de Montesquiou. Upon the return of Napoleon from Elba he immediately resigned, on 25 March 1815, and returned to his literary pursuits.

After the Hundred Days, he returned to Ghent, where he saw Louis XVIII, and in the name of the liberal party pointed out that a frank adoption of a liberal policy could alone secure the duration of the restored monarchy – advice which was ill-received by the king's confidential advisers.

This visit to Ghent was brought up by political opponents in later years as unpatriotic. "The Man of Ghent" was one of the terms of insult frequently used against him in the days of his power. The reproach appears to be wholly unfounded. He was acting not to preserve the failing empire, but to establish a liberal monarchy and to combat the reactionary ultra-royalists.

On the second restoration, Guizot was appointed secretary-general of the ministry of justice under de Barbé-Marbois, but resigned with his chief in 1816. In 1819 he was one of the founders of the Liberal journal Le Courrier français. Again in 1819 he was appointed general director of communes and departments in the ministry of the interior, but lost his office with the fall of Decazes in February 1820.

During these years Guizot was one of the leaders of the Doctrinaires, a small party strongly attached to the charter and the crown, and advocating a policy which has become associated (especially by Émile Faguet) with the name of Guizot, that of the juste milieu, a middle path between absolutism and popular government.

Adhering to the great principles of liberty and toleration, they were sternly opposed to the anarchical traditions of the Revolution. They hoped to subdue the elements of anarchy through the power of a limited constitution based on the suffrage of the middle class and promoted by the literary talents of the time. They were opposed alike to the democratic spirit of the age, to the military traditions of the empire, and to the bigotry and absolutism of the court. The Doctrinaires fell out of influence following the July Revolution in 1830.

In 1820, when the reaction was at its height after the murder of the Duc de Berry, and the fall of the ministry of the duc Decazes, Guizot was deprived of his offices, and in 1822 even his course of lectures were interdicted.

During the succeeding years he played an important part among the leaders of the liberal opposition to the government of Charles X, although he had not yet entered parliament, and this was also the time of his greatest literary activity.

In 1822, he published his lectures on representative government (Histoire des origines du gouvernement représentatif, 1821–1822, 2 vols.; Eng. trans. 1852); also a work on capital punishment for political offences and several important political pamphlets. From 1822 to 1830 he published two important collections of historical sources, the memoirs of the history of England in 26 volumes, and the memoirs of the history of France in 31 volumes, a revised translation, of Shakespeare, and a volume of essays on the history of France. Written from his own pen during this period was the first part of his Histoire de la révolution d'Angleterre depuis Charles I à Charles II (2 vols., 1826–1827; Eng. trans., 2 vols., Oxford, 1838), which he resumed and completed during his exile in England after 1848.

The Martignac administration restored Guizot in 1828 to his professor's chair and to the council of state. During his time at the University of Paris his lectures earned him a reputation as a historian of note. These lectures formed the basis of his general Histoire de la civilisation en Europe (1828; Eng. trans. by William Hazlitt, 3 vols., 1846), and of his Histoire de la civilisation en France (4 vols., 1830).

In January 1830 he was elected by the town of Lisieux to the Chamber of Deputies, and he retained that seat during the whole of his political life. Guizot delivered an address in March 1830 calling for greater political freedom in the Chamber of Deputies. The motion passed 221 against 181. Charles X responded by dissolving the Chamber and called for new elections which only strengthened opposition to the throne.

On his return to Paris from Nîmes on 27 July, the fall of Charles X was already imminent. Guizot was called upon by his friends Casimir Perier, Jacques Laffitte, Villemain and Dupin to draw up the protest of the liberal deputies against the royal ordinances of July, while he applied himself with them to control the revolutionary character of the late contest. Personally, Guizot was always of opinion that it was a great misfortune for the cause of parliamentary government in France that the infatuation and ineptitude of Charles X and Prince Polignac rendered a change in the hereditary line of succession inevitable.

Once convinced that it was inevitable, he became one of the most ardent supporters of Louis Philippe. In August 1830 Guizot was made minister of the interior, but resigned in November. He had now joined the ranks of the moderate liberals, and for the next eighteen years was a determined foe of democracy, the unyielding champion of "a monarchy limited by a limited number of bourgeois."

In 1831 Casimir Périer formed a more vigorous and compact administration, terminated in May 1832 by his death; the summer of that year was marked by a formidable republican rising in Paris, and it was not until 11 October 1832 that a stable government was formed, in which Marshal Soult was first minister, Victor, 3rd duc de Broglie took the foreign office, Adolphe Thiers the home department, and Guizot the department of public instruction.

Guizot, however, was already unpopular with the more advanced liberal party. He remained unpopular all his life. Yet never were his great abilities more useful to his country than while he filled this office of secondary rank but of primary importance in the department of public instruction. The duties it imposed on him were entirely congenial to his literary tastes, and he was master of the subjects they concerned. He applied himself in the first instance to carry the law of 28 June 1833, which established and organized primary education in France.

The branch of the Institute of France known as the Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques, which had been suppressed by Napoleon, was revived by Guizot. Some of the old members of this learned body – Talleyrand, Sieyès, Roederer and Lakanal – again took their seats there, and a host of more recent celebrities were added by election for the free discussion of the great problems of political and social science. The Société de l'histoire de France was founded for the publication of historical works, and a vast publication of medieval chronicles and diplomatic papers was undertaken at the expense of the state.

The July Monarchy was threatened in 1839 by Louis-Mathieu Molé, who had formed an intermediate government. Guizot and the leaders of the left centre and the left, Thiers and Odilon Barrot worked together to stop Molé. Victory was secured at the expense of principle, and Guizot's attack on the government gave rise to a crisis and a republican insurrection. None of the three leaders of that alliance took ministerial office, and Guizot was not sorry to accept the post of ambassador in London, which withdrew him for a time from parliamentary contests. This was in the spring of 1840, and Thiers succeeded shortly afterwards to the ministry of foreign affairs.

Guizot was received with distinction by Queen Victoria and by London society. His literary works were highly esteemed, and he was sincerely attached to the alliance of the two nations and the cause of peace. He also secured the return of Napoleon's ashes to France at the insistence of Thiers.

As he himself remarked, he was a stranger to England and a novice in diplomacy; the embroiled state of the Syrian War question, on which the French government had separated itself from the joint policy of Europe, and possibly the absence of entire confidence between the ambassador and the minister of foreign affairs, placed him in an embarrassing and even false position. The warnings he transmitted to Thiers were not believed. The treaty of 15 July was signed without his knowledge and executed against his advice. For some weeks Europe seemed to be on the brink of war, until the king ended the crisis by refusing his assent to the military preparations of Thiers, and by summoning Guizot from London to form a ministry and to aid his Majesty in what he termed " ma lutte tenace contre l'anarchie."

Thus began, under dark and adverse circumstances, on 29 October 1840, the important administration in which Guizot remained the master-spirit for nearly eight years. He himself took the office of minister for foreign affairs, and upon the retirement of Marshal Soult, he became prime minister. His first care was the maintenance of peace and the restoration of amicable relations with the other powers of Europe. His success gave unity and strength to the moderate liberal party, who now felt that they had a great leader at their head.

During Guizot's tenure as foreign minister, he and Lord Aberdeen, the foreign secretary to Sir Robert Peel, carried on well, and thus they secured France and Britain in the entente cordiale. Part of the formation of the entente came about when Guizot secured the transfer of Napoleon's ashes from St. Helena to the French government.

The opposition in France denounced Guizot's foreign policy as basely subservient to England. He replied in terms of unmeasured contempt: "You may raise the pile of calumny as high as you will; you will never reach the height of my disdain! (Vous n'arriverez jamais a la hauteur de mon dédain! ") In 1845 British and French troops fought side by side for the first time in the Anglo-French blockade of the Río de la Plata.

The fall of Peel's government in 1846 changed these intimate relations; and the return of Palmerston to the foreign office led Guizot to believe that he was again exposed to the passionate rivalry of the British cabinet. A friendly understanding had been established between the two courts with reference to the future marriage of the young queen of Spain. The language of Lord Palmerston and the conduct of Sir Henry Bulwer (afterwards Lord Dalling) at Madrid led Guizot to believe that this understanding was broken, provoking the Affair of the Spanish Marriages after Guizot came to believe that Britain intended to place a Coburg on the throne of Spain.

Determined to resist any such intrigue, Guizot and the king plunged headlong into a counter-intrigue, wholly inconsistent with their previous engagements to Britain and fatal to the happiness of the queen of Spain. By their influence she was urged into a marriage with a despicable offset of the house of Bourbon, and her sister was at the same time married to the youngest son of the French king, in direct violation of Louis Philippe's promises. This transaction, although it was hailed at the time as a triumph of the policy of France, was in truth as fatal to the monarch as it was discreditable to the minister. It was accomplished by a mixture of secrecy and violence.

It was defended by subterfuges. Its immediate effect was to destroy the Anglo-French alliance, and to throw Guizot into closer relations with the reactionary policy of Metternich and the Northern courts.

His first object as prime minister was to unite and discipline the moderate liberal party, which had been broken up by previous dissensions and ministerial changes. In this he entirely succeeded by his courage and eloquence as a parliamentary leader, and by the use of all those means of influence which France supplied to a dominant minister. No one ever doubted the purity and disinterestedness of Guizot's own conduct. He despised money; he lived and died poor; and though he encouraged the fever of money-getting in the French nation, his own habits retained their primitive simplicity. But he did not disdain to use in others the baser passions from which he was himself free. Some of his instruments were mean; he employed them to deal with meanness after its kind.

In 1846, the opposition accused the government of buying the votes of the electorate. Guizot acknowledged that corruption happened but the government could not really prevent it. Non-voters exaggerated the occurrences of corruption to point to their need for enfranchisement. Guizot utterly failed to satisfy the demand for expansion of suffrage.

Some scholars point out that corruption, while certainly present, did not have a large effect on the voting records of those in the Chamber of Deputies.

The strength of Guizot's oration was his straightforward style of speaking. He was essentially a ministerial speaker, far more powerful in defence than in opposition. He was also a master of parliamentary tactics. His confidence in himself, and in the majority of the chamber which he had moulded to his will, was unbounded. The long success and the habit of authority led him to forget that in a country like France there were people outside the chamber elected by a small constituency, to which the minister and the king himself were held responsible.

Guizot's view of politics was essentially historical and philosophical. His tastes and his acquirements gave him little insight into the practical business of administrative government. Of finance he knew nothing; trade and commerce were strange to him; military and naval affairs were unfamiliar to him; all these subjects he dealt with by second hand through his friends, Pierre Sylvain Dumon (1797–1870), Charles Marie Tanneguy, Comte Duchâttel (1803–1867), or Marshal Bugeaud. The consequence was that few measures of practical improvement were carried by his administration. Still less did the government lend an ear to the cry for parliamentary reform.

On this subject the king's prejudices were insurmountable, and his ministers had the weakness to give way to them. It was impossible to defend a system which confined the suffrage to 200,000 citizens and returned a chamber of whom half were placemen. Nothing would have been easier than to strengthen the moderate liberal party by attaching the suffrage to the possession of land in France, but blank resistance was the sole answer of the government to the moderate demands of the opposition. Warning after warning was addressed to them in vain by friends and by foes alike, and they remained profoundly unconscious of their danger till the moment when it overwhelmed them.

In the afternoon of 23 February 1848, King Louis-Philippe summoned Guizot from the chamber, which was then sitting, and informed him that considering the situation in Paris and elsewhere in the country during the Banquet agitation for electoral reform, and the alarm and division of opinion in the royal family, led him to doubt whether he could retain Guizot as his prime minister. Guizot instantly resigned, returning to the chamber only to announce that the administration was at an end and that the king had sent for Louis-Mathieu Molé.

Molé failed in the attempt to form a government, and between midnight and one in the morning Guizot, who had according to his custom retired early to rest, was again sent for to the Tuileries. The king asked his advice. "We are no longer the ministers of your Majesty," replied Guizot; "it rests with others to decide on the course to be pursued. But one thing appears to be evident: this street riot must be put down; these barricades must be taken; and for this purpose my opinion is that Marshal Bugeaud should be invested with full power, and ordered to take the necessary military measures, and as your Majesty has at this moment no minister, I am ready to draw up and countersign such an order." The marshal, who was present, undertook the task, saying, "I have never been beaten yet, and I shall not begin to-morrow. The barricades shall be carried before dawn."

Adolphe Thiers and Barrot decided to withdraw the troops. Guizot found a safe refuge in Paris for some days in the lodging of a humble miniature painter whom he had befriended, and shortly afterwards escaped across the Belgian frontier and from there to London, where he arrived on 3 March. His mother and daughters had preceded him, and he was speedily installed in a modest habitation in Pelham Crescent, Brompton.

The society of England, though many people disapproved of much of his recent policy, received the fallen statesman with as much distinction and respect as they had shown the king's ambassador in 1840. A professorship at Oxford was spoken of, which he was unable to accept. He stayed in England about a year, devoting himself again to history. Back in Paris in 1850, Guizot published two more volumes on the English revolution -- Pourquoi la Révolution d'Angleterre a-t-elle reussi? and Discours sur l'histoire, de la Révolution d'Angleterre. In February 1850 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels co-wrote a critical assessment of this two-volume history.

After having resigned as Prime Minister of France, he left politics. He was aware that the link between himself and public life was broken forever, and he never made the slightest attempt to renew it. The greater part of the year he spent at his residence at Val Richer, a former cistercian monastery near Lisieux in Normandy, which had been sold at the time of the first Revolution. His two daughters married two descendants of the patrician family De Witt of Amsterdam, not be confused with the illustrious Dordrecht family De Witt of former Grand Pensionary Johan de Witt. Both where so congenial in faith and manners to the Huguenots of France, kept his house. One of his sons-in-law farmed the estate. Guizot devoted his later years with undiminished energy to literary labour, which was in fact his chief means of subsistence.

In 1854, Guizot published his Histoire de la république d'Angleterre et de Cromwell (2 vols., 1854), then his Histoire du protectorat de Cromwell et du rétablissement des Stuarts (2 vols., 1856). He also published an essay on Peel, and amid many essays on religion, during the ten years 1858–1868, appeared the extensive Mémoires pour servir à l'histoire de mon temps, in nine volumes. His speeches were included in 1863 in his Histoire parlementaire de la France (5 vols. of parliamentary speeches, 1863).

As his grandchildren grew up around him, he began to teach them French history. From these lessons sprang his last work, the Histoire de France racontée à mes petits enfants. The history came down to 1789, and was continued to 1870 by his daughter Madame Guizot de Witt from her father's notes.

Two institutions may be said even under the Second Empire to have retained their freedom: the Institut de France and the Protestant Consistory. In both of these Guizot continued to the last to take an active part. He was a member of three of the five academies into which the Institute of France is divided. The Academy of Moral and Political Science owed its restoration to him, and he became in 1832 one of its first associates. The Academy of Inscriptions and Belles Lettres elected him in 1833 as the successor to Dacier. In 1836, he was selected as a member of the Académie Française, the highest literary distinction of the country. In these learned bodies Guizot continued for nearly forty years to take a lively interest and to exercise a powerful influence. He was a keen advocate of their independence. His voice had the greatest weight in the choice of new candidates; the younger generation of French writers never looked in vain to him for encouragement, and his constant aim was to maintain the dignity and purity of the profession of letters. In 1842, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, and a foreign honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1855.

In the consistory of the Protestant church in Paris Guizot exercised a similar influence. His early education and his experience of life conspired to strengthen the convictions of a religious temperament. He remained throughout his life a firm believer in the truths of revelation, and a volume of Meditations on the Christian Religion was one of his latest works. But though he adhered inflexibly to the church of his fathers and combated the rationalist tendencies of the age, which seemed to threaten it with destruction, he retained not a tinge of the intolerance or asperity of the Calvinistic creed. He respected in the Church of Rome the faith of the majority of his countrymen, and the writings of the great Catholic prelates, Bossuet and Bourdaloue, were as familiar and as dear to him as those of his own persuasion, and were commonly used by him in the daily exercises of family worship.

Down to the summer of 1874 Guizot's mental vigour and activity were unimpaired. He died peacefully, and is said to have recited verses of Pierre Corneille and texts from the Bible on his death-bed.

During the 1820s, Guizot was among the darlings of the European liberal intelligentsia. His historical works such as Histoire générale de la civilisation en Europe (1828) and Histoire de la civilisation en France (1830) were widely admired by thinkers including John Stuart Mill ("I have dinned into people's ears that Guizot is a great thinker and writer"), Johann Wolfgang von Goethe ("Guizot is a man after my own heart...He possesses deep knowledge, combined with an enlightened liberality"), Charles Sainte-Beuve ("this astonishing man about whom one could say so many things"), and Alexis de Tocqueville. In 1840, he was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society.

Guizot's later resolute opposition to universal suffrage has led his critics to argue that he was a conservative or even reactionary. However, it is more accurate to describe Guizot as a proponent of the juste milieu or political centrism that defended representative government against absolutism and the excesses of democracy. His doctrine of the sovereignty of reason was intended as a liberal strategy to divide and limit sovereignty, and to consolidate the constitutional gains of the Charter of 1814. He likewise called for the abolition of capital punishment. His ideas influenced subsequent liberal reformers throughout Europe such as József Eötvös in Hungary, Johan Rudolph Thorbecke in the Netherlands, and José Ortega y Gasset in Spain.

In recent years, the scholarship of Pierre Rosanvallon, Larry Siedentop, Ivo Mosley and Aurelian Crăiuțu has renewed interest in Guizot's political thought and the Doctrinaires more generally.

François Lehideux (30 January 1904 – 21 June 1998) was a French industrialist and member of the Vichy government.

In 1929 Lehideux married the daughter of Fernand Renault, and soon became a leading figure in the Renault car company. He was assistant to Louis Renault and in this position convinced the head of the company to employ André Lefèbvre within the development department, Lehideux admiring Lefèbvre's bold ideas and feeling that Renault needed to modernise its designs in order to continue to lead the way in French automobile manufacture.

During his time with Renault, Lehideux made no secret of his ambition. A year after the outbreak of war Louis Renault held a meeting, on 3 September 1940, with the country's new leader, of Philippe Pétain, at which Renault received the reassurance he sought that the government wished him to remain at the head of his company. Renault at this time was greatly concerned that his brother's son in law, François Lehideux, was scheming with political contacts to take the top job at Renault. The incident also reflects the extent to which the right wing government of Pétain shared the interventionist approach to industry that had been evident in his left wing predecessor, prime minister Léon Blum, five years earlier. Government interventionism would be an important part of the story of the French auto-industry, most particularly regarding the Renault business itself, in the post-war decades. Following his unsuccessful pitch for the top job it was Lehideux who now left the company.

In October 1940 Lehideux was appointed to the headship of the COA, an organisation charged with smoothing relations between the German authorities and French auto-makers. He is credited with having successfully intervened in 1943 to block German plans to crate up Ford's newly completed car plant at Poissy for shipment to the company's Cologne location.

Along with the likes of Jacques Barnaud, Jean Bichelonne and Pierre Pucheu Lehideux was a member of a group of technocrats who were important in the early days of the Vichy regime. These individuals, sometimes known as jeunes cyclistes, advocated extensive economic reform in order that France could restore its position in Europe.

In 1941 he was given charge of a new body, the Direction Générale de l'équipement nationale, the purpose of which was to improve the economy and overcome high unemployment. In his role as leader of this body Lehideux produced a ten-year plan for the economic development and growth of France, which somehow inspired the plan Monnet after the war.

Lehideux served as Minister of Industrial Production, resigning when Pierre Laval returned to government.

He was arrested after the Second World War but freed in 1946. On 17 February 1949 all charges against him were dropped by the High Court of Justice on grounds of "insufficient evidence": He had provided protection for members of the OCF. By now he was returning to a successful career in business. Indeed, the Ford Motor Company appointed him managing director of their French operations in 1950, succeeding Maurice Dollfus, a controversial decision which sparked a hostile reaction that encouraged Ford to sell its French arm to Simca in 1954.

Lehideux defended his involvement in Vichy after the war. He also became involved in the Association for the Defence of the Memory of Marshal Pétain, a group that campaigned for a reassessment of Petain. At his death at the age of 95 in June 1998 Lehideux was the final surviving minister of the Vichy regime.

François Michel Édouard Rebsamen (French pronunciation: [ fʁɑ̃swa ʁɛbsamɛn ] ; born 25 June 1951) is a French politician who served as Minister for Territorial Development and Decentralisation in the government of Prime Minister François Bayrou from 2024 to 2025. A former member of the Socialist Party, he previously served as Minister of Labour, Employment, Vocational Training and Social Dialogue in the first and second governments of Prime Minister Manuel Valls from 2014 to 2015.

Rebsamen is the son of Eric Gottfried Rebsamen, a Protestant who was born in Stuttgart on 9 January 1917, and worked at Renault in Dijon for several months in 1939–40. In that same city, after the war, the senior Rebsamen married Denise Agron, daughter of Édouard Agron, a surgeon and radical-socialist, originally from Briennon in Loire, who was a member of Dijon's municipal council under the Popular Front. The senior Rebsamen died in Dijon on 19 February 1974.

Rebsamen earned a master's degree in public law, a diplôme d'études supérieures spécialisées in economics and a degree in political science.

Rebsamen began his professional and political career by serving as chief of staff for the Regional Council of Burgundy from 1979 to 1983, where he worked alongside Pierre Joxe (1979 – 1982) and André Billardon (1982 – 1983). He followed Joxe to various other posts, serving as his chief of staff from 1984 to 1986 and again from 1988 to 1991. He then worked under Laurent Fabius while the latter was First Secretary of the Socialist Party (1992 – 1993), then as technical advisor to Jean-Jack Queyranne.

In the early 1970s, Rebsamen was an active member of the Revolutionary Communist League, a militant group. He left in 1974.

Following the 1989 French municipal elections, Rebsamen was elected president of the Socialist group in the Dijon municipal council.

In 1994, Rebsamen was elected to the Regional Council of Burgundy, where he held a seat until 2001. In 1997 he ran in the legislative election in the 1st constituency of Côte-d'Or, but was defeated by Robert Poujade, the mayor of Dijon. In the same year, he was named National Secretary of the Socialist Party at the Brest Congress, and became the party's deputy head, under his friend François Hollande.

Rebsamen was elected in March 1998 as the general councillor of the canton of Dijon-5, winning 51.5% of the vote and defeating the incumbent, Pierre Barbier of the Rally for the Republic (RPR).

In the 2001 municipal election, Rebsamen became the first left-wing candidate to be elected mayor of Dijon since 1935, winning 52.1% of the vote and defeating Jean-François Bazin (RPR). That year he also became president of Grand Dijon, a post he held until 2014. He ran again for the legislature in 2002, but lost to Bernard Depierre of the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP), who succeeded Poujade. He was re-elected general councillor in March 2004, this time winning 62.5% of the vote.

Rebsamen directed the Socialist Party's campaign for the March 2004 regional and cantonal elections, and in 2005 ran the campaign for a "Yes" vote in the French referendum on the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe. In June, then in August 2006, he asked Jack Lang and Dominique Strauss-Kahn to withdraw their candidacy for president of France, and explicitly supported Ségolène Royal, becoming co-director of her campaign, along with Jean-Louis Bianco.

Rebsamen was re-elected mayor of Dijon in the 2008 municipal election, winning 56.2% of the vote to François-Xavier Dugourd's 36.4%. His plan to build a tramway in Dijon was unanimously approved by the Greater Dijon Community Council on 15 May 2008.

From 2007 to 2008, Rebsamen was a director of Dexia-Crédit Local de France, resigning a few days before it went bankrupt.

In the 2008 elections, Rebsamen became a Senator, the first Socialist to represent Côte-d'Or in the Senate since 1948, and then resigned as general councillor. In the Senate, he was a member of the Committee on Finance. Following the Senate elections of 25 September 2011, and the election of 1 October, Rebsamen was chosen to lead the Socialist group in the Senate.

In the Socialist Party's 2011 primary, Rebsamen endorsed François Hollande as the party's candidate ahead of the 2012 presidential election.

In 2012, Rebsamen opposed a government effort tried to prevent politicians from holding multiple posts, and said that if forced to choose between continuing as Senator or as mayor of Dijon he would opt for the latter.

Following the 2014 municipal election, Rebsamen was elected to his third term as mayor with 52.8% of the vote, defeating Alain Houpert (UMP).

On 2 April 2014, Rebsamen was appointed Minister of Labour, Employment and Social Dialogue in the government of Prime Minister Manuel Valls. This appointment led Rebsamen to resign from the mayorship of Dijon. Upon the appointment of the second Valls government, his ministerial portfolio was expanded to include vocational training. While at the Labour Ministry, he was nicknamed "Minister of Unemployment" owing to the high jobless rate characteristic of Hollande's presidency.

On 30 July 2015, after the death of Alain Millot, who had succeeded him as mayor of Dijon, Rebsamen announced that he would run for the post again. On 10 August 2015, he was re-elected mayor and Grand Dijon (renamed Dijon Métropole in 2017) president, and a few days later he resigned his ministerial post. On 6 December 2016, he was offered the post of Minister of the Interior, but refused as he preferred to remain mayor of Dijon.

Ahead of the Socialist Party's 2018 convention in Aubervilliers, Rebsamen publicly endorsed Stéphane Le Foll as candidate for the party's leadership.

After being diagnosed with cancer, Rebsamen announced on 10 April 2018 that he would not be able to serve as mayor of Dijon and president of Dijon Métropole during his treatment, and thus appointed Nathalie Koenders as interim mayor and Pierre Pribetich as interim metropolis president.

Ahead of the 2022 presidential election, Rebsamen endorsed Emmanuel Macron and left the Socialist Party. In May 2022, he launched the Progressist Federation (Fédération progressiste, FP), a new centre-left party. The party joined the Ensemble coalition and saw two of its members – Christine Decodts in Nord and Benoît Bordat in Côte-d'Or – win a seat in the National Assembly in 2022, joining the Renaissance group.

After having resigned as mayor of Dijon on 25 November 2024, Rebsamen was appointed Minister for Territorial Development and Decentralisation the following 23 December in the newly-formed government of Prime Minister François Bayrou, marking his return to national politics.

François Sauvadet (born 20 April 1953) is a French journalist and politician of the Union of Democrats and Independents (UDI) who has been serving as the president of the Côte-d'Or department in eastern France since 2008.

Sauvadet worked as a journalist at regional daily newspaper Le Bien Public from 1977 until 1993.

Sauvadet represented Côte-d'Or's 4th constituency in the French National Assembly from 1993 to 2016, when he resigned to focus on activities in regional politics.

Over the course of his career in national politics, Sauvadet served as the chair of the New Centre 's parliamentary group from 2007 to 2011 and as Minister for the Civil Service in the government of Prime Minister François Fillon from 2011 to 2012. Ahead of the 2012 French presidential election, he endorsed Nicolas Sarkozy as the center-right parties' joint candidate. In 2012, he was one of the founders of the Union of Democrats and Independents (UDI). On 27 July 2021 he was elected head of the Assemblée des départements de France.

François Zimeray is a lawyer, former politician, human rights activist and diplomat. Born on 4 July 1961, he was a Member of the European Parliament for the Party of European Socialists from 1999 to 2004. Former mayor of Petit-Quevilly, he served as President of the Greater Rouen - Normandy area from 2001 to 2008.

He was appointed on 13 February 2008 as French Ambassador-at-large for Human Rights by Nicolas Sarkozy and Bernard Kouchner. Zimeray served as the French Ambassador to Denmark from 2013 to 2018. He nearly lost his life in the 2015 Copenhagen shootings, Islamist terror attack on February 14, 2015, where he was targeted together with other activists.

François Zimeray was born to Jewish parents from Morocco and Algeria. Zimeray grew up in Paris.

In September 2018, on his return from Denmark, he established together with Jessica Finelle the law firm Zimeray & Finelle.

At the same time, he joins with Prince Zeid and Shirin Ebadi, Nobel Peace Prize, a team of lawyers very committed to the defense of fundamental rights in the London firm Doughty Street Chambers.

In November 2018, the Internal Political Committee of the National Assembly of Venezuela chaired by Juan Guaidó, designates François Zimeray to advise and assist him in the international courts and institutions regard to the serious violations of human rights committed in the country.

In December 2018, he defended the interests of Saif ul Malook, Asia Bibi 's lawyer, a Pakistani Christian sentenced to death for blasphemy and acquitted at the end of October after having spent nine years in prison. In February 2019 he launched an appeal to the European heads of state to ask them to give Saif ul Malook "the protection and the status that his heroism calls". With the support of Lawyers Without Borders, SOS Eastern Christians and Bars, he calls on European leaders to allow Saif Al Malook to reside and work freely in Europe.

As a French lawyer mandated by the NGO European Saudi Organization for Human Rights (ESOHR) he defended Rahaf Mohammed in 2019 in Bangkok against deportation back to Saudi Arabia. Rahaf Mohammed, who fled in Bangkok, had intended to claim asylum in Australia and escape her family who she says abused her and threatened to kill her for amongst other reasons leaving Islaman act that is also a capital offence under Saudi law.

In April 2019, together with Matthias Fekl and Jessica Finelle, he seized the Special Rapporteur on the Promotion and Protection of Freedom of Expression of the United Nations to denounce the fate of the Egyptian writer Alaa Al Aswany prosecuted in a military court and banned from published for 5 years in Egypt. The same year, he became one of the two French lawyers defending Carlos Ghosn during his incarceration in Japan. At the request of the family, they both seized the UN to denounce a detention that he considers as "medieval".

In 2020, the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention found that the detention of Carlos Ghosn in Japan was arbitrary and in violation of human rights. He also became involved in the defense of a rape and sequestration victim in Switzerland allegedly committed by a Swiss theologist.

In 2021, he obtained the release of Fabien Azoulay, a 43-year-old French-American entrepreneur who was arrested during a trip to Turkey and sentenced to 20 years in prison for ordering rim cleaner online, unaware that the product had recently been banned in that country.

As France's Ambassador for Human Rights since February 2008, Zimeray has helped spread the culture of human rights into the French diplomacy. He has been the first non-career diplomat to hold this position since its creation in 2000 and has also had the longest assignment so far.

Zimeray has worked with five different Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Secretary of State: Bernard Kouchner, Michèle Alliot-Marie, Alain Juppé, Rama Yade and Laurent Fabius, then President of the COP21. He was chosen to present France's Universal Periodic Review (UPR) at the Human Rights Council in 2008 and 2012, as well as to represent France to the Alliance of Civilizations and Durban II Conference.

Since then, near to 100 diplomatic missions have led him to the Syrian border, Chechnya, Colombia, Gaza, Israel, Sri Lanka camps, Turkmenistan, Burma, Moscow, Thailand, Baghdad, Jordan, Lebanon, Kirghizstan, Uganda, Chad, Burundi, Congo, Rwanda, Libya, Algeria, Egypt, Nepal, among others.

In October 2011, he went to Tripoli just a few days after the death of former leader Muammar Gaddafi. In November 2011, he was one of the first diplomats to be received in Rangoon by the Lady Aung San Suu Kyi, one month before the official visit of US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. In January and April 2012, François Zimeray went twice to the Kharkiv prison, attempting to visit former Prime Minister of Ukraine Yulia Tymoshenko. Although he was not allowed to enter the prison and see her, he attended the opening session of her second trial and denounced "accusations obviously politically grounded".

Zimeray represented the French diplomacy by attending several trials. He went to Moscow for Mikhail Khodorkovsky 's trial, to Kazakhstan to support the human rights defender Yevgeny Zhovtis. In January 2011, he went to Yuriy Lutsenko 's trial, in Kyiv. In November 2012, he managed to visit Lydienne Yen-Eyoum in prison, a French-Cameroonian lawyer arbitrarily detained in Cameroon since July 9, 2011. She was released from prison in 2016, after her arrest and detention were found to be arbitrary by the United Nations. In May 2013, he also visited Bangladesh after the 2013 Dhaka garment factory collapse to meet the families of the victims at the ENAM hospital in Savar, and express France's solidarity. In Dhaka, he then met with the authorities and all stakeholders contributing to the improvement of Labor Rights and conditions in Bangladesh and pointed out the human rights issues raised by the factory collapse.

In accordance with EU Guidelines on Human Rights Defenders, François Zimeray set the following goal: "Each French embassy has to become a 'House of Human rights'."

As Ambassador in charge of the Holocaust issues, Zimeray launched different initiatives to raise awareness about contemporary antisemitism: he went to Auschwitz several times and supports important projects enhancing dialogue between cultures, such as the Aladdin Project, which had been presented in Baghad in February 2010.

On October 8, 2013, François Zimeray presented his credentials to the Queen of Denmark. On February 14, 2015, following the Paris terrorist attacks, Zimeray was invited to give the keynote speech at Krudttønden in Copenhagen, a debate on freedom of expression and blasphemy, featuring Lars Vilks and Femen leader Inna Chevtchenko, when it was attacked by a masked gunman.

Zimeray's commitment to human rights dates back to 1979, when, then aged 17, he founded an association to support and cater for Cambodian refugees in Paris. Thereafter, he made visit to refugee camps on the Thai border, where he forged his political beliefs. Since then, his commitment for human rights has never ended.

He played a decisive role in the organisation of the European campaign in support for Darfur. In 2007, he visited the Darfur refugee camps in Chad with the French philosopher, Bernard-Henri Lévy. He raised awareness and managed to mobilize French public opinion as well as political leaders.

In May 2009, Zimeray founded the Alliance of Lawyers for Human rights, based in Paris offering free legal expertise to associations, NGOs and institutions working in the field of human rights.

Zimeray is also a prominent figure well known for his committed support for the Palestinian moderates and the Israeli "peace camp" in 2002. He actively supports The People's Voice, the initiative by Palestinian Sari Nusseibeh and Israeli Ami Ayalon. François Zimeray went to Gaza twice and described the attitude of people defining themselves as exclusively in favour of one side against the other ("pro-palestinian" or "pro-Israel") as "intellectual hooliganism" (speech at the French National Assembly for "Kids creating Peace").

He founded the Cercle Léon Blum and worked to promote dialogue between European leaders and Middle Eastern political and civil society representatives as Chairman of the Medbridge Strategy Center founded in Brussels with prominent European politicians such as Willy De Clercq, François Léotard, Emma Bonino and Ana Palacio. He then had several meetings with Shimon Peres, Mahmoud Abbas and King Abdullah II of Jordan.

Zimeray is a member of the Paris Bar and the International Criminal Bar of The Hague. He has represented victims in trials of Khmer Rouge leaders, successfully campaigned to free imprisoned political opponents in Laos, and defended a child soldier in Congo/Kinshasa before the International Criminal Court. He has also defended cases before the European Court of Human Rights.

During twenty years, Zimeray has worked as a lawyer in the firm Jeantet&Associés. Back then, he advised individuals as well as French and international companies. With his partners, Hubert Védrine and Jean-Pierre Jouyet, he took part in the international development of the Jeantet firm.

Zimeray is a member of the French Institute of International Legal Experts (IFEJI).

He created with Jessica Finelle (September 2018) the lawyer firm Zimeray&Finelle.

At 37, Zimeray became the youngest member of the French socialist delegation at the European Parliament, elected on Francois Hollande 's list. He worked in the Legal Affairs Committee and the Foreign Affairs and Defence Policy Committee. He is the author of eight reports adopted unanimously and took part in the framing of the Charter of Fundamental Rights.

In 2000, he was the sponsor of a European Parliament motion for a resolution against female genital mutilation. The next year, at the request of Emma Bonino, former Humanitarian Aid Commissioner, François Zimeray went to Laos in order to defend and free a member of the European Parliament, as well as four other human rights defenders.

Although member of the socialist group, he did not hesitate to defend the parliamentarian immunities of Charles Pasqua (PPE) and Marco Pannella (PVE), respectively in 2002 and 2003.

But for the 2004 election, the socialist party choose another candidate to represent them, judging Zimeray too anti-Palestinian.

Zimeray, identified by former Prime Minister Laurent Fabius, first made his mark in 1989 when at just 27 years old he was elected Mayor of Petit-Quevilly (23,000 inhabitants). He became the youngest mayor of a town with over 20,000 inhabitants in France and founded the first association of mayors for environment, "Eco-Maires".

He transformed the city by creating parks, accommodation, new areas and facilities such as the multimedia library François Truffaut. He was re-elected two times in the first round. In 2001, he was elected President of the Greater Rouen-Normandy area (37 cities, 450,000 inhabitants) and launched several urban and cultural projects: the Palais des Sports (designed by Dominique Perrault), the renovation of the docks and public transportations (metro, cycle).

Zimeray has stated "We face a frequent misunderstanding. Many people place human rights in some kind of moral area and wait for us to answer with symbols, declarations and gestures.One must have the courage to say that Human Rights are not morality, they are rights that exist or does not exist, that are applied or violated: the right to not be tortured, access to fair trial, equality between men and women. Our action does not only take place in some declaratory and narcissistic style."

Zimeray has commented that he does not like the expression that France is "the country of human rights" and stated "I know the state of French prisons... I would rather say that France and Human Rights are like an old couple, and as with every couple there are ups and downs.

In his book published after the Copenhagen terror attack he survived (February 14, 2015) he advocates against patriarchy : "But if, at the end of this journey, I had to choose just one cause that stands above all others, I now know that our determination to empower women to achieve their full potential – particularly by educating girls – will speak volumes about the future of humanity. It is a cause we can all subscribe to, and I know no higher one. (..) Around the world I have seen women challenge the patriarchal order that subjects them to violence and forces men to serve the empire of domination and performance." The book, "J'ai vu partout le même visage" ("I have seen the same face everywhere I went") - "An Ambassador comes face to face with man's inhumanity to man" was granted the Pierre Simon Ethics and geopolitics prize in Paris City hall. (Plon, Paris 2016)

In 2021, he also participated in a collective work paying tribute to Afghan women short after the take-over of Afghanistan by the Talibans.

Francois Zimeray has called himself "a friend of Israel". In 2003, Zimeray said the EU should investigate whether its donations to the Palestinian Authority were being used to fund terrorism against Israel. Zimeray said "Europe has for too long closed its eyes to the corruption, the misappropriation of aid for education to financial support for propaganda as well as terrorism."

In 2009, Zimeray abstained from a vote endorsing the Goldstone report, which had accused Israel of committing war crimes in the Gaza War (2008–2009).

With respect to the Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip, François Zimeray said Israel has the right to screen goods that are allowed to enter Gaza. In 2023, Zimeray accused Hamas of genocide in the 2023 Hamas-led attack on Israel.

Freedom of religion in France is guaranteed by the constitutional rights set forth in the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen.

From the conversion of King Clovis I in 508, the Roman Catholic faith was the state religion for a thousand years, as was the case across Western Europe. In the 1500s, the Protestant faith gained numerous converts in France. A series of bloody persecutions and religious civil wars were ended by the Edict of Nantes issued by King Henry IV, granting official tolerance and protection to the Protestant minority. However, the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes by Henry's grandson, Louis XIV in 1685, forced many Protestants to convert to Catholicism or flee the country as Huguenot refugees.

Catholicism remained the state religion of France until the 1790s, when it was heavily persecuted during the French Revolution. After Napoleon Bonaparte became head of state, he brought an end to the religious turmoil by negotiating the Concordat of 1801 with the Pope, allowing Catholic worship, education, and charitable activities to resume with financial support from the state. This agreement continued in force throughout the 19th century, despite rising anti-clericalism. Toleration was also extended to Lutherans, Calvinists, and Jews.

Since the enactment of the 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State, the French government has followed the principle of laïcité (secularism), in which the State does not recognize or support any religion as official (except for the local law in Alsace-Moselle). Instead, it merely recognizes certain religious organizations, according to formal legal criteria that do not address religious doctrine. In return, religious organizations are to refrain from involvement in the State's policy-making.

Alsace came back to France only in November 1918. Contrary to other French regions, Alsace was under French Concordat of 1802. The territory was under German dominion from 1871 to 1918. When it came back to France, they kept the Concordat rule and did not come under Loi 1905.

In 2023, Freedom House scored the country 3 out of 4 for religious freedom; this was mainly due to the Reinforcing Republican Principles Bill (the Anti-Separatism Law), as well as high-profile antisemitic speech in the public media.

French language terminology related to religion and freedom of religion differs somewhat from English. In particular, there are several misleading faux amis between French and English regarding religion:

The relationship between government and religious organizations in France is defined by the 1905 "Law concerning the separation of the churches and the state" ("Loi concernant la séparation des Églises et de l'Etat"). Its first sentence is, though:

The Republic assures freedom of conscience. It guarantees the free exercise of religious worship under the sole restrictions hereafter in the interest of public order. The Republic does not grant recognition nor pay nor subsidises any church. (La République assure la liberté de conscience. Elle garantit le libre exercice des cultes sous les seules restrictions édictées ci-après dans l'intérêt de l'ordre public. La République ne reconnaît, ne salarie ni ne subventionne aucun culte.)

The 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, which is considered by legal authorities to have equal legal standing with the Constitution of France, states:

No one may be questioned about his opinions, [and the] same [for] religious [opinions], provided that their manifestation does not trouble the public order established by the law.

The law has the right to ward [i.e., forbid] only actions [which are] harmful to the society. Any thing which is not warded [i.e., forbidden] by the law cannot be impeded, and no one can be constrained to do what it [i.e., the law] does not order.

Thus follows that the French government cannot arbitrarily regulate and prohibit religious activity; it is strictly constrained to regulate it only to the extent that there is a need to safeguard public order and prohibit actions harmful to society (such as, for instance, human sacrifices).

The French concept of religious freedom did not grow out of an existing pluralism of religions but has its roots in a history with Roman Catholicism as the single official religion and including centuries of persecution of people not endorsing it, or straying from the most official line, from the Cathars to the Huguenots and the Jansenists – this lasted until the French Revolution.

French insistence on the lack of religion in all things public (laïcité or secularism) is a notable feature in the French ideal of citizenship. This concept of secularism, also plays a role in ongoing discussions about the wearing of scarves by Muslim women in public schools. In 2004, the French Parliament passed a law prohibiting the wearing of ostentatious religious garb in public primary and secondary schools; motivations included the tradition of keeping religious and political debates and proselytism out of such schools, as well as the preservation of the freedom of Muslim female students forced to wear certain costumes out of peer pressure. See French law on secularity and conspicuous religious symbols in schools.

The French Republic has always recognised individuals rather than groups and holds that its citizens' first allegiance is to society in general and not to a particular group, religious or otherwise; the opposing attitude, known as communautarisme, is generally considered undesirable in political discourse in France. On the other hand, the state sees that it is also responsible to protect individuals from groups rather than to protect groups, religious or others.

Apart from special cases due to historical circumstances (the local law in Alsace-Moselle and the military chaplaincy regimes), the French government is prohibited by law from granting official recognition to religion, and is also prohibited from subsidizing them or paying their personnel. However the government grants recognition to legal entities (associations) supporting religious activities. The difference is important, since the French government refuses to legally define what is a religion and what is not, and refuses to legally delimit the boundaries of religions. The state has a role in the appointment of bishops, directly in the case of Strasbourg and Metz, and indirectly (but with a rarely used power of veto) in that of other diocesan bishops. In consequence only suitable nationals are appointed and the episcopate does not reflect the ethnic diversity of practising Catholics in France.

Individuals organizing as groups with the exclusive purpose of worship (associations cultuelles) may register as such and get significant tax exemptions set by law. Religious groups with non-worship (e.g. humanitarian) activities are free to get organized as associations with the usual tax exemptions granted to secular associations. These definitions are covered by an extensive body of jurisprudence (roughly, case law) which focuses on the activities of the groups from a financial point of view, and does, according to law, not take religious doctrine into account.

The population of France is roughly 50% Roman Catholic, 4–5% Muslim, around 3% Protestant, 1% Jewish, 1% Buddhist, 1% other denominations, and 40% not religious (with 30% of atheists). Church attendance is low among Catholics, and polls indicate that a significant proportion of the population is atheist or agnostic. Since the French government does not collect data on religious preferences, all quoted numbers are from polls rather than from a census and should be considered with the corresponding caution.

Since the 1970s and 1980s, an increasing number of new religious movements have become active in France. Certain religious bodies such as the Church of Scientology, the Children of God, the Unification Church, the Raëlian movement or the Order of the Solar Temple were listed by parliamentary reports as dangerous or criminal cults.

Officials and associations fighting excesses of such groups, justified these measures by the need to have appropriate legal tools and the need to fight criminal organizations masquerading as legitimate religious groups. Critics contended that those actions unfairly targeted minority religions, jeopardized freedom of religion, and were motivated by prejudice. The matters were made even more complex by the fact that some of the groups involved are based in the United States, where they actively lobbied the intervention of the government of that country.

France, as well as other countries, was aware of various tragedies caused by groups labeled as "destructive cults" such as the People's Temple, the Branch Davidians and Aum Shinrikyo and the suicide murders of the Order of the Solar Temple which occurred in Quebec, Switzerland and France. Furthermore, some groups such as the Church of Scientology were accused of defrauding their members.

The population in general is not in favor of groups described as cults. In 2000, a representative 1000 person poll indicated that the majority of the polled people considered cults a significant threat to democracy (73%), their family and friends (66%), and themselves (64%) and 86% (76% of adherents of other religions than Catholicism) favored legislation restricting cults.

Leaders of the French Protestant minority claim that freedom of religion was actually well protected in France and that cultural sensitivity and careful relationships with local authorities and other Christians could prevent most difficulties.

Some groups have complained that, following from the publications of those reports and the enactment of the About-Picard law, they have suffered from discrimination by public authorities, private corporations and individuals.

The group Coordination des Associations et Particuliers pour la Liberté de Conscience, founded in January 2002, requested:

This group, however, has been qualified by a 2005 OSCE report as a partisan organization whose "allegations are essentially anonymous and thus of uncertain provenance and reliability."

Some limited controversy occurred in France concerning alleged religious discrimination regarding the security measures that the French government has deployed for official visits of Chinese officials and for festivities organised in collaboration with China, including the exclusion of pro-Tibet and pro- Falun Gong protesters from the path of the Chinese officials. The International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights denounced the warm welcome of president Jiang Zemin in France, which it denounced as being motivated by economic prospects of trade with China. Many French politicians have denounced what they considered to be an over-zealous security apparatus in those visits. Similar controversial security measures have been implemented for the visit of former US president George W. Bush, another foreign head of state controversial in France.

In its 2000 annual report by the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom, released by the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor of the U.S. Department of State, it was reported that "The ensuing publicity [by the release of a parliamentary report against "sectes"] contributed to an atmosphere of intolerance and bias against minority religions. Some religious groups reported that their members suffered increased intolerance after having been identified on the list."

In its 2004 annual report by the same commission it reports that "[...] official government initiatives and activities that targets "sects" or "cults" have fueled an atmosphere of intolerance toward members of minority religions in France. [...] These initiatives [the publication of reports characterizing specific groups as dangerous and the creating of agencies to monitor and fight these groups] and are particularly troubling because they are serving as models for countries in Eastern Europe where the rule of law and other human rights are much weaker than in France".

They conclude with an assessment that since the restructuring of the main agency concerned with this issue (referring to the new MIVILUDES replacing its predecessor, MILS), have reportedly improved religious freedoms in France.

In its February 2004 statement, the commission recommended that the U.S. government urge the government of France to ensure that any state regulations on public expression of religious belief or affiliation adhere strictly to international human rights norms and that the French government and legislature should be urged to reassess their initiatives in light of its international obligations to ensure that every person in France is guaranteed the freedom to manifest his or her religion or belief in public, or not to do so.

The Commission went on by giving advice to the French government that it should start to tackle immigration issues, which have been a topic of hot political debate for the past 25 years:

The Commission also stated that though increased immigration in France in recent years has created new challenges for the French government, including integration of these immigrants into French society as well as problems of public order, these challenges should be addressed directly...

The commission did not include France in their 2005 report.

According to Pew Research Center in 2017, France has a high level of government restrictions on religion. Among the world's 25 most populous nations, France is among the 12 countries with a high level of religious restrictions, according to 2015 data. In Europe, France has the second highest level of religious restrictions, behind only Russia.

In 2004, France passed a law banning the use of "conspicuous" religious symbols in public schools, including the hijab.

Many Muslims complained that the law infringed on their freedom of religion. Similarly the Muslim Public Affairs Council called the ban "a major affront to freedom of religion", noting that many Muslims believe it is mandated by religious texts.

Human Rights Watch stated that the law is "an unwarranted infringement on the right to religious practice".

The United States Commission on International Religious Freedom, appointed by the US government, expressed concern for the law in its 2004 report. It stated that "The French government's promotion of its understanding of the principle of secularism should not result in violations of the internationally recognized individual right to freedom of religion or belief."

On 14 September 2010, an act of parliament was passed resulting in the ban on the wearing of face-covering headgear, including masks, helmets, balaclava, niqābs and other veils covering the face in public places, except under specified circumstances. The ban also applies to the burqa, a full-body covering, if it covers the face.

It was reported that a set of rules including a ban on religious signs or symbols at civil marriages was introduced in the 9th and 10th arrondissements of Marseille. The mayor-council of Marseille did not support the ban.

In 1982 premier minister Pierre Mauroy requested a report on sectes which was delivered by Alain Vivien in 1983. The "Rapport Vivien" outlines problems of families, possible reasons for this sudden increase in such groups, sects as described by themselves and by others, the legal situation in France and abroad, and recommends some actions like education of children in the sense of laïcité, better information of the general public, mediation between families and adherents by a family court, help to French adherents abroad, attention on the rights of children. It concludes with the Voltaire quotation: " Que chacun dans sa loi cherche en paix la lumière. " ("So that everyone within its law can search in peace for the light")

The National Assembly instituted the first Parliamentary Commission on Cults in France in 1995, headed by parliament members Alain Gest and Jacques Guyard, following the mass suicide of adepts of the Order of the Solar Temple.

On March 21, 2000, the Justice Court of Paris found Jacques Guyard guilty of defamation for having called Anthroposophy a secte ("cult") practicing "mental manipulation". He was fined FF 20,000 and ordered to pay FF 90,000 to the anthroposophical Federation of Steiner schools. The Court stated that "the investigation [of that parliamentary report] was not serious. It is proved that it only considered affidavits by alleged 'victims' of Anthroposophy but that neither the authors of these affidavits nor the alleged perpetrators were heard by the [parliamentary] commission". The Paris judges also decided to strip Guyard of his parliamentary immunity in connection with this case. (Le Monde March 23, 2000)

The most controversial part of the report was the appendix, where a list of purported cults compiled by the general information division of the French National Police (Renseignements généraux) was reprinted. It contained 173 groups, including Jehovah's Witnesses, the Theological Institute of Nîmes (a fundamentalist Christian Bible college), and the Church of Scientology. Although this list has no statutory or regulatory importance, it is at the background of the criticism directed at France with respect to freedom of religion.

Major concerns listed in these official reports and other discussions include:

The government of Alain Juppé created in 1996 the " Observatoire interministériel des sectes " ("interministerial board of observation of cults") which delivered yearly reports and out of which grew in 1998 the "Interministerial Mission in the Fight Against Sects/Cults" (MILS) headed by Alain Vivien. MILS was formed to coordinate government monitoring of sectes (name given to cults in France). In February 1998 MILS released its annual report. The activities of the MILS and Alain Vivien's background as the head of an anti-cult organization raised serious concerns and critiques from several human rights organizations and government bodies (See also About-Picard law#Reactions). In 1999, Vivien was put under police protection following threats and the burglary of his home (L'Humanité, January 14, 1999;).

Vivien resigned in June 2002 under criticism from groups targeted by the Report on Cult activities. An interministerial working group was formed to determine the future parameters of the Government's monitoring of sects, called the "Interministerial Mission for Monitoring and Combatting Cultic Deviances" (MIVILUDES ; official site Archived 2011-02-07 at the Wayback Machine).

Headed by Jean-Louis Langlais, senior civil servant at the Ministry of the Interior, MIVILUDES was charged with observing and analyzing movements that constitute a threat to public order or that violate French law, coordinating the appropriate response, informing the public about potential risks, and helping victims to receive aid. In its announcement of the formation of MIVILUDES, the Government acknowledged that its predecessor, MILS, had been criticized for certain actions abroad that could have been perceived as contrary to religious freedom. In an interview given in March 2003, Langlais emphasized that the issue at stake is not to fight "sects" as such but merely "deviances" these might have. However, he also admitted that it is difficult to define the concept of "deviances".

In May 2005 the former prime minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin issued a circular indicating that the list of cults published on the parliamentary report should no longer be used to identify cults.

In a number of cases, minority religious groups have litigated against the national or local governments, or against private organizations, which they deemed to have infringed on their rights because of religious prejudice.

The French Air and Space Force (FASF, French : Armée de l'air et de l'espace, pronounced [ aʁme d(ə) lɛʁ e d(ə) lɛspas ], lit. ' Army of Air and Space ', AAE) is the air and space force of the French Armed Forces. Formed in 1909 as the Service Aéronautique ("Aeronautical Service"), a service arm of the French Army, it became an independent military branch in 1934 as the French Air Force (Armée de l'air). On 11 September 2020, it assumed its current name, the French Air and Space Force, to reflect an "evolution of its mission" into the area of outer space.

The number of aircraft in service with the French Air and Space Force varies depending on the source; the Ministry of Armed Forces gives a figure of 658 aircraft in 2014. According to 2025 data, this figure includes 207 combat aircraft: 99 Dassault Mirage 2000 and 108 Dassault Rafale. As of 2021, the French Air and Space Force employs a total of 40,500 regular personnel, with a reserve element of 5,187 in 2014.

The Chief of Staff of the French Air and Space Force (CEMAAE) is a direct subordinate of the Chief of the Defence Staff (CEMA), a high-ranking military officer who in turn answers to the civilian Minister of the Armed Forces.

The founding of the Service Aéronautique began in 1909, when the French War Minister approved the purchase of a Wright Biplane. The following year, another Wright biplane, a Bleriot, and two Farmans were added to the lone acquisition. On 22 October 1910, General Pierre Roques was appointed Inspector General of what was becoming referred to as the Cinquieme Arme, or Fifth Service.

In March 1912, the French parliament enacted legislation to establish the air arm. It was projected to consist of three distinct branches based on aircraft missions—reconnaissance, bombing, or countering other aircraft.

France was one of the first states to start building aircraft. At the beginning of World War I, France had a total of 148 planes (eight from French Naval Aviation (Aéronautique Navale)) and 15 airships. In August 1914, as France entered World War I, French airpower consisted of 24 squadrons (escadrilles) supporting ground forces, including three squadrons assigned to cavalry units. By 8 October, expansion to 65 squadrons was being planned. By December, the plans called for 70 new squadrons.

Meanwhile, even as procurement efforts scaled up, inventive airmen were trying to use various light weapons against opposing airplanes. Roland Garros invented a crude method of firing a machine gun through the propeller arc by cladding his propeller with metal wedges deflecting any errant bullets. After destroying three German airplanes, Garros came down behind enemy lines on 18 April 1915. His secret weapon was thus exposed, and Anthony Fokker came up with the synchronization gear that by July 1, 1915, turned airplanes into flying gun platforms.

On 21 February 1916, the Verdun Offensive began. New weapons demanded new tactics. Commandant Charles de Tricornet de Rose was the original French pilot, having learned to fly in March 1911. This experienced flier was given a free hand to select pilots and airplanes for a new unit tasked with keeping German observation craft from over the French lines. The ad hoc unit commandeered all available Morane-Saulniers and Nieuport 11s, as well as the 15 best pilots regardless of posting. This ad hoc unit patrolling the skies over Verdun was the first French Groupement de Chasse. The Groupement was successful despite Tricornet's death in a mishap. Under the leadership of new commander Captain Auguste de Reverand, such flying aces as Georges Guynemer, Charles Nungesser, and Albert Deullin began their careers.

Encouraged by the success of their original Groupement, the French massed several squadrons for the Battle of the Somme. The burgeoning French aircraft inventory afforded the formation of Groupement de Combat de la Somme under Captain Felix Brocard. The Groupement was formed on 1 July 1916 with a posting of four Nieuport squadrons: Squadron N.3, N.26, N.73, and N.103. Three other squadrons-- Squadron N.37, N.62, and N.65 were temporarily attached at various times.

On 19 October 1916, three fixed Groupes de Combat were established, each to consist of four squadron. Numbered 11, 12, and 13, they were only the first three Groupements.

During March 1917, Groupe de Combat 14 and Groupe de Combat 15 were formed. Again, each new Groupe was assigned four Nieuport fighter squadrons; again, each was sent to support a different French field army.

On 10 January 1918, Groupe de Combat 16 was formed from four SPAD squadrons. In February, five more Groupe de Combats were founded from SPAD squadrons: Groupes de Combats number 17, 18, 19, 20, and 21. The various Nieuport models were now being phased out as the new SPADs filled the inventories of the French.

With the Groupes success, the French were encouraged to amass airpower into still larger tactical units. On 4 February 1918, Escadre de Combat No. 1 was created out of Groupe de Combat 15, Groupe de Combat 18, and Groupe de Combat 19. It was followed by Escadre de Combat No. 2, formed on the 27th from Groupe de Combat 11, Groupe de Combat 13, and Groupe de Combat 17. Each groupe would be stocked with 72 fighters.

The escadres were not the end of the French accumulation of air power. On 14 May 1918, they were grouped into the Division Aerienne. As bombing aircraft were also being concentrated into larger units, the new division would also contain Escadre de Bombardement No. 12 and Escadre de Bombardement No. 13. The bombing units were both equipped with 45 Breguet 14 bombers. The last addition to the new division was five protection squadrons, operating 75 Caudron R.11 gunships to fly escort for the Breguets.

On 25 June 1918, Groupe de Combat 22 was founded. Groupe de Combat 23 followed soon thereafter. A couple of night bombardment groupes were also founded.

Then, on 15 July 1918, the Division was committed to the Second Battle of the Marne. From then on, whether in whole or in part, the Division Aerienne fought until war's end. By the time of the Battle of Saint-Mihiel, the French could commit 27 fighter squadrons to the effort, along with reconnaissance and bombing squadrons. The 1,137 airplanes dedicated to the battle were the most numerous used in a World War I battle.

When the 11 November 1918 armistice came, French air power had expanded to 336 squadrons, 74 of which were SPAD fighter squadrons. France had 3,608 planes in service. Confirmed claims of 2,049 destroyed enemy airplanes included 307 that had been brought down within French lines. French airmen had also destroyed 357 observation balloons. However, 5,500 pilots and observers were killed out of the 17,300 engaged in the conflict, amounting to 31%. A 1919 newspaper article reported that the French Air Force had suffered losses of 61%.

Military aeronautics was established as a "special arm" by the law of 8 December 1922. It remained under the auspices of the French Army. It was not until 2 July 1934, that the "special arm" became an independent service and was totally independent.

The initial air arm was the cradle of French military parachuting, responsible for the first formation of the Air Infantry Groups (Groupements de l'Infanterie de l'Air) in the 1930s, out of which the Air Parachute Commandos (commandos parachutistes de l'air) descended.

The French Air Force maintained a continuous presence across the French colonial empire, particularly from the 1920s to 1943.

The French Air Force played an important role in the war, most notably during the Battle of France in 1940. The Vichy French Air Force had later a significant presence in the French Levant.

The engagement of the Free French Air Forces from 1940 to 1943, and then the engagement of the aviators of the French Liberation Army, were also important episodes in the history of the French Air Force. The sacrifices of Commandant René Mouchotte and Lieutenant Marcel Beau illustrated their devotion.

After 1945, France rebuilt its aircraft industry. The French Air Force participated in several colonial wars during the Empire such as French Indochina after the Second World War. Since 1945, the French Air Force was notably engaged in Indochina (1945–1954).

The French Air Force was active in the Algerian War from 1952 until 1962 and Suez (1956), later Mauritania and Chad, the Persian Gulf (1990–1991), ex- Yugoslavia and more recently in Afghanistan, Mali and Iraq.

From 1964 until 1971 the French Air Force had the unique responsibility for the French nuclear arm via Dassault Mirage IV or ballistic missiles of Air Base 200 Apt-Saint-Christol on the Plateau d'Albion.

Accordingly, from 1962, the French political leadership shifted its military emphasis to nuclear deterrence, implementing a complete reorganisation of the Air Force, with the creation of four air regions and seven major specialised commands, among which were the Strategic Air Forces Command, COTAM, the Air Command of Aerial Defense Forces (Commandement Air des Forces de Défense Aérienne, CAFDA), and the Force aérienne tactique (FATac). In 1964, the Second Tactical Air Command was created in Nancy to take command of air units stationed in France but not assigned to NATO. The Military Air Transport Command had previously been formed in February 1962 from the Groupement d'Unités Aériennes Spécialisées. Also created in 1964 was the Escadron des Fusiliers Commandos de l'Air (EFCA), seemingly grouping all FCA units. The Dassault Mirage IV, the principal French strategic bomber, was designed to strike Soviet positions as part of the French nuclear triad.

In 1985, the Air Force had four major flying commands, the Strategic Air Forces Command, the Tactical Air Forces Command, the Military Air Transport Command, and CAFDA (air defence).

CFAS had two squadrons of S2 and S-3 IRBMs at the Plateau d'Albion, six squadrons of Mirage IV As (at Mont de Marsan, Cazaux, Orange, Istres, St Dizier, and EB 3/94 at Luxeuil – Saint-Sauveur Air Base), and three squadrons of C-135F, as well as a training/reconnaissance unit, CIFAS 328, at Bordeaux. The Force aérienne tactique included the 3e Escadre de Chasse, 4e Escadre de Chasse, 7e Escadre de Chasse, and the EC 11, EC 13, and ER 33 wings, with a total of 19 squadrons of Mirage III, SEPECAT Jaguars, two squadrons flying the Mirage 5 F (EC 2/13 and EC 3/13, both at Colmar), and a squadron flying the Mirage F.1 CR. CoTAM counted 28 squadrons, of which ten were fixed-wing transport squadrons, and the remainder helicopter and liaison squadrons, at least five of which were overseas. CAFDA numbered 14 squadrons mostly flying the Dassault Mirage F.1 C. Two other commands had flying units, the Air Force Training Command, and the Air Force Transmissions Command, with four squadrons and three trials units.

Dassault Aviation led the way mainly with delta-wing designs, which formed the basis for the Dassault Mirage III series of fighter jets. The Mirage demonstrated its abilities in the Six-Day War, Yom Kippur War, Falklands War, and Gulf War, becoming one of the most popular jet fighters of its day and being widely sold.

In 1994, the Fusiliers Commandos de l'Air command was reestablished under a different form.

The French Air Force entered a phase of inventory replacement and expansion. The Air Force ordered the Airbus A400M military transport aircraft, then in development. By November 2016, 11 had already been delivered to ET00.061 at Orleans-Bricy, and integration of the new Dassault Rafale multi-role jet fighter was underway; the first 20-aircraft squadron became operational in 2006 at Saint-Dizier.

In 2009, France rejoined the NATO Military Command Structure, having been absent since 1966. France was a leading nation, alongside the United States, United Kingdom and Italy in implementing the UN sponsored no-fly zone in Libya (NATO Operation Unified Protector), deploying 20 fighter aircraft to Benghazi in defense of rebel-held positions and the civilian population.

The last remaining squadron of Dassault Mirage F1s retired the aircraft in July 2014 and replaced them with Dassault Rafales.

On 13 July 2019, President Emmanuel Macron announced the creation of a space command, which would come into being within the French Air Force by September 2019, and the transformation of the French Air Force into the French Air and Space Force. According to Defense Minister Florence Parly, France reserves the right to arm French satellites with lasers for defensive purposes.

The official renaming occurred on 24 July 2020, with the new Air and Space Force logo unveiled on 11 September 2020.

On 26 July 2023, FASF conducted its first ever joint fighter exercise with Japan, continuing its defense ties between the two countries.

The Chief of Staff of the French Air and Space Force (CEMAAE) determines French Air and Space Force doctrines application and advises the Chief of the Defence Staff (CEMA) on the deployment, manner, and use of the Air and Space Force. They are responsible for the preparation and logistic support of the French Air and Space Force. The CEMAA is assisted by a Deputy Chief, the Major Général de l'Armée de l'Air, who is the Chief of Staff of the Air and Space Forces Staff. Finally, the CEMAA is assisted by the Inspectorate of the French Air and Space Force (IAA) and by the French Air and Space Force Health Service Inspection (ISSAA).

The Air and Space Force is organized in accordance with Chapter 4, Title II, Book II of the Third Part of the French Defense Code [ fr ] (French: code de la Défense), which replaced decree n° 91-672 dated 14 July 1991.

Under the authority of the Chief of Staff of the French Air and Space Force (CEMAAE) in Paris, the Air and Space Force includes:

The Air and Space Force headquarters, employing 150 personnel, are located alongside the Chief of the Defence Staff 's offices (EMA) and the Army and Navy headquarters at the Balard armed forces complex in Paris. The new site replaced the former Paris Air Base (BA 117) which served as air staff headquarters until 25 June 2015.

The Air and Space Army Staff (État-major de l'Armée de l'air et de l'espace) is the highest service-specific authority of the French air force. It is formally under the command of the Chief of Staff of the Air and Space Force (CEMAAE), but the organisation is under the direct authority of his deputy, the Major General of the Air and Space Force (major général de l'Armée de l'air et de l'espace (MGAAE), in the French military tradition a 'Major General' is not a military rank, but the designation of Chief of Staff of a high command.)

Chief of Staff of the Air and Space Force (CEMAAE), the chief of the French Air and Space Force, officer in the rank of General of Air Army (a full General equivalent).

Major General of the Air and Space Force (MGAAE), officer in the rank of General of Air Corps (a Lieutenant-General equivalent)

The French Air and Space Force has had three commands: two grand operational commands (CDAOA and CFAS) and one organic command (CFA).

The official designation of the service was changed in July 2019 from Air Army (Armée de l'Air) to Air and Space Army (Armée de l'air et de l'espace), when the previous joint Inter-Service Space Command (Commandement interarmées de l'espace (CIE)) under the French General Staff was transformed into the Space Command (Commandement de l'espace (CDE)) and absorbed into the Air and Space Force as its fourth command.

All air regions were disestablished on 1 January 2008. In the 1960s, there were five air regions (RA). The number was then reduced to four by a decree of 30 June 1962 with the disestablishment of the 5th Aerial Region (French North Africa). The decree of 14 July 1991 reduced the air regions to three: « RA Atlantic », « RA Mediterranean » and « RA North-East ». On 1 July 2000 was placed into effect an organization consisting of « RA North » (RAN) and « RA South » (RAS). The territorial division was abolished by decree n°2007-601 of 26 April 2007.

From 2008 to 2010 the French Air Force underwent the "Air 2010" streamlining process. The main targets of this project were to simplify the command structure, to regroup all military and civil air force functions and to rationalise and optimise all air force units. Five major commands, were formed, instead of the former 13, and several commands and units were disbanded.

The Directorate of Human Resources of the Air and Space Force (DRH-AAE) recruits, trains, manages, administers, and converts personnel of the Air and Space Force. Since January 2008, the DRH-AAE groups the former Air Force directorate of military personnel (DPMMA) and some tasks of the former Air Force Training Command. The directorate is responsible for Air and Space Force recruitment via the recruiting bureau.

French joint defence service organisations, supporting the air and space force, include:

Commanded by a Lieutenant-colonel or Colonel, the Escadre is a formation that assembles various units and personnel dedicated to the same mission. In 1932, the "regiment" designation was replaced with "Escadre", which until 1994 was a unit consisting of the following:

Escadres (wings) were dissolved from 1993 as part of the Armées 2000 reorganisation, were reestablished in 2014. The problems caused by having the aircraft maintenance units not responsible to the flying squadrons they supported eventually forced the change.

Four Escadres were reformed in the first phase:

In the second phase, the French Air Force announced in August 2015 the creation of six additional wings:

Also established was the Escadre aérienne de commandement et de conduite projetable [ fr ] at Évreux-Fauville Air Base on 27 August 2015.

The French Air and Space Force announced in August 2015 that unit numbering, moves of affected aircraft, and the transfer of historic material (flags, traditions and names) would be completed in 2016.

Another air force wing was added on September 5, 2019:

Commanded by a lieutenant-colonel, the Escadron is the basic operational unit. This term replaced that of Group as of 1949 with the aim to standardize usage with the allies of NATO who were using the term 'squadron'. However, the term Group did not entirely disappear: the term was retained for the Aerial Group 56 Mix Vaucluse, specialized in Special Operations or Group – Groupe de ravitaillement en vol 2/91 Bretagne which is still carrying the same designation since 2004.

A fighter squadron (escadron) can number some twenty machines, spread in general in three Escadrilles. A Transport Escadron (Escadron de Transport) can theoretically count a dozen Transall C-160, however, numbers are usually much less for heavier aircraft (three Airbus A310 -300 and two Airbus A340 -200 for the Escadron de Transport 3/60 Estérel).

The squadrons have retained the designations of the former Escadres disbanded during the 1990s. For instance: Transport Escadron 1/64 Béarn [ fr ] (more specifically Transport Escadron 01.064 Béarn), which belonged to the 64th Transport Escadre (French : 64 Escadre de Transport) during the dissolution of the later (recreated in August 2015). Not all escadrons (Squadrons) are necessarily attached to an Escadre.

The Escadrille (flight) has both an administrative and operational function, even of the essential operational control is done at the level of the Esacdron. A pilot is assigned to the Escadrille, however the equipment and material devices, on the other hand, are assigned to the Escadron. Since the ESTA (Aeronautic Technical Support Escadrons) came into being, material devices and the mechanics have been assigned directly to the base then put at disposition of the based Escadrons.

The Escadrilles adopted the traditions of the prestigious units out of which most (SPA and SAL), are those traditions of the First World War.

The Escadron de transport, d'entraînement et de calibration 00.065 (ETEC 65, "Transportation, training and calibration squadron") is a unit of the French Air and Space Force, under direct command of the Minister of Defence, in charge of the transportation of the President, the Prime Minister and other French government officials. Flight are identified as "COTAM 0xy", with the callsign " COTAM 001 " (" COTAM Unité ") being reserved for the President and "COTAM 002" for foreign presidents.

The Fusiliers Commandos de l'Air comprise:

Protection Squadrons protect airbases inside and outside the national territory, and in exterior operations as well.

The CPAs carry out common missions, as well as specialized tasks including intervention and reinforcement of protection at the profit of sensible points "air" inside and outside the national territory.

Flying activity in France is carried out by a network of bases, platforms and French air and space defence radar systems. It is supported by bases, which are supervised and maintained by staff, operational centres, warehouses, workshops, and schools. Both in France and abroad, bases have similar infrastructure to provide standardised support.

The French Air and Space Force has, as of 1 August 2014:

Some French airbases house radar units (e.g. Lyon, Mont-Verdun, Drachenbronn, Cinq-Mars-la-Pile, Nice, Mont-Agel) to carry out air defence radar surveillance and air traffic control. Others house material warehouses or command posts. Temporary and semi-permanent foreign deployments include transport aircraft at Dushanbe (Tajikistan, Operation Héraclès), and fighter aircraft in N'Djamena (Tchad, Opération Épervier), among others.

As swift as the French Air and Space Force operates, the closure of aerial bases is more constant and immediate, having known a strong acceleration since the 1950s. An air base commander has authority over all units stationed on their base. Depending on the units' tasks, this means that they are responsible for approximately 600 to 2500 personnel.

On average, a base, made up of about 1500 personnel (nearly 3500 people including family), provides a yearly economic boost to its area of about 60 million euros. Consequently, determining the sites for air bases constitutes a major part of regional planning.

More than ten bases have been closed since 2009. Doullens Air Base (BA 922) was a former command and reporting centre; Toulouse – Francazal Air Base (BA 101), was closed on 1 September 2009; Colmar-Meyenheim Air Base (BA 132) was closed on 16 June 2010; Metz-Frescaty Air Base (BA 128) was closed on 30 June 2011; Brétigny-sur-Orge Air Base (BA 217), closed 26 June 2012; Cambrai – Épinoy Air Base (BA 103), was closed on 28 June 2012; Reims – Champagne Air Base (June 2012); Drachenbronn Air Base (BA 901) closed on 17 July 2015; Dijon Air Base (BA 102), was vacated on 30 June 2016; Creil Air Base (BA 110) vacated on 31 August 2016; and Taverny Air Base (DA 921), the former Strategic Air Forces Command headquarters.

The Air and Space Force operates a wide range of air and space surveillance systems. Among them, the:

Since the end of the Algerian War, the French Air and Space Force has comprised about 17 to 19% of the French Armed Forces. In 1990, at the end of the Cold War, numbers reached 56,400 military personnel under contract, out of which 36,300 were part of conscription and 5,400 civilians.

In 2008, forecasts for personnel of the French Air Force were expected to number 50,000 out of which 44,000 aviators on the horizon in 2014.

In 2010, the number personnel of the French Air Force was reduced to 51,100 men and women (20%) out of which: 13% officers ; 55% sous-officier ; 29% air military technicians (MTA); 3% volunteers of national service and aspirant volunteers; 6,500 civilians (14%). They form several functions:

Non-navigating personnel of the French Air and Space Force include and are not limited to : Systems Aerial Mechanics [ fr ], Aerial Controllers [ fr ], Meteorologists, Administrative Personnel, Air Parachute Commandos [ fr ], in Informatics, in Infrastructures, in Intelligence, Commissioner of the Armies [ fr ] (Administrator Task).

Pilots, Mechanical Navigating Officer [ fr ], Navigating Arms Systems Officer [ fr ] (NOSA), Combat Air Medic [ fr ] (CVA).

Officers, within their recruitment and future specialty, are trained at:

Officers of the French Air and Space Force are spread in three corps:

Non-commissioned officers (Sous-Officiers) are trained at:

Military Air Technicians [ fr ] having been trained until 1 July 2015 at the Center of Elementary Military Formation (French : " Centre de formation militaire élémentaire ") of the Technical Instruction School of the French Air and Space Force [ fr ] of Saintes. Since 1 July 2015, training has taken place at Orange-Caritat Air Base, within the " Operational Combatant Preparation Center of the Air Force " (French : Centre de préparation opérationnelle du combattant de l'Armée de l'air).

Air traffic controllers are trained at the Center of Instruction Control and Air Defense (French : Centre d'Instruction du Contrôle et de la Défense Aérienne).

The rank insignia of commissioned officers.

The rank insignia of non-commissioned officers and enlisted personnel.

The French Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission (CEA) (French : Commissariat à l'énergie atomique et aux énergies alternatives) is a French public government-funded research organisation in the areas of energy, defense and security, information technologies and health technologies. The CEA maintains a cross-disciplinary culture of engineers and researchers, building on the synergies between fundamental and technological research.

CEA is headed by a board headed by the general administrator (currently François Jacq since 20 April 2018), advised by the high-commissioner for atomic energy (currently Patrick Landais [ fr ]). Its yearly budget amounts to €5.8 billion and its permanent staff is slightly over 21,000 persons.

CEA was created in 1945; since then, the successive high-commissioners have been Frédéric Joliot-Curie, Francis Perrin, Jacques Yvon [ fr ], Jean Teillac [ fr ], Raoul Dautry, René Pellat, Bernard Bigot, Catherine Cesarsky, Daniel Verwaerde [ fr ], and François Jacq.

In December 2009, French President Nicolas Sarkozy declared that CEA should change its name from Commissariat à l’énergie atomique (English: Commission for Atomic Energy) to Commissariat à l’énergie atomique et aux énergies alternatives (English: Commission for Atomic Energy and Alternative Energies); this change took effect on 10 March 2010, when the decision was published in the Journal officiel de la République française.

It conducts fundamental and applied research into many areas, including the design of nuclear reactors, the manufacturing of integrated circuits, the use of radionucleides for curing illnesses, seismology and tsunami propagation, the safety of computerized systems, etc.

It has one of the top 100 supercomputers in the world, the Tera-100. TERA 100, first system designed and built in Europe to reach the petaflops in 2010, was ranked in 5th position in the worldwide TOP 500. CEA is now building TERA-1000 which is a key step in the implementation of their Exascale program for the computing needs that CEA would face by 2020.

In March 2016, Reuters published an article describing the "Top 25 Global Innovators – Government" and placed CEA as "number one" amongst "The World's Most Innovative Research Institutions."

CEA is divided into four directorates, or divisions:

The direction des énergies [ fr ] (DES) comprises four institutes:

The direction de la recherche technologique [ fr ] (DRT), known also as CEA Tech division, is divided between two CEA sites, at Saclay and Grenoble. CEA Tech focuses on technological research and development in the field of energy, IT (both hardware and software) and healthcare informatics. It plays an active role in transferring knowledge and research to industry.

The CEA Tech division is further divided into three research institutes:

The current director of DRT since january 2023 is Julie Galland.

The direction de la recherche fondamentale [ fr ] (DRF) consists of 9 institutes:

The current DRF director since 25 August 2025 is François Daviaud.

The direction des applications militaires [ fr ] (DAM) builds the nuclear weapons of the French military and designs the power plants for the nuclear submarines of the French Navy.

CEA has spun off multiple companies, some being partial subsidiaries or where CEA has minority interest. Some such companies are listed below:

CEA has played an active role in research, development and innovation in the four main areas of low-carbon energies (nuclear and renewable), technologies for information and health technologies, very large research infrastructures (TGIR), and defense and global security.

Moreover, two of the ten CEA centers across France have joined with the University of Paris-Saclay to develop high quality research and training. The centers which form a part of the University of Paris-Saclay include:

(Since 2017, these two centers merged into CEA Paris-Saclay center, and are now referred to as sites in that center.)

The CEA researchers involved in the University of Paris-Saclay represent over 20% of the university's research potential, particularly in the field of physics and engineering. CEA maintains a strong presence in training to master and engineer level by administering INSTN, wherein various courses are taught by its researchers.

CEA has around 400 researchers who hold an accreditation to supervise research, making it a significant contributor to the research and doctoral programs of the University Paris-Saclay.

The INSTN, Institut national des sciences et techniques nucléaires (National Institute for Nuclear Science and Technology) is a public higher education institution administered by the CEA (French Atomic Energy and Alternative Energies Commission) under the joint authority of the Ministry of National Education, Higher Education and Research, the Ministry of the Economy, Industry and the Digital Sector and the Ministry of the Environment, Energy and Marine Affairs.

The French anarchist leagues were a group of at least two leagues, the Ligue des antipatriotes [ fr ] and the Ligue des Anti-propriétaires, founded in France in 1886 in reaction to the creation of the Ligue des Patriotes.

The two organizations, which often brought together the same individuals and were primarily based in Paris, engaged in a variety of tactics ranging from legal antimilitarist propaganda to activities such as the widespread promotion of déménagement à la cloche de bois, an illegalist practice considered a forerunner of modern squatting.

These leagues, to which other groups like the Cercle international could be added, helped reunify the anarchist movement in France after the destruction of its structures caused by the repression of 1883. They remained active until the 1890s.

The anarchist movement emerged around the Saint-Imier Congress (1872) before spreading widely. Initially, anarchists were gathered within the Anti-Authoritarian International, which evolved into the Black International in the early 1880s.

This organization disappeared during the 1880s, as did the first anarchist federations in France, which gravitated around Lyon and the Rhône, dissolved by the anarchists themselves to evade the repression of 1883. This left French anarchists without structures capable of uniting them beyond local groups. However, this situation did not last long; as early as 1883, authorities noticed that anarchists were once again coordinating between groups in a fairly uniform manner, despite the suppression of the federations. They thus initiated anarchist companionship.

As the movement's primary center in France gradually shifted from Lyon to Paris, anarchists in the capital and its surrounding areas launched several leagues. The first of these, the Ligue des antipatriotes [ fr ] (English: Anti-Patriot League), was founded in August 1886 by the Anarchist Youth of Belleville group.

This organization was established to counteract the recently founded Ligue des Patriotes and to carry out anti-patriotic and antimilitarist propaganda. While mostly active around Paris, it could also operate in other areas and was composed of numerous pre-existing anarchist groups that chose to join it. The founders' plan was to subdivide the league into sections corresponding to each of Paris's twenty arrondissements. In 1886, the league notably published a Manifesto to Conscripts, which it successfully distributed both across the country and abroad.

Four months later, in December, Jean Couchot founded the Ligue des Anti-propriétaires (English: Anti-Landlords/Owners League), a parallel organization that frequently brought together the exact same people. According to historian Jean Maitron, it operated without any regulations, bylaws, or official headquarters, engaging primarily in the illegalist practice of déménagement à la cloche de bois. This practice, which Couchot was already practicing prior to founding the organization, consisted of discreetly moving out tenants who were defaulting on their rent. It is considered one of the early methods foreshadowing modern squatting.

In the vast majority of cases, these moves were carried out silently and peacefully during the night. However, conflicts occasionally erupted during the process between concierges or police officers and the anarchists vacating the premises. For instance, in 1887, Paolo Chiericotti and two other Italian anarchists clashed with their landlord while attempting a move. Following the landlord's subsequent complaint and the conviction of one of the three men, the landlord's business was targeted in a nighttime bombing. According to the police, the antipropriétaires gathered primarily as rent deadlines approached, offering their assistance to interested parties to carry out these déménagements à la cloche de bois. They were also reportedly supported by the Chambre syndicale des hommes de peine (English: Laborers' Trade Union), a number of whose members were also affiliated with both leagues.

These leagues, which were active between the late 1880s and the early 1890s, are to be understood in relation to other organizations or groups active during this period, such as the Cercle international of Paris, in their capacity to bring together different local groups and contribute to unifying both the actions and thought of anarchists in France.

Historian Vivien Bouhey included them in his list of core elements explaining the movement's coordination during this period, writing on the subject:

These individuals or groups do not live isolated from one another, contrary to what has been written until now. Quite the opposite, they are generally in permanent contact, and this in several ways: [...] 5. Thanks to prisoner aid funds, which, on a local, national, or even international scale, foster mutual aid among comrades; 6. Thanks to leagues, which, at the local, regional, or national level, federate a certain number of groupings; 7. Thanks to a minority of gyrovague companions, who serve as liaison agents by transmitting news from one group to another; [...]

French anti-Southern sentiment during the Third Republic manifested as a form of hatred directed towards the French from the South of France. This phenomenon was particularly prevalent at the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century. This sentiment originated from a multitude of factors, including linguistic, economic, cultural, and historical interpretations of the country and the process of constructing ethnotypes. In this context, the populations of the South were perceived as talkative, vain, and indolent, largely due to the assumption that their lives were easier due to the sunny climate and that they were governed by passions rather than reason. Those with anti-Southern sentiments attributed the preponderance of the South in society to the Roman conquest, the actions of Joan of Arc, and the French Revolution.

A subset of the nationalist right espoused a sentiment of patriotism towards individuals hailing from the South. The patriotism of the Southerners was called into question; they were judged as cowardly and indifferent. Following the defeat in the Battle of Lorraine in 1914, they were hastily declared guilty. Southern politicians, with Léon Gambetta and Ernest Constans at the vanguard, were accused of seizing power through populism to monopolize the wealth of the North and redistribute it in the South. Ultimately, Southerners were portrayed as belonging to a "race" that had been corrupted by Protestants and, in particular, Jews, with whom they were believed to have conspired to seize power. Their general behavior was thought to be a consequence of the structure of their brains.

The South of France is a geographical area with vague boundaries. It was invented after the Revolution that ended the provinces and is based on a geographical reading of the nation from its Parisian center. Anti-Southern sentiment has its origin in the process of constructing ethnotypes, a moral and physical classification of individuals based on prejudices. These are notably built on the theory of climates [ fr ], but also rest on linguistic, economic, cultural, and historical interpretations of the country.

The notion that Southerners are morally and militarily inferior to Northerners due to the climate is a concept that has been expressed by several prominent thinkers throughout history. Montesquieu, in his 1748 work The Spirit of Law, Germaine de Staël in her 1800 treatise On Literature, and Charles Victor de Bonstetten, in his late 18th-century work The Man of the South and the Man of the North or the Influence of Climate, published in 1824, are among the most notable proponents of this idea. In his work, which systematizes this distinction, Bonstetten reflects a mindset that was common at the time.

From the outset of the 19th century, public opinion became increasingly attuned to the economic disparity between the South of France, which remained predominantly agrarian due to a dearth of capital, and the North, which was undergoing industrialization, emulating the growth patterns observed in Britain and Germany. Additionally, the South was perceived (erroneously) to have a lower level of education. Moreover, historical events contributed to constructing a violent image of the Southerners. These events included the massacres at La Glacière in Avignon in 1791, the decisive intervention of the Marseillais on August 10, 1792, the Federalist insurrection of 1793, and the violence of the White Terror in 1815.

The ethnotypic view of the South of France as a uniform space was pervasive in literature and popular culture. The populations of the region were often depicted as loquacious, vain, and indolent, due to the assumption that life was easy for them due to the sunny climate. They were also portrayed as governed by passions rather than reason, and thus violent. Additionally, their accent, the use of Occitan, which was incomprehensible to Northerners, and their way of speaking French were also mocked.

At the turn of the Second Empire and the Third Republic, in the popular Northern mindset, the Provençal was perceived as the embodiment of the Southerner, replacing the Gascon, which had previously been regarded as the epitome of the region's characteristics. The Provençal was now seen as "boastful and ridiculous," while the Gascon was considered "verbose and boastful but proud and quarrelsome." In the early 1870s, the success of Tartarin of Tarascon by Alphonse Daudet significantly contributed to this movement. Furthermore, these stigmatizing representations were repeated in school textbooks and novels in the second half of the 19th century, which reinforced the North/South opposition among the elites, including Ernest Renan, the leading thinker of French intellectuals.

Some historians who were critical of the South sought to identify the historical origins of what they perceived to be an ethnic disparity. In an article published in Le Gaulois in 1903, Maurice Barrès posited that the conquest of Gaul by Julius Caesar was the primary cause of the disparity between the North and the South. In his thesis novel, Jean Révolte, roman de lutte (1892), Gaston Méry posits that ancient Rome served as a bridgehead for Southern expansion towards Northern Europe. For some conservatives, the 1789 Revolution unfortunately granted primacy to the Gallo-Roman stock of the South, inclined towards egalitarianism, pacifism, and pleasure, over the Frankish stock of the North, inclined towards elitism, militarism, and work. This was posited as the cause of the defeat of 1870 by Ernest Renan.

In his 1891 novel Là-bas, Joris-Karl Huysmans posited a prehistoric scenario in which the English Channel had not yet formed and France and England constituted a unified territory and population. It was believed that Joan of Arc was the cause of this incoherent France, incorrectly uniting the incompatibilities of the South and the North. In a pamphlet published the following year, the Freemason Louis Martin, a progressive republican, put forth the argument that she had prevented the fusion of two sister nations and led to the exacerbation of French and English national characteristics. Conversely, for Charles Maurras, a staunch defender of the South despite his nationalist leanings, she repelled the Northern enemy and preserved Latin predominance.

As Joris-Karl Huysmans observed, the Renaissance, with its return to antiquity, also had an impact on Northern Gothic literature. This impact manifested in the infusion of Mediterranean paganism into the literary landscape. One notable example is the replacement of the Virgin Mary with the Venus figure.

Anti-Southern sentiment, in varying degrees of intensity and focus, manifested as disdain, mistrust, hostility, hatred, or racism and was a prevalent phenomenon between 1870 and 1914. Robert Lafont discussed the phenomenon of internal racism, which he identified as a product of the enduring tensions within French society. By the early 1890s, as Jean-Marie Seillan observed, these tensions had reached a point where they gave rise to a form of proto-fascism in France. Three key factors were identified as the primary drivers of the most vehement anti-Southern sentiment.

The regions of the South exhibited a persistent aversion to the French state, which manifested in various forms of resistance, including reluctance to fulfill military obligations, evasion of taxation, and, on occasion, violent revolt. However, the defeat of 1870 left a profound impact, and individuals were sought to bear the brunt of the collective blame. In his 1871 work La Défense de Tarascon [ fr ], Alphonse Daudet portrayed Southerners as both boastful and indifferent to the Franco-Prussian War of 1870. The generalization of Tarasconians to all Southerners was swiftly embraced in the context of the profound disappointment and resentment that accompanied the defeat. In his work De Profundis, a piece from his Songs of the Soldier, the poet Paul Déroulède portrays a Marseillais who chooses to maintain his tranquility rather than engage in combat. The text of this collection, which had a significant audience until 1914, significantly influenced the perception of Southerners as cowardly and unpatriotic. However, a comparative study of war efforts by French departments demonstrated no notable differences, and post-armistice mutinies also occurred in both the South and North of France.

The 1907 winegrowers' revolt was distinguished by the mutiny of a portion of the 17th Infantry Regiment, comprising Southern soldiers, who were concerned about the fate of the inhabitants of Béziers. The military authority, in a scathing report, relied on stigmatizing ethnic stereotypes to a significant extent. Lieutenant-Colonel Émile Driant echoed these in his novel Robinsons sous-marins, which was very popular among conservative youth. The novel is built on an opposition between a devoted Breton and a repulsive, hateful, rebellious, and "internationalist" Provençal.

Following the French army's initial setback in August 1914, during the Battle of Lorraine, Parisian senator Auguste Gervais [ fr ], in an article published in Le Matin, as well as several other newspapers, attributed the defeat to the Provençals of the 15th Corps. However, historical analysis has shown that the defeat resulted from the inadequacy of the campaign plan and the doctrine of an all-out offensive. Two soldiers were executed in violation of the law. Notwithstanding the government's denials, the affair had a detrimental impact on the reputation of Southerners. On the front, Southern soldiers were held in low regard, perceived as cowardly, and subjected to harassment by soldiers and officers from the North. The appellation " Tartarin," for instance, was employed as an epithet directed at Southern combatants. In the context of the extensive demographic integration that the war engendered, the invocation of stereotypes imbued one's environment with meaning and reinforced one's sense of identity. In the face of pervasive prejudices, Southern soldiers from a particular region might attempt to deflect blame onto those from an alternative region within the South or disavow their affiliation with the South.

The nationalist, conservative right, excluded from power by the Republicans, rapidly accepted the premise that Southern politicians, predominantly from the left, had assumed control to consolidate the wealth of the North, redistribute it in the South, and secure allegiance. Between 1871 and 1914, only 28.3% of ministerial and state secretary positions were held by people from the South. Despite this, the South was perceived as economically lagging, while the North, which was much more industrialized, contributed significantly to the state budget. Additionally, the Southerner was considered inclined towards radicalism and socialism due to social conflicts or political expressions.

The proliferation of hateful fantasies can be attributed, at least in part, to the influence of literary elites. Notable proponents of this perspective include Joris-Karl Huysmans, and Gaston Méry, who wrote in Jean Révolte, Roman de lutte (1892), "The Southerner, that's the enemy!," Léon Daudet, and several newspapers such as Le Matin and La Gazette. In an article published in Le Figaro in 1871, Alphonse Daudet, an anti-republican, accused Southerners of exploiting the war to engage in politics and being responsible for establishing the Third Republic. In Victorien Sardou 's 1872 play Rabagas, the Provençals are depicted as having seized control of the state. Similarly, in Alphonse Daudet's 1881 novel Numa Roumestan [ fr ], they are portrayed as eloquent talkers with little taste for action, who prefer to seize power through parliamentarism. This novel was successfully adapted for the theater in Paris. The figure of Léon Gambetta is central to both cases. The sociologist Edmond Demolins, in Les Français d'aujourd'hui (1898), attempts to identify the underlying causes of this phenomenon by examining the role of subsistence and climate. As summarized by historian Céline Piot, the sentiment is hardly complimentary: "The Southerners are victims of an incurable inability to work, and thus naturally inclined towards politics, which is a profitable industry for lazy and non-industrious peoples."

The prominent role of Ernest Constans from Béziers, minister of the interior, in the expulsion of religious congregations and opposition to General Georges Boulanger and the Ligue des patriotes, incited another surge of animosity from the far-right. Similarly, the ascendance of the Bloc des gauches between 1902 and 1904, which included numerous Southerners and pursued an assertive anti-clerical policy, incited resentment. Southerners were perceived as undermining the authority of the Church through their promotion of secularization and their association with the tarnishing of the honor of the army in the Dreyfus Affair. Deputies such as Jules Delafosse [ fr ], writers including Jules Lemaître, president of the Ligue de la patrie française, Maurice Barrès, and others were eager to condemn the dominance and ineptitude of Southern political figures, which they believed undermined the influence of Northern leaders. In 1907, Charles Maurras, a nationalist from the South who opposed leftist radicals, asserted that Southern politicians were intentionally maintaining the country in a state of subjugation.

In the aftermath of the First World War, the incursion of Southern officials into the Northern and Eastern regions was met with considerable resistance. The invasion itself was denounced, as were the presumed inefficiency and lack of legitimacy of the officials who had invaded.

Many authors, including Arthur de Gobineau, Jules Michelet, and Hippolyte Taine, conceptualized Southerners as a distinct racial group. Gobineau viewed populations south of the Seine as in a state of decline, comprising only vestiges of the Germanic race. Michelet characterized them as a heterogeneous, troubled, anxious, and turbulent population. On the other hand, Taine depicted them as sensual, quick-tempered, rough, and lacking in intellectual and moral fortitude.

From the perspective of some nationalists, Southerners were perceived as anti-French and as being at odds with the nation's interests. This was attributed to their belonging to a different racial group, or more specifically, to their having been influenced by foreign ideas and blood. It is alleged that the South was home to the largest concentrations of Protestants and, in particular, Jews. The concept of Jewish influence in the South can be traced back to Arthur de Gobineau's 1852 essay, L'Essai sur l'inégalité des races. However, the explicit association of Southerners with Jews emerged during the rise of the Third Republic and the subsequent fear of democracy. For Provençal Charles Maurras, the Southern population remained healthy in its internal exile, and its missteps were due only to Jewish, Protestant, or Albigensian oppression. However, Maurras was virtually alone in promoting this view.

Similarly, Southerners, who may have exhibited physical characteristics analogous to those of Jews, were purported to be readily identifiable by a distinctive accent, mannerisms, and even the odor of garlic they exuded. The language itself was regarded as superficial. Some scientists lent support to the notion of racial distinctions. In 1911, in the journal L'Opinion, Dr. Répin from the Pasteur Institute posited that the observed opposition between the temperaments of dolichocephalic races (Northern men, such as the Anglo-Saxons or the Franks) and those of brachycephalic races (Southern men, such as the Latins and Celts) was due to brain size. It was postulated that Southern brains were smaller and therefore less inclined to reflection. However, the frequency of neural connections was held to explain their talkativeness and ease of speech.

In volume II of La France juive (1886), Édouard Drumont asserted that Léon Gambetta sought to establish a Jewish Republic in France. In a similar vein, Gaston Méry, an admirer of Drumont, posited that the Southerners and the Jews were like brothers and that they were interdependent. "The first requires the second's financial resources to secure electoral victory, while the second can more effectively consolidate its position if it can advance while concealed by the first." Consequently, Méry postulated the existence of two distinct threats: the Latin peril and the Jewish peril. However, he was distinctive in his assertion that the Germans had constituted the nobility vanquished by the Revolution, that the Latins constituted the majority of the bourgeoisie that needed to be subdued, and that the Celts, with their purported pure bloodline, constituted the people who must rise.

As posited by literary historian Sarah Al-Matary [ fr ], the Boulangist experience inaugurates novelistic aesthetic perspectives that assume the form of "racial" literature, politicized and occasionally in dialogue with "scholarly production" that, in the latter half of the nineteenth century, purported to discern an autocratic proclivity among Latin peoples, manifesting in forms such as absolute monarchy, the Terror, and Caesarism. Some idealized the "Latin race" as a model of civilization, while those on the opposite end of the political spectrum exhibited sentiments of disgust or hatred.

Following the conclusion of World War I, French anti-Southern sentiment exhibited a gradual decline, particularly due to population shifts. However, in 1935, Alexis Carrel, a Nobel laureate, still espoused the view that Northern races were superior to those on the Mediterranean coasts. Before World War II, the writer Louis-Ferdinand Céline, whose works evince a "Nordicism," explicitly manifested his anti-Southern sentiments by reusing several clichés. These included portraying the North as a conquering and productive entity, in contrast to the South as a threatening and paralyzing force. In L'École des cadavres [ fr ], Sarah Al-Matary notes that the author equates "Latinism" with "Greece," which is "already of the Orient." This invokes Freemasonry, which the pamphleteer associates with "Jews," frequently compared in his writings to "Negroes."

The French Armed Forces (French : Forces armées françaises, pronounced [ fɔʁs aʁme fʁɑ̃sɛːz ]) are the military of France. They consist of four service branches : The Army, the Navy, the Air and Space Force, and the National Gendarmerie. The National Guard serves as the French Armed Forces' military reserve force.

Under the French constitution, the president of France serves as commander-in-chief of the French military. The Chief of the Defence Staff, currently Général d'armée aérienne Fabien Mandon, oversees all military operations.

France has the ninth largest defense budget in the world and the second largest in the European Union (EU). It also has the largest military by size in the EU. As of 2025, the total active personnel of the French Armed Forces are 264,000, along with 43,000 reservists; including the National Gendarmerie (which numbered 155,000 in 2024), France's military manpower is 462,000.

France is frequently considered a top-tier military power, often ranking among the top ten due to its global capabilities and independent nuclear umbrella; according to the 2026 Global Firepower Index, the French Armed Forces are the world's sixth most powerful military.

The Armed Forces continuously rank as one the institutions in which the French people have the highest confidence. A 2023 IFOP poll showed that 89% of the French trusted their Armed Forces.

The military history of France encompasses an immense panorama of conflicts and struggles extending for more than 2,000 years across areas, including modern France, greater Europe, and French territorial possessions overseas. According to British historian Niall Ferguson, the French participated in 50 of the 125 major European wars that have been fought since 1495; more than any other European state. They are followed by the Austrians who fought in 47 of them, the Spanish in 44 and the English (and later British) who were involved in 43. In addition, out of all recorded conflicts which occurred since the year 387 BC, France has fought in 168 of them, won 109, lost 49 and drawn 10.

The Gallo-Roman conflict predominated from 60 BC to 50 BC, with the Romans emerging victorious in the conquest of Gaul by Julius Caesar. After the decline of the Roman Empire, a Germanic tribe known as the Franks took control of Gaul by defeating competing tribes. The "land of Francia", from which France gets its name, had high points of expansion under kings Clovis I and Charlemagne. In the Middle Ages, rivalries with England and the Holy Roman Empire prompted major conflicts such as the Norman Conquest and the Hundred Years' War. With an increasingly centralized monarchy, the first standing army since Roman times, and the use of artillery, France expelled the English from its territory and came out of the Middle Ages as the most powerful nation in Europe, only to lose that status to Spain following defeat in the Italian Wars. The Wars of Religion crippled France in the late 16th century, but a major victory in the Thirty Years' War made France one of the most powerful nations on the continent once more. In parallel, France developed its first colonial empire in Asia, Africa, and in the Americas. Under Louis XIV, France achieved military supremacy over its rivals, but escalating conflicts against increasingly powerful enemy coalitions checked French ambitions and left the kingdom bankrupt at the opening of the 18th century.

Resurgent French armies secured victories in dynastic conflicts against the Spanish, Polish, and Austrian crowns. At the same time, France was fending off attacks on its colonies. As the 18th century advanced, global competition with Great Britain led to the Seven Years' War, where France lost its North American holdings. Consolation came in the form of dominance in Europe and the American Revolutionary War, where extensive French aid in the form of money and arms, and the direct participation of its army and navy led to America's independence. Internal political upheaval eventually led to 23 years of nearly continuous conflict in the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars. France reached the zenith of its power during this period, dominating the European continent in an unprecedented fashion under Napoleon Bonaparte, but by 1815 it had been restored to its pre-Revolutionary borders. The rest of the 19th century witnessed the growth of the Second French colonial empire as well as French interventions in Belgium, Spain, and Mexico. Other major wars were fought against Russia in the Crimea, Austria in Italy, and Prussia within France itself.

Following defeat in the Franco-Prussian War, Franco-German rivalry erupted again in the First World War. France and its allies were victorious this time. Social, political, and economic upheaval in the wake of the conflict led to the Second World War, in which the Allies were defeated in the Battle of France and the French government surrendered and was replaced with an authoritarian regime. The Allies, including the government in exile's Free French Forces and later a liberated French nation, eventually emerged victorious over the Axis powers. As a result, France secured an occupation zone in Germany and a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council.

The imperative of avoiding a third Franco-German conflict on the scale of those of two world wars paved the way for European integration starting in the 1950s. France became a nuclear power with its first test of an atomic bomb in Algeria in 1960. Since the 1990s its military action is most often seen in cooperation with NATO and its European partners.

Today, French military doctrine is based on the concepts of national independence, nuclear deterrence (see Force de dissuasion), and military self-sufficiency. France is a charter member of NATO, and has worked actively with its allies to adapt NATO—internally and externally—to the post- Cold War environment. In December 1995, France announced that it would increase its participation in NATO's military wing, including the Military Committee (France withdrew from NATO's military bodies in 1966 whilst remaining full participants in the Organisation's political Councils). France remains a firm supporter of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe and other cooperative efforts. Paris hosted the May 1997 NATO-Russia Summit which sought the signing of the Founding Act on Mutual Relations, Cooperation and Security. Outside of NATO, France has actively and heavily participated in both coalition and unilateral peacekeeping efforts in Africa, the Middle East, and the Balkans, frequently taking a lead role in these operations. France has undertaken a major restructuring to develop a professional military that will be smaller, more rapidly deployable, and better tailored for operations outside of mainland France. Key elements of the restructuring include: reducing personnel, bases and headquarters, and rationalisation of equipment and the armaments industry.

Since the end of the Cold War, France has placed a high priority on arms control and non-proliferation. French Nuclear testing in the Pacific, and the sinking of the Rainbow Warrior strained French relations with its Allies, South Pacific states (namely New Zealand), and world opinion. France agreed to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1992 and supported its indefinite extension in 1995. After conducting a controversial final series of six nuclear tests on Mururoa in the South Pacific, the French signed the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty in 1996. Since then, France has implemented a moratorium on the production, export, and use of anti-personnel landmines and supports negotiations leading toward a universal ban. The French are key players in the adaptation of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe to the new strategic environment. France remains an active participant in: the major programs to restrict the transfer of technologies that could lead to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction: the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Australia Group (for chemical and biological weapons), and the Missile Technology Control Regime. France has also signed and ratified the Chemical Weapons Convention.

On 31 July 2007, President Nicolas Sarkozy ordered M. Jean-Claude Mallet, a member of the Council of State, to head up a thirty-five member commission charged with a wide-ranging review of French defence. The commission issued its White Paper in early 2008.

Acting upon its recommendations, President Sarkozy began making radical changes in French defense policy and structures starting in the summer of 2008. In keeping with post- Cold War changes in European politics and power structures, the French military's traditional focus on territorial defence will be redirected to meet the challenges of a global threat environment. Under the reorganisation, the identification and destruction of terrorist networks both in metropolitan France and in francophone Africa will be the primary task of the French military. Redundant military bases will be closed and new weapons systems projects put on hold to finance the restructuring and global deployment of intervention forces. In a historic change, Sarkozy furthermore has declared that France "will now participate fully in NATO," four decades after former French president General Charles de Gaulle withdrew from the alliance's command structure and ordered American troops off French soil.

In May 2014, high ranking defence chiefs of the French Armed Forces threatened to resign if the defence budget received further cuts on top of those already announced in the 2013 White Paper. They warned that further cuts would leave the armed forces unable to support operations abroad.

There are currently 36,000 French troops deployed in foreign territories —such operations are known as "OPEX" for Opérations Extérieures ("External Operations"). Among other countries, France provides troops for the United Nations force stationed in Haiti following the 2004 Haiti rebellion. France has sent troops, especially special forces, into Afghanistan to help the United States and NATO forces fight the remains of the Taliban and Al Qaeda. In Opération Licorne a force of a few thousand French soldiers is stationed in Ivory Coast on a UN peacekeeping mission. These troops were initially sent under the terms of a mutual protection pact between France and the Ivory Coast, but the mission has since evolved into the current UN peacekeeping operation. The French Armed Forces have also played a leading role in the ongoing UN peacekeeping mission along the Lebanon - Israel border as part of the cease-fire agreement that brought the 2006 Lebanon War to an end. Currently, France has 2,000 army personnel deployed along the border, including infantry, armour, artillery and air defence. There are also naval and air personnel deployed offshore.

The French Joint Force and Training Headquarters (État-Major Interarmées de Force et d'Entraînement) at Air Base 110 near Creil maintains the ability to command a medium or large-scale international operation, and runs exercises. In 2011, from 19 March, France participated in the enforcement of a no-fly zone over northern Libya, during the Libyan Civil war, in order to prevent forces loyal to Muammar Gaddafi from carrying out air attacks on Anti-Gaddafi forces. This operation was known as Opération Harmattan and was part of France's involvement in the conflict in the NATO-led coalition, enforcing UN Security Council Resolution 1973. On 11 January 2013 France begun Operation Serval to fight Islamists in Mali and the Sahal Region with African support but without NATO involvement and launched Operation Barkhane to combat terror in African Sahal from 2014 to 2022.

France participates in several recurring exercises with other nations, including:

In 2023, Exercise Orion, the largest in decades, is to be held in the Champagne-Ardenne region. About 10,000 soldiers are expected to take part, along with the French navy and possibly forces from Belgium, Britain, and the United States.

The head of the French armed forces is the President of the Republic, in his role as chef des armées. However, the Constitution puts civil and military government forces at the disposal of the gouvernement (the executive cabinet of ministers chaired by the Prime Minister, who are not necessarily of the same political side as the president). The Minister of the Armed Forces oversees the military's funding, procurement and operations.

Historically, France relied a great deal on conscription to provide manpower for its military, in addition to a minority of professional career soldiers. Following the Algerian War, the use of non-volunteer draftees in foreign operations was ended; if their unit was called up for duty in war zones, draftees were offered the choice between requesting a transfer to another unit or volunteering for the active mission.

In 1996, President Jacques Chirac 's government announced the end of conscription and in 2001, conscription formally was ended. Young people must still, however, register for possible conscription (should the situation call for it). As of 2017 the French Armed Forces have total manpower of 426,265, and has an active personnel of 368,962 (with the Gendarmerie Nationale).

The reserve element of the French Armed Forces consists of two structures; the Operational Reserve and the Citizens Reserve. As of 2022 the strength of the Operational Reserve is 25,785 personnel.

Apart from the three main service branches, the French Armed Forces also includes a fourth military branch called the National Gendarmerie. It had a reported strength of 103,000 active personnel and 25,000 reserve personnel in 2018. They are used in everyday law enforcement, and also form a coast guard formation under the command of the French Navy. There are however some elements of the Gendarmerie that participate in French external operations, providing specialised law enforcement and supporting roles.

Historically the National Guard functioned as the Army's reserve national defense and law enforcement militia. After 145 years since its disbandment, due to the risk of terrorist attacks in the country, the Guard was officially reactivated, this time as a service branch of the Armed Forces, on 12 October 2016.

Since 2019, young French citizens can fulfill the mandatory service Service national universel (SNU) within the Armed Forces in the service branch of their choice.

Placed under the command of the staffs, the French armed forces include the five service branches, the Army, the National Navy, the Air and Space Force, the National Gendarmerie, and the National Guard, as well as the support services and joint organizations:

In addition, the National Gendarmerie form a Coast Guard force called the Gendarmerie Maritime which is commanded by the French Navy.

The National Gendarmerie is primarily a military and airborne capable police force which serves as a rural and general purpose police force.

Reactivated in 2014, the National Guard serves as the official primary military and police reserve service of the Armed Forces. It is placed under the jurisdiction of Ministry of the Armed Forces and serves as a reserve force. It also doubles as a force multiplier for law enforcement personnel during contingencies and to reinforce military personnel whenever being deployed within France and abroad.

The French Army (French : Armée de terre, lit. ' Land Army ') is the land service branch of the French Armed Forces. The Army is commanded by the Chief of Staff of the French Army (CEMAT), who is subordinate to the Chief of the Defence Staff (CEMA), who in turn is responsible to the President of France. CEMAT is also directly responsible to the Ministry of Armed Forces for administration, preparation and equipment.

The French Army, following the French Revolution, has generally been composed of a mixed force of conscripts and professional volunteers. It is now considered an All-Volunteer Force (or professional) force, since the French Parliament suspended the conscription of soldiers.

The first permanent army of France, which was paid with regular wages instead of being supplied by feudal levies, was established in the early 15th century under Charles VII. It was formed due to the need for reliable troops during the Hundred Years' War. Though, the Army was not disbanded because it saw continued use by the Kings of France following the conflict. Upon the outbreak of a conflict, an ordonnance would be issued to govern the length of service, composition and payment of units.

The Compagnies d'ordonnance formed the core of the Gendarme well into the 16th century, and were stationed throughout France and summoned into larger armies as needed. There was also provisions made for francs-archers, which was a militia of bowmen and foot soldiers raised from the non-noble classes, but the units were disbanded once war ended.

Meanwhile, the bulk of infantry was still provided by urban or provincial militias, which were raised from an area or city to fight locally and that were named for their recruiting grounds. Gradually, the units became more permanent, and in the late 15th century, Swiss instructors were recruited, and some of the 'Bandes' (Militia) were combined to form temporary 'Legions' of up to 9000 men. The men would be paid, contracted to fight and receive military training.

Henry II further regularised the French Army by forming standing infantry regiments to replace the Militia structure. The first of them (Régiments de Picardie, Piémont, Navarre and Champagne) were called Les Vieux Corps (The Old Corps). It was normal policy to disband regiments after a war was over as a cost-saving measure with the Vieux Corps and the French Royal Guard being the only survivors.

Regiments could be raised directly by the King and so be called after the region in which they were raised or by the nobility and so called after the noble or his appointed colonel. When Louis XIII came to the throne, he disbanded most of the regiments in existence, leaving only the Vieux and a handful of others, which became known as the Petite Vieux and also gained the privilege of not being disbanded after a war.

In 1684, there was a major reorganisation of the French infantry and another in 1701 to fit in with Louis XIV 's plans and the War of the Spanish Succession. The reshuffle created many of the modern regiments of the French Army and standardised their equipment and tactics. The army of the Sun King tended to wear grey-white coats with coloured linings. There were exceptions and the foreign troops, recruited from outside France, wore red (Swiss, Irish etc.) or blue (Germans, Scots etc.) while the French Guards wore blue. In addition to the regiments of the line the Maison du Roi provided several elite units, the Swiss Guards, French Guards and the Regiments of Musketeers being the most famous. The white/grey coated French Infantry of the line Les Blancs with their Charleville muskets were a feared foe on the battlefields of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, fighting in the Nine Years' War, the Wars of Spanish and Austrian Succession, the Seven Years' War and the American Revolution.

The French Revolution caused the Army to lose most of its officers to aristocratic flight or the guillotine, and thus it became demoralised and ineffective. The revolutionary militias of Sans-culottes, and the bourgeoise National Guard formed the nucleus of the French Revolutionary Army alongside the remnants of the dissolved Royal French Army ; it was created following the storming of the Tuileries palace, where the French National Guard joined the revolt, the loyal Swiss Guards were massacred and the King was deposed.

From 1792, the Revolutionary Army fought against a combination of European powers in the French Revolutionary Wars, with the state directing most of its industry and population to war efforts, marking the start of modern conscription in the world, it also allowed more flexible military strategies, setting way for Napoleonic warfare. Moreover, many noble officers were retired, decreasing stratification and increasing military specialism. These, and the extreme investments into war efforts allowed France to begin a steady advance into Europe.

Under Napoleon I, the French Imperial Army conquered most of Europe during the Napoleonic Wars. Professionalising again from the Revolutionary forces and using columns of attack with heavy artillery support and swarms of pursuit cavalry the French army under Napoleon and his marshals was able to outmanoeuvre and destroy the allied armies repeatedly until 1812. Napoleon introduced the concept of all arms Corps, each one a traditional army 'in miniature', permitting the field force to be split across several lines of march and rejoin or to operate independently. The Grande Armée operated by seeking a decisive battle with each enemy army and then destroying them in detail before rapidly occupying territory and forcing a peace.

In 1812, Napoleon invaded the Russian Empire with a new Grande Armee, seeking to remove their influence from eastern Europe and secure the frontiers of his empire and client states. The campaign initially went well, but the vast distances of the Russian Steppe and its cold winter forced his army into a shambling retreat preyed on by Russian raids and pursuit. This force could not be replaced and with the "ulcer" of the ongoing war in the Iberian peninsula against Britain and Portugal, the French Army was badly short of trained troops and French manpower was almost exhausted.

After Napoleon's abdication and return, halted by an Anglo-Dutch and Prussian alliance at Waterloo, the French army was placed back under the restored Bourbon Monarchy. The structure remained largely unchanged and many officers of the Empire retained their positions.

The Bourbon restoration was a time of political instability with the country constantly on the verge of political violence. The army was committed to the restoration of Spanish monarchial absolutism in 1824. It achieved its aims in six months, but did not fully withdraw until 1828. By comparison with the earlier Napoleonic invasion, this expedition was rapid and successful.

Taking advantage of the weakness of the local bey, the French invasion of Algiers in 1830 again rapidly overcame initial resistance. The French government formally annexed Algeria but it took nearly 45 years to fully pacify the country. This period of French history saw the creation of the Armée d’Afrique, which included the Légion étrangère. The Army was now uniformed in dark blue coats and red trousers, which it would retain until the First World War.

The news of the fall of Algiers had barely reached Paris in 1830 when the Bourbon Monarchy was overthrown and replaced by the constitutional Orleans Monarchy. During the July 1830 revolution, the Paris mobs proved too much for the troops of the Maison du Roi and the main body of the French Army, sympathetic to the crowds, did not become heavily involved.

In 1848 a wave of revolutions swept Europe and brought an end to the French monarchy. The army was largely uninvolved in the street fighting in Paris which overthrew the King but later in the year troops were used in the suppression of the more radical elements of the new Republic which led to the election of Napoleon's nephew as president.

The Pope had been forced out of Rome as part of the Revolutions of 1848, and Louis Napoleon sent a 14,000 man expeditionary force of troops to the Papal State under General Charles Oudinot to restore him. In late April 1849, it was defeated and pushed back from Rome by Giuseppi Garibaldi 's volunteer corps, but then recovered and recaptured Rome.

The French army was among the first in the world to be issued with Minié rifles, just in time for the Crimean War against Russia, allied with Britain. This invention gave line infantry a weapon with a much longer range and greater accuracy and lead to new flexible tactics. The French army was more experienced at mass manoeuvre and war fighting than the British and the reputation of the French army was greatly enhanced.

A series of colonial expeditions followed and in 1856 France joined the Second Opium War on the British side against China; obtaining concessions. French troops were deployed into Italy against the Austrians, the first use of railways for mass movement.

The French army was now considered to be an example to others and military missions to Japan and the emulation of French Zouaves in other militaries added to this prestige. However, an expedition to Mexico failed to create a stable puppet régime.

France was humiliated following its defeat in the Franco-Prussian War, and while the army had far superior infantry weapons in the form of the Chassepot and Mitrailleuse, its tactics and artillery were inferior, and by allowing the Prussian Army to take the initiative, the French Army was rapidly bottled up into its fortress towns and defeated. The loss of prestige within the army lead to a great emphasis on aggression and close quarter tactics.

In August 1914, following the outbreak of the Great War, the French Armed Forces numbered some 1,300,000 soldiers, and by the end of the war the French Army had called up 8,817,000 men, including 900,000 colonial troops; of these around 1,397,000 French soldiers were killed in action, mostly on the Western Front. French soldiers, at the beginning of the war, still wore the colourful uniforms of the Franco-Prussian War, with this conspicuous dress proving unsuited to the trenches and, accordingly, by 1915 the mostly blue and red peacetime uniforms had been replaced by bleu-horizon (light blue-grey), with the Adrian helmet in place of the kepi. The traditional capote of the French infantry continued to be worn in the trenches but in bleu-horizon. Colonial and North African soldiers adopted khaki uniforms.

In May 1940, at the beginning of World War II 's six-week long Battle of France, the French Army deployed 2,240,000 combatants grouped into 94 divisions (of which 20 were active and 74 were reservists) from the Swiss border to the North Sea.These numbers did not include the Army of the Alps facing Italy or the 600,000 men dispersed through the French colonial empire. After defeat in June 1940, the government of Vichy France was allowed to retain 100–120,000 Armistice Army personnel in the zone libre, as well as larger forces across the French colonial empire: more than 220,000 in Africa (including 140,000 in French North Africa), and forces in Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon and French Indochina. Free French Forces, under the command of Charles de Gaulle, continued the fight with the Allies until the final defeat of the Axis in 1945.

After 1945, despite enormous efforts in the First Indochina War of 1945–54 and the Algerian War of 1954–62, both lands eventually left French control. French units stayed in Germany after 1945, forming the French Forces in Germany. 5th Armored Division stayed on in Germany after 1945, while 1st and 3rd Armoured Divisions were established in Germany in 1951. However NATO -assigned formations were withdrawn to fight in Algeria; 5th Armoured Division arrived in Algeria in April 1956. From 1948 to 1966, many French Army units fell under the integrated NATO Military Command Structure. Commander-in-Chief Allied Forces Central Europe was a French Army officer, and many key NATO staff positions were filled by Frenchmen. While an upper limit of 14 French divisions committed to NATO had been set by the Treaty of Paris, the total did not exceed six divisions during the Indochina War, and during the Algerian War the total fell as low as two divisions.

The Army created two parachute divisions in 1956, the 10th Parachute Division under the command of General Jacques Massu and the 25th Parachute Division under the command of General Sauvagnac. After the Algiers putsch, the two divisions, with the 11th Infantry Division, were merged into a new light intervention division, the 11th Light Intervention Division, on 1 May 1961.

During the Cold War, the French Army, though leaving the NATO Military Command Structure in 1966, planned for the defence of Western Europe. In 1977 the French Army switched from multi-brigade divisions to smaller divisions of about four to five battalions/regiments each. From the early 1970s, 2nd Army Corps was stationed in South Germany, and effectively formed a reserve for NATO's Central Army Group. In the 1980s, 3rd Army Corps headquarters was moved to Lille and planning started for its use in support of NATO's Northern Army Group. The Rapid Action Force of five light divisions, including the new 4th Airmobile and 6th Light Armoured Divisions, was also intended as a NATO reinforcement force. In addition, the 152nd Infantry Division was maintained to guard the S3 intercontinental ballistic missile base on the Plateau d'Albion.

In the 1970s–1980s, two light armoured divisions were planned to be formed from school staffs (the 12th and 14th). The 12th Light Armoured Division (12 DLB) was to have its headquarters to be formed on the basis of the staff of the Armoured and Cavalry Branch Training School at Saumur.

In the late 1970s an attempt was made to form 14 reserve light infantry divisions, but this plan was too ambitious. The planned divisions included the 102nd, the 104th, 107e, 108e, the 109th Infantry Division [ fr ], 110e, 111e, 112e, 114e, 115th, and 127th Infantry Divisions. From June 1984, the French Army reserve consisted of 22 military divisions, administering all reserve units in a certain area, seven brigades de zone de défense, 22 régiments interarmées divisionnaires, and the 152nd Infantry Division, defending the ICBM launch sites. The plan was put into action from 1985, and brigades de zone, such as the 107th Brigade de Zone, were created. But with the putting-in-place of the "Réserves 2000" plan, the brigades de zone were finally disbanded by mid-1993. 1st Army Corps was disbanded on 1 July 1990; 2nd Army Corps in August 1993.

At the end of the Second World War, France was immediately confronted with the beginnings of the decolonisation movement. The French army, which had employed indigenous North African spahis and tirailleurs in almost all of its campaigns since 1830, was the leading force in opposition to decolonization, which was perceived as a humiliation. In Algeria the Army repressed an extensive rising in and around Sétif in May 1945 with heavy fire: figures for Algerian deaths vary between 45,000 as claimed by Radio Cairo at the time and the official French figure of 1,020.

The Army saw maintaining control of Algeria as a high priority. By this time, one million French settlers had established themselves, alongside an indigenous population of nine million. When it decided that politicians were about to sell them out and give independence to Algeria, the Army engineered a military coup that toppled the civilian government and put General de Gaulle back in power in the May 1958 crisis. De Gaulle, however, recognized that Algeria was a dead weight and had to be cut free. Four retired generals then launched the Algiers putsch of 1961 against de Gaulle himself, but it failed. After 400,000 deaths, Algeria finally became independent. Hundreds of thousands of Harkis, Muslims loyal to Paris, went into exile in France, where they and their children and grandchildren remain in poorly assimilated " banlieue " suburbs.

The Army repressed the Malagasy Uprising in Madagascar in 1947. French officials estimated the number of Malagasy killed from a low of 11,000 to a French Army estimate of 89,000.

In February 1996, President Jacques Chirac began the transition of the Army to a professional force, and as part of the resulting changes, ten regiments were dissolved in 1997.

On 1 July 1997, the specialized support brigades were transferred to various communes ; Lunéville for signals, Haguenau for artillery and Strasbourg for engineers. On 1 September 1997, the 2nd Armoured Division left Versailles and was installed at Châlons-en-Champagne in place of the disbanded 10th Armoured Division. On 5 March 1998, in view of the ongoing structural adoptions of the French Army, the Minister of Defence decided to disband III Corps, and the dissolution became effective 1 July 1998. The headquarters transitioned to become Headquarters Commandement de la force d'action terrestre (CFAT) (the Land Forces Action Command).

During the professionalisation process, numbers decreased from the 236,000 (132,000 conscripts) in 1996 to around 140,000. By June 1999, the Army's strength was 186,000, including around 70,000 conscripts. 38 of 129 regiments were planned to be stood down from 1997 to 1999. The previous structure's nine 'small' divisions and sundry separate combat and combat support brigades were replaced by nine combat and four combat support brigades. The Rapid Action Force, a corps of five small rapid-intervention divisions formed in 1983, was also disbanded, though several of its divisions were re-subordinated.

Opération Sentinelle is a French military operation with 10,000 soldiers and 4,700 police and gendarmes deployed since the aftermath of the January 2015 Île-de-France attacks, with the objective of protecting sensitive "points" of the territory from terrorism. It was reinforced during the November 2015 Paris attacks, and was part of a state of emergency in France due to continued terror threats and attacks.

The organisation of the army is fixed by Chapter 2 of Title II of Book II of the Third Part of the Code of Defense, notably resulting in the codification of Decree 2000-559 of 21 June 2000.

In terms of Article R.3222-3 of the Code of Defence, the Army comprises:

The French Army was reorganized in 2014. The new organisation consists of two combined divisions (carrying the heritage of 1st Armored and 3rd Armored divisions) and given three combat brigades to supervise each. There is also the Franco-German Brigade. The 4th Airmobile Brigade was reformed to direct the three combat helicopter regiments. There are also several division-level (niveau divisionnaire) specialized commands including Intelligence, Information and communication systems, Maintenance, Logistics, Special Forces, Army Light Aviation, the Foreign Legion, National Territory, Training.

The Army is divided into arms (armes). They include the Infantry (which includes the Chasseurs Alpins, specialist mountain infantry, the Troupes de Marine, heirs of colonial troops and specialist amphibious troops), the Armoured Cavalry Arm (Arme Blindée Cavalerie), the Artillery, the Engineering Arm (l'arme du génie), Matériel, Logistics (Train) and Signals (Transmissions). Each brigade will have several armes within its units.

The French Foreign Legion was established in 1831 for foreign nationals willing to serve in the French Armed Forces. The Legion is commanded by French officers. It is an elite military unit numbering around 9,000 troops. The Legion has gained worldwide recognition for its service, most recently in Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan since 2001. It is not strictly an Arme but a commandement particulier, whose regiments belong to several arms, notably the infantry and the engineering arm.

The Troupes de marine are the former Colonial Troops. They are the first choice units for overseas deployment and recruit on this basis. They are composed of Marine Infantry (Infanterie de Marine) (which includes parachute regiments such as 1er RPIMa and a tank unit, the Régiment d'infanterie-chars de marine) and the Marine Artillery (Artillerie de Marine).

The Aviation légère de l'armée de Terre (ALAT, which translates as Army Light Aviation), was established on 22 November 1954 for observation, reconnaissance, assault and supply duties. It operates numerous helicopters in support of the French Army, its primary attack helicopter is the Eurocopter Tiger, of which 80 were ordered. It is an Arme with a commandement particulier.

On the administrative side, there are now no more than one Directorate and two services.

The Army Human Resources Directorate (DRHAT) manages human resources (military and civilian) of the Army and training.

The two Services are the service of ground equipment, and the integrated structure of operational maintenance of terrestrial materials (SIMMT, former DCMAT). This joint oriented service is responsible for project management support for all land equipment of the French army. The holding-operational equipment the Army is headed by the Service de maintenance industrielle terrestre (SMITer).

Historically there were other services of the Army who were all grouped together with their counterparts in other components to form joint agencies serving the entire French Armed Forces.

After the health service and the fuel service were both replaced respectively by the French Defence Health service and Military Fuel Service, other services have disappeared in recent years:

The Army Commissariat was dissolved on 31 December 2009 and intégrated into the joint-service Service du commissariat des armées.

There is the Diocese of the French Armed Forces which provides pastoral care to Catholic members of the Army. It is headed by Luc Ravel and is headquartered in Les Invalides.

On 24 July 1873, the French Parliament passed a law which created 18 military regions in metropolitan France. A 19th Army Corps was created in Algeria in September 1873 (see Région militaire). In 1905, the strength of the Troupes coloniales stationed in the 19 military districts of metropolitan France was reported at 2,123 officers and 26,581 other ranks. In 1946, following the Second World War ten military regions were created or recreated, in accordance with a decree of 18 February 1946. They included the 1st (Paris); 2e (Lille); 3e (Rennes); 4e (Bordeaux); 5e (Toulouse); 6e (Metz); 7e (Dijon); 8th (Lyon); the 9th (Marseille), and the 10th in Algeria. The 10th Military Region (France) supervised French Algeria during the Algerian War.

The Défense opérationnelle du territoire supervised reserve and home defence activities from 1959 to the 1970s. However, by the 1980s the number had been reduced to six: the 1st Military Region (France) with its headquarters in Paris, the 2nd Military Region (France) at Lille, the 3rd Military Region (France) at Rennes, the 4th Military Region (France) at Bordeaux, the 5th at Lyons and the 6th at Metz. Each supervised up to five division militaire territoriale – military administrative sub-divisions, in 1984 sometimes supervising up to three reserve regiments each. Today, under the latest thorough reform of the French security and defence sector, there are seven Zone de défense et de sécurité each with a territorial ground army region: Paris (or Île-de-France, HQ in Paris), Nord (HQ in Lille), Ouest (HQ in Rennes), Sud-Ouest (HQ in Bordeaux), Sud (HQ in Marseille), Sud-Est (HQ in Lyon), Est (HQ in Strasbourg).

As of 2020, the French Army employed 118,600 personnel; this includes the 9,000-strong French Foreign Legion and 8,500-strong Paris Fire Brigade. In addition, the reserves of the French Army consist of 25,000 personnel.

Enlistment contracts for French army soldiers can range from a one to a five-year contract, which are all renewable. Meanwhile, Non-commissioned officers serve on permanent contracts, or exceptionally on renewable five years-contracts. Though NCO candidates are required to have a high school diploma that grants them access to university. École Nationale des Sous-Officiers d’Active (ENSOA), Basic NCO school of 8 months, followed by combat school of 4 to 36 weeks depending on occupational specialty. A small number of NCO candidates are trained at the Ecole Militaire de Haute Montagne (EMHM) (High Mountain Military School). NCOs with the Advanced Army Technician Certificate (BSTAT) can serve as platoon leaders.

All Career officers serve on permanent contracts, with direct entry cadets with two years of Classe préparatoire aux grandes écoles or a bachelor's degree spend three years at École Spéciale Militaire de Saint-Cyr (ESM), and graduate as First Lieutenants. Direct entry cadets with a master's degree spend one year at ESM, and graduate as First Lieutenants. Non-commissioned officers with three years in the army, spend two years at École militaire interarmes, and graduate as First Lieutenants. 50% of the commissioned officers in the French Army are former NCOs.

Contract officers serve on renewable contracts for a maximum of 20 years service. A bachelor's degree is required. There are two different programs, combat officers and specialist officers. Officers in both programs graduate as Second Lieutenants and may reach Lieutenant Colonels rank. Combat officers spend eight months at ESM, followed by one year at a combat school. Specialist officers spend three months at ESM, followed by a year of on the job-training within an area of specialization determined by the type of degree held.

Civilian women were hired by the French army in the First World War, thereby opening new opportunities for them, forcing a redefinition of military identity, and revealing the strength of anti-Republicanism within the Army. Officers by the 1920s accepted women as part of their institution.

In 1999, the Army issued the Code of the French Soldier, which includes the injunctions:

Mastering his own strength, he respects his opponent and is careful to spare civilians. He obeys orders while respecting laws, customs of war and international conventions. (...) He is aware of global societies and respects their differences.

The rank insignia of commissioned officers.

The rank insignia of non-commissioned officers and enlisted personnel.

In the 1970s, France adopted a light beige dress uniform which is worn with coloured kepis, sashes, fringed epaulettes, fourragères and other traditional items on appropriate occasions. The most commonly worn parade dress, however, consists of camouflage uniforms worn with the dress items noted above. The camouflage pattern, officially called Camouflage Centre Europe (CE), draws heavily on the colouration incorporated into the US M81 woodland pattern, but with a thicker and heavier striping. A desert version called the Camouflage Daguet has been worn since the Gulf War which consists of large irregular areas of chestnut brown and light grey on a sand khaki base.

The legionnaires of the Foreign Legion wear white kepis, blue sashes, and green and red epaulettes as dress uniform, while the Troupes de marine wear blue and red kepis and yellow epaulettes. The pioneers of the Foreign Legion wear the basic legionnaire uniform but with leather aprons and gloves. The Chasseurs Alpins wear a large beret, known as the "tarte" (the pie) with dark blue or white mountain outfits. The Spahis retain the long white cloak or " burnous " of the regiment's origin as North African cavalry.

The military cadets of Saint-Cyr and the École Polytechnique retain their late 19th century dress uniforms. A dark blue/black evening dress is authorized for officers and individual branches or regiments may parade bands or "fanfares" in historic dress dating as far back as the Napoleonic period.

The French ban on face covering is the result of an act of parliament passed in 2010 banning the wearing of face-covering headgear, including masks, helmets, balaclavas, niqābs and other veils covering the face, and full body costumes and zentais (skin-tight garments covering entire body) in public places, except under specified circumstances. This ban does not apply to the hijab, as it does not cover the face. The ban does apply to the burqa, a full-body covering. In April 2011, France became the first European country to impose a ban on full-face veils (among other face covering clothes) in public areas.

Public debate exacerbated concerns over immigration, nationalism, secularism, security, and sexuality. Arguments supporting this proposal include that face coverings prevent the clear identification of a person (which may be a security risk, or a social hindrance within a society which relies on facial recognition and expression in communication), that the alleged forcing of women to cover their faces is sexist, and that Muslims who continue this practice should be forced to assimilate into traditional French social norms. Arguments against include that the ban encroaches on individual freedoms, and that it discriminates against interpretations of Islam that require or encourage women to wear face coverings, that it takes away the choice of women to decide whether to dress according to a particular standard of modesty, and prevents anonymity in situations where it might be socially or personally desirable. Opponents accused President Nicolas Sarkozy of fostering Islamophobia and using the law for political gain. Some researchers posited that the ban "reduces the secondary educational attainment of Muslim girls and affects their trajectory in the labor market and family composition in the long run" as well as reducing the "social integration of Muslim women into French society".

As of 11 April 2011, it was illegal to wear a face-covering veil or other masks in public spaces. Veils, scarves, and other headwear that do not cover the face are unaffected by this law. The law imposes a fine of up to €150, and/or participation in citizenship education, for those who violate the law. The bill also penalises, with a fine of €30,000 and one year in prison, anyone who forces (by violence, threats, or abuse of power) another to wear face coverings; these penalties may be doubled if the victim is under the age of 18.

As a result of the law, the only exception to someone wearing a face-covering cloth in public will be if they are travelling in a private car or worshiping in a religious place. French police say that while there are five million Muslims in France, fewer than 2,000 are thought to fully cover their faces with a veil. The wearing of all conspicuous religious symbols in public schools was previously banned in 2004 by a different law, the French law on secularity and conspicuous religious symbols in public schools. This affected the wearing of Islamic veils and headscarves in schools, as well as turbans and other distinctive items of dress.

The law was challenged and taken to the European Court of Human Rights which upheld the French law on 1 July 2014, accepting the argument of the French government that the law was based on "a certain idea of living together". In October 2018, the United Nations Human Rights Committee found that France's ban disproportionately harmed the right of two women [plaintiffs] to manifest their religious beliefs, and could have the effects of "confining them to their homes, impeding their access to public services and marginalizing them."

Amid the COVID-19 pandemic, there was some controversy over whether the use of face masks in response was compatible with the ban on face coverings although it was clarified that it was, under the existing exceptions for health and safety.

Initial instances of the French government's actions towards a full face covering ban can be traced back to the " Scarf Affair " of 1989. Under this law, hijabs were no longer allowed to be worn in French public schools. Permission was granted to school administrators to declare when this law was being violated by students. Lack of adherence to the bill led to the adaption of a nationwide and religiously consistent plan.

The Law of Secularity and Conspicuous Religious Symbols in Schools was passed in September 2004. This law stated all religious items could no longer be worn in public schools including but not limited to: kippahs, Catholic crosses, and Muslim religious attire. Despite covering all religions, the law seemed to unevenly target Muslim individuals.

The French Parliament began an initial inquiry on the issue shortly after President Nicolas Sarkozy stated in June 2009 that religious face veils were "not welcome" within France. Sarkozy had stated that the law is to protect women from being forced to cover their faces and to uphold France's secular values. A poll carried out by Pew Research Center leading up to the vote indicated that 80% of French voters supported the ban. It was estimated that about 2,000 women wore the head coverings to be banned by this bill.

In 2010, the Belgian lower house of parliament approved a bill to ban facial coverings, but this was not voted into law as the Belgian government fell before the Senate could vote on it. As of 2010, when the French law was being debated, partial bans were being discussed in the Netherlands and Spain; bans had been announced locally in Italy but later declared unconstitutional, leading to a national law being proposed; and public debate on the issue was starting in Austria, while Germany, the United Kingdom and Switzerland did not consider legislation, although in the UK, directives had been issued leaving the issue to the discretion of school directors and magistrates.

Fadela Amara, who had recently served as a junior minister in the French government and is a Muslim, had previously declared: "The veil is the visible symbol of the subjugation of women, and therefore has no place in the mixed, secular spaces of France's state school system."

These actions taken by the government stem from the long history of separation between Church and state experienced in France. Established in 1905, Laïcité, the French term for separation of church and state governs that no religion can influence government affairs and policies. Anastasia Comobiso writes regarding the topic, "The State abolishes the particular rights granted to institutions or religious congregations, and confines religion itself to personal and private subjectivity". Muslim face coverings, according to the French government, hinder universal women's rights and threaten the safety of the public.

The bill was passed by the National Assembly by a vote of 335–1. The sole vote against the ban in the National Assembly was cast by Daniel Garrigue, who warned that "to fight an extremist behavior, we risk slipping toward a totalitarian society." It was passed by the Senate by a vote of 246–1, with 100 abstentions. The bill prohibits the wearing of face coverings in public places and also applies to foreign tourists visiting France. The law imposes a fine of up to €150, and/or participation in citizenship education, for those who violate the law. The bill also penalises, with a fine of €30,000 and one year in prison, anyone who forces (by violence, threats or by abuse of power) another to wear face coverings; these penalties may be doubled if the victim is under the age of 18. The Constitutional Council of France declared the ban constitutionally valid on 7 October 2010, clearing the final legal obstacle for the law, but the law was designed to come into force after the elapse of six months from the day of its publication in the Journal Officiel.

Article 2 of the law provides that "The prohibition provided for in Article 1 does not apply if the attire is prescribed or authorized by legislative or regulatory provisions [for example a motorcycle helmet], if it is justified for health or professional reasons, or if it is part of sporting activities, parties or artistic or traditional events." Consequently, wearing surgical masks in public, widely practiced during the COVID-19 pandemic, is authorized by this statute.

Dalil Boubakeur, the grand mufti of the Paris Mosque, the largest and most influential in France, testified to parliament during the bill's preparation. He commented that the niqāb was not prescribed in Islam, that in the French and contemporary context its spread was associated with radicalisation and criminal behavior, and that its wearing was inconsistent with France's concept of the secular state ; but that due to expected difficulties in applying a legal ban, he would prefer to see the issue handled "case by case". Mohammed Moussaoui, the president of the French Council of the Muslim Faith, opposed using a law but favored discouraging Muslim women from wearing the full veil.

Abroad, in July 2010, hundreds of Muslims protested against the bill in Karachi, Pakistan. The chief of the Pakistan-based Jamaat-e-Islami Party demanded that the UN take immediate action against France. Nasharudin Mat Isa, leader of the Pan-Malaysian Islamic Party, said that the ban had made Muslims around the world angry but stated that he hoped that it would not provoke any terrorist incidents.

Abdel Muti al-Bayyumi, a member of the council of clerics at Al-Azhar Mosque in Cairo, Egypt, applauded the ban and stated that the niqāb has no basis in Sharia. He also said: "I want to send a message to Muslims in France and Europe. The niqab has no basis in Islam. I used to feel dismayed when I saw some of the sisters (in France) wearing the niqab. This does not give a good impression of Islam." Yusuf al Qaradawi, another prominent Egyptian Islamic scholar, stated that in his view "the niqab is not obligatory" while criticizing France for violating the freedom of those Muslim women who hold the view that it is and criticizing France in that "they allow other women to freely dress in a revealing and provocative manner".

Hamza Yusuf criticized the French government for the ban, writing:

While I am personally opposed to the face veil, it is a legitimate, if minority opinion, in the Islamic legal tradition for a woman to wear one. Most women who wear it believe they are following God's injunction and not their husband's. French laicism seems as fundamentalist as the very religious fanatics it wants to keep out. On a trip to France a few years ago, I was shocked to see pornography openly displayed on the streets in large advertisements. How odd that to unveil a woman for all to gape at is civilized, but for her to cover up to ward off gazes is a crime... While the French Prime Minister sees no problem with exposing in public places a woman's glorious nakedness, he is oddly and quite rabidly disturbed by allowing others to cover it up. The sooner secular nations learn to allow people of faith to live their lives in peace, the sooner peace will flourish.

Amnesty International condemned the passage of the bill in the Assembly as a violation of the freedom of expression of those women who wear the burqa or niqab.

RTBF columnist François De Smet responded that this could not be considered a matter of freedom of expression or even religion since face coverings are but a relic of tribal tradition; that it is face coverings that amount to a violation of the freedom of expression as they block the exchange of facial expressions which as Emmanuel Levinas pointed out are the basis for a moral participation in society; and that the neurotic search for purity that motivates facial coverings ultimately represents the "radical rejection of others" and conveys contempt for others who are not deemed worthy of sharing the wearer's facial expressions.

Individuals who continue to battle the legislation argue this law infringes on the human rights of women, possibly even further discriminating against them. Hebah Ahmed, a female Muslim activist, stated when asked about the topic, "I think that it's a bad idea because I think it's yet another example of men telling women how to dress, how to live their life. It's another way to try to control women. And to take it to a government level and to try to legislate the way that a woman dresses is not just wrong and against human rights, but it really violates the whole basis [of] democracy".

Hassen Chalghoumi, a notable imam of the mosque in Drancy near Paris who had earlier received death threats and seen his religious service interrupted by Islamists because he supported dialog with the French Jewish community, later expressed support for the ban. He stated that the full facial covering "has no place in France, a country where women have been voting since 1945" and that "the burqa is a prison for women, a tool of sexist domination and Islamist indoctrination".

In October 2010, Osama bin Laden accused France of preventing "free women from wearing the burqa" in a released recording. The ban against the face covering veil is a frequent theme in publications linked to Salafi jihadist organisations such as Al-Qaeda and the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.

The legislators provided that, once the law was declared constitutional, a six-month period for discussion and education of the affected public would follow before the law came into force. In a program overseen by the Muslim women-led Ni Putes Ni Soumises, NGO representatives and social workers conducted individual and group information meetings with women in towns and suburbs with large Muslim populations. The representatives reported instances of some women deciding to file complaints against their husbands once informed of their rights; of some others stating that they were waiting for the law to come into force so that it would compel their husbands to release them from wearing the veil; and of some others stopping the wearing of the facial veil outright after the information meetings. While no disturbances were reported during the personal meetings with the women who could be reached, the representatives reported instances of local Islamic clerics issuing fatwās against them, of being verbally harassed, of being threatened including with implied death threats, and in one case of being physically assaulted by men. In the last preparatory phase, larger meetings and public debates were organised.

Before the law entered into force, French Interior Minister Claude Guéant instructed the police to enforce the law "with tact and sensitivity", and stated that under no circumstances could force be used to remove facial coverings in public; individuals should instead be invited to show their faces to permit identification. Guéant also instructed that people arrested for wearing full facial coverings should be told about the law's motivations in a spirit of education, as the law provides.

On 22 September 2011, Hind Ahmas and Najate Nait Ali became the first women to be fined under the burqa ban after having been arrested in May for attempting to deliver an almond cake to the mayor of Meaux (a supporter of the ban) whilst wearing niqabs (the French word for fine, amende, is similar in sound to almond.) They were fined 120 and 80 euros, respectively. Hind Ahmas announced her intention to take the case to the European Court of Human Rights. Kenza Drider announced her intention to run for the presidency whilst wearing a niqab.

Some balaclava -wearing sympathisers of Pussy Riot were arrested in Marseille in August 2012 for being in breach of the ban. In 2013, they stood outside Elysée Palace in niqab and subsequently received a criminal conviction. The French criminal courts noted in 2014 that the lower court was wrong to dismiss her rights covered under article 18 but dismissed her appeal. The French delegation argued that wearing face coverings violated the principle of "living together". Judges Nußberger and Jäderblom dissented, calling the concept, "far-fetched and vague." Going on to note that the very decision of declaring what a woman is allowed to wear was hypocritical and antithetical to the aim of protecting human rights. The committee came to the determination in 2018 that the case had been incorrectly dismissed after review by a single judge on the grounds that, "the conditions of admissibility laid down in articles 34 and 35 of the Convention [had] not been met." Upon review the committee concluded that the applicants's human rights had been violated under article 18 and 26 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The committee dismissed the notion of "living together" as a vague notion not protected under international law. Under the Optional Protocol, the government of France has been given opportunity to respond before the committee finalises their decision.

On 9 April 2011, 61 people were arrested in Paris for holding an unauthorized demonstration against the impending law.

The law came into effect on 11 April 2011. To protest the law's introduction several veiled women protested outside Notre Dame de Paris. One of the protestors, Kenza Drider, stated that she was "just expressing [her] freedom to be." The French government stated that the burqa damaged community relations. Supporters of the bill also stated that it promoted gender equality and secularism.

Police unions said in a statement that the enforcement of the law would be "extremely difficult... if not almost impossible". Interior Minister Claude Guéant pointed out that notwithstanding any implementation difficulties "the role of the police and gendarmerie are to ensure that the law is respected." In fact, there were no publicized enforcement problems at the outset. The few demonstrators being arrested on the first day were brought in for discussion, as planned by the Interior Ministry and as consistent with the law's provision for citizenship education in lieu of a fine, and the first fines were imposed subsequently "without incident".

As of 2011, five months after the law came into effect, the police had noted 100 incidents of women being stopped under the law. None of them led to a punishment, though "fewer than 10" were going through the courts. Some police have wrongly given on-the-spot fines, which were later annulled. French Collective against Islamophobia reported an increase in the number of physical attacks on women wearing the niqab. Hind Ahmas, a protester against the law, was twice arrested for wearing a niqab.

Some law enforcement officers have complained of being attacked, physically while enforcing the law and then afterward in the media's portrayal. In July 2013, a husband allegedly attempted to strangle a police officer during a check of an entirely-veiled woman in Trappes and the next night a group of 250 youths threw projectiles at a police station. Clashes continued the following night and spread to Élancourt and Guyancourt.

In the Mirail district of Toulouse in April 2018, police asked a woman to remove her face covering veil so she could be identified, but she refused and while being taken into the police vehicle started screaming. The French article states that a video recording of the event circulated social media showing the woman being beaten by police. Shortly thereafter, about 30 individuals assaulted the police officers by throwing objects at them. The officers responded with tear gas and stun grenades and had to use their weapons 18 times before being able to leave. Later the same night, there was further rioting associated with this incident in the Renerie and Bellefontaine districts of Toulouse where 11 vehicles were set afire.

On 23 October 2018, the United Nations Human Rights Committee published a statement coming down against France for human rights violations. The committee was responding to two complaints about women being prosecuted for wearing clothing that violated the French ban on face coverings. This was a landmark case for the UN Human Rights Committee seeing as it was the first case by the committee to address the Islamic veil. The committee concluded that France had not provided a strong enough reason for its ban on face veiling. France had initially argued that it was a necessary law in order for their community to better coexist and live in harmony. The UN committee disagreed with this reasoning. Further, the UN committee believed that the ban would strip away the rights of veiled women by ostracizing them from the French community. Following the UN statement, France has 180 days to respond with what steps they are taking to change their law.

Since then, the French Senate has proposed a ban on mothers wearing headscarves when accompanying their children on school field trips. Jean-Michel Blanquer came out in staunch opposition to a pamphlet produced by a French parents association for including the photo of a mother wearing a headscarf. Blanquer has also expressed that the heads of schools should discourage the inclusion of mothers who choose to wear the headscarf, invoking the argument of France's strong secularism. The ban was approved by the French parliament's upper house but rejected in the lower house in May 2019.

According to a paper by Friedman and Merle published in Feminist Media Studies, the French news coverage was overall unifying in presenting a narrative of France's identity as a secular nation that respects religious freedom but controls its public expression. Coverage invoked republican values, legacy societal principles, and legislative approval. Very few newspapers offered perspectives that criticized the law. Women who would be directly impacted by the ban were rarely quoted as sources in news coverage.

Legal bans on face covering in public exist also in different other states worldwide:

The French bicycle industry and the history of the bicycle are intertwined. Spanning the last century and a half, the industry has seen two booms, and continues into the 21st century, albeit less dominant today.

To most the invention of the bicycle was by the German Baron Karl von Drais, who rode his 1816 machine while collecting taxes from his tenants. He patented his "draisine" (or "draisienne"), a "pushbike" powered by the action of the rider's feet pushing against the ground.

Reports of early forebears of the bicycle were velocipedes, and included many human-powered vehicles. One, the scooter-like dandy horse or celerifere of the French Comte de Sivrac, dating to 1790, was long cited as the earliest bicycle, however, most historians now believe these unsteerable hobby-horses probably never existed, but were made up by Louis Baudry de Saunier, a 19th-century French bicycle historian.

In the 1860s, the Michaux family, Parisian coach builders, developed a new drive mechanism, placing pedals and cranks on an enlarged wooden front wheel with iron tires, which was mounted on a heavy steel frame. The credit for their innovative crank and pedals remains in dispute. Pierre Lallement, a Michaux mechanic, claimed to have collaborated with Ernest Michaux, while Henry Michaux told in March 1893 in the newspaper L'Éclair how his brother Ernest, together with their father Pierre have developed the idea in 1861 after modifying a draisine brought for repairs. The design was an adaptation of the crank-handles the two inventors had seen on a grinding wheel. In any event, Pierre Michaux's factory started producing crank-and-pedal driven velocipedes : two the first year, 142 the following year.

Perhaps owing to dispute over the invention, in 1865 Lallement emigrated to The United States, where, with the financial backing of James Carroll of Ansonia, Connecticut, he recorded the first U.S. patent on a bicycle, in 1866. Meanwhile, by 1865, the Michaux family was manufacturing 400 velocipedes annually; their bicycles were on display at the first international bicycle exhibition in 1867, and by 1869, the Michaux factory, with a daily production of 200, began selling in the United States. Their wood and iron construction earned these velocipedes the sobriquet Boneshakers. The first boneshaker race was in 1868, in Paris' Parc de Saint Cloud ; the winner was James Moore, a friend of the Michaux family. Moore also won the 123 km Paris–Rouen race in 1869, finishing in 10 hours and 40 minutes.

However, tensions between France and Prussia building since the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 erupted into the Franco-Prussian War in 1870, and production of bicycles at Michaux was suspended to support the war effort. As a result, the next innovations occurred in Great Britain. Prior to the Franco-Prussian war, the Michaux family had reached an agreement with Rowley B. Turner of the Coventry Sewing Machine Company to manufacture 400 Michaux velocipedes to be sold in France. With the war, Turner arranged instead to sell them in England. James Starley, a foreman at Coventry, began to make improvements and in 1885, the Starley Rover, a "safety bicycle" manufactured by Starley's nephew, John Kemp Starley, was the first recognisably modern bicycle.

The Michaux-Perreaux steam velocipede, developed by 1867 and issued a US patent in 1872, is commonly known as the first ever motorcycle. It is plain to see that it derives from The Michaux muscle-powered velocipede.

While the bicycle was popular among wealthy young men in cities such as London, New York City, and Paris, Starley's safety bicycle ushered in the " golden age of bicycles. " A bicycle craze swept Europe and North America during the Gay Nineties ; suddenly, the bicycle was safe, affordable, and available for transport and leisure for the ordinary person. Although France was swept up in the craze, production remained centered in England and the United States. However, the seeds were sown for the rebirth of the French industry.

In 1876 Clément Cycles was started by its eponym, Adolphe Clément-Bayard. Also founded in 1876 was the Société Parisienne.

In 1881, Paul de Vivie, a man of twenty-eight, bought his first bicycle, an ordinary. By 1887, de Vivie decided to devote his attention to his avocation ; he sold his business, and moved to Saint-Étienne, where he opened a bicycle shop and started a magazine, Le Cycliste. Velocio, as de Vivie was known, began to import bicycles from Coventry; within two years, however, he had begun to produce his own bicycles. His 1889 La Gauloise was the first bicycle produced in France.

In 1882 Cycles Peugeot was born, the fruit of Armand Peugeot and his brothers, who worked for the family firm then called Peugeot Frères Aînés (PFA). PFA exhibited a steam-powered tricycle at the 1889 World Fair in Paris. By 1892 the company was called Les Fils de Peugeot Frères, but friction developed between the brothers and in 1896 Armand created Société Anonyme des Automobiles Peugeot which would go on to become the largest car manufacturer in France, producing 10,000 cars per year by the dawn of the First World War.

The Hurtu company was founded in 1880 as Hurtu, Hautin et Diligeon as a maker of sewing machines and soon added machine tools and bicycles to their range. The Hurtu name was continued by Diligeon and company and successfully pioneered French automobiles from 1896.

Charles Terrot and Wilhelm Stücklen had founded a machinery factory in Cannstatt in 1862, and Terrot added a branch factory in Dijon in 1887. In 1890 the Dijon factory added bicycles to its products. The same year, the Manufacture d'Articles Vélocipediques Idoux et Chanel (MAVIC), started by Charles Idoux and Lucien Chanel, was formed for the manufacture and the sale of spare parts for bicycles.

In 1889, two brothers, Édouard Michelin (1859–1940) and André Michelin (1853–1931), ran a farm implement business in Clermont-Ferrand, France. One day, a cyclist whose pneumatic tyre needed repair turned up at the factory. The tyre was glued to the rim, and it took over three hours to remove and repair the tyre, which then needed to be left overnight to dry. The next day, Édouard Michelin took the repaired bicycle into the factory yard to test. After only a few hundred metres, the tyre failed. Despite the setback, Édouard was enthusiastic about the pneumatic tyre, and he and his brother worked on creating their own version, one that did not need to be glued to the rim. Michelin was incorporated on 28 May 1889. In 1891 Michelin took out its first patent for a removable pneumatic tyre which was used by Charles Terront to win the world's first long-distance cycle race, the 1891 Paris–Brest–Paris.

In 1891 Cycles Gladiator was found by Alexandre Darracq and Paul Aucoq. In 1896 Adolphe Clément, holder of the extremely profitable manufacturing rights for Dunlop tyres in France, joined with a syndicate led by Dunlop Rubber 's founder Harvey Du Cros to buy out Gladiator. The merger formed a major bicycle manufacturing conglomerate: Clément, Gladiator & Humber & Co Limited. The range of cycles was expanded with tricycles, quadricycles, and in 1902 a motorised bicycle, then cars and motorcycles.

French bicycle manufacturers have included:

French bicycle component manufacturers have included:

French chocolate is chocolate produced in France. France is considered the "home of dark chocolate ", and French chocolate has a smooth texture and is characterised by its dark roast flavour.

Anne of Austria, the daughter of the Spanish King Philip III, is often attributed as introducing chocolate to France in 1615 despite a lack of contemporary documentation. Other figures that have been speculated to have introduced or popularised chocolate in France include Cardinal Richelieu, who used it as a medicine, and Marie Thérèse upon marrying Louis XIV in 1660. In 1643 chocolate was being written about in France as a "foreign drug". Chocolate gained popularity in elevated social circles around the 1650s and 1660s.

Production has historically been associated with the city of Bayonne. During the 18th century, the French emphasized cacao quality in making chocolate. Chocolate recipes commonly included vanilla, which was twice as common in French recipes for chocolate at this time than British recipes. During the 19th century, chocolate in French society was considered simultaneously a health food and being potentially dangerous. Chocolate gained importance in confectionery during the 19th century. The combined use of the mélangeur and roller mills allowed the production of a smooth chocolate, particularly suitable for eating. During the second half of the 19th century, France was the second largest consumer of chocolate behind only Spain. French assortments dominated the confectionery market until the appearance of milk chocolate in 1890s.

As of 1988, French consumers generally ate milk chocolate from family businesses. What constituted a French taste in chocolate was unclear, and the French ate less chocolate than other Europeans. Chocolate was strongly associated with gift giving on specific seasons, social occasions and ceremonies. While aficionados maintained that dark chocolate was superior, among the public distinctions in chocolate were not made, and artisanal chocolatiers were not distinguished as a craft from pastry chefs. Foreign firms mass-producing chocolate emulated French merchandising and had captured 48% of the confectionery gift market by 1989. To receive advanced training, chocolatiers had to travel to Switzerland and Belgium. Parisian craft leaders and local chocolatiers appealed to officials for authenticating French artisans and their methods and products.

During the 1990s, chocolatiers institutionalized a craft identity, codifying a taste standard borrowed from wine connoisseurship, based on dark chocolate. Chocolate makers appropriated symbols from Aztec, local and national histories to create a French chocolate identity. In 1995, the Salon du Chocolat opened, attracting 40,000 visitors with exhibits of chocolate making and an haute fashion show. In 1998, the Académie française du Chocolat et de la Confiserie was formed to codify correct linguistic use.

By 2000, French chocolate was considered culturally authentic and gourmet in French society. A trend of consumers choosing chocolate for their high cocoa percentages and bean origins and varieties. By 2008, the French were among the highest consumers of chocolate. As of 2014, the Salon du Chocolat 's fashion show was still being exhibited. The Festival of Gourmet Art also continued, which featured chocolate accessories and paintings. Chocolate makers and consumers were interested in sourcing high-quality, single-origin beans. Firms such as Valrhona moved to bean-to-bar production, cultivating relationships with small producers.

French chocolate's flavour is a dark roast, with a smooth texture. The use of milk fat rather than chocolate crumb in French milk chocolate gives it a different flavour to chocolates manufactured in countries such as the United Kingdom.

As of 2008, the Confederation of artisinal chocolate and sugar candy producers (Confédération des Chocolatiers et Confiseurs de France) was an industry group for chocolatiers in France. As of 2024, France levied a 5.5% VAT on dark chocolate and a 20% VAT on white chocolate.

In 1990, the Ministry of Education approved requests to organize the first Meilleur Ouvrier de France (Best Craftsman of France) competition in the chocolate and candy making category.

Chocolatier involvement in the Best Craftsman of France competition requires high time, social and financial investment for success. This has led to a consolidation of the industry in heirs of successful chocolatiers.

As of 2014, chocolate was officially omitted as an element of French gastronomy.

The French civil service (French : Fonction publique française) is the set of civil servants (fonctionnaires) working the Government of France.

Not all employees of the state and public institutions or corporations are civil servants; however, the media often incorrectly equate "government employee" or "employee of a public corporation" with fonctionnaire. For instance, most employees of the RATP and SNCF (metropolitan and national rail transport authorities) are not civil servants. The Civil Service is also sometimes incorrectly referred to as the administration, but, properly speaking, the administration is the compound of public administrations and public administrative establishments, not their employees.

Most employment positions in the French civil service are open to citizens of the European Union. Others, especially in police and justice, are specifically reserved for nationals, while a minority are open regardless of citizenship. About half of the civil servants are employed in the French public education system.

Technically, fonction publique may also refer to fonction publique militaire, the personnel of military status. They are generally counted apart. There also exist ouvriers d'État (State Workers) - that is, blue collar workers - for industrial functions.

Civil servants of the State are divided into corps ("professions"). Corps are grouped in 3 categories (formerly 4): category A for management, design, and general studies professions (e.g. judges, engineers, professors...); category B for applications-related professions (e.g. librarians, superior technicians...); and category C for executions-related professions (e.g. technicians, administrative assistants...). Each corps has a set of possible job or task descriptions and may have its own particular statutes. The categories A, B and C are hierarchical classifications based on the level of responsibility, education and remuneration of civil servants. Category A (minimum college level) concerns design and management functions; category B (university entrance qualificationl) applies to application and drafting functions, and category C (high school level) applies to implementation functions. Other French Civil Services have different organisations; for instance the Territorial Civil Service (Fonction Publique Territoriale) is not divided between rigid "corps" but between " cadre d'emplois " (lit. employment framework). In the French Armed Forces, commissioned officers belong to category A, non-commissioned officers to category B, and troops to category C.

These corps may themselves be divided into ranks (grades, called classes in certain corps). For instance, the corps of university professors is a category A corps divided into 3 classes: second class (equivalent to an American associate professor), first class (full professor), exceptional class (leading full professor in their area). Generally, to avoid rank inflation, the number of civil servants in the higher ranks (especially "exceptional class") is constrained by a maximal percentage of the total number of civil servants of the corps.

Certain corps enjoying particular prestige are called the " grands corps de l'État " (lit. major state corps)

High-level administrative positions are typically paid much less than the equivalent positions in private industries. However, members of grand Corps often practice pantouflage — that is, they take temporarily (and sometimes permanent) leave from government work and go work in industry. Occasionally, people from a ministry supervising some industry would later go to work in that same industry; this practice was later prohibited. Pantouflage however still exists, and the coziness between some industrial, political and administrative circles is regularly denounced.

Members of the great administrative corps are well represented in politics. This is facilitated by civil servants (of any level) being able to exercise elected office on a temporary leave (détachement) from government.

Civil servants have duties; failure to carry them out may result in disciplinary action, up to discharge. The main duties are:

A civil servant should devote their full professional activity to their appointed task. By exception, a civil servant may in addition to their regular activities write books; they may also accomplish certain tasks (teaching...) with the permission of their hierarchical supervisor.

One cannot be a civil servant if one has been convicted of a crime incompatible with one's functions.

In certain exceptional cases, certain aspects of the private life of a civil servant may be termed incompatible with their functions. For instance, it is inappropriate for a member of the police or the judiciary to live with a delinquent partner or a prostitute. Appreciation of what is appropriate or not is largely a matter of case law.

A civil servant should not, by their actions and especially by their declarations, cause harm to institutions.

Generally speaking, a civil servant should always refrain from enunciating personal opinions in a manner that can be construed as expressing the official opinion of the French government or a public institution. Obviously, this is more of a matter for the higher managerial positions. Agents operating abroad should be especially prudent. For instance, an ambassador should refrain from making any private comment on international issues.

The academic freedom of university professors is a principle recognized (in theory) by the laws of the Republic, as defined by the Constitutional Council ; furthermore, statute law declares about higher education that "teachers-researchers [university professors and lecturers], researchers and teachers are fully independent and enjoy full freedom of speech in the course of their research and teaching activities, provided they respect, following university traditions and the dispositions of this code, principles of tolerance and objectivity ".

A civil servant must accomplish the orders given by their hierarchical supervisor, unless those orders are evidently illegal and contrary to public interest.

While the hierarchical authority is normally responsible for assigning civil servants to positions and evaluating their work, certain corps of civil servants follow specific rules regarding the management, evaluation and discipline of their members. For instance, professors and researchers are evaluated by elected committees of their peers. Furthermore, judges of the judiciary (magistrats du siège) as well as administrative magistrates cannot be removed from their position, even for a promotion, without their agreement.

Civil servants must not reveal private or secret information that they have gained in the course of their duties. Depending on a civil servant's corps, this obligation may be of varying intensity : while administrative magistrates are formally discouraged from making their profession in non-professional works and opinions, members of the military are expected to maintain a very high standard of discretion. This restraint on the side of the military has even led it to being nicknamed " the great mute " (" la grande muette ").

Civil servants must not use the means at their professional disposal for private gain.

Civil servant must be neutral with respect to the religious or political opinions, origin, or sex, and should refrain from expressing their own opinions.

Most positions are open to citizens of the European Union. Certain positions involving the main powers of the state (e.g. Police) are open only to French nationals. Some rare positions, e.g. university professors and researchers, are open regardless of citizenship.

As an exception to the general rules concerning workers, civil servants do not sign contracts; their situation is defined by statutory and regulatory dispositions, most notably the General Statute of the Civil Servants (Statut Général des Fonctionnaires).

The general rule is that civil servants are recruited through competitive exams, either:

The most common method is to organize written and/or oral exams in subjects pertaining to the tasks to be accomplished. For certain positions, such as professorships in universities, the exam, organized locally for each position or each set of similar positions, consists in the submission of a file listing the professional qualifications and experience of the candidate, followed by an interview. In all cases, a committee ranks candidates by order of preference; the positions are filled by the candidates accepting them called in that order of preference. For some top managerial positions, nominations are at the discretion of the executive.

High level nominations are made by the President of the Republic in the council of ministers. The rest are by the head of the agency they belong to, or by a minister; in fact, they are in general appointed by some person who has received from the head of agency or minister the authority to do so.

The pay of a civil servant is composed of:

The traitement is for most civil servants fixed by multiplying an index by the value of the index point in Euros. The value of the index point is set by the executive and is raised regularly to compensate for inflation. The index depends on the corps, rank and seniority in rank (échelon).

In the case of high-level civil servants known as hors échelle, the corps, rank and seniority correspond to a letter code (e.g. A1, E2, G); the corresponding yearly pay can then be looked up in tables set by the executive. For instance, the topmost traitement, corresponding to pay grade G, is €82737.67 per year, starting 1 July 2009.

There are special rules for the pays of elected officials and government ministers.

On 31 December 1999, official statistics give for the state civil service:

(1) Including 12,000 young employees on limited time contracts.

The Constitution of 1848 is the constitution passed in France on 4 November 1848 by the National Assembly, the constituent body of the Second French Republic. It was repealed on 14 January 1852 by the constitution of 1852 which profoundly changed the face of the Second Republic and served as the basis for the Second French Empire.

16 delegates were chosen to debate the structure of the new constitution, including Alexis de Tocqueville, author of Democracy in America.

The delegates debated two types of legislature power, unicameral and bicameral legislatures. Most arguments were given in support of a single legislative body. These included the belief that an additional house would only benefit an aristocracy in France. Also, many delegates believed that two houses would slow the pace of political progress happening in France. Tocqueville believed that two houses were necessary to prevent abuses by the executive power as well as prevent political passions from being exerted on the laws.

The Constitutional law on the Modernisation of the Institutions of the Fifth Republic (French: loi constitutionnelle de modernisation des institutions de la V République) was enacted into French constitutional law by the Parliament of France in July 2008, to reform state institutions.

Inter alia, the law introduced a limit of two terms for the President of France, recognised regional languages as part of the nation's heritage, and established the position of Defender of Rights.

Proposed in Nicolas Sarkozy 's manifesto during the French presidential election of 2007, the stated goal of the changes was to modernise the institutions of the Fifth Republic. The Comité de réflexion et de proposition sur la modernisation et le rééquilibrage des institutions, (literally : "A committee of reflection and proposal on the modernisation and the re-balancing of the institutions"), presided over by Édouard Balladur, a former Prime Minister, was established in July 2007. It was composed primarily of constitutional jurists and political personalities with legal competence. Following three months of work, it submitted its report to the President of the Republic on 29 October 2007.

This resulted in a bill, which was approved by the National Assembly on 9 July 2008 and by the Senate on the 17th.

The bill re-evaluated the role of the executive and augmented the parliament's powers. Some of the proposals were not ratified, such as the introduction of proportional representation for elections of the National Assembly, the ban on dual mandates (cumul des mandats), nor the reform of representation in the Senate. Other clauses, such as a two-term limit for the President of the Republic, were added.

The final vote was submitted to Congress on 21 July 2008 and ratified by only one vote more than the required three-fifths (60%) majority of votes cast. The press drew attention to the aye vote of Jack Lang, who had broken with his party whip. The President of the National Assembly, Bernard Accoyer, also voted, which defied the tradition whereby the President of a sitting abstains from voting. Without those two votes the bill would not have passed.

The text of the law received the Great Seal of France on 1 October 2008.

In the following translation, where appropriate, a direct English equivalent of the French term is used. Otherwise, in order to make the terminology intelligible to at least some English speakers, terms used in the United Kingdom parliament are substituted. For example une assemblée is the equivalent of a house of the U.K. parliament. Only rarely, is equivalence complete. For example, the Senate of France is in only some respects the equivalent of the House of Lords.

The votes of the parliamentarians met in Congress were distributed as follows:

French criminal law is "the set of legal rules that govern the State's response to offenses and offenders". It is one of the branches of the juridical system of the French Republic. The field of criminal law is defined as a sector of French law, and is a combination of public and private law, insofar as it punishes private behavior on behalf of society as a whole. Its function is to define, categorize, prevent, and punish criminal offenses committed by a person, whether a natural person (Personne physique) or a legal person (Personne morale). In this sense it is of a punitive nature, as opposed to civil law in France, which settles disputes between individuals, or administrative law which deals with issues between individuals and government.

Criminal offenses are divided into three categories, according to increasing severity: contraventions, délits, and crimes. The last two categories are determined by the legislature, while contraventions are the responsibility of the executive branch. This tripartite division is matched by the courts responsible for enforcing criminal law: the police tribunal for infractions; the Correctional court for délits ; the cour d'assises for crimes. Criminal law is carried out within the rules of French criminal procedure which set the conditions under which police investigations, judicial inquiries and judgements are carried out.

Like the legal systems of other liberal democracies, French criminal law is based on three guiding principles: the principle of legality in criminal law, an illegal act (actus reus), and intent (mens rea). It has been influenced by various legal, ethical, and scientific philosophical movements over the centuries. While most of these influences are national in origin, European courts (such as the Court of Justice of the European Union and the European Court of Human Rights) have also influenced French criminal law. French criminal law was first codified during the French Revolution, resulting in the French Penal Code of 1791. Under the First Empire, Napoleon enacted the Penal Code of 1810, replaced by the French penal code of 1994.

The public prosecutor and his staff are responsible for the pursuit of legal proceedings and criminal prosecution, in collaboration with the police. To determine the offense, the judge must have a preexisting legal basis (préalable légal), a material element, (actus reus) and a moral element (mens rea). The offense can only be charged if the perpetrator is mentally competent, and has consented to the commission of a criminal act (as perpetrator or accomplice) of their own free will. If the offense is attributed to a perpetrator, they are liable to legal punishment, which may be aggravated or mitigated according to the circumstances. The judicial authority pronounces a sentence according to the severity of the acts: imprisonment or detention, fine, conditional sentencing, community service, day-fine, and so on. The convicted person may appeal the decision to the court of appeal, and, ultimately, to the Court of Cassation.

France has a dual system of law : one system deals with private relationships, and is sometimes called "private law" (droit privé) or "ordinary law" (droit commun), and the other system which covers administrative officials, and is called " administrative law " (droit administratif). This duality is not merely or mainly about covering different domains or legal topics, and in fact, the two systems overlap and deal with some of the same or similar topics. Rather, the duality is about the fact that the authorities which enforce them and which also develop their content are completely autonomous and independent of each other.

The two systems have entirely separate judges, courts, and bodies of written texts which support them, and are known in French as "orders": the "judiciary order" (ordre judiciaire) for private law, and the "administrative order" (ordre administrative) for public law. This separation came about during the French Revolution, when the justice system was established respecting a strict separation of powers in the law of 16–24 August 1790 in particular, article 13.

The administrative order has jurisdiction (compétence) over cases between the state and public organizations, as well as between individuals and the public organs of government, and thus stands apart from the criminal law system, which is part of the judiciary order.

The judiciary system or order, is also known as "ordinary law" (juridictions de l'ordre judiciaire) and is further divided into two branches: civil law and criminal law.

The main function of criminal law is punishment for infractions, while the main function of civil law is compensation for damages. The main differences are that criminal law seeks to punish or penalize when an infraction against existing law is committed, and is "vertical" in the sense that it comes from the government down towards an individual or legal entity; whereas civil law establishes a horizontal framework among members of society, and seeks to facilitate reparation of damages caused by one member of society towards another.

Civil and criminal law come together in certain cases, such as civil procedures which involve a criminal aspect. Although the goal of civil law is to compensate a victim via the awarding of damages, damages can have occurred during the commission of a criminal offense. Article 2 of the French penal code addresses this situation, and offers victims the option of suing for damages via a civil action in the criminal courts.

The two branches, civil and criminal, are mirrored in the types of actions a person or official may take in an attempt to right wrongs, namely civil action (action civile) in the case of civil law, and public action (action publique) in the case of criminal law. In a civil matter, someone who feels they are a victim of another member of society may identify themselves as a victim to judicial authorities, and seek compensation from the perpetrator. A criminal matter is dealt with by a public action (action publique) to punish the perpetrator. In particular, it is up to the public prosecutor to initiate this action on behalf of the public, and to seek punishment for the accused, rather than reparations.

The Republic of France has had three penal codes: the code of 1791, the code of 1810, and the code of 1994, still in effect as of 2022.

The origins of criminal law go back to family justice, retribution for perceived offenses, and revenge. Private revenge was originally a way of maintaining a rough sort of social order among clans, with fear of revenge the deterrent factor. This created a certain respect for strangers and other clans, and when a settling of accounts was necessary, this could take place not only against a presumed perpetrator, but also against their family, the clan chief, or top clan members, so that criminal liability was originally collective and not individual.

With the Fall of the Roman Empire officials in charge of police disappeared. With the rise of feudalism in France, policing powers were dispersed among a multitude of seigneurs. Lords of their fiefs, they were all-powerful, including that of justice among the peasants they controlled.

As states evolved and gained power, private justice receded; the State was only involved insofar as procedural control of private revenge, to control excesses. France was influenced by the texts of Roman justice which were still available and studied, and by the thirteenth century, the state started to become more involved, and the previous system of private justice evolved into public justice, with the State assuming the power of suppression, targeting social wrongs rather than individual, private ones, in which private victims or plaintiffs became secondary to the state's role.

These private and public systems coexisted for a while. A crime could be seen as the failure of a monarch to keep the oath he took upon accession, to maintain peace in the kingdom, which justified the interest in public repression of crime, if the individuals concerned could not do so privately. By the sixteenth century, individuals sometimes had to seek permission from the monarch to engage in self-defense. This has further evolved today, to the point where self-defense is still permitted if one is in immediate danger, otherwise, it is allocated to the authorities. Revenge was no longer permitted to individuals, but appropriated by the monarch, based on their divine power.

In medieval France and elsewhere in Europe, trial by ordeal was an ancient judicial practice by which the guilt or innocence of an accused was determined, such as trial by battle, by fire, or water. The belief was that God determined the result, and presentation of evidence or witnesses played no part. This persisted for centuries, because people believed it worked, and there was no one (except the victim and the real perpetrator, who would remain silent) to say it did not. But by the 12th century belief in it began to weaken, led by opposing views from the Church. Opposition became widespread, and in 1215 the Church condemned trial by ordeal in the Fourth Lateran Council. This meant priests could no longer use trial by ordeal to determine guilt or innocence, and other means had to be found.

The Church already had one other method, which hitherto had been used only for cases of offenses against the clergy, and for cases of suspected heresy, namely they would organize a commission of inquiry headed by some trustworthy individual to find out the facts. The investigator would question suspects and witnesses and write up a report. The ruling on guilt or innocence would be based on the written dossier. This formal investigation, or "inquisition", is the basis of the inquisitorial system in France. England took a different approach, summoning a group of people to answer the question of guilt or innocence formerly assigned to God, and this became the origin of trial by jury and the accusatorial system.

Development of the French criminal justice system has important roots in ecclesiastical law of the Roman Catholic Church. While England was moving towards the adversarial system of criminal justice, in France was laying the basis for the inquisitorial system. This goes back to the medieval church's efforts to investigate and eliminate heresies. In southern France of the 12th century for example, corruption and immoral behavior by clerics led to the establishment of various movements in response such as the Cathari, that the Church declared heretical, and authorized a Crusade against them at the Third Lateran Council. Despite this and much bloodshed, the movement grew. At the 1229 Council of Toulouse, Dominicans organized investigations into the heresy, attempting either to change their beliefs or stopping their proliferation; these were called inquisitions, and secular criminal procedure began to adapt the church methods into their own systems, and became the basis for the French inquisitorial system.

French criminal justice goes back to the Maréchaussée in the Middle Ages. From that time, and to a lesser extent until the end of the Ancien Régime, the functions of the police and the justice system were closely intertwined. Kings, lords and high dignitaries rendered justice. In that sense, justice in the armies was part of the remit of the Grand Constable of France, who succeeded the Seneschal in 1191 as head of the armies, and of the Marshals of France, who were his lieutenants. The Grand Constable and the marshals delegated their powers to their provosts.

These jurisdictions merged under Francis I under the name of the Constabulary and Marshalcy Tribunal, with its seat in Paris. The provosts also rendered justice to the armies in provostal courts. The enforcement bodies were the company of the Constabulary and the companies of the Maréchaussée. The Maréchaussée originally roamed the countryside catching and sentencing evildoers from among the military, and after 1536, among the civilian population as well. They also had the power to sentence perpetrators they had caught. There was no central organization, but they adopted the collective name maréchaussée ("marshalcy") because the detachments were assigned to army marshals.

The Constabulary was eliminated in 1626 by Louis XIII and the Constabulary and Marshalcy Tribunal was placed under the command of the Marshal of France. According to the Criminal Ordinance of 1670, certain crimes identified as "royal cases" were investigated by the Maréchaussée but judged by a chamber of the Parliament dealing with criminal matters, while the others, identified as "provost cases" (cas prévôtaux), were judged by the provost courts.

A series of reforms in the 18th century were instituted to make the Maréchaussée more effective, reinforce its military character, and improve coverage in the countryside. The edict of 1720 accentuated its territorial nature and created a hierarchy under a provost court and a Maréchaussée detachment in each of the thirty-six governments or provinces, with a provost at the head of each one in the provincial capital. The provostships (prévôtés) were divided into lieutenancies with a lieutenant in each city heading up a presidial court. By 1778, on the eve of the Revolution, there was a corps of 4,000 men in the Maréchaussée, which developed into the first national police force in France.

Criminal law in the 16th to 18th centuries was fairly static, and had a basis in the growing awareness of Roman law during the Renaissance. Rulings generally followed the Roman Digest, except when local customs or written tracts clearly dealt with a specific situation. Although French criminal lawyers were inspired by the Romans to write treatises on the law, the content was based more on local or feudal custom.

Criminal law was also influenced by Christianity, and by canon law. Ecclesiastical courts played an important role in the Middle Ages, and trials were held on any subject which the Church felt touched their domain (heresy, witchcraft, adultery, etc.), and cooperated with non-Church authorities in handing over the most serious offenders. The most original aspect of Church law was in the influence of sin and penitence ; punishment was based in retribution. Where revenge was more about hurting individuals or groups based on a grievance, retribution was a sanction based on the moral responsibility of the offender, intended to expiate the wrong, and in proportion to the seriousness of the offense.

The age of the offender was taken into consideration in dispensing punishment, retaining the Roman distinction between infants, pre-pubescent, pubescent, and so on. If they were Latin : doli capax, lit. ' capable of deceit ', they could be legally punished, including capital punishment for children of 11.

The guiding principle was retribution, not rehabilitation; the focus was on preserving the public order and the general population, while separating out and penalizing the bad portion. There was much regional variation in interpretation of criminal law, and also implementation of penalties, which tended to be harsh. Little was written, and the types of offenses and attendant penalties derived from custom; Roman texts were examined to determine what they were and how to proceed. The Criminal Ordinance of 1670 attempted to codify the customary practices, but it did not list specific offenses or their penalties, so it was unclear what activities were permitted, or the penalties if they were prosecuted. Judges retained arbitrary discretion to rule as they saw fit, including whether a defendant was guilty or not. Since all power derived from the King, they had ultimate power to order an existing prosecution under the King's Seal to be quashed, or to circumvent the procedures and orders of judges and courts to convict and imprison an individual, even in the absence of guilt, or even commission of a crime; these orders were known as lettres de cachet.

One of the signal events of the French Revolution was the declaration by the National Constituent Assembly on 4 August 1789 abolishing the feudal system in France. In November, this included suspension of the judicial system of the Ancien regime and its 13 regional parlements, followed by abolition in 1790. This led directly to the first formal codification of French law, including civil law, and criminal law.

The Penal Code of 1791 was adopted during the Revolution by the Constituent Assembly, between 25 September and 6 October 1791. It was France's first penal code, and was influenced by the Enlightenment thinking of Cesare Beccaria and Montesquieu.

Penal law in particular had been a source of great controversy during the French Revolution, during which the first Penal Code and numerous constitutions were produced. An important feature of the 1791 code, as well as the 1795 Code of Offences and Penalties, was fixed penalties to keep the role of judge strictly distributive, thereby eliminating the previous tradition of arbitrary sentencing.

The Code of Offences and Penalties (Code des délits et des peines) was a criminal code adopted in revolutionary France by the National Convention on 25 October 1795.

The code deals with judicial organization, criminal procedure, and criminal sanctions. It distinguishes between the functions of administrative police, which is concerned with the prevention of crimes and offenses, and judicial police, which is concerned with the investigation of crimes and identification of suspects. This distinction is still in force in the Fifth Republic.

Due to severe deficiencies noted in the 1785 code, the Consulate named a five-man commission in 1801 to come up with a replacement for the criminal code as well as the procedural code. The criminal investigation code (procedural code) was published in 1808, and the criminal code in 1810. The procedural code of 1808 was a combination of the accusatory and the inquisitorial systems and remained in effect until 1958, when it was replaced by the Code of criminal procedure of 1958 in the advent of the Fifth Republic.

The Penal code of 1810 was a code of criminal laws created under Napoleon, replacing the French Penal Code of 1791. It replaced various laws adopted during the first ten years of the Revolution, including the 1791 code and the 1795 code of Offenses. With the 1810 penal code, sentences were given a set range, allowing judges more latitude to decide on the severity of the punishment. The 1810 code was revised twice: a major change in 1832, the second, much more limited, in 1863.

The current criminal code (code pénal) is the codification of French criminal law. It took effect 1 March 1994 and replaced the French Penal Code of 1810, which had been in effect until then. This in turn became known as the "old penal code" for the rare decisions that still needed to refer to it.

The Penal Code project began with the work of the Commission for Revision created in 1974 by President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing. The 1978 draft of Book I (General Provisions) was heavily criticized by the criminal justice community and rejected by the government in 1980. After government changed hands in 1981, Robert Badinter, a former criminal lawyer who had become Minister of Justice, took over the commission. In 1989, François Mitterrand prioritized the project during his second term as president. The new penal code was passed by Parliament on 22 July 1992, followed by an amendment in December, and corrections in February 1994. It came into force on 1 March 1994.

Initially known as the new penal code (nouveau code pénal), it was not so much a reform of the French Penal Code of 1810, but an original work with a new outline, new principles, a new formulation of the law, and even a new numbering system that is hierarchical instead of sequential.

It introduced a number of new concepts, such as the criminal responsibility of legal persons (responsabilité pénale des personnes morales) (not including the State itself) in Article 121–2, and increased the sentencing for almost all délits and crimes.

There have been numerous amendments and reforms since the 1994 code was promulgated.

In 2010, there was the law criminalizing psychological violence within intimate relationships, created by law 2010-769 of 9 July 2010.

A major reform of the criminal justice system was introduced in 2011, including reform of garde à vue, penal reform for minors, and more participation of citizens in the criminal justice process.

The criminalization of clients of prostitution was passed in Law 444 of 2016, with the aim of combating human trafficking and the exploitation of sex workers.

French criminal law is governed by the principle of legality and its three corollaries, the principle of strict interpretation of the law, the application of criminal law in time, and the application of criminal law in space.

The principle of legality (French : principe de légalité) is one of the most fundamental principles of French law, and goes back to the Penal Code of 1791 adopted during the Revolution.

French legal publisher Dalloz describes it this way:

The principle of legality of offenses and penalties (or principle of criminal legality) is a fundamental principle of modern criminal law, as expressed by the phrase "Nullum crimen, nulla poena sine lege "; it means that there can be no crimes, offenses, or contraventions without a prior definition of said offenses, as contained in a text setting out their constituent elements and the penalty which applies to them. In other words, it implies that an individual can only be prosecuted and sentenced by the application of a law that exists prior to the act of which he is accused.

— Légalité des délits et des peines, Dalloz

This principle is enshrined in the first chapter of the penal code, General Principles, in article 111–3.

The legal framework established by the Revolution put Parliament in charge of all three severity levels of infractions, but this was changed later, and now there is a division of authority, with Parliament retaining control of the two most serious levels, crimes and délits, whereas contraventions are now considered a regulatory matter, and are handled by the government, not Parliament. This is covered in the first chapter of the code, in article 111–2.

The principle of criminal liability is defined in the constitution, and a fundamental corollary of it is the application of the criminal law in time (application de la loi pénale dans le temps). This principle defines the non-retroactive nature of criminal sanctions, and is governed by article 112-1 of the penal code. The article defines the disposition in cases where acts were committed around the time a new law was taking effect.

French criminal procedure (procédure pénale) focuses on how individuals accused of crimes are dealt with in the French criminal justice system: how people are investigated, prosecuted, tried, and punished for an infraction defined in the penal code. These procedural issues are codified in the French code of criminal procedure (Code de procédure pénale). It is the procedural arm of French criminal law.

French criminal procedure has roots in customary law of the Ancien regime under Louis XIV, and was first codified with the Code of criminal procedure of 1808 (Code d'instruction criminelle). This was replaced in 1959 with the Code of criminal procedure (Code de procédure pénale ; CPP).

The main groups involved in the administration of criminal justice in France are the courts, the Public Ministry (France), and the judicial police. Criminal courts are structured in three levels, with the Police court and the Correctional court in the first instance ; appeals are held by the Cour d'appel and the Cour de Cassation.

Courts involved include the police court and the correctional court at the first level or instance, and the Cour d'Appel and Cour de Cassation at the second and third instance. Traditionally, the legal system for administering criminal justice in France has been and continues to be the inquisitorial system, but more and more, aspects of the adversarial system, such as plea bargaining, have been included as well.

The typical stages of criminal procedure include: reporting an offense, police investigation, prosecution, judicial investigation, trial, and sentencing. During the investigation phase, various powers are available to assist, such as: garde à vue (remand in custody); arrest, search, and others, all laid out in specific sections of the code.

In France, the term criminal procedure (French : procédure pénale) has two meanings; a narrow one, referring to the process that happens during a criminal case as it proceeds through the phases of receiving and investigating a complaint, arresting suspects, and bringing them to trial, resulting in possible sentencing—and a broader meaning referring to the way the justice system is organized into the actors and institutions involved, chiefly the police, the prosecutors, the Public Ministry, the courts and judges, and their roles and interactions.

Criminal law (droit pénale) deals with an individual's rights and obligations under the law, as codified in a penal code. Under French criminal law, the penal code (CP) defines what acts (or omissions) are punishable. Criminal procedure focuses on how individuals accused of crimes are dealt with in the criminal justice system: how people are investigated, prosecuted, tried, and punished. In France, these procedural issues are codified in the Code of criminal procedure (Code de procédure pénale).

Unlike civil law, which is applied without applying to the courts for the most part, criminal law is carried out through observance of the rules established by a written code, which connects the infraction committed, through a series of procedures leading ultimately to a sentence for an offender found guilty. Whereas civil law and civil procedure are separate areas of law, criminal law and criminal procedure are closely intertwined, and the glue is the code of criminal procedure.

French cuisine is the cooking traditions and practices of France. In the 14th century, Guillaume Tirel, a court chef known as "Taillevent", wrote Le Viandier, one of the earliest recipe collections of medieval France. In the 17th and 18th centuries, chefs François Pierre La Varenne and Marie-Antoine Carême spearheaded movements that shifted French cooking away from its foreign influences such as from Italian cuisine and developed France's own indigenous style.

Cheese and wine are a major part of the cuisine. They play different roles regionally and nationally, with many variations and appellation d'origine contrôlée (AOC) (regulated appellation) laws.

Culinary tourism and the Guide Michelin helped to acquaint commoners with the cuisine bourgeoise of the urban elites and the peasant cuisine of the French countryside starting in the 20th century. Many dishes that were once regional have proliferated in variations across the country.

Knowledge of French cooking has contributed significantly to Western cuisines. Its criteria are used widely in Western cookery school boards and culinary education. In November 2010, French gastronomy was added by the UNESCO to its lists of the world's "intangible cultural heritage".

In French medieval cuisine, banquets were common among the aristocracy. Multiple courses would be prepared, but served in a style called service en confusion, or all at once. Food was generally eaten by hand, meats being sliced off in large pieces held between the thumb and two fingers. The sauces were highly seasoned and thick, and heavily flavored mustards were used.

Pies were a common banquet item, with the crust serving primarily as a container, rather than as food itself, and it was not until the very end of the Late Middle Ages that the shortcrust pie was developed.

Meals often ended with an issue de table, which later changed into the modern dessert, and typically consisted of dragées (in the Middle Ages, meaning spiced lumps of hardened sugar or honey), aged cheese, and spiced wine, such as hypocras.

The ingredients of the time varied greatly according to the seasons and the church calendar, and many items were preserved with salt, spices, honey, and other preservatives. Late spring, summer, and autumn afforded abundance, while winter meals were more sparse. Livestock were slaughtered at the beginning of winter. Beef was often salted, while pork was salted and smoked. Bacon and sausages would be smoked in the chimney, while the tongue and hams were brined and dried. Cucumbers were brined as well, while greens would be packed in jars with salt. Fruits, nuts and root vegetables would be boiled in honey for preservation. Whale, dolphin and porpoise were considered fish, so during Lent, the salted meats of these sea mammals were eaten.

Artificial freshwater ponds (often called stews) held carp, pike, tench, bream, eel, and other fish. Poultry was kept in special yards, with pigeon and squab being reserved for the elite. Game was highly prized, but very rare, and included venison, boar, hare, rabbit, and fowl.

Kitchen gardens provided herbs, including some, such as tansy, rue, pennyroyal, and hyssop, which are rarely used today. Spices were treasured and very expensive at that time—they included pepper, cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg, and mace. Some spices used then, but no longer today in French cuisine are cubebs, long pepper (both from vines similar to black pepper), grains of paradise, and galengale.

Sweet-sour flavors were commonly added to dishes with vinegar and verjus combined with sugar (for the affluent) or honey. A common form of food preparation was to thoroughly cook, pound, and strain mixtures into fine pastes and mushes, something believed to be beneficial to make use of nutrients.

Visual display was prized. Brilliant colors were obtained by the addition of, for example, juices from spinach and the green part of leeks. Yellow came from saffron or egg yolk, while red came from sunflower (after the Columbian Exchange), and purple came from Crozophora tinctoria or Heliotropium europaeum.

Gold and silver leaf were placed on food surfaces and brushed with egg whites. Elaborate and showy dishes were the result, such as tourte parmerienne which was a pastry dish made to look like a castle with chicken-drumstick turrets coated with gold leaf. One of the grandest showpieces of the time was a roast swan or peacock sewn back into its skin with feathers intact, the feet and beak being gilded.

The most well-known French chef of the Middle Ages was Guillaume Tirel, also known as Taillevent. Taillevent worked in numerous royal kitchens during the 14th century. His first position was as a kitchen boy in 1326. He was chef to Philip VI, then the Dauphin who was son of John II. The Dauphin became King Charles V of France in 1364, with Taillevent as his chief cook. His career spanned sixty-six years, and upon his death, he was buried in grand style between his two wives. His tombstone represents him in armor, holding a shield with three cooking pots, marmites, on it.

Paris was the central hub of culture and economic activity, and as such, the most highly skilled culinary craftsmen were to be found there. Markets in Paris such as Les Halles, la Mégisserie, those found along Rue Mouffetard, and similar smaller versions in other cities were very important to the distribution of food. Those that gave French produce its characteristic identity were regulated by the guild system, which developed in the Middle Ages. In Paris, the guilds were regulated by city government as well as by the French crown. A guild restricted those in a given branch of the culinary industry to operate only within that field.

There were two groups of guilds—first, those that supplied the raw materials: butchers, fishmongers, grain merchants, and gardeners. The second group were those that supplied prepared foods: bakers, pastry cooks, sauce makers, poulterers, and caterers. Some guilds offered both raw materials and prepared food, such as the charcutiers and rôtisseurs (purveyors of roasted meat dishes). They would supply cooked meat pies and dishes as well as raw meat and poultry. This caused issues with butchers and poulterers, who sold the same raw materials.

The guilds served as a training ground for those within the industry. The degrees of assistant cook, full-fledged cook and master chef were conferred. Those who reached the level of master chef were of considerable rank in their individual industry, and enjoyed a high level of income as well as economic and job security. At times, those in the royal kitchens did fall under the guild hierarchy, but it was necessary to find them a parallel appointment based on their skills after leaving the service of the royal kitchens. This was not uncommon as the Paris cooks' Guild regulations allowed for this movement.

During the 16th and 17th centuries, French cuisine assimilated many new food items from the New World. Although they were slow to be adopted, records of banquets show Catherine de' Medici serving sixty-six turkeys at one dinner. The dish called cassoulet has its roots in the New World discovery of haricot beans, which are central to the dish's creation, but had not existed outside of the Americas until the arrival of Europeans.

Haute cuisine (pronounced [ ot kɥizin ], "high cuisine") has foundations during the 17th century with a chef named La Varenne. As an author of works such as Le Cuisinier françois, he is credited with publishing the first true French cookbook. His book includes the earliest known reference to roux using pork fat. The book contained two sections, one for meat days, and one for fasting. His recipes marked a change from the style of cookery known in the Middle Ages to new techniques aimed at creating somewhat lighter dishes, and more modest presentations of pies as individual pastries and turnovers. La Varenne also published a book on pastry in 1667 entitled Le Parfait confitvrier (republished as Le Confiturier françois) which similarly updated and codified the emerging haute cuisine standards for desserts and pastries.

Chef François Massialot wrote Le Cuisinier roïal et bourgeois in 1691, during the reign of Louis XIV. The book contains menus served to the royal courts in 1690. Massialot worked mostly as a freelance cook, and was not employed by any particular household. Massialot and many other royal cooks received special privileges by association with the French royalty. They were not subject to the regulation of the guilds; therefore, they could cater weddings and banquets without restriction. His book is the first to list recipes alphabetically, perhaps a forerunner of the first culinary dictionary. It is in this book that a marinade is first seen in print, with one type for poultry and feathered game, while a second is for fish and shellfish. No quantities are listed in the recipes, which suggests that Massialot was writing for trained cooks.

The successive updates of Le Cuisinier roïal et bourgeois include important refinements such as adding a glass of wine to fish stock. Definitions were also added to the 1703 edition. The 1712 edition, retitled Le Nouveau cuisinier royal et bourgeois, was increased to two volumes, and was written in a more elaborate style with extensive explanations of technique. Additional smaller preparations are included in this edition as well, leading to lighter preparations, and adding a third course to the meal. Ragout, a stew still central to French cookery, makes its first appearance as a single dish in this edition as well; prior to that, it was listed as a garnish.

Shortly before the French Revolution, dishes like bouchées à la Reine [ fr ] gained prominence. Essentially royal cuisine produced by the royal household, this is a chicken-based recipe served on vol-au-vent created under the influence of Queen Marie Leszczyńska, the Polish-born wife of Louis XV. This recipe is still popular today, as are other recipes from Queen Marie Leszczyńska like consommé à la Reine and filet d'aloyau braisé à la royale. Queen Marie is also credited with introducing Polonaise garnishing to the French diet.

The French Revolution was integral to the expansion of French cuisine, because it abolished the guild system. This meant anyone could now produce and sell any culinary item they wished.

Bread was a significant food source among peasants and the working class in the late 18th century, with many of the nation's people being dependent on it. In French provinces, bread was often consumed three times a day by the people of France. According to Brace, bread was referred to as the basic dietary item for the masses, and it was also used as a foundation for soup. In fact, bread was so important that harvest, interruption of commerce by wars, heavy flour exploration, and prices and supply were all watched and controlled by the French Government. Among the underprivileged, constant fear of famine was always prevalent. From 1725 to 1789, there were fourteen years of bad yields to blame for the low grain supply. In Bordeaux, during 1708–1789, thirty-three bad harvests occurred.

Marie-Antoine Carême was born in 1784, five years before the Revolution. He spent his younger years working at a pâtisserie until he was discovered by Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord ; he would later cook for Napoleon. Prior to his employment with Talleyrand, Carême had become known for his pièces montées, which were extravagant constructions of pastry and sugar architecture.

More important to Carême's career was his contribution to the refinement of French cuisine. The basis for his style of cooking was his sauces, which he named mother sauces. Often referred to as fonds, meaning "foundations", these base sauces, espagnole, velouté, and béchamel, are still known today. Each of these sauces was made in large quantities in his kitchen, then formed the basis of multiple derivatives. Carême had over one hundred sauces in his repertoire.

In his writings, soufflés appear for the first time. Although many of his preparations today seem extravagant, he simplified and codified an even more complex cuisine that existed beforehand. Central to his codification of the cuisine were Le Maître d'hôtel français (1822), Le Cuisinier parisien (1828) and L'Art de la cuisine française au dix-neuvième siècle (1833–5).

Georges Auguste Escoffier is commonly acknowledged as the central figure to the modernization of haute cuisine and organizing what became the national cuisine of France. His influence began with the rise of some of the great hotels in Europe and America during the 1880s–1890s. The Savoy Hotel, managed by César Ritz, was an early hotel in which Escoffier worked, but much of his influence came during his management of the kitchens in the Carlton from 1898 until 1921. He created a system of "parties" called the brigade system, which separated the professional kitchen into five separate stations.

These five stations included the garde manger that prepared cold dishes; the entremettier, which prepared starches and vegetables; the rôtisseur, which prepared roasts, grilled and fried dishes; the saucier, which prepared sauces and soups; and the pâtissier, preparing all pastry and desserts items.

This system meant that instead of one person preparing a dish on one's own, multiple cooks would prepare the different components for the dish. An example used is oeufs au plat Meyerbeer ; under the prior system, the dish would take up to fifteen minutes to prepare, while in the new system, the eggs would be prepared by the entremettier, kidney grilled by the rôtisseur, and truffle sauce made by the saucier, and thus the dish could be prepared in a shorter time and served quickly.

Escoffier also simplified and organized the modern menu and structure of the meal. He published a series of articles in professional journals which outlined the sequence, and he finally published his Livre des menus in 1912. This type of service embraced the service à la russe (serving meals in separate courses on individual plates), which Félix Urbain Dubois had made popular in the 1860s. Escoffier's largest contribution was the publication of Le Guide Culinaire in 1903, which established the fundamentals of French cookery. The book was a collaboration with Philéas Gilbert, E. Fetu, A. Suzanne, B. Reboul, Ch. Dietrich, A. Caillat and others. The significance of this is to illustrate the universal acceptance by multiple high-profile chefs to this new style of cooking.

Le Guide Culinaire deemphasized the use of heavy sauces and leaned toward lighter fumets, which are the essence of flavor taken from fish, meat and vegetables. This style of cooking looked to create garnishes and sauces whose function is to add to the flavor of the dish, rather than mask flavors like the heavy sauces and ornate garnishes of the past. Escoffier took inspiration for his work from personal recipes in addition to recipes from Carême, Dubois and ideas from Taillevent's Le Viandier, a modern version of which was published in 1897. A second source for recipes came from existing peasant dishes that were translated into the refined techniques of haute cuisine.

The third source of recipes was Escoffier himself, who invented many new dishes, such as pêche Melba. Escoffier updated Le Guide Culinaire four times during his lifetime, noting in the foreword to the book's first edition that even with its 5,000 recipes, the book should not be considered an "exhaustive" text, and that even if it were at the point when he wrote the book, "it would no longer be so tomorrow, because progress marches on each day."

This period is also marked by the appearance of nouvelle cuisine. The term "nouvelle cuisine" has been used many times in the history of French cuisine which emphasized the freshness, lightness and clarity of flavor and inspired by new movements in world cuisine. In the 1740s, Menon first used the term, but the cooking of Vincent La Chapelle and François Marin was also considered modern. In the 1960s, Henri Gault and Christian Millau revived it to describe the cooking of Paul Bocuse, Jean and Pierre Troisgros, Michel Guérard, Roger Vergé and Raymond Oliver. These chefs were working toward rebelling against the "orthodoxy" of Escoffier's cuisine. Some of the chefs were students of Fernand Point at the Pyramide in Vienne, and had left to open their own restaurants. Gault and Millau "discovered the formula" contained in ten characteristics of this new style of cooking. Those characteristics were:

1. A rejection of excessive complication in cooking.

2. The cooking times for most fish, seafood, game birds, veal, green vegetables and pâtés were greatly reduced in an attempt to preserve the natural flavors. Steaming was an important trend emerging from this characteristic.

3. The cuisine was made with the freshest possible ingredients.

4. Large menus were abandoned in favor of shorter menus.

5. Strong marinades for meat and game ceased to be used.

6. They stopped using heavy sauces such as espagnole and béchamel thickened with flour-based roux in favor of seasoning their dishes with fresh herbs, quality butter, lemon juice, and vinegar.

7. They used regional dishes for inspiration instead of haute cuisine dishes.

8. New techniques were embraced and modern equipment was often used; Bocuse even used microwave ovens.

9. The chefs paid close attention to the dietary needs of their guests through their dishes.

10. The chefs were highly innovative and created new combinations and pairings.

Some have speculated that a contributor to the emergence of nouvelle cuisine was World War II, when animal protein was in short supply during the German occupation. By the mid-1980s, food writers stated that nouvelle cuisine had reached exhaustion and many chefs began returning to the haute cuisine style of cooking, although many of the lighter presentations and new techniques remained.

French cuisine continues to change and adapt. In the contemporary period. "La Bistronomie" describing a fusion of bistro and haute cuisine emerged alongside new popular foods such as the French taco, new styles of food including food trucks, growing interest in vegetarian food and increased vegetarian options, and a public interest in simpler dining options. These changes are alongside the incorporation and mainstreaming of dishes from immigrant communities in part shaped by immigration and global exchange. Culinary influences are especially strong from across the Francophone world and beyond, including North African cuisines (notably couscous, which is often cited as one of modern France’s most widely consumed dishes), Lebanese cuisine (with foods like falafel becoming widely popular), Southeast Asian traditions from countries such as Vietnam and Cambodia (including pho and banh mi), and a growing presence of African cuisines and spices in everyday French cooking. This transformation is tied to the French restaurant workforce with immigrants playing a major role in French commercial kitchens. Estimates suggest roughly twenty-five percent of chefs in France are immigrants, and in Paris about half of chefs are immigrants. France also continues to attract international chefs to train, who either stay in France or return to their home countries after learning French techniques.

There are many dishes that are considered part of French national cuisine today.

A meal often consists of three courses, hors d'œuvre or entrée (introductory course, sometimes soup), plat principal (main course), fromage (cheese course) or dessert, sometimes with a salad offered before the cheese or dessert.

The notion of a French national cuisine is understood as a set of foods that all people eat and have strong opinions about, regardless of class. Those who are poorer still eat the same foods as the rich, albeit less frequently.

French regional cuisine is characterized by its extreme diversity and style. Traditionally, each region of France has its own distinctive cuisine.

Paris and Île-de-France are central regions where almost anything from the country is available, as all train lines meet in the city. Over 9,000 restaurants exist in Paris and almost any cuisine can be obtained here. High-quality Michelin Guide -rated restaurants proliferate here.

Game and ham are popular in Champagne, as well as the special sparkling wine simply known as Champagne. Fine fruit preserves are known from Lorraine as well as the quiche Lorraine. Alsace, a region of historically Allemanic German culture, has retained elements of German cuisine, especially similar to those from the neighboring Palatinate and Baden region, but has implemented French influences since France first took control of the region in the 17th century. As such, beers made in the area are similar to the style of bordering Germany. Dishes like choucroute (French for sauerkraut) are also popular. Many eaux de vie (distilled alcohol from fruit, comparable to schnaps) are from this region, due to a wide variety of local fruits (cherry, raspberry, pear, grapes) and especially prunes (mirabelle, plum).[9]:259,295

The coastline supplies many crustaceans, sea bass, monkfish and herring. Normandy has top-quality seafood, such as scallops and sole, while Brittany has a supply of lobster, crayfish and mussels.

Normandy is home to a large population of apple trees; apples are often used in dishes, as well as cider and Calvados. The northern areas of this region, especially Nord, grow ample amounts of wheat, sugar beets and chicory. Thick stews are found often in these northern areas as well.

The produce of these northern regions is also considered some of the best in the country, including cauliflower and artichokes. Buckwheat grows widely in Brittany as well and is used in the region's galettes, called jalet, which is where this dish originated.

High-quality fruits come from the Loire Valley and central France, including cherries grown for the liqueur Guignolet and Belle Angevine pears. The strawberries and melons are also of high quality.

Fish are seen in the cuisine, often served with a beurre blanc sauce, as well as wild game, lamb, calves, Charolais cattle, Géline fowl, and goat cheeses.

Young vegetables are used often, as are the specialty mushrooms of the region, champignons de Paris. Vinegars from Orléans are a specialty ingredient used as well.

Burgundy and Franche-Comté are known for their wines. Pike, perch, river crabs, snails, game, redcurrants, blackcurrants all originate here.

Savory specialties accounted in the Cuisine franc-comtoise from the Franche-Comté region are croûte aux morilles [ fr ], Poulet à la Comtoise [ fr ], trout, smoked meats and cheeses such as Mont d'Or, Comté and Morbier which are best eaten hot or cold, coq au vin jaune [ fr ] and the special dessert gâteau de ménage [ fr ].

Charolais beef, poultry from Bresse, sea snail, honey cake, Chaource and Époisses cheese are specialties of the local cuisine of Burgundy. Dijon mustard is also a specialty of Burgundy cuisine. Crème de cassis is a popular liquor made from blackcurrants. Oils are used in the cooking here, including nut oils and rapeseed oil.

The area covers the old province of Dauphiné, once known as the "larder" of France, that gave its name to gratin dauphinois, traditionally made in a large baking dish rubbed with garlic. Successive layers of potatoes, salt, pepper and milk are piled up to the top of the dish. It is then baked in the oven at low temperature for 2 hours.

Fruit and young vegetables are popular in the cuisine from the Rhône valley, as are wines like Hermitage AOC, Crozes-Hermitage AOC and Condrieu AOC. Walnuts and walnut products and oil from Noix de Grenoble AOC, lowland cheeses, like St. Marcellin, St. Félicien and Bleu du Vercors-Sassenage.

Poultry from Bresse, guinea fowl from Drôme and fish from the Dombes, a light yeast-based cake, called Pogne de Romans and the regional speciality, Raviole du Dauphiné, and there is the short-crust "Suisse", a Valence biscuit speciality.

Lakes and mountain streams in Rhône-Alpes are key to the cuisine as well. Lyon and Savoy supply sausages while the Alpine regions supply their specialty cheeses like Beaufort, Abondance, Reblochon, Tomme and Vacherin.

Mères lyonnaises are female cooks particular to this region who provide local gourmet establishments. Celebrated chefs from this region include Fernand Point, Paul Bocuse, the Troisgros brothers and Alain Chapel.

The Chartreuse Mountains are the source of the green and yellow digestif liquor Chartreuse, produced by the monks of the Grande Chartreuse.

Since the 2014 administrative reform, the ancient area of Auvergne is now part of the region. One of its leading chefs is Regis Marcon.

Oysters come from the Oléron - Marennes basin, while mussels come from the Bay of Aiguillon.

High-quality produce comes from the region's hinterland, especially goat cheese. This region and in the Vendée is grazing ground for Parthenaise cattle, while poultry is raised in Challans.

The region of Poitou-Charentes purportedly produces the best butter and cream in France. Cognac is also made in the region along the river Charente.

Limousin is home to the Limousin cattle, as well as sheep. The woodlands offer game and mushrooms. The southern area around Brive draws its cooking influence from Périgord and Auvergne to produce a robust cuisine.

Bordeaux, a renowned French city, lends its name to a distinctive wine style celebrated worldwide. Bordeaux, along with the larger Aquitaine region, ranks among the top three wine destinations globally, alongside Napa Valley and Tuscany. Saint-Emilion, a UNESCO World Heritage village, is a key destination, drawing a multitude of wine tourists to the region.

Bordeaux's diverse viticultural regions specialize in a range of grape varieties such as Merlot, Cabernet Franc, and increasingly Cabernet Sauvignon, each thriving in the picturesque landscapes of the area. This variety contributes significantly to the region's rich viticultural diversity and the production of wines of strong quality.

Building on this agricultural foundation, Bordeaux wine offers a rich history, varied terroir, and complex flavor profile, making it highly versatile for food pairing across various cuisines and occasions. Traditional Bordeaux blends typically include the aforementioned Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, and Cabernet Franc, providing a spectrum of flavors and textures that complement a wide array of dishes.

Lighter wines like Bordeaux Blanc or a light-bodied Bordeaux Rouge can elegantly accompany seafood or poultry. The crisp acidity and citrus notes of Bordeaux Blanc complement delicate seafood dishes like grilled fish or shrimp cocktail, while the soft tannins of a light Bordeaux Rouge enhance the flavors of roasted chicken or turkey. Moreover, Bordeaux Rouge wines pair beautifully with dishes like roasted lamb, duck breast, or vegetable stews. The wine's balanced fruitiness and moderate tannins complement the richness of the proteins without overpowering the palate.

Meanwhile, more robust Bordeaux Rouge wines, particularly from renowned appellations like Saint-Émilion, are perfect for richer, savory dishes such as grilled steak or braised beef, where their intense fruit flavors and firm tannins provide a balanced counterpoint to the umami-rich flavors. Understanding this interplay of flavors allows diners to elevate their culinary experiences, creating memorable pairings with Bordeaux wines.

The Pyrenees also has lamb, such as the Agneau de Pauillac, as well as sheep cheeses. Beef cattle in the region include the Blonde d'Aquitaine, Boeuf de Chalosse, Boeuf Gras de Bazas, and Garonnaise.

Free-range chicken, turkey, pigeon, capon, goose and duck prevail in the region as well. Gascony and Périgord cuisines includes pâtés, terrines, confits and magrets. This is one of the regions notable for its production of foie gras, or fattened goose or duck liver.

The cuisine of the region is often heavy and farm-based. Armagnac is also from this region, as are prunes from Agen.

Gers, a department of France, is within this region and has poultry, while La Montagne Noire and Lacaune area offer hams and dry sausages.

White corn is planted heavily in the area both for use in fattening ducks and geese for foie gras and for the production of millas, a cornmeal porridge. Haricot beans are also grown in this area, which are central to the dish cassoulet.

The finest sausage in France is saucisse de Toulouse, which is also part of cassoulet of Toulouse. The Cahors area produces a specialty " black wine " as well as truffles and mushrooms.

This region also produces milk-fed lamb. Unpasteurized ewe 's milk is used to produce Roquefort in Aveyron, while in Laguiole is producing unpasteurized cow's milk cheese. Salers cattle produce milk for cheese, as well as beef and veal products.

The volcanic soils create flinty cheeses and superb lentils. Mineral waters are produced in high volume in this region as well. Cabécou cheese is from Rocamadour, a medieval settlement erected directly on a cliff, in the rich countryside of Causses du Quercy [ fr ; nl ].

This area is one of the region's oldest milk producers ; it has chalky soil, marked by history and human activity, and is favourable for the raising of goats.

Restaurants are popular in the area known as Le Midi. Oysters come from the Étang de Thau, to be served in the restaurants of Bouzigues, Mèze, and Sète. Mussels are commonly seen here in addition to fish specialties of Sète, bourride, tielles and rouille de seiche.

In the Languedoc jambon cru, sometimes known as jambon de montagne is produced. High quality Roquefort comes from the brebis (sheep) on the Larzac plateau.

The Cévennes area offers mushrooms, chestnuts, berries, honey, lamb, game, sausages, pâtés and goat cheeses. Catalan influence can be seen in the cuisine here with dishes like brandade made from a purée of dried cod wrapped in mangold leaves. Snails are plentiful and are prepared in a specific Catalan style known as a cargolade. Wild boar can be found in the more mountainous regions of the Midi.

The Provence and Côte d'Azur region is rich in citrus, vegetables, fruits and herbs; the region is one of the largest suppliers of all these ingredients in France. The region also produces the largest amount of olives, and creates high-quality olive oil. Lavender is used in many dishes in Haute-Provence. Other important herbs in the cuisine include thyme, sage, rosemary, basil, savory, fennel, marjoram, tarragon, oregano, and bay leaf. Honey is a prized ingredient in the region.

Seafood is widely available throughout the coastal area and is heavily represented in the cuisine. Goat cheeses, air-dried sausages, lamb, beef, and chicken are popular here. Garlic and anchovies are used in many of the region's sauces, as in poulet Provençal, which uses white wine, tomatoes, herbs, and sometimes anchovies. Pastis is found everywhere that alcohol is served.

The cuisine uses a large amount of vegetables for lighter preparations. Truffles are commonly seen in Provence during the winter. Thirteen desserts in Provence are the traditional Christmas dessert, and may include, for example, quince cheese, biscuits, almonds, nougat, apple, and fougasse.

Rice is grown in the Camargue, which is the northernmost rice-growing area in Europe, with Camargue red rice being a specialty. Anibal Camous, a Marseillais who lived to be 104, maintained that it was by eating garlic daily that he kept his "youth" and brilliance. When his eighty-year-old son died, the father mourned, "I always told him he wouldn't live long, poor boy. He ate too little garlic!"

Goats and sheep proliferate on the island of Corsica, and lamb are used to prepare dishes such as stufato, ragouts and roasts. Cheeses are also produced, with brocciu being the most popular.

Chestnuts, growing in the Castagniccia forest, are used to produce flour, which is used in turn to make bread, cakes and polenta. The forest provides acorns used to feed the pigs and boars that provide much of the protein for the island's cuisine. Fresh fish and seafood are common.

The island's pork is used to make fine hams, sausage and other unique items including coppa (dried rib cut), lonzu (dried pork fillet), figatellu (smoked and dried liverwurst), salumu (a dried sausage), salcietta, Panzetta, bacon, and prisuttu (farmer's ham).

Clementines (which hold an AOC designation), lemons, nectarines and figs are grown there. Candied citron is used in nougats, while and the aforementioned brocciu and chestnuts are also used in desserts.

Corsica offers a variety of wines and fruit liqueurs, including Cap Corse, Patrimonio, Cédratine, Bonapartine, liqueur de myrte, vins de fruit, Rappu, and eau-de-vie de châtaigne.

French Guianan cuisine or Guianan cuisine is a blend of the different cultures that have settled in French Guiana including European, Indian, Indigenous (Amerindian), Chinese, and Hmong influences. Common dishes include fricassés, stews made of awara broth (made from palm pulp), blaff (onions, garlic, celery and basil broth), pimentade (tomato sauce broth) or roast cougnade (grilled fish), and Colombos (meat-based stew and vegetables with curry). There are markets in Cayenne selling fresh and prepared foods among other items. Some dishes from Metropolitan France are reimagined using local ingredients such as Gratin de Couac using cassava root in lieu of potato.

The cuisine of Réunion is a Creole cuisine (in French, Créole) with a mixture of cooking styles and ingredients. It is strongly influenced by Malagasy cuisine (from Madagascar), as well as other cuisines from East Africa. It also incorporates elements of larger French, Indian and Chinese cuisines, brought by French colonialization and Indian and Chinese immigrants respectively. Notable dishes include samosas, bouchons, rougail, and various curries.

The cuisine of Martinique is a Creole cuisine with a mix of French, indigenous, African, and Indian cooking styles using local ingredients such as breadfruit, cassava, and christophene. Creole dishes rely heavily on seafood, including curries and fritters. Crêperies, Brasseries, and restaurants featuring cuisine from various French regions can be found all over Martinique. Notable local dishes include Accra a fish-based fritter, Boudin sausage, Fricassée de chatrou an octopus stew, Colombo de Martinique a coconut-milk based curry, and Ti Punch a rum and cane juice based drink.

The cuisine of Guadeloupe includes Caribbean, African, European and Indian influences. Notable dishes includes the fish fritter accra, a savory stuffed donut called bokit, and coconut-based desserts like custard and sorbet. Notably. the spice blend "colombo" or "massalé" is a curry-like mix of pepper, saffron, coriander, cumin and garlic with the flavor profile included by Sri Lankan immigrants. The island is also known for rums and includes nine distilleries producing traditional and agricultural rum.

The cuisine of New Caledonia includes local Kanak, Melanesian, and traditional French cooking styles. A notable local dish is bougna which is a stew composed of starches, taros, sweet potatoes, poingo bananas, yams, and is accompanied by local meat and cooked in coconut milk. Seafood is also common including fish and lobster. Traditional French pastries, breads, cheeses, and wines may also be found especially in the capital of Nouméa.

The cuisine of French Polynesia includes a significant array of fruits and vegetables especially sweet potato and coconut. Due to the island nature of the region, seafood is also very common. The " ahima’a ", is a traditional Polynesian underground oven in which hot stones are placed inside to cook the ingredients. Notable dishes include Faraoa 'ipo, Poisson cru and Rēti'a.

The cuisine of Mayotte includes influences from European France, Portugal, the Arab world, and India. Common food includes rice as a daily staple mixed with root vegetables, plantains, fresh and dried fish, and milk from grated coconuts and meat. Notable dishes include Chahoula ya nadzi, rice boiled in water or coconut milk generally served for large meals and makarara a festive fried cake that is prepared into rolls of dough made of flour and coconut milk.

French cuisine varies according to the season. In summer, salads and fruit dishes are popular because they are refreshing and produce is inexpensive and abundant. Greengrocers prefer to sell their fruits and vegetables at lower prices if needed, rather than see them rot in the heat. At the end of summer, mushrooms become plentiful and appear in stews throughout France. The hunting season begins in September and runs through February. Game of all kinds is eaten, often in elaborate dishes that celebrate the success of the hunt. Shellfish are at their peak when winter turns to spring, and oysters appear in restaurants in large quantities.

With the advent of deep-freeze and the air-conditioned hypermarché, these seasonal variations are less marked than before, but they are still observed, in some cases due to legal restrictions. Crayfish, for example, have a short season and it is illegal to catch them out of season. Moreover, they do not freeze well.

French regional cuisines use locally grown vegetables, such as pomme de terre (potato), blé (wheat), haricots verts (a type of French green bean), carotte (carrot), poireau (leek), navet (turnip), aubergine (eggplant), courgette (zucchini), and échalotte (shallot).

French regional cuisines use locally grown fungi, such as truffe (truffle), champignon de Paris (button mushroom), chanterelle ou girolle (chanterelle), pleurote (en huître) (oyster mushrooms), and cèpes (porcini).

Common fruits include oranges, tomatoes, tangerines, peaches, apricots, apples, pears, plums, cherries, strawberries, raspberries, redcurrants, blackberries, grapes, grapefruit, and blackcurrants.

Varieties of meat consumed include poulet (chicken), pigeon (squab), canard (duck), oie (goose, the source of foie gras), bœuf (beef), veau (veal), porc (pork), agneau (lamb), mouton (mutton), caille (quail), cheval (horse), grenouille (frog), and escargot (snails). Commonly consumed fish and seafood include cod, canned sardines, fresh sardines, canned tuna, fresh tuna, salmon, trout, mussels, herring, oysters, shrimp and calamari.

Eggs often eaten as: omelettes, hard-boiled with mayonnaise, scrambled plain, scrambled haute cuisine preparation, œuf à la coque.

Herbs and seasonings vary by region, and include fleur de sel, herbes de Provence, olive, tarragon, rosemary, marjoram, lavender, thyme, fennel, and sage.

Fresh fruit and vegetables, as well as fish and meat, can be purchased either from supermarkets or specialty shops. Street markets are held on certain days in most localities; some towns have a more permanent covered market enclosing food shops, especially meat and fish retailers. These have better shelter than the periodic street markets.

Le petit déjeuner (breakfast) is traditionally a quick meal consisting of tartines (slices) of French bread with butter and honey or jam (sometimes brioche), along with café au lait (also called café crème), or black coffee, or tea and rarely hot chicory. Children often drink hot chocolate in bowls or cups along with their breakfasts. Croissants, pain aux raisins or pain au chocolat (also named chocolatine in the south-west of France) are mostly included as a weekend treat. Breakfast of some kind is always served in cafés opening early in the day.

There are also savoury dishes for breakfast. An example is le petit déjeuner gaulois or petit déjeuner fermier with the famous long narrow bread slices topped with soft white cheese or boiled ham, called mouillettes, which is dipped in a soft-boiled egg and some fruit juice and hot drink.

Another variation called le petit déjeuner chasseur, meant to be very hearty, is served with pâté and other charcuterie products. A more classy version is called le petit déjeuner du voyageur, where delicatessens serve gizzard, bacon, salmon, omelet, or croque monsieur, with or without soft-boiled egg and always with the traditional coffee/tea/chocolate along fruits or fruit juice. When the egg is cooked sunny-side over the croque-monsieur, it is called a croque-madame.

In Germinal and other novels, Émile Zola also mentioned the briquet : two long bread slices stuffed with butter, cheese and or ham. It can be eaten as a standing/walking breakfast, or meant as a "second" one before lunch.

In the movie Bienvenue chez les Ch'tis, Philippe Abrams (Kad Merad) and Antoine Bailleul (Dany Boon) share together countless breakfasts consisting of tartines de Maroilles (a strong cheese) along with their hot chicory.

Le déjeuner (lunch) is a two-hour mid-day meal or a one-hour lunch break. In some smaller towns and in the south of France, the two-hour lunch may still be customary. Sunday lunches are often longer and are taken with the family. Restaurants normally open for lunch at noon and close at 2:30 pm. Some restaurants are closed on Monday during lunch hours.

In large cities, a majority of working people and students eat their lunch at a corporate or school cafeteria, which normally serves complete meals as described above; it is not usual for students to bring their own lunch to eat. For companies that do not operate a cafeteria, it is mandatory for employees to be given lunch vouchers as part of their employee benefits. These can be used in most restaurants, supermarkets and traiteurs ; however, workers having lunch in this way typically do not eat all three courses of a traditional lunch due to price and time constraints. In smaller cities and towns, some working people leave their workplaces to return home for lunch. An alternative, especially among blue-collar workers, is eating sandwiches followed by a dessert; both dishes can be found ready-made at bakeries and supermarkets at budget prices.

Le dîner (dinner) often consists of three courses, hors d'œuvre or entrée (appetizers or introductory course, sometimes soup), plat principal (main course), and a cheese course or dessert, sometimes with a salad offered before the cheese or dessert. Yogurt may replace the cheese course, while a simple dessert would be fresh fruit. The meal is often accompanied by bread, wine and mineral water. Most of the time the bread would be a baguette which is very common in France and is made almost every day. Main meat courses are often served with vegetables, along with potatoes, rice or pasta. Restaurants often open at 7:30 pm for dinner, and stop taking orders between the hours of 10:00 pm and 11:00 pm. Some restaurants close for dinner on Sundays.

In French cuisine, a beverage that precedes a meal is called an apéritif (literally: "that opens the appetite"), and can be served with an amuse-gueule (literally: "mouth amuser"). Those that end it are called digestifs. During the meal, plates are served with water, wine or sometimes beer (choucroute and beer, for example).

The apéritif varies from region to region: Pastis is popular in the south of France, Crémant d'Alsace in the eastern region. Champagne can also be served. Kir, also called blanc-cassis, is a common and popular apéritif -cocktail made with a measure of crème de cassis (blackcurrant liqueur) topped up with white wine. The phrase kir royal is used when white wine is replaced with a Champagne wine. A simple glass of red wine, such as Beaujolais nouveau, can also be presented as an apéritif, accompanied by an amuse-bouche. Some apéritifs can be fortified wines with added herbs, such as cinchona, gentian and vermouth. Trade names that sell well include Suze (the classic gentiane), Byrrh, Dubonnet, and Noilly Prat. Beer can also be an apéritif. Other drinks are fruit juices or syrups for children.

Digestifs are traditionally stronger, and include Cognac, Armagnac, Calvados, eau de vie and fruit alcohols.

A typical French Christmas dish is turkey or capon, with chestnuts. Other common dishes are smoked salmon, oysters, caviar and foie gras. The Yule log (bûche de Noël) is a very French tradition during Christmas. Chocolate and cakes also occupy a prominent place for Christmas in France. This cuisine is normally accompanied by Champagne. Tradition says that thirteen desserts complete the Christmas meal in reference to the twelve apostles and Christ.

The modern restaurant has its origins in French culture. Prior to the late-18th century, diners who wished to "dine out" would visit their local guild-member's kitchen and have their meal prepared for them. However, guild members were limited to producing whatever their guild registry delegated to them. These guild members offered food in their own homes to a steady clientele that appeared day-to-day but at set times. The guest would be offered the meal table d'hôte, which is a meal offered at a set price with very little choice of dishes, sometimes none at all.

The first steps toward the modern restaurant were locations that offered "restorative" bouillons, or restaurants —this word being the origin of the term "restaurant". This process took place during the 1760s and 1770s. These locations were open at all times of the day, featuring ornate tableware and reasonable prices. These locations were meant more as meal replacements for those who had "lost their appetites and suffered from jaded palates and weak chests."

In 1782 Antoine Beauvilliers, pastry chef to the Count of Provence (the future King Louis XVIII), opened one of the most popular restaurants of the time—the Grande Taverne de Londres —in the arcades of the Palais-Royal. Other restaurants were opened by chefs of the time who were leaving the failing monarchy of France, in the period leading up to the 1789 French Revolution. It was these restaurants which expanded upon the limited menus of prior decades, and which led to the full restaurants that were completely legalized with the advent of the French Revolution and the abolition of the guilds. This and the substantial discretionary income of the nouveau riches of the French Directory period (1795 to 1799) helped to sustain these new restaurants.

Larger restaurants and hotels in France employ extensive staff and are commonly referred to as either the kitchen brigade for the kitchen staff or dining room brigade system for the dining room staff. This system was created by Georges Auguste Escoffier. This structured team system delegates responsibilities to different individuals who specialize in certain tasks. The following is a list of positions held both in the kitchen and dining rooms brigades in France:

French Cultural Studies is a peer-reviewed academic journal that publishes papers in the field of Cultural Studies. The journal's editor is Nicholas Hewitt (University of Nottingham). It has been in publication since 1990 and is currently published by SAGE Publications.

French Cultural Studies is a journal which seeks to address key changes that have affected aspects of the study of French culture, language and society in the education system. It aims to provide a forum for a range of work currently being done on French culture. The journal also includes work on the study of literature. However, the main focus of the journal of on areas such as cinema, television, media and the press, the visual arts, popular culture, and cultural and intellectual debate. The journal covers cultural history, from the French Revolution to the present.

French Cultural Studies is abstracted and indexed in, among other databases: Academic Search Premier, the British Humanities Index, SCOPUS, and the Social Sciences Citation Index. According to the Journal Citation Reports, its 2010 impact factor is 0.128, ranking it 9th out of 10 journals in the category 'Cultural Studies'.

The denier (/ d ə ˈ n ɪər / ; Latin : denarius, Italian : denaro, Greek : δηνάριο, romanized : dinario ; abbr. d.) or penny was a medieval coin which takes its name from the Frankish coin first issued in the late seventh century; in English it is sometimes referred to as a silver penny. The appearance of the penny represents the end of gold coinage, which, at the start of Frankish rule, had either been Roman (Byzantine) or "pseudo-imperial" (minted by the Franks in imitation of Byzantine coinage). Silver would be the basis for Frankish coinage from then on. The denier was minted in France, Cyprus and parts of the Italian peninsula for the whole of the Middle Ages, in states such as the patriarchate of Aquileia, the Kingdom of Sicily, the Republic of Genoa, the Republic of Siena, Kingdom of Cyprus, and the crusader state Kingdom of Jerusalem, among others.

Around 755, amid the Carolingian Reforms, Pepin the Short introduced a new currency system which was eventually adjusted so that 12 pence (Latin : denarii ; French : deniers) equaled one shilling (solidi ; sols or sous) and 20 shillings equaled one pound (libra, librae, or lirae ; livres). Later, three deniers equaled one liard. Only the denier was an actual coin; the rest were money of account. This system and the denier itself served as the model for many of Europe's currencies, including sterling, the Italian lira, the Spanish dinero and the Portuguese dinheiro.

In Ancien Régime France, the denier was used as a notional measure of interest rates on loans. Thus, a rate of 4% (1/25) would be expressed as "denier 25"; a rate of 5% (1/20) as "denier 20"; and so forth.

The French Development Agency (French : Agence française de développement, AFD) is a public French financial institution that supports and complements France's diplomacy. Active in Africa, Asia, the Middle East, Latin America, the Indo-Pacific, the Caribbean, and France's overseas territories, AFD finances and supports projects that aim to improve living conditions, foster economic growth, and protect the planet. Its 2,600 staff members are based in Paris, Marseille, and a network of 85 offices worldwide.

AFD's origins go back to the Caisse Centrale de la France Libre (CCFL), created by Charles de Gaulle on 2 December 1941 and successively renamed the Caisse Centrale de la France d'Outre-Mer (CCFOM) in February 1944 and the Caisse Centrale de Coopération Économique (CCCE) in 1958. By 1967, the CCCE had lost all the money-issuing duties that had been at the origin of the CCFL, but had expanded the development financing that the CCFOM had acquired in 1944.

In 1992, the CCCE was renamed the Caisse Française de Développement. With the reform of French development cooperation in 1998, the CFD became Agence Française de Développement.

In addition to a marked increase in its financing, between 2001 and 2010, there was a diversification in the financial instruments used by AFD: grants, of course, but also highly “concessional” loans or loans without interest subsidies, investment funds, guarantee funds and partnerships. AFD can provide loan recipients with liquidity to finance, at attractive rates – due to the AAA rating, the highest for long-term issuances, given to AFD by the international rating agencies –, their investment policies or programs when markets are unable to meet their needs.

In 2013, Anne Paugam took over from Dov Zerah as CEO. She is the first woman to head AFD. In 2014, The Act on Development and International Solidarity recognized the importance of the work conducted by AFD towards France's international commitments. In 2015, Gaël Giraud became AFD's Chief Economist. In 2016, Rémy Rioux took over as CEO from Anne Paugam. A new French law enacted in 2021 established the AFD Group, bringing together Proparco, Expertise France, and AFD.

In May 2026, Christophe Lecourtier, has been officially appointed as Chief Executive Officer of Agence Française de Développement (AFD).

As a specialized credit institution, AFD is subject to banking law, particularly in the field of risk sharing. AFD is a public financial institution. The Government has entrusted it with the role of the main operator for France's cooperation policy. It thereby combines the functions of development bank and implementing agency for France's Official Development Assistance policy.

AFD has a contract of objectives and policies with the state and implements the orientations defined by the Inter-ministerial Committee for International Cooperation and Development (CICID), chaired by the Prime Minister.

In overseas France, AFD conducts a policy, on behalf of the state, to support public authorities and finance the economy. This mandate was reaffirmed during the first Inter-ministerial Committee for Overseas France, chaired by the French president, which was held in November 2009.

Its board of directors comprises a chairperson and 16 members appointed by a decree, including 6 representatives of the State: Ministry of the Economy, Industry and Digital Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Development, Ministry of the Interior, Ministry of Overseas France.

The French Development Agency (AFD) implements the policy defined by the French Government. It works to combat poverty and promote sustainable development.

It achieves this by financing and supporting projects that improve living conditions for populations, promote economic growth and protect the planet.

In 2014, AFD allocated EUR 8.1bn to finance projects, including EUR 6.35bn in developing countries and EUR 1.55bn for overseas France.

In 2014, AFD allocated some EUR 767m to education and health and invested over EUR 633m in water and sanitation programs. Projects related to territorial development benefited from over EUR 4bn, i.e. almost half AFD's commitments, with projects in the energy, transport and telecommunications sectors in rural and urban areas. For 2014, the breakdown for commitments by sector is as follows:

AFD also operates in emerging countries for issues related to the protection of the environment and energy management.

In a crosscutting manner to these sectors, in 2014, AFD earmarked 53% of its international activity for the fight against climate change, i.e. EUR 2.8bn, which financed development projects that also have a positive impact on the climate.

AFD, via the projects it finances and several initiatives, is gearing up for the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP21) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). For example, with the GoodPlanet Foundation, it is putting on a photo exhibition “60 SOLUTIONS Against Climate Change”, which presents concrete, innovative and effective initiatives in four sectors that combine climate change and economic development.,

AFD has been working for over sixty years to promote development in Southern countries and the French overseas territories. It is active in the field in over 90 countries, where it finances and supports projects that improve living conditions for populations, promote economic growth and protect the planet: getting children into school, assisting farmers, financing small businesses, water supply, tropical forest conservation, combating climate change... AFD's strategy is guided by sustainable development. Its operations are in line with the Millennium Development Goals, at the intersection of the objectives of economic growth, poverty reduction and environmental conservation.

A wide range of financial and technical instruments meet the different needs of countries: grants, guarantees, equity investments, subsidized loans, loans on market terms and technical assistance.

It develops financial and intellectual partnerships with other donors and contributes, in conjunction with its supervisory authorities, to public policymaking and to France's influence in the development sphere.

In Latin America and the Caribbean, AFD promotes sustainable and equitable development through green and inclusive growth. There are a number of projects to fight climate change, for urban development, as well as projects to promote social convergence.

Sub-Saharan Africa is the priority region for France's public development policy. In 2014, AFD invested EUR 2.95bn in the region, i.e. 36.5% of its total financing. Among the many projects, a number focus on promoting access to essential services, the growth of sustainable cities, the development of infrastructure, family farming and job-creating enterprises, as well as on the preservation of natural resources.

In Asia, AFD works to promote environmental and regional balances, with a focus on projects that limit the environmental footprint of cities or contribute to regional convergence.

AFD supports the region's political and economic transition, with a focus on promoting Euro-Mediterranean integration, territorial development and job creation. The AFD also funds restoration works, such as that of the Saint Hilarion monastery which the AFD funded in order to have the Byzantine-era site inscribed in the UNESCO World Heritage Sites list.

Since 1946, AFD has had a public service mandate to provide a reference public service provision for credit and social housing. In 2014, overseas France accounted for 19% of AFD's activity, i.e. EUR 1.55bn. AFD conducts several types of action in overseas France. Its activities are based on the following areas: financing and assisting public policies, advisory services for local authorities, promoting business competitiveness and job creation, supporting regional integration and action for sustainable development. This involves financing and supporting projects that improve living conditions for populations and promote economic growth, while preserving the environment. Thanks to its financing, its expertise and its knowledge production, it assists the local public sector, finances companies, housing and urban development, and supports regional cooperation.

It fulfills this mandate through nine agencies throughout the overseas territories: French Guiana, French Polynesia, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Mayotte, New Caledonia, Réunion, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Wallis and Futuna.

In the overseas departments (DOM), in Saint Martin, Saint Barthélemy and Saint Pierre and Miquelon, AFD also represents the public investment bank Bpifrance, which finances the creation, innovation, investments and international development of French SMEs.

AFD is the reference shareholder in seven social housing companies (Simar in Martinique, Sic in New Caledonia, Sig in Guadeloupe, SIDR in Réunion, Siguy and Simko in French Guiana and Sim in Mayotte). These property companies promote, manage and build social housing.

Finally, it provides part of the staff of the note-issuing banks, Institut d'Emission d'Outre-mer and Institut d'Emission des Départements d'Outre-mer.

Knowledge production is a major activity for AFD and aims to contribute to the definition of the public policies of France and its partners. It has become an essential complement to the financial and technical tools. AFD's knowledge production started to play an important role in the 2000s. This drive for knowledge production is based on the organization of seminars and conferences, training given by CEFEB, a studies and research program, and the establishment of partnerships with academic and research institutes.

AFD also offers a number of publications on developing countries and the French overseas territories:

All this contributes to improving knowledge of the Official Development Assistance policy: “its rationale, its effectiveness, its interactions with the other public policies, its role in the management of globalization” AFD's aim is to become an internationally recognized research center, both in terms of sustainable development and global public goods, and the design of innovative financing instruments.

In 2007, AFD was called into question for its support for French companies suspected of contributing to deforestation in Central Africa. However, no legal proceedings were brought against AFD.

AFD has strict procedures during project appraisal for impact control and measurement in terms of social and environmental responsibility. It has provided EUR 900,000 of financing to the Central Africa Forest Commission (COMIFAC), which is responsible for guiding, coordinating, harmonizing and taking decisions in terms of the conservation and sustainable management of forest ecosystems. Mr. Joyandet, French Secretary of State for Cooperation and Francophonie from March 2008 to July 2010, criticized the Chief Executive Officer at the time, Mr. Severino, for AFD's emergency-oriented approach, without a long term-vision and a certain lack of scope. However, the Minister's remarks did not gain wide consensus among the development community.

According to the Cameroon National Anti-corruption Commission (CONAC), two front companies, including one controlled by AFD, have been suspected of fraud. In December 2013, CONAC presented its 2012 activity report in Yaoundé, indicating that over CFA 113bn had been misappropriated from the cotton development company (SODECOTON) between 2002 and 2011.

In December 2021, created under the name Caisse centrale de la France libre in 1941, the public financial institution could change its name again in the coming months, 80 years after its launch. Or a project in the process of reflection, which also includes an overhaul of its operation and its development policy, which "appear unsuitable in relation to our experience", according to its director Rémy Rioux.

The Directory (also called Directorate ; French : le Directoire [ diʁɛktwaʁ ]) was the system of government established by the French Constitution of 1795. It takes its name from the committee of five men vested with executive power. The Directory governed the French First Republic from 26 October 1795 (4 Brumaire an IV) until 9 November 1799, when it was overthrown by Napoleon Bonaparte in the Coup of 18 Brumaire and replaced by the Consulate.

The Directory was continually at war with foreign coalitions, including Britain, Austria, Prussia, the Kingdom of Naples, Russia and the Ottoman Empire. It annexed Belgium and the left bank of the Rhine, while Bonaparte conquered a large part of Italy. The Directory established 29 short-lived sister republics in Italy, Switzerland and the Netherlands. The conquered cities and states were required to send France huge amounts of money, as well as art treasures, which were used to fill the new Louvre museum in Paris. An army led by Bonaparte tried to conquer Egypt and marched as far as Saint-Jean-d'Acre in Syria. The Directory defeated a resurgence of the War in the Vendée, the royalist-led civil war in the Vendée region, but failed in its venture to support the Irish Rebellion of 1798 and create an Irish Republic.

The French economy was in continual crisis during the Directory. At the beginning, the treasury was empty; the paper money, the assignat, had fallen to a fraction of its value, and prices soared. The Directory stopped printing assignats and restored the value of the money, but this caused a new crisis; prices and wages fell, and economic activity slowed to a standstill.

In its first two years, the Directory concentrated on ending the excesses of the Jacobin Reign of Terror ; mass executions stopped, and measures taken against exiled priests and royalists were relaxed. The Jacobin political club was closed on 12 November 1794 and the government crushed an armed uprising planned by the Jacobins and an early socialist revolutionary, François-Noël Babeuf, known as " Gracchus Babeuf". But after the discovery of a royalist conspiracy including a prominent general, Jean-Charles Pichegru, the Jacobins took charge of the new Councils and hardened the measures against the Church and émigrés. They took two additional seats in the Directory, hopelessly dividing it.

In 1799, after several defeats, French victories in the Netherlands and Switzerland restored the French military position, but the Directory had lost all the political factions' support, including some of its Directors. Bonaparte returned from Egypt in October, and was engaged by Abbé Sieyès and others to carry out a parliamentary coup d'état on 9–10 November 1799. The coup abolished the Directory and replaced it with the French Consulate led by Bonaparte.

The period known as the Reign of Terror began as a way of harnessing revolutionary fervour, but quickly degenerated into the settlement of personal grievances. On 17 September 1793, the Law of Suspects authorised the arrest of any suspected "enemies of freedom"; on 10 October, the National Convention recognised the Committee of Public Safety under Maximilien Robespierre as the supreme authority, and suspended the Constitution until "peace was achieved".

According to archival records, from September 1793 to July 1794 some 16,600 people were executed on charges of counter-revolutionary activity; another 40,000 may have been summarily executed or died awaiting trial. At its peak, the slightest hint of counter-revolutionary thoughts could place one under suspicion, and even his supporters began to fear their own survival depended on removing Robespierre. On 27 July, he and his allies were arrested and executed the next day.

In July 1794, the Convention established a committee to draft what became the 1795 Constitution. Largely designed by Pierre Daunou and Boissy d'Anglas, it established a bicameral legislature, intended to slow down the legislative process, ending the wild swings of policy under the previous unicameral systems. Deputies were chosen by indirect election, a total franchise of around 5 million voting in primaries for 30,000 electors, or 0.5% of the population. Since they were also subject to stringent property qualification, it guaranteed the return of conservative or moderate deputies.

The Directory was established after the Constitution of Year III which was adopted by a referendum on 24 September 1795, and constituted after the first elections which were held from 12–21 October 1795. On 25 October the National Convention held its last meeting; the Committee of Public Safety was dissolved or rather disappeared before the end of the month. On 31 October, in addition to Paul Barras, Jean-François Rewbell, Louis-Marie de La Révellière-Lépeaux, Étienne-François Le Tourneur and Emmanuel-Joseph Sieyès were chosen as Directors.

At the end of October a legislature consisting of the Council of 500 was created, responsible for drafting legislation, and Council of Ancients, an upper house containing 250 men over the age of 40, who would review and approve it. Executive power was in the hands of five Directors, selected by the Council of Ancients from a list provided by the lower house, with a five-year mandate. This was intended to prevent executive power being concentrated in the hands of one man.

We propose to you to compose an executive power of five members, renewed with one new member each year, called the Directory. This executive will have a force concentrated enough that it will be swift and firm, but divided enough to make it impossible for any member to even consider becoming a tyrant. A single chief would be dangerous. Each member will preside for three months; he will have during this time the signature and seal of the head of state. By the slow and gradual replacement of members of the Directory, you will preserve the advantages of order and continuity and will have the advantages of unity without the inconveniences.

The 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen was attached as a preamble, declaring "the Rights of Man in society are liberty, equality, security, and property". It guaranteed freedom of religion, freedom of the press, and freedom of labour, but forbade armed assemblies and even public meetings of political societies. Only individuals or public authorities could tender petitions.

The judicial system was reformed, and judges were given short terms of office: two years for justices of the peace, five for judges of department tribunals. They were elected, and could be re-elected, to assure their independence from the other branches of government.

The new legislature had two houses, a Council of Five Hundred and a Council of Ancients with two hundred fifty members. Electoral assemblies in each canton of France, which brought together a total of thirty thousand qualified electors, chose representatives to an electoral assembly in each department, which then elected the members of both houses. The members of this legislature had a term of three years, with one-third of the members renewed every year. The Ancients could not initiate new laws, but could veto those proposed by the Council of Five Hundred.

The Constitution established a unique kind of executive, a five-man Directory chosen by the legislature. It required the Council of Five Hundred to prepare, by secret ballot, a list of candidates for the Directory. The Council of Ancients then chose, again by secret ballot, the Directors from that provided list. The Constitution required that Directors be at least forty years old. To assure gradual but continual change, one Director, chosen by lot, was replaced each year. Ministers for the various departments of State aided the Directors. These ministers did not form a council or cabinet and had no general powers of government.

The new Constitution sought to create a separation of powers ; the Directors had no voice in legislation or taxation, nor could Directors or Ministers sit in either house. To assure that the Directors would have some independence, each would be elected by one portion of the legislature, and they could not be removed by the legislature unless they violated the law.

Under the new Constitution of 1795, to be eligible to vote in the elections for the Councils, voters were required to meet certain minimum property and residency standards. In towns with over six thousand population, they had to own or rent a property with a revenue equal to the standard income for at least one hundred fifty or two hundred days of work, and to have lived in their residence for at least a year. This ruled out a large part of the French population.

The greatest victim under the new system was the City of Paris, which had dominated events in the first part of the Revolution. On 24 August 1794, the committees of the sections of Paris, bastions of the Jacobins which had provided most of the manpower for demonstrations and invasions of the Convention, were abolished. Shortly afterwards, on 31 August, the municipality of Paris, which had been the domain of Danton and Robespierre, was abolished, and the city placed under direct control of the national government. When the Law of 19 Vendémiaire Year IV (11 October 1795), in application of the new Constitution, created the first twelve arrondissements of Paris, it established twelve new committees, one for each arrondissement. The city became a new department, the Department of the Seine, replacing the former Department of Paris created in 1790.

Meanwhile, the leaders of the still ruling National Convention tried to meet challenges from both neo-Jacobins on the left and royalists on the right. On 21 September 1794, the remains of Jean-Paul Marat, whose furious articles had promoted the Reign of Terror, were placed with great ceremony in the Panthéon, while on the same day, the moderate Convention member Merlin de Thionville described the Jacobins as "A hangout of outlaws" and the "knights of the guillotine". Young men known as Muscadins, largely from middle-class families, attacked the Jacobin and radical clubs. The new freedom of the press saw the appearance of a host of new newspapers and pamphlets from the left and the right, such as the royalist L'Orateur du peuple edited by Stanislas Fréron, an extreme Jacobin who had moved to the extreme right, and at the opposite end of the spectrum, the Tribun du peuple, edited by Gracchus Babeuf, a former priest who advocated an early version of socialism. On 5 February 1795, the semi-official newspaper Le Moniteur Universel (Le Moniteur) attacked Marat for encouraging the bloody extremes of the Reign of Terror. Marat's remains were removed from the Panthéon two days later. The surviving Girondin deputies, whose leaders had been executed during the Reign of Terror, were brought back into the Convention on 8 March 1795.

The Convention tried to bring a peaceful end to the Catholic and royalist uprising in the Vendée. The Convention signed an amnesty agreement, promising to recognize the freedom of religion and allowing territorial guards to keep their weapons if the Vendéens would end their revolt. On a proposal from Boissy d'Anglas, on 21 February 1795 the Convention formally proclaimed the freedom of religion and the separation of church and state.

Between July 1794 and the October 1795 elections for the new-style Parliament, the government tried to obtain international peace treaties and secure French gains. In January 1795 General Pichegru took advantage of an extremely cold winter and invaded the Dutch Republic. He captured Utrecht on 18 January, and on 14 February units of French cavalry captured the Dutch fleet, which was trapped in the ice at Den Helder. The Dutch government asked for peace, conceding Dutch Flanders, Maastricht and Venlo to France. On 9 February, after a French offensive in the Alps, Ferdinand III, Grand Duke of Tuscany signed a treaty with France. Soon afterwards, on 5 April, France signed a peace treaty, the Peace of Basel, with Prussia, where King Frederick William II was tired of the war; Prussia recognized the French occupation of the western bank of the Rhine. On 22 July 1795, a peace agreement, the "Treaty of Basel", was signed with Spain, where the French Revolutionary Army had marched as far as Bilbao in the War of the Pyrenees. By the time the Directory was chosen, the coalition against France was reduced to Britain and Austria, which hoped that Russia might be brought in on its side.

On 20 May 1795 (1 Prairial Year III), the Jacobins attempted to seize power in Paris. Following the model of Danton's seizure of the National Assembly in June 1792, a mob of sans-culottes invaded the meeting hall of the Convention at the Tuileries Palace, killed one deputy, and demanded that a new government be formed. This time the army moved swiftly to clear the hall. Several deputies who had taken the side of the invaders were arrested. The uprising continued the following day, as the sans-culottes seized the Hôtel de Ville as they had done in earlier uprisings, but with little effect; crowds did not move to support them. On the third day, 22 May, the army moved into and occupied the working-class neighborhood of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine. The sans-culottes were disarmed and their leaders were arrested. In the following days the surviving members of the Committee of Public Safety, the committee that had been led by Robespierre, were arrested, with the exception of Carnot and two others. Six of the deputies who had participated in the uprising and had been sentenced to death committed suicide before they were taken to the guillotine.

On 23 June 1795, the Chouans, royalist and Catholic rebels in Brittany, formed an army of 14,000 men near Quiberon. With the assistance of the British navy, a force of two thousand royalists was landed at Quiberon. The French army under General Lazare Hoche reacted swiftly, forcing the royalists to take refuge on the peninsula and then to withdraw. They surrendered on 21 July; 748 of the rebels were executed by firing squad.

The new Constitution of the Year III was presented to the Convention and debated between 4 July – 17 August 1795, and was formally adopted on 22 August 1795. It was a long document, with 377 articles, compared with 124 in the first French Constitution of 1793. Even before it took effect, however, the members of the Convention took measures to assure they would still have dominance in the legislature over the government. They required that in the first elections, two hundred and fifty new deputies would be elected, while five hundred members of the old Convention would remain in place until the next elections. A national referendum of eligible voters was then held. The total number of voters was low; of five million eligible voters, 1,057,390 electors approved the Constitution, and 49,978 opposed it. The proposal that two thirds of members of the old Convention should remain in place was approved by a much smaller margin, 205,498 to 108,754.

The new Constitution of the Year III was officially proclaimed in force on 23 September 1795, but the new Councils had not yet been elected, and the Directors had not yet been chosen. The leaders of the royalists and constitutional monarchists chose this moment to try to seize power. They saw that the vote in favor of the new Constitution was hardly overwhelming. Paris voters were particularly hostile to the idea of keeping two-thirds of the old members of the Convention in the new Councils. A central committee was formed, with members from the wealthier neighborhoods of Paris, and they began planning a march on the center of the city and on the Tuileries, where the Convention still met.

The members of the Convention, very much experienced with conspiracies, were well aware that the planning was underway. A group of five republican deputies, led by Paul Barras, had already formed an unofficial directory, in anticipation of the creation of the real one. They were concerned about the National Guard members from western Paris, and were unsure about the military commander of Paris, General Jacques-François Menou. Barras decided to turn to military commanders in his entourage who were known republicans, particularly Napoleon Bonaparte, whom he had known when Bonaparte was successfully fighting the British in Toulon. Bonaparte, at this point a general of second rank in the Army of the Interior, was ordered to defend the government buildings on the right bank.

The armed royalist insurgents planned a march in two columns along both the right bank and left bank of the Seine toward the Tuileries. There on 5 October 1795, the royalists were met by the artillery of sous-lieutenant Joachim Murat at the Sablons and by Bonaparte's soldiers and artillery in front of the church of Saint-Roch. Over the next two hours, the " whiff of grapeshot " of Bonaparte's cannons and gunfire of his soldiers brutally mowed down advancing columns, killing some four hundred insurgents, and ending the rebellion. Bonaparte was promoted to General of Division on 16 October, and General in Chief of the Army of the Interior on 26 October. It was the last uprising to take place in Paris during the French Revolution.

Between 12 and 21 October 1795, immediately after the suppression of royalist uprising in Paris, the elections for the new Councils decreed by the new Constitution took place. 379 members of the old Convention, for the most part moderate republicans, were elected to the new legislature. To assure that the Directory did not abandon the Revolution entirely, the Council required that all of the members of the Directory be former members of the Convention and regicides, those who had voted for the execution of Louis XVI.

Due to the rules established by the Convention, a majority of members of the new legislature, 381 of 741 deputies, had served in the Convention and were ardent republicans, but a large part of the new deputies elected were royalists, 118 versus 11 from the left. The members of the upper house, the Council of Ancients, were chosen by lot from among all of the deputies.

On 31 October 1795, the Council of Ancients chose the first Directory from a list of candidates submitted by the Council of Five Hundred. One person elected, the Abbé Sieyès, refused to take the position, saying it didn't suit his interests or personality. A new member, Lazare Carnot, was elected in his place.

The members elected to the Directory were the following:

The following day, the members of the new government took over their offices in the Luxembourg Palace, which had previously been occupied by the Committee of Public Safety. Nothing had been prepared, and the rooms had no furniture: they managed to find firewood to heat the room, and a table in order to work. Each member took charge of a particular sector: Rewbell diplomacy; Carnot and Le Tourneur military affairs, La Révellière-Lépeaux religion and public instruction, and Barras internal affairs.

The Council of Ancients was attributed the building at the Tuileries Palace formerly occupied by the Convention, while the Council of Five Hundred deliberated in the Salle du Manège, the former riding school west of the palace in the Tuileries Garden. One of the early decisions of the new parliament was to designate uniforms for both houses: the Five Hundred wore long white robes with a blue belt, a scarlet cloak and a hat of blue velour, while members of the Ancients wore a robe of blue-violet, a scarlet sash, a white mantle, and a violet hat.

The new Director overseeing financial affairs, La Réveillière-Lépeaux, gave a succinct description of the financial state of France when the Directory took power: "The national Treasury was completely empty; not a single sou remained. The assignats were almost worthless; the little value which remained drained away each day with accelerated speed. One could not print enough money in one night to meet the most pressing needs of the next day.... The public revenues were nonexistent; citizens had lost the habit of paying taxes. [...] All public credit was dead and all confidence lost. [...] The depreciation of the assignats, the frightening speed of the fall, reduced the salary of all public employees and functionaries to a value which was purely nominal."

The drop in value in the money was accompanied by extraordinary inflation. The Louis d'or (gold coin), which was worth 2,000 ₶. in paper money at the beginning of the Directory, increased to 3,000₶. and then 5,000₶. The price of a liter of wine increased from 2₶.10 s. in October 1795 to 10₶. and then 30₶. A measure of flour worth 2₶. in 1790 was worth 225₶. in October 1794.

The new government continued to print assignats, which were based on the value of property confiscated from the Church and the aristocracy, but it could not print them fast enough; even when it printed one hundred million in a day, it covered only one-third of the government's needs. To fill the treasury, the Directory resorted in December 1795 to a forced loan of 600 million-₶. from wealthy citizens, who were required to pay between 50₶. and 6,000₶. each.

To fight inflation, the government began minting more coins of gold and silver, which had real value; the government had little gold but large silver reserves, largely in the form of silverware, candlesticks and other objects confiscated from the churches and the nobility. It minted 72 million écus, and when this silver supply ran low, it obtained much more gold and silver through military campaigns outside of France, particularly from Bonaparte's army in Italy. Bonaparte demanded gold or silver from each city he conquered, threatening to destroy the cities if they did not pay.

These measures reduced the rate of inflation. On 19 February 1796, the government held a ceremony in the Place Vendôme to destroy the printing presses which had been used to produce huge quantities of assignats. This success produced a new problem: the country was still flooded with more than two billion four hundred million (2.400.000.000) assignats, claims on confiscated properties, which now had some value. Those who held assignats were able to exchange them for state mandates, which they could use to buy châteaux, church buildings and other biens nationaux (state property) at extremely reduced prices. Speculation became rampant, and property in Paris and other cities could change hands several times a day.

Another major problem faced by the Directory was the enormous public debt, the same problem that had led to the Revolution in the first place. In September–December 1797, the Directory attacked this problem by declaring bankruptcy on two-thirds of the debt, but assured payment on the other third. This resulted in the ruin of those who held large quantities of government bonds, but stabilized the currency. To keep the treasury full, the Directory also imposed new taxes on property owners, based on the number of fireplaces and chimneys, and later on the number of windows, of their residences. It refrained from adding more taxes on wine and salt, which had helped cause the 1789 revolution, but added new taxes on gold and silver objects, playing cards, tobacco, and other luxury products. Through these means, the Directory brought about a relative stability of finances which continued through the Directory and Consulate.

The food supply for the population, and particularly for the Parisians, was a major economic and political problem before and during the Revolution; it had led to food riots in Paris and attacks on the Convention. To assure the supply of food to the sans-culottes in Paris, the base of support of the Jacobins, the Convention had strictly regulated grain distribution and set maximum prices for bread and other essential products. As the value of the currency dropped, the fixed prices soon did not cover the cost of production, and supplies dropped. The Convention was forced to abolish the maximum on 24 December 1794, but it continued to buy huge quantities of bread and meat which it distributed at low prices to the Parisians. This Paris food distribution cost a large part of the national budget, and was resented by the rest of the country, which did not have that benefit. By early 1796, the grain supply was supplemented by deliveries from Italy and even from Algeria. Despite the increased imports, the grain supply to Paris was not enough. The Ministry of the Interior reported on 23 March 1796 that there was only enough wheat to make bread for five days, and there were shortages of meat and firewood. The Directory was forced to resume deliveries of subsidized food to the very poor, the elderly, the sick, and government employees. The food shortages and high prices were one factor in the growth of discontent and the Gracchus Babeuf 's uprising, the Conspiracy of the Equals, in 1796. The harvests were good in the following years and the food supplies improved considerably, but the supply was still precarious in the north, the west, the southeast, and the valley of the Seine.

In 1795, the Directory faced a new threat from the left, from the followers of François Noël Babeuf, a talented political agitator who took the name Gracchus and was the organizer of what became known as the Conspiracy of the Equals. Babeuf had, since 1789, been drawn to the Agrarian Law, an agrarian reform preconized by the ancient Roman brothers, Tiberius and Gaius Gracchus, of sharing goods in common, as means of achieving economic equality. By the time of the fall of Robespierre, he had abandoned this as an impractical scheme and was moving towards a more complex plan. Babeuf did not call for the abolition of private property, and wrote that peasants should own their own plots of land, but he advocated that all wealth should be shared equally: all citizens who were able would be required to work, and all would receive the same income. Babeuf did not believe that the mass of French citizens was ready for self-government; accordingly, he proposed a dictatorship under his leadership until the people were educated enough to take charge. "People!", Babeuf wrote. "Breathe, see, recognize your guide, your defender.... Your tribune presents himself with confidence."

At first, Babeuf's following was small; the readers of his newspaper, Le Tribun du peuple ("The Tribune of the People"), were mostly middle-class far-left Jacobins who had been excluded from the new government. However, his popularity increased in the working-class of the capital with the drop in value of the assignats, which rapidly resulted in the decrease of wages and the rise of food prices. Beginning in October 1795, he allied himself with the most radical Jacobins, and on 29 March 1796 formed the Directoire secret des Égaux ("Secret Directory of Equals"), which proposed to "revolutionize the people" through pamphlets and placards, and eventually to overthrow the government. He formed an alliance of utopian socialists and radical Jacobins, including Félix Lepeletier, Pierre-Antoine Antonelle, Sylvain Marechal, Jean-Pierre-André Amar and Jean-Baptiste Robert Lindet. The Conspiracy of Equals was organized in a novel way: in the center was Babeuf and the Secret Directory, who hid their identities, and shared information with other members of the Conspiracy only via trusted intermediaries. This conspiratorial structure was later adopted by Marxist movements. Despite his precautions, the Directory infiltrated an agent into the conspiracy, and was fully informed of what he was doing. Bonaparte, the newly named commander of the Army of the Interior, was ordered to close the Panthéon Club, the major meeting place for the Jacobins in Paris, which he did on 27 February 1796. The Directory took other measures to prevent an uprising; the Legion of Police (légion de police), a local police force dominated by Jacobins, was forced to become a part of the Army, and the Army organized a mobile column to patrol the neighborhoods and stop uprisings.

Before Babeuf and his conspiracy could strike, he was betrayed by a police spy and arrested in his hiding place on 10 May 1796. Though he was a talented agitator, he was a very poor conspirator; with him in his hiding place were the complete records of the conspiracy, with all of the names of the conspirators. Despite this setback, the conspiracy went ahead with the Grenelle camp affair. On the night of 9–10 September 1796, between 400 and 700 Jacobins went to the 21st Regiment of Dragoons (21e régiment de dragons) army camp at Grenelle and tried to incite an armed rebellion against the Directory. At the same time a column of militants was formed in the working-class neighborhoods of Paris to march on the Luxembourg Palace, headquarters of the Directory. Director Carnot had been informed the night before by the commander of the camp, and a unit of dragoons was ready. When the attack began at about ten o'clock, the dragoons appeared suddenly and charged. About twenty Jacobins were killed, and the others arrested. The column of militants, learning what had happened, disbanded in confusion. The widespread arrest of Babeuf's militants and Jacobins followed. The practice of arresting suspects at their homes at night, stopped after the downfall of Robespierre, was resumed on this occasion.

Despite his arrest, Babeuf, in jail, still felt he could negotiate with the government. He wrote to the Directory: "Citizen Directors, why don't you look above yourselves and treat with me as with an equal power? You have seen now the vast confidence of which I am the center... this view makes you tremble." Several attempts were made by Babeuf's followers to free him from prison. He was finally moved to Vendôme for trial. The Directory did not tremble. The accused Jacobins were tried by military courts between 19 September and 27 October. Thirty Jacobins, including three former deputies of the Convention, were convicted and guillotined. Babeuf and his principal followers were tried in Vendôme between 20 February and 26 May 1797. The two principal leaders, Babeuf and Augustin Alexandre Darthé, were convicted. They both attempted suicide, but survived and were guillotined on 27 May 1797. However, in the following months, the Directory and Councils gradually turned away from the royalist right and tried to find new allies on the left.

The major preoccupation of the Directory during its existence was the war against the coalition of Britain and Austria. The military objective set by the Convention in October 1795 was to enlarge France to what were declared its natural limits: the Pyrenees, the Rhine and the Alps, the borders of Gaul at the time of the Roman Empire. In 1795, Prussia, Spain and the Dutch Republic quit the War of the First Coalition and made peace with France, but Great Britain refused to accept the French annexation of the Austrian Netherlands. Beside Britain and Austria, the only enemies remaining for France were the Kingdom of Sardinia and several small Italian states. Austria proposed a European congress to settle borders, but the Directory refused, demanding direct negotiations with Austria instead. Under British pressure, Austria agreed to continue the war against France.

Lazare Carnot, the Director who oversaw military affairs, planned a new campaign against Austria, using three armies: General Jean-Baptiste Jourdan 's Army of Sambre-et-Meuse on the Rhine and General Jean Victor Moreau 's Army of the Rhine and Moselle on the Danube would march to Vienna and dictate a peace. A third army, the Army of Italy under General Bonaparte, who had risen in rank with spectacular speed due to his defense of the government from a royalist uprising, would carry out a diversionary operation against Austria in northern Italy. Jourdan's army captured Mayence and Frankfurt, but on 14 August 1796 was defeated by the Austrians at the Battle of Amberg and again on 3 September 1796 at the Battle of Würzburg, and had to retreat back to the Rhine. General Moreau, without the support of Jourdan, was also forced to retreat.

The story was very different in Italy. Bonaparte, though he was only twenty-eight years old, was named commander of the Army of Italy on 2 March 1796, through the influence of Barras, his patron in the Directory. Bonaparte faced the combined armies of Austria and Sardinia, which numbered seventy thousand men. Bonaparte slipped his army between them and defeated them in a series of battles, culminating at the Battle of Mondovi where he defeated the Sardinians on 22 April 1796, and the Battle of Lodi, where he defeated the Austrians on 10 May. King Victor Amadeus III of Sardinia was forced to make peace in May 1796 and ceded Nice and Savoy to France.

At the end of 1796, Austria sent two new armies to Italy to expel Bonaparte, but Bonaparte outmaneuvered them both, winning a first victory at the Battle of Arcole on 17 November 1796, then at the Battle of Rivoli on 14 January 1797. He forced Austria to sign the Treaty of Campo Formio (October 1797), whereby Emperor Francis II ceded Lombardy and the Austrian Netherlands to the French Republic in exchange for Venice and urged the Imperial Diet to surrender the lands beyond the Rhine.

The Directory was eager to form a coalition with Spain to block British commerce with the continent and to close the Mediterranean Sea to British ships. By the Second Treaty of San Ildefonso, concluded in August 1796, Spain became the ally of France, and on 5 October, it declared war on Britain. The British fleet under Admiral Jervis defeated the Spanish fleet at the Cape St Vincent, keeping the Mediterranean open to British ships, but Britain was brought into such extreme peril by the Spithead and Nore mutinies in its fleet that it offered to acknowledge the French conquest of the Netherlands and to restore captured French colonies in the Caribbean and India.

The Directory also sought a new way to strike British interests and to repay Britain for the support it gave to royalist insurgents in Brittany. A French fleet of 44 vessels departed Brest on 15 December 1796, carrying an expeditionary force of 14,000 soldiers, led by General Hoche to Ireland, where they hoped to join forces with Irish rebels to expel the British from the Kingdom of Ireland. However, the fleet was separated by storms off the Irish coast and, being unable to land in Ireland, had to return to home port with 31 vessels and 12,000 surviving soldiers.

The first elections held after the formation of the Directory were held in March and April 1797, in order to replace one-third of the members of the Councils. The elections were a crushing defeat for the old members of the Convention; 205 of the 216 were defeated. Only eleven former deputies from the Convention were reelected, several of whom were royalists. The elections were a triumph for the royalists, particularly in the south and in the west; after the elections there were about 160 royalist deputies, divided between those who favored a return to an absolute monarchy, and those who wished a constitutional monarchy on the British model. The constitutional monarchists elected to the Council included Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours, who later emigrated to the United States with his family, and whose son, Éleuthère Irénée du Pont, founded the "E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company", now known as DuPont. In Paris and other large cities, the candidates of the left dominated. General Jean-Charles Pichegru, a former Jacobin and ordinary soldier who had become one of the most successful generals of the Revolution, was elected president of the new Council of Five Hundred. François Barbé-Marbois, a diplomat and future negotiator of the sale of Louisiana to the United States, was elected president of the Council of Ancients.

Royalism was not strictly legal, and deputies could not announce themselves as such, but royalist newspapers and pamphlets soon appeared, there were pro-monarchy demonstrations in theaters, and royalists wore identifying clothing items, such as black velvet collars, in show of mourning for the execution of Louis XVI. The parliamentary royalists demanded changes in the government fiscal policies, and a more tolerant position toward religion. During the Convention, churches had been closed and priests required to take an oath to the government. Priests who had refused to take the oath were expelled from the country, on pain of the death penalty if they returned. Under the Directory, many priests had quietly returned, and many churches around the country had re-opened and were discreetly holding services. When the Directory proposed moving the ashes of the celebrated mathematician and philosopher René Descartes to the Panthéon, one deputy, Louis-Sébastien Mercier, a former Girondin and opponent of the Jacobins, protested that the ideas of Descartes had inspired the Reign of Terror of the Revolution and destroyed religion in France. Descartes' ashes were not moved. Émigrés who had left during the Revolution had been threatened by the Convention with the death penalty if they returned; now, under the Directory, they quietly began to return.

Parallel with the parliamentary royalists, but not directly connected with them, a clandestine network of royalists existed, whose objective was to place Louis XVIII, then in exile in Germany, on the French throne. They were funded largely by Britain, through the offices of William Wickham, the British spymaster who had his headquarters in Switzerland. These networks were too divided and too closely watched by the police to have much effect on politics. However, Wickham did make one contact that proved to have a decisive effect on French politics: through an intermediary, he had held negotiations with General Pichegru, then commander of the Army of the Rhine.

The Directory itself was divided. Carnot, Letourneur and La Révellière Lépeaux were not royalists, but favored a more moderate government, more tolerant of religion. Though Carnot himself had been a member of the Committee of Public Safety, he declared that the Jacobins were ungovernable, that the Revolution could not go on forever, and that it was time to end it. A new member, François-Marie, marquis de Barthélemy, a diplomat, had joined the Directory; he was allied with Carnot. The royalists in the Councils immediately began to demand more power over the government and particularly over the finances, threatening the position of Barras.

Barras, the consummate intriguer, won La Révellière Lépeaux over to his side, and began planning the downfall of the royalists. From letters taken from a captured royalist agent, he was aware of the contacts that General Pichegru made with the British and that he had been in contact with the exiled Louis XVIII. He presented this information to Carnot, and Carnot agreed to support his action against the Councils. General Hoche, the new Minister of War, was directed to march the Army of Sambre-et-Meuse through Paris on its way to Brest, on the pretext that they would be embarked for a new expedition to Ireland. Hoche himself resigned as Minister of War on 22 July. General Pierre Augereau, a close subordinate and ally of Bonaparte, and his troops arrived in Paris on 7 August, though it was a violation of the Constitution for soldiers to be within twelve leagues of the city without permission of the Councils. The royalist members of the Councils protested, but could do nothing to send them away.

On 4 September 1797, with the army in place, the Coup d'état of 18 Fructidor, Year V was set in motion. General Augereau's soldiers arrested Pichegru, Barthélemy, and the leading royalist deputies of the Councils. The next day, the Directory annulled the elections of about two hundred deputies in 53 departments. Sixty-five deputies were deported to Guiana, 42 royalist newspapers were closed, and 65 journalists and editors were deported. Carnot and Barthélemy were removed from the Directory. Carnot went into exile in Switzerland; he later returned and became, for a time, Bonaparte's minister of war. Barthélemy and Pichegru both were sent to exile in French Guiana (Devil's Island). In June 1798, they both escaped, and went first to the United States and then to England. During the Consulate, Pichegru returned secretly to Paris, where he was captured on 28 February 1804. He died in prison on 6 April 1804, either strangled or having committed suicide.

The coup was followed by a scattering of uprisings by royalists in Aix-en-Provence, Tarascon and other towns, particularly in the southwest and west. A commissioner of the Directory was assassinated in Lyon, and on 22 October counter-revolutionaries seized the city government of Carpentras for twenty-four hours. These brief uprisings served only to justify a wave of repression from the new government.

With Carnot and Barthélemy gone from the Directory, and the royalists expelled from the Councils, the Jacobins were once again in control of the government. The two vacant places in the Directory were filled by Merlin de Douai, a lawyer who had helped write the Law of Suspects during the Reign of Terror; and François de Neufchâteau, a poet and expert in industry inland navigation, who served only a few months. Eight of the twelve Directors and ministers of the new government were regicides, who as deputies of the Convention had voted for the execution of Louis XVI, and were now determined to continue the Revolution.

The central administration and city governments were quickly purged of suspected royalists. The next target was the wave of noble émigrés and priests who had begun to return to France. The Jacobins in the Councils demanded that the law of 1793 be enforced; émigrés were ordered to leave France within fifteen days. If they did not, they were to be judged by a military commission, and, on simple proof of their identity, were to be executed within twenty-four hours. Military commissions were established throughout the country to judge not only returning émigrés, but also rebels and conspirators. Between 4 September 1797 and the end of the Directory in 1799, 160 persons were condemned to death by the military tribunals, including 41 priests and several women.

On 16 October 1797, the Council of Five Hundred considered a new law which banned political activities by nobles, who were to be considered as foreigners, and had to apply for naturalization in order to take part in politics. A certain number, listed by names, were to be banned permanently from political activity, were to have their property confiscated, and were to be required to leave immediately. The law called for certain exemptions for those in the government and military (Director Barras and General Bonaparte were both from minor noble families). In the end, resistance to the law was so great that it was not adopted.

The Jacobin-dominated councils also demanded the deportation of priests who refused to take an oath to the government, and an oath declaring their hatred of royalty and anarchy. 267 priests were deported to the French penal colony of Cayenne in French Guiana, of whom 111 survived and returned to France. 920 were sent to a prison colony on the Île de Ré, and 120, a large part of them Belgians, to another colony on the Île d'Oléron. The new government continued the anti-religious policy of the Convention. Several churches, including the cathedral Notre Dame de Paris and the church of Saint-Sulpice, were converted into Theophilanthropic temples, a new religion based on the belief in the existence of God and the immortality of the human spirit. Religious observations were forbidden on Sunday; they were allowed only on the last day of the 10-day week (décade) of the French Republican Calendar. Other churches remained closed, and were forbidden to ring their bells, although many religious services took place in secret in private homes. The National Guard was mobilized to search rural areas and forests for priests and nobles in hiding. As during the Reign of Terror, lists were prepared of suspects, who would be arrested in the event of attempted uprisings.

The new Jacobin-dominated Directory and government also targeted the press. Newspaper publishers were required to submit copies of their publications to the police for official approval. On 17 December 1797, seventeen Paris newspapers were closed by order of the Directory. The Directory also imposed a substantial tax on all newspapers or magazines distributed by mail, although Jacobin publications, as well as scientific and art publications, were excluded. Books critical of the Jacobins were censored; Louis-Marie Prudhomme 's six-volume Histoire générale et impartiale des erreurs, des fautes et des crimes commis pendant la Révolution française ("General and impartial history of the errors, faults and crimes committed during the French Revolution") was seized by the police. The Directory also authorized the opening and reading of letters coming from outside of France.

Despite all these security measures, there was a great increase in brigandage and robbery in the French countryside; travelers were frequently stopped on roads and robbed; the robberies were often blamed on royalist bands. On 18 January 1798, the Councils passed a new law against highwaymen and bandits, calling for them to be tried by military tribunals, and authorizing the death penalty for robbery or attempted robbery on the roads of France.

The political repression and terror under the Directory were real, but they were on a much smaller scale than the Reign of Terror under Robespierre and the Convention, and the numbers of those repressed declined during the course of the Directory. After 1798, no further political prisoners were sent to French Guiana, and, in the final year of the Directory, only one person was executed for a political offense.

In the spring of 1798, not only a new third of the legislature had to be chosen, but the places of the members expelled by the revolution of Fructidor had to be filled. 437 seats were open, out of 750. The elections took place between 9 and 18 April. The royalists had been disqualified, and the moderates were in disarray, while the radical Jacobins made a strong showing. Before the new deputies could take their seats, Barras and the other Directors, more moderate than the new Jacobins, organized a commission to review the elections, and disqualified many of the more extreme Jacobin candidates (Law of 22 Floréal Year VI), replacing them with moderates. They sent the list of candidates for Director to the Councils, excluding any radicals. François de Neufchåteau was chosen by a drawing of lots to leave the Directory and Barras proposed only moderate Jacobins to replace him: the choice fell on Jean-Baptiste Treilhard, a lawyer. These political maneuvers secured the power of the Directory, but widened further the gap between the moderate Directory and the radical Jacobin majority in the Councils.

On 17 October 1797, General Bonaparte and the Austrians signed the Treaty of Campoformio. It was a triumph for France. France received the left bank of the Rhine as far south as Andernach, Belgium, and the Ionian Islands that had belonged to the Republic of Venice. Austria in compensation was given the Veneto and the former Venetian Dalmatia. In late November and December, Napoleon took part in negotiations with the Holy Roman Empire and Austria, at the Second Congress of Rastatt, to redraw the borders of Germany. He was then summoned back to Paris to take charge of an even more ambitious project, the invasion of Britain, which had been proposed by Director Carnot and General Hoche. But an eight-day inspection of the ports where the invasion fleet was being prepared convinced Bonaparte that the invasion had little chance of success: the ships were in poor condition, the crews poorly trained, and funds and logistics were lacking. He privately told his associate Marmont his view of the Directory: "Nothing can be done with these people. They don't understand anything of greatness. We need to go back to our projects for the East. It is only there that great results can be achieved." The invasion of England was cancelled, and a less ambitious plan to support an Irish uprising was proposed instead (see below).

The grand plan of the Directory in 1798, with the assistance of its armies, was the creation of "Sister Republics" in Europe which would share the same revolutionary values and same goals, and would be natural allies of France. In the Dutch Republic (Republic of the Seven United Netherlands), the French army installed the Batavian Republic with the same system of a Directory and two elected Councils. In Milan, the Cisalpine Republic was created, which was governed jointly by a Directory and Councils and by the French army. General Louis-Alexandre Berthier, who had replaced Bonaparte as the commander of the Army of Italy, imitated the actions of the Directory in Paris, purging the new republic's legislature of members whom he considered too radical. The Ligurian Republic was formed in Genoa. Piedmont was also turned by the French army into a sister republic, the Piedmontese Republic. In Turin, King Charles-Emmanuel IV, (whose wife, Clotilde, was Louis XVI 's youngest sister), fled French dominance and sailed, protected by the British fleet, to Sardinia. In Savoy, General Barthélemy Catherine Joubert did not bother to form a sister republic, he simply made the province a department of France.

The Directory also directly attacked the authority of Pope Pius VI, who governed Rome and the Papal States surrounding it. Shortly after Christmas on 28 December 1797, anti-French riots took place in Rome, and a French Army brigadier general, Mathurin-Léonard Duphot, was assassinated. Pope Pius VI moved quickly and formally apologized to the Directory on 29 December 1797, but the Directory refused his apology. Instead, Berthier's troops entered Rome and occupied the city on 10 February 1798. Thus the Roman Republic was also proclaimed on 10 February 1798. Pius VI was arrested and confined in the Grand Duchy of Tuscany before being taken to France in 1799. The Vatican treasury of thirty million francs was sent to Paris, where it helped finance Bonaparte's expedition to Egypt, and five hundred cases of paintings, statues, and other art objects were sent to France and added to the collections of the Louvre.

A French army under General Guillaume Brune occupied much of Switzerland. The Helvetic Republic was proclaimed on 12 April 1798. On 26 August 1798, Geneva was detached from the new republic and made part of France. The treasury of Bern was seized, and, like the treasury of the Vatican, was used to finance Bonaparte's expedition to Egypt.

The new military campaigns required thousands of additional soldiers. The Directory approved the first permanent law of conscription, which was unpopular in the countryside, and particularly in Belgium, which had formally become part of France. Riots and peasant uprisings took place in the Belgian countryside. Blaming the unrest on Belgian priests, French authorities ordered the arrest and deportation of several thousands of them.

The idea of a French military expedition to Egypt had been proposed by Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord in a memoir to the Institut de France as early as 3 July 1797, and in a letter the following month from Talleyrand to Bonaparte. The Egyptian expedition had three objectives: to cut the shortest route from England to British India by occupying the Isthmus of Suez ; to found a colony which could produce cotton and sugar cane, which were in short supply in France due to the British blockade; and to provide a base for a future French attack on British India. It also had several personal advantages for Bonaparte: it allowed him to keep a distance from the unpopular Directory, while at the same time staying in the public eye.

The Directory itself was not enthusiastic about the idea, which would take its most successful general and his army far from Europe just at the time that a major new war was brewing. Director La Révellière-Lépeaux wrote: "The idea never came from the Directory or any of its members. The ambition and pride of Bonaparte could no longer support the idea of not being visible, and of being under the orders of the Directory."

The idea presented two other problems: Republican French policy was opposed to colonization, and France was not at war with the Ottoman Empire, to which Egypt belonged. Therefore, the expedition was given an additional scientific purpose: "to enlighten the world and to obtain new treasures for science." A large team of prominent scientists was added to the expedition; twenty-one mathematicians, three astronomers, four architects, thirteen naturalists and an equal number of geographers, plus painters, a pianist and the poet François-Auguste Parseval-Grandmaison.

On 19 May 1798, two hundred ships carrying Bonaparte, and 35,000 men comprising the Armée d'Orient, most of them veterans of Bonaparte's Army of Italy, sailed from Toulon. The British fleet under Nelson, expecting a French expedition toward Constantinople, was not in position to stop them. The French fleet stopped briefly at Malta, capturing the island, the government of which offered little resistance. Bonaparte's army landed in the bay of Alexandria on 1 July, and captured that city on 2 July, with little opposition. He wrote a letter to the Pasha of Egypt, claiming that his purpose was to liberate Egypt from the tyranny of the Mamluks. His army marched across the desert, despite extreme heat, and defeated the Mamluks at the Battle of the Pyramids on 21 July 1798. A few days later, however, on 1 August, the British fleet under Admiral Nelson arrived off the coast; the French fleet was taken by surprise and destroyed in the Battle of the Nile. Only four French ships escaped. Bonaparte and his army were prisoners in Egypt.

Another attempt to support an Irish uprising was made on 7 August 1798. A French fleet sailed from Rochefort-sur-Mer (Rochefort) carrying an expeditionary force led by General Jean Joseph Amable Humbert. The attack was intended to support an uprising of Irish nationalists led by Wolfe Tone. Tone had several meetings with Bonaparte in France to coordinate the timing, but the uprising within the Kingdom of Ireland began early and was suppressed on 14 July 1798 before the French fleet arrived. The French force landed at Killala, in northwest Ireland, on 22 August. It defeated British troops in two small engagements on 24 and 27 August, and Humbert declared the formation of an Irish Republic at Castlebar on 27 August, but the French forces were defeated at the Battle of Ballinamuck on 8 September 1798 by the troops of Lord Cornwallis, British Commander-in-Chief, Ireland. A second part of the French expeditionary force, not knowing that the first had surrendered, left Brest on 16 September. It was intercepted by the Royal Navy in the bay of Donegal, and six of the French warships were captured.

Tensions between the United States and France developed into the Quasi-War, an undeclared naval war. France complained the United States was ignoring the 1778 Treaty of Alliance that had brought the French into the American Revolutionary War. The United States insisted on taking a neutral stance in the war between France and Britain. After the Jay Treaty with Britain went into effect in 1795, France began to side against the United States and by 1797 had seized over 300 American merchant ships. Federalists favored Britain while Jeffersonian Republicans favored France. Federalist President John Adams built up the United States Navy, finishing three frigates, approving funds to build three more and sending diplomats to Paris to negotiate. They were insulted by Foreign Minister Talleyrand (who demanded bribes before talking). The XYZ Affair told Americans about the negotiations and angered American public opinion. The war was fought almost entirely at sea, mostly between privateers and merchant ships. In 1800, the Convention of 1800 (Treaty of Mortefontaine) ended the conflict.

Britain and Austria had been alarmed by the French creation of Sister Republics. Austria first demanded that France hand over a share of the territory of the new Republics to it. When the Directory refused, Austria began searching for partners for a new military alliance against France. The new Tsar of Russia, Paul I, was extremely hostile to French republican ideas, sympathetic to the exiled Louis XVIII, and willing to join a new coalition against France. The Tsar offered an army of 20,000 men, sent by sea to Holland on his Baltic fleet. He sent another army of 60,000 men, veterans of fighting in Poland and Turkey, under his best general, Alexander Suvorov, to join the Austrian forces in northern Italy.

The King of Prussia, Frederick-William III, had carefully preserved neutrality in order to profit from both sides. The Directory made the error of sending one of the most prominent revolutionaries of 1789, the Abbé Sieyés, who had voted for the death of Louis XVI, as ambassador to Berlin, where his ideas appalled the arch-conservative and ultra-monarchist king. Frederick William maintained his neutrality, refusing to support either side, a setback for France.

By the end of 1798, the coalition could count on 300,000 soldiers, and would be able to increase the number to 600,000. The best French army, headed by Bonaparte, was stranded in Egypt. General Brune had 12,000 men in Holland; Bernadotte, 10,000 men on the Rhine; Jourdan, 40,000 men in the army of the Danube; Masséna, 30,000 soldiers in Switzerland; Scherer, 40,000 men on the Adige river in northern Italy; and 27,000 men under Macdonald were based in Naples : a total of 170,000 men. To try to match the coalition forces, the Directory ordered a new call up of young men between the ages of twenty and twenty five to the army, seeking to add two hundred thousand new soldiers.

On 10 November 1798, the British and Austrian governments had agreed on a common goal of suppressing the five new sister republics and forcing France back into its 1789 borders. Then on 29 November 1798, on the first day of the War of the Second Coalition, King Ferdinand of Naples launched an attack on Rome, which was lightly defended by French soldiers. A British fleet landed three thousand Neapolitan soldiers in Tuscany. However, the French army of General Championnet responded quickly, defeating the Neapolitan army at the Battle of Civita Castellana at Civita Castellana on 5 December. The next day, 6 December 1798, French soldiers also forced King Charles Emmanuel IV to remove his soldiers from Piedmont and to retreat to his island of Sardinia, his last possession. The French army marched to the Kingdom of Naples, obliging King Ferdinand to leave his City of Naples on a British warship on 23 December 1798. Naples was then occupied on 23 January 1799, and a new Neapolitan republic, the so-called Parthenopean Republic, the sixth under French protection, was proclaimed on 26 January.

Peace negotiations with Austria went nowhere in the spring of 1799, and the Directory decided to launch a new offensive into Germany, but the arrival of a Russian army under Alexander Suvorov and fresh Austrian forces under the Archduke Charles for a time changed the balance of power. Jourdan 's Army of the Danube crossed the Rhine on 6 March but was defeated by the Archduke Charles, first at the Battle of Ostrach and then at the Battle of Stockach on 25 March 1799. Jourdan's army withdrew while Jourdan himself returned to Paris to plea for more soldiers.

The forces of the Second Coalition invaded French-occupied Italy, and after five earlier battles, a joint Russian-Austrian army under Suvorov's command defeated Moreau at the Battle of Cassano on 27 April 1799 and thus occupied Turin and Milan and thereby took back the Cisalpine Republic from France. Suvorov then defeated the French Army on the Terrivva. To redress the situation, Joubert was named the new head of the Army of Italy on 5 July, but his army suffered defeat by the Russians at the Battle of Novi, on 15 August; Joubert himself was shot through the heart when the battle began, and his army was routed. The Sister Republics established by the French in Italy quickly collapsed, leaving only Genoa under French control.

In August, the Russians and British opened a new front in the Netherlands. A British army was landed at Den Helder on 27 August, and was joined by a Russian army. On 31 August, the Batavian Navy, allied with France, surrendered to the Royal Navy. Seeing the French army and government in a crisis, the leaders of the royalist rebellions in the Vendée and Brittany came together on 15 September to prepare a renewed uprising.

The surviving leaders of the royalist rebellions in the Vendée and Brittany, which had long been dormant, saw a new opportunity for success and met to plan strategy on 15 September 1799. The royalist commander Louis de Frotté, in exile in England, returned to France to command the new uprising.

While the French armies in Italy and Switzerland tried to preserve the Sister Republics, Bonaparte pursued his own campaign in Egypt. He explained in a letter to the Directory that Egyptian venture was just the beginning of a broader campaign "to create a formidable diversion in the campaign of Republican France versus monarchic Europe. Egypt would be the base of something much larger than the original project, and at the same time a lever which will aid in the creation of a general uprising of the Muslim world." This uprising, he believed, would lead to the collapse of British power from the Middle East to India. With this goal in mind, he left Cairo and marched his army across the Sinai desert into Syria, where he laid siege to the port of Saint-Jean-d'Acre of the Ottoman Empire, which was defended by a local army and supplied by a British fleet offshore. His long siege and attempts to storm the city were a failure; his army was ravaged by disease, it was down to 11,000 men, and he learned that an Ottoman army was to be embarked by the British fleet to sail to Cairo to recapture the city. On 17 May, he abandoned the siege and was back in Cairo by 4 June. The British fleet landed the Ottoman army, but as soon as they were ashore they were decisively defeated by Bonaparte at the Battle of Abukir on 25 July 1799.

Due to the British blockade of Egypt, Bonaparte had received no news from France for six months. He sent one of his military aides to meet with Turkish government officials and to try to get news from France, but the officer was intercepted by the British navy. The British admiral and naval commander in the eastern Mediterranean, Sir Sidney Smith, who had lived in Paris and knew France well, gave the officer a packet of recent French newspapers and sent him back to Bonaparte. Bonaparte spent the night reading the newspapers, learning about the political and military troubles in France. His orders permitted him to return home any time he chose. The next day he decided to return to France immediately. He handed over command of the army to General Kléber and left Egypt with a small party of senior officers aboard the frigate Muiron. He escaped the British blockade but did not reach France until 9 October.

The military position of France, which seemed disastrous during the summer, improved greatly in September. On 19 September, General Brune won a victory over an Anglo-Russian army in the Netherlands at Castricum. On 18 October, besieged by Brune at Alkmaar, the Anglo-Russian forces under the Duke of York agreed to withdraw. In Switzerland, a Russian Army had split into two. On 25–26 September, the French army in Switzerland, led by André Masséna, defeated one part of the Russian army under Alexander Rimsky-Korsakov at the Second Battle of Zurich, and forced the rest of the Russian army, under Suvorov, into disastrous retreat across the Alps to 'Italy'. Suvorov was furious at the Austrians, blaming them for not supporting his troops, and he urged the Tsar to withdraw his forces from the war.

The royalist uprising in the west of France, planned to accompany the Anglo-Russian-Austrian offensive, was also a failure. The Chouans briefly seized Le Mans on 14 October and Nantes on 19 October, but they were quickly driven out by the French Army, and the rebellion had collapsed by 29 October.

Since the beginning of the Revolution, the nation suffered from rampant inflation. By the time of the Directory, the paper money, the assignat, based on the value of goods confiscated from the church and nobility, had already lost most of its value. Prices had soared, and the government could not print money fast enough to meet its expenses. The value of the assignat had dropped drastically against the value of the livre, the main unit of currency of the old regime which contained silver. In 1790, at the beginning of the Revolution, an assignat with a face value of 1,000₶. could be exchanged for 900 silver livres. In January 1795, The Convention decided to issue assignats worth 30 billion-₶., without any additional backing by gold. By March 1795, an assignat with a value of 1,000₶. could buy only 80 silver livres. In February 1796, the Directory decided to abolish the assignat, and held a public ceremony to destroy the printing plates. The assignat was replaced by a new note, the Mandats territoriaux. But since this new paper money also lacked any substantial backing, its value also plummeted; by February 1797 the Mandat was worth only one percent of its original value. The Directory decided to return to the use of gold or silver coins, which kept their value. 100₶. of Mandats was exchanged for 1 silver livre. The difficulty was that the Directory had only enough gold and silver to produce 300 million-₶.. The result of the shortage of money in circulation was a drastic deflation and drop in prices, which was accompanied by a drop in investment, and a drop in wages. It led to a drop in economic activity, and unemployment.

New elections to elect 315 members of the Councils were held between 21 March – 9 April 1799. The royalists had been discredited and were gone; the major winners were the neo-Jacobins, who wanted to continue and strengthen the Revolution. The new members of the Council included Lucien Bonaparte, the younger brother of Napoleon, just twenty-four years old. On the strength of his name, he was elected the President of the Council of Five Hundred.

This time the Directors did not try to disqualify the Jacobins but looked for other ways to keep control of the government. It was time to elect a new member of the Directory, as Rewbell had been designated by the drawing of lots to step down. Under the Constitution, the selection of a new member of the Directory was voted by the old members of the Councils, not the newly elected ones. The candidate selected to replace him was the Abbé Sieyés, one of the major leaders of the revolution in 1789, who had been serving as Ambassador to Berlin. Sieyés had his own project in mind: He had devised a new doctrine that the power of government should be limited in order to protect the rights of the citizens. His idea was to adopt a new Constitution with a supreme court, on the American model, to protect individual rights. He privately saw his primary mission as preventing a return of Reign of Terror of 1793, a new constitution, and bringing the Revolution to a close as soon as possible, by whatever means.

Once the elections were complete, the Jacobin majority immediately demanded that the Directory be made more revolutionary. The Councils began meeting on 20 May, and on 5 June they began their offensive to turn the Directors to the left. They declared the election of the Director Treilhard illegal on technical grounds and voted to replace him with Louis-Jérôme Gohier, a lawyer who had been Minister of Justice during the Convention, and who had overseen the arrest of the moderate Girondin deputies. The Jacobins in the Council then went a step further and demanded the resignation of two moderate Directors, La Revelliere and Merlin. They were replaced by two new members, Roger Ducos, a little-known lawyer who had been a member of the Committee of Public Safety, and was an ally of Barras, and an obscure Jacobin general, Jean-François-Auguste Moulin. The new Ministers named by the Directors were for the most part reliable Jacobins, though Sieyés arranged the appointment of one of his allies, Joseph Fouché, as the new Minister of Police.

The Jacobin members immediately began proposing laws that were largely favorable to the sans-culottes and working class, but which alarmed the upper and middle classes. The Councils imposed a forced loan of one hundred million francs, to be paid immediately according to a graduated scale by all who paid a property tax of over three hundred francs. Those who did not pay would be classified the same as émigré nobles and would lose all civil rights. The Councils also passed a new law that called for making hostages of the fathers, mothers and grandparents of émigré nobles whose children had emigrated or were serving in rebel bands or armies. These hostages were subject to large fines or deportation in the event of assassinations or property damage caused by royalist soldiers or bandits. On 27 June General Jourdan, a prominent Jacobin member of the Councils, proposed a mass draft of all eligible young men between twenty and twenty-five to raise two hundred thousand new soldiers for the army. This would be the first draft since 1793.

The new Jacobins opened a new political club, the Club du Manège, on the model of Jacobin clubs of the Convention. It opened on 6 July and soon had three thousand members, with 250 deputies, including many alumni of the Jacobins during the Reign of Terror, as well as former supporters of the ultra-revolutionary François Babeuf. One prominent member, General Jourdan, greeted the members at the club's banquet of 14 July with the toast, "to a return of the pikes'", referring to the weapons used by the sans-culottes to parade the heads of executed nobles. The club members also were not afraid to attack the Directory itself, complaining of its lavish furnishings and the luxurious coaches used by Directory members. The Directory soon responded to the provocations; Sieyés denounced the club members as a return of Robespierre's reign of terror. The Minister of Police, Fouché, closed the Club on 13 August.

The rule that Directors must to be at least forty years old became one justification for the Coup of 18 Brumaire : the coup d'état took place on 9 November 1799, when Bonaparte was thirty years old. Bonaparte returned to France, landing at the fishing village of Saint-Raphaël on 9 October 1799, and made a triumphal progression northward to Paris. His victory over the Ottoman Turks at the Battle of Abukir had been widely reported, and overshadowed the other French victories at the Second Battle of Zurich and the Battle of Bergen. Between Avignon and Paris, he was welcomed by large, enthusiastic crowds, who saw him as a saviour of the Republic from foreign enemies and the corruption of the Directory. Upon his arrival in Paris he was elected to the Institut de France for the scientific accomplishments of his expedition to Egypt. He was welcomed by royalists because he was from a minor noble family in Corsica, and by the Jacobins because he had suppressed the attempted royalist coup d'état at the beginning of the Directory. His brother Lucien, though only twenty-four years old, became a prominent figure in the Council of Five Hundred because of his name.

Bonaparte's first ambition was to be appointed to the Directory, but he was not yet forty years old, the minimum age set by the Constitution, and the Director Gohier, a strict legalist, blocked that avenue. His earliest ally had been the Director Barras, but he disliked Barras because his wife Joséphine had been his mistress before she married Bonaparte, and because of charges of corruption that surrounded Barras and his allies. Bonaparte wrote later that the Jacobin director, General Jean-François-Auguste Moulin, approached Bonaparte and suggested that he lead a coup d'état, but he declined; he wished to end the Revolution, not continue it. Sieyés, who had been looking for a war hero and general to assist in a coup d'état, had originally in mind General Joubert, but Joubert had been killed at the Battle of Novi in August 1799. He then approached General Jean Victor Marie Moreau, but Moreau was not interested. The first meeting between Sieyés and Bonaparte, on 23 October 1799, went badly; the two men each had enormous egos and instantly disliked each other. Nonetheless, they had a strong common interest and, on 6 November 1799, they formalized their plan.

The coup d'état was carefully planned by Sieyès and Bonaparte, with the assistance of Bonaparte's brother Lucien, the diplomat and consummate intriguer Talleyrand, the Minister of Police Fouché, and the Commissioner of the Directory, Pierre François Réal. The plan called for three Directors to suddenly resign, leaving the country without an Executive. The Councils would then be told that a Jacobin conspiracy threatened the Nation; the Councils would be moved for their own security to the Château de Saint-Cloud, some 5 kilometres (3.1 mi) west of Paris, safe from the mobs of the French capital. Bonaparte would be named head of government to defend the Republic against the conspiracy; the Councils would be dissolved, and a new Constitution would be written. If the coup went well, it was simply a parliamentary maneuver; it would be perfectly legal. Bonaparte would provide security and take the part of convincing the Deputies. Fouché and Réal would assure that there would be no interference from the police or the city of Paris. Fouché proposed that the leading Jacobin deputies be arrested at the start of the coup, but Bonaparte said it would not be necessary, which later proved to be an error. Shortly before the coup, Bonaparte met with the principal army commanders: Jourdan, Bernadotte, Augereau and Moreau, and informed them of the impending coup. They did not all support it, but agreed not to stand in his way. The president of the Council of Ancients was also brought into the coup, so he could play his part, and Bonaparte's brother Lucien would manage the Council of Five Hundred. On the evening of 6 November, the Councils held a banquet at the former church of Saint-Sulpice. Bonaparte attended, but seemed cold and distracted, and departed early.

Early in the morning of 9 November, army units began taking positions in Paris, and the members of the Council of Ancients were awakened and instructed to come to the Tuileries Palace for an emergency meeting. When they gathered at seven-thirty, they were told that a Jacobin conspiracy to overthrow the government had been discovered and that they should transfer their meeting the next day to the Château de Saint-Cloud, where they would be in safety. The members were asked to approve a decree to move the meeting site, and to appoint Bonaparte as commander of troops in Paris to assure their security. Alarmed, they quickly approved the decree. Bonaparte himself appeared with his staff and told them, "Citizen representatives, the Republic was about to perish. You learned of it and your decree has just saved it". At eleven in the morning, the members of the Council of Five Hundred met at the Palais Bourbon and were given the same message. They agreed to move their meeting the following day to Saint-Cloud.

As planned, by the afternoon Sieyés and Roger Ducos had given their resignations. Talleyrand was assigned to win the resignation of Barras. Talleyrand was supplied with a large amount of money to offer Barras to quit; historians differ on whether he gave the money to Barras or kept it for himself. Barras, seeing the movements of soldiers outside and being assured that he could keep the great wealth he had acquired as a Director, readily agreed to leave the Directory. With three members gone, the Directory could not legally meet. The Jacobin directors Moulin and Gohier were arrested and confined to the Luxembourg Palace under the guard of General Moreau. The first day of the coup had gone exactly as planned.

On 10 November, the members of both councils were taken in a procession of carriages with a strong military escort to Saint-Cloud. 6,000 soldiers had already been assembled at the château; because their pay had repeatedly been delayed, they were particularly hostile to the members of the Chambers. Bonaparte spoke first to the Council of the Ancients, assembled in the Orangerie of the domain of Saint-Cloud, and explained that the Directory was no more. Bonaparte was received coldly, but the Council did not offer any opposition. He then moved to the Council of Five Hundred, which was already meeting under the presidency of his brother Lucien. Here he received a far more hostile reception from the Jacobin deputies. He was questioned, jeered, insulted, shouted down, and jostled. His brother was unable to restore calm, and some of the Jacobin deputies began to demand that Bonaparte be declared outside the law, as Robespierre had been. If the Council voted him outside the law, Bonaparte could be arrested and executed immediately without trial. While the deputies raged and argued, Bonaparte and his brother, escorted by a handful of soldiers, left the Orangerie, approached the unit of grenadiers of General Joachim Murat waiting impatiently outside, and told them that the deputies had tried to assassinate Bonaparte with their pens. The grenadiers charged into the hall and quickly emptied it of deputies.

Bonaparte wrote his own official version of what happened, which was published in all newspapers and posted on placards on walls all over France; it vividly described how he had narrowly escaped death from the hands of "twenty Jacobin assassins" and concluded: "The majority returned freely and peacefully to the meeting hall, listened to the propositions which had been made for assuring the public safety, deliberated and prepared a beneficial resolution which should become the new law and basis of the Republic."

With that event, the Directory was finished. A new government, the Consulate, was founded. According to most historians, the French Revolution was over.

Despite wars and social turmoil, the population of France continued to grow during the Directory. It was 27,800,000 in 1796, before the Directory, and had grown to 27,900,000 by 1801. Annual population growth had dropped from 16 percent in 1785, before the Revolution, to zero in 1790; but it then rebounded to 36 percent in 1795, then down to 12 percent in 1800. Part of the drop in birth rate during the Directory is attributed to the simplification of divorce, and the change in inheritance laws, which granted equal shares to all descendants. The number of young men killed in the wars during the Directory numbered 235,000 between 1795 and 1799. The high birth rate before the Revolution – together with conscription from conquered and allied states – allowed Napoleon to fill the ranks of his Grande Armée during the Empire between 1804 and 1815.

By the time of the Directory, French society had been dramatically restructured. Nobles and clergy, the two classes which had held most of the power before the Revolution, had disappeared. An estimated one percent of the population, mostly nobles and priests, but also many members of the upper middle class who had supported the monarchy, had emigrated. The number was even higher in border regions, such as Bas-Rhin, where 4.5 percent of the population had left.

Under the Directory the middle and upper classes took a dominant position in Paris society, replacing the nobility. Enormous fortunes were made, often by providing supplies to the army or by speculation on real estate. Some parts of the middle and upper classes suffered: the abolition of the old professional guilds of lawyers and doctors brought the ruin of many members, who faced competition from anyone who wanted to use those titles. The merchants and shipowners in Bordeaux, Nantes, Marseille and other ports were ruined by the British naval blockade. Bankers took on a more prominent role, when investment was scarce.

Two new groups gained importance during the Directory. The number of government officials of all levels increased dramatically. The writer Louis-Sébastien Mercier in his Paris pendant la Révolution (1789–1798), ou Le nouveau Paris, published in 1800, wrote: "There is no one who has not complained of the insolence, or the ignorance, of the multitude of government officials employed in the bureaus to sharpen their pens and to obstruct the course of affairs. New has the bureaucracy been carried to a point so so exaggerated, so costly, to exhausting."

Generals and other military officers also grew greatly in importance during the Directory and became a caste independent of the political structure. The Directory had abolished the Jacobin system of political commissioners who supervised and could overrule the military commanders. Generals like Bonaparte in Italy, Hoche in Germany and Pichegru in Alsace directed entire provinces according to their own ideas and wishes, with little interference from Paris. The soldiers of these generals were often more loyal to their generals than to the Directory, as the soldiers of Bonaparte showed during the 1799 coup d'état that ended the Directory.

The working class and poor in Paris and other large cities suffered particularly from the high inflation during the first part of the Directory, which brought higher prices for bread, meat, wine, firewood and other basic commodities. In the last two years of the Directory, the problem was the opposite: with the suppression of the assignats, the money became scarce, the economy slowed, and unemployment grew. The Directory distributed scarce food items, such as cooking oil, butter and eggs, to government employees and to members of the Councils. Before the Revolution, taking care of the poor had been the responsibility of the Church. During the Directory, the government, particularly in Paris and other large cities, was forced to take over this role. To feed the Parisians and prevent food riots, the government bought flour in the countryside at market prices with its silver coins, then gave it to the bakeries, which sold it at the traditional market price of four sous a pound, which was virtually nothing. The subsidies were reduced in the last years of the Directory, paying only for bread, but they were an enormous expense for the Directory. At the beginning, the government tried to provide the standard minimum of one pound of bread a day per person, but the shortage of money reduced the daily ration to sixty grams of bread a day. The government also tried giving rice as a substitute for bread, but the poor lacked firewood to cook it.

Under the Directory a system of public charity "was finally put in place with some success," with legislation passed in November 1796 establishing bureaux de bienfaisance in every commune. These were responsible for providing home relief. Funding for state hospitals was also increased, and legislation from December 1796 placed abandoned children under the state's care.

Economic problems led to a large increase in crime under The Directory, particularly in the countryside. Bands of the unemployed became beggars and turned to robbery, and brigands robbed travelers along the highways. Some of the brigands were former royalists turned highwaymen. They were later celebrated in the novel of Alexander Dumas, Les Compagnons de Jéhu (The Companions of Jehu). The government did not have the money to hire more police, and the great majority of the army was occupied fighting in Italy, Switzerland and Egypt. The growing insecurity on the roads seriously harmed commerce in France. The problem of brigands and highwaymen was not seriously addressed until after a serious wave of crimes on the roads in the winter of 1797–98. The Councils passed a law calling for the death penalty for any robbery committed on the main highways or against a public vehicle, such as a coach, even if nothing was taken. If the crime was committed by more than one person, the robbers were tried by a military tribunal rather than a civilian court. The wave of highway robberies was finally stopped by Bonaparte and the Consulate, which employed special tribunals even swifter and more severe than the Directory tribunals.

Corruption was another serious problem, particularly with the businessmen who provided supplies to the army and government. In one case, the Chevalier enterprise received a contract to build three large warships and two frigates at Rochefort ; the company was paid in national property seized from the aristocracy and the Church, but it never constructed the ships, or even bought the materials. Huge contracts for government supplies were passed from the furnishers to sub-contractors, who each paid the furnisher a fee. Sometimes contractors demanded to be paid for their services in advance in silver. They were paid, but never delivered the services, and then reimbursed the government with nearly-worthless assignats. The Directors themselves were accused of receiving money from contractors. The Minister of Finance of the Directory, Dominique-Vincent Ramel-Nogaret, was offered 100,000 francs for a bribe to give a contract by a furnisher named Langlois. Ramel refused and turned Langlois over to the police; however, some ministers and Directors, like Barras, left the government with large fortunes. The Directory was unable to escape the accusations of widespread corruption.

Born in reaction against the strict codes of behavior established during the Convention and the Reign of Terror, the Muscadins were fashionable young men who carried canes and sometimes, in groups, attacked sans-culottes. Following soon afterwards, the Directory had its own fashion reflecting the new social behavior and carried out by young Parisians of both sexes, from middle and upper-class families, often survivors of the excesses of the Revolution, who had lost parents and family members to the guillotine. They were called Incroyables and Merveilleuses and dressed in extravagant costumes. The men, the Incroyables, wore long hair to their shoulders, round hats with broad brims, short coats and silk culottes. Their female counterparts, the Merveilleuses, wore flowing, high-breasted transparent dresses reminiscent of the Greco-Roman era. They frequented balls called Bals des victimes and spoke in their own particular accent and vocabulary, avoiding to pronounce the letter "R", as it was the first letter of the word "Revolution".

During the Directory, almost all the structures and rules of Paris society had been swept away, but no new structures and rules had yet been created to replace them. The brothers Goncourt meticulously described the period on their Histoire de la société française pendant le Directoire. Caste and rank mattered far less; all the old titles and forms of address had disappeared, along with old customs and social conventions. Men no longer took off their hats when talking to women, and people of different ranks spoke to each other as equals. Society no longer met in private, in the houses of the nobility, but in public, at balls, restaurants and public gardens. As the Goncourts said, "social anarchy" reigned in Paris: "everyone met with everyone." Government ministers could be seen walking or dining with actresses, bankers with courtesans.

"Liaisons were easy", the Goncourts reported, "marriage less so." The old system of marriages arranged between families based on fortune, profession, and social condition was less common. Marriages were no longer controlled by the church, but by the new civil code, which described marriage as "nature in action." Marriage was seen as a temporary, not a permanent state. Children born outside of marriage were given equal status concerning inheritance and other legal matters as those born to married couples. Divorce was much simpler, and could be requested by either the husband or wife. In one period of fifteen months, 5,994 civil law divorces were granted in Paris, of which 3,886 were requested by the wife. Of 1,148 divorces granted on the grounds of "incompatibility of humor", 887 were requested by the wife. The new system also led to a large increase in the number of children born outside of marriage and not wanted; in 1795 four thousand unwanted children in the Department of the Seine were turned over to foundling hospitals.

The breakdown of the old system of arranged marriages led to the creation of the first newspaper where men and women could advertise themselves for suitable spouses, called the Indicateur des marriages. It also led to the establishment of the first marriage bureaus. A businessman named Liardot rented a large former mansion, brought in selected eligible young women as paying guests, and invited men seeking wives to meet them at balls, concerts and card games each given at the house each evening. The men were screened by their profession and education.

Although balls were not banned during the Reign of Terror, after the death of Robespierre and the fall of the Jacobins, the city experienced a frenzy of dancing that lasted throughout the period of the French Directory. The Goncourt brothers reported that 640 balls took place in 1797 alone. Several former monasteries were turned into ballrooms, including the Noviciate of the Jesuits, the Monastère des Carmes (turned into a prison where 191 members of the Catholic Church — bishops, priests, monks — were massacred on 2 September 1792), the Séminaire Saint-Sulpice, and even in the former Saint-Sulpice cemetery. Some of the former palatial townhouses of the nobility were rented and used for ballrooms; the Hôtel de Longueville near the Louvre put on enormous spectacles, with three hundred couples dancing, in thirty circles of sixteen dancers each, the women in nearly transparent dresses, styled after Roman tunics. In the public balls, everyone danced with everyone; merchants, clerks, artisans and workers danced with shop women and seamstresses. In the more popular public balls, the cavaliers were charged 80 sous for admission, while women paid 12 sous. At more exclusive balls, admission was five livres. Aristocrats who had survived or returned from exile held their own balls in their houses in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, where Bals des victimes ("Balls of the victims") were attended by invitees who had lost at least one parent to the guillotine.

The formal dancing of the minuet was replaced by a much more passionate new dance, the waltz, which was introduced to Paris during this time from Germany. For summer evening entertainment, Parisians began to abandon the Tuileries Gardens and the gardens of the Palais-Royal and went to the new pleasure gardens which appeared in the neighborhood between the Grands boulevards and the Palais-Royal. The most famous was the Jardin de Tivoli, also known as Folie Boutin or Grand Tivoli, located on rue Saint-Lazare. It had belonged to an aristocrat named Boutin, who was guillotined during the Reign of Terror. It was a vast garden covering 40 arpents (ca. 20 hectares), and could hold as many as ten thousand persons. It had alleys filled with promenaders, greenhouses, illuminations, an orchestra, dancing, a café, and fireworks at night. Other new gardens competed by adding spectacles and pageants. The Jardin des Champs-Élysées offered a pageant of costumed soldiers on horseback performing elaborate maneuvers and firing weapons. The Mousseau (now Parc Monceau) had performers dressed as American Indians dancing and fighting battles. The former Pavillon de Hanovre, which had been part of the Duke of Richelieu 's residential complex, featured a terrace for dancing and dining decorated with Turkish tents, Chinese kiosks and lanterns.

Many new restaurants and cafés, usually close to the twenty-three theaters, appeared in and around the Palais-Royal and the new boulevards. A new café, the Tortoni, specializing in ice creams, opened in 1795 at the corner of the boulevard des Italiens and rue Taitbout. The new restaurants in the Palais-Royal were often run by the former chefs of archbishops and aristocrats who had gone into exile. The restaurant Méot offered a menu with over one hundred dishes. Beside the Méot and Beauvilliers, under the arcades of the Palais-Royal were the restaurants and cafés such as Naudet, Robert, Véry, Foy, Huré, Berceau, Lyrique, Liberté conquise, de Chartres (now Le Grand Véfour), and du Sauvage (the last owned by the former coachman of Robespierre). In the cellars of the Palais-Royal were more popular cafés, usually with music, smaller menus at more reasonable prices. One of those, the Postal, offered a menu for just 36 sous. Many of the cafés in the cellars had orchestras; the most famous was the Café des Aveugles, with an orchestra of four blind musicians.

After the Reign of Terror had ended, dining hours for upper-class Parisians returned gradually to what they had been before the Revolution, with déjeuner at midday, dinner at 6 or 7 in the evening, and supper at 2 in the morning. When the theater performances ended at 10 PM, the spectators went to the nearby cafés on the boulevards.

The Roman Catholic Church suffered significant loss of property and political influence during the French Revolution. Priests, who refused to take an oath to the Civil Constitution of the Clergy emigrated or were expelled from France under a penalty of death. Church property, from cathedrals to candlesticks, was seized and sold. Church ceremonies were banned, causing clandestine religious services to be conducted in private homes. During the Reign of Terror, at Robespierre's urging, the National Convention, on 7 May 1794, proclaimed a new religion, the Cult of the Supreme Being, which in a little over a year led to the Thermidorian Reaction, and Robespierre's downfall and execution. The Roman Catholic Church had been the official state religion during the monarchy, and the Directors were all anti-religious republicans, but the Directory, with a few exceptions, did not try to impose any particular religious views, and its policy toward priests and religious institutions changed depending upon political events. After the fall of Robespierre, the repression against the Church eased and, although the policy of repression remained, many churches, especially in the provinces, re-opened, and exiled priests began to quietly return.

In November 1797, working with the new decimal-based Republican Calendar, the week of which has ten days, the Directory replaced Sundays and religious holidays with republican celebrations. The tenth day of the week, called decadi, was designated to replace Sunday. The churches still functioning with Constitutional priests were instructed to have mass on decadi, rather than on the day that would have been Sunday in the previous calendar, and decadi became the official non-working day: government employees were off, and schools, shops and markets were closed. To replace saints' and religious days, a whole series of secular holidays was created, in addition to the patriotic celebrations already in place, such as 14 July and important dates of the French Revolution. There were also special days, such as, "the day of the sovereignty of the people"; "the day of youth"; "the day of spouses"; "the day of agriculture" and "the day of the elderly". Certain churches were given new names: the cathedral Notre Dame de Paris was renamed "Temple of the Supreme Being", Saint-Étienne-du-Mont became the "Temple of Filial piety". On decadi, the constitutional priests who performed services were required to share the space with other republican religions and associations who wanted to use the buildings. Large churches were divided into sections for use by various religions.

A new religion, Theophilanthropy, had been founded in 1796 by a Freemason printer-bookseller named Jean-Baptiste Chemin-Dupontès (1760–1852?). It was encouraged by the Director La Révellière-Lépeaux and the Ministry of the Interior, with the state paying for its newspaper. Members believed in God and in the immortality of the soul, but not in the original sin. The sect was similar in form to Calvinism, with readings aloud of texts, hymns and sermons. With the support of the Directory, the sect was given four churches in Paris, including Saint-Roch, Saint-Sulpice and, in April 1798, Notre-Dame de Paris, as well as churches in Dijon, Poitiers and Bordeaux. Members of the sect included some prominent figures, such as General Hoche, the industrialist Éleuthère Irénée du Pont, the painter Jean-Baptiste Regnault, and the American philosopher and political activist Thomas Paine. Beginning in May 1798, however, the Directory began to withdraw support from the newly established deistic sect, which it considered too close to the Jacobins. The sect still had eighteen churches in 1799, but in 1801 it was abolished by Bonaparte.

In Italy, the French army attacked the Papal States governed by the Roman Catholic Church in Italy. In February 1797, Bonaparte occupied Ancona to force Pope Pius VI to negotiate. The pope was obliged to cede Ancona and the northern part of his states, creating the French-sponsored Anconine Republic. The gold and silver in the treasury of the Vatican was taken to France to help support the French currency. Following anti-French riots in Rome in December 1797, a French army under Berthier entered Rome and proclaimed a Roman Republic. Pius VI was taken prisoner by the French Army, and transferred to Valence in France, where he was kept prisoner until his death in 1801.

Many of the economic, social and political woes during the Directory were results of the breakdown of the financial system. The principal problem was a great shortage of money with real value; that is, coins made of silver, and an excess of paper money, the value of which shrank as more and more was printed. The Directory produced only 32 million livres worth of silver-based coins in its first two years. Much of this money was hoarded, since, unlike the paper money, it had and retained real value. As a consequence, the government, to cover its costs, was forced to print millions of notes, first called assignats and then mandats, which were based on the value of property seized from the Church and the clergy. These notes declined in value as more and more were printed. When the notes became nearly worthless, the Directory first devalued them and finally gave up and stopped printing paper money. The shortage of real money in the second part of the Directory led to a new problem: shortage of credit; interest rates rose to about ten percent, double what they had been in 1789. The consequence in the last two years of the Directory was a decline in economic activity, and in wages, while prices rose. The population lost confidence in the money and in the Directory's management.

The lack of credit led to the creation of a number of new private banks, and the growing importance of banks and bankers in the economy. The Caisse des comptes courants, created in June 1796, had some of the most important industrialists and financiers in France as its founders, who would later become the founders of the Banque de France. Several other new private banks followed, which concentrated the wealth of France even more in Paris. Since the nobility had gone into exile, the bankers became the new nobility of France. In other words, bankers became the new aristocrats.

The transportation system within France was another handicap to the economy. The roads and canals had not been improved or maintained since the overthrow of the monarchy. Major canals that had been started in Burgundy and in the north were unfinished. Maritime commerce was in an even worse situation as a result of the war and blockade of French ports by Britain. During the Directory, the number of French ships of more than two hundred tons was one tenth of what it had been in 1789. The conquest of Belgium, the Netherlands and Italy improved the situation somewhat: French goods could be transported on the neutral ships of these countries, and maritime traffic on the Baltic Sea to Germany became an important trade route for France. However, the British navy largely cut off the trade with the French colonies in the Caribbean, which earlier had provided sugar, cotton, indigo and coffee to France; and the entry of the fleet of Admiral Nelson into the Mediterranean Sea cut off the trade routes there. The major ports of Nantes and Marseille saw their commerce and trade routes disappear.

The continual wars and fiscal crises greatly limited the expansion of French industry. The Industrial Revolution had only just begun in France. Production during the Directory had fallen below what it was in 1789. The number of workers in the silk industry in Lyon had dropped from 12,000 before 1787 to 6,500. The cotton textile industry was more successful due to the embargo against British products caused by the war. New factories and new technologies, such as mechanical looms, were introduced in Normandy and in Alsace. However, the technologies were still primitive; the steam engine had not yet arrived in French factories. The chemical industry was also advancing rapidly during the Directory; the chemist and entrepreneur Jean Antoine Claude Chaptal built a chemical factory in Montpellier, which he soon moved to Chaillot, a village west of Paris. The most effective promoter of French industry was François de Neufchâteau, who was Minister of the Interior before becoming a Director in 1797. He planned a new canal system, began work on a new road across the Pyrenees, and organized the first national industrial exposition in Paris, which opened with great success in October 1798. Once he became Consul, Bonaparte copied the idea of the industrial exposition. Despite this bright spot, French industry was primitive: without steam power, most factories in France depended upon water power, and the metallurgy industry still melted iron with wood fires, not oil.

Agriculture was another weak spot of the French economy. While the country was essentially rural, the methods of farming had not been changed in centuries. The vast majority of farmers had small plots of land, sold little and worked essentially to produce enough food for their families. The price of grain was freed from government control under the Directory in 1797, and farmers could sell their grain at whatever price they could get. Following the Revolution in 1789, the forests had been taken away from the nobles and opened to everyone; as a result, large areas of the forests were immediately cut down, and no new trees planted to replace them. The land of the nobility and Church was taken and redistributed to peasants, but under the new inheritance laws, which gave equal shares to all sons, the size of the farm plots became smaller and smaller. Small plots were not consolidated into larger fields, as was taking place in England at the same time. Most farmers were reluctant to try new methods; they did not want to leave fields idle to recover productivity, or to grow forage crops to feed cattle. Furthermore, during the endless wars of the Directory, thousands of farmers were taken into the army, and thousands of horses and mules needed for farming were taken by the Army for the use of the cavalry and transport. Under these conditions, food shortages and famines occurred regularly in France until the time of Napoleon III.

The education system of France was in a chaotic state at the beginning of the Directory. The College of Sorbonne and most other colleges of the University of Paris, had been closed because of their close association with the Catholic Church, and did not reopen until 1808. The schools run by the Catholic Church had also been closed, and any kind of religious instruction forbidden. The government of Jacobins during the Convention created several new scientific institutions, but had concentrated on primary education, which it decreed should be obligatory and free for all young people, but there were few teachers available. By forbidding religious education, seizing the property of the Church and chasing out the clergy, they effectively closed the largest part of the educational system of the country.

At the beginning of the period, the Directory reversed the policy of obligatory and free education for all, largely because of the lack of money to pay teachers. The Directory began to create a system of central schools, with the goal of one in each department, which boys could attend from the age of twelve, with a full curriculum of sciences, history and literature. The state paid a part of the cost, while each student also paid the professor a fee. The new schools had libraries (mostly confiscated from the nobility), small botanical gardens, and museums of natural history. For the first time in French schools, French instead of Latin was the basis of education. Three of these schools were organized in Paris; two of them later became the famous Lycée Henri-IV and Lycée Charlemagne. But by the end of the Directory there were only 992 students in the three Paris schools.

For primary education, each arrondissement in Paris had one school for boys and another for girls, and each commune in the country was supposed to have the same. Since the state lacked money, teachers were paid by the commune or by the students. Students would graduate after learning to read, write and count. In villages, the school was often located in the former church, and teachers were expected, as part of their duties, to carry water, clean the church, ring the bells, and, when needed, dig graves in the churchyard cemetery.

The choices were greater for the children of the middle and upper middle class, as these families had tutors, or sent their children to private schools, but for much of the population, schooling was minimal. There were 56 public schools in the Seine department, which by the population should have had at least 20,000 students; but they had only between 1100 and 1200.

The continual wars during the Directory also had their effect on education. Beginning in October 1797, boys in public schools were required to take part in periodic military exercises, and the Directory established five military schools, called Écoles de Mars, for a total of 15,000 students. Attendance was a requirement for entry into the higher schools of engineering and public works.

The Directory focused its attention on secondary education and especially on creating specialized higher schools for training managers, judges, doctors and engineers, for which there was an immediate and pressing need. The École Polytechnique had been founded by a member of the Directory, Lazare Carnot and the mathematician Gaspard Monge, in 1794. The school became the most prestigious engineering and public works school in France. However, by the end of the Directory there were still no law schools, and only two schools of medicine outside of Paris.

The Institut de France was also founded in 1795 by Lazare Carnot and Monge, to bring together the scientists and researchers, who previously had worked in separate academies, to share knowledge and ideas. It was divided into three large sections: physical sciences and mathematics; moral and political science; and literature and the fine arts. It organized the large party of scientists and scholars who accompanied Napoleon to Egypt, which discovered such treasures as the Rosetta Stone, which allowed the deciphering of Egyptian hieroglyphs. One of the Institut de France first members and speakers was Napoléon Bonaparte, who took the place of Carnot after the latter had been removed from the Directory and left France.

The artists of Paris were in a difficult situation during the Directory, as their most important patrons, the aristocracy, had been executed or had emigrated; however a new wealthy class was just being formed. Before the Revolution a half-figure portrait could be commissioned from a less-known artist for three hundred livres. During the Directory, the price fell to forty-eight livres. Nonetheless, the Salon took place in the Louvre in 1795 as it had since 1725, before the Revolution, and each year thereafter. The most prominent artist of the Revolution, Jacques-Louis David, closely connected with the Jacobins, was in seclusion in his studio inside the Louvre. At the end of the period, in 1799, he produced one important work, the Intervention of the Sabine Women. However, a new generation of artists, inspired by David, showed their works; François Gérard ; Anne-Louis Girodet, a pupil of David, renown for his romantic paintings, particularly a 1797 painting of the prominent actress Mademoiselle Lange as Venus ; Carle Vernet, the son and father of famous painters; the portrait painter and miniaturist Jean-Baptiste Isabey, known as the "painter of the kings" or "portraitist of Europe", who painted Queen Marie-Antoinette and Empress Joséphine, and remained active until the Second Empire ; the genre painter Louis-Léopold Boilly ; Antoine-Jean Gros, a young history and landscape painter, who soon achieved fame and a government position in 1796 with a heroic portrait of Bonaparte at the Battle of Arcole ; the romantic landscapes of Hubert Robert ; Pierre-Paul Prud'hon, whose work combined Neoclassicism and Romanticism ; and a major neoclassical sculptor from the earlier generation, Jean-Antoine Houdon, famous for his busts of George Washington and Voltaire.

Making the Louvre into an art museum had first been proposed in 1747 by Étienne La Font de Saint-Yenne and supported by Denis Diderot in 1765 in the article on the Louvre in the Encyclopédie. The idea was accepted by Louis XVI who, in 1789, began work on converting the Grande Galerie of the Louvre to a museum space. The Revolution intervened, and on 27 July 1793 the Convention decreed the creation of a Museum of the Republic (Musée de la République française), which opened on 10 August 1793, the first anniversary of the storming of the Tuileries.

In 1797, at the end of Bonaparte's triumphant first Italian campaign, convoys of wagons began arriving in Paris, carrying bronze horses, Greek antiquities, tapestries, marble statues, paintings and other works of art taken from Italian cities under the terms of peace agreed by the Austrians. They included works by Raphael, Leonardo da Vinci, Titian, Paolo Veronese and other masters. Other convoys arrived from the Netherlands and Flanders. The more famous works were displayed on wagons in a festive victory parade through the center of Paris. The rest was crammed, unwrapped, into the corridors, galleries and stairways of the Louvre. Work began to rebuild the Galerie d'Apollon and other galleries to provide a home for the 'newly acquired' art.

The Directory had no public money to spend on architecture, but the newly-wealthy upper class had abundant money to buy châteaux and town houses, and to redecorate them. The style of interior decoration, known as the Directoire style, was one of the notable contributions of the period. It was a transitional style, a compromise between the Louis XVI style and French neoclassicism. Riesener, the famous furniture designer for Louis XVI, did not die until 1806, though his clientele changed from the nobility to the wealthy new upper class. The Directory saw the first widespread use of mahogany, an imported tropical wood used in the making of furniture.

The Directory period produced a small number of important literary works, often very critical of the excesses of Revolution. These included Essay on the Revolutions by Chateaubriand, published in 1797, which called for a return to Christian values. At the complete opposite end of the literary scale was the last major work of the Marquis de Sade, The New Justine, published in 1797. Sade also wrote a satirical brochure mocking thinly-disguised characters resembling Bonaparte and Joséphine. Shortly after the end of the Directory, on 6 March 1801, Sade was arrested for Justine and its sequel and ended his days in the insane asylum of Charenton.

Historians generally have not been kind to the 'Age of the Directory'. Adolphe Thiers, later twice the Prime Minister and the first president of the Third Republic, wrote the first major history in French of the Revolution, in ten volumes, published between 1823 and 1827. He described the Directory this way:

One of the indispensable qualities of a government is to have good reputation that defends it against unjust attacks. When it has lost this reputation, and when people blame it for the faults of others, and even for bad luck, then it no longer has the ability to govern, and this incapacity should force it to retire. How many governments had been used up during the Revolution!... The Directory had been used up like the Committee of Public Safety before it, and the government of Napoleon that followed. All the accusations against the Directory proved not its faults but its nullity.

Thiers blamed Barras, the only Director who served from the beginning to the end of the Directory, for its failure.

By a bizarre chance, but one that is seen often in the conflicts within revolutions, public opinion had indulgence for the one Director who merited it the least. Barras alone deserved all that was said of the Directory. First of all, he never worked; he left to his colleagues all the burden of business. He spoke only at decisive moments, when his voice was stronger than his courage. He occupied himself with nothing. He only concerned himself with the personnel of the government, which best suited his genius at intrigue. He took a share of all the profits of the government suppliers, and alone of the Directors deserved the accusation of corruption. Despite all of his faults, he was treated differently than the others, first of all because, unlike the other four, he was not a lawyer; and despite his laziness, his debauched habits, his bad manners, and his liaisons with the Jacobins, he alone was credited with 18 Fructidor [the downfall of Robespierre], and he gave the appearance of a man of action, more capable of governing than his colleagues... He was even treacherous toward his colleagues; because all of the criticism that he deserved himself he skillfully managed to shift exclusively onto them.

The most celebrated and vivid description of French society under the Directory was written by the Goncourt brothers, Edmond and Jules, published in 1864, which described the mores, daily life, culture and preoccupations of the Parisians. Its final chapter contained the lines:

Like a guest at the end of an orgy, France was weary; weary of gods, of tribunes, of heroes, of executioners; weary of struggles, of efforts, of cries, of curses, of enthusiasms, of fevers, of intoxications, of storms, of triumphs, of agonies – France was weary of revolutions, coups d'états. constitutions, legislatures... weary of conquests, weary of being saved; weary of Belgium submissive, Italy conquered; of Germany, when all the eagles of Germany had been taken to the Invalides, but France was still not the head; France was weary of climbing into the sky, of amassing empires, of monopolizing the world; France glutted with glory; France broken, sleeping on a mattress of corpses, sleeping on a bed of laurels. France, emptied of men, of silver, of crimes, of ideas, of eloquence; France, like Mirabeau when he was dying, asking of his doctors and his descendants only one single thing: to sleep!

The shortest and simplest description of the entire period, from the Convention to the Empire, was given by Honoré de Balzac in 1837–43 in his novel Illusions perdues. The Spanish Jesuit diplomat Carlos Herrera tells Lucien de Rubempré: "In 1793 the French invented government by the people, which ended with an absolute emperor. So much for your national history".

The Directory was a terribly orgy of the middle classes, in which the fortunes acquired during the Revolution, especially during the Thermidorean reaction, were squandered in unbridled luxury. For if the Revolution had put in circulation eight milliards of paper-money, the Thermidorean reaction went ten times as fast in that direction, for it issued the amazing sum of thirty milliards in paper within fifteen months.

The Directory became a kind of ineffective dictatorship. It repudiated most of the assignats [paper money] and the debt but failed to restore financial confidence or stability. Guerrilla activity flared up again in the Vendée and other parts of western France. The religious schism became more acute; the Directory took severe measures toward the refractory clergy [those who would not swear allegiance to the government].

In 1971, the American historians Jerome Blum, Rondo Cameron, and Thomas G. Barnes wrote:

It was a government of self-interest rather than virtue, thus losing any claim on idealism. It never had a strong base of popular support; when elections were held, most of its candidates were defeated. Historians have been quite negative on the Directory's use of military force to overturn election returns that went against them. [...] Having by this coup d'état forfeited its claim to be a constitutional government, the Directory henceforth clung to power only by such illegal acts as purges and quashed elections.

In the 1970s, other historians wrote that the achievements of the Directory were minor, though it did establish administrative procedures and financial reforms that worked out well when Napoleon started using them. It was blamed for creating chronic violence, ambivalent forms of justice, and repeated recourse to heavy-handed repression.

The Terror had left a dual legacy that made such normalcy impossible. On the one hand, massive disengagement, apathy, and cynicism about government; on the other hand, rancorous, violent hostility between the politically engaged minorities of royalists and Jacobins, between whom the directorial moderates vainly attempted to navigate. Legality became the main casualty in this situation.

The four years of the Directory were a time of chronic disquiet and the late atrocities had made goodwill between parties impossible. The same instinct of self-preservation which had led the members of the Convention to claim so large a part in the new legislature and the whole of the Directory impelled them to keep their predominance. War was at the center of attention, not only for the survival of France but for the loot and forced payments into the French treasury.

The Directory was officially led by a president, as stipulated by Article 141 of the Constitution of the Year III. An entirely ceremonial post, the first presidency was held by Rewbell who was chosen by lot on 2 November 1795. The directors conducted their elections privately, and appointed a new president every three months. The last president was Gohier, who resigned during Brumaire after his arrest by troops under the Bonapartist general Jean Victor Marie Moreau.

The following table displays all Directeurs and their dates of service:

The French Equal Opportunities and Anti-Discrimination Commission (French Haute autorité de lutte contre les discriminations et pour l'égalité or HALDE) was a French "independent administrative authority" which "has the right to judge all discrimination, direct or indirect, that is prohibited by law or an international agreement to which France is a signatory."

HALDE was created by law n° 2004–1486 on 30 December 2004, published in the Journal officiel on 31 December 2004, and dissolved in 2011 with its mission transferred to the Defender of Rights.

HALDE had twelve members who were appointed by the French President for five-year terms. They could neither be expelled from their posts nor reappointed at the end of them. New members were added every thirty months, with five members being removed at this time (the president of HALDE stays, however). Thus, five of the first members were limited to 30 month-terms. These five were be selected randomly at HALDE's first meeting.

HALDE's members were chosen according to the following allotment:

HALDE was aided by a consultative committee named by itself, including people who "have an activity within the scope of the struggle against discrimination and for the promotion of equality."

Cases were submitted to HALDE in three different ways:

HALDE was entitled to lead various hearings as well as investigations; it could also send files to the procureur de la République. HALDE also promoted equality generally, and could recommend modifications of existing laws or rules, and published a public annual report concerning its performance of its duties.

The Executive Commission of 1848 (French: Commission exécutive) was a short-lived government during the French Second Republic, chaired by François Arago, which exercised executive power from 9 May to 24 June 1848. It succeeded the Provisional Government of 1848 and was in turn replaced by the Cabinet of General Cavaignac. The members of the Commission acted as collective head of state.

The Commission lacked support in the National Assembly. It soon found itself at odds with the conservative majority and effectively unable to properly govern. The closure of the National Workshops, which led to the June Days uprising, sealed its fate. Judging the Commission unable to quell the uprising, the Assembly effectively dissolved it on 24 June by a vote of no confidence and gave full powers to General Louis-Eugène Cavaignac.

In May 1848 the National Assembly decided to establish the Executive Commission as a collective head of state, similar to the National Convention and its Committee of Public Safety in the first French Revolution. The members were chosen from prominent members of the former Provisional Government. The members named to the commission by the Assembly on 9 May 1848 were François Arago (as President of the Commission), Alphonse de Lamartine, Louis-Antoine Garnier-Pagès, Alexandre Auguste Ledru-Rollin and Pierre Marie de Saint-Georges.

Lamartine was seen by many as representing order and respect for property, while Ledru-Rollin stood for violence and communism. However, Lamartine used his strong popular mandate to force the National Assembly to make Ledru-Rollin one of the members of the Executive Commission. This greatly undermined his credibility. Lamartine's motives are unclear, but perhaps he was concerned that the power was swinging too far towards the Conservatives.

The members of the Executive Commission were not assigned ministries. Instead, at the first meeting on 11 May 1848 the commission appointed ministers. They were all moderate republicans apart from Ferdinand Flocon. The composition of the government was thus unsatisfactory to both the conservative majority of the National Assembly and the radical left.

At this time the bourgeoisie were becoming increasingly uneasy about the possibility of mob rule leading to a repeat of the Reign of Terror of the first French Revolution. Ledru-Rollin planned a fête de la Concorde on 15 May celebrating peace and labor that included decorations that recalled the earlier revolution. On 13 May the Executive Commission, nervous about rumors of planned demonstrations, announced that the festival was postponed. The move backfired. A crowd led by Louis Auguste Blanqui launched an attack on 15 May on the Palais Bourbon, where the Assembly was meeting. The head of the National Guard of Paris, General Amable de Courtais, would not order his men to use violence. For three hours the Assembly was paralyzed by the demonstrators.

Order was restored, but the authority of the Commission was damaged. The conservative majority in the Assembly blamed the Executive Commission for allowing the incident to occur, saying it was not competent. The arrest of the leaders of the workers, Armand Barbès and Blanqui, left the working people without leaders. General Coutais was also arrested, accused of treason. The government reorganized the National Guard and moved a large garrison of regular army troops into the center of Paris. On 22 May 1848 the Executive Commission dissolved the Club Raspail and the Club Blanqui, left-wing bases.

Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, who was in exile in London, was elected to the National Assembly on 4 June 1848. He was known to be ambitious to take supreme power, and had already made two failed attempts, in 1836 and 1840. A circular appeared in the departments on 16 June 1848 in which the Executive Government ordered the arrest of Louis-Napoléon. It appears to have been issued just before the question was raised in the National Assembly, and indicates that the government was confident that the motion would pass. On 13 June Lamartine and Ledru-Rollin argued in the Assembly that Louis-Napoleon be disqualified, but the majority voted to admit him. In the event, Louis-Napoleon sent a letter of resignation, but his plans remained unclear. This was another of the steps that weakened the government and led to its fall.

National Workshops had been established by decree of the Provisional Government in February 1848 with the objective of providing employment through undertaking public works. They employed thousands of men during the spring of 1848, doing jobs like leveling and ditching. The National Assembly placed increasing pressure on the Commission to close down the workshops. When the Executive Commission announced their effective closure on 21 June 1848 this pushed an already discontented proletariat into open rebellion.

According to the Bien Public, the commission anticipated the June Days Uprising (23–26 June 1848) and ordered General Louis-Eugène Cavaignac to concentrate forty or fifty thousand men in Paris so he could suppress the riots without bloodshed. However, when the riots began on the morning of Friday 23 June there were only ten to twelve thousand troops in the city. Cavaignac insisted on letting the workers build their barricades without opposition, so they could be more effectively destroyed, where Lamartine and others argued for taking immediate action to avoid bloodshed. Cavaignac's views prevailed.

On Saturday 24 June 1848 the Assembly decided to remove the Executive Commission from power and install Cavaignac as dictator. At the insistence of the Assembly the five members of the Executive Commission resigned on that day. This ended the political careers of Lamartine and Ledru-Rollin. Once Cavaignac had been granted full power, more troops appeared and the uprising was quickly suppressed.

The French Fifth Republic (French : Cinquième République Française) is France 's current republican system of government. It was established on 4 October 1958 by Charles de Gaulle under the Constitution of the Fifth Republic.

The Fifth Republic emerged from the collapse of the Fourth Republic, replacing the former parliamentary republic with a semi-presidential (or dual-executive) system that split powers between a president as head of state and a prime minister as head of government. Charles de Gaulle, who was the first French president elected under the Fifth Republic in December 1958, believed in a strong head of state, which he described as embodying l'esprit de la nation ("the spirit of the nation"). Under the Fifth Republic, the president has the right to dissolve the national assembly and hold new parliamentary elections. If the president has a majority in the national assembly, the president sets domestic policy and the prime minister puts it into practice. During a presidential mandate, the president can also change prime ministers and reshuffle the government. If there is a different majority in the national assembly, the president is forced to nominate a prime minister from a different party, which is called a cohabitation. In the beginning of the Fifth Republic, presidential elections were held every seventh year and parliamentary elections every fifth year. Starting in the year 2002, the presidential elections (in April) and parliamentary elections (in June) were synchronized to be held every fifth year, which ended in the 2024 French snap election.

The Fifth Republic is France's third-longest-lasting political regime, after the hereditary, feudal monarchy of the Ancien Régime and the parliamentary Third Republic (4 September 1870 – 10 July 1940).

The Fourth Republic had suffered from a lack of political consensus, a weak executive, and governments forming and falling in quick succession since 1946. With no party or coalition able to sustain a parliamentary majority, prime ministers found themselves unable to risk their political position with unpopular reforms.

The trigger for the collapse of the French Fourth Republic was the Algiers crisis of 1958. France was still a colonial power, although conflict and revolt had begun the process of decolonization. French West Africa, French Indochina, and French Algeria still sent representatives to the French parliament under systems of limited suffrage in the French Union. Algeria in particular, despite being the colony with the largest French population, saw rising pressure for separation from Metropolitan France. The situation was complicated by those in Algeria, such as European settlers, native Jews, and Harkis (native Muslims who were loyal to France), who wanted to maintain the union with France. The Algerian War was not just a separatist movement but had elements of a civil war.

Further complications came when a section of the French Army rebelled and openly backed the Algérie française movement to defeat separation. Charles de Gaulle, who had retired from politics a decade before, placed himself in the midst of the crisis, calling on the nation to suspend the government and create a new constitutional system. The parliament was unable to choose a government amid popular protest, and De Gaulle was carried to power when the last parliament of the Fourth Republic voted for its own dissolution and the convening of a constitutional convention.

De Gaulle and his supporters proposed a system of strong presidents elected for seven-year terms. The president, under the proposed constitution, would have executive powers to run the country in consultation with a prime minister whom he would appoint. On 1 June 1958, Charles de Gaulle was appointed head of the government ; on 3 June 1958, a constitutional law empowered the new government to draft a new constitution of France, and another law granted Charles de Gaulle and his cabinet the power to rule by decree for up to six months, except on matters of criminal law, electoral law, matters related to the basic rights and freedoms of citizens, and the activities of trade unions. These plans were approved by more than 80% of those who voted in the referendum of 28 September 1958. The new constitution was signed into law on 4 October 1958. Since each new constitution established a new republic, France moved from the Fourth to the Fifth Republic.

The new constitution contained transitional clauses (articles 90–92) extending the period of rule by decree until the new institutions were operating. René Coty remained president of the Republic until the new president was proclaimed. On 21 December 1958, Charles de Gaulle was elected president of France by an electoral college. The provisional constitutional commission, acting in lieu of the constitutional council, proclaimed the results of the election on 9 January 1959. The new president began his office on that date, appointing Michel Debré as prime minister.

The 1958 constitution also replaced the French Union with the French Community, which allowed fourteen member territories (excluding Algeria) to assert their independence. 1960 became known as the " Year of Africa " because of this wave of newly independent states. Algeria became independent on 5 July 1962.

The president was initially elected by an electoral college but in 1962 de Gaulle proposed that the president be directly elected by the citizens and held a referendum on the change. Although the method and intent of de Gaulle in that referendum were contested by most political groups except for the Gaullists, the change was approved by the French electorate. The Constitutional Council declined to rule on the constitutionality of the referendum.

The president is now elected every five years, changed from seven by a constitutional referendum in 2000, to reduce the probability of cohabitation due to former differences in the length of terms for the National Assembly and presidency. The president is elected in one or two rounds of voting : if one candidate gets a majority of votes in the first round that person is president-elect; if no one gets a majority in the first round, the two candidates with the greatest number of votes go to a second round.

Two major changes occurred in the 1970s regarding constitutional checks and balances. Traditionally, France operated according to parliamentary supremacy : no authority was empowered to rule on whether statutes passed by Parliament respected the constitutional rights of the citizens. In 1971, however, the Constitutional Council, arguing that the preamble of the constitution referenced the rights defined in the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen and the preamble of the 1946 constitution, concluded that statutes must respect these rights and so declared partially unconstitutional a statute because it violated freedom of association.

Only the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, or the president of either house of Parliament could ask for a constitutional review before a statute was signed into law—which greatly reduces the likelihood of such a review if all these officeholders happened to be from the same side of politics, which was the case at the time. Then in 1974, a constitutional amendment widened this prerogative to 60 members of the National Assembly or 60 members of the senate. From that date, the opposition has been able to have controversial new statutes examined for constitutionality.

Socialist (PS) Centrist (CD) Centrist (REM) Republican (UDF) Gaullist (UDR ; RPR) Neo-Gaullist (UMP)

Source: "Les présidents de la République depuis 1848" [ Presidents of the Republic Since 1848 ] (in French). Présidence de la République française.

Socialist (PS) Centrist (RE) Republican (UDF) Gaullist (UNR ; UDR ; RPR) Neo-Gaullist (UMP ; LR)

Source: "Former Prime Ministers of the Fifth Republic". Government of France.

The French Fifth Risk Plan aimed at curbing the risk of dependency for the elderly. The dependency risk is called in France the "fifth risk" because the Social Security is divided into four branches, each covering one so-called "risk": illness, old age, family and employment.

In France, the issue of support for elderly dependency is more and more acute: it is estimated today that four people from the baby boom generations will suffer from it.

In 2008, the INSEE identified 1 314 920 persons aged over 85 years in France. In 2015, the figure is expected to reach than 2 million. The number of people with high handicap could rise from 660 000 in 2005 to 940 000 in 2025. Meanwhile, because of population aging, the average number of potential caregivers by dependent elderly person will tend to decrease.

As the four branches of the Social Security (sickness, diseases at work, family, old age) will not be able to cope with this demographic challenge, the Government plans to take care of dependency by the creation of a fifth risk, combining public funding for the solidarity and the establishment of an insurance system encouraged by tax incentives.

The law of 24 January 1997, defines dependency as "a state in which the person who, notwithstanding the care that is likely to receive, needs support for the performance of actions essential to life or requires regular supervision".

In 2008, public spending related to the care of dependent elderly people (health care benefits and benefits of compensation for loss of autonomy) was around 19 billion euros per year, or 1% of GDP.

The law of 30 June 1975 established the third person compensatory allowance (Allocation compensatrice tierce personne or ACTP) for people with disabilities. It was funded by taxes, and was extended in 1983 to the elderly. It was replaced by the specific dependency allowance (Prestation spécifique dépendance) with the law of 24 January 1997, and was finally suppressed with the implementation of the individual allowance for autonomy (Allocation personnalisée à l’autonomie or APA) on 1 January 2002.

In June 2007, the President of the Republic Nicolas Sarkozy expressed his will to introduce the fifth risk in the social protection system. This announcement was part of his desire to reform the system, considered too complex. The announcement was followed by consultations with social partners, along with the publication of several reports dealing with this issue. In particular, the main issue is determining the part to be paid thanks to national solidarity. The negotiations ended in December 2008.

Along with these negotiations, reports were published. The Gisserot report (March 2007) recommended the development of long-term care insurance alongside the APA. The reports of the Caisse nationale de solidarité pour l’autonomie (October 2007) and a report by the Senate (July 2008) were also published. The government declared that it would take these reports into account to propose a bill draft.

The law for the financement of Social Security for 2009 already provided support for dependency and secured a better support for people with disabilities. It recalled the objectives assigned to the future draft bill on dependency to be created during the first half of 2009.

In the history of France, the French Republic (French: République française), retroactively referred to as the First Republic (French: Première République) and sometimes referred to in historiography as Revolutionary France, was founded on 21 September 1792 during the French Revolution. The First Republic lasted until the declaration of the First Empire on 18 May 1804 under Napoléon Bonaparte, although the form of government changed several times.

On 21 September 1792, the deputies of the Convention, gathered for the first time, unanimously decided the abolition of the constitutional monarchy in France.

Although the Republic was never officially proclaimed on 22 September 1792, the decision was made to date the acts from the year I of the Republic. On 25 September 1792, the Republic was declared "one and indivisible". From 1792 to 1802, France was at war with the rest of Europe. It also experienced internal conflicts, including the wars in Vendée.

This period was characterised by the downfall and abolition of the French monarchy, the establishment of the National Convention and the Reign of Terror, the Thermidorian Reaction and the founding of the Directory, and, finally, the creation of the Consulate and Napoleon's rise to power.

Under the Legislative Assembly, which was in power before the proclamation of the First Republic, France was engaged in war with Prussia and Austria. In July 1792, Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick, commanding general of the Austro–Prussian Army, issued his Brunswick Manifesto, threatening the destruction of Paris should any harm come to King Louis XVI and his family.

This foreign threat exacerbated France's political turmoil amid the French Revolution and deepened the passion and sense of urgency among the various factions. In the insurrection of 10 August 1792, citizens stormed the Tuileries Palace, killing six hundred of the King's Swiss guards and insisting on the removal of the king.

A renewed fear of counterrevolutionary action prompted further violence, and in the first week of September 1792, mobs of Parisians broke into the city's prisons. They killed over half of the prisoners, including nobles, clergymen, and political prisoners, but also common criminals, such as prostitutes and petty thieves. Many victims were murdered in their cells: raped, stabbed, and/or slashed to death. This became known as the September Massacres.

As a result of the spike in public violence and the political instability of the constitutional monarchy, a party of six members of France's Legislative Assembly was assigned the task of overseeing elections. The resulting Convention was founded with the dual purpose of abolishing the monarchy and drafting a new constitution.

The convention's first act was to establish the French First Republic and officially strip the king of all political powers. The monarchy was abolished with the proclamation of the abolition of the monarchy on 21 September 1792.

Louis XVI, now a private citizen bearing his family name of Capet, was subsequently put on trial for crimes of high treason starting in December 1792. On 16 January 1793 he was convicted, and on 21 January, he was executed.

Throughout the winter of 1792 and spring of 1793, Paris was plagued by food riots and mass hunger. The new Convention did little to remedy the problem until late spring of 1793, occupied instead with matters of war. Finally, on 6 April 1793, the Convention created the Committee of Public Safety, and was given a monumental task: "To deal with the radical movements of the Enragés, food shortages and riots, the revolt in the Vendée and in Brittany, recent defeats of its armies, and the desertion of its commanding general."

Most notably, the Committee of Public Safety instated a policy of terror, and perceived enemies of the republic began to be executed by guillotine at an ever-increasing rate. This began a period which is known today as the Reign of Terror.

Despite growing discontent with the National Convention as a ruling body, in June the Convention drafted the Constitution of 1793, which was ratified by popular vote in early August. However, the Committee of Public Safety was seen as an "emergency" government, and the rights guaranteed by the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen and the new constitution were suspended under its control.

The constitution of the republic did not provide for a formal head of state or a head of government. It could be discussed whether the head of state would have been the president of the National Convention under international law. However, this changed every two weeks and was therefore not formative.

After the arrest and execution of Robespierre on 28 July 1794, the Jacobin club was closed, and the surviving Girondins were reinstated. A year later, the National Convention adopted the Constitution of the Year III. They reestablished freedom of worship, began releasing large numbers of prisoners, and most importantly, initiated elections for a new legislative body.

On 3 November 1795, the Directory was established. Under this system, France was led by a bicameral Parliament, consisting of an upper chamber called the Council of Elders (with 250 members) and a lower chamber called the Council of Five Hundred (with, accordingly, 500 members), and a collective Executive of five members called the Directory (from which the historical period gets its name). Due to internal instability, caused by hyperinflation of the paper monies (" Assignats "), and French military disasters in 1798 and 1799, the Directory lasted only four years, until overthrown by the Coup of 18 Brumaire on 9 November 1799.

The French Consulate era began with the coup of 18 Brumaire on 9 November 1799. Members of the Directory itself planned the coup, indicating clearly the failing power of the Directory. Napoleon Bonaparte was a co-conspirator in the coup and became head of the government as the First Consul.

In conjunction with this powerful executive authority, four assemblies were established:

On 18 May 1804, Napoleon was proclaimed Emperor of the French by the Sénat conservateur. He would later proclaim himself Emperor of the French, ending the First French Republic and ushering in the First French Empire.

The French fiscal package of 2007 is a series of measures implemented by the Fillon administration in 2007. The paquet fiscal is often called in France loi TEPA, referring to the law in favor of labor, employment and purchasing power (in French loi pour le travail, l’emploi et le pouvoir d’achat). The package consists of fiscal measures aiming at lightening the fiscal burden on businesses, liberalize the labor market and stimulate investment.

The bill on labor, employment and purchasing power (TEPA), whose main measures are often commonly known as the paquet fiscal (tax package) shall be beneficial to growth. According to the Fillon administration, shaping a taxation system more favorable to businesses and lower labor costs could encourage the growth of purchasing power, productive investment and the attractiveness of the territory. This measure, implemented short after the election of Nicolas Sarkozy in 2007 as President of the French Republic, as a strong ideological value. According to the official text, "The revival of the economy requires in priority the rehabilitation of work as a value, as a tool to improve the purchasing power and to fight unemployment".

The cost of these measures was assessed by the government to 13.6 billion euros per year. The exemption on overtime would represent a loss of 6 billion euros for the state budget. The cost of the reduction to 60% of the tax shield would be 600 million euros, the reform of inheritance tax would cost 1.7 billion euros and the cost on interest paid to purchase the primary residence would be of 3.7 billion euros.

The government claimed that will not thwart the European requirements on the recovery of public finances. The government was to announce a reform policy of the State (the "general review of public policies"), which would generate significant savings, for example by not replacing an official two who retired.

The government relied on the effect of the measures announced and considers that they will both stimulate work (overtime and facilitated transmission of wealth) and increase investment in increasing the attractiveness of the French territory for owners of capital available for investment (tax shield). The parliamentary debate showed that even in the majority, some remained skeptical about the effectiveness of this tax package. the opposition also insisted in the "social unfairness" of several measures.

During the political debate in the National Assembly and the Senate, there were concerns about the compatibility of the measures announced with the state of public finances. In particular, the government claimed that these measures would help raise growth to 2.5% in 2008 while the specialized institutes, including the INSEE, forecast that it would not exceed 2.1%.

Others worry over effects in the medium and long term. In case of the failure of the measures to dynamize economic growth, the government would be forced to seek new revenues to fill gaps and comply with the commitments made at European level (reducing the debt below 60% of GDP by 2010 or 2012). The risk would be an increase in taxes (VAT, CSG and CRDS) with a bad impact on the purchasing power and reducing consumption of some households by 2009.

The parliamentary opposition and the main trade unions consider that this tax package is first "socially unfair". These criticisms referred to the lowering of the tax shield and the deduction of a portion of the interest to acquire the principal residence, which would benefit first to the biggest borrowers, and possibly causing a rise in property prices detrimental to the poorest buyers. Similarly, the exemption of overtime benefit to only a minority of employees in growing sectors and could have a counter-productive effect by limiting new hirings. In addition, these measures mainly benefiting wealthier classes would have a limited impact on consumption.

French Flemish (Fransch vlaemsch, Flamind franchoèse, Standard Dutch : Frans-Vlaams, French : flamand français) is a West Flemish dialect spoken in the north of contemporary France.

Place names indicate that Flemish was spoken as early as the 8th century in the region of Flanders that was ceded to France at the 1659 Treaty of the Pyrenees. This area became known as French Flanders. Its dialect subgroup, called French Flemish, meanwhile, became a minority dialect that survives mainly in Dunkirk (Duinkerke in Dutch, Duunkerke in West Flemish, "dune church"), Bourbourg (Broekburg in Dutch), Calais (Kales), Saint-Omer (Sint-Omaars), with its Flemish ethnic enclave of Haut-Pont (Haute-Ponte), and Bailleul (Belle).

French Flemish has about 20,000 daily users, and twice that number of occasional speakers. The dialect's status appears to be moribund, but there has been an active movement to retain French Flemish in the region.

Though generally seen as a dialect of Dutch, some of its speakers prefer to call it a regional language. Jean-Paul Couché, chairman of the Akademie voor Nuuze Vlaemsche Taele (ANVT), argues:

Linguistically, a dialect depends on a larger, national language. That does not apply to French Flemish. We are not connected to standard Dutch because it is an artificial language that was created based on the dialects of North Holland. Research shows that the distance between French Flemish and Dutch is greater than that between Dutch and German.

Although French Flemish and West Flemish are together with Limburgish the most distant dialects from Standard Dutch, Standard Dutch and Standard German are more distant still. However, that is not the case for dialects spoken at both sides of the Dutch-German border. This is partly due to the fact that those German dialects are not dialects of High German but of Low German and Low Franconian.

An earlier form of Flemish was once spoken in what is now metropolitan France over a much wider area than in the 21st century. This is also reflected in the toponymy of Nord-Pas-de-Calais, for instance in the name of the town of Wissant, in which the Flemish Witsant (“white sand”) can easily be recognised.

The chambers of rhetoric testify to an intellectual life in Flemish in French Flanders. These societies, created in the 15th century, organised religious festivities in towns and villages; the chamber of Eecke dates from 1542. They held competitions intended to “maintain the purity of the Flemish language in its form and pronunciation” and to promote poetry in Flemish. These competitions were public. Some chambers survived until the 19th century, and even into the 20th century in the case of the restored chamber of Eecke.

A native of French Flanders, the poet and playwright Michiel de Swaen was a 17th-century Dutch-language writer. In his plays, common people speak Flemish, whereas nobles use a written form strongly influenced by Brabantian and Hollandic.

After the French Revolution, the old Flemish chambers of rhetoric, which had been dissolved like civil and religious corporations, gradually re-established themselves in French Flanders. Louis de Backer notes the reconstitution of the chamber of rhetoric of Hondschoote on 27 Nivôse Year X of the French Republican calendar, as well as the organisation at Bergues of a poetry competition in which the chambers of rhetoric of Kortrijk, Steenvoorde, Steene, Veurne, Moorsele, Poperinge and Hondschoote took part. In the early 19th century, Flemish authors from France were still taking part in literary competitions in Diksmuide and Veurne, including Hubben from Dunkirk, Bertein and Bels from Wormhout, Van Rechem from Hazebrouck and Louis Lecomte from Bailleul.

The spread of French through schooling was an important factor in the decline of French Flemish in the 19th century. According to Jean-Claude Dupas, teaching in Flemish continued after the French Revolution, despite an initial attempt by the Convention to impose teaching in French. The turning point came in the 19th century, when French gradually became the normal and then exclusive language of primary education.

At the beginning of the 19th century, in the arrondissement of Dunkirk and in that of Hazebrouck, all municipalities were Flemish-speaking, with the exception of three municipalities in the arrondissement of Dunkirk that were exclusively French-speaking, namely Gravelines, Loon and Mardyck, and ten municipalities in the arrondissement of Hazebrouck that were likewise exclusively French-speaking, namely Blaringhem, Boeseghem, Thiennes, Haverskerque, Merville, La Gorgue, Estaires, Neuf-Berquin, Steenwerck and Nieppe.[12] In addition, French was also spoken in Holque and Saint-Momelin, but alongside Flemish, and in the arrondissement of Lille only the municipality of Wervicq-Sud was Flemish-speaking at that time.

According to a letter from the prefect dated 13 September 1806, out of the 671 municipalities in the Nord department, 99 were Flemish-speaking and 572 were French-speaking.[12] Also in 1806, there were reportedly 155,712 speakers of Flemish in the Nord department and 1,261 in Pas-de-Calais. In 1807, according to a letter from a sub-prefect, the inhabitants of Clairmarais, Ruminghem and the suburbs of Saint-Omer continued to speak their “corrupted Flemish”. They used it alongside French, which they practised rather than their Flemish [sic].

In 1833, the law on primary education, known as the Guizot Law, made the teaching of the elements of the French language compulsory in primary schools. Several studies devoted to French Flanders present this date as an important stage in the educational Frenchification of the region: according to Jean-Claude Dupas, it was from 1833 onwards that the State truly sought to limit the use of Flemish in schools; Hugo Ryckeboer also states that from this period onwards Flemish was gradually excluded from education, contributing to the decline of Flemish in the arrondissements of Dunkirk and Hazebrouck, where it nevertheless remained widely spoken among the popular, working-class and agricultural populations.

According to Abel Hugo, around 1835 Flemish was the usual language in the arrondissements of Hazebrouck and Dunkirk. However, all the inhabitants also knew and spoke French, a development he described as a conquest of the Revolution. Fifty years earlier, one would not have found in Flanders one farmer in twenty who could express himself in any language other than his mother tongue.

In 1845, in Pas-de-Calais, the localities of Clairmarais, Saint-Folquin, Le Haut-Pont, Saint-Omer-Cappelle, Oye, Ruminghem and Vieille-Église were places where Flemish was still spoken.

In January 1853, the Academic Council of the Nord department adopted a specific decision concerning the use of Flemish in schools in the arrondissements of Dunkirk and Hazebrouck. Teachers were authorised to teach reading in Flemish alongside reading in French, but only so that children whose mother tongue was Flemish could learn their catechism and prepare for First Communion. All other exercises, however, had to take place in French, and the teacher was required to speak French and not tolerate the use of any other language in the school. This decision, sometimes presented as a ban on Flemish in schools, therefore did not abolish all educational use of the language, but confined it to a religious and transitional function. It formed part of the broader movement of educational Frenchification in the 19th century, at a time when Flemish was still widely used among the popular, working-class and agricultural populations of French Flanders.

In the second half of the 19th century, scholarly defence of French Flemish was organised around local scholars and learned societies. Louis de Backer published several works devoted to the Flemings of France and their language, while the Comité flamand de France, founded in 1853, set itself the task, among others, of studying the language and literature of the Flemings of France.

The Historical Commission of the Nord department in 1845, and the Comité flamand de France in a more complete manner in 1857, recorded the linguistic situation in northern France. It emerged that, out of the 59 municipalities making up the arrondissement of Dunkirk, 40 spoke exclusively Flemish, 2 exclusively French, 5 Flemish and French with Flemish dominant, and 13 French and Flemish with French dominant.

Before their definitive incorporation into France, the inhabitants of the arrondissement of Dunkirk spoke only Flemish. This situation had not changed substantially by 1862. A significant part of the population knew French in 1862, but the majority of the inhabitants, especially those belonging to the working and agricultural classes, continued to speak Flemish at that time.

Around 1863, the language spoken by the inhabitants of the arrondissement of Hazebrouck, especially by the working and agricultural classes, was Flemish. According to a statistical study drawn up in 1857, out of the 53 municipalities making up the arrondissement, 31 spoke exclusively Flemish, 8 exclusively French, 11 Flemish and French with Flemish dominant, and 3 French and Flemish with French dominant.

According to De Backer, the disappearance of the last generations of the 19th century nevertheless marked the decline of Flemish as a written language in France. The language then survived more in oral, popular and festive uses. He notably mentions Tisje-Tasje of Noordpeene, a figure of cabaret and Flemish popular culture who became one of the emblematic giants of Hazebrouck, as well as Verlyck of Hazebrouck, who is said to have enlivened the fairs and kermesses of the region for more than half a century with his jokes, songs and comic dialogues with a puppet named Kô Poulle, which became legendary.

A 1911 census revealed that 75% of the market gardeners of Saint-Omer spoke West Flemish.

At the turn of the 19th and 20th centuries, the decline of French Flemish formed part of a broader context of educational and administrative Francization. In schools, the use of Flemish was gradually associated with a popular, rural or archaic speech form, in contrast to French, which was presented as the language of education, social advancement and national unity. Testimonies report punishments imposed on pupils caught speaking Flemish, including the use of the “symbol” or signum : the child at fault was given an object, which he or she could pass on to another pupil by denouncing them in turn; whoever still had the object at the end of the day was punished. Other accounts mention humiliations, such as rinsing the mouth with cold water, intended to wash away the “bad” Flemish words. Inscriptions such as “Défense de parler flamand” (“Speaking Flemish forbidden”) or “Il est interdit de parler flamand et d’uriner sur les murs” (“It is forbidden to speak Flemish and to urinate on the walls”) are regularly cited as traces of this educational and social stigmatization.

In French Flanders, this linguistic pressure was combined with the conflict between republican schooling and Catholic circles. After the law of 9 December 1905 concerning the separation of the Churches and the State, the defence of Flemish could become, in some clerical or Catholic circles, a way of resisting republican secularization. The local language retained a religious and communal function: it continued to be used in families, in some parish contexts, in local relations and in rural areas. Conversely, for some republican authorities, Flemish appeared as one of the signs of a rural, Catholic and peripheral world that had to be more firmly integrated into the French nation through school, administration and military service.

The crisis over the inventories of Church property in 1906 gave this opposition a national dimension. On 6 March 1906, in Boeschèpe, an inventory operation concerning Church property led to clashes; Géry Ghysel, a village butcher, was killed. This episode was one of the two deaths recorded nationally during the quarrel over the inventories and caused considerable political emotion, contributing to the fall of the Rouvier government. In Flanders, the crisis reinforced the association between rural Catholicism, resistance to the central State and attachment to local customs, of which the Flemish language was part. It did not by itself cause the decline of Flemish, but it hardened the ideological climate in which the language was perceived.

In the years preceding the First World War, this religious tension was compounded by growing hostility towards anything that could be associated with the Germanic world. After the loss of Alsace-Lorraine in 1871, and then in the context of Franco-German rivalry, West Flemish in France occupied an ambiguous position: it was the traditional language of a French population, but it nevertheless belonged to the continuum of Germanic languages. This situation encouraged its symbolic marginalization. In some discourses, speaking Flemish could be perceived not only as a sign of social backwardness, but also as a foreign or suspect survival in a Republic that increasingly valued linguistic unity. This double stigmatization, both educational and national, helps explain why many parents, especially after the First and then the Second World War, chose to transmit French to their children rather than Flemish.

In the 1970s, French Flemish also benefited from the folk revival and from growing interest in regional cultures. Traditional song and dance became means of promoting the Flemish linguistic heritage. Christian-Pierre Ghillebaert notably cites, among the first folk groups to emerge from this revival, Joël et Klerktje and Haeghedoorn, and, for a more recent period, Het Reuzekoor and Edmonde Vanhille. Haeghedoorn, a group active in the repertoire of French Flanders, was the subject of a 1980 television report produced by France Régions 3 Lille and preserved by the INA, in which it was presented as a group perpetuating the Flemish tradition in popular festivals and cafés of inland Flanders. Its recordings, later included in a compilation, cover pieces recorded between 1975 and 1993; several traditional titles are indicated as coming from the collections of Edmond de Coussemaker, with arrangements by the group. In the same movement, Marieke en Bart also defended a repertoire sung in the Flemish of the Westhoek, notably based on the popular songs collected in the 19th century by Edmond de Coussemaker.

In 1972, Alex Vanneste carried out a new study of the linguistic situation in the Dunkirk arrondissement.[34] It showed that the French language had gained ground compared with 1874, since all the formerly bilingual municipalities with a French-speaking majority had become monolingual French-speaking.

In 1978, Radio Uylenspiegel was created in Cassel, first as a pirate radio station and then on FM in 1982, with the aim of promoting the Flemish language and culture. In 2002, 10% of its broadcasts were in Flemish. In addition, three regional journals, namely Platch’iou (1981–2000), Revue de l’Houtland (1979–2001) and Yser houck (since 1989), regularly devoted articles to various aspects of Flemish in France and included texts in regional Flemish or in Dutch.

According to the INSEE survey conducted in conjunction with the 1999 census, the Flemish language, concerning approximately 60,000 speakers over the age of 18, was mainly reported by the oldest generations. The proportion of speakers was divided by 13.3 for Flemish between people aged over 60 and those under 25. The language retention rate for Flemish, defined as the proportion of adults who had heard their parents speak Flemish and who themselves used it, even only occasionally, was around one third (33%); this proportion reached 42% among farmers. The figure of 33% as a retention rate implies only 11% retention after two generations, that is, after roughly 60 years. Among Flemish speakers, slightly more than half belonged to the categories of workers and employees, and 11% were farmers.

At the beginning of the 21st century, French Flemish is scarcely spoken outside the arrondissement of Dunkirk, extending as far as Armentières, west of Lille, the “capital of Flanders”, which itself has never been Flemish-speaking. In the 1980s and 1990s, thanks to the work of the association Tegaere Toegaen, French Flemish was taught in several secondary schools, either as a third modern language under the title “Flemish regional language and culture” or in school clubs, as well as in a few primary schools. In the 1990s, a “Flemish option” was also offered at the teacher-training college. Since the mid-2000s, at the request of the Institut de la langue régionale flamande, Flemish has once again been taught in a few primary schools as part of an experimental programme.

The institutional situation has recently evolved with the inclusion of West Flemish among the regional languages that may be taught within the French national education system. The circular of 16 December 2021 on the teaching of regional modern languages explicitly mentions West Flemish among the languages concerned, alongside Picard, Basque, Breton, Catalan, Corsican and Occitan, among others.

New prospects for the “rescue” of French Flemish opened with the Public Office for West Flemish, whose creation was approved on 27 March 2018 by the standing committee of the Hauts-de-France Regional Council. This office is the fifth of its kind in France, after those for the Basque language[43] (a public interest grouping created in 2004), the Breton language (a public cultural cooperation establishment created in 2010), the Occitan language (a public cultural cooperation establishment created in 2015) and the Catalan language (a public interest grouping created in 2016).

The preservation of French Flemish also involves audiovisual collections of native speakers. Mark Ingelaere has for several years documented French Flemish through his YouTube channel Streektaal, recording conversations with speakers still able to speak vlaemsch ; according to Les Plats Pays, he had already filmed more than 460 speakers by 2024. This work constitutes a form of heritage collection at a time when family transmission of the language has become very weak.

In French Flanders, Flemish references today enjoy renewed symbolic and commercial visibility, including shop signs, café names, regional products, bilingual signs, flags and cultural events, even as the active use of West Flemish continues to decline sharply. The language survives mainly among elderly people, often in rural areas, while younger generations frequently retain only passive knowledge, a few words or expressions, or affective markers of local identity.

Recent initiatives, such as the free app Lingue Vive, developed with the support of the Institut de la langue régionale flamande, aim to familiarise children with West Flemish vocabulary, as part of a process of transmission and preservation rather than a return to widespread social use.

A growing, re-introduced language, French Flemish is taught in several schools in the French Westhoek. The ANVT-ILRF was given permission to carry out experimental lessons in four public schools (in Esquelbecq, Noordpeene, Volckerinckhove, Wormhout) for the school years of 2007–08 until 2010–11, after which it would be evaluated. Afterwards, all requirements were met but it was only allowed to continue them, but not to expand to other schools or to the collège. On the other hand, the private Catholic education began teaching standard Dutch in collèges in Gravelines and Hondschoote.

The Forestry Ordinance of 1669 (“sur le fait des Eaux et Forêts ") proclaimed by Louis XIV of France sought to protect and restore France’s timber resources as well as its considerable forestry heritage. The Ordinance consolidated and clarified older, more fragmented regulations. It was drafted after serious investigation of forestry exploitation practices by Jean-Baptiste Colbert, who successfully championed the idea of systematic reform. The Ordinance specified the skills of royal officers, imposed a uniform mode of forest exploitation and sought to steer forest exploitation toward what would today be called “sustainable” practices. This major reform also reflected a long-term strategy to protect forestry resources at a time when wood was not only the primary construction material (including its all important role in maritime construction), but also the primary source of energy for households and industry. Today's forest codes in France and in many other countries are direct heirs of this ordinance.

Noting that "the disorder which had crept into the Waters and Forests of our kingdom was so universal and so inveterate that the remedy seemed almost impossible", Louis XIV promulgated an ordinance that was to become a landmark in the history of forestry. However, the Ordinance of 1669 was part of a broader campaign of forestry reform under Louis XIV that lasted from 1661 to 1680. Colbert provided the knowledge and the impetus for this reform effort, but Louis XIV provided his wholehearted support.

French forests were beset by numerous problems in the first half of the 17th century. These problems had been a long time in the making. From the 13th century onwards, political powers had attempted to put some order in the rampant exploitation of forest resources for fuel and building materials. However, these efforts had shown over the centuries that they were not up to the task of dealing with the tragedy of the forest commons.

By the mid-17th century, the urgent need for reform was clear from the extreme disorder of the administration of royal property after the long period of the Wars of Religion and the Huguenot Rebellions. Colbert, as Minister of Louis XIV, exclaimed: "France will perish for lack of wood!"

Indeed, war and civil strife had taken their toll on the forests themselves and on the administrative structure that was supposed to manage them. As in other areas of service to the King, many of the commissioners and other forestry officials engaged in self-dealing and embezzlement. Often they were not well qualified or not motivated to do their jobs. Indeed, the "ignorance of forest officers, the constant need for money from the Treasury, and embezzlement had led to enormous waste and inconsiderate sales of wood. " As a result, little of the forestry revenues that should have accrued to the Treasury actually ended up there and often the forests were a drain on royal coffers.

In addition, the system of rights enjoyed by the various users of forest resources (nobles, ecclesiastics, commoners and towns) was not well documented – nobles or ecclesiastics would usurp royal rights by encroaching on the King’s land or exploiting his resources; users of the forest would buy exploitation rights from people who did not in fact own them; and many users – particularly the noble and ecclesiastical elites –would simply exploit the forest in ways that were detrimental to it (e.g. excessive grazing of animals, building kilns for firing bricks using the forest's wood as an energy source). As a result, France was being rapidly deforested. Of particular concern to Colbert and Louis XIV was that, for ship building, France was forced to rely on masts imported from the Netherlands or from nordic countries, leaving it vulnerable to blockades.

Colbert was the main instigator and drafter of the Ordinance, with the approval and encouragement of Louis XIV. While overseeing the forestry holdings of Cardinal Mazarin as his Intendant, Colbert had obtained insights into the problems of forestry management. Thus, he was well positioned to deal with these issues before being named Intendant of Finance in 1661. Forestry reform was one of many other projects that Colbert would launch as first steps in the transition to the modern French state. Indeed, Colbert and the King XIV were well aware that the self-dealing of officers of the Crown and the usurping of royal rights by the nobility were broader problems that extended well beyond forestry and they sought to address these problems.

In late 1661, Colbert's first step in forestry reform was to take stock of the situation – he initially ordered the grands maîtres (the top officials in charge of forestry management) to report on the size of the forests for which they were responsible, the distribution and composition of species of trees and the type of forest exploitation that was taking place. He also asked for a list of harvests and sales of forest products from 1635 to 1661. Also inventoried were local residents' rights as well as abuses, usurpations and crimes committed in France’s forests. All of this reporting was to be finished in only a few months (by January 1662). The initial reports were disappointing. Some of the Grands Maîtres failed to submit reports and others proved to be of little use. Often, the officials faced hostility from the local elites.

After several attempts, Colbert managed to compile reliable information about the state of many forests, principally by constituting a team of trusted commissioners. On the 10th of March 1663, Colbert issued detailed instructions on how the commissioners or ' maîtres de requetes " were to carry out their investigative mission. He begins by itemising a detailed list of the corruption and shortcomings of earlier commissioners. He then warns his commissioners to be on their guard against all previous officials, given the long tradition of abuses in the sector.

The Reformation was implemented by stewards, as well as a small number of forestry Commissioners like Louis de Froidour who initially made himself known in the reformation of the forests of Île-de-France and was then made responsible for that of the department of Languedoc, to which all the Pyrenees, Quercy and Angoumois were later to be added. These officials collected information from archives of legal documents, interviews of local people and from forest visits where measurements were taken and assessments of abuses made. Their reports provided both information and proposals that would be used later during the drafting of the Ordinance of 1669. One analysis asserts that these reports by Commissioners may also have exaggerated the misdeeds of earlier forest gardiens so as to justify their existence and mission and in order to justify the State's interference in this key area of local life.

Colbert's information gathering efforts also resulted in the imposition of disciplines and punishments on the corp of royal officials charged with implementing forestry policy. Indeed, "never before had royal forest policy been implemented with such exactitude and serverity." In November 1662, he instructed the Commissioner of Ile-de-France to "execute justice, spare no one, fear nothing.. it is necessary to bring the greatest severity to those who have committed depredations in the forests." Some of the delinquent forest officials were dismissed and others were punished. In one case, a sergeant in the forest of Alençon had been condemned to the galleys (forced labour). Colbert wrote: "His punishment will serve as an example; and it will be well that you give, if you please, the order for his being taken to La Toulon with the first chain."

Officials and others were also fined and required to disgorge ill-gotten gains. By the end of this reform, the Crown had recovered more than 70,000 acres of wood and the amount of fines exceeded 2 million pounds.

Between 1215 and 1611, 18 Forest Ordinances were issued by royal decree. These earlier attempts at regulation of forests were not successful and, indeed, were a subject of widespread mockery, but they also meant that Colbert was not starting from a blank slate when he began drafting the Ordinance of 1669. This Ordinance consists of 32 Titles which are themselves divided into several hundred Articles.

The Ordinance first defines "the Jurisdiction of Waters & Forests" — it governed the Kingdom's Waters and Forests, including hunting, fishing and water policing and, in addition to royal forests, it covered ecclesiastical forests, those owned by the nobility, and those belonging towns. All of these were to be governed by rules and administrative and legal structures put in place by the King.

Broadly speaking, the Ordinance defines the rights and responsibilities of different actors in the forest system; creates a cadre of royal officials with defined roles; and sets rules for avoidance of conflict of interest and punishments for officials who are remiss in their duties. The highest ranking personnel were the Grand Masters (Title III), who were qualified officers whose role was to oversee the execution of the Ordinance and the conduct of the lower officers (Title II) -Masters, Lieutenants, Attorneys, Gardes-Marteau (keeper of the stamping hammers used in martelage, which defines forest boundaries, windthrows and stolen trees and trees for sale; only this official was to have access to this hammer; Title VII) and Greffiers (who kept copies of documents and decrees, took minutes of meetings and forest visits and accounts of wood harvests, sales auctions and other events; Title VIII) These lower officers were organised in a pyramidal structure under the Grand Master and were subject to several constraints: 1) they had to be at least 25 years of age: 2) they could not have family relationships any closer than first cousins with other forest officers; and 3) most were not allowed to hold other royal positions.

The Ordinance also regulates the major processes of forest exploitation: the sale, felling and martelage of trees (Title XV; this provides detailed instructions on record keeping, avoidance of conflict of interest, due care by forest officials); the sale of windthrows (uprooted trees; Title XVII); the sale of rights to the glandée (the use of the fruits of some trees, especially oak, as animal feed; Title XVIII); the organisation of pasturing of cattle and pigs (Title XIX); wood used for heating and construction (Title XX); the provision of building timber for royal mansions and the Navy (Title XXI). Titles XXIV imposes what would now be called a "sustainable" system of logging. Under this system, large forests were divided into compartments, which each compartment being subjected to successive clear cuts (except that 16 trees were to be left standing to reseed). By the end of the cycle of successive logging of parcels, the first parcel would be ready to be logged again. In addition, in communal and ecclesiastical forests, one fourth of the land area was to be reserved for timber trees (Titles XXIV and XXV).

The last five titles are: the “Police and Conservation of Forests, Waters & Rivers”, “Roads and Chemins Royals és Forests & marshes of Rivers”, followed by two Titles -- “ Des Chasses ” (Title XXX, Hunting, which broadly preserves royal and noble prerogatives regarding hunting of forest animals) and “ De la Pesche ” (Title XXXI, Fishing). The final Title is devoted to “Penalties, fines, restitution, damages, interests, & confiscations”. Title XXXII provides inter alia for penalties and punishments for crimes committed by forest officials: "Officers who have been convicted of forgery or fraud are to be condemned to pay quadruple, be deprived of their offices, banished from the forests and subjected to corporal punishment... the Guards who shall have made the [fraudulent] reports shall be sent to the galleys for life, without any moderation." Many other offences under the Ordinance were punishable by fines. Culprits found guilty of depredations were liable for both fines and restitution, with the latter being greater than or equal to the fine. The fine was paid to the royal Treasury, while the restitution accrued to the possessor of the forest (the King or some other right holder). If the possessor was a community, it was required to spend the restitution money on public works in the forest or elsewhere. The death penalty could be imposed for serious offenses.

The principal judicial structure charged with adjudicating disputes or judging violations had 3 levels: a lower court (Gruries); an intermediate forum (the Master or Maîtres) and, finally, the highest court (the Courts of the Marble Table). For some types of offense (e.g. appeals by the Grand Masters themselves or by officials of the Marble Tables), Parliament could serve as an appeals body (Titles XIII and XIV).

An administrative monument of the Ancien Régime, the 1669 Ordinance now serves as the basis for France's current Forest Code and those of other countries as well. An analysis of French forestry policy by the European Forestry Institute credits the Ordinance with being "the first real forestry code." It goes on to say: "This code unified the law, regulated practices and defined the rules of forest management. Known as the ' amènagement forestier ', this code has ever since determined the management plan of the forest. This forest management became a model throughout Europe."

However, the Ordinance presented serious shortcomings as a general framework for forest management in France. Although its regulations of were ideal for oak silviculture, they were unsuitable for stands of conifers which do not sprout on stumps. For this reason, in the years following the enactment of the Ordinance, hundreds of supplementary statutes were issued. Some of these were designed to remedy the Ordinance's shortcomings with respect to non-deciduous trees. Subsequent legislation and local adaptations to the law managed to alleviate, "but did not eliminate, the damaging effects of technical deficiencies in the law."

The French Foundation for the Study of Human Problems (French : Fondation française pour l'étude des problèmes humains), often referred to as the Alexis Carrel Foundation or the Carrel Foundation, was a eugenics organization created by Nobel laureate in Medicine Alexis Carrel under the Vichy regime in World War II France.

Alexis Carrel spent most of his career at the Rockefeller Institute in New York and returned to France just before the outbreak of World War II. Carrel, who had worked previously with Philippe Pétain during the First World War, accepted an offer to establish and lead a foundation for the study of human problems. Its ambitious mission was to give an account of the "human element associating the soul and the body".

Charged with "the comprehensive study of the most appropriate measures needed to safeguard, improve, and advance the French people in all their activities," the Foundation was created by decree of the Vichy regime in 1941, and Carrel was appointed as "regent".

The Foundation initiated studies on demographics (Robert Gessain, Paul Vincent, Jean Bourgeois), nutrition (Jean Sutter), and housing (Jean Merlet), as well as the first polls (Jean Stoetzel). The foundation employed 300 researchers from the summer of 1942 to the end of the autumn of 1944.

The Foundation made many positive accomplishments during its time. It promoted the 16 December 1942 Act which established the prenuptial certificate, which was required before marriage and which sought to insure the good health of the spouses, in particular in regard to sexually transmitted diseases (STD) and "life hygiene". The institute also established the livret scolaire, which could be used to record students' grades in the French secondary schools, and thus classify and select them according to scholastic performance.

Carrel was suspended after the liberation of Paris in August 1944 and died soon thereafter, thus avoiding the inevitable purge. The Foundation itself was "purged", but resurfaced soon after as the French Institute for Demographic Studies (INED) after the war. Most members of Carrel's team moved to INED, led by demographist Alfred Sauvy, who coined the expression " Third World ". Others joined Robert Debré 's National Hygiene Institute which later became INSERM.

The French Fourth Republic (French : Quatrième république française) was the republican government of France from 27 October 1946 to 4 October 1958, governed by the fourth republican constitution of 13 October 1946. Essentially a reestablishment and continuation of the French Third Republic which governed from 1870 during the Franco-Prussian War to 1940 during World War II, it suffered many of the same problems which led to its end. The French Fourth Republic was a parliamentary republic.

Despite political dysfunction, the Fourth Republic saw an era of great economic growth in France and the rebuilding of the nation's social institutions and industry after World War II, with assistance from the United States through the Marshall Plan. It also saw the beginning of the rapprochement with France's longtime enemy Germany, which led to Franco-German co-operation and eventually to the European Union.

The new constitution made some attempts to strengthen the executive branch of government to prevent the unstable situation before the war, but instability remained and the French Fourth Republic saw frequent changes of government – there were 21 administrations in its 12-year history. Moreover, the government proved unable to make effective decisions regarding decolonization of the numerous remaining French colonies. After a series of crises culminating in the Algerian crisis of 1958, the French Fourth Republic collapsed. Wartime leader Charles de Gaulle returned from retirement to preside over a transitional administration empowered to design a new French constitution. The Fourth Republic was dissolved on 5 October 1958 following a public referendum which established the current French Fifth Republic with a strengthened presidency.

After the liberation of France in 1944, the Vichy government was dissolved and the Provisional Government of the French Republic (French : Gouvernement provisoire de la République française, GPRF), also known as the French Committee of National Liberation, was instituted after a unanimous request of the Provisional Consultative Assembly to be properly represented. With most of the political class discredited and containing many members who had more or less collaborated with Nazi Germany, Gaullism and communism became the most popular political forces in France.

Charles de Gaulle led the GPRF from 1944 to 1946. Meanwhile, negotiations took place over the proposed new constitution, which was to be put to a referendum. De Gaulle advocated a presidential system of government, and criticized the reinstatement of what he pejoratively called "the parties system". He resigned in January 1946 and was replaced by Felix Gouin of the French Section of the Workers' International (Section française de l'Internationale ouvrière, SFIO). Ultimately only the French Communist Party (Parti communiste français, PCF) and the socialist SFIO supported the draft constitution, which envisaged a form of government based on unicameralism ; but this was rejected in the referendum of 5 May 1946.

For the 1946 elections, the Rally of Left Republicans (Rassemblement des gauches républicaines, RGR), which encompassed the Radical-Socialist Party, the Democratic and Socialist Union of the Resistance and other conservative parties, unsuccessfully attempted to oppose the Christian democrat and socialist MRP –SFIO–PCF alliance. The new constituent assembly included 166 MRP deputies, 153 PCF deputies and 128 SFIO deputies, giving the tripartite alliance an absolute majority. Georges Bidault of the MRP replaced Felix Gouin as the head of government.

A new draft of the Constitution was written, which this time proposed the establishment of a bicameral form of government. Leon Blum of the SFIO headed the GPRF from 1946 to 1947. After a new legislative election in June 1946, the Christian democrat Georges Bidault assumed leadership of the Cabinet. Despite De Gaulle's so-called discourse of Bayeux of 16 June 1946 in which he denounced the new institutions, the new draft was approved by 53% of voters voting in favor (with an abstention rate of 31%) in the referendum held on 13 October 1946 and the Constitution of 27 October 1946 came into force two weeks later as the Fourth Republic, in an arrangement in which executive power essentially resided in the hands of the President of the Council (the prime minister). The President of the Republic was given a largely symbolic role, although he remained chief of the French Army and as a last resort could be called upon to resolve conflicts.

After the expulsion of the Communists from the governing coalition, France joined the Cold War against communism, as expressed by becoming a founding member of NATO in April 1949. France now took a leadership position in unifying western Europe, working closely with Konrad Adenauer of West Germany. Robert Schuman, who was twice Prime Minister and at other times Minister of Finance and Foreign Minister, was instrumental in building post-war European and trans-Atlantic institutions. A devout Catholic and anti-Communist, he led France to be a member of the European Communities, the Council of Europe and NATO.

Les Trente Glorieuses ('The Glorious Thirty') was the high prosperity in the 30 years from 1945 to 1975. In 1944, De Gaulle introduced a dirigiste economic policy, which included substantial state control over a capitalist economy, which was followed by 30 years of unprecedented growth.

The wartime damage was extensive, and large reparations from defeated Germany did not happen. The United States helped revive the French economy with the Marshall Plan (1948–1951), giving France $2.3 billion with no repayment. France was the second largest recipient after Britain. The total of all American grants and credits to France from 1946 to 1953 amounted to $4.9 billion. It provided urgently needed funding for modernizing transport systems, electricity generation, and basic industries including cement, coal, and steel. The plan required a modernization of French industrial and managerial systems, free trade, and friendly economic relations with West Germany.

The French economy grew rapidly like economies of other developed countries within the framework of the Marshall Plan such as West Germany, Italy, and Japan. These decades of economic prosperity combined high productivity with high average wages and high consumption, and were also characterised by a highly developed system of social benefits. According to various studies, the real purchasing power of the average French worker's salary went up by 170% between 1950 and 1975, while overall private consumption increased by 174% in the period 1950-1974. The French standard of living, which had been damaged by both World Wars, became one of the world's highest. The population also became far more urbanized; many rural départements experienced a population decline while the larger metropolitan areas grew considerably, especially that of Paris. Ownership of various household goods and amenities increased considerably, while the wages of the French working class rose significantly as the economy became more prosperous. As noted by the historians Jean Blondel and Donald Geoffrey Charlton in 1974,

If it is still the case that France lags in the number of its telephones, working-class housing has improved beyond recognition and the various 'gadgets' of the consumer society–from television to motor cars–are now purchased by the working class on an even more avid basis than in other Western European countries.

The worldwide 1973 oil crisis slowed down its explosive growth. Thus, the mid-1970s marked the end of the period. Thomas Piketty describes the Trente Glorieuses as an exceptional "catch up" period following the world wars. He cites statistics showing that normal growth in wealthy countries is about 1.5–2%, whereas in Europe growth dropped to 0.5% between 1913 and 1950, and then "caught up" with a growth rate of 4% between 1950 and 1970, until settling back to 1.5–2% from 1970 onward.

Public opinion polls showed that in February 1954, only 7% of the French people wanted to continue the fight in Indochina against the Communists, led by Ho Chi Minh and his Viet Minh movement.

Pierre Mendès France was a Radical Party leader who was Prime Minister for eight months in 1954–55, working with the support of the Socialist and Communist parties. His top priority was ending the war in Indochina, which had already cost 92,000 dead, 114,000 wounded and 28,000 captured in the wake of the humiliating defeat at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu in early May 1954.

At the Geneva Conference (1954), he made a deal that gave the Viet Minh control of Vietnam north of the 17th parallel, and allowed him to pull out all French forces. That left South Vietnam standing alone. However, the United States moved in and provided large-scale financial, military and economic support for South Vietnam.

Mendès France next came to an agreement with Habib Bourguiba, the nationalist leader in Tunisia, for the independence of that colony by 1956, and began discussions with the nationalist leaders in Morocco for a French withdrawal.

The intention of the new Constitution's authors was to rationalize the parliamentary system. Ministers were accountable to the legislative body, the French National Assembly, but some measures were introduced in order to protect the Cabinet and to reinforce the authority of the Prime Minister of France, who led the Cabinet. The goal of the new constitution was to reconcile parliamentary democracy with ministerial stability.

For instance, under the new Constitution, the President of the Council was the leader of the executive branch (Prime Minister of France). The President of the French Republic, elected by the Parliament (the National Assembly and the Council of the Republic), played a symbolic role. His main power was to propose a Prime Minister, who was subject to election by the National Assembly before forming a Cabinet. Only the Prime Minister could invoke a parliamentary vote on legitimacy of the Cabinet. The Prime Minister was also the only member of the executive able to demand a vote of confidence from the National Assembly (in the Third Republic any minister could call for a vote of confidence). The Cabinet could be dismissed if an absolute majority of the National Assembly's members voted against the Cabinet. Finally, the National Assembly could be dissolved after two ministerial crises in the legislature.

However, these constitutional measures did not work. In January 1947, after his election by the National Assembly and the nomination of his ministers, Prime Minister Paul Ramadier called for a vote of confidence in order to verify that the Assembly approved the composition of his Cabinet. This initiated a custom of double election, a vote for the Prime Minister followed by a vote of confidence in the chosen Cabinet, that weakened the Prime Minister's authority over the Cabinet. Cabinets were dismissed with only a plurality (not the absolute majority) of the National Assembly voting against the Cabinet. Consequently, these ministerial crises did not result in the dissolution of Parliament. Thus, as in the Third Republic, this regime was characterized by ministerial instability.

The Fourth Republic was also a victim of the political context. The split of the three-party alliance in spring 1947, the departure of Communist ministers, Gaullist opposition, and the new proportional representation did not create conditions for ministerial stability. Governmental coalitions were composed of an undisciplined patchwork of center-left and center-right parties. Finally, the Fourth Republic was confronted with the collapse of the French colonial empire.

The creation of the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) was first proposed by French foreign minister Robert Schuman and French economist Jean Monnet on 9 May 1950 as a way to prevent further war between France and Germany. Though the United Kingdom was invited, its Labour government, then preparing for a re-election fight, did not join the initiative. It was formally established in 1951 by the Treaty of Paris, signed by France, Italy, West Germany, Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands. Between these countries the ECSC would create a common market for coal and steel. The ECSC was governed by a 'High Authority', checked by bodies representing governments; representatives of the peoples of the member States (selected from each state's Members of Parliament); and an independent judiciary.

The 1951 Treaty of Paris, which created the ECSC, was superseded on 25 March 1957 by the Treaty of Rome, which established the European Economic Community (the forerunner to the European Union, created in 1993 through the Maastricht Treaty).

The trigger for the collapse of the Fourth Republic was the Algiers crisis of 1958. France was still a colonial power, although conflict and revolt had begun the process of decolonization. French West Africa, French Indochina, and French Algeria still sent representatives to the French parliament under systems of limited suffrage in the French Union. Algeria in particular, despite being the colony with the largest French-identifying population, saw rising pressure for separation from the Métropole. The situation was complicated by those in Algeria, such as the Pieds-Noirs, who wanted to stay part of France, so the Algerian War became not just a separatist movement but had elements of a civil war.

Further complications came when a section of the French Army rebelled and openly backed the Algérie française movement to defeat separation. Revolts and riots broke out in 1958 against the French government in Algiers, but there were no adequate and competent political initiatives by the French government in support of military efforts to end the rebellion owing to party politics. The feeling was widespread that another debacle like that of Indochina in 1954 was in the offing and that the government would order another precipitous pullout and sacrifice French honour to political expediency. This prompted General Jacques Massu to create a French settlers' committee to demand the formation of a new national government under General De Gaulle, who was a national hero and had advocated a strong military policy, nationalism and the retention of French control over Algeria. General Massu, who had gained prominence and authority when he ruthlessly suppressed Algerian militants, famously declared that unless General De Gaulle was returned to power, the French Army would openly revolt; General Massu and other senior generals covertly planned the takeover of Paris with 1,500 paratroopers preparing to take over airports with the support of French Air Force units. Armoured units from Rambouillet prepared to roll into Paris.

On 24 May, French paratroopers from the Algerian corps landed on Corsica, taking the French island in a bloodless action called Opération Corse. Operation Resurrection would be implemented if De Gaulle was not approved as leader by the French Parliament, if De Gaulle asked for military assistance to take power, or to thwart any organized attempt by the French Communist Party to seize power or stall De Gaulle's return.

De Gaulle, who had announced his retirement from politics a decade before, placed himself in the midst of the crisis, calling on the nation to suspend the government and create a new constitutional system. On 29 May 1958, French politicians agreed upon calling on De Gaulle to take over the government as prime minister. The French Army's willingness to support an overthrow of the constitutional government was a significant development in French politics. With Army support, De Gaulle's government terminated the Fourth Republic (the last parliament of the Fourth Republic voted for its dissolution) and drew up a new constitution proclaiming the French Fifth Republic in 1958.

The franc (/ f r æ ŋ k / ; French : franc français, [ fʁɑ̃ fʁɑ̃sɛ ] ; sign : F or Fr), also commonly distinguished as the French franc (FF), was a currency of France. Between 1360 and 1641, it was the name of coins worth 1 livre tournois and it remained in common parlance as a term for this amount of money. It was reintroduced (in decimal form) in 1795. After two centuries of inflation, it was redenominated in 1960, with each new franc (NF) being worth 100 old francs. The NF designation was continued for a few years before the currency returned to being simply the franc. Many French residents, though, continued to quote prices of especially expensive items in terms of the old franc (equivalent to the new centime), up to and even after the introduction of the euro (for coins and banknotes) in 2002. The French franc was a commonly held international reserve currency of reference in the 19th and 20th centuries. Between 1998 and 2002, the conversion of francs to euros was carried out at a rate of 6.55957 francs to 1 euro.

The French franc traces its origins to the Carolingian monetary system of the 8th century AD, and more specifically to the livre tournois, an offshoot of the same system which emerged in the 13th century. Here is a table of changes to the value of the livre parisis and the livre tournois in terms of silver or gold until the French franc was introduced in 1795.

Emperor Charlemagne's monetary system was introduced in 781 AD to the Frankish Carolingian Empire and spread over the centuries to much of Western Europe, with a Livre (pound) of silver divided into 20 sols or sous (shillings) and the sol divided into 12 deniers (pennies). Only the denier existed as a coin for the next 500 years, with the sou and livre functioning as accounting multiples of the denier. The first livre and denier weighed 407.92 g and 1.7 g, respectively, of the finest silver available.

Livres and deniers issued c. 1000 under the Capetian dynasty contained 305.94 g and 1.27475 g fine silver, respectively. The French mark of 8 ounces was a unit of weight equal to 244.752 grams, and equal in weight to 192 deniers or 16 sols of this period.

In subsequent centuries the French kings would struggle to implement fixed standards for the livre over a decentralized realm of Frankish feudal rulers, many of whom claimed the right to issue currency within their own domains, and often resorting to currency debasements in moments of stringency. While monetary values as proclaimed by French kings would eventually be identified as the livre parisis, other regions almost always got by with currencies of lower standard. One such currency, the livre tournois, would eventually become the preferred accounting system under a more centralized French kingdom.

The emergence of the livre tournois as France's preferred accounting system occurred during the reign of King Louis IX with the issuance of the silver gros tournois with 58 issued to a French mark of silver of fineness 23 ⁄ 24 (hence 4.044 g fine silver in a gros), and valued at 1 sol (12 deniers) in France's Touraine region, though valued less than 1 sol parisis. The new coin's reputation and handling convenience versus those of debased deniers assured the adoption of the gros tournois to the rest of Western Europe.

Towards the reign of King Philip IV le Bel came pressures to further debase the denier, which occurred in 1317 when the gros tournois was raised to 15 deniers tournois or 12 deniers (1 sol) parisis, thus commencing the fixed parity of 4 deniers parisis to 5 deniers tournois. While French kings would continue to prescribe coin values in multiples of 4 and 12 deniers parisis until the end of the 15th century, the rest of France would gradually choose to recognize their increased values in multiples of 5 and 15 deniers tournois.

The start of the Hundred Years' War against England in 1337 would increase the pressure to further debase the French livre. An attempt in 1343 to reverse earlier depreciations of circulating deniers and reinstate the old 1317-era gros tournois (forte monnaie, or strong money) caused financial havoc especially with borrowers who received depreciated coins and who then had to repay debts in forte monnaie. Lower valuations for the livre had to be accepted subsequently as the war raged on.

In 1361 the gros tournois of 15 deniers tournois (1 sol parisis) was minted at 84 to a French Mark of silver, 23/24 fine (hence, 2.79 fine silver in a gros). At the same time gold flowing from Southern Europe started to become an important medium of exchange in the North, so gold francs worth 1 livre tournois (16 sols parisis) were minted at 63 to a French mark of fine gold (hence, 3.885 g in a franc). Gold as circulating currency would henceforth continue in the form of écus d'or of varying gold content.

The gold franc worth one livre tournois was introduced in 1360 to pay the ransom of King John II of France. This coin secured the king's freedom and showed him on a richly decorated horse earning it the name franc à cheval (meaning "free on horseback" in French). The obverse legend, like other French coins, gives the king's title as Francorum Rex (" King of the Franks " in Latin) and provides another reason to call the coin a franc. John's son, Charles V, continued this type. It was copied exactly at Brabant and Cambrai and, with the arms on the horse cloth changed, at Flanders. Conquests led by Joan of Arc allowed Charles VII to return to sound coinage and he revived the franc à cheval. John II, however, was not able to strike enough francs to pay his ransom and he voluntarily returned to English captivity.

John II died as a prisoner in England and his son Charles V was left to pick up the pieces. Charles V pursued a policy of reform, including stable coinage. An edict dated 20 April 1365 established the centrepiece of this policy, a gold coin officially called the denier d'or aux fleurs de lis which had a standing figure of the king on its obverse, pictured under a canopy. Its value in money of account was one livre tournois, just like the franc à cheval, and this coin is universally known as a franc à pied ('free on foot'). In accordance with the theories of the mathematician, economist and royal advisor Nicole Oresme, Charles struck fewer coins of better quality gold than his ancestors. In the accompanying deflation, both prices and wages fell, but wages fell faster and debtors had to settle up in better money than they had borrowed. The Mayor of Paris, Étienne Marcel, exploited their discontent to lead the Jacquerie revolt which forced Charles V out of the city. The franc fared better. It became associated with money stable at one livre tournois.

A certain degree of peace achieved at the start of the 15th century helped settle the value of French currency. After 1422 the gros of 1 sol parisis was minted at 96 to a French mark, 3 ⁄ 4 fine (hence 1.912 g per gros), while the écu of 20 sols parisis was minted at 64 to a French mark, 22 + 1 ⁄ 2 karats or 15 ⁄ 16 fine (hence 3.585 g per écu). The gros and the écu compared favourably with England's 2-pence coin of 1.8 g silver and 40-pence (1 ⁄ 6 th of a pound) half-noble coin of 3.48 g gold, resulting in an approximate exchange rate of 1 pound sterling to six livres parisis.

Peace in the Burgundian Netherlands after the 1420s also resulted in the 1434 realignment of the Flemish monetary system with the French livre. The new Flemish guilder (pound) of 20 stuiver (shilling) contained 32.6 g fine silver and was approximately par with the Livre Parisis of 20 sols (38.24 g). Such parities between the French livres to the Flemish and English currencies would persist up to the 1560s and would facilitate the issue of identical coin denominations across these countries.

The Great Bullion Famine of the mid-15th century resulted in yet another debasement during the reign of King Louis XI, with the livre parisis reduced to 1 French ounce (30.594 g) fine silver or 2.620 g fine gold. The silver gros was minted at 69 to the French mark, 23 ⁄ 24 fine (3.4 g fine silver) and was valued at 1 ⁄ 9 th the Livre Parisis (or 2 + 2 ⁄ 9 sols). The gold écu au soleil was minted at 72 to the mark, 23 + 1 ⁄ 8 karats fine (3.2754 g fine gold), and was valued at 25 sols parisis. The close of the 15th century saw the beginnings of a more centralized French currency system and the discontinuation of competing currency systems within France.

The livre parisis of 1 French ounce approximately matched the silver content of 1 ⁄ 6 th pound sterling (1 troy ounce of sterling silver). It would also become the model for the Holy Roman Empire when its prince-electors started issuing the 1-ounce silver Guldengroschen divided into 21 Groschen (gros, shillings) or 252 Pfennige (pence).

A considerable acceleration in the debasement of the French, English and Dutch currencies occurred during the reign of the Valois-Angoulême kings in the 16th century amidst the huge influx of precious metals from the American continent arriving through the Habsburg Netherlands. The loose enforcement of monetary standards in the Dutch provinces resulted in a significant 1 ⁄ 3 rd reduction in the value of the French livre by 1549, with debasements continuing into the 17th century.

The French ounce (30.594 g) of fine silver was raised in value from 1 to 1 + 1 ⁄ 2 livre parisis (or from 25 to 37 + 1 ⁄ 2 sols tournois). The écu au soleil of 3.2754 g fine gold was raised in value from 25 to 37 + 1 ⁄ 2 sols parisis (or 31 + 1 ⁄ 4 to approximately 47 sols tournois). This 50% advance was also seen in England in 1551 when it raised its troy ounce of sterling silver from 40 to 60 pence, and in the 17th century when the Holy Roman Empire raised its one-ounce silver thaler from 1 to 1 + 1 ⁄ 2 silver gulden.

The 16th century saw the issuance of larger silver coins, first in testoons (9 g fine silver, valued at 11 sols Tournois in 1549), and later on in silver francs (12.3 g fine silver, valued at 1 livre tournois in 1577). These French coins, however, were much less popular than the 1-ounce silver coins coming out of Spain, the Netherlands and the Holy Roman Empire, leading to the 1641 currency reform under King Louis XIII.

Henry III exploited the association of the franc as sound money worth one livre tournois when he sought to stabilize French currency in 1577. By this time, inflows of gold and silver from Spanish America had caused inflation throughout the world economy and the kings of France, who were not getting much of this wealth, only made things worse by manipulating the values assigned to their coins. The States General which met at Blois in 1577 added to the public pressure to stop currency manipulation. Henry III agreed to do this and he revived the franc, now as a silver coin valued at one livre tournois. This coin and its fractions circulated until 1641 when Louis XIII replaced it with the silver écu. Nevertheless, the name "franc" continued in accounting as a synonym for the livre tournois.

In the 17th century King Louis XIII abolished its unpopular coinage of francs and ecus in favour of Spanish-modelled coins. It also abolished the livre parisis system in favour of exclusive use of the livre tournois. The Spanish dollar was the model for the Louis d'argent – 9 to a French mark (244.752 g) of silver, 11 ⁄ 12 fine (hence 24.93 g fine silver), and valued at 3 livres tournois. The Spanish doubloon or two-escudo coin was the model for the Louis d'or – 36 + 1 ⁄ 4 to a French mark of gold, 11 ⁄ 12 fine (hence 6.189 g fine gold), and valued at 10 livres.

France entered another turbulent period during the War of the Spanish Succession from 1701 to 1714, resulting in another debasement of the livre tournois. Under King Louis XV 's reign in 1726 the silver écu d'argent was issued at 8.3 to a mark of silver, 11/12 fine (hence 27.03 g fine silver), and valued at 6 livres. A new gold Louis d'or was also issued at 30 to a mark of gold, 11/12 fine (hence 7.4785 g fine gold), and valued at 24 livres.

The rise in the value of gold at the onset of the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain and elsewhere as well as King Louis XVI 's reign led to the rise in the gold–silver ratio to 15.5, resulting in the reduction in the gold content of the 24-livre Louis d'or from 1 ⁄ 30 to 1 ⁄ 32 of a mark, 11/12 fine. While the silver standard remained unchanged, assays of the period indicate that coins contained approximately 1.5% less bullion than officially specified. The 1795 swapping of livres to francs at the rate of 1.0125 livres = 1 franc suggest that the 6-livre ecu contained 26.67 g fine silver while the reduced 24-livre Louis contained 6.88 g fine gold.

The livre tournois was swapped in 1795 for the French franc (or franc germinal), worth 4.5 g silver or 9 ⁄ 31 g = 0.29032 g gold (ratio 15.5), at a rate of 1 franc = 1 + 1 ⁄ 80 livres or 1 livre, 3 deniers.

The decimal "franc" was established as the national currency by the National Convention of Revolutionary France in 1795 as a decimal unit (1 franc = 10 décimes = 100 centimes) of 4.5 g of fine silver. This was slightly less than the livre of 4.505 g, but the franc was set in 1796 at 1.0125 livres (1 livre, 3 deniers), reflecting in part the past minting of sub-standard coins. Silver coins now had their denomination clearly marked as "5 FRANCS" and it was made obligatory to quote prices in francs. This ended the ancien régime 's practice of striking coins with no stated denomination, such as the Louis d'or, and periodically issuing royal edicts to manipulate their value in terms of money of account, i.e. the livre tournois. The franc became the official currency of France in 1799.

Coinage with explicit denominations in decimal fractions of the franc also began in 1795. Decimalization of the franc was mandated by an act of 7 April 1795, which also dealt with the decimalization of weights and measures. France led the world in adopting the metric system and it was the second country to convert from a non-decimal to a decimal currency, following Russia 's conversion in 1704, and the third country to adopt a decimal coinage, also following the United States in 1787. France's first decimal coinage used allegorical figures symbolizing revolutionary principles, like the coinage designs the United States had adopted in 1793.

The circulation of this metallic currency declined during the Republic: the old gold and silver coins were taken out of circulation and exchanged for printed assignats, initially issued as bonds backed by the value of the confiscated goods of churches, but later declared as legal tender currency. The withdrawn gold and silver coins were used to finance the French Revolutionary Wars and to import food, which was in short supply.

As during the " Mississippi Bubble " in 1715–1720, too many assignats were put in circulation, exceeding the value of the "national properties", and the coins, due also to military requisitioning and hoarding, rarefied to pay foreign suppliers. With national government debt remaining unpaid, and a shortage of silver and brass to mint coins, confidence in the new currency declined, leading to hyperinflation, more food riots, severe political instability and termination of the First French Republic and the political fall of the French Convention. Then followed the economic failure of the Directory : coins were still very rare. After a coup d'état that led to the Consulate, the First Consul progressively acquired sole legislative power at the expense of the other unstable and discredited consultative and legislative institutions.

In 1800 the Banque de France, a federal establishment with a private board of executives, was created and commissioned to produce the national currency. In 1803, the franc Germinal (named after the month Germinal in the revolutionary calendar) was established, creating a gold franc containing 290.034 mg of fine gold. From this point, gold and silver-based units circulated interchangeably on the basis of a 1:15.5 ratio between the values of the two metals (bimetallism) until 1864, when all silver coins except the 5-franc piece were debased from 900 ‰ to 835 ‰ silver without the weights changing.

This coinage included the first modern gold coins with denominations in francs. It abandoned the revolutionary symbols of the coinage 1795, now showing Napoleon in the manner of Roman emperors, first described as "Bonaparte Premier Consul" and with the country named as "République Française". After his coronation in 1804 coins changed the obverse legend to "Napoléon Empereur", dropping his family name in the manner of regnal names. In 1807, the reverse legend changed to name France as " Empire Français ". In analogy with the old Louis d'or these coins were called gold Napoleons. Economically, this sound money was a great success and Napoleon's fall did not change that. Succeeding governments maintained Napoleon's weight standard, with changes in design which traced the political history of France. In particular, this currency system was retained during the Bourbon Restoration and perpetuated until 1914.

France was a founding member of the Latin Monetary Union (LMU), a single currency employed primarily by the Romance -speaking and other Mediterranean states between 1865 and the First World War. The common currency was based on the franc germinal, with the name franc already being used in Switzerland and Belgium, whilst other countries minted local denominations, redeemable across the bloc with 1-to-1 parity, though with local names: e.g., the peseta. In 1873, the LMU went over to a purely gold standard of 1 franc = 0.290322581 grams of gold.

The outbreak of World War I caused France to leave the gold standard of the LMU. The war severely undermined the franc's strength: war expenditure, inflation and postwar reconstruction, financed partly by printing ever more money, reduced the franc's purchasing power by 70% between 1915 and 1920. After a brief appreciation of the franc during the Depression of 1920–1921, it depreciated a further 43% between 1922 and a balancing of the budget in 1926. This devaluation was aggravated by the insistence of the Republican U.S. federal government and World War Foreign Debts Commission that France's war debts be repaid within 25 years at a minimal 4.25 percent interest per year. The currency devaluation contributed to French demands for high reparations payments from Germany. After a brief return to the gold standard between 1928 and 1936, the currency was allowed to resume its slide, until in 1959 it was worth less than 2.5% of its 1934 value.

During the Nazi occupation of France (1940–1944), the franc was a satellite currency of the German Reichsmark. The exchange rate was 20 francs for 1 RM. The coins were changed, with the words Travail, famille, patrie (Work, Family, Fatherland) replacing the republican triad Liberté, égalité, fraternité (liberty, equality, fraternity), with the emblem of the Vichy regime added.

After the liberation of France, the US attempted to impose the use of the US occupation franc, which was averted by General De Gaulle.

After World War II, France devalued its currency within the Bretton Woods system on several occasions. Beginning in 1945 at a rate of 480 francs to the British pound (119.1 to the U.S. dollar), by 1949 the rate was 980 to the pound (350 to the dollar). This was reduced further in 1957 and 1958, reaching 1382.3 to the pound (493.7 to the dollar, equivalent to 1 franc = 1.8 mg pure gold).

In January 1960 the French franc was revalued, with 100 existing francs making one nouveau franc. The abbreviation "NF" was used on the 1958 design banknotes until 1963. Old one- and two-franc coins continued to circulate as new centimes (no new centimes were minted for the first two years). The one-centime coin never circulated widely. Inflation continued to erode the franc's value: between 1950 and 1960, price levels increased 72 per cent (5.7% per year on average); between 1960 and 1970, it increased 51 per cent (4.2%). Only one further major devaluation occurred (11% in August 1969) before the Bretton Woods system was replaced by free-floating exchange rates. When the euro replaced the franc on 1 January 1999, the franc was worth less than an eighth of its original 1960 purchasing power.

After revaluation and the introduction of the new franc, many French people continued to use the term "old francs" (anciens francs) for large sums, for example for the prices of houses, apartments, and cars. This was common until the introduction of the euro and even later. Many people, old and young – even those who had never used the old franc – still quoted prices in old francs, confusing tourists and people abroad. For example, lottery prizes were most often advertised in amounts of centimes, equivalent to the old franc, to inflate the perceived value of the prizes at stake. Multiples of 10 NF were occasionally referred to as "mille francs" (one thousand francs) or "mille balles" ("balle" being a slang word for franc) in contexts where it was clear that the speaker did not mean 1,000 new francs. The expression "heavy franc" (franc lourd) was also commonly used to designate the new franc.

All franc coins and banknotes ceased to be legal tender in January 2002, upon the official adoption of the euro.

From 1 January 1999, the value exchange rate of the French franc against the euro was set at a fixed parity of €1 = 6.55957 F. Euro coins and notes replaced the franc entirely between 1 January and 1 March 2002.

In August 1795, the Monetary Law replaced the livre ("pound") with the franc, which was divided into 10 décimes ("tenths") and 100 centimes ("hundredths"). Copper coins were issued in the denominations of 1 centime, 5 centimes, 1 décime, and 2 décimes, designed by Augustin Dupré. After 1801, French copper coins became rare.

The 5-centime copper coin was called a sou, referring to "sole" (fr. Latin: solidus), until the 1920s.

An Imperial 10-décime coin was produced in billon from 1807 to 1810.

During the Consulship period (1799–1804) silver francs were struck in decimal coinage. A five-franc coin was first introduced in 1801–02 (L'AN 10), half-franc, one-franc, and gold 40-franc coins were introduced in 1802–03 (L'AN 11), and quarter-franc and two-franc coins in 1803–04 (L'AN 12).

The 5-franc silver coin was called an écu, after the six-livre silver coin of the ancien regime, until the 1880s.

Copper coins were rarely issued between 1801 and 1848, so the quarter franc was the lowest current denomination in circulation. But during this period, copper coins from earlier periods circulated. A Napoleon 5-centime coin (in bell metal) and Napoleon and Restoration 1-décime coins were minted.

Most pre-decimal silver was removed from circulation by 1834. Until they were also demonetized in 1845, 15- and 30-sou coins from 1791-1793 continued to circulate with a value of 0.75 and 1.50 francs, and 18th-century billon coins that had come to be known as “pièces de 6 liards” (originally issued with various values) were valued at 7.5 centimes.

A new bronze coinage was introduced from 1848. The Second Republic Monetary Authority minted a 1-centime copper coin with a 1795 design. 2, 5 and 10-centime coins were issued from 1853. The quarter franc was discontinued, with silver 20-centime coins issued between 1849 and 1868 as the smallest silver coin produced in France.

The gold coinage also changed. 40-franc coins were last struck in 1839 (with just 23 coins minted). Several new denomination were introduced as gold coinage: 5 gold francs (1856), 10 gold francs (1850), 50 gold francs (1855), and 100 gold francs (1855). A second design for the 100 gold franc coin was released in 1878 depicting standing genius writing the constitution. The pictured example (1889) was issued as a proof and only 100 coins were struck.

The last gold 5-franc pieces were minted in 1869, and silver 5-franc coins were last minted in 1878. After 1815, the 20-franc gold coin was called a " napoléon " (royalists still called this coin a " louis "), and so that is the colloquial term for this coin until the present. During the Belle Époque, the 100-franc gold coin was called a "monaco", referring to the flourishing casino business in Monte Carlo.

Nickel 25-centime coins were introduced in 1903.

World War I and the aftermath brought substantial changes to the coinage. Gold coinage was suspended and the franc was debased. Smaller, holed 5, 10, and 25-centime coins minted in nickel or cupro-nickel were introduced in 1914, finally replacing copper in 1921. In 1920, 1 and 2-centime coins were discontinued and production of silver coinage ceased, with aluminium -bronze 50-centime, 1-franc, and 2-franc coins introduced. Until 1929, these coins were issued by the chambers of commerce, bearing the phrase bon pour on it (meaning: "good for"). At the beginning of the 1920s, chambers of commerce also issued small change coins in aluminium. In 1929, the original franc germinal of 1795 was replaced by the franc Poincaré, which was valued at 20% of the 1803 gold standard.

In 1929, silver coins were reintroduced in 10-franc and 20-franc denominations. A very rare gold 100-franc coin was minted between 1929 and 1936.

In 1933, a nickel 5-franc coin was minted, but was soon replaced by a large aluminium-bronze 5-franc coin.

The events of the Second World War also affected the coinage substantially. In 1941, aluminium replaced aluminium- bronze in the 50 centimes, and 1, 2, and 5 francs as copper and nickel were diverted into the War Effort. In 1942, following German occupation and the installation of the French Vichy State, a new, short lived series of coins was released which included holed 10 and 20 centimes in zinc. 50 centimes, and 1 and 2 francs were aluminium. In 1944 this series was discontinued and withdrawn and the previous issue was resumed.

Following the war, rapid inflation caused denominations below 1 franc to be withdrawn from circulation while 10 francs in copper nickel were introduced, followed by reduced size 10-franc coins in aluminium-bronze in 1950, along with 20 and 50-franc coins of the same composition. In 1954, copper-nickel 100 francs were introduced.

In the 1960s, 1 and 2 (old) franc aluminium coins were still circulating, used as "centimes".

In 1960, the new franc (nouveau franc) was introduced, worth 100 old francs. Stainless steel 1 and 5 centimes, aluminium-bronze 10, 20, and 50 centimes, nickel 1 franc and silver 5 francs were introduced. Silver 10-franc coins were introduced in 1965, followed by a new, smaller aluminium-bronze 5-centime and a smaller nickel 1 ⁄ 2 -franc coin in 1966.

A first attempt to introduce a nickel 2-franc coin in 1960 failed.

Nickel-clad copper-nickel 5-franc and nickel-brass 10-franc coins replaced their silver counterparts in 1970 and 1974, respectively. Nickel 2 francs were finally introduced in 1979, followed by bimetallic 10 francs in 1988 and trimetallic 20 francs in 1992. The 20-franc coin was composed of two rings and a centre plug.

A nickel 10-franc piece was issued on 22 October 1986, in an attempt to increase usability, reduce counterfeiting, and make it easier for vending machines to recognise. While 120 million were released into circulation, circulation was halted on 26 November due to confusion with the half-franc and an unpopular design. The coin was subsequently withdrawn on 19 December and became demonetized at the end of June the next year. This led to the conception of the later bimetallic model. The aluminium-bronze pieces continued to circulate until the bimetallic pieces were developed and additional aluminium-bronze coins were minted to replace those initially withdrawn. Once the bimetallic coins were circulating and produced in necessary quantities, the aluminium-bronze pieces were gradually withdrawn and demonetized.

A.900 silver 50-franc piece was issued from 1974 to 1980, known as the largest silver coin ever minted in France, (due to its face value in accordance to its size) but was withdrawn and demonetized after the price of silver spiked in 1980. Then, in 1982, a 100-franc piece, also in.900 silver, was issued, and circulated to a small extent, until the introduction of the euro.

All French franc coins were demonetized in 2005 and are no longer redeemable at the Banque de France.

At the time of the complete changeover to the euro on 1 January 2002, coins in circulation (some produced as recently as 2000) were:

Coins were freely exchangeable until 17 February 2005 at Banque de France only (commercial banks were not required to accept the old coins after the transition period in 2002, but some did), by converting their total value in francs to euros (rounded to the nearest cent) at the fixed rate of 6.55957 francs for 1 euro. Banknotes remained convertible up until 17 February 2012. By that date, franc notes worth some €550 million remained unexchanged, allowing the French state to register the corresponding sum as revenue.

The first franc paper money issues were made in 1795. They were assignats in denominations between 100 and 10,000 francs. These followed in 1796 by "territorial mandate promises" for 25 up to 500 francs. The treasury also issued notes that year for 25 up to 1000 francs.

In 1800, the Bank of France began issuing notes, first in denominations of 500 and 1000 francs. In the late 1840s, 100 and 200-franc notes were added, while 5, 20 and 50 francs were added in the 1860s and 70s, although the 200-franc note was discontinued.

The First World War saw the introduction of 10 and 1000-franc notes. The chambers of commerce's notgeld ("money of necessity"), from 1918 to 1926, produced 25c, 50c, 1 F, 2 F, 5 F, and 10 F notes.

Despite base-metal 5, 10 and 20 F coins being introduced between 1929 and 1933, the banknotes were not removed. In 1938, the first 5000-franc notes were added.

In 1944, the liberating Allies introduced dollar-like paper money in denominations between 2 and 1000 francs, as well as a brass 2-franc coin.

After the Second World War, 5, 10 and 20-franc notes were replaced by coins in 1950, as were the 50- and 100-franc notes in the mid-1950s. In 1954, the 10,000-franc notes were introduced.

In 1959, banknotes in circulation when the old franc was replaced by the new franc were:

The first issue of the new franc consisted of 500, 1000, 5000 and 10,000-franc notes overprinted with their new denominations of 5, 10, 50 and 100 new francs. This issue was followed by notes of the same design but with only the new denomination shown. A 500-new franc note was also introduced in 1960 representing Molière, replaced in 1969 by the yellow Pascal type (colloquially called a pascal). A 5-franc note was issued until 1970 and a 10-franc note (showing Hector Berlioz) was issued until 1979.

From 1992 until 1998, a series of redesigned banknotes by Roger Pfund was issued, to be the last notes before the introduction of the euro. Banknotes in circulation when the franc was replaced were:

Banknotes current at changeover to the Euro could be exchanged at the French central bank or other services until 17 February 2012.

Most older series banknotes were exchangeable for 10 years from date of withdrawal. As the last banknote from the previous series was withdrawn on 1 February 1999 (100 francs, Delacroix), the deadline for its exchange was 31 January 2009.

Along with the Spanish peseta, the French franc was also a de facto currency used in Andorra (which had no national currency with legal tender). It circulated alongside the Monegasque franc in Monaco, with which it had equal value. These currencies were all replaced by the euro in 2002.

French fries, or simply fries, also known as French fried potatoes, chips, and finger chips, are batonnet or julienne -cut deep-fried potatoes of disputed origin. They are prepared by cutting potatoes into even strips, drying them, and frying them, usually in a deep fryer. Pre-cut, blanched, and frozen russet potatoes are widely used, and sometimes baked in a regular or convection oven, such as an air fryer.

French fries are served hot, either soft or crispy, and are generally eaten as part of lunch or dinner or by themselves as a snack, and they commonly appear on the menus of diners, fast food restaurants, pubs, and bars. They are typically salted and may be served with ketchup, vinegar, mayonnaise, tomato sauce, or other sauces. Fries can be topped more heavily, as in the dishes of poutine, loaded fries or chilli cheese fries, and are occasionally made from sweet potatoes instead of potatoes.

The standard method for cooking French fries is deep frying, which submerges them in a hot fat, typically oil.

The potatoes are prepared by first cutting them (peeled or unpeeled) into even strips, which are then wiped off or soaked in cold water to remove the surface starch, and thoroughly dried. They may then be fried in one or two stages. Chefs generally agree that the two-bath technique produces better results. Freshly harvested potatoes have a high moisture content that results in a soggy texture when fried; consequently, stored potatoes are preferred for crisp fries.

In the two-stage or two-bath method, the first bath, sometimes called blanching, is in hot fat (around 160 °C/320 °F) to cook the fries through. This step can be done in advance. Then they are more briefly fried in very hot fat (190 °C/375 °F) to crisp the exterior. They are then placed in a colander or on a cloth to drain, then served. The exact times of the two baths depend on the size of the fries. For example, for 2–3 mm strips, the first bath takes about 3 minutes, and the second bath takes only seconds.

Since the 1960s, most French fries in the US have been produced from frozen Russet potatoes which have been blanched or at least air-dried industrially. The usual fat for making French fries is vegetable oil. In the past, beef suet was recommended as superior, with vegetable shortening as an alternative. McDonald's used a mixture of 93% beef tallow and 7% cottonseed oil until 1990, when they changed to vegetable oil with beef flavouring. Horse fat was standard in northern France and Belgium until recently, and is recommended by some chefs.

French fries are fried in a two-step process: the first time is to cook the starch throughout the entire cut at low heat, and the second time is to create the golden crispy exterior of the fry at a higher temperature. This is necessary because if the potato cuts are only fried once, the temperature would either be too hot, causing only the exterior to be cooked and not the inside, or not hot enough where the entire fry is cooked, but its crispy exterior will not develop. Although the potato cuts may be baked or steamed as a preparation method, this section will only focus on French fries made using frying oil. During the initial frying process (approximately 150°C), water on the surface of the cuts evaporates off the surface and the water inside the cuts gets absorbed by the starch granules, causing them to swell and produce the fluffy interior of the fry.

The starch granules are able to retain the water and expand due to gelatinisation. The water and heat break the glycosidic linkages between amylopectin and amylose strands, allowing a new gel matrix to form via hydrogen bonds which aid in water retention. The moisture that gets trapped within the gel matrix is responsible for the fluffy interior of the fry. The gelatinised starch molecules move towards the surface of the fries "forming a thick layer of gelatinised starch" and this layer of pre-gelatinised starch becomes the crisp exterior after the potato cuts are fried for a second time. During the second frying process (approximately 180 °C), the remaining water on the surface of the cuts evaporates and the gelatinised starch molecules that collected towards the potato surface are cooked again, forming the crisp exterior. The golden-brown colour of the fry will develop when the amino acids and glucose on the exterior participate in a Maillard browning reaction.

In the United States and most of Canada, the term French fries or French fried potatoes (also written as french fries or French-fried potatoes), or shortened to fries, refers to all dishes of fried elongated pieces of potatoes. Variants in shape and size may have names such as curly fries, shoestring fries, etc.

In Great Britain, Australia, South Africa, Ireland and New Zealand, the term chips is generally used, being a popular dish in most Commonwealth countries. However, the term French fries or skinny fries is used for thinly cut fried potatoes which are distinguished from the more traditional thick cut chips.

In the US or Canada, these more thickly-cut chips might be called steak fries, depending on the shape, while the word chips is more often used in North America to refer to potato chips, commonly known in the UK, Ireland and South Africa as crisps. In Australia and New Zealand, chips are often referred to as hot chips to distinguish them from potato chips, although the type of 'chip' is often implied through context.

Thomas Jefferson had "potatoes served in the French manner" at a White House dinner in 1802. The expression "French fried potatoes" first occurred in print in English in the 1856 work Cookery for Maids of All Work by Eliza Warren : "French Fried Potatoes. – Cut new potatoes in thin slices, put them in boiling fat, and a little salt; fry both sides of a light golden brown colour; drain." This account referred to thin, shallow-fried slices of potato. It is not clear where or when the now familiar deep-fried batons or fingers of potato were first prepared. In the early 20th century, the term "French fried" was used in the sense of "deep-fried" for foods like onion rings or chicken.

The term was in use in the United States as early as 1880. An 1899 item in Good Housekeeping specifically references Kitchen Economy in France : "The perfection of French fries is due chiefly to the fact that plenty of fat is used." One legend about the name "French fries" claims that when the American Expeditionary Forces arrived in Belgium during World War I, they assumed that chips were a French dish because French was spoken in the Belgian Army. But the name was used long before that in English, even in the U.S. Army, and the popularity of the term did not increase for decades after 1917.

The oldest documents where a fried potato is mentioned are from Chile in 1629 in the city of Nacimiento, extracted from Happy Captivity, written in 1673 by Chilean Francisco Núñez de Pineda, where he narrates his experiences as a captive war soldier in 1629 at the hands of Mapuche warriors. In the text, he mentioned eating "papas fritas" (fried potatoes) in 1629 and Mapuche women "sent fried and stewed potatoes" to the chiefs. The exact shape is unclear, likely wide slices or cubes fried in lamb or guanaco tallow which was customary. However, the cane shape originates from Europe.

French fries in their current form may have been invented in Spain, the first European country in which the potato appeared from the New World colonies. Professor Paul Ilegems, curator of the Frietmuseum in Bruges, Belgium, believes that Saint Teresa of Ávila of Spain cooked the first French fries, and refers also to the tradition of frying in Mediterranean cuisine as evidence.

The Belgians and French have an ongoing dispute about where fries were invented.

The Belgian food historian Pierre Leclercq has traced the history of the French fry and asserts that "it is clear that fries are of French origin". They became an emblematic Parisian dish in the 19th century. Frédéric Krieger, a Bavarian musician, learned to cook fries at a roaster on rue Montmartre in Paris in 1842, and took the recipe to Belgium in 1844, where he created his business, Fritz, and sold "la pomme de terre frite à l'instar de Paris" ("Paris-style fried potatoes"). The modern style of fries born in Paris around 1855 is different from the domestic fried potato that existed in the 18th century.

From the Belgian standpoint, the popularity of the term "French fries" is explained as "French gastronomic hegemony" into which the cuisine of Belgium was assimilated, because of a lack of understanding coupled with a shared language and geographic proximity of the countries. The Belgian journalist Jo Gérard [ fr ] claimed that a 1781 family manuscript recounts that potatoes were deep-fried prior to 1680 in the Meuse valley, as a substitute for frying fish when the rivers were frozen. Gérard never produced the manuscript that supports this claim, and "the historical value of this story is open to question". In any case, it is unrelated to the later history of the French fry, as the potato did not arrive in the region until around 1735; furthermore, given 18th-century economic conditions: "it is absolutely unthinkable that a peasant could have dedicated large quantities of fat for cooking potatoes. At most they were sautéed in a pan".

Fries are very popular in Belgium, where they are known as frieten (in Flemish) or frites (in Belgian French), and the Netherlands, where they are known as patat in the north and, in the south, friet(en). In Belgium, fries are sold in shops called frietkot / frituur (Flemish), friteries (French), Fritüre / Frittüre (German) or snackbar (Dutch in The Netherlands). They are served with a large variety of Belgian sauces and eaten either on their own or with other snacks. Traditionally, fries are served in a cornet de frites (French), patatzak / frietzak / fritzak (Dutch/Flemish), or Frittentüte (German), a white cardboard cone, then wrapped in paper, with a spoonful of sauce (often mayonnaise) on top.

In France and other French-speaking countries, fried potatoes are formally pommes de terre frites, but more commonly pommes frites ("fried apples"), patates frites, or simply frites. The words aiguillettes ("needle-ettes") or allumettes ("matchsticks") are used when the French fries are very small and thin. One enduring origin story holds that French fries were invented by street vendors on the Pont Neuf bridge in Paris in 1789, just before the outbreak of the French Revolution. However, a reference exists in France from 1775 to "a few pieces of fried potato" and to "fried potatoes". Eating potatoes for sustenance was promoted in France by Antoine-Augustin Parmentier, but he did not mention fried potatoes in particular. A note in a manuscript in U.S. president Thomas Jefferson's hand (circa 1801–1809) mentions "Pommes de terre frites à cru, en petites tranches" ("Potatoes deep-fried while raw, in small slices"). The recipe almost certainly comes from his French chef, Honoré Julien. The thick-cut fries are called pommes Pont-Neuf or simply pommes frites (about 10 mm or 3 ⁄ 8 in); thinner variants are pommes allumettes (matchstick potatoes; about 7 mm or 1 ⁄ 4 in), and pommes paille (potato straws; 4 mm or 1 ⁄ 8 in). Pommes gaufrettes are waffle fries. A popular dish in France is steak frites, which is steak accompanied by thin French fries.

French fries were introduced to German-speaking countries in the 19th century. In Germany, they are usually known by the French words pommes frites, or only Pommes or Fritten (derived from the French words, but pronounced as German words). Often served with ketchup or mayonnaise, they are popular as a side dish in restaurants, or as a street-food snack purchased at an Imbissstand (snack stand). Since the 1950s, currywurst has become a widely-popular dish that is commonly offered with fries. Currywurst is a sausage (often bratwurst or bockwurst) in a spiced ketchup-based sauce, dusted with curry powder and served with fries.

The standard deep-fried cut potatoes in the United Kingdom are called chips, and are cut into pieces typically between 10 and 15 mm (0.4 and 0.6 in) thick. They are occasionally made from unpeeled potatoes (skins showing). British chips are not the same thing as potato chips (an American term); those are called "crisps" in the UK and some other countries. In the UK, chips are part of the popular, and now international, fast food dish fish and chips, as well as many other dishes. In the UK, "chips" are not the same as French fries: chips are more thickly cut than French fries, and they can be cooked once or multiple times at different temperatures. From 1813 on, recipes for deep-fried cut potatoes occur in popular cookbooks. By the late 1850s, at least one cookbook refers to "French Fried Potatoes".

The first commercially available chips in the UK were sold by Mrs 'Granny' Duce in one of the West Riding towns in 1854. A blue plaque in Oldham marks the origin of the fish-and-chip shop and the start of the fast food industry in Britain. In Scotland, chips were first sold in Dundee : "in the 1870s, that glory of British gastronomy – the chip – was first sold by Belgian immigrant Edward De Gernier in the city's Greenmarket". In Ireland the first chip shop was "opened by Giuseppe Cervi", an Italian immigrant, "who arrived there in the 1880s". It was estimated in 2011 that in the UK, 80% of households bought frozen chips each year. Although chips were a popular dish in most Commonwealth countries, the "thin style" French fries have been popularised worldwide in large part by the large American fast food chains such as McDonald's and Burger King.

" Pommes frites " or just " frites " (French), " frieten " (a word used in Flanders and the southern provinces of the Netherlands) or " patat " (used in the north and central parts of the Netherlands) became a national snack. Fries also come in the form of a common Dutch street food, known as Patatje Oorlog, translated to as "war fries". It consists of fries dressed with mayonnaise, a peanut-based satay sauce and garnished with diced raw onions along with a variety of other optional ingredients.

The town of Florenceville-Bristol, New Brunswick in Canada, headquarters of McCain Foods, calls itself "the French fry capital of the world" and also hosts a museum about potatoes called Potato World. McCain Foods is the world's largest manufacturer of frozen French fries and other potato specialities. Canada is also responsible for providing 22% of China's French fries.

French fries are the main ingredient in the Québécois dish known as poutine, a dish consisting of fried potatoes covered with cheese curds and brown gravy. Poutine has a growing number of variations, but it is generally considered to have been developed in rural Québec sometime in the 1950s, although precisely where in the province it first appeared is a matter of contention.

In the United States, the J. R. Simplot Company is credited with successfully commercialising French fries in frozen form during the 1940s. Subsequently, in 1967, Ray Kroc of McDonald's contracted the Simplot company to supply them with frozen fries, replacing fresh-cut potatoes. In 2004, 29% of the United States' potato crop was used to make frozen fries; 90% consumed by the food services sector and 10% by retail. The United States supplies China with most of their French fries, as 70% of China's French fries are imported. Pre-made French fries have been available for home cooking since the 1960s, having been pre-fried (or sometimes baked), frozen and placed in a sealed plastic bag. Some fast-food chains dip the fries in a sugar solution or a starch batter, to alter the appearance or texture. French fries are one of the most popular dishes in the United States, commonly being served as a side dish to main dishes and in fast food restaurants. The average American eats around 30 pounds (14 kg) of French fries a year.

In Spain, fried potatoes are called patatas fritas or papas fritas. Another common form, involving larger irregular cuts, is patatas bravas. The potatoes are cut into big chunks, partially boiled and then fried. They are usually seasoned with a spicy tomato sauce. Fries are a common side dish in Latin American cuisine or part of larger preparations such as the salchipapas in Peru or chorrillana in Chile.

Whilst eating 'regular' crispy French fries is common in South Africa, a regional favourite, particularly in Cape Town, is a soft soggy version doused in white vinegar called "slap-chips" (pronounced " slup-chips " in English or " slaptjips " in Afrikaans). These chips are typically thicker and fried at a lower temperature for a longer period of time than regular French fries. Slap-chips are an important component of a Gatsby sandwich, also a common Cape Town delicacy. Slap-chips are also commonly served with deep fried fish which are also served with the same white vinegar.

Fried potato (フライドポテト, Furaido poteto) is a standard fast-food side dish in Japan. Inspired by Japanese cuisine, okonomiyaki fries are served with a topping of unagi sauce, mayonnaise, katsuobushi, nori seasoning (furikake) and stir-fried cabbage.

French fries come in multiple variations and toppings. Some examples include:

Fries tend to be served with a variety of accompaniments, such as salt, vinegar (malt, balsamic or white), pepper, Cajun seasoning, grated cheese, melted cheese, mushy peas, heated curry sauce, curry ketchup, hot sauce, relish, mustard, mayonnaise, bearnaise sauce, tartar sauce, chilli, tzatziki, feta cheese, garlic sauce, fry sauce, butter, sour cream, ranch dressing, barbecue sauce, gravy, honey, aioli, brown sauce, ketchup, lemon juice, piccalilli, pickled cucumber, pickled gherkins, pickled onions or pickled eggs. In Australia, a popular flavouring added to chips is chicken salt.

French fries primarily contain carbohydrates (mostly in the form of starch), with some fat absorbed during the deep-frying process and protein from the potato. Salt, which contains sodium, is almost always applied as a surface seasoning. For example, a large serving of French fries at McDonald's in the United States is 154 grams and includes 350 mg of sodium. The 510 calories come from 66 g of carbohydrates, 24 g of fat and 7 g of protein.

A number of experts have criticised French fries for being very unhealthy. According to Jonathan Bonnet in a Time magazine article, "fries are nutritionally unrecognizable from a spud" because they "involve frying, salting, and removing one of the healthiest parts of the potato: the skin, where many of the nutrients and fiber are found." Kristin Kirkpatrick calls French fries "an extremely starchy vegetable dipped in a fryer that then loads on the unhealthy fat, and what you have left is a food that has no nutritional redeeming value in it at all." David Katz states that "French fries are often the super-fatty side dish to a burger—and both are often used as vehicles for things like sugar-laced ketchup and fatty mayo." Eric Morrissette, spokesperson for Health Canada, states that people should limit their intake of French fries, but eating them occasionally is not likely to be a health concern.

Frying French fries in beef tallow, lard, or other animal fats adds saturated fat to them. Replacing animal fats with tropical vegetable oils, such as palm oil, simply substitutes one saturated fat for another. For many years partially hydrogenated vegetable oils were used as a means of avoiding cholesterol and reducing saturated fatty acid content, but in time the trans fat content of these oils was perceived as contributing to cardiovascular disease. Starting in 2008, many restaurant chains and manufacturers of pre-cooked frozen French fries for home reheating phased out trans-fat–containing vegetable oils.

French fries contain some of the highest levels of acrylamides of any foodstuff, and experts have raised concerns about the effects of acrylamides on human health. According to the American Cancer Society, it is not clear as of 2013 whether acrylamide consumption affects people's risk of getting cancer. A meta-analysis indicated that dietary acrylamide is not related to the risk of most common cancers, but could not exclude a modest association for kidney, endometrial or ovarian cancers. A lower-fat method for producing a French-fry–like product is to coat "Frenched" or wedge potatoes in oil and spices/flavouring before baking them. The temperature will be lower compared to deep frying, which reduces acrylamide formation.

In April 2023, researchers from China suggested a possible link between the consumption of fried food and mental health problems. According to the study, those who frequently consume fried food, especially potatoes, have an increased risk of depression and anxiety, by 7% and 12% respectively, compared to those who do not. The connection was particularly prominent among younger males. However, the causal relationship is not conclusive. The results are still preliminary, and the researchers are uncertain whether consuming fried foods causes mental health problems or individuals with symptoms of anxiety and depression tend to opt for fried foods.

In June 2004, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), with the advisement of a federal district judge from Beaumont, Texas, classified batter-coated French fries as a vegetable under the Perishable Agricultural Commodities Act. This was primarily for trade reasons; French fries do not meet the standard to be listed as a processed food. This classification, referred to as the "French fry rule", was upheld in the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit case Fleming Companies, Inc. v. USDA.

A 2022 study estimated the environmental impact of 57,000 food products in the UK and Ireland, finding that French fries had a lower impact on the environment than many other foods.

The French General Review of Public Policies (RGPP), in French "Révision générale des politiques publiques", aims at reducing public spending while increasing the efficiency and quality of public action. It was launched by the Fillon Government in July 2007. According to the government, this initiative should give a "boost" to a reform of the state that has so far produced only partial results.

In recent years several modernization plans have already been undertaken. In particular a new process initiated by the LOLF ("Loi organique relative aux lois de finances" or "Organic Law on Finance Acts") was implemented in 2006, after this reform was voted in 2001. It consists in giving priority to efficiency instead of means in administrations. Also, a circular of 25 June 2003 launched the "ministerial strategies of reform " to be established in each department and presented to Parliament. Finally, a circular of 29 September 2005, followed by a circular of 13 July 2006 establishing a program of systematic audits of government departments.

Yet, these measures have failed to put an end to extreme bureaucracy and to rising deficits. The 2005 Pébereau Report on debt pointed out the concern about a growing deficit. These reports set out the first principles of an urgent review of public policies.

The French general strike of 1936 aimed to establish workers' rights, which began on 11 May 1936 in the Bréguet factory and led to the creation of unions. The strike began to end with the Parisian metal unions returning to work on 12 June 1936.

The strike resulted in the improvement of workers' rights in France, such as the 40-hour week and the legal acceptance of unions, stopping employers from discriminating against those in unions.

During the 1920s and early 1930s, people were not willing to associate themselves as trade union activists due to dismissal being the common recourse. Herrick Chapman estimates that although in general aircraft factories had between 150 and 1,500 workers, there were rarely more than "a half dozen men in the early thirties who devoted themselves to the clandestine life of communist cell meetings, tract writing, and the virtually futile effort to recruit comrades". Between 1927 and 1933, there were 10 aircraft workers' strikes, of which 8 failed.

In 1931, the great depression hit France. The great depression caused factories to close and sharpened the societal conflict in France. The effects of this depression began to be felt in 1934, when there were violent right-wing protests which some authors such as Michael Torigian believe "threatened the existence of the French Republic".

Adolf Hitler 's rearmament caused the French government to launch Plan I in 1934, which was a major procurement program based on equipping the air force. This meant that by 1935, the workforce in aircraft construction had hit 32,000 workers, which was double the number it was in 1933.

On 6 June,1936, a Popular Front government was elected, so the workers expected socialist policies and ideas from the government which would push their interests, such as workers' rights. Although a socialist government had been elected, it didn't mean that the government could push through economic changes to the markets, etc. too quickly. Furthermore, the strike movement destabilised the Popular Front government led by Léon Blum.

After the first election of a socialist Prime Minister, there were strikes across the economy which began in May 1936, and carried on until June 1936. Those who were on strike adopted a tactic of "occupying" their places of work; for some, this brought hope, and for others it brought fear of a revolution. Those on strike locked their employers out of the buildings whilst locking themselves in.

The strikes began in Le Havre and Toulouse in aircraft factories and quickly gained traction in many other cities, with the plethora of industries involved widening. The strikes began on 11 May 1936 in the Bréguet factory due to two men being sacked. This strike was organised by the CGT (General Confederation of Labour, which was communist led).

The strikes began to spread across France quickly; by 1 June 1936, there were 10 occupied workplaces, and by the evening of 2 June, there were 150 occupied workplaces. Half of the metallio workers (metal workers) were on strike, which equated to about 150,000 people on strike. This part of the movement was not sanctioned by the CGT leadership and had spread with people using these strikes as a means to end the deep-rooted grievances. By June 5, over half a million workers were on strike; from the beginning of his premiership, Blum resisted calls from the right to end the strikes through force. On the evening of June 7, the CGT, employer representatives and the government drew up the Matignon agreements.

Even with the agreements, the number of those on strike still increased, and by the 9th of June there were 2 million workers, which, according to Michael Torigian, accounted for around a quarter of the French working class population.

The strikes had become out of control, with the CGT metal union being unable to end the strikes. This led to the party chief, who was Maurice Thorez, going to the communists to ask for them to help to end the strikes on the 11th. The French metal workers consisted of around 300,000 people.

By the 12th, the strikes were beginning to end, with the settlement in the metal works being dealt with.

The Matignon agreements were the agreements signed on June 7, which led to the June 24 laws. These laws had some major features, such as the French government allowing the creation of unions in 1936 as a result of the strikes; this helped those in unions in the hiring process, as employers were not allowed to discriminate against those in unions. Furthermore, the agreement legislated mandatory joint conflict resolution with members from the unions as well as within the employer in a collective agreement. On July 21, the 40-hour week was voted in by the Popular Front government. The strikes also led to higher wages and two weeks of paid holidays.

The two workers who were fired in the Bréguet factory were reinstated.

In France, the green and blue infrastructure (TVB, from the French trame verte et bleue) has officially designated since 2007 one of the major national projects arising from the Grenelle Environnement. It consists of the entire network of biological corridors (or ecological corridors, existing or to be restored), landscape corridors.. and "biodiversity reservoirs", with protected areas being essential to these ecological continuities.

It aims to halt the biodiversity loss (both extraordinary and ordinary) as the landscape becomes increasingly fragmented. It is also the national version of the pan-European ecological network. It should enable animal and plant species to move around in order to carry out the important stages of their life cycle (feeding, resting, reproduction, etc.). It should also facilitate the genetic exchanges necessary for the survival of wild species, as well as the movement of the “ distribution areas ” of wild species and natural habitats, under the constraints of climate change. The “green” part corresponds to natural and semi-natural terrestrial environments, and the “blue” component refers to the aquatic and wetland network (rivers, streams, wetlands, estuaries, etc.).

It is finally a major framework and tool for spatial planning, for the ecological restoration of the territory in France. It is based upstream on consultation involving the State, local authorities, and a large number of stakeholders, including environmental protection associations. Between 2011 and 2015, regional ecological coherence plans (SRCE) were developed and implemented in each region. These documents must now be translated into coordinated regional and local strategies (notably through SCoTs and other urban planning documents) and concrete actions (e.g., preservation of functionalities, mapping, construction of wildlife crossings, intentional management and restorative management).

The national biodiversity strategy is implemented at regional level (including overseas territories) through regional biodiversity strategies (RBS, also promoted by the IUCN)), as well as through Agenda 21 and other territorial strategies, action plans of local authorities (“The State and local authorities will work to strengthen actions, co-organizing them where necessary and ensuring their consistency)).

In May 2011, most regions had begun developing their SRCE. They did so either by updating an existing TVB (Alsace, Nord-Pas-de-Calais), by conducting a preliminary study for the SRCE, or by drafting specifications for this study. "Preliminary committees for regional green and blue belt committees” (bodies making proposals to the State and the Region, co-developers of the SRCE) had already been set up in Franche-Comté, Poitou-Charentes (February 2011) and in May in Limousin, Nord-Pas-de-Calais, Pays de la Loire, Rhône-Alpes, with a coordinated approach at the national level by Fabienne Allag-Dhuisme, TVB project manager at the Ministry of Ecology

In June 2011, a national committee and regional committees responsible for the green and blue infrastructure were officially prepared by two executive orders published on July 29, 2011 (not applying in Corsica or the overseas departments). Their composition and operation are governed by the provisions of executive order No. 2006-672 of June 8, 2006, as amended, relating to the creation, composition and operation of a dministrative commissions with advisory status.

The concepts of infrastructure and ecological network, as tools for biodiversity restoration and protection and spatial planning, emerged in the 1990s, in the context of the Convention on Biological Diversity (Rio 1992), in Europe the Habitats Directive (EU 1992) and the Pan-European Biological and Landscape Diversity Strategy (Sofia 1995).

First tested in Northern European countries, they have been implemented on a European scale with the Pan-European Ecological Network, which they must apply to all levels of territory.

In France, several regions tested the creation of a network of biological corridors from the mid-1990s (Nord-Pas-de-Calais, Alsace, department of Isère). In 1999, the Voynet law, also known as LOADDT, through the Collective service scheme for natural areas introduced the notion of ecosystem services provided by biodiversity.

In 2004, a National Biodiversity Strategy aimed in particular (flagship action No. 17) to restore minimal ecological connectivity at different territorial levels. The national biodiversity strategy (SNB) is one of the main implementations of the European strategy mentioned above. It must respond to local issues, as well as the guidelines of the Convention on Biological Diversity (ratified by France in 1994). France has a major environmental responsibility in the world due to its unique situation. It must manage a particularly extensive marine environment (in all oceans) and a natural terrestrial heritage that is also rich in the long term.

Then, in 2007, the theme of "ecological corridors", "ecological connectivities" was widely taken up by the participants in the Grenelle Environment Forum and enshrined in the Grenelle I and Grenelle II laws. These laws clearly introduce, for the first time in French law and urban planning documents, the notion of ecological continuity. The notion of ecological network (the framework) was in 2009 translated and proposed in a draft law (know as the Grenelle II law), and various documents or policy proposals. Three methodological guides coordinated by INRAE (formerly Irstea) were consulted on and improved between 2008 and 2010. Designed to help government and local authorities implement the network from the national level down to the level of local urban planning (PLU), territorial coherence and sustainability plans (SCoT) and communal map, they can be downloadable from the green and blue network resource centre website.

The implementation of the green and blue infrastructure is part of a set of biodiversity measures introduced or specified in the Grenelle II law. This law also proposes certification of the environmental quality of farms, strengthens the protection of wetlands and water quality, and recognizes - through a national maritime strategy - the importance of marine biodiversity for which France is one of the main stakeholders in terms of maritime area (overseas territories) and number of species or habitats concerned.

Its mapping, based on data and methods validated by an operational committee following the Grenelle Environment Forum, taking into account land use and mapping of agricultural areas with high natural value using different tools, was carried out at national level. Since January 2018, it has been available online on the National Natural Heritage Inventory website.

The green and blue network has been expanded in parallel with new networks that take into account new components to address "intangible" sources of fragmentation or complex interactions between environments. These new networks include the black network relating to light pollution, the white network relating to noise pollution, the brown network for soil, the aerial network for flying species, and the turquoise network for areas where terrestrial and aquatic environments meet.

The 2009 bill assigned to the TVB the general objective of halting biodiversity loss (both extraordinary and ordinary), in a context of climate change. It is also the national implementation of the Pan-European Ecological Network. The statement of reasons for the law specifies and recognises that "scientific advances in conservation biology demonstrate the limitations and inadequacies of traditional policies for creating protected areas (regardless of their legal status), which focus on remarkable species or habitats. “ The legislator explains that ”it is now essential to think in terms of the connectivity and functionality of ecosystems on a very large spatial scale, integrating not only the mobility of species and, to a lesser extent, ecosystems, but also ordinary biodiversity." (These are also the objectives of Europe and the UN.)

The objectives primarily concern biodiversity and more sustainable, even restorative land use planning, but social benefits are also expected. For Robert Barbault, creating the green and blue belt also means "reconnecting living networks so that biodiversity can function, but it also means reconnecting social ties around nature, which is essential to us."

However, Chantal Jouanno, former Secretary of State for Ecology, believes "we do not know how to quantify the benefit provided by biodiversity [...] we cannot quantify all that is remarkable biodiversity [...] in fact, we arrive at figures that are far below reality".

The SNB in its glossary describes the TVB as: "Structuring approach that consists of incorporating the preservation and restoration of ecological continuities into spatial planning decisions. It includes a green component referring to terrestrial natural and semi-natural environments and a blue component referring to the aquatic and wetland network" (rivers, streams, wetlands...).

The definition of the green and blue infrastructure is specified by the Environmental Code (Book III, Title VII), as follows:

An executive order dated December 27, 2012 confirms that the green and blue belt is "a network formed by terrestrial and aquatic ecological continuities identified by regional ecological coherence plans as well as by documents from the State, local authorities and their groupings to which legislative provisions recognize this competence and, where applicable, that of delimiting or locating these continuities.“ It is also a ”tool for sustainable land use planning. It extends to the low-tide line and, in estuaries, to the transverse limit of the sea. Furthermore, “the identification and delimitation of the ecological continuities of the green and blue network must, in particular, enable animal and plant species whose preservation or restoration is a national or regional issue to move around in order to ensure their life cycle and promote their ability to adapt ”.

Still according to the Environmental Code:

From the identification of biodiversity issues (" remarkable or ordinary: environments and patrimonial species, main threats, problem species, invasive, "environmental" risks linked to species circulation etc. "), regions identify by major landscape unit and issues the broad features of their ecological functioning and analyse, diagnose, map and hierarchise degrees and causes of ecological fragmentation of the territory (natural or artificial obstacles...). In this work of identifying its green and blue infrastructure, each region is free to use the method of its choice and in this respect to use or not species.

The infrastructure is made for species and natural habitats, but these species and habitats also contribute to making the infrastructure.

Particular attention should be paid to invasive species that could take advantage of ecological continuities to colonize new territories: this issue would require the establishment of specific governance.

Large habitats may be divided into sub-networks. For example, a network of limestoe grasslands will be a sub-infrastructure of an open thermophilic environments network; a network of forest ponds may constitute a sub-infrastructure of a ponds network, itself a sub-infrastructure of the wetland network of the blue infrastructure.

The national guide (April 2009 version) asks regions to base themselves on at least five sub-infrastructures:

Specific habitats such as rocky areas (mountain ranges, rock faces and outcrops, rocky coasts, etc.), or semi-natural areas (hedgerows, public parks, etc.), possibly undergoing more or less spontaneous renaturation (slag heaps, quarries, etc.), cave or underground environments (particularly those that are home to bats or are likely to be home to bats) may be taken into account.

Certain planning documents and projects at the national level must be compatible with national guidelines for the preservation and restoration of ecological continuity; these are those that are approved or decided by law, decree, or ministerial order.

The compatibility of these planning documents and projects is assessed in particular with regard to impacts likely to be caused to areas constituting the green and blue infrastructure under article L. 371-1 as well as to species, habitats and ecological continuities of national importance identified as constituting national and cross-border issues by the framework document adopted under article L. 371-2.

The legislative obligation to “take into account” is a hierarchical link that also exists between, on the one hand, territorial coherence plans and, on the other hand, regional plans for sustainable development and territorial equality, regional plans for the development of marine aquaculture, regional quarry plans, and departmental plans for access to forest resources (in addition to the SCOT taking into account the SRCE): hierarchy of standards established by Section L.131-2 of the Urban Planning Code.

This type of relationship (of consideration) also exists between local urban planning plans and documents serving as such on the one hand, and territorial climate-air-energy plans on the other, as well as departmental plans for access to forest resources.

The bill proposed to amend the Urban Planning Code so that:

In 2011, in its commitments for implementing the new national biodiversity strategy (May 2011), the State in a section Land use and land action plans to set up easements (DUP or contractual devices of the environmental easement type) to locally preserve a certain naturalness.

Local authorities will be able to include in PLUs an ecological continuity area (requested in 2010 by FNE), to materialise the green and blue infrastructure in urban planning and development documents.

The green and blue infrastructure, as presented in 2009 relied on available scientific knowledge. It also benefited from more than two years of work by Grenelle de l'environnement groups. An operational committee COMOP "Green and blue infrastructure" led by senator Paul Raoult, assisted by two co-project leaders (Christian Barthod (DEB) and Vincent Graffin from the Muséum national d'histoire naturelle (MNHN)), was assisted for scientific and technical aspects by INRAE (formerly Irstea), the Muséum, the ONEMA and local authorities (ARF, ADF, AMF, ADCF-ACUF, federation of PNR). Some NGOs including France nature environnement (FNE) which published numerous proposals, for the TVB and organised its 33rd annual congress (in Lille, in 2009) on this theme. Numerous experts and socio-economic partners were also consulted. The Natural Heritage Service of the Muséum national d'histoire naturelle (MNHN-SPN) made available with the Office for insects and their environment in 2013 documents on " life history traits " of species vulnerable to fragmentation to help draft SRCE and develop regional ecological network infrastructures and sub-infrastructures. The MNHN-SPN also published in 2014 under the TVB resource centre two reports on climate change and light pollution. These reports provide a state of knowledge and propose ways to take these issues into account through ecological networks, particularly in connection with the national TVB (green and blue infrastructure).

They are established under the authority of regional and national committees, by;

In 2005, a "green and blue infrastructure exchange group" was created, as a place for exchanges between "experts" and "practitioners" of infrastructures and ecological corridors (in 2011, it associated about a hundred members: PNR, public establishments, local authorities, associations, research laboratories...).

In 2009, this green and blue infrastructure was not yet defined and even less implemented locally at the finest scales. It calls for broad partnership, involving in particular the skills of the new Agency for Marine Protected Areas, the Conservatoire du littoral, the Conservatoires d'espaces naturels, national parks, regional natural parks and nature reserves (via RNF (Réserves naturelles de France) and via regions responsible for regional nature reserves), the ONEMA and the ONCFS (National Office for Hunting and Wildlife), the Office national des forêts, the Network of Grand Sites of France, Rivages de France, etc.

To do this, and to help those who will map it and who will apply and protect it, the law (art. L.371-2 of the Environmental Code) provides for two framework documents.

Two initial versions of this document (the second dated April 10, 2009) were developed by the State " in consultation with local authorities, socio-professional partners, basin committees, concerned approved environmental protection associations and [...] qualified personalities due to their skills in environmental protection ". These guidelines are subject to public and local authority observations, before adoption by decree in Council of State. This document was based in particular on available scientific knowledge in biodiversity and landscape ecology and natural heritage inventory and expert opinions.

Early 2014, an executive order specifies (in annex) the national guidelines for the preservation and restoration of ecological continuities, providing a framework document for the national TVB, consisting of two parts:

A Regional Scheme of Ecological Coherence or SRCE whose project is developed by the Region and the State, on available scientific bases, with experts and the regional scientific council for natural heritage, in compliance with national guidelines mentioned in article L. 371-2 as well as in compliance with SDAGEs (water development and management master plans). This development is done by associating departments, communal groupings competent in spatial planning or urban planning or, failing that, communes with a land use plan or local urban plan, national parks, regional natural parks, concerned approved environmental protection associations, and representatives of interested socio-professional partners. This SRCE includes in particular, besides a non-technical summary:

The project and opinions will be submitted to public inquiry by the regional prefect, then possibly modified to take in particular account of public observations, before being submitted to deliberation of the Regional Council, then adopted by regional prefect order who will bring them to the attention of communes or their competent groupings in urban planning matters and keep them available to the public.

Local authorities or their groupings responsible for spatial planning or urban development will now have to draw up or revise their spatial planning and urban development documents, taking these two framework documents into account. For national projects (including major linear infrastructure projects by the State and its public institutions), it must specify the compensatory measures needed to compensate for "the damage to ecological continuity that the implementation of these planning documents, projects, or major linear infrastructure projects is likely to cause".

Sub-infrastructures are emerging, at varying speeds depending on the region. For example, in 2008 and 2009, the Île-de-France Regional Planning and Development Institute began mapping:

Evaluation: An executive order will give a certain deadline to an "competent administrative authority" to evaluate the results of the application of the first framework document in terms of preservation and restoration of ecological continuities and to decide on its maintenance or possible revision (the expiry of this framework document not causing that of "regional ecological coherence schemes" specifies the law. The SRCE after a certain deadline (set by executive order) will be subject to joint analysis by presidents of regional councils and prefects to evaluate the effects of their implementation on the preservation and restoration of ecological continuities, after which regional councils will deliberate on their continuation or revision. The regional prefect will decide in the same terms by prefectural decision. Without concordant decisions or deliberations, the scheme will lapse and must be revised according to the same procedure as for its development.

The bill specifies that (in compliance with public procurement rules) departments can be project owner, or assistant to project owner for all work contributing to preserve or restore ecological continuities of the green or blue infrastructure of an adopted SRCE (regional ecological coherence scheme). For missions other than assistance to project ownership, a department can also mobilise the product of the TDENS (departmental tax on sensitive natural areas).

They were associated with the Grenelle de l'environnement process and:

In June 2011, seven of the largest managers of fragmented linear infrastructure joined forces “to take action in favor of biodiversity" by creating a charter and establishing a “ Linear Infrastructure and Biodiversity Club ” aimed at strengthening their commitment to biodiversity and forming a reference group for external partners.

Particular provisions are proposed for Corsica and overseas

This infrastructure fits into global strategies (Cf. Convention on Biological Diversity in particular) and Pan-European biodiversity protection.

Border communities (regions, departments) must therefore work closely with their counterparts across the border to jointly develop the ecological network to be protected and ensure that a country's ecological corridors are properly connected.

Many countries in Northern and Eastern Europe are 10 to 15 years ahead in terms of ecological networks. Discussions are underway concerning migratory birds and, more recently, migratory insects (butterflies in particular, with the Monarch butterfly notably in America) and underwater ecological corridors.

France is associated with several cross-border projects, including for example:

Several guides were written by the Comop biodiversity, then by the DREAL Midi-Pyrénées which integrated feedback from 2 SCoT

Furthermore, certain municipalities at the forefront in integrating the French green and blue infrastructure make all their documents and concrete application methods of the green and blue infrastructure available to technicians and municipalities wishing to draw inspiration from them. For example, the Local Urban Plan of the municipality of Noyarey obtained the First regional Rhône-Alpes prize 2013 on eco-responsibility and sustainable development (organised by the Regional Network on Eco-responsibility and Sustainable Development).

They are carried out at regional to European scales, via indicators defined at national scale, but partly broken down regionally according to biogeographical characteristics of territories. It involves in particular seeing how - from a structural point of view (spatial organisation of eco-landscapes, relative to ecological potential) and functional (do corridors function as they should?) - the "constituent elements" of regional and national and European green and blue infrastructures evolve

Evaluation: Planned and framed by law, for its "public policy evaluation" part and after verification that the SNB properly took into account all or part of the Aichi targets since validated at the 2010 Nagoya Biodiversity Conference it will be done along the way, and in particular every 6 years during SRCE updates and during updates of the national biodiversity strategy and regional schemes that frame and promote it (SRADT and SRCE, as well as SRB). It is an evaluation mainly "a posteriori" externalised and entrusted to a neutral and independent actor based on a zero state and scientifically collected data by biodiversity observatories and other competent actors.

Monitoring: It is ensured by all project leaders and certain observers. The concept of Green and blue infrastructure has developed strongly in France since the 2000s in particular. In 2011, it shows itself as a source of ecological coherence, environmental intercommunal cooperation, but still in appropriation by most inhabitants, elected officials, technicians and local authorities. For this reason, it seems better translated in urban planning documents (on paper) than applied on a large scale or broken down at fine scale on the ground, and sometimes encountering contradictory regulations or deemed priority or highly centralised governance which does not facilitate the transition from scientific theories of landscape ecology to field action, in cities, in countryside or even more on and under the sea.

Certain researchers have been very interested in inhabitants' knowledge of the TVB and analysed the result of numerous inhabitant interviews in various French regions. The finding is alarming: either the TVB is very poorly known, and the notion of biodiversity is almost systematically reduced to animal species or tree in the city ; or the TVB is known but reduced to its aesthetic function.

For the blue infrastructure part, this is done within the framework of the Water Framework Directive (and its schedule for revising SDAGE and measure programmes, every 6 years),

Actions to preserve and restore the environment do not apply to military activities when these activities respond to “a national defense imperative.

The French invasion of Honolulu (also known as the Sacking of Honolulu, or the Tromelin Affair) was an attack on Honolulu, capital of the Hawaiian Kingdom, by French admiral Louis Tromelin in 1849 in retribution for the local persecution of Catholics and repression of French trade.

In the Treaty of 1843 with Hawaii, France had agreed never on any pretense to take possession of any portion of Hawaiian territory. The French government had issued orders to Guillaume Patrice Dillon, its new consul in Honolulu in 1848: "Avoid in your conduct any show of pugnaciousness [esprit de lutte]. It is befitting that moderation be the one to consolidate the fruits of firmness". Nevertheless, on November 5, 1848, he wrote to the French Foreign Office: "I am convinced that it will prove sufficient to display a good French corvette for three days at Honolulu to force concessions from this devious and hypocritical Government."

On August 12, 1849, French admiral Louis Tromelin arrived in Honolulu Harbor on the corvette Gassendi with the frigate La Poursuivante. While in Honolulu, Tromelin found out about the past persecution of Catholics and the high tariffs on French brandy from Dillon, who oversaw French interests in Hawaii. Tromelin, angered by the Protestant ABCFM missionaries’ intention to shut out Catholicism and French trade, worked with Dillon to compose ten demands to King Kamehameha III on August 22.

The demands had not been met by August 25. That afternoon, after a second warning to the civilians of the impending invasion, 140 French Marines, two field pieces, and scaling ladders were landed by boat. The marines took an empty Honolulu Fort from the two men defending it, Governor of Oahu Mataio Kekūanaōʻa and Marshal of the Kingdom Warren Goodale, who did not resist, the fort having been evacuated before the French landed. The marines spiked the coastal guns, threw kegs of powder into the harbor and destroyed all the other weapons they found (mainly muskets and ammunition). They raided government buildings and general property in Honolulu, causing $100,000 in damages. They also took the king's yacht, Kamehameha III, which was sailed to Tahiti and never returned. After these raids, the invasion force withdrew to the fort. During the occupation, men in Honolulu ridiculed the French, and on August 30 they organized a mock attack party making the marines double their guard and send skirmishing patrols out late into night, encountering no attackers. Tromelin eventually recalled his men and left Hawaii on September 5.

Gerrit P. Judd led a party to inquire and settle the incident, leaving for Paris on September 11. Along the way Judd requested support from the United States and United Kingdom, the latter accepting for his case against Tromelin. At first the French government condemned the attack on Honolulu but with the account of Tromelin and Dillon who left with Tromelin on September 5, the French government reconsidered the incident as more justified and did not make reparation for the damages.

Throughout the years various claims which could be identified as French irredentism (French : l'irrédentisme français) originated to promote the annexation of majority French-speaking territories, adjacent territories and strategically important territories to the nation of France. French irredentism focused on the territories held by modern-day Germany and Italy, with an irredentist narrative gaining traction between the 19th and 20th Century. Unlike irredentism in some other nations, French irredentism is largely episodic.

In a general sense, " irredentism " is a term that explains the dynamic between two nations, one of which, the one practicing irredentism, desire to annex the territory of the other nation on the basis of ethnic reasons. It differs itself from revanchism in its dynamic due to revanchism being focuses on the will to reclaim a territory, currently within the possession of another nation, which was once part of said revanchist nation.

France rarely experienced irredentist tendencies, and only did so episodically. Historically French nationalism was not focused on French identity and ethnic unity, and only did so in specific episodes.

The origins of French irredentism are debated and can be tied to the idea of the natural borders of France, which, according to some historians, including Norman J. G. Pounds and Pernot François, was first theorized by Cardinal Richelieu in 1642 within the context of an apocryphal statement. However, according to other historians, such as Peter Sahlins and Lucien Zeller, Richelieu had not even wrote such statement himself, and instead it had been written by a Jesuit Father Philippe Labbe and that the statement itself had not called for a "restoration of Gaul " to its natural borders (French: frontières naturelles), but rather, this was a historiographic interpretation given in the following centuries to such doctrine for political scopes. The goals to pursue a Rhine -to-the- Alps border, at the time, was not pursued in a systematic matter by the Kingdom of France, and was rather anachronistic. What has been historically proven was that the doctrine showcased within the statement called for securing fortified positions on rivers and within strategic places of central Europe (including Metz and Breisach) as to avoid being encircled by the Habsburgs and their domains and serve French interests in central Europe during the Thirty Years' War.

Modern era historian Gaston Zeller [ de ] 's analysis of the topic aligned with Sahlins' idea that looking at the idea of French natural borders in the early modern era and identifying them as irredentistic nationalistic ideas similar to those following the French Revolution was a form of contemporary teleological reading. The French monarchy had portrayed itself as a natural successor to Roman Gaul in the past as well as embracing the legacy of Clovis and Charlemagne symbolically, and such model were used as to justify past territorial expanionism in the past during the Grand Siècle, however they were never adopted as systematic policies for future gains and were not a full representation in the Kingdom's own political agenda.

Ideas related to the myth of Gaul continued onto the 18th Century and even became known and theorized outside of France itself, with the Prussian Anacharsis Cloots releasing Wishes of a Gallophile (French: Voeux d'un gallophile), in favor of French annexation of the Left Bank of the Rhine.

In the immediate aftermath of the initial phases of the French Revolution the revolutionaries, as stated on 22 May 1790, renounced wars of conquest, and thus expansionistic goals that the Ancien Régime still retained, regardless of intent. Figures like Lazare Carnot would continue to insist, even in latter phases of the Revolution, that pushing upon "natural borders", especially in the Rhineland, was unnecessary and dangerous.

Historical analysis, including those of Jordan R. Hayworth and Peter Sahlin, however, state that the actual origin of French irredentism and French natural borders as a state-pursued policy, despite initial rejection of such policy from within, dates back to the French Revolution out of necessity to have a strong natural border protected by natural barriers after the weakening of the French military during the revolution and the ongoing external threats by neighbouring nations, with once again, myths such as the one of Roman Gaul and Charlemagne being brought up as a symbolic justification for irredentism.

Initially, the focus was merely defensive, in order to protect the gains made in the French Revolution, however, French operations soon enough turned offensive, and thus did their claims onto Savoy, Low Countries and the Rhineland. Once conquered these territories were not merely occupied but became integral parts of France, with law and order monopolized by French authorities and administrative areas being created, putting the policy into actual practice. These annexations also were justified through a sense of new found nationalism, and the general public started to adopt irredentist and nationalistic ideals to a wider scale in a way never seen before. The idea that a set of territories were rightfully to be annexed to France based on French identity and right to expand there started to be popularized in both the public and the institutions, building the basis of the idea of an irredentist "rightful territory" that would later develop in Napoleonic times and diversify from merely being a strategical policy and transforming into an ideological one.

Specific geographic places such as the Pyrenees, the Alps and the Rhine river remained well established geographical and historical claims beyond the ancien régime's borders during the Napoleonic times and Napoleon went even beyond such theorized borders.

The idea of that the Rhine was the "natural eastward border" of France started to be less tied to the Gaullic Myth following the fall of Napoleon and into the 1840s, and instead, it started to have a more personal, national, contemporary, nationalistic and non merely strategic tone. The claim was used as to rally support to the government by the prime minister at the time, Adolphe Thiers, but it never led to a systematic agenda. So whilst the question of the Rhine border had transformed into a national one, it had not become an active irredentist claim unlike back in the time of the Revolutionary period where it was not merely a question of national unity but rather a piece of the government's own agenda (which was actually pursued).

Most territorial claims by France in the 19th century or even the 20th century were not tied to language, ethnicity and historical claims unlike German and Italian irredentism but they instead were based on an elective conception of nationality. There are a few exceptions however, which can be classified as irredentism, and in the 1800s that exception was the Second French Empire attitude towards Savoy and Nice, which led to the Treaty of Turin in 1860. This was a claim based on identity, national unity, linguistics and historical claims, thus, irredentist, with the nation systematically pursuing such claims in its agenda even before the treaty. Various historians, including Paul Guichonnet [ fr ] highlighted that social, linguistic, and cultural affinities were used in an irredentist manner before and after the treaty as to justify it. The annexation was complete and even supported by the nation that had given up the territory, the Kingdom of Sardinia-Piedmont, as well as his king, King Victor Emanuel II, which supported French irredentist claims in exchange of Napoleon III 's support of Italian unification.

Only two areas of the former "historical Savoy" were left out of the Treaty of Turin, the towns of Tende and La Brigue. These territories remained Italian due to King Emanuel II request, stating that they were part of the royal hunting ground and thus could not be handed over to the French. However, the real reason these towns were not handed over were due to their strategic position which could have been useful in the event of a Franco-Italian war in the future, something Italian generals and officials within the army warned and pushed Emanuel II to consider. While the situation fluctuated along the lines of the evolution of the French-Italian relations over the years, local and French regret over not annexing the towns and the adjacent territories grew over the years on the basis of French identity, with French newspaper lamenting it on irredentistic grounds. Such irredentist sentiments would linger up until the end of World War II, following the results of the Treaty of Paris.

Other territorial claims started to be prevalent following the Franco-Prussian War, which ended in 1871. Territorial ambitions to regain the lost territory of Alsacce-Lorraine became part of the public discourse and the political agenda of France. However, such territorial ambitions were revanchistic and not irredentist, as they were directed towards a directly lost territory and do not fit the definition.

During World War II resentment grew between the Kingdom of Italy and the Third French Republic and its Allied-aligned successors due to the Italian entry in WW2 and the Italian occupation of French territories during the war, such as their occupation of Nice and Corsica. This resentment was from both the French officials in exile and also the population residing in occupied zones, with a group of resistance forming in 1943 within them, including in La Brigue. This group's goal was to await liberation and the expulsion of the local Carabinieri before expelling all Italian residents residing in their respective areas of operation and then opt for a French-oriented redrawal of the Italian border. The movement was led by Vincent Paschetta, Louis Fulconis, Joseph Aubert and Léonard Wirz, and had pursued such goals up until September 1944 when an Allied advance towards the occupied areas was temporarily stopped. After such date the focus remained French accession. In Tende and Brigue alone the adherence to the movement amounted to 1200 members. Members of the resistance group sent a letter directly to Charles de Gaulle, explaining in detail why the towns which were left out of the Treaty of Turin should be annexed and why further adjustments on the border should have occurred.

De Gaulle's ambitions however did not stop to annexing Tende and La Brigue, and as early as in October 1943, one month after the Armistice of Cassibile, he expressed France's territorial ambitions in Italy, and then vocalized them in an official statement held in Algiers where he supported the annexation of territories in the Roya Valley [ fr ], Susa valley, province of Imperia, parts of the province of Savona (up to Pietra Ligure), Aosta Valley, La Brigue, Tende and other adjacent territories on the basis of national security as well as the "interest of the local population" and the unification of the local French-speaking communities into France and alleged liberation from italianization. While not publicly stated, some sources suggest that ambitions went as far as annexing Turin. French irredentist ideals seems to have had some support Winston Churchill, who addressed it in the Tehran Conference by showcasing and incorporated such wills in his Italy plan.

After the new Italian government led by Pietro Badoglio and King Victor Emanuel III was recognized by the Allied Powers, France's claims on Italy started to lose significant support from its allies and France's political position was severely weakened. This led Georges Bidault and Maurice Couve de Murville to tell Charles de Gaulle to opt for a diplomatic solution rather than an irredentist attitude, however, De Gaulle openly refused. According to Charles de Gaulle, Italy had to be punished for their alliance with Nazi Germany by demilitarizing their border with France and annexing bordering territories in the alpine border regions on the basis of the French-speaking demographic presence in the area and concepts of national unity and utility of "rightful French lands". In November 1944, according to French secret services information, if a referendum was to take place following the war in the Ligurian riviera, they estimated at least 90% of the people would vote in favor.

On 23 December 1944 the National Defense Committee decided to create the Alpine Army Detachment and planned to use the eventual defeat of the Germans as an opportunity to militarily occupy areas claimed by France in Italy. Charles de Gaulle believed that once stationed, it would have been difficult for other nations, including Italy and possibly France's own allies, to kick France outside of Italy and thus they would have been able to secure and annex the occupied territories into France. This strategy had already been laid out in late 1943 by the Comité Français de Libération Nationale. At the same time, in Aosta Valley and adjacent areas, Operation Mont Blanc had begun, giving funds to Cesare Olietti and other local pro-French partisans and civilians to promote the idea of French annexation in the region and sway the public, even through the use of lobbying directly from the French secret services, to join France.

The French in 1945 were allowed to enter by the Allied command up until 20 kilometers within French territory in order to coordinate local resistance against the Italian Social Republic, and soon after the French were allowed to occupy territories up to 30 kilometers from the Italian border. The French occupied cities such as Ventimiglia and Imperia (the latter laying over the 30 kilometers limit) and started to establish local administrations, border control facilities, border guards and military presence, preparing for annexation.

In the immediate aftermath of World War II general Harold Alexander ordered the creation of an Alpine, and specifically Aostan, military government as to better manage the territory and asked French general Paul-André Doyen to retreat his troops and withdraw to the borders prior to the Italian entry in World War II, however, under the orders of Charles de Gaulle, Doyen refused and threatened he would impede the creation of a military government under official French orders. U.S. president Harry S. Truman then called Charles de Gaulle, threatening him that he would cut all supplies towards France aside from rations if he had not retreated, forcing Charles de Gaulle to retreat aside from some key territories, including Le Brigue and Tende.

After the war, La Brigue and Tende were annexed to France following the Treaty of Paris of 1947 and referendums held in the region with widespread public support. All other territories not included were left by the French.

The French judiciary courts (French : ordre judiciaire), also known as "ordinary courts", are one of two main divisions of the dual jurisdictional system in France, the other division being the administrative courts (French : ordre administratif).

Ordinary courts have jurisdiction over two branches of law:

Use of the term civil law in France means private law, and should not be confused with the group of legal systems descended from Roman Law known as the civil law legal system, in contrast to the common law legal system.

On an exceptional basis the judiciary may also become involved in certain litigation between an individual and the State or some other public person. Such litigation would include matters of expropriation, for example, where the expropriated party does not agree with the indemnification amount. Traffic accidents in which one of the vehicles belongs to the government would also fall under the jurisdiction of this court, as well, in this instance, as that of the juge civil, who also has the power to act; another example would be a case when the propriety of a contrôle d'identité is contested and needs to be determined.

Two degrés de juridiction, (degrees of jurisdiction), often exist in French law:

The Court of Cassation hears appeals of the verdicts rendered by the courts of the above two jurisdictions. The Court of Cassaction itself only judges matters of law; it does not re-try the facts a third time.

The French legal system distinguishes between

The organization of the French judiciary was first addressed by the judicial organization law of 1790 which established the justices of the peace, as well as district courts. The justices and the district courts served in turn as courts of first instance and appeals courts, in rotation. The same law also provided for commercial courts (tribunaux de commerce).

For criminal matters, criminal courts with a jury were created.

The Constitution of the Year VIII reorganized the court system. It retained the justices of the peace but separated the courts of first instance from the appeal courts.

The first juridictions de prud'hommes were created in 1806. In criminal matters, judgment by a jury is reserved for crimes, the most serious type of criminal doffense punishable by ten years or more in prison.

In 1958, justices of the peace were eliminated and replaced by the tribunal d'instance, the police court, and the Tribunal de grande instance (also the correctional court — tribunal correctionnel). The juridiction de proximité was introduced in 2002, but was scheduled to be eliminated starting January 1, 2013.

The first-degree civil jurisdiction is so specific that it may be divided into several subjects areas (commercial, social, rural, etc.). These courts then have the deciding word in those subjects.

Other first-degree civil jurisdictions have a more general purview, but are divided by the taux de ressort, most often as the applicant requests.

This is the case in the following jurisdictions:

Where litigation is not specifically assigned by legislation to another jurisdiction, the tribunal de grande instance is responsible for litigation on matters involving more than 10 €000. But for litigation arising from real estate, the tribunal d'instance has authority over litigation evaluated where potential damages range between 4 €000 and €10,000, and the juridiction de proximité for litigation evaluated at 4 000 € or less.

In the overseas French possessions (collectivités d'outre-mer), naming sometimes differs from this pattern and a court of first instance (tribunal de première instance) exercises a general review power over first-degree civil jurisdiction.

The Agricultural land tribunals are responsible for some types of rural litigation.

The juge des enfants (juvenile judge), according to Article 151-3 of the Code de l'organisation judiciaire, may rule in any matter that concerns educational assistance measures under the conditions specified at Article 375.

There are two categories of criminal jurisdiction: investigation (French : instruction) and judgement (jugement). This distinction is echoed by the French code of criminal procedure (Code de procédure pénale), which nevertheless does not define how to distinguish the one from the other. The distinction is even more nuanced since in French procedural law the "judgment" jurisdictions also have powers of investigation.

An investigation jurisdiction has powers of criminal investigation and can carry out or launch different investigations: it can hear witnesses and civil parties (parties civiles), search, seal, appoint an expert, put a suspect in temporary detention or in detention under judiciary supervision, and rule on the different questions that arise in the course of criminal investigation, such as the return of seized assets.

A judge in a court of judgment jurisdiction has the same powers, but generally makes only limited use of them, since the juge d'instruction has already done so. The essential function of a cour de judgement is to determine the guilt of defendants under criminal law and to sentence those it finds guilty.

Criminal jurisdictions judge criminal offenses (infractions), and they also determine the civil consequences of committing the offense.

The tribunal de police judges contraventions. The tribunal correctionnel judges délits. The cour d'assises and the criminal tribunal (in Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon) judge crimes, according to where they were committed. The commercial maritime tribunal is a jurisdiction d'exception, but it has been composed in the same way as jurisdictions of common law such as the correctional tribunal since the decision of the constitutional council of July 2, 2010.

The sentencing judge (juge de l'application des peines) and the sentencing court (tribunal de l'application des peines) decide the application of criminal penalties, especially with respect to prisoners.

Eight regional jurisdictions decide matters of preventive safety detention (rétention de sûreté) after a prisoner has served out their sentence, in the case of persons convicted of certain very serious offenses and judged still to be dangerous to society.

The elimination of the tribunal aux armées de Paris, the last peacetime military tribunal, was announced for 2011, when they were to be replaced by the common-law correctional tribunal. It took effect 1 January 2012 as a result of the law of 13 December 2011.

Infractions committed by a minor are judged, depending on their severity and also the age of the minor, by the juge des enfants, by the tribunal pour enfants or by the Cour d'assises des mineurs.

The Court of Appeal retries the facts of a disputed case previously tried in a court of first instance. This is known as the double degree of jurisdiction (double degré de juridiction).

At the Court of Appeal level litigation is considered by a single court—although in separate divisions—whether the matter is civil or criminal. Depending on the volume of appeals the number of divisions may vary. There is always, however, at least one civil division, social division, commercial division, and correctional appeals division.

There are a total of 36 courts of appeal on French territory.

At the courts of appeal, in criminal law matters:

Saint Pierre and Miquelon has a Superior court of appeal, which hears the appeals from that jurisdiction.

Since the 2000 presumption of innocence law, known as the "Guigou law", a special form of appeal (called tournant) been available against the arrêts of the Assises court, and the Criminal and Army tribunals: appeals are heard in a different criminal jurisdiction with additional jurés in the case of an Assises court or Criminal tribunal, or assesseurs-jurés in Mayotte). (Although appeals filed against a criminal jurisdiction ruling in an overseas department, New Caledonia, French Polynesia, Wallis and Futuna or Saint Pierre and Miquelon, the appeal may be heard in the same jurisdiction that heard it in first instance, but different judges should sit on the panel that re-tries the case.

The judicial panel of the national jurisdiction for security detention is composed of three counselors from the Court of Cassation. It hears appeals of decisions to impose preventive detention on convicted prisoners who have completed their sentence but are still considered dangerous.

The jurisdiction of the National court for disability and industrial accident insurance pricing judges cases where appeals concern incapacitation and work-related injury, sometimes called technical appeals, rendered by the French Social Security administration.

The Court of Cassation is the supreme court for civil and criminal cases in France. It does not constitute a third degree of jurisdiction, because unlike the Courts of Appeal, it only addresses the legal form of the verdict. Thus the juges du fond designation for first and second degree judges, which sometimes appears in cassation court verdicts.

The Cour de cassation renders two types of verdict: confirmatif or infirmatif.

The former confirms a verdict by a court of appeal, (or of another court if the case has exhausted the first and last degrees of jurisdiction). The trial theoretically ends at this point, all avenues of recourse having been exhausted. Still, other jurisdictions may be invoked, such as the European Court of Human Rights, but this remains rare.

If the court's verdict is on the other hand infirmatif, the judgment is "cassé", or broken, essentially quashed or canceled. There are then several possibilities:

If the matter is sent back to the lower courts, both the facts and the law are retried. The resulting new judgment may also be appealed. The next higher court would be cassation. Here the bench sometimes quashes a verdict without returning it to the lower court, or where a lower court may bow to the Cour de cassation by rendering a judgment that takes the cassation court's ruling into account.

Unlike the Courts of Appeal, there is only one Cour de cassation, which sits in Paris.

The French Land Transport Accident Investigation Bureau (Bureau d'Enquêtes sur les Accidents de Transport Terrestre, abbreviated BEA-TT) is an agency of the French government formed in 2004 and charged with the investigation into accidents involving all forms of land transport, including railways, urban guided transportation systems (metros, trams), cable-hauled transport systems, road transport (heavy goods vehicles, and public transport by coach and bus), and canals and other navigable inland waterways.

Prior to the formation of the BEA-TT, the government minister with responsibility for transportation would set up ad hoc investigation commissions, for example after the 1988 Paris-Gare de Lyon rail accident and 1999 Mont Blanc tunnel fire. These commissions were supported by the Conseil Général des Ponts et Chaussées (CGPC, "Civil Engineering General Council").

The CGPC's experience, particularly following the Mont Blanc tunnel fire, showed there was a need for a new legal framework that guaranteed investigators access to sites, recordings and information covered by commercial confidentiality or pre-trial non-disclosure agreements. An Act of parliament passed on 3 January 2002 supplied the legal basis for technical investigations and reaffirms and mandates the investigatory principals of independence, and commits to the publishing of the report. The BEA-TT was founded by a decree on 26 January 2004, with the right of access to all elements useful to an investigation, even those covered by non disclosure or confidentiality requirements such as those pre-trial or for commercial and medical reasons.

Its current head office is in the Grande Arche in La Défense business district and in Puteaux.

It formerly was headquartered in the Tour Voltaire [ fr ] in La Défense business district and in Puteaux, and previously in the Tour Pascal B [ fr ] in Puteaux and La Défense.

There is an equivalent agency in regards to state and military land transport, the Bureau enquêtes accidents défense de transport terrestre (BEAD-TT).

French (français [ fʁɑ̃sɛ ] or langue française [ lɑ̃ɡ fʁɑ̃sɛːz ]) is a Romance language of the Indo-European family. Like all other Romance languages, French and its closest relatives—the langues d'oïl, historically spoken in northern France and southern Belgium —descended from the Vulgar Latin of the Roman Empire. It was influenced by native Celtic languages of Northern Roman Gaul and by the Germanic Frankish language of the post-Roman Frankish invaders. Over time, French largely supplanted most regional Romance varieties across France, Belgium and Switzerland. As a result of French and later Belgian colonialism, it was introduced to new territories in the Americas, Africa, and Asia, and numerous French-based creole languages, most notably Haitian Creole, were developed. A French-speaking person or nation may be referred to as Francophone in both English and French.

French is the 22nd most natively spoken language in the world, the sixth most spoken language by total number of speakers, and is among the top five most studied languages worldwide, with about 120 million learners as of 2017. It is estimated to have about 310 million speakers, of which about 74 million are native speakers; it is spoken as a first language (in descending order of the number of speakers) in France, Canada (Quebec), Belgium (Wallonia and the Brussels-Capital Region), western Switzerland (Romandy region), Luxembourg, and Monaco. Meanwhile, in Francophone Africa it is spoken mainly as a second language or lingua franca, though it has also become a native language in several urban areas. In some North African countries like Algeria and Morocco, it is the primary language for the elite (alongside Arabic) while being an auxiliary language for the general population. French is an official language in 26 countries, as well as one of the most geographically widespread languages in the world, with speakers in about 50 countries. Most of these countries are members of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (OIF), the community of 54 member states which share the use or teaching of French. In 2025, approximately 50% of the Francophone population lived in sub-Saharan Africa and the Indian Ocean, 30% lived in Europe, 15% in North Africa, 7% in the Americas, and a small percent in Asia and Oceania. French is the second most widely spoken mother tongue in the European Union. Of Europeans who speak other languages natively, approximately one-fifth are able to speak French as a second language.

French has a long history as an international language of literature, diplomacy and science and is a primary or second language of many international organizations including the United Nations, the European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the World Trade Organization, the International Olympic Committee, the General Conference on Weights and Measures, and the International Committee of the Red Cross. Many institutions of the EU use French as a working language along with English, German and Italian ; in some institutions, French is the sole working language (e.g. at the Court of Justice of the European Union).

French is a Romance language (meaning that it is descended primarily from Vulgar Latin) that evolved out of the Gallo-Romance dialects spoken in northern France. The language's early forms include Old French and Middle French.

Due to Roman rule, Latin was gradually adopted by the inhabitants of Gaul. As the language was learned by the common people, it developed a distinct local character, with grammatical differences from Latin as spoken elsewhere, some of which is attested in graffiti. This local variety evolved into the Gallo-Romance tongues, which include French and its closest relatives, such as Franco-Provençal.

The Gaulish language likely survived into the sixth century in France despite considerable Romanization. Coexisting with Latin, Gaulish helped shape the Vulgar Latin dialects that developed into French contributing loanwords and calques (including oui, the word for "yes"), sound changes shaped by Gaulish influence, and influences in conjugation and word order. Recent computational studies suggest that early gender shifts may have been motivated by the gender of the corresponding word in Gaulish.

Following the Roman conquest of Gaul, 90% of the population remained indigenous in origin. Furthermore, sociological factors drove an uneven language shift. Latin spread from urban centers—such as Narbonensis —into rural hinterlands as native populations became bilingual. Although the Roman state lacked a deliberate policy of suppression, its requirement that formal administration use Latin accelerated the language's adoption in regulated zones.

During the Crisis of the Third Century, locals increasingly adopted Latin to communicate with Germanic tribes and Roman settlers. Consequently, writing in Gaulish and monolingualism all but disappeared between the 4th and 5th centuries. By the time the Romans left, the majority of the population spoke a mix of Celtic, Latin, and occasionally Greek. Additionally, because Northern Gaul was politically cut off from the Mediterranean by the 5th century, its local Latin diverged sharply from standard grammar rules. Overall, Latin was largely adopted by the masses after the Roman departure, largely because of the increasing influence of missionaries and the Romanized elite as sources of authority, rather than the central Imperial authority.

The estimated number of French words that can be attributed to Gaulish is placed at 154 by the Petit Robert, which is often viewed as representing standardized French, while if non-standard dialects are included, the number increases to 240. Known Gaulish loans are skewed toward certain semantic fields, such as plant life (chêne, bille, etc.), animals (mouton, cheval, etc.), nature (boue, etc.), domestic activities (ex. berceau), farming and rural units of measure (arpent, lieue, borne, boisseau), weapons, and products traded regionally rather than further afield. This semantic distribution has been attributed to peasants being the last to hold onto Gaulish.

The beginning of French in Gaul was greatly influenced by Germanic invasions into the country. These invasions had the greatest impact on the northern part of the country and on the language there. A language divide began to grow across the country. The population in the north spoke langues d'oïl while the population in the south spoke langues d'oc. One langue d'oïl became Old French. The Old French period spanned between the late 8th and mid-14th centuries. Old French shared many characteristics with Latin. For example, Old French used different word orders, just as Latin did, because it had a case system retaining the distinction between nominative subjects and oblique non-subjects. The period is marked by a heavy superstrate influence from the Germanic Frankish language, which non-exhaustively included the use in upper-class speech and higher registers of V2 word order, a large percentage of the vocabulary (now at around 15% of modern French vocabulary) including the impersonal singular pronoun on (a calque of Germanic man), and the name of the language itself.

Up until its later stages, Old French, alongside the langue d'oc called Old Occitan, maintained a relic of the old nominal case system of Latin longer than most other Romance languages (with the notable exception of Romanian which still currently maintains a case distinction), differentiating between an oblique case and a nominative case. The phonology was characterized by heavy syllabic stress, which led to the emergence of various complicated diphthongs such as -eau, which would later be leveled as monophthongs.

The earliest evidence of what became Old French can be seen in the Oaths of Strasbourg and the Sequence of Saint Eulalia, while Old French literature began to be produced in the eleventh century, with major early works often focusing on the lives of saints (such as the Vie de Saint Alexis), or wars and royal courts, notably including the Chanson de Roland, the Matter of Britain, as well as a cycle focused on William of Orange.

During the period of the Crusades, French became so dominant in the Mediterranean Sea that it became the lingua franca (literally 'Frankish language'). Due to increased contact with Arabs (who referred to the Crusaders as Franj), numerous Arabic loanwords entered French, such as amiral (admiral), alcool (alcohol), coton (cotton) and sirop (syrup), as well as scientific terms such as algébre (algebra), alchimie (alchemy) and zéro (zero).

Within Old French many dialects emerged but the Francien dialect is one that not only continued but also thrived during the Middle French period between the mid-14th to the early 17th centuries. Modern French grew out of this Francien dialect. The status of French as a global language of administration and diplomacy is not merely a product of modern history, but the result of a process of state-building that began in the Crusader states.

The transition towards French as a formal language began in the Kingdom of Jerusalem. Facing a crisis of authority during the War of the Lombards of the mid-13th century, the nobility replaced Latin with Outremer French—a koiné of Parisian, Norman, and Picard dialects—to codify the Assizes of Jerusalem. For the knights and jurists of Outremer, this refined vernacular became a vital tool for legal security in matters of property and inheritance, distinguishing them from Byzantines, Muslims, and newly arrived European crusaders. The military elite, who often lacked academic training in Latin, standardized laws they could read and debate in their native tongue.

This made Jerusalem the first state to implement French for legal and administrative security, three decades before France itself. This administrative model "rebounded" to Europe through Louis IX, who, after his stay in the Levant (1250–1254), professionalized the French chancery. This trajectory reached its legal peak with the Ordinance of Villers-Cotterêts (1539), where Francis I mandated French as the exclusive language for all legal acts and official communications, effectively ending the official role of Latin and centralizing the state around the Parisian standard.

Grammatically, during the period of Middle French, noun declensions were lost and there began to be standardized rules. Robert Estienne published the first Latin-French dictionary, which included information about phonetics, etymology, and grammar. Politically, the first government authority to adopt Modern French as the official language was the Aosta Valley in 1536, three years before France itself.

During the 17th century, French replaced Latin as the most important language of diplomacy and international relations (lingua franca). It retained this role until approximately the middle of the 20th century, when it was replaced by English as the United States became the dominant global power following the Second World War. Stanley Meisler of the Los Angeles Times said that the fact that the Treaty of Versailles was written in English as well as French was the "first diplomatic blow" against the language.

During the Grand Siècle (17th century), France, under the rule of powerful leaders such as Cardinal Richelieu and Louis XIV, enjoyed a period of prosperity and prominence among European nations. Richelieu established the Académie française to protect the French language. By the early 1800s, Parisian French had become the primary language of the aristocracy in France.

Near the beginning of the 19th century, the French government began to pursue policies with the end goal of eradicating the many minorities and regional languages (patois) spoken in France. This began in 1794 with Henri Grégoire 's "Report on the necessity and means to annihilate the patois and to universalize the use of the French language". When public education was made compulsory, only French was taught and the use of any other (patois) language was punished. The goals of the public school system were made especially clear to the French-speaking teachers sent to teach students in regions such as Occitania and Brittany. Instructions given by a French official to teachers in the department of Finistère, in western Brittany, included the following: "And remember, Gents: you were given your position in order to kill the Breton language". The prefect of Basses-Pyrénées in the French Basque Country wrote in 1846: "Our schools in the Basque Country are particularly meant to replace the Basque language with French..." Students were taught that their ancestral languages were inferior and they should be ashamed of them; this process was known in the Occitan-speaking region as Vergonha.

In the 21st century, the French language has undergone significant transformations in both linguistic and sociopolitical contexts. Linguistically, French is increasingly shaped by regional variations, particularly those emerging from sub-Saharan Africa. Youth sociolects and vernacular influences, such as Camfranglais in Cameroon and Nouchi in Côte d'Ivoire, have given rise to hybrid linguistic forms that not only dominate local informal communication but are also gaining traction in Francophone popular culture, music, and social media across the broader Francosphere. While there is significant variation in spoken French, written French stays largely consistent. While French is a significant language on the internet ranking fourth, only approximately 65.5% of Francophones have access to the internet. In the 21st century, French remains a major language for business, diplomacy, and culture though its use, geography, and sociopolitical context continues to shift with declines in some areas (including academia) and growth in others.

On a global scale, the number of French speakers continues to rise, largely attributable to demographic growth in sub-Saharan Africa, where French serves as an official, educational, and administrative language in numerous states. French now serves as a language of instruction in the educational systems serving approximately 93 million pupils from 36 countries and governments worldwide, 24 of which are located in the Africa–Indian Ocean and Middle East regions, either as the sole language or in combination with others. Notably, 80% of students attending French-language schools are in Africa, where French is commonly used both for teaching and as a shared means of communication among different communities. The majority of Francophones in the sub-Saharan region and the Maghreb are young, and are found in the 15–24 age group. This growth contrasts with the declining presence of French in parts of Asia, particularly in former French colonies such as Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia, where it has been largely replaced by local languages and English in both public life and education, though significant immigrant populations from these regions continue in France and other francophone regions.

In sociopolitical terms, French remains deeply entangled in debates over language, identity, and historical legacy. In the Republic of the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, and Cameroon, (among others) French remains the undisputed language of government, formal education, and major media. The 2022 OIF report highlights that in Kinshasa, Brazzaville, Abidjan, and Yaoundé, French serves as the dominant vehicular language, so entrenched that many urban children acquire it alongside local vernaculars as a de facto first language. Several Sahelian states have formally curtailed French as part of postcolonial language-planning. Many governments and residents perceive it to be a remnant of colonial rule, in a complex context of cultural and political sovereignty discussions, local and Russian propaganda, political and military conflicts, and other factors. In July 2023, Mali 's constitutional referendum demoted French from "official" to merely "working" status while elevating thirteen indigenous tongues to constitutional parity. Burkina Faso 's transitional authorities have announced similar plans to strip French of its official role, framing these moves as assertions of cultural sovereignty as well as a closer relationship to Russian than France. Yet in both Bamako and Ouagadougou, French endures as the lingua franca of higher education, national media, and interethnic commerce. The language being primarily spoken by secondary-language speakers who have mixed use of the language but reflecting the complicated role of the language in these contexts amidst French military withdrawal in Africa, rising nationalism, shifting alliances, and other factors.

In longstanding Francophone strongholds, policymakers now seek a more balanced multilingual landscape. Senegal 's government has expanded Wolof-language programming on public television and begun renaming colonial-era names in Dakar, even though French remains the sole constitutional language and continues to dominate academia. This reflects a real commitment seen in Senegal and elsewhere to shift from French to local languages or English. Algeria has mandated Arabic -medium instruction in formerly Francophone private schools and introduced English tracks at its universities, framed as part of a broader multilingual strategy but in the context of diplomatic issues with France, yet French persists in judicial proceedings, international business, and everyday urban speech in Algiers and Oran and debate continues internally on language in the country. Meanwhile, in Morocco and Tunisia, French continues to enjoy high prestige, both governments maintain bilingual curricula in secondary and tertiary education, and French remains the lingua franca of tourism, scientific research, and many private-sector enterprises. Québec has doubled down on French through Bill 96 (An Act respecting French, the official and common language of Québec), assented on 1 June 2022. Bill 96 reaffirms French as the province's sole official language, tightens requirements for French language services and commercial signage, and expands the Charter of the French Language's scope which are measures designed to counter anglophone pressures and reinforce cultural identity. Similarly, countries such as Madagascar, Central African Republic, Chad, and Haiti, have legally committed to French alongside local languages.

Overall, French remains a practical and widely accepted medium of communication, particularly where linguistic diversity demands a neutral lingua franca. Despite regional tensions or reductions in certain contexts, French continues to expand as a global language of diplomacy, development, and multilateral cooperation. Several non-Francophone countries, including Rwanda, Ethiopia, Ghana, and even countries outside Africa such as Moldova and the United Arab Emirates, have joined or expanded their involvement in the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (OIF). Their participation reflects an interest in leveraging French for international diplomacy, educational exchange, and regional economic integration. French is also used for collaboration on public health, economic development, business and local governance including through the Association internationale des maires francophones (AIMF) and other organizations.

Francophone collaboration today spans an increasingly diverse set of domains. In media, international broadcasters such as TV5Monde, Radio France Internationale (RFI), and France 24 play key roles in disseminating French-language content worldwide, especially across Africa, Europe, the Middle East, and the Caribbean. In education, institutions like the Agence universitaire de la Francophonie (AUF) and Espace Francophone pour la Recherche, Développement et l'Innovation support research and academic partnerships between Francophone universities across five continents. In culture, the arts, and sports events like the Jeux de la Francophonie foster artistic exchange and culture and reflect increased francophone art and culture emerging outside of Europe and used in local communities around the world including new francophone social media, francophone cinema, TV, francophone literature, art, francophone music, and sport.

Per the OIF, between 2022 and 2025, use of French experienced significant growth, increasing from 321 to between 348 and 396 million speakers (depending on the methodology used). The first method counts all native speakers in countries considered natively Francophone (France, Monaco, and the Francohpone regions of Belgium, Switzerland, and Canada). In other countries where French is an official language, co-official language, or language of instruction only children aged 10 and older and adults aged 15 and older who are literate in French are counted. The second method additionally includes children aged 6–9 who are literate in French in countries of the Global South where French is an official language, co-official language, or language of instruction. Under this method there are 396 million French speakers, distributed across the five continents, nearly 65% of whom are in Africa. Given the second methodology, the OIF states that French is the fourth most spoken language in the world, with 170 million students enrolled in French language education or courses, and the language being the third most used for business and fourth most used on the internet.

Growth of French is caused by many factors including population growth in Africa, a youthful Francophone population, urbanization and improved educational access. In 2025, approximately 70% of Francophones live in urban areas as the world continues to urbanize. The Francophone population is young. In 2025, around 150 million young Francophones represent 30.6% of the total population. In 2024, more than 170 million pupils in 36 countries around the world received education in French or learned French in institutional settings, in contexts of French as a native, or French as a second language. The number of learners of French as a foreign language worldwide is estimated at 51 million learners. Primary education remains the main point of growth for French, particularly in countries such as Niger, Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d'Ivoire, Mali, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where school enrollment rates have risen quickly since 2010. In Côte d'Ivoire the number of Francophones is growing rapidly, at a pace higher than demographic growth. French language use increased from 7.4 million in 2010 to 17.1 million in 2025 (+131%) while the country's population grew from 22 to 33 million (52%) during the same period. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo the number of French speakers grew from rom 31 million in 2010 to 68 million in 2025.

French usage is also growing to formal organizational initiatives, business, and culture. The Agency for French Education Abroad has 600 locations and 397,000 students as of 2025. The Alliance Francaise network has almost 1,000 locations with 824 main branches and 160 affiliated branches spread across 138 countries. Within this system, there are 450,000 students including 420,000 students of French and 33,000 students in other courses. Combined with the Institut de France (IF) there are 912,000 students enrolled in language centers outside of France. Due to France's Campus France program, over 440,000 international students study in France and students studying at numerous other universities in the Agence universitaire de la Francophonie.

According to a demographic projection led by the Réseau Démographie de l'Agence universitaire de la Francophonie, the total number of French speakers will reach approximately 500 million in 2025 and over 1 billion by 2050, largely due to rapid population growth in sub-Saharan Africa. in 2026, the OIF estimated French will be spoken by between 466 million and 666 million people by 2050, the majority of which 9 of 10 will live in Africa.

Spoken by 19.71% of the European Union's population, French is the third most widely spoken language in the EU, after English and German and the second-most-widely taught language after English.

Under the Constitution of France, French has been the official language of the Republic since 1992, although the Ordinance of Villers-Cotterêts made it mandatory for legal documents in 1539. France mandates the use of French in official government publications, public education except in specific cases, and legal contracts; advertisements must bear a translation of foreign words.

In Belgium, French is an official language at the federal level along with Dutch and German. At the regional level, French is the sole official language of Wallonia (excluding a part of the East Cantons, which are German-speaking) and one of the two official languages—along with Dutch —of the Brussels-Capital Region, where it is spoken by the majority of the population (approx. 80%), often as their primary language.

French is one of the four official languages of Switzerland, along with German, Italian, and Romansh, and is spoken in the western part of Switzerland, called Romandy, of which Geneva is the largest city. The language divisions in Switzerland do not coincide with political subdivisions, and some cantons have bilingual status: for example, cities such as Biel/Bienne and cantons such as Valais, Fribourg and Bern. French is the native language of about 23% of the Swiss population, and is spoken by 50% of the population.

Along with Luxembourgish and German, French is one of the three official languages of Luxembourg, where it is generally the preferred language of business as well as of the different public administrations. It is also the official language of Monaco.

At a regional level, French is acknowledged as an official language in the Aosta Valley region of Italy (the first government authority to adopt Modern French as the official language in 1536, three years before France itself), in which is spoken as a first language by 1.25% of the population and as a second one by approximately 50%. French dialects remain spoken by minorities on the Channel Islands ; it is also spoken in Andorra and is the main language after Catalan in El Pas de la Casa. The language is taught as the primary second language in the German state of Saarland, with French being taught from pre-school and over 43% of citizens being able to speak French.

The majority of the world's French-speaking population lives in Africa; while it is an official language in 18 countries, it is not spoken as a first language by the majority, acting mainly as a second one or a lingua franca due to the many indigenous languages spoken in the territories. According to a 2023 estimate from the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie, an estimated 167 million African people spread across 35 countries and territories can speak French as either a first or a second language ; only 1.2 million of these spoke it as a first language according to Ethnologue. This number does not include the people living in non-Francophone African countries who have learned French as a foreign language. There is not a single African French, but multiple forms that diverged through contact with various indigenous African languages. Language and slang from francophone Africa, particularly as popularized through music, are playing a growing role in influencing French across the francophone world.

While spoken mainly as a second language, French is increasingly being spoken as a native language in Francophone Africa among some communities in urban areas or the elite class. This is especially true in the cities of Abidjan, Kinshasa, and Lubumbashi, Douala, Libreville, Antananarivo, Cotonou, and Brazzaville. However, in contrast to Central Africa and most of West Africa where French had been entrenched, countries in North Africa and the Sahel have generally distanced themselves from the language due to colonial connections. For example, Algeria intermittently attempted to remove the use of French in favor of a strong native language (see Arabization), and French was removed as an official language in Mali, Burkina Faso, and Niger in 2023, 2024, and 2025, respectively. Despite these changes and the emergence of English as a global lingua franca, French today remains a major language in the Sahel and the societies of Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia.

Due to the rise of French in Africa, the total French-speaking population worldwide is expected to reach 700 million people in 2050. French was the fastest growing language on the continent (in terms of either official or foreign languages). Sub-Saharan Africa is the region where the French language is most likely to expand, because of the expansion of education and rapid population growth. It is also where the language has evolved the most in recent years. Some vernacular forms of French in Africa can be difficult to understand for French speakers from other countries, but written forms of the language are very closely related to those of the rest of the French-speaking world.

French is the second most commonly spoken language in Canada and one of two federal official languages alongside English. As of the 2021 Canadian census, it was the native language of 7.7 million people (21% of the population) and the second language of 2.9 million (8% of the population). Although French is spoken throughout Canada, it is mostly present in Quebec, with significant Francophone populations also being found in New Brunswick, especially the region of Acadia, and parts of Northern and Eastern Ontario.

French is the sole official language in the province of Quebec, where some 80% of the population speak it as a native language and 95% are capable of conducting a conversation in it. Quebec is also home to the city of Montreal, which is the world's fourth-largest French-speaking city, by number of first language speakers. New Brunswick and Manitoba are the only officially bilingual provinces, though full bilingualism is enacted only in New Brunswick, where about one third of the population is Francophone. French is also an official language of all of the territories (Northwest Territories, Nunavut, and Yukon). Out of the three, Yukon has the most French speakers, making up just under 4% of the population. Furthermore, while French is not an official language in Ontario, the French Language Services Act ensures that provincial services are available in the language. The Act applies to areas of the province where there are significant Francophone communities, namely Eastern Ontario and Northern Ontario. Elsewhere, sizable French-speaking minorities are found in southern Manitoba, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island and the Port au Port Peninsula in Newfoundland and Labrador, where the unique Newfoundland French dialect was historically spoken. Smaller pockets of French speakers exist in all other provinces. The Ontarian city of Ottawa, the Canadian capital, is also effectively bilingual, as it has a large population of federal government workers, who are required to offer services in both French and English, and is just across the river from the Quebecois city of Gatineau.

According to the United States Census Bureau (2011), French is the fourth most spoken language in the United States after English, Spanish, and Chinese, when all forms of French are considered together and all dialects of Chinese are similarly combined. French is the second-most spoken language (after English) in the states of Maine and Vermont. In Louisiana, it is tied with Spanish for second-most spoken if Louisiana French and all creoles such as Haitian are included. French is the third most spoken language (after English and Spanish) in the states of Connecticut, Rhode Island, and New Hampshire. Louisiana is home to many distinct French dialects, collectively known as Louisiana French. New England French, essentially a variant of Canadian French, is spoken in parts of New England. Missouri French was historically spoken in Missouri and Illinois (formerly known as Upper Louisiana), but is nearly extinct today. French also survived in isolated pockets along the Gulf Coast of what was previously French Lower Louisiana, such as Mon Louis Island, Alabama and DeLisle, Mississippi (the latter only being discovered by linguists in the 1990s) but these varieties are severely endangered or presumed extinct. In 2024–2025, Louisiana has around 4,300 pupils enrolled in 32 French immersion schools, and nearly 22,800 learners of French as a foreign language.

French is one of two official languages in Haiti alongside Haitian Creole. It is the principal language of education, administration, business, and public signage and is spoken by all educated Haitians. It is also used for ceremonial events such as weddings, graduations, and church masses. The vast majority of the population speaks Haitian Creole as their first language; the rest largely speak French as a first language. As a French Creole language, Haitian Creole draws the large majority of its vocabulary from French, with influences from West African languages, as well as several European languages. It is closely related to Louisiana Creole and the creole from the Lesser Antilles.

French is the sole official language of all the overseas territories of France in the Caribbean that are collectively referred to as the French West Indies, namely Guadeloupe, Saint Barthélemy, Saint Martin, and Martinique.

In the countries of Dominica, Grenada, St Lucia, Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela, and Panama French based creoles are used in lesser capacities, being secondary languages. It should be understood that Creoles are distinct from French although they are occasionally intelligible (depending on the Creole and how much French influence the language received). The Creoles of Venezuela and Panama are dying/severely endangered. In Trinidad and Grenada creole (known colloquially as Patwa) are only spoken by elders although revitalisation efforts are growing. In Dominica and St Lucia standard French is also used unofficially as a third language and some people use French and French creoles interchangeably.

French is the official language of both French Guiana on the South American continent, and of Saint Pierre and Miquelon, an archipelago off the coast of Newfoundland in North America.

French was the official language of the colony of French Indochina, comprising modern-day Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia. All three countries are full members of La Francophonie (OIF). It continues to be an administrative language in Laos and Cambodia, although its influence has waned in recent decades. In 2025, there were about 712,000 speakers in Vietnam, 400,000 in Cambodia, and 215,000 in Laos.

In Cambodia, there are about 400,000 French speakers and almost 125,000 Cambodians were learning French in 2018. In 2025, 400,000 students were learning French and around 3,000 schoolchildren were enrolled in bilingual courses across the country and between 7,000 and 8,000 graduate students take French classes as part of training in specialized fields such as medicine or law. The OIF has also promoted the teaching of the French language in Cambodia, notably through its Teacher Mobility Program, which facilitates the placement of French-speaking educators from other countries in Cambodian institutions. The National Center for French Learning was opened in 2025.

The 20th Sommet de la Francophonie will be held in Cambodia, in November 2026. The summit will mark the transfer of the Francophonie presidency from France to Cambodia. Norodom Monineath, the Queen Mother of Cambodia, authored the foreword to a report emphasizing the significance of the OIF and the Observatoire de la Langue Française. In her remarks, she described Cambodia's role as host of the summit as a distinct honor for both herself and the nation.

The Lycée Français René-Descartes in Phnom Penh has over a thousand students, the majority of which are Cambodian, is part of the Agency for French Education Abroad (AEFE) among other francophone schools affiliated with the AEFE including the EFI French International School. Other organizations include the Institut Français du Cambodge an Alliance Française, and The French Chamber of Commerce in Cambodia Cambodia has French media including L'Echo du Cambodge and Le Toque.

In Laos, there are approximately 215,000 francophones. Approximately 75,000 students are learning French as a second language and 3,000 students are in bilingual courses. Approximately 3% of Laotians can speak French. The Ecole Francophone de Luang Prabang offers French and Lao education.

A former French mandate, Lebanon designates Arabic as the sole official language, while a special law regulates cases when French can be publicly used. Article 11 of Lebanon's Constitution states that "Arabic is the official national language. A law determines the cases in which the French language is to be used". The French language in Lebanon is a widespread second language among the Lebanese people, and is taught in many schools along with Arabic and English. French is used on Lebanese pound banknotes, on road signs, on Lebanese license plates, and on official buildings (alongside Arabic).

Today, French and English are secondary languages of Lebanon, with about 40% of the population being Francophone and 40% Anglophone. The use of English is growing in the business and media environment. Out of about 900,000 students, about 500,000 are enrolled in Francophone schools, public or private, in which the teaching of mathematics and scientific subjects is provided in French. Actual usage of French varies depending on the region and social status. One-third of high school students educated in French go on to pursue higher education in English-speaking institutions. English is the language of business and communication, with French being an element of social distinction, chosen for its emotional value.

French was the official language of French India, consisting of the geographically separate enclaves referred to as Puducherry. It continued to be an official language of the territory even after its cession to India in 1956 until 1965. A small number of older locals still retain knowledge of the language, although it has now given way to Tamil and English.

In colonial Vietnam, the elites primarily spoke French, while many servants who worked in French households spoke a French pidgin known as " Tây Bồi " (now extinct). After French rule ended, South Vietnam continued to use French in administration, education, and trade. However, since the Fall of Saigon and the opening of a unified Vietnam's economy, French has gradually declined in modern Vietnam: it has been effectively displaced as the first foreign language of choice by English, and slightly under 1% of the population was fluent in French in 2018. Nevertheless, it continues to be taught as the other main foreign language in the Vietnamese educational system and is regarded as a cultural language. In 2025, approximately 40,000 students and 6,500 university students are enrolled in French.

French is an official language of the Pacific Island nation of Vanuatu, where 31% of the population was estimated to speak it in 2023. It is the sole official language in the French special collectivity of New Caledonia and the overseas collectivities of Wallis and Futuna and French Polynesia.

In New Caledonia, 97% of the population can speak, read and write French while in French Polynesia this figure is 95%, and in Wallis and Futuna, it is 84%. In French Polynesia and to a lesser extent Wallis and Futuna, where oral and written knowledge of the French language has become almost universal, French increasingly tends to displace the native Polynesian languages as the language most spoken at home. In French Polynesia, the percentage of the population who reported that French was the language they use the most at home rose from 67% at the 2007 census to 74% at the 2017 census. In Wallis and Futuna, the percentage of the population who reported that French was the language they use the most at home rose from 10% at the 2008 census to 13% at the 2018 census.

According to the OIF, approximately 321 million people worldwide are "able to speak the language" as of 2022, without specifying the criteria for this estimation or whom it encompasses. French is regarded as an influential world language because of its wide use in the worlds of journalism, jurisprudence, education, and diplomacy, though its use, geography, and sociopolitical context continues to shift with declines in some areas, including academia, and growth in others. Given the demographic prospects of the French-speaking nations of Africa, researcher Pascal-Emmanuel Gobry wrote in 2014 that French "could be the language of the future"; despite this growth in parts of Central and West Africa, where it had been entrenched as an official, administrative and educational language in numerous states, countries in North Africa and the Sahel have generally distanced themselves from the language due to colonial connections: some countries such as Algeria intermittently attempted to eradicate the use of French, and it was removed as an official language in Mali, Burkina Faso and Niger in 2023, 2024, and 2025, respectively. Its use is also largely declined in parts of Asia, particularly in former French colonies such as Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia, where it has been replaced by local languages and English in both public life and education.

In diplomacy, French is one of the six official languages of the United Nations (and one of the UN Secretariat 's only two working languages), one of twenty official and three procedural languages of the European Union, an official language of NATO, the International Olympic Committee, the Council of Europe, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Organization of American States (alongside Spanish, Portuguese and English), the Eurovision Song Contest, one of eighteen official languages of the European Space Agency, World Trade Organization and the least used of the three official languages in the North American Free Trade Agreement countries. It is also a working language in nonprofit organisations such as the Red Cross (alongside English, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Arabic and Russian), Amnesty International (alongside 32 other languages of which English is the most used, followed by Spanish, Portuguese, German, and Italian), Médecins sans Frontières (used alongside English, Spanish, Portuguese and Arabic), and Médecins du Monde (used alongside English).

Significant as a judicial language, French is one of the official languages of such major international and regional courts, tribunals, and dispute-settlement bodies as the African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights, the Caribbean Court of Justice, the Court of Justice for the Economic Community of West African States, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, the International Court of Justice, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea the International Criminal Court and the World Trade Organization Appellate Body. It is the sole internal working language of the Court of Justice of the European Union, and makes with English the European Court of Human Rights 's two working languages.

In the European Union, French was the dominant language within all institutions until the 1990s. After several enlargements of the EU (1995, 2004), French significantly lost ground in favour of English, which is more widely spoken and taught in most EU countries. French currently remains one of the three working languages, or "procedural languages", of the EU, along with English and German. It is the second-most widely used language within EU institutions after English, but remains the preferred language of certain institutions or administrations such as the Court of Justice of the European Union, where it is the sole internal working language, or the Directorate-General for Agriculture. Since 2016, Brexit has rekindled discussions on whether or not French should again hold greater role within the institutions of the European Union.

In 1997, George Weber published, in Language Today, a comprehensive academic study entitled "The World's 10 most influential languages". In the article, Weber ranked French as, after English, the second-most influential language of the world, ahead of Spanish. His criteria were the numbers of native speakers, the number of secondary speakers (especially high for French among fellow world languages), the number of countries using the language and their respective populations, the economic power of the countries using the language, the number of major areas in which the language is used, and the linguistic prestige associated with the mastery of the language (Weber highlighted that French in particular enjoys considerable linguistic prestige). In a 2008 reassessment of his article, Weber concluded that his findings were still correct since "the situation among the top ten remains unchanged."

Knowledge of French is often considered to be a useful skill by business owners in the United Kingdom; a 2014 study found that 50% of British managers considered French to be a valuable asset for their business, thus ranking French as the most sought-after foreign language there, ahead of German (49%) and Spanish (44%). MIT economist Albert Saiz calculated a 2.3% premium for those who have French as a foreign language in the workplace.

In 2011, Bloomberg Businessweek ranked French the third most useful language for business, after English and Standard Mandarin Chinese.

Although there are many French regional accents, foreign learners normally use only one variety of the language.

French pronunciation follows strict rules based on spelling, but French spelling is often based more on history than phonology. The rules for pronunciation vary between dialects, but the standard rules are:

French is written in the Latin script. The French alphabet has 26 letters. Standard French orthography also uses the acute accent, grave accent, circumflex, diaeresis (tréma), and cedilla. Accented letters and ç are not separate letters of the alphabet. Diacritics are retained on capital letters in standard French typography.

The orthographic ligatures ⟨ œ ⟩ and ⟨ æ ⟩ occur in conventional spellings. ⟨ œ ⟩ is common in words such as cœur, sœur, œuf, œuvre and œil, whereas ⟨ æ ⟩ is much rarer and is found chiefly in learned words and Latin expressions such as ex æquo. Legacy French AZERTY layouts often lacked direct access to these and other characters required for fully correct French typography; this is a keyboard limitation rather than a rule of French spelling. The voluntary French keyboard standard NF Z71-300, published by AFNOR in 2019, was designed in part to remedy such limitations.

French orthography is alphabetic but relatively deep. It represents not only phonological information but also morphological, grammatical, lexical and historical distinctions. In the influential analysis of Nina Catach, the French writing system combines a phonographic component with morphographic and other non-phonographic information. Estimates depend on how graphemes and phonemes are counted, but recent descriptions commonly give about 130 graphemes for roughly three dozen phonemes.

The system is considerably more predictable in the direction from spelling to pronunciation than from pronunciation to spelling. A phoneme may have several possible spellings, and many written letters have no independent pronunciation. For example, inflectional morphology is frequently visible in writing but not in speech: the plural -s in amis and many verbal endings are normally silent, while homophonous verbal endings can have different spellings. Morphological knowledge therefore contributes substantially to French spelling, including the spelling of otherwise silent letters.

Historical sound change is another source of mismatch between spelling and pronunciation. In addition, some spellings were deliberately reshaped to reflect etymology. For example, modern doigt 'finger' descends from Latin digitus ; the g in the modern spelling is part of an etymological reshaping of older French forms such as doi and doit.

Many word-final consonant letters are silent, but this is not a general rule that is suspended whenever the next word begins with a vowel. Some final consonants are pronounced in all contexts, while others are latent and may surface in liaison. Liaison is a morphophonological process that occurs only in particular syntactic and lexical contexts before a vowel-initial word; depending on the context, it can be obligatory, optional or prohibited. Thus forms such as les amis and beaux-arts contain liaison [z], but a following vowel does not automatically cause every silent final consonant to be pronounced.

French uses numerous multiletter graphemes, such as ⟨ ou ⟩, ⟨ au ⟩, ⟨ eau ⟩, ⟨ ch ⟩ and vowel–nasal-consonant sequences. Sequences of a vowel followed by ⟨ n ⟩ or ⟨ m ⟩ often represent a nasal vowel when the nasal consonant is word-final or followed by another consonant; before a following vowel or a doubled nasal consonant, the vowel is commonly oral and the nasal consonant is pronounced. There are lexical and morphological exceptions, so this is a spelling tendency rather than a complete rule.

Orthographic double consonants do not normally represent phonemic consonant length in contemporary French. Surface lengthening can nevertheless occur in particular morphological, lexical or prosodic environments; it should not be described as a straightforward spelling-to-sound rule.

The acute accent occurs in native French principally on ⟨ é ⟩ and normally indicates a close-mid front vowel, /e/. The grave accent on ⟨ è ⟩ normally indicates an open-mid front vowel, /ɛ/. It is misleading, however, to describe these values simply as alternatives to a 'default' /ə/ for unaccented ⟨ e ⟩, because unaccented ⟨ e ⟩ has several possible phonological values and may also be silent.

The circumflex has several functions rather than a single phonetic or etymological one. Depending on the word and variety of French, it can correlate with a difference in vowel quality, distinguish otherwise identical written forms (for example sur and sûr, du and dû), mark particular verbal forms, or reflect the history of the spelling. The familiar association of the circumflex with a lost ⟨ s ⟩, as in forêt beside older forest, is real but not systematic. The 1990 orthographic rectifications retained the circumflex on ⟨ a ⟩, ⟨ e ⟩ and ⟨ o ⟩, while making it optional on most occurrences of ⟨ i ⟩ and ⟨ u ⟩, with exceptions where it marks grammatical or semantic distinctions.

The diaeresis or tréma indicates that a letter is to receive a separate phonetic interpretation rather than being absorbed into an adjacent multiletter spelling, as in naïf, Noël and maïs. Under the 1990 rectifications, the tréma is placed on the pronounced vowel in forms such as aigüe, ambigüe and cigüe, and is used in forms such as argüer to prevent a misleading pronunciation. Traditional spellings such as aiguë remain in use.

The cedilla in ⟨ ç ⟩ indicates /s/ before ⟨ a ⟩, ⟨ o ⟩ or ⟨ u ⟩, where plain ⟨ c ⟩ would normally represent /k/ ; compare France ~ français and placer ~ plaçons. Before ⟨ e ⟩, ⟨ i ⟩ and ⟨ y ⟩, plain ⟨ c ⟩ normally already represents /s/, so a cedilla is not required. The cedilla is retained on capital ⟨ Ç ⟩.

The grave accent on ⟨ à ⟩ and ⟨ ù ⟩ does not ordinarily mark a different pronunciation; it primarily distinguishes homographs, as in a 'has' versus à 'to/at' and ou 'or' versus où 'where'. The long lists of rare ⟨ ÿ ⟩, ⟨ ö ⟩ and foreign-name examples are better treated in the dedicated article on the French alphabet rather than in a summary of the writing system.

The ⟨ x ⟩ in plurals such as chevaux is a historical spelling development, not a direct continuation of a Latin plural ending. In medieval French, ⟨ l ⟩ before plural ⟨ s ⟩ was vocalized, so forms such as chevals developed into chevaus. Scribes commonly represented the final sequence ⟨ us ⟩ by an abbreviation resembling ⟨ x ⟩ ; the abbreviation was later interpreted as the letter ⟨ x ⟩, while ⟨ u ⟩ was restored in writing, producing the modern spelling chevaux.

In 1990 the Superior Council of the French Language proposed a set of orthographic rectifications, approved by the Académie française and published in the Journal officiel. They concern such matters as hyphenation and word joining, the plurals of compounds and loanwords, accents and the diaeresis, some verbs in -eler and -eter, the past participle of laisser before an infinitive, and a number of isolated anomalies. The Académie presents the rectifications as recommendations rather than as a compulsory replacement of traditional spelling; traditional and rectified spellings therefore coexist in present-day usage.

The rectifications were not a new reform introduced in 2016. A 2015 French national curriculum explicitly stated that its texts applied the 1990 rectifications, which helped generate renewed public attention the following year. The French and mathematics sections of that 2015 cycle-3 programme were replaced by a new programme in 2025 (with staged implementation in 2025–2027), so the 2016 schoolbook episode should not be used as a timeless description of current curriculum policy.

French is a moderately inflected language. Nouns and most pronouns are inflected for number (singular or plural, though in most nouns the plural is pronounced the same as the singular even if spelled differently); adjectives, for number and gender (masculine or feminine) of their nouns; personal pronouns and a few other pronouns, for person, number, gender, and case ; and verbs, for tense, aspect, mood, and the person and number of their subjects. Case is primarily marked using word order and prepositions, while certain verb features are marked using auxiliary verbs. According to the French lexicogrammatical system, French has a rank-scale hierarchy with clause as the top rank, which is followed by group rank, word rank, and morpheme rank. A French clause is made up of groups, groups are made up of words, and lastly, words are made up of morphemes.

French grammar shares several notable features with most other Romance languages, including

Every French noun is either masculine or feminine. Because French nouns are not inflected for gender, a noun's form cannot specify its gender. For nouns regarding the living, their grammatical genders often correspond to that which they refer to. For example, a male teacher is an enseignant while a female teacher is an enseignante. However, plural nouns that refer to a group that includes both masculine and feminine entities are always masculine. So a group of two male teachers would be enseignants. A group of two male teachers and two female teachers would still be enseignants. However, a group of two female teachers would be enseignantes. In many situations, including in the case of enseignant, both the singular and plural form of a noun are pronounced identically. The article used for singular nouns is different from that used for plural nouns and the article provides a distinguishing factor between the two in speech. For example, the singular le professeur or la professeure (the male or female teacher, professor) can be distinguished from the plural les professeur(e)s because le /lə/, la /la/, and les /le(s)/ are all pronounced differently.

With enseignant, however, for both singular forms the le / la becomes l', and so the only difference in pronunciation is that the ⟨t⟩ on the end of masculine form is silent, whereas it is pronounced in the feminine. If the word was to be followed by a word starting with a vowel, then liaison would cause the ⟨t⟩ to be pronounced in both forms, resulting in identical pronunciation. There are also some situations where both the feminine and masculine form of a noun are the same and the article provides the only difference. For example, le dentiste refers to a male dentist while la dentiste refers to a female dentist. Furthermore, a few nouns' meanings depend on their gender. For example, un livre (masculine) refers to a book, while une livre a (feminine) is a pound.

The French language consists of both finite and non-finite moods. The finite moods include the indicative mood (indicatif), the subjunctive mood (subjonctif), the imperative mood (impératif), and the conditional mood (conditionnel). The non-finite moods include the infinitive mood (infinitif), the present participle (participe présent), and the past participle (participe passé).

The indicative mood makes use of eight tense-aspect forms. These include the present (présent), the simple past (passé composé and passé simple), the past imperfective (imparfait), the pluperfect (plus-que-parfait), the simple future (futur simple), the future perfect (futur antérieur), and the past perfect (passé antérieur). Some forms are less commonly used today. In today's spoken French, the passé composé is used while the passé simple is reserved for formal situations or for literary purposes. Similarly, the plus-que-parfait is used for speaking rather than the older passé antérieur seen in literary works.

Within the indicative mood, the passé composé, plus-que-parfait, futur antérieur, and passé antérieur all use auxiliary verbs in their forms.

The subjunctive mood only includes four of the tense-aspect forms found in the indicative: present (présent), simple past (passé composé), past imperfective (imparfait), and pluperfect (plus-que-parfait).

Within the subjunctive mood, the passé composé and plus-que-parfait use auxiliary verbs in their forms.

The imperative is used in the present tense (with the exception of a few instances where it is used in the perfect tense). The imperative is used to give commands to you (tu), we/us (nous), and plural you (vous).

The conditional makes use of the present (présent) and the past (passé).

The passé uses auxiliary verbs in its forms.

French uses both the active voice and the passive voice. The active voice is unmarked while the passive voice is formed by using a form of verb être ("to be") and the past participle.

However, unless the subject of the sentence is specified, generally the pronoun on "one" is used:

Word order is subject–verb–object although a pronoun object precedes the verb. Some types of sentences allow for or require different word orders, in particular inversion of the subject and verb, as in " Parlez-vous français? " when asking a question rather than " Vous parlez français? " Both formulations are used, and carry a rising inflection on the last word. The literal English translations are "Do you speak French?" and "You speak French?", respectively. To avoid inversion while asking a question, " Est-ce que " (literally "is it that") may be placed at the beginning of the sentence. " Parlez-vous français? " may become " Est-ce que vous parlez français? " French also uses verb–object–subject (VOS) and object–subject–verb (OSV) word order. OSV word order is not used often and VOS is reserved for formal writings.

The majority of French words derive from Vulgar Latin or were constructed from Latin or Greek roots. In many cases, a single etymological root appears in French in a "popular" or native form, inherited from Vulgar Latin, and a learned form, borrowed later from Classical Latin. The following pairs consist of a native noun and a learned adjective:

More recently (1994) the linguistic policy (Toubon Law) of the French language academies of France and Quebec has been to provide French equivalents to (mainly English) imported words, either by using existing vocabulary, extending its meaning or deriving a new word according to French morphological rules. The result is often two (or more) co-existing terms for describing the same phenomenon.

It is estimated that 12% (4,200) of common French words found in a typical dictionary such as the Petit Larousse or Micro-Robert Plus (35,000 words) are of foreign origin (where Greek and Latin learned words are not seen as foreign). About 25% (1,054) of these foreign words come from English and are fairly recent borrowings. The others are some 707 words from Italian, 550 from ancient Germanic languages, 481 from other Gallo-Romance languages, 215 from Arabic, 164 from German, 160 from Celtic languages, 159 from Spanish, 153 from Dutch, 112 from Persian and Sanskrit, 101 from Native American languages, 89 from other Asian languages, 56 from other Afro-Asiatic languages, 55 from Balto-Slavic languages, 10 from Basque and 144 (about 3%) from other languages.

One study analyzing the similarity of seven Romance languages to Vulgar Latin in terms of accent vocalization estimated that among the languages analyzed, French was the most differentiated language from Vulgar Latin in this respect. The French language's lexical similarity to a selection of other Romance languages is 89% with Italian, 80% with Sardinian, 78% with Rhaeto-Romance, and 75% with Romanian, Spanish and Portuguese.

The numeral system used in the majority of Francophone countries employs both decimal and vigesimal counting. After the use of unique names for the numbers 1–16, those from 17 to 69 are counted by tens, while twenty (vingt) is used as a base number in the names of numbers from 70 to 99. The French word for 80 is quatre-vingts, literally "four twenties", and the word for 75 is soixante-quinze, literally "sixty-fifteen". The vigesimal method of counting is analogous to the archaic English use of score, as in "fourscore and seven" (87), or "threescore and ten" (70).

Belgian, Swiss, and Aostan French as well as that used in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi, use different names for 70 and 90, namely septante and nonante. In Switzerland, depending on the local dialect, 80 can be quatre-vingts (Geneva, Neuchâtel, Jura) or huitante (Vaud, Valais, Fribourg). The Aosta Valley similarly uses huitante for 80. Conversely, Belgium and in its former African colonies use quatre-vingts for 80.

In Old French (during the Middle Ages), all numbers from 30 to 99 could be said in either base 10 or base 20, e.g. vint et doze (twenty and twelve) for 32, dous vinz et diz (two twenties and ten) for 50, uitante for 80, or nonante for 90.

The term octante was historically used in Switzerland for 80, but is now considered archaic.

French, like most European languages, uses a space to separate thousands. The comma (French: virgule) is used in French numbers as a decimal point, i.e. "2,5" instead of "2.5". In the case of currencies, the currency markers are substituted for decimal point, i.e. "5$7" for "5 dollars and 7 cents ".

Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in French:

Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in English:

The French law of 29 December 1915 (French : Loi du 29 décembre 1915 concernant les lieux de sépulture à établir pour les soldats des armées françaises et alliées décédés pendant la durée de la guerre) gave the government the right to acquire land to be held in perpetuity for cemeteries for soldiers of the Allies who died in the First World War. It also granted the right for French soldiers to have individual graves and permitted temporary British cemeteries to remain in place as a "perpetual resting place". It became a model for the treatment of Allied fatalities in theatres elsewhere in the war.

Since the start of the First World War in August 1914 the British Army had buried their fatalities in civilian cemeteries close to the battlefields of the Western Front. By 1915 it was realised that this was not sustainable as the existing cemeteries were being overwhelmed by the number of burials. Fabian Ware, who served on the front with the British Red Cross took an interest in the matter and from spring 1915 spoke with French government representatives to discuss a long-term solution for military burials. Ware, fluent in French, advocated for the provision of permanent cemeteries in France for British military burials. Ware's case was taken up by the Adjutant-General of the British Expeditionary Force, Sir Nevil Macready, who formally asked for the right to purchase land for this purpose.

There was some political opposition in France to permitting foreign governments to purchase large swathes of land. The French government instead decided to acquire the land themselves and make it available to foreign governments.

The law created a simplified eminent domain procedure for the acquisition of land for cemeteries. This was to be implemented by prefects when land could not be granted from local municipalities or purchased by negotiation. An area of 3 square metres (32 sq ft) per grave was permitted. An early draft of the law permitted acquisition by eminent domain only when existing civilian cemeteries were insufficient, but the final version permitted it in any circumstance. Additionally the law designated the temporary war cemeteries which had since been established by the British Army as "the free gift of the French people for a perpetual resting place of those who are laid there".

In addition to providing for foreign soldiers the law also changed the way French fatalities were treated. The law stated that "any soldier who has died for France has the right to a grave in perpetuity at the expense of the State". It granted for the first time the right for French soldiers to have, where possible, an individual and marked grave; mass graves had previously been permitted. The law also halted the practice of exhuming French bodies from the front and taking them to other parts of the country for burial; they would now be buried close to where they had died.

The law was passed in both chambers of the French Parliament on 29 December 1915.

The law became a model for laws in other countries in which the Allies operated. Similar arrangements were made for the burial of Allied casualties in Belgium, Italy, Greece, Palestine, Iraq, Egypt, Germany and Turkey. The French war ministry used the law to replace existing mass graves with individual burials and to concentrate scattered burials in designated military cemeteries. This work began as soon as the law was passed but was interrupted by the German spring offensive in 1918. After the war's end the newly formed Office des Sépultures Militaires used the law to complete the work.

In 1917 the British Empire 's Imperial War Graves Commission (IWGC), under Ware, became an association régulièrement constituée as defined by the law of 29 December 1915 and acted as the representative of the armed forces of the British Empire for war graves purposes. The IWGC took over this role from the Edward, Prince of Wales ' National Committee for the Care of Soldiers' Graves, established in January 1916. The IWGC, which is now the Commonwealth War Graves Commission, continues to maintain Commonwealth cemeteries of the First and Second World Wars in France and elsewhere.

The 23 February 2005 French law on colonialism (French : loi n° 2005-158 du 23 février 2005 portant reconnaissance de la Nation et contribution nationale en faveur des Français rapatriés, "Law No. 2005-158 of 23 February 2005 regarding recognition of the Nation and national contribution in favour of the French repatriates") was an act passed by the National Assembly, which imposed on high-school (lycée) teachers a requirement to teach the "positive values" of colonialism to their students (Article 4, Paragraph 2). The law, particularly the aforementioned paragraph and Articles 1 and 13, created a public uproar and drew massive opposition from the left, and Article 4, Paragraph 2 was repealed by president Jacques Chirac (UMP) at the beginning of 2006, after accusations of historical revisionism from various teachers and historians, including Pierre Vidal-Naquet, Claude Liauzu, Olivier Le Cour Grandmaison and Benjamin Stora. Its Article 13 was also criticized as it supported former Organisation armée secrète (OAS) militants.

At the end of Algerian War, upon independence in 1962, 900,000 European-Algerians (Pieds-noirs) fled to France within a few months in fear of the FLN 's revenge. The French government was totally unprepared for the vast number of refugees, which caused turmoil in France. The majority of Algerian Muslims who had worked for the French were disarmed and left behind as the treaty between French and Algerian authorities declared that no actions could be taken against them. However, the Harkis in particular, having served as auxiliaries with the French army, were regarded as traitors by the FLN and between 50,000 and 150,000 Harkis and family members were murdered by the FLN or by lynch-mobs, often after being abducted and tortured. About 91,000 managed to flee to France, some with help from their French officers acting against orders, and as of 2016 they and their descendants form a significant part of the Algerian-French population.

The controversial Article 4 asked teachers and textbooks to "acknowledge and recognize in particular the positive role of the French presence abroad, especially in North Africa". This was considered by the left-wing and many in the former colonies as a denial of the problems of colonialism. There was rising antagonism both nationally and internationally until the law was repealed at the start of 2006. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, president of Algeria, refused to sign the envisioned "friendly treaty" with France because of this law. On 26 June 2005, he declared that the law "...approached mental blindness, negationism and revisionism." Famous writer Aimé Césaire, leader of the Négritude anti-colonialist literary movement, also refused to meet then-UMP leader Nicolas Sarkozy. The latter cancelled his visit to the overseas department of Martinique, where a thousand people demonstrated against him in Fort-de-France. Sarkozy was elected president in 2007.

UMP deputy Christian Vanneste was criticized for having introduced the expression "rôle positif" (French for "positive values") in the text. On 25 April 2005, more than a thousand professors and thesis students had signed the petition "Colonisation: No to the teaching of an official history". MP Christiane Taubira called the law "disastrous" and enacted because of lobbying from the harkis and the Pieds-Noirs, remaining silent on the Indigenate Code or forced labour in the former colonies.

Supporters of the law were decried as a resurgence of the "colonial lobby", a term used in late 19th-century France to label people (deputies, scientists, businessmen, etc.) who supported French colonialism. In defiance of this revisionism, Chirac finally turned against his own UMP majority that had voted for the law, and declared: "In a Republic, there is no official history. Writing history is the business of historians: it should not be circumscribed by laws." He passed a decree charging the president of the Assembly, Jean-Louis Debré (UMP), with modifying the controversial law, to take out the revisionist article. In order to do so, Chirac ordered Prime minister Dominique de Villepin to refer the matter to the Constitutional Council, hoping the decision would allow such a decree to repeal the law. The Constitutional Council indeed decreed that the regulation of history textbooks is an administrative matter, not a legal one, and as such, the contested amendment was repealed at the beginning of 2006.

In a tribune Liberty for History, 19 historians (including Élisabeth Badinter, Alain Decaux and Marc Ferro) demanded the repeal of all "historic laws": not only the 23 February 2005 Act, but also the 1990 Gayssot Act against "racism, xenophobia and historical revisionism", the Taubira Act on the recognition of slavery as a " crime against humanity ", and the law recognizing the Armenian genocide. Historians found this demand controversial. While many agreed that the state should not be determining history, few believed that the previous acts had to be repealed. Some opposed the Gayssot Act and other laws, but thought repealing them would be perceived as a kind of condemnation of the ideas.

The debate on the 23 February 2005 law was linked to a wider debate in France concerning colonialism and current issues of immigration. As the historian Benjamin Stora pointed out, people interested in colonialism have a major "memory" stake in influencing the way various communities and the nation represent themselves. Official state histories generally have a hard time accepting the existence of past crimes and errors. The Algerian war of independence (1954–62), characterized at the time by the French government as a "public order operation," was only recognized as a "war" in 1999 by the French National Assembly. In the same sense, philosopher Paul Ricœur (1981) has said that there has to be a " decolonization of memory", because mentalities themselves have been colonized during the " Age of Imperialism."

French leave (sometimes a French exit, an Irish goodbye or an Irish exit, or in French a filer à l'anglaise) is a departure from a location or event without informing others or without seeking approval. Examples include relatively innocuous acts such as leaving a party without bidding farewell in order to avoid disturbing or upsetting the host, or more problematic acts such as a soldier leaving his post without authorization.

The first attestation of the phrase in the Oxford English Dictionary is from 1751, a time when the English and French cultures were heavily interlinked.

The Oxford English Dictionary records: "the custom (in the 18th century prevalent in France and sometimes imitated in England) of going away from a reception, etc. without taking leave of the host or hostess. Hence, jocularly, to take French leave is to go away, or do anything, without permission or notice."

James Boswell 's journal for November 15, 1762, mentions his friend not seeing him off on his leaving Scotland "... as Cairnie told me that people never took leave in France, I made the thing sit pretty easy."

In Canada and the United States, the expression Irish goodbye is also used.

In French, the equivalent phrase is filer à l'anglaise ("to leave English style") and seems to date from the turn of the 19th and 20th centuries. Similarly in some other languages, like Italian or Polish, the phrase "English leave" is used.

Dutch is one of the few languages where this concept is expressed without reference to another nationality. Common colloquial phrases include de rattentaxi nemen ("taking the rat taxi") or een Houdini doen ("doing a Houdini", after the escape artist).

The term is sometimes used to mean the act of leisurely absence from a military unit.

The French Left (French : Gauche française) refers to communist, socialist, social democratic, democratic socialist, and anarchist political forces in France. The term originates from the National Assembly of 1789, where supporters of the revolution were seated on the left of the assembly. During the 1800s, left largely meant support for the republic, whereas right largely meant support for the monarchy.

The left in France was represented at the beginning of the 20th century by two main political parties, namely the Republican, Radical and Radical-Socialist Party and the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO), created in 1905 as a merger of various Marxist parties.

In the aftermaths of the Russian Revolution and the Spartacist uprising in Germany, the French Left divided itself in reformists and revolutionaries during the 1920 Tours Congress.

The distinction between left and right wings in politics derives from the seating arrangements which began during the 1789 National Assembly, in which the more radical Jacobin deputies sat on the benches to the left of the hall. Throughout the 19th century, the main line dividing Left and Right in France was between supporters of the Republic and those of the Monarchy. On the right, the Legitimists held counter-revolutionary views and rejected any compromise with modern ideologies while the Orléanists hoped to create a constitutional monarchy, under their preferred branch of the royal family, a brief reality after the 1830 July Revolution. The Republic itself, or, as it was called by Radical Republicans, the Democratic and Social Republic (la République démocratique et sociale), was the objective of the French workers' movement, and the lowest common denominator of the French Left. The June Days uprising during the Second Republic was the attempt by the left to assert itself after the 1848 Revolution, that foundered on its own divided radicalism which too few of the (still predominantly rural) population shared.

Following Napoleon III 's 1851 coup and the subsequent establishment of the Second Empire, the Left was excluded from the political arena and focused on organising the workers. The growing French workers movement consisted of diverse strands; Marxism began to rival Radical Republicanism and the " utopian socialism " of Auguste Comte and Charles Fourier with whom Karl Marx had become disillusioned. Socialism fused with the Jacobin ideals of Radical Republicanism leading to a unique political posture embracing nationalism, socialist measures, democracy and anti-clericalism (opposition to the role of the church in controlling French social and cultural life) all of which remain distinctive features of the French Left. Most practicing Catholics continue to vote conservative while areas which were receptive to the revolution in 1789 continue to vote socialist.

Paris was throughout the 19th century the permanent theater of insurrectionary movements and headquarters of European revolutionaries. Following the French Revolution of 1789 and the First French Empire of Napoleon I, the former royal family returned to power in the Bourbon Restoration. The Restoration was dominated by the Counter-revolutionaries who refused all inheritance of the Revolution and aimed at re-establishing the divine right of kings. The White Terror struck the Left, while the ultra-royalists tried to bypass their king on his right. This intransigence of the Legitimists, however, finally led to Charles X 's downfall during the Three Glorious Days, or July Revolution of 1830. The House of Orléans, cadet branch of the Bourbon, then came to power with Louis-Philippe, marking the new influence of the second, important right-wing tradition of France (according to the historian René Rémond 's famous classification), the Orléanists. More liberal than the aristocratic supporters of the Bourbon, the Orleanists aimed at achieving a form of national reconciliation, symbolized by Louis-Philippe's famous statement in January 1831: "We will attempt to remain in a ' juste milieu ' (the middle ground), in an equal distance from the excesses of popular power and the abuses of royal power."

The July Monarchy was thus divided into the supporters of the "Citizen King", of the constitutional monarchy and of census suffrage, the right-wing opposition to the regime (the Legitimists) and the left-wing opposition (the Republicans and Socialists). The loyalists were divided into two parties, the conservative, center-right, Parti de la résistance (Party of the Resistance), and the reformist center-left Parti du mouvement (Party of the Movement). Republicans and Socialists, who requested social and political reforms, including universal suffrage and the " right to work " (droit du travail), were then at the far-left of the political board. The Parti du mouvement supported the " nationalities " in Europe, which were trying, all over of Europe, to shake the grip of the various Empires in order to create nation states. Its mouthpiece was Le National. The center-right was conservative and supported peace with European monarchs, and had as mouthpiece Le Journal des débats.

The only social law of the bourgeois July Monarchy was to outlaw, in 1841, labor to children under eight years of age, and night labor for those of less than 13 years. The law, however, was almost never implemented. Christians imagined a "charitable economy", while the ideas of Socialism, in particular utopian socialism (Saint-Simon, Charles Fourier, etc.) diffused themselves. Louis Auguste Blanqui theorized Socialist coup d'états, the socialist and anarchist thinker Pierre-Joseph Proudhon theorized mutualism, while Karl Marx arrived in Paris in 1843, and met there Friedrich Engels.

Marx had come to Paris to work with Arnold Ruge, another revolutionary from Germany, on the Deutsch–Französische Jahrbücher, while Engels had come especially to meet Marx. There, he showed him his work, The Condition of the Working Class in England. Marx wrote for the Vorwärts revolutionary newspaper, established and run by the secret society called League of the Just (Bund der Gerechten), founded by German workers in Paris in 1836 and inspired by the revolutionary Gracchus Babeuf and his ideal of social equality. The League of the Just was a splinter group from the League of the Outlaws (Bund der Geächteten) created in Paris two years before by Theodor Schuster, Wilhelm Weitling and others German emigrants, mostly journeymen. Schuster was inspired by the works of Philippe Buonarroti. The latter league had a pyramidal structure inspired by the secret society of the Republican Carbonari, and shared ideas with Saint-Simon and Charles Fourier 's utopian socialism. Their aim was to establish a "Social Republic" in the German states which would respect "freedom", "equality" and "civic virtue".

The League of the Just participated in the Blanquist uprising of May 1839 in Paris. Hereafter expelled from France, the League of the Just moved to London, where they would transform themselves into the Communist League.

In his spare time, Marx studied Proudhon, whom he would later criticize in The Poverty of Philosophy (1847). He developed his theory of alienation in the Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844, published posthumously, as well as his theory of ideology in The German Ideology (1845), in which he criticized the Young Hegelians : " It has not occurred to any one of these philosophers to inquire into the connection of German philosophy with German reality, the relation of their criticism to their own material surroundings. ". For the first time, Marx related history of ideas with economic history, linking the "ideological superstructure" with the "economical infrastructure", and thus tying together philosophy and economics. Inspired both by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and Adam Smith, he imagined an original theory based on the key Marxist notion of class struggle, which appeared to him self-evident in the Parisian context of insurrection and permanent turmoil. " The dominant ideology is the ideology of the dominant class, " did he conclude in his essay, setting up the program for the years to come, a program which would be further explicated in The Communist Manifesto, published on 21 February 1848, as the manifesto of the Communist League, three days before the proclamation of the Second Republic. Arrested and expelled to Belgium, Marx was then invited by the new regime back to Paris, where he was able to witness the June Days uprising first hand.

The February 1848 Revolution toppled the July Monarchy, replaced by the Second Republic (1848–1852), while the June Days uprising (or June 1848 Revolution) gave a lethal blow to the hopes of a " Social and Democratic Republic " (" la République sociale et démocratique ", or " La Sociale "). On 2 December 1851, Louis Napoleon ended the Republic by a coup d'état proclaiming the Second Empire (1852–1870) the next year. The Second Republic, however, is best remembered for having first established male universal suffrage and for Victor Schœlcher 's abolition of slavery on 27 April 1848. The February Revolution also established the principle of the "right to work" (droit au travail – or "right to have a work"), and decided to establish " National Workshops " for the unemployed. At the same time, a sort of industrial parliament was established at the Luxembourg Palace, under the presidency of Louis Blanc, with the object of preparing a scheme for the organization of labour. These tensions between right-wing, liberal Orléanists, and left-wing, Radical Republicans and Socialists caused the second, June Revolution. In December, presidential elections were held, for the first time in France. Democracy seemed at first to triumph, as universal suffrage was implemented also for the first time. The left was divided however into four candidacies, Lamartine and Cavaignac, the repressor of the June Days Uprising, on the center-left, Alexandre Auguste Ledru-Rollin as representative of the Republican Left, and Raspail as far-left, Socialist, candidate. Both Raspail and Lamartine obtained less than 1%, Cavaignac reached almost 20%, while the prince Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte surprisingly won the election with almost 75% of the votes, marking an important defeat of the Republican and Socialist camps.

After having been elected by universal suffrage President of the Republic in December 1848, Louis Napoleon Bonaparte took power during the 1851 coup, and proclaimed himself Emperor, establishing the Second Empire. This was a blow to the Left's hopes during the Republic, which had already been crushed after the June Days uprising during which the bourgeoisie took the upper hand. Napoleon III followed at first authoritarian policies, before attempting a liberal shift in the end of his reign. Many left-wing activists exiled themselves to London, where the First International was founded in 1864.

After the Paris Commune of 1871, the French Left was decimated for ten years. Until the 1880s general amnesty, this harsh repression, directed by Adolphe Thiers, would heavily disorganize the French labour movement during the early years of the French Third Republic (1871–1940). According to historian Benedict Anderson...

"roughly 20,000 Communards or suspected sympathizers [were executed during the Bloody Week], a number higher than those killed in the recent war or during Robespierre 's ‘ Terror ’ of 1793–94. More than 7,500 were jailed or deported to places like New Caledonia. Thousands of others fled to Belgium, England, Italy, Spain and the United States. In 1872, stringent laws were passed that ruled out all possibilities of organizing on the left. Not till 1880 was there a general amnesty for exiled and imprisoned Communards. Meantime, the Third Republic found itself strong enough to renew and reinforce Louis Napoleon 's imperialist expansion—in Indochina, Africa, and Oceania. Many of France's leading intellectuals and artists had participated in the Commune (Courbet was its quasi-minister of culture, Rimbaud and Pissarro were active propagandists) or were sympathetic to it. The ferocious repression of 1871 and after was probably the key factor in alienating these milieux from the Third Republic and stirring their sympathy for its victims at home and abroad."

The February 1871 legislative elections had been won by the monarchists Orléanists and Legitimists, and it was not until the 1876 elections that the Republicans won a majority in the Chamber of Deputies. Henceforth, the first task for the center-left was to firmly establish the Third Republic, proclaimed in September 1870. Rivalry between the Legitimists and the Orléanists prevented a new Bourbon Restoration, and the Third Republic became firmly established with the 1875 Constitutional Laws. However, anti-Republican agitation continued, with various crisis, including the Boulangisme crisis or the Dreyfus affair. The main political forces in the Left at this time were the Opportunist Republicans, the Republican, Radical and Radical-Socialist Party, and the emergent Socialist parties who won several municipal elections in the 1880s, establishing what has been dubbed "municipal socialism." At the turn of the 20th century, the Radicals replaced the Opportunists as the main center-left forces, although the latter, who slowly became social conservatives, continued to claim their place as members of the Left – a political phenomenon known as " sinistrisme ".

Furthermore, the Waldeck Rousseau law of 1884, legalized trade-unions, enabling the creation of the Confédération générale du travail (General Confederation of Labour, CGT) eleven years later, issued from a merger of Fernand Pelloutier 's Bourse du Travail and other, local workers' associations. Dominated by anarcho-syndicalists, the unification of the CGT culminated in 1902, attracting figures such as Victor Griffuelhes or Émile Pouget, and then boasting 100,000 members.

Thus, until the turn of the 20th century, the dominant forces of the French Left were composed of the Opportunist Republicans, who considered that the Republican regime could only be consolidated by successive phases. Those dominated French politics from 1876 to the 1890s. The "Opportunists" included figures such as Léon Gambetta, leader of the Republican Union who had participated to the Commune, Jules Ferry, leader of the Republican Left [ fr ; nl ] who passed the Jules Ferry laws on public, mandatory and secular education, Charles de Freycinet, who directed several governments in this period, Jules Favre, Jules Grévy or Jules Simon. While Gambetta opposed colonialism as he considered it a diversion from the "blue line of the Vosges ", that is of the possibility of a revenge against the newly founded German Empire, Ferry was part of the "colonial lobby" who took part in the Scramble for Africa.

The Opportunists broke away with the Republican, Radical and Radical-Socialist Party which aimed at deep transformations of society, leading to strong disagreements in the Chamber of Deputies, in particular with Georges Clemenceau. At the end of the 19th century, the Opportunists were replaced by the Radicals as the primary force in French politics.

In 1879, Paul Brousse founded the first Socialist party of France, dubbed Federation of the Socialist Workers of France (Fédération des travailleurs socialistes de France, FTSF). It was characterised as " possibilist " because it promoted gradual reforms. In the same time, Édouard Vaillant and the heirs of Louis Auguste Blanqui founded the Central Revolutionary Committee (Comité révolutionnaire central or CRC), which represented the French revolutionary tradition. However, three years later, Jules Guesde and Paul Lafargue (the son-in-law of Karl Marx, famous for having written The Right to Be Lazy, which criticized labour 's alienation) left the federation, which they considered too moderate, and founded the French Workers' Party (Parti ouvrier français, POF) in 1880, which was the first Marxist party in France.

A few years later, parts of the anarchist movement, based in Switzerland, started theorizing propaganda of the deed. Bakunin and other federalists had been excluded by Karl Marx from the First International (or International Workingmen's Association, founded in London in 1864) during the Hague Congress of 1872. The Socialist tradition had split between the anarchists, or "anti-authoritarian Socialists", and the Communists. A year after their exclusion, the Bakuninists created the Jura Federation, which called for the creation of a new, anti-authoritarian International, dubbed Anarchist St. Imier International (1872–1877). The latter was made up of several groups, mainly the Italian, Spanish, Belgian, American, French and Swiss sections, who opposed Marx's control of the Central Council and favoured the autonomy of national sections free from centralized control.

In December 1893, the anarchist Auguste Vaillant threw a bomb in the National Assembly, injuring one. The Opportunist Republicans swiftly reacted, voting two days later the " lois scélérates ", severely restricting freedom of expression. The first one condemned apology of any felony or crime as a felony itself, permitting widespread censorship of the press. The second one allowed to condemn any person directly or indirectly involved in a propaganda of the deed act, even if no killing was effectively carried on. The last one condemned any person or newspaper using anarchist propaganda (and, by extension, socialist libertarians present or former members of the International Workingmen's Association (IWA)). Thus, free speech and encouraging propaganda of the deed or antimilitarism was severely restricted. Some people were condemned to prison for rejoicing themselves of the 1894 assassination of French president Marie François Sadi Carnot by the Italian anarchist Sante Geronimo Caserio.

Following these events, the United Kingdom once again became the last haven for political refugees, in particular anarchists, who were all conflated with the few who had engaged in bombings. Henceforth, the UK became a nest for anarchist colonies expelled from the continent, in particular between 1892 and 1895, which marked the height of the repression. Louise Michel, aka "the Red Virgin", Émile Pouget or Charles Malato were the most famous of the many, anonymous anarchists, deserters or simple criminals who had fled France and other European countries. These exiles would only return to France after President Félix Faure 's amnesty in February 1895. A few hundreds persons related to the anarchist movement would however remain in the UK between 1880 and 1914. In reaction, the British restricted right of asylum, a national tradition since the Reformation in the 16th century. Several hate campaigns were issued in the British press in the 1890s against these French exiles, resulting in riots and a "restrictionist" party which advocated the end of liberality concerning freedom of movement, and hostility towards French and international activists

In the meanwhile, important figures in the anarchist movement began to distance themselves with this understanding of "propaganda of the deed", in part because of the state repression against the whole labor movement provoked by such individual acts. In 1887, Peter Kropotkin thus wrote in Le Révolté that "it is an illusion to believe that a few kilos of dynamite will be enough to win against the coalition of exploiters". A variety of anarchists advocated the abandonment of these sorts of tactics in favor of collective revolutionary action, for example through the trade union movement. The anarcho-syndicalist, Fernand Pelloutier, leader of the Bourse du Travail from 1895 until his death in 1901, argued in 1895 for renewed anarchist involvement in the labor movement on the basis that anarchism could do very well without "the individual dynamiter."

The Fédération des Bourses du Travail was created in 1892, on a decentralized basis, federating each city workers' organization. Three years later, they merged in the Confédération générale du travail (CGT) trade-union, dominated by anarcho-syndicalists until the First World War. In 1894, the government of Pierre Waldeck-Rousseau, a moderate Republican, had legalized workers' and employers' trade-unions (Waldeck-Rousseau Act), thus allowing such a legal form of association. The CGT's most important sections were then workers in railway companies and in the printing industry (cheminots and ouvriers du livre). For decades, the CGT would dominate the labor movement, keeping away from the political field and the parliamentary system (See below: Creation of the SFIO and Charter of Amiens.).

Furthermore, the Dreyfus affair divided again France into two rival camps, the Right (Charles Maurras) supporting the Army and the Nation, while the Left (Émile Zola, Georges Clemenceau) supported human rights and Justice. The Dreyfus Affair witnessed the birth of the modern intellectual engaging himself in politics, while nationalism, which had been previously, under the form of liberal nationalism, a characteristic of the Republican Left, became a right-wing trait, mutating into a form of ethnic nationalism. The Left itself was divided among Radical Republicans and the new, emerging forces advocating Socialism, whether in its Marxist interpretation or revolutionary syndicalism tradition.

By 1896, French socialists had acquired control of 157 town councils. They provided public baths, washing troughs, parks, strike funds, legal aid, meals at school, and crèches. Socialist municipalities also provided homes for victims of industrial accidents and improved conditions for council workers.

The left in France was represented at the beginning of the 20th century by two main political parties, namely the Republican, Radical and Radical-Socialist Party and the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO), created in 1905 as a merger of various Marxist parties.

In 1914, after the assassination of the leader of the SFIO, Jean Jaurès, who had upheld an internationalist and anti-militarist line, the SFIO accepted to join the Union sacrée national front. In the aftermaths of the Russian Revolution and the Spartacist uprising in Germany, the French Left divided itself in reformists and revolutionaries during the 1920 Tours Congress which saw the majority of the SFIO spin-out to form the French Section of the Communist International (SFIC).

The early French Left was often alienated into the Republican movements.

In 1902, Jules Guesde's French Workers' Party (POF) merged with others socialist parties to form the Socialist Party of France (Parti socialiste de France, PSF), and finally merged in 1905 with Jean Jaurès ' Parti socialiste français to form the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO). Marcel Cachin, who would lead the split in 1920 which led to the creation of the French Communist Party (first SFIC, then PCF) and edited L'Humanité newspaper, became a member of the POF in 1891.

In the 1880s, the Socialists knew their first electoral success, conquering some municipalities. Jean Allemane and some FTSF members criticized the focus on electoral goals. In 1890, they created the Revolutionary Socialist Workers' Party (Parti ouvrier socialiste révolutionnaire or POSR), which advocated the revolutionary " general strike ". Additionally, some deputies took the name Socialist without adhering to any party. These mostly advocated moderation and reform.

In 1899, a debate raged among Socialist groups about the participation of Alexandre Millerand in Pierre Waldeck-Rousseau 's cabinet (Bloc des gauches, Left-Wing Block), which included the Marquis de Gallifet, best known for having directed the bloody repression during the Paris Commune, alongside Radicals. Furthermore, the participation in a "bourgeois government" sparked a controversy opposing Jules Guesde to Jean Jaurès. In 1902, Guesde and Vaillant founded the Socialist Party of France, while Jaurès, Allemane and the possibilists formed the French Socialist Party. In 1905, during the Globe Congress, under the pressure of the Second International, the two groups merged in the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO).

The party remained hemmed in between the Radical Party and the revolutionary syndicalists who dominated the trade unions. The General Confederation of Labour, created in 1895 from the fusion of the various Bourse du Travail (Fernand Pelloutier), the unions and the industries' federations, claimed its independence and the non-distinction between political and workplace activism. This was formalized by the Charter of Amiens in 1906, a year after the unification of the other socialist tendencies in the SFIO party. The Charte d'Amiens, a cornerstone of the history of the French labor movement, asserted the autonomy of the workers' movement from the political sphere, preventing any direct link between a trade-union and a political party. It also proclaimed a revolutionary syndicalist perspective of transformation of society, through the means of the general strike. This was also one of the founding piece of Georges Sorel 's revolutionary syndicalist theory.

Following World War I, the demographics of France were deeply renewed, with an increasing urban population, including many workers, and more immigrants to replace the deceased manpower. These demographic changes were important for the left, providing it important electoral supports. Furthermore, the slaughter during the war lead to renewed pacifism feelings, incarnated by Henri Barbusse 's Under Fire (1916). Many veterans, such as Paul Vaillant-Couturier, then became famous communists. Finally, the Russian Revolution lifted great hopes in the workers' movement (Jules Romains hailed this " grande lueur venue de l'Est " – "great light coming from the East"). On the opposite side of the political board, the conservatives played on the "red scare" and won a massive victory during the 1919 election, forming the National Bloc.

The new context issued of the Russian Revolution brought a new split in the French Left, realized during the 1920 Tours Congress when the majority of the SFIO (including Boris Souvarine, Fernand Loriot, etc.) decided to join the Third International, thus creating the SFIC (future French Communist Party, PCF), while Léon Blum and others remained in the reformist camp, in order to "keep the old house" (Blum). Marcel Cachin and Ludovic-Oscar Frossard travelled to Moscow, invited by Lenin.

Opposed to collaboration with the bourgeois parties, the SFIC criticized the first Cartel des Gauches (Left-Wing Cartel) which had won the 1924 elections, refusing to choose between Socialists (SFIO) and Radicals (or, as they put it, between "the plague and cholera"). After Lenin's death in 1924, the SFIC radicalized itself, following the Komintern's directions. Founders of the party were expelled, such as Boris Souvarine, the revolutionary syndicalist Pierre Monatte, or Trotskyist intellectuals such as Alfred Rosmer or Pierre Naville. The SFIC thus lost members, decreasing from 110,000 in 1920 to 30,000 in 1933.

In the same time, the SFIC organized the anti-colonialist struggle, encouraging Abd el-Krim 's insurgents during the Rif War or organizing an alternative exhibition during the 1931 Paris Colonial Exposition. The Communist Party was then admired by intellectuals such as the surrealists (André Breton, Louis Aragon, Paul Éluard...). Young philosophers such as Paul Nizan also joined it. The poet Aragon traveled to the United States, and maintained indirect relations through his wife Elsa Triolet with the Russian poet Vladimir Mayakovsky.

On the other hand, the SFIO opposed the revolutionary strategy of the SFIC, although maintaining a Marxist language, and prepared itself to seize power through the elections. It allied itself with the Radical-Socialist Party in the Cartel des Gauches, enabling it to win the 1924 election. The Radicals Édouard Herriot or Édouard Daladier then incarnated the Radicals' opening to both Marxist parties, the SFIO and the SFIC. However, despite their alliance, the SFIO and the Radicals diverge on their views on the role of the state or on their attitude towards Capitalism and the middle classes.

Following the Wall Street crash of 1929 and the beginning of the Great Depression in France in 1931, debates arose inside the SFIO concerning the role of the state. Marcel Déat and Adrien Marquet created a Neo-Socialist tendency and were expelled from the SFIO in November 1933. Others, responding to the debates lifted in the right-wing by the Non-Conformist Movement, theorized planism to answer the ideological and political crisis lifted by the inefficiency of classical liberalism and refusal of state interventionism in the economy. In the left wing of the SFIO, the tendencies named Bataille socialiste (Socialist Struggle) and Marceau Pivert 's Gauche révolutionnaire (Revolutionary Left) engaged themselves in favor of a Proletarian Revolution.

In 1932 a second Cartel des Gauches won the election, but this time the SFIO did not associate themselves in the government. The leader of the Cartel, Daladier, was forced to resign following 6 February 1934 crisis organized by far-right leagues, which were immediately interpreted by the French Left as a Fascist coup d'état attempt. This led to the creation of an anti-fascist movement in France, unifying Socialists and Communists together against the fascist threat in a united front. The Comité de vigilance des intellectuels antifascistes (CVIA) was henceforth created, while the French Communist Party (PCF) signed a pact of unity of action with the SFIO in July 1935. The Comintern had then adopted the popular front strategy against fascism. The leader of the PCF, Maurice Thorez, then initiated a patriotic turn opposed to previous internationalism.

On the other hand, in June 1934 Leon Trotsky initiated the French Turn, a strategy of entryism in the SFIO, supported by Raymond Molinier but opposed by Pierre Naville.

The same year, the Confédération générale du travail unitaire (CGTU) trade-union, which had split from the CGT after the Tours Congress, was reintegrated to the CGT. This alliance between Socialists and Communists paved the way for the victory of the Popular Front during the 1936 election, leading Léon Blum to become prime minister. Opposed to the alliance with bourgeois parties, the Trotskyists divided themselves, about 600 of them leaving the SFIO.

This new alliance between the two rival Marxist parties (the reformist SFIO and the revolutionary PCF) was an important experience mainly at the level of the party leaders. The base was already used to work together, from Social-Democrats to anarchists, against the rise of fascism.

Headed by Léon Blum, the Popular Front won the 3 May 1936 election, leading to a government composed of Radical and Socialist ministers. Just as the SFIO had supported the Cartel des Gauches without participating to it, the PCF supported the Popular Front without entering government. At the beginning of June 1936, massive strikes acclaimed the victory of the union of the Lefts, with more than 1.5 million workers on strike. On 8 June 1936, the Matignon Accords granted the 40 hours workweek to the workers, as well as right of collective bargaining, right of strike action, and dismantled all laws preventing organization of trade-unions. After having won these new rights, Maurice Thorez, the leader of the PCF, pushed workers to stop the strikes, preventing an over-radicalization of the situation.

The Popular Front saw harsh opposition from the conservatives and the French far-right. Fearing the action of the extra-parliamentary right-wing leagues, Blum had prohibited them, leading François de La Rocque to transform the Croix-de-Feu league into a new, mass party, dubbed French Social Party (PSF). Charles Maurras, the leader of the monarchist Action Française (AF) movement, threatened Blum with death, alluding to his Jewish origins. On the other hand, the Minister Roger Salengro was pushed to suicide after attacks by a right-wing newspaper. Finally, the Cagoule terrorist group attempted several attacks.

In 1938, Marceau Pivert's Revolutionary Left tendency was expelled from the SFIO, and he created the Workers and Peasants' Socialist Party (PSOP) along with Luxemburgists such as René Lefeuvre.

After the Liberation, the SFIO, under the leadership of Guy Mollet (1946–1969), definitively adopted a social-democrat, reformist stance, and most of its members supported the colonial wars, in turn opposed by the PCF. The Communist Party enjoyed high popularity due to its active role in the Resistance, and was then dubbed " parti des 85 000 fusillés " ("party of the 85,000 executed people"). On the other hand, the labor movement, which had been re-unified in the CGT during the Popular Front, split again. In 1946, the anarcho-syndicalists created the Confédération nationale du travail (CNT) trade-union, while other anarchists had already created, in 1945, the Fédération Anarchiste (FA).

The Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF) twice had as President of the Councils figures of the SFIO (Félix Gouin and Léon Blum). Although the GPRF was active only from 1944 to 1946, it had a lasting influence, in particular regarding the enacting of labour laws, which were envisioned by the National Council of the Resistance, the umbrella organisation which united all Resistant movements, in particular the Communist Front National, political front of the Francs-Tireurs et Partisans (FTP) Resistance movement. Beside de Gaulle's ordinances granting, for the first time in France, right of vote to women, the GPRF passed various labour laws, including the 11 October 1946 act establishing occupational medicine. From 1945 to 1947, a socialist agricultural minister under Charles De Gaulle developed provision for marketing agencies and the protection of tenant rights. A Socialist law of 1946 replaced the metayage system with a tenancy statute (statut de fermage) that provided greater security from eviction "and put a normal annual rent in place of the tithe".

Paul Ramadier 's Socialist government then crushed the Malagasy Uprising of 1947, killing up to 40,000 people. Ramadier also accepted the terms of the Marshall Plan and excluded the five Communist ministers (among whom the vice-Premier, Maurice Thorez, head of the PCF) during the May 1947 crises – an event which simultaneously occurred in Italy. This exclusion put an end to the Three-parties alliance between the PCF, the SFIO and the Christian-Democrat Popular Republican Movement (MRP), which had been initiated after Charles de Gaulle 's resignation in 1946.

Jules Moch (SFIO), Interior Minister of Robert Schuman 's cabinet, re-organized in December 1947 the Groupe mobile de réserve (GMR) anti-riot police (created during Vichy), renamed Compagnies Républicaines de Sécurité (CRS), in order to crush the insurrectionary strikes started at the Renault factory in Boulogne-Billancourt by anarchists and Trotskyists. This repression split the CGT, leading to the formation in April 1948 of the spin-off Force Ouvrière (FO), headed by Léon Jouhaux and subsidised by the American Federation of Labor (AFL), and assisted by the AFL sole representative in Europe, Irving Brown, who worked with Jay Lovestone.

The Three-Parties alliance was succeeded by the Third Force (1947–1951), a coalition gathering the SFIO, the United States center-right party, the Radicals, the MRP and other centrist politicians, opposed both to the Communist and the Gaullist movement. The Third Force was also supported by the conservative National Centre of Independents and Peasants (CNIP), which succeeded in having its most popular figure, Antoine Pinay, named president of the Council in 1952, a year after the dissolving of the Third Force coalition.

When French Generals threatened Pierre Pflimlin 's government with a coup in May 1958, leading to the recall of Charles de Gaulle to power in the turmoil of the Algerian War (1954–62), the Radicals and the SFIO supported his return and the establishment of the semi-presidential regime of the Fifth Republic. On the left, however, various personalities opposed de Gaulle's come-back, seen as an authoritarian threat. Those included François Mitterrand, who was minister of Guy Mollet 's Socialist government, Pierre Mendès France (a Young Turk and former prime minister), Alain Savary (also a member of the SFIO party), the Communist Party, etc. Mendès-France and Savary, opposed to their respective parties' support to de Gaulle, would form together, in 1960, the Parti socialiste autonome (PSA, Socialist Autonomous Party), ancestor of the Parti socialiste unifié (PSU, Unified Socialist Party).

Although Guy Mollet's government had enacted repressive policies against the National Liberation Front (FLN), most of the left, including the personalist movement which expressed itself in Esprit, opposed the systematic use of torture by the French Army. Anti-colonialists and anti-militarists signed the Manifesto of the 121, published in L'Express in 1960. Although the use of torture quickly became well-known and was opposed by the left-wing opposition, the French state repeatedly denied its employment, censoring more than 250 books, newspapers and films (in metropolitan France alone) which dealt with the subject (and 586 in Algeria). Henri Alleg 's 1958 book, La Question, Boris Vian 's The Deserter, Jean-Luc Godard 's 1960 film Le petit soldat (released in 1963) and Gillo Pontecorvo 's The Battle of Algiers (1966) were famous examples of such censorship. A confidential report of the International Committee of the Red Cross leaked to Le Monde newspaper confirmed the allegations of torture made by the opposition to the war, represented in particular by the French Communist Party (PCF) and other anti-militarist circles. Although many left-wing activists, including famous existentialists writers Jean-Paul Sartre and Albert Camus, and historian Pierre Vidal-Naquet, denounced without exception the use of torture, the French government was itself headed in 1957 by the general secretary of the SFIO, Guy Mollet. In general, the SFIO supported the colonial wars during the Fourth Republic (1947–54), starting with the crushing of the Malagasy Uprising in 1947 by the socialist government of Paul Ramadier.

In the years after the end of the Second World War, parties of the Left were able to implement innovative reforms in various local authorities that came under their control. Communist-headed municipalities, for instance, acquired a reputation (like their Italian equivalents) of often being innovative, being honest, and being generally well run. In comparison with non-Communist authorities, Communist authorities tended to levy higher local taxes, charge lower rates for use of services, and use less of their revenue for self-financing investment. In addition, Communist authorities devoted a considerably greater proportion of resources than non-Communist authorities to educational and social programmes. According to a study by Andrew Knapp and Vincent Wright, at a time of more or less full employment "Communist mayors were purposeful and competent at building housing, schools, clinics, sports halls and cultural centres", but were however "far less successful at delivering the economic development that became the key voter priority as joblessness rose in the 1980s".

Socialist-led authorities were also innovative like PCF-led authorities, with a greater priority given by such councils to educational and social policies and public services than by councils headed by parties of the Centre and Right, although spending was not as proportionately high as in PCF-led municipalities. According to a study by Neill Nugent and David Lowe, there appeared to be "a much greater variation in specific priorities between PS-led councils than between PCF-led councils", with the range of issues identified by PS councillors and mayors as constituting their accomplishments and objectives being "enormously varied". As noted by the study, while traditional and expected concerns with issues such as urban renewal, educational facilities, transport, and housing remained, these had been supplanted by "a wide range of community, cultural and environmental interests". Amongst such accomplishments being cited by Socialist mayors in early 1980 included waste disposal schemes, the creation of pedestrian-only areas in town centres, the provision of municipal taxi and bicycle services, and making facilities available for young people (which included, in the one municipality, helping to set up cafes managed by young people themselves). One innovative authority, La Rochelle, had been led by Michel Crepeau (a proponent of environmentalism) of the MRG since 1971, and amongst his priorities had been a major waste recycling scheme which had come to make a profit for the town.

The livre (abbreviation: £ or ₶., French for libra (pound)) was the currency of Kingdom of France and its predecessor states of Francia and West Francia from 781 to 1794. Several different livres existed, some concurrently. The livre was the name of coins and of units of account.

The livre was established by Charlemagne as a unit of account equal to one pound of silver. It was subdivided into 20 sous (also sols), each sou equalling 12 deniers. The word livre came from the Latin word libra, a Roman unit of weight and still the name of a pound in modern French, and the denier comes from the Roman denarius. This system and the denier itself served as the model for many of Europe's currencies, including the British pound, Italian lira, Spanish dinero and the Portuguese dinheiro.

This first livre is known as the livre carolingienne. Only deniers were initially minted, but debasement led to larger denominations being issued. Different mints in different regions used different weights for the denier, leading to several distinct livres of different values.

"Livre" is homophonous to the French word for "book" (from the Latin word liber), the distinction being that the two have different genders. The monetary and weight unit is feminine, la/une livre, while "book" is masculine, le/un livre.

For much of the Middle Ages, different duchies of France were semi-autonomous if not practically independent from the weak Capetian kings, and thus each minted its own currency. Charters would need to specify which region or mint was being used: "money of Paris" or "money of Troyes ". The first steps towards standardization came under the first strong Capetian monarch, Philip II Augustus (1165–1223). Philip II conquered much of the continental Angevin Empire from King John of England, including Normandy, Anjou, and Touraine.

The currency minted at the city of Tours in Touraine was considered very stable, and Philip II decided to adopt the livre tournois as the standard currency of his lands, gradually replacing even the livre of Paris, and ultimately the currencies of all French-speaking areas he controlled. This was a slow process lasting many decades and not completed within Philip II's lifetime.

The result was that from 1200 onwards, following the beginning of King Philip II's campaigns against King John, the currency used within French speaking lands was in a state of flux, as the livre tournois was gradually introduced into other areas.

Until the thirteenth century and onwards, only deniers were actually minted as coin money. Both livres and sous did not actually exist as coins but were used only for accounting purposes.

Upon his return from the crusades in the 1250s, Louis IX instigated a royal monopoly on the minting of coinage in France and minted the first gold écu d'or and silver gros d'argent, whose weights (and thus monetary divisions) were roughly equivalent to the livre tournois and the denier.

Between 1360 and 1641, coins worth 1₶. were minted known as francs. This name persisted in common parlance for 1₶. but was not used on coins or paper money.

The official use of the livre tournois accounting unit in all contracts in France was legislated in 1549. However, in 1577, the livre tournois accounting unit was officially abolished and replaced by the écu, which was at that time the major French gold coin in actual circulation. In 1602, the livre tournois accounting unit was brought back.

Louis XIII stopped minting the franc in 1641, replacing it with coins based on the silver écu and gold Louis d'or. The écu and louis d'or fluctuated in value, with the écu varying between three and six livres tournois until 1726 when it was fixed at 6₶. The louis was initially (1640) worth 10₶., and fluctuated too, until its value was fixed at 24₶. in 1726.

In 1667, the livre parisis was officially abolished. However, the sole remaining livre was still frequently referred to as the livre tournois until its demise.

The first French paper money was issued in 1701 and was denominated in livres tournois. However, the notes did not hold their value relative to silver due to massive over–production. The Banque Royale (the last issuer of these early notes) crashed in 1720, rendering the banknotes worthless (see John Law for more on this system).

In 1726, under Louis XV 's minister Cardinal Fleury, a system of monetary stability was put in place. Eight Troy ounces (a mark, or about 250 grams) of gold was worth 740₶.9s. (so, one Troy ounce of gold was worth approximately 4 Louis or 93₶.); 8 Troy ounces of silver was worth 51₶.2s.3d. This led to a strict conversion rate between gold and silver (14.4867 to 1) and established the values of the coins in circulation in France at:

However a coin of 1₶. was not minted. Yet in 1720 a special coin minted in pure silver was produced and assigned a token value of 1₶. Additionally, France took Navarrese 20-sou coins minted in 1719 and 1720, re-struck them as 1 ⁄ 6 écu (between the years of 1720 and 1723) essentially creating a coin worth 1 livre. These re-struck coins, however, eventually were assigned the value of 18 sous.

A kind of paper money was reintroduced by the Caisse d'Escompte in 1776 as actions au porteur, denominated in livres. These were issued until 1793, alongside assignats from 1789. Assignats were backed (in theory) by government-held land. Like the issues of the Banque Royale, their value plummeted.

The last coins and notes of the livre currency system were issued in Year II of the Republic (1794). In 1795, the franc was introduced, worth 1₶.3d. (1 + 1 ⁄ 80 ₶), and the first one- franc coin was struck in 1803. Still the word livre survived; until the middle of the 19th century it was indifferently used alongside the word franc, especially to express large amounts and transactions linked with property (real estate, property incomes or "rentes", cattle, etc...).

The livre had also been used as the legal currency of the Channel Islands. The Jersey livre remained legal currency in Jersey until 1834 when dwindling supplies of no-longer minted coins obliged the adoption of the pound as legal tender.

Today and after two centuries of using the franc, France uses the euro as its currency.

Bureau d'Enquêtes sur les Événements de Mer ('Marine Accident Investigation Office'), known as BEAmer, is the French agency that investigates accidents and incidents of ships. Its head office is in the Grande Arche Sud (South) in the La Défense business district and the commune of Puteaux, Hauts-de-Seine, in the Paris metropolitan area.

France established BEAmer, a marine casualties investigation board, on 16 December 1997. In 2003 and 2004 the agency's role within the framework of the French government was finalized.

There is an equivalent agency in regards to state and military vessels, the Bureau enquêtes accidents défense mer (BEAD-mer).

The director since May 2019 is rear admiral François-Xavier Rubin de Cervens, (Administrator for Maritime Affairs). Merchant marine Captain and chief engineer.

Its head office was previously in Tour Pascal B [ fr ] in Puteaux and La Défense, and before that, in the Tour Voltaire [ fr ] in Puteaux and La Défense. In the past the head office was in the 5th arrondissement of Paris.

In French cuisine, the mother sauces (French : sauces mères, pronounced [ sos mɛʁ ]), also known as greater sauces (grandes sauces, pronounced [ ɡʁɑ̃d sos ]), are a group of sauces upon which many other sauces—"daughter sauces" or lesser sauces—are based. Different classifications of mother sauces have been proposed since at least the early 19th century.

The most common list of mother sauces in contemporary use is béchamel, espagnole, tomato, velouté, and Hollandaise sauce.

Béchamel is a milk-based sauce, thickened with a white roux and typically flavoured with onion, nutmeg, or thyme.

Espagnole is a strong-flavoured brown sauce, made from a dark brown roux and a brown stock reduction—usually beef or veal stock—and tomatoes or tomato paste. Ingredients typically include roasted bones or bacon.

Velouté is light in colour, made by reducing clear stock (made from un-roasted bones), usually veal, chicken or fish stock, thickened with a white or blond roux. Velouté is the French word for "velvety".

Sometimes Tomate or Tomat. In addition to tomatoes, ingredients typically include carrots, onion, garlic, butter, and flour, plus pork belly and veal broth. The sauce tomate described by Escoffier is a tomato sauce made with fatty salted pork belly, a mirepoix of carrots, onions and thyme, and white stock.

Hollandaise is a warm emulsion based on egg yolk and clarified butter, flavoured with lemon juice or vinegar. In the original 1903 French edition of Le guide culinaire, hollandaise appears on page 150 among the petites sauces (daughter sauces), not among the grandes sauces.

Béarnaise sauce is a derivation of hollandaise.

In 1833, Marie-Antoine Carême described four grandes sauces (great sauces). In 1844, the French magazine Revue de Paris reported:

Don’t you know that the grand sauce Espagnole is a mother sauce, of which all the other preparations, such as reductions, stocks, jus, veloutés, essences, and coulis, are, strictly speaking, only derivatives?

Different groups of mother and daughter sauces have been proposed by different chefs, varying in number and selection.

In 1833, Marie-Antoine Carême published a classification of French sauces in his reference cookbook L’art de la cuisine française au XIXe siècle ("The Art of French Cuisine in the 19th Century"). He called them Grandes et Petites sauces ("great and small sauces").

In this cookbook, Carême defined a sauce classification and listed four grandes sauces :

Carême classified numerous sauces as petites sauces.

In 1867, the French chef and pâtissier Jules Gouffé published Le livre de cuisine comprenant la grande cuisine et la cuisine de ménage (The Cookbook Including Grand And Domestic Cooking).

In this book, Gouffé listed twelve mother sauces. (He used both the terms grandes sauces and sauce mères).

The pioneering chef Auguste Escoffier is credited with establishing the importance of Espagnole, Velouté, Béchamel and Tomate, as well as Hollandaise and Mayonnaise. His book Le guide culinaire was published in 1903. It lists numerous " Grandes Sauces de base", including espagnole, velouté, béchamel, and tomate as well as others such as mirepoix and jus de veau lié (thickened veal stock).

The original French editions of Le guide culinaire listed Hollandaise as a daughter sauce rather than a grande sauce. Mayonnaise, in the chapter on cold sauces, was described as a mother sauce for cold sauces, and compared to Espagnole and Velouté. The 1907 English edition removed this description of mayonnaise entirely, replacing it with hollandaise among the basic sauces — the likely origin of the modern five-sauce list.

The 1907 English edition of Le guide culinaire, A Guide to Modern Cookery, listed fewer "basic sauces", including Hollandaise alongside espagnole, "half glaze" (demi glace), velouté, allemande, béchamel, and tomate. The English edition did not describe mayonnaise as a mother sauce, and included the sentence that "Allemande Sauce is not, strictly speaking, a basic sauce".

The French National Public Health Agency (L'Agence nationale de santé publique, ANSP), also known as Santé publique France, is a French public administrative establishment under the supervision of the Ministry of Health. The president of its board of directors is appointed by a decree of the President of the French Republic.

Established under the Health System Modernization Law, Santé publique France was created on 1 May 2016. It succeeded the Institut de veille sanitaire (InVS), the Institut national de prévention et d'éducation pour la santé (Inpes), the Établissement de préparation et de réponse aux urgences sanitaires (Éprus), and Addictions Drogues Alcool Info Service (Adalis).

The creation of Santé publique France stemmed from a preliminary report submitted on 2 June 2015 to Marisol Touraine, then Minister of Social Affairs, Health, and Women's Rights, by François Bourdillon, Director General of InVS and Inpes. This report followed various parliamentary analyses, inspections, evaluations, and expert reports on existing health agencies, leading to the territorial reform law passed on 25 November 2014, which reduced the number of French regions from 22 to 13 and introduced metropoles. The agency was formed by merging three existing health agencies under the Ministry of Health:

The agency was formalized through the Health System Modernization Law of 26 January 2016 and an ordinance of 14 April 2016. François Bourdillon emphasized its population-focused approach, distinguishing it from agencies like the National Agency for the Safety of Medicines and Health Products (ANSM), which oversees product safety, the National Agency for Food, Environmental, and Occupational Health Safety (Anses), which evaluates risks, or the High Authority for Health (HAS), which focuses on practice quality. The agency aims to emulate models like the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the United States or Public Health England, prioritizing comprehensive public health knowledge, protection, and promotion.

Santé publique France conducts continuous epidemiological surveillance to monitor population health, enabling tailored health policies, addressing health issues, and responding to exceptional health situations. It maintains ongoing health monitoring to identify health risks early and supports efforts to reduce health inequalities through health promotion and prevention strategies. The agency also innovates by piloting experimental programs across French territories. Its missions align with the first pillar of the 2018–2022 National Health Strategy: promoting health and prevention across all settings.

The Ministry of Health sets five-year objectives for Santé publique France through a Contract of Objectives and Performance (COP), first signed by Agnès Buzyn, Minister of Solidarities and Health, in 2018. The 2018–2022 COP outlined six strategic and 22 operational goals, covering epidemiological surveillance, prevention, crisis preparedness, policy expertise, and partnerships. The agency develops multiyear programs to define its priorities, validated annually by its board of directors. The 2018–2022 program focused on determinants and settings, populations, major diseases, territories, interventions, and infrastructure.

By 2022, Santé publique France aimed to address:

The board, comprising 32 members, sets strategic directions, programs, and resource allocation. It includes nine state representatives, one from mandatory health insurance schemes, four institutional partners, three health professionals, four association representatives, two local elected officials, two qualified experts, three agency staff, two deputies, and two senators. Members serve four-year terms, renewable once. The president, appointed by presidential decree, has been Marie-Caroline Bonnet-Galzy since 18 December 2017.

The 27-member scientific council, appointed for four years, ensures the quality and coherence of the agency’s scientific policies, advising on research, expertise, and partnerships.

This seven-member committee, appointed for four years, ensures compliance with ethical and deontological standards, preventing conflicts of interest.

Comprising 10 to 20 members, this committee optimizes agency actions, communication during health crises, and prioritizes public health issues.

In 2019, the agency employed 625 staff with a budget of approximately €200 million. In 2020, it received a state allocation of €150,155,356, plus an exceptional €860 million for epidemic prevention and strategic stockpiling.

Santé publique France operates 15 regional intervention units (Cire) to conduct epidemiological surveillance, monitor population health, issue health alerts, and manage local crises under the agency’s regional directorate.

The agency’s headquarters in Saint-Maurice, Val-de-Marne, near the Bois de Vincennes, spans three buildings:

Established in 2007, the health reserve supports public health responses during crises exceeding normal capacities, involving volunteer health professionals. It has been deployed during outbreaks like chikungunya and the COVID-19 pandemic in France.

Santé publique France collaborates with European public health agencies, including:

Santé publique France supports the World Health Organization ’s European Bureau and co-funds WHO-European Commission projects. It serves as the secretariat for the International Association of National Public Health Institutes, established in 2006, and is a member of the International Union for Health Promotion and Education (IUHPE).

Santé publique France ’s documentary portal compiles its scientific outputs, including the Bulletin épidémiologique hebdomadaire (BEH), Géodes data, health barometer studies, a registry of promising interventions, the magazine La santé en action, and prevention materials.

The BEH, a free publication, features articles from public health stakeholders, with its editorial board partly composed of agency members.

Géodes provides regional and national health indicators in interactive maps, charts, and tables.

Health barometers, initiated by CFES in 1992, guide public health policies by analyzing behaviors like vaccination, smoking, alcohol consumption, and cancer screening.

The registry of validated interventions catalogs evidence-based prevention programs.

La santé en action is a quarterly magazine on health promotion and prevention.

The agency publishes prevention and surveillance materials, including epidemiological updates on diseases like influenza and dengue.

Santé publique France manages thematic prevention websites and funds remote health assistance programs.

In 1998, Inpes launched the "Tabac Info Service" helpline. Since 2003, it has managed various remote health assistance programs. In 2014, the "Health Assistance Quality Label" was introduced to ensure service quality, requiring compliance with specific standards.

French nationalism (French : Nationalisme français) usually manifests as civic and cultural nationalism, promoting the cultural unity of France.

French nationalism emerged during the Hundred Years' War, which consisted of a series of intermittent conflicts with the Kingdom of England. The wars produced a great icon of French nationalism, Joan of Arc. The Catholic Church also played a major role after the Protestant Reformation. French nationalism became a powerful movement after the French Revolution in 1789. Napoleon Bonaparte promoted French nationalism based upon the ideals of the French Revolution such as the idea of liberty, equality, fraternity and justified French expansionism and French military campaigns on the claim that France had the right to spread the enlightened ideals of the French Revolution across Europe, and also to expand France into its so-called " natural borders." Napoleon's invasions of other nations spread the concept of nationalism outside of France.

After Napoleon's defeat and downfall, French nationalism from the 19th to early 20th century took on an assertive and extreme patriotism that supported military force to achieve its political goals. During World War I, France pursued irredentist claims on the region of Alsace-Lorraine that had been lost to Germany at the end of the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1871. French national pride was damaged in World War I by the long, drawn-out war with Germany fought on its soil; especially in World War II when the French government surrendered to Germany in 1940; and after France lost many of its colonies due to decolonization after World War II.

The symbols of nationalism included not only Joan of Arc but also Roland, the hero of The Song of Roland (La chanson de Roland). He died in combat against the Unfaithful while defending Charlemagne and his men, making him a suitable patriotic symbol for the modern age.

The politics of left and right played a role as conservatives seized on nationalism to attack the left. Conservative French nationalists successfully labeled antimilitarism as antinationalist in the 1898-1914 era. Many of the more vocal antimilitarists were activist anarchists and radical Marxist organizations. Historians have interpreted this attack by arguing French nationalism was rejecting its roots in the French Revolution and was becoming something of an extremist, protofascist movement. However, most antimilitarists did not reject their nation but instead claimed to be protecting the Republic which they saw as synonymous with the nation. They saw the conservatives as a danger to a republican France.

The large conservative Catholic element, frustrated by the failure to restore the monarchy, turned to a new variation on nationalism. Led by the daily newspaper La Croix, founded by the Assumptionist priests in 1883, it denounced the Republic's anti-clericalism and encouraged Boulangism and Germanophobia. It promoted French imperialism as the fulfillment of a mission to bring civilization and Christianity to the pagans ("mission civilisatrice") and it boasted of France's cultural superiority over everyone else.

The Dreyfus affair of the 1890s saw conservatives use nationalism to attack the Third Republic. However, when the republicans passed laws hostile to the Catholic Church in 1901-1905, such as disbanding the Assumptionists, many conservatives switched their energies and funding away from nationalistic projects to a defense of the Church instead. Devout Catholic women were especially active in this switch. Historian Robert Fuller argues it effectively ended the nationalist challenge to the Third Republic.

The disaster of the Nazi Occupation of France led to a collapse of confidence in Republican governance. Maréchal Philippe Pétain, a hero of the world war, was called upon to save France again in the name of French nationalism. He responded by stressing "the need to stay in France, to prepare a national revival, and to share the sufferings of our people. It is impossible for the government to abandon French soil without emigrating, without deserting. The duty of the government is, come what may, to remain in the country, or it could not longer be regarded as the government". Robert Bruce wrote: "He longed to take an active part in remaking France in his image and ridding the nation of the past twenty years of socialist and Marxist teachings and programs whose bitter fruit had been the defeat of 1940. France would be strong again. France would be great again, and it was his duty to make that come to pass."

Pétain's great enemy was the leader of Free France, Charles de Gaulle. He became President of France and sought to resurrect national pride. De Gaulle sought to make France the leader of an independent Europe - free from American and Soviet influence. De Gaulle's government sought Franco-German reconciliation and took a leading role in the founding of the European Coal and Steel Community that sought to resolve economic tensions between France and Germany, that French foreign minister Robert Schuman declared was designed "to end Franco-German hostility once and for all".

Into the 21st century, one controversy has been the legal treatment of veiled Muslim women and prostitutes. The government has targeted what some perceive as the 'under-covered' bodies of prostitutes and the 'over-covered' bodies of veiled Muslim women in order to exclude them from the public space. After the multiple Islamic terrorist attacks of 2015 and 2016, French nationalists had a new reason to promote anti-immigration laws. The emerging forms of French nationalism emphasize the promotion of sexual liberalism as a core value of citizenship. Julie Billaud and Julie Castro argue that the goals are to enforce a virile nationalism, prescribe new sexual norms, and criminalize immigrants and those living at the social margins.

French nationalism during World War II experienced divided attitudes towards the Nazi occupier, the Vichy government and the resistance.

In a context of both moral, social and political decline in French society that the extreme right flourished during the interwar period. Undermined by political and financial scandals, the Third Republic was at the same time powerless to curb the effects of the crisis which ravaged France in 1931. Nationalist movements multiplied, advocating for some anti-parliamentarism, for others xenophobia, anti-Semitism, Anti-German sentiment, anti-protestantism or even anti-communism. In 1940, the debacle against the German invader was seen by many French nationalists as the sanction of French decadence and proof that the Republic was incapable of defending the country. The same year, the French placed their destiny in the hands of Marshal Pétain. But the powerful pull of French nationalism drove others to engage in resistance against the occupying German forces.

From the defeat of the battle of France in 1940 as well as later, many French nationalists joined General De Gaulle against the German occupation. Gaullism in World War II was strongly nationalist, and components of Free France often came from the right-wing and far-right. De Gaulle himself was a Catholic, nationalist and conservative. In addition, nationalists and monarchists were among the first resistance fighters in France.

Admiration for Nazism or/and fascism is not unanimous in the ranks of the French anti-Semitic far-right, germanophobia and nationalism inducing, among some, the rejection of Nazism.

Within the French Resistance, many of the early resisters were French nationalists as early as 1940. Many members of the Croix-de-feu, the Action française as well as former Bandera Jeanne d'Arc [ fr ] volunteers (French unit having fought on the side of the Spanish nationalists during the Spanish Civil War) joined the resistance. As soon as Pétain shook Hitler's hand, other nationalists, embittered by the gesture, rallied to the Resistance. August 1940 saw the founding of the resistance network Combat, a non-negligible part of whose members were nationalists. In the Occupied zone, the Resistance Network was born under the impetus of men from various far-right movements, the OCM (Organisation civile et militaire).

Colonel Rémy, who was a nationalist militant before the Second World War, rejected the Armistice of June 22, 1940 from the start and joined the resistance from the appeal of June 18, 1940. He was among the first to join General de Gaulle and would form the resistance movement Confrérie Notre-Dame, a network of right-wing French Catholics.

Georges Loustaunau-Lacau was to be the founder of one of the largest resistance networks, the Alliance Network whose members were mainly from right-wing and far-right circles, Marie-Madeleine Fourcade, herself from the right-wing nationalist and former opponent of the Popular Front will lead the network from 1941 to 1943 then from 1944 until the end of the Second World War. In 1942, Colonel François de la Rocque, a right-wing nationalist of the Croix-de-feu and the French Social Party, founded the Klan Network, linked to the Alibi Network, although this was later stopped. by the Gestapo and deported, his network will operate until the Liberation of France. Noël Ottavi [ fr ] one of the figures of the Croix-de-feu and the French Social Party died during the war because of his resistance activities.

In 1942, Georges Groussard, who had rallied to Vichy, defected and founded the "Gilbert Network", which would work with the British Secret Intelligence Service with the aim of providing information on the German occupiers.

Daniel Cordier, a former member of the Action française and Camelots du Roi, was one of Jean Moulin 's relatives and is secretary during the war.

Another phenomenon is that of the "vichysto-resistants", resistance fighters who approve of the policy of the Vichy regime but reject the German occupation, including Pierre de Bénouville or the future president of the French republic François Mitterrand, who will evolve left-wing after the war.

One of the most famous French nationalists who joined the fight against Nazi Germany was Philippe Leclerc de Hauteclocque, a former sympathizer of the Action Française and commander of the 2nd Armored Division which took part in the Liberation of France and in the German Campaign of 1945. Jean de Lattre de Tassigny, also one of the great figures in French military history was also an anti-republican nationalist in the interwar period.

Roger Holeindre, who would become one of the personalities of the post-war French far-right, was a member of the resistance.

Another part of the nationalist movement rallied to the collaboration, the French fascists and reactionaries rallied to Marshal Pétain.

The French Popular Party (PPF) of Jacques Doriot was the main political party of the collaboration with Nazi Germany. Marcel Bucard's Parti franciste also participates in the collaboration with the German occupation.

Some members of Action française (AF) did not take the same trajectory as many of their former comrades and decided to collaborate, notably Robert Brasillach and the AF theorician Charles Maurras. Lucien Rebatet who had long been anti-German, decided to collaborate with the German occupation.

Philippe Henriot who was the greatest propagandist of the Vichy regime had campaigned on the extreme right of the interwar period. Some of his former comrades had become resistance fighters while others chose to collaborate. He is finally killed by a commando from the French Forces of the Interior.

The French Milice established by Joseph Darnand was one of the most relentless collaborationist forces during the Vichy regime. This was generally made up of far-right activists and opportunists. Early Milice volunteers included members of France's pre-war far-right parties, such as the Action Française, and working-class men convinced of the benefits of the Vichy government's politics. The Milice persecuted Jews and resistance fighters of all political persuasions (including nationalist resistance fighters) in France.

Fascist -type organization, the Milice wanted to be a revolutionary movement, at the same time anti-republican, anti-Semitic, anti-communist, against international capitalism, for corporatism, nationalist and authoritarian.

If in the collective imagination, the collaboration was on the far-right, in reality it was not the only composition and a good number of former leftists also joined the collaboration with Nazi Germany.

Some collaborators were not politicized and were sometimes mafiosos, like Henry Lafont and his Carlingue.

The French Navy is the maritime arm of the French Armed Forces and one of the four military service branches of France. It is among the largest and most powerful naval forces in the world recognised as being a blue-water navy. The French Navy is capable of operating globally and conducting expeditionary missions, maintaining a significant overseas presence. The French Navy is one of eight naval forces currently operating fixed-wing aircraft carriers, with its flagship Charles de Gaulle being the only nuclear-powered aircraft carrier outside the United States Navy, and one of two non-American vessels to use catapults to launch aircraft.

Founded in the 17th century, the French Navy is one of the oldest navies still in continuous service, with precursors dating back to the Middle Ages. It has taken part in key events in French history, including the Napoleonic Wars and both world wars, and played a critical role in establishing and securing the French colonial empire for over 400 years. The French Navy pioneered several innovations in naval technology, including the first steam-powered ship of the line, first seagoing ironclad warship, first mechanically propelled submarine, first steel-hulled warship, and first armoured cruiser.

The French Navy consists of six main components: the Naval Action Force, the Submarine Forces (FOST and ESNA), French Naval Aviation, the Navy Riflemen (including Naval Commandos), the Marseille Naval Fire Battalion, and the Maritime Gendarmerie. As of 2021, the French Navy employed 44,000 personnel (37,000 military and 7,000 civilian), more than 180 ships, 200 aircraft, and six commandos units; as of 2014, its reserve element numbered roughly 48,000.

It operates a wide range of fighting vessels, including various aeronaval forces, attack and ballistic missile submarines, frigates, patrol boats and support ships, with aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle serving as the centrepiece of most expeditionary forces.

The history of French naval power dates back to the Middle Ages, and had three loci of evolution:

The first true French Royal Navy (French : la Marine Royale) was established in 1626 by Cardinal Richelieu, chief minister to King Louis XIII. During the French Revolution, la Marine Royale was formally renamed la Marine Nationale. Under the First French Empire and the Second French Empire, the navy was designated as the Imperial French Navy (la Marine impériale française). Institutionally, however, the navy has never lost its short familiar nickname, la Royale.

The original symbol of the French Navy was a golden anchor, which, beginning in 1830, was interlaced by a sailing rope ; this symbol was featured on all naval vessels, arms, and uniforms. Although anchor symbols are still used on uniforms, a new naval logo was introduced in 1990 under Naval Chief of Staff Bernard Louzeau, featuring a modern design that incorporates the tricolour —by flanking the bow section of a white warship with two ascending red and blue spray foams—and the inscription " Marine nationale ".

Cardinal Richelieu personally supervised the Navy until his death in 1643. He was succeeded by his protégé, Jean Baptiste Colbert, who introduced the first code of regulations of the French Navy and established the original naval dockyards in Brest and Toulon. Colbert and his son, the Marquis de Seignelay, between them administered the Navy for twenty-nine years.

During this century, the Navy cut its teeth in the Anglo-French War (1627–1629), the Franco-Spanish War (1635–59), the Second Anglo-Dutch War, the Franco-Dutch War, and the Nine Years' War. Major battles in these years include the Battle of Augusta, Battle of Beachy Head, the Battles of Barfleur and La Hougue, the Battle of Lagos, and the Battle of Texel.

The 1700s opened with the War of the Spanish Succession, over a decade long, followed by the War of the Austrian Succession in the 1740s. Principal engagements of these wars include the Battle of Vigo Bay and two separate Battles of Cape Finisterre in 1747. The most grueling conflict for the Navy, however, was the Seven Years' War, in which it was virtually destroyed. Significant actions include the Battle of Cap-Français, the Battle of Quiberon Bay, and another Battle of Cape Finisterre.

The Navy regrouped and rebuilt, and within 15 years it was eager to join the fray when France intervened in the American Revolutionary War. Though outnumbered everywhere, the French fleets held the British at bay for years until victory. After this conflict and the concomitant Anglo-French War (1778–1783), the Navy emerged at a new height in its history. Major battles in these years include the Battle of the Chesapeake, the Battle of Cape Henry, the Battle of Grenada, the invasion of Dominica, and three separate Battles of Ushant.

Within less than a decade, however, the Navy was decimated by the French Revolution when large numbers of veteran officers were dismissed or executed for their noble lineage. Nonetheless, the Navy fought vigorously through the French Revolutionary Wars as well as the Quasi-War. Significant actions include a fourth Battle of Ushant (known in English as the Glorious First of June), the Battle of Groix, the Atlantic campaign of May 1794, the French expedition to Ireland, the Battle of Tory Island, and the Battle of the Nile.

Other engagements of the Revolutionary Wars ensued in the early 1800s, including the Battle of the Malta Convoy and the Algeciras Campaign. The Quasi-War wound down with single-ship actions including USS Constellation vs La Vengeance and USS Enterprise vs Flambeau.

When Napoleon was crowned Emperor in 1804, he attempted to restore the Navy to a position that would enable his plan for an invasion of England. His dreams were dashed by the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805, where the British all but annihilated a combined Franco-Spanish fleet, a disaster that confirmed British naval superiority for the rest of the Napoleonic Wars. Still, the Navy did not shrink from action: among the engagements of this time were the Battle of the Basque Roads, the Battle of Grand Port, the Mauritius campaign of 1809–1811, and the Battle of Lissa.

After Napoleon's fall in 1815, the long era of Anglo-French rivalry on the seas began to close, and the Navy became more of an instrument for expanding the French colonial empire. Under King Charles X, the two nations' fleets fought side by side in the Battle of Navarino, and throughout the rest of the century they generally behaved in a manner that paved the way for the Entente Cordiale.

Charles X sent a large fleet to execute the invasion of Algiers in 1830. The next year, his successor, Louis Philippe I, made a show of force against Portugal at the Battle of the Tagus, and in 1838 conducted another display of gunboat diplomacy, this time in Mexico at the Battle of Veracruz. Beginning in 1845, a five-year Anglo-French blockade of the Río de la Plata was imposed on Argentina over trade rights.

The Emperor Napoleon III was determined to follow an even stronger foreign policy than his predecessors, and the Navy was involved in a multitude of actions around the world. He joined in the Crimean War in 1854; major actions for the Navy include the siege of Petropavlovsk and the Battle of Kinburn. The Navy was heavily involved in the Cochinchina Campaign in 1858, the Second Opium War in China, and the French intervention in Mexico. It took part in the French expedition to Korea and the Shimonoseki campaign. In the Franco-Prussian War in 1870, the Navy imposed an effective blockade of Germany, but events on land proceeded at such a rapid pace that it was superfluous. Isolated engagements between French and German ships took place in other theaters, but the war was over in a matter of weeks.

The Navy continued to protect colonial safety and expansion under the French Third Republic. The Sino-French War saw considerable naval action including the Battle of Fuzhou, the Battle of Shipu, and the Pescadores Campaign. In Vietnam, the Navy helped wage the Tonkin Campaign which included the Battle of Thuận An, and it later participated in the Franco-Siamese conflict of 1893.

The 19th century French Navy brought forth numerous new technologies. It led the development of naval artillery with its invention of the highly effective Paixhans gun. In 1850, Napoléon became the first steam-powered ship of the line in history, and Gloire became the first seagoing ironclad warship nine years later. In 1863, the Navy launched Plongeur, the first submarine in the world to be propelled by mechanical power. In 1876, Redoutable became the first steel-hulled warship ever. In 1887, Dupuy de Lôme became the world's first armoured cruiser.

During the latter part of the century, French officers developed the so-called Jeune École (Young School) theory that emphasized the use of small, cheap torpedo boats to destroy expensive battleships, coupled with long-range commerce raiders to attack an opponent's merchant fleet.

The first seaplane, the French Fabre Hydravion, was flown in 1910, and the first seaplane carrier, Foudre, was christened in the following year. Despite that innovation, the general development of the French Navy slowed down in the beginning of the 20th century as the Anglo-German naval arms race grew in intensity.

It entered World War I with relatively few modern vessels, and during the war few warships were built because the main French effort was on land. While the British held control of the North Sea, the French held the Mediterranean, where they mostly kept watch on the Austro-Hungarian Navy. The largest operations of the Navy were conducted during the Dardanelles Campaign. In December 1916, during the Noemvriana events, French warships also bombarded Athens, trying to force the pro-German government of Greece to change its policies. The French Navy also played an important role in countering Germany's U-boat campaign by regularly patrolling the seas and escorting convoys.

Between the World Wars, the Navy modernized and expanded significantly, even in the face of limitations set by the 1922 Washington Naval Treaty. New additions included the heavy and fast Fantasque -class "super- destroyers ", the Richelieu -class battleships, and the submarine Surcouf which was the largest and most powerful of its day.

During the first two years of World War II, the French Navy participated in the Battle of the Atlantic, the Norwegian campaign, the Dunkirk evacuation and, briefly, the Battle of the Mediterranean. However, after the fall of France in June 1940, the Navy was obligated to remain neutral under the terms of the armistice that created Vichy France. Approximately 100 French warships around the world joined the Free French under Charles de Gaulle, but the bulk of the French Navy, including all its capital ships, declared their allegiance to Vichy France. On 3 July 1940, Force H of the Royal Navy launched an attack on Mers-el-Kébir in Algeria to prevent the French fleet there from falling into German hands, destroying or damaging several French warships. In 1942, the Vichy Navy fought the Naval Battle of Casablanca when the Allies invaded French North Africa, but the confrontations were set aside once the Germans occupied Vichy France. The capital ships were a primary target for the Germans, but before they could be seized they were scuttled by their own crews. A few small ships and submarines managed to escape in time, and these joined the Free French Naval Forces, an arm of Free France that fought as an adjunct of the Royal Navy until the end of the war. In the Pacific theatre as well, Free French vessels operated until the Japanese capitulation; Richelieu was present at the Japanese Instrument of Surrender.

The Navy later provided fire support and troop transport in the Indochina War, the Algerian War, the Gulf War, and the Kosovo War.

Since 2000, the Navy has given logistical support to the War in Afghanistan (2001–2021) as well as the global war on terror. In 2011, it assisted Opération Harmattan in Libya.

The chief of the naval staff is Amiral Nicolas Vaujour [ fr ], and as of November 2024 the Navy has an active strength of 37,965 military personnel and 3,000 civilian staff. The Navy is organised into four main operational branches:

In addition, the National Gendarmerie of France maintain a maritime force of patrol boats that falls under the operational command of the French Navy:

During most of the Cold War, the Navy was organised in two squadrons based in Brest and Toulon, commanded by ALESCLANT (Amiral commandant l'escadre de l'Atlantique) and ALESCMED (Amiral commandant l'escadre de la Méditerranée) respectively. Since the post-Cold War restructuring process named Optimar '95, the two components have been divided into the Naval Action Force (commanded by ALFAN) and the Antisubmarine Group (commanded by ALGASM).

As of 2014, the largest French naval base is the military port of Toulon. Other major bases in metropolitan France are the Brest Arsenal and Île Longue on the Atlantic, and Cherbourg Naval Base on the English Channel. Overseas French bases include Fort de France and Degrad des Cannes in the Americas; Port des Galets and Dzaoudzi in the Indian Ocean; and Nouméa and Papeete in the Pacific. In addition, the navy shares or leases bases in foreign locales such as Abu Dhabi, Dakar and Djibouti.

Although French naval doctrine calls for two aircraft carriers, the French only have one, Charles de Gaulle. Originally a planned order for French aircraft carrier PA2 was based on the design of the British Queen Elizabeth -class aircraft carrier recently constructed and launched for the Royal Navy. However, the French programme had been delayed several times for budgetary reasons and the result was priority being given to the more exportable FREMM project. In April 2013 it was confirmed that the second aircraft carrier project would be abandoned due to defence cuts announced in the 2013 French White Paper on Defence and National Security.

The French Navy operates three amphibious assault ships, eleven destroyers (classified in the French Navy as surface combatants of the "first rank"), five general purpose frigates and has a commitment to six fleet submarines (SSNs). These vessels, with the aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle, constitute the French Navy's main ocean-going war-fighting force, while the four ballistic missile submarines (SSBN) of the navy's Strategic Oceanic Force provide the backbone of the French nuclear deterrent.

According to the Ministry of Armed Forces the list of active French Navy ships in 2025 include:

The French Naval Aviation is officially known as the Aéronautique navale and was created on the 19 June 1998 with the merging of Naval patrol aircraft and aircraft carrier squadrons. It has a strength of around 6,800 civilian and military personnel operating from four airbases in Metropolitan France. The Aéronavale has been modernized with 41 Rafale fighters which operate from the aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle.

Seamen must be at least 17 but no more than 30 years old, with no minimum level of schooling.

Petty officers must be at least 17 but no more than 30 years old, with at least a high school diploma giving access to university studies.

Petty officer candidates begin training with five months at the Petty Officer School of Maistrance at Brest.

Contract officers serve on an initial eight-year contract, renewable up to 20 years.

The rank insignia of the French Navy are worn on shoulder straps of shirts and white jackets, and on sleeves for navy jackets and mantels. Until 2005, only commissioned officers had an anchor on their insignia, but enlisted personnel are now receiving them as well. Commanding officers have titles of capitaine, but are called commandant (in the army, both capitaine and commandant are ranks, which tends to stir some confusion among the public). The two highest ranks, vice-amiral d'escadre and amiral (admiral), are functions, rather than ranks. They are assumed by officers ranking vice-amiral (vice admiral). The only amiral de la flotte (Admiral of the Fleet) was François Darlan after he was refused the dignity of amiral de France (Admiral of France). Equivalent to the dignity of Marshal of France, the rank of amiral de France remains theoretical in the Fifth Republic ; it was last granted in 1869, during the Second Empire, but retained during the Third Republic until the death of its bearer in 1873. The title of amiral de la flotte was created so that Darlan would not have an inferior rank than his counterpart in the British Royal Navy, who had the rank of Admiral of the Fleet.

The rank insignia of commissioned officers.

The rank insignia of non-commissioned officers and enlisted personnel.

Unlike in the French Army and Air and Space Force, one does not prepend mon to the name of the rank when addressing an officer (that is, not mon capitaine, but simply capitaine).

The main military musical unit of the French Navy is the Military Band of the Toulon Fleet (French : La musique des équipages de la flotte de Toulon), founded on 13 July 1827. The Bagad Lann Bihoue, based on the bagad bands in Bretagne, is currently the sole pipe band in the service of the French Navy, which uses bagpipes and bombards, and thus is affiliated to the band.

In Canada, French naval music has affected the traditions of Canadian navy bands. French navy bands in the country date back to the era of New France. Musical units were primarily attached to the Compagnies Franches de la Marine and the Troupes de la marine, the former of which maintained two drums (tambour) and a fife.

France's financial problems have affected all branches of her military. The 2013 French White Paper on Defence and National Security cancelled the long-planned new aircraft carrier and a possible fourth Mistral -class amphibious assault ship. The backbone of the fleet will be the Aquitaine -class FREMM anti-submarine frigates, replacing the Georges Leygues class, but plans to buy a possible seventeen FREMMs were cut back to eleven and then to eight. The cancellation of the third and fourth Horizon destroyers meant that the last two FREMM hulls, which entered service between 2021 and 2023, are fitted out as FREDA air-defence ships to replace the Cassard class. DCNS has shown a FREMM-ER concept to meet this requirement, emphasising ballistic missile defence with the Thales Sea Fire 500 AESA radar. Industrial considerations mean that the funds for FREMMs 9-11 are now being spent on five more exportable Frégate de Défense et d'Intervention (FDI, "intermediate size frigates") from 2024 to supplement, and ultimately replace, the La Fayette class, three of which are being upgraded with new sonars to operate into the early 2030s. With respect to support ships, the Durance class are being replaced under the FLOTLOG project by up to four derivatives of Italy's Vulcano -class logistic support ship, with three being delivered from 2023 to 2027. A fourth potential ship is delayed until after 2030.

Construction has started on the first of six Barracuda -class nuclear attack submarines ; commissioning of Suffren took place in 2020. These nuclear attack submarines are to be followed in the 2030s by the incremental introduction of a new class of nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs) whose construction began in 2024.

The first MM40 Exocet Block 3 missile was test-fired in 2010 to be produced. Naval versions of the SCALP EG land-attack cruise missile are under development, along with a planned Aster Block 1NT with greater capabilities against ballistic missiles.

In October 2018, the French Ministry of Defence launched an 18-month study for €40 million for the eventual future replacement of the aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle beyond 2030. A decision to build the new carrier was taken by President Emmanuel Macron in 2020 and once it enters service it is anticipated to remain in service until beyond 2080. Construction of the new carrier is to begin in around 2025 with service entry anticipated in the latter 2030s.

French of France (French : français de France [ fʁɑ̃sɛ də fʁɑ̃s ]) is the predominant variety of the French language in France, Andorra and Monaco, in its formal and informal registers. It has, for a long time, been associated with Standard French. It is now seen as a variety of French alongside Acadian French, Belgian French, Canadian / Quebec French, Swiss French, etc.

In Paris, nasal vowels are no longer pronounced as in traditional Parisian French: /ɑ̃/ → [ɔ̃], /ɛ̃/ → [ɐ̃], /ɔ̃/ → [õ] and /œ̃/ → [ɐ̃]. Many distinctions are lost: /a/ and /ɑ/, /ɛ/ and /ɛː/, /ø/ and /ə/, /ɛ̃/ and /œ̃/, and /nj/ and /ɲ/.

In the South of France, nasal vowels have not changed and are still pronounced as in traditional Parisian French: enfant [ɑ̃ˈfɑ̃], pain [pɛ̃], bon [bɔ̃] and brun [bʁœ̃], but some speakers add a [ŋ] at the end. Many distinctions are lost. At the end of words, most speakers do not distinguish /e/ and /ɛ/ : both livré and livret are pronounced [liˈvʁe]. In closed syllables, they no longer distinguish /ɔ/ and /o/ or /œ/ and /ø/ : both notre and nôtre are pronounced [nɔtʁ̥], and both jeune and jeûne are pronounced [ʒœn]. The distinctions of /a/ and /ɑ/ and of /ɛ/ and /ɛː/ are lost. Older speakers pronounce all e s: chaque [ˈʃakə] and vêtement [ˈvɛtəmɑ̃].

In the North, both /a/ and /ɑ/ are pronounced as [ɔ] at the end, with là is pronounced [lɔ] and mât [mɔ]. In Jura, the phoneme /ʁ/ is pronounced as a uvular trill : rouge is pronounced [ʀuːʒ], rêve is pronounced [ʀeːv], phonemic long vowels are still maintained: pâte [pɑːt] and fête [feːt], etc. In Brittany and Nord-Pas-de-Calais, phonemic long vowels are also maintained: neige [neːʒ] and tête [teːt].

The French Office for Biodiversity (OFB ; French: Office français de la biodiversité) is an établissement public à caractère administratif within the Government of France. It is under the control of both the Ministry of the Ecological Transition and Ministry of Agriculture and Food. It conducts research and enforces government policies on wildlife and the environment.

The OFB, located in Vincennes, was established on 1 January 2020 as the new entity succeeding the French Agency for Biodiversity (primarily in charge of national parks and other protected areas) and the National Office for Hunting and Wildlife. It has 2,800 agents (including 1,900 in territorial entities and in the overseas territories). Of these agents, 1,800 are environmental inspectors exercising the police powers of the OFB.

The OFB was founded in 2020 with the merging of the French Agency for Biodiversity and the National Hunting and Wildlife Office of France. The Agency for Biodiversity had been founded in 2016 through a merger of National Office for Water and Aquatic Environments (the former Higher Fisheries Council) with the National Park Service of France and the Marine Protected Areas Agency.

OFB conducts research and provides expertise on species, environments and their uses. It provides support for government environmental policies and assists managers of national areas. CFB also strives to educate the public on biodiversity issues and gain their support for conservation.

OFB contributes to the exercise of administrative and judicial policies relating to water (pollution of the resource, damage to wetlands or the coast), natural areas, flora and wild fauna (game species or protected, fight against trafficking in species), hunting (counter-poaching, strengthening hunting security) and fishing. The OFB also organizes the review of the hunting license and issues the license.

To fulfill this mission, environmental inspectors have certain criminal investigation powers enabling them to search for and find certain environmental offenses. Commissioned by ministerial decision and sworn in by the judicial authority, they exercise their judicial police missions under the authority of the public prosecutor. The environmental police also includes the administrative police.

Within the OFB, environmental technicians exercise these missions under the authority of the departmental prefect. They issue technical opinions on projects subject to administrative instruction at the request of the prefect, and carry out administrative checks on compliance with environmental regulations.

The French Parliament (French : Parlement français, [ paʁləmɑ̃ fʁɑ̃sɛ ]) is the bicameral parliament of the French Fifth Republic, consisting of the Senate (Sénat) and National Assembly (Assemblée nationale). Each assembly conducts legislative sessions at separate locations in Paris: the Senate meets in the Palais du Luxembourg, the National Assembly convenes at the Palais Bourbon, both on the Rive Gauche.

Each house has its own regulations and rules of procedure. However, occasionally they may meet as a single house known as the Congress of the French Parliament (Congrès du Parlement français), convened at the Palace of Versailles, to revise and amend the Constitution of France.

The French Parliament, as a legislative body, should not be confused with the various parlements of the Ancien Régime in France, which were regional appeals courts with certain administrative functions varying from province to province and as to whether the local law was written and Roman, or customary common law.

The word "Parliament", in the modern meaning of the term, appeared in France in the 19th century, at the time of the constitutional monarchy of 1830–1848. It is never mentioned in any constitutional text until the Constitution of the 4th Republic in 1946. Before that time, reference was made to "les Chambres" or to each assembly, whatever its name, but unlike in Great Britain, the legislature as a whole had no name as such.

Across the varied constitutional structures used in France since 1791, all have had a legislative body of varying names, which has for most of its history been bicameral (though at times unicameralism and more unorthodox forms with three or more chambers have existed).

The current Parliament is composed of two chambers: the Senate (French : le Sénat) and the National Assembly, which have 349 and 577 members respectively.

Deputies, who sit in the National Assembly, are elected by first past the post voting in two rounds for a term of five years, notwithstanding a dissolution of the Assembly. Each constituency has around 100,000 residents, though some variance of size exists between rural and urban constituencies. For example, the Val-d'Oise constituency has 188,000 electors, while Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon near Canada has just 6,000.

Senators are elected by indirect universal suffrage by the grands électeurs, who consist of deputies, regional councillors, departmental councillors and representatives of municipal councillors. The latter constitute 95% of the electoral body.

Normally, the parliament meets for a single nine-month session each year but under special circumstances the President of France can call an additional session. Parliamentary power was limited after the establishment of the Fifth Republic ; however, the National Assembly can still cause a government to fall if an absolute majority of the legislators votes for a motion of no confidence. As a result, the government usually consists of members from the political party that dominates the Assembly and must be supported by a majority there to prevent a vote of no-confidence.

The Prime Minister and other government Ministers are appointed by the President, who is under no constitutional or other mandatory obligation to make governmental appointments from the ranks of the majority party in parliament. This is a safeguard that was introduced by the founder of the Fifth Republic, Charles de Gaulle, to attempt to prevent the disarray and horse-trading seen in the parliamentary regimes of the Third and Fourth Republics; however, in practice the prime minister and other ministers usually do belong to the majority party. A notable exception to this custom occurred during Nicolas Sarkozy 's premiership when he appointed socialist ministers and Secretary of State -level junior ministers to his government. The rare periods during which the president is not from the same political party as the prime minister are usually known as cohabitation. The Cabinet of Ministers is led by the President rather than the Prime Minister.

The government (or, when it sits in session every Wednesday, the cabinet) exerts considerable influence on the agenda of Parliament. The government can link its term to a legislative text which it proposes, and unless a motion of censure is introduced within 24 hours of the proposal and passed within 48 hours of introduction – thus full procedures last at most 72 hours – the text is considered adopted without a vote. However, this procedure was limited by a 2008 constitutional amendment. Legislative initiative rests with the National Assembly.

Legislators enjoy parliamentary immunity. Both assemblies have committees that write reports on a variety of topics. If necessary, they can establish parliamentary commissions of inquiry with broad investigative power. However, this is almost never exercised because the majority can reject a proposition by the opposition to create an investigatory commission. Also, such a commission may only be created if it does not interfere with a judicial investigation, meaning that in order to cancel its creation, one just needs to press charges on the topic concerned by the investigatory commission. Since 2008, the opposition may impose the creation of an investigative commission once a year, even against the wishes of the majority. However, they still cannot lead investigations if there is a judicial case in process already (or that starts after the commission is formed).

The French Parliamentary Commission on Rwanda was invested in the beginning of 1998, following a press-led campaign and articles by journalist Patrick de Saint-Exupéry in the Figaro newspaper, which called for an examination into the role of the French government in the events surrounding the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. The Belgian Senate undertook a similar initiative in 1997.

The French deputies decided to examine French policy in Rwanda between 1990 and 1994. For the first time in the history of the Fifth Republic, the Assembly examined events related to the "reserved domains" of the President of the Republic, in other words, functions of government historically seen as the exclusive realm of presidential authority. Composed of members of the Foreign Relations Parliamentary Committee and the National Defence and Armed Forces Parliamentary Committee, this mission was thus an expression of a renewed intent of parliamentarians to extend the democratic field of the Parliament.

The commission was presided over by Paul Quilès, and the hearings took place between March 24 and July 9, 1998. In connection with the inquiry, the committee members spent two days in Rwanda, visiting the Murambi memorial and meeting with Rwandan officials and private organizations. Entitled "Report of the Information Mission of the National Defense and Armed Forces Committee and the Foreign Affairs Committee on the military operations led by France, other countries and the United Nations in Rwanda between 1990 and 1994", the final report was published on December 15, 1998.

A French passport (French : passeport français) is an identity document issued to French citizens. Besides enabling the bearer to travel internationally and serving as indication of French nationality (but not proof; the possession of a French passport only establishes the presumption of French nationality according to French law), the passport facilitates the process of securing assistance from French consular officials abroad or other European Union member states in case a French consular is absent, if needed.

Every French citizen is also a citizen of the European Union. The passport, along with the national identity card allows for rights of free movement and residence in any of the states of the European Union, European Economic Area and Switzerland.

The history of the French passport can be traced to documents issued in the 18th century. The French passport cover was changed in 2022.

Passports are valid for 10 years for applicants aged 18 or over and 5 years for applicants under the age of 18. Optical passports (older) have no sign under the word "Passeport" on the front page. Electronic passport contains an embedded chip and has the chip logo under the word "Passeport". Biometric passeports are the most recent ones and are decorated as the electronic passports but the word "Passeport" is underlined.

Unlike those from most other EU countries which are burgundy, ordinary passports have a Bordeaux-red front cover, with the diplomatic emblem of France emblazoned in the centre of the front cover. The word "PASSEPORT" (Passport) is inscribed below the emblem and "Union européenne" (European Union), "République française" (French Republic) above. The "e-passport" cover has a microchip symbol at the bottom. On the biometric variant of e-passports, the word "PASSEPORT" is underlined. French passports use the standard EU design, with the standard passport containing 32 pages.

The biodata page includes the following data:

The information page ends with the Machine Readable Zone starting with P<FRA.

The data page is printed in French and English with translation of the fields on the bearer's page in the other languages of the European Union elsewhere in the document.

Visa requirements for French citizens are administrative entry restrictions by the authorities of other states placed on citizens of France. As March 2025, French citizens had visa-free or visa on arrival access to 192 countries and territories, ranking the French passport 2nd in terms of travel freedom (tied with the passports of Germany, Finland, Italy, Japan and Spain), according to the Henley Passport Index.

French citizens can live and work in any country within the EU as a result of the right of free movement and residence granted in Article 21 of the EU Treaty.

French peasants were the largest socio-economic group in France until the mid-20th century. The word peasant, while having no universally accepted meaning, is used here to describe those who practiced subsistence farming throughout the Middle Ages, often smallholders or those paying rent to landlords, and rural workers in general. As industrialization developed, some peasants became wealthier than others and drove investment in agriculture. Rising inequality and financial management in France during the late 18th century eventually motivated peasants to revolt and destroy the feudal system. Today peasants could no longer be said to exist as an economic or social group in France, although many attempts have been made to honor and preserve their supposed traditional way of life.

By the middle of the 16th century, France's demographic growth, its increased demand for consumer goods, and its rapid influx of gold and silver from Africa and the Americas led to inflation (grain became five times as expensive from 1520 to 1600), and wage stagnation. Although many richer land-owning peasants and enterprising merchants had been able to grow rich during the boom, the standard of living fell greatly for poor rural peasants, who were forced to deal with bad harvests at the same time. This led to reduced purchasing power and a decline in manufacturing. The monetary crisis led France to abandon (in 1577) the livre as its money of account, in favor of the écu in circulation, and banning most foreign currencies.

Meanwhile, France's military ventures in Italy and (later) disastrous civil wars demanded huge sums of cash, which were raised with through the taille and other taxes. The taille, which was levied mainly on the peasantry, increased from 2.5 million livres in 1515 to 6 million after 1551, and by 1589 the taille had reached a record 21 million livres. Financial crises hit the royal household repeatedly, and so in 1523, Francis I established a government bond system in Paris, the "rentes sure l'Hôtel de Ville".

In the 17th century rich peasants who had ties to the market economy provided much of the capital investment necessary for agricultural growth, and frequently moved from village to village (or town). Geographic mobility, directly tied to the market and the need for investment capital, was the main path to social mobility. The "stable" core of French society, town guildspeople and village laborers, included cases of staggering social and geographic continuity, but even this core required regular renewal. Accepting the existence of these two societies, the constant tension between them, and extensive geographic and social mobility tied to a market economy holds the key to a clearer understanding of the evolution of the social structure, economy, and even political system of early modern France. Collins (1991) argues that the Annales School paradigm underestimated the role of the market economy; failed to explain the nature of capital investment in the rural economy, and grossly exaggerated social stability.

Before mid-century, in France, most peasants lived their day-to-day lives without engaging themselves politically. Things changed after a major regional conflict; the War of the Austrian Succession, which France fought to keep Prussia from claiming Habsburg lands (unsuccessfully). It was an expensive, drawn-out, and confusing war for ordinary French citizens. The French did not make meaningful territorial gains and instead, indebted themselves further (leading to higher taxes for peasants). News about the result of the war led to wide controversy surrounding French interests and about the presence of misinformation coming from the crown. People began to pay closer attention, forming their own opinions on governmental affairs.

The situation worsened dramatically after the result of the Seven Years' War (1756-1763). The French suffered the loss of almost all their territories in North America, humiliating the monarchy, and doubling the nation’s debt. The government tried to recoup the cost by creating new tax policies on land and income (which targeted commoners while excluding nobles), enforcement of unpaid/mandatory labor programs, and forced purchase of inflated goods (mainly salt). Pamphlets like the Richesse de l’Etat (1764) critiqued the way the tax system was being managed, placing the blame on a lack of fiscal equity, transparency, and a partiality to the interests and well-being of the second and first estates. “The expensive, and unjust system of taxation should be replaced by a single tax on wealth, which would be apportioned among the top two million property owners according to a graduated scale.”

New attitudes and opinions like these can be largely attributed to the expansion of political thought influenced by the ideals of the Enlightenment Period. Publications, particularly the Encyclopédie, developed a public that questioned authority, demanded reform, and valued reason over tradition. These ideas created backlash from the government: ""On April 16, 1757, the Crown decreed that anyone who published anything that merely tended to “stir up spirits” (“émouvoir les esprits”) would be executed."". Censorship campaigns like this added to distrust in the monarchy, framing it as tyrannical and untrustworthy.

This distrust in the crown only grew after public scandals, like in the case of Guillaume Kornmann, who was victimized by a French official through an affair with his wife. This tugged at the heartstrings of the common people, who pinned the blame on a corrupt government. Louis XVI’s attacks on venal offices through Chancellor Maupeou’s reforms (1771) undermined the independent judiciary (even with its existing flaws). The falling credibility and legitimacy of the monarchy stemmed from issues like these, which were now exploding in front of a public that was politically aware and ready to enact change.

Peasants increasingly understood their grievances as systemic rather than local and began to see the monarchy as responsible for their suffering. When the fiscal crisis of the late 1780s forced the Crown to call the Estates General, peasants were prepared not only to articulate their grievances but also to act. The politicization that unfolded between 1748 and 1789 laid the groundwork for peasant participation in the French Revolution and for the radical challenge to feudal authority that followed.

France faced a series of major economic crises after 1770. Because of very expensive wars, and inadequate financial system, the government was virtually bankrupt. From the point of view of the peasants, rapid population growth, harvest failures, physiocratic calls for modernization of agriculture, and rising seigneurial dues motivated peasants to destroy feudalism in France. They played a major role in starting the French Revolution in 1789. However most quickly retired from active political involvement. Karl Marx argued that the “allotment farmer” lacked political unity due to the sheer local nature of their lives. Napoleon I was widely popular. The Second Republic was widely resented for imposing high taxes, most notorious among them the 45 centime tax.

France was a rural nation as late as 1940, but a major change took place after railways started arriving in the 1850s–60s. In his seminal book Peasants into Frenchmen (1976), historian Eugen Weber traced the modernization of French villages and argued that rural France went from backward and isolated to modern and possessing a sense of French nationhood during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. He emphasized the roles of railroads, republican schools, and universal military conscription. He based his findings on school records, migration patterns, military service documents and economic trends. Weber argued that until 1900 or so a sense of French nationhood was weak in the provinces. Weber then looked at how the policies of the Third Republic created a sense of French nationality in rural areas. The book was widely praised, but was criticized by some, such as Ted W. Margadant, who argued that a sense of Frenchness already existed in the provinces before 1870.

After a period of free trade under Napoleon III and the early Third Republic, French national policy became more protectionist with regard to agricultural products, to protect the very large agricultural population, especially through the Méline tariff of 1892. France maintained two forms of agriculture: a modern, mechanized, capitalistic system in the Northeast, and in the rest of the country a reliance on subsistence agriculture on very small farms with low income levels.

In 1884 unions were legalised which in the countryside allowed for the creation of syndicats agricoles representing farmers. At first this led to the setting up of gentry-led unions (called the syndicalisme des ducs).

Modernization of the traditional/subsistence farming sector began in the 1940s, and resulted in a rapid depopulation of rural France, although protectionist measures remained national policy. With government support, younger, more active farmers bought out their neighbors, enlarged their properties, and used the latest in mechanization, new seeds, fertilizers, and new techniques. The result was a revolution in agricultural output, as well as a sharply reduced number of active farmers from 7.4 million in 1946 to only 2 million in 1975. It also resulted in millions of empty old farm houses. They were promptly purchased and upgraded by Frenchmen who wanted a rural retreat away from the frenzy of their primary work in the cities. Many did this out of nostalgia about family memories of rural living that drew the city dwellers back to the countryside. By 1978, France was the world leader in per capita ownership of second homes and L’Express reported an "irresistible infatuation of the French for the least Norman thatched house, Cévenol sheep barn or the most modest Provençal farmhouse."

Numerous organizations since the 1930s have emerged to preserve and enhance the position of the small farm in France, with a wide range of ideological approaches from far left to far right. They all seek to honor the tradition and fund the surviving farmers, and mobilize their political support.

The media became deeply involved, especially the postwar French film industry. Film depicted the exodus from countryside to city as a threat to France's historic role as a traditional, agrarian society. Documentaries celebrated the enormous power of modern machinery and electrification, while fictional dramas portrayed the joy of city dwellers who returned to the wholesome atmosphere of the country.

French people (French : Les Français, lit. ' The French ') are the individuals who are identified with the country of France, or more broadly, a global sociolinguistic group that share a common connection through the French language, culture, and history that originated in Western Europe. The Francophone world is one of the most geographically widespread linguistic communities.

The French people are primarily descended from Gallo-Romans (Romanized Celts) and Germanic peoples such as the Franks, the Visigoths, the Suebi and the Burgundians who settled in Gaul from east of the Rhine after the fall of the Roman Empire, as well as various later waves of lower-level irregular migration that have continued to the present day. The Norsemen also settled in Normandy in the 10th century and contributed significantly to the ancestry of the Normans. Furthermore, regional ethnic minorities also exist within France that have distinct lineages, languages and cultures such as Bretons in Brittany, Occitans in Occitania, Basques in the French Basque Country, Catalans in northern Catalonia, Germans in Alsace, Corsicans in Corsica and Flemings in French Flanders.

France has long been a patchwork of local customs and regional differences, and while most French people still speak the French language as their mother tongue, languages like Picard, Poitevin-Saintongeais, Franco-Provencal, Occitan, Auvergnat, Corsican, Basque, Lorraine Franconian, Alsatian, Norman, Breton, french flemish and Catalan remain spoken in their respective regions. Arabic is also widely spoken, arguably the largest minority language in France as of the 21st century (a spot previously held by Breton and Occitan).

Modern French society is a melting pot. From the middle of the 19th century, it experienced a high rate of inward migration, mainly consisting of Italians, Portuguese, Spaniards, Berbers, Arabs, Jews, Sub-Saharan Africans, Chinese, and other peoples from the Middle East and East Asia, and the government, defining France as an inclusive nation with universal values, advocated assimilation through which immigrants were expected to adhere to French values and cultural norms. Nowadays, while the government has let newcomers retain their distinctive cultures since the mid-1980s and requires from them a mere integration, French citizens still equate their nationality with citizenship as does French law.

As of 2025, the total population in France was estimated about 68.6 million. In addition to mainland France, French people and people of French descent can be found internationally, in overseas departments and territories of France such as the French West Indies (French Caribbean), and in foreign countries with significant French-speaking population groups or not, such as the United States (French Americans), Canada (French Canadians), Argentina (French Argentines), Brazil (French Brazilians), Mexico (French Mexicans), Chile (French Chileans) and Uruguay (French Uruguayans).

To be French, according to the first article of the French Constitution, is to be a citizen of France, regardless of one's origin, race, or religion (sans distinction d'origine, de race ou de religion). According to its principles, France has devoted itself to the destiny of a proposition nation, a generic territory where people are bounded only by the French language and the assumed willingness to live together, as defined by Ernest Renan 's " plébiscite de tous les jours " ('everyday plebiscite') on the willingness to live together, in Renan's 1882 essay " Qu'est-ce qu'une nation? ").

The debate concerning the integration of this view with the principles underlying the European Community remains open.

France has been historically open to immigration, although this has changed in recent years. Referring to this perceived openness, Gertrude Stein, wrote: "America is my country but Paris is my home". Indeed, the country has long valued its openness, tolerance and the quality of services available. Application for French citizenship is often interpreted as a renunciation of previous state allegiance unless a dual citizenship agreement exists between the two countries (for instance, this is the case with Switzerland : one can be both French and Swiss). The European treaties have formally permitted movement and European citizens enjoy formal rights to employment in the state sector (though not as trainees in reserved branches, e.g., as magistrates).

Seeing itself as an inclusive nation with universal values, France has always valued and strongly advocated assimilation. However, the success of such assimilation has recently been called into question. There is increasing dissatisfaction with, and within, growing ethno-cultural enclaves (communautarisme). The 2005 French riots in some troubled and impoverished suburbs (les quartiers sensibles) were an example of such tensions. However they should not be interpreted as ethnic conflicts (as appeared before in other countries like the US and the UK) but as social conflicts born out of socioeconomic problems endangering proper integration.

Historically, the heritage of the French people is mostly of Celtic or Gallic, Latin (Romans) origin, descending from the ancient and medieval populations of Gauls or Celts from the Atlantic to the Rhone Alps, Germanic tribes that settled France from east of the Rhine and Belgium after the fall of the Roman Empire such as the Franks, Burgundians, Allemanni, Visigoths, and Suebi, Latin and Roman tribes such as Ligurians and Gallo-Romans, Basques, and Norse populations largely settling in Normandy at the beginning of the 10th century as well as " Bretons " (Celtic Britons) settling in Brittany in Western France.

The name "France" etymologically derives from the word Francia, the territory of the Franks. The Franks were a Germanic tribe that overran Roman Gaul at the end of the Roman Empire.

In the pre-Roman era, Gaul (an area of Western Europe that encompassed all of what is known today as France, Belgium, part of Germany and Switzerland, and Northern Italy) was inhabited by a variety of peoples who were known collectively as the Gaulish tribes. Their ancestors were Celts who came from Central Europe in the 7th century BCE or earlier, and non-Celtic peoples including the Ligures, Aquitanians and Basques in Aquitaine. The Belgae, who lived in the northern and eastern areas, may have had Germanic admixture; many of these peoples had already spoken Gaulish by the time of the Roman conquest.

Gaul was militarily conquered in 58–51 BCE by the Roman legions under the command of General Julius Caesar, except for the south-east which had already been conquered about one century earlier. Over the next six centuries, the two cultures intermingled, creating a hybridized Gallo-Roman culture. In the late Roman era, in addition to colonists from elsewhere in the Empire and Gaulish natives, Gallia also became home to some immigrant populations of Germanic and Scythian origin, such as the Alans.

The Gaulish language is thought to have survived into the 6th century in France, despite considerable Romanization of the local material culture. Coexisting with Latin, Gaulish helped shape the Vulgar Latin dialects that developed into French, with effects including loanwords and calques (including oui, the word for "yes"), sound changes, and influences in conjugation and word order. Today, the last redoubt of Celtic language in France can be found in the northwestern region of Brittany, although this is not the result of a survival of Gaulish language but of a 5th-century AD migration of Brythonic speaking Celts from Britain.

The Vulgar Latin in the region of Gallia took on a distinctly local character, some of which is attested in graffiti, which evolved into the Gallo-Romance dialects which include French and its closest relatives.

With the decline of the Roman Empire in Western Europe, a federation of Germanic peoples entered the picture: the Franks, from which the word "French" derives. The Franks were Germanic pagans who began to settle in northern Gaul as laeti during the Roman era. They continued to filter across the Rhine River from present-day Netherlands and Germany between the 3rd and 7th centuries. Initially, they served in the Roman army and obtained important commands. Their language is still spoken as a kind of Dutch (French Flemish) in northern France (French Flanders). The Alamans, another Germanic people immigrated to Alsace, hence the Alemannic German now spoken there. The Alamans were competitors of the Franks, and their name is the origin of the French word for "German": Allemand.

By the early 6th century, the Franks, led by the Merovingian king Clovis I and his sons, had consolidated their hold on much of modern-day France. The other major Germanic people to arrive in France, after the Burgundians and the Visigoths, were the Norsemen or Northmen. Known by the shortened name " Norman " in France, these were Viking raiders from modern Denmark and Norway. They settled with Anglo-Scandinavians and Anglo-Saxons from the Danelaw in the region known today as Normandy in the 9th and 10th centuries. This later became a fiefdom of the Kingdom of France under King Charles III. The Vikings eventually intermarried with the local people, converting to Christianity in the process. The Normans, two centuries later, went on to conquer England and Southern Italy.

Eventually, though, the largely autonomous Duchy of Normandy was incorporated back into the royal domain (i. e. the territory under direct control of the French king) in the Middle Ages. In the crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem, founded in 1099, at most 120,000 Franks, who were predominantly French -speaking Western Christians, ruled over 350,000 Muslims, Jews, and native Eastern Christians.

Unlike elsewhere in Europe, France experienced relatively low levels of emigration to the Americas, with the exception of the Huguenots, due to a lower birthrate than in the rest of Europe. However, significant emigration of mainly Roman Catholic French populations led to the settlement of the Province of Acadia, Canada (New France) and Louisiana, all (at the time) French possessions, as well as colonies in the West Indies, Mascarene islands and Africa.

On 30 December 1687, a community of French Huguenots settled in South Africa. Most of these originally settled in the Cape Colony, but have since been quickly absorbed into the Afrikaner population. After Champlain's founding of Quebec City in 1608, it became the capital of New France. Encouraging settlement was difficult, and while some immigration did occur, by 1763 New France only had a population of some 65,000. From 1713 to 1787, 30,000 colonists immigrated from France to the Saint-Domingue. In 1805, when the French were forced out of Saint-Domingue (Haiti), 35,000 French settlers were given lands in Cuba.

By the beginning of the 17th century, some 20% of the total male population of Catalonia was made up of French immigrants. In the 18th century and early 19th century, a small migration of French emigrated by official invitation of the Habsburgs to the Austro-Hungarian Empire, now the nations of Austria, Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovakia, Serbia, and Romania. Some of them, coming from French-speaking communes in Lorraine or being French Swiss Walsers from the Valais canton in Switzerland, maintained for some generations the French language and a specific ethnic identity, later labelled as Banat (French: Français du Banat). By 1788, there were eight villages populated by French colonists.

The French First Republic appeared following the 1789 French Revolution. It replaced the ancient kingdom of France, ruled by the divine right of kings.

The 1870 Franco-Prussian War, which led to the short-lived Paris Commune of 1871, was instrumental in bolstering patriotic feelings; until World War I (1914–1918), French politicians never completely lost sight of the disputed Alsace-Lorraine region which played a major role in the definition of the French nation and therefore of the French people.

The decrees of 24 October 1870 by Adolphe Crémieux granted automatic and massive French citizenship to all Jewish people of Algeria.

Successive waves of immigrants during the 19th and 20th centuries were rapidly assimilated into French culture. France's population dynamics began to change in the middle of the 19th century, as France joined the Industrial Revolution. The pace of industrial growth attracted millions of European immigrants over the next century, with especially large numbers arriving from Poland, Belgium, Portugal, Italy, and Spain.

In the period from 1915 to 1950, many immigrants came from Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Russia, Scandinavia and Yugoslavia. Small but significant numbers of Frenchmen in the North and Northeast regions have relatives in Germany and Great Britain.

Between 1956 and 1967, about 235,000 North African Jews from Algeria, Tunisia, and Morocco also immigrated to France due to the decline of the French empire and following the Six-Day War. Hence, by 1968, Jews of North African origin comprised the majority of the Jewish population of France. As these new immigrants were already culturally French they needed little time to adjust to French society.

French law made it easy for thousands of settlers (colons in French), national French from former colonies of North and East Africa, India and Indochina to live in mainland France. It is estimated that 20,000 settlers were living in Saigon in 1945, and there were 68,430 European settlers living in Madagascar in 1958. 1.6 million European pieds noirs settlers migrated from Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco. In just a few months in 1962, 900,000 pied noir settlers left Algeria in the most massive relocation of population in Europe since the World War II. In the 1970s, over 30,000 French settlers left Cambodia during the Khmer Rouge regime as the Pol Pot government confiscated their farms and land properties.

In the 1960s, a second wave of immigration came to France, which was needed for reconstruction purposes and for cheaper labour after the devastation brought on by World War II. French entrepreneurs went to Maghreb countries looking for cheap labour, thus encouraging work-immigration to France. Their settlement was officialized with Jacques Chirac 's family regrouping act of 1976 (regroupement familial). Since then, immigration has become more varied, although France stopped being a major immigration country compared to other European countries. The large impact of North African and Arab immigration is the greatest and has brought racial, socio-cultural and religious questions to a country seen as homogenously European, French and Christian for thousands of years. Nevertherless, according to Justin Vaïsse, professor at Sciences Po Paris, integration of Muslim immigrants is happening as part of a background evolution and recent studies confirmed the results of their assimilation, showing that "North Africans seem to be characterized by a high degree of cultural integration reflected in a relatively high propensity to exogamy " with rates ranging from 20% to 50%. According to Emmanuel Todd the relatively high exogamy among French Algerians can be explained by the colonial link between France and Algeria.

A small French descent group also subsequently arrived from Latin America (Argentina, Chile and Uruguay) in the 1970s.

Most French people speak the French language as their mother tongue, but certain languages like Norman, Occitan languages, Corsican, Euskara, French Flemish and Breton remain spoken in certain regions (see Language policy in France). There have also been periods of history when a majority of French people had other first languages (local languages such as Occitan, Catalan, Alsatian, West Flemish, Lorraine Franconian, Gallo, Picard or Ch'timi and Arpitan). Today, many immigrants speak another tongue at home.

According to historian Eric Hobsbawm, "the French language has been essential to the concept of 'France'," although in 1789, 50 percent of the French people did not speak it at all, and only 12 to 13 percent spoke it fairly well; even in oïl languages zones, it was not usually used except in cities, and even there not always in the outlying districts.

Generations of settlers have migrated over the centuries to France, creating a variegated grouping of peoples. Thus the historian John F. Drinkwater states, "The French are, paradoxically, strongly conscious of belonging to a single nation, but they hardly constitute a unified ethnic group by any scientific gauge."

The modern French are the descendants of mixtures including Romans, Celts, Iberians, Ligurians and Greeks in southern France, Germanic peoples arriving at the end of the Roman Empire such as the Franks and the Burgundians, and some Vikings who mixed with the Normans and settled mostly in Normandy in the 9th century.

According to Dominique Schnapper, "The classical conception of the nation is that of an entity which, opposed to the ethnic group, affirms itself as an open community, the will to live together expressing itself by the acceptation of the rules of a unified public domain which transcends all particularisms".

The conventional conception of French history starts with Ancient Gaul, and French national identity often views the Gauls as national precursors, either as biological ancestors (hence the refrain nos ancêtres les Gaulois), as emotional/spiritual ancestors, or both. Vercingetorix, the Gaulish chieftain who tried to unite the various Gallic tribes of the land against Roman encroachment but was ultimately vanquished by Julius Caesar, is often revered as a "first national hero". In the famously popular French comic Asterix, the main characters are patriotic Gauls who fight against Roman invaders while in modern days the term Gaulois is used in French to distinguish the "native" French from French of immigrant origins. However, despite its occasional nativist usage, the Gaulish identity has also been embraced by French of non-native origins as well: notably, Napoleon III, whose family was ultimately of Corsican and Italian roots, identified France with Gaul and Vercingetorix, and declared that "New France, ancient France, Gaul are one and the same moral person."

It has been noted that the French view of having Gallic origins has evolved over history. Before the French Revolution, it divided social classes, with the peasants identifying with the native Gauls while the aristocracy identified with the Franks. During the early nineteenth century, intellectuals began using the identification with Gaul instead as a unifying force to bridge divisions within French society with a common national origin myth. Myriam Krepps of the University of Nebraska-Omaha argues that the view of "a unified territory (one land since the beginning of civilization) and a unified people" which de-emphasized "all disparities and the succession of waves of invaders" was first imprinted on the masses by the unified history curriculum of French textbooks in the late 1870s.

Since the beginning of the Third Republic (1871–1940), the state has not categorized people according to their alleged ethnic origins. Hence, in contrast to the United States Census, French people are not asked to define their ethnic appartenance, whichever it may be. The usage of ethnic and racial categorization is avoided to prevent any case of discrimination; the same regulations apply to religious membership data that cannot be compiled under the French Census. This classic French republican non- essentialist conception of nationality is officialized by the French Constitution, according to which "French" is a nationality, and not a specific ethnicity.

France sits at the edge of the European peninsula and has seen waves of migration of groups that often settled owing to the presence of physical barriers preventing onward migration. This has led to language and regional cultural variegation, but the extent to which this pattern of migrations showed up in population genetics studies was unclear until the publication of a study in 2019 that used genome wide data. The study identified six different genetic clusters that could be distinguished across populations. The study concluded that the population genetic clusters correlate with linguistic and historical divisions in France and with the presence of geographic barriers such as mountains and major rivers. A population bottleneck was also identified in the fourteenth century, consistent with the timing for the Black Death in Europe.

Modern French people predominantly present the R1b haplogroup of the Y chromosome, transmitted patrilineally and associated with steppe descent

French nationality has not meant automatic citizenship. Some categories of French people have been excluded, throughout the years, from full citizenship:

France was one of the first countries to implement denaturalization laws. Philosopher Giorgio Agamben has pointed out this fact that the 1915 French law which permitted denaturalization with regard to naturalized citizens of "enemy" origins was one of the first example of such legislation, which Nazi Germany later implemented with the 1935 Nuremberg Laws.

Furthermore, some authors who have insisted on the "crisis of the nation-state" allege that nationality and citizenship are becoming separate concepts. They show as example "international", " supranational citizenship" or " world citizenship " (membership to international nongovernmental organizations such as Amnesty International or Greenpeace). This would indicate a path toward a " postnational citizenship".

Besides this, modern citizenship is linked to civic participation (also called positive freedom), which implies voting, demonstrations, petitions, activism, etc. Therefore, social exclusion may lead to deprivation of citizenship. This has led various authors (Philippe Van Parijs, Jean-Marc Ferry, Alain Caillé, André Gorz) to theorize a guaranteed minimum income which would impede exclusion from citizenship.

In France, the conception of citizenship teeters between universalism and multiculturalism. French citizenship has been defined for a long time by three factors: integration, individual adherence, and the primacy of the soil (jus soli). Political integration (which includes but is not limited to racial integration) is based on voluntary policies which aims at creating a common identity and the interiorization by each individual of a common cultural and historic legacy. Since in France, the state preceded the nation, voluntary policies have taken an important place in the creation of this common cultural identity.

On the other hand, the interiorization of a common legacy is a slow process, which B. Villalba compares to acculturation. According to him, "integration is therefore the result of a double will: the nation's will to create a common culture for all members of the nation, and the communities' will living in the nation to recognize the legitimacy of this common culture". Villalba warns against confusing recent processes of integration (related to the so-called "second generation immigrants", who are subject to discrimination), with older processes which have made modern France. Villalba thus shows that any democratic nation characterize itself by its project of transcending all forms of particular memberships (whether biological, ethnic, historic, economic, social, religious or cultural). The citizen thus emancipates himself from the particularisms of identity which characterize himself to attain a more "universal" dimension. He is a citizen, before being a member of a community or of a social class.

Therefore, according to Villalba, "a democratic nation is, by definition, multicultural as it gathers various populations, which differs by their regional origins (Auvergnats, Bretons, Corsicans or Lorrainers...), their national origins (immigrant, son or grandson of an immigrant), or religious origins (Catholics, Protestants, Jews, Muslims, Agnostics or Atheists...)."

Ernest Renan described this republican conception in his famous 11 March 1882 conference at the Sorbonne, Qu'est-ce qu'une nation? (" What is a Nation? "). According to him, to belong to a nation is a subjective act which always has to be repeated, as it is not assured by objective criteria. A nation-state is not composed of a single homogeneous ethnic group (a community), but of a variety of individuals willing to live together.

Renan's non-essentialist definition, which forms the basis of the French Republic, is diametrically opposed to the German ethnic conception of a nation, first formulated by Fichte. The German conception is usually qualified in France as an "exclusive" view of nationality, as it includes only the members of the corresponding ethnic group, while the Republican conception thinks itself as universalist, following the Enlightenment 's ideals officialized by the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen. While Ernest Renan's arguments were also concerned by the debate about the disputed Alsace-Lorraine region, he said that not only one referendum had to be made in order to ask the opinions of the Alsatian people, but also a "daily referendum" should be made concerning all those citizens wanting to live in the French nation-state. This plébiscite de tous les jours ('everyday plebiscite') might be compared to a social contract or even to the classic definition of consciousness as an act which repeats itself endlessly.

Henceforth, contrary to the German definition of a nation based on objective criteria, such as race or ethnic group, which may be defined by the existence of a common language, among other criteria, the people of France is defined as all the people living in the French nation-state and willing to do so, i.e. by its citizenship. This definition of the French nation-state contradicts the common opinion, which holds that the concept of the French people identifies with one particular ethnic group. This contradiction explains the seeming paradox encountered when attempting to identify a "French ethnic group ": the French conception of the nation is radically opposed to (and was thought in opposition to) the German conception of the Volk ("ethnic group").

This universalist conception of citizenship and of the nation has influenced the French model of colonization. While the British Empire preferred an indirect rule system, which did not mix the colonized people with the colonists, the French Republic theoretically chose an integration system and considered parts of its colonial empire as France itself and its population as French people. The ruthless conquest of Algeria thus led to the integration of the territory as a Département of the French territory.

This ideal also led to the ironic sentence which opened up history textbooks in France as in its colonies: "Our ancestors the Gauls...". However, this universal ideal, rooted in the 1789 French Revolution ("bringing liberty to the people"), suffered from the racism that impregnated colonialism. Thus, in Algeria, the Crémieux decrees at the end of the 19th century gave French citizenship to north African Jews, while Muslims were regulated by the 1881 Indigenous Code. Liberal author Tocqueville himself considered that the British model was better adapted than the French one and did not balk before the cruelties of General Bugeaud 's conquest. He went as far as advocating racial segregation there.

This paradoxical tension between the universalist conception of the French nation and the racist attitudes intermingled into colonization is most obvious in Ernest Renan himself, who went as far as advocating a kind of eugenics. In a 26 June 1856 letter to Arthur de Gobineau, author of An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races (1853–1855) and one of the first theoreticians of " scientific racism ", he wrote:

You have written a remarkable book here, full of vigour and originality of mind, only it's written to be little understood in France or rather it's written to be misunderstood here. The French mind turns little to ethnographic considerations: France has little belief in race, [...] The fact of race is huge originally; but it's been continually losing its importance, and sometimes, as in France, it happens to disappear completely. Does that mean total decadence? Yes, certainly from the standpoint of the stability of institutions, the originality of character, a certain nobility that I hold to be the most important factor in the conjunction of human affairs. But also what compensations! No doubt if the noble elements mixed in the blood of a people happened to disappear completely, then there would be a demeaning equality, like that of some Eastern states and in some respects China. But it is in fact a very small amount of noble blood put into the circulation of a people that is enough to ennoble them, at least as to historical effects; this is how France, a nation so completely fallen into commonness, in practice plays on the world stage the role of a gentleman. Setting aside the quite inferior races whose intermingling with the great races would only poison the human species, I see in the future a homogeneous humanity.

During the Ancien Régime (before the 1789 French revolution), jus soli (or "right of territory") was predominant. Feudal law recognized personal allegiance to the sovereign, but the subjects of the sovereign were defined by their birthland. According to the 3 September 1791 Constitution, those who are born in France from a foreign father and have fixed their residency in France, or those who, after being born in a foreign country from a French father, have come to France and have sworn their civil oath, become French citizens. Because of the war, distrust toward foreigners led to the obligation on the part of this last category to swear a civil oath in order to gain French nationality.

However, the Napoleonic Code would insist on jus sanguinis ("right of blood"). Paternity, against Napoléon Bonaparte's wish, became the principal criterion of nationality, and therefore broke for the first time with the ancient tradition of jus soli, by breaking any residency condition toward children born abroad from French parents. However, according to Patrick Weil, it was not "ethnically motivated" but "only meant that family links transmitted by the pater familias had become more important than subjecthood".

With the 7 February 1851 law, voted during the Second Republic (1848–1852), "double jus soli " was introduced in French legislation, combining birth origin with paternity. Thus, it gave French nationality to the child of a foreigner, if both are born in France, except if the year following his coming of age he reclaims a foreign nationality (thus prohibiting dual nationality). This 1851 law was in part passed because of conscription concerns. This system more or less remained the same until the 1993 reform of the Nationality Code, created by 9 January 1973 law.

The 1993 reform, which defines the Nationality law, is deemed controversial by some. It commits young people born in France to foreign parents to solicit French nationality between the ages of 16 and 21. This has been criticized, some arguing that the principle of equality before the law was not complied with, since French nationality was no longer given automatically at birth, as in the classic "double jus soli " law, but was to be requested when approaching adulthood. Henceforth, children born in France from French parents were differentiated from children born in France from foreign parents, creating a hiatus between these two categories.

The 1993 reform was prepared by the Pasqua laws. The first Pasqua law, in 1986, restricts residence conditions in France and facilitates expulsions. With this 1986 law, a child born in France from foreign parents can only acquire French nationality by demonstrating a will to do so, at age 16, by proving haven been schooled in France and has a sufficient command of the French language. This new policy is symbolized by the expulsion of 101 Malians by charter.

The second Pasqua law on "immigration control" makes regularisation of illegal aliens more difficult and, in general, residence conditions for foreigners much harder. Charles Pasqua, who said on 11 May 1987: "Some have reproached me of having used a plane, but, if necessary, I will use trains", declared to Le Monde on 2 June 1993: "France has been a country of immigration, it doesn't want to be one anymore. Our aim, taking into account the difficulties of the economic situation, is to tend toward 'zero immigration' (" immigration zéro ")".

Therefore, modern French nationality law combines four factors: paternality or 'right of blood', birth origin, residency and the will expressed by a foreigner, or a person born in France to foreign parents, to become French.

The 1992 Maastricht Treaty introduced the concept of European citizenship, which comes in addition to national citizenships.

By definition, a " foreigner " is someone who does not have French nationality. Therefore, it is not a synonym of " immigrant ", as a foreigner may be born in France. On the other hand, a Frenchman born abroad may be considered an immigrant (e.g. former prime minister Dominique de Villepin who lived the majority of his life abroad). In most of the cases, however, a foreigner is an immigrant, and vice versa. They either benefit from legal sojourn in France, which, after a residency of ten years, makes it possible to ask for naturalisation. If they do not, they are considered " illegal aliens ". Some argue that this privation of nationality and citizenship does not square with their contribution to the national economic efforts, and thus to economic growth.

In any cases, rights of foreigners in France have improved over the last half-century:

The INSEE does not collect data about language, religion, or ethnicity – on the principle of the secular and unitary nature of the French Republic.

Nevertheless, there are some sources dealing with just such distinctions:

It is said by some that France adheres to the ideal of a single, homogeneous national culture, supported by the absence of hyphenated identities and by avoidance of the very term "ethnicity" in French discourse.

As of 2008, the French national institute of statistics INSEE estimated that 5.3 million foreign-born immigrants and 6.5 million direct descendants of immigrants (born in France with at least one immigrant parent) lived in France representing a total of 11.8 million and 19% of the total population in metropolitan France (62.1 million in 2008). Among them, about 5.5 million are of European origin and 4 million of North African origin.

Between 1848 and 1939, 1 million people with French passports emigrated to other countries. The main communities of French ancestry in the New World are found in the United States, Canada and Argentina while sizeable groups are also found in Brazil, Chile, Uruguay and Australia.

There are nearly seven million French speakers out of nine to ten million people of French and partial French ancestry in Canada. The Canadian province of Quebec (2006 census population of 7,546,131), where more than 95 percent of the people speak French as either their first, second or even third language, is the center of French life on the Western side of the Atlantic; however, French settlement began further east, in Acadia. Quebec is home to vibrant French-language arts, media, and learning. There are sizable French-Canadian communities scattered throughout the other provinces of Canada, particularly in Ontario, which has about 1 million people with French ancestry (400 000 who have French as their mother tongue), Manitoba, and New Brunswick, which is the only fully bilingual province and is 33 percent Acadian.

The United States is home to an estimated 13 to 16 million people of French descent, or 4 to 5 percent of the US population, particularly in Louisiana, New England, Northern New York, and parts of the Midwest. The French community in Louisiana consists of the Creoles, the descendants of the French settlers who arrived when Louisiana was a French colony, and the Cajuns, the descendants of Acadian refugees from the Great Upheaval. Very few creoles remain in New Orleans in present times. In New England, the vast majority of French immigration in the 19th and early 20th centuries came not from France, but from over the border in Quebec, the Quebec diaspora. These French Canadians arrived to work in the timber mills and textile plants that appeared throughout the region as it industrialized. Today, nearly 25 percent of the population of New Hampshire is of French ancestry, the highest of any state.

English and Dutch colonies of pre-Revolutionary America attracted large numbers of French Huguenots fleeing religious persecution in France. In the Dutch colony of New Netherland that later became New York, northern New Jersey, and western Connecticut, these French Huguenots, nearly identical in religion to the Dutch Reformed Church, assimilated almost completely into the Dutch community. However, large it may have been at one time, it has lost all identity of its French origin, often with the translation of names (examples: de la Montagne > Vandenberg by translation; de Vaux > DeVos or Devoe by phonetic respelling). Huguenots appeared in all of the English colonies and likewise assimilated. Even though this mass settlement approached the size of the settlement of the French settlement of Quebec, it has assimilated into the English-speaking mainstream to a much greater extent than other French colonial groups and has left few traces of cultural influence. New Rochelle, New York is named after La Rochelle, France, one of the sources of Huguenot emigration to the Dutch colony; and New Paltz, New York, is one of the few non-urban settlements of Huguenots that did not undergo massive recycling of buildings in the usual redevelopment of such older, larger cities as New York City or New Rochelle.

French Argentines form the third largest ancestry group in Argentina, after Italian and Spanish Argentines. French immigration to Argentina peaked between 1871 and 1890, though considerable immigration continued until the late 1940s. At least half of these immigrants came from Southwestern France, especially from the Basque Country, Béarn (Basses-Pyrénées accounted for more than 20% of immigrants), Bigorre and Rouergue, but significant numbers also from Savoy and the Paris region. Today around 6.8 million Argentines have some degree of French ancestry or are of partial or wholly of French descent (up to 17% of the total population). French Argentines had a considerable influence over the country, particularly on its architectural styles and literary traditions, as well as on the scientific field. Some notable Argentines of French descent include writer Julio Cortázar, physiologist and Nobel Prize winner Bernardo Houssay or activist Alicia Moreau de Justo. With something akin to Hispanic culture, the French immigrants quickly assimilated into mainstream Argentine society.

French Uruguayans form the third largest ancestry group in Uruguay, after Italian and Spanish Uruguayans. During the first half of the 19th century, Uruguay received the most French immigrants of any South American country. It constituted back then the second receptor of French immigrants in the New World after the United States. While the United States received 195,971 French immigrants between 1820 and 1855, 13,922 Frenchmen, most of them from the Basque Country and Béarn, left for Uruguay between 1833 and 1842.

The majority of immigrants were coming from the Basque Country, Béarn and Bigorre. Today, there are an estimated at 300,000 French descendants in Uruguay.

French migration to the United Kingdom is a phenomenon that has occurred at various points in history. Many British people have French ancestry, and French remains the foreign language most learned by British people. Much of the UK's mediaeval aristocracy was descended from Franco - Norman migrants at the time of the Norman Conquest of England, and also during the Angevin Empire of the Plantagenet dynasty.

According to a study by Ancestry.co.uk, 3 million British people are of French descent. Among those are television presenters Davina McCall and Louis Theroux. There are currently an estimated 400,000 French people in the United Kingdom, most of them in London.

The first French emigration in Costa Rica was a very small number to Cartago in the mid-nineteenth century. Due to World War II, a group of exiled French (mostly soldiers and families orphaned) migrated to the country.

In Mexico, a sizeable population can trace its ancestry to France. After Spain, this makes France the second largest European ethnicity in the country. The bulk of French immigrants arrived in Mexico during the 19th and early 20th centuries.

From 1814 to 1955, inhabitants of Barcelonnette and the surrounding Ubaye Valley emigrated to Mexico by the dozens. Many established textile businesses between Mexico and France. At the turn of the 20th century, there were 5,000 French families from the Barcelonnette region registered with the French Consulate in Mexico. While 90% stayed in Mexico, some returned, and from 1880 to 1930, built grand mansions called Maisons Mexicaines and left a mark upon the city. Today the descendants of the Barcelonettes account for 80,000 descendants distributed around Mexico.

In the 1860s, during the Second Mexican Empire ruled by Emperor Maximilian I of Mexico —in collaboration with Mexican conservatives and part of Napoleon III 's plan to create a Latin empire in the New World (indeed responsible for coining the term of "Amérique latine", "Latin America" in English)-- many French soldiers, merchants, and families set foot upon Mexican soil. Emperor Maximilian's consort, Carlota of Mexico, a princess of Belgium, was a granddaughter of Louis-Philippe of France.

Many Mexicans of French descent live in cities or states such as Zacatecas, San Luis Potosí, Sinaloa, Monterrey, Puebla, Guadalajara, and the capital, Mexico City, where French surnames such as Chairez/Chaires, Renaux, Pierres, Michel, Betancourt, Alaniz, Blanc, Ney, Jurado (Jure), Colo (Coleau), Dumas, or Moussier can be found. Today, Mexico has more than 3 million people of full and partial French descent. mainly living in the capital, Puebla, Guadalajara, Veracruz and Querétaro.

The French came to Chile in the 18th century, arriving at Concepción as merchants, and in the mid-19th century to cultivate vines in the haciendas of the Central Valley, the homebase of world-famous Chilean wine. The Araucanía Region also has an important number of people of French ancestry, as the area hosted settlers arrived by the second half of the 19th century as farmers and shopkeepers. With something akin to Hispanic culture, the French immigrants quickly assimilated into mainstream Chilean society.

From 1875 to 1895, 80% of settlers were from southwestern France, especially from Basses-Pyrénées (Basque country and Béarn), Gironde, Charente-Inférieure and Charente and regions situated between Gers and Dordogne.

Most of French immigrants settled in the country between 1875 and 1895. Between October 1882 and December 1897, 8,413 Frenchmen settled in Chile. At the end of the century they were almost 30,000. According to the census of 1865, out of 23,220 foreigners established in Chile, 2,483 were French, the third largest European community in the country after Germans and Englishmen. In 1875, the community reached 3,000 members, 12% of the almost 25,000 foreigners established in the country. It was estimated that 10,000 Frenchmen were living in Chile in 1912, 7% of the 149,400 Frenchmen living in Latin America.

Today it is estimated that 800,000 Chileans are of French descent.

Former president of Chile Michelle Bachelet is of French origin, as was Augusto Pinochet. A large percentage of politicians, businessmen, professionals and entertainers in the country are of French ancestry.

It is estimated that there are 1 million to 2 million or more Brazilians of French descent today. This gives Brazil the second largest French community in South America.

From 1819 to 1940, 40,383 Frenchmen immigrated to Brazil. Most of them settled in the country between 1884 and 1925 (8,008 from 1819 to 1883, 25,727 from 1884 to 1925, 6,648 from 1926 to 1940). Another source estimates that around 100,000 French people immigrated to Brazil between 1850 and 1965.

The French community in Brazil numbered 592 in 1888 and 5,000 in 1915. It was estimated that 14,000 Frenchmen were living in Brazil in 1912, 9% of the 149,400 Frenchmen living in Latin America, the second largest community after Argentina (100,000).

The Brazilian Imperial Family originates from the Portuguese House of Braganza and the last emperor's heir and daughter, Isabella, married Prince Gaston d'Orleans, Comte d'Eu, a member of the House of Orléans, a cadet branch of the Bourbons, the French Royal Family.

The first French immigrants were politicians such as Nicolas Raoul and Isidore Saget, Henri Terralonge and officers Aluard, Courbal, Duplessis, Gibourdel and Goudot. Later, when the Central American Federation was divided in 7 countries, Some of them settled to Costa Rica, others to Nicaragua, although the majority still remained in Guatemala. The relationships start to 1827, politicians, scientists, painters, builders, singers and some families emigrated to Guatemala. Later in a Conservative government, annihilated nearly all the relations between France and Guatemala, and most of French immigrants went to Costa Rica, but these relationships were again return to the late of the nineteenth century.

Elsewhere in the Americas, French settlement took place in the 16th to 20th centuries. They can be found in Haiti, Cuba (refugees from the Haitian Revolution) and Uruguay. The Betancourt political families who influenced Peru, Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, Puerto Rico, Bolivia and Panama have some French ancestry.

Large numbers of Huguenots are known to have settled in the United Kingdom (from 50,000), Ireland (10,000), in Protestant areas of Germany (especially the city of Berlin) (from 40 000), in the Netherlands (from 50 000), in South Africa and in North America. Many people in these countries still bear French names.

In Asia, a proportion of people with mixed French and Vietnamese descent can be found in Vietnam. Including the number of persons of pure French descent. Many are descendants of French settlers who intermarried with local Vietnamese people. Approximately 5,000 in Vietnam are of pure French descent, however, this number is disputed. A small proportion of people with mixed French and Khmer descent can be found in Cambodia. These people number approximately 16,000 in Cambodia, among this number, approximately 3,000 are of pure French descent. An unknown number with mixed French and Lao ancestry can be found throughout Laos. A few thousand French citizens of Indian, European or creole ethnic origins live in the former French possessions in India (mostly Pondicherry). In addition to these Countries, small minorities can be found elsewhere in Asia; the majority of these living as expatriates.

During the great power era, about 100 French families came to Sweden. They had mainly emigrated to Sweden as a result of religious oppression. These include the Bedoire, De Laval and De Flon families. Several of whom worked as merchants and craftsmen. In Stockholm, the French Lutheran congregation was formed in 1687, later dissolved in 1791, which was not really an actual congregation but rather a series of private gatherings of religious practice.

Apart from Québécois, Acadians, Cajuns, and Métis, other populations with some French ancestry outside metropolitan France include the Caldoches of New Caledonia, Louisiana Creole people of the United States, the so-called Zoreilles and Petits-blancs of various Indian Ocean islands, as well as populations of the former French colonial empire in Africa and the West Indies.

In European historiography, the term French period (French : Période française, German : Franzosenzeit, Dutch : Franse tijd) refers to the period between 1794 and 1815 during which most of Western Europe was controlled by Republican or Napoleonic France. The exact duration of the period varies by the location concerned. A related term in English-language historiography is the Napoleonic era.

In German historiography, the term emerged in the 19th century and developed nationalist connotations. It entered Low German usage with Fritz Reuter 's popular work Ut de Franzosentid (1860). It was used alongside the concept of Erbfeind ("hereditary enemy") to express anti-French feeling as part of the formation of a German national identity and as such was used in a non-neutral way under the German Empire and Third Reich. In Germany, the term has thus been shunned since the Bonn Republic, with " French Revolutionary Wars " and " Napoleonic Wars " more commonly used today.

Following the Battle of Austerlitz and the War of the Third Coalition, Napoleon dissolved the Holy Roman Empire, annexed parts of Austria and certain German states to France, and formed the German states into the Confederation of the Rhine. Napoleon was their "protector," but as the Confederation was above all a military alliance, their foreign policy was utterly dominated by France, and the states had to supply France with large numbers of military troops. Disquiet about mass-conscription (the levée en masse) also trigged an uprising, known as the Peasants' War, in 1798 within modern-day Belgium and Luxembourg. In Germany, Napoleon formed two new states, the Grand Duchy of Berg and the Kingdom of Westphalia, which he gave to his general Joachim Murat and his brother Jerome Bonaparte, respectively. The Austrian Netherlands and Prince-Bishopric of Liège were annexed and became départements of France.

During the French occupation, the Napoleonic Code was introduced, during which the German people came into contact with the ideals of the French Revolution, including nationalism. In Prussia, which was not part of the French-dominated Confederation of the Rhine, but still occupied by France, this created a dynamic towards constitutional, political, social, and military reform which would prove critical during the Liberation War. In the Confederation itself, there were already riots against the French rule, and after the devastation of the French army during the French invasion of Russia, the commander of the Prussian Corps, Yorck, signed a ceasefire with Russia. This was to be the decisive trigger of the Liberation War.

The French period contributed significantly to the emergence of the idea of unity and national consciousness in Germany. The many regions with their various dialects found in the struggle against the French occupation "German" as a common definition of anti-French sentiment or freedom. After the Vormärz period, the desire for freedom from the government was suppressed, until the March Revolution in 1848 and the formation of the first German parliament, though not all German-speaking territories were involved. In the Prussian War of Liberation conscription modeled after the levée en masse of General Gerhard von Scharnhorst was introduced and the Prussian army reforms introduced. The Prussian reforms (1807–1812) during the French period include not only the formal abolition of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806 but also the largest political and social upheavals between the Early Modern Period and the Modern Period in Germany. With the abandonment of Francis II from the Holy Roman Empire to the Austrian Empire, there was also created a political split between Prussia and Austria, which laid the ground for Austrian exclusion from the German Question.

In 1977 and 1979, several petitions were signed by a number of prominent French intellectuals, doctors, and psychologists calling for reforms to or the abolition of the French age-of-consent law. A January 1977 petition published in Le Monde criticized the Affaire de Versailles [ fr ] —the detention of three men arrested for sex offences against children aged 12–13. A May 1977 petition addressed at the French Parliament called for the equalization of homosexual and heterosexual ages of consent. A 1979 petition published in Libération defended a man arrested for sexual relations with girls aged 6–12.

In 1945, an ordinance was enacted by the French government that established an age of consent in France of 15. However, an article within this ordinance forbade sodomy and similar "sexual relations against nature" with any person under the age of 21. In 1974, this was lowered to 18. This was perceived by activists, including Michel Foucault and Guy Hocquenghem, as being discriminatory against gay men.

Michel Foucault argued that it is intolerable to assume that a minor is incapable of giving meaningful consent to sexual relations. Foucault also believed consent, as a concept, was a "contractual notion", and that it was not a sufficient measure of whether harm was being conducted. Foucault, Sartre, and newspapers such as Libération and Le Monde each defended the idea of sexual relationships with minors.

On 26 January 1977 an open letter, written by Gabriel Matzneff and signed by 69 people, was published in Le Monde, presenting a defense of those placed in pre-trial detention for sexual relations with children under the age of 15. In particular, the letter addresses the Affaire de Versailles [ fr ], a 1973 incident in which three men—Bernard Dejager, Jean-Claude Gallien, and Jean Burckardt—were arrested for non-violent sex offences against children aged 12–13. The letter, published the day before their trial, criticizes the French legal system for the long pre-trial detention of the three men and argues that the children had consented, but that the law had denied them their right to consent. Finally, the letter claims that the law is inconsistent—it argues that if minors aged 13 had the "capacity for discernment" to be held responsible for a crime, then the law should provide them with the same capacity to consent.

The signatories to the January 1977 petition included Gabriel Matzneff (the petition's author), Jean-Louis Bory, Pierre Hahn [ eo ; fr ; ia ; pt ], Jean-Luc Hennig [ ar ; fr ; ru ], Guy Hocquenghem, Françoise d'Eaubonne, René Schérer, Pierre Guyotat, Louis Aragon, Francis Ponge, Roland Barthes, Simone de Beauvoir, Philippe Sollers, Patrice Chéreau, Bernard Kouchner, François Châtelet, Gilles Deleuze, Félix Guattari, Jean-Paul Sartre, and Jean-François Lyotard.

Notably, the signatories did not include Michel Foucault, Marguerite Duras, Hélène Cixous, or Xavière Gauthier [ fr ; sv ], who all refused to sign the January petition.

Philippe Sollers later stated in 2001 that "there were so many manifestos, we signed them almost automatically". In 2013, Gabriel Matzneff revealed on his blog that he had written the letter and criticized various signatories which he viewed were erasing or backtracking on their signature.

In May 1977, a petition was signed by 80 French intellectuals, calling for the end of discrimination against homosexual men encoded in the 1945 ordinance. It also asks that the Penal Code Revision Commission (French : Commission de Révision du Code Pénal) review the age of consent and recommend changes to parliament.

The May 1977 petition was signed by a number of prominent French intellectuals, doctors, and psychologists from a wide range of political positions, including Michel Foucault, Gilles Deleuze, Jacques Derrida, Louis Aragon, Roland Barthes, Louis Althusser, Simone de Beauvoir, Jean-Paul Sartre, Félix Guattari, Michel Leiris, Alain Robbe-Grillet, Philippe Sollers, Jacques Rancière, Jean-François Lyotard, Francis Ponge, Jean Danet, Françoise Dolto, Bernard Besret, and Gabriel Matzneff.

On 4 April 1978 a conversation between Michel Foucault, Jean Danet and Guy Hocquenghem detailing the reasons for their positions was broadcast by the radio channel France Culture during the program Dialogues. In the conversation, which was later republished as " Sexual Morality and the Law [ es ; fr ; it ; pt ] ", the three discussed the petition and concluded that consent as a legal concept is a contractual notion and thus a "trap", saying that "no one makes a contract before making love".

In 1979, a petition was published in Libération, supporting Gérard R., who was arrested for having sexual relations with girls aged six to twelve living at his home. The petition argued that the girls were "happy" with the situation. The letter was later reproduced in the paper L'Express, in the issue of 7 March 2001.

In 1982, the French government removed its clauses regarding sodomy and similar acts "against nature" from the 1945 ordinance.

French philosophy is philosophy in France, by French people, and in the French language, a part of French culture. French philosophy includes several schools of thought and has influenced Western philosophy for centuries. It includes the medieval scholasticism of Peter Abelard, the founding of modern philosophy by René Descartes, the 18th century Enlightenment philosophes who influenced the French Revolution, 19th century eclecticism, spiritualism, socialism, and positivism ; and 20th century continental philosophy such as philosophy of science, phenomenology, existentialism, structuralism, poststructuralism, and postmodernism.

French philosophy begins in the medieval period with authors writing in Latin, brought by the Romanization of Gaul and Gallo-Roman culture. Cassiodorus (ca. 490–585) cites in his book Variae (dated 526) a letter to king Athalaric : "Finally you found Roman eloquence in regions that were not originally its own; and there the reading of Cicero rendered you eloquent where once the Gaulish language resounded." Christian monk Gennadius of Massilia (died c. 496) wrote Of Church Doctrine (De Ecclesiasticis Dogmatibus), long attributed to Saint Augustine.

Medieval philosophy was very much a part of Christian philosophy and theology. During the Carolingian Renaissance, Ratramnus (d. c. 868) defended Gottschalk of Orbais ' (808–868) views on double predestination, a controversy throughout Francia in the 9th century.

Ratramnus also later supported Gottschalk in his conflict with archbishop Hincmar (806–882) of Rheims, advisor to Charles the Bald. Hincmar of Rheims altered a hymn, changing the words trina deitas (triune God) for summa deitas (supreme God). Gottschalk accused Hincmar of Sabellianism, and Hincmar accused Gottschalk of Arianism.

Ratramnus also wrote Against the Objections of the Greeks who Slandered the Roman Church, a response to the Photian schism (863–867) and defense of the filioque addition to the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed.

The Benedictine monk of Marmoutier Abbey and empiricist Gaunilo is well known for his work In Behalf of the Fool. Gaunilo objects to Saint Anselm of Canterbury 's (1033–1109) ontological argument for the existence of God found in Anselm's Proslogion (c. 1078). Gaunilo contends as a reductio that the same argument proves the existence of "the most perfect island". Lanfranc (c. 1010–1089) and Saint Anselm were Benedictine monks at Bec Abbey.

Medieval philosophy was also concerned with the problem of universals inherited from antiquity. Roscellinus (c. 1050–c. 1121) defended nominalism, stating universals are merely an emission of sound (flatus vocis). Among Roscellinus' supporters was Raimbert of Lille.

Roscellinus also stated the three persons of the Trinity were not one substance, arguing if they were then God the Father and the Holy Spirit would have become incarnate along with God the Son. This prompted Anselm's On Faith in the Trinity.

In 1092/1093, a council convoked at Soissons by the archbishop of Reims condemned his interpretation and accused Roscellinus of tritheism. Roscellinus recanted his theological beliefs, but later returned to professing them.

Anselm of Laon (d. 1117) studied under Anselm at Bec and was a leading proponent of philosophical realism who helped to pioneer biblical hermeneutics. William of Champeaux (c. 1070–1121) studied under Roscellinus and Anselm of Laon, and was also a proponent of realism. William was a friend of mystic Bernard of Clairvaux (1090–1153).

The philosophers of the cathedral school at Chartres were at the forefront of an intellectual climate of the High Middle Ages now known as the twelfth-century Renaissance, pioneering the Scholastic philosophy that came to dominate European medieval philosophy. Known as Chartrains, they promoted scholarship and Platonism, such as found in the Timaeus.

Ivo of Chartres (c. 1040–1115) was a student of Anselm at Bec. The best known philosophers at Chartres included Bernard (d. c. 1125) and Thierry (d. c. 1150) of Chartres, and Gilbert of Poitiers (c. 1086 –1154).

Gilbert of Poitiers studied under William of Champeaux, Anselm of Laon and Bernard of Chartres. Gilbert's views on the Trinity were controversial, contending the divine essence of God exists separately, and so he was condemned for teaching a "quaternity."

William of Conches (c. 1090–c. 1154) studied under Bernard. Herman of Carinthia (c. 1105–c. 1155) and Clarembald of Arras (c. 1110–c. 1187) were among Thierry's students.

William of Champeaux was also the teacher of Walter of Mortagne (c. 1100–1174), leader of the "indifferentists", a type of platonist who attempts to avoid the more extreme forms of platonism, and according to whom the universal it itself indifferent, changing according to points of view. Raimbert's nominalism was attacked by Odo of Tournai (1060–1113).

Peter Abelard (1079–1142) was a scholastic philosopher, theologian and logician who taught at the cathedral schools of Paris. The Chambers Biographical Dictionary describes him as "the keenest thinker and boldest theologian of the 12th Century". He wrote Sic et Non (c. 1121) and fixed more decisively than anyone before him the scholastic manner of philosophizing. Abelard was also expelled by Anselm of Laon, and clashed with his master William of Champeaux, and opposed by Alberic of Paris. Abelard is also notable for his love affair and collaboration with Héloïse (1101–1164).

Abelard helped to establish the authority of Aristotle 's logic. Abelard distinguished between de dicto modal sentences and de re modal sentences. Abelard also defended conceptualism on the problem of universals. Abelard further showed a great interest in ethics, writing Ethics (1139).

Abelard amended Augustine 's doctrine of original sin. The Vatican and Pope Innocent III accepted the view that unbaptized babies did not, as at first believed, go straight to Hell but to a special area of limbo, limbus infantium. They would therefore feel no pain, but no supernatural happiness either, because they would not be able to see the deity who created them.

Abelard's lectures attracted students from across Europe, helping prepare the founding of the University of Paris a few decades after his death. The patronage of Italian philosopher Peter Lombard (c. 1096–1160) by Odo, bishop of Lucca, who recommended him to Bernard of Clairvaux, allowed him to leave Italy and further his studies at Reims and Paris. Lombard became Bishop of Paris and is author of the Sentences (c. 1150).

The Petit Pont school introduced the new logic, and included Adam of Balsham (c. 1100–c. 1157), who studied with Lombard, and William of Soissons, who coined the principle of explosion.

The Summa aurea of William of Auxerre (1150–1231) shows a debt to Lombard. Bishop of Paris William of Auvergne (c. 1185–1249) extensively engaged with Aristotle. Franciscan John of La Rochelle (c. 1200–1245) taught at Paris.

Italian philosopher and founder of the Aristotelian Thomist school Thomas Aquinas (c. 1225–1274) taught at Paris. John of Paris (c. 1255–1306) defended Aquinas.

The Condemnations of 1210–1277 at the recently founded Sorbonne, Étienne Tempier deemed Aristotle's Physics to be heresy, opening the door to modern science by questioning ancient science. Averroists Siger of Brabant (c. 1240–c. 1284) and Boethius of Dacia have been singled out as the most prominent targets of the 1277 censure. John of Jandun (c. 1285–1328) was a later Averroist.

The enigmatic Gerard of Brussels probably published his pioneering study of kinematics On Motion some time in the 13th century. Lambert of Auxerre was a contemporary logician.

A number of Jewish philosophers were in Southern France in the Middle Ages, such as Samuel ibn Tibbon (c. 1150–c. 1230), who wrote Biur meha-Millot ha-Zarot (1213), an explanation of the philosophical terms of Guide for the Perplexed (c. 1190) by Maimonides, which seeks to reconcile Aristotelianism with Rabbinical Jewish theology. Gersonides (1288–1344) was a rigid Aristotelian.

Catalan Ramon Llull (c. 1232–c. 1316) visited Paris in the 1280s and Llullism became popular. Llulism is a philosophical system known as 'the Art' which propounds a belief in the unity of Christianity influenced by neoplatonism.

While Llull was not himself an alchemist, a number of works on alchemy were attributed to him, as well as to Arnaldus de Villanova (c. 1240–1311). Influenced by Joachim of Fiore, Arnaldus claimed in On the Coming of the Antichrist (1288) that in 1378 the Antichrist would come and the world would end. He was imprisoned and the Sorbonne ordered his works to be burned. Both Llull and Villanova had some influence on alchemist John of Rupescissa (c. 1310–c. 1368), known for aqua vitae.

The nominalist beliefs of British philosopher William of Ockham were banned in Paris in 1339. Despite this his views proved influential.

Jean Buridan (c. 1301–c. 1360) was a nominalist who is the namesake for Buridan's ass. Buridan criticized Aristotle's Physics, which could not explain e. g. why an arrow in flight continues to move once leaving the bow. Buridan in response developed the theory of impetus, a precursor to inertia.

Buridan was also one of the foremost logicians of the later Middle Ages, writing the textbook Compendium of Dialectic, influenced by Peter of Spain. For 200 years after Buridan, little was said about syllogistic logic.

Nicole Oresme (1325–1382) studied with Buridan. Together they studied acceleration or "uniformly difform motion".

Oresme was a counselor of King Charles V, and his astronomical commentary on Aristotle's On the Heavens anticipated Copernicus with arguments that the Earth rotates. Oresme also criticized Aristotelian notions of space and time, considering time independent of motion, influenced by, (or at least agreeing with) Peter John Olivi (1248–1298) and Gerardus Odonis (1285–1349).

Oresme also contributed to economics and followed Aristotle in arguing against usury, even though Oresme said inflation was worse. His opposition to usury was shared by Thomists like Giles of Lessines (c. 1230–c. 1304), as well as Giles of Rome (c. 1243–1316) student and Italian Gerard of Siena (c. 1295–1336), and Peter John Olivi and Gerardus Odonis; and his master Buridan. Buridan and Oresme supported a metallist theory of money.

The nominalist and skeptical views of Nicholas of Autrecourt (c. 1299–1369) and John of Mirecourt, known as Monachus Albus ('the White Monk'), were condemned as heresy in 1347. Both wrote commentaries on the Sentences ; and both rejected causality and Aristotelian substance theory. Mirecourt influenced Peter Ceffons.

Pierre d'Ailly (1351–1420) was a nominalist who taught the Sentences. His pupils were Jean Gerson (1363–1429) and Nicholas of Clémanges (c. 1360–1440). All three philosophers were embroiled in the Western Schism of 1378, and taught Ockham's conciliar theory. Jean Gerson developed natural rights theory, and also defended the divine mission of Joan of Arc.

University of Toulouse professor and physician Raymond Sebond (1385–1436) opposed the Ockhamists and was influenced by Llull. He attempted to reconcile reason and faith. Raymond declares that the Book of Nature and the Bible are both divine revelations. Sebond wrote the posthumously published Theologia naturalis (1484).

Italian Renaissance humanist Gregory of Tifernas was the first teacher of Greek in France at the University of Paris in 1458. Guillaume Fichet (1433–c. 1480) and Robert Gaguin (1434–1501) are usually seen as the first French humanists. Guillaume Budé (1467–1540) was another French humanist.

French Renaissance humanist Rabelais (c. 1490–1553) contributed to French philosophy in Gargantua and Pantagruel a belief in hedonistic man uncorrupted by institutions, and ridiculed Pyrrhonism in the third book (1546).

Logician and education reformer Petrus Ramus (1515–1572) wrote Everything that Aristotle has said is false (1536). The Ramists distrusted human thought and put faith in intuitive logical relations. The Dialogues (1557) of Ramist Guy De Bruès (b. c. 1530) entertained skepticism. After Ramus's death, followers such as Banosius and Nancelius produced biographies. Ramism had a lasting influence in Europe and even New England.

Following the Reformation, France saw a Protestant movement, such as the Huguenots, led by Genevan Calvinism founder John Calvin (1509–1564), author of Institutes of the Christian Religion (1536). Calvinism affirms predestination and salvation through God alone (monergism). Calvin also advanced the sensus divinitatis, an innate divine awareness of God's presence.

William Farel (1489–1565) influenced Calvin, and was influenced by Llullist and humanist Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples (c. 1455–c. 1536).

Jean Bodin (c. 1530–1596) was critical of papal authority, preferring the sovereignty of an absolute monarch during the Wars of Religion (1562 – 1598). Ramus converted to Protestantism and was a victim of the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre (1572). Budé's family fled from France.

Parisian printer Henri Estienne (1531–1598) transmitted the first Latin translation of ancient Pyrrhonian skeptic Sextus Empiricus in 1562. Estienne's father Robert (1503–1559) was a Protestant convert and the "father of French lexicography ", writing Latin and French dictionaries.

Michel de Montaigne (1533–1592) was a skeptic, summed up in his personal motto of Que sais-je? ("what do I know?") His highly influential writing style consists of essays ('attempt', he coined the term) first published in 1580, filled with autobiographical and casual anecdotes.

Montaigne's best known skeptical essay is the circuitous Apology for Raymond Sebond, which recapitulates much from Sextus Empiricus, while defending Christianity and the cosmological argument. Montaigne maintains beasts and savages are better off than people. He propounded cultural primitivism in Of Cannibals.

Montaigne was friends with political philosopher Étienne de La Boétie (1530–1563), author of the posthumously published Discourse on Voluntary Servitude (1577). Montaigne also influenced moralist François de La Rochefoucauld (1613–1680).

Montaigne's follower was the Parisian and neostoic Pierre Charron (1541–1603), who was also influenced by Guillaume du Vair (1556–1621). Charron is notable for On Wisdom (1601), which argued that ethics could be separated from religion, and that one attacks reason to boost faith and wisdom. Charron also wrote The Three Truths (1594), in which Charron sought to prove that God exists, Christianity is true, and the true church is Roman Catholicism. Francis Garasse (1585–1631) criticized Charron, believing he thought only nature was needed for wisdom and guidance.

University of Toulouse professor Francisco Sanches (c. 1550–1623) published the skeptical That Nothing Is Known (1581). While Sanches does not develop the idea, he states the need for a method based on indubitable inner experience.

France in the early modern period became the cultural center of Europe, especially under the reign of "Sun King" Louis XIV, and saw a number of prominent philosophers. Louis XIV's tutor was libertine François de La Mothe Le Vayer (1588–1672). Libertines were such skeptics that they believed the more knowledge, the more grief. Philosophy at this time often sought to reconcile dogmatism and skepticism.

Modern philosophy began in France with René Descartes (1596–1650), who raised problems central to 17th century thought. An expat who lived in the Dutch Republic, he studied at the Jesuit school La Flèche and was a pioneer of mathematics and the Scientific Revolution.

Descartes founded a mechanistic philosophy known as Cartesianism which incorporated his Cartesian physics. Cartesianism was also rationalist and dualist, supported in works like Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) and Discourse on Method (1637). The three great rationalists of early modern philosophy are Descartes, Baruch Spinoza, and German philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716).

It is often said Descartes changed the primary object of philosophy from ontology to epistemology. Concerned with the recent spread of skepticism, Descartes desired to find indubitable ground on which all the sciences could be placed and progressively built. Thus he doubted anything he could and accepted only certain (or apodeictic) knowledge as truth.

After invoking the possibility of dreaming to doubt the information from the senses and the external world, and further of an omnipotent deceiver to reject mathematics and logic, Descartes discovered at least one thing could be known for certain. Even if he doubted everything, if he himself was doubting, then he had to exist. Thus Cogito Ergo Sum —I think, therefore I am. This became his first principle.

Descartes claimed since the Cogito is perceived " clearly and distinctly ", anything similarly clear and distinct must be true. Then he argues one can conceive of an infinite being, but finite beings cannot produce infinite ideas and hence an infinite being must have put the idea into his mind. He uses this ontological argument to invoke the existence of a benevolent God as the indubitable foundation making all sciences possible.

Cartesianism attracted several followers such as Jansenist solitaires Antoine Arnauld (1612–1694), Pierre Nicole (1625–1695), and Claude Lancelot (c. 1615–1695). Arnauld and Lancelot produced the Port-Royal Grammar (1660); and Arnauld and Nicole produced the Port-Royal Logic (1662), the "most influential logic book after Aristotle and before the end of the nineteenth century". In 1649, Nicolas Cornet (1572–1663) sought the condemnation of five propositions from Cornelius Jansen 's Augustinus. Arnauld defended the Jansenists.

Cornet's student Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet (1627–1704) supported the king's revocation of the Edict of Nantes (Edict of Fontainebleau, 1685), abolishing the rights of the Protestant minority. Bossuet also banned the work of Oratorian Richard Simon (1638–1712), who was influenced by Pre-Adamite theorist Isaac La Peyrère (1596–1676).

Other Cartesians were physiologist Louis de La Forge, Géraud de Cordemoy, Claude Clerselier, University of Paris professor Edmond Pourchot, recollect Antoine Le Grand, mystic Pierre Poiret, physicist Jacques Rohault, Bernard de Fontenelle, Robert Desgabets, Pierre-Sylvain Régis, and François Poullain de la Barre.

François Poullain de la Barre (1647–1723) influenced Gabrielle Suchon (1632–1703), the first to produce a significant body of work solely on the topic of women. Claude Buffier (1661–1773) supported women's education.

While Descartes drew many followers, others were left unsatisfied. Some accused him of circularity, proclaiming his ontological argument uses his definition of truth as a premise, while his proof of his definition of truth uses his ontological argument as a premise.

Another famous problem arises from Descartes’ substance dualism; the interaction problem first pointed out by Princess Elizabeth of Bohemia. For Descartes, a substance can be conceived of as existing independently of anything else. He defined the mind as an unextended substance and the body as an extended substance. This raised the fundamental question of how it is possible that mind and body interact with one another. Descartes also held as a result of his dualism that animals were mere machines.

The Minim and polymath Marin Mersenne (1588–1648) wrote The Truth of Science (1625), a dialogue between an alchemist, a skeptic and a Christian philosopher, the latter opposing both the over-confidence of the first and the excessive doubts of the second. The rest of the book is an 800 page compilation of mathematics to prove there is knowledge immune from doubt.

Mersenne is notable as the father of acoustics and the namesake for Mersenne primes. He was "the center of the world of science and mathematics during the first half of the 1600s," and, because of his ability to make connections between people and ideas, "the post-box of Europe". As well as in France, Mersenne corresponded with scholars in the Dutch Republic, England, and Italy, including Constantijn Huygens, Thomas Hobbes, and Galileo Galilei.

Blaise Pascal (1623–1662) was a child prodigy mathematician and scientist who grew increasingly religious. Pascal was a vacuuist who repeated the barometric mercury experiments of Italian Evangelista Torricelli, while Descartes was a plenist who held " nature abhors a vacuum ".

Pascal is known for defending Jansenism and Arnauld in Provincial Letters (c. 1657). When Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet was asked which work he wished he had written aside from his own, he answered the Provincial Letters.

Pascal was also a fideist, and distinguished between using the head and using the heart. His aphoristic collection Pensées (Thoughts, 1670) is a name given posthumously to fragments that Pascal had been preparing of an apology for Christianity, which was never completed. Pensées contains Pascal's Wager. Pascal's Wager is an early application of the mathematics of probability, and says people engage in a life-defining gamble regarding the belief in the existence of God.

Pascal was a Cartesian dualist, illustrated with a quote from the Pensées : "Man is only a reed, the weakest in nature, but he is a thinking reed." However, his disagreements can be illustrated by his calling Descartes' philosophy "useless and uncertain".

Cartesian Nicolas Malebranche (1638–1715) believed not even substances of the same kind could interact with each other, because no necessary causation could be perceived. He proposes then that it is God, an uncreated substance, who brings it about that each time one perceives a 'cause', one also perceives an 'effect'. Hence the doctrine is named occasionalism. This doctrine saw predecessors in Louis de La Forge (1632–1666), Géraud de Cordemoy (1626–1684), and the Flemish Arnold Geulincx.

Malebranche was well-known and celebrated in his own time, but has since become somewhat of an obscure figure. However, his philosophy had a direct influence upon Spinoza, and Scottish skeptic David Hume 's questioning of causality, which awoke German idealist Immanuel Kant from his "dogmatic slumber."

Pierre Gassendi (1592–1655), the most influential anti-Cartesian in France, argued against innate ideas. Gassendi sought to revive the ancient atomism of Epicureanism, and was also a nominalist and a skeptic. Gassendi was an acquaintance of nominalist Thomas Hobbes. Gassendi was a member of the libertins érudits (free thinker) discussion group, which included playwright Cyrano de Bergerac, scholar Henri Louis Habert de Montmor, librarian Gabriel Naudé, and physician Guy Patin.

Historian Richard Popkin states Gassendi was one of the first to formulate the modern "scientific outlook". Gassendi tracked the transit of Mercury in 1631, using the predictions of German Johannes Kepler 's Rudolphine Tables (1627). Gassendi's disciples included François Bernier (1620–1688) and Samuel de Sorbiere (1615–1670). Playwright Molière (1622–1673) may have also been influenced by Gassendi.

Academic skeptic Simon Foucher (1644–1696) opposed Descartes and Malebranche, arguing against representationalism in the philosophy of perception. Foucher wrote Dissertation on the Search for Truth (1673). Robert Desgabets (1610–1678) responded to Foucher. Desgabets quipped “Descartes is not always a good Cartesian.”

Another influential critic of Descartes was churchman Pierre Daniel Huet (1630–1721), who worked as Bossuet's assistant, and wrote Censura philosophiae cartesianae (1689), arguing for a return to Christian skepticism.

Pierre Bayle (1647–1706) was a Huguenot at the Academy of Sedan, who fled to Rotterdam in the Dutch Republic, and wrote a biographical dictionary, the Historical and Critical Dictionary (1697). His views were dubbed "super skepticism" by Richard Popkin. Bayle would characterize his own views differently, stating "I know too much to be a Pyrrhonist, and I know too little to be a Dogmatist".

Bayle's comments on the problem of evil inspired Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, who wrote in Latin and French, to publish his Théodicée (1710). Leibniz was an optimist who believed God created the best of all possible worlds. Bayle was also an influence on David Hume.

The 18th century saw the French Enlightenment and nearby Swiss Enlightenment. French Enlightenment philosophers, known as philosophes, were deeply political, and many became critics of church and state, and promoters of rationality and progress. They had a deep influence on the politics and ideologies of both the American Revolution and the French Revolution. Marquis de Lafayette (1757–1834) supported both revolutions.

Philosophy was discussed in salons, often led by salonnières such as Marie Thérèse Geoffrin, Madame Lambert, or Jeanne Julie Éléonore de Lespinasse.

Charles de Secondat, baron de Montesquieu (1689–1755) deeply influenced the American Revolution. His belief that government powers should be separated into legislative, executive, and judicial branches formed the basis for separation of powers under the United States Constitution. In The Spirit of the Laws (1748), Montesquieu outlined the view that man and society are influenced by climate. He believed that hotter climates create hot-tempered people and colder climates aloof people, whereas the mild climate of France is an ideal balance.

François-Marie Arouet, better known as Voltaire (1694–1778), was a prominent Enlightenment figure who advocated the right to a free trial and freedom of religion. Voltaire was a deist, and was twice sentenced to prison, and once to temporary exile to England.

A heavy influence on the Enlightenment was the work of British natural philosopher Sir Isaac Newton and the philosophy of Newtonianism, who published his Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica (1686), which included his laws of motion, introducing classical mechanics in physics.

Voltaire and Émilie du Châtelet (1706–1749) wrote Elements of the Philosophy of Newton (1738), helping to popularize Newtonianism in France alongside Pierre Louis Maupertuis (1698–1759). Châtelet was the first woman published by the French Academy of Sciences. Voltaire's Letters on the English (1734) introduced French readers to the philosophy of the British empiricists like Newton and John Locke, as well as to playwright William Shakespeare.

Voltaire is best remembered for his aphorisms and satire of Leibniz known as Candide (1759), written soon after the 1755 Lisbon Earthquake, which tells the tale of a young believer in Leibnizian optimism who becomes disillusioned after a series of hardships.

Voltaire's anonymously published Philosophical Dictionary (1764) was censored in many countries, including Switzerland (Geneva) and France, where all available copies of the book were collected and burned in the town square.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778) distinguished himself from the progressive scientism of the Enlightenment with his proclamation in Discourse on the Arts and Sciences (1750) that art and science are corruptors of human morality. Furthermore, he caused controversy with his theory that man is good by nature but corrupted by society, in contradiction to the Christian doctrine of original sin.

Rousseau's The Social Contract (1762) advances social contract theory and affirms only the general will of the people has the right to legislate. It famously begins “Man is born free, and everywhere he is in chains.” Upon publication, its distribution in France was prohibited, and Rousseau fled the country to avoid imprisonment.

However it influenced the French Revolution. Rousseau was so highly praised by the revolutionaries that in 1794 his remains were moved to the Panthéon in Paris. Rousseau's Emile (1762), previously forbidden and publicly burned, became the basis of a new national system of education. His portrait graced the home of Kant, who called Rousseau "Newton of the moral world".

Some of his theories continue to be controversial, such as the general will, which has been accused of both fascism and communism. His critique of private property in works like Discourse on Inequality (1755) has been seen as a forebear to Marxist ideology. Both Étienne-Gabriel Morelly (1717–1778), who was mistaken for Rousseau, and Abbé de Mably (1709–1785), who was influenced by Rousseau, influenced socialism. Victor d'Hupay (1746–1818) coined the term communism.

Another Rousseau disciple was romanticist François-René de Chateaubriand (1768–1848), author of The Genius of Christianity (1802).

Denis Diderot (1713–1784) was a key collaborator of the Encyclopédistes who created the Encyclopédia, with mathematician Jean le Rond d’Alembert (1717–1783) and publisher André Le Breton (1708–1779).

A systematic collection of all the arts and sciences, the Encyclopédia caused great controversy. Diderot was harassed repeatedly by the police, and even arrested. The ecclesiastical party disliked the Encyclopédia, a threat to the aristocracy as it asserted the state should take care of the people. In the end, Le Breton began removing all articles he deemed controversial in fear of punishment.

Diderot was influenced by naturalists like the Comte de Buffon (1707–1788), and influenced Jean-Baptiste Robinet (1735–1820). Jean-Baptiste-Claude Delisle de Sales (1741–1816) wrote The Philosophy of Nature (1770).

D'Alembert taught Marquis de Condorcet (1743–1794) who supported free markets and equality, including for women. His wife Sophie de Condorcet ran a salon. Rousseau critic Benjamin Constant (1767–1830) attended. Constant was a liberal and collaborator with Madame de Staël (1766–1817), who introduced German idealism to France with On Germany (1813).

Influenced by Locke and Voltaire, Catholic priest Étienne Bonnot de Condillac (1714–1780) founded sensationalism, which emphasized an epistemology of sensation and perception. Idéologues at the National Institute were Condillac disciples, such as Antoine Destutt de Tracy, Volney, Pierre Laromiguière, physiologist Pierre Jean Georges Cabanis, French Basque Dominique Joseph Garat, and economists Pierre Louis Roederer and Jean-Baptiste Say. Condillac also influenced chemist Antoine Lavoisier (1743–1794).

The Institute sponsored a prize essay contest on language and "the influence of signs on the faculty of thought", won by Joseph Marie, baron de Gérando (1772–1842).

Physician and materialist Julien Offray de La Mettrie (1709–1751) wrote Man a Machine (1747), affirming the Cartesian view of animals also applied to people, arguing against immortal souls. He had to flee France and settle in Berlin.

Claude Adrien Helvétius (1715–1771), whose wife Madame Helvétius ran a salon, was also a materialist, and argued against Montesquieu's climate theory. Helvétius published the sensationalist On Mind (1758), which said the only real motive is self-interest, therefore there is no good and evil, only competitive pleasures. Its non-religious, utilitarian and egalitarian doctrines raised a public outcry, and the Sorbonne publicly burned it in 1759, forcing Helvétius to issue several retractions.

Baron d'Holbach (1723–1789) was a materialist who promoted atheism and ran a salon, which helped in the dissemination of " Protestant and especially German thought". He wrote The System of Nature (1770) and The Universal Morality (1776). Other atheists were utopian Sylvain Maréchal, astronomer Jérôme Lalande, and Jacques-André Naigeon.

The sensationalists were opposed by Christian traditionalists like Louis de Bonald (1754–1840) who believed in revelation, and skeptic Félicité de La Mennais (1782–1854).

The deism and atheism was combated by Pascal-influenced Catholics like Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet and Nicolas-Sylvestre Bergier (1718–1790), who influenced Counter-Enlightenment and conservative monarchist Joseph de Maistre (1753–1821), who opposed the French Revolution and influenced Ultramontanism.

The Storming of the Bastille (July 14, 1789) marked the start of the French Revolution, which adopted the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (1789) authored by Abbé Sieyès, who also wrote the pamphlet What Is the Third Estate? (1789). Maximilien Robespierre (1758–1794) and Jean-Paul Marat (1743–1793) were radical Jacobin leaders and Montagnard, sans-culottes supporters elected as deputies to the National Convention. Robespierre was appointed a member of the Committee of Public Safety and Marat of the Committee of General Security ; both formed the provisional government during the Reign of Terror (c. 1793-1794).

Marat was assassinated in his bathtub by reactionary Charlotte Corday. She was soon executed by guillotine on the Place de Grève. Soon after, so were Queen Marie Antoinette and Olympe de Gouges (1748–1793), author of Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen (1791).

Despite Catholic Red Priests like Jacques Roux (1752–1794), enragé and elected member of the Paris Commune, the French Revolution was opposed to the Church. During the Terror, Roux committed suicide before the Revolutionary Tribunal could try him. Condorcet died in prison after a period of hiding, during which he wrote Sketch for a Historical Picture of the Progress of the Human Mind (1795). French materialism and the Revolution influenced Marquis de Sade (1740–1814), namesake of sadism and writer of such works as Philosophy in the Boudoir (1795).

Revolutionaries like Antoine-François Momoro (1756–1794) supported atheism and the Cult of Reason ; Robespierre supported deism and started the Cult of the Supreme Being. The National Convention decreed a rotating series of holidays like the Fête de la Fédération every décadi, the ten-day week in the new French Republican Calendar. Robespierre declared 20 Prairial Year II (8 June 1794, the Christian holiday of Pentecost) the first day of the Festival of the Supreme Being.

The Convention turned against Robespierre, who was arrested without trial and executed by guillotine on the Place de la Révolution, followed by the Thermidorian Reaction and the First White Terror.

The Conspiracy of the Equals which published The Manifesto of the Equals (1796) was led by François-Noël Babeuf (1760–1797), who was influenced by Abbé de Mably.

The turn of the 19th century also saw the Haitian Revolution led by Toussaint Louverture (1743–1803) and influenced by the French Revolution.

Napoleon ended the Revolution with the Coup of 18 Brumaire (9 November 1799), establishing himself as head of the Consulate and eventually Emperor of the French.

The 19th century saw the Napoleonic Wars, the Bourbon Restoration (1814–1830), then the July Revolution of 1830 followed by the July Monarchy (1830–1848) and the Revolution of 1848. Alexis de Tocqueville (1805–1859) analyzed the causes of the French Revolution in The Old Regime and the Revolution (1856).

France also experienced the loss of the Franco-Prussian War (1870) and the subsequent revolutionary and violently suppressed Paris Commune.

The Academy of Moral and Political Sciences was restarted in 1832, through an appeal by François Guizot (1787–1874) to King Louis Philippe.

French revolutionary Henri de Saint-Simon (1760–1825) birthed Saint-Simonianism, affirming science's ability to transform society in such works as Introduction to scientific discoveries of the 19th century (1803) and eulogy to Napoleon Notes on the study of man (1813). Saint-Simon was also a Christian who wrote The New Christianity (1825).

Saint-Simonian Pierre Leroux (1797–1871) and Paul-François Dubois (1793–1874) established Le Globe in 1824, the movement's main publication during the July Monarchy (1830–1848). French historian Augustin Thierry (1795–1856) followed Saint-Simon.

Saint-Simon's intellectual rival was physicist Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749–1827). Known as the "French Newton", he argued for determinism with Laplace's demon. Influenced by Laplace, André-Marie Ampère (1775–1836) was a founder of classical electromagnetism. Influenced by Condorcet, Antoine Augustin Cournot (1801–1877) tried to unite the concepts of cause and chance.

Pierre Paul Royer-Collard (1763–1845) was leader of the Doctrinaires during the Bourbon Restoration. He brought Scottish common sense realism to France, shown in his pupil Victor Cousin (1792–1867), the founder of eclecticism. Cousin also learned under Pierre Laromiguière (1756–1837) at École Normale Supérieure, and was influenced by German idealism as well.

Cousin student was Théodore Jouffroy (1796–1842) was also influenced by Scottish philosophy. Along with Leroux and Dubois, Jouffroy and Jean-Philibert Damiron (1794–1862) helped establish Le Globe. Adolphe Garnier (1801–1864) continued Jouffroy's work. Garnier's Treatise on the Faculties of the Soul (1852) won the Montyon Prize.

Statesman Jules Simon (1814–1896) was also influenced by Cousin, as was Charles de Rémusat (1797–1875). Étienne Vacherot (1809–1897) succeeded Cousin at the Sorbonne.

French spiritualism was influenced by Maine de Biran (1766–1824), at first a follower of Condillac, but who became a mystical theosophist influenced by Malebranche and Pascal. Maine de Biran's diary covers the melancholy and tension of the Hundred Days, Napoleon's exile and return culminating in his final defeat at the Battle of Waterloo (1815), and permanent exile. An idiosyncratic French philosopher likely influenced by Maine de Biran was Jules Lequier (1814–1862).

Félix Ravaisson-Mollien (1813–1900) and Jules Lachelier (1832–1918) were also influenced by German idealism, but distinguished their views from Cousin's, preferring spiritualism. Lachelier taught Jules Lagneau (1851–1894), who taught the "reflexive method", and was a franc-tireur in the Franco-Prussian War.

Alfred Jules Émile Fouillée (1838–1912) was a spiritualist who believed in "idea-forces". Fouillée was the step-father of Jean-Marie Guyau (1854–1888).

Saint-Simon influenced the utopian socialism of Charles Fourier (1772–1837) and Fourierism. Fourier influenced Christian and utopian socialist Étienne Cabet (1788–1856), who was a more radical revolutionary than Fourier. Cabet saw Christianity as synonymous with socialism.

Christian and socialist Louis Blanc (1811–1882), a historian of the 1830 Revolution who opposed the July Monarchy, was a member of the provisional government during the 1848 Revolution. Blanc was exiled but returned to France in time for the defeat in the Franco-Prussian War. He did not support the revolutionary Paris Commune, but successfully proposed amnesty for the Communards.

After the suppression of the 1848 Revolution, radicalism and republicanism declined. Blanc, Romantic author Victor Hugo (1802–1885), and historian Edgar Quinet (1803–1875) attended the first meeting of the League of Peace and Freedom. One-time president of the League Émile Arnaud coined the term pacifism.

Saint-Simon and the book by Philippe Buonarroti (1761–1837) History of Babeuf’s Conspiracy of Equals (1828) influenced socialist philosopher Louis-Auguste Blanqui (1805–1881), the founder of Blanquism. Blanquism believes socialist revolution should involve a coup d'etat by a relatively small group of highly organised and secretive conspirators. Blanqui participated in the 1830 Revolution, and was a leading voice in the radical clubs of the 1848 Revolution. Blanqui spent 33 years of his life in prison, earning him the nickname "The Prisoner".

Fourier was an influence on anarchist Pierre Joseph Proudhon (1809–1865). Proudhonism supports mutualism, a kind of market socialism. Proudhon published The Philosophy of Poverty (1846), prompting a book-length critique from Karl Marx entitled The Poverty of Philosophy (1847), starting a rift which resulted in the split between anarchism and Marxism at the First International (1864). It continued with the followers of Russian collectivist anarchist Mikhail Bakunin and lasts to this day.

Auguste Comte (1798–1857) was the founder of sociology, the philosophy of positivism, and may be regarded as the first modern philosopher of science. Comte also had considerable influence outside of France, impacting the work of Karl Marx and John Stuart Mill.

Influenced by Fourier and Saint-Simon, Comte developed positivism to remedy the aftermath of the French Revolution, calling for a new social project based on the sciences. Comte proposed a theory of social evolution, with society undergoing three phases in its quest for the truth according to a general ' law of three stages ': (1) the theological, (2) the metaphysical, and (3) the positive.

While originally a follower of Saint-Simon, Comte was not a Christian. He attempted to introduce a " religion of humanity " which, though largely unsuccessful, was influential for various Secular Humanist organizations in the 19th century. Comte coined the term " altruism ".

Comte's student Charles Renouvier (1815–1903) was influenced by Lequier, and was a German idealist and personalist who founded neocriticism. Sociologist Émile Durkheim (1858–1917) read Comte and Renouvier. Durkheim was a structural functionalist who wrote Suicide (1897). Durkheim was friends with Octave Hamelin (1856–1907).

Cousin and Comte influenced Hippolyte Taine (1828–1893), the founder of French literary naturalism, and a proponent of sociological positivism and historicism. Deeply shaken by the 1870 defeat and Paris Commune, Taine became devoted to his major historical work, The Origins of Contemporary France (1875–1893).

Vacherot influenced Taine's fatalism, which was challenged by orientalist Ernest Renan (1823–1892). Renan influenced modernist Alfred Loisy (1857–1940).

20th-century French philosophy saw the rise of many continental schools of thought, including philosophy of science and phenomenology. Existentialism had a wide influence, only to die out somewhat with the advent of structuralism, which came to be seen as merely a necessary means to post-structuralism and postmodern thought which came to dominate the late 20th century.

20th-century France saw the end of the Belle Époque up until World War I (1914–1918). Aesthetician André Malraux (1901–1976) and philosopher of science Jean Cavaillès (1903–1944) were part of the French Resistance in World War II (1939–1945). Afterwards came the Trente Glorieuses. But France also saw widespread strikes and civil unrest in May 68, inspired by countercultural, anti-imperialist, Marxist, and anarchist ideologies.

Surrealism, led by André Breton, developed in the aftermath of World War I. Durkheim influenced Georges Bataille (1897–1962), author of Story of the Eye (1928).

Ferdinand de Saussure (1857–1913) was a Swiss linguist who taught in Paris, bringing the linguistic turn to France. He distinguished linguistics from philology, by studying the underlying structures of language, rather than etymology. His small output, such as the Course in General Linguistics (1916), most of which was published posthumously, became the foundation for linguistics, semiotics and structuralism.

Saussure divided language into two parts: the langue, the grammatical system of signs and rules, and parole, individual acts of speech. This was likened by Saussure to the difference between the rules of chess and chess pieces.

For Saussure, the essential unit of any language is the word, or sign. Like language, he divides the word into two parts: the signifier, which is the sound-image, and the signified, which is the referent or concept associated with the signifier. Saussure stressed this association was arbitrary, maintaining that any signifier can refer to any signified. A sign obtains its meaning by contrast with what it is not within the langue. For example, the word ‘dog’ means dog simply because it does not mean cat, bird, or cornflakes.

Henri Bergson (1859–1941) was popular during his lifetime, appealing to both academics and the general public, leading to the "Bergson boom". Bergson was awarded the 1927 Nobel Prize for Literature. However, interest in his work decreased after World War II.

Writers outside of French philosophy influenced by Bergson include the novelist Marcel Proust, poet T. S. Eliot, American philosopher William James, and British philosopher Alfred North Whitehead.

Bergson was influenced by Kant, Lachelier, Herbert Spencer 's evolutionary philosophy, and mathematician Bernhard Riemann. Bergson coined the term élan vital, establishing vitalism in works like Creation Evolution (1907), and was the French representative of Lebensphilosophie. Bergson's work focused on consciousness, which Bergson thought was always experienced as a multiplicity.

He also thought the experience of time was intrinsic to consciousness, calling it "the duration ". Bergson regards the duration as a qualitative multiplicity, rather than quantitative; there is heterogeneity but no separation, juxtaposition or mechanistic causality. The duration can only be grasped through intuition. Bergson notably debated Einstein.

Catholic Léon Bloy (1846–1917) influenced neo-Thomism in France, through philosophers such as Bergson student Jacques Maritain (1882–1973), a mentor to Pope Paul VI, who presented to Maritain his "Message to Men of Thought and of Science" at the close of Vatican II.

The Neo-Thomists were opposed by World War I casualty and Bergsonian Catholic Charles Péguy (1873–1914), who influenced non-conformist personalists Emmanuel Mounier (1905–1950) and Alexandre Marc (1904–2000). The Neo-Thomists also opposed orientalist esotericist René Guénon (1886–1951).

Philosophy of mind was advanced by spiritualists like psychologist René Le Senne (1882–1954) and Louis Lavelle (1883–1951). Lavelle's magnum opus was The Dialectic of the Eternal Present (1922).

In France, philosophy of science, also known as French historical epistemology or French epistemology, was a prominent school of thought which included Henri Poincaré, Pierre Duhem, Émile Boutroux, Léon Brunschvicg, Jean Cavaillès, Gaston Bachelard, Georges Canguilhem, Jules Vuillemin, Arthur Hannequin, Émile Meyerson, Paul Tannery, Gaston Milhaud, Alexandre Koyré, Jean-Toussaint Desanti, Gilbert Simondon, Michel Serres, and Jean-Michel Berthelot.

Henri Poincaré (1854–1912) had views on the philosophy of mathematics opposite to those of logicists like Louis Couturat (1868–1914), who believed that mathematics was a branch of logic. Poincaré strongly disagreed, claiming intuition was the life of mathematics, known as pre-intuitionism or conventionalism. He held the same view for science, found in the book Science and Hypothesis (1902). Édouard Le Roy (1870–1954) held views similar to Poincaré.

Thermodynamicist Pierre Duhem (1861–1916) introduced the Duhem thesis in works such as The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory (1906), a form of confirmation holism, which says a single scientific hypothesis can never be falsified by itself, coming with a combination of other theories.

Duhem also sought to revise the history of science from its anti-Catholicism and founded the history of medieval science with the ten volume The System of the World, beginning in 1913.

Lachelier also taught Poincaré's brother-in-law Émile Boutroux (1845–1921), a critic of materialism in science. Boutroux taught philosopher of action Maurice Blondel (1861–1949), first cousin of physicist André Blondel.

Boutroux also influenced Léon Brunschvicg (1869–1944), who in 1893 co-founded the Revue de métaphysique et de morale with Xavier Léon (1868–1935) and Élie Halévy (1870–1937). Brunschvicg was the husband of feminist Cécile Kahn (1877–1946).

Cavaillès studied science, mathematical logic, and set theory. Gaston Bachelard (1884–1962) introduced the concepts of epistemological obstacle and epistemological break. Georges Canguilhem (1904–1995) reintroduced vitalism into the philosophy of biology. Jules Vuillemin (1920–2001) focused on epistemology and introduced the "philosophy of algebra ".

More recently, Marc Augé (1935–2023) was an anthropologist who in the book Non-Places (1995) explored the concept of "non-places", transient spaces where people remain anonymous, such as airports, gas stations, and shopping malls.

Simone Weil (1909–1943) was an Alsatian Jewish mystic philosopher and political activist who wrote the posthumously published The Need for Roots (1949). Weil influenced Pope Paul VI and René Girard (1923–2015). Her ideas include uprootedness, decreation (renouncing the gift of free will), obligations as the basis of rights, the unjust character of misfortune, and compassion, which Weil believed involved attention, was patriotic, and must act in the area of metaxy.

Émile-Auguste Chartier, known as Alain (1868–1951), was taught by Lagneau, and himself taught Weil, Canguilhem, and existentialist Mikel Dufrenne (1910–1995). Alain supported the Radical Party.

Georges Sorel (1847–1922) was a revolutionary syndicalist influenced by Proudhon and Bergson who founded Sorelianism. He was a friend of anarchist Fernand Pelloutier (1867–1901). Sorel advocated violence and the power of myth, who wrote Reflections on Violence (1908).

Phenomenology is philosophy which emphasizes phenomena as it is given to consciousness, attempting to avoid imposed explanations, influenced by German thinkers Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger. In France, phenomenology was also influenced by Bergson, and is still an important area of research in France today.

Emmanuel Lévinas (1906–1995) propounded phenomenology and translated Husserl’s Cartesian Meditations (1931). Lévinas re-introduced ethics into phenomenology, absent since the demise of German Max Scheler ; and further proclaimed ethics should be the first subject of philosophy. He is notable for such notions as the other and the face.

Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908–1961) was concerned with the foundations of perception and influenced by Gestalt psychology. His theory was produced in opposition to Cartesian doctrines like a "pre-reflective subject" in the Cogito and substance dualism. In contrast to the clear distinction between the mind and the external world, for Merleau-Ponty the mind and body are bound together as 'embodied subjectivity'. Merleau-Ponty explains the habitual use of tools as " dilation " of "being-in-the-world".

Paul Ricœur (1913–2005) was best known for combining phenomenology with hermeneutics. He was awarded the 2000 Kyoto Prize for having "revolutionized the methods of hermeneutic phenomenology." Ricoeur was imprisoned in prisoner-of-war camp Oflag II-D with Mikel Dufrenne, who later wrote The Phenomenology of Aesthetic Experience (1953).

Existentialism was a prominent school of thought in the first half of the 20th century, influenced by philosophers such as the Danish Søren Kierkegaard and German Friedrich Nietzsche. Existentialism is concerned with the human condition, exploring such topics as purpose and freedom.

The most notable French existentialist was Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980), also a phenomenologist and libertarian Marxist who thought his conclusions followed from atheism. He was a spokesman for a generation, but his influence waned with the advent of structuralism.

Sartre's main thesis is existence precedes essence, first stated in Existentialism Is a Humanism (1946). An artisan devises an essence for an object, such as a knife, for the purpose of slicing bread. However, without God, man has no essence; he is born free, thrown into the world solely responsible for his actions which create his essence. The denial of this responsibility through excuses is what Sartre termed bad faith.

Sartre responded to Heidegger's Being and Time with Being and Nothingness (1943). He also wrote the novel Nausea (1938) about alienation. His play No Exit (1944) is the source of the quote "Hell is other people."

Gabriel Marcel (1889–1973), a Christian who wrote The Mystery of Being (1951) tried to distance himself from similarities to Sartre, preferring "philosophy of existence" to existentialism.

French philosophy also influenced the Caribbean. Trinidadian Marxist C. L. R. James (1901–1989) wrote The Black Jacobins (1938) about the Haitian Revolution. Sartre, James, and négritude poet Aimé Cesaire influenced Martinican Pan-Africanist Frantz Fanon (1925–1961), supporter of the Algerian War and author of Black Skin, White Masks (1952). The Frantz Fanon prize is awarded by the Caribbean Philosophical Association.

Albert Camus (1913–1960), winner of the 1957 Nobel Prize in Literature, rejected being labelled an existentialist, preferring to be called an absurdist. In the opening pages of The Myth of Sisyphus (1942), he states what he considers to be the fundamental question of philosophy: is suicide the correct response to an absurd world? Likening a Godless life to the story of Sisyphus, where he is doomed forever to push a rock up a hill only for it to roll down again, Camus’ answer is "No. It requires revolt. [...] The struggle itself is enough to fill a man’s heart. One must imagine Sisyphus happy." Camus also wrote The Stranger (1942), ranked greatest book of the 20th Century by Le Monde.

Simone de Beauvoir (1908–1986) was an existential feminist. Beauvoir in works like The Second Sex (1949) and The Ethics of Ambiguity (1948) believed that men had surrounded women in a false aura of mystery, stereotyping them into "the other" and an underclass, as an excuse for not understanding them and dominating them. But Beauvoir maintains that Sartre’s thesis (that is, existence precedes essence) applies to women as much as it does to men and that through their choices and actions, women can transcend this aura and reject being the underclass.

French Structuralism played a major role in intellectual thought after World War II. It rejected existential concepts of freedom for the idea of man as determined by structures. However, by the end of the century it was seen as important not by itself, but for the schools of thought it produced, such as poststructuralism and deconstruction.

Structuralism finds its roots in the thought of Ferdinand de Saussure, who thought language could be studied synchronically, i.e. as a complete system within a frozen moment of time, or it can be studied diachronically, examining its historical development. It can be said that structuralists focused on the synchronic aspects of culture, while poststructuralists, focused on the diachronic aspects.

While Ferdinand de Saussure was concerned with linguistics, soon structuralism was influenced by German thinkers such as Marx, Heidegger, and Sigmund Freud ; and began to be applied to anthropology, social sciences and psychology.

Claude Lévi-Strauss (1908–2009) rejected Sartrean freedom and is the founder of structural anthropology, which sees culture as a system of symbolic communication.

Roland Barthes (1915–1980) applied structuralism to literary theory. In Mythologies (1957), Barthes explored media such as advertisements and films to demonstrate the bourgeois propaganda found within. He described these myths as second-order signs, assigning or associating signifiers to signifiers, such as a bottle signifying wine also signifying high class.

Jacques Lacan (1901–1981) was a structuralist psychoanalyst, who sought to correct perceived errors in Freud’s thought, plus errors in the interpretation of Freud. As well as Marx and Heidegger, Lacan was influenced by G. W. F. Hegel, through scholars Jean Hyppolite (1907–1968) and Alexandre Kojève (1902–1968).

Louis Althusser (1918–1990) and his colleagues, prominently including Étienne Balibar (b. 1942), reworked Marxism using insights from structuralism, against the humanist trend in Sartrean and Western Marxisms. Althusser offered an influential, new reading of Marx's work, describing an "epistemological break" between the Young Hegelian Marx and the late Marx of Das Kapital. Althusser's focus on economics brought him into conflict with social historians, such as E. P. Thompson.

The late 20th-century saw the rise of so-called poststructuralist and postmodern thought, especially in France. Postmodernism is fairly hard to define, and some people maintain it is nothing but a slur applied to a group of disparate philosophers wrongly grouped together. However, it can also be seen as a critique of modernity and traditional western thought, influenced heavily by structuralism, phenomenology and existentialism.

Jean-François Lyotard (1924–1998) defined postmodernism as scepticism toward metanarratives. A metanarrative is a kind of grand arching story that encompasses—and claims to predict—everything. An example is whig history, which sees history as the inevitable march of progress. Another example is Marxism, which sees communism as the inevitable historical, dialectical consequence of class struggle.

Lyotard considered the metanarrative an essential feature of modernity. Hence the postmodern condition is the replacement of metanarratives with several micro-narratives, which lack any all-embracing structure, but were brought about by technological developments in such fields as communication and mass media, making metanarratives indefensible.

Michel Foucault (1926–1984) maintained a similar scepticism about absolutes, such as right and wrong, sane and insane, and human nature. His method was not to deny such notions, but to historicize them, examining what in the supposedly necessary may be contingent, and demonstrating the relationships between power, politics, and knowledge.

Foucault was influenced by Nietzsche, and was anti-Hegelian and anti-teleological in his historical writings. Foucault's four-volume The History of Sexuality introduced the concept of biopower. His early works like The Order of Things (1966) used an "archaeological method" or episteme, while his later work used a " genealogical method " or dispositif.

His main fields of investigation were psychiatry, medicine, and institutions. In Madness and Civilization (1961), he argued psychiatry was not an obvious improvement on previous treatments of the insane, and are a form of controlling defiance of bourgeois society. Foucault introduced the idea of a disciplinary institution in Discipline and Punish (1975).

Jacques Derrida (1930–2004) believed Western philosophy had become phonocentric and logocentric. Derrida in works like Of Grammatology (1967) developed deconstruction as a response to structuralism, provocatively stating "there is nothing outside the text."

Derrida maintained that no meaning is stable and opposes binary oppositions. Deconstruction attempts to show the fluidity of the text, allowing highly original interpretations. It examines a text from several different standpoints of interpretation, to show the text is irreconcilably contradictory, unstable, ambiguous and historically and culturally defined. This method is called différance.

Jean Baudrillard (1929–2007) in works like Simulacra and Simulation (1981) used the term simulacra to describe the concealment that there are no truths in a given field. An example he gives is the map–territory relation in a Borges story, where a map was so accurate that it laid over and covered the entire city it mapped. When the empire was destroyed, the only object left was the map. For Baudrillard, people live in the map and hence reality crumbles because of misuse. Eventually, the difference between reality and illusion becomes indistinguishable. Baudrillard called this hyperreality.

Gilles Deleuze (1925–1995) developed a philosophy of difference which valued difference over identity, and the simulacrum higher than the idea and its copy, seen as an inversion of the method of Leibniz (on identity) and Plato (on mimesis). Deleuze led a revitalization of interest in Bergson, through Le Bergsonisme (1966).

Deleuze's best known work is Difference and Repetition (1968). Deleuze and Félix Guattari developed schizoanalysis in Anti-Oedipus (1972) and A Thousand Plateaus (1980). Deleuze also developed a constructivist view of philosophy as the job of developing concepts, as it is the poet’s job to produce poems and the painter’s job to paint paintings. So Deleuze read philosophers in an idiosyncratic way which he once referred to as " buggery ;" creating new concepts utterly different from the philosopher he’s reading. An example is Spinoza, whom Deleuze read as an empiricist.

Hélène Cixous (born 1937) developed a feminist interpretation of post-structuralism most influenced by Derrida. She argued that patriarchal cultures build male domination into their language and literary canon, and that a feminist revolution must account for this. She urged female writers to adopt deconstructionist methods and forward their own vision of life as a woman.

Luce Irigaray (born 1930) is a feminist, post-structuralist ostracized by the followers of Lacan. She is considered one of the founders of French difference feminism.

The French Poll Tax of 1695 was established by King Louis XIV in order to finance the War of the League of Augsburg. The traditional methods of war financing had been exhausted. Vauban and Chamlay favoured taxation of the rich and privileged. Yet Pontchartrain refused to propose any measures beyond the traditional. But Basville took the initiative to a poll tax plan, and circumvented the inner circles in Paris by having it formally presented to the King by the Estates of Languedoc. As a universal tax on persons, the poll tax affected all of the three estates in all the provinces of France. Exceptions were only made for members of the mendicant orders and for the poor certified by the priest, and for those who would pay less than 2 livres in poll tax. The taxpayers were divided into twenty-two classes. Members of each class paid a fixed sum of tax. Inclusion in each class was determined not by wealth, but by rank and status. The clergy paid a lump sum of 4 million livres per year instead of being individually taxed. French historians have studied the social implications of the classifications in the schedule to the poll tax decree. Bluche and Solnon maintain that the poll tax schedule constitutes a veritable social hierarchy of France. Alain Guery rejects that the schedule to the poll tax corresponds to a social hierarchy.

France had been engaged in the War of the League of Augsburg since 1688 and in 1694 no peace was in sight. To meet military expenditure, the Controller-General of Finances, Louis Phélypeaux de Pontchartrain, and his predecessor had already implemented the traditional measurers of war financing; raising the Taille and the contract of the Ferme générale, obliged the privileged estates to contribute to the treasury, created and sold countless government positions and debased the currency. But these measures did not make it possible to cover the war expenditures. In 1693, they amounted to 180 million livres while the net revenue of the government after deducting the costs of collection only was 108 million livres. An increase in the taxes of the common people was not an option after the great famine of 1693-1694. In the inner circle around the King, thought began to be given to the creation of a new tax to which the rich and privileged would contribute. This was the basis of the poll tax of 1695.

Vauban, the Commissioner General of Fortifications, proposed in 1694 to establish a progressive tax which would affect all subjects in a position to pay it and which would be established on the basis of 1/15 of all their income. The Quartermaster-General Chamlay was well aware that France's ability to wage war depended on the government's capacity to mobilize its financial resources. Inspired by Vauban, Chamlay summarized six different solutions extending the tax base to the privileged strata of the society. The first, which was finally implemented through the poll tax of 1695, consisted in classifying individuals into categories, "taxing them according to their status, their official positions and their professions and making the heads of families pay for women, infants and servants". The second was a variant of the first, which taxed not only the head of the family, but also the other members of his household. The third proposal was easier to implement, but would bring in less money and only affect cities. It would be a question of charging a certain sum to each house, whether in the cities or in the main towns, the sum being proportional to the rents. The fourth option was to levy an annual tithe on all rentier property. But, here again, the product would be mediocre, because the bourgeois, craftsmen and merchants whose goods were in paper or silver, would be exempted from it. If this was to be remedied, they would have to be compelled to disclose their business secrets, which would cause them harm and ruin. The fifth proposal was inspired by Holland and England, since it involved increasing taxes on beverages, foodstuffs and goods (except grain) throughout the kingdom. But this increase would be very unpopular, because it would affect the poor as much as the rich. The last way would be to charge the intendants of each généralité to levy a tax on each city and on the nobility, taking into account the means and income of each.

Pontchartrain refused, however, to propose any measures beyond the traditional. But the intendant Nicolas de Basville of Languedoc took the initiative to a poll tax plan, and circumvented the inner circles in Paris by having it formally presented to the King by the Estates of Languedoc. In their deliberation of December 10, 1694, they declared: “The assembly takes the liberty of proposing to His Majesty that it pleases him to make a general subsidy or poll tax which shall be borne by all his subjects. Considering that there is no more certain way to support government expenditures than this type of impost which will be fixed and certain during the course of the war, and being shared by all of His Majesty's subjects, each according to his strength, will furnish abundant relief and maintaining the honour and peace of the State without being a burden on the individuals”. Pontchartrain resisted the measure, but necessity forced him to give in when the financiers declared that they would not give any more credits unless the financial affairs of the State were in order.

As a universal tax on persons, the poll tax affected all of the three estates - the clergy, the nobility and the third estate - in all the provinces of France - whether countries of estates, countries of elections states or conquered countries. No distinctions would be made between clergy and laity, noble and commoners, military and civilian, privileged and unprivileged, citizens of the free cities and burghers of the small towns, all must contribute. Exceptions were only made for members of the mendicant orders, for the poor certified by the parish priest and for those who would pay less than 2 livres in poll tax. The taxpayers were divided into twenty-two classes. Members of each class paid a fixed sum of tax; inclusion in each class was determined not by wealth, but by rank, quality and status. The clergy, however, were not classified on an individual basis, since they entered into a contract with the King promising to pay a lump sum of 4 million livres per year (later raised to 10 million for 1695 and 1696) instead of being subject to the poll tax. Taxpayers of the first class were to pay 2,000 livres per year, those of the second class 1,500, those of the third 1,000 and so on down to the last class whose members were assessed for one livre. No one had to pay double poll tax; persons holding several titles or offices only contribute in correspondence with the highest class he belonged to. Married sons or sons with dependents were obliged to pay the poll tax even if they lived with their parents. The tax of widows was reduced by half, and that of minors with three quarters.

The poll tax rolls were drawn up by the intendants of provinces with the aid of deputies or trustees in the countries of estates and by a certain number of gentlemen appointed by the king in the countries of elections. The intendants of provinces also handled the poll tax rolls of members of the army; the intendants of the navy and the galley corps those of these fleets. The provost of merchants and the aldermen were responsible for the rolls of the city of Paris. Nobles were, however, taxed on a separate roll. The poll tax was payable in two fixed terms, one in March, and the other in June. Collection of the poll tax was entrusted to the receivers of the ‘’Taille’’ in the rural parishes, to the receivers of common funds in cities in the countries of elections and to the provincial treasurers in the countries of estastes. In the military it was the responsibility of the paymasters. The guardians of the treasury collected the poll tax from bankers and stockbrokers.

The gross revenue for the poll tax was 21 million livres in 1695, which after deductions for miscellaneous expenses and moderations granted to provinces, cities and individuals amounted to a net income of 19 million livres. In 1696 the gross income amounted to 23 million livres, the contribution from the clergy not included. In 1697 the gross income was 24 million with the contribution of the clergy included. The total contributions for the three years may be estimated to 67 million livres.

After the Peace of Ryswick 20 September 1697 the poll tax was abolished, as of 1 April 1698.

French historians have studied the social implications of the classifications in the schedule to the poll tax decree.

François Bluche and Jean-François Solnon maintain that the poll tax schedule constitutes a veritable social hierarchy in France. It is a deliberate expression of the King's efforts to reorganize the social order on service to the State; a project that began at the death of Cardinal Mazarin in 1661, when Louis XIV personal reign began. The new social hierarchy was to be founded on social class and not on the estates. In the schedule, the nobility is identified in the first three classes, but then reappears only at the head of class seven with marquises, counts, viscounts and barons. These were holders of fiefdoms of dignity, although in practice the innumerable beneficiaries of courtesy titles also were taxed. While jurists persisted in using anachronistic definitions of nobility in the spirit of Charles Loyseau, the schedule recognises that all gentlement of France, once the dukes and knights of the Order of the Holy Spirit are set aside, are equals. In this seventh class, the marquises and viscounts rub shoulders with tax collectors, paymasters, subcontractors and principal writers. Bluche & Solon deduce that a change of status is detectable not only between the end of class six and the beginning of class seven, but also between the end of class 13 and the beginning of class 14.

Alain Guery rejects that the schedule to the poll tax forms a social hierarchy. He contends that the purpose of the schedule to the poll tax is not sociological; it doesn't give us a straight representation of the true social hierarchy of France at this time. On the contrary, it is a picture of how the government wants to perceive and organize society. The implemented criterion of classification is proximity to the State, and to the State at war. It's not essential that the clergy and others who cannot maintain the government in war are missing from its pages. The French are classified in relation to the State such as it is, but also as the government wants it to be. The functional tripartition of the Middle Ages is substituted by a new social order that does not completely deny the preceding world but modifies it. The schedule's double hierarchies of classes and estates are a compromise between State and society. Those whose importance the State recognizes in society as it wishes are identified with precision, the other are regrouped in categories much blurrier and vague.

The schedule was originally issued on 18 January 1695 as part of the King's declaration. The Royal Council of Finances amended it through three addendums: 12 February 1695, 26 February 1695 and 31 January 1696.

Addendum : The treasurer-generals of the Ordinary of War.

Third addendum: The Intendant of the Navy having the general inspection of the register of sailors, and the Intendant of the Naval Forces.

Addendum : The Chief Criminal Clerk of the Parlement of Paris, and the Chief Clerk of Requests of the Hôtel de Ville of Paris.

Addendum: Presidents of the courts of auditors, of the courts of aids, and of the courts of requests of the palace in the provinces, presidents of the Court of the Mint, procurators of the Court of the Mint, chief clerk of the Court of the Mint, the Chief Clerk of the Court of Requests of the Palace in Paris, director-generals of provisions and magazines, principal writers to the Extraordinary of War.

Addendum : Advocates and King's procurators of the Treasury of France in Paris.

Second addendum: The Chief Clerk of the Bureau of Finances in Paris.

Third addendum: Commissary-generals of the Navy and of the Galley Fleet, and the Inspector-General of the Navy in Bretagne.

Addendum : Advocate-generals of the Court of the Mint, presidents of the election of Paris, presidents of salt magazine in Paris, chief clerks of the superior courts in the provinces, provincial receivers of the tax on clergy, paymaster of the salaries of the Secretaries of State.

Addendum : clerk-bag keepers of the Great Chamber and of the Chamber of Investigations of the Parlement of Paris, and clerks of the Chamber of Investigations of the Parlement of Paris.

Third addendum: Captain-lieutenants on the flag galleys.

Addendum : The Provost-General of the Constabulary, the Provost-General of the Mint, provost-generals of the Maréchaussée, presidents of Presidial courts in the provinces, the Bailiff of the Royal Palace of Paris, the Criminal lieutenant of the election of Paris, stewards of pavements and dykes, clerk-bag keepers of the Great Council, clerks of the courts of aids and of the courts of requests of the palace, paymasters of the salaries of the treasurers of France, receivers of the tax on clergy in each diocese, provincial generals of the Mint, cashiers of the contractors, foreign exchange brokers, tidal vendors, controller-generals of provisions and magazines, writers of the contribution revenue.

Second addendum: Particular masters of water and forests in Paris.

Third addendum: Ordinary commissaries of the Galley Fleet following the chains of the condemned, captains of galiots and of naval artillery, the Secretary-General of the Navy, and the Secretary-general of the Galley Fleet.

Addendum: Assessors and councillors of the Presidial courts of the provinces, elected and clerks of the election of Paris, controllers and clerks of the salt magazine in Paris, secretaries to the superior courts in the provinces, chief clerks of requests of the parliaments in the provinces.

Addendum: Lieutenant-generals of the marble tables of the provinces, judge-auditors of the Châtelet of Paris, clerks of the parc civil of the Châtelet of Paris, clerks of the jurisdiction of the auditors of the Châtelet of Paris, and clerks of the consular jurisdictions.

Second addendum: Commandants of forts and castles.

Third addendum: Storekeepers of ports and arsenals of the Navy and of the Galley Fleet, and the Secretary to the General of the Galleys.

Addendum: Captains of the Hunt, King's procurators and clerks of the Constabulary, lieutenants of the Marshals of France, assessors of the city halls in cities where there is a parliament or other high court, controllers of the Royal Demesne, clerk-writers of the superior courts in the provinces, keepers of the books of the courts of auditors of the provinces, controllers of residuals of the courts of auditors of the provinces, privileged wine merchants, principal writers of the Mail in the cities of the first order, particular writers to the Extraordinary of War, some of the writers of provisions and magazines, and commissary-generals of the streets of Paris.

Third addendum: Commissary-generals of the Navy and the Galley Fleet in office, reformed captains of ships and galleys, captains of light frigates, and cashiers to the treasurer-generals of the Navy and of the Galley Fleet.

Addendum: Lieutenant-generals of Bailiwicks which are not under the jurisdiction of parliaments, chiefs of provostships, castellanies and other royal justices which are not under the jurisdiction of parliament, provincial controllers of the tax on clergy, conrollers of the Receiver Generals of Finances, parchment clerks of the Parlement of Paris, the first bailiffs of requests of the Hôtel de Ville and of the Royal Palace of Paris, and first bailiffs of the Châtelet of Paris.

Second addendum: Particular masters of water and forest, first bailiff to the bureau of finances in Paris, and some of the writers of the Ferme.

Third addendum: Provosts of the Navy and of the Galley Fleet.

Addendum: Officers of the Marble Table, assessors of cities of the second order, parchment clerks of requests of the Royal Palace of Paris, court clerks of requests of the parliaments in the provinces, lieutenants of the Provost-General of the Constabulary, first bailiffs of the election and other jurisdictions in Paris, controllers of the tax on clergy in the dioceses, controllers of pavements and dykes, and some of the writers of provisions and magazines.

Second addendum: First bailiffs to the bureaus of finances in the provinces, cashiers to bankers, and some of the writers of the Ferme.

Third addendum: Secretary-interpreters in service of the Navy, lieutenants and ensigns of ports and arsenals of the Navy and of the Galley Fleet, lieutenants and ensigns of the gardes de l'Étendard réal of the Galley Fleet, captains of fire-ships, and physicians in service of the ports.

Addendum: Lieutenant-colonels of infantry and cavalry, assessors of the city hall of small cities, King's procurators of the Mint, lieutenants of the Hunt, King's procurators in the jurisdiction of the Hunt, clerks in the jurisdiction of the Hunt, captains of the Archers of the Gabelle, first writers of the Mail in cities of the second and third order, inspector-visitors of the Mail, parchment clerks of the Châtelet of Paris, of the election and of other jurisdictions in Paris, parchment clerks of the superior courts in the provinces, diocesan economists, first writers to the consular jurisdictions, directors of the hospital for the King's troops, writers of receiving and distributing fodder for the King's troops in the fortresses, writers delivering the King's passports, some of the writers of provisions and magazines, wardens of the courts of auditors in the provinces, itinerant clerks.

Second addendum: King's procurators and clerks of the foreign trade jurisdiction, bailiffs of the Bureau of Finance in Paris, and some of the writers of the Ferme.

Third addendum: Reformed captains of light frigates, aid-majors of the Navy and of the Galley Fleet, lieutenants of galiots and of naval artillery, sub-lieutenants of naval artillery, sub-lieutenants of galleys, lieutenants of light frigates, captains of fluyts, ordinary engineers in service of the Navy, premier master shipbuilders, the Captain for custody of the condemned for the galleys at the Château de la Tournelle, surgeon-majors in service of the ports, lieutenants, King's procurators and clerks of the Naval Provostship, captains of merchant ships and of privateers with twenty or more guns.

Addendum: Lieutenants of the Archers of the Gabelle, lieutenants of the Provost-General of the Mint, commissaries and controllers of the watch of the Maréchaussé, exempts of the Provost-General of the Constabulary, officers of the royal provostships and castellanies other than the chiefs, clerks of the Mint, assessors, King's procurators and clerks of the Maréchaussé, first bailiffs of the Presidial courts in the provinces, bailiffs of the petty chanceries, bailiffs of the financial bureaus in the provinces, subcontractors of provisions, store-keeper of provisions, mail writers sorting letters, writers to the principal writers of the Extraordinary of War and of provisions and magazines, prison wardens, married esquires, married stewards, and parish beadles in Paris.

Second addendum: Scriveners in cities where there is a parliament, some of the writers of the Ferme, master scribes of the notaries in Paris, apprentices to merchants with stores in Paris, non-married esquires and non-married stewards.

Third addendum: Reformed lieutenants and ensigns of the Navy and the Galley Fleet, masters of hydrography, master shipbuilders of the Navy and the Galley Fleet, captains of merchant ships and privateers with ten to twenty guns, chaplains in service of ports and arsenals of the Navy and the Galley Fleet, and writers to the cashiers and principal writers of the treasurer-generals of the Navy and the Galley Fleet.

Addendum: Lieutenants of cavalry and dragoons, aide-majors of infantry, cavalry and dragoons, brigadiers of the Ferme, game keepers, bailiffs of the consular jurisdictions, controllers of the troop hospitals, writers in charge of provisions for the frontier fortresses, writers distributing letters at the Mail, parish beadles in the provinces, parish vergers, and married cooks and sommeliers.

Second addendum: Scriveners in the cities of the second order, bailiffs of the Presidial courts, apprentices to great merchants with stores in cities of the first order, master scribes of the advocates and notaries in Paris, master ccribes of notaries in cities of the first order, apprentices to great merchants with shops, widowed damsels, unmarried cooks and sommeliers.

Third addendum: Quartermasters of the gardes de l'Étendard réal of the Galley Fleet, aids of the naval artillery, engineer aids and draughtsmen of the Navy and the Galley Fleet, chief of brigades of the gardes-marine, captains of merchant ships and of privateers with less than ten guns, lieutenants and ensigns of merchant ships and of privateers with less than ten guns, and extraordinary surgeons serving in the ports and arsenals of the Navy and the Galley Fleet.

Addendum: Exempts of the Provost-General of the Mint, exempts or brigadiers of the watch, guards of the Ferme, archers of the Gabelle, archers of the Provost-General of the Constabulary, assessors of town halls in walled towns, surgeon-majors of regiments, couriers, married Valets de chambre.

Second addendum: Scribes to notaries and procurators in Paris and the provinces, merchant's apprentices, unmarried Valets de chambre, chambermaids, and some of the servants in Paris.

Third addendum: Ordinary writers in the service of the Navy and the Galley Fleet, registry clerks serving in the conscription of seamen, extraordinary writers in the ports and arsenals of Navy and the Galley Fleet and in the registry bureaus, boatswains serving in the ports and arsenals of Navy and the Galley Fleet, master workers serving in the ports and arsenals of the Navy and the Galley Fleet with a pay of 30 livres a month and above, teaching masters of the gardes-marin, brigadiers and sub-brigadiers of the gardes-marin, officers and servants in service of hospitals for the sick with a pay of 30 livres a month and above, petty officers with a pay of 30 livres a month and above, bombardiers with a pay of 30 livres a month and above, non-commissioned officers of the Galley Fleet with a pay of 30 livres a month and above, captains of merchant ships with no guns, and surgeons, writers and chaplains of merchant ships and privateers.

Addendum: Archers of the Provost-General of the Mint, archers of the watch, factors, married gardeners, married coachmen and porters.

Second addendum: Unmarried gardeners, unmarried coachmen and porters, and some of the servants in Paris and servants in the cities of first and second order.

Third addendum: Foreign petty officers serving in the Navy and the Galley Fleet and on merchants ships and privateers, archers of the Navy and the Galley Fleet, wardens of port prisons, porters of the arsenals of the Navy and the Galley Fleet, petty officers, bombardiers and non-commissioned officers of the Galley Fleet paid less than 30 livres per month, captains-of-arms and corporals of the Compagnies franches de la marine, officers and servants in service of hospitals for the sick paid less than 30 livres per month, petty officers crippled in the service enjoying a half-pay of 30 livres a month and above, and master workers serving in the ports and arsenals of the Navy and the Galley Fleet paid less than 30 livres per month.

Addendum: Married postilions, grooms and lackeys, married shepherds, carters and other servants of yeomen, farmers and other country dwellers.

Second addendum: Apprentices to surgeons and apothecaries, apprentices to barbers and wig-makers, apprentices to tavernkeepers, apprentices to artisans, unmarried postilions, grooms and lackeys and other servants not included in the schedule or its addendums, shepherds, carters and other servants of yeomen, farmers and other country dwellers who are not married, and servants in small cities, towns and villages.

Third addendum: Oar and bow mariners serving on the galleys, galley partisaniers, prayers of the galleys, apprentice gunners of the ships and galleys, keepers of ships and arsenals of the Navy and the Galley Fleet, petty officers crippled in the service enjoying a half-pay of less than 30 livres a month, and foreign seamen serving in the navy and the galleys and on merchants ships and privateers.

The French presidential inauguration is an event marking the beginning of a new term for the president of France.

The Constitution of France does not mention any requirements for the conduct of proceedings. However, over the years, various traditions have emerged, such that the inauguration is not merely a simple transfer of power but an entire day of parades, speeches, military and civil tributes, and general celebrations. Unlike many other countries, there is no oath of office.

The 'inauguration day' is set about ten days after the second round of the presidential election in France, no later than the last day the mandate of the outgoing president.

The "inauguration" includes not only the transfer of power between the president-elect and the outgoing president, but also of a variety of ceremonial devices, both civil and military. The day is still considered an "inauguration" ("investiture" in French) even if the incumbent President is re-elected. It must be held no later than the last day of the official mandate of the outgoing President or, in case of a vacancy as a result of resignation or death, as soon as possible the results of the presidential election have been made official by the Constitutional Council. Under the Third and Fourth republics, the president-elect was inaugurated immediately on the day of their election by both houses of the Parliament, the ceremony taking place in the Marengo room (adjacent to the office of the president of Congress) of the Palace of Versailles. The inauguration of president of the French Republic is now held in the ballroom of the Élysée Palace, the official residence of the presidency.

The president-elect arrives at the Élysée Palace, usually by car (Valéry Giscard d'Estaing arrived on foot). They review a detachment of the Republican Guard in the courtyard, before being greeted on the steps by their predecessor. The two then share a conversation in one of the rooms of the Élysée, effectuating the handover, including the communication access codes of the French nuclear arsenal, which constitute an exclusive prerogative of the President. The new head of state then accompanies the outgoing president to the courtyard where they leave the Élysée for good, honoured by a salute from the Republican Guard. This part of the inauguration does not take place where the incumbent president has been re-elected. Until 1974, the outgoing president would attend the entire inauguration.

The president-elect then returns for the inauguration ceremony itself (which has always been held at the ballroom of the Élysée Palace under the Fifth Republic ; it used to be held in the Salon des Ambassadeurs), accompanied by the Prime Minister and the presidents of both chambers of the French Parliament, while the chamber orchestra of the Republican Guard plays a solemn march chosen by the newly elected president. The actual inauguration takes place when the president of Constitutional Council announces the official results of the presidential election. It is this announcement that officially transfers powers to the new President and marks the precise commencement of the new presidential mandate. The new head of state then signs the minutes of investiture. The Grand Chancellor of the Legion of Honor then pins on the lapel of the President the rosette of the Grand Cross and presents to him the Grand Collar of the Legion of Honour (composed of sixteen rings of solid gold) placed on a red velvet cushion, pronouncing the ritual phrase:

"Mr. President of the Republic, we recognise you as the Grand Master of the National Order of the Legion of Honour."

The President then delivers their inaugural address, and invited guests are presented one by one by the Chief of Protocol.

In 1981, the new president could not receive the insignia from the Grand Chancellor of the Legion of Honour. The Grand Chancellor, General Alain de Boissieu, son-in-law of General de Gaulle, had decided to resign a few days earlier rather than participate in the inauguration of François Mitterrand, who had in the past called de Gaulle's leadership a "dictatorship". Mitterrand was instead recognised as Grand Master by the senior Grand Cross, General André Biard.

After the ceremony, the president heads to the terrace of the park of the Élysée, accompanied by the Prime Minister and the presidents of both chambers, to receive military honours rendered by the Republican Guard and to render homage to the French flag while La Marseillaise plays. The new president then reviews the troops assembled at the palace. Simultaneously, a 21-gun salute is fired from the Les Invalides by a battery of honour of the French artillery to mark the presidential inauguration (the salute can begin either after the announcement of the results, or during the military honours). This tradition dates back to the 101 shots that were fired under the Ancien Régime at the burial of the dead king and the accession of his successor. The number was reduced to 21 by Charles de Gaulle in 1959. Two Canon 75-Model 1897 guns are used. The blanks are fired once every eight seconds.

The president then leaves the Élysée Palace, usually in the afternoon, after lunch with a few guests. A car has been used since the inauguration of Gaston Doumergue in 1924. Renault cars were standard until 1950, with the 40 HP, the Renault Reinastella and the Renault Suprastella serving in this role. After the Talbot Lago of 1950 used by René Coty, Charles de Gaulle and Georges Pompidou used a Citroën Traction built by Chapron in 1955. Valéry Giscard d'Estaing in 1974 (who made part of the journey on foot), François Mitterrand in 1981 and Jacques Chirac in 1995 used a 5.6 m-long Presidential Citroën SM weighing 1.78 tonnes, commissioned in 1971 by Georges Pompidou. Nicolas Sarkozy in 2007 used a Peugeot 607 Paladine concept-car built in 2000, with an electronically retractable hard roof specially loaned from Peugeot for the occasion. In 2012, François Hollande used a Citroën DS5 Hybrid4 with a sunroof, specially designed for the occasion.

The new President then goes to the Arc de Triomphe de l'Étoile, escorted by the cavalry regiment of the Republican Guard and their band, where they lay a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier and rekindle its flame, and then to the City Hall of Paris where they are received by the Mayor of Paris. Several presidents have also adapted these ceremonies to pay tribute to individuals of their choice. Thus, in 1947 Vincent Auriol went to Fort Mont Valerian in order to honor the dead of the Resistance during World War II. François Mitterrand went on foot, accompanied by a huge crowd, up to the square of the Pantheon to place roses on the graves of Victor Schœlcher, Jean Jaurès and Jean Moulin. Nicolas Sarkozy placed wreaths on the statues of Georges Clemenceau and Charles de Gaulle on the Champs-Élysées, before heading to the Bois de Boulogne to honour 35 youth killed during the Resistance. There the letter of Guy Môquet was read by a high school student and the Song of the Partisans was played by Republican Guard. In 2012, François Hollande chose to honour Jules Ferry and Marie Curie.

The President then visits the Town Hall of Paris as part of a republican tradition, where he meets the mayor, the municipal team, and other personalities of civil society or politics. The parchment of the city is signed.

Originally, the presidents were dressed in white tie and actually put on the great collar of the Legion of Honor. This outfit was also used for the official photograph, until Georges Pompidou. From the inauguration of Valéry Giscard d'Estaing in 1974, presidents have worn ordinary business attire. The great collar is no longer worn but is presented on a cushion by the Grand Chancellor of the Legion of Honor.

Although no precise estimates exist, the number of French soldiers captured by Nazi Germany during the Battle of France between May and June 1940 is generally recognised around 1.8 million, equivalent to around 10 percent of the total adult male population of France at the time. After a brief period of captivity in France, most of the prisoners were deported to Germany. In Germany, prisoners were incarcerated in Stalag or Oflag prison camps, according to rank, but the vast majority were soon transferred to work details (Kommandos) working in German agriculture or industry. Prisoners from the French colonial empire, however, remained in camps in France with poor living conditions as a result of Nazi racial ideologies.

During negotiations for the Armistice of 22 June 1940, the Vichy French government adopted a policy of collaboration in hopes for German concessions allowing repatriation. The Germans nevertheless deferred the return of prisoners until the negotiation of a final peace treaty, which never occurred due to the United Kingdom 's refusal to surrender and Germany's defeat in the Battle of Britain. The absence of a large proportion of the male population of France also had important consequences on the position of women in occupied France and charity fundraising on behalf of the prisoners played an important role in French daily life until late in the occupation. Limited repatriation of certain classes of POWs did occur from 1940 and the government was keen to encourage the return of prisoners, even launching the unpopular relève system in order to exchange prisoners of war for French labourers going to work in Germany. Nevertheless, many prisoners remained in German captivity until the defeat of Germany in 1945. Prisoners who returned to France, either by repatriation or through escaping, generally found themselves stigmatised by the French civilian population and received little official recognition.

France declared war on Germany alongside the United Kingdom following the German invasion of Poland in September 1939. The Anglo-French Supreme War Council decided to stay on the defensive along the border, relying on the Maginot Line in helping counter an anticipated German offensive across the German-French border. As neither side made any offensive moves, a Drôle de Guerre (Phoney War) developed as both sides stood-off along the border.

On 10 May 1940, the Germans launched an invasion of France through neutral Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg. Shortly afterwards, a breakthrough at Sedan outflanked the force which the French and British had sent into Belgium. By the end of May, the Belgian and Dutch armies had surrendered and the British were evacuating their Expeditionary Force from Dunkirk. German forces reached Paris on 14 June. In total, around 100,000 French soldiers were killed in action. The trauma from the German victories caused a period of division within the government of the Third Republic. German commanders finally met with French officials on 18 June who sought a cessation of hostilities, with the goal being an armistice with Germany. Marshal Philippe Pétain, who had been celebrated as a war hero in World War I, came to power as Prime Minister.

Pétain's government signed an armistice agreement on 22 June 1940 to end hostilities. Shortly afterwards, he established a new conservative and authoritarian Vichy regime ostensibly to lead a moral renewal of France and to purge the country of the communism, freemasonry, and Jewish influence which conservatives blamed for causing the military defeat in June 1940. Although the Vichy regime continued to control the so-called zone libre in southern France, the north and north-west of the country, including Paris, became the zone occupée under German military occupation. Alsace-Lorraine became a de facto part of Germany while Italy also received a small occupied region in France's south-east. In practice, Vichy exercised only very limited form of sovereignty in the occupied zones. Vichy was nominally independent and saw itself as neutral in the ongoing conflict. It retained control over France's pre-war colonial empire but in practice was essentially a German client state.

By the time of the armistice on 22 June, approximately 1.8 million French soldiers were in captivity; a figure representing roughly 10 percent of the total adult male population of France at the time. One of the terms of the Compiègne Armistice was that French prisoners would remain in German custody until the end of the war which was thought to be imminent. French prisoners came from all backgrounds, regions and civilian occupations within France and also included a substantial number of soldiers from the French colonial empire. Nevertheless, approximately a third of all French prisoners of war were French farmers or peasants and, in some regions, the total proportion of agricultural workers captured was much higher. This created labour shortages in many civilian occupations, particularly agriculture which was largely unmechanised.

During the interwar period, France had experienced considerable immigration from elsewhere in Europe. In particular, a large number of Poles and Spanish republicans, who had emigrated to France, subsequently served in the French army and were captured by the Germans. These foreign prisoners were often singled out for worse treatment.

In 1944 and 1945, as the German situation deteriorated, provision of food to POW camps became more sporadic and starvation became a problem. As Soviet troops advanced westwards, camps in the east were evacuated and moved on foot, in so-called death marches, away from the front in extremely poor conditions.

Initially most French prisoners were detained in France, but after repeated escapes, the Germans decided to move the vast majority to new camps in Germany and Eastern Europe.

Conditions in camps varied considerably geographically and over time. Conditions were particularly poor in the summer of 1940, when facilities proved insufficient to accommodate the large number of new POWs, and in the particularly cold winter that same year. Gradually, as prisoners were repatriated, relieving overcrowding, conditions generally improved. From 1943, however, as the war on the Eastern Front turned against Germany, conditions worsened and the food supply became more precarious. Some camps were purpose-built, like Stalag II-D, but others could be former barracks, asylums or fortresses.

Prisoners were generally divided into camp by rank. Officers, given different status to other ranks, were imprisoned in Oflags (short for Offizierslager or "Officers' Camp") while NCOs and other ranks were imprisoned in Stalags (or Stammlager, "Main Camp"). Each Stalag included numerous Arbeitskommandos (work units) outside the camp itself, some of which could be hundreds of kilometers away. The vast majority of prisoners (c. 93 percent) were not confined behind barbed wire, but instead worked in German factories or in farms, sometimes without guards.

Prisoners arriving in camps were divided into groups by the Germans. Mostly, this consisted of bringing soldiers of similar backgrounds (Communists, Jews or Bretons) together for administrative purposes and to limit their interaction with other prisoners. Although this sorting of soldiers generally occurred on a small scale only, a camp was established at Lübeck for French prisoners dubbed "enemies of the Reich", where they could be detained in isolation. Prisoners considered rebellious, however, were often sent to special camps in which conditions were extremely poor.

Within Stalags and Oflags, prisoners had substantial amounts of leisure time. Letters and parcels from home could take months to arrive in camps and be distributed by the Red Cross ; consequently, most had little regular contact with their families. The Red Cross also provided food, books, sports equipment and musical instruments, as well as information and letters. Thanks to the access to books, the historian Fernand Braudel wrote most of his influential work La Méditerranée et le monde méditerranéen à l'époque de Philippe II (1949), which established the analytical concept of the longue durée, while in captivity in Germany.

Numerous clubs, bands, sports teams and societies operated within the camps. In Stalag IX-A, French prisoners established both symphony and jazz orchestras and a choir. An informal "temporary university" was also established in the same camp. The future French President François Mitterrand delivered a series of lectures on the ancien régime to his fellow prisoners in another camp. Jean-Paul Sartre also delivered lectures on philosophy. Drama was also extremely popular and, despite only having very limited resources, numerous plays were staged.

Politically, the prisoners of war in Germany were given virtually more freedom than civilians in occupied France. In accordance with the Geneva Conventions, French prisoners elected hommes de confiance (Men of trust) from among their number to represent their interests. The Germans attempted to encourage prisoners to adopt Nazi or collaborationist ideologies, even supporting the creation of a pro-German newspaper, Le Trait d'Union, for prisoners and pro-Vichy Cercles Pétain groups existed in many separate camps. Although Pétain was generally supported by the prisoners, Pierre Laval who was Petain's de facto Prime Minister was extremely unpopular. Laval's re-promotion in 1942 following his dismissal in December 1940, together with the failure of his Relève system, widely undermined support for Vichy among prisoners.

Most French prisoners of war were not held in camps for most of the war, but instead, over 93 percent of French prisoners of war lived and worked on Kommandos of work details. Under the terms of the Geneva Convention NCOs were, like officers, exempted from work during captivity, but Germans often forced them to work. Workers were fed but virtually their entire wages were paid directly to the German army and prisoners were only allowed to retain 70 pfennigs per day.

Work Kommandos were very variable, but those in agriculture were generally considered better than ones in factories or mining, where conditions were worse and prisoners were vulnerable to Allied bombing raids. In rural areas of Germany, French prisoners replaced locals conscripted into the German army as agricultural labourers. Guarding Kommandos came to be regarded as an unnecessary waste of manpower - it was thought unlikely that a prisoner would attempt to escape in a country where he did not know the language. This meant that, in practice, prisoners were allowed a wider measure of freedom compared to the camps. They were often viewed with curiosity by the German rural population, and the French prisoners were often allowed to mix quite freely with German civilians. Although unlawful, many French prisoners began relationships with German women.

Around 120,000 prisoners from the French colonies were captured during the Battle of France. Most of these troops, around two-thirds, came from the French North African possessions of Tunisia, Morocco and, particularly, Algeria. Around 20 percent were from French West Africa. The rest were from Madagascar and Indochina. Influenced by Nazi racial ideology, German troops summarily killed between 1,000 and 1,500 black prisoners during the Battle of France. Among those captured who narrowly escaped execution was Léopold Sédar Senghor, an academic who would become the first President of independent Senegal in 1960.

Unlike their white compatriots, the colonial prisoners of war were imprisoned in Frontstalags in France rather than being brought to Germany. By keeping colonial soldiers in France on the pretext of preventing the spread of tropical diseases, the Germans also wanted to prevent the " racial defilement " (Rassenschande) of German women outlawed by the Nuremberg Laws of 1935. Black troops were treated worse than their white compatriots, and some of them were used for "degrading" anthropological experiments or subjects of medical testing into diseases. Although the living conditions for black soldiers gradually improved, they were still considerably lower than those of white French soldiers. The mortality rate among black soldiers was also considerably higher.

Some colonial troops were repatriated before the end of the war. Around 10,000 North African prisoners were released in 1941. Escapes and repatriations reduced the number of colonial prisoners of war to 30,000 by July 1944. With the Allied advance through France in 1944, between 10–12,000 prisoners were transported to Stalags in Germany where they were held until the end of the war. Former colonial prisoners of war were demobilised in 1944 but received less compensation than their white counterparts. A mutiny among former prisoners at Thiaroye in French Senegal on 30 November 1944 was repressed with violence.

During the Battle of the Alps, 154 French soldiers were captured by the Italians. These prisoners were forgotten during the armistice negotiations, and the final agreement makes no mention of them. They were held at the POW camp in Fonte d'Amore in Sulmona, along with 600 Greeks and 200 Britons, treated, by all accounts, in accordance with the laws of war. Their fate is unknown after Italy's armistice with the Allies, when they presumably came under German control.

The Allies captured 38,000 Vichy French soldiers in the Syria–Lebanon campaign in June 1941. The prisoners of war were offered the choice of joining the Free French or being repatriated to France. Only 5,668 men volunteered to join the Free French; the remainder chose to be repatriated. According to a statement given by Winston Churchill to the House of Commons on 10 November 1942, "upwards of 1,000 prisoners" loyal to Vichy were taken by the British during October in the Madagascar campaign. The intention of the British was again to repatriate those POWs who did not wish to join the Free French, perhaps in exchange for British officers interned in France.

Following the Japanese occupation of French Indochina, about 4,500 French prisoners were confined in a makeshift prison established at the Citadel of Hanoi in northern Vietnam. Inside its makeshift hospital, where sanitation and medical services were lacking, about half a dozen died every day.

Initially, following the armistice, it was rumoured that all French troops would be soon returned by the Germans. Petain tasked Georges Scapini, a World War I veteran and a pro-German member of the Chamber of Deputies, to negotiate the release of hostages. Scapini initially argued to the Germans that the transfer of prisoners as a goodwill gesture would ensure French public support for the Axis occupation and the Vichy regime. From his contacts with the German Ambassador Otto Abetz and Hermann Reinecke of the OKW, however, he realized that the prisoners were to be used as a bargaining chip to ensure French collaboration, and that a full transfer of French prisoners would be impossible. After the expulsion of 100,000 Jews from Lorraine was ordered by its Gauleiter Josef Bürckel, Hitler would make the concession of allowing France to assume the protecting power for its own prisoners of war. This was also because the previous protecting power of France, the United States, began to sympathize with Britain and after its diplomatic staff became too small to conduct routine inspections of German prison camps.

From the autumn of 1940, the Germans began to repatriate French reservists whose private occupations were in short supply in Vichy France, such as medical workers like doctors and nurses along with postmen and gendarmes. In 1941, after lobbying by the Vichy government, the policy was extended to French veterans of World War I and fathers of four or more children. Individual prisoners with good contacts could also be requested for repatriation. In practice, this meant that a disproportionate number of prisoners who were released early came from the upper classes.

In 1941, the Germans introduced the Flamenpolitik, intended to divide German-occupied Belgium by favouring Dutch speakers over French ones. In February 1941, repatriation of Flemish prisoners began. At the time, Dutch dialects were still widely spoken in French Flanders and, although Belgian prisoners were primarily targeted by the policy, some French prisoners were also released as a result.

The reintegration of French prisoners into civilian life was facilitated by a network of Maisons du Prisonnier (Prisoner Houses), established across France, which would help them readjust and find work. Generally, prisoners found it easy to regain their pre-war jobs because of the shortage of labour. The government had hoped that returning prisoners of war would be more sympathetic to the Vichy regime, but prisoners coming back were not noticeably more loyal to Vichy than other groups.

The relève (relief) was a policy championed by Pierre Laval in which, in exchange for French workers volunteering to work in Germany, a proportional number of prisoners would be released. The policy was announced in June 1942 and soon became extremely unpopular and divisive across French society, and among the prisoners themselves. The Vichy government had originally hoped that a much greater number of prisoners would be released under the scheme, but the Germans refused to repatriate prisoners in the proportions which Vichy had suggested. In the end, around 100,000 prisoners were repatriated under the scheme. Many, however, were old or sick prisoners who the Germans were often keen to release from custody in any event due to their inability to work (and who technically should have been released under earlier quotas) rather than peasant soldiers portrayed by Vichy propaganda.

The failure of the relève to attract sufficient numbers of French workers led to its abandonment in favour of the forced Service du travail obligatoire (STO; "Obligatory Work Service") in 1943.

The implementation of forced labour deportations from France was accompanied by a new policy in 1943. For every French worker who arrived in Germany, one POW could be "transformed" into a "free worker" (travailleur libre). Prisoners had the option and could choose to be transformed from being a prisoner of war to become a free worker in a German factory. Around 221,000 prisoners joined the scheme. The policy benefited the Germans, for whom the prisoners were a good source of extra labour, but it meant they were also able to transfer to the front German soldiers guarding POW camps, freeing 30,000 of them as a result of the policy.

Although the exact number of French prisoners who escaped from captivity in Germany is unknown, it has been estimated at around 70,000, representing approximately five per cent of all French prisoners. The Vichy government did not encourage prisoners to escape, but many of its officials were sympathetic to escapees who reached French territory. Some prisoners, particularly those working in agriculture, spent substantial amounts of time without guards, and prisoners caught by the Germans trying to escape were rarely severely punished. During the period of detention in France, fines were sometimes imposed on locals for mass escapes of prisoners in the region. It was partially to prevent escapes that led to the German decision to deport prisoners to the Reich.

As sick prisoners were often repatriated, many faked illness in an attempt to return home. From 1941, when those in certain occupations were repatriated, others produced fake identification documents to enable them to be released.

Among the escapees was Henri Giraud, a French General who had commanded a division in 1940, who escaped from Königstein prison and, despite his pro-Vichy sympathies, joined the Free French in 1943. Jean-Paul Sartre also managed to escape by forging papers demonstrating that he had a disability, leading to his repatriation.

The continued imprisonment of French soldiers was a major theme in Vichy propaganda. Prisoners of war featured in the programme of moral rejuvenation promised as part of the Révolution nationale (National Revolution). A recurring idea was the idea of prisoners of war as martyrs or penitents, suffering in order to redeem France from its pre-war excesses. The period of detainment was therefore depicted as a form of purification which would overcome internal divides within France and atone for the defeat of 1940.

The government sponsored numerous initiatives aimed at improving conditions or achieving repatriation. At the request of the Vichy government, Georges Scapini, a deputy and World War I veteran, was appointed to lead a committee to monitor the treatment of French prisoners in Germany. Scapini's Service Diplomatique des Prisonniers de Guerre (Prisoners of War Diplomatic Service; SDPG) was given responsibility to negotiate with the German authorities in all matters concerning prisoners of war. A government-backed national fund-raising campaign was run by the Secours National (National Aid) for the benefit of French prisoners. Among other activities, the Secours ran a week-long campaign nationally in 1941.

At a local level, many communities ran independent initiatives to raise money for their local community's prisoners, often organised around communities or churches, which held prayer days for POWs. These campaigns were immensely successful, and despite German restrictions on public gatherings, French civilians were able to raise large collections from lotteries and sponsored sports matches. These local prisoner relief schemes were "among the greatest stimulants of sociability under the occupation" and helped to foster a sense of community. Infighting along political and social lines did however occur in local aid committees, and there were also numerous cases of corruption and theft from local funds. Later in the war, the Vichy government increasingly tried to take control of local fund-raising, but this was often resisted by the local groups themselves.

In order to show solidarity with their relations in France, prisoners also raised funds among themselves to send back to their native regions if they had been targeted by Allied strategic bombing or food shortages.

Initially, there was considerable confusion among families with members serving in the army. It took several months for relations and friends to discover the fate of their relatives and name of casualties. Initially, only very few prisoners, usually those working in important civilian industries, were sent back to France.

For wives and families of prisoners of war, life under the occupation was particularly hard. In pre-war France, the husband was generally the household's chief wage earner, so many households saw a sharp drop in income and living standards.

Only very small allowances were made by the government to families of POWs, which was not sufficient to offset the economic difficulties caused. The large proportion of men in prisoner of war camps changed the gender balance in jobs. Many women took over running family farms and businesses, and others were forced to look for employment.

The prisoners of war also posed a big problem for Vichy's policy of moral rejuvenation summarised in its motto Travail, famille, patrie (Work, family, homeland). From October 1940, Vichy attempted to limit women's access to work which had particular effects on prisoners' families. Because of the emphasis on family values under Vichy, the government was especially worried about infidelity among the wives of prisoners in Germany. Concerned about prisoners' wives having babies, the law of 15 February 1942 made abortion a treasonable offence that carried the death penalty. For having administered 27 abortions, Marie-Louise Giraud was guillotined on 30 July 1942. In December 1942, a law was issued making cohabitation with wives of prisoners of war illegal. The government also made divorce much harder and officially made adultery an insufficient reason for legal separation in order to stop suspicious POWs divorcing their wives in France. Wives of prisoners who had had affairs were also often demonised by their local communities who considered it equivalent to prostitution. Generally, however, Vichy's moral legislation had little real effect.

It has been estimated that 37,000 French soldiers died in the German captivity. Their mortality rate estimates range from 1-2.8%, one of the lowest in WW2.

From the early repatriations, returned prisoners were generally treated with pity, suspicion and disdain by French civilians. Many believed that they had only been allowed to return in exchange for agreeing to collaborate. Later Vichy propaganda had implied that prisoners lived in good conditions, so many civilians believed that the prisoners had suffered much less than civilians during the conflict. As veterans of the 1940 Battle of France, the prisoners were blamed for the French defeat and portrayed as cowards who had surrendered, rather than fight to the death. They were also unfavourably compared with other men of their generation who had served in the Free French Forces or Resistance.

Prisoners had little effect on the resistance in France. Initially there were three resistance networks based around repatriated prisoners split along political lines, but in March 1944, the three merged to form the National Movement of Prisoners of War and Deportees.

After the war, there was a decade-long period of divisive debate about whether POWs should be considered as veterans, therefore making them eligible for a veteran's card with its accompanying benefits, but this was not resolved until the 1950s. A national organization of former prisoners was established, under the name Fédération nationale des combattants prisonniers de guerre (National Federation of Prisoner of War Veterans), which campaigned for the rights of former POWs. French prisoners were banned by a court from referring to themselves as "deportees" which had been exclusively applied to political prisoners and Holocaust victims.

No medal for prisoners was ever established, although the Médaille des Évadés (Escapees' Medal) was awarded to almost 30,000 prisoners who had escaped from camps in Germany.

The topic of French prisoners of war was relatively under-researched in French historiography and of little interested to the general public for many years. The first monograph dedicated to this was Yves Durand ’s La Captivité, published in 1980. In popular culture, the first major treatment of this was the comedic film La Vache et le prisonnier (1959) directed by Henri Verneuil.

French Provincial Cooking is a 1960 cookery book by Elizabeth David. It was first published in London by Michael Joseph.

Elizabeth David (1913–1992) was a British cookery writer who spent some years living in France and other Mediterranean countries. In the mid-20th century she strongly influenced the revitalisation of home cookery in her native country and beyond with articles and books about European cuisines and traditional British dishes.

French Provincial Cooking was published by Michael Joseph in London in 1960. The first print run sold out and the book had to be reprinted within weeks of publication. The first paperback issue of the first edition was by Penguin Books in 1964. The hardback sold for one pound fifteen shillings (£1.75 in decimal terms); the paperback cost seven shillings and sixpence (35½p).

New editions were published in 1965, 1967 and 1970. Between the editions there were reprints with minor revisions. In addition to her original five-page introduction, David wrote prefatory notes to 1977 and 1983 reissues.

The book deals with the following topics:

After the success of her first book, the 1950 A Book of Mediterranean Food, based on her stays in Antibes and elsewhere during the Second World War, David wrote four others on Mediterranean cuisines, namely the 1951 French Country Cooking, the 1954 Italian Food, the 1955 Summer Cooking, and finally in 1960 French Provincial Cooking. David states that French Provincial Cooking incorporated numerous articles she had written for Vogue and The Sunday Times in the 1950s. It has been described as "her most influential book", offering in Joe Moran's words a "stylish but straightforward cuisine [which] fitted in with a new type of casual urban entertaining", suitable for having "a few friends round for a meal" as opposed to an old-fashioned dinner party.

In 1953, the American Cordon Bleu cook Julia Child visited Marseille and was like David impressed by the freshness of the produce from vegetables to fish, so unlike America's chilled and wrapped supermarket goods. This led to her 1961 book Mastering the Art of French Cooking. The culinary historian Rosemary Lancaster writes that while Child's book describes how to prepare the food plainly and directly, without David's discourses on the ambience of the cuisine, both women "seduced their readers", changing cooking habits in their home countries.

In 1972, J. A. E. Loubère recommended the book to Americans for its combination of the pleasures of "armchair traveling" and "armchair cookery", noting that the provinces covered extend beyond the familiar ones, and that where some cuts of meat would not be readily available in the US, the recipes can easily be adjusted. The book had success in Australia, too. The Australian novelist Marion Halligan wrote that David "gave meaning to the food" at newly-fashionable post-war dinner parties that offered French food.

The Provisional government was the first government of the French Second Republic, formed on 24 February 1848 following the abolition of the July Monarchy by the February Revolution. The provisional government was succeeded on 9 May 1848 by the Executive Commission.

The Provisional Government was formed after three days of street fighting in Paris that ended in the abdication of King Louis Philippe I at noon on February 24. The leaders of the government were selected by acclamation in two different meetings later that day, one at the Chamber of Deputies and the other at the Hôtel de Ville. The first set of seven names, chosen at the Chamber of Deputies, came from the list of deputies made by the moderate republican paper Le National. The second set of names, chosen at the Hôtel de Ville, came from a list made by the more radical republican paper La Réforme. In addition to the first set of deputies it included three journalists and a representative of the workers. Later that evening the combined list was acclaimed at the Hôtel de Ville.

The members of the new Provisional Government collectively acted as head of state. They included the former deputies Jacques-Charles Dupont de l'Eure, Alphonse de Lamartine, Adolphe Crémieux, François Arago, Alexandre Auguste Ledru-Rollin, Louis-Antoine Garnier-Pagès and Pierre Marie de Saint-Georges. The three journalists were Armand Marrast, Louis Blanc (a socialist) and Ferdinand Flocon. The representative of the workers was Alexandre Martin, known as "Albert".

Various reforms were carried out during the Provisional Government's time in office. The old trade guilds were replaced (for purposes of conciliation) by organisations of employers and workers, while the undercutting of wages by various institutions like prisons was forbidden. In addition, as noted by one study, “the community accepted responsibility for industrial accidents, the Tuileries being set aside as a hospital for this purpose.” Imprisonment for debt was also abolished. A decree of March 1848 abolished “marchandage;” a subcontracting process that (as noted by one study) “encouraged competitive bidding between small entrepreneurs and forced down wages.” Another decree limited the working hours of adult males, while under another, as noted by one study, “the taxes on salt and other articles of consumption were remitted.”

Like its successor, the Executive Commission, the provisional government had a collective leadership, that exercised the power of head of state (French : Chief d'état) for all its duration.

The positions of power in the Provisional Government were mainly given to moderate republicans, although Étienne Arago was made Minister of Posts and Marc Caussidière became Prefect of Police. Alexandre Martin ("Albert"), Louis Blanc and Ferdinand Flocon did not get ministerial portfolios, and so had little power. The ministers were:

The French Prudential Supervision and Resolution Authority (French : Autorité de contrôle prudentiel et de résolution, ACPR), formerly known as Prudential Supervision Authority (French : Autorité de contrôle prudentiel, ACP), is a financial supervisory authority within the Bank of France, which exercises prudential supervision of regulated French financial firms such as banks and insurance companies.

Under European Union policy frameworks, the ACPR is the national competent authority for France within European Banking Supervision. It is a voting member of the respective Boards of Supervisors of the European Banking Authority (EBA) and European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA), It is France's designated National Resolution Authority and plenary session member of the Single Resolution Board (SRB). It provides the permanent single common representative for France in the Supervisory composition of the General Board of the Anti-Money Laundering Authority (AMLA). It is also a member of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB).

A number of financial supervisory authorities were created in France over the years and with various mandates. These included:

In January 2010, the ACP was formed by executive order through the merger of the Banking Commission, ACAM, and CECEI.

A new executive order in July 2013 granted it resolution authority, in the context of the formation of the European Single Resolution Mechanism, and correspondingly changed its name from ACP to ACPR.

In 2017, the ACPR lost its previous status of independent administrative authority (Article 24 of Law 2017-55 of 20 January 2017), and thus became more directly integrated into the Bank of France.

From July 2020 to April 2021, the ACPR conducted the first assessment of financial risks resulting from climate change, which included 22 insurance organizations and 9 banking groups.

The ACPR's stated purposes include supervision and control, preservation of the stability of the financial system and protection of clients, insured participants and beneficiaries who are subject to its control. The ACPR have supervisory powers, the power to impose administrative enforcement measures, and disciplinary powers with respect to entities under its jurisdiction. It may also make public any information that it deems necessary to discharge its duties.

The ACPR has three different decision-making bodies: the Supervisory College, the Resolution College and the Sanctions Committee, as well as some consultative bodies, such as the Audit Committee and the Scientific Consultative Committee. It occasionally launches public consultations on different issues, as was the case in 2013, when it drafted the regulations for crowdfunding following a public consultation launched alongside the Autorité des marchés financiers and the French Ministry of the Economy and Finance.

The ACPR's chairman is the Governor of the Bank of France. The Secretary-General (French : secrétaire général) is the ACPR's chief executive officer. The successive Secretaries-General of ACP, then ACPR have been:

The French re-education camps, officially called The Centre of Prevention, Integration and Citizenship (French : Le Centre de Prévention, D’insertion et de Citoyenneté), were planned and partially implemented re-education camps announced by the French government in May 2016, following a rise in violent terror attacks across France such as the Charlie Hebdo shooting of January 2015 and the November 2015 Paris attacks.

Announced by the then-Prime Minister Manuel Valls on 9 May 2016 under the newly established Interministerial Committee for the Prevention of Delinquency and Radicalization, the programme aimed to establish "treatment centres" in every region of France by the end of 2017. The first camp opened in September 2016 in Beaumont-en-Véron, situated within the Château de Pontourny, an 18th-century manor in central France. The camp had a total capacity of 25 people, while at its peak housed 9 participants. According to France 24, the first camp was shut down in August 2017 after concerns from the local community, as well as criticism of the admissions criteria, which specified volunteer participants who had not committed terror offences. Following these concerns, a Senate committee deemed the programme “a complete fiasco”, resulting in the camp's shutdown.

The French Republican calendar (French : calendrier républicain français), also commonly called the French Revolutionary calendar (calendrier révolutionnaire français), was a calendar created and implemented during the French Revolution and used by the French government for about 12 years from late 1793 to 1805, and for 18 days by the Paris Commune in 1871, meant to replace the Gregorian calendar.

The calendar consisted of twelve 30-day months, each divided into three 10-day cycles similar to weeks, plus five or six intercalary days at the end to fill out the balance of a solar year. It was designed in part to remove all religious and royalist influences from the calendar, and it was part of a larger attempt at dechristianisation and decimalisation in France (which also included decimal time of day, decimalisation of currency, and metrication). It was used in government records in France and other areas under French rule, including Belgium, Luxembourg, and parts of the Netherlands, Germany, Switzerland, Malta, and Italy.

The National Constituent Assembly at first intended to create a new calendar marking the "era of Liberty", beginning on 14 July 1789, the date of the storming of the Bastille. However, on 2 January 1792 its successor the Legislative Assembly decided that Year IV of Liberty had begun the day before. Year II had therefore begun on 1 January 1790.

On 21 September 1792 the French First Republic was proclaimed, and the new National Convention decided that 1792 was to be known as Year I of the French Republic. It decreed on 2 January 1793 that Year II of the Republic had begun the day before. However, the new calendar as adopted by the Convention in October 1793 made 22 September 1792 the first day of Year I. The Common Era, commemorating the birth of Jesus Christ, was abolished and replaced with l'ère républicaine, the Republican Era, signifying the "age of reason" overcoming superstition, as part of the campaign of dechristianisation.

The calendar is frequently named the "French Revolutionary Calendar" because it was created during the revolution, but this is a slight misnomer. In France, it is known as the calendrier républicain as well as the calendrier révolutionnaire. There was initially a debate as to whether the calendar should celebrate the revolution, which began in July 1789, or the Republic, which was established in 1792. Immediately following 14 July 1789, papers and pamphlets started calling 1789 year I of Liberty and the following years II and III. It was in 1792, with the practical problem of dating financial transactions, that the legislative assembly was confronted with the problem of the calendar. Originally, the choice of epoch was either 1 January 1789 or 14 July 1789.

After some hesitation the assembly decided on 2 January 1792 that all official documents would use the "era of Liberty" and that the year IV of Liberty started on 1 January 1792. This usage was modified on 22 September 1792 when the Republic was proclaimed and the Convention decided that all public documents would be dated Year I of the French Republic. The decree of 2 January 1793 stipulated that the year II of the Republic began on 1 January 1793; this was revoked with the introduction of the calendar, which set 22 September 1793 as the beginning of year II. The establishment of the Republic was used as the epochal date for the calendar; therefore, the calendar commemorates the Republic, and not the Revolution.

The Concordat of 1801 re-established the Roman Catholic Church as an official institution in France, although not as the state religion of France. The concordat took effect from Easter Sunday, 28 Germinal, Year X (18 April 1802); it restored the names of the days of the week to the ones from the Gregorian calendar, and fixed Sunday as the official day of rest and religious celebration. However, the other attributes of the republican calendar, the months, and years, remained as they were.

The First Republic ended with the coronation of Napoleon I as emperor on 11 Frimaire, Year XIII, or 2 December 1804. Despite this, the republican calendar continued to be used until 1 January 1806, when Napoleon declared it abolished. It was used again briefly in the Journal officiel for some dates during a short period of the Paris Commune, 6–23 May 1871 (16 Floréal – 3 Prairial Year LXXIX).

The prominent atheist essayist and philosopher Sylvain Maréchal published the first edition of his Almanach des Honnêtes-gens (Almanac of Honest People) in 1788. The first month in the almanac is "Mars, ou Princeps" (March, or First), the last month is "Février, ou Duodécembre" (February, or Twelfth). The lengths of the months are the same as those in the Gregorian calendar; however, the 10th, 20th, and 30th days are singled out of each month as the end of a décade (group of ten days). Individual days were assigned, instead of to the traditional saints, to people noteworthy for mostly secular achievements. Later editions of the almanac would switch to the Republican Calendar.

The days of the French Revolution and First French Republic saw many efforts to sweep away various trappings of the ancien régime (the old feudal monarchy); some of these were more successful than others. The new Republican government sought to institute, among other reforms, a new social and legal system, a new system of weights and measures (which became the metric system), and a new calendar.

Amid nostalgia for the ancient Roman Republic, the theories of the Age of Enlightenment were at their peak, and the devisers of the new systems looked to nature for their inspiration. Natural constants, multiples of ten, and Latin as well as Ancient Greek derivations formed the fundamental blocks from which the systems were built.

The calendar was created by a commission under the direction of the politician Gilbert Romme seconded by Claude Joseph Ferry [ fr ] and Charles-François Dupuis. They associated with their work chemist Louis-Bernard Guyton de Morveau, mathematician and astronomer Joseph-Louis Lagrange, astronomer Jérôme Lalande, mathematician Gaspard Monge, astronomer and naval geographer Alexandre Guy Pingré, and poet, actor and playwright Fabre d'Églantine (who invented the names of the months) with the help of André Thouin (gardener at the Jardin des plantes of the Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris). As the rapporteur of the commission, Romme presented the calendar to the Jacobin -controlled National Convention on 23 September 1793, which adopted it on 24 October 1793 and also extended it proleptically to its epoch of 22 September 1792. It is because of his position as rapporteur of the commission that the creation of the republican calendar is attributed to Romme.

French coins of the period used the calendar. Many show the year (French : an) in Arabic numerals, although Roman numerals were used on some issues. Year 11 coins typically have a "XI" date to avoid confusion with the Roman "II".

Years usually appear in writing as Roman numerals. Roman numeral I indicates the first year of the republic, that is, the year before the calendar actually came into use. By law, the beginning of each year was set at midnight, beginning on the day the apparent autumnal equinox falls at the Paris Observatory.

There were twelve months, each divided into three 10-day weeks called décades. The tenth day, décadi, replaced Sunday as the day of rest and festivity. The five or six extra days needed to approximate the solar or tropical year were placed after the final month of each year and called complementary days. This arrangement was an almost exact copy of the calendar used by the Ancient Egyptians, though in their case the year did not begin and end on the autumnal equinox.

A period of four years ending on a leap day was to be called a "Franciade". The name " Olympique " was originally proposed but changed to Franciade to commemorate the fact that it had taken the revolution four years to establish a republican government in France. The leap year was called Sextile, an allusion to the " bissextile " leap years of the Julian and Gregorian calendars, because it contained a sixth complementary day.

Each day was divided into ten hours, each hour into 100 decimal minutes, and each decimal minute into 100 decimal seconds. Thus an hour was 144 conventional minutes (2.4 times as long as a conventional hour), a minute was 86.4 conventional seconds (44% longer than a conventional minute), and a second was 0.864 conventional seconds (13.6% shorter than a conventional second). Clocks were manufactured to display this decimal time, but it did not catch on. Mandatory use of decimal time was officially suspended 7 April 1795, although some cities continued to use decimal time as late as 1801. The numbering of years by Roman numerals ran counter to this general decimalisation tendency.

The month names were based on nature, principally having to do with the prevailing weather in and around Paris and sometimes evoking the Medieval Labours of the Months. The extra five or six days in the year were not given a month designation but considered Sansculottides or complementary days. Most of the month names were new words coined from French, Latin, or Greek. The endings of the names were grouped by season. -dor comes from δῶρον, dō̂ron means 'giving' in Greek.

In Britain, a contemporary wit mocked the calendar by calling the months: Wheezy, Sneezy, and Freezy ; Slippy, Drippy, and Nippy ; Showery, Flowery, and Bowery ; Hoppy, Croppy, and Poppy. Historian Thomas Carlyle suggests somewhat more serious English names in his 1837 work The French Revolution: A History, namely Vintagearious, Fogarious, Frostarious, Snowous, Rainous, Windous, Buddal, Floweral, Meadowal, Reapidor, Heatidor, and Fruitidor. Like the French originals, they are neologisms suggesting a meaning related to the season.

Each month was divided into three décades or "weeks" of ten days each, named:

Décadis became an official day of rest instead of Sunday, in order to diminish the influence of the Roman Catholic Church. They were used for the festivals of a succession of new religions meant to replace Catholicism: the Cult of Reason, the Cult of the Supreme Being, the Decadary Cult, and Theophilanthropy. Christian holidays were officially abolished in favor of revolutionary holidays. The law of 13 Fructidor year VI (30 August 1798) required that marriages must only be celebrated on décadis. This law was applied from the 1st Vendémiaire year VII (22 September 1798) to 28 Pluviôse year VIII (17 February 1800).

Five extra days – six in leap years – were national holidays at the end of every year. These were originally known as les sans-culottides (after sans-culottes), but after year III (1795) as les jours complémentaires :

The Roman Catholic Church used a calendar of saints, which named each day of the year after an associated saint. To reduce the influence of the Church, Fabre d'Églantine introduced a rural calendar in which each day of the year had a unique name associated with the rural economy, stated to correspond to the time of year. Every décadi (ending in 0) was named after an agricultural tool. Each quintidi (ending in 5) was named for a common animal. The rest of the days were named for "grain, pasture, trees, roots, flowers, fruits" and other plants, except for the first month of winter, Nivôse, during which the rest of the days were named after minerals.

Our starting point was the idea of celebrating, through the calendar, the agricultural system, and of leading the nation back to it, marking the times and the fractions of the year by intelligible or visible signs taken from agriculture and the rural economy. (...)

As the calendar is something that we use so often, we must take advantage of this frequency of use to put elementary notions of agriculture before the people – to show the richness of nature, to make them love the fields, and to methodically show them the order of the influences of the heavens and of the products of the earth.

The priests assigned the commemoration of a so-called saint to each day of the year: this catalogue exhibited neither utility nor method; it was a collection of lies, of deceit or of charlatanism.

We thought that the nation, after having kicked out this canonised mob from its calendar, must replace it with the objects that make up the true riches of the nation, worthy objects not from a cult, but from agriculture – useful products of the soil, the tools that we use to cultivate it, and the domesticated animals, our faithful servants in these works; animals much more precious, without doubt, to the eye of reason, than the beatified skeletons pulled from the catacombs of Rome.

So we have arranged in the column of each month, the names of the real treasures of the rural economy. The grains, the pastures, the trees, the roots, the flowers, the fruits, the plants are arranged in the calendar, in such a way that the place and the day of the month that each product occupies is precisely the season and the day that Nature presents it to us.

— Fabre d'Églantine, "Rapport fait à la Convention nationale au nom de la Commission chargée de la confection du Calendrier", Imprimerie nationale, 1793

Leap years in the calendar are a point of great dispute, due to the contradicting statements in the establishing decree stating:

Each year begins at midnight, with the day on which the true autumnal equinox falls for the Paris Observatory.

The four-year period, after which the addition of a day is usually necessary, is called the Franciade in memory of the revolution which, after four years of effort, led France to republican government. The fourth year of the Franciade is called Sextile.

These two specifications are incompatible, as leap years defined by the autumnal equinox in Paris do not recur on a regular four-year schedule. It was erroneously believed that one leap day would be skipped automatically every 129 years, on average, but actually five years would sometimes pass between leap years, about three times per century. Thus, the years III, VII, and XI were observed as leap years, and the years XV and XX were also planned as such, even though they were five years apart.

A fixed arithmetic rule for determining leap years was proposed by Delambre and presented to the Committee of Public Education by Romme on 19 Floréal An III (8 May 1795). The proposed rule was to determine leap years by applying the rules of the Gregorian calendar to the years of the French Republic (years IV, VIII, XII, etc. were to be leap years) except that year 4000 (the last year of ten 400-year periods) should be a common year instead of a leap year. Shortly thereafter, Romme was sentenced to the guillotine and committed suicide, and the proposal was never adopted, although Jérôme Lalande repeatedly proposed it for a number of years.

The proposal was intended to avoid uncertain future leap years caused by the inaccurate astronomical knowledge of the 1790s (even today, this statement is still valid due to the uncertainty in ΔT). In particular, the committee noted that the autumnal equinox of year 144 was predicted to occur at 11:59:40 pm local apparent time in Paris, which was closer to midnight than its inherent 3 to 4 minute uncertainty.

The calendar was abolished by an act dated 22 Fructidor an XIII (9 September 1805) and signed by Napoleon, which referred to a report by Michel-Louis-Étienne Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély and Jean Joseph Mounier, listing two fundamental flaws.

The report also notes that the 10-day décade was unpopular and had already been suppressed three years earlier in favor of the seven-day week, removing what was considered by some as one of the calendar's main benefits. The 10-day décade was unpopular with laborers because they received only one full day of rest out of ten, instead of one in seven, although they also got a half-day off on the fifth day (thus 36 full days and 36 half days in a year, for a total of 54 free days, compared to the usual 52 or 53 Sundays). It also, by design, conflicted with Sunday religious observances.

Another criticism of the calendar was that despite the poetic names of its months, they were tied to the climate and agriculture of metropolitan France and therefore not applicable to France's overseas territories.

The following pictures, showing twelve allegories for the months, were illustrated by French painter Louis Lafitte and engraved by Salvatore Tresca [ fr ].

Below are the Gregorian dates each year of the Republican Era (French: Ère Républicaine) began while the calendar was in effect. Extra (sextile) day inserted before date, due to previous leap year

The Republican Calendar was abolished in the year XIV (1805). After this year, there are two historically attested calendars which may be used to determine dates. Both calendars gave the same dates for years 17 to 52 (1808–1844), always beginning on 23 September, and it was suggested, but never adopted, that the reformed calendar be implemented during this period, before the Republican Calendar was abolished.

For this calendar, Delambre's revised method of calculating leap years is used. Other methods may differ by one day. Time may be cached and therefore not accurate. Decimal time is according to Paris Mean Time, which is 9 minutes 21 seconds (6.49 decimal minutes) ahead of Greenwich Mean Time (GMT).

The " Coup of 18 Brumaire " or "Brumaire" was the coup d'état of Napoleon Bonaparte on 18 Brumaire An VIII (9 November 1799), which many historians consider to be the end of the French Revolution. Karl Marx 's 1852 essay The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte compares the coup d'état of 1851 of Louis Napoléon unfavorably to his uncle's earlier coup, with the statement "History repeats... first as tragedy, then as farce".

Another famous revolutionary date is 9 Thermidor An II (27 July 1794), the date the Convention turned against Maximilien Robespierre, who, along with others associated with the Mountain, was guillotined the following day. Émile Zola 's novel Germinal takes its name from the calendar's month of Germinal. The seafood dish Lobster Thermidor was named after the 1891 play Thermidor, set during the Revolution. The French frigates of the Floréal class all bear names of Republican months. The months in J. R. R. Tolkien 's Nûmenorean Calendar are those of the Republican Calendar, translated into Elvish language. In T Kingfisher 's novel Illuminations, each chapter is set on a particular day and month, mostly in Thermidor, of the calendar. She explains her affection for the "delightful and rather absurd" calendar in the author's acknowledgements at the end of the book.

The Gauche Républicaine (Republican Left) was a French parliamentary group, initially informal, originating from the republican opposition positioned on the left in the Corps législatif during the Second French Empire. It operated in the National Assembly elected in 1871 at the start of the Third Republic, and later in the Chamber of Deputies from 1876, before merging with the radicals of the Union républicaine to form the Union des gauches in 1885.

The group comprised "moderate" republicans with liberal leanings, also known as Opportunist Republicans. It positioned itself between the radical Extrême gauche led by Léon Gambetta and the Centre gauche associated with Adolphe Thiers. Its key leaders included Jules Grévy, Jules Ferry, who served as President of the Council in 1880–1881 and 1883–1885, and Jules Simon.

Following the Ordre moral government under Patrice de MacMahon, during the first true legislature of the Third Republic (1876–1877), the Gauche républicaine held the largest group in the Chamber with 193 deputies. However, it faced significant conflict with President Patrice de MacMahon, a monarchist elected by the previous Assembly. This tension culminated in the 16 May 1877 crisis, which led to the dissolution of the Chamber. The subsequent elections reaffirmed the republican majority, prompting MacMahon's resignation in 1879, allowing the moderates, led by Léon Gambetta, to dominate.

With Jules Grévy ascending to the presidency, the Gauche républicaine became the dominant political force for the next two decades, supplying most ministers and senior officials. The term "gauche" (left) reflected the group's position in the hemicycle opposite the monarchists on the right, as well as the French political tendency known as sinistrisme. As the radicals, led by Georges Clemenceau, a fierce opponent of Jules Ferry, gained strength, the Gauche républicaine shifted toward the centre-right.

In February 1882, after the fall of Léon Gambetta 's " Grand ministère," the group adopted the name Union démocratique. Its members supported all successive ministries until 1885, forming the "ministerial majority."

Following the 1885 legislative elections, the group merged with two other opportunist factions—the Union républicaine and the remaining members of the Centre gauche —to form the Union des gauches.

From a historical perspective, the Gauche républicaine of 1871 can be seen as a precursor to modern French parliamentary right-wing groups.

Louis Philippe I François Guizot Thomas Robert Bugeaud

The French Revolution of 1848 (French : Révolution française de 1848), also known as the February Revolution (Révolution de février), was a period of civil unrest in France, in February 1848, that led to the collapse of the July Monarchy and the foundation of the French Second Republic. It sparked the wave of revolutions of 1848.

The revolution took place in Paris, and was preceded by the French government's crackdown on the campagne des banquets. Starting on 22 February as a large-scale protest against the government of François Guizot, it later developed into a violent uprising against the monarchy. After intense urban fighting, large crowds managed to take control of the capital, leading to the abdication of King Louis Philippe I on 24 February and the subsequent proclamation of the Second Republic.

Under the Charter of 1814, Louis XVIII ruled France as the head of a constitutional monarchy. Upon Louis XVIII's death, his brother, the Count of Artois, ascended to the throne in 1824, as Charles X. Supported by the ultra-royalists, Charles X was an extremely unpopular reactionary monarch whose aspirations were far more grand than those of his deceased brother. He had no desire to rule as a constitutional monarch, taking various steps to strengthen his own authority as monarch and weaken that of the lower house.

In 1830, Charles X, presumably persuaded by one of his chief advisers, Jules, Prince de Polignac, issued the Four Ordinances of St. Cloud. These ordinances abolished freedom of the press, reduced the electorate by 75%, and dissolved the lower house. This action provoked an immediate reaction from the citizenry, who revolted against the monarchy during the Three Glorious Days of 26–29 July 1830. Charles was forced to abdicate the throne and to flee Paris for the United Kingdom. As a result, Louis Philippe, of the Orléanist branch, rose to power, replacing the old Charter by the Charter of 1830, and his rule became known as the July Monarchy.

Nicknamed the "Bourgeois Monarch", Louis Philippe sat at the head of a moderately liberal state controlled mainly by an educated elite. He was supported by the Orléanists and opposed on his right by the Legitimists (former ultra-royalists) and on his left by the Republicans. Louis Philippe was an expert businessman and, by means of his businesses, he had become one of the richest men in France. Louis Philippe saw himself as the successful embodiment of a "small businessman" (petit bourgeois). He and his government did not look with favor on the big business (bourgeoisie), especially the industrial section of the French bourgeoisie, yet Louis Philippe did support the bankers, large and small. At the beginning of his reign in 1830, Jacques Laffitte, a banker and liberal politician who supported Louis Philippe's rise to the throne, said "From now on, the bankers will rule."

During the reign of Louis Philippe, the privileged "financial aristocracy", i.e. bankers, stock exchange magnates, railroad barons, owners of coal mines, iron ore mines, and forests and all landowners associated with them, tended to support him, while the industrial section of the bourgeoisie, which may have owned the land their factories sat on but not much more, were disfavored by Louis Philippe and actually tended to side with the middle class and laboring class in opposition to Louis Philippe in the Chamber of Deputies. Land-ownership was favored, and this elitism resulted in the disenfranchisement of much of the middle and working classes.

By 1848, only about one percent of the population held the franchise. Although France had a free press and trial by jury, only landholders were permitted to vote, which alienated the petite bourgeoisie and even the industrial bourgeoisie from the government. Louis Philippe was viewed as generally indifferent to the needs of society, especially to those members of the middle class who were excluded from the political arena. Early in 1848, some Orléanist liberals, such as Adolphe Thiers, had turned against Louis Philippe, disappointed by his opposition to parliamentarism. A reform movement developed in France which urged the government to expand the electoral franchise, just as Great Britain had done with the Reform Act 1832. The more radical democrats of the reform movement coalesced around the newspaper, La Réforme ; the more moderate republicans and the liberal opposition rallied around the Le National newspaper. Starting in July 1847 the reformists of all shades began to hold " banquets " at which toasts were drunk to "République française" (the French Republic), " Liberté, égalité, fraternité ", etc. Louis Philippe turned a deaf ear to the reform movement, and discontent among wide sections of the French people continued to grow.

Alexis de Tocqueville observed, "We are sleeping together in a volcano.... A wind of revolution blows, the storm is on the horizon." Lacking the property qualifications to vote, the lower classes were about to erupt in revolt.

The French middle class watched changes in Britain with interest. When Britain's Reform Act 1832 extended enfranchisement to any man paying taxes of £10 or more per year (equivalent to £1,000 in 2025, previously the vote was restricted to landholders), France's free press took interest. Meanwhile, economically, the French working class may perhaps have been slightly better off than Britain's working class. Still, unemployment in France threw skilled workers down to the level of the proletariat. The only nominally social law of the July Monarchy was passed in 1841. This law prohibited the use of labor of children under eight years of age, and the employment of children less than 13 years old for night-time work. This law was routinely flouted.

The year 1846 saw a financial crisis and bad harvests, and the following year saw an economic depression. A poor railway system hindered aid efforts, and the peasant rebellions that resulted were forcibly crushed. According to French economist Frédéric Bastiat, the poor condition of the railway system can largely be attributed to French efforts to promote other systems of transport, such as carriages. Perhaps a third of Paris was on social welfare. Writers such as Louis Blanc ("The right to work ") and Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (" Property is theft!") proliferated.

Bastiat, who was one of the most famous political writers of the 1840s, had written countless works concerning the economic situation before 1848, and provided a different explanation of why the French people were forced to rise in the revolt. He believed that the main reasons were primarily political corruption, along with its very complex system of monopolies, permits, and bureaucracy, which made those who were able to obtain political favors unjustly privileged and able to dictate the market conditions and caused a myriad of businesses to collapse, as well as protectionism which was the basis for the French foreign trade at the time, and which caused businesses along the Atlantic coast to file for bankruptcy, along with the one owned by Bastiat's family. Indeed, most of Bastiat's early works concern the situation in Bayonne and Bordeaux, two large merchant harbors before the Napoleonic Wars, gradually devastated first by Napoleon I's continental blockade, and later by the protectionist legislation of the nineteenth century. According to Bastiat's biographer, G.C. Roche, just prior to the revolution, 100,000 citizens of Lyon were described as "indigent" and by 1840 there were at least 130,000 abandoned children in France. International markets were not similarly troubled at the time, which Bastiat attributed to the freedom of trade. Indeed, a large part of French economic problems in the 1830s and 1840s were caused by the shortage and unnaturally high prices of different products which could have easily been imported from other countries, such as textiles, machines, tools, and ores, but doing so was either outright illegal at the time or unprofitable due to the system of punitive tariffs.

Bastiat has also noted that the French legislators were entirely unaware of the reality and the effects of their radical policies. One of the members of the French Chamber of Deputies reportedly received a standing ovation when he proposed that the depression of 1847 was due primarily to "external weakness" and "idle pacifism". Nationalist tendencies caused France to severely restrict all international contacts with the United Kingdom, including the ban on importing tea, perceived as destructive to the French national spirit. As the United Kingdom was the largest economy in the world in the nineteenth century, France deprived itself of its most important economic partner, one that could have supplied France with what it lacked and bought surplus French goods.

Such governmental policies and obliviousness to the real reasons of economic troubles were, according to Bastiat, the main causes of the French Revolution of the 1848 and the rise of socialists and anarchists in the years preceding the revolution itself.

Because political gatherings and demonstrations were outlawed in France, activists of the largely middle class opposition to the government began to hold a series of fund-raising banquets. This campaign of banquets (campagne des banquets), was intended to circumvent the governmental restriction on political meetings and provide a legal outlet for popular criticism of the regime. The campaign began in July 1847. Friedrich Engels was in Paris dating from October 1847 and was able to observe and attend some of these banquets. He wrote a series of articles on them, including "The Reform Movement in France" which was published in La Réforme on 20 November 1847; "Split in the Camp—the Réforme and the National—March of Democracy" published in The Northern Star on 4 December 1847; "Reform Banquet at Lille—Speech of LeDru-Rollin" published in The Northern Star on 16 December 1847; "Reform Movement in France—Banquet of Dijon" published in The Northern Star on 18 December 1847; "The Réforme and the National" published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung on 30 December 1847; and "Louis Blanc's Speech at the Dijon Banquet" published in the Deutsche-Brusseler-Zeitung on 30 December 1847.

On 14 January 1848, ahead of the highly awaited next banquet in Paris, the government of prime minister François Guizot outlawed it. Nonetheless, the banquet's organizers decided that it would still be held, alongside a political demonstration, and scheduled it for 22 February.

Aware of the political gatherings scheduled for the following day, the French government banned the political banquets for the second time on 21 February. The ban succeeded in pressuring the organizing committee to cancel the events. However, the workers and students, mobilising in the previous days, refused to back down over the demonstrations. 22 February started quietly, and at 9 a.m., members of the Municipal Guard who had been assigned to arrest the banquet leaders were recalled to their normal duties by the Prefect of Police. Only a small number of troops remained at critical points. Shortly before noon, large crowds began flooding out onto the streets of Paris, gathering from the eastern suburbs and the Latin Quarter towards the Place de la Concorde and the Place de la Madeleine. Their appearance came as a surprise to the authorities, after the events were supposedly cancelled, and led to a confused initial response.

The crowds, mostly unarmed, easily overcame the few Municipal Guardsmen, filling the squares and nearly invading the Palais Bourbon, the seat of the Chamber of Deputies. These demonstrations soon developed into a large-scale, popular revolt, making 22 February the first day of the Revolution. With the arrival of reinforcements in the afternoon, protesters were dispersed from the Place de la Concorde and the Place de la Madeleine. The crowds were too large to be arrested or contained, and so they spread out around the Champs-Élysées and back into southeast Paris, building the first barricades. In the evening, early skirmishes took place with the Municipal Guard.

On 23 February, the Ministry of War requested more regular troops from outside Paris. Crowds marched past Guizot's residence shouting "Down with Guizot" (À bas Guizot) and "Long Live the Reform" (Vive la réforme). The National Guard was mobilized, however its soldiers refused to engage the crowds, and instead joined them in their demonstrations against Guizot and King Louis Philippe. In the early afternoon, Louis Philippe summoned Guizot to the Tuileries Palace, the king's residence, and reluctantly asked for his resignation. Guizot returned to the Parliament where he resigned as prime minister, and the King then requested Count Molé to form a new government.

Upon Guizot's resignation, the leaders of the Movement Party (known as the "dynastic opposition"), Adolphe Thiers and Odilon Barrot, congratulated themselves on achieving a change of ministry while preserving the monarchy. After news of Guizot's resignation spread through Paris, fighting gradually ceased and the crowds began to celebrate. However, despite the fall of an unpopular government, underlying social pressures remained, and republicans still sought to secure a change of regime.

At around 9:30 pm, a crowd of over six hundred gathered outside the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on the Boulevard des Capucines. The building was guarded by about two hundred men of the 14th Line Infantry Regiment [ fr ]. The commanding officer ordered the crowd not to pass, but the soldiers began to be pressed by the crowd. The officer then ordered his men to fix bayonets in order to keep people at distance. However, as they were performing this, an unidentified weapon was discharged, and in response the soldiers opened fire on the crowd in a fusillade. 52 people were killed and 74 others were injured, and the crowd immediately dispersed as people fled in all directions.

News of the massacre soon sparked anger among Parisians. After the crowd regrouped on the Boulevard des Capucines, some of the dead were loaded on to horse-drawn wagons and paraded through the streets by workers calling for vengeance, as a general call to arms. During the night between 23 and 24 February, over 1,500 barricades were erected throughout Paris, and many railways leading to the city were sabotaged.

By 24 February, Paris was a barricaded city, and King Louis Philippe remained without a government, as first Molé, then Thiers, failed to form a cabinet. After hearing of the massacre on the Boulevard des Capucines, Louis Philippe called for a government to be installed by Barrot, who represented a significant concession to the reformists. At the same time, however, the king gave the command of the troops in Paris to Marshal Bugeaud, who was despised by the crowds for his reputation of brutality in suppressing protests. In the early morning, Bugeaud sent four columns through the city in an attempt to defeat the insurgents at the barricades. However, Louis Philippe, intending to avoid even more bloodshed, ordered the officers in charge to attempt to negotiate before opening fire. Several barracks in Paris were attacked, and a convoy of ammunition was captured by the insurgents at Vincennes. The seat of the city administration, the Hôtel de Ville, was taken by the revolutionary National Guards. Bugeaud ordered all his soldiers to fall back and consolidate the defense around the Tuileries Palace.

During the morning, heavy fighting broke out in several parts of Paris, with the largest combat taking place at the Place du Château d'Eau. There, armed insurgents attacked the Château d'Eau, a guard post on the way to the Tuileries held by about one hundred men of the Municipal Guard and the despised 14th Line Regiment. After intense fighting, the Château d'Eau was overrun and set on fire, with the surviving soldiers throwing away their weapons in surrender.

With the insurgents closing in on the royal palace, Thiers advised Louis Philippe to leave Paris and crush the revolution from outside with an overwhelming force of regular troops; however, this strategy was soundly rejected by Thiers' colleagues, including Barrot. While the Château d'Eau burned, the king received conflicting pieces of advice from his allies, and briefly collapsed in his study. Émile de Girardin was the first of his advisors to suggest abdication. At around noon, realizing no further defense was possible, Louis Philippe called off all resistance and formally abdicated in favor of his nine-year-old grandson Philippe, Count of Paris.

Louis Philippe and Queen Maria Amalia boarded a carriage awaiting at the Place de la Concorde and left Paris escorted by cavalry. After the royal couple's departure, the revolutionaries finally seized the now nearly deserted Tuileries Palace. On the king's throne, which would be burned the next day at the Place de la Bastille, they wrote, "The People of Paris to All Europe: Liberty, Equality, Fraternity. 24 February 1848". The Palais Royal, the historic seat of the Orléans family in Paris, was likewise invaded by revolutionaries and sacked. Another Orléans residence just west of Paris, the Château de Neuilly, was pillaged and largely burned down on the 25th.

After Louis Philippe's abdication, his daughter-in-law Helena, Duchess of Orléans, became the presumptive regent of France as the mother of Philippe, Count of Paris. She therefore, along with her son, went from the Tuileries to the Chamber of Deputies to try to prevent the abolition of the monarchy. However, following their victory at the Tuileries, the revolutionary crowd broke into the meeting hall of the Chamber. The effort by the dynastic opposition to secure a regency was defeated by popular calls for a Republic, and a preliminary list of members of a provisional government was announced by deputy Alphonse de Lamartine.

Responding to cries of "To the Hôtel de Ville!", Lamartine, along with the left-wing republican deputy Ledru-Rollin, marched to the Hôtel de Ville. There, on the evening, the final list of the eleven individuals who would form the Provisional Government was drawn up, with its members then being proclaimed one by one to the crowd outside. Its composition was the result of a compromise between the moderate and radical tendencies of the republican movement, associated, respectively, with the newspapers Le National and La Réforme. In the early hours of 25 February, Lamartine came to the balcony of the Hôtel de Ville and, followed by cheering from the crowd, he proclaimed the French Republic.

The February Revolution had a major impact in Europe, sparking a revolutionary wave known as the Revolutions of 1848. The American chargé d'affaires to the Austrian Empire, William H. Stiles, reported the Revolution "fell like a bomb amid the states and kingdoms of the Continent", and that "the various monarchs hastened to pay their subjects the constitutions which they owed them". As one of its immediate effects, it sparked a wave of revolutions in the German states. The outcome of the Revolution in France pressured the monarchs of Prussia, Bavaria, Austria and Sardinia into granting liberal reforms.

In Mexico, monarchist sentiment had gained traction since 1845, envisioning the restoration of the First Mexican Empire under a European monarch as the cure to the country's chronic instability. Great Britain, the Netherlands, and France were cited as examples of countries that had abandoned unstable republican forms of government and found prosperity as parliamentary monarchies. The fall of the French monarchy and its replacement by a republic switched political fashion back to republicanism and may have prevented a monarchist restoration in the aftermath of the Mexican defeat in the Mexican-American War.

The first period of French rule in the Ionian Islands (French : Départements Français de Grèce, Italian : Commissariato Generale delle Isole Ionie ; Greek : Πρώτη Γαλλοκρατία των Επτανήσων) lasted from June 1797 to March 1799. Following the fall of the Republic of Venice in May 1797, the Ionian Islands, a Venetian possession, were occupied by Revolutionary France. The French instituted a new, democratic regime and, following the Treaty of Campo Formio, annexed the islands to France, forming the three departments of Corcyre (Corfu), Ithaque (Ithaca) and Mer-Égée (Aegean Sea).

Originally widely welcomed, French rule began to grow oppressive to the islanders, and aroused the enmity of the Ottoman and Russian Empires. In 1798, a joint Russo-Ottoman campaign was launched against the islands, culminating in the four-month siege of Corfu. Its fall in March 1799 signalled the end of French rule, and the islands were reorganized as the Russo-Ottoman protectorate of the Septinsular Republic. The islands were again annexed to France in 1807 after the Treaty of Tilsit, but retained many of the institutions of the Septinsular Republic. The French were evicted from most of the islands by the British in 1809–10; only Corfu resisted until 1814. In 1815, the British established the United States of the Ionian Islands.

At the end of the 18th century, the Ionian Islands (Corfu, Zakynthos, Cephalonia, Lefkada, Ithaca, and Kythira) along with a handful of exclaves on the Epirote mainland, namely the coastal towns of Parga, Preveza, Vonitsa, and Butrint, were the sole remaining overseas possessions of the once mighty Republic of Venice in the East. In 1795, the Islands' population was counted as 152,722.

Under Venetian rule, the society of the Ionian Islands was divided into three classes, analogous to those of Venice itself: the privileged nobility, the urban middle class (cittadini) and the commoners (popolari). The noble families, who enjoyed full Venetian citizenship, were on top of the pyramid, and provided the members of the ruling council of each island. Originally restricted to Italian settler families, from the 16th century on this group also included Greek families. As in Venice, Corfu, Cephalonia, and Zakynthos each had a Libro d'Oro, where the aristocratic families were inscribed. Their nature differed from island to island: in Corfu, they were obliged to reside in Corfu city; likewise in Kythira and Zakynthos they mostly dwelled in the capital, whereas in Cephalonia a rural nobility persisted, and no clear distinction was evident in Lefkada. Nevertheless, the power of the nobility rested on the ownership of land, and as a class they derided mercantile activity, which was left to the urban burghers; as a result, the latter also came to amass wealth and land. The burghers in turn challenged the nobility's claim to monopolize local authority and aspired to join the ruling class, while the peasantry was largely politically marginalized.

The Venetian authorities were left in a position of mediator, but still had to acknowledge the power of the noble families, who often were a law on themselves and could even raise military corps of their own; while the nobles were content to pursue their private feuds and plot and conspire against each other for local office, they were also able of concerted action against the Venetian authorities, when they felt their interests threatened. Venetian writ ran lightly in the cities, and was almost non-existent in the countryside; not infrequently, Venetian official who ventured to the country to arrest some outlaw, were forced back in humiliation. The Venetian regime was more concerned with maintaining its rule than providing efficient administration. Thus ten murders were punished with ten years in prison, while speaking ill of the Venetian governor—the provveditore generale da Mar —was punished with twenty. Out of a mix of governmental ineffectiveness and deliberate policy, the bulk of the local populace was kept in a state of ignorance: there were no printing presses or schools, and the majority of the population was illiterate. Only the privileged classes, who could send their sons to study abroad, had access to higher education. As the medievalist William Miller remarked, "If the Corfiotes of that day seemed [...] to be ignorant and superstitious, poor and indolent, they were what Venice had made them".

A further distinguishing feature between rulers and ruled was religion, where the official Roman Catholicism of the Venetian authorities was opposed by the popular Greek Orthodox identity, expressed in the veneration of each island's saint or saints. Increasingly during the 18th century, Orthodoxy also provided a link to a rising European power, the Russian Empire. A pro-Russian current emerged, and several Islanders entered Russian service, especially during Catherine the Great 's " Greek Project ". Disregarding Venetian neutrality, many Isladers, including nobles, participated in attempts to provoke a Greek uprising against Ottoman rule, such as the Orlov Revolt or the raids of Lambros Katsonis and Andreas Verousis [ el ]. Others, especially from Cephalonia, settled in the Crimea, recently conquered by the Russian Empire. Nevertheless, support for the Venetian regime was still widespread enough that when the new provveditore generale, Carlo Aurelio Widmann, arrived in 1795, he could rely on the assistance of the local communes, leading nobles, the Jewish community of Corfu, and both Orthodox and Catholic clergy, to raise the necessary funds to pay for the garrisons and administrative personnel. This also shows the parlous state of Venetian defences of the Islands at that time, crippled by lack of money, interest, and supplies from the metropole.

As the French Revolutionary Wars erupted into northern Italy, Venice was shaken to its core: the spread of radical Jacobin ideals among her subjects, the undisguised hostility of the victorious French armies to the ancient aristocratic republic, and the dismal state of Venetian finances and military preparedness led to the gradual erosion of Venetian rule in its mainland possessions (Terraferma), and the eventual Fall of the Republic of Venice to Napoleon Bonaparte in May 1797. In the Ionian Islands, the news of the French advance into Lombardy in 1796 led Widmann to take extraordinary measures to strengthen the defence of the Islands, even investing his own private fortune for the cause. French agents were already active in the islands, most notably the French consul in Zakynthos, the merchant Constantine Guys, who not only fomented anti-Venetian feeling, but was suspected of orchestrating the arson of his own consulate on 29 October, an event that was used by Napoleon as one of the pretexts for his declaration of war against Venice. Rumours of the self-abolition of the Great Council of Venice on 12 May spread quickly to the islands. While pro-French elements (the karmanioloi) were instructed by Guys on the meaning of concepts like "liberty" and "equality", many nobles mobilized against them, with proposals were made to kill all French sympathizers. Despite such agitation, order was kept, and the definite news of the political change in the metropolis, with the establishment of a new, republican Provisional Municipality of Venice, in early June, was met with calm and restraint.

The fate of Venice and of its possessions was to be decided between France and Austria. No mention of the Ionian Islands was made in the Preliminaries of Leoben. The two sides had different objectives: the Austrians wanted to keep the French out, and welcomed the possibility that the islands would come under the rump Venetian Republic envisaged at Leoben, as a buffer between French and Austrian territories in the Adriatic; whereas for Napoleon the islands were a critical stepping-stone for his ambitions in the Eastern Mediterranean, which would soon lead to his invasion of Egypt. As the French diplomat Jacques Baeyens notes, the whole "Ionian adventure" was a personal project for Napoleon, who consulted nobody, least of all the ruling French Directory, before sending French troops to occupy the islands. The Islands were to be

Consequently, on 26 May, Napoleon ordered his fellow Corsican, the général de division Antoine Gentili, to begin preparations for a military occupation of the Ionian Islands. A mixed Franco-Venetian fleet with 3,159 men sailed on 13 June from Malamocco. The ships flew the Venetian flag of St. Mark, since Gentili was ostensibly merely the representative of the new, pro-French Provisional Municipality of Venice, and the expedition intended to avoid possible secession of the colony from the metropolis. In reality, Napoleon instructed Gentili to encourage the local inhabitants to pursue independence, by reminding them of the glories of Ancient Greece; the scholar Antoine-Vincent Arnault was sent along as observer for Napoleon and a political advisor and propagandist.

In the meantime, commissioners from the Provisional Municipality of Venice arrived in Corfu, informing Widmann of events and bringing orders to maintain order and begin the democratization of the local administration. Widmann tried to ensure consensus by issuing a notarized declaration of public concord, but only 177 citizens, of whom 71 nobles, signed it. The French fleet arrived on 27 June, and the French troops disembarked on the next day, amidst tumultuous reception by the local populace, led by the Orthodox primate (protopapas), Georgios Chalikiopoulos Mantzaros, who gifted Gentili with a copy of Homer 's Odyssey ; the nobility reacted to Gentili's proclamation, on 29 June, that the French brought liberty to the Islands with reserve and suspicion. Nevertheless, with the support of the populace and the resigned stance of the Venetian authorities, the imposition of French rule was rapidly accomplished not only on Corfu, but on the other islands as well. The only resistance was provided by some elements of the Venetian garrison troops, but these were quickly disarmed and disbanded; only the volunteer companies at the exposed possessions of Butrint, Parga, Lefkada, and Kythira, as well as the armatoloi troops in Preveza and Vonitsa, were retained in French pay. Although Widmann nominally remained the head of the administration, actual power lay with Gentili. When Venetian commissioners arrived bearing 60,000 ducats for the payment of army and fleet and the loans Widmann had contracted, the money was simply confiscated by the French.

The Austrian court protested the unilateral French occupation, but could do little about it. In the ongoing negotiations, Napoleon for a while pretended that the islands were to be incorporated into the Cisalpine Republic, but in the end, Austria was forced to accept the fait accompli to secure her own control over Dalmatia from the spoils of the Venetian state.

As in the Venetian metropolis, the French established new administrations in the form of Provisional Municipalities. In Corfu, the body comprised the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Corfu, Francisco Fenzi, the protopapas Mantzaros, a Catholic and an Orthodox priest, two Jews, six nobles, ten burghers, two craftsmen and six peasants. Widmann was appointed to chair the body, but he resigned during its first session, and was replaced by the Corfiot noble Spyridon Georgios Theotokis. The nobles tried to mobilize anti-Jewish sentiment against the council, and a riot broke out on its second session on 28 June, but was suppressed.

With Arnault as its political advisor, the Provisional Municipality of Corfu became the supreme executive authority on the island. Its chairman and vice-chairman were elected by secret ballot among its members for terms of one month. Sessions of the council were opened to the public (but confined to 40 attendees); closed sessions could be held to discuss a subject, but all decision-making had to be public, and every citizen could request to speak during these sessions. Eight committees (comitati) were created for Public Salvation, Health, Food, Commerce and the Arts, Economy, Police, Public Education, and Military Affairs. These committees exercised administration in their respective fields and could propose laws and select their officials, but their approval was the purview of the Provisional Municipality council.

Justice was reformed wholesale, with the introduction of French legal principles and the establishment of civil courts—seven county courts, two courts of first instance, and a court of appeal—and criminal courts—two magistrate's courts and an appeals court. Unlike Venetian times, when judges were chosen by the heads of the noble families, now the judges were appointed by the Provisional Municipality, which had also the right to issue pardons. A similar pattern was followed in the other islands, with the notable exception of Cephalonia, which traditionally had been divided into multiple provinces; now no less than five Provisional Municipalities were established on the island, at Argostoli, Livatho, the Castle of Saint George, Asos, and Lixouri.

On 5 July, in an official ceremony, a tree of liberty was planted in the main square of Corfu city, while the flag of St. Mark was thrown into a pyre, to be replaced by the French tricolour. On the next day, the Provisional Municipality of Corfu ordered the Libro d'Oro, the emblems of the Venetian Republic, the patents of nobility and coats of arms of the noble families to be likewise destroyed. This provoked the reaction of the nobles, who destroyed the liberty tree. Although a bounty of 500 thaler was placed on the unknown perpetrators, they were never found. Similar events spread across the islands: at Zakynthos, the Roman Catholic Bishop of Cephalonia and Zakynthos, Francesco Antonio Mercati and the Greek Orthodox protopapas, Gerasimos Soumakis, led the ceremony of planting the tree of liberty on 23 July; at Cephalonia, Jacobin clubs were established, and proposed the abolition of Christianity and the restoration of Ancient Greek religion and of the Olympic Games ; everywhere the burning of the Libro d'Oro and the symbols of nobility was accompanied by festivities by the populace. In Zakynthos, the more established presence of pro-French and Jacobin-influenced elements led to some violence against the nobility, but elsewhere the new regime took power mostly peacefully, and proceeded to reform society and administration; following the abolition of the nobility's privileges, proposals were made for debt relief, and a land reform involving the feudal lands, increasing the competences of local government, etc.

The French revolutionary songs Carmagnole and the Marseillaise, in their original lyrics or in various translations and adaptations, traditional Greek revolutionary songs, and the works of Rigas Feraios and the republican Zakynthian poet Antonios Martelaos, enjoyed great popularity. For the first time, extensive use of the Greek language was made in public documents, which were headed with the words "Liberty" and "Equality", and dated, in imitation of the French Revolutionary calendar, as the "First Year of Greek Liberty" (Χρόνος πρῶτος τῆς Ἐλευθερίας τῶν Γραικῶν). The new political and administrative reality also demanded that new terms were invented, and thus introduced into the modern Greek language along with the ideas of the French Revolution. All these events signified a complete break from the Venetian regime. The Provisional Municipality of Venice was left to lodge a formal but ineffective protest, on 4 August, to the French ambassador, Lallemant.

In August, Gentili began a 40-day tour of the Islands, confirming the firm installation of the new regime, but Arnault resigned on 29 July. The lawyer Pierre-Jacques Bonhomme de Comeyras [ fr ] was appointed as his successor on 7 January 1798. He did not immediately come to the Islands, however; informed of the bad state of public finances, he toured Italy for several months trying to secure funds, mostly in vain, until he succeeded in concluding a 500,000- franc loan with the Republic of Ragusa.

The pro-French elements in Zakynthos soon sent emissaries to Napoleon for an outright annexation of the Islands to France. In Corfu, the pro-Venetian tendency initially prevailed in the Provisional Municipality, hoping to be included in a reorganized Venetian state. Eventually, however, the pro-French faction won out, particularly after attempts to get Austria to intervene in Corfu failed to elicit any response; on 5 October Napoleon declared himself ready to cede Venice itself to the Austrians, but was determined to keep the Ionian Islands. The pro-French faction eventually prevailed in Lefkada as well, while Cephalonia remained divided, and Preveza pro-Venetian. Finally, in the Treaty of Campo Formio of 17 October, the last vestiges of the Republic of Venice were swept away. According to its provisions, Austria annexed most of the mainland domains of Venice, including the city itself. The Ionian Islands, the "most valuable part of Venice" according to French Foreign Minister Talleyrand, were left to the "full sovereignty" of France. Very quickly, the Provisional Municipalities of the islands petitioned Napoleon to annex the islands outright, and Gentili's reports to Napoleon also indicated that the population was favourable to a full integration with the French Republic. On 1 November Napoleon's stepson Eugène de Beauharnais arrived at Corfu, and on the same day announced to the Provisional Municipality the terms of the Treaty of Campo Formio, and the annexation of the islands to France. The news was received with great enthusiasm by the council, which awarded Eugene with a sword, and voted to send a delegation to convey its gratitude to Napoleon.

On 7 November, Napoleon issued a decree creating the departments (départements in French, πολιτομερίδια in Greek) of Corcyre, Ithaque, and Mer-Égée. Corcyre comprised the island of Corfu and its neighbouring island groups, and the mainland exclaves of Butrint and Parga; Ithaque comprised Lefkada, Ithaca, Cephalonia and other minor islands, as well as Preveza and Vonitsa on the mainland; Mer-Égée comprised Zakynthos, Kythira and Antikythira, and other minor islands. Each department was run by a five-member committee (commission départementale) and its administration was divided into twelve sections (Commerce and Arts, Police, Gambling, Theatre, National Guard, Waters and Cisterns, Public Buildings, Military Lodgings, Furniture and Food Provisions, Health and Prisons, Public and Private Schools, Mores and Religions). Each department was further subdivided into cantons with a municipal committee for each (five-member for cantons under 5,000 residents, seven-member for above). Cities were also divided into cantons, which received new names evocative of the new ethos: Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, France, Greece, Commerce, etc. A French commissioner, who had to sign off on all decisions, was assigned to each department; a commissioner-general of the Directory was established at Corfu, a post provisionally occupied by Gentili. In turn, each department was to send a representative to the Directory in Paris. As an integral part of the French Republic, the French Constitution of 1795 was applied across the islands, and all Ionian public authorities and vessels were to be issued with French insignia and passports. The defence of the new French possession was assumed by the Division du Levant, whose commanding general was also the supreme police authority, and a naval squadron of ten ships.

Due to a sudden illness, Gentili had to return to Corsica to recuperate, where he died almost immediately. As his replacement, the Directory briefly envisaged the distinguished general and future King of Sweden, Jean Bernadotte ; but in the event, the général de division Louis François Jean Chabot was chosen. The new commissioner-general, Comeyras, did not arrive in Corfu until 28 July 1798, and immediately engaged in the reorganization of the islands' administration with much energy. His tenure proved brief, however, as barely a month later he was recalled and replaced with François Louis Dubois [ fr ]. Among his achievements were the establishment of a five-man team of legal experts to revise the appeals process, and of three gendarmerie companies to provide police services. Comeyras left Corfu in early September, before his successor arrived; he died at Ancona of an epidemic.

Among the beneficial measures of the French authorities were the great care shown to public health and education. The public school system—which was partly funded by secularizing Catholic Church property—was expanded and French-language public schools founded. A "National Library" was opened in May, and a "National Printing Office" under the Frenchman Jouenne on 11 August. The French also planned to establish further printing presses, send children to France for education, and create a regular shipping route to Italy.

The French occupation of the Islands gave rise to hopes among Greek emigrants and intellectuals in Western Europe that they could be used as a springboard for a liberation of Greece. In July 1797, Rigas Feraios published his Constitution of the Hellenic Republic, based on the French revolutionary constitutions of 1793 and 1795. For a time Napoleon appeared receptive to proposals of a Greek uprising, and entertained contacts with the Maniots in southern Greece, Ali Pasha of Yanina, and Ibrahim Pasha of Scutari. He even sent the Corsican Greek military officer Demetrio Stefanopoli as his envoy to the Ionian Islands and Mani, who on his return in 1798 openly spoke of a restored Byzantine Empire and "Franco-Greek liberty" up to the Bosporus. At the same time, in Ancona, an "Executive Directory for the Commerce of Corsica, Malta, Zakynthos, Cephalonia, Corfu, the French Isles of the Adriatic, the Archipelago, and Egypt" was established with Greek and French members, aiming to collect intelligence and foment insurrection. In the event these machinations came to nothing, once the French were committed to the invasion of Egypt, rather than the Balkan provinces of the Ottoman Empire.

While initially enjoying broad support, the French regime soon began to lose some of its appeal. The heavy taxation and strict fiscal administration were widely resented, while the dismissive attitude of the French towards religion and the traditions of the Ionian people, coupled with the predatory behaviour of French troops, made them increasingly unpopular. The quartering of troops among the Corfiot citizenry—a necessity due to the complete lack of barracks—was also greatly resented.

Although the Greek clergy had supported the installation of the democratic regime and even participated actively in it, the French generally treated the clergy with hostility, as can be seen by their demand that all clerics wear the tricolour revolutionary cockade on pain of execution. The nobles were opposed to the French from the outset, and maintained contacts with Austria, never losing the opportunity to foment popular resentment, but even the new democratic clubs like the "Patriotic Society" and the "Constitutional Club", making full use of the very liberty granted by the French, began criticizing Gentili and questioning the necessity of French presence in the Ionian Islands; the Constitutional Club was eventually closed by the French authorities.

French diplomatic manoeuvring, notably the cession of Venice to Austria, also estranged parts of the populace: in December 1797, rumours began circulating that the same fate awaited the Ionian Islands, with the mainland exclaves to be sold to the Ottomans. Chabot intervened forcefully to quell the rumours, and expelled the Catholic archbishop Francisco Fenzi, who was considered as the instigator of the rumours, on 11 April 1798. Conversely, the news of the French occupation of Malta and Alexandria, as part of Napoleon's invasion of the Ottoman territories in the Levant, were received with enthusiasm.

The main external concern of the French administration was its relationship to its most important neighbour, the powerful and ambitious Ali Pasha of Yanina, semi-autonomous Ottoman ruler of much of Albania and mainland Greece. Already on 1 June 1797, Ali Pasha himself had taken the initiative, sending a letter to Napoleon expressing his respect and admiration, hopes of friendly relations, and the dispatch of four French artillery NCOs to train the Pasha's own artillery. Both Napoleon and the Directory received this with favour, and instructed Gentili to establish amicable relations with the ruler of Yanina.

Gentili met in person with Ali at Butrint during his tour of the islands, and French envoys, notably adjudant-général Roze, were frequent visitors at his court in Yanina. Roze was even wed to an adopted daughter of Ali's. Ali managed to convince the French of his good intentions, showering them with honours and providing food—and even feigning interest in Jacobin ideals—but his main objective, the cession of the mainland exclaves of the Ionian Islands, was rebuffed. Gentili did, however, lift the prohibition on Ottoman ships from traversing the Straits of Corfu, which had been in place since the 1718 Treaty of Passarowitz. This allowed Ali to move over sea against his rival, Mustafa Pasha of Delvino. In July/August 1797 (or in Easter 1798, according to other sources), his forces sailed to Lukovo and committed massacres against the local population, forcing them to submit to Ali's authority.

Relations became strained in 1798, after Ali received orders from the Sultan to provide troops for a campaign against another powerful regional ruler, the pasha of Vidin, Osman Pazvantoğlu. Chabot sent his adjutant, Schaeffer, ostensibly to demarcate the boundaries at Butrint, but in reality to dissuade Ali from obeying, as the French had good relations with Pazvantoğlu. Ali Pasha used the opportunity to complain of the lack of reciprocation for his friendly gestures, and claimed that only if the French provided him with 10,000 troops and 100,000 sequins would he be able to disobey the Sultan. In mid-June, Napoleon's aide-de-camp, Lavalette, arrived in the Islands, bearing news of the capture of Malta and a letter from Napoleon to Ali Pasha, urging him to put faith in Lavalette and in turn send a trusted envoy of his own to Napoleon. As Ali was absent in the campaign against Pazvantoğlu, Lavalette was unable to hand over the letter. In reality, Napoleon's invasion of Egypt caused Ali deep concern about ultimate French designs. While the French authorities in the Islands believed in Ali's friendship and considered that his domains shielded them from attack by the Sultan's forces, Ali decided to side with the Sultan, particularly after news of the French defeat in the Battle of the Nile arrived. In preparation for the inevitable conflict, the ruler of Yanina patched up his differences with all neighbouring rulers and magnates, as with the Souliotes.

The French invasion of Egypt had upset the balance of power in the East, and caused a rapprochement between the Ottomans and the Russian Empire, who concluded an alliance in July 1798 (although the official treaty was delayed until January 1799). As the joint Russo-Ottoman fleet set sail for the Ionian Islands, the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, Gregory V sent a missive to the clergy and people of the Islands, denouncing the impious and godless French, urging the inhabitants to drive them off, and assuring them that the Sublime Porte would allow them to choose their own form of government, on the model of the Republic of Ragusa. The same assurances were repeated in a proclamation by the head of the Russian fleet, Fyodor Ushakov, who also emphasized that the joint fleets were operating to liberate the Islanders from the "heathen French". The French fought back in the propaganda war, with pamphlets like the To the Rhomaioi of Greece by the Greek Konstantinos Stamatis and Emile Gaudin's Reflections of a Philhellene (translated into Greek by Stamatis) being printed and circulated in large numbers.

Chabot, the military governor of the Islands, received news of the Russo-Ottoman declaration of war on France on 3 October 1798, at Lixouri. At this time, Ali Pasha's forces had already assembled in the settlements around Butrint. Biding his time, Ali invited adjudant-général Roze for negotiations to Filiates, but once he had learned as much as he could about French strength and dispositions at Corfu and elsewhere, he ordered him taken prisoner to Yanina. Ali tried to repeat the same stratagem with the commandant of Butrint, but he sent only Lieutenant Steil and a Greek priest; both were arrested and brought to Yanina. Ali composed a letter to Chabot, demanding the cession of the mainland exclaves, as well as the Castle of Santa Maura on Lefkada. A second letter followed soon after, where he demanded the surrender of Corfu itself. The new commissioner-general, Dubois, arrived at about the same time, and on 13 October issued a proclamation to the inhabitants of the three departments.

During the following days, the commandant of Butrint reported that Ali's troops were moving to occupy the heights around the town, and asked for reinforcements. The attack began on 18 October. Chabot sent général de brigade Nicolas Grégoire Aulmont de Verrières [ fr ] with 300 men, and came himself to supervise the defence. Unable to withstand the vastly larger numbers of Ali's troops, on 25 October the French blew up the fortifications and evacuated to Corfu, along with the Greek inhabitants of the town and its environs.

At the same time, Ali's forces moved on Preveza. There the French, anticipating an attack, had begun erecting fieldworks at the isthmus leading to the town, at the site of ancient Nicopolis. On 22 October Ali himself, accompanied by his son Mukhtar and some 4,000 foot and 3,000 horse, appeared. The French, under général de brigade Jean Jacques Bernardin Colaud de La Salcette [ fr ], could muster only 440 French regulars, 200 militiamen, and 60 Souliotes. The ensuing Battle of Nicopolis was extremely bloody, with most of the French troops killed or captured, the latter including La Salcette. After capturing Preveza, Ali had the pro-French inhabitants publicly executed, and torched the town. Using the unsuspecting Metropolitan of Arta, Ali then lured the Prevezans who had fled to Aktion to return, and had them too beheaded. The French prisoners were subjected to torture, and those who survived were sent to Constantinople. Vonitsa too surrendered afterwards, and only Parga was left to resist Ali's forces. General Chabot tried to enlist Mustafa Pasha of Delvino against Ali Pasha, but failed.

The Russo-Ottoman fleet arrived at Kythira on 7 October 1797. The French garrison, 68 strong under Captain Michel, refused repeated offers of surrender. After naval bombardment and attacks by Ottoman infantry, on 13 October the French agreed to surrender the island's fort under terms. From Kythira the fleet sailed to Zakynthos via Koroni. On Zakynthos, the French position was precarious. The nobles on the island were joined by a large pro-Russian faction, while leading members of the French administration were missing at this crucial moment: commissioner Chriseuil de Rulhière [ fr ] was in Paris, the head of the administration was in Corfu for consultations, and general La Salcette was in Lefkada and then Preveza. The burden of defending the island fell on Major Vernier, who disposed of 400 French soldiers and 500 militia. The fleet appeared off the island on 24 October. While many of the inhabitants of Zakynthos town fled to the interior in fear of bombardment, large numbers of peasants, bearing Russian flags, streamed into the town to prevent the French and their supporters from providing any resistance. The latter were forced to retreat behind the walls of the citadel, while the peasants opened the jails, looted the administrative buildings, and burned the tree of liberty along with all official documents at the Square of St. Mark's. The looting spread to the houses of individual pro-democratic citizens, as well as to the Jewish quarter. A delegation of nobles, led by Count Nikolaos Gradenigos Sgouros and the protopapas Soumakis went to Ushakov to offer the capitulation of the island. A detachment of 700 Russians, along with a few Turks, landed on the island and joined the mass assembled in the town, laying siege to the citadel. The French garrison surrendered on 25 October. Vernier and 54 others were left free to return to France, while the rest were moved to Glarentza as prisoners of war, before being shipped to Constantinople.

The next target of the Russo-Ottoman fleet was Cephalonia. As in Zakynthos, there too a broad pro-Russian movement, fanned by Russian agents, the clergy, and the nobility, had come into existence. The French under Captain Royer disposed of no more than 350 men, who had to defend the island's two major towns, Argostoli and Lixouri. Given that both were completely unfortified, and amidst daily growing and more blatant hostility by the population, the French decided to withdraw to the Assos Castle, and thence evacuate to Lefkada. Upon their departure from Argostoli, the inhabitants, joined by armed peasants, tore down the French flag and hoisted the Russian one instead. Amidst rioting and violence, the democratic regime was abolished. When the Russo-Ottoman fleet arrived on 29 October, the island was no longer under French control. The French garrison of Lixouri successfully evaded to Lefkada, but was taken captive by armed peasants, while those of Argostoli managed to reach Assos only to surrender to the Russians, and be in turn transported to Constantinople. In Ithaca, the local inhabitants convinced the French garrison, under Captain Millet, that resistance was futile, and urged them to withdraw to Corfu. Unlike the other islands, the withdrawal of the French took place in an orderly and friendly atmosphere. When Ushakov sent two of his ships to the island, the inhabitants submitted.

In Lefkada, the anti-French agitation had also had a profound effect; the local authorities informed the French that they could not count on the support of the populace, which was rapidly arming itself, against the Russians. The French, under Major Mialet, withdrew to the Castle of Santa Maura. Reinforced by the garrison of Vonitsa, and some remnants of the garrison of Preveza, he disposed of about 500 men. On 28 October, the Russian flag was hoisted in the town hall, and remained there despite French threats to the inhabitants. A squadron of the Russo-Ottoman fleet arrived soon after, and after the refusal of the French to surrender, began to besiege the fortress. Eventually the rest of the fleet under Ushakov arrived, and after several days of close blockade and bombardment, the French surrendered on 17 November. Ushakov allowed 20 French officers to depart for France immediately, but the rest were sent to captivity in Constantinople.

With the fall of Lefkada, Corfu remained as the last bastion of French control in the Ionian Islands. There too, the anti-French and pro-Russian sentiment had been gaining ground, and the exhortations of commissioner-general Dubois largely failed to have an impact. French forces on the island, augmented by the garrisons of Ithaca and Parga, amounted to 1,500 infantry and some 300 artillerymen, as well as 8 naval vessels. To augment this force, on 23 October martial law was declared and a militia formed, followed by compulsory levies from the wealthy and confiscations of food and animals. On 2 November, the inhabitants of Corfu city were disarmed, but when the French tried to repeat this at the suburb of Mantouki the next day, they met violent resistance, leading to the bombardment and evacuation of the suburb, and the looting of the Platytera Monastery. The rest of the suburbs were disarmed without major incident. Preparations for a siege also included the levelling of the quarter of Sano Rocco at the main entrance to the city, and the fortification of the island of Vido.

The first enemy ships arrived off the city on 5 November, landing troops north and south of the city. Russian offers for a capitulation, including the immediate transfer of the garrison to a French port, were rejected. Hostilities began on 9 November with skirmishes between the two sides. On 19 November, Ushakov arrived from Lefkada with the remainder of the fleet. His main priority was to restore order to the island, where the collapse of French authority had unleashed an orgy of looting, murder, and arson. Count Nikolettos Voulgaris was appointed to head the civil administration, while the peasantry was organized to support the siege. The Russo-Ottoman forces were further augmented by 3,000 Albanians sent by Ali Pasha, while on the French side volunteer detachments from Corfu and Cephalonia distinguished themselves. On 3 February 1799, three French ships managed to break the blockade and went to Ancona, carrying pleas for reinforcements—as well as art objects looted from Corfu—but the reinforcements never arrived. The capture of Vido island on 1 March 1799 signalled the beginning of the end for the besieged, and the garrison capitulated on 4 March, on condition that the French troops be repatriated immediately.

In all the islands they occupied, the Russians installed provisional administrations of nobles and burghers. Very soon, the Russian authorities invited assemblies of the nobles to undertake the governance of the Ionian Islands, thereby restoring the previous status quo. On 6 May, the commanders of the two fleets announced that the Ionian Islands would comprise a unitary state, governed by a Senate (Γερουσία) in Corfu city, composed of three representatives each from Corfu, Cephalonia, and Zakynthos, two from Lefkada, and one each from Ithaca, Kythira, and Paxoi. The Venetian nobleman Angelo Orio [ el ], the last Venetian provveditore of Argostoli, was appointed head of the Senate, and entrusted with the creation of a constitution for the new state. Orio's constitution envisaged a thoroughly aristocratic regime, with each island headed by a Great Council composed of the nobles and the upper bourgeoisie. The Great Councils would elected the senators. Each island would retain a local administration and a treasury, but a central treasury would exist in Corfu. The Senate was the ultimate executive authority, and its chairman the head of state. A Minor Council of 40 would be elected by the Great Councils of the three largest islands, and would be responsible for justice, the selection of officials, and advising on legislation. On 21 June, at Ushakov's instigation, a Greek Orthodox archbishopric was re-established on the islands as the Metropolis of Corfu. The aged protopapas Mantzaros elected to fill the post, but died before he could be consecrated. A heated and protracted struggle between the priest Petros Voulgaris and the scholar and former archbishop of Kherson and Astrakhan, Nikiforos Theotokis, followed, but with Ushakov's intervention the new see was finally filled with the election of the Ierotheos Kigalas on 19 February 1800.

On 21 June 1799, the Senate decided to send a twelve-member delegation to Constantinople and Saint Petersburg to express its gratitude to the Sultan and Tsar, but also press for the restoration of the Islands' maritime and land frontier with the withdrawal of Ali Pasha from Butrint, Preveza, and Vonitsa, and their recognition as an independent state. As Angelo Orio participated in the delegation, he was replaced as head of the Senate by Spyridon Theotokis. Once in Constantinople, however, the delegation quickly realized that the Porte was not interested in recognizing the Islands' independence, but rather in creating a vassal state under Ottoman suzerainty. At the suggestion of the Russian ambassador, Vasily Tomara [ ru ], the delegation submitted a memorandum to the other ambassadors, requesting the recognition of the Islands as an independent and federal state, under the protection of the European powers. Two of the delegates, the Corfiot Count Antonio Maria Capodistrias and the Zakynthian Count Nikolaos Gradenigos Sigouros Desyllas remained in Constantinople to conduct negotiations with the Porte, while Orio and another delegate, Kladas, were to represent the Ionian cause in Saint Petersburg. The negotiations between Russia, the Porte, and the Islands, led to the signing of the Treaty of Constantinople on 2 April 1800, which created the Septinsular Republic, under joint Russian and Ottoman protection.

The new state proved politically unstable, but retained its precarious autonomy. The islands remained de facto under Russian influence and military protection, becoming thus involved in the Russian conflicts with France and Ali Pasha. The Septinsular Republic survived until 1807, when the Treaty of Tilsit once again surrendered the islands to France. While the Republic was abolished, its constitution and forms of governance were retained during this second period of French rule. The renewed French presence in the area aroused the opposition of the British, who instigated a naval blockade of the islands. In October 1809, British forces easily took Zakynthos, Cephalonia, Ithaca, and Kythira, followed by Lefkada in April 1810. Only Corfu, Parga, and Paxoi held out, amidst a deteriorating supply situation, until the 1814 and the resignation of Napoleon. The Islands then passed under British control, and were formed into the United States of the Ionian Islands in 1815.

French school holidays are the periods when schools in France, and all the pupils in them, have a holiday. The dates are fixed nationally by the Ministry of Education for a period of three years. Holiday dates are given as a Saturday date "after classes", as some schools have lessons on Saturday mornings, and return on a Monday morning.

The fixed dates can lead to over-crowding in tourist resorts such as the Mediterranean coast and the ski resorts, and price increases and availability problems in travel and accommodations. To alleviate this problem, holiday schedules for the "winter" and "spring" holidays in February and April, respectively, are staggered by dividing the country into three zones. Nevertheless, the synchronized school holiday schedules still cause some crowding effects as families head to popular holiday locations, especially in the summer at the beginning and end of the months in July and August when the traffic jams are a regular feature of the news bulletins.

The summer holidays officially begin in early July for all state schools and all students, whatever their age or type of school start their new school year at the beginning of September. Teachers return on 1 September, pupils usually on 2 September, but that might vary depending on how the weekend falls.

All Saints holidays start on the last weekend of October before 1 November and last two weeks since 2012 (before it lasted a week and a half).

Christmas holidays last two weeks encompassing Christmas and New Year. They are always full weeks.

Winter holidays last two weeks and are distributed in France depending on zones between the second week of February and the first week of March.

Easter holidays last two weeks and are distributed in France depending on zones between the second week of April and the first week of May.

The three zones (A, B and C) dictate when a school at a particular location will have its holiday. The zones are not contiguous areas of France, but are designed to split the population evenly.

Zone A includes Besançon, Bordeaux, Clermont-Ferrand, Dijon, Grenoble, Limoges, Lyon and Poitiers.

Zone B includes Aix - Marseille, Amiens, Caen, Lille, Nancy - Metz, Nantes, Nice, Orléans - Tours, Reims, Rennes, Rouen and Strasbourg.

Paris, Versailles and Créteil, along with Montpellier and Toulouse in the South West.

Corsica and overseas departments and territories define differently their school calendars. Whereas it is the Ministry of National Education which decides when will be holidays in metropolitan France, Corsica, French Polynesia, Guadeloupe, French Guiana, Martinique, Mayotte, New Caledonia, Réunion, Saint Pierre and Miquelon and Wallis and Futuna holidays can be adapted by decree by the local Director of Education for a span of three years.

For instance, school years in New Caledonia and Wallis and Futuna start in January and end in December.

The French Second Republic (French : Deuxième république française or La II République), officially the French Republic (République française), was the second republican formation of the government of France. The republic existed from 1848, when the monarchy fell, until its dissolution only four years later in 1852 upon the proclamation of the Second French Empire.

Following the final defeat of Napoleon Bonaparte at the Battle of Waterloo, in June 1815, France had been reconstituted into a monarchy known as the Bourbon Restoration. After a brief period of revolutionary turmoil in 1830, royal power was again secured in the " July Monarchy ", governed under principles of moderate conservatism and improved relations with the United Kingdom.

In 1848, Europe erupted into a mass revolutionary wave in which many citizens challenged their royal leaders. Much of it was led by France in the February Revolution, overthrowing King Louis-Philippe. Radical and liberal factions of the population convened the French Second Republic in 1848. Attempting to restore the First French Republic's values on human rights and constitutional government, they adopted the motto of the First Republic ; Liberté, Égalité, Fraternité. The republic was plagued with tribalist tendencies of its leading factions: royalists, proto-socialists, liberals, and conservatives. In this environment, Napoleon's nephew, Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, established himself as a popular anti-establishment figure and was elected president in 1848.

Under the Second Republic's constitution, the president was restricted to a single term of four years. To avoid this restriction and remain in power, President Louis-Napoléon overthrew the second Republic in a process beginning with the 1851 self-coup d'état ; he became known as Emperor Napoleon III of the Second French Empire from 1852.

France's "February Revolution" of 1848, was the first of the Revolutions of 1848. The events of the revolution led to the end of the 1830–1848 Orleans Monarchy and led to the creation of the Second Republic.

The Revolution of 1830, part of a wave of similar regime changes across Europe, had put an end to the monarchy of the Bourbon Restoration and installed a more liberal constitutional monarchy under the Orleans dynasty governed predominantly by Guizot's conservative-liberal center-right and Thiers' progressive-liberal center-left.

But to the left of the dynastic parties, the monarchy was criticized by Republicans (a mixture of Radicals and socialists) for being insufficiently democratic: its electoral system was based on a narrow, privileged electorate of property owners and therefore excluded workers. During the 1840s several petitions requesting electoral reform (universal manhood suffrage) had been issued by the National Guard but had been rejected by both of the main dynastic parties. Political meetings dedicated to this issue were banned by the government, and electoral reformers therefore bypassed the ban by holding a series of 'banquets' (1847–1848), events where the political debate was disguised as dinner speeches. This movement began overseen by Odilon Barrot 's moderate center-left liberal critics of Guizot's conservative government but took on a life of its own after 1846 when the economic crisis encouraged ordinary workers to demand a say over the government.

On 14 February 1848, Guizot's government decided to put an end to the banquets, on the grounds of constituting illegal political assembly. On 22 February, striking workers and Republican students took to the streets, demanding an end to Guizot's government, and erected barricades. Odilon Barrot called a motion of no confidence in Guizot, hoping that this might satisfy the rioters, but the Chamber of Deputies sided with the premier. The government called a state of emergency, thinking it could rely on the troops of the National Guard, but instead on the morning of 23 February, the Guardsmen sided with the revolutionaries, protecting them from the regular soldiers who by now had been called in.

The industrial population of the faubourgs was welcomed by the National Guard on their way toward the center of Paris. Barricades were raised after the shooting of protestors outside the Guizot manor by soldiers.

On 23 February 1848 Premier François Guizot 's cabinet resigned, abandoned by the petite bourgeoisie, on whose support they thought they could depend. The heads of the more left-leaning conservative-liberal monarchist parties, Louis-Mathieu Molé and Adolphe Thiers, declined to form a government. Odilon Barrot accepted, and Thomas Robert Bugeaud, commander-in-chief of the first military division, who had begun to attack the barricades, was recalled. In the face of the insurrection that had now taken possession of the whole capital, King Louis-Philippe abdicated in favor of his nine-year-old grandson, Prince Philippe, Count of Paris, but under pressure from insurgents who invaded the chamber of the Chamber of Deputies, leaders leaned in favor of the insurrection and prepared a provisional government; a (second) republic was then proclaimed by Alphonse de Lamartine.

The provisional government, with Dupont de l'Eure as its president, consisted of Lamartine for foreign affairs, Crémieux for justice, Ledru-Rollin for the interior, Carnot for public instruction, Goudchaux for finance, Arago for the navy, and Burdeau for war. Garnier-Pagès was mayor of Paris.

But, in 1830, the republican-socialist party set up a rival government at the Hôtel de Ville (city hall), including Louis Blanc, Armand Marrast, Ferdinand Flocon, and Alexandre Martin, known as Albert L'Ouvrier ("Albert the Worker"), which bid fair to involve discord and civil war. But this time the Palais Bourbon was not victorious over the Hôtel de Ville. It had to consent to a fusion of the two bodies, in which, however, the predominating elements were the moderate Republicans. It was uncertain what the policy of the new government would be.

One party seeing that despite the changes in the last sixty years of all political institutions, the position of the people had not been improved, demanded a reform of society itself, the abolition of the privileged position of property, which they viewed as the only obstacle to equality, and as an emblem hoisted the red flag (the 1791 red flag was, however, the symbol not merely of the French Revolution, but rather of martial law and of order). The other party wished to maintain society on the basis of its traditional institutions, and rallied around the tricolore. As a concession made by Lamartine to popular aspirations, and in exchange for the maintaining of the tricolor flag, he conceded the Republican triptych of Liberté, Égalité, Fraternité, written on the flag, on which a red rosette was also to be added.

The first collision took place as to the form which the 1848 Revolution was to take. Lamartine wished for them to maintain their original principles, with the whole country as supreme, whereas the revolutionaries under Ledru-Rollin wished for the Republic of Paris to hold a monopoly on political power. On 5 March the government, under the pressure of the Parisian clubs, decided in favor of an immediate reference to the people, and direct universal suffrage, and adjourned it until 26 April. This added the uneducated masses to the electorate and led to the election of the Constituent Assembly on 4 May 1848. The provisional government having resigned, the republican and anti-socialist majority on 9 May entrusted the supreme power to an Executive Commission consisting of five members: Arago, Pierre Marie de Saint-Georges, Garnier-Pagès, Lamartine, and Ledru-Rollin.

The result of the general election, the return of a predominantly moderate, if not monarchical, constituent assembly dashed the hopes of those who had looked for the establishment, by a peaceful revolution, of their ideal socialist state. but they were not prepared to yield without a struggle, and in Paris itself they commanded a formidable force. In spite of the preponderance of the "tricolor" party in the provisional government, so long as the voice of France had not spoken, the socialists, supported by the Parisian proletariat, had exercised an influence on policy disproportionate to their relative numbers. By the decree of 24 February, the provisional government had solemnly accepted the principle of the "right to work", and decided to establish " National Workshops " for the unemployed; at the same time, a sort of industrial parliament was established at the Luxembourg Palace, under the presidency of Louis Blanc, with the object of preparing a scheme for the organization of labor; and, lastly, by the decree of 8 March, the property qualification for enrolment in the National Guard had been abolished and the workmen were supplied with arms. The socialists thus formed a sort of state-within-a-state, complete with a government and an armed force.

On 15 May, an armed mob, headed by François-Vincent Raspail, Auguste Blanqui, and Armand Barbès, and assisted by the proletariat-aligned Guard, attempted to overwhelm the Assembly, but were defeated by the bourgeois-aligned battalions of the National Guard. Meanwhile, the national workshops were unable to provide remunerative work for the genuine unemployed, and of the thousands who applied, the greater number were employed in aimless digging and refilling of trenches; soon even this expedient failed, and those for whom work could not be invented were given a half wage of 1 franc a day.

On 21 June, Alfred de Falloux decided in the name of the parliamentary commission on labour that the workmen should be discharged within three days and those who were able-bodied should be forced to enlist in the armed forces.

After this, the June Days uprising broke out, over the course of 24–26 June, when the eastern industrial quarter of Paris, led by the worker Louis Pujol, fought the western quarter, led by general Louis-Eugène Cavaignac, who had been appointed military dictator. The socialist party was defeated and afterwards its members were deported. But the republic had been discredited and had already become unpopular with both the peasants, who were exasperated by the new land tax of 45 centimes imposed in order to fill the empty treasury, and with the bourgeoisie, who were intimidated by the power of the revolutionary clubs and disadvantaged by the economic stagnation. By the "riots" of the June Days, the working classes were also alienated from it. The Duke of Wellington wrote at this time, "France needs a Napoleon! I cannot yet see him..." The granting of universal suffrage to a society with Imperialist sympathies would benefit reactionaries, which culminated in the election of Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte as president of the republic.

The new constitution, proclaiming a democratic republic, direct universal suffrage, and the separation of powers, was promulgated on 4 November 1848. Under the new constitution, there was to be a single permanent Assembly of 750 members elected for a term of three years by the scrutin de liste. The Assembly would elect members of a Council of State to serve for six years. Laws would be proposed by the Council of State, to be voted on by the Assembly.

The executive power was delegated to the president, who was elected for four years by direct universal suffrage, i.e. on a broader basis than that of the Assembly, and was not eligible for re-election. He was to choose his ministers, who, like him, would be responsible to the Assembly.

Revision of this constitution was made practically impossible: it involved obtaining three times in succession a majority of three-quarters of the deputies in a special assembly. It was in vain that Jules Grévy —on behalf of those who perceived the obvious and inevitable risk of creating, under the name of a president, a monarch and indeed one who was more than a king at that—proposed that the head of the state should be no more than a removable president of the ministerial council. Lamartine, thinking that he was sure to be the choice of the electors under universal suffrage, won over the support of the Chamber, which did not even take the precaution of rendering ineligible the members of families which had reigned over France. It made the presidency an office dependent upon popular acclamation.

The election was keenly contested; the democratic republicans adopted as their candidate Ledru-Rollin, the "pure republicans" Cavaignac, and the recently reorganized Imperialist party Prince Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte. Unknown in 1835, and forgotten or despised since 1840, Louis Napoleon had in the last eight years advanced sufficiently in the public estimation to be elected to the Constituent Assembly in 1848 by five departments. He owed this rapid increase of popularity partly to blunders of the government of July, which had unwisely aroused the memory of the country, filled as it was with recollections of the Empire, and partly to Louis Napoléon's campaign carried on by means of pamphlets of socialistic tendencies. Moreover, the monarchists, led by Thiers and the committee of the Rue de Poitiers, were no longer content even with the safe dictatorship of the upright Cavaignac, and joined forces with the Bonapartists. On 10 December the peasants gave over 5,000,000 votes to a name: Napoléon, which stood for order at all costs, against 1,400,000 for Cavaignac. Henri Georges Boulay de la Meurthe was elected vice president, a unique position in French history.

For three years, there was an indecisive struggle between the heterogeneous Assembly and the president, who was silently awaiting his opportunity. He chose as his ministers men with little inclination towards republicanism, with a preference for Orléanists, the chief of whom was Odilon Barrot. In order to strengthen his position, he endeavoured to conciliate the reactionary parties, without committing himself to any of them. The chief instance of this was the expedition to Rome voted by the Catholics, to restore the temporal authority of Pope Pius IX, who had fled Rome in fear of the nationalists and republicans. (Garibaldi and Mazzini had been elected to a Constitutional Assembly.) The pope called for international intervention to restore him in his temporal power. The French president moved to establish the power and prestige of France against that of Austria, as beginning the work of European renovation and reconstruction which he already looked upon as his mission. French troops under Oudinot marched into Rome. This provoked an insurrection in Paris in favour of the Roman Republic, that of the Château d'Eau, which was crushed on 13 June 1849. On the other hand, when the pope, though only just restored, began to yield to the general movement of reaction, the president demanded that he should set up a Liberal government. The pope's dilatory reply having been accepted by the French ministry, the president replaced it on 1 November, by the Fould -Rocher cabinet.

This looked like a declaration of war against the Catholic and monarchist majority in the Legislative Assembly, which had been elected on 28 May in a moment of panic. But the president again pretended to be playing the game of the Orléanists, as he had done in the case of the Constituent Assembly. The complementary elections of March and April 1850 resulted in an unexpected victory for the republicans which alarmed the conservative leaders, Thiers, Berryer and Montalembert. The president and the Assembly co-operated in the passage of the Loi Falloux of 15 March 1850, which again placed university instruction under the direction of the Church.

A conservative electoral law was passed on 31 May. It required each voter to prove three years' residence at his current address by way of entries in the record of direct taxes. This effectively repealed universal suffrage: factory workers, who moved fairly often, were thus disenfranchised. The law of 16 July aggravated the severity of the press restrictions by re-establishing the "caution money" (cautionnement) deposited by proprietors and editors of papers with the government as a guarantee of good behaviour. Finally, an interpretation of the law on clubs and political societies suppressed about this time all the republican societies.

The president had only joined the cry of "Down with the Republicans!" in Montalembert in the hope of effecting a revision of the constitution without having recourse to a coup d'état. His concessions only increased the boldness of the monarchists, who had only accepted Louis-Napoléon as president in opposition to the Republic and as a step in the direction of the monarchy. A conflict was now inevitable between his personal policy and the majority of the Chamber, who were divided into legitimists and Orléanists in spite of the death of Louis-Philippe in August 1850.

Louis-Napoléon exploited their projects for a restoration of the monarchy, which he knew to be unpopular in the country, and which gave him the opportunity of furthering his own personal ambitions. From 8 August to 12 November 1850 he went about France stating the case for a revision of the constitution in speeches which he varied according to each place; he held reviews, at which cries of "Vive Napoléon!" showed that the army was with him; he superseded General Changarnier, on whose arms the parliament relied for the projected monarchical coup d'état ; he replaced his Orléanist ministry with obscure men devoted to his own cause, such as Morny, Fleury and Persigny, and gathered round him officers of the African army, broken men like General Saint-Arnaud ; in fact he practically declared open war.

His reply to the votes of censure passed by the Assembly, and their refusal to increase his civil list was to hint at a vast communistic plot in order to scare the bourgeoisie, and to denounce the electoral law of 31 May 1850, in order to gain the support of the mass of the people. The Assembly retaliated by throwing out the proposal for a partial reform of that article of the constitution which prohibited the re-election of the president and the re-establishment of universal suffrage (July). All hope of a peaceful issue was at an end. When the questors called upon the Chamber to have posted in all barracks the decree of 6 May 1848 concerning the right of the Assembly to demand the support of the troops if attacked, the Mountain, dreading a restoration of the monarchy, voted with the Bonapartists against the measure, thus disarming the legislative power.

Louis-Napoléon saw his opportunity, and organised the French coup of 1851. On the night of 1/2 December 1851, the anniversary of his uncle Napoleon's coronation in 1804 and his victory at Austerlitz in 1805, he dissolved the Chamber, re-established universal suffrage, had all the party leaders arrested, and summoned a new assembly to prolong his term of office for ten years. The deputies who had met under Berryer at the Mairie of the 10th arrondissement to defend the constitution and proclaim the deposition of Louis Napoleon were scattered by the troops at Mazas and Mont Valérien. The resistance organized by the republicans within Paris under Victor Hugo was soon subdued by the intoxicated soldiers. The more serious resistance in the départements was crushed by declaring a state of siege and by the "mixed commissions". The plebiscite of 20 December ratified by a huge majority the coup d'état in favour of the prince-president, who alone reaped the benefit of the excesses of the Republicans and the reactionary passions of the monarchists.

French Sign Language (French : langue des signes française, LSF) is the sign language of deaf and hard-of-hearing people in France and in French-speaking parts of Switzerland. According to Ethnologue, it has 100,000 native signers.

French Sign Language is related and partially ancestral to Dutch Sign Language (NGT), Flemish Sign Language (VGT), Belgian-French Sign Language (LSFB), Irish Sign Language (ISL), American Sign Language (ASL), Quebec (also known as French Canadian) Sign Language (LSQ), Brazilian Sign Language (LSB or Libras) and Russian Sign Language (RSL).

French Sign Language is frequently, though mistakenly, attributed to the work of Charles Michel de l'Épée (l'abbé de l'Épée). In fact, he is said to have discovered the already existing language by total accident; having ducked into a nearby house to escape the rain, he fell upon a pair of deaf twin sisters and was struck by the richness and complexity of the language that they used to communicate among themselves and the deaf Parisian community. The abbé set himself to learning the language, now known as Old French Sign Language, and eventually he established a free school for the deaf. At this school, he developed a system he called "methodical signs", to teach his students how to read and write. The abbé was eventually able to make public demonstrations (1771–1774) of his system, demonstrations that attracted educators and celebrities from all over the continent and that popularised the idea that the deaf could be educated, especially by gesture.

The methodical signs he created were a mixture of sign language words he had learned with some grammatical terms he invented. The resulting combination, an artificial language, was over-complicated and completely unusable by his students. For example, where his system would elaborately construct the word "unintelligible" with a chain of five signs ("interior-understand-possible-adjective-not"), the deaf natural language would simply say "understand-impossible". LSF was not invented by the abbé, but his major contributions to the deaf community were to recognize that the deaf did not need oral language to be able to think, and to indirectly accelerate the natural growth of the language by virtue of putting so many deaf students under a single roof.

From this time French Sign Language flourished until the late 19th century when a schism developed between the manualist and oralist schools of thought. In 1880 the Milan International Congress of Teachers for the Deaf-Mute convened and decided that the oralist tradition would be preferred. In due time the use of sign language was treated as a barrier to learning to talk and thus forbidden from the classroom.

This situation remained unchanged in France until the late 1970s, when the deaf community began to militate for greater recognition of sign language and for a bilingual education system. In 1991 the National Assembly passed the Fabius law, officially authorising the use of LSF for the education of deaf children. A law was passed in 2005 fully recognising LSF as a language in its own right.

The French manual alphabet is used both to distinguish signs of LSF and to incorporate French words while signing.

The French Society of Financial Analysts (French : Société Française des Analystes Financiers (SFAF)) is the main professional organisation representing members of the French financial industry. It was created in 1961 and currently has over 1500 members, all of whom are financial professionals— financial analysts, portfolio managers, investment bankers etc. SFAF is a member of EFFAS and ACIIA.

SFAF plays a highly active role in the French financial market, advising the financial authorities and assisting listed companies in their dealings with the financial community. It has also established a code of ethics for the analyst profession in France. In 1961, the Society created a professional financial training school which is now certified to issue the Certified International Investment Analyst (CIIA) diploma.

The society publishes Revue Analyse Financière, one of Europe’s longest running financial research quarterlies, with contributions from leading academics and financial industry professionals as well as policy makers and national and international regulators.

The French Southern and Antarctic Lands (French : Terres australes et antarctiques françaises, TAAF) is an overseas territory (French : Territoire d'outre-mer or TOM) of France.

The territory is sometimes referred to as the French Southern Lands (French : Terres australes françaises) or the French Southern Territories, usually to emphasize non-recognition of French sovereignty over Adélie Land as part of the Antarctic Treaty System.

The entire territory has no known permanently settled inhabitants. Approximately 150 (in the winter) to 310 (in the summer) people are usually present in the French Southern and Antarctic Lands at any time, but they are mainly made up of military personnel, officials, scientific researchers and support staff.

On 5 July 2019, the Crozet Islands, the Kerguelen Islands, and the Saint Paul and Amsterdam Islands were inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site as the "French Austral Lands and Seas" because of their pristine wilderness, biodiversity, and enormous bird colonies.

Although the region's capital is based in Réunion, this island is a member of the overseas departments and regions of France, and should not be confused with the overseas territories.

The islands became known in the 16th century, when the Spanish discovered Amsterdam Island on 18 March 1522, which was later claimed and named by the Dutch. Saint Paul Island was discovered in 1559 by the Portuguese. The Crozet islands were discovered on 24 January 1772 by French explorer Marc-Joseph Marion du Fresne during an expedition. Adelie Land was the last to be discovered, in 1840 by the French during an expedition led by Jules Dumont d'Urville, who would later have a research station on the island named after him.

The entire territory has no known permanently settled inhabitants. It is mainly visited by military personnel, officials, scientific researchers, and support staff. In 2019, the Crozet Islands, Kerguelen Islands, and Saint Paul and Amsterdam Islands were inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site due to their pristine wilderness, biodiversity, and enormous bird colonies.

On 6 August 1955, French law reorganized the administration of the islands into a new overseas territory administered by France itself, changing the previous arrangement in which the territory was attached to Madagascar (then a French colony).

The Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean are partially claimed by the Comoros, Madagascar and Mauritius. The Malagasy and Mauritian claims, however, are significantly later than their access to independence. However, the agreement reached in October 2024 on the surrender to Mauritius of the Chagos Islands by Great Britain, in the heart of the Indian Ocean, notably home to the American base of Diego Garcia, has relaunched the debate in Madagascar.

The French Southern and Antarctic Lands have formed a territoire d'outre-mer (an overseas territory) of France since 1955. Formerly, they were administered from Paris by an administrateur supérieur assisted by a secretary-general; since December 2004, however, their administrator has been a préfet, currently Florence Jeanblanc-Risler, with headquarters in Saint Pierre on Réunion Island.

The TAAF administration, the French Polar Institute Paul-Émile Victor (IPEV) and the French Navy jointly operate the icebreaker Astrolabe which is based out of Reunion. The vessel is used both to bring personnel and supplies to the Dumont d'Urville Station and for research and patrol duties. The French armed forces also maintain small troop contingents on some of the Scattered Islands in order to protect the French territorial claim.

The territory is divided into five districts:

According to new law 2007-224 of February 21, 2007, the Scattered Islands constitute the TAAF's fifth district. The TAAF website does not mention their population. The data are not included in the totals. The Îles Éparses principal station is on Tromelin Island. The headquarters of the district chief lies beyond the TAAF, in Saint Pierre on Réunion Island. The Territory's principal station is Martin-de-Viviès on Amsterdam Island. The capital and headquarters of the territorial administrator lies beyond the TAAF, in Saint Pierre on Réunion Island.

Each district is headed by a district chief, who has powers similar to those of a French mayor (including recording births and deaths and being an officer of judicial police).

Because there is no permanent population, there is no elected assembly, nor does the territory send representatives to the national parliament.

The territory includes the Crozet Islands, the Kerguelen Islands, and the Saint Paul and Amsterdam Islands in the southern Indian Ocean near 43°S, 67°E, along with Adélie Land, the sector of Antarctica claimed by France. Adélie Land, named by the French explorer Jules Dumont d’Urville after his wife, covers about 432,000 km (167,000 sq mi). The islands, totaling 7,781 km (3,004 sq mi), have no indigenous inhabitants, although in 1997 there were approximately 100 researchers whose numbers varied from winter (July) to summer (January).

Amsterdam Island and Saint Paul Island are both extinct volcanoes and have been delineated as the Amsterdam and Saint-Paul Islands temperate grasslands ecoregion. The highest point in the territory is Mont Ross on Kerguelen Island, standing at 1,850 m (6,070 ft). Notably, there are very few airstrips on the islands, existing only on islands with weather stations. The 1,232 km (766 mi) of coastline lacks ports or harbors, offering only offshore anchorages.

The islands in the Indian Ocean receive supplies via the special ship Marion Dufresne, which sails out of Le Port in Réunion Island. Terre Adélie, the Antarctic sector claimed by France, is supplied by L’Astrolabe, which sails out of Hobart in Tasmania.

Regarding maritime activity, the territory maintains a merchant marine fleet totaling (as of 1999) 2,892,911 GRT/5,165,713 tonnes deadweight (DWT). This fleet includes seven bulk carriers, five cargo ships, ten chemical tankers, nine container ships, six liquefied gas carriers, 24 petroleum tankers, one refrigerated cargo ship, and ten roll-on/roll-off (RORO) carriers. Notably, this fleet operates under the French register, allowing French-owned ships to benefit from more liberal taxation and manning regulations than those permissible under the main French register. However, this register is expected to be replaced by the International French Register (Registre International Français, RIF) in the future.

Mauritius, Madagascar, and the Comoros dispute France's sovereignty over the Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean. Mauritius claims Tromelin Island and states that the island, discovered by France in 1722, was not ceded by the Treaty of Paris in 1814. Madagascar claims sovereignty over the Glorioso Islands (including Banc du Geyser), though the island group was never a part of the Malagasy Protectorate, having been a part of the Colony of Mayotte and dependencies, then a part of the French Comoros that had become a separately administered colony from Madagascar in 1946. Madagascar has also claimed Bassas da India, Europa Island, and Juan de Nova Island since 1972, and a 1979 United Nations resolution (without binding force) demanded the cession of these islands to Madagascar. The Comoros also claims the Glorioso Islands (including Banc du Geyser), as a part of the disputed French region of Mayotte.

The French claim over Adélie Land, being a part of Antarctica, is not internationally recognized.

Due to their isolation, the French islands in the southern Indian Ocean comprise one of the last remaining large wilderness areas on Earth. Furthermore, the islands are positioned along the Antarctic Convergence, where upwelling creates nutrient-rich waters. As a result, birds and marine mammals gather on the islands in great abundance. More than 50 million birds of 47 species breed on the islands, including more than half the breeding population of 16 different species. The largest populations of king penguins and the endangered Indian yellow-nosed albatross on Earth are found on the Crozet Islands and Amsterdam Island, respectively. Other threatened bird species with important populations on the islands include Eaton's pintail, MacGillivray's prion, and the Amsterdam albatross, which is one of four bird species endemic to the island group. The French Southern Lands also hold the second largest population of southern elephant seals on Earth, numbering roughly 200,000, and the third largest population of the Antarctic fur seal.

Because of their isolation and subpolar location, the French Southern Lands are relatively depauperate of vegetation, with both Saint-Paul and Crozet having no native tree or shrub species. However, eight of the 36 higher plant species are endemic. Some species of endemic invertebrates have also been recorded on the islands, including moths and flies which have lost their wings in the absence of predators.

The territory's natural resources are limited to fish and crustaceans. Economic activity is limited to servicing meteorological and geophysical research stations and French and other fishing fleets.

The main fish resources are Patagonian toothfish and spiny lobster. Both are poached by foreign fleets; because of this, the French Navy, and occasionally other services, patrol the zone and arrest poaching vessels. Such arrests can result in heavy fines or the seizure of the ship.

France previously sold licenses to foreign fisheries to fish the Patagonian toothfish; because of overfishing, it is now restricted to a small number of fisheries from Réunion Island.

The territory takes in revenues of about € 16 million a year.

While the territory lacks a permanent civilian population, there are several inhabited research stations. Île Amsterdam has a meteorological station. Îles Crozet contains the Alfred Faure research station with a population of about 20-30 people. One of the most populous research stations in the Îles Kerguelen, Port-aux-Francais, contains 50-100 researchers. The Îles Éparses contains a French military garrison and is a spot for meteorology. The Dumont d’Urville station is a vital area for studying wildlife, the atmosphere and the ice caps.

There are no permanent settlements on the islands, however the French Armed Forces maintain small troop contingents on some of the islands. There are also weather stations on all the islands apart from Bassas da India.

The French Southern Territories (i.e. the TAAF excluding Adélie Land) have been given the following country codes : FS (FIPS) and TF (ISO 3166-1 alpha-2).

In France employees of some government-owned corporations enjoy a special retirement plan, collectively known as régimes spéciaux de retraite. These professions include employees of the SNCF (national railways), the RATP (Parisian transport), the electrical and gas companies (EDF and GDF) which used to be government-owned; as well as some employees whose functions are directly related to the State such as the military, French National Police, sailors, Civil law notaries ' assistants, employees of the Opéra de Paris, etc. The main differences between the special retirement plan and the usual private sector retirement plans are the retirement age and the number of years a worker must contribute to the fund before being allowed a full pension. In the private sector the minimum retirement age is 62 (since 2010, previously was 60) and the minimum number of quarters of contribution to the retirement fund in order to receive a full pension is between 166 and 172 quarters depending on date of birth. Employees who are enrolled in the special retirement plan can retire earlier.

According to the Conseil d'Orientation des Retraites, a governmental organism created to study the French retirement funds, the statistics for special retirement plans must be considered with caution for the following reasons:

There are 15 special retirement plans. Most suffer from an imbalance in regards to the number of workers relative to the number of pensioners, in total there are 500,000 workers contributing to the funds and 1,100,000 pensioners. In comparison, in the private sector there are 18 million workers versus 15 million pensioners.

Because of this discrepancy the special retirement plan is partly financed by the State, or by the employees of the government-owned companies that are on the standard retirement plan.

There have been several plans by conservative governments to abolish the special deal and replace it with the standard retirement plan for government-owned companies and civil servants. These efforts have been highly controversial and have caused large strikes such as those of 1995 (1995 strikes in France) and November, 2007 (November 2007 strikes in France).

Before the welfare state came into being, some companies decided to give their employees a pension in order to attract workers to strenuous or dangerous jobs. Starting from 1679 sailors were allowed a pension if an injury stopped them from working and in 1709 all fishing and merchant sailors were granted a retirement pension. During the 19th century, various other professions were granted pensions, including employees of the Banque de France, employees of the Comédie-Française, civil servants, national rail employees, and miners. Some professions were also given health insurance funds.

In 1930 and 1945 general public welfare funds were introduced that included retirement plans. The employees of the companies who had previously been granted pension schemes decided to keep them instead of participating in the new plans. The ordonnance (law created by the executive organ of State) of October 4, 1945, which is now incorporated into the set of laws regulating social securities measures (code de la Sécurité Sociale), officially permitted these older pension plans to subsist and they became known as the régimes spéciaux (special retirement plans).

Because of the diminishing number of workers in many of the sectors using special retirement plans, most noticeably in mining and railway employment, the contributions of these workers alone would not be sufficient to cover all of the pension commitments. The State, local government agencies, and the standard retirement fund provide the funds needed to balance the expenditures.

The special retirement plan funds are largely in deficit. In 2006 €14.7 billion were paid out in pensions under the special retirement plan, whereas the contributions by workers were only €6.2 billion. As such it has become necessary for the losses to be offset by four different mechanisms:

∗ The difference is made up from sources other than worker contributions, these sources may differ depending on the sector or company involved. ∗∗ In addition to pensions, the social benefits budget includes disability insurance, life insurance, and maternity leave, among others.

The decree 54-24 establishes that SNCF personnel may request the right to retire if they satisfy both the conditions of being over 55 years old (50 for drivers who have been working for at least 15 years) and having paid 25 annuities. This same decree also authorises the SNCF to forcefully retire its personnel who meet the same conditions. The pension is equal to 2% of salary per year of work, with a maximum of 75% of total salary.

The SNCF retirement fund created by decree 2007-730 is financed mainly by:

In 1995 Alain Juppé 's government attempted to align the special retirement plan with the standard one but abandoned the reform following large strikes.

In 2007 François Fillon 's government was planning a reform of the special retirement plan to make it identical to that of the civil servants. This plan has also provoked widespread strikes in France and was eventually abandoned.

The French tariff of 1881 was a tariff passed by the National Assembly of the French Third Republic that became law on 7 May 1881.

The Minister of Agriculture and Commerce, Marie Camille Alfred, vicomte de Meaux [ Wikidata ], relied on the ministry's secretary, Jules Ozenne, and the general director of customs, Léon Amé, to help formulate the government's tariff policy. They wished to retain and extend the free trade policies of the Second French Empire by lowering the protectionist duties in France's general tariff to the level of the conventional tariff in France's commercial treaties. This new general tariff would then be used to negotiate trade treaties that would lower the conventional tariff.

Meaux announced the government's intention to devise a new tariff in a circular of 7 April 1875. He also appealed for the advice on tariff levels from France's chambers of commerce. 54 chambers responded, with a majority favouring replacing the ad valorem duties with fixed duties and with all of them supporting making the existing conventional tariff the new general tariff. In March 1876 Meaux ordered the Conseil supérieur du commerce to draft a bill that would determine tariff levels. In February 1877 the bill was submitted to the Chamber of Deputies : it abolished all protective duties and in the majority of duties it made the old minimum duties the maximum that could be levied. However, the Seize Mai crisis led to the bill being withdrawn.

In March 1878 the Chamber appointed a commission (under the chairmanship of Jules Ferry) to report on a tariff bill. This deliberated until March 1879. Ferry called the commission "the most complete, the most practical, the best controlled, in a word, the most serious [inquiry] that has ever taken place". Another request for input from the chambers of commerce again led to 54 responses between April and August 1878. These revealed protectionism 's growing popularity since 1875, with half favouring duties higher than those desired by the government. In December 1879 the commission submitted its moderately protectionist tariff bill to the Chamber.

The debate was divided between free traders who argued for a low general tariff and a new conventional tariff, against the protectionists who favoured a prohibitive tariff if and when the commercial treaties expired. In June 1878 the Free Trade Association was founded. On 1 May 1879 the protectionists held a congress (chaired by Augustin Pouyer-Quertier) in the Grand Hotel in Paris, with over 100 delegates representing the chambers of commerce, senators, deputies and officers of the Association de l'industrie française. Both sides campaigned to win over public opinion in the propaganda war fought across the country. Pouyer-Quertier wished to convert the French farmer to protection in the hope that they would support tariffs for industry in return for tariffs for agriculture.

In the Chamber the debate on the bill started on 30 January 1880, with lobbyists from both sides congregating in Paris to influence the vote. An agreement between the industrial protectionists and the farmers' bloc to support protection broke down when the industrialists, mistrusting their agricultural allies, failed to vote for agricultural protection. In the voting on the clauses of the bill in the Chamber, the free traders achieved their main goal in defeating the higher tariffs for industrial goods favoured by the commission.

In the Senate the protectionists again dominated the commission appointed to examine the bill, with the result that their bill resembled the protectionist one drafted by the Chamber's commission. The main difference, however, reflected a renewed attempt at industrial-agricultural co-operation: this time agriculture received higher rates of protection than before. The Senate began debating the bill on 15 February 1881, with voting commencing on 19 February. Again, the industrial-agricultural alliance broke down. This time, however, it was the agriculturists who broke ranks: despite the industrialists voting for agricultural protection the agriculturists voted against the duty on textiles.

In the end, industry failed to receive the protection it campaigned for: the general tariff for manufacturers was raised by 24 per cent. and fixed at a specific level rather than ad valorem. Agriculture received less protection than industry but the agriculturists managed to raise livestock duties and they also ensured that agricultural duties could not be lowered in any future commercial treaty. Overall, the law was a victory for free traders.

The duty on wheat was 0.60 francs per 100kg; for flour 1.20 francs; butter 13 francs; cheese 8 francs; eggs 10 francs; beef and pork 3 francs; bullocks 15 francs; cows 8 francs; pigs 3 francs and wine 8 francs. Oats and barley were admitted duty free. Raw materials were either admitted duty free or subject to a small duty.

The French tariff of 1885 was a protectionist law passed by the National Assembly of the French Third Republic that imposed tariffs. It became law on 28 March 1885.

Under the 1881 tariff, wheat was subject to a duty of 0.60 francs per 100kg. A combination of foreign competition and bad harvests had caused a growth in grain imports since 1879. Grain prices declined from 22 francs per hectoliter in 1881 to 16 francs in 1885. The Société des agriculteurs de France and the Association de l'industrie française combined to pressure the government into increasing tariffs. The agriculturists held a series of national agricultural conventions to rally farmers to protection, beginning in November 1884. The farmers requested a duty of 5 francs. The Minister of Agriculture, Jules Méline, was supportive but the Chamber of Deputies voted for a duty of 3 francs.

The duty on wheat was raised to 3 francs per 100kg; on oats and barley 1.50 francs; on flour 6 francs; on beef and pork 7 francs; on bullocks 25 francs per head; on cows 12 francs per head and on pigs 6 francs per head. The duties on butter, cheese, eggs and wine remained unchanged from 1881.

French Tech is an accreditation awarded to French cities recognized for their startup ecosystem. It is also a name used by technologically innovative French businesses throughout the world.

Convinced by the necessity to promote the emergence of successful start-ups in France to generate economic value and jobs, the French Government created the French Tech Initiative at the end of 2013. Its philosophy: build on member initiatives of the French Tech themselves, highlight what already exists, and create a snowball effect. It is a shared ambition, propelled by the State but carried and built with all the actors of the French tech company and start-up scene.

The French Tech initiative also has a transversal objective: to enhance the coherence of public actions in favour of startups. It does not create a new organization or a new public tool, but is carried by a small team, Mission French Tech, which works closely with the French Ministry of Economy and Finance, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and with the General Commissariat for Investment. Its partners, the pillars of the initiative, are national operators, who, under the common banner "French Tech" coordinate their actions in favor of startups: Caisse des Dépôts, Bpifrance and Business France.

Funding from the French Tech Initiative for accelerators (€200 million) and international attractiveness (€15 million) is part of the Investments for the Future program. In this context, the operator is Caisse des Dépôts, which relies on Bpifrance for investment in accelerators and on Business France for international investments.

The French Tech aims to provide a strong common visual identity to French startups as well as to promote entrepreneurial exchanges between them.

Nine French cities received French Tech accreditation in November 2014 during a first wave of certification.

Cities like Strasbourg, Mulhouse, Nice, Avignon, Angers, Brest and Saint-Étienne preferred to wait to register their candidacies later in 2015.

In January 2015, the French Minister for Digital Affairs Axelle Lemaire announced a budget of €15 million to enhance the attractiveness of the French Tech abroad.

The Banque Publique d'Investissement (Bpifrance) also announced it was investing €200 million in subsidies from 2015. In 2012 alone, Bpifrance invested €700 million.

Axelle Lemaire also announced the establishment of 'French Tech Hubs' in major international cities like Montreal, New York City, London, Berlin, Barcelona, Stockholm, Tokyo, Singapore, Seoul, Shanghai, Taipei, Tel Aviv, São Paulo, Phnom Penh, Cape Town, Abidjan, Moscow and Santiago. Most of which have already opened since February 2014.

In 2016, the movement continued to expand its international reach, notably in international shows and forums. In the United States of America, French startups were part of the largest foreign delegation at the 2016 Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in Las Vegas. 190 French Tech startups were enrolled this year, with a total of 210 French businesses on site. They were the largest European delegation at the 2015 Consumer Electronics Show. In January 2017, the French delegation was the largest foreign delegation again at the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas.

In June 2017, the French Tech national ecosystem has seen the inauguration of world's biggest business incubator, Station F, in Paris. It hosts 1,000 start-ups within 34,000 square meters in the heart of the city.

In November 2014, nine cities were accredited:

In June 2015, four new specialised areas were accredited:

To this list are added four thematic cities:

On October 21, 2015, eight major retailers signed a charter to highlight French Tech products on their shelves, at the French Ministry of Economy with Axelle Lemaire, Minister for Digital Affairs. Among those who signed the charter are major players in the retail sector, including Auchan, Boulanger [ fr ], Carrefour, Darty, Fnac, E.Leclerc, Lick and Orange S.A.

The French Third Republic (French : Troisième République, sometimes written as La III République) was the system of government adopted in France from 4 September 1870, when the Second French Empire collapsed during the Franco-Prussian War, until 10 July 1940, after the Fall of France during World War II led to the formation of the Vichy government. The French Third Republic was a parliamentary republic.

The early days of the French Third Republic were dominated by political disruption caused by the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1871, which the Third Republic continued to wage after the fall of Emperor Napoleon III in 1870. Social upheaval and the Paris Commune preceded the final defeat. The German Empire, proclaimed by the invaders in the Palace of Versailles, annexed the French regions of Alsace (keeping the Territoire de Belfort) and Lorraine (the northeastern part, i.e. present-day department of Moselle). The early governments of the French Third Republic considered re-establishing the monarchy, but disagreement as to the nature of that monarchy and the rightful occupant of the throne could not be resolved. Consequently, the Third Republic, originally envisioned as a provisional government, instead became the permanent form of government of France.

The French constitutional laws of 1875 defined the composition of the Third Republic. It consisted of a Chamber of Deputies and a Senate to form the legislative branch of government and a president to serve as head of state. Calls for the re-establishment of the monarchy dominated the tenures of the first two presidents, Adolphe Thiers and Patrice de MacMahon. However, growing support for the republican form of government among the French populace and a series of republican presidents in the 1880s gradually quashed prospects of a restoration with the republic being seen as, in the words of Thiers, "the form of government that divides us the least".

The Third Republic established many French colonial possessions, including French Indochina, French Madagascar, French Polynesia, and large territories in West Africa during the Scramble for Africa, all of them acquired during the last two decades of the 19th century. The early years of the 20th century were dominated by the Democratic Republican Alliance, which was originally conceived as a centre-left political alliance, but over time became the main centre-right party. The period from the start of World War I to the late 1930s featured sharply polarized politics, between the Democratic Republican Alliance and the Radicals. The government fell less than a year after the outbreak of World War II, when Nazi forces occupied much of France, and was replaced by the rival governments of Charles de Gaulle 's Free France (La France libre) and Philippe Pétain 's French State (L'État français).

During the 19th and 20th centuries, the French colonial empire was the second largest colonial empire in the world only behind the British Empire ; it extended over 13,500,000 km (5,200,000 sq mi) of land at its height in the 1920s and 1930s. Journalist Raymond Recouly wrote in 1931 that of all the Powers in Europe, only France could offer both a substantial metropolitan and colonial military career. In terms of population however, on the eve of World War II, France and its colonial possessions totaled only 150 million inhabitants, compared with 330 million for British India alone.

Adolphe Thiers called republicanism in the 1870s "the form of government that divides France least"; however, politics under the Third Republic were sharply polarized. On the left stood reformist France, heir to the French Revolution. On the right stood conservative France, rooted in the peasantry, the Catholic Church, and the army. In spite of France's sharply divided electorate and persistent attempts to overthrow it, the Third Republic endured for 70 years, which makes it the longest-lasting system of government in France since the collapse of the Ancien Régime in 1789.

The Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1871 resulted in the defeat of France and the overthrow of Emperor Napoleon III and his Second French Empire. After Napoleon's capture by the Prussians at the Battle of Sedan (1 September 1870), Parisian deputies led by Léon Gambetta established the Government of National Defence as a provisional government on 4 September 1870. The deputies then selected General Louis-Jules Trochu to serve as its president. This first government of the Third Republic ruled during the Siege of Paris (19 September 1870 – 28 January 1871). As Paris was cut off from the rest of unoccupied France, the Minister of War Léon Gambetta succeeded in leaving Paris in a hot air balloon, and established the provisional republican government in the city of Tours on the Loire river.

After the French surrender in January 1871, the provisional Government of National Defence disbanded, and national elections were called to elect a new French government. French territories occupied by Prussia at the time did not participate. The resulting conservative National Assembly elected Adolphe Thiers head of a provisional government, ("head of the executive branch of the Republic pending a decision on the institutions of France"). The new government negotiated a peace settlement with the newly proclaimed German Empire : the Treaty of Frankfurt signed on 10 May 1871. To prompt the Prussians to leave France, the government passed a variety of financial laws, such as the controversial Law of Maturities, to pay reparations.

In Paris, resentment built against the government from late March through May 1871. Paris workers and National Guards revolted and took power as the Paris Commune, which maintained a radical left-wing regime for two months until the Third government bloodily suppressed it in May 1871. The ensuing repression of the communards had disastrous consequences for the labour movement.

The French legislative election of 1871, held in the aftermath when the regime of Napoleon III collapsed, resulted in a monarchist majority in the French National Assembly that favoured a peace agreement with Prussia. Planning to restore the monarchy, the " Legitimists " in the National Assembly supported the candidacy of Henri, Comte de Chambord, alias "Henry V", grandson of King Charles X, the last king from the senior line of the Bourbon dynasty. The Orléanists supported Louis-Philippe, Comte de Paris, a grandson of King Louis Philippe I, who replaced his cousin Charles X in 1830. The Bonapartists lost legitimacy due to the defeat of Napoléon III and were unable to advance the candidacy of any member of the Bonaparte family.

Legitimists and Orléanists eventually agreed on the childless Comte de Chambord as king, with the Comte de Paris as his heir. This was the expected line of succession for the Comte de Chambord based on France's traditional rule of agnatic primogeniture if the renunciation of the Spanish Bourbons in the Peace of Utrecht was recognised. Consequently, in 1871 the throne was offered to the Comte de Chambord.

Chambord believed the restored monarchy had to eliminate all traces of the Revolution (most famously including the tricolore), to restore unity between the monarchy and the nation. Compromise on this was impossible, Chambord believed, if the nation were to be made whole again. The general population, however, was unwilling to abandon the Tricolour flag. Monarchists therefore resigned themselves to delay the monarchy until the death of the ageing, childless Chambord, then to offer the throne to his more liberal heir, the Comte de Paris. A "temporary" republican government was therefore established. Chambord lived on until 1883, but by that time, enthusiasm for a monarchy had faded, and the Comte de Paris was never offered the French throne.

Following the French surrender to Prussia in January 1871, concluding the Franco-Prussian War, the transitional Government of National Defence established a new seat of government at Versailles due to the encirclement of Paris by Prussian forces. New representatives were elected in February of that year, constituting the government which would come to evolve into the Third Republic. These representatives – predominantly conservative republicans – enacted a series of legislation which prompted resistance and outcry from radical and leftist elements of the republican movement. In Paris, a series of public altercations broke out between the Versailles-aligned Parisian government and the city's radical socialists. The radicals ultimately rejected the authority of Versailles, responding with the foundation of the Paris Commune in March.

The principles underpinning the Commune were viewed as morally degenerate by French conservatives at large while the government at Versailles sought to maintain the tenuous post-war stability which it had established. In May, the regular French Armed Forces, under the command of Patrice de MacMahon and the Versailles government, marched on Paris and succeeded in dismantling the Commune during what would become known as The Bloody Week. The term ordre moral ("moral order") subsequently came to be applied to the budding Third Republic due to the perceived restoration of conservative policies and values following the suppression of the Commune.

De MacMahon, his popularity bolstered by his victory over the Commune, was later elected President of the Republic in May 1873 and would hold the office until January 1879. A staunch Catholic conservative with Legitimist sympathies and a noted mistrust of secularists, de MacMahon grew to be increasingly at odds with the French parliament as liberal and secular republicans gained a legislative majority during his presidency.

In February 1875, a series of parliamentary acts established the constitutional laws of the new republic. At its head was a President of the Republic. A two-chamber parliament consisting of a directly elected Chamber of Deputies and an indirectly elected Senate was created, along with a ministry under the President of the council (prime minister), who was nominally answerable to both the President of the Republic and the legislature. Throughout the 1870s, the issue of whether a monarchy should replace or oversee the republic dominated public debate.

The elections of 1876 demonstrated strong public support for the increasingly anti-monarchist republican movement. A decisive Republican majority was elected to the Chamber of Deputies while the monarchist majority in the Senate was maintained by only one seat. President de MacMahon responded in May 1877, attempting to quell the Republicans' rising popularity and limit their political influence through a series of actions known as le seize Mai.

On 16 May 1877, de MacMahon forced the resignation of Moderate Republican prime minister Jules Simon and appointed the Orléanist Albert de Broglie to the office. The Chamber of Deputies declared the appointment illegitimate, exceeding the president's powers, and refused to cooperate with either de MacMahon or de Broglie. De MacMahon then dissolved the Chamber and called for a new general election to be held the following October. He was subsequently accused by Republicans and their sympathizers of attempting a constitutional coup d'état, which he denied.

The October elections again brought a Republican majority to the Chamber of Deputies, reiterating public opinion. The Republicans would go on to gain a majority in the Senate by January 1879, establishing dominance in both houses and effectively ending the potential for a monarchist restoration. De MacMahon himself resigned on 30 January 1879 to be succeeded by the moderate Republican Jules Grévy. He promised that he would not use his presidential power of dissolution, and therefore lost his control over the legislature, effectively creating a parliamentary system that would be maintained until the end of the Third Republic.

Following the 16 May crisis in 1877, Legitimists were pushed out of power, and the Republic was finally governed by Moderate Republicans (pejoratively labelled "Opportunist Republicans" by Radical Republicans) who supported moderate social and political changes to nurture the new regime, such as a purge of the civil service. The Jules Ferry laws making public education free, mandatory, and secular (laїque), were voted in 1881 and 1882, one of the first signs of the expanding civic powers of the Republic. From that time onward, the Catholic clergy lost control of public education.

To discourage the monarchists, the French Crown Jewels were broken up and sold in 1885. Only a few crowns were kept, their precious gems replaced by coloured glass.

In 1889, the Republic was rocked by a sudden political crisis precipitated by General Georges Boulanger. An enormously popular general, he won a series of elections in which he would resign his seat in the Chamber of Deputies and run again in another district. At the apogee of his popularity in January 1889, he posed the threat of a coup d'état and the establishment of a dictatorship. With his base of support in the working districts of Paris and other cities, plus rural traditionalist Catholics and royalists, he promoted an aggressive nationalism aimed against Germany. The elections of September 1889 marked a decisive defeat for the Boulangists. They were defeated by the changes in the electoral laws that prevented Boulanger from running in multiple constituencies; by the government's aggressive opposition; and by the absence of the general himself, in self-imposed exile with his mistress. The fall of Boulanger severely undermined the conservative and royalist elements within France; they would not recover until 1940.

Revisionist scholars have argued that the Boulangist movement more often represented elements of the radical left rather than the extreme right. Their work is part of an emerging consensus that France's radical right was formed in part during the Dreyfus era by men who had been Boulangist partisans of the radical left a decade earlier.

The Panama scandals of 1892, regarded as the largest financial fraud of the 19th century, involved a failed attempt to build the Panama Canal. Plagued by disease, death, inefficiency, and widespread corruption, and its troubles covered up by bribed French officials, the Panama Canal Company went bankrupt. Its stock became worthless, and ordinary investors lost close to a billion francs.

France lagged behind Bismarckian Germany, as well as Great Britain and Ireland, in developing a welfare state with public health, unemployment insurance and national old age pension plans. There was an accident insurance law for workers in 1898, and in 1910, France created a national pension plan. Unlike Germany or Britain, the programs were much smaller – for example, pensions were a voluntary plan. Historian Timothy Smith finds French fears of national public assistance programs were grounded in a widespread disdain for the English Poor Law.

Tuberculosis was the most dreaded disease of the day, especially striking young people in their twenties. Germany set up vigorous measures of public hygiene and public sanatoria, but France let private physicians handle the problem. The French medical profession guarded its prerogatives, and public health activists were not as well organized or as influential as in Germany, Britain or the United States. For example, there was a long battle over a public health law which began in the 1880s as a campaign to reorganize the nation's health services, to require the registration of infectious diseases, to mandate quarantines, and to improve the deficient health and housing legislation of 1850. However, the reformers met opposition from bureaucrats, politicians, and physicians. Because it was so threatening to so many interests, the proposal was debated and postponed for 20 years before becoming law in 1902. Implementation finally came when the government realized that contagious diseases had a national security impact in weakening military recruits, and keeping the population growth rate well below Germany's. There is no evidence to suggest that French life expectancy was lower than that of Germany.

The most important party of the early 20th century in France was the Radical Party, founded in 1901 as the "Republican, Radical and Radical-Socialist Party" ("Parti républicain, radical et radical-socialiste"). It was classically liberal in political orientation and opposed the monarchists and clerical elements on the one hand, and the Socialists on the other. Many members had been recruited by the Freemasons. The Radicals were split between activists who called for state intervention to achieve economic and social equality and conservatives whose first priority was stability. The workers' demands for strikes threatened such stability and pushed many Radicals toward conservatism. It opposed women's suffrage for fear that women would vote for its opponents or for candidates endorsed by the Catholic Church. It favoured a progressive income tax, economic equality, expanded educational opportunities and cooperatives in domestic policy. In foreign policy, it favoured a strong League of Nations after the war, and the maintenance of peace through compulsory arbitration, controlled disarmament, economic sanctions, and perhaps an international military force.

Followers of Léon Gambetta, such as Raymond Poincaré, who would become President of the Council in the 1920s, created the Democratic Republican Alliance (ARD), which became the main center-right party after World War I.

Governing coalitions collapsed with regularity, rarely lasting more than a few months, as radicals, socialists, liberals, conservatives, republicans and monarchists all fought for control. Some historians argue that the collapses were not important because they reflected minor changes in coalitions of many parties that routinely lost and gained a few allies. Consequently, the change of governments could be seen as little more than a series of ministerial reshuffles, with many individuals carrying forward from one government to the next, often in the same posts.

The Dreyfus affair was a major political scandal that convulsed France from 1894 until its resolution in 1906, and then had reverberations for decades more. The conduct of the affair has become a modern and universal symbol of injustice. It remains one of the most striking examples of a complex miscarriage of justice in which a central role was played by the press and public opinion. At issue was blatant antisemitism as practised by the French Army and defended by conservatives and Catholic traditionalists against secular centre-left, left and republican forces, including most Jews. In the end, the latter triumphed.

The affair began in November 1894 with the conviction for treason of Captain Alfred Dreyfus, a young French artillery officer of Alsatian Jewish descent. He was sentenced to life imprisonment for communicating French military secrets to the German Embassy in Paris and sent to the penal colony at Devil's Island in French Guiana (nicknamed la guillotine sèche, the dry guillotine), where he spent almost five years.

Two years later, evidence came to light that identified a French Army major named Ferdinand Walsin Esterhazy as the real spy. After high-ranking military officials suppressed the new evidence, a military court unanimously acquitted Esterhazy. In response, the Army brought up additional charges against Dreyfus based on false documents. Word of the military court's attempts to frame Dreyfus began to spread, chiefly owing to the polemic J'accuse, a vehement open letter published on the liberal newspaper L'Aurore in January 1898 by the notable writer Émile Zola. Activists put pressure on the government to re-open the case.

In 1899, Dreyfus was returned to France for another trial. The intense political and judicial scandal that ensued divided French society between those who supported Dreyfus (now called "Dreyfusards"), such as Anatole France, Henri Poincaré and Georges Clemenceau, and those who condemned him (the anti-Dreyfusards), such as Édouard Drumont, the director and publisher of the antisemitic newspaper La Libre Parole. The new trial resulted in another conviction and a 10-year sentence, but Dreyfus was given a pardon and set free. Eventually all the accusations against him were demonstrated to be baseless, and in 1906, Dreyfus was exonerated and re-instated as a major in the French Army.

From 1894 to 1906, the scandal divided France deeply and lastingly into two opposing camps: the pro-Army "anti-Dreyfusards" composed of conservatives, Catholic traditionalists and monarchists who generally lost the initiative to the anti-clerical, pro-republican "Dreyfusards", with strong support from intellectuals and teachers. It embittered French politics and facilitated the increasing influence of radical politicians on both sides of the political spectrum.

The democratic political structure was supported by the proliferation of politicized newspapers. The circulation of the daily press in Paris went from 1 million in 1870 to 5 million in 1910; it later reached 6 million in 1939. Advertising grew rapidly, providing a steady financial basis for publishing, but it did not cover all of the costs involved and had to be supplemented by secret subsidies from commercial interests that wanted favourable reporting. A new liberal press law of 1881 abandoned the restrictive practices that had been typical for a century. High-speed rotary Hoe presses, introduced in the 1860s, facilitated quick turnaround time and cheaper publication. New types of popular newspapers, especially Le Petit Journal, reached an audience more interested in diverse entertainment and gossip than hard news. It captured a quarter of the Parisian market and forced the rest to lower their prices. The main dailies employed their own journalists who competed for news flashes. All newspapers relied upon the Agence Havas (now Agence France-Presse), a telegraphic news service with a network of reporters and contracts with Reuters to provide world service. The staid old papers retained their loyal clientele because of their concentration on serious political issues. While papers usually gave false circulation figures, Le Petit Provençal in 1913 probably had a daily circulation of about 100,000 and Le Petit Méridional [ fr ] had about 70,000. Advertising only filled 20% or so of the pages.

The Roman Catholic Assumptionist order revolutionized pressure group media by its national newspaper La Croix. It vigorously advocated for traditional Catholicism while at the same time innovating with the most modern technology and distribution systems, with regional editions tailored to local taste. Secularists and Republicans recognized the newspaper as their greatest enemy, especially when it took the lead in attacking Dreyfus as a traitor and stirring up antisemitism. After Dreyfus was pardoned, the Radical government closed down the entire Assumptionist order and its newspaper in 1900.

Banks secretly paid certain newspapers to promote particular financial interests and hide or cover up misbehaviour. They also took payments for favourable notices in news articles of commercial products. Sometimes, a newspaper would blackmail a business by threatening to publish unfavorable information unless the business immediately started advertising in the paper. Foreign governments, especially Russia and the Ottomans, secretly paid the press hundreds of thousands of francs a year to guarantee favourable coverage of the bonds they were selling in Paris. When the real news was bad about Russia, as during its 1905 Revolution or during its war with Japan, it raised the ante to millions. During the World War, newspapers became more of a propaganda agency on behalf of the war effort and avoided critical commentary. They seldom reported the achievements of the Allies, crediting all the good news to the French army. In a sentence, the newspapers were not independent champions of the truth, but secretly paid advertisements for banking.

The World War ended a golden era for the press. Their younger staff members were drafted, and male replacements could not be found (female journalists were not considered suitable). Rail transportation was rationed and less paper and ink came in, and fewer copies could be shipped out. Inflation raised the price of newsprint, which was always in short supply. The cover price went up, circulation fell and many of the 242 dailies published outside Paris closed down. The government set up the Interministerial Press Commission to supervise the press closely. A separate agency imposed tight censorship that led to blank spaces where news reports or editorials were disallowed. The dailies sometimes were limited to only two pages instead of the usual four, leading one satirical paper to try to report the war news in the same spirit:

War News. A half-zeppelin threw half its bombs on half-time combatants, resulting in one-quarter damaged. The zeppelin, halfways-attacked by a portion of half-anti aircraft guns, was half destroyed.

Regional newspapers flourished after 1900. However the Parisian newspapers were largely stagnant after the war. The major postwar success story was Paris-Soir, which lacked any political agenda and was dedicated to providing a mix of sensational reporting to aid circulation and serious articles to build prestige. By 1939, its circulation was over 1.7 million, double that of its nearest rival the tabloid Le Petit Parisien. In addition to its daily paper, Paris Soir sponsored a highly successful women's magazine Marie Claire. Another magazine, Match, was modelled on the photojournalism of the American magazine Life.

France was a rural nation, and the peasant farmer was the typical French citizen. In his seminal book Peasants into Frenchmen (1976), historian Eugen Weber traced the modernization of French villages and argued that rural France went from backward and isolated to modern with a sense of national identity during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. He emphasized the roles of railroads, republican schools, and universal military conscription. He based his findings on school records, migration patterns, military service documents and economic trends. Weber argued that until 1900 or so a sense of French nationhood was weak in the provinces. Weber then looked at how the policies of the Third Republic created a sense of French nationality in rural areas. Weber's scholarship was widely praised, but was criticized by some who argued that a sense of Frenchness existed in the provinces before 1870.

Aristide Boucicaut founded Le Bon Marché in Paris in 1838, and by 1852 it offered a wide variety of goods in "departments inside one building". Goods were sold at fixed prices, with guarantees that allowed exchanges and refunds. By the end of the 19th century, Georges Dufayel, a French credit merchant, had served up to three million customers and was affiliated with La Samaritaine, a large French department store established in 1870 by a former Bon Marché executive.

The French gloried in the national prestige brought by the great Parisian stores. The great writer Émile Zola (1840–1902) set his novel Au Bonheur des Dames (1882–83) in the typical department store. Zola represented it as a symbol of the new technology that was both improving society and devouring it. The novel describes merchandising, management techniques, marketing, and consumerism.

The Grands Magasins Dufayel was a large department store with inexpensive prices, built in 1890 in the northern part of Paris, where it reached a large new customer base among the working class. In a neighbourhood with few public spaces, it provided a consumer version of the public square. It encouraged workers to approach shopping as an exciting social activity, not just a routine exercise in obtaining necessities, just as the bourgeoisie did at the famous department stores in the central city. Like the bourgeois stores, it helped transform consumption from a business transaction into a direct relationship between consumers and sought-after goods. Its advertisements promised the opportunity to participate in the newest, most fashionable forms of consumerism at reasonable cost. The latest technology was featured, such as cinemas and exhibits of inventions like X-ray machines (which could be used to fit shoes) and the gramophone.

Increasingly after 1870, the stores' work force became feminized, opening up job opportunities for young women. Despite the low pay and long hours, they enjoyed the interactions with the newest and most fashionable merchandise and upscale customers.

Throughout the lifetime of the Third Republic (1870–1940), there were battles over the status of the Catholic Church in France among the republicans, monarchists and the authoritarians (such as the Napoleonists). The French clergy and bishops were closely associated with the monarchists and many of its hierarchy were from noble families. Republicans were based in the anti-clerical middle class, who saw the Church's alliance with the monarchists as a political threat to republicanism, and a threat to the modern spirit of progress. The republicans detested the Church for its political and class affiliations; for them, the Church represented the Ancien Régime, a time in French history most republicans hoped was long behind them. The republicans were strengthened by Protestant and Jewish support. Numerous laws were passed to weaken the Catholic Church. In 1879, priests were excluded from the administrative committees of hospitals and boards of charity; in 1880, new measures were directed against the religious congregations; from 1880 to 1890 came the substitution of lay women for nuns in many hospitals; in 1882, the Ferry school laws were passed. Napoleon's Concordat of 1801 continued in operation, but in 1881, the government cut off salaries to priests it disliked.

Republicans feared that religious orders in control of schools—especially the Jesuits and Assumptionists —indoctrinated anti-republicanism into children. Determined to root this out, republicans insisted they needed control of the schools for France to achieve economic and militaristic progress. (Republicans felt one of the primary reasons for the German victory in 1870 was their superior education system.)

The early anti-Catholic laws were largely the work of republican Jules Ferry in 1882. Religious instruction in all schools was forbidden, and religious orders were forbidden to teach in them. Funds were appropriated from religious schools to build more state schools. Later in the century, other laws passed by Ferry's successors further weakened the Church's position in French society. Civil marriage became compulsory, divorce was introduced, and chaplains were removed from the army.

When Leo XIII became pope in 1878, he tried to calm Church-State relations. In 1884, he told French bishops not to act in a hostile manner toward the State (Nobilissima Gallorum gens [ fr ]). In 1892 he issued Au milieu des sollicitudes, an encyclical advising French Catholics to rally to the Republic and defend the Church by participating in republican politics. The Popular Liberal Action (Action libérale populaire, or ALP) party was founded in 1901 by Jacques Piou and Albert de Mun, former monarchists who switched to republicanism at the request of Pope Leo XIII. From the Church's perspective, its mission was to express the political ideals and new social doctrines embodied in Leo's 1891 encyclical Rerum novarum.

Action libérale was the parliamentary group from which the ALP political party emerged, adding the word populaire ("popular") to signify this expansion. Membership was open to everyone, not just Catholics. It sought to gather all the "honest people" and to be the melting pot sought by Leo XIII where Catholics and moderate Republicans would unite to support a policy of tolerance and social progress. Its motto summarized its program: "Liberty for all; equality before the law; better conditions for the workers." However, the "old republicans" were few, and it did not manage to regroup all Catholics, as it was shunned by monarchists, Christian democrats, and Integrists. In the end, it recruited mostly among the liberal-Catholics (Jacques Piou) and the Social Catholics (Albert de Mun). The ALP was drawn into battle from its very beginnings (its first steps coincided with the beginning of the Combes ministry and its anticlerical combat policy), as religious matters were at the heart of its preoccupations. It defended the Church in the name of liberty and common law. Fiercely fought by the Action française, the movement declined from 1908, when it lost the support of Rome. Nevertheless, the ALP remained until 1914 the most important party on the right.

The attempt at improving the relationship with republicans failed. Deep-rooted suspicions remained on both sides and were inflamed by the Dreyfus Affair (1894–1906). Catholics were for the most part anti-Dreyfusard. The Assumptionists published antisemitic and anti-republican articles in their journal La Croix. This infuriated republican politicians, who were eager to take revenge. Often they worked in alliance with Masonic lodges. The Waldeck-Rousseau Ministry (1899–1902) and the Combes Ministry (1902–1905) fought with the Vatican over the appointment of bishops. Chaplains were removed from naval and military hospitals in the years 1903 and 1904, and soldiers were ordered not to frequent Catholic clubs in 1904.

Emile Combes, when elected Prime Minister in 1902, was determined to defeat Catholicism thoroughly. After only a short while in office, he closed down all parochial schools in France. Then he had parliament reject authorization of all religious orders. This meant that all fifty-four orders in France were banned and about 20,000 members immediately left France, many for Spain. In 1904, Émile Loubet, the president of France from 1899 to 1906, visited King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy in Rome, and Pope Pius X protested at this recognition of the Italian State. Combes reacted strongly and recalled his ambassador to the Holy See. Then, in 1905, a law was introduced that abolished Napoleon's 1801 Concordat. Church and State were declared separate, though all Church property was confiscated. Religious personnel were no longer paid by the State. Public worship was to be given over to associations of Catholic laymen who controlled access to churches. However, in practice, masses and rituals continued to be performed.

Combes was vigorously opposed by all the Conservative parties, who saw the mass closure of church schools as a persecution of religion. Combes led the anti-clerical coalition on the left, facing opposition primarily organized by the pro-Catholic ALP. The ALP had a stronger popular base, with better financing and a stronger network of newspapers, but had far fewer seats in parliament.

The Combes government worked with Masonic lodges to create a secret surveillance of all army officers to make sure that devout Catholics would not be promoted. Exposed as the Affaire Des Fiches, the scandal undermined support for the Combes government, and he resigned. It also undermined morale in the army, as officers realized that hostile spies examining their private lives were more important to their careers than their own professional accomplishments.

In December 1905, the government of Maurice Rouvier introduced the French law on the separation of Church and State. This law was heavily supported by Combes, who had been strictly enforcing the 1901 voluntary association law and the 1904 law on religious congregations' freedom of teaching. On 10 February 1905, the Chamber declared that "the attitude of the Vatican" had rendered the separation of Church and State inevitable and the law of the separation of church and state was passed in December 1905. The Church was badly hurt and lost half its priests. In the long run, however, it gained autonomy; ever after, the State no longer had a voice in choosing bishops, thus Gallicanism was dead.

Foreign policy of 1871–1914 was based on a slow rebuilding of alliances with Russia and Britain in order to counteract the threat from Germany. Bismarck had made a mistake in taking Alsace and Lorraine in 1871, setting off decades of popular hatred of Germany and demand for revenge. Bismarck's decision came in response to popular demand, and the Army's demand for a strong frontier. It was not necessary since France was much weaker militarily than Germany, but it forced Bismarck to orient German foreign policy to block France from having any major allies.

France rebuilt its Army, emphasizing modernization in such features as new artillery, and after 1905 invested heavily in military aircraft. Most important in restoring prestige was a strong emphasis on the growing colonial empire, which brought prestige, despite large financial costs. Very few French families settled in the colonies, and they were too poor in natural resources and trade to significantly benefit the overall economy. Nevertheless, they were second in size only to the British Empire, provided prestige in world affairs, and gave an opportunity for Catholics (under heavy attack by the Republicans in Parliament) to devote their energies to spread French culture and civilization worldwide. An extremely expensive investment in building the Panama Canal was a total failure, in terms of money, many deaths by disease, and political scandal. Bismarck was fired in 1890, and after that German foreign policy was confused and misdirected. For example, Berlin broke its close ties with St. Petersburg, allowing the French to enter through heavy financial investment, and a Paris–St Petersburg military alliance that proved essential and durable. Germany feuded with Britain, which encouraged London and Paris to drop their grievances over Egypt and Africa, reaching a compromise whereby the French recognized British primacy in Egypt, while Britain recognized French primacy in Morocco. This enabled Britain and France to move closer together, finally achieving an informal military relationship after 1904.

French diplomacy was largely independent of domestic affairs; economic, cultural and religious interest groups paid little attention to foreign affairs. Permanent professional diplomats and bureaucrats had developed their own traditions of how to operate in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and their style changed little from generation to generation. Most of the diplomats came from high status aristocratic families. Although France was one of the few republics in Europe, its diplomats mingled smoothly with the aristocratic representatives at the royal courts. Prime ministers and leading politicians generally paid little attention to foreign affairs, allowing a handful of senior men to control policy. In the decades before the First World War they dominated the embassies in the 10 major countries where France had an ambassador (elsewhere, they sent lower-ranking ministers). They included Théophile Delcassé, the foreign minister from 1898 to 1905; Paul Cambon, in London, 1890–1920; Jules Jusserand, in Washington from 1902 to 1924; and Camille Barrère, in Rome from 1897 to 1924. In terms of foreign policy, there was general agreement about the need for high protective tariffs, which kept agricultural prices high. After the defeat by the Germans, there was a strong widespread anti-German sentiment focused on revanchism and regaining Alsace and Lorraine. The Empire was a matter of great pride, and service as administrators, soldiers and missionaries was a high status occupation.

French foreign policy from 1871 to 1914 showed a dramatic transformation from a humiliated power with no friends and not much of an empire in 1871, to the centerpiece of the European alliance system in 1914, with a flourishing colonial empire that was second in size only to Great Britain. Although religion was a hotly contested matter in domestic politics, the Catholic Church made missionary work and church building a speciality in the colonies. Most Frenchmen ignored foreign policy; its issues were a low priority in politics.

French foreign policy was based on a fear of Germany—whose larger size and fast-growing economy could not be matched—combined with a revanchism that demanded the return of Alsace and Lorraine. At the same time, imperialism was a factor. In the midst of the Scramble for Africa, French and British interest in Africa came into conflict. The most dangerous episode was the Fashoda Incident of 1898 when French troops tried to claim an area in the Southern Sudan, and a British force purporting to be acting in the interests of the Khedive of Egypt arrived. Under heavy pressure the French withdrew, securing Anglo-Egyptian control over the area. The status quo was recognised by an agreement between the two states acknowledging British control over Egypt, while France became the dominant power in Morocco, but France suffered a humiliating defeat overall.

The Suez Canal, initially built by the French, became a joint British-French project in 1875, as both saw it as vital to maintaining their influence and empires in Asia. In 1882, ongoing civil disturbances in Egypt prompted Britain to intervene, extending a hand to France. The government allowed Britain to take effective control of Egypt.

France had colonies in Asia and looked for alliances and found in Japan a possible ally. At Japan's request, Paris sent military missions in 1872–1880, in 1884–1889 and in 1918–1919 to help modernize the Japanese army. Conflicts with China over Indochina climaxed during the Sino-French War (1884–1885). Admiral Courbet destroyed the Chinese fleet anchored at Fuzhou. The treaty ending the war put France in a protectorate over northern and central Vietnam, which it divided into Tonkin and Annam.

Under the leadership of expansionist Jules Ferry, the Third Republic greatly expanded the French colonial empire. France acquired Indochina, Madagascar, vast territories in West Africa and Central Africa, and much of Polynesia.

In an effort to isolate Germany, France went to great pains to woo Russia and Great Britain, first by means of the Franco-Russian Alliance of 1894, then the 1904 Entente Cordiale with Great Britain, and finally the Anglo-Russian Entente in 1907 which became the Triple Entente. This alliance with Britain and Russia against Germany and Austria eventually led Russia, Britain, and France to enter World War I as Allies.

French foreign policy in the years leading up to the First World War was based largely on hostility to and fear of German power. France secured an alliance with the Russian Empire in 1894 after diplomatic talks between Germany and Russia had failed to produce any working agreement. The Franco-Russian Alliance served as the cornerstone of French foreign policy until 1917. A further link with Russia was provided by vast French investments and loans before 1914. In 1904, French foreign minister Théophile Delcassé negotiated the Entente Cordiale with Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 5th Marquess of Lansdowne, the British Foreign Secretary, an agreement that ended a long period of Anglo-French tensions and hostility. The Entente Cordiale, which functioned as an informal Anglo-French alliance, was further strengthened by the First and Second Moroccan crises of 1905 and 1911, and by secret military and naval staff talks. Delcassé's rapprochement with Britain was controversial in France as Anglophobia was prominent around the start of the 20th century, sentiments that had been much reinforced by the Fashoda Incident of 1898, in which Britain and France had almost gone to war, and by the Boer War, in which French public opinion was very much on the side of Britain's enemies. Ultimately, the fear of German power was the link that bound Britain and France together.

Preoccupied with internal problems, France paid little attention to foreign policy in the period between late 1912 and mid-1914, although it did extend military service to three years from two over strong Socialist objections in 1913. The rapidly escalating Balkan crisis of July 1914 surprised France, and not much attention was given to conditions that led to the outbreak of World War I.

The Third Republic, in line with the imperialistic ethos of the day sweeping Europe, developed a French colonial empire. The largest and most important were in French North Africa and French Indochina. French administrators, soldiers, and missionaries were dedicated to bringing French civilization to the local populations of these colonies (the mission civilisatrice). Some French businessmen went overseas, but there were few permanent settlements. The Catholic Church became deeply involved. Its missionaries were unattached men committed to staying permanently, learning local languages and customs, and converting the natives to Christianity.

France successfully integrated the colonies into its economic system. By 1939, one third of its exports went to its colonies; Paris businessmen invested heavily in agriculture, mining, and shipping. In Indochina, new plantations were opened for rice and natural rubber. In Algeria, land held by rich settlers rose from 1,600,000 hectares in 1890 to 2,700,000 hectares in 1940; combined with similar operations in Morocco and Tunisia, the result was that North African agriculture became one of the most efficient in the world. Metropolitan France was a captive market, so large landowners could borrow large sums in Paris to modernize agricultural techniques with tractors and mechanized equipment. The result was a dramatic increase in the export of wheat, corn, peaches, and olive oil. French Algeria became the fourth most important wine producer in the world. Nickel mining in New Caledonia was also important.

Opposition to colonial rule led to rebellions in Morocco in 1925, Syria in 1926, and Indochina in 1930, all of which the colonial army quickly suppressed.

France entered World War I when Germany declared war (Aug 3rd) and invaded neutral Luxembourg and attacked the French border. Decisions were all made by senior officials, especially President Raymond Poincaré, Premier and Foreign Minister René Viviani, and the ambassador to Russia Maurice Paléologue. Not involved in the decision-making were military leaders, arms manufacturers, the newspapers, pressure groups, party leaders, or spokesmen for French nationalism.

The UK wanted to remain neutral but entered the war when the German army invaded Belgium on its way to Paris. The Anglo-French victory at the Battle of the Marne in September 1914 ensured the failure of Germany's strategy to win quickly. It became a long and very bloody war of attrition, but France emerged on the winning side.

French intellectuals welcomed the war to avenge the humiliation of defeat and loss of territory in 1871. At the grass roots, Paul Déroulède 's League of Patriots, a proto-fascist movement based in the lower middle class, had advocated a war of revenge since the 1880s. The strong socialist movement had long opposed war and preparation for war. However, when its leader Jean Jaurès, a pacifist, was assassinated at the start of the war, the French socialist movement abandoned its anti-militarist positions and joined the national war effort. President Raymond Poincaré called for unity in the form of a " Union sacrée " ("Sacred Union"), and in France there were few dissenters.

After the French army successfully defended Paris in 1914, the conflict became one of trench warfare along the Western Front, with very high casualty rates. It became a war of attrition. Until spring of 1918 there were almost no territorial gains or losses for either side. Georges Clemenceau, whose ferocious energy and determination earned him the nickname le Tigre ("the Tiger"), led a coalition government after 1917 that was determined to defeat Germany. Meanwhile, large swaths of northeastern France fell under the brutal control of German occupiers. The bloodbath of the war of attrition reached its apogee in the Battles of Verdun and the Somme. By 1917 mutiny was in the air. A consensus among soldiers agreed to resist any German attacks, but to postpone French attacks until the Americans arrived.

A state of emergency was proclaimed and censorship imposed, leading to the creation in 1915 of the satirical newspaper Le Canard enchaîné to bypass the censorship. The economy was hurt by the German invasion of major industrial areas in the northeast. Although the occupied area in 1914 contained only 14% of France's industrial workers, it produced 58% of the steel and 40% of the coal.

In 1914, the government implemented a war economy with controls and rationing. By 1915, the war economy went into high gear, as millions of French women and colonial men replaced the civilian roles of many of the 3 million soldiers. Considerable assistance came with the influx of American food, money and raw materials in 1917. This war economy would have important reverberations after the war, as it would be a first breach of liberal theories of non-interventionism.

The production of munitions proved a striking success, well ahead of Britain or the United States or even Germany. The challenges were monumental: the German seizure of the industrial heartland in the northeast, a shortage of manpower, and a mobilization plan that left France on the brink of defeat. Nevertheless, by 1918 France was producing more munitions and artillery than its allies, while supplying virtually all of the heavy equipment needed by the arriving American army. Building on foundations laid in the early months of the war, the Ministry of War matched production to the operational and tactical needs of the army, with an emphasis on meeting the insatiable demands for artillery. The elaborately designed link between industry and the army, and the compromises made to ensure that artillery and shells of the required quantity and quality were supplied, proved crucial to French success on the battlefield.

In the end the damages caused by the war amounted to about 113% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of 1913, chiefly the destruction of productive capital and housing. The national debt rose from 66% of GDP in 1913 to 170% in 1919, reflecting the heavy use of bond issues to pay for the war. Inflation was severe, with the franc losing over half its value against the British pound.

To uplift the French national spirit, many intellectuals began to fashion patriotic propaganda. The Union sacrée sought to draw the French people closer to the actual front and thus garner social, political, and economic support for the soldiers. Antiwar sentiment was very weak among the general population. However, among intellectuals there was a pacifistic "Ligue des Droits de l'Homme" (League for the Rights of Mankind) (LDH). It kept a low profile in the first two years of war, holding its first congress in November 1916 against the background slaughters French soldiers on the Western Front. The theme was the "conditions for a lasting peace." Discussions focused on France's relationship with its autocratic, undemocratic ally, Russia, and in particular how to square support for all that the LDH stood for with Russia's bad treatment of its oppressed minorities, especially the Poles. Secondly, many delegates wanted to issue a demand for a negotiated peace. This was rejected only after a lengthy debate showed how the LDH was divided between a majority that believed that arbitration could be applied only in times of peace, and a minority that demanded an immediate end to the carnage. In spring 1918 the desperate German offensive failed, and the Allies successfully pushed back. The French people of all classes rallied to Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau 's demand for total victory and harsh peace terms.

The entry into war by the United States turned the war around and in the summer and autumn of 1918 led to the defeat of Germany. The most important factors that led to the surrender of Germany were its exhaustion after four years of fighting and the arrival of large numbers of troops from the United States beginning in the summer of 1918. Peace terms were imposed on Germany by the Big Four : Great Britain, France, the United States, and Italy.

Clemenceau demanded the harshest terms and won most of them in the Treaty of Versailles in 1919. Germany was largely disarmed and forced to take full responsibility for the war, meaning that it was expected to pay huge war reparations. France regained Alsace–Lorraine, and the German industrial Saar Basin, a coal and steel region, was occupied by France. The German African colonies, such as Kamerun, were partitioned between France and Britain. From the remains of the Ottoman Empire, Germany's ally during World War I that also collapsed at the end of the conflict, France acquired the Mandate of Syria and the Mandate of Lebanon.

From 1919 to 1940, France was governed by two main groupings of political alliances. On the one hand, there was the right-center Bloc national led by Georges Clemenceau, Raymond Poincaré and Aristide Briand. The Bloc was supported by business and finance and was friendly toward the army and the Church. Its main goals were revenge against Germany, economic prosperity for French business and stability in domestic affairs. On the other hand, there was the left-center Cartel des gauches dominated by Édouard Herriot of the Radical Socialist party. Herriot's party was in fact neither radical nor socialist, rather it represented the interests of small business and the lower middle class. It was intensely anti-clerical and resisted the Catholic Church. The Cartel was occasionally willing to form a coalition with the Socialist Party. Anti-democratic groups, such as the Communists on the left and royalists on the right, played relatively minor roles.

The flow of reparations from Germany played a central role in strengthening French finances. The government began a large-scale reconstruction program to repair wartime damages, and was burdened with a very large public debt. Taxation policies were inefficient, with widespread evasion, and when the financial crisis grew worse in 1926, Poincaré levied new taxes, reformed the system of tax collection, and drastically reduced government spending to balance the budget and stabilize the franc. Holders of the national debt lost 80% of the face value of their bonds, but runaway inflation did not occur. From 1926 to 1929, the French economy prospered and manufacturing flourished.

Foreign observers in the 1920s noted the excesses of the French upper classes, but emphasized the rapid re-building of the regions of northeastern France that had seen warfare and occupation. They reported the improvement of financial markets, the brilliance of the post-war literature and the revival of public morale.

The world economic crisis known as the Great Depression affected France a bit later than other countries, hitting around 1931. While the GDP in the 1920s grew at the very strong rate of 4.43% per year, the 1930s rate fell to only 0.63%. In comparison to countries such as the United States, Great Britain, and Germany, the depression was relatively mild: unemployment peaked under 5%, and the fall in production was at most 20% below the 1929 output. In addition, there was no banking crisis.

In 1931 the well-organized veterans movement demanded and received pensions for their wartime service. This was funded by a lottery—the first one allowed in France since 1836. The lottery immediately became popular, and became a major foundation of the annual budget. Although the Great Depression was not yet severe, the lottery appealed to charitable impulses, greed, and respect for veterans. These contradictory impulses produced cash that made possible the French welfare state, at the crossroads of philanthropy, market and public sphere.

The 6 February 1934 crisis was an anti-parliamentarist street demonstration in Paris organized by multiple far-right leagues that culminated in a riot on the Place de la Concorde, near the seat of the French National Assembly. The police shot and killed 15 demonstrators. It was one of the major political crises during the Third Republic (1870–1940). Frenchmen on the left feared it was an attempt to organize a fascist coup d'état. As a result of the actions of that day, several anti-fascist organizations were created, such as the Comité de vigilance des intellectuels antifascistes, in an attempt to thwart the rise of fascism in France. According to historian Joel Colton, "The consensus among scholars is that there was no concerted or unified design to seize power and that the leagues lacked the coherence, unity, or leadership to accomplish such an end."

Foreign policy was of growing concern to France during the inter-war period, with fears of German militarism in the forefront. The horrible devastation of the war, including the death of 1.5 million French soldiers, the devastation of much of the steel and coal regions, and the long-term costs for veterans, were always remembered. France demanded that Germany assume many of the costs incurred from the war through annual reparation payments. French foreign and security policy used the balance of power and alliance politics to compel Germany to comply with its obligations under the Treaty of Versailles. The problem was that the United States and Britain rejected a defensive alliance. Potential allies in Eastern Europe, such as Poland, Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia were too weak to confront Germany. Russia had been the long term French ally in the East, but now it was controlled by the Bolsheviks, who were deeply distrusted in Paris. France's transition to a more conciliatory policy in 1924 was a response to pressure from Britain and the United States, as well as to French weakness.

France enthusiastically joined the League of Nations in 1919, but felt betrayed by President Woodrow Wilson, when his promises that the United States would sign a defence treaty with France and join the League were rejected by the United States Congress. The main goal of French foreign policy was to preserve French power and neutralize the threat posed by Germany. When Germany fell behind in reparations payments in 1923, France seized the industrialized Ruhr region. The British Labour Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald, who viewed reparations as impossible to pay successfully, pressured French Premier Édouard Herriot into a series of concessions to Germany. In total, France received £1600 million from Germany before reparations ended in 1932, but France had to pay war debts to the United States, and thus the net gain was only about £600 million.

France tried to create a web of defensive treaties against Germany with Poland, Czechoslovakia, Romania, Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union. There was little effort to build up the military strength or technological capabilities of these small allies, and they remained weak and divided among themselves. In the end, the alliances proved worthless. France also constructed a powerful defensive wall in the form of a network of fortresses along its German border. It was called the Maginot Line and was trusted to compensate for the heavy manpower losses of the First World War.

The main goal of foreign policy was the diplomatic response to the demands of the French army in the 1920s and 1930s to form alliances against the German threat, especially with Britain and with smaller countries in central Europe.

Appeasement was increasingly adopted as Germany grew stronger after 1933, for France suffered a stagnant economy, unrest in its colonies, and bitter internal political fighting. Appeasement, says historian Martin Thomas was not a coherent diplomatic strategy or a copying of the British. France appeased Italy on the Ethiopia question because it could not afford to risk an alliance between Italy and Germany. When Hitler sent troops into the Rhineland—the part of Germany where no troops were allowed—neither Paris nor London would risk war, and nothing was done. The military alliance with Czechoslovakia was sacrificed at Hitler's demand when France and Britain agreed to his terms at Munich in 1938.

In 1920, the socialist movement split, with the majority forming the French Communist Party. The minority, led by Léon Blum, kept the name Socialist, and by 1932 greatly outnumbered the disorganized Communists. When Stalin told French Communists to collaborate with others on the left in 1934, a popular front was made possible with an emphasis on unity against fascism. In 1936, the Socialists and the Radicals formed a coalition, with Communist support, to complete it.

The Popular Front's narrow victory in the elections of the spring of 1936 brought to power a government headed by the Socialists in alliance with the Radicals. The Communists supported its domestic policies, but did not take any seats in the cabinet. The prime minister was Léon Blum, a technocratic socialist who avoided making decisions. In two years in office, it focused on labour law changes sought by the trade unions, especially the mandatory 40-hour work week, down from 48 hours. All workers were given a two-week paid vacation. A collective bargaining law facilitated union growth; membership soared from 1,000,000 to 5,000,000 in one year, and workers' political strength was enhanced when the Communist and non-Communist unions joined. The government nationalized the armaments industry and tried to seize control of the Bank of France in an effort to break the power of the richest 200 families in the country. Farmers received higher prices, and the government purchased surplus wheat, but farmers had to pay higher taxes. Wave after wave of strikes hit French industry in 1936. Wage rates went up 48%, but the work week was cut back by 17%, and the cost of living rose 46%, so there was little real gain to the average worker. The higher prices for French products resulted in a decline in overseas sales, which the government tried to neutralize by devaluing the franc, a measure that led to a reduction in the value of bonds and savings accounts. The overall result was significant damage to the French economy, and a lower rate of growth.

Most historians judge the Popular Front a failure, although some call it a partial success. There is general agreement that it failed to live up to the expectations of the left.

Politically, the Popular Front fell apart over Blum's refusal to intervene vigorously in the Spanish Civil War, as demanded by the Communists. Culturally, the Popular Front forced the Communists to come to terms with elements of French society they had long ridiculed, such as patriotism, the veterans' sacrifice, the honour of being an army officer, the prestige of the bourgeois, and the leadership of the Socialist Party and the parliamentary Republic. Above all, the Communists portrayed themselves as French nationalists. Young Communists dressed in costumes from the revolutionary period and the scholars glorified the Jacobins as heroic predecessors.

Historians have turned their attention to the right in the interwar period, looking at various categories of conservatives and Catholic groups as well as the far right fascist movement. Conservative supporters of the old order were linked with the "haute bourgeoisie" (upper middle class), as well as nationalism, military power, the maintenance of the empire, and national security. The favourite enemy was the left, especially as represented by socialists. The conservatives were divided on foreign affairs. Several important conservative politicians sustained the journal Gringoire, foremost among them André Tardieu. The Revue des deux Mondes, with its prestigious past and sharp articles, was a major conservative organ.

Summer camps and youth groups were organized to promote conservative values in working-class families, and help them design a career path. The Croix de feu / Parti social français (CF/PSF) was especially active.

France's republican government had long been strongly anti-clerical. The Law of Separation of Church and State in 1905 had expelled many religious orders, declared all Church buildings government property, and led to the closing of most Church schools. Since that time, Pope Benedict XV had sought a rapprochement, but it was not achieved until the reign of Pope Pius XI (1922–1939). In the papal encyclical Maximam Gravissimamque (1924), many areas of dispute were tacitly settled and a bearable coexistence made possible.

The Catholic Church expanded its social activities after 1920, especially by forming youth movements. For example, the largest organization of young working women was the Jeunesse Ouvrière Chrétienne /Féminine (JOC/F), founded in 1928 by the progressive social activist priest Joseph Cardijn. It encouraged young working women to adopt Catholic approaches to morality and to prepare for future roles as mothers at the same time as it promoted notions of spiritual equality and encouraged young women to take active, independent, and public roles in the present. The model of youth groups was expanded to reach adults in the Ligue ouvrière chrétienne féminine ("League of Working Christian Women") and the Mouvement populaire des familles.

Catholics on the far right supported several shrill, but small, groupings that preached doctrines similar to fascism. The most influential was Action Française, founded in 1905 by the vitriolic author Charles Maurras. It was intensely nationalistic, antisemitic and reactionary, calling for a return to the monarchy and domination of the state by the Catholic Church. In 1926, Pope Pius XI condemned Action Française because the pope decided that it was folly for the French Church to continue to tie its fortunes to the unlikely dream of a monarchist restoration and distrusted the movement's tendency to defend the Catholic religion in merely utilitarian and nationalistic terms. Action Française never fully recovered from the denunciation, but it was active in the Vichy era.

Léon Blum was a French socialist politician and three-time Prime Minister of France. Although his tenure was brief during his two tenures in the 1930s as prime minister, his policies played a key role in French policy during the events leading up to World War II. As Prime Minister in the left-wing Popular Front government in 1936–1937, he provided a series of major economic and social reforms. Blum declared neutrality in the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939) to avoid the civil conflict spilling over into France itself. Once out of office in 1938, he denounced the appeasement of Germany. When Germany defeated France in 1940, he became a staunch opponent of Vichy France.

After the fall of the Blum government, Édouard Daladier became head of government on 10 April 1938, orienting his government towards the centre and ending the Popular Front. Along with Neville Chamberlain, Benito Mussolini and Adolf Hitler, Daladier signed the Munich Agreement in 1938, which gave Nazi Germany control over the Sudetenland. After Hitler's invasion of Poland in 1939, Britain and France declared war on Germany.

During the Phoney War, France's failure to aid Finland against the Soviet Union 's invasion during the Winter War led to Daladier's resignation on 21 March 1940 and his replacement by Paul Reynaud. Daladier remained Minister of Defence until 19 May, when Reynaud took over the portfolio personally after the French defeat at Sedan.

Reynaud opposed the Munich Agreement of September 1938, when France and the United Kingdom gave way before Hitler's proposals for the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia. After the outbreak of World War II Reynaud became the penultimate Prime Minister of the Third Republic in March 1940. He was also vice-president of the Democratic Republican Alliance center-right party. Reynaud was Prime Minister during the German defeat of France in May and June 1940; he persistently refused to support an armistice with Germany, as premier in June 1940, he unsuccessfully attempted to save France from German occupation in World War II, and resigned on 16 June. After unsuccessfully attempting to flee France, he was arrested by Philippe Pétain 's administration. Surrendering to German custody in 1942, he was imprisoned in Germany and later Austria until liberation in 1945, where he was released after the Battle of Itter Castle in which one of the leaders, German Major Josef Gangl, declared a hero by the Austrian resistance, took a sniper's bullet to save Reynaud.

The most important factor in French foreign policy was the Remilitarization of the Rhineland on 7 March 1936 in defiance of the Treaty of Versailles, which had been declared to be a permanent demilitarized zone. With the Rhineland remilitarized, for the first time since 1918 German military forces could menace France directly, and equally importantly the Germans started to build the Siegfried line along the Franco-German border. The assumption behind the French alliance system in Eastern Europe was that the French Army would use the demilitarized status of the Rhineland to launch an offensive into western Germany if the Reich should invade any of France's allies in Eastern Europe, namely Poland, Czechoslovakia, Romania and Yugoslavia.

With the building of the Siegfried Line, it was possible for Germany to invade any of France's Eastern European allies with the majority of the Wehrmacht being sent east with the remainder of the Wehrmacht staying on the defensive in the Rhineland to halt any French offensive into Germany, a situation that boded ill for the survival of the French alliance system in Eastern Europe. A further complication for the French was the greater population of Germany as France could only field a third of the young men that the Reich could field along with the greater size of the German economy. To even the odds against the Reich, it was the unanimous opinion of all French foreign policy and military experts that France needed allies.

The nation that France wanted the most as an ally was Great Britain, which had the world's largest navy and provided that Britain made the "continental commitment" of sending another large expeditionary force to France like the BEF of the First World War would allow the French to face any challenge from Germany on more even terms. The need for the "continental commitment" allowed Britain to have a sort of veto power over French foreign policy in the interwar period as the French wanted the "continental commitment" very badly, and thus could not afford to alienate the British too much.

The other major ally the French wanted was the Soviet Union. However, the lack of a common German–Soviet frontier, the unwillingness of Romania and especially Poland to grant the Red Army transit rights, and the strong British dislike of the alliance that the French signed with the Soviet Union in 1935 all presented problems from the French viewpoint. Blum's foreign policy was one of attempting to improve relations with Germany to avoid a war while seeking to strengthen France's alliances and to conclude an alliance with Britain.

Daladier's last government was in power at the time of the negotiations preceding the Munich Agreement during which France pressured Czechoslovakia to hand the Sudetenland to Nazi Germany. In April–May 1938, British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain strongly but unsuccessfully pressed Daladier to renounce the French-Czechoslovak alliance, which led to Britain becoming involved in the crisis. From the British perspective, the problem was not the Sudetenland but the French-Czechoslovak alliance. British military experts were almost unanimous that Germany would defeat France in a war unless Britain intervened. The British thought that allowing Germany to defeat France would unacceptably alter the balance of power, and so Britain would have no choice but to intervene if a French-German war broke out.

The alliance would have turned any German attack on Czechoslovakia into a French–German war. As British Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax stated at a Cabinet meeting in March 1938, "Whether we liked or not, we had to admit the plain fact that we could not afford to see France overrun."

At the Anglo-French summit on 28–29 April 1938, Chamberlain pressured Daladier to renounce the alliance with Czechoslovakia, only to be firmly informed that France would stand by its obligations, which forced the British to be involved very reluctantly in the Sudetenland Crisis. The summit of 28–29 April 1938 represented a British "surrender" to the French, rather than a French "surrender" to the British since Daladier made it clear France would not renounce its alliance with Czechoslovakia.

Unlike Chamberlain, Daladier had no illusions about Hitler's ultimate goals. In fact, he told the British in a late April 1938 meeting that Hitler's real aim was to eventually secure "a domination of the Continent in comparison with which the ambitions of Napoleon were feeble".

Daladier went on to say, "Today, it is the turn of Czechoslovakia. Tomorrow, it will be the turn of Poland and Romania. When Germany has obtained the oil and wheat it needs, she will turn on the West. Certainly we must multiply our efforts to avoid war. But that will not be obtained unless Great Britain and France stick together, intervening in Prague for new concessions [i.e. to the Sudeten Germans] but declaring at the same time that they will safeguard the independence of Czechoslovakia. If, on the contrary, the Western Powers capitulate again, they will only precipitate the war they wish to avoid."

Despite being on the opposite sides of the ideological divide, starting on 14 April 1938 the Conservative MP Winston Churchill started a correspondence with Blum, sending him a series of letters written in his idiosyncratic French, encouraging him to support rearmament and oppose appeasement. During the Sudetenland crisis of 1938, Daladier accepted the offer of the British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain to serve as an "honest broker" in an attempt to find a compromise. Chamberlain met with Adolf Hitler at a summit at Berchtesgaden where he agreed that the Sudetenland region of Czechoslovakia would be transferred to Germany. At a subsequent Anglo-German summit at Bad Godesberg, Hitler rejected Chamberlain's plan over a secondary issue as he demanded that the Sudetenland be transferred to Germany before 1 October 1938 while the Anglo-French plan called for a transfer to occur after 1 October. For a time in September 1938, it appeared that Europe was on brink of a war again. The fact that the issue at stake was only a secondary issue, namely the timetable for transferring the Sudetenland, after the primary issue had been settled struck many as bizarre.

The Munich Agreement that ended the crisis was a compromise as it was affirmed that the Sudetenland would be transferred to Germany but after only 1 October, albeit on a schedule that favored the German demand to have the Sudetenland "go home to the Reich " as soon as possible. When the Munich Agreement was signed on 30 September 1938, Blum wrote that he felt " soulagement honteux " ("shameful relief") as he wrote that he was happy that France would not be going to war with Germany, but he felt ashamed of an agreement that favored Germany at the expense of Czechoslovakia. On 1 October 1938, Blue wrote in Le Populaire : "There is not a woman and a man to refuse MM. Neville Chamberlain and Édouard Daladier their rightful tribute of gratitude. War is avoided. The scourge recedes. Life can become natural again. One can resume one's work and sleep again. One can enjoy the beauty of an autumn sun. How would it be possible for me not to understand this sense of deliverance when I feel it myself?"

Blum's contorted position of voting for the Munich Agreement, but being opposed to further appeasement was largely an attempt to hold together the Socialists. In the months that followed, Blum became more critical of the "men of Munich". The principal object of his criticism was not Daladier—whom he knew to be a reluctant appeaser—but rather the Foreign Minister, Georges Bonnet. Bonnet was known to be the advocate of some sort of Franco-German understanding under which France would recognize Eastern Europe as being in the German sphere of influence and abandon all of France's allies in Eastern Europe. Blum focused his criticism on Bonnet as the main advocate of appeasement in the cabinet.

In an attempt to improve productivity in the French armament industry, especially its aviation industry, the Finance Minister Paul Reynaud, supported by Daladier, brought in a series of sweeping laws that undid much of the Popular Front's economic policies, most notably ending the 48 hour work week. Blum joined forces with the Communists in opposing the Daladier government's economic policies, and supported the general strike called by the Communists on 30 November 1938. Daladier called out the French Army to operate essential services and had the French police use tear gas to evict striking workers at the Renault works. The use of the military to operate essential services while sending out the police to arrest the strike leaders broke the general strike. In a speech, Blum accused Daladier of using repressive methods to crush the French working class and revert France back to the pre-1936 economic system.

Complicating matters was the beginning of a major crisis in Italo-French relations. On 30 November 1938 – the same day as the general strike – a carefully staged "spontaneous" demonstration organized by the Italian Foreign Minister Count Galeazzo Ciano took place in the Italian Chamber of Deputies where on cue all of the deputies rose up to shout "Tunis, Corsica, Nice, Savoy!" Benito Mussolini had intended to use what he called "Sudeten methods" on France as the Italian media started a violent anti-French campaign demanding that France cede Corsica, Nice, Savoy and Tunisia to Italy.

Daladier responded with a series of resolute speeches on French radio where he rejected all of the Italian demands, which won him much popularity in France. From the viewpoint of Blum, being opposed to Daladier at a time when he won himself many accolades as the defender of France's territorial integrity against Italy was politically difficult. At the next session of the Chambre des députés on 9 December 1938, the Popular Front formally came to an end as Daladier chose to base his majority of the parties of the right and center. Despite the end of the Popular Front, Blum did not press for a vote of no-confidence or new elections. Blum believed that Daladier would win an election if one was called, and the Socialists did not vote for a Communist motion of no-confidence in the Daladier government.

When war was declared in 1939, Maurice Gamelin was France's commander in chief, with his headquarters at the Château de Vincennes, a facility completely devoid of telephonic or any other electronic links to his commanders in the field: a massive oversight in the face of the Wehrmacht's subsequent swift and flexible ' Blitzkrieg ' tactics. France saw little action during the Phoney War, apart from a few French divisions crossing the German border in the Saar Offensive, who advanced a mere 8 km (5.0 mi). They stopped even before reaching Germany's unfinished Siegfried Line. According to General Siegfried Westphal, a German staff officer on the Western Front, if France had attacked in September 1939 German forces could not have held out for more than one or two weeks. Gamelin ordered his troops back behind the Maginot Line, but only after telling France's ally, Poland, that France had broken the Siegfried Line and that help was on its way. Before the war, he had expected the Polish Army to hold out against Germany for six months.

Gamelin prohibited any bombing of the industrial areas of the Ruhr, in case the Germans retaliated. The French mobilisation had called up many essential workers, which disrupted vital French industries in the first weeks of the campaign. Gamelin's vision for France's defence was based upon a static defence along the Franco-German border, which was reinforced by the Maginot Line. However, the Line did not extend along the Belgian frontier. During the winter of 1939–40, which was one of the coldest of the 20th century, work on the extension of the Line along the Belgian frontier was slow and not of the same quality as the original defences. Gamelin, along with many other members of the French High Command, saw the Ardennes as unlikely to be attacked and chose to defend it with only ten reserve divisions and few fortifications. Much of the French army was posted further northwest along the Belgian frontier. According to General Hasso von Manteuffel, a German Panzer commander, France had more and better tanks than Germany, but chose to disperse them.

Gamelin's own views had changed from a purely defensive strategy relying on the Maginot Line. French strategists predicted a German drive across northern Belgium, as in 1914. Gamelin favoured an aggressive advance northward to meet the attacking German forces in Belgium and the Netherlands, as far removed from French territory as possible. This strategy, known as the Dyle Plan, fitted with Belgian defensive plans and also with British objectives. Gamelin committed much of the motorised forces of the French Army and the entire British Expeditionary Force (BEF) to this strategy. Such a strategy also meant that most of the French Army would leave its one-year-old prepared defensive positions in northern France to be committed to joining battle on an unknown Belgian defensive line.

Despite reports of the build-up of German forces, and even knowing the date of the planned German attack, Gamelin did nothing until May 1940, stating that he would "await events". Then, when the Germans attacked, Gamelin insisted on moving 40 of his best divisions, including the BEF, northwards to conform to the Dyle Plan.

In the first few days of the Battle of Belgium, many Allied aircraft were attacked while still on the ground. The rest of the air support was concentrated on the French advance, rather than attacking the exposed 150 km (93 mi) column supplying the German advance. Quickly, the French and the British became fearful of being outflanked and they withdrew from the defensive lines drawn up across Belgium. They did not pull back fast enough to prevent them being outflanked by the German Panzer divisions.

The German wing that attacked further south was able to cross the River Meuse faster than anticipated, aided by heavy Luftwaffe aerial bombardment. Although almost all the crossings over the Meuse were destroyed by the French, one weir 60 km (37 mi) north of Sedan had been left intact and was only lightly defended. It was thus quickly captured and exploited by the Germans. Meanwhile, French guns were ordered to limit their firing in case they ran out of ammunition. German Colonel-General Heinz Guderian disregarded his orders, and attacked aggressively on this front.

In response, Gamelin withdrew forces in this area so that they could defend Paris, thinking this was the Germans' objective, rather than the coast.

The looming threat to France of Nazi Germany was delayed at the Munich Conference of 1938. France and Great Britain abandoned Czechoslovakia and appeased the Germans by giving in to their demands concerning the acquisition of the Sudetenland (the portions of Czechoslovakia with German-speaking majorities). Intensive rearmament programs began in 1936 and were re-doubled in 1938, but they would only bear fruit in 1939 and 1940.

Historians have debated two themes regarding the sudden collapse of the French government in 1940. One emphasizes a broad cultural and political interpretation, pointing to failures, internal dissension, and a sense of malaise that ran through all French society. A second one blames the poor military planning by the French High Command. According to the British historian Julian Jackson, the Dyle Plan conceived by French General Maurice Gamelin was destined for failure, since it drastically miscalculated the ensuing attack by German Army Group B into central Belgium. The Dyle Plan embodied the primary war plan of the French Army to stave off Wehrmacht Army Groups A, B, and C with their much revered Panzer divisions in the Low Countries. As the French 1st, 7th, 9th armies and the British Expeditionary Force moved in Belgium to meet Army Group B, the German Army Group A outflanked the Allies at the Battle of Sedan of 1940 by coming through the Ardennes, a broken and heavily forested terrain that had been believed to be impassable to armoured units. The Germans also rushed along the Somme valley toward the English Channel coast to catch the Allies in a large pocket that forced them into the disastrous Battle of Dunkirk. As a result of this brilliant German strategy, embodied in the Manstein Plan, the Allies were defeated in stunning fashion. France had to accept the terms imposed by Adolf Hitler at the Second Armistice at Compiègne, which was signed on 22 June 1940 in the same railway carriage in which the Germans had signed the armistice that ended the First World War on 11 November 1918.

The Third Republic officially ended on 10 July 1940, when the French parliament gave full powers to Marshal Philippe Pétain, who proclaimed in the following days the État Français (the "French State"), commonly known as the "Vichy Regime" or " Vichy France " following its re-location to the town of Vichy in central France. Charles de Gaulle had made the Appeal of 18 June earlier, exhorting all French not to accept defeat and to rally to Free France and continue the fight with the Allies.

Throughout its seventy-year history, the Third Republic stumbled from crisis to crisis, from dissolved parliaments to the appointment of a mentally ill president (Paul Deschanel). It fought bitterly through the First World War against the German Empire, and the inter-war years saw much political strife with a growing rift between the right and the left. When France was liberated in 1944, few called for a restoration of the Third Republic, and a Constituent Assembly was established by the government of a provisional French Republic to draft a constitution for a successor, established as the Fourth Republic (1946 to 1958) that December, a parliamentary system not unlike the Third Republic.

Adolphe Thiers, first president of the Third Republic, called republicanism in the 1870s "the form of government that divides France least." France might have agreed about being a republic, but it never fully accepted the Third Republic. France's longest-lasting governmental system since before the 1789 Revolution, the Third Republic was consigned to the history books as being unloved and unwanted in the end. Yet, its longevity showed that it was capable of weathering many storms, particularly the First World War.

One of the most surprising aspects of the Third Republic was that it constituted the first stable republican government in French history and the first to win the support of the majority of the population, but it was intended as an interim, temporary government. Following Thiers's example, most of the Orleanist monarchists progressively rallied themselves to the Republican institutions, thus giving support of a large part of the elites to the Republican form of government. On the other hand, the Legitimists remained harshly anti-Republicans, while Charles Maurras founded the Action française in 1898. This far-right monarchist movement became influential in the Quartier Latin in the 1930s. It also became a model for various far right leagues that participated to the 6 February 1934 riots that toppled the Second Cartel des gauches government.

The topic of the "decadence" of French institutions and France arose as a historiographical debate at the end of the Second Empire and was a recurring theme of debate during the Third Republic. Each defeat, setback, or national humiliation served to confirm the idea, as France lost its vital essence or even will to exist, while energetic young countries like the United States appeared to be on the upsurge, France and old world civilization appeared in stasis or on a slow decline, according to this thesis. It first made its appearance in the somewhat bizarre and now obscure writings of Claude-Marie Raudot, who was hostile to First and Second Empire, and wrote that France was living and wished to live in a world of illusion. Raudot pointed out the declining birth rate, falling below replacement level, which he considered a cancerous symptom of the national malaise, foretelling an inevitable national decline, while the Russians and the Americans pushed ahead as seen in de Tocqueville 's writings, and even Brazil was seen as a future rising star.

Proponents of the concept have argued that the French defeat of 1940 was caused by what they regard as the innate decadence and moral rot of France. The notion of la décadence as an explanation for the defeat began almost as soon as the armistice was signed in June 1940. Marshal Philippe Pétain stated in one radio broadcast, "The regime led the country to ruin." In another, he said "Our defeat is punishment for our moral failures" that France had "rotted" under the Third Republic. In 1942 the Riom Trial was held bringing several leaders of the Third Republic to trial for declaring war on Germany in 1939 and accusing them of not doing enough to prepare France for war.

John Gunther in 1940, before the defeat of France, reported that the Third Republic ("the reductio ad absurdum of democracy") had had 103 cabinets with an average length of eight months, and that 15 former prime ministers were living. Marc Bloch in his book Strange Defeat (written in 1940, and published posthumously in 1946) argued that the French upper classes had ceased to believe in the greatness of France following the Popular Front victory of 1936, and so had allowed themselves to fall under the spell of fascism and defeatism. Bloch said that the Third Republic suffered from a deep internal "rot" that generated bitter social tensions, unstable governments, pessimism and defeatism, fearful and incoherent diplomacy, hesitant and shortsighted military strategy, and, finally, facilitated German victory in June 1940. The French journalist André Géraud, who wrote under the pen name Pertinax in his 1943 book, The Gravediggers of France indicted the pre-war leadership for what he regarded as total incompetence.

After 1945, the concept of la décadence was widely embraced by different French political fractions as a way of discrediting their rivals. The French Communist Party blamed the defeat on the "corrupt" and "decadent" capitalist Third Republic (conveniently hiding its own sabotaging of the French war effort during the Nazi-Soviet Pact and its opposition to the "imperialist war" against Germany in 1939–40).

From a different perspective, Gaullists called the Third Republic a "weak" regime and argued that if France had a regime headed by a strong-man president like Charles de Gaulle before 1940, the defeat could have been avoided. In power, they did exactly that and started the Fifth Republic. Then was a group of French historians, centered around Pierre Renouvin and his protégés Jean-Baptiste Duroselle and Maurice Baumont, that started a new type of international history to take into what Renouvin called forces profondes (profound forces) such as the influence of domestic politics on foreign policy. However, Renouvin and his followers still followed the concept of la décadence with Renouvin arguing that French society under the Third Republic was "sorely lacking in initiative and dynamism" and Baumont arguing that French politicians had allowed "personal interests" to override "any sense of the general interest".

In 1979, Duroselle published a well-known book entitled La Décadence that offered a total condemnation of the entire Third Republic as weak, cowardly and degenerate. Even more so then in France, the concept of la décadence was accepted in the English-speaking world, where British historians such A. J. P. Taylor often described the Third Republic as a tottering regime on the verge of collapse.

A notable example of the la décadence thesis was William L. Shirer 's 1969 book The Collapse of the Third Republic, where the French defeat is explained as the result of the moral weakness and cowardice of the French leaders. Shirer portrayed Édouard Daladier as a well-meaning, but weak willed; Georges Bonnet as a corrupt opportunist even willing to do a deal with the Nazis; Marshal Maxime Weygand as a reactionary soldier more interested in destroying the Third Republic than in defending it; General Maurice Gamelin as incompetent and defeatist, Pierre Laval as a crooked crypto-fascist; Charles Maurras (whom Shirer represented as France's most influential intellectual) as the preacher of "drivel"; Marshal Philippe Pétain as the senile puppet of Laval and the French royalists, and Paul Reynaud as a petty politician controlled by his mistress, Countess Hélène de Portes. Modern historians who subscribe to la décadence argument or take a very critical view of France's pre-1940 leadership without necessarily subscribing to la décadence thesis include Talbot Imlay, Anthony Adamthwaite, Serge Berstein, Michael Carely, Nicole Jordan, Igor Lukes, and Richard Crane.

The first historian to denounce la décadence concept explicitly was the Canadian historian Robert J. Young, who, in his 1978 book In Command of France argued that French society was not decadent, that the defeat of 1940 was due to only military factors, not moral failures, and that the Third Republic's leaders had done their best under the difficult conditions of the 1930s. Young argued that the decadence, if it existed, did not impact French military planning and readiness to fight. Young finds that American reporters in the late 1930s portrayed a calm, united, competent, and confident France. They praised French art, music, literature, theatre, and fashion, and stressed French resilience and pluck in the face of growing Nazi aggression and brutality. Nothing in the tone or content of the articles foretold the crushing military defeat and collapse of June 1940.

Young has been followed by other historians such as Robert Frankenstein, Jean-Pierre Azema, Jean-Louis Crémieux-Brilhac, Martin Alexander, Eugenia C. Kiesling, and Martin Thomas, who argued that French weakness on the international stage was due to structural factors as the impact of the Great Depression had on French rearmament and had nothing to do with French leaders being too "decadent" and cowardly to stand up to Nazi Germany.

Since 1985, the French Ministry of Culture and Communication has pursued a policy of preserving and promoting France 's heritage. Historic towns and districts have been designated Villes et Pays d'Art et d'Histoire ("Towns and Lands of Art and History").

The Ministry provides financial and technical support to regions and groups for architectural and heritage undertakings. The Ministry imposes an obligation on beneficiaries to receive workers it has deemed qualified to participate in projects. The national council of towns and districts of art and history (Le conseil national des Villes et Pays d'Art et d'Histoire), set up in 1995, participates in the development and general policy of the network. It advises on the eligibility of towns and districts for the Lands of Art and History designation, and effects withdrawal of support from landmarks where standards slip.

Policies of the network are put into effect by the regional directorates of arts and culture (Direction régionale des affaires culturelles: DRAC). The directorates seek to ensure that projects are relevant and blend into the culture of the region. They also serve as intermediaries between localities and the national organization.

In 2005, about 130 towns and districts were part of this network.

A more accurate and readily-understandable translation of pays would be district (Towns and Districts of Art and History), as the word pays refers to an administrative area centered on a town or village - akin to a district or subdivision of an English county.

The numbers in brackets are those assigned by the Ministry to the départements.

- Towns of Art and of History : Aix-les-Bains (74), Valence (26), Grenoble (38), Vienne (38), Saint-Étienne (42), Albertville (73), Chambéry (73), Moulins (03).

- Land of Art and of History : Pays de Saône-Vallée (01), Pays du Vivarais méridional (07), Pays Voironnais (38), Pays du Forez (42), Pays des Hautes vallées de Savoie (vallée de la Tarentaise, Maurienne et Beaufortain) (73), Agglomération d’ Annecy (74), Pays de la Vallée d'Abondance (74), Pays Issoire Val d'Allier sud, Pays du Haut-Allier, Pays de Riom, Pays de Saint-Flour, Pays de Billom Saint-Dier-d'Auvergne (63), Pays du Puy-en-Velay (43).

- Towns of Art and of History : Autun (71), Auxerre (89), Châlon-sur-Saône (71), Joigny (89), Nevers (58), Dijon (21), La Charité-sur-Loire (58), Besançon (25), Dole (39).

- Land of Art and of History : Pays de l' Auxois (21), Pays Charolais-Brionnais (71), Pays « Entre Cluny et Tournus » (71), Pays de Montbéliard (25), Pays du Revermont (Poligny, Arbois, Salins : 39).

- Towns of Art and of History : Dinan (22), Dinard (35), Concarneau (29), Fougères (35), Lorient (56), Morlaix (29), Vannes (56), Vitré (35), Brest (29)).

- Land of Art and of History : Pays de Morlaix (22), Pays de Quimperlé (22).

- Metropolis of Art and of History : Rennes (35).

- Towns of Art in which assent has been withdrawn : Auray (56), Saint-Malo (35).

- Towns of Art and of History : Orléans (45), Tours (37), Blois (41), Vendôme (41), Bourges (18), Chinon (37), Loches (37).

- Land of Art and of History : Pays Loire Touraine (37), Pays Loire Val d'Aubois, Pays de la vallée du Cher et du Romorantinais (41).

- Towns of Art and of History : Ajaccio (2A), Bastia (2B), Sartène (2A), Bonifacio (2A)).

- Towns of Art and of History : Mulhouse (68), Strasbourg (67), Sedan (08), Châlons-en-Champagne (51), Bar-le-Duc (55), Metz (57), Langres (52), Reims (51), Troyes (10), Charleville-Mézières (08), Lunéville (54).

- Land of Art and of History : Pays du Val d'Argent, Pays de Guebwiller (68), Pays d’ Épinal, Cœur des Vosges (88).

- Towns of Art and of History : Basse-Terre, Pointe-à-Pitre.

- Towns of Art and of History : Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni.

- Land of Art and of History : Pays des estuaires Maroni-Mana (including Awala-Yalimapo and Suriname : resort de Galibi).

- Towns of Art and of History : Roubaix (59), Boulogne-sur-Mer (62), Cambrai (59), Lille (59), Tourcoing (59), Chantilly (60), Beauvais (60), Laon (02), Noyon (60), Saint-Quentin (02), Soissons (02).

- Land of Art and of History : Pays de Lens - Liévin, Pays de Saint-Omer et de la Morinie (62).

- Metropolis of Art and of History : Amiens (80).

- Towns of Art and of History : Boulogne-Billancourt (92), Étampes (91), Meaux (77), Noisiel (77), Pontoise (95), Rambouillet (78), Vincennes (Val-de-Marne), Communauté d' Agglomération de Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines (78), Plaine Commune (93).

- Land of Art and of History : Pays de l’ Etampois – Sud Essonne (91), Parc naturel régional du Vexin français.

- Towns of Art and of History : Saint-Pierre.

- Towns of Art and of History : Caen (14), Dieppe (76), Fécamp (76), Le Havre (76), Bernay (27).

- Land of Art and of History : Pays d'Auge (14 & 61), Pays du Clos du Cotentin & Valognes (50), Pays de Coutances (50), Rouen - Elbeuf - Austreberthe (76).

- Towns of Art and of History : Bergerac (24), Bordeaux (33), Périgueux (24), Sarlat (24), Pau (64), Bayonne (64), Dax (40), La Réole (33), Limoges (87), Cognac (16), Poitiers (86), Rochefort (17), Royan (17), Saintes (17), Thouars (79).

- Land of Art and of History : Pays du Béarn des Gaves (64), Pays du Grand Villeneuvois (47), Pays des Pyrénées béarnaises (64), Pays des Hautes terres corréziennes et Ventadour (19), Pays Vézère et Ardoise (19), Pays des Monts et Barrages (87), Île de Ré (17), Pays du Confolentais (16), Pays de l’ Angoumois (16), Pays Châtelleraudais (86), Pays Mellois (79), Pays Montmorillonnais (86), Pays de Parthenay (79).

- Towns of Art and of History : Millau (12), Cahors (46), Figeac (46), Montauban (82), Moissac (82), Toulouse (31), Beaucaire (30), Lodève (34), Narbonne (11), Nîmes (30), Perpignan (66), Uzès (30).

- Land of Art and of History : Pays des Bastides du Rouergue (Najac, Sauveterre-de-Rouergue, Villefranche-de-Rouergue, Villeneuve d'Aveyron) (12), Pays de la Vallée de la Dordogne (46), Pays des Pyrénées cathares (Canton de Mirepoix, Canton de Lavelanet) (09), Pays du Grand Auch (32), Pays des Vallées d'Aure et du Louron (31), Grand Rodez (12), Pays de Mende et Lot-en- Gévaudan (48), Pays de Pézenas (34), Pays de la Vallée de la Têt (66), Pays transfrontalier des Vallées du Tech et du Ter ((66)), Pays du Haut Languedoc et Vignobles (34).

- Metropolis of Art and of History : Montpellier Méditerranée Métropole (34).

- Towns of Art and of History : Guérande (44), Nantes (44), Angers (49), Fontenay-le-Comte (85), Laval (53), Le Mans (72), Saumur (49), Clisson (44), Saint-Nazaire (44).

- Land of Art and of History : Pays du Perche sarthois (72), Pays Coëvrons- Mayenne (53), Pays de la Vallée du Loir (72), Pays du Vignoble nantais (44).

- Towns of Art and of History : Arles (13), Briançon (05), Fréjus (83), Grasse (06), Hyères (83), Martigues (13), Menton (06), Nice (06).

- Land of Art and of History : Pays de Carpentras et du Comtat Venaissin (84), Pays S.U.D. Serre-Ponçon Ubaye Durance (04 and 05), Pays de la Provence Verte (83), Pays des Vallées Roya-Bévéra (06).

- Towns of Art and of History : Saint-Denis, Saint-Pierre.

- Land of Art and of History : Les portes du Sud.

France has a unique history of units of measurement due to its radical decision to invent and adopt the metric system after the French Revolution.

In the Ancien régime and until 1795, France used a system of measures that had many of the characteristics of the modern Imperial System of units but with no unified system. There was widespread abuse of the king's standards, to the extent that the lieue could vary from 3.268 km in Beauce to 5.849 km in Provence. During the revolutionary era and motivated in part by the inhomogeneity of the old system, France switched to the first version of the metric system. This system was not well received by the public, and between 1812 and 1837, the country used the mesures usuelles – traditional names were restored, but the corresponding quantities were based on metric units: for example, the livre (pound) became exactly 500 g. After 1837, the metric system was reintroduced and progressively became the only system of use, with other units now in only residual use.

In the pre-revolutionary era (before 1795), France used a system of measures that had many of the characteristics of the modern Imperial System of units, but there was no unified system of measurement. Charlemagne and successive kings had tried but failed to impose a unified system of measurement in France. (In England, by contrast, the Magna Carta decreed that "there shall be one unit of measure throughout the realm.")

The names and relationships of many units of measure were adopted from Roman units of measure and many more were added – it has been estimated that there were seven or eight hundred different names for the various units of measure. In addition, the quantity associated with each unit of measure differed from town to town and even from trade to trade to such an extent that the lieue (league) could vary from 3.268 km in Beauce to 5.849 km in Provence. It has been estimated that, on the eve of the Revolution, a quarter of a million different units of measure were in use in France. Although certain standards, such as the pied du roi (the king's foot) had a degree of pre-eminence and were used by savants across Europe, many traders chose to use their own measuring devices, giving scope for fraud and hindering commerce and industry.

As an example, the weights and measures used at Pernes-les-Fontaines in southeastern France differ from those catalogued later in this article as having been used in Paris. In many cases, the names are different, while the livre is shown as being 403 g, as opposed to 489 g – the value of the livre du roi. (The Imperial pound is about 453.6 g.)

The French Revolution and subsequent Napoleonic Wars marked the end of the Age of Enlightenment. The forces of change that had been brewing manifested themselves across all of France, including the way in which units of measure should be defined. The savants of the day favored the use of a system of units that were inter-related and which used a decimal basis.

There was also a wish that the units of measure should be for all people and for all time and therefore not dependent on an artefact owned by any one particular nation. Talleyrand, at the prompting of the savant Condorcet, approached the British and the Americans in the early 1790s with proposals of a joint effort to define the metre. In the end, these approaches came to nothing and France decided to "go it alone".

Decimal time was introduced in the decree of 5 October 1793 under which the day was divided into 10 "decimal hours", the "hour" into 100 " decimal minutes" and the "decimal minute" into 100 "decimal seconds". The "decimal hour" corresponded to 2 hr 24 min, the "decimal minute" to 1.44 min and the "decimal second" to 0.864 s.

The implementation of decimal time proved an immense task and under the article 22 of the law of 18 Germinal, Year III (7 April 1795), the use of decimal time was no longer mandatory. On 1 January 1806, France reverted to the traditional timekeeping.

The metric system of measure was first given a legal basis in 1795 by the French Revolutionary government. Article 5 of the law of 18 Germinal, Year III (7 April 1795) defined five units of measure. The units and their preliminary values were:

Decimal multiples and submultiples of these units would be defined by Greek prefixes - "myria", "kilo", "hecta" (100), "deka" - and Latin prefixes - "deci", "centi" and "milli". Using Cassini's survey of 1744, a provisional value of 443.44 lignes was assigned to the metre which, in turn, defined the other units of measure.

The final value of the metre had to wait until 1799, when Delambre and Mechain presented the results of their survey between Dunkirk and Barcelona that fixed the length of the metre at 443.296 lignes. The law 19 Frimaire An VIII (10 December 1799) defined the metre in terms of this value and the kilogram as being 18,827.15 grains. These definitions enabled the construction of reference copies of the kilogram and metre, which were to be used as standards for the next 90 years.

At the same time, a new decimal-based system for angular measurement was implemented. The right angle was divided into 100 grads, which in turn was divided in 100 centigrads. An arc on the earth’s surface formed by an angle of one centigrad was one kilometre.

The metric system was introduced into France in 1795 on a district by district basis, starting with Paris. However, the introduction was by modern standards poorly managed. Although thousands of pamphlets were distributed, the Agency of Weights and Measures, which oversaw the introduction, underestimated the work involved. Paris alone needed 500,000 metre sticks, yet one month after the metre became the sole legal unit of measure, there were only 25,000 in store. This, combined with other excesses of the Revolution made the metric system unpopular.

Napoleon ridiculed the metric system, but as an able administrator, he recognized the value of a sound basis for a uniform system of measurement. Under the décret impérial du 12 février 1812 (imperial decree of 12 February 1812), he introduced a revised system of measure – the mesures uselles or "customary measures" for use in small retail businesses. However, all government, legal and similar works still had to use the metric system and the metric system continued to be taught at all levels of education. Many pre-metric units were reintroduced, with their old relations to each other, but were redefined in terms of metric units. Thus the aune was defined as 120 centimetres and the toise (fathom) as being two metres, with as before six pieds (feet) making up one toise, twelve pouces (inches) making up one pied and twelve lignes making up one pouce. Likewise, for mass and weight, the livre (pound) was defined as being 500 g, each livre comprising sixteen onces and each once eight gros.

La loi du 4 juillet 1837 (the law of 4 July 1837) of the July Monarchy effectively revoked the use of mesures usuelles by reaffirming the laws of measurement of 1795 and 1799 to be used from 1 May 1840. However, many units of measure, such as the livre, remained in colloquial use for many years and the livre still does to some extent.

When this legislation was introduced, the metric system was beginning to take hold across Europe. Switzerland and the German state of Baden had both defined their Fuß (foot) as being 300 mm and the German state of Hessen-Darmstadt has defined its Fuß as being 250 mm. Moreover, the Netherlands, Belgium, Greece, Lombardy and Venice had all adopted the metric system, albeit with local names for the "metre", "kilogram" and so on. The metric system was given a boost when the German Zollverein (Customs Union) introduced the Zollpfund of 500 g in 1850.

The Great Exhibition of 1851 in London was followed by international exhibitions in Paris in 1855 and 1867. The 1867 exhibition had a stand showing how the diverse units of measure were converging onto the metric system – a system that had been developed in France and whose standards were in the custody of the French government, but available for world use.

In 1870, while France was preparing to host an international conference to discuss international cooperation in the sphere of units of measurement, the Franco-Prussian War broke out. France was humiliated by Prussia's military action, but in 1872 France seized the diplomatic initiative and re-issued the invitations for the 1870 conference. The conference met in 1875 and concluded with the signing of the Treaty of the Metre. The principal agreements under the treaty were:

Thus the French metre and kilogram passed into international control.

During the early part of the twentieth century, the French introduced their own units of power – the poncelet, which was defined as being the power required to raise a mass of 100 kg against standard gravity with a velocity of 1 m/s, giving a value of 980.665 W. However, many other European countries defined their units of power (the Pferdestärke in Germany, the paardekracht in the Netherlands and the cavallo vapore in Italy) using 75 kg rather than 100 kg, which gave a value of 735.49875 W (about 0.985 HP). Eventually, the poncelet was replaced with the cheval vapeur, which was identical to equivalent units of measure in neighboring countries. In 1977, these units, along with the stère and the livre (and amongst others, the German Pfund) were proscribed by EEC Directive 71/354/EEC which required EU member states to standardize on the International System of Units (SI) and therefore to use the watt and its multiples.

"Frenchelon" is the nickname given to the signal intelligence system operated by France. The name is a reference to its Anglo-American counterpart ECHELON.

Its existence has never been officially acknowledged by French authorities, although numerous journalists, based on military information, have mentioned it, since the European Parliament investigated ECHELON and also its implications in counter-terrorism. The term was coined by Kenneth Cukier, an American journalist living in Paris, in a paper presented at the Computers, Freedom and Privacy conference in 1999, and later in an op-ed in The Wall Street Journal Europe edition.

The system is allegedly operated by DGSE, whose Direction Technique (Technical Direction) is responsible for signal intelligence. The largest station is in Domme, near Sarlat in Périgord. Some of the other stations in France are: Alluets-Feucherolles (Alluets-le-Roi), Mutzig (Alsace), Mont Valérien, Plateau d'Albion, Agde, Solenzara (South Corsica), and Filley Barracks in Nice.

There are some other stations in overseas territories and former colonies:

These stations, in addition to the DGSE headquarters on boulevard Mortier in Paris, intercept and decipher electronic communications using software coded communications of diplomatic, military or industrial origin.

French newspapers recently indicated that DGSE had an interception program on submarine cables, similar to NSA ones. No official data indicates whether this could be a part of FRENCHELON.

It should not be confused with the French Army 's official listening system Emeraude (Ensemble mobile écoute et recherche automatique des émissions [ fr ]), which used to be mistakenly confused with Frenchelon.

His Serene Highness Otto Eduard Leopold, Prince of Bismarck, Count of Bismarck-Schönhausen, Duke of Lauenburg

French–German (Franco–German) enmity (French : Rivalité franco-allemande, German : Deutsch-französische Erbfeindschaft) was the idea of unavoidably hostile relations and mutual revanchism between Germans (including Austrians) and French people that arose in the 16th century and became popular with the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1871. It was an important factor in the unification of Germany (excluding Austria), World War I, and ended after World War II, when under the influence of the Cold War, West Germany and France both became part of NATO and the European Coal and Steel Community.

In 1477, the Habsburg archduke Maximilian I of Austria, son of Emperor Frederick III, married Mary the Rich, the only child of the Burgundian duke Charles the Bold. Frederick and Charles had arranged the marriage, shortly before the duke was killed at the Battle of Nancy.

His ancestors of the French House of Valois-Burgundy over the centuries had acquired a collection of territories on both sides of the border of France with the Holy Roman Empire. It stretched from Burgundy proper in the south to the Low Countries in the north, somewhat resembling of early medieval Middle Francia. He had plans to raise Burgundian lands to the status of a kingdom (recreating the Kingdom of Lotharingia), but died at the Battle of Nancy (1477). Upon the duke's death, King Louis XI of France attempted to seize his heritage as reverted fiefs but was defeated by Maximilian at Battle of Guinegate (1479), who by the 1493 Treaty of Senlis annexed the Burgundian territories, including Flanders as well as French-speaking Artois and asserted the possession of the County of Burgundy (Franche-Comté).

Maximilian, Holy Roman Emperor from 1493, was also able to marry his son Philip the Handsome to Joanna of Castile, heiress to both the Crown of Castile and the Crown of Aragon. His grandson, Emperor Charles V, inherited the Low Countries and the Franche-Comté in 1506; when he by his mother also inherited Spain in 1516, France was surrounded by Habsburg territories and felt under pressure. The resulting tension between the two powers caused a number of conflicts, such as the Italian Wars or the War of the Spanish Succession, until the Diplomatic Revolution of 1756 made them allies against Prussia.

The Thirty Years War (1618–1648), was a complex conflict that took place in and around the Holy Roman empire, with religious, structural, and dynastic causes. France intervened in this conflict both indirectly, largely but not exclusively, on the side of various intervening Protestant powers, as well as directly from 1635 on. The 1648 Peace of Westphalia gave France limited control over Alsace and Lorraine. The 1679 Treaties of Nijmegen consolidated this result by bringing the towns under French control. In 1681, France occupied Strasbourg.

Meanwhile, the expanding Muslim Ottoman Empire became a serious threat to Christian Austria. The Vatican initiated a so-called Holy League against the "hereditary enemy" of Christian Europe ("Erbfeind christlichen Namens"). Far from joining or supporting the common effort of Austria, Brandenburg-Prussia, the other German states and Poland, France under Louis XIV of France invaded the Spanish Netherlands in September 1683, a few days before the Battle of Vienna. While Austria and the other German states were occupied with the Great Turkish War (1683–1699), France initiated the War of the Grand Alliance (1688–1697). The attempt to conquer large parts of southern Germany ultimately failed, when German troops were withdrawn from the Ottoman border and moved to the region. However, following a scorched earth policy that caused a large public outcry at the time, French troops, under notorious General Ezéchiel du Mas, Comte de Mélac, devastated large parts of the Palatinate, Baden and Württemberg burning down and levelling numerous cities and towns in southern Germany.

In the course of the Seven Years' War and in view of the rising Kingdom of Prussia, which had concluded the neutrality Treaty of Westminster with Great Britain, France under Louis XV realigned their foreign policy. The Diplomatic Revolution instigated by the Austrian chancellor Wenzel Anton Kaunitz in 1756 ended the French-Habsburg enmity.

The Diplomatic Revolution as an alliance between France, the Habsburg Empire and Russia manifested in 1756 in the Treaty of Versailles and the following Seven Years' War against Prussia and Great Britain. Although an overall German nation-state was on the horizon, the loyalties of the German population outside of Prussia were primarily with smaller states. The French war against Prussia was justified through its role as guarantor of the 1648 Peace of Westphalia, and France was fighting on the side of the majority of German states, including Habsburg Austria.

The civil population still regarded war as a conflict between their authorities and distinguished between troops less according to the side on which they fought than according to how they treated the local population. The personal contacts and mutual respect between French and Prussian officers did not stop entirely while they were fighting each other, and the war resulted in a great deal of cultural exchange between the French occupiers and the German population.

The perception of war began to change after the French Revolution. The levée en masse for the Revolutionary Wars and the beginning formation of nation states in Europe made war increasingly a conflict between peoples rather than a conflict between authorities carried out on the backs of their subjects.

At the battle of Austerlitz (1805), Napoleon I put an end to the millennium-old Holy Roman Empire the next year. A year later, at the battle of Jena, French forces crushed the Prussian armies. Within two weeks of Jena, Napoleon had conquered almost all of Prussia except the area around Königsberg. The Prussian army, previously thought invincible, had been fought to almost the point of total liquidation. This humiliation led German philosophers (such as Clausewitz, Fichte, Arndt...) to play an important role for the development of German nationalism. It led politicians (such as Stein and Hardenberg) to reform Prussia in order to adapt their country to the new world brought about by the French Revolution.

The Continental System led Napoleon to directly incorporate German-speaking areas such as Hamburg into his First French Empire. Napoleon reshaped the map of Germany by the creation of the Confederation of the Rhine, which included vassal States ruled directly by members of the Bonaparte family (such as the Kingdom of Westphalia, and the Grand Duchy of Berg) and allied States who took advantage of the French protectorate to increase their territory and power (such as the Kingdom of Bavaria and the Kingdom of Saxony).

The Napoleonic Wars, often fought in Germany and with Germans on both sides, as in the Battle of the Nations at Leipzig, also marked the beginning of what was explicitly called French–German hereditary enmity. Modern German nationalism was born in opposition to French domination under Napoleon. In the recasting of the map of Europe after Napoleon's defeat, most of the German-speaking territories in the Rhineland adjoining France were put under the rule of Prussia and the remainder were ruled by Bavaria and Grand Duchy of Hesse.

During the first half of the 19th century, many Germans looked forward to a unification of most or all of the German states, but most German leaders and the foreign powers were opposed to it. The German nationalist movement believed that a united Germany (even without Austria) would replace France as the dominant land power in Western Europe. This argument was aided by demographic changes: since the Middle Ages, France had had the largest population in Western Europe, but in the 19th century, its population stagnated (a trend that continued until the second half of the 20th century), and the population of the German states overtook it and continued to rapidly increase. Following the Congress of Vienna in 1815, France had lost territories on the left bank of the Rhine, which had been annexed during the Revolutionary Wars.

The Rhine Crisis emerged from a combination of French imperial ambitions and the nationalist sentiments that were growing in both France and Germany. In 1840, French Prime Minister Adolphe Thiers reignited claims to these territories, asserting that the Rhine should be reinstated as France's natural eastern border. This demand was met with strong resistance from the other German states, particularly Prussia, which had regained control of these areas. This also significantly fueled German nationalism, as the defense of the Rhine became a symbol of national pride and unity among the German states. Nationalist songs, such as " Die Wacht am Rhein," gained popularity, reflecting the growing sentiment against French claims. This period marked a shift towards a more aggressive and mass-oriented German nationalism, as various social classes rallied to defend what they considered their "most German river".

The unification of Germany, excluding Austria, was triggered by the Franco-Prussian War in 1870 and the French defeat. The military forces of Prussian and the other German states (excluding Austria) crushed the French armies at the Battle of Sedan. Finally, the Treaty of Frankfurt, reached after a lengthy siege of Paris forced France to cede the Alsace-Lorraine territory (consisting of most of Alsace and a quarter of Lorraine), of which most of the inhabitants spoke German dialects. France had to pay an indemnity of five billion francs to the newly declared German Empire. Thereafter, the German Empire had replaced France as the leading land power. Under Otto von Bismarck Germany was content--it had all it wanted so that its main goal was peace and stability. However, when it appeared Germany would decisively win in late 1870, German public opinion demanded it to humiliate France; the German Army favoured annexation to create more defensible frontiers. Bismarck reluctantly gave in--the French would never forget or forgive, he mistakenly calculated, so he might as well take the provinces. Germany's foreign policy fell into a trap with no exit. The only policy that made sense was trying to isolate France so it had no strong allies. However, France complicated Berlin's plans when it became friends with Russia. In 1905 a German plan for an alliance with Russia fell through because Russia was too close to France.

In the late 19th century and early 20th century, resentment existed between many nearby populations of French and German Americans, reflecting ethnic tensions on the European continent.

The incident happened in April 20, 1887, Schnaebelé was invited by a German colleague to meet at the Franco-German border for a discussion. However, upon his arrival, he was arrested by two agents of the German border guard, who were disguised as laborers. The arrest sparked immediate outrage in France, as it was perceived as a violation of French sovereignty, with claims that it occurred on French territory but Germans authorities accuse Schnaebelé espionage and trespassing over the Rhine fortresses. The French government, led by warhawk parties under Boulanger, reacted strongly, calling for an ultimatum against Germany. This incident occurred during a period of heightened nationalism and militarism in both countries, and the potential for conflict loomed large. The incident occurred between France and Germany, leading to fears nearly go to war. However, German Emperor William I intervened and ordered Schnaebelé's release, which occurred on April 30, 1887. This decision was seen as a move to de-escalate the situation and maintain stability in Europe. Despite the resolution, the Schnaebelé incident contributed to the growing animosity between the two nations and was part of a larger series of events known as the Georges Boulanger Affair, which involved various political and military tensions in France during that period. At same time, Chancellor Bismarck was pushing for an expensive new military law in Germany, and some historians speculate that the incident was used to justify heightened military readiness and taxation by stirring fears of war. However, Bismarck carefully managed the situation, communicating to the French ambassador that while he considered the arrest justified, Schnaebele’s release was necessary to honor international protocols.

The desire for revenge (esprit de revanche) against Germany, and demands for the recovery of the "lost provinces" of Alsace and Lorraine was often heard in the 1870s. The short-term French reaction after 1871 was Revanchism : a sense of bitterness, hatred and demand for revenge against Germany, and demand for the return of the two lost provinces. Paintings that emphasized the humiliation of the defeat came in high demand, such as those by Alphonse de Neuville. However elite French opinion changed after about five years. The elites were now calm and considered it a minor issue. The Alsace-Lorraine issue was a minor theme after 1880, and Republicans and Socialists systematically downplayed the issue. J.F.V. Keiger says, "By the 1880s Franco–German relations were relatively good." Return didn't become a French war aim until after World War I began.

The Allied victory in 1918 saw France seize back Alsace-Lorraine and briefly resume its old position as the leading land power on the European continent. France was the leading proponent of harsh peace terms against Germany at the Paris Peace Conference. As the war had been fought mostly on French soil, it had destroyed much of the infrastructure and industry in Northern France, and France had suffered the highest number of casualties proportionate to population. Much of French opinion wanted the Rhineland; the section of Germany west of the Rhine and adjoining France's northeastern boundary, and the old focus of French ambition, to be detached from Germany as an independent country. In the end, the Americans and the British forced them to settle for a promise that the Rhineland would be demilitarized, and that heavy German reparation payments would be levied.

On the remote eastern end of the German Empire, the Memel territory was separated from the rest of East Prussia and occupied by France before being annexed by Lithuania. Austria, which had been reduced to roughly its German-speaking areas, excluding the Sudetenland (the mostly German-inhabited areas of the Czech lands) and South Tyrol, was forbidden to re-join its former fellow states of the Holy Roman Empire by joining Germany. In response to the German failure to pay reparations under the Treaty of Versailles in 1923, France returned with the Occupation of the Ruhr area of Germany, the center of German coal and steel production, until 1925. Also, the French-dominated International Olympic Committee banned Germany from the Olympic Games of 1920 and 1924, which illustrates the French desire to isolate Germany.

Under terms of Versailles, the French Army had the right to occupy the Rhineland until 1935, but in fact the French withdrew from the Rhineland in June 1930. As a number of the units the French stationed in the Rhineland between December 1918 - June 1930 were recruited from France's African colonies, this promoted a violent campaign against the so-called " Black Horror on the Rhine " as the German government and various grass-roots German groups claimed that the Senegalese units in the French Army were raping white German women on an industrial scale. Numerous German authors likened that France, the "hereditary enemy on the Rhine" had deliberately unleashed the Senegalese-who were always portrayed as animals or malicious children -- to rape German women. In the words of the American historian Daniel Becker, the campaign against the "Black Horror on the Rhine" centered "tales of sexual violence against German, bourgeois, white women that often bordered on the pornographic" and the campaign against the "Black Horror" by various German authors and associated international sympathizers "unleashed a rhetoric of violence, and radical nationalism that, as some scholars have argued, laid the groundwork for widespread support for the various racial projects of the Nazi regime." Additionally, the campaign against the "Black Horror on the Rhine" served to strengthen the demand for Germany to become the Volksgemeinschaft (People's Community") because only by becoming united in the Volksgemeinschaft could Germany again become strong enough to crush France and end the "Black Horror".

However, the UK and the US did not favor these policies, which were seen as too pro-French. Germany soon recovered economically and then from 1933, under Adolf Hitler, began to pursue an aggressive policy in Europe. Meanwhile, France in the 1930s was tired, politically divided, and above all dreaded another war, which the French feared would again be fought on their soil for the third time (the first 2 being 1870 and 1914), and again destroy a large percentage of their young men. France's stagnant population meant that it would find it difficult to withhold the sheer force of numbers of a German invasion; it was estimated Germany could put two men of fighting age in the field for every French soldier. Thus in the 1930s the French, with their British allies, pursued a policy of appeasement of Germany, failing to respond to the remilitarization of the Rhineland, although this put the German army on a larger stretch of the French border.

Finally, however, Hitler pushed France and Britain too far, and they jointly declared war when Germany invaded Poland in September 1939. But France remained exhausted and in no mood for a rerun of 1914–18. There was little enthusiasm and much dread in France at the prospect of actual warfare. After the Phoney War when the Germans launched their blitzkrieg invasion of France in 1940, the French Army crumbled within weeks, and with Britain retreating, an atmosphere of humiliation and defeat swept France.

A new government under Marshal Philippe Pétain called for an armistice, and German forces occupied most of the country. A minority of the French forces escaped abroad and continued the fight under General Charles de Gaulle (the "Free French" or the "Fighting French"). On the other hand, the French Resistance conducted sabotage operations inside German-occupied France. To support the invasion of Normandy of 1944, various groups increased their sabotage and guerrilla attacks; organizations such as the Maquis derailed trains, blew up ammunition depots, and ambushed Germans, for instance at Tulle. The 2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich came under constant attack and sabotage on their way across the country to Normandy, suspected the village of Oradour-sur-Glane of harboring terrorists, arms and explosives, and wiped out the population in retaliation.

There was also a free French army fighting with the Allies, numbering almost 500,000 men by June 1944, 1,000,000 by December and 1,300,000 by the end of the war. By the war's end, the French army occupied south-western Germany and a part of Austria. French troops under the command of General Jean de Lattre de Tassigny destroyed and looted the town of Freudenstadt in the southern Blackforest (Schwarzwald) region for 3 days and perpetrated at least 600 rapes of German women of all ages there. Also various killings of civilians are recorded there. Mass rapes committed by French troops were also reported in the cities of Pforzheim, Stuttgart, Magstadt and Reutlingen.

When Allied forces liberated Normandy and Provence in August 1944, a victorious rebellion emerged in occupied Paris and national rejoicing broke out, as did a maelstrom of hatred directed at French people who had collaborated with the Germans. Women had their head shaved for the crime of horizontal collabortion. Some Germans taken as prisoners were killed by the resistance.

There was debate among the other Allies as to whether France should share in the occupation of the defeated Germany because of fears that the long Franco–German rivalry might interfere with the rebuilding of Germany. Ultimately the French were allowed to participate and from 1945 to 1955, French troops were stationed in the Rhineland, Baden-Württemberg, and part of Berlin, and these areas were put under a French military governor. The Saar Protectorate was allowed to rejoin West Germany only in 1957.

Kehl was turned into a suburb of Strasbourg. After the war, all citizens were expelled from Kehl. This state of affairs continued until 1953, when the city was returned to the Federal Republic of Germany and the refugees returned.

In the 1950s, the French and West Germans launched a new period of Franco–German cooperation that led to the formation of the European Union. Since then, France and Germany (West Germany between 1949 and 1990) have generally cooperated in the running of the European Union and often in foreign-policy matters in general. For example, they jointly opposed the US invasion of Iraq in 2003, leading US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld to lump them together as " Old Europe ".

Frexit (a portmanteau of "French" or "France" and "exit") is the hypothetical French withdrawal from the European Union (EU). The term is formed by analogy with Brexit, which denotes the similar withdrawal by the United Kingdom. The term was mostly used during the campaign leading to the French presidential election of 2017.

A poll by the Pew Research Center in June 2016, before the 2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum, found France to have a 61% unfavourable view of the EU, second only to Greece 's 71%, with the United Kingdom on 48%. However, when asked about an actual departure from the EU, 45% of French wanted to stay in the bloc while 33% expressed a desire to leave. The figure in favour of remaining increased to 60% in a subsequent poll in 2019.

The United Kingdom European Union membership referendum held on 23 June 2016, which resulted in 51.9% of votes being cast in favour of exiting the EU, occurred during the electoral campaign leading to the French presidential election of 2017. Following the referendum result, Front National Leader Marine Le Pen promised a French referendum on EU membership if she were to win the presidential election. Former President François Hollande met with politicians including Le Pen in the aftermath of the vote and rejected her proposal for a referendum. Fellow 2017 candidate Nicolas Dupont-Aignan of Debout la France also advocated for a referendum.

In an early use of the term Frexit, Le Pen said "Just call me Madame Frexit" in a Bloomberg Television interview she gave journalist Caroline Connan on 23 June 2015, one year before the Brexit referendum in June 2016. In a January 2018 interview with the British Broadcasting Corporation, President of France Emmanuel Macron agreed with Andrew Marr that the French people were equally disenchanted with globalisation and if presented with a simple yes / no response to such a complex question, they would "probably" have voted for Frexit in the same circumstances.

In August 2019, Le Monde editorial director Sylvie Kauffmann argued that "Brexit has made Frexit impossible" and that Le Pen "no longer dared push her Frexit argument" by the time of the 2017 presidential election. During that election, the term was co-opted by candidate François Asselineau, who advocated a unilateral withdrawal of the EU using article 50 of the Treaty of Lisbon. Asselineau secured 0,92% of the popular vote.

In January 2019, pollster Institut français d'opinion publique conducted a survey on several questions that might be asked were the Citizens' initiative referendum to be applied in France. One of these questions is about the exit of France from the EU. The result was that 60% opposed it. A YouGov /Eurotrack survey conducted in March 2023 among 1002 French citizens found that 48% would vote to remain in the EU, 26% would vote to leave, while another 26% would not know/refused/abstained. By August 2025 these values remained largely stable (+/- 2%).

In October 2016 (shortly after the UK's decision to leave the EU), the British political analyst Simon Usherwood, a specialist on euroscepticism, opined that France would be the country which was most susceptible to following the UK. Also in late 2016, George Soros, who was opposed to Brexit, predicted that France and the Netherlands would be the next countries to leave the EU.

In March 2017, Moody's Corporation stated that "the risk that the election results (...) will reopen the question of the maintenance in France of a single currency and its membership of the European Union, is small but growing".

At the same time, the Belgian Herman Van Rompuy, former president of the European Council, rejected the potential for a Frexit and a Nexit (the withdrawal of the Netherlands).

In an OpEd for Le Monde in April 2017, French jurist Dominique Rousseau wrote "an amendment that would aim to suppress title XV relating to the European Union [in the Constitution of France ] is impossible because it would call into question the Republican tradition of loyal cooperation with other states.

The fricandeau (plural, fricandeaux) is a traditional French dish, dating back to the sixteenth century. Slices of veal are studded with bacon and slowly braised. Each slice is served whole, and the result is intended to be so tender than it can be cut with a spoon. In the past other meats have been used, but veal is now usual.

The Dictionnaire de l'Académie Française dates the term fricandeau back to the sixteenth century, and says that it derives from fricasser, to make a fricassee. Earlier editions mention beef or rabbit as possible meats, but the current edition mentions only veal. Alexandre Dumas makes reference to fricandeau in his Grand Dictionnaire de cuisine (1873), presenting "Old-fashioned fricandeau – an old recipe that is better than the current way of doing things". Both Dickens and Thackeray were familiar with the dish, as were Abraham Lincoln and Benjamin Disraeli. The dish was taken up in Austria, the Netherlands, Poland, and Switzerland, Eliza Acton gave a recipe for it in her Modern Cookery for Private Families (1845).

The first recorded mention of the word in English was in 1706, and it was still well enough known in Britain for H. W. Fowler to have an entry for it in his Modern English Usage (1926), although it was dropped when Sir Ernest Gowers revised the book in 1965. Auguste Escoffier gave a recipe for fricandeau in his Le Guide culinaire (1903) and Madame Saint-Ange (1927) published a considerably fuller one.

Fricandeaux are slices of veal taken from the noix de veau – broadly the same as the silverside in English butchery or the bottom round in American – cut in the direction of the grain of the meat. Their thickness, according to Escoffier, must not exceed 4 centimetres (1.5 inches). The surface of the meat is beaten to break up the fibres and a larding needle is then used to stud the veal with fatty bacon lardons. The meat is lightly sealed – not browned – in a frying pan with butter. It is then gently braised on the hob in white wine or veal stock or both, together with onions and carrots. When the liquids have reduced to a syrupy consistency the cooking continues in the oven.

The dish was traditionally so tender that it was cut with a spoon rather than a knife. It was at one time usually accompanied by sorrel (oseille), but according to Madame Saint-Ange the herb was believed to cause gout. In her 1927 book she wrote that le fricandeau à l'oseille was:

Dumas took the view that most cooks used too much stock, so that the meat lacked flavour. The gourmet and food writer Curnonsky recommended using cognac instead of white wine.

Although it has the same name, the fricandeau of the Auvergne is quite different from the customary fricandeau, being a sort of pork pâté. The name has also been used for dishes of sturgeon and sweetbreads.

The Friendship Bridge (German : Freundschaftsbrücke, French : Pont de l'amitié) is a bridge which crosses the Saar river, south of Saarbrücken, and links the Saarland municipality of Kleinblittersdorf with the Lorraine commune of Grosbliederstroff.

Although the idea of having a bridge between the two places, linked with each other for centuries, originated in the 1860s, the bridge was in fact first built in 1880. Having been destroyed at the beginning of the Second World War, it was newly built in 1964. The bridge's current form as a footbridge was constructed in 1993.

While it impresses neither through architectural boldness nor through record breaking dimensions, the varied history of Franco-German relations, from " hereditary enmity " to a strong partnership within the European Union, can be interpreted through the bridge, especially since the 1963 Élysée Treaty came into force. While at times the bridge served as a border crossing between France and Germany, between these times it shifted between being seen as either an inner-German or an inner-French work of construction.

In the Middle Ages and in the early Modern Era, Groß- and Kleinblittersdorf were two districts of the Lorraine village of Bliederstorff (first documented in the year 777) on opposite banks of the Saar river. The prefixes Groß- (meaning big in German) and Klein- (meaning small) for the respective districts first appeared at the end of the 16th Century, and were simply an indicator of their different population sizes. Separated by the resolutions of the Congress of Vienna, both districts belonged to the German Empire after the Franco-Prussian War of 1871, although to different states (Großblittersdorf to the Imperial Territory of Alsace-Lorraine, Kleinblittersdorf to the Prussian Rhine Province). From 1919, Großblittersdorf was once again a municipality in France, while Kleinblittersdorf was located in the League of Nations controlled Saarland region as a result of the Treaty of Versailles, and from 1935 in the Third Reich. From 1940 until the end of the Second World War, they were both again under German rule. Whereas in 1956, like from 1919 until 1935, both places were again under French influence: Grosbliederstroff (as it is now known) as a municipality in the Moselle department and Kleinblittersdorf in the semi-autonomous Saarland, which was incorporated into the Federal Republic of Germany on 1 January 1957 due to the Saar Treaty.

In the Middle Ages and the early Modern Era there were of course no structural river crossings. It is assumed that crossing the Saar, which had not yet been canalised, was initially made possible with the help of a ford and later a ferryman with a dugout canoe. It was not until 1868 that the idea of the bridge was embraced. The initial idea sought to construct a pier between a small river island in the Saar and the parallel lock canal (part of the Saar Canal), which was built in the years 1862–1879. Initiatives by the Mayor of Grosbliederstroff were repeatedly rejected by the Metz prefecture. It is not known whether there were attempts to also contact the responsible Prussian authorities on the Saar 's eastern bank. However, it was not until soon after the war of 1870/71 that the planning of the project properly began. At this time there was clearly a large need for a further river crossing between Saarbrücken and Saareguemines, as many workers from the towns to the left of the Saar found employment in the factories in the district of Brebach, which today is in the south-east of Saarbrücken. In addition, the Saar was no longer a border river, rather it was located on German territory. Therefore, any of the German military personnel's fears that such a structure would make it easier for troops of the "hereditary enemy" France to cross the border into German territory became irrelevant.

In August 1968, the company Richard Schmidt in Luisenthal was commissioned to build a stone arch bridge with six pillars. On 1 October 1880, the bridge, despite having had no railing installed before the official opening, was initially approved for pedestrians and from January 1881 also approved for vehicles. Part of the construction costs were covered through the paying of a toll, and toll booths were built on both bridgeheads for this purpose. Commuters on the western bank of the Saar now had greater access to the Kleinblittersdorf train station on the important Saarbrücken - Saareguemines railway line, which was much easier and faster to reach than the previous ferry service. The new crossing additionally offered residents the welcomed opportunity to visit and to run errands in the other district.

On 9 September 1939, shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War, the French Military demolished the bridge, so that in the event of a German attack between the Siegfried Line and the Maginot Line, it would be harder to cross the Saar. When Germany actually attacked France half a year later, the Wehrmacht erected a wooden makeshift bridge in this position, which was again destroyed after the Battle of Normandy in the latter half of 1944.

After the end of the war, only a small passenger ferry connected the two places for many years. This was the situation despite the France-Germany reconciliation, which has taken place particularly since Jean Monnet 's Europe Declaration on 9 May 1950 as part of Western European integration through practical cooperation in the Council of Europe (which Germany joined in 1951), the European Coal and Steel Community (from 1952), and the European Economic Community (from 1958). This intensified the relations between the two countries, though at first only a little. During the reconstruction period, the construction of a new bridge and thus an additional permanent border crossing, especially one that was so close to Saarbrücken, was not on the political agenda for the Metz prefecture or for the Saarland governments under Minister-President Johannes Hoffmann and his successors.

This only changed after the German Chancellor Adenauer and French President de Gaulle signed the Élysée Treaty in 1963, which became known as the German-French Friendship Treaty. Apart from regulating foreign and domestic affairs as well as politics regarding the youth and culture, this agreement combined with the establishment of a Youth Office, facilitated a variety of transboundary initiatives on a regional and local level. Thus, Kleinblittersdorf and Grosbliederstroff did not only become sister cities very early on, but they also negotiated the construction of a new Saar bridge between the two municipalities in 1964, thus creating a new border crossing. However, it was not the first bridge to exist in this place. In fact, the main body of the bridge was built on top of the "Bridge of Sighs" (German : Kummersteg), a steel arch bridge of approximately 4 meters width, which had been located in the regional capital until the beginning of 1962 and was replaced by a new construction (Wilhelm-Heinrich-Brücke), and was brought to a new purpose. An approximately 2 meter wide part of wood and steel construction had to be added to the last section of the bridge over the river Saar, parallel to the Canal de la Sarre (German : Saarkanal) on the French side, because the original bridge was too short. In 1981, there was one more modification in the same place. The increase of the bridge's height enabled the passage of larger riverboats up to Sarreguemines past the otherwise non- navigable canal of the river Saar in this area.

However, the bridge was not given the name "Friendship Bridge" (German : Freundschaftsbrücke French : Pont de l'amitié) until 1968.

Given its old age, further maintenance and repair of the bridge soon turned out to be uneconomic. Laid-out as a pedestrian bridge, the Friendship Bridge only carried an urban importance initially. The necessity to facilitate the border-crossing of goods and passenger trafficking in this spot was already seen in the 1970s, as all suitable border crossings for motor traffic to France at Rilchingen-Hanweiler and Saarbrücken -Güdingen were too far away and would have required cross-town links. The solution was a road bridge (German : Abt-Fulrad-Brücke (Kleinblittersdorf)), which was built at the beginning of the 1980s, connecting the B-51 with the Route nationale 61 (or respectively the Départementale 31) connecting the distributor road to the autobahn Saarbrücken - Paris (French : Autoroute A 320) near Forbach - which parallels the B-51 on the west bank. It crosses the river Saar only a few kilometers south of Auersmacher (a district of Kleinblittersdorf). Additionally, the recently finished building project Bypass B-51 of the Kleinblittersdorf municipality crossing under the old bridge required a larger overhead clearance. These were the frame conditions for the necessary replacement construction of the pedestrian connection of both town centres. Construction began at the end of 1992 and the inauguration followed on 12 September 1993 by the respective mayors, Günther Brettar (Kleinblittersdorf) and Jean Jung (Grosbliederstroff), as well as the environment minister of the Saarland region, Jo Leinen. The old bridge, which was only a few meters away, was not removed until after this event because it allowed around 800 pedestrians to cross over every day during the construction work.

The new three-bay bridge has a width of 3.5 m, a length of 140.2 m and consists of a river bridge and an outland bridge. The river bridge features open spans ranging between 58.8 m and 65.9 m. It has a haunched steel composite construction with a box girder cross section, whose overall height varies between 1.5 m at the abutment and 3.5 m over the river piers. The outland bridge has a span of 14.2 m and a reinforced concrete superstructure. The building costs added up to 4 million DM ("German marks "). The offices responsible for the architectural planning were Andree from Dillingen and Dincher from Saarbrücken, whereas the companies Modernbau (formerly a subsidiary of Bilflinger + Berger) and Dillinger Stahlbau (English: steel construction) were responsible for the bridge's construction.

The filigree bridge is eye-catching, thanks to its burgundy painted metal railing and the historically arched lamp posts with their bell-shaped lamps. This impression is made even stronger by two silver, pointedly arched, non-structural light-metal pylons, which tower over the walkway like two Gothic archways. Between their pinnacles, additional lamps hang from a support cable, which is an added symbol of the uniting nature of the bridge. Due to building laws, the pylon stands on the "French half" of the bridge inside the balustrade whereas on the German side it is attached on the outside. The electrical power supply is provided by the French company EDF and is paid for by the municipality Grosbliederstroff.

The 40th anniversary celebration of this first post-war bridge construction was held on 5 May 2004 by several hundred official representatives from 77 municipalities and communal organisations which came from the greater area of Saarbrücken /East Moselle to honour the occasion: In the very middle of the bridge they signed a resolution, containing further goals of border-crossing collaboration in this "Eurodistrict" within the Euroregion SaarLorLux.

In 1987, the Kleinblittersdorf municipality mounted a piece of plastic art by Wolfram Huschens, a German artist from the Saarland region, made from copper sheets on a glacial erratic at the eastern end of the roadbridge B51/N61 next to the custom clearance site which had been rendered redundant by the Schengen Agreement (1985). The statue displays two intertwining, incomplete wheel-like bodies, symbolising the historical conflict and cooperation of the French and German regions neighbouring each other. The work is titled "Border between Germany and France".

On the occasion of the anniversary of the German liberation on 8 May 2007, the first four stations of the projects of the cultural capitals called hArt an der Grenze (English: close to the limit) were opened between Kleinblittersdorf and Grosbliederstroff, displaying artistic works on the bridge and the former border hut until the end of August 2007. The project included objects like life-sized photographs of artists wearing the uniforms of former customs officers and a performance by Bernd Wegener called "Le son du vent" (English: The sound of the wind) for which bells had been hung between the similarly shaped lamps on the bridge.

In 1982, the local Carnival society called "Grünschnäbel" (English: green beaks) declared the only 30 m (during low tide) wide river Saar-islet between the two municipalities to be the "Free State Carnevalis", holding annual ceremonies there, rewarding celebrities like Willy Millowitsch, Oskar Lafontaine, Ephraim Kishon, Lilo Pulver and Wim Thoelke with the title of Doctor humoris causa. This often made it necessary for the participants of the title bestowal to wear rubber boots while the audience could watch the ceremony from the bridge, keeping their feet dry. In 2007, the event took place for the last time, due to the ageing process of the "Grünschnäbel", possibly the future owners of this "free state", which was auctioned off in June and July 2007, might continue to put it to public use.

It was not until the May 2004 act that the bridge became a symbol of cooperation between the two former enemy nations and also a model for further "bridges of friendship" between Saarland and Lorraine with a similar history:

A frikandel (Dutch pronunciation: [ frikɑnˈdɛl ]. Plural frikandellen) is a traditional snack originating from the Netherlands. It is a sort of minced-meat sausage, of which the modern version was developed after World War II. The history of this snack in the Spanish Netherlands goes back to the 17th century.

Unlike the modern frikandel, the historical frikandel (frickedil) is made from minced veal and generally spiced with mace, nutmeg, salt, pepper and optionally orange peel. A version without egg and breadcrumbs was cooked in a veal net.

The shape of the frikandel could have been phallic on purpose. The writer P.C. Hooft called 'fricadellen' a recipe for old spinsters. Also, a special version of the frikandel was served to pregnant women, according to 18th-century cookery books. It was a veal meatball containing an egg yolk, hidden and sewn into a small leaf of lettuce.

There is some confusion around whether frikandel should be written with or without an "n", but in essence, the frikandel and the frikadel are two different products. Until 2005 however, only "frikadel", was seen as the official spelling. After 2005, "frikandel" was accepted as well.

The difference between a "frikandel" and a "frikadel" is that the frikadel was invented in 1954 and the frikandel is a similar product invented in 1958 and has a different production method, yielding a smoother end-product. Currently, the frikadel is no longer in production.

The modern frikandel is a cylindrical chewy, skinless, dark-coloured sausage-like meat product which is usually eaten warm. Unlike most sausages, the frikandel is deep-fried. In Belgium and in the north of France (Nord-Pas-de-Calais), it is called a " frikadel ", " fricandelle " or " fricadelle ". In some parts of Flanders (Belgium), notably around Antwerp, it is called " curryworst " (not to be confused with the German currywurst, though in eastern Germany people tend to make currywurst from skinless sausage). In the U.S., a product inspired by the frikandel although not identical is marketed under the "Dutch Dawg" and "Freakandel" brands.

In Belgium, frikadel means (also raw) minced pork; it seldom contains other meat. Where the sausage is called " curryworst ", the term frikadel is often used to describe a sort of meatball (the precursor of the frikandel, with the same meat), commonly eaten in Belgium, Germany and Denmark.

Who created the modern frikandel is contested. Some claimed it was first made by Gerrit de Vries in Dordrecht in 1954 when a law prevented him from selling his product as a meatball. He changed the name and shape instead of the recipe. Others say it was created by Jan Bekkers in Deurne in 1958, and named by him " frikandel " after he founded the Beckers factory the following year.

However, the present recipe with very fine mince is derived from Bekker's 1958 version. The De Vries 1954 sausage, named fricadelle, contained chunkier minced meat and essentially was a minced meat patty shaped like a sausage.

In the Netherlands, northern France, Belgium, Aruba and Curaçao, the frikandel consists of a mixture of mechanically separated meat, including chicken (40% or more) and pork (about 25%). In the US, it contains pork (50%), beef (35%) and non-mechanically separated chicken (15%). Some manufacturers also add in a bit of horse meat. A halal version exists and contains only chicken and beef. Other ingredients are bread crumbs, thickener, herbs and spices, onion and flavour enhancers.

It is the most popular fast food snack in the Netherlands, followed by kroket. According to the AKSV (the General Association of Manufacturers of Cooking Supplies and Snacks in the Netherlands), 600 million frikandellen are produced each year in the Netherlands. Most of these are also sold in the Netherlands, where more than 37 frikandellen are consumed per capita per year.

In the Netherlands, it is most often served with curry ketchup, mayonnaise or fritessaus, though some eat it with tomato ketchup, mustard or apple sauce. A frikandel speciaal is very popular: a frikandel served with mayonnaise or fritessaus, curry ketchup or regular tomato ketchup and chopped raw onion. The frikandel speciaal usually has a deep cut lengthwise through the middle to provide room for the chopped onions and the sauce. Some people prefer the taste of a frikandel if the cut is made before frying, resulting in a larger crisp surface. Sometimes the frikandel is served on a bun and is then called a broodje frikandel.

In Belgium and in the north of France, it is served with any sauce of choice and sold in a variety of ways, such as with onions, in a long bun, a piece of baguette, as a kebab or plain and untouched.

Frikandellen can also be included in party-packs together with other Dutch snacks such as bitterballen, although they are significantly reduced in length. They are also often available in holiday resorts abroad which are popular with the Dutch, such as Lloret de Mar, Spain.

In the Netherlands, frikandel - eating contests are regularly held all over the country. The record for most frikandellen consumed in one hour was set in 2005 by Sjonnie Noordeinde of Delft, consuming 47 sausages of 80 grams each.

The Belgian company Vanreusel created a number of variants of the frikandel such as the Frikandel XXL (a larger variant of the frikandel) in 2010 and the loempidel (a frikandel wrapped in a lumpia coat) in 2019.

In many other countries, including South Africa, Denmark and Germany, frikadel or Frikadelle (not to be confused with frika n del) is the local name of minced-meat meatballs or patties like those used in hamburgers. The Indonesian perkedel shares the same name and origin, but the primary ingredient is mashed potato.

Frog legs (French : Cuisses de grenouille) are the muscular hindlimbs of frogs that are consumed as food by humans in some cuisines. Frog legs are rich in protein, omega-3 fatty acids, vitamin A, and potassium. They are often said to taste like chicken because of the mild flavor, with a texture most similar to chicken wings. The taste and texture of frog meat are approximately between chicken and fish. Frog muscles do not resolve rigor mortis as quickly as skeletal muscles from warm-blooded animals (chicken, for example) do, so heat from cooking can cause fresh frog legs to twitch.

Frog legs are eaten in many countries, and in French cuisine they are considered a national delicacy. As of 2014, the world's largest exporter of edible frogs is Indonesia, followed by China. In Brazil, Mexico, and the Caribbean, many frogs are still caught wild. Edible frogs are raised commercially in certain countries, including Vietnam. Ethical concerns have been raised about the trade due to minimal transparency or regulation over supply chains, disruption of ecosystems, and inhumane treatment during slaughter.

In Albania, frog legs are regarded as a delicacy. Frogs are mostly collected from the wild.

In Australia and New Zealand, frogs are considered more exotic; they are generally consumed in Asian or French restaurants, with a primary focus on the hind legs. In Canada, they are somewhat more common, particularly in the eastern and northeastern parts of the country.

Mountain chickens (Leptodactylus fallax) are frogs named for their habitat and flavor which are eaten in Montserrat and Dominica. The frogs are now critically endangered.

In culinary environment, frogs are known in Chinese as tiánjī (Chinese : 田鸡, literally 'field chicken'). Frog legs (traditional Chinese : 田雞腿 ; simplified Chinese : 田鸡腿 ; pinyin : Tiánjī tuǐ) are also eaten in China, but are generally restricted to Southern Chinese cuisine traditions such as Cantonese and Sichuan cuisine. Bullfrogs and pig frogs are farmed on a large scale in some areas of China, such as Sichuan.

In Chinese cuisine, frog legs are usually stir-fried and mixed with light spices, stewed, fried, or made into congee.

Frog legs are popular in some parts of Croatia, especially in the Gorski Kotar region in the northwest of the country. They are considered a specialty in the Lokve municipality, where they are served cooked, fried, or in a stew, sometimes with polenta on the side.

Frog legs, or cuisses de grenouille as it is known in France, are a traditional dish particularly found in the region of the Dombes (département of Ain). Eaten for over a thousand years, they have been part of the national diet of France. Roughly 4,000 tonnes of frog legs are consumed every year in France.

In Greece, frog legs are particularly associated with the city of Ioannina and its adjacent lake Pamvotida.

In Indonesian cuisine, frog-leg soup is known as swikee or swike, most probably brought by the Chinese community in Indonesia and popular in Chinese Indonesian cuisine. Swikee is mainly frog-leg soup with a strong taste of garlic, gingers, and fermented soya beans (tauco), accompanied by celery or parsley leaves. Swikee is a typical dish from Purwodadi, Grobogan in Central Java province. Frog legs are also fried in margarine and sweet soy sauce or tomato sauce, battered and deep fried, or grilled. Frog eggs are also served in banana leaves (pepes telur kodok). The dried and crispy fried frog skin is also consumed as krupuk crackers; the taste is similar to fried fish skin.

Indonesia is the world's largest exporter of frog meat, exporting more than 5,000 tonnes of frog meat each year, mostly to France, Belgium, and Luxembourg. Most of the supply of frog legs in Western Europe originates from frog farms in Indonesia; however, there is concern that frog legs from Indonesia are poached from wild populations, which may endanger wild amphibians.

Frogs are a common food in the northern part of Italy, especially throughout Piemonte and Lombardy and within these two regions especially in the Vercelli area in Piemonte and in the Pavia and Lomellina areas in Lombardy. In these places, frogs are part of the ancient culinary tradition and a typical staple food. The consumption of frogs is mainly related to the availability of animals due to the rural activities and typical agriculture in these places.

The large presence of frogs is mainly due to the agriculture typical of these areas which have always been known for their rice. The large cultivation of rice means that there is a large presence of artificial water channels used to flood rice fields during the growing season, which makes a perfect habitat for frogs. During the growth period when fields stay flooded, and even more during the draining of the fields, farmers and others often gather to go frog hunting armed with nets. Some towns even organize collective hunting sessions and games.

Frogs have gained much culinary relevance in these areas, with many rural towns hosting food festivals called sagre – centered on frogs – where frogs are prepared in various ways. They typically take place during the rice-harvesting periods. With frog consumption closely connected to rice production and being the native land of the Italian dish risotto, one of the most common dishes is frog risotto, risotto alle rane. Other local frog dishes include them being dipped in egg batter, breadcrumbed and then fried, or in soups and stews.

The harvesting of frog legs is customarily carried out in states such as Baja California, Chihuahua, Jalisco, Sonora, Tamaulipas, Veracruz, Zacatecas, and a large portion of Mexico’s Central Plateau. It takes place almost year-round, and the legs are consumed fried, in soups, broths, or stews—such as frog legs in green sauce.

In Romania, edible frogs are known as pui de baltă (' pond chicken '). The legs are eaten breaded and fried.

Frog legs (žabji kraki) are a popular dish in Slovenian cuisine, especially in areas of eastern Slovenia (Prekmurje and north-eastern Styria). They are also quite popular in the country's capital, Ljubljana, and have been considered the "basis of the traditional city cuisine of Ljubljana". Up to modern times, they have been traditionally considered Lenten food and were especially popular in spring. They are also a popular traditional dish in the Vipava Valley, in western Slovenia, and are served in numerous restaurants throughout the Slovenian Littoral.

In the western part of Spain, Extremadura and Castilla y Leon, frog legs are served deep-fried. They constitute a delicacy for the local inhabitants. Frog legs also hold great culinary value along the banks of the Ebro.

Fried frog legs are a specialty of the small city of Vylkove in Odesa Oblast, Ukraine, but they have also gained popularity in Odesa.

In 2013, archaeologists digging at Blick Mead, Wiltshire found the remains of a cooked frog leg which was served as part of a feast in c. 7,000 BC during the Mesolithic era. However, in the modern era frog legs are widely regarded as "repellent" in Britain. "Frog" has been used as an anti-French slur in the English-speaking world since the late 18th century. During the late 19th century, French restaurateur Auguste Escoffier tried to rename them " nymphs " in a vain attempt to sell them to London diners. In recent decades, several British celebrity chefs have introduced frog leg dishes to their menus, notably Heston Blumenthal, whose recipes have included frog blancmange.

Frog legs are eaten in parts of the Southern United States, particularly in the Deep South and Gulf states where French influence is more prominent, including South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana. The legs are almost always served battered and fried. The Fellsmere Frog Leg Festival in Florida celebrates the dish every January. They are also eaten in Eastern states, but not as commonly. Frog legs are a popular dish in Cleveland, Ohio, especially in its Little Italy and Asiatown neighborhoods. The most common kinds of frogs eaten are bullfrogs and leopard frogs, as these are abundant in most of the country, including the South. Although the consumption of wild native frogs is generally discouraged, the harvest and cooking of invasive bullfrogs, especially in the Western US, has been encouraged as a form of control and to promote local cuisine.

Some methods of cooking include egg-/cracker-crumb breading or battered. They are either fried or grilled. Deep-fried frog legs can also be found at fairs.

Raccoons, possums, partridges, prairie hens, and frogs were among the fare Mark Twain recorded as part of American cuisine.

Each year about US$ 40 million worth of frog legs are traded internationally, with most countries in the world participating in this trade. The world's top importers of frog legs are France, Belgium, and the United States, while the biggest international exporters are Indonesia and China. While these figures do not account for domestic consumption, when production from frog farms is taken into account, it is conservatively estimated that humans consume up to 3.2 billion frogs for food around the world every year.

Movement of live or unfrozen, unskinned amphibians is a potential way for deadly amphibian diseases such as Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis and Ranavirus to be transported around the world, and despite recommendations on preventing disease spread from the World Organisation for Animal Health, which regulates the international spread of epizootic diseases, few countries have adopted these recommendations as law.

In Canada, the sale of fresh or frozen frog legs is illegal unless they are determined free from bacteria of the genus Salmonella, as per the official method MFO-10, Microbial Examination of Froglegs.

Many environmentalists urge the restriction of frog consumption—especially those harvested from the wild—because amphibian populations are declining and frogs are an essential element of ecosystems. Conservationists warn that gastronomic demand for frogs is seriously depleting regional populations. Frogs are sensitive to environmental changes, disease, habitat degradation, and pollution. Animal welfare advocates raise ethical concerns with harvest practices, as wild frogs are typically dismembered while alive and then left to die.

As most of the frog production comes from wild harvesting rather than frog farms, over-exploitation in the frog exporting countries like Indonesia, Turkey and Albania has caused a rapid decrease in frog population, and endangered some species. Also, due to this intense harvesting the increase in the usage of pesticides have been observed.

The exception to this is where the American bullfrog is not native and has been introduced. In these ecosystems, American bullfrogs can decimate local amphibian populations, upset ecosystem balance, and have negative impacts on other species of wildlife as well.

A 2011 paper raised animal welfare concerns over methods such as live removal of legs and methods of hunting, recommending that countries of origin "establish humane standards to govern the capture, handling, packaging and export of live frogs and for the capture, handling, killing, and processing of frogs used for food to minimize animal suffering ". This was corroborated by the authors of a 2022 paper, who called for the end of the common practice of cutting frog's legs with axes and scissors, without anesthesia.

According to Jewish dietary laws, all reptiles and amphibians are considered unclean animals. Therefore, frog legs are not kosher, and are forbidden to observant Jews in Orthodox Judaism. However, more liberal streams of Judaism such as Reform do not prohibit the eating of non-kosher animals. Traditional Judaism also includes universal laws that define which activities are considered sinful even for non-Jews according to Jewish law, known as the Noahide laws. Under this rubric, there is a prohibition against eating limbs taken from live animals, known as eiver min hachai ; thus, Jewish law would consider it to be sinful for any person to eat frogs legs that were removed from live frogs. This is also considered to be under the prohibition of cruelty to animals, which liberal Jewish streams accept as forbidden just as traditional Judaism considers to be forbidden.

Frog meat is considered as haraam (non- halal) according to some Islamic dietary laws. Those who consider it haraam cite the hadith that prohibits the killing of frogs, together with ants, bees, and seabirds. This haraam status has caused controversy in Demak, Indonesia, where the authorities urged the (frog leg soup) restaurant owners not to associate swikee with Demak town, since it would tarnish Demak's image as the first Islamic city/town in Java, and also opposed by its inhabitants that mainly follow the Shafi'i school, which forbids the consumption of frogs. The Islamic madhhab (school) of Shafi'i, Hanafi and Hanbali strictly forbids the consumption of frogs, but in the Maliki school, opinions vary between the consumption of all frogs being halal, to only the green frog commonly found in rice fields being halal, while other species, especially those with blistered skin, are considered to be unclean.

In medieval and early modern Europe, frogs were not classified as meat and could therefore be eaten during the Christian fast of Lent, along with fish and bird flesh. Monks in Lorraine were recorded as eating frogs during Lent in the 13th century. The famous French chef Grimod de La Reynière wrote in the early 19th century that frogs were known as Alouettes de Carême (Lenten larks).

Fromage fort (literally "strong cheese") is a French cheese spread traditionally made by blending together pieces of different leftover cheeses, white wine (or other spirits), garlic, and various herbs. Other ingredients include pepper and leek broth. Aging is optional, and brings out strong flavors once done.

Blue cheese, while one of the possible components, is usually included in small quantities, as its flavor is often stronger than other traditional ingredients.

Cheeses commonly used in fromage fort include:

The history of the spread is unclear. Some believe it to have been created in the French countryside to repurpose leftover cheese as a snack.

Fromage fort can be eaten chilled or at room temperature. Common ways to eat include pairing the spread with crackers or vegetables, or smearing it on slices of bread and baking it.

Obatzda, from Germany is a similar cheese spread produced by blending cheeses, flavourings, butter, and beer.

Front for the Liberation of Iran (FIL), Iran Liberation Front (ILF) or the Saviour Front (Persian : جبهه نجات ایران) was an Iranian monarchist organization based in Paris, which sought to restore the Pahlavi dynasty following the Iranian Revolution. It was led by Ali Amini, former Prime Minister of Iran, who announced establishment of the group on 19 January 1982.

In July 1983, the organization signed an agreement with the National Resistance Movement of Iran, another French-based organization led by Shapour Bakhtiar over shared policies, which included installing Reza Pahlavi. By 1984, personal conflicts had reduced effectiveness of this alliance, according to Anoushiravan Ehteshami.

The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) reportedly funded the organization since 1982, paying a monthly stipend of $100,000. The money included $20,000–$30,000 for the expenses of a radio named Radio Nejat (lit. ' Radio Liberation ') which was broadcast from Egypt to Iran four hours a day. The radio's greatest achievement was on September 5, 1986, when the CIA overrode Iranian domestic TV frequencies, sending the 11-minutes speech of Reza Pahlavi.

When the news of CIA money circulated media in the United States, France and Iran, Amini who felt his reputation was damaged, withdrew from politics.

Amini was replaced by Manouchehr Ganji in 1986.

An aire d'attraction d'une ville (or AAV, literally meaning "catchment area of a city") is a statistical area used by France 's national statistics office INSEE since 2020, officially translated as functional area in English by INSEE, which consists of a densely populated urban agglomeration and the surrounding exurbs, towns and intervening rural areas that are socioeconomically tied to the central urban agglomeration, as measured by commuting patterns. INSEE's functional area (AAV) is therefore akin to what is most often called metropolitan area in English.

INSEE's AAV follows the same definition as the Functional Urban Area (FUA) used by Eurostat and the OECD, and the AAVs are thus strictly comparable to the FUAs. Before 2020, INSEE used another metropolitan statistical area, the aire urbaine (AU), which was defined differently than the AAV, but the AU has now been discontinued and replaced with the AAV in order to facilitate international comparisons with Eurostat's FUAs.

The functional area is a grouping of communes comprising a 'population and employment centre' (pôle de population et d'emploi in French), which Eurostat calls "city" or "greater city" (depending on the FUA), defined according to population and employment criteria, and an outlying 'commuting zone' (couronne in French), which Eurostats calls "commuting zone" in English, like INSEE, but zone de navettage in French (unlike INSEE which calls it couronne), in which at least 15% of the working population work in the population and employment centre.

In France, the fundamental principles recognized by the laws of the Republic (French: principes fondamentaux reconnus par les lois de la République, abbreviated to PFRLR) are certain principles recognized by the Constitutional Council and the Council of State as having constitutional force.

This concept is mentioned briefly in the preamble of the Constitution of 1946. The preamble of the constitution of 1958 references the 1946 preamble, and the constitutional judges, in their "freedom of association" ruling, decision n°71-44 DC of 16 July 1971, gave constitutional force to this preamble.

Fundamental principles were mentioned in a budget law of 31 March 1931 (article 91) to characterize freedom of instruction. This was adopted as a compromise by deputies from the Popular Republican Movement (MRP) when writing the Constitution of the Fourth Republic, since the SFIO (socialist) and PCF (communist) deputies had declared themselves hostile to a constitutionalization of this freedom along with the other rights cited in the preamble.

The principles attached to this notion were defined by the judge. First, the Council of State identified freedom of association as a fundamental principle, initially basing it on a 1956 appellate decision, and then, from 1971 on the Constitutional Council's Decision #71-44 DC on freedom of association as well.

Today, the fundamental principles designate in the modern spirit the landmark laws of the first, second, and third republics, notably freedom of conscience and freedom of association.

The extensive constitutional body of law developed by the Constitutional Council since 1971 has given constitutional force to some principles by making them fundamental principles recognized by the laws of the Republic (PFRLR). These essential principles of French law, created by the legislature but not specified in the constitution or raised as a constitutional norm, such as the principle of independence of administrative jurisdiction or freedom of association, were then imposed on the legislature and administration.

PFRLRs are mainly defined by constitutional judges, even though their first mention was by the Council of State. Constitutional judges consider themselves not creators but interpreters of these principles, to avoid concerns of “government by the judges”.

The Constitutional Council verified four criteria before recognizing the PFRLR. Thus, a principle must come from:

Since 2013 and Decision no. 2013-669 DC of 17 May 2013 “Law providing for same-sex marriage”, three new conditions have been identified. On this occasion, the Council ruled that the opposite-sex character of marriage was not a PFRLR.

The principles must pertain to at least one of the following topics:

As of April 2022, the Constitutional Council has identified eleven principles as PFRLR:

Furthermore, the Council of State in 1996 identified the prohibition of political extradition.

The PFRLRs are to be distinguished from other principles identified by the Constitutional Council:

A fève is a small trinket hidden in a king cake or similar dessert. They may also be known as trinkets or favors. The French word fève translates to ' fava bean ', which is what was originally hidden in the cake. Modern fèves can be made out of other materials, such as porcelain or plastic, and can take varied shapes and forms. The themes of fève are very diverse and may include religious symbols, tools related to baking or even depictions of famous figures. Cakes with fèves are found throughout Europe and the US and are particularly associated with Three Kings Day or Mardi Gras. The person who finds the fève usually is awarded special privileges or gifts for the day. Fèves have also become collector's items, and in France, their collectors are known as fabophiles or favophiles.

During the Middle Ages bakers began replacing the fava bean with a porcelain trinket, usually depicting religious figures like the baby Jesus. By the 19th century these icons had largely replaced the fava bean and included whimsical shapes like lucky charms as well as more risqué subject matter. By the 20th century cartoon characters and pop culture icons were also integrated into designs and were more commonly made of plastic post-1950.

During the Nazi occupation of France, 13 fèves were commissioned for a group of Nazi officers. Each one was emblazoned with a swastika and possession of one allegedly allowed the officer entry into an exclusive swingers club. Modern fabophiles have indicated that some of these figures have survived into the modern era. However, these collectors generally do not care to acknowledge them due to their connection to genocide and military occupation, as well as fear of theft held by those in possession of one or more of the items.

In contemporary times, fèves are released in sets of eight to twelve, generally inexpensive, and designed to appeal to children and collectors alike.

In an American king cake — popularly eaten during Epiphanytide, as well as around Mardi Gras in New Orleans and the Gulf Coast — the fève traditionally takes the form of a small plastic or porcelain baby, symbolizing baby Jesus. Fava beans were also used to represent Jesus.

The one who finds the baby Jesus in their slice of cake is said to receive luck and prosperity, and is responsible for baking or purchasing the next year's cake, or for throwing the next Mardi Gras party. In some traditions, the finder of the baby is designated "king" or "queen" for the evening.

As plastic babies replaced beans and porcelain figures, commercial bakers have begun placing the baby outside of the cake, and leaving the hiding to the customer. This is also because there is a potential of customers choking on or swallowing the baby, for which bakers want to avoid liability.

The National Federation of Taxpayers (FNC) or the National Federation of Taxpayer Syndicates and Groups is an assembly of taxpayer syndicates founded in 1928 by Louis-Alphonse Large, an accountant, and presided over by Baron Albert d'Anthouard de Wasservas, a retired diplomat, and later by the industrialist Jacques Lemaigre Dubreuil. The group is often mistakenly referred to as the "League of Taxpayers".

Its founding was supported by groups representing farmers, architects, shop owners and shareholders. It attracted numerous professional associations, trade unions, and groups of liberal professions.

The FNC did not openly conflict with public authorities and presented itself as "a body for monitoring and controlling government actions without particular hostility towards it". However, the worsening economic crisis in 1931 and the victory of the second Cartel des Gauches in 1932 radicalized its rhetoric. From that point, the FNC opposed any tax increase or form of inflation, advocated for reduced public spending, and accused radical and socialist parliamentarians of squandering public funds.

In February 1933, the federation organized protests outside prefectures and urged its local syndicates to close businesses. On March 19, 1933, it held a National Taxpayer Day to protest "fiscal and statist plunder," coinciding with several demonstrations. Police recorded 100,000 demonstrators across 46 cities, especially in western and Parisian regions. Paradoxically, this radicalization weakened the FNC's integration into the larger representative organizations of economic interests.

The FNC was involved in the riot of February 6, 1934 through the participation of its Parisian members and its support for calls to protest.

In 1935, the FNC was presided over by Jacques Lemaigre Dubreuil, a shareholder of the Société Générale des Huiles de Pétrole and managing director of Lesieur Oils.

During the summer of 1936, shareholders of the Banque de France grouped under the Association des porteurs d'action de la Banque de France (APABF) allied with the FNC. Jacques Lemaigre Dubreuil was a candidate for the general council representing shareholders. He filed a lawsuit against Vincent Auriol, the minister of finance, for fraud to publicize his candidacy. He was elected and actively opposed Émile Labeyrie, Governor of the Bank of France, and Vincent Auriol during the Popular Front government.

The FNC aimed to symbolically represent taxpayers, who were theoretically already represented by parliamentarians. It sought "to substitute Parliament in defending taxpayer interests and negotiating with the Ministry of Finance". To achieve this, it advocated regime change and promoted the salvation of the petite bourgeoisie through tax strikes and street pressure. The direct action strategy led by Louis-Alphonse Large placed the FNC among violent groups.

The FNC claimed 400,000 members in 1931 and 700,000 in 1934. Its decision-making bodies were composed of merchants, lawyers, notaries, and property owners.

In 1930, the FNC established ties with Henri Dorgères ' Comités de défense paysanne.

The Camelots du Roi of the Action Française supported security at some meetings. While serving as FNC president, Jacques Lemaigre Dubreuil established connections with La Cagoule and also funded L'Insurgé.

The left wing historian Annie Lacroix-Riz claims that the federation was a member of the Comité national d'entente économique (National Committee for Economic Agreement), which grouped major French economic, industrial, property and agricultural interests.

Félix Gouin (French: [ feliks ɡwɛ̃ ] ; 5 October 1884 – 25 October 1977) was a French Socialist politician who was a member of the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO).

Félix Gouin was born in Peypin, Bouches-du-Rhône, the son of school teachers. He studied law in Aix-en-Provence.

In 1940 he was among the minority of parliamentarians refusing to grant full powers to Marshal Philippe Pétain.

During the war, he was part of the central committee which reconstituted the Human Rights League and also co-founded the Brutus Network, a Socialist Resistance group.

In 1946, he then succeeded Charles de Gaulle as head of the French Provisional Government. Gouin's tenure was arguably most notable for seeing the enactment of France's first ever compulsory, amply funded retirement and worker's compensation laws. In addition, both the 40-hour law and overtime pay were re-established, while the comités d'entreprise ("works councils)" were extended to firms with 50 workers. In April 1946, a statute was adopted by the French Parliament that abolished the colonial legal status of France's four oldest colonies: Réunion, Guyane, Martinique, and Guadeloupe. Gouin's time in office also witnessed a significant extension of the role of the state in the workings of the French economy, with electricity, gas, coal, and the nine main insurance groups nationalized.

Fête du Citron (Occitan : Festival de Limòn) is a carnival event organised by the tourist office of the city of Menton, France, and held every year at the end of winter. It is also sometimes called Carnaval de Menton (Carnival of Menton).

The festival, held every year in mid-February, celebrates the annual production of specialty lemons and other citrus fruit in Menton. All of the floats and sculptures present at the carnival are created from lemons and oranges. Fête du Citron has been recognised by the Ministry of Culture of France, and it was entered in the inventory of intangible cultural heritage in 2019.

In 1875, hoteliers proposed to the municipality to create a carnival parade to enliven the city in winter. As early as 1876, the event attracted locals and wealthy winter visitors alike. At the time, it was fashionable for the wealthy to come and spend the winter months in the mild climate of the French Riviera. Kings, princes, and artists flocked to palaces in the city or had villas built there. The 1882 edition of the carnival was notably attended by Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom and it culminated with a fireworks display over Garavan Bay. The Carnival of Menton bears some similarities to its cousin from neighbouring Nice : a parade of large heads, confetti streams, flower battles, Mardi Gras celebration, and finally, the burning in effigy of the "Majesty of the Carnival". The feasts which surround the celebration mark the period before Lent.

In 1928, Menton was the main producer of lemons on the European continent. A hotelier had the idea of organizing a private exhibition of flowers and citrus fruits in the gardens of the Riviera Hotel. The event's success was such that the following year, the municipality took up the idea on its own. The name "Fête du Citron" was born in 1934. The Lemon Festival combines traditional carnival events with a celebration of Menton's reputation as Europe's lemon capital. Today, Menton is not known for the quantity of lemons it produces but rather their quality, as they are of a specialty kind sought after by chefs from across the region. The celebration features elaborate themed floats whose structures are covered in citrus fruit, primarily lemons and oranges, a large portion of which is imported from Spain every year. At the end of the event, the fruits are sold at low prices. Each year since 1959, a different theme is chosen for the festival.

Fête du Citron is the second largest public winter event on the French Riviera after the Nice Carnival.

The celebration did not take place during the war years between 1940 and 1946, in 1991 due to the Gulf War, and in 2021 because of the COVID-19 pandemic.

The gabelle (French pronunciation: [ ɡabɛl ]) was a very unpopular French salt tax that was established during the mid-14th century and lasted, with brief lapses and revisions, until 1946. The term gabelle is derived from the Italian gabella (a duty), itself originating from the Arabic word qabila (قَبِلَ, "he received").

In France, the gabelle was originally an indirect tax that was applied to agricultural and industrial commodities, such as bed sheets, wheat, spices, and wine. From the 14th century onward, the gabelle was limited and solely referred to the French crown's taxation of salt.

Because the gabelle affected all French citizens (for use in cooking, for preserving food, for making cheese, and for raising livestock) and propagated extreme regional disparities in salt prices, the salt tax stood as one of the most hated and grossly unequal forms of revenue generation in the country's history. The French state also monopolized the trade in salt and forced all individuals in France over the age of eight to buy a minimum amount of salt each year.

Repealed in 1790 by the National Assembly in the midst of the French Revolution, the gabelle was reinstated by Napoleon Bonaparte in 1806. It was briefly terminated and reinstated again during the French Second Republic and ultimately abolished in 1945 following France's liberation from Nazi Germany.

In 1229, when the Albigensian Crusades were brought to a close by King Louis IX and his mother (Blanche of Castile), France gained control of the Rhône Estuary and nearby Mediterranean coast. This led to the establishment of the first French Mediterranean port city, Aigues-Mortes ("dead waters"), in 1246. Here, salt-evaporation ponds and storehouses were constructed. These saltworks were intended to finance Louis' crusading ambitions in the Middle East. The means by which this salt would enrich the royal treasury was through a special duty on salt producers, which became the origin of the gabelle.

The temporary tax under St. Louis (as he became known) was extended in 1259 by his brother Charles I, further establishing royal control over salt, in this case over the Berre saltworks near Marseilles. This salt administration would eventually encompass Peccais, Aigues-Mortes, and the region of Camargue and come to be known as the Pays de petites gabelles. On 16 March 1341, King Philip VI established the first permanent royal tax on salt in France, known as the Pays de grandes gabelles.

Repressive as a state monopoly, it was made doubly so by the government obliging every individual above the age of eight years to buy weekly a minimum quantity of salt at a fixed price. Known as the Sel de devoir, translated to "salt duty", citizens in the Pays de grandes gabelles region were forced to buy up to 7 kilograms (15lb) of salt per year.

Each province had a Greniers à sel (a salt granary) where all salt produced from that region had to be taken in order to be bought (at a fixed price) and sold (at an inflated price).

When first instituted, the gabelle was levied uniformly on all the provinces in France at a rate of 1.66% on the sale price. For the greater part of its history the prices varied and resulted in large disparities between the different provinces. There were six distinct groups of provinces, which were called pays (lit. "countries"; to be understood as an obsolete word for "region"), and classified as follows:

Because all of the Pays had extreme disparities in tax rates and salt consumption, opportunities for smuggling were rife within France. In 1784, Jacques Necker, a French statesman of Swiss birth and finance minister of Louis XVI until the French Revolution, reported that a minot of salt, which was 49 kilograms (107.8 pounds) cost only 31 sous in Brittany, but 81 in Poitou, 591 in Anjou, and 611 in Berry.

The large differences in cost between various pays clearly show the reason behind the active smuggling of salt that took place in France until the gabelle was abolished. The obvious means of smuggling salt was to buy it in a region where it was cheap and to sell it illegally in regions where it was expensive, at a higher price, but still less than the legal price. Such smugglers were called faux-sauniers, from faux ("false") and the root sau -, referring to salt. They were able to amass large fortunes and seen by French citizens as heroes against an arbitrary and oppressive tax of a common good necessary to life. In turn, the customs guards tasked with arresting the faux-sauniers were called gabelous, a term obviously derived from the gabelle they sought to uphold. They were despised by common folk as they were, without cause, able to search people and their homes to find illegal salt. The gabelous carried weapons and were known to grope women for pleasure under the false pretence of looking for salt. Women often smuggled salt under their dresses and sometimes in false buttocks (faux culs). By the end of the eighteenth century, female smuggling was so common in some areas, especially in the west, that more women were arrested than men. It has been estimated that between 1759 and 1788, out of the 4788 arrests in Laval, 2845 women and children were arrested, amounting to more than half.

Many activities other than direct smuggling were considered to be unlawful faux-saunage. Sheepherders letting their flock drink from salty ponds, traders overly salting cod during transportation, and fishing at night (fisherman with great knowledge of waterways presumed to be smuggling salt) are all attested examples. Even production of salted products could sometimes be restricted.

Under the 1640 codification of gabelle law by Jean-Baptiste Colbert, participating in faux saunage, warranted a range of harsh punishments. Merely housing a faux-saunier could lead to imprisonment, fines, and, if repeated, death. Faux-sauniers could be sentenced to up to ten years on a galley if they were caught without weapons, and to death if caught while armed. French nobles, if caught buying contraband salt, would immediately lose their status of nobility following their first offense. In 1773, along the Loire River, which separated the regions of Brittany and Anjou, with respective salt prices of 31 sous and 591 sous, over 3000 soldiers were stationed in response to the massive amounts of smuggling that took place.

There are many reasons for the French Revolution, but the unfair taxes and financial burden imposed upon the lower-classes and peasants was a main facet of the general population's discontent. Each year, by the end of the 18th century, about 3000 citizens (men, women, and children) were being imprisoned, sent to the galleys, or put to death for crimes against the gabelle. All the while, religious persons, nobility, and high-ranking officials were often exempt from the gabelle or paid much lower taxes. In 1789, following the ascension of the National Assembly, the gabelle was voted down and abolished throughout France. In 1790 the National Assembly decided that all persons imprisoned for breaking laws pertaining to the gabelle were to be freed from prison and that all charges and convictions were to be permanently dropped. This freedom would be short lived as Napoleon reinstated the gabelle in 1804, this time without major exemptions for regions such as Brittany. The gabelle stayed part of France's legislation until abolished in 1945.

Gabriel Nissim Attal (French: [ ɡabʁijɛl atal ] ; born 16 March 1989) is a French politician who has served as the General Secretary of Renaissance since December 2024 and president of the Renaissance group in the National Assembly since September 2024. He previously served as the prime minister of France from January to September 2024. He was the youngest and the first openly gay prime minister in French history. He previously served in various ministerial positions.

Following his election to the National Assembly in the 2017 French legislative election, Attal became the junior minister to the minister of national education and youth in 2018, which made him the youngest person to serve in the Government of France since the establishment of the Fifth Republic. He later served as the spokesperson of the government in 2020; the minister of public action and accounts in 2022; and the minister of national education and youth in 2023. On 9 January 2024, amid a major government crisis, Attal was appointed to replace Élisabeth Borne as the prime minister by French president Emmanuel Macron, at age 34.

Attal led the ruling Ensemble coalition into the legislative election in June 2024 after Macron dissolved the National Assembly following the defeat in the earlier European Parliament election. The snap election resulted in another hung parliament and electoral defeat for the government. Attal resigned as prime minister in July and remained as head of a caretaker government until Michel Barnier succeeded him on 5 September 2024.

In May 2026, Attal announced his candidancy for the 2027 French presidential election.

Attal was born on 16 March 1989 in Clamart, Île-de-France. He grew up in the 13th and 14th arrondissements of Paris with three sisters. His father, Yves Attal, was a lawyer and film producer; his mother, Marie de Couriss, worked as an employee of a film production company. Attal's father was Jewish, of Tunisian Jewish and Alsatian Jewish descent. His mother is of French and Greek-Russian ancestry from Odesa, her grandfather having arrived in France as a White Russian émigré. Genealogists have found both French and Russian nobility, including members of the La Forest-Divonne family in France and the House of Golitsyn and the House of Dolgorukov in Russia, amongst her ancestors. Through his mother, Attal is descended from King Charles VI of France. Attal was raised in his mother's Orthodox Christian faith.

Attal attended the École alsacienne, an exclusive private school in the 6th arrondissement of Paris. He obtained a Baccalauréat with a mention très bien in 2007. He went on to study law at Panthéon-Assas University from 2008 to 2011, and earned a Master of Public Affairs from Sciences Po in 2012. He also spent a year (2009–2010) working with Éric de Chassey, director of the French Academy in Rome.

His earliest political activity was participation in the 2006 youth protests in France. Taking up a place at Sciences Po in 2007, he created a committee for the support of Íngrid Betancourt, the Franco-Colombian hostage held by the FARC.

After an internship at the French National Assembly with Marisol Touraine during the 2012 presidential campaign, Attal worked for five years as an assistant to the Minister of Health, a role which involved parliamentary liaison and speechwriting.

In the 2014 municipal elections, Attal was placed fifth on the Socialist Party list. He was elected as one of the four Socialist Party councillors of Vanves and took over the lead of the opposition, after the resignation of the head of the socialist list.

Attal was elected to the French National Assembly on 18 June 2017, representing the Hauts-de-Seine's 10th constituency, winning out over the designated successor of André Santini.

Attal was quickly considered one of the most talented new members of parliament, with Amélie de Montchalin. As a deputy of the National Assembly, he became a member of the Committee on Cultural and Education Affairs, where he served as whip of the group La République En Marche!.

In December 2017, Attal was appointed rapporteur on a bill on access to higher education.

Attal was named chairperson of La République En Marche! in January 2018 and in September 2018, after the election of Richard Ferrand to the presidency of the National Assembly, he ran as a candidate to succeed him as president of the group La République En Marche!, but withdrew his candidacy the day before the election when he was considered one of the three favourites. He later endorsed Roland Lescure.

On 16 October 2018, Attal was appointed Secrétaire d'État (junior minister) to the Minister of National Education and Youth Jean-Michel Blanquer. At 29, he was the youngest member of a government under the Fifth Republic, beating the previous record set by François Baroin in 1995 by a few months. As a junior minister, he was responsible for youth issues and setting up universal national service. From 2020 to 2022, he was the government spokesperson under Prime Minister Jean Castex. He became Minister of Public Action and Accounts in the government of Prime Minister Élisabeth Borne in May 2022.

In July 2023, Attal was appointed minister of national education and youth in the 2023 French government reshuffle. At the age of 34, he became the youngest person to hold that office under the Fifth Republic. In this position, he announced the ban on abayas under the "principle of secularism", extending a ban on religious symbols in French public schools that already included Christian crosses, Jewish Kippahs and Islamic veils.

Following Borne's resignation as prime minister on 8 January 2024, media sources announced Attal as favourite to succeed her. His appointment as prime minister was announced on 9 January 2024. At the age of 34, he became the youngest and the first openly gay person to hold the office in France.

Lacking a parliamentary majority as a result of the 2022 legislative election, Attal formed a minority government, the second one since the start of the Macron Presidency. He appointed what was widely described as the most right-leaning cabinet since Macron took office, with over half of his senior ministers previously coming from the conservative UMP/LR party.

At the beginning of his tenure as prime minister, Attal was seen as one of the most popular politicians in France. The French media speculated that he was a potential contender in the 2027 presidential election. On 16 January 2024, Attal announced that, like Élisabeth Borne before him, he would not be seeking a vote of confidence in the National Assembly as implicitly allowed in the French Constitution.

On 9 June 2024, Macron called a snap election after his party's disappointing results in the 2024 European Parliament election. Although he was not in agreement with Macron's decision, Attal took on the leadership of Macron's Ensemble alliance's election campaign. In the first round of voting on 30 June, Ensemble won only 20.0% of the votes, in third place behind the far-right National Rally (RN) with 33.3% and the left-wing alliance New Popular Front (NFP) with 28.0%, which constituted the worst electoral performance for a ruling coalition in a general election since the establishment of the Third Republic in 1870. Attal said that the priority was to prevent NR from gaining an absolute majority in the National Assembly and asked Ensemble candidates in third place against NR in their constituencies to withdraw from the second round of voting. The second round of voting on 7 July resulted in Ensemble winning 168 seats, behind NFP with 182 and ahead of RN with 143. Attal offered his resignation to the president the following morning, only for it to be refused by Macron, who asked him to stay on for the time being in order to maintain the stability of the country. Attal retained his own seat in the Hauts-de-Seine's 10th constituency with 58.2% of the vote in a contest against NFP candidate Cécile Soubelet.

On 13 July 2024, Attal was elected unopposed as leader of the Renaissance Party in the National Assembly with the support of 84 of the 98 Renaissance members. Macron formally accepted Attal's resignation on 16 July 2024, but at the same time asked him to remain in place as head of a caretaker government.

On 5 September 2024, President Macron appointed Michel Barnier as the new prime minister. At the handover ceremony the following day, Attal made a speech in which he expressed his frustration at having had only eight months in office – too little time to see any of his plans come to fruition. On leaving the office of prime minister, he took on leadership of Macron's party in the National Assembly.

In 2025, Attal proposed a bill to outlaw the wearing of an Islamic headscarf by minors in public spaces. He stated: "No one can believe that a little girl chooses to wear a veil; it is obviously something imposed upon her."

In May 2026, Attal formally launched his candidacy for the 2027 French presidential election. During his announcement, he voiced support for starting a national debate in France over surrogacy, a move which drew condemnation from various ministers in both sides of the political aisle. Civil society groups warned that the legislation of surrogacy in France would have ramifications across Europe.

In 2018, Attal was outed on Twitter by his former École alsacienne classmate Juan Branco. Attal lived in a civil union with Stéphane Séjourné at the time. Their relationship had ended by 2022. They got back together in 2024.

When they were both attending the École alsacienne, Attal had a relationship with singer Joyce Jonathan, but Jonathan said that the relationship was merely "a joke between us" and "a playtime crush".

Attal said in a TV interview that he had been subjected to homophobic bullying at school, implying that the culprit was Branco, though Branco denied this. He has also described being the target of homophobic and antisemitic hate speech on social media as a politician.

Though baptized as a member of the Russian Orthodox Church, Attal considers himself an atheist.

Gallo (endonym galo) is one of the Oïl languages spoken in Western Brittany, in western France. It is traditionally spoken in Ille-et-Vilaine, Loire-Atlantique, and the eastern parts of Morbihan and Côtes-d'Armor, on the eastern side of the Breton linguistic boundary running roughly from Plouha to the Pénerf river [ fr ]. The eastern limit of Gallo is less clearly defined, owing to the existence of a dialect continuum with neighboring Oïl languages such as Mayennais [ fr ], Norman, and Angevin. Some linguists therefore consider Gallo to extend into areas adjacent to historic Brittany, particularly within the broader region of the Armorican Massif.

Because there are no universally accepted criteria for distinguishing languages from dialects, there is no full consensus regarding the status of Gallo. Although it is primarily an oral language, it has been the subject of academic research and standardization efforts, and books in Gallo are published on a regular basis. Unlike Breton, however, Gallo does not benefit from a long tradition of political or institutional advocacy. Both languages were nevertheless jointly recognized as "languages of Brittany" by the Regional Council of Brittany in 2004.

As a Romance language, Gallo is very different from Breton, which is a Celtic language. Speakers are referred to as gallésants or Gallo speakers. The term "Gallo" originates from the Breton language ; its use by speakers themselves is relatively recent, although it is attested in the press as early as the beginning of the 20th century. Many speakers simply use the term " patois ", although this label is often regarded as pejorative.

Despite some initiatives to promote the teaching of Gallo in schools and universities, the language is endangered. Speakers are generally elderly, and intergenerational transmission is very weak. Gallo is classified as seriously endangered by UNESCO. Estimates of the number of speakers vary widely, with between 3 percent and 8 percent of the local population reported as being able to speak the language.

The term Gallo derives from the Breton word gall, meaning "foreigner (of a Romance-speaking background)", itself originating from a Celtic root.

The term can be compared with the Scottish Gaelic word gall, which also means "foreigner", and more specifically "a Scot who does not speak Gaelic" or "an inhabitant of southern Scotland", where the traditional language is Scots rather than Scottish Gaelic.

The feminine form " gallèse " derives from the Breton gallez, the feminine form of gall. The Trésor de la langue française records several derived variants, including "gallot", "gallec", "gallek", "gallais", "gallic", and "gallou", as well as the feminine "gallote". These terms may refer not only to the language itself, but also to people from Upper Brittany and to cultural features associated with the language and its speakers.

The term gallo was initially used by Breton speakers, which partly explains why it has historically been little used by Gallo speakers themselves. A survey conducted in 1986 by Henriette Walter showed that only slightly more than 4 percent of speakers in the Côtes-d'Armor reported having always used the term, and that about one third of them perceived it as carrying a rather pejorative meaning. According to this survey, the term "patois" was by far the most commonly used designation. Although the word gallo has been attested for a long time, with its first written occurrence dating to 1358, it is therefore largely a relatively recent denomination.

Gallo is also referred to as " langue gallèse " (Gallo language) or "Britto-Romance".

The term "Britto-Romance" was coined in 1978 by the linguist Alan-Joseph Raude to emphasize that Gallo is "a Romance idiom spoken by Bretons". According to him, the designation "patois" is inappropriate because it denotes "an inferior vernacular variety of a language of culture", a concept that is sociological rather than linguistic.

Another linguist, Jean-Paul Chauveau, similarly considers the term "patois" to be generic, as it can be applied to any variety of speech in France that differs from French. In this sense, it "denies any specific identity to the language to which it is applied".

The term "patois" is generally perceived as pejorative, although it may retain an affective or familiar connotation for some Gallo speakers.

Gallo should not be confused with the Gallo-Romans, nor with the term " Gallo-Romance ", which refers to the Romance varieties spoken in former Roman Gaul that later gave rise to the Oïl languages, including both Gallo and French. In Breton, until around 1960, the term Gallaoued did not specifically denote the French (Fransizien), but rather local Romance-language speakers, such as inhabitants of market towns who had shifted to French.

Gallo is part of the Oïl languages, a linguistic group that occupies roughly the northern half of France. This group includes a wide range of more or less clearly defined and differentiated varieties that share a Latin origin and a Germanic influence derived from Old Frankish, the language of the Franks. Among the Oïl languages, in addition to Gallo, are Picard, Norman, French (that is, Francien as spoken in Île-de-France and the Orléanais), Poitevin, Champenois, Romance Lorrain, Berrichon, Northern Burgundian, and others.

Gallo, like the other Oïl languages, is neither Old French nor a deformation of modern French. The historical developments are largely shared, including the influence of Frankish on vocabulary and syntax, the loss of the nominative versus oblique case distinction, and the loss of pronunciation of many final letters. Gallo has evolved continuously since the medieval period, and an earlier stage referred to as "Old Gallo" can therefore be identified.

Moreover, because Old French itself was only weakly standardized, medieval writers used terms and constructions characteristic of their own regions. As a result, traces of Old Gallo can be found in medieval writings from Upper Brittany.

The Oïl languages belong to the group of Gallo-Romance languages, which also includes Franco-Provençal, spoken in particular around Savoy. The Gallo-Romance languages are themselves part of the wider group of Romance languages, which also includes, among others, Italian, Spanish, and Romanian. The Romance languages in turn belong to the larger Indo-European language family.

Breton has influenced Gallo through a limited number of lexical borrowings. However, the use of the preposition "pour" as an auxiliary verb has been identified as being of Celtic origin. The relationship between Breton and Gallo has been compared to that between the two languages of Scotland : Scots and Scottish Gaelic.

Le monde vienent su la térre librs tertous e s'entrvalent en drets e dignetë. Il lou apartient d'avair de la rézon e de l'esprit e il ont de s'entrenchevi côme feraent dés freres.

Touos les houmes nâquissent libes et parêles dauns leus taête et en dreits. Il ount byin de l'obiche et de l'ingamo et deivent faire d'aveu leus prochan coume si ch'teit pour yeus.

Le munde trtouts avant naeçhu libres trtouts parélls den la dégnetai é den lés dréts. L'avant de l'aeme é de la cunsience é le devant coméyà e trtouts fratrnaument.

Tous ches ètes humains is sont nès libes et égals in dignitè et pi in droéts. Is sont dotès d'roaison et pis d'conschienche et pis is doévtte foaire ches uns invers ches eutes dins un esprit d'fratérnitè.

Tertos les houms naissont libĕrs, ansement is aont les meimĕs dreits e la meimĕ dighnitaiy. Is aont coumĕ dounaison ieun antendouerĕ e ieunĕ airzon e is deivont s'ajidair les ieuns les outĕrs coumĕ des frairĕs.

Tous les êtres humains naissent libres et égaux en dignité et en droits. Ils sont doués de raison et de conscience et doivent agir les uns envers les autres dans un esprit de fraternité.

Totes los èssers umans naisson liures e egals en dignitat e en dreches. Son dotats de rason e de consciéncia e se devon comportar los unes amb los autres dins un esperit de fraternitat.

Libr ha par an eil re ouzh ar re all eo ganet tout an dud, koulz diwar-bouez an droedoù hag an dignite. Rezon ha skiant zo dezho ha rankout a reont beviñ an eil asambles gant egile, e-ser kaout ur spered a vreudeuriezh.

The linguistic area of Gallo is difficult to define. To the west, the linguistic boundary of Brittany is clearly identifiable, as it separates a Celtic language from a Romance variety. By contrast, the boundary between Gallo and the other Oïl languages is less clearly defined, owing to the existence of a dialect continuum. Traditionally, the Oïl-speaking area has often been divided according to the limits of historical regions. However, these boundaries do not always correspond to linguistic realities.

Some authors rely on traditional regions to define the Gallo area, while introducing qualifications. Walther von Wartburg, Hans-Erich Keller, and Robert Geuljans conventionally equate the Gallo area with the departmental boundaries of Ille-et-Vilaine and Loire-Atlantique, while adding northern Anjou. Hervé Abalain [ fr ] likewise restricts Gallo to Upper Brittany, but extends it to the western fringe of Mayenne and Maine-et-Loire. He further groups Gallo, Angevin, Norman, and the varieties of Mayenne and Sarthe into a single set, which he terms the western Oïl languages.

Defining the limits of Gallo is further complicated by a lack of detailed cartography for the central varieties of the Oïl domain. The speech forms of Maine, Touraine, and the Orléanais are situated between Paris and more clearly identified Oïl languages such as Gallo or Norman. These varieties tend to be marginalized and lack a strong linguistic identity. Some scholars therefore consider north-central France to constitute a central zone without clear internal boundaries. In this perspective, Marcel Cohen regarded Maine as an indeterminate area in which Gallo, Angevin, and Orléanais intermingle, and consequently declined to draw boundaries between them.

Marie-Rose Simoni-Aurembou considers Gallo to be an "Oïl variety", comparable to Norman or Poitevin, bordered to the east by a set of "Oïl variations" such as Angevin. According to her, Gallo does not extend beyond the limits of historical Brittany, except in the south, where Poitevin extends northward toward the Loire, without actually reaching it.

Finally, some authors disregard traditional boundaries altogether and rely exclusively on linguistic criteria to define the Oïl languages. Jean-Paul Chauveau, drawing in particular on lexical influences, groups Gallo, Angevin, and Mayennais into a broad area known as the "Pays d'Ouest", which he subdivides into three zones: a western zone including Côtes-d'Armor, Morbihan, and western Ille-et-Vilaine; an eastern zone comprising Sarthe, Mayenne, and eastern Ille-et-Vilaine; and a southern zone including Loire-Atlantique and Maine-et-Loire. This last zone lacks cohesion, as the area north of the Loire aligns more closely with the Mayenne group, while the area south of the river shows Poitevin influence. Chauveau does not define a clear boundary between Gallo and Poitevin, but instead identifies a threshold marked by the Loire.

The languages of Brittany and neighboring regions according to several authors:

The modern western boundary of Gallo is clearly defined, as it bears no resemblance to Breton. The linguistic frontier between the two languages was compared to the " Great Wall of China " by the historian Pierre-Michel-François Chevalier in 1845. In 1952, Francis Gourvil [ fr ] traced this boundary between Plouha, on the western coast of the Bay of Saint-Brieuc, and the Pénerf River near the Rhuys Peninsula. Between these two points, he drew the line through Senven-Léhart, Quintin, Mûr-de-Bretagne, Saint-Gérand, Réguiny, and Sulniac.

The linguistic boundary has shifted over the centuries, as evidenced by toponymy. Place names beginning with Car-, Ker-, or Tre- and parish names illustrate the successive retreats of Breton from its maximum territorial extent. Breton and Gallo coexisted in central Brittany during the period of Middle Breton (1100–1650).

However, the boundary remained relatively stable during the Middle Breton period (1100–1650). Toponymy, particularly place names beginning with Ker-, indicates this boundary in the 12th century, and maps from the 17th century show essentially the same line. The earlier retreat of Breton in the Guérande Peninsula began during this period and continued until the early 20th century. In this area, Breton was not replaced by Gallo but by French, specifically a regional variety similar to that spoken in the rest of Lower Brittany until the 1980s.

To the east, Gallo borders Norman, Mayennais, and Angevin, the latter two belonging to the same linguistic group as Gallo, and Poitevin to the south. All these varieties are part of the Oïl languages and share a common Latin origin. It is not possible to draw clear boundaries between them other than historical ones. They form a dialect continuum, meaning that they overlap and blend across several regions before encountering linguistic borders where they come into contact with entirely different languages.

The Oïl language continuum extends, for example, from the border with Breton to Belgium, where it meets Dutch and its Flemish dialects. Within this range, one moves progressively from Gallo to Mayennais, Norman, Champenois, Picard, and others. Administrative and linguistic boundaries rarely coincide.

The word for "today" provides an illustrative example of this overlap. Most Gallo speakers use the term anet, but in the easternmost part of Upper Brittany, along the borders with Mayenne and Maine-et-Loire, speakers use anui, a form also found in Mayennais, Angevin, and Norman. Conversely, a form similar to the Gallo anet is attested in Ernée in Mayenne.

Varieties located within the Oïl continuum therefore overlap, and Angevin and Gallo speakers may understand each other to some extent and use similar vocabulary. By contrast, varieties located at the extremes of the continuum are not mutually intelligible. Gallo, for example, contrasts sharply with Walloon, which is also an Oïl language but is not understood by Gallo speakers.

The varieties linguistically closest to Gallo are those of Maine, Anjou, and the southern part of Manche, located south of the Joret line and comparable to the dialects of southern Calvados and western Orne in western Normandy.

While the transition toward Mayennais, Angevin, and Norman is gradual, the transition with Poitevin to the south is more abrupt. A dense bundle of isoglosses crosses the former Marches of Brittany and Poitou [ fr ], near the present-day boundary between Loire-Atlantique and Vendée, marking a zone of rapid transition from Gallo to Poitevin.

One emblematic feature of this rapid transition is the use in Poitevin of the subject personal pronouns "i" for the first person and "le" for the third person, as opposed to the Gallo system "je" and "il". This pronoun system is found south of a line placing certain communes in southern Loire-Atlantique (Legé, Corcoué-sur-Logne, Touvois) within the Poitevin domain, while some communes in northwestern Vendée (Noirmoutier-en-l'Île, Bouin, Bois-de-Céné in the Breton Marsh) align more closely with Gallo with respect to this feature.

It is not easy to group the regional variations of Gallo into clearly defined dialects. Depending on the criteria chosen, the geographical definition of potential dialects can vary considerably. Using demonstrative pronouns as a criterion, for example, the following variations can be distinguished:

From a phonological perspective, three further groups can be identified:

Numerous additional regional divisions can be added based on pronunciation. For example, the "ai" of mai, corresponding to French "oi" in moi, is pronounced a around Rennes, aj in Loire-Atlantique, and me or ɛ along the border with the Breton-speaking area. This distribution does not apply to all words: for instance, the ɛ area extends eastward for the "ai" in vair ("voir"), and words such as vaizin ("voisin") and baire ("boire") are generally pronounced vejzɛ̃ and bejʁ, or vajzɛ̃ and bajʁ.

The infinitive ending of verbs in -er also shows differences in pronunciation. In general, Gallo speakers pronounce this ending as ə (for example, manjer mɑ̃ʷʒə for "manger"), except around the Loire estuary and the English Channel, where -er is pronounced as in French. Around Cancale and Corcoué, the ending is pronounced aj. This distribution does not apply to past participles and common nouns ending in -é, such as mangé or blé, whose pronunciation follows other regional patterns. In some places, such as Abbaretz, the pronunciation of the past participle differs depending on whether it is used with the auxiliary yètr ("être") or avair ("avoir"). The word bllë ("blé"), for its part, can be pronounced blé, blë, byé, byë, byè, byëy, or byay depending on the region. The appearance of l in bllë is relatively recent and mainly affects the northern coast and the Rennes area. It probably entered Gallo under the influence of French, which led to increased palatalization of words.

Differences in pronunciation sometimes lead to lexical variation, as with the word ouézè (plural ouéziaos in some areas). In Gallo, it may be pronounced ouazé, ouazéo, ouézè, ouézéo, or ouéziao, except in a small area northwest of Rennes, where a g is added at the beginning: gaziao. This addition likely serves to avoid hiatus and facilitate pronunciation, and recalls the transformation of Celtic w into g in Latin-based languages (for example, waspa "waste" gave rise to French gaspiller). Finally, around Vannes, "bird" is said as pichon, a word derived from Latin pipione, equivalent to French pigeon.

The Celts from north of the Alps and Central Europe settled in Armorica and other areas, often close to European coastlines, around the 8th century BC (archaeological remains have been found at sites such as Roquepertuse, Entremont, and Ensérune). Several peoples emerged there, including the Redones and the Namnetes. They spoke varieties of the Gaulish language and maintained significant economic ties with the British Isles. The conquest of Armorica by Julius Caesar in 56 BC led to a degree of Romanization of the population, but only the upper social strata truly adopted Latin culture. Gaulish continued to be spoken in the region until the 6th century, especially in sparsely populated rural areas. Thus, when the Britto-Romans, arriving from Great Britain, settled in western Armorica, they encountered a population that had retained certain aspects of Gaulish culture, although it was Christian and composed of Roman citizens. The integration of the Bretons therefore proceeded relatively smoothly. The first small Breton kingdoms, such as Cornouaille and Domnonée, emerged in the 5th century.

In contrast to the rural areas of western Armorica, the cities of Nantes and Rennes were genuine Roman cultural centers. Following the barbarian invasions of the 5th and 6th centuries, these two cities, as well as the regions east of the Vilaine River, came under Frankish domination. Franks also settled within the Celtic domain, where pockets of Gallo-Roman population already existed, for example around Vannes and Saint-Brieuc. Settlement in Armorica during the Merovingian period was therefore diverse, combining Bretons from Great Britain assimilated with Gaulish tribes, Latinized urban populations, and Germanic groups.

The boundary between the Breton kingdoms and the Frankish kingdom was unstable and difficult to define, particularly because wars between Franks and Bretons were frequent between the 6th and 9th centuries. Before the 10th century, Breton was spoken by at least part of the population as far east as Pornic and Roz-sur-Couesnon. Beyond this lay the Breton March, a Romance-speaking frontier zone established by the Frankish kings, which later shifted eastward to include the Avranchin and the Cotentin following the Treaty of Compiègne.

Nevertheless, according to most toponymists, Brittonic place names do not extend east of the Couesnon River. This casts doubt on the idea that Breton was ever widely spoken east of this river during the 9th or 10th century.

The Latinized population of Upper Brittany spoke the Vulgar Latin of Gaul, a language influenced by Gaulish, particularly in vocabulary and pronunciation. The palatalization of [k] to [ʃ], for example from cantare to chanter, and the spirantization of [b] to [v], as in faba becoming fève, probably date from this period. Latin grammatical declensions and the neuter gender began to disappear as early as the Gallo-Roman period, while articles started to be used.

The Franks introduced a new language, Old Frankish, but they did not impose it on the Gallo-Romans, and Latin continued to be used until the early 9th century. For roughly three hundred years, northern France thus experienced a period of Latin/Frankish bilingualism. During this time, the Franks gradually adopted Latin as the written and religious language. Like the Gauls before them, they influenced the language's evolution by contributing Germanic vocabulary and modifying pronunciation.

The Vikings who invaded Brittany in the 10th century also introduced some Old Norse vocabulary, which can still be found in contemporary Gallo. In fact, all of these Old Norse-derived words are also found in Norman, an Oïl language that contains even more of them. As with Standard French, these terms are more likely borrowings from Norman, since they are all shared with that language, whereas the reverse is not true. Examples include bouette or boite "fishing bait" (from Old Norse beita), biter or abiter "to touch" (Old Norse bíta "to bite"), bruman "newlywed, son-in-law" (Old Norse bruðmaðr), falle "bird's crop" (Old Norse falr), jenotte "earthnut" (Old Norse *jarðhnot), ha "dogfish" (Old Norse há), mielle "sandy ground, dune" (Old Norse melr), and mucre "damp, moldy" (Old Norse mykr). Exceptions include a few terms used for navigation and early maritime techniques in the Loire estuary and valley, which are direct borrowings from Old Norse, such as gueurde "rope used to hoist part of a sail" and guiroie, which later became French girouette ("weather vane").

The Oïl languages appeared in a more or less stabilized written form around the 11th century. At that time, differences between regional varieties were probably less pronounced than today. Lexical borrowing between dialects was frequent, and there are few written records of regional varieties, since scribes used a kind of common interdialectal literary language throughout northern France. The language of the court and of literature began to diverge sharply from regional speech from the 13th century onward, while these varieties also underwent independent phonetic changes and increasingly diverged from one another.

The earliest written traces of Gallo date from the 12th century. The Aiquin, the only Breton chanson de geste, contains several terms specific to contemporary Gallo, such as s'aroter "to set off" and lours "their". The Livre des Manières by Stephen de Fougères also contains many features characteristic of Gallo, including terms such as enveier ("to send"), il deit ("he must"), and chasteaus ("castles"; in modern Gallo: chatiaos).

A text from the Chronicles of Saint-Denis [ fr ] written in the 13th century mentions "Bretons who speak Breton", implying for the first time the existence of Bretons who did not speak the Breton language. The term "gallo" itself was first used in 1358, in a document issued by Duke John IV to his treasurer Georges Gicquel: "nostre general recepveur en Bretaigne gallou, salut."

The designation "Gallo Brittany" or its synonym Upper Brittany subsequently appears regularly in medieval texts.

When Insular Bretons settled in western Armorica, urban centers as well as the countryside east of a Trieux – Laïta line remained strongly Romanized. While Breton quickly became dominant west of this line, the linguistic reality in the eastern part was different and should rather be understood as a zone where bilingualism was the norm, with the majority of the rural population consisting of Romance-language speakers. In the 9th century, with the expansion of Breton territory into the formerly Frankish dioceses of Nantes and Rennes under the reign of Nominoe, the Breton language reached its greatest geographical extent. In the following century, however, Breton already began to retreat within the bilingual zone. This retreat was slow, and Breton-speaking enclaves persisted in eastern Brittany, first along the north coast as far as Dinan in the 12th century, then as far as Saint-Brieuc in the 16th century. In the south, east of Guérande, the retreat of Breton was not clearly marked before the 19th century.

In mixed areas, borrowings from Breton into Gallo were more numerous than elsewhere.

Standard French, which developed during the Renaissance, initially functioned as a sociolect, meaning that it was used only by certain social classes. The Ordinance of Villers-Cotterêts, promulgated in 1539, made the use of French compulsory in official documents. Education then became the main vector for spreading the language, from the 17th century onward, when the use of Latin declined at universities. In 1793, during the French Revolution, French became the sole language of public instruction. From the reign of Louis Philippe I, education became more accessible, and Jules Ferry made schooling free, secular, and compulsory in 1882. From that point on, all French citizens attended school and therefore learned French.

The 19th century was also marked by profound social changes that favored the disappearance of regional languages. Conscription, introduced during the Revolution, brought together men from different regions who had to use French to communicate. The construction of roads and railways increased mobility, while rural exodus and urban industrialization led to population mixing. Industrial growth also gave rise to a new bourgeoisie that disparaged regional speech, and the expansion of the press helped disseminate the French language. This process, initiated by newspapers, was continued in the 20th century by radio and then television. In Upper Brittany, as in the rest of France, bilingualism became widespread before being followed by frequent abandonment of the regional language.

The use of Gallo became confined to informal situations in rural settings. While agriculture remained dominant in Upper Brittany until the 1950s, it declined sharply thereafter, reducing opportunities to speak Gallo. The decrease in the number of speakers was further intensified by the lack of intergenerational transmission, as parents no longer wished to teach their children a language associated with a declining social milieu and perceived as an obstacle to social and economic advancement. The negative image that the state had associated with Gallo and other regional languages was thus relayed by the speakers themselves.

In response to the decline of Gallo, protective movements emerged at the end of the 19th century and gained momentum in the 1970s. Today, the entire French population speaks French, and regional languages, once on the verge of extinction, are no longer repressed as they were under the French Third Republic. The Breton Cultural Charter [ fr ], signed in 1977 by the state and Breton local authorities, marked a significant shift in the perception of the languages of Brittany. The charter states, for example, that it is necessary to "ensure that the Breton language and the Gallo speech, and their specific cultures, are provided with the means necessary for their development, including in education and on radio and television."

Since the early 1980s, Gallo has therefore been taught in a small number of educational settings. Nevertheless, it is classified as a seriously endangered language by UNESCO.

In 1878, Paul Sébillot wrote: "The speech spoken in the Gallo or French-speaking country is a dialect of French, which has affinities with the dialects of neighboring regions, especially Angevin, Tourangeau, and Lower Norman: it contains a large number of old words, a very small number of words borrowed from Breton, and is, apart from fairly numerous local expressions but with very French turns of phrase, very easy to understand."

Gallo is not necessarily intelligible to a French speaker, notably because of its distinctive phonology and vocabulary. Mutual intelligibility between speakers of different languages is, moreover, strongly conditioned by their willingness to understand and their individual background, such as knowledge of linguistics or general culture. Contemporary linguist Bernard Cerquiglini holds a view opposed to that of Paul Sébillot. According to him, Gallo, like the other Oïl languages, cannot be considered a dialect of French because the differences between the two are too great. According to Cerquiglini, the fact that Gallo derives directly from Vulgar Latin, and not from a regional deformation of French, also prevents it from being classified as a dialect. He thus emphasizes the highly artificial nature of standard French, even in relation to its Francien origins. The study of languages and dialects has evolved considerably since the 19th century, and there is no longer any universally accepted criterion for distinguishing a dialect from a language.

According to contemporary theories, Gallo cannot be considered a language if one assumes that it lacks high cultural prestige or the status of an official language. Nor is it a major factor of cohesion and identity, unlike Breton or Basque. On the other hand, Gallo can be regarded as a language because it possesses a degree of standardization, writing systems, and a body of literature, even if these remain at a developmental stage. Finally, the status of language or dialect attributed to a speech variety often depends more on political factors than on strictly linguistic ones.

At the international level, Gallo does not have an ISO 639 language code. It has no official status at the national level, as France recognizes only one official language, French. While regional languages were initially regarded as incompatible with the ideal of a single and indivisible republic, the French state has gradually begun to take them into account. However, it has not adopted a proactive language policy aimed at encouraging formal recognition of regional languages, instead favoring limited and accommodating measures.

Since the amendment of the French Constitution in 2008, Gallo has been recognized as part of the national heritage of France. Article 75-1 of the Constitution of France [ fr ] states that "regional languages belong to the heritage of France." In addition, Gallo is the only Oïl language officially recognized as a "regional language" by the French Ministry of National Education, as it is the only one taught within the school system.

Public recognition of Gallo within Brittany is relatively recent. On 17 December 2004, the Regional Council of Brittany unanimously recognized Breton and Gallo as "the languages of Brittany, alongside the French language." The Departmental Council of Ille-et-Vilaine has also publicly expressed support for Gallo. By contrast, in Loire-Atlantique and the wider Pays de la Loire region, no official position regarding Gallo has been adopted.

The recognition of Gallo by local authorities, as well as its introduction into the school system, has raised the issue of standardisation. This issue has generated significant ideological debate, without leading to a consensual solution, as is often the case for languages that are not regulated by a state authority. Other languages of France, such as Occitan, face similar debates.

Supporters of standardisation view it as a way to confer prestige on Gallo and to facilitate both its teaching and mutual intelligibility among speakers. Opponents argue that the creation of a norm would impoverish the language and that selecting one variety over others would be arbitrary. Moreover, standardisation is not necessarily a required stage in the development of minority languages. Corsican, for example, which is offered in the CAPES teaching examination and other university qualifications, is a polynomic language [ fr ] without a universal standard, comprising many dialects united by a strong shared identity. In the case of Corsican, the absence of a standard has not hindered either its teaching or the development of writing systems.

A possible standardisation is also not necessarily required for a language with limited media visibility and whose use by administrative or governmental bodies is not envisaged. The issue could nevertheless become more significant if Gallo were to gain greater media exposure in the future.

The question of Gallo standardisation has largely been sidestepped by teachers. They generally transmit the variety they themselves learned, and most do not wish to see the creation of a norm that would override regional variation. However, Gallo teaching programmes at secondary and higher education levels include a dialectological approach, providing learners with an overall view of the language and facilitating comprehension of varieties they have not personally learned. The development of writing systems is sometimes perceived as a form of standardisation, but this concerns only orthography, not grammar, pronunciation, or vocabulary. These systems tend instead to reinforce regional varieties, either by proposing flexible spellings that respect variation or by establishing fixed orthographies that still allow for differences in pronunciation when read aloud.

Breton, like Gallo, is in decline. Nevertheless, it has an undisputed status as a language and plays a strong role in identity formation. It benefits from a long tradition of activism and is no longer subject to strong negative perceptions. On the contrary, it affirms the distinctiveness of Breton culture, whereas Gallo is associated with French and thus perceived as external. As a non-Celtic element and a language without prestige, Gallo may be viewed as inferior to Breton.

In Loire-Atlantique, movements defending the Breton identity of the department rely far more on the Breton language, traditionally spoken in a small area around Guérande, than on Gallo, despite the latter having a much wider geographical distribution and also serving as a link between the departments of historic Brittany.

At the institutional level, the persistent difference in treatment between the two languages further marginalises Gallo, as Breton consistently benefits from greater resources for teaching and promotion. According to the theory of "one people, one language", Breton would be the national language of Brittany, leaving no place for Gallo. Granting Gallo equal status with Breton within Breton culture would also highlight the Romance character of that culture and render it bipolar, or even tripolar if French is also considered a language of Brittany.

While the promotion of Breton tends to overshadow Gallo, French contributes more directly to its marginalisation. French has been firmly established in Upper Brittany since the 1960s, and Gallo is disappearing mainly because it has become increasingly difficult to practise. It is no longer essential to everyday life and, for many speakers, has become merely a local speech variety used only in certain contexts. Gallo also remains associated with a pejorative image and is often perceived as coarse or backward, whereas French carries more prestigious connotations. Writing also constitutes a weakness of Gallo in comparison with French. Although writing systems exist, they are little known among speakers, and Gallo remains largely perceived as an oral language. Moreover, speakers are not always able to read or write Gallo without prior instruction.

Due to long-standing and close contact, Gallo has also been profoundly influenced by French. Many speakers alternate between Gallo and French words or sentences within the same discourse without being aware of switching languages. Conversely, non-Gallo speakers in Upper Brittany may use Gallo terms unknowingly. This "creolisation" of Gallo has increased its proximity to French and weakened its linguistic autonomy, while also contributing to a decline in speakers' linguistic awareness. The simplification of Gallo may at times be deliberate, particularly among storytellers, in order to reach a broader audience that includes non-speakers.

Determining the number of Gallo speakers is difficult, as respondents in surveys may misjudge their own language proficiency. In addition, the social stigma affecting Gallo likely leads to false or underestimated declarations, particularly among younger people. Finally, many individuals speak Gallo while using a large number of French words and syntactic structures, and therefore cannot always be counted as speakers in a strict sense.

In the 1999 census, 49,626 residents of historic Brittany responded to the survey entitled Étude de l'histoire familiale, which included a question on languages used with relatives. It reported 29,060 people using Gallo, including 28,300 in the Brittany region (1.3% of the population, while Breton speakers represented 12%). After extrapolation to the total population, the number of Gallo speakers was ultimately estimated at 40,710 in historic Brittany, or about 1% of its population. Gallo thus ranked fourth, behind French, Breton (11.3%), and English (4.3%).

Gallo was most widespread in Ille-et-Vilaine, where 2.5% of the population reported using it according to the 1999 census, followed by the Côtes-d'Armor (1.8%), Morbihan (1.6%), and Loire-Atlantique (1.5%). According to the same census, Ille-et-Vilaine was the only department where Gallo speakers outnumbered Breton speakers. A survey conducted for the Credilif laboratory at University of Rennes 2 in 2008 reported around 200,000 speakers; this figure was said to double when including those able to understand Gallo.

A survey carried out in 2004 and 2005 across all departments of Upper Brittany showed that only 5% of Gallo-speaking parents had passed the language on to their children. Transmission appeared instead to occur more often from grandparents to grandchildren. The 2004–2005 survey also showed that the vast majority of Gallo speakers were or had been farmers, and that only 23% of respondents declared being able to write in Gallo.

In 2013, the association Bretagne Culture Diversité [ fr ] decided to create a barometer of Breton public opinion by conducting regular surveys based on the same questions. The first was entrusted to the TMO Régions institute, which conducted telephone interviews with 1,003 people aged 18 and over between 9 and 17 December 2013 in the five departments of historic Brittany. This survey showed a significant difference compared with the 1999 INSEE survey. According to the results, 5% of residents of historic Brittany declared that they spoke Gallo very well or fairly well, whereas in 1999 INSEE had estimated the proportion of Gallo speakers at 1.3% of the population of the four-department Brittany region.

In addition, 8% of residents of historic Brittany said they understood Gallo very well or fairly well, 8.9% said they spoke or understood a few words, and 83% did not use it at all. The survey also included a new question on the future of the language: 42% of residents of Brittany said they were worried about the future of Gallo, 18% were confident, and 28% were indifferent. These figures brought the two languages of Brittany closer together, with Breton spoken by 6% of residents of Brittany and Gallo by 5%, while 9% of residents understood Breton and 8% understood Gallo. Opinions differed more sharply regarding the future of the two languages: 40% of Bretons were confident about the future of Breton, compared with only 19% who were indifferent. Likewise, the proportion of respondents who did not express an opinion was lower for Breton (4%) than for Gallo (12%).

A new survey commissioned by the Brittany region in 2024 and conducted by the TMO institute revealed a sharp decline in the number of speakers, now estimated at 132,000 people, compared with 191,000 in the 2018 survey. According to this survey, Gallo now has more speakers than Breton.

The teaching of Gallo in schools was first proposed shortly before the Second World War by the Compagnons de Merlin, the Gallo-speaking branch of the Breton Regionalist Federation [ fr ] (FRB). Beyond being a cultural demand, the introduction of Gallo in schools was seen as a way to improve pupils' academic performance, notably by valuing their linguistic skills. These demands raised, for the first time, the issue of possible standardisation of Gallo and the creation of a writing system. The ideas were not taken up again until the 1970s. In 1977, the signing of the Breton Cultural Charter by the French state allowed for an initial form of recognition of the language.

During the 1981–1982 school year, the Rector of the Academy of Rennes, Paul Rollin, created a post of Chargé de mission pour la langue et la culture gallèse in secondary education, entrusted to the certified history teacher Gilles Morin. At the same time, in cooperation with the departmental education authority of Ille-et-Vilaine, a post of pedagogical adviser for Gallo was created at the École normale supérieure de Rennes. Christian Leray [ fr ], a teacher holding a CAEI qualification, was appointed assistant pedagogical adviser at the teacher training college (CPAEN) in September 1982, where he organised a Gallo training unit for future primary school teachers. His responsibilities included organising in-service teacher training and coordinating Gallo teaching in two rural priority education zones (ZEPs of Retiers and Tremblay – Antrain).

Gallo was offered as an optional subject in the general and technological baccalauréat examinations from 1984 onward. Optional courses and academic research on Gallo have been offered at University of Rennes 2 since 1981. Since 2008, the university has offered a Gallo option consisting of three hours per week over the three years of the undergraduate degree.

Teaching of Gallo language and culture is offered in primary schools in the Maure-de-Bretagne area of Ille-et-Vilaine, involving approximately 1,300 pupils. The association Dihun has also implemented a similar system in Catholic primary schools in eastern Morbihan. In secondary education, Gallo is offered as an optional subject. It is taught by certified teachers in seven middle schools and seven public high schools within the Academy of Rennes [ fr ]. It is also, within the same academy, an optional language subject in the baccalauréat examinations.

At the start of the 2009 school year, 1,400 primary school pupils, 226 middle school pupils, and 233 high school pupils were enrolled in Gallo courses. In 2011, excluding primary school pupils, there were 574 learners, representing an improvement compared with 2009. Gallo nevertheless remains one of the least taught regional languages in France. In the same year, Breton was studied by 7,324 middle and high school pupils, and Alsatian by 35,855 pupils. Only Mosellan (Lorraine Franconian) was less widely taught, with just 187 pupils.

In Loire-Atlantique, a department that is nevertheless a signatory to the Breton Cultural Charter, Gallo is taught in only one educational institution (Sion-les-Mines). This situation is mainly due to the department lying outside the Academy of Rennes and to the much weaker Gallo promotion movement there compared with the Brittany region. The geographical distribution of activism in favour of Gallo often explains the presence or absence of the language in educational institutions within a given region.

The earliest written traces of Gallo date back to the 12th century. Le livre des Manières by Stephen de Fougères is the oldest publication in a Romance language from Brittany. The dialectal forms found in the Roman d'Aquin (or La Conqueste de la Bretaigne par le roy Charlemaigne), a chanson de geste from the 12th century, illustrate the development of the langue d'oïl in Upper Brittany.

Gallo is primarily a language of oral tradition, with a substantial body of folktales, fables, and legends. This oral tradition also includes riddles (devinaîlles), proverbs, songs, and stories that address or challenge religious beliefs. Gallo legends often revolve around recurring figures such as Gargantua, Morgan le Fay, and Birou, or attempt to explain the formation of landscapes.

Oral Gallo legends were collected from the late 19th century onward by folklorists and ethnologists such as Paul Sébillot, a native of Matignon, Adolphe Orain [ fr ] from Bain-de-Bretagne, François Duine [ fr ] from the Dolois [ fr ] area, and Amand Dagnet [ fr ] from the Coglais [ fr ], who also worked in Mayenne. These authors, however, most often transcribed the tales in French. In addition, Paul Féval wrote several dialogues in Gallo in his novel Châteaupauvre, published in 1876. Amand Dagnet also produced a theatrical work in Gallo, La Fille de la Brunelas, in 1901.

In the 1920s, Jeanne Malivel of Loudéac versified a Gallo tale told by her grandmother, Les Sept Frères. This work inspired the creation of the artistic renewal movement Seiz Breur. During the 1930s and under the Occupation, Henri Calindre of Ploërmel published humorous monologues and plays in Gallo under the pseudonym Mystringue.

After the Second World War, a second wave of collection was led by Simone Morand and Albert Poulain. They were actively involved in preserving and promoting Gallo culture through publications and by founding associations such as the Groupement culturel breton des pays de Vilaine. In the 1970s, Brittany experienced a strong cultural revival, and events centered on Gallo storytelling and song emerged.

The association Les Amis du Parler Gallo was founded in 1976 and began publishing works by contemporary Gallo authors. L'Anthologie de littérature gallèse contemporaine was published in 1982 and brought together texts by around thirty authors, including Jean-Yves Bauge, Pierre Corbel, Ernestine Lorand [ fr ], Gilles Morin, and Laurent Motrot. Albert Meslay [ fr ] published La Cosmochérette, a humorous science fiction novel, in 1983. Gallo poetry also developed, with authors such as Jacqueline Rebours, known for her politically engaged poetry, Christian Leray, and Laurent Motrot, who published poems in the journal Aneit. Bèrtran Ôbrée [ fr ], singer of the band Ôbrée Alie [ fr ], whose songs are mostly in Gallo, also writes poetry. The poetry collection « Poéteriy » – Poésie gallaise contemporaine was published in 1990 by Les Amis du Parler Gallo, by then renamed Bertègn Galèzz.

Although authors continued to publish in journals and newspapers, Gallo-language publishing declined during the 1990s, before growing significantly from the early 2000s onward, with many works opting for bilingual editions in Gallo and French. The emblematic work that helped revive Gallo-language publishing was written by Adèle Denys [ fr ] : her Mémoires d'une centenaire « aout'fas en Pays Gallo », published in 1999. New authors emerged, such as Fabien Lécuyer, whose detective novel Meliy (published in 2004) was adapted for the theatre by the Tradior company, and whose historical novel Ene oraïje naïr was also the first e-book published in Gallo. In 2007, André Bienvenu published his childhood memoirs in three volumes, Les Braises de la vie.

Despite this vitality, resistance to publishing books in Gallo remains. For example, Serge Richard's novel Ken Tost d'an Tenzor was translated into Gallo (Le Naez sus le tenzor) but did not find a publisher, as was also the case for translations of Animal Farm by George Orwell and La Guerre des boutons by Louis Pergaud.

Comics in Gallo have also developed since the 1980s. The magazine Le Lian, published by Bertègn Galèzz, featured the first Gallo-language comics, including Les Tois Frëres by Didier Auffray and La Tourneye du René, a one-panel gag series illustrated by Hubert Goger with text by Mimi Buet, from 1984 onward. Since 2011, Louis-France Baslé has published the comic strip Piyou le cania cancalais in Le Plat Gousset, a local bulletin of the town of Cancale. Albums of Tintin, Asterix, and Jack Palmer have also been translated into Gallo.

The first Gallo texts intended for children appeared in Le Lian in 1985. Children's publishing has expanded since the 2000s, notably through the associative publishing house Les Emouleriy au Sourgarre, with albums such as Miston, le ptit chutiaù by Michael Genevée and Romain Ricaud. The first Imagier en gallo by Anne-Marie Pelhate was published in 2014 and includes over six hundred illustrated Gallo words. Similarly, the Fables of La Fontaine have been translated into Gallo.

Gallo music is less well known than Celtic music sung in Breton or French, but it is nonetheless a full component of Breton culture. A new generation of artists has brought the language back to the forefront of the Breton music scene in a more modern way, including Bèrtran Ôbrée, Les Vilaïnes Bétes, and IMG, as well as in a more traditional style with groups such as Les Mangeouses d'Oreilles and Girault & Guillard.

There are also artists who usually sing in French or Breton but have produced works in Gallo. These include Trouz an Noz, Tri Yann, and Cabestan [ fr ].

The studio Dizale of Quimper has dubbed two feature-length animated films (The Gruffalo and The Gruffalo's Child by Max Lang and Jakob Schuh) into Gallo, in partnership with the Institut de la langue gallèse [ fr ], released in 2019.

Simone Morand [ fr ] played a major role in promoting Gallo culture, even before the Second World War. The first association dedicated to the promotion of Gallo existed between 1939 and 1944: the Compagnons de Merlin, affiliated with the Fédération régionaliste de Bretagne [ fr ], which published the journal Galerne. After that, associative activity was virtually nonexistent until 1976, with the founding of Les Amis du Parler Gallo, later renamed Bertègn Galèzz. An internal split among members led to the creation of the association Aneit in 1984.

Other associations were founded thereafter, including La Bouèze, the Université du temps libre of Dinan, Maézoe, Vantyé, L'Epille, La Soett, La Granjagoul [ fr ], and Chubri.

These associations mainly focus on collecting and documenting the language, either across the entire Gallo-speaking area or at a local level. Some have developed databases, such as Bertègn Galèzz, while others have specialized fields of expertise, such as Maézoe in toponymy and L'Epille in traditional song. La Granjagoul, based in Parcé, is an association dedicated to safeguarding intangible cultural heritage. It carries out oral heritage collection activities in the Fougères area and supports and organizes the promotion of this heritage. It also offers activities in Gallo for children in partnership with the parents' association Dihun Breizh, which aims to promote Gallo and Breton within the education system.

Several cultural events linked to Gallo take place every year in Upper Brittany, including the Mill Góll festival in Rennes, held since 2003, La Gallésie en fête in Monterfil, the Estourniales in Liffré, Bogue d'or [ fr ], a storytelling and singing competition in Redon, the Assembiés gallèses in La Chèze, and the Gallèseries of Saint-Malo.

The Breton and Gallo Language Week is held every year in March or April at the initiative of the Regional Council of Brittany. Activities are organized locally by intermunicipal groupings (pays) and aim to promote these languages. The Breton and Gallo Language Week also takes place in Loire-Atlantique, but there the activities are organized by associations rather than by official institutions.

Several associations publish or have published journals written partly or entirely in Gallo. These include Pihern, an annual journal published by Vantyé in Guémené-Penfao, and Druj, a journal of L'Andon dou Galo [ fr ] in Trémorel, which had two issues in the 2000s. Bertègn Galèzz publishes Le Liaun, a journal with irregular periodicity published since 1978, containing many articles in Gallo. The journal Nostre lenghe aneit was also published annually in Gallo by the association Aneit in Saint-Nazaire from 1984 to 1988. In December 2014, the weekly online publication Runje, written entirely in Gallo, was launched by Fabien Lécuyer.

Nevertheless, Gallo remains largely absent from mainstream regional media. Its visibility is limited to a small number of articles and regular columns. André Le Coq has published Les Caoseries a Matao, current-affairs columns, in L'Hebdomadaire d'Armor, published in Merdrignac, since the 1990s. A weekly Gallo column titled Assis-té, mets du suc!, written by multiple authors, also appears in Le Courrier Indépendant [ fr ] of Loudéac. Since 2006, Hervé Drouard has written a Gallo-language current-affairs column titled Au cul d'la tonne in the weekly newspaper La Mée, based in Châteaubriant.

In 2013, Daniel Giraudon wrote a column in the Sunday edition of Ouest-France. His initial column, Le Gallo souffle sur les Breizh, compared Gallo and Breton. His later column, Le Galo come on l'caoze, focused exclusively on Gallo and was also broadcast on the radio station Plum'FM. Bèrtran Ôbrée writes the column En gallo dans le texte, illustrated by Vincent Chassé, in the quarterly magazine NousVousIlle, published by the Ille-et-Vilaine Department since the early 2010s.

The literary journal Hopala! [ fr ] claims to publish works in the three languages of Brittany and published poems in Gallo in 2001 and 2003. Similarly, Alain Kervern [ fr ] organized four trilingual haiku competitions between 2001 and 2005 in Hopala!, and later in the journal Le Peuple breton in 2011 and 2013. Articles written in Gallo by Régis Auffray, Fabien Lécuyer, and Patrick Deriano have appeared since 2005 in the Breton-language journal Ya!, published by the association Keit vimp Bev in Laz.

Online, the site Agence Bretagne Presse [ fr ] publishes news items and articles in Gallo. The news website 7seizh.info regularly publishes Gallo-language articles by Fabien Lécuyer on current affairs, including international news and sports.

Since 1996, Gallo has been broadcast on France Bleu Armorique through columns by Fred le Disou and Roger le Contou. Despite an announced cancellation in 2013, they have remained on air, later joined by new contributors, including a woman, in the late 2010s. Plum'FM is a community radio station created in the early 2000s in Plumelec and based in Sérent since 2009. In 2014, the station broadcast eleven and a half hours of Gallo-language programming per week, with several shows hosted by Matao Rollo and Anne-Marie Pelhate. Plum'FM also partners with Radio Bro Gwened [ fr ], based in Pontivy, exchanging Gallo-language programming. Since September 2013, the Radio chrétienne francophone [ fr ] station in the Côtes-d'Armor has broadcast a Gallo-language radio adaptation of the novel Châteaupauvre by Paul Féval. Occasional Gallo-language programs are also broadcast by other radio stations, such as Radio Rennes [ fr ], including its show Chemins de Terre, hosted by Loïc Turmel.

The presence of Gallo on television remains very limited. The first Gallo-language television program was broadcast on November 24, 2007, on the local Côtes-d'Armor channel Armor TV [ fr ], presented by Matao Rollo. Fred le Disou and Roger le Contou have also appeared on the local channel TV Rennes [ fr ] since September 2008, where they present an unconventional weather segment.

In May 2022, the media platform Galoweb was launched. It is an online platform for the creation and distribution of audiovisual content in Gallo, modeled on the Breton-language web television channel Brezhoweb [ fr ]. During its first year, Galoweb offered Gallo-language programs for all ages, including nursery rhymes, a current-affairs magazine, and animated series.

The consonants of Gallo are broadly similar to those of French. Local variants nevertheless exist, such as the voicing of s to z in the Pays de Retz, and that of t to d in the Pays de la Mée. Certain consonant clusters are also characteristic of specific regions, such as the plosives c and ɟ, that is, a k and a g accompanied by a slight j, and the affricates dʒ and tʃ in the western part of Upper Brittany. In that area, the word curë kyʁe is thus pronounced tʃyʁə, and ghepe dʒep. Elsewhere, one may hear cyʁə and ɟəp. The word Qhi can be pronounced ki, tʃi, or ci. These variations result from a fronting of the place of articulation of palatal consonants.

The semivowel j is widely used to palatalize other consonants, notably fj, tj, sj, and pj. Such palatalization is not found in all regions, however, and j is then often replaced by l. The word pllée, for example, may be realized as pje or ple.

The h, of Germanic origin, ceased to be pronounced from the 13th century. It nevertheless remains in use in the Mené, a small area around Merdrignac and Plémet.

The vowel system of Gallo is close to that of French but has undergone divergent developments. Gallo therefore displays several features that are absent from French, such as extensive use of the schwa and of diphthongs.

In Gallo as in French, stressed Latin a evolved into e or eː. Thus, adsátis gave assé ase. However, whereas French merged e and eː into a single e, Gallo preserved a distinction between the two. The eː, corresponding for example to a stressed Latin a followed by s, became e or a diphthong, most often ej, while e generally shifted to a schwa (ə) in most regions. This opposition between e and eː makes it possible, for instance, to distinguish past participles orally according to gender and number. Whereas in standard French chassé, chassée, and chassés are pronounced identically, most Gallo speakers distinguish ʃasə for the masculine and ʃase for the feminine and plural forms. In this example, ə indicates a final é, while e indicates that the é is followed by an e or an s. According to this rule, assé became assë asə.

The infinitive of Latin verbs in -are followed the same pattern: captiáre gave chasser ʃasə in Gallo and chasser ʃase in French. This evolution of stressed a varies by region and admits exceptions. In the central area of Upper Brittany, the schwa replaced e, whereas in some peripheral regions it is replaced by ɛ or remains e. Some words do not follow the rule, such as pátre and mátre, which yielded pere peʁ and mere meʁ in most of Upper Brittany; et pere pəʁ and mere məʁ are only heard in the central-western area. Free stressed a before l does not follow the e / eː pattern either and evolved very differently depending on the region. Thus, sále yielded sèl, sél, sé, or seu. The schwa is also used to realize syllabic l and ʁ, as in berton bʁˌtɔ̃.

Like the other langues d'oïl, Gallo was subject to Bartsch's law, according to which free stressed a in contact with a preceding palatal consonant became ie, as in cápra, which became chieuvr. In Gallo as in French, the yodh disappeared around the Renaissance, yielding chèvre and cheuv, and it is now found only in the Côtes-d'Armor. In eastern Brittany, the loss of the yod was stronger than in French, and some speakers say chen instead of chien (from Latin cáne).

Open stressed Latin e also evolved into ie in Gallo as in French, with hĕri yielding, for example, yere. In Gallo, the vowel following the yod varies by region. In most of Upper Brittany it is a schwa, while elsewhere it is ɛ or e ; the geographical distribution mirrors that of e / eː. Open stressed Latin o became ue, then monophthongized in both French and Gallo around the 12th century, becoming œ in French and ə in Gallo. Thus, cór gave qheur. The evolution of close stressed Latin e is far more diverse, and the original diphthong éi was replaced by a wide range of phonemes varying by word and region. The many pronunciations of mai, from Latin mé, illustrate this diversity: maj, ma, me, mɛ, etc. The pronunciation of close free stressed Latin o / u is more conservative in Gallo than in other langues d'oïl. Thus, gùla yielded goule in Gallo, but gueule in French. Some terms are nevertheless influenced by neighboring langues d'oïl: astour ("now", from Latin hóra) gives way to asteur in eastern Upper Brittany. In southern Loire-Atlantique, in contact with Poitevin, ɔ is generalized, and one hears guernol and parto instead of guernouille and partout.

Gallo makes use of diphthongs, like Latin and other langues d'oïl, as well as Romance languages such as Spanish and Portuguese. French, by contrast, has lost its diphthongs since at least the 16th century. Gallo diphthongs generally involve the semivowels w and j, and more rarely ɥ : wa, wə, wi, aw, ja, ju, aj, ej, ɛ̃i, ɥi, ɥɛ̃, ɥə, etc. The triphthong jaw is also attested.

The diphthong aw, which is very common, most often results from the loss of a consonant that existed in Latin. For example, fagu (" beech ") became fao, and the hiatus fau developed into a diphthong: faw. In some words such as talpa, l was vocalized as u, and al thus became aw : tawp. In French, by contrast, al merged into o, yielding taupe top. In northern Upper Brittany, diphthongs are used to mark the plural : un martè maʁtə, des martiaos maʁtjaw. In Loire-Atlantique, only the plural form is used.

The nasal diphthong ɛ̃ɔ̃, heard for example in grand (gʁɛ̃ɔ̃, "big"), is typical of western langues d'oïl and is also found in Norman, Poitevin-Saintongeais, and Angevin, sometimes in slightly different forms (aɔ̃ in Saintongeais, ɛ̃ɑ̃ in Norman).

There is still no single writing system that is unanimously approved and widely known. The main difficulty faced by Gallo lies in the differences in pronunciation from one region to another. For example, to say me, Gallo speakers, depending on their region, may say maj, mɛj, mej, ma, mɛ or me. Using French-based spelling, they would therefore write the same word in many different ways: maï, maye, maille, mèï, mey, meille, ma, mé, mè, and so on.

However, the creation of a common system is necessary in order to improve the readability of texts, to represent pronunciation varieties, and to compile a dictionary. The different writing systems that have been proposed can be grouped into two broad tendencies: one favors a single orthography that can be pronounced in different ways while respecting regional variation, while the other proposes numerous letters and letter combinations representing all regional phonemes, allowing speakers to write according to their own pronunciation.

The first effort to codify Gallo orthography was undertaken by the association Amis du parler gallo in 1977. It proposed retaining French spelling while adding specific characters, such as lh to indicate palatalization and ë to represent the schwa. Since then, other systems have emerged, such as ELG, MOGA, ABCD, and BAP.

From an orthographic perspective, two groups can be distinguished: some writing systems propose complex spellings, with silent letters and non-phonetic graphemes, while others are more phonetic and avoid silent letters.

ELG orthography (an acronym for écrire le gallo, meaning "write Gallo"), the oldest of the proposed systems, was introduced in 1978 by Alan-Joseph Raude and deliberately rejects reference to French spelling. Raude drew on medieval Gallo texts in order to devise an original orthography, as if Gallo had never ceased to be written. By reusing medieval spellings, ELG also makes it possible to trace Gallo back to its origins, at a time when regional pronunciation differences were less marked than they are today.

Thus, for words meaning finger, evening, or me, which are pronounced differently depending on the region, ELG replaces the French oi with a long e and a short i inherited from Latin. These words are therefore written deit, seir, mei, allowing each speaker to pronounce them according to local usage. Similarly, ruczèu ("stream") is pronounced ʁysəw in the east of Upper Brittany and ʁyzəw in the west, and the ae of Bertaeyn (Brittany) may be pronounced ae, aɛ, aə, and so on. The letter groups oe, cz, tz are other characteristic features of this orthography.

Moreover, final e sounds ceased to be pronounced in Gallo as early as the 12th century, several centuries before French. Raude therefore proposes not writing them. By contrast, silent final consonants are retained in order to facilitate derivation: fauc ("false"), fauchae ("to mow"). Because of the absence of a final e, it must be doubled if it is pronounced. Thus, where French has grand and grande, ELG Gallo has graund and graundd.

ELG has a distinctive visual appearance that gives Gallo a clearly marked identity. However, it is difficult to read and write without prior learning, and even native Gallo speakers do not always immediately recognize it as Gallo. ELG is used, for example, for bilingual French–Gallo signage in a station of the Rennes Metro.

The Aneit system was presented in 1984 by the association Bertègn Galèzz, which succeeded the Amis du parler gallo. This spelling system is the result of five years of research across Upper Brittany and takes its name from the public information booklet Nostre lenghe aneit ("our language today"). Also known as the "unified orthography", it follows the same etymological approach as ELG.

The Aneit system differs from ELG in several respects. For example, every written letter must serve a purpose, which leads to the removal of silent h and double consonants except in specific cases (ll to indicate palatalization, for instance). Aneit shares the same difficulties as ELG, since knowledge of a word's spelling is required in order to read or write it correctly. In addition, Aneit uses the letters ó, ú, and r̃ (r with a tilde), characters that are difficult to access on a standard French keyboard.

Vantyé orthography was developed by the association of the same name in the early 1980s and is characterized by a desire to bring Gallo spelling closer to Breton. Thus, the sound [k] is represented exclusively by the letter k, rather than by q as used in other systems, and [w] is represented by w : ke for "that" and wézyaw for "bird". Silent letters are abandoned, and a degree of freedom is left to the user.

Vantyé orthography is therefore more of a practical tool than a fully codified spelling system, unlike ELG and Aneit, but it is consequently much easier to master. It nevertheless raises certain issues, as it is primarily intended for speakers of the Mitau area and does not allow all the phonemes used in other regions to be written.

MOGA orthography was introduced in 2007 by Bèrtran Ôbrée and the association Chubri. Unlike ELG and Aneit, which focus on the etymology of words, MOGA is a phonetic writing system. It also draws on speakers' knowledge of French. Thus, the sound ɲ is represented by gn, as in French, rather than by ny or nh. Likewise, the diphthong aw is written ao, instead of aù or au as in earlier systems, which can be ambiguous since in French the sound w is represented by w. Each letter or group of letters in MOGA corresponds to a single sound.

Regional varieties are taken into account, and letter groups have been created to represent all Gallo phonemes, even if they are used by only a small number of speakers. Thus, lh represents ʎ, a rare phoneme restricted to the central part of the Côtes-d'Armor.

The same word may be spelled in different ways depending on local usage, such as the city of Rennes, which may be written in Gallo in the various MOGA orthographies as Renn, Rènn, Rein·n, or Rin·n (with spelling and pronunciation ranging from the most common to the rarest usages). There is therefore not a single MOGA orthography, but several MOGA orthographies.

ABCD orthography (from the initials of its creators: Régis Auffray, André Bienvenu, André Le Coq, and Patrice Dréano) is used by the Association des enseignants de gallo and at University of Rennes 2. It was standardized in 2009 and adopts the main principles of MOGA: reliance on speakers' knowledge of French and a phonetic approach to writing. Whereas MOGA proposes one sound per letter or letter group, ABCD offers several options so that users can choose among them. This makes it possible to cover regional variants, and a text written in ABCD will not necessarily be read in the same way by all Gallo speakers. ABCD also makes extensive use of French conventions, including silent letters such as s marking the plural, and is therefore very easy to read without prior training.

Phonemes written as in French (a, ch, p...) are not shown in this table. Moreover, since the pronunciation of letters in ELG and ABCD varies greatly by region, this list is not exhaustive.

In addition, the MOGA and ABCD systems use the combination ll in words that are palatalized by some Gallo speakers. Thus, bllë is pronounced bjə or blə depending on the region. In ABCD, the combinations mm, nm, and nn are not pronounced as in French, since the first letter serves to nasalize the vowel and only the second letter is pronounced: fenme is pronounced fɑ̃m and not fenm, and Janne is pronounced ʒɑ̃n and not ʒan. As in French, if the final letter is an e or a consonant, it is generally not pronounced.

In MOGA, lj is written lh, and ñ replaces n to show that it must not be nasalized: (il) diñra is pronounced dinʁa, as in French.

In ELG orthography, certain letters and letter groups can only appear in specific positions, such as oey, which exists only at the end of a word. As in ABCD, final consonants in ELG are generally silent. The sound s is written cz, c, ç, or s depending on its position in the word and the surrounding letters. In word-final position, its silent equivalent is tz.

Articles in Gallo are almost the same as in French: le, la, les, eun, eune, des. The partitive article du also exists. The neutral pronoun ce does not exist, and cela can be replaced by eci or ela.

The order of personal pronoun objects in a sentence can differ from French. When there are two object pronouns in a clause, one direct object and one indirect object, the indirect object comes first. Thus, in Gallo one says je li l'ai donnë for "I gave it to him". This rule also applies in the imperative: donne maï le for "give it to me".

Demonstrative pronouns derive from the Latin iste : sti-ci, sti-là (masculine) and ste-ci, ste-là (feminine). The plural is closer to French: s(t)eus-ci, s(t)eus-là. Relative and interrogative pronouns are similar to those of French (qui/que); they mainly differ in pronunciation, since most Gallo speakers use affricates or the voiceless palatal stop instead of the voiceless velar stop. Thus ke and ki become cə / tʃə and ci / tʃi. Moreover, the distinction between animate and inanimate referents is not systematic: qhi qe tu vis? can mean either "whom did you see?" or "what did you see?". In western Upper Brittany, however, the distinction is mandatory, and cai ("what") is used to refer to an inanimate object.

Redundant use of the possessive with a is common: sés chevaos a li ("his horses, his"). The preposition a placed before an infinitive produces a similar emphatic effect and can also be used in a sentence describing two simultaneous actions, where French uses the gerund : i coure a veni ("he comes running"). Demonstrative pronouns are replaced by possessives: le sien replaces celui à/qui/que/de. For example, le sien qi veut means "the one who wants".

The French word avec ("with") is expressed in Gallo in several ways depending on context. The preposition o or d'o is used to describe an action involving a thing, a human, or an animal, as in aler és clloz d'o son chen ("to go to the fields with one's dog"), or in the context of a passive relationship between two humans, as in yètr d'assant d'o qheuq'eun ("to agree with someone"). The preposition cant or cantë is used for an action between two humans: yètr a caozer cantë son bonaminz ("to be talking with one's friend").

As in French, nouns in Gallo can be masculine or feminine and singular or plural. The gender of nouns is generally the same as in French, with a few exceptions such as aje ("age"), bole ("bowl"), and crabe ("crab"), which are feminine, and memouere ("memory") and vipere ("viper"), which are masculine.

Feminine marking is expressed in several ways depending on the word. In some cases, as in French, the final consonant becomes voiced: petit becomes petite, and vaizin becomes vaizine. In words ending in a nasal vowel, this vowel may be denasalised, as in French bon / bonne. Agent nouns derived from verbs and ending in -ou, such as chantou, take endings in -ouze, -ouère, or -resse (eune chantouère, "a female singer"). Finally, words ending in non-silent consonants, doubled consonants, or developed consonant clusters (-ch, -sch, etc.) are invariable.

Plural formation is also governed by several different rules. Words ending in a consonant remain invariable, whereas those ending in a vowel may lengthen that vowel: un crochet [kʁoʃɛ], des crochets [kʁoʃɛː]. Other words form the plural with a diphthong, such as chatè ("castle"), which becomes chatiao, or by vowel alternation, such as pommier [pɔ̃mjə], which becomes pommiérs [pɔ̃mje]. In Loire-Atlantique, the diphthongal plural does not exist, and the diphthongal form is always used: chatéo ("castle", singular and plural). Le mondd ("people, everyone") is invariable and expresses a collective plural; the verb that follows must therefore be conjugated in the plural. Adjectives rarely distinguish between singular and plural forms.

Conjugation in Gallo is characterised by the importance of the simple past in spoken language. Verbs in this tense fall into four groups. Most verbs, such as hucher ("to shout"), are conjugated with endings in -i : je huchis, tu huchis, etc. There are variations for the first and third person plural: -imes or -ites for we, and -ites or -irant for they. Verbs ending in -air(e) or -aer, such as baire or chaer, take endings in -û : je chûs, vous chûtes, etc. The first and third person plural follow the same variation patterns as verbs in -i. Finally, there are also a few verbs in -u, such as vair, and in -in, such as veni and prindr. The verb avair ("to have") belongs to the -i group, but it can also take endings from the -û and -u groups. The verb to be has two forms, je fus/sus, due to a change of stem.

The endings in -i, such as j'apërchis and je venis, corresponding to French j'aperçus and je vins, illustrate the closeness of Gallo to Latin for verbs originating from the third and fourth Latin conjugations. For the perfect endings of first-group Latin verbs, French retained the linking vowel, whereas Gallo retained the final ending:

The endings of verbs in the present indicative are simple, as they are the same for all verbs, with a few exceptions such as to be. Regular verbs are conjugated by keeping the stem for the singular forms and adding -ons or -om for we, and -éz for you (plural). For the third person plural, usage varies: either the stem takes no ending, or -ant or -aint is added.

The imperfect is formed with the stem and endings similar to those of French, though pronunciation can vary greatly between regions, ranging for example from je manjë to je manjay or je manjéy. As with the simple past, the first and third person plural are subject to variation: -ions, -é, or -iom for we, and -é, -a, -ay, or -yon for they. The older form -ao for the first two persons singular (je manjao) is attested in Bourseul, where it is also used to conjugate the conditional mood, and -yain for the first person plural appears in proverbs.

The endings of the future tense and the conditional are the same for all verbs and are similar to those of French. The present subjunctive is formed with the suffix -j.

The conditional mood is used in subordinate clauses introduced by si ("if") expressing hypothesis, whereas French requires the imperfect indicative [ fr ] (" les si n'aiment pas les rai "). In Gallo, for example, one says si qheuqu'un seraet venu. The conditional also replaces the subjunctive in purpose clauses introduced by pour ("in order to").

The imperative mood is formed using the endings of the present indicative, except for a few irregular verbs such as veni ("to come"): ataï! ("come!"), atous! ("come!" plural).

Interrogation is expressed by means of the particle ti, which is placed after the verb: j'ons- ti le dret d'aler vair? ("Do I have the right to go and see?"). In indirect questions, qe is inserted before the subject: Den cai qe tu sonjes? ("What are you thinking about?").

The prefix entre-, which marks reciprocity ("to help each other"), is a true morpheme in Gallo and can therefore be freely used with a large number of verbs: Les chens s' entr- taint mordus means "the dogs had bitten each other". It accompanies the reflexive pronoun and can be separated from the verb by an auxiliary or an object pronoun. The reflexive voice can also be used to indicate a process without an agent or internal to the person: i s'apernaet means "he was learning by himself".

je së/sé t'es il/ol ét je sons/sôme vous etes il/ol sont

je taes tu taes i/o taet je tions/tains vous tiéz i taent

je fus/sus tu fus/sus i/ol fut/sut je fumes/sumes vous futes/sutes i/ol furent/surant

je serë tu serâs i/ol sera je serons vous seréz i/ol seront

je serës tu serës i/ol serët je serions/serans vous seriez i/ol serant

qe je seje qe tu sejes q'i/o seje qe je sejions qe vous sejiéz q'i/ol sejent/sejant

j'enveye t'enveyes il/ol enveye j'enveyons v'enveyéz il enveyent/enveyant

j'enveyaes t'enveyaes il/ol enveyaet j'enveyons/enveyains v'enveyiéz il enveyent/enveyant

j'enveyis t'enveyis il/ol enveyit j'enveyimes v'enveyites il enveyirent

j'enveyerë t'enveyerâs il/ol enveyera j'enveyerons v'enveyeréz il enveyeront

j'enveyrës t'enveyerës il/ol enveyerët j'enveyerions/enveyerant v'enveyeriéz il enveyeraent

qe j'enveyeje qe t'enveyejes q'il/ol enveyeje qe j'enveyejions qe v'enveyejiéz q'il enveyejent/enveyejant

je cres tu cres i/o cret je creyons vous creyéz i creyent/crevent/crezent/cressent

je creyaes tu creyaes i/o creyaet je creyons/creyains vous creyiéz i creyaent

je creyis/crû tu creyis/crûs il/ol creyit/crût je creyimes/crûmes vous creyites/crûtes i creyirent/crûrant

je crerë tu crerâs il/ol crera je crerons vous creréz i creront

je crerës tu crerës i/o crerët je crerions/crerant vous creriéz i crerant

qe je creje qe tu crejes q'i/o creje qe je crejions qe vous crejiéz q'i crejent/crejant

Gallo is an Oïl language, and its vocabulary, like its grammar, derives largely from Vulgar Latin. Lexical items inherited from Latin are also found in Old French and in other Oïl languages, and some terms were carried overseas to Quebec, such as ferdillouz ("chilly, sensitive to cold"), which is used for example in the Magdalen Islands in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence.

Words in Gallo inherited from Latin do not necessarily have direct equivalents in French, such as sicot, which denotes the stump of a cut plant and derives from Vulgar Latin ciccotu (compare French "chicot"). Other terms, such as merien, meaning "nap", also derive from Vulgar Latin (compare French "méridienne"), although the corresponding French word is not inherited from Latin ("sieste" is a borrowing from Spanish). Finally, some words come from Classical Latin, such as subller, which derives from sibilāre. The French equivalent siffler comes instead from Vulgar Latin sifilāre. The verb chomë, from Latin caumāre, has retained its original meaning "to lack", but it also has other meanings such as "to raise" or "to set upright". It can be used reflexively, with se chomë meaning "to stand up", and as a present participle, en chomant meaning "while remaining standing". The noun chomant also means "skeleton".

Gallo has a significant Celtic substrate, inherited mainly from Gaulish but also from Breton, which distinguishes it from other Oïl languages. Because of similarities between Breton and Gaulish, it is sometimes difficult to determine the precise Celtic etymology of Gallo words. Borrowings from Breton are more common near the linguistic border. A term of Celtic origin used at the eastern edge of Upper Brittany is therefore more likely to derive from Gaulish than from Breton.

The word pobran ("buttercup") is used only along the Atlantic coast, from the Gulf of Morbihan to the Pays de Retz via the Loire estuary; the word berlu ("foxglove") is not used beyond Saint-Brieuc and Ploërmel ; and trinchon ("sorrel") is not heard east of Lamballe, Redon and Blain. For its part, bran (" cereal bran "), which is not used beyond Fougères, Rennes and Redon, resembles the Breton brenn, but it derives from Latin brennus, which itself may come from a Gaulish term.

In general, Breton has borrowed far more words from Gallo than Gallo has borrowed from Breton. Thus, brochë ("to knit"), which comes from Latin brocca, gave rise to Breton brochenn ("knitting needle").

The lexicon of Germanic origin in Gallo derives largely from Frankish, the language of the Franks. The Franks occupied the eastern part of Brittany from the 5th century onward and gradually assimilated into the local populations.

Ganache (UK : / ɡ ə ˈ n æ ʃ /, US : / ɡ ə ˈ n ɑː ʃ / ; French: [ ɡanaʃ ]) is a glaze, icing, sauce, or filling for pastries and other sugar confectionery that is made from chocolate and cream.

In the broad sense of the term, ganache is an emulsion between (melted) solid chocolate (which is made with cocoa butter, the fat phase) and a water-based ingredient, which can be cream, milk or fruit pulp. It has a smooth and shiny appearance. Depending on the ratio of cocoa butter and water in the finished product, ganache can be either semi-solid or liquid at room temperature, which allows its usage in a wide diversity of desserts and confectionery items.

Ganache is a chocolate preparation containing heavy cream, or some other liquid.

The ratio between these ingredients varies, depending on the ingredients used and the preferred final consistency. A 1:1 ratio (i.e., equal weights of dark chocolate and cream) will produce a relatively hard ganache appropriate for icing or filling foods. More chocolate makes a "heavy" ganache, appropriate for making truffles ; more liquid makes a thinner, "pourable" ganache that is more easily whipped. A heavy ganache can require twice as much dark chocolate as cream by weight, or 2.5 times as much milk chocolate or white chocolate. Similar ratios apply when making butter-based ganache, which uses unsalted butter instead of cream.

In preparing a ganache, cream and sometimes butter are heated. If the ganache is being infused with flavorings such as herbs or a tea, they are added to the hot (not boiling) cream and left to steep for several minutes. The hot cream is added to chocolate, left to stand for a few minutes so the heat from the cream can melt the chocolate, and then stirred to combine.

Finally, liqueurs or flavored pastes are sometimes added at the end. If liqueurs are added, then the amount of chocolate in the ganache must be increased proportionally to compensate for the added liquid (e.g., 100 grams of chocolate for 100 grams of liqueur, if a 1:1 ratio is being used). Other flavorings, such as nuts, may also be added at the end.

Ganache was said to have been created accidentally in the 1850s in Paris at a confectionery shop owned by Paul Siraudin, after an apprentice spilled cream on chocolate, prompting his master to call him "ganache" (meaning "idiot"). Ganache or crème ganache was originally sold as a kind of chocolate truffle. Siraudin named the sweet after a popular Vaudeville comedy debuted in that year by his contemporary Victorien Sardou called Les Ganaches ("The Chumps").

Chocolate desserts similar to ganache have probably been made since the introduction of cocoa to Europe. In his 1693 cookbook Le Cuisinier royal et bourgeois, François Massialot describes a 'crême de chocolat' consisting of milk, egg yolk, cream and chocolate.

Gardens of the French Renaissance were initially inspired by the Italian Renaissance garden, which evolved later into the grander and more formal jardin à la française during the reign of Louis XIV, by the middle of the 17th century.

In 1495, King Charles VIII and his nobles brought the Renaissance style back to France after their war campaign in Italy. They reached their peak in the gardens of the royal Château de Fontainebleau, Château d'Amboise, Château de Blois, and Château de Chenonceau.

French Renaissance gardens were characterized by symmetrical and geometric planting beds or parterres, plants in pots, paths of gravel and sand, terraces, stairways and ramps, moving water in the form of canals, cascades and monumental fountains, and extensive use of artificial grottoes, labyrinths, and statues of mythological figures. They became an extension of the châteaux that they surrounded, and were designed to illustrate the Renaissance ideals of measure and proportion, and to remind viewers of the virtues of Ancient Rome.

In the 13th century, the Italian landscape architect Pietro de' Crescenzi wrote a treatise called Opus Ruralium Commodium, which laid out a formal plan for gardens, ornamented with topiary sculptures, trees and bushes trimmed into architectural shapes, following a tradition begun by the Romans. King Charles V of France ordered a French translation in 1373, and the new Italian style began to appear in France.

Another influential writer was Leon Battista Alberti (1404–1472), who in 1450 wrote a tract, De re aedificatoria for Lorenzo de' Medici. Alberti used the geometric principles of Vitruvius to design building façades and gardens. He suggested that the house should look over the garden, and that the garden should have "porticos for giving shade, cradles where vines grow on columns of marble, and there should be vases and even amusing statues, provided that they are not obscene."

In his design of the gardens of the Cortile del Belvedere in Rome, the architect Bramante (1444–1544) introduced the idea of perspective, using a long axis perpendicular to the palace, along which he placed parterres and fountains. This became a central feature of Renaissance gardens.

A popular novel by the monk Francesco Colonna, published in Venice in 1499, called The Dream of Poliphile, an allegorical journey by a traveller, Poliphile, to fantastic lands in search of his love, Polia, had an enormous influence upon gardens of the time. The ideas of a "garden-island" in a lake, such as the one in the Boboli Gardens in Florence, of statues of giants coming out of earth in the park of the Villa di Pratolino, and the theme of labyrinth were all taken from the imaginary voyages of Poliphile. All these elements were to appear in French Renaissance gardens.

In 1495, Charles VIII invaded the Kingdom of Naples, and he saw the luxury of the palaces and gardens in Italy. When he returned to France in 1496, he convinced and brought back with him 22 Italian artists, including a monk and master gardener from Naples named Pacello da Mercogliano. They decided to reproduce in Amboise the marvels of Tuscany and elected a 15 hectares amphitheater-shaped land in the heart of the city to realize the King's dream of Poggioreale. Charles VIII ordered the construction of Château-Gaillard, Amboise, and Pacello chose this royal domain to introduce and acclimatize the first orange trees in France. He created lawns, floral beds and settings for his "Arte del Verde" and successfully introduced Italian style gardens for the very first time in France. He used Château-Gaillard as an experimental laboratory for his innovations: he created a new variety of plum called " Reine Claude " ("Queen Claude"), and used very specific techniques such as half barrels as tree planter boxes.

The gardens of Château-Gaillard stand as the "missing link" between medieval monastic gardens and future French formal gardens.

At the beginning of the 16th century, King Francis I, who had also visited Italy and had met Leonardo da Vinci, built gardens in the new style on three terraces of different levels bordered by the old walls of his Château de Blois. Besides the parterres of flowers, the gardens produced a wide variety of vegetables and fruits, including orange and lemon trees in boxes, which were taken indoors in winter. The building that sheltered them, still standing, was the first orangerie in France. The gardens were on the site of the present-day Grow Garden] and the site of the railways station. The last vestiges of the garden were destroyed in 1890 by the construction of the Avenue Victor-Hugo.

At about the same time, Pacello da Mercogliano designed gardens for the Château de Gaillon owned by Cardinal Georges d'Amboise, a Minister of King Henry IV, who had also spent time in Italy. The gardens, built on different levels below the old medieval château, were planted in parterres of flowers and fruit trees. The parterre at the entrance of the garden featured the coat of arms of France in flowers. Bushes were trimmed into the shapes of men on horseback, ships, and birds. It was also decorated with imposing fountains of marble.

The gardens of the Château de Bury were built between 1511 and 1524 by Florimont Robertet, a Secretary of State for both Louis XII and Francis I. Robertet had visited the Villa Medici in Fiesole and wanted to reproduce the terraced gardens he saw there. The château, departing from the traditional design, was integrated closely with its gardens. Visitors passed through a square garden inside the castle and out into two geometric gardens behind the château, decorated with fountains and surrounded by a wooden gallery. The axis went from the entrance to the chapel, at the far end of the garden. Like Italian Renaissance gardens, the gardens of Bury were located on the edge of a hill, with a fine view of the forest of Blois. In the centre of the court of the château, Robertet placed a bronze copy of Michelangelo's David, which had been given to him by the Republic of Florence.

The gardens of the Château de Fontainebleau, located in a forest which had been the hunting preserve of the Capetian Kings of France, were created by Francis I beginning in 1528. The garden featured fountains, parterres, a forest of pine trees brought from Provence and the first artificial grotto in France in 1541. Catherine de' Medici ordered copies in bronze of the statues which decorated the Cortile del Belvedere in Rome. A statue of Hercules in repose by Michelangelo decorated the garden of the lake. In 1594, Henry IV added a small island in the lake connected to the court of fountains by a bridge.

The Château de Chenonceau had two separate gardens: the first created in 1551 for Diane de Poitiers, the mistress of King Henry II, with a large parterre and a jet d'eau (jet of water), and a second, smaller garden created for Catherine de' Medici in 1560, on a terrace raised above the River Cher, divided into compartments, with a basin in the centre.

The gardens of the Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye marked the beginning of the transition to a new style, which would be called jardin à la française. The garden was laid out in 1595 by royal gardener Charles Mollet for Henry IV.

The La Garenne Lemot estate (French : Domaine de la Garenne Lemot ; Breton : domani Garenne Lemot) is a park located in the communes of Gétigné and Clisson in Loire-Atlantique, as well as Cugand in Vendée. It was created by the sculptor François-Frédéric Lemot at the beginning of the 19th century. The ensemble is intended as a tribute to the landscapes and architecture of Italy. The estate consists of a neo-Palladian villa overlooking the valley of the Sèvre Nantaise, as well as woods and gardens where fabriques and statues in the Antique style, along with the gardener's and gatekeeper's houses in an Italianate style, are erected.

The Departmental Council of Loire-Atlantique purchased the estate from the Lemot family in 1968. It was listed as a historic monument the following year and has been classified in stages since 1988. Currently, it is a place for strolls and a cultural center where contemporary art exhibitions and performances are regularly organized.

The La Garenne Lemot estate is located in the southeast of the Loire-Atlantique department, on the border with Vendée, in the valley of the Sèvre Nantaise. At the southeastern edge of the commune of Clisson, it extends mainly over the territory of the commune of Gétigné. The park occupies an entire hillside within a loop formed by the river, from the heights at thirty-five meters above sea level along the former Route nationale 149 between Nantes and Poitiers, down to the riverbanks, twenty meters lower. The total area of the estate is 13 hectares. It is open to the public every day, with free access.

However, the park has the particularity of including elements located outside the estate, on the other side of the river, placed there to create perspectives with the buildings and garden features. These fabriques are located in the territories of the communes of Clisson and Cugand.

Originally, the land known as the "Bois de la Garenne" was a hunting reserve belonging to the lords of Clisson. The site is situated on granitic terrain, then covered with heaths and about four hundred oaks.

During the French Revolution, during the Vendée Wars, the Clisson valley was devastated. In response to the levée en masse of three hundred thousand men by the Convention in 1793, the Clisson district rose in insurrection. After battles between the Vendéens and Republicans, the "Mayençais" of Jean-Baptiste Kléber set fire to the Clisson castle and many houses. In January 1794, the infernal columns finished destroying Clisson, the church, and many houses in the village of Gétigné. The town's population used the oaks from the garenne around 1796 to build shelters while awaiting the reconstruction of their homes. It was in this context of rebuilding the valley that the arrival of François-Frédéric Lemot changed the fate of the estate.

In 1805, François-Frédéric Lemot, a sculptor from Lyon, was drawn to Clisson by François Cacault (1743–1805), a diplomat and former deputy of Loire-Inférieure. The latter, along with his brother Pierre Cacault (1744–1810), an artist painter, had founded a museum there with numerous art collections amassed during their stays in Italy.

Both men wished to make it a place of welcome for artists. While stationed in Rome, François Cacault had the opportunity to associate with artists residing at the French Academy in Rome, including François-Frédéric Lemot, Prix de Rome winner in sculpture in 1790. By settling in Clisson, the artists around Cacault sought to rediscover the landscape paintings of the Roman countryside in the hills overlooking the Sèvre.

According to François-Frédéric Lemot, Nicolas Poussin was inspired by the Sèvre valley to paint the landscapes of his painting Diogène jetant son écuelle, currently housed at the Louvre Museum. This legend is false but remains an invitation for artists to explore the region. Upon his arrival in 1805 with other artists, the sculptor was struck by the resemblance to Italy:

When I arrived in Clisson, I was so surprised and struck by the great character of the landscape that I felt transported to Italy. I could not stop contemplating the richness and variety of its admirable scenes, where nature seemed to display all its picturesque magnificence. The Bois de la Garenne, in particular, held me constantly with the beauty of its vegetation, its rocks, its waterfalls, the expanse of its viewpoints, and night always found me with a pencil in hand during these solitary walks.

— François-Frédéric Lemot, Notice historique sur la ville et le château de Clisson, 1812

François-Frédéric Lemot acquired the Garenne property on 26 and immediately began preparatory drawings for his estate project. He developed it continuously until his death in 1827. The inspirations remained Italian; François-Frédéric Lemot aimed to recreate an idealized historical landscape painting evoking, as in the works of Poussin, the countryside of Tuscany, Latium, and Umbria. The sculptor wanted to give the site the air of Tivoli, a spectacular city and grand landscape, a favorite study subject for artists staying in Italy. He enlisted the Nantes architect Mathurin Crucy, also a Prix de Rome winner in 1774, to draft his designs. The entire project was overseen on-site by the Clisson estate manager, Joseph Gautret (1771–1855), who resided in the gardener's house. The correspondence between the two men provides insight into the stages of the estate's development. The property covered a total area of twenty-five hectares, of which the park was only the center: Baron Lemot was a true landowner, owning several meierhofs. His properties were elevated to the rank of Majorat the day before his death.

The park was developed from 1806; François-Frédéric Lemot planted 280 trees, followed by a thousand poplars the next year along the Sèvre and on the river's islands. Gautret and his workers devoted 360 days to this task and to clearing brush and brambles. The manager even acquired ferrets to eliminate the rabbits in the garenne. At the same time, three avenues were laid out, converging toward the terrace and the future site of the villa. The small paths were bordered with lilacs and hazels. François-Frédéric Lemot demanded dense vegetation over most of the park to create surprise effects. A vegetable garden, now gone, was laid out and enclosed between 1807 and 1808: around a basin, a three-hectare nursery was planted to allow various species to mature before planting in the park. Along the Sèvre's banks, the terrain was leveled from September 1806, and a meadow was established. Between 1807 and 1809, two hundred poplars were planted along the banks and on the small islands, along with a hundred willows. Some park developments strictly followed the chapter "les Jardins" from Pierre Henri de Valenciennes 's treatise: Éléments de perspective pratique, a l'usage des artistes, suivis de réflexions et conseils à un élève sur la peinture, et particulièrement sur le genre du paysage, Paris, Victor Desenne, J.-B.-M. Duprat, Jules-Louis-Melchior Porthmann, 1799. The park is thus a recomposition of a historical landscape painting on the scale of nature, making it a unique project.

Gautret employed up to thirteen people for park maintenance. Seeds were transported from Nantes or Paris. Local species were favored for tree selection, accompanied by shrubs to create thickets. Numerous pines were also planted, extending to the hills on the other side of the Sèvre, between the obelisk and the Clisson castle, from 1809. François-Frédéric Lemot declared: "I want to multiply this tree greatly in the park and the region, which will give it entirely the appearance of Italy"(7). Roses were installed from 1814. From the same year, vines were also planted: first, chasselas vines on brick pillars along the main entrance path, forming a trellis. Then, four thousand vine plants were installed on the sunny hillside in 1827. Exotic tree species were introduced at the end of the 19th century.

The buildings were constructed in Italian-inspired styles. The gardener's house was built from 1811 to 1815, likely based on plans by Mathurin Crucy or François-Léonard Seheult [ fr ]. Crucy drafted plans for a villa, with construction starting in 1816. The work and plans were taken over by the Parisian architect Pierre-Louis van Cleemputte (1758–1834) in 1824, but François-Frédéric Lemot never saw its completion. The garden fabriques were built by Mathurin Crucy and François-Frédéric Lemot between 1818 and 1823. Upon his death, François-Frédéric Lemot was buried in the Temple of Friendship, a former funeral chapel arranged in the Clisson cemetery, opposite the castle, across the Sèvre.

The son of François-Frédéric Lemot, Barthélémy (1810–1883), decided to settle in Clisson in 1841 and served as mayor of the town several times until 1881. He completed the development of the villa but also had the belvedere, the monumental staircase, the Gallery of Illustrious Men, the stone colonnade enclosing the courtyard, and the icehouse constructed. As the town's first magistrate, he promoted the Italianate style in the construction of several public buildings.

In the 1950s and 1960s, the estate served as a reception center called "Le Joyeux Nid" for children in difficulty under the care of child welfare services. It remained in the possession of the sculptor's descendants until 1968, when the estate was sold to the Departmental Council of Loire-Atlantique. The estate then began to be subject to protection measures as a historic monument. In 1969, the villa and the Temple of Vesta were listed, followed by the Henri IV column and the surrounding park in 1986. By decree of 14, the entire park and its fabriques, the exterior of the villa, and the gardener's house were classified as historic monuments, along with the exterior of the Temple of Friendship and the obelisk on the left bank. In 2000, the gatekeeper's house, the last unprotected building, was classified.

The estate hosted the Frac des Pays de la Loire from 1988 until 1994, when it relocated to Nantes. In 1990, a documentary exhibition on the estate's history and Italianate architecture was permanently installed in the gardener's house. In the same building, the Center for Studies on Heritage and Italianity in Architecture (CÉPIA) organized conferences, summer universities on-site, and produced publications in the field of architecture and heritage.

François-Frédéric Lemot, being a sculptor and not an architect, enlisted neoclassical architects for the construction of the buildings within the estate. However, his drawings indicate that it was François-Frédéric Lemot who defined the main lines of the architectural project for all these buildings.

The building was erected by the architect Pierre-Louis van Cleemputte (1758–1834), after several projects by Mathurin Crucy. Its construction was planned from the outset of the project, but work did not begin until 1824. Its architecture is in the neo-Palladian style. Composed of a main building and two return wings, the southwest façade opens via a loggia onto the valley of the Sèvre and several follies located opposite, on the other side of the river. Barthélemy Lemot added a belvedere to the top of the building, as well as a colonnade in a hemicycle shape overlooking the three access paths to the villa. In 1872, he commissioned the architect Lenoir to complete the loggia. It was not until around 1930 that the former kitchen garden alley, opposite the villa, was widened into a grand access alley, with statues of Diana, Hippomenes and Atalanta, as well as floral kraters.

Inside, around 1866, Barthélémy Lemot also arranged the gallery of the illustrious on the first floor of the villa. This includes medallion representations of his father as well as seven other artists, friends of François-Frédéric: Claude Dejoux, sculptor and Lemot's teacher; Charles Percier, the architect; François Gérard, the painter; André Galle, sculptor; François-Joseph Talma, the tragedian; François Adrien Boieldieu, composer; and Antoine-Jean Gros, also a painter. These medallions were made from portraits by David d'Angers. The gallery also contains a series of four allegorical busts from the 17th century representing the seasons, works by Alessandro Rondoni, as well as a bronze cast of the Judgment of Solomon, the Prix de Rome winning work of François-Frédéric Lemot in 1790

As the center of gravity of the park, the villa commands several views over different follies and surrounding monuments: the antique-style obelisk to the east, the statue of Henri IV and the Temple of Friendship to the south, and the Château de Clisson to the west.

The gardener's house was the first building constructed on the estate, in an Italianate style. Two inspirations can be noticed: the crenelated walls and the dovecote tower recall the castelli of Umbria. In contrast, the entrance pavilion, adorned with a gallery topped by a loggia, is directly inspired by the casa colonica. This is a type of architectural model defined as part of an agrarian reform launched in the Tuscan countryside in the 1770s to rehouse peasants whose lands had been redistributed. Mathurin Crucy and François-Frédéric Lemot thus aimed to propose a model of agrarian reform already tested in the context of rebuilding the surrounding countryside. Construction began in 1811 and was completed in 1815. Rubble masonry was used for the main structure, but the rural Italian character is conveyed by the use of elongated brick (seventeen centimeters long by two centimeters thick). The flat roofs are covered with red tiles, and the presence of serlianas and round arch bays using brick gives the ensemble its southern character. The house is complemented by a barn, two sheds, and a dovecote. It was primarily in this building that François-Frédéric Lemot resided, as the villa was barely completed at the time of his death.

The gatekeeper's house was built in 1817 near the Sèvre riverbanks. Located at one of the park's entrances, it evokes rural Umbrian houses with its paired windows, its low-arched windows on the upper floor, and the external staircase under an awning.

The arrival of François-Frédéric Lemot in Clisson corresponds to a period of reconstruction and transformation in the town and its surroundings. The Italianate style chosen for the estate by the sculptor directly influences a number of buildings constructed in the commune and residences built in this region of the Sèvre Nantaise valley. Thus, even though the initial reconstruction of Clisson after the Revolution used architectural elements and materials traditional to the region, several buildings soon drew direct inspiration from the Italian style introduced by François-Frédéric Lemot. During his eulogy delivered by the deputy mayor of Clisson in 1827, it was stated that "to please him, we sought in our constructions to approach the picturesque style to support his vision". The use of small-sized bricks, round tiles, the incorporation of serlianas, paired windows, low-pitched roofs, and Genoese cornices [ fr ] demonstrate this. These architectural elements are notably found in the former Hôtel de l'Europe, built in 1844–1845, in the asylum hall constructed by the commune in 1853 while Barthélémy Lemot was mayor of the town, and in the Busseuil house, built by a Nantes bookseller friend of Lemot.

The architectural influence of La Garenne Lemot is also evident in several estates built in the early 19th century in the Clisson region by wealthy landowners from Nantes or industrialists newly settled in the Sèvre valley. This is the case, for example, in Clisson itself, at the Garenne Valentin estate. The merchant Jacques-Charles Valentin, a friend of Lemot, established his residence in the former Benedictine convent of the Trinity, which he redeveloped and expanded in the Italian and neo-Palladian style between 1810 and 1817. This is also true of the Château de l'Oiselinière in Gorges, four kilometers northwest of Clisson, in the rustic Italian style, and the Noë Bel-Air estate in Vallet in the Palladian style. This influence is also found in several mills and factories established along the Sèvre.

The Temple of Vesta is the largest fabrique in the park, likely based on plans by Mathurin Crucy, modified by Cleemputte and François-Frédéric Lemot. Constructed from the summer of 1819 to July 1822, it is a direct reference to the Temple of Vesta in Tivoli. Taking the form of a tholos, with a circular plan, it consists of eighteen columns with Doric capitals, rather than Corinthian as in its Italian model. The shafts of the columns were carved from local granite, but the capitals and bases were sculpted in Paris. The central cella includes a door and three windows. It was intended to house a marble statue in its center, which was never realized. However, the walls between the windows once held plaster busts and terracotta statuettes, which have since disappeared. François-Frédéric Lemot wanted a basin behind the temple to supply a waterfall cascading under the fabrique and down to the Sèvre, to further imitate the gardens of Tivoli. This project was not completed. Only a vaulted passage in the stone base remains.

The Grotte d'Héloïse is set into the hillside facing the Sèvre. It is a direct reference to Héloïse d'Argenteuil, the lover of Peter Abelard, who was born in Le Pallet, nearby. In this arranged and transformed cave, a dedication by Antoine Peccot [ fr ], nephew of Crucy, was engraved in 1813: "Héloïse perhaps wandered on this shore." According to Abelard himself, the future abbess came to her lover's hometown to give birth to Astrolabe. François-Frédéric Lemot thus attempted to suggest that she did so on the banks of the Sèvre, in the current park. The allusion also reflects the early Romanticism interest in the Middle Ages.

The Rousseau Rock bears the poem by the English poet William Shenstone, already engraved in the fountain cave of the Parc Jean-Jacques Rousseau. This park, one of the most famous fabrique parks of the 18th century in France, was a model for François-Frédéric Lemot. Only the first line changes: " Ô limpide fontaine " ("Oh limpid fountain") is replaced by " Ô limpide rivière " ("Oh limpid river"), a reference to the nearby Sèvre.

The Delille Rock has borne a verse from the poet Jacques Delille 's work Les Jardins since 1815: "Its indestructible mass has wearied time." This quotation is also present on a rock in the Château de Mortefontaine [ fr ], another famous 18th century fabrique park near the Ermenonville Forest. At the foot of this rock, near the winding path, stands the statue of a Roman senator.

The antique edicule was designed by Crucy, taking the form of a rural oratory, like an ancient lararium. Featuring a circular niche on one side and a semicircular niche on the other, it was intended to house a statue of Ceres. This statue is now located in the central avenue. The edicule is built in stone and brick.

The antique tomb was also designed by Crucy. Carved by a local stonemason, it replicates the form of Jean-Jacques Rousseau 's tomb on the Île des Peupliers in Ermenonville. It bore the painted inscription et in Arcadia Ego, now faded. This tomb also appears in the paintings of Hubert Robert and in an inscription on a burial in a painting of the same name by Nicolas Poussin. It is an allusion to Virgil, evoking the fragility of the world.

The Madrid Column is believed to be a reuse of an architectural element from the Château de Madrid. This Renaissance château was built in Neuilly-sur-Seine by Francis I and destroyed at the end of the 18th century. No archival evidence confirms this hypothesis. Nevertheless, it constitutes another homage to French history, particularly the Renaissance period.

The milestone was erected in 1813. According to François-Frédéric Lemot, the Roman road between Nantes and Poitiers crossed the estate, which has proven to be fanciful. However, this milestone was intended to recall the passage of this road through the park, along the river. On the other side of the path, a stone mounting block was arranged, modeled on ancient seats used by Roman riders to mount their horses.

The Baths of Diana is a natural rock formation arranged in 1815 in the riverbed, intended as a resting place for the Roman goddess of the hunt. For this, François-Frédéric Lemot drew inspiration from the banks of Lake Nemi near Rome and the Metamorphoses by Ovid. The wild effect of the site is enhanced by the groves of hornbeams planted around it.

The Plessard Mill was purchased by François-Frédéric Lemot in 1823, who left it in its original state, straddling the river. It was rebuilt in the Italian style between 1851 and 1854 by his son and Paul Méchinaud, a local architect. The building was further expanded in 1901.

The park, due to the orientation of the slope, is entirely focused toward the opposite bank of the Sèvre: this left bank was therefore a privileged location for installing other fabriques to correspond with the estate's perspectives.

The obelisk, designed by Crucy, was originally intended to be placed within the grounds of the Château de Clisson. It was the Nantes architect who convinced François-Frédéric Lemot to install it on the other side of the park, still on the opposite bank, to enhance the perspective. Once the land in the commune of Cugand, in Vendée, was acquired in 1814, the structure was built in 1815 with proportions allowing it to be visible from the villa.

The Temple of Friendship is a former funerary chapel called "Saint-Gilles Church" located in the Clisson cemetery. François-Frédéric Lemot acquired it in 1808 and in 1812 added a Doric portico to the facade facing the valley and the estate's villa. The goal was to transform it into a temple intended to house the remains of the Cacault brothers. It was completed only in 1824. Ultimately, only François-Frédéric Lemot was buried there upon his death in 1827.

The Henri IV Column is a column topped with a bust of the King of France. It is one of the last fabriques created by François-Frédéric Lemot, who likely sculpted the bust himself. He is also famous for sculpting the equestrian statue of the same king located on the Pont Neuf in Paris. The column is intended to provide a perspective from the villa's terrace and also symbolizes François-Frédéric Lemot's allegiance to the Restoration regime.

For François-Frédéric Lemot, the ruins of the Château de Clisson constitute a fabrique of the park in their own right. They can be observed by park visitors from the villa's terrace. For this reason, he acquired the ruins, consolidating rather than restoring them. This is one of the earliest examples in France of integrating picturesque medieval ruins into a fabrique park, a practice common in England since the early 18th century.

Since the establishment of the Frac des Pays de la Loire at the estate between 1988 and 1994, La Garenne Lemot has been closely associated with contemporary art. Two fabriques designed by contemporary artists have been installed in the park, alongside the historic ones. The first is the work titled Pergola/Two-Way Mirror Bridge for Clisson, located on the banks of the Sèvre, in the eastern part of the park, created in 1989 by the American artist Dan Graham. He designed an installation specifically for this site, combining natural and artificial materials. It is a two-pane glass cabin protecting a small passage over a water feature, reflecting the surrounding park. The second fabrique is a work by Pascal Convert titled L'Appartement de l'artiste, located in the undergrowth near the villa. This small black marmorite structure was not designed for the park but during the artist's residency at the Villa Medici in 1990, while he was a fellow at the French Academy in Rome. Both works belong to the collection of the Frac des Pays de la Loire.

Beneath the appearance of wild and picturesque nature, the floral species were carefully selected at the beginning of the 19th century. The tree species were first chosen based on the recommendations of contemporary gardening treatises: acacia, alder, birch, chestnut, cedar, hornbeam, oak, spruce, maple, ash, yew, horse chestnut, larch, walnut, elm, poplar, plane tree, willow, linden, Japanese varnish tree, rowan, pear, and apple or wild cherry. François-Frédéric Lemot also selected pines to enhance the Italian landscape effect: maritime pine, stone pine, and Scots pine. Shrubs were added to increase the density of the groves: privet, holly, hazel, as well as lilacs, roses, and broom.

The garden itself is designed for strolling and contemplating viewpoints. Two main sections can be distinguished. The upper part of the park is organized into three main avenues, all converging toward the villa and its esplanade. The first heads west toward one of the park's entrances opposite the road to Cholet. At the center of the roundabout where it ends is the park's former icehouse. The second, aligned with the villa, leads to the vegetable garden, while the third, oriented northeast, ends at the Diana circus, at the center of which stands a statue of Faustina. The lower part of the park is organized from the entrance from the town of Clisson and the former Saint-Antoine hospital, where the gatekeeper's house is located. After passing under a trellis of virgin ivy, the avenue winds along the Sèvre valley through trees and thickets, alternating between open and enclosed spaces, while providing views of the main garden fabriques. It allows one to ascend to the Diana roundabout, passing by the easternmost fabrique of the park, the Temple of Vesta.

After various historical studies on the park, particularly through the examination of the correspondence between François-Frédéric Lemot and his estate manager, an initial restoration of the park began in 1992. In 1999, a study was launched to establish a park management plan, accompanied by a health assessment of the park. The objective of this plan is to implement dynamic conservation of the vegetal heritage through the establishment of a master plan for restoration, planting, and maintenance of the various spaces. This management plan was developed in collaboration with garden historian Elisabetta Cereghini and architect Vincent Lurton. It is one of the first management plans established in France for a historic garden, following that of the Château de la Roche-Courbon and concurrently with the Parc de Saint-Cloud. The new restoration work began in 2002 with the aim of restoring the picturesque atmospheres intended by François-Frédéric Lemot, while taking into account the park's evolution since the sculptor's death. The work aims to both preserve the park's vegetal heritage and contribute to its necessary renewal. External constraints such as climatic conditions and visitor traffic are taken into account. It is thus planned to plant conifers such as fir, Virginia juniper, thuja, as well as whitebeam, cherry, medlar, bay laurel, and flowering species: trumpet vine, clematis, daphne, Hydrangea sp., tamarisk, snowball viburnum, and jasmine. The selection of roses is based on varieties existing at the end of the 18th century and the beginning of the 19th century.

The estate is included in the Zone naturelle d'intérêt écologique, faunistique et floristique (ZNIEFF) type 2 (2nd generation) "Vallée de la Sèvre de Nantes à Clisson," of which it forms the southern end. This ZNIEFF, whose inventory began in 1989 and was completed in 2005, includes significant natural habitats composed, in addition to the river's running waters, of deciduous forests, alluvial thickets, and waterside vegetation. In these environments, the presence of three protected fauna species and four rare or threatened specimens, as well as seven protected flora species and seventeen rare or threatened specimens, has been recorded.

The rare and protected fauna specimens are three fish species: the river lamprey (Lampetra fluviatilis), the European eel (Anguilla anguilla), and the northern pike (Esox lucius), as well as one snake species: the viperine snake (Natrix maura). Among the significant flora specimens, there is one fern, the common adder's-tongue (Ophioglossum vulgatum), seven monocotyledons : the starved sedge (Carex depauperata), the green-winged orchid (Coeloglossum viride), the great wood-rush (Luzula sylvatica), the bug orchid (Orchis coriophora), the loose-flowered orchid (Orchis laxiflora), the burnt orchid (Orchis ustulata), the triangular club-rush (Schoenoplectus triqueter), and eight dicotyledons : the estuary angelica (Angelica heterocarpa [ fr ]), the narrow-leaved bittercress (Cardamine impatiens), the soft hornwort (Ceratophyllum submersum), the solid-tubered corydalis (Corydalis solida), the false rue-anemone (Isopyrum thalictroides), the wood forget-me-not (Myosotis sylvatica), the ivy broomrape (Orobanche hederae), and the thyme-leaved speedwell (Veronica acinifolia).

Each year, the Villa Lemot hosts exhibitions of contemporary art. As part of an exchange program with the French Academy of Fine Arts, the estate has hosted an annual exhibition since 1993 showcasing the work of artists in residence at the Casa de Velázquez in Madrid, a residency organized in partnership with the Academy. After two years of residency in Spain, young artists present their work in photography, painting, video, and drawing at the villa each year.

Additionally, a new partnership has been established with the Frac des Pays de la Loire (which was housed at the site between 1988 and 1993) and the estate since 2006. Once a year, the FRAC organizes an exhibition of contemporary artists. The first exhibition was held in 2006 under the title "Chambre avec vues."

Since 1994, every October, the "Entretiens de la Garenne Lemot" are held: an international multidisciplinary colloquium primarily focused on the relationship between Antiquity and the 18th century. Organized by the association of the same name, the colloquium is directed by Jackie Pigeaud, a former professor at the University of Nantes. Its proceedings have been published in recent years by the Presses universitaires de Rennes. Topics addressed include the reading of the garden (1997), academies (1999), travel (2000), water (2002), the meeting of the arts (2005), metamorphoses (2006), mirrors (2008), the limit (2009), and the tree (2010).

A documentation center dedicated to art, architecture, and landscape is also available to the public, located in the gardener's house. During the warmer months, a cultural program is offered in the park: dance, performances, concerts, and open-air cinema are organized from May to September as part of a departmental program titled "Les beaux jours."

Garrigue or garigue (/ ɡ ə ˈ r iː ɡ / gə- REEG), also known as phrygana (Greek : φρύγανα [ ˈfriɣana ], n. pl.), is a type of low scrubland ecoregion and plant community in the Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub biome.

It is found on limestone soils in southern France and around the Mediterranean Basin, generally near the seacoast where the moderated Mediterranean climate provides annual summer drought. It is an anthropogenic degradation and succession form of former evergreen oak forests that existed until around 2500 years BCE.

The term has also found its way into haute cuisine, suggestive of the resinous flavours of a garrigue shrubland.

UNEP World Conservation Monitoring Centre described garrigue as "discontinuous bushy associations of the Mediterranean calcareous plateaus, which have relatively alkaline soils. It is often composed of kermes oak, lavender, thyme, and white cistus. There may be a few isolated trees."

Garrigue is discontinuous with widely spaced bush associations with open spaces, and is often extensive. It is associated with limestone and base rich soils, and calcium associated plants.

Aside from dense thickets of kermes oak that punctuate the garrigue landscape, juniper and stunted holly oaks and holm oaks are the typical trees; aromatic lime-tolerant shrubs such as lavender, sage, rosemary, wild thyme and Artemisia are common garrigue plants.

The aromatic oils and soluble monoterpenes of such herbs leached into garrigue soils from leaf litter have been connected with plant allelopathy, which asserts the dominance of a plant over its neighbors, especially annuals, and contributes to the characteristic open spacing and restricted flora in a garrigue. The fines (charred wood and smoke residues, or charcoal dust) of periodic brush fires also have had an effect on the patterning and composition of the garrigues. Clear summer skies and intense solar radiation have induced the evolution of protective physiologies: the familiar glaucous, grayish-green of garrigue landscapes is produced by the protective white hairs and light-diffusing, pebbled surfaces of many leaves typical of garrigue plants.

Garrigue is a common general word for the shrubland habitat ecosystems in southern France along with maquis, which are known elsewhere in the Mediterranean region as matorral and tomillar in Spain, macchia in Italy, phrygana in Greece, garig in Croatia, and garriga in Catalonia or horesh in Israel.

In California a similar Mediterranean climate ecoregion is named chaparral ; in Chile it is named the matorral ; in South Africa it is named fynbos ; and in Australia it is named mallee. All are in the Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub biome.

Both garrigue and maquis are associated with the Mediterranean climate within the Mediterranean region. However, the distinction is not clear and term use is inconsistent.

Maquis shrubland is broadly similar to garrigue, but the vegetation is denser, being composed of numerous closely spaced shrubs. Maquis is associated with siliceous (acid) soils, unlike the relatively alkaline calcareous soils of the garrigue. Its plant communities are often suites associated with holm oak. Calcifuges such as Erica and Calluna are present in the maquis ecoregion.

Deforestation of the indigenous oak forest since the Late Bronze Age, for cultivation of olives, vines and grain, the introduction of sheep and especially goats and charcoal-making for heat and iron-working, exposed the land surface to weathering and resulted in erosion of the topsoil. The wild garrigue, then, is a man-formed landscape. The intensity of grazing pressure has had a direct response in the ecotope, reflected today in the decline of goat-pasturing.

First cited in French in 1546, garrigue is borrowed from Provençal garriga, equivalent to Old French jarrie. The term is most likely related to Gascon carroc "rock" and to Germanic Swiss Karren, a kind of sedimentary rock. These words could derive from a supposed source such as *carra "rock," perhaps a remnant of a pre-Roman language and possibly akin to Basque *karr-, harri "rock." Gaulish and then Latin appear to have borrowed *carra, which evolved into its modern descendants in Romance languages.

The dense, thrifty growth of garrigue flora has recommended many of its shrubs and sub-shrubs for uses as ornamental plants in traditional and drought tolerant gardens. Many shrubs and flowering perennials of the garrigue are mainstays of the English "mixed border" of herbaceous and woody plants found in English gardens, and around the world, though often grown under cooler, moister conditions.

Some have become invasive species in the Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub biome's other ecoregions beyond the Mediterranean Basin on other continents, including the California chaparral and woodlands.

Grapes that are grown in the garrigues region of France are said to produce wines with a "barnyard" or "earthy" tone, or "the herbal scent of lavender that fills the hills of Provence in the summer time." Some wines bottled in Southern France contain the word garrigues as part of their appellation or label name.

Gaston Defferre (14 September 1910 – 7 May 1986) was a French Socialist politician. He served as mayor of Marseille for 33 years until his death in 1986. He was minister for overseas territories in Guy Mollet’s socialist government in 1956–1957. His main achievement was to establish the framework used to grant independence to France’s African territories. In 1967, he fought the last duel in French history. As the Socialist candidate for president in 1969, he received only 5 percent of the vote. He was much more successful in promoting François Mitterrand as leader of the Socialist Party (Parti Socialiste ; PS) in 1971. He held a series of ministerial portfolios after the Socialist victory in 1981, especially as minister of state for the interior and decentralization.

A lawyer and member of the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO), Defferre was involved in the Brutus Network, a Resistance Socialist group, during World War II. A long-standing member of the National Assembly (1945–1958, 1962–1986) and member of the Senate (1959–1962), he also served for many years as mayor of Marseille (1944–1945, 1953–1986). He was a formidable political force in the South-East, where he owned the major centre-left newspaper Le Provençal (which he co-founded at the Liberation) and later acquired the right-wing daily Le Méridional.

Defferre served as Merchant Marine Minister (1950–1952), then Overseas Minister (1956–1957), and laid the groundwork for the end of French colonialism in sub-Saharan Africa through Loi-cadre Defferre.

In his region, he faced a strong French Communist Party (PCF) with which he was frequently in conflict. As mayor, he relied on the support of the non-Gaullist center-right in the municipal assembly. In the same way, he advocated a national alliance between the SFIO and the Christian democratic Popular Republican Movement (MRP). Before the 1965 presidential election, L'Express published an identikit of the best center-left candidate under the name of "Mister X". It corresponded with Defferre's profile (L'Express co-founder Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber being a well known advocate of a Third Force alliance of socialists, Christian democrats and Radicals). But, failing to create an SFIO-MRP- Radical Party federation, Defferre had to give way to François Mitterrand, whose preferred strategy for the Socialists was the formation of a left-wing coalition including the PCF. His political career was strongly supported by members of the Corsican mafia, not least the Guérini clan.

Defferre was a participant in the last duel in France that took place in 1967 when he insulted René Ribière at the French parliament and was subsequently challenged to a duel fought with swords. Defferre yelled ‘Taisez-vous, abruti!‘ (‘Shut up, stupid!’) at Ribière following an argument in the French National Assembly. Ribière demanded an apology, Defferre refused, so Ribière demanded satisfaction by duel. René Ribière lost the duel, having been wounded twice. He escaped relatively uninjured, however.

In 1969 Defferre was the Socialist candidate once again for the French presidency. This time he had the support of ex-Premier Pierre Mendès-France, who would have been Premier again had Defferre been elected. But he was soundly defeated, suffering from the polarisation of French politics following the events of May 1968, scoring only 5% of the vote, the lowest ever score for a French Socialist candidate. The failure of Defferre prompted the birth of the new Socialist Party (PS) and buried the idea of an alliance with the centre-right.

Having been the main opponent of Guy Mollet in the party, and leader of the Socialist group in the National Assembly, Defferre helped Mitterrand take the leadership during the Epinay Congress (1971), in spite of his reservations concerning Mitterrand's strategy of an alliance with the Communists. Later, when Mitterrand became president, Defferre served as Mitterrand's interior minister from 1981 to 1984. He was the architect of the 1982 decentralization reforms. Town and Country Planning Minister until 1986, he died in office as Mayor of Marseille. His widow, Edmonde Charles-Roux, was president of the literary circle the Académie Goncourt.

Gaston Gérard chicken is a typical Burgundian dish. It is also known as chicken Dijon.

This recipe was created for the first time in 1930 by the wife of the mayor of Dijon, Gaston Gérard, for the French gastronomist, humorist and food critic Curnonsky. Bresse chicken is most often used.

According to one story, Reine Geneviève Bourgogne, first wife of the mayor of Dijon, was preparing a chicken in her usual way for the "prince of gastronomists". There was a serious incident in the kitchen which almost compromised the meal and the reputation of the hostess as a good cook. A jar of mustard (or paprika, but that spice is not in the recipe) fell into the casserole dish and spread out over the poultry as it cooked. Unable to get the condiment out, they added Burgundy white wine, crème fraîche and grated comté. This mixture pleased the famous gastronomic critic. He congratulated the mistress of the house for this recipe which he found strongly to his taste, and named it after his host.

The chicken is first browned in oil or butter, then left to cook. The sauce is made with the cooking juice, grated cheese, white wine from Burgundy, mustard, and cream. It is served slightly browned and paired with a white wine.

Champagne socialist is a political term commonly used in the United Kingdom. It is a popular epithet that implies a degree of hypocrisy, and it is closely related to the concept of the liberal elite. The phrase is generally used to describe self-identified anarchists, communists, and socialists whose luxurious lifestyles, metonymically including consumption of champagne, are ostensibly in conflict with their political beliefs. In more inflammatory contexts, it can be exaggerated to describe privileged individuals who express support for any policy or cause at all that addresses economic inequality.

"Champagne socialist" is a pejorative which refers to the perceived hypocrisy between advocating for socialist ideals and enjoying affluent lifestyles.

Ed Rooksby writing for The Guardian says that the apparent contradiction depends on how socialism and equality are understood. He writes that socialism does not necessarily mean absolute equality, but rather where everyone has equal access to the resources they require in order to flourish.

The term has been used by left-wing commentators to criticise centrist views. Some traditional left-wingers regard the first Labour Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald as a "champagne socialist" who betrayed the Labour movement. MacDonald's lavish lifestyle and his mingling with high society were supposed to have been corrupting influences that led to the end of the Labour Government in 1931 and the eventual formation of the National Government. More recently, the epithet has been levelled at supporters of the New Labour movement which brought Tony Blair to power in 1997.

In an article about Oscar Wilde 's 1891 essay " The Soul of Man under Socialism ", political commentator Will Self expressed the view that Wilde could be considered an early champagne socialist because of his aesthetic lifestyle and socialist leanings.

The writer and Labour supporter John Mortimer, when accused of being a champagne socialist, said that he preferred to be thought of as "more a Bollinger Bolshevik ".

In the fourth series of the British television comedy Absolutely Fabulous, Saffron is offered a job with New Labour. While she is at pains to avoid being seen as a champagne socialist, her grandmother considers the family to be " Bolly Bolsheviks".

The label has also been applied to the Labour politician Geoffrey Robinson MP on account of his large personal fortune. Singer Charlotte Church has described herself as a "prosecco socialist", referring to the increasing popularity and lower price range of non-champagne sparkling wines such as prosecco and cava.

In the UK, the term is often used by critics to disparage people with a leftwing political view. This argument claims that the champagne socialist espouses leftist views while enjoying a luxurious lifestyle.

This usage of the term has been criticised by Caitlin Moran as a fallacious argument, because she claims it assumes that only those who are poor can express an opinion about social inequality. Russell Brand made a similar point that the "hypocrisy" accusation serves to shut down discussion of the problem of inequality.

In Australia and New Zealand, the variant "Chardonnay socialist" was used, as Chardonnay was seen as a drink of affluent people. By the late 1990s, chardonnay had become more readily available and generally consumed in Australia; today it is the most dominant white wine variety produced in the country. As a result, the drink's association with elitism has faded.

Staunch Australian right-wingers also used the term to deride those who supported what they considered "middle-class welfare"—government funding for the arts, free tertiary education, and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.

In France, the term gauche caviar (lit. ' caviar left ') has a broadly similar meaning and usage as champagne socialist. One description referred to it as "the free-thinking, authority-hating, individualistic, tolerant, socialist position… which shaded into a bohemian, existential, communitarian, fairly depressed" worldview espoused by people with money and good clothes.

The term was once prevalent in Parisian circles, applied deprecatingly to those who professed allegiance to the Socialist Party (PS), but who maintained a far from proletarian lifestyle that distinguished them from the working-class base of the PS. A more explicit reference identified this group as left-wingers who speak with great passion about the plight of the poor while eating caviar in their spectacular Parisian duplex apartment.

The label was also employed by detractors to describe François Mitterrand. This was further reinforced by the fact that several members of his administration were identified as part of the gauche caviar such as Jack Lang, who was the culture minister.

In early 2007, Ségolène Royal became identified with the gauche caviar when it was revealed that she had been avoiding paying taxes. The description damaged her campaign for the French presidency. Similarly French politician Bernard Kouchner and his wife Christine Ockrent have been labelled with the term. However, his appointment as Minister of Foreign Affairs was not hampered by the label. Other supposed members of this gauche caviar include Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the former IMF managing director, and his wife, the journalist Anne Sinclair, heiress to much of the fortune of her maternal grandfather, the art dealer Paul Rosenberg. It is said that around 2015, the gauche caviar also supported the Greek government of SYRIZA and PM Tsipras, "desperate for a new 'anti-imperialist hero' after Hugo Chavez's death".

The weekly news magazine, Le Nouvel Observateur, has been described as the "quasi-official organ of France's gauche caviar ".

In 2017, Current Affairs ran a lighthearted article featuring a political cartoon of guests at a Marxist gathering dressed in fancy attire and sipping on champagne. The central argument was that conspicuous consumption was not inherently antithetical to leftist values so long as luxuries were shared equally. As the magazine put it, "When we say let them eat cake, we are serious: there must be cake, it must be good cake, and it must be had by all. The reason Marie Antoinette needed beheading was not that she wished cake on the poor, but that she never actually gave them any."

The term appears in Blind Alleys, a 1906 work of fiction by the American author George Cary Eggleston which distinguishes the "beer socialist" who "wants everybody to come down to his low standards of living" and the "champagne socialist" who "wants everybody to be equal on the higher plane that suits him, utterly ignoring the fact that there is not enough champagne, green turtle and truffles to go round".

In a 2022 Reason article, Jason Brennan and Christopher Freiman characterized Bernie Sanders, Elizabeth Warren, and political commentator Hasan Piker as so-called "champagne socialists." In the article, Brennan and Freiman chide these "socialist figureheads" to "open their wallets before they open their mouths" on the basis that each had supposedly donated little of their personal wealth to causes they support, but had instead called for increased taxes. In the case of Sanders and Piker, Brennan and Freiman criticize their supposedly excessive living arrangements, while Warren is reprehended for donating only a small portion of her net worth to causes she advocates for.

The term is broadly similar to the American terms " limousine liberal ", " Learjet liberal", or " Hollywood liberal", and to idioms in other languages such as the Spanish Izquierda caviar [ es ], the Portuguese esquerda caviar, the Indian " Khan Market liberal" (which represents a highly affluent shopping area of South Delhi that is popular among leftists), the French Gauche caviar, the Dutch Salonsocialist [ nl ], the German Salonbolschewist [ de ], the Italian Radical chic, the Swedish Rödvinsvänster [ sv ] (lit. ' Red vine left '), and the Polish kawiorowa lewica (lit. ' caviar left '). In Turkey, Solperen (lit. ' Lefty ') or Cihangir solcusu [ tr ] (lit. ' Cihangir leftist ') is commonly used, since Cihangir is a high-income neighborhood of Beyoğlu, Istanbul, although şampanya sosyalisti ("champagne socialist") and salon sosyalisti ("salon socialist") are used as well. In Switzerland, Cüpli -Sozialisten (lit. ' Glass-of-Champagne Socialist ') is used. Other related terms include " Tuscany faction [ de ] ", " Hampstead liberal ", " Gucci socialist", " Gucci communist", " Neiman Marxist", " cashmere communist ", and in Ireland, " smoked salmon socialist".

Gaullism (French: Gaullisme [ ɡolism ]) is a French political stance based on the thoughts and actions of World War II French Resistance leader Charles de Gaulle, who would become the founding President of the Fifth French Republic. De Gaulle withdrew French forces from the NATO Command Structure, forced the removal of allied (US) military bases from France, as well as initiated France's own independent nuclear deterrent programme. His actions were predicated on the view that France would not be subordinate to other nations.

According to historian Serge Berstein, Gaullism is "neither a doctrine nor a political ideology " and cannot be considered either left or right. Rather, "considering its historical progression, it is a pragmatic exercise of power that is neither free from contradictions nor of concessions to momentary necessity, even if the imperious word of the general gives to the practice of Gaullism the allure of a programme that seems profound and fully realised." Gaullism is "a peculiarly French phenomenon, without doubt the quintessential French political phenomenon of the 20th century".

Lawrence D. Kritzman argues that Gaullism may be seen as a form of French patriotism in the tradition of Jules Michelet. He writes: "Aligned on the political spectrum with the right, Gaullism was committed nevertheless to the republican values of the Revolution, and so distanced itself from the particularist ambitions of the traditional right and its xenophobic causes." Furthermore, "Gaullism saw as its mission the affirmation of national sovereignty and unity, which was diametrically opposed to the divisiveness created by the leftist commitment to class struggle."

Gaullism was nationalistic. In the early post-WWII period, Gaullists advocated for retaining the French Empire. De Gaulle shifted his stance on empire in the mid-1950s, suggesting potential federal arrangements or self-determination and membership in the French Community.

Berstein writes that Gaullism has progressed in multiple stages:

Since 1969, Gaullism has been used to describe those identified as heirs to de Gaulle's ideas. The Cross of Lorraine, used by the Resistant Free France (1940–1944) during World War II, has served as the symbol of many Gaullist parties and movements, including the Rally of the French People (1947–1955), the Union for the New Republic (1958–1967), or the Rally for the Republic (1976–2002).

The "fundamental principle" of Gaullism is a "certain idea of France" as a strong state. In his War Memoirs, de Gaulle describes France as "an indomitable entity, a 'person' with whom a mystical dialogue was maintained throughout history. The goal of Gaullism, therefore, is to give precedence to its interests, to ensure that the voice is heard, to make it respected, and to assure its survival … to remain worthy of its past, the nation must endow itself with a powerful state." Kritzman writes that "the Gaullist idea of France set out to restore the honor of the nation and affirm its grandeur and independence" with de Gaulle seeking to "construct a messianic vision of France's historic destiny, reaffirm its prestige in the world, and transcend the national humiliations of the past." Accordingly, de Gaulle urged French unity over divisive "partisan quarrels" and emphasized French heritage, including both the Ancien Régime and the Revolution. The French political figures most admired by de Gaulle "were those responsible for national consensus— Louis XIV, Napoleon, Georges Clemenceau —who saw as their goal the creation of political and social unity by a strong state."

In order to strengthen France, Gaullists also emphasize the need for "a strong economy and a stable society." Gaullism believes, according to Berstein, that "it is the imperative of the state, as guardian of the national interest, to give impetus to economic growth and to guide it. Liberal opinion is accepted if it promises more efficiency than planning. As for social justice, so long as its natural distrust of big business can be allayed, it is less a matter of doctrine than a means of upholding stability. To put an end to class struggle, Gaullists hope to make use of participation, a nineteenth-century concept of which the general spoke frequently, but which he allowed his associates to ignore."

As part of a strong state, de Gaulle highlighted the necessity to found state institutions on a strong executive, contrasting with the French republican tradition, which emphasized the role of the elected assembly. During his time in office, de Gaulle sought to establish authority by holding direct universal votes and popular referendums and by directly engaging with the nation (via speeches broadcast over radio, press conferences, and trips to the provinces). Even though he frequently spoke on his respect for democracy, his political opponents perceived in his rule a tendency toward dictatorial power; many feared a Bonapartist revival or a republican monarchy. France remained a democracy, however, and de Gaulle's decision to step down as president following voters' rejection of the April 1969 constitutional referendum showed that his commitment to democratic principles was not merely a rhetorical ploy.

In foreign policy, Gaullists are identified with both realism and French exceptionalism, and de Gaulle sought to impose French influence on the global order. Gaullists supported decolonization, which freed France from the burden of empire. This was reflected in de Gaulle's resolution of the Algeria crisis (1954–1962), which was strongly influenced by de Gaulle's realpolitik, or "keen sense of political expediency." Realizing that decolonization was inevitable, and that a continued crisis and extended Algerian War would harm the French economy and perpetuate national disunity, "de Gaulle felt that it was in France's best interests to grant independence and desist from military engagement," thereby preserving French unity and grandeur.

Gaullists emphasize the need for France to "guarantee its national independence without resorting to allies whose interests might not coincide with those of France." The development of independent French nuclear capability, undertaken at significant effort despite much international criticism, was an outgrowth of this worldview. However, de Gaulle simultaneously initiated one of the first international nonproliferation efforts by quietly unshackling and distancing the French program from a diplomatically troublesome secret involvement with an Israeli junior partner, attempting to demilitarize and open to international oversight the Israeli nuclear arms program.

France under de Gaulle sought to avoid a post-World War II bipolar global political order dominated by the two superpowers of the United States and the Soviet Union, and sought to avoid dependence on the United States. Kritzman writes: "Gaullist foreign policy was motivated by its need to distinguish itself from … the two great superpowers. Paradoxically, [de Gaulle] desired to be part of the Western alliance and be critical of it at the same time on key issues such as defense." Most notably, de Gaulle withdrew France from North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) military operations in 1966, and directed non-French NATO troops to leave France, although France remained a NATO member. Gaullists were also critical of the overseas economic influence of the U.S. and the role of the U.S. dollar in the international monetary system. Under de Gaulle, France established diplomatic relations with China earlier than most other Western nations; imposed an arms embargo against Israel (1967); and denounced American imperialism in the Third World.

De Gaulle and the Gaullists did not support Europe as a supranational entity, but did favour European integration in the form of "a confederation of sovereign states mutually engaged in "common policy, autonomous from the superpowers," and significantly influenced by France. De Gaulle's hopes to advance this sort of union largely failed, however, "in the face of the desire of the other European powers to remain closely allied to the United States."

De Gaulle's political legacy has been profound in France and has gradually influenced the entirety of the political spectrum. His successor as president, Georges Pompidou, consolidated Gaullism during his term from 1969 to 1974. Once-controversial Gaullist ideas have become accepted as part of the French political consensus and "are no longer the focus of political controversy." For instance, the strong presidency was maintained by all of de Gaulle's successors, including the socialist François Mitterrand (1981–1995). French independent nuclear capability and a foreign policy influenced by Gaullism–although expressed "in more flexible terms"–remains "the guiding force of French international relations." During the 2017 presidential election, de Gaulle's legacy was claimed by candidates ranging from the radical left to the radical right, including Jean-Luc Mélenchon, Benoît Hamon, Emmanuel Macron, François Fillon and Marine Le Pen.

According to Berstein, "It is no exaggeration to say that Gaullism has molded post-war France. At the same time, considering that the essence of Gaullist ideas are now accepted by everyone, those who wish to be the legitimate heirs of de Gaulle (e.g., Jacques Chirac of the RPR) now have an identity crisis. It is difficult for them to distinguish themselves from other political perspectives." Not all Gaullist ideas have endured, however. Between the mid-1980s and the early 2000s, there have been several periods of cohabitation (1986–1988, 1993–1995, 1997–2002), in which the president and prime minister have been from different parties, a marked shift from the "imperial presidency" of de Gaulle. De Gaulle's economic policy, based on the idea of dirigisme (state stewardship of the economy), has also weakened. Although the major French banks, as well as insurance, telecommunications, steel, oil and pharmaceutical companies, were state-owned as recently as the mid-1980s, the French government has since then privatized many state assets.

The term "traditional Gaullism" (Gaullisme traditionnel) has been used by scholars to describe the core values of Gaullism embodied by the actions and policies of Charles de Gaulle, generally in distinction with other Gaullist currents such as "social Gaullism" and "neo-Gaullism".

Resistant Gaullism (Gaullisme de Résistance) emphasizes the need for French political and military independence from potentially hostile powers, inspired by de Gaulle's role in the fight against Nazi Germany and Vichy France during World War II. The term "first-generation Chiraquian Gaullism" (Gaullisme chiraquien de première génération) has been used to describe politicians loyal to the populist stance and the opposition to European integration and the free market as initially advocated by Jacques Chirac in the late 1970s. This position was embodied in particular by Charles Pasqua and Philippe Séguin, who came to oppose Chirac's shift to neo-Gaullism during the 1990s.

Social Gaullism, or "left-wing Gaullism", focuses on the social dimensions of Gaullism, and has often been linked by scholars to social democracy. Opposed to the class conflict analysis of Marxism, which was perceived as a threat to national unity, de Gaulle advocated instead a "capital-labour association", that is the need for the direct participation of workers in their company's financial results and management, which he believed was a necessary condition for them to take an interest in its functioning and development. This aspect of Gaullism has been promoted by the Democratic Union of Labour between 1959 and 1967, and by politicians like René Capitant, Jacques Chaban-Delmas, Jean Charbonnel, Léo Hamon, Philippe Dechartre [ fr ] or Jean Mattéoli. More recently, the Citizen and Republican Movement and Jean-Pierre Chevènement took up the banner of left-Gaullism.

"Neo-Gaullism" has been used in literature to describe a movement that emerged after the death of de Gaulle in 1970 and drew more influence from economic liberalism. Many aspects of neo-Gaullism, such as support for the Maastricht Treaty (1992) and French rapprochement with NATO under Chirac's presidency, have been described as difficult to reconcile with the historical idea of Gaullism. However, key components of Gaullism have remained, including the concept of a strong, independent state, the unity of the French people and references to de Gaulle's leadership. Neo-Gaullists have also conserved in some aspects the idea that France has a role to play in containing the world's "hyperpowers", as seen in Chirac's refusal to follow the US in the Iraq War in 2003.

Pompidolian Gaullism (Gaullism pompidolien) highlights the need for France to adapt its economy in an increasingly competing world that may threaten social peace at home, in the legacy of French president Georges Pompidou (1969–1974). "Second-generation Chiraquian Gaullism" (or "Chiraquian neo-Gaullism"), which emerged in the mid-1980s, has been influenced by neoliberalism and is more open to European integration, in the legacy of French president Jacques Chirac (1995–2007). However during the 1995 presidential campaign, Chirac criticised the "sole thought" (pensée unique) of neoliberalism represented by his challenger on the right and promised to reduce the "social fracture", placing himself more to the centre and thus forcing Balladur to radicalise himself. Ultimately, he obtained more votes than Balladur in the first round (20.8 per cent), and then defeated the Socialist candidate Lionel Jospin in the second round (52.6 per cent).

After attending the École nationale d'administration, Chirac began his career as a high-level civil servant, entering politics shortly thereafter. Chirac occupied various senior positions, including minister of agriculture and minister of the interior. In 1981 and 1988, he unsuccessfully ran for president as the standard-bearer for the conservative Gaullist party Rally for the Republic (RPR). Chirac's internal policies initially included lower tax rates, the removal of price controls, strong punishment for crime and terrorism, and business privatisation.

After pursuing these policies in his second term as prime minister, Chirac changed his views. He argued for different economic policies and was elected president in 1995, with 52.6% of the vote in the second round, beating Socialist Lionel Jospin, after campaigning on a platform of healing the "social rift" (fracture sociale). Chirac's economic policies, based on dirigisme, allowing for state-directed investment, stood in opposition to the laissez-faire policies of the United Kingdom under the ministries of Margaret Thatcher and John Major, which Chirac described as "Anglo-Saxon ultraliberalism ".

In France, the term Gaullist Party is usually used to refer to the largest party professing to be Gaullist. Gaullism claims to transcend the left–right divide in a similar way to populist republican parties elsewhere such as Fianna Fáil in Republic of Ireland, the Justicialist Party in Argentina, and the African National Congress in South Africa.

In the past, some Gaullist voters saw themselves as leaning towards the political left, a view ascribed to the once-leading Gaullist André Malraux. Most of Charles de Gaulle 's own followers leaned towards the political right, christian democratic or national conservative. Consequently, left-leaning voters started showing less support again after Malraux's death in 1976, as figures of the Gaullist left (like Jacques Chaban-Delmas) were gradually marginalised. Under its various names and acronyms, the Gaullist Party has been the dominant organisation of the French right since the beginning of the Fifth Republic (1958).

Author of the L'Appel of 18 June 1940, and founder and leader of the Free French Forces, General Charles de Gaulle is the symbol of the French Resistance to the Nazi occupation and the Vichy government. Yet, based in London, then in Algiers, he was forced to compromise with the domestic Resistance movements dominated by various political forces (such as the Communists). In 1944, while France was liberated, de Gaulle presided over the provisional government composed of Communists, Socialists, and Christian Democrats. Because de Gaulle refused to create a great political party unifying the non-Communist Resistance, a lot of parties re-emerged. The Christian democratic Popular Republican Movement (MRP) seemed to be the closest to de Gaulle.

The provisional government implemented policies inspired by the programme of the National Council of Resistance : nationalization of banks and some industrial companies (for example Renault), and the development of a welfare state. However, it was divided about the way forward for political institutions and the constitution for the Fourth Republic. For de Gaulle, the "regime of the parties" that had characterized the Third Republic was a cause of the 1940 military disaster. He advocated a strong executive power, governing in the national interest, led by a man who was an incarnation of national unity. Indeed, in his mind, France is strong when it is united and the parties, represented in Parliament, serve particular interests and thus express national divisions.

In November 1945, a large majority of the French voters accepted the elaboration of a new Constitution. At the same time, they elected a new National Assembly. The French Communist Party, the Socialist French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO) and the Christian democratic MRP were the largest forces represented in this Assembly. It re-elected de Gaulle as president of the provisional government but, disagreeing with restoration of the "regime of the parties", de Gaulle resigned in January 1946.

In May 1946, a first constitutional law was rejected by referendum. One month later, a new Assembly was elected in order to write a new constitutional text. In his Bayeux Manifesto, de Gaulle outlined his institutional ideas but he was accused of wanting re-establish a Bonapartist government. Furthermore, without the support of a political force, he could not influence the constitutional law being prepared. René Capitant founded a Gaullist Union for the Fourth Republic but it could not prevent the approval of the text prepared by the elected National Assembly, which restored the parliamentary system.

In 1947, he gathered the anti-Communist opposition in the Rally of the French People (Rassemblement du peuple français or RPF). He accused the Fourth Republic of being dominated by the "parliamentary fiddles" and to organize the state helplessness. In keeping with its strongly nationalist stance, it accused the French Communist Party of being a vassal of the Soviet Union. Furthermore, it denounced what it called the "abandonment" of colonies by the Third Force cabinets, and it viewed French participation in the European Economic Community to be a threat to the nation. In addition, the Gaullists recommended an association between capital and labour in order to end the "struggle of classes", which hampered national unity.

Six months after its founding, membership of the RPF reached one million. It took control of the executive of many cities, including Paris, Marseille and Bordeaux. After the 1951 legislative election, despite the change to the ballot system, the RPF formed the largest parliamentary group of the National Assembly but had a systematic opposition.

In 1952, some RPF deputies voted in favour of Antoine Pinay 's cabinet then joined the majority, against the instructions of de Gaulle. They left the RPF parliamentary group. More and more divided, the RPF suffered a significant decrease in support in the 1953 local elections. On 6 May 1953, de Gaulle asked to the Gaullist deputies to abandon the name "RPF". One month later, 5 Gaullist deputies joined Joseph Laniel 's government. Indeed, they participated to right-wing majorities then, a part of the Gaullists as Jacques Chaban-Delmas joined the centre-left Republican Front under the label National Centre of Social Republicans (Centre national des républicains sociaux or CNRS).

At the end of the 1950s, the Fourth Republic floundered in the Algerian War. The 13 May 1958 crisis led to turmoil, and a threat of military coup was brandished. Emissaries sent by de Gaulle such as Jacques Soustelle participated in this bustle. The National Assembly accepted to call back de Gaulle to lead the cabinet. On 28 September, a new constitution was approved by referendum and the Fifth Republic was born. The parliamentary system was not questioned, but the presidential function was enhanced.

In order that he should not be faced with an hostile National Assembly, dominated by the parties (as was the case in 1945–1946), de Gaulle let his followers organize a political party, the Union for the New Republic (Union pour la nouvelle république or UNR). After the November 1958 legislative election, it became the largest force in the political system. It was allied with centre-left and centre-right parties to support de Gaulle, who was elected President of France by a congress of local and national elected officials in December 1958. Michel Debré was nominated as prime minister.

However, the change of Algerian policy divided the party. The chairman of the National Assembly Jacques Chaban-Delmas considered Algeria was a part of the presidential "reserved domain", as well as foreign and military affairs. Soustelle, leader of the pro- French Algeria faction in the party, left the cabinet in 1960, then was ejected from the UNR. He joined Georges Bidault at the head of the Organisation armée secrète which perpetrated terrorist attacks. After this crisis, the UNR appeared as the party of de Gaulle's unconditional supporters, hence its reputation of "boot party". Debré theorized its function of strap of the government. With de Gaulle refusing to be a party leader, Debré covertly took this position.

Meanwhile, the centre-left parties returned to the opposition in 1959, followed in 1962 by the centre-right parties, who criticized the eurosceptic declarations of de Gaulle and the "presidentialisation" of French politics. Indeed, de Gaulle instituted the direct election of the presidency, defying all political parties (except the UNR). The French voters approved this by referendum. De Gaulle had intended to replace Debré with Georges Pompidou as prime minister but this was denied by a vote of no-confidence. De Gaulle dissolved the National Assembly. Associated with the left-wing Gaullists of the Democratic Union of Labour (Union démocratique du travail or UDT), and allied with Valéry Giscard d'Estaing 's Independent Republicans, the UNR won the 1962 legislative election and Pompidou was confirmed to lead the cabinet.

Naturally, the UNR/UDT supported de Gaulle's candidature at the 1965 presidential election. But he won only after a second ballot, which he considered as a disavowal. Relations became more difficult with the only non-Gaullist party in the presidential majority, the Independent Republicans, while the opposition was reconstructed.

While the Popular Republican Movement intensified its criticism, some Christian-Democrats, such Maurice Schumann, joined the Gaullist Party, renamed Union of Democrats for the Fifth Republic (Union des démocrates pour la Cinquième République or UD-V). Prime Minister Pompidou led the party during the 1967 legislative campaign. He encouraged the emergence of a new generation of Gaullist politicians who were loyal to him. The incumbent parliamentary majority only won a narrow victory.

One year later, Gaullist power was confronted with the social and student protests of the May 1968 crisis. Although the newly renamed Union for the Defense of the Republic (Union pour la défense de la République or UDR) triumphed at the June 1968 legislative election, disagreements had risen between de Gaulle and Pompidou. Pompidou reproached de Gaulle for leaving the country during the crisis without informing him. For de Gaulle, his aim of an alliance between capital and labour could prevent this sort of social crisis, but Pompidou wished to scrap it. Indeed, for de Gaulle's circle, Pompidou was more a classical conservative than a real Gaullist.

Pompidou left the leadership of the cabinet in order to prepare his future presidential campaign. In this, he declared his candidacy if de Gaulle were to resign. That was the case in 1969, after the failure of that year's referendum on Senate and regional reform, and he won the 1969 presidential election despite the reluctance of some of the "barons of Gaullism".

His prime minister Jacques Chaban-Delmas announced a reform programme for a "New Society". It raised sceptical reactions from the conservative wing of the UDR, then from Pompidou himself. They reproached him for giving too many concessions to the left-wing opposition. In President Pompidou's circle, he was accused of wanting to weaken the presidential functions in favour of himself. The party became the Union of Democrats for the Republic (Union des démocrates pour la République) while this crisis broke out. Pompidou refused Chaban-Delmas a vote of confidence in the National Assembly and, when he held it anyway, Pompidou forced him to resign and nominated Pierre Messmer. The UDR, allied with the Independent Republicans and Centre, Democracy and Progress, won the 1973 legislative election and succeeded in blocking the "Union of the Left" and its Common Programme.

When Pompidou died in office, on 2 April 1974, his two former prime ministers, Chaban-Delmas and Messmer, claimed the UDR candidacy for the presidential election. Finally, the latter withdrew, but some influential personalities in the party, notably in the circle of the late president, doubted of the capacity of Chaban-Delmas to defeat François Mitterrand, the representative of the "Union of the Left". Led by the young minister Jacques Chirac, a former adviser of Pompidou, they published the Call of the 43. They covertly supported Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, Minister of Economy and the Independent Republicans' leader. Giscard eliminated Chaban-Delmas in the first round, then narrowly defeated Mitterrand in the second. He was the first non-Gaullist President of the Fifth Republic.

Chirac became prime minister, and then leader of the UDR in December 1974, in spite of the negative opinions of many historical Gaullist personalities (Michel Debré, Jacques Chaban-Delmas, etc.). They accused him of having betrayed the party during the previous presidential campaign. Some months later, a conflict broke out between the executive leadership and Chirac left the cabinet in August 1976.

In December 1976, the UDR was replaced by the Rally for the Republic (Rassemblement pour la République or RPR). This name was chosen due to its similarity with the RPF. Indeed, the New Gaullist Party was devised as a machine of reconquest behind one man, Jacques Chirac.

Without withdrawing from the presidential majority, the RPR criticized the executive duo of President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing and Prime Minister Raymond Barre. In December 1978, six months before the 1979 European Parliament election, the Call of Cochin denounced the "abasement of France" by "the foreign party", which sacrificed the national interests and the independence of the country in order to build a federal Europe. This accusation targeted clearly Giscard d'Estaing. The RPR contrasted the social doctrine of Gaullism to the president's market liberalism.

The RPR supported Chirac in the 1981 presidential election but he was eliminated in the first round. He refused to give instructions for voting for the second round, even if he said "in a private capacity", he would vote for Giscard d'Estaing. In fact, the RPR was suspected of working for the defeat of the incumbent president.

While the Socialist Party leader François Mitterrand became president, the RPR gradually abandoned the Gaullist doctrine, adopting the European and liberal positions of the Union for French Democracy (Union pour la démocratie française or UDF). The two parties competed for the leadership of the right-wing opposition, but they presented a common list at the 1984 European Parliament election and a platform to prepare for winning the 1986 legislative election.

From 1986 to 1988, Chirac " cohabited " as prime minister with Mitterrand, but lost the 1988 presidential election. After his defeat, his leadership was challenged by younger politicians who wished to renew the right. Furthermore, the abandonment of the Gaullist doctrine was criticized by Charles Pasqua and Philippe Séguin. They tried to remove him from the RPR leadership in 1990, in vain. However, the division re-appeared with the 1992 Maastricht referendum. Chirac voted "yes" whereas Séguin and Pasqua campaigned for "no".

The " Union for France ", a RPR/UDF coalition, won the 1993 legislative election. Chirac refused to re-cohabit with Mitterrand, and his confidente Edouard Balladur became prime minister. Balladur promised he would not be a candidate in the 1995 presidential election. Nevertheless, polls indicated Balladur was the favorite in the presidential race and furthermore, he was supported by the majority of right-wing politicians. He decided finally to be a candidate against Chirac. However, they claimed they remained "friends for 30 years".

The Socialists being weakened after the 14 years of Mitterrand's presidency, the main contest was on the right, between Balladur and Chirac, two Neo-Gaullists. Balladur proposed a neoliberal programme and took advantage of the "positive results" of his cabinet, whereas Chirac advocated Keynesianism to reduce the "social fracture" and criticized the "dominant ideas", targeting Balladur. Chirac won the 1995 presidential election.

In November 1995, his prime minister Alain Juppé, "the best among us" according to Chirac, announced a plan of welfare state reforms which sparked wide social conflict. President Chirac dissolved the National Assembly and lost the 1997 legislative election. He was forced to cohabit with a left-wing cabinet led by Lionel Jospin until 2002.

Séguin succeeded Juppé as RPR leader. But, he criticized the ascendancy of President Jacques Chirac over the party. He resigned during the 1999 European election campaign, while Pasqua presented a dissident list to advocate the Gaullist idea of a "Europe of nations". Pasqua founded the Rally for France (Rassemblement pour la France or RPF) and obtained more votes than the RPR official list led by Nicolas Sarkozy. Michèle Alliot-Marie was elected RPR leader, against the wishes of President Chirac who supported another candidate.

Before the 2002 presidential election, RPR and non-RPR supporters of Chirac gathered in an association: the "Union on the move". It became the Union for the Presidential Majority (Union pour la majorité présidentielle or UMP) after the 21 April electoral shock. Chirac was re-elected and the new party won the legislative election. It was renamed Union for a Popular Movement a few months later, establishing the UMP as a permanent organization. In 2004, Sarkozy — Chirac's main rival — was elected the party's president. Chirac finished his presidency in 2007 after 12 years in power.

Sarkozy was elected president in 2007. During his leadership, the party shifted to the right with more conservative policies. Sarkozy was defeated in 2012. Despite his defeat, Nicolas Sarkozy remained influential in the party politics. He became again then President of the UMP in 2014 and renamed the party The Republicans in 2015. Sarkozy ran in the party's presidential primaries for the then upcoming 2017 election, but was defeated. Laurent Wauquiez was selected as leader in 2017. Since then the party has moved further to the right.

The following is a list of Gaullist political parties and their successors:

Gaumais is the regional language, spoken in Gaume, in the south of Belgian Luxembourg and in some border villages such as Ville-Houdlémont and Gorcy. It is a dialect of Lorraine spoken in France near Carignan, Canton of Montmédy and Stenay. In Belgium, Gaumais is recognized as an "endogenous regional language" by the French Community of Belgium.

Gaumais is not a uniform dialect. Like many regional languages, local variations exist along a dialectal continuum. Gaumais was also fully intelligible in the border regions stretching from Rodange to Stenay, passing through Longuyon. Nevertheless, a southern Gaumais (Virton - Halanzy axis) and a northern Gaumais (Semois - Muno - Habay axis) are considered to exist, even though each village has its own distinct characteristics. In the northwest, the influence of Ardennes, a Champenois dialect, extends as far as Izel.

In general, the Gaumais vocabulary is very close to that used in other dialects of Romance Lorraine.

The Lorraine dialect derives from Vulgar Latin, spoken by Romanized populations. Some Celtic words remain, but it is the Latin vocabulary that structures this dialect.

The Gaumais dialect has been influenced by Germanic and has taken many of its features from them, such as the definite article la (la Djeanne) and le (le Djean), but also words like la crombîre (Grundbirne = potato) or la waffe (waffle).

It has gradually incorporated words of other origins such as casavèk (katsavejka = women's blouse), also present in Walloon.

The evolution of the dialect will be marked by a progressive Francization of Gaumais, French already being in the 17th century the official language of religious civil status.

In 1794, when the Gaume region was annexed to France, Henri Grégoire presented his report to the National Convention. Originally from Lorraine, he advocated "eradicating local dialects and universalizing the use of the French language." Regional languages would be systematically stigmatized as worthless.

1815 saw the creation of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, definitively marking the borders of Gaume. The dialect then evolved very differently on either side of the border. Compulsory and secular schooling in France allowed French to quickly supplant Gaumais as the mother tongue by the end of the 19th century. Belgium followed suit after World War I.

The Gaumais dialect was thus banned in Belgian schools in favor of French, and its use led to repression. The change was rapid but later than in France. This compulsory, French-language education resulted in the absence of transmission of the dialect to the new generation. Through contact with older generations, some Gaumais nevertheless retained a significant knowledge of it and became recognized authors writing in the dialect: Albert Yande, Roger Moreau, Hélène Hanse-Boquel, and Fernand Bonneau. This context helps explain the significant differences in the number of works published in the dialect between the Gaume region and French Lorraine.

The Royal Gaumais Circle of Brussels was founded in 1917. The Academy of Gaumais dialects was created in the early 2000s.

It is recognized by a decree of the French Community of Belgium as an indigenous language on December 24, 1990.

Today, there is no uniform Gaumais or Lorrain dialect like there is for the Basque or Breton.

In 2009, after 29 years of work, the Académie du patois gaumais, a group of enthusiasts, published Le Dictionnaire encyclopédique des patois de Gaume.

The local dialect has enjoyed a certain popularity in Belgium in recent years, even though the language is seriously endangered. This is evidenced by the publication of the Gaumais translation of The Little Prince and the performances organized by various theatre groups. An annual mass is held in Gaumais in Tintigny.

The number of speakers, difficult to quantify due to a lack of linguistic surveys in Belgium or France, is steadily declining. Very few speak Gaumais as their first language. However, there are many speakers, often elderly, who have learned the dialect as a second language and can express themselves in it.

A number of words and grammatical rules from the Gaume region have passed into Belgian French. As a result, the inhabitants of Gaume can often understand a sentence in the local dialect without necessarily being able to speak it themselves.

The oldest works are often undated. At the beginning of the 18th century, the civil registrar of Virton noted a few words of the local dialect in his population registers. It was also at this time that writing became widespread in Gaume, allowing the less privileged social classes to commit oral tradition to paper in their mother tongue.

Gaume literature has made poetry its preferred medium. Authors such as Albert Yande and Léon Gillet produced numerous texts expressing customs, traditions, habits, stories, and fables. The most recent album is Au travé des couteurs du Piwitch' à Djilbépan by Jacky Clausse.

In 2013, Jean-Luc Geoffroy published L'Oscar èt l'Alfred à l'icole, the first novel written in Gaumais. In 2015, he published a bilingual version of El Paul à Nawé, a Christmas tale. That same year, he also contributed to the work Le voyage en Oïlie by translating the Lorraine chapter. Similarly, he published El pètit prince, a translation of the famous novel. In 2019, he published a tale called La Blandine èt l'Corentin.

Other authors have focused on shorter or more diverse works. This is the case of Georges Themelin who published a series of tales, fables and monologues in A l'ombe don vî tillu released in 2004 and its second volume in 2008. He is also the author of The Five Seasons, published in 2019.

The first lexicon in Gaumais dates on November 6, 1806 and contains 18 words. It was produced by Marson Grandjean, mayor of Virton, in response to the linguistic survey by Charles Coquebert de Montbret. It is kept in the National Archives in Luxembourg.

The linguist Edouard Liegeois published the very first dictionary in 1897, entitled Lexique du patois gaumet, which was followed by two supplementary volumes. Lucien Roger followed suit in 1907 with his Lexique du patois gaumais de Prouvy-Jamoigne. The former mayor of Saint-Mard, Emond Jacques, also compiled a dictionary of his village. It was never published, but it greatly inspired future works.

The scientific community also turned its attention to the Gaume region during the summer of 1912. Ferdinand Brunot and his student Charles Bruneau traveled along the border to make sound recordings in Florenville, Chiny, Gérouville, and other locations. This was the very first survey in both France and Belgium using a phonograph. Charles Bruneau then undertook a vast survey that resulted in three books covering nine localities in the northwest of the Gaume. In addition, two localities in the canton of Montmédy and ten others in the canton of Carignan were included.

The Linguistic Atlas of Wallonia also focused on the Gaumais dialect from the outset, in order to cover the whole of political Wallonia. Thirty Gaumais localities were surveyed. Jean Lanher's L'Atlas linguistique et ethnographique de la Lorraine romane also conducted research in Saint-Mard.

In 1962, the linguist Jules Massonnet made a survey of the patois of his native village of Chassepierre.

The first comprehensive dictionary was published in 1978. The Saint-Léger Cultural Circle, very active in preserving its local language, published an impressive glossary of all the local words recorded.

As part of the Architecture rurale de Wallonie collection covering Belgian Lorraine, the publisher Mardaga is conducting a survey on a lexicon related to architecture and daily life in the villages of Châtillon, Termes, Watrinsart and Prouvy.

Georges Themelin published in 1999 the very first French-Lorraine/Gaumais dictionary in its Dampicourt variant, a work still unpublished to this day because it is the only one to translate from French into Gaumais. It is also the most important with 20,000 words.

Publications followed one after another, beginning with Alex Michel's dictionary of the Chiny dialect in 2008. In 2009, the Académie des Patois Gaumais published its Dictionnaire encyclopédique des patois de la Gaume (Encyclopedic Dictionary of the Dialects of Gaume). This remarkable work has the merit of presenting and compiling a maximum number of words (16,000 in total) and variants from across the Gaume region. In 2018, Jean-Luc Geoffroy released the Glossaire gaumais-français de Willancourt (Gaumais-French Glossary of Willancourt) based on the work and texts of the author Nestor Marchal.

In March 2021, Georges Themelin has published the second edition of his French-Lorraine/Gaumais dictionary. At just over 700 pages in A4 format, it is the most substantial dictionary ever produced in Lorraine. It also includes a grammar section.

In December 2021, Jean-Louis Laurent has published a 616-page dictionary of the Gaumais dialect, based on research conducted by the author in Èthe-Belmont and on the work of his predecessors. The preparatory work for the edition received the Wallonia-Brussels Federation's prize for philology in regional languages in 2020.

Theatre in the Gaumais region is very old. Its written form, however, is much more recent. Numerous authors have written or adapted plays and performances. This is notably the case with Georges Themelin, Albert Hinck, and Christian Lambinet, who published Les utils aterloyis in 2018, a play using new words to describe modernity.

The Gaume curtain of Saint-Léger was very active until the end of the 20th century and its plays have been preserved thanks to video recording.

In 2019, the most active groups were the workshop of the Académie des Patois Gaumais and Ceux d'Valansart.

The mistress of Dampicourt is the oldest song preserved to date.

Jean-Claude Watrin is undeniably the best known. Part of his repertoire was written in the Gaumais dialect. Cécile Liégeois released an album with Jean-Marie Liégeois in 2008 and a second one in 2018.

One of the best-known songs from Gaume is "tchantans tchantans".

Gaumais is an Langues d'oïl, a variant of Lorraine as spoken in Romance Lorraine.

In his work Adieu Patois!, Jean Marie Didier defends the Germanic and Celtic origin of Gaumais, based on a historical and phonological study. According to the author, the influence of the barbarian invasions and Frankish domination on the local language is considerable.

Originally an oral language, Gaumais does not have a truly standardized spelling system. However, contemporary dialect authors use two systems :

Both systems have their advantages, but the first often receives criticism from local authors who find it unsuitable for certain rules of the Gaumais.

Gayant is a processional giant that symbolizes the city of Douai. It is carried through the city for three days each year at the beginning of July as part of an eponymous festival alongside its "wife", Marie Cagenon, and their three "children", Jacquot, Fillon, and Binbin. The family arrives at the belfry at Douai on the final Sunday of the festival, which culminates with Le Grand Cortège (The Grand Procession) in the afternoon.

Gayant is included in UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage List as an example of processional giants and dragons in Belgium and France.

The Gayant family consists of Gayant, his wife Marie Cagenon, and their three children: Jacquot, Fillon, and Binbin.

The giants have gone through multiple rebuilding sessions (NR), restorations (R), and disappearances (D):

Since 1827, plans to restore and rebuild the family have been coordinated, occurring in 1859, 1867, 1874, 1881, 1885, 1892, 1912, 1922, 1947, and 1954. Each year, the mannequins, which are constructed of wicker, are cleaned and restored.

Unlike other cities, Douai did not give a name to its giant; it is simply called Gayant (giant) in the language of Picardy, which was in use in Douai at the time of the original festival.

According to local legend, at the end of the ninth century, the townsmen of Scarpe asked for Jehan Gelon to help them if the city were attacked by barbarians. Gelon advised them to take refuge in the tower and to expect him in the event of an attack.

When the city was besieged by the Normans, Gelon, accompanied by his three sons, arrived by traveling through a tunnel in the city and defeated the Normans. The attackers who, while leaving, destroyed his castle and massacred the women there. Gelon and his sons, now traumatized from the loss of their families decide to go to war. According to legend, Gelon died close to Bavay. The legend has it that the inhabitants of Douai, in remembering his acts of bravery, made him a giant—the symbol of the city.

An episode of La Belle Hélène de Constantinople, a famous epic of the 14th century, takes place between Douai and Cantin. Morant and his army ineffectively besiege the tower of the Giant, the perfidious and heathen vassal situated in Douai. This tower is linked by an underground passage with Cantin, where the giant brother of Douai, Maloré, was. Morant decides to take the tower of Cantin, which was easier to break in. Morant rushes to Cantin to help his brother. But Morant takes bulwarks, kills the Giant, and releases Douai and Cantin from the heathen.

Jean Wauquelin (1452) wrote this epic for the Duke of Burgundy Philip the Good in 1448.

Many historians reject the legend of Jean Gelon and prefer to see it as the city's homage to Saint Maurand. Two stories exist about the appearance of Saint Maurand in a dream, preventing the French capture of a city.

The most commonly accepted example goes as follows: In 1479, the French invaded Douai, then Burgundian. On 16 June 1479, several French troops tried to open the Door of Arras; it was believed that St. Maurand prevented them from intruding. Several of his sacred artifacts were treasured within the church of Sacré-Coeur.

The second story says that the procession of the giant had already begun, so the identification with the Saint came later. In 1556, St. Maurand told the guard of Sacré-Coeur's church to "sound the matins." Subsequently, a knight of Light, Saint Maurand appeared to fight against Gaspard de Coligny.

In the 19th century, several accounts in the form of tales or plays take a Gayant-like character and reinvent his history. "Intrepid Gayant", one of the "Tales of King Cambrinus" written by Charles Deulin is a well known tale: The giant of Douai becomes a wild child brought up by a she-bear, which takes it for one of her own because of his breadth and his bear-like strength. A logger finds him, adopts him, and the child becomes an adult.

The giant has had his current form since 1954. The earliest description dates to 1530, and describes the character as twenty-two feet tall, wearing the costume of a feudal man of war in medieval armor with gloved hands. The mannequin was created by the corporation of the Manneliers. Until 1598, only one carrier was needed to move it. In 1665, it needed five carriers for the wicker mannequin. The appearance of the giant is no longer the same. The helmet has been removed, and he wears a wig. The lance has been replaced by a war hammer. The Sabre appeared beside the body in 1700. In 1703, during the construction of the new Gayant, the painter Martin Saint Leger was charged to paint specific colors for each giant. The helmet was reinstated, and then between 1724 and 1741, the giant wore a cap of rabbit fur. Absent from 1792 to 1801, its return is marked by the will to equip Gayant with the fashion of the day (Consulate). In 1823, the feudal style returned. The artist Wallet then draws corresponding clothing of the time of Francis I. The sketches of Wallet were used as the model for all the restorations. Although in 1827, a cotton coat was added as well as a streamer of scarlet serge on the upper part of the lance.

Gaz de France (GDF) was a French company which produced, transported and sold natural gas around the world, especially in France, its main market. The company was also particularly active in Belgium, the United Kingdom, Germany, and other European countries. Through its part-owned Belgian subsidiary SPE it was also involved in nuclear power generation. The company conducted a merger of equals with fellow utility company Suez on 22 July 2008 to form GDF Suez. Its head office was located in the 17th arrondissement of Paris.

Gaz de France was created with its sister company Électricité de France (EDF) in 1946 by the French Government. After the liberalisation of Europe’s energy markets, Gaz de France also entered into the electricity sector, having developed combined natural gas-electricity offerings.

With part-privatisation EDF and Gaz de France latterly became two totally separate entities, with each controlling a distribution subsidiary responsible for running its distribution system. For Gaz de France, this was the Gaz de France Distributor. Together, these two distributors managed a joint department, “EDF Gaz de France Distribution” formerly called “EDF GDF Services, which was responsible for field-based activities (meter reading, activating connections, engineering work, etc.). In January 2008 EDF Gaz de France Distribution was split into two entities: ErDF (Électricité réseau distribution France), 100% owned by EDF, and GrDF (Gaz réseau distribution France), wholly owned by Gaz de France (and now by GDF Suez).

The company's capital was partially floated on the Paris Stock Exchange in July 2005, raising €2.5 billion for the State of France. The government continued to hold an approximate 80% stake in the company until the 2008 merger with Suez. The French state now holds approximately 35.7% of GDF Suez.

On 25 February 2006 French Prime minister Dominique de Villepin announced the merger of Suez and GDF, which would make the world's largest liquefied natural gas company. Since the French state owned over 80% of Gaz de France, it was necessary to pass a new law in order to make the merger possible. The merger was overseen by R N Rothschild & Sons Investment Bank.

On 3 September 2007, Gaz de France and Suez announced agreed terms of merger, on the basis of an exchange of 21 Gaz de France shares for 22 Suez shares via the absorption of Suez by Gaz de France. The French state would hold more than 35% of shares of the merged company, GDF Suez.

Whilst Nicolas Sarkozy was for several months opposed to the Villepin government’s plans for a merger of the two companies, he subsequently accepted the government proposal. This plan for a merger between Gaz de France and Suez came under fire from the whole of the political left, which feared the loss of one of the last ways of preventing the price rises experienced over the previous three years, and by the social Gaullists and trade unions. In retaliation, the opposition submitted 137,449 amendments to the plan. Under normal parliamentary procedure, parliament would have been required to vote on the amendments, which would have taken 10 years. The French Constitution does give the government options to bypass such a filibuster, but in the end these were not used.

Law No. 2006-1537 of 7 December 2006 on the energy sector authorised the privatisation of Gaz de France. On 2 September 2007 the boards of directors of Gaz de France and Suez approved the new framework for the planned merger between the companies. The newly created company, GDF Suez, came into existence on 22 July 2008; the world's second-largest utility and a group of €74 billion of revenues.

Gaz de France's head office was located in the 17th arrondissement of Paris. The company took possession of the building, built in the late 1950s, in the early 1960s.

General Inspectorate of Maritime Affairs (Inspection générale des affaires maritimes) is a French General Inspectorate in the areas of the sea. The office is placed under the authority of the State Secretariat for the Sea.

The General Inspectorate of Maritime Affairs informs and advises the ministers, in particular the ministers in charge of the armed forces, ecological transition, agriculture and food sovereignty, overseas territories, for the exercise of their powers in the areas of the sea. On their behalf, it carries out a general inspection mission which relates to the regularity, quality and efficiency of the action of the services with competence in the fields of the sea, as well as an advisory mission for the operation of the services.

The Inspectorate helps to monitor and guide maritime affairs administrators and maritime education teachers. The Inspector General exercises the function of Chief of the Corps of Maritime Affairs Administrators as well as the function of Chief of the Corps of Instructors of Maritime Education.

The Inspectorate is headed by the Inspector General of Maritime Affairs and includes an Inspector General of Maritime Education who is responsible for organizing the missions of the General Inspectorate in the field of maritime education.

The General Inventory of Cultural Heritage, known locally as the Inventaire général du patrimoine culturel, is a government body in France that "shall identify, study and publicize heritage of cultural, historical or scientific interest" They have created an Inventory to make a record of all goods based on archival sources created by human kind throughout France. It covers everything from architecture, urban planning, furniture or other objects from the 5th Century to 30 years before the date of the survey.

The General Inventory of Cultural Heritage was created in 1964 by André Malraux, who was at the time the Minister of Cultural Affairs. In 2004 the production of the inventory was transferred from central government to the regions, with the State continuing to provide coordination and control. Previously handled by the Architecture and Heritage Department, the management of the Inventory was attached to the Heritage Department of the General Heritage Department from 2010.

In French law, judges cannot create legal norms, because of the principle known as " la prohibition des arrêts de règlement " of Article 5 of the French civil code : "Judges are forbidden from pronouncing in a generally dispositive and regulatory fashion on the matters submitted to them." They can only put into evidence and interpret existing norms. This general principle underlies the state of existing law, which is merely uncovered by the judge.

The general principles of law, principes généraux du droit, PGD are rules of universal scope which:

The Court of Justice of the European Union also recognizes general principles of law in European Union law. In international law, "general principles of law recognized by civilized nations" are considered a source of law under Article 38.1 (c) of the statute governing the International Court of Justice.

Traditionally, the general principles of law have a very minor role in civil law, which is essentially codified, and a much larger role in administrative law, which is largely based on case law, since for a very long time, very few texts of general scope covered all, or even most, administrative activities.

These general principles, and particularly their judicial interpretation, have been debated in legal theory. The expression "general principles of law" was consecrated after the Liberation of France by an arrêt about the rights of defendants. (principe des droits de la défense) The Tribunal des conflits cited this principle, in its decision of 8 February 1873, titled Dugave et Bransiet.

The Conseil d'État has brought out a number of principles on this topic:

In France, the generalized social contribution (French : Contribution sociale généralisée or CSG) is a tax created on 18 December 1990 to fund the social protection system (namely health insurance and family benefits) and, since 2018, unemployment benefits.

The CSG aims to diversify the financing of social protection, based mainly on social contributions. The traditional system had become questionable because social contributions used to be a burden for employers, for contributions are levied on earnings, i.e. they are part of the labor costs. In addition, only incomes from work used to contribute.

The CSG enabled easing the burden of social security contributions on wages, to promote a way of funding consistent with the widespread use of Social Security benefits, and to force all household incomes to contribute (e.g. income from work but also property), contrary to social contributions. The revenues are significant (75 billion euros) and represent almost two-thirds of taxes allocated to social protection (65%). The CSG is currently the second most important tax in France, after the VAT.

The CSG payable by all residents in France, except (for earned & retirement income) those who are not members of any French compulsory medical insurance scheme. It is levied at source on most income, excluding benefits and family. Its rate, modified in 2018, amounts to 9.2% for most categories of income, of which 2.4% is treated as taxable income for income tax. There are reduced rates for income from benefits (pensions, unemployment benefits).

The CSG tax base is reduced by 1.75% of the first € 164,544 of earned income (that is 4 times the Social Security threshold (fr), a parameter fixed on a yearly basis by the government).

The CSG was created by the Second Rocard government (fr) to diversify the financing sources of the French social protection system. The tax, created by the 1990 Finance Act, entered effect on 1 February 1991 at a time of relatively high economic growth and buoyant tax revenues.

Starting on 1 February 1991, the CSG rate was set at 1.1% to finance family benefits, replacing employer contributions to the family benefits regime.

On 1 January 1993 the CSG rate was bumped to 2.4% to finance the newly created Retirement Solidarity Fund (fr) (Fonds de solidarité vieillesse or FSV), which started operating in January 1994. The FSV is a non-contributory retirement regime which is tasked with providing universal retirement benefits to low-income retirees.

On 1 January 1997 the CSG rate was increased to 3.4% to finance the public health insurance regime and lottery winnings are from then on subjected to the CSG at the same rate. That increase is offset by a reduction of the employee contribution to the health insurance regime.

Until 31 December 1997 the CSG rate was identical for all types of income. From 1 January 1998 until 2018, specific rates exist for some types of income:

Geneviève Fioraso (born 10 October 1954) is a French politician who served as a member of the National Assembly from 2007 to 2017, representing the first district of Isère. On 16 May 2012 she was appointed Minister for Higher Education and Research in the French government of Jean-Marc Ayrault.

Born in Amiens in 1954, the youngest of six children, Fioraso obtained her high-school diploma Baccalauréat at the age of 16 years and married at 18. A student of Hypo- Khâgne, she continued her studies and obtained a master's degree in English, then worked as an English teacher in Amiens.

In 1978 Fioraso left teaching and moved to Grenoble, where she served first as Information Officer, then managing Documentation and Press for the City of Grenoble, where she began collaborating with Hubert Dubedout, city's mayor and MP, and became his parliamentary attaché in 1983.

In 1985 Fioraso participated in the cantonal electoral campaign, alongside Michel Destot. From 1989 to 1995, she was part of the management team of Corys, a startups of the CEA. Once he was elected mayor of Grenoble in 1995, Michel Destot requested that she serve as his Chief of Staff, for which she followed the economy and innovation affairs in particular.

From 1999 to 2001, Fioraso was director of the Agence Régionale du Numérique, a regional agency set up by the digital network of cities of the Rhône-Alpes region.

From 2001 to 2004, Fioraso was a senior marketing manager at France Telecom, in charge of emerging markets in the social-health sector.

From 2008 Fioraso was deputy for the Economy, Universities and Research for the City Council of Grenoble. During her previous term she was Deputy assistant for the Economy, Innovation, Trade and Craft, and First Vice-President of Metro - Agglomeration community of the Grenoble Alpes Métropole -, in charge of economic development. From 2003, she was the CEO of the S.E.M. Minatec Entreprises (public-private venture, entrusted with the marketing of high-tech building of Minatec). She also serves as Chair of the Institut d'Administration des Entreprises Grenoble, Business Administration Institute of Grenoble.

In 2007, Fioraso won 63.03% of the vote and defeated Alain Carignon to be elected députée -member of the French Parliament- in Isère's 1st constituency. In parliament, she was a board member of the Socialist, Radical, Citizen and various left group; member of the Committee on Economic Affairs, the Environment and Territory ; and member of the Parliamentary Office for the Evaluation of Scientific and Technological Choices (OPECST, Office parlementaire d'évaluation des choix scientifiques et technologiques).

On 11 February 2014, Fioraso was among the guests invited to the state dinner hosted by U.S. President Barack Obama in honor of President François Hollande at the White House.

In December 2014, Fioraso managed to resolve a two-year strategy dispute between France and Germany on the European Space Agency and paved the way to an agreement of 20 governments on funding for Ariane 6 space rocket.

Fioraso did not contest the 2017 French legislative election.

Genevoise sauce or Geneva sauce is a type of French brown sauce made from fish fumet, mirepoix, red wine, and butter, usually accompanying fatty fishes such as trout and salmon. Some versions use white wine instead of red wine.

The sauce was originally made from the braising liquid from dishes prepared "à la genevoise" popular during Marie-Antoine Carême 's time. One of the first recipes for the sauce was given by the eighteenth-century French chef and writer Louis Eustache Ude, who used white wine instead of red wine.

This sauce was later further popularized by the French chef and writer Auguste Escoffier in Le guide culinaire.

Fish bones (ideally salmon heads) and mirepoix are first sautéed in butter. The pot is then deglazed with red wine and reduced by half. Fish fumet is then added and simmered for about 40 minutes. The sauce is then finished with cold knobs of butter.

The notion of gens du voyage (travelers) is an administrative concept created under French law to designate the community of travellers with no fixed residence, hence referred to as the nomadic community. The notion of " gens du voyage " remains very vague, as it does not avoid the possibility of stigmatization, linked to prejudices about a population that is widely diverse. The term was later taken up by the so-called Besson laws (Law on the reception and housing of Travellers), which organized the reception of Travellers on designated sites in municipalities with more than 5,000 inhabitants. The gens du voyage are French citizens in their own right, working in itinerant trade, construction and landscaping; fairground people are a "category" among them. More often than not, this nomadic lifestyle is the fruit of a family history. Not all are itinerant; some have settled down and others have chosen to return to mobile housing after a period of sedentary living.

The French expression " gens du voyage " should not be confused with:

The four main groups of European gens du voyage are: the so-called Oriental Roms, who came from North India in the 13th century and are mainly to be found in Central and Eastern Europe ; the Sinti or Manouches, mainly settled in Germany and the large northern half of France ; the Gitanos or Kalés, whose presence in the Iberian Peninsula and southern France is attested as far back as the Middle Ages ; and the Yenish people, mainly settled in German-speaking and border countries, and also found in the Gard, Ardèche and Massif Central regions.

Described as " voleurs de poules " (lit. French for "chicken thieves") and subject to various forms of discrimination, the gens du voyage have repeatedly seen their freedom to come and go placed under close police surveillance. First with the anthropometric booklet instituted by a law of 1912 on the movement of nomads, then with the " carnets " and " livrets de circulation " (circulation booklets) introduced by the law of January 3, 1969 on "the exercise of itinerant economic activities and the regime applicable to persons moving in France without fixed domicile or residence".

From the Middle Ages onwards, many families from different regions of France developed economic activities linked to mobility: peddlers, mercenaries and seasonal workers. Examples include the cagots in southwestern France.

Refugees from Little Egypt, who arrived in France in the early 15th century, also adopted this lifestyle out of economic necessity. At first, they worked as war contractors for the great feudal lords. Then, following Louis XIV 's ban on private warfare and the King's Declaration against the Bohemians in 1682, which sent them to the galleys and forced them to hide and move around, they found new employment in seasonal services and itinerant trade.

At the end of the 1870 war, many Yenish from Alsace opted for France and joined the mass of families living a life structured around itinerancy. In the 19th century, nomadic populations, now known as " gens du voyage ", included families of diverse origins: Manouches, Yenish, but also French peasants living on the road.

At the end of the 19th century, they were referred to exclusively as bohemians, but several administrative and legal steps led to their definition as pariahs, notably the 1895 census of "all nomads, bohemians and wanderers", followed by the July 16, 1912 law "on the exercise of itinerant professions and the circulation of nomads". Under this law, Travellers (both children and adults) were subject to controls through the presentation of their "anthropometric identity booklets", on which, in addition to photographs (face and profile), fingerprints and even vaccination records appeared. Worse still, on April 6, 1940, the French government issued a decree banning the circulation of "nomads" throughout metropolitan France and placing them under assigned residence; the decree was not lifted until July 1946. Under pressure from Nazi Germany, Vichy France created nomad camps where travellers, Romani people, gypsies and similar, were interned in harsh conditions until 1946.

Prior to January 2017, non-sedentary French citizens were required to hold a circulation permit in order to move freely within France. Describing this administrative document as an "internal passport" and the law of January 3, 1969 which instituted it as an "apartheid law", Olivier Le Mailloux, a lawyer representing a travelling showman holding a livret de circulation, referred the matter to the French Constitutional Council. "Even though they are French, travellers still have to report regularly to the police station or gendarmerie," said the lawyer. The law of January 3, 1969 concerned people with no fixed domicile or residence of more than six months in a member state of the European Union.

In its decision, handed down on October 5, 2012, the Constitutional Council followed his analysis, declaring the carnet de circulation contrary to the Constitution on the grounds that this travel document "disproportionately impaired the exercise of the freedom to come and go" and "unjustifiably restricted the exercise of civic rights". However, the Constitutional Court upheld the legislator's requirement for itinerant people to hold a " livret de circulation ", which was less coercive than the " carnet de circulation ".

The abolition of carnets de circulation by the Égalité et Citoyenneté law of January 27, 2017 was hailed as a step forward by the French Rights Defender, notably in his report on gens du voyage " Lever les entraves au droit " (lifting barriers to the law) (oct 2021).

Olivier Le Mailloux continued the legal battle on behalf of the " Gens du voyage " associations he was defending before the Conseil d'Etat, arguing that the " livrets de circulation " were contrary to the European Convention on Human Rights.

The Conseil d'Etat partially agreed with him, declaring the sanctions applicable to all those who did not hold a travel permit or who could not justify possession before the forces of law and order to be contrary to the European Convention on Human Rights.

On October 28, 2016 in Montreuil-Bellay, the French President acknowledged France's responsibility for the internment of gens du voyage during World War II and inaugurated a memorial to the victims.

On December 22, 2016, the French National Assembly definitively adopted the law on equality and citizenship, which repeals the law of January 3, 1969, thus putting an end to travelers' carnets de circulation and the commune of attachment. The matter was referred to the French Constitutional Council. The law was promulgated on January 27, 2017.

The 1st "Besson" law of May 31, 1990 required towns with a population of over 5,000 to provide sites for nomads, which led to complex situations for towns close to this limit. The second "Besson" law, Law no. 2000-614 of July 5, 2000, further defined the rules.

In March 2003, the law on internal security increased the penalties for illegal land occupation (six months' imprisonment and a 3,750 euro fine, seizure of motor vehicles and suspension of driving license). The November 7, 2018 law increased the penalties incurred to one year's imprisonment and a 7,500-euro fine.

In November 2005, the French National Assembly passed the 2006 Finance Act making people living in mobile homes liable to property tax. The tax was reviewed in 2010 and definitively repealed in 2019.

In 2018, following a bill, a new text modified the current rules in three areas: it clarified the role of the State, local authorities and their groupings, modified procedures for evacuating illegal parking sites, and strengthened criminal penalties.

Created and set up in December 2015, under the mandate of Sylvia Pinel, Minister of Housing, Territorial Equality and Rurality [ fr ], the Commission nationale consultative des gens du voyage (CNCGDV), aims to adapt public policy to the reception, housing, support and culture of gens du voyage. It is part of a renewed inter-ministerial strategy concerning the situation of gens du voyage, following on from the reflections and proposals of Prefect Hubert Derache. The Commission was set up by the Dihal (interministerial delegation for housing and access to housing for homeless or poorly housed people).

The second Besson law of July 5, 2000 required towns of over 5,000 inhabitants to build and provide permanent halting sites for gens du voyage [ fr ]. These sites, equipped with individual sanitary facilities, as well as water and electricity supply points, involved a high development cost of around 75,000 euros per site (plus maintenance costs), which was assumed by the Departmental Councils, the State, urban communities and/or communes, depending on the case. However, many car parks were operated under public-private partnerships, i.e. delegated to companies. These companies, often specialized in this field, produced substantial sales figures.

In some departments, use of the sites could be free of charge (e.g. Côtes-d'Armor). Elsewhere, a parking fee may be charged for each space, ranging from one to ten euros per day per family.

As of July 17, 2013, only 52% of the sites planned in 2000 had been built (less than 30% for large-scale sites). Most of the reception areas actually built were far from city centers, inaccessible by public transport, or located in potentially dangerous industrial zones, such as the Rouen-Petit Quevilly site just a few meters from the Lubrizol plant, classified as SEVESO high threshold, which suffered a major fire on September 26, 2019. On this point, the FNASAT (Loris Granal and Gaëlla Loiseau) study on the location of public accommodation and housing for gens du voyage provided essential elements of knowledge and analysis.

The geography of France consists of a terrain that is mostly flat plains or gently rolling hills in the north and the west and mountainous in the south (including the Massif Central and the Pyrenees) and the east (the country's highest points being in the Alps). Metropolitan France has a total size of 551,695 km (213,011 mi) (Europe only). It is the third-largest country in Europe by area (after Russia and Ukraine) and the largest in Western Europe.

Metropolitan France's territory is relatively large and so its climate is not uniform and gives rise to the following climate nuances:

Climate change in France includes above average heating.

Total renewable water resources: 211 km (2011)

Freshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural): 31.62 km /yr (19%/71%/10%) (512.1 m /yr per capita) (2009)

Coal, iron ore, bauxite, zinc, uranium, antimony, arsenic, potash, feldspar, fluorspar, gypsum, timber, fish, gold, clay, petroleum, silver

Flooding, Hailstorms, avalanches, midwinter windstorms, drought, forest fires in the south near the Mediterranean

The region that now comprises France consisted of open grassland during the Pleistocene Ice Age. France gradually became forested as the glaciers retreated starting in 10,000 BC, but clearing of these primeval forests began in Neolithic times. These forests were still fairly extensive until the medieval era.

In prehistoric times, France was home to large predatory animals such as wolves and brown bears, as well as herbivores such as elk. The larger fauna have disappeared outside the Pyrenees Mountains where bears live as a protected species. Smaller animals include martens, wild pigs, foxes, weasels, bats, rodents, rabbits, and assorted birds.

By the 15th century, France had largely been denuded of its forests and was forced to rely on Scandinavia and their North American colonies for lumber. Significant remaining forested areas are in the Gascony region and north in the Alsace-Ardennes area. The Ardennes Forest was the scene of extensive fighting in both world wars.

The northcentral part of the region is dominated by the Paris Basin, which consists of a layered sequence of sedimentary rocks. Fertile soils over much of the area make good agricultural land. The Normandy coast to the northwest is characterized by high, chalk cliffs, while the Brittany coast (the peninsula to the west) is highly indented in places that deep valleys were drowned by the sea, and the Biscay coast to the southwest is marked by flat, sandy beaches.

A recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 1,433 km of tidal flats in France, making it the 23rd ranked country in terms of tidal flat area.

France has several levels of internal divisions. The first-level administrative division of Metropolitan France is regions. Also the French Republic has sovereignty over several other territories, with various administrative levels.

This is a list of the extreme points of France; the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.

These are the extreme temperatures in France.

George Pau-Langevin (French pronunciation: [ ʒɔʁʒ po lɑ̃ʒvɛ̃ ] ; born 19 October 1948 in Pointe-à-Pitre, Guadeloupe) is a French lawyer and politician. A member of the Socialist Party (PS). Close to Bertrand Delanoë, she was deputy for the 21st constituency of Paris from 2007 to 2012, then re-elected in the 15th constituency, which took over roughly the same territory in Paris, in 2012. She was the Minister Delegate for Educational Success in the governments of Jean-Marc Ayrault from 2012 to 2014, then was appointed Minister of Overseas Territories in 2014 in the governments of Manuel Valls. Resigning in 2016, she regained her seat as a deputy and was re-elected the following year. She left the National Assembly in November 2020, following her appointment as Deputy Defender of Rights.

Pau-Langevin was president of the Movement against racism and for friendship between peoples from 1984 to 1987. In 1989, she joined the National Agency for the Promotion and Integration of Workers from Overseas as deputy director, which she later directed from 1997 to 2001.

Municipal councilor of the 20th arrondissement of Paris from 1989 to 1995, Pau-Langevin found this function during the municipal elections of 2008, elected on the list led by Frédérique Calandra.

Pau-Langevin was one of the initiators of the name change of the street Richepanse (general who contributed to reestablish slavery in Guadeloupe in 1802, on the order of Bonaparte) in street Chevalier-de-Saint-George, in the 1st arrondissement of Paris (named after a Métis from Guadeloupe, swordsman, violinist, conductor and famous composer, from the second half of the 18th century).

Pau-Langevin was a member of the Regional council of Île-de-France from 1992 to 1998.

Pau-Langevin was elected member of the National Assembly for Paris's 21st constituency during the 2007 French legislative election. During her first term, she was the only black deputy from mainland France. In parliament, she served on the Committee on Legal Affairs (2007-2012).

As vice-president of the Socialist, Radical and Citizen Group (SRC) in the National Assembly, Pau-Langevin was in charge of immigration and co-development issues between 2007 and 2009. In this capacity, she is responsible for the opposition to the September 2007 bill relating to immigration control, integration and asylum. She fights the measure relating to DNA tests within the framework of family reunification and seizes, with her colleagues of the socialist group, the Constitutional Council on the subject of ethnic statistics.

During the 2012 legislative elections, Pau-Langevin was elected member of the National Assembly in the Paris's 15th constituency, which mostly covered the same area of Paris as the abolished 21st constituency after the 2010 redistricting of French legislative constituencies. Her appointment as minister leads her to leave her mandate to her substitute, Fanélie Carrey-Conte, who exercises it from 22 July 2012.

Following François Hollande 's victory in the 2012 presidential election, Pau-Langevin was appointed Junior Minister for Educational Success in the government of Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault.

Pau-Langevin's tenure at the Ministry of Educational Success includes measures in favor of the School's relationship with parents, equality and against discrimination, the holding of meetings with the Minister of the city and all stakeholders of educational success, the creation of a National Observatory of educational success and the attribution of the Great National Cause 2013 to the fight against illiteracy.

During the reshuffle of 2 April 2014, following the defeat of the majority in the municipal elections, Pau-Langevin was appointed Minister of Overseas in the First Valls government in place of Victorin Lurel. She was reappointed to this post on 27 August 2014 in the Second Valls government, even if her departure is envisaged during the reshuffle of February 2016.

In this capacity, Pau-Langevin presented several plans for the overseas territories (youth, housing, health, security) and in April 2016 managed several nights of urban violence in Mayotte. She also prepared, jointly with the Secretary of State for Real Equality Ericka Bareigts, a bill for real equality overseas, providing for a development plan to gradually reduce the differences in living standards and quality of life and the creation of the future Cité des Outre-mer.

Pau-Langevin announced her resignation on 30 August 2016 (the same day as Emmanuel Macron) for personal reasons [and] regaining contact with the field, after having however made a press conference back to school the same morning. She was replaced by Ericka Bareigts.

In the Socialist Party's 2017 presidential primaries, Pau-Langevin endorsed Vincent Peillon as her party's candidate for that year's presidential election and worked on his campaign team.

Running for re-election in the 2017 legislative elections, Pau-Langevin won the second round with 60.3% of the votes cast, in a constituency where La République en marche had not invested a candidate.

In parliament, Pau-Langevin has served on the Committee on Cultural Affairs and Education (2017-2019) and the Committee on Legal Affairs (since 2019). In December 2018, she was appointed rapporteur for the "flash mission" on the future of France Ô, but later withdrew from the mission on 22 March 2019, believing that, despite several reminders, the work of this mission did not start. During an interview, here are these propros : "we're already running France Ô. This is something serious and that is why I will not continue this mission because I feel that it is useless".

Ahead of the Socialist Party's 2018 convention in Aubervilliers, Pau-Langevin publicly endorsed Stéphane Le Foll as candidate for the party's leadership.

In addition to her committee assignments, Pau-Langevin was appointed by Prime Minister Jean Castex as deputy of Ombudsman (Défenseur des droits) Claire Hédon in 2020. She left the Assembly in November 2020.

Pau-Langevin was decorated with the Legion of Honour in March 2002.

Georges Gorse (French pronunciation: [ ʒɔʁʒ ɡɔʁs ] ; 15 February 1915 – 17 March 2002) was a French politician and diplomat.

Born in Cahors, he qualified in 1939 as a professor at the University of Cairo. During World War II he joined Charles de Gaulle and the Free French as Director of Information, served on the Provisional Consultative Assembly. After the war he was elected to represent the Vendée in the French National Assembly from 1946 to 1951, and then the Section Française de l'Internationale Ouvrière (SFIO) from 1951 onwards. In 1957, Guy Mollet made him an Ambassador to Algeria, then he was elected as Gaullist representative which he held from 1967 to 1997.

During the events of May 1968, having attended a private political meeting as Minister of Information, he broke the news to the French media of de Gaulle's now notorious statement "reform yes, but ' chienlit, no".

Gorse held a wide range of positions of state:

Georges Pâques (29 January 1914 – 19 December 1993) was a French civil servant and spy. He began spying for the Soviet Union in 1944, and had a long, successful bureaucratic career in France. At the time of his arrest for espionage in 1963, he was the deputy head of NATO 's press service.

Pâques was born in 1914 in Chalon-sur-Saône. He was admitted to the École normale supérieure in Paris in 1935, where he befriended Georges Pompidou and studied Italian. He taught in Nice from 1940 to 1941, but moved to Rabat after the allied landings in North Africa and he joined the forces of Henri Giraud. Thereafter, he fought in the French Resistance under the pseudonym of René Versailles. He was Chief of Staff at the Ministry of the Navy from 1944 to 1945, and later at the Ministry of State for Muslim Affairs. While working in Algiers in 1944, he was recruited into Soviet Service by Imek Bernstein, a mentor of Pâques and veteran of the International Brigades in Spain. After the end of the war, he worked in the ministries of Reconstruction and Urban Planning and Health. He also directed a journal, La Production française, from 1950 to 1954. After failing to win a seat in the National Assembly in 1951, he continued his bureaucratic work until 1958. The return of de Gaulle in May 1958 bettered Pâques's professional prospects, and he was able to join Louis Jacquinot 's office in the Defense Staff's information service until July 1961, when he secured an appointment as director of the prestigious Institut des hautes études de défense nationale, which lasted until October 1962, when he joined the NATO press service at the recommendation of Georges Gorse.

Pâques was an extremely productive agent for the Soviets throughout his bureaucratic career in France and his employment at NATO. William T. Murphy identified him as one of the most valuable Soviet agents of the postwar era, exceeded only by Kim Philby and Klaus Fuchs. Aided by a top-secret security clearance and easy access to French ministers, he provided the Soviets with NATO war plans, force postures, and defensive strategies for West Germany, along with crucial French intelligence during the Cuban Missile Crisis and biographical writeups about NATO officials. Despite his brief tenure at NATO, an internal NATO document stated that Pâques had compromised “most of the essential elements” of NATO's defense strategies.

Throughout his professional career, Pâques was known as a sober, devout Catholic, albeit with a cynical streak. He was a professed conservative and anticommunist, and was in favor of the continued French presence in Algeria.

Pâques was arrested on 10 August 1963 in the wake of the Martel Affair. Although he had joined NATO after Anatoliy Golitsyn (a.k.a. Martel)'s defection, Golitsyn's allegations of deep infiltration within the French cabinet and military intelligence ignited the molehunt which resulted in Pâques's arrest.

At his trial in 1964, Pâques admitted his espionage activities, claiming that he did them in the service of world peace and against American hegemony, despite anti-Soviet scruples. A five-member jury convicted him in Paris and sentenced him to life imprisonment; he was freed and pardoned after seven years in prison by his old friend, now President, Georges Pompidou. After his release, he worked for an economic think-tank and died in 1993.

The Giberville bucket is a bucket in wood and bronze from a grave of the 5th or 6th century AD excavated in the commune of Giberville, in what is now the Calvados department in Normandy, France. It is now in the Normandy Museum in Caen.

Discovered during excavations of a Merovingian necropolis in the 1970s, the Giberville bucket, dating from Late Antiquity, was found where the ancient practice of burying buckets in graves had been revived in Gaul since the 4th century. The bucket was unearthed in a necropolis that was in use from the late 5th to the 6th century, adding to its historical significance.

Made of yew wood and bronze, the artifact is richly decorated with representations of a Roman emperor and a hunting scene. Because of this decoration, the excavator interprets the bucket as a gift from an emperor to a member of a barbarian community. This object was subsequently kept and buried with a woman at the beginning of the century. It is, therefore, a witness of the transition period between the Western Roman Empire 's end and the Merovingian era's beginning.

While fragments of other similar buckets have been found, the Giberville bucket stands out for its exceptional state of preservation and unique iconography, making it an extremely rare and significant object.

The bucket was found in 1970s archaeological excavations of a necropolis of 482 graves in Giberville called "Le Martray." Giberville is 2.5 km from the Orne and its tributary, the Gronde, and 7 km south-southwest of the Roman camp at Bénouville.

The name first appears in 1066 and again in 1082 as Goisbertivilla. This is a typical medieval name ending in -ville, meaning "rural estate." The first element, Giber -, comes from the Germanic name Gausbert(us). The name Le Martray is also medieval. It means "martyr." It remembers the place's funerary destination.

The last decades of the Western Roman Empire and relations with newcomers from "barbarian people" led to a new way of thinking about history. The Empire accepted the creation of independent political entities within its borders. In French history books from the late 19th and early 20th centuries, "barbarian invasions" was a common term. Historiography exaggerates the negative aspects of these federation agreements.

The question of identity and ethnic and cultural identification looks at Romanity and citizenship. The Edict of Caracalla of 212 changed this by allowing all free men in the Empire to become citizens.

Several research studies have revealed that the Roman Empire and the 'barbarian' world were not as distinct as previously believed. The changes in Gaul during Late Antiquity were intricate, with the region being divided between a struggling and isolated north, Armorican Gaul, and the south, still under the influence of Roman-educated elites until the Western Roman Empire's demise. The federated peoples settled in the Empire and were in client kingdoms within its borders. They pledged allegiance to Rome, providing soldiers in return for money and other benefits. Barbarian kings only ruled their people. Flavius Honorius and his general Constantius set up the client kingdoms in Gaul from 411 onwards. They replaced the old limes system with a new, more practical policy.

Barbarian kingdoms were groups of different ethnicities who wanted to join the Roman army and take care of their people. Barbarian warriors helped defeat Attila at the Battle of the Catalaunian Fields.

Northern Gaul had fewer troops to maintain the limes because the elite moved closer to Frankish power. The Empire's priority was to protect southern Gaul and Italy. In 439, the Vandals took over Carthage without permission. The Eastern Roman Empire may have accepted the late fifth-century kingdoms because it was impossible to retake the capital of Roman Africa.

In the 5th century, the northern part of Gaul rejected imperial authority. There are few sources, but it may have been linked to Constantine III being overthrown. The usurper was killed in Arles in 411. Troops on the Rhine withdrew during this troubled period. They were protecting the English Channel but could not prevent new arrivals. The central power hunted down supporters of the usurper or those backing the "separatist movement." It regained a foothold and reorganized the defenses around 411-416. However, the Armorican provinces remained in turmoil throughout the century. Their rallying to Clovis could be seen as the religious elites' rallying to a Catholic Christian leader in a context marked by Arianism, particularly among the Visigoths.

Roman funeral rites included a banquet, a sacrifice, and the burial of the body or ashes. The burial site was decorated with items for the banquet and the deceased. In Late Antiquity, these rites continued to be necessary. Most burials were in cemeteries, not at home. Christianity replaced this last "legacy of Antiquity," moving the deceased's final resting place closer to the living.

Barbarian mercenaries adopted burial rites that showed the social status of the dead. The body was put in a wooden box in a pit. Graves were covered with a mound of earth or stone and a stone or other marker with the name of the person buried. Burial rites and grave objects continued to be important in Late Antiquity.

Countryside necropolises are family-run. The least furnished graves are for "members of their household." They were set up along communication routes and on territorial boundaries. They lasted from a few generations to two or three centuries. As Christianity spread, chapels appeared in the countryside in the sixth and seventh centuries.

People from Romano-Barbaric populations are buried in traditional clothes, but the fabrics are not preserved. Archaeologists can find fibulae. Pins mark women's burials, showing they wore specific headdresses. The burials sometimes have an "ostentatious character" (like at Airan). They show a "late-antique cultural mix" with Gallo-Roman funerary rites and burial in traditional clothes. Specialists can tell that people from other places were there because they found things like fibulae, pins, and combs. Men's graves have belts with buckle plates made in Barbaricum.

This area of the Caen Plain has a long history of human activity. Near Martray, there is evidence of an Indigenous farm and a burial enclosure. Archaeologists found things from the Early Roman period about 1.1 km from the farm. They found a building that might have been a tannery and a bronze tripod.

The Caen Plain had many small settlements. The village had about fifteen families in the Early Middle Ages. Two necropolises have been found in Giberville. The area's burials show the community was "affluent" during the 6th century. This was due to trade from the Roman Empire, not just farming. The skeletons had a thin look, especially the women. The men were about 1.72 m tall, and the women were about 1.59 m tall. This is taller than the people in the Saint-Martin-de-Fontenay necropolis. The community had a better quality of life. In the 7th century, women were taller and slimmer, while men were shorter but more robust. The population started to change, becoming more open to the outside world. About 14% of burials were of non-adults in the sixth century and 17% in the 7th century. More children and young adults are buried than adults. In the sixth century, more young people died than in previous centuries. There are fewer young men and more young women and women over 60 in graves from the century. In the next century, things got better for women but worse for young men. Their share of the necropolis rose from 25% to 39%. This may be linked to a bias in the male sample.

The necropolis was used from the 5th to the 7th century. The tomb with the bucket dates from the early 6th century. Only about 20 of the later tombs have sarcophagi. The graves are in rows facing west and east. Archaeologists found wooden coffins and one cremation. Only about 20 of the later tombs have sarcophagi. The graves are in rows facing west and east. Archaeologists found wooden coffins. One cremation was found.

There are groups of tombs. Archaeologists found that people buried close together were related. A burial enclosure was also found. It was marked by a fence with post-hole marks, 30 to 45 cm in diameter. A 90 cm post contained a "wooden candle" to indicate the cemetery site. The size of the enclosure did not change. The posts were about 1.20 m high, and the candle was twice as high. Stone blocks marked graves.

Christian Pilet and Jean-Yves Marin date the work to the late 4th and early 5th centuries. Marin says the bucket is difficult to date because of the fragmentary inscription. The bucket was found in a woman's grave, where she was buried with weapons. Archaeologists call these graves "chief's graves." Women's graves near these burials had lots of material, including fibulae, necklaces, glass, and wooden tableware.

The first group of graves is east-west and has a palisade. It includes the necropolis' "founder". A wooden palisade and a 5-meter-diameter ditch surrounded the "founder" grave. Later graves are around a core. Archaeologists believe a structure existed a few meters from the first group in a complex dated to the end of the 5th and beginning of the 6th centuries.

The tombs were robbed when the necropolis was in use. Two-thirds of the tombs were looted, and archaeologists found a pile of objects. Looting damaged the graves, but archaeologists found some food and fire pits. Excavations have also found a yellow glass apodous beaker and a Frankish coin from the first third of the 6th century.

The use of these coins, weighing close to a silique and found in soldiers' graves, constitutes "without doubt an important milestone in Frankish coinage at the beginning of the 6th century." The excavations also uncovered elements of a necklace and fibulae "in gilded silver and cloisonné glassware."

Throughout the 7th century, the necropolis maintained its structure, with groups of tombs and overlapping burials, a continuity that extended into the 8th century. The ornamental objects discovered, including arched fibulae, are part of a widespread group from the 6th and 7th centuries, with only two objects bearing a cross. The presence of nineteen Caen stone sarcophagi, 'looted or reused,' is a testament to the Christianization of the local community.

After the necropolis was gradually abandoned in the second half of the 7th century, the deceased were buried not far from the church of Saint-Martin de Giberville, 2 km away, or around a church dedicated to Saint Germain, which has since disappeared and whose toponymy, the "Champ Saint-Germain" or "Dellage Saint-Germain," is still remembered today. Cemeteries were located not far from the "community of the living." The necropolis around the church was in use from the late 7th to the 14th century. The funerary enclosure in the Martray area, "the place of the dead," left its mark on the landscape and people's minds.

Work on many Merovingian necropolises began in the 1900s. A study on buckets was published in the 2000s. Funerary archaeology was active in the former Lower Normandy region from the 1970s to the 1990s, excavating necropolises in the Caen plain. Three sword-bearing individuals were found in graves on the Giberville site. From 1975 to 1980, several salvage excavations were carried out in the commune. Roadworks and housing development led to the discovery of a necropolis to the north of the church, and the development of the industrial zone led to the discovery of the Martray necropolis. Thirty sarcophagi were found around Saint-Martin church between 1975 and 1980.

The Martray necropolis has limestone tombs and sarcophagi. The eastern side of the Martray necropolis was not excavated because of the road. They found 394 tombs and think there are about 482 burials, including the area covered by the road. Two hundred two tombs were from the early 20th century, but a third was empty, and a quarter had been reused. One hundred eighty-nine tombs were from the 6th century. This is fewer than in the previous century, possibly because the area was not fully excavated. Eighty tombs had no skeletons. The archaeologist says the skeletons were not well preserved.

One of the most interesting discoveries was a bucket found in tomb 41. This unique find was unearthed during rescue excavations from October 1976 to June 1977.

Like the other tombs in the necropolis, grave n° 41 was hewn from limestone, and the bucket was at the tomb's foot. The bucket is the only remaining artifact from the looted grave. The Martray necropolis also had Anglo-Saxon fibulae.

The bucket is made of yew wood slats. This type of wood is used in most cases, although buckets of oak or ash are known to exist. Yew is known to have been used for containers and common wooden pottery despite the toxins present in the wood. The wood is rot-resistant and has "numerous technical and aesthetic qualities."

The Giberville bucket has fourteen slats, each 14 cm high and 3 cm wide. Its handle and headband are embossed bronze, and the decoration is engraved bronze.

The Giberville bucket, with its unique features, stands a modest 15 cm high, with a diameter of 12.8 cm at the mouth and 13.7 cm at the bottom. The decoration, a captivating blend of political and mythological elements, adds a fascinating dimension to the artifact. The 42 cm circumference is adorned with two bronze bands, each 1.3 cm wide. A brass band graces the top of the pail, enhancing its allure. A 13.3 cm high and 1.4 cm wide bronze band is used for the handle, a distinctive feature of this historic artifact.

The metal band supporting the decoration is 17 cm by 4 cm, 0.5 mm thick. A 4.5 cm by 2 cm bronze plaque is attached to the handle. Traces of repairs have been found on other preserved examples, such as those from Rhenen and Saint-Dizier.

In terms of size and shape, the Giberville bucket, as described by Amélie Vallée, corresponds to the "bronze-plated bucket" type, although some have Christian or geometric decoration. It was probably made by mobile craftsmen from northern France, between the Seine and the Oise, following a "late Roman tradition." However, the question of fixed or itinerant workshops remains unanswered, even if several craftsmen must have worked on the objects, given the variety of techniques. Amélie Vallée raises the question of centralized production and possible diffusion by imitation or the role of contacts between Merovingian elites and other peoples.

The decoration is stamped and partially superimpositioned. The handle is engraved, and the upper band shows the right side of a coin, characters, a rider, and a standing figure with horses and deer (plates 10 and 11 in Pilet, 1990). The scene is depicted twice, on both sides of the handle. Five elements are present: a coin, a rider, a deer, a figure, and a head.

The bucket's pattern represents a coin mounted in a medallion, a common practice in the 3rd century as a pendant or necklace. The practice continued into the 4th century. The right side of the coin is partially preserved.

Two patterns are present: a floral and a cruciform. The 30 mm diameter coin shows an imperial bust and the inscription "DN VAL". Given the long space for the figure's title, this is a Valentinian. The name Valentinian is not specified, and we don't know if it refers to Valentinian I, Valentinian II, or Valentinian III, as these emperors reigned from 364 to 455. Christian Pilet opts for Valentinian I. The imperial bust is adorned with a diadem of two rows of pearls and a drapery.

The size of the coin reproduced in the work, with a diameter of 30 mm, is more significant than that of a standard coin, which would be that of a multiple. Multiples were common during the reign of Valentinian and were intended to reward soldiers and dignitaries of the empire according to an ancient tradition. The size of common coins from the 4th century is about 20-21 mm.

Coins are often used to decorate lamps, in which case they are pressed onto clay. Coins used for embossing had to have relief, so gold and silver were used. Aurei or solidi were often used. The depicted coin is a "work of imagination", even if models inspired the craftsman.

A male figure is shown standing, wearing a helmet and a short tunic, holding a standard, the labarum, in his left hand. In Honorius's time, the emperor was depicted in this way with a standard or shield.

At the emperor's feet is a "prisoner" with unbound hands. The pattern is an artistic creation, although it is based on accurate representations circulating in Gallic workshops at the end of the 4th century. In imperial depictions, the right hand held a prisoner or a shield. This scene is similar to representations on the reverse of circulating coins of the Gloria Romanorum type. In another depiction, the emperor holds a standard in one hand, with a bound captive at his feet and the other on a shield.

The frame of the work shows a hunting scene. It depicts a hunt with a stag (a dix-cors) surrounded by four vertagus or vertragus breed dogs, "prized for their speed," as described by Arrien, with a rider carrying a spear. Wearing a cuirass and a diadem floating in the wind, this rider is identified as the emperor. This depiction of the emperor hunting is common, even though deer hunting is only of interest in the Late Roman Empire. Thus, stag hunting is one of the elements used to date the work.

The emperor is depicted three times: in money profile, standing, and on horseback. It is yet to be known whether the craftsman responsible for the work proceeded directly to the minting stage or whether he went through a die stage. The scene shows the end of the hunt. Four hounds have stopped the stag and are biting it in various places. The hounds surround the rider at the back, stop his mount, and prepare to throw a spear at the stag. He wears a cuirass, and the element behind his neck corresponds to a wreath, representing the emperor. The emperor is also depicted after the hunt, with a standard at his side. The horse tramples a snake. A 4 mm wide weave represents the horse.

There are also eight triangular designs, each with two opposing dogs; these dogs are also vertagus.

The face of a Gorgon is depicted with snakes in her hair and her tongue sticking out. Such representations can also be seen in buckets found on the limes of Pannonia at Intercisa, preserved in Mainz in the Central Roman-Germanic Museum, and Budapest, in the Hungarian National Museum, when one of these two buckets was discovered, a coin of Valentinian I was found.

The nature of the object reserved it for a member of the elite. The decoration has been interpreted as representing the emperor as the destroyer of his enemies and protector; therefore, it has a political meaning.

Placing wooden buckets in burials is an ancient practice that has interested scientists since the 19th century. It is attested at the end of the Bronze Age and developed at the end of the La Tène period.

Discoveries have been made from southern England to the Rhine. From the 1st century, the practice has no longer been attested in northwestern Gaul. It is attested again from the 4th century and develops from the second half of the 5th century until the 2nd century, at the end of the reign of Clovis. Its presence in funerary contexts is attested in only a dozen cases. After the second half of the 7th century, burials' "funerary endowment" diminished. However, buckets continued to be placed in graves, especially in the Viking world and at Oseberg. The graves were marked not only by wooden buckets but also by various other objects. The buckets were placed in male and female graves, at the feet of the deceased near the head or other body parts, and inside or outside the coffin. Some were placed next to "prestige" pottery. The burials included ceramic, glass, copper alloy, and wooden vessels, adding to the richness and complexity of funerary practices.

The function of these buckets remains as much a mystery as their contents: alcoholic beverages, soup, or fragile objects. Matthieu Poux has highlighted the cultic role of the yew tree in Celtic times, as the toxicity of yew wood accentuated the "hallucinogenic effects of alcohol". The use of yew wood in the early Middle Ages, including for everyday objects, suggests that it was used for aesthetic or practical reasons. Some may have contained 'berries and eggs', but the information gathered is 'too specific'. The buckets may have been used at funeral feasts as part of the service. These feasts would have had the function of strengthening communities. The buckets could also have been used to deposit food, a widespread custom in Late Antiquity, and continued in the early Christian communities despite opposition from the clerical hierarchy.

According to Christian Pilet and Jacqueline Pilet-Lemière, the tombs of chiefs surrounded by the tombs of rich women make it "tempting to see in the organization of the society of the dead a reflection of the society of the living".

The bucket, made at the end of the 4th or beginning of the 5th century, could have been a donativum, a gift from an emperor to his soldiers, given the proximity of the Roman camp at Bénouville, only 7 km away, or to civilian dignitaries.

The depiction of the emperor could confirm the object's function, which is identical to that of other objects, such as buckle plates similar to those on the Notitia dignitatum or a gold belt discovered at Sainte-Croix-aux-Mines. High imperial officials gave gifts to "civil dignitaries and [...] army commanders". The depiction of the emperor hunting on the object is linked to the "propaganda of power".

Like Perseus, the emperor is protected from enemies by his virtus and the Gorgon's head. Because these patterns play a role, the craftsman has created a "work of propaganda". The emperor is depicted three times, and the object was intended as a gift. Gifts could also be belts with buckles, sometimes made of gold; the Giberville bucket, by comparison, is "a piece of junk". According to Christian Pilet, it could have been offered to a barbarian chieftain who had served in the Roman army, hoarded and repaired by a woman who took it to her grave at the beginning of the century. It may have contained elements that have since disappeared.

The arrival of populations of Germanic origin in the Roman Empire impacted art, even if the ancient culture continued for several centuries. According to Christian Pilet, the Giberville bucket is a "witness of the Roman-Germanic culture", despite the difficulty of dating it.

Other evidence of this culture, "remnants", were collected in other Giberville burials, including a buckle and a buckle plate. These objects were buried in the graves of armed men with spears, bows, and axes, along with their wives.

The proximity of the sea led to trade with the other side of the Channel. Not far from the site of the Roman camp at Bénouville, excavations carried out in 1840 by Abbé Durand of the Société des Antiquaires de Normandie unearthed an Anglo-Saxon brooch that testifies to exchanges with Anglo-Saxon England. Anglo-Saxon brooches were also found in the Martray necropolis. Cremations also confirm the Anglo-Saxon presence.

The Black vests or Black jackets (French : Gilets noirs) is a French activist organization mostly composed of undocumented immigrants. The group campaigns for the provision of administrative documents for all immigrants, as well as decent housing and living conditions. The Gilets noirs arose partly in response to perceived racist, anti-immigrant, and pro-fascist sentiment among the Yellow vests movement.

The Black vests movement started in November 2018 in Île-de-France.

It is made up of people who self-identify as "immigrants with or without papers, children of immigrants, allies of the cause, housed and unhoused people", mostly based in the " Foyers de travailleurs migrants ", high density social housing for immigrant workers. They gained public attention in July 2019, when they jointly occupied the Panthéon with the La Chapelle Debout ('Stand up La Chapelle ') collective, and the Droits devant! ("Rights up front!") association, to demand a meeting with then- Prime Minister Édouard Philippe to make their demands heard. The groups called this action "Black vests looking for the Prime Minister", and it was the subject of an editorial in the daily newspaper Libération.

The movement's demands include: collective regularisation of their legal status in France, access to decent, safe and healthy housing, the end of deportations and deportation orders (French : obligations de quitter le territoire français), the end of exploitative off-the-books employment, and freedom of movement & residence. Since France introduced movement restrictions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Black vests have also denounced unsanitary conditions in migrant workers housing [ fr ] and the impossibility of social distancing there, particularly by organising a rent strike to force property managers to disinfect homes and provide residents with cleaning and hygiene supplies.

The Black vests have been publicly endorsed by numerous organizations, including ACT UP-Paris, Paris & suburbs anti-fascist action (French: Action antifasciste Paris-Banlieue), the Asso Solidaires union, Femmes Plurielles, the Moroccan Association for Human Rights, the Mwasi Collective, and the association of Maghrebi workers in France (French: Association des travailleurs maghrébins de France).

Elected officials, including MP Éric Coquerel, Paris city councilmember David Belliard, and Senator Esther Benbassa, have also expressed support for the collective.

Giuseppe Maria Garibaldi (Italian: [ dʒuˈzɛppe ɡariˈbaldi ] ; 4 July 1807 – 2 June 1882) was an Italian general, revolutionary and republican. He contributed to the Unification of Italy (Risorgimento) and the creation of the Kingdom of Italy. He is considered to be one of Italy's " fathers of the fatherland ", along with Camillo Benso di Cavour, King Victor Emmanuel II and Giuseppe Mazzini. Garibaldi is also known as the "Hero of the Two Worlds" because of his military enterprises in South America and Europe.

Garibaldi was a follower of the Italian nationalist Mazzini and embraced the republican nationalism of the Young Italy movement. He became a supporter of Italian unification under a democratic republican government. However, breaking with Mazzini, he pragmatically allied himself with the monarchist Cavour and the Kingdom of Sardinia in the struggle for independence, subordinating his republican ideals to his nationalist ones until Italy was unified. After participating in an uprising in Piedmont, he was sentenced to death, but escaped and sailed to South America, where he spent 14 years in exile, during which he took part in several wars and learned the art of guerrilla warfare. In 1835 he joined the rebels known as the Ragamuffins (farrapos), in the Ragamuffin War in Brazil, and took up their cause of establishing the Riograndense Republic and later the Catarinense Republic. Garibaldi also became involved in the Uruguayan Civil War, raising an Italian force known as Redshirts, and is still celebrated as an important contributor to Uruguay 's reconstitution.

In 1848, Garibaldi returned to Italy. He commanded and fought in military campaigns that eventually led to the Italian unification. The provisional government of Milan made him a general and the Minister of War promoted him to General of the Roman Republic in 1849. When the war of independence broke out in April 1859, Garibaldi led his Hunters of the Alps in the capture of major cities in Lombardy, including Varese and Como, until he reached the frontier of South Tyrol ; the war ended with the acquisition of Lombardy. The following year, 1860, he led the Expedition of the Thousand on behalf of, and with the consent of, Victor Emmanuel II, King of Sardinia. The expedition was a success and concluded with the annexation of Sicily, Southern Italy, Marche and Umbria to the Kingdom of Sardinia before the creation of a unified Kingdom of Italy on 17 March 1861. His last military campaign took place during the Franco-Prussian War as commander of the Army of the Vosges.

Garibaldi became an international figurehead for national independence and republican ideals, and is considered by twentieth-century historiography and popular culture as Italy's greatest national hero. He was showered with admiration and praise by many contemporary intellectuals and political figures, including Abraham Lincoln, William Brown, Francesco de Sanctis, Victor Hugo, Alexandre Dumas, Malwida von Meysenbug, George Sand, Charles Dickens, and Friedrich Engels. Garibaldi also inspired later figures like Jawaharlal Nehru and Che Guevara. Historian A. J. P. Taylor called him "the only wholly admirable figure in modern history". The volunteers who followed Garibaldi during his campaigns were known as the Garibaldini or Redshirts, after the color of the shirts that they wore in lieu of a uniform.

Garibaldi was born and christened Joseph-Marie Garibaldi on 4 July 1807 in Nice, to the Ligurian family of Domenico Garibaldi from Chiavari and Maria Rosa Nicoletta Raimondi from Loano. In 1814, the Congress of Vienna returned Nice to Victor Emmanuel I of Sardinia. (Nice would be returned to France in 1860 by the Treaty of Turin, over the objections of Garibaldi.)

Garibaldi's family's involvement in coastal trade drew him to a life at sea.

He lived in the Pera district of Istanbul from 1828 to 1832. He became an instructor and taught Italian, French, and mathematics in the Ottoman Empire. Garibaldi had close ties with the vast Sardinian exile network in the Ottoman Empire, befriending people such as Giovanni Timoteo Calosso.

In April 1833, he travelled to Taganrog, in the Russian Empire, aboard the schooner Clorinda with a shipment of oranges. During ten days in port, he met Giovanni Battista Cuneo from Oneglia, a politically active immigrant and member of the secret Young Italy movement of Giuseppe Mazzini. Mazzini was a passionate proponent of Italian unification as a liberal republic via political and social reform.

In November 1833, Garibaldi met Mazzini in Genoa, starting a long relationship that later became troubled. He joined the Carbonari revolutionary association, and in February 1834 participated in a failed Mazzinian insurrection in Piedmont.

Garibaldi first sailed to the Beylik of Tunis before eventually finding his way to the Empire of Brazil. Once there, he took up the cause of the Riograndense Republic in its attempt to separate from Brazil, joining the rebels known as the Ragamuffins in the Ragamuffin War of 1835.

During this war, he met Ana Maria de Jesus Ribeiro da Silva, commonly known as Anita. When the rebels proclaimed the Catarinense Republic in the Brazilian province of Santa Catarina in 1839, she joined him aboard his ship, Rio Pardo, and fought alongside him at the battles of Imbituba and Laguna.

In 1841, Garibaldi and Anita moved to Montevideo, Uruguay, where Garibaldi worked as a trader and schoolmaster. The couple married in Church of St. Francis of Assisi in the Ciudad Vieja neighborhood, the following year. They had four children; Domenico Menotti (1840–1903), Rosa (1843–1845), Teresa Teresita (1845–1903), and Ricciotti (1847–1924). A skilled horsewoman, Anita is said to have taught Giuseppe about the gaucho culture of Argentina, southern Brazil and Uruguay. Around this time he adopted his distinctive style of clothing—wearing the red shirt, poncho, and hat commonly worn by gauchos.

In 1842, Garibaldi took command of the Uruguayan fleet and raised an Italian Legion of soldiers—known as Redshirts —for the Uruguayan Civil War. This recruitment was possible as Montevideo had a large Italian population at the time: 4,205 out of a total population of 30,000 according to an 1843 census.

Garibaldi aligned his forces with the Uruguayan Colorados led by Fructuoso Rivera and Joaquín Suárez, who were aligned with the Argentine Unitarian Party. This faction received some support from the French and British in their struggle against the forces of former Uruguayan president Manuel Oribe 's Blancos, which was also aligned with Argentine Federales under the rule of Buenos Aires caudillo Juan Manuel de Rosas. The Italian Legion adopted a black flag that represented Italy in mourning, with a volcano at the centre that symbolized the dormant power in their homeland. Though contemporary sources do not mention the Redshirts, popular history asserts that the legion first wore them in Uruguay, getting them from a factory in Montevideo that had intended to export them to the slaughterhouses of Argentina. These shirts became the symbol of Garibaldi and his followers.

Between 1842 and 1848, Garibaldi defended Montevideo against forces led by Oribe. In 1845, he managed to occupy Colonia del Sacramento and Martín García Island, and led the infamous sacks of Martín García island and Gualeguaychú during the Anglo-French blockade of the Río de la Plata. Garibaldi escaped with his life after being defeated in the Costa Brava combat, delivered on 15 and 16 August 1842, thanks to the mercy of Admiral William Brown. The Argentines, wanting to pursue him to finish him off, were stopped by Brown who exclaimed "let him escape, that gringo is a brave man." Years later, a grandson of Garibaldi would be named William, in honour of Admiral Brown. Adopting amphibious guerrilla tactics, Garibaldi later achieved two victories during 1846, in the Battle of Cerro and the Battle of San Antonio del Santo.

Garibaldi joined Freemasonry during his exile, taking advantage of the asylum the lodges offered to political refugees from European countries. At the age of 37, during 1844, Garibaldi was initiated in the Asilo de la Virtud Lodge of Montevideo. This was an irregular lodge under a Brazilian Freemasonry not recognized by the main international masonic obediences, such as the United Grand Lodge of England or the Grand Orient de France.

While Garibaldi had little use for Masonic rituals, he was an active Freemason and regarded Freemasonry as a network that united progressive men as brothers both within nations and as a global community. Garibaldi was eventually elected as the Grand Master of the Grand Orient of Italy.

Garibaldi regularized his position later in 1844, joining the lodge Les Amis de la Patrie of Montevideo under the Grand Orient of France.

The fate of his homeland continued to concern Garibaldi. The election of Pope Pius IX in 1846 caused a sensation among Italian patriots, both at home and in exile. Pius's initial reforms seemed to identify him as the liberal pope called for by Vincenzo Gioberti, who went on to lead the unification of Italy. When news of these reforms reached Montevideo, Garibaldi wrote to the Pope:

If these hands, used to fighting, would be acceptable to His Holiness, we most thankfully dedicate them to the service of him who deserves so well of the Church and of the fatherland. Joyful indeed shall we and our companions in whose name we speak be, if we may be allowed to shed our blood in defence of Pius IX's work of redemption.

Mazzini, from exile, also applauded the early reforms of Pius IX. In 1847, Garibaldi offered the apostolic nuncio at Rio de Janeiro, Bedini, the service of his Italian Legion for the liberation of the peninsula. Then news of the outbreak of the Sicilian revolution of 1848 in January and revolutionary agitation elsewhere in Italy, encouraged Garibaldi to lead approximately 60 members of his legion home.

Garibaldi returned to Italy amidst the turmoil of the revolutions of 1848 in the Italian states and was one of the founders and leaders of the Action Party. Garibaldi offered his services to Charles Albert of Sardinia, who displayed some liberal inclinations, but he treated Garibaldi with coolness and distrust. Rebuffed by the Piedmontese, he and his followers crossed into Lombardy where they offered assistance to the provisional government of Milan, which had rebelled against the Austrian occupation. In the course of the following unsuccessful First Italian War of Independence, Garibaldi led his legion to two minor victories at Luino and Morazzone.

After the crushing Piedmontese defeat at the Battle of Novara on 23 March 1849, Garibaldi moved to Rome to support the Roman Republic recently proclaimed in the Papal States. However, a French force sent by Louis Napoleon threatened to topple it. At Mazzini's urging, Garibaldi took command of the defence of Rome. In fighting near Velletri, Achille Cantoni saved his life. After Cantoni's death, during the Battle of Mentana, Garibaldi wrote the novel Cantoni the Volunteer.

On 30 April 1849, the Republican army, under Garibaldi's command, defeated a numerically far superior French army at the Porta San Pancrazio gate of Rome. Subsequently, French reinforcements arrived, and the Siege of Rome began on 1 June. Despite the resistance of the Republican army, the French prevailed on 29 June. On 30 June the Roman Assembly met and debated three options: surrender, continue fighting in the streets, or retreat from Rome to continue resistance from the Apennine Mountains. Garibaldi, having entered the chamber covered in blood, made a speech favouring the third option, ending with: Ovunque noi saremo, sarà Roma ("Wherever we will go, that will be Rome").

The sides negotiated a truce on 1–2 July, Garibaldi withdrew from Rome with 4,000 troops, and ceded his ambition to rouse popular rebellion against the Austrians in central Italy. The French Army entered Rome on 3 July and reestablished the Holy See 's temporal power. Garibaldi and his forces, hunted by Austrian, French, Spanish, and Neapolitan troops, fled to the north, intending to reach Venice, where the Venetians were still resisting the Austrian siege. After an epic march, Garibaldi took temporary refuge in San Marino, with only 250 men having not abandoned him. Anita, who was carrying their fifth child, died near Comacchio during the retreat.

Garibaldi eventually managed to reach Porto Venere, near La Spezia, but the Piedmontese government forced him to emigrate again. He went to Tangier, where he stayed with Francesco Carpanetto, a wealthy Italian merchant. Carpanetto suggested that he and some of his associates finance the purchase of a merchant ship, which Garibaldi would command. Garibaldi agreed, feeling that his political goals were, for the moment, unreachable, and he could at least earn a living.

The ship was to be purchased in the United States. Garibaldi went to New York City, arriving on 30 July 1850. However, the funds for buying a ship were lacking. While in New York, he stayed with various Italian friends, including some exiled revolutionaries. He attended the Masonic lodges of New York in 1850, where he met several supporters of democratic internationalism, whose minds were open to socialist thought, and to giving Freemasonry a strong anti-papal stance.

The inventor Antonio Meucci employed Garibaldi in his candle factory on Staten Island (the cottage where he stayed is listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places and is preserved as the Garibaldi Memorial). Garibaldi was not satisfied with this, and in April 1851 he left New York with his friend Carpanetto for Central America, where Carpanetto was establishing business operations. They first went to Nicaragua, and then to other parts of the region. Garibaldi accompanied Carpanetto as a companion, not a business partner, and used the name Giuseppe Pane.

Carpanetto went on to Lima, Peru, where a shipload of his goods was due, arriving late in 1851 with Garibaldi. En route, Garibaldi called on revolutionary heroine Manuela Sáenz. At Lima, Garibaldi was generally welcomed. A local Italian merchant, Pietro Denegri, gave him command of his ship Carmen for a trading voyage across the Pacific, for which he required Peruvian citizenship, which he obtained that year. Garibaldi took the Carmen to the Chincha Islands for a load of guano. Then on 10 January 1852, he sailed from Peru for Canton, China, arriving in April.

After side trips to Xiamen and Manila, Garibaldi brought the Carmen back to Peru via the Indian Ocean and the South Pacific, passing clear around the south coast of Australia. He visited Three Hummock Island in the Bass Strait. Garibaldi then took the Carmen on a second voyage: to the United States via Cape Horn with copper from Chile, and also wool. Garibaldi arrived in Boston and went on to New York. There he received a hostile letter from Denegri and resigned his command. Another Italian, Captain Figari, had just come to the U.S. to buy a ship and hired Garibaldi to take the ship to Europe. Figari and Garibaldi bought the Commonwealth in Baltimore, and Garibaldi left New York for the last time in November 1853. He sailed the Commonwealth to London, and then to Newcastle upon Tyne for coal.

The Commonwealth arrived on 21 March 1854. Garibaldi, already a popular figure on Tyneside, was welcomed enthusiastically by local working men—although the Newcastle Courant reported that he refused an invitation to dine with dignitaries in the city. He stayed in Huntingdon Place Tynemouth for a few days, and in South Shields on Tyneside for over a month, departing at the end of April 1854. During his stay, he was presented with an inscribed sword, which his grandson Giuseppe Garibaldi II later carried as a volunteer in British service in the Second Boer War. He then sailed to Genoa, where his five years of exile ended on 10 May 1854.

Garibaldi returned to Italy in 1854. Using an inheritance from the death of his brother, he bought half of the Italian island of Caprera (north of Sardinia), devoting himself to agriculture. In 1859, the Second Italian War of Independence (also known as the Franco-Austrian War) broke out in the midst of internal plots at the Sardinian government. Garibaldi was appointed major general and formed a volunteer unit named the Hunters of the Alps (Cacciatori delle Alpi). Thenceforth, Garibaldi abandoned Mazzini's republican ideal of the liberation of Italy, assuming that only the Sardinian monarchy could effectively achieve it. He and his volunteers won victories over the Austrians at Varese, Como, and other places.

Garibaldi was very displeased as his home city of Nice (Nizza in Italian) had been surrendered to the French in return for crucial military assistance. In April 1860, as deputy for Nice in the Piedmontese parliament at Turin, he vehemently attacked Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour, for ceding the County of Nice (Nizzardo) to Emperor Napoleon III of France. In the following years, Garibaldi (with other passionate Niçard Italians) promoted the Italian irredentism of his native city, supporting the Niçard Vespers riots in 1871.

On 24 January 1860, Garibaldi married 18-year-old Giuseppina Raimondi. Immediately after the wedding ceremony, she informed him that she was pregnant with another man's child and Garibaldi left her the same day. At the beginning of April 1860, uprisings in Messina and Palermo in the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies provided Garibaldi with an opportunity. He gathered a group of volunteers called i Mille (the Thousand), or the Redshirts as popularly known, in two ships named Il Piemonte and Il Lombardo, and left from Quarto, in Genoa, on 5 May in the evening and landed at Marsala, on the westernmost point of Sicily, on 11 May.

Swelling the ranks of his army with scattered bands of local rebels, Garibaldi led 800 volunteers to victory over an enemy force of 1,500 at the Battle of Calatafimi on 15 May. He used the counter-intuitive tactic of an uphill bayonet charge. He saw that the hill was terraced, and the terraces would shelter his advancing men. Though small by comparison with the coming clashes at Palermo, Milazzo, and Volturno, this battle was decisive in establishing Garibaldi's power on the island. An apocryphal but realistic story had him say to his lieutenant Nino Bixio, "Here we either make Italy, or we die." His Neapolitan adversaries now fought for him, which led to accusations of bribery being made against their leader, Francesco Landi.

The next day, he declared himself dictator of Sicily in the name of Victor Emmanuel II of Italy. He advanced to the outskirts of Palermo, the capital of the island, and launched a siege on 27 May. He had the support of many inhabitants, who rose up against the garrison, but before they could take the city, reinforcements arrived and bombarded the city nearly to ruins. At this time, a British admiral intervened and facilitated a truce, by which the Neapolitan royal troops and warships surrendered the city and departed. The young Henry Adams —later to become a distinguished American writer—visited the city in June and described the situation, along with his meeting with Garibaldi, in a long and vivid letter to his older brother Charles. Historians Clough et al. argue that Garibaldi's Thousand were students, independent artisans, and professionals, not peasants. The support given by Sicilian peasants was not out of a sense of patriotism but from their hatred of exploitive landlords and oppressive Neapolitan officials. Garibaldi himself had no interest in social revolution and instead sided with the Sicilian landlords against the rioting peasants.

By conquering Palermo, Garibaldi had won a signal victory. He gained worldwide renown and the adulation of Italians. Faith in his prowess was so strong that doubt, confusion, and dismay seized even the Neapolitan court. Six weeks later, he marched against Messina in the east of the island, winning a ferocious and difficult Battle of Milazzo. By the end of July, only the citadel resisted.

Having conquered Sicily, he crossed the Strait of Messina and marched north. Garibaldi's progress was met with more celebration than resistance, and on 7 September he entered the capital city of Naples, by train. Despite taking Naples, however, he had not to this point defeated the Neapolitan army. Garibaldi's volunteer army of 24,000 was not able to conclusively defeat the reorganized Neapolitan army—about 25,000 men—on 30 September at the Battle of Volturno. This was the largest battle he ever fought, but its outcome was effectively decided by the arrival of the Royal Sardinian Army.

Meanwhile, Garibaldi's victories started to cause disquiet to the Piedmont, and particularly the Sardinian prime minister, Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour. He feared that, should the revolutionaries succeed in conquering the entire Neapolitan state, they would then invade the Papal States, which would lead to France intervening. The Piedmontese themselves had conquered most of the Pope's territories in their march south to meet Garibaldi, but they had deliberately avoided Rome, the capital of the Papal state. Garibaldi deeply disliked Cavour. To an extent, he simply mistrusted Cavour's pragmatism and realpolitik, but he also bore a personal grudge for Cavour's trading away his home city of Nice to the French the previous year. On the other hand, he supported the Sardinian monarch, Victor Emmanuel II, despite his dislike of royalty, who he admired as a champion of Italian independence. In his famous meeting with Victor Emmanuel at Teano on 26 October 1860, Garibaldi greeted him as King of Italy and shook his hand. Garibaldi rode into Naples at the king's side on 7 November, then retired to the rocky island of Caprera, refusing to accept any reward for his services.

At the outbreak of the American Civil War (in 1861), Garibaldi was a very popular figure. The 39th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment was named Garibaldi Guard after him. Garibaldi expressed interest in aiding the Union, and he was offered a major general's commission in the U.S. Army through a letter from Secretary of State William H. Seward to Henry Shelton Sanford, the U.S. Minister at Brussels, 27 July 1861. On 9 September 1861, Sanford met with Garibaldi and reported the result of the meeting to Seward:

He said that the only way in which he could render service, as he ardently desired to do, to the cause of the United States, was as Commander-in-chief of its forces, that he would only go as such, and with the additional contingent power—to be governed by events—of declaring the abolition of slavery—that he would be of little use without the first, and without the second it would appear like a civil war in which the world at large could have little interest or sympathy.

But Abraham Lincoln was not ready to free the slaves; Sanford's meeting with Garibaldi occurred a year before Lincoln issued the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation. Sanford's mission was hopeless, and Garibaldi did not join the Union army. A historian of the American Civil War, Don H. Doyle, however, wrote, "Garibaldi's full-throated endorsement of the Union cause roused popular support just as news of the Emancipation Proclamation broke in Europe." On 6 August 1863, after Lincoln had issued the final Emancipation Proclamation, Garibaldi wrote to Lincoln, "Posterity will call you the great emancipator, a more enviable title than any crown could be, and greater than any merely mundane treasure."

On 5 October 1860, Garibaldi set up the International Legion bringing together different national divisions of French, Poles, Swiss, Germans and other nationalities, with a view not just of finishing the liberation of Italy, but also of their homelands. With the motto "Free from the Alps to the Adriatic ", the unification movement set its gaze on Rome and Venice. Mazzini was discontented with the perpetuation of monarchial government, and continued to agitate for a republic. Garibaldi, frustrated at inaction by the king, and bristling over perceived snubs, organized a new venture. This time, he intended to take on the Papal States.

Garibaldi himself was intensely anti-Catholic and anti-papal. His efforts to overthrow the pope by military action mobilized anti-Catholic support. On 28 September 1862, 500 Irish labourers disrupted a pro-Garibaldi meeting in London by chanting "God and Rome", which triggered weeks of ethnic conflict between Protestants and Irish Catholics. Garibaldi's hostility to the pope's temporal domain was viewed with great distrust by Catholics around the world, and the French Emperor Napoleon III had guaranteed the independence of Rome from Italy by stationing a French garrison there. Victor Emmanuel was wary of the international repercussions of attacking Rome and the pope's seat there, and discouraged his subjects from participating in revolutionary ventures with such intentions. Nonetheless, Garibaldi believed he had the secret support of his government. Once he was excommunicated by the pope, he chose the Protestant pastor Alessandro Gavazzi as his army chaplain.

In June 1862, he sailed from Genoa to Palermo to gather volunteers for the impending campaign, under the slogan Roma o Morte ("Rome or Death"). An enthusiastic party quickly joined him, and he turned for Messina, hoping to cross to the mainland there. He arrived with a force of around two thousand, but the garrison proved loyal to the king's instructions and barred his passage. They turned south and set sail from Catania, where Garibaldi declared that he would enter Rome as a victor or perish beneath its walls. He landed at Melito di Porto Salvo on 14 August and marched at once into the Calabrian mountains.

Far from supporting this endeavour, the Italian government was quite disapproving. General Enrico Cialdini dispatched a division of the regular army, under Colonel Emilio Pallavicini, against the volunteer bands. On 28 August, the two forces met in the rugged Aspromonte. One of the regulars fired a chance shot, and several volleys followed, killing a few of the volunteers. The fighting ended quickly, as Garibaldi forbade his men to return fire on fellow subjects of the Kingdom of Italy. Many of the volunteers were taken prisoner, including Garibaldi, who had been wounded by a shot in the foot. The episode was the origin of a famous Italian nursery rhyme : Garibaldi fu ferito ("Garibaldi was wounded").

A government steamer took him to a prison at Varignano near La Spezia, where he was held in a sort of honourable imprisonment and underwent a tedious and painful operation to heal his wound. His venture had failed, but he was consoled by Europe's sympathy and continued interest. After he regained his health, the government released Garibaldi and let him return to Caprera.

En route to London in 1864 he stopped briefly in Malta, where many admirers visited him in his hotel. Protests by opponents of his anticlericalism were suppressed by the authorities. In London, his presence was received with enthusiasm by the population. He met the British prime minister Viscount Palmerston, as well as revolutionaries then living in exile in the city. At that time, his ambitious international project included the liberation of a range of occupied nations, such as Croatia, Greece, and Hungary. He also visited Bedford and was given a tour of the Britannia Iron Works, where he planted a tree (which was cut down in 1944 due to decay).

Garibaldi took up arms again in 1866, this time with the full support of the Italian government. The Austro-Prussian War had broken out, and Italy had allied with Prussia against the Austrian Empire in the hope of taking Venetia from Austrian rule in the Third Italian War of Independence. Garibaldi gathered again his Hunters of the Alps, now some 40,000 strong, and led them into the Trentino. He defeated the Austrians at Bezzecca, and made for Trento.

The Italian regular forces were defeated at Lissa on the sea, and made little progress on land after the disaster of Custoza. The sides signed an armistice by which Austria ceded Venetia to Italy, but this result was largely due to Prussia's successes on the northern front. Garibaldi's advance through Trentino was for nought, and he was ordered to stop his advance to Trento. Garibaldi answered with a short telegram from the main square of Bezzecca with the famous motto: Obbedisco! ("I obey!").

After the war, Garibaldi led a political party that agitated for the capture of Rome, the peninsula's ancient capital. In 1867, he again marched on the city, but the Papal army, supported by a French auxiliary force, proved a match for his badly armed volunteers. He was shot in the leg in the Battle of Mentana, and had to withdraw from the Papal territory. The Italian government again imprisoned him for some time, after which he returned to Caprera.

In the same year, Garibaldi sought international support for altogether eliminating the papacy. At the 1867 congress for the League of Peace and Freedom in Geneva he proposed: "The papacy, being the most harmful of all secret societies, ought to be abolished."

When the Franco-Prussian War broke out in July 1870, Italian public opinion heavily favoured the Prussians, and many Italians attempted to sign up as volunteers at the Prussian embassy in Florence. After the French garrison was recalled from Rome, the Italian Army captured the Papal States without Garibaldi's assistance. Following the wartime collapse of the Second French Empire after the Battle of Sedan, Garibaldi, undaunted by the recent hostility shown to him by the men of Napoleon III, switched his support to the newly declared Government of National Defense of France. On 7 September 1870, within three days of the revolution in Paris that ended the Empire, he wrote to the Movimento of Genoa, "Yesterday I said to you: war to the death to Bonaparte. Today I say to you: rescue the French Republic by every means."

Subsequently, Garibaldi went to France and assumed command of the Army of the Vosges, an army of volunteers. French socialist Louis Blanc referred to Garibaldi as a "soldier of revolutionary cosmopolitanism" based on his support for liberation movements throughout the world. After the war he was elected to the French National Assembly, where he briefly served as a member of Parliament for Alpes-Maritimes before returning to Caprera.

When the Paris Commune erupted in 1871, Garibaldi joined with younger radicals such as Felice Cavallotti in declaring his full support for the Communards and internationalism. Garibaldi suggested a grand alliance between various factions of the left: "Why don't we pull together in one organized group the Freemasonry, democratic societies, workers' clubs, Rationalists, Mutual Aid, etc., which have the same tendency towards good?". He began organizing a Congress of Unity, which was supported by many of the radical, free-thinking, and socialist groups throughout Italy such as La Plebe. The Congress was held in the Teatro Argentina despite being banned by the government, and endorsed a set of radical policies including universal suffrage, progressive taxation, compulsory lay education, administrative reform, and abolition of the death penalty.

Garibaldi had long claimed an interest in vague ethical socialism such as that advanced by Henri Saint-Simon and saw the struggle for liberty as an international affair, one which "does not make any distinction between the African and the American, the European and the Asian, and therefore proclaims the fraternity of all men whatever nation they belong to". He interpreted the International Workingmen's Association as an extension of the humanitarian ideals for which he had always fought. Although he did not agree with their calls for the abolition of property, Garibaldi defended the Communards and the First International against the attacks of their enemies: "Is it not the product of the abnormal state in which society finds itself in the world? [...] Shouldn't a society (I mean a human society) in which the majority struggle for subsistence and the minority want to take the larger part of the product of the former through deceptions and violence but without hard work, arouse discontent and thoughts of revenge amongst those who suffer?".

Garibaldi wrote a letter to Celso Ceretti in which he declared: "The International is the sun of the future [ sole dell'avvenire ]!". The letter was printed in dozens of workers' news sheets and papers, and was instrumental in persuading many fence-sitters to join the organization. After Garibaldi's death, many of his disciples embraced the libertarian socialist ideas of Mikhail Bakunin. As Italy still lacked an industrial proletariat, "Garibaldi's socialism represented most accurately craft trade-unionism and a general focus on economic egalitarianism". His socialism was a "socialism wherein the struggle against every injustice, and a love for freedom, predominated. Garibaldi was not an unpractical man, but an active witness of that kind of generosity in feelings and firm wish for justice". In the first volume of Carl Landauer's European Socialism, Garibaldi is mentioned alongside Mazzini as outstanding "Italian revolutionaries".

According to Denis Mack Smith, "the difference is not so large when we find what Garibaldi meant by the term. Socialism for him was nothing very revolutionary, and perhaps he flaunted the word partly because he delighted to feel that it would shock the Mazzinians." In describing the move to the left of Garibaldi and the Mazzinians, Lucy Riall writes that this "emphasis by younger radicals on the 'social question' was paralleled by an increase in what was called 'internationalist' or socialist activity (mostly Bakuninist anarchism) throughout northern and southern Italy, which was given a big boost by the Paris Commune". The rise of this socialism "represented a genuine challenge to Mazzini and the Mazzinian emphasis on politics and culture; and Mazzinis' death early in 1872 only served to underline the prevailing sense that his political era was over. Garibaldi now broke definitively with Mazzini, and this time he moved to the left of him. He came out entirely in favour of the Paris Commune and internationalism, and his stance brought him much closer to the younger radicals, especially Felice Cavallotti, and gave him a new lease on political life. From his support was born an initiative to relaunch a broad party of the radical left."

Despite being elected again to the Italian parliament, first as part of the Historical Left and then of the Historical Far Left, Garibaldi spent much of his late years on Caprera. However, he still managed to serve the Italian parliament with extreme distinction and supported an ambitious project of land reclamation in the marshy areas of southern Lazio. In 1879, Garibaldi founded the League of Democracy, along with Cavallotti, Alberto Mario and Agostino Bertani, which reiterated his support for universal suffrage, abolition of ecclesiastical property, the legal and political emancipation of women and a plan of public works to improve the Roman countryside that was completed.

In a 6 October 1875 letter from Caprera, "To my brothers of the Herzegovina and to the oppressed of Eastern Europe", Garibaldi wrote:

The Turk must go away to Broussa. He descended like a wolf, passing the Bosphorus, devastating, murdering, and violating those populations who gave us the Pelasgi, who were, perhaps, the first civilisers of Europe. He must no longer tread upon that part of the world kept by him in misery. At Broussa, with his vices, depredations, and cruelties, he will find enough people of Asia Minor to torment and plunge into desolation. Rise, then, heroic sons of Montenegro, Herzegovina, Bosnia, Servia, Therapia, Macedonia, Greece, Epirus, Albania, Bulgaria, and Roumania! All of you have a most splendid history. Among you were born Leonidas, Achilles, Alexander, Scanderbeg, and Spartacus. And today even, among your robust populations, you may still find a Spartacus and a Leonidas. Do not trust to diplomacy. That old woman without a heart certainly deceives you. But with you are all the men of heart throughout the world. England herself, till today favourable to the Turks, has manifested to you by means of the obolus and sympathy of one of her great men that she ought to prefer the alliance and gratitude of a confederation of free peoples to the decrepit confederation of The Empire of the Crescent. Then to Broussa with the Turk! Only thus can you make yourself independent and free. On this side of the Bosphorus the fierce Ottoman will always be under the stimulant of eternal war, and you will never obtain the sacred rights of man.

Ill and confined to bed by arthritis, Garibaldi made trips to Calabria and Sicily. In 1880, he married Francesca Armosino, with whom he previously had three children. Before the wedding, he stated he was not a Catholic and was willing to become a Protestant. Though raised a Catholic, in later life he became a supporter of Freemasonry, abjured Christianity, and expressed religious positions reminiscent of deism. On his deathbed, Garibaldi asked for his bed to be moved to where he could view the sea. On his death on 2 June 1882, his wishes for a simple funeral and cremation were not respected. He was buried on his farm on the island of Caprera alongside his last wife and some of his children.

In 2012, Garibaldi's descendants announced that, with permission from authorities, they would have Garibaldi's remains exhumed to confirm through DNA analysis that the remains in the tomb are indeed Garibaldi's. Some anticipated that there would be a debate about whether to preserve the remains or to grant his final wish for a simple cremation. In 2013, personnel changes at the Ministry of Culture sidelined the exhumation plans. The new authorities were "less than enthusiastic" about the plan.

Garibaldi's popularity, skill at rousing the common people, and his military exploits are all credited with making the unification of Italy possible. He was also a global exemplar of mid-19th century revolutionary liberalism and nationalism. After the liberation of southern Italy from the Neapolitan monarchy in the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, Garibaldi chose to sacrifice his liberal republican principles for the sake of unification. Garibaldi's acclaim stretched across Europe, with his name revered in Britain and France. His was the tale of an Italian vagabond trekking the South American plains from battle to battle with his pregnant wife in tow and then returning home and for the love of his homeland forsaking his ambition of making Italy a republic. His exploits became legendary, and when he toured Britain in his older days he was received as a hero.

Garibaldi subscribed to the anti-clericalism common among Latin liberals and did much to circumscribe the temporal power of the Papacy. His personal religious convictions are unclear to historians. In 1882, he wrote that "Man created God, not God created Man", yet he is quoted as saying in his autobiography: "I am a Christian and I speak to Christians—I am a good Christian and speak to good Christians. I love and venerate the religion of Christ because Christ came into the world to deliver humanity from slavery for which God has not created it. But the Pope, who wishes all men to be slaves—who demands of the powerful of the earth fetters and chains for Italians—the Pope king does not know Christ. He lies to his religion. Among the Indians, two geniuses are recognized and adored: that of good and that of evil. Well, the Genius of Evil for Italy is the Pope king. Let no one misunderstand my words—let no one confound Popery with Christianity—the Religion of Liberty with the avaricious and sanguinary Politics of Slavery. [...] You have the duty to educate the people—educate the people—educate them to be Christians—educate them to be Italians. [...] Viva l'Italia! Viva Christianity!".

Garibaldi was a popular hero in Britain. In his review of Lucy Riall's Garibaldi biography for The New Yorker, Tim Parks cites the English historian A. J. P. Taylor as saying that "Garibaldi is the only wholly admirable figure in modern history". British historian Denis Mack Smith wrote:

At the height of glory, Giuseppe Garibaldi was perhaps the most famous person in Italy. His name was much more famous than that of Cavour and Mazzini, and many more people would have heard of him than Verdi or Manzoni. Abroad, Garibaldi symbolized the Risorgimento Italy of those dramatic years and the intrepid audacity that contributed so much to the formation of the Italian nation. [...] A professional liberator, he fought for the oppressed people wherever he found them. Despite having the temperament of the fighter and the man of action, he managed to be an idealist distinctly distinct from his colder-minded contemporaries. Everything he did, he did it with passionate conviction and unlimited enthusiasm; a career full of color and unexpected shows us one of the most romantic products of the time. Moreover, he was a lovable and charming person, of transparent honesty, who was obeyed without hesitation and for whom he died happy.

About G. M. Trevelyan 's work on Garibaldi, David Cannadine wrote:

Trevelyan's great work was his Garibaldi trilogy (1907–11), which established his reputation as the outstanding literary historian of his generation. It depicted Garibaldi as a Carlylean hero—poet, patriot, and man of action—whose inspired leadership created the Italian nation. For Trevelyan, Garibaldi was the champion of freedom, progress, and tolerance, who vanquished the despotism, reaction, and obscurantism of the Austrian empire and the Neapolitan monarchy. The books were also notable for their vivid evocation of landscape (Trevelyan had himself followed the course of Garibaldi's marches), for their innovative use of documentary and oral sources, and for their spirited accounts of battles and military campaigns.

Along with Giuseppe Mazzini and other Europeans, Garibaldi supported the creation of a European federation. Many Europeans expected that the 1871 unification of Germany would make Germany a European and world leader that would champion humanitarian policies. This idea is apparent in the following letter Garibaldi sent to Karl Blind on 10 April 1865:

The progress of humanity seems to have come to a halt, and you with your superior intelligence will know why. The reason is that the world lacks a nation which possesses true leadership. Such leadership, of course, is required not to dominate other peoples, but to lead them along the path of duty, to lead them toward the brotherhood of nations where all the barriers erected by egoism will be destroyed. We need the kind of leadership which, in the true tradition of medieval chivalry, would devote itself to redressing wrongs, supporting the weak, sacrificing momentary gains and material advantage for the much finer and more satisfying achievement of relieving the suffering of our fellow men. We need a nation courageous enough to give us a lead in this direction. It would rally to its cause all those who are suffering wrong or who aspire to a better life, and all those who are now enduring foreign oppression. This role of world leadership, left vacant as things are today, might well be occupied by the German nation. You Germans, with your grave and philosophic character, might well be the ones who could win the confidence of others and guarantee the future stability of the international community. Let us hope, then, that you can use your energy to overcome your moth-eaten thirty tyrants of the various German states. Let us hope that in the centre of Europe you can then make a unified nation out of your fifty million. All the rest of us would eagerly and joyfully follow you.

Through the years, Garibaldi was showered with admiration and praises by many intellectuals and political figures. Francesco De Sanctis stated that "Garibaldi must win by force: he is not a man; he is a symbol, a form; he is the Italian soul. Between the beats of his heart, everyone hears the beats of his own." Admiral William Brown called him "the most generous of the pirates I have ever encountered". Argentine revolutionary Che Guevara stated: "The only hero the world has ever needed is called Giuseppe Garibaldi."

Five ships of the Italian Navy have been named after him, including a World War II cruiser and the former flagship, the aircraft carrier Giuseppe Garibaldi.

Statues of his likeness, such as the handshake of Teano, stand in many Italian squares, and in other countries around the world. On the top of the Janiculum hill in Rome, there is a statue of Garibaldi on horseback.

Several worldwide military units have been named after Garibaldi, including the Polish Garibaldi Legion during the January Uprising and the French foreign Garibaldi Legion during World War I. The 39th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment of the American Civil War was named Garibaldi Guard after him.

A bust of Giuseppe Garibaldi is prominently placed outside the entrance to the old Supreme Court Chamber in the United States Capitol Building in Washington, DC, a gift from members of the Italian Society of Washington.

Greek Freemasons, in order to honour Garibaldi's struggles for freedom and in commemoration of the Redshirts' assistance during the Greco-Turkish War (1897), the Balkan Wars and the First World War, established a Lodge named after the great patriot in 1980. Lodge Giuseppe Garibaldi (no. 130) is still active (as of 2026) and operates in Athens under the jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of Greece.

In 1865, the English football team Nottingham Forest chose their home colours from the uniform worn by Garibaldi and his men in 1865. The Garibaldi School in Mansfield, Nottinghamshire is also named after him.

The Garibaldi Beard style is named after him.

The Giuseppe Garibaldi Trophy (Italian : Trofeo Garibaldi ; French : Trophée Garibaldi) is a rugby union trophy awarded to the winner of the annual Six Nations Championship match between France and Italy.

A species of bright red-orange fish in the damselfish family received the vernacular name Garibaldi in memory of the Garibaldi red shirts. Also, a species of hoverfly, Sphiximorpha garibaldii, was described from a specimen collected in Italy shortly after Garibaldi's victory in the Battle of Varese, and named in his honour.

The public house in Bourne End, Buckinghamshire has been named The Garibaldi since at least 1876, after Garibaldi stayed in nearby Cliveden in 1864.

The global security law is a French legislative text promulgated on 25 May 2021. It is intended to

The last point is primarily regulated in the law's Article 24 giving the bill the nickname Article 24 in public discourse.

The bill is structured by 7 titles. The law's articles are enumerated from 1 to 32, some of which are further subdivided by letters. The bill mostly amends other laws, such as the Code pénal. Many provisions are made “on an experimental basis” implying that not all of them are rolled out nationwide in order to keep a control group for comparison.

Articles 1 to 6 outline and grant municipal police full judicial policing authority if the municipality employs more than 15 policemen. This is supposed to speed up processes. Previously, all crimes had to be reported to the national police first.

Articles 7 to 19d concern private security companies. Private security guards have to fulfill more qualifications in order to do their job.

The articles 20 through 21 provide a common set of provisions for remote access to body cameras, police cameras and street CCTV monitoring systems. Articles 22 through 22b authorize police to deploy police drones for monitoring.

The use of mobile cameras was allowed since 2016, but previously access to recordings required a warranted reason, such as investigating an incident. Deployment of UAVs did not have any legal basis at all, but nevertheless were recently used more often.

Article 24 makes it illegal to photograph law enforcement officers with the intention of “threatening [their] physical or psychological integrity.”

Articles 28 through 29b introduce more video surveillance options in public transit and on roads.

Articles 30 to 30c contain miscellaneous.

Special provisions were made for France's overseas territories in articles 31 to 31d.

The law is backed by the governing party. Law enforcement officers were increasingly facing harassment, in particular via online social media. The police unions UNSA and Alliance Police nationale support the bill. The latter, the APN, claims the safety of law enforcement members was closely related to France's security and demands even more extensive measures.

However, since its proposal, the law was protested by over 100,000 citizens,

and has been met with criticism and protests by journalist and civil rights organizations.

In order to coordinate efforts, on 8 November 2020, many organizations united in the collective Stop Loi Sécurité Globale. Amnesty International, CNCDH, Quadrature du net, and the UNHCR see civil liberties under attack. Public outcry has been mainly over increased surveillance (Articles 21 and 22) and the potential criminalization of journalists reporting on police actions and by-standers who simply choose to film police without any malicious intent. Fewer documentation would thus decrease police accountability. Although not mentioned in the bill, the Federation of Labor Unions cgt, Amnesty International, and LQDN, among others, criticize that “processing” of imagery could entail facial recognition, thus putting citizens under general suspicion.

The law was drawn up by the members of the National Assembly Alice Thourot (LREM, Drôme) and Jean-Michel Fauvergue (LREM, Seine-et-Marne), a former commander of a RAID police unit.

On 20 October 2020, examination of the text began in an accelerated procedure which requires only one lecture by the parliament and subsequent approval by the senate. The national consultative commission on human rights of France sees the repeated use of accelerated procedure as a decline of democratic debate.

During the parliament's session on 24 November 2020, the proposal was adopted with a support of 388 yeas, versus 104 nays, and 66 in abstention. Most members of the ruling party LREM («En Marche!») voted in support for the bill, whilst most votes against were cast by parties belonging to the left spectrum; 10 votes against also came from LREM members.

Following mass protests, the most controversial Article 24 was reworded by the Law Commission of the French Senate. Initially any distribution of photographs was penalized. The new wording rather focuses on “ causing the identification” of subjects.

France's upper house, The Senate, unanimously approved the amended bill on 18 March 2021, the Day of Political Prisoners. On 15 April 2021, the National Assembly confirmed the changed version with 75 yeas and 33 nays.

In France a law has to be promulgated within 15 days after its final adoption. However, the deadline is suspended if the law is referred to the Constitutional Council. Opposing organizations and local governments had already preemptively announced to call the Constitutional Council.

In its decision of 20 May 2021, the Constitutional Council recognized partial unconstitutionality.

With unconstitutional provisions removed, the law was promulgated and published on 25 and 26 May 2021 respectively.

The Globes de Cristal Awards (English: Crystal Globe Awards) is a set of awards bestowed by members of the French Press Association recognizing excellence in home art and culture. The annual formal ceremony and dinner at which the awards are presented happens each February.

The 1st Globes de Cristal were in 2006 in Paris. The 2014 ceremony was held at Le Lido cabaret on 10 March 2014 and was hosted by Valérie Bénaïm, who is the first woman to host the show, without being a co-host.

The "Globe de Cristal Awards" categories are: movies, actors, actresses, theater, concerts, novels, singers, TV series, exhibitions and fashion designers.

The ceremony takes place at the Lido and is broadcast live on France 3, February at 11PM

The ceremony was replayed in the media especially for its controversy concerning a joke, considered vulgar, by Jean-Luc Delarue. At the moment he handed Yamina Benguigui her award, he asked the director: "Would you like for me to hold your globe?" adding afterwards "or your globes?" (her wearing a low-cut black dress that showed off part of her chest) along with a grimace. The public services host gave his apologies several days later

The ceremony takes place at the Lido and is broadcast live on Virgin 17, February at 8:50PM.

The ceremony takes place at the Lido and is retransmitted in almost live recording on France 3, February at 8:45PM

The ceremony was broadcast live from Lido on France 3, February at 11:40PM.

The ceremony was broadcast live from Lido on Chérie 25, February at 8:45PM.

The ceremony is broadcast live from Lido on D17, le March at 10:30PM. It got together viewers (0.5% on either side of the audience)

The 10th edition of the awards ceremony took place on 13 April 2015 at the Lido in Paris. The ceremony was broadcast live on D17. It attracted 49,000 viewers in France (constituting 0.4% of the audience share).

Gold hats (or golden hats) (German : Goldhüte, singular: Goldhut) are a very specific and rare type of archaeological artefact from Bronze Age Europe. So far, four such objects are known and formally classified as "cone-shaped gold hats of the Schifferstadt type". The objects are made of thin sheet gold and were attached externally to long conical and brimmed headdresses which were probably made of some organic material and served to stabilise the external gold leaf. The following conical gold hats are known:

The archaeological contexts of the cones are not very clear; for the Berlin specimen, the context is entirely unknown. At least two of the known examples (Berlin and Schifferstadt) appear to have been deliberately and carefully buried in antiquity.

Although none can be dated precisely, their technology suggests that they were probably made between 1400–800 BC.

The hats are associated with the Bronze Age Tumulus culture and Urnfield culture. Their close similarities in symbolism and techniques of manufacture are testimony to a coherent Bronze Age culture over a wide-ranging territory in western and central Europe. A comparable golden pectoral was found at Mold, Flintshire, in northern Wales, which is of somewhat earlier date.

The cone-shaped gold hats of Schifferstadt type are assumed to be connected with a number of comparable cap or crown-shaped gold leaf objects from Ireland (Comerford Crown, discovered in 1692 and since lost) and the Atlantic coast of Spain (gold leaf crowns of Leiro and Axtroki), as well as various gold bowls (such as the Eberswalde Hoard), vessels, ornaments and diadems (such as the Velem diadem from Hungary) from across central and northern Europe. According to Sperber (2003) the Schifferstadt-type conical gold hats may have originated from contact with Atlantic Bronze Age cultures.

It is assumed that the gold hats served as religious insignia for the deities or priests of a sun cult then widespread in Central Europe. Their use as headgear is strongly supported by the fact that the three of four examples have a cap-like widening at the bottom of the cone, and that their openings are oval (not round), with diameters and shapes roughly equivalent to those of a human skull. The figural depiction of an object resembling a conical hat on a stone slab of the King's Grave at Kivik, Southern Sweden, strongly supports their association with religion and cult, as does the fact that the known examples appear to have been deposited (buried) carefully.

Attempts to decipher the gold hats' ornamentation suggest that their cultic role is accompanied or complemented by their use as complex calendrical devices. Whether they were really used for such purposes, or simply presented the underlying astronomical knowledge, remains unknown.

The gold cones are covered in bands of ornaments along their whole length and extent. The ornaments - mostly disks and concentric circles, sometimes wheels - were punched using stamps, rolls or combs. The older examples (Avanton, Schifferstadt) show a more restricted range of ornaments than the later ones.

It appears to be the case that the ornaments on all known gold hats represent systematic sequences in terms of number and types of ornaments per band.

A detailed study of the Berlin example, which is fully preserved, claimed that the symbols possibly represent a lunisolar calendar. The object may have permitted the determination of dates or periods in both lunar and solar calendars.

Since an exact knowledge of the solar year was of special interest for the determination of religiously important events, such as the summer and winter solstices, if astronomical knowledge was depicted on the gold hats, it would have been of high value to Bronze Age society. Whether the hats themselves were indeed used for determining such dates, or whether they even represented such knowledge, remains unknown.

The functions hypothesised so far would permit the counting of temporal units of up to 57 lunar months. A simple multiplication of such values could also permit the calculation of longer periods, e.g. metonic cycles.

Each symbol, or each ring of a symbol, may represent a single day. Apart from ornament bands incorporating differing numbers of rings there are seemingly special symbols and zones in intercalary areas, which may have had to be added to or subtracted from the periods in question.

The system of this mathematical function incorporated into the artistic ornamentation has not been fully deciphered so far, but a schematic study of the Berlin Golden Hat and the periods it may delimit has been attempted.

In principle, according to this theory, starting with zone Z i, a sum is achieved by adding a relevant contiguous number of neighbouring sections: Z i... Z i+n. To reach the equivalent lunar or solar value, from this initial sum must be subtracted the sum of symbols from the intercalary zone(s) within the area counted.

The illustration depicts the solar representation on the left and the lunar one on the right. The red or blue fields in zones 5, 7, 16, and 17 are intercalary zones.

The values in the individual fields are reached by multiplying the number of symbols per zone with the number of rings or circles incorporated in each predominant symbol. The special symbols in zone 5 are assigned the value of "38", as indicated by their number.

(For example: Zone 12 is dominated by 20 repetitions of punched symbol No. 14, a circular disc symbol surrounded by 5 concentric circles. Thus, the symbol has the value of 20 × 5 = 100. The smaller ring symbols placed between the larger repetitions of No. 14 are considered as mere ornaments and thus not counted.)

Through this system, the hats could be used to calculate a lunisolar calendar system, i.e. a direct reading in either lunar or solar dates, as well as the conversion between them.

The table can be used in the same way as the original gold hats may have been. To determine the number of days in a specific time period (yellow fields), the values of the coloured fields above are added, reaching an intermediate sum. If any of the red intercalary zones are included, their sum has to be subtracted. This allows the calculation of 12, 24, 36, 48, 54, and 57 synodic months in the lunar system and of 12, 18, 24, 36, 48, 54, and 57 solar months (i.e. twelfths of a tropical year).

(For example: To determine a 54 month cycle in the lunar system, the numerical values of the green or blue zones 3 to 21 are added, reaching a sum of 1,739 days. From this, the values of the red 'intercalary' fields 5, 16, and 17 are subtracted, The result is 1739 - 142 = 1597 days, or 54 synodic months of 29.5305 days each.)

The overall discrepancy of 2 days to the astronomically accurate value is probably the result of a slight imprecision in the Bronze Age observation of synodic and solar month.

Similar symbols are found on the gold bowls of the Eberswalde hoard. According to the Neues Museum, Berlin: “Gold vessels in the Eberswalde hoard bear sun and circular symbols like those on the Berlin gold hat. Some of these contain calendrical information as well."

The gold hats known so far are made from a gold alloy containing 85–90% gold, about 10% silver and traces of copper and tin (< 1% each). They are made of seamless single pieces of gold sheet, hammered to a thinness between 0.25 millimetres (0.0098 in) (Schifferstadt) and 0.6 millimetres (0.024 in) (Berlin). Thus, the cones are surprisingly light considering their size. The Ezelsdorf example, measuring 89 centimetres (35 in) in height, weighs only 280 grams (9.9 oz).

Because of the tribological characteristics of the material, it tends to harden with increasing deformation (see ductility), increasing its potential to crack. To avoid cracking, an extremely even deformation would have been necessary. Additionally, the material would have had to be softened by repeatedly heating it to a temperature of at least 750 °C (1,380 °F).

Since gold alloy has a relatively low melting point of about 960 °C (1,760 °F), a very careful temperature control and an isothermal heating process would have been required, so as to avoid melting any of the surface. For this, the Bronze Age artisans presumably used a charcoal fire or oven similar to those used for pottery. The temperature could only be controlled through the addition of air, using a bellows.

Considering the tribologic conditions and the technical means available at the time, the production even of an undecorated gold hat would represent an immense technical achievement.

In the course of their further manufacture, the gold hats were embellished with rows of radial ornamental bands, chased into the metal. To make this possible, they were probably filled with a putty or pitch based on tree resin and wax ; in the Schifferstadt specimen, traces of this have survived. The thin gold leaf was structured by chasing: stamp-like tools or moulds depicting the individual symbols were repeatedly pressed into (or rolled along) the exterior of the gold. Combs were also used.

The gold hats were first brought together for comparison and set in the broader context of the culture of Bronze Age Europe in a 1999 exhibition in Bonn, Gods and heroes of the Bronze Age: Europe in the time of Odysseus. Normally they reside in separate museums, at Berlin (Museum für Vor- und Frühgeschichte), Speyer (Historisches Museum der Pfalz, the Schifferstadt specimen), Nuremberg (Germanisches Nationalmuseum, the Ezelsdorf one), and Saint-Germain-en-Laye (Musée d'Archéologie Nationale).

In cooking and gastronomy, goose is the meat of several species of bird in the family Anatidae, which also includes ducks and swans. The family has a cosmopolitan distribution, and various wild species and domesticated breeds are used culinarily in multiple cuisines. There is evidence as early as 2500 BC of deliberate fattening of domesticated geese in Egypt.

The meat, liver and other organs, fat, blood, and eggs are used in various cuisines. Methods of cooking include roasting, spit-roasting, braising, steaming, grilling, simmering, and stewing. Dishes include roasts, joints, soups, stews, curries, sausages, forcemeats, and dumplings.

In many culinary traditions, a roast goose is a feast meal dating back centuries.

The common domestic goose belongs by descent to Anser anser, the greylag goose, which is still also widely seen in the wild in Europe. It features in the cuisine of France, Britain, Germany and many other European countries. Geese also provide some famous oriental dishes: Alan Davidson in The Oxford Companion to Food instances the marinated and roasted goose of Shantou in Guangdong province in China.

Geese have been bred for the table for thousands of years, but by comparison with some other animals, domestication began late because geese take 30 days to hatch their young and more to rear them, which was too long for nomadic peoples. There are records of domesticated geese in ancient Egypt, and wall-paintings show them being force-fed to enlarge their livers. Pliny the Elder wrote in the second century AD that the goose was chiefly prized for its liver; he mentioned to the practice of force-feeing, and commented that soaking the liver in honey and milk made it even larger. Apicius gives a Roman-era recipe for anserem elixum calidum ex iure frigido apiciano (boiled goose served hot with cold apician sauce), in which a plain boiled goose is covered in a sauce made of pepper, lovage, coriander seed, mint, and rue.

The meat, liver and other organs, fat, skin and blood are used in various cuisines. The meat has a distinctive flavor. Goose eggs are also used culinarily, but unlike chicken eggs are only available seasonally; in the UK goose eggs have a autumn-to-early-winter availability.

Roast goose is the most common method of preparation. Roasted whole or cut-up goose dishes are found in Asian, European, and Middle Eastern cuisines. Spit-roasted goose was a traditional component of the indigenous cuisines of North America.

A byproduct of roasting is that roasting a goose will render a great deal of excellent-quality fat which can be used for roasting potatoes or other vegetables, as the shortening in pie crust (sweet or savory), as a spread for bread, and a multitude of other culinary uses. One can also simmer pieces of goose submerged in the fat to make confit. In some cuisines geese are raised primarily for lard. According to NPR, goose fat is "the crème de la crème of fats". in 2006 Nigella Lawson called it "the essential Christmas cooking ingredient".

In Chinese cuisine, goose is also steamed or braised with aromatics. In some cuisines stews or soups are made from goose meat. In German cuisine, goose neck is stuffed with goose liver and cooked to make a sausagelike dish; similar dishes are made in eastern Europe. Goose meat is also used to fill pies or dumplings or to make sausage.

Most Chinese preparations of goose involve cooking it thoroughly. In southern China, roast goose is a variety of siu mei, or roasted meat dishes, within Cantonese cuisine. It is made by roasting geese with seasoning often in a charcoal furnace at high temperature. Roasted geese of high quality have crisp skin with juicy and tender meat. Slices of roast goose may be served with plum sauce.

In the cuisine of Teochew people in Singapore, braised goose is a traditional dish; typical braising ingredients include soy sauce, rice wine, garlic, and spices such as cinnamon, ginger, and star anise.

Roast goose is traditionally popular and remains a common main dish in Hong Kong. Roast goose, as served in Hong Kong, especially in the city of Sham Tseng, is similar to its counterpart in the neighboring Guangdong Province of southern China. Some restaurants offer a similarly prepared roast duck.

For many European cultures, roast goose is traditionally eaten only on appointed holidays, including Christmas and St. Martin's Day. Roast goose was a traditional Sabbath meal among Jews in Eastern Europe.

In Britain, goose became particularly associated with Michaelmas in late September. According to Mrs Beeton in her Book of Household Management (1861):

Hannah Glasse (1751) published a recipe headed "Goose à la Mode", in which a whole chicken stuffed with ox-tongue is placed inside a large goose and the assemblage is gently poached with onions, herbs, ham, red wine, and chopped veal sweetbread, truffles and mushrooms. Mrs Beeton, a century later, specified a plain roast, with sage and onion stuffing.

A traditional dish in Croatia is guščji paprikaš, a noodle and goose meat stew with roots in the areas around Županja. Croatia also has a roasted goose dish, martinjska guska s marunima, which is stuffed with chestnuts; it is often served on the feast of St Martin.

Gaasesteg is a goose roast with apples and prunes, similar to the French Oie à la hambourgeoise. It is usually served with red cabbage and Brunede Kartofler – potatoes browned in butter and sugar.

The goose also features prominently in the cuisine of France. Davidson writes that the Gauls of what is now France were already producing plump geese, fed on barley or millet gruel, before the Romans invaded, and that the French can possibly claim the longest and most faithful devotion to the goose. They were for many years the principal producers of foie gras, goose (or duck) livers artificially enlarged by force feeding, known in France as gavage – considered a delicacy by some and an abuse by others. The French may have been overtaken as producers by eastern European countries and Israel, but remain its principal consumers. The range of French methods of cooking goose is wide, and includes:

In Germany roast goose is the traditional Christmas Day dish and is almost always served with red cabbage. In some parts of the country the bird is accompanied by potato dumplings ; in other areas noodles are served. Roast goose may be stuffed with chestnuts, prunes and apples ("Gefüllter Gansebraten mit Esskastanie") Stuffed goose neck is considered a delicacy in Germany: a filleted neck is stuffed with goose liver, pork, truffle, onion and fat bacon all minced. The result is sewn at both ends and resembles a fat sausage, which is fried in butter. Goose also features in Schwarzsauer : a stew of goose with pears, prunes and apples.

The "goose region" of Hungary is the southern Great Hungarian Plains. Goose liver is a major export.

In the Middle Ages a young goose had the same high prestige as a sucking pig : Piero Camporesi quotes a traditional saying, " Porco d'un mese, oca di tre, è un mangiar da re " – a piglet one month old, and a young goose of three, are food for a king. In Italy, goose used to be the traditional food for the feast of All Saints in early November. The bird would be roast with a stuffing of chestnuts and fruit. Areas in Lombardy and the Veneto, where there is plentiful grazing, have seen a revival of goose gastronomy.

Geese have been raised for food in Poland for centuries. In the 1600s and 1700s they were particularly popular for feast and celebration dinners. Czernina soup was traditionally popular. National consumption of goose has decreased, with most geese being consumed on St. Martin's Day.

Oca con peras – baby goose with pears, poached in white stock with pine nuts, raisins and parsley – is particularly associated with Gerona and the feast day that marks the winter solstice. Elisabeth Luard calls the dish "one of the great classics of the Catalan kitchen".

In addition to roast goose stuffed with apples and prunes, familiar in other cuisines, there is a Swedish dish called Sprängd gås, in which a goose is immersed in brine for two or three days and then gently poached with carrots, onions, parsley and peppercorns. It may be served either hot or cold.

Many indigenous people of North America traditionally depended heavily on goose as a food.

Goose has generally been replaced by the turkey in the United States ; the high price per pound of goose and low ratio of meat to bone and fat makes goose more expensive per serving than turkey. While goose was once a common Christmas dinner in the United States, it has become less popular as the main dish than other meats or fish.

Goose is not commonly eaten in Australia, but from 2019 it was raised on the continent and offered in some restaurants.

Feseekh is a traditional Egyptian dish that is usually served during Sham el-Nessim, a spring holiday that dates back to the time of the Pharaohs. Feseekh is made by salting and fermenting fish, often with goose meat added to enhance its flavor and nutrition.

In Iran goose meat is often used in ghimeh, a stew of yellow split peas, diced potatoes, and meat cooked in a tomato sauce.

Mansaf is a traditional Jordanian dish often served during weddings and other celebrations; it is usually made with tender pieces of lamb or goat meat cooked with spices, served on top of a bed of rice, and topped with a yogurt sauce, but goose meat is sometimes used as.

Roasted goose is a commonly eaten main dish in parts of Turkey. The Kars region of Turkey specializes in Kars-style roast goose, or Kars kazı ve bulgur pilavı (Kars goose with bulgur pilaf). The Kars goose is also a breed of goose raised in the area specifically for use in this dish. The goose is baked at extremely high temperature in a tandoori-style oven above a dish of bulgur onto which the rendering fat drips.

Ovillers-la-Boisselle is a commune in the Somme department in Hauts-de-France in northern France.

The commune of Ovillers-la-Boisselle is situated 22 kilometres (14 mi) northeast of Amiens and extends to the north and south of the D 929 Albert–Bapaume road.

The constituent village of Ovillers-la-Boisselle (commonly shortened to "Ovillers") lies on the north of the D 929 road, north-east of Aveluy and south-west of Pozières.

The constituent village of La Boisselle, which had 35 houses in 1914, lies across the D 929, to the south-west of Ovillers at the junction of the D 104 to Contalmaison.

The village of La Boisselle is a settlement dating back to pre-Roman times, and the D 929 Albert–Bapaume road follows the course of a Roman road. During the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871), the area suffered serious damage after the Battle of Bapaume.

In World War I, the area was the site of intense and sustained fighting between German and Allied forces. Between 1914 and 1916, the Western Front ran through the commune, and its villages were completely destroyed. In 1916, the commune was the site of particularly heavy fighting during the Battle of the Somme (see Ovillers-la-Boisselle in World War I). After the Armistice of 11 November 1918, the former inhabitants returned and gradually rebuilt most of the infrastructure as it had been before the war.

In 2011, British researchers around Peter Barton started the La Boisselle Project, a long-term archaeological, historical, technological and genealogical study with special focus on L'îlot de La Boisselle, a 3.12-hectare (7.7-acre) historic site on the south-western tip of La Boisselle which was known during World War I as L'îlot to the French, Granathof to the Germans and Glory Hole to the British. The site still holds mine craters as well as traces of trenches, shelters and tunnels related to underground warfare, but is private property and not open to the public.

Gothic is a now-extinct East Germanic language that was spoken by the Goths. It is known primarily from the Codex Argenteus, a 6th-century copy of a 4th-century Bible translation, and is the only East Germanic language with a sizeable text corpus.

It is the earliest Germanic language that is attested in any sizable texts, but it lacks any modern descendants. The oldest documents in Gothic date back to the fourth century. The language was in decline by the mid-sixth century, partly because of the military defeat of the Goths at the hands of the Franks, the elimination of the Goths in Italy, and geographic isolation (in Spain, the Gothic language lost its last and probably already declining function as a church language when the Visigoths converted from Arianism to Nicene Christianity in 589). The language survived as a domestic language in the Iberian Peninsula (modern-day Spain and Portugal) as late as the eighth century. Gothic-seeming terms are found in manuscripts subsequent to this date, but these may or may not belong to the same language.

A language known as Crimean Gothic survived in Crimea as late as the second half of the 18th century. Lacking certain sound changes characteristic of Gothic, however, Crimean Gothic cannot be a lineal descendant of the language attested in the Codex Argenteus.

The existence of such early attested texts makes Gothic a language of considerable interest in comparative linguistics.

Only a few documents in Gothic have survived – not enough for a complete reconstruction of the language. Most Gothic-language sources are translations or glosses of other languages (namely, Greek), so foreign linguistic elements most certainly influenced the texts. These are the primary sources:

Reports of the discovery of other parts of Ulfilas's Bible have not been substantiated. Heinrich May in 1968 claimed to have found in England twelve leaves of a palimpsest containing parts of the Gospel of Matthew.

Only fragments of the Gothic translation of the Bible have been preserved. The translation was apparently done in the Balkans region by people in close contact with Greek Christian culture. The Gothic Bible was apparently used by the Visigoths in Occitania until the loss of Visigothic Occitania at the start of the 6th century, in Visigothic Iberia until about 700, and perhaps for a time in Italy, the Balkans, and Ukraine until at least the mid-9th century. Apart from biblical texts, the only substantial Gothic document that still exists – and the only lengthy text known to have been composed originally in the Gothic language – is the Skeireins, a few pages of commentary on the Gospel of John.

Very few medieval secondary sources make reference to the Gothic language after about 800. In De incrementis ecclesiae Christianae (840–842), Walafrid Strabo, a Frankish monk who lived in Swabia, writes of a group of monks who reported that even then certain peoples in Scythia (Dobruja), especially around Tomis, spoke a sermo Theotiscus ('Germanic language'), the language of the Gothic translation of the Bible, and that they used such a liturgy.

Many writers of the medieval texts that mention the Goths used the word Goths to mean any Germanic people in eastern Europe (such as the Varangians), many of whom certainly did not use the Gothic language as known from the Gothic Bible. Some writers even referred to Slavic -speaking people as "Goths". However, it is clear from Ulfilas's translation that the Gothic language belongs with the Germanic language group, not with Slavic.

Christoph Hartknoch writes in his Alt- und Neues Preussen Oder Preussischer Historien Zwey Theile from 1684 how bishop Paulus Piafecius said that Adam Maccovius under request of king Sigismund iii, traveled to Spain in 1622 to find writings in the Gothic and Vandalic language. He allegedly found a Hebrew church history (Hebraer Kirchen-Historiae) written in the Gothic language which he brought to Poland.

Generally, the term "Gothic language" refers to the language of Ulfilas, but the attestations themselves date largely from the 6th century, long after Ulfilas had died.

A few Gothic runic inscriptions were found across Europe, but due to early Christianization of the Goths, the runic writing was quickly replaced by the newly invented Gothic alphabet.

Ulfilas's Gothic, as well as that of the Skeireins and various other manuscripts, was written using an alphabet that was most likely invented by Ulfilas himself for his translation. Some scholars (such as Braune) claim that it was derived from the Greek alphabet only, while others maintain that there are some Gothic letters of runic or Latin origin.

Gothic words can be transliterated into the Latin script. Transliteration mirrors the conventions of the native alphabet, such as writing long /iː/ as ei. There are two variant transliteration systems: a "raw" one that directly represents the original Gothic script and a "normalized" one that adds diacritics (macrons and acute accents) to certain vowels to clarify the pronunciation or, in certain cases, to indicate the Proto-Germanic origin of the vowel in question. The latter system is usually used in the academic literature.

The following table shows the correspondence between spelling and sound for vowels:

The following diacritics, not used in the original writing system, are sometimes added to vowel letters in transliterations:

The following table shows the correspondence between spelling and sound for consonants:

Gothic phonology is reconstructed based on data such as comparison with other Germanic languages, analysis of the transcription of Greek and non-Greek terms and names in Gothic, and analysis of spelling alternations and variations in Gothic texts.

The vowel system of Gothic is debated, particularly the status of mid vowels and diphthongs. Certain contrasts (such as the quantitative distinction between short [a ɛ ɔ u] and long [aː ɛː ɔː uː]) are not marked in the writing system but are assumed based on etymology. The following table presents the usual reconstructed vowel system:

The following table is of the consonant phonemes. Transliterated graphemes that differ from their IPA transcriptions are written in ⟨ angle brackets ⟩. Allophones are shown in (parentheses) and explained in the sections that follow.

Gothic distinguished single or short consonants from long or geminated consonants: the latter were written double, as in atta [atːa] ' dad ', kunnan [kunːan] ' to know ' (Dutch kennen, German kennen, Icelandic kunna). Gothic is rich in fricative consonants (although many of them may have been approximants ; it is hard to separate the two) originating from Grimm's law and Verner's law. Gothic retained Proto-Germanic * z as /z/, unlike North Germanic languages and West Germanic languages, which turned this sound into /r/ through rhotacization. Voiced fricative consonants were devoiced at the ends of words.

Accentuation in Gothic can be reconstructed through phonetic comparison, Grimm's law, and Verner's law. Gothic used a stress accent rather than the pitch accent of Proto-Indo-European. This is indicated by the shortening of long vowels [eː] and [oː] to [a] and the loss of short vowels [a] and [i] in unstressed final syllables.

Just as in other Germanic languages, the free moving Proto-Indo-European accent was replaced with one fixed on the first syllable of simple words. Accents do not shift when words are inflected. In most compound words, the location of the stress depends on the type of compound:

For example, with comparable words from modern Germanic languages:

Gothic preserves many archaic Indo-European features that are not always present in modern Germanic languages, in particular the rich Indo-European declension system. Gothic had nominative, accusative, genitive and dative cases, as well as vestiges of a vocative case that was sometimes identical to the nominative and sometimes to the accusative. The three genders of Indo-European were all present. Nouns and adjectives were inflected according to one of two grammatical numbers : the singular and the plural.

Nouns can be divided into numerous declensions according to the form of the stem: a, ō, i, u, an, ōn, ein, r, etc. Adjectives have two variants, indefinite and definite (sometimes indeterminate and determinate), with definite adjectives normally used in combination with the definite determiners (such as the definite article sa/þata/sō) while indefinite adjectives are used in other circumstances. Indefinite adjectives generally use a combination of a -stem and ō -stem endings, and definite adjectives use a combination of an -stem and ōn -stem endings. The concept of "strong" and "weak" declensions that is prevalent in the grammar of many other Germanic languages is less significant in Gothic because of its conservative nature: the so-called "weak" declensions (those ending in n) are, in fact, no weaker in Gothic (in terms of having fewer endings) than the "strong" declensions (those ending in a vowel), and the "strong" declensions do not form a coherent class that can be clearly distinguished from the "weak" declensions.

Although descriptive adjectives in Gothic (as well as superlatives ending in -ist, -ost) and the past participle may take both definite and indefinite forms, some adjectival words are restricted to one variant. Some pronouns take only definite forms: for example, sama ' same ', adjectives like unƕeila ('constantly', from the root ƕeila, 'time'; compare to the English "while"), comparative adjective and present participles. Others, such as áins ' some ', take only the indefinite forms.

The table below displays the declension of the Gothic adjective blind ' blind ', compared with the an -stem noun guma ' man, human ' and the a -stem noun dags ' day ' :

This table is, of course, not exhaustive as there are secondary inflections of various sorts not described here. An exhaustive table of only the types of endings that Gothic took is presented below.

Gothic adjectives follow noun declensions closely; they take same types of inflection.

Gothic inherited the full set of Indo-European pronouns: personal pronouns (including reflexive pronouns for each of the three grammatical persons), possessive pronouns, both simple and compound demonstratives, relative pronouns, interrogatives and indefinite pronouns. Each follows a particular pattern of inflection (partially mirroring the noun declension), much like other Indo-European languages. One particularly noteworthy characteristic is the preservation of the dual number, referring to two people or things; the plural was used only for quantities greater than two. Thus, "the two of us" and "we" for numbers greater than two were expressed as wit and weis respectively. While Proto-Indo-European used the dual for all grammatical categories that took a number (as did Classical Greek and Sanskrit), most Old Germanic languages are unusual in that they preserved it only for pronouns. Gothic preserves an older system with dual marking on both pronouns and verbs (but not nouns or adjectives).

The simple demonstrative pronoun sa (neuter: þata, feminine: so, from the Indo-European root * so, * seh 2, * tod ; cognate to the Greek article ὁ, ἡ, τό and the Latin is tud) can be used as an article, allowing constructions of the type definite article + weak adjective + noun.

The interrogative pronouns begin with ƕ-, which derives from the Proto-Indo-European consonant * kʷ that was present at the beginning of all interrogatives in proto-Indo-European, cognate with the wh- at the beginning of many English interrogative, which, as in Gothic, are pronounced with [ʍ] in some dialects. The same etymology is present in the interrogatives of many other Indo-European languages: w- [v] in German, hv- in Danish, the Latin qu- (which persists in modern Romance languages), the Greek τ- or π-, the Slavic and Indic k- as well as many others.

The bulk of Gothic verbs follow the type of Indo-European conjugation called ' thematic ' because they insert a vowel derived from the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European phonemes * e or * o between roots and inflexional suffixes. The pattern is also present in Greek and Latin:

The other conjugation, called " athematic ", in which suffixes are added directly to roots, exists only in unproductive vestigial forms in Gothic, just like in Latin. The most important such instance is the verb "to be", which is athematic in Greek, Latin, Sanskrit, and many other Indo-European languages.

Gothic verbs are, like nouns and adjectives, divided into strong verbs and weak verbs. Weak verbs are characterised by preterites formed by appending the suffixes -da or -ta, parallel to past participles formed with -þ / -t. Strong verbs form preterites by ablaut (the alternating of vowels in their root forms) or by reduplication (prefixing the root with the first consonant in the root plus aí) but without adding a suffix in either case. This parallels the Greek and Sanskrit perfects. The dichotomy is still present in modern Germanic languages:

Verbal conjugation in Gothic have two grammatical voices : the active and the medial; three numbers: singular, dual (except in the third person) and plural; two tenses: present and preterite (derived from a former perfect); three grammatical moods : indicative, subjunctive (from an old optative form) and imperative as well as three kinds of nominal forms: a present infinitive, a present participle, and a past passive. Not all tenses and persons are represented in all moods and voices, as some conjugations use auxiliary forms.

Finally, there are forms called 'preterite-present': the old Indo-European perfect was reinterpreted as present tense. The Gothic word wáit, from the Proto-Indo-European * woid-h 2 e ' to see (pft.) ', corresponds exactly to its Sanskrit cognate véda and in Greek to ϝοἶδα. Both etymologically should mean "I have seen" (in the perfect sense) but mean "I know" (in the preterite-present meaning). Latin follows the same rule with nōuī ' I have learned /I know '. The preterite-present verbs include áigan ' to possess ' and kunnan ' to know ' among others.

The word order of Gothic is fairly free as is typical of other inflected languages. The natural word order of Gothic is assumed to have been like that of the other old Germanic languages; however, nearly all extant Gothic texts are translations of Greek originals and have been heavily influenced by Greek syntax.

Sometimes what can be expressed in one word in the original Greek will require a verb and a complement in the Gothic translation; for example, διωχθήσονται ' diōchthēsontai, they will be persecuted ' is rendered:

Likewise Gothic translations of Greek noun phrases may feature a verb and a complement. In both cases, the verb follows the complement, giving weight to the theory that basic word order in Gothic is object–verb. This aligns with what is known of other early Germanic languages.

However, this pattern is reversed in imperatives and negations:

And in a wh -question the verb directly follows the question word:

Gothic has two clitic particles placed in the second position in a sentence, in accordance with Wackernagel's Law.

One such clitic particle is -u, indicating a yes–no question or an indirect question, like Latin - ne :

The prepositional phrase without the clitic -u appears as af þus silbin : the clitic causes the reversion of originally voiced fricatives, unvoiced at the end of a word, to their voiced form; another such example is wileid-u ' do you (pl.) want ' from wileiþ ' you (pl.) want '. If the first word has a preverb attached, the clitic actually splits the preverb from the verb: ga-u-láubjats ' do you both believe...? ' from galáubjats ' you both believe '.

Another such clitic is -uh ' and ', appearing as -h after a vowel: ga-h-mēlida ' and he wrote ' from gamēlida ' he wrote ', urreis nim-uh ' arise and take! ' from the imperative form nim ' take '. After iþ or any indefinite besides sums ' some ' and anþar ' another ', -uh cannot be placed; in the latter category, this is only because indefinite determiner phrases cannot move to the front of a clause. Unlike, for example, Latin -que, -uh can only join two or more main clauses. In all other cases, the word jah ' and ' is used, which can also join main clauses.

More than one such clitics can occur in one word: diz-uh-þan-sat ijōs ' and then he seized them (fem.) ' from dissat ' he seized ' (notice again the voicing of diz-), ga-u-ƕa-sēƕi ' whether he saw anything ' from gasēƕi ' he saw '.

For the most part, Gothic is known to be significantly closer to Proto-Germanic than any other Germanic language except for that of the (scantily attested) Ancient Nordic runic inscriptions, which has made it invaluable in the reconstruction of Proto-Germanic. In fact, Gothic tends to serve as the primary foundation for reconstructing Proto-Germanic. The reconstructed Proto-Germanic conflicts with Gothic only when there is clearly identifiable evidence from other branches that the Gothic form is a secondary development.

Gothic fails to display a number of innovations shared by all Germanic languages attested later:

The language also preserved many features that were mostly lost in other early Germanic languages:

Most conspicuously, Gothic shows no sign of morphological umlaut. Gothic fotus, pl. fotjus, can be contrasted with English foot – feet, German : Fuß – Füße, Old Norse : fótr – fœtr, Danish : fod – fødder. These forms contain the characteristic change /u/ > /iː/ (English), /uː/ > /yː/ (German), /oː/ > /øː/ (ON and Danish) due to i-umlaut; the Gothic form shows no such change.

Proto-Germanic * z remains in Gothic as z or is devoiced to s. In North and West Germanic, * z changes to /r/ by rhotacism :

Gothic retains a morphological passive voice inherited from Indo-European but unattested in all other Germanic languages except for the single fossilised form preserved in, for example, Old English hātte or Runic Norse (c. 400) haitē ' am called ', derived from Proto-Germanic * haitaną ' to call, command '.

The morphological passive in North Germanic languages (Swedish gör ' does ', görs ' is being done ') originates from the Old Norse middle voice, which is an innovation not inherited from Indo-European.

Unlike other Germanic languages, which retained dual numbering only in some pronoun forms, Gothic has dual forms both in pronouns and in verbs. Dual verb forms exist only in the first and second person and only in the active voice; in all other cases, the corresponding plural forms are used. In pronouns, Gothic has first and second person dual pronouns: Gothic and Old English wit, Old Norse vit ' we two ' (thought to have been in fact derived from * wi-du literally ' we two ').

Gothic possesses a number of verbs which form their preterite by reduplication, another archaic feature inherited from Indo-European. While traces of this category survived elsewhere in Germanic, the phenomenon is largely obscured in these other languages by later sound changes and analogy. In the following examples the infinitive is compared to the third person singular preterite indicative:

The standard theory of the origin of the Germanic languages divides the languages into three groups: East Germanic (Gothic and a few other very scantily-attested languages), North Germanic (Old Norse and its derivatives, such as Swedish, Danish, Norwegian, Icelandic, and Faroese) and West Germanic (all others, including Old English, Old High German, Old Saxon, Old Dutch, Old Frisian and the numerous modern languages derived from these, including English, German, and Dutch). Sometimes, a further grouping, that of the Northwest Germanic languages, is posited as containing the North Germanic and West Germanic languages, reflecting the hypothesis that Gothic was the first attested language to branch off.

A minority opinion (the so-called Gotho-Nordic hypothesis) instead groups North Germanic and East Germanic together. It is based partly on historical claims: for example, Jordanes, writing in the 6th century, ascribes to the Goths a Scandinavian origin. There are a few linguistically significant areas in which Gothic and Old Norse agree against the West Germanic languages.

Perhaps the most obvious is the evolution of the Proto-Germanic * -jj- and * -ww- into Gothic ddj (from Pre-Gothic * ggj?) and ggw, and Old Norse ggj and ggv (" Holtzmann's Law "), in contrast to West Germanic where they remained as semivowels. Compare Modern English true, German treu, with Gothic triggws, Old Norse tryggr.

However, it has been suggested that these are, in fact, two separate and unrelated changes. A number of other posited similarities exist (for example, the existence of numerous inchoative verbs ending in - na, such as Gothic ga-waknan, Old Norse vakna ; and the absence of gemination before j, or (in the case of old Norse) only g geminated before j, e.g. Proto-Germanic * kunją ' kin ' > Gothic kuni, Old Norse kyn, but Old English cynn, Old High German kunni). However, for the most part these represent shared retentions, which are not valid means of grouping languages. That is, if a parent language splits into three daughters A, B and C, and C innovates in a particular area but A and B do not change, A and B will appear to agree against C. That shared retention in A and B is not necessarily indicative of any special relationship between the two.

Similar claims of similarities between Old Gutnish (Gutniska) and Old Icelandic are also based on shared retentions rather than shared innovations.

Another commonly-given example involves Gothic and Old Norse verbs with the ending -t in the 2nd person singular preterite indicative, and the West Germanic languages have -i. The ending -t can regularly descend from the Proto-Indo-European perfect ending * -th₂e, while the origin of the West Germanic ending -i (which, unlike the -t -ending, unexpectedly combines with the zero-grade of the root as in the plural) is unclear, suggesting that it is an innovation of some kind, possibly an import from the optative. Another possibility is that this is an example of independent choices made from a doublet existing in the proto-language. That is, Proto-Germanic may have allowed either * -t or * -i to be used as the ending, either in free variation or perhaps depending on dialects within Proto-Germanic or the particular verb in question. Each of the three daughters independently standardized on one of the two endings and, by chance, Gothic and Old Norse ended up with the same ending.

Other isoglosses have led scholars to propose an early split between East and Nortʍest Germanic. Furthermore, features shared by any two branches of Germanic do not necessarily require the postulation of a proto-language excluding the third, as the early Germanic languages were all part of a dialect continuum in the early stages of their development, and contact between the three branches of Germanic was extensive.

Polish linguist Witold Mańczak argued that Gothic is closer to German (specifically Upper German) than to Scandinavian and suggested that their ancestral homeland was located in the southernmost part of the Germanic territories, close to present-day Austria, rather than in Scandinavia. Frederik Kortlandt has agreed with Mańczak's hypothesis, stating: "I think that his argument is correct and that it is time to abandon Iordanes' classic view that the Goths came from Scandinavia."

The reconstructed Proto-Slavic language features several apparent borrowed words from East Germanic (presumably Gothic), such as * xlěbъ, ' bread ', vs. Gothic 𐌷𐌻𐌰𐌹𐍆𐍃 (hlaifs).

The Romance languages also preserve several loanwords from Gothic, such as Portuguese agasalho ' warm clothing ', from Gothic * 𐌲𐌰𐍃𐌰𐌻𐌾𐌰 ' * gasalja, companion, comrade ' ; ganso ' goose ', from Gothic * 𐌲𐌰𐌽𐍃 ' *gans, goose ' ; luva ' glove ', from Gothic 𐌻𐍉𐍆𐌰 ' lōfa, palm of the hand ' ; and trégua ' truce ', from Gothic 𐍄𐍂𐌹𐌲𐌲𐍅𐌰 ' triggwa, treaty, covenant '. Other examples include the French broder ' to embroider ', from Gothic * 𐌱𐍂𐌿𐌶𐌳𐍉𐌽 ' *bruzdon, to embroider ' ; gaffe ' gaffe ', from Gothic 𐌲𐌰𐍆𐌰𐌷 ' gafāh, catch, something which is caught ' ; and the Italian bega ' quarrel, dispute ', from Gothic * 𐌱𐌴𐌲𐌰 ' *bēga, quarrel '.

Several linguists have made use of Gothic as a creative language. The most famous example is " Bagme Bloma " ' Flower of the Trees ' by J. R. R. Tolkien, part of Songs for the Philologists. It was published privately in 1936 for Tolkien and his colleague E. V. Gordon.

Tolkien's use of Gothic is also known from a letter from 1965 to Zillah Sherring. When Sherring bought a copy of Thucydides ' History of the Peloponnesian War in Salisbury, she found strange inscriptions in it; after she found his name in it, she wrote him a letter and asked him if the inscriptions were his, including the longest one on the back, which was in Gothic. In his reply to her he corrected some of the mistakes in the text; he wrote for example that hundai should be hunda and þizo boko ' of those books ', which he suggested should be þizos bokos ' of this book '. A semantic inaccuracy of the text which he mentioned himself is the use of lisan for read, while this was ussiggwan. Tolkien also made a calque of his own name in Gothic in the letter, which according to him should be Ruginwaldus Dwalakoneis.

Gothic is also known to have served as the primary inspiration for Tolkien's invented language Taliska, which, in his legendarium, was the language spoken by the race of Men during the First Age before being displaced by another of his invented languages, Adûnaic. As of 2022, Tolkien's Taliska grammar has not been published.

On 10 February 1841, the Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities published a reconstruction in Gothic of the Creed of Ulfilas.

The Thorvaldsen Museum also has an alliterative poem (Thunravalds Sunau) from 1841 by Hans Ferdinand Massmann, the first publisher of the Skeireins, written in the Gothic language. It was read at a great feast dedicated to Thorvaldsen in the Gesellschaft der Zwanglosen [ de ] in Munich on 15 July 1841. This event is mentioned by Ludwig von Schorn in the magazine Kunstblatt from 19 July 1841. Massmann also translated the academic commercium song Gaudeamus into Gothic in 1837.

Thomas le Marchant Douse included a partial Gothic translation of Pilgrim's Progress in his book An introduction, phonological, morphological, syntactic to the Gothic of Ulfilas from 1886.

In Philip José Farmer 's fantasy novel A Barnstormer in Oz (1982), the Ozian language which Farmer created to be spoken by the people surrounding main character Hank Stover is suspected by Hank to be Gothic. Examples of words in the Ozian language are gund for ' cancer ', resembling Gothic 𐌲𐌿𐌽𐌳 and fotuz for ' foot ', resembling Gothic 𐍆𐍉𐍄𐌿𐍃.

In 2012, professor Bjarne Simmelkjær Hansen of the University of Copenhagen published a translation into Gothic of Adeste Fideles for Roots of Europe.

In Fleurs du Mal, an online magazine for art and literature, the poem Overvloed of Dutch poet Bert Bevers appeared in a Gothic translation.

Alice in Wonderland has been translated into Gothic (Balþos Gadedeis Aþalhaidais in Sildaleikalanda) by David Carlton in 2015 and is published by Michael Everson.

In 2026, a Gothic language option was added to Minecraft.

𐌰𐍄𐍄𐌰 𐌿𐌽𐍃𐌰𐍂 𐌸𐌿 𐌹𐌽 𐌷𐌹𐌼𐌹𐌽𐌰𐌼 𐍅𐌴𐌹𐌷𐌽𐌰𐌹 𐌽𐌰𐌼𐍉 𐌸𐌴𐌹𐌽 𐌵𐌹𐌼𐌰𐌹 𐌸𐌹𐌿𐌳𐌹𐌽𐌰𐍃𐍃𐌿𐍃 𐌸𐌴𐌹𐌽𐍃 𐍅𐌰𐌹𐍂𐌸𐌰𐌹 𐍅𐌹𐌻𐌾𐌰 𐌸𐌴𐌹𐌽𐍃 𐍃𐍅𐌴 𐌹𐌽 𐌷𐌹𐌼𐌹𐌽𐌰 𐌾𐌰𐌷 𐌰𐌽𐌰 𐌰𐌹𐍂𐌸𐌰𐌹 𐌷𐌻𐌰𐌹𐍆 𐌿𐌽𐍃𐌰𐍂𐌰𐌽𐌰 𐌸𐌰𐌽𐌰 𐍃𐌹𐌽𐍄𐌴𐌹𐌽𐌰𐌽 𐌲𐌹𐍆 𐌿𐌽𐍃 𐌷𐌹𐌼𐌼𐌰 𐌳𐌰𐌲𐌰 𐌾𐌰𐌷 𐌰𐍆𐌻𐌴𐍄 𐌿𐌽𐍃 𐌸𐌰𐍄𐌴𐌹 𐍃𐌺𐌿𐌻𐌰𐌽𐍃 𐍃𐌹𐌾𐌰𐌹𐌼𐌰 𐍃𐍅𐌰𐍃𐍅𐌴 𐌾𐌰𐌷 𐍅𐌴𐌹𐍃 𐌰𐍆𐌻𐌴𐍄𐌰𐌼 𐌸𐌰𐌹𐌼 𐍃𐌺𐌿𐌻𐌰𐌼 𐌿𐌽𐍃𐌰𐍂𐌰𐌹𐌼 𐌾𐌰𐌷 𐌽𐌹 𐌱𐍂𐌹𐌲𐌲𐌰𐌹𐍃 𐌿𐌽𐍃 𐌹𐌽 𐍆𐍂𐌰𐌹𐍃𐍄𐌿𐌱𐌽𐌾𐌰𐌹 𐌰𐌺 𐌻𐌰𐌿𐍃𐌴𐌹 𐌿𐌽𐍃 𐌰𐍆 𐌸𐌰𐌼𐌼𐌰 𐌿𐌱𐌹𐌻𐌹𐌽 𐌿𐌽𐍄𐌴 𐌸𐌴𐌹𐌽𐌰 𐌹𐍃𐍄 𐌸𐌹𐌿𐌳𐌰𐌽𐌲𐌰𐍂𐌳𐌹 𐌾𐌰𐌷 𐌼𐌰𐌷𐍄𐍃 𐌾𐌰𐌷 𐍅𐌿𐌻𐌸𐌿𐍃 𐌹𐌽 𐌰𐌹𐍅𐌹𐌽𐍃

atta unsar þu in himinam weihnai namo þein qimai þiudinassus þeins wairþai wilja þeins swe in himina jah ana airþai hlaif unsarana þana sinteinan gif uns himma daga jah aflet uns þatei skulans sijaima swaswe jah weis afletam þaim skulam unsaraim jah ni briggais uns in fraistubnjai ak lausei uns af þamma ubilin unte þeina ist þiudangardi jah mahts jah wulþus in aiwins

/ˈatːa ˈunsar θuː in ˈhiminam ˈwiːhnɛː ˈnamoː θiːn ˈkʷimɛː ˈθiu̯ðinasːus θiːns ˈwɛrθɛː ˈwilja θiːns sweː in ˈhimina jah ana ˈɛrθɛː hlɛːɸ ˈunsarana ˈθana ˈsinˌtiːnan ɡiɸ uns ˈhimːa ˈdaɣa jah aɸˈleːt uns ˈθatiː ˈskulans ˈsijɛːma ˈswasweː jah ˈwiːs aɸˈleːtam θɛːm ˈskulam ˈunsarɛːm jah ni ˈbriŋɡɛːs uns in ˈɸrɛːstuβnijɛː ak ˈlɔːsiː uns aɸ ˈθamːa ˈuβilin ˈunteː ˈθiːna ist ˈθiu̯ðanˌɡardi jah mahts jah ˈwulθus in ˈɛːwins/

Father our, thou in heaven, {be holy} name thy. Come kingdom thy, happen will thy, as in heaven also on earth. Loaf our, the daily, give us this day, and forgive us, that debtors be, {just as} also we forgive those debtors our. And not bring us in temptation, but loose us from the evil. For thine is kingdom and might and glory in eternity.

The governess of the children of France (French : gouvernante des Enfants de France ; sometimes the governess of the royal children, gouvernante des enfants royaux) was an office in the French royal court in pre-Revolutionary France and during the Bourbon Restoration. As the head of the royal nursery, she was charged with the education of the children and grandchildren of the monarch. The holder of the office was taken from the highest-ranking nobility of France and was passed between female family members for much of its history by right of succession (survivance). The governess was supported by various deputies or under-governesses (sous gouvernantes) and oversaw a household consisting of dozens of servants and caregivers.

The Livre qui contient tout ce qui peut interesser Madame la Gouvernante des Enfans de France et surintandante de Leurs Maisons (1704-44) is the primary written source on the office of the royal governess during the Bourbon dynasty. It is housed and digitized by the Bibliothèque nationale de France. The official court document serves as a manual for the governess and her deputies. It includes the etiquette, ceremonial procedures and daily responsibilities of the role in great detail. It also consists of household inventories of the royal nursery.

The Government of France (French : Gouvernement français, pronounced [ ɡuvɛʁnəmɑ̃ fʁɑ̃sɛ ]), officially the Government of the French Republic (Gouvernement de la République française, [ ɡuvɛʁnəmɑ̃ d(ə) la ʁepyblik fʁɑ̃sɛːz ]), or the Fifth Republic (Cinquième République), exercises executive power in France. It is composed of the prime minister, who is the head of government, as well as both senior and junior ministers.

The Council of Ministers, the main executive organ of the government, was established in the Constitution in 1958. Its members meet weekly at the Élysée Palace in Paris. The meetings are presided over by the president of France, the head of state, although the officeholder is not a member of the government.

The Prime Minister may designate ministers to be titled as ministers of state (ministres d'État), who are the most senior, followed in protocol order by ministers (ministres), ministers delegate (ministres délégués), whereas junior ministers are titled as secretaries of state (secrétaires d'État). All members of the government, who are appointed by the president following the recommendation of the prime minister, are responsible to the National Assembly, the lower house of the French Parliament. Cases of ministerial misconduct are tried before the Cour de Justice de la République.

With regard to Monaco, it is the Government of France's prerogative to propose to the Prince of Monaco an appointee to be Minister of State.

All members of the French government are appointed by the president of the Republic on the advice of the prime minister. Members of the government are ranked in a precise order, which is established at the time of government formation. In this hierarchy, the prime minister is the head of government. While the president is constitutionally free to appoint whomever they like, in practice, they must nominate a candidate that reflects the will of the majority of the National Assembly, as the government relies on the confidence of the French Parliament. After being nominated to lead a government, the prime minister nominee must propose a list of ministers to the president. The president can either accept or reject these proposed ministers. Ministers are ranked by importance:

According to the Constitution of the French Fifth Republic, the government directs and decides the policy of the nation. In practice, the government writes bills to be introduced to parliament, and also writes and issues decrees. All political decisions made by the government must be registered in the government gazette.

The Council of Ministers (French : Conseil des ministres) is established by the Constitution. It is composed only of the senior ministers, though some secretaries of state may attend Council meetings. The Council of Ministers is chaired by the president, unlike the government, but is still led by the prime minister, who was officially titled as the president of the Council of Ministers (French : président du Conseil des ministres) during the Third and Fourth Republics.

All "projects of law" (projets de loi, bills that are proposed by the government, while propositions de loi are the ones proposed by members of Parliament) and some decrees must be approved by the Council of Ministers. Furthermore, it is the Council of Ministers that defines the collective political and policy direction of the government, and takes practical steps to implement that direction. In addition to writing and implementing policy, the government is responsible for national defense, and directs the actions of the French Armed Forces. The workings of the government of France are based on the principle of collegiality.

Meetings of the Council of Ministers take place every Wednesday morning at the Élysée Palace. They are presided over by the president of the Republic, who promotes solidarity and collegiality amongst government ministers. These meetings follow a set format. In the first part of a meeting, the Council deliberates over general interest bills, ordinances, and decrees. In the second part, the Council discusses individual decisions by each minister regarding the appointment of senior civil servants. In the third part, usually, either one minister will give a presentation about some reform or project that they are directing, or the president will ask for advice on some subject from the ministers. In addition, the minister of foreign affairs provides the Council with weekly updates on important international issues.

Most government work, however, is done elsewhere. Much of it is done by each individual ministry, under the direction of the minister responsible for that ministry. Ministers each have their own staff, called a "ministerial cabinet" (French : Cabinet ministériel). Each ministerial cabinet consists of around ten to twenty members, who are political appointees. Cabinet members assist the minister in running a ministry. Members of ministerial cabinets are powerful figures within the government and work in both the political and administrative spheres. The hierarchy in each ministerial cabinet is determined by the minister. Working groups consisting of representatives from several ministries are commonplace. It is the duty of the prime minister to oversee these inter-ministry meetings and to ensure that government work is done effectively and efficiently. All ministerial cabinet decisions must be co-signed by the prime minister. Any decree must also seek the prime minister's advice as well.

The government is responsible for the economic and financial policy of the French Republic, the prime minister must authorize all expenditures made by each ministry, and also manage all revenue. Expenditures are made through what is called a "finance law" (French : Loi de Finances), which is equivalent to an appropriation bill. Each minister must prepare a list of requests for funds annually, and submit it to the Budget Ministry. This ministry decides whether to grant or deny requests for funding by ministers. The ministry also calculates the state budget for the coming year. The parliament must vote on all applications of finance law.

Members of the French government cannot occupy any parliamentary office or position of occupational or trade leadership at the national level, any public employment, or any professional activity. These restrictions are in place to alleviate external pressure and influence on ministers, and to enable them to focus on their governmental work. Thus, a member of the National Assembly or the Senate who is appointed to the government must resign their seat in order to serve as a minister or as the prime minister. Despite these restrictions, members of the government are allowed to keep local elected positions, such as those of city mayor or regional councilor. While the Constitution of the French Republic does not prohibit ministers from being the leader of a political party, it is customary that ministers should not occupy such a post.

The government is responsible to the French Parliament. In particular, the government must assume responsibility for its actions before the National Assembly, and the National Assembly can dismiss the government with a motion of censure. The government cannot function during the tenure of acting (interim) president, as that position is granted either to the president of the Senate or the prime minister, compromising separation of powers. If the government decides to launch an armed operation with a duration of longer than four months, it must first consult parliament and request an authorization. The prime minister may convene parliament for extraordinary sessions, or add additional sitting days to the legislative calendar.

The names of ministries change often in France. This is a list of current ministries:

The Governor of the Bank of France (French: Gouverneur de la Banque de France) is the most senior officer of the Bank of France. The position is currently held by Emmanuel Moulin, who took office on 2 June 2026.

Assisted by two Deputy Governors and independent with regard to political authorities, the Governor administers the Banque de France in pursuit of its three core missions: monetary strategy, financial stability and services to the economy.

He chairs the General Council, which deliberates on issues concerning the management of activities outside the purview of the Eurosystem.

He also sits on the Governing Council of the European Central Bank, which is responsible for setting Eurosystem monetary policy.

The duties of the Governor of the Banque de France include fulfilling several mandates laid down in the Monetary and Financial Code, including:

Since the constitutional revision of 23 July 2008, the Governor of the Banque de France has been appointed by decree of the President of the Republic following consultation with the Finance Committees of the National Assembly and the Senate, which have the power to veto appointments by a three-fifths majority vote.

List of governors of the Banque de France, which is a member of the European Central Bank :

GR 10 is a French GR footpath, or hiking trail, that runs the length of the Pyrenees Mountains. It roughly parallels the French–Spanish border on the French side. Those attempting the entire trail often choose to walk it from west to east, from Hendaye on the Bay of Biscay to Banyuls-sur-Mer on the Mediterranean Sea, but it can also be traversed east to west.

Hiking the entire route is estimated to take around 52 days for hikers who are physically fit and used to mountain hiking. Some stretches involve a lot of ascending and descending, including a few one-day sections that can climb and then descend 1,200 metres (3,900 ft), but the GR 10 is a hiking trail, and there is no actual mountain climbing involved. The trail covers a distance of 866 kilometres (538 mi), with 48,000 metres (157,000 ft) of ascent and, given the coast-to-coast nature of the route, the same descent.

Lodging along the route that cater to walkers include hotels, gîtes d'étape, and very basic mountain refuges. Camping is only necessary for two or three nights in the Ariège section. Some walkers walk one section of the trail at a time, completing the route over several visits.

The trail is well marked with red and white painted blazes. It appears on all regional maps, including on Michelin roadmaps. The route is within the area shown by the Editions Sud-Ouest Rando éditions range of maps (numbers 1–11), which are based on French Institut Géographique National 1:50,000 scale maps. Parts of the route, especially around towns and villages, change from year to year, so walkers should carry the most recent editions of the maps and guides.

A number of sections include alternative routes of a less demanding nature. Some alternatives offer more scenic choices, for example the alternative route from Cauterets to Luz-Saint-Sauveur takes in Pont d'Espagne, the Refuge Oulettes de Gaube, the Refuge Baysellance, Gavarnie, Gedre and Pragneres, and offers more spectacular mountain scenery.

Another notable section is near the village of Etsaut, where the route follows the Chemin de la Mâture, a track carved into a sheer cliff face. This path was created in the 18th century to facilitate the transport of tree trunks destined to be made into masts for French warships.

There are four very detailed guide books (in French) describing the GR 10. These are published by the Fédération Française de la Randonnée Pédestre (French Hiking Federation). These guide books can be purchased at most large sports stores in the region, and in a few of the largest sports stores in the major cities in France. English guides are also available.

The Spanish GR 11 is a similar route on the Spanish side of the border, while the only-occasionally-marked Haute Randonnée Pyrénéenne (HRP) follows a generally higher route through the Pyrenees, from mountaintop to mountaintop, frequently crossing from one side of the border to the other.

The best time for hiking on the GR 10 is late spring/early summer and late summer/early fall. In the middle of the summer the heat can become a problem, though some of the ski stations on the route open their lifts for summer walkers, providing opportunities for hikers to avoid some ascents and descents. In the fall mountain storms become more frequent, making conditions dangerous. In winter most of the GR 10 is impassable due to snow.

The first high pass walking from the Atlantic Ocean is the Hourquette d'Arre (2465m). Walking from the Mediterranean Sea, the equivalent high pass is the Coma d'Anyell (2450m). Both are normally snowed up until about 14 June (in 2013 two weeks later). These are about 14 and 9 days in from the respective starting points.

The GR 10 passes through the French departments of:

Some commonly used overnight stops with camping or gîte facilities include:

The GR12 (Grande Randonnée) is a transnational long-distance hiking trail and leads from Amsterdam via Brussels to Paris. Of the 977 km of the GR 12, 222 km run in the Netherlands, 197 km in Flanders, 212 km in Wallonia and the longest section of 346 km in France.

The Dutch part of the trail between Amsterdam and Bergen op Zoom is better known as the Dutch long-distance network as Floris V -pad LAW 1–3.

From north to south, the route passes through:

In Belgium the route leads north via Antwerp and Brussels past Reims and finally to Paris. The route passes the cities of Bergen-op-Zoom, Deurne, Lier, Mechelen, Grimbergen and Brussels. From there on to Ukkel, Beersel, Braine-le-Chateau, Ronquieres, Walcourt, Dourbes, Olly, Moulin-Manteau, Rocroi and before Paris Montcornet.

The landforms extend over the almost 1000 km of Dutch polders, the small-scale parts of Flanders, the forests in southern Belgium and northern France to the open hilly landscapes near Reims. The trail is also used as a "feeder" for pilgrimages to Santiago.

The GR 20 (or fra li monti) is a GR footpath that crosses the Mediterranean island of Corsica running approximately north–south, described by the outdoor writer Paddy Dillon as "one of the top trails in the world".

The whole trail is about 180 km long with 12,000 m of elevation gain, and is clearly waymarked throughout. Every year, approximately 10,000 to 20,000 hikers walk along the trail, typically completing it in about 15 days. The trail is considered to be the most difficult of all the GR routes and consists of two parts: the northern part, between Calenzana and Vizzavona and the southern part, between Vizzavona and Conca.

Vizzavona is regarded as the midpoint due to the presence of a train station, making it a convenient starting or ending point for hikers covering only one part the route. From Vizzavona, the train can be taken to Bastia or Ajaccio as well as many smaller towns and villages such as Corte. The northern part is considered by some the more difficult part because of the steep and rocky paths, though this could be an effect of many walkers beginning in the north and not being as fit for this section. The southern part of the trail is often considered easier though the lower altitude may give rise to higher temperatures in summer and so provide more difficult walking conditions.

Along the trail there are mountain huts known as " refuges " or gîte d'etapes. The standard and price of accommodations and food varies between refuges. Hikers can sleep in a tent near the refuge, but it is not permitted to pitch tents along the trail.

The GR 20 is an advanced trail. Other less difficult trails on the island include the Mare e monti (sea and mountains) and the Mare a mare (from sea to sea) trails.

The idea of GR 20 comes from a former general inspector for youth and sports, Marcel Schlück, and his friend Guy Degos, both hiking enthusiasts.

In June 2016, François D'Haene set a time of 31 hours and 6 minutes. In 2021, this was broken by Lambert Santelli with a time of 30 hours 25 minutes. In July 2026, D'Haene retook the record with a time of 29 hours and 46 minutes.

The current record by a woman is held by Anne-Lise Rousset who completed the course in 35 hours and 50 minutes in June 2022.

The long-distance hiking trail 34 (French : Sentier de grande randonnée 34 or GR 34 for short; Breton : Hent bale hir 34) is a French coastal path that starts from Mont-Saint-Michel (Manche) and ends in Saint-Nazaire (Loire-Atlantique). It runs along almost the entire coast of the Brittany region from Mont Saint-Michel and, beyond the limit between Morbihan and Loire-Atlantique, to the mouth of the Loire. It stretches over 1,700 kilometres (1,100 miles). It largely follows former customs paths. These paths, gradually abandoned during the first half of the 20th century, allowed customs officers to patrol the coast from their guardhouses, located at key observation points on the Brittany coast.

The Breton coastal path has its origins in the late 18th century, after the French Revolution. Among the measures adopted by the National Constituent Assembly (1789–1791) at the end of the Ferme générale was the creation on 23 April 1791 of the National Customs Authority (French : Régie nationale des douanes). By a decree of 5 November 1790, the Constituent Assembly thus abolished all internal borders and decided to "retreat customs to the borders".

It was in this context that the Breton customs officers' path was created in 1791. The men, who ensured the surveillance in pairs, took turns every two hours and had the task of monitoring the coasts and fighting smuggling. Along the path, gabions, cabins, huts, straw huts and many small dry-stone constructions built by the customs officers themselves provided places to stop. They are in addition to the official positions provided by the Customs Administration.

The objectives of the path were fourfold:

In 2018, the trail was used by 9 million users, 40% of whom were locals and 60% tourists. The local economic benefits are estimated at 202 million euros.

The GR 400 is a long-distance walking route within the Grande Randonnée network in France. It is not a linear route, but a series of five circuits, all within the Monts de Cantal area of the Massif Central. The circuits interconnect with, and sometimes follow the same route as, the GR 4, one of the spine paths of the network, and also with a subsidiary section of the Via Podiensis St James's Way route. The walking is described as "within the range of any good hiker accustomed to walking in mountain country and to carrying a rucksack"

Parts of these loops, together with sections of the GR4, can be combined to create a complete tour of the Monts du Cantal volcanic region, totalling 133 km and suggested as an 8-day walk. The routes include some of the highest and most dramatic points within the Cantal volcano area, including the Plomb du Cantal (1855 m, the highest point on the path and the second highest in the Massif Central), Puy Mary and Puy Griou

The GR 59 Grande Randonnée long-distance footpath in France connects two mountain ranges across relatively low-lying terrain. In the north, it begins at Ballon d'Alsace in the Vosges at a height of over 1000m. It loses height rapidly, and runs south-south-west through the département of the Haute-Saône to Besançon on the river Doubs, in the département of the same name. It then follows a circuitous route, partly along the river Loue (a tributary of the Doubs) to Lons-le-Saunier in the département of Jura. At St-Amour just south of Lons, the GR 9 splits from the GR 59 and takes a more easterly route, near the Swiss border, while the GR59 continues into the regions of Bugey and Revermont in the département of Ain, finally rejoining the GR 9 near Yenne on the banks of the Rhône ; the GR 9 then continues to the Mediterranean at St-Tropez.

Towns and villages that the path passes through, with approximate heights and distances from the northern end of the path, include:

Detailed guides to the path (in French) are available from the Fédération Française de la Randonnée Pédestre in two sections: No. 510, "Des Vosges au Jura", and No. 901, "Tours et traversées dans l'Ain".

The GR 65 is a long-distance walking route of the Grande Randonnée network that extends from the French Prealps, across south central France, through the Pyrenees.

The French name for this GR route is the Chemin de Saint-Jacques and the Spanish name is the Camino de Santiago francés, because the GR 65 is an important variant route of the old Christian pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela, one of several variants of the Way of St. James. In English it is the French Way, sometimes called The Le Puy Route or by its Latin name Via Podiensis, including its subtrails GR651 and GR652.

The GR 65 is part of the system of European long-distance paths known as E3 European long distance path.

The route starts in Geneva, Switzerland, and continues through France to La Côte-Saint-André (Isère), Le Puy-en-Velay (Haute-Loire), Nasbinals (Lozère), Conques (Aveyron), Figeac (Lot), Cahors (Lot) Moissac (Tarn-et-Garonne), and Aire-sur-l'Adour (Landes), to Roncesvalles, Spain.

The GR 7 is a long-distance footpath in Spain, Andorra and France. One of the GR footpaths, it is part of both the Spanish network of Senderos de Gran Recorrido and the French network of Sentiers de Grandes Randonnées. Part of GR 7 forms the south-westernmost part of the European walking route E4 in Spain. GR 7 runs from Tarifa, near Gibraltar, across Spain, through France into Andorra, and back into France to Mont Aigoual and Aire-de-Côte in the Cévennes. GR 7 continues north from the Cévennes mountains and the final 250 km end on the top of the Ballon d'Alsace, Alsace, northern France; here it meets E5.

The Spanish GR 7 is 1900 km long. It was the first long-distance footpath to be marked out in Spain, and was initiated in 1974. It runs up the east side of peninsular Spain, but at some distance from the coast. From south-west to north-east, it runs through the Spanish regions of:

Like all the Gran Recorrido paths, the GR 7 is marked with red and white waymarks. These waymarks, at least on some segments of the trail, are few and faded.

There is a choice of two routes around the Spanish Sierra Nevada, one to the north of the mountains, and one to the south below. The Southern Route through the Alpujarra foothills is popular, linking numerous small Spanish villages.

The French part of GR 7 is 1400 km long. From Andorra, the GR 7 continues in France, through the Cevennes to Mont Aigoual and Aire-de-Côte, and then north to Alsace.

GR 7 appears to coincide with European walking route E7 in northern Spain, in Andorra, and in France as far as the Cevenne. From the Cevenne the European walking route E7 continues south along Gr 6, through the South of France, Italy, Slovenia, and Hungary. It will eventually end in Romania, so as to create a route that will reach from the Atlantic (Lisbon, Portugal) to the Black Sea ; however, some stages, including parts of the route through Italy, are still in planning.

The GR 70, also known as the Chemin de Stevenson or the Robert Louis Stevenson Trail, is a Grande Randonnée (long-distance footpath) that runs for approximately 225 kilometres (140 mi) through the French departments of Haute-Loire, Lozère and Gard in a generally north–south direction from Le Monastier-sur-Gazeille to Saint-Jean-du-Gard. It follows approximately the route taken by Robert Louis Stevenson in 1878, a journey described in his book Travels with a Donkey in the Cévennes.

Although it is not on the formal route, many hikers begin at Le-Puy-en-Velay and walk to Le Monastier-sur-Gazeille via a section of the GR 430. Similarly, many walkers continue beyond the official end-point of Saint-Jean-du-Gard to Alès via sections of the GR 61 and GR 44 D. Both of these cities have railway stations.

The route was formally adopted by the Fédération Française de la Randonnée Pédestre (French Hiking Federation) in 1994, and by 2007 an estimated 6000 hikers walked its full length each year. A dedicated organisation, the Association Sur Le Chemin de Robert Louis Stevenson, promotes the trail and maintains an accommodation list.

Places marked with an asterisk are not on the formal route, but are often included by those walking the GR 70.

The trail and Stevenson's journey are central to the plot of the movie My Donkey, My Lover & I.

The Regordane Way is the southernmost section of the historical route that links Paris to Lower Languedoc and the Camargue. It runs from Le Puy-en-Velay, south west of St Etienne to Saint-Gilles-du-Gard to the south west of Nîmes, a distance of 211 kilometres or 140 miles.

The origin of its name is most likely that of the ancient Province through which it passes – la Regordana. This Province corresponded approximately to the triangular area linking the towns of Alés, Pradelles and Largentière.

Its existence dates back to the dawn of man and its importance certainly grew from the year 843 onwards, when it became the most easterly route of a nascent Gaul. The Regordane was the fourth most important pilgrimage route in Christendom during this era, bolstered by its strategic position as a point of departure for Santiago de Compostela, the Holy Land (St Gilles was a port at the time) and Rome.

The GR 700 is France 's newest Grande Randonnée route that follows approximately the pilgrimage path of the Chemin de St-Gilles and the mystical trail The Regordane. The Saint-Gilles Way dates back to the mid-9th century and was Christendom's fourth most important pilgrimage by the 11th century. It runs from Le Puy-en-Velay to Saint-Gilles du Gard in Camargue. The Regordane is a section of this trail that runs between Luc in Lozere and Alès at the foothills of the Cévennes.

The GR 700 runs from Le Puy en Velay to Saint-Gilles du Gard, but is not necessarily faithful to the original trails. The whole route uses the misnomer 'The Regordane Way.' This epithet is incorrect because it implies that the full route was formerly known as The Regordane, which was never the case. Moreover, the use of the word 'Way' implies a Roman origin (Way = Voie) which studies demonstrate is wrong.

The sentier de Grande Randonnée 8, or GR 8 for short, is a long distance hiking trail on the French Atlantic coast. It is part of the Grande Randonnée network and runs from Saint-Brevin-les-Pins (Loire-Atlantique, France) on the south of the Loire estuary, opposite the large port city of Saint-Nazaire and currently terminates at Sare in the Atlantic Pyrenees.

The path descends from the Côte de Jade of the Pays de Retz, through the Vendée and Charente-Maritime towards Royan, takes the ferry over the Gironde estuary and continues in the Gironde then the Landes, while following the Atlantic coast, before crossing the Adour further east, in Urt continuing south-west to Sare, the current trail head. There it joins the GR 10 which continues westward to Hendaye near the Spanish border and town of Irun and eastward through the Pyrénées-Atlantiques. The path therefore traverses six coastal administrative departments in two regions : Loire-Atlantique and Vendée in the Pays de Loire, and Charente-Maritime, Gironde, Landes and Pyrénées-Atlantiques in Nouvelle-Aquitaine.

The GR 8 is the youngest of the ten main routes (GR 1 to GR 10) of the French hiking network and has not yet been completely demarcated. However, several small gaps in the route can be easily filled by using other walking routes, such as the GR 364 at Talmont-Saint-Hilaire, the GR 360 and the GR 4 between Rochefort and Royan, and the Way of Saint James (the Voie Littorale) south of the Gironde estuary. In this latter area of Aquitaine, the GR 8 was almost completely defined and marked, but a number of private owners since prohibited the passage of GR walkers, so that a new route has to be found. In the vicinity of La Rochelle, hikers will have to find a suitable route for the time being.

The GR 8 is part of the E9 European long distance path linking Estonia with Portugal.

Gracia Barrios Rivadeneira (27 June 1927 – 28 May 2020) was a Chilean painter and the winner of the 2011 National Prize for Plastic Arts.

The daughter of writer Eduardo Barrios (winner of the 1946 National Prize for Literature) and pianist Carmen Rivadeneira, Gracia Barrios was interested in art from an early age. She took classes with the painter Carlos Isamitt and later, while still in school, attended evening classes at the School of Fine Arts of the University of Chile. After high school, she continued her higher education at the aforementioned university from 1944 to 1949. There she had as teachers Augusto Eguiluz, Carlos Pedraza, and Pablo Burchard, the latter having the greatest influence on her style.

Barrios began her teaching career in 1953, at her alma mater, as an assistant in the drawing workshop of Carlos Pedraza. Later she assumed other positions, until 1973. During the 1960s she belonged to Grupo Signo, which broke with Post-Impressionism and advocated an abandonment of easel painting. Among the other members of the group were Alberto Pérez, José Balmes, and Eduardo Martínez Bonati. In 1962 the group held exhibitions in Spain and France.

After the 1973 Chilean coup d'état, the artist went into exile in France along with her husband and daughter; they remained out of Chile for approximately ten years.

Upon returning, Barrios worked as a visiting professor at the Catholic University from 1983 to 1986, and beginning in 1994 was a professor at Finis Terrae University. She ended her teaching career some years later. "Before, art was more democratic because it revolved more around the University of Chile [...] That's why there were artists from all social spectrums. For some time, creation has gone hand in hand with economic power, with having a good surname, with moving in certain spheres. I miss doing classes, but that is one of the reasons why I left it," explained the painter.

In 2011, she won the National Prize for Plastic Arts for her work that, according to the jury, "is distinguished by its incessant search for the human condition and, above all, by the relationship of the human being with its existential and historical contexts."

The work of Gracia Barrios focuses on "human activity in everyday life." Although she initially opted for figurative painting, towards the 1960s she changed to a more informal style, called "informal realism" by the artist herself. With this, Barrios alluded to the man "by means of the monumentality of torsos, heads, and maternities, expressing also the direct approach with the American continent and its people." Some of the themes she tackled in her paintings were war, indigence, and exile.

In addition to using oil and acrylic paints, the artist experimented with natural elements such as earth and clay in order to give greater density to her works.

Her paintings have been exhibited in countries such as Spain, France, Germany, Brazil, and Japan, and adorn not only Chilean museums, but also some European ones, such as the Barcelona Museum of Contemporary Art and the André Malraux Museum of Le Havre.

In 1943, while attending free courses at the University of Chile, Barrios met the Catalan painter José Balmes. They were introduced by the poet Enrique Lihn. They married in 1952 and had a daughter, Concepción Balmes, who is also a painter.

Garcia Barrios died from COVID-19 on 28 May 2020, at the age of 92.

The Grand Ouest (Breton : Mervent Bras) is a geographical concept that can varyingly encompass a number of regions located in the western third or half of France, in the Atlantic Arc.

This territorial grouping is not formally defined and its many definitions are due in particular to the fact that it has never had its own political and administrative structure.

Not referring to any official subdivision or territorial authority, the Grand Ouest is an entity with variable definitions. It systematically includes Brittany and the Pays de la Loire, frequently the former Lower Normandy and Poitou-Charentes regions, and sometimes extends to the Centre-Val de Loire region and the former Upper Normandy region.

The territory is often the subject of projects and facilities shared by the different regions concerned (such as the Cancéropôle du Grand Ouest); sociological, political and economic areas of study ; or technical and administrative areas (such as the tissue bank of the Établissement français du sang [ fr ]). However, in some cases, the term ‘Ouest’ is used to define this geographical area (for example, for the former European electoral constituency and INSEE 's ZEAT Ouest). Its two largest cities, by any definition, are Nantes and Rennes.

Grand Siècle (French pronunciation: [ ɡʁɑ̃ sjɛkl ]) or Great Century refers to the period of French history during the 17th century, under the reigns of Louis XIII and Louis XIV.

Though primarily associated with Louis XIV's reign, the Grand siècle was notable for the development of art, music and literature already before the Sun King rise to power and historians usually date its beginnings with the start of Henry IV 's reign in 1589. The effects of the end of the French Wars of Religion obtained by Henry IV (with the 1598 Edict of Nantes sanctioning religious peace between Catholics and Protestants) and, later, the impact of the Thirty Years' War, which made the Kingdom of France the dominant European power in place of a Spain exhausted by continuous wars were considerable.

This new dominant position, achieved by the middle of the 17th-century, was allowed through the newfound internal peace but also the careful management of the royal household and government by a succession of efficient kings and ministers throughout the century (kings Henry IV, Louis XIII and Louis XIV advised by ministers Sully, Cardinal Richelieu and Cardinal Mazarin). Louis XIV's personal reign, under an absolutist stance from 1661 onwards, definitively quelled the rebellion of the upper aristocracy, thanks to the construction of the Palace of Versailles, where the court was relocated, and created a powerful state apparatus, through the work of effective ministers of state such as Colbert and Louvois who reformed many policies. Hailing from families of secondary nobility and fiercely loyal to the king, they developed trade, manufacturing, the navy and French colonies according to the economic theories of mercantilism.

In the military field, several brilliant generals succeeded one another at the head of the royal armies throughout the century, such as the Grand Condé, victorious in the 1643 Battle of Rocroi, which marked the decline of the Spanish tercios and the advent of line infantry, the great strategist Viscount Turenne, renowned for his strategic troop movements and maneuvers (he was Napoleon Bonaparte's most admired general); and, under Louis XIV, the Marshals of Luxembourg, Vendôme, and Villars. Across the 17th-century, France experienced a military expansion of its borders to the north, east and south with the conquest of Spanish Roussillon, part of Flanders, German-speaking Alsace, and Spanish-held Franche-Comté, at the expense of the Habsburg monarchy. At the beginning of the 18th century, France, which had been surrounded by Habsburg -ruled states since the end of the 16th century, succeeded in placing a member of the Bourbon royal family on the Spanish throne, the Duke of Anjou, a grandson of Louis XIV, who became Philip V of Spain, fulfilling the objective that had governed a good part of its foreign policy during the previous century.

In 1626, Richelieu created the French Royal Navy, which was later reorganized and expanded by Minister Colbert during the reign of Louis XIV, under the leadership of brilliant flagships such as Duquesne and Tourville. In the 17th century, France created its own colonial empire with a vast domain in North America, called New France, stretching from Quebec to Louisiana (named in honor of Louis XIV) via the Mississippi. Several French explorers were the first to venture into the interior of the North American continent, the most famous being René Robert Cavelier de La Salle, who explored the Great Lakes region. But the country's most important holdings for its economy were the various islands in the Caribbean, where sugarcane cultivation was developed through slaves imported from Africa, particularly Saint-Domingue (now Haiti), Guadeloupe, Martinique, and Grenada. To trade with the Orient and India, a French East India Company was created in 1664, under state authority, while France established various trading posts along the coast of India.

The period was notable for its development of art, music and literature, along with the construction of the Palace of Versailles, the effects of the French Wars of Religion, and the impacts of the Thirty Years' War, which made France the dominant power in Europe instead of Spain. Significant figures during this period include gardener André Le Nôtre, architects François Mansart, Louis Le Vau and Jules Hardouin-Mansart, painters Nicolas Poussin, Simon Vouet, Claude Lorrain, Georges de La Tour, Philippe de Champaigne, Charles Le Brun, sculptors Pierre Puget, François Girardon and Antoine Coysevox, playwrights Pierre Corneille, Molière and Jean Racine, the poets François de Malherbe, Jean de La Fontaine and Nicolas Boileau, writers Madame de La Fayette, Charles Perrault, composers Henri Dumont, Jean-Baptiste Lully, Marc-Antoine Charpentier, Michel Richard Delalande, André Campra, Henri Desmarest, Marin Marais and François Couperin, philosophers René Descartes, Blaise Pascal, Antoine Arnauld, Nicolas Malebranche, Pierre Gassendi, La Rochefoucauld, La Bruyere, and Pierre Bayle.

Commune de Grande-Synthe v. France is a lawsuit filed by the commune of Grande-Synthe against the Government of France, alleging that the government has not taken enough action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to fulfill its commitments according to domestic and international law. In July 2021, the Conseil d'État ruled that the French government must take all necessary measures to reduce emissions by March 2022.

In 2015, the European Union, including France as a member state, under the Paris Agreement, committed to reduce domestic greenhouse gas emissions by at least 40% compared to 1990 levels by 2030. This commitment was part of the EU's Intended Nationally Determined Contribution aimed at keeping the global temperature increase below 2°C.

Grande-Synthe, a small coastal city in northern France particularly vulnerable to climate change impacts, claims that the French government fails to take sufficient measures to lower greenhouse gas emissions in order inter alia to comply with the Paris Agreement, presenting its case to the Conseil d'État beginning in 2020. The Conseil d'État, France's highest administrative court, first declared the city's petition admissible. On the substance of the case, the court observed that despite the country’s commitment to reducing emissions as outlined in the Paris Agreement, France in the years since has consistently exceeded its self-imposed carbon budgets.

The Conseil d'État ruled in July 2021 that the French government must, before March 2022, take all necessary measures to achieve the objectives of the Paris Agreement. On May 15, 2023, the Conseil d’État found that its decision had not been sufficiently enforced, noting:

“The High Council on Climate (HCC) considered that there is a proven risk that the 2030 reduction target will not be met. As the HCC noted, out of the 25 emission reduction strategic directions established by the Government (national low carbon strategy or SNBC), only six benefitted from measures in line with the reduction trajectory that has been set, and four even involved measures with contrary effects, particularly in the transport, building, agriculture and energy sectors. The HCC thus stressed that there is a significant risk that the targets set for 2030 will not be met.”

The claimants asked the Conseil d’État for a fine of €50 million per six-month period of non-compliance. However, the Conseil d’État, considering the government’s past efforts by and those further anticipated, decided it was not necessary at this time to enforce this penalty. Instead, it chose to regularly monitor the government's compliance with its ruling.

The grands corps de l'État (French pronunciation: [ ɡʁɑ̃ kɔʁ d(ə) leta ] ; English: Grand Corps of the French State) are a feature of the French state as envisaged in the reforms of Jean-Baptiste Colbert. Some of these grands corps date back to the reign of Louis XV, in the 18th century, but most originated or were given their modern form during the reign of Napoleon.

The exact list of grands corps de l'État is debatable, mainly because there is disagreement about whether a particular corps is grand enough to be counted. However, Who's Who in France gives the following list: the ingénieurs des mines, the ingénieurs des ponts, the administrateurs de l'INSEE, the ingénieurs de l'armement, the conseillers d'État, the Cour des comptes and the inspecteurs des finances.

In France, the members of these grand corps have great importance in the government administration, since many executive positions are held by them. Many senior corporate executives of French companies come straight out of these Grand Corps.

The administrative grands corps mainly recruit graduates of the École nationale d'administration (ENA). They are more closely connected with politics than the technical grands corps are. Georges Pompidou was member of the Conseil d'État, François Hollande and Jacques Chirac were both members of the Cour des comptes, and Emmanuel Macron, Valéry Giscard d'Estaing and Michel Rocard were members of the Inspection des finances.

The technical grands corps mainly recruit from graduates of the École Polytechnique, Écoles normales supérieures or other schools such as École des Ponts and École des Mines.

Three other technical grands corps no longer function:

The system of grands corps has been criticised from within its own ranks as well as from outside. In January 2009, a report on the future of the technical grands corps was sent to the Prime Minister.

The graphic charter of government communication is the graphic charter of the logo of France, used by government services. It was adopted in 1999 by the government of Lionel Jospin and revolves around a logo associating Marianne, the tricolour flag and the motto Liberté, Égalité, Fraternité (transl. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity) to represent the French Republic. A redesign of this graphic charter was carried out in 2020.

François Mitterrand, when he was the President of the Republic, was offered by Jacques Séguéla the idea of a logo for state institutions. However, he had refused it, deeming it too "publicitaire" ^

In 1997, the Court of Auditors noted in a report that a “kaleidoscope of different symbols” existed in the publications of the administration. Its author, Bernard Candiard, who then became director of the Service d'information du Gouvernement (SIG or transl. Government Information Service), launched the project of creating a logo within this organization, with Nicole Civatte. The objective was to "create an identifier of the State which would clearly indicate that the State exists as a specific issuer: a place where an autonomous word has to be affirmed", according to an internal document issued in March 1999 by SIG.

A call for tenders was launched in 1998. The creation of the logo was entrusted to the Audour Soum agency (which then merged with the Hémisphère droit agency, a subsidiary of the Séguéla group), with Evelyn Soum as project manager. Designed by graphic designer Isabelle Bauret, the logo met specifications drawn up "at the end of an investigation combining semiotic analysis, interviews with senior officials, as well as meetings with the general public". It was tested by Sofres to the public and government officials before being released. But the President of the Republic, Jacques Chirac, consulted by the government in January 1999, hesitating at first to "touch the integrity of the flag".

The graphic charter was finally introduced by circular n 4.694 / SG signed by the Prime Minister Lionel Jospin, on 24 September 1999.

The circular n 5459 / SG signed by the Prime Minister Francois Fillon, on 8 April 2010, changed the graphic charter for decentralised services.

The circular n 6144 / SG signed by the Prime Minister Edouard Philippe, on 17 February 2020, simplified the graphic charter and made it more suitable for reading on a smartphone.

The first 1999 version of the logo constituted a graphic mark that the SIG has registered with the National Institute of Industrial Property (INPI) under number 7596745 and under the name “ Liberté-Égalité-Fraternité République Française ” as well as a Community trade mark.

In addition, since 31 March 2016, the logo is one of the emblems protected under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement.

The logo is reminiscent of the national flag, featuring an elongated rectangular design with the three colours: blue, white, and red. The central white portion showcases a silhouette of Marianne in profile, oriented towards the right.

Beneath the rectangle, there is a typographic base which includes:

The two lines are separated by a filet [ fr ].

In the first half of 2020, a new graphic charter, referred to as the “State brand”, was introduced. This was produced by the “4uatre” branding agency. The design incorporates key elements from its predecessor, including the depiction of Marianne within a French flag and the inclusion of the Republic’s motto.

The new design expands Marianne’s frame of view to reveal her shoulders. A new typography, named “Marianne”, was created, and the motto “ Liberté, Égalité, Fraternité ” was hand-redrawn in italics and positioned beneath the official title.

The logo comprises the following elements:

Within this brand block, only the official name of the issuer is subject to change, while the typography remains consistent.

The Marianne font was created for the State by Mathieu Réguer, commissioned by the agency “4uatre”. It is available in six thickness levels (Thin, Light, Regular, Medium, Bold, Extrabold). As a substitute for this typography, Arial can be used. In addition to Marianne, the Spectral font (created by the Parisian company Production Type for Google in 2017) is authorised for quotes, translations etc.

The new charter applies, in addition to State administrations (ministries, prefectures, embassies, etc.), to State operators. They will have to affix, in addition to their own logo, the “French Republic” brand block in order to clearly indicate to the public that they belong to the State.

According to the Prime Minister's services, the implementation of the new charter should not generate additional costs, the organizations concerned being supposed to dispose of their old stocks of letterhead.

The main colours of the charter are those of the French flag, to which a wide range of secondary colours is also added.

The 1999 circular specifies that the graphic charter "is intended to be used in all of the ministries' relations with third parties, as well as with other services or bodies under the State". The logo can thus be found on letterheads, business cards, websites, forms, posters etc., published by the government and the administration. The graphic charter applies to ministerial cabinets and central administrations as well as to decentralised services in departments and regions, prefectures and embassies.

The other institutions of the Republic (Presidency of the Republic, National Assembly, Senate, Constitutional Council, Court of Cassation, Council of State, etc.) as well as independent administrative authorities and local authorities generally have their own graphic charter and do not use the government logo.

This logo is moreover a mark and not an official emblem: indeed article 2 of the Constitution of the Fifth Republic officially recognises only the tricolour flag, the hymn La Marseillaise, and the motto Liberty, Equality, Fraternity.

Bernard Candiard, who headed the SIG when the logo was created in 1999, said that it is a national symbol that "endows the country with a modest banner that allows us to come together". The French Embassy in the United States states that the logo was designed not only to unify government public relations but also to present a more accessible image of the state, which had previously been perceived as abstract, distant, and archaic; the logo aims to unite, mobilise, provide security and optimism, and evoke patriotic pride.

The logo incorporates three symbols of France that originated from the French Revolution : the flag, Marianne, and the motto. Frédéric Lambert noted its inspiration from Eugène Delacroix ’s “ La Liberté guidant le peuple ”, a work from the revolution of 1830.

Adopted during a period of cohabitation, the logo is intended to be consensual, focusing more on communication than passionate symbolism. Bernard Richard observed that its association with administrative documents, such as tax forms and traffic ticket notices, may hinder the popular fervor associated with other French emblems. However, its adoption and recognition by the public are evident, as demonstrated by the viral response to its use following the attacks of November 13, 2015.

Historian Maurice Agulhon described the logo as "having more of a postage stamp aesthetic than that of a logo", noting its similarity to stamps featuring Marianne. The Flags of the World website suggests that the logo blends the two aspects of Marianne described by Agulhon and elaborated by Michel Pastoureau in Les Emblèmes de la France - being both wise and bourgeois, and rebellious and popular.

Additionally, a lack of cohesion among the logos of different ministries was observed.

On 11 January 2007, activists from several associations, in particular Droit Au Logement (DAL or transl. Right To Housing), Collectif Jeudi Noir (transl. Black Thursday Collective) and Macaq (abbreviation of Mouvement d’Animation Culturelle et Artistique de Quartier (transl. Movement of Cultural Animation and Artistic District)), denounced the inaction of the public authorities in the housing crisis by inaugurating a fake "Ministry of Housing Crisis" in the 2nd arrondissement of Paris, in the corner of Place de la Bourse and rue de la Banque. A poster diverting the logo of the government was displayed by adding a crowbar and a bunch of keys.

In 2013, in the documentary Trop noire pour être française? (transl. Too Black to be French?), Isabelle Boni-Claverie diverted the logo by replacing the blue of the flag with black and by drawing a black Marianne.

After the attacks of 13 November 2015, graphic designers from the Les Cartons collective hijacked the government logo by adding a tear to the corner of Marianne's eye, in tribute to the victims (of the attacks of 13 November 2015 in France). The visual was widely shared on social networks, and was displayed in Bordeaux on the facade of the Aquitaine regional council.

Gratin (French: [ ɡʁatɛ̃ ]) is a culinary technique in which a dish is topped with a browned crust, often using breadcrumbs, cheese, or egg. The term may be applied to any dish made using this method. Gratin is usually prepared in a shallow dish. A gratin is baked or cooked under an overhead grill or broiler to form a golden crust on top, and it is often served in its baking dish.

Popular potato-based gratins are referred to by a variety of names including scalloped potatoes, potatoes au gratin (or au gratin potatoes), and potato bake. The name " old rotten potatoes " is sometimes used humorously.

A gratin dish is a shallow oven-proof container that is commonly used to prepare gratins and similar dishes.

The etymology of gratin is from the French language word gratter, meaning "to scrape" (from having to scrape the food out of the dish it was cooked in). The technique predates the current name, which did not appear in English until 1846 (OED, s.v. "gratin").

In addition to the well-known potato dishes such as gratin dauphinois, gratin may be applied to many other bases of meat, fish, vegetables, or pasta.

Many gratinéed dishes are topped with béchamel, mornay or other sauces.

Potatoes gratiné is one of the most common gratins and is known by various names, including “gratin potatoes” and gratin de pommes de terre. Slices of boiled potato are put in a buttered fireproof dish, sprinkled with cheese, and browned in the oven. Sliced raw potatoes may also be baked in a liquid or sauce that steams them and forms a golden crust on top. In the US, the dish is referred to variously as funeral potatoes, potatoes au gratin, scalloped potatoes, or au gratin potatoes. In English-speaking Canada, it is called scalloped potatoes or potatoes au gratin. In French-speaking Canada, the dish is referred to as patates au gratin. In Australia, it is known as potato bake, and New Zealanders refer to it as scalloped potatoes, potato scallops, or potato cake. In North America, traditionally, au gratin potatoes included cheese and scalloped potatoes did not, but this differentiation has been lost to time.

To make pommes de terre gratinées, or "potatoes with cheese," according to the recipe of Marcel Boulestin, large floury potatoes are baked in the oven, then halved and the flesh scooped from the skins. The flesh is mashed with butter, cream, grated cheese, and seasoning(s). The mix is then scooped back into the skins, arranged in a baking dish, sprinkled with grated cheese, and browned in the oven or under the grill. This preparation is also called "twice-baked potatoes".

Gratin dauphinois is a speciality of the Dauphiné region of France. The dish is typically made with thinly sliced and layered potatoes, and cream, cooked in a buttered dish rubbed with garlic. Some recipes add cheese and eggs.

Gratin savoyard is a similar dish found in the adjacent Savoie department. It consists of alternating layers of sliced potatoes, Beaufort cheese, and pieces of butter, with bouillon as the liquid. Cream is not used.

Funeral potatoes is a similar dish consisting of hash browns or cubed potatoes, cheese (cheddar or Parmesan), onions, cream soup (chicken, mushroom, or celery) or a cream sauce, sour cream, and a topping of butter with corn flakes or crushed crackers or potato chips. The dish has been associated with members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints because of its popularity among members of the church.

The Neapolitan dish pasta al gratin (also referred to as "pasta au gratin" in American English) may be made with various kinds of pasta, including penne, rigatoni, fusilli, macaroni, or tagliatelle. The pasta is cooked al dente, then covered with béchamel sauce, cheese (typically a mixture including scamorza, mozzarella or parmesan) and breadcrumbs, then baked.

Sole au gratin is a sole gratin, often covered with mushrooms. Many fish-based gratins use a white gratin sauce and cheese, and brown quickly. Cozze gratinate is a mussel -based recipe found in Italy.

Janssons frestelse ("Jansson's temptation") is a Swedish gratin of potatoes, onions, and preserved fish, somewhat similar to a French dish of potatoes with anchovies.

Cod au gratin is a classic Newfoundland comfort food dish of cod baked in a creamy sauce and topped with cheese.

Gratin Languedocien is made with eggplant and tomato, covered in breadcrumbs and oil, then browned. This dish is similar to the Italian dish known as melanzane alla parmigiana (eggplant parmesan). Other vegetables commonly used in gratin dishes include cauliflower, spinach, and butternut squash.

Gratin dauphinois (/ ˈ ɡ r æ t. æ̃ ˌ d oʊ. f ɪ ˈ n w ɑː / GRAT -a doh-fi- NWAH) is a French gratin of sliced raw potatoes baked in cream, from the Dauphiné region in south-eastern France. There are many variants of the name of the dish, including pommes de terre dauphinoise, potatoes à la dauphinoise and gratin de pommes à la dauphinoise.

The first mention of the dish is from 12 July 1788. It was served with ortolans at a dinner given by Charles-Henri, Duke of Clermont-Tonnerre and lieutenant-general of the Dauphiné, for the municipal officials of the town of Gap, now in the département of Hautes-Alpes.

Gratin dauphinois is made with thinly sliced raw potatoes and cream, cooked in a buttered dish rubbed with garlic; cheese is sometimes added for the Savoyard sister dish. The potatoes are peeled and sliced to the thickness of a coin, usually with a mandoline. They are layered in a shallow earthenware or glass baking dish and cooked in a slow oven; the heat is raised for the last 10 minutes of cooking.

By tradition, the gratin dauphinois does not include cheese, which would make it more similar to a gratin savoyard (which does not include cream). Recipes given by many chefs – including Auguste Escoffier, Austin de Croze and Constance Spry – call for cheese and eggs; others such as Robert Carrier specify cheese but no egg.

The gratin dauphinois is distinguished from ordinary gratin potatoes by the use of raw rather than boiled potatoes. It is a quite different dish from pommes dauphine.

The Great Seal of France (French : Grand sceau de France) is the seal of the French Republic. After the 1792 revolution established the First French Republic, the insignia of the monarchy was removed from the seal. Over time, the new seal changed. At first, it featured Marianne, symbol of the revolution. It evolved to show that the people developed their culture and politics. In modern times, it depicts Liberty, along with aspects of culture such as art, education, and agriculture.

The Great Seal features Liberty, wearing a crown with seven arches. She holds a fasces and is supported by a ship's tiller with a cock carved or printed on it, representing the Gallic rooster (le coq gaulois), a symbol of the Gauls and early French nation. At her feet is a vase with the letters "SU" (" Suffrage Universel ", "Universal suffrage"). At her right, in the background, are symbols of the arts (painter's tools), architecture (Ionic order), education (burning lamp), agriculture (a sheaf of wheat) and industry (a cog wheel). The scene is surrounded by the legend "RÉPUBLIQUE FRANÇAISE, DÉMOCRATIQUE, UNE ET INDIVISIBLE" ("French Republic, democratic, one and indivisible") and "24 FEV.1848" (24 February 1848) at the bottom.

The reverse bears the words "AU NOM DU PEUPLE FRANÇAIS" ("in the name of the French people") surrounded by a crown of oak (symbol of perennity and justice) and laurel (symbol of glory) leaves tied together with wheat and grapes (agriculture and wealth), with the circular national motto " LIBERTÉ, ÉGALITÉ, FRATERNITÉ ".

The first seals were created by the Merovingian kings to authenticate their orders. Merely rings originally, later worn on a necklace, the royal seals grew bigger and bigger under the House of Capet to reach around 12 cm (4.7 in). These are the modern dimensions of the seal.

All the seals under the Ancien Régime featured the king sitting on this throne and giving justice, yet every king had his own personal seal, a unique item which passed with him. All edicts, orders, decrees and declarations were then sealed.

On August 13, 1792, representatives of the National Convention arrested King Louis XVI. He was imprisoned, and later executed on January 21, 1793. This act of regicide demonstrated that "the Convention had irreversibly ruled out any compromise with the Revolution's opponents." With the absence of the king, the French Republic sought a new national symbol. It was from these tumultuous times that the French symbol of Marianne emerged. The French Revolution not only challenged the political authority of the Old Regime led by the monarchy; it also challenged the traditional symbols that had thus far defined the French people. Anthropologists have argued that every society needs a "center" which includes social and political mapping that gives the people a sense of their place. In the traditional model of authority, "the king was the sacred center and culture was firmly fixed in the longstanding notions of a catholic hierarchical order." By de-centering this frame of traditional authority while overthrowing the monarchy, revolutionaries realized that the cultural framework of the past could not be carried into the future, and that the use of the king as the insignia of the seal had to be replaced with a new seal signifying the Republic. Revolutionaries began iconoclastically destroying tangible reminders of the Old Regime, such as breaking the seals of royalty, the scepter and the crown and melting them into republican coins.

The abolition of royalty, however, led to questions about the importance of having a unified symbol. In the beginning, seals were only used to compensate for the imperfection of writing. Yet as Henri Grégoire argued, civilized people found that "a sign, a type, was necessary to give character to authenticity" to all public acts. The nation would only be recognizable by its public symbolic representation, and hence it was agreed that a new seal of state would be created to give the new republic a sense of permanence. The seal was not only a representation of public authority, but it signified the new republican mold. As Lynn Hunt puts it, "new symbols could make new men." The French Revolution stood for the notion that members of a society could invent culture and politics for themselves. As the National Convention worked to unify the Republic after the fall of the monarchy, the process to declare a national symbol became more urgent. In the end, "the choice of a new insignia seemed almost automatic." In order to dispel all traces of monarchical influence, the members of the National Convention "proposed the choice of Liberty." The choice was a clear one and deputies of the Convention like Abbe Grégoire proposed that the Republic's image should be "Liberty, 'so that our emblem, circulating all over the globe, should present to all peoples the beloved image of Republican liberty and pride.'" This notion of Liberty is, in a sense, "the very essence of the Republic."

Liberty was officially represented by the female figure of Marianne, which adheres to traditional iconographic expectations. The Phrygian cap worn by this figure of liberty was representative of the inherent freedom of the French people and provided a sharp contrast to the crown of the monarchy. According to Maurice Agulhon, an expert on this particular symbol of the French Revolution, Marianne "represented both Liberty, an eternal value, and at the same time the newly constituted regime of the French Republic." She was depicted as "a woman holding a stave surmounted by a cap and trampling a yoke underfoot; this is the emblem that the ancients gave to Liberty won through valor." The feminine civic allegory of Marianne was distant from the controversial personalities of National Convention; therefore, Marianne's "abstraction and impersonality" allowed the symbol to endure the different phases of the Revolution. In addition, Marianne's close resemblance to the Catholic figure of Mary created unity between the rational revolutionaries and the devout peasantry. The emblem of Marianne was not only widely accepted, but also widely diffused in France. However, as the Revolution radicalized in 1793 with the rise of the Committee on Public Safety, the emblem of Marianne was replaced by a far more formidable symbol of the Revolution: Jacques-Louis David 's statue of Hercules.

Napoleon, Louis XVIII, and Charles X all used monarchical seals like the Old Regime, Louis Philippe I used one showing only his bust.

The present seal dates back to the Second Republic, which briefly used the seals of the First Republic before having a new design made by the artist Jacques-Jean Barre on the 8 September 1848.

Under the Second Republic, usage of the Great Seal of France tended to be reduced to sealing laws, decrees of the National Assembly and diplomatic treaties. The function of Keeper of the seals was officially linked to that of Minister of Justice at that time (the French Minister of Justice is popularly referred to " Le Garde des Sceaux ").

After the Second Empire, the practice of applying seals to laws was gradually abandoned and restricted to constitutional acts and diplomatic treaties (for instance, the Treaty of Versailles was sealed in this way).

Under the Fourth Republic, the only document to be sealed was the Constitution of October 27, 1946.

Since the Fifth Republic, after sealing the Constitution of October 4, 1958, it became common practice to seal some constitutional modifications. Used in 1946, and twice at the beginning of the Fifth Republic, the sealing ceremonies became much less common from 1963 to 1991 period when only two laws – ordinary, but of great symbolic importance – were sealed. Since 1992, the pace of ceremonies has increased again: the constitutional changes since then were often the subject of a seal.

The date of the ceremony was very close to the date of passage of the law until 1964. It was subsequently clearly separated from the vote and publication of the text. An extreme case consists in the Constitutional Law no. 99-569 of July 8, 1999 on equality between women and men, sealed March 8, 2002, two and a half years after the entry into force of the law.

Sealing ceremonies are always held at the Chancellerie where the Keeper of the Seals, the Minister of Justice, holds a sealing press affixed to a best and the unique matrices of the Seal of the State.

Originally, sealers used a plastic sealing wax which they shaped by hand into generally circular pieces which were definitely shaped by a press.

Nowadays, a liquid wax is fed directly into the inferior part of a shape made of a stamp and a mobile metallic ring; the shape is closed and the wax cools down until it becomes pasty before it is applied.

Usage of the Great Seal having become obsolete between 1920 and 1946, the recipe for the wax was lost. In 1946, trials had to be made by the Sigillographic service of the National Archives.

The Ancien Régime used a green wax for important documents, and a yellow for less important ones.

The Restoration, the July Monarchy and the Third Republic kept the yellow wax, while the First Republic, the Consulate and the Empire used a red wax.

The Constitution of 1946 is sealed with red wax. The Constitution of 1958 and subsequent documents were sealed with yellow wax, until 2002 when green was again used.

The Empire sealed on wide yellow and blue silk ribbons; the Republic and the Consulate, on a tricolor braid.

The Third Republic used the same red and green ribbon as the Monarchy. Since 1946 (the Fourth and Fifth Republics), a tricolor ribbon is in use.

This article is intended to give an overview of green building in France

In July 2007, the French government established six working groups to address ways to redefine France's environment policy. The proposed recommendations were then put to public consultation, leading to a set of recommendations released at the end of October 2007. These recommendations will be put to the French parliament in early 2008.

The name of the process, "Le Grenelle de l'Environnement", refers to a 1968 conference when government negotiated with unions to end weeks of social unrest.

The six working groups addressed climate change, biodiversity and natural resources, health and the environment, production and consumption, democracy and governance, and competitiveness and employment.

20% reduction in France's energy consumption by 2020 and a boosting of the use of renewable energy, such as wind power and biofuels, by 20% by 2020;

The French regulation (RT) for new construction was following an incremental logic with a regular (every five years) increase in the exigence level requested to achieve by 2020 (RT 2020) a 40% reduction of energy consumption with respect to the RT 2000. Current label are: THPE 2005=20% better than the RT2005. THPE EnR 2005= 30% better than RT2005+ Renewable energy production for the majority of heating.

Within the framework of the "Grenelle de l’envronnement", a performance acceleration is expected to meet with the following objectives for tertiary buildings:

I. Low consumption buildings (BBC) by 2010 with minimum requirements concerning the levels of renewable energy and CO 2 absorption materials by 2012.

II. Passive new buildings (BEPAS) or Positive buildings (BEPOS) by 2020.

Labels for refurbishment of existing BBC buildings.

All these developments match with the European and international regulations and frameworks.

The Grenelle camp affair was an event of the French Revolution which occurred under the Directory, on the night of 9 to 10 September 1796.

The affair was the decisive episode in the Conspiracy of the Equals led by Gracchus Babeuf. Advocating agrarian communism, he prepared a plot with a number of Montagnards. After the failure of the Insurrection of 12 Germinal Year III and the Revolt of 1 Prairial Year III (1 April and 20 May 1795), Babeuf abandoned the strategy of inciting a popular uprising.

On 10 May 1796, Babeuf and the members of the Conspiracy of the Equals were arrested. Faced with the repression that then fell on Parisian democratic circles, several of his associates tried to provoke an uprising, first within the Police Legion and then, after its dissolution on 13 Floréal Year III (May 2, 1795), among the soldiers of the 21st Dragoon Regiment, who were camped at Grenelle.

Already responsible for the arrest of Babeuf and his comrades, the double agent fr: Georges Grisel was at the origin of the police plot prior to the Grenelle affair. Perhaps warned by Grisel, Lazare Carnot is said to have warned Malo, the unit commander. According to other sources it was in fact Malo who warned Carnot, who decided to take advantage of the situation to get rid of the last remaining Jacobins.

200 to 500 conspirators arrived at the camp on the night of 23 to 24 Fructidor (9 to 10 September). They were met with gunfire, leaving around twenty dead and many wounded. 132 conspirators were captured in the camp and the surrounding area.

Among the directors, while Carnot and Étienne-François Letourneur were organizing the defense of the Luxembourg Palace against an expected attack, Paul Barras is said to have helped some of his compromised friends to flee. As for La Révellière-Lépeaux, then president of the Directory, he was not informed until the last moment, and Reubell left for his country house in Arcueil.

The Directory decided on a campaign of merciless repression. On 24 Fructidor, the Council of 500 and the Council of Ancients voted for a law modifying the existing law of 22 Messidor (12 July) and allowing the use of the measures of 30 Prairial Year III (18 June 1795), which had originally been adopted to counter the Vendéen and the Chouan rebels captured under arms. Consequently, the Grenelle prisoners were brought before a military tribunal.

In Vendémiaire year V (October 1796), the tribunal, meeting at the Temple, pronounced about thirty death sentences, although sources differ on the number of convictions and the names of those condemned. Those executed included General fr:Maximilien Henri Nicolas Jacob. Contrary to the Fructidor law, which allowed an appeal to the court of cassation, thirty of the condemned were shot without delay. Two others were sentenced in absentia, and another committed suicide. Three former members of the National Convention, Javogues, Cusset and Huguet were among those shot, as well as the former mayor of Lyon Bertrand and several former revolutionary commissioners.

On 22nd of Germinal (11 April 1797), the Court of Cassation annulled the other convictions. Sent before the Criminal Court of the Seine, all were acquitted.

The Grenelle de l'environnement was an open multi-party debate that took place in France in the summer and fall of 2007 to define key points of public policy on environmental and sustainable development over the following five-year period. Bringing together representatives of national and local government and organizations (industry, labour, professional associations, non-governmental organizations) on an equal footing, the "Grenelle Environment Round Table" (as it might be called in English) was instigated by then-French President Nicolas Sarkozy.

Officially launched on 6 July 2007, the Grenelle de l'environnement brought together the government, local authorities, trade unions, business and volunteer sectors to draw up a plan of action of concrete measures to tackle environmental issues. The " Grenelle " name came from the first conference to have brought all these players together, the May 1968 labor conference, which took place in the Rue de Grenelle.

Six working groups, composed of representatives of the central government, local governments, employer organizations and trade unions and NGOs, first gathered to debate the topics of climate change and energy, biodiversity and natural resources, health and the environment, production and consumption of ecological democracy, development patterns and environmental employment and competitiveness. Two groups devoted to Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) and waste management were also established. All submitted their proposals on 27 September 2007. After a public debate in the first half of October, these proposals led to 20 measures on 25 October.

According to the Court of Auditors and Didier Migaud (First President of the Court) speaking before the National Assembly's Finance Committee on January 18, 2012 the taxes intended to fund some of the Grenelle initiatives were not collected on time, which hindered their implementation. Four years after the Grenelle process began, the State budget allocated to it for the 2009–2011 period totaled €3.5 billion (compared to the projected €4.5 billion).

The Grenelle working groups set ambitious goals in numerous areas: biodiversity and natural resources, climate change, relations between the environment and public health, modes of production and consumption, issues of "environmental governance" and "ecological democracy", the promotion of sustainable patterns of development favorable to competitiveness and employment, genetically modified organisms (GMOs), waste management.

To realize these commitments, thirty-three operational sites were launched in December 2007 to determine the proposals for action for implementing the conclusions of the Grenelle.

They were to deliver their first plans in March 2008, for inclusion in the environment bill debated by in spring 2008. However, the debate on the bill for the implementation of the Grenelle Environment was postponed several times, finally was begun in October, and was adopted by the National Assembly on 21 October 2008 and then sent to the Senate.

This text, known as "First Grenelle Act", sets the general policy and describes the choices made while not specifying their practical implementation or funding. It simply reflects the legislative commitments made in October 2007. This first bill focuses on climate and seeks to divide, by four, all emissions of greenhouse gases by 2050. The industrial sectors most affected are construction and transport, which together account for 40% of total emissions. The bill includes construction of 1,500 km of public transport, and the rehabilitation of 800,000 housing units to halve their energy consumption by 2020. Other provisions are related to energy (promotion of renewable energy), products incorporating nanomaterials, agriculture (increase in the share of organic agriculture to 20% by 2020, halving the amount of pesticides).

The only measure actually implemented in 2008 was the bonus-malus system on new vehicles, establishing penalties for purchasers of the most polluting vehicles and instead introducing a bonus for the least polluting cars. This measure was introduced by decree for the bonus (decree of 26 December 2007) and an amendment to the 2007 Rectificative Finance Act (which allows to change during the year the initial Finance Act) for the penalty (malus). Already implemented, the system has actually shifted consumption to cleaner vehicles.

Among the measures already taken, the law of 25 June 2008 on genetically modified organisms aimed to implement several provisions of the Grenelle, although some environmental organizations challenged some of its provisions.

The funding and the detailed rules for the implementation of the provisions of the first Grenelle act were specified in the Finance Act (law which determines, for a year, the nature, the amount and the allocation of resources and expenditure of the government), adopted in December 2008. The funding was also to be specified in a so-called "Grenelle 2" in 2009 or 2010. At the end of 2008, there were growing concerns about the funding of the Grenelle, due to the economic crisis. The total cost of the bill "Grenelle 1" has been estimated at around 120 billion euros, representing an annual average of 12 billion euros investment (0,6% of GDP).

The establishment of a "climate energy contribution" or " carbon tax " (product tax based on the environmental damage they cause) was to bring in nearly 9.7 billion euros a year, according to a study by the ADEME (French Agency for Environment and Energy Management). But the measure has not been included in any bill yet, and even though the Government announced its future implementation, it did not set any timetable. Another funding source was to come from a tax on heavy vehicles to be levied from 2011, but its level and its base were not determined. Investments in renewable energy should also generate additional revenue (for example, 75% of expenditures to rehabilitate public buildings would be financed by the savings on reduced consumption). Savings in other sectors were also to play a part.

The Grenelle de l'insertion or Grenelle Insertion, concluded on 27 May 2008, refers to an open multi-party debate in France that gathered representatives of national and local government and organizations (industry, labor, professional associations, non-governmental organizations) on an equal footing, with goal of unifying a position on the reform of the national policy of insertion. It insisted on the need to reform the insertion system to make it more attractive for people to return to work. It was held from November 2007 to May 2008, instigated by President Nicolas Sarkozy. It led to various reforms, among them the implementation of the Revenue of Active Solidarity (RSA) in 2008.

The organization of a Grenelle de l'insertion was announced by the President on 2 October 2007, to be dedicated to the transformation of political integration. The government pointed out that the insertion system had become increasingly complex and caused exclusion.

Gains from work are offset by the reduction of social benefits only paid in case of unemployment. A "Green Paper on integration", published in March 2008, noticed that the current allowances in case of unemployment -revenu minimum d’insertion (RMI), allocation parent isolé (API) and allocation adulte handicapé (AAH)- do not incite people to ge back to work and cause an inactivity trap to appear.

More than 7 million French people lived below the poverty line (817 euros per person per month) in 2007. In its 2007–2008 report, the National Observatory of Poverty and Social Exclusion found that the number has not increased since 2002, but their situation has deteriorated, while the phenomenon of working poor has increased. An estimated 1.5 million people in 2003 and 1.7 million in 2005 were concerned.

On 21 November 2007, the High Commissioner for Active Solidarity against poverty unveiled three objectives during the Grenelle insertion negotiations:

Inspired by the Grenelle de l'environnement, the process of the Grenelle de l'insertion was initiated in Grenoble on 23 and 24 November 2007 to establish, for 6 months, "a time of collective negotiations to rebuild a more efficient integration system". It was presented as an opportunity to rethink the goals and characteristics of "helped contracts" (contrats aidés in French) and to experiment the revenu de solidarité active (RSA).

From 1 June 2009, the revenue of active solidarity (RSA), in French Revenu de Solidarité Active will replace the minimum income (RMI), created 20 years earlier. Intended to fight against the phenomenon of working poor and to facilitate return to work. However, it was subject to public debate.

The French policy of insertion led in the last decades was source of exclusion. The social measures taken over the last twenty years have increased unemployment and poverty at work, exclusion and insecurity.

For tan employee, the gains achieved with their hiring were often offset by the reduction of social benefits attributed to him when he was unemployed. This bad effect particularly concerned the RMI, the single parent allowance (API) and the disabled adult allowance (AAH). They do not incite someone to return to work and generated a "inactivity trap" effect.

In addition, the phenomenon of working poor was increasing: an estimated 1.5 million people in 2003 and 1.7 million in 2005 (data from the 2007–2008 of the National Observatory of poverty and social exclusion).

The 1 December 2008 Act, consequence of the Grenelle de Insertion, provides the establishment of the RSA. The RSA is to replace, as from 1 June 2009 in metropolitan France and not later than 1 January 2011 for the DOM-TOM, the minimum subsistence income (RMI) and the single parent allowance (API).

The amount paid to unemployed beneficiaries will be at the same level as the RMI, with an increase for single people with children, of which the amount is equal to the previous allowance for single parent (API).

Individuals who go back to work will receive an additional income, a part of the RSA. The amount of this benefit will be equivalent to the amount of the former allocation (received during the unemployment period) minus 38% of the wage. This initial share of RSA decreases when the wage increases. Ad hoc benefits are also provided to cope with expenses related to the resumption of work (transport and childcare).

Finally, and on condition that they does not earn more than up to 1.04 the minimum wage, a worker with modest incomes can also benefit from the RSA.

Grenoville was a luxury perfume and cosmetics house established by the French perfumer Paul Grenoville in 1879.

In 1879, the maître parfumeur Paul Grenouille changed his family name into ‘Grenoville’ when he founded his perfume house at 64, rue Rodier in Paris. His name might have inspired that of Jean-Baptiste Grenouille, who is the main character of Patrick Süskind ’s novel Perfume (1985).

Paul Grenoville’s wife, Marie-Marthe Richard, took over the company after her husband died in 1900. Bluet was her first perfume, Rosier du Roy her second. In 1902, she moved Grenoville to new premises at 19, rue Royale, where the house kept a boutique shop until 1971.

In the early 1920s, she established Grenoville’s headquarters and factories at 108-110, Boulevard Péreire in Asnières. Female workers at the Grenoville house were nicknamed the "Grenovillettes".

In June 1924, Marie-Marthe Richard sold the house of Grenoville, as well as its factories, to the Parfise company.

The Grenoville house was awarded a silver medal at the International Exhibition of Modern Decorative and Industrial Arts in 1925. The report on French perfumery at the Exhibition indicated that Grenoville’s perfumes had "gained the favour of elegant women".

The Grenoville house developed in the interwar years and branched out in Brussels, New York, London, and Milan. Grenoville’s perfumes were also distributed in Morocco, Tunisia, and Algeria, where they were advertised as "the best, the most tenacious and the finest".

The Grenoville house closed doors in the early 1970s.

In about a century of activity, the Grenoville house created many perfumes, among which the most famous were:

Grenoville’s perfumes were sold in luxury bottles, some of which were made in Baccarat cristal. The bottle of Victrix was even designed by the French glassmaker René Lalique.

This perfume house also sold beauty products, including a lipstick line called " Sûre d’Elle " (self-confident), and a range of face powders called "Neo Derma" that offered sun and cold protection, as well as balms, talc, brillantine, and shampoos.

Grenoville advertised its products in theatre programmes, illustrated newspapers, and, more importantly, in fashion magazines, including Vogue Paris and Vogue US.

The Grenoville house was also famous for its innovative shop windows. In 1927, Grenoville showed its perfumes at the Hairdressing Fair in a display decorated with an immense vial of perfume, which supported many small vials of identical shape. This stunning display was remarked by Vendre magazine, which specialized in the modern "art of selling".

Gros Caillou (literally "big pebble") is a landmark of the French city of Lyon in the neighborhood Croix-Rousse. The rock's mineralogical composition suggests it is a glacial erratic, and would have been transported from the nearby Alps by slowly moving glaciers.

Originally, Gros Caillou was located at the end of Boulevard de la Croix-Rousse, constructed in 1865, and the boundary between the 1st arrondissement (Croix-Rousse hill) and the 4th arrondissement (Croix-Rousse plateau). Until it was annexed in 1852, the Croix-Rousse Plateau was a separate city. Thus, the location of Gros Caillou at that intersection became a unifying symbol. At the beginning of the 21st century, an underground parking lot and green area took over this area and Gros Caillou was relocated 30m into the 1st arrondissement.

Gros Caillou is a metamorphic Triassic quartzite, typical of the alpine regions of Haute- Maurienne and Haute Tarentaise. It is rock that was displaced by glaciers over 200 km during the Riss glaciation (around 140,000BC).

The discovery of Gros Caillou dates back to 1861 during drilling of the tunnels of a funicular linking downtown Lyon to the Croix-Rousse plateau. The drilling had to be interrupted as the workers were blocked by an extremely hard rock, which they could not break.

After many attempts and work stoppages, Gros Caillou was eventually excavated, becoming a symbol of not only the annexation of Croix-Rousse, but a symbol of the perseverance of Lyon's inhabitants. Had the funicular not been under construction, Gros Caillou would never have been found and relocated to the east side of Croix-Rousse boulevard, where to this day it overlooks the Rhône River and the Alps.

Groupe ADP, formerly Aéroports de Paris or ADP (Paris Airports), is an international airport operator based in Paris (France). Groupe ADP owns and manages Parisian international airports Charles de Gaulle Airport, Orly Airport and Le Bourget Airport, all gathered under the brand Paris Aéroport since 2016.

Groupe ADP operates 26 international airports. It owns 46.1% of TAV Airports Holding, and cross-owns 8% of the Schiphol Group. Since 2025, the CEO is Philippe Pascal. Groupe ADP is owned by the company Aéroports de Paris SA, which is publicly listed at the Euronext Paris (SBF 120 and mid 60).

The company L'aéroport de Paris was created as a établissement public à caractère industriel et commercial in 1945. In 1946, the first provisional terminal at Orly Airport was achieved, as well as the reconstruction of Paris–Le Bourget Airport. In the 1950s, Orly Airport outgrew Le Bourget's traffic, and became the leading Parisian airport, breaking the 1 million passengers/year milestone. Le Bourget launched the first edition of the Paris Air Show in 1953 and switched to business jet operations in 1976.

In 1957, L'aéroport de Paris started to look for a land to build a new Parisian airport. Construction of the airport started in 1966 and Charles de Gaulle Airport officially started its operations in March 1974. In 1976, 20 million passengers flew through the Parisian airports.

During the 1980s and 1990s, L'aéroport de Paris, which became Aéroports de Paris in 1989 and Paris Aéroport in 2016, built new satellites and terminals for the Charles de Gaulle airport (terminal 2, terminal 3). By 1987, traffic in the Parisian airports grew to 40 million. A TGV train station opened within the Charles de Gaulle airport in 1994.

Aéroports de Paris became a public company on 20 April 2005, although the French government retained a majority of the company's shares. In 2008, Aéroports de Paris and Schiphol Group signed a strategic partnership that involved buying 8% of each other's shares to seal the deal. In 2008, French conglomerate Vinci also bought 3.3% of Aéroports de Paris, calling the airport operator "the heart of its strategic aims".

In Parisian airports, the development and consolidation continued. At Paris-Charles de Gaulle Airport, the inter-terminal train system CDGVAL started in 2007. Terminal 2G opened in 2008 to serve international flights to Eastern Europe. Terminal 2E, Satellite 3 (Hall L) opened in 2005 and Satellite 4 (Hall M) in 2012. A museum opened within the airport in 2013 in Terminal 2E, Hall M. In Orly, a development project voted in 2012 plans to merge the airport's south and west terminals with the construction of an 80,000 m2 building to create one great terminal.

In 2012, Aéroports de Paris and Air France decided to work together towards embellishing the experience in Parisian airports and turn Paris-Charles de Gaulle into a competitive hub for international connections. Aéroports de Paris opened the new Hall M in Terminal 2E in July 2012 (7.8 million passengers/year capacity) which contains 65,000 square feet of shops and restaurants, a museum, and Air France's largest business lounge. In November 2014, Aéroports de Paris opened a luxury fashion area in terminal 2E, Hall K of the Paris-Charles de Gaulle Airport. From 2006 to 2015, the number of fine food restaurants grew from 1 to 20 in Paris - Charles de Gaulle Airport, and style fashion brands from 6 to 20.

Starting in the 1970s, Aéroports de Paris became an active airport developer in other countries, contributing to the construction of the terminal 1 of the Abu Dhabi International Airport, the terminal 1 of the Shanghai Pudong International Airport, the Mohammed V International Airport, the Damascus International Airport, the Arturo Merino Benítez International Airport,... ADP Ingénierie was created in 2000 as a fully owned subsidiary to provide large-scale engineering for airport-related development projects.

Through its involvement in airport development projects, Aéroports de Paris became a stakeholder in many airports. ADP Management was created as a fully owned subsidiary in 1991 to consolidate the group's growing participations in airports and other industry-related assets. In 2012, in addition to its existing 8% share, ADP Management acquired 38% of TAV Airports Holding, the leading airport operator in Turkey that used to operate the Istanbul Atatürk International Airport as well as airports in Georgia, Tunisia, North Macedonia, Latvia and Saudi Arabia. ADP Management also acquired 49% of TAV Construction.

In 2003, Aelia (subsidiary of Lagardère Services) and Aéroports de Paris created the Société de Distribution Aéroportuaire (SDA) to manage the sales of alcohol, tobacco, cosmetics and food within the Parisian airports. In 2011, the company managing duty-free shops in Parisian airports merged with the SDA. In 2011, Groupe ADP and Lagardère Travel Retail also created Relay@ADP to manage bookstores, press and souvenirs stores in Parisian airports.

In 2001, Aéroports de Paris created its own telecommunications operator, ADP Telecom, which became Hub Telecom a year later, and finally Hub One in 2012. In 2006, Hub One was involved in the creation of Bolloré telecom, thus holds minority shares in the company. In 2016, Hub One deployed the free guest wifi network across the Parisian airports.

In 2011, Aéroports de Paris and French JCDecaux created the joint-venture branded JCDecaux Airport Paris to handle the interactive display advertising system in Parisian airports. In November 2016, Paris Aéroport launched a special photo exhibition with the French photographer Dominique Issermann which were exhibited all around the airport through the JC Decaux Airport display advertising system.

In 2015, Aéroports de Paris and Select Service Partner created the company Epigo to manage fast-food shops in the Charles de Gaulle Airport.

In November 2015, the group's CEO Augustin de Romanet announced ADP's strategic programme Connect 2020. The plan includes a major overhaul of the company's branding organization:

The rebranding shift became effective in April 2016. The Connect 2020 also planned to follow through with the project to unify Orly South and West terminals. In Charles de Gaulle, Terminals of the Satellite 1 will be merged, as well as terminal 2B and 2D. A new luggage automated sorting system and conveyor under Terminal 2E Hall L to speed luggage delivery time for airlines operating Paris-Charles de Gaulle's hub. The CDG Express, the direct express rail link from Paris to Charles de Gaulle Airport, is planned for completion by 2027.

Following the announcement of the Connect 2020 plan, the passenger brand Paris Aéroport was applied to Parisian international airports (Charles de Gaulle, Orly and Le Bourget). The goal is two-fold: Attract more visitors to the Parisian airports, and thus turn Paris Aéroport into a demonstration of Groupe ADP's expertise in airport management worldwide.

The Paris Aéroport brand borrows the love effect associated with the French capital to define its airport experience, choosing Paris vous aime (Paris loves you) as its tagline.

ADP Ingénierie was created in 2000 as a fully owned subsidiary to provide large-scale engineering for airport-related development projects.

ADP International (formerly ADP Management) was created as a fully owned subsidiary in 1991 to consolidate the group's growing participations in airports and other industry-related assets.

Assets under consideration by Groupe ADP:

Over the years, Groupe ADP has formed strategic alliances with several large-scale providers to develop its airports' experience.

Groupe ADP is also active in these airport-related sectors:

Breakdown of the group's revenue by segment:

Aéroports de Paris SA - which fully owns and operates Groupe ADP, Paris Aéroport and other airport-related activities - is governed by a board of administrators (6 named by the shareholders, 6 named by the French government, 6 employees' representatives) and by an executive committee, both headed by Augustin de Romanet since 2012. As of 31 December 2018, the shareholders of Aéroports de Paris SA are:

According to French Transport Code, the French government must remain the majority shareholder.

The Groupe Collaboration was a French collaborationist group active during the Second World War. Largely eschewing the street politics of many such contemporary groups, it sought to establish cultural links with Nazi Germany and to appeal to the higher echelons of French life. It promoted a "Europeanist" outlook and sought the rebirth of France as part of a pan-European " National Revolution ".

The Groupe was a revival of the Comité France-Allemagne, established in September 1940 by Fernand de Brinon. It eschewed political party status and instead worked towards cultural collaboration with the Germans. To this end it adopted a largely conservative approach and focused on such activities as hosting discussion circles and publishing two journals - La Gerbe and L'Union Francaise. The initiative had the support of Otto Abetz and was at least partially supported financially by German money.

It was divided into sections based on the pursuits it endorsed with science, economics, literature and law wings, as well as an arts section which included drama, music and visual arts sections. Max d'Ollone served as president of the music section and in this role he was expected to organise gala events to celebrate the visits of German dignitaries to Paris. An exhibition by German sculptor and active Nazi Arno Breker in Paris was organised under the auspices of the Groupe, an event that became a source of much controversy in the post- Liberation era. It also broadcast a weekly radio show in Paris.

Its headquarters were in Paris, although the Groupe was permitted to organise in both Vichy France and the occupied zone. By 1943 it could claim 26,000 members in the occupied zone and 12,000 in the Vichy zone, with some 200,000 people attending its events. Many of its members were not otherwise active in political movements.

Alphonse de Chateaubriant, the 1911 Prix Goncourt winner, presided over the group, whilst its governing committee included Abel Bonnard and Cardinal Alfred-Henri-Marie Baudrillart among its membership. Pierre Benoit, Georges Claude and Pierre Drieu La Rochelle were among the other prominent figures to sit on the committee, along with Robert Brasillach, Jacques Chardonne and Paul Belmondo.

A youth movement, Jeunes de l'Europe nouvelle (JEN), was attached to the Groupe, although it was somewhat more stridently active than its sedate parent organisation. Led by Jacques Schweizer, the former leader of the youth section of the Jeunesses Patriotes, it was active in promoting pro-collaboration propaganda campaigns. The JEN slightly pre-dated the Groupe, having initially been established by Saint-Loup before affiliating to the Groupe.

In 1942 the Groupe lent its support to the Front révolutionnaire national, an initiative established by Marcel Déat as an attempt to realise his dream of forging a single mass party in support of collaborationism. The idea was not a success after a number of groups, including the influential French Popular Party (PPF), refused to support the initiative. Despite this a number of leading PPF members were also active in the Groupe itself. For his part Déat saw the Groupe as vital for portraying a positive image of Germany in order to lessen the negative perceptions of occupation and collaborationism.

The group went into steep decline in the latter stages of the war as the tide began to turn against Germany. Following the Liberation membership of the Groupe Collaboration was defined as a basis for a judgement of Indignité nationale against any individual member.

The Groupe des Dix (the Group of Ten) was the name given to a group of notable French personalities (mostly philosophers and scientists) who would regularly meet up between 1969 and 1976.

The Groupe des Dix was formed in 1969. The atmosphere was one of openness and conviviality: the meetings were not recorded and the participants felt that they had a maximum amount of freedom to be themselves and discuss their ideas. The group formed with the purpose of better informing political action in the light of recent scientific discoveries. The group explored many topics and occasionally invited high status speakers to speak about their work. The group had a transdisciplinary vision. Discussions were diverse and occurred largely on a background in cybernetics, systems theory, neurobiology and information theory. Some of the disciplines regularly discussed were: anthropology, ecology, evolutionary psychology, economics and media studies. Many members influenced each other's future works.

Some of the members of the group were: Henri Atlan, Jacques Attali, Jean-François Boissel, Robert Buron, Joël de Rosnay, Henri Laborit, André Leroi-Gourhan, Edgar Morin, René Passet, Michel Rocard, Jacques Robin, Jacques Sauvan, Jack Baillet, Alain Laurent and Michel Serres.

The Groupe Feministe Socialiste was founded in 1899 by Louise Saumoneau and Élisabeth Renaud, both working class socialists who wished to bring feminism to the working class in France. The socialist movement and the feminist movement both existed, but had little overlap prior to this point.

Over four million French women were working outside the home in non-agricultural labor at the turn of the century, but they lacked representation in the organized reform efforts. The Groupe Feministe Socialiste hoped to provide a place for representation of working class women.

The original manifesto of the Groupe Feministe Socialiste stated that they wanted to end the "double oppression of women, exploited on a large scale by capitalism, subject to men by laws and especially by prejudice."

The group gained popularity quickly, but it suffered from disinterest from male socialists as well as class conflict between the bourgeois and proletariat feminists.

A good example of this class conflict can be seen in the suggestion made at a 1900 convention that domestic servants receive a full day off per week, a measure already adapted for industrial workers. Bourgeois feminists hesitated. While "humanitarian enough to accept reforms in principle, they balked when such reforms threatened their way of life."

Groupe Feministe Socialiste experienced some strife in the form of conflict between its two founders, who had had their differences from the beginning. Élisabeth Renaud's goals were conciliatory; she hoped to bridge the gap between socialism and bourgeois feminism. Louise Saumoneau, on the other hand, hated the bourgeois feminists, feeling that they were irrevocably out of touch with the realities of the working class.

In 1902, Renaud left the party, leaving Saumoneau to run the party. The Groupe Feministe Socialiste survived until 1905, when the various socialist groups currently existing in France unified, leaving the GFS outside of the newly formed Section Francaise de L'Internationale Ouvriere. That combined with Saumoneau's "uncompromising" stance, spelled the demise of the Groupe Feministe Socialiste.

The Groupement des scientifiques pour l'information sur l'énergie nucléaire GSIEN (Association of Scientists for Information on Nuclear Energy) is a multidisciplinary not-for-profit association of independent scientists who aim to spread information about the nuclear industry in France founded on December 15, 1975.

In addition to providing a structure within which independent evaluations can take place, GSIEN aims to ensure that the French nuclear industry, one of the World's largest, provides open and honest information.

In 1977 GSIEN was first to provide an explanation of the causes and consequences of the Three Mile Island accident, while the authorities tried to play-down the incident, however GSIEN came to prominence at the time of the 1986 Chernobyl disaster when the press and public found that their independent information helped to compensate for the shortcomings in the official information. They subsequently became widely recognised after many of their members contributed to various overseas projects.

GSIEN was founded in the wake of the launch in 1974 of the Messmer Plan to switch all of France's electricity generation to nuclear power, which took place without public or parliamentary debate. The announcement of the Messmer Plan caused a split in the scientific community between those physicists (generally older) who favoured the plan, and those (generally younger) who were concerned about the potential risks, leading to l’Appel des 400 (the appeal of the 400), a petition signed initially by over 400 scientists, and ultimately by around 4,000, expressing their concern over a number of issues including 'secrecy' and 'official propaganda '. GSIEN was created following this petition, inspired in part by model of the Union of Concerned Scientists in the United States, with the objective of disseminating information to 'prevent nuclear officials from turning information into propaganda'.

In 1998 Monique Sené, nuclear physicist, one of GSIEN's co-founders and its president, was awarded the National Order of the Legion of Honour for her work as anti–nuclear power activist.

Since its first edition in June 1976, GSIEN has published over 250 editions of its quarterly newsletter, la Gazette Nucléaire (the Nuclear Gazette).

GSIEN has also published a number of books including Electro-nucléaire : danger (1977, ISBN 978-2-02-004711-1), Plutonium Sur Rhône (1981, ISBN 978-2-901968-47-4)

GSIEN members have been invited by several Local Information Commissions to participate in a number of 10-yearly nuclear plant inspections, including those at Fessenheim, Golfech Nuclear Power Plant and Blayais Nuclear Power Plant, as well as in a various other assessments.

The Groupement des écoles d'aéronautique (GEA France) (in English French aeronautical universities network) includes three French national aerospace engineering grandes écoles focused on this scope:

The Institut sino-européen d'ingénierie de l'aviation (Sino-European Institute of Aviation Engineering) of Tianjin has been created by the GEA grandes écoles, in partnership with DGAC and French companies (EADS, Airbus, Thales, Eurocopter, Safran) as part of a Franco-Chinese cooperation following the implantation of an Airbus A320 assembly plant in Tianjin. The university opened in October 2007, trains Chinese students. They follow a course in aerospace engineering, taught in French and in six years, a first year of learning the French language, followed by two years of classes préparatoires and three years of aeronautical engineering.

Not linked with the engineering training, three Mastères Spécialisés are taught at the Institut sino-européen d'ingénierie de l'aviation of Tianjin :

These courses are for Chinese students who wants to join the aeronautical sector.

Guerlain (French pronunciation: [ ɡɛʁlɛ̃ ]) is a French luxury perfume, cosmetics, and skincare house which is among the oldest in the world. Many traditional Guerlain fragrances are characterized by a common olfactory accord known as the " Guerlinade [ fr ] ".

The house was founded in Paris in 1828 by the perfumer Pierre-François Pascal Guerlain. It was run by the Guerlain family until 1994, when it was bought by the French multinational company LVMH.

Its flagship store is 68, Avenue des Champs-Elysées in Paris.

The House of Guerlain was owned and managed by members of the Guerlain family from its inception in 1828 to 1994. It was acquired in 1994 by the LVMH group, a French multinational investment corporation specializing in luxury brands.

The House of Guerlain was founded in 1828, when Pierre-François Pascal Guerlain opened his perfume store at 42, rue de Rivoli in Paris. As both the founder and first perfumer of the house, Pierre-François composed and manufactured custom fragrances with the help of his two sons, Aimé and Gabriel. Through continued success and the patronage of members in high society, Guerlain opened its flagship store at 15, rue de la Paix in 1840, and put its mark on the Parisian fashion scene.

The success of the house under Pierre-François peaked in 1853 with the creation of Eau de Cologne Impériale for French Emperor Napoleon III and his Spanish-French wife Empress Eugénie. This perfume earned Pierre-François the prestigious title of being His Majesty's Official Perfumer. Guerlain went on to create perfumes for Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom and Queen Isabella II of Spain, among other royalty.

With the death of Pierre-François in 1864, the house was left to his sons Aimé Guerlain and Gabriel Guerlain. The roles of perfumer and manager were divided between the two brothers, with Gabriel managing and further expanding the house, and Aimé becoming the master perfumer. The House of Guerlain thus began a long tradition whereby the position of master perfumer was handed down through the Guerlain family.

As Guerlain's second generation in-house perfumer, Aimé was the creator of many classic compositions, including Fleur d'Italie (1884), Rococo (1887) and Eau de Cologne du Coq (1894). However, many would argue that his greatest composition was 1889's Jicky, the first fragrance described as a "parfum" rather than an eau de cologne, and among the first to use synthetic ingredients alongside natural extracts.

The business was handed down to the sons of Gabriel Guerlain: Jacques Guerlain and Pierre Guerlain. Jacques, Aimé's nephew, became Guerlain's third master perfumer; he was the author of many of Guerlain's most famous classics, which are still held in high esteem in the modern perfume industry. Many of his perfumes are still sold and marketed today. Among Jacques Guerlain's most important creations are Mouchoir de Monsieur (1904), Après L'Ondée (1906), L'Heure Bleue (1912), Mitsouko (1919), Guerlain's flagship fragrance Shalimar (1925), and Vol de Nuit (1933). Jacques composed his final perfume, Ode (1955), with the assistance of his grandson, then-18-year-old Jean-Paul Guerlain.

Jean-Paul Guerlain was the last family master perfumer. He created Guerlain's classic men's fragrances Vétiver (1959) and Habit Rouge (1965). He also created Chant d'Arômes (1962) and Chamade (1969). From 1975 to 1989, he collaborated with perfumer Anne-Marie Saget, composing Nahema (1979), Jardins de Bagatelle (1983), Derby (1985) and Samsara (1989). His later work includes Héritage (1992), Coriolan (1998) and Vétiver pour Elle (2004). Jean-Paul Guerlain retired in 2002, but continued to serve as advisor to his successor until 2010, when he was terminated after making a racist remark on French television regarding the inspiration for his scent Samsara. With no heir from within the Guerlain family to take over, the role of master perfumer is no longer tied to family succession.

In a decision widely seen as a break with tradition, the Guerlain family sold the company to the luxury goods conglomerate LVMH in 1994. Though Jean-Paul Guerlain remained as an in-house perfumer until 2002, other perfumers were brought in after 1994 to compose perfumes for Guerlain, and Jean-Paul had to submit his compositions against those of others. Fans of the house viewed the LVMH purchase as a step towards the cheapening and commercialization of the legendary firm's legacy. Most were unhappy with the first post-LVMH release, the 1996 sweet mimosa floral Champs-Elysées, composed by Olivier Cresp, whose entry was selected over that of Jean-Paul Guerlain.

Among the outside perfumers to compose perfumes for the firm after 1994 was Mathilde Laurent, who worked for Guerlain at the end of the 1990s and in the early 2000s. She composed Aqua Allegorica Pamplelune (1999) and Shalimar Light (2003, reattributed to Jean-Paul Guerlain and relaunched in 2004 following reformulation). Maurice Roucel, a perfumer of Symrise, composed L'Instant de Guerlain (2004) and Insolence (2006). As the niece of Jean-Jacques Guerlain, some thought Patricia de Nicolaï would have been a candidate for the position of Guerlain's in-house perfumer, though the presence of a glass ceiling in the company prevented her selection for position.

In May 2008, Thierry Wasser was named the in-house perfumer for Guerlain. Wasser, a Swiss perfumer who used to work for Firmenich, created Iris Ganache (2007) and Quand Vient la Pluie (2007) for Guerlain before his appointment the following year. Jean-Paul Guerlain stayed on in an advisory consultant role, both for fragrance design and ingredients. Wasser was to work closely with Sylvaine Delacourte, Guerlain's Artistic Director. In 2010, the LVMH Group cut ties with Jean-Paul Guerlain as their consultant due to his racist comments on French television.

Russian model Natalia Vodianova has been the face of Guerlain campaigns since 2008. Vodianova began advertising Shalimar to celebrate the perfume house's 180th birthday. For the Fall 2013 makeup collection, Olivier Echaudemaison, Guerlian's Creative Director of Makeup since 2000 commented "Every season we fantasize with Natalia's image and invent for her a new role. For us, it is not just a model, which advertises cosmetics, but above all, a great actress".

In October 2011, the company named Malaysian actress Michelle Yeoh as a new spokesmodel. Yeoh is an ambassador for the Orchidée Impériale line of skincare.

In 2018, Guerlain founded an initiative to raise awareness around bee protection which launched globally in 2021. As part of this initiative, the House invited friends to lead Bee School Sessions to raise awareness among the youth of today. UK ambassador Camille Charrière taught a Bee School Session in May 2023 in Notting Hill at Hampden Gurney Primary School.

In February 2024, the Emirati artist and singer, Balqees Fathi became the Regional Ambassador for the brand in the Middle East.

Guerlain's creations have long influenced the trends of perfumery with fragrances such as Jicky, Shalimar, Vétiver, and La Petite Robe Noire. Guerlain is among the few older houses (such as Caron) that exist solely to produce and market perfumes. Many brands in the perfume industry, such as Chanel and Jean Patou are in fact divisions of fashion houses or multinational conglomerates that license the brand name. Alongside its fragrances, today Guerlain has expanded to offer a large range of makeup and skincare. Guerlain products are available across the world at serviced counters within department stores, and at beauty stores such as fellow LVMH brand Sephora. Guerlain also maintains thirteen international beauty and spa 'boutiques', five within France (two being in Paris).

Since its foundation in 1828, Guerlain has created over 600 fragrances. Among the company's most notable (in terms of longevity, sales or cultural impact) are:

The guinguette (French pronunciation: [ ɡɛ̃ɡɛt ]), originating in the 17th century, was a type of popular tavern in the suburbs of Paris and of other cities in France. The term comes from guinguet, a type of cheap green wine served there. A goguette was a venue for informal solo and ensemble singing, and goguettes also served as places for drinking, socialising, and recreation

During the 18th century, a consumer revolution led once isolated villages and hamlets outside Paris to be swept up in a booming material culture. Commodities, and particularly alcohol, consumed outside the customs barrier of the city were considerably cheaper, being exempt from state taxes. This encouraged the growth of an entertainment industry just beyond the tax man's reach and a network of drinking establishments was established. They were especially popular on Sundays and holidays, when Parisians would visit to enjoy themselves and to get drunk cheaply. Today, the term 'guinguette' is still used for a waterside refreshment stand, particularly open-air, all over France.

The development of railways in the 1880s and the establishment of the " Gare de la Bastille " (Bastille station) with many trains serving the eastern suburbs of Paris (such as Nogent sur Marne) contributed to the success of guinguettes.

The majority are on the edges of the Seine and the Marne rivers, and some are in a district that stretches to the outskirts of Rouen. Some guinguettes were however far from the rivers, as the picturesque guinguettes of le Plessis-Robinson built among the chestnut trees. There were hundreds of guinguettes as far away as Nogent-sur-Seine, where the nature of the Seine valley changes most.

Today guinguettes are objects of nostalgia. The guinguettes were marvelous places to return to lighter times during the Années folles of the 1920s. They were obviously an eminent subject for painting during the first half of the 20th century.

But television and the ban on bathing in the rivers in the 1960s caused the decline of guinguettes. This ban was justified for reasons of hygiene (water quality deteriorated in the 1960s and 1970s) and safety (the risk due to barge traffic and drowning). In the 1960s, guinguettes became a subject of nostalgia. Many people forgot guinguettes, as the French scriptwriter Michel Audiard had one of his characters point out. Since the 1980s, there has been a small revival, particularly along the Marne river. In 2008, some guinguettes were open every weekend.

As of 2008, a gradual return to modern guinguettes had begun, notably in Paris, with opening of la Guinguette de Rosa Bonheur, named after the legendary 19th century feminist painter of the same name. Combining the spirit of the Camargue region in southern France, there are currently four distinct locations, beginning with the original in the Parc des Buttes-Chaumont, followed by Rosa-sur-Seine at the Port of Invalides, Rosa à l'ouest in Asnières-sur-Seine, and Rose à l'Est at the Chalet de la Porte Jaune in the Park Bois de Vincennes.

Gustavo Marín, a Chilean-French economist and sociologist, is noted in particular for his key role in the creation and development of the longstanding international network, the Alliance for a Responsible, Plural and United World. He was Director of the world-governance think tank, the Forum for a new World Governance (FnWG) from 2007 to 2015. He is currently retired.

Born on April 24, 1950, in Antofagasta, in northern Chile. Today, he is married and has four children.

Of Quechua and Aymara descent, he was a student at the School of Sociology of the Catholic University until 1970. He quit school to live with the Mapuche people in southern Chile, where he was one of the main organizers of a widespread movement to recover land that had been taken away from the Mapuche communities by colonizers. He resisted against the coup led by Augusto Pinochet on September 11, 1973, and stayed underground until April 1974, when he was captured by the military intelligence services. He was detained for several months in the secret jails of the dictatorship then sentenced to a 20-year prison term by a military court. He was adopted by Amnesty International and other Human Rights organizations, which allowed him to be evacuated to France in November 1976.

As a political refugee in France, he began working in 1977 as a telephone installer, while pursuing his higher education. He obtained a PhD in Economics from the University of Paris 8. From 1983 to 1986 he worked in the Development Department of the Cimade. He returned to Chile through Argentina in 1986. There, he worked at Pries-Cono Sur (South Cone Regional Social and Economic Research Program, a research network in economic, social, and political fields), as Coordinator of research centers, universities, labor unions, and NGOs in Argentina, Chile, Brazil, and Uruguay.

During this period, he published the following books, widely used as sources in academic works:

In 1992, he returned to France and worked as Head of the Future of the Planet Program at the Charles Léopold Mayer Foundation for the Progress of Humankind, an independent foundation instituted under Swiss law and based in Paris. He has been Head of Programs at the same foundation since 2002. He was one of the organizers of the Alliance for a Responsible, Plural and United World and was a founding member of the International Council of the World Social Forum.

His Relatos íntimos de José Peralta, a personal account of his political activity and detainment, was published in Chile by Ediciones Tiempo Nuevo in 2003 and re-edited by Ediciones AYUN in 2009. It has been translated:

Gustavo Marín has organized seminars and conferences on themes related to democracy, civil society, and governance in China, India, Iran, Lebanon, Mauritania, Rwanda, South Africa, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, France, Spain, among other countries.

Late 2007, he launched, jointly with Arnaud Blin, the Forum for a new World Governance (FnWG), of which he was Director until April 2015. He published more than thirty Proposal Papers, and together with Arnaud Blin and a dozen collaborators he co-authored the Diccionario del Poder Mundial, published in Spanish by the Chilean edition of Le Monde Diplomatique and in French by the publisher Nuvis under the title Dictionnaire de la gouvernance mondiale.

Guy La Chambre (5 June 1898 – 24 May 1975) was a French politician. He served as Minister of Merchant Marine in 1934 and Minister of Air from 1938 until 1940.

Guy La Chambre was born on 5 June 1898, into a prosperous family with roots in Brittany. His father, Charles La Chambre served in the Chamber of Deputies representing Ille-et-Vilaine from 1902 to 1906, and Guy's grandfather Charles-Emile also served in that capacity from 1876 to 1881 and from 1889 to 1893.

He was educated at the Lycée Condorcet and the Lycée Louis-le-Grand and studied law at the University of Paris. In 1916 he enlisted as a volunteer in the French Army and served for the remainder of the First World War, being awarded the Croix de guerre 1914–1918 for his services. In the aftermath of the German defeat La Chambre served with the Allied occupation forces in the Rhineland. After completing his legal studies and being admitted to the bar, La Chambre was employed working in the private office of Prime Minister Aristide Briand.

At the 1928 general election, he stood successfully in Saint-Malo and held his seat in the 1932 and 1936 elections. He was Minister of Merchant Marine from January 30, 1934 – February 9, 1934.

He was appointed Minister of Air on 18 January 1938, and held the office until 21 March 1940.

On 10 July 1940, he voted in favour of granting the cabinet presided by Marshal Philippe Pétain authority to draw up a new constitution, thereby effectively ending the French Third Republic and establishing Vichy France. In spite of his pro-Pétain vote, he appeared at the Riom Trial in 1942 as one of those accused of being responsible for the defeat.

Recettes générales, commonly known as généralités (French pronunciation: [ ʒeneʁalite ]), were the administrative divisions of France under the Ancien Régime and are often considered to prefigure the current préfectures. At the time of the French Revolution, there were 36 généralités.

Among the multiple divisions utilised for various purposes by the kings' administrators, généralités emerged gradually from the 14th to the 16th centuries. Initially fiscal, their role steadily increased to become by the late 17th century — under the authority of an intendant (reporting to the Controller-General of Finances) — the very framework of royal administration and centralisation.

Before the 14th century, oversight of the collection of royal taxes fell generally to the baillis and sénéchaux in their circumscriptions. Reforms in the 14th and 15th centuries saw France's royal financial administration run by two financial boards which worked in a collegial manner: the four généraux des finances (also called général conseiller or receveur général) oversaw the collection of taxes (taille, aides, gabelle, etc.) and the four trésoriers de France (treasurers) oversaw revenues from royal lands (the domaine royal). Together they were often referred to as messieurs des finances. The four members of each board were divided by geographical circumscriptions (although the term généralité is not found before the end of the 15th century); the areas were named Languedoïl (center and southwest of the country), Languedoc (Languedoc, Lyonnais, Forez, Beaujolais), Outre-Seine-et-Yonne (Île-de-France, Champagne), and Normandy (the latter was created in 1449 ; the other three were created earlier), with the directors of the Languedoïl region typically having an honorific preeminence. By 1484, the number of généralités had increased to six.

In the 16th century, the kings of France, in an effort to exert a more direct control over royal finances and to circumvent the double-board (accused of poor oversight), instituted numerous administrative reforms, including the restructuring of the financial administration and an increase in the number of généralités. On December 7, 1542, by edict of Francis I, France was divided into sixteen généralités. The number increased to twenty-one at the end of the 16th century, and to thirty-six by the time of the French Revolution. The last two were created in 1784.

The administration of the généralités of the early modern period went through a variety of reforms. In 1577 Henry III established five treasurers (trésoriers généraux) in each généralité who would form a bureau of finances. In the 17th century, oversight of the généralités was subsumed by the " intendants of finance, justice and police", and the expression généralité and intendance became roughly synonymous.

Géoportail is a comprehensive web mapping service of the French government that publishes maps and geophysical aerial photographs from more than 90 sources for France and its territories. The service, first developed by two public agencies (the IGN and the BRGM), was officially inaugurated on 23 June 2006 by president Jacques Chirac.

Though the French service has sometimes been described as a competitor or rival to Google Maps, it is different from Google 's mapping service (launched one year before in February 2005), since they have different objectives. Geoportail makes some unusual cartographic sources available, such as the renowned 18th-century Cassini maps and the Napoléonic-period Minutes État-Major, in addition to IGN road maps, administrative maps, topographic maps, cadastral and building surveys, public service utility maps, transportation maps, hydrographic maps, atmospheric and weather maps, geological maps, land use maps, maps of cultural sites, and much more. All maps and aerial photographs at Geoportail may be combined and viewed in transparent layers controlled by the user. The highest resolution of aerial photography, in general, is higher than what is available at Google Maps. Place names are identified and searchable for smallest villages and physical locations, beyond what is found on similar sites.

Since its inception in June 2006, the French service has progressively added new data and has undergone significant updates. The latest major upgrade became available in summer 2012.

The project originated for two main purposes:

The project was launched during summer 2005 in the IGN. The goal for the opening of the Géoportail was set as summer 2007.

On 6 January 2006, in Metz, the former President of the French Republic, Jacques Chirac, expressed the wish to open the Géoportail during the year.

In early March 2006, the IGN launched an advertising campaign about the Géoportail.

On 23 June 2006 the site was launched by Jacques Chirac and other ministers.

In this first release, users could browse in 2D over:

After the site was first launched, connection requests were 5 times greater than expected by the project team, which led to a crash of the servers. A message was posted apologizing for this problem while a solution was found. On 1 July access to the site was restored.

Gérard Philippe René André Larcher (French pronunciation: [ ʒeʁaʁ filip ʁəne ɑ̃dʁe laʁʃe ] ; born 14 September 1949) is a French politician serving as president of the Senate since 2014, previously holding the office from 2008 to 2011. A member of The Republicans, he has been a Senator for the Yvelines department since 1986, with an interruption between 2004 and 2007, when he was Minister for Employment, Labour and Professional Integration of Young People under President Jacques Chirac. Larcher also served as mayor of Rambouillet from 1983 to 2004 and again from 2007 until 2014.

Larcher was born in Flers, Orne to a Roman Catholic family. He is the son of Philippe Larcher, director of a textile factory and former Mayor of Saint-Michel-des-Andaines, a small town in Orne.

Upon his second marriage with Christine Weiss, a dentist, he converted to Protestantism. From this union were born three children: Aymeric, Dorothée and Charlotte. After he graduated from the National Veterinary School of Lyon (ENVL), Larcher worked from 1974 to 1979 in the France team of equestrian sports.

In 1976, Larcher joined the movement of young Gaullists, because he admired Charles de Gaulle and supported the policy orientations of the founder of the Fifth Republic. In the 1983 municipal election, he was elected Mayor of Rambouillet, in Yvelines. Two years later, he was elected regional councillor of Île-de-France.

On 28 September 1986, for the first time, Larcher was elected to be Senator for Yvelines, under the banner of the Rally for the Republic (RPR). Aged 37, he was one of the youngest French Senators. Appointed Secretary of the Senate in 1989, he was re-elected as a Senator in 1995 and elected as Vice President of the Senate in 1997. In 2001, he was appointed as President of the Senate's Economic Affairs Commission.

In March 2004, after the defeat of the right in regional elections, Larcher was appointed junior minister to the minister of social affairs in the cabinet of Jean-Pierre Raffarin. He retained his place in the government in June 2005, after the appointment of Dominique de Villepin as prime minister.

In May 2007, the new president, Nicolas Sarkozy, suggested Larcher enter the government of François Fillon as minister of agriculture, but Larcher declined and preferred to sit in the Senate. In the following months, he prepared his candidacy for President of the Senate, to succeed Christian Poncelet. On 31 July 2008, he was declared a candidate for the UMP primary to elect the president of the Senate, against former prime minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin. On 24 September, he was elected as the UMP's candidate for the presidency of the Senate with 78 votes, against 56 votes for Raffarin and 17 votes for Senator Philippe Marini.

Larcher was elected as President of the Senate on 1 October 2008, receiving 173 votes against 134 votes for Socialist candidate Jean-Pierre Bel.

The left won a Senate majority in the September 2011 Senate election, and Jean-Pierre Bel was elected as President of the Senate on 1 October 2011. He received 179 votes against 134 votes for Larcher, who was the right's candidate; a centrist, Valerie Letard, received 29 votes.

After the victory of the right in September 2014 Senate elections, Larcher was again nominated for the post of President of the Senate by members of the UMP group, and he was elected as President of the Senate on 1 October 2014.

In 2019, Larcher argued that wearing the Islamic headscarf in the public space is "a freedom that he wants to defend" and considers Islam "compatible with the Republic, provided that it is neither radical nor political."

Ahead of the 2022 presidential elections, Larcher publicly declared his support for Xavier Bertrand as the Republicans’ candidate. Ahead of the party's 2022 and 2025 conventions, he endorsed Bruno Retailleau 's candidacies as chairman.

H-France, founded in 1991, is the largest scholarly organization in the Anglophone world dedicated to the history and culture of the Francophone world. Operated by volunteer doctoral scholars, the organization promotes international academic discussion through three primary channels. It has about 4000 members in 2026. Michael Breen, Professor of History & Humanities at Reed College, is Editor-in-Chief. The Library Guide to "French and Francophone Studies" at the University of Illinois-Urbana Champaign gives H-France prominence as the recommended online resource. According to J.B. Shank, “H-France has quickly made itself into a powerful digital partner in the field-defining discussions.” In 2001 it formed a partnership with the Society for French Historical Studies that made the digital journal H-France Review one of the Society’s official journals. Historian Jeremy D. Popkin argued in 2001 that H-France was transforming how scholars disseminated their findings, with much faster turnaround than paper journals, as well as much longer articles and far more discussion. Furthermore it enabled professors at small schools to have far more interaction with other scholars and specialists.

It publishes several open-access journals, including

It manages a daily email network of 4,000 members across 40 nations, facilitating research inquiries, conference announcements, and professional advice on archives and libraries.

Its website provides free access to all publications and specialized tools, including a Scholars Registry, a Digital Humanities Database, and a Research Repository for archival materials.

Hammaguir (also written Hamaguir and Hammaguira) (Arabic : حماقير) is a village in Abadla District, Béchar Province, Algeria, south-west of Béchar. It lies on the N50 national highway between Béchar and Tindouf. The location is notable for its role in French rocketry.

Between 1947 and 1967 there was a rocket launch site, the Interarmy Special Vehicles Test Centre (abbreviated CIEES in French), near Hammaguir, used by France for launching sounding rockets and the satellite carrier " Diamant " between 1965 and 1967. The Diamant launch pad at Hammaguir is located at 30° 46′ 41″ N, 3° 3′ 14″ W. The CIEES facility was also used for testing surface-to-air and air-to-air missiles.

The first French satellite Astérix was launched from there in 1965.

In honor of its role in the early development of French spaceflight, its name was given to a Martian crater in 1979 and to an asteroid crater in 2009.

Hammaguir has a hot desert climate, with extremely hot summers and cool winters, and very little precipitation throughout the year.

Hare à la royale (also called lièvre à la royale or royal hare) is a classic dish of French cuisine. A whole hare is slowly braised in red wine and served with a sauce made from its heart, liver, lungs and blood.

The culinary term à la royale has different meanings according to the dish to which it is applied. It may be used of clear soups; of fish or poultry poached and served hot, garnished with quenelles and mushrooms with poached oysters and truffles (fish) or foie gras (poultry); and of hot or cold desserts made from unusual ingredients and presented with sophistication.

Lièvre à la royale is a traditional dish, which, according to Larousse Gastronomique, is claimed by both Orléanais and Périgord as originating in their region. It is mentioned in several 19th-century French texts, but was brought to greater prominence by the senator and newspaper columnist Aristide Couteaux. In November 1898 he published a description of and recipe for lièvre à la royale in Le Temps. Elizabeth David, who printed a translation of the article in her first book, Mediterranean Food (1950), summarised it:

M. Couteaux related at length how he had spent a week in Poitou hunting the right kind of hare; how, the exactly suitable animal at last in his hands, he instantly took the train to Paris, sent out his invitations, and hurried off to consult his friend Spüller, who ran a well-known restaurant in the Rue Favart, to arrange the preparation and cooking of his hare for the following day. The dish takes from noon until 7 o'clock to prepare and cook … by 6 o'clock the exquisite aroma had penetrated the doors of Spüller's restaurant, floated down the street and out into the boulevard, where the passers-by sniffed the scented air; an excitable crowd gathered, and the whole quartier was " mis en émoi " [in uproar].

David adds that anyone willing to devote the time and ingredients needed to cook the dish will realise that the senator was not exaggerating.

A hare is butchered but left whole. Its heart, liver and lungs are kept to one side, as is its blood. The hare is slowly poached in red wine with bacon, garlic, carrots, shallots and onions. When it is cooked it is taken out of the cooking dish, to which are then added the heart, liver and lungs, and more bacon, garlic and shallots, which are simmered and sieved. More red wine is added, together with the blood, diluted with cognac. The hare is presented whole, in the sauce, and according to Couteaux, is so tender that "to use a knife to serve the hare would be a sacrilege: a spoon alone is amply sufficient".

There are later versions of the dish, adding slices of fresh foie gras and cream for additional richness. Paul Bocuse includes truffles as well as foie gras as optional additions. Joël Robuchon made the dish, based on Couteaux's recipe, for his presentation to the Compagnons du Devoir.

The hate speech laws in France are matters of both civil law and criminal law. Those laws protect individuals and groups from being defamed or insulted because they belong or do not belong, in fact or in fancy, to an ethnicity, a nation, a race, a religion, a sex, a sexual orientation, or a gender identity or because they have a handicap. The laws forbid any communication which is intended to incite discrimination against, hatred of, or harm to, anyone because of his belonging or not belonging, in fact or in fancy, to an ethnicity, a nation, a race, a religion, a sex, a sexual orientation, or a gender identity, or because he or she has a handicap.

France abolished the offence of blasphemy in 1791; but the offence persisted in the regions of Alsace and Moselle as Articles 166 and 167 of the local penal code until 2016. The articles persisted as a holdover from the German criminal code of 1871. Validated by La loi du 17 Octobre 1919 and le Décret du 25 Novembre 1919, the articles forbade public blasphemy against God. No convictions under Articles 166 and 167 were registered.

The Law on the Freedom of the Press of 29 July 1881 guarantees freedom of the press, subject to several prohibitions. Article 24 prohibits anyone from publicly inciting another to discriminate against, or to hate or to harm, a person or a group for belonging or not belonging, in fact or in fancy, to an ethnicity, a nation, a race, a religion, a sex, or a sexual orientation, or for having a handicap. The penalty for violating this prohibition is up to a year of imprisonment and a fine of up to €45,000, or either one of those, as well as the suspension of some civil rights in some cases.

Articles 32 and 33 prohibit anyone from publicly defaming or insulting a person or group for belonging or not belonging, in fact or in fancy, to an ethnicity, a nation, a race, a religion, a sex, or a sexual orientation, or for having a handicap. The penalty for defamation is up to a year of imprisonment and a fine of up to €45,000, or either one of those punishments. The penalty for insult is up to six months of imprisonment and a fine of up to €22,500, or either one of those punishments.

La loi du 29 juillet 1881 allows the public prosecutor to initiate criminal proceedings against a violator of the law either upon the complaint of a victim or upon his own initiative. A victim may choose to undertake a civil action against a violator. Such a civil action must obey rules prescribed for a criminal proceeding, and a court may assess both civil damages and criminal penalties at the same time. Article 48-1 permits civil-rights organizations to seek damages for violations of the law.

Act 90-615 of 13 July 1990 or the Gayssot Act (named for its sponsor in the National Assembly) introduced a right to respond for any person who considers that a newspaper or other print medium has damaged his honor on the grounds of his ethnicity, nationality, race or religion. The Gayssot Act sets a punishment of five years' imprisonment and a €45,000 fine for the public expression of ideas that challenge the existence of the crimes against humanity committed by Nazi Germany during World War II as defined in the appendix to the London Agreement of 8 August 1945.

The non-public insult of a person or a group of people because of their origin or their membership or their non-membership, true or supposed, to an ethnic group, a nation, sexual identity, gender identity, disability, a race or a specific religion is punishable by a fine of €500, or up to €3000 for a repeat offence.

By legislation adopted in 1972, France may ban groups that advocate racism.

In March 2019, Laetitia Avia drafted legislation (Avia law [ fr ]) that is similar to Germany's NetzDG. The law required the regulation of hateful content online. In July 2019, the National Assembly passed the bill to enforce these rules to limit hateful content online. These rules may apply to all hateful content and extremism. Those who fail to comply face up to 75,000 to 250,000 euros per fine.

On 13 May 2020, the National Assembly passed the legislation and it would likely to go effect in 18 June.

On 18 June 2020, the French Constitutional Council struck down core provisions of the law.

In January 2026, the Law Committee of the French National Assembly approved Proposition de loi n° 575, introduced by MP Caroline Yadan, aimed at combating what its sponsors described as “renewed forms of antisemitism.” The bill proposes to extend existing legal provisions to sanction implicit incitement to antisemitism, including publicly calling for the destruction of a state recognised by France, such as Israel. It also seeks to broaden penalties for Holocaust denial and trivialisation of genocides, and strengthen sanctions against incitement to terrorism.

The committee approved the bill by an 18–16 vote, with support from members of the governing majority and opposition from some left-wing lawmakers. The proposal advanced to the full National Assembly for further debate and potential adoption. The bill has been supported by Jewish organisations in France, while some human rights groups and commentators have raised concerns about possible implications for freedom of expression.

In 1984, a judge of first instance prohibited a poster that advertised the film Ave Maria by Jacques Richard. The poster showed a young woman, covered only at the waist, with her arms and feet tied to a cross. No appeal was made.

In 1985, three organizations asked a court in Paris to ban the film Je vous salue, Marie by Jean-Luc Godard. The film put the biblical story of Mary and Joseph in a modern setting. The organizations said the film insulted their religion. The court refused to ban the film.

In 1988, a court refused to ban the film The Last Temptation of Christ by Martin Scorsese. Several organizations argued that the film insulted Christians, but the trial judge allowed the film to be shown if it contained the warning—and if its advertising contained the warning—that the film was not an adaptation of the Bible.

In 1989, a court in Paris refused to ban the novel The Satanic Verses by Salman Rushdie for being an insult to Muslims, because the novel was not forced on anyone.

In 1994, the newspaper Le Quotidien de Paris published the article L'obscurité de l'erreur by journalist, sociologist, and historian Paul Giniewski. The article was a reaction to the publication of the papal encyclical Veritatis Splendor. In the article, Giniewski criticizes the Pope, and states that "Catholic doctrine abetted the conception and the realization of Auschwitz ". A Catholic organization initiated criminal proceedings on the ground that the article was an insult to a group because of its religion. The court of first instance convicted the newspaper, but the first court of appeal annulled the conviction. The Catholic organization launched a civil action. The court of first instance decided that the article constituted a defamation of Catholics, but the first court of appeal disagreed. The Supreme Court of Appeal held that the first court of appeal had made an error, and referred the matter back to that court. The first court of appeal then held Giniewski liable for defaming Catholics. Giniewski appealed, but the Supreme Court of Appeal rejected his contention that his aim was not to insult Catholics but to present an opinion in good faith. Giniewski appealed to the European Court of Human Rights. The European Court held that the courts of France were wrong.

In 1997, a Christian organization asked for the removal of a poster which advertised the film The People vs Larry Flynt by Miloš Forman. The poster depicted a miniature Woody Harrelson —the actor who played the role of porn-tycoon Larry Flynt—in a loincloth made from the American flag, and suspended as though crucified upon the pubic area of a bikini-clad woman. A court rejected the organization's contention that the poster insulted Christians.

In 1998, a Christian organization asked to ban caricatures published by the satirical magazine La Grosse Bertha. One of its covers represented Christ dying with the inscription: I suck (in French, "je suçe", which pronounces similarly to "Jesus") was his name by Robert Obscene and Alain Porno from the Acadébite (a play on the words Academy and penis), on inside page a cartoon with the Christ saying Why have you forsaken Me Jerk? and the apostles at the foot of the cross carrying banners: pension forced to 33 years, Job insecurity, in back page, a drawing titled miscellaneous news item illustrated with a disemboweled slept naked woman a crucifix crashed in the vagina and on another cover under the title: the Pope at the transvestites, a drawing representing Pope John-Paul II sodomized by a transvestite who exclaims: welcome to Brazil. The courts of first instance and appeal decided that they didn't constitute an incitement to hatred towards the Catholics. The Supreme Court of Appeal held that the first court of appeal had made a procedural error, and referred the matter back to another court which confirmed the absence of conviction decided by the lower courts and considered that mockery of the Catholic religion, the faiths, the symbols, and the rites of the religious practice had not caused any state of mind for incitement to discrimination, hatred, or violence and was no justification to restrict the liberty of the press.

In 2002, a Christian organization asked for the removal of a poster which advertised the film Amen. by Costa Gavras. The poster depicted a cross and a swastika, a priest, and a Nazi officer. The organization said the poster was an insult to Catholics. A court found otherwise.

In 2002, a court in Paris considered a complaint by several civil-rights organizations about a remark by Michel Houellebecq, the author of the novel Platforme. During an interview, Houellebecq remarked that Islam is "the stupidest religion." The court decided the remark could neither be considered a racial insult to Muslims, nor an incitement to religious or racial hatred.

In 2002, several civil-rights organizations initiated civil and criminal proceedings against Oriana Fallaci and her publisher for the novel La Rage et l'Orgueil. The organizations argued that the novel insulted Arabs, Muslims, and Islam, and incited discrimination, hatred, and violence on religious and racial grounds. The legal proceedings foundered for procedural reasons.

In March 2005, Marithé François Girbaud, a brand of women's clothing, had a billboard—40 metres long—placed on a building on the Avenue Charles-de-Gaulle in Neuilly-sur-Seine. The billboard featured a photograph of 12 beautiful, well-dressed women and one shirtless man posed round a table in the manner of the characters in the painting The Last Supper by Leonardo da Vinci. A Catholic organization complained that the billboard insulted a group of people because of their religion. The court of first instance convicted Girbaud, and ordered the billboard removed. In April 2005, a higher court upheld the conviction. In November 2006, the Supreme Court of Appeal annulled the conviction.

On 25 April 2005, the daily newspaper Libération published a depiction of Christ —naked except for a big condom—on a cloud above a gathering of bishops. Text on the drawing has a white bishop telling a black bishop that Christ would have used a condom. A Catholic organization complained that the drawing insulted a group of people because of their religion. In November 2005, the court of first instance acquitted Libération. In May 2006, a higher court confirmed the decision of the lower court. In May 2007, the Supreme Court of Appeal confirmed the decisions of the lower courts.

In 2005, the organization Aides Haute-Garonne organized La nuit de la Sainte-Capote (the night of the Holy Condom), an informative evening about the prevention of the human immunodeficiency virus. To announce the event, the organization handed out a prospectus. The prospectus contained a head-and-shoulders image of a woman wearing a nun's bonnet. Near that image was the image of two pink condoms. The prospectus's text asked for the protection of Sainte Capote. A Catholic organization initiated proceedings on the ground that the prospectus insulted a group because of its religion. The court of first instance convicted Aides Haute-Garonne. The first court of appeal, the Court of Toulouse, upheld the conviction. In February 2006, the Supreme Court of Appeal annulled the conviction.

In 2006, the satirical weekly Charlie Hebdo released a special issue which featured cartoons pertinent to Islam, including some from the Danish newspaper Jyllands-Posten. A Muslim organization initiated criminal proceedings against Philippe Val, editor-in-chief of Charlie Hebdo, for insulting a group of people because of their religion. In March 2007, the court of first instance acquitted Val. The first court of appeal confirmed the lower court's judgment on the ground that the cartoons targeted only terrorists or fundamentalists—not the whole Muslim community.

On 18 January 2007, a tribunal in Lyon sentenced Bruno Gollnisch to a three-month, suspended prison-term and a fine of €5,000 for the offense of contesting information about the Holocaust. The court also ordered him to pay €55,000 in damages to the plaintiffs and to pay for the judgment to be published in the newspapers that originally printed his remarks.

In 2007, the Supreme Court of Appeal considered a remark by a comedian during an interview published in the journal Lyon Capitale. The comedian said that " Jews are a sect, a fraud". The court said the remark was an insult to a group defined by their place of origin.

In 2008, legendary French actress Brigitte Bardot was convicted for the fifth time for inciting hatred. The Movement Against Racism and for Friendship between Peoples (MRAP) filed the charge against Bardot because, in a letter to the government about throat-cutting of animals during the Muslim festival of Eid al-Adha, she complained about "this population that leads us around by the nose, [and] which destroys our country."

In 2013 Bob Dylan was placed under judicial investigation in France for allegedly provoking ethnic hatred of Croats. It followed a legal complaint lodged by a Croat association in France over a 2012 interview Dylan gave to Rolling Stone magazine. In April 2014, the case against Dylan himself was dropped, but the director of Rolling Stone ' s French edition was ordered to stand trial.

The Haut-Commissariat à la Stratégie et au Plan (HCSP, lit. ' High Commission for Strategy and Planning ') is an advisory body reporting to the government of France, which took its present name and form in May 2025. It was originally founded in the context of the Monnet Plan, intended to address resource scarcity in France in the immediate aftermath of World War II.

With relatively minor changes to its role, it has been successively known as the Commissariat Général du Plan (CGP, lit. ' General Planning Commission ', 1946-2006), Centre d'Analyse Stratégique (CAS, lit. ' Center for Strategic Analysis ', 2006-2013), Commissariat Général à la Stratégie et à la Prospective (CGSP, lit. ' General Commission for Strategy and Foresight ', 2013-2014), and France Stratégie (lit. ' France Strategy ', 2014-2025); it has also absorbed the Haut-Commissariat au Plan (HCP, lit. ' High Commission for Planning ', 2020-2025), a separate body whose name referred to the original Commissariat Général. All these organizations have been known colloquially as " le Plan " (lit. ' the Plan ').

The idea of the Commissariat Général came from exchanges between Charles de Gaulle and Jean Monnet. It was established by De Gaulle as Chairman of the Provisional Government of the French Republic, on 3 January 1946. Monnet was appointed its first General Commissioner, a position he held until moving to Luxembourg in 1952 as first President of the High Authority of the European Coal and Steel Community.

The Commissariat Général's first plan, the Modernization and Re-equipment Plan, was designed to spur economic reconstruction following World War II. Its aims were: (1) to develop national production and foreign trade, particularly in those fields where France is most favourably placed; (2) to increase productivity; (3) to ensure the full employment of manpower; (4) to raise the standard of living and to improve the environment and the conditions of national life. This plan is commonly known as the Monnet Plan after Monnet, its chief architect.

In pursuit of its objectives, the Commissariat Général set production targets for 1950 according to the resources that were then expected to be available, starting with six crucial sectors: coal mining, steel, electricity, rail transport, cement, and farm machinery. Later oil, chemicals, fertilizers, synthetic fertilizers, synthetic fibres, shipbuilding and other sectors were added. The Commission's plan emphasized expansion, modernization, efficiency, and modern management practice. It set investment targets, and allocated investment funds.

The plan’s process – focusing, prioritizing, and pointing the way – has been called "indicative planning" to differentiate it from highly directive and rigid Soviet style planning.

The Centre d'Analyse Stratégique was established by decree on 6 March 2006, succeeding the Commissariat Général. Its stated mission was to advise the Government in the creation and application of economic, social, environmental and cultural policy.

It drew upon an 11-member Steering Committee that included two Deputies, two Senators and a member of the Economic and Social Council.

All of the Centre's work was made public on its official site and in printed editions by La Documentation française. Each year, the Centre also organized around a dozen public events, including seminars, colloquiums and one-day conferences.

In April 2013 the CAS was reorganized as the Commissariat Général à la Stratégie et à la Prospective, which was rebranded in June 2014 as France Stratégie without change of legal basis. Like its predecessors, it was government-funded and part of the Office of the French Prime Minister. It also served as hub for a network of research bodies and institutes, including CEPII and the Conseil d'Analyse Économique.

The Haut-Commissariat au Plan [ fr ] was established in 2020 as a separate body from France Stratégie with a light secretariat, tailored for politician François Bayrou who became its first and only head.

In December 2024, Bayrou became Prime Minister of France but initially kept his position as Haut-Commissaire au Plan. In March 2025, former minister Clément Beaune was appointed as head of both France Stratégie and the HCP, and the two bodies were merged by executive order in May.

The Plan was headquartered in the Hôtel de Vogüé [ fr ], a historical property at 18, rue de Martignac in Paris; the name "rue de Martignac" was often use metonymically to refer to the Planning Commission.

The Planning Commission expanded to nearby offices at 30, rue Las Cases and 5, rue Casimir Périer, both vacated by Crédit Agricole when the latter relocated its head office to near the Gare Montparnasse in the 1960s. In 2001–2002, these extensions of the Planning Commission relocated from there to another government building in the same neighborhood at 113, rue de Grenelle.

In 2017, France Stratégie moved together with other services of the office of the Prime Minister to the newly renovated office complex known as Ensemble Fontenoy-Ségur [ fr ], known colloquially as "Ségur".

In 2020, the HCP was located from creation at a former urban mansion on 19, rue de Constantine on the Esplanade des Invalides, a prestige building ereceted in the 1880s that had been the home of Carlos de Beistegui and his family from 1913 to his death in 1970, was acquired by the French state in 1971, and hosted the Service d'Information du Gouvernement [ fr ], another piece of the office of the Prime Minister, from 1974 to 2017. Since the 2025 merger, the HCSP's head Clément Beaune has kept his office there, while most of the body's staff has remained at "Ségur".

The Haute Autorité pour la transparence de la vie publique (HATVP, lit. High Authority for the transparency of public life) is an independent French administrative authority created by the law on transparency of public life on 11 October 2013. It replaced the Commission pour la transparence financière de la vie politique (lit. Commission for the financial transparency of politics). The authority is responsible for ascertaining and preventing potential conflicts of interest among French public servants and officials.

Until 1989, the investigation and application of ethical problems, which included conflicts of interest or chronicles, were included in criminal proceedings, but had no special laws or authority to deal with such affairs until the Luchaire Affair that took place between 1982 and 1986. During the tenure of Charles Hernu, France supplied shells to Iran. The newspaper La Presse de la Manche and a report of the Contrôle général des armées published by L'Express in January 1987 revealed that end-user certificates were falsified to show destinations other than Iran, as the country was under an arms embargo at the time.

After this scandal, the first "transparency of public life" law was passed; it defined the state funding of political parties and mandated some public servants to publish their financial status. However, this law was very vague and unclear in some aspects.

In 1994, a parliamentary working group led by Philippe Séguin made 18 proposals including the limitation of election expenses, the reformation of the status of political parties, and the extension of the mandatory declaration of status to more categories of public servants.

On 14 January 2020, the High Authority received three delegates from the European Commission.

On April 10, 2013, after the Cahuzac affair, the HATVP was created.

Haute cuisine (French: [ ot kɥizin ] ; lit. ' high cooking ') or grande cuisine is a style of cooking characterised by meticulous preparation, elaborate presentation, and the use of high quality ingredients. Typically prepared by highly skilled gourmet chefs, haute cuisine dishes are renowned for their high quality and are often offered at premium prices.

Haute cuisine represents the cooking and eating of carefully prepared food from regular and premium ingredients, prepared by specialized chefs, and commissioned by those with the financial wherewithal to do so. It has had a long evolution through the monarchy and the bourgeoisie and their ability to explore and afford prepared dishes with exotic and varied flavors and looking like architectural wonders. Haute cuisine distinguished itself from regular French cuisine by what was cooked and served, by obtaining premium ingredients such as fruit out of season, and by using ingredients not typically found in France.

Trained kitchen staff was essential to the birth of haute cuisine in France, which was organized at the turn of the 20th century by August Escoffier into the brigade de cuisine. The extravagant presentations and complex techniques that came from these kitchens required ingredients, time, equipment, and therefore money. For this reason, early haute cuisine was accessible to a small demographic of rich and powerful individuals. Not only were professional chefs responsible for building and shaping haute cuisine, but their role in the cuisine was what differentiated it from regular French cuisine.

Haute cuisine is influenced by French cuisine with elaborate preparations and presentations that serve small, multiple courses prepared by a hierarchical kitchen staff, historically at the grand restaurants and hotels of Europe. The cuisine was very rich and opulent, with decadent sauces made out of butter, cream, and flour, the basis for many typical French sauces still in use today. The 17th-century chef and writer La Varenne (1615–1678) marked a change from cookery as known in the Middle Ages, to somewhat lighter dishes, and more modest presentations. Subsequently, Antonin Carême (1784–1833) also published works on cooking, and he simplified and codified an earlier and even more complex cuisine. Nineteenth-century French haute cuisine interacted with the development of fine dining in Britain. French master chef, Jassinton Rozea (1721-1783) wrote several culinary books on haute cuisine (The Gift of Comus, 1752, and The Compleat Cook, Market Woman & Dairy Maid, 1756 - Library of Congress, USA) was also master chef to Charles Seymour, 6th. Duke of Somerset and had subsequent positions at the stately homes of the Duke of Montrose, the Duke of Roxburgh, the Lords Hervey & Edgecombe, and later John Hope, Earl of Hopetoun House, Edinburgh. Jassinton was renowned both in London & Edinburgh for his glorious banquets attended by European aristocrats in the expected French tradition.

Contrary to popular belief, Catherine de' Medici did not introduce Italian food to the French court to create haute cuisine.

Georges Auguste Escoffier is a central figure in the modernisation of haute cuisine as of about 1900, which became known as cuisine classique. These were simplifications and refinements of the early work of Carême, Jules Gouffé and Urbain Dubois. It was practised in the grand restaurants and hotels of Europe and elsewhere for much of the 20th century. The major developments were to replace service à la française (serving all dishes at once) with service à la russe (serving meals in courses) and to develop a system of cookery, based on Escoffier's Le Guide Culinaire, which formalized the preparation of sauces and dishes. In its time, it was considered the pinnacle of haute cuisine, and was a style distinct from cuisine bourgeoise (the cuisine of affluent city dwellers), the working-class cuisine of bistros and homes, and cuisines of the French provinces.

The 1960s were marked by the appearance of nouvelle cuisine, as chefs rebelled from Escoffier's "orthodoxy" and complexity. Although the term nouvelle cuisine had been used in the past, the modern usage can be attributed to authors André Gayot, Henri Gault, and Christian Millau, who used nouvelle cuisine to describe the cooking of Paul Bocuse, Alain Chapel, Jean and Pierre Troisgros, Michel Guérard, Roger Vergé and Raymond Oliver, many of whom were once students of Fernand Point.

In general, nouvelle cuisine puts an emphasis on natural flavours, so the freshest possible ingredients are used, preparation is simplified, heavy sauces are less common, as are strong marinades for meat, and cooking times are often reduced. Nouvelle cuisine was a movement towards conceptualism and minimalism and was a direct juxtaposition to earlier haute cuisine styles of cooking, which were much more extravagant. While menus were increasingly short, dishes used more inventive pairings and relied on inspiration from regional dishes.

Within 20 years, however, chefs began returning to the earlier style of haute cuisine, although many of the new techniques remained.

Haute Cuisine is a 2012 French comedy-drama film based on the true story of Danièle Mazet-Delpeuch and how she was appointed as the private chef for François Mitterrand. The original French title is Les Saveurs du Palais.

Hortense Laborie (Catherine Frot), a renowned chef from Périgord, is astonished when the President of the Republic (Jean d'Ormesson) appoints her as his personal chef, responsible for creating all his meals at the Élysée Palace. Despite jealous resentment from the other kitchen staff, Hortense quickly establishes herself, thanks to her indomitable spirit. The authenticity of her cooking soon seduces the President, but the corridors of power are littered with traps. The story is framed by Laborie's later role cooking at a French Antarctic research station.

Parts of the movie were actually filmed at the Élysée Palace, in a three-day shooting window where filming was only allowed when then President Nicolas Sarkozy was not at the palace.

Iceland served as a stand-in for the Crozet islands in the movie. The film crew spent six days there to film on location.

The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports a 68% approval rating with an average rating of 6.1/10 based on 31 reviews. The website's consensus reads, "While it'll certainly be an easier sell for foodie filmgoers, Haute Cuisine' s beautifully filmed biopic should satisfy most viewers hungry for a beautifully filmed dramedy." On Metacritic, it has a score of 61 out of 100 based on 14 reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews".

The Haute Qualité Environnementale or HQE (High Quality Environmental standard) is a standard for green building in France, based on the principles of sustainable development first set out at the 1992 Earth Summit. The standard is controlled by the Paris -based Association pour la Haute Qualité Environnementale (ASSOHQE).

The standard specifies criteria for the following:

Managing the impacts on the outdoor environment

On 16 June 2009, it was announced that the CSTB (Centre Scientifique et Technique du Batiment) and its subsidiary CertiVéA had signed a memorandum of understanding to work together with the global arm of the United Kingdom's Building Research Establishment (BRE) to develop a pan-European building environmental assessment method. The BRE developed and markets BREEAM (the BRE Environmental Assessment Method), which has similarities to the French HQE. Unfortunately, BREEAM and HQE are still disseminating their own standards round the world, leaving little doubt that no pan-European method will emerge in the near future, at least stemming from these two organisations.

Since 2013, the HQE brand is now available for buildings and districts worldwide. As of 2016 HQE is present in 24 countries.

The Haute Randonnée Pyrénéenne (HRP) is a high-level long-distance trail in the Pyrenees joining the Atlantic and Mediterranean. It approximately follows the French and Spanish border and passes through Andorra.

Like the GR 10 and the GR 11, the path travels the length of the Pyrenees from coast to coast. However, where the GR 10 and GR 11 stick mainly to lower routes and mountain passes on the French and Spanish sides of the border respectively, the HRP follows a high course through the mountains and cols, frequently crossing the border to follow the highest walkable route. It is mostly an unmarked trail although the typical paths are sometimes marked by cairns of stones or small red and white painted marks. It is usually done from west to east, which takes about 45 days to complete for an experienced hiker. It crosses the Parc National des Pyrenées and the Parc nacional d'Aigüestortes i Sant Maurici. Many variations on the original route proposed by Georges Veron are possible and described in the guidebook, as well as some easy summits (Aneto, Vignemale). There are some popular and crowded places on the trail, but also very remote areas, where it can take a day before you see someone. In these areas it can be several days between huts, so it is necessary to carry a tent. The HRP crosses the Way of St. James (El Camino de Santiago) on the Col d'Ibañeta, near Roncevaux.

Like the GR 10, the HRP begins at Hendaye on the Atlantic coast and finishes at Banyuls-sur-Mer on the Mediterranean.

The HRP was devised by Georges Véron in 1968. Joosten's published version of the route deviates substantially from Véron's and both offer variants to their main itineraries. A digital (gpx) version of Joosten's guide, improved and expanded, can be obtained from www.hrpguide.org with all proceeds going to a Himalayan earthquake relief fund. In 2020, Louis-Philippe Loncke used the HRP to cross the Pyrenees without resupply or external assistance.

The Haute Route (or the High Route or Mountaineers' Route) is the name given to a route (with several variations) undertaken on foot or by ski touring between Chamonix, France, and the Matterhorn, in Zermatt, Switzerland.

First charted as a summer mountaineering route by members of the English Alpine Club in the mid-19th century, the route takes around 12+ days walking (or 7+ days skiing) for the 180 km from the Chamonix valley, home of Mont Blanc, to Zermatt, home of the Matterhorn. Originally dubbed "The High Level Route" in English by members of the hiking club, the term was translated into French when first successfully undertaken on skis in 1911. Since then the French term has prevailed. While the term haute route has become somewhat genericized for any of the many multi-day, hut-to-hut alpine tours, the "Chamonix-Zermatt Haute Route" remains the original.

Besides the original Haute Route, there is also a "Walker's" Haute Route, which is an alpine hiking trail that follows a network of well-marked and signposted paths. The "Walker's" route stays below 3000 meters and takes advantage of the popular mountain huts and small inns and hotels in the villages along the way. In the spring, summer and aumtumn, this route requires no ropes, crampons, or protection devices, unlike the actual Haute Route.

The original Haute Route has large portions of glacier travel, for which suitable mountaineering gear and experience is necessary. In the winter, ski touring gear is required, and depending upon the weather and route chosen, may require crampons, ropes and avalanche protection gear.

There is occasionally a danger of collapsing glaciers which can render the path virtually impassable. However, a lower level variation exists that avoids crossing glaciers. The majority of hikers complete it in 12–16 days.

First successfully completed in 1911, the Haute Route ski tour is among the most famous and coveted ski tours in the world. Using high mountain huts to allow skiers to stay high and cover substantial distances, it winds through the highest, peaks of the Alps from Mont Blanc to the Matterhorn. It requires good weather, favourable snow conditions and strong effort to complete this line. Because of this, roughly half of the skiers who begin the tour do not complete it.

There are many variations of the HLR (High Level Route) that work their way between Chamonix and Zermatt, including those listed below. It is also possible to add ascents of a number of ski peaks to any of the routes. The winter Haute Route deviates from the summer route to avoid terrain that is dangerous or impassable when snow-covered. Many people also ski the Haute Route in the opposite direction, by variations that select better ascent and descents.

Lionel Claudepierre, a member of PGHM of Bourg Saint Maurice, set a new record of 18h35m on Monday 15 April 2013.

The winter Haute Route's original line which involves long climbs and mountaineering with ice axe and crampons.

A longer, harder, more technical route that eliminates the road break of the Verbier and Classic variations.

Optional ski peak ascents along the listed Haute Route variations include the Mont Blanc, Rosablanche, Pigne d'Arolla, Mont Blanc de Cheilon, Mont Vélan, Breithorn. Some of these peak ascents will require an additional day or more, and range from easy to very technical and difficult.

In April 2018, a group of ten hikers found itself in extremely bad weather on the segment between the Dix Hut and the Vignettes Hut. Three survived.

On March 9, 2024, a group of six sent a distress signal while en route to Tête Blanche. Helicopter rescue launches were not possible due to strong winds. Climbing rescuers turned back after encountering bad weather and likely avalanches. The next day, a physician and a police officer could be dropped by helicopter to a site from which they reached the location of the group, finding five dead. The sixth body was recovered in August that year.

A hearth tax was a property tax in certain countries during the medieval and early modern period, levied on each hearth, thus by proxy on wealth. It was calculated based on the number of hearths, or fireplaces, within a municipal area and is considered among the first types of progressive tax.

Hearth tax was levied in the Byzantine Empire from the 9th century, France and England from the 14th century, and finally in Scotland and Ireland in the 17th century.

In the Byzantine Empire a tax on hearths, known as kapnikon, was first explicitly mentioned for the reign of Nicephorus I (802–811), although its context implies that it was already then old and established and perhaps it should be taken back to the 7th century AD. Kapnikon was a tax levied on households without exceptions for the poor.

In the 1340s especially, the King of France 's personal expenditure on dowries, gratuities, the upkeep of the palace, his travels and his wardrobe, consumed the entirety of the royal income. The fouage (Latin : focagium) was assessed on the basis of households and was usually paid by towns in a pre-arranged lump sum raised in any manner the locality chose to employ. It existed in certain French provinces, and became widespread in the 14th century when the royal finances were unable to bear the rising costs of war and state agents. In particular, fouages were levied in 1342 and 1349.

The hearth-penny was an Anglo-Saxon term for Peter's pence.

In England, hearth tax, also known as hearth money, chimney tax, or chimney money, was a tax imposed by Parliament in 1662, to support the government expenditure of King Charles II. Following the Restoration of the monarchy in 1660, Parliament calculated that the Crown needed an annual income of £1,200,000. The hearth tax was a supplemental tax to make up for the shortfall. It was considered easier to establish the number of hearths than the number of heads, insofar as hearths could be easily counted, were difficult to conceal or demolish, and did not move. This form of taxation was new to England, but had precedents abroad. It generated considerable debate, but was supported by the economist Sir William Petty, and carried through the Commons by the influential West Country member Sir Courtenay Pole, 2nd Baronet (whose enemies nicknamed him "Sir Chimney Poll" as a result). The Fire-Hearth and Stoves Taxation Act 1662 (14 Cha. 2. c. 10) received royal assent on 19 May 1662, with the first payment due on 29 September 1662, Michaelmas.

One shilling was liable to be paid for every fire hearth or stove, in all dwellings, houses, edifices or lodgings, and was payable at Michaelmas, 29 September and on Lady Day, 25 March. The tax thus amounted to two shillings per hearth or stove per year. The original bill contained a practical shortcoming in that it did not distinguish between owners and occupiers and was potentially a major burden on the poor as there were no exemptions. The bill was subsequently amended so that the tax was paid by the occupier. Further amendments introduced a range of exemptions that ensured that a substantial proportion of the poorer people did not have to pay the tax.

Exemption certificates had to be signed by a minister, a churchwarden, or an overseer of the poor and two justices of the peace. From 1664, everybody whose home had more than two hearths was liable to pay the tax, even if otherwise exempt, and changes were made to reduce the scope for tax avoidance.

Revenue generated in the first year was less than expected, so from 1663, the names and number of hearths were required to be listed even if non-liable. This additional detail has made the relevant hearth tax documents particularly useful to modern historians and other researchers. However, details of householders who were not liable to pay the tax were not recorded for all years of its operation, as they were not needed for audit purposes when the right to collect the tax was "farmed" for collection by contractors in return for their payment of a fixed premium.

The arrangements for collecting the hearth tax varied during its lifetime:

The tax fell most heavily on those who occupied the houses with the greatest number of hearths. For instance, in 1673-4 the Earl of Exeter had to pay for 70 hearths at Burghley House. In contrast, most householders who were liable to pay tax had only one or two hearths and a significant proportion of householders were not liable to pay at all.

The hearth tax was much resented because it often entailed inspection of the interior of dwellings by the sub-collectors and petty constables, who had legal authority to enter every property to check on the number of hearths. Some people stopped up their chimneys so that the tax was not due on them, but where this was discovered by the assessors the tax was doubled. On 31 July 1684, a fire in Churchill, Oxfordshire, destroyed 20 houses and many other buildings, and killed four people. It was apparently caused by a baker who, to avoid chimney tax, had knocked through the wall from her oven to her neighbour's chimney. Sir Courtenay Pole, its principal author, was attacked for having devised "the most vexatious tax on the people that ever was known."

After the Glorious Revolution, the hearth tax was repealed by the newly empowered English Parliament in the Hearth Money Act 1688 (1 Will. & Mar. c. 10), agreed to by the newly installed William III and Mary II in 1689, as:

not only a great oppression to the poorer sort, but a badge of slavery upon the whole people, exposing every man’s house to be entered into, and searched at pleasure, by persons unknown to him.

At the end of the Glorious Revolution in 1688, William III and Mary II also agreed to and signed the English Bill of Rights 1689 marking a new level of co-operation and power sharing between Parliament and the English monarchs. The cancellation of the hearth tax and the signing of the Bill of Rights, etc. led to a greater measure of legal protection for life, liberty, and property in England that encouraged and empowered the middle class at the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. This action both signalled the end of several centuries of tension and conflict between the Crown and Parliament, and the end of the idea that English kings had any divine rights and that England would be restored to Roman Catholicism. The new King William III and his wife Mary II were Protestant leaders from the Dutch Republic who were invited by Parliament to rule England. To make up for the loss of tax revenue, due to the cancellation of the hearth tax, uniform property taxes were imposed with few exclusions.

By the Supply (No. 4) Act 1690 (September c. 5) the Parliament of Scotland granted a tax of 14 shillings on every hearth, payable by both landowners and tenants, to raise money for the army with only hospitals and the poor living on parish charity being exempt, the tax being collected from 1691 to 1695.

Unlike in England, which abolished the Hearth Tax in 1689, it continued in the Kingdom of Ireland till the early 19th century although it underwent major reform at end of the 18th century. It was levied half yearly by the sheriff of each county on the basis of lists of the names of householders compiled by local justices of the peace. The list of the households required to pay the Hearth Tax became known as the Hearth Money Rolls, which were arranged by county, barony, parish, and townland. The tax was sometimes collected over an area known as a 'walk', which was based on both the town and a large rural area outside the town.

Several attempts were made in Parliament to abolish or at least limit the proportion of households obliged to pay the tax, which was widely regarded as "a shameful infliction upon the poor peasant, to whom even two or three shillings in the year for such a tax was a burden and a wrong". The chief proposers of a radical change were Thomas Conolly and John O'Neill. In 1788, for example, they argued that for a substantial portion of those having to pay the tax, the yearly cash demand was an unreasonable burden. Henry Grattan developed the same point: "I am convinced, that the man who has but five pounds in the world, and pays thirty shillings for his house, ought not to pay hearth-money; the strongest argument for his relief is the bare statement of his condition….The wretchedness of their living, and the misery of their consumption, is the reason why they scarcely pay any tax but the hearth-money, and is likewise a reason why they should not even pay hearth-money."

Major reform of the hearth tax was finally carried out in 1793 whereby one-hearth households with less than £10 in personal property, or with houses and land worth £5 or less, were henceforth deemed exempt from the tax. The measure was apparently a consequence of parliamentary pressure in the previous session; the modification of the window tax in Britain giving total relief to poorer householders had led to calls in the Irish Parliament for similar "liberality" in the light of Ireland's healthy finances. The Chancellor of the Exchequer (William Pitt) had refused, but a parliamentary committee was established under the de facto chairmanship of Mr G. P. Bushe who successfully proposed that one-hearth householders should be divided into two groups: those above and those below £5 in annual valuation. Subsequently, in 1795, freedom from hearth tax was extended to all one-hearth householders, as the opposition had earlier demanded; at the same time, the tax on multiple-hearth houses was raised. The number of persons exempted from the hearth tax was estimated at between a million and a half to two million.

The original Hearth Money Rolls are not extant. The records were housed in the Four Courts in Dublin, the repository for the Public Records Office, but during the Irish Civil War in 1922 the building was destroyed by fire, which also destroyed the Rolls (along with the Ireland census records for 1821, 1831, 1841, and 1851), but copies of some of the Rolls have survived.

The comprehensiveness and near-national coverage of hearth tax returns differentiates this historical evidence from other pre-modern surveys and tax records. Unlike other taxation surveys, the hearth tax recorded the names of those who were not liable to pay the tax, and hence provides a means of looking at a full range of social groups.

The work of C. A. F. Meekings during the mid-twentieth century is an important resource for hearth tax research. It provides useful commentaries on hearth tax manuscripts in The National Archives (TNA), and arranges the hearth tax files in order according to the different systems of administration. Meekings' compilation of hearth tax accounts, which was published posthumously, is a useful resource for economic historians.

Further information on hearth taxes, as well as other Stuart taxes and loyalty lists, is provided by Jeremy Gibson, which offers a comprehensive summary of hearth tax returns and assessments, whether in TNA, county record offices, or other libraries and archives. Each digest includes a brief commentary on the date, geographical coverage, state of the manuscript, approximate number of names included, and details of complete or partially published editions.

An additional resource for hearth tax research is Elizabeth Parkinson's study of the establishment of the tax and the complexities of its administration in the period 1662–1666. This work provides assistance with deciphering the technical details of hearth tax documents, which otherwise might appear to be little more than lists of names and numbers.

A principal focus of interest in the hearth tax lies in its application for understanding the distribution of wealth among social ranks within geographical areas. The method of connecting bands of hearth numbers to social categories was pioneered by William George Hoskins, looking at the city of Exeter. His system has subsequently been adjusted by local historians and, as Tom Arkell noted, these adaptations depend upon a 'particular locality's structure, but this diversity, combined with too many variables, prevents effective comparison between most of these [local] studies'.

During the 1980s Arkell's discussion of the eight hearth tax records for Kineton hundred in Warwickshire enabled detailed comparisons to be made between the data for 1662–1666 and 1669–1674, and to test the extent of the coverage of each record. This led him to conclude that 'the proportions of different hearth tax categories remained remarkably stable for the hundred's six best assessments'.

A decade later, Margaret Spufford cleared a path for local historians interested in studying local variations in wealth and poverty at county and parish levels, and set out the relevance of the hearth tax to architectural history and genealogy. She developed Hoskins' argument that the numbers of hearths in a household could be equated with levels of personal wealth, and that by organising the properties into groups determined by the number of hearths, historians could assess patterns of wealth and poverty which distinguished between social categories. She placed this system within a national template and tested the divergences in wealth between counties, areas within counties, and parishes.

Tom Arkell responded in The Local Historian, putting forward an alternative approach which drew upon an array of published and unpublished data. First, he argued for the aggregation of data from different returns in the mid-1660s and the early 1670s to produce more reliable statistics, thereby overcoming the problems of damaged or incomplete records. Second, he suggested that the percentage of households with three hearths and above provided a clear way of identifying regional variations in wealth, especially when groups of parishes with broadly similar percentages were grouped together into sub-regions. Third, he provided a national table of sub-regions graded by the proportion of dwellings with three hearths and over.

Both Arkell and Spufford used statistics and maps to enable readers to quickly appreciate the relative position of a parish, or groups of parishes, in relation to counterparts in a county, and to extrapolate to the national level by making comparisons between case studies.

Since 2010 the Centre for Hearth Tax Research has turned its attention to the digital humanities as a way of researching and publishing the Restoration hearth tax.

In 2019, the centre launched a new website "Hearth Tax Digital". This replaced Hearth Tax Online, established in 2010 and taken down in 2017. Hearth Tax Digital is a new platform for the publication and dissemination of research and analysis on hearth tax records and other associated documents. It provides a unique window into society and the social character of England in the late seventeenth century. It acts both as a portal through which the Hearth Tax Project & Centre can circulate data and findings, and also as a forum for other research centres, historical groups or individuals to publish work allied to hearth tax studies. Hearth Tax Digital provides free access to personal name data as well as analysis of the distribution of both population and wealth in urban and rural communities in England.

The advanced search function allows historians to combine searches for personal names, place names and other words occurring in the texts (e.g. blind, Mrs, seaman) with searches by hearth numbers. This function operates in the manner of database technology. The great advantage of the website developed by Professor Vogeler and Dr Wareham is that it goes beyond the traditional database functions to provide historical information rooted in the documents in terms of the original order in which they were written. Searches by place to reveal the lists of the names of all the householders in the parish or township, and searches for individual householders return the name of that householder in the context of the names of other householders who were their neighbours. The same approach is also used in the Records page, which means as readers scan their eyes down the returns they are able to follow in the footsteps of the collectors and consider local geographies of population distribution and the divide between rich and poor on a street-by-street basis. All searches are linked to a data basket function whereby groups of entries from the search enquiries are brought together which the user can store for further analysis, or indeed bring together a series of single entries highlighted from reading the returns in the records pages.

A final word should be reserved for exemption certificates. Until recently there was relatively little concern with the exemption certificates that recorded the names of the householders who were not liable to pay the hearth tax. For the West Riding there are around 650 of these certificates, helping to fill the gaps for some areas where the exempt are under-recorded in the returns and assessments; and in the East Riding of Yorkshire volume the data from 55 selected exemption certificates in compared to a series of returns between 1670 and 1674 to check completeness of coverage. This research facilitates further understanding of those people who were beneath the tax threshold and the terminology which was used to describe poorer property.

The Centre for Hearth Tax Research is based at the University of Roehampton, London. The primary objective of the Centre for Hearth Tax Research is to publish, in a hard-copy volume, the best surviving hearth tax return or returns for every county in England where a satisfactory return has not already been published. However, this represents a long-term project and it will be several years before some county volumes are completed.

The centre was established in 1995 (then known as the Centre for Hearth Tax Studies) under the direction of Professor Margaret Spufford. The current director is Dr Andrew Wareham and the research officer is Aaron Columbus.

In 2000, the award of a grant from the Heritage Lottery Fund paid for the microfilming of all of the taxation returns stored in The National Archives and a publishing partnership was established between the centre and the British Record Society which has led to the publication of a number of county volumes, including recent volumes on Essex (2012), London and Middlesex (2014), Yorkshire East Riding (2016) and the city of Bristol (2018). Upcoming volumes include Huntingdonshire, Norfolk and Northamptonshire.

In 2004, the British Academy adopted the Hearth Tax Project and, in 2007 and 2009, the Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC) made awards to fund a London and Middlesex Hearth Tax Project and a research and outreach programme which assisted with the organisation of an exhibition on landscapes of poverty at the Essex Record Office which was visited by c. 1,875 people.

In 2019, the centre launched a new website "Hearth Tax Digital". This replaced Hearth Tax Online, established in 2010 and taken down in 2017. Hearth Tax Digital was created in a collaboration by the Centre for Hearth Tax Research at Roehampton University with the Zentrum für Informationsmodellierung, Universität Graz, arising from the research collaboration between Professor Vogeler and Dr Wareham. It has been funded by the British Academy and the University of Roehampton in 2018–2019, and it is hosted in the humanities digital archive infrastructure of Graz University, the GAMS. The ongoing work of the Hearth Tax Project & Centre means that new transcripts and analyses are being continually produced and, consequently, Hearth Tax will be updated as new counties are completed

The centre also operates a blog, Hearth Tax Online "Hearth Tax Online".. This is a forum by which to publish activities, analysis of the Hearth Tax, and guest blogs by those engaging with the Hearth Tax.

Eugène Henri Brisson (French: [ ɑ̃ʁi bʁisɔ̃ ] ; 31 July 1835 – 14 April 1912) was a French statesman, who was twice Prime Minister of France, between 1885–1886 and in 1898.

He was born at Bourges (Cher), and followed his father's profession of advocate. Having made his mark in opposition during the last days of the empire, he was appointed deputy-mayor of Paris after the government was overthrown. He was elected to the Assembly on 8 February 1871, as a member of the extreme Left. While not approving of the Commune, he was the first to propose amnesty for the condemned (on 13 September 1871), but the proposal was voted down. He strongly supported compulsory primary education, and was firmly anti-clerical. He was president of the chamber from 1881 — replacing Léon Gambetta — to March 1885, when he became prime minister upon the resignation of Jules Ferry ; but he resigned when, after the general elections of that year, he only just obtained a majority for the vote of credit for the Tonkin expedition.

He remained conspicuous as a public man, took a prominent part in exposing the Panama scandals, was a strong candidate for the presidency of France after the murder of President Carnot in 1894; however, he lost to Jean Casimir-Perier. Brisson was once again president of the chamber from December 1894 to 1898. Brisson stood once again as a candidate for the presidency of France in 1895, but lost once again to Félix Faure. Following the 1898 French legislative election, whilst the country was violently excited over the Dreyfus affair, the incumbent Premier, Jules Méline, lost the confidence of the Chamber of Deputies - subsequently allowing Brisson be re-appointed as Premier and form a new cabinet in June 1898. Brisson's firmness and honesty increased popular respect for him, but a chance vote on a matter of especial excitement overthrew his ministry in October. As a leader of the radicals he actively supported the ministries of Waldeck-Rousseau and Combes, especially concerning the laws on the religious orders and the separation of church and state. In May 1906, he was re-elected president of the chamber of deputies by 500 out of 581 votes.

Henri de Raincourt (French pronunciation: [ ɑ̃ʁi də ʁɛ̃kuʁ ] ; born 17 November 1948) is a French politician who was Minister for Relations with Parliament (2009-2010) and Minister in charge of Co-operation (2010-2012) during Nicolas Sarkozy ’s presidency. Previously a Senator representing the Yonne department, he is set to re-join the Senate in June 2012, a month after leaving the Government.

He was elected Senator for Yonne in 1986, and re-elected in 1995 and 2004; he was Chairman of the Union for a Popular Movement Senate caucus between 2008 and 2009. He has also served as President of the Yonne General Council between 1992 and 2008.

A farmer by profession, Henri de Raincourt is the son of Philippe de Raincourt (1909–1959), Senator for Yonne from 1948 to 1959. He is also a fourth-generation grandson of the Marquis de Sade.

He has been deputy chairman of the UMP since 2013.

Marie Henri Daniel Gauthier, comte de Rigny (French pronunciation: [ ɑ̃ʁi də ʁiɲi ] ; 2 February 1782 – 6 November 1835) was the commander of the French squadron at the Battle of Navarino in the Greek War of Independence.

He was a nephew of Baron Joseph Dominique, baron Louis, and son of a former captain in the Penthièvre Dragoon regiment, and who died leaving five small boys, including his brother, the future General Rigny. The French Revolution led him out of the Pont-à-Mousson school, where he had been sent. He was ten years old then, had lost his father and his mother was listed as the list of emigrants. An aunt collected the family, consisting of a young girl of sixteen years and five boys, including Henry, the eldest.

After spending several months in Special School in Brest, where he had been sent there to finish his studies, in 1798, he entered the navy as a midshipman with Admiral Étienne Eustache Bruix. In 1799 he was appointed midshipman.

He assisted in the blockade of Porto Ferrajo and the Battle of Algeciras, and then he made the Egyptian campaign, and took part in the Saint-Domingue expedition, Corsica and Spain. In 1803 he was appointed ensign and as such sent to the camp of Boulogne, he was responsible for commanding the corvette La Triomphante.

Interrogated by Napoleon about the tides for the invasion of England, the young sailor gave to the Emperor a response strong and concise. Embedded with the marines of the Guard in the Army in 1806 and 1807, he made in the course of two years these campaigns Prussia, Poland and Pomerania; fought at Jena, to Pułtusk, the siege of Stralsund and Graudentz, where he was wounded. Assigned to the army of Spain in 1808, he became aide-de-camp of Marshal Bessières ; he distinguished himself at the Battle of Medina de Rioseco, and was wounded at the Battle of Somosierra, and he witnessed the capture of Madrid, in 1809, and the Battle of Wagram.

In 1816, he was elevated to the rank of captain. In 1822 he received the command of the French naval forces assembled in the Levant (flagship the frigate Médée). He soon raised the French flag daily in these waters against the Greek and Turkish pirates, his intelligent care settled in the Archipelago Police navigation. He was appointed Admiral in 1825, and raised his pennant in his flagship Sirène. In September 1827 the French government tasked him with the enforcement of the joint resolution by France, Russia, and England, who had united to wrest Greece from the Turkish rule. He commanded the French fleet at the Battle of Navarino on 20 October 1827, which action earned him the Cross of the Order of the Bath, the Order of St. Alexander Nevsky, and promotion to Vice-Admiral.

An obelisk-shaped memorial dedicated to the victory of the Allied fleets and their three admirals, the French admiral Henri de Rigny, the British admiral Edward Codrington, and the Russian admiral Lodewijk van Heiden was later erected on the central square of Pylos. The monument was the work of the sculptor Thomas Thomopoulos (1873–1937) and its unveiling took place in 1930, although it was completed in 1933.

Back in France after the evacuation of the Morea, which he chaired, the Admiral was appointed maritime prefect of Toulon in 1829. In 1829, king Charles X awarded him the title of Count of Rigny, but he refused until 8 August that year, the portfolio of the Navy in the Polignac ministry. Admiral Count Rigny went into the Levant to resume command of the fleet. Returning to Toulon for health reasons, in September 1830 he was appointed to the Board of Admiralty, and received the decoration of Grand Officier of the Legion of Honor.

Called in 1831 to the Chamber of Deputies by a double election, Admiral Rigny received, on 3 March that year, king Louis-Philippe, the portfolio of the navy. Assigned on 4 April 1834, the Department of Foreign Affairs, he started that administration of a new activity. On 12 March 1835 his health became increasingly unsteady, forcing him to resign his ministerial duties, but in August, he accepted a short mission to Naples. He was barely back in late October, when he felt the first attacks of which he succumbed on the night of 6 to 7 November 1835 at the age of 52 years. After his death, his widow gave birth to a daughter, Amelia Marie Gaultier Rigny, born on 7 February 1868. She married Baron Verneaux and died on 6 July 1868 at the Chateau de Ris Ris-Orangis. The Countess of Rigny, his mother also died at the Chateau de Ris on 13 November 1875.

On 17 September 1834 Henri de Rigny married Adele Defontaine Narcissus, of Mons (born 13 May 1803), widow in her first marriage to a wealthy Belgian businessman, Daniel Honnor Florent François (1780–1830), with whom she had two daughters: Elise (1826–1876), later Duchess of Padua by her marriage with Louis Arrighi de Casanova, and Leonie (1829–1892), later Marchioness of Talhouët by her marriage with Auguste de Talhouët-Roy.

Henri Frenay Sandoval (11 November 1905 – 8 August 1988) was a French military officer and French Resistance member, who served as minister of prisoners, refugees and deportees in Charles de Gaulle 's Provisional Government of the French Republic.

Henry Frenay was born in Lyon, France, on 11 November 1905, into a Catholic family with a military tradition, and staunch right-wing and anti-communist beliefs. Frenay would later say of his youth, "without knowing, I belonged to a French right-wing, traditionalist, poor, patriotic and paternalistic tradition.” His father was a soldier, who was awarded the Legion of Honour in 1912 and served in the First World War, by the end of which he had reached the rank of lieutenant colonel.

He was educated at the Lycée Ampère in Lyon and later studied Germanic languages at the university of Strasbourg in 1938, writing a dissertation on the German minority in Polish Upper Silesia.

In 1924, at the age of 19, and having attended a preparatory class at the Lycée du Parc, Frenay enrolled at Saint Cyr, graduating in 1926. In 1933, having served abroad in the army for multiple years in Germany and Syria, he returned to France, specifically to Hyères in south-east France, where he was assigned to the 3rd Alpine Infantry Brigade. He reached the rank of captain in 1934 and studied at the École Supérieure de Guerre in 1935.

At the outbreak of World War II, Frenay rejoined the French army and was assigned to the Maginot Line as a staff officer. On 13 June 1940, the 43rd Army Corps, to which he was deployed at the time, was ordered to retreat, and Frenay was taken prisoner by the German army four days later in Vosges. He managed to escape from a POW camp in Alsace on 27 June 1940, and reached the Zone libre on 15 July, heading to Marseille, where he quickly became aware of the severity of France's situation.

Having been warned of the Nazi ideological plans very early on through meetings organised by Berty Albrecht, and convinced that France would recover from its defeat, Frenay set out in August 1940 to gather the beginnings of a network around himself and Albrecht. This network, the Mouvement de Libération Nationale (MLN), was the first historical movement of internal resistance in France. Originally, the resistance's goal was not to fight the Vichy Regime. Frenay, a military man, saw Pétain as a former Marshal who had led France during the Great War and was consequently willing to give him the benefit of the doubt, hoping that he was playing a double game, preparing for the salvation of France in one way or another.

As a Resistance member, Frenay also became an editor of underground newspapers such as Vérités (Truths).

In July 1941, Frenay met with former Prefect Jean Moulin, who had been dismissed by the Vichy Regime in November 1940 due to his Radical, republican ideals and sought to find out the size of the internal resistance movements in France on the orders of General de Gaulle. Frenay, trusting de Gaulle, trained Moulin and introduced him to the Resistance. In November 1941, Frenay had a hand in the formation of the Combat group.

In January 1942, Frenay met with Moulin again following the latter's return from London, where he had been charged with unifying the French Resistance and rallying it to de Gaulle. He continued to met with Moulin frequently until 1943, though the two often disagreed on many matters, with Frenay believing that Moulin favoured pro-Soviet movements over his own, though in reality Moulin had been tasked by de Gaulle to separate the political conflict from the military resistance, with the belief that Free France, the French government in exile in London and later in Algiers, should carry out the political function under his leadership. Frenay, on the other hand, believed that the Resistance should be its own, autonomous political movement that created new post-war institutions and did not simply welcome back the old parties and associated networks, citing the failure of the party system under the Third Republic.

In February 1942, to obtain the release of militants from the Zone Libre, Frenay twice met with Henri Rollin, head of the Direction de la surveillance du territoire, then the Minister of the Interior of Vichy France, Pierre Pucheu, who suggested that Frenay should connect his movements to the French secret services, a suggestion which Frenay rejected. During a third meeting with Rollin and members of Pucheu's cabinet, Frenay stormed down. Nevertheless, these meetings led to the release of several Resistance fighters.

In the Zone Libre, Frenay sought to take military control of the French Resistance, when the three largest movements in the Zone (Francs-Tireurs et Partisans, Libération-sud and Combat) merged, which led to discussions with de Gaulle and Moulin, subsequently leading to the forming of the Conseil National de la Résistance, which, despite his leading involvement, Frenay distrusted and generally kept his own group, Combat, as separate from as possible.

When the Gestapo captured Moulin in June 1943, Frenay fled to Algiers. In November 1943, he met Charles de Gaulle, who appointed him as a minister of prisoners, refugees and deportees. Frenay, due to his major role in the internal Resistance, had desired a more important role in the Ministry of the Interior, but the differences of opinion between him and de Gaulle led to Frenay obtaining this lower ranking position.

After the war, Frenay retained his role as minister of prisoner, refugees and deportees until 21 October 1945, during which time he helped organise the return of 1,330,000 prisoners, refugees and deportees from the Allied Zone to France and their reintegration back into national life.

Frenay was a passionate supporter of the post-war moves to European unity. He took part in the Hague Congress in 1948, which created the European Movement. From 1950 to 1954, Frenay was President of the Union of European Federalists. He resigned his presidency after the rejection by France of the European Defense Community (EDC). It was at this time that he definitively broke with General de Gaulle over the latter's opposition to European integration. Frenay retired from political life and became a businessman. He published his autobiography, The Night Will End: Memoirs of a Revolutionary in 1976, which notably criticised Moulin and de Gaulle as reckless.

In 1934, Frenay met and fell in love with Berty Albrecht, a Protestant feminist and anti-fascist, twelve years his senior and married, albeit separated from her husband. Through her, he met German, anti-Nazi refugees and came to be interested in Nazism, consequently discovering the threat it posed through reading Mein Kampf. Their relationship continued until 1942, during which time they worked together on the underground newspapers. Albrecht was eventually captured by SS Officer Klaus Barbie in 1943, in a trap likely intended to draw out Frenay, and became a martyr of the resistance, committing suicide to avoid revealing information under torture.

In 1942, Frenay met Chilina Ciosi (1909–1997), head doctor of a clinic in Font-Romeu and head of a Resistance transit route to Spain. She gave birth to a child on 6 October 1943. To avoid endangering the mother and child, their son was declared "of unknown father and mother" and placed in a nursery until the end of the conflict. Frenay and Ciosi married after the war, on 25 November 1946.

Frenay died at Porto-Vecchio, Corsica, on 8 August 1988. Then- President, and former resistant, François Mitterrand issued a eulogy following Frenay's death, and across France streets have been named after him, including a square in Paris in the 12th arrondissement.

Henri Gault (French pronunciation: [ ɑ̃ʁi ɡo ], 4 November 1929 – 9 July 2000) was a French food journalist. He was co-founder of the Gault Millau guides with Christian Millau, and invented the phrase nouvelle cuisine. He later stated that he regretted it.

Gault was born Henri Gaudichon on 4 November 1929 in Pacy-sur-Eure, France. Following in his father's foot steps, he started his studies in medicine. In 1956 he became a reporter for the French newspapers Paris-Presse and L'Intransigeant.

In 1961 he began working for Paris Presse mainly covering local politics. The then editor of the paper, Christian Millau, asked Gault to try writing restaurant reviews. Given the success of the reviews, Gault and Millau compiled the reviews into a book called Guide Julliard. An American version of the book was later published by Odyssey Press.

In 1969 they started the monthly magazine GaultMillau which would eventually be published as separate editions for different regions of France. The first volume of the GaultMillau guide was published in 1972.

In 1973, Gault and Millau invented the term nouvelle cuisine in an article where they discussed the 10 commandments of the nouvelle cuisine :

Gault died from a heart attack on 9 July 2000 in Saint-Sulpice-en-Pareds at the age of 71.

Henri Guernut was a French politician born on 2 November 1876 in Lavaqueresse in the Aisne and died 28 May 1943 in Paris.

His parents were peasants in Thiérache. Henri got the attention of his teacher and was sent to the school of Vervins. He was then granted a scholarship to continue at the high school of Laon and then of Lille. He was then accepted at the prestigious Lycée Louis-le-Grand. He finally went to Sorbonne and obtained a degree in law.

He published some articles in The La Revue socialis and got involved in Dreyfus affair. He joined the French League for the Defense of Human and Citizen's Rights which had just been founded and was later called the Human Rights League (France). In 1912 he became secretary general of the league.

For his reformist position he did not participate in the 1914–1918 war. He remained general secretary of the League of Human Rights from 1912 to 1932.

In 1924, he ran for legislative elections in Château-Thierry but he was beaten. In 1928, he was elected as an independent leftist. Henri was reelected in 1932 at Radical Party (France). He finally left his responsibilities of directing the League of Human Rights.

He became Minister of National Education from 24 January to 4 June 1936 in the government of Albert Sarraut (2) but the victory of the Popular Front led to his departure. He was replaced by Jean Zay. He also lost his seat as deputy of the Aisne, in favor of Paul Lambin of SFIO – French Section of the Workers' International.

He then returned to the League of Human Rights and attacked the " Stalinist tyranny" while it not have a very clear position on the issue and did not denounce the Moscow Trials.

He continued writing his columns in his newspaper La Tribune de l'Aisne, but suspended this activity in 1940. Taking up his lawyer's dress, he tried to defend victims of the Occupation. He died in 1943 of tuberculosis.

Henri Lafont (born Henri Chamberlin, 22 April 1902 – 26 December 1944) was an underworld figure who headed the Carlingue, French auxiliaries for the German security services, during the German occupation of France in World War II.

He was executed by firing squad on 26 December 1944 alongside corrupt policeman Pierre Bonny and footballer-turned-criminal Alexandre Villaplane.

Henri Louis Chamberlin grew up in a working-class environment. His father was a typesetter and his mother a housecleaner. His father died when he was 11 and his mother was said to have abandoned him on the day of the burial in 1912. Left to his own devices, he frequently wandered in the Paris market of Les Halles, working as a courier or laborer.

In 1919 he was sent to a youth correctional facility until he turned 18 for stealing a bicycle. On his release, he was drafted into the 39th Regiment of Algerian tirailleurs. When he was discharged two years later he was sentenced to two years in prison and ten years of banishment from Paris for receiving a stolen vehicle. While in prison he met two men who later became his associates, Lionel de Wiet, a cocaine addict who posed as an aristocrat, and Adrien Estébétéguy, known as "the Basque" or "Cold-Hand", a violent thug from Toulouse who served eight sentences for robbery. He also married while in prison, at Aix-en-Provence, and later had two children.

He settled in Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne, where he found work. After a theft of 2000 francs from the store where he worked, he was sent to a prison camp in Cayenne. He changed his name to Norman, then Lafont.

In early 1940, Chamberlin was running a Simca dealership as Henri Normand in the outer Parisian quarter of Porte des Lilas and made contacts among the police. He joined a volunteer brigade but was arrested in Paris for desertion. In June 1940, he was sent to Cherche-Midi prison, then, as the Wehrmacht advanced, to a camp in Cepoy. There, he met a German spy named Karl Hennecke and a Swiss spy named Max Stoecklin, who had been an Abwehr agent for Hermann Brandl since 1934 and escaped with them.

He returned to Paris, by then occupied, with his fellow escapees, members of the Abwehr. Lafont later remarked: "If the guys on the other side, the resistance, had suggested something to me, I would have done it no question. But in July and August 1940, I didn't know about the resistance and hadn't seen anything. I didn't even know what it was."

Agent Max Stoecklin, his fellow prison escapee, set him up as a buying agent for the Wehrmacht, in charge of appropriating French wealth. He made himself useful, buying everything from clothes to furniture to food, and came to the attention of Hermann Brandl, Abwehr special agent, and of captain Wilhelm Radecke [ de ] of the Wehrmacht. He moved several times and wound up at 93 rue Lauriston [ fr ], the property of a Madame Weinberg before the war.

In July 1940, Lafont and Radecke recruited 27 felons from Fresnes prison. Colonel Oscar Reile [ fr ; de ], their superior, ordered Lafont's arrest on learning of the freed prisoners.

Radecke warned Lafont of this and suggested he find one of the leaders of the anti-Nazi resistance, former Belgian spymaster Otto Lambrecht, sought by the Abwehr, whose capture would earn the favor of the authorities. Lafont arrested Lambrecht in the zone libre and brought him back to Gestapo headquarters in Paris in the trunk of his car, bound hand and foot. There he tortured him with his own hands. This resulted in the dismantlement of Belgian counter-espionage after the arrests of 600 people.

He joined the police and was given badge number 6474 R. He reigned over a band of around one hundred felons and enjoyed almost complete immunity. A system of penalties from fines to death sanctioned those who did not obey his rules. The band was made up of gangsters and other felons, but also of corrupt policemen. The best-known, Pierre Bonny, became his lieutenant.

Near the end of 1940, Hermann Brandl asked Lafont to smuggle an agent into North Africa, so he could install a secret transmitter for communicating with German authorities. Lafont made camp with his team at Cap Doumia near Algiers. But two of his accomplices were arrested by the police and the mission failed. Lafont was sentenced to death in absentia.

The Germans used the Bonny-Lafont gang to checkmate the Resistance, and they excelled at this task.

Torture was common in interrogations: prisoners' fingernails were torn out, and their teeth filed. They were beaten, kicked, and burned with cigarettes or welding torches; water torture and electric shocks were also inflicted. The gang allegedly also carried out assassinations sponsored by the Germans.

In 1942, the Carlingue was put under the authority of the Gestapo. Lafont outdid himself to please his new superiors, notably giving a sumptuous Bentley as a wedding gift to Helmut Knochen, an aide to Heydrich charged with bringing the secret police to France.

In early 1942, he reached an understanding with the Devisenschutzkommando (DSK) (Detachment for currency security) based at 5 rue Pillet-Will, which was tasked with the very lucrative battle against the black market. He received a commission of up to 20% on these transactions. It was a matter of introducing himself into high society, gaining the confidence of its members, and concentrating on people with problems who wanted to hide money in Switzerland or obtain travel passes. At the meetup, team members would produce their police credentials and seize the currency. When their victims were Jewish, the team not only confiscated everything but also took them to the SD on Avenue Foch. The gang also committed many burglaries, calling them police raids; in December 1942 Lafont shared fine china looted from the former American embassy among the most prominent German restaurants of Paris.

Lafont, a former petty criminal, became the most important man in France, lived large and enjoyed having important people ask him for favors. He organised many society soirées and took his superiors out to the best cabarets and nightclubs of Paris, such as the One-Two-Two. He visited these establishments, many of which his gang was extorting, in German uniform, which displeased the Wehrmacht information services.

Frequent visitors to "the 93" included police prefect Amédée Bussière [ fr ], journalist Jean Luchaire, actress Yvette Lebon and her daughter, as well as quite a few women known as the Countesses of the Gestapo. Lafont was on familiar terms with René Bousquet and Pierre Laval, but his relationships with other collaborators like Fernand de Brinon were rather poor.

In 1943, the gang inflicted heavy losses on the Défense de la France network, with the arrests of some sixty members. Défense de la France survived the blow, but among those arrested was Geneviève de Gaulle, niece of the general, brought in on 20 July 1943 by former inspector Bonny.

Other Parisian gestapistes existed, with whom the Lafont-Bonny gang struggled for power: the "Corsican gang", the "Neuilly Gestapo", directed by Frédéric Martin alias Rudy de Mérode, once associated with Gédéon van Houten [ fr ]. The Lafont gang, with the support of the Gestapo, which appreciated its effectiveness against Resistance networks, managed to get these competitors deported.

At the beginning of 1944, Lafont proposed and, with Algerian nationalist Muhammad al-Maadi (a former French officer of La Cagoule), created the secret right-wing North African Legion [ fr ], made up of men from North Africa. Wearing the uniform of the milice, the brigade saw combat against the résistance intérieure française : the Maquis du Limousin (three sections saw combats against the maquis de Corrèze, notably Tulle), then the Périgord in Dordogne, (one section) with the massacre of 52 hostages at Mussidan. in Sainte-Marie-de-Chignac 23 hostages executed or in an abandoned quarry near Brantôme 26 hostages including Georges Dumas, shot on the command of Alexandre Villaplane and in Franche-Comté (one section). The legion was dissolved in July 1944 and dispersed. Some of its former members went with el-Maadi to Germany and others joined the Free India Legion SS Freies Indien Legion).

Bonny and Henri Chamberlin, a.k.a. Lafont, were interrogated at the Conciergerie.

Brought before the investigating magistrate, Pierre Bonny confessed everything and implicated more than a thousand other people in the "rue Lauriston affair". A wave of panic swept Paris, especially after the discovery of the black market in false Resistance certificates.

The trial started 1 December 1944 and ended on 11 December. A few people testified on Lafont's behalf about his service, including resistance fighters for whom he had done favors or whose family members he had saved. At the farm the police found 2.5 million francs in small bills in a laundry basket.

When the verdict condemning them both to death was read, Pierre Bonny had to be held up by the gendarmes, while Lafont seemed very relaxed, with a smile on his lips.

On 26 December, Lafont faced a firing squad at the Fort de Montrouge [ fr ]. Moments before he told his lawyer, maître Drieu:

I regret nothing, Madame. Four years surrounded by orchids, dahlias and Bentleys were worth it! I have lived ten times faster, is all. Tell my son to always stay out of the caves. May he be a man like his father!

Henri Chamberlin/Lafont declined a blindfold and died tied to the stake bareheaded with a cigarette between his lips.

The French Connection was purportedly financed with funds from the Carlingue via Auguste Ricord, Lafont's employee, arrested in September 1972 in the United States.

Henri-Paul Pellaprat (pronounced [ ɑ̃ʁi pɔl pɛlapʁa ] ; Saint-Maur-des-Fossés, 1869–1954) was a French chef, founder with the journalist Marthe Distel of Le Cordon Bleu cooking school in Paris. He was the author of La cuisine familiale et pratique and other classic French cookery texts. He worked from the age of twelve as a pastry boy and then cooked at many of the most famous restaurants of La Belle Époque Paris such as the Maison Dorée. He taught at l’École du Cordon bleu for 32 years; his students including Maurice Edmond Sailland, later known as Curnonsky, and Raymond Oliver.

In 1966, after his death, his book L'Art Culinaire Moderne was translated into English and published for the American market under the name Modern French Culinary Art. It contained 2030 recipes and many color photos, covering everything from everyday casual French cooking to haute cuisine. Discussing this translation, the New York Times wrote, "one could not hardly ask for a better or more sumptuous one", adding that this book "demonstrates once again that cooking can be among the higher arts."

Henry Franklin-Bouillon (3 September 1870 - 12 November 1937) was a French politician.

Franklin-Bouillon was born in St Helier, Jersey. He began as a member of the Radical-Socialist Party, but belonged to its furthest right-wing: he advocated that the Radical-Socialists join with Poincaré 's alliance of centre-right and right-wing parties to oppose communism and socialism and support punitive military policy towards Germany. In 1927 these stances prompted him to lead two-dozen like-minded deputies to quit the Radical-Socialist Party, forming a mid-sized centre-right parliamentary party of Independent Radicals, named the Social and Radical Left group.

He met Mustafa Kemal Atatürk in Ankara in 1921 and they became close friends. In 1922 he travelled through the devastated areas by the retreating Greek army and after visiting the burned town of Manisa, he declared that out of 11,000 houses in the city of Magnesia (Manisa) only 1,000 remained.

Franklin-Bouillon died aged 67 in Paris.

Herbes de Provence (French: [ ɛʁb də pʁɔvɑ̃s ] ; Provençal : èrbas de Provença, [ ˈɛr.bas də pɾoˈvɛn.sa ]) is a mixture of dried herbs considered typical of the Provence region of southwestern France. Formerly simply a descriptive term, commercial blends started to be sold under this name in the 1970s. These blends often contain savory, marjoram, rosemary, thyme, oregano, tarragon, basil, bay leaves, and black pepper. Lavender leaves or buds are also sometimes included in North American formulations. The herb mixture is typically used with grilled foods, stews, and soups.

...the famous mixtures of herbes de Provence... were unknown to my Provençal grandmothers, who used, individually and with discernment, thyme, rosemary and savory gathered in the countryside.

Provençal cuisine uses many herbs which are often characterized collectively as herbes de Provence, but not in specific combinations, and not historically sold as a mixture. It was in the 1970s that varying mixtures were formulated by spice wholesalers, including Ducros in France, which is now part of McCormick & Company.

The commercial name herbes de Provence has no Protected Geographical Status or other legal definition. Indeed, only 10% of herbes de Provence sold in France are produced in France; 95% come from Central European (especially Poland) and Eastern European (notably Albania) countries, the Maghreb region of Northwest Africa, or China. Herbes de Provence are often sold in larger bags than other herbs, and the price in Provence is considerably lower than for other herbs.

Herbes de Provence mixtures typically contain a combination of savory, marjoram, rosemary, thyme, oregano, with other herbs, such as basil, bay leaf, tarragon, summer savory, parsley, and fennel, as well as chervil and hyssop, added or substituted by region. In the North American market, for example, lavender leaves are typically included with the base herbs, though lavender does not appear in the recipes in Jean-Baptiste Reboul 's 1910 compendium of Provençal cooking.

The French Label Rouge quality assurance definition is 19% thyme, 27% rosemary, 27% savory, and 27% oregano.

Herbes de Provence are primarily used to flavour grilled foods such as fish and meat, and vegetable stews. The mixture can be added to foods before, during, or after cooking, or mixed with cooking oil and lightly roasted before cooking. They can also be incorporated in vinaigrettes, sprinkled on raw foods such as salads, or used to season fresh cheese, such as goat cheese rolled in herbes de Provence.

Hermès International S.C.A. (/ ɛər ˈ m ɛ z / air- MEHZ, French: [ ɛʁmɛs ]), using the trade name Hermès Paris or simply Hermès, is a French luxury goods company that was founded in 1837 by Thierry Hermès in Paris, France. At that time, it specialized in the saddlery and harness making trade, producing equipment for horse riders and their horses. The company then branched out into trades including leather goods (which is now its core business), followed by silk, ready-to-wear, watchmaking, jewellery, fashion accessories and perfumery. In 2020, the beauty division added a sixteenth business line.

Hermès is still controlled by descendants of the founder, Thierry Hermès. The Hermès family is divided into three branches – the Dumas, Guerrand and Puech cousins – united within the H51 holding company. Except for the period from 2003 to 2013, during which Patrick Thomas was CEO, the company has always been run by a descendant of the founder. Today, it employs around 26,500 people, and near 16,349 employees in France, where it has 63 manufactures and production sites. In 2025, Hermès generated sales of 16 billion euros, with a net income of 5 billion euros.

Thierry Hermès was born on 10 January 1801 in Krefeld (in what is now Germany) to a French father and a German mother. He settled in 1829 in Pont-Audemer, Normandy, a town known for working hides, where he was employed as an apprentice to a saddler and harness maker. Having become a master craftsman, he returned to Paris in 1837, where he opened his first workshop near the church of La Madeleine. He designed, made and sold high-quality harnesses and other equipment for horses. Hermès won several awards, including a first-class medal at the 1867 Exposition Universelle, which gave him access to a prestigious clientele, including world leaders such as Tsar Nicholas II. He died in Neuilly-sur-Seine in 1878.

In 1880, Charles-Émile Hermès, Thierry's son, took over the direction of the company. He moved it to 24 rue du Faubourg-Saint-Honoré, where Hermès International is still headquartered. In 1889, assisted by his two sons, Adolphe and Émile-Maurice, he added other products for riders, such as horse blankets and silk helmets. They succeeded their father in 1902, creating Hermès Frères. Shortly after, Émile-Maurice began furnishing the emperor of Russia with saddles. Émile-Maurice also created the Haut à Courroies bag for horsemen to carry their saddle and boots.

During World War I, Émile-Maurice traveled to America. The country was booming, and transportation, particularly the automobile, was progressing. On his return, he and his brother applied their saddlery expertise, including saddle stitch sewing, to the expanding luggage market. He also returned from this trip with the zipper technology, which he introduced to leather goods and fashion. Subsequently, Émile-Maurice was granted the exclusive rights to use the zipper for leather goods and clothing. In 1918, Hermès introduced the first leather golf jacket with a zipper, made for Edward, Prince of Wales. The zipper became known in France as the fermeture Hermès (Hermès fastener).

In 1919, Émile-Maurice Hermès bought out his brother and became the sole proprietor. He extended the business to travel accessories, sports, automobiles, jewellery, and fashion. In 1922, the first leather handbags were introduced after Émile-Maurice's wife complained of not being able to find one to her liking. Émile-Maurice created the handbag collection himself. In the 1920s and 1930s, the designer Lola Prusac created and developed a line of clothing adapted to the emerging beach and mountain sports. Hermès fashion then appealed to an affluent clientele of all nationalities.

In the 1930s, Émile-Maurice's three sons-in-law, Robert Dumas, Jean René Guerrand, and Francis Puech, joined the company and created the ladies' bag with straps, which was revisited and christened the Kelly bag in the 1950s. Guerrand developed the perfumery business, while Dumas spearheaded the development of leather goods and silk. It was during World War II that orange, imposed by shortages and stockouts caused by the German occupation of France, became the official color of the house. At the same time, Émile-Maurice Hermès chose the drawing Duc attelé, groom à l'attente, by Alfred de Dreux to illustrate the Hermès logo.

In 1924, Hermès established a presence in the United States and opened two shops outside of Paris. In 1929, the first women's couture apparel collection was previewed in Paris. During the 1930s, Hermès introduced some of its most recognized original goods such as the leather "Sac à dépêches" in 1935, and the Hermès carrés (square scarves) in 1937. The scarves became integrated into French culture. In 1938, the "Chaîne d'ancre" bracelet and the riding jacket and outfit joined the classic collection. By this point, the company's designers began to draw inspirations from paintings, books, and objets d'art. The 1930s also witnessed Hermès's entry into the United States market by offering products in a Neiman Marcus department store in New York ; however, it later withdrew. In 1949, the same year as the launch of the Hermès silk tie, the first perfume, "Eau d'Hermès", was produced.

From the mid-1930s, Hermès employed the Swiss watchmaker Universal Genève as the brand's designer of timepieces, producing a line of men's wrist chronographs (manufactured in 18K gold or stainless steel) and women's Art Déco cuff watches in 18K gold, steel, or platinum. Both models contained dials signed either "Hermès" or "Hermès Universal Genève", while the watch movements were signed "Universal Genève S.A". The Hermès/Universal partnership lasted until the 1950s.

Émile-Maurice summarized the Hermès philosophy during his leadership as "leather, sport, and a tradition of refined elegance."

Robert Dumas took over as head of Hermès on the death of his father-in-law in 1951, while closely collaborating with his brother-in-law Jean-René Guerrand. He introduced original handbags, jewelry, and accessories, and was particularly interested in design possibilities with the silk scarves. During the mid-20th century, scarf production diminished.

A few years after the 1947 creation of Comptoir Nouveau de la Parfumerie, launched on the initiative of Jean-René Guerrand, the house's first perfumes were produced in France, such as the perfume Calèche in 1961. Eau d'Hermès, created by Edmond Roudnitska in 1951, harked back to the company's origins, its fragrance recalling that of leather.

In the 1950s, the Kelly bag, then simply called a lady's small strap bag, found its name when a photograph of Grace Kelly, the new princess of Monaco wearing the bag, was published in Life magazine and went around the world. The late 1960s saw the appearance of the first women's ready-to-wear lines, designed by Catherine de Károlyi. The company made its international debut, opening stores in Europe, Asia, and the United States.

Jean-Louis Dumas, the son of Robert Dumas-Hermès, joined the family firm in 1964. He took over in 1978 and developed new businesses within Hermès. He created the watchmaking subsidiary La Montre Hermès, in Bienne, Switzerland, and acquired the English John Lobb Bootmaker, glass manufacturer Saint-Louis and goldsmith Puiforcat [ fr ]. From the 1980s, tableware became a strong segment of the firm. And, overall, the collection of Hermès goods expanded in 1990 to include over 30,000 pieces. New materials used in the collection included porcelain and crystal.

Dumas brought in designers Eric Bergère and Bernard Sanz to revamp the apparel collection and, in collaboration, added unusual entries. They included python motorcycle jackets and ostrich-skin jeans, which were dubbed as "a snazzier version of what Hermès has been all along." Annual sales in 1978, when Jean-Louis became head of the firm, were reported at US$50 million. By 1990, annual sales were reported at US$460 million, mainly due to Dumas's strategy.

The first advertising campaign, featuring a young girl in jeans wearing a silk square, marked the desire to appeal to a new clientele and broke with the house's traditional codes. In 1984, a discussion with his neighbor during a flight from Paris to London, Jane Birkin, led him to design the Birkin Bag. The Birkin Bag, or simply "Birkin," was inspired by how Jane Birkin would carry her items in a large, woven basket. Jean-Louis Dumas also recruited new talent such as designer Martin Margiela to modernize the ready-to-wear collections. Hermès then relocated its workshops and design studios to Pantin, just outside Paris.

In 1989, Hermès became a limited partnership, before being listed on the Stock Exchange four years later. At the time, the equity sale generated great excitement. The 425,000 shares floated at FFr 300 (US$55 at the time) were oversubscribed by 34 times. Dumas told Forbes magazine that the equity sale would help lessen family tensions by allowing some members to liquidate their holdings without "squabbling over share valuations among themselves." To this time, the Hermès family was still retaining a strong hold of about 80% in stocks, placing Jean-Louis Dumas and the entire family on the Forbes list of billionaires. Mimi Tompkins of U.S. News & World Report called the company "one of Paris' best guarded jewels."

In the following years, Dumas decreased Hermès' franchises from 250 to 200 and increased company-owned stores from 60 to 100 to better control sales of its products. The plan was to cost about FFr 200 million in the short term but to increase profits in the long term. Having around FFr 500 million to invest, Hermès pressed ahead, targeting China for company-operated boutiques, finally opening a store in The Peninsula Beijing in 1997. By the late 1990s, Hermès continued to diminish the number of franchised stores, buying them up and opening more company-operated boutiques. The fashion industry was caught off guard in September 1999, when Jean-Louis decided to pay FFr 150 million for a 35% stake in the Jean-Paul Gaultier fashion house.

Hermès acquired a 35% stake in Jean Paul Gaultier in 1999. In 2004, Jean-Paul Gaultier was appointed head of women's ready-to-wear, succeeding Martin Margiela. He remained there for seven years and Hermès eventually sold its shares to the Spanish group Puig. Also in 2004, Jean-Claude Ellena became the in-house perfumer or "nose" and has created several successful scents, including the Hermessence line of fragrances. This was followed by the acquisition of several plants to secure supplies of raw materials, but also tanneries, including Tannerie d'Annonay, bought out from its employees in 2013 and Tanneries du Puy-en-Velay, bought out from shoemaker J. M. Weston in 2015. From the 2010s, Hermès also stepped up the number of factories it opened in France, particularly for leather goods. This was done to meet growing demand for products that each require many hours of work, but also to maintain a high level of quality by taking advantage of French craftsmanship.

Jean-Louis Dumas retired from the group for health reasons in 2006 and appointed Patrick Thomas, with whom he had managed the company in tandem since 2004, as head of Hermès International. Thomas became the first Hermès executive from outside the founder's family. Pierre-Alexis Dumas, son of Jean-Louis Dumas, became artistic director of Hermès. In thirty years, Hermès sales will have risen from 42 million in 1978 to 1.9 billion euros in 2009. Jean-Louis Dumas died in Paris on 1 May 2010 at the age of 72.

On 23 October 2010, the LVMH group took a stake in Hermès to around 17.1%, with no official desire to take control. A financial battle ensued, with the heirs of the Hermès family suspecting Bernard Arnault, LVMH's majority shareholder, of wanting to take total control of the family business. Hermès management then clarified that its status as a management limited partnership protected it from any hostile financial operations, such as a takeover.

A new holding company, named "H51", made up of 52 of the main shareholder heirs and holding 50.2% of Hermès capital, was created in 2011 to counter the LVMH group. Julie Guerrand, from the 6th generation, took the helm. This new entity requires each person with at least 0.5% of the capital to declare his or her name, as the company's management wants to know now who owns what. At the end of 2014, the confrontations between LVMH and Hermès came to an end with an agreement signed between the two groups. The majority of Hermès shares acquired by LVMH were redistributed to its own shareholders, including the holding company of Bernard Arnault. At the end of December 2016, the descendants of Thierry Hermès collectively owned 65.1% of the share capital of Hermès International S.A. In 2017, Arnault announced the sale of his remaining shares in Hermès.

In 2012, the company posted sales of 3.5 billion euros. That year, sales were divided between five zones: 16% for France, 17% for America, 20% for Europe (excluding France), 12% for Japan, and 33% for Asia, excluding Japan. In 2013, Axel Dumas, a member of the 6th generation of Thierry Hermès descendants, was appointed managing director of Hermès International, replacing Patrick Thomas. He had been successively France sales director, then managing director of the jewelry and leather goods-saddlery divisions before becoming managing director of the group operations in 2011. Under his leadership, the decision was taken to expand the company's production and distribution capacities. Hermès announced an increase in its turnover of 9.7 percent, representing more than €4 billion in sales. In March 2018, Hermès opened a multi-story shop at the Dubai Mall. In 2019, the brand was ranked 33rd in the Forbes List "World's Most Valuable Brands". The company officially joined the CAC 40 in June 2018, with 57 billion euros in market capitalization. compared with 600 million euros when it went public in 1993.

Against the backdrop of the COVID-19 pandemic, the group saw sales fall by 7% and net income by 9% in 2020. Nevertheless, it resumed a sustained pace of growth the following year, and announced a net income of 2.445 billion euros on sales of 9 billion euros, higher figures than before the pandemic. The 2021 review of WIPO 's annual World Intellectual Property Indicators ranked Hermès 7th in the world for the 68 industrial design registrations that were published under the Hague System during 2020. This position is significantly up on their previous 15th-place ranking for their 27 industrial design registrations published in 2019. In 2021, the group reported a net profit of €2.445 billion and €9 billion in sales, achieving an operating margin of 39.3%. These results surpassed pre-pandemic figures. Hermès also entered the EURO STOXX 50.

In March 2022, after the beginning of the Russo-Ukrainian War, Hermès announced the suspension of its activities in Russia. About 60 employees were affected across three stores. In 2024, Hermès' net profit reached €4.6 billion, with a 40.5% operating margin. Sales growth spanned all regions, totaling €15.2 billion. Analysts suggest this resilience is due to Hermès impeccable brand image, storytelling, and positioning, as well as citing the broader consumer interest in "quiet luxury". Hermès presented "Hermès in the Making," a traveling exhibition across France, showcasing its artisanal craftsmanship. Also in 2023, the company won a copyright lawsuit against American artist Mason Rothschild, who replicated and sold the Birkin bag as an NFT collection. In the same year, the group announced four new production sites in France: Espagnac, Loupes, Riom, and Charleville-Mézières.

In 2025, the group's revenue reached 16 billion euros, with a net profit of 5 billion euros.

In October 2025, British designer Grace Wales Bonner was announced as Hermès' creative director of men's ready-to-wear. She is set to present her first collection for the brand in January 2027.

Hermès has sixteen product divisions that encompassed leather, scarves, ties, men's wear, women's wear, perfume, watches, stationery, footwear, gloves, enamelware, decorative arts, tableware, beauty, and jewellery. The company licenses no products and keeps tight control over the design and manufacture of its vast inventory. By the end of 2025, Hermès International's divisions, ranked in proportion to their contribution to sales, are distributed as follows:

Horse tack and leather crafting are the original Hermès specialty. The Hermès leather goods-saddlery branch designs and manufactures all the company's families of leather objects. Craftsmen working in leather factories in France make riding and travel goods, women's and men's bags, and small leather goods. Each product is handcrafted using the raw materials available. This explains why it takes so long to obtain the most sought-after confections such as Kelly or Birkin bags, while Hermès is often wrongly accused of organizing shortages. There is also a department called Hermès Horizons, in which craftsmen make unique objects to order, sometimes far from its usual productions, such as boxing gloves or a wooden canoe.

A famous Hermès handbag, the " Birkin bag ", was named after British actress Jane Birkin. In a chance encounter with Jean-Louis Dumas, she complained that her bag was not practical for everyday use. Consequently, he invited her to France, where they co-designed the bag in 1984. Birkin later stopped carrying her namesake bag due to her tendonitis, as the bag became too large and heavy for her to carry. According to Vogue : "Jane Birkin 'is satisfied by the measures taken by Hermès', according to the brand, following an investigation by the fashion house [that refuted] claims made by PETA that its famous Birkin bags were being 'constructed from the skins of factory-farmed and cruelly slaughtered crocodiles.' "

While the Kelly and Birkin are two of the house's most famous bags, Hermès has a wide range of other popular handbags. One, the bolide is a dome-shaped carry-all that comes in varying sizes with a leather shoulder strap. It is widely recognized as the first handbag that was constructed with a zipper. The bolide comes in both stiff leathers, such as Epsom, and relaxed leathers, such as Clemence. Clemence leather is sometimes referred to as Bianca leather - a particular grain that originates from France. Another popular bag from the Hermès house is the Evelyne, a comparatively affordable saddle-style bag meant to be worn cross-body with a traditional fabric strap. The evelyne is available in 4 different sizes: the TPM (16 cm), PM (29 cm), GM (33 cm)and TGM (40 cm) and is generally made in relaxed leathers like clemence. The evelyne boasts a perforated "H" motif that is meant to be hidden and worn towards the body, to allow easy access to the top of the bag. Hermès operate on a wishlist system for these items around the world as they are coveted and highly sought after.

In 2021, the Farm Transparency Project released video footage from three Australian crocodile farms owned by Hermès, which showed the small cages and concrete floors the animals live on and how they are slaughtered, including by stabbing and electrocution.

Ready-to-wear department was born at Hermès in the 1920s-1930s, initially with sportswear, with the first menswear, a leather golf jacket, created for Duke of Windsor, Edward VIII, in 1925. Then, during the 1940s, Hermès gradually turned away from the sportswear focus to ready-to-wear, officially launched in 1967 with Catherine de Károlyi. Hermès clothing and accessories are now the group's second largest business. This department includes women and men ready-to-wear as well as fashion accessories. In addition, several renowned fashion designers have headed it, such as Lola Prusac, Martin Margiela, Jean-Paul Gaultier, or Christophe Lemaire. Today, this division is run by Nadège Vanhée and men's ready-to-wear by Véronique Nichanian. In 2027, Grace Wales Bonner became creative director of menswear ready-to-wear.

Silk and textiles represent, in 2023, the Hermès group's fourth activity. This activity is headed by Holding Textile Hermès (HTH), located in Pierre-Bénite, a town in the metropolis of Lyon. It is structured in half a dozen subsidiaries and employs around 800 people. The first carré de soie [ fr ], called "Jeu des omnibus et dames blanches" and illustrating the Parisian Madeleine-Bastille public carriage line, was created in 1937. Hermès oversaw the production of its scarves throughout the entire process, purchasing raw silk, spinning it into yarn, and weaving it into fabric twice as strong and heavy as most scarves available at the time. A variety of ranges followed: squares, ties, scarves, and shawls. Since the 1980s, Hermès has controlled the entire silk and textile production chain. In 2020, a technical innovation, kept secret by Hermès, makes it possible to print squares with different designs and colors on the front and back of the carré, double-sided.

The company's scarf designers spend years creating new print patterns that are individually screen-printed. Designers can choose from over 70,000 different colors. When production first began, a dedicated factory was established in Lyon, France, the same year that Hermès celebrated its 100th anniversary. Contemporary Hermès carrés measure 90 cm × 90 cm (35 in × 35 in), weigh 79 grams (2.8 oz), and are woven from the silk of 300 mulberry moth cocoons. All hems are hand-stitched and motifs are wide-ranging. Two collections per year are released, along with some reprints of older designs and limited editions, and two collections per year are introduced in a Cashmere /silk blend. Since 1937, Hermès has produced over 3,000 unique designs; the horse motif is particularly famous and popular. The ubiquitous "Brides de Gala" version, introduced in 1957, has been produced more than 70,000 times. A Hermès scarf is sold somewhere in the world every 25 seconds; by the late 1970s, more than 1.1 million scarves had been sold worldwide.

Between 1926 and 1978, Hermès marketed timepieces through partnerships with Jaeger-LeCoultre, Patek Philippe and Rolex. It then contributed its creative skills and leather working know-how. It was under the impetus of Jean-Louis Dumas, in 1978, that the company really launched into watchmaking with the installation of a workshop in Bienne, in Switzerland. At that time, watches were almost exclusively for men, so he decided to appeal to women too, with a breakthrough design in the Arceau line, presented the same year. This line was followed by Cape Cod in 1991 with a double-turn bracelet. More recently, Hermès has introduced several watch models, including the Slim d’Hermès (2015), developed in collaboration with graphic designer Philippe Apeloig, the Galop d’Hermès (2019), designed by Ini Archibong with numerals created by type designer Vincent Sauvaire, the men's Hermès H08 line, launched in 2021, and the women's Hermès Cut model, introduced in 2024.

From the 2000s onwards, Hermès acquired stakes in several watchmaking companies, as in 2006 with a 25% stake in Vaucher manufacture for 25 million Swiss francs, already a supplier of movements for the Hermès house, with an investment of around sixteen million euros. It then acquired Natéber, a dial manufacturer, in 2012, and Joseph Erard, a watch case specialist, the following year. The first watches with in-house movements were released in 2012. In 2018, the company made its debut at the Watches and Wonders trade show.

Since the 1930s, Hermès has been designing perfumes on a confidential basis, via special orders tailor-made for some of its customers. Perfume truly appeared at Hermès with the creation of the Comptoir Nouveau de la Parfumerie. In 1951, the first Hermès fragrance, Eau d'Hermès, created by Edmond Roudnitska, was sold in France. The first women's fragrances, Doblis and Calèche, were launched in 1955 and 1961, respectively.

Hermès is one of the few luxury houses in France not to outsource the production of its fragrances and to have its own nez, like Jean-Claude Ellena, Hermès' exclusive perfumer from 2004 to 2016. He is the creator of several best-sellers such as Un jardin en Méditerranée, Terre d'Hermès and Hermessences. Hermès produces all its perfumes in its own workshops at Le Vaudreuil, in Normandy, which explains the small share of this division in the group's total sales. Christine Nagel joined the group in 2014 and, following his departure in 2016, succeeded him as olfactory designer.

In 2020, the group launched its sixteenth business, beauty, with a lipstick collection named Rouge Hermès and inspired by its carré de soie. Followed the brushes and nail polishes in 2021, then in 2022 the first complexion products. In 2023, Hermès launched Regard, a new collection dedicated to the eyes.

Among the group's other divisions is Maison d'Hermès (Hermès Home), which consists of the table services, household linens, outdoor textiles, decorations, furniture, and carpets lines. The first Hermès objects for the home were created in the 1920s. A table setting department was created in 1984.

Hermès also has a jewelry division, which has its origins in the equestrian bucklery. This craft appeared in 1927 with the first silver and leather bracelet, Filet de selle. In 1938, the Chaîne d'ancre bracelet, emblematic of the house, was created by Robert Dumas. Hermès jewellery is thought around the themes of equitation or water sports. For years, Hermès has partnered with Tuareg tribesmen for silver jewelry. The Saharan nomads ' traditional motifs were often mirrored in various Hermès products, including scarves.

Hermès International's profitability is the result of a "long-term strategy aimed at enhancing the know-how and creativity of its craftsmen, while maintaining a high degree of innovation". Their strong brand identity and independence as a family business also contribute. This strategy is illustrated by the statement made by Jean-Louis Dumas in 2007: "We don't have a policy of image; we have a policy of product". Hermès considers that its best advertising is the quality of its products, which is why it has neither muses nor a marketing department.

At Hermès, the craftsman must master every stage of production; it can take up to six years for a craftsman to master some processes. Particular attention is paid to the choice of raw material : the company has a department dedicated to the purchase, tanning, and dyeing of skins. It has also invested in crocodile farms in Australia. It takes an average of two years to train a craftsman on leather and six years on precious skins. Many take up their trade by vocation, but others transfer from other careers. To this end, the company works in collaboration with France Travail.

The Group's stated aim is to maintain a high level of quality, even if this is sometimes to the detriment of sales growth. The aim is also to rebalance the weight of the various divisions, with leather still accounting for 47% of sales in 2012.

Founded as a saddlery and harness maker, Hermès has always focused on the horse, as illustrated by a quip attributed to Jean-Louis Dumas : "Our first customer is the horse. The second, the rider". At the beginning of the 20th century, with the advent of the automobile and transatlantic travel, it broadened its focus to leather good; still, it continues to provide equestrian goods.

In 2009, Hermès created the Saut Hermès, a certified CSI 5* Concours de Saut International show jumping competition, the highest International Federation for Equestrian Sports category classification. Beyond the competitions, the event is peppered with equestrian shows and demonstrations.

The Hermès distribution network includes nearly 300 stores in 45 countries, plus a presence in specialty stores for watches, perfumes, and tableware. Hermès' iconic and founding store, the brand's first “Maison”, is located at 24 rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré in Paris and has existed since the company's beginnings in 1880.

Between 1880 and 1920, the first stores opened in France in seaside resorts, spa towns or cities related to equitation. Hermès' international expansion began in New York City, with hatmaker Dobb's in 1924, and continued more broadly after World War II, with the development of a network of directly-operated stores.

Between 1950 and 2000, this network expanded internationally. From the 2000s onwards, Hermès opened new “maisons”, flagship-style stores, in various countries. In September 2000, the second after 24 rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré in Paris appeared in New York City, on Madison Avenue. Other Hermès “houses” would follow in 2001 in the Ginza district, in Tokyo, in 2006 in Seoul or in 2014 in Shanghai.

In November 2010, the company opened a new store in the Hôtel Lutetia, in the 6th arrondissement of Paris. Being a former swimming pool built in 1935 and listed as a monument historique, major renovation work was required to transform the premises into a store. It is spread over two levels and showcases all the company's divisions, with a particular focus on the home. The space also features a bookshop and a teahouse.

In 2026, Hermès opened its sixth " Maison ", a store bringing together all of its craft divisions, in London, on Bond Street.

The Hermès Group has some sixty production sites, which account for around 60% of total output, most of them in France. The first workshop opened at 24 rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré in 1880, and it wasn't until 1989 that the first dedicated silk workshop outside Paris opened, in Lyon. Hermès, for example, has a leather-working workshop in the village of Saint-Vincent-de-Paul, near Bordeaux, where it employs 180 people. Others have recently opened in Louviers in the Eure, in Tournes in the Ardennes or in Riom in the Puy-de-Dôme. Some fifteen workshops are also dedicated to repairing around 200,000 products every year.

Hermès sends around 80 master trainers, employees who have worked for the group for at least eight years, to each new workshop to train incoming craftspeople. This mission is completed in an average of eighteen months. Assembly-line work is outlawed, and the emphasis is on quality rather than productivity. In leather goods, for example, each bag is handcrafted. In September 2021, Hermès opened the École Hermès des savoir-faire, accredited by the French Ministry of Education, and awards a Certificat d'aptitude professionnelle (CAP) leatherwork diploma. In 2022, it also received accreditation from the French Federation of Leather Goods to issue the cutting and sewing Certificat de qualification professionnelle (CQP).

The “petit h” or “re-creation workshop” was launched in 2010 under the impetus of Pascale Mussard, a member of the sixth generation of the Hermès family, who would later become its artistic director. Based in Pantin on the premises of Hermès, it is a creative laboratory of objects based on the recovery and detours of materials. The materials used come from offcuts derived from various Hermès divisions, but also from those of other Group brands, such as Cristalleries de Saint-Louis or Puiforcat [ fr ]. It enables former craftsmen to give a second life to scraps of leather, fabric, silk or even buttons, buckles, Saint-Louis crystal and any other prestige material that has a defect and is destined to be used no more. Initially sold on an ad hoc basis, petit h productions have, since 2013, had their own dedicated space in the Hermès boutique at 17 rue de Sèvres in Paris.

The corporate foundation Hermès was created in 2008 on the initiative of Pierre-Alexis Dumas. Its vocation is to support actions in favor of artistic creation and the transmission of know-how, solidarity and the preservation of biodiversity. It develops its own programs such as exhibitions and artist residencies for the visual arts. In 2016, for example, the foundation was behind Manufacto, a program to raise awareness of workmanship among the younger generation in schools. Students design their own objects such as stools or lamps, discovering the techniques, gestures and tools of craftsmen. The foundation operates several contemporary art spaces, including La Verrière in Brussels, Belgium, Le Forum in Tokyo, Japan, and Atelier Hermès in Seoul, South Korea.

The foundation also created the Émile Hermès prize in 2007, which rewards an innovative project in the field of design every two years. In 2014, the three winners who shared the first prize, chaired by Italian architect Michele De Lucchi, were Johan Brunel and Samuel Misslen for their "Ventilated Capsule," Antoine Lesur and Marc Venot for "Hut," and Paul Tubiana for "Leon." In 2012, the Foundation participated in the "New Settings" show for the promotion of the arts. In 2013, the Foundation supported the exhibition of works by young artists shown at the Palais de Tokyo. In January 2014, it has pledged a three-year support of the Cité internationale of Aubusson tapestry.

John Lobb founded John Lobb Bootmaker in 1866, in London. It manufactures and markets mainly custom-made boots and dress boots for men, but also collections of ready-to-wear and leather accessories. It opened its first store in France in 1900, and Hermès bought the one in Paris in 1976. Only the London store remains to this day in the hands of the founder's family. Hermès then developed the John Lobb brand and opened stores worldwide. Today, both companies continue to uphold their tradition of custom-made shoe-making, with the original Lobb family workshop in London and the Hermès-owned workshop in Paris.

Puiforcat [ fr ] is a goldsmith and silversmith company founded in Paris in 1820, by brothers Émile and Joseph-Marie Puiforcat and their cousin Jean-Baptiste Fuchs. Initially a simple cutlery, Puiforcat gradually transformed into a goldsmith workshop to offer table setting and lifestyle objects, in classical, Art Deco and contemporary art styles. The company came under the full control of Hermès in 1993. It has since maintained, like the rest of the group, a tradition of savoir-faire and craftsmanship for all its pieces, some of which require several hundred hours of work.

Saint-Louis was founded in 1586 in Saint-Louis-lès-Bitche in Moselle and is the oldest crystallerie in Europe. At the time, it was not yet producing crystal, but glass, as crystal was not discovered in France until 1781. In 1767, it obtained the title of Verrerie Royale de Saint-Louis, by order of King Louis XV. It abandoned glass to specialize solely in crystal in 1825. Saint-Louis introduced the notion of table setting arts into everyday language. Bought out by Hermès in 1989, it has since specialized in mouth-blown and hand-cut crystal for tableware, lighting, and decoration.

Since it was founded in Paris in 1837 by Thierry Hermès, Hermès International has been run almost exclusively by him and his descendants. Today, Hermès is majority-owned by the family and has been headed since 2013 by Axel Dumas, a member of the sixth generation.

Hermès International is listed on Euronext Paris and is a component of the CAC 40 :

Hermès International is controlled, through Emile Hermès SAS, by the Hermès family group, which also holds, notably through H51 SAS, a majority stake in the company's share capital as an active partner. The Hermès family fortune was estimated in 2024 at 155 billion euros by the magazine Challenges.

Hesdin (French pronunciation: [ edɛ̃ ] ; West Flemish : Heusdin) is a former commune in the Pas-de-Calais department in northern France. On 1 January 2025, it was merged into the new commune of Hesdin-la-Forêt.

The N39, from Arras to Montreuil, used to be the main thoroughfare of the town. In the 1950s, a circular route was created to help traffic flow. A second bypass was built in the 1980s, taking all through traffic well away from the town centre.

The Canche river flows through the centre of Hesdin.

Hesdin was a fief of the counts of Artois, vassals of the Counts of Flanders until 1180. When Philip, count of Flanders gave Artois as dowry to his niece Isabella of Hainault when she married Philip Augustus of France in 1180, Hesdin and the other seigneuries passed to France.

At the end of the 11th century, Hesdin gained renown for the park and chateau of Robert II, Count of Artois, which featured the earliest examples of early medieval automata in Europe. These included mechanical monkeys covered in badger fur, mechanized fountains, a large sundial surrounded by lions and leopards, and a bellows-operated organ. Over the years additional automata were added, including creations such as a mechanical king and an indoor fountain with mechanical birds. Guillaume de Machaut, in his poem Le Remede de Fortune, characterized them as "the marvels, the delights, the inventions, the engines, the contrivances, the water courses, the strange things that were enclosed there." By the 1380s, the automata had fallen into disrepair, until Philip the Good renovated them again in the 1430s. A 1433 bill of account recounts numerous mechanical amusements, including machines that played pranks on the guests as well as angels and figures that spoke and directed visitors.

Though subsequently the territory passed to the Dukes of Burgundy, Hesdin remained one of a handful of French strongholds, until in 1553 Emperor Charles V ordered the utter destruction of the old fortified town on a rise of ground and built the present town the following year, some 6 kilometres (3.7 mi) from the original site, on the banks of the Canche. The unfortified village of Vieil-Hesdin was later built on the original site.

In 1639 the French laid siege to Hesdin and under Louis XIII, it was recaptured for France. Thus, though Hesdin has an ancient name and 16th century structures, there is nothing left of the medieval town.

During World War II, the town was occupied by Germany. The SS operated a subcamp of the V SS construction brigade, in which mostly Soviet and Polish prisoners were subjected to slave labour. In August 1944, due to Allied advance, the Germans dissolved the subcamp and deported its prisoners to subcamps of the Mittelbau-Dora concentration camp. In 1975, a memorial plaque and a small museum was established at the site of the subcamp.

In 2014 Hesdin elected a 22-year-old law student, Stéphane Sieczkowski-Samier, as Mayor. Sieczkowski-Samier became the youngest mayor in France and is nicknamed "Petit Sarko" (little Sarkozy) in the French press as a reference to the previous French President Nicolas Sarkozy who is from the same political party.

Hesdin is dominated by the central square, the Place d'Armes overlooked by the Hôtel de Ville completed in 1629. The Hôtel de Ville, with its large belfry, was inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List in 2005 as part of the Belfries of Belgium and France site, because of its historical importance as the center of municipal power within the region.

The contemporary Church of Notre Dame was begun in 1565 and completed in 1685.

Thursday is market day in Hesdin, when a large range of local produce and more typical inexpensive market items can be purchased from the stalls in the surrounding streets.

In the first two weeks of August the town has the fete of the Cochon Rose (Pink Piglet) which includes a variety of events including a Sunday Brocante (flea market) which is the biggest in the region.

In France, the High Council for Social Dialogue (Haut Conseil du Dialogue Social) is a body established by the law of 20 August 2008

on the renovation of social democracy and reform of working hours

and is attached to the services of the Ministry of Labour. Its mission is to finalize, every four years, the list of trade unions recognized as representative by professional branch and at the national and interprofessional levels. It also provides recommendations to the minister of labour on the application of laws related to union representativeness.

The prime minister designates one of these three qualified individuals as the chairperson of the sessions. Members serve a five-year term.

The council was inaugurated on 5 March 2009 by Brice Hortefeux, then minister of labour, social relations, family, solidarity, and urban affairs. The first chairperson was Yannick Moreau, section president at the Council of State.

The composition of the council has been updated several times since 2014. The official website provides the most recent list.

The High Council on Climate (French: Haut Conseil pour le Climat) is an independent executive council in the Government of France announced by Emmanuel Macron in 2018 and created on 14 May 2019. The council is meant to address the countries climate policy, and produce reports on the progress of France towards its climate commitments. The organization was formed separately from the National Council for Ecological Transition which was formed to create a social dialogue body responding to groups, like the Yellow vests movement.

The current chair of the council is Corinne Le Quéré and the council includes 13 scientists and experts in climate change. The council is inspired by the Committee on Climate Change in the UK.

The main role of the High Council on Climate is to provide advice and recommendations to the French government on climate change policies and strategies, including the implementation of the Paris Agreement. The council is tasked with evaluating the effectiveness of government policies and actions in reducing greenhouse gas emissions and adapting to the impacts of climate change.

The council publishes annual reports that assess France's progress in meeting its climate targets and provide recommendations for future actions. The reports cover a wide range of topics, including:

Every five years, it issues a report on France's greenhouse gas emissions reduction trajectory, which is itself revised every five years. In this report, the committee assesses whether this trajectory is sufficient with regard to France's commitment to the Paris climate agreement, European commitments and the commitment to carbon neutrality in 2050, while taking into account the economic and social sustainability of the transition as well as the issues of sovereignty.

The High Council on Climate also engages in public outreach and education, raising awareness about the importance of addressing climate change and the need for urgent action.

" Histoire/Geschichte " is a series of Franco-German history coursebooks, published since 2006. The projects aims to create a "shared vision" between French and Germans regarding the history of Europe since Antiquity. The project originated from the "Franco-German Youth Parliament" in Berlin on 21 January 2003 which gathered 500 young pupils from the French and German upper secondary school at the occasion of the 40th anniversary of the Franco-German Élysée Treaty, later taken up by German Department for Foreign Affairs and French Ministry of Education. They suggested the development of a "history coursebook having the same content in both countries so that negative preconceptions caused by mutual ignorance might be avoided".

This coursebook has been available since September 2006 for grade 12 students (Klasse 12/13 in Germany). It is published jointly by Editis in France and Ernst Klett in Germany. A coursebook for grade 11 has also been produced. The set of three coursebooks will cover the period from Antiquity to modern times.

Reviews say it is a symbolic token of Franco-German cooperation. In 2008, two years after its creation, 80,000 coursebooks had been sold in each country. Since inception, several other pairs of countries have discussed the possibility of creating a bi-national coursebook, including Czech Republic — Germany, Poland — Germany and Slovak Republic — Hungary.

The historiography of France examines how historians have interpreted and written about French history over time, reflecting shifting political, cultural, and intellectual contexts. It can refer to the different ways that French and foreign historians have perceived French history, the role that perceptions of history have played in French politics and wider culture or the historiographical schools, such as the Annales School, which started or developed in France.

During the Ancien Régime, historical writing often served dynastic or religious purposes, exemplified by court historians and church chroniclers who promoted the monarchy and Catholic orthodoxy. The Enlightenment introduced a critical shift, with thinkers like Voltaire and Montesquieu seeking to explain historical change through a more secular analysis.

The French Revolution and the early to mid nineteenth century saw more nationalist narratives with the growth of an enduring national myth with historians such as Jules Michelet elevating historical figures such as Joan of Arc and Charles Martel. There was also a debate on the French Revolution both inside and outside France that in the Nineteenth Century tended to mostly reflect the political divide at the time with conservatives condemning the revolution, liberals praising the revolution of 1789 and radicals praising the revolution of 1793.

The late nineteenth century saw the growing influence of the scholarly German style of historiography with a careful attention to source documents with the founding of the Catholic Revue des questions historiques in 1866 and ten years later the Protestant and republican Revue historique which championed the École méthodique.

The 20th century marked a profound transformation in French historiography, driven by methodological innovation and a shift in historical focus. The most influential development was the rise of the Annales School, founded by Marc Bloch and Lucien Febvre in 1929, which broke with traditional narrative history centered on political events and " great men." Instead, it emphasized long-term social structures, economic patterns, and the use of interdisciplinary tools from sociology, geography, and anthropology. The school's second generation, particularly Fernand Braudel, revolutionized historical thought with his concept of the longue durée, exemplified in his seminal work The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II [ fr ] (1949), which examined history on civilizational rather than event-based timelines. Post-war historians such as Georges Duby, Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie and Pierre Nora expanded these approaches by integrating mentalities, climate data, and collective memory into historical analysis.

Particularly well debated subjects include the Paris Commune, the Battle of France, and the Vichy regime

The salons of Early Modern and Revolutionary France played an integral role in the cultural and intellectual development of France. The salons were seen by contemporary writers as a cultural hub, responsible for the dissemination of good manners and sociability. It was not merely manners that the salons supposedly spread but also ideas, as the salons became a centre of intellectual as well as social exchange, playing host to many members of the Republic of Letters. Women, in contrast to other Early Modern institutions, played an important and visible role within the salons. The extent of this role is, however, heavily contested by some historians.

The role that the salons played in the process of Enlightenment, and particularly the fact that women played such an integral part in them, means that there is an abundance of historical debate surrounding them. The relationship with the state and the public sphere, the role of women, as well as their form and periodisation are all important factors in the historiography of the salon.

The historiography of the salons is far from straightforward. The salons have been studied in depth by a mixture of feminist, Marxist, cultural, social and intellectual historians. Each of these methodologies focus on different aspects of the salons, and thus have varying analyses of the salons’ importance in terms of French history and the Enlightenment as a whole.

Major historiographical debates focus around the relationship between the salons and the public sphere, as well as the role of women within the salons.

Breaking down the salons into a historical periods is complicated due to the various historiographical debates that surround them. Most studies stretch from the mid-seventeenth century to the end of eighteenth century. Goodman is typical in ending her study at The French Revolution, where, she writes: 'the literary public sphere was transformed into the political public'. Steven Kale is relatively alone in his recent attempts to extend the period of the salon up until Revolution of 1848. Kale points out:

A whole world of social arrangements and attitude supported the existence of french salons: an idle aristocracy, an ambitious middle class, an active intellectual life, the social density of a major urban center, sociable traditions, and a certain aristocratic feminism. This world did not disappear in 1789.

The content and form of the salon to some extent defines the character and historical importance of the salon. Contemporary literature about the salons is dominated by idealistic notions of politesse (politeness), civilité (civility) and honnêteté (honesty or proper behavior), but whether the salons lived up to these standards is matter of debate. Older texts on the salons tend to paint an idealistic picture of the salons, where reasoned debate takes precedence and salons are egalitarian spheres of polite conversation. Today, however, this view is rarely considered an adequate analysis of the salon. Dena Goodman claims that rather than being leisure based or 'schools of civilité' salons were instead at 'the very heart of the philosophic community' and thus integral to the process of Enlightenment. In short, Goodman argues, the seventeenth and eighteenth century saw the emergence of the academic, Enlightenment salons, which came out of the aristocratic 'schools of civilité'. Politeness, argues Goodman, took second-place to academic discussion.

The period in which salons were dominant has been labeled the 'age of conversation'. The topics of conversation within the salons - that is, what was and was not 'polite' to talk about - are thus vital when trying to determine the form of the salons. The salonnières were expected, ideally, to run and moderate the conversation (See Women in the salon). There is, however, no universal agreement among historians as to what was and was not appropriate conversation. Marcel Proust 'insisted that politics was scrupulously avoided'. Others suggested that little other than government was ever discussed. The disagreements that surround the content of discussion partly explain why the salon's relationship with the public sphere is so heavily contested. Oppositional politics were frowned upon within the salon, thus whether the salons can be classed as within the public sphere is debatable.

Recent historiography of the salons has been dominated by Jürgen Habermas ' work, The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere (triggered largely by its translation into French, in 1978, and then English, in 1989), which argued that the salons were of great historical importance. Theatres of conversation and exchange – such as the salons, and the coffeehouses in England – played a critical role in the emergence of what Habermas termed the ‘ public sphere ’, which emerged in ‘cultural-political contrast’ to court society. Thus, while women retained a dominant role in the historiography of the salons, the salons received increasing amounts of study, much of it in direct response to, or heavily influenced by Habermas’ theory.

The dominance of Habermas ’ work in salon historiography has come under criticism from some quarters, with Pekacz singling out Dena Goodman's Republic of Letters for particular criticism because it was written with ‘the explicit intention of supporting [Habermas’] thesis’, rather than verifying it. The theory itself, meanwhile, has been criticised for a fatal misunderstanding of the nature of salons. The main criticism of Habermas’ interpretation of the salons, however, is that the salons were not part of an oppositional public sphere, and were instead an extension of court society.

This criticism stems largely from Norbert Elias ’ The History of Manners, in which Elias contends that the dominant concepts of the salons – politesse, civilité and honnêteté – were ‘used almost as synonyms, by which the courtly people wished to designate, in a broad or narrow sense, the quality of their own behaviour’. Joan Landes agrees, stating that, ‘to some extent, the salon was merely an extension of the institutionalised court’ and that rather than being part of the public sphere, salons were in fact in conflict with it. Erica Harth concurs, pointing to the fact that the state ‘appropriated the informal academy and not the salon’ due to the academies’ ‘tradition of dissent’ – something that lacked in the salon. But Landes’ view of the salons as a whole is independent of both Elias’ and Habermas’ school of thought, insofar that she views the salons as a ‘unique institution’, that cannot be adequately described as part of the public sphere, or court society. Others, such as Steven Kale, compromise by declaring that the public and private spheres overlapped in the salons. Antoine Lilti goes further, describing the salons as simply ‘institutions within Parisian high society,’ with little or no link to the realm of the public sphere or public opinion. Because salons appear to be largely aristocratic institutions of "politesse", Lilti argues the only possible impact on the public sphere was in the form of patronage networks for philosophes.

The most prominent defence of salons as part of the public sphere comes from Dena Goodman's The Republic of Letters, which claims that the ‘public sphere was structured by the salon, the press and other institutions of sociability’. Goodman's work is also credited with further emphasising the importance of the salon in terms of French history, the Republic of Letters and the Enlightenment as a whole, and has dominated the historiography of the salons since its publication in 1994.

When dealing with the salons, historians have traditionally focused upon the role of women within them. Works in the nineteenth and much of the twentieth century often focused on the scandals and ‘petty intrigues’ of the salons. Other works from this period focused on the more positive aspects of women in the salon. Indeed, according to Jolanta T. Pekacz, the fact women dominated history of the salons meant that study of the salons was often left to amateurs, while men concentrated on 'more important' (and masculine) areas of the Enlightenment.

Historians tended to focus on individual salonnières, creating almost a 'great-woman' version of history that ran parallel to the Whiggish, male dominated history identified by Herbert Butterfield. Even in 1970, works were still being produced that concentrated only on individual stories, without analysing the effects of the salonnières' unique position. The integral role that women played within salons, as salonnières, began to receive greater - and more serious - study in latter parts of the twentieth century, with the emergence of a distinctly feminist historiography. The salons, according to Caroyln Lougee, were distinguished by 'the very visible identification of women with salons', and the fact that they played a positive public role in French society. General texts on the Enlightenment, such as Daniel Roche's France in the Enlightenment tend to agree that women were dominant within the salons, but that their influence did not extend far outside of such venues. Antoine Lilti, on the other hand, rejects the notion that women 'governed' conversation in the salons.

It was, however, Goodman's The Republic of Letters that ignited a real debate surrounding the role of women within the salons and – so Goodman contends – the Enlightenment as a whole. According to Goodman: ‘The salonnières were not social climbers but intelligent, self-educated, and educating women who adopted and implemented the values of the Enlightenment Republic of Letters and used them to reshape the salon to their own social intellectual, and educational needs’. While few historians doubt that women played an important, significant role in the salons, Goodman is often criticised for her narrow use of sources. Very recent historiography has tended to moderate Goodman's thesis, arguing that while women did play a significant role in the salons they facilitated - rather than created, as Goodman argues - the ideas and debates generally associated with the Enlightenment. This was particular true in Vienna, where the cultural salon started later than it did in Paris and Berlin.

The first written records for the history of France appeared in the Iron Age. What is now France made up the bulk of the region known to the Romans as Gaul. Greek writers noted the presence of three main ethno-linguistic groups in the area: the Gauls, Aquitani and Belgae. Over the first millennium BC the Greeks, Romans and Carthaginians established colonies on the Mediterranean coast and offshore islands. The Roman Republic annexed southern Gaul in the late 2nd century BC, and legions under Julius Caesar conquered the rest of Gaul in the Gallic Wars of 58–51 BC. A Gallo-Roman culture emerged, and Gaul was increasingly integrated into the Roman Empire. In the later stages of the empire, Gaul was subject to barbarian raids and migration. The Frankish king Clovis I united most of Gaul in the late 5th century. Frankish power reached its fullest extent under Charlemagne. The medieval Kingdom of France emerged from the western part of Charlemagne's Carolingian Empire, known as West Francia, and achieved increasing prominence under the rule of the House of Capet, founded in 987. The monarchy initially wielded only limited authority, but Philip II of France brought the Angevin Empire to an end by defeating a coalition of his rivals at the Battle of Bouvines in 1214. Following this victory, France became the most prosperous and powerful kingdom in Europe.

A succession crisis in 1328 led to the Hundred Years' War between the House of Valois and the House of Plantagenet. The war began in 1337 following Philip VI 's attempt to seize the Duchy of Aquitaine from its hereditary holder Edward III of England, the Plantagenet claimant to the French throne. A notable figure of the war was Joan of Arc, a French peasant girl who led forces against the English, establishing herself as a national heroine. The war ended with a Valois victory in 1453, strengthening French nationalism and increasing the power and reach of the French monarchy. During the Ancien Régime over the next centuries, France transformed into a centralized absolute monarchy through the Renaissance and Reformation. At the height of the French Wars of Religion, France became embroiled in another succession crisis, as the last Valois king, Henry III, fought against factions of the House of Bourbon and House of Guise. Henry, the Bourbon King of Navarre, won and established the Bourbon dynasty. A burgeoning worldwide colonial empire was established in the 16th century.

By the mid-17th century, France had emerged as the dominant hegemonic power in Europe, building Europe's strongest army, engaging in a series of wars, and undergoing a period of artistic and scientific development. In the late 18th century the monarchy and associated institutions were overthrown in the French Revolution. The Revolutionary Tribunal executed political opponents by guillotine, instituting the Reign of Terror (1793–94). The country was governed as a Republic, until Napoleon 's French Empire was declared in 1804. Following his defeat in the Napoleonic Wars, France went through regime changes, being ruled as a monarchy, then Second Republic, then Second Empire, until a more lasting French Third Republic was established in 1870.

During World War I, France played a decisive role in defeating the Central Powers as part of the Triple Entente, while participating in the majority of the war's major battles fought on the Western Front. France during World War II was one of the Allied Powers but was conquered by Nazi Germany in 1940. The Third Republic was dismantled, and most of the country was controlled directly by Germany, while the south was controlled until 1942 by the collaborationist Vichy government. Following liberation in 1944, the Fourth Republic was established. France slowly recovered and enjoyed a baby boom that reversed its low fertility rate. Long wars in Indochina and Algeria drained French resources and ended in political defeat. In the wake of the 1958 Algerian crisis, Charles de Gaulle set up the French Fifth Republic. Into the 1960s most of the French colonial empire became independent, while smaller parts were incorporated into the French state as overseas departments and collectivities. Since World War II France has been a permanent member in the UN Security Council and NATO. It played a central role in the unification process after 1945 that led to the European Union. It remains a strong economic, cultural, military and political factor in the 21st century.

Stone tools discovered at Chilhac and Lézignan-la-Cèbe indicate that pre-human ancestors may have been present in France at least 1.6 million years ago. Neanderthals were present in Europe from about 400,000 BC but died out about 40,000 years ago, possibly out-competed by modern humans during a period of cold weather. The earliest evidence of modern humans in France was found at the Mandrin Cave and has been dated to between 56,800 and 51,700 years ago.

In the Chalcolithic and early Bronze Age the territory was largely dominated by the Bell Beaker culture, followed by the Armorican Tumulus culture, Rhône culture, Tumulus culture, Urnfield culture and Atlantic Bronze Age culture, among others. The Hallstatt culture and La Tène culture developed during the Iron Age, during which the first written records for the history of France appear.

In 800 BC, Ionian Greeks founded the colony of Massalia (present-day Marseille) on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea, making it one of the oldest cities in France. At the same time, some Celtic tribes arrived in the eastern parts (Germania Superior) of the region and spread to the rest of France between the 5th and 3rd century BC.

Covering large parts of modern-day France, Belgium, northwest Germany and northern Italy, Gaul was inhabited by many Celtic and Belgae tribes of whom the Romans referred as Gauls and who spoke the Gaulish language roughly between the Oise and the Garonne, according to Julius Caesar. On the lower Garonne the people spoke Aquitanian, a Pre-Indo-European language related to (or a direct ancestor of) Basque whereas a Belgian language was spoken north of Lutecia but north of the Loire according to other authors like Strabo. The Celts founded cities such as Lutetia Parisiorum (Paris) and Burdigala (Bordeaux) while the Aquitanians founded Tolosa (Toulouse).

Long before any Roman settlements, Greek navigators settled in what would become Provence. The Phoceans founded important cities such as Massalia (Marseille) and Nikaia (Nice), bringing them into conflict with the neighboring Celts and Ligurians. The Celts often fought with Aquitanians and Germans, and a Gaulish war band led by Brennus invaded Rome following the Battle of the Allia.

However, the tribal society of the Gauls did not change fast enough for the centralized Roman state. The Gaulish tribal confederacies were defeated by the Romans in battles such as Sentinum and Telamon during the 3rd century BC. In the early 3rd century BC, some Belgae (Germani cisrhenani) conquered the surrounding territories of the Somme in northern Gaul after battles supposedly against the Armoricani (Gauls) near Ribemont-sur-Ancre and Gournay-sur-Aronde, where sanctuaries were found.

When Carthaginian commander Hannibal fought the Romans, he recruited several Gaulish mercenaries who fought on his side at Cannae. It was this Gaulish participation that caused Provence to be annexed in 122 BC by the Roman Republic. As the Consul of Gaul, Julius Caesar conquered all of Gaul. Despite Gaulish opposition led by Vercingetorix, the Gauls succumbed to the Roman onslaught. The Gauls had some success at first at Gergovia but were ultimately defeated at Alesia in 52 BC. The Romans founded cities such as Lugdunum (Lyon), Narbonensis (Narbonne) and allowed in a correspondence between Lucius Munatius Plancus and Cicero to formalize the existence of Cularo (Grenoble).

Gaul was divided into several different provinces. The Romans displaced populations to prevent local identities from becoming a threat to Roman control. Thus, many Celts were displaced in Aquitania or were enslaved and removed from Gaul. There was a strong cultural evolution in Gaul under the Roman Empire, the most obvious one being the replacement of the Gaulish language by Vulgar Latin. It has been argued the similarities between Gaulish and Latin favoured the transition. Gaul remained under Roman control for centuries, and Celtic culture was then gradually replaced by Gallo-Roman culture.

The Gauls became better integrated with the empire with the passage of time. For instance, generals Marcus Antonius Primus and Gnaeus Julius Agricola were both born in Gaul, as were emperors Claudius and Caracalla. Emperor Antoninus Pius also came from a Gaulish family. In the decade following Valerian 's capture by the Persians in 260, Postumus established a short-lived Gallic Empire, which included the Iberian Peninsula and Britannia. Germanic tribes, the Franks and the Alamanni, entered Gaul at this time. The Gallic Empire ended with Emperor Aurelian 's victory at Châlons in 274.

A migration of Celts occurred in the 4th century in Armorica. They were led by the legendary king Conan Meriadoc and came from Britain. They spoke the now extinct British language, which evolved into the Breton, Cornish, and Welsh languages. In 418 the Aquitanian province was given to the Goths in exchange for their support against the Vandals. Those same Goths had sacked Rome in 410 and established a capital in Toulouse.

The Roman Empire had difficulty integrating all the barbarian newcomers—with whom foederati treaties were concluded—within the empire, and generals as Flavius Aëtius had to use these tribes against each other in order to maintain some Roman control. He first used the Huns against the Burgundians, and these mercenaries destroyed Worms, killed king Gunther, and pushed the Burgundians westward. The Burgundians were resettled by Aëtius near Lugdunum in 443. The Huns, united by Attila, became a greater threat, and Aëtius used the Visigoths against the Huns. The conflict climaxed in 451 at the Battle of Châlons, in which the Romans and Goths defeated Attila.

The Roman Empire was on the verge of collapsing. Aquitania was definitely abandoned to the Visigoths, who would soon conquer a significant part of southern Gaul as well as most of the Iberian Peninsula. The Burgundians claimed their own kingdom, and northern Gaul was practically abandoned to the Franks. Aside from the Germanic peoples, the Vascones entered Wasconia from the Pyrenees, and the Bretons formed three kingdoms in Armorica: Domnonia, Cornouaille and Broërec.

In 486 Clovis I, leader of the Salian Franks, defeated Syagrius at Soissons and subsequently united most of northern and central Gaul under his rule. Clovis then recorded a succession of victories against other Germanic tribes such as the Alamanni at Tolbiac. In 496 Clovis started a war against the Goths in Aquitanië, which was mainly aimed for gathering loot. It took the Gothic king Alaric II two years to push back the Franks. In 507 a second war started. This time, Clovis defeated Alaric at Vouillé and annexed Aquitaine, and thus Toulouse, into his Frankish kingdom. After his victory the pagan Clovis adopted Catholicism. This gave him greater legitimacy and power over his Christian subjects and granted him clerical support against the Arian Visigoths.

The Goths retired to Toledo in what would become Spain. Clovis made Paris his capital and established the Merovingian dynasty but his kingdom did not survive his death in 511. Under Frankish inheritance traditions, all sons inherit part of the land, so four kingdoms emerged: centered on Paris, Orléans, Soissons, and Rheims. Over time, the borders and numbers of Frankish kingdoms were fluid and changed frequently. Also during this time, the mayors of the palace, originally the chief advisors to the kings, became the real power in the Frankish lands; the Merovingian kings were reduced to little more than figureheads.

By this time Muslims had conquered Hispania, and Septimania became part of the Al-Andalus, which threatened the Frankish kingdoms. Duke Odo the Great defeated a major invading force at Toulouse in 721 but failed to repel a raiding party in 732. The mayor of the palace, Charles Martel, defeated that raiding party at the Battle of Tours and earned respect and power within the Frankish Kingdom. The assumption of the crown in 751 by Pepin the Short (son of Charles Martel) established the Carolingian dynasty as the kings of the Franks.

Carolingian power reached its fullest extent under Pepin's son Charlemagne. In 771 Charlemagne reunited the Frankish domains after a further period of division, subsequently conquering the Lombards under Desiderius in what is now northern Italy (774), incorporating Bavaria (788) into his realm, defeating the Avars of the Danubian plain (796), advancing the frontier with Al-Andalus as far south as Barcelona (801), and subjugating Lower Saxony after a prolonged campaign (804).

In recognition of his successes and his political support for the papacy, Charlemagne was crowned Emperor of the Romans by Pope Leo III in 800. Charlemagne's son Louis the Pious kept the empire united; however, this Carolingian Empire would not survive Louis' death. Two of his sons— Charles the Bald and Louis the German —swore allegiance to each other against their brother Lothair I in the Oaths of Strasbourg, and the empire was divided among Louis's three sons (Treaty of Verdun, 843). After a last brief reunification (884–887), the imperial title ceased to be held in the western realm, which was to form the basis of the future French kingdom. The eastern realm, which would become Germany, elected the Saxon dynasty of Henry the Fowler.

Under the Carolingians, the kingdom was ravaged by Viking raiders. In this struggle, some important figures such as Count Odo of Paris and his brother Robert rose to fame and became kings. This emerging dynasty, whose members were called the Robertians, was the predecessor of the Capetian dynasty. Led by Rollo, some Vikings had settled in Normandy and were granted the land, first as counts and then as dukes, by King Charles the Simple in order to protect the land from other raiders. The people that emerged from the interactions between the Viking aristocracy and the already mixed Franks and Gallo-Romans became known as the Normans.

France was a very decentralised state during the Middle Ages. The authority of the king was more religious than administrative. The 11th century in France marked the apogee of princely power at the expense of the king when states like Normandy, Flanders or Languedoc enjoyed a local authority comparable to kingdoms in all but name. The Capetians, as they were descended from the Robertians, were formerly powerful princes who had successfully unseated the weak Carolingian kings. The Capetians in a way held a dual status of king and prince; as king they held the Crown of Charlemagne and as Count of Paris they held their personal fiefdom, best known as Île-de-France.

Some of the king's vassals would grow sufficiently powerful that they would become some of the strongest rulers of western Europe. The Normans, the Plantagenets, the Lusignans, the Hautevilles, the Ramnulfids, and the House of Toulouse successfully carved lands outside France for themselves. The most important of these conquests for French history was the Norman Conquest by William the Conqueror.

An important part of the French aristocracy also involved itself in the Crusades, and French knights founded and ruled the Crusader states. The French were also active in the Iberian reconquista to rechristianize Muslim Spain and Portugal. The Iberian reconquista made use of French knights and settlers to repopulate former Muslim settlements that were sacked by conquering Spanish or Portuguese Christians.

The monarchy overcame the powerful barons over ensuing centuries and established absolute sovereignty over France in the 16th century. Hugh Capet in 987 became "King of the Franks" (Rex Francorum). He was recorded to be recognised king by the Gauls, Bretons, Danes, Aquitanians, Goths, Spanish and Gascons.

Capet's son Robert the Pious was crowned king before Capet's demise. Capet decided so in order to have his succession secured. Robert met Emperor Henry II in 1023 on the borderline. They agreed to end all claims over each other's realm, setting a new stage of Capetian and Ottonian relationships. The reign of Robert was involved the Peace and Truce of God (beginning in 989) and the Cluniac Reforms.

Under King Philip I, the kingdom enjoyed a modest recovery during his extraordinarily long reign (1060–1108). His reign also saw the launch of the First Crusade to regain the Holy Land. It is from Louis VI (reigned 1108–37) onward that royal authority became more accepted. Louis was more a soldier and warmongering king than a scholar. The way the king raised money from his vassals made him quite unpopular; he was described as greedy and ambitious. His regular attacks on his vassals, although damaging the royal image, reinforced the royal power. From 1127 onward Louis had the assistance of a skilled religious statesman, Abbot Suger. Louis VI successfully defeated, both military and politically, many of the robber barons. When Louis VI died in 1137, much progress had been made towards strengthening Capetian authority.

Thanks to Abbot Suger's political advice, King Louis VII (junior king 1131–37, senior king 1137–80) enjoyed greater moral authority over France than his predecessors. Powerful vassals paid homage to the French king. Abbot Suger arranged the 1137 marriage between Louis VII and Eleanor of Aquitaine in Bordeaux, which made Louis VII Duke of Aquitaine and gave him considerable power. The marriage was ultimately annulled and Eleanor soon married the Duke of Normandy — Henry Fitzempress, who would become King of England two years later.

The late direct Capetian kings were considerably more powerful and influential than the earliest ones. This period also saw the rise of a complex system of international alliances and conflicts opposing, through dynasties, kings of France and England and the Holy Roman Emperor. The reign of Philip II Augustus (junior king 1179–80, senior king 1180–1223) saw the French royal domain and influence greatly expanded. He paved the way for more powerful monarchs like Saint Louis and Philip the Fair. Philip II spent an important part of his reign fighting the so-called Angevin Empire.

During the first part of his reign Philip II allied himself with the Duke of Aquitaine and son of Henry II and Eleanor of Aquitaine — Richard Lionheart — and together they launched a decisive attack on Henry's home of Chinon and removed him from power. Richard replaced his father as King of England afterward. The two kings then went crusading during the Third Crusade ; however, their alliance and friendship broke down during the crusade. John Lackland, Richard's successor, refused to come to the French court for a trial against the Lusignans and, as Louis VI had done often to his rebellious vassals, Philip II confiscated John's possessions in France. John's defeat was swift and his attempts to reconquer his French possession at the decisive Battle of Bouvines (1214) resulted in complete failure. Philip II had annexed Normandy and Anjou, plus capturing the Counts of Boulogne and Flanders, although Aquitaine and Gascony remained loyal to the Plantagenet King.

Prince Louis (the future Louis VIII, reigned 1223–26) was involved in the subsequent English civil war as French and English (or rather Anglo-Norman) aristocracies were once one and were now split between allegiances. While the French kings were struggling against the Plantagenets, the Church called for the Albigensian Crusade. Southern France was then largely absorbed in the royal domains.

France became a truly centralised kingdom under Louis IX (reigned 1226–70). The kingdom was vulnerable: war was still going on in the County of Toulouse, and the royal army was occupied fighting resistance in Languedoc. Count Raymond VII of Toulouse finally signed the Treaty of Paris in 1229, in which he retained much of his lands for life, but his daughter, married to Count Alfonso of Poitou, produced him no heir and so the County of Toulouse went to the King of France. King Henry III of England had not yet recognized the Capetian overlordship over Aquitaine and still hoped to recover Normandy and Anjou and reform the Angevin Empire. He landed in 1230 at Saint-Malo with a massive force. This evolved into the Saintonge War (1242). Ultimately, Henry III was defeated and had to recognise Louis IX's overlordship, although the King of France did not seize Aquitaine. Louis IX was now the most important landowner of France. There were some opposition to his rule in Normandy, yet it proved remarkably easy to rule, especially compared to the County of Toulouse which had been brutally conquered. The Conseil du Roi, which would evolve into the Parlement, was founded in these times. After his conflict with King Henry III of England, Louis established a cordial relation with the Plantagenet King.

The Kingdom was involved in two crusades under Louis: the Seventh Crusade and the Eighth Crusade. Both proved to be complete failures for the French King. Philip III became king when Saint Louis died in 1270 during the Eighth Crusade. Philip III was called "the Bold" on the basis of his abilities in combat and on horseback, and not because of his character or ruling abilities. Philip III took part in another crusading disaster: the Aragonese Crusade, which cost him his life in 1285. More administrative reforms were made by Philip IV, also called Philip the Fair (reigned 1285–1314). This king was responsible for the end of the Knights Templar, signed the Auld Alliance, and established the Parlement of Paris. Philip IV was so powerful that he could name popes and emperors, unlike the early Capetians. The papacy was moved to Avignon and all the contemporary popes were French, such as Philip IV's puppet Bertrand de Goth, Pope Clement V.

The tensions between the Houses of Plantagenet and Capet climaxed during the so-called Hundred Years' War (actually several distinct wars over the period 1337 to 1453) when the Plantagenets claimed the throne of France from the Valois. This was also the time of the Black Death in France, as well as several devastating civil wars. In 1420, by the Treaty of Troyes Henry V was made heir to Charles VI. Henry V failed to outlive Charles so it was Henry VI of England and France who consolidated the Dual-Monarchy of England and France.

It has been argued that the difficult conditions the French population suffered during the Hundred Years' War awakened French nationalism, a nationalism represented by Joan of Arc (1412–1431). Although this is debatable, the Hundred Years' War is remembered more as a Franco-English war than as a succession of feudal struggles. During this war, France evolved politically and militarily.

Although a Franco-Scottish army was successful at the Battle of Baugé (1421), the humiliating defeats of Poitiers (1356) and Agincourt (1415) forced the French nobility to realise they could not stand just as armoured knights without an organised army. Charles VII (reigned 1422–1461) established the first French standing army, the compagnies d'ordonnance, and defeated the Plantagenets once at Patay (1429) and again, using cannons, at Formigny (1450). The Battle of Castillon (1453) was the last engagement of this war; Calais and the Channel Islands remained ruled by the Plantagenets.

France's population was 13 million people in 1484 and 20 million in 1700. It had the second largest population in Europe around 1700. France's lead slowly faded after 1700, as other countries grew faster.

Political power was widely dispersed. The law courts ("Parlements") were powerful. However, the king had only about 10,000 officials in royal service – very few indeed for such a large country, and with very slow internal communications over an inadequate road system. Travel was usually faster by ocean ship or river boat. The different estates of the realm — the clergy, the nobility, and commoners — occasionally met together in the " Estates General ", but in practice the Estates General had no power, for it could petition the king but could not pass laws.

The Catholic Church controlled about 40% of the wealth. The king (not the pope) nominated bishops, but typically had to negotiate with noble families that had close ties to local monasteries and church establishments. The nobility came second in terms of wealth, but there was no unity. Each noble had his own lands, his own network of regional connections, and his own military force.

The cities had a quasi-independent status, and were largely controlled by the leading merchants and guilds. Peasants made up the vast majority of the population, who in many cases had well-established rights that the authorities had to respect. In the 17th century peasants had ties to the market economy, provided much of the capital investment necessary for agricultural growth, and frequently moved from village to village (or town). Although most peasants in France spoke local dialects, an official language emerged in Paris and the French language became the preferred language of Europe's aristocracy and the lingua franca of diplomacy and international relations. Holy Roman Emperor Charles V quipped, "I speak Spanish to God, Italian to women, French to men, and German to my horse."

With the death in 1477 of Charles the Bold, France and the Habsburgs began a long process of dividing his rich Burgundian lands, leading to numerous wars. In 1532, Brittany was incorporated into the Kingdom of France.

France engaged in the long Italian Wars (1494–1559), which marked the beginning of early modern France. Francis I faced powerful foes, and he was captured at Pavia. The French monarchy then sought for allies and found one in the Ottoman Empire. The Ottoman Admiral Barbarossa captured Nice in 1543 and handed it down to Francis I.

During the 16th century, the Spanish and Austrian Habsburgs were the dominant power in Europe. The many domains of Charles V encircled France. The Spanish Tercio was used with great success against French knights. Finally, on 7 January 1558, the Duke of Guise seized Calais from the English.

Economic historians call the era from about 1475 to 1630 the "beautiful 16th century" because of the return of peace, prosperity and optimism across the nation, and the steady growth of population. In 1559, Henry II of France signed (with the approval of Ferdinand I, Holy Roman Emperor) two treaties (Peace of Cateau-Cambrésis) : one with Elizabeth I of England and one with Philip II of Spain. This ended long-lasting conflicts between France, England and Spain.

The Protestant Reformation, inspired in France mainly by John Calvin, began to challenge the legitimacy and rituals of the Catholic Church. French King Henry II severely persecuted Protestants under the Edict of Chateaubriand (1551). Renewed Catholic reaction — headed by the powerful Francis, Duke of Guise — led to a massacre of Huguenots at Vassy in 1562, starting the first of the French Wars of Religion, during which English, German, and Spanish forces intervened on the side of rival Protestant ("Huguenot") and Catholic forces.

King Henry II died in 1559 in a jousting tournament; he was succeeded in turn by his three sons, each of whom assumed the throne as minors or were weak, ineffectual rulers. Into the power vacuum entered Henry's widow, Catherine de' Medici, who became a central figure in the early years of the Wars of Religion. She is often blamed for the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre of 1572, when thousands of Huguenots were murdered in Paris and the provinces of France.

The Wars of Religion culminated in the War of the Three Henrys (1584–89), at the height of which bodyguards of the King Henry III assassinated Henry de Guise, leader of the Spanish-backed Catholic league, in December 1588. In revenge, a priest assassinated Henry III in 1589. This led to the ascension of the Huguenot Henry IV ; in order to bring peace to a country beset by religious and succession wars, he converted to Catholicism. He issued the Edict of Nantes in 1598, which guaranteed religious liberties to the Protestants, thereby effectively ending the civil war. Henry IV was assassinated in 1610 by a fanatical Catholic.

When in 1620 the Huguenots proclaimed a constitution for the 'Republic of the Reformed Churches of France', the chief minister Cardinal Richelieu invoked the entire powers of the state to stop it. Religious conflicts therefore resumed under Louis XIII when Richelieu forced Protestants to disarm their army and fortresses. This conflict ended in the Siege of La Rochelle (1627–28), in which Protestants and their English supporters were defeated. The following Peace of Alais (1629) confirmed religious freedom yet dismantled the Protestant military defences.

In the face of persecution, Huguenots dispersed widely throughout Europe and America.

The religious conflicts that plagued France also ravaged the Habsburg-led Holy Roman Empire. The Thirty Years' War eroded the power of the Catholic Habsburgs. Although Cardinal Richelieu, the powerful chief minister of France, had mauled the Protestants, he joined this war on their side in 1636 because it was in the national interest. Imperial Habsburg forces invaded France, ravaged Champagne, and nearly threatened Paris.

Richelieu died in 1642 and was succeeded by Cardinal Mazarin, while Louis XIII died one year later and was succeeded by Louis XIV. France was served by some very efficient commanders such as Louis II de Bourbon, Prince de Condé and Henri de la Tour d'Auvergne, Vicomte de Turenne. The French forces won a decisive victory at Rocroi (1643), and the Spanish army was decimated; the Tercio was broken. The Truce of Ulm (1647) and the Peace of Westphalia (1648) brought an end to the war.

France was hit by civil unrest known as The Fronde which in turn evolved into the Franco-Spanish War in 1653. Louis II de Bourbon joined the Spanish army this time, but suffered a severe defeat at Dunkirk (1658) by Henry de la Tour d'Auvergne. The terms for the peace inflicted upon the Spanish kingdoms in the Treaty of the Pyrenees (1659) were harsh, as France annexed Northern Catalonia.

During the 16th century, the king began to claim North American territories and established several colonies. Jacques Cartier was one of the great explorers who ventured deep into American territories during the 16th century.

The early 17th century saw the first successful French settlements in the New World with the voyages of Samuel de Champlain in 1608. The largest settlement was New France. In 1699, French territorial claims in North America expanded still further, with the foundation of Louisiana.

The French presence in Africa began in Senegal in 1626, although formal colonies and trading posts were not established until 1659 with the founding of Saint-Louis. The first French settlement of Madagascar began in 1642 with the establishment of Fort Dauphin.

Louis XIV, known as the "Sun King", reigned over France from 1643 until 1715. Louis continued his predecessors' work of creating a centralized state governed from Paris, sought to eliminate remnants of feudalism in France, and subjugated and weakened the aristocracy. By these means he consolidated a system of absolute monarchical rule in France that endured until the French Revolution. However, Louis XIV's long reign saw France involved in many wars that drained its treasury.

The French-dominated League of the Rhine fought against the Ottoman Turks at the Battle of Saint Gotthard in 1664. France fought the War of Devolution against Spain in 1667. France's defeat of Spain and invasion of the Spanish Netherlands alarmed England and Sweden. With the Dutch Republic they formed the Triple Alliance to check Louis XIV's expansion. Louis II de Bourbon had captured Franche-Comté, but in face of an indefensible position, Louis XIV agreed to the peace of Aachen. War broke out again between France and the Dutch Republic in the Franco-Dutch War (1672–78). France attacked the Dutch Republic and was joined by England in this conflict. Through targeted inundations of polders by breaking dykes, the French invasion of the Dutch Republic was brought to a halt. The Dutch Admiral Michiel de Ruyter inflicted a few strategic defeats on the Anglo-French naval alliance and forced England to retire from the war in 1674. Because the Netherlands could not resist indefinitely, it agreed to peace in the Treaties of Nijmegen, according to which France would annex France-Comté and acquire further concessions in the Spanish Netherlands. In May 1682, the royal court moved to the lavish Palace of Versailles, which Louis XIV had greatly expanded. Over time, Louis XIV compelled many members of the nobility, especially the noble elite, to inhabit Versailles. He controlled the nobility with an elaborate system of pensions and privileges, and replaced their power with himself.

Peace did not last, and war between France and Spain again resumed. The War of the Reunions broke out (1683–84), and again Spain, with its ally the Holy Roman Empire, was defeated. Meanwhile, in October 1685 Louis signed the Edict of Fontainebleau ordering the destruction of all Protestant churches and schools in France. Its immediate consequence was a large Protestant exodus from France. Over two million people died in two famines in 1693 and 1710.

France would soon be involved in another war, the War of the Grand Alliance. This time the theatre was not only in Europe but also in North America. Although the war was long and difficult (it was also called the Nine Years' War), its results were inconclusive. The Treaty of Ryswick in 1697 confirmed French sovereignty over Alsace, yet rejected its claims to Luxembourg. Louis also had to evacuate Catalonia and the Palatinate. This peace was considered a truce by all sides, thus war was to start again.

In 1701, the War of the Spanish Succession began. The Bourbon Philip of Anjou was designated heir to the throne of Spain as Philip V. The Habsburg Emperor Leopold opposed a Bourbon succession, because the power that such a succession would bring to the Bourbon rulers of France would disturb the delicate balance of power in Europe. Therefore, he claimed the Spanish thrones for himself. England and the Dutch Republic joined Leopold against Louis XIV and Philip of Anjou. They inflicted a few resounding defeats on the French army; the Battle of Blenheim in 1704 was the first major land battle lost by France since its victory at Rocroi in 1643. Yet, the extremely bloody battles of Ramillies (1706) and Malplaquet (1709) proved to be Pyrrhic victories for the allies, as they had lost too many men to continue the war. Led by Villars, French forces recovered much of the lost ground in battles such as Denain (1712). Finally, a compromise was achieved with the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713. Philip of Anjou was confirmed as Philip V, king of Spain; Emperor Leopold did not get the throne, but Philip V was barred from inheriting France.

Louis XIV wanted to be remembered as a patron of the arts, and invited Jean-Baptiste Lully to establish the French opera.

The wars were so expensive, and so inconclusive, that although France gained some territory to the east, its enemies gained more strength than it did. Vauban, France's leading military strategist, warned the King in 1689 that a hostile "Alliance" was too powerful at sea. He recommended the best way for France to fight back was to license French merchants ships to privateer and seize enemy merchant ships, while avoiding its navies. Vauban was pessimistic about France's so-called friends and allies and recommended against expensive land wars, or hopeless naval wars.

Louis XIV died in 1715 and was succeeded by his five-year-old great-grandson who reigned as Louis XV until his death in 1774. In 1718, France was once again at war, as Philip II of Orléans' regency joined the War of the Quadruple Alliance against Spain. In 1733 another war broke in central Europe, this time about the Polish succession, and France joined the war against the Austrian Empire. Peace was settled in the Treaty of Vienna (1738), according to which France would annex, through inheritance, the Duchy of Lorraine.

Two years later, in 1740, war broke out over the Austrian succession, and France seized the opportunity to join the conflict. The war played out in North America and India as well as Europe, and inconclusive terms were agreed to in the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748). Prussia was then becoming a new threat, as it had gained substantial territory from Austria. This led to the Diplomatic Revolution of 1756, in which the alliances seen during the previous war were mostly inverted. France was now allied to Austria and Russia, while Britain was now allied to Prussia.

In the North American theatre, France was allied with various Native American peoples during the Seven Years' War and, despite a temporary success at the battles of the Great Meadows and Monongahela, French forces were defeated at the disastrous Battle of the Plains of Abraham in Quebec. In 1762, Russia, France, and Austria were on the verge of crushing Prussia, when the Anglo-Prussian Alliance was saved by the Miracle of the House of Brandenburg. At sea, naval defeats against British fleets at Lagos and Quiberon Bay in 1759 and a crippling blockade forced France to keep its ships in port. Finally peace was concluded in the Treaty of Paris (1763), and France lost its North American empire.

Britain's success in the Seven Years' War had allowed them to eclipse France as the leading colonial power. France sought revenge for this defeat, and under Choiseul France started to rebuild. In 1766, the French Kingdom annexed Lorraine and the following year bought Corsica from Genoa. Having lost its colonial empire, France saw a good opportunity for revenge against Britain in signing an alliance with the Americans in 1778, and sending an army and navy that turned the American Revolution into a world war. Admiral de Grasse defeated a British fleet at Chesapeake Bay while Jean-Baptiste Donatien de Vimeur, comte de Rochambeau and Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette joined American forces in defeating the British at Yorktown. The war was concluded by the Treaty of Paris (1783) ; the United States became independent. The British Royal Navy scored a major victory over France in 1782 at the Battle of the Saintes and France finished the war with huge debts and the minor gain of the island of Tobago.

The " Philosophes " were 18th-century French intellectuals who dominated the French Enlightenment and were influential across Europe. The philosopher Denis Diderot was editor-in-chief of the famous Enlightenment accomplishment, the 72,000-article Encyclopédie (1751–72). It sparked a revolution in learning throughout the enlightened world.

In the early part of the 18th century the movement was dominated by Voltaire and Montesquieu. Around 1750 the Philosophes reached their most influential period, as Montesquieu published Spirit of Laws (1748) and Jean-Jacques Rousseau published Discourse on the Moral Effects of the Arts and Sciences (1750). The leader of the French Enlightenment and a writer of enormous influence across Europe, was Voltaire.

Astronomy, chemistry, mathematics and technology flourished. French chemists such as Antoine Lavoisier worked to replace the archaic units of weights and measures by a coherent scientific system. Lavoisier also formulated the law of Conservation of mass and discovered oxygen and hydrogen.

The French Revolution was a period of political and societal change in France that began with the Estates General of 1789, and ended with the coup of 18 Brumaire in November 1799 and the formation of the French Consulate. Many of its ideas are considered fundamental principles of liberal democracy, while its values and institutions remain central to modern French political discourse.

Its causes are generally agreed to be a combination of social, political and economic factors, which the Ancien Régime proved unable to manage. A financial crisis and widespread social distress led in May 1789 to the convocation of the Estates General, which was converted into a National Assembly in June. The Storming of the Bastille on 14 July led to a series of radical measures by the Assembly, among them the abolition of feudalism, state control over the Catholic Church in France, and a declaration of rights.

The next three years were dominated by the struggle for political control, exacerbated by economic depression. Military defeats following the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars in April 1792 resulted in the insurrection of 10 August 1792. The monarchy was abolished and replaced by the French First Republic in September, while Louis XVI was executed in January 1793.

After another revolt in June 1793, the constitution was suspended and effective political power passed from the National Convention to the Committee of Public Safety. About 16,000 people were executed in a Reign of Terror, which ended in July 1794. Weakened by external threats and internal opposition, the Republic was replaced in 1795 by the Directory. Four years later in 1799, the Consulate seized power in a military coup led by Napoleon Bonaparte. This is generally seen as marking the end of the Revolutionary period.

During the War of the First Coalition (1792–1797), the Directory had replaced the National Convention. Five directors then ruled France. As Great Britain was still at war with France, a plan was made to take Egypt from the Ottoman Empire, a British ally. This was Napoleon 's idea and the Directory agreed to the plan in order to send the popular general away from the mainland. Napoleon defeated the Ottoman forces during the Battle of the Pyramids (1798). Scientists and linguists thoroughly explored Egypt. Weeks later, the British fleet under Admiral Horatio Nelson unexpectedly destroyed the French fleet at the Battle of the Nile. Napoleon planned to move into Syria, but was defeated at the Siege of Acre. He returned to France without his army, which surrendered.

The Directory was threatened by the Second Coalition (1798–1802). Royalists and their allies still dreamed of restoring the monarchy to power, while the Prussian and Austrian crowns did not accept their territorial losses during the previous war. In 1799, the Russian army expelled the French from Italy in battles such as Cassano, while the Austrian army defeated the French in Switzerland at Stockach and Zurich. Napoleon then seized power through a coup and established the Consulate in 1799. The Austrian army was defeated at the Battle of Marengo and the Battle of Hohenlinden in 1800.

While at sea, the French had some success at Boulogne, but Nelson's Royal Navy destroyed an anchored Danish and Norwegian fleet at the Battle of Copenhagen (1801), because the Scandinavian kingdoms opposed the British blockade of France. The Second Coalition was beaten and peace was settled in two distinct treaties: the Treaty of Lunéville and the Treaty of Amiens. A brief interlude of peace ensued in 1802–03, during which Napoleon sold French Louisiana to the United States, because it was indefensible.

In 1801, Napoleon concluded a "Concordat" with Pope Pius VII that opened peaceful relations between church and state in France. The policies of the Revolution were reversed, except the Church did not get its lands back. Bishops and clergy were to receive state salaries, and the government would pay for the building and maintenance of churches. Napoleon reorganized higher learning by dividing the Institut National into four (later five) academies.

In 1804, Napoleon was titled Emperor by the senate, thus founding the First French Empire. Napoleon's rule was constitutional, and although autocratic, it was much more advanced than traditional European monarchies of the time. The proclamation of the French Empire was met by the Third Coalition. The French army was renamed La Grande Armée in 1805 and Napoleon used propaganda and nationalism to control the French population. The French army achieved a resounding victory at Ulm, where an entire Austrian army was captured.

A Franco-Spanish fleet was defeated at Trafalgar, making plans to invade Britain impossible. Despite this defeat, Napoleon inflicted on the Austrian and Russian Empires one of their greatest defeats at Austerlitz on December 2, 1805, destroying the Third Coalition. Peace was settled in the Treaty of Pressburg ; the Austrian Empire lost the title of Holy Roman Emperor and the Confederation of the Rhine was created by Napoleon over former Austrian territories.

Prussia joined Britain and Russia, thus forming the Fourth Coalition. Although the Coalition was joined by other allies, the French Empire was also not alone since it now had a complex network of allies and subject states. The largely outnumbered French army crushed the Prussian army at Jena-Auerstedt in 1806; Napoleon captured Berlin and went as far as Eastern Prussia. There the Russian Empire was defeated at the Battle of Friedland (14 June 1807). Peace was dictated in the Treaties of Tilsit, in which Russia had to join the Continental System, and Prussia handed half of its territories to France. The Duchy of Warsaw was formed over these territorial losses, and Polish troops entered the Grande Armée in significant numbers.

In order to ruin the British economy, Napoleon set up the Continental System in 1807, and tried to prevent merchants across Europe from trading with Britain. The large amount of smuggling frustrated Napoleon, and did more harm to his economy than to his enemies'.

Freed from his obligation in the east, Napoleon then went back to the west, as the French Empire was still at war with Britain. Only two countries remained neutral in the war: Sweden and Portugal, and Napoleon then looked toward the latter. In the Treaty of Fontainebleau (1807), a Franco-Spanish alliance against Portugal was sealed as Spain eyed Portuguese territories. French armies entered Spain in order to attack Portugal, but then seized Spanish fortresses and took over the kingdom by surprise. Joseph Bonaparte, Napoleon's brother, was made King of Spain after Charles IV abdicated.

This occupation of the Iberian peninsula fueled local nationalism, and soon the Spanish and Portuguese fought the French using guerilla tactics, defeating the French forces at the Battle of Bailén (June and July 1808). Britain sent a short-lived ground support force to Portugal, and French forces evacuated Portugal as defined in the Convention of Sintra following the Allied victory at Vimeiro (21 August 1808). France only controlled Catalonia and Navarre and could have been definitely expelled from the Iberian peninsula had the Spanish armies attacked again, but the Spanish did not.

Another French attack was launched on Spain, led by Napoleon himself, and was described as "an avalanche of fire and steel". However, the French Empire was no longer regarded as invincible by European powers. In 1808, Austria formed the Fifth Coalition in order to break down the French Empire. The Austrian Empire defeated the French at Aspern-Essling, yet was beaten at Wagram while the Polish allies defeated the Austrian Empire at Raszyn (April 1809). Although not as decisive as the previous Austrian defeats, the peace treaty in October 1809 stripped Austria of a large amount of territory, reducing it even more.

In 1812, war broke out with Russia, engaging Napoleon in the disastrous French invasion of Russia (1812). Napoleon assembled the largest army Europe had ever seen, including troops from all subject states, to invade Russia, which had just left the continental system and was gathering an army on the Polish frontier. Following an exhausting march and the bloody but inconclusive Battle of Borodino, near Moscow, the Grande Armée entered and captured Moscow, only to find it burning as part of the Russian scorched earth tactics. Although there still were battles, the Napoleonic army left Russia in late 1812 annihilated, most of all by the Russian winter, exhaustion, and scorched earth warfare. On the Spanish front the French troops were defeated at Vitoria (June 1813) and then at the Battle of the Pyrenees (July–August 1813). Since the Spanish guerrillas seemed to be uncontrollable, the French troops eventually evacuated Spain.

Since France had been defeated on these two fronts, states that had been conquered and controlled by Napoleon saw a good opportunity to strike back. The Sixth Coalition was formed under British leadership. The German states of the Confederation of the Rhine switched sides, finally opposing Napoleon. Napoleon was largely defeated in the Battle of the Nations outside Leipzig in October 1813, his forces heavily outnumbered by the Allied coalition armies and was overwhelmed by much larger armies during the Six Days Campaign (February 1814), although, the Six Days Campaign is often considered a tactical masterpiece because the allies suffered much higher casualties. Napoleon abdicated on 6 April 1814, and was exiled to Elba.

The Congress of Vienna reversed the political changes that had occurred during the wars. Napoleon suddenly returned, seized control of France, raised an army, and marched on his enemies in the Hundred Days. It ended with his final defeat at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815, and his exile to St. Helena, a remote island in the South Atlantic Ocean.

The monarchy was subsequently restored and Louis XVIII, younger brother of Louis XVI, became king, and the exiles returned. However many of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic reforms were kept in place.

Napoleon centralized power in Paris, with all the provinces governed by all-powerful prefects whom he selected. They were more powerful than royal intendants of the ancien régime and had a long-term impact in unifying the nation, minimizing regional differences, and shifting all decisions to Paris.

Religion had been a major issue during the Revolution, and Napoleon resolved most of the outstanding problems, moving the clergy and large numbers of devout Catholics from hostility to the government to support for him. The Catholic system was reestablished by the Concordat of 1801 (signed with Pope Pius VII), so that church life returned to normal; the church lands were not restored but the Jesuits were allowed back in and the bitter fights between the government and Church ended. Protestants, Jews and atheists were tolerated.

The French taxation system had collapsed in the 1780s. In the 1790s the government seized and sold church lands and lands of exiled aristocrats. Napoleon instituted a modern, efficient tax system that guaranteed a steady flow of revenues and made long-term financing possible.

Napoleon kept the system of conscription that had been created in the 1790s, so that every young man served in the army, which could be rapidly expanded even as it was based on a core of careerists and talented officers. Before the Revolution the aristocracy formed the officer corps. Now promotion was by merit and achievement—every private carried a marshal's baton, it was said.

The modern era of French education began in the 1790s. The Revolution in the 1790s abolished the traditional universities. Napoleon sought to replace them with new institutions, the École Polytechnique, focused on technology. The elementary schools received little attention.

Of permanent importance was the Napoleonic Code created by eminent jurists under Napoleon's supervision. Praised for its clarity, it spread rapidly throughout Europe and the world in general, and marked the end of feudalism and the liberation of serfs where it took effect. The Code recognized the principles of civil liberty, equality before the law, and the secular character of the state. It discarded the old right of primogeniture (where only the eldest son inherited) and required that inheritances be divided equally among all the children. The court system was standardized; all judges were appointed by the national government in Paris.

The century after the fall of Napoleon I was politically unstable:

Every [French] head of state from 1814 to 1873 spent part of his life in exile. Every regime was the target of assassination attempts of a frequency that put Spanish and Russian politics in the shade. Even in peaceful times governments changed every few months. In less peaceful times, political deaths, imprisonments and deportations are literally incalculable.

The period from 1789 to 1914, dubbed the " Long nineteenth century " by the historian Eric Hobsbawm, extends from the French Revolution's aftermath to the brink of World War I. Throughout this period, France underwent significant transformations that reshaped its geography, demographics, language, and economic landscape, marking a period of profound change and development. The French Revolution and Napoleonic eras fundamentally altered French society, promoting centralization, administrative uniformity across departments, and a standardized legal code. Education also centralized, emphasizing technical training and meritocracy, despite growing conservatism among the aristocracy and the church. Wealth concentration saw the richest 10 percent owning most of the nation's wealth. The 19th century saw France expanding to nearly its modern territorial limits through annexations and overseas imperialism, notably in Algeria, Indochina, and Africa. Despite territorial gains, France faced challenges, including a slow population growth, compared to its European neighbors, and a late industrialization that saw a shift from rural to urban living and the rise of an industrial workforce.

The period was also marked by significant linguistic and educational reforms, which sought to unify the country through language and secular education, contributing to a stronger national identity. Economically, France struggled to match the industrial growth rates of other advanced nations, maintaining a more traditional economy longer than its counterparts. Politically, the century was characterized by the end of the ancien régime, the rise and fall of the First and Second Empires, the tumultuous establishment of the Third Republic, and the radical experiment of the Paris Commune, reflecting the ongoing struggle between revolutionary ideals and conservative restoration.

Significant social and political reforms marked Napoleon III 's era, introducing measures like public assistance and regulations to improve working and living conditions for the lower classes. The Second Empire (1852–1870) sought modernization through infrastructure projects like the railway system, yet Napoleon III's foreign policy ventures often ended in failure, notably the catastrophic Franco-Prussian War which led to his capture and deposition. The Third Republic embarked on modernizing France, with educational reforms and attempts to create a unified national identity. Foreign policy focused on isolation of Germany and forming alliances, leading to the Triple Entente. Domestically, issues like the Dreyfus affair highlighted the nation's divisions, while laws aimed at reducing the Catholic Church's influence sparked further controversy.

Cultural and artistic movements, from Romanticism to Modernism, mirrored these societal changes, contributing to France's rich cultural legacy. The Belle Époque emerged as a period of cultural flourishing and peace, overshadowed by the growing threats of war and internal discord. The long 19th century set the foundations for modern France, navigating through revolutions, wars, and social upheavals to emerge as a unified nation-state near the front of the global stage, by the early 20th century.

The second colonial empire constituted the overseas colonies, protectorates and mandate territories that came under French rule from the 16th century onward. A distinction is generally made between the "first colonial empire", that existed until 1814, by which time most of it had been lost, and the "second colonial empire", which began with the conquest of Algiers in 1830. The second colonial empire came to an end after the loss in later wars of Vietnam (1954) and Algeria (1962), and relatively peaceful decolonizations elsewhere after 1960.

France lost wars to Britain that stripped away nearly all of its colonies by 1765. France rebuilt a new empire mostly after 1850, concentrating chiefly in Africa as well as Indochina and the South Pacific. Republicans, at first hostile to empire, only became supportive when Germany after 1880 started to build their own colonial empire. As it developed, the new empire took on roles of trade with France, especially supplying raw materials and purchasing manufactured items as well as lending prestige to the motherland and spreading French civilization and language and the Catholic religion. It also provided manpower in the World Wars.

It became a moral mission to lift the world up to French standards by bringing Christianity and French culture. In 1884, the leading proponent of colonialism, Jules Ferry, declared; "The higher races have a right over the lower races, they have a duty to civilize the inferior races." Full citizenship rights – assimilation – were offered. In reality the French settlers were given full rights and the natives given very limited rights. Apart from Algeria few settlers permanently settled in its colonies. Even in Algeria, the " Pied-Noir " (French settlers) always remained a small minority.

At its apex, it was one of the largest empires in history. Including metropolitan France, the total amount of land under French sovereignty reached 11,500,000 km (4,400,000 sq mi) in 1920, with a population of 110 million people in 1939. In World War II, the Free French used the overseas colonies as bases from which they fought to liberate France. "In an effort to restore its world-power status after the humiliation of defeat and occupation, France was eager to maintain its overseas empire at the end of the Second World War." Only two days after the defeat of Nazi Germany, France suppressed Algerian calls for independence, who were celebrating VE day, ending in a massacre, which killed at least 30,000 Muslims. However, gradually anti-colonial movements successfully challenged European authority. The French Constitution of 27 October 1946 (Fourth Republic), established the French Union which endured until 1958. Newer remnants of the colonial empire were integrated into France as overseas departments and territories within the French Republic. These now total about 1% of the pre-1939 colonial area, with 2.7 million people living in them in 2013. By the 1970s, the last "vestiges of empire held little interest for the French.... Except for the traumatic decolonization of Algeria, however, what is remarkable is how few long-lasting effects on France the giving up of empire entailed."

The population held steady from 40.7 million in 1911, to 41.5 million in 1936. The sense that the population was too small, especially in regard to the rapid growth of more powerful Germany, was a common theme in the early twentieth century. Natalist policies were proposed in the 1930s, and implemented in the 1940s.

France experienced a baby boom after 1945; it reversed a long-term record of low birth rates. In addition, there was steady immigration, especially from former French colonies in North Africa. The population grew from 41 million in 1946, to 50 million in 1966, and 60 million by 1990. The farming population declined sharply, from 35% of the workforce in 1945 to under 5% by 2000. By 2004, France had the second highest birthrate in Europe.

Preoccupied with internal problems, France paid little attention to foreign policy in the 1911–14 period, although it did extend military service to three years from two over strong Socialist objections in 1913. The rapidly escalating Balkan crisis of 1914 caught France unaware, and it played only a small role in the coming of World War I. The Serbian crisis triggered a complex set of military alliances between European states, causing most of the continent, including France, to be drawn into war within a few short weeks. Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia in late July, triggering Russian mobilization. On 1 August both Germany and France ordered mobilization. Germany was much better prepared militarily than any of the other countries involved, including France. The German Empire, as an ally of Austria, declared war on Russia. France was allied with Russia and so was ready to commit to war against the German Empire. On 3 August Germany declared war on France, and sent its armies through neutral Belgium. Britain entered the war on 4 August, and started sending in troops on 7 August. Italy, although tied to Germany, remained neutral and then joined the Allies in 1915.

Germany's "Schlieffen Plan" was to quickly defeat the French. They captured Brussels, Belgium by 20 August and soon had captured a large portion of northern France. The original plan was to continue southwest and attack Paris from the west. By early September they were within 65 kilometres (40 mi) of Paris, and the French government had relocated to Bordeaux. The Allies finally stopped the advance northeast of Paris at the Marne River (5–12 September 1914).

The war now became a stalemate – the famous " Western Front " was fought largely in France and was characterized by very little movement despite extremely large and violent battles, often with new and more destructive military technology. On the Western Front, the small improvised trenches of the first few months rapidly grew deeper and more complex, gradually becoming vast areas of interlocking defensive works. The land war quickly became dominated by the muddy, bloody stalemate of Trench warfare, a form of war in which both opposing armies had static lines of defense. The war of movement quickly turned into a war of position. Neither side advanced much, but both sides suffered hundreds of thousands of casualties. German and Allied armies produced essentially a matched pair of trench lines from the Swiss border in the south to the North Sea coast of Belgium. Meanwhile, large swaths of northeastern France came under the brutal control of German occupiers.

Trench warfare prevailed on the Western Front from September 1914 until March 1918. Famous battles in France include the Battle of Verdun and the Battle of the Somme in 1916, and five separate conflicts called the Battle of Ypres (from 1914 to 1918).

After Socialist leader Jean Jaurès, a pacifist, was assassinated at the start of the war, the French socialist movement abandoned its antimilitarist positions and joined the national war effort. Prime Minister René Viviani called for unity—for a " Union sacrée " ("Sacred Union")--Which was a wartime truce between the right and left factions that had been fighting bitterly. France had few dissenters. However, war-weariness was a major factor by 1917, even reaching the army. The soldiers were reluctant to attack; Mutiny was a factor as soldiers said it was best to wait for the arrival of millions of Americans. The soldiers were protesting not just the futility of frontal assaults in the face of German machine guns but also degraded conditions at the front lines and at home, especially infrequent leaves, poor food, the use of African and Asian colonials on the home front, and concerns about the welfare of their wives and children.

After defeating Russia in 1917, Germany now could concentrate on the Western Front, and planned an all-out assault in the spring of 1918, but had to do it before the very rapidly growing American army played a role. In March 1918 Germany launched its offensive and by May had reached the Marne and was again close to Paris. However, in the Second Battle of the Marne (15 July to 6 August 1918), the Allied line held. The Allies then shifted to the offensive. The Germans, out of reinforcements, were overwhelmed day after day and the high command saw it was hopeless. Austria and Turkey collapsed, and the Kaiser's government fell. Germany signed " The Armistice " that ended the fighting effective 11 November 1918, "the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the eleventh month."

The war was fought in large part on French soil, with 3.4 million French dead including civilians, and four times as many military casualties. The economy was hurt by the 1914 German invasion of major industrial areas in the northeast, which produced 58% of the steel, and 40% of the coal. In 1914, the government implemented a war economy with controls and rationing. By 1915 the war economy went into high gear, as millions of French women and colonial men replaced the civilian roles of many of the 3 million soldiers. Considerable assistance came with the influx of American food, money and raw materials in 1917. This war economy would have important reverberations after the war, as it would be a first breach of liberal theories of non-interventionism. The damages caused by the war amounted to about 113% of the GDP of 1913, chiefly the destruction of productive capital and housing. The national debt rose from 66% of GDP in 1913 to 170% in 1919, reflecting the heavy use of bond issues to pay for the war. Inflation was severe, with the franc losing over half its value against the British pound.

The richest families were hurt, as the top 1 percent saw their share of wealth drop from about 60% in 1914 to 36% in 1935, then plunge to 20 percent in 1970 to the present. A great deal of physical and financial damage was done during the world wars, foreign investments were cashed in to pay for the wars, the Russian Bolsheviks expropriated large-scale investments, postwar inflation demolished cash holdings, stocks and bonds plunged during the Great Depression, and progressive taxes ate away at accumulated wealth.

Peace terms were imposed by the Big Four, meeting in Paris in 1919: David Lloyd George of Britain, Vittorio Orlando of Italy, Georges Clemenceau of France, and Woodrow Wilson of the United States. Clemenceau demanded the harshest terms and won most of them in the Treaty of Versailles in 1919. Germany was forced to admit its guilt for starting the war, and was permanently weakened militarily. Germany had to pay huge sums in war reparations to the Allies (who in turn had large loans from the U.S. to pay off).

France regained Alsace-Lorraine and occupied the German industrial Saar Basin, a coal and steel region. The German African colonies were put under League of Nations mandates, and were administered by France and other victors. From the remains of the Ottoman Empire, France acquired the Mandate of Syria and the Mandate of Lebanon. French Marshal Ferdinand Foch wanted a peace that would never allow Germany to be a threat to France again, but after the Treaty of Versailles was signed he said, "This is not a peace. It is an armistice for 20 years."

France was part of the Allied force that occupied the Rhineland following the Armistice. Foch supported Poland in the Greater Poland Uprising and in the Polish–Soviet War and France also joined Spain during the Rif War. From 1925 until his death in 1932, Aristide Briand, as Prime Minister during five short intervals, directed French foreign policy, using his diplomatic skills and sense of timing to forge friendly relations with Weimar Germany as the basis of a genuine peace within the framework of the League of Nations. He realized France could neither contain the much larger Germany by itself nor secure effective support from Britain or the League.

As a response to the Weimar Republic's default on its reparations in the aftermath of World War I, France occupied the industrial region of the Ruhr as a means of ensuring German payments. The intervention was a failure, and France accepted the international solution to the reparations issues, as expressed in the Dawes Plan and the Young Plan.

Politically, the 1920s was dominated by the Right, with right-wing coalitions in 1919, 1926, and 1928, and later in 1934 and 1938.

In the 1920s, France established an elaborate system of border defences called the Maginot Line, designed to fight off any German attack. The Line did not extend into Belgium, which Germany would exploit in 1940. Military alliances were signed with weak powers in 1920–21, called the " Little Entente ".

The Great Depression affected France a bit later than other countries, hitting around 1931. While the GDP in the 1920s grew at the very strong rate of 4.43% per year, the 1930s rate fell to only 0.63%. The depression was relatively mild: unemployment peaked under 5%, the fall in production was at most 20% below the 1929 output; there was no banking crisis.

In contrast to the mild economic upheaval, the political upheaval was enormous. Socialist Leon Blum, leading the Popular Front, brought together Socialists and Radicals to become Prime Minister from 1936 to 1937; he was the first Jew and the first Socialist to lead France. The Communists in the Chamber of Deputies voted to keep the government in power, and generally supported the government's economic policies, but rejected its foreign policies. The Popular Front passed numerous labor reforms, which increased wages, cut working hours to 40 hours with overtime illegal and provided many lesser benefits to the working class such as mandatory two-week paid vacations. However, renewed inflation cancelled the gains in wage rates, unemployment did not fall, and economic recovery was very slow. The Popular Front failed in economics, foreign policy, and long-term stability: "Disappointment and failure was the legacy of the Popular Front." At first the Popular Front created enormous excitement and expectations on the left—including very large scale sitdown strikes—but in the end it failed to live up to its promise. However, Socialists would later take inspiration from the attempts of the Popular Front to set up a welfare state.

The government joined Britain in establishing an arms embargo during the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939). Blum rejected support for the Spanish Republicans because of his fear that civil war might spread to deeply divided France. Financial support in military cooperation with Poland was also a policy. The government nationalized arms suppliers, and dramatically increased its program of rearming the French military in a last-minute catch-up with the Germans.

Appeasement of Germany, in cooperation with Britain, was the policy after 1936, as France sought peace even in the face of Hitler 's escalating demands. Prime Minister Édouard Daladier refused to go to war against Germany and Italy without British support as Neville Chamberlain wanted to save peace at Munich in 1938.

Germany's invasion of Poland in 1939 finally caused France and Britain to declare war against Germany. But the Allies did not launch massive assaults and instead kept a defensive stance: this was called the Phoney War in Britain or Drôle de guerre — the funny sort of war — in France. It did not prevent the German army from conquering Poland in a matter of weeks with its innovative Blitzkrieg tactics, also helped by the Soviet Union's attack on Poland.

When Germany had its hands free for an attack in the west, the Battle of France began in May 1940, and the same Blitzkrieg tactics proved just as devastating there. The Wehrmacht bypassed the Maginot Line by marching through the Ardennes forest. A second German force was sent into Belgium and the Netherlands to act as a diversion to this main thrust. In six weeks of savage fighting the French lost 90,000 men.

Many civilians sought refuge by taking to the roads of France: some 2 million refugees from Belgium and the Netherlands were joined by between 8 and 10 million French civilians, representing a quarter of the French population, all heading south and west. This movement may well have been the largest single movement of civilians in history prior to the Partition of India in 1947.

Paris fell to the Germans on 14 June 1940, but not before the British Expeditionary Force was evacuated from Dunkirk, along with many French soldiers.

Vichy France was established on 10 July 1940 to govern the unoccupied part of France and its colonies. It was led by Philippe Pétain, the aging war hero of the First World War. Petain's representatives signed a harsh Armistice on 22 June, whereby Germany kept most of the French army in camps in Germany, and France had to pay out large sums in gold and food supplies. Germany occupied three-fifths of France's territory, leaving the rest in the southeast to the new Vichy government. However, in practice, most local government was handled by the traditional French officialdom. In November 1942 all of Vichy France was finally occupied by German forces. Vichy continued in existence but it was closely supervised by the Germans.

The Vichy regime sought to collaborate with Germany, keeping peace in France to avoid further occupation although at the expense of personal freedom and individual safety. Some 76,000 Jews were deported during the German occupation, often with the help of the Vichy authorities, and murdered in the Nazis' extermination camps.

The French soldiers held as POWs and forced laborers in Germany throughout the war were not at risk of death in combat, but the anxieties of separation for their wives were high. The government provided them a modest allowance, but one in ten became prostitutes to support their families. It gave women a key symbolic role to carry out the national regeneration. It used propaganda, women's organizations, and legislation to promote maternity, patriotic duty, and female submission to marriage, home, and children's education. Conditions were very difficult for housewives, as food and other necessities were in short supply. Divorce laws were made much more stringent, and restrictions were placed on the employment of married women. Family allowances that had begun in the 1930s were continued, and became a vital lifeline for many families; it was a monthly cash bonus for having more children. In 1942, the birth rate started to rise, and by 1945 it was higher than it had been for a century.

General Charles de Gaulle in London declared himself on BBC radio to be the head of a rival government in exile, and gathered the Free French Forces around him, finding support in some French colonies and recognition from Britain but not the United States. After the Attack on Mers-el-Kébir in 1940, where the British fleet destroyed a large part of the French navy, still under command of Vichy France, that killed about 1,100 sailors, there was nationwide indignation and a feeling of distrust in the French forces, leading to the events of the Battle of Dakar. Eventually, several important French ships joined the Free French Forces. The United States maintained diplomatic relations with Vichy and avoided recognition of de Gaulle's claim to be the one and only government of France. Churchill, caught between the U.S. and de Gaulle, tried to find a compromise.

Within France proper, the organized underground grew as the Vichy regime resorted to more strident policies in order to fulfill the enormous demands of the Nazis and the eventual decline of Nazi Germany became more obvious. They formed the Resistance. The most famous figure of the French resistance was Jean Moulin, sent in France by de Gaulle in order to link all resistance movements; he was captured and tortured by Klaus Barbie (the "butcher of Lyon"). Increasing repression culminated in the complete destruction and extermination of the village of Oradour-sur-Glane at the height of the Battle of Normandy. On 10 June 1944, a company of the 2nd SS Panzer Division, entered Oradour-sur-Glane, and massacred 642 men, women and children, all of whom were civilians. In 1953, 21 men went on trial for the Oradour killings; all but one were pardoned by the French government.

On 6 June 1944, the Allies landed in Normandy, with a French component. On 15 August Allied forces landing in Provence, this time including 260,000 men of the French First Army. The German lines finally broke, and they fled back to Germany while keeping control of some of the major ports. Allied forces liberated France and the Free French were given the honor of liberating Paris in late August. The French army recruited French Forces of the Interior (de Gaulle's formal name for resistance fighters) to continue the war until the final defeat of Germany; this army numbered 300,000 men by September, and 370,000 by spring 1945.

The Vichy regime disintegrated. An interim Provisional Government of the French Republic was quickly put into place by de Gaulle. The gouvernement provisoire de la République française, or GPRF, operated under a tripartisme alliance of communists, socialists, and democratic republicans. The GPRF governed France from 1944 to 1946, when it was replaced by the French Fourth Republic. Tens of thousands of collaborators were executed without trial. The new government declared the Vichy laws unconstitutional and illegal, and elected new local governments. Women gained the right to vote.

The political scene in 1944–45 was controlled by the Resistance, but it had numerous factions. Charles de Gaulle and the Free France element had been based outside France, but now came to dominate, in alliance with the Socialists, the Christian Democrats (MRP), and what remained of the Radical party. The Communists had largely dominated the Resistance inside France, but cooperated closely with the government in 1944–45, on orders from the Kremlin. There was a general consensus that important powers that had been an open collaboration with the Germans should be nationalized, such as Renault automobiles and the major newspapers. A new Social Security system was called for, as well as important new concessions to the labour unions. Unions themselves were divided among communist, Socialist, and Christian Democrat factions. Frustrated by his inability to control all the dominant forces, de Gaulle resigned in 1946. On 13 October 1946, a new constitution established the Fourth Republic. The Fourth Republic consisted of a parliamentary government controlled by a series of coalitions. France attempted to regain control of French Indochina but was defeated by the Viet Minh in 1954. Only months later, France faced another anti-colonialist conflict in Algeria and the debate over whether or not to keep control of Algeria, then home to over one million European settlers, wracked the country and nearly led to a coup and civil war. Charles de Gaulle managed to keep the country together while taking steps to end the war. The Algerian War was concluded with the Évian Accords in 1962 which led to Algerian independence.

The June 1951 elections saw a re-emergence of the right, and until June 1954 France was governed by a succession of centre-right coalitions.

Wartime damage to the economy was severe, and apart from gold reserves, France had inadequate resources to recover on its own. The transportation system was in total shambles — the Allies had bombed out the railways and the bridges, and the Germans had destroyed the port facilities. Energy was in extremely short supply, with very low stocks of coal and oil. Imports of raw materials were largely cut off, so most factories shut down. The invaders had stripped most of the valuable industrial tools for German factories. Discussions with the United States for emergency aid dragged on, with repeated postponements on both sides. Meanwhile, several million French prisoners of war and forced labourers were being returned home, with few jobs and little food available for them. The plan was for 20 percent of German reparations to be paid to France, but Germany was in much worse shape even than France, and in no position to pay.

After de Gaulle left office in January 1946, the diplomatic logjam was broken in terms of American aid. The U.S. Army shipped in food, from 1944 to 1946, and U.S. Treasury loans and cash grants were disbursed from 1945 until 1947, with Marshall Plan aid continuing until 1951. France received additional aid from 1951 to 1955 in order to help the country in its war in Indochina. Apart from low-interest loans, the other funds were grants that did not involve repayment. The debts left over from World War I, whose payment had been suspended since 1931, were renegotiated in the Blum-Byrnes agreement of 1946. The United States forgave all $2.8 billion in debt from the First World War, and gave France a new loan of $650 million. In return, French negotiator Jean Monnet set out the French five-year plan for recovery and development. The Marshall Plan gave France $2.3 billion with no repayment. The total of all American grants and credits to France from 1946 to 1953, amounted to $4.9 billion.

A central feature of the Marshall Plan was to encourage international trade, reduce tariffs, lower barriers, and modernize French management. The Marshall Plan set up intensive tours of American industry. France sent missions of businessmen and experts to tour American factories, farms, stores and offices. They were especially impressed with the prosperity of American workers, and the low price of vehicles. Some French businesses resisted Americanization, but the most profitable, especially chemicals, oil, electronics, and instrumentation, seized upon the opportunity to attract American investments and build a larger market. The U.S. insisted on opportunities for Hollywood films, and the French film industry responded with new life.

Although the economic situation in France was grim in 1945, resources did exist and the economy regained normal growth by the 1950s. France managed to regain its international status thanks to a successful production strategy, a demographic spurt, and technical and political innovations. Conditions varied from firm to firm. Some had been destroyed or damaged, nationalized or requisitioned, but the majority carried on, sometimes working harder and more efficiently than before the war. Despite strong American pressure through the ERP, there was little change in the organization and content of the training for French industrial managers. This was mainly due to the reticence of the existing institutions, and the struggle among different economic and political interest groups for control over efforts to improve the further training of practitioners.

The Monnet Plan provided a coherent framework for economic policy, and it was strongly supported by the Marshall Plan. It was inspired by moderate, Keynesian free-trade ideas rather than state control. Although relaunched in an original way, the French economy was about as productive as comparable West European countries.

Pierre Mendès France, was a Radical party leader who was Prime Minister for eight months in 1954–55, working with the support of the Socialist and Communist parties. His top priority was ending the deadly war in Indochina in the wake of the humiliating defeat at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu. The U.S. had paid most of the costs of the war, but its support inside France had collapsed. In February 1954, only 7% of the French people wanted to continue the fight to keep Indochina out of Ho Chi Minh and his Viet Minh movement. At the Geneva Conference in July 1954, Pierre France made a deal that gave the Viet Minh control of Vietnam north of the 17th parallel, and allowed France to pull out all its forces. That left South Vietnam standing alone, and the U.S. would provide support for it afterwards. Pierre France next came to an agreement with Habib Bourguiba, the nationalist leader in Tunisia, for the independence of that colony by 1956, and began discussions with Moroccan nationalists for a French withdrawal.

With over a million European residents in Algeria (the Pieds-Noirs), France refused to grant independence until the Algerian War of Independence had turned into a French political and civil crisis. Algeria won its independence in 1962, unleashing a massive wave of immigration from the former colony back to France of both Pied-Noir and Algerians who had supported France.

In 1956, another crisis struck French colonies, this time in Egypt. The Suez Canal, having been built by the French government, belonged to the French Republic and was operated by the Compagnie universelle du canal maritime de Suez. Great Britain had bought the Egyptian share from Isma'il Pasha and was the second-largest owner of the canal before the crisis.

The Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser nationalized the canal despite French and British opposition; he determined that a European response was unlikely. Great Britain and France attacked Egypt and built an alliance with Israel against Nasser. Israel attacked from the east, Britain from Cyprus and France from Algeria. Egypt was defeated in a mere few days. The Suez crisis caused an outcry of indignation in the Arab world, and Saudi Arabia set an embargo on oil on France and Britain. U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower forced a ceasefire; Britain and Israel soon withdrew, leaving France alone in Egypt. Under strong international pressures, the French government ultimately evacuated its troops from Suez and largely disengaged from the Middle East.

The May 1958 seizure of power in Algiers by French army units and French settlers opposed to concessions in the face of Arab nationalist insurrection ripped apart the unstable Fourth Republic. The National Assembly brought De Gaulle back to power during the May 1958 crisis. He founded the Fifth Republic with a strengthened presidency, and he was elected in the latter role. He managed to keep France together while taking steps to end the war, much to the anger of the Pieds-Noirs (Frenchmen settled in Algeria) and the military; both had supported his return to power to maintain colonial rule. He granted independence to Algeria in 1962 and progressively to other French colonies.

Proclaiming grandeur essential to the nature of France, de Gaulle initiated his "Politics of Grandeur." He demanded complete autonomy for France in world affairs, which meant that major decisions could not be forced upon it by NATO, the European Community or anyone else. De Gaulle pursued a policy of "national independence." He vetoed Britain's entry into the Common Market, fearing it might gain too great a voice on French affairs. While not officially abandoning NATO, he withdrew from its military integrated command, fearing that the United States had too much control over NATO. He launched an independent nuclear development program that made France the fourth nuclear power. France then adopted the dissuasion du faible au fort doctrine which meant a Soviet attack on France would only bring total destruction to both sides.

He restored cordial Franco-German relations in order to create a European counterweight between the "Anglo-Saxon" (American and British) and Soviet spheres of influence. De Gaulle openly criticised the U.S. intervention in Vietnam. He was angry at American economic power, especially what his Finance minister called the " exorbitant privilege " of the U.S. dollar.

In May 1968, he appeared likely to lose power amidst widespread protests by students and workers, but persisted through the crisis with backing from the army. His party, denouncing radicalism, won the 1968 election with an increased majority in the Assembly. Nonetheless, de Gaulle resigned in 1969 after losing a referendum in which he proposed more decentralization.

By the late 1960s, France's economic growth, while strong, was beginning to lose steam. A global currency crisis meant a devaluation of the Franc against the West German Mark and the U.S. Dollar in 1968, which was one of the leading factors for the social upheaval of that year. Industrial policy was used to bolster French industries.

The Trente Glorieuses era (1945–1975) ended with the worldwide 1973 oil crisis, which increased costs in energy and thus on production. Economic instability marked the Giscard d'Estaing government (1974–1981). Giscard turned to Prime Minister Raymond Barre in 1976, who advocated numerous complex, strict policies ("Barre Plans"). The plans included a three-month price freeze; wage controls; salary controls; a reduction of the growth in the money supply; increases in taxes and bank rates but a reduction in the value-added tax; measures to restore the trade balance; limits on expensive oil imports; special aid to exports; an action fund to aid industries; increased financial aid to farmers; and social security.

Economic troubles continued into the presidency of François Mitterrand. A recession in the early 1980s led to the abandonment of dirigisme, in favour of a more pragmatic approach to economic intervention. Growth resumed later in the decade, only to be slowed down by the economic depression of the early 1990s, which affected the Socialist Party.

France's recent economic history has been less turbulent than in many other countries. The average income in mid-century grew by 0.9% per year, a rate which has been outdone almost every year since 1975. By the early 1980s, for instance, wages in France were on or slightly above the EEC average.

After the fall of the USSR and the end of the Cold War, potential menaces to mainland France appeared considerably reduced. France began reducing its nuclear capacities and conscription was abolished in 2001. In 1990, France, led by Mitterrand, joined the short successful Gulf War against Iraq; the French participation to this war was called the Opération Daguet.

Jacques Chirac assumed office after a campaign focused on the need to combat France's high unemployment rate. The economy became strengthened. French leaders increasingly tied the future of France to the continued development of the European Union (EU). In 1992, France ratified the Maastricht Treaty establishing the EU. In 1999, the Euro was introduced to replace the Franc. France also became involved in joint European projects such as Airbus, the Galileo positioning system and the Eurocorps.

The French stood among the strongest supporters of NATO and EU policy in the Balkans, to prevent genocide in former Yugoslavia ; French troops joined the 1999 NATO bombing of the country. France became actively involved in fighting against international terrorism. In 2002, Alliance Base, an international Counterterrorist Intelligence Center, was secretly established in Paris. France contributed to the toppling of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan, but it strongly rejected the 2003 invasion of Iraq.

Jacques Chirac was reelected in 2002, and became a fierce opponent of the Iraq invasion. Conservative Nicolas Sarkozy was elected and took office in 2007. Sarkozy was very actively involved in the military operation in Libya to oust the Gaddafi government in 2011. After 2005, the world economy stagnated, and the 2008 global crisis (including its effects in both the Eurozone and France) dogged Sarkozy, who lost reelection in 2012 against Socialist Francois Hollande. Hollande advocated a growth policy in contrast to the austerity policy advocated by Germany's Angela Merkel as a way of dealing with the Euro area crisis.

At the close of the Algerian war, hundreds of thousands of Muslims, including some who had supported France (Harkis), settled permanently in France, especially in the larger cities where they lived in subsidized public housing, and suffered very high unemployment rates. In 2005, the predominantly Arab-immigrant suburbs of many French cities erupted in riots. Traditional interpretations say these race riots were spurred by radical Muslims or unemployed youth. Another view states that the riots reflected a broader problem of racism and police violence in France. In 2009, there were more riots.

In 2015, The New York Times summarized an ongoing conflict between France's secular and individualist values, and a growing Muslim conservatism. In 1994, Air France Flight 8969 was hijacked by terrorists; they were captured. In 2012, a Muslim radical shot three French soldiers and four Jewish citizens in Toulouse and Montauban. In January 2015, the satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo and a Jewish grocery store came under attack from some angered Muslims in Paris. World leaders rallied to Paris to show their support for free speech. There were more terrorist attacks afterwards, including another series of attacks in Paris in November 2015, and a truck attack in Nice in 2016.

In the 2017 election for president the winner was Emmanuel Macron, the founder of a new party " La République En Marche! " (later Renaissance RE). In the 2022 presidential election president Macron was re-elected after beating his far-right rival, Marine Le Pen, in the runoff.

The problem of high unemployment has yet to be resolved.

Newspapers have played a major role in French politics, economy and society since the 17th century.

Print media played a significant role in the formation of popular public opinion towards the monarchy and Old Regime. Under the Old Regime, France had a small number of heavily censored newspapers which needed royal licenses to operate; papers without licenses had to operate underground. Both the brief public opinion pamphlets and daily life periodicals were reviewed and edited heavily in order to indirectly influence the people, even hiring writers for such propaganda. Radical Republican journalism experienced a dramatic proliferation as the Estates General convened: “in that month [May 1789] over a hundred pamphlets appeared… and the figure rose to 300 in June”. Between 1789 and 1799, over 1,300 new newspapers had emerged, combined with a large demand for pamphlets and periodical literature, which caused a flowering, albeit short-lived press. While official regulations attempted to suppress dissent in large-scale publications, some smaller papers and journals provided readers with more radical subject matter.

The increasing popularity of these revolutionary publications was reflected in the increased political activity of the French population, particularly those in Paris, where citizens flocked to coffeehouses to read pamphlets and newspapers and to listen to orators. Two important newspapers of the time were Friend of the People, and The Defender of the Constitution, which were operated by Marat and Robespierre respectively. While both papers presented republican arguments and anti-religious sentiments, the result was a direct competition for support from the same readers.

Such is the case of the royalist daily pamphlet: Ami du Roi produced and distributed by the abbé Royou and his influential sister, Madame Fréfron. The pamphlet began on September 1, 1790 and it was one of the most widely read right-wing journals. After a short run, the paper was denounced in May 1792 by the Assembly citing its news briefs condemning the Civil Constitution of the Clergy. This was especially inflammatory following the shootings on the Champ de Mars just a year before in July, where a large number of protesters illegally gathered signatures. They resisted the National Guard with stolen arms and fifty people died during the confrontation. Both liberal and conservative publications together became the main communication medium; newspapers were read aloud in taverns and clubs and circulated amongst patrons.

During the conservative era of the Directory, from 1794 to 1799, newspapers declined sharply in importance. The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen allowed for the freedom of the press but also allowed for the government to repress abuses of the press. This allowed the government to define “abuses of the press” as it saw fit and justified the heavy censorship that took place during the Revolution. At the height of the Reign of Terror, the government's press censorship was stricter than that of the Old Regime, censoring hundreds of papers and brochures that did not align with the government's policies or ideals. Newspapers changed their names and titles frequently to avoid being censored or banned, and multiple journalists were executed at the guillotine during this time including Jacques Pierre Brissot and Camille Desmoulins.

The Moniteur Universel served as the official record of legislative debates. Jean-Paul Marat gained enormous influence through his powerful L'Ami du peuple with its attacks on scandals and conspiracies that alarmed the people until he was assassinated in 1793. In addition to Marat, numerous important politicians came to the fore through journalism, including Maximilien de Robespierre and Jacques Hébert. In 1789, all restrictions on the press were eliminated; by 1793 over 400 newspapers had been founded, including 150 in Paris alone. During the conservative era of the Directory, from 1794 to 1799, newspapers declined sharply in importance. When Napoleon took power in 1799, only seventy-two papers were left in Paris, and he soon closed all but 13. In 1811, he took the final step: he allowed only four papers in Paris and one in each of the other departments; all of them closely censored. It is recognized that propaganda was heavily used throughout the rise of Napoleon. Napoleon utilized propaganda in a wide range of media including newspapers, art, theatres, and his famous bulletins. Through the use of media, Napoleon proved to be an early master of modern propaganda. Napoleon ensured that his efforts were being met by not only censoring the majority of media content but by also creating and publishing his own works. For example, Napoleon owned two military newspapers, the Courrier de l’Armée d’Italie and La France vue de l’Armée d’Italie. This allowed Napoleon to distribute propaganda related to his military successes, which swayed public opinion in France in his favor. Under Napoleon, the organ of official information was the Moniteur (Gazette nationale, ou le moniteur universal), which was founded in 1789 under the same general management as the Mercure. Both newspapers were sources of establishment messages and written for an establishment audience, with the Moniteur representing the majority view in the French assembly and the Mercure representing the minority.

The restoration of the House of Bourbon in 1815 allowed for a free press. The Serre laws, passed in May 1819, would govern press freedom in France for much of the nineteenth century. Under these laws, censorship was light, but there were restrictions such as the requirement to pay a large deposit with the government, and a stamp tax of five centimes on each copy. A handful of newspapers were published, closely aligned with political factions. They were expensive, sold only by subscription, and served by a small elite.

In the mid-19th century, 1815-1880s, a series of technical innovations revolutionized the newspaper industry and made possible mass production of cheap copies for a mass national readership. The telegraph arrived in 1845, and, about 1870, the rotary press developed by Hippolyte Auguste Marinoni. Previously, publishers used expensive rag paper and slow hand-operated screw presses. Now they used much cheaper wood pulp paper, on high-speed presses. The cost of production fell by an order of magnitude. The opening of the railway system in the 1860s made rapid distribution possible between Paris and all the outlying cities and provinces. As a result of the technical revolution, much greater quantities of news was distributed much faster, and more cheaply. In June 1836 La Presse became the first French newspaper to include paid advertising in its pages, allowing it to lower its price, extend its readership and increase its profitability; other titles soon copied the formula.

The revolution of 1848 gave rise to many ephemeral papers. However, liberty of the press disappeared in 1851 under the Second Empire of Napoleon III. Most newspapers were suppressed; each party was allowed only one paper. The severity of the censorship relax in the 1860s but did not end until the French Third Republic started in 1871.

Le Correspondent founded in 1843 and published fortnightly, expressed liberal Catholic opinion, urged a restoration of freedom in France, resisted a growing anti-clericalism, and fought its conservative Catholic rival paper L'Univers. The paper clashed with government censors. In 1848 editors were convicted of "inciting hate and scorn of the government." The paper had many supporters and the emperor issued a pardon. In 1861 authorities forced the dismissal of a professor at the University of Lyons for an offensive article he wrote. The circulation was 3,290 in 1861, 5,000 in 1868, and 4,500 in 1869.

Émile de Girardin (1806 – 1881) was the most successful and flamboyant journalist of the era, presenting himself as a promoter of mass education through mass journalism' His magazines reached over hundred thousand subscribers, and his inexpensive daily newspaper La Presse undersold the competition by half, thanks to is cheaper production and heavier advertising. Like most prominent journalists, Girardin was deeply involved in politics, and served in parliament. To his bitter disappointment, he never held high office. He was of brilliant polemicist, a master of controversy, with pungent short sentences that immediately caught the reader's attention.

The new Third Republic, 1871–1914, was a golden era for French journalism. Newspapers were cheap, energetic, uncensored, omnipresent, and reflected every dimension of political life. The circulation of the daily press combined was only 150,000 in 1860. It reached 1 million in 1870 and 5 million in 1910. In 1914 Paris published 80 daily newspapers. Le Temps was the serious paper of record. Moderates additionally read Le Figaro. Catholics followed La Croix. Nationalists read L'Intransigeant. Socialists (and after 1920 Communists) took direction from " L'Humanité." Much more popular than any of these, and much less political, with nationwide circulation of a million or more came Le Petit Journal, Le Matin, and Le Petit Parisien. The heavy-handed censorship of the First World War, the conscription of journalists, and the severe shortage of newsprint, drastically undercut the size, scope, and quality of all the newspapers.

Advertising grew rapidly, providing a steady financial basis that was more lucrative than single-copy sales. A new liberal press law of 1881 abandoned the restrictive practices that had been typical for a century. New types of popular newspapers, especially Le Petit Journal reached an audience more interested in diverse entertainment and gossip rather than hard news. It captured a quarter of the Parisian market, and forced the rest to lower their prices. In 1884, it added the Supplément illustré, a weekly Sunday supplement that was the first to feature color illustrations. In 1887, it boasted a daily circulation of 950,000, the highest of any newspaper in the world. In 1914. It sold 1.5 million copies a day across France. Most Frenchmen lived in rural areas, and traditionally had minimal access to newspapers. The illustrated popular press revolutionized the rural opportunities for entertaining and colorful news, and helped modernize traditional peasants into Frenchmen.

The main dailies employed their own journalists who competed for news flashes. All newspapers relied upon the Agence Havas (now Agence France-Presse), a telegraphic news service with a network of reporters and contracts with Reuters to provide world service. The staid old papers retained their loyal clientele because of their concentration on serious political issues.

The Roman Catholic Assumptionist order revolutionized pressure group media by its national newspaper La Croix. It vigorously advocated for traditional Catholicism while at the same time innovating with the most modern technology and distribution systems, with regional editions tailored to local taste. Secularists and Republicans recognize the newspaper as their greatest enemy, especially when it took the lead in attacking Dreyfus as a traitor and stirred up anti-Semitism. When Dreyfus was pardoned, the Radical government in 1900 closed down the entire Assumptionist order and its newspaper.

Businesses and banks secretly paid certain newspapers to promote particular financial interests, and hide or cover up possible most behavior. Publishers took payments for favorable notices in news articles of commercial products. Sometimes, a newspaper would blackmail a business by threatening to publish unfavorable information unless the business immediately started advertising in the paper. Foreign governments, especially Russia and Turkey, secretly paid the press hundreds of thousands of francs a year to guarantee favorable coverage of the bonds it was selling in Paris. When the real news was bad about Russia, as during its 1905 Revolution or during its war with Japan, it raised the bribes it paid to millions of francs. Each ministry in Paris had a group of journalists whom it secretly paid and fed stories. During the World War, newspapers became more of a propaganda agency on behalf of the war effort; there was little critical commentary. The press seldom reported the achievements of the Allies; instead they credited all the good news to the French army. In a word, the newspapers were not independent champions of the truth, but secretly paid advertisements for special interests and foreign governments.

Regional newspapers flourished after 1900. However the Parisian newspapers were largely stagnant after the war; circulation inched up to 6 million a day from 5 million in 1910. The major postwar success story was Paris Soir ; which lacked any political agenda and was dedicated to providing a mix of sensational reporting to aid circulation, and serious articles to build prestige. By 1939 its circulation was over 1.7 million, double that of its nearest rival the tabloid Le Petit Parisien. In addition to its daily paper Paris Soir sponsored a highly successful women's magazine Marie-Claire. Another magazine Match was modeled after the photojournalism of the American magazine Life.

John Gunther wrote in 1940 that of the more than 100 daily newspapers in Paris, two (L'Humanité and Action Française ' s publication) were honest; "Most of the others, from top to bottom, have news columns for sale". He reported that Bec et Ongles was simultaneously subsidized by the French government, German government, and Alexandre Stavisky, and that Italy allegedly paid 65 million francs to French newspapers in 1935. France was a democratic society in the 1930s, but the people were kept in the dark about critical issues of foreign policy. The government tightly controlled all of the media to promulgate propaganda to support the government's foreign policy of appeasement to the aggressions of Italy and especially Nazi Germany. There were 253 daily newspapers, all owned separately. The five major national papers based in Paris were all under the control of special interests, especially right-wing political and business interests that supported appeasement. They were all venal, taking large secret subsidies to promote the policies of various special interests. Many leading journalists were secretly on the government payroll. The regional and local newspapers were heavily dependent on government advertising and published news and editorials to suit Paris. Most of the international news was distributed through the Havas agency, which was largely controlled by the government.

Alternative news sources were likewise tightly controlled. Radio was a potentially powerful new medium, but France was quite laggard in consumer ownership of radio sets, and the government impose very strict controls. After 1938, stations were allowed only three brief daily bulletins, of seven minutes each, to cover all the day's news. The Prime Minister's office closely supervised the news items that were to be broadcast. Newsreels were tightly censored; they were told to feature non-controversial but glamorous entertainers, film premieres, sporting events, high-fashion, new automobiles, an official ceremonies. Motion pictures likely likewise were censored, and were encouraged to reinforce stereotypes to the effect that the French were always lovers of liberty and justice, contending against cruel and barbarous Germans. The government-subsidized films that glorified military virtues and the French Empire. The goal was to tranquilize public opinion, to give it little or nothing to work with, so as not to interfere with the policies of the national government. When serious crises emerged such as the Munich crisis of 1938, people were puzzled and mystified by what was going on. When war came in 1939, Frenchman had little understanding of the issues, and little correct information. They suspiciously distrusted the government, with the result that French morale in the face of the war with Germany was badly prepared.

The press was heavily censored during the Second World War; the Paris newspapers were under tight German supervision by collaborators; others were closed. In 1944, the Free French liberated Paris, and seized control of all of the collaborationist newspapers. They turned the presses and operations over to new teams of editors and publishers, and provided financial support. As a result, the previously high-prestige Le Temps was replaced by the new daily Le Monde.

During the Fourth Republic from 1944 to 1958, Le Figaro was in effect the official organ of the foreign ministry. French radio and television was under government ownership and strict supervision. Under the Fifth Republic, radio and television remained under strict control of the national government. Newspapers provided limited news of international affairs, and had little influence on government decisions.

In the early 21st century, the best-selling daily was the regional Ouest-France in 47 local editions, followed by Le Progres of Lyon, La Voix du Nord in Lille, and Provençal in Marseille. In Paris the Communists published l'Humanité while Le Monde and Le Figaro had local rivals in Le Parisien, L'Aurore and the leftist Libération.

The history of Jura salt refers to the geological formation and extraction of salt in the Jura department, specifically within the Franche-Comté salt basin, dating back to the Late Triassic period.

Salt extraction in the Jura region began in prehistoric times and was well-established by the Latin antiquity. It became a significant source of wealth in the 6th century when King Sigismund of Burgundy donated rights to the saltworks of Salins to the Abbey of Agaune in present-day Valais, Switzerland. By the 10th century, these saltworks fell under the feudal control of the Seigneury of Salins, acquired by the House of Chalon-Arlay in the 13th century. In the 15th and 16th centuries, the Salins saltworks, the only active saltworks at the time, were restructured into a royal monopoly under the Spanish Habsburgs. Following the Conquest of Franche-Comté and the Treaty of Nijmegen in 1678, these rights were transferred to the French crown. However, the productivity of the Salins saltworks declined, and the need for vast wood resources to fuel the boilers led to the establishment of the Royal Saltworks at Arc-et-Senans near the Chaux forest, with brine transported via a 21 kilometres (13 mi) brine pipeline. Operations at Arc-et-Senans began in 1779 and ceased in 1895.

During the medieval period, salt springs at Grozon and Lons-le-Saunier were exploited but abandoned in the 14th century due to low profitability. In the modern era, extraction resumed at Montmorot, near Lons-le-Saunier, where a saltworks was established in 1752, operating until 1966. In the mid-19th century, new extraction sites were developed, such as the Grozon saltworks, which operated until 1944 alongside local coal mining, and a brine extraction site at Poligny to supply the Solvay factory in Tavaux near Dole.

By the late 20th century, Jura salt was primarily used in thermalism at sites like Lons-le-Saunier and Salins-les-Bains. The region's salt heritage is preserved through initiatives like the Salt Museum in Salins-les-Bains and the transformation of the Arc-et-Senans saltworks into a cultural center, both recognized as UNESCO World Heritage Sites.

During the Late Triassic (approximately 215 million years ago), the Panthalassa ocean, covering eastern France as part of the Pangaea supercontinent, receded, leaving a shallow brine lagoon. Through evaporation, this formed a thick layer of over 100 metres (330 ft) of evaporite (containing rock salt), later covered by over 200 metres (660 ft) of marl and limestone through sedimentation. The Jura Massif formed about 35 million years ago during the Priabonian due to compression and folding from the Alps to the west. The evaporite layer rose closer to the surface in some areas due to folding and erosion. Water infiltrated the ground, circulated through salt deposits, and re-emerged as resurgences.

The main rock salt deposits in the Jura Massif are concentrated in three key areas. The southern zone, along the foothills of the Revermont, is the most significant, with major sites at Lons-le-Saunier - Montmorot and Salins-les-Bains, alongside deposits at Tourmont, Grozon, and Poligny. A less rich northern zone near Besançon spans from Montferrand-le-Château to Châtillon-le-Duc, including the Pouilley-les-Vignes Saltworks and Miserey-Salins Saltworks. The third zone, in northeastern Haute-Saône near the Doubs and Territoire de Belfort, lies within the Keuper coal basin of Haute-Saône around Villersexel and the Porte de Bourgogne, historically linked to the Principality of Montbéliard. Notable sites include Saulnot, Gouhenans, Athesans-Étroitefontaine, and Mélecey.

Large-scale, long-term production focused primarily on sites in the Jura department, with Salins (later renamed Salins-les-Bains in 1926) and Lons-le-Saunier/Montmorot being the most prominent. Other zones saw limited exploitation, mainly in the 19th century. Salt production involved evaporating brine from deep sources using heat, a process known as igneous salt production, with technological advancements over the centuries.

During its primary salt-producing period, the town was known as Salins, adopting its current name, Salins-les-Bains, in 1926. The name Salins is used here.

In Gaulish and Roman times, Jura salt was renowned for its use in salting meats exported to Rome, as noted by Strabo (58 BCE – 25 CE): " Ex Sequanis optima suilla salmenta Romam perfectur " ("From the Sequani comes the finest salted pork sent to Rome"). This likely refers to salt from Lons-le-Saunier, where springs were more accessible than those in Salins, though evidence of early brine use exists at Salins.

During the 5th-century barbarian invasions, the Burgundians established the Kingdom of Burgundy in 443, encompassing Salins. Amid conflicts with the Franks under Clovis I, King Sigismund, a Burgundian ruler, took refuge in the Abbey of Agaune, which he founded around 515 in present-day Valais. Around 522, he donated his substantial Jura holdings, including Salins and its saltworks, to the abbey, ensuring its prosperity for nearly four centuries. This donation is first documented in historical texts as " in Pago Bisuntinensi, Salinum cum Castra de Bracon Miegens," though authenticity is uncertain, with only 10th-century copies surviving. A papal bull attributed to Pope Adrian I in 773 reportedly confirmed this possession.

Little is known about Salins during the Early Middle Ages. The Abbey of Condat held interests in the saltworks, as confirmed by a charter from Lothair I in 844/854. An ancient salt route also passed through Salins, connecting Dijon and its Abbey of Saint-Bénigne to Saint-Maurice-d’Agaune in Valais.

Around 940/942, the Abbey of Agaune was forced to enfeoff its Jura holdings to Aubry I of Mâcon, Count of Mâcon, establishing the Seigneury of Salins. By the 11th century, the seigneury was prominent, passing to the Duke of Burgundy in 1224 and, through an exchange in 1237, to John I of Chalon, the first of the House of Chalon-Arlay. This ownership granted the lords of Salins regional dominance through salt revenues, which supported abbeys like Cluny, Balerne, Goailles, Rosières, Bonlieu, and Buillon, as well as vassals and allies such as the House of Joux, Usier, Pesmes, Montbéliard, and Montfaucon. Salt revenues also funded castles to control salt routes to Pontarlier, Switzerland, and the Jura wine region, including Vadans, Pin, and Arlay Castle, which gave the Chalon-Arlay family its name. Gaucher II, the first to hold the title of Lord of Salins, was described in 1084 as " Dei gratia Advocatus oppidi Salinensis " (By the grace of God, advocate of the town of Salins).

Other Jura salt sites, such as Grozon and Lons-le-Saunier, were exploited by monastic owners like the Balerne Abbey monks but were abandoned in the 14th century in favor of the more productive Salins.

Initially, Salins had a single brine source, which became the Great Saunerie or Bourg-Dessus saltworks. Enfeoffed in the 10th century by the Abbey of Agaune to Aubry I, it was acquired in 1237 by John I of Chalon, known as Jean l’Antique, of the House of Chalon-Arlay. A secondary unit, the "Chauderette de Rosières," was granted to the Rosières Abbey in the late 12th century but returned to the Counts of Chalon in 1249. This produced the distinct "Rosière salt." A third unit, the Petite Saunerie or Bourg-Dessous saltworks, also known as the " puits à muire," emerged later and was collectively owned by ecclesiastical, noble, and bourgeois stakeholders.

Production methods remained consistent for centuries, involving the extraction of underground brine and its evaporation through heating. This required significant wood for boilers and substantial labor. A 160 metres (520 ft) underground gallery, built in the 13th century and modified until the 19th century, supported operations. Brine was extracted from wells about 20 metres (66 ft) deep, initially using a bucket-and-balance system, later replaced by a bucket-chain system powered by horse-driven winches, and by 1750, by hydraulic gears driven by the Furieuse river. Early extractions yielded brine with 30 grams per litre (4.8 oz/imp gal) salinity, increasing to 80 grams per litre (13 oz/imp gal) in the Middle Ages, though salinity declined over time (for comparison, the Mediterranean Sea has a salinity of 38 grams per litre (6.1 oz/imp gal)).

Brine was evaporated in large pans suspended over fires, as described in Diderot's Encyclopedia in 1765. Surface workshops, called "bernes," housed pans, boilers, wood storage, and forges. At its peak, the Great Saunerie had eight bernes, and the Petite Saunerie had five, each employing dozens of workers managing fires, raking salt, and forming salt blocks. A single batch required 17–18 hours, with 16 batches (a "remandure") taking 11–12 days of continuous work. The saltworks consumed vast amounts of wood, estimated at 35000 stères in the 17th century, with high transport costs.

Salt was shaped into blocks (" salignons ") for Franche-Comté or granulated for export to Swiss cantons in barrels.

The lords of Salins owned the Great Saunerie and controlled the Chauderette de Rosières, but the Petite Saunerie was divided into 419 shares, each granting 30 buckets of brine. These shares were gradually repurchased by Charles the Bold in the 15th century, with consolidation completed in 1571 under the Spanish County’s governor, the Duke of Alba, following the 1568 confiscation of William of Orange ’s assets. The Habsburgs and Spanish kings, as Counts of Burgundy, held these rights until 1678, when Louis XIV annexed Franche-Comté.

By the late 16th century, a royal monopoly on salt production and sales generated significant wealth. In 1590, the Burgundy County’s accounts recorded a profit of 114000 livres from the saltworks, representing 60% of domainal revenues. Royal ministers appointed a "Pardessus" to manage the Salins saltworks, often delegating to a local lieutenant, though mismanagement was common. In 1601, the saltworks were leased to a fermier under a royal judge’s oversight. Following French annexation, Louis XIV inherited the unified saltworks and associated forests, formalized in a 1614 agreement.

Salt production peaked in Salins in the 15th century at about 7,000 tonnes (6,900 long tons; 7,700 short tons) annually (20 tonnes (20 long tons; 22 short tons) daily in 1467), declining to 2,000 tonnes (2,000 long tons; 2,200 short tons) annually by the early 17th century, with 2,047 tonnes (2,015 long tons; 2,256 short tons) in 1632 (about 5.6 tonnes (5.5 long tons; 6.2 short tons) daily) before the Ten Years’ War (Franche-Comté).

By the mid-18th century, Salins faced challenges: brine salinity dropped by 10% over a century, and wood supplies for boilers, strained by lower salinity and competing forge demands, required increasingly distant and costly sourcing. The saltworks’ location in the Furieuse valley limited expansion, such as adding natural evaporation basins (graduation), which improved productivity at sites like Montmorot. Hydraulic pumps powered by the Furieuse improved extraction but were hampered by the river’s irregular flow, failing to address rising energy costs.

This led to the construction of a new saltworks near the 20,000 hectares (49,000 acres) royal Chaux Forest near Dole and the Loue river, supplied by a brine pipeline from Salins.

Production at Salins declined as Arc-et-Senans processed much of its brine (135,000 litres (30,000 imp gal; 36,000 US gal) daily). By the early 19th century, coal from Épinac, transported via the Rhône-Rhine Canal, began replacing wood. Salins produced 1,500–1,800 tonnes (1,500–1,800 long tons; 1,700–2,000 short tons) in 1844, compared to 4,000 tonnes (3,900 long tons; 4,400 short tons) at Arc-et-Senans and slightly more at Montmorot. Deep drilling in 1835 reached high-salinity brine (330 grams per litre (53 oz/imp gal) versus 80 grams per litre (13 oz/imp gal) previously).

In 1840, the French state ended the royal salt monopoly, and in 1843, the Eastern State Saltworks (Salins, Arc-et-Senans, Grozon, Montmorot) were sold to Jean-Marie de Grimaldi’s group, backed by Spain’s Queen Isabella II. Deep drilling intensified, and thermalism investments grew. In July 1854, the Petite Saunerie was demolished to build a thriving thermal spa, operational until at least 1914. The Great Saunerie supplied Arc-et-Senans until 1889 and continued until 1962, producing 1,000 tonnes (980 long tons; 1,100 short tons) in 1958, mainly for Salins-les-Bains’ thermal baths. By the 21st century, municipalized facilities produced only road salt. A new well, Puits des Cordeliers, was drilled in 1994 for the thermal center, and a salt museum was established following UNESCO designation in 2009.

In 1774, royal authorities approved a new saltworks near the 20,000 hectares (49,000 acres) Chaux Forest by Dole and the Loue river, connected to Salins by a 21.25 kilometres (13.20 mi) brine pipeline. Known as the Royal Saltworks of Chaux, located in Arc-et-Senans, Doubs, it was designed by Claude-Nicolas Ledoux and built from 1775 to 1779. The wooden pipeline, later replaced with cast iron from 1782, lost 30% of brine due to leaks and smuggling, necessitating six control stations.

The grand buildings achieved only 80% of their target (3,000–4,000 tonnes (3,000–3,900 long tons; 3,300–4,400 short tons) instead of 6,000 tonnes (5,900 long tons; 6,600 short tons)), dropping to 1,600 tonnes (1,600 long tons; 1,800 short tons) by 1793. Proposals to convert the site to a textile factory emerged within 20 years. Improved brine salinity from Salins’ deep drilling sustained 19th-century operations despite cheaper sea salt and modern transport. After the 1840 monopoly abolition, Grimaldi’s group acquired the saltworks, boosting production from 1,750 tonnes (1,720 long tons; 1,930 short tons) in the late 18th century to 3,750 tonnes (3,690 long tons; 4,130 short tons) by the mid-19th century, before declining to 1,200 tonnes (1,200 long tons; 1,300 short tons) in 1894. Production ceased in 1895, and the site deteriorated until its 1926 designation as a monument historique and purchase by the Doubs department in 1927. Restored and designated a UNESCO site in 1982, it now hosts exhibitions and conferences.

Salt springs at Lons-le-Saunier were known in antiquity but abandoned in the 14th century as the Chalon family prioritized Salins. To address Salins’ declining output and meet Swiss supply obligations, extraction resumed in Montmorot in 1744. The saltworks, operational by 1752, used traditional brine evaporation with added brine graduation basins for natural evaporation. Acquired by Grimaldi’s Société anonyme des anciennes Salins domaniales de l’Est in 1843, it produced over 4,000 tonnes (3,900 long tons; 4,400 short tons) in 1848 and operated until 1966, alongside the growth of thermalism in Lons-le-Saunier from 1892 via the Puits Salé spring.

Stones from a destroyed medieval fortress were donated by Louis XV in 1733 for the saltworks’ construction, authorized by a 1743 Council of State decree and built between 1744 and 1752 by engineer Jean Querret du Bois. Expanded in 1843, 1925, and 1930–1940, the buildings were partially demolished or repurposed from 1970.

Known in Roman times but minimally exploited, the Grozon / Tourmont salt springs near Poligny were active in the Merovingian period, with a saltworks documented in 722 and confirmed by 2014 archaeological finds. Monastic-controlled operations ceased in 1369 as Salins monopolized production.

19th-century chemical industry demands revived interest in Jura brines. A mining concession granted in 1845 led to a saltworks built in 1853–1854, utilizing an on-site coal mine for boiler fuel until 1860. Grimaldi’s company acquired the saltworks in 1875, merging them with Montmorot and Montaigu concessions in 1888. Production reached 1,200 tonnes (1,200 long tons; 1,300 short tons) in 1864, 3,000 tonnes (3,000 long tons; 3,300 short tons) in 1875, and 960 tonnes (940 long tons; 1,060 short tons) in 1884, closing in 1885. Operations resumed in 1918, producing 2,855 tonnes (2,810 long tons; 3,147 short tons) in 1919.

A 1892 concession for rock salt exploration in Montaigu near Lons-le-Saunier led to drilling in Perrigny and construction of a saltworks in 1891–1892, later merged with Lons-le-Saunier’s territory by 1963. Production grew from 1,000 tonnes (980 long tons; 1,100 short tons) in 1893 to 2,500 tonnes (2,500 long tons; 2,800 short tons) in 1895, 4,442 tonnes (4,372 long tons; 4,896 short tons) in 1904, and 2,744 tonnes (2,701 long tons; 3,025 short tons) in 1919, peaking at 7,000 tonnes (6,900 long tons; 7,700 short tons) in 1959 before closing.

A 1894 mining concession led to the 1895–1896 construction of the Poligny saltworks. Production began in May 1896, reaching 4,500 tonnes (4,400 long tons; 5,000 short tons) in 1898, 4,100 tonnes (4,000 long tons; 4,500 short tons) in 1901, and 4,051 tonnes (3,987 long tons; 4,465 short tons) in 1919. From 1928 to 1931, salt production ceased, and brine from expanded drilling was piped to the Solvay factory in Tavaux starting in 1932, supplemented and later replaced by brine from Ain (Etrez and Marboz) by 2007.

The salt spring at Les Nans near Champagnole was used domestically in the 19th century.

By the late 18th century, Jura salt production was about 70,000 tonnes (69,000 long tons; 77,000 short tons) annually, with Franche-Comté consuming 25,000 tonnes (25,000 long tons; 28,000 short tons), leaving surplus for export to Swiss cantons, Germany, and neighboring provinces. However, profitability was questioned, with some advocating for production limited to local needs and treaty obligations.

In Franche-Comté, salt trade followed Spanish provincial rules. "Ordinary salt" was lightly taxed as table salt, formed into 3.5-pound blocks in the Bailliage d’Amont, 2.5-pound blocks in the Bailliage d’Aval, or "door salt" in Salins, with "franc-salé" exemptions for officials. "Rosière salt" faced a heavier tax. These distinctions faded with 18th-century administrative reforms. Jura salt was six times cheaper than in neighboring gabelle regions, fueling smuggling.

Before 1678, Franche-Comté, not fully French, avoided the gabelle established in 1343 by Philip VI of France. In 1680, Colbert created five tax-collecting Farms, including the gabelle, dividing France into six tax regions. Franche-Comté, a "saltworks region," had no direct salt tax but a state monopoly on "true salt." "False salt" was illegal, with smugglers facing severe penalties. A royal edict of 27 August 1703 regulated salt sales, supplemented by an August 1705 edict against smuggling.

Price disparities drove smuggling with Lorraine, Swiss cantons, Burgundy, and especially Bresse, where salt cost 60 livres per quintal versus 15 livres in Jura. Between October 1745 and June 1746, 42 salt seizures occurred in Bresse. Smugglers used methods like scraping salt blocks for " pousset," siphoning brine, or attacking transports, risking fines, banishment, or galleys. The unpopular gabelle was abolished on 1 December 1790, standardizing salt trade and ending smuggling.

In the 2000s, Jura salt extraction has largely ceased, but its legacy endures through thermalism, the Salins-les-Bains Salt Museum, the Arc-et-Senans cultural site, and events like the Terra Salina salt routes. The Solvay factory in Tavaux continues salt-based chemical production but relies on brine from Bresse and Poligny, processing 700,000 tonnes (690,000 long tons; 770,000 short tons) annually for products like sodium chloride, sodium hypochlorite, caustic soda, and others.

In France, taxation is determined by the yearly budget vote by the French Parliament, which determines which kinds of taxes can be levied and which rates can be applied.

Taxation in France covers all taxes, duties, fees, contributions and social security contributions imposed by the public authorities on French individuals and companies or those living in France. Taxes are thus levied by the government, and collected by the public administrations. According to INSEE, public administrations can be defined as "all institutional units whose main function is to produce non-market goods and services or to redistribute national income and wealth, and whose resources come mainly from compulsory contributions paid by units belonging to other institutional sectors". French "public administrations" are made up of three different institutions:

Taxes in France are made up of taxes (compulsory, unrequited payments to public authorities), plus social security contributions. Most of the taxes are collected by the government and the local collectivities, while the social deductions are collected by the Social Security. There is a distinction to be made between taxes (impôts), which applies to production, importations, wealth and incomes, and social contributions (cotisations sociales), which are payments, calculated as a percentage of salary, which entitle employees to social benefits in the event of illness, unemployment or when they claim their pension. These social contributions are payable by both the employer and the employee. Taxes and contributions together are called in French prélèvements obligatoires (compulsory deductions).

All economic agents (individuals or legal entities involved in economic activity) pay tax in France. There are many types of tax, mainly affecting households and businesses. There is a distinction to be made between those liable to pay tax and taxpayers (economic agents who pay tax are called taxpayers, while taxpayers are those who actually bear the burden of tax). People having their tax residence in France are subject to French tax. Thus, they are natural or legal persons either living in France, i.e. have their homes or principal residence in France; working in France; or having the center of their economic interests in France. Any one of these criteria is sufficient for a person to be treated as taxable.

Despite a downward trend registered since 1999, the tax burden in 2022 (46,1% of GDP) remains at a high level, both historically and in comparison with other countries. OECD countries have experienced an increase in the tax burden since the mid-1960s comparable to that of France, rising from 25% of the GDP in 1965 to 34% in 2022. That of the countries of the European Union has increased by nearly 12 percentage points of GDP over the period. Efforts to control the increase in the tax burden have been made by the states of the OECD: the tax rate decelerated during the 90s and has decreased slightly since 2000. This is why France continues to be among the OECD countries whose tax rate is the highest. Taxes account for 46,1% of GDP against 34% on average in OECD countries. The overall rate of social security and tax on the average wage in 2022 was 82% of gross salary, compared with 77% of the total average tax wedge. The levels of social security contributions are particularly high (17% of GDP against 9% of GDP on average for OECD). The social security budgets are larger than the budget of the national government. The budgets of both the national government and social security organizations run deficits.

Taxes in France can be classified according to the institution which collects and benefit from them and to the people who pay them. Taxes are monetary benefits imposed on people according to their capacities and without return of benefit, for the purpose of public expenditure to achieve economic and social goals set by the government. As for tariffs, they are different from taxes because of their strictly economic aspect; their purpose is to protect the domestic market. However, some charges levied by the customs administration are taxes: the value added tax levied on goods from non-members of the European Union, the tax on petroleum products, which applies regardless of the origin of products, and other taxes. social security contributions are collected for social protection. Some other taxes, based on personal income, are allocated to social agencies and do not give taxpayers the right to benefit from them.

These taxes, collected by public administrations or by the institutions of the EU, apply to the production and the consumption of goods and of services. These taxes are independent from profits. They include taxes on the products and others taxes on the production. The taxes on the production cover essentially the taxe professionnelle, the taxe foncière, and the versement transport (the professional tax, tax land and the payment transport), which apply to the use of labour and the property or the use of land, buildings and other assets used for the sake of production. They are local taxes, so they are not collected by the central government (see Local taxes). Taxes on consumption traditionally consisted of indirect duties on the consumption and excise duties, applying only on the use of certain products (alcoholic beverages, manufactured, tobacco products and energy products). However, the establishment of the VAT and its generalization have considerably reduced the scope and thus the revenue of these indirect duties and excise duties even if one of them, the tax on petroleum products, is still considerable. In 2022, taxes on production paid by companies represented 3.3% of GDP in France, compared with an average of 1.5% for the eurozone and 1.7% for the European Union.

In order to establish a single market made up of the member states of the European Union, a number of directives on VAT has been enacted since 1967, with the obligation for states to adapt their domestic legislation. The rules relating to the scope, the tax base, the payment, the territoriality of goods and services as well as reporting requirements are partially harmonized, but states can apply transitional arrangements in respect of rates, exemptions and rights of deduction, whose rules are being harmonized.

The VAT (French: taxe sur la valeur ajoutée, TVA) is a general consumption tax, which applies to goods and services located in France. It is a proportional tax on output collected by the companies and ultimately completely supported by the final buyer, i.e. the consumer, since it is included in the price of goods or services. Indeed, VAT is applied to the "added value", i.e. the added value to the product or service at each stage of production or marketing, so that at the end of the economic circuit, the overall tax burden corresponds to the tax calculated on the final price paid by the consumer. The current standard rate is at 20%. Two reduced rates exist: a 10% rate for books, hotel stays, local public transportation, and restaurant meals; and 5.5% for most groceries. A specific rate of 2.1% applies only to prescription drugs covered by Social Security. In 2021, the state collected around 152 billion euro from the total VAT revenue, while other organizations collected roughly 91.2 billion euros.

The taxe intérieure de consommation sur les produits énergétiques (TICPE) applies to petroleum products and biofuels according to fixed rates provided by the legislation. It applies only in metropolitan France – in the overseas territories, there is a special consumption tax (TSC) on premium unleaded and diesel. It applies to motor fuels and heating fuels, such as petrol and gasoline, electricity, natural gas, coal and coke. It replaced the previous TIPP tax that only applied to petroleum products. In the face of the rise in oil prices, a reduction in the rate of the TIPP for fuel sold to consumers was adopted by the Parliament in 2006. The TIPP is collected by the services de la direction générale des douanes et des droits indirects (DGDDI) when fuel products are consumed on the domestic market. The revenue from the TICPE amounted to 30.5bn, or 1.15% of GDP, in 2022. Energy products are subject to both the tax on energy products (TICPE) and the value added tax (VAT). The TICPE is also included in the taxable amount of energy products subject to VAT.

Since January 2023, petrol is taxed at a rate of €0.53799/litre and diesel at a rate of €0.42875/litre, with a VAT of 16% added to the total price. As of 2022, a "maximum fuel price" has been established by the government, capped at €1.546/litre for EURO 95 petrol and at €1.525/litre for diesel as of 11 November 2023.

Wealth may be subject to taxation when transmitted for sale or for free (gift, inheritance). In most cases, inheritance tax has to be paid. However, there are a number of exemptions. To determine inheritance tax, you must first determine the net taxable assets, the taxable estate assets, the personal allowance, and finally the taxable portion. In addition, it may be taxed when owned: wealth is subject to annual taxation through the impôt de solidarité sur la fortune (ISF) and local property taxes are payable on real estate. Capital gains is payable when assets are disposed of, but this tax is a tax on the profit.

The taxes called droits d'enregistrement, correspond to the stamp acts. They mainly apply to the sale of buildings (in addition to local taxes), inheritance and gifts, assignment of businesses and registration of vehicles. Revenues collected by the state amounted in 2006 to €14.7 bn.

It was abolished by the French government in September 2017.

Wealth Tax (solidarity tax on wealth), in French impôt de solidarité sur la fortune (ISF) was an annual tax payable by individuals the net value of whose wealth exceeds a certain amount. It was established in 1989 to finance the RMI. In 2017, the return of ISF amounted to €5.067bn.

Individuals who are residents in France are taxed on their worldwide assets and individuals who are residents outside France under French law are taxed on their assets in France. The tax is set for each household (married couples or partners, persons cohabiting, and minor children). The tax base includes all property, rights and values that constitute the wealth of taxpayers at 1 January of the relevant tax year (buildings built or not, individual businesses, farms, movable furniture, financial investments, debts owed to you, automobiles, aircraft, pleasure boats,...). However, certain assets are wholly or partially exempted (mainly professional property, i.e. individual companies, rights on literary and artistic works held by the author, some rural property, objects and antiques, artwork or collectibles).

Individuals resident in France are entitled to a deduction of 30% against the value of their main home for wealth tax purposes.

A resident in France may potentially reduce wealth tax due to the restriction that applies to the amount of combined income tax, wealth tax, social charges (CSG and CRDS) and local property taxes that can be taken from one's taxable income.

This restriction is known as the Bouclier Fiscal or tax shield, and limits these taxes to no more than 50% of your taxable income.

On 6 August 2008, France enacted a law that entitles all those who have been non-resident in France for the five previous years, to exclude their non-French assets from wealth tax for the first five years of their residence in France.

While this minor tax applies only to the most wealthy of the population, and actually collects very little revenue (2% of overall tax revenue), it is very controversial. Many people on the political left consider it a symbol of solidarity, while many on the right argue that it encourages entrepreneurs to leave France. In 2018, to replace the solidarity tax on wealth, the tax on real estate wealth ("impôt sur la fortune immobilière" (IFI)) was introduced, along with a flat-rate levy of 30% on capital income, including both income tax and social security contributions. In 2022, revenue from the tax on real estate wealth will reach €1.83 billion, i.e. 1/3 of the potential revenue from the solidarity tax on wealth.

These taxes, known as Droits de Succession et de Donation, apply to both gifts and inheritances. The taxes apply where:

(a) The donor/deceased is resident in France at the date of the gift/death;

(b) The recipient is resident in France and has been so resident for at least 6 of the 10 tax years prior to the year in which the gift/inheritance is received; or

These provisions can be overridden by a Tax Treaty.

Tax is payable by the recipient, based on the amount received and their relationship with the donor or deceased.

Assets passing on death between spouses and PACS partners are now exempt from French succession tax, but gifts are still taxable between spouses and PACS partners.

As for wealth tax, the value of your main home can be reduced by 30% for succession tax purposes provided the property is also occupied as a main home by the surviving spouse or by one or several children. PACS partners can also benefit from the 30% deduction.

(nieces, nephews, uncles, aunts, cousins, great-aunts and uncles etc.)

Allowances are available, and the main ones are:

For example, a child can receive 100,000 * 2 = €200,000 from their parents in allowances before being taxed.

In France, unmarried couples (regardless of gender) can enter into a PACS (Pacte Civil de Solidarite) agreement.

The PACS is a written agreement which can now be achieved by going before a Notaire who then registers it with the authorities. The relations between the partners are similar to those of husband and wife.

The tax position for PACS partners is now aligned with that of a married couple. For income tax purposes, the couple is assessed to income tax as a household from the day the PACS agreement takes force.

For succession tax, the surviving PACS partner is exempt from tax on inheritances. For gifts, the allowance is now €80,724 and the tax rates are as for married couples. If a PACS agreement is broken before the end of the year following the year it was entered into, for motives other than marriage of the couple or death of one of the partners, the allowance will be denied and the tax relief clawed back.

As of 14 May 2009, France recognises most foreign Civil Partnerships as equivalent to a PACS.

In France there are three categories of taxes on income: the corporate tax, the income tax for individuals and taxes for social purposes (CSG and the CRDS, paid by the households). Taxes paid by employers on wages, namely social contributions, are not considered as taxes by the French central government.

The impôt sur le revenu (IR) is a tax on all income available to individuals in a year. With certain exceptions, net income is determined from total income, whatever its origin, after applying certain deductions, and then a single scale of taxation is applied. This scale is characterized by rates applied to slices of income according to the principle of progressivity. However, there are numerous provisions, so there are many systems of taxation depending on the type of income received. In addition, some income and capital gains are subject to a fixed rate of tax. The IR is payable each year on the total taxable income of the household. In 2021, proceeds from the IR amounted to €280;bn.

The income subject to IR is divided into seven categories: industrial and commercial profits, non-commercial and agricultural profits, land income, salaries and wages, pensions and annuities, movable income, and capital gains. Individuals' total income is taxed if they are resident in France, whether they have French nationality or not. Individuals not living in France are taxed only on their income from French sources. The tax is calculated for each "fiscal household", i.e. the family unit composed of either a single person, or two partners and their children or other dependents. Whatever the nationality, a person who is a tax resident in France is taxable on their worldwide income. People not living in France are subject to limited tax on their income from French sources only.

The amount of taxable income, or "revenu fiscal de référence" (RFR), is not equal to the income received by the household in the year. Instead, the RFR is determined by dividing the income by the number of "parts" in the fiscal household (1 part for every adult, 0.5 parts for each of the first two child, and 1 part for each successive child), and then diminished further by a standard deduction and any other deductions the taxpayer may have claimed in the year.

The table below shows the percentage of income tax applicable to taxable income, or RFR (rather than gross income).

Exemptions are made for social reasons. Taxpayers whose net income does not exceed €7,920 are exempted from the IR. In principle, taxable income is calculated from the income available to a fiscal household in one year. Some expenses by the household tax are deductible from total income. There can be cuts and maximum taxable amounts of the income.

The income tax is calculated by the administration based on the amounts reported by taxpayers who are required to declare their whole income earned during the previous year. But the calculation of income tax takes into account the personal situation of the taxpayer, in particular through the "family quotient" (or units in the household) on the one hand and in the allocation of reductions or tax credits to taxpayers, on the other hand. The family quotient can take into account family responsibilities and, according to them, eases the effects of progressive taxation since the progressive rate is applied to a partial income (the taxable income). This process consists of dividing the taxable income of the household tax into a number of units (or parts) equal to the number of individuals. The progressive scale of tax is then applied to taxable income per share. Finally, this partial tax is multiplied by the number of units to determine the taxable base.

The family quotient is one unit for a single person, two for a married couple, plus an extra half for each of the first two children and an additional unit for each child from the third.

There are certain limitations to the amount of tax savings that can be achieved under the parts system. If the system produces a tax bill which has been reduced by more than €2,301 (for 2009 income) per half part compared to what it would have been without reference to the parts, you are not allowed to use this system. You will always receive two parts for a married couple notwithstanding.

Various tax credits are available to set against the total tax calculated. These include tax credits for dividends, energy-saving work carried out on the main residence, purchase of an environmentally friendly car, employment of home help, child minding expenses, for filing tax returns electronically and paying tax by direct debit or electronically, for mortgage interest, among others.

Initially set to start in 2018, France will introduce a pay-as-you-earn scheme for the collection of the income tax in January 2019. To accommodate the progressive tax rates, which are computed on the total income and composition of the household, while preserving the privacy of employees to their employers, the administration only transmits to companies the individual tax rate to retain on their employees' paychecks.

Individuals receiving non-salary incomes must pay a monthly account on their estimated income tax by the tax administration.

For single people with taxable income of between 11.800 euros and 16,418 euros and couples with no children with taxable revenue between 17,454 and 25,983 euros (23,717 euros to 35,400 euros with a child), a tax credit of 480 euros for single people (960 euros for a couple) was introduced in 2013. For 2014 revenues the tax credit was increased to 1,135 euros for single people and 1,870 euros for couples. The 2023 budget law introduces a number of personal tax measures and measures to help households meet rising energy spending such as a support schemes to cope with rising energy prices (limitation of the rate increases of gas an electricity and a fuel allowance of €100 will be paid to the 10 million most modest workers who use their vehicle to go to work) and an aid for the ecological transition (an aid for the purchase of bicycles is renewed and increased in 2023, MaPrimeRénov' Serenity is strengthened and the One noNew social leasing scheme)

The contribution exceptionnelle sur les hauts revenus is a temporary tax introduced in 2012 by François Fillon as a measure to curb the budget deficit. For a single person the rate of the tax is 3% on income between 250,001 euros and 500,000 euros, for an income above 500,000 the rate is 4%.

For tax years 2013 & 2014 earnings above 1 million euros will be subject to a tax payable by the payer/employer. The tax is similar to the employer social security contributions which above 1 million euros amount to 0.22% of gross salary compared to 44% for salaries of 150,000 euros. The tax introduced by François Hollande as the 75% tax is in fact an additional employer contribution of 50% which when existing social security charges are added reaches 75%. The proposed tax was subsequently modified after being rejected by the Council of State and was implemented in 2014 in its current form and will be discontinued as of January 2015.

The corporate tax, in French impot sur les societes (IS), is an annual tax in principle that affects all profits made in France by corporations and other entities. It concerns about one-third of French companies. The standard rate is 33.3% for all of their activities. In 2016, the net proceeds from corporation tax amounted to €29.9 bn. The corporate tax rate in France is gradually being reduced, with the standard rate set to be lowered to 25% for all companies by 2022. For companies with a turnover of less than €10 million, profits up to €38,120 are taxed at a reduced rate of 15%. There are also additional taxes on top of the standard corporate income tax, such as a 3.3% social contribution tax for companies with a turnover of at least €7.63 million and a corporate tax liability over a certain threshold. The taxable income is equal to the difference between gross profit and costs and deductible expenses. The gross operating profit is made by the difference between sales and costs. In addition to the gross operating profit, all income or profits made apart are normally taxable: income from the rental of property, interests, deposits and bonds. A reduced rate applies to a limited number of Long Term Capital Gains. Since 2012 a tax credit equal to 7% of total salary costs can be deducted from the gross tax due.

Since its creation in 1945, the Social Security is mainly financed by social contributions or "cotisations sociales", i.e. deductions from wages. The purpose of social contributions is to finance social security benefits and programs, such as health insurance, pensions, family allowances, unemployment insurance, work accident/illness compensation, and social minimums. Social contributions are typically calculated as a proportional rate on salaries, though some are also charged as a flat fee. The social security system in France is based on a principle of solidarity, where some pay more in contributions than they receive in benefits, to support those who are less well-off. Until recently, there was no wide taxation on social expenditure, contrary to most of its European partners. However, in order to find a solution to the problems of financing of the social security, governments have had to broaden its range of resources by the introduction of additional tax, notably the general social contribution (CSG) and the repayment of the debt of social security (CRDS) at a rate of 0.5%, to repay the debt of the ASSO.

Established by the Finance Act 1991, the general social contribution (CSG) is payable by individuals living in France and who benefit from the compulsory health insurance. Revenues from the CSG are allocated to social security budget, specifically to the National Family Allowance, the Solidarity Fund pension schemes and insurance. Indeed, unlike the social contributions that give those who pay a right to benefit from them, the CSG, is levied without direct compensation (like any other tax). The CSG has a very broad base as it applies in principle to earnings and income from wealth. The CSG is made up of four different bases of assessment: earned income and replacement income; income from property; investment income; gambling winnings and bets. According to the DREES (The Department of Research, Studies, Evaluation and Statistics (DREES) is the ministerial statistical service for the health and social sectors), in 2021, the CSG will have cost taxpayers more than €129.4 billion and generated revenue for the State, an increase of 4.7% compared with 2020.

The contribution to the social debt (CRDS) was created in 1996. Like the CSG, it applies to earnings and to income from wealth. It was initially established for a period of 13 years, but this time limit was abolished in 2004. The territorial scope of the CRDS is the same as the CSG: thus, CRDS is paid by individuals living in France who benefit from a compulsory insurance scheme. The rate is 0.5%. The base of the CRDS is somewhat broader than the CSG, for it includes incomes exempted from CSG such as family benefits or housing allowances. The methods of recovering the CRDS are identical to those of the CSG. CRDS is not deductible from the tax base for tax on income. The yield for the year 2012 is €6,6bn.

In summary, the social charges are made up of four elements: the CSG, CRDS, PS and RSA. The amounts are different for each type of income, and the position can be summarized below:

There are no allowances on reliefs other than being able to deduct a proportion of the social charges payable on income taxed at the scale rates against earned or pension income. Thus, where income or gains are taxed at fixed rates, no deduction is available.

There are a huge number of local taxes. The most important are the direct taxes. The local direct taxes are the oldest taxes in the French tax system, as they succeed to direct contributions that were created in 1790 and 1791 as taxes collected by the central government then transferred to local authorities upon the tax reform of 1917. Local taxes are levied by the state for local authorities (regions, departments, municipalities, local public institutions). There are six main direct taxes (the council tax on second home; the property tax on built-up properties (TFPB); the propert tax on non-built properties (TFPNB); the annual tax on vacant accommodation (TLV) and council tax on vacant accommodation (THLV); the tax on the sale of bare land made suitable for building; the tax or fee for household waste collection (TEOM or REOM)). The rates are set by the territorial assemblies (regional or municipal councils) when they vote their annual budget. However, rates can not exceed certain limits set by the state. The tax bases are established by the state. There are many permanent or temporary exemptions. The revenue from local taxes amounted to €173bn in 2022 (6.6% of GDP). Apart from these four main taxes, there are many other taxes. Direct taxes include the taxe pour frais de chambres d'agriculture (expense of the chambers of agriculture), the taxe d'enlèvement des ordures ménagères (garbage collection), and the taxe sur les pylônes. Indirect taxes are taxes applying to spring water, mines, spectacles, advertising, navigation, electricity, pollution and workplace.

The professional tax (taxe professionnelle) is due each year by legal persons or natural persons who are self-employed in France. Various exemptions are provided (activities performed by the State, local authorities and public institutions, business and agricultural organizations, etc.). The tax base is constituted by the rental value of assets available to the taxpayer. This is then subject to discounts or rebates. The amount of business tax is calculated by multiplying the taxable net by the rates approved by each local beneficiaries. The rates are set by the local communities and organizations, within limits set by national legislation. In 2021, the amount of revenue collected through corporate taxes was €74bn.

The residence tax (taxe d'habitation) applies to all buildings sufficiently furnished and their dependencies (gardens, garages, private car parks): the tax is payable by any person who has a residential unit at one's disposal, for any reason (owner, renter, occupant for free), on 1 January of the taxable year. The tax base is a notional rental value of the residential property. In 2017, the revenue from the housing taxes amounted to €22,575bn.

The property tax on built lands (taxe foncière) is applied to properties built in France. The taxable properties consist of all permanent constructions, i.e. buildings (blocks of flats, houses, workshops, warehouses, etc.). The tax base is equal to 50% of the notional rental value of the building (i.e. the value set by the tax administration) and on land/location value. There are many exemptions and exceptions. In 2018, the product amounted to €42 bn.

In 2022, revenues amounted to 46.1% of GDP.

There are five beneficiaries of the tax revenues : in 2017, the "cotisations sociales" received the biggest percentage : 37%, social security administrations have received 17% of it; the state and the central government bodies 32%; the local administrations (APUL) 14%; the European Union (EU) less than 1%. Direct and indirect taxes account for 46.1% of GDP in 2022. State resources come almost entirely from taxes. The social security bodies are financed largely by social contributions but also by taxes, including the general social contribution (CSG) and the contribution for the repayment of the social debt (CRDS). Local administrations are mostly financed by the four main local direct taxes (housing tax, property taxes and business tax).

The public deficit amounted to 5,5% of the GDP (€50.6 billion) in 2023 compared to 2,8% on average in the euro zone, excluding France. According to the 2024 PSTAB, France's public deficit should fall back below 3% in 2027. At the end of the third quarter of 2023, public debt in the Maastricht sense stood at €3,088.2on, an increase of €41. 3bn, after + €34.5bn in the previous quarter. Expressed as percentage of gross domestic product (GDP), it stood at 111.7%, as in the second quarter of 2023. As in the previous quarter, the increase in public debt was accompanied by a fall in the general government cash position (-€17.3 bn), with the result that net debt rose by more than gross debt (+€61.0 bn) to 102.9% of GDP.

The deficit of social security administrations remains at €10,8;bn in 2023, but the corresponding debt ("social debt") has increased (€8,8bn in 2023). The deficit of local administrations is still limited, but amounted to €10bn in 2023, as a result of a spending growth significantly higher than that of the revenue in the recent years. As for the net tax revenue of the central government, net tax receipts amount to €38.6bn compared with €31.1bn at the end of February 2023, an increase of €7.5bn, because of increasing transfers of revenues to social security and local authorities to reduce their deficit. By 2022, public spending in France will have risen to €1,536bn, equivalent to 58.2 points of GDP. The public deficit for 2023 is €154.0bn, or 5.5% of gross domestic product (GDP). Although deficits have been commonplace, efforts have been made in recent years to cut back the growth of taxes and government spending. Deficit reduction became a top priority of the government when France committed to the European Monetary Union. The Maastricht Treaty targets for the EMU required the members countries to reduce the government's budget deficit to 3% of GDP and the public debt to 60% of GDP.

The evolution of the level of the tax burden since the early 1970s can be divided into three distinct phases. First, during the 70s and in the first half of the 1980s, the tax rate increased from 34% to 42%. Then it stabilized at a rate close to 42% until the early 1990s, when it resumed its growth rate to the historical height of 44.9% in 1999. Since then, the rate of PO government has declined slightly to between 43% and 47% of the GDP.

Over the last decades, the distribution of tax burden between the three main administrations has changed significantly. The share allocated to the state has tended to decline, while that allocated to the social security institutions and local governments has grown. The higher tax rate of social security is due to the general upward trend of social spending, particularly the higher spending on pension and health insurance systems. In 2021, the public spending on pensions represented 13.8 percent of the GDP, compared with 11.67 percent in 2002.

In this context, the structure of the funding of the social security administrations has been more and more assured by taxes rather than social contributions. In particular, new taxes were levied to help fund the social security administrations, such as the general social contribution (CSG) and the contribution for the repayment of the social debt (CRDS). More recently, the central government has helped to fund the social security administrations by the revenues from the excise on alcohol and tobacco, in part to offset reductions in social contributions. As for the growth of the revenues for the benefit of local administrations, it is only due to the devolution, begun with the 1992 laws, and continued with the reforms in 2003.

The tax system has never been united in France. There have always been an extreme diversity in collection, the base, the rates and the nature of the taxes. Until 1789, taxes were collected by the state, the church and lords. After the French revolution, taxes consisted of taxes on wealth and on incomes. The current tax system was shaped during the 20th century. All taxes created under the French Revolution were abolished, the last being the patentes, abolished in 1974. Whereas taxation aimed at assuring "the maintenance of the public force" and "the expenditures of the administrations"(Déclaration des droits de l'homme et du citoyen de 1789), taxation is now aiming at assuring efficient public services and a fair distribution of the wealth and the income.

Historically, most taxes have been paid either or in shares of harvest (dime and champart) or work (corvée, military service). Gradually, each of these taxes has been replaced by a cash contribution for being more convenient for both the beneficiary and the taxpayer. The taille, created in the 14th century, was one of the oldest taxes levied by the French monarchy. It was replaced by the fouage. Under the Old Regime, the collection of taxes was leased, i.e. that the state entrusted the task to entrepreneurs, big farmers, who paid the amount of the tax to be levied, then levied the tax for themselves. The system was convenient for both the state (the revenue was anticipated and it was disposed of the unpopularity of tax collectors) and for big farmers (the bargain was very profitable). However, the people considered the collection mainly a source of injustice and excesses.

Some notable indirect taxes under the Old Regime were the aides (indirect taxes collected by the state, applying to beverages), the banalités (tax imposed by the lords for the use of mills, ovens and wine presses), the casuel (collected by the Church at baptisms, marriages and funerals), the cens (tax collected by the lords, for the use of their land), the champart (collected by the lords, paid by an amount of the crops of grains), the dîme (collected by the church, applying to all the lands), the gabelle (collected by the king, for the consumption of salt), the minage (collected by the king or the lords, for the sales of grains at fairs and markets). There were three direct taxes, created between the 15th and the 18th centuries: the taille, the capitation and the dixième. The taille, created in the 15th century and used for more than three centuries, applied to incomes from non-privileged people from ownership, housing, farm land and breeding. The capitation, created in 1695, was a tax on social status that taxed everyone, however, for those subject to the taille the capitation was an addition to the taille. The dixième, created in 1710, applied to all the income from any ownership (land, real estate, annuities), at a rate of 10% (dixieme meaning tenth). In 1749, it was replaced by the vingtième (twentieth, i.e. a tax with a rate of 5%).

The French Revolution transformed the tax system completely. The former system was abolished. The parliament, on behalf of the people, took control of the right to levy taxes (the sovereign loses this right), destroyed all statutes and tax privileges (of the nobility and clergy, but also the provinces, cities, corporations, etc.) planned to establish a fair proportional contribution and made these changes official in the Declaration of Human Rights and the Citizen of 1789. Four direct taxes were created in the late 18th century, applying only to wealth: the land contribution, the housing contribution, the patentes (industry and trade), and the contribution from doors and windows.

Throughout the 19th century, taxes changed little. Taxes from the Revolution remained, i.e. taxes on wealth (Impôt sur la fortune) on the professional activity (the patente, ancestor of the taxe professionnelle), and many indirect taxes and "droits" applied to the trade of goods (inheritance, purchase of real estate). From the middle of the 19th century, there were debates for the creation of an income tax, proposed by Proudhon in 1848, then by Gambetta in 1869. In 1872, a tax on incomes from real estate was created. In 1876, Gambetta proposed to create a proportional tax on all incomes. The only result is the creation in 1896 of a tax on incomes from the stock exchange.

Before 1914, taxes mainly applied to the wealth (wealth, land, inheritance) or incomes from wealth. The tax burden did not exceed 10%. Many propositions, successively from Doumer, Cavaignac and Waldeck-Rousseau, failed, due to the opposition of the right. It was the Great War which gave the opportunity to create a tax on income, in 1917, thanks to Joseph Caillaux, the minister of Finances. At the same time, the four contributions created in 1790 and 1791 were turned into local taxes, and replaced by the income tax as the main national tax.

After the Second World War, the tax system underwent a certain number of reforms aiming at modernizing and adapting it. The income tax was adapted and old contributions abolished. A family quotient was created in 1945. The business tax was created in 1948, reformed in 1959. Finally, the last significant innovation in technical terms, the VAT was introduced in 1954. Then the French example was adopted gradually in most developed countries. The French tax system is currently controversial with the development of the European Union and globalization. Tax competition has risen sharply, and it becomes necessary to take into account the legal possibilities to avoid paying taxes (the practice of expatriation is legal, unlike tax evasion).

The valleys of the Alps have been inhabited since prehistoric times. The Alpine culture, which developed there, centers on transhumance.

Currently the Alps are divided among eight countries: France, Monaco, Italy, Switzerland, Liechtenstein, Austria, Germany and Slovenia. In 1991 the Alpine Convention was established to regulate this transnational area, whose area measures about 190,000 square kilometres (73,000 sq mi).

The Wildkirchli caves in the Appenzell Alps show traces of Neanderthal habitation (about 40,000 BCE). During the Würm glaciation (up to c. 11700 BP), the entire Alps were covered in ice. Anatomically modern humans reach the Alpine region by c. 30,000 years ago. MtDNA Haplogroup K (believed to have originated in the mid-Upper Paleolithic, between about 30,000 and 22,000 years ago, with an estimated age here of c. 12,000 years BP), is a genetic marker associated with southeastern Alpine region.

Traces of transhumance appear in the Neolithic. In the Bronze Age, the Alps formed the boundary of the Urnfield and Terramare cultures. The mummy found on the Ötztal Alps, known as " Ötzi the Iceman ", lived c. 3200 BC. At that stage the population in its majority had already changed from an economy based on hunting and gathering to one based on agriculture and animal husbandry. It is still an open question whether forms of pastoral mobility, such as transhumance (alpiculture), already existed in prehistory.

The earliest historical accounts date to the Roman period, mostly due to Greco-Roman ethnography, with some epigraphic evidence due to the Raetians, Lepontii and Gauls, with Ligurians and Venetii occupying the fringes in the south-west and south-east, respectively (Cisalpine Gaul) during the 4th and 3rd centuries BC. The Rock Drawings in Valcamonica date to this period. A few details have come down to modern scholars of the conquest of many of the Alpine tribes by Augustus, as well as Hannibal 's battles across the Alps. Most of the local Gallic tribes allied themselves with the Carthaginians in the Second Punic War, for the duration of which Rome lost control over most of Northern Italy. The Roman conquest of Italy was only complete after the Roman victory over Carthage, by the 190s BC.

Between 35 and 6 BC, the Alpine region was gradually integrated into the expanding Roman Empire. The contemporary monument Tropaeum Alpium in La Turbie celebrates the victory won by the Romans over 46 tribes in these mountains. The subsequent construction of roads over the Alpine passes first permitted southern and northern Roman settlements in the Alps to be connected, and eventually integrated the inhabitants of the Alps into the culture of the Empire. The upper Rhône Valley or Vallis Poenina fell to the Romans after a battle at Octodurus (Martigny) in 57 BC. Aosta was founded in 25 BC as Augusta Praetoria Salassorum in the former territory of the Salassi. Raetia was conquered in 15 BC.

With the division of the Roman Empire and the collapse of its Western part in the fourth and fifth centuries, power relations in the Alpine region reverted to their local dimensions. Often dioceses became important centres. While in Italy and Southern France, dioceses in the Western Alps were established early (beginning in the fourth century) and resulted in numerous small sees, in the Eastern Alps such foundations continued into the thirteenth century and the dioceses were usually larger. New monasteries in the mountain valleys also promoted the Christianisation of the population. In that period the core area of supra-regional political powers was mainly situated north of the Alps, first in the Carolingian Empire and later, after its division, in France and the Holy Roman Empire. The German emperors, who received the imperial investiture from the Pope in Rome between the ninth and the fifteenth centuries, had to cross the Alps along with their entourages.

In the 7th century, much of the Eastern Alps were settled by Slavs. Between the 7th and 9th century, the Slavic principality of Carantania existed as one of the few non-Germanic polities in the Alps. The Alpine Slavs, who inhabited the majority of present-day Austria and Slovenia, were gradually Germanized from the 9th to the 14th century. The modern Slovenes are their southernmost descendants.

The successive emigration and occupation of the Alpine region by the Alemanni from the 6th to the 8th centuries are, too, known only in outline. For "mainstream" history, the Frankish and later the Habsburg empire, the Alps had strategic importance as an obstacle, not as a landscape, and the Alpine passes have consequently had great significance militarily.

Between 889 and 973, a community of Muslim raiders operating from their base of Fraxinetum, on the coast of Provence, blocked the Alpine passes to Christian travellers until their expulsion by Christian forces led by Arduin Glaber in 973, at which point transalpine trade was able to resume.

Not until the final breakup of the Carolingian Empire in the 10th and 11th centuries is it possible to trace out the local history of different parts of the Alps, notably with the High Medieval Walser migrations.

The French historian Fernand Braudel, in his famous volume on Mediterranean civilisation, describes the Alps as "an exceptional range of mountains from the point of view of resources, collective disciplines, the quality of its human population and the number of good roads." This remarkable human presence in the Alpine region came into being with the population growth and agrarian expansion of the High Middle Ages. At first a mixed form of agriculture and animal husbandry dominated the economy. Then, from the Late Middle Ages onwards, cattle tended to replace sheep as the dominant animals. In a few regions of the northern slope of the Alps, cattle farming became increasingly oriented toward long-range markets and substituted agriculture completely. At the same time other types of interregional and transalpine exchange were growing in significance. The most important pass was the Brenner, which could accommodate cart traffic beginning in the fifteenth century. In the Western and Central Alps, the passes were practicable only by pack animals up to the period around 1800.

The process of state formation in the Alps was driven by the proximity to focal areas of European conflicts such as in the Italian wars of 1494–1559. In that period the socio-political structures of Alpine regions drifted apart. One can identify three different developmental models: one of princely centralization (Western Alps), a local-communal one (Switzerland) and an intermediate one, characterised by a powerful nobility (Eastern Alps).

Until the late nineteenth century many Alpine valleys remained mainly shaped by agrarian and pastoral activities. Population growth favoured the intensification of land use and the spread of corn, potato and cheese production. The shorter growing season at higher altitudes did not seem to be an impediment until around 1700. Later, however, it became a major obstacle to the further intensification of agriculture, especially in comparison to the surrounding lowlands where land productivity increased rapidly. Inside the Alpine region there was a striking difference between the western and central parts, which were dominated by small farming establishments, and the eastern part, which were characterised by medium or big farms. Migration to the urbanised zones of the surrounding areas was already apparent before 1500 and was often temporary. In the Alps themselves, urbanisation was slow.

In the Central Alps the chief event, on the northern side of the chain, is the gradual formation from 1291 to 1516 of the Swiss Confederacy, at least so far as regards the mountain cantons, and with especial reference to the independent confederations of the Grisons and the Valais, which only became full members of the Confederation in 1803 and 1815 respectively. The attraction of the south was too strong for both the Forest Cantons and the Grisons, so that both tried to secure, and actually did secure, various bits of the Milanese.

The Gotthard Pass was known in antiquity as Adula Mons, but it was not one of the important Alpine passes due to the impassability of the Schöllenen Gorge north of the pass. This changed dramatically with the construction of the so-called Devil's Bridge by the year 1230. Almost immediately, in 1231, the formerly unimportant valley of Uri was granted imperial immediacy and became the main route connecting Germany and Italy. Also in 1230, a hospice dedicated to Gotthard of Hildesheim was built on the pass to accommodate the pilgrims to Rome which now took this route. The sudden strategical importance for the European powers gained by what is now Central Switzerland was an important factor in the formation of the Old Swiss Confederacy beginning in the late 13th century.

In the 15th century, the Forest Cantons won the Valle Leventina as well as Bellinzona and the Valle di Blenio (though the Valle d'Ossola was held for a time only). Blenio was added to the Val Bregaglia (which had been given to the bishop of Coire in 960 by the emperor Otto I), along with the valleys of Valle Mesolcina and of Val Poschiavo.

In the case of the Western Alps (excluding the part from the chain of Mont Blanc to the Simplon Pass, which followed the fortunes of the Valais), a prolonged struggle for control took place between the feudal lords of Savoy, the Dauphiné and Provence. In 1349 the Dauphiné fell to France, while in 1388 the county of Nice passed from Provence to the house of Savoy, which also then held Piedmont as well as other lands on the Italian side of the Alps. The struggle henceforth was limited to France and the house of Savoy, but little by little France succeeded in pushing back the house of Savoy across the Alps, forcing it to become a purely Italian power.

One turning-point in the rivalry was the Treaty of Utrecht (1713), by which France ceded to Savoy the Alpine districts of Exilles, Bardonnèche (Bardonecchia), Oulx, Fenestrelles, and Châtean Dauphin, while Savoy handed over to France the valley of Barcelonnette, situated on the western slope of the Alps and forming part of the county of Nice. The final act in this long-continued struggle took place in 1860, when France obtained by cession the rest of the county of Nice and also Savoy, thus remaining sole ruler on the western slope of the Alps.

The Eastern Alps had been included in the Frankish Empire since the 9th century. From the High Middle Ages and throughout the Early Modern era, the political history of the Eastern Alps can be considered almost totally in terms of the advance or retreat of the house of Habsburg. The Habsburgers' original home was in the lower valley of the Aar, at Habsburg castle. They lost that district to the Swiss in 1415, as they had previously lost various other sections of what is now Switzerland. But they built an impressive empire in the Eastern Alps, where they defeated numerous minor dynasties. They won the duchy of Austria with Styria in 1282, Carinthia and Carniola in 1335, Tirol in 1363, and the Vorarlberg in bits from 1375 to 1523, not to speak of minor "rectifications" of frontiers on the northern slope of the Alps. But on the other slope their progress was slower, and finally less successful. It is true that they won Primiero quite early (1373), as well as (1517) the Ampezzo Valley and several towns to the south of Trento. In 1797 they obtained Venetia proper, in 1803 the secularized bishoprics of Trento and Brixen (as well as that of Salzburg, more to the north), besides the Valtellina region, and in 1815 the Bergamasque valleys, while the Milanese had belonged to them since 1535. But in 1859 they lost to the house of Savoy both the Milanese and the Bergamasca, and in 1866 Venetia proper also, so that the Trentino was then their chief possession on the southern slope of the Alps. The gain of the Milanese in 1859 by the future king of Italy (1861) meant that Italy then won the valley of Livigno (between the Upper Engadine and Bormio), which is the only important bit it holds on the non-Italian slope of the Alps, besides the county of Tenda (obtained in 1575, and not lost in 1860), with the heads of certain glens in the Maritime Alps, reserved in 1860 for reasons connected with hunting. Following World War I and the demise of Austria-Hungary, there were important territorial changes in the Eastern Alps.

For the modern era it is possible to offer a quantitative estimate of the population of the Alpine region. Within the area delimited by the Alpine Convention, there were about 3.1 million inhabitants in 1500, 5.8 in 1800, 8.5 in 1900 and 13.9 in 2000.

Sixteenth-century scholars, especially those from cities near the Alps, began to show a greater interest for the mountain phenomena. Their curiosity was also aroused by important questions of the genesis of the earth and the interpretation of the Bible. By the eighteenth century, a distinctive enthusiasm for nature and the Alps spread in European society. An example thereof is the famous multi-volume work " Voyages dans les Alpes " (1779–1796) by Horace-Bénédict de Saussure. In his work the naturalist from Geneva described, among other things, his 1787 ascent of Mont Blanc at 4800 metres above sea level. This new interest is also reflected in literature, most notably by Jean-Jacques Rousseau ’s best-selling romantic novel " Julie, ou la nouvelle Heloise " (1761). These cultural developments resulted in a growth of interest in the Alps as a travel destination and laid the foundation for modern tourism. As Europe was getting increasingly more urbanised, the Alps distinguished themselves as a place of nature. During the colonial expansion many mountains in Asia, Australia and America were now named after the Alps as well.

During the nineteenth and twentieth centuries several important changes occurred. First, the Alpine population was now characterised by a particular growth rate, which was increasingly differentiated from that of the more dynamic non-mountain areas. Second, the migratory fluxes became ever more important and ever more directed toward extra-European destinations. Beginning in the early twentieth century, several regions were affected by depopulation. This process amplified the imbalanced distribution of the population within the Alps, because the urban centres at lower altitudes experienced strong growth and clearly became the most important dynamic localities during the twentieth century.

The economy showed many signs of change too. First of all, the agriculture sector started to lose importance, and sought to survive by introducing specialised crops in valley bottoms and reinforcing cattle-raising at higher altitudes. This profound transformation was obviously due to the spread of industrialisation in Europe during the nineteenth century, which had its impact on the Alps, directly or indirectly. On the one hand, activities such as iron manufacturing, which had become prominent during the early modern era, reached their limits due to transportation costs and the increasing scale of business operations. On the other hand, at the turn of the twentieth century, new opportunities emerged for the manufacturing sector, due largely to electric power, one among the main innovations of the second industrial revolution. Abundant water and steep slopes made the Alps an ideal environment for the production of hydroelectric power. Hence many industrial sites appeared there.

However, it was undoubtedly the service sector that experienced the most important new development within the Alpine economy: the rapid rise of tourism. The first phase was dominated by summertime visits and, by about 1850, the expansion of Alpine health resorts and spas. Later, tourism started to shift to the winter season, particularly after the introduction of ski-lifts in early twentieth century. For a long time, transit traffic and trade had been an essential part of the service sector in the Alps. The traditional routes and activities began to face strong competition from the construction of railway lines and tunnels such as the Semmering (1854), the Brenner (1867), the Fréjus/Mont-Cenis (1871), the Gotthard (1882), the Simplon (1906) and the Tauern (1909). In 2016 opened the 57 km long Gotthard Base Tunnel. With a maximum elevation of only 549 metres above sea level, it is the first flat direct route through the Alpine barrier.

In general, it is noteworthy that even if modern industry – tourism, the railway and later the highway system – represented opportunities for the Alps, complementing its traditional openness to new challenges, it also produced negative consequences, such as the human impact on the environment.

Like other parts of Europe, the Alpine region was affected by the formation of the nation states that produced tensions between various groups and had consequences for border areas. In these regions, the coercive power of the state was felt much more strongly that it had been before. Borders lost their permeability and now bisected areas formerly characterised by a shared sense of community and ongoing exchanges. During World War I the eastern Alpine region was one of the epicentres of the conflict.

After World War II, the Alps entered a new phase. At one and the same time, regional identities were reinforced and a common Alpine identity was constructed. A remarkable step was made in 1991 with the signing of the Alpine Convention between all Alpine countries and the European Union. This process was strengthened by the appearance of a new set of cultural values for the Alps. In the nineteenth century, there had been a tension between the romantic advocates of the "sacredness" of the Alpine peaks (such as John Ruskin), and modern mountain climbers (such as Leslie Stephen), who promoted the notion of the Alps as the "playground of Europe". In the twentieth century, the mountains acquired a clearly positive, iconic, status as places unsullied by undesirable urban influences such as pollution, noise and so on.

The fascination that the Alps exerted on the British has to be related to the general increase in charm and appeal of this mountain range during the eighteenth century. Yet British particularities were involved as well. Traditionally, many Englishmen felt the attraction of the Mediterranean, which was associated with the practice of the Grand Tour, and thus had to cross Europe and the Alps to reach it. From a place of transit, the Alps turned into a tourist destination as the flow of people and means of transport increased. Moreover, with the invention of new sports the Alps became an area of experimental training. The Alps offered many mountain climbers a degree of difficulty that fit their expectations.

The convergence of these phenomena granted to Alpine tourism a central position. It intensified from the middle of the nineteenth century onwards and, in spite of fluctuations, would never lose its importance. Railway companies, travel guides, travelogues and travel agents joined forces to make the Alps a prestigious tourist destination. With Thomas Cook in particular, the Alps appeared, as early as 1861, in the catalog of tourist offers and were instrumental in the establishment of a "truly international industry" of tourism. This industry developed the infrastructure: railway lines, hotels and other services such as casinos, promenades, improvements, and funiculars.

The conquest of the Alps by British tourists was achieved along with their domestication and with the passionate participation of local, regional and national élites, be they political, economic or cultural. Leslie Stephen, in a best-selling book first published in 1871, defined the Alps as "the Playground of Europe". The book highlights the incredible success of the mountains but it also reflects the tensions that emerged among their visitors. There was a clash between the "real enthusiasts", sensitive to beauty, and the "flock of ordinary tourists" sticking to their customs and comforts.

During the twentieth century, then, the Alps were involved in the globalisation of tourism, a process that caused the multiplication of its destinations. However, in the British population these mountains retained an undeniable attraction. In fact, the British continued to view winter sports in particular (such as skiing, skating, bobsleigh, curling) as significant grounds for justifying their travel and their perpetuation of a unique culture. The personalities of Gavin de Beer and Arnold Lunn represent this attitude through a prolific interpretation of this mountain range from every possible perspective. Indeed, the British have never ceased to love and be attracted to the Alps. This is not likely to end soon, if the advertisements and presentations of the major Alpine resorts that intersperse the Sunday editions of the major newspapers are any indicator.

The Alps are at the crossroads of the French, Italian, German and South Slavic linguistic sprachraums. They also act as a linguistic refugium, preserving archaic dialects such as Romansh, Walser German or Romance Lombardic. Extinct languages known to have been spoken in the Alpine region include Rhaetic, Lepontic, Ligurian and Langobardic.

As a result of the complicated history of the Alpine region, the native language and the national feelings of the inhabitants do not always correspond to the current international borders. The Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol region, which was annexed by Italy after World War I, has a German-speaking majority in the northern province of South Tyrol. There are Walser German speakers to found in northern Italy near the Swiss border. There are some French and Franco-Provencal -speaking districts in the Italian Aosta Valley, while there are clusters of Slovene-speakers in the Italian portion of the Julian Alps, in the Resia Valley (where the archaic Resian dialect of Slovene is still spoken) and in the mountain district known as Venetian Slovenia.

An habitation à loyer modéré (HLM, pronounced [ aʃ ɛl ɛm ], lit. ' housing at moderate rent ') is a form of low-income housing in France, Algeria, Senegal, and Quebec. It may be public or private, with rent subsidies.

HLMs constitute 16% of all housing in France. There are approximately four million such residences, housing an estimated 10 million people. The standard of living in the HLM housing projects is often the lowest in the country.

72% of French HLMs built before 2001 (and 95% of those built between 2001 and 2011) are small buildings or individual houses. The average size of buildings is 20 apartments. Construction of HLM is mainly financed by funds collected on Livret A, a type of savings account regulated by the Caisse des dépôts et consignations. In 2011, the French people have placed 280 billion euros on this type of savings account.

In the early 1960s, “bidonvilles” housed most low-income immigrants. Bidonvilles were housing developments, commonly referred to as “shanty towns” located in the metropole with little to no running water or utilities. The largest bidonvilles were located in Champigny with the majority population being Portuguese immigrants and a similar number in Nanterre with the majority population being Algerian immigrants. The Movement for France (MPF), which was a political party, pushed for the betterment of living conditions initially stating that social demands such as the need for shelter were basic and thus universal. MPF’s agenda slowly changed from housing being a universal need, to an exclusive right for citizens and the working class. The new HLM buildings improved living conditions; however, social commentaries coined the term Sarcellitis which is used to describe living in a depressing environment. The dramatic change from living in bidonvilles would overlook the unsightly buildings, but the environmental challenges (via police brutally) would soon follow in the coming years within the newly formed HLM communities. The French government hoped that by sheltering low-income populations, it would bring the standard of living up, but it instead stratified a hierarchical system. Surveillance of immigrant groups (in HLMs) were issued by government officials to procure cultural information on immigrant communities so as to better acclimate them into French society. This racially motivated approach was perpetuated by the Fifth Republic officials because they believed the immigrant communities were incapable of living in France. The lack of assimilation was a result of inequality and discrimination thus keeping immigrants in the HLM suburbs.

The low level of construction during and between the two world wars, the rural exodus that had started to take place in France (directed mainly at Île-de-France, the Paris region) and the baby boom, contributed to a deficit of an estimated four million residences. Eugène Claudius-Petit, the Minister for Reconstruction and Urbanisation, promoted a scheme of massive construction of socially subsidised residences to address this problem. The new system took its foundations from the HBM (habitation à bon marché – "inexpensive housing") system, which had been created in 1889 and financed mainly by charitable sources rather than the state.

The level of social construction did not significantly rise until minister Pierre Courant launched an ambitious plan in 1956, warranted by the increased rate of immigration from France's former colonies. Courant's plan had the goal of construction of at least 240,000 residences each year, and it was an unexpected success: from 1956 on, there were more than 300,000 new residences built annually, with a good number of them HLM. In 1964, there were 95,000 new HLM apartments. The residences were often constructed in large complexes, by le chemin de grue ("the way of the crane"). The new, large apartment buildings were perfectly rectangular, to allow a crane to roll along a track and place components on both sides of the building simultaneously, saving both time and effort.

The greatest increase in the number of HLMs came in the late 1960s and early 1970s, when many planned communities, or ZUP (zones à urbaniser en priorité : "priority urbanisation zones") were constructed. They were built mostly in the suburbs of Paris. A total of 195 ZUP were created, producing over two million new, mostly HLM, residences.

The emphasis shifted to improving the standard of living in the residences already in existence. In 1968, for example, only 41% of the HLM apartments had toilet and sanitary facilities. By the end of the 1970s, the figure had risen to about 80%. New HLM sites, with more rooms per residence, were built in smaller cities and towns, and numerous programmes were launched to combat poverty, unemployment and delinquency in ZUP communities. In 2001, each HLM residence had, on average, 2.4 persons living in it (compared to 3.2 in 1954), four rooms (three in 1954), and 96% of all HLM apartments had toilet and sanitary facilities, compared to only 10% in 1954.

According to a study by the Banque des Territoires in 2025, building new or renovated social housing seems impossible given the budgetary equation in France.

Hollandaise sauce (/ h ɒ l ə n ˈ d eɪ z / or / ˈ h ɒ l ə n d eɪ z / ; from French sauce hollandaise [ sos ɔlɑ̃dɛz ] meaning "Dutch sauce") is a French recipe, a mixture of egg yolk, melted butter, and lemon juice (or a white wine or vinegar reduction). It is usually seasoned with salt, and either white pepper or cayenne pepper.

It is a key ingredient of eggs Benedict, and is often served on vegetables such as steamed asparagus.

Sauce hollandaise is French for "Hollandic sauce". The first documented recipe is from 1651 in La Varenne 's Le Cuisinier François for "asparagus with fragrant sauce":

make a sauce with some good fresh butter, a little vinegar, salt, and nutmeg, and an egg yolk to bind the sauce; take care that it doesn't curdle

The name was given during the Franco-Dutch war.

La Varenne is credited with bringing sauces out of the Middle Ages with his publication and may well have invented hollandaise sauce. A more recent name for it is sauce Isigny, named after Isigny-sur-Mer, which is famous for its butter. Isigny sauce is found in recipe books starting in the 19th century.

By the 19th century, sauces had been classified into four categories by Carême. One of his categories was allemande, which was a stock-based sauce using egg and lemon juice. Escoffier replaced allemande with egg-based emulsions, specifically mayonnaise, in his list of the mother sauces of haute cuisine. Hollandaise was included in the section on derivatives but in the English translation, the mention of mayonnaise as a mother sauce was removed and hollandaise was moved to the section on mother sauces.

While many assume that a true hollandaise sauce should only contain the basic ingredients of eggs, butter, and lemon, Prosper Montagne suggested using either a white wine or vinegar reduction, similar to a Béarnaise sauce, to help improve the taste.

In English, the name "Dutch sauce" was common through the 19th century, but was largely displaced by hollandaise in the 20th.

As in other egg emulsion sauces, like mayonnaise and Béarnaise, the egg does not coagulate as in a custard ; rather, the lecithin in the eggs serves as an emulsifier, allowing the mixture of the normally immiscible butter and lemon juice to form a stable emulsion.

To make hollandaise sauce, beaten egg yolks are combined with butter, lemon juice, salt, and water, and heated gently while being mixed. Some cooks use a double boiler to control the temperature. Some recipes add melted butter to warmed yolks; others call for unmelted butter and the yolks to be heated together; still others combine warm butter and eggs in a blender or food processor. Temperature control is critical, as excessive temperature can curdle the sauce. Some chefs start with a reduction. The reduction consists of vinegar, water and cracked peppercorns. These ingredients are reduced to "au sec" or almost dry, strained, and added to the egg yolk mixture.

Hollandaise and its derivative Mayonnaise (Hollandaise appearing in the 17th century and Mayonnaise appearing in the 18th century) are among the French mother sauces, and the foundation for many derivatives created by adding or changing ingredients, including:

Homelessness in France is a significant social issue that is estimated to affect around 300,000 people - a figure that has doubled since 2012 (141,500) and tripled since 2001 (93,000). Around 185,000 people are currently staying in shelters, some 100,000 are in temporary housing for people seeking asylum and 16,000 live in slums. As of 2024, France has the second highest homeless population in Europe behind the UK.

One study of homeless in Paris found that homeless people have a high degree of social proximity to other people living in conditions of poverty. And terms in the media used to describe homelessness are formed around poverty and vagrancy.

Some researchers maintain that a Housing First policy would not solve the homelessness issue in France.

Some researchers maintain that industrial restructuring in France led to the loss of some jobs among blue-collar workers whose skills did not transfer readily to other job sectors, which in turn led to a rise in homelessness.

Homeless children in France is not a new phenomenon; the writer Emile Zola wrote about homeless children in late nineteenth century France.

The homeless emergency number in France is 115. The line is operated by SAMU Social.

The House of Ponthieu was a Frankish noble dynasty that ruled the County of Ponthieu, a strategically important coastal territory in what is now the Somme, Hauts-de-France, from the late 10th century until its integration into the Crown of Castile–León in 1279 through dynastic marriage.

The lineage began with Hugh I, considered the first Count of Ponthieu, active before the year 1000. He was succeeded by his son Enguerrand I.

The counts of Ponthieu consolidated territory and established alliances with powerful neighbors:

Their power stemmed from dynastic marriages and relative stability, even as the Capetian monarchy consolidated power in northern France.

After Guy I, the title passed to Agnes, who ruled jointly with her husband William III Talvas. Their son Guy II ruled until 1147. His successors were John I (1147–1191), William IV, Marie of Ponthieu, and finally Joan of Dammartin, who married Ferdinand III of Castile in 1237. Through this marriage, Ponthieu passed into the Crown of Castile in 1279, marking the end of the independent dynasty.

The House of Ponthieu developed a coastal principality that served as a crossroads between Normandy, Flanders, and Capetian France. Its members engaged in diplomacy, crusading, and marriage alliances. Under Joan of Dammartin, Ponthieu became part of a broader international network within Iberia.

The housewives demonstrations in France were street protests against shortages and restrictions in France during the Second World War attended mostly by women, at a time when gatherings were subject to prior authorization by the German occupying force or by the Vichy regime.

Often demonstrating with their children, they demanded more food and essential goods in front of prefectures and town halls. These movements took place mainly between November 1940 and September 1942, and occurred in various departements, particularly where the Communist Party was well established.

While these movements were in part a spontaneous reaction to terrible living conditions, they were also the result of mobilization by the Communist Party, and considered a form of resistance.

Although street demonstrations were forbidden, nevertheless from 1941 onwards around 240 so-called "housewives' demonstrations" were organized to protest against the poor supply of food and basic necessities. The term "housewives' demonstration" first appeared at the time, indicating either that they were a new phenomenon or were reported as such. In the course of the 19th century, the model of the "housewife", who runs her household with ingenuity, even when she has a job, was imposed on women, starting in the cities. During the German occupation of France during the Second World War, they were largely responsible for ensuring survival in the face of everyday difficulties, and for feeding, clothing and heating the family. The queues are full of housewives.

The vast majority of these demonstrations were attended by women, which represented a break with the pre-war situation. They numbered from a few dozen to as many as a thousand. Most of the time they were few in number except in Sète, where on January 20, 1942, participation can be estimated at 2,000 women.

Demonstrators often took their children with them. They would go to the prefecture or town hall and send a delegation, sometimes with a petition, to demand more food, coal or other necessities. According to one account by the Commissaire de police in Dunkirk :

On 17 April 1941, at around 10 a.m., around 200 women... went to the Dunkirk town hall and demanded... additional bread ration cards. Turned away, they made their way toward the sub-prefecture, and were turned back by the security service as they approached. The demonstrators then came back towards Dunkirk town hall in small groups.... Around a hundred gathered in front of the town hall, demanding bread cards, potatoes and dried vegetables. In the afternoon, the demonstrators gathered again in front of the town hall and headed for the sub-prefecture.

The demands expressed immediate needs, and rarely were explicitly political. They were often fulfilled in 1940-1941, but with greater difficulty in 1941-1942, when the government feared contagion. To mobilize, organizers drew on what they saw as successes elsewhere, such as in Lanester, Morbihan, where the leaflet distributed on the night of April 15-6, 1942 read:

Women.. our children are hungry. Following the example of women of the 20th arrondissement of Paris, and the housewives of Troyes, Belfort and Reims, who, after petitioning, have obtained an increase in supplies, let us demand [more] bread. To keep French wheat French, let's sign petitions and demonstrate our disapproval in front of town halls.

These demonstrations took place mainly from November 1940 to July 1941, and from November 1941 to September 1942, both in the Paris region, as well as around the country in the Nord and Pas-de-Calais, all along the Mediterranean coast from the Pyrénées-Orientales to the Alpes-Maritimes, in the Doubs, the Calvados, the Morbihan and other departments.

The first protests took place in November 1940. In Carcassonne, Béziers and Marseille, women protested in front of prefectures, demanding potatoes. These early demonstrations were followed by some sixty others up to the summer of 1941, in the occupied zone. From the following winter until September 1942, the women's demonstrations began again in greater numbers, about twice as many (130) as in the previous year, and broadened to some twenty departments. Chiefly working-class women were involved.

Their demands became part of broader movements and gave way to patriotic demonstrations, which began to multiply in May 1942. Subsequently, demonstrations by housewives were fewer, numbering around forty in two periods: the first, between May and September 1943, and again in the first half of 1944.

The ebb and flow of protests followed a seasonal pattern. More numerous in winter and spring, they tended to correspond to periods of increasing hardship during the pre-harvest scarcity that precedes the next harvest.

The Vichy Regime was concerned by this and tried to curb the movement by forbidding dissemination of information about the demonstrations and warning mayors that there would be no extra deliveries of food. However, the French authorities did not dare to use force against the women's marches. The German occupiers, who were not the main target of the protests, felt little concern. The regime clamped down much less on housewives' demonstrations than they did on patriotic ones. In some cases, the police or gendarmerie tried to prevent a march from advancing, arresting the "leaders" or keeping an eye on them, like the activists Alphonsine Delanois or Madeleine Porquet in the Nord department.

With their seasonal nature, their predominantly feminine character, the role of rumor in triggering them and the rivalries between localities, these demonstrations had many antiquated features reminiscent of the food riots of the Ancien Régime. Demonstrations often started at the market, where the absence of one essential product or another triggered angry emotions.

Nevertheless, the extent to which these movements were spontaneous is open to question. While their sudden appearance was clearly evident in the Doubs or the Var in 1942, that was not always the case elsewhere. Indeed, there were many cases of demonstrators responding to the call of unsigned leaflets with concrete demands.

The communists played a role in organizing these demonstrations. In April 1941, the underground paper L'Humanité appealed to women to go "en masse to the town halls to claim their due". Most of the demonstrations in spring 1941 took place in working-class municipalities that had been run by the pre-war Popular Front in the Parisian " red belt " suburbs, the Nord, and Pas-de-Calais. The geographical expansion of these movements in the winter and spring of 1941-1942 was also supported by the Communists, although this did not hamper local initiatives

The Huguenots (/ ˈ h juː ɡ ə n ɒ t s / HEW -gə-nots, UK also /- n oʊ z / - ⁠ nohz ; French: [ yɡ(ə)no ]) are a religious group of French Protestants who held to the Reformed (Calvinist) tradition of Protestantism. The term, which may be derived from the name of burgomaster Besançon Hugues, who defended Geneva from Catholic Savoy but then let it fall to Protestantism, was in common use by around 1550. Huguenot was frequently used in reference to those of the Reformed Church of France from the time of the Protestant Reformation. By contrast, the Protestant populations of eastern France, in Alsace, Moselle, and Montbéliard, were mainly Lutherans.

In his Encyclopedia of Protestantism, Hans Hillerbrand wrote that on the eve of the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre in 1572, the Huguenot community made up as much as 10% of the French population. By 1600, it declined to 7–8%, and was reduced further late in the century after the return of persecution under Louis XIV, who instituted the Dragonnades to forcibly convert Protestants, and then finally revoked all Protestant rights in his Edict of Fontainebleau of 1685. In 1686, Protestants comprised just 1% of the population.

The Huguenots were concentrated in the southern and western parts of the Kingdom of France. As Huguenots gained influence and more openly displayed their faith, Catholic hostility grew. A series of religious conflicts followed, known as the French Wars of Religion, fought intermittently from 1562 to 1598. The Huguenots were led by Jeanne d'Albret ; her son, the future Henry IV (who would later convert to Catholicism in order to become king); and the princes of Condé. The wars ended with the Edict of Nantes of 1598, which granted the Huguenots substantial religious, political and military autonomy.

Huguenot rebellions in the 1620s resulted in the abolition of their political and military privileges. They retained the religious provisions of the Edict of Nantes until the rule of Louis XIV, who gradually increased persecution of Protestantism until he issued the Edict of Fontainebleau (1685). This ended legal recognition of Protestantism in France and the Huguenots were forced to either convert to Catholicism (possibly as Nicodemites) or flee as refugees; they were subject to violent Dragonnades. Louis XIV claimed the French Huguenot population was reduced from about 900,000 or 800,000 adherents to just 1,000 or 1,500. He exaggerated the decline, but the Dragonnades were devastating for the French Protestant community. The exodus of Huguenots from France created a brain drain, as many of them had occupied important places in society.

The remaining Huguenots faced continued persecution under Louis XV. By the time of his death in 1774, Calvinism had been all but eliminated from France. Persecution of Protestants officially ended with the Edict of Versailles, signed by Louis XVI in 1787. Two years later, with the Revolutionary Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 1789, Protestants gained equal rights as citizens. The Reformed Church of France represented the main continuation of the Huguenot tradition in modern France. In 2013, it merged with the Evangelical Lutheran Church in France to form the United Protestant Church of France, which today represents the largest Protestant denomination in France and includes both Reformed (Calvinist) and Lutheran traditions descended in part from the Huguenots.

A term used originally in derision, Huguenot has unclear origins. Various hypotheses have been promoted. The term may have been a combined reference to the Swiss politician Besançon Hugues (died 1532) and the religiously conflicted nature of Swiss republicanism in his time. It used a derogatory pun on the name Hugues by way of the Dutch word Huisgenoten (literally "housemates"), referring to the connotations of a somewhat related word in German Eidgenosse ('Confederate' in the sense of 'a citizen of one of the states of the Swiss Confederacy').

In Geneva, John Calvin 's adopted home and the centre of the Calvinist movement, Hugues, though Catholic, was a leader of the "Confederate Party", so called because it favoured independence from the Duke of Savoy. It sought an alliance between the city-state of Geneva and the Swiss Confederation. The label Huguenot was purportedly first applied in France to those conspirators (all of them aristocratic members of the Reformed Church) who were involved in the Amboise plot of 1560: a foiled attempt to wrest power in France from the influential and zealously Catholic House of Guise. This action would have fostered relations with the Swiss.

O. I. A. Roche promoted this idea among historians. He wrote in his book, The Days of the Upright, A History of the Huguenots (1965), that Huguenot is:

a combination of a Dutch and a German word. In the Dutch-speaking North of France, Bible students who gathered in each other's houses to study secretly were called Huis Genooten ("housemates") while on the Swiss and German borders they were termed Eid Genossen, or "oath fellows", that is, persons bound to each other by an oath. Gallicised into Huguenot, often used deprecatingly, the word became, during two and a half centuries of terror and triumph, a badge of enduring honour and courage.

Some disagree with such non-French linguistic origins. Janet Gray argues that for the word to have spread into common use in France, it must have originated there in French. The "Hugues hypothesis" argues that the name was derived by association with Hugues Capet, king of France, who reigned long before the Reformation. He was regarded by the Gallicians as a noble man who respected people's dignity and lives. Janet Gray and other supporters of the hypothesis suggest that the name huguenote would be roughly equivalent to "little Hugos", or "those who want Hugo".

Paul Ristelhuber, in his 1879 introduction to a new edition of the controversial and censored, but popular 1566 work Apologie pour Hérodote, by Henri Estienne, mentions these theories and opinions, but tends to support a completely Catholic origin. As one legend holds, a gateway area in the streets of Tours was haunted by the ghosts of le roi Huguet (a generic term for these spirits), "because they were wont to assemble near the gate named after Hugon, a Count of Tours in ancient times, who had left a record of evil deeds and had become in popular fancy a sort of sinister and maleficent genius. This count may have been Hugh of Tours, who was disliked for his cowardice. Additionally, it is related that it was believed that these spirits, instead of spending their time in Purgatory, came back to rattle doors and haunt and harm people at night. Protestants went out at night to their lascivious conventicles, and so the priests and the people began to call them Huguenots in Tours and then elsewhere." The name, Huguenot, "the people applied in hatred and derision to those who were elsewhere called Lutherans, and from Touraine it spread throughout France." The prétendus réformés ("supposedly reformed") were said to gather at night at Tours, both for political purposes and for prayer and singing psalms. Reguier de la Plancha (d. 1560) in his De l'Estat de France offered the following account as to the origin of the name, as cited by The Cape Monthly :

Reguier de la Plancha accounts for it [the name] as follows: "The name huguenand was given to those of the religion during the affair of Amboyse, and they were to retain it ever since. I'll say a word about it to settle the doubts of those who have strayed in seeking its origin. The superstition of our ancestors, to within twenty or thirty years thereabouts, was such that in almost all the towns in the kingdom they had a notion that certain spirits underwent their Purgatory in this world after death, and that they went about the town at night, striking and outraging many people whom they found in the streets. But the light of the Gospel has made them vanish, and teaches us that these spirits were street-strollers and ruffians. In Paris the spirit was called le moine bourré ; at Orléans, le mulet odet ; at Blois le loup garon ; at Tours, le Roy Huguet ; and so on in other places. Now, it happens that those whom they called Lutherans were at that time so narrowly watched during the day that they were forced to wait till night to assemble, for the purpose of praying God, for preaching and receiving the Holy Sacrament; so that although they did not frighten nor hurt anybody, the priests, through mockery, made them the successors of those spirits which roam the night; and thus that name being quite common in the mouth of the populace, to designate the evangelical huguenands in the country of Tourraine and Amboyse, it became in vogue after that enterprise."

Some have suggested the name was derived, with intended scorn, from les guenon de Hus (the "monkeys" or "apes of Jan Hus "). By 1911, there was still no consensus in the United States on this interpretation.

The Huguenot cross is the distinctive emblem of the Huguenots (croix huguenote). It is now an official symbol of the Église des Protestants réformés (French Protestant church). Huguenot descendants sometimes display this symbol as a sign of reconnaissance (recognition) between them.

The issue of demographic strength and geographical spread of the Reformed tradition in France has been covered in a variety of sources. Most of them agree that the Huguenot population reached as many as 10% of the total population, or roughly 2 million people, on the eve of the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre in 1572.

The new teaching of John Calvin attracted sizeable portions of the nobility and urban bourgeoisie. After John Calvin introduced the Reformation in France, the number of French Protestants steadily swelled to ten percent of the population, or roughly 1.8 million people, in the decade between 1560 and 1570. During the same period, there were some 1,400 Reformed churches operating in France. Hans J. Hillerbrand, an expert on the subject, in his Encyclopedia of Protestantism: 4-volume Set claims the Huguenot community reached as much as 10% of the French population on the eve of the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre in 1572, declining to 7–8% by around 1600, and further after heavy persecution began once again with the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes by Louis XIV in 1685. Among the nobles, Calvinism peaked on the eve of the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre. Since then, it sharply decreased as the Huguenots were no longer tolerated by both the French royalty and the Catholic masses. By around 1600, Huguenots constituted 7–8% of the whole population, or 1.2 million people. By the time Louis XIV revoked the Edict of Nantes in 1685, Huguenots accounted for 800,000 to 1 million people.

Huguenots controlled sizeable areas in southern and western France. In addition, many areas, especially in the central part of the country, were also contested between the French Reformed and Catholic nobles. Demographically, there were some areas in which the whole population had been Reformed. These included villages in and around the Massif Central, as well as the area around Dordogne, which used to be almost entirely Reformed too. John Calvin was a Frenchman and himself largely responsible for the introduction and spread of the Reformed tradition in France. He wrote in French, but unlike the Protestant development in Germany, where Lutheran writings were widely distributed and could be read by the common man, it was not the case in France, where only nobles adopted the new faith and the folk remained Catholic. This is true for many areas in the west and south controlled by the Huguenot nobility. Although relatively large portions of the peasant population became Reformed there, the people, altogether, still remained majority Catholic.

Overall, Huguenot presence was heavily concentrated in the western and southern portions of the French kingdom, as nobles there secured the practice of the new faith. These included Languedoc-Roussillon, Gascony and even a strip of land that stretched into the Dauphiné. Huguenots lived on the Atlantic coast in La Rochelle, and also spread across provinces of Normandy and Poitou. In the south, towns like Castres, Montauban, Montpellier and Nîmes were Huguenot strongholds. In addition, a dense network of Protestant villages permeated the rural mountainous region of the Cevennes. Inhabited by Camisards, it continues to be the backbone of French Protestantism. Historians estimate that roughly 80% of all Huguenots lived in the western and southern areas of France.

Today, there are some Reformed communities around the world that still retain their Huguenot identity. In France, Calvinists in the United Protestant Church of France and also some in the Protestant Reformed Church of Alsace and Lorraine consider themselves Huguenots. A rural Huguenot community in the Cevennes that rebelled in 1702 is still called Camisards, especially in historical contexts. Huguenot exiles in the United Kingdom, the United States, South Africa, Australia, and a number of other countries still retain their identity.

As a final destination, most of the Huguenot émigrés moved to Protestant states such as the Dutch Republic, England and Wales (prominently in Kent and London), Protestant-controlled Ireland, the Channel Islands, Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, Switzerland, the electorates of Brandenburg and the Palatinate in the Holy Roman Empire, and the Duchy of Prussia. Some fled as refugees to the Dutch Cape Colony, the Dutch East Indies, various Caribbean colonies, and several of the Dutch and English colonies in North America. A few families went to Orthodox Russia and Catholic Quebec.

Today most Huguenots have assimilated into the various societies and cultures where they have settled. Remnant communities of Camisards in the Cévennes, most Reformed members of the United Protestant Church of France, French members of the largely German Protestant Reformed Church of Alsace and Lorraine, and the Huguenot diaspora in England and Australia, all still retain their beliefs and Huguenot designation.

The availability of the Bible in vernacular languages was important to the spread of the Protestant movement and development of the Reformed Church in France. The country had a long history of struggles with the papacy (see the Avignon Papacy, for example) by the time the Protestant Reformation finally arrived. Around 1294, a French version of the scriptures was prepared by the Roman Catholic priest, Guyard des Moulins. A two-volume illustrated folio paraphrase version based on his manuscript, by Jean de Rély, was printed in Paris in 1487.

The first known translation of the Bible into one of France's regional languages, Arpitan or Franco-Provençal, had been prepared by the pre-Protestant reformer Peter Waldo (c. 1140 – c. 1205). The Waldensians created fortified areas, as in Cabrières, perhaps attacking an abbey. They were suppressed by Francis I in 1545 in the Massacre of Mérindol.

Other predecessors of the Reformed church included the pro-reform and Gallican Roman Catholics, such as Jacques Lefevre (c. 1455–1536). The Gallicans briefly achieved independence for the French church, on the principle that the religion of France could not be controlled by the Bishop of Rome, a foreign power. During the Protestant Reformation, Lefevre, a professor at the University of Paris, published his French translation of the New Testament in 1523, followed by the whole Bible in the French language in 1530. William Farel was a student of Lefevre who went on to become a leader of the Swiss Reformation, establishing a Protestant republican government in Geneva. Jean Cauvin (John Calvin), another student at the University of Paris, also converted to Protestantism. Long after the sect was suppressed by Francis I, the remaining French Waldensians, then mostly in the Luberon region, sought to join Farel, Calvin and the Reformation, and Olivétan published a French Bible for them. The French Confession of 1559 shows a decidedly Calvinistic influence.

Although usually Huguenots are lumped into one group, there were actually two types of Huguenots that emerged. Since the Huguenots had political and religious goals, it was commonplace to refer to the Calvinists as "Huguenots of religion" and those who opposed the monarchy as "Huguenots of the state", who were mostly nobles.

This group of Huguenots from southern France had frequent issues with the strict Calvinist tenets that are outlined in many of John Calvin's letters to the synods of the Languedoc.

Early in his reign, Francis I (r. 1515–1547) persecuted the old, pre-Protestant movement of Waldensians in southeastern France. Francis initially protected the Huguenot dissidents from Parlementary measures seeking to exterminate them. After the 1534 Affair of the Placards, however, he distanced himself from Huguenots and their protection.

Huguenot numbers grew rapidly between 1555 and 1561, chiefly amongst nobles and city dwellers. During this time, their opponents first dubbed the Protestants Huguenots ; but they called themselves reformés, or "Reformed". They organised their first national synod in 1558 in Paris.

By 1562, the estimated number of Huguenots peaked at approximately two million, concentrated mainly in the western, southern, and some central parts of France, compared to approximately sixteen million Catholics during the same period. Persecution diminished the number of Huguenots who remained in France.

As the Huguenots gained influence and displayed their faith more openly, Roman Catholic hostility towards them grew, even though the French crown offered increasingly liberal political concessions and edicts of toleration.

Following the accidental death of Henry II in 1559, his son succeeded as King Francis II along with his wife, the Queen Consort, also known as Mary, Queen of Scots. During the eighteen months of the reign of Francis II, Mary encouraged a policy of rounding up French Huguenots on charges of heresy and putting them in front of Catholic judges, and employing torture and burning as punishments for dissenters. Mary returned to Scotland a widow in the summer of 1561.

In 1561, the Edict of Orléans declared an end to the persecution, and the Edict of Saint-Germain of January 1562 formally recognised the Huguenots for the first time. However, these measures disguised the growing tensions between Protestants and Catholics.

These tensions spurred eight civil wars, interrupted by periods of relative calm, between 1562 and 1598. With each break in peace, the Huguenots' trust in the Catholic throne diminished, and the violence became more severe, and Protestant demands became grander, until a lasting cessation of open hostility finally occurred in 1598. The wars gradually took on a dynastic character, developing into an extended feud between the Houses of Bourbon and Guise, both of which — in addition to holding rival religious views — staked a claim to the French throne. The crown, occupied by the House of Valois, generally supported the Catholic side, but on occasion switched over to the Protestant cause when politically expedient.

The French Wars of Religion began with the Massacre of Vassy on 1 March 1562, when dozens (some sources say hundreds) of Huguenots were killed, and about 200 were wounded. It was in this year that some Huguenots destroyed the tomb and remains of Saint Irenaeus (d. 202), an early Church father and bishop who was a disciple of Polycarp. The Michelade by Huguenots against Catholics was later on 29 September 1567.

In what became known as the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre of 24 August to 3 October 1572, Catholics killed thousands of Huguenots in Paris and similar massacres took place in other towns in the following weeks. The main provincial towns and cities experiencing massacres were Aix, Bordeaux, Bourges, Lyon, Meaux, Orléans, Rouen, Toulouse, and Troyes.

Although the exact number of fatalities throughout the country is not known, on 23 or 24 August, between 2,000 and 3,000 Protestants were killed in Paris and a further 3,000 to 7,000 more in the French provinces. By 17 September, almost 25,000 Protestants had been massacred in Paris alone. Beyond Paris, the killings continued until 3 October. An amnesty granted in 1573 pardoned the perpetrators. Following the killings many Protestants fled to the Kentish coast among other places.

The pattern of warfare, followed by brief periods of peace, continued for 25 years. The warfare was definitively quelled in 1598, when Henry of Navarre, having succeeded to the French throne as Henry IV, and having recanted Protestantism in favour of Roman Catholicism in order to obtain the French crown, issued the Edict of Nantes. The Edict reaffirmed Roman Catholicism as the state religion of France, but granted the Protestants equality with Catholics under the throne and a degree of religious and political freedom within their domains. The Edict simultaneously protected Catholic interests by discouraging the founding of new Protestant churches in Catholic-controlled regions.

With the proclamation of the Edict of Nantes, and the subsequent protection of Huguenot rights, pressures to leave France abated. However, enforcement of the Edict grew increasingly irregular over time, making life so intolerable that many fled the country. The Huguenot population of France dropped to 856,000 by the mid-1660s, of which a plurality lived in rural areas. The greatest concentrations of Huguenots at this time resided in the regions of Guienne, Saintonge- Aunis - Angoumois and Poitou.

Montpellier was among the most important of the 66 villes de sûreté ("cities of protection" or "protected cities") that the Edict of 1598 granted to the Huguenots. The city's political institutions and the university were all handed over to the Huguenots. Tension with Paris led to a siege by the royal army in 1622. Peace terms called for the dismantling of the city's fortifications. A royal citadel was built and the university and consulate were taken over by the Catholic party. Even before the Edict of Alès (1629), Protestant rule was dead and the ville de sûreté was no more.

By 1620, the Huguenots were on the defensive, and the government increasingly applied pressure. A series of three small civil wars known as the Huguenot rebellions broke out, mainly in southwestern France, between 1621 and 1629, in which the Reformed areas revolted against royal authority. The uprising occurred a decade following the death of Henry IV, who was assassinated by a Catholic fanatic in 1610. His successor Louis XIII, under the regency of his Italian Catholic mother Marie de' Medici, was more intolerant of Protestantism. The Huguenots responded by establishing independent political and military structures, establishing diplomatic contacts with foreign powers, and openly revolting against central power. The rebellions were implacably suppressed by the French crown.

Louis XIV inherited the throne in 1643 and acted increasingly aggressively to force the Huguenots to convert. At first he sent missionaries, backed by a fund to financially reward converts to Roman Catholicism. Then he imposed penalties, closed Huguenot schools and excluded them from favoured professions. Escalating, he instituted dragonnades, which included the occupation and looting of Huguenot homes by military troops, in an effort to forcibly convert them. In 1685, he issued the Edict of Fontainebleau, revoking the Edict of Nantes and declaring Protestantism illegal.

The revocation forbade Protestant services, required the education of children as Catholics, and prohibited emigration. It proved disastrous to the Huguenots and costly for France. It precipitated civil bloodshed, ruined commerce, and resulted in the illegal flight from the country of hundreds of thousands of Protestants, many of whom were intellectuals, doctors and business leaders whose skills were transferred to Britain as well as Holland, Switzerland, Prussia, South Africa and other places they fled to. 4,000 emigrated to the Thirteen Colonies, where they settled, especially in New York, the Delaware River Valley in Eastern Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Virginia. The English authorities welcomed the French refugees, providing money from both government and private agencies to aid their relocation. Those Huguenots who stayed in France were subsequently forcibly converted to Roman Catholicism and were called "new converts".

After this, the Huguenots (with estimates ranging from 200,000 to 1,000,000) fled to Protestant countries: England, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Norway, Denmark, and Prussia—whose Calvinist Great Elector Frederick William welcomed them to help rebuild his war-ravaged and underpopulated country. Following this exodus, Huguenots remained in large numbers in only one region of France: the rugged Cévennes region in the south. There were also some Calvinists in the Alsace region, which then belonged to the Holy Roman Empire. In 1702, a regional group known as the Camisards (who were Huguenots of the mountainous Massif Central region) rioted against the Catholic Church, burning churches and killing the clergy. It took French troops years to hunt down and destroy all the bands of Camisards, between 1702 and 1709.

By the 1760s Protestantism was no longer a favourite religion of the elite. By then, most Protestants were Cévennes peasants. It was still illegal, and, although the law was seldom enforced, it could be a threat or a nuisance to Protestants. Calvinists lived primarily in the Midi ; about 200,000 Lutherans accompanied by some Calvinists lived in the newly acquired Alsace, where the 1648 Treaty of Westphalia effectively protected them.

Persecution of Protestants diminished in France after 1724, finally ending with the Edict of Versailles, commonly called the Edict of Tolerance, signed by Louis XVI in 1787. Two years later, with the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen of 1789, Protestants gained equal rights as citizens.

The government encouraged descendants of exiles to return, offering them French citizenship in a 15 December 1790 law:

All persons born in a foreign country and descending in any degree from a French man or woman expatriated for religious reason are declared French nationals (naturels français) and will benefit from rights attached to that quality if they come back to France, establish their domicile there and take the civic oath.

Article 4 of 26 June 1889 Nationality Law stated: "Descendants of families proscribed by the revocation of the Edict of Nantes will continue to benefit from the 15 December 1790 Law, but on the condition that a nominal decree should be issued for every petitioner. That decree will only produce its effects for the future."

Foreign descendants of Huguenots lost the automatic right to French citizenship in 1945 (by force of the Ordonnance n° 45-2441 du 19 octobre 1945, which revoked the 1889 Nationality Law). It states in article 3: "This application does not, however, affect the validity of past acts by the person or rights acquired by third parties on the basis of previous laws."

In the 1920s and 1930s, members of the extreme-right Action Française movement expressed strong animus against Huguenots and other Protestants in general, as well as against Jews and Freemasons. They were regarded as groups supporting the French Republic, which Action Française sought to overthrow.

In World War II, Huguenots led by André Trocmé in the village of Le Chambon-sur-Lignon in Cévennes helped save many Jews. They hid them in secret places or helped them get out of Vichy France. André Trocmé preached against discrimination as the Nazis were gaining power in neighbouring Germany and urged his Protestant Huguenot congregation to hide Jewish refugees from the Holocaust.

In 2003, there were approximately one million Protestants in France, representing some 2% of its population. Most are concentrated in Alsace in northeast France and the Cévennes mountain region in the south, who still regard themselves as Huguenots to this day. Surveys suggest that Protestantism has grown in recent years, though this is due primarily to the expansion of evangelical Protestant churches, which particularly have adherents among immigrant groups that are generally considered distinct from the French Huguenot population.

A diaspora of French Australians still considers itself Huguenot, even after centuries of exile. Long integrated into Australian society, it is encouraged by the Huguenot Society of Australia to embrace and conserve its cultural heritage, aided by the Society's genealogical research services.

In the United States, there are several Huguenot worship groups and societies. The Huguenot Society of America has headquarters in New York City and has a broad national membership. One of the most active Huguenot groups is in Charleston, South Carolina. While many American Huguenot groups worship in borrowed churches, the congregation in Charleston has its own church. Although services are conducted largely in English, every year the church holds an Annual French Service, which is conducted entirely in French using an adaptation of the Liturgies of Neuchâtel (1737) and Vallangin (1772). Typically, the Annual French Service takes place on the first or second Sunday after Easter in commemoration of the signing of the Edict of Nantes.

French Protestants reacted differently to persecution and the ban of Protestantism. Some converted to the Catholic faith, while others decided to leave. Some left their elderly parents, or children who were too young to travel. Those who left were from every social class and every profession, including lawyers, merchants and officers. They came from all over France. The only common denominator was that they were Protestants, would not convert to Catholicism and were willing to risk it all to practice their religion freely. Those who left left everything, including land to be confiscated unless a family that converted to Catholicism inherited it and paid the refugees. This last scenario happened very rarely.

40% of the Protestants from the Northern part of France left, while 25% of the south did the same. Those closer to the border (both land and sea) as well as where they were a minority in the population of the area left more: it was the case in the Paris area, Normandy and the Atlantic coast. Farmers often stayed attached to the land while craftsmen and merchants represented a large group of those who left. Some temporarily converted to Catholicism to sell their property before leaving. Others left overnight.

Those who left must rely on guides who knew the routes out of France. Most were honest but some sold out their customers to the authorities. Paying for those guides was expensive as they risked being sent to the galley until 1687, and later hanging. They traveled by night and were often disguised. Often, the Huguenots purchased paper guides at a very high price. These guides told the reader which cities to go to, where to avoid, who to contact, etc.

Many left the country by sea, leaving from Bordeaux, La Rochelle, the Île de Ré, Nantes, and other ports along the coast aboard English and Dutch ships after they had made their way to the coast using what was available and what could be afforded. Others went by land to the Dutch Republic or Switzerland. Many walked hundreds of miles. The borders with other countries were well guarded, as well as the border between provinces within France and the risk of arrest was a constant fear until they arrived safely. On the way, they encountered honest people who helped them as well as some who sold them out or stole their money. Help came from Protestants and Catholics. The fugitives sometimes had to lie about their identity. Entire networks existed to escort them across France to a safe country. Some fugitives were arrested on the way. For those who made it, they often arrived tired, starving, with nothing to wear, and no money to their name.

The details of these trips have been recently discovered through the memoirs written by Huguenots for their families. These were often written years later, once safely outside of France and published only recently. These include:

The first Huguenots to leave France sought freedom from persecution in Switzerland and the Netherlands. A group of Huguenots were part of the French colonisers who arrived in Brazil in 1555 to found France Antarctique. A couple of ships with around 500 people arrived at the Guanabara Bay, present-day Rio de Janeiro, and settled on a small island. A fort, named Fort Coligny, was built to protect them from attack from the Portuguese troops and Brazilian natives. It was an attempt to establish a French colony in South America. The fort was destroyed in 1560 by the Portuguese, who captured some of the Huguenots. The Portuguese threatened their Protestant prisoners with death if they did not convert to Roman Catholicism. The Huguenots of Guanabara, as they are now known, produced what is known as the Guanabara Confession of Faith to explain their beliefs. The Portuguese executed them.

Huguenots first settled at the Cape of Good Hope in 1671; the first documented was the wagonmaker François Vilion (Viljoen). The first Huguenot to arrive at the Cape of Good Hope was Maria de la Quellerie, wife of commander Jan van Riebeeck (and daughter of a Walloon church minister), who arrived on 6 April 1652 to establish a settlement at what is today Cape Town. The couple left for Batavia ten years later.

But it was not until 31 December 1687 that the first organised group of Huguenots set sail from the Netherlands to the Dutch East India Company post at the Cape of Good Hope. The largest portion of the Huguenots to settle in the Cape arrived between 1688 and 1689 in seven ships as part of the organised migration, but quite a few arrived as late as 1700; thereafter, the numbers declined and only small groups arrived at a time. Many of these settlers were given land in an area that was later called Franschhoek (Dutch for "French Corner"), in the present-day Western Cape province of South Africa. A large monument to commemorate the arrival of the Huguenots in South Africa was inaugurated on 7 April 1948 at Franschhoek. The Huguenot Memorial Museum was also erected there and opened in 1957.

The official policy of the Dutch East India governors was to integrate the Huguenots and the Dutch communities. When Paul Roux, a pastor who arrived with the main group of Huguenots, died in 1724, the Dutch administration, as a special concession, permitted another French cleric to take his place "for the benefit of the elderly who spoke only French". But with assimilation, within three generations the Huguenots had generally adopted Dutch as their first and home language.

Many of the farms in the Western Cape province in South Africa still bear French names. Many families, today, mostly Afrikaans -speaking, have surnames indicating their French Huguenot ancestry. Examples include: Blignaut, Cilliers, Cronje (Cronier), de Klerk (Le Clercq), de Villiers, du Plessis, Du Preez (Des Pres), du Randt (Durand), du Toit, Duvenhage (Du Vinage), Franck, Fouché, Fourie (Fleurit), Gervais, Giliomee (Guilliaume), Gous/Gouws (Gauch), Hugo, Jordaan (Jourdan), Joubert, Kriek, Labuschagne (la Buscagne), le Roux, Lombard, Malan, Malherbe, Marais, Maree, Minnaar (Mesnard), Nel (Nell), Naudé, Nortjé (Nortier), Pienaar (Pinard), Retief (Retif), Roux, Rossouw (Rousseau), Taljaard (Taillard), TerBlanche, Theron, Viljoen (Vilion) and Visagie (Visage). The wine industry in South Africa owes a significant debt to the Huguenots, some of whom had vineyards in France, or were brandy distillers, and used their skills in their new home.

French Huguenots made two attempts to establish a haven in North America. In 1562, naval officer Jean Ribault led an expedition that explored Florida and the present-day Southeastern United States, and founded the outpost of Charlesfort on Parris Island, South Carolina. The French Wars of Religion precluded a return voyage, and the outpost was abandoned. In 1564, Ribault's former lieutenant René Goulaine de Laudonnière launched a second voyage to build a colony; he established Fort Caroline in what is now Jacksonville, Florida. War at home again precluded a resupply mission, and the colony struggled. In 1565 the Spanish decided to enforce their claim to La Florida, and sent Pedro Menéndez de Avilés, who established the settlement of St. Augustine near Fort Caroline. Menéndez's forces routed the French and executed most of the Protestant captives.

Barred by the government from settling in New France, Huguenots led by Jessé de Forest sailed to North America in 1624 and settled instead in the Dutch colony of New Netherland (later incorporated into New York and New Jersey), as well as Great Britain's colonies, including Nova Scotia. A number of New Amsterdam's families were of Huguenot origin, often having emigrated to the Netherlands from France as refugees previously. In 1628 the Huguenots established a congregation as L'Église française à la Nouvelle-Amsterdam (the French church in New Amsterdam). This parish continues today as the French Church du Saint-Esprit, now a part of the Episcopal Church (Anglican) communion, and welcomes Francophone New Yorkers from all over the world. Upon their arrival in New Amsterdam, Huguenots were offered land directly across from Manhattan on Long Island for a permanent settlement and chose the harbour at the end of Newtown Creek, becoming the first Europeans to live in Brooklyn, then known as Boschwick, in the neighbourhood now known as Bushwick.

Huguenot immigrants settled throughout pre-colonial America, including in New Amsterdam (New York City), some 21 miles north of New York in a town which they named New Rochelle, and some further upstate in New Paltz. The " Huguenot Street Historic District " in New Paltz has been designated a National Historic Landmark site and contains one of the oldest streets in the United States of America. A small group of Huguenots also settled on the south shore of Staten Island along the New York Harbor, for which the current neighbourhood of Huguenot was named. Huguenot refugees also settled in the Delaware River Valley of Eastern Pennsylvania and Hunterdon County, New Jersey in 1725. Frenchtown in New Jersey bears the mark of early settlers.

New Rochelle, located in the county of Westchester on the north shore of Long Island Sound, seemed to be the great location of the Huguenots in New York. It is said that they landed on the coastline peninsula of Davenport's Neck called "Bauffet's Point" after travelling from England, where they had previously taken refuge on account of religious persecution, four years before the revocation of the Edict of Nantes. They purchased from John Pell, Lord of Pelham Manor, a tract of land consisting of six thousand one hundred acres with the help of Jacob Leisler. It was named New Rochelle after La Rochelle, their former strong-hold in France. A small wooden church was first erected in the community, followed by a second church that was built of stone. Previous to its erection, the strong men would often walk twenty-three miles on Saturday evening, the distance by the road from New Rochelle to New York, to attend the Sunday service. The church was eventually replaced by a third, Trinity-St. Paul's Episcopal Church, which contains heirlooms including the original bell from the French Huguenot Church Eglise du St. Esperit on Pine Street in New York City, which is preserved as a relic in the tower room. The Huguenot cemetery, or the "Huguenot Burial Ground", has since been recognised as a historic cemetery that is the final resting place for a wide range of the Huguenot founders, early settlers and prominent citizens dating back more than three centuries.

Some Huguenot immigrants settled in central and eastern Pennsylvania. They assimilated with the predominantly Pennsylvania German settlers of the area.

In 1700 several hundred French Huguenots migrated from England to the colony of Virginia, where the King William III of England had promised them land grants in Lower Norfolk County. When they arrived, colonial authorities offered them instead land 20 miles above the falls of the James River, at the abandoned Monacan village known as Manakin Town, now in Goochland County. Some settlers landed in present-day Chesterfield County. On 12 May 1705, the Virginia General Assembly passed an act to naturalise the 148 Huguenots still resident at Manakintown. Of the original 390 settlers in the isolated settlement, many had died; others lived outside town on farms in the English style; and others moved to different areas. Gradually they intermarried with their English neighbours. Through the 18th and 19th centuries, descendants of the French migrated west into the Piedmont, and across the Appalachian Mountains into the West of what became Kentucky, Tennessee, Missouri, and other states. In the Manakintown area, the Huguenot Memorial Bridge across the James River and Huguenot Road were named in their honour, as were many local features, including several schools, including Huguenot High School.

In the early years, many Huguenots also settled in the area of present-day Charleston, South Carolina. In 1685, Rev. Elie Prioleau from the town of Pons in France was among the first to settle there. He became pastor of the first Huguenot church in North America in that city. After the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685, several Huguenots including Edmund Bohun of Suffolk, England, Pierre Bacot of Touraine France, Jean Postell of Dieppe France, Alexander Pepin, Antoine Poitevin of Orsement France, and Jacques de Bordeaux of Grenoble, immigrated to the Charleston Orange district. They were very successful at marriage and property speculation. After petitioning the British Crown in 1697 for the right to own land in the Baronies, they prospered as slave owners on the Cooper, Ashepoo, Ashley and Santee River plantations they purchased from the British Landgrave Edmund Bellinger. Some of their descendants moved into the Deep South and Texas, where they developed new plantations.

The French Huguenot Church of Charleston, which remains independent, is the oldest continuously active Huguenot congregation in the United States. L'Église du Saint-Esprit in New York, founded in 1628, is older, but it left the French Reformed movement in 1804 to become part of the Episcopal Church.

Most of the Huguenot congregations (or individuals) in North America eventually affiliated with other Protestant denominations with more numerous members. The Huguenots adapted quickly and often married outside their immediate French communities. Their descendants in many families continue to use French first names and surnames for their children. Assimilated, the French made numerous contributions to United States economic life, especially as merchants and artisans in the late Colonial and early Federal periods. For example, Eleuthère Irénée du Pont, a former student of Lavoisier, established the Eleutherian gunpowder mills. Howard Hughes, famed investor, pilot, film director, and philanthropist, was also of Huguenot descent and descendant from Rev. John Gano.

Paul Revere was descended from Huguenot refugees, as was Henry Laurens, who signed the Articles of Confederation for South Carolina. Other descendants of Huguenots included Jack Jouett, who made the ride from Cuckoo Tavern to warn Thomas Jefferson and others that Tarleton and his men were on their way to arrest him for crimes against the king; Reverend John Gano, a Revolutionary War chaplain and spiritual advisor to George Washington ; Francis Marion ; and a number of other leaders of the American Revolution and later statesmen. The last active Huguenot congregation in North America worships in Charleston, South Carolina, at a church that dates to 1844. The Huguenot Society of America maintains the Manakin Episcopal Church in Virginia as a historic shrine with occasional services. The Society has chapters in numerous states, with the one in Texas being the largest.

After the British Conquest of New France, British authorities in Lower Canada tried to encourage Huguenot immigration in an attempt to promote a Francophone Protestant Church in the region, hoping that French-speaking Protestants would be more loyal clergy than those of Roman Catholicism. While a small number of Huguenots did come, the majority switched from speaking French to English. As a result, Protestants are still a religious minority in Quebec today.

The Huguenots originally spoke French on their arrival in the American colonies, but after two or three generations, they had switched to English. They did not promote French-language schools or publications and "lost" their historic identity. In upstate New York, they merged with the Dutch Reformed community and switched first to Dutch and then, according to church records, to English by around 1800. In colonial New York City, they switched from French to English or Dutch by 1730.

Some Huguenots fought in the Low Countries alongside the Dutch against Spain during the first years of the Dutch Revolt (1568–1609). The Dutch Republic rapidly became a destination for Huguenot exiles. Early ties were already visible in the Apologie of William the Silent, condemning the Spanish Inquisition, which was written by his court minister, the Huguenot Pierre L'Oyseleur, lord of Villiers. Louise de Coligny, daughter of the murdered Huguenot leader Gaspard II de Coligny, married William the Silent, leader of the Dutch (Calvinist) revolt against Spanish (Catholic) rule. As both spoke French in daily life, their court church in the Prinsenhof in Delft held services in French. The practice has continued to the present day. The Prinsenhof is one of the 14 active Walloon churches of the Dutch Reformed Church (now of the Protestant Church in the Netherlands). The ties between Huguenots and the Dutch Republic's military and political leadership, the House of Orange-Nassau, which existed since the early days of the Dutch Revolt, helped support the many early settlements of Huguenots in the Dutch Republic's colonies. They settled at the Cape of Good Hope in South Africa and New Netherland in North America.

Stadtholder William III of Orange, who later became King of England, emerged as the strongest opponent of King Louis XIV after the French attacked the Dutch Republic in 1672. William formed the League of Augsburg as a coalition to oppose Louis and the French state. Consequently, many Huguenots considered the wealthy and Calvinist-controlled Dutch Republic, which also happened to lead the opposition to Louis XIV, as the most attractive country for exile after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes. They also found many French-speaking Calvinist churches there (which were called the " Walloon churches ").

After the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685, the Dutch Republic received the largest group of Huguenot refugees, an estimated total of 75,000 to 100,000 people. This was a huge influx, as the entire population of the Dutch Republic amounted to c. 2 million at that time. In 1705, Amsterdam and the area of West Frisia were the first areas to provide full citizenship rights to Huguenot immigrants, followed by the whole Dutch Republic in 1715. Huguenots intermarried with Dutch from the outset.

One of the most prominent Huguenot refugees in the Netherlands was Pierre Bayle. He started teaching in Rotterdam, where he finished writing and publishing his multi-volume masterpiece, Historical and Critical Dictionary. It became one of the 100 foundational texts of the United States Library of Congress. Some Huguenot descendants in the Netherlands may be noted by French family names, although they typically use Dutch given names. Due to the Huguenots' early ties with the leadership of the Dutch Revolt and their own participation, some of the Dutch patriciate are of part-Huguenot descent. Some Huguenot families have kept alive various traditions, such as the celebration and feast of their patron Saint Nicolas, similar to the Dutch Sint Nicolaas (Sinterklaas) feast.

As a major Protestant nation, England patronized and helped protect Huguenots since at least the mid-1500s. Kent hosted the first congregation of Huguenots in England around 1548. During the reign of Mary I (1553–1558) they were expelled but, with the accession of Elizabeth I, returned to London in 1559 and Kent in 1561. An early group of Huguenots settled in Colchester in 1565. There was a small naval Anglo-French War (1627–1629), in which the English supported the French Huguenots against King Louis XIII. London financed the emigration of many to England and its colonies around 1700. Some 40,000–50,000 settled in England, mostly in towns near the sea in the southern districts, with the largest concentration in London where they constituted about 5% of the total population in 1700. Many others went to the American colonies, especially South Carolina. The immigrants included many skilled craftsmen and entrepreneurs who facilitated the economic modernization of their new home, in an era when economic innovations were transferred by people rather than through printed works. The British government ignored the complaints made by local craftsmen about the favoritism shown to foreigners. The immigrants assimilated well in terms of using English, joining the Church of England, intermarriage and business success. They founded the silk industry in England. Many became private tutors, schoolmasters, travelling tutors and owners of riding schools, where they were hired by the upper class.

Both before and after the 1708 passage of the Foreign Protestants Naturalization Act, an estimated 50,000 Protestant Walloons and French Huguenots fled to England, with many moving on to Ireland and elsewhere. In relative terms, this was one of the largest waves of immigration ever of a single ethnic community to Britain. Andrew Lortie (born André Lortie), a leading Huguenot theologian and writer who led the exiled community in London, became known for articulating their criticism of the Pope and the doctrine of transubstantiation during Mass.

Of the refugees who arrived on the Kent coast, many gravitated towards Canterbury, then the county's Calvinist hub. Many Walloon and Huguenot families were granted asylum there. Edward VI granted them the whole of the western crypt of Canterbury Cathedral for worship. In 1825, this privilege was reduced to the south aisle and in 1895 to the former chantry chapel of the Black Prince. Services are still held there in French according to the Reformed tradition every Sunday at 15:00.

Other evidence of the Walloons and Huguenots in Canterbury includes a block of houses in Turnagain Lane, where weavers' windows survive on the top floor, as many Huguenots worked as weavers. The Weavers, a half-timbered house by the river, was the site of a weaving school from around 1574 to about 1830. (It has been adapted as a restaurant — see illustration above. The house derives its name from a weaving school which was moved there in 1899, reviving an earlier use.) Other refugees practiced a variety of occupations necessary to sustain the community as distinct from the indigenous population. Such economic separation was the condition of the refugees' initial acceptance in the city. They also settled elsewhere in Kent, particularly Sandwich, Faversham and Maidstone — towns in which there used to be refugee churches.

The French Protestant Church of London was established by Royal Charter in 1550. It is now located at Soho Square. Huguenot refugees flocked to Shoreditch, London. They established a major weaving industry in and around Spitalfields (see Petticoat Lane and the Tenterground) in East London. In Wandsworth, their gardening skills benefited the Battersea market gardens. The flight of Huguenot refugees from Tours, France drew off most of the workers of its great silk mills, which they had built. Some of these immigrants moved to Norwich, which had accommodated an earlier settlement of Walloon weavers. The French added to the existing immigrant population, then comprising about a third of the population of the city.

Some Huguenots settled in Bedfordshire, one of the main centres of the British lace industry at the time. Although some sources have asserted that some of these refugees were lacemakers and contributed to the East Midlands lace industry, this is contentious. The only reference to immigrant lace makers in this period is of twenty-five widows who settled in Dover, and there is no contemporary documentation to support there being Huguenot lace makers in Bedfordshire. The implication that the style of lace known as "Bucks Point" demonstrates a Huguenot influence, being a "combination of Mechlin patterns on Lille ground", is fallacious: what is now known as Mechlin lace did not develop until the 1690s and lace with Mechlin patterns and Lille ground did not appear until c. 1770s–1790s, when it later became widely copied throughout Europe.

Many Huguenots from the Lorraine region also eventually settled in the area around Stourbridge in the modern-day West Midlands, where they found the raw materials and fuel to continue their glassmaking tradition. Anglicised names such as Tyzack, Henzey and Tittery are regularly found amongst the early glassmakers, and the region went on to become one of the most important glass regions in the country.

Winston Churchill was the most prominent Briton of Huguenot descent, deriving from the Huguenots who went to the colonies; his American grandfather was Leonard Jerome.

Following the French Crown's revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1598, many Huguenots settled in Ireland, encouraged by an act of Parliament in 1662 for Protestants settling in Ireland. Huguenot regiments fought for William of Orange in the Williamite War in Ireland, for which they were rewarded with land grants and titles, many settling in Dublin. Significant Huguenot settlements were in Dublin, Cork, Portarlington, Lisburn, Waterford and Youghal. Smaller settlements, which included Killeshandra in County Cavan, contributed to the expansion of flax cultivation and the growth of the Irish linen industry.

For over 150 years, Huguenots were allowed to hold their services in the Lady Chapel in St. Patrick's Cathedral. A Huguenot cemetery is located in the centre of Dublin, off St. Stephen's Green. Prior to its establishment, Huguenots used the Cabbage Garden near the cathedral. Another Huguenot cemetery is located off French Church Street in Cork.

A number of Huguenots served as mayors in Dublin (1666–1667 and 1669–1670), Cork (1662, 1682), Youghal (1683, 1721 and 1752) and Waterford. Numerous signs of Huguenot presence can still be seen, with names still in use, and with areas of the main towns and cities named after the people who settled there. Examples include the Huguenot District and French Church Street in Cork City ; and D'Olier Street in Dublin, named after a High Sheriff and one of the founders of the Bank of Ireland. A French church in Portarlington dates back to 1696, and was built to serve the significant new Huguenot community in the town. At the time, they constituted the majority of the townspeople.

One of the more notable Huguenot descendants in Ireland was Seán Lemass (1899–1971), who was appointed as Taoiseach, serving from 1959 until 1966. Additionally, Irish Gothic author Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu (1814–1873) was of Huguenot descent.

With the precedent of a historical alliance — the Auld Alliance — between Scotland and France, Huguenots were mostly welcomed to, and found refuge in, the nation from around the year 1700. Although they did not settle in Scotland in such significant numbers as in other regions of Britain and Ireland, Huguenots have been romanticised and are generally considered to have contributed greatly to Scottish culture. John Arnold Fleming wrote extensively of the French Protestant group's impact on the nation in his 1953 Huguenot Influence in Scotland, while sociologist Abraham Lavender, who has explored how the ethnic group transformed over generations "from Mediterranean Catholics to White Anglo-Saxon Protestants", has analyzed how Huguenot adherence to Calvinist customs helped facilitate compatibility with the Scottish people.

A number of French Huguenots settled in Wales, in the upper Rhymney valley of the current Caerphilly County Borough. The community they created there is still known as Fleur de Lys (the symbol of France), an unusual French village name in the heart of the valleys of Wales. Nearby villages are Hengoed, and Ystrad Mynach. Apart from the French village name and that of the local rugby team, Fleur De Lys RFC, little remains of the French heritage.

Around 1685, Huguenot refugees found a haven in the Lutheran and Reformed states in Germany and Scandinavia. Nearly 50,000 Huguenots established themselves in Germany, 20,000 of whom were welcomed in Brandenburg-Prussia, where Frederick William (r. 1640–1688), granted them special privileges (Edict of Potsdam of 1685) and churches in which to worship (such as the Church of St. Peter and St. Paul, Angermünde and the French Church, Berlin). The Huguenots furnished two new regiments of his army: the Altpreußische Infantry Regiments No. 13 (Regiment on foot Varenne) and 15 (Regiment on foot Wylich). Another 4,000 Huguenots settled in the German territories of Baden, Franconia (Principality of Bayreuth, Principality of Ansbach), Landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel, Duchy of Württemberg, in the Wetterau Association of Imperial Counts, in the Palatinate and Palatine Zweibrücken, in the Rhine-Main-Area (Frankfurt), in modern-day Saarland ; and 1,500 found refuge in Hamburg, Bremen and Lower Saxony. Three hundred refugees were granted asylum at the court of George William, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg in Celle.

In Berlin, the Huguenots created two new neighborhoods: Dorotheenstadt and Friedrichstadt. By 1700 one fifth of the city's population was French-speaking. The Berlin Huguenots preserved the French language in their church services for over 100 years. They ultimately decided to switch to German in protest against the occupation of Prussia by Napoleon in 1806–1807. Many of their descendants rose to positions of prominence. Several congregations were founded throughout Germany and Scandinavia, such as those of Fredericia (Denmark), Berlin, Stockholm, Hamburg, Frankfurt, Helsinki, and Emden.

Prince Louis de Condé, along with his sons Daniel and Osias, arranged with Count Ludwig von Nassau-Saarbrücken to establish a Huguenot community in present-day Saarland in 1604. The Count supported mercantilism and welcomed technically skilled immigrants into his lands, regardless of their religion. The Condés established a thriving glass-making works, which provided wealth to the principality for many years. Other founding families created enterprises based on textiles and such traditional Huguenot occupations in France. The community and its congregation remain active to this day, with descendants of many of the founding families still living in the region. Some members of this community emigrated to the United States in the 1890s.

In Bad Karlshafen, Hessen, Germany, is the Huguenot Museum and Huguenot archive. The collection includes family histories, a library, and a picture archive.

After the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre of 1572, some persecuted Huguenots fled to Poland, taking advantage of its religious tolerance confirmed by the Warsaw Confederation, marking the first significant historical wave of French migration to Poland.

The exodus of Huguenots from France created a brain drain, as many of them had occupied important places in society. The kingdom did not fully recover for years. The French crown's refusal to allow non-Catholics to settle in New France may help to explain that colony's low population compared to that of the neighboring British colonies, which opened settlement to religious dissenters. By the start of the French and Indian War, the North American front of the Seven Years' War, a sizeable population of Huguenot descent lived in the British colonies, and many participated in the British defeat of New France in 1759–1760.

Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg, invited Huguenots to settle in his realms, and a number of their descendants rose to positions of prominence in Prussia. Several prominent German military, cultural and political figures were ethnic Huguenots, including the poet Theodor Fontane, General Hermann von François, the hero of the First World War 's Battle of Tannenberg, Luftwaffe general and fighter ace Adolf Galland, the Luftwaffe flying ace Hans-Joachim Marseille, WWII Wehrmacht Lieutenant Colonel/ Inspector General of the Bundeswehr Ulrich de Maizière and the famed U-boat Captains Lothar von Arnauld de la Perière and Wilhelm Souchon. Related to Ulrich de Maizière were also the last prime minister of East Germany, Lothar de Maizière and the former German Federal Minister of the Interior, Thomas de Maizière. A 2014 study in the American Economic Review linked Huguenot migration to Prussia with a boost in industrial productivity.

The persecution and the flight of the Huguenots greatly damaged the reputation of Louis XIV abroad, particularly in England. Both kingdoms, which had enjoyed peaceful relations until 1685, became bitter enemies and fought each other in a series of wars, called the " Second Hundred Years' War " by some historians, from 1689 onward.

In October 1985, to commemorate the tricentenary of the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, President François Mitterrand of France announced a formal apology to the descendants of Huguenots around the world. At the same time, the government released a special postage stamp in their honour reading "France is the home of the Huguenots" (Accueil des Huguenots).

Huguenots' legacy persists both in France and abroad.

The Genevan utopian tradition, rooted in French Calvinism, combined religious conviction with civic responsibility, laying early groundwork for modern capitalism and welfare economics. Max Weber famously identified the Calvinist "Protestant ethic" as foundational to capitalist development. In Geneva, communal support, education, and moral discipline informed a civic model that inspired Enlightenment thinkers and later economic theorists. As Huguenot ideals spread to Protestant regions, they influenced American and European welfare institutions. Thinkers like J.S. Mill and Karl Marx reinterpreted this moral framework, promoting visions of economic justice. In the U.S., similar values are enshrined in the Constitution's call to "promote the general Welfare". The legacy of Genevan utopianism persists in debates over ethical capitalism, redistribution, and social policy.

Several French Protestant churches are descended from or tied to the Huguenots, including:

The French word huissier (" doorman ", from huis, an archaic term for a door) designates ceremonial offices in France and Switzerland.

In French government ministries and Parliament, a huissier is an employee who provides general service to the minister or assembly (transmitting messages, handling ballot boxes, etc.). Traditionally, they wear a chain around the neck, because their original function was to lock and unlock doors.

Before the Revolution, the title could be a court office in the household of royalty, as a type of valet de chambre.

In Switzerland, huissier is the French equivalent of German Weibel (also Amtsweibel), the term for a ceremonial office in Swiss cantonal and federal governments, parliaments, and courts of law. At the federal level, the office is known as Bundesweibel, at the cantonal level as Standesweibel for governments, Ratsweibel for parliaments and Gerichtsweibel for courts of law. Some cities also have office at the communal level (Stadtweibel).

Swiss huissiers in their official capacities wear ceremonial robes with the heraldic colours of the entity they represent, Bundesweibel in red and white, cantonal Weibel in cantonal colours (Standesfarben).

A huissier de justice (French pronunciation: [ ɥisje də ʒystis ] ; literally French for "justice usher"), sometimes translated to judicial officer, or gerechtsdeurwaarder in Dutch, is an officer of the court in France, Luxembourg, Belgium, Quebec, and Switzerland. The officer is appointed by a magistrate of the court (or in France, by the Minister of Justice) and holds a monopoly on the service and execution of court decisions and enforceable instruments. Huissiers de justice also serve as formal witnesses to events (constat d'huissier) in the manner of a notary public.

There is no exactly similar position in the English or American legal system, but the post is often translated as bailiff or process server because of the roughly similar function.

In their role as a member of the legal profession they are authorized to serve process, and as such are responsible for delivering legal documents and authenticating the parties to whom they are delivered; proceed in the enforcement and recovery of any court and legal claims, including bankruptcy, property claims, seizures, and evictions ; issue court summonses (assignments and quotations); and perform other actions. They may also exercise authorizations of a Court of Appeals, and act in insurance and property actions.

Further, they have the sole right to call police hearings to guarantee execution of court orders, and to conduct other activities such as amicable settlements, draft findings of private deeds, and offer limited legal advice. They are authorized to authenticate character findings, which may serve as evidence during litigation. Some elements of their statements cannot be challenged except by way of improbation.

Human rights in France are contained in the preamble of the Constitution of the French Fifth Republic, founded in 1958, and the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen. France has also ratified the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as well as the European Convention on Human Rights 1960 and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (2000). All these international law instruments take precedence on national legislation. However, human rights abuses take place nevertheless. The state of detention centres for unauthorized migrants who have received an order of deportation has also been criticized.

During the French Revolution, deputies from the Third Estate drafted the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, voted by the General Estates on 26 August 1789. Inspired by the philosophy of the Enlightenment and by the 1776 United States Declaration of Independence – Lafayette participated in the drafting of both – in that it proclaims the " inalienable rights of Man ", and is protected by a "Supreme Being", it mainly granted to the people the right of freedom of expression, of freedom of thought, freedom of association, liberty, security and the protection of private property. France signed and ratified the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 as well as all Geneva Conventions.

In 2010, the French government launched a programme of forced deportation of the Roma. These deportations have been heavily criticised by many human rights and international political organisations. The Council of Europe has condemned the expulsions, calling them "contrary to human dignity". Those who accepted to leave France received €300 per adult and €100 per child under the condition that they sign a declaration stating they will not try to come back to France. The French Government had the goal of deporting 30,000 Roma in 2011.

In conventional terms, France does not have censorship laws. Historically, before its repeal under François Mitterrand in the early 1980s, the ORTF had a significant influence on the mass media. The CSA that has since replaced it is concerned with the respect of French law in the media, in particular the 1990 Gayssot Act which prohibits racist and/or religious hate speech, and time period allocated to each political party during pre-electoral periods. Furthermore, other laws prohibit homophobic hate speech, and a 1970 law prohibits the advocacy of illegal drugs.

In 2004, the Inspector General of the National Police received 469 registered complaints about illegitimate police violence during the first 11 months of the year, down from 500 during the same period in 2003. There were 59 confirmed cases of police violence, compared to 65 in the previous year. In April 2004, the ECHR condemned the Government for "inhumane and degrading treatments" in the 1997 case of a teenager beaten while in police custody. The court ordered the Government to pay Giovanni Rivas $20,500 (15,000 euros) in damages and $13,500 (10,000 euros) in court costs. The head of the police station in Saint-Denis, near Paris, was forced to resign after allegations of rape and other violations committed by the police force under his command. Nine investigations concerning police abuse in this police station were done in 2005 by the IGS inspection of police.

On 2 December 2020, the French government dissolved the ‘ Collective Against Islamophobia in France ’ (CCIF), an NGO that combats discrimination against Muslims. CCIF's works have been recognised by the Human Rights Watch as well as other international human rights organizations and lawyers to be important in documenting the discriminatory impact of counterterrorism measures.

The "idéal républicain" (republican ideal) intends to achieve equality in rights between French citizens. To this end, in the national census, the collection of statistics regarding ethnicity or religion is forbidden. This has led to some debate over the decline of indigenous minority languages and identity in the French Republic.

According to the Direction centrale des renseignements généraux (Central Directorate of General Intelligence), the former intelligence service of the French police, in 2004 there were 1,513 explicitly racist or antisemitic incidents in France, including 361 acts of violence. Antisemitic incidents were the most numerous, accounting for 950 of the incidents, including 199 violent acts. Anti-Maghreb incidents accounted for 563 incidents, including 162 violent acts. The Paris region was the most affected. 2007 saw an overall decrease of 9% in such incidents.

In May 2019, "inhumane treatment" by France towards the children of French citizens affiliated with Islamic State jihadists stranded in Syria highlighted that Paris was flouting its UN Convention on the Rights of the Child obligations.

Before the Revolution, Standard French (a dialect of Langue d'Oïl) was spoken in only slightly more than half of the territory of France. In western Brittany, southern Flanders, Alsace-Lorraine and most of the southern half of France (Occitania), local people had their own distinct cultures. Breton is a Celtic language akin to Welsh, Alsace-Lorraine was part of the German-speaking world, while Occitan is a separate Romance language. With the centralization of the Republic that accompanied the Revolution, the state imposed the teaching of Standard French in all schools and universities, and the exclusive use of French in government institutions.

Promotion of a local language or culture has finally been allowed, but under severe restrictions which effectively make it difficult to publish, organize classes, or media broadcasts.

Freedom of religion in France is guaranteed by the constitutional rights set forth in the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen. In practice, however, the government restricts religious expression in the public square. For example, it is typically illegal to wear religious symbols in public schools such as crosses or hijabs. In addition, France from the Third Republic onwards has had a long tradition of hostility towards Catholicism, and an almost equally long flirtation with antisemitism.

France legalized women's suffrage on 21 April 1944.

The Neuwirth law legalized birth control methods on 28 December 1967. Youths were given anonymous and free access to them in 1974.

Abortion was legalized in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy by the Veil law on 17 January 1975.

Homosexuality was decriminalized during the Revolution by the law of 25 September – 6 October 1791.

On 6 August 1942 Vichy government introduced a discriminative law in penal code: article 334 (moved to article 331 on 8 February 1945 by the Provisional Government of the French Republic) increased age of consent to 21 for homosexual relations. This law remained valid until 4 August 1982.

A less known discriminative law (ordonnance n°60-1245 on 1960, 25 November) doubled penalty for indecent exposure in case of homosexual activity, between 1960 and 1980 (penal code article 330). This text is also known as the Mirguet amendment.

The pacte civil de solidarité, a form of civil union, introduced in 1999, allows same-sex unions.

A bill granting same-sex couples the right to marry and jointly adopt children was adopted by the National Assembly on 18 May 2013 by Law 2013-404

Intersex people in France face significant gaps in protection from non-consensual medical interventions and protection from discrimination. In response to pressure from intersex activists and recommendations by United Nations Treaty Bodies, the Senate published an inquiry into the treatment of intersex people in February 2017. It calls for significant changes to some medical practices, and also reparations for individuals subjected to coercive medical treatment. An individual, Gaëtan Schmitt, has taken legal action to obtain civil status as "neutral sex" ("sexe neutre") but, in May 2017, this was rejected by the Court of Cassation.

There has been a growing awareness of human trafficking as a human rights issue in Europe (see main article: trafficking in human beings). The end of communism and collapse of the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia has contributed to an increase in human trafficking, with the majority of victims being women forced into prostitution. France is a transit and destination country for persons, primarily women, trafficked mainly from Central and Eastern Europe and from Africa for the purpose of labour exploitation and sexual exploitation. The Government of France fully complies with the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking. The French government was called on to make sure that implementation of the 2003 Domestic Security Law did not result in re-victimizing trafficking victims by improving the screening of foreign prostitutes so that trafficking victims are properly identified and protected from their traffickers.

France traditionally claims to act as the protector of its nationals abroad. This mission, framed by the 1963 Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, involves providing assistance in cases of arrest, conviction, or violations of fundamental rights.

Several parliamentary reports and NGOs, however, have noted gaps between this principle and actual practice, particularly in politically sensitive situations. A prominent case is that of Franco-Algerian citizen Tayeb Benabderrahmane, who was arrested by in Doha in January 2020. He claims to have been arbitrarily detained for 307 days without effective consular assistance or access to an independent lawyer. Released in October 2020 on condition that he sign a confidentiality protocol with Nasser Al-Khelaïfi, he filed a complaint in France in 2022 for kidnapping and torture.

On 31 May 2023, he was sentenced in absentia to death for espionage by a Qatari criminal court. The French Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs was informed of this judgment in the summer of 2023, but did not communicate it to Benabderrahmane, who only became aware of it in November 2023. The lack of any public reaction highlighted a possible failure of diplomatic protection.

The collection, storage, and use of personal data is regulated by the CNIL whose mission is to enforce compliance with the data privacy law.

Human rights organizations operating in France include:

Renaissance humanism began to develop in France in the 15th century, after the Hundred Years' War between France and England ended, and spreading from Italy, but did not become a distinct movement until the 16th century.

In 1464, Raoul Lefèvre composed for the Duke of Burgundy a history of Troy. At that time the French still regarded themselves as descendants of Hector. If we except the Sorbonne, the University of Paris, none of the French universities took part in the movement. Individual writers and printing-presses at Paris, Lyon, Rouen and other cities became its centres and sources. Guillaume Fichet and Robert Gaguin are usually looked upon as the first French Humanists. Fichet introduced "the eloquence of Rome" at Paris and set up a press at the Sorbonne. He corresponded with Bessarion and had in his library volumes of Petrarch, Guarino of Verona and other Italians. Gaguin copied and corrected Suetonius in 1468 and other Latin authors. Poggio Bracciolini 's jest book and some of Valla 's writings were translated into French. In the reign of Louis XI, who gloried in the title "the first Christian king", French poets celebrated his deeds. The homage of royalty took in part the place among the literary men of France that the cult of antiquity occupied in Italy.

Ancient Greek, which had been completely forgotten in France, had its first teachers in Gregory Tifernas, who reached Paris, 1458, Janus Lascaris, who returned with Charles VIII, and Hermonymus of Sparta, who had Johann Reuchlin and Guilielmus Budaeus (known variously as William Budaeus (English), Guillaume Budé (French) and Guilielmus Budaeus (Latin)) among his scholars. An impetus was given to the new studies by the Italian, Hieronymus Aleander, afterwards famous for his association with Martin Luther at Worms. He lectured in Paris, 1509, on Plato and issued a Latino-Greek lexicon. In 1512 his pupil, Vatable, published the Greek grammar of Manuel Chrysoloras. Budaeus, perhaps the foremost Greek scholar of his day, founded the Collège Royal, 1530, and finally induced Francis I to provide for instruction in Biblical Hebrew and Greek. The University of Paris at the close of the 14th century was sunk into a low condition and Erasmus bitterly complained of the food, the morals and the intellectual standards of the Collège de Montaigu which he attended. Budaeus urged the combination of the study of the Scriptures with the study of the classics and exclaimed of the Gospel of John, "What is it, if not the almost perfect sanctuary of the truth!"

Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples studied at the Universities of Paris, Pavia, Padua and Cologne and, for longer or shorter periods, tarried in the greater Italian cities. He knew Greek and some Hebrew. From 1492 to 1506 he was engaged in editing the works of Aristotle and Raymundus Lullus and then, under the protection of Guillaume Briçonnet, Bishop of Meaux, he turned his attention to theology. It was his purpose to offset the Sentences of Peter the Lombard by a system of theology giving only what the Scriptures teach. In 1509, he published the Psalterum quintuplex, a combination of five Latin versions of the Psalms, including a revision and a commentary by his own hand. In 1512, he issued a revised Latin translation of the Pauline Epistles with commentary. In this work, he asserted the authority of the Bible and the doctrine of justification by faith, without appreciating, however, the far-reaching significance of the latter opinion. Three years after the appearance of Luther's New Testament, Lefèvre's French translation appeared, 1523. It was made from the Vulgate, as was his translation of the Old Testament, 1528. In 1522 and 1525, appeared his commentaries on the four Gospels and the Catholic Epistles. The former was put on the Index by the Sorbonne. The opposition to the free spirit of inquiry and to the Reformation, which the Sorbonne stirred up and French royalty adopted, forced him to flee to Strassburg and then to the liberal court of Marguerite de Navarre.

Among those who came into contact with Lefèvre were Guillaume Farel and John Calvin, the Reformers of Geneva. Another student of Lefèvre was the anatomist Jacques Dubois. In the meantime Clément Marot, 1496–1544, the first true poet of the French literary revival, was composing his French versification of the Psalms and of Ovid 's Metamorphoses. The Psalms were sung for pleasure by French princes and later for worship in Geneva and by the Huguenots. When Calvin studied the humanities and law at Bourges, Orléans and Paris, about 1520, he had for teachers Maturin Cordier and Pierre de L'Estoile, the canonists, and Melchior Wolmar, teacher of Greek, whose names the future Reformer records with gratitude and respect.

The Hôtel du département des Bouches-du-Rhône, known as Le Grand Bleu, is the headquarters and council chambers of the Conseil General of Bouches-du-Rhône in Marseille, France. The Sterling Prize-nominated building, noted for its distinct ultramarine colour, was designed by architects Will Alsop and Jan Störmer as the new regional government headquarters. Located north of Marseille's city centre, in the Saint-Just district, the High-Tech structure was designed to combine dispersed administrative functions into a single site. The winner of an international architecture competition launched in 1989, which in its final round saw Alsop and John Lyall compete versus established architectural practice Foster + Partners, the Hôtel du département was designed with architectural artist Brian Clarke, who conceived the colouration and treatment of the facade as a “skin of art”. The landmark High-tech building, the largest public building to be constructed in the French provinces in the twentieth century, was built in 26 months, opening in 1994.

At the time of the brief for the competition, the department council had its administrative functions dispersed over 23 locations, and the centralisation of these activities was a key element in the design considerations for the open competition, which took place in two stages. Prior to the close of the competition, Alsop and Störmer's stage one proposal model was exhibited at the Arc-en-Rêve Centre d'Architecture, Bordeaux, in 1991; the final version of the design, coloured blue by artist Brian Clarke, and with the facade artwork resolved, was exhibited after the building's construction at The Mayor Gallery in London, and the Tony Shafrazi Gallery in New York.

Construction was begun on the site in Marseille's northern suburbs in 1991, and was completed in 1994; the building was officially inaugurated in September of that year. The Hôtel du Département is the largest public building in Marseille.

The building developed its visual identity through the design process; Clarke and Alsop's final version, submitted as the winning competition entry, shifted from an all-white to an all-blue scheme. The completed building is externally clad in blue-coloured glass, rendered through a novel technique of ceramic glazing devised by Clarke, to produce a 'skin of art' across the entire building; along the west elevation is a 1,200-square-metre (13,000 sq ft) linear composition by Clarke in bands of ceramic glaze screenprinted onto the panels of the facade. The colour, which approximates Yves Klein blue, is cited by the architects as the portion of the design process that took the most time and consideration to resolve.

The building is formed of two administrative blocks linked by an atrial space, and a separate building, the 'Deliberatif' or debating chamber, abuting onto the two blocks. The building is notable for its distinctive X-shaped concrete support columns or pilotis, cast in situ.

The Hôtel du Timbre, full name Hôtel du Timbre, de l'Enregistrement et des Domaines (lit. ' Stamp, Registration and Public Lands Building '), is a public building on 9–13, rue de la Banque [ fr ] in Paris, France. Originally built as a facility to produce stamped paper (French : papier timbré), it was in its time one of the largest manufacturing sites in Paris.

The Hôtel du Timbre was created as part of the larger urban development project associated with the northwards extension of the rue de la Banque, initiated by royal decree of 1844 on land previously used in part by the convent of discalced Augustinians (of which the church survives as Notre-Dame-des-Victoires). The land stood between the Bank of France, from which the street derived its name, and the stock exchange building, in the heart of what was then Paris's financial district. As part of that endeavor, architect Paul Lelong [ fr ] designed three prominent public buildings intended to be erected simultaneously, namely the Hôtel du Timbre on the new street's western side, and on the western side, the town hall of Paris 2nd arrondissement and adjacent barracks for the garde nationale de Paris [ fr ].

The Hôtel du Timbre was initially intended as a facility to produce and sell stamped paper which at the time was widely used for a number of administrative and commercial proceedings. As such, it replaced a previous hôtel du timbre that stood on rue de la Paix on the location of the former Couvent des Capucines. The importance of the stamp (French : timbre) administration was enhanced by the adoption of new legislation on 1850 that established a stamp duty of 0.5 percent on transactions on stocks, bonds, and insurance policy, and 0.05 percent on government debt instruments.

After Lelong died in 1846, Victor Baltard replaced him as project architect and brought the building to completion. The corresponding civil service relocated from the rue de la Paix in 1848, and the complex was eventually completed in 1852.

The building complex occupies a length of 114 meters on rue de la Banque, punctuated by several pavilions. The central pavilion, ostensibly inspired by church architecture, displays two allegorical medallions with figures representing, respectively, Security and Law, sculpted by Eugène André Oudiné. Between those two, a monumental inscription reading "TIMBRE IMPERIAL MDCCCL" (lit. ' Imperial Stamp 1850 ') which referenced both the applicable legislation (law of 1850) and the imperial regime that was in place by the time of completion in 1852. Because of their political overtones, the lower two lines were later erased, leaving only the word "TIMBRE" visible. Above is a triangular pediment sculpted by Henri Alfred Jacquemart.

By the early 20th century, the administration of Registration and Stamp used the northern section of the complex, while that of Public Lands (Domaines) used the southern part. The stamp duty administration remained in the Hôtel du Timbre until 1973, when it was replaced by a local office of the French tax authorities which itself stayed until 2023. The complex's total floor size eventually reached about ten thousand square meters.

In 2022, the Hôtel du Timbre was auctioned away by the French government. It was purchased in early 2023 by Covéa, an insurance company. In late 2023, a project was approved to convert it into mixed-usage including offices, coworking spaces, apartments, restaurant and retail commerce, on a design by architects Perrot & Richard and Asphalt.

The Iberian Peninsula (IPA : / aɪ ˈ b ɪər i ə n / eye- BEER -ee-ən), also known as Iberia, is a peninsula in southwestern Europe.

Mostly separated from the rest of continental Europe by the Pyrenees, the Iberian Peninsula includes Peninsular Spain and Continental Portugal, which together make up almost all of the region, as well as Andorra, Gibraltar, and a small part of Metropolitan France. With an area of approximately 583,254 square kilometres (225,196 sq mi), and a population of roughly 53 million, it is the second-largest European peninsula by area, after the Scandinavian Peninsula.

The Iberian Peninsula has always been associated with the River Ebro (Ibēros in ancient Greek and Ibērus or Hibērus in Latin). The association was so well known it was hardly necessary to state. For example, Ibēria was the country "this side of the Ibērus" in Strabo. Pliny goes so far as to assert that the Greeks had called "the whole of the peninsula" Hiberia because of the Hiberus River.

The river appears in the Ebro Treaty of 226 BCE between Rome and Carthage, setting the limit of Carthaginian interest at the Ebro. The fullest description of the treaty, stated in Appian, uses Ibērus. With reference to this border, Polybius states that the "native name" is Ibēr, apparently the original word, stripped of its Greek or Latin -os or -us termination.

The early range of these natives, which geographers and historians place from the present southern Spain to the present southern France along the Mediterranean coast, is marked by instances of a readable script expressing a yet unknown language, dubbed " Iberian ". Whether this was the native name or was given to them by the Greeks for their residence near the Ebro remains unknown. Credence in Polybius imposes certain limitations on etymologizing: if the language remains unknown, the meanings of the words, including Iber, must also remain unknown.

In modern Basque, the word ibar means "valley" or "watered meadow", while ibai means "river", but there is no proof connecting the names with Ebro or Iberia.

The word Iberia comes from the Latin word Hiberia originating from the Ancient Greek word Ἰβηρία (Ibēríā), used by Greek geographers under the rule of the Roman Empire to refer to what is known today in English as the Iberian Peninsula. At that time, the name did not describe a single geographical entity or a distinct population; the same name was used for the Kingdom of Iberia, natively known as Kartli in the Caucasus, the core region of what would later become the Kingdom of Georgia.

It was Strabo who first reported the delineation of Iberia from Gaul (Keltikē) by the Pyrenees and included the entire land mass southwest (he says "west") from there. With the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the consolidation of Romance languages, the word "Iberia" continued the Roman word Hiberia and the Greek word Ἰβηρία.

Hecataeus of Miletus was the first known to use the term Iberia, which he wrote about c. 500 BCE. Herodotus of Halicarnassus says of the Phocaeans that "it was they who made the Greeks acquainted with [...] Iberia." According to Strabo, prior historians used Iberia to mean the country "this side of the Ἶβηρος (Ibēros, the Ebro) as far north as the Rhône, but in his day they set the Pyrenees as the limit. Polybius respects that limit, but identifies Iberia as the Mediterranean side as far south as Gibraltar, with the Atlantic side having no name. Elsewhere he says that Saguntum is "on the seaward foot of the range of hills connecting Iberia and Celtiberia."

According to Charles Ebel, the ancient sources in both Latin and Greek use Hispania and Hiberia (Greek: Iberia) as synonyms. The confusion of the words was because of an overlapping in political and geographic perspectives. The Latin word Hiberia, similar to the Greek Iberia, literally translates to "land of the Hiberians". This word was derived from the river Hiberus, now called Ebro or Ebre. Hiber (Iberian) was thus used as a term for peoples living near the river Ebro. The first mention in Roman literature was by the annalist poet Ennius in 200 BCE. Virgil wrote impacatos (H)iberos ("restless Iberi") in his Georgics.

Roman geographers and other prose writers from the time of the late Roman Republic called the entire peninsula Hispania. In Greek and Roman antiquity, the name Hesperia was used for both the Italian and Iberian Peninsula. For the Iberian Peninsula, Hesperia Ultima, referring to its position in the far west, appears as form of disambiguation from the former among Roman writers. Since Roman antiquity, Jews have used the name Sepharad for the peninsula.

As they became politically interested in the former Carthaginian territories, the Romans began to use the names Hispania Citerior and Hispania Ulterior for 'near' and 'far' Hispania. At the time Hispania was made up of three Roman provinces : Hispania Baetica, Hispania Tarraconensis, and Hispania Lusitania. Strabo says that the Romans use Hispania and Iberia synonymously, distinguishing between the near northern and the far southern provinces. The name Iberia was ambiguous, being also the name of the Kingdom of Iberia in the Caucasus.

Whatever languages may generally have been spoken on the peninsula soon gave way to Latin, except for that of the Vascones, which was preserved as a language isolate by the barrier of the Pyrenees.

The modern phrase "Iberian Peninsula" was coined by the French geographer Jean-Baptiste Bory de Saint-Vincent on his 1823 work "Guide du Voyageur en Espagne". Prior to that date, geographers had used the terms 'Spanish Peninsula' or 'Pyrenaean Peninsula'.

The Iberian Peninsula has been inhabited by members of the Homo genus for at least 1.2 million years as remains found in the sites in the Atapuerca Mountains demonstrate. Among these sites is the cave of Gran Dolina, where six hominin skeletons, dated between 780,000 and one million years ago, were found in 1994. Experts have debated whether these skeletons belong to the species Homo erectus, Homo heidelbergensis, or a new species called Homo antecessor.

Around 200,000 BP, during the Lower Paleolithic period, Neanderthals first entered the Iberian Peninsula. Around 70,000 BP, during the Middle Paleolithic period, the last glacial event began and the Neanderthal Mousterian culture was established. Around 37,000 BP, during the Upper Paleolithic, the Neanderthal Châtelperronian cultural period began. Emanating from Southern France, this culture extended into the north of the peninsula. It continued to exist until around 30,000 BP, when Neanderthal man faced extinction.

About 40,000 years ago, anatomically modern humans entered the Iberian Peninsula from across the Pyrenees. On the Iberian Peninsula, modern humans developed a series of different cultures, such as the Aurignacian, Gravettian, Solutrean and Magdalenian cultures, some of them characterized by the complex forms of the art of the Upper Paleolithic.

During the Neolithic expansion, various megalithic cultures developed in the Iberian Peninsula. An open seas navigation culture from the east Mediterranean, called the Cardium culture, also extended its influence to the eastern coasts of the peninsula, possibly as early as the 5th millennium BCE. These people may have had some relation to the subsequent development of the Iberian civilization.

As is the case for most of the rest of Southern Europe, the principal ancestral origin of modern Iberians are Early European Farmers who arrived during the Neolithic. The large predominance of Y-Chromosome Haplogroup R1b, common throughout Western Europe, is testimony to a considerable input from various waves of (predominantly male) Western Steppe Herders from the Pontic–Caspian steppe during the Bronze Age. Iberia experienced a significant genetic turnover, with 100% of the paternal ancestry and 40% of the overall ancestry being replaced by peoples with steppe-related ancestry.

In the Chalcolithic (c. 3000 BCE), a series of complex cultures developed that would give rise to the peninsula's first civilizations and to extensive exchange networks reaching to the Baltic, Middle East and North Africa. Around 2800 – 2700 BCE, the Beaker culture, which produced the Maritime Bell Beaker, probably originated in the vibrant copper-using communities of the Tagus estuary and spread from there to many parts of western Europe.

The Bronze Age began on the Iberian Peninsula in 2100 cal. BC according to radiocarbon datings of several key sites.

Bronze Age cultures developed beginning c. 1800 BCE, when the culture of Los Millares was followed by that of El Argar. During the Early Bronze Age, southeastern Iberia saw the emergence of important settlements, a development that has compelled some archeologists to propose that these settlements indicate the advent of state-level social structures. From this centre, bronze metalworking technology spread to other cultures like the Bronze of Levante, South-Western Iberian Bronze and Las Cogotas.

Preceded by the Chalcolithic sites of Los Millares, the Argaric culture flourished in southeastern Iberia in from 2200 BC to 1550 BC, when depopulation of the area ensued along with disappearing of copper–bronze–arsenic metallurgy. The most accepted model for El Argar has been that of an early state society, most particularly in terms of class division, exploitation, and coercion, with agricultural production, maybe also human labour, controlled by the larger hilltop settlements, and the elite using violence in practical and ideological terms to clamp down on the population. Ecological degradation, landscape opening, fires, pastoralism, and maybe tree cutting for mining have been suggested as reasons for the collapse.

The culture of the motillas developed an early system of groundwater supply plants (the so-called motillas) in the upper Guadiana basin (in the southern meseta) in a context of extreme aridification in the area in the wake of the 4.2-kiloyear climatic event, which roughly coincided with the transition from the Copper Age to the Bronze Age. Increased precipitation and recovery of the water table from about 1800 BC onward should have led to the forsaking of the motillas (which may have flooded) and the redefinition of the relation of the inhabitants of the territory with the environment.

By the Iron Age, starting in the 8th century BCE, the Iberian Peninsula consisted of complex agrarian and urban civilizations, either Pre-Celtic or Celtic (such as the Celtiberians, Gallaeci, Astures, Celtici, Lusitanians and others), the cultures of the Iberians in the eastern and southern zones and the cultures of the Aquitanian in the western portion of the Pyrenees.

As early as the 12th century BCE, the Phoenicians, a thalassocratic civilization originally from the Eastern Mediterranean, began to explore the coastline of the peninsula, interacting with the metal-rich communities in the southwest of the peninsula, contemporarily known as the semi-mythical Tartessos. Around 1100 BCE, Phoenician merchants from Tyre founded the trading colony of Gadir. Phoenicians established a permanent trading port in the Gadir colony c. 800 BCE in response to the increasing demand of silver from the Assyrian Empire.

The seafaring Phoenicians, Greeks and Carthaginians successively settled along the Mediterranean coast and founded trading colonies there over several centuries. While early Greek trade activities in the Western Mediterranean trace back the 8th century BCE, it was not until the 6th century BCE when Phocaeans founded Massalia and Emporion, and thus their footprint on the eastern and northeastern seaboard of the Iberian Peninsula accrued.

Together with the presence of Phoenician and Greek epigraphy, several paleohispanic scripts developed in the Iberian Peninsula along the 1st millennium BCE. The development of a primordial paleohispanic script antecessor to the rest of paleohispanic scripts (originally supposed to be a non-redundant semi-syllabary) derived from the Phoenician alphabet and originated in Southwestern Iberia by the 7th century BCE has been tentatively proposed. The severing of links with Tyre prompted an increase of relations of Phoenician-Punic Gadir with Carthage. The nature of the relationship of the Far West Phoenicians with Carthage has been a moot question in academia, with historiographical approaches ranging in between a straight Carthaginian hegemony over Gadir and a more autonomous Phoenician Far West.

In 348 BCE, the territories of the Iberian Peninsula were formally put under the Carthaginian sphere of influence under the purview of the terms of the second treaty between Rome and Carthage. Following the Carthaginian loss of Sicily and Sardinia to the Romans, the Barcids went on to militarily conquer the peninsular territories in 237 BCE, proceeding to put coastal Iberians and Turdetani as well as some Celtic inland peoples under their grip, and founding Akra Leuké [ es ] and Qart-Hadast.

In 218 BCE, during the Second Punic War against the Carthaginians, the first Roman troops occupied the Iberian Peninsula, known to them as Hispania. After 197, the territories of the peninsula most accustomed to external contact and with the most urban tradition (the Mediterranean Coast and the Guadalquivir Valley) were divided by Romans into Hispania Ulterior and Hispania Citerior. Local rebellions were quelled, with a 195 Roman campaign under Cato the Elder ravaging hotspots of resistance in the northeastern Ebro Valley and beyond.

The threat to Roman interests posed by Celtiberians and Lusitanians in uncontrolled territories lingered on. Further wars of indigenous resistance, such as the Celtiberian Wars and the Lusitanian War, were fought in the 2nd century. Urban growth took place, and population progressively moved from hillforts to the plains.

An example of the interaction of slaving and ecocide, the aftermath of the conquest increased mining extractive processes in the southwest of the peninsula, which required a massive number of forced laborers, initially from Hispania and latter also from the Gallic borderlands and other locations of the Mediterranean. This caused far-reaching environmental outcomes, vis-à-vis long-term global pollution records, with levels of atmospheric pollution from mining across the Mediterranean during Classical Antiquity having no match until the Industrial Revolution.

In addition to mineral extraction, of which the region was the leading supplier in the early Roman world, with production of the likes of gold, silver, copper, lead, and cinnabar, Hispania also produced manufactured goods, such as sigillata pottery, colourless glass, linen garments. Rural products included fish and fish sauce (garum), and dry crops such as wheat and, more importantly, esparto, olive oil, and wine.

The process of Romanization spurred on throughout the first century BC. The peninsula was also the battleground of civil wars between rulers of the Roman republic; such as the Sertorian War, and the conflict between Caesar and Pompey later in the century.

During their 600-year occupation of the Iberian Peninsula, the Romans introduced the Latin language which developed into the languages of the Iberian peninsula today, with the exception of Basque.

In the early fifth century, Germanic peoples occupied the peninsula, namely the Suebi, the Vandals (Silingi and Hasdingi) and their allies, the Alans. Only the kingdom of the Suebi (Quadi and Marcomanni) would endure after the arrival of another wave of Germanic invaders, the Visigoths, who occupied all of the Iberian Peninsula and expelled or partially integrated the Vandals and the Alans. The Visigoths eventually occupied the Suebi kingdom and its capital city, Bracara (modern day Braga), in 584–585. They would also occupy the province of the Byzantine Empire (552–624) of Spania in the south of the peninsula. However, Balearic Islands remained in Byzantine hands until Umayyad conquest, which began in 703 CE and was completed in 902 CE.

In 711, a Muslim army conquered the Visigothic Kingdom in Hispania. Under Tariq ibn Ziyad, the Islamic army landed at Gibraltar and, in an eight-year campaign, occupied all except the northern kingdoms of the Iberian Peninsula in the Umayyad conquest of Hispania. Al-Andalus (Arabic : الإندلس, tr. al-ʾAndalūs, possibly "Land of the Vandals"), is the Arabic name given to Muslim Iberia. The Muslim conquerors were Arabs and Berbers ; following the conquest, conversion and arabization of the Hispano-Roman population took place, (muwalladum or Muladí). After a long process, spurred on in the 9th and 10th centuries, the majority of the population in Al-Andalus eventually converted to Islam. The Muslims were referred to by the generic name Moors. The Muslim population was divided per ethnicity (Arabs, Berbers, Muladí), and the supremacy of Arabs over the rest of group was a recurrent causal for strife, rivalry and hatred, particularly between Arabs and Berbers. Arab elites could be further divided in the Yemenites (first wave) and the Syrians (second wave). Christians and Jews were allowed to live as part of a stratified society under the dhimmah system, although Jews became very important in certain fields. Some Christians migrated to the Northern Christian kingdoms, while those who stayed in Al-Andalus progressively arabised and became known as musta'arab (mozarabs). The slave population comprised the Ṣaqāliba (literally meaning "slavs", although they were slaves of generic European origin) as well as Sudanese slaves.

The Umayyad rulers faced a major Berber Revolt in the early 740s; the uprising originally broke out in North Africa (Tangier) and later spread across the peninsula. Following the Abbasid takeover from the Umayyads and the shift of the economic centre of the Islamic Caliphate from Damascus to Baghdad, the western province of al-Andalus was marginalised and ultimately became politically autonomous as independent emirate in 756, ruled by one of the last surviving Umayyad royals, Abd al-Rahman I. Al-Andalus became a center of culture and learning, especially during the Caliphate of Córdoba. The Caliphate reached the height of its power under the rule of Abd-ar-Rahman III and his successor al-Hakam II, becoming then, in the view of Jaime Vicens Vives, "the most powerful state in Europe". Abd-ar-Rahman III also managed to expand the clout of Al-Andalus across the Strait of Gibraltar, waging war, as well as his successor, against the Fatimid Empire.

Between the 8th and 12th centuries, Al-Andalus enjoyed a notable urban vitality, both in terms of the growth of the preexisting cities as well as in terms of founding of new ones: Córdoba reached a population of 100,000 by the 10th century, Toledo 30,000 by the 11th century and Seville 80,000 by the 12th century.

During the Middle Ages, the North of the peninsula housed many small Christian polities including the Kingdom of Castile, the Kingdom of Aragon, the Kingdom of Navarre, the Kingdom of León or the Kingdom of Portugal, as well as a number of counties that spawned from the Carolingian Marca Hispanica. Christian and Muslim polities fought and allied among themselves in variable alliances. The Christian kingdoms progressively expanded south taking over Muslim territory in what is historiographically known as the " Reconquista " (the latter concept has been however noted as product of the claim to a pre-existing Spanish Catholic nation and it would not necessarily convey adequately "the complexity of centuries of warring and other more peaceable interactions between Muslim and Christian kingdoms in medieval Iberia between 711 and 1492").

The Caliphate of Córdoba was subsumed in a period of upheaval and civil war (the Fitna of al-Andalus) and collapsed in the early 11th century, spawning a series of ephemeral statelets, the taifas. Until the mid 11th century, most of the territorial expansion southwards of the Kingdom of Asturias/León was carried out through a policy of agricultural colonization rather than through military operations; then, profiting from the feebleness of the taifa principalities, Ferdinand I of León seized Lamego and Viseu (1057–1058) and Coimbra (1064) away from the Taifa of Badajoz (at times at war with the Taifa of Seville); Meanwhile, in the same year Coimbra was conquered, in the Northeastern part of the Iberian Peninsula, the Kingdom of Aragon took Barbastro from the Hudid Taifa of Lérida as part of an international expedition sanctioned by Pope Alexander II. Most critically, Alfonso VI of León-Castile conquered Toledo and its wider taifa in 1085, in what it was seen as a critical event at the time, entailing also a huge territorial expansion, advancing from the Sistema Central to La Mancha. In 1086, following the siege of Zaragoza by Alfonso VI of León-Castile, the Almoravids, religious zealots originally from the deserts of the Maghreb, landed in the Iberian Peninsula, and, having inflicted a serious defeat to Alfonso VI at the battle of Zalaca, began to seize control of the remaining taifas.

The Almoravids in the Iberian peninsula progressively relaxed strict observance of their faith, and treated both Jews and Mozarabs harshly, facing uprisings across the peninsula, initially in the Western part. The Almohads, another North-African Muslim sect of Masmuda Berber origin who had previously undermined the Almoravid rule south of the Strait of Gibraltar, first entered the peninsula in 1146.

Somewhat straying from the trend taking place in other locations of the Latin West since the 10th century, the period comprising the 11th and 13th centuries was not one of weakening monarchical power in the Christian kingdoms. The relatively novel concept of "frontier" (Sp: frontera), already reported in Aragon by the second half of the 11th century become widespread in the Christian Iberian kingdoms by the beginning of the 13th century, in relation to the more or less conflictual border with Muslim lands.

By the beginning of the 13th century, a power reorientation took place in the Iberian Peninsula (parallel to the Christian expansion in Southern Iberia and the increasing commercial impetus of Christian powers across the Mediterranean) and to a large extent, trade-wise, the Iberian Peninsula reorientated towards the North away from the Muslim World.

During the Middle Ages, the monarchs of Castile and León, from Alfonso V and Alfonso VI (crowned Hispaniae Imperator) to Alfonso X and Alfonso XI tended to embrace an imperial ideal based on a dual Christian and Jewish ideology. Despite the hegemonic ambitions of its rulers and the consolidation of the union of Castile and León after 1230, it should be pointed that, except for a brief period in the 1330s and 1340s, Castile tended to be nonetheless "essentially unstable" from a political standpoint until the late 15th century.

Merchants from Genoa and Pisa were conducting an intense trading activity in Catalonia already by the 12th century, and later in Portugal. Since the 13th century, the Crown of Aragon expanded overseas; led by Catalans, it attained an overseas empire in the Western Mediterranean, with a presence in Mediterranean islands such as the Balearics, Sicily and Sardinia, and even conquering Naples in the mid-15th century. Genoese merchants invested heavily in the Iberian commercial enterprise with Lisbon becoming, according to Virgínia Rau, the "great centre of Genoese trade" in the early 14th century. The Portuguese would later detach their trade to some extent from Genoese influence. The Nasrid Kingdom of Granada, neighbouring the Strait of Gibraltar and founded upon a vassalage relationship with the Crown of Castile, also insinuated itself into the European mercantile network, with its ports fostering intense trading relations with the Genoese as well, but also with the Catalans, and to a lesser extent, with the Venetians, the Florentines, and the Portuguese.

Between 1275 and 1340, Granada became involved in the "crisis of the Strait", and was caught in a complex geopolitical struggle ("a kaleidoscope of alliances") with multiple powers vying for dominance of the Western Mediterranean, complicated by the unstable relations of Muslim Granada with the Marinid Sultanate. The conflict reached a climax in the 1340 Battle of Río Salado, when, this time in alliance with Granada, the Marinid Sultan (and Caliph pretender) Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Othman made the last Marinid attempt to set up a power base in the Iberian Peninsula. The lasting consequences of the resounding Muslim defeat to an alliance of Castile and Portugal with naval support from Aragon and Genoa ensured Christian supremacy over the Iberian Peninsula and the preeminence of Christian fleets in the Western Mediterranean.

The 1348–1350 bubonic plague devastated large parts of the Iberian Peninsula, leading to a sudden economic cessation. Many settlements in northern Castile and Catalonia were left forsaken. The plague marked the start of the hostility and downright violence towards religious minorities (particularly the Jews) as an additional consequence in the Iberian realms.

The 14th century was a period of great upheaval in the Iberian realms. After the death of Peter the Cruel of Castile (reigned 1350–69), the House of Trastámara succeeded to the throne in the person of Peter's half brother, Henry II (reigned 1369–79). In the kingdom of Aragón, following the death without heirs of John I (reigned 1387–96) and Martin I (reigned 1396–1410), a prince of the House of Trastámara, Ferdinand I (reigned 1412–16), succeeded to the Aragonese throne. The Hundred Years' War also spilled over into the Iberian peninsula, with Castile particularly taking a role in the conflict by providing key naval support to France that helped lead to that nation's eventual victory. After the accession of Henry III to the throne of Castile, the populace, exasperated by the preponderance of Jewish influence, perpetrated a massacre of Jews at Toledo. In 1391, mobs went from town to town throughout Castile and Aragon, killing an estimated 50,000 Jews, or even as many as 100,000, according to Jane Gerber. Women and children were sold as slaves to Muslims, and many synagogues were converted into churches. According to Hasdai Crescas, about 70 Jewish communities were destroyed.

During the 15th century, Portugal, which had ended its southwards territorial expansion across the Iberian Peninsula in 1249 with the conquest of the Algarve, initiated an overseas expansion in parallel to the rise of the House of Aviz, conquering Ceuta (1415) arriving at Porto Santo (1418), Madeira and the Azores, as well as establishing additional outposts along the North-African Atlantic coast. In addition, already in the Early Modern Period, between the completion of the Granada War in 1492 and the death of Ferdinand of Aragon in 1516, the Hispanic Monarchy would make strides in the imperial expansion along the Mediterranean coast of the Maghreb. During the Late Middle Ages, the Jews acquired considerable power and influence in Castile and Aragon.

Throughout the late Middle Ages, the Crown of Aragon took part in the mediterranean slave trade, with Barcelona (already in the 14th century), Valencia (particularly in the 15th century) and, to a lesser extent, Palma de Mallorca (since the 13th century), becoming dynamic centres in this regard, involving chiefly eastern and Muslim peoples. Castile engaged later in this economic activity, rather by adhering to the incipient atlantic slave trade involving sub-saharan people thrusted by Portugal (Lisbon being the largest slave centre in Western Europe) since the mid 15th century, with Seville becoming another key hub for the slave trade. Following the advance in the conquest of the Nasrid kingdom of Granada, the seizure of Málaga entailed the addition of another notable slave centre for the Crown of Castile.

By the end of the 15th century (1490) the Iberian kingdoms (including here the Balearic Islands) had an estimated population of 6.525 million (Crown of Castile, 4.3 million; Portugal, 1.0 million; Principality of Catalonia, 0.3 million; Kingdom of Valencia, 0.255 million; Kingdom of Granada, 0.25 million; Kingdom of Aragon, 0.25 million; Kingdom of Navarre, 0.12 million and the Kingdom of Mallorca, 0.05 million).

For three decades in the 15th century, the Hermandad de las Marismas, the trading association formed by the ports of Castile along the Cantabrian coast, resembling in some ways the Hanseatic League, fought against the latter, an ally of England, a rival of Castile in political and economic terms. Castile sought to claim the Gulf of Biscay as its own. In 1419, the powerful Castilian navy thoroughly defeated a Hanseatic fleet in La Rochelle.

In the late 15th century, the imperial ambition of the Iberian powers was pushed to new heights by the Catholic Monarchs in Castile and Aragon, and by Manuel I in Portugal.

The last Muslim stronghold, Granada, was conquered by a combined Castilian and Aragonese force in 1492. As many as 100,000 Moors died or were enslaved in the military campaign, while 200,000 fled to North Africa. Muslims and Jews throughout the period were variously tolerated or shown intolerance in different Christian kingdoms. After the fall of Granada, all Muslims and Jews were ordered to convert to Christianity or face expulsion—as many as 200,000 Jews were expelled from Spain. Approximately 3,000,000 Muslims fled or were driven out of Spain between 1492 and 1610. Historian Henry Kamen estimates that some 25,000 Jews died en route from Spain. The Jews were also expelled from Sicily and Sardinia, which were under Aragonese rule, and an estimated 37,000 to 100,000 Jews left.

In 1497, King Manuel I of Portugal forced all Jews in his kingdom to convert or leave. That same year he expelled all Muslims that were not slaves, and in 1502 the Catholic Monarchs followed suit, imposing the choice of conversion to Christianity or exile and loss of property. Many Jews and Muslims fled to North Africa and the Ottoman Empire, while others publicly converted to Christianity and became known respectively as Marranos and Moriscos (after the old term Moors). However, many of these continued to practice their religion in secret. The Moriscos revolted several times and were ultimately forcibly expelled from Spain in the early 17th century. From 1609 to 1614, over 300,000 Moriscos were sent on ships to North Africa and other locations, and, of this figure, around 50,000 died resisting the expulsion, and 60,000 died on the journey.

A series of case studies by the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs at Harvard University demonstrated that the change of relative supremacy from Portugal to the Hispanic Monarchy in the late 15th century was one of the few cases of avoidance of the Thucydides Trap.

Challenging the conventions about the advent of modernity, Immanuel Wallerstein pushed back the origins of the capitalist modernity to the Iberian expansion of the 15th century. During the 16th century Spain created a vast empire in the Americas, with a state monopoly in Seville becoming the center of the ensuing transatlantic trade, based on bullion. Iberian imperialism, starting by the Portuguese establishment of routes to Asia and the posterior transatlantic trade with the New World by Spaniards and Portuguese (along Dutch, English and French), precipitated the economic decline of the Italian Peninsula. The 16th century was one of population growth with increased pressure over resources; in the case of the Iberian Peninsula a part of the population moved to the Americas meanwhile Jews and Moriscos were banished, relocating to other places in the Mediterranean Basin. Most of the Moriscos remained in Spain after the Morisco revolt in Las Alpujarras during the mid-16th century, but roughly 300,000 of them were expelled from the country in 1609–1614, and emigrated en masse to North Africa.

In 1580, after the political crisis that followed the 1578 death of King Sebastian, Portugal became a dynastic composite entity of the Hapsburg Monarchy; thus, the whole peninsula was united politically during the period known as the Iberian Union (1580–1640). During the reign of Philip II of Spain (I of Portugal), the Councils of Portugal, Italy, Flanders and Burgundy were added to the group of counselling institutions of the Hispanic Monarchy, to which the Councils of Castile, Aragon, Indies, Chamber of Castile, Inquisition, Orders, and Crusade already belonged, defining the organization of the Royal court that underpinned the Polysynodial System through which the empire operated. During the Iberian union, the "first great wave" of the transatlantic slave trade happened, according to Enriqueta Vila Villar, as new markets opened because of the unification gave thrust to the slave trade.

By 1600, the percentage of urban population for Spain was roughly 11.4%, while for Portugal the urban population was estimated as 14.1%, which were both above the 7.6% European average of the time (edged only by the Low Countries and the Italian Peninsula). Some striking differences appeared among the different Iberian realms. Castile, extending across a 60% of the territory of the peninsula and having 80% of the population was a rather urbanised country, yet with a widespread distribution of cities. Meanwhile, the urban population in the Crown of Aragon was highly concentrated in a handful of cities: Zaragoza (Kingdom of Aragon), Barcelona (Principality of Catalonia), and, to a lesser extent in the Kingdom of Valencia, in Valencia, Alicante and Orihuela. The case of Portugal presented an hypertrophied capital, Lisbon (which greatly increased its population during the 16th century, from 56,000 to 60,000 inhabitants by 1527, to roughly 120,000 by the third quarter of the century) with its demographic dynamism stimulated by the Asian trade, followed at great distance by Porto and Évora (both roughly accounting for 12,500 inhabitants). Throughout most of the 16th century, both Lisbon and Seville were among Western Europe's largest and most dynamic cities.

The 17th century has been largely considered as a very negative period for the Iberian economies, seen as a time of recession, crisis or even decline, the urban dynamism chiefly moving to Northern Europe. A dismantling of the inner city network in the Castilian plateau took place during this period (with a parallel accumulation of economic activity in the capital, Madrid), with only New Castile resisting recession in the interior. Regarding the Atlantic façade of Castile, aside from the severing of trade with Northern Europe, inter-regional trade with other regions in the Iberian Peninsula also suffered to some extent. In Aragon, suffering from similar problems than Castile, the expelling of the Moriscos in 1609 in the Kingdom of Valencia aggravated the recession. Silk turned from a domestic industry into a raw commodity to be exported. However, the crisis was uneven (affecting longer the centre of the peninsula), as both Portugal and the Mediterranean coastline recovered in the later part of the century by fuelling a sustained growth.

The aftermath of the intermittent 1640–1668 Portuguese Restoration War brought the House of Braganza as the new ruling dynasty in the Portuguese territories across the world (bar Ceuta), putting an end to the Iberian Union.

Despite both Portugal and Spain starting their path towards modernization with the liberal revolutions of the first half of the 19th century, this process was, concerning structural changes in the geographical distribution of the population, relatively tame compared to what took place after World War II in the Iberian Peninsula, when strong urban development ran in parallel to substantial rural flight patterns.

The Iberian Peninsula is the westernmost of the three major southern European peninsulas—the Iberian, Italian, and Balkan. It forms the westernmost portion of the larger Eurasian landmass. It is bordered on the southeast and east by the Mediterranean Sea, and on the north, west, and southwest by the Atlantic Ocean. The Pyrenees mountains are situated along the northeast edge of the peninsula, where it adjoins the rest of Europe. Its southern tip, located in Tarifa is the southernmost point of the European continent and is very close to the northwest coast of Africa, separated from it by the Strait of Gibraltar and the Mediterranean Sea.

The Iberian Peninsula encompasses 583,254 km and has very contrasting and uneven topograph. The mountain ranges of the Iberian Peninsula are mainly distributed from west to east, and in some cases reach altitudes of approximately 3,000 mamsl, resulting in the region having the second highest mean altitude (637 mamsl) in Western Europe.

The Iberian Peninsula extends from the southernmost extremity at Punta de Tarifa to the northernmost extremity at Punta de Estaca de Bares over a distance between lines of latitude of about 865 km (537 mi) based on a degree length of 111 km (69 mi) per degree, and from the westernmost extremity at Cabo da Roca to the easternmost extremity at Cap de Creus over a distance between lines of longitude at 40° N latitude of about 1,155 km (718 mi) based on an estimated degree length of about 90 km (56 mi) for that latitude. The irregular, roughly octagonal shape of the peninsula contained within this spherical quadrangle was compared by the ancient geographer Strabo to an ox-hide.

About three quarters of that rough octagon is the Meseta Central, a vast plateau ranging from 610 to 760 m in altitude. It is located approximately in the centre, staggered slightly to the east and tilted slightly toward the west. The conventional centre of the Iberian Peninsula has long been considered Getafe just south of Madrid. It is ringed by mountains and contains the sources of most of the rivers, which find their way through gaps in the mountain barriers on all sides.

The coastline of the Iberian Peninsula is 3,313 km (2,059 mi), 1,660 km (1,030 mi) on the Mediterranean side and 1,653 km (1,027 mi) on the Atlantic side. The coast has been inundated over time, with sea levels having risen from a minimum of 115–120 m (377–394 ft) lower than today at the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) to its current level at 4,000 years BP.

The coastal shelf created by sedimentation during that time remains below the surface. It was never very extensive on the Atlantic side, as the continental shelf drops rather steeply into the depths. An estimated 700 km (430 mi) length of Atlantic shelf is only 10–65 km (6.2–40.4 mi) wide. At the 500 m (1,600 ft) isobath, on the edge, the shelf drops off to 1,000 m (3,300 ft).

The submarine topography of the coastal waters of the Iberian Peninsula has been studied extensively in the process of drilling for oil. Ultimately, the shelf drops into the Bay of Biscay on the north (an abyss), the Iberian abyssal plain at 4,800 m (15,700 ft) on the west, and Tagus abyssal plain to the south. In the north, between the continental shelf and the abyss, is an extension called the Galicia Bank, a plateau that contains the Porto, Vigo, and Vasco da Gama seamounts, which form the Galicia interior basin. The southern border of these features is marked by Nazaré Canyon, which splits the continental shelf and leads directly into the abyss.

The major rivers flow through the wide valleys between the mountain systems. These are the Ebro, Douro, Tagus, Guadiana and Guadalquivir. All rivers in the Iberian Peninsula are subject to seasonal variations in flow.

The Tagus is the longest river on the peninsula and, like the Douro, flows westwards with its lower course in Portugal. The Guadiana river bends southwards and forms the border between Spain and Portugal in the last stretch of its course.

The terrain of the Iberian Peninsula is largely mountainous. The major mountain systems are:

The Iberian Peninsula contains rocks of every geological period from the Ediacaran to the Recent, and almost every kind of rock is represented. World-class mineral deposits can be found there. The core of the Iberian Peninsula consists of a Hercynian cratonic block known as the Iberian Massif. On the northeast, this is bounded by the Pyrenean fold belt, and on the southeast it is bounded by the Baetic System. These twofold chains are part of the Alpine belt.

To the west, the peninsula is delimited by the continental boundary formed by the magma -poor opening of the Atlantic Ocean. The Hercynian Foldbelt is mostly buried by Mesozoic and Tertiary cover rocks to the east, and outcrops through the Sistema Ibérico and the Catalan Mediterranean System.

The Iberian Peninsula features one of the largest lithium deposits belts in Europe, an otherwise relatively scarce resource in the continent, scattered along the Iberian Massif's Central Iberian Zone [ es ] and Galicia Tras-Os-Montes Zone [ es ]. Also in the Iberian Massif, and similarly to other Hercynian blocks in Europe, the peninsula hosts some uranium deposits, largely located in the Central Iberian Zone unit.

The Iberian Pyrite Belt, located in the SW quadrant of the Peninsula, ranks among the most important volcanogenic massive sulphide districts on Earth, and it has been exploited for millennia.

The Iberian Peninsula's location and topography, as well as the effects of large atmospheric circulation patterns induce a NW to SE gradient of yearly precipitation, roughly from 2,000 mm to 300 mm.

The Iberian Peninsula has three dominant climate types. One of these is the oceanic climate seen in the northeast, in which precipitation has barely any difference between winter and summer. Most of Portugal and Spain have a Mediterranean climate. The warm-summer Mediterranean climate and the hot-summer Mediterranean climate, with differences in precipitation and temperature depending on latitude and position versus the sea. This applies greatly to the Portuguese and Galician Atlantic coasts where, due to upwelling / downwelling phenomena, average temperatures in summer can vary by as much as 10 °C (18 °F) in only a few kilometers. For example, Peniche vs Santarém.

There are more localized steppe climates in central Spain, with temperatures resembling a more continental Mediterranean climate. In other extreme cases, there are highland alpine climates such as in Sierra Nevada. There are areas with extremely low precipitation and desert climates or semi-desert climates, such as the Almería area, Murcia area and southern Alicante area.

In the southwestern interior of the Iberian Peninsula the hottest temperatures in Europe are found, with Córdoba averaging around 37 °C (99 °F) in July and August. The Spanish Mediterranean coast usually averages around 30 °C (86 °F) in summer. In sharp contrast A Coruña at the northern tip of Galicia has a summer daytime high average at just below 23 °C (73 °F).

This cool and wet summer climate is replicated throughout most of the northern coastline. Winters in the Peninsula are for the most part, mild, although frosts are common in higher altitude areas of central Spain. The warmest winter nights are usually found in downwelling favourable areas of the west coast, such as on capes. Precipitation varies greatly between regions on the Peninsula, in December for example the northern west coast averages above 200 mm (7.9 in) whereas the southeast can average below 30 mm (1.2 in). Insolation can vary from just 1,600 hours in the Bilbao area, to above 3,000 hours in the Algarve and Gulf of Cádiz.

The current political configuration of the Iberian Peninsula comprises the bulk of Portugal and Spain, the whole landlocked microstate of Andorra, a small part of the French department of Pyrénées-Orientales (French Cerdagne), and the British Overseas Territory of Gibraltar.

French Cerdagne is on the south side of the Pyrenees mountain range, which runs along the border between France and Spain. For example, the Segre river, which runs west and then south to meet the Ebro, has its source on the French side. The Pyrenees range is often considered the northeastern boundary of Iberian Peninsula, although the French coastline curves away from the rest of Europe north of the range, which is the reason why Perpignan, which is also known as the capital of Northern Catalonia, is often considered as the entrance to the Iberian Peninsula.

Regarding Portugal and Spain, this chiefly excludes the Macaronesian archipelagos (the Azores and Madeira of Portugal, and the Canary Islands of Spain), the Balearic Islands (Spain), and the Spanish territories in North Africa (most conspicuously the cities of Ceuta and Melilla, as well as uninhabited islets and rocks).

The countries and territories on the Iberian Peninsula:

The Iberian city network is dominated by three international metropolises (Barcelona, Lisbon, and Madrid) and four regional metropolises (Bilbao, Porto, Seville, and Valencia). The relatively weak integration of the network favours a competitive approach vis-à-vis the inter-relation between the different centres. Among these metropolises, Madrid stands out within the global urban hierarchy in terms of its status as a major service centre and enjoys the greatest degree of connectivity.

According to Eurostat (2019), the metropolitan regions with a population over one million are listed as follows:

The woodlands of the Iberian Peninsula are distinct ecosystems. Although the various regions are each characterized by distinct vegetation, there are some similarities across the peninsula.

While the borders between these regions are not clearly defined, there is a mutual influence that makes it very hard to establish boundaries and some species find their optimal habitat in the intermediate areas.

The endangered Iberian lynx (Lynx pardinus) is a symbol of the Iberian mediterranean forest and of the fauna of the Iberian Peninsula altogether.

A new Podarcis lizard species, Podarcis virescens, was accepted as a species by the Taxonomic Committee of the Societas Europaea Herpetologica in 2020. This lizard is native to the Iberian Peninsula and found near rivers in the region.

The Iberian Peninsula is an important stopover on the East Atlantic flyway for birds migrating from northern Europe to Africa. For example, curlew sandpipers rest in the region of the Bay of Cádiz.

In addition to the birds migrating through, some seven million wading birds from the north spend the winter in the estuaries and wetlands of the Iberian Peninsula, mainly at locations on the Atlantic coast. In Galicia are Ría de Arousa (a home of grey plover), Ria de Ortigueira, Ria de Corme and Ria de Laxe. In Portugal, the Aveiro Lagoon hosts pied avocet, the common ringed plover, grey plover and little stint. Ribatejo Province on the Tagus supports pied avocet, grey plover, dunlin, bar-tailed godwit and common redshank.

The Sado Estuary holds dunlin, Eurasian curlew, grey plover and common redshank. The Algarve hosts red knot, common greenshank and turnstone. The Guadalquivir Marshes region of Andalusia and the Salinas de Cádiz are especially rich in wintering wading birds: Kentish plover, common ringed plover, sanderling, and black-tailed godwit in addition to the others. The Ebro delta is home to all the species mentioned above.

With the sole exception of Basque, which is of unknown origin, all modern Iberian languages descend from Vulgar Latin and belong to the Western Romance languages. Throughout history and pre-history, many different languages have been spoken in the Iberian Peninsula, contributing to the formation and differentiation of the contemporaneous languages of Iberia. Most of them have become extinct or fallen into disuse. Basque is the only non-Indo-European surviving language in Iberia and Western Europe.

In modern times, Spanish (the official language of Spain, spoken by the entire 45 million population in the country, the native language of about 36 million in Europe), Portuguese (the official language of Portugal, with a population over 10 million), Catalan (over 7 million speakers in Europe, 3.4 million with Catalan as first language), Galician (understood by the 93% of the 2.8 million Galician population) and Basque (cf. around 1 million speakers) are the most widely spoken languages in the Iberian Peninsula. Spanish and Portuguese have expanded beyond Iberia to the rest of world, becoming global languages.

Other minority romance languages with some degree of recognition, include the several varieties of Astur-leonese, collectively amounting to about 0.6 million speakers, and Aragonese (spoken by barely 8% of the 130,000 people inhabiting the Alto Aragón).

English is the official language of Gibraltar. Llanito is a unique language in the territory, an amalgamation of mostly English and Spanish. In Spain in 2019, 54.3% could speak a foreign language, below that of the EU-28 average. Portugal meanwhile achieved 69%, above the EU average, but still below the EU median. Spain ranks 25th out of 33 European countries in the English Proficiency Index.

Both Spain and Portugal have traditionally used a non-standard rail gauge (the 1,668 mm Iberian gauge) since the construction of the first railroads in the 19th century. Spain has progressively introduced the 1,435 mm standard gauge in its new high-speed rail network (one of the most extensive in the world), inaugurated in 1992 with the Madrid–Seville line, followed to name a few by the Madrid–Barcelona (2008), Madrid–Valencia (2010), an Alicante branch of the latter (2013) and the connection to France of the Barcelona line. Portugal however suspended all the high-speed rail projects in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, putting an end for the time being to the possibility of a high-speed rail connection between Lisbon, Porto and Madrid.

Handicapped by the Pyrenees mountain range hindering the connection to the rest of Europe, Spain and subsidiarily Portugal only have two meaningful rail connections to France able for freight transport, located at both ends of the mountain range. An international rail line across the Central Pyrenees linking Zaragoza and the French city of Pau through a tunnel existed in the past. An accident in the French part destroyed a stretch of the railroad in 1970 and the Canfranc Station has been a cul-de-sac since then.

There are four points connecting the Portuguese and Spanish rail networks: Valença do Minho – Tui, Vilar Formoso – Fuentes de Oñoro, Marvão-Beirã – Valencia de Alcántara and Elvas – Badajoz.

The prospect of the development (as part of a European-wide effort) of the Central, Mediterranean and Atlantic rail corridors is expected to be a way to improve the competitiveness of the ports of Tarragona, Valencia, Sagunto, Bilbao, Santander, Sines and Algeciras vis-à-vis the rest of Europe and the World.

In 1980, Morocco and Spain started a joint study on the feasibility of a fixed link (tunnel or bridge) across the Strait of Gibraltar, possibly through a connection of Punta Paloma [ es ] with Cape Malabata. Years of studies have made no real progress thus far.

A transit point for many submarine cables, the Fibre-optic Link Around the Globe, Europe India Gateway, and the SEA-ME-WE 3 feature landing stations in the Iberian Peninsula. The West Africa Cable System, Main One, SAT-3/WASC, Africa Coast to Europe also land in Portugal. MAREA, a high capacity communication transatlantic cable, connects the north of the Iberian Peninsula (Bilbao) to North America (Virginia), whereas Grace Hopper is an upcoming cable connecting the Iberian Peninsula (Bilbao) to the UK and the US intended to be operative by 2022. EllaLink is an upcoming high-capacity communication cable expected to connect the Peninsula (Sines) to South America and the mammoth 2Africa project intends to connect the peninsula to the United Kingdom, Europe and Africa via Portugal and Barcelona by 2023–24.

Two gas pipelines: the Pedro Duran Farell pipeline and more recently the Medgaz from, respectively, Morocco and Algeria link the Maghreb and the Iberian Peninsula, providing Spain with Algerian natural gas. The contract for the first pipeline expires on 31 October 2021 and—amidst a tense climate of Algerian–Moroccan relations —there are no plans to renew it.

The official currency across Iberia is the Euro, with the exception of Gibraltar, which uses the Gibraltar Pound (at parity with Sterling).

Major industries include mining, tourism, small farms, and fishing. Because the coast is so long, fishing is popular, especially sardines, tuna and anchovies. Commodities mined include iron, gold, coal, lead, silver, zinc, quicksilver, and salt.

Regarding their role in the global economy, both the microstate of Andorra and the British Overseas Territory of Gibraltar have been described as tax havens.

The Galician region of Spain, in the north-west of the Iberian Peninsula, became one of the biggest entry points of cocaine in Europe, on a par with the Dutch ports. Hashish is smuggled from Morocco via the Strait of Gibraltar.

Iberism (Aragonese, Basque, Galician, Portuguese and Spanish : Iberismo ; Asturian and Leonese : Iberismu ; Mirandese : Eiberismo ; Catalan and Occitan : Iberisme), also known as pan-Iberism or Iberian federalism, is the pan-nationalist ideology supporting a unification of Portugal and Spain.

Portugal and Spain share a common history to some degree. Spanish and Portuguese are both Romance languages like Catalan, Galician, Asturleonese and Aragonese, all spoken in the Iberian peninsula.

The Portuguese language and Galician languages evolved from the medieval Galician-Portuguese when the County of Portugal separated from the Kingdom of León by becoming the Kingdom of Portugal. On the other hand, the Galician language has become increasingly influenced by the Castilian language since Galicia 's incorporation into the Crown of Castile as a dependent Kingdom of León.

The identities of both modern Spain and Portugal developed during the experience of the Reconquista. In 1512, Ferdinand II of Aragon conquered the Kingdom of Navarre bringing the territories of what would become known as modern Spain under a common ruler. However Portugal remained an independent kingdom, competing with Spain (Castile) in colonial expansion. To avoid conflict, the Treaty of Tordesillas divided the world into Portuguese and Castilian hemispheres of influence.

As a result of the disappearance of Sebastian I of Portugal at the Battle of Alcácer Quibir, Philip II of Spain exerted his dynastic rights and used Castilian troops to overcome the rival pretender. The national poet of Portugal Luís de Camões opposed Philip, but had himself written some sonnets in Spanish (bilingualism was then common in both courts).

In 1581, Philip became Philip I of Portugal, joining both crowns into the most extended empire in history up to that time. The Spanish Habsburgs (Philip III of Spain and II of Portugal, Philip IV of Spain and III of Portugal) ruled what has later been called the Iberian Union, a personal union of different kingdoms, including Portugal (with its colonies), Castile (with its colonies), and Aragon. In 1640, the duke of Bragança gathered those restless in Portugal with the support of Cardinal Richelieu of France. His rebellion succeeded and he became the John IV of Portugal. The North African city of Ceuta decided to leave the crown of Portugal and remain under the Spanish king.

In 1801, the Portuguese city of Olivença was occupied by Spain and passed to Spanish sovereignty as Olivenza. Portugal has never made a formal claim to the territory after the Treaty of Vienna decided that Spain should terminate its occupation of the city, which Spain ignored nor has it acknowledged the Spanish sovereignty over Olivenza. There is no common definition of the border in the area.

It was José Marchena who, in the 18th century, gave this doctrine a progressive, federal and republican tone in l'Avis aux espagnols. In the Liberal Triennium (1820–1823), the secret liberal organizations tried to spread Iberism in Portugal, to create seven confederated republics, five in Spain and Lusitania Ulterior and Lusitania Citerior in Portugal.

In the later Revolutionary Sexennium, the movement reached its apogee; General Prim was also in favour of uniting the two countries. After his murder, the First Spanish Republic (1873–1874) seemed the right moment for the union given its federalism.

In the point of view of the 19th-century conservative restorations in Spain and Portugal, the "iberisms" played the role of agents of social change with republican and revolutionary stances, thus threatening the stability of the peninsular nations.

In the 20th century, Iberism melted into the ideologies of some leftist currents such as the anarchist Federación Anarquista Ibérica and the Federación Ibérica de Juventudes Libertarias.

The nationalistic dictatorships of Portugal and Francoist Spain shared many political similarities and some degree of mutual support but both countries were said to live "back to back".

Currently no party represented in either country's parliament has the goal of Iberism but both countries joined the European Economic Community in 1986 and their borders and those of all other countries signing the Schengen accord have been opened since then. The Spanish party Izquierda Republicana has defended 'Iberian Federalism' as political structure for the state.

Large companies have opened shop in the neighbouring country, and the Portuguese state closed the birth center of the border municipality of Elvas, sending patients to the Extremadura health system. Some groups defend Iberism, including some Spanish and Portuguese officers. One 2006 survey by an Angolan weekly newspaper, Sol, showed only 28% of the Portuguese think that Portugal and Spain should be one country. 42% of these would put the capital in Madrid and about the same, 41%, in Lisbon.

A 2009 poll found 30.3% of Spanish respondents would support a federation and 39.9% of Portuguese respondents would support one. The figures rose to 31 and 45 percent, respectively, in 2010.

A poll conducted by the Spanish University of Salamanca in 2011 found that 39.8% of Spanish respondents and 46.1% of Portuguese respondents supported the creation of the federation between the two countries. 1741 people took part in the poll.

Mas i Sans proposed that the federal or confederate capital city of Iberia be established at Santarém, Ribatejo, Portugal, but the capital city of the Diocesis Hispaniarum, created by the Roman Emperor Diocletianus in 287 was Emerita Augusta (modern Mérida), in Spanish Extremadura.

The French national identity card or simply Identity card (French : carte nationale d’identité or CNI) is an official identity document consisting of an electronic ID-1 card bearing a photograph, name and address. While the identity card is non-compulsory, all persons must possess some form of valid government-issued identity documentation.

Identity cards, valid for a period of 10 years, are issued by the local préfecture, sous-préfecture, mairie (in France) or in French consulates (abroad) free of charge. A fingerprint of the holder is taken, which is stored in paper files and which can only be accessed by a judge in closely defined circumstances. A central database duplicates the information on the card, but strict laws limit access to the information and prevent it being linked to other databases or records.

The card may be used to verify identity and nationality and may also be used as a travel document within Europe (except Belarus, Russia, Ukraine and United Kingdom) as well as French overseas territories, Anguilla, Egypt, Turkey, Georgia, Dominica (max 14 days), Montserrat and Saint Lucia instead of a French passport. The cards are widely used for other purposes — for example, when opening a bank account, or when making a payment by cheque.

While passports have been issued in France, under one form or another, since the Middle Ages, the identity card is a 20th-century innovation. The first ID was issued to foreigners in residence in France in 1917, in order to control the foreign population in a time of war and spy scare. The first card for Frenchmen was created by the Police Prefect of the Seine département, then the Paris local authority, in 1921. This carte d'identité des Français was a non-compulsory ID document and was only issued in the Paris region.

Following defeat in the Battle of France, the Vichy government created a new national identity card under the law of October 27, 1940. This new ID was compulsory for every French person over the age of 16. A central record was also instituted. From 1942, French Jews had the word "Jew" added to their card in red, which helped the Vichy authorities identify 76,000 for deportation as part of the Holocaust.

Under the decree 55-1397 of October 22, 1955 a revised non-compulsory card, the carte nationale d'identité (CNI) was introduced, and the central records abandoned. With the introduction of lamination in 1988 it was renamed the carte nationale d’identité sécurisée (CNIS) (secure national identity card). In 1995 the cards were made machine-readable. It became free in 1998.

On 15 March 2021, a new electronic model has been released.

The French national identity card can be used as an identification document in France in situations such as opening a bank account, identifying oneself to government agencies, proving one's identity and regular immigration status to a law enforcement official etc.

Similarly, French citizens exercising their right to free movement in another EU/EEA member state or Switzerland are entitled to use their French national identity card as an identification document when dealing not just with government authorities, but also with private sector service providers. For example, if a supermarket in Ireland refuses to accept a French national identity card as proof of age when a French citizen attempts to purchase an age-restricted product, and insists on the production of an Irish passport, driving license or other identity document, the supermarket would, in effect, be discriminating against this individual on this basis of his/her nationality in the provision of a service, thereby contravening the prohibition in Art 20(2) of Directive 2006/123/EC of discriminatory treatment relating to the nationality of a service recipient in the conditions of access to a service which are made available to the public at large by a service provider.

In practice, the ID card can often be used for various identification purposes worldwide, such as for age verification in bars or checking in at hotels.

The French national identity card can be used as a travel document (instead of a French passport) to/from the following countries:

The identity card also grants access to the following European territories: Madeira, Azores, Canary Islands, Ceuta, Melilla, Faroe Islands, and Svalbard.

Previously, the Dominican Republic, Morocco, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal, Sint Maarten, Tunisia and the United Kingdom permitted French citizens to travel to their countries on the strength of a French national identity card alone. Greenland does not accept French or European ID cards.

Prior to 1 January 2013, unaccompanied minors under the age of 18 who travelled outside metropolitan France using their French national identity cards were required to obtain an autorisation de sortie du territoire (AST). In order to obtain an AST, one of the minor's legal ascendant(s) had to visit the local mayor's office. On 1 January 2013, the obligation to obtain an AST was removed, and all minors are now able solely to use their French national identity cards when leaving/re-entering France without a legal ascendant. However, whilst the Border Police unit of the French National Police no longer require an AST from the legal ascendant(s) of an unaccompanied minor when he/she leaves or re-enters France, the border authorities of other countries may require the minor to present some form of written approval from his/her legal ascendant(s) before admitting him/her.

Prior to 1 January 2014, French national identity cards were issued with a maximum period of validity of 10 years.

On 1 January 2014, the period of validity of new cards issued to adults was increased from 10 to 15 years.

In addition, on the same day, a retroactive change in the period of validity came into effect by virtue of Decree 2013-1188. As a result, all French national identity cards issued between 2 January 2004 and 31 December 2013 to adults had their period of validity automatically extended from 10 years to 15 years. This extension took place without the need for any physical amendment to the expiry date which appears on eligible cards — for example, the holder of a French national identity card issued on 1 February 2004 (when he/she was already an adult) will actually be valid until 1 February 2019 automatically without the need for any amendment to the card (even though it states on the card that it will expire on 1 February 2014).

As of 15 March 2021, the new ID card lasts 10 years.

The card measures 105 x 74 mm. The paper card was laminated and had rounded corners until a new credit card sized plastic format was introduced as part of an overhaul in 2021. All the information on the card was given in the French language only until English was added with the new card design.

Whilst French passports and residence permits (issued to non-EU/EEA/Swiss citizens residing in France) contain an RFID chip, the design of the French national identity card remained unchanged from 1994 to 2021 and so cards were issued without an RFID chip (unlike a number of other EU member states which have updated the design of their national identity cards to include an RFID chip) until 2021. Whilst fingerprints are collected as part of the application process for the card, fingerprint images were neither printed on the card nor stored in an RFID chip embedded within the card.

The front side of the previous design (used from 1994 to 2021) featured the words "RÉPUBLIQUE FRANÇAISE" across the top and "Carte nationale d'identité/ National Identity Card" as well on cards issues since 2021 on the front, plus the following information:

At the bottom of the front side (the back on the new design) is a two-line machine readable zone.

The rear side contains the following information:

The Institut Français de Recherche pour l'Exploitation de la Mer (French for ' French Research Institute for Exploitation of the Sea ') or Ifremer is an oceanographic institution in France. A state-run and funded scientific organization, it is France's national integrated marine science research institute. Ifremer operates a number of research vessels and other vehicles, including the ROV Victor 6000 and the crewed submersible Nautile.

Ifremer focuses its research activities in the following areas:

In other words, Ifremer's purpose is to:

"Conduct research, innovate, and provide expertise to protect and restore the ocean, sustainably manage marine resources and ecosystems, and share marine data."

Ifremer is located at 26 sites, including five main centres (Boulogne, Brest, Nantes, Toulon, and Tahiti), with headquarters at Brest. About twenty research departments are associated to these centres.

L’Inspection générale des affaires sociales (IGAS) (English : General Inspectorate of Social Affairs) is a French government agency which is responsible for conducting inspections and evaluations in a across various fields, including social affairs, health, social protection ('solidarité'), employment, labor, community politics, professional structures and modernisation of the state. It was founded in 1967.

IGAS employs 125 inspectors and 30 administrative staff. The inspectors lead audits and inspections, conduct evaluations, offer consulting and interim management. It has jurisdiction over public institutions - government, regional and local authorities, agencies - as well as private companies, NGOs or charities if they receive public funding or sponsoring. Since 2009 the leader of the institution is Pierre Boissier.

Statistics about the immigration to France are based on variables whose compilation is governed by law. They are mainly produced from the census. Statistics on residence permits, asylum applications and thematic surveys of population samples are also used. The data produced varies from one organization to another, due to differences in definitions.

The type and quality of statistics compiled from the census have evolved over time, in line with changes in the status of foreigners, the possibilities of acquiring citizenship and the nomenclature of population categories. Within the scientific community, in connection with the fight against discrimination, there is a debate on the recording of variables revealing the origins of individuals.

Statistics on immigration in France have a political dimension. Political discourse and public action rely on the interpretation or manipulation of figures to shape immigration policy.

In 1991, the French High Council for Integration defined the category of "immigrant" as distinct from "foreigner". An immigrant is a person born outside France who was of foreign nationality at birth. French descendants born abroad are neither immigrants nor foreigners. Foreigners born in France, generally children who will acquire French nationality, are not immigrants either, as they have not crossed a border. French immigrants are therefore included in both French citizen and immigration statistics.

Immigrants, on the other hand, are born abroad, whatever their nationality or nationalities at birth. This is a broader definition for people changing their place of residence. For its statistics, the United Nations defines an immigrant as a person whose daily resting place reaches, or is expected to reach, at least one year in the territory of a state other than that of his or her last habitual residence. The duration of residence may therefore be shorter than the duration of the residence permit.

France does not have a population register. Data on illegal immigrants, i.e. those without a residence permit, are estimated on the basis of the number of people receiving state medical aid. Data on legal immigrants comes from several sources.

The French National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE) is responsible for France's population census, a major source of data.

Since 2004, INSEE no longer carries out a general population census every eight or nine years, but instead conducts annual sample censuses, registering immigrants who have lived in France for more than a year. This is the only source covering also nationals of European Union countries. The loss of completeness is largely compensated for by the tighter annual frequency. In addition, questions on country of birth and current and previous nationalities make it possible to track changes in net migration between people born abroad (immigrants), those born in France and French-descendants born abroad.

The data can be undermined by situations of dual residence, where people do not have a single regular place of residence, and by people commuting between countries. For example, in the first case, in 2004, the Ministry of the Interior counted 105,000 Algerians aged 64 or over with a valid residence permit, while INSEE counted 63,000. The first were not present at the time of the census. In the second case, the back-and-forth between countries can lead to a person being counted again after several years.

The Ministry of the Interior also publishes statistics resulting from the issuance of residence permits by prefectures. Minors under the age of 16 are not included, nor are non-working minors aged 16 to 18. Since 2004, nationals of the European Economic Area and Switzerland are no longer included. Previously, they were only partially included, as not all of them applied for a residence permit.

From 2000 to 2009, the National Institute for Demographic Studies, a French organization, records the number of foreigners obtaining a residence permit of at least one year for the first time. This includes some students. As these people may leave before their residence permit expires, this figure is recalculated on the basis of an effective presence of one year. Following a reform of residence permits in 2009, INED is now able to access all administrative data on residence permits. The figure obtained is supplemented by an assessment of EU nationals. Because of its broader definition than that of INED, the UN figures are higher. In 2019, France had a 10% immigrant population according to the French definition, but a 13% immigrant population according to the UN definition. The latter figure is reached thanks to the census, which records the return of natives from abroad.

The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, a European body, uses residence permits to count so-called "permanent" immigrants, who receive a residence permit that is, in principle, renewable indefinitely.

Numbers counted on the basis of residence permits are of a legal nature. Entry into French territory may take place before or after the date of application for a residence permit. The expiry of a residence permit does not necessarily indicate departure from the country. According to sociological studies, census data is more reliable than information provided by residence permits.

The statistics France submits to Eurostat, a European body, are based on figures from the French Office for Immigration and Integration (OFII) and the French Office for the Protection of Refugees and Stateless Persons (OFPRA). OFII publishes statistics on adult and minor immigrants who are not nationals of a European Economic Area country, all of whom are subject to a compulsory medical examination. Until 2002, OFPRA recorded the files of adults who applied for asylum and their outcome. Thereafter, it also counts accompanying adults and minors. These people may live on French territory for a long time before receiving a decision. Eurostat figures may be several tens of thousands lower than those of INED, as they are limited to entries by non-EU nationals - holders of a residence permit or beneficiaries of the right of asylum - regardless of the duration of the permit. Entries by temporary or seasonal workers, asylum seekers - i.e. those who have not yet received a decision - and students are not included.

A further source of information is provided by thematic surveys of population samples. They cover a wide range of subjects. Their aim is to study behavior. The permanent demographic sample was introduced in 1968. Since 2003, all surveys conducted by the National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE) have included questions on parents' origins, making it possible to count and describe the children of immigrants, even if they were born in France and became French.

The collection and use of data is governed by the French Data Protection Act of 1978, amended in 2004, which prohibits "except with the express consent of the person concerned, the collection or processing of personal data which reveals, directly or indirectly, the racial or ethnic origins, political, philosophical or religious opinions or trade-union membership of individuals, or which relates to the health or sexual orientation of such individuals". As such, " race " and " ethnicity " variables are usually absent from people management files. A few exceptions are provided for, for instance in cases of the public interest, statistical processing carried out by INSEE or a ministerial statistical service, or the processing of data required to establish, exercise or defend a legal claim. Private operators are subject to the law, but may also apply for exemptions. In all cases, there must be no direct or indirect means of identifying the persons concerned by the data collection.

The National Data Protection Authority (CNIL) is responsible for enforcing these regulations, which were drawn up for fear of misuse of the information collected. As the notions of race or ethnicity have not been precisely defined, the CNIL interprets the scope of the variables and the circumstances of collection and processing to judge the potential use that could, in the worst-case scenario, be made of them. Research surveys, for example on religion or ethnic origins, may therefore benefit from exemptions. The census provides information on the nationality of foreigners and immigrants, as well as on the origins of parents, which can be considered ethnic data.

Unlike private institutes, public administrations producing statistics are also subject to the law of June 7, 1951, amended in May 2009. The law establishes the National Council for Statistical Information (Conseil national de l'information statistique - CNIS), a consultative body with the power to make proposals and oversee public statistical surveys.

Statistical data classification is not neutral, since it constructs a reading grid through which reality is recorded and interpreted. It produces the meaning on which public action is based, which, in turn, can lead to a modification of the system and thus to a redrawing of the population.

Initially, the categories used in the census were based on legal definitions of population categories. The Civil Code of 1804 recognized as French only children born of French parents. The mid-nineteenth century saw the crystallization of the French national myth, which Jules Michelet and later Ernest Lavisse helped to establish and disseminate. The foreigner is a body outside the State and society. In 1851, more than sixty years after the first censuses were taken, the number of naturalized French citizens began to be counted. That same year, a law automatically conferred French nationality on any child born on French soil to a foreign father. This provision was extended to mothers in 1893.

In 1889, due to the significant demographic growth of foreigners on French territory, a law was passed stipulating that "any individual born in France to a foreigner and who, at the time of his majority, is domiciled in France, is French, unless, in the year following his majority, he has declined to be French". This law, the result of an assimilationist vision of the nation, ensured the rapid disappearance of the foreign population. The existence of the Naturalized French category stems from public policy issues. Its purpose is to study the assimilation of foreigners into the French population.

From 1881 to 1990, public registers differentiated between French nationals by birth, naturalized French nationals and foreigners, who were required to specify their nationality. Until 1927, French women who married foreigners became legal foreigners. From 1962 onwards, survey require naturilized French to state their original nationality. Between 1954 and 1968, French Muslims appear in the data tables. In 1891, from 1926 to 1936 and from 1975 onwards, foreigners are the subject of a special volume, in line with the importance of the immigration theme in political debate. In the second half of the 20th century, nationality became a significant descriptor in all statistics based on census results.

During the 20th century, the main stream of French sociological thought promoted the "thesis of the social contract as the foundation of the modern nation", and a division of society into antagonistic classes which assimilation should reduce. The emergence of cultural pluralism was hard to imagine. The category of immigrant, poorly defined at the time, was seen as irrelevant, as immigration was not seen as a long-term phenomenon.

In the 1980s, the French political authorities began to realize that the immigrant population, which had been considered a temporary workforce, was destined to settle on a long-term basis. To integrate these populations, it was necessary to know who they were, and therefore to develop statistical resources. In 1991, the statistical category of " immigrants ", a pure creation of statisticians, was added to complement the legal category of "foreigners", which included a population that was administratively constructed and sociologically irrelevant. This new category improves the congruence of data with social issues such as the study of discrimination. Since 1999, respondents have been asked their country of birth, nationality and any previous nationality.

At the same time, from 1992 to 1995, the National Institute of Demographic Studies, in collaboration with the National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies, and under the direction of Michèle Tribalat, carried out the Geographic Mobility and Social Integration survey on immigrant populations and their children. Ethnic categories were used, as well as a category called "native French ". Initial criticisms of the survey's method, epistemology and tools soon emerged. The controversy became particularly violent and reached its peak during the 1999 census, to such an extent that the national press got involved. Researchers are torn between the ability of statistics to inform and their capacity to enclose the world in a representation. "The production of "ethnic" or "racial" statistics requires a set of conditions that clash head-on with the tradition of French statistics and sociology". Scientific, political and also historical issues - statisticians collaborated in the enforcement of the anti-Jewish laws of 1940 - are involved.

Some scientists are calling for new ways of measuring origins, in order to assess the extent of discrimination and thus guide public action, but also to respond to criticism from the extreme right. However, the ways of categorizing populations practiced in Anglo-Saxon countries, and on which they wish to model themselves, also have their limits. The reliability of responses, on the one hand, and the phenomenon of métissage, opinions and identity, on the other, are obstacles to categorization based on objective data (nationality, place of birth, parents' place of birth, language spoken or mother tongue, religion, skin color, etc.) and to categorization based on a notion of origins (Asian, African-American, White, etc.). What these two types of methods have in common is that they "only partially capture what really underpins discrimination: other people's perception of an individual's origin".

Opponents of recording variables on origins argue that there is a "risk of stigmatizing a population who no-one should distinguish from other French people", or that it is necessary to preserve the mystery of origins so that the nation remains united by avoiding identity assignment. There are also fears of excessive invasion of privacy, a resurgence of racial classifications and eugenic thinking, and use for questionable or malicious political ends. Most opponents want to stick to the status quo, i.e. the inclusion of data on "immigrants" or "children of immigrants". A few wish to avoid statistical categorization, and stick to monographic observational studies on limited samples, or to qualitative studies.

To avoid discrimination, some organizations use the categories "French", "foreigners from the European Union" and "foreigners from outside the European Union" in their publications, in place of nationality. This does not allow for full cross-referencing of information and, according to P. Simon and J. Stavo-Debauge, produces the opposite effect by creating a quasi-hierarchy, with foreigners from outside the European Union making up the group with the most difficulties. Paradoxically, a highly aggregated country classification is more evocative of ethnic discrimination than a country-level classification. Other organizations redact variables such as nationality, necessary for the proper processing of their files, when publishing data.

In practice, the law and judicial practice allow ethnic statistics to be drawn up, where the nationality of foreigners and immigrants and the origins of their parents are recorded. In a decision dated November 15, 2007, the French Constitutional Council ruled that this was an "objective" method for "measuring diversity". At the beginning of the 21st century, the debate shifted to skin color. The racial categories used in certain research studies should not be taken as essential truths, but as perceived categories, to be studied as such, with the aim of revealing the mechanisms of discrimination by studying behavior.

For researchers, the purpose of statistical data on immigration, whatever their nature, is to understand "dynamics, background trends, correlations or causal relationships ". In other words, their purpose is not simply to count people, but to study the place of immigrants in society.

This data is subject to pressure from the rest of society because of its political nature. Categories and ways of classifying populations are the object of this pressure. Political discourse, which varies from party to party, and public action are based on the interpretation of figures to define immigration policy, whether it be to promote, limit or abolish it. Immigration statistics are also a means for civil society to evaluate the actions of those in power. Statistics on emigration and the return of immigrants do not feature prominently in public debate.

For ideological or journalistic purposes, the different categories of immigrant and foreigner may be lumped together, and the results of demographic and sociological studies based on statistical data may be over-interpreted or misused. A lot of raw data cannot be disconnected from the determination of risk factors, for example, when it comes to determining a tendency towards violence. The transition from observation to normative judgement based on count data alone can also be problematic, due to the difficulty of setting thresholds. For example, French people's feelings about the proportion of immigrants do not shed any light on the number of immigrants that society can tolerate.

Immigration to Besançon refers to the settlement of individuals in the city who were not born in Besançon or its surrounding region, historically known as Franche-Comté (including the County of Burgundy, and ancient Sequania). In contemporary usage, the term generally applies to individuals who are not French nationals and who originate from countries outside of France. Historically, the earliest populations to settle in the area were the Sequani, a Gallic tribe, followed by Roman conquerors who incorporated the region into the Roman Empire. However, the first identifiable migratory community in the modern sense was the Jewish population, which established a presence in Besançon during the Middle Ages and remained there until the 19th century.

During the Renaissance, the city experienced a significant influx of Italian migrants, contributing to its cultural and architectural development. From the 18th century onward, Swiss immigrants also settled in the region, playing a key role in the establishment and growth of the local watchmaking industry. From the 1870s, soldiers from France’s colonial empire—primarily from North Africa and parts of Asia—were brought to the country to serve in the military. After World War I, and especially during the 1920s and 1930s, migration from Italy, Spain, Portugal, and Eastern Europe increased in response to labor shortages in industry. This trend continued after World War II, with significant migration from the Maghreb, the Iberian Peninsula, and Italy persisting until the 1980s, particularly to meet demand in the construction and housing sectors.

More recent waves of immigration have included individuals from Eastern Europe —especially the Balkans and former Yugoslavia —as well as from Sub-Saharan Africa and, to a lesser extent, Southeast Asia. Over time, the settlement of diverse populations has contributed to the city’s multicultural character. These migratory movements have introduced a range of cultural and religious traditions, the most longstanding of which is Judaism, followed in more recent times by Islam and Buddhism.

The history of immigration to Besançon spans several centuries and, in a broader sense, even millennia, when accounting for the various invasions and population movements that have shaped the region. Immigration to the city has primarily occurred for two main reasons: socio-economic hardship (such as the search for employment or improved living conditions) and political instability (including war and persecution) in migrants’ countries of origin. A smaller but notable proportion of arrivals consisted of foreign soldiers stationed in the city between 1870 and 1945, many of whom eventually settled there.

Throughout its history, Besançon has been ruled by a number of different peoples and empires. Although these occupations were primarily invasions rather than migrations in the modern sense, the presence of non-native groups significantly influenced the city’s demographic evolution, cultural identity, and architectural heritage.

In the 2nd century BCE, the site of modern-day Besançon—then an oppidum —was inhabited by the Sequani, a Gallic tribe that controlled a vast territory extending between the Rhône, Saône, Jura, and Vosges rivers. Archaeological excavations have revealed public infrastructure dating from this period, including remnants uncovered in 2001 during preventive excavations near the former city ramparts. The city was encircled by a murus gallicus, a type of Gallic defensive wall, remnants of which were also discovered at the site. Known in Latin as Vesontio, the city was an economic center of Sequania and a strategic target for various groups, including the Germani and the Aedui prior to its conquest by Julius Caesar in 58 BC. The Battle of Vesontio marked the city's incorporation into the Roman Empire, establishing early contact with the Italian peninsula. One of the earliest written records of Vesontio appears in Caesar’s Commentarii de Bello Gallico, where the city is mentioned. Under Roman rule, the city flourished, as demonstrated by surviving monuments such as the Porte Noire, the aqueduct of Besançon-Arcier, which passes through the Porte Taillée and ends at Square Castan, and the remains of the amphitheater.

The first identifiable migratory community to settle in Besançon in a non-military context was the Jewish population. The city’s geographical position between Germany and Italy made it an important center of trade, attracting many Jewish merchants who frequently passed through. The presence of a Jewish community is confirmed by a letter sent in 1245 by Pope Innocent IV to the Archbishop of Besançon, instructing him to enforce the wearing of the rouelle, a badge identifying Jews. In the 14th century, the municipal authorities of Besançon granted Jews permission to reside in the city in exchange for a droit d’entrage (entry fee) and an annual cens (tax). By 1393, records indicate the presence of twelve Jewish families, who maintained a school under the leadership of Joseph de Trèves. In 1394, a local citizen was fined 60 sous for assaulting a Jewish man who was guarding the town, indicating that some members of the community held roles in local defense or civic functions. During the mid-14th century, some Jews fled to Besançon from other parts of France to escape persecution following the widespread antisemitic belief in the so-called " lepers' plot", a conspiracy theory alleging that Jews had conspired with lepers and the Muslim kingdom of Granada to poison water wells. That same year, King Charles VI of France expelled Jews from the royal domains, and Duke Philip the Bold (Philippe le Hardi) enacted similar measures in the Duchy of Burgundy. However, Besançon, as a Free Imperial City of the Holy Roman Empire, was not subject to these decrees. As a result, it became a refuge for Jews expelled from neighboring territories, contributing to the growth of the local Jewish population.

Relations between Besançon and the Italian Peninsula resumed in the 16th century, during the Renaissance, a period of significant cultural and economic influence in transalpine territories. The presence of Genoese merchants in the city is attested from 1535, following their expulsion from Lyon and Chambéry. These merchants established a trade fair in Besançon, attracting moneychangers and other traders for a period of time. However, the city eventually proved economically unviable and difficult to access, leading to a gradual decline in Italian presence. A notable architectural legacy of this era is the Palais Granvelle, considered a Renaissance masterpiece.

Beginning in the 16th century, Protestantism appeared in the city, likely introduced by immigrants from Switzerland and the Principality of Montbéliard. While initially met with hostility, Protestant communities gradually gained acceptance due in part to the contributions of Swiss Calvinists watchmakers, who helped establish the watchmaking industry in Franche-Comté. Protestant worship spaces were progressively granted, including the Refuge Chapel, the former Capuchin Chapel (later known as the Chamars Temple), and eventually the Church of the Holy Spirit. In 1793, Laurent Mégevand (1754–1814) of Geneva, accompanied by around 80 colleagues, settled in Besançon and formally founded its watchmaking industry. This initiative brought 22 additional watchmaking families to the city, numbering between 400 and 700 individuals. By the end of the First French Empire, there were approximately 1,500 Swiss nationals in Besançon, 500 of whom were exclusively employed in watchmaking. Over time, this workforce was increasingly replaced by local labor.

From the 1850s onward, Besançon experienced its first significant wave of mass immigration, largely driven by economic growth and industrial development. Initially dominated by Swiss immigrants, the foreign population soon included a growing number of Italians, who by the late 19th century had become the city's largest foreign community. The 1846 census reported that the majority of foreigners in the city were of Italian, German, or Swiss origin (particularly from Neuchâtel), with generally neutral or mildly strained relations with the local population. Historical records, such as Claude Fohlen's Histoire de Besançon, reference the employment of Piedmontese laborers in major construction projects, including the 1850 development of a canal to supply water from the Arcier springs. The 1851 census recorded approximately 300 residents from Savoy and 96 Italians in the city (335 in the department). The Italian community, primarily from Piedmont, Lombardy, and, to a lesser extent, Liguria, was largely composed of young, male, working-class migrants who frequently moved for seasonal labor. Mea nwhile, Italian merchants, street vendors, and artists, typical of earlier migratory trends, continued to settle in the city.

Notable Italian residents included Gaétan Migon, a restaurateur whose establishment was visited by Honoré de Balzac in 1833; Roncaglio, an organist at Saint-Pierre Church and later Saint-Jean Cathedral (1780–1864); and the painter Jean-Baptiste Franceschi (1795–1881) along with his sculptor sons. In 1872, Besançon hosted its first foreign consulate—an Italian consulate—followed by a Swiss consulate in 1874. Only the latter remains operational. By the time of the Franco-Prussian War of 1870 and the Paris Commune, the city had a diverse foreign population including Italians, Swiss, Austro-Germans, a few Russians, and religious figures from the Near East. The 1876 census recorded 166 Italians in the city, primarily employed in construction and public works; this number exceeded 200 by 1888, with the majority residing in the Battant district, particularly on Petit Charmont, Grand Charmont, and Richebourg streets.

Following the defeat of the Second French Empire in 1871, France began preparations for military revanche in the 1890s, relying increasingly on manpower from its colonial empire. Soldiers from North Africa and Indochina were conscripted and stationed across Franche-Comté, including Besançon. The participation of Muslim soldiers during World War I is commemorated in the Saint-Claude Cemetery, which contains a Muslim section with approximately 20 oriental stelae in memory of fallen colonial soldiers. While colonial presence in the city before World War II was relatively limited, it became more pronounced during the conflict, when indigenous colonial armies were actively deployed in the region.

Tensions between French and Italian workers surfaced in the 1890s, mirroring broader national sentiments. In March 1890, labor disputes broke out during the construction of a paper mill in the Prés-de-Vaux area. The local newspaper Le Petit Comtois reported the next day that Italians were no longer being hired, a decision welcomed by French workers. Nonetheless, Besançon began to lose its economic appeal. A 1889 survey showed that foreign workers increasingly preferred industrial hubs such as Pontarlier, Morteau, Montbéliard, and the Territoire de Belfort. According to the 1896 census, the number of Italians in Besançon had slightly declined, though it remained above 200. Department-wide, there were 1,663 Italians. In 1911, this number rose to 2,467 Italians and 7,843 Swiss in the department, but the onset of World War I in 1914 made life more precarious for foreign residents.

A significant anti-immigrant episode occurred following the laying of the foundation stone for the Besançon-les-Bains hotel. Italian workers criticized the poor quality of imported materials, leading to tensions. On 22 September 1891, a crowd of 1,500 demonstrators gathered at city hall to demand the replacement of Italian workers with French laborers. The protest was widely covered in the local press, with headlines such as "Too many foreigners" and "Too many enemies being made to live at the expense of our compatriots." Ultimately, the Italian workers were dismissed and replaced by locals. This episode is conspicuously absent from Gaston Coindre’s Mon vieux Besançon, written between 1900 and 1912, which otherwise offers a detailed chronicle of city life during that era.

The city’s Jewish population was also affected by World War I. A war memorial at the entrance to the Jewish cemetery commemorates members of the community who died in the conflict. The monument bears the inscription: "Ah! our youth! our pride... oh! how the heroes have fallen!" (II Samuel 1:19), along with a French remembrance medallion. The names of twenty fallen soldiers are engraved on the memorial.

After World War I, experienced an economic downturn, particularly due to the weakening of the watchmaking industry. The city then diversified into other sectors such as textiles, metallurgy, food processing, and paper and cardboard manufacturing. From the 1920s onward, the city saw modest population growth, increasing by 17% between 1921 and 1936, from 55,652 to 65,022 inhabitants. By 1936, the foreign population included 1,352 Italians and 1,103 Swiss, alongside newer arrivals such as Spanish Republicans and refugees from Eastern Europe and the territories of the former Soviet Union. A new wave of Jewish immigrants, primarily from Germany, Austria, Poland, and Central Europe, also settled in Besançon, fleeing the rise of antisemitism in their home countries. By 1934, the city was home to approximately 2,500 immigrants, many of them recent arrivals. Immigration increased again in 1939, following the Anschluss and the beginning of the Allies' involvement in the Axis conflict. Toward the end of the 1930s, the city witnessed renewed hostility toward foreigners, particularly those from countries whose governments had diverged from French policy. Among those targeted were Spaniards, Czechs, and Italians, the latter of whom were subject to anti-Italian demonstrations in 1938 and 1940. Despite this, many immigrants gradually integrated into the city, as was the case with the Italian community, which later facilitated the arrival of family and acquaintances during the postwar economic boom known as the Trente Glorieuses.

In 1936, there were 3,212 foreign nationals living in Besançon, out of a total population of 56,491—approximately 5.7% of the population. This included 1,352 Italians (nearly half of the foreign population), 1,103 Swiss, 156 Poles, and smaller numbers from other nationalities. Since at least 1931, Italians had formed the largest foreign community in both the city and the Doubs department, where 7,990 Italian nationals were recorded. Within Besançon, the Italian community was primarily concentrated in the Battant district, especially west of rue de Madeleine, from quai Veil Picard to Fort Griffon and avenue Siffert, as well as in rue du Petit Charmont, rue du Grand Charmont, and rue Richebourg, where 579 of the city's 689 foreigners resided. Italians were also present in other parts of the city, including the city center, though in smaller numbers. Most members of this community reported working in the construction industry. The late 1930s proved more challenging for the Italian community in Besançon as the Second World War approached. Several Fascist-linked associations and groups were established, including the Association of Italian Veterans, the Il Circolo sports club, and the Union Populaire Italienne (UPI), which had 21 branches in the Doubs department and one in Besançon. Despite support from Rome, these organizations remained small and failed to gain significant influence or lasting presence.

Following the political tensions between France and Italy in November 1938—arising from Italy’s claims on Savoy, Nice, Corsica, and Djibouti, several anti-Italian demonstrations took place in Besançon. In December 1938, approximately 300 university students, along with some high school and college pupils, demonstrated against Benito Mussolini 's territorial claims. In response, the UPI distanced itself from Mussolini's position and expressed support for the French Republic. Tensions escalated further when France and Italy entered the war in June 1940. Another demonstration was held in Place Saint-Pierre, where slogans such as "Mussolini's toilet" were chanted in the city center. The demonstration was widely supported by the local population, and the UPI once again aligned itself with the French position, as it had done in 1938.

In January 1939, approximately 1,350 Spanish refugees arrived in Besançon, fleeing the authoritarian National Catholic regime of General Francisco Franco. In response to xenophobic and racist reactions, Maurice Dubourg addressed his congregation, urging compassion and solidarity with the refugees:

Why is it that some people don't seem to understand these gestures of kindness that unite people of different opinions and backgrounds in a spirit of charity? They say that these refugees are not interesting, that they do not deserve our pity, and that it is a bad deed to help the enemies of the social order. Is it possible that such pagan considerations find credence among Catholics? (...) As the representative of our divine Savior, who came to earth to preach goodness and forgiveness of offenses, we must raise the most indignant of protests against such remarks, and condemn them severely. (...) Ah, dear faithful of Besançon, We implore you, do not harden your hearts, do not let yourselves be won over by this pagan spirit which tends to penetrate everywhere and of which you could one day be in your turn the painful victims.

The Jewish population of Besançon, like elsewhere in France, was targeted by the German occupation and the Vichy regime. During this period, 82 people from Besançon were deported—approximately 40 of them Jewish—as well as 302 individuals from the Doubs department, including 102 Jews.

Several residents of Italian origin joined the Resistance. Among them was Pierre Mosini, son of a Piedmontese immigrant who had settled near Besançon in 1897. A fervent French patriot, Mosini saw two of his sons taken as prisoners of war, while the other four became members of the Resistance. Across the Doubs, numerous individuals of Italian descent—including members of the Lana, Bencetri, Gualdi, Caverzacio, Pintucci, Socié-Lorenzjni, Piova, and Minazzi families—played roles in the Resistance and in the reorganization of the French Communist Party. In Besançon, Alphonse Bachetti, born in Italy in 1902 and naturalized in 1947, also participated actively. A lumberjack in the Chailluz forest, he joined the Foreign Legion in 1939, took part in the Norwegian campaign in 1940, and later fought with the Free French Forces in Syria, Egypt, Tunisia, Italy, and France. He lived in Besançon until his death in 1969; a commemorative plaque in the Grandes Baraques honors his contribution.

Resistance efforts also included individuals of Spanish and Swiss origin. The Molard brothers, of Spanish heritage, were involved in several resistance actions in Besançon before their arrest and execution at the Besançon citadel, on September 26, 1943, along with 14 others. Swiss-born André Montavon, born in 1919, studied in Besançon and joined the Resistance in 1940. He participated in at least sixteen operations and published a diary before being arrested on June 10, 1943. He avoided execution due to his Swiss citizenship, as he was detained with the aim of being exchanged for German prisoners held in Switzerland. Montavon survived several internments in concentration camps and was liberated at the end of the war.

Two Luxembourgers, Marcel Servé and Pierre Engels also took part in the Resistance. Servé worked as a liaison and helped smuggle French escapees and Luxembourg draft evaders to England. He was sentenced to death on June 2, 1942, and executed at the Besançon Citadel three days later. Engels, who had joined the French army before May 1940, was captured and escaped, later joining the Resistance in the Jura. Arrested again in 1944, he was executed on June 23, 1944. Both men were posthumously named Chevalier de la Légion d'Honneur.

A commemorative plaque near the Besançon casino honors soldiers of the 1st French Army who fought in the Doubs region, many of whom were colonial troops. The Rougemont military cemetery contains 2,169 graves of French servicemen who died during World War II, including 1,251 with Muslim headstones. Additional Muslim graves are located in the Saint-Claude and Saint-Ferjeux cemeteries. The monument Les Sentinelles de la Mémoire, located on the Promenade des Glacis, also commemorates foreign soldiers of all origins who served during the conflict.

Immigration to France, and to Besançon in particular, after the Second World War was primarily driven by the urgent need for labor during the country’s reconstruction. Between the late 1940s and the mid-1970s, large numbers of migrants from Italy, Spain, Portugal, and the Maghreb contributed to the French economic boom, a period commonly referred to as the Trente Glorieuses. During this time, Besançon experienced significant demographic growth and substantial economic development, particularly in the garment and artificial textile industries, watchmaking, food processing, and precision mechanics. Urban expansion also created a high demand for labor. Entire neighborhoods, including Planoise, Les 408, Clairs-Soleils, Palente-Orchamps, and Montrapon-Fontaine-Écu, were built during this period. The construction and public works sector became the city’s largest employer of foreign workers. One notable example was the Lhéritier company, which, out of 290 employees (mostly masons), employed 196 foreign workers: 63 Portuguese, 14 Italians, 40 Moroccans, 32 Algerians, and a smaller number of Yugoslavs, Turks, and others. These immigrant workers were highly profitable for local companies. They accepted difficult working and living conditions and were often managed outside the protection of the French Labor Code. Their marginalization from trade union structures allowed employers to exploit them with few restrictions. In addition, these workers were considered economically efficient: immediately employable, physically robust, motivated, and typically single.

Despite a strong rural exodus, this influx of immigrant labor helped offset the shortage of local workers. Over time, many settled in temporary housing estates and later in the neighborhoods they had helped build. They brought their families, learned French, and began integrating into local society. However, the late 1970s marked a turning point. The closure of several key factories—including Lip in 1977, Rhodiacéta in 1982, and Kelton shortly thereafter—led to a decline in available jobs and a deterioration in living conditions, particularly for immigrants. This period also saw a shift in migration patterns. The demand for unskilled labor decreased, reflecting broader structural changes such as the collapse of the local watchmaking industry and the downsizing of the construction sector.

After the war, Besançon received a substantial number of Spanish immigrants, arriving for both political and economic reasons. Political refugees, primarily opponents of the Franco regime, began arriving before 1955. This population, typically aged between 30 and 35, initially viewed their stay as temporary, hoping for a political change that would allow their return to Spain—an outcome that would not materialize until the 1970s. By 1974–1975, the Doubs prefecture recorded only 34 Spanish refugees in Besançon, a figure that reflects the widespread naturalization of earlier arrivals. Most political exiles settled permanently after the 1970s. Economic migration from Spain began during the post-war period, driven by the desire for improved living conditions and better educational opportunities for children. This migration was largely family-based and originated in the broader wave of movement during the late 1950s. The majority of migrants belonged to Spain’s most disadvantaged social classes. During the Trente Glorieuses, at least 350 Spanish families, representing about 1,680 individuals, settled in the city. Migrants primarily came from Andalusia (30.4%), Castile and León (23.9%), Galicia (11.4%) and, to a lesser extent, Asturias. These regional origins reflect broader socio-economic conditions—rural underemployment and agrarian crisis in Andalusia, and urban job scarcity in Castile and León despite some industrial development.

According to INSEE, Spaniards accounted for 15% of all foreign workers in Besançon in 1968. Many were regularized locally due to the slow and cumbersome procedures for obtaining work permits. Men typically worked in construction and public works, sectors facing high demand for labor, while women—particularly younger ones—were employed in domestic services or textile factories. Spanish workers were generally well-regarded by employers, which facilitated their professional advancement and social integration. Housing for these workers varied. While employers were legally required to provide accommodations, most migrants secured housing through family or community networks. Many lived initially in transit housing—such as the Amitié cités, or in neighborhoods like Saint-Ferjeux and Montarmots—before moving into affordable long-term housing. Approximately 100 families settled in historic districts like La Boucle and Battant, though many later relocated to newer neighborhoods such as Planoise, Clairs-Soleils, Palente, Orchamps, and Saint-Claude. Integration was relatively smooth, although language barriers persisted. By 1966, 245 Spanish nationals had been naturalized in the Doubs prefecture, out of 1,373 naturalized foreigners in Besançon, indicating a strong pattern of assimilation Spanish cultural life in the city was also active. Four associations—Club Deportivo Español, Juventud Española, Club Alegria, and Unión Hispánica—were merged in 1972 by the municipality into a single organization, the Centro Español.

After the Second World War, Italians arrived in France—alongside Spaniards and Portuguese—to help compensate for the labor shortage resulting from wartime destruction. In 1946, Italians made up the largest foreign community in Besançon, with 810 nationals, followed by 570 Swiss and 133 Poles, out of a total of 1,863 foreigners. The Battant district remained the preferred area of settlement for Italians arriving in the Comtois capital. Although Italian immigration to Besançon had long-standing roots, the post-war period introduced a shift in the migrants’ geographical origins. No longer primarily from northern Italy, many new arrivals came from central and southern regions. In 1950, Italians continued to form the city’s largest foreign community, followed by Algerians and Spaniards. Like most immigrant groups in the city, Italians worked mainly as masons and earthworkers on the numerous construction sites around Besançon. According to the 1954 census, there were 1,017 Italians living in Besançon and 6,002 in the Doubs department.

At the time, around 30% (301 individuals) resided in the Battant area, while 27% (277 individuals) lived in peripheral neighborhoods such as Rosemont, Saint-Ferjeux, Montrapon-Fontaine-Écu, Saint-Claude, and Palente. The city was undergoing rapid demographic and spatial expansion, and the historic center could no longer accommodate the growing population. A significant portion of the Italian community worked in construction: of the 28 building companies listed in the 1956 Doubs telephone directory, nearly 20 had Italian-sounding names such as Bianchi, Bonsignori, Contini, Lorenzon, and Rodari. Although the Fascist regime in Italy had collapsed, integration into French society remained challenging for many Italian immigrants. Prejudices and derogatory terms such as “Rital” and “Macaroni” persisted. Nonetheless, by 1968, Italians still represented the city’s largest foreign community, with around 2,300 individuals. However, according to local historians Aimé Bouilly and Colette Bourlier, Italian immigration had essentially ceased by 1965, with only a few late arrivals from Calabria and Sicily.

Portuguese immigration to France began in the 1960s, driven by both economic and political factors. Economic motivations included limited development and widespread poverty, while political reasons stemmed from the colonial wars in Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea-Cape Verde. Military service had been extended to four years, with soldiers often sent to the African front. In both France and Besançon, the Portuguese community found employment with relative ease, particularly in construction, public works, the automotive sector, and general industry. However, integration proved difficult. Legal emigration was severely restricted by the Salazar regime, resulting in a large wave of clandestine immigration. Language barriers, housing challenges, and social exclusion further complicated their integration into French society. Many Portuguese migrants initially lived in shantytowns or substandard housing—such as the notorious settlement in Champigny-sur-Marne near Paris. In Besançon, the community was placed in transit housing estates, notably the Tour de l'Amitié I.

Over time, living conditions improved. Shantytowns gave way to proper housing, and the community gradually integrated. The Carnation Revolution of 1974, followed by the end of Portugal’s colonial wars and its accession to the European Union in 1986, significantly improved Portugal’s international image and the situation of its emigrants. In 1979, Portuguese nationals formed the second-largest foreign community in Besançon, with 1,800 individuals. By 1999, their numbers had declined to 922, making them the city’s third-largest foreign community, after Algerians and Moroccans. One notable member of this community is Jacky da Costa, who published Mémoire de la Communauté silencieuse, recounting his life in Barco and Covilhã, his migration to Besançon, and his involvement in local Luso-Bisontin associations rooted in his Christian faith. He estimated the regional Portuguese population at 12,000.

Immigration from the Maghreb began in the early 1950s, but intensified from the 1960s onwards, particularly following the independence of the Maghreb countries, and continued into the 1970s and 1980s, especially in the case of Morocco. Between 1947 and 1962, Algerian Muslims held the same legal status as other French citizens, with the right to vote and full civil rights, making them internal migrants akin to Bretons or Corsicans. This status contributed significantly to their migration to Besançon, as in other parts of France. Even after Algeria’s independence in 1962, Algerians retained a relative freedom of movement to France, a situation facilitated by the country's extraordinary post-war economic growth, which demanded a vast labor force—Besançon being no exception.

From 1974, immigration policy became more restrictive, but Algerians continued to settle in the city, with 1976 marking the peak year of Algerian immigration to Besançon. Moroccan immigration became more prominent from 1968, and continued into the 1980s. This persistence of North African immigration beyond the formal end of mass labor migration is largely explained by the policy of family reunification, which allowed the spouse and children under eighteen of a legally resident foreign national to join them in France. A 1982 interview with Abderrahmane Lahlou, Algerian consul in Besançon, illustrates the profound demographic and cultural impact of Algerian immigration in the Comtois capital and the Franche-Comté region more broadly—introducing new customs and the Islamic faith, which was represented by local associations and the Algerian consulate itself. That same year, a report estimated that 50,000 Muslims were living in Franche-Comté.

For years, former soldiers who chose to settle in Besançon lived in abandoned casemates in the glacis near the Viotte train station, often in “appalling conditions,” until a coalition of local figures, including Mayor Jean Minjoz, Freemason Henri Huot, Protestant pastor Jean Carbonare, and Abbé Chays, intervened to secure more humane living conditions. In the 1960s, several transitional housing projects were established to accommodate colonial veterans and newly arrived North African workers. These included the Founottes site (later renamed Escale), Amitié, and Acacias. North African immigrants also settled in newly developed neighborhoods, such as Clairs-Soleils, Montrapon-Fontaine-Écu, and later Planoise, Orchamps, Palente, and the “408".

Many Harkis also settled in the Besançon area during the 1960s. In 1962, Harki families moved into buildings on chemin des Montarmots, into housing for repatriates on rue de Vesoul, and into other neighborhoods including Saint-Claude, Montrapon, Orchamps, Palente, as well as prefabricated homes in Franois, Saône, and the Valdahon military camp. By 1966, there were 488 Harki families in the Doubs department, more than half of them residing in Besançon and its surrounding areas. A 1986 census showed 428 families in the department, two-thirds of whom lived in the Besançon area and one-third in the Pays de Montbéliard, representing around 3,000 people including their children.

From the 1970s onward, the Comtois capital received no more than sixty immigrants per year from Cambodia and Vietnam, most of them Buddhist students at Besançon’s Center for Applied Linguistics. After the fall of Phnom Penh on April 17, 1975, around thirty Cambodians and Vietnamese were granted refugee status and chose to settle in the city. Over time, several dozen more arrived through the end of the decade, thanks in part to the efforts of Father Gilles. Social housing in the Saint-Ferjeux district was renovated and made available to these migrants. The Forum de Planoise became the only building in France managed by a municipal social welfare center (Centre communal d'action sociale) to host a temporary accommodation facility specifically for the Asian population. Father Gilles played a central role in integrating members of the community by helping them find employment. He also facilitated the return of around fifty Thai prisoners, a dozen of whom settled in Besançon.

From the 1980s onwards, immigration to the Comtois capital—and to France as a whole—changed significantly. Although migratory flows into the city continued, they were far less substantial than during the post-war period. As a result, the composition of the immigrant population began to shift: many were now skilled or highly skilled workers ("chosen workforce") who entered France legally, while others were unskilled and often came from impoverished backgrounds ("illegal workers") who typically entered the country without documentation. These new migrants to Besançon generally come from Sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, or Central Europe. Since the 1980s, the number of Italians and Spaniards has declined sharply. A slight decrease also affected the Swiss, Algerians, and Portuguese, although the Moroccan population more than doubled between 1975 and 1990—from 934 to 2,057. The Turkish community, which first settled in Besançon in the 1970s, also grew rapidly, although its overall size remained small compared to other foreign populations in the city. As a regional capital, Besançon continued to attract many foreigners, including researchers, international students, and migrants arriving for economic or political reasons, including descendants of earlier migrants such as Italians. New arrivals from Eastern Europe, especially the Balkans (including Roma from Macedonia and Kosovo) as well as other parts of the former Eastern Bloc, settled in the city for both economic and political reasons.

These new migrants generally face the same social, linguistic and integration problems as the populations who arrived in the 1920s or during the Trente Glorieuses. However, many associations have sprung up to help them, and to open up life in Bisont to the cultures of the world. Many immigrants and their descendants retain emotional ties with their homelands, while considering Besançon as their own city. Figures show the evolution of migratory flows: in 1975, the city's main communities were Algerians (3,837), Portuguese (1,907), Italians (1,756), Moroccans (901) and Tunisians (300); in 1983, Algerians were still in first place with 1,718, followed by Portuguese (1,650), Moroccans (1,473), Italians (1,022) and Spaniards (572); finally, the Moroccan community took first place in 1990 with 2,057 people, closely followed by the Algerians in second place with 2,024 people, the Portuguese (1,316 people), the Italians (717 people) and the Turks (464 people).

Overall, the Franche-Comté region has experienced immigration patterns similar to those of Besançon, although certain disparities exist between cities and departments. Nonetheless, the broader regional history and sociology of foreign populations offer valuable insight into immigration in the Comtois capital.

As of the late 20th century, Franche-Comté had a foreign population representing 5.9% of its total, slightly below the national average of 7.4%. Immigration to the region began to decline in 1975, with an overall drop of 14%, while immigration levels in the rest of France continued to rise or stabilize. According to 1999 data, the majority of migrants in the region came from the 15 European Union countries outside France (34%), followed by the Maghreb—Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia (31%). Other origins included Eastern Europe (14%), Turkey (11%), other Asian countries (5%), Sub-Saharan Africa (4%), and the Americas and Oceania (1%). More than 100 nationalities were represented in Franche-Comté, with the five largest groups being Moroccans (15.7%), Algerians (14.1%), Portuguese (13.9%), Italians (12%), and Turks (10.6%)—accounting for over two-thirds of the total immigrant population. The region also had a relatively high proportion of migrants from the former Yugoslavia, who made up 4.8% of the immigrant population—well above the national average of 1.7%. Franche-Comté ranked just behind Alsace as the leading French region in terms of the number of Turkish immigrants, even though they were only the fifth largest foreign community in the region.

The sociological profile of immigrants in Franche-Comté differs in some respects from that of the native French population. In 1999, the region's immigrant population was aging: 25% were aged 60 or older, 40% were between 40 and 59, and only 35% were under 40. In contrast, in 1975, over-60s made up just over 5%, while those under 40 accounted for nearly 70%. Gender demographics also shifted over time: women represented 50% of immigrants in 1999, compared to just 40% in 1975. These demographic characteristics, however, vary by nationality.

According to the 1999 general population census, Besançon had 10,426 immigrants, representing 8.9% of the city’s total population. The main countries of origin were Algeria (1,933), Morocco (1,485), Portugal (1,010), Italy (800), and Turkey (482), closely mirroring regional trends. However, in the city, Algerians formed the largest group, followed by Moroccans. More than 53.1% of the immigrant population in Besançon lived in social housing (HLM), and the unemployment rate among them stood at 29.3%.

Immigration to Besançon has often disrupted local life. Indeed, new populations have almost always had an impact on the city's history (the rise of the city under Roman rule, the colonial settlers of the 1st and 2nd World Wars), demographics (the increase in the population of Besançon during the various waves of immigration), culture (artists from immigrant families, the appearance of new architecture) or religion (the emergence of Judaism, Islam and Buddhism), and sometimes even the economy (the founding of the watchmaking industry by the Swiss, immigration in the 1960s for labor). The Sequani and Romans laid early foundations, with Roman structures like the Porte Noire enduring. Jewish settlers introduced commerce and religious diversity, with the 1869 Besançon Synagogue as a testament. Swiss watchmakers established a key industry, while Italians influenced Renaissance architecture, notably the Palais Granvelle. Post-war Maghrebi, Spanish, and Portuguese workers built modern neighborhoods like Planoise, leaving a lasting urban footprint. Associations and symbols like the Statue of Diversity reflect Besançon's inclusive identity.

Until 1946, the city's two main foreign communities were Italians and Swiss, the result of several long-standing waves of immigration. However, from 1954 onwards, the trend was reversed for the Swiss, who became less and less numerous, in contrast to the Italians, who experienced a new migratory surge at this time. New communities also appeared at this time: Algerians arrived in 1954, reaching their peak in 1976; Spaniards also arrived in the city at this time, but this wave of migration was short-lived, as the Spanish population began to decline from 1968 onwards. As for the Portuguese, they had been settling in the Comtoise capital since 1962, and their arrival was particularly significant until 1977. Finally, the city's Moroccan population immigrated from 1968 until the 1980s. Other, more minor influxes took place at the end of the 1960s, but remained at a relatively low level, as in the case of Tunisians, Yugoslavs, and Turks. From the end of the 1970s and throughout the 1980s, the populations of the older waves of migrants declined. Italian, Spanish and Portuguese communities saw their numbers halved. Algerian immigration is also declining, while Moroccans and Turks are still on the rise. New nationalities are increasing in number, notably from sub-Saharan African countries such as Senegal, but also from South-East Asia.

Immigration flows between 1946 and 1970, coinciding with the massive arrival of French families from the countryside, increased the population of Bisont from 65,000 to over 120,000. It is estimated that between 1946 and 1999, the city of Besançon welcomed a total of 131,316 foreigners of all nationalities. These new populations are particularly visible in certain districts of the city, notably Planoise, where in 2008 there were more than 50 different nationalities.

The population of Besançon and much of Franche-Comté has been predominantly Catholic since the region was evangelized in the 3rd century by the martyred saints Ferjeux and Ferréol, although some historians question the veracity of this version. Over the centuries, dozens of churches were built in and around the Comtois capital, and although the Reformation and the separation of Church and State disrupted the omnipotence of the Church in Franche-Comté, Christianity still remains the majority religion in the region.

Other religions and congregations appeared over the centuries, notably with immigration: Jews since the Middle Ages, the Reformed Protestantism from the 16th century onwards, followed by Muslims from the 1870s, then Buddhism in the 1970s, and finally an Orthodox Christian community founded in 2006.

Today, Judaism is the third-largest religion in Bisont, after Christianity and Islam, with around 150 families, mainly shopkeepers, executives, and employees. Post-war immigration from North Africa has given a new face to the city's Jewish community, to the extent that synagogue services are now held under the Sephardic rite. Numerous traces of the community's importance remain, including the Besançon synagogue, the city's Jewish cemetery, and the Château de la Juive. Since the 1970s, the community has had an association (the "Maison Jérôme Cahen"), as well as the Besançon Shalom radio station since 2008, under the aegis of the Besançon consistory.

Islam has been present in Franche-Comté since the 1870s, with the presence in the region of colonial soldiers, most of whom came from the Maghreb. However, Islam did not take root until the 1960s, following the massive arrival of immigrants from the former French colonies, many of them from North Africa. After many difficulties linked to the integration of this new population and to the problems encountered in practicing the Muslim religion, the Bisontine community gradually began to organize itself, and associations began to emerge in the late 1980s, such as the Sunna association. In the 1990s, the first prayer halls were opened, followed by the Sunna mosque in Besançon.

The 21st century brought prosperity to the Besançon community, with sufficient places of worship in the city's main districts. However, the Muslim communities of Besançon and France are also experiencing a great deal of controversy, notably over the burqa, the place of minarets in France and, less directly, the question of national identity. According to radio station France Bleu Besançon, in 2010 the city had 15,000 Muslims, representing around 13% of Besançon's total population and placing this faith second only to Christianity in terms of numbers.

Since 2006, Besançon has officially been home to an Orthodox religious community, with a parish located on the side of the Sainte-Jeanne-d'Arc de Bregille church. The community, which has taken the name of Protection de la Mère de Dieu et Saint Georges (Protection of the Mother of God and Saint George), comes mainly from Romania, Russia, and the whole of Eastern Europe. This Orthodox group is recognized and integrated into the Romanian Orthodox Metropolis of Western and Southern Europe. It is one of the city's only Eastern churches. The Saint-Vasilije Ostroski Cudotvorac parish on chemin des Quatrouillots in the Saint-Claude district is home to the Serbian Orthodox community.

The Reformed Protestants of Besançon have been present in the city since the 16th century, but their community of just a few members was not recognized. It wasn't until the early 19th century that negotiations began between the Protestants and the city, and on January 6, 1805, they acquired the former Capucins chapel, now called the Temple de Chamars, as a place of worship. However, the building had to close, and the last service was held on April 24, 1842, as the chapel had to be reallocated by the city for the artillery arsenal. The former chapel of the Hospitaliers du Saint-Esprit hospital was thus offered to the Protestants of Besançon as a new place of worship, following restoration of the building by the city. In 1842, the city ceded the chapel and the adjacent tower of the former hospital to the Protestant community, and on April 28, 1842, the Temple du Saint-Esprit was dedicated.

As soon as it was integrated into the population of Besançon, the Asian community, and more particularly the Cambodians, asserted their desire to practice their religion, and so the "Centre bouddhique de Besançon" was created to set up a pagoda in a building in Planoise. In 1982, a monk who had just arrived from Cambodia took up residence in the Comtois capital to perform religious ceremonies and guide practitioners, but later left the city. Thus, Buddhists in Bisont refer to the bonzes of Lyon and Nancy. The city's Laotian and Vietnamese communities encountered a number of difficulties related to their worship (e.g. recourse to pagodas outside the city, or the practice of spirit worship requiring a life close to nature), which gradually led to a decline in the practice of Buddhist worship. In 1990, the " Association bouddhiste vietnamienne de Besançon " (Besançon Vietnamese Buddhist Association) was set up, bringing in a bonze from Paris for community celebrations. Although efforts have been made, Buddhism is in decline in the Comtois capital, mainly due to young people's ignorance of their parents' religion, but also and above all due to the lack of infrastructure and Buddhist representatives in the city. A report from 1988 by France 3 shows the organization of the festival of flowers and the dead in Besançon by the Association des Cambodgiens de Franche-Comté. For the first time, this event was celebrated at the same time by the Laotian, Cambodian, and Vietnamese communities, who came for the occasion from all over eastern France. This report shows the rite of the Feast of the Dead, and reports that 3,000 people from South-East Asia were living in Franche-Comté at the time. The festival was also an opportunity to raise funds for the Planoise Buddhist Cultural Center.

New Chinese immigration is bringing vitality to the community and giving it a new face. Numerous Chinese stores, including restaurants, have opened in the Comtoise capital, as in the Planoise district and the city's historic center. In addition to the Buddhist Center, Besançon now boasts a Kagyüpa -type association called " Association Émergences," founded in 2003, as well as the " Groupe Shambhala Bouddhiste de Besançon," located in the Fontaine-Argent area. Buddhism is currently the fourth most popular religion in Besançon, after Christianity, Islam, and Judaism.

In addition to the emergence of new religions, immigrant populations have brought their own customs and habits, including language, dress codes and the arts (especially music). Although these cultures are generally forgotten, they are still present in France and the Comtois capital.

Only Arabic and Portuguese remain stable, albeit on the fringes, being understood and correctly spoken in 2% of French households in the case of the former, and 1% in the case of the latter. However, it's not uncommon to hear these languages in places that are typical of certain parts of the city, such as halal butcher shops and markets, particularly in Planoise. It's also worth noting that some Arabic and foreign words are present in contemporary French slang, not least because French people of North African origin are a significant component of the populations of working-class neighborhoods. Traditional dress is rarely worn, although the presence of Islamic veils and traditional costumes (mainly hijabs and djellabas) is occasionally visible, but mainly worn by the first generation, of North African origin.

The Planoise district, which organizes its own music festival, Fête de la Musique, thanks to local residents, features oriental, Kabyle, Turkish, Kosovar, and world music, demonstrating the city's ethnic diversity and introducing its residents to traditional music, mostly from Muslim countries. However, few singers of foreign origin from Bisont have performed songs in languages other than French (or English), with the younger generation generally preferring hip-hop. Paradoxically, although the younger generation of Moroccan and North African origin is less scrupulous about applying their parents' religion and customs, they consider themselves more nationals of their home countries than of France, and keep in regular contact with their parents' countries of origin.

Arab-Muslims have several associations at their disposal: the Sunna Association, present in the town's main mosque, and the Al-Fath Association, present in the eponymous Planoise mosque. The city's Turkish community can worship through the Association Culturelle des Turcs de Besançon and the Amicale Franco-Turque de Besançon-Planoise, located in the Châteaufarine prayer hall, as well as the Association de la Jeunesse Musulmane de Besançon and the Association islamique des Turcs de Besançon, located in the Clairs-Soleils prayer hall. There is also an Italian association in the Comtois capital: the Sardinian Association "Su Tirsu", located on rue de Belfort. These organizations foster cultural preservation and community integration.

The Comtois capital has always been home to personalities from other countries. Many of Bisont's leading figures have parents or grandparents who are Arab-Muslim, African or from European regions other than France—such as Italy, Central Europe, or Belgium —or were themselves born abroad and later moved to the city. Still others have studied or worked in the city, as is the case for most of Bisont's artists and sportsmen and women. Their involvement in the life of Bisont thus highlights the ethnic diversity and cosmopolitanism of the Comtois capital.

A number of personalities from Europe have left their mark on Besançon, such as Laurent Mégevand from Geneva, founder of the Besançon watchmaking industry, Franco-Belgian scriptwriter Jean-François Di Giorgio and Italian-born sculptor Jean-Baptiste Francesqui. Footballers Ryszard Tarasiewicz, Henri Skiba and Stefan Białas of Polish origin, Rudi Strittich and Camillo Jerusalem of Austrian origin, and Eddy Dublin of Luxembourg played for Besançon Racing Club. But other personalities from Besançon also had strong links with other European countries, such as Besançon-born Antoine Perrenot de Granvelle, who was Archbishop of Malines-Brussels, State Councillor to Charles V and Philip II of Spain, Prime Minister of the Spanish Netherlands, Viceroy of Naples and President of the Supreme Council of Italy and Castile. Viviane Wade, wife of Senegal's current head of state Abdoulaye Wade, was born in Besançon.

Numerous Jewish personalities from Besançon, most of them from Central Europe, have also contributed to the city's history, including the Veil-Picard family of Alsatian origin, the Lipmann family (founders of Lip), the Weil family and rabbis Paul Haguenauer and René Gutman.

The Comtois capital is home to a number of prominent figures from the Maghreb, most of whom are of the Muslim faith. These include Rachid Djebaili, an Algerian footballer who grew up in Planoise, Mohamed Louhkiar, a Moroccan footballer, Khedafi Djelkhir, a boxer of Algerian origin, Ghani Yalouz, a wrestler born in Casablanca, the rap group Mifa Saï Saï, city councillor Michel Omouri, and Salah Gaham, who died heroically trying to stop car fires during the 2005 riots.

The town is home to a number of large immigrant families, the largest and best-known of which is the Hakkar family. Originally from Khenchela, the Hakkar family has a history typical of Algerian-Muslim families in the Comtois capital. Merzoug Hakkar was one of the first Algerians to immigrate to the city in 1957, having fought on the side of France during the Second World War and then for Algerian independence. His family joined him in the following years, and little by little, the Hakkars became the city's largest family, currently numbering some 1,000 members. The most illustrious of these is boxer Morrade Hakkar, but other members are also doctors, lawyers, film-makers, and company directors. Another family member, Abdelhamid Hakkar, was sentenced to life imprisonment in 1989 for the murder of a policeman, Brigadier Alain Schaffer. After the European Court of Human Rights imposed a new trial, he was convicted again in 2003.

Aldo Naouri, a doctor of Judeo-Libyan origin, also passed through the town. Having spent a number of years in the Comtois capital, he has made a major contribution to pediatrics and, to a lesser extent, psychoanalysis.

There are few black-African personalities from the Comtois capital, with the exception of Franco- Beninese jazz singer Mina Agossi and Senegalese Mamadou Thiam, who lived in the Clairs-Soleils district from the age of 11, where he grew up and made his debut in the rings. However, the town also boasts a number of prominent figures, such as current Senegalese head of state Abdoulaye Wade, who holds an honorary doctorate from the University of Franche-Comté, where he studied from 1952 to 1955 before articling at the Besançon Bar from 1955 to 1957; his wife Viviane Wade is a native of the town. Burkinabe players Tanguy Barro and Hamado Ouedraogo, Ivorians Georges Ba and Jean-Jacques Domoraud, Senegalese David Amadou M'Bodji, Congolese Thomas Florin, Malian Moussa Traoré, and Félicien Mbanza from Burundi have all played for Besançon Racing Club.

The city also boasts an Asian personality: rapper Lil Shaolin, one of whose parents is Vietnamese. He has filmed several clips about the city and the Planoise district, the most famous of which are " à 25 000 km/h " and " 2.5 triple zéro." An Indian is also popular in the Comtois capital: Siva Sivasankaran, a flower seller. He was already well known to the people of Bisonne for having sold roses in restaurants for many years, but his arrest and subsequent threat of eviction mobilized a good number of people in the city, giving it a certain local notoriety.

In 2024, the United Nations estimated 9.2 million immigrants (foreign-born people) in France, representing 13.8% of the total population, making France the second largest foreign born population in Europe after Germany and tied with the United Kingdom. This is an increase from the United Nations statistics in 2015 in which there were 8 million immigrants (foreign-born people) in France, which at the time represented 11.5% of the country's total population.

The area with the largest proportion of immigrants is the Parisian urban area (Greater Paris), where almost 40% of immigrants lived in 2012. Other regions with important immigrant populations are Rhône-Alpes (Lyon) and Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur (Marseille).

The Paris region is a magnet for immigrants, hosting one of the largest concentrations of immigrants in Europe. As of 2006, about 45% of people (6 million) living in the region were either immigrant (25%) or born to at least one immigrant parent (20%).

Among the 802,000 newborns in metropolitan France in 2010, 27.3% had one or both parents foreign-born, and about one quarter (23.9%) had one parent or both born outside of Europe. Including grandparents, about 22% of newborns in France between 2006 and 2008 had at least one foreign-born grandparent (9% born in another European country, 8% born in Maghreb and 2% born in another region of the world).

In 2014, the National Institute of Statistics (INSEE) published a study reporting that the number of Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian immigrants in France between 2009 and 2012 has doubled. This increase resulting from the financial crisis that hit several European countries in that period, has pushed up the number of Europeans settled in France. Statistics on Spanish immigrants in France show a growth of 107 percent between 2009 and 2012, i.e. in this period went from 5,300 to 11,000 people.

Of the total of 229,000 new foreigners coming to France in 2012, nearly 8% were Portuguese, British 5%, Spanish 5%, Italians 4%, Germans 4%, Romanians 3%, and Belgians 3%.

By 2022, the total number of new foreigners coming to France rose above 320,000 for the first time, with nearly a majority coming from Francophone Africa (Former French Colonies). A significant increase in students, family reunification and labor migration occurred under the presidency of Emmanuel Macron.

The population dynamics began to change in the middle of the nineteenth century, as France joined the Industrial Revolution. The pace of industrial growth attracted millions of European immigrants over the next century, with especially large numbers arriving from Poland, Belgium, Portugal, Italy, and Spain. In the wake of the First World War, in which France suffered six million casualties, significant numbers of workers from French colonies arrived. By 1930, the Paris region alone had a North African Muslim population of 70,000.

Large numbers of Belgians emigrated to France in the late-nineteenth century (there were nearly 500,000 Belgians in France in 1886), as well as Italians. The interwar era was marked by the arrival of numerous Poles (500,000 in 1931), Spaniards, Russians and Armenians.

After the Second World War, postwar immigration to France significantly increased. During the period of reconstruction, France experienced labour shortages, and as a result; the French government was eager to recruit immigrants coming from all over Europe, the Americas, Africa and Asia.

Although there was a presence of Vietnamese in France since the late-nineteenth century (mostly students and workers), a wave of Vietnamese migrated to the country after the Battle of Dien Bien Phu and the Geneva Accords, which granted Vietnam its independence from France in 1954. These migrants consisted of those who were loyal to the colonial government and those married to French colonists. Following the partition of Vietnam, students and professionals from South Vietnam continued to arrive in France. Although many initially returned to the country after a few years, as the Vietnam War situation worsened; the vast majority of Vietnamese decided to remain in France and brought their families over as well.

This period also saw a significant wave of immigrants from Algeria. Before 1962, Algerians were not restricted, as a result of the 1945 Code of Nationality. In 1954, the Algerian War started, the result of which led to 200,000 Algerian immigrants moving to France. However, because of the tensions between the Algerians and the French, these immigrants were no longer welcome. This conflict between the two sides led to the Paris Massacre of 17 October 1961, when the police used force against an Algerian demonstration on the streets of Paris. After the war, after Algeria gained its independence, the free movement between France and Algeria was once again allowed, and the number of Algerian immigrants started to increase drastically. From 1962-75, the Algerian immigrant population increased from 350,000 to 700,000. Many of these immigrants were known as the " harkis," and the others were known as the " pieds-noirs." The "harkis" were Algerians who supported the French during the Algerian War; once the war was over, they were deeply resented in Algeria, and thus sought safety in France. The "pieds-noirs" were European settlers who moved to Algeria, but migrated back to France following Algerian independence in 1962.

Additionally, the number of Pakistani and Japanese immigrants also increased during this period. There was also a great number of students and workers from former French colonies in Africa. In the 1960s, there was a wave of Portuguese, Moroccan and Turkish immigrants.

With this massive influx of immigrants, France became an asylum for refugees. According to the convention in Geneva, refugee status was granted to four out of five overseas applicants. Many of these refugees came from countries in Eastern Europe (i.e. Hungary) and Latin America, because they feared oppression in their countries of origin.

Although the majority of immigrants at this time came from rural regions, only 6% of them were willing to work in agriculture. About two-thirds of the immigrants worked in mining, steel, construction, and automotive industries. Approximately 12% of male immigrants and the majority of female immigrants worked in domestic services, restoration, and commerce (as for French women, a woman working was subject to her husband's authorisation until 1965.) Youth and elderly immigrants usually worked in craftsmanship and small scale trades.

During the 1970s, France simultaneously faced economic crisis and allowed immigrants (mostly from the Muslim world) to permanently settle in France with their families and to acquire French citizenship. It resulted in hundreds of thousands of Muslims, especially to the larger cities, living in subsidized public housing and suffering from very high unemployment rates. Alongside this, France renounced its policy of assimilation, instead pursuing a policy of integration.

In 1974, France restricted immigration from its former colonies, but immigration from former colonies in the Maghreb and West Africa would end up steadily increasing under the presidencies of Nicolas Sarkozy, François Hollande and Emmanuel Macron. In the late 20th century and in the 21st century, immigration has diversified, with many immigrants originating from Sub-Saharan Africa (922,000 in 2019), Asia (486,000 in 2019) and Latin America. In addition, the enlargement of the European Union has led to more Eastern European immigrants.

According to an Ipsos poll in September 2019, 65% of respondents in France said that accepting migrants did not improve the situation in France and 45% responded that accepting migrants deprived the French of social services.

In 2019, 46.5% of all immigrants were born in Africa, 35.3% were born in Europe, 14.7% in Asia and 5.4% in the Americas and Oceania. In 2020, non-EU citizens had employment rates less than 50% in the southern and southwestern regions of France and in the north and northeastern regions and was above 65% only in the Burgundy region.

The African proportion of both migrants and residents in France is increasing, as by 2022, nearly a majority, 48.2%, of all immigrants living in France come from Africa, 32.3% come from Europe, 13.5% come from Asia and 6% come from the Americas and Oceania. 61.7% of all immigrants living in France come from non-European origins in 2022. By 2022, the total number of new foreigners coming to France rose above 320,000 for the first time, with a significant increase in students, family reunification and labour migration from African and Asian countries happening under the presidency of Emmanuel Macron.

A 2023 survey carried out by Jean-Paul Gourévitch for the Contribuables associés association (English: Associated Taxpayers) found that the estimated cost of immigration to France for French taxpayers was of about €53,900,000,000 per year, four times more than the Justice ministry's yearly budget.

In June 2025, the UDR (right) group in the French Parliament, led by Éric Ciotti, called for the creation of a parliamentary commission to calculate the true cost of immigration. Ciotti is demanding a detailed assessment of French spending on health, housing, education, and emergency aid to migrants, as well as their economic contributions.

In 2014, the National Institute of Statistics (INSEE, for its acronym in French) published a study on Thursday, according to which has doubled the number of Italian, Portuguese and Spanish immigrants in France between 2009 and 2012. According to the French Institute, this increase, resulting from the financial crisis that hit several European countries in that period, has pushed up the number of Europeans installed in France. Statistics on Spanish immigrants in France show a growth of 107 percent between 2009 and 2012, i.e. in this period went from 5300 to 11,000 people. Of the total of 229,000 foreigners arriving to France in 2012, nearly 8% were Portuguese, British 5%, Spanish 5%, Italians 4%, Germans 3%, and Belgians 3%.

With the increase of Italian, Portuguese and Spanish immigrants to France, the weight of European immigrants reached 46 percent in 2012, while this percentage for African reached 30%, with a presence in Morocco (7%), Algeria (7%) and Tunisia (3%). Meanwhile, 14 percent of all immigrants who settled in France that year were from Asian countries—3% of China and 2% in Turkey, while in America and Oceania constitute 10% of Americans and Brazilians accounted for higher percentage, 2 percent each.

By 2022, as a result of rapidly increasing African immigration into France, the proportion of European immigrants declined from 46% in 2012 to 32.3%.

French of Maghrebi (Arabs and Berbers) origin in France form the largest ethnic group after French of European origin.

According to Michèle Tribalat, a researcher at INED, there were 3.5 million people of Maghrebi origin (with at least one grandparent from Algeria, Morocco or Tunisia) living in France in 2005 corresponding to 5.8% of the total French metropolitan population (60.7 million in 2005). Maghrebis have settled mainly in the industrial regions in France, especially in the Paris region. Many famous French people like Edith Piaf, Isabelle Adjani, Arnaud Montebourg, Alain Bashung, Dany Boon, Zinedine Zidane, Karim Benzema, and Kylian Mbappé have Maghrebi ancestry.

In 2005, the percentage of young people under 18 of Maghrebi origin (at least one immigrant parent) were about 7% in Metropolitan France, 12% in Greater Paris, 13% in Lyon, 21% in Perpignan, 22% in French département of Seine-Saint-Denis, 37% in 18th arrondissement of Paris and 40% in several arrondissements of Marseille.

16% of newborns in France between 2006 and 2008 have at least one Maghrebi grandparent.

Their number increased in the following years. According to other sources between 5 and 6 million people of Maghrebi origin live in France corresponding to about 7-9% of the total French metropolitan population.

As of 2011, there were 4.5 million Algerians in France of which 42% were women.

By 2022, as result of both The African proportion of both migrants and residents in France increasing, nearly a majority, 48.2%, of all immigrants living in France come from Africa. Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia are the main countries of origin for immigrants into France in 2022.

Immigrants from Sub-Saharan Africa come primarily from the countries of Francophone Africa in West Africa and Central Africa, and also Madagascar. The most common countries of birth for these immigrants are Madagascar, Senegal, Ivory Coast, Cameroon, DRC, Mali, Republic of the Congo, Mauritius, Comoros and Guinea. Some of these immigrants have been settling in France for over a century, and were employed in various jobs such as soldiers (Senegalese Tirailleurs) and domestic workers; while others, such as Malians in France, started arriving mainly from the 1960s onward.

An important community of immigrants from North America to France are Haitians in France. Citizens of the United States of America total more than 100,000 permanent residents in France, Canadians 11,931, followed by Latin Americans are a growing sub-group the most numerous are the Brazilians 44,622, followed by Venezuelans 30,000, Peruvians 22,002, Chileans (esp. arrived in the 1970s) 15,782, and Argentineans 11,899 (or up to 15,000). Latin Americans are increasingly emigrating to France for economic reasons, study, work, family, and sometimes political asylum.

Illegal immigration to France has developed as the country's immigration policy has become more rigid. There were between 890,000 and 1.2 million illegal immigrants in France, the second highest numbers of illegal immigrants in Europe after Germany.

In 2011, 28,000 of such people were expelled from France. The French government set a goal of 35,000 for the next year. The initialism 'OQTF', from the 2006 law obligation de quitter le territoire français, is sometimes used for a person who is required to leave France.

The French government threatened to withdraw from the Schengen accord in 2009, 2011 and 2012.

As of 2016, many undocumented immigrants tried to jump the fences at Calais and board a train or truck heading for the United Kingdom. The Home Office has agents working alongside French police and immigration agents to prevent unauthorized people from entering the British border zone.

In France, the three largest cities (Paris, Lyon and Marseille) also attract the largest share of immigrants to the country. The region with the largest proportion of immigrants is the Île-de-France (Greater Paris), where 40% of immigrants live. Immigrants are more concentrated in urban areas than the native population. 90.1% of the immigrant population is located in urban areas which is significantly more than the proportion for the native population, 81.9% of them living in urban areas. In 2012, 38.2% of the total immigrant population lived in the Parisian urban area compared to 4.1% and 3.1% respectively for Lyon and Marseille. According to INSEE, French National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies, responsible for the production and analysis of official statistics in France, about 35% of people (4 million) living in Île-de-France, are either immigrant (17%) or born to at least one immigrant parent (18%) in 2006.

In the city of Paris, 20% of people living are immigrants and 41.3% of people under 20 have at least one immigrant parent. Among the young people under 18, 12.1% are of Maghrebi origin, 9.9% of non-French West Indies Subsaharan African origin and 4.0% of South European origin. 436,576 immigrants live in Paris, representing 20% of Parisians and 22.4% of immigrants in Ile-de-France. 162 635 children under 20 with at least one immigrant parent live in Paris, representing 41.3% of the total of children under 20 in Paris and 15.4% of the total of children under 20 with at least one immigrant parent in Ile-de-France

According to UN estimates from mid-2020, the most common countries of birth of the foreign born population in France were:

Immigration into France was expected to exceed 300,000 in the early 2020s, as shown in table below.

With the increase of Spanish, Portuguese and Italians in France, the weight of European immigrants arrived in 2012 to 46 percent, while this percentage for African reached 30%, with a presence in Morocco (7%), Algeria (7%) and Tunisia (3%). Meanwhile, 14 percent of all immigrants who settled in France that year were from Asian countries - 3% of China and 2% in Turkey, while in America and Oceania constitute 10% of Americans and Brazilians accounted for higher percentage, 2 percent each.

In 2008, according to The National Institute of Statistics (INSEE), there were 12 million immigrants and their direct descendants (2nd generation) making up about 20% of the population. with an immigrant defined as a foreign born person without French citizenship at birth. Without considering citizenship at birth, people not born in metropolitan France and their direct descendants made up 30% of the population aged 18–50 in metropolitan France in 2008.

In 2008, there were 5.3 million immigrants corresponding to 8.5% of the total population in France (63.9 million in 2008). 42% were from Africa (30% from Maghreb and 12% from Sub-Saharan Africa), 38% from Europe (mainly from Portugal, Italy and Spain), 14% from Asia and 5% from the Americas and Oceania. Of this total, 40% have assumed French citizenship. In addition, 1.8 million people born in foreign countries (including 1 million in Maghreb) with French citizenship at birth were not included in this total.

There were also 6.7 million direct descendants of immigrants (born in France with at least one immigrant parent) living in France in 2008, corresponding to 11% of the total population in France. Immigrants aged 18–50 count for 2.7 million (10% of population aged 18–50) and 5.3 million for all ages (8% of population). 2nd Generation aged 18–50 make up 3.1 million (12% of 18–50) and 6.5 million for all ages (11% of population). The regions with the largest proportion of immigrants and direct descendants of immigrants are the Île-de-France and Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur / Languedoc-Roussillon, where more than one third and one quarter of the inhabitants respectively were either immigrants or direct descendants of immigrants.

The table shows immigrants and 2nd generation immigrants by origin in 2008. It leaves aside 3rd generation immigrants, illegal immigrants, as well as ethnic minorities with long-standing French citizenship like black people from the French overseas territories residing in metropolitan France (800,000), Roms (500,000) or people born in the Maghreb with French citizenship at birth and their descendants (about 4 million Maghrebi Jews, Harkis and Pied-Noirs and their descendants live in France).

In 2005, 18.1% of young people under 18 were of foreign origin (at least one immigrant parent) in France including 13.5% of non-European origin. Ile-de-France has the highest proportion of total young people with foreign origins, including Europe and non-European, at about 37%.

People under 18 of Maghrebi, Sub-saharian and Turkish origin became a majority in several cities of Ile-de-France (Clichy-sous-Bois, Mantes-la-Jolie, Grigny, Saint-Denis, Les Mureaux, Saint-Ouen, Sarcelles, Pierrefitte-sur-Seine, Garges-lès-Gonesse, Montfermeil, La Courneuve, Sevran, Aubervilliers, Argenteuil, Évry, Stains, Gennevilliers et Épinay-sur-Seine). Youth of non-European origin became a majority in a few areas outside the Ile-de-France also, in particular in Vaulx-en-Velin close to Lyon, as well as Vénissieux, Rillieux-la-Pape and Wazemmes in Lille, in Grand Parc in Bordeaux, and in several arrondissements of Marseille. In Grigny, 31% of young people are of Sub-saharian origin.

Between 2006 and 2008 about 22% of newborns in France had at least one foreign-born grandparent (9% born in another European country, 8% born in Maghreb and 3% born in another region of the world).

In 2010, 27.3% of the 802,000 newborns in metropolitan France had at least one foreign-born parent. In 2010, about one quarter (24%) of all the newborns had at least one parent born outside of Europe, with about 17% of newborns in France having at least one parent originate from Africa (11% from Maghreb and 6% from Subsaharan Africa).

In May 2025, according to INSEE, the increase in educational attainment was greatest among African immigrants. One in two African immigrants now has a higher education diploma, compares to just under one in three in 2006.

Regarding the country of origin of "posted workers", the same document states the origin of the posted workers: Poles represent the largest contingent of employees posted to France (18% of the total), followed by the Portuguese (15%) and Romania (13%). The majority of these employees, about 60% comes from the historical countries of the European Union, but the share from the new Member States "EU" is growing very rapidly, and the nationals of countries outside "EU "also increases.

In April 2025, a survey conducted by the CSA Institute revealed that a majority of the French population wanted stricter conditions for access to asylum in France.

A 2006 study found "that the share of immigrants in the population has no significant impact on crime rates once immigrants' economic circumstances are controlled for, while finding that unemployed immigrants tend to commit more crimes than unemployed non-immigrants." As shown in the 2006 study with 1999 French census data calculations, an unemployed nonimmigrant outlier raises the number of crimes by 0.297, and another raises it by 0.546.

Aoki and Yasuyuki's research show that data that is frequently shown regarding French immigration and crime is misleading, as it does not take discrimination and economic hardships into account as a motivator for criminal acts. As shown in the 2006 study, after adding the share of unemployed immigrants in the labor force, it is determined that the effect of the share of immigrants now becomes insignificant.

With the exception of 2015 in Macrotrends collection of data, French crime rates overall have been on the steady decline, experiencing a 5.68% decline from 2017 to 2018. However, immigration rates are on the incline, with a 10.74% increase of migrants granted asylum from 2017 to 2018. This data from 1990 to 2022 indicates that crime rates and migration rates do not correlate if one is only looking at the numbers, with no other qualitative factors in place.

A study by sociologist Farhad Khosrokhavar, director of studies at the EHESS, found that "Muslims, mostly from North African origin, are becoming the most numerous group in [French prisons]." His work has been criticized for taking into account only 160 prisoners in 4 prisons, all close to northern Paris where most immigrants live.

According to police figures, 77% of perpetrators of solved rapes in Paris during 2023 were of foreign nationality.

Children born in France to foreign parents with legal long-term residence in France are automatically granted French citizenship upon reaching the age of 18. People born abroad and living in France can acquire French citizenship if they satisfy certain conditions. In 2009 the number of naturalised persons was 135,000, with the largest contingent from Maghreb (41.2%). People who have worked in the French military can also get French citizenship.

According to Eurostat 59.9 million people lived in the European Union in 2023 who were born outside their resident country. This corresponds to 13.35% of the total EU population. Of these, 31.4 million (9.44%) were born outside the EU and 17.5 million (3.91%) were born in another EU member state.

In 1945, people from all occupation sectors were against migration, with 89% in the professions, 68% in the building industry and 79% in the iron and steel industry being opposed to immigration. In 1971, an INED poll was asked which gauged as to whether or not the French public thought there were too many foreigners (2.7 million, 5%) in the country. 2% thought there were too few, 39% thought the present number was about right while 40% thought it was too high and 12% much too high. In 1974, another INED poll asked as to whether or not a maximum should be set on the number of foreigners in the country. 70% thought there should be a maximum, 9% thought there should not, and 15% said it depended on the nationality. For the latter part, the majority of those who said it was dependent on the nationality thought there should be a maximum for non-European nationalities (Black Africans, 67%, North Africans, 87%), while less said there should be for European groups (Italians, 28%, Spanish, 33%, Portuguese, 43%, Yugoslavs, 37%). The majority additionally thought that European nationalities would "adapt easier into French life" in comparison to only 19% for North and Black Africans.

In an IFOP commissioned poll in 1973, the majority of the French public (very probable, 23%, fairly probable, 36%, slightly probable, 26%) believed that there would be an increase in the amount of foreigners in the country by the year 2000. The majority also thought that it represented a serious situation (very serious, 17%, fairly serious, 37%) comparatively to 39% (not very serious, 28%, not at all serious, 11%) of the public who did not.

In 1990, 76% of the French public thought there were too many Arabs in the country, 46% for Blacks, 40% for Asians and 24% for Jews.

The Île-de-France is a magnet for immigrants, hosting one of the largest concentrations of immigrants in Europe. As of 2006, about 35% of people (4 million) living in the region were either immigrant (17%) or born to at least one immigrant parent (18%). In 2020-2021, about 5 million people, or 41% of the population of Île-de-France, are either immigrants (21%) or have at least one immigrant parent (20%), these figures do not include French people born in Overseas France and their direct descendants.

If the region, primary seat of French political and economic power for centuries, has always attracted immigrants, modern immigration can be traced back to the second half of the 19th century when France emerged as an immigration destination with Eastern European Jews fleeing persecutions, and Southern Europeans (mostly Italians) and Belgians seeking better economic conditions. During the first half of the 20th century, immigrants were mostly Europeans, but after decolonisation, and during the French post-war economic boom, many immigrants came from former French colonies (chiefly the Maghreb and West Africa). At the 2010 census, 23.0% of the total population in the Île-de-France region were born outside of Metropolitan France, up from 19.7% at the 1999 census.

Among these people born outside Metropolitan France, 1,611,989 were immigrants (see definition below the table), making up 14.7% of the region's total population. INSEE estimated that on 1 January 2005, the number of immigrants in the region had reached 1,916,000, making up 16.7% of its total population. This is an increase of 304,000 immigrants in slightly less than six years.

According to a study in 2009, nearly 56% of all newborns in the region in 2007 had at least one parent originated from sub-Saharan Africa, Turkey, Maghreb or Overseas departments and territories of France.

In 2005, 37% of young people under 18 had at least one immigrant parent in Île-de-France, including a quarter of African origin (Maghreb and sub-Saharan Africa).

People under 18 of Maghrebi, sub-Saharan and Turkish origin became a majority in several cities of the region (Clichy-sous-Bois, Mantes-la-Jolie, Grigny, Saint-Denis, Les Mureaux, Saint-Ouen, Sarcelles, Pierrefitte-sur-Seine, Garges-lès-Gonesse, Aubervilliers, Stains, Gennevilliers and Épinay-sur-Seine). Young people of Maghrebi origin comprised about 12% of the population of the region, 22% of that of département of the Seine-Saint-Denis district, and 37% of the 18th arrondissement of Paris. In Grigny, 31% of young people are of sub-Saharan origin.

In the département of Seine-Saint-Denis (population 1.5 million), 57% of people under 18 have at least one immigrant parent, including 38% of African origin.

Parliamentary immunity (French : immunité parlementaire) is an aspect of French politics. Members of the Parliament of France enjoy irresponsibility for what they did as parliamentarians, and partial inviolability – that is, severe restrictions for the police or justice to arrest or detain them. Both irresponsibility and inviolability are mandated by article 26 of the Constitution of France.

These dispositions are somewhat controversial, following abuse of such privileges.

Members of the Parliament may not be sought, prosecuted, judged or imprisoned for actions that they have accomplished within their duties as parliamentarians. In particular, parliamentarians are immune from prosecution for defamation committed in the exercise of their functions. This includes speeches and votes in public sittings of the assemblies, law proposals, amendments, as well as reports and other actions commissioned by parliamentary instances. This, according to the jurisprudence, does not include interviews on broadcast radio, nor does it include reports commissioned by the executive branch – since such actions are not specific to the duties of a parliamentarian.

For interventions in public sitting, members of parliament are however still subject to the disciplinary rules of their assembly.

There is no way to lift this irresponsibility clause, and the parliamentarian himself or herself cannot renounce it. The termination of the parliamentary term does not allow the prosecution of former parliamentarians for actions committed within their parliamentarian duties.

While members of parliament are not criminally responsible for their actions as parliamentarians, they are, however, responsible for their actions as private citizens. There are, however, strong limitations as to their prosecution.

Members of Parliament may be arrested or otherwise deprived of their freedom, or face restrictions thereof, only with the permission of the desk of their assembly. This authorization is not needed in case of a flagrant felony (e.g. the parliamentarian was caught red-handed) or in case of a definitive condemnation by a court of law. The assembly of which the parliamentarian is a member may oppose any such measure for the duration of the parliamentary session.

Requests for the arrest or detention of a parliamentarian are issued by the general prosecutor of the competent Court of Appeal, sent to the Minister of Justice, who transmits them to the Desk of the relevant assembly. The Desk examines the requests and rules on it; its ruling is published in the Journal Officiel.

The topic of parliamentarian immunity is somewhat controversial in France, especially in the context of scandals of corruption or graft involving politicians. Many resent such a mechanism, in which some influential members of society enjoy special rights and are not made accountable for their own actions.

In 2004, Charles Pasqua was voted in as a senator by conservative electors of the Paris region (the Senate is elected by an electoral college). This was denounced by critics, including the Canard Enchaîné, as a way to prevent Pasqua from being prosecuted for various alleged crimes of corruption and misuse of public funds. See corruption scandals in the Paris region.

Likewise, in early 2005, the idea was suggested that former Presidents of France should become senators-for-life, instead of being able to sit in the Constitutional Council. Ostensibly, this idea was a means to solve the problem of such former presidents as Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, who may not have kept to the strict duty of political neutrality in their speech expected from members of the council. This, however, was criticized as a way to provide Jacques Chirac with immunity for related scandals.

Indicative planning is a form of economic planning implemented by a state in an effort to solve the problem of imperfect information in market economies by coordination of private and public investment through forecasts and output targets. The resulting plans aim to supply economically valuable information as a public good that the market by itself cannot disseminate, or where forward markets are nonexistent. However, indicative planning takes only endogenous market uncertainty into account, plans the economy accordingly, and does not look into exogenous uncertainty like technology, foreign trade, etc. Indicative plans serve to complement and enhance the market, as opposed to replace the market mechanism, hence they are adopted in market-based and mixed economies and were most widely practiced in France and Japan before the 1980s. When utilizing indicative planning, the state employs "influence, subsidies, grants, and taxes [to affect the economy], but does not compel". Indicative planning is contrasted with directive or mandatory planning, where a state (or other economic unit) sets quotas and mandatory output requirements. Planning by inducement is often referred to as indicative planning.

Indicative planning is coordinated information that guides the choices of separate state and private entities in a market economy or mixed economy.

The Eighth Five Year Plan (1992 - 1997) adopted Indicative Planning in India. The Eighth Five Year Plan (1992 - 1997) managed the transition from a centrally planned economy to a market led economy through indicative planning.

Indicative planning originated in France after the Second World War by Charles de Gaulle in 1946 to strengthen the French economy and offset the demands of socialists and Communists calling for socialization of the means of production and/or Stalinist command planning. Indicative planning was one aspect of dirigisme that lasted until the 1980s. Indicative planning was carried out by the General Planning Commission. The underlying concept behind indicative planning is the early identification of oversupply, bottlenecks and shortages so that state investment behavior can be modified in a timely fashion to reduce the incidence of market disequilibrium, with the goal being a concerted economy. Policy tools used included export subsidies, R&D funding, tax breaks, preferential lending by state-owned banks, and a relaxed antitrust policy.

Since the 1978 economic reforms in China, the state reduced its role to directing economic activity rather than managing it through directive plans. By the early 21st century, the Chinese government had limited the role of directive mandatory planning to goods of national importance and large-scale construction, while increasing the scope of indicative planning and market forces in all other sectors of the economy. The current Chinese socialist market economy is largely based on market forces for consumer goods and indicative planning for heavy industry in the public sector.

The Soviet Union utilized indicative plans for its state-run economy up until 1928, before they were integrated into mandatory planning under the Supreme Council of the National Economy and later by the Gosplan. Alexei Kosygin 's 1965 Soviet economic reform tried to introduce some sort of indicative planning in the USSR.

The Japanese government practiced indicative planning through the Japanese Economic Planning Agency.

The term National Economic Planning is associated with government's effort to coordinate the working of both the public sector and the private sector through a structured mechanism. Although, during the 20th century, the term was more associated with the communist and eastern economies, through the 1970s, theorists and practitioners documented the growth of this practice amongst western economies too. In the latter part of the 20th century and till date, economists have demanded that underdeveloped and developing countries — especially in continents like Africa — should embrace National Economic Planning to a large extent. Famous proponents and practitioners of National Economic Planning have been Nobel Prize–winning Russian politician Leonid Kantorovich, John M Hartwick, Carl Landauer (who, in 1947, wrote one of the first western books on the subject, titled Theory of National Economic Planning), American Republican politician Alf Landon, the Russian born Canadian politician David Lewis, Chinese politician Zhang Baoshun and German sociologist Adolph Lowe.

Organizational Committees (French: Comités d'organisation) were entities established by the Vichy regime to regulate and control the French economy during the German occupation of France in World War II. Initially intended to protect French economic interests, these committees soon became tools of economic collaboration with Nazi Germany.

The Organizational Committees were created by the law of August 16, 1940, to oversee industrial production following the armistice with Germany. They operated under the higher authority of the Central Office for the Allocation of Industrial Products (Office central de répartition des produits industriels, OCRPI), established by the law of September 10, 1940. The OCRPI was attached to the Secretariat of State for Allocation within the Ministry of Commerce and Industry.

The Organizational Committees (CO) were responsible for the "secondary allocation" of resources among the enterprises under their jurisdiction, while the OCRPI managed the "primary allocation." Over time, these allocations increasingly prioritized the needs of German industry.

The number of Organizational Committees grew significantly during the occupation, from 15 in late 1940 to over 200 by the spring of 1944.

Between 1941 and 1943, three committees were created to control musical professions under the Vichy government. These committees implemented strict German directives, including the decree of June 6, 1942, which banned Jewish individuals from holding artistic positions in performances, films, and concerts.

Established by decree on March 16, 1941, this committee was chaired by René Dommange, who oversaw music publishing and production.

Directed by composer and conductor Henri Rabaud, this state-affiliated committee managed royalties and reorganized the SACEM. It systematically seized royalties deemed to be "enemy property," including those belonging to Jewish artists, as well as English, American, and French exiles.

Initially established in 1941, it was later renamed the "Committee for Musical Art and Free Music Education" in 1943. Both iterations were chaired by French pianist Alfred Cortot and enforced bans on performances by Jewish artists, their works, and "degenerate art" (Entartete Kunst).

The COES was created by the decree of August 16, 1940, to regulate theatrical activity. It primarily excluded Jewish personnel, managed funding for performance venues, and coordinated with the German occupiers, including Otto Abetz and the Goethe-Institut.

The Comité d'organisation de l'industrie cinématographique (COIC) was tasked with normalizing and controlling film production under Vichy. Established by the August 16, 1940 law, it operated under the Ministry of Information.

Created on May 3, 1941, the Committee for Industries, Arts, and Book Trade oversaw the allocation of paper and censorship of publications. Its members included notable resistance figures such as Marguerite Duras.

Managed Franco-German textile agreements.

Directed by General Jean Bergeret, this committee facilitated German demands for aircraft production.

Led by François Lehideux, it coordinated French automobile production with the German Generalbevollmächtigte für das Kraftfahrwesen (GBK).

The Organizational Committees relayed Vichy government instructions to businesses. For example, on July 2, 1942, Pierre Laval ordered them to improve labor efficiency in industries supporting the forced labor program.

The Initiative and Liberty Movement (French : Mouvement initiative et liberté, MIL) is a French Gaullist political association.

First called GIL (Initiative and Liberty Groups), it was established in March 1981 and became the Initiative and Liberty Movement on November 17, 1981. It was chaired by Jacques Rougeot, who was close to the Rally for the Republic (RPR) and president of the National Inter-University Union (UNI). General Alain de Boissieu, Pierre Messmer and Jacques Foccart also participated in its establishment.

The MIL was born before the victory of the left in 1981. It tried "to prevent that, after having seized political power, the socialist-communists definitely put their hands on and minds on the structures of France", according to its terms.

As Pierre Debizet said on TF1 on July 25, 1985, the MIL does not consider itself officially as a "resurgence" of the Service d'Action Civique (SAC).

From 1986 on, its new cause was to liberate France from the "socialist stagnation". Pierre Debizet compared, in 1985, socialism to AIDS.

However, the MIL struggled to take off, though it had several thousand members, including Alain Peyrefitte and the former Chief of Staff of the Army, General Jean Delaunay. Yet one thing was certain: despite low name recognition, everybody on the right knew the MIL.

About the ideas of MIL in the 1980s, the historian François Audigier said: "The MIL is a kind of ideological laboratory, which crossed the diverse influences of the liberal right, a reactionary Catholicism and a rigid Gaullism. It used an anti-immigration, pro-life, defense of private schools and the rejection of left-wing values, a package that had nothing to envy to the National Front 's program".

The MIL, now chaired by Christian Labrousse, who claims to be on the "civic right" a Gaullist and a patriot. Its emblem is the Cross of Lorraine. This movement is associated to the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP). It is part of the UMP's right-wing and is a "Gaullist loyalist" organization as opposed to neo-Gaullism, which integrates neoliberalism and moderate centre-right ideas.

The MIL is a "movement of thought" out of defending the common civic values (primacy of individual freedom, responsibility, duty and cohesion of society). Gaullism is for the MIL an inspiration.

He considers that communitarianism, immigration and Islamism threaten the national identity of France, and that resistance is a civic duty.

Pierre Clostermann, a Companion of the Liberation ; Jacques Foccart, former head of Free France network and former General Secretary of the Presidency of the Republic between 1959 and 1974; Michel Habib-Deloncle, former minister of General de Gaulle; Pierre Messmer, a Companion of the Liberation and former Prime Minister and Maurice Schumann, a former minister and a Companion of the Liberation, now dead, were members of its honorary committee.

Are also members of the honorary committee of the MIL

In the 1995 French presidential election it supported Jacques Chirac to "escape from socialism" and repeated its support for Chirac in the 2002 election ("Chirac, the true Gaullist") and it supported Nicolas Sarkozy in the 2007 election. It opposed the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe in 2005.

The INSEE code (/ ɪ n s eɪ / in- SAY) is a numerical indexing code used by the French National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE) to identify various entities, including communes and départements. They are also used as national identification numbers given to people.

Although today this national identification number is used by social security in France and is present on each person's social security card (carte Vitale), it was originally created under Vichy France under the guise of the Registration Number to the National Directory of Identification of Physical People (Numéro d'inscription au répertoire des personnes physiques, NIRPP or simply NIR). The latter was originally to be used as a clandestine military recruitment tool, but in the end served to identify Jews, gypsies, and other "undesirable" populations under Vichy's conceptions. The first digit of the NIR was 1 for a male European, 2 for a female European, 3 for a male Muslim, 4 for a female Muslim, 5 for a male Jew, 6 for a female Jew, 7 for a male foreigner, 8 for a female foreigner, while 9 and 0 were reserved for persons of undetermined racial status.

The Demographic Service was created in 1940 in order to replace the military recruitment office prohibited by the June 1940 Armistice with Nazi Germany. On October 11, 1941, the Demographic Service absorbed the former General Statistics of France (SGF, created in 1833). The new organization was called the National Statistical Service (Service national des statistiques, SNS).

Each French person receives at birth a national identification number, the "numéro d'inscription au répertoire" (NIR or National Repertory registration), also called a "numéro de sécurité sociale" (or Social Security number). This INSEE number is composed of 13 digits + a two-digit key. Although the total number is of 15 digits, its composition makes it easy for individuals to remember at least the first seven digits (they just have to know their sex, year and month of birth, and department of birth).

Their format is as follows: syymmlloookkk cc, where

The "sex" codes (s : 1 for male, 2 for female) can be given in special occasions for temporary registrations, such as for someone who a person who works as a wage-earner but is not registered for miscellaneous reasons. The sex code can be changed if someone underwent gender reassignment. Under Vichy France, but only in Algeria (not in metropolitan France) this s code was also used to register Jews, Algerian Muslims, foreigners, or ill-defined people. Thus, 3 or 4 was given to Muslim people of Algeria and of all colonies ; 5 or 6 for indigenous Jews; 7 or 8 for foreigners; 9 or 0 for miscellaneous and ill-defined status (people in none of these classes).

The part llooo is used together, referred to as the COG, which identifies the person's location of birth.

They are also specific codes for people whose date or place of birth is unknown, although this is today more and more rare (for example, the birth code is greater than 20 if the month of birth is unknown, and the communal code is 990 if the commune of origin is unknown). For overseas departments, the department number has three digits, and the communal number two digits (since 1950). People born abroad have a departmental code of 99, and the communal code is replaced by the code of the country of birth, which has three digits. Before 1964, departmental codes from 91 to 96 were used for Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco.

If in a specified month the total number of births exceeds 999, an extension common code is created.

The last code is obtained by a mathematical method (dividing by 97 the number formed by the first 13 digits, taking the remainder from this division, and then the "complement to 97", that is the difference between 97 and this remainder): this gives the control key code.

The NIR (National Identification Repertory) was created by René Carmille, who died at the Dachau concentration camp in 1944. Between April and August 1941, under the Vichy regime, Carmille conducted the first general survey to prepare the secret mobilisation of a French army. The codification was then done by General Marie in Algeria, to obtain a census of Jews, Muslims and other categories. The aim was to create a file of the whole of the French population and to discriminate according to ethnic or statutory criteria, following the racial policies of Vichy. Thus, the first digit that is now used to distinguish males and females then had other purposes: 3 or 4 for Algerian non-Jewish indigenous people, 5 or 6 for indigenous Jews, 7 or 8 for foreigners, and 9 or 0 for miscellaneous and ill-defined statutes.

This discriminatory categorization used in Algeria was abolished in 1944 and has never been used in Metropolitan France where, throughout the war, only "1" and "2" (for male and female) was used. The administration of the NIR was assigned in 1946 to the new Statistical Institute, the INSEE. This institution is also in charge of the RNIPP (répertoire national d'identification des personnes physiques, National Repertory of Identification of Physical Persons), which contains for each individual: the NIR, last name, first name, sex, date and place of birth, and a reference of the Birth Registration (Acte de naissance).

SIREN codes are given to businesses and nonprofit associations, SIRET codes to their establishments and facilities (SIRENE database).

INSEE also gives numerical indexing codes (French: les Codes INSEE) to various administrative entities in France:

The departmental codes are well known since they were used as the last two digits of vehicle registration plates (75 is Paris, 13 Marseille, 31 Toulouse, etc.). However, this vehicle registration plate numbering system became optional in 2009 so the last two digits no longer necessarily indicate the department to which the car is registered.

The commune codes were assigned initially by numbering the alphabetically ordered list of commune names within each department or overseas division. Exceptions have occurred over time because some communes were renamed, some communes were split and new communes have been added to the end of the list.

The departmental codes are also best known as part of the French postal codes; but the postal codes do not include the INSEE commune numbers but were designed by geographical series starting by the main city of the department and then split geographically around them, with additional series given for special distribution. Some areas of the largest and most populated communes can also be assigned distinct series. The postal codes do not indicate precisely the communes but the location of the post office in charge for the distribution, and many rural communes share the same postal code number as the commune where the post office is located.

There are also 5-digit INSEE codes for foreign countries and territories, beginning with 99.

The Inspection du travail (IT, Labour inspection) is a specialist agency of the French civil service, responsible for investigating employment conditions and enforcing labour law, created in 1892 during the Third Republic.

The Labour inspection was officially created by the 19 May 1874 law during the Third Republic, establishing a body of 15 divisionary inspectors, and several departmental inspectors. However, they were not very efficient. Following the International Conference on Labour in Berlin on 15 March 1890, envisioning the creation of an international labour legislation, the Third Republic created by the 2 November 1892 law a specialized body of civil servants dedicated to inspection of labour conditions. It was first of all charged of the surveillance of the implementation of the 22 March 1841 law prohibiting child labour of less than 8 years old. This law had been enacted following reports by the physician René Villermé. The 1890 law also enacted a maximal length of work for children, women and underage girls.

The function was popularized by the inspector Pierre Hamp, who maintained a chronicle in L'Humanité newspaper from 1906 to 1912. Following the creation of the Ministry of Labour in 1906, the IT became one of its services.

In 1947, the 81st International Convention of the International Labour Organization forced all ratifying states to "organize a system of labour inspection". France ratified it under the Fourth Republic by a 10 August 1950 law.

In 1975, a law was introduced to limit and regulate redundancies making it compulsory for employers wishing to carry out redundancies to obtain the authorization of labour inspectors. This law was abolished in 1986 by Jacques Chirac administration.

During a routine inspection of seasonal workers on a vineyard on 2 September 2004, Claude Duviau, a farmer from Saussignac shot and killed two labour inspectors, Sylvie Trémouille and Daniel Buffière. Duviau was later found guilty of murder and sentenced to 30 years in prison. He died in custody on 26 January 2016. The shooting led to a nation-wide debate on labour inspectors' work conditions in France.

There are in 2010 600 Labour Inspectors and 1219 controllers. Each year, they established approximatively 16.000 procès-verbaux, of which only a fourth lead to a sanction of the employer.

Labor inspectors take an 18-month paid training course at the Institut national du travail, de l'emploi et de la formation professionnelle (INTEFP) in Marcy-l'Étoile (Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes) near Lyon. The labor inspector exam is one of the most selective category A administrative exams, with a success rate of just 6.75% in 2018.

The Institut national du travail, de l'emploi et de la formation professionnelle (INTEFP) was created in 1975, first at 83 boulevard Pasteur in Paris, then at 21 rue de la Vanne in Montrouge, before moving to Lyon in 1980. Under the direct supervision of the Ministry of Labor, the school became a public administrative establishment on January 1, 2006, under Decree no. 2005-1555 of December 13, 2005.

The General Inspectorate of Finance or Inspection générale des finances (French pronunciation: [ ɛ̃spɛksjɔ̃ ʒeneʁal de finɑ̃s ], IGF) is an interdepartmental auditing and supervisory body in France. Its general mission is to provide oversight, audit, analysis, consulting and evaluation services in administrative, economic and financial matters. In the recent years, the IGF has been at the head of the movement of modernisation of the state (in particular through its leading role in the General Review of Public Policies).

It is currently run by Catherine Sueur. It is placed under the joint responsibility of the Ministry of Economy and Finance and Ministry of Public Action and Accounts. Yet, because it is an interdepartmental body, it carries out missions for many ministries.

The General Inspectorate of Finance is not only a state body; it has been one of the Grand Corps of the French State since the 18th century. A small but influential corps, the IGF enjoys a particular prestige: each year it recruits some of the best students graduating from the highly regarded École nationale d'administration, and career opportunities after leaving the IGF are very good in both public and private sectors.

Today the General Inspectorate of Finance conducts a variety of assignments upon request both from its supervising ministries and from other ministries, the Prime Minister or the President of the Republic. The IGF has four main missions:

Fields of investigation offer a great diversity of subjects as the IGF can be called upon by any ministry, jointly with the Finance or Budget ministers. Members also work with World Bank or International Monetary Fund teams on specific international assignments.

The IGF is often compared to a consulting firm - a consulting firm of the state (its members are civil servants), within the state (it is not an independent body), and for the state (its only client are public administrations). But many differences that regarding the work method of the IGF. The IGF's reports allow three levels of reading: a short summary for ministers (2-5 pages), a synthesis for their staff and for high-level civil servants (20-50 pages), and the complete report for the administration agents (200-800 pages).

The Tournée consists of approximately 50 people, with a median age of 34. The group comprises the inspectors of finance (members of the 'corps'), seconded civil servants from other ministries (acting inspectors of finance), and interns. Placed under the supervision of the general inspectors, it performs the bulk of the operational work entailed in carrying out the assignments entrusted to the IGF. Inspectors of finance are mainly recruited after graduation from the École nationale d'administration (the French national school for high-ranking civil servants) - working for the inspection is often one of the top choices of graduates. They spend at least four years working for the IGF before moving to a career outside the IGF. The tournée represents a richly rewarding experience for its members, with a heavy emphasis on teamwork, enabling inspectors of finance to develop their capabilities progressively.

The General Inspectorate of Finance also draws upon talent from a diversity of backgrounds, recruiting via an "external channel", to bring in executive grade personnel with ten years’ public service experience and enable the staff to benefit from a wider range of experience.

There are 40 or so general inspectors of finance, who embody the expertise and experience of the IGF. In some cases they carry out assignments directly, in others they supervise or direct them, in certain cases overseeing and guiding members of the tournée. As consultant general inspectors they provide expertise in a specific area, Finance Ministry Department or another ministry. They bring the IGF’s vision to bear on their particular sphere, contribute to the planning and oversight of missions, supervise the implementation of their recommendations, and ensure knowledge acquired is properly capitalized on and circulated.

There are approximately 260 members of the corps, of which 70 inspectors currently work within the General Inspectorate. The Head of the General Inspectorate of Finance is Marie-Christine Lepetit. Each mission usually gathers between one and four Inspecteurs des Finances under the supervision of one Inspecteur Général des Finances, and can sometimes involve other auditing body (such as the Inspection Générale des Affaires Sociales or the Inspection Générale de l'Administration) or even private consulting firms such as McKinsey & Company.

Junior inspectors generally complete four years of assignments before moving on to other ministerial departments, public bodies, ministerial cabinets, international organizations or the private sector.

Current prominent figures of the Inspection include:

Other famous inspectors of finance include:

The Institut d'étude des questions juives (IEQJ) (Institute for the Study of Jewish Questions) was an antisemitic propaganda organization created in France under the German occupation during World War II, with the support of the Propagandastaffel (German Propaganda Office) and under the regulation of the Gestapo.

Originally known as the Bureau d'information et d'étude des questions juives (Office of Information and Research on Jewish Affairs) it was soon renamed to Institut d'étude des questions juives and officially launched on 11 May 1941. The name of the organization is variously translated, with a majority using the literal rendering, Institute for the Study of Jewish Questions, while some sources in English use the more accurate Institute for the Study of Jewish Affairs. In March 1943, the IEQJ became the Institut d'études des questions juives et ethnoraciales (Institute for Research on Jewish and Ethnoracial Affairs) (IEQJR).

It should not be confused with the Institute for Research on the Jewish Question, the Nazi party institute in Frankfurt.

The first Secretary General of the IEQJ was Paul Sézille. He remained in the post until 1942, and was succeeded by journalist René Gérard. The co-founder was Octave Bellet.

The IEQJ was based in Paris at 21 rue La Boétie in a building belonging to art dealer Paul Rosenberg, who was owner of a major art gallery in Paris that had been requisitioned by the Nazis. As a private organization under direct control of the German authority, the IEQJ had no formal link with the Vichy regime. Its main role was the spreading of antisemitic propaganda and the publication of the magazine Le Cahier jaune [ fr ] directed by André Chaumet which published 13 issues between November 1941 and February 1943. This was followed by a second magazine entitled Revivre (with the subtitle "The great illustrated magazine about race") published from March 1943 to 20 July 1944, this time in direct connection with Vichy, and this, too, directed by Chaumet. The IEQJ also published La Question juive en France ("The Jewish Question in France").

The most important action of the IEQJ was their sponsorship of the exhibition Le Juif et la France ("Jews and France") which began in September 1941.

Financing of the IEQJ was provided by the German intelligence service of the German Embassy and by Theodor Dannecker, head of the Amt IV J of the Gestapo, responsible for "the Jewish question". Funding was for 200,000 francs the first months, and 50,000 francs thereafter.

The IEQJ was absorbed into the propaganda department of the Commissariat-General for Jewish Affairs to be expanded, and replaced in March 1943 by Institut d'études des questions juives et ethnoraciales (IEQJR) ("Institute for the Study of Jewish and Ethno-Racial Issues") headed by George Montandon.

The French Institut de radioprotection et de sûreté nucléaire (IRSN) ("Radioprotection and Nuclear Safety Institute") located in Fontenay-aux-Roses is a public official establishment with an industrial and commercial aspect (EPIC) created by the AFSSE Act (Agence française de sécurité sanitaire de l'environnement et du travail [ fr ] – French Agency of Sanitary Environmental Security) and by February 22, 2002 decreed n°2002-254. The IRSN is placed under the conjoint authority of the Defence minister, the Environmental minister, the Industry minister and the Health and Research minister.

The IRSN gathers more than 1500 experts and researchers from the Institut de protection et de sûreté nucléaire (IPSN – Protection and Nuclear Safety Institute) and the Office de protection contre les rayonnements ionisants [ fr ] (OPRI – Ionizing radiations protection office). These scientists are thus competent on nuclear safety, radioactive protection and control of nuclear and sensitive materials.The IRSN realize investigations, expertise assessments and studies on the fields of nuclear safety, protection against ionizing radiation, protection and control of nuclear material, and protection against voluntary ill-advised acts.

2001: creation of IRSN by law no. 2001-398 of 9 May 2001, article 51. IRSN was created from the merger of the Institute for Nuclear Protection and Safety (IPSN), which was part of the Commissariat à Atomic Energy (CEA) and the Office for Protection against Ionizing Radiation (OPRI), which was attached to the Ministry of Health, with the aim of creating a new public research and expertise establishment, independent of industrialists.

2002: operation of IRSN specified by decree no. 2002-254 of February 22, 2002.

2007: operation of IRSN modified by decree no. 2007-529 of April 6, 2007 to take account of law no. 2006-686 of June 13, 2006, relating to transparency and security in nuclear matters.

2016: operation of IRSN amended by decree no. 2016-283 of March 10, 2016 creating articles R592-15 et seq. in the environment code and repealing decree no. 2002-254 of February 22, 2002.

2025: The Nuclear Safety and Radiation Protection Authority (ASNR) created by the law on the organisation of the governance of nuclear safety and radiation protection of 21 May 2024 came into operation on 1 January 2025. It is the result of the merger of the Autorité de sûreté nucléaire (ASN) and the Institut de radioprotection et de sûreté nucléaire (IRSN).

IRSN has nearly 1,816 employees, including many specialists, engineers, researchers, doctors, agronomists, veterinarians and technicians, competent experts in nuclear safety and radiation protection as well as in the field of control of sensitive nuclear materials.

This staff is spread over 9 sites in France, with the Institute's headquarters located in Fontenay-aux-Roses. The largest facilities are located in Fontenay-aux-Roses, Vésinet and Cadarache. Establishments are also present in Cherbourg-en-Cotentin, Orsay, Saclay, Tournemire, Villeneuve-lès-Avignon and Tahiti. This last antenna is responsible for monitoring radioactive fallout from former French nuclear tests in French Polynesia.

The Institut de veille sanitaire (InVS ; English: French Institute for Public Health Surveillance, literally "Institute of Health Surveillance") was a French public establishment of the Health minister. It was merged in 2016 with other health agencies into the Agence nationale de santé publique (Santé Publique France ; English: French National Public Health Agency, literally "National Agency for Public Health").

Its mission was to survey the health of the population and, if required (for example in the case of an epidemics), to alert the administration, health specialists and the whole of the population. This surveillance role was shared with other public organisations such as the Agence nationale de sécurité du médicament et des produits de santé (ANSM) and the Agence française de sécurité sanitaire de l'alimentation, de l'environnement et du travail (Anses).

The Institut de veille sanitaire was criticized by the press for its lack of response during the European heat wave of 2003 but was cleared by several official commissions.

A public administrative establishment, placed under the supervision of the Minister for Health, the Institute for Health Surveillance (InVS) succeeds the National Public Health Network (RNSP). It brings together surveillance, vigilance and alert missions in all areas of public health. Created by the law of July 1, 1998, relating to the strengthening of health monitoring and control of the health safety of products intended for humans, InVS saw its field of action supplemented and reinforced by the law of August 9, 2004, on public health policy, in order to respond to the new challenges revealed by recent health crises and emerging risks.

Its first managing director was Jacques Drucker, succeeded by Gilles Brücker in 2002, then Françoise Weber in 2007 and François Bourdillon in 2014.

The 2016 law on the modernization of the health system provides for the creation of the national public health agency, the merger of the health monitoring institute, the national institute for prevention and health education, the preparation establishment and response to health emergencies, effectively created on 1 May 2016.

The Institut français de Vienne or French Institute in Vienna is an Institut français in Vienna, Austria. It is a French public institution attached to the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs of France. The promotion of French culture overseas is its main mission. The French Institute in Vienna is housed in the Palais Clam-Gallas.

The institute was founded in 1926 as the Centre de hautes études françaises à Vienne, or centre for higher French studies in Vienna. It was closed following the Anschluss of 1938 and throughout the Second World War. It re-opened on 10 November 1947 in the Palais Lobkowitz, which had previously been the French embassy. Since 1981, the institute has occupied the Palais Clam-Gallas, which was acquired by France from the Clam-Gallas family in 1952. Guillaume Rousson has been Director of the institute since September 2011.

The French Institute in Vienna aims promote cultural exchange between France and Austria. According to its mission statement, it does so in five ways: through the teaching of French language; through promotion of contemporary French culture; through the library of the institute; by providing an open forum for intercultural exchange; and by assisting academic and scientific exchange.

The Institute organises in-house cultural events, and gives financial or material support other events elsewhere in Vienna or Austria, including the Viennale, the Impulstanz dance festival and the annual French-language film festival and book fair. It publishes a newsletter with information about French culture in Austria, such as news of forthcoming film releases, exhibitions and touring artists.

The library of the institute holds 25,000 documents in French and around 1,200 DVDs, and offers online access to the French press.

The French Institute in Vienna is a member of the European Union National Institutes for Culture (EUNIC) cluster in Vienna, a network of European cultural institutes and embassies in Vienna. The cluster organises an annual EUNIC week in the city. In 2013 the Presidency of the cluster was held by the French Institute in Vienna, represented by its director.

The French Institute of the Near East (French : Institut français du Proche-Orient, IFPO) is a French social science research institute with locations in Jordan (Amman), Lebanon (Beirut), with additional operations in Iraq and Palestine, and formerly in Syria (Damascus and Aleppo) until 2011. It was founded in 2002.

Operating under the French government 's Ministry of Europe and Foreign Affairs (French: Ministère de l'Europe et des Affaires étrangères, MEAE) portfolio, the IFPO is part of a network of French research centers abroad.

The IFPO was established in 2002, combining three existing French institutes in the area: IFEAD (French Institute for Arab Studies in Damascus, established in 1922), IFAPO (French Institute of Near Eastern Archaeology, established in Syria and Lebanon in 1946), and CERMOC (Centre for Study and Research on the Contemporary Middle East, established in Lebanon in 1977 and Jordan in 1988). The IFPO holds the status of a "Joint Entity of French Research Institutes Abroad" (UMIFRE no6, Unité Mixte des Instituts français de recherche à l'étranger) and is under the aegis of the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the CNRS (French National Centre for Scientific Research). In 2010, the IFPO opened a research center in the Erbil Citadel in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq.

The institute is organized into three scientific departments: Archaeology and Ancient History (Director: Carole Roche-Hawley); Arab Studies, Medieval and Modern (Director: Iyas Hassan); and Contemporary Studies (Director: Matthieu Rey).

The institute recruits researchers from France, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, and other countries around the world.

Researchers are selected to participate in various academic projects initiated by the institute for a maximum duration of three years. The IFPO is also open to young researchers (PhD candidates, grant holders, etc.) of all nationalities. The duration of their stay varies according to the individual.

The institute also awards some short-term grants for limited projects.

The Institut Français du Sénégal is a French cultural organization for the diffusion of French culture in Senegal. Its secondary purpose is to promote the culture of Senegal and, more generally, cultural diversity. Léopold Sédar Senghor called this intercultural cooperation le dialogue des cultures (the dialogue of cultures).

The current name of the institution is recent. Earlier, it was called the Centre Culturel Français de Dakar ("French cultural centre of Dakar"), or simply the Alliance Française.

The Institute is composed of a cultural centre and a language centre. The cultural centre holds concerts, dances, theatre, fashion shows, lectures, exhibitions, workshops, and festivals while the language centre offers language courses, certifications, and technology training. French, Wolof, Spanish, and Portuguese are all taught at the language centre.

The director is Jean-Yves Pouliquen. He succeeded Christian Saglio, who left the Institute on July 5, 2007.

The Institut français en Inde (IFI) also knows as the French Institute in India is the service of the Embassy of France in India responsible for implementing French cultural, educational, and scientific diplomacy in India. It is part of the global network of the Institut français under the French Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs.

Headquartered in New Delhi, the IFI acts as the central node for Franco-Indian cooperation, closely working with a vast network in India that includes 15 Alliance Française centers and research centers such as the Institut Français de Pondichéry.

This French Institute was inaugurated on 29 March 2012 by Mr Xavier Darcos, then president of the French Institute alliance. However, French cultural activities in Delhi have existed under various forms before the official opening of the institute. Before 2012, all cultural activities related to the French embassy were supervised by Culturesfrance.

The French Institute entertains close links with the French Embassy in India, New Delhi, the local Alliance Française and other French-teaching establishments like the Lycée Français de Delhi.

The Lycée français de Delhi and the Centre for Social Research and Humanities are also based within its walls. It is located next to the 5 stars hotel 'Taj Mahal', the Parsi cemetery and a few hundred meters from the Rajpath and India Gate

The institute’s cultural center participates actively to the local and national art scene, by organising dozens of cultural events every year, on a local, regional or national basis. It also participates to external events, within the promotion of friendly ties between France and other francophone countries and India.

It cooperates intimately with Indian universities to propose joint courses to Indian and French students alike. In 2011 alone, 2500 Indian students chose to study in France via the joint programs created by the Institut français.

The French Institute for Demographic Studies (French : Institut national d'études démographiques, pronounced [ ɛ̃stity nɑsjɔnal detyd demɔɡʁafik ] ; INED) is a French research institute specializing in demography and population studies in general.

In 1941, Nobel Prize winner Alexis Carrel, an early proponent of eugenics and euthanasia, and a member of Jacques Doriot 's French Popular Party (PPF), advocated for the creation of the French Foundation for the Study of Human Problems (Fondation Française pour l'Étude des Problèmes Humains), using connections to the Pétain cabinet. Charged with the "study, in all of its aspects, of measures aimed at safeguarding, improving and developing the French population in all of its activities", the Foundation was created by decree of the collaborationist Vichy regime in 1941, and Carrel appointed as 'regent'. The Foundation also had for some time as general secretary François Perroux.

The Foundation was behind the 16 December 1942 Act mandating the " prenuptial certificate ", which required all couples seeking marriage to submit to a biological examination, to insure the "good health" of the spouses, in particular with regard to sexually transmitted diseases (STD) and "life hygiene". Carrel's institute also conceived the "scholar booklet" ("livret scolaire "), which could be used to record students' grades in French secondary schools, and thus classify and select them according to scholastic performance. Besides these eugenic activities aimed at classifying the population and improving its health, the Foundation also supported the 11 October 1946 law instituting occupational medicine, enacted by the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF) after the Liberation.

The Foundation initiated studies on demographics (Robert Gessain, Paul Vincent, Jean Bourgeois), nutrition (Jean Sutter), and housing (Jean Merlet), as well as the first polls (Jean Stoetzel). The foundation, which after the war became the INED demographics institute, employed 300 researchers from the summer of 1942 to the end of the autumn of 1944. "The foundation was chartered as a public institution under the joint supervision of the ministries of finance and public health. It was given financial autonomy and a budget of forty million francs, roughly one franc per inhabitant: a true luxury considering the burdens imposed by the German Occupation on the nation's resources. By way of comparison, the whole Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) was given a budget of fifty million francs."

Alexis Carrel had previously published in 1935 the best-selling book L'Homme, cet inconnu ("Man, This Unknown"). Since the early 1930s, Carrel had advocated the use of gas chambers to rid humanity of its "inferior stock", and endorsed scientific racism discourse. One of the founders of these pseudoscientific theories had been Arthur de Gobineau in his 1853–1855 essay titled An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races. In the 1936 preface to the German edition of his book, Carrel had added praise for the eugenics policies of the Third Reich, writing that:

(t)he German government has taken energetic measures against the propagation of the defective, the mentally diseased, and the criminal. The ideal solution would be the suppression of each of these individuals as soon as he has proven himself to be dangerous.

INED was founded by virtue of the ministerial order no. 45-2499 of 24 October 1945. It was created on the initiative of the eminent paediatrician Robert Debré (1882-1978), who had submitted a report on the institutionalization of demography to the Comité français de la Libération nationale d'Alger in January 1944. To head the institute, General Charles de Gaulle appointed the statistician and economist Alfred Sauvy who, as advisor to the President of the Council, Paul Reynaud, had drafted the French government's first pro-natalist measures in 1938. INED moved into the premises of the Fondation française pour l'étude des problèmes humains headed by Dr Alexis Carrel, and employed around 7% of the foundation's personnel, which counted only a handful of demographers.

The 1945 order defined the missions of INED: "The role of INED is to study demographic problems in all their aspects. To this end, the Institute will collect the relevant documentation, conduct surveys, carry out experiments and follow experiments conducted abroad, study the material and moral means which may contribute to the quantitative growth of the population and its qualitative development, and ensure the dissemination of demographic knowledge".

The early days were difficult for INED. With the unexpected onset of the baby boom (200,000 additional births in France in 1946), an institute to promote fertility became apparently superfluous. But before long, INED was asked to study the consequences of the baby boom and its effect on housing, school enrolment, employment, infant and maternal mortality. The first INED demographers, mostly graduates of Ecole Polytechnique, drew inspiration from Alfred J. Lotka (1880-1949) and Pierre Depoid (1909-1968) to develop original demographic analysis methods which affirmed the scientific independence of INED and established its international reputation. Eminent INED researchers include:

The work of these pioneers was set down in the manuals and the dictionary of demography written by Roland Pressat (who joined INED in 1953), which became essential reading for generations of students. Pressat disseminated the principles of demographic analysis internationally, notably in Quebec, Eastern Europe and Africa. It is he who devised the modern form of the " Lexis diagram ", a key tool for demonstrating the relationship between periods and cohorts. The sociologist Jean Stoetzel (1910-1987), who founded IFOP in 1938 after working as an internee for Gallup in America, was a pioneer of survey studies at INED. With the help of Alain Girard (1914-1996), he launched surveys on women's employment, ideal family size, choice of spouse, immigration, etc. He was succeeded in this area by Louis Roussel in the 1970s, and by Henri Léridon in the 1980s.

The social history of population is represented by Louis Chevalier (1911-2001), a historian of Paris, who was elected to the Collège de France in 1952; the history of disease by Dr Jean-Noël Biraben.

Population genetics were developed successively by Jean Sutter (1910-1970) and Albert Jacquard (1925-).

A second generation of INED researchers joined the institute in 1965, some from the Ecole Polytéchnique (Daniel Courgeau, Henri Leridon, Hervé Le Bras) and others from wide-ranging backgrounds (Jacques Vallin, Georges Tapinos [1940-2000], Patrick Festy, Chantal Blayo, Jean-Claude Chesnais).

Through a 1986 decree which superseded the 1945 order, INED became a public scientific and technological establishment (établissement public à caractère scientifique et technologique, EPST), with a legal status similar to that of other French public research bodies such as CNRS, INRA, INSERM and IRD (former ORSTOM). Previously attached to the various social ministries, INED's main supervisory authority was henceforth the Ministry of Education and Research (which pays the civil servant salaries at INED). INED is also attached to the ministries in charge of population questions and health statistics (social affairs, health or employment, depending on the government in power). With the decree of 1986, the pro-natalist objectives of 1945 disappeared. INED's new mission was to develop and disseminate demographic knowledge with the aim of fostering general economic and social progress. Under the decree of 1986, the missions of INED are defined as follows:

The late 1990s brought a third generation of senior researchers, including graduates of Ecole Polytechnique, of ENSAE, of the Institut de démographie de Paris, and of Ecole Normale, along with several doctors of medicine. A growing number of women now occupy senior positions at INED. Since 1990, researchers have been recruited by competitive examination after obtaining their PhD. New generations of researchers, born in the 1960s and 1970s are now extending the depth and scope of research at INED.

Chairman of the Board of Administration:

In 2007, INED has a staff of 200, including 60 tenured researchers, 110 technicians and engineers, plus around 20 PhD students and associate researchers.

Like other French public research institutions, INED has two categories of researchers – research officers and research directors – each comprising two grades.

As of January 2000, INED comprises 11 research units and several departments (surveys, library and documentation, publications, IT, etc.) A statistical methods department was set up in January 2007.

While maintaining a flexible structure of specialized units (researchers may belong to two units simultaneously), INED has developed a system of organization by projects, built around some 30 key projects which are assessed by the Scientific Council and whose detailed content is presented on the INED website. These key projects include major household surveys and European projects.

There are three other European research institutes comparable to INED: NIDI (Netherlands Interdisciplinary Demographic Institute) in The Hague (Netherlands), MPIDR (Max-Planck Institute for Demographic Research) in Rostock (Germany) and VID (Vienna Institute of demography) in Vienna (Austria), founded respectively in 1970, 1996 and 2002, and largely based on the model of INED. In the other countries of Europe, demographers work in universities or national statistical offices. INED maintains close relations with its various European counterparts, via both European Commission research projects and international consortia linked to the United Nations.

Since 2000, INED has hosted the world headquarters of the International Union for the Scientific Study of Population (IUSSP), of which it is a member along with other national demographic research organizations.

In March 1998, after fifteen years in the 14th arrondissement of Paris, INED moved to new premises in the 20th arrondissement, at 133 boulevard Davout.

Though government-funded research is not the same thing as government statistics, INED works closely with French statistical bodies, notably INSEE (Institut national de la statistique et des études économiques).

It is nevertheless different from INSEE in several ways. While INSEE is a department of the Economy and Finance Ministry present in all regions of France and employing more than 5,000 people, INED is an institute of just 200 people attached to the Ministry of Research and based exclusively in Paris (though some of its researchers work on long-term assignments abroad). INSEE calculates the demographic indicators of France (birth rate, death rate, fertility, life expectancy) using vital records and census data. INSEE also estimates net migration using administrative data. INED reprocesses these data, adjusts them if necessary and performs in-depth analyses. It uses complementary sources (such as first residence permits awarded by the prefectures) and organizes surveys to collect new data. The scope of the two organizations is also different: INSEE focuses primarily on France, while INED studies all countries of the world.

Though demography is central to INED, the scope of its research covers all forms of "population studies". Its researchers have very diverse fields of expertise, including sociology, economics, geography, history, political science, public health and statistics.

INED's current research themes, covered by its thirty key projects, include:

Half of INED's budget and research activity are devoted to the demography of France, and half to the demography of other countries. The regions most extensively covered are, in decreasing order, Western Europe, Central Europe, the Arab world, western Africa, Asia and Latin America.

To study the demographic and health transition in western Africa, INED runs three demographic surveillance sites in three groups of villages where it records demographic events and causes of death to analyse ongoing trends:

Half the INED research budget (excluding payroll costs) is devoted to major surveys of households and individuals. They are conducted by the INED Surveys Department, often in collaboration with INSEE. Surveys carried out since the 1980s include:

The Institut national de l'information géographique et forestière (French pronunciation: [ ɛ̃stity nɑsjɔnal də lɛ̃fɔʁmasjɔ̃ ʒeɔɡʁafik e fɔʁɛstjɛʁ ] ; "National Institute of Geographic and Forest Information"), previously Institut géographique national (French pronunciation: [ ɛ̃stity ʒeɔɡʁafik nɑsjɔnal ] ; "National Geographic Institute") and still abbreviated as IGN, is a French public state administrative establishment founded in 1940 to produce and maintain geographical information for France and its overseas departments and territories.

The IGN depends on the French Ministry of Equipment, Transport, Town and Country Planning, Tourism and Sea. Its missions are fixed by decrees.

State subsidies represent 51% of the budget, and sales 49%.

The IGN runs four laboratories to research geographical information acquisition, production, distribution and applications. It also runs its own school to teach techniques to its staff and other students: École nationale des sciences géographiques (English: National School of Geographical Sciences) or ENSG.

The IGN is responsible for the management and updating of:

It has to lead research, and to take part in the standardization process in the field of geographical information. It has to manage ENSG, and the documentation service about its products, techniques and services.

A group of French public administrations, in partnership with the IGN, establish the Large Scale Reference (Référentiel à grande échelle, RGE): orthophoto, topography, cadastral survey and address databases which can be superimposed on all the French territory, with a 1-meter resolution.

The IGN is also in charge of the Géoportail. The associated shop Le Monde des Cartes at 50 Rue de la Verrerie in Paris closed in 2017.

The IGN is the successor to the Geographical Service of the Army (Service Géographique de L’Armée or SGA), which was founded in 1887 and disbanded in 1940, itself a successor to the Dépôt de la Guerre. The old maps produced by the SGA were divided into two batches: one which remained at the Institute and one which joined the military files of Vincennes. The general Louis Hurault, who was at the origin of these modifications, was the first director of the IGN. He tried, in vain, to recover the material shared by the Germans. A law in ten articles is signed the 14 in order to define the functions of the IGN. The statutes had been signed the 8. This established the national School of geographical sciences in order to train Cartographical engineers.

During the Second World War, the IGN became famous for its counterfeiters. The cartographers are indeed experts in penmanship and the material necessary to the production of fake identity papers was available to the institute. Certain engineers of the IGN were in contact with the services of allied information based in London. In secret, they brought a complete set of maps to London covering France and North Africa in order to replace maps destroyed in a bombardment.

The agents of the IGN took an active part in armed resistance in 1943. Several agents were shot by the Germans or died in action. Between September 1944 and on 8 May 1945, the IGN was under the control of the "provisional government" and most of its personnel and of his services are transformed into "military geographical Service". At the end of the war, the IGN received the thanks of Generals Bradley and Eisenhower.

Between 1945 and 1946, the debate is intense concerning the future of the IGN, last creation of the Third Republic. A law is finally signed the 8. It confirms the membership of the IGN to the Ministry of works and create the "geographical Section of staff of the Army", new section in charge of the military map.

In 1947, the IGN receives the mission of covering the whole France, but also all the dependents' territories, like North Africa, Western Africa, Madagascar, the countries associated with Indochina and the departments and overseas territories. The task is considerable with more than 12 million km ² being covered. The independence of these countries will have as a consequence the creation of national services in each country (examples: DTGC in Senegal, IGN-N in Niger).

To carry out the aerial survey task, the IGN was equipped in 1948 with several ex USAAF Boeing B-17 Flying Fortresses, specially modified for the task. They were based at Creil airfield to the north of Paris. The aircraft were replaced by French-built Hurel-Dubois HD.34 twin engined survey aircraft in the late 1950s.

The IGN then initiates a period of active co-operation with the majority of these organizations by providing some engineers of the IGN and also receive the students of the ENSG who intended to become the executives of the cartographic services of new independent countries. The activity of the IGN apart from the French territory also develops by the control geodesic project(Ecuador 1975, Libya 1979, Saudi Arabia 1981), of cartography (Saudi Arabia, Burundi, Senegal, Mali, Ivory Coast, Togo, Benin...).

1982 to 1988, the control of a large topometric project and numerical cartography in Riyadh is the occasion to massively introduce digital techniques into the processing production; in parallel, the idea of a topoland data base emerges at meetings of the "national Commission of the geographical information" chaired by Guy Lengagne; this commission returns his report in 1983 and outlines numerical geographical information then in agreement with the period of the basic map with 1:25 000.Publicly owned establishment related to administration since 1 January 1967, it is placed under the supervision of the ministry for Transport, the equipment, tourism and the sea.

In 1971, the IGN and the CNES form the "Group of research of geodesic space". This collaboration between the IGN and the CNES continues with the launching of the program SPOT the 5. The launching of satellite SPOT-1 takes place the 22.Six days after take SPOT-1 in orbit, the IGN create its programme of "data bases launches", the "data bases". The data base of the cities, the data base of leveling distribution, the data base of geodesic distribution, the aerial missions data base and the toponyms data base were progressively established. The "Topo data base", bases of topographic data digitized, covers from now on the whole of France and includes nearly two million toponyms.

Its activities abroad begin into 1986 within a new subsidiary private company IGN France International.

From 2000, the IGN develops the concept of Reference frame on a Large Scale (référentiel à grande échelle = RGE); it is a question of completing within a deadline short digitalization the cartography of the French territory with a meter scale and according to four components: topography, land registry and address. This RGE is entirely completed at the end of 2008. Then it enter in a cycle of maintenance in June 2006, the IGN opened the service Géoportail allowing the cartographic visualization of the French territory on a Web navigator and using on one hand funds of air photographs and on the other hand the digitized maps to the 1/25 000. "Phase 2" of Géoportail was put on line one year later, with a new ergonomics.

At the end of 2006, the IGN was involved in the production of a receiver GPS, for the excursion and automobile navigation, called Evadeo. The software of navigation was provided by BCI navigation (replaced in 2008 by CompeGPS), the road data are of Navteq and it puce GPS of SiRF, and the IGN provides a part with extracts of its maps at various scales.

In June 2007, the IGN started offering a service whereby it is possible to have a map printed centred on any location in France. This is similar to the service offered in Great Britain by the Ordnance Survey.

In July 2007, Géoportail – an online map service – began offering 3D movable views in a similar style to GoogleEarth. To use this function, it is necessary to install the plugin TerraExplorer.

From 1 January 2012, the Institut Géographique National merged with the Inventaire forestier national to form the Institut national de l’information géographique et forestière, keeping the same IGN acronym.

The Institut national de l'origine et de la qualité (French: [ ɛ̃stity nɑsjɔnal də lɔʁiʒin e d(ə) la kalite ] ; INAO ; previously Institut National des Appellations d'Origine) is the French organization charged with regulating French agricultural products with protected designation of origin (PDOs). It is controlled by the Government of France, and it forms part of the Ministry of Agriculture. The organization was co-founded by Châteauneuf-du-Pape producer Baron Pierre Le Roy.

Every appellation d'origine contrôlée (AOC), the French term for PDOs, is produced according to rules codified by the INAO. Because its primary purpose is to regulate the use of noteworthy names, one of its primary tasks is to delimit the geographic area entitled to produce a product. For wine this means vineyards, but the INAO also regulates the places of processing and aging.

The INAO, like other organizations charged with regulating and helping producers, is often put in a contradictory position. An individual farmer may want his farm to be included in the limited area, but that might have the effect of diluting the average quality of the area. Rarely is this without controversy, and it is a delicate balancing act.

Government control of agricultural products began with the law of August 1, 1905, granting the government authority to define the official boundaries for the production of certain agricultural products. At first, the appellations were not designed as measures of quality of the produce and failed to resolve the problem of over-production of wine, a problem that continues to this day. A second law, passed on May 6, 1919, gave the courts power to act in cases where the regulations were not being followed. This once again was an initial failure, as the resulting prosecutions proved to be long and fraught with difficulty.

In a further attempt to address problems in the wine industry, the INAO was created by a decree initiated by Joseph Capus and enacted on July 30, 1935. Under this law the Comité National des appellations d'origine (CNAO) was given the sole authority to rule on matters related to the quality of wine. The members of the committee included delegates of ministries of agriculture, finance and justice and presidents of viticulture syndicates. They consulted with the top wine producers in each region to define the boundaries of appellations and the rules for a wine to qualify. The CNAO was funded by a fee paid by the producers. A number of small wine producers were eager to escape the state regulations imposed on bulk winemakers, and sought to join. However the CNAO enforced high standards and the percentage of French wine designated as AOC actually declined in the first years after the CNAO was formed. The first AOC laws were passed in 1936, and most of the classical wines from Bordeaux, Burgundy, Champagne and Rhône had their initial set of AOC regulations before the end of 1937.

After World War II the committee became the public-private Institut National des Appellations d'Origine (INAO). In 1990, the economic success of the appellations led parliament in a law of July 2 to extend the powers of the INAO to cover all agricultural produce.

Since January 1, 2007, the Institute is renamed Institut national de l'origine et de la qualité and also guarantees organic and Label Rouge certifications. In spite of the name change it retains the abbreviation INAO.

The National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies (French : Institut national de la statistique et des études économiques, pronounced [ ɛ̃stity nɑsjɔnal də la statistik e dez‿etyd(z‿)ekɔnɔmik ]), abbreviated INSEE or Insee (/ ˈ ɪ n s eɪ / in- SAY, French: [ inse ]), is the national statistics bureau of France. It collects and publishes information about the French economy and people and carries out the periodic national census. Headquartered in Montrouge, a commune in the southern Parisian suburbs, it is the French branch of Eurostat. The INSEE was created in 1946 as a successor to the Vichy regime 's National Statistics Service (SNS). It works in close cooperation with the Institut national d'études démographiques (INED).

The INSEE is responsible for the production and analysis of official statistics in France. Its best known responsibilities include:

The INSEE is the responsibility of MINEFI, the French Ministry of Finance. The current director is Jean-Luc Tavernier. However, Eurostat considers INSEE as an independent body, although its independence is not written in the law.

Research and teaching for the INSEE is undertaken by GENES or Group of the National Schools of the Economy and Statistics (French: Groupe des Écoles Nationales d'Économie et Statistique) which includes:

INSEE gives numerical indexing codes (French: les Codes INSEE) to various entities in France:

The INSEE was preceded by several related statistical agencies in France. In 1833, the Statistics Bureau (French: Bureau de la statistique) was created by Adolphe Thiers. In 1840 it was renamed SGF or General Statistics of France.

Under the direction of Lucien March, the SGF expanded its activities. It began an investigation of consumption habits in 1907, following with periodic investigations on retail prices in 1911.

In 1920 Alfred Sauvy introduced competitive entrance exams for SGF recruitment. However, it was René Carmille, a pioneer of the use of the calculator, who laid the foundations of the modern organization. In 1940, the Demographic Service (Service de la démographie) was created under the Ministry of Finance in order to replace the military recruitment office prohibited by the June 1940 Armistice with Nazi Germany. In order to better conceal its undertakings, the Demographic Service absorbed the SGF on 11 October 1941. The new organization was called the SNS or National Statistics Service. As part of this reorganization, six new offices were created in the Northern (occupied) zone whose regional structure is maintained today in INSEE.

René Carmille created an Applied Sciences School (predecessor of the current ENSAE) to specially train members for the SNS.

Carmille worked for Vichy France but he was actually a double agent for the French underground. From his position in the SNS he sabotaged the Nazi census of France, which saved untold numbers of Jewish people from death camps. He also used his department to help mobilize French resistance in Algeria. He was caught by the Nazis and sent to Dachau where he died in 1945.

The SNS was finally transformed into the INSEE by the law of 27 April 1946; the National Institute of Statistics and Economic Surveys for the metropolis and overseas France (L'Institut national de la statistique et des études économiques pour la métropole et la France d'outre-mer).

IRIS is the name for France's unit of division of geographical regions for the purposes of taking a census. In order to prepare for the dissemination of the 1999 French population census, INSEE developed a system for dividing the country into units of equal size, known as IRIS2000, now known simply as 'IRIS'. The acronym stands for 'Ilots Regroupés pour l'Information Statistique' ('aggregated units for statistical information') and the 2000 in the name referred not only to the upcoming millennium year but to the target size of 2,000 residents per basic unit.

Since 1999, IRIS has represented the fundamental unit for dissemination of infra-municipal data in France and its overseas departments and regions. Towns with more than 10,000 inhabitants, and a large proportion of towns with between 5,000 and 10,000 inhabitants, are divided into several IRIS units. France is composed of around 16,100 IRIS in total, of which 650 are in the overseas departments. There are 3 types of IRIS unit in use; residential IRIS (pop. between 1,800 and 5,000), business IRIS (containing more than 1,000 employees) and miscellaneous IRIS (specific large zones which are sparsely inhabited and have large surface areas (leisure parks, ports, forests etc.).

The following is a list of directors of the INSEE since it was founded:

The Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology (French : Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, IPBS) is a research center run as a collaboration between the French National Centre for Scientific Research (French: Centre national de la recherche scientifique, CNRS) and Paul Sabatier University. It has a scientific and administrative staff of 260 people, including a large number of postdoctoral workers and postgraduate (master's and PhD) students. The primary objective of the institute is the identification and characterization of novel therapeutic targets in the fields of cancer and infectious diseases (particularly tuberculosis).

The institute is located on 205 route de Narbonne and shares the campus with Laboratoire de Chimie de Coordination (LCC).

The IPBS is a participant of Toulouse's emerging cancer and infectious diseases research network: a founding member of the Toulouse Biology Research Federation (FRBT), a scientific network of Toulouse's leading life sciences laboratories, an active member of the Cancéropole Grand Sud-Ouest, a partner in the Toulouse Oncopôle and a member of the Toulouse Cancer Laboratory of Excellence (LABEX TOUCAN).

In 2023, the Toulouse Biomedical Research Federative Structure (SFR-BMT, FED 4138) and the Toulouse Biology Research Federation (SFR-BT, FR 3451) will merge to become the “Biology and Biotechnology for Health” Research Federative Structure (SFR-B2S).

The institute brings together 17 research teams working in close collaboration on two main areas of research in the fields of cancer, infection and inflammation: “Biology of the tissue and cellular microenvironment”, and “Structural and molecular mechanisms of disease”.

Olivier Neyrolles will head the IPBS-Toulouse from January 1, 2021. The IPBS's scientific strategy is to increase its visibility and attractiveness through international cooperation, by recruiting international team leaders, welcoming foreign students and researchers and participating in mobility programs such as the “International Research Projects” developed by the CNRS and the “Hubert Curien Partnerships” developed by the French Ministry of Europe and Foreign Affairs.

In January 2009, Dr. Jean-Philippe Girard succeeded Prof. François Amalric as Director of the institute. The current policy of the IPBS is to increase its international cooperation through hosting foreign students and researchers, currently numbering 21, and through participating in mobility programs such as the Joint Research Programs developed by the CNRS and the Hubert Curien Partnerships developed by the Ministry of Europe and Foreign Affairs.

Under the leadership of Professor François Amalric, the IPBS continued its work on the characterization and validation of new pharmacological targets using molecular and cell biology approaches, together with analysis of the structure/function relationships of biomolecules and their assemblies.

The Cancer Biology Department was created in 2005, and five new teams were established during the period from 2005 to 2008. These new teams supported the two main axes of research covered by the Department: DNA transactions and repair, and the microenvironment of tumors.

The Structural Biology and Biophysics Department was created in 2009 with the objective of enhancing the exposure of the IPBS in structural biology and biophysics.

Professor Jean Cros founded the IPBS in 1996, with the aim of applying the methods and concepts of modern cell, molecular and structural biology to the identification and validation of novel pharmacological targets in the fields of cancer and G-protein -coupled receptors. In December 1997, a new building was opened on the campus of the Paul Sabatier University to house all of the institute's groups on one site.

Between 1990 and 1995, new teams arrived to develop topics about tuberculosis, protein engineering and structural biology.

In 1972, Claude Paoletti and Jean Cros created the Laboratory of Basic Pharmacology and Toxicology (French: laboratoire de Pharmacologie et de Toxicologie fondamentale-LPTF), which in 1990 became the seventh French pole of the National Programme IMABIO (Macromolecules engineering). New topics such as oncology, neurology and genotoxicology emerged.

In 2020, the IPBS is changing its logo and image to highlight the diseases on which researchers are focusing: cancer, infection and inflammation.

The IPBS has 17 research teams. The new scientific objectives are based on two complementary lines of research related to cancer, inflammation and infectious diseases:

Biology of the tissue and cellular microenvironment - This first aspect of research will focus on the study, at tissue and cellular levels, of the microenvironment in disease and its influence on treatment. It will cover the following topics:

Structural and molecular mechanisms of disease : This second area of research will be linked, at the molecular level, to the study of structural and molecular mechanisms of disease, in order to characterize targets and to propose candidates for new therapies. It will cover the following themes:

IPBS supports technological facilities and equipment for use by the institute's researchers and external investigators. The institute hosts five technological platforms, all of them having the IBiSA label (national coordination of the life science platforms).

This platform uses mass spectrometry and bioinformatics tools to handle programs in areas ranging from biology and health to agricultural applications.

The IPBS is a partner site for other platforms.

The core facility uses time-lapse imaging to visualize complex systems from molecules to whole organisms, at time scales ranging from nanoseconds to several days. The facility also has instrumentation capable of phenotypic characterization and sorting of eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells by flow cytometry.

The IPBS zootechnics facilities are part of the life science core facility of Toulouse, which includes eight other sites with complementary technical skills.

All these technological facilities are part of Genotoul, a regional network of research platforms in life sciences, open to groups from both public and private sectors, and involved in technology development and innovation.

The IPBS has a longstanding industrial focus, since 1999, IPBS has been active in partnership with industry.

In 2024, the start-up See2cure, developed through a collaboration between IPBS and the Institut Universitaire du Cancer de Toulouse (IUCT-Oncopole), was launched to enhance cancer surgery using fluorescence-guided techniques.

In 2023, the IPBS recruited a Business Developer in Biology, Health and Cosmetics, their mission includes:

In 2020, IPBS welcomed G.CLIPS Biotech, a small biotech company focused on researching therapeutic agents targeting membrane proteins.

From 1999 to 2003, the first public-private high throughput screening center between CNRS and Pierre Fabre SA was present at IPBS.

Since 1999, the IPBS has developed scientific collaborations and/or hosted activities of eight companies: Abtech (struck off on 1 September 2008), Endocube (struck off on 12 March 2008), Millegen (closed), Novaleads (struck off on 10 September 2014), Nanobiotix, Protein Bio Sensor (registered on 6 July 2005), Praxcell (struck off on 5 March 2012), Icelltis (registered on 10 January 2008).

The IPBS was awarded the INPI Innovation Trophies 2008 Award.

The Scientific Advisory Board advises the Director and executive board on the scientific policy of the institute, public relations, and aspects relating to research team life cycles (creation, modification of research orientations, transition, etc.). The SAB also assesses the scientific projects conducted by each research team at the institute.

The SAB is composed of nine researchers, who are (in alphabetical order):

The IPBS has been involved in many research networks under the European Commission ’s Frameworks, from the Fifth Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development activities (FP5) to Horizon 2020 projects.

These networks involve several teams from the Tuberculosis & Infection Biology department, which participate in European integrated projects fighting tuberculosis. This includes projects coordinated by the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative, but also involve teams from the Cancer Biology and Structural Biology & Biophysics departments.

Since 2000, the Tuberculosis & Infection Biology department of the IPBS has been part of the TBVAC Consortium. The TBVAC Consortium includes key partners from leading European laboratories, as well as from the United States, Asia, Africa and Australia, Scientists and developers from 40 research partners collaborated in TBVAC2020. The current 4-year project started in January 2015 and is coordinated by the Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative (TBVI).

Since 2015, IPBS has taken part in various European schemes, such as RESPIRE 2 and 3, and in the Initial Training Network (ITN).

In collaboration with the University of Ljubljana, the IPBS developed a European Associated Laboratory (LEA) entitled Pulsed Electric Fields Applications in Biology and Medicine (LEA EBAM). This French-Slovenian “without walls” laboratory, created in January 2011 for four years, has been renewed for the same duration.

IPBS teams are also members of the interregional (Spain - France - Andorra) POCTEFA 2014–2020 created to promote the sustainable development of the border territories of the three countries on both sides of the Pyrenees.

The IPBS is mainly supported by direct and indirect finance from the CNRS and the Paul Sabatier University, covering the wages of more than 260 researchers. Other funding sources include the European Union, the Occitanie administrative region, industry, public contracts, charities and other facilities. The average annual budget is € 7 million (US$1,182,700). From 1996 to 2023, the institute has produced more than 2500 publications, 80 European and international contracts, more than 400 thesis supported by students and 9 incubated startups.

Instituts d'études politiques (French pronunciation: [ ɛ̃stity detyd pɔlitik ] ; English: Institutes of Political Studies), or IEP's, colloquially referred to as Sciences Po, are eleven publicly owned institutions of higher learning in France. They are located in Aix-en-Provence, Bordeaux, Grenoble, Lille, Lyon, Paris, Rennes, Strasbourg and Toulouse, since 2014 Saint-Germain-en-Laye. and since 2022 Fontainebleau Their vocation is the study and research of contemporary political science. All students at the IEPs study a curriculum that is highly practical and broad-based, focusing on the full range of the social sciences across law, economics, finance, and management. These schools are considered as some of the most selective in France, mainly because they are the place where many political and business leaders are trained.

These establishments are more widely known under the name of Sciences Po. Sciences Po Paris is considered to be the most prestigious of all the IEP's in France, and is the only one allowed to refer to itself with the epithet "Sciences Po" without indicating the name of the city where it is located, under a legal agreement with the other IEP's. Other IEP's can use the term "Sciences Po" to refer to themselves only when followed by the names of the cities where they are located, such as " Sciences Po Aix " or " Sciences Po Grenoble ". Other IEPs in France were created after the Paris one, apart from Strasbourg, which was created by the same law but with the status of an internal institute of the Robert Schuman University.

According to article 2 of an 18 December 1989 decree, their mission is:

The Sciences Po approach and style inspired many universities in France but also abroad. The most famous example the London School of Economics, founded on the model of the Ecole Libre des Sciences Politiques.

Sciences Po institutes are a type of Grande École, a French institution of higher education that is separate from, but parallel and connected to the main framework of the French public university system. Similar to the Ivy League in the United States, Oxbridge in the UK, and C9 League in China, Grandes Écoles are elite academic institutions that admit students through an extremely competitive process., unlike French ordinary public universities which "have an obligation to accept all candidates in the same academic field".

Alumni go on to occupy elite positions within government, administration, and corporate firms in France. In particular, the Paris IEP ("Sciences Po") has produced at least seven recent French presidents (including the incumbent, Emmanuel Macron), 13 French prime ministers, 12 foreign heads of state or government, and six of the CEO's of France's largest companies.

Although they are more expensive than public universities in France, Grandes Écoles typically have much smaller class sizes and student bodies, and many of their programs are taught in English. International internships, study abroad opportunities, and close ties with government and the corporate world are a hallmark of the Grandes Écoles. Many of the top ranked schools in Europe are members of the Conférence des Grandes Écoles (CGE), as are the Sciences Po institutions. Degrees from Sciences Po are accredited by the Conférence des Grandes Écoles and awarded by the Ministry of National Education (France) (French : Le Ministère de L'éducation Nationale).

The ten Instituts d'études politiques are:

The other Instituts d'études politiques around the world are :

Every year an inter-IEP competition is held, hosted by the hometown of one of the IEPs and attended by participants from all 10 IEPs. The first crit, as it is known colloquially, was created in 1987 by the IEPs of Bordeaux and Toulouse who decided to have a friendly rugby match.

This competition takes the form of a 3-day sports event and party, and is held over the last weekend of March, run by the host university's "Sports office". The hosting of an event generally costs about 200,000 euros, funded by the participants, as well as by sponsors and grants. The hosting of the event is rotated between the different IEPs each year.

Each of the 10 instituts has a distinctive colour and distinctive symbols and/or mascots:

Paris and Aix-en-Provence are the usual winners of the trophy

Integration is a feature of tax systems that apply the same effective tax rate to income no matter whether it is taxed inside the corporation or given to shareholders to be taxed as personal income. Integration may be partial or complete. Complete integration would treat corporate income as flowing through to shareholders, while partial integration only treats some income—often from dividends —this way. Integration systems have been implemented, often in the form of a dividend tax credit, in many national tax systems.

Integration may be partial or complete. Complete integration occurs when a corporation functions, for tax purposes, as a flow-through entity : all income received by the corporation, whether retained by it or distributed to shareholders, would be treated as shareholders' income. In such a system, according to Sijbren Cnossen, all corporate tax would be treated like a prepayment of individual income tax for which shareholders would be credited on their personal tax returns—regardless of whether property was transferred to them in the relevant taxation period. Partial integration, by contrast, occurs when only some corporate income, often that which is distributed to shareholders as a dividend, is treated as "flowing through" the corporation. Glenn Hubbard describes such a system as "any plan in which corporate income is taxed only once, rather than taxed both when earned and when distributed to shareholders as dividends".

There are several ways to achieve partial or full integration. Full integration could be achieved by ending corporate tax, thereby treating all corporate income as shareholders' income by implication. Alternatively, dividend tax might be eliminated, thereby treating all corporate income as income to the corporation instead. Partial integration focused on dividends may occur when shareholders receive a tax credit on dividend income intended to factor in the tax already paid by the corporation on the amount distributed as a dividend.

Historically, both the United States and United Kingdom had tax systems integrated to varying degrees. In the UK, as early as 1799, a corporation could claim a tax deduction from its income because shareholders were taxed on dividend distributions. As of the mid-19th century, federal tax law in the US allowed shareholders to exclude dividends from their income because it was taxed at the corporate level.

By 1979, Canada, Japan, Germany, and France, as well as the UK, had implemented partial integration through a dividend tax credit : shareholders who received dividends could claim a credit on their tax returns corresponding to income tax already paid by the corporation on the amount distributed. Canada adopted its first form of integration in 1972, following recommendations by the Carter commission, a royal commission chaired by Kenneth Carter which delivered its report in 1966. New Zealand enacted a form of integration in 1988. As of the 1990s, "most industrialized nations" had implemented some form of integration.

Although it had earlier employed a partial integration system, federal taxation in the US by the end of World War II was not integrated: corporate income was taxed under the undistributed profits tax, under an additional tax on corporate income, and as dividend income to shareholders. From the 1970s to the 1990s, proposals for integrating the US tax system were floated but did not become law.

Intemelio is a Ligurian dialect spoken historically from the Principality of Monaco to the Italian province of Imperia.

Since the Renaissance the Ligurian language was spoken in all the territories of the Republic of Genoa ; in the western area of the Republic one of its groups (spoken mainly on the coast between Monaco and Sanremo) was called Intemelio and was centered on Ventimiglia.

In the actual Italian area of Ventimiglia there is the most renowned Intemelio : the "Ventimigliese", that stretches from the coast until Piedmont.

The Royasc dialect is connected to the "Ventimigliese", as a mountainous version of the Intemelio that has some Occitan influences.

In Sanremo the local intemelio dialect is heavily influenced by the Genoese dialect.

Intemelio is used by nearly 10,000 people in the area of Ventimiglia of the province of Imperia, but other 40,000 are able to understand it and speak a few sentences of this dialect in western Liguria.

A few thousand speak fluently the local variants of Intemelio in France and Monaco : Monegasque, and Brigasc.

The Ligurian area of Seborga speaks the "Ventimigliese" dialect Intemelio and the so-called Principality of Seborga considered the possibility of using this dialect as the official language.

An intendant (French: [ ɛ̃tɑ̃dɑ̃ ] ; Portuguese : intendente [ ĩtẽˈdẽtɨ ] ; Spanish : intendente [ intenˈdente ]) was, and sometimes still is, a public official, especially in France, Spain, Portugal, and Latin America. The intendancy system was a centralizing administrative system developed in France. In the War of the Spanish Succession of 1701 to 1714 the French royal House of Bourbon secured its hold on the throne of Spain; it extended a French-style intendancy system to Spain and Portugal - and subsequently worldwide through the Spanish Empire and Portuguese Empire. Regions were divided into districts, each administered by an intendant. The title continues in use in Spain and in parts of Spanish America for particular government officials.

Intendants were royal civil servants in France under the Old Regime. A product of the centralization policies of the French crown, intendants were appointed "commissions," and not purchasable hereditary "offices," which thus prevented the abuse of sales of royal offices and made them more tractable and subservient emissaries of the king. Intendants were sent to supervise and enforce the king's will in the provinces and had jurisdiction over three areas: finances, policing and justice.

Their missions were always temporary, which helped reduce favorable bias toward a province, and were focused on royal inspection. Article 54 of the Code Michau described their functions as "to learn about all crimes, misdemeanors and financial misdealings committed by our officials and of other things concerning our service and the tranquility of our people" (" informer de tous crimes, abus et malversations commises par nos officiers et autres choses concernant notre service et le soulagement de notre peuple ").

In the 17th and 18th centuries, the intendants were chosen from the noblesse de robe ("administrative nobility") or the upper-bourgeoisie. Generally, they were masters of requests in the Conseil des parties. They were chosen by the Controller-General of Finances who asked the advice of the Secretary of State for War for those who were to be sent in border provinces. They were often young: Charles Alexandre de Calonne became an intendant at the age of 32, Turgot and Louis Bénigne François Berthier de Sauvigny at the age of 34, and Louis-Urbain-Aubert de Tourny at the age of 40.

A symbol of royal centralization and absolutism, the intendant had numerous adversaries. Those nostalgic for an administration based on noble lineage (such as Saint-Simon) saw intendants as parvenus and usurpers of noble power. Partisans of a less absolute monarchy (such as Fénelon) called for them to be abolished. Jacques Necker, the only Minister of Finances since 1720 who had not himself been an intendant, accused them of incompetence because of their youth and social aspirations. The cahiers de doléances of 1789 depicted them as over zealous agents of fiscal policies which weighed heavily on the people.

The term intendant was also used for certain positions close to the Controller-General of Finances (see this term for more information):

In the same way, the term intendant général was used for certain commissioned positions close to the State Secretaries of War and of the Navy.

As early as the 15th century, the French kings sent commissioners to the provinces to report on royal and administrative issues and to undertake any necessary action. These agents of the king were recruited from among the masters of requests, the Councillors of State and members of the Parlements or the Court of Accounts. Their mission was always for a specific mandate and lasted for a limited period. Along with these, there were also commissioners sent to the army, in charge of provisioning the army, policing and finances; they would supervise accountants, providers, merchants, and generals, and attend war councils and tribunals for military crimes. Such commissioners are found in Corsica as early as 1553, in Bourges in 1592, in Troyes in 1594, and in Limoges in 1596.

When Henry IV ascended the throne in 1589, one of his prime focuses was to reduce the privileges of the provincial governors who, in theory, represented "the presence of the king in his province" but had, during the civil wars of the early modern period, proven themselves to be highly intractable; these positions had long been held by only the highest ranked noble families in the realm. The Intendants to the provinces —- the term "Intendant" appears around 1620 during the reign of Louis XIII – became an effective tool of regional control.

Under Louis XIII's minister Cardinal Richelieu, with France's entry into the Thirty Years' War in 1635, the Intendants became a permanent institution in France. No longer mere inspectors, their role became one of government administrators. During the Fronde in 1648, the members of Parlement of the Chambre Saint-Louis demanded that the Intendants be suppressed; Mazarin and Anne of Austria gave in to these demands except in the case of border provinces threatened by Spanish or Imperial attack. At the end of the Fronde, the Intendants were reinstated.

When Louis XIV (1643–1715) was in power, the Marquis of Louvois, War Secretary between 1677 and 1691, further expanded the power of the provincial intendants. They monitored Louis's refinements of the French military, including the institution of a merit promotion system and a policy of enlistment limited to single men for periods of four years. After 1680, Intendants in France had a permanent position in a fixed region (or " généralité "); their official titles being intendant de justice, police et finances, commissaires départis dans les généralités du royaume pour l'exécution des ordres du roi (or de Sa Majesté).

The position of Intendant remained in existence until the French Revolution. The title was maintained thereafter for military officers with responsibility for financial auditing at regimental level and above.

A 2021 study, which used a dataset of 430 intendants from 1640 to 1789, found that less than half of these officials went through the legally-specified training path. The study raised questions about the impersonal nature of these bureaucrats, with evidence indicating that familial and marital ties were factors in appointments, and that appointment duration had wide variability.

Appointed and revoked by the king and reporting to the Controller-General of Finances, the Intendant in his "généralité" had at his service a small team of secretaries. In the 18th century, the "généralité" was subdivided into "subdelegations" at the head of which was placed a "subdelegate" (having also a team of secretaries) chosen by the Intendant. In this way, the Intendant was relatively understaffed given his large jurisdiction.

The French North American colony of New France, which later became the Canadian province of Quebec, also had a senior official called an intendant, who was responsible to the French King. New France's first intendant was Jean Talon, comte d'Orsainville in 1665, and the last one, at the time of the British conquest of Quebec was François Bigot.

Intendants were introduced into Spain and the Spanish Empire during the eighteenth-century Bourbon Reforms. The reforms were designed by the new dynasty to make political administration more efficient and to promote economic, commercial, and fiscal development of their new realms. An intendente was in charge of a Spanish administrative unit, called an intendencia, which could include one or more provinces. The intendente was appointed directly by the Crown and had responsibility to oversee the treasury, the collection of taxes, and corruption practices and to promote agriculture and economic growth in general. With fiscal powers that gave them a say in almost all administrative, ecclesiastical and military matters, intendentes were conceived by the Bourbon kings to be a check on other local officials (who in the past couple of centuries had come to gain their position through the sale of offices or inheritance), just as the intendants had been in France a century earlier. Throughout the 18th century the Bourbons experimented with the powers and duties of the intendants, both in Spain and overseas, so what follows is only a general description of the Spanish intendancy. In any given area at any given time, the duties of the intendant would have been specified by the laws that established that particular intendancy.

The first intendencias were established in Spain after 1711, during the War of the Spanish Succession on the advice of Jean Orry, who had been sent by Louis XIV of France to help his young grandson Philip V set up his new government. The first intendants (superintendentes generales del ejército) oversaw the finances of the army and of the territories conquered by the Bourbons, and after the war, they were made permanent (intendentes de ejército y provincia). (After 1724, most intendancies lost their military character except in areas with a captaincy general and in Navarre.) In 1749 an intendancy was established in every province, with the intendant also holding the office of corregidor of the capital city. (The offices were separated again in 1766). District alcaldes mayores or coregidores were subordinated to the provincial intendente-corregidor and assisted him in managing the province and implementing reforms.

As a result of the Seven Years' War an intendancy was set up in Cuba in 1764. The Cuban intendant had oversight of the army's and the royal treasury's finances. (Two new intendancies with oversight only over the treasury were established in 1786 in Camagüey and Santiago de Cuba.) After a two years of experimentation with the new office, an intendancy was introduced in Louisiana (1764).

That same year Visitador General José de Gálvez created a plan to set up intendancies in New Spain (Mexico). The first one was set up in central Mexico in 1786, followed in 1787 by Veracruz, Puebla, Valladolid in Michoacan, Guadalajara, Oaxaca, Guanajuato, Zacatecas, San Luis Potosí, Durango, Sonora, and in 1789 Mérida, the main city in Yucatán. These administrative changes codified existing regional divisions of Center (Mexico, Veracruz, Puebla, Michoacan), South (Oaxaca, Mérida), and North (Zacatecas, Guanajuato, San Luis Potosí, Durango, and Sonora).

In 1776 Gálvez, now Minister of the Indies, established an intendancy (superintendencia) for all of Venezuela in 1776, and several in the Río de la Plata in 1783. Most of the overseas intendants were assisted by officials (subdelegados) who replaced the old corregidores or alcaldes mayores. Initially intendancies were held by a separate person from the viceroy or the governor, but eventually in many places the offices were granted to one person due to conflicts that emerged between these two.

More intendancies were established in Quito, Peru, Philippines, Puerto Rico (1784), Guatemala, more areas of New Spain, Chile (1786) and Cuenca (1786). The Revolt of the Comuneros prevented their installation in New Granada.

In Portugal, historically, the title "intendant" (intendente in Portuguese) has been mainly associated with police roles.

From 1760 to 1832, the head of the Police of the Kingdom of Portugal had the title of "Intendant General of the Police of the Court and of the Kingdom". A similar title - that of "Intendant General of the Public Security" - was used from 1928 to 1932 to designate the head of the Portuguese Civil Police.

Presently, intendant is a rank of officer in the Public Security Police, roughly equivalent to the military rank of lieutenant-colonel. Analogously, the police rank of sub-intendant corresponds to the rank of major, while the police rank of superintendent corresponds to the rank of colonel.

The rank insignia of an intendant consists of a dark blue epaulet with two crossed horsewhips inside a laurel wreath and two PSP stars. Each PSP star consists in a six points silver star with the "SP" monogram in the center. The rank insignia of a sub-intendant is similar but with only a single PSP star.

Nowadays in the Spanish armed forces, the title Intendant refers to a Colonel in the Supply Branch either in the Navy, Army or Air Force. It is also used in some branches of the administration such as the Catalan Police, (Mossos d'Esquadra in Catalan) or in some Autonomous Communities (Comunidades Autónomas in Spanish).

In Argentina, intendente (m) or intendenta (f) refers to city mayors – heads of government of municipalities (or partidos in Buenos Aires Province). This meaning is not at all connected to the usage in other countries. Spanish-language media in countries other than Argentina tend to refer to Argentine city mayors as alcaldes, which is the most common Spanish word for mayor. In the Argentine Army, "Intendencia" is the Spanish name of the Quartermaster Corps, and its members are informally called "intendentes". In some organizations, such as clubs, gated communities, large companies, etc., "intendente" is the name given to the person in charge of general maintenance of common spaces.

Chile is administratively divided in 16 regions. Between 1976 (1974 in some regions) and 2021, each region was headed by an intendant, appointed by the president.

In Cuba, the intendant was introduced by the Constitution of the Republic (2019) to head the Administrative Councils - subordinate to the Municipal Assemblies of People's Power (town halls) - and with strictly executive-administrative functions. As the highest local authority is the President of the Municipal Assembly (mayor), it is up to him to designate and remove the intendant, after agreement with the majority of the Delegates of People's Power (councilors).

The Republic of Paraguay is administratively divided into 17 departamentos (departments), each of which is headed by an gobernador departamental (departmental governor). These departamentos are divided into 261 distritos (districts) (plus the capital district), districts are headed by an intendente municipal (municipal intendant), these intendants are popularly elected, and serve a term of five years.

Uruguay is divided administratively into 19 departamentos (departments). The executive power of each department is the intendencia (intendancy), headed by an intendente departamental (departmental intendant). The intendants are popularly elected, and serve a term of five years.

The position of intendant was part of the tsarist Russian army from 1812 to 1868; intendants were responsible for supplies, finances, etc. in the field. After the 1935 rank reform that established 'personal ranks' in the Soviet military, it was reintroduced as the rank title for administrative and supply officers. The specific ranks, their collar insignia, and their line equivalents were:

On 7 May 1940, the rank title system for all Soviet Army senior officers was changed to bring it closer in line with standard European practice, and the ranks of major general of the intendant service, lieutenant general of the intendant service, and colonel general of the intendant service were introduced. Senior officers from brigintendant to armintendant rank underwent a re-attestation process and were given a general rank.

On 30 March 1942, the 'intendant' ranks equivalent to those between lieutenant and colonel were abolished, and officers holding those ranks also underwent a re-attestation process and received ranks ranging from lieutenant of the intendant service to colonel of the administrative service.

In Scotland intendant is an archaic title meaning "supervisor" or "curator". The senior officer of the City of Glasgow Police was called an Intendant in the document establishing the force in 1800.

For much of its history, the chief magistrate of the city of Charleston, South Carolina was the Intendant of the City, roughly corresponding to a mayor. The title Intendant was also used in other Lowcountry towns, where the office was assisted by "wardens," a system which may have derived from earlier ecclesiastical administration under colonial rule.

It is also commonly found today in many theaters and opera houses in Europe, where it is the equivalent to the title of general director, given to an individual in a managerial position, generally having control over all aspects of the company.

In Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, Intendant was a title in the mirror universe. The mirror universe version of Kira Nerys held the position of Intendant of Bajor.

Under the Ancien régime, intendants were pivotal figures in the royal administration of France, operating within the généralités. Their role was somewhat analogous to modern prefects, though with less extensive authority.

Intendants managed the administration of généralités, assisted by a secretary known as the subdélégué général. Each généralité was subdivided into subdélégations (akin to subprefectures), led by a subdélégué (comparable to a subprefect) appointed by the intendant. Subdélégations were further divided into arrondissements (equivalent to modern cantons), officially termed arrondissements de correspondance de la subdélégation. Each arrondissement was overseen by a correspondent, appointed by the intendant upon the subdélégué ’s recommendation.

Intendants received an average pension of 10,000 pounds, while subdélégués were unpaid and often held concurrent roles such as magistrates, civil administrators, or military officers.

In 1789 the fledgling National Assembly used this structure as a model to create departments and districts. Later, Napoleon Bonaparte adapted it to establish the modern system of prefects and subprefects.

From 1789 to 1980 the intendant's responsibilities were divided between the prefect and the military intendant.

As early as the 15th century, the king dispatched commissioners to the provinces to inspect local authorities and implement necessary measures. These commissioners were drawn from maîtres des requêtes, conseillers d'État, members of the Parlements, or the Chambres des comptes. Their assignments were temporary to prevent the re-emergence of feudal power structures. Intendants also served with armies, managing police, provisions, and finances, overseeing accountants, suppliers, and generals, and attending war councils for military offenses. Intendants are recorded in Bourges in 1592, Troyes in 1594, and Limoges in 1596.

The term "intendant" emerged in the 1620s, with the official title "intendant de justice, police et finances" (intendant of justice, police, and finances). Their roles were initially temporary and focused on inspection. Article 58 of the Code Michau outlined their duties (without using the term intendant): to "investigate all crimes, abuses, and malfeasances committed by our officers and other matters concerning our service and the relief of our people." With France's entry into the Thirty Years' War in 1635, intendants became permanent fixtures. From 1633, Chancellor Séguier formalized the system: within their généralité, intendants, as direct agents of royal authority, oversaw municipal bodies, managed the allocation and collection of direct taxes, and suppressed anti-tax riots. They transitioned from inspectors to administrators. During the Fronde in 1648, the Chambre Saint-Louis parliamentarians secured the temporary abolition of intendants. Mazarin and Anne of Austria conceded, except in frontier provinces threatened by Spanish and Imperial forces. After the Fronde, intendants were reinstated nationwide. By 1680, intendants held fixed posts within a généralité, with the title "intendant de justice, police, and finances, commissioner dispatched to the généralités of the kingdom for the execution of the king’s orders."

In the 17th and 18th centuries, intendants typically came from the nobility of the robe or the upper bourgeoisie, often serving as maîtres des requêtes at the Conseil des parties. They were selected by the Controller-General of Finances, with input from the Secretary of State for War for those assigned to frontier provinces. Many were appointed at a young age, such as Calonne at 17, Turgot and Berthier de Sauvigny at 34, and Tourny at 40.

Appointed and revocable by the king, an intendant in his généralité relied on a small team of secretaries. By the 18th century, généralités were divided into subdélégations, each led by a subdélégué chosen by the intendant, supported by a minimal staff. With limited resources, intendants handled a broad range of responsibilities.

As intendant de justice, they oversaw tribunals (except the parlements, with which they frequently clashed). They ensured judicial officers were neither slow, negligent, nor overly lenient, particularly toward nobles, nor excessively greedy for fees. Intendants held the right of évocation, allowing them to transfer cases between tribunals for fairer judgments. They could also personally adjudicate cases with royal judges. This encroachment on judicial officers’ prerogatives and incomes made intendants fierce adversaries of the judiciary, which repeatedly demanded their abolition or curtailment.

As intendant de police, they maintained public order, commanded the maréchaussée, and monitored public opinion. They managed troop provisioning and military logistics, oversaw the provincial militia, and intervened in religious affairs, particularly monitoring Protestants. In many provinces, intendants diligently enforced Louis XIV's anti-Protestant policies. They also supervised educational institutions.

As intendant des finances, they allocated direct royal taxes (at least in pays d’élection), managed the king's domanial rights (e.g., centième denier, petit scel, franc-fief), updated the king's terriers, and oversaw the financial management of communities (e.g., religious, educational). They enforced fiscal measures like the capitation and the 1696 armorial edict, primarily a tax measure.

Beyond these roles, intendants played an economic role, conducting surveys of the kingdom's state (notably the Mémoires pour l’instruction du duc de Bourgogne under Louis XIV). They promoted agricultural innovation, introducing new crops and improving livestock breeding (e.g., Turgot in Limousin). They established and inspected royal manufactures, managed gunpowder and saltpeter production, maintained and expanded road networks, oversaw postal services, and enhanced urban infrastructure (e.g., Tourny in Bordeaux). They mediated disputes over customs duties, opened charity workshops for the unemployed, established beggar depots, and ensured food supplies during subsistence crises by purchasing and redistributing grain.

As symbols of monarchical centralization, intendants, as appointed and revocable commissioners, faced opposition from officers who owned their positions. Critics like the duc de Saint-Simon, nostalgic for a nobility-based administration, and advocates of a tempered monarchy, like Fénelon, called for their abolition. Necker, the only Minister of Finance since 1720 who was not an intendant, criticized their youth and ambition. The cahiers de doléances of 1789 portrayed them as zealous enforcers of burdensome fiscal policies.

Nuclear sharing is a concept in deterrence theory in which a nuclear-armed country deploys nuclear weapons on the territory of a country that does not possess nuclear weapons and extends its nuclear deterrent to that country. Nuclear sharing typically also involves joint planning and training processes for potentially using them, going beyond nuclear stationing or nuclear basing, which refer to a nuclear-armed country's deployment of nuclear weapons on foreign soil without an operational role for the host country's military and government.

It was originally conceived during the Cold War, when the United States and the Soviet Union placed their own nuclear weapons in many non-nuclear countries of the American-aligned First World and the Soviet-aligned Second World, as part of the nuclear arms race between the two sides. However, since the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, the concept continues to be practiced by the United States and Russia. United States nuclear weapons, for delivery by fighter aircraft, are based in Belgium, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Turkey, and the United Kingdom. Russian nuclear weapons, for delivery by aircraft and short-range missiles, are deployed in Belarus.

As part of nuclear sharing, the participating countries carry out consultations and make common decisions on nuclear-weapons policy, training, and deployment, and maintain technical equipment (notably nuclear-capable aircraft) that is required for the delivery of nuclear weapons. In the event of a war that turns nuclear, the United States has publicly declared—with agreement from the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament (ENDC)—that the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) would no longer be controlling.

In the modern form, via the usage of permissive action links (PALs), including anti-tampering systems, a host country is prevented from unilaterally detonating its shared weapons, on a short timeframe. This applies to currently shared United States and Russian weapons. Due to the lack of transfer of operational control, this has been described by scholars as non-substantive nuclear sharing.

Historically, before the introduction of PALs in 1962, the US was aware that stationing or sharing agreements were insufficient to prevent host militaries from unilaterally seizing and using nuclear launch capabilities. Memorandums show that president Dwight D. Eisenhower 's goal was to “give, to all intents and purposes, control of [American nuclear] weapons” to European allies and for the US to “retain titular possession only.” This has been described by scholars as substantive nuclear sharing. One example was the simple dual-key operation of PGM-17 Thor IRBMs in the United Kingdom under Project Emily. The Royal Air Force officer key began the missile launch sequence, and the United States Air Force officer key armed the warhead, with no real protection from British seizure of the American key.

In contrast to nuclear sharing, foreign deployment of nuclear weapons and delivery systems, without cooperation from the host country's military, is termed nuclear stationing. This was the most common type of arrangement throughout the Cold War, including all foreign deployment by the USSR, and all US deployments in Asia and in European countries without sharing arrangements. Such early deployments were often highly secretive, with host governments sometimes not being informed entirely.

A separate but related concept is nuclear weapons technology transfer, where a state is provided with assistance to develop an independent nuclear arsenal. Examples include French collaboration with the Israeli nuclear program, Soviet collaboration with the Chinese nuclear program, Chinese collaboration with the Pakistani nuclear program., and US-UK bilateral assistance after 1957.

Of the three nuclear powers in NATO (France, the United Kingdom and the United States), only the United States is known to have provided weapons for nuclear sharing. However, the UK also deployed, stationed, or tested nuclear weapons on the territory of West Germany, Singapore, and the Akrotiri and Dhekelia overseas territory on the island of Cyprus. France tested nuclear weapons on the territory of Algeria, then a colony. The United States began moving weapons to Europe in 1954, first to the UK, and then to West Germany. The US negotiated agreements with the Allied countries where US nuclear weapons would be stored, including Section 144b of the Atomic Energy Act, and a national stockpile agreement. It also negotiated additional agreements with France, West Germany, Belgium, Netherlands, Canada, and the UK for the use of nuclear weapons stored and controlled by US forces in West Germany. These arrangements included delivery of short-range nuclear weapons - including landmines, rockets, and artillery, as well as nuclear armed depth charges and anti-aircraft missiles. The US also negotiated a separate agreement with Canada to provide nuclear-armed anti-air and anti-ship weapons to defend North America. The US deployed nuclear forces in Greenland (Danish territory) and Iceland - as well as extensively in East Asia: Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, the Philippines, but these were solely for delivery by US troops.

Historically, the shared nuclear weapon delivery systems were not restricted to bombs. Greece used Nike-Hercules Missiles as well as A-7 Corsair II attack aircraft. Canada had Bomarc nuclear-armed anti-aircraft missiles, Honest John surface-to-surface missiles and the AIR-2 Genie nuclear-armed air-to-air rocket, as well as tactical nuclear bombs for the CF-104 fighter. PGM-19 Jupiter medium-range ballistic missiles were shared with Italian air force units and Turkish units with US dual key systems to enable the warheads. PGM-17 Thor intermediate-range ballistic missiles were forward deployed to the UK with RAF crews. An extended version of nuclear sharing, the NATO Multilateral Force was a plan to equip NATO surface ships of the member states with UGM-27 Polaris missiles, but the UK ended up purchasing the Polaris missiles and using its own warheads, and the plan to equip NATO surface ships was abandoned. In the later Cold War, the deployment of US Pershing II and Soviet RSD-10 Pioneer medium-range ballistic missiles to Europe resulted in the "Euromissile Crisis" including the 1979 NATO Double-Track Decision.

Canada hosted weapons under the control of the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD), rather than NATO, until 1984, and Greece until 2001. The United Kingdom also received US tactical nuclear weapons such as nuclear artillery and Lance missiles until 1992, even though the UK is a nuclear-weapon state in its own right; these were mainly deployed in West Germany.

After the Soviet Union collapsed, the nuclear weapon types shared within NATO were reduced to tactical nuclear bombs deployed by Dual-Capable Aircraft (DCA), i.e. aircraft capable of carrying conventional or nuclear weapons. According to the press, Eastern European member states of NATO have resisted the withdrawal of the shared nuclear bombs from Europe, fearing it would show a weakening of US commitment to defend Europe against Russia.

As of 2025, Belgium, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Turkey, and the United Kingdom have been hosting US nuclear weapons as part of NATO's nuclear sharing policy. They are assigned to delivery by specific US and European aircraft wings, operating NATO-designated dual-capable aircraft.

In peacetime, the nuclear weapons stored in non-nuclear countries are guarded by United States Air Force (USAF) personnel and previously, some nuclear artillery and missile systems were guarded by United States Army (USA) personnel; the permissive action link codes required for arming them remain under American control. In case of war, the weapons are to be mounted on the participating countries' warplanes. The weapons are under custody and control of USAF Munitions Support Squadrons co-located on NATO main operating bases who work together with the host nation forces.

As of 2025, 125 to 130 tactical B61 nuclear bombs are believed to be deployed in Europe under the nuclear sharing arrangement. The weapons are stored within a vault in hardened aircraft shelters, using the USAF WS3 Weapon Storage and Security System. European air forces operate General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcons (F-16s) and Panavia Tornados Interdictor/Strike (PA-200s), and are in the process of transitioning to Lockheed Martin F-35A Lightnings II (F-35As). United States Air Forces in Europe operates F-16s at Aviano, Italy, and both F-35As and McDonnell Douglas F-15E Strike Eagles (F-15Es) at Lakenheath, UK. F-35As only operate under the USAF from RAF Lakenheath. The use of stockpiled American B61s in Europe, via the DCA programme, is claimed to require authorization from the NATO Nuclear Planning Group and Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, in addition to the US president.

The United States has stationed nuclear weapons in the Kingdom of Belgium since 1963. As of 2023, an estimated 10 to 15 B61 nuclear bombs are stored at Kleine Brogel Air Base, maintained by USAFE 's 701st Munitions Support Squadron and designated for the usage of the Belgian 10th Tactical Wing, flying their F-16 MLU fighter jets.

In Italy, B61 bombs are stored at the Ghedi Air Base and at the Aviano Air Base. According to the former Italian President Francesco Cossiga, Italy's role in a planned retaliation consisted in striking with those nuclear weapons Czechoslovakia and Hungary had the Warsaw Pact waged nuclear war against NATO. He acknowledged the presence of US nuclear weapons in Italy, and speculated about the possible presence of British and French nuclear weapons.

The only German nuclear base is located in Büchel Air Base, near the border with Luxembourg. The base has 11 Protective Aircraft Shelters (PAS) equipped with WS3 Vaults for storage of nuclear weapons, each with a maximum capacity of 44 B61 nuclear bombs. There are 20 B61 bombs stored on the base for delivery by German PA-200 Tornado IDS bombers of the JaBoG 33 squadron. The Tornado IDS aircraft were due to be retired by the end of 2024; while 2010 and 2018 assessments questioned what nuclear sharing role, if any, Germany would then retain, in 2020 Germany (Fourth Merkel cabinet) announced that it would buy 30 Boeing F/A-18E/F Super Hornets to replace the Tornado in its nuclear-capable role. The Super Hornet was not yet certified for the B61 bomb, but Dan Gillian, head of Boeing's Super Hornet program, had previously stated his optimism about achieving this certification in a timely manner. In 2022, against the backdrop of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the Super Hornet order was cancelled and Germany (Kabinett Scholz) instead chose to order 35 Lockheed Martin F-35 jets for nuclear sharing use.

B61 bombs are stored at Volkel Air Base in the Netherlands, for delivery by F-35A fighters. An estimated 10 to 15 bombs are stored as of 2023. The F-35 took over the Netherlands' nuclear strike role from the F-16 on 1 June 2024, becoming the first European country to operate a stealth aircraft for a nuclear role.

On 10 June 2013, former Dutch prime minister Ruud Lubbers confirmed the existence of 22 shared nuclear bombs at Volkel Air Base. This was inadvertently confirmed again in June 2019 when a public draft report to the NATO Parliamentary Assembly was discovered to reference the existence of US nuclear weapons at Volkel, as well as locations in Belgium, Italy, Germany, and Turkey. A new version of the report was released on 11 July 2019 without reference to the locations of the weapons.

In 2017, due to an increasingly unstable relationship between the United States and Turkey it was suggested that the United States consider removing 50 tactical nuclear weapons stored under American control at the Incirlik Air Base in Turkey. The presence of US nuclear weapons in Turkey gained increased public attention in October 2019 with the deterioration of relations between the two nations after the Turkish military incursion into Syria.

In July 2025, experts concluded that between 25 and 30 United States nuclear weapons had been redeployed to RAF Lakenheath for the first time since 2008. This was based on telemetry from a 15 July Boeing C-17 Globemaster III flight between New Mexico and the United Kingdom, as well as preparations for nuclear weapons storage at the base being documented since 2023. The US and UK defense departments reiterated their policy to not confirm or deny nuclear weapon presence. The weapons can be delivered by both F-35A and F-15E aircraft, it is the second nuclear base in Europe to host F-35As, after Volkel Air Base, and the only one to host F-15Es. An October 2025 Federation of American Scientists report argued US nuclear weapons may not be present at Lakenheath, as it might first be required to complete base security fences and command posts, expected to take until 2031.

RAF Marham is also expected to have upgrades completed in the early 2030s at a former US nuclear base, although it will host a Royal Air Force wing of F-35As. A parliamentary inquiry questioned the change to the country's nuclear posture and the issue of US control of the weapons, with inquiring MP Tan Dhesi calling it the "UK’s most significant defence expansion since the cold war ".

In 2022, after the Russian invasion of Ukraine, reports appeared about the possible inclusion of Poland in the nuclear sharing policy, with then-president Andrzej Duda calling the country's lack of nuclear weapons a "problem" and saying that it was in talks with the United States about the possibility of nuclear sharing. In June 2023, then-prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki declared Poland's interest in hosting nuclear weapons under the policy, citing the reported deployment of Russian nuclear weapons to its Kaliningrad region and Belarus, while National Security Bureau head Jacek Siewiera said the country was interested in certifying its upcoming F-35A fleet as being capable of delivering B61 bombs.

In April 2024, president Duda said that Poland was "ready" to host nuclear weapons and had been discussing the matter with the United States government for "some time". The new Polish prime minister, Donald Tusk, said that he wanted to speak with Duda to understand the intention behind the statement and that he wanted Poland to "be safe and well-armed, but [he] would also like any initiatives to be very well prepared by the people responsible for them and for all [Poles] to be convinced that this is what [they] want." In May 2024, foreign minister Radosław Sikorski accused president Duda of failing to consult with him on this and other major foreign policy announcements and said that he had "asked the president privately and publicly not to discuss such delicate and secret matters in public, because it [did] not help Poland"; he also said that the previous Polish government had been told that the idea of Poland being involved with nuclear sharing was "not on the table".

After the announcement in March 2025 that France was considering the extension of its nuclear deterrence to other European countries (see next section), president Duda welcomed this development while simultaneously renewing his call for American weapons to be based in Poland.

In August 2026, deputy defence minister Paweł Zalewski said that, while Poland wanted to participate in NATO nuclear deterrence, it did not want nuclear weapons on its territory. He later clarified that Poland had the opportunity to take part in NATO's dual-capable aircraft program. The defence minister, Władysław Kosiniak-Kamysz, later said that Poland remained interested in NATO nuclear sharing and in a potential European nuclear umbrella, but did not address the issue of stationing weapons in Poland. Zalewski's comments were criticised by opposition politicians, including Marcin Przydacz (senior foreign policy aide to the new Polish president Karol Nawrocki) and Morawiecki-era defence minister Mariusz Błaszczak, as well as retired brigadier general Stanisław Koziej.

In March 2025, amid European concerns over whether the United States could continue to be relied on as an ally, the French president Emmanuel Macron said that his country would consider the possibility of extending the protection offered by its nuclear arsenal to other European states. Both Macron and defence minister Sébastien Lecornu stressed that ultimate control over the weapons would be retained by France, and claims that the potential decision amounted to a plan for nuclear sharing were explicitly denied. Friedrich Merz said that discussions on nuclear sharing should be held with France and Britain (which also has nuclear weapons) but warned that European weapons could only ever be a supplement to the existing American arrangement.

NATO's official nuclear policy states that "The fundamental purpose of NATO's nuclear capability is to preserve peace, prevent coercion and deter aggression."

CSNO (Conventional Support for Nuclear Operations), formerly called SNOWCAT (Support for Nuclear Operations with Conventional Air Tactics) is a program for NATO members to provide conventional military assets to support nuclear strike missions. This includes via escort fighters and suppression of enemy air defenses. Its exact participants are unknown, but as of 2023 it includes Czechia, Denmark, Hungary, Poland, the United Kingdom, and two unknown states. In April 2023, the Finnish Ministry of Defence announced that the country "could join support functions for NATO nuclear operations outside its own territory", which was interpreted as suggesting SNOWCAT participation.

The British think tank Chatham House has noted NATO does not directly possess nuclear weapons as the three nuclear states maintain "absolute custody".

A 2019 NATO speech emphasized the role of the strategic nuclear forces of the three nuclear-armed members: "Should an adversary decide to attack NATO, they must not only contend with NATO’s decision-making processes, but also the decision-making processes in Washington, London and Paris."

Deterrence scholars have argued that prior to the introduction permissive action links and the consequent end of "substantive nuclear sharing", NATO attempted deterrence via the threat of fully independent NATO command decision-making on the employment of forward-deployed nuclear weapons in Europe. The Supreme Allied Commander Europe, Lauris Norstad said in the late 1950s NATO was intended as a "fourth nuclear power" alongside the US, USSR, and UK.

Leiden University scholar Linde Desmaele has argued that US nuclear weapons in Europe, and participation in conventional support for nuclear operations, are "primarily tools of alliance management" and their main purposes are:

The Soviet Union practiced nuclear stationing during the Cold War, primarily with Warsaw Pact countries. It stationed nuclear weapons in East Germany, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, and Mongolia, as well as briefly in Cuba during the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis. It is possible that similar arrangements were made with Bulgaria, but no sources have been found to date. In 1963, in the wake of the Cuban Missile Crisis, the Socialist Republic of Romania made a secret declaration to the United States that it did not host Soviet nuclear weapons, and that it would wish to remain neutral rather than uphold its Warsaw Pact obligations in the event of a superpower conflict.

Some historical evidence indicates during the 1973 Yom Kippur War, the Soviet Union deployed nuclear weapons to Egypt, including possibly providing two warheads to Soviet Scud missile brigades, as well as the typical nuclear weapons stored on ships and submarines of the 5th Operational Squadron based in Syria.

On 27 February 2022, shortly after the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Belarusians voted in a constitutional referendum with political and military reforms, including to repeal the post-Soviet constitutional prohibition on basing of nuclear weapons. The reforms also removed the country's neutral status and allowed permanent basing for the Russian Armed Forces. The referendum was criticized by the EU, UK, US, Canada, and other countries in the context of the censorship and human rights violations against the Belarusian opposition.

At a meeting on 25 June 2022, Russian President Vladimir Putin and President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko agreed the deployment of Russian short-range nuclear-capable missiles. Lukashenko has described the weapons as " non-strategic ". Russia supplied Belarus with nuclear-capable Iskander-M missile systems in 2023, with President Putin announcing the first delivery of warheads occurring as of 16 June 2023 in a speech at the St. Petersburg International Forum. These missile warheads are believed to have a variable yield between 5 and 50 kilotons. Additionally, Russia has completed modifications necessary for Belarusian Su-25 bombers to carry nuclear air-dropped bombs and the pilots have received training. The yield of these bombs is not believed to exceed 20 kilotons. Belarus has reported full operation of the nuclear-capable Iskanders and Su-25s, and exercised their use with training nuclear warheads in May 2024.

As of 2025, there is no conclusive open-source evidence that Russian nuclear warheads and gravity bombs themselves are being stored in Belarus, although the most likely location if so is a Cold War-era depot near Asipovichy. In December 2024, Lukashenko stated Belarus was hosting "dozens" of Russian warheads. Putin has also stated that its Oreshnik, an intermediate-range ballistic missile, could be deployed to Belarus in the second half of 2025, and that Belarus would play a role in nuclear targeting.

Despite Lukashenko's statement on weapon usage "without hesitation in case of aggression against Belarus", which could indicate the transfer of operational control to Belarus, Putin emphasized Russian control was maintained, and General Secretary of the CIS Sergey Lebedev described a "double nuclear button" for weapon usage.

It was common belief among foreign officials in 2010 that Saudi Arabia and Pakistan have an understanding in which Pakistan would supply Saudi Arabia with warheads if security in the Persian Gulf was threatened. A Western official told The Times that Saudi Arabia could have the nuclear warheads in a matter of days of approaching Pakistan. Pakistan's ambassador to Saudi Arabia, Muhammed Naeem Khan, was quoted as saying, "Pakistan considers the security of Saudi Arabia not just as a diplomatic or an internal matter but as a personal matter." Naeem also said that the Saudi leadership considered Pakistan and Saudi Arabia to be one country and that any threat to Saudi Arabia is also a threat to Pakistan. Western intelligence sources told The Guardian that "the Saudi monarchy paid for up to 60% of the Pakistani nuclear programme, and in return has the option to buy a small nuclear arsenal ('five to six warheads') off the shelf". Saudi Arabia has potential dual-purpose delivery infrastructure, including Tornado IDS and F-15S fighter bombers and improved Chinese CSS-2 intermediate range ballistic missiles with accuracy sufficient for nuclear warheads but delivered with high explosive warheads.

In November 2013, a variety of sources told BBC Newsnight that Saudi Arabia was able to obtain nuclear weapons from Pakistan at will. The report further alleged, according to western experts, that Pakistan's defense sector had received plentiful financial assistance from Saudi Arabia. Gary Samore, an adviser to Barack Obama, said, "I do think that the Saudis believe that they have some understanding with Pakistan that, in extremis, they would have claim to acquire nuclear weapons from Pakistan." Amos Yadlin, formerly head of Israeli military intelligence, said "They already paid for the bomb, they will go to Pakistan and bring what they need to bring."

According to the US-based Center for Strategic and International Studies think-thank, the BBC's report on possible Pakistani-Saudi nuclear sharing was partially incorrect. There was no indication of the validity or credibility of the BBC's sources, and the article failed to expand on what was essentially an unverified lead. Furthermore, if Pakistan were to transfer nuclear warheads onto Saudi soil, it was highly unlikely that either nation would face any international repercussions if NATO-esque guidelines were followed. A research paper produced by the British House of Commons Defence Select Committee states that as long as current NATO nuclear sharing arrangements remain in place, the NATO states would have few valid grounds for complaint if such a transfer were to occur.

On 17 September 2025, Pakistan and Saudi Arabia signed the Strategic Mutual Defence Agreement, a week after the Israeli airstrike in Qatar added to long-running concerns about US unpredictability and commitment to Gulf states defence. The agreement states an attack on one country will be treated as an attack on both. A senior Saudi official told Reuters, regarding whether Pakistan would provide Saudi Arabia with a nuclear umbrella, "This is a comprehensive defensive agreement that encompasses all military means." Pakistani Defense Minister Khawaja Asif initially suggested that the strategic agreement with Saudi Arabia might involve a nuclear element but later backtracked, stating that such a scope was not included. The ambiguity surrounding his remarks fueled speculation about the pact's implications, with its precise terms remaining unclear. Ali Shihabi, a Saudi commentator with close ties to the monarchy, welcomed the “deterrence that comes from sharing Pakistan’s nuclear umbrella.”

In 2015, Russia accused the US of violating the NPT, but since Russia resumed its own nuclear sharing arrangements, now with Belarus, it no longer makes this assertion. However, China accused the US of violating the NPT at a side event to the NPT review process in Geneva in July 2024.

At the time the NPT was being negotiated, the NATO nuclear sharing agreements were well known and discussed publicly in the United Nations at the NPT negotiations in Geneva, national parliaments, NATO and government press releases, and in the news media. The US and USSR discussed the wording of Articles I and II at length bilaterally and negotiated the wording to ensure that they were compatible with the NPT during an especially intense negotiation from 22 to 30 October 1966 on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly in New York. While some have erroneously claimed that such arrangements were secret or unknown, and that some signatories not have known about these agreements and interpretations at that time, these claims have been thoroughly debunked.

During the Cold War militarization of the Iron Curtain region of Europe, the US and Soviet arsenals of chemical weapons played an intertwined role with nuclear sharing.

The United States stationed chemical weapons at its overseas military bases, in Okinawa until 1972 and in West Germany, until 1990. The Soviet Union likely stationed chemical weapons in East Germany, Czechoslovakia, and Poland, based on post-Cold War evidence, but repeatedly denied this. Both sides developed a large arsenal of ground and air delivery systems: shells, mines, rockets, longer-range missiles, spray tanks, and many others.

In 1969, the Nixon administration proclaimed a policy of no-first-use of chemical weapons, but maintained its chemical arsenal as a deterrent to Soviet first use in Europe. British intelligence concluded that Warsaw Pact battle plans included a massive surprise battlefield attack with chemical weapons, intended to maximize casualties and cause demoralization.

A 1984 RAND report argued that Soviet forces viewed chemical weapons usage as a matter of tactical advantages and disadvantages, and not as especially escalatory. In this vein, Soviet forces may be more likely to strike the rear than the frontline: threatening rendering NATO nuclear airbases in Europe inoperable with chemical attacks, including persistent chemical weapons, a fear which contributed to the development of the Weapons Storage and Security System for nuclear weapons at the bases. It also argued NATO would not be willing to respond to a Soviet chemical first use with nuclear weapons.

The International Singing Competition of Toulouse (French : Concours international de chant de Toulouse) is an international classical singing competition run by the Théâtre du Capitole in Toulouse, France.

First edition took place in 1954. Held annually from 1954 to 1994 (except in 1973), the competition was not held in 1995 due to theatre renovation work. When it resumed in 1996, the competition became biannual. The Competition has been a member of the World Federation of International Music Competitions since 1958.

In the 1970s and 1980s, the competition was marked by the large number of winners from the USSR, the United States and Romania. Since the mid-2000s, South Korea has been the winner, with 4 consecutive tenors having won the Grand Prix from 2008 to 2016.

The jury is made up of artistic directors of major theaters and opera houses, mainly in Europe, with the notable participation of the Metropolitan Opera of New York (on 12 occasions). During the various editions, it has notably been chaired by Emmanuel Bondeville, Daniel-Lesur, Marcel Landowski, Raymond Gallois-Montbrun, Rolf Liebermann and Hugues Gall. Several foreign celebrities were also jurors, including tenors Ferruccio Tagliavini and Giuseppe Di Stefano, or even sopranos Rita Streich, Birgit Nilsson, Leyla Gencer, Teresa Stich-Randall or Edda Moser.

The competition is open to young singers of all nationalities from 18 to 33 years. Applicants must present a program comprising six titles in the Mélodie, Lied, Oratorio categories, and six extracts from operas, with at least one French composer.

48°47′28″N 2°27′47″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.791°N 2.463°E ﻿ / 48.791; 2.463 The International Women's Film Festival, formerly known as Créteil International Women's Film Festival (in French Festival International de Films de Femmes (FIFF); formerly Festival international de films de femmes de Créteil), also known simply as Films des Femmes, is an annual film festival held in Créteil, France.

The Festival international de films de femmes de Créteil was founded by Jackie Buet in 1978 to showcase the directing talents of female filmmakers who, at the time, had difficulty getting their films adequately distributed. The first festival was held in 1979 in Sceaux. It transferred to Créteil in 1985.

As of 2024 it is known as the Festival International de Films de Femmes (FIFF).

Located in Créteil, a city southeast of Paris, today the festival is 10 non-stop days premiering 50 or more new films directed by one or more women. The festival also offers film classes, thematic forums and debates. The competition is open to women from around the world who have made a feature-length documentary, a short length fiction and a documentary film.

The festival offers a number of prizes, including several Audience awards and the "Grand Jury Prize." There is a festival archive containing more than 10,000 films by women.

Iparretarrak (meaning " the Northerners " in Basque), commonly known as IK, was a Basque nationalist and revolutionary socialist paramilitary organization operating in the French or Northern Basque Country, founded in 1973 by Philippe Bidart and other Basque activists. 1982 was their most active year, with 32 attacks. IK mostly targeted tourist developments but also assassinated a number of French police personnel. In 1984, they attacked the Biarritz airport before the arrival of the French president François Mitterrand, who was accused by IK of "not respecting the Basque culture and national rights".

Despite sharing the same goals and methods, it held an uneasy relation with ETA, a more powerful organization based in the Southern Basque Country, mostly because ETA has used the French Basque Country as a safe haven and did not want to provoke the French Government in this regard.

In 1998 it declared a unilateral truce, which broke when in 2000 it attacked a police station in Lecumberry and a tourism site in Bayonne. To date, it has not claimed any more actions, but another group, Irrintzi (probably numbering no more than one cell), followed IK's path in the French Basque Country by starting an on-off campaign against tourist targets.

In 2007 Philippe Bidart, the leader and founder of IK, was set free after serving a prison term since 1988.

Iran National Council for Free Elections (Persian : شورای ملی ایران برای انتخابات آزاد), also called the Iran National Council (INC ; Persian : شورای ملی ایران, romanized : Šurā-ye melli-e Irān) or the National Council of Iran (NCI), is a political umbrella group headquartered in Paris, France. It serves as part of the Iranian opposition to the government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, with Reza Pahlavi acting as its spokesman. Pahlavi, who lives in the United States, is the former Crown Prince of Iran and is the son of the deposed Shah, and previously declared himself to be the new " Reza Shah II " in exile in 1980, following the 1979 revolution and the death of his father.

The "self-styled" National Council claims to represent religious and ethnic minorities, as well as monarchists and republicans. According to Kenneth Katzman, in 2017, the group which was established with over 30 groups in 2013 had suffered defections and its activity level appeared minimal.

In 2025–26 researchers identified coordinated online campaigns promoting Reza Pahlavi and his political movement.

The Irati Forest (French : Forêt d'Iraty ; French pronunciation: [ fɔʁɛ diʁati ] ; Spanish : Selva de Irati ； Basque : Iratiko oihana), found in the western Pyrenees, covers 17,300 ha (43,000 acres) of the Navarre region, astride on the Soule (Larrau) and Lower Navarre (Mendive and Lecumberry) provinces (French Basque Country) and Navarre (Spanish Basque Country), framed by Mount Okabe (1,466 m) and Pic d'Orhy (2,017 m).

It is the second largest and best preserved mixed beech-fir forest in Europe.

Located in a scarcely populated area, it has maintained a wild and mysterious aspect, fueled by many old Basque legends.

The access route was only built in 1964.

Its name comes from the Irati river, which crops up from the meeting of the Urtxuria and Urbeltza.

For the most part, the Irati Forest shares the flora and fauna of the Pyrenees. Birds found in the area include goldcrests, chaffinches, robins, black woodpeckers, and white-backed woodpeckers. Notable mammals include foxes, wild boar, martens, and roe deer. Smaller mammals include the red vole, gray dormouse, and shrew, as well as the polecat and badger. The primary tree species are beech and silver fir.The forest is also home to linden, hazelnut, elm, willow, maple, boxwood, and juniper trees, and rarely yew. Other plants are ferns, lichens, moss, and sloe, and well as rare herbaceous plants such as narcissus and winter bell. Solitary oaks, which used to be more common in the region, are still found in the area. Despite being an intervened forest, it maintains a high degree of maturity, with a high diversity of environments that encompasses forests, wetlands, montane and subalpine meadows of the cervico (Nardus stricta), rocky, moor and scrubland, the Atlantic heaths with blueberry and argoma (Ulex gallii) or gorse (Genista hispanica subsp. occidentalis).

Irrintzi is an armed Basque nationalist group or cell that acts in the Northern Basque Country (Basque : Iparralde).

The first known action of Irrintzi was sabotage in 2006 around Bayonne (including a bomb against the summer house of the French Minister of the Interior Michèle Alliot-Marie). Since then, the organization has attacked railroads, tourist sites, and political party headquarters, mainly by bomb. The Monégasque chef Alain Ducasse, with a restaurant in Bidarray, was accused by Irrintzi of being a speculator and of "folklorising" the Basque Country, and was forced to leave the Basque Country due to the constant attacks that his restaurant suffered. Their declarations are usually closed by the slogan Euskal Herria ez da salgai (transl. the Basque Country is not for sale). This calling card was found in more than 30 attacks against tourist targets during 2007.

The Institute for Strategic Research (in French: Institut de recherche stratégique de l'École militaire), known by its French acronym IRSEM, is a research institute of the French Ministry of Armed Forces. Located in the complex of buildings of the École militaire, it has a staff of around forty people. It was managed from 2009 to 2015 by Frédéric Charillon and from 2016 to 2022 by Jean-Baptiste Jeangène Vilmer. Fully financed by the Ministry of the Armed Forces, IRSEM is an independent part of the ministry.

IRSEM was benchmarked among the top Western European policy institutes in the University of Pennsylvania 's "2019 Top Think Tanks in Europe".

Created de facto in September 2009 and de jure by a decree of October 15, 2010, IRSEM was attached to the Armed Forces Staff (EMA) for 5 years before coming under the supervision of the General-Directorate for International Relations and Strategy (Direction générale des relations internationales et de la stratégie, DGRIS) in 2015. As of September 2020, IRSEM was part of the portfolio of the Director of Defense Strategy, Foresight and Counter-Proliferation of the DGRIS.

It is the result of the merger of the Center for Defense Social Sciences Studies (C2SD), the Center for Studies and Research in Higher Military Education (CEREMS), and the Center for Defense History Studies (CEHD). It also absorbs the research activity of CHEAr.

IRSEM has four missions, namely research, both internal (for the ministry) and external (open publications); "strategic succession" (support for young researchers, through doctoral and postdoctoral funding and a monthly young researchers' seminar); contribution to higher military education (at the War School and at the Center for Advanced Military Studies), and contribution to public debates.

IRSEM has its own collections in different formats (Strategic Briefs, Research Papers, Studies and the scientific journal Les Champs de Mars published by the Presses de Sciences Po). In addition, its researchers regularly publish abroad, in French and in English, books and academic articles, and articles promoting research.

ISO 3166-2:FR is the entry for France in ISO 3166-2, part of the ISO 3166 standard published by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), which defines codes for the names of the principal subdivisions (e.g., provinces or states) of all countries coded in ISO 3166-1.

Currently for France, ISO 3166-2 codes are defined for the following subdivisions:

Each code consists of two parts, separated by a hyphen. The first part is FR, the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 code of France. The second part is either of the following:

The metropolitan departments use their INSEE codes, which are currently used in postal codes, and used in vehicle registration plates until 2009. INSEE codes are assigned as follows:

Subdivision names are listed as in the ISO 3166-2 standard published by the ISO 3166 Maintenance Agency (ISO 3166/MA).

Click on the button in the header to sort each column.

Besides being included as subdivisions of France in ISO 3166-2, several subdivisions are also officially assigned their own country codes in ISO 3166-1.

The dependency Clipperton Island (FR-CP) is also exceptionally reserved the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 code CP on the request of the International Telecommunication Union.

Metropolitan France (the part of France located in Europe) was previously officially assigned its own set of country codes in ISO 3166-1, with alpha-2 code FX, before it was deleted from ISO 3166-1. The code is now exceptionally reserved on the request of France.

The following changes to the entry have been announced by the ISO 3166/MA since the first publication of ISO 3166-2 in 1998. ISO stopped issuing newsletters in 2013.

Italian irredentism in Corsica was a cultural and historical movement promoted by Italians and by people from Corsica who identified themselves as part of Italy rather than France, and promoted the Italian annexation of the island.

Corsica was part of the Republic of Genoa for centuries until 1768, when the Republic ceded the island to France, one year before the birth of Napoleon Bonaparte in the capital city of Ajaccio. Under France, the use of Corsican (a regional language closely related to Italian) has gradually declined in favour of the standard French language. Italian was the official language of Corsica until 1859.

Giuseppe Garibaldi called for the inclusion of the "Corsican Italians" within Italy when the city of Rome was annexed to the Kingdom of Italy, but Victor Emmanuel II did not agree to it.

The course of Italian irredentism did not affect Corsica very much, and only during the Fascist rule of Benito Mussolini were the first organizations strongly promoting the unification of the island to the Kingdom of Italy founded.

Before World War I in Livorno, professor Francesco Guerri founded the review Corsica antica e moderna, inspired on the Archivio storico di Corsica of Gioacchino Volpe. Petru Rocca created in the 1920s the Partito autonomista (Autonomist Party) of Corsica, of which he was the leader, with the support of monsignor Domenico Parlotti and dr. Croce, director of the "Archivi di Stato della Corsica".

Before and during World War II, some Corsican intellectuals staged pro-Italian propaganda and cultural activities in Italy (mainly in the Gruppi di Cultura Corsa "Corsican culture Associations"). These included Marco Angeli, Bertino Poli, Marchetti, Luccarotti, Grimaldi, and finally Petru Giovacchini, who was later proposed as a possible governor of Corsica in case Italy had annexed it. The most renowned was Petru Giovacchini, who considered Pasquale Paoli (the hero of Corsica) as the precursor of Corsican irredentism in favor of the unification of the island to Italy. The "Gruppi di Cultura Corsa" of Giovacchini reached a membership of 72,000 members by 1940, according to the historian R.H. Rainero.

In November 1942 the VII Army Corps of the Regio Esercito occupied Corsica as part of the German-led response to the Allied landings in Africa, leaving the island still under the formal sovereignty of Vichy France. Because of the lack of partisan resistance at first, and to avoid problems with Marshal Philippe Pétain, no Corsican units were formed under Italian control (except for a labour battalion formed in March 1943). However, a Resistance movement based on local inhabitants loyal to France and boosted by Free French leaders developed, opposing the irredentist propaganda and the Italian occupation, and was repressed by the fascist forces and subsequently by German troops.

Some irredentist Corsican military officials collaborated with Italy, including the retired Major Pantalacci (and his son Antonio), colonel Mondielli and colonel Petru Simone Cristofini (and his wife, the first Corsican female journalist Marta Renucci). After Free French forces and Resistance forces, together with some Italian troops who sided with the Allies, retook Corsica, Petru Cristofini was executed in 1943. Petru Giovacchini was also condemned to death, but fled to Italy where he found refuge until his death in 1955. Italian irredentism as an active movement in Corsica essentially died out with him.

Colonel Pietro Cristofini (or Petru Simon Cristofini) was born in Calenzana (near Calvi, Corsica) on 26 May 1903 and in 1939 became a captain of the 3rd Algerian Fusiliers regiment. He was initially a supporter of Pétain. After the Allied occupation of French North Africa he commanded the Phalange Africaine.

In Tunisia, he was wounded in one eye and then, before returning to Corsica, met Benito Mussolini in Rome. He was a supporter of the union of Corsica to Italy and defended irredentist ideals. He actively collaborated with Italian forces in Corsica during the first months of 1943. In the island he worked with Petru Giovacchini (the possible governor of Corsica if the Axis had won the war). Cristofini, as head of the Ajaccio troops, helped the Italian Army to repress the Resistance opposition in Corsica before the Italian Armistice in September 1943.

He was put on trial for treason after the Allies retook Corsica, and sentenced to death. He tried to kill himself, and was executed while suffering from his wounds in November 1943. His wife, Marta Renucci, was sentenced in 1946 to 15 years of jail in Algiers for supporting irredentism and for collaborating with Italian fascism, but served only a reduced sentence.

While Corsican was spoken at home as a local vernacular, Italian had been the public and literary language on the island until the first half of the 19th century.

The Constitution, written in 1755 for the short-lived Corsican Republic, was written in Italian and Paoli proclaimed Italian as the sole official language of Corsica. Italian had been the prestige language in Corsica until the end of the 19th century. Even Paoli's second Corsican Constitution, for the Anglo-Corsican Kingdom in 1794, was in Italian. In the second half of the 19th century French replaced Italian, mainly because of Napoleon III. Corsican started to be used by Corsican intellectuals.

The modern varieties of Corsican (corsu) are directly related to the Tuscan dialect of Pisa, an Italian city that dominated the island before Genoa. In the north of the island (Calvi), there was also a local dialect (now nearly extinct) very similar to medieval Genoese. In the mountainous interior of Corsica, many villagers have some proficiency of Corsican, a medieval Pisan lect.

The similarity of Corsican to Italian, because of their common Tuscan origin, can be seen in an example phrase: "I was born in Corsica and I spent there the best years of my youth".

Sò natu in Corsica è v'aghju passatu i megli anni di a mio ghjuventù (Corsican); Sono nato in Corsica e vi ho passato i migliori anni della mia gioventù (Italian); Je suis né en Corse et j'y ai passé les meilleurs années de ma jeunesse (French).

Nearly 12% of Corsicans can speak Italian as a foreign language nowadays, while three-quarters understand it thanks to the television programmes from Italy.

The irredentist Marco Angeli di Sartèna wrote the first book in Corsican (titled Terra còrsa) in 1924 and many lyrics (titled Malincunie) in Ajaccio. He created and wrote the newspaper «Gioventù» of the Partito Corso d'azione ("Corsican Action Party"), partially in Italian and Corsican.

Pasquale Paoli was considered by Niccolò Tommaseo, who collected his Lettere (Letters), as one of the precursors of Italian irredentism. Paoli was sympathetic to Italian culture and regarded his own native language as an Italian dialect (Corsican is an Italo-Dalmatian tongue closely related to Tuscan). The Babbu di a Patria ("Homeland's father"), as Pasquale Paoli was nicknamed by the Corsican separatists, wrote in his Letters the following message in 1768 against the French:

We are Corsicans by birth and sentiment, but first of all we feel Italian by language, origins, customs, traditions; and Italians are all brothers and united in the face of history and in the face of God... As Corsicans we wish to be neither slaves nor "rebels" and as Italians we have the right to deal as equals with the other Italian brothers... Either we shall be free or we shall be nothing... Either we shall win or we shall die, weapons in hand... The war against France is right and holy as the name of God is holy and right, and here on our mountains will appear for Italy the sun of liberty....

Pasquale Paoli wanted the Italian language to be the official language of his Corsican Republic. His Corsican Constitution of 1755 was in Italian and was used as a model for the American constitution of 1787. Furthermore, in 1765 Paoli founded in the city of Corte the first University of Corsica (where the teaching was done in Italian).

The Florentine dialect promoted by the Corsican Italians, had been the language of culture in Corsica since the Renaissance. Many Corsican authors wrote an extensive literature in Italian in the last centuries.

In the 14th century there was La Cronica of Giovanni della Grossa (1388-1464), Pier Antonio Monteggiani (1464-1525) and Marcantoni Ceccaldi (1526-1559). Storia di Corsica was published in 1594 by Anton Pietro Filippini. In the 15th and 16th centuries there were Ignazio Cardini (1566-1602), Pietro Cirneo (1447-1507), Guiglielmo Guglielmi di Orezza (1644-1728) with A Malannata and Ottave giocose.

In the 18th century, the Accademia dei Vagabondi was founded in Bastia, following the model of the Italian "Accademie". Angelo Francesco Colonna wrote Commentario delle glorie e prerogative del Regno e Popoli di Corsica in 1685.

During the Corsican Republic of Pasquale Paoli, there were Giulio Matteo Natali (Disinganno intorno alla Guerra de Corsica in 1736), Don Gregorio Salvini (Giustificazione della Revoluzione di Corsica (1758-1764)) and the same Pasquale Paoli (Corrispondenza, published only in 1846).

During the 19th century in Bastia, Salvatore Viale wrote La Dionomachia in 1817, Canti popolari corsi in 1843 and Dell'uso della lingua patria in Corsica in 1858, where he lamented the decline in the use of Italian language as a learned language in favor of French.

Many Corsican authors (who wrote in Italian) were influenced by the ideals of the Italian Risorgimento during the second half of the 19th century, such as Giuseppe Multado, Gian Paolo Borghetti, Francesco Ottaviano Renucci (Storia della Corsica dal 1789 al 1830 and Novelle storiche corse). Even the Italian Niccolò Tommaseo collected the Canti popolari corsi (with points of view of Italian irredentism) and made a compilation of the letters (Lettere di Pasquale de Paoli) of Pasquale Paoli.

Santu Casanova founded the famous literary review A Tramuntana (published in Ajaccio between 1896 and 1914) and wrote in Italian Meraviglioso testamento di Francesco in 1875 and La morte ed il funerale di Spanetto in 1892. He is considered the link between the old generations of Corsican writers who wrote in Italian language and the new ones, who started to use the Corsican language.

During the first half of the 20th century, the most important Corsican publication in Italian was the literary review A Muvra of Petru Rocca. Other Corsican authors in Italian were Domenicu Versini (nicknamed Maistrale), Matteu Rocca (I lucchetti in 1925), Dumenicu Carlotti (Pampame corse in 1926), Ageniu Grimaldi and Ugo Babbiziu (Una filza di francesismi colti nelle parlate dialettali corse in 1930).

The Corsican Italians who promoted the ideal of Corsican irredentism published mainly in Italy, because of the persecutions from the French regime in the island in the first half of the 20th century.

Thus, Petru Giovacchini wrote the poems Musa Canalinca and Rime notturne in 1933 in Corsica, but successively wrote and published Aurore, poesie corse, Corsica Nostra and Archiatri pontifici corsi in Rome (the last, while he was in exile in 1951, a few years before his premature death).

The irredentist Marco Angeli published in Milan Gigli di Stagnu and Liriche corse in 1934 and Bertino Poli wrote Il pensiero irredentista corso e le sue polemiche in Florence in 1940.

Small list of renowned Corsican Italians:

Italian irredentism in Nice was the political movement supporting the annexation of the County of Nice to the Kingdom of Italy.

According to some Italian nationalists and fascists like Ermanno Amicucci, Italian- and Ligurian -speaking populations of the County of Nice (Italian : Nizza) formed the majority of the county's population until the mid-19th century. However, Occitan nationalists and linguists argue that both Occitan and Ligurian languages were spoken in the County of Nice.

During the Italian unification, in 1860, the House of Savoy allowed the Second French Empire to annex Nice from the Kingdom of Sardinia in exchange for French support of its quest to unify Italy. Consequently, the Niçois were excluded from the Italian unification movement and the region has since become primarily French-speaking.

The region around Nicaea, as Nice was then known in Latin, was inhabited by the Ligures until its subsequent occupation by the Roman Empire after their subjugation by Augustus. According to Theodor Mommsen, fully Romanized by the 4th century AD, when the invasions of the Migration Period began.

The Franks conquered the region after the fall of Rome, and the local Romance language speaking populations became integrated within the County of Provence (with a brief period of independence as a maritime republic (1108–1176).) In 1388, the commune of Nice sought the protection of the Duchy of Savoy, and Nice continued to be controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Savoy monarchs until 1860.

During this time, the maritime strength of Nice rapidly increased until it was able to cope with the Barbary pirates. Fortifications were largely extended by the House of Savoy and the roads of the city and surrounding region improved. Emmanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy, abolished the use of Latin and established Italian as the official language of Nice in 1561.

Conquered in 1792 by the armies of the French First Republic, the County of Nice was part of France until 1814, after which it was placed under the protection of the Kingdom of Sardinia by the Congress of Vienna.

After the Treaty of Turin was signed in 1860 between the Sardinian king and Napoleon III as a consequence of the Plombières Agreement, the county was again and definitively ceded to France as a territorial reward for French assistance in the Second Italian War of Independence against Austria, which saw Lombardy united with Piedmont-Sardinia. King Victor-Emmanuel II, on April 1, 1860, solemnly asked the population to accept the change of sovereignty, in the name of Italian unity, and the cession was ratified by a regional referendum. Italophile manifestations and the acclamation of an "Italian Nice" by the crowd were reported on this occasion. These manifestations did not influence the course of events. A plebiscite was held on April 15 and 16, 1860. The opponents of annexation called for abstention, which resulted in a very high abstention rate. The "Yes" vote won 83% of registered voters throughout the county of Nice and 86% in Nice, partly thanks to pressure from the authorities. This is the result of a masterful operation of information control by the French and Piedmontese governments, to influence the outcome of the vote in relation to the decisions already taken. The irregularities in the plebiscite voting operations were evident. Such as in the case of Levens: in those same official sources, they recorded facing only 407 voters, however, 481 votes were cast, almost all in favor of joining France.

The Italian language, which was previously the official language of the County, used by the Church, at the town hall, taught in schools, and used in theaters and at the Opera, was immediately abolished and replaced by French. Discontent over annexation to France led to the emigration of a large part of the Italophile population, also accelerated by Italian unification after 1861. A quarter of the population of Nice, around 11,000 people from Nice, decided to voluntarily exile to Italy. The emigration of a quarter of the Niçard Italians to Italy took the name of Niçard exodus. Many Italians from Nizza then moved to the Ligurian towns of Ventimiglia, Bordighera and Ospedaletti, giving rise to a local branch of the movement of the Italian irredentists which considered the re-acquisition of Nice to be one of their nationalist goals.

Giuseppe Garibaldi, born in Nice, vehemently opposed the cession of his hometown to France, arguing that the Plebiscite he ratified in the treaty was vitiated by electoral fraud. In 1871, during the first free elections in the County, the pro-Italian lists obtained almost all the votes in the legislative elections (26,534 votes out of 29,428 votes cast), and Garibaldi was elected deputy at the National Assembly. Pro-Italians take to the streets cheering "Viva Nizza! Viva Garibaldi!". The French government sends 10,000 soldiers to Nice, closes the Italian newspaper Il Diritto di Nizza and imprisons several demonstrators. The population of Nice rose up from February 8 to 10 and the three days of demonstration took the name of " Niçard Vespers ". The revolt is suppressed by French troops. On February 13, Garibaldi was not allowed to speak at the French parliament meeting in Bordeaux to ask for the reunification of Nice to the newborn Italian unitary state, and he resigned from his post as deputy. The failure of Vespers led to the expulsion of the last pro-Italian intellectuals from Nice, such as Luciano Mereu or Giuseppe Bres, who were expelled or deported.

The pro-Italian irredentist movement persisted throughout the period 1860–1914, despite the repression carried out since the annexation. The French government implemented a policy of Francization of society, language and culture. The toponyms of the communes of the ancient County have been francized, with the obligation to use French in Nice, as well as certain surnames (for example the Italian surname "Bianchi" was francized into "Leblanc", and the Italian surname "Del Ponte" was francized into "Dupont"). This led to the beginning of the disappearance of the Niçard Italians. Many intellectuals from Nice took refuge in Italy, such as Giovan Battista Bottero who took over the direction of the newspaper La Gazzetta del Popolo in Turin. In 1874, it was the second Italian newspaper by circulation, after Il Secolo in Milan.

Italian-language newspapers in Nice were banned. In 1861, La Voce di Nizza was closed (temporarily reopened during the Niçard Vespers), followed by Il Diritto di Nizza, closed in 1871. In 1895 it was the turn of Il Pensiero di Nizza, accused of irredentism. Many journalists and writers from Nice wrote in these newspapers in Italian. Among these are Enrico Sappia, Giuseppe André, Giuseppe Bres, Eugenio Cais di Pierlas and others.

Another Niçard Italian, Garibaldian Luciano Mereu, was exiled from Nice in November 1870, together with the Garibaldians Adriano Gilli, Carlo Perino and Alberto Cougnet. In 1871, Luciano Mereu was elected City Councilor in Nice during the term of Mayor of Augusto Raynaud (1871–1876) and was a member of the Garibaldi Commission of Nice, whose president was Donato Rasteu. Rasteu remained in office until 1885.

This led to the beginning of the disappearance of the Niçard Italians. Many intellectuals from Nice took refuge in Italy, such as Giovan Battista Bottero who took over the direction of the newspaper La Gazzetta del Popolo in Turin. In 1874, it was the second Italian newspaper by circulation, after Il Secolo in Milan.

Giuseppe Bres tried to counter the French claim that the Niçard dialect was Occitan and not Italian, publishing his Considerations on Niçard dialect in 1906 in Italy.

Benito Mussolini considered the annexation of Nice to be one of his main targets. In 1940, the County of Nice was occupied by the Italian army and the newspaper Il Nizzardo ("The Niçard") was restored there. It was directed by Ezio Garibaldi, grandson of Giuseppe Garibaldi. Only Menton was administered until 1943 as if it were an Italian territory, even if the Italian supporters of Italian irredentism in Nice wanted to create an Italian governorate (on the model of the Governorate of Dalmatia) up to the Var river or at least a "Province of the Western Alps".

The Italian occupation government was far less severe than that of Vichy France ; thus, thousands of Jews took refuge there. For a while, the city became an important mobilization center for various Jewish organizations. However, when the Italians signed the Armistice of Cassibile with the Allies, German troops invaded the region on September 8, 1943, and initiated brutal raids. Alois Brunner, the SS official for Jewish affairs, was placed at the head of units formed to search out Jews. Within five months, 5,000 Jews were caught and deported.

The area was returned to France following the war and in 1947, the areas of La Brigue and Tende, which had remained Italian after 1860 were ceded to France. Thereafter, a quarter of the Niçard Italians living in that mountainous area moved to Piedmont and Liguria in Italy (mainly from the Roya Valley and Tenda).

Today, after a sustained process of Francization conducted since 1861, the former county is predominantly French-speaking. Only along the coast around Menton and in the mountains around Tende there are still some native speakers of the original Intemelio dialect of Ligurian.

Currently the area is part of the Alpes-Maritimes department of France.

In Nice, the language of the Church, municipality, law, school, and theater was always the Italian language....From 460 AD to the mid-19th century, the County of Nice counted 269 writers, not including those still living. Of these 269 writers, 90 used Italian, 69 Latin, 45 Italian and Latin, 7 Italian and French, 6 Italian with Latin and French, 2 Italian with Nizzardo dialect and French, 2 Italian and Provençal.

Before the year 1000, the area of Nice was part of the Ligurian League, under the Republic of Genoa ; thus, the population spoke a dialect different from the one typical of western Liguria: that spoken in the eastern part of Liguria, which today is called "Intemelio" was spoken. The medieval writer and poet Dante Alighieri wrote in his Divine Comedy that the Var near Nice was the western limit of the Italian Liguria.

Around the 12th century, Nice came under the control of the French Capetian House of Anjou, who favored the immigration of peasants from Provence that brought with them their Occitan language. From 1388 to 1860, the County of Nice came under Savoyard rule and remained connected to the Italian dialects and peninsula. According to some Italian nationalists, in this era, the people of the mountainous areas of the upper Var Valley started to lose their former Ligurian linguistic characteristics and began to adopt Provençal influences. In those centuries the local Niçard dialect became distinct from the Monégasque of the Principality of Monaco.

Traditionally, Italian linguists maintained that Niçard originated as a Ligurian dialect. Before the annexation of the county of Nice to France in 1860, all the historical texts and archives of the city were written either in the Ligurian language, or in Italian. On the other hand, French linguists argue that Niçard is a dialect of Occitan while conceding that Monégasque is a dialect of Ligurian. However, Sue Wright notes that before the Kingdom of Sardinia ceded the County of Nice to France, "Nice was not French-speaking before the annexation but underwent a shift to French in a short time... and it is surprising that the local Italian dialect, the Nissart, disappeared quickly from the private domain." She also wrote that one of the main reasons of the disappearance of the Italian language in the County was because "(m)any of the administrative class under Piedmont-Savoy ruler, the soldiers; jurists; civil servants and professionals, who used Italian in their working lives, moved [back] to Piedmont, after the annexation and their places and roles were taken by newcomers from France".

Indeed, immediately after 1861, the French government closed all the Italian language newspapers, and more than 11,000 Niçard Italians moved to the Kingdom of Italy. The sheer scale of the Niçard exodus can be inferred from the fact that in the Savoy census of 1858, Nice had only 44,000 inhabitants. In 1881, The New York Times wrote, "Before the French annexation, the Niçois were quite as much Italian as the Genoese and their dialect was if anything, nearer the Tuscan, than is the harsh dialect of Genoa.

Giuseppe Garibaldi defined his "Nizzardo" as an Italian dialect, albeit with strong similarities to Occitan and with some French influences, and for this reason promoted the union of Nice to the Kingdom of Italy.

Today some scholars, like the German Werner Forner, the French Jean-Philippe Dalbera and the Italian Giulia Petracco Sicardi, agree that the Niçard has some characteristics – phonetic, lexical and morphological – that are typical of western Ligurian. The French scholar Bernard Cerquiglini pinpoints in his Les langues de France the actual existence of a Ligurian minority in Tende, Roquebrune-Cap-Martin and Menton.

Another reduction in the number of the Nizzardi Italians happened after World War II, when defeated Italy was forced to surrender to France the small mountainous area of the County of Nice, that had been retained in 1860. From the Val di Roia, Tenda and Briga, one quarter of the local population moved to Italy in 1947. The entire population of Nice before the 1960s had Italian surnames. The Niçard Vespers were three days of popular uprising of the inhabitants of Nice in 1871, promoted by Giuseppe Garibaldi in favor of the union of the county of Nice with the Kingdom of Italy.

In the century of nationalism between 1850 and 1950, the Nizzardi Italians were reduced from a majority of 70% of the 125,000 people living in the County of Nice at the time of the French annexation, to a current minority of nearly two thousand (in the area of Tende and Menton) today.

Nowadays, even though the populations of Nice and its surroundings are fluent in French, some still speak the original Niçard language of Nissa La Bella.

Italian irredentism in Savoy was the political movement among Savoyards promoting annexation to the Savoy dynasty's Kingdom of Italy. It was active from 1860 to World War II.

Italian irredentists were citizens of Savoy who considered themselves to have ties with the House of Savoy.

The historical region of Savoy was the original territory of the Duchy of Savoy, which expanded across the Alps into Piedmont and other territories, eventually transforming into the Kingdom of Sardinia, then the Kingdom of Italy. The capital of the duchy was Chambéry until 1562, when it was moved to Turin. French was an official language beginning in the 15th century and Italian beginning in the 16th. The historical region of Savoy was divided administratively into Savoie Propre (Chambéry), Chablais (Thonon), Faucigny (Bonneville), Genevois (Annecy), Maurienne (Saint Jean de Maurienne) and Tarentaise (Moûtiers).

Vaugelas, a native of the duchy, became one of the most renowned French linguists.

In 1860 the area was annexed to France after a referendum, but a segment of the Savoyard population demonstrated against the annexation. Indeed, the final vote count on the referendum announced by the Court of Appeals was 130,839 in favour of annexation to France, 235 opposed and 71 void - a suspiciously high level of support.

Presently, the situation seems the following: generally, it does not exist any will to separate Savoy and Piedmont. In the highest part of the country, Maurienne, Tarentaise and Upper-Savoy (Albertville and Beaufortain), the population is resolutely for the statu quo. In Genevois, Faucigny and Chablais, if ever should produce a change, the annexation by Switzerland is preferred to any other solution.

At the beginning of 1860, more than 3000 people demonstrated in Chambéry against rumours that the region would be annexed to France. On 16 March 1860, the provinces of northern Savoy (Chablais, Faucigny and Genevois) sent to Victor Emmanuel II, Napoleon III and the Swiss Federal Council a petition to remain within the Kingdom of Sardinia (or be annexed to Switzerland were a separation from Sardinia unavoidable).

Giuseppe Garibaldi complained about the referendum that allowed France to annex Savoy and Nice, and a group of his followers (among the Italian Savoyards) took refuge in Italy in the following years. With a 99.8% vote in favour of joining France, there were allegations of vote-rigging.

Some opposition to French rule was manifest when, in 1919, France officially (but contrary to the annexation treaty) ended the military neutrality of the parts of the country of Savoy that had originally been agreed to at the Congress of Vienna, and also eliminated the free trade zone - both treaty articles having already been unofficially violated during World War I. In 1871 a separatist movement appeared in north and central Savoy. The Republican Committee of the town of Bonneville considered that "the 1860 vote, was the result of imperial pressure, and not the free demonstration of the will of our country" and called for a new referendum. In response, the French government sent 10,000 troops to Savoy to "restore order".

The Associazione Oriundi Savoiardi e Nizzardi Italiani was founded in Italy, and lasted until 1966.

During the fascist period in the early 1940s, organizations were created that promoted the unification of Savoy to the Kingdom of Italy. They had nearly a hundred members in 1942, concentrated mainly in Grenoble and Chambéry.

When Italy occupied Savoy in November 1942, these fascist groups claimed that nearly 10,000 Savoyards demanded the unification to Italy, but the matter was not pursued, mainly because the King of Italy opposed it.

After World War II, all Savoyard irredentist organizations were outlawed by French authorities.

Most of the remaining Savoyard irredentists supported in the 1950s and 1960s the development of autonomist political organizations, such as the Mouvement Région Savoie (Savoy Regional Movement).

Only in 1940 did the Italian Savoyards fulfil their irredentism, when some small areas bordering the Alps were annexed by Italy. The initial zone was 832 km² and contained 28,500 inhabitants.

In November 1942, in conjunction with " Case Anton ", the German occupation of most of Vichy France, the Royal Italian Army (Regio Esercito) expanded its occupation zone. Italian forces took control of Grenoble, Nice, the Rhône River delta, and nearly all of Savoy.

A process of Italianization of the schools in Savoy was started, but was never fully implemented. Only a few Italian Savoyards were voluntarily enrolled in the Italian Army through fascist organizations like the Camicie Nere. Others joined the resistance and fought against the invaders.

Most of the Irredentist Savoyards actively helped the Jews in the occupied zone in Savoy, a region that acted as a refugee zone for Jews fleeing persecution in Vichy France during World War II.

The projects to incorporate Savoy to the Kingdom of Italy were supported by the fascist Savoyards of Grenoble, but nothing was done even then because in September 1943 Nazi Germany substituted Italy in the occupation of Savoy.

Savoyards historically have spoken a dialect related to the Arpitan language : the Savoyard dialect. Arpitan is spoken in France, in Switzerland and in Italy. However, French is the predominant language today.

During the fascist occupation in 1942-1943, Italian authorities promoted a process of Italianization of all the people of Savoy, mainly related to the use of Italian in substitution of the Savoyard dialect.

The Italian geographic region, Italian physical region or Italian region is a geographical region of Southern Europe delimited to the north by the mountain chains of the Alps. This subregion is composed of a peninsular and continental part and an insular part. Located between the Balkan Peninsula and the Iberian Peninsula, it protrudes into the centre of the Mediterranean Sea and overlooks the Adriatic Sea, the Ionian Sea, the Ligurian Sea, the Sardinian Channel, the Sea of Corsica, the Sea of Sardinia, the Strait of Sicily, and the Tyrrhenian Sea.

The Italian geographic region, in its traditional and most widely accepted extent, has an area of approximately 324,000 square kilometres (125,000 mi), which is greater than the area of the entire Italian Republic (301,230 square kilometres (116,310 mi)). The region also includes territories that are sovereign parts of Croatia, France, Slovenia, and Switzerland, as well as the four small sovereign states of the Principality of Monaco, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of San Marino, and the Vatican City State (the Holy See).

The meaning of the term Italy has been the subject of reconstructions not only by linguists but also by historians, traditionally attentive to the question; however, one is not always faced with etymologies in the strict sense but rather with hypotheses that are based on considerations external to the specifically linguistic reconstruction of the name, and which over time have formed a rich corpus of solutions among which there are numerous ones that refer to traditions or in any case highly problematic.

Since ancient times it has been hypothesized that the name derives from the word Italói, a term with which the Greeks designated the Vituli, a population that lived in the extreme tip of the peninsula, the region south of today's Catanzaro, who worshipped the simulacrum of a calf. The name would therefore mean "inhabitants of the land of calves".

What is usually considered certain is that the name initially indicated only that extreme part of Calabria which lies to the south of the gulfs of Saint Euphemia and Squillace ; subsequently the name "Italy" was extended as far as Cilento and Lucania, between the river Lao and Metaponto.

Gradually the name "Italy" was used to indicate an ever larger territory, extending progressively and unstoppably towards the north: in the 4th century BC it extended as far as Paestum and Taranto; around 300 BC it expanded to include the whole of Campania. At the beginning of the 3rd century BC almost the entire peninsula was defined as "Italy", from Tuscany to the Marche, unified under Roman domination. De facto, all the lands south of the Alps were called "Italy" from the late 3rd century BC (likely from the battle of Clastidium in 222 BC). De jure, the northern border of Italia was moved west from the Esino to the Rubicon and east to include Liguria, apparently by Sulla. Under Augustus it was brought to correspond off exactly with its current meaning: the northern border was made to coincide with the Alps, the western border with the Var river and the eastern border with the Raša river, in Istria. Finally, with Diocletian, the name "Italy" was extended to Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica, that is, to the entire Italian geographical region.

In common language, the Italian region generally refers to the Italian Peninsula. Similarly, the inhabitants of the islands use the term continent to designate the mainland that goes from the Alps to Reggio Calabria. Geographically, Italy running in north-west to south-east direction can be divided into the calcareous Alps, the alluvial plain, the Northern, Central and Southern Apennines and Sicily.

The natural limits of the Italian region, marked by the Alpine drainage divide and the sea, are relatively clear, except at the western and eastern extremities of the Alps.

On the eastern borders, the chain of the Julian Alps and the Kvarner Gulf are traditionally indicated, to which Dante Alighieri also refers. However, other proposed limits include a border along the Isonzo (formerly advocated by Austrian Empire), which would exclude the upper Isonzo valley, Trieste and Istria entirely. Other borders were listed by the historian, and exile from Cherso, Luigi Tomaz in " The border of Italy in Istria and Dalmatia ", among which, in the Augustan regional structure of Roman Italy, the administrative limes along the Arsa River, marked the end of Venetia et Histria.

Therefore, to the east, despite the more depressed character of the orography and the scarcity of surface hydrography found in the region south of the Nauporto pass near Postumia, the continuity of the mountain bulwark is ensured by the reliefs placed between Mount Pomario and Mount Nevoso, its terminal pillar, where it reaches the Kvarner Gulf and the Bay of Buccari, immediately south-east of Fiume. To the east, therefore, the extreme limit of Italy is generally identified in Buccari. To the south-east of the Nauporto pass and to the north-west of Mount Pomario, the traceability of the natural border is rather difficult as in this area the hydrographic watershed does not coincide with the orographic chain, which is characterized by rather small peaks.

As for the islands of Cherso and Lussino, their belonging to the Italian geographical region may vary according to the sources and interpretations. In particular, they are included in the Italian geographical region as these islands are the natural continuation of Istria, being closer to the Istrian coasts than to the Dalmatian ones.

On the contrary, to the west, the boundary is unchallenged and easily definable between the canton of Valais, Savoy, Aosta Valley and Piedmont, near the coast can be represented by that buttress of the Maritime Alps which, detaching itself from the Po-French drainage divide in correspondence with Monte Clapier, follows the Authion Massif, which culminates in Mont Bégo, and divides the Roia basin to the east from the Varo and Paglione basins to the west. The salient created by the side valley of the Bevera including the Mentone basin is orographically separated from everything, thus grafting the border at Capo d'Aglio where the entire Principality of Monaco is included. Due to the characteristic of being orographically separated from everything, the Menton basin can be excluded. In the latter case, the geographical limit would rejoin the current international state border at the height of Mount Buletta, corresponding with it up to the sea (this is not a priori correspondence but a simple correspondence by convergence between the geographical and political border; the latter is cited for convenience).

This solution makes it possible to bring the border of the Italian geographic region closer to the ethno-linguistic one between Ligurian, Intemelio and Occitan languages of the Niçard dialect. Another hypothesis would have it that the border, after touching the top of Mont Pelat, includes the entire basin of the Varo river with its tributaries, placing Nice within the Italian region, or that, albeit smaller, than from Monte Clapier divides the Roia and Paglione basins on one side from that of the Varo on the other, reaching the coast not far from the latter's mouth, south-west of Nice, thus leaving Nice still in the geographic region of Italy (as Francesco Petrarca already claimed in 1331). However, there is an opposite thesis, supported by Charles de Gaulle at the end of World War II, which, assigning the nature of a transalpine pass to Colle di Tenda, excludes the entire Roia Valley with Ventimiglia from the Italian physical region.

In a narrow sense, the continental part, delimited to the north by the Alpine watershed, to about 40% of the Italian region and is located in the north of an imaginary line that goes from the mouth of the Magra river to that of the Rubicone river. Most of them are made up of the water catchment areas of the Po, Adige, Brenta, Piave, Tagliamento and Isonzo rivers. From the continental part, however, some Alpine valleys are excluded which, although they are part of the Italian State, such as the Val di Lei tributary of the North Sea through the Rhine river, the Val di Livigno, the Sella di Dobbiaco and the Tarvisio basin to the north-east of the Camporosso saddle, tributaries of the Black Sea through rivers affluent of the Danube.

The Italian Peninsula, or the Italic Peninsula or the Apennine Peninsula, is a peninsula on the European continent crossed by the Apennine chain and delimited by four seas: the Ligurian Sea, the Tyrrhenian Sea, the Ionian Sea and the Adriatic Sea. Together with the Iberian Peninsula and the Balkan Peninsula, they are the three peninsulas that make up Southern Europe.

The peninsula in a narrow sense begins from the Tuscan-Romagna Apennines, starting from an imaginary line that goes from the mouth of the Magra river to that of the Rubicone river, and extends to the extreme southern offshoot of Capo Spartivento in Calabria. The peninsula has an extension of about 1.000 kilometre (0.621 mi) in a north-west / south-east direction. The closest large islands, Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica, are not parts of it. The peninsula corresponds to about 45% of the Italian geographical region.

The island part extends over an area of about 60,000 square kilometres (23,000 mi) (about 18.5% of the whole Italian region), of which 58,000 square kilometres (22,000 mi) for Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica. Outside these large islands, numerous smaller islands, often grouped in archipelagos, are found along the Italian coast, mostly in the Tyrrhenian Sea. The list below shows the largest islands belonging to the Italian geographical region:

The extreme points of the Italian geographical region, measured with respect to the Greenwich meridian, are:

The orthodromic distance N–S is 1,269 km.

The Italian Republic occupies 93% of the Italian geographical region. The remaining portion (23 000 km) is divided between several other states, some of which (in order of geographical extension: Malta, San Marino, Monaco, and Vatican City) are entirely included in the political borders. Some strips of western Niçard and the Alpine sector near the French border (Italian up to the 1947 Peace Treaty), Corsica, Italian Switzerland, the Maltese Islands, and Julian March, Slovenian and Croatian, are also ascribed to the Italian geographical region, including the city of Fiume.

The following countries are entirely included in the limits of the Italian geographical region:

The following areas also fall within the borders of the Italian geographical region:

Three alpine valleys, tributaries of the Rhine and Danube, as well as Lampedusa and Lampione of the Pelagian Islands (small islands located on the African continental shelf) are parts of the Italian Republic even though they are not parts of the Italian geographical region.

The idea of Italy as a geographic region is very old. It was described with the geographical notion of peninsula as early as the 1st century BC in the oldest treatise called Geographica (in ancient Greek: Γεωγραφικά - Gheographikà), a work in 17 volumes by the Greek geographer Strabo (65/64 – 25/21 BC). In the 15th century, Guarino da Verona translated the entire work into Latin, thus contributing to its rediscovery.

In the introduction of his book, Strabo gives his definition of Italy:

Present-day Italy begins at the foot of the Alps : [I mean present-day Italy], because this name initially indicated only the ancient Ouitoulía, that is the district located between the Strait of Sicily and the gulf of Taranto and Poseidonia ; but, having taken on a sort of predominance over time, this name has ended up extending to the foot of the Alps, also embracing, on the one hand, all of Liguria up to the Varo and of course also the surroundings of Liguria from the border with the Etruria, and, on the other side, all of Istria up to Pula.

— Strabo, Geographica - Book V - Chapter I: The Transpadania and the Cispadania

For several centuries, the geographical description of Strabo did not change until the publication of the first universal geography of Conrad Malte-Brun (1775–1826), Geography or description of all parts of the world.

After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, and in particular with the arrival of the Lombards, Italy lost its political unity. In the Carolingian age, a new Kingdom of Italy was born (Latin: Regnum Italicum); it included only Northern Italy. Conversely, from the point of view of the Byzantine Empire, Italía was predominantly coterminous with Catepanate of Italy, i.e. the Southern Italy that they controlled and that was home to a substantial Greek-speaking population. In addition, starting from the 12th century, Northern Italy itself found itself divided into a myriad of small states often in conflict with each other or victims of foreign expansionist aims.

However, in the 14th century, Dante Alighieri wrote in the Divine Comedy (L'Inferno, Canto IX, 114):

As in Pola, near del Carnaro, where Italy closes and its terms wet.

Similarly, Francesco Petrarca wrote at the same time in his work the Il Canzoniere (s. CXLVI, 13–14):

that fair country, the Apennines divide, and Alps and sea surround.

In his memoirs written during his captivity on the island of Saint Helena, but published only in 2010, Napoleon Bonaparte makes a description of Italy in the first chapter:

Italy is surrounded by the Alps and the sea, its natural limits are determined with the same precision as if it were an island. It is located between 36° and 46° degree of latitude, 4° and 16° of longitude of Paris; it consists of three parts: the mainland, the peninsula and the islands. The first is separated from the second by the Isthmus of Parma. If from Parma, as the center, a semicircle is traced on the north side with a radius equal to the distance from Parma to the mouth of the Var or the mouth of the Isonzo (60 leagues), the development of the chain of the upper part of the Alps that separates Italy from the mainland. This semicircle forms the territory of the so-called continental part, the surface of which is 5,000 square leagues. The peninsula is a trapezoid between the mainland to the north, the Mediterranean to the west, the Adriatic to the east, the Ionian Sea to the south, the two main sides of which are 200 to 210 leagues long, and the other two sides 60 to 30 alloys; its surface is 6000 square alloys. The third part, that is the islands, that is Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, which geographically belongs more to Italy than to France, forms an area of 4000 square leagues; which brings the surface of the whole of Italy to 15,000 square alloys. Here we have considered the natural limits without entering into any political division. Thus we have not understood Savoy, which is beyond the Alps, nor Dalmatia, nor Istria, and we have understood the part of the Italian-Swiss nurses that are below the Alps, and all the part of Tyrol that pours its waters in the Adige and under the Brenner; all this, moreover, forms few changes. On the eastern side the border mark was placed on the Isonzo, even if the natural division of the mountains would pass between Laybach and Isonzo, would include a portion of Carniola and Istria, and would unite the Adriatic to Rijeka; but at the Isonzo the mountains of the Alps are lowered and their consideration becomes less

After the fall of Napoleon and the restoration of the absolutist monarchical regimes, Italy remained, according to Metternich, "a simple geographical expression" without political unity. However, a process had been set in motion that would lead to the unification of Italy.

After the proclamation of Vittorio Emanuele II King of Italy on 17 March 1861, the new united Italy experienced the birth of the Italian nationalism and the Italian irredentism, which claimed that the natural border of Italy had to pass on the crest of the Alps based on geographical concepts. Furthermore, the environment that gravitates around the Società Geografica Italiana of Rome and the Società di Studi Geografici of Florence was strongly imbued with a nationalist spirit which, during the following decades, will become more and more colonialist and militarist. This would explain, as Lucio Gambi demonstrated, the enthusiastic and almost unanimous adhesion of Italian geographers to fascism a few decades later.

After World War I, the notion of the Italian geographical region diminished, as the natural borders, except for some marginal territory, were mostly reached with the annexation of Trentino-Alto Adige and Julian March, and it was on other scales that Italian nationalism and imperialism were expressed, well beyond the borders of the Italian geographical region.

After World War II, Italy lost a large part of Julian March, and Italian geography eliminated all political and nationalistic aspects to focus only on geographic ones. Therefore, the notion of Italian geographic region, including territories that are not part of the Italian Republic, continues to be present in some Italian geographic encyclopedias, such as the one published by the De Agostini.

Iñaki Kijera Zelarain (also spelled Iñaki Kijera Celerain, 30 April 1961 – 1 September 1979) was a Basque protester who died in a demonstration in favor of Basque terrorists. He was 18 when he died and was living with his parents in the Antiguo district.

He was born on 30 April 1961 in San Sebastián. Four years after the death of the Spanish caudillo Francisco Franco, the Spanish State was still in great turmoil. Repressed groups, ideologies and nationalities saw a chance to express their opinions and wishes. A new Constitution was formed in 1978 which allowed for the possibility of autonomy for Spanish territories, like the Statute of Autonomy of the Basque Country, which was ratified on 25 October 1979.

1979 was a year of unrest. Attacks against Basque political refugees and terrorists in Northern Basque Country (which was under French administration), and French Police Forces' repression made things more difficult for Basque leftist nationalists. Demonstrators used hunger strikes and other protests to denounce the situation, and drew attention to the political status of Basque prisoners and refugees, namely in: Hendaia, Hazparne, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Bilbao, Durango, San Sebastián, and Pamplona.

That same year, France refused to acknowledge Basque refugees as political refugees, arguing that Spain was already a democracy. To protest this refusal, refugees began a hunger strike in several Northern Basque Country provinces, under the slogan "Euskadin bizi nahi dugu", "We want to live in Euskadi ". In Southern Basque Country, solidarity was shown in different ways: politicians administrative buildings, citizens went on hunger strikes, and started several demonstrations. Some of these demonstrations would become especially bloody.

On 31 August 1979, more than forty politicians of different political parties (HB, EE, LKI, PTE and EMK-OIC) closed themselves up in the Provincial Council of Gipuzkoa in favor of Basque political refugee's rights. The next day, Committees in Favor of Amnesty ("Amnistiaren Aldeko Batzordeak") called for a demonstration to be held on September 1, in the four Southern Basque Country capitals. Joaquin Argote, the Civil Governor of Gipuzkoa, banned San Sebastián's demonstration. Forces of Public Order took control of the city on 1 September, in order to prevent any demonstration attempts.

However, approximately 2000 people showed up and joined with those closed up in the Provincial Councils of Gipuzkoa and San Sebastián (who were tied to each other as a sign of protest). They started a demonstration on the street and the Spanish National Police responded with violence.

Kijera took part in the demonstration with his friends. When the Spanish National Police scattered the demonstrators, he hid in Old Town. As the police took the street where he was located, he attempted to reach the gardens of Alderdi Eder and was shot by an officer from approximately 10 meters. The bullet hit him in the right side and exited his back. He laid on the pavement for 15 minutes at the rear of the City Council. Others who tried to approach him where stopped by the police who beat and shot rubber bullets at them. A doctor and a nurse from the Red Cross attempted to aid Iñaki. Police initially also hit the Red Cross workers. After some fighting, they were able to put Iñaki in a private car after dodging rubber bullets. The wounded man was transferred to an ambulance and taken to a hospital, where he later died.

There were other injuries in the same demonstration. La Vanguardia newspaper named Jon Artola Lopez, Javier Atorrasagasti and two elected officials of the town of Oiartzun, among the injured.

Next day was trawler race day in San Sebastián, but it was cancelled, and mayor Jose Maria Alkain (PNV) declared the day an official day of mourning.

The following Monday, a general strike in Southern Basque Country paralyzed Gipuzkoa. Gas stations where shut down, and radio stations broadcast classical music all day. In San Sebastián, just a few grocery stores where open, and even those closed at noon. There were no taxis or buses on the streets. Forces of Public Order went from one side of the city to another, and found neighborhood entrances blocked by barricades.

Iñaki Kijera was buried in Polloe cemetery, and funeral rituals were held in Antigua district's "San Sebastian Martir" church. 10,000 people assembled and made way to San Sebastián's downtown area. Once again, the police charged and scattered the demonstrators using violence. Uprisings took place all through the city. As a result, there were more injured and arrested demonstrators.

The general strike continued on Bizkaia, Nafarroa and Álava.

Nine years later, National Police officer Salvador Méndez Villatoro was sentenced to one year in prison for negligence in Kijera's murder. During the trial, Méndez Villatoro claimed he had not known that a live round had been loaded into his rifle alongside rubber bullets.

Jacques Boyon (30 September 1934 – 15 January 2019) was a French politician who served as Deputy of the National Assembly for Ain from 1978 to 1981, 1986 to 1988, and 1988 to 1997. He was also mayor of Pont-d'Ain, president of the General Council of Ain, and secretary of state for defense under Jacques Chirac 's government from 1986 to 1988.

Jacques Boyon was the son of Marc Boyon, a normalist and aggregator of grammar, and a teacher of letters, history and geography, and brother of Michel Boyon.

Jacques Boyon was a member of the Honorary Committee of the Initiative and Freedom Movement. A former pupil of the ENA, he was appointed in 1960 Auditor at the Court of Auditors.

He was promoted to a councilor in 1986. He was deputy in the National Assembly for Ain, mayor of Pont-d'Ain, president of the General Council of Ain and secretary of state for defense under the government of cohabitation of Jacques Chirac from 1986 to 1988. He was president of the Lake Geneva Council from 1989 to 1991. He was then Chairman of the Board of the Institute of International and Strategic Relations between 2005 and 2012.

Jacques Chaban-Delmas (French: [ ʒak ʃabɑ̃ dɛlmas ] ; 7 March 1915 – 10 November 2000) was a French Gaullist politician. He served as Prime Minister under Georges Pompidou from 1969 to 1972. He was the Mayor of Bordeaux from 1947 to 1995 and a deputy for the Gironde département between 1946 and 1997.

Jacques Chaban-Delmas was born Jacques Michel Pierre Delmas in Paris. He studied at the Lycée Lakanal in Sceaux, before attending the École Libre des Sciences Politiques ("Sciences Po"). In the resistance underground, his final nom de guerre was Chaban ; after World War II, he formally changed his name to Chaban-Delmas. As a general of brigade in the resistance, he took part in the Parisian insurrection of August 1944, with general de Gaulle. He was the youngest French general since François Séverin Marceau-Desgraviers, during the First French Empire.

A member of the Radical Party, he finally joined the Gaullist Rally of the French People (RPF), which opposed the Fourth Republic 's governments. In 1947, he became mayor of Bordeaux, which was for 48 years his electoral fief. As a member of the National Assembly, he sat with the RPF.

In 1953, when the RPF group split (and Charles de Gaulle supposedly retired), Chaban-Delmas became head of the Union of Republicans for Social Action and president of the National Centre of Social Republicans party. He "tied up" with centre-left parties and joined Pierre Mendès-France 's cabinet one year later as Minister of Public Works. He took part in the centre-left coalition Republican Front, which won the 1956 legislative election. He was France's Defence Minister in 1957–1958. His governmental participation during the Fourth Republic inspired the distrust of de Gaulle and some Gaullists.

Following de Gaulle's return to power in 1958, Chaban-Delmas agreed to the advent of the French Fifth Republic and the new Constitution. He took part in the foundation of the Union for the New Republic (UNR) and was elected, against de Gaulle's will, chairman of the National Assembly. He kept this function until the end of de Gaulle's presidency in 1969. Unlike some Gaullists, for instance, Jacques Soustelle, he supported de Gaulle's policy to end the Algerian War of Independence. During the 1959 UNR Congress, he was the first politician to evoke a "reserved presidential domain," composed chiefly of defence and diplomacy. This interpretation of the Constitution of 1958 has survived.

In 1969, when Georges Pompidou acceded to the presidency, he chose Chaban-Delmas, who had concluded that the May 68 crisis was the consequence of a strained and conflicted society, as prime minister. Chaban-Delmas tried to promote what he called "a new society", based on dialogue between the different social forces in French society. Amongst other reforms, government authority over the mass media was relaxed, while legislation was passed on social welfare coverage for the poor and elderly which consolidated France's profile as a welfare state. In addition, regular increases were made to the minimum wage which prevented greater wage disparities. A new legal aid scheme was introduced, along with a number of new social welfare benefits.

As a result of his social policies, Chaban-Delmas was viewed as too " progressive " by the "conservative" wing of the Gaullist movement. He was suspected of wanting to "tie up" again with the centre-left. Indeed, his advisers who inspired the "new society" programme were considered as close to the centre-left (Simon Nora and Jacques Delors, who would serve as Finance Minister under François Mitterrand). Besides, a latent conflict opposed Chaban-Delmas to President Pompidou and the presidential circle. They accused him of trying to weaken the presidency in favour of himself. The satirical paper Le Canard Enchaîné accused him of breaking the law through tax evasion and in 1972, Chaban-Delmas canvassed for a vote of confidence in the Assembly. He did obtain this, but the President still managed to force his resignation.

Two years later, following the death in office of President Pompidou, Chaban-Delmas ran for the presidency himself. He was supported by the "lords of gaullism", but 43 personalities close to the late president, led by Jacques Chirac, published the Call of the 43 [ fr ] in favour of the candidacy of Valéry Giscard d'Estaing. Chaban-Delmas was defeated on the first ballot of the 1974 presidential election, winning only 15.10% of the vote. Chirac became President Giscard d'Estaing's prime minister.

Chaban-Delmas stood in the Gaullist Party (RPR) and, in spite of Chirac's leadership, returned to the chair of the National Assembly (1978–1981). Due to his friendship with President Mitterrand, his name was mentioned as a possible prime minister during the first " cohabitation " (1986–1988), but he instead became president of the National Assembly for the third time and Chirac again became premier.

Chaban-Delmas retired in 1997, towards the end of his thirteenth term of member of the National Assembly and two years after the end of his eighth term as Mayor of Bordeaux.

Minister of Public Works, Transport, and Tourism: June–August 1954 / 1954–1955

Minister of Housing and Reconstruction: September–November 1954

Minister of Defence and Armed Forces: 1957–1958

President of the National Assembly: 1958–1969 / 1978–1981 / 1986–1988

Member of the National Assembly for the Gironde 2nd : 1946–1969 (Became Prime minister in 1969) / 1972–1997. Elected in June 1946, reelected in November 1946, 1951, 1956, 1958, 1962, 1967, 1968, 1973, 1978, 1981, 1988, 1993.

President of the Regional Council of Aquitaine : 1974–1979 / 1985–1988 (Resignation). Elected in 1986.

Regional councillor of Aquitaine : 1974–1979 / 1985–1988 (Resignation). Elected in 1986.

Mayor of Bordeaux : 1947–1995. Reelected in 1953, 1959, 1965, 1971, 1977, 1983, 1989.

Municipal councillor of Bordeaux : 1947–1995. Reelected in 1953, 1959, 1965, 1971, 1977, 1983, 1989.

President of the Urban Community of Bordeaux : 1967–1983 / 1983–1995. Reelected in 1971, 1983, 1989.

Vice-president of the Urban Community of Bordeaux : 1977–1983.

Jacques Alexandre Bernard Law, marquis de Lauriston (French pronunciation: [ ʒak alɛksɑ̃dʁ bɛʁnaʁ lo ] ; 1 February 1768 – 12 June 1828) was a French soldier and diplomat of Scottish and Portuguese descent, and a general officer in the French Army during the Napoleonic Wars. He was born in Pondicherry in French India, where his father, Jean Law de Lauriston, was Governor-General. Jean Law de Lauriston was a nephew of the financier John Law. Jacques' mother was a member of the Carvallho family of Portuguese traders.

Lauriston Castle, in Scotland, was inherited by John Law in 1729. Lauriston is one of the names inscribed on the Arc de Triomphe.

Lauriston obtained his first commission about 1786, served with the artillery and on the general staff during the early campaigns of the Revolution, and became brigadier of artillery in 1795. Resigning in 1796, he was brought back into the service in 1800 as aide-de-camp to Napoleon, with whom, as a cadet, Lauriston had been on friendly terms. In the years immediately preceding the first empire, Lauriston was, successively, director of the La Fère artillery school and special envoy to Denmark before being selected to convey to England the ratification of the Peace of Amiens in 1802.

In 1805, having risen to the rank of general of division, he took part in the war against Austria. He occupied Venice and the Republic of Ragusa in 1806, was made governor-general of Venice in 1807, took part in the Erfurt negotiations of 1808, was ennobled as a count, and served with the emperor during the Peninsular War in Spain (1808–1809), where he commanded the division that besieged and won Pamplona. He fought under Viceroy Eugène de Beauharnais at the Battle of Raab in the Italian campaign and the subsequent advance to Vienna.

At the Battle of Wagram on 6 July 1809, Napoleon ordered Lauriston to form a grand battery to stop the surprise Austrian attack against his left flank. To provide time, the emperor directed General Étienne Marie Antoine Champion de Nansouty 's heavy cavalry to charge. While Nansouty's cuirassiers and carabiniers sacrificed themselves in futile attacks on the Austrians, Lauriston assembled 112 artillery pieces for his huge battery. He gathered all 60 guns from the Imperial Guard, 24 guns from General Karl Philipp von Wrede 's Bavarian division, and 38 pieces from Eugène's Army of Italy. He advanced the batteries into grapeshot range, unlimbered the guns, and opened fire. In the face of this terrific blizzard of lead, the Austrian III Armeekorps of General Johann Kollowrat halted and edged back out of the firing range. The barrage allowed time for Napoleon to organize a successful counterattack.

In 1811, Lauriston was made ambassador to Russia. In 1812, he held a command in the Grande Armée and gained distinction through his firmness in covering the retreat from Moscow. He commanded the V Corps at Lützen and Bautzen during the German campaign, but was captured during the disastrous retreat after the Battle of Leipzig in October 1813.

Lauriston was held as a prisoner of war until the fall of the empire. He then joined King Louis XVIII of France, to whom he remained faithful during the Hundred Days. His reward was a seat in the Chamber of Peers and a command in the Royal Guard. In 1817, he was created a marquis, and became commandant supérieur of the Département du Finistère et de la place de Brest. In 1823, Lauriston was made a Marshal of France and he commanded a corps during the Spanish expedition. He died of a stroke in Paris on 11 June 1828. The name LAURISTON is inscribed on Column 13 of the Arc de Triomphe.

Jacques Laurent Peirotes (11 September 1869 Strasbourg – 4 September 1935) was a French and German politician, mayor of Strasbourg from 1919 to 1929.

The young Jacques Peirotes, son of a carpenter working at the locomotives factory of Graffenstaden, learned the job of typographer while entering into politics.

Since 1900, he was editor of the Freie Presse (Free Press) that was an organ of the Strasbourg branch of the Social Democratic Party which he joined in 1895. In 1902, he became its political manager. In 1913, the newspaper was printed in 9,500 units.

He came into the town council of Strasbourg in 1902 and was elected councilor of the southern canton of the Kreis Straßburg (Stadt) in 1903. He also was deputy in the second chamber of the Landtag of the Reichsland Elsass-Lothringen from 1911 to 1918 and deputy of Colmar in the Reichstag in 1912.

When the First World War broke out, he was exiled by German authorities to Hanover and designated as Banned from Alsace. He then published his political manifesto Neutral oder Französisch (Neutral or French). When he came back at the end of the war, he had the skill to neutralize the soldiers and workers councils. He sat as president of the Municipal Commission of Strasbourg from November 10–29, 1918. On November 10, 1918 he proclaimed the forfeiture of the German Empire and the advent of the French Republic. He asked to the French authorities to hasten the troops arrival which ended the Socialist revolution taking place.

Elected mayor of Strasbourg in 1919 and reelected in 1925, he created a 'municipal office for cheap accommodations' which built 3,000 social apartments in ten years. He was beaten in the 1929 election by a coalition of communists and autonomists that led Charles Hueber to the town hall.

A street was later named after him in the Swiss quarter of Strasbourg (Krutenau).

Jacques Rabemananjara (23 June 1913 – 2 April 2005) was a Malagasy politician, playwright and poet. He served as a government minister, rising to Vice President of Madagascar. Rabemananjara was said to be the most prolific writer of his negritude generation after Senghor, and he had the first négritude poetry published.

Rabemananjara was born in Maroantsetra in Antongil Bay in eastern Madagascar on 23 June 1913, of Betsimisarakan origin. He began his education on the island of Sainte Marie, but soon left to finish his studies at the seminary at Antananarivo, the capital of Madagascar.

In 1935–36, the Madagascan authorities prohibited any further publication of a monthly journal of young people of Madagascar, which he was responsible for. The magazine, Revue des Jeunes de Madagascar, had 10 issues. The journal was an early example of political writing pre-dating later more well-known examples of négritude.

Despite his leadership of the journal, Rabemanajara was chosen in 1939 to attend a commemoration in Paris for the 150th anniversary of the French revolution. Having travelled to Paris he was able to not only gain entry to the Sorbonne and took courses in administration, but also to get his first collection of poetry, On the Steps of the Evening, published. In Paris, he met the Senegalese poet and politician Léopold Sédar Senghor and Alioune Diop who all participated in the important African studies journal Presence Africaine.

Influenced by the work of fellow Malagasy poet Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo, his early work dealt in classical alexandrian metre with the early history of Madagascar. His 1940 work Sur les marches du soir dealt with the forced exile of Queen Ranavalona III. She had been removed by the French colonial powers in 1897. Rabemananjara published his play Les dieux malgaches, the first modern Malagasy play in French, This play dealt with the pre-colonial past and with the coup that unseated King Radama II in 1863.

After the war, Rabemananjara also met Raseta and Joseph Ravoahangy, who was a partner with Rabemananjara in the creation of the MDRM (Democratic Movement for the Renovation of Madagascar).

Rabemananjara was elected to represent the Tamatave region in 1946 as the third member of the National Assembly from Madagascar. As a journalist at this time he interviewed Ho Chi Minh including his association with the Malagasy politician Jean Ralaimongo. He was suspected of being involved in the instigation of the 1947 Malagasy Uprising, despite the fact that he had urged the rioters to be calm. He was arrested, and sentenced to life imprisonment with hard labour.

During his captivity he wrote the poems Antsa, Lamba and Antidote. Rabemanajara was eventually pardoned in 1956. Rabemananjara's freedom allowed him to attend the first International Congress of Black Writers and Artists in Paris. He was one of the main speakers and earned a place at the top table of this important conference, which was funded by UNESCO and was still celebrated 50 years later.

He was exiled in France until Madagascar's independence in 1960. The new government under President Philibert Tsiranana asked him to join a number of ministries, namely minister of economy, industry, mines and power; then minister of agriculture; and then minister of state for foreign affairs. He also took the post of Vice President.

Rabemanajara was again exiled after the 1972 revolution, but this was his choice and he was not to return for 20 years. He died in France on April 2, 2005.

On 9 April 2017, the British newspaper The Observer published an article by Jay Rayner, its restaurant critic, describing a meal for two at Le Cinq, a luxury restaurant in Paris. Rayner visited with the intention of writing an observational piece on how expensive some restaurants were, as he had been irritated by people complaining about the cost of eating out. The review described his experience as by far the worst of his 18-year career, exacerbated by the earnestness of the waitstaff. The piece went viral and was praised by writers from Vox and Vice, though many reviewers from French outlets criticised Rayner. The food website Eater listed the review on their Best Bad Restaurant Reviews of 2017 listicle.

Jay Rayner became The Observer ' s restaurant critic in 1999; by April 2017, his reviews for them were averaging 60,000 online views. After tiring of people complaining about the cost of eating out, he visited Le Cinq, a three- Michelin-star restaurant in the luxury Hotel George V in Paris, with the intention of writing an observational piece on how expensive some restaurants were. His review described the restaurant as decorated in "various shades of taupe, biscuit and fuck you", with thick carpet to "muffle the screams", and featured press shots supplied by the restaurant throughout as the restaurant had not allowed The Observer to photograph their food. According to his review, what Rayner ate included the following:

Jayner's meal cost €600. He described it as "by far the worst restaurant experience I have endured in my 18 years in this job", exacerbated by the earnestness of the waitstaff, and wrote that he had been left with such unpleasant memories he would be lucky to forget them. He also criticised the restaurant for giving his female companion a menu without prices and ended the review with several iPhone pictures of what he ate, which also appeared on his website.

Rayner's review went viral and received around 3,000 comments within three days; the extra traffic caused his website to crash. By 17 May, the review had been viewed more than 2,000,000 times and he had been dubbed "the world's most feared food critic". Rayner subsequently published to Twitter an itemised receipt.

Rayner included the review in his 2018 book Wasted Calories and Ruined Nights, a compendium of 20 of his negative reviews. In the foreword, he explained that he had written the review because he had been made "eye-gougingly, bone-crunchingly, teeth-grindingly angry" by the experience, so much so that it made him wonder what he could do to Le Cinq with "a can of kerosene and a box of matches".

The review was described by Vox as "a glorious ' the Emperor has no clothes ' exercise", while Vice described it as "worth a read, in a craning-your-neck-to-look-at-a-very-expensive-car-crash kind of way". The Sydney Morning Herald described his images as depicting "piles of slime on plates". However, Libération 's Elvire von Bardeleben felt Rayner was hypocritical for criticising the restaurant's opulence given that he had dined there for that reason and dismissed his review as contrarianism, while François-Régis Gaudry accused Rayner of bitterness and Alice Bosio of Le Figaro described Rayner's critique as a "diatribe as violent as it is a caricature". A "source close to" Christian Le Squer, the restaurant's head chef, described Rayner's review as "rich bashing". The review was listed by food website Eater on its "Best Bad Restaurant Reviews of 2017" listicle and described in 2023 by Sean Thomas of The Spectator as "one of the most famous British restaurant reviews of the last decade".

Jean Cruppi (22 May 1855 – 16 October 1933) was a French politician of the Third Republic where he held several ministerial posts. He started as a lawyer before becoming a magistrate. He was also a writer and journalist before his career in government. His first major posting was Minister of Commerce and Industry in 1908. He was appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs in the Ernest Monis government, which lasted less than four months from 2 March – 27 June 1911. Cruppi was responsible for sending soldiers into Fez, eventually leading to France's control over Morocco. In the aftermath, Cruppi held talks with the British in London at the start of the Agadir Crisis, which was caused by France's invasion of Morocco.

He was married to author and activist Louise Cruppi. The couple married in 1882 and had four children.

Jean Hoeufft (Liège, 1578– Paris, 5 September 1651) was a Dutch banker and arms dealer, who rose through the court of Louis XIII of France to become Treasurer to Louis XIV.

Hoeufft made a fortune from his diplomatic and business ventures, ultimately becoming one of the richest men in Europe outside of the royal families.

Jan Hoeufft was born in 1578 in Liège in the Spanish Netherlands to one of the most powerful families of the United Provinces. His father, a Roermond timber merchant, had moved to Aachen, Liège and Heinsberg after converting to the Reformed Church. Not much is known about Jean Hoeufft's early life. He did not marry and had no known children.

Hoeufft eventually settled in Rouen, where there was religious freedom for Protestants for a time under Henry IV of France. He was naturalized in 1601. He developed trade and ship owner activities trading between Spain and the United Provinces. From 1609 until 1616, he was deeply involved in the salt trade from Hiers-Brouage, along with his brother Dirck, based in Dordrecht. They supplied ships to the East India Company, and in 1620 they commissioned a ship-of-war, to be built in Amsterdam for Charles, Duke of Guise.

By 1621 Hoeufft was appointed chamberlain to Louis XIII. In the 1620s he was involved in arms trading for Charles Gonzaga, Duke of Nevers. In 1628 he was allowed to collect taxes, and thus became an agent of Richelieu, who used his connections to raise money on the Dutch money market. In the 1630s he became a banker.

Hoeufft repeatedly advanced funds to the King, and took part in major financial deals. In 1634 Hoeufft participated in peace talks between the Dutch and Spain, in which Jules Mazarin and Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange were also involved. Hoeufft played a key part in diplomatic negotiations, despite having no official authority to do so. His appointment as Commissioner of the States General of the Netherlands was formalized in 1637.

In 1639 his house in Rouen was sacked as part of the religious wars; it is likely he moved to La Rochelle or Paris. In 1643 he obtained the fief Fontaine-le-Comte, a former lake near Sacy-le-Grand.

Hoeufft became treasurer and Secretary to Louis XIV, holding those roles until his death in 1651.

At the time of the Thirty Years' War, arms dealing was a highly lucrative business in Europe. Hoeufft, described by a contemporary as “‘a man capable of speaking and acting’ as well as ‘[having] money to distribute to people should there be need,’” was well-suited to the job. Hoeufft dealt with Axel Oxenstierna, Johan Adler Salvius, Hugo Grotius, Abraham de Wicquefort and Adriaen Pauw on the French support for the Swedish army; the money had to be allocated to the Amsterdam Wisselbank.

In finance, he was Cardinal Richelieu 's banker for remitting subsidies during the Thirty Years War, and as banker to the Dukes of Saxe-Weimar, was charged with building financial links between the courts of France and Weimar.

Hoeufft occupied a prominent place in the network of political interests that bound together France’s structure of alliances during the Thirty Years War. "In some sense, his political interests were so tightly interwoven with his financial and mercantile interests that they are difficult to disentangle."

The Hoeufft family invested over a million livres in reclamation of lakes and wetlands in Picardie, Poitou and other parts of France. For the most part this work was carried out between 1642 and 1653 by Dutch engineers, such as Jan van Ens [ nl ; fr ].

In 1650, Hoeufft was the director of the operation to drain the Poitou Marsh in western France. From the 1640s, one of his associates was David de la Croix, who married Hoeufft's niece, Marguerite Hoeufft. When Hoeufft died, de la Croix was among his beneficiaries and took over the Poitou marsh operation.

Frédéric Otto Fabrice de Gressenich, Councillor and Maître d'hotel du Roi, the son of Hoeufft's sister Anne, inherited the Sacy marshes along with his Hœufft cousins. As the only cousin living in France, Fabrice administered the lands on their behalf.

Hoeufft died in Paris on 5 September 1651. He had two brothers and five sisters, who by then lived in Cologne, Dordrecht, London, and Utrecht.

Hoeufft bequeathed two million livres to the poor of the Reformed Church of Charenton, near Paris.

In 1736 Hoeufft's property at Petit Poitou was sold at Luçon in the Poitevin.

Jean Joseph Antoine de Couvoisier (30 November 1775 – 18 September 1835) was a French magistrate and politician.

Couvoisier was born at Besançon on 30 November 1775. During the revolutionary period, he left the country and served in the army of the émigrés and later in that of Austria.

In 1801, under the consulate, he returned to France and established himself as an advocate at Besançon, being appointed conseiller-auditeur to the court of appeal therein 1808. At the Restoration he was made advocate-general by Louis XVIII, resigned and left France during the Hundred Days, and was reappointed after the second Restoration in 1815.

In 1817, after the modification of the constitution by the ordonnance of the 5 September, he was returned to the chamber of deputies, where he attached himself to the left centre and supported the moderate policy of Richelieu and Decazes. He was an eloquent speaker, and master of many subjects; and his proved royalism made it impossible for the Ultra-Royalists to discredit him, much as they resented his consistent opposition to their short-sighted violence.

After the revolt at Lyon, he was nominated procureur-general of the city, and by his sense and moderation did much to restore order and confidence. He was again a member of the chamber from 1819 to 1824, and vigorously opposed the exceptional legislation which the second administration of Richelieu passed under the influence of the ultra-Royalists.

In 1824, he failed to secure re-election, and occupied himself with his judicial duties until his nomination as councilor of state in 1827. On 8 August 1829, he accepted the offer of the portfolio of justice in the Polignac ministry, but resigned on 19 May 1830, when he realized that the government intended to abrogate the Charter and the inevitable revolution that would follow. During the trial of the ex-ministers, in December, he was summoned as a witness, and paid a tribute to the character of his former colleagues which, in the circumstances, argued no little courage. He refused to take office under Louis Philippe I, and retired into private life, dying on 18 September 1835.

Jean Leonetti (born 9 July 1948) is a French cardiologist and politician who served as a member of National Assembly from 1997 to 2011 and again from 2012 to 2017, representing Alpes-Maritimes's 7th constituency. He a former president of the Republicans and is also a member of the Radical Party.

Following Jean-François Copé ’s resignation as chair of the UMP, Leonetti supported Bruno Le Maire ’s candidacy to succeed Copé. He later endorsed Alain Juppé in the Republicans’ primaries ahead of the 2017 presidential election.

In 2015, Leonetti authored legislation allowed patients with hours or days to live to stop treatment and request to be placed under general anaesthetic until the moment they die.

In his capacity as Minister of European Affairs, Leonetti said in 2011 the Eurozone could survive even if Greece were forced out of the currency union.

Jean Sulpice (French pronunciation: [ ʒɑ̃ sylpis ] ; born 27 July 1978) is a French chef from Aix-les-Bains. He is best known for being the youngest French chef to ever receive a Michelin Star ; he was 26 years old at the time. His first restaurant was called Restaurant de Jean Sulpice (The Oxalys before 2014) and was located in Val Thorens in the French Alps.

Jean Sulpice was born on 27 July 1978 in Aix-Les-Bains, Savoie. He comes from a family of restaurant owners and he spent his childhood in his hometown. His vocation for cooking started at a very young age when he spent time in his parents' restaurant...

At the age of 16, Jean Sulpice obtained an apprenticeship at the Auberge Lamartine and started learning gastronomy alongside the renowned French chefs Jean and Pierre Marin. In 1998, Jean Sulpice met Marc Veyrat and was offered a second in command position at La Ferme de Mon Père, in Megève. Wanting to learn more, Jean Sulpice left Marc Veyrat's kitchen and entered the kitchen of the Arnsbourg restaurant, in Baerenthal (Moselle), next to Jean-Georges Klein. He also worked at the Hotel de Carantec (Finistère) and in Paris for two years.

In December 2002 he opened his own restaurant in Val Thorens (2300m high), with his wife Magali Sulpice. The restaurant has since been renamed "Restaurant de Jean Sulpice" (2014). The restaurant is the holder of two Michelin stars and became the highest-starred restaurant in Europe. Jean Sulpice, who obtained 2 stars, his first at the age of 26 and his second at 31, is considered the youngest starred French chef

Jean Sulpice sold his Val Thorens restaurant in 2016 and took over the once Michelin 3-star century old famed Auberge du Père Bise, in Talloires on Lake Annecy in the French Alps.

Jean Sulpice's first restaurant opened in 2002, and it was located in Val Thorens, at an altitude of 2,300 metres, situated in the 3 valleys ski area, which are the highest ski resorts in Europe. The name of the restaurant (changed in 2014) was taken from a plant called oxalis. These flowers are endemic to the mountains of Val Thorens and have been a big part of Jean Sulpice's inspiration for cooking.

The opening of his restaurant represented a challenge for him since tourists around Val Thorens were typically expecting to eat fondues and raclettes when in the mountain. Nonetheless, the restaurant has become the highest gastronomic restaurant in the world. The restaurant has a staff of 25 employees, and offers menus ranging in price from €74 to €226 in 2014.

"Un adepte de terroir et de saisonnalité" (An adept of regional and seasonal dishes)

Jean Sulpice's recipes are inspired by the regional and seasonal traditions of Savoie, as well as his life experience. The creation of new dishes comes from testing different cooking methods with raw products, at different temperatures, in order to create different textures, flavors and appearances. Many procedures are adapted as cooking at the altitude of 2,300m is a challenge at a chemical level. Therefore, in order to cook at this altitude, Jean Sulpice had to adapt many of his cooking procedures.

Apart from being a well-known chef, he is also involved in several projects. The seasonal opening of his restaurant allows time for Jean Sulpice to participate in external events, such as cooking for the day-nursery of Val Thorens. His objective is to raise awareness, to educate and to transmit the good quality of food to children. Jean Sulpice also runs 'open kitchen' events in summer to share knowledge of his gastronomy.

In September 2014, Jean Sulpice participated in the Épicure Culinary Festival in Zürich and in June 2014, he took part in a culinary workshop, organized by Uncle Ben's (rice), where parents and children were able to cook together with the aim of promoting family cooking. He was also present at the Ben's Beginners, which was about culinary transmission to young children.

Jean Sulpice is the youngest French cook to receive two Michelin stars. He won the first one at the age of 26, and the second one 5 years later at the age of 31. He is now working towards getting his third Michelin Star. Furthermore, Jean Sulpice also has four Gault-Millau chef hats.

Jean Sulpice was named "Cook of the Year" in the 2018 edition of the Gault et Millau Guide.

Jean Sulpice also was panelist for Un dîner presque parfait : le combat des régions. is a M6 cooking TV Show presented by Stéphane Rotenberg. This TV Show regroups the 16 new winners of Un Dîner presque parfait 2010 edition. Each winner represents his own region during the confrontation, and Cyril Lignac judged each region with a specific panelist per region. Jean Sulpice was the South of France panelist. In 2010, the TV Show began on 23 August and ended on 27 September of the same year.

On 30 August 2010, during the second week of competition, Jean Sulpice and Cyril Lignac proposed 3 tests to determine the winner of the week.

On 20 September 2010, it was the quarter-finals (first part) and the semi-finals (second part). During the first part Jean Sulpice and the other chefs judged the contestants in an amusement park (Disneyland Paris). During the second part, they judged them in the Palace of Versailles, near Paris.

The final took place on 27 September 2010. Jean Sulpice and the rest of the panel judged the last 2 contestants in a Paris-Bruxelles train, and in a 50m high basket.

Jean Sulpice is married to Magali Sulpice, who is also the sommelier of Restaurant Jean Sulpice. The couple has two children.

Michel Albert Jean Joseph Ybarnégaray (French pronunciation: [ ʒɑ̃ ibaʁneɡaʁɛ ] ; 16 October 1883 – 25 April 1956) was a French Basque politician and founder of the International Federation of Basque Pelota.

Jean Ybarnegaray was born in Uhart-Cize, Department of Pyrénées-Atlantiques, then called Basses Pyrénées, in the Northern Basque Country. He studied law at the Sorbonne and Bordeaux University and practised as a lawyer. He was elected to the Chamber of Deputies in April 1914.

On the outbreak of the First World War, he was recalled to service. He was wounded and discharged from the army with the Legion of Honour, returning to the Chamber of Deputies, where he criticised the Nivelle Offensive of 1917, the armistice of 1918 and the Treaty of Versailles.

A member of the Republican Federation, Ybarnegaray joined the French Social Party of François de La Rocque in 1938. He served as Minister of State in Paul Reynaud 's government from 10 May 1940. On arrival of refugees from the Basque (1937) and Catalan fronts (1939) in the Spanish Civil War, Ybarnegaray took a hostile stance against the exiles, labeling them as "reds" and turned a cold shoulder to Basque nationalism or any Basque political approach.

He served in the French State government in the first cabinet of Marshal Philippe Pétain as Minister for Veterans and the Family. He resigned his office on 6 September 1940.

Ybarnegaray had undertaken French Resistance activities, assisting escapees in crossing the Pyrenees, for which he was arrested in 1943 and detained in Plansee in the state of Tyrol. Although he was sentenced after the war to losing civil rights, his Resistance activities resulted in the sentence being suspended.

Jean-Baptiste Bienvenu Martin (22 July 1847 – 10 December 1943) was a French Radical leader and cabinet officer. He was born at Saint-Bris-le-Vineux (Yonne), and was educated in the law.

He held an under prefecture, entered the Council of State, and in 1894 became director under the Minister of the Colonies. He was an unsuccessful senatorial candidate for Yonne in 1897, was elected deputy for Auxerre in that year, was reelected in 1898 and 1902, and in 1905 became Senator for Yonne. In the Chamber he supported the Waldeck-Rousseau and the Combes ministries, and advocated the separation of church and state.

In 1904 he became the leader of the new Radical group of the Left. In 1905-06 he held the portfolio of Public Instruction in the Rouvier cabinet; he was Minister of Justice in the Doumergue cabinet in 1913–14, and in the first cabinet organized by René Viviani in June, 1914; and when the War in Europe broke out in 1914, he became Minister of Labor in the second Viviani cabinet, formed August 26 of that year.

He died on December 10, 1943, at Saint-Bris.

Jean-Baptiste Colbert (French: [ ʒɑ̃.ba.tist kɔl.bɛʁ ] ; 29 August 1619 – 6 September 1683) was a French statesman who served as First Minister of State from 1661 until his death in 1683 under the rule of King Louis XIV. His lasting impact on the organization of the country's politics and markets, known as Colbertism, a doctrine often characterized as a variant of mercantilism, earned him the nickname le Grand Colbert ([ lə ɡʁɑ̃ kɔl.bɛʁ ] ; "the Great Colbert").

A native of Reims, he was appointed Intendant of Finances on 4 May 1661. Colbert took over as Controller-General of Finances, a newly created position, in the aftermath of the arrest of Nicolas Fouquet for embezzlement, an event that led to the abolishment of the office of Superintendent of Finances. He worked to develop the domestic economy by raising tariffs and encouraging major public works projects, as well as to ensure that the French East India Company had access to foreign markets, so that they could always obtain coffee, cotton, dyewoods, fur, pepper, and sugar. He acted to create a favorable balance of trade and increase colonial holdings. As there was slavery in the colonies, in 1682, Colbert commissioned the beginning of a project that would become the Code Noir in 1685, two years after his death. In addition, he founded France's merchant navy (marine marchande), becoming Secretary of State of the Navy in 1669.

His effective market reforms included the foundation of the Manufacture royale de glaces de miroirs in 1665 to supplant the importation of Venetian glass, which was forbidden in 1672 as soon as the national glass manufacturing industry was on sound footing. Also encouraging the technical expertise of Flemish cloth manufacturing in France, he founded royal tapestry works at Gobelins and supported those at Beauvais. He issued more than 150 edicts to regulate the guilds. The Académie des sciences was founded in 1666 at his suggestion; he was a member of the Académie française from 1 March 1667 to his death, where he occupied the 24th seat, to which Jean de La Fontaine was later elected. His son Jean-Baptiste Colbert, Marquis de Seignelay (1651–1690), succeeded him as Navy Secretary.

Colbert's father and grandfather were merchants in his birthplace of Reims, France. He claimed to have Scottish ancestry. A widespread (but unconfirmed) belief exists that he spent his early youth at a Jesuit college, working for a Parisian banker; as well as working for the father of Jean Chapelain.

Before the age of 20, Colbert had a post in the war office, a position generally attributed to the marriage of an uncle to the sister of Secretary of War Michel Le Tellier. Colbert spent some time as an inspector of troops, eventually becoming the personal secretary of Le Tellier. In 1647, through unknown means, Colbert acquired the confiscated goods of an uncle, Pussort. In 1648, he and his wife Marie Charron, received 40,000 crowns from an unknown source; and in 1649 Colbert became the councilor of state, i.e. a political minister.

In 1657, he purchased the Barony of Seignelay.

Colbert was recommended to King Louis XIV by Mazarin. While Cardinal Mazarin was in exile, Louis's trust in Colbert grew. In 1652, Colbert was asked to manage the affairs of the Cardinal while he was away. This new responsibility would detach Colbert from his other responsibility as commissaire des guerres. Although Colbert was not a supporter of Mazarin in principle, he would defend the cardinal's interests with unflagging devotion.

Colbert's earliest recorded attempt at tax reform came in the form of a mémoire to Mazarin, showing that less than half of the taxes paid by the people reached the King. The paper also contained an attack on Nicolas Fouquet. The postmaster of Paris, a spy of Fouquet's, read the letter, leading to a dispute which Mazarin attempted to suppress.

In 1661, Mazarin died and Colbert "made sure of the King's favor" by revealing the location of some of Mazarin's hidden wealth. In January 1664 Colbert became the Superintendent of buildings ; in 1665 he became Controller-General of Finances ; in 1669, he became Secretary of State of the Navy ; he also gained appointments as minister of commerce, of the colonies, and of the palace. In short, Colbert acquired power in every department except that of war.

A great financial and fiscal reform now claimed all his energies. Not only the nobility, but many others who had no legal claim to exemption, paid no taxes; the bulk of the burden fell on the rural poor. Supported by the young king Louis XIV, Colbert aimed the first blow at the man accused of being the greatest of the royal embezzlers, the superintendent Nicolas Fouquet. Fouquet's fall secured Colbert's own advancement.

After the abolition of the office of superintendent and of many other offices dependent upon it, control of France's finances fell to a royal council. The sovereign functioned as its president, but Colbert, though only an intendant for the first four years, operated as its ruling spirit, enjoying as he did king's favor and confidence.

His ruthlessness in the execution of his functions may have set a dangerous precedent, but it probably struck him necessary in that the council could not defer to individual interests. This way of administering his policies was particularly in evidence in his preparation and enforcement of his forestry ordinance of 1669. When he had severely punished guilty officials, he turned his attention to the government's fraudulent creditors. Here he had a simple way of operating. He repudiated some of the public loans and reduced the interest rate on others. The amount of the reduction was initially his own decision but ultimately that of a council he established to examine all claims against the state.

Much more serious difficulties met his attempts to introduce equality in taxation among the various classes. Cutting back the number of the privileged proved impossible, but Colbert firmly resisted false claims for exemption and lightened direct taxation by increasing indirect taxes, from which the privileged could not escape. At the same time, he undertook improvements to the way taxes were collected.

In 1665, Colbert suggested bringing the country under a unified system of weights and measures.

Colbert's relentless hard work and thrift made him an esteemed minister. He achieved a reputation for improving the state of French manufacturing and bringing the economy back from the brink of bankruptcy. Nevertheless, despite his best efforts, France grew increasingly impoverished because of the King's excessive spending on wars.

Having introduced a measure of order and economy into the workings of the government, Colbert called for the enrichment of the country by means of commerce. Through Colbert's dirigiste policies, France fostered manufacturing enterprises in a wide variety of fields. The authorities established new industries, protected inventors, invited in workmen from foreign countries, and prohibited French workmen from emigrating.

To maintain the character of French goods in foreign markets as well as to afford a guarantee to the domestic consumer, Colbert had the quality and quantity of each article fixed by law, punishing breaches of the regulations by public exposure of the delinquent and destruction of the goods concerned, and, on the third offense, by the pillory. Colbert prohibited the production of certain products that might have suited consumers, and the time-consuming supervision he imposed on commercial enterprises may have acted as a hindrance to improvement. Other parts of Colbert's schemes have met with less equivocal condemnation.

By his firm maintenance of the corporation system, each industry remained in the hands of certain privileged bourgeois ; while the lower classes found opportunities of advancement closed. He did, however, wisely consult the interests of internal commerce.

Unable to abolish the duties on the passage of goods from province to province, he did what he could to induce the provinces to equalize them. Currency exchange rates still remained between these provinces despite a policy focusing on the unification of French trade. His régime improved roads and canals. Pierre Paul Riquet (1604–1680) planned and constructed the Canal du Midi under Colbert's patronage.

To encourage overseas trade with the Levant, Senegal, Guinea and other places, Colbert granted privileges to companies, but, like the noted French East India Company, all proved unsuccessful.

Colbert took much interest in art and literature. He possessed a remarkably fine private library, which he delighted to fill with valuable manuscripts from every part of Europe and the Near East where France had placed a consul. He employed Pierre de Carcavi and Étienne Baluze as librarians. Colbert's grandson sold the manuscript collection in 1732 to the Bibliothèque Royale.

Colbert founded a number of institutions:

He reorganised the Academy of Painting and Sculpture which Mazarin had established. Wishing to increase the prestige of the image of France and the French royal family, Colbert played an active role in bringing the great Italian architect-sculptor, Gian Lorenzo Bernini, to Paris (June–October 1665), in order to design the new East Facade of the Louvre. This was a striking coup and caused a sensation because Bernini, the most famous artist in all of Europe, had never before (or after) consented to travel any significant distance to meet a patron, however highly ranked, but had to agree in this case for reasons of diplomacy between France and the Holy See. While in France, Bernini also sculpted a marble portrait bust of Louis XIV (Versailles palace). However the relations between the two strong-willed men, Colbert and Bernini, proved melodramatically stormy. Bernini's Louvre design was ultimately rejected.

In 1666 Colbert established an Académie dedicated to the development of science and advising the government in this field. For the French Academy of Sciences he chose scientists, mathematicians, as well as physicists which at the time included anatomists, botanists, and zoologists. The first session was held on 22 December 1666 in Paris. Colbert himself became a member of the Académie Française. He proposed one very characteristic rule with the intention of expediting the great Dictionary, in which he had a great interest: no one could count as present at any meeting unless he arrived before the hour of commencement and remained till the hour for leaving.

In 1673 Colbert presided over the first exhibition of the works of living painters and he enriched the Louvre with hundreds of pictures and statues.

He gave many pensions to men of letters, among whom we find Molière, Corneille, Racine, Boileau, P D Huet (1630–1721) and Antoine Varillas (1626–1696); and even foreigners, as Huygens, Carlo Roberto Dati the Dellacruscan. Evidence exists to show that by this munificence he hoped to draw out praises of his sovereign and himself. But this motive certainly does not account for all the splendid, if in some cases specious, services that he rendered to literature, science and art.

Colbert worked incessantly hard until his final hours. Work was his religion; he once pondered whether it was better to rise early and work or retire very late and work. He concluded that rising early and retiring late would be the ideal combination. Towards the end of his life he suffered from stomach aches, which caused him much distress. He was reduced to eating moist bread dipped in chicken broth for his meals.

By 64 he was bedridden and died seven days after his birthday. The surgeons who examined him found that he had been suffering from kidney stones. A huge stone was found in his urinary tract, which would explain his pain.

The main building of the Ministry of the Economy and Finance building, completed in 1989, is named after him.

His policies inspired those of Alexander Hamilton, the first treasury secretary of the United States.

Six ships of the French Navy bore his name:

In literature, the power struggle between Colbert and Fouquet is one of the main plotlines of Alexandre Dumas, père 's novel The Vicomte of Bragelonne, the second sequel to The Three Musketeers. Dumas paints Colbert as an uncouth and ruthless schemer who stops at little, in contrast to the more refined Fouquet, counselled by Aramis, but also as a visionary patriot.

Colbert's statue stands outside the Assemblée nationale. Following a series of international protests, the statue was vandalized in 2020 due to Colbert's part in drafting the Code Noir. This legal instrument sanctioned an intentionally brutal system of torture and repression to enforce institutional slavery in the French colonial empire and restrict the enterprise of free Black people.

Jean-Claude Gaudin (French pronunciation: [ ʒɑ̃ klod ɡodɛ̃ ] ; 8 October 1939 – 20 May 2024) was a French politician for The Republicans. He served as the Mayor of Marseille from 1995 to 2020.

Gaudin was a member of the National Assembly of France from Bouches-du-Rhône from 1978 to 1989 and was a member of the French Senate from 1989 to 1995 and again from 1998. From 1995 to 1997, he served as Minister of Territorial Development in Alain Juppé's Second Cabinet.

Gaudin served as vice-president of the Senate from 1998 to 2011; as vice-president of UMP 2002 – 2007 and as one of several vice-presidents for UMP 2013–2014.

Jean-Claude Gaudin was born on 8 October 1939 in Mazargues, a neighbourhood of the 9th arrondissement in Marseille, Bouches-du-Rhône, France. His ancestors had lived in Mazargues since 1600. His father was a mason and his mother was an espadrille -maker. They entertained author and playwright Marcel Pagnol (1895–1974), actress Alida Rouffe (1874–1939), and actor Raimu (1883–1946). They also had a small house at the Calanque de Sormiou, where they spent their summers.

In 1965, he was enrolled in military service where he served briefly. Upon graduation from university, he became a teacher of history and geography for fifteen years at the Lycée Saint-Joseph in Marseille. He was elected on the list of centrist and socialist politicians led by Gaston Defferre against the Gaullist party Union for the New Republic (UNR). He was subsequently elected in a local election and became one of the youngest members on the Marseille city council. He was re-elected again in 1971.

In 1974, he took part in the presidential campaign of Valéry Giscard d'Estaing. In 1978, he won his first election for the National Assembly as the candidate in the 2nd district of the Rhône delta. He beat the outgoing socialist deputy, Charles-Émile Loo, with 53.7% of the votes cast. In June 1981, he won reelection. He then became president of the Union for French Democracy (UDF) group in the National Assembly.

In 1986, he was given the responsibility for the executive of Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur. On 25 April 1986, he became president of the first regional council of Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur elected by direct vote. In 1988, after the dissolution of the National Assembly, he was again re-elected, for the fourth time, deputy of the Rhône delta for 2nd district of Marseille, with 60.63% of the votes cast. His presidency of the UDF Group in the National Assembly was also renewed.

In September 1989, he was a candidate for the senatorial elections and won the district. In 1992, Gaudin carried the vote again, beating Bernard Tapie and Jean-Marie Le Pen. He was also re-elected president of the regional council of Provence-Alpes-Côte-d'Azur on 27 March 1992.

In 1983, Gaudin tried to unseat Gaston Defferre as Mayor of Marseille, and lost by a handful of votes. In 1989, he was expected to win against Defferre's successor Robert Vigouroux, but lost again. In 1995, Gaudin stood for the post of Mayor along with maintaining his position as a senator. He won with an absolute majority of 55 City councilmen out of 101 and was installed as Mayor of Marseille on 25 June 1995.

From June 1995 to September 1996, Gaudin was president of football club Olympique de Marseille. The club had recently filed for bankruptcy in the aftershocks of the French football bribery scandal.

On 7 November 1995, on a proposal from Alain Juppé, President Jacques Chirac named Jean-Claude Gaudin Minister for Integration and City and Regional Planning.

On 6 October 1998, he became vice-president of the Senate. He was re-elected Mayor of Marseille again on 25 March 2001 as well as 16 March 2008, and president of the Urban Community of Marseille Provence Métropole on 11 April. On 3 October 2001, Jean-Claude Gaudin was re-elected as vice-president of the Senate for a second time. In 2004, he was re-elected for a third time as vice-president of the Senate.

In 2004, Gaudin was interim president of the UMP after Alain Juppé stepped down and before Nicolas Sarkozy was elected. He was interim president again in 2007 after Nicolas Sarkozy stepped down, alongside Pierre Méhaignerie and Brice Hortefeux.

In 2013, he announced he would run for Mayor a fourth time. In the first round of the election, he obtained 37.64% of the votes. In the second round he garnered 42.39% while the Socialist candidate got 31,09 and Front National's candidate 26,51. On 4 April, the municipal council in Marseille elected him as mayor for a new period with no opposing candidate.

In June 2017, he announced that he would not be seeking another term in the 2020 municipal elections. He held his last municipal council—the 198th— on 27 January 2020 and supported the candidacy of Martine Vassal against Bruno Gilles to succeed to him. In May 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, Gaudin announced ordering 1.5 million face masks for residents of Marseille, and advocated a policy of voluntary screening.

The left-wing candidate Michèle Rubirola was elected by the municipal council to succeed to him on 4 July 2020. Soon after, he was named by the new mayor as head of the ecumenical association Marseille Espérance, founded in 1990 by his predecessor Robert Vigouroux.

A few months after Gaudin stepped down as mayor, a preliminary hearing related to supposed no-show jobs at the Marseille City Hall, started after a system of false recordkeeping of SAMU Social employees' attendance was revealed, and led the National Financial Prosecutor's Office (PNF) to send him, with six of his relatives, before the tribunal correctionnel. The conclusions of the PNF call out his management of human resources by pointing out undue overtime, as well as unjustified absenteeism in the SAMU Social and in the museums and libraries of the city. During the hearings, Gaudin regularly justified himself by mentioning a "social peace" and the fear of trade union reactions.

The PNF pointed out several grievances, including the "lack of control of work efficiency", the "flat rate of overtime", or "the payment of unworked overtime", in numerous services including the SAMU Social, Allô mairie, museums, a city garage, etc. More than 800 agents were claimed to have benefited from these irregularities, with a cost for the city reaching one million euros per year. Jean-Claude Gaudin and four of his associates ended up pleading guilty of "neglectful embezzlement" in a plea bargain procedure. The sentence suggested by the PNF was negotiated on 22 March before being approved by the judge. Gaudin was sentenced to a €10,000 fine and a six-month suspended prison sentence in March 2022.

On 11 July 1997, Gaudin was made Knight of the Legion of Honour, with which he was formally decorated on 14 October. He was promoted to Officer on 14 July 2018.

On 26 September 2016, Gaudin was awarded the Plaque rank of the Order of the Aztec Eagle by the president of Mexico, Enrique Peña Nieto.

Gaudin was a practising Catholic. He lived in a rented apartment in Neuilly-sur-Seine during the week and spent his weekends in a mansion in Saint-Zacharie.

Gaudin died at his residence in Saint-Zacharie on 20 May 2024, at the age of 84.

Jean-François Deniau (French pronunciation: [ ʒɑ̃ fʁɑ̃swa dənjo ] ; 31 October 1928 – 24 January 2007) was a French politician, diplomat, essayist and novelist. Until 1998, he was a member of the Union for French Democracy (UDF).

In 1958, he became the director of Foreign Relations for the European Commission. He was the author of the foreword of the Treaty of Rome. In 1963, he was named French ambassador to Mauritania and in 1967 he was appointed as one of the French European Commissioners, as a member of the Rey Commission, in 1970 followed by his membership of the Malfatti Commission. He was responsible for the accession negotiations of Great Britain, the Republic of Ireland, Denmark and Norway, and for assistance to developing countries.

In 1973, he entered the government of Pierre Messmer as Secretary of State for Coopération, and was then named Secretary of State to the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development in the government formed by Jacques Chirac after the election of Valéry Giscard d'Estaing to the presidency of the French Republic in 1974. In 1976, J.F. Deniau became France's ambassador to Madrid, on the request of the new king Juan Carlos, with whom he had begun a friendship during regattas. Deniau would play an active advisory role to the king and the government during Spain's democratic transition following the death of General Franco.

In September 1977, Jean-François Deniau was named Secretary of State to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the government of Raymond Barre, then Minister of Foreign Commerce (1978), and finally Minister of Administrative Reform in Raymond Barre's last government (1981).

From 1978 to 1981 and from 1986 to 1997 he was a member of the French parliament.

He was elected to the Académie Française on 9 April 1992.

Jean-Jack Queyranne (born 2 November 1945) is a French politician. He was the Regional President of the Rhône-Alpes from June 2002 until January 2016. He was a deputy in the National Assembly from the seventh district of Rhône. He is a member of the Socialist Party.

Queyranne replaced Charles Hernu in the National Assembly in 1981 when the latter was appointed to the government as Minister of Defense. He served in the National Assembly until 1993. In the 1997 legislative election, he was re-elected to the National Assembly and then joined the government as Secretary of State for the Overseas, under the Minister of the Interior. He remained in this position until he became Minister for Relations with Parliament on August 29, 2000, in which position he served until May 5, 2002.

He was Deputy Mayor (Adjoint au Maire) of Villeurbanne from March 1977 to June 1988, and he was subsequently Mayor of Bron from March 1989 to June 1997 and Deputy Mayor of Bron from June 1997 to April 2004. From March 18, 1985 to March 29, 1990, he was a member of the General Council of Rhône.

Queyranne was a member of the Regional Council of Rhône-Alpes from March 1978 to March 1979, from August 1981 to March 1986, and from March 1998 to July 2002. From 2004 to 2016, he was President of the Regional Council of Rhône-Alpes.

Minister for Relationships with Parliament : 2000–2002

Minister of Interior (interim) : 1998–1999.

Secretary of State for Overseas : 1997–2000.

Member of the National Assembly of France for Rhône (7th constituency) : 1981-1993 / Reelected in 1997, but he became minister / Since 2002. Elected in 1981, reelected in 1986, 1988, 1997, 2002, 2007.

President of the Regional Council of Rhône-Alpes : 2004–2016. Reelected in 2010.

Regional councillor of Rhône-Alpes : 1978-1979 / 1981-1986 / 1998-2002 (Resignation) / Since 2004. Reelected in 2004, 2010.

General councillor of Rhône : 1985-1990 (Resignation).

Mayor of Bron : 1989-1997 (Resignation). Reelected in 1995.

Deputy-mayor of Bron : 1997-2004 (Resignation). Reelected in 2001.

Municipal councillor of Bron : 1989-2004 (Resignation). Reelected in 1995, 2001.

Deputy-mayor of Villeurbanne : 1977-1988 (Resignation). Reelected in 1983.

Municipal councillor of Villeurbanne : 1977-1988 (Resignation). Reelected in 1983.

Vice-president of the Urban Community of Lyon : 1995-2004 (Resignation). Reelected in 2001.

Member of the Urban Community of Lyon : 1977-2004 (Resignation). Reelected in 1983, 1989, 1995, 2001.

Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber, often referred to as JJSS (13 February 1924 – 7 November 2006), was a French journalist and politician. He co-founded L'Express in 1953 with Françoise Giroud, and then went on to become president of the Radical Party in 1971. He oversaw its transition to the center-right, the party being thereafter known as Parti radical valoisien. He tried to found in 1972 the Reforming Movement with Christian Democrat Jean Lecanuet, with whom he supported Valéry Giscard d'Estaing 's conservative candidature to the 1974 presidential election.

Jean-Jacques Schreiber (his birth name) was born in Paris, the eldest son of Émile Servan-Schreiber, journalist, who founded the financial newspaper Les Échos, and Denise Brésard. Three of his siblings are Brigitte Gros, former senator of Yvelines and mayor of Meulan, Christiane Collange, journalist, Jean-Louis Servan-Schreiber, journalist.

The Schreiber family is a Jewish family.

Enjoying the full attention of his mother, JJSS was a highly gifted and hard-working child. He studied at the Lycée Janson-de-Sailly and the Lycée de Grenoble, then returned to Paris. Beginning in adolescence, he accompanied his father to meetings with highly placed people such as Raoul Dautry, a cabinet-level officer under both Vichy and liberated France. Having been accepted by the École polytechnique, France's top engineering school in 1943, he joined Charles de Gaulle 's Free French Forces with his father and went to Alabama for training as a fighter pilot; however, he never entered combat.

After the liberation, he graduated from Ecole Polytechnique in 1947, but never worked as an engineer. That same year, he married journalist and author Madeleine Chapsal. Fascinated by science and politics, Servan-Schreiber now discovered a taste for writing and journalism. The brilliant 25-year-old was hired to write for the recently founded daily newspaper Le Monde by its founder, Hubert Beuve-Méry, as a foreign affairs editorialist. His deep acquaintance with the United States led him to specialize in the Cold War.

Servan-Schreiber was among the first to recognize the inevitability of decolonization, writing a series of articles on the Indo-Chinese conflict. This led to his meeting the future Prime Minister Pierre Mendès-France, at that time a dedicated opponent of the French military effort in Indo-China. In 1953 Servan-Schreiber co-founded (with Françoise Giroud) the weekly L'Express, initially published as a Saturday supplement to the family-owned newspaper Les Échos. On the magazine's open agenda was the elevation of Mendès-France to power. Due to government seizures and censorship, the magazine quickly enchanted both the youth and the most prominent intellectuals of the 1950s and 1960s with its innovations. Among its contributors were Albert Camus, Jean-Paul Sartre, André Malraux and François Mauriac. During Mendès-France's pivotal eight-month term as Council President (the formal title for the Prime Minister during the Fourth Republic), JJSS served him as a shadow councilor.

Servan-Schreiber was conscripted to Algeria in 1956 – to still his dissent, says Giroud. Drawing on his experiences there, he published his first book, " Lieutenant en Algérie ". Its account of the brutality of French repression caused a controversy over its alleged deleterious effect on the army's morale. L'Express ran excerpts from the book.

Servan-Schreiber opposed General De Gaulle's return to power in 1958. However, De Gaulle was successful, and the influence of L'Express began to wane. In the same period, JJSS experienced other upsets. His family lost control of Les Échos ; he split politically with Mendès-France; he divorced his first wife, and separated from Françoise Giroud, his mistress since the early 1950s, in order to marry Sabine Becq de Fouquières, who would become the mother of his four sons David, Émile, Franklin, and Édouard.

In 1964 following a study which he commissioned from his brother Jean-Louis, JJSS transformed L'Express into a weekly news magazine patterned after TIME. L'Express soared in popularity once again. It broadened its coverage to such subjects as new technologies and women's liberation. It became a mirror of the changing French society.

As the 1960s unfolded, Servan-Schreiber found himself in the position of a rich press lord, a political editorialist always chasing after new ideas. His trenchant analysis drew some of the first minds of his generation to him. Growing more and more disenchanted with De Gaulle's policies, he was no longer willing to settle for an observer's role.

He found a collaborator in Michel Albert, who provided him with extensive documentation to inform his editorials. One of Albert's reports struck him particularly. It presented the United States and Europe as engaged in a silent economic war, in which Europe appeared to be completely outclassed on all fronts: management techniques, technological tools, and research capacity. Servan-Schreiber saw in this thesis the potential for a seminal book. He fleshed it out with reading keys and concrete proposals for a counter-offensive. The result was his international best-seller Le Défi Américain ("The American Challenge", 1967). It sold 600,000 copies in France, unprecedented for a political essay, and was translated into 15 languages. This book was instrumental in creating a resurgence of French nationalism and drawing attention to the importance of transnational cooperation in Europe.

Building on the book's success, he traveled throughout Europe, speaking to packed lecture halls, touting the advantages of a federal Europe with a common currency and of a decentralized France.

General De Gaulle's resignation in 1969 persuaded Servan-Schreiber to try his hand at politics. In October 1969, he became secretary-general of the Radical Party. He helped to reform the party, writing its manifesto, and became its president in 1971. After the splitting away of the left-wing Radicals, who formed the Left Radical Party (PRG), Servan-Schreiber became the president of the center-right Parti radical valoisien. He was elected Deputy of Nancy in 1970, but, later on the same year, he made the surprise decision to run against Jacques Chaban-Delmas in Bordeaux. He was soundly defeated, which tarnished his image. He served several terms or partial terms in the French National Assembly, and was Minister for Reform in 1974 but, being opposed to nuclear tests, he was prompted to resign after three weeks by Prime Minister Jacques Chirac. He was elected in 1976 as President of the regional council of Lorraine, defeating Pierre Messmer.

During his political career, he frequently waged progressive campaigns against the current of a sociologically conservative France. He advocated decentralization through regionalization; reallocation of resources from the Concorde program to the Airbus ; an end to nuclear testing ; reform of the grandes écoles ; and computerization. He refused to cooperate with Georges Marchais 's Communist Party. He seemed unable to play political power games. His centrist strategy was never successful and eventually brought down his party.

Wanting to extricate himself from the daily management of L'Express, he sold it to financier Jimmy Goldsmith in 1977. Deprived of its power base, his political career quickly deteriorated. He lost his Assembly seat in 1978. He left the party in 1979 at the time of the first direct European elections, to present a list of candidates under the slogan Emploi, Égalité, Europe (Employment, Equality, Europe) with Giroud. The list won only 1.84% of the votes, and Servan-Schreiber decided to retire from political life.

In 1980 Servan-Schreiber published his second bestseller, Le Défi mondial (The Global Challenge), devoted to the technological rise of Japan through computerization. The book was also later adapted into the documentary television series The World Challenge.

He served once again as shadow councillor to his close acquaintances François Mitterrand and Valéry Giscard d'Estaing ; his friendship with the latter went back to the École Polytechnique. However, his initiative to create a centre for the promotion of information technology in France turned into a money pit and closed down in 1986. He then moved to Pittsburgh where he had his four sons (David, Émile, Franklin and Édouard) educated at Carnegie Mellon University, a leader in computer science. Servan-Schreiber directed the university's international relations.

Returning to France, he continued to write, including two volumes of memoirs, until he was afflicted with an Alzheimer's -like degenerative disease. He died following a bronchitis attack in 2006. His eldest son, the psychiatrist and writer David Servan-Schreiber, died in July 2011 at the age of 50 of a brain tumor.

Jean-Louis Marie Borloo (French pronunciation: [ ʒɑ̃lwi maʁi bɔʁlo ] ; born 7 April 1951) is a French politician and lawyer who served as the inaugural president of the Union of Democrats and Independents (UDI) from 2012 to 2014. In government, he was Minister Delegate for the City and Urban Renewal from 2002 to 2004 and Minister of Employment, Social Cohesion and Housing from 2004 to 2007 under President Jacques Chirac, and Minister of the Economy, Finance and Employment in 2007 and Minister of Ecology, Energy, Sustainable Development and the Sea from 2007 until 2010 under President Nicolas Sarkozy.

Jean-Louis Marie Borloo was born in Paris. His parents were Lucien Borloo, born in Guémené-sur-Scorff, Morbihan, of Breton and Belgian origin, and Mauricette Acquaviva from Marseille, of Corsican origin. Borloo gained his baccalauréat in 1969, in the philosophy stream.

In 1972 he took a first degree in Law and Philosophy at Panthéon-Sorbonne University, in 1974 a further degree in History and Economics at Paris X Nanterre, and in 1976 an MBA at HEC Paris. While a student, he worked at a filling station to pay his studies.

Borloo began his career as a lawyer in the 1980s. He became president of the Valenciennes Football Club in 1986. In 1989, he was elected mayor of Valenciennes as an Independent, winning over 76% of the second-round vote.

In the June 1989 European Parliament election, Borloo was elected to the European Parliament as the second candidate on Simone Veil 's list. He held this seat until his election as regional councillor in Nord-Pas-de-Calais in 1992.

Borloo was elected to the National Assembly as a miscellaneous right candidate representing the 21st constituency of Nord in 1993. Joining the caucus of the UDF, he was re-elected in 1997, two years after his re-election as Mayor of Valenciennes.

He was a founding member of Ecology Generation in 1990, but he later joined the Union for French Democracy led by François Bayrou. However, in 2002 he joined the Radical Party, associated with the new Union for a Popular Movement (UMP). He was co-president of the Radical Party alongside André Rossinot between 2005 and 2007, when he became sole president of the party.

It was on the Radical-UMP ticket that Borloo was re-elected as a deputy in 2002 and 2007. He was Minister Delegate for the City and Urban Renovation in the Jean-Pierre Raffarin governments between 2002 and 2004, Minister of Labour, Employment and Social Cohesion under Raffarin between 2004 and 2005, and finally Minister of Employment, Social Cohesion and Housing in the Dominique de Villepin government between 2005 and 2007. In that role, he introduced a five-year plan of social cohesion, which was centered around three axes: equal opportunity, housing and employment.

On 21 July 2005 Borloo married news anchorwoman Béatrice Schönberg at Rueil-Malmaison, Hauts-de-Seine.

From 18 May to 19 June 2007, he was Minister of the Economy and Finance in the François Fillon cabinet. Between 19 June 2007 and November 2010, he was the French minister of State for Energy, Ecology and Sustainable Development. In this capacity, he was a major player in the 2007–2008 Grenelle de l'environnement. He quit the government allegedly after being passed over for premiership in a cabinet reshuffle.

In April 2011, Borloo left the UMP in protest at Sarkozy's rightward swing. He announced plans to set up a "republican, ecologist, and social alliance", with a view to becoming a candidate in the 2012 presidential election. However, he decided not to run for President of France.

In September 2012, he created the Union of Democrats and Independents (UDI), successor of The Alliance, trying to unify all the centrist parties, while the UDI still allied with the UMP.

Despite being a leader in the UDI, Borloo was not involved in the 2014 municipal elections, mentioning health reasons, such as frontal acute pneumonia and sepsis. On 6 April 2014, Borloo announced in a letter to the executives of the UDI that he would resign immediately from "every political term and position" due to his health concerns.

Jean-Luc Antoine Pierre Mélenchon (French: [ ʒɑ̃lyk melɑ̃ʃɔ̃ ] ; born 19 August 1951) is a French left-wing politician who has been the de facto leader of La France Insoumise (LFI) since it was established in 2016. He was the deputy in the National Assembly for the 4th constituency of Bouches-du-Rhône from 2017 to 2022 and led the La France Insoumise group in the National Assembly from 2017 to 2021. Mélenchon was previously elected as a Member of the European Parliament (MEP) in 2009 and reelected in 2014. He has run for President of France three times, in 2012, 2017 and 2022. In 2026 he announced his candidacy for the 2027 French presidential election.

He started his political career as a member of the Internationalist Communist Organisation. After joining the Socialist Party (PS) in 1976, Mélenchon was successively elected a municipal councillor of Massy (1983) and general councillor of Essonne (1985). In 1986, he entered the Senate, to which he was reelected in 1995 and 2004. He also served as Minister for Vocational Education between 2000 and 2002 under Minister of National Education Jack Lang in the cohabitation government of Lionel Jospin. He was part of the left wing of the PS until the Reims Congress of November 2008, when he left the party to found the Left Party with Marc Dolez, a member of the National Assembly. Mélenchon first served as party president before becoming party co-president alongside Martine Billard, a position he held until 2014. As co-president of the Left Party, he joined the electoral coalition of the Left Front before the 2009 European Parliament election in France ; he was elected as a MEP in the South-West France constituency and reelected in 2014. He became the Left Front's candidate in the 2012 French presidential election, in which he came in fourth, receiving 11.1% of the first-round vote.

In February 2016, Mélenchon founded La France Insoumise. He stood as a candidate in the 2017 French presidential election, again coming in fourth, with 19.6% of the first-round vote. He became a member of the National Assembly for LFI following the 2017 French legislative election, receiving 59.9% in the second round in the 4th constituency of Bouches-du-Rhône, located in Marseille (France's second-largest city). Mélenchon stood again under the LFI banner in the 2022 French presidential election, coming in third with 21.95% of the vote, just over one point short of qualifying for the second round. After this, he led the newly formed New Ecological and Social People's Union (NUPES) alliance of parties to a second-place performance in the 2022 French legislative election. LFI was confirmed as the largest party of the French left in the 2024 French legislative election, where the left-wing New Popular Front (NFP) achieved a plurality of seats and LFI was confirmed as the largest left-wing group in the National Assembly.

Mélenchon is a highly polarizing figure in France. Many observers highlight his oratorical talent and political skills, but also criticize his penchant for provocation and his dubious inflammatory statements.

Mélenchon was born in Tangier (Tangier International Zone), Morocco. His father, Georges, was a postmaster of Spanish descent, and his mother, Jeanine Bayona, was a primary school teacher of both Spanish and Sicilian descent. He grew up in Morocco, until his family moved to France in 1962. Mélenchon was then educated at the Lycée Pierre-Corneille, a state secondary school in Rouen, Normandy. He graduated in 1972. With a degree in philosophy from the University of Franche-Comté in Besançon and having gained a CAPES, he became a teacher before entering politics. He was originally a follower of Pierre Lambert and a member of the Trotskyist movement before supporting François Mitterrand and joining the Socialist Party (PS).

In 1969, Mélenchon met Bernadette Abriel, two years younger than him, and they became parents of Marlyne, in 1974. Marlyne had various jobs in the public sector.

Since the beginning of the 2010s, Jean-Luc Mélenchon has been in a relationship with Sofia Chikirou, a member of his own party. His relationship with Sofia Chikirou is considered an open secret She has been nicknamed "the boss's wife".

Mélenchon left Besançon to enter professional life in Lons-le-Saunier (Jura), and joined the PS in September 1976. He was part of the democratic socialist and left-wing of the PS. Mélenchon did not join the French Communist Party (PCF) because of the latter's refusal to condemn the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 to end the Prague Spring, an event that he said had significantly affected him in political terms, even more than the protests of 1968, which occurred when he was still a university student and he became leader of the student movement at the University of Besançon, and was one of the causes of his joining in 1972 the Internationalist Communist Organisation. As a member of the PS, he soon assumed local and departmental responsibilities (deputy section secretary of Montaigu), and developed a federal newspaper that fought for a union between the PS and the PCF. It was at this time that the latter broke the agreements of the union of the left on a joint program of government. He then came to the attention of Claude Germon, mayor of Massy (Essonne) and member of the executive office of the PS responsible for the business section. Without stable work after his application was rejected at the Croix du Jura newspaper, he was hired by Claude Germon to become his private secretary.

Mélenchon became one of the leading Mitterrandist leaders of the Essonne federation, which led him to the position of first secretary of this federation at the Valence Congress in 1981; he remained in this position until 1986. He positioned himself both against the "Second left" of Michel Rocard and the Centre of Socialist Studies, Research, and Education (CERES) of Jean-Pierre Chevènement. He was elected senator during the senatorials of 1986, and again in 1995 and 2004. A supporter of Mitterrand and left-wing reformist socialism, Mélenchon presented two lectures about Mitterrand's presidency, "1981: The Revolution Suspended" and "A Complete Balance Sheet of François Mitterand's presidency". He saw Mitterand's win in 1981 as the end of a political process of which the main accelerator was "the ten million workers on strike" in the protests of 1968. He argued that the reforms introduced by Mitterrand were more wide-ranging than often recognised, citing the nationalisation of dozens of banks electricity companies, engineering companies, and motorways, the doubling of the budget of the Ministry of Culture, and increased taxes for the rich, and against the perceived betrayal on the part of Mitterrand and the other left-wing leaders. According to Mélenchon, the blame for the turn to austerity rest on a lack of political courage, a lack of strategy on the left of the left, and a lack of mass mobilisation.

He was elected senator in the 1986 French Senate elections.

A founder, along with Julien Dray, of the Socialist Left in 1988, he opposed the open-door policy of François Mitterrand's second presidency, targeting Michel Rocard and the "soft left," as well as France's entry into the Gulf War (first Gulf War), against the majority of his party and President Thierry.

At the 1990 Rennes Congress, where no motion reached 30%, the party's left wing was divided into four factions. Mélenchon led his own motion, which obtained 1.35% of the vote. In June 1990, he submitted a bill to the Senate for the creation of a civil partnership contract, a precursor to what would become the Civil Solidarity Pact (PACS) in 1999.

In April 1992, he was defeated in the Massy-Ouest canton, which he had won in 1985: his 38.43% was insufficient compared to the 39.71% of the right-wing candidate, Vincent Delahaye. He attributes his defeat by 73 votes to Guy Bonneau's (Génération écologie) remaining in the second round.

In 1992, he called for a vote in favour of the Maastricht Treaty, which he considered a "left-wing compromise". In a speech to the Senate, he considers that the single currency is the major instrument that will allow Europe to be "carrier of civilization, culture, networks of solidarity" against the dollar, which. In this vein, he expressed regret over the Danish vote on the Maastricht Treaty, stating: "As cruel as it may be to hear, nations can be mistaken. Ours has already made a mistake, and we know the price that history has paid for missing the boat."

While continuing to defend the existence of the single currency, he quickly regretted his choice regarding the Maastricht Treaty and, along with the Socialist Left, submitted an amendment, entitled "Turning the page on Maastricht," to a 1996 Socialist Party convention. He later declared that the opponents of this treaty were right and that the stated objective at the time was a "total failure".

A long-standing and stable faction, the Socialist Left presented its own motion at three Socialist Party congresses until its dissolution in 2002. It obtained scores ranging from 7.3% to 13.3% of the votes cast.

Although a Mitterrand supporter, Mélenchon backed Michel Rocard's appointment as First Secretary of the Socialist Party in 1993, which allowed him to gain a leadership position within the party, as he became press secretary: "Rocard, who advocated consensus when he was Prime Minister, no longer speaks of an alliance with centrists but of an axis with socialists, communists, and ecologists. That's the change…".

At the 1997 Brest Congress, Mélenchon ran for First Secretary of the Socialist Party (PS). The only opponent to François Hollande, he obtained 8.81% of the vote, a lower score than the Socialist Left motion, and he experienced this defeat as a humiliation. In 2009, he claimed that François Hollande had not kept his word to grant him a score of 15% as per their agreement and indicated that he had told him he would never forgive him.

On April 22 and 23, 1998, he went against the party's position and was the only senator from the Socialist group to vote against the bill integrating the Bank of France into the European System of Central Banks and against the resolution on the transition to the euro. He asserted on this occasion that, faced with transnational capitalism, European economic integration gives the illusion of power, while in fact it is a means of confinement. Following this vote, he was sanctioned, along with five other parliamentarians, by the national bureau of the Socialist Party and received a letter of reprimand from the First Secretary, François Hollande.

In the following months, Mélenchon and his colleagues in the Socialist Left opposed the Treaty of Amsterdam, which they criticized in particular for the lack of economic governance and the insufficient progress towards a social Europe. According to them, this treaty constitutes a threat to the French social model and can only lead to "serious social and economic risks, dangerous for democracy" During the ratification of the treaty in Congress on January 18, 1999, he was one of the five Socialist members of parliament to vote against the text.

In March 2000, he agreed to participate in the Lionel Jospin government as Minister Delegate for Vocational Education under the Minister of National Education, Jack Lang, after having declined the positions of Secretary of State, Minister of State for Housing in 1997 and for Overseas Territories. His time at this junior ministry was notably marked by a reform of the Vocational Aptitude Certificates (CAP), a reform of the Validation of Acquired Skills, and the creation of the " Vocational High School " label. He held this position until the 2002 French presidential election, which saw the Socialist Prime Minister, Lionel Jospin, eliminated in the first round.

Following the electoral defeat of April 2002, when the faction led by Julien Dray chose to join François Hollande's team, Mélenchon co-founded the New World (Socialist Party) movement with Henri Emmanuelli. Their motion obtained 16.3% of the vote at the Dijon congress, a score equivalent to that of the New Socialist Party (2003), the other main left-wing faction within the party.

After the "Yes" vote won in the internal referendum of the Socialist Party on the draft treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe, he broke with his party's instructions and campaigned alongside Marie-George Buffet (French Communist Party|PCF)), Olivier Besancenot (Revolutionary Communist League|LCR) and José Bové (Peasant Confederation) at rallies for the "no" vote. The "no" campaign led to the split of the New World (Socialist Party)|New World: while Henri Emmanuelli created a new movement, Socialist Alternative, Mélenchon created Trait d'union (TU)|Socialist Party|Trait d'union). At the same time, he founded the association Pour la République sociale (PRS), outside the Socialist Party, with the aim of formulating and promoting a Republican and anti-liberal Left orientation within the French left. PRS advocates for a new political force that takes into account both the failure of what was the Soviet model and the "dead end" of a European social democracy accompanying the "reforms" of neoliberalism

He argues that the Socialist candidate for the 2007 French presidential election should be someone who supported the "no" vote in the referendum on the European Constitution, because, in his view, this deadline coincides with the European timetable for renegotiating the Constitutional Treaty, which should take effect in 2009. In this spirit, Mélenchon believes Laurent Fabius is the best-placed candidate for the 2007 presidential election.

At the Le Mans congress in November 2005, the Socialist Party's "Trait d'union" (Trait d'union) submitted a contribution. Despite the consensus among its leaders on the European question, the left wing of the Socialist Party was divided. "Trait d'union" joined the motion led by Laurent Fabius and supported by Marie-Noëlle Lienemann, while the other leaders of the left wing rallied behind the motion presented by the New Socialist Party (NPS). The former obtained 21.2% of the vote, the latter 23.6%, while party members re-elected the outgoing majority of François Hollande (53%). In the context of the primary election held a year later within the Socialist Party (PS) to choose between the candidates for the Socialist nomination in the presidential election, Mélenchon again endorsed Laurent Fabius.

In this regard, he declared in August 2005:

There aren't fifty candidates for the 2007 presidential election within the PS; at this point, there are only two left: Laurent Fabius and Dominique Strauss-Kahn. They are two intelligent men, who look good, but they need to be distinguished on something, namely their ideas and commitments. […] I hope the Socialist Party doesn't make the mistake of fielding a candidate who supported the "yes" vote [in the French referendum on the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe, which is the case with Dominique Strauss-Kahn]. By logic, I conclude that Laurent Fabius should be the candidate. […] Fabius has been a minister; he is capable of leading the country. I will support him, but not with a blank check."

Two days after the Socialist Party's nomination of Ségolène Royal, which he had opposed, he attended a meeting of the anti-liberal left, leaving doubt about its possible support for his candidacy in the presidential election.

After the failure of the unity groups to unite behind a common candidate, he wrote on his blog, affirming his support for Ségolène Royal :"A portion of the politically engaged left-wing electorate is becoming demobilized. They do not feel represented. A segment of the electorate, among those disheartened (by the harshness of life) — disoriented (by the absence of an intelligible radical political alternative), will continue to waver between disgusted indifference and bursts of blind electoral anger. Finally, the centrality of the Socialist candidacy on the left is now absolute, whether one likes it or not, because it seems to be the only effective way to achieve the most basic common program: to be present in the second round and defeat the right." The defeat of the latter in the second round of the presidential election, against the candidate of the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP), Nicolas Sarkozy, led him to criticize the former candidate's strategy very sharply, notably through his book "In Search of the Left".

At the Reims congress in September 2008, Trait d'union submitted a new contribution. Calling for unity among all the left-wing factions of the Socialist Party, Mélenchon quickly reached an agreement with the Forces Militaires movement led by Marc Dolez, a member of parliament from northern France. However, the other factions, gathered around the New Socialist Party (2003) of Benoît Hamon and Henri Emmanuelli, hesitated for a long time between this strategy and supporting the motion led by Martine Aubry and Laurent Fabius. The day before the motions were to be submitted, an agreement was finally reached between the seven contributions from the left wing of the Socialist Party, and Mélenchon was among the signatories of motion C entitled "A world ahead", led by Benoît Hamon He described this gathering as a historic event: this motion, in fact, brought together for the first time all the factions of the left wing of the Socialist Party, with emblematic figures of this tendency such as Gérard Filoche, Marie-Noëlle Lienemann, and Paul Quilès.

On November 6, 2008, Socialist Party members voted to decide between the different motions. The motion supported by Ségolène Royal came in first with approximately 29% of the votes cast, while the one led by Benoît Hamon came in fourth with 18.5%. For Mélenchon, this was a victory for the outgoing majority, which won 80% of the votes, and among these votes, some advocate an alliance with the center. Feeling too far removed from this trend to the point that it was pointless to participate in the congress, Jean-Luc Mélenchon and Marc Dolez announced on November 7 their decision, out of loyalty to their commitments and in the interest of independent action, to leave the Socialist Party (France) and create a new movement uncompromising in its opposition to the right.

They announce the construction of a new left-wing party, simply called the Left Party (on the German model of Die Linke), and call for the formation of a united front of left-wing forces for the European elections. On November 18, during a meeting with the French Communist Party, the two parties announced their alliance in the form of a partnership, within the framework of a Left Front for a different democratic and social Europe, against the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon and the current European treaties. The launch meeting of the Left Party was held on 29 November 2008 in Saint-Ouen, in the presence of the co-president of Die Linke, Oskar Lafontaine.

At the Reims Congress in September 2008, the political current Trait d'union, created after the victory of the "No" in the 2005 French European Constitution referendum, Mélenchon made a new contribution. On the eve of the filing of the motions, an agreement was reached between the seven contributions of the left wing of the PS, and Mélenchon was one of the signatories of Motion C entitled "A world ahead", led by Benoît Hamon. For the first time, this motion brought together all the sensibilities of the left wing of the PS, with emblematic personalities like Gérard Filoche, Marie-Noëlle Lienemann, and Paul Quilès. He described this gathering as a "historic event".

On 6 November 2008, the Socialist militants voted to decide between six motions. The motion supported by Ségolène Royal led with about 29% of the votes cast, while the one led by Benoît Hamon came in fourth with 18.5%. For Mélenchon, this was a victory of the outgoing majority, which carried 80% of the votes (with the first three motions) including the motion advocating the alliance in the centre. Believing themselves too far from this trend to the point that it would not be useful to take part in the congress, Mélenchon, alongside Marc Dolez, announced on 7 November their decision, "out of fidelity to their commitments", and for their independence of action, to leave the PS, and to create a new movement "without concession facing the right".

They announced "the construction of a new left-wing party", simply called the Left Party (on the German model of Die Linke), and called for "the constitution of a left-wing front for the European elections". On 18 November, in a meeting with the PCF, the two parties announced their alliance in the form of a "partnership", within the framework of a "left front for another democratic and social Europe, against the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon and the current European Treaties". The launch meeting of the Left Party was held on 29 November in Saint-Ouen, in the presence of Die Linke's co-chairman Oskar Lafontaine. Mélenchon became the party president. Until 2014, he was also co-president alongside Martine Billard.

A political outsider, Mélenchon was the candidate representing the Left Front (Communist Party of France, Left Party, Unitary Left) in the 2012 French presidential election. He took fourth place and achieved 11.10% of the vote, trailing behind François Hollande, Nicolas Sarkozy, and Marine Le Pen and their respective parties (the PS, the Union for a Popular Movement, and the National Front). In comparison, the winner, Hollande, received 28.63% of the vote. It was the first time the non-socialist left had registered a double figure result since Georges Marchais in 1981.

In the 2012 French legislative election, Mélenchon represented the Left Front in the Pas-de-Calais' 11th constituency against his rival Marine Le Pen, where she had over 31% in the presidential election. He received third place with 21.46% of the vote, narrowly edged out for second by Socialist Party member Phillip Kemel. Mélenchon decided not to stand in the second round of the election after this result.

During the presidency of Hollande, Mélenchon became one of the most critical voices in the left against his centrist free-market policy, which he considered a betrayal of the culture and ideas of the French left. During an interview on the French television channel TF1 on 10 February 2016, Melenchon launched the left-wing political platform La France Insoumise, without any expectation of victory. La France Insoumise was subsequently endorsed by several parties, such as the Left Party and French Communist Party, in addition to members of the Europe Ecology – The Greens like Sergio Coronado, an assembly member for the 2nd Overseas Constituency, and the mayor of Grenoble, Éric Piolle. According to political scientist Christopher Bickerton, La France Insoumise was comparable to Podemos in Spain, and Le Baron Noir character Michel Vidal is based on Mélenchon. La France Insoumise's broad range meant it ran, in the words of Bickerton, "from the remnants of the PCF's industrial working class votes to the vast majority of the country's Muslim population, as well as urbanised intellectuals and France’s many neo-ruralist converts". According to Bickerton, La France Insoumise is "a flexible organisation, in tune with the individualism of the present", with "no membership as such" and much of its activism being "self-financed and self-organised", and where "Mélenchon gives his approval to initiatives after the fact rather than issuing orders or instructions."

On 12 January 2017, Mélenchon secured the 500 elected sponsors required to be validated by the Constitutional Council. After Benoît Hamon won the nomination for the Parti Socialiste on a left-wing platform, beating former Prime Minister, Manuel Valls, 58–41, Hamon announced on TF1 on 27 February that he and Melenchon had been in talks to form an alliance but their stances on the European Union separated them, as Melenchon's platform was to renegotiate EU treaties or hold a referendum. France 24 reported: "Adding their scores would place a candidate in first or second place." Mélenchon, who saw himself as "outside the frame of political parties", held at a consistent 12% for most of the campaign, until a late upwards surge which put him just behind third place François Fillon at 18%. This late surge is mainly due to Mélenchon's performance within the second presidential debate hosted by BFM TV and CNews, where, according to an Elabe poll, he was found the most convincing candidate by 25%; however, he did not qualify for the second round of voting, winning 19.6% of the vote in the first round, placing fourth. With seven million votes, La France Insoumise had achieved the biggest vote in France for the radical left since 1945; it achieved 24% among blue-collar voters, 22% among low-paid white-collar voters, and 30% among 18–24 year-olds.

After the first round, Mélenchon refused to endorse Macron and told his voters that "no vote should go to the National Front", as he had done in 2002. Following constant criticism for this choice, Mélenchon invited members of La France Insoumise to vote on who he will endorse with the choices being "Vote for Emmanuel Macron", "Blank Vote", or "Abstain", with the result being announced on 2 May. 36.12% submitted a blank vote, 34.83% chose to endorse Macron, and 29.05% abstained. His campaign positions included the intent to establish a Sixth Republic and preserve the environment. According to the NGOs for the development aid Action Against Hunger, Action santé mondiale, CARE France, and ONE Campaign, Mélenchon was the candidate in the presidential election who is the most engaged regarding international solidarity. Together with other French intellectuals, he vigorously denounces free trade between France and the United States as an example of global exploitation.

In June 2017, Mélenchon became a member of the National Assembly for La France Insoumise following his win in the legislative election in the 4th constituency of Bouches-du-Rhône, which covers parts of the centre of Marseille. He won 59.9% of the vote in the second round against En Marche! candidate Corrine Versini. He defeated sitting member Patrick Mennucci in the first round, a notable member of the Socialist Party in Marseille. The collapse of the Socialist Party meant that La France Insoumise had become the de facto opposition to Emmanuel Macron in the National Assembly.

His election to the National Assembly drew national media attention. During the examination of the 2017 Labour Law bill, he was remarked in the National Assembly for his multiple interventions, defending the Labour Code status quo along with fellow La France Insoumise members, arguing that flexibilisation would be harmful to workers. He drew attention from the media once more when he came in Parliament with a five-euros food shopping bag to denounce a student benefits cut planned by the government. In December 2019, Mélenchon received a suspended prison sentence of three months for rebellion and provocation following an altercation with police officers who had come to serve a warrant at the La France Insoumise headquarters in Paris.

Mélenchon was again a candidate in the 2022 French presidential election. He was one of three candidates placed without their consent on the ballot for the 2022 French People's Primary, a non-official vote for a common left-wing candidate; he came third out of seven, behind Christiane Taubira and Yannick Jadot. Taubira withdrew in March, and endorsed Mélenchon. Mélenchon's polling numbers surged in the final weeks of campaigning, putting him within chance of making the second round. In 2017, 21.4% had been enough to gain access to the second round.

For the first round of the 2022 presidential election, Mélenchon's strategy was to unite the other left-wing anti-neoliberal parties against Emmanuel Macron, who attempted to play down his neoliberalism in the second round in order to appeal to Mélenchon voters while presenting Marine Le Pen as a dangerous nationalist. This dynamic flipped in the 2022 French legislative election as Mélenchon and La France Insoumise had become part of the New Ecological and Social People's Union (NUPES), a broad anti-neoliberal coalition. In turn, Macron denounced Mélenchon and the anti-neoliberal NUPES coalition as delusional anti-capitalists. Mélenchon urged his supporters "not to give a single vote to Mrs Le Pen". According to political scientist Christopher Bickerton, observers commented that "the LFI's electoral offer was the most sophisticated of all the parties — a total of 694 proposals, from a sixth republic to 'rational' anti-terrorist legislation, to a commitment to the demilitarisation of space."

In the first round of voting in France's two round voting system, Mélenchon came in third place with 22% of the vote, behind Macron (28%) and Le Pen (23%). Only the top two finishers continue on to the second round, so Mélenchon was eliminated after the results of the first round were certified. Mélenchon advised his voters not to vote for Le Pen in the second round but did not endorse Macron. His 7.7 million first-round voters became a key demographic for the second round. He was the most popular candidate for voters aged 24–35, and in the overseas departments of Martinique, Guadeloupe, French Guiana, Réunion, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, and Saint Martin, obtaining majorities in several of these jurisdictions. He also finished first in Île-de-France. Mélenchon did not run for re-election in Bouches-du-Rhône's 4th constituency, instead giving his candidacy to Manuel Bompard. Mélenchon led the NUPES coalition since May 2022. In the 2022 legislative election, NUPES won 131 seats. Amid divisions, NUPES dissolved in 2023.

On 3 May 2026, Mélenchon officially announced his candidacy for the 2027 French presidential election during the TF1 evening news broadcast. Libération reported: "The founder of La France Insoumise hopes to reach the runoff round for the first time, having finished fourth in 2017 (19.58% of the vote) and third in 2022 (21.95%)." He said during the broadcast, "The context and the urgency of the situation drove the movement's decision." He said that he thinks he is the "best prepared" within his party and that the "main adversary" is the Rassemblement National.

He held his first campaign rally on 7 June 2026 in Seine-Saint-Denis.

Mélenchon is a socialist republican, inspired primarily by the founder of French republican socialism, Jean Jaurès. During his political career, Mélenchon crossed various tendencies of the French left, from Trotskyism in his youth to more moderate socialism, as he was in the Socialist Party for almost thirty years, occupying a place on the left wing of the party, before he began a companionship with the French Communist Party, after his departure from the Socialist Party in 2008. He rejects the labels of radical left or far-left that the press has often ascribed to his political positions. According to historian Jean-Numa Ducange, Mélenchon became for many the main representative of the historical French left during the 2017 presidential election, scoring 20%, far ahead of the Socialist Party candidate Benoît Hamon, and was not a radical leftist, having unconditionally supported the Plural Left that was in power between 1997 and 2002, and having himself been a minister in this government between 2000 and 2002. According to historian Roger Martelli, Mélenchon's long Socialist Party past contradicts the restricted image of "left of the left", and gives him a "traditional anchoring". Historian Sudhir Hazareesingh described Mélenchon as a "democratic socialist candidate [who] symbolises France's hunger for social, political, and environmental reform, as well as the popular frustration with the nation's established elites", and as "a middle-class champion of the working people, a former senator turned radical reformer, a transformative visionary driven by memories of past glories, a digital geek steeped in classical learning, an inveterate critic of presidentialism who is himself a charismatic leader, and a 70-year-old veteran who counts the young among his primary constituencies". According to sociologist Paolo Gerbaudo, Mélenchon supports social-democratic and reformist socialist policies, having softened his "revolutionary and radical image". During the 2022 presidential campaign, Mélenchon shifted towards a more pragmatic approach, instead of a philosophical and theoretical one, while campaigning in favour of bread-and-butter issues. According to political scientist Christopher Bickerton, among the reasons for "Mélenchon's high score in the 2022 presidential election was that he supplemented his earlier populism with an extensive and comprehensive legislative programme".

Mélenchon's radicalism is linked to his criticism of neoliberalism. According to the Belgian public media RTBF, his radical appearance is linked to his criticism of neoliberalism, international treaties, and the functioning of the European Union (EU), as well as his tax reform. Mélenchon does not support Marxist ideas of " proletarian revolution ", as is the case with the New Anticapitalist Party and Lutte Ouvrière, and his tax reform is more moderate than that of the far-left. On the political spectrum, Mélenchon is placed on the political left, including by international news outlets like CNN, The Daily Telegraph, Der Spiegel, Deutsche Welle, NBC News, The New Yorker, Politico, The Scotsman, The Spectator, and The Times ; he is often also classified as far-left, or left-wing populist, by Anglo-Saxon news outlets (the Associated Press, BBC News, Bloomberg News, The Conversation, the Financial Times, The Independent, Reuters, Time, and The Washington Post), as well as by the French media whose audience is international (Euronews, France 24, and Radio France Internationale). He is described as a "firebrand leader of the left".

Mélenchon is a proponent of increased labour rights and the expansion of French welfare programmes. He has also called for the mass redistribution of wealth, to rectify existing socioeconomic inequalities. Domestic policies proposed by Mélenchon include a 100% income tax on earnings over €360,000 a year, 100% inheritance tax on sums beyond €12 million, full state reimbursement for health care costs, a reduction in presidential powers, in favour of the legislature, and the easing of immigration laws. Mélenchon supports same-sex marriage and women's right to abortion. He also favors the legalisation of cannabis, but opposes prostitution and supports the ban on the purchase of sex, which came into effect in 2016. Mélenchon believes in the "créolisation" of French culture and society, a term coined by the Martinican poet Édouard Glissant, who defines it as "a blend of cultures that creates something new", that "belongs to none of the cultures that comprise it". During a campaign rally in December 2021, Mélenchon told his supporters: "Whatever one's gender, colour, or religion, we are called upon to love one another, and so we pool together our tastes and our cultures. That's créolisation. Créolisation is the future of humanity." Hazareesingh argued that Mélenchon "mobilised support in deprived inner-city areas, and was the only major candidate who unambiguously denounced racism and Islamophobia, and defended a multicultural vision of Frenchness which, borrowing from the poet Édouard Glissant, he labelled 'créolisation'". During a rally on 14 June 2024, Melenchon stated, "When I was born, one in ten French people had a foreign grandparent, now it's one in four. Consequently, those who call themselves French by origin pose a serious problem for the cohesion of society."

Mélenchon is an outspoken critic of the EU, which he views as having been corrupted through neoliberalism. During his 2012 campaign, Mélenchon positioned himself against the trend towards economic globalisation, which he denounced as disproportionately profiting the financial industry and "high income earners", at the expense of the poor. He insisted that international organisations such as the EU threatened to "strangle the voice of the people". He supports a renegotiation of European treaties. Mélenchon opposes the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), which he perceives as an affront to France's national sovereignty. He has repeatedly called for France to withdraw from NATO. Mélenchon has voiced his support for Rattachism.

Mélenchon has been labelled a populist by numerous diverse people, with the Socialist Party senator Luc Carvounas saying he goes to "the summits of demagoguery and populism", and the magazine Slate stating that Mélenchon's rhetoric is "shocking" and implying his entire political life is based around pleasing the people. He has been compared to Le Pen in terms of debating style; political scientist Dominique Reynié even went as far as to say he "flirts with xenophobia when it helps him". According to Bickerton, "LFI's starting point is not Marxist dialectics or class conflict, but le peuple ". Political scientist Chloe Morin described Mélenchon as "the principal asset of La France Insoumise. He is also their principal handicap. He is a great orator, a matchless tactician, but also a deeply divisive figure." Mélenchon has himself his vision of populism, which he sees as positive if it comes with left-wing politics, and believes it is possible to bring about a "citizens' revolution", to usher in "the epoch of the people". He is inspired by the philosopher Chantal Mouffe, who sought to theorise and rehabilitate the term " left populism ". This theory argues that neoliberalism and austerity only made the far-right stronger, and that the populist concept of "the people" has to be reintroduced into the political sphere in a civic sense, rather than an ethnic way (creating a " right populism " to fight).

Mélenchon advocates for the holding of a constitutional convention to create a Sixth French Republic. In the 2017 party manifesto titled L'Avenir en commun, it states in the first chapter: "The new constitution that France needs must be radically different." On 14 September 2014, Mélenchon wrote in Le Monde that "France must protect itself from the powers of finance. They devour the real economy.... To this end, the definition of the constitutional rights of private ownership of capital should change.... Again, it is inclusion in the Constitution that will fix this and make it a common rule."

Mélenchon is endorsed by the Movement for the 6th Republic, and has spoken positively of them before. A spokesman for La France Insoumise affirmed that Mélenchon was very welcoming of a Sixth Republic run by the people that welcomes democracy, ecology, and challenges social issues. The constitutional convention members must not have ever been elected representatives, and they would not be able to present themselves thereafter.

The association L214, which is a non-profit for animal protection, stated that he was the only candidate "for animals" during its evaluation of the candidates' programmes, giving him a score of 15.7/20, placing him at the head of 11 candidates.

Mélenchon's attendance before the 2012 presidential election was at 63%, and after this, his average is often compiled with pre-2012, so it is compiled at 71.40%. Mélenchon justified his relatively low attendance with how active he is within France itself, and has posted a list of other reasons on his blog. He increased his attendance after that, with the website votewatch.eu reporting it in 2017 at 85.1%.

In line with France's one China policy, Mélenchon considers Taiwan to be a part of China. In 2026, he stated regarding Taiwan that "There is a problem, and it is up to the Chinese to resolve it. We must intervene politely and respectfully, so that it is done calmly. If they intervene, we will not get involved. If I am President of the Republic, we will never go to war with China". He added "we mustn't have a colonial relationship with China. We're no longer in the 19th century. We must come to an understanding with them".

Mélenchon is critical of German economic policies. In 2013, he said: "Nobody wants to be German. They are poorer, they die earlier, they don't have children. Even their migrants are fleeing, because no one wants to live with them." After writing a pamphlet against German policies in May 2015, Mélenchon declared: "But I'm not being anti-German. My aim is to rid my readers of any fascination with the so-called ' German model '. What a 'model', indeed! It is a mockery, a fake paradise, whose population suffers from increasing impoverishment and social violence. The fantasy of the 'German model' is the opium of the rich!"

After the German Chancellor Angela Merkel described reform efforts so far in France and Italy as "insufficient" in December 2014, Mélenchon replied through Twitter in German and French: "Maul zu, Frau #Merkel! Frankreich ist frei. Occupez-vous de vos pauvres et de vos équipements en ruines!" ("Shut your mouth, Mrs. Merkel! France is free. Take care of your poor and your ruined equipment.") In reaction to the 2015 Greek bailout referendum on the Greek sovereign debt crisis in early July 2015, he said that the "right-wing German government" was primarily responsible for the aggravation of the crisis.

In 2014 Mélenchon considered the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea to be "absolutely predictable", stating that "Crimean ports [were considered by Russia as] vital for Russia's security", and that Russia was taking "protective measures against an adventurous putschist power", also alleging that Ukraine was influenced by neo-Nazis. He further opposed imposing sanctions on Russia, and as a member of the European Parliament, voted against all forms of cooperation with Ukraine, including on science. In 2015, Mélenchon referred to Ukraine as a country "struggling to be one". During the 2021–2022 Russo-Ukrainian crisis, he said that Russia "...must not cross Ukraine's borders", while stating that the United States should not "annex Ukraine into NATO". This was criticized as making "obfuscations and excuses for Russia", as there is no such thing as annexation into NATO. He blamed the cause of the conflict between 2014 and 2022 on what he termed as NATO "pushing ever closer to [Russia's] borders".

Nonetheless, Mélenchon denounced the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, describing it as an "unbearable escalation" and calling for the use of "diplomatic" means to obtain "an immediate ceasefire and the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Ukraine". After initially opposing arms deliveries to Ukraine, Mélenchon endorsed arms deliveries in June 2022 with the justification that "Ukraine has the right and the duty to defend itself", but opposed further French involvement.

Mélenchon mocked accusations (see § Accusations of support for Russia) of support for Putin, saying that it is unlikely that an eco-socialist would support Putin, and when attacked by Benoît Hamon on the topic of Putin, he stated: "I am not bound in any way to Mr. Putin. I am absolutely fighting his policy, and if I were Russian, I would not vote for his party, but for the Russian Left Front whose leader is in prison." Mélenchon declared opposition to Putin's domestic policy and notes his friend of the Russian Left Front, Sergey Udaltsov, is imprisoned in Russia. In February 2022, Mélenchon condemned the Russian invasion of Ukraine. After Sergey Udaltsov expressed support for the invasion of Ukraine, Mélenchon cut his political ties with him and condemned his stance. In October 2022 he hosted three Russian opponents to Putin, Alexey Sakhnin, Andreï Roudoï and Elizabeta Smirnova, members of the "coalition of Russian socialists against the war".

Mélenchon favoured a United Nations -led intervention in Syria featuring all nations on the UN Security Council. He opposes intervention without international cooperation. After the chemical attack in Ghouta, he said that a strike on Syria "would be an enormous mistake" leading to escalation and called instead for a "political solution".

Mélenchon has compared an intervention in Syria to Iraq, and has approved of Russia's intervention in Syria, saying that he believes Vladimir Putin will resolve the ISIS problem in Syria, noting "It was the Russians who cut off the lines of supply that Daesh used to smuggle oil to Turkey". He said many times that he believed Putin could not be left to solve the problem in Syria alone, saying: "The UN will solve the problem... it's time for an international coalition".

In response to the 2019 Turkish offensive into north-eastern Syria against the Kurdish -led Syrian Democratic Forces, Melenchon tweeted: "If Turkish footballers do the military salute, they must expect to be treated as the soldiers of an enemy army. So we do not play football against them. The basics of sportsmanship are no longer there!"

During a European Parliament session on 8 June 2016 concerning Venezuela, Mélenchon criticised what he called European hypocrisy, comparing European tolerance of Saudi Arabian rule and intolerance of Venezuelan rule.

In June 2016, Mélenchon criticized the Saudi-led intervention in the Yemeni civil war and the Macron government's support for the war effort of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, which contributed to the humanitarian crisis in Yemen.

In 2018, Mélenchon described the countries that denounced the 2018 Venezuelan presidential election were "puppets of the United States". He said that the date of the election was agreed upon with the approval of former Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero and that some of the opposition had decided to boycott it.

Following the 2020 Baghdad International Airport airstrike that resulted in the killing of major general Qasem Soleimani, Mélenchon tweeted: "We must equally condemn the USA and Iran as warmongers. My condemnation of the USA does not exempt Iran from the fact that it is a theocracy that wants to destroy the State of Israel." On French news channel LCI, he declared: "the current government of Iran claims it wants to destroy the State of Israel. This is an intolerable project which in itself creates incredible tension in the region, and obviously favors extremes on either side."

Mélenchon is a strong supporter of Palestinian statehood and is a harsh critic of Israel, which he regards as a colonial state. After Jeremy Corbyn and the Labour Party lost the 2019 United Kingdom general election, he claimed that the election results were influenced by the Israeli Likud Party.

In 2024, Mélenchon condemned Israel's military operations in the Gaza Strip as " genocide " and supported South Africa's genocide case against Israel.

On 4 October 2024, three days before the one year anniversary of the 7 October Hamas attack on Israel, Melenchon called for "putting Palestinian flags everywhere" in universities after 7 October, in response to Patrick Hetzel calling for a "maintenance of order" on university grounds.

In 2017, Mélenchon called for French withdrawal from the integrated command of NATO, and in 2022 advocated for France assuring its own defence.

Mélenchon comes from a left-wing tradition that emphasises the unity of the French Republic and is suspicious of regionalism. Nevertheless, Mélenchon has no fixed position on regionalism, but has stated that he supports the teaching of regional languages, especially Breton. He supports state funding for the teaching of the Breton language. He has gone against autonomy for Brittany, even criticising socialists from the region for promoting "autonomy".

In 2018, Mélenchon was asked a question about an anti-corruption investigation by a journalist from Toulouse, Véronique Gaurel. He responded by mocking her accent, accusing her of "talking nonsense" and then asking "has anyone got a question in more or less comprehensible French?". Video of the exchange was circulated widely on social media and sparked a debate about whether discrimination based on regional accents should be made illegal. Mélenchon apologised for his comment, claiming he thought the journalist was mocking him.

Mélenchon has been repeatedly criticized by Reporters Without Borders for his extreme hostility toward journalists and news organizations.

In 2009, he told journalist Arlette Chabot, "You should go to hell", and added: "She acts like a monkey".

In 2010, he called TV presenter David Pujadas "a bastard".

In May 2012, he called Renaud Revel of L'Express a "dirty little spy", and called the magazine " fascist ".

In April 2012, Hugh Schofield, correspondent for the BBC, said he had been insulted by Mélenchon.

In 2018, investigative journalists working for France Info revealed irregularities in his campaign finance accounts. In response, Mélenchon called them "scum", and urged all his supporters to harass France Info journalists. The same year, he called the newspaper Mediapart the corrupt " instrument of the police and the courts".

In 2021, a court found him guilty of public defamation after calling a Le Monde journalist a former assassin.

In 2024, he told reporters working for popular TV show Quotidien : "You fascists, get out of here"

In 2025, two journalists published La Meute, a book about the rise of his movement. Mélenchon called them " degenerates ". The publisher Flammarion denounced threats against the authors.

Some commentators claimed Mélenchon "supported Russia" and was sympathetic towards Vladimir Putin. Notably, the journalist Nicolas Hénin said that Mélenchon is "on the left of the political spectrum, but is an advocate for the Kremlin leader", with Hénin quoting how Mélenchon is the "political victim number one" after the murder of the Russian opposition leader Boris Nemtsov. Cécile Vaissié, author of The Kremlin Networks, considers Mélenchon as "one of those that approve of Putin", and Yannick Jadot of EELV said that the "pro-Russia" stance is "contrary to any environment thinking".

Jean-Luc Mélenchon has been regularly described by political critics as friendly to Russia, an accusation he denies. According to French public radio channel France Inter, his position has varied, from dowplaying the threat in 2014 to outright condemnation after the 2022 invasion of Ukraine.

In 2015, opposition leader Boris Nemtsov, an outspoken critic of Vladimir Putin, was killed next to the Kremlin. In response, the EU Parliament voted a motion denouncing the human rights situation in Russia. Mélenchon was one of the only members of the European Parliament to vote against the motion. He called it propaganda.

In January 2022, a few weeks before the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, he told Le Monde :

"The Russians are moving troops toward their borders? Who would not do the same thing with such a neighbor?"

As soon as the invasion of Ukraine happened, Jean-Luc Mélenchon condemned it as an unlawful act of aggression on behalf of Russia. This criticism was criticised as opportunistic by Mélenchon's opponents.

A few days after the invasion began, Jean-Luc Mélenchon said France should not provide any military aid to Ukraine. He later changed his mind and endorsed providing military aid, justifying it by Ukraine's right to defend itself. This change of policy was criticised by Mélenchon's opponents.

In October 2022, the French Parliament introduced a motion denouncing Russia's war against Ukraine. Most French political parties supported the motion. Two exceptions were the Rassemblement National (far-right) and Mélenchon's France Insoumise. They both abstained.

In 2023, Mélenchon was invited on France 5. He said: "We should focus on ourselves. Why should we care about the centuries-old quarrels of the Latvians or Estonians with Russia? Why should we ensure Ukraine's physical borders?".

In May 2025, Sophia Chikirou, a French deputy member of Mélenchon's party, attended a rally celebrating the Allied victory over Nazism. Several media outlets accused this event of being pro-Russian.

In August 2025, Jean-Luc Mélenchon created controversy after calling Volodymyr Zelensky an illegitimate leader due to the delay of the planned Ukrainian 2024 presidential election in the context of the war. At the same time he was criticised for arguing Vladimir Putin was only a threat to Ukraine and should not be considered a threat for Western Europe.

Mélenchon is accused of frequently using antisemitic dogwhisles.

In 2013, Mélenchon referred to French Finance Minister Pierre Moscovici as "one of those Eurogroup bastards [finance ministers]" putting pressure on Cyprus as it urgently sought a bail-out solution to its debt crisis. Moscovici behaves like someone who has stopped thinking in French. Someone who thinks only in the language of international finance"

Harlem Désir stated that "Mélenchon should immediately withdraw these unacceptable comments that he made using the vocabulary of the 1930s". Mélenchon responded that he "had no idea of Pierre Moscovici’s religion and [had] no intention of making an issue of it in the future".

In August 2014, during a speech in Grenoble, Mélenchon criticised the Representative Council of Jews of France (CRIF), a coalition of organisations representing French Jewry, saying "We’ve had enough of CRIF. France is the opposite of aggressive communities that lecture to the rest of country." He also stated "We do not believe that any people is superior to another", which was viewed by his critics as an allusion to the Torah's designation of Jews as the " chosen people ". Cnaan Liphshiz said that Mélenchon's comments came in the wake of a series of protests in France against Israel's 2014 Gaza War. While antisemitic attacks had also been reported in France within the previous month, Liphshiz wrote that Mélenchon was referring instead to French Jews "rally[ing] in front of the embassy of a foreign country or serv[ing] its flag, weapon in hand."

In July 2017, Mélenchon maintained that Republican France bears no guilt in the Holocaust, and criticised Emmanuel Macron for admitting at a gathering in Paris remembering the Vel' d'Hiv Roundup that Vichy France was the legal French government at the time, thus conceding the French State's responsibility in the deportation of the Jews. Mélenchon's comments were echoing those of François Mitterrand, a former president, who declared in 1994 that the round-up and deportation of Jews to death camps during the war was the work of the country's Nazi occupiers and " Vichy France ", an illegitimate entity distinct from France. Haaretz noted that Marine Le Pen had made comments similar to Mélenchon's three months earlier.

Following the murder in March 2018 in Paris of Mireille Knoll, an elderly Jewish woman who survived the events at Vel d'Hiv and the Holocaust, CRIF leadership requested Mélenchon stay away from a march in her memory; Mireille's son, Daniel, said that "everyone without exception" could attend, and that, "CRIF is being political, I'm opening my heart to all those who have a mother". As with Marine Le Pen, who made the same choice to be present, despite the appeal, he was booed and abused by a group of angry protesters. In November 2019, Mélenchon further accused CRIF of practising "blatant, violent, and aggressive sectarianism, namely against me", after it asked him not to attend the memorial ceremony for Knoll more than 18 months earlier. No physical violence occurred at the march; police accompanied Mélenchon and his team away from the proceedings.

In December 2019, Mélenchon deplored that Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn gave in to the accusations of antisemitism in his party, saying Corbyn "had to endure, unaided, churlish anti-Semitism claims from England's chief rabbi and various influence networks linked to Likud. Instead of riposting, he spent his time apologising and making pledges... It showed a weakness that troubled the popular sectors [of the electorate]."

In 2020, while interviewed about the French police, Mélenchon said:

"I don't know if Jesus was on a cross, but he was put there by his own people."

The Catholic Church called his statement shameful and disturbing. The Wiesenthal Center said that it was spreading belief in Jewish deicide ; they noted that this allegation was condemned by the Second Vatican Council 's declaration Nostra Aetate, and noted that "its imagery fuelled violence across Europe, culminating in the Nazi Holocaust".

In October 2021, Mélenchon said that far-right leader Éric Zemmour 's opposition to immigration was rooted in Jewish culture. His remarks created outrage and were condemned as antisemitic by figures across the political spectrum

In early June 2024, Mélenchon wrote in a blog post that antisemitism was "residual" and "absent" from pro-Palestinian demonstrations. Éric Dupond-Moretti disagreed with this characterisation and accusations were levied that Mélenchon was minimising the increase of antisemitic acts since the beginning of the Gaza war.

In 2011, journalist Rudy Reichstadt, director of Conspiracy Watch, commented that while it would be "quite unfair" to call Mélenchon a conspiracy theorist, he did sometimes abet antisemitic conspiracy theories by downplaying them or making excuses for those who promulgate them.

In June 2021, Mélenchon predicted that, in the last week of the 2022 presidential campaign, there would be a "grave incident or murder" that would be used to "point the finger at the Muslims and to invent a civil war". He cited the attack on retiree Paul Voise in 2002 shortly before the 1st round of the presidential election, the Jihadist attack against a Jewish school in Toulouse by Mohammed Merah a few months before the presidential election of 2012, and the terrorist attack in Paris a few days before the first round of the 2017 presidential election. His statements were supported by his own party and condemned by other political parties. He later clarified that he was referring to "murderers [who] are waiting for the best time to get people talking about them" and the politicians who use these events for electoral purposes. Reichstadt described Mélenchon's statement as "ambiguous" and quite close to conspiracy beliefs. He claimed that Mélenchon has been promoting conspiracy theories for several years.

Jean-Marcel Jeanneney (13 November 1910 – 17 September 2010) was minister in various French governments in the 1950s and 1960s, and France's first ambassador to Algeria in the immediate aftermath of the Algerian War. Born in Paris, he has been a professor of economics and is the founder of the Observatoire Français des Conjonctures Économiques (OFCE).

The only son of Jules Jeanneney (a deputy in the National Assembly of France, president of the French Senate, and Minister of State in Charles de Gaulle 's post-World War II provisional government), Jean-Marcel Jeanneney graduated in economics from the Paris Institute of Political Studies (better known as Sciences Po). He taught at universities in Dijon and Grenoble in the late 1930s.

Jeanneney was his father's Chief of Staff during the provisional government (1944–1946). In 1958, the younger Jeanneney was appointed by Jacques Rueff to the Rueff-Pinay committee, a group of experts on economic reform whose ultimate product, the Rueff-Pinay plan, lowered French tariffs, returned the French franc to full convertibility after re-evaluating it, and reformed financial markets.

Jeanneney was Minister of Industry in the Michel Debré government from 1959 to 1962, ending when he was appointed French ambassador and high commissioner to Algeria. He held this post for six months, immediately after Algeria gained independence from France. He served on a number of government committees between 1963 and 1966, and was Minister for Social Affairs from 1966 to 1968. Jeanneney was elected in 1968 to the National Assembly as a deputy for Isère, running with the Union des Démocrates pour la République and defeating the incumbent Pierre Mendès-France. He resigned his seat shortly afterwards to become the Minister Responsible for Senate and Regional Government Reform for a year.

From 1965 to 1989, Jeanneney served in a number of posts in local government in Rioz.

Jeanneney taught economics at the University of Paris I from 1970 to 1989, becoming a director at the French Fondation nationale des sciences politiques (National Foundation for Political Science). He founded OFCE in 1981 and was its president until 1989.

Jeanneney's son, Jean-Noël Jeanneney (born 1942), is a well-known French politician and educator.

Jean-Marcel Jeanneney died in Paris, France, on 17 September 2010 at the age of 99.

Jean-Michel Baylet (born 17 November 1946 in Toulouse, Haute-Garonne) is a French politician, Senator, and former leader of the moderate center-left Radical Party of the Left.

He is a RDSE Senator from the Tarn-et-Garonne department. He is also President of the General Council of the Tarn-et-Garonne. He also served as mayor Valence-d'Agen until 2001 and had various roles in the governments of Laurent Fabius, Michel Rocard, Édith Cresson, and Pierre Beregovoy.

In addition to his political career, he was a journalist for the La Dépêche du Midi newspaper, before inheriting that newspaper and other print media from his mother.

Baylet was candidate to the citizens presidential primary of 2011 ; he lost against Martine Aubry, François Hollande, Ségolène Royal, Arnaud Montebourg and Manuel Valls (all socialists).

Jean-Vincent Placé (born 12 March 1968) is a South Korean-born, French Green politician.

Adopted by a French family as a child, Placé entered politics as a member of the Radical Party of the Left before joining Europe Ecology – The Greens. He and fellow Green François de Rugy left the party in 2015 to found their own Ecologist Party.

He formerly was Senator for the department of Essonne, Secretary of State for State Reform and Simplification in the Second Valls government, and president of political group Union des démocrates et des écologistes.

Little is known about Placé's origins, apart from the fact that he spent part of his childhood in an orphanage in Suwon, South Korea. Although his birth certificate states he was born Kwon Oh-bok (권오복) in Seoul on 12 March 1968, Placé himself has expressed doubts about the date because of his situation as an orphan; at the time of his adoption by a French family in 1975, he reportedly appeared younger than his official age. He then grew up with his adoptive family in Normandy.

After studying economics, Placé, then 26 years old, met La Rochelle mayor and Parliament member Michel Crépeau and became active within his party "Movement of Radicals of the Left" (later Radical Party of the Left). According to L'Obs, Placé also joined the Grand Orient de France, France's largest Masonic organization. He became an attaché to Crépeau until Crépeau's death in 1999, after which Placé left the Radical Party and joined The Greens, which later became Europe Ecology – The Greens (EELV).

The 2004 French regional elections saw Jean-Vincent Placé being elected as a member of the regional council of Île-de-France, on a list of candidates led by Socialist Jean-Paul Huchon, as the result of an alliance between The Greens and the Socialist Party. Placé was subsequently elected as the head of the Green group within the council.

In 2011, under EELV membership, Placé was elected as senator for the department of Essonne. In 2012, he became the first president of the newly formed Ecologist group in the French Senate.

In 2014, Placé publicly criticized the "leftist" direction his party was allegedly taking and lamented it had become "the party of Romani people and Palestine " instead of focusing on environmental issues. Eventually, in 2015, upset by talks of alliance between EELV and the Left Front for the regional elections, Jean-Vincent Placé and François de Rugy both left EELV and founded their own centre-left, green party, Écologistes! (later the Ecologist Party). The party then participated in the creation of political group Union des démocrates et des écologistes (UDE) of which Placé became the first president.

From 2016 to 2017, he was appointed by then-Prime Minister Manuel Valls as "Secretary of State for State Reform and Simplification" in Valls's second government. In order to access government office, Placé stepped down from his positions as senator and president of the Senate's Ecologist group.

In 2016, Placé applied for the honorary title of Colonel of the citizen reserve forces within the 13th Parachute Dragoon Regiment.

In December 2016, when Bernard Cazeneuve was appointed prime minister, Placé retained his position within his government as Secretary of State for State Reform and Simplification.

In the 2017 Socialist primaries, Jean-Vincent Placé showed support for former prime minister Manuel Valls, who eventually lost the primary to Benoît Hamon. Placé then backed the Socialist candidate Hamon during the presidential campaign.

Following the formation of Prime Minister Édouard Philippe 's first government in 2017, Placé was no longer a member of the French government and took back his position within the Senate, this time as a member of the Socialist and Republican group.

In September 2017, after being mugged in the streets of Paris, he publicly expressed his desire to put his political career on hold, thus declining to stand in the then-upcoming senatorial elections. When Placé made his announcement, his name was not on any candidate list for the Senate. He remained a member of the regional council of Île-de-France.

In April 2018, following issues with alcoholism and a publicized incident in a Paris nightclub, Placé resigned from his position as president of UDE.

In 2011, during an appearance on television, Placé reacted to then- UMP member of Parliament Christian Vanneste 's recent comments about same-sex marriage, by calling Vanneste "despicable" and claiming he had a reputation for " homophobic ", " racist ", "maybe even antisemitic " remarks. Vanneste then sued Placé for defamation. A Paris court eventually sentenced Placé to a € 500 fine and ordered him to pay Vanneste € 1,500 in damages.

In 2013, an investigation by newspaper Le Canard enchaîné revealed that Placé owed more than € 18,000 to the region of Île-de-France, mostly in unpaid traffic fines. Placé, who acknowledged his mistake, explained he was "not a man of numbers" and swore to pay his fines. In 2014, he stormed out of a talk show where the topic was brought up again, saying his situation was now resolved.

In September 2017, Placé was assaulted in the streets of Paris: the robbers took his cellphone, credit card, and € 7,000 watch. Placé later told the press he was considering putting his political career on hold.

On the night between 4 and 5 April 2018, an intoxicated Placé was arrested outside a Paris nightclub by French police and kept into custody for 37 hours. He was charged with " disrespect towards police officers ", "racial insults " and "violent behavior under the influence", and brought to the courts. Placé then resigned from his position as president of UDE. In an interview with Paris Match, Placé apologized for disorderly intoxication and revealed he had been struggling with alcoholism for several months. However, he denied allegations of any sexist or racist behavior. In September 2018, a Paris court found him guilty of "acts of violence" and gave him a € 1,000 fine and a three-month suspended sentence, while dismissing the charge of "racial insults".

Although Placé was born in South Korea and spent part of his childhood there, he claims little relation to his birth country and credits his identity to education within the "School of the [French] Republic". After being adopted in 1975 by a French family he describes as politically " Gaullist ", he did not set foot in South Korea again until an official visit in 2011. While there, he said to the local press "France is my country" and reportedly told locals he was unable to speak their language.

Placé was previously in a relationship with fellow Green politician Cécile Duflot. After the end of what Placé calls a "love story", he began a relationship with another Green politician, French Parliament member Éva Sas. Together they had a daughter who was born in November 2013. Placé and Sas separated in 2014.

Jeannette Bougrab (born 26 August 1973) is a French lawyer and politician of the UMP who served as the junior minister for Youth and Community Life in the government of Prime Minister François Fillon from 2010 to 2012. Prior to this, she was the Chair of the French Equal Opportunities and Anti-Discrimination Commission (HALDE) from 16 April 2010 to 14 November 2010.

Jeannette Bougrab was born 26 August 1973 in Déols (Indre), to a Harki father. She received a Masters (DEA) in Law from the University of Orléans in 1997. In 2002 she completed a PhD in Public Law from the Sorbonne in Paris as well as a Masters (Magistère) in Economics Law.

Bougrab has been an associate Professor of Law at Institut d'Études Politiques de Paris and the Sorbonne. She also worked as a lawyer for the Constitutional Council of France.

Bougrab served on the board of directors of the Union pour un Mouvement Populaire (UMP) until 2007. She has been a member of the Haut Conseil à l'Intégration, the Administrative Board of the Arab World Institute (AWI) and the diversity oversight of the Conseil supérieur de l'audiovisuel (CSA). In 2010, she also became Chair of the Administrative Board of the Agence pour la Cohésion Sociale et l'Egalité (ACSE).

In 2015, Bougrab was appointed at the head of the Institut Français in Helsinki.

Ahead of the Republicans ’ 2016 primaries, Bougrab endorsed Nicolas Sarkozy as the party’s candidate for 2017 presidential elections.

She is an atheist and a supporter of French secularism. She has claimed that she was the companion of cartoonist Charb, who was director of the Charlie Hebdo satirical journal and was killed in the Charlie Hebdo shooting in January 2015; however, Charb's family has strongly disputed this.

Bougrab has stated to the media, "I always knew he was going to die like Theo Van Gogh. I begged him to leave France but he wouldn’t." She has also said that Charb never had children because he knew he was going to die, that he defended secularism and the spirit of Voltaire. "I admired him before I fell in love with him and I loved him because of the way he was, because he was brave. He thought that life was a small thing unless he was defending his ideals," she said.

Charb's family, via a statement issued by his brother on 10 January 2015, denied the existence of any "interpersonal commitment" between Charb and Jeannette Bougrab. In response Jeanette Bougrab authorized the release of recent photographs of the couple together.

Jellied eels is a traditional English dish that originated in the 18th century, primarily in the East End of London. The dish consists of chopped eels boiled in a spiced stock that is allowed to cool and set, forming a jelly. It is usually served cold.

Eels were historically a cheap, nutritious and readily available food source for the people of London; European eels were once so common in the Thames that nets were set as far upriver as London itself, and eels became a staple for London's poor. The earliest known eel, pie and mash houses opened in London in the 18th century, and the oldest surviving shop, M.Manze, has been open since 1902. At the end of the Second World War, there were around 100 eel, pie and mash houses in London. In 1995, there were 87.

In 2026 there are relatively few eel, pie and mash shops, although jellied eels are sold in some of the capital's delicatessens and supermarkets. The water quality of the Thames, having improved greatly since the 1960s, has since become suitable once again for eels. The Environment Agency supports a Thames fishery, allowing nets as far upriver as Tower Bridge. However, the European eel is critically endangered.

Jellied eels are traditionally prepared using the European eels native to Britain. Typically, the eels are chopped (shucked) into rounds and boiled in water and vinegar to make a fish stock with nutmeg and lemon juice, before being allowed to cool. The eel is a naturally gelatinous fish, with the cooking process releasing proteins, like collagen, into the liquid, which solidify upon cooling to form a jelly, though gelatin may be added in order to aid this process.

Recipes for jellied eels are individual to particular London pie and mash shops, and also street sellers; however, traditional recipes for authentic Victorian jellied eels have common ingredients and cooking methods, with variation only in the herbs and spices used to flavour the dish.

Jellied eels are often sold with pie and mash, another traditional East End food, and eaten with chilli vinegar or with malt vinegar and white pepper.

Jemmape (French pronunciation: [ ʒɛmap ]) was a department of the First French Republic and of the First French Empire in present-day Belgium. It was named after the Battle of Jemappes, fought between the French and the Austrians in 1792 near the village of Jemappes, near Mons. Jemappes was spelled Jemmape, Jemmapes or Jemmappes at the time. Its territory corresponded more or less with that of the Belgian province of Hainaut. It was firstly created on 2 March 1793, and then recreated on 1 October 1795, when the Austrian Netherlands and the Prince-Bishopric of Liège were officially annexed by the French Republic. Before annexation, its territory lay in the County of Hainaut, Tournai and the Tournaisis, the County of Namur (Charleroi) and the Bishopric of Liège (Thuin).

The Chef-lieu of the department was Mons. The department was subdivided into the following three arrondissements and cantons :

After Napoleon was defeated in 1814, the department was dissolved and later it became part of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands as the province of Hainaut.

The Prefect was the highest state representative in the department.

The Secretary-General was the deputy to the Prefect.

The office of Subprefect of Mons was held by the Prefect until 1811.

Jicky is a perfume originally created by Aimé Guerlain in 1889 for French perfume and cosmetics house Guerlain. Introduced in 1889, it is the oldest continuously produced perfume in the world.

Jicky was one of the first perfumes created with the addition of synthetic materials, and was the first abstract perfume in history, meaning it is not based on a single note. Its perfume notes include: spice, lemon, lavender, wood and vanilla. Its stopper is shaped like a champagne cork.

Jicky was the nickname of Aimé Guerlain's nephew, Jacques Guerlain, and according to legend, was also the pet name of Aimé's girlfriend from his time studying in England.

Jicky was featured in the exhibition, The Art of Scent 1889–2012, curated by Chandler Burr at the Museum of Arts and Design, New York. This exhibition tracks the evolution and major innovations in scent design, since the dawn of the synthetic aroma compound in the late nineteenth century. Each of the scents in the exhibition is aligned to a historical art movements, with Jicky aligned with romanticism to reflect the emerging bourgeois French society.

Joconde is the central database created in 1975 and now available online, maintained by the French Ministry of Culture, for objects in the collections of the main French public and private museums listed as Musées de France, according to article L. 441-1 of the Code du patrimoine amounting to more than 1,200 institutions.

"La Joconde" is the French name of the Mona Lisa, which like about half of the collections of the Louvre, is included in the database, as one of 295 items by, after, or connected with Leonardo da Vinci ; of these, only 42 works are by Leonardo da Vinci, including 6 paintings. By November 2012, Joconde contained over 475,000 object online and over 290,000 with images, from 366 collections in France, including 209,350 drawings, 63,547 paintings, 34,561 prints, 34,102 sculptures or 16,631 costumes and their accessories and is still expanding. By June 2022 it counted 636,405 objects.

The database is not only dedicated to the information of the public but as well to the needs of the administrators and curators of the museums, thanks to the online presentation of professional tools to facilitate notably the museums collections cataloguing and state inventory (récolement). This explains the great precision of the listings. Since the museums participate on a voluntary basis to the regular enrichment of the database, some can present a large part of their collection, while others appear only because of the mere permanent deposits made by the first ones.

Live on the French Minitel system from 1992, the database went online in 1995. Originally just for objects from the fine arts and decorative arts, in 2004 Joconde was united with what had been separate databases for objects from archeology and ethnology. It comes under the "Direction des Musées de France" (DMF) section of the Ministry.

A small number of the best known objects have a prose commentary. Not all images are in colour, especially for the archaeological collections. When an object created after the mid-20th century has no image this is most often for copyright reasons. On the original database, the listing of 49 search criteria is highly structured, using a special vocabulary, which allows for very specific and accurate searches, helped as well by the index.

Since July 9, 2019, Joconde is available on the Plateforme Ouverte du Patrimoine (POP), the general database of the ministry of culture, which gathers 8 databases and offers only 9 main advanced search criteria, but 3,976,845 objects, on 25 June 2022, including 253,677 drawings, 146,620 paintings or 226,777 sculptures. The former search page of Joconde is still available, but no more updated since 19 March 2019.

John Law (pronounced [ lɑs ] in French in the traditional approximation of Laws, the colloquial Scottish form of the name; 21 April 1671 – 21 March 1729) was a Scottish-French economist and financier. He rose to power in France where he created a novel financial scheme for French public finances known as Law's System (French : le système de Law) with two institutions at its core, John Law's Bank and John Law's Company (also known as the Mississippi company), ending in the devastating boom and bust "Mississippi Bubble" of 1720.

Born in Scotland, Law was an accomplished gambler with an interest in the rules of probability. After killing a man in a duel and being sentenced to death, he fled to mainland Europe. He read economics and made the acquaintance of Philippe II, Duke of Orléans, who became regent for the juvenile Louis XV in 1715. In 1716 Philippe approved Law's plan to create a private bank which would take gold deposits in return for bank notes, loaning out the gold. It was structured as a joint-stock company and was bought by the French government in 1718, becoming the Banque royale. In 1717 Law founded another joint-stock company, the Mississippi company, whose purpose was the economic exploitation of Louisiana as well as other French colonies. Law became Controller General of Finances in 1720 and was the richest man in Europe. He had to leave France that same year, as a stock boom turned into a bust. He then lived in various European cities and died in Venice, impoverished.

Whereas Law's System unquestionably ended in failure as a monetary framework, it had lasting influence as an early experiment in fiat money. Its soundness remains debated, with some analysts maintaining that it was not fundamentally flawed. Whereas the Mississippi company ended in bankruptcy, whether the collapse of Law's System represented an episode of sovereign default is ambiguous, given that France's debt situation was largely unchanged.

Law was born into a family of Lowland Scots bankers and goldsmiths from Fife ; his father, William, had purchased Lauriston Castle, a landed estate at Cramond on the Firth of Forth and was known as Law of Lauriston. On leaving the High School of Edinburgh, Law joined the family business at the age of 14 and studied the banking business until his father died in 1688. He subsequently neglected the firm in favour of extravagant pursuits and travelled to London, where he lost large sums by gambling.

On 9 April 1694, John Law fought a duel with another British dandy, Edward "Beau" Wilson, in Bloomsbury Square, London. Wilson had challenged Law over the affections of Elizabeth Villiers. Law killed Wilson with a single pass and thrust of his sword. He was arrested and charged with murder and stood trial at the Old Bailey. He appeared before the infamously sadistic "hanging judge" Salathiel Lovell and was found guilty of murder and sentenced to death. He was initially incarcerated in Newgate Prison to await execution. His sentence was later commuted to a fine, on the grounds that the killing only amounted to manslaughter. Wilson's brother appealed and had Law imprisoned, but he managed to escape to Amsterdam.

Law urged the establishment of a national bank to create and increase instruments of credit and the issue of banknotes backed by land, gold, or silver. The first manifestation of Law's System came when he had returned to Scotland and contributed to the debates leading to the Treaty of Union 1707. He wrote a pamphlet entitled Two Overtures Humbly Offered to His Grace John Duke of Argyll, Her Majesties High Commissioner, and the Right Honourable the Estates of Parliament (1705) which foreshadowed the ideas he would propose for establishing new systems of finance, paper money and refinancing the national debt in a subsequent tract entitled Money and Trade Considered: with a Proposal for Supplying the Nation with Money (1705). Law's propositions of creating a national bank in Scotland were ultimately rejected, and he left to pursue his ambitions abroad.

By 1710, Law had married Lady Katherine Knowles or Knollys (1669-1747), daughter of Nicholas Knowles, 3rd Earl of Banbury. They had a daughter, Mary Katherine, who went on to marry her cousin, William Knollys (Banbury MP).

Law spent ten years moving between France and the Netherlands, dealing in financial speculations. He had the idea of abolishing minor monopolies and private farming of taxes. He would create a bank for national finance and a state company for commerce, ultimately to exclude all private revenue. This would create a huge monopoly of finance and trade run by the state, and its profits would pay off the national debt.

John Law's system, first endorsed by the Regent Philippe d'Orléans in May 1716 and developed from then in increasing ambitious stages until 1720, rested on the expansion of monetary supply through the creation of fiat money and a complete overhaul of the French state's revenue collection, coinage and borrowing, all of which were centralized in Law's Company. Along the way, Law's Company absorbed all French colonial trading companies which had developed in fits and starts over the previous century, and started an unprecedented colonization of its own in Louisiana with the foundation of New Orleans in 1718. It was renamed the Compagnie des Indes (Indies Company) in 1719, and in February 1720 absorbed the bank that Law had initially established in May 1716.

Law's social standing rose with his financial heft. On 17 September 1719, he converted to Catholicism in the low-profile convent of the Recollects [ fr ] in Melun. On 2 December 1719, he was elected an honorary member of the Royal Academy of Sciences. The Regent then appointed Law as Controller-General of Finances on 5 January 1720, effectively giving him control over external and internal commerce. As Controller-General, Law instituted many reforms, some of which had lasting effects, while others were soon abolished. He tried to break up large land-holdings to benefit the peasants; he abolished internal road and canal tolls; he encouraged the building of new roads, the starting of new industries (even importing artisans but mostly by offering low-interest loans), and the revival of overseas commerce — and indeed industry increased by 60 per cent in two years, and the number of French ships engaged in export went from 16 to 300.

The system started to unravel in 1720 as price inflation started to surge. Law sought to hold the Indies Company's share price at 9,000 livres in March 1720, and then on 21 May 1720 to engineer a controlled reduction in the value of both notes and the shares, a measure that was itself reversed six days later. As the public rushed to convert banknotes to coin, Law was forced to close the Banque Générale for ten days, then limit the transaction size once the bank reopened. On 29 May 1720, Law was dismissed as Comptroller-General of Finances. The queues grew longer, the Indies Company's stock price continued to fall, and food prices soared by as much as 60 per cent. At the end of 1720, the Regent eventually dismissed Law as Controller General and as head of the Indies Company.

When arriving in Paris in 1714 Law made his home in Place Louis-le-Grand, now place Vendôme, in the Hôtel de Gramont [ fr ] where he hosted and entertained various Parisian nobles. On 30 June 1718 he purchased the Hôtel Langlée on 19 rue Neuve-des-Petits-Champs, now 46-54 rue des Petits-Champs in Paris, and moved there after due renovations. In July 1718, he started buying lots with entrances on the Place Vendôme, and ended up owning most of that square before his downfall. The Hôtel Langlée was later demolished, and the lots on Place Vendôme sold by the French state in the restructuring following Law's flight from the country.

Law also acquired a number of suburban estates and properties in Normandy and farther away from Paris, amassing a significant land and real estate portfolio. On 30 April 1718, he purchased the Château de la Marche [ fr ] from Nicolas Desmarets. On 30 June 1718, the same day as his acquisition of the Parisian Hôtel Langlée, he bought the Château de Tancarville from Louis Henri de La Tour d'Auvergne, comte d'Évreux. Law then acquired the estates of Toucy, Valençay and Roissy [ fr ] in the second half of 1719, and Orcher, Effiat [ fr ], Guermantes and Yville [ fr ] in the course of 1720.

On 10 May 1719 Law purchased the western part of the former Palais Mazarin known as the Hôtel de Nevers. In September 1719, he negotiated with Paul Jules de La Porte [ de ] to purchase the rest of the Palais Mazarin, and bought six houses bordering rue Vivienne on the western side, then went on to acquire the entire city block including the Hôtel Tubeuf. In 1720, Law relocated the Indies Company there. In late October of that year, the site also became the official location for the Paris stock exchange, following the closure of the market's previous incarnation at rue Quincampoix on 22 March 1720 (even though unregulated trading lingered there) and subsequent short-lived venues on place Vendôme and in the garden of the Hôtel de Soissons. Law commissioned Venetian painter Giovanni Antonio Pellegrini to redecorate the first-floor gallery of the Hôtel de Nevers for the purpose of hosting the company's shareholders meetings. After Law's downfall, the restructured French Indies Company remained in the Hôtel Tubeuf and the stock market in that building's rear garden bordering rue Vivienne, while the Hôtel de Nevers was granted in 1725 to the Royal Library which later became the Bibliothèque nationale de France (now its Site Richelieu).

Some of the acquisitions gave Law the right to use nobility titles, such as Marquess of Toucy. Law appears not to have taken advantage of that option, however, except in isolated cases of notarized documents that refer to him as Count of Tancarville. He has been occasionally said to have claimed or aimed at the title of "Duke of Arkansas" for his company's endeavors in the Mississippi valley, but this assertion, generally made in the United States, has no documentary basis.

Law moved to Brussels on 22 December 1720 in impoverished circumstances when his properties in France were voluntarily confiscated. He spent the next few years gambling in Rome, Copenhagen and Venice but never regained his former prosperity. Law realised he would never return to France when Orléans died suddenly in 1723 and Law was granted permission to return to London, having been pardoned in 1719. He lived in London for four years and then moved to Venice, where he contracted pneumonia and died poor in 1729. His gravestone is in the San Moisè, Venice.

Law had lasting influence as a monetary theorist. He held that money creation stimulated an economy, paper money was preferable to metal, and dividend-paying shares a superior form of money. He propounded ideas such as the scarcity theory of value and the real bills doctrine.

The chaotic collapse of Law's System has been compared to the 17th-century tulip mania parable in Holland. The Mississippi bubble coincided with the South Sea bubble in England, which allegedly took ideas from it.

Henry Thornton explained why Law's scheme failed: "He forgot that there might be no bounds to the demand for paper; that the increasing quantity would contribute to the rise of commodities: and the price of commodities require, and seem to justify, a still further increase."

Law's nephew, Jean Law de Lauriston, was later Governor-General of Pondicherry.

The term " millionaire " was coined for beneficiaries of Law's scheme.

While most of Law's system was directed at domestic financial reform, its overseas impact was also notable, including the founding of New Orleans on behalf of the Compagnie d'Occident in 1718. More broadly, it has been assessed that "Law's was the most determined French colonial enterprise until the capture of Algiers in 1830".

Sharon Condie and Richard Condie 's 1978 National Film Board of Canada (NFB) animated short John Law and the Mississippi Bubble is a humorous interpretation. The film was produced by the NFB at its newly opened Winnipeg studio. It opened in Canadian cinemas starting in September 1979 and was sold to international broadcasters. The film received an award at the Tampere Film Festival.

In 1864 William Harrison Ainsworth published the novel John Law based on his career. John Law is the focus of Rafael Sabatini 's 1949 novel The Gamester.

John Law is referenced in Voltaire 's 'Dictionnaire Philosophique', as part of the entry on reason.

John Law is the subject of the section entitled "Fragment d'un ancien mythologiste" in "Lettre CXLII" of Montesquieu 's epistolary novel "Lettres Persanes" published in 1721.

The 2003 novel The Cryptographer by Tobias Hill contains an eponymous major character and plot referencing his life.

The Jonzac thermal springs are hot springs in Jonzac, France. They are located 1,800 metres (5,900 ft) meters underground and since their discovery in 1979, the spring waters have fed a thermal spa located in Jonzac.

Rainwater started seeping into the ground 30,000 years ago, between the Massif Central and the edge of the Massif Armoricain. During this process, these rainwaters journeyed through various layers formed of dolomites, sandstone, and clays. The waters warmed and absorbed minerals as they descended into the Trias aquifer in the north of the Aquitaine Basin. This water was discovered in 1979 when the town of Jonzac was drilling the ground to expand its geothermal heating system. The Jonzac spa opened in 1986.

Joseph-Marie-Auguste Caillaux (French: [ ʒozɛf maʁi oɡyst kajo ] ; 30 March 1863 – 22 November 1944) was a French politician of the Third Republic. He was a leader of the French Radical Party and Minister of Finance, but his progressive views in opposition to the military alienated him from conservative elements. He was accused of corruption, but was cleared by a parliamentary commission. This political weakness strengthened the right wing elements in the Radical Party.

The son of Eugène Caillaux, he studied law and attended lectures at the École des Sciences Politiques. He entered the civil service in 1888 as an inspector of finance, and spent most of his official career in Algiers. Standing as a Republican candidate in the elections of 1898 for the department of the Sarthe, in opposition to the Duc de la Rochefoucault-Bisaccia, he was elected to the Chamber of Deputies by 12,929 votes to 11,737. He became Minister of Finance in the Waldeck-Rousseau Cabinet, and after its fall it was not until the Clemenceau Ministry of 1906 that he returned to office, once more with the portfolio of Finance. During the revolt of the Languedoc winegrowers on 22 May 1907 Caillaux tabled a bill on wine fraud. The text submitted to Parliament provided for an annual declaration of their harvest by wine growers, prohibition of second-cycle sweetening, and control and taxation of purchases of sugar.

In 1911 he became prime minister. The leader of the Radicals, he favored a policy of conciliation with Germany during his premiership from 1911 to 1912, which led to the maintenance of the peace during the Second Moroccan Crisis of 1911. He and his ministers were forced to resign on 11 January 1912, after it was revealed that he had secretly negotiated with Germany without the knowledge of President Armand Fallières.

Nevertheless, thanks to his undoubted qualities as a financier, he remained a great power in French politics. He fought the Three Years' Service bill with the utmost tenacity. Although that measure became law, it was he who finally, on the financial aspect of that bill, brought about the downfall of the Barthou Ministry in the autumn of 1913.

While the Entente Cordiale was in effect, it was impossible for Caillaux to return to the position of prime minister, but he joined the succeeding Doumergue Cabinet as Minister of Finance. As a financial expert, he had long identified himself with a great and necessary reform in the fiscal policy of France—the introduction of the principle of an income tax. Throughout the winter of 1913, he campaigned for this principle. His advocacy of an income tax, and his uncertain and erratic championship of proletarian ideas, alarmed all the conservative elements in the country, and throughout the winter he was attacked with increasing vehemence from the platform and through the press. Those attacks reached their highest point of bitterness in a series of disclosures in the newspaper Le Figaro of a more or less personal nature.

In 1914, Le Figaro started the publication of love letters that had been sent by Caillaux to his second wife Henriette while he was still married to the first, Berthe Gueydan. In March 1914, Madame Caillaux in turn shot to death Gaston Calmette, the editor of Le Figaro, and Caillaux resigned as Minister of Finance. In July 1914, Madame Caillaux was acquitted on the grounds that she committed a crime passionel.

Caillaux became the leader of a peace party in the Assembly during World War I. After a mission to South America, he returned in 1915, and at once began to lobby. He financed newspapers, and did everything he possibly could behind the scenes to consolidate his position. He became acquainted with the Bolos and the Malvys of political and journalistic life. By the spring of 1917, he had become in the eyes of the public " l'homme de la défaite ", the man who was willing to effect a compromise peace with Germany at the expense of Great Britain. However, the advent of Clemenceau to power killed all his hopes. This led to his arrest for treason in 1917. After a long delay, he was convicted of high treason by the High Court of the Senate, and sentenced to three years' imprisonment, the term he had already served. He was also forbidden to reside in French territory for five years and deprived of civil rights for ten years.

Again rehabilitated after World War I, Caillaux served at various times in the left wing governments of the 1920s.

On 10 July 1940, Caillaux voted as a Senator in favour of granting the cabinet presided by Marshal Philippe Pétain authority to draw up a new constitution, thereby effectively ending the French Third Republic and establishing Vichy France.

Joseph Caillaux is interred in the Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.

His political collaborators included the Nord region journalist and politician Émile Roche.

Augustin Alfred Joseph Paul-Boncour (French: [ ʒozɛf pɔl bɔ̃kuʁ ] ; 4 August 1873 – 28 March 1972) was a French politician and diplomat of the Third Republic. He was a member of the Republican-Socialist Party (PRS) and served as Prime Minister of France from December 1932 to January 1933. He also served in a number of other government positions during the 1930s and as a Permanent Delegate to the League of Nations in 1936 during his tenure as Minister of State. He has been described politically as a "centre-left republican".

Born in Saint-Aignan, Loir-et-Cher, Paul-Boncour received a law degree from the University of Paris and became active in the labor movement, organizing the legal council of the Bourses du Travail (workers' associations). He was private secretary to Premier Pierre Waldeck-Rousseau from 1898 to 1902. Elected to the Chamber of Deputies as a Radical in 1909, he held his seat until 1914, briefly serving as Minister of Labour from March to June 1911. After serving in the military during World War I, he returned to the French National Assembly. While a member of the Assembly, he became chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee in 1928. He was active at this time in attempts to encourage disarmament in Europe, with League of Nations negotiations with Germany in Geneva. This also included advocating an international force for the cause of mutual assistance in the league which would act to deter aggression. However his disarmament approach were the subjects of disagreement with opposition politicians under Léon Blum which resulted in Paul-Boncour resigning as the French delegate to the league.

Turning to Socialism, he joined the SFIO in 1916. Paul-Boncour left the socialist party in 1931 because he considered imperative, in face of the League of Nations progressive powerlessness, to reinforce national defence, something the socialists opposed. After his resignation from the SFIO in 1931 he joined the Republican-Socialist Party (PRS).

In 1931, Paul-Boncour was elected to the Senate, and served in that capacity until the establishment of the Vichy régime in 1940 (during World War II). During his time as a Senator, Paul-Boncour served in a variety of cabinet and diplomatic posts. He served as Minister of War in 1932. On 18 December 1932 he became Prime Minister of France and served briefly in this role until 28 January 1933.

In 1935, his part PRS merged with the French Socialist Party (PSF) and the Socialist Party of France-Jean Jaurès Union (PSdF) to form the Socialist Republican Union (USR). He was the Permanent Delegate to the League of Nations from 1932 to 1936 and Foreign Minister on two occasions (31 December 1932 to 30 January 1934 and 13 March to 8 April 1938).

Paul-Boncour was opposed to the formation of the Vichy government, and recommended continuing the fight against Nazi Germany after the fall of France, from Algiers. As a member of the Consultative Assembly from 1944, he led the French delegation to the United Nations conference in San Francisco and signed the United Nations Charter on behalf of France. He once again served as a senator from 1946 to 1948.

He died in Paris on 28 March 1972 at the age of 98.

José Miguel Valdés Carrera (March 14, 1837 - November 5, 1898) was a Chilean political figure and liberal politician, who served several times as minister. José Miguel Valdés was of Basque descent on his mother's side.

He was born in Santiago, the youngest son of Francisco Javier Valdés Aldunate and of Javiera Carrera Fontecilla. He studied at the Seminary of Santiago and completed his studies at the Instituto Nacional. Valdés married Emilia La Jara Alliendeallier, and they had 4 children.

He started his political career by joining the Liberal party and participating in the 1859 Revolution. Most of his life, he dedicated himself to the cultivation of his Hacienda Baracaldo in Santiago. In 1867 he was elected deputy for Santiago (1867-1870) and later re-elected for the period 1888–1891. A firm supporter of President José Manuel Balmaceda, he was appointed minister of War and Navy and of Industry and Public Works in 1889, and of Finance in 1891. The same year Valdés was elected a Senator for Concepcion. At the end of the 1891 Chilean Civil War, he had to seek refuge in the embassy of the United States, and soon afterward was exiled to France. He died in Paris at the age of 61.

The Official Journal of the French Republic (French: Journal officiel de la République française), also known as the JORF or JO, is the government gazette of the French Republic. It publishes the major legal official information from the national Government of France, the French Parliament and the French Constitutional Council.

The journal consists of several publications:

The direction of Official Gazettes (French: Direction des journaux officiels) is a service of the Prime Minister of France. It publishes the Journal officiel as well as other official gazettes publishing information from certain ministries or administrations. It is based at 26, rue Desaix (15th arrondissement of Paris).

The French Journée de solidarité (or Journée de solidarité envers les personnes âgées / Day of solidarity with the elderly) is a French law from the Code Du Travail. It was established on June 30, 2004 under the government of Jean-Pierre Raffarin. This law states that each year an employee must work seven hours for free for one of his or her employers, and that each year the employer has to pay a specific contribution. The contribution is defined by another law at a rate of 0.3 percent to be paid to the ad hoc Caisse nationale de solidarité pour l'autonomie by the employers (0.3 percent is considered to be the approximate value of this seven hours' work). Its effect is the removal of a day's holiday.

The implementation of this new kind of 'worked holiday' has been complicated, and has led to some controversy over its implications for social rights.

Adopted after the 2003 heatwave caused the death of nearly 15,000 people, the revenue from the law is intended to finance actions in favor of elderly people, especially to prevent risks due to excessive heat. Firms must pay one day's gross salary (without wage costs and social security contributions) for each employee to the State. Estimated figures led to discussion as to the scheme's productivity, which Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin judged satisfactory. On June 1, 2006, he said that benefits from the day (scheme) had been "incalculable".

The employer pays exactly 0.3 percent of employees' gross salary, which is included in employer wage costs. This amount is almost equivalent to one day of net salary. The employer does not have wage costs to pay for that working holiday (because there is no net salary for that day). Thus it results in the employer paying only half the usual rate for one working day and benefits from that day. Over the course of a year, this day is almost equal to (considering a rate of 50 percent for employer wage costs):

The difference between the two rates (0.43 and 0.23), about 0.20 percent of hourly costs including wage costs, is passed to the State.

In 2004, this new added working day was imposed by law to be by default on Pentecost Monday, formerly a non-working holiday. From 2004 to 2008, Pentecost Monday was worked by numerous employees. Pentecost Monday is still a holiday (but a working holiday). This was confirmed by the French Council of State on May 3, 2005.

Many people, especially from the Collectif des Amis du Lundi (CAL) activist organisation are against this law which re-establishes in France one mandatory unpaid work day. The French Council of State was consulted over the constitutional position but did not consider the law illegal.

The judiciary of France is the court system, administrated by the Minister of Justice, of France. It is separated into the ordinary courts, which litigate criminal and civil cases, and the administrative courts, which supervise the government and handle complaints thereof. There are three tiers to each court: the inferior court, the intermediate appellate court and the court of last resort. The intermediate appellate court hears cases on appeal from the inferior court, and the court of last resort hears appeals from the intermediate appellate courts. Judges are appointed by the High Council of the Judiciary and serve for life unless removed, with due process, by the Council.

France's independent court system enjoys special statutory protection from the executive branch. Procedures for the appointment, promotion, and removal of judges vary depending on whether it is for the ordinary (" judiciaire ") or the administrative stream. Judicial appointments in the judicial stream must be approved by a special panel, the High Council of the Judiciary. Once appointed, career judges serve for life and cannot be removed without specific disciplinary proceedings conducted before the council with due process.

The Ministry of Justice handles the administration of courts and the judiciary, including paying salaries or constructing new courthouses. The Ministry also funds and administers the prison system. Lastly, it receives and processes applications for presidential pardons and proposes legislation dealing with matters of civil or criminal justice. The Minister of Justice is also the head of public prosecution, though this is controversial since it is seen to represent a conflict of interest in cases such as political corruption against politicians.

At the basic level, the courts can be seen as organized into:

The structure of the French judiciary is divided into three tiers:

There are exceptions to this scheme, as noted below.

While in Germanic Europe the supreme courts can and do tend to write more verbose opinions supported by legal reasoning, the typical Francophone court of cassation decision is short, concise and devoid of explanation or justification. There is no stare decisis, or principle of precedent, binding lower courts to respect superior courts' rulings (case law) on questions of law ; but a line of similar case decisions, while not precedent per se, forms the jurisprudence constante.

For petty misdemeanors like most traffic violations, suspected offenders may either plea nolo contendere and pay a set fine amount (amende forfaitaire) or contest the charge in court. The court may then find the defendant innocent or guilty, but if found guilty, they are liable to be sentenced to pay a higher fine.

Under the system of jurisdictional dualism in France, courts are organized into two main divisions (French : ordres):

The ordinary courts, also called judiciary courts, have jurisdiction over two branches of law:

At the bottom of the court hierarchy are the courts of minor jurisdiction, which may sit as police courts (tribunal de police) to hear summary offenses (such as traffic violations, limited assault, breach of peace) or as civil courts (tribunal d'instance) to hear minor civil cases.

The next tier are the courts of major jurisdiction. When the court hears délits, less serious felonies and misdemeanors, it is called a Criminal Court (tribunal correctionnel, also called a Correctional Court). When the court sits to hear civil matters, it is called a Civil Court (tribunal de grande instance, also called a Grand Instance Court). It has original jurisdiction over civil cases involving more than €10,000 in legal damages. Litigants are legally required to be represented by an attorney. The court also sits as a Juvenile Court (tribunal pour enfants).

These courts usually sit in panels of three judges, but some minor offenses such as traffic violations, lite drug trafficking, and misuse of credit cards and checking accounts may be heard by a single judge.

The Labour Court (France) (conseil de prud'hommes) hears disputes and suits between employers and employees (apart from cases devoted to administrative courts); the court is said to be paritaire because it is composed of equal numbers of representatives from employer unions, e.g., MEDEF and CGPME, and employee unions. The Agricultural Land Tribunal (tribunal paritaire des baux ruraux) hears cases dealing with long-term leases for farm land estates. The Social security tribunal (tribunal des affaires de sécurité sociale) hears suits over welfare and state benefits. The Business Court (tribunal de commerce) hears matters involving trade and business disputes and the panel is elected from the local business community.

The courts of assize (cour d'assises, also called a Court of Sessions) are located in each department of France with original and appeals jurisdiction over felony offenses. When acting as a trial court, it normally rules in panels of three judges and six (formerly nine) jurors, but in some cases (involving e.g. terrorism or illegal drug trade) the court may sit in panels of five judges without grand jury. When acting as appellate court, it rules in either panels of three judges and nine (formerly twelve) jurors or seven judges without grand jury.

The courts of appeal (cour d'appel) are limited to appellate jurisdiction and hear the bulk of appeals. They sit in panels of three judges. Appeals courts are usually organized into social security, business, civil and criminal divisions. Formerly, it required the intervention of a solicitor or case attorney (avoué) to prepare and manage the case and to act as an intermediary between the barrister and the appealing party; the functions of the avoué were abolished in 2012.

The Court of Cassation (cour de cassation) is the highest level of appeal in France. These courts sit in six chambers with fifteen judges in each; however, only seven judges need to be present to hear a case. There are more than 120 judges serving in the court.

The Court of Cassation hears appeals from the assize courts and the courts of appeal. Criminal cases are heard in only one of the court's five chambers and the court has no legal authority to deny a criminal appeal. The Court is referred to as the guardian of the law. It only reviews questions of law, not questions of fact. The Court's essential purpose is to ensure that the interpretation of the law is uniform throughout the country.

The Court is located in the Hall of Justice building in Paris. It was established in 1790 under the name Tribunal de cassation during the French Revolution, and its original purpose was to act as a court of error with revisionary jurisdiction over lower provincial prerogative courts (Parlements). However, much about the Court continues the earlier Paris Parliament Court.

The financial courts - national Court of Audit (cour des comptes) and regional audit courts (chambres régionales des comptes) - have jurisdiction to try cases involving possible misuse of public funds, and, in some rare instances, of private funds.

They are empowered and mandated by Article 15 of the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen which set forth that French citizens have the right to hold public officers, agents, and officials accountable for the finances they oversee and operate. The courts' roles and responsibilities are laid out in the Financial Court Code.

The Jurisdictional Court, or tribunal des conflits, handles conflicts between the civil system of justice and the administrative system of justice. There are two kinds of conflicts:

In both cases, the tribunal des conflits will render final judgment on which system is competent.

The Constitutional Council (Conseil Constitutionnel) practices judicial review of legislative acts and laws. The ordinary and administrative courts have refused to perform this type of judicial review, outside of 2 exceptions in 1851. It supervises controversies of elections and performs judicial review by determining the constitutionality of parliamentary legislation.

The Court of Audit and regional audit courts mostly adjudicate cases regarding public funds, carrying out:

Neither national or regional audit courts hear cases related to private organizations, with the few exceptions noted here. Instead, financial cases concerning private funds and money fall within the jurisdiction of the civil justice system.

Prior to 1982, France only had a single national Court of Audit. With a push toward decentralization in the creation of province-like administrative regions and the increased role of local elected officials and considering the Court's enormous docket, France saw fit to establish regional audit courts. The national court now deals primarily with the government, public establishments, and (semi-)public companies on a national level, while the regional courts handle the local level. The court may occasionally delegate national-level audits to regional courts, as is often the case with post-secondary educational facilities.

An important concept in the business of the financial courts is the difference between, in French public accountings, between ordonnateurs (managers who order expenses and perception of payments) and payeurs (the public accountants who pay expenses and recoup debts). The Court only judges public accountants; but it may also make observations about the decisions taken by the ordonnateurs, and possibly send them before other courts for mismanagement (see below).

These jurisdictions act as courts in the ordinary sense of the word in some limited circumstances. That is, they judge the accounting of public accountants (comptables publics) and may fine them in case of certain failures:

In addition, the Cour des Comptes supports and provides half of the judges of the Cour de discipline financière et budgétaire (Court of financial and budgetary discipline), the other half being provided by the Conseil d'État. This court tries ordonnateurs — that is, the persons who order expenses and the recovery of debts, may fine them for undue expenses or for sums that they should have decided to recover. However, the court cannot try government ministers, or (in almost all cases), local elected officials; thus, with few exceptions, the only ordonnateurs that face the court are civil servants.

If the Cour des Comptes or the regional chambers discern criminal behavior in the accounts that they audit, they refer the matter to the appropriate criminal court.

Most of the activity of the Cour des Comptes and the regional chambers is not of a judicial kind (juridictionnel); rather, they act as a general auditing system. However, even for these activities, they act with almost complete independence of both the executive and the legislative branches.

The court and chambers may advise, or reprimand, ministries, administrations and public establishments that they audited.

The court and chamber publish a yearly report in which it discusses a selection of misuses of funds and other incidents. In addition, they may also publish specialized reports. The court and chambers are free to inquire on whatever they wish within their field of competency; the court may also be commissioned reports by Parliament.

In all these advisory and publishing activities, the court and chambers do not limit themselves to pure accounting issues, but they also take the efficiency of public services into account. They may, for instance, criticize an expense that was legally ordered and accounted for, but which was inappropriate with respect to criteria of good financial management.

The 2001 Loi d'orientation sur les lois de finances (LOLF, law fixing the framework for budget acts) changed the way budget was passed in France: now, budget is attributed to specific missions, and the efficiency of spending on each mission is to be assessed. In that context, the court's missions will include an increased dose of assessment of efficiency.

In France, career judges and public prosecutors are considered civil servants exercising one of the sovereign powers of the state, hence only French citizens are eligible with the notable exclusion of other EU member states citizens under the 49(4) TFEU clause.

Jules Armand Stanislas Dufaure (French: [ ʒyl aʁmɑ̃ dyfoʁ ] ; 4 December 1798 – 28 June 1881) was a French statesman who served 3 non-consecutive terms as Prime Minister of France.

Dufaure was born at Saujon, Charente-Maritime, and began his career as an advocate at Bordeaux, where he won a great reputation by his oratorical gifts. He abandoned law for politics and, in 1834, was elected deputy. In 1839, he became minister of public works in the ministry of Jean-de-Dieu Soult, and succeeded in freeing railway construction in France from the obstacles which until then had hampered it.

Losing office in 1840, Dufaure became one of the leaders of the Opposition, and on the outbreak of the revolution of 1848, he accepted the Republic and joined the party of moderate republicans. On 13 October, he became minister of the interior under Louis-Eugène Cavaignac, but retired on the latter's defeat in the presidential election. During the Second French Empire, Dufaure abstained from public life, and practised at the Paris bar with such success that he was elected bâtonnier in 1862.

In 1863, he succeeded to Étienne-Denis Pasquier 's seat in the Académie Française. In 1871, he became a member of the Assembly, and proposed Adolphe Thiers as President of the Republic. Dufaure became the minister of justice as chief of the party of the "left-centre," and his tenure of office was distinguished by the passage of the jury-law. In 1873, he fell with Thiers, but in 1875 resumed his former post under Louis Buffet, whom he succeeded on 9 March 1876, the first to become president of the council (his predecessors wore the title of vice-presidents of the council). In the same year, he was elected a life senator. On 12 December, he withdrew from the ministry owing to the attacks of the republicans of the left in the chamber and of the conservatives in the senate.

After the conservatives' defeat on 16 May, he returned to power on 24 December 1877. Early in 1879, Dufaure took part in compelling the resignation of Patrice MacMahon, duc de Magenta, but immediately afterwards (1 February), worn out by opposition, he retired. As Prime Minister, he served as the Acting President of the Republic on 30 January 1879.

See G Picot, M. Dufaure, sa vie et ses discours (Paris, 1883).

Pierre Jules Baroche (French pronunciation: [ pjɛʁ ʒyl baʁɔʃ ] ; 18 November 1802, Paris – 29 October 1870, Jersey) was a French statesman, who served as minister in several of Napoleon III 's governments. He was Minister of the Interior from 15 March 1850 to 24 January 1851, Minister of Foreign Affairs from 10 April 1851 to 26 October 1851, President of the Conseil d'État from 30 December 1852, briefly Minister of Foreign Affairs again from 4 January 1860 to 24 January 1860, Minister without portfolio from 3 December 1860, and Minister of Justice (and of Public Worship) from 23 June 1863 to 17 July 1869.

Born to a family of shopkeepers, Baroche received his baccalauréat in 1820 and pursued a legal education, becoming a lawyer in 1823. He became moderately well-known and somewhat notorious as a lawyer, particularly in his pleadings before the Cours des pairs (Court of Peers). He defended former Defense Minister Amédée Louis Despans-Cubières from corruption charges before the peers in 1847.

Baroche ran for office unsuccessfully in Seine-et-Oise in 1840, 1842 and 1846, finally winning a National Assembly seat in Charente-Inférieure in 1847. He strongly opposed the government of François Guizot and took part in its overthrow. A sincere republican during the 1848 revolution, he represented Charente-Inférieure at the constituent assembly of the Second Republic. After 1848, however, he became associated with right wing politics and particularly with the purge of leftist and royalist judges from the French courts and with the defense of the many press censorship laws passed as the republic became increasingly authoritarian. He resigned his ministry in 1851 in a disagreement with French president Louis Napoleon, and he refused to participate in the coup d'état of 14 January 1852 that established the Second Empire, but became president of the Conseil d'État in December of the same year, remaining in that powerful post for most of the next decade. He was appointed a Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor on 3 February 1855.

Following liberal reforms in 1860, Napoleon III appointed Baroche to a ministry without portfolio, while he was still president of the Conseil d'État, in order to shore up his support in parliament. Baroch's appointment to the Ministry of Justice was his principal role in the 1860s, but in the end, as the political tide turned against the Empire, he declined in popularity and was dismissed by the Emperor in 1869, although he appointed Baroche to the French Senate. Nonetheless, Baroche was so closely linked to the Empire and its repressive policies that, like many other high-ranking officials in the imperial government, he fled to Great Britain as the Second Empire crumbled, dying shortly afterwards on the island of Jersey.

Jules Auguste Armand Marie de Polignac, Count of Polignac (French: [ ʒyl də pɔliɲak ] ; 14 May 1780 – 30 March 1847), then Prince of Polignac, and briefly 3rd Duke of Polignac in 1847, was a French statesman and ultra-royalist politician after the Revolution. He served as prime minister under Charles X, just before the July Revolution in 1830 that overthrew the senior line of the House of Bourbon.

Born in Versailles, Jules was the younger son of Jules, 1st Duke of Polignac, and Gabrielle de Polastron, a confidante and favourite of Queen Marie-Antoinette. Due to his mother's privileged position, the young Jules was raised in the environment of the court of Versailles, where his family occupied a luxurious suite of thirteen rooms. His sister, Aglaé, was married to the duc de Guîche at a young age, helping to cement the Polignac family's position as one of the leaders of high society at Versailles.

With the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789, Jules's mother and her circle were forced to flee abroad due to threats against their lives. She had been one of the most consistent supporters of absolutism, and she bequeathed these political sympathies to her son following her death in 1793.

Jules married twice. He was first married in London, in 1816, to Barbara Campbell (Ardneaves House, Islay 22 Aug. 1788 – Saint-Mandé 23 May 1819), a young Scotswoman. Barbara later returned with him to France, where they had two children:

After his first wife's death in 1819, he married in London, on 3 June 1824, Charlotte, comtesse de Choiseul, widow of comte Cesar de Choiseul (d. 1821), née the Honourable (Maria) Charlotte Parkyns (St. Marylebone, 6 Jan. 1792 – 1/2 Sep. 1864). She was the youngest child (of six children) of Thomas Parkyns, 1st Baron Rancliffe (created 1795) and his wife Elizabeth Anne James, and sister of George Augustus Anne Parkyns, Lord Rancliffe and Henrietta, Lady Rumbold (1789–1833), wife of Sir William Rumbold, 3rd Bt. He had met her while she was renewing her passport at the London embassy, where he was the Ambassador (1823–1829). They had five children, two of whom were born while their father was in prison:

The couple's marriage was annulled by the French Chamber of Peers, but Jules and Charlotte went to England after his release in 1836, and they renewed their vows before the French consul in 1837.

Returning to France, which was then ruled by Napoleon Bonaparte, Jules continued in his zealous loyalty to the exiled royal family. In 1804, a year after his sister's death, Jules was implicated in the conspiracy of Cadoudal and Pichegru to assassinate Bonaparte, and was imprisoned until 1813. After the restoration of the Bourbons, he was rewarded with various honours and positions. He held various offices, received from the Pope his title of "Prince," in 1820, and in 1823, King Louis XVIII made him ambassador to Great Britain. A year later, his mother's former friend ascended the throne as King Charles X. Polignac's political sympathies did not alter, and he was one of the most conspicuous ultra-royalists during the Restoration era.

At the time, it was rumoured that Polignac supported ultra-royalist policies because he thought he was receiving inspiration from the Virgin Mary. There is little historical evidence for this story, however. There is no mention of such motivation in Polignac's personal memoirs or in the memoirs of the Restoration court.

On 8 August 1829, Charles X appointed him to the ministry of foreign affairs and in the following November, Polignac became president of the council, effectively the most powerful politician in France. Critics of the king’s government saw Polignac’s rise as a step towards overthrowing the constitution. Polignac, with other ministers, was held responsible for the decision to issue the Four Ordinances, which were the immediate cause of the revolution of July 1830.

Upon the outbreak of revolt, he fled, wandering for some time among the wilds of Normandy before he was arrested at Granville. At his trial before the Chamber of Peers, he was condemned and sentenced to 'perpetual' imprisonment at the château in Ham. But he benefited by the amnesty of 1836, when his sentence was commuted to exile. During his captivity, he wrote Considerations politiques (1832). Afterwards, he spent several years in exile in England before being permitted to re-enter France, on condition that he never again take up his abode in Paris.

According to the Legacies of British Slave-Ownership at the University College London, de Polignac was awarded a payment as a slave trader in the aftermath of the Slavery Abolition Act 1833 with the Slave Compensation Act 1837. The British Government took out a £15 million loan (worth £ 1.54 billion in 2025) with interest from Nathan Mayer Rothschild and Moses Montefiore, paid from the public budget (formally ending in 2015). de Polignac was associated with three different claims, he owned 628 slaves in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and received a £15,765 payment at the time (worth £ 1.62 million in 2025). Although a French subject, de Polignac had connections in the British Empire due to his Scottish wife, Barbara Campbell (1788–1819), daughter of Duncan Campbell of Ardnave.

From his second marriage to Maria-Charlotte Parkyns, daughter of Lord Rancliffe, Jules de Polignac had fathered seven children, including Prince Ludovic de Polignac (1827–1904), a lieutenant-colonel in the French Army who participated in the colonization of Algeria ; Prince Camille Armand Jules Marie de Polignac (1832–1913), a major-general in the Confederate Army during the American Civil War ; and Prince Edmond de Polignac (1834–1901), a composer, musical theorist and proponent of the octatonic scale.

Jules died at St. Germain in 1847 from the effects of his imprisonment. About one month prior, he had assumed the title of duc de Polignac upon the death of his older brother, Armand, who had died without children.

Comte Pierre de Polignac, later Prince Pierre, Duke of Valentinois (father of Rainier III of Monaco and therefore an ancestor of the entire current princely family) is descended from a different and cadet branch of the Polignac family, which has the comital rank only. Pierre was the youngest son, descended from the youngest son of the first Duke of Polignac.

Jules Désiré Elby (25 November 1857 – 2 July 1933) was a French industrialist and Democratic Republican Alliance politician who represented Pas-de-Calais in the Senate between 1923 and 1933. He was also Director-General of the Bruay Mining Company.

Elby was born in Gonnelieu, Cambrésis, the son of Jules Émile Elby (a cotton weaver) and Virginie Josèphe Mignot. At the age of 18 he entered the Bruay Mining Company as a labourer.

Elby remained with the Bruay Mining Company for 58 years, becoming Director-General in 1899 and finally Chairman of the Board of Directors in 1924. During the First World War he was commissioned by the French Army to administer Bruay-la-Buissière and ensure that the town maintained its coal production, despite its very close proximity to the fighting on the Western Front.

His political career began in 1899, when he was elected mayor of Bruay-en-Artois. Elby was conseiller général of Houdain from 1901 to 1919. On 7 January 1923 he stood in a by-election to the Senate as the Republican candidate in Pas-de-Calais, and was elected in the first round with 1,033 votes to the Socialist candidate's 536. At the Luxembourg Palace he enrolled as a member of the Republican Union, part of the Democratic Republican Alliance. He was re-elected on 9 January 1927. During his time in the Senate he served on the Accounting Commission, the Railway Commission, in the Ministry of Transport and National Machinery, and in the Ministry of Mining. He retained his seat until his death at the age of 75 in 1933.

Elby held numerous other positions, including as a director of the Bank of France and President of the Chamber of Commerce of Bethune.

Elby became Grand Officer of the Legion of Honour in 1919, having been made a knight in 1904. He was also honoured as a Grand Cross of the Order of Leopold II by Belgium (1920) and as a Commander of the Order of the British Empire by the United Kingdom (1920) for his work during the First World War. He was given an honorary Croix de Guerre.

He married Mathilde, the daughter of the Senator Alfred Leroy. Through marriage Elby became connected to the families of vicomte de Butler and comte du Merle. Mathilde died at the age of 38 in 1898 while undergoing an operation. Their children were subsequently sent to boarding school in England. One of their sons was the politician Henri Elby.

Elby owned numerous properties, including the Château de Remaisnil, which was held by his family until the 1950s, and the Château de Fressin.

Martin Jules Gouffé (French pronunciation: [ ʒyl ɡufe ] ; 1807 – 28 February 1877) was a French chef and pâtissier, nicknamed l'apôtre de la cuisine décorative ("The apostle of decorative cooking").

He had a deep impact on the development of French gastronomy by publishing unusually simple and precise recipes in his cookery books, of which the two best-known are Le Livre de cuisine (1867) and Le Livre de pâtisserie (1873).

Gouffé was born in 1807 at 2 rue Saint-Merri, in what is now the 4th arrondissement of Paris. His father, Pierre-Louis Gouffé, was a well-known pastry cook, and Jules and his two brothers, Alphonse and Hippolyte, all trained under him. Alphonse later became head pastry cook to Queen Victoria and Hippolyte, head chef to Count Shuvalov of Russia. Unlike them, Jules spent his entire career in Paris.

Under the guidance of Pierre-Louis, the young Gouffé learned his trade, and very early on was attracted to creating artistic presentations. He later recalled that the celebrated pâtissier and chef Antonin Carême happened to pass by and saw in the window of Gouffé senior's shop "two baskets of pastillage and a marzipan cake which were my work". Carême was impressed and took on the sixteen-year-old Gouffé as a trainee. Fifty years later, Gouffé wrote:

Working under Carême, Gouffé learned the general art of cookery as well as that of pâtisserie. He later wrote: "A good pastry chef can become an excellent cook, but one rarely hears of a man trained as a cook who goes on to master pastry".

In 1838 Gouffé married Anne Suzanne Mercier. He remained under Carême's tutelage until 1840, when he opened a pâtisserie in the rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré. The establishment flourished: workers there soon numbered twenty-eight. He sold the shop in 1855, and was persuaded by his long-time friends Charles Monselet, Baron Brisse and Alexandre Dumas senior to take over the management of the kitchens of the Jockey-Club de Paris. His biographer Edmond Neirinck writes that the Universal Exhibition of 1867 allowed Gouffé to express all his talent, but one event did not come off. The organisers had originally planned, and announced, an international gastronomy competition in a state-of-the-art building to be designed by Gouffé on the Champs de Mars, but the government decided instead to lease every available part of the site to traders.

Less than four years later, during the Siege of Paris in 1870–71, when the Prussians blockaded the city, Gouffé, like other chefs, had to exercise ingenuity and a willingness to use unfamiliar ingredients in dishes such as horse soup, mule's liver and roast leg of dog.

Gouffé retired to La Charité-sur-Loire, but he returned to Paris, where he died in the suburb of Neuilly-sur-Seine on 28 February 1877, aged 69 or 70.

While chef to the Jockey Club, Gouffé began writing cookery books. They were published not only in France but in translation elsewhere; the English versions were translated by his brother Alphonse. In the preface to his first book, Le Livre de cuisine (1867), Gouffé wrote:

As a chef, Gouffé became known l'apôtre de la cuisine décorative ("The apostle of decorative cooking"), but as a writer he was known for the simplicity, clarity and precision of his recipes. He stated that he not written a single one without constantly having the clock in front of him and the scales in his hand. He added that once his reader has mastered a recipe, such constant recourse to clock and scales is less necessary, but that rigorous precision in the writing of recipes is essential, as "the only way to put an end to the approximations and doubts which still hover over even the simplest preparations, and cause so many people to eat badly at home".

In The Oxford Companion to Food, Alan Davidson writes that Gouffé's most successful book was Le Livre de cuisine, "a comprehensive work which ran to nearly 900 pages and was distinguished by a number of innovations. The typographical design was clear and spacious, and the book was beautifully illustrated with nearly 200 engravings and colour lithographs". In Davidson's view, the content matched the presentation: "Gouffé wrote in a limpid style, comprehensible by all and exhibiting a standard of literary craftsmanship which equalled the author’s skill in the kitchen. This was, moreover, the first French cookery book to give metric measurements and cooking times in a systematic way".

Gouffé has been an influence on chefs including Bernard Loiseau and molecular gastronomy researchers, such as Hervé This.

François Judith Paul Grévy (15 August 1807 – 9 September 1891), known as Jules Grévy (French: [ ʒyl ɡʁevi ]), was a French lawyer and politician who served as President of France from 1879 to 1887. He was a leader of the Moderate Republicans, and given that his predecessors were monarchists who tried without success to restore the French monarchy, Grévy is considered the first real republican president of France. During Grévy's presidency from 1879 to 1887, according to David Bell, there was a disunity among his cabinets. Only one survived more than a year. Grévy paid attention chiefly to defense, internal order, and foreign relations. Critics argue that Grévy's confusing approach to appointments set a bad precedent for handling crises.

Born in a small town in the Jura department, Grévy moved to Paris where he initially followed a career in law before becoming a republican activist. He began his political career after the French Revolution of 1848, as a member of the National Assembly of the French Second Republic, where he became known for his opposition to Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte and as a supporter of lesser authority for the executive branch. During the 1851 coup d'état by Louis-Napoléon he was briefly imprisoned, and afterwards retired from political life.

With the downfall of the Second French Empire and the reestablishment of the Republic in 1870, Grévy returned to prominence in national politics. After occupying high offices in the National Assembly and the Chamber of Deputies, he was elected president of France in 1879. During his presidency Grévy confirmed his longtime stance by diminishing his own executive authority in favor of the Parliament, and in foreign policy strove for peaceful relations and opposed colonialism. He was reelected in 1885, but two years later Grévy's son-in-law was implicated in a corruption scandal and Grévy had to resign after exhausting the pool of willing politicians to form a fresh government. His nearly nine years as president of France are seen as the consolidation of the French Third Republic.

Grévy was born on 15 August 1807 in Mont-sous-Vaudrey, in the department of Jura, into a republican family. His paternal grandfather, Nicolas Grévy (1736–1812), the son of farmers from Aumont, moved to Mont-sous-Vaudrey during the French Revolution, where he bought the property of la Grangerie. He was a justice of the peace. Grévy's parents were François Hyacinthe Grevy (1773–1857) and Jeanne Gabrielle Planet (1782–1855). His father, who had joined the French Revolutionary Army as a volunteer in 1792, rose to become a battalion commander and fought in the Revolutionary Wars until retiring to Mont-sous-Vaudrey under the Consulate. He operated a tile factory on his property.

At age 10, Grévy started attending school at the nearby town of Poligny, and continued his studies in Besançon, Dole, and finally at the Faculty of Law of Paris. He became a lawyer at the Paris bar in 1837, distinguishing himself at the Conférence du barreau de Paris. Having steadily maintained republican principles under the July Monarchy, he started his political activity as a defense attorney in the trial of Philippet and Quignot, two accomplies of Armand Barbès in a failed republican insurrection on 12 May 1839.

In 1848, a revolution in France abolished the July Monarchy and led to the creation of the Second Republic, and with it Grévy was appointed Commissioner of the Republic for the department of Jura. In April 1848 he was elected by that department for a seat in the constituent National Assembly. On the signed declaration for his candidacy, Grévy demanded a "strong and liberal Republic, that makes itself loved for its wisdom and moderation". Foreseeing the rise of Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte in that year's presidential election he began to advocate a weak executive branch, and became famous during the debates on the drafting of the Constitution for his opposition to electing the president by universal suffrage, instead proposing that the executive power should be vested on a "President of the Council of Ministers", who would be appointed and dismissed by the directly elected National Assembly. The "Grévy Amendment", as it became known, was rejected, and in December 1848 Bonaparte was elected president of France.

Grévy was elected vice-president of the National Assembly in April 1849. The same month he protested against the president's decision to launch an expedition against the revolutionary Roman Republic, created as part of the First Italian War of Independence, but the invasion proceeded and succeeded in restoring Papal rule. In 1851, his fear that Louis-Napoléon intended to perpetuate himself in power was proven true, when the president seized dictatorial power with a coup d'état on 2 December, in which Grévy was arrested and imprisoned in Mazas Prison. He was released shortly after but retired from politics in the subsequent French Empire, under now emperor Napoleon III, and returned to his law practice.

Grévy resumed his political career in the last years of the Empire. In 1868 he was elected to the Corps législatif, where he quickly emerged as a leader of the liberal opposition. Along with Adolphe Thiers and Léon Gambetta he opposed the declaration of the Franco-Prussian War, in 1870, and condemned the socialist insurrection of the Paris Commune. Upon the death of Thiers years later, in 1877, Grévy would become the head of the Republican Party.

After the collapse of the Empire in the Franco-Prussian War, Grévy was elected as representative of Jura and Bouches-du-Rhône to the National Assembly of the new Third Republic, in 1871. He served as president of the Assembly from February 1871 to April 1873, when he resigned on account of the opposition from the Right, which blamed him for having called one of its members to order in the session of the previous day. On 8 March 1876 Grévy was named president of the Chamber of Deputies, a post which he filled with such efficiency that upon the resignation of Legitimist president Marshal de MacMahon he seemed to step naturally into the Presidency of the Republic, and on 30 January 1879 was elected without opposition by the republican parties.

Throughout his presidency, Grévy sought to minimize his powers and instead favored a strong legislature. On 6 February 1879, shortly after taking office, he made a speech before the Chambers where he explained his vision of the role of President: "Subject with sincerity to the great law of the parliamentary regime, I will never enter into battle against national wishes expressed by its institutional bodies". This interpretation of the office's limited power influenced most of the later presidents of the Third Republic.

In foreign policy he strove for peaceful relations, particularly with the German Empire, resisting revanchist demands for a retribution over the disastrous defeat in the Franco-Prussian War, and opposed colonial expansion. Among internal policies his presidency was marked by anti-clerical reforms, particularly under the government of prime minister Charles de Freycinet. In 1880, he passed an amnesty law in favor of the communards.

On 28 December 1885, Grévy was elected for another seven years as president of the Republic. Two years later however, in December 1887, he was compelled to resign due to the decorations scandal that started after his son-in-law, Daniel Wilson, was found to be selling awards of the Legion of Honour. Although Grévy himself was not implicated in the scheme, he was indirectly responsible for the misuse Wilson had made of the access to the Élysée. Under pressure from the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate, Grévy resigned on 2 December and addressed a last message to the two chambers, in which he stated "my duty and my right would be to resist, wisdom and patriotism command me to yield". This political matter was the first to feed anti-Masonic opinion in France.

Grévy wrote a two-volume Discours politiques et judiciaires ("Political and Judicial Speeches") in 1888.

Grévy married in 1848 to Coralie Frassie, the daughter of a tanner from Narbonne. They had one daughter, Alice (1849–1938), who married Daniel Wilson in 1881.

He died in his hometown of Mont-sous-Vaudrey on 9 September 1891, following a pulmonary edema. His state funeral was held on 14 September.

Initiated at the masonic lodge "La Constante Amitié" in Arras, his masonic activity was inseparable from his policies, especially in the ensuing struggle for separation of church and state that marked the beginning of the Third Republic and MacMahon's resignation.

In private life, Grévy was an ardent billiards player, and was featured as one in a portrait published in the Vanity Fair magazine in 1879.

He is referred to as one of Swann's dinner hosts in Proust 's In Search of Lost Time.

There is a type of lilac, Syringa vulgaris 'President Grévy', named after him.

Jules Bazile, known as Jules Guesde (French: [ ʒyl ɡɛːd ] ; 11 November 1845 – 28 July 1922) was a French socialist journalist and politician. For a period he was editor of the socialist newspaper La Petite République.

Guesde was the inspiration for a famous quotation by Karl Marx. Shortly before Marx died in 1883, he wrote a letter to Guesde and Paul Lafargue, both of whom already claimed to represent " Marxist " principles. Marx accused them of "revolutionary phrase-mongering". This exchange is the source of Marx's remark, reported by Friedrich Engels : " ce qu'il y a de certain c'est que moi, je ne suis pas marxiste " ("what is certain is that [if they are Marxists], [then] I myself am not a Marxist").

Jules Bazile was born in Paris, on the Île-St-Louis. He began his career as a clerk in the Interior Ministry. He wrote in republican newspapers under the Second Empire and chose "Jules Guesde" as a pen name after his mother's name, Eléonore Guesde. On the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War, he was editing Les Droits de l'Homme at Montpellier, and had to take refuge in Geneva in 1871 from a prosecution instituted on account of articles which had appeared in his paper in defence of the Paris Commune. There he read the works of Karl Marx.

In 1876, he returned to France to become one of the chief French advocates of Marxism, being imprisoned for six months in 1878 for taking part in the first Parisian International Congress. He edited at different times Les Droits de l’Homme, Le Cri du peuple, and Le Socialiste, but his best-known organ was the weekly Égalité.

Guesde, who was in prison at the time, was the author of a resolution moved by the delegates from Paris at the Socialist Workers' Congress (1879) and carried by a large majority. It was:

Property is the one social question. Seeing that the present system of property is opposed to those equal rights that will condition the society of the future; that it is unjust and inhuman that some should produce everything and others nothing, and that it is precisely the latter who have all the wealth, all the enjoyment, and all the privilege; seeing that this state of affairs will not be put an end to by the good-will of those whose whole interest lies in its continuance; the Congress adopts as its end and aim the collective ownership of the soil, the subsoil, the instruments of labour, raw materials, and would render them for ever inalienable from that society to which they ought to return.

Guesde had been in close association with Paul Lafargue, and through him with Karl Marx, whose daughter Lafargue had married. It was in conjunction with Marx and Lafargue that he drew up the programme accepted by the National Congress of the French Workers' Party at Le Havre in 1880, which laid stress on the formation of an international labour party working by revolutionary methods. The following year, at the Reims Congress, the orthodox Marxist programme of Guesde was opposed by the " possibilists ", who rejected the intransigent attitude of Guesde for the reformist policy of Paul Brousse and Benoît Malon.

At the Congress of Saint-Étienne, the difference developed into division. Those who refused all compromise with a capitalist government followed Guesde, while the reformists formed several groups. Guesde took his full share in the consequent discussions between the Guesdists, the Blanquists, the Possibilists, and others. In 1893 he was returned to the Chamber of Deputies for Roubaix, with a large majority over the Christian Socialist and Radical candidates. He brought forward various proposals in social legislation forming the programme of the Workers' Party, without reference to the divisions among the Socialists, and, on 20 November 1894, succeeded in raising a two days' discussion of the collectivist principle in the Chamber.

In 1902 he was not re-elected, but resumed his seat in 1906. In 1903 there was a formal reconciliation at the Reims Congress of the sections of the party, which then took the name of the Socialist Party of France. All socialist tendencies were then unified in 1905 in the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO), the French section of the Second International. Guesde, nevertheless, continued to oppose the reformist policy of Jean Jaurès, whom he denounced for supporting one " bourgeois " party against another. In 1900, he had already opposed him on the question of socialist participation in " bourgeois " government. His defence of the principle of freedom of association led him, incongruously enough, to support the religious Congregations against Émile Combes 's Separation of the Churches and the State.

During the revolt of the Languedoc winegrowers on 11 June 1907, Jaurès, who defended the vine growers cause in the Chamber of Deputies, filed a counter-bill with Jules Guesde. The two socialist deputies proposed nationalization of the wine estates.

The outbreak of World War I, which was regarded as threatening France's existence, had the effect of changing the uncompromising attitude of Guesde. In August 1914, while the Reformist Jaurès was assassinated due to his opposition to the war, Guesde was included in the national unity government of René Viviani as a Minister without Portfolio in 1914, and continued to serve as Minister of State from 1915 until the end of 1916. During this period, he adopted patriotic positions and sometimes even nationalist views. Guesde thought that the war would give birth to a social revolution in France and would thus be the starting point of an international revolution.

After the armistice, in the Congress of Tours, he chose the "old house" SFIO following Léon Blum and Jean Longuet, against the majority which created the French Section of the Communist International, the future Communist Party, for which he was condemned by Vladimir Lenin.

Besides his numerous political and socialist pamphlets, in 1901, he published two volumes of his speeches in the Chamber of Deputies entitled Quatre ans de lutte de classe 1893-1898 (Four years of class struggle).

Jules Émile Jeanneney (6 July 1864 – 27 April 1957) was a French lawyer and politician.

Jules Jeanneney was born on 6 July 1864, in Besançon. His mother died soon after his birth, leaving his father, an auctioneer, to raise the child. Jeanneney said that he felt that his mother's death affected him greatly in later life. He studied law at the Sorbonne and practised as a lawyer.

At the urging of René Waldeck-Rousseau Jeanneney entered politics in 1897 when he was elected mayor of Rioz. In 1902 he stood in the elections to the Chamber of Deputies and was elected to represent Haute-Saône. In 1909 he was elected to the Senate where he supported the Democratic Republican Alliance. He would remain a Senator until 1944.

Jeanneney was elected vice-president in 1924, then he headed the important Finance committee until 1932 when he was elected President of the Senate to replace Albert Lebrun. As President of the Senate, Jeanneney led the debate on 10 July 1940 which resulted in the granting of extraordinary powers to Marshal Philippe Pétain and the creation of the Vichy Regime. Jeanneney accepted these results rather than seeking them and along with Édouard Daladier protested at the use Pétain made of his powers.

Jeanneney served as Minister of State with responsibility for reforming the administration in Charles de Gaulle 's Provisional Government from 1944 to 1945. He died in Paris, on 27 April 1957, aged 92. after he died, a school was created at his name in rioz franche compté

Jeanneney's son Jean-Marcel Jeanneney and his grandson Jean-Noël Jeanneney were active in French politics.

Jules-Louis Breton (1 April 1872 – 2 August 1940) was an inventor and a French politician. He was a representative of the French Assembly, and the proponent of the Breton-Prétot machine, a device developed in France from November 1914, intended to cut a way through barbed wire on the battlefield. It was developed with an engineer named Prétot, but did not progress beyond the experimental stage.

Breton was born on 1 April 1872 in Courrières, Pas-de-Calais. He was a Socialist with Anarchist tendencies, and as a Natalist, endeavoured to giving more freedom to women.

During World War I he was France's Undersecretary of State for Inventions for National Defense. and later founded and directed the National Research and Invention Ministry. He was also Minister of Hygiene under President Millerand in 1920.

Breton was the founder and first director of the National Board of Scientific and Industrial Research and Inventions (ORNI: Office national des recherches scientifiques et industrielles et des Inventions), created on 29 December 1922 and dissolved on 24 May 1938, predecessor of the Centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS). In this role he founded the Salon des arts ménagers (Household Arts Exhibition), which showcased domestic appliances.

He died on 2 August 1940 in Meudon Bellevue.

On 4 July 2022, Emmanuel Macron carried out the first reshuffle of his minority government, led by Prime minister Élisabeth Borne, since the start of his second presidential term. As it is customary that the Prime minister offers the resignation of their government after a legislative election under the Fifth Republic, a cabinet reshuffle was anticipated. However, the unexpected outcome of the June 2022 legislative election that saw President Macron's centrist coalition losing its majority in Parliament changed the dynamics and nature of the reshuffle: falling 38 seats short of an overall majority in the National Assembly (from a 115-seat majority in the previous Parliament) and with 3 ministers (including 2 senior ones) having lost their seats, the cabinet had to undergo broader changes than expected.

On 21 June 2022, two days after the second round of the legislative election, Prime minister Borne offered her government's resignation to the President but Macron refused it and instead asked the cabinet to "stay on task", a way to avoid a caretaking period that would have prevented ministers from taking important regulatory measures.

Between 21 June and 4 July, both President Macron and his Prime minister held talks with parliamentary opposition leaders in order to try forming a stable majority government. Nonetheless, since no opposition party showed interest in either supporting or entering a Macron-led government, the executive pair ultimately had to settle for a three-party minority coalition government. Also, adding to the political disarray surrounding the imminent reshuffle, Overseas Minister Yaël Braun-Pivet resigned from government on 25 June to run as the presidential bloc's candidate for President of the National Assembly, leaving her ministerial portfolio to the PM to manage.

Despite speculation about the scope of the reshuffle and reports of potential right-leaning appointments to the senior cabinet in a bid to bring the pivotal LR party closer to supporting the administration in Parliament, the reshuffle was less far-reaching than expected. Despite adding two dozen new ministers, few changes to the senior ministerial line-up were made and the new team's composition did not indicate any change of political direction as a result of the legislative election results. Brigitte Bourguignon, Health and Prevention Minister, and Amélie de Montchalin, Ecological Transition and Territorial Cohesion Minister, both resigned from cabinet after losing their seats in the election. Solidarity and Autonomy Minister Damien Abad, a former parliamentary LR leader, was sacked after rape allegations against him emerged and tarnished the presidential coalition's campaign. In the end, the reshuffle was considered to have been used more as an opportunity to calibrate political imbalances between diverse factions inside the cabinet than as a way to broaden its parliamentary appeal in the context of a hung parliament. Furthermore, multiple new junior-ministerial appointments were made and many figures with political experience during Macron's first term were promoted or even returned to government, as proven by Marlène Schiappa 's appointment as State Secretary just a month after leaving the cabinet or Olivier Véran 's appointment as the government spokesperson after being demoted in May. The new cabinet also included some new figures who were not career politicians, both in cabinet-level and in junior-ministerial jobs, as symbolized by the appointment of François Braun as Health and Prevention Minister.

Just after the reshuffle became effective, Véran, now acting as the government spokesperson, announced that the Prime Minister would not ask the National Assembly for a vote of confidence in her government and that the cabinet intended to govern on an ad hoc, bill-to-bill basis.

According to an Ifop -Fiducial poll for Sud Radio carried out on the 5 and 6 July 2022, 46% of the French said they were satisfied with the new government's composition, compared to 42% who were satisfied with the initial government's line-up in May 2022 and 48% who were satisfied with the Castex government 's composition in July 2020.

Emmanuel Macron carried out the second major reshuffle of his minority government, led by Prime Minister Élisabeth Borne, in July 2023. Following the "hundred days of appeasement and action" Macron called for in April 2023, the reshuffle had been highly anticipated and briefed in the press. There were reports of a potential change of prime minister and likely removal of ministers who had not drawn enough attention to their departments' policies or ministers who had underperformed the President's expectations. The reshuffle was seen as an opportunity for Macron to "reset" his presidency, after the contentious passage of a pension system reform and the 2023 French riots, and reassert his authority, significantly diminished following the result of the legislative election the previous year. Despite expectations that the reshuffle was to be pivotal to the rest of Macron's second term and that it would indicate a clear, fresh political direction for the country, few changes to the cabinet's composition were made and, crucially, Borne retained her position as head of government. Overall, the operation was interpreted as a fallback reshuffle, in the sense that the President sought to close ranks around his leadership by rewarding loyalist politicians, pushing out civil society figures and minimally altering existing political balances inside his Cabinet. Nevertheless, the removal of education minister Pap Ndiaye was seen as a concession to conservative and far-right critics.

It was widely reported that Macron and his prime minister disagreed over the scope of the government reshuffle and the manner of "staging" it: Borne reportedly argued in favor of substantial changes to the ministerial line-up while Macron favored carrying out a "technical" reshuffle. Likewise, Borne reportedly wanted to make her retention of the premiership a political event by resigning, being reappointed and subsequently forming a new cabinet, so that it could strengthen her position in the face of cabinet rivals: Macron chose instead to announce his decision to keep her as PM through press reports followed by a confirmation of those reports by his entourage, an unprecedented manner to unveil such a key decision under the Fifth Republic.

The government reshuffle carried out jointly by Macron and Borne was widely criticized by the press as one of the most "chaotic", "strange" and "failed" reshuffles in the history of the Fifth Republic: conservative newspaper Le Figaro branded the reshuffle as "half way between François Hollande and the Fourth Republic ", criticizing "a lot of noise for nothing"; centre-left Le Monde newspaper criticized a "painful" and "strange" reshuffle for a government "without any roadmap"; left-wing Libération newspaper branded the July 2023 reshuffle as "narrow" and as bearing no "political message", a reshuffle coming after "three days of mess" and insufficient to erase "rumors of disagreements between the President and his Prime minister". Reuters described the reshuffle as a proof of Macron's "limited room for manoeuvre" since he lost his parliamentary majority barely one month into his second term.

Marine Le Pen, far-right National Rally (RN) parliamentary party leader, said that the reshuffle was a proof of Macron's "tragic disconnection", while Mathilde Panot, far-left Unbowed France (LFI- NUPES) parliamentary group leader that "the casting (e.g., the Cabinet's composition) is not an issue, but the policy is". Eric Ciotti, centre-right-to-right-wing The Republicans (LR) party leader, declared that "an umpteenth reshuffle cannot be a serious response to the crisis we are facing", while Olivier Faure, centre-left Socialist Party (PS) First Secretary, branded the reshuffled Borne government as a "deliquescent" government.

According to an Odoxa-Backbone consulting poll published by Le Figaro on 21 July, 61% of the French are dissatisfied with the reshuffle, 62% wanted to see a change of Prime minister and 74% think the reshuffled Cabinet will implement the same policy as before.

According to another poll conducted by the Elabe institute for news channel BFMTV on the 18 and 19 July (i.e., before the full extent of the reshuffle was known), 55% of the respondents thought Macron was "wrong" in keeping Borne as PM.

Some news media questioned the manner in which the whole July 2023 government reshuffle had been handled: 20 Minutes branded the political sequence as a "wacky week", a week during which the country learned that Macron had chosen to keep Borne as his Prime minister through unofficial reports and a more than discreet confirmation by the President's "entourage" given to the media. The multiple postponements of the new cabinet's announcement and the numerous leaks to the media about the government's new composition on announcement day while the official communiqué had not been sent out also contributed to give an unprecedented impression of chaos and uncertainty at the center of government.

Similarly, Le Monde reported that the manner in which Borne's retention of the premiership was announced had been widely considered as showing "little respect" to the Constitution, even inside Macron's own party.

One of the unofficial but most critical goals of this government reshuffle was to broaden parliamentary support for Macron's administration, which is in minority status in legislature as a result of the June 2022 parliamentary elections. Besides, no opposition party represented in Parliament showed interest in propping up a Macron-led administration or even discussing a potential coalition government. Therefore, the reshuffle became the only realistic opportunity for the executive branch to strengthen its political position in the face of the hung parliament elected a year ago.

In spite of that, Macron refused to shake up the ministerial line-up just like he refused to change his Prime minister. The consequence is that the reshuffle, in contrary to one of its purposes, did not change the parliamentary arithmetics, forcing Macron's administration to carry on governing on an ad-hoc, day-to-day basis, therefore risking deadlock and showdown with an opposition-dominated Parliament in the coming months.

The head of the educational trade union (SGEN-CFDT), Catherine Nave-Bekhti, along with educational specialist Philippe Meirieu and former Socialist education minister Najat Vallaud-Belkacem, suggested that Pap Ndiaye lost his position as Education Minister in part due to his reply the week before to the constant criticism from CNews and Europe 1, in which he said that these two outlets, owned by conservative billionaire Vincent Bolloré, had become "radical far-right" news outlets.

Since his appointment to the Cabinet, Pap Ndiaye had become a target of right-wing and far-right opposition parties over his past as an African-American studies academic and his allegedly " woke " ideological inclinations.

• Adoption of the French Constitution of 1848

The June Days (French : les journées de Juin) were an uprising staged by workers in Paris from 22 to 26 June 1848. It was in response to plans to close the National Workshops, created by the Second Republic in order to provide work and a minimal source of income for the unemployed. The National Guard, led by General Louis-Eugène Cavaignac, was called out to quell the rebellion. Over 4,500 people were either killed or injured, while 4,000 insurgents were deported to French Algeria. The uprising marked the end of the hopes of a "democratic and social republic" (république démocratique et sociale) and the victory of the liberals over the Radical Republicans.

Louis Philippe 's July monarchy oversaw a period of internal turmoil in France. The provisional government of the French Second Republic was declared after the abdication of the king in February, which immediately enacted democratic reforms such as universal male suffrage. To combat unemployment, the Second Republic funded the National Workshops, which provided jobs and wages, through new taxes applied to landowners. Higher taxes alienated land owners and peasants, who subsequently opposed the national workshops. As a result, these land taxes were flouted, leading to a financial crisis for the Second Republic.

On 23 April 1848, a mainly moderate and conservative constituent assembly was elected, which was opposed by the Parisian public and radicals. Insurgents then invaded the assembly in the demonstration of 15 May 1848 to prevent their democratic republic from being "eroded away". The invasion was quickly thwarted; however, it sparked fear in conservatives, who had gained a majority of seats in the constituent assembly. Ultimately, the conservatives closed down the National Workshops, a decision which sparked the June uprising.

On 23 June, Comte de Falloux 's committee issued a decree stating that the Workshops would be closed in three days, and that although young men could join the army, provincials would have to return home or they could simply be dismissed. Outrage surrounding the closing of the Workshops increased, and culminated into an uprising. In sections of the city, hundreds of barricades were built which blocked transportation and reduced mobility. The National Guard was called out to halt the riot, but this produced a clash between the guard and the protestors.

Insurgents consisted of labourers who had built barricades out of broken stones. The strength of the National Guard was estimated to be over 40,000 guards; however, they were outnumbered by insurgents as they gained strength by recruiting citizens from their homes or forcing them to join. The insurgents also seized many armories to gather weaponry.

By 26 June, the uprising was over, resulting in the death or injury of about 1,500 troops and about 3,000 insurgents. A notable casualty was Denis Auguste Affre, the Archbishop of Paris, who was killed during peace negotiations. The Archbishop was led to believe that his presence at the barricades might be the means of restoring peace. He accordingly applied to General Cavaignac, who warned him of the risk he was about to incur. Soon afterwards, the firing having ceased at his request, he appeared on the barricade at the entrance to the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, accompanied by M. Albert, of the national guard, who wore the dress of a workingman, and bore a green branch as a sign of peace, and by Tellier, a devoted servant. Very shortly after, shots were heard, and the insurgents hastily returned fire towards the National Guard, thinking they were betrayed, killing the archbishop in the cross fire. The archbishop's public funeral occurred on 7 July. After the insurgents were crushed and arrested en masse, over 4,000 insurgents were deported to Algeria, and all hopes of a revolution were abandoned.

Five months following the June Uprising, the French Constitution of 1848 was adopted, handing executive powers to the president with a four-year term of office, allowing him to appoint ministers and other high-ranking officials. The constitution also provided for an Assembly of 750 legislators, for which public elections would take place every three years. After the constitution was enacted, the 1848 French presidential election was held and Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte was elected. After three years in power, Bonaparte staged a coup d'état, extending his mandate for ten years; he went on to establish the Second French Empire.

Jurisdictional dualism in France is the separation of the French court system into two separate divisions, or " ordres ", as they are called in French: the ordinary courts (ordre judiciaire), and the administrative courts (ordre administratif). The ordinary courts, also known as the judiciary order, handle criminal and civil cases, while the administrative courts handle disputes between individuals and the government. This dual system allows for a clear separation of powers and specialized handling of cases related to the actions of the government. The administrative courts are headed by the Council of State, and the ordinary courts by the Court of Cassation for judiciary law.

The separation of public law (administrative) and private law (judiciary) goes back to Roman law. A separate branch for public law existed during the Ancien régime. Many other countries have such a system (including in common-law countries) not only in having a separate judicial order for administrative courts (which exist also in Germany, for example, with Article 95 of the Basic Law of Germany). However, France is exceptional in this regard because of the position of the administrative judge in being superior to the administration, and because administrative law is largely unwritten, and established mostly by administrative judicial jurisprudence. That is, administrative law derives largely from case law written by administrative judges, and not by laws passed by the legislature.

In the case of the judiciary order, codes are established by the legislature and open to all, but as administrative law is result of jurisprudence and uncodified, it is not discussed in Parliament, not published in the Journal Officiel, and hidden from the public.

When there is a potential conflict of jurisdiction between courts of the administrative order and courts of the judiciary order, this is handled by the Tribunal des conflits.

Courts of the judiciary order (French : ordre judiciaire), known as "ordinary courts", have jurisdiction for two branches: settling civil cases between private individuals, as well as cases of criminal law.

The branch that deals with disputes between private individuals is the civil courts. Civil courts settle disputes (for example, rent, divorce, inheritance) but do not impose penalties. The criminal courts constitute the branch that handles criminal offenses, and punish offenses against people, property and society.

The administrative courts (French : ordre administratif) in France are one of the two main branches of the French dual court system, the other being the judiciary order. It handles cases between individuals and the government at any level. Courts of the administrative order have jurisdiction when a "public person" (not a human, but a personne publique) is involved, for example, a municipality or a government department. Courts of the administrative order are organized in three levels: The Council of State, the administrative courts of appeal in the second instance, and the administrative courtsin the first instance; these courts ensure a balance between the prerogatives of public power and the rights of citizens.

Specifically excluded from administrative law are civil cases between private individuals, as well as cases of criminal law ; these are both handled by the § ordinary courts.

The dual system of law comprises private law (droit privé), also known as judicial law, and public law (droit public). This distinction dates back to Roman law.

Roman law was codified, and in the south of France the Jus gentium continued to be used, although mostly only in the case of public and administrative law, and private law was left to the localities to determine. The distinction between private law and public law goes back to Ulpian, a Roman jurist of the third century, who wrote: "Public law is what regards the welfare of the Roman state, private law what regards the interests of individual persons; because some things are of public, others of private utility."

During the Ancien Regime, the French court system was divided into two branches: the Parlement, which dealt with criminal and civil cases, and the Conseil d'Etat, which dealt with disputes between individuals and the government. This division was based on the idea of separating the judicial and administrative branches of government in order to prevent conflicts of interest and ensure a fair and impartial justice system.

During the Ancien Regime, the Conseil d'Etat played a crucial role in the development of French administrative law. The Conseil d'Etat issued decisions and opinions on legal disputes, which helped to establish a body of administrative law that governed the relationship between individuals and the state. Additionally, the Conseil d'Etat was responsible for advising the king on legal matters, which further solidified its role as the main administrative court.

Montesquieu expressed the distinction between the two, describing public law as, "laws concerning the relationship between those who govern and those who are governed", and private law as "laws concerning the relationship that all citizens have with each other".

The French legal system has undergone several changes and reforms throughout history. After the French Revolution, the Conseil d'Etat was abolished and replaced with a new court system that was based on separation of powers. In the 19th century, the court system was further reorganized and the Conseil d'Etat was re-established as the main administrative court. In the 20th century, several reforms were implemented to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the court system, including the introduction of new specialized courts and the streamlining of the judicial process.

In recent years, the French government has prioritized modernizing the court system by introducing new technologies to increase access to justice and simplifying judicial procedures to make the system more accessible to the public. These included the Légifrance website, offering open access to a complete database of French legal codes and legal texts, and improvements to the site of the Ministère de la Justice.

In 2020, there were significant reforms that resulted in the merger of two courts: the administrative court of appeal and the Council of State, creating the new juge des contentieux de la protection (judge of protection disputes) who handles disputes over the protection of individual rights.

Juste milieu (meaning "middle way" or "happy medium") is a term that has been used to describe centrist political philosophies that try to find a balance between extremes, and artistic forms that try to find a middle ground between the traditional and the modern. In the political sense it is most associated with the French July Monarchy (1830–1848), which ostensibly tried to strike a balance between autocracy and anarchy. The term has been used in both a positive and negative sense.

The term has been used at different times in French history. Jacques-François Blondel, in his article in the Encyclopedia of 1762 described the work of the architect Pierre Contant d'Ivry as shown in the Palais-Royal in Paris as the juste milieu between two extremes, the gravity of the former classicist style and the frivolity of the more recent Rococo style. Pierre-Alexandre-Laurent Forfait, a French engineer who became Minister of the Navy, was elected to the legislature in 1791 during the French Revolution. He was a very moderate revolutionary, and was called the Juste milieu by the extremists, a title he accepted with pride.

During the July Monarchy, in January 1831 Louis-Philippe received an address sent by the city of Gaillac, which said it submitted itself to the King's government "in order to assure the development of the conquests of July". His much-quoted response was that "We will attempt to remain in a juste milieu, in an equal distance from the excesses of popular power and the abuses of royal power."

Vincent E. Starzinger compares the Juste Milieu of the Doctrinaires of France to English Whiggism of the same period, finding similarities in ideas of sovereignty, representation, freedom and history. An article in the Edinburgh Review of January 1833 made this identification, saying the three great parties in France were "its Tory Carlists, its juste milieu Whigs, and its Radical Republicans. The article praised François Guizot and Victor de Broglie as "always the tried and consistent friends of freedom... the most accomplished scholars... of constitutional learning." In 1836 Guizot, then prime minister in France under Louis Philippe, described the concept as,

Our policy... the policy of the juste milieu, is essentially inimical to absolute principles, to consequences carried to the extreme. We ourselves are the living embodiment of this idea; for, allow me to remind you, we have fought for freedom as we have for order... The policy of the juste milieu must be defined as against all excesses; yes, it rejects absolute principles, extreme principles; it is adaptable to the divers needs of society; it manages to stay abreast of ongoing social changes, and in turn engages in combat whenever necessary.

Caricaturists such as Charles Philipon, Jules David and Honoré Daumier generally belonged to the mouvement party, and wanted to implement the ideals of liberty and the French republic. They attacked the juste milieu as a trick to prevent these ideals being achieved. Charles Philipon caricatured king Louis Philippe with a drawing titled Le juste milieu that depicted him as a pear-shaped dummy with no head, wearing ancien regime clothes, but with a tricolor on his hat. A white Bourbon flag is stuffed into his waistcoat. It suggests that his supposed commitment to republican ideals is superficial, and in fact he is a believer in traditional monarchy.

Eventually the tension between the monarchical principle and republican ideals represented in the Juste milieu proved unsustainable, and the regime was overthrown in the French Revolution of 1848.

The term juste milieu has been applied to art in the July Monarchy (1830 – 1848) to describe a style of painting that reconciled classicists such as Auguste Couder and romantics such as Eugène Delacroix. Juste milieu artists included Désiré Court, Jean-Baptiste-Auguste Vinchon, Hanna Hirsch-Pauli, Horace Vernet, Charles-Émile-Callande de Champmartin and Ary Scheffer. The art historian Albert Boime extended the term from this common usage to also cover a "compromise movement" that he detected among artists in the 1880s. There does indeed seem to have been a group of artists who were recognized at the time as falling between the Impressionists and such pompier artists as William-Adolphe Bouguereau.

The term as used from the 1830s through to the 1920s characterized artists who created popular works, not as radical as the avant-garde, but modern nevertheless. They would be looked down as less "authentic" than the path breakers of their time, but they were much more commercially successful. The juste milieu in the fin de siècle had a great range of styles. They can perhaps be best characterized as professional insiders who sought official honors, as opposed to radical outsiders.

Some members of the juste milieu around the end of the nineteenth century thought of themselves as heirs of the French impressionists. Members who exhibited in Vienna in 1903 included Max Liebermann, Max Klinger, Paul-Albert Besnard, Charles Cottet, James McNeill Whistler and John Lavery.

François Pierre Marie Justin Godart (26 November 1871 – 13 December 1956) was a French lawyer and politician who served as the Minister for Health from 3 June 1932 to 18 December 1932.

Justin Godart was born into a working-class family in Lyon on 26 November 1871. Godart was educated at the Collège-lycée Ampère and gained a Doctor of Law there. In 1904, Godart was elected the sixth deputy mayor of Lyon as a member of the Radical Party. In 1906, Godart became a Deputy of the French National Assembly, representing Lyon.

From 1915 to 1918, Godart served as the Undersecretary of State for War in charge of the armed forces medical service. When Édouard Herriot became Prime Minister of France in 1924, Godart was appointed as the Minister for Labour, Hygiene, Welfare Work, and Social Security Provisions. Godart's time in this position came to an end with Herriot's ouster the next year. In 1926, Godart became a Senator, representing the department of Rhone. In 1932, Godart became the Minister of Public Health, again under Herriot. However, Godart did not remain in this position for long, as Herriot again lost power that December.

On 10 July 1940 Godart joined the Vichy 80, a collection of French parliamentarians who unsuccessfully voted against a constitutional amendment dissolving the Third Republic and giving Philippe Pétain the power to establish a new authoritarian state, now known as Vichy France. During World War II, Godart was involved in Resistance activities, editing an anti-Vichy newspaper. Upon Lyon's liberation by Allied forces in September 1944, he became the interim Mayor of Lyon. In 1945, Godart resigned from the Radical Party.

After his political career, Godart continued to play an active role in campaigning for improved labour conditions, such as the eight-hour day. Until 1950, Godart represented France in the International Labour Organization. He died in Paris on 12 December 1956. In 2004, Israel conferred the Righteous among the Nations honorific upon Godart for his services to Jews during the Holocaust.

Jérôme André Cahuzac (French pronunciation: [ ʒeʁom ɑ̃dʁe kaʔyzak ] ; born 19 June 1952) is a French surgeon and former politician who served as Minister of the Budget at the Ministry of the Economy and Finance under President François Hollande from 2012 to 2013. A former member of the Socialist Party (PS), he previously was the member of the National Assembly for the 3rd constituency of Lot-et-Garonne from 1997 to 2002 and again from 2007 to 2012. He resigned from his ministership and was expelled from his party amidst the Cahuzac affair, in which he was accused and subsequently convicted of tax fraud.

A native of Talence, a suburb of Bordeaux, Cahuzac was elected as the member of the National Assembly for the 3rd constituency of Lot-et-Garonne in the 1997 legislative election, but lost his 2002 reelection bid to UMP candidate Alain Merly. He stood again for the seat in 2007 and defeated UMP candidate and former celebrity prosecutor Jean-Louis Bruguière. He was reelected in 2012.

Following the 2001 municipal election, Cahuzac took office as Mayor of Villeneuve-sur-Lot, a position he resigned upon his appointment as a government minister.

In the Socialist Party's 2011 primaries, Cahuzac endorsed François Hollande as the party's candidate for the 2012 presidential election.

On 16 May 2012, Cahuzac was appointed as Minister Delegate for the Budget at the Ministry of the Economy, Finance and External Trade (renamed Ministry of the Economy and Finance on 18 June 2012) in the government of Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault.

He resigned as the minister in charge of fighting against tax fraud on 19 March 2013 due to tax fraud allegations but maintained he was innocent. On 2 April 2013 he admitted on his blog that he had held a secret foreign bank account for about 20 years. As a consequence, he was officially excluded as a member of the Socialist Party on 9 April 2013.

On 3 April 2016, the Panama Papers leak confirmed former allegations adding details, that Cahuzac owned a Seychelles company named Cerman Group Limited, incorporated in 2009, whose director and shareholder were from other offshore companies. When French authorities were investigating allegations of tax fraud in 2013, and Seychelles authorities questioned Mossack Fonseca, the intermediate representing the undisclosed owner, they learned that Cahuzac was the owner. Mossack Fonseca told Seychelles authorities in 3 May 2013, that they severed ties, as Cahuzac was a high risk politically exposed person ; Cerman Group Limited was dissolved in January 2015.

Cahuzac was sentenced to three years in prison and five years of ineligibility on 8 December 2016. He appealed on points of law. In May 2018, the Court of Appeal of Paris gave him four years of prison (two suspended).

The Karachi affair (French : affaire Karachi), otherwise known as Agosta Submarine scandal, was a major military scandal that took place in the second administration of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, involving the presidencies of François Mitterrand and Jacques Chirac in 1992–97.

The scandal involved the payment of massive commissions and kickbacks between France and Pakistan over the negotiations to acquire Agosta 90B-class submarines. The submarines utilized the emerging air-independent propulsion (AIP) proprietary designs, which Pakistan was eager to acquire over the nuclear submarines.

In 1992, the Benazir government began negotiating with French President François Mitterrand to procure the designs for the expensive and complex submarine, eventually signing the contract in 1994 for a sum equivalent to € 826 million ($ 996 m). Negotiations and the decision-making for defense procurement with France was extremely controversial, with the United Kingdom later entering in the competition by offering its four Upholder -class submarines, which were being decommissioned from the military service with the Royal Navy.

The Pakistan Navy NHQ wanted to procure the four used British-manufactured diesel-electric Upholder -class submarines, which were already available and at a lesser cost than newly build Agosta s, which were still in the prototype phase, and would have taken years to manufacture and deliver. Nonetheless, the Benazir administration selected the Agosta, taking advantage of the lucrative financial credits provided by France.

Commissions of 6.25% of the contract, approximately €50 million, were paid out to the lobbying firms in Pakistan and France. Some €50m were allegedly paid as " sweeteners " to various senior Pakistan Navy admirals and officers as well as the political leaders. In 1996–97, the Naval Intelligence led by its Director-General, Rear-Admiral Tanvir Ahmed, secretly launched its investigations into this matter and began collecting physical evidence that eventually led to the exposure of Chief of Naval Staff, Admiral Mansurul Haq, in receiving massive monetary commissions in 1997. Massive media coverage and the news of the dismissals of one and two-star admirals tarnished the image of the Navy, with Admiral Fasih Bokhari, who took over the command of the Navy from Admiral Mansurul Haq, forced to attempt damage control of the situation.

In 1990s, it was legal in France to award monetary commissions and kickbacks to the political lobbyists involved in the bilateral deals until France began partied and ratified the OECD Convention that led to the outlawing the practice of awarding monetary commissions in 2000.

Since its exposure in the news media of both France and Pakistan, the scandal has been involved in various investigative journalism and attracted sensations and conspiracy theories in both countries, including this scandal's allegement of financing the political campaign of then- Prime Minister Edouard Balladur in the presidential elections took place in 1995. Upon electing President Jacques Chirac cancelled the commissions and kickbacks, angering many officials in Pakistan and France according to the media reports. Other theories and subsequent investigative journalist reports alleged that the bus bombing on 8 May 2002 in Karachi that killed eleven French engineers in Karachi was in retaliation for the cancellation of these commissions. This theory was rejected by the Government of Pakistan when the FIA and the CID made potential discovery in linking the HuM and the al-Qaeda had carried out the terrorist attack in Karachi, mistaking the French nationals for the Americans.

Plans to replace the ageing Hangor -class diesel-electric submarines with nuclear submarines were aggressively pursued by then- Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee Admiral Iftikhar Ahmed Sirohey as a counter to Indian Navy activities in 1990. The motivation for procuring nuclear submarines was partly due to the Indian Navy's lease of the ageing K-43, a Charlie -class submarine, from the Soviet Union in 1990, and Chairman Joint chiefs Adm. Sirohey had been negotiating with the Chinese Navy to acquire the short-term lease for the submarine, Han. Pakistan abandoned talks with the Chinese Navy after the Indian contract with the Soviet Union was terminated over training issues and restrictions on Indian sailors accessing the missile control room and reactor compartment of the Charlie -class submarine.

In 1990, Pakistan entered in negotiation with Sweden, China, and France over the procurement and acquisition of submarines with air-independent propulsion as a substitute for nuclear-powered submarines. Sweden offered their Gotland -class submarines with an AIP technology, while China offered the diesel-electric, Type 035 submarines at a price tag of $US 180 million, which was $US 83 million cheaper than the French submarines. The Chinese offer was rejected partly due to Navy exploring the idea of acquiring AIP technology, despite the fact that more Chinese submarines were available to buy. Due to the expensive procurement of the Gotland class and that the Type 035 was comparatively outdated, the Navy abandoned their talks with Swedish and Chinese governments, and consequently the Pakistan government entered talks with the French government.

Upon hearing the news in 1992–93, the Chinese government reportedly offered to sell off their Han -class nuclear submarine at price tag of $63 million USD, which Pakistani war strategists were less enthusiastic due to the submarine's noise and performance as they view it as "less tactical advantage" for Pakistan.

Eventually, Pakistan entered in negotiation with France over the procurement of the Agosta-90Bravo submarines after the French designer, the DCNS, presented the Agosta 90B prototype in 1992. At this time, the personal connections between Chief of Naval Staff Admiral S. M. Khan and British First Sea Lord Admiral of the Fleet Sir Julian Oswald resulted in the British government selling the Type 21 frigates to Pakistan in 1993–94.

Learning that Pakistan was in the market for submarines, the Royal Navy entered in the competition by offered their four Upholder -class diesel-electric submarines to the Pakistan Navy, an offer which was favored by the naval chief Adm. S.M. Khan, who began lobbying for the British submarines over the French submarines.

The United Kingdom formally entered in the competition with France in 1993–94, offering their four British manufactured Upholder -class submarines, which were available to immediate transfer for a much lower price than the French offer. Although Admiral Khan favored procuring the British submarines, his Vice Chief of Naval Staff Vice-Admiral A. U. Khan had provided strong lobbying in the government of procuring the technology and proprietary designs of Agosta submarine from France rather than procuring the readily available British submarines. There was a strong lobby for French technology over the British technology, Rear-Admiral Fasih Bokhari, DCNS (Supply) and Rear-Admiral Aziz Mirza, then- Additional Secretary at the Ministry of Defense (MoD) also favored acquiring the Agosta 90Bravos over the Upholder s.

When the retirement of Admiral S.M. Khan was confirmed in 1994, Aftab Mirani, the Defense Minister in the Bhutto government informed Adm. Khan that the final decision was for the acquisition of the French technology over the British second-hand submarines.

In 1993, the Benazir government had been considering acquiring and commissioning the four diesel-electric Upholder -class submarines from the United Kingdom, which were made available after Pakistan had bought the Amazon -class frigates and commissioned them into the Pakistan Navy as the Tariq class in 1994.

With the Chief of Naval Staff Admiral S.M. Khan lobbying for the Upholder -class boats, which were available at a much lower price and in greater numbers than the French offer, others in his naval staff, including Vice Chief of Naval Staff (VCNS) V-Adm. A.U. Khan and R-Adm. Fasih Bokhari, the DCNS (Supply), who were submariners by profession and had trained in the French-built Hangor -class submarines, were on the idea of utilizing the air-independent propulsion technology that French Navy were offering.

Nonetheless, the Navy NHQ recommended that the Finance ministry and the Defence production ministry acquire the Upholder class which were then readily available, for a lower prince while the Agosta s had yet to be built, and would have taken years to be delivered.

Upon hearing of the United Kingdom's offer, the French government offered extremely lucrative monetary offers and generous financial credits to the Pakistan government in its annual federal budgets if it selected the Agosta –90Bravo submarines, which had the additional advantage of keeping the "underemployed KSEW in Karachi" in employment and works.

Despite the strong political opposition by India over this deal in 1994, French President François Mitterrand and Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto signed off a submarine procurement deal that was initially budgeted at $ 520 million but the programme of technology transfer cost $950 million, for which France first provided loans that were to be paid in five to six years.

In 1994, the French government awarded the defence contracts to DCNS, Thales, Dassault Systèmes, as the French Navy 's Forces Sous-marines took the responsibility of providing training to Pakistan Navy's submarine command (SUBCOM). In Pakistan, the entire contract was awarded to KSEW by the Government of Pakistan, that opened the employment opportunities in self-sustainability while issuing major tender offers to unemployed heavy machine industry, as private accounting firms were hired as civilian defense contractors to oversee the accounting and finances.

In 1994–96, the French government paid large amounts of commissions and kickbacks paid in Euros to lobbying firms in Pakistan and France as part of the common practice— a practice that the Pakistani government also followed to award commissions paid in Pakistan Rupees to naval officers and political figures to maintain the support of the program despite its cost. This policy was intended to "convince" political leaders and military officials, but such practices were declared illegal in France until the signing of the OECD Convention against Corruption in 2000.

The French state-owned consortium, the SOFEMA, channeled money to political and military officials through front companies and individuals in Pakistan and France. The names of the recipients are still kept as secret but the amounts are known and were reported to the French Ministry of Finance and Pakistan Ministry of Finance in 2000, as these commissions are 6.25% of the contract amount. The French newspaper, Libération, revealed that payments of SOFEMA continued until 2001, when they were stopped by former French President Jacques Chirac.

As early as 1995, the Naval Intelligence had been tracking news of military officials being financially paid by France and Pakistan in a program overseen by the Chief of Naval Staff Adm. Mansurul Haq. Knowledge on commission being paid to the naval officials were exposed when Naval Intelligence's spy chief Rear-Admiral Javed Iqbal led the arrest of the project engineer, Capt. Z.U. Alvi at the Karachi Naval Dockyard, based on an accidental intelligence based on the sting operation. Capt. Alvi who confirmed his contacts with Zafar Iqbal, a defence contractor, and accepted "receiving millions of € and R$ in the briefcase(s) " only to be handed over to the interested military and political figures. Civilian defense contractor, Zafar Iqbal, was a businessman who had financial ties with the Bhutto-Zardari family and had access to the sensitive accounting departments linked to the Navy NHQ in Islamabad, which prompted the Naval Intelligence to conduct the further inquiry into business deals of Iqbal after receiving a reference from an anonymous naval officer.

The investigative leads, case studies, and the evidences were then compiled by the R-Adm. Javed Iqbal who passed it further to the acting director in 1995.

The Naval Intelligence, under acting director Cdre. Shahid Ashraf, did look into this matter but the efforts were hampered when Cdre. Ashraf reportedly confronted Adm. Masurul Haq, and later joined the scheme when he accepted the subsequent financial amount that was transferred to Ashraf's account by Adm. Mansurul Haq in 1995. It was not until 1996 when new director, Rear-Admiral Tanvir Ahmed, began looking into this matter and dug out the cover-up intelligence information in this matter, eventually launching his own investigation with new and most reliable leads that he had discovered when he looked into this matter.

In 1997, the scandal was eventually exposed in the news media by director of naval intelligence, Rear-Admiral Tanvir Ahmed when he authorized a second sting operation that the arrests of several high ranking admirals in the Navy, and Cdre. Ashraf who had departed to the United Kingdom to attend the war course at the Royal College of Defence Studies in Great Britain, was eventually recalled to face the court-martial.

In 1997, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif signed the relief papers that dismissed the commission of Admiral Mansurul Haq, and was arrested for a brief time by the Naval Police but was released when Naval Intelligence investigations led by R-Adm. Ahmad failed to produce any evidence against him in 1998.

In 1999, the National Accountability Bureau (NAB) under Cdre. Muhammad Zakaullah, announced to take over of inquiries and requested the extradition of Adm. Mansurul Haq from the United States in 2001 in light of new evidences surfaced. Mansurul Haq later faced the accountability and transferred more than $ 9.5 million, though a plea bargain deal that ensure his release, into the Navy's account in 2003–04—an amount that was said to be enough to pay the salaries of entire Navy for two years. In 1999–2005, there were several indictments and convictions held against civilian contractors and politicians by the courts in Pakistan in light of the inquiries conducted by the NAB and the FIA who were able to recover the large sum of amount into national treasury through the plea bargains.

Inquiries and findings that involved several high ranking admirals were subjected to a massive cover up by the Musharraf administration when the release of Cdre. Ashraf and Capt. Liaquat Ali Malik was authorized under the unknown circumstances in 2002–03. Major allegations were also directed towards the senior ranking army generals who played a crucial role in covering-up other defence deals with France and Ukraine when Agosta commission case was exposed in 2000–03 to prevent tarnishing the further image of the military in the public.

In France, the NAB and the FIA investigations also implicated the civilian defence contractor, Amir Lodhi (brother Dr. Maliha Lodhi), whose share was €2.9 million, Aftab Shaban Mirani, the Defence Minister in Benazir's administration, Zafar Iqbal, a civilian defence contractor, Hazar Bijarani, Defence Production minister in Benazir administration, and A.A. Zardari, Investment minister in Benazir's administration. According to the FIA and NAB, Amir Lodhi was a close associate and business partner of Asif Ali Zardari and Benazir Bhutto. In 2010, Cdre. Ashraf leveled serious allegations on Sharif family of being benefactory of the scheme, though he failed to provide subsequent evidences.

The NAB and the FIA reportedly recovered more than ~ $ 30 million from the benefitted parties though it was reported that ~ $ 28 million were still untraceable and unaccounted for.

When the scandal became public in 1997 by the Naval Intelligence, the French court opened the inquiry into this matter as French prosecutors were able to retrieve evidences from their Pakistani counterparts. The French media widely reported that Ziad Takieddine, a Lebanese French civilian contractor, received millions of Euros as part of his commission, and then paid off lobbying firms in Pakistan and France in their respective currencies. The French courts eventually opened the inquiries and founded that the large part of the commission was used to finance the presidential campaign of Edouard Balladur in 1995.

The French court investigation also founded the connection of Paul Manafort, an American adviser to French presidential candidate Edouard Balladur, into this weapons trade with Pakistan. On April 26, 1995, it was reported that €8.8 million were donated to the presidential campaign of former French Prime Minister Edouard Balladur from the account of Crédit du Nord, only three days after the first round of presidential elections. Based on the court's insights, the French Police detailed Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres, the former French culture minister in Balludur's government, for questioning about the kickbacks on Agosta 90Brave submarines deal which may have funded the Edouard Balladur 's failed 1995 presidential campaign.

On 3 July 2012, French police raided Nicolas Sarkozy 's private residence and campaign office as part of their probe into claims that he was involved in illegal political campaign financing. The French prosecutors leveled allegations on French politicians of their involvement in selling the Agosta submarine commissions that was used in political campaigns. Nicolas Sarkozy who was the Finance minister in Balladur's government in 1995, had denied any involvement in the scandal.

In the morning of 8 May 2002, a man driving an explosive-laden Honda Civic parallel to the Daewoo city bus outside the Sheraton Hotel in Karachi, detonated his car with the moving bus, ripping the bus apart and severely damaging the hotel. In this attack, it was reported that eleven of the French navy's engineers and two Pakistani engineers were killed while 40 others were injured in this attack. The French engineers were working with their Pakistani counterparts to assemble the machined parts of the Agosta 90 Bravo submarines in Naval Dockyard in Karachi Initial blames were put on the Indian branch of al-Qaeda, and later Pakistani crime-scene investigators linked it with HuM operatives who later confessed that the attacks were supposed to target the Americans but mistakenly attacked the French nationals.

The European media later placed the blame on the Pakistani military who orchestrated this attack in retaliation for the cancellation of these commissions— this theory was rejected by the Pakistan MoI after Interior Minister Moinuddin Haider held a televised press conference to release the details of mastermind, Sharib Zubair, arrested on 18 September 2002.

The families of eleven killed French engineers filed multiple lawsuits in Sindh High Court with their lawyers arguing for financial compensation from the governments of both nations while seeking the death penalties for those accused, and the two HuM operatives were sentenced to death for the bombing in 2003. The suspected bomb-maker, Mufti Mohammad Sabir, was arrested in Karachi on 8 September 2005 and hanged in 2014. In series of lawsuits filed by the families of French engineers, there were several convictions on many suspected HuM operatives who were either hanged or facing solitary confinement in successive years, though the courts had acquitted three defendants by 2009 due to lack of evidences.

According to French Libération, the links between the attack and the activities of the DCNS were raised by it, and by American investigators in 2002 who joined the investigation. The DCNS recruited Claude Thévenet, an official from the DST, who worked with Tariq Pervez, a lead investigator in the FIA 's investigation into corruption in this scandal and events leading towards targeting the French nationals, to investigate the circumstances of the attack. Thévenet report, titled: "Nautilus", dated 11 September 2002, concluded that it was related to the discontinuation of payment of commissions. This report, although intended as confidential, was seized by the judges in the spring of 2008, in connection with another case, and forwarded to Judge Marc Trévidic.

The Pakistani investigators contested the French findings and cited their theory that the attack was indeed carried out by HuM and al-Qaeda, mistaking the French nationals for the Americans.

In 2013, Mansurul Haq filed a lawsuit against the Government of Pakistan, seeking to restore his military rank and medical pensions, at the Sindh High Court. The Sindh High Court agreed upon restoring the rank (as former) but not the medical pensions that are enjoyed by the retired four-star officers in the Pakistani military – Haq later died from chronic heart disease in 2018.

In 2002–03, the Navy, NAB, FIA and the Musharraf administration had to sustained strong criticism over the handling of the scandal by the former spies and investigators who served in the Naval Intelligence. Within the Navy, the officers from the Surface Command, along with Aviation Command (NAVCOM) blamed the officers in the Submarine Command (COMSUBS) of receiving the commissions and kickbacks. In 2010, the Investigative journalism in this matter was launched by journalists from Dawn News and Geo News after Asif Ali Zardari assume the presidency in 2008.

According to V-Adm. Javed Iqbal in 2013, it was Adm. S.M. Khan, the Navy chief in 1994, who "was the real person to take away the big chunk because the deal was implemented in his tenure." Navy investigator, R-Adm. Tanvir Ahmed, also backed and echoed Adm. Iqbal 's allegation and scrutinized Adm. S.M. Khan of receiving the commissions and kickbacks while giving criticism to Navy's naval crime investigation branch for singling out Mansurul Haq.

The Navy's investigators, V-Adm. Javed Iqbal and R-Adm. Ahmad, reportedly testified in media that the "top brass of the Navy's leadership at that time had come from the Submarine Command (SUBCOM), including Vice-Admiral A. U. Khan, Adm. Abdul Aziz Mirza, and Adm. Fasih Bokhari, which according to investigators, were central in covering-up the scandal by quietly closing the investigations. Major allegations also directed towards the Pakistan Army 's generals who worked towards with their naval counterparts to cover-up the investigations to prevent maligning the image of the Navy and the military as whole.

In 2011, the News International editorial gave criticism to Fasih Bokhari of quietly closed the case against retired Mansurul Haq when the latter was not found guilty but did not take actions against those naval officers who had received kickbacks including Aftab Shaban Mirani who the Defence Minister involved in the affairs."

The title keeper of the seals or equivalent is used in several contexts, denoting the person entitled to keep and authorize use of the great seal of a given country. The title may or may not be linked to a particular cabinet or ministerial office. This is most often the case today, but in the past the role was often a distinct and important job.

The official Keeper of the Great Seal of Canada is the Governor General. At his or her installation, the governor general swears three oaths, one of which is the oath of the office of keeper of the great seal. The seal is also presented to the Governor General who entrusts it back to the registrar general for safekeeping. The seal is actually kept with the Registrar General of Canada, a title which since 1995 has been linked to the office of Minister of Industry.

Each province since 1869 has its own seal and their keepers are the provincial Lieutenant Governors. As the Registrar General actually keeps the Great seal of Canada, so the provincial Great Seals are placed by the lieutenant-governors of the provinces into the keeping of the provincial Attorneys-General.

The French Keeper of the Seals (Garde des Sceaux) is a title held by the Minister of Justice. Formerly, as Keeper of the Seals of France, this title belonged to the Chancellor, the ancien régime counterpart of the minister of justice. The title is nowadays often used interchangeably with "Minister of Justice of France."

The Minister of Justice guards the Great Seal of France, dating from 1848, in his or her office, as well as the stamping press. The Seal was used in 1958 to seal the Constitution of France and has since been used to seal certain constitutional amendments.

In Italy, the Minister of Justice assumes the duties of Guardasigilli (Keeper of the Seals). As Guardasigilli, the Minister of Justice countersigns all laws and decrees signed by the president and the decrees issued by other ministries. The Minister of Justice is also the editor of the Gazzetta Ufficiale della Repubblica Italiana, the official bulletin of the Italian Republic.

The Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal of Japan (内大臣, Naidaijin) was an administrative post not of Cabinet rank in the government of the Empire of Japan, responsible for keeping the Privy Seal of Japan and State Seal of Japan.

In the Netherlands, custody of the great seal is held ex-officio by the Minister of Justice.

The Governor-General of New Zealand has custody of the Seal of New Zealand. However, responsibility for the seal is delegated to the Clerk of the Executive Council. The seal is affixed to various instruments that require it.

In medieval and Renaissance times the Papal Custode del Piombo ("Keeper of the Lead ") was an important and well-paid office, always held by a friar. The painter Sebastiano del Piombo held it from 1531 until his death in 1546, and the nickname he is known by came from his job-title. He had to take holy orders for the purpose, despite having a wife and two sons. The position was usually awarded for life, and in the Renaissance was often given to artists who worked on papal projects. The important architect Bramante had been appointed in 1513, but died the next year, when Mariano Fetti succeeded. He was already a friar, and a sort of court jester, but also an intimate friend to the Medici Pope Leo X. He held the role under three popes until his death in 1531, when Sebastiano succeeded him.

Several British officials have titles connected to the keeping of seals.

The United States Secretary of State is the official keeper of the Great Seal of the United States, and the seal may only be affixed to instruments as provided by law or by authorization of the President. The authority to manage the operation of the device is delegated to an official at the State Department. This official is the Director of the Office of Presidential Appointments, the office that manages the Great Seal at the Department of State. Informally, the director is sometimes referred to as the “Keeper” in the sense that the job has been delegated.

Unlike the Great Seals listed above, the Great Seal of the United States is the primary graphical emblem of the United States and is used equivalently to a coat of arms.

The seals of individual U.S. states are typically the responsibility of the State Secretary of State.

Minister of Justice (French : Ministre de la Justice), formally known as Keeper of the Seals, Minister of Justice (Garde des Sceaux, ministre de la Justice [ ɡaʁd de so ministʁ d(ə) la ʒystis ]), is a cabinet position in the Government of France. The current minister of justice has been Gérald Darmanin since 2024. The ministry is headquartered on Place Vendôme in the 1st arrondissement of Paris.

The Minister of Justice also holds the ceremonial office of Keeper of the Seals of France and is custodian of the Great Seal of France. This symbolic role is still shown in the order of words of the minister's official designation, Minister of Justice, Keeper of the Seals (Ministre de la Justice, garde des Sceaux).

France's Ministry of Justice might oversee the administration of justice in French Guiana, French Polynesia, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Mayotte, New Caledonia, Réunion, Saint Barthélemy, Saint-Martin, Saint Pierre and Miquelon and Wallis and Futuna.

Kering S.A. (French: [ keʁiŋ ]) is a French multinational holding company specializing in luxury goods, headquartered in Paris. It owns the brands Gucci, Yves Saint Laurent, Balenciaga, Bottega Veneta, Alexander McQueen, Creed, and Maui Jim, among others.

The timber-trading company Pinault S.A. was founded in 1962, by François Pinault. After the company was quoted on Euronext Paris in 1988, it became the retail conglomerate Pinault-Printemps-Redoute (PPR) in 1994. The luxury group was rebranded Kering in 2013. It has been a constituent of the CAC 40 since 1995. François-Henri Pinault has been President of Kering since 2005, and Luca de Meo CEO since September 2025. In 2025, the group's revenue reached €14.67 billion.

In 1962, François Pinault opened the Établissements Pinault in Brittany (France) specialized in timber trading with a 100,000-franc loan from the bank. His business grew rapidly by acquiring many local timber operations and building its own import bridges, turning Pinault S.A. into a leading timber trader in France in the 1980s. By 1988, the group owned 180 companies and 33 factories for an annual revenue of 10 billion francs.

In 1988, Pinault S.A. was listed on the Paris Stock Exchange and started a new period of growth in the retail sector through major acquisitions. In 1989, Pinault S.A. purchased 20% of CFAO, a French distribution conglomerate active throughout Africa. In 1990, Pinault S.A. and CFAO merged, and François Pinault became head of the newly formed group which acquired Conforama (French furniture retailer) in 1991, Printemps (French department stores) in 1992, which also owned 54% of La Redoute (French mail-order shopping retailer), and Fnac (French bookstore, multimedia and electronics retailer) in 1994. The group was renamed Pinault-Printemps-Redoute in 1994.

In 1999, Pinault-Printemps-Redoute purchased a controlling 42% stake of the Gucci group for $3 billion, and 100% of Yves Saint Laurent. Those investments marked the cornerstone of the group's shift towards luxury. Through Gucci, Pinault-Printemps-Redoute acquired Boucheron in 2000, Bottega Veneta and Balenciaga in 2001, and signed partnerships with Alexander McQueen and Stella McCartney.

In 2003, François-Henri Pinault, son of the founder François Pinault, became general manager of Artémis, the family holding company that controlled Pinault-Printemps-Redoute. In 2005, he was named president and CEO of Pinault-Printemps-Redoute, a year after the group had reached a 99.4% ownership of Gucci. The group continued acquiring luxury brands: Sowind Group (watch company owner of Girard-Perregaux) and Brioni (Italian tailor) in 2011; Pomellato Group (jewelry company owner of Pomellato and Dodo) and Qeelin (jewelry) in 2012; Christopher Kane (British fashion house) and Richard Ginori (porcelain) in 2013; Ulysse Nardin (watches) in 2014. The group also sold its retail assets: Le Printemps in 2006; Conforama in 2011; CFAO in 2012; Fnac in 2012; La Redoute in 2013. PPR developed a 'sport & lifestyle' portfolio with the acquisition of Puma in 2007, Cobra Golf in 2010, and Volcom in 2011, all of which were sold the following decade.

In March 2013, PPR changed its name to Kering. Bottega Veneta hit the billion-dollar sales mark in 2012. In 2014, Kering created its own eyewear production arm, Kering Eyewear (1.5 billion euros revenue in 2023), and acquired the eyewear brands Lindberg in 2021 and Maui Jim in 2022. Balenciaga was turned into a disruptive fashion house and Yves Saint Laurent hit the 2-billion dollar sales mark in 2019. From 2015 to 2022, the group's revenue was essentially driven by Gucci's year-on-year high performance, the latter hitting the 10-billion dollars sales mark in 2022. The group divested its interests in Stella McCartney in 2018, Christopher Kane in 2019, and its watch division (Girard-Perregaux and Ulysse Nardin) in 2022. Since 2015, Kering has been hosting the program Women in Motion in partnership with the Cannes Festival to highlight and reward women's contribution to cinema, a program that was extended to the Rencontres d'Arles photography festival in 2019.

In 2023, Kering's annual results declined to 19.6 billion (-4%), mainly caused by the deceleration of Gucci's streak. That same year, Kering acquired the fragrance company Creed, 30% of the fashion house Valentino, and Kering Beauté was launched to manage in-house the development of beauty products for the group's brands. In 2025, Luca de Meo was appointed CEO to give a new impetus to the luxury group. One of his priority focus was to address the group's financial dependency on Gucci. In October 2025, Kering sold its beauty division, which includes Creed, to L'Oréal in a deal that values the segment at approximately $4 billion. The group's jewelry and watch brands (Boucheron, Pomelatto, Dodo, Qeelin), along with its industrial arm Raselli Franco Group, were incubated in the new subsidiary Kering Jewelry.

On July 7, 2026, Kering terminated its Gucci Beauty licensing agreement with Coty, ahead of the original June 2028 expiration date. Under the revised terms, Coty will receive approximately $400 million, continue operating Gucci Beauty through mid-2027, and subsequently, a new 50-year licensing agreement with L'Oréal will take effect on July 1, 2027.

Kering's headquarters are located in the former Hôpital Laennec in the 7th arrondissement of Paris. The parent holding company of Kering is Groupe Artémis. In 2025, Kering made 14.67 billion euros in revenue, and managed 43,731 employees and 1,719 stores.

Kering fully or partially owns the following brands:

Kering also owns Kering Eyewear (luxury eyewear production arm) and Kering Beauté (cosmetics division).

L'Art culinaire was a biweekly gastronomical magazine for professional chefs founded in Paris in 1882 by Maurice Dancourt, who later used the pseudonym Châtillon-Plessis. Its first issue appeared as a supplement to La Petite Revue illustrée: littéraire, artistique et gastronomique in January 1883. Its editors and contributors included Philéas Gilbert, Auguste Escoffier, and other leading chefs. In the 1890s, it was edited by Châtillon-Plessis and became "the leading professional culinary journal in the world", with contributors across Europe and North America, and a claimed readership of 10,000. During the first World War, it was published irregularly, and after the war, it lost prestige and contributors, including Escoffier, Gilbert, and Prosper Montagné, to La Revue culinaire. Its last issue was in 1953.

Starting in 1894, Escoffier contributed recipes and model menus to each issue: "L'école des menus: étude et composition de menus modernes à la maison, à l'hôtel, et au restaurant".

The magazine was originally the organ of the Union Universelle pour le Progrès de l'Art Culinaire, founded earlier in 1882, and became the organ of the Société des Cuisiniers français pour le Progrès de l'Art Culinaire (nominally the Paris section of the Union) in 1883. The Union and the Société had three goals: publishing a journal to disseminate the latest ideas; establishing a professional cooking school in Paris; and promoting culinary competitions (concours culinaires). The cooking school was finally established in 1891 on rue Bonaparte, but failed in 1894. The first competition was held in December 1882, before the magazine was launched, the second in November 1883, and thereafter it was held annually in January. It inspired cooking competitions in Vienna (1884), London (1885), Brussels (1887), and New York (before 1892).

L'Histoire is a monthly mainstream French magazine dedicated to historical studies, recognized by peers as the most important historical popular magazine (as opposed to specific university journals or less scientific popular historical magazines).

L'Histoire was founded by Michel Winock. Jean-Noël Jeanneney, president of the National Library of France since 2002, and Jean-Michel Gaillard are part of the editorial board. Many historians who write for L'Histoire also teach at the Paris Institute of Political Studies, better known as Sciences Po.

According to historian Gérard Noiriel in 2005, "L'Histoire" has lost its status as a "high-level popular science magazine" and emphasizes that "the scholarly dimension of its initial approach has virtually disappeared." Noting that "one no longer finds in 'L'Histoire' the list of courses at the Collège de France, but rather television listings," he adds: "most issues are directly related to current events, and the normative stance of intellectual journalism has prevailed at the expense of scientific understanding."

The association Acrimed criticized the special issue dated May 2008: "First, the entire field of historical studies revolves around the magazine itself, its collaborators and the initiatives it supports. Then, historical debates are reduced to the positions of the editorial staff or those close to them, with criticism of these positions barely mentioned or dismissed outright. According to this article, "L'Histoire" has a clear preference for historians such as François Furet and Stéphane Courtois, known for their anti-communist or even anti-Marxist positions. The theses of Marxist historians, such as Michel Vovelle or Albert Soboul, are poorly represented there. Acrimed denounces a discrimination resulting in a refusal of debate, for example regarding the presentation of the controversy launched by the publication in 1997 of the Black Book of Communism : the association asserts that the historian supposed to criticize a thesis is judge and party, which would pose a problem from the point of view of scientific research. Finally, Acrimed considers that, like other newspapers in the group to which it belongs, the magazine produces a " liberal discourse ".

Furthermore, Acrimed notes that in a special issue published in April 2017, on the eve of the 2017 French presidential election, and entitled "The Great Quarrel: The History of France," "L'Histoire" devotes four pages to an interview with Emmanuel Macron, the only candidate granted access to the magazine to explain how his conception of history is intertwined with his vision of France. The association emphasizes that "Sciences et Avenir," another publication belonging to Claude Perdriel], an outspoken supporter of Macron, also published at the same time a single interview with a candidate.

L'Intermédiaire des chercheurs et curieux (French pronunciation: [ lɛ̃tɛʁmedjɛʁ de ʃɛʁʃœʁ e kyʁjø ], lit. ' The Intermediary of Researchers and the Curious '), abbreviated as ICC, was a monthly French magazine consisting of questions and answers of its readers on various encyclopedic topics. It focused mainly on art, history, genealogy, literature, and religions.

The magazine appeared from 1864 to 1940. Initially it focused on the arts and all sciences. It reappeared in April 1951, first under a slightly different name.

A high-ranking official of Scottish origin, Charles Read, under the pseudonym of Carle de Rash, was the founder and the first director. He took as a model the Notes and Queries, published in London, and based it on the same principle. Genealogical and nobility issues gained in importance following the reappearance in 1951.

Since 1981 ICC is not published in September, reducing the number of issues from 12 to 11 per year. It seized publication in 2016.

The ICC was sold by annual subscription:

L'Oréal S.A. (French: [ lɔʁe.al ]) is a French multinational personal care corporation registered in Paris and headquartered in Clichy, Hauts-de-Seine. As of 2024, it is the world's largest cosmetics company. As of the early 2020s, L'Oréal owned 36 brands and 497 patents.

In the early 20th century, Eugène Paul Louis Schueller (1881–1957), a French chemist, developed a hair dye formula called l'Auréale. Schueller formulated and manufactured his own products, which he sold to Parisian hairdressers. On 31 July 1909, Schueller registered his company, the Société Française de Teintures Inoffensives pour Cheveux (Safe Hair Dye Company of France), which eventually became L'Oréal. In 1920, the company employed three chemists; the number of employees continued to grow, with 100 by 1950, and 1,000 by 1984; in 2021, there was an estimated total of 85,252 worldwide.

After launching in the hair-colour business, L'Oréal branched out into other cleansing and beauty products. As of 2020, L'Oréal marketed in all sectors of the beauty business: hair colour, hair styling, body and skincare, cleansers, makeup, and fragrance.

L'Oréal purchased Synthélabo, a pharmaceutical company, in 1973. Synthélabo merged with Sanofi in 1999 to become Sanofi-Synthélabo. Sanofi-Synthélabo merged with Aventis in 2004 to become Sanofi-Aventis.

Nestlé has owned a stake in L'Oréal since 1974, when it bought into the company at the request of Liliane Bettencourt, the daughter of the founder of L'Oréal.

In 1984, L'Oréal acquired part of Helena Rubinstein Incorporated from Albi International. The portions acquired were the Japanese and Latin American divisions of the company, along with overseeing the operations and the markets for those divisions. The joint venture partnership between L'Oréal and Albi International lasted until 1988, when L'Oréal brought the remainder of the company and has owned the entire company since then.

From 1988 to 1989, L'Oréal controlled the film company Paravision International, whose properties included the Filmation and De Laurentiis libraries. StudioCanal acquired the Paravision properties in 1994.

On 20 August 2002, L'Oréal announced that its wholly owned U.S. subsidiary, L'Oréal USA, had acquired ARTec Systems Group, Inc., a professional salon hair care and hair color company based in Port Washington, New York, for an undisclosed sum. Founded in 1990 by Leland Hirsch and Michael Mazzei, ARTec sold hair care, hair color and styling products under the Textureline, Purehair, Kiwi, Enamels and Spaline names through roughly 20,000 U.S. salons, and reported net sales to distributors of $38 million in the previous year. L'Oréal said the purchase was intended to broaden the L'Oréal Professionnel brand beyond hair color, which had accounted for the large majority of the division's U.S. sales. ARTec's Port Washington operations were merged into L'Oréal Professional's New York office, and both founders left their posts while remaining as contract consultants. The ARTec lines were subsequently absorbed into L'Oréal Professionnel and the standalone brand was retired.

On 17 March 2006, L'Oréal purchased cosmetics company The Body Shop for £562 million. In May 2008, L'Oréal acquired YSL Beauté for $1.8 billion.

In 2014, L'Oréal finalized the acquisition of major Chinese beauty brand Magic Holdings for $840 million. In February 2014, L'Oréal agreed to buy back 8% of its shares for €3.4bn from Nestlé. In February 2014, Shiseido agreed to sell its Carita and Decléor brands to L'Oréal for €227.5 million (US$312.93 million (2014)). In June 2014, L'Oréal agreed to acquire NYX Cosmetics for an undisclosed price, bolstering its makeup offerings in North America. Also that year, L'Oréal announced it had agreed to purchase Brazilian hair care company Niely Cosmeticos Group for an undisclosed amount. In September 2014, L'Oréal acquired the brand Carol's Daughter. In July 2016, L'Oréal agreed to acquire IT Cosmetics for $1.2 billion.

In 2017, Bettencourt died and left the business to her daughter, Françoise Bettencourt Meyers.

In 2018, L'Oréal acquired the beauty technology company ModiFace. In May 2018, L'Oréal announced a new beauty and fragrance partnership with Valentino. In December 2020, L'Oréal announced that it would acquire Takami Co, a Japanese skincare company.

In 2021, L'Oréal announced the acquisition of the vegan skincare brand Youth to the People.

In April 2023, L'Oréal purchased Australian luxury cosmetics brand Aesop for US$2.53 billion. In December 2023, L'Oréal announced its acquisition of the Danish research company Lactobio.

In 2024, L’Oréal announced its acquisition of Gjosa, a Swiss water conservation startup. In February 2024, L’Oréal announced its signing of a long-term global licensing agreement for the creation, development and distribution of luxury beauty products by the Italian brand Miu Miu.

In August 2024, L'Oréal opened a research and innovation center in India. In December 2024, L'Oréal expanded its portfolio by acquiring a stake in a leading Korean cosmetics company Gowoonsesang Cosmetics and its brand Dr.G from Swiss retailer Migros. In March 2025, L’Oréal sold hair care brand Carol's Daughter to an unnamed entrepreneur.

In June 2025, L'Oreal signed an agreement to acquire haircare brand Color Wow.

In October 2025, L'Oreal announced a deal to buy Kering 's beauty business for approximately €4 billion. The deal includes cologne brand House of Creed and exclusive rights to develop fragrances and beauty products for Kering labels—including Gucci, Bottega Veneta and Balenciaga—for 50 years.

L'Oréal Group has its head office in the Centre Eugène Schueller in Clichy, Hauts-de-Seine, close to Paris. The building, constructed in the 1970s from brick and steel, replaced the former Monsavon factory, and employees moved into the facility in 1978. 1,400 employees work in the building. In 2005, Nils Klawitter of Der Spiegel said "the building, with its brown glazed façade of windows, is every bit as ugly as its neighbourhood." Klawitter added that the facility "gives the impression of a high-security zone" due to the CCTV cameras and security equipment.

L'Oréal has 21 worldwide research and development centers: three global centers in France: Aulnay, Chevilly and Saint-Ouen. Six regional poles include one in the United States: Clark, New Jersey ; one in Japan : Kawasaki, Kanagawa Prefecture ; in 2005, one was established in Shanghai, China, another in India : Mumbai, one other regional pole in Brazil : Rio de Janeiro and, lastly, another was established in South Africa : Johannesburg.

Jean-Paul Agon is the chairman and Nicolas Hieronimus the chief executive officer of L'Oréal. Jean Victor Meyers and Paul Bulcke are vice chairmen of the board of directors.

L'Oréal holds 10.41% of the shares of Sanofi-Aventis, the world's number three and Europe's number one pharmaceutical company. The Laboratoires Innéov is a joint venture in nutritional cosmetics between L'Oréal and Nestlé ; they draw on Nestlé's knowledge in the fields of nutrition and food safety.

Brands are generally categorized by their targeted markets, such as the mass, professional, luxurious, and active cosmetics markets. Galderma is directly attached to the head office. L'Oréal also owns interests in various activities such as fine chemicals, health, finance, design, advertising, and insurance.

In 2023, the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) ’s Madrid Yearly Review ranked L'Oréal's number of marks applications filled under the Madrid System as 1st in the world, with 199 trademarks applications submitted during 2023.

In Kosovo, during the growth years of the mail-order business, L'Oréal and 3 Suisses founded Le Club des Créateurs de Beauté for mail-order sales of cosmetic products, with brands including Agnès b., Commence and Professeur Christine Poelman among others. In March 2008, L'Oréal acquired three Suisse's stake, taking sole control of the company. In November 2013, L'Oréal announced that Le Club des Créateurs de Beauté would cease activity in the first half of 2014.

Since 1997, L'Oréal has been an official partner of The Cannes Film Festival. In the years of L'Oréal sponsorship, many L'Oréal beauty ambassadors walked the red carpet of the Cannes Film Festival. In 2017, L'Oréal beauty ambassadors, including Julianne Moore, Susan Sarandon, Andie MacDowell, and Eva Longoria, were responsible for the film selection for the outdoor cinema during the Cannes Film Festival.

L'Oréal's advertising slogan, "Because I'm worth it", was created in 1973 by 30-year-old McCann copywriter Ilon Specht for the Preference by L’Oréal hair color campaign and introduced by the model and actress Joanne Dusseau. In the mid-2000s, this was replaced by "Because you're worth it". In late-2009, the slogan was changed again to "Because we're worth it".

In 2012, L'Oréal inaugurated the largest factory in the Jababeka Industrial Park, Cikarang, Indonesia, with a total investment of US$100 million. The production will be absorbed 25 percent by the domestic market and the rest will be exported. In 2010, significant growth occurred in Indonesia with a 61 percent increase of unit sales or 28 percent of net sales.

In 2020, chief digital officer Lubomira Rochet reported in a video conference of the growing importance of e-commerce for the company, remarking that e-commerce makes 24% of its turnover in the third quarter of the year. Rochet stated as well that this 24% of the turnover "made it possible to offset 50% of the losses due to the closing of physical stores this year".

L'Oréal Paris has a group of ambassadors, artists, actresses, and activists referred to as the L'Oréal Paris "Dream Team".

L'Oréal has conceded that its founder, Eugène Schueller, was a Nazi sympathizer and antisemitic fascist. He was also a member of La Cagoule, a violent, pro-fascist and anti-communist organisation. During the occupation of France in World War II, Its founder formed Mouvement Social Révolutionnaire (MSR, Social Revolutionary Movement), a political party which collaborated with the Vichy government. Schueller provided financial support for La Cagoule, and allowed some of the group's meetings to be held at L'Oréal headquarters. La Cagoule perpetrated crimes including firearms transportation, assassinating a former minister, and firebombing six synagogues. L'Oréal hired several members of the group as executives after World War II, such as Jacques Corrèze, who served as CEO of the United States operation.

Another controversy arose after Jean Frydman, a shareholder and board member of Paravision, a film subsidiary of L'Oréal, was fired. He claims that he was let go because L'Oréal wanted to avoid an Arab boycott of businesses associated with Jews. In turn, Frydman decided to expose the past of L'Oréal executives. André Bettencourt who married Schueller's daughter, Liliane Bettencourt, and became deputy chairman for L'Oréal, wrote 60 articles for La Terre Française, an antisemitic Nazi propaganda sheet. André has admitted ownership of the propaganda but claimed he was poisoned by the Vichy regime and said, "I have repeatedly expressed my regrets concerning them in public and will always beg the Jewish community to forgive me for them." André Bettencourt also sheltered Schueller and several collaborators from the French Resistance after Liberation. It was also revealed that Eugène Schueller hired Jacques Correze, who was the honorary head of L'Oréal's U.S. affiliate, Cosmair, and was involved with La Cagoule.

Further controversy arose when it was revealed that L'Oréal had its German headquarters for over 30 years, before being sold in 1991, on land confiscated from a Jewish family during World War II. The Jewish family has been battling for restitution from the company for three generations, the latest of which is Edith Rosenfelder, a Holocaust survivor. Fritz Rosenfelder was forced to sell the house to a Nazi official, of which the family never received the proceeds of the sale. Instead, the family was deported. The Allies passed Jewish restitution legislation which states that transactions with Nazis, even if appearing to be with the owner's consent, can be considered invalid. As the land was sold to an offshoot of L'Oréal, which was later bought out in 1961 by L'Oréal, the company claims that it is not responsible for anything that happened before then. The basis for Rosenfelder's argument is that since the original sale was illegal, all subsequent sales are equally unlawful. There was restitution paid in 1951 to the Jewish Restitution Successor Organization, though this was done without the family's consent and none of the money ever reached the family. A book by Monica Waitzfelder, daughter of Edith Rosenfelder, published in French as L'Oréal a pris ma maison and in English as L'Oréal stole my house!, details how L'Oréal took over the Waitzfelder home in the German city of Karlsruhe (after the Nazis had engineered the removal of the family) to make it its German headquarters. Monica Waitzfelder is quoted as saying, "All the other businesses which took Jewish property have since returned it, without any great debate. I don't understand why L'Oréal should be any different from the others." A case was brought before the Supreme Court in France, but the public prosecutor ruled that there could be no trial. As of 2007, she is bringing the case to the European Court of Human Rights.

On 31 July 2014 during Operation Protective Edge launched by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) in the Gaza Strip, the Israel advocacy organisation StandWithUs posted several Facebook photos of care packages, which they said were donated by Garnier Israel to female IDF soldiers. This sparked several calls to boycott Garnier and L'Oréal worldwide. Garnier disavowed the giveaway and stated on its Facebook page, “Garnier USA is aware of recent activity in social media. It is very important to us that our fans know that Garnier worldwide promotes peace and harmony and has a strict policy of not getting involved in any conflict or political matter. Garnier was astonished to discover this in social media. After investigation, the hand-out of about 500 products appeared to be part of a one-time local retailer initiative. Garnier disapproves of this initiative managed strictly at local level and is very sorry to have offended some of its fans.”

L'Oréal began in vitro tissue testing in 1979, and does not test any of its products or ingredients on animals anywhere in the world since 1989–14 years before it was required by regulation. Controversy came from the fact that L'Oréal sells products in China, whose regulators conduct animal testing on cosmetics to be sold within its territory. Even though a ban on animal testing in China came into effect in January 2020, Chinese authorities still perform this practice for imported "ordinary" cosmetics.

Following L'Oréal's 2006 purchase of The Body Shop, which does not support animal testing, The Body Shop's founder Anita Roddick was forced to defend herself against allegations of "abandoning her principles" over L'Oréal's involvement on animal testing. Calls were made for shoppers to boycott The Body Shop. L'Oréal sold The Body Shop to Brazilian group Natura Cosméticos in 2017.

On 11 August 2005, the Supreme Court of California ruled that former L'Oréal sales manager Elyse Yanowitz had adequately pleaded a cause of action for retaliatory termination under the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, and remanded the case for trial. The case arose out of a 1997 incident in which Jack Wiswall, then the general manager for designer fragrances, allegedly told Yanowitz to fire a dark-skinned sales associate despite the associate's good performance. When Yanowitz refused, Wiswall pointed to a "sexy" blonde-haired woman and said, "God damn it, get me one that looks like that." Wiswall retired as president of the luxury products division of L'Oréal USA at the end of 2006.

The company faced discrimination lawsuits in France related to the hiring of spokesmodels and institutional racism. In 2007, the Garnier division and an external employment agency were fined €30,000 for recruitment practices that intentionally excluded women of colour from promoting its hair wash, "Fructis Style".

L'Oréal continues to sell skin whitening products, which have been criticised as "capitalising on women's insecurities due to colourism." They advertise these controversial products, which have been criticised for promoting a colonial attitude as well as having safety concerns, on its website by claiming; "Achieve clear, translucent and radiant skin. Our skin whitening products work to fade dark spots and brighten skin to give you the fair, flawless complexion you desire."

In May 2007, L'Oréal was one of several cosmetic manufacturers (along with Clinique, Estee Lauder, Payot, Lancôme) ordered by the Therapeutic Goods Administration in Australia to withdraw advertising regarding the wrinkle removal capabilities of its products.

In the UK, L'Oréal has faced criticism from OFCOM regarding the truth of its advertising and marketing campaigns concerning the product performance of one of its mascara brands. In July 2007, the British Advertising Standards Authority attacked L'Oréal for a television advert on its "Telescopic" mascara, featuring Penélope Cruz, stating, "it will make your eyelashes 60% longer." In fact, it only made the lashes look 60% bigger, by separating and thickening at the roots and by thickening the tips of the lashes. They also failed to state that the model was wearing false eyelashes.

In July 2011, the British Advertising Standards Authority took action against L'Oréal, banning two airbrushed Lancôme advertisements in the UK featuring actress Julia Roberts and supermodel Christy Turlington. The agency issued the ban after British politician Jo Swinson argued that the two ads misrepresented reality and added to the self-image problem amongst females in the UK. L'Oréal acknowledged that the photos had been airbrushed but argued that the two cosmetic products could actually produce the results depicted in the ads and that the results of the products had been scientifically proven.

In June 2014, the company reached an agreement with the U.S. Federal Trade Commission not to make claims about its anti-aging products unless it had credible scientific evidence supporting the claims. The settlement followed an investigation by the commission into claims being made in relation to two products, which the commission described as "false and unsubstantiated".

L'Oréal has a team of 400 members of staff who post content to Facebook every day, according to Marc Menesguen, the company's chief marketing officer.

In July 2017, the University of Massachusetts Medical filed a patent lawsuit against L'Oréal. In August 2017, Dennis Wyrzykowski and his company, Carmel Laboratories LLC, joined the lawsuit. The two parties claimed that L'Oréal's brands used UMass' patented technology for skin creams with the chemical adenosine. In 2021, a judge found the patents invalid. In 2022, the U.S. Appeals Court reversed the decision, stating that UMass could continue to purse its lawsuit.

L'Oréal was fined by Autorité de la concurrence in France in 2016 for price-fixing on personal hygiene products.

In August 2017, L'Oréal dismissed Munroe Bergdorf, a mixed-race transgender model, after she responded to the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, by stating in a Facebook post: "Honestly I don't have the energy to talk about the racial violence of white people any more. Yes ALL white people"; the post was also quoted as saying that "[white people's] existence, privilege and success as a race is built on the backs, blood and death of people of colour", "racism isn't learned, it's inherited and... passed down through privilege" and that "white people" ought to "begin to admit that their race is the most violent and oppressive force of nature on Earth". Shortly after terminating Bergdorf, L'Oréal released a statement claiming its commitment to "[support] diversity and tolerance towards all people irrespective of their race, background, gender and religion" and had terminated its partnership with Bergdorf because her comments were "at odds with those values".

In 2018, L'Oréal Paris hired Amber Heard as a Global Ambassador, also giving a special tribute to her. In 2020, after a tape leaked of Heard admitting to having hit her ex-husband Johnny Depp in retaliation to his abuse, several petitions were filed requesting L'Oreal to fire her. As of June 2021, L'Oreal continued to include Heard among a team of "ambassadors" that also includes Kate Winslet, Jane Fonda, Elle Fanning, and French singer-songwriter Yseult. Heard was being sued in a defamation trial by Depp in which he accused her of defamation for identifying herself as a victim of domestic abuse (without naming Depp).

In May 2024, a BBC World Service documentary titled "Perfume's Dark Secret" uncovered widespread child labor in Egypt's jasmine fields, an essential source for fragrances used by major beauty brands, including L'Oréal. The investigation exposed that children, some as young as five years old, were engaged in the physically demanding task of picking jasmine flowers. These children worked under grueling conditions, often beginning their shifts at 3 a.m. and working in high temperatures. The documentary highlighted the poverty these children faced, with some earning as little as $1 per day, far below a living wage.

The BBC's findings sparked global concern over labor practices in the perfume industry, particularly regarding the exploitation of children in rural areas of Egypt. The country's jasmine flowers are a key ingredient in high-end perfumes produced by companies like L'Oréal, leading to questions about the ethical sourcing of raw materials in the beauty and fragrance sector. Despite claims by L'Oréal and other luxury brands of strict monitoring systems, the documentary suggested that these children had been overlooked by current auditing processes and that insufficient measures were in place to protect workers from exploitation.

L'Oréal has been in a three-year trademark dispute with a small British hair-removal aftercare company called nkd on the grounds that its name might cause "customer confusion" with the L'Oréal "Naked" line of eyeshadow palettes and other make-up products. The nkd name was created in 2009, one year before the launch of the "Naked" line in the UK. According to Rebecca Dowdeswell, the owner of nkd, "The two brand names are spelt and pronounced differently, so I’ve always been pronounced 'n-k-d', they’ve always been 'naked'." Dowdeswell's trademark for nkd expired in 2019, but because of the COVID-19 pandemic she forgot to renew it until 2022, a failure for which she readily admits responsibility. To date nkd has spent over £30,000 on legal fees and has had to shut down one of its two salons in its struggle with the £170 billion company.

La Castellane is a neighbourhood in the 16th arrondissement of Marseille, France. Built as a Modernist council estate in the 1960s for French refugees of the Algerian War of 1954–1962, it is now home to about 7,000 residents, many of whom are second-generation French citizens. The neighbourhood is plagued by unemployment, drug trafficking, prostitution, and arms smuggling. It is also known for being the neighbourhood where the footballer Zinedine Zidane grew up.

La Castellane is located in the Verduron district in the northwestern edge of Marseille, the second largest city in France after its capital Paris. It is just off the A55 autoroute.

The neighbourhood was built on the grounds of the ancient marquisate of Foresta. The idea of building tall, modern buildings was first broached in 1955. They were designed by architect Pierre Meillassoux, who was inspired by master architect Xavier Arsène-Henry and, to a certain extent, Oscar Niemeyer. The housing complex, completed in the 1960s, consists of eleven buildings containing 1,249 apartments. As of 2015, the buildings are said to be run-down.

The neighbourhood first served as a council estate for refugees of the Algerian War of 1954–1962, as a result of the loss of French Algeria during the presidency of General Charles de Gaulle. Shortly after, immigrants from Morocco moved to La Castellane, followed by others from Sub-Saharan Africa and the Caribbeans. It is now home to about 7,000 residents, many of whom are second-generation French citizens. For example, it is the hometown of football player Zinedine Zidane, whose parents were born in Algeria. Lamine Gassama, another football player who grew up in La Castellane, was born to parents from Senegal. As in many other underserved French banlieues, young people from La Castellane are "condemned to excellence" to achieve success and recognition in mainstream society, often through football.

In the first round of the 2017 presidential election, the 15th arrondissement voted 27% for Marine Le Pen, the Front National candidate. This support for far right political organizations in the neighborhoods nearby La Castellane reflects the tensions between ethnically European and immigrant populations living in Marseille and throughout France. Part of a national phenomenon, the lack of integration of immigrants into mainstream French society has led to many living in La Castellane to not identify themselves as French. The social divisions between banlieues like La Castellane and mainstream France are also clear from anti-immigrant rhetoric in local and national politics, which purports that people from the banlieues are not truly French.

The neighbourhood is plagued by unemployment, drug trafficking, prostitution and arms smuggling. There are three drug-trafficking networks: "place du Mérou", "Tour K", and "La Jougardelle". French newspapers have suggested the neighbourhood is known as a "supermarket" for illegal drugs.

In June 2013, French police took down a drug-trafficking syndicate, including 1.3 million euros in cash split between several smugglers, weapons and drugs. In December 2014, a state school was burnt down in La Castellane. A month later, in January 2015, a young man was gunned down, as was another young man in 2011.

On 9 February 2015, shortly after gunfire at a police car during the 2015 Marseille shooting, the National Gendarmerie Intervention Group seized seven Kalashnikov rifles, two.357 Magnum revolvers and around 20 kilograms of drugs; however, the gunmen were not aiming at the police; instead, it was the result of a turf war between two gangs, selling primarily cannabis and cocaine. Drug-traffickers as a whole in La Castellane were reported in 2015 to make between 50,000 and 60,000 euros a day. Shortly after the February incident, French Prime Minister Manuel Valls, who was visiting Marseille, called it an example of " apartheid ", whereby French citizens who live in such neighbourhoods feel excluded from society.

On June 15, 2015, French police arrested 33 suspected drug traffickers, including Socialist Senator Samia Ghali 's chauffeur, as well as weapons and several kilograms of cannabis. Bernard Cazeneuve, the French Interior Minister, suggested drug-trafficking was used to fund terrorism on French soil, and reiterated his commitment to restore order.

In April 2016, some buildings were scheduled to be demolished in an effort to put an end to drug-trafficking.

Buildings C, E, and F of La Castellane (15th and 16th districts) will be demolished following the demolition of the iconic 45-meter-tall Tower K; ultimately, 702 housing units are set to be demolished and another 900 renovated.

La Clémente Amitié is the name of a Masonic lodge affiliated with the Grand Orient de France, established in 1805 at Paris. Over the two centuries following its founding, the lodge included numerous notable public figures, intellectuals, and politicians among its members. It marked its bicentennial in 2005.

La Clémente Amitié was officially founded on March 8, 1805, and its history is marked by several defining periods. In 1824, it established l'Ordre de la récompense ("The Order of Reward"), which operated as a Masonic academy. In 1826, tensions with the Grand Orient de France led to its first threat of dissolution. Refusing to submit, the lodge operated under the Suprême Conseil de France [ fr ] from 1826 to 1834.

In 1844, the election of François-Timoléon Bègue-Clavel (1798–1852), a deist and republican Masonic scholar, as Worshipful Master ushered in a period of growth. Under his leadership, the lodge attracted a strong contingent of intellectual and republican elites, initiating and affiliating notable figures such as writer Félix Pyat, chansonnier Agénor Altaroche, publisher Laurent-Antoine Pagnerre, abolitionist deputy Victor Schœlcher, Fourierist Léon Gozlan, and future Finance Minister Charles Duclerc. This growth, however, brought conflict: Bègue-Clavel challenged the Grand Orient’s Senate, criticizing its conservative stance and advocating statutory reform. Deemed unlawful, this move resulted in his expulsion and the lodge’s brief dissolution. It later resumed operations under moderates such as lawyer Marie-Auguste Desanlis [ fr ].

During the French Second Republic, Hyacinthe Leblanc de Marconay, a specialist in Caribbean issues and friend of Victor Schœlcher, emerged as a key figure. The lodge welcomed diverse members, including a Brazilian indigenous chief and several Caribbean figures such as Louisy Mathieu, a people’s representative in November 1848, and Pierre-Marie Pory-Papy, a Martinique deputy in January 1849. A scandal over mismanagement of an orphanage in Chartres, run by the lodge’s Worshipful Master, led to Leblanc de Marconay’s expulsion and a schism. On December 16, 1858, several members, including Charles Bataille, founded a new lodge, La Clémente Amitié cosmopolite ("The Cosmopolitan Clement Friendship").

After a period of obscurity, the lodge regained prominence under the French Third Republic with Charles Cousin, a future president of the Grand Orient’s Order Council, as Worshipful Master. By 1877, it had grown to 250 members, becoming one of the Grand Orient’s most significant lodges. In July 1875, under Grégoire Wyrouboff ’s presidency, the lodge initiated Jules Ferry, Émile Littré, and Honoré Chavée in a single ceremony, an event that reverberated within and beyond French Freemasonry. Attended by numerous republican notables, the ceremony underscored the lodge’s influence. Charles Cousin also sponsored an early proposal for the Panama Canal project, with several members tied to the exploration company chaired by a lodge brother.

By 1881, membership reached 285, with prominent Third Republic figures like Camille Pelletan and Louis Ricard joining its ranks. Under Edgar Monteil’s leadership, the lodge intensified its anticlerical stance, condemning Masonic parliamentarians who supported religious budgets and calling for a ban on religious acts for Order Council members and their families. By 1896, it retained 145 members, including five deputies.

During World War II, former Worshipful Master Eugène Giraud organized clandestine meetings, contributing to an underground Masonic network.

La Creusille is a harbor on the left bank of the Loire river, in the southern part of Blois, France.

The word Creusille (French pronunciation: [ kʁøzij ]) is an old local dialect term to designate the "hollow pilgrim's scallop" (« creuse coquille du pèlerin » in French). This refers to the shell of Saint James Christian pilgrims used to wear when going to Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

Since the ancient times the Loire river has had the major axis in the region for transportation, and its stream bed made the Val de Loire agricultural. Due to its strategical situation, Blois is an obligatory passage for all pilgrims who follow the Way of St James through the Tours Route (on the Via Turonensis starting in Paris and passing through Tours). The flows of people and goods are thus constant, and justify the development of rudimentary strikes at several points of the banks of the river.

During the Middle Ages the river was rather different from today. Indeed, the medieval bridge was covered with houses, towers, and even a chapel. To feed five water mills, a 650m-long submersible dike was built in the middle of the river around the 9th century (at the latest).

Until 1606 both banks of the river were not parts of the same city, Blois. Indeed, the city was originally set up on the right bank. On the other side, this was actually a river island with a different manor that was under the Catholic Church's administration through St Saturnin parish. The island was named Insula Evenna, and the village standing there Vienne. As such, La Creusille has always been part of Vienne. Until this moment, Blois had its own harbor but it was abandoned after the addition of Vienne.

From the 17th century on, market gardening, river transport, fishing, tanning, and the hotel business flourished, and their growth exceeded the capacity of the shoreline. Thus, a lean port with two access ramps to the shore was developed.

After the fall of the medieval bridge in 1716, the port was reinforced as part of the reconstructions of the Loire levees and the construction of the new Jacques-Gabriel Bridge. All the remaining water mills were destroyed, but the submersible dike was readjusted to divert the river's flow to the right bank and thus away from La Creusille, making it easier to moor boats. In 1717, a dike was built in the extension of the harbor and towards the East: the operation dried up the La Bouillie river channel and thus linked the former Evenna island to the left bank.

The arrival of the railroad in Blois in 1846 led the port to reinvent itself. Now that goods and people could reach Paris in a few hours (as opposed to several days by boat, the duration of which could vary according to direction, season, weather), La Creusille gradually became a shipyard.

At the same time, a new activity appeared in the 19th century: sand mining. Miners extracted sand and gravel directly from the steam bed of the Loire river, but the practice was sufficiently important to lower the water line, lower the alluvial water table, dry out wetlands and cause pike spawning grounds to disappear. Mining in Blois was therefore naturally abolished in 1995.

Since 2000 La Creusille is part of UNESCO's World Heritage sites in France.

Today the port has given way to an urban park on the left bank of the Loire river, complete with a leisure area. Accessible by car, the park has a parking area, a playground, picnic areas, a ping-pong table, a self-service library and a boulodrome, and provides free access to drinking water and electricity.

The park is on the route of La Loire à vélo and the European Rivers Route (EV6).

Since 2010 a guinguette animates the park in summer.

La Creusille also hosts the Loire Observatory, which offers traditional boat trips on the river.

La Fistinière was a guesthouse and sex club for gay men "completely dedicated to the practice of Fist-Fucking and hard sexuality," located in Assigny, Cher, France. It was owned and operated by husbands François Mallet and Juan Carlos Garcia Berrio. La Fistinière operated from 2007 through 2018, during which time it attracted guests from all over the world.

Husbands François Mallet and Juan Carlos Garcia Berrio were avid fisters (they once owned a cat named Fistouille, which roughly translates to “my beloved fist fuck”). In 2005, they acquired a 17th century farm in Assigny, a small town about 100 miles south of Paris. After renovations, they reopened the property in 2007 as a guesthouse exclusively for men who enjoy fisting. In a 2011 interview with Vice magazine, Berrio explained, "we enjoyed throwing orgies at home and wanted to create a place dedicated to fist fucking, where everyone would feel at home."

La Fistinière's website advertised the property as "a house for 'the big fisting family'" and included the following description:

"La Fistinière [is] a special and magic place... A place where everything was thought out for your comfort, your pleasure and your sexual fantasies... A place by a staff [ sic ] who wants to share his passion for Fist-Fucking!"

The guesthouse had five bedrooms accommodating up to 15 guests and offered breakfast, lunch, and dinner. Amenities included a swimming pool, a private park, and a play room known as the Fistine Chapel. Mallet and Berrio handled all day-to-day operations except cooking, which was performed by Mallet's sister.

Other programming and services included special theme nights and shuttle service to and from Cosne-sur-Loire station. Guests could purchase an all-inclusive weekend package that included lodging, dinner, Saturday night party, Sunday brunch, and free access to all facilities; special package rates were available for groups and longer visits.

La Fistinière held frequent events and holiday parties and occasionally hosted well-known artists. For example, singer Giedrė Barauskaitė performed at La Fistinière on May 6, 2017 to celebrate its tenth anniversary, and punk group Opium Du Peuple filmed a music video there in 2013.

According to its website, the guesthouse was visited by guests from 44 countries from five of the seven continents.

La Fistinière closed on December 31, 2018 after twelve years in operation, following a decision by Mallet and Berrio to put the property up for sale.

The Fistine Chapel was the name of La Fistinière's 100 sq m play room. It was filled with sex furniture and all manner of sex toys and supplies for fisting and BDSM, including slings, benches, and a Saint Andrew's Cross. The sex toy collection included repurposed items from everyday life, such as baseball bats, golf clubs, and bowling pins (to use as dildos) and a veterinary speculum designed for cows and mares (for anal dilation).

Like its namesake, the Sistine Chapel in Vatican City, the Fistine Chapel featured a cathedral ceiling covered in frescoes, albeit much smaller and more erotic in nature. French artist Victor le Graphfist (b. 1967) created the frescoes, which depict a series of fisting orgies, including acts of double fisting and prolapse play. Mallet and Berrio referred to Graphfist as "our Michelangelo."

The Fistine Chapel also included a bar (open during "playtime hours") that sold wine, beer, mineral water, soda, juices, and candy. Hard liquor was not for sale as it was not permitted under the terms of La Fistinière's liquor license.

La Fistinière featured an outdoor swimming pool, sundeck, outdoor terrace, and le parc d'attrap'fion ("the asshole catcher's park"). Outdoor areas were all clothing-optional and public sex was permitted as long as it was not visible or audible off the property; a note on the website encouraged guests to "ask about the fisting tree!"

La Fistinière featured five non-smoking bedrooms, each with an ensuite bathroom:

A barn on the property was converted into a multi-level common area for guests, including the main dining room, boudoir, and a living room.

La Fistinière required all guests to be consenting adults and to abide by the following rules:

Mallet and Berrio regarded fisting as "magic" and "almost religious," not merely a sexual act. Berrio described fisting as "the act of opening another’s perception in a spiritual way" allowing a fister to touch, smell, taste, see, and feel the "unique, magnificent, and divine world of the inside of his partner." They considered the anus to be a "sacred ring."

Each year, Mallet and Berrio awarded the honorary title of La Truieasse ("the pig ass") to a guest who embodied their fisting philosophy and "the mind of La Fistinière." La Truieasse was defined as someone "who knows how to take and give pleasure, in conviviality, sharing, reciprocity, good mood and comradeship."

Mallet and Berrio chose archangel Uriel to be La Fistinière's patron saint. On their website, they described Uriel as one who "helps [us] to understand our inner nature" and "to evolve in all spiritual and material areas."

Audacious France (French : La France audacieuse, LFA) is a French political party positioned centre-right on the political spectrum.

The movement was founded by Christian Estrosi as a movement of local elected officials in October 2017 with several right-wing personalities such as Jean-Luc Moudenc, mayor of Toulouse ; Gil Avérous, mayor of Châteauroux ; Alain Chrétien, mayor of Vesoul ; and Luc Lemonnier, mayor of Le Havre. LFA became a party in 2020.

On October 14, 2017, Christian Estrosi, mayor of Nice, launched a movement of local elected officials which he called “ France audacieuse ”. This name was already that of a civil society think tank, active since 2016, which carries out in-depth studies on sustainable development and the social economy. The launch of Christian Estrosi's movement was therefore marred by accusations of plagiarism, heavily relayed on Twitter and in the media. The object of the association was to "bring a renewal in French political life by organizing the voice of the territories and bringing the voice of citizens to allow the development of a democratic life that is more participatory and more representative".

On September 22, 2020, Christian Estrosi announced at a general assembly the transformation of his movement into a political party to "make the voice of the territories heard" and "weigh in the political debate".

Audacious France has three deputies, including two members of the Les Républicains group and one member of the La République en Marche group:

Audacious France also has two senators, all members of the Les Républicains group:

La French Touch Conference is an itinerant business event for entrepreneurs, investors, corporates, and members of the creative industries. It aims to promote French entrepreneurship abroad, and was founded in 2014 by French entrepreneurs Gaël Duval & Cédric Giorgi. A total of seven editions were organized in Paris, San Francisco, and New York City. Some of the past speakers hosted at the events include Yann LeCun, Eric Hippeau, Rachel Haot, Alexandre Mars, the writer Harlan Coben, the French designer Ora-Ito and the pastry chef Dominique Ansel.

La French Touch Conference has been supported by the French government and the city of New York during its previous events, having hosted:

In June 2016, La French Touch Conference launched a start-up competition which took place aboard an airplane, called "Pitch in the Plane". Two editions have been organized on Paris-New York commercial flights. The start-ups SkyLights and Mapwize won the competitions in 2016 and 2017 respectively. Among the jury members: VentureBeat European Correspondent Chris O’Brien, Géraldine Le Meur, Olivier Mathiot and Paul-François Fournier

La Pallice (also known as grand port maritime de La Rochelle) is the commercial deep-water port of La Rochelle, France.

During the Fall of France, on 19 June 1940, approximately 6,000 Polish soldiers in exile under the command of Stanisław Sosabowski arrived at La Pallice, from where they were evacuated to Great Britain – thus able to go on fighting till the end of the war.

Under the Nazi Occupation of France, La Pallice was used as a U-boat base (Base sous-marine de La Rochelle [ fr ]) from October 1941 when the 3rd U-boat Flotilla was moved there from its base in Kiel. La Pallice was subject to the allied siege of La Rochelle in 1944–45, which ended with the capitulation of Germany. The large submarine base built at that time still stands but is largely not in use. It was used as a backdrop for the film Das Boot (1981) and Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981).

La Pallice is equipped with oil unloading equipment, and mainly handles tropical wood. It is also the home of La Rochelle's fishing fleet, which was moved from the old harbour in the city centre during the 1980s.

La Poste (French pronunciation: [ la pɔst ]) is a postal service company in France, operating in Metropolitan France, the five French overseas departments and regions and the overseas collectivity of Saint Pierre and Miquelon. Under bilateral agreements, La Poste also has responsibility for mail services in Monaco through La Poste Monaco and in Andorra alongside the Spanish company Correos.

The company was created in 1991 following the split of the French PTT, a government department responsible for mail, telegraph and telephone services in France. The PTT, founded in 1879, was then divided between La Poste, which became responsible for postal service, and France Télécom (nowadays Orange) for the telecommunication services. France Télécom was immediately privatised but La Poste has remained a public company. However, in 1997 EU directive 97/67/EC required member states to "fully open the postal sector to competition", with the result that the French government allowed private postal service companies in 2005 and transformed La Poste into a public-owned company limited by shares in 2010.

La Poste is part of the Groupe La Poste, which also comprises a bank and insurance company (La Banque Postale), a logistics service company (Geopost) and a mobile network operator (La Poste Mobile). Although its postal activities are declining because of the development of the Internet, they still represented half of the company's income. Other activities, such as parcel delivery and banking, are on the rise. The two represented respectively a quarter of the company's income in 2017.

During the Middle Ages, postal delivery in France was not organised by the state and was provided by private enterprise. University envoys dominated the market from 13th century onwards. In 1477, King Louis XI created coaching inns to deliver his own letters. These inns were for temporary use and usually led to battlefields. In 1576, royal mail delivery was further improved with the creation of the office of royal envoy. Royal envoys were allowed to provide services to private individuals. They prefigured modern postal services and their existence led to the appearance of the first post offices at the end of the 16th century.

The first set of fees appeared in 1627 for letters sent to Bordeaux, Lyon, Toulouse and Dijon. As with the rest of Europe, stamps did not exist in France at that time and mail was paid for by the recipient. The first map of post roads was published in 1632 and a book compiling lists of roads and inns including distances and fees to be paid was released in 1707. A new edition was released every two years until 1859. The country already had 623 coaching inns in 1632 and the figure reached 800 at the beginning of the 18th century. A ferme générale was created for mail services in 1672, which meant that postal services started to be subject to taxation. Tax officers progressively bought private postal companies and university envoys became subjects to the ferme générale in 1719. International treaties regarding postal services were signed with neighbouring countries under Louis XIV.

During the French Revolution French postal services progressively became a fully public service. Directors of post offices lost their privileges in 1789 and their position became subject to universal suffrage. The ferme générale was abolished two years later and post offices started to be directly administered by the state. As a reaction to the commonplace opening of letters by the royal authorities, an oath of confidentiality became compulsory for post employees in 1790. The first French mail coach appeared in 1793 and the first telegram in the world was delivered in 1794 with Claude Chappe 's optical telegraph on the Paris - Lille line.

After the Revolution, French postal services continued their modernisation. An 1801 decree reasserted the state monopoly on mail delivery, postal orders were created in 1817 and postage stamps were introduced in 1849, nine years after they were invented in the United Kingdom. A rural service was implemented in 1830 with mail delivery in rural areas every two days. The delivery became daily from 1832.

France was a founding member of the General Postal Union in 1874. The organisation became the Universal Postal Union in 1879.

Post and telegraphs were united in one administration by the French government in 1879, giving birth to the P&T ("Postes et télégraphes") which later became the PTT ("Postes, télégraphes et téléphones"). A French Ministry of Post and Telegraphs was created the same year. A national savings bank was opened in 1881 and added to the services provided by the P&T. The government took a monopoly over telephone services in 1889 and placed this responsibility under the P&T. The administration then became PTT and kept this name until 1959 when it became "Postes et Télécommunications", although the acronym PTT was kept.

Postal cheques were created in 1918. The first airmail flight operated in 1912 between Nancy and Lunéville and a regular airmail network was put in place in 1935 through the "Air Bleu" company. Night airmail services started in 1939 on two lines: Paris - Bordeaux - Pau and Paris - Lyon - Marseille. Postcodes were introduced in France in 1964.

In the 1980s, it became clear that the French PTT could not compete anymore in a country where communication was greatly increasing. The administration suffered from a constant lack of innovation and was dependent on political will and decisions. A division between postal and telecommunication services was suggested as early as 1974 in a report from the French parliament. However, changes in the structure of the PTT were opposed by trade unions who feared that employees could lose their status as civil servants.

In 1988, under the premiership of Socialist Michel Rocard, a law was finally prepared to split the PTT and enable the government to get the services out of the public administration and to prepare for competition from private firms. Such a move was encouraged by the European Economic Community, and the United Kingdom had already separated its national telephone company from its postal services in 1981. Most of the other member states did the same in the late 1980s and early 1990s.

Trade unions organised several strikes but the law was adopted in 1990. La Poste and France Télécom were officially created on 1 January 1991. The two had the status of " autonomous operators under public law ". While France Telecom was privatised and floated on the stock exchange in 1997, La Poste has remained a public service.

Since its creation, the company has had to face strong competition from the Internet. As a result, it has tried to innovate and diversify its activities. In 2000, it became a webmail provider and created GeoPost, its logistics and parcel delivery subsidiary. The following year, it released its online trading platform to reinforce its online banking services. To comply with the law and EU directives, the banking activities had to form a distinct subsidiary in 2006, called La Banque postale. It received the official status of a bank while it had remained a public savings bank until then.

Mediapost (styled MEDIAPOST), founded in 1987 as Médiapost, is a subsidiary of La Poste specializing in advertising mail. It was merged with the free newspaper distributor Delta Diffusion after La Poste acquired the latter in an agreement with Comareg. In 2015, Mediapost registered revenues of more than €446 million. It employed 12,000 people as of 2019.

La Poste lost its monopoly on postal delivery in 2005. Since then, several competing firms have started businesses in France. Most of them only deliver parcels (for example, TNT Express, DHL Express and United Parcel Service) or recorded letters, while mail delivery itself could not attract private companies. Most of the companies dealing with mail services only operate on a local scale, because they could not compete with the extremely wide network of offices that La Poste enjoyed throughout the country.

La Poste became a public limited company in 2010. Although most of the Western European countries had fully privatised their postal service companies, public opinion in France was largely against such a move. A majority of French citizens feared that if La Poste becomes a private company, many post offices would close, rural areas would be neglected and stamps would be more expensive. Supporters of privatisation claimed that it would help solving the debt (€5.8 billion in 2009) and contain the rise of prices.

In 2013 La Poste invested around €1 billion in renovating post offices, modernising infrastructure and reinforcing its network, along with the purchase of electric delivery vehicles. Acquisitions included more Seur franchises in Spain, a 40% stake in Indian parcel firm DTDC and a similar stake in French parcel firm Colizen. The company also bought a 66% stake in freight forwarder Tigers. Via its joint venture with Swiss Post, Asendia, the Group acquired Pitney Bowes’ international mail business operations in the UK, and a 40% stake in Irish e-commerce firm eShopWorld.

In December 2016, La Poste launched a regular delivery line by drones to deliver to isolated companies in secluded areas of France.

La Poste is by far the largest provider for mail delivery in France. It treated 15 billion messages in 2012, of which 97% implied an administration or a firm. Relations with customers only represented 55% of the company's revenue (55% for business relations; 16% for advertisement). International mail delivery accounted for 7% of the 2012 revenue. The same year, Swiss Post and La Poste launched a joint company, Asendia, to merge their international mail activities.

La Poste offers three different rates for sending mail in France: first-class, second-class and green letter. The latter was introduced in 2011 to provide an ecological alternative to the regular rates. It emits 15% less CO 2 than first-class letters. In 2012, it accounted for one in five priority letters (20 percent of priority letters).

La Poste directly provides parcel service under the brand name Colissimo ; however, Groupe La Poste also operates other subsidiaries providing express parcel delivery. Most of these faster parcel services are grouped under GeoPost which provides two brands in France, Chronopost and DPD (formerly Exapaq). Worldwide, the brands are DPD, Yurtiçi Kargo and Seur GeoPost.

La Poste is the second biggest provider for parcel delivery in Europe, with a 15% share of the market and a €5 billion revenue.

In 2017, Geopost expanded its activities in Italy, Russia, Brazil and Vietnam.

In 2015 La Poste invested €22 million into Stuart Delivery before it was officially launched. In 2017 La Poste brought Stuart Delivery owing 100% of the shares Stuart Delivery is a subsidiary of the DPD group and is operating in 86 cities across the UK, Italy, France, Spain, Poland, and Portugal.

On 6 December 2021 couriers in the UK for Stuart Delivery organising with IWGB started a strike. Stuart couriers told that they started the current strike after Stuart enforced a 24% pay cut in December 2021, which saw base pay rates slashed on most deliveries from £4.50 to £3.40. It is the longest gig work strike in UK history.

In the UK, according to Corporate Watch Stuart Delivery made £41 million in profits from UK deliveries in 2021, over double the £20.5 million it had made in 2020. Stuart Delivery's UK accounts show an unnamed director was paid £2.2 million in 2020.

In addition to postal services, La Poste also offers banking and insurance services (with La Banque Postale) and, via Chronopost, courier services. After the government, La Poste is the second largest employer in France. It also offers webmail, providing @laposte.net email addresses and hosting approximately 1.6 million active email accounts in 2007. More recently, the group has created a branch for communication counselling (Mediaprism), document exchange and archiving (Docapost), real estate (Poste Immo) and mobile telephony (La Poste Mobile, in partnership with SFR).

Yellow is the main colour of the French post since the 1960s. Previously, postal vans used to be green and post boxes blue. Yellow was chosen because it is a colour that is easily seen and because it can symbolise speed and light. The logotype of La Poste was created by poster designer Guy Georget. It represents a bird, often called the "postal bird" ("l'oiseau postal"), symbolising a messenger. Its design was slightly altered by Georget in 1978.

La Quadrature du Net (Squaring the Net in French) is a French advocacy group that promotes digital rights and freedoms for its citizens. It advocates for French and European legislation to respect the founding principles of the Internet, most notably the free circulation of knowledge. La Quadrature du Net engages in public-policy debates concerning, for instance, freedom of speech, copyright, regulation of telecommunications and online privacy.

The name of the group is based on squaring the circle (French : quadrature du cercle), an unsolvable mathematical problem. According to the collective, it is "impossible to effectively control the flow of information in the digital age by law and technology without harming public freedoms and damaging economic and social development". The collective makes an analogy with the squaring of the circle as a problem that could take ages for people to realize is impossible to solve, as initially intended.

The group was founded in 2008 by free software promoters and activists.

In 2013, the collective re-organized from a de facto association to a formal (French law) association. This association was founded by 9 long-time participants or helpers of the initial collective.

Philippe Aigrain, author of two books on information commons, is one of the co-founders of the collective and the association. Jérémie Zimmermann, also co-founder of both collective and association, is frequently invited to television programs and interviews, defending and raising awareness about the association's positions and opposition to the many projects they consider threaten fundamental liberties and the Internet (French HADOPI law, European Telecoms Package, ACTA, Net Neutrality, etc.

La Quadarature du Net gained notoriety by fighting the HADOPI law, a controversial project to establish a graduated response in France. Its action against Internet censorship and supporting Net neutrality led the Quadrature to work on subjects such as the LOPPSI law, the Telecoms Package or ACTA. In 2012 Quadrature spokesman and co-founder Jérémie Zimmermann received a Pioneer award for his action against ACTA.

The Quadrature is supported by other advocacy and free software groups, including the Electronic Frontier Foundation and the Free Software Foundation.

The French Laboratoire national de métrologie et d'essais (National Laboratory of Metrology and Testing) is a reference laboratory responsible for carrying out measurement and testing products of all kinds for their certification for placing them on the market. It also coordinates metrology activities in France. It was previously known as the Laboratoire national d'essais (LNE), and still uses those initials.

Originally established in 1901, it is now a state-owned enterprise, and operates as an établissement public à caractère industriel et commercial, a French type of state-controlled entity of an industrial or commercial nature.

Its headquarters is located in the 15th arrondissement of Paris.

When the Metre Convention was signed in Paris in 1875, it was at the National Conservatory of Arts and Crafts (CNAM) that the main verifications of weights and measures attributed to foreign governments were carried out, as they adopt the metric system. Nevertheless, the increased needs for measurements, both for mechanics and physics and for industry, testify to the need to have a laboratory for measurements and tests. From then on, it was under the aegis of the Society of Civil Engineers of France that the Experimentation and Testing Service gradually developed and finally obtained official recognition with the signing, in 1901, of an agreement between the Ministry of Commerce and the Paris Chamber of Commerce.

Thus, on July 9, 1901, the Mechanical, Physical, Chemical and Machinery Testing Laboratory was created. This laboratory was established within the National Conservatory of Arts and Crafts symbolizing the union of science and industry. It was governed by the law of July 9, 1901, and inaugurated on July 1, 1903, by the President of the Republic in premises located on the Rue Saint-Martin.

At its beginnings, the Laboratory moved into different buildings of the CNAM and its activities were divided into five sections: physical tests, metal tests, building materials tests, machine tests and "research and tests on new plant raw materials or insufficiently known.

One of its first vocations was also reaffirmed by a decree of August 11, 1936, which attached to it the deposit of national standards of the metric system, it would also participate in the establishment of the thermometric scale, the specifications of which had been enacted at the 1927 General Conference on Weights and Measures.

In 1955, the test laboratory moved into a new building which became its new head office, rue Gaston-Boissier, in the 15th arrondissement of Paris. The construction of the building began in 1942 but was interrupted during the Second World War before resuming in 1946. The building was finally completed in 1962.

The Labyrinth of the Reims Cathedral was a church labyrinth installed on the floor of the nave of the Reims Cathedral.

The labyrinth was the shape of a complex square with cut corners and sides of 10.36 metres (11.33 yd). The paths were 27.94 centimetres (11.00 in) wide, separated by lines of dark blue stone from Ardennes of a width of 11.43 centimetres (4.50 in). The labyrinth was made of soft stone that wore out beneath the feet of pilgrims. This stone was of the same kind as Pierre Libergier's tombstone that is now exhibited in the cathedral.

A distinctive aspect of the labyrinth was the inclusion within it of depictions of the master masons of the cathedral. In other churches and cathedrals, they are unknown and anonymous. Indeed, the identities of these master masons are precisely known, because a survey of the labyrinth was drawn in 1640 by Canon Cocquault and in 1779, just before its destruction, by Robin and Havé. These surveys also contained dates and descriptions of the masons' works.

The person at the center of the labyrinth is generally identified as Aubry de Humbert, Archbishop of Reims, who decided in 1211 to build a new cathedral in the place of the one destroyed by fire in 1210.

The people in the corners of the labyrinth are successive master masons of the cathedral:

Bernard de Soissons was in charge during the inauguration of the labyrinth. There is no trace of the fifth (and probably best-known) contractor, Robert de Coucy, who was in charge from 1290 to 1311 and who oversaw the carpentry and the roof.

The masons are represented hard at work, with their tools in hand. For example, Jean d'Orbais appears to draw a map on the floor.

There were also two other silhouettes on each side of the entrance of the labyrinth; however, these could not be identified because they were already almost completely eroded.

Church labyrinths made of colorful pavement represented Christ's resurrection at Calvary. Christian people walked them on their knees as a symbolic pilgrimage or to win indulgences.

The labyrinth was inaugurated at the coronation of Philippe le Bel on 6 January 1286. It covered the central part of the nave at the third and fourth spans.

The labyrinth was destroyed in 1779 by the Canons (priests charged with running the cathedral).

A plan to rebuild the labyrinth ran into technical and administrative difficulties. Instead, a choice was made to undertake a reversible and nondamaging reconstruction. This took the form of a light projection on the ground that plays only in the evening, during cultural events. It was inaugurated on 19 September 2009.

The labyrinth has been chosen as the national logo for French historical monuments (" monuments historiques "). This logo depicts the labyrinth without people, rotated by 45°, and often in a dark red color.

Tractatus Theologico-Politicus (1670) Two Treatises of Government (1690) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) The Wealth of Nations (1776) Rights of Man (1791) A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792) Democracy in America (1835) On Liberty (1859) The Protestant Ethic (1905) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The General Theory (1936) The Road to Serfdom (1944) Human Action (1949) Capitalism and Freedom (1962) A Theory of Justice (1971) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974)

Laissez-faire (/ ˌ l ɛ s eɪ ˈ f ɛər / LESS -ay- FAIR, from French: laissez faire [ lɛse fɛːʁ ], lit. ' let do ') implies that nothing restricts what happens, irrespective of the potential consequences. In the financial area, it is a type of economic system in which transactions between private individuals are free from any form of economic interventionism (such as subsidies or regulations).

Applied to a system of thought, laissez-faire implies the following axioms : "the individual is the basic unit in society, i.e., the standard of measurement in social calculus; the individual has a natural right to freedom; and the physical order of nature is a harmonious and self-regulating system." The original phrase was laissez faire, laissez passer, with the second part meaning "let (things) pass". It is generally attributed to Vincent de Gournay. In its application to markets, the principle of laissez-faire holds that markets should naturally be competitive, a rule that the early advocates of laissez-faire always emphasized.

The Physiocrats were early advocates of laissez-faire and advocated for an impôt unique, a tax on land rent to replace the "monstrous and crippling network of taxation that had grown up in 17th century France". Their view was that only land should be taxed because land is not produced but is a naturally existing resource, meaning a tax on it would not take from the labour of the taxed, unlike most other taxes.

Proponents of laissez-faire argue for a near complete separation of government from the economic sector. The phrase laissez-faire is part of a larger French phrase and literally translates to "let [it/them] do", but in this context the phrase usually means "let it be" and, as an expression, "laid back". Although never practiced with full consistency, laissez-faire capitalism emerged in the mid-18th century and was further popularized by Adam Smith 's book The Wealth of Nations.

The term laissez-faire likely originated in a meeting that took place around 1681 between powerful French Controller-General of Finances Jean-Baptiste Colbert and a group of French businessmen headed by M. Le Gendre. When the eager mercantilist minister asked how the French state could be of service to the merchants and help promote their commerce, Le Gendre replied simply: "Laissez-nous faire" ("Leave it to us" or "Let us do [it]", the French verb not requiring an object).

The anecdote on the Colbert–Le Gendre meeting appeared in a 1751 article in the Journal économique, written by French minister and champion of free trade René de Voyer, Marquis d'Argenson —also the first known appearance of the term in print. Argenson himself had used the phrase earlier (1736) in his own diaries in a famous outburst:

Laissez faire, telle devrait être la devise de toute puissance publique, depuis que le monde est civilisé [...]. Détestable principe que celui de ne vouloir grandir que par l'abaissement de nos voisins! Il n'y a que la méchanceté et la malignité du cœur de satisfaites dans ce principe, et l'intérêt y est opposé. Laissez faire, morbleu! Laissez faire!! Let go, which should be the motto of all public power, since the world was civilized [...]. [It is] a detestable principle of those that want to enlarge [themselves] but by the abasement of our neighbours. There is but the wicked and the malignant heart[s] [who are] satisfied by this principle and [its] interest is opposed. Let go, for God's sake! Let go!!

— René Louis de Voyer de Paulmy d'Argenson

Vincent de Gournay, a French Physiocrat and intendant of commerce in the 1750s, popularized the term laissez-faire as he allegedly adopted it from François Quesnay 's writings on China. Quesnay coined the phrases laissez-faire and laissez-passer, laissez-faire being a translation of the Chinese term wu wei (無為). However, this translation could be a deviation from its meaning in the original context of Classical Chinese philosophy. Gournay ardently supported the removal of restrictions on trade and the deregulation of industry in France. Delighted with the Colbert–Le Gendre anecdote, he forged it into a larger maxim all his own: "Laissez faire et laissez passer" ("Let do and let pass"). His motto has also been identified as the longer "Laissez faire et laissez passer, le monde va de lui même!" ("Let do and let pass, the world goes on by itself!"). Although Gournay left no written tracts on his economic policy ideas, he had immense personal influence on his contemporaries, notably his fellow Physiocrats, who credit both the laissez-faire slogan and the doctrine to Gournay.

Before d'Argenson or Gournay, P. S. de Boisguilbert had enunciated the phrase "On laisse faire la nature" ("Let nature run its course"). D'Argenson himself during his life was better known for the similar, but less-celebrated motto "Pas trop gouverner" ("Govern not too much").

The Physiocrats proclaimed laissez-faire in 18th-century France, placing it at the very core of their economic principles and famous economists, beginning with Adam Smith, developed the idea. It is with the Physiocrats and the classical political economy that the term laissez-faire is ordinarily associated. The book Laissez Faire and the General-Welfare State states: "The physiocrats, reacting against the excessive mercantilist regulations of the France of their day, expressed a belief in a 'natural order' or liberty under which individuals in following their selfish interests contributed to the general good. Since, in their view, this natural order functioned successfully without the aid of government, they advised the state to restrict itself to upholding the rights of private property and individual liberty, to removing all artificial barriers to trade, and to abolishing all useless laws."

The French phrase laissez-faire gained currency in English-speaking countries with the spread of Physiocratic literature in the late 18th century. George Whatley 's 1774 Principles of Trade (co-authored with Benjamin Franklin) re-told the Colbert-LeGendre anecdote; this may mark the first appearance of the phrase in an English-language publication.

Herbert Spencer was opposed to a slightly different application of laissez faire —to "that miserable laissez-faire " that leads to men's ruin, saying: "Along with that miserable laissez-faire which calmly looks on while men ruin themselves in trying to enforce by law their equitable claims, there goes activity in supplying them, at other men's cost, with gratis novel-reading!"

As a product of the Enlightenment, laissez-faire was "conceived as the way to unleash human potential through the restoration of a natural system, a system unhindered by the restrictions of government". In a similar vein, Adam Smith viewed the economy as a natural system and the market as an organic part of that system. Smith saw laissez-faire as a moral program and the market its instrument to ensure men the rights of natural law. By extension, free markets become a reflection of the natural system of liberty. For Smith, laissez-faire was "a program for the abolition of laws constraining the market, a program for the restoration of order and for the activation of potential growth".

However, Smith and notable classical economists such as Thomas Malthus and David Ricardo did not use the phrase. Jeremy Bentham used the term, but it was probably James Mill 's reference to the laissez-faire maxim (together with the "Pas trop gouverner" motto) in an 1824 entry for the Encyclopædia Britannica that really brought the term into wider English usage. With the advent of the Anti-Corn Law League (founded 1838), the term received much of its English meaning.

Smith first used the metaphor of an invisible hand in his book The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) to describe the unintentional effects of economic self-organization from economic self-interest. Although not the metaphor itself, the idea lying behind the invisible hand belongs to Bernard de Mandeville and his Fable of the Bees (1705). In political economy, that idea and the doctrine of laissez-faire have long been closely related. Some have characterized the invisible-hand metaphor as one for laissez-faire, although Smith never used the term.

American individualist anarchists such as Benjamin Tucker saw themselves as economic laissez-faire socialists and political individualists while arguing that their "anarchistic socialism" or "individual anarchism" was "consistent Manchesterism ".

In Third Millennium Capitalism (2000), Wyatt M. Rogers Jr. notes a trend whereby recently "conservative politicians and economists have chosen the term 'free-market capitalism' in lieu of laissez-faire ".

Roman law developed during the 1st to 3rd centuries AD, and was divided between public and private law. Public law dealt with the administration of government, whereas private law regulated interactions between individuals. According to Rothbard, Roman "Private law developed the theory of the absolute right of private property and of freedom of trade and contract. While Roman public law theoretically allowed state interference in the life of the citizen, there was little such interference in the late Republic and early Empire. Private property rights and laissez-faire were therefore the fundamental heritage of the Roman law to later centuries, and much of it was adopted by countries of the Christian West."

In Europe, the laissez-faire movement was first widely promoted by the Physiocrats, a movement that included Vincent de Gournay (1712–1759), a successful merchant who became a political figure. Gournay is postulated to have adapted the Taoist concept wu wei, from the writings on China by François Quesnay (1694–1774). Gournay held that government should allow the laws of nature to govern economic activity, with the state only intervening to protect life, liberty and property. François Quesnay and Anne Robert Jacques Turgot, Baron de l'Aulne took up Gournay's ideas. Quesnay had the ear of Louis XV, King of France, and in 1754 persuaded him to give laissez-faire a try. On September 17, the King abolished all tolls and restraints on the sale and transport of grain. For more than a decade, the experiment appeared successful, but 1768 saw a poor harvest, and the cost of bread rose so high that there was widespread starvation while merchants exported grain to obtain the best profit. In 1770, the Comptroller-General of Finances Joseph Marie Terray revoked the edict allowing free trade in grain.

The doctrine of laissez-faire became an integral part of 19th-century European liberalism. Just as liberals supported freedom of thought in the intellectual sphere, so were they equally prepared to champion the principles of free trade and free competition in the sphere of economics, seeing the state as merely a passive policeman, protecting private property and administering justice, but not interfering with the affairs of its citizens. Businessmen, British industrialists in particular, were quick to associate these principles with their own economic interests. Many of the ideas of the physiocrats spread throughout Europe and were adopted to a greater or lesser extent in Sweden, Tuscany, Spain and in the newly created United States. Adam Smith, author of The Wealth of Nations (1776), met Quesnay and acknowledged his influence.

In Britain, the newspaper The Economist (founded in 1843) became an influential voice for laissez-faire capitalism. Some laissez-faire- oriented thinkers opposed extensive government relief for famines within the British Empire. In 1847, referring to the famine then underway in Ireland, founder of The Economist James Wilson wrote: "It is no man's business to provide for another". More specifically, in An Essay on the Principle of Population, Malthus argued that there was nothing that could be done to avoid famines because he felt he had mathematically proven that population growth tends to exceed growth in food production. However, The Economist campaigned against the Corn Laws that protected landlords in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland against competition from less expensive foreign imports of cereal products. The Great Famine in Ireland in 1845 led to the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846. The tariffs on grain which kept the price of bread artificially high were repealed. However, repeal of the Corn Laws came too late to stop the Irish famine, partly because it was done in stages over three years.

A group that became known as the Manchester Liberals, to which Richard Cobden (1804–1865) and John Bright (1811–1889) belonged, were staunch defenders of free trade. After the death of Cobden, the Cobden Club (founded in 1866) continued their work. The breakdown of laissez-faire as practised by the British Empire was partly led by British companies eager for state support of their positions abroad, in particular British oil companies.

In Italy, philosopher Benedetto Croce created the term "liberism" (derived from the Italian term liberismo), a term for the economic doctrine of laissez-faire capitalism ; it is synonymous with economic liberalism. He claimed that "Liberalism can prove only a temporary right of private propriety of land and industries." It was popularized in English by Italian political scientist Giovanni Sartori. Sartori specifically imported the term from Italian to distinguish between social liberalism, which is generally considered a political ideology often advocating extensive government intervention in the economy, and those economic liberal theories that propose to virtually eliminate such intervention. In informal usage, liberism overlaps with other concepts such as free trade, right-libertarianism, the American concept of libertarianism, and the laissez-faire doctrine of the French liberal Doctrinaires. The intention of Croce and of Sartori to attack the right to private property and to free enterprise separating them from the general philosophy of liberalism, that is primarily a theory of natural rights, was always criticised openly by the quoted philosophers and by some of the main representatives of liberalism, such as Luigi Einaudi, Friedrich Hayek, and Milton Friedman. The Austrian School economist Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk argued that the differences between the economic concept of liberism and the economic consequences of liberalism can be summarized by saying that "A market is a law system. Without it, the only possible economy is the street robbery."

Frank Bourgin's study of the Constitutional Convention and subsequent decades argues that direct government involvement in the economy was intended by the Founding Fathers. The reason for this was the economic and financial chaos the nation suffered under the Articles of Confederation. The goal was to ensure that dearly won political independence was not lost by becoming economically and financially dependent on the powers and princes of Europe. The creation of a strong central government able to promote science, invention, industry and commerce was seen as an essential means of promoting the general welfare and making the economy of the United States strong enough for them to determine their own destiny. Others view Bourgin's study, written in the 1940s and not published until 1989, as an over-interpretation of the evidence, intended originally to defend the New Deal and later to counter Ronald Reagan 's economic policies.

Historian Kathleen G. Donohue argues that in the 19th century liberalism in the United States had distinctive characteristics and that "at the center of classical liberal theory [in Europe] was the idea of laissez-faire. To the vast majority of American classical liberals, however, laissez-faire did not mean "no government intervention" at all. On the contrary, they were more than willing to see government provide tariffs, railroad subsidies, and internal improvements, all of which benefited producers". Notable examples of government intervention in the period prior to the American Civil War include the establishment of the Patent Office in 1802; the establishment of the Office of Standard Weights and Measures in 1830; the creation of the Survey of the Coast (later renamed the United States Coast Survey and then the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey) in 1807 and other measures to improve river and harbor navigation; the various Army expeditions to the west, beginning with Lewis and Clark 's Corps of Discovery in 1804 and continuing into the 1870s, almost always under the direction of an officer from the Army Corps of Topographical Engineers and which provided crucial information for the overland pioneers that followed; the assignment of Army Engineer officers to assist or direct the surveying and construction of the early railroads and canals; and the establishment of the First Bank of the United States and Second Bank of the United States as well as various protectionist measures (e.g. the tariff of 1828). Several of these proposals met with serious opposition and required a great deal of horse-trading to be enacted into law. For instance, the First National Bank would not have reached the desk of President George Washington in the absence of an agreement that was reached between Alexander Hamilton and several Southern members of Congress to locate the capitol in the District of Columbia. In contrast to Hamilton and the Federalists was Thomas Jefferson and James Madison 's opposing political party, the Democratic-Republicans.

Most of the early opponents of laissez-faire capitalism in the United States subscribed to the American School. This school of thought was inspired by the ideas of Hamilton, who proposed the creation of a government-sponsored bank and increased tariffs to favor Northern industrial interests. Following Hamilton's death, the more abiding protectionist influence in the antebellum period came from Henry Clay and his American System. In the early 19th century, "it is quite clear that the laissez-faire label is an inappropriate one" to apply to the relationship between the United States government and industry. In the mid-19th century, the United States followed the Whig tradition of economic nationalism, which included increased state regulation and macroeconomic development through infrastructure. Public works such as the provision and regulation transportation such as railroads took effect. The Pacific Railway Acts provided the development of the First transcontinental railroad. To help pay for its war effort in the Civil War, the United States government imposed its first personal income tax on 5 August 1861 as part of the Revenue Act of 1861 (3% of all incomes over US$800; rescinded in 1872).

Following the Civil War, the movement towards a mixed economy accelerated. Protectionism increased with the McKinley Tariff of 1890 and the Dingley Tariff of 1897. Government regulation of the economy expanded with the enactment of the Interstate Commerce Act of 1887 and the Sherman Antitrust Act. The Progressive Era saw the enactment of more controls on the economy as evidenced by the Woodrow Wilson administration's New Freedom program. Following World War I and the Great Depression, the United States turned to a mixed economy which combined free enterprise with a progressive income tax and in which from time to time the government stepped in to support and protect American industry from competition from overseas. For example, in the 1980s the government sought to protect the automobile industry by "voluntary" export restrictions from Japan.

In 1986, Pietro S. Nivola wrote: "By and large, the comparative strength of the dollar against major foreign currencies has reflected high U.S. interest rates driven by huge federal budget deficits. Hence, the source of much of the current deterioration of trade is not the general state of the economy, but rather the government's mix of fiscal and monetary policies – that is, the problematic juxtaposition of bold tax reductions, relatively tight monetary targets, generous military outlays, and only modest cuts in major entitlement programs. Put simply, the roots of the trade problem and of the resurgent protectionism it has fomented are fundamentally political as well as economic".

A more recent advocate of total laissez-faire has been Objectivist Ayn Rand, who described it as "the abolition of any and all forms of government intervention in production and trade, the separation of State and Economics, in the same way and for the same reasons as the separation of Church and State". Rand's political philosophy emphasized individual rights (including property rights) and she considered laissez-faire capitalism the only moral social system because in her view it was the only system based on the protection of those rights. She opposed statism, which she understood to include theocracy, absolute monarchy, Nazism, fascism, communism, socialism and dictatorship. Rand believed that natural rights should be enforced by a constitutionally limited government. Although her political views are often classified as conservative or libertarian, she preferred the term "radical for capitalism". She worked with conservatives on political projects, but disagreed with them over issues such as religion and ethics. She denounced libertarianism, which she associated with anarchism. She rejected anarchism as a naïve theory based in subjectivism that could only lead to collectivism in practice.

Laissez-faire capitalism has been presented as raw, pure, or unrestrained capitalism, capitalism free of any regulations, with low or minimal or no government and operating entirely on the profit motive. It shares a similar economic conception with anarcho-capitalism.

Advocates of laissez-faire capitalism argue that it relies on a constitutionally limited government that unconditionally bans the initiation of force and coercion, including fraud. Therefore, free market economists such as Milton Friedman and Thomas Sowell argue that, under such a system, relationships between companies and workers are purely voluntary and mistreated workers will seek better treatment elsewhere. Thus, most companies will compete for workers on the basis of pay, benefits, and work-life balance just as they compete with one another in the marketplace on the basis of the relative cost and quality of their goods.

So-called "raw" or "hyper-capitalism" is a major motif of cyberpunk in dystopian works such as Syndicate.

Although laissez-faire has been commonly associated with capitalism, there is a similar laissez-faire economic theory and system associated with socialism called left-wing laissez-faire, or free-market anarchism, also known as free-market anti-capitalism and free-market socialism to distinguish it from laissez-faire capitalism. One first example of this is mutualism as developed by Pierre-Joseph Proudhon in the 19th century, from which emerged individualist anarchism. Benjamin Tucker is one eminent American individualist anarchist who adopted a laissez-faire system he termed anarchistic socialism in contraposition to state socialism. This tradition has been recently associated with contemporary scholars such as Kevin Carson, Roderick T. Long, Charles W. Johnson, Brad Spangler, Sheldon Richman, Chris Matthew Sciabarra and Gary Chartier, who stress the value of radically free markets, termed freed markets to distinguish them from the common conception which these left-libertarians believe to be riddled with capitalist and statist privileges. Referred to as left-wing market anarchists or market-oriented left-libertarians, proponents of this approach strongly affirm the classical liberal ideas of self-ownership and free markets while maintaining that taken to their logical conclusions these ideas support anti-capitalist, anti-corporatist, anti-hierarchical and pro-labor positions in economics; anti-imperialism in foreign policy; and thoroughly radical views regarding such cultural issues as gender, sexuality and race. Critics of laissez-faire as commonly understood argues that a truly laissez-faire system would be anti-capitalist and socialist.

Kevin Carson describes his politics as on "the outer fringes of both free market libertarianism and socialism " and has also been highly critical of intellectual property. Carson has identified the work of Benjamin Tucker, Thomas Hodgskin, Ralph Borsodi, Paul Goodman, Lewis Mumford, Elinor Ostrom, Peter Kropotkin and Ivan Illich as sources of inspiration for his approach to politics and economics. In addition to individualist anarchist Benjamin Tucker's big four monopolies (land, money, tariffs and patents), he argues that the state has also transferred wealth to the wealthy by subsidizing organizational centralization in the form of transportation and communication subsidies. Carson believes that Tucker overlooked this issue due to Tucker's focus on individual market transactions whereas he also focuses on organizational issues. As such, the primary focus of his most recent work has been decentralized manufacturing and the informal and household economies. The theoretical sections of Carson's Studies in Mutualist Political Economy are also presented as an attempt to integrate marginalist critiques into the labor theory of value.

In response to claims that he uses the term capitalism incorrectly, Carson says he is deliberately choosing to resurrect what he claims to be an old definition of the term to "make a point". He claims that "the term 'capitalism,' as it was originally used, did not refer to a free market, but to a type of statist class system in which capitalists controlled the state and the state intervened in the market on their behalf". Carson holds that "capitalism, arising as a new class society directly from the old class society of the Middle Ages, was founded on an act of robbery as massive as the earlier feudal conquest of the land. It has been sustained to the present by continual state intervention to protect its system of privilege without which its survival is unimaginable". Carson argues that in a truly laissez-faire system the ability to extract a profit from labor and capital would be negligible. Carson coined the pejorative term vulgar libertarianism, a phrase that describes the use of a free market rhetoric in defense of corporate capitalism and economic inequality. According to Carson, the term is derived from the phrase vulgar political economy which Karl Marx described as an economic order that "deliberately becomes increasingly apologetic and makes strenuous attempts to talk out of existence the ideas which contain the contradictions [existing in economic life]".

Gary Chartier offers an understanding of property rights as contingent yet tightly constrained social strategies, reflective of the importance of multiple, overlapping rationales for separate ownership and of natural law principles of practical reasonableness, defending robust yet non-absolute protections for these rights in a manner similar to that employed by David Hume. This account is distinguished both from Lockean and neo-Lockean views which deduce property rights from the idea of self-ownership and from consequentialist accounts that might license widespread ad hoc interference with the possessions of groups and individuals. Chartier uses this account to ground a clear statement of the natural law basis for the view that solidaristic wealth redistribution by individual persons is often morally required, but as a response by individuals and grass-roots networks to particular circumstances rather than as a state-driven attempt to achieve a particular distributive pattern. He advances detailed arguments for workplace democracy rooted in such natural law principles as subsidiarity, defending it as morally desirable and as a likely outcome of the elimination of injustice rather than as something to be mandated by the state.

Chartier has discussed natural law approaches to land reform and to the occupation of factories by workers. He objects on natural law grounds to intellectual property protections, drawing on his theory of property rights more generally and develops a general natural law account of boycotts. He has argued that proponents of genuinely freed markets should explicitly reject capitalism and identify with the global anti-capitalist movement while emphasizing that the abuses the anti-capitalist movement highlights result from state-tolerated violence and state-secured privilege rather than from voluntary cooperation and exchange. According to Chartier, "it makes sense for [freed-market advocates] to name what they oppose 'capitalism.' Doing so calls attention to the freedom movement's radical roots, emphasizes the value of understanding society as an alternative to the state, underscores the fact that proponents of freedom object to non-aggressive as well as aggressive restraints on liberty, ensures that advocates of freedom aren't confused with people who use market rhetoric to prop up an unjust status quo, and expresses solidarity between defenders of freed markets and workers — as well as ordinary people around the world who use "capitalism" as a short-hand label for the world-system that constrains their freedom and stunts their lives".

Over the years, a number of economists have offered critiques of laissez-faire economics. Adam Smith acknowledges some moral ambiguities towards the system of capitalism. Smith had misgivings concerning some aspects of each of the major character-types produced by modern capitalist society, namely the landlords, the workers and the capitalists. Smith claimed that "[t]he landlords' role in the economic process is passive. Their ability to reap a revenue solely from ownership of land tends to make them indolent and inept, and so they tend to be unable to even look after their own economic interests" and that "[t]he increase in population should increase the demand for food, which should increase rents, which should be economically beneficial to the landlords". According to Smith, the landlords should be in favour of policies which contribute to the growth in the wealth of nations, but they often are not in favour of these pro-growth policies because of their own indolence-induced ignorance and intellectual flabbiness. Smith stated clearly that he believed that without morality and laws, society would fail. From that perspective, it seems dubious that Smith supported a pure Laissez-Faire style of capitalism, and the ideas he supports in The Wealth of Nations is heavily dependent on the moral philosophy from his previous work, Theory of Moral Sentiment.

Many philosophers have written on the systems society has created to manage their civilizations. Thomas Hobbes used the concept of a " state of nature ", which is a time before any government or laws, as a starting point to consider the question. In this time, life would be " war of all against all ". Further, "In such condition, there is no place for industry; because the fruit thereof is uncertain... continual fear and danger of violent death, and the life of man solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short."

Regardless of preferred political preference, all societies require shared moral values as a prerequisite on which to build laws to protect individuals from each other. Adam Smith wrote Wealth of Nations during the Enlightenment, a period of time when the prevailing attitude was, "All things can be Known." In effect, European thinkers, inspired by the likes of Isaac Newton and others, set about to "find the laws" of all things, that there existed a "natural law" underlying all aspects of life. They believed that these could be discovered and that everything in the universe could be rationally demystified and catalogued, including human interactions.

Critics and market abolitionists such as David McNally argue in the Marxist tradition that the logic of the market inherently produces inequitable outcomes and leads to unequal exchanges, arguing that Smith's moral intent and moral philosophy espousing equal exchange was undermined by the practice of the free market he championed. According to McNally, the development of the market economy involved coercion, exploitation and violence that Smith's moral philosophy could not countenance.

The British economist John Maynard Keynes condemned laissez-faire economic policy on several occasions. In The End of Laissez-faire (1926), one of the most famous of his critiques, Keynes argues that the doctrines of laissez-faire are dependent to some extent on improper deductive reasoning and says the question of whether a market solution or state intervention is better must be determined on a case-by-case basis.

The Austrian School economist Friedrich Hayek stated that a freely competitive, laissez-faire banking industry tends to be endogenously destabilizing and pro-cyclical, arguing that the need for central banking control was inescapable.

Karl Polanyi 's Great Transformation criticizes self-regulating markets as aberrational, unnatural phenomena which tend towards social disruption.

In modern economics laissez-faire typically has a bad connotation, which hints towards a perceived need for restraint due to social needs and securities that can not be adequately responded to by companies with just a motive for making profit.

Robert Kuttner states that "for over a century, popular struggles in democracies have used the nation-state to temper raw capitalism. The power of voters has offset the power of capital. But as national barriers have come down in the name of freer commerce, so has the capacity of governments to manage capitalism in a broad public interest. So the real issue is not 'trade' but democratic governance".

The main issues of raw capitalism are said to lie in its disregard for quality, durability, sustainability, respect for the environment and human beings as well as a lack of morality. From this more critical angle, companies might naturally aim to maximise profits at the expense of workers' and broader social interests.

The Lamour Watermill (French : Le Moulin Lamour) is a museum and arts centre located in Briastre, Hauts-de-France, France. The water-powered mill and its edifices were built in the year 1800. It was originally used for milling grain, but stopped its operations in the 1930s before being converted into a museum by the Belleval family in the late 1990s.

Marie Anne and Ludovic Belleval are the mill's owners and curators. Both graduated from the École des Beaux-Arts of Cambrai and are Specialized Educators accredited by the French Ministry of National Education, Higher Education and Research. Marie-Anne is a technician, ceramic artist and painter conducting watercolors, acrylic painting, engraving, etching and clay-modeling workshops. Painter and sculptor Ludovic also holds a Bachelor's degree in Visual Arts from the University of Valenciennes. Both have exhibited their œuvres in various venues. The Bellevals are also involved in primary schools located in Solesmes, Caudry, Cambrai, Valenciennes and their surrounding areas. In 1994, Ludovic and Marie-Anne Belleval bought the Lamour mill.. A decision that has been reinforced by the fact that this Briastre mill still has its "right to water". "This right was granted by Me Leroy, notary of Napoléon Bonaparte, and is valid forever." The mill had ceased its activity in 1947. The couple advocates for heritage preservation, the defense of nature and artistic promotion. The couple has completely restored the interior of the mill of 300 m2. The machines are in working order but it is necessary to give them life by replacing a water wheel (French: Roue à aubes) and connect it to the different mechanisms.

The Lamour mill is the last watermill in the entire Selle valley that remains open to the public. It produces oil and flour using three 5-meter-high (in diameter) paddle wheels. In 2014, the 'Selle Basin Joint Union ' in charge of watercourses management announced that eight watermills and dams, including the Lamour mill, would disappear in 2015 on the river affluent of the Scheldt in order to comply with the implementation of European regulations. Northern Fishing Federation director, Emmanuel Petit argued that "The more rivers keep their profile, the more the impact of floods is mitigated. This also allows the fish as a good ecological indicator of the river's state to go up the Selle River to reproduce." President of the union Georges Flamengt declared that "If these adjustments were not made, Brussels will inflict a 10000€ penalty a day to the French state." The cost of destruction for the eight mills had been quantified to a minimal estimate of 350,000 Euros financed by the French Water Agency (became a European Union Hydrographic District in 2000) which could reach 1.5 million Euros if the union opted for more expensive technical solutions. A consultation process had been initiated with all owners who were given until 2018 to comply with this regulatory requirement. Among those concerned about The Lamour mill were the 'Siccanor Mill' in Douchy-les-Mines, the 'Malaquin Mill' in Montrécourt, the 'Poirette Threshold' in Haussy, the 'Taupe Mill' in Saint-Python, the Barracks in Solesmes, the 'Bleuse Mill' in Neuvilly and the Third Estate Farm in Saint-Souplet.

The museum is a three-story building displaying more than 300 rare objects and artifacts dating from 1800 to 1960. Pedagogical guided tours in costume are also available to classes of pupils and students, familiarizing them to characters from some of the 17th and 18th centuries' pivotal paintings. An estaminet with traditional wooden games is entirely recreated.

Marie-Anne and Ludovic Belleval lead specialized art workshops for therapeutic needs of people with disabilities and special needs. Every week, they welcome several groups from specialized institutions, such as shelters or occupational centers. People evolve at their own pace in a friendly and understanding atmosphere that is conducive to creativity. Participants are encouraged to respect, congratulate, and help each other by accepting differences without animosity. The teaching is individualized, and the proposed techniques are adapted according to intellectual, social, or physical difficulties. A workshop on the ground floor is fully accessible for wheelchair users.

Professionally trained beekeeper, Ludovic Belleval, produces flower honey, propolis, royal jelly, and pollen. In June and July, he welcomes school classes to witness the harvesting of the flowing frames of honey. Belleval is an educator beekeeper and aims at sensitizing school-children to the importance of environmental issues.

The Landes de Gascogne (French pronunciation: [ lɑ̃d də ɡaskɔɲ ] ; in Gascon, classic spelling las Lanas de Gasconha, Fébusienne spelling leus Lanes de Gascougne), or Gascony Moors, is a natural region of France of nearly 14000 km². It extends over three departments: Gironde, Landes and Lot-et-Garonne, and includes 386 communes. The region is a flat, sandy plain in the west of the Aquitaine Basin beside the Atlantic Ocean. The interior is cut off from the sea by a barrier of dunes. It is dominated by pine forests that cover 66% of the territory, with islets of agriculture over 18% of the territory.

A periglacial desert during the Last Glacial Period, the Landes de Gascogne was later covered by a mixed forest of deciduous and coniferous trees as the climate warmed in the Holocene. This was largely cleared by humans around 600 AD and replaced by moorland (landes). Both sheep and cattle grazed here, but an epizootic in 1775 destroyed the cows and only sheep remained. The popular image of the Landes was that of a Gascon shepherd standing on stilts to watch over his flock. In the early 19th century the dunes were stabilized, and in the second half of the 19th century an intensive plantation program replaced much of the heathland with stands of maritime pine. Today the economy is dominated by tourism along the coast and forestry for the paper industry in the interior.

The region is a sloping and generally flat sedimentary plateau characterized by poor, sandy soil.

It is this flatness, with the coastal dune barrier preventing the easy flow of fresh water towards the sea, which gave the region its character of wetland, at least before the major drainage works, the fixing of dunes and pine plantation from the end of the 18th century and throughout the 19th century. The landscape of wet moors, surveyed by Landes shepherds on stilts, gave way in the mid-nineteenth century to the first forest in France: the Landes de Gascogne forest which extends over the “triangle of the Landes” (Soulac, Nérac, Hossegor). On the occasion of certain folk festivals, the shepherds once again become the waders of the Landes of yesteryear, who guarded their flocks, dressed in sheepskins, perched high on their stilts.

The region has undergone a profound transformation as a result of these works which in less than a century have completely changed an economy and a culture that was thousands of years old. The agro-pastoral system has given way to industrial sap tapping (previously practiced only in natural coastal forests), and gradually to the timber industry. Industrial and commercial agriculture trials were unsuccessful until the arrival of corn in the 1960s. It is a region that is becoming urbanized and peri-urbanized (+ 2.3% per year in urban sprawl from 2006 to 2009).

The coastline took on more importance with the development of seaside and resort tourism from the mid-nineteenth century (notably with the arrival of the train from 1841 to La Teste-de-Buch, then to Bayonne and Lacanau). Tourism remains an important source of seasonal jobs. The population is rising sharply, with around 839,200 people in 2006 (i.e. + 60% in forty years, + 0.9% / year from 1990 to 1999, + 1.4% per year from 1999 to 2006, 2/3 of the new residents coming from other regions).

International competition and technological developments have hit the forest economy hard, but it remains one of the main sources of wealth in Nouvelle-Aquitaine.

The Landes de Gascogne are bordered to the west by the Atlantic Ocean and to the north-east by the wine-growing fringe of the Médoc, the Bordelais [ fr ], the Bazadais [ fr ] and the Queyran [ fr ]. To the south-east they are bordered by the Pays d'Albret [ fr ] and the Ténarèze [ fr ], with the course of the Gélise as boundary, Armagnac, Tursan, Chalosse, the Pays d'Orthe [ fr ] and the Seignanx [ fr ].

The Landes de Gascogne coastline is part of the Côte d'Argent. Seaside resorts include:

The Landes forest covers 9,740 square kilometres (3,760 sq mi). It is a vast triangle stretching from Soulac to Hossegor and as far as Nérac. It covers most of the departments of Gironde and Landes as well as the west of Lot-et-Garonne. About 9% of the forest area is on the coastal dunes and about 91% is inland on the sandy plain of the Landes plateau.

The pine forest covered only 2,000 square kilometres (770 sq mi) before systematic afforestation of the dunes and the Landes plateau modified this landscape. Nowadays maritime pine (Pinus pinaster), the predominant species, represents 80% of the trees that make up the forest. The remaining 20% is made up of oaks, elms, lime trees, chestnut trees, alders, laurels, strawberry trees, plum trees, apple trees, cherry trees, etc. Maritime pines were 85% of trees on over 8,030 square kilometres (3,100 sq mi) at the start of the 21st century. The composition of the massif is changing, with an increasing proportion of deciduous trees, natural or introduced, which has risen from 8% to 15% in the ten years from 2000 to 2010.

The Landes forest includes diverse landscapes. To the north, the proximity of the Bordeaux vineyards offers landscapes of mixed pine and vines, where Échoppes [ fr ] and traditional Landes houses [ fr ] rub shoulders. To the south, the pines gradually give way to the green hills of the Chalosse in the foothills of the Pyrenees. The Côte d'Argent is home to forests with a different undergrowth from that of the interior of the Landes. Strawberry trees (Arbutus unedo), holm oaks (Quercus ilex) and cork oaks (Quercus suber) share the light that is not captured by the pines. At the heart of the forest massif, the presence of a few streams, and in particular the Leyre, is conducive to the development of a forest made up of deciduous trees often hiding the river: the gallery forest.

The wooded area was affected by two major storms, Cyclone Martin (1999) and Cyclone Klaus (2009), during which 26% of the Landes forest by area suffered more than 40% damage to the maritime pines. Especially since the 1976 drought, the massif has also been a regular victim of attacks by pine processionary caterpillars, bark beetles and other pests to which monospecific stands are particularly sensitive, and has been periodically threatened by forest fires.

The common word lande (moor) (in Gascon lana / lanne) comes from the Celtic landa alteration of lann enda, that is to say the ends of the land (flat) or the plain, here the great Aquitaine plain. It is a common allusion to maritime borders as well as to their characteristic vegetation, this last vegetal meaning being later and specific to peasant traditions.

The Latin term ager syrticus is another name that recalls that it is about a vast maritime shore, sometimes inundated and marshy, which the ancient cultivators of the Landes sands literally translated as "land worked by the intrusions of the sea or by invasion of waters blocked by dunes and which cannot thus freely access the maritime shores, lands also shaped by the sand-carrying winds, sometimes destroying all life in the wind and which blow in grapeshot, sometimes tens of leagues from the sea, not refraining from bursting into the good countries with a bang". It is this last term ager syrticus passed in medieval Latin which appears on the sketches of the first Carolingian maps, above a white space between Bordeaux and Adour, as in the Universal Geography of Anton Friedrich Büsching in the Age of Enlightenment.

The appellation "Landes de Gascogne" only appears in the 19th century, the region being designated before that by "Landes de Bordeaux", which has a more restrictive meaning today.

The Cenozoic limestone and molassic substratum of the Aquitaine Basin was affected by tectonic movements which produced an open trench on the Atlantic platform near Biscarrosse. At the end of the Miocene, sediments of oceanic and detrital origin from the Pyrenees accumulated. Subsequently, several processes would result in what is called the "sands of the Landes":

The coast is protected by dunes, with unique vegetation, which deprive many small coastal rivers of access to the ocean and lead to the formation of a string of lakes. Arcachon Bay is the only breach in the Landes dune cordon, which is 200 kilometres (120 mi) long.

The Landes to Gascogne was a periglacial desert between 21,000 BC and 16,000 BC. Loess, fine sediment produced by glaciation, was blown into the Aquitanian Basin forming a sandy desert. During the Magdalenian period of the Upper Paleolithic, the Landes de Gascogne was uninhabited (but not uncrossable). It formed a "quasi-cultural barrier" between the people living on either side of it.

Concerning the history of the vegetation, based on pollen data, the Landes de Gascogne territory was covered by an important diversified forest (oak, elm, lime, ash, beech, pine, etc.) during the first half of the Holocene (9,700 to 3,900 BC). At the start of the Holocene the forest cover was characterized by a large pine forest, replaced around 6000–5500 BC by an oak grove rich in heliophyte trees and shrubs (birch, hazel, alder, etc.). Although it was subject to regular deforestation from the late Neolithic (around 3500 BC) this forest persisted until the beginning of the Middle Ages (around 600 AD), from which time the intensification of human activities leads in certain sectors to its disappearance and replacement by moorland.

Concerning human occupation, pollen data indicate anthropization dating back to the first half of the Early Neolithic (5,500–6,000 years BC), without archaeological remains to confirm this. The occupation is perennial from the late Neolithic (3500 BC), intensifies during Protohistory (from 3500 BC) and reaches a peak during the Middle Ages. The traditional image of the Grande-Lande is of a marginal or inhospitable space, caricatured under the term "Landes desert". However, this space should be reconsidered as previously densely populated and exploited from the end of the Neolithic period.

(For more information on the Gironde Landes in the 18th century, see Jacques Baurein [ fr ], Variétés Bordeloises, article XXXIX, pages 412–422.)

Until the middle of the 19th century, the inhabitants of the Landes had to contend with the extreme poverty of the soils of their communes. The moor consisted of vast expanses of bare, swampy, flat and unhealthy land. The Landais lived by the agro-pastoral system. Grouped together in "airials" (small isolated hamlets), they cultivated rye and millet, the basis of their meager diet, and raised sheep whose role was to fertilize the land. The image of Landes shepherds [ fr ] perched on their stilts comes from this period. This means of locomotion was perfectly adapted to monitor the herds, and to move quickly over long distances.

According to historians cows were numerous before the classic image emerged of the Landes shepherd watching from the top of his stilts as his sheep grazed the short heath. The great epizootic of 1775 destroyed the cows and sheep prevailed. Likewise, it was only after the disappearance of a large part of the forest, decimated in the 17th century by frost, fires and deforestation, that short heath emerged at the end of the 18th century.

On the initiative of the " Captaux de Buch ", local lords in the Pays de Buch, Nicolas Brémontier [ fr ] undertook to fix the moving sands of the coast which threatened the neighboring dwellings. Later François Jules Hilaire Chambrelent [ fr ] drained the moor by digging ditches, locally called crastes. Indeed, the situation had become difficult in the moors, where all agricultural experiments (rice, mulberry trees, peanuts, tobacco, etc.) had so far failed. Sandy and soggy soils did not allow crops to grow, and malaria epidemics decimated the population.

Pine was, and remains, the only species that could grow in the poor soils of the moors. This work resulted in the law of 19 June 1857, which required all the municipalities of the Landes de Gascogne to drain their wet moors to enhance them, in particular by afforestation with maritime pine (Pinus pinaster). Due to lack of financial means, most municipalities were forced to sell their moors to individuals, thus privatizing the municipalities. Until then, the region had 200,000 hectares (490,000 acres) of natural forests, which would be extended throughout the Landes de Gascogne. The face of the region was profoundly transformed and the pine became the "golden tree" for its resin.

Until the shifting dunes of the Aquitaine coast were fixed, the wind regularly carried large amounts of sand inland. Many villages had to be moved or rebuilt. The pioneers of the fixation include the Captaux of the de Ruat family who carried out conclusive tests at La Teste-de-Buch at the end of the 18th century. This work was extended to the entire coast by men like Guillaume Desbiey [ fr ], Baron Charlevoix de Villiers, François Jules Hilaire Chambrelent [ fr ], Toussaint Catros [ fr ] and Nicolas Brémontier [ fr ]. The French state took charge of building a stabilized coastal barrier during the nineteenth century: in 1876 88,000 hectares (220,000 acres) were fixed. During the twentieth century, the National Forestry Office (ONF) managed and maintained these dunes.

Tapping trees is a thousand-year-old activity in the Landes de Gascogne. The first tappers exploited the embryos of what would become the largest forest in Europe to make a sort of tar used for caulking boats. They were found near the coast, in Lacanau, La Teste-de-Buch, Arcachon, Biscarrosse and Hossegor. With the disappearance of pastoralism and the massive plantations of maritime pines, the tapping process spread throughout the forest and became a flagship industrial activity of the region until the 1950s. After distillation of the harvested resin, two compounds are obtained that are useful for industry: rosin (70%) and turpentine (20%). The outlets were mainly in the chemical industry. Tapping disappeared at the end of the 1980s, and nowadays the Landes Forest feeds the paper industry. Tourism has also been one of the region's main sources of income since the beginning of the 20th century.

In the nineteenth century, after the great reforestation of the 1850–1880 period that followed the law of 1857, wildfires became more serious, especially during the years of great droughts such as 1871, 1893, 1922 and 1937. During World War II, the usual causes of fires in peacetime such as lightning and carelessness were supplemented by causes linked to hostilities such as guerrillas of the French Resistance, plane crashes, landmines in the coastal dunes and scarcity of firefighters. It is estimated that between 1942 and 1945 over 300,000 hectares (740,000 acres) were destroyed.

Faced with the scale of the disasters, at the Liberation of France the Provisional Government of the French Republic issued the Ordinance of 28 April 1945 relating to the development of the Landes de Gascogne region. The explanatory memorandum states that,

The Landes forest is in the process of declining... The existence of these desert expanses of tens of thousands of hectares practically abandoned by their owners following fires or unregenerated logging resulting from faulty sanitation, is unworthy of a large country like France.... The State must immediately compensate for the powerlessness of the Landes owners by considerable and very urgent works of construction of roads, digging of canals, defense against fires, electrification of the villages and supply of drinking water of the rural populations.

A first credit of four hundred million old francs was committed from the state budget.

There followed the regional decree of the Commissioner of the Republic in Bordeaux of 26 March 1946, which required the creation of organizations, voluntary or official, for defense of forests against fire in all the municipalities of the forest massif. Next the decree of 25 March 1947 created in each of the three departments of the Landes de Gascogne (Gironde, Landes and Lot-et-Garonne) a corps of professional forest firefighters. As early as 1948, large credits from the National Forest Fund recently created in 1946 were granted to reforest disaster areas and to equip the massif with preventive means and active control.

After the 1949 Landes forest fire claimed 82 lives, a backup plan called the "Plan de Labouheyre" was drawn up. A Regional Commission of Landes de Gascogne was immediately constituted which met for the first time on 16 November 1949 in Labouheyre, Landes. It concluded an agreement between public services and forest owners for organization of a fire defense. A Central Commission replaced the regional one by ministerial decree of 17 December 1949. A network of firebreaks, tracks and drainage ditches was built.

A distinction should be made between the Landes department and the Landes de Gascogne region. The first corresponds to an administrative entity and the second to a natural and cultural region. For example, Chalosse, Tursan and Marsan are part of the Landes department, while they are excluded from the Landes de Gascogne. Conversely, the Landes forest extends in the east as far as Lot-et-Garonne, reaches the Adour river in the south and extends north to Soulac in the Médoc.

The Landes de Gascogne, a natural region united by historical, geological, biological, linguistic and cultural links, are divided into three administrative entities: the departments of Gironde, Landes and Lot-et-Garonne.

When the departments were created during the French Revolution, they did not listen to the wishes of a certain Simon (Elder), a surveyor, who wanted to form a homogeneous department that respected several centuries of history, which would have been baptized Leyre. The prefecture would have been based in Lugos, renamed "Lugôville" for the occasion. Simon (Elder) defended this idea for decades. In addition, no attention was paid to the future bishop of Bayonne, François Gieure, when he demanded that the "odious appellation" be changed from the "Landes department" to the fairer "Adour department". Yet it was a strange marriage that the French Revolution celebrated: the marriage of the Chalosse hills with the Landes desert.

Soon the dividing line between Landais and non-Landais no longer passed as it had always done between the plain and the hills, the black sand and the fertile soil, it simply followed the dotted lines of the departmental maps. While the peasants of the south of Adour were transformed into Landais, the inhabitants of Salles and Saint-Symphorien became unnamed individuals, pale Girondins.

The vast triangle from Soulac-sur-Mer (Gironde) to Capbreton (Landes department) via Nérac (Lot-et-Garonne) that constitutes the Landes de Gascogne territory, is divided into several small " pays ", or sub-regions. These are united by historical and geographical links, and also geological because they all belong to the sandy plain of the Landes, biological through the Landes Forest, linguistic (the vernacular is the Gascon language) and cultural (they all belong to Gascony).

When the departments of France were created on 4 March 1790 in application of the law of 22 December 1789, the Landes de Gascogne were divided into three departments:

This new division brought together heterogeneous groups that before had no common link, such as the south of the Landes forest and Chalosse in the Landes department, and the north of the Landes forest and the Entre-Deux-Mers in Gironde. The consequences of this separation are the origin of much confusion over the presence of the Landes forest in Gironde. Landes traditions tend to disappear and people tend to associate, wrongly, the Landes de Gascogne with the Landes department.

Enhancement of the local heritage in this western part of the Gironde has focused for many years on seaside activities and the wine-growing activity of the eastern fringe of the Médoc. However, we are witnessing a gradual reversal of this tendency to forget, and more and more tourist books and maps are integrating this Landes cultural heritage into the Landes Girondines. It is nonetheless true that the pays of the Landes de Gascogne countries are united in terms of cultural heritage. They are:

The Landes de Gascogne Regional Natural Park was created in 1976 and comprises 51 municipalities in Gironde and in the Landes department. Its missions are preservation of heritage, balanced development of economic activities, and promoting public awareness of their environment by arousing the curiosity of guests and residents. It thus supports discovery tourism. Each of its facilities offers a path to enter the history of this country and understand the charm of the Landes de Gascogne.

Located between the departments of Landes and Gironde, the park extends from Arcachon Bay to Pays de Buch, follows the valleys of the Grande Leyre and the Petite Leyre, and borders the Grande Lande. The park lodge is located in Belin-Béliet.

Among the local terms that may be useful to know, some Gascon words are:

The Landes forest (pronounced [ lɑ̃d ] ; La forêt des Landes in French) in the Landes de Gascogne (las Lanas de Gasconha in the Gascon language), in the historic Gascony natural region of southwestern France now known as Aquitaine, is the largest man-made woodland in Western Europe. The French word landes and Gascon lanas mean 'moors' or 'heaths', from Transalpine Gaulish * landa ("uninhabited/uncultivated area"); compare Irish lann, Welsh llan (“enclosure”).

The forest (also known as the 'moors of Gascony', and formerly, the 'moors of Bordeaux') covers a large portion of Landes and Gironde, two of the departments of France ; it also spills over into parts of the Lot-et-Garonne department. The sources of several rivers can be found in this region, including the sources of the Leyre, the Boudigau, the Ciron, and the Gat Mort. The largest towns within the forest are Arcachon, Dax, and Mont-de-Marsan.

The forest is composed mostly of maritime pine, Pinus pinaster. Unlike many other European forests, the Landes forest is almost entirely created and managed by man for industrial purposes. This massive pine plantation was started in the 18th century in the Pays de Buch area of Gironde, to halt erosion and cleanse the soil.

Most of the region now occupied by the Landes forest was swampy land that was sparsely inhabited until the 19th century, when the 19 June 1857 law ended traditional pastoralism and led to wide scale reforestation, in order to rehabilitate the landscape and provide for regional economic development. Prior to this period, the people of the Landes used stilt-walking to move from place to place in the wet terrain. Since the 1970s, parts of the forest have given way to intensive agriculture (in particular, grain farming.)

The area of the forest is estimated to be around 10,000 square kilometres (3,900 sq mi), of which nine-tenths is exclusively devoted to a monoculture of maritime pines (Pinus pinaster), but, in the centre of this pinhadar (pine plantation in the Gascon dialect of Occitan), there is a natural forest that survives from the post-glacial timbering of this part of southwestern France. There, pines co-exist with other species, chiefly oak, alder, birch, willow, and holly. This mixed temperate forest is most commonly found along watercourses, where the drainage is particularly good. The old-growth forest was probably more extensive prior to the Middle Ages, when a colder, more humid, climate took hold and changed the species composition. Because of the need for wood for fuel and construction, and because of a steady expansion in the grazing of sheep, the aboriginal forest was further depleted between the 15th and 18th centuries.

A major storm in January 2009 damaged approximately 300,000 hectares (740,000 acres) of forest, 90% of which was located in the Landes Forest.

Before the mid-19th century, only the breeding of sheep on the moors (and the production of sheep manure as a soil amendment) allowed the cultivation of rye. Because of wet winters, it was necessary to top-dress the land with thatch to preserve it for the next growing season. The disappearance of the moors, because of the expansion of the pine plantations, brought about the end of this herding and wetland grain-growing culture, and the iconic image of shepherds on stilts disappeared as well. The shepherd image was replaced by the image of the resin-collector with his tools.

In the first part of the 20th century, extensive commercial exploitation of wood, paper, and pine resin began, and these industries became an important part of the regional economy. Many local people are still employed in forest-related pursuits, including forestry, sawmills, paper mills, woodcrafts like parquetry and joinery and furniture making, as well the fabrication of paper-based products like cardboard and fiberboard for construction. However, resin-collecting, which required hard labor, has almost completely disappeared because modern chemical processes for producing solvents and other useful chemicals often do not rely on pine resin or pine tar as a precursor. DRT is the largest company in this region that uses the byproducts of pine exploitation.

This article presents the main landmarks in the city of Paris within administrative limits, divided by its 20 arrondissements. Landmarks located in the suburbs of Paris, outside of its administrative limits, while within the metropolitan area are not included in this article.

The 1st arrondissement forms much of the historic centre of Paris. Place Vendôme is famous for its deluxe hotels such as Hôtel Ritz, The Westin Paris – Vendôme, Hôtel de Toulouse (headquarters of Banque de France), Hôtel du Petit-Bourbon, Hôtel Meurice, and Hôtel Regina Les Halles were formerly Paris's central meat and produce market, and, since the late 1970s, are a major shopping centre. The old Halles were demolished in 1971 and replaced by the Forum des Halles. The central market, the biggest wholesale food market in the world, was transferred to Rungis, in the southern suburbs.

The Axe historique, is a line of monuments which begins in the first arrondissement at the center of the Louvre with equestrian statue of Louis XIV and continues through the 8th toward the west through the Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel, the Tuileries Gardens, the Luxor Obelisk erected in the centre of Place de la Concorde, the Champs-Élysées, the Arc de Triomphe, centred in the Place de l'Étoile circus, the Avenue de la Grande Armée (through the 16th and the 17th), and ends at the Grande Arche de la Défense outside of Paris. The former Conciergerie prison held some prominent Ancien Régime members before their deaths during the French Revolution. Also of note in the 1st arrondissement are the theatres Théâtre du Châtelet, Théâtre du Palais-Royal, squares such as Place des Pyramides, Place Dauphine, Place des Victoires and Place du Châtelet, the Comédie-Française, Galerie nationale du Jeu de Paume, the Palais de Justice and Palais-Royal.

The 2nd arrondissement of Paris lies to the north of the 1st. The Boulevard des Capucines, Boulevard Montmartre, Boulevard des Italiens, Rue de Richelieu and Rue Saint-Denis are major roads running through the district. The 2nd arrondissement is the theatre district of Paris, overlapping into the 3rd, and contains the Théâtre des Capucines and Théâtre-Musée des Capucines, Opéra-Comique, Théâtre des Variétés, Théâtre des Bouffes-Parisiens, Théâtre du Vaudeville and Théâtre Feydeau. Also of note are the Académie Julian, Bibliothèque nationale de France, Café Anglais and Galerie Vivienne.

The 3rd arrondissement is located to the northeast of the 1st. Le Marais is a trendy district spanning the 3rd and 4th arrondissements. It is architecturally very well preserved, and some of the oldest houses and buildings of Paris can be found there. It is a very culturally open place, known for its Chinese, Jewish and gay communities. The Place des Vosges, established in 1612 to celebrate the wedding of Louis XIII to Anne of Austria lies at the border of the 3rd and 4th arrondissements and is the oldest planned square in Paris, and the Place de la République was named after the constitutional change in France. The 3rd arrondissement is noted for its museums such as Musée des Archives Nationales, Musée Picasso, Musée de la Chasse et de la Nature, Musée Cognacq-Jay, Musée d'Art et d'Histoire du Judaïsme, Musée de la Poupée, Musée des Arts et Métiers and the Carnavalet Museum, and theatres such as Théâtre Déjazet, Théâtre de la Gaîté, and Théâtre du Marais. Several hotels are located in this district including Hôtel de Guénégaud and Hôtel de Soubise.

The 4th arrondissement is located to the east of the 1st. Place de la Bastille (4th, 11th and 12th arrondissements, right bank) is a district of great historical significance, for not just Paris, but also all of France. Because of its symbolic value, the square has often been a site of political demonstrations, and it has a tall column commemorating the final resting place of the revolutionaries killed in 1830 and 1848. Bibliothèque de l'Arsenal, La Force Prison, Centre Georges Pompidou and Lycée Charlemagne are notable institutions here. The 12th-century cathedral Notre Dame de Paris on the Île de la Cité is one of the best-known landmarks of the 4th arrondissement, and there are the Gothic 13th-century Sainte-Chapelle palace chapel, Notre-Dame-des-Blancs-Manteaux, Saint-Louis-en-l'Île, Saint-Merri, Saint-Paul-Saint-Louis, St-Gervais-et-St-Protais, and Temple du Marais. Roads running through the 4th arrondissement include Rue Charlemagne, Rue de Rivoli, Rue des Francs-Bourgeois, and Rue des Rosiers. There are also a number of notable hotels in the district, including Hôtel de Beauvais, Hôtel de Sully, Hôtel de Sens, Hôtel de Ville, Hôtel Lambert, and Hôtel Saint-Pol, and a significant number of bridges, including Pont au Change, Pont au Double, Pont de Sully, Pont Louis-Philippe, Pont Marie, Pont Notre-Dame, Pont Saint-Louis, and Pont Saint-Michel.

Quartier Latin (5th and 6th arrondissements, "Left Bank") is a 12th Century scholastic centre formerly stretching between the "Left Bank's" Place Maubert and the Sorbonne campus of the University of Paris, is the oldest and one of the most famous colleges in Europe and the World. It is known for its lively atmosphere and many bistros. Various higher-education establishments, such as Collège de France, Collège Sainte-Barbe, Collège international de philosophie, Sciences Po Paris, the École Normale Supérieure, Mines ParisTech, and the Jussieu university campus, make it a major educational centre in Paris. The Panthéon church is where many of France's illustrious men and women are buried. Also of note is the Arab World Institute, Musée Curie, Hotel des Trois Colleges, Jardin des Plantes, Musée national du Moyen Âge, Muséum national d'histoire naturelle Paris Mosque, Paris Observatory, Sainte-Geneviève Library, and Théâtre de la Huchette.

The 6th arrondissement, to the south of the centre and Seine has numerous hotels and restaurants and also educational institutions. Hotels located in the district include Hôtel Au Manoir Saint Germain des Prés, Hôtel de Chimay, Hôtel de Vendôme, Hôtel des Monnaies, Hôtel Lutetia, and L'Hôtel, cafés include Café de Flore, Café Procope, and Café de la Rotonde, and academies and schools include the Académie française, the medical school Académie Nationale de Médecine, Académie de la Grande Chaumière, Collège Stanislas de Paris, School for Advanced Studies in the Social Sciences, Paris Tech, and the American Graduate School in Paris, with its Business and Economics and International Relations and Diplomacy schools. Among the museums located in the 6th arrondissement are the Musée "Bible et Terre Sainte", Musée d'Anatomie Delmas-Orfila-Rouvière, Musée Dupuytren, and Musée Edouard Branly. The Jardin du Luxembourg contains one of the several small-scale Statues of Liberty in Paris. It was created by Bartholdi who created the larger version of the statues which was sent as a gift from France to the United States in 1886 and now stands in New York City's harbour. The Odéon-Théâtre de l'Europe is located in this district, as is the Luxembourg Palace. The Pont des Arts, Pont Neuf, and Pont Saint-Michel bridges lead across the Seine to the historic centre.

The 7th arrondissement lies to the southwest of the centre, across the Seine. The Eiffel Tower is the most famous landmark of the 7th arrondissement and of Paris itself. It was a "temporary" construction by Gustave Eiffel for the 1889 Universal Exposition (early " World's Fair "), but was never dismantled and is now an enduring symbol of Paris, instantly recognized throughout the World. The Axe historique (Historical axis) is a line of monuments, buildings, and thoroughfares that run in a roughly straight line from the city centre westwards. Many hotels are located in this district including Hôtel Biron, Hôtel de Castries, Hôtel de Conti, Hôtel de Mademoiselle de Condé, Hôtel du Châtelet, and Hôtel Matignon. The Invalides museum is the burial place for many great French soldiers, including Napoleon Bonaparte, later the Emperor Napoleon I, (1769–1821), and the 18th Century military school, Ecole Militaire, is also located here. Other museums include the Musée Rodin and the Musée de la Légion d'honneur. The Ukrainian Embassy and the World Heritage Centre lie in the 7th arrondissement, and several bridges crossing the Seine include Pont de la Concorde and Pont Royal.

The Avenue des Champs-Élysées is a 17th-century avenue connecting the Place de la Concorde and the Napoleonic Arc de Triomphe, which straddles the 8th, 16th and 17th arrondissements. It is a major tourist attraction and shopping street, one of the most famous routes of the World, hosting labels such as Sephora, Lancel, Louis Vuitton and Guerlain, as well as Renault, Toyota and numerous small souvenir outlets, and is perhaps the most well-known street in France. The Canadian and American Embassies and many hotels lie in the 8th arrondissement, including Hôtel de Crillon, Hôtel Le Bristol Paris, Hôtel de la Marine, Hôtel de Marigny, Hôtel de Pontalba, Hôtel Fouquet's Barrière Four Seasons Hotel George V, Hotel Napoleon and Hôtel Salomon de Rothschild as well as the Les Ambassadeurs, Ledoyen, and Taillevent restaurants. Theatres located here include the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées, Théâtre des Folies-Marigny, Théâtre de la Madeleine and Théâtre Marigny, and museums include the Musée Cernuschi, Musée Jacquemart-André and Musée Nissim de Camondo.

Place de la Concorde was built as the "Place Louis XV", site of the infamous guillotine and execution in 1793 of Louis XVI, the King of France during the French Revolution, (1789–1799), setting off the infamous " Reign of Terror ", where the severed, bloody head of the King was exhibited to the crowds of Parisians. The Egyptian obelisk of Luxor is Paris's "oldest monument". On this square, on either side of the Rue Royale, there are two identical stone buildings: the eastern one houses the French Naval Ministry, the western the luxurious Hôtel de Crillon. Avenue Montaigne, next to the Champs-Élysées, is home to luxury brand labels such as " Chanel ", " Prada ", " Christian Dior " and " Givenchy ". Faubourg Saint-Honoré is not only home to the Élysée Palace (official residence and home of the President of the French Republic, but is also one of the city's high-fashion districts with labels such as " Hermès " and " Christian Lacroix ". The Église de la Madeleine is located in the 8th arrondissement.

The 9th arrondissement lies north of the centre and is a continuation of the theatre and museum district with theatres including Théâtre de l'Athénée, Éden-Théâtre, Théâtre Mogador, Théâtre de l'Œuvre, Théâtre des Nouveautés, Théâtre du Vaudeville, Théâtre de Paris and Théâtre Verlaine, and museums such as Musée Grévin, Musée du Parfum, Musée national Gustave Moreau, Musée de la Franc-Maçonnerie and Musée de la Vie Romantique. The district also contains the Café de la Paix, Casino de Paris, Lycée Condorcet, Grand Synagogue of Paris, Salle des Concerts Herz, and several hotels such as Hôtel Drouot, Hôtel Guimard and Hôtel Thellusson.

Avenue de l'Opéra is a Haussmannian thoroughfare created in the Second Empire, beginning in front of the Opéra Garnier on Place de l'Opéra and ending at Palais-Royal in the first arrondissement. In the vicinity of the Opéra Garnier is the capital's densest concentration of department stores and office buildings including the Printemps and Galeries Lafayette department stores, the Paris headquarters of BNP Paribas and American Express. The Palais Garnier, built in the later Second Empire period, houses the Paris Opera and the Paris Opera Ballet.

The 10th arrondissement lies northeast of the centre and is a continuation of the theatre district with many theatres including Théâtre Antoine-Simone Berriau, Théâtre des Bouffes du Nord, Théâtre de la Porte Saint-Martin, Théâtre de l'Ambigu-Comique, Théâtre de la Renaissance, Théâtre des Variétés-Amusantes and Théâtre du Gymnase Marie Bell. Roads running through the district include Boulevard de la Chapelle, Boulevard de Magenta Rue d'Abbeville, and Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Denis. Also of note is Musée de l'Éventail, Hôpital Saint-Louis, The Kurdish Digital Library, Lariboisière Hospital, Lycée Edgar-Poe, Prison Saint-Lazare and the Saint Laurent and Saint-Vincent-de-Paul churches. The Alhambra music hall opened in 2008.

The 11th arrondissement is located in eastern Paris, west of the 20th arrondissement. Roads running through the district include Boulevard du Temple, Boulevard Richard-Lenoir, Rue du Dahomey, Rue Oberkampf, and Rue Saint-Bernard. It contains the squares Place de la Nation, Place de la République, Place du 8 Février 1962, the theatres Bataclan, Théâtre des Folies-Dramatiques, Théâtre de l'Ambigu-Comique, Théâtre des Délassements-Comiques, and Théâtre des Funambules, the museums Musée du Fumeur and Musée Édith Piaf, and La Roquette Prisons.

The 12th arrondissement in the southeastern suburbs of Paris is separated from the 13th by the Seine with several bridges. The district contains the Place de la Bastille and Place de la Nation (bordering the 11th), Picpus Cemetery and Parc de Bercy, and the Boulevard de la Bastille runs through it. A 12th-century convent was located here, Saint-Antoine-des-Champs, and today the Buddhist temples Kagyu-Dzong and Pagode de Vincennes are located in the 12th arrondissement. Landmarks of note include Bassin de l'Arsenal, Bastille railway station, Palais Omnisports de Paris-Bercy and the restaurant Le Train Bleu. Opéra Bastille, the main facility of the Paris National Opera, was inaugurated in 1989 as part of President François Mitterrand 's " Grands Travaux ". Designed by Uruguayan architect Carlos Ott, it is located at the Place de la Bastille and houses a 2,700-seat theatre as well as smaller concert hall and a studio.

The 13th lies in the south-eastern part of Paris. It contains the neighbourhoods of Chinatown, Floral City, Butte-aux-Cailles, and the Italie 2 shopping centre with some 130 stores. Institutions such as the Bibliothèque nationale de France and École Estienne are located here, as is Les Olympiades, Paris Store, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Place d'Italie, and Stade Sébastien Charléty. Sainte-Rosalie church was built in 1869 in honour of Sister Rosalie Rendu. The district is also known for its bridges such as Pont amont, Pont de Bercy, Pont de Tolbiac, and Pont National.

Montparnasse is a historic left bank area in the 14th arrondissement, the southern part of Paris, famous for artists' studios, music halls, and café life. The Montparnasse Cemetery, large Montparnasse – Bienvenüe Métro station, Théâtre Montparnasse, and the nearby lone Tour Montparnasse skyscraper are located there. Other landmarks include the Catacombs of Paris, École normale supérieure de jeunes filles, Hôpital Cochin, Hôtel de Massa, Le Dôme Café, La Santé Prison, and Échelles du Baroque, the latter of which is a residential building complex, completed in 1985 by the international team Ricardo Bofill in the baroque style.

The 15th arrondissement marks the southwestern part of the city. The Boulevard du Montparnasse with its Tour Montparnasse passes through here (to be noted: the panoramic restaurant on the 56th floor). Dominating the river is the Front de Seine district with the newly reopened Beaugrenelle Shopping Center. There are several bridges such as Pont de Bir-Hakeim, Pont de Grenelle where the replica of the Statue of Liberty is standing on Île aux Cygnes, Pont Mirabeau, Pont du Garigliano and Pont aval. A number of institutions are based in the 15th arrondissement, the Pasteur Institute, and research hospitals: Hôpital Européen Georges-Pompidou and Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital. Art Schools such as Académie de La Palette today, replaced by the Panthéon-Sorbonne University, Saint Charles Campus-Visual arts and aesthetics and École nationale supérieure des arts appliqués et des métiers d'art and Panthéon-Assas University -Law school - Vaugirard Campus. The International culinary school Le Cordon Bleu and Schiller International University are both located in the 15th arrondissement. Other places of interest include museums such as Musée Bourdelle, Musée Mendjisky (School of Paris), Musée Pasteur, Musée Jean Moulin, (French Résistance), Musée de La Poste and Musée du Montparnasse, Théâtre Silvia-Monfort near Parc Georges-Brassens, the Australian embassy and Japan cultural Center.

The French automobile company Citroën had several factories along the river, Quai André-Citroën. The modernist Parc André Citroën now lays in their place with the Ballon Generali in the center. The Palais des Sports was built in 1960 to replace the old Vel' d'Hiv and has hosted many notable music concerts over the years. Nearby, is the Paris expo Porte de Versailles, Paris convention Center.

Val de Seine, straddling the 15th arrondissement and the communes of Issy-les-Moulineaux and Boulogne-Billancourt to the south-west of central Paris is the new media hub of Paris and France, hosting the headquarters of most of France's TV networks (TF1 in Boulogne-Billancourt, France 2 in the 15th arrondissement, Canal+ and the international channels France 24 and Eurosport in Issy-les-Moulineaux), as well as several telecommunication and IT companies such as Neuf Cegetel in Boulogne-Billancourt or Microsoft 's Europe, Africa & Middle East regional headquarters in Issy-les-Moulineaux.

The 16th arrondissement is the largest district of Paris, marking the western side of the city, which extends beyond the left bank of the Seine. Paris Saint-Germain F.C. are based here and play their home games at the Parc des Princes and Stade Roland Garros hosts the annual French Open tennis tournament. Tennis Club de Paris, the Stade de Paris rugby club, Longchamp Racecourse, and the Auteuil Hippodrome, a horse racing venue established in 1873 and which hosted the equestrian events of the 1924 Summer Olympics are based in the 16th arrondissement. Avenues passing through the district include Avenue d'Iéna, Avenue de la Grande Armée, Avenue de Malakoff, Avenue Foch, Avenue Henri-Martin and Avenue Victor-Hugo. Like the 2nd arrondissement, the district has many museums, including Musée Clemenceau, Musée Marmottan Monet, Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris, Musée national de la Marine, Musée d'Ennery, Musée d'Art Dentaire Pierre Fauchard, Musée de la Contrefaçon, Musée Galliera and Musée du Vin, and the Théâtre national de Chaillot. The Passy neighbourhood contains the Passy Cemetery. A number of organizations are based in the 16th arrondissement, including Radio France and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

The 17th arrondissement to the west of the 18th arrondissement marks the northwestern suburbs of the city. The avenues Avenue de la Grande Armée, Avenue de Wagram and Avenue des Ternes pass through the district. It has several squares, including Place Charles de Gaulle (with the Arc de Triomphe, bordering 16th and 8th), Place de Wagram, Place des Ternes and Square des Batignolles, the latter of which is in the neighbourhood of Batignolles, which also contains the Batignolles Cemetery and Parc Clichy-Batignolles. Other landmarks of note include the Académie d'Agriculture, Hyatt Regency Paris Étoile, Théâtre Hébertot and Palais des congrès de Paris.

La Défense, beyond the 17th arrondissement (straddling the communes of Courbevoie, Puteaux, and Nanterre, 2.5 km (2 mi) west of the city proper) is a key suburb of Paris and one of the largest business centres in the world. Built at the western end of a westward extension of Paris's historical axis from the Champs-Élysées, La Défense consists mainly of business high-rises, with most of the tallest skyscrapers in the Paris urban area, built around a pedestrian esplanade. Initiated by the French government in 1958, it now hosts 3,500,000 m (37,673,686 sq ft) of offices, making it the largest district in Europe developed specifically for business. Its most emblematic building, the Grande Arche (Great Arch), houses a part of the Ministry of Ecology.

The 18th arrondissement marks the northern suburbs of the city. Montmartre is a historic area on the Butte, home to the Basilique du Sacré-Cœur. Montmartre has always had a history with artists and has many studios and cafés of many great artists in that area. The boulevards Boulevard de Clichy, Boulevard de la Chapelle and Boulevard de Rochechouart pass through the district. Notable landmarks include the Académie de La Palette, Théâtre de l'Atelier, Cirque Medrano, Place de Clichy, Élysée Montmartre, Espace Dalí, Moulin Rouge, and Musée d'Art Juif. Plaine Saint-Denis (straddling the communes of Saint-Denis, Aubervilliers, and Saint-Ouen, immediately north of the 18th arrondissement, across the Périphérique ring road) is a former derelict manufacturing area that has undergone large-scale urban renewal since the 1980s, and contains most of France's television studios as well as some major movie studios.

The 19th arrondissement marks the northeast suburbs of Paris. It contains the Conservatoire de Paris, Cité de la Musique, Cité des Sciences et de l'Industrie, and the neighbourhood of La Villette, which contains the Grande halle de la Villette and Parc de la Villette. The Conservatoire, a prestigious music and dance school. was established in 1795, and in 1946 it was split into two Conservatoires. Several canals run through the 19th arrondissement including Canal de l'Ourcq and Canal Saint-Denis, and the Place de la Bataille-de-Stalingrad lies at their intersection, commemorating the Battle of Stalingrad. One of the Paris Métro stations Stalingrad is also named after it. The Zénith de Paris, one of the largest concert venues in Paris located here. Opened in 1984, it has a capacity of 6,293 people, and has hosted concerts of many of the top names in pop music.

The 20th arrondissement marks the eastern suburbs of the city and contains the neighbourhood of Belleville and also borders the commune of the same name. The neighbourhood of Belleville covers both of the 19th and 20th arrondissements, and was annexed to the City of Paris in 1860. During the first half of the 20th century, many immigrants settled there: German Jews fleeing the Third Reich in 1933, and Spaniards in 1939, and it became a "Jewish ghetto". Many Algerians and Tunisian Jews arrived in the early 1960s. Belleville is home to one of the largest congregations of the Reformed Church of France., and contains the Église Réformée de Belleville. Also of note is the Charonne quarter and its Église Saint-Germain de Charonne, the Théâtre national de la Colline (established in 1951), and Parc de Belleville, situated on the hill between the Parc des Buttes-Chaumont and the Père Lachaise Cemetery.

France has one official language, the French language. The French government does not regulate the choice of language in publications by individuals, but the use of French is required by law in commercial and workplace communications. In addition to mandating the use of French in the territory of the Republic, the French government tries to promote French in the European Union and globally through institutions such as La Francophonie. The perceived threat from Anglicization has prompted efforts to safeguard the position of the French language in France.

Besides French, there exist many other vernacular minority languages of France, both in European France, in Overseas France, and in French overseas territories. These languages are recognized by article 75-1 of the French constitution. The 1999 report written for the French government by Bernard Cerquiglini identified 75 languages (including just eight in continental France proper) that would qualify for recognition were the government to ratify the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (currently signed but not ratified).

The Ordinance of Villers-Cotterêts of 1539 made French the administrative language of the kingdom of France for legal documents and laws. Previously, official documents were written in medieval Latin, which was the language used by the Roman Catholic Church. However, historians debate on whether the ordinance intended to abolish only Latin, or both Latin and the regional vernaculars. The Ordinance called for the use of langage maternel François (French vernacular), although previous royal edicts had defined François (King's French) and langage maternel (vernacular) as separate and distinct. Nevertheless, most provinces switched to the use of the King's French by 1539, with the exception of Navarre and Roussillon which continued the use of Gascon and Catalan respectively.

The Académie française was established in 1635 to act as the official authority on the usages, vocabulary, and grammar of the French language, and to publish an official dictionary of the French language. Its recommendations however carry no legal power and are sometimes disregarded even by governmental authorities. In recent years the Académie has tried to prevent the Anglicisation of the French language.

Prior to the French Revolution of 1789, French kings did not take a strong position on the language spoken by their subjects. However, in sweeping away the old provinces, parlements and laws, the Revolution strengthened the unified system of administration across the state. At first, the revolutionaries declared liberty of language for all citizens of the Republic; this policy was subsequently abandoned in favour of the imposition of a common language which was to do away with the other languages of France. Other languages were seen as keeping the peasant masses in obscurantism.

The new idea was expounded in the 1794 Report on the necessity and means to annihilate the patois and to universalise the use of the French language. Its author, Henri Grégoire, deplored that France, the most advanced country in the world with regard to politics, had not progressed beyond the Tower of Babel as far as languages were concerned, and that only three million of the 25 million inhabitants of France spoke a pure Parisian French as their native tongue. The lack of ability of the population to understand the language in which were the political debates and the administrative documents was then seen as antidemocratic.

The report resulted the same year in two laws which stated that the only language tolerated in France in public life and in schools would be French. Within two years, the French language had become the symbol of the national unity of the French State. However, the revolutionaries lacked both time and money to implement a language policy.

In the 1880s, the Third Republic sought to modernize France, and in particular to increase literacy and general knowledge in the population, especially the rural population, and established free compulsory primary education.

The only language allowed in primary school was French. All other languages were forbidden, even in the schoolyard, and transgressions were severely punished. After 1918, the use of German in Alsace-Lorraine was outlawed. In 1925, Anatole de Monzie, Minister of public education, stated that "for the linguistic unity of France, the Breton language must disappear." As a result, the speakers of minority languages began to be ashamed when using their own language – especially in the educational system – and over time, many families stopped teaching their language to their children and tried to speak only French with them. In neighbouring Belgium, a parallel policy to expand the use of standard French also took place.

The 1950s were also the first time the French state recognised the right of the regional languages to exist. A law allowed for the teaching of regional languages in secondary schools, and the policy of repression in the primary schools came to an end. The Breton language began to appear in the media during this time.

The French government allowed in 1964 for the first time one and a half minutes of Breton on regional television. But even in 1972, president Georges Pompidou declared that "there is no place for minority languages in a France destined to make its mark on Europe".

In 1992 the constitution was amended to state explicitly that "the language of the Republic is French".

The Toubon Law (full name: law 94-665 of 4 August 1994 relating to usage of the French language) mandated the use of the French language in official government publications, in all advertisements, in all workplaces, in commercial contracts, in some other commercial communication contexts, in all government-financed schools, and some other contexts.

The law does not concern private, non-commercial communications, such as non-commercial web publications by private bodies. It does not concern books, films, public speeches, and other forms of communications not constituting commercial activity. However, the law mandates the use of the French language in all broadcast audiovisual programs, with exceptions for musical works and "original version" films.

Broadcast musical works are subject to quota rules under a related law whereby a minimum percentage of the songs on radio and television must be in the French language. A minimum of four in ten songs broadcast by domestic radio stations must be in the French language.

In 2006, under this law, a French subsidiary of a US company was fined €500,000 plus an ongoing fine of €20,000 per day for providing software and related technical documentation to its employees in English only.

In 2008, a revision of the French constitution creating official recognition of regional languages was implemented by the Parliament in Congress at Versailles.

In 2021, a law on regional languages was adopted by the parliament. However, its articles on immersion education in public schools and on use of regional languages' diacritics in civil records were vetoed by the Constitutional Council.

In 1999 the Socialist government of Lionel Jospin signed the Council of Europe 's European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, but it was not ratified. The Constitutional Council of France declared that the Charter contains unconstitutional provisions since the Constitution states that the language of the Republic is French.

The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages is a European convention (ETS 148) adopted in 1992 under the auspices of the Council of Europe to protect and promote historical regional and minority languages in Europe, ratified and implemented by 25 States, but not by France, as of 2014. The charter contains 98 articles of which signatories must adopt a minimum of 35 (France signed 39). The signing, and the failure to have it ratified, provoked a public debate in French society over the charter.

More recently, in a letter to several deputies dated 4 June 2015, François Hollande announced the upcoming filing of a constitutional bill for the ratification of the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages. On 30 July 2015, the Council of State gave an unfavorable opinion on the charter. On 27 October 2015, the Senate rejected the draft law on ratification of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages driving away the assumption of Congress for the adoption of the constitutional reform which would have given the value and legitimacy to regional languages.

The non-French Oïl languages and Franco-Provençal are highly endangered; because of their similarity to standard French, their speakers conformed first in phonology, and then orthography much more readily. The other languages are still spoken but are all considered endangered.

In the 1940s, more than one million people spoke Breton as their main language. The countryside in western Brittany was still overwhelmingly Breton-speaking. Today, about 170,000 people are able to speak Breton (around 8% of the population in the traditionally Breton speaking area), most of whom are elderly. Other regional languages have generally followed the same pattern; Alsatian and Corsican have resisted better, while Occitan has followed an even worse trend.

Accurate information on the state of language use is complicated by the inability (due to constitutional provisions) of the state to ask language use questions in the census.

Since the rejection of ratification of the European Charter, French governments have offered token support to regional languages within the limits of the law. The Délégation générale à la langue française (General delegation of the French language) has acquired the additional function of observing and studying the languages of France and has had " et aux langues de France " ('...and languages of France ') added to its title.

The French government hosted the first Assises nationales des langues de France in 2003, but this national round table on the languages of France served to highlight the contrast between cultural organisations and language activists on the one hand and the state on the other.

The decentralization has not extended to giving power in language policy to the regions. In fact, the use of regional languages at local government level is still severely contested. In 2022, some local councils in the traditionally Catalan-speaking department of the Pyrénées-Orientales, such as Elne, passed a modification of their statutes to allow the intervention in Catalan language by their elected members, as long as they provide an exact oral translation in French, as well a written French translation of the session. Despite being considered a symbolic gesture, the prefect of the Department, arguing that the political rights of French speakers will be violated, appealed to justice to repeal these initiatives. In April 2023, the Administrative Court of Montpellier sided with the Prefect, thus declaring illegal the decisions of the local councils.

In April 2021, France approved the "Molac" law (8 April 2021) which aims to protect and promote regional languages across the country. The law allows for schools to offer teaching in the medium of a regional minority language for the majority of the school day. However, the French Minister of Education, opposed to the teaching in minority languages, asked the Conseil Constitutionnel to declare it unconstitutional. This led to certain provisions of the law being constitutionally struck down on 21 May 2021.

Excluding the languages spoken in the overseas regions and other overseas territories, and the languages of recent immigrants, the following languages are spoken by sizeable minorities in France:

Breton (Gwenedeg / Vannetais, Gwennraneg, Kerneveg, Leoneg, and Tregerieg)

Alsatian, Dutch (West Flemish / French Flemish), Lorrainian, Luxembourgish, and Yenish

According to French republican ideology (see also Laïcité), all citizens are ultimately Frenchmen and therefore no minority groups (i.e. ethnolinguistic groups) may exercise extra rights; this is an idea stemming from the French Revolution, contrasting with the previous situation in which many distinguishable groups had special rights and privileges in their regions.

This policy of cultural homogeneity has been challenged from both the right wing and the left wing. In the 1970s, nationalist or regionalist movements emerged in regions such as Brittany, Corsica and Occitania. Even though they remain a minority, networks of schools teaching France's regional languages have arisen, such as the Diwan in Brittany, the Ikastola in the Basque Country, the Calandreta in Occitania, and the La Bressola schools in Northern Catalonia.

Despite popular demand for official recognition, regional language teaching is not supported by the state. However, in certain areas, such as Brittany, regional councils maintain bilingual public schools as far as it is within the law. Other Breton education is provided by Catholic schools and private schools, Dihun and Diwan, respectively. In 2011, only 14,000 pupils were enrolled in French-Breton bilingual schools, although this number reflected an increase of around 30% from the year 2006, when the number of pupils was just over 11,000. The Ofis Publik ar Brezhoneg also reported in 2011 that a further 16,000 students from early childhood to adulthood were learning Breton as a second language (at primary schools, collèges, lycées, university or evening courses), bringing the total number of Breton learners to at least 30,000.

A long campaign of defacing road signs led to the first bilingual road signs in the 1980s. These are now increasingly common in Brittany, because of the help given by the Ofis ar Brezhoneg in bilingualizing many road, town hall and other official signs.

As far as the media are concerned, there is still little Breton to be found on the airwaves, although since 1982 a few Breton-speaking radio stations have been created on an associative basis. The launching of the Breton TV Breizh in 2000 was intended to offer wider coverage of Breton. However, Breton-language programme schedules gradually decreased in favour of French-language broadcasting, until in 2010 they totally disappeared.

In Corsica, the 1991 "Joxe Statute", in setting up the Collectivité Territoriale de Corse, also provided for the Corsican Assembly, and charged it with developing a plan for the optional teaching of Corsu. At the primary school level Corsu is taught up to a fixed number of hours per week (three in the year 2000) and is a voluntary subject at the secondary school level, but is required at the University of Corsica.

There is some opposition to the Loi Toubon mandating the use of French (or at least a translation into French) in commercial advertising and packaging, as well as in some other contexts.

French is the sole official language in France according to the second article of the French Constitution. French, a Gallo-Romance language, is spoken by nearly the entire population of France.

In addition to French, several regional languages are also spoken to varying degrees, such as Alsatian, an Alemannic variety (spoken by 1.44% of the national population); Basque, a language isolate ; Breton, a Celtic language (spoken by 0.61%); Corsican, an Italo-Dalmatian language ; and various other Gallo-Romance languages (Langues d'oïl 1.25%, Occitan 1.33%). Some of these languages are also spoken in neighbouring countries, such as Belgium, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Andorra, or Spain.

The official language of the French Republic is French (art. 2 of the French Constitution) and the French government is, by law, compelled to communicate primarily in French. The government, furthermore, mandates that commercial advertising be available in French (though it can also use other languages). The French government does not otherwise mandate the use of French by private individuals or corporations or in any other media.

A revision of the French constitution creating official recognition of regional languages was implemented by the Parliament in Congress at Versailles in July 2008.

The 1999 Report written for the government by Bernard Cerquiglini identified 75 languages that would qualify for recognition under the government's proposed ratification of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. Of those languages, 24 are indigenous to the European territory of the state while all the others are from overseas areas of the French Republic (in the Caribbean, Indian Ocean, Pacific Ocean and South America).

Although ratification was blocked by the Constitutional Council as contradicting the Fifth Republic's constitutional provision enshrining French as the language of the Republic, the government continues to recognise regional and minority languages to a limited extent (i.e. without granting them official status) and the Délégation générale à la langue française has acquired the additional function of observing and studying the languages of France and has had et aux langues de France added to its title. The category of languages of France (in French: langues de France) is thus administratively recognised even if this does not go so far as to provide any official status. Following his election as president, François Hollande reasserted in 2012 his campaign platform to ratify the European Charter and ensure a clear legal framework for regional languages (within a programme of administrative decentralisation that would give competencies to the regions in language policy).

The regional languages of France are sometimes called patois, but this term (roughly meaning "dialects") is often considered derogatory. Patois is used to refer to essentially oral languages, even though some have a current and/or historical use, such as Occitan, which was already being written at a time when French was not and its literature has continued to thrive, with a Nobel Prize for Frédéric Mistral in 1904.

It is estimated that at the time of the French Revolution in 1789, only half of the population of France could speak French, and as late as 1871 only a quarter spoke French as their native language.

The topic of the teaching of regional languages in public primary and secondary schools is controversial. Proponents of the measure state that it would be necessary for the preservation of those languages and to show respect to the local culture. Opponents contend that local languages are often non-standardised (thus making curricula difficult), of dubious practical usefulness (since most are spoken by a small number of people, without any sizable corpus of publications) and that the curriculum and funding of public schools are already too strained. The topic also leads to wider controversial questions of autonomy of the régions. Regarding other languages, English, Spanish, Italian and German are the most commonly studied foreign languages in French schools.

In April 2001, the Minister of Education, Jack Lang, stated formally that "Depuis plus de deux siècles, les pouvoirs politiques ont combattu les langues régionales", ie for more than two centuries, the political powers of the French government had repressed regional languages, and announced that bilingual education would, for the first time, be recognised, and bilingual teachers recruited in French public schools.

Some of the languages of France are also cross-border languages (for example, Basque, Catalan, Corsican, Dutch, Franc-Comtois, Franco-Provençal, Norman, Picard, Occitan and others), some of which enjoy a recognised or official status in the respective neighbouring state or territory. French itself is also a cross-border language, being spoken in neighbouring Andorra, Belgium, Italy, Luxembourg, Monaco, and Switzerland.

According to the 2007 Adult Education survey, part of a project by the European Union and carried in France by the Insee and based on a sample of 15,350 people, French was the mother tongue of 87.2% of the total population, or roughly 55.81 million people, followed by Arabic (3.6%, 2.3 million), Portuguese (1.5%, 960,000), Spanish (1.2%, 770,000) and Italian (1.0%, 640,000). People who spoke other languages natively made up the remaining 5.2% of the population.

The regional languages of Metropolitan France include:

There are also several languages spoken in France's overseas areas (see Administrative divisions of France for details):

French Sign Language is also recognised as a language of France (with at least one regional variant in Provence).

A large number of immigrant languages are spoken in France, with a handful having a significant number of home speakers. (Figures as of 2000)

At the 1999 census, INSEE sampled 380,000 adult people all across Metropolitan France, and asked them questions about their family situation. One of the questions was about the languages that their parents spoke with them before the age of five. This is the first time serious statistics were computed about the proportion of mother tongues in France. The results were published in Enquête familiale, Insee, 1999.

Here is a list of the nine most prominent mother tongues in France based on Enquête familiale.

When the people with mother tongue and people with some exposure to the language before the age of five (see note #3 below) are added together, the five most widely spoken languages in metropolitan France are (note that the percentages add up to more than 100, because many bilingual people are now counted twice):

The following languages are listed as having 50,000 or more total speakers in Metropolitan France according to the 2022 edition of Ethnologue. Entries identified by Ethnologue as macrolanguages (such as Arabic, Persian, Malay, Pashto, and Chinese, encompassing all their respective varieties) are not included in this section.

The langues d'oïl are a dialect continuum that includes standard French and its closest relatives historically spoken in the northern half of France, southern Belgium, and the Channel Islands. They belong to the larger category of Gallo-Romance languages, which also include the historical languages of east-central France and western Switzerland, southern France, portions of northern Italy, the Val d'Aran in Spain, and under certain acceptations those of Catalonia.

Linguists divide the Romance languages of France, and especially of Medieval France, into two main geographical subgroups: the langues d'oïl to the north, and the lengas d'òc in the southern half of France. Both groups are named after the word for yes in their recent ancestral languages. The most common modern langue d'oïl is standard French, in which the ancestral oïl has become oui.

Langue d'oïl (in the singular), Oïl dialects and Oïl languages (in the plural) designate the ancient northern Gallo-Romance languages as well as their modern-day descendants. They share many linguistic features, a prominent one being the word oïl for yes. (Oc was and still is the southern word for yes, hence the langue d'oc or Occitan languages). The most widely spoken modern Oïl language is French (oïl was pronounced [o.il] or [o.i], which has become [ wi ], in modern French oui).

In the singular, langue d'oïl refers to the mutually intelligible linguistic variants of lingua romana spoken since the 8th century in northern France and southern Belgium (Wallonia), since the 10th century in the Channel Islands, and between the 11th and 14th centuries in England (the Anglo-Norman language). Langue d'oïl, the term itself, has been used in the singular since the 12th century to denote this ancient linguistic grouping as a whole. With these qualifiers, langue d'oïl sometimes is used to mean the same as Old French (see History below).

In the plural, Oïl dialects refer to the varieties of the ancient langue d'oïl.

Oïl languages are those modern-day descendants that evolved separately from the varieties of the ancient langue d'oïl. Consequently, langues d'oïl today may apply either: to all the modern-day languages of this family except the French language; or to this family including French. " Oïl dialects" or "French dialects" are also used to refer to the Oïl languages except French —as some extant Oïl languages are very close to modern French. Because the term dialect is sometimes considered pejorative, the trend today among French linguists is to refer to these languages as langues d'oïl rather than dialects.

Five zones of partially mutually intelligible Oïl dialects have been proposed by Pierre Bec :

Gallo has a stronger Celtic substrate from Breton. Gallo originated from the oïl speech of people from eastern and northern regions: Anjou ; Maine (Mayenne and Sarthe); and Normandy ; who were in contact with Breton speakers in Upper Brittany. See Marches of Neustria

Named after the former provinces of Poitou and Saintonge

For the history of phonology, orthography, syntax and morphology, see History of the French language and the relevant individual Oïl language articles.

Each of the Oïl languages has developed in its own way from the common ancestor, and division of the development into periods varies according to the individual histories. Modern linguistics uses the following terms:

In the 9th century, romana lingua (the term used in the Oaths of Strasbourg of 842) was the first of the Romance languages to be recognized by its speakers as a distinct language, probably because it was the most different from Latin compared with the other Romance languages (see History of the French language).

Many of the developments that are now considered typical of Walloon appeared between the 8th and 12th centuries. Walloon "had a clearly defined identity from the beginning of the thirteenth century". In any case, linguistic texts from the time do not mention the language, even though they mention others in the Oïl family, such as Picard and Lorrain. During the 15th century, scribes in the region called the language "Roman" when they needed to distinguish it. It is not until the beginning of the 16th century that we find the first occurrence of the word "Walloon" in the same linguistic sense that we use it today.

By late- or post-Roman times Vulgar Latin within France had developed two distinctive terms for signifying assent (yes): hoc ille ("this (is) it") and hoc ("this"), which became oïl and oc, respectively. Subsequent development changed "oïl" into "oui", as in modern French. The term langue d'oïl itself was first used in the 12th century, referring to the Old French linguistic grouping noted above. In the 14th century, the Italian poet Dante mentioned the yes distinctions in his De vulgari eloquentia. He wrote in Medieval Latin : " nam alii oc, alii si, alii vero dicunt oil " ("some say 'oc', others say 'sì', others say 'oïl'")—thereby distinguishing at least three classes of Romance languages: oc languages (in southern France); si languages (in Italy and Iberia) and oïl languages (in northern France).

Other Romance languages derive their word for "yes" from the classical Latin sic ' thus ', such as the Italian sì, Spanish and Catalan sí, Portuguese sim, and even French si (used when contradicting another's negative assertion). Sardinian is an exception in that its word for "yes", eja, is from neither origin. Similarly Romanian uses da for "yes", which is of Slavic origin.

However, neither lingua romana nor langue d'oïl referred, at their respective time, to a single homogeneous language but to mutually intelligible linguistic varieties. In those times, spoken languages in Western Europe were not codified (except Latin and Medieval Latin), the region's population was considerably lower than today, and population centers were more isolated from each other. As a result, mutually intelligible linguistic varieties were referred to as one language.

In the 13th century these varieties were recognized and referred to as dialects ("idioms") of a single language, the langue d'oïl. However, since the previous centuries a common literary and juridical "interdialectary" langue d'oïl had emerged, a kind of koiné. In the late 13th century this common langue d'oïl was named French (françois in French, lingua gallica or gallicana in Medieval Latin). Both aspects of "dialects of a same language" and "French as the common langue d'oïl" appear in a text of Roger Bacon, Opus maius, who wrote in Medieval Latin but translated thus: " Indeed, idioms of a same language vary amongst people, as it occurs in the French language which varies in an idiomatic manner amongst the French, Picards, Normans and Burgundians. And terms right to the Picards horrify the Burgundians as much as their closer neighbours the French".

It is from this period though that definitions of individual Oïl languages are first found. The Picard language is first referred to by name as "langage pikart" in 1283 in the Livre Roisin. The author of the Vie du bienheureux Thomas Hélye de Biville refers to the Norman character of his writing. The Sermons poitevins of around 1250 show the Poitevin language developing as it straddled the line between oïl and oc.

As a result, in modern times the term langue d'oïl also refers to that Old French which was not as yet named French but was already—before the late 13th century—used as a literary and juridical interdialectary language.

The term Francien is a linguistic neologism coined in the 19th century to name the hypothetical variant of Old French allegedly spoken by the late 14th century in the ancient province of Pays de France —the then Paris region later called Île-de-France. This Francien, it is claimed, became the Medieval French language. Current linguistic thinking mostly discounts the Francien theory, although it is still often quoted in popular textbooks. The term francien was never used by those people supposed to have spoken the variant; but today the term could be used to designate that specific 10th-and-11th centuries variant of langue d'oïl spoken in the Paris region; both variants contributed to the koine, as both were called French at that time.

For political reasons it was in Paris and Île-de-France that this koiné developed from a written language into a spoken language. Already in the 12th century Conon de Béthune reported about the French court who blamed him for using words of Artois.

By the late 13th century the written koiné had begun to turn into a spoken and written standard language, and was named French. Since then French started to be imposed on the other Oïl dialects as well as on the territories of langue d'oc.

However, the Oïl dialects and langue d'oc continued contributing to the lexis of French.

In 1539 the French language was imposed by the Ordinance of Villers-Cotterêts. It required Latin be replaced in judgements and official acts and deeds. The local Oïl languages had always been the language spoken in justice courts. The Ordinance of Villers-Cotterêts was not intended to make French a national language, merely a chancery language for law and administration. Although there were competing literary standards among the Oïl languages in the mediæval period, the centralisation of the French kingdom and its influence even outside its formal borders sent most of the Oïl languages into comparative obscurity for several centuries. The development of literature in this new language encouraged writers to use French rather than their own regional languages. This led to the decline of vernacular literature.

It was the French Revolution which imposed French on the people as the official language in all the territory. As the influence of French (and in the Channel Islands, English) spread among sectors of provincial populations, cultural movements arose to study and standardise the vernacular languages. From the 18th century and into the 20th century, societies were founded (such as the "Société liégoise de Littérature wallonne" in 1856), dictionaries (such as George Métivier 's Dictionnaire franco-normand of 1870) were published, groups were formed and literary movements developed to support and promote the Oïl languages faced with competition. The Third Republic sought to modernise France and established primary education where the only language recognised was French. Regional languages were discouraged, and the use of French was seen as aspirational, accelerating their decline. This was also generally the case in areas where Oïl languages were spoken. French is now the best-known of the Oïl languages.

Besides the influence of French literature, small-scale literature has survived in the other Oïl languages. Theatrical writing is most notable in Picard (which maintains a genre of vernacular marionette theatre), Poitevin and Saintongeais. Oral performance (story-telling) is a feature of Gallo, for example, while Norman and Walloon literature, especially from the early 19th century tend to focus on written texts and poetry (see, for example, Wace and Jèrriais literature).

As the vernacular Oïl languages were displaced from towns, they have generally survived to a greater extent in rural areas - hence a preponderance of literature relating to rural and peasant themes. The particular circumstances of the self-governing Channel Islands developed a lively strain of political comment, and the early industrialisation in Picardy led to survival of Picard in the mines and workshops of the regions. The mining poets of Picardy may be compared with the tradition of rhyming Weaver Poets of Ulster Scots in a comparable industrial milieu.

There are some regional magazines, such as Ch'lanchron (Picard), Le Viquet (Norman), Les Nouvelles Chroniques du Don Balleine (Jèrriais), and El Bourdon (Walloon), which are published either wholly in the respective Oïl language or bilingually with French. These provide a platform for literary writing.

Apart from French, an official language in many countries (see list), the Oïl languages have enjoyed little status in recent times.

The Norman languages of the Channel Islands enjoy a certain status under the governments of their Bailiwicks and within the regional and lesser-used language framework of the British-Irish Council. The Anglo-Norman language, a variant of Norman once the official language of England, today holds mostly a place of ceremonial honour in the United Kingdom (now referred to as Law French).

The French government recognises the Oïl languages as languages of France, but the Constitutional Council of France barred ratification of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.

The French Community of Belgium recognized certain Oïl languages spoken in Wallonia, such as Champenois, Lorrain (Gaumais), Picard and Walloon.

The langues d'oïl were more or less influenced by the native languages of the conquering Germanic tribes, notably the Franks. This was apparent not so much in the vocabulary (which remained overwhelmingly of Latin origin) as in the phonology and syntax; the invading Franks, Burgundians and Normans became the rulers and their accents were imposed as standard on the rest of the population. This accounts in large part for the relative distinctiveness of French compared to other Romance languages.

The English language was heavily influenced by contact with Norman following the Norman Conquest and much of the adopted vocabulary shows typically Norman features.

Portuguese was heavily influenced by more than a millennium of perennial contact with several dialects of both Oïl and Occitan language groups, in lexicon (up to 15–20% in some estimates, at least 5000 word roots), phonology and orthography. The influence of Occitan was, nevertheless, the most marked, through the status Provençal in particular achieved in southwestern Europe around the troubadour apex in the Middle Ages, when Galician-Portuguese lyric was developed. Aside the direct influence of Provençal literature, the presence of languages from modern-day France in the Galician-Portuguese area was also strong due to the rule of the House of Burgundy, the establishment of the Orders of Cluny and Cister, the many sections of the Way of St. James pilgrimage route that come from elsewhere in Europe out of the Iberian Peninsula, and the settlement in Iberia of people from the other side of the Pyrenees, arriving during and after the Reconquista.

The anti-Portuguese factor of Brazilian nationalism in the 19th century led to an increased use of the French language in detriment of Portuguese, as France was seen at the time as a model of civilization and progress. The learning of French has historically been important and strong among the Lusophone elites, and for a great span of time it was also the foreign language of choice among the middle class of both Portugal and Brazil, only surpassed in the globalised postmodernity by English.

The French spoken in Belgium shows some influence from Walloon.

The development of French in North America was influenced by the speech of settlers originating from northwestern France, many of whom introduced features of their Oïl varieties into the French they spoke. (See also French language in the United States, French language in Canada)

The Lantern Tower (French : tour de la Lanterne) is one of the three medieval historic towers in La Rochelle, Poitou-Charentes, France, which guarded the port at Aunis. The Lantern tower served as a Lighthouse and a prison throughout its history. It was also known by other names: Garrot tower, Priest tower, and Four Sergeant tower. In 1789 the French government declared it a Monument historique

The original purpose of the tower was to watch ship traffic in the port. It also served as a lighthouse. In the 1500s the tower was used to imprison priests. It was a multi-purpose building: used both as a lighthouse and a prison. The tower was used to watch the Aunis coastline during the middle ages ; and it was used to guide ships into port. Throughout its history it was also used to house prisoners: first priests, then sailors, and finally prisoners from the Wars of the Vendée.

A lardon, also spelled lardoon, is a small strip or cube of fatty bacon, or occasionally pork fat (usually subcutaneous fat), used in a wide variety of cuisines to flavor savory food and salads. In French cuisine, lardons are also used for larding, by threading them with a needle into meats that are to be braised or roasted. Lardons are not normally smoked, and they are made from pork that has been cured with salt.

In French cuisine, lardons are served hot in salads and salad dressings, as well as on some tartes flambées, stews such as beef bourguignon, quiches such as Quiche Lorraine, in omelettes, with potatoes, and for other dishes such as coq au vin.

The Oxford English Dictionary defines "lardon" as "one of the pieces of bacon or pork which are inserted in meat in the process of larding", giving primacy to that process. According to the Middle English Dictionary, the earliest occurrence of the word is in 1381, in the work The Forme of Cury ; it advises to insert lardons in cranes and herons.

Lardons may be prepared from different cuts of pork, including pork belly and fatback, or from cured cuts such as bacon or salt pork. According to food writer Regina Schrambling, when the lardon is salt-cured but not smoked in the style of American bacon, "the flavor comes through cleanly, more like ham but richer because the meat is from the belly of the pig, not the leg". The meat (fat) is usually cut into small strips or cubes about one centimeter (3 ⁄ 8 inch) wide, then blanched or fried.

Some chefs recommend using pancetta as a substitute; ham is also suggested.

It is common for the lardons to be used for two distinct purposes in the same dish. The fat rendered from the cubed pork is good for sautéing vegetables or meat during the early stages of a recipe, and the crisp browned pork cubes can be added as a garnish or ingredient just before serving: "the crispy bits are used to add a smoky, salty flavor and a pleasant crunch to all kinds of dishes". The rich flavor pairs well with cheeses and sturdy leaf vegetables like spinach and frisée, for which the hot rendered fat can be used as part of the salad dressing.

Lardons are frequently used in French cuisine to flavor salads, stews (such as beef bourguignon and coq au vin), quiches (quiche Lorraine), potatoes, omelettes and other dishes. A particular Parisian use of lardons is in the salade aux lardons, a wilted salad (often made with frisée (endive) lettuce) in which the lettuce leaves are wilted slightly by the addition of still-hot lardons and hot vinaigrette. A nineteenth-century recipe for a pie à la chasse calls for beef to be larded with lardons made of ham and bacon. A traditional dish from the Alsace region is the tarte flambée, a thin pizza-like bread covered with crème fraîche, onion, and lardons. A regional specialty from the Savoie is tartiflette, which is made with potatoes, reblochon cheese, cream, and lardons.

A traditional use for lardons is in a technique called "larding", in which long strips of chilled pork fat are threaded (with the use of a needle) into meats that are to be braised or roasted, such as beef filets or veal (especially lean cuts), poultry, and lean fish such as tuna. These lardons are cut in strips about 3 mm thick and 3 mm wide, and the fat is chilled before cutting and threading. The technique is explained at length in the classic book of French cuisine La bonne cuisine de Madame E. Saint-Ange, which details two techniques: surface larding, or "studding", in which the lardons are threaded onto the surface, and interior larding, in which the lardons are left in a channel (made with a larger-sized needle than is used for studding) inside the meat.

Madame St. Ange recommends larding for braised calf's sweetbreads (as does The French Laundry Cookbook) and for a specific style of cooking hare. American food writer James Peterson specifically recommends using fatback for larding; salt pork, he says, "has a funny taste and won't work". Julia Child recommends using lard or porkbellies (pancetta); she too thinks that neither salt pork nor bacon work, and suggests blanching these first, to get rid of the overwhelming cured or smoked flavors.

The origin of larding is in the Middle Ages, when hunting game was a popular activity amongst the upper classes and the meat acquired from it was often too lean and tough because of the animal's natural physical activity; larding provided the equivalent of today's marbling.

The needle used is a larding needle (also "barding needle" or lardoir). There are two basic kinds of larding needle, hollow and U-shaped. Hollow larding needles are about 5 mm in diameter with some sort of teeth or hook to keep the lard strip attached; they are passed completely through the meat. U-shaped larding needles, often called by the French name lardoir, are long needles with a "U" cross-section.

Four larding needles, accompanied by two crossed turning spits, are found in the coat of arms of the Confrérie de la Chaîne des Rôtisseurs, a French gastronomic society.

In many cuisines around the world, pork fat is used as a flavoring, and lardons are found in various other cultures. In Puerto Rico, they are called tocino and are added to dishes such as arroz con gandules.

In Dutch cuisine lardons are used in many traditional dishes such as stamppot, and the split pea soup snert.

The large-scale retail sector in France consists of "hypermarkets and companies classified as large specialized retailers."

In 2014, the food retail industry employed 603,137 people.

In France, the hypermarket chains include: E.Leclerc, Carrefour, Intermarché Hyper, Hyper U, Auchan, and Casino. As of 2016, there were more than 2,000 hypermarkets and 10,000 supermarkets in the country, generating approximately €110 billion in revenue.

The distribution channels in this sector are highly diverse. In addition to supermarket operators like Intermarché Super, Carrefour Market, E.Leclerc Express, Super U, Casino Supermarché, SPAR Supermarché, Match, or Auchan Supermarché, other players operating in the hard-discount segment, such as Lidl, Aldi Nord, Netto, Leader Price, Supeco, and Norma, as well as shopping malls, generalist chains, and specialized brands.

The history of large-scale retail in France remains relatively unknown and under-researched by historians, with "mostly a few interesting economic studies and some family sagas or success stories recounted by journalists, testimonials from industry players, or communication agencies."

The 19th-century department stores, and pioneering grocery chains like Félix Potin and Casino, established several principles later adopted by large-scale retail: store size for department stores, fixed pricing, sales catalogs, promotional pricing, and the franchise model for Félix Potin. Self-service was introduced in 1948 with the opening of the first Goulet-Turpin [ fr ] store, measuring only 40 m², in Paris's 18th arrondissement. However, contemporary large-scale retail — defined by INSEE as "hypermarkets and companies classified as large specialized retailers" — emerged in France in the 1950s and 1960s. The first supermarkets were Goulet-Turpin in 1958, Carrefour in 1959, Auchan and Promodès in 1961, and Intermarché in 1970. The first European hypermarket was opened in France by Carrefour in Sainte-Geneviève-des-Bois in 1963. The hypermarket model was a French innovation, combining food and non-food items under one large roof, and remained a national specialty for a long time.

According to Philippe Moati, large-scale retail can be seen as "the commercial avatar of Fordism," as it facilitated the sale of mass-produced goods in the 1960s after the country's post-war reconstruction [ fr ]. This mass production resulted from reduced transportation costs, industrial modernization, and the international opening of the French economy. Mass consumption and consumer society emerged in France from "a new wage compromise: unions accepted the consequences of Taylorist-Fordist principles on working conditions in exchange for real wage increases." The creation of the guaranteed minimum wage (SMIG) in 1950 and the social benefits of the welfare state allowed the average annual consumer budget to double between 1950 and 1968.

Although French large-scale retail appeared to lag behind its German and English counterparts in 1960, representing only 6% of the market, it progressed rapidly by implementing the "discount" model—a sales approach based on very low prices where "profitability stems not from unit margins but from asset turnover." At that time, the net margin for supermarkets was around 3%, compared to 7% for traditional grocery stores. In November 1959, Edouard Leclerc proposed to "reduce the cost of living by 20% by selling goods at wholesale prices directly purchased from manufacturers" and eliminating intermediary margins. The rapid turnover of stock and customer receivables enabled large-scale retail chains to place massive supplier orders, achieve economies of scale through the large size of retail locations, minimize labor costs by standardizing self-service practices, and implement a streamlined labor management system where the workforce was relatively unskilled and underpaid.

Between 1960 and 1972, French industrial production grew at an annual rate of 6.1%, while advertising expenditures were multiplied by five between 1952 and 1972. In addition to rising living standards, rural exodus, sustained high birth [ fr ] rates, and household car ownership contributed to new consumer behaviors and an unprecedented rise in large-scale retailing.

Initially, supermarket openings were driven by many actors, including food subsidiaries such as Félix Potin and Docks de France, consumer cooperatives like Maxicoop and Rond Point [ fr ], and wholesalers such as Promodès and Major [ fr ]. Department stores—unlike Printemps, which began operating hypermarkets after 1969—and major industrial groups were more hesitant, with the notable exception of Auchan.

By the early 1970s, the main competitor to large-scale retail was no longer department stores or traditional shops. With the proliferation of retail outlets, competition among brands intensified, making it insufficient to offer low prices; retailers had to "be cheaper than the cheapest." As the size of the retail network became a key competitive factor, rapid expansion of new stores became essential. Large-scale retailers established unique relationships with suppliers: purchasing goods at low prices, negotiating extended payment terms (thereby benefiting from inter-company credit), and leveraging significant "back margins." Since most customers paid in cash, the resulting working capital allowed retailers to finance new store openings without resorting to loans or relinquishing control of often family-run businesses. In this expansion race, independent groups like Les Mousquetaires (Intermarché) and E.Leclerc were at an advantage, operating 15% of the nation's hypermarkets in 1979—a share that grew to 50% by 1997.

Carrefour 's introduction of private-label products (PLPs) in 1976 highlighted the shifting power dynamic between retailers and suppliers. Unlike earlier strategies, such as Casino's integration of industrial production as early as 1901, retailers began purchasing large quantities from small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and selling these products at prices significantly lower than branded goods, all while achieving higher margins. In the inflationary context following the first oil shock, large-scale retailers distinguished themselves by their relentless pursuit of lower prices.

A 2018 survey of fish counters in over 1,300 supermarkets revealed that 86% of fish sold came from unsustainable sources.

It is difficult to speak of a crisis in large-scale retail when supermarkets and hypermarkets experienced annual revenue growth of 5% and 6.5%, respectively, between 1978 and 1996, despite a clear decline in sales emerging after 2008.

However, the extensive growth model that characterized the postwar boom—focused on low prices, eliminating intermediaries, and continually increasing retail space—gradually entered a crisis after 1980, particularly for hypermarkets. Growth potential began to show signs of saturation as household ownership of manufactured goods reached high levels, regulatory constraints tightened after 1990, and e-commerce and hard discount retailers gained momentum after 1995.

Simultaneously, there is a noticeable "disconnect between retailers and evolving consumer behavior," as consumers increasingly seek more varied products of better quality with higher symbolic value. Consumer behavior has become more individualized and "is increasingly resistant to being confined to a predefined category based on simple criteria (such as socio-professional status or age)."

By 1999, commercial density had reached 707 retail outlets per 1,000 inhabitants, and by 2012, 98% of French citizens were customers of large-scale retail. To adapt, the sector must develop new strategies and establish a new model of intensive growth.

The development of the large-scale retail sector is closely linked to the evolution of French society since 1945.

The relationship between public authorities and large-scale retail is complex. Philippe Moati notes that "the attitude of public authorities toward large-scale retail has often been ambiguous," sometimes seeking to limit the expansion of large outlets while at other times promoting it in the name of combating inflation. Other experts argue that regulations have often been circumvented, giving rise to a significant system of corruption. "Given the prominence of these issues during the 1990s, the corruption processes deserve further study, particularly since they were decisive in shaping legislation concerning the opening of large retail outlets." Generally, lawmakers and political leaders have often been preoccupied with the electoral stakes posed by changes in commercial structures.

French actors in the large-scale retail sector are also quick to criticize regulations. For instance, E.Leclerc, on its website dedicated to the history of the E.Leclerc movement, outlines its "battles against legislation."

At the end of World War II, the ordinances of June 30, 1945, established price control aimed at combating the rising inflation during a period of scarcity. This system quickly became unpopular among merchants and small businesses represented by the CGPME.

At the end of 1978, René Monory, Minister of Commerce and Industry under the Raymond Barre Government [ fr ], liberalized the prices of goods in an inflationary context. The administrative regime was abandoned, but the Ministry of Finance sought to maintain regulatory power. The liberalization intensified with the Balladur ordinance of December 1, 1986. However, prices in certain sectors such as water, gas, and books (under the Lang Law) remained "regulated."

In 1997, the law on the fairness and balance of commercial relations, known as the " Galland Law," removed back margins from the criteria for prohibiting sales at a loss. It was amended and partially replaced in January 2006 by the Jacob-Dutreil law, which no longer set a maximum price threshold but instead established a floor price for goods. The Galland Law required suppliers to publish a single official price list for their products for all distributors. This price, minus various discounts, rebates, or other unconditional elements listed on the sales invoice, could be included in the sale price and formed the gross margin. The law considers this price as the threshold for selling at a loss. Other elements, such as budgets provided by suppliers to distributors, usually at the end of the year for promotional efforts, highlighting products, or achieving quantitative purchase targets, are considered back margins and cannot be included in the sale price calculation, to avoid being classified as a sale at a loss, which is prohibited in France. This law sets a legal minimum price for items and leads to the standardization of retail prices for consumer goods in France, leaving distributors with only imports (negotiated tariffs abroad with an exclusive supplier) and private-label brands to differentiate themselves based on price.

Michel-Édouard Leclerc wrote in 2007: "France is the only country in Europe that has known only ten years of price freedom since World War II, between the Balladur ordinance of 1986 and the Galland law of 1997."

To reduce distributors' margins and thus lower sale prices—which helps increase household purchasing power —two laws were passed in 2008 under the Fillon government.

The circular of March 31, 1960, concerning the prohibition of commercial practices that restrict competition, known as the " Fontanet Circular," prohibits the refusal to sell. In a context where "price-cutting pioneers like Édouard Leclerc are frowned upon by industrialists, producers, and despised by traditional merchants," no producer, industrialist, or agricultural supplier can refuse to sell, even to supermarkets that were rapidly expanding at the time.

Law no. 73-1193 of December 27, 1973, on the orientation of commerce and craftsmanship [ fr ], also known as the " Royer Law," aims to limit economic competition in the retail sector. It stipulates that "the public authorities ensure that the development of commerce and craftsmanship supports the growth of all types of businesses, whether independent, grouped, or integrated, while avoiding the chaotic expansion of new forms of distribution that could crush small businesses and waste commercial resources."

The context for this law's creation was increasing electoral pressure from small merchants and the agricultural sector. First, Pierre Poujade 's Union for the Defense of Tradesmen and Artisans and later Gérard Nicoud's [ fr ] Inter-union Confederation for the Defense and National Union of Independent Workers [ fr ] opposed the rapid growth of large retailers, sometimes violently.

Departmental Commercial Urbanism Committees (CDUC) and the National Commercial Urbanism Commission [ fr ] (CNUC) were established in 1969. They limited the establishment of stores over 3,000 m through a prior review process before construction permits were granted. The Royer Law strengthened and made this control mandatory for retail spaces exceeding 1,000 m.

However, the Royer Law failed to curb the growth of large retail outlets. Instead, it fostered significant corruption, as seen in the Destrade [ fr ] and Trager cases [ fr ]. In several instances, decision-making bodies "monetized" their authorization for store openings: "It was as if the market law took revenge on the Royer Law, which sought to protect the small against the large, thus rebelling against one of the canons of economic liberalism. Competitors quickly analyzed regulatory constraints as inherent costs tied to the various 'arrangements' they had to make and incorporated these into their financial projections for their projects."

The law of July 5, 1996, on the development and promotion of commerce and craftsmanship [ fr ], known as the " Raffarin Law," reinforced the Royer Law by lowering the size threshold requiring authorization to 300 square meters. It also made obtaining authorizations more challenging (by altering the composition of the commissions, now renamed Departmental Commercial Equipment Commissions [ fr ] and National Commercial Equipment Commissions [ fr ]). The Raffarin Law "by halting the momentum of store creation (...) likely hindered productivity gains and reduced France's macroeconomic growth potential" while exerting an inflationary effect.

The Economic Modernization Law [ fr ], passed in July 2008, aimed to increase household purchasing power by allowing price negotiations between suppliers and distributors. It bolstered competition in the retail sector by loosening restrictions on new store openings below 1,000 m, particularly in smaller communities. After 2008, the National Commercial Equipment Commission, renamed the National Commercial Planning Commission, became more permissive. The approval rate for store openings significantly increased: while fewer applications were submitted, they involved significantly larger retail spaces, averaging about 5,000 m.

At the beginning of 2015, several amendments were introduced by Emmanuel Macron, then Minister of the Economy. Among these was the authorization for Sunday openings for retail spaces exceeding 400 square meters, in exchange for a 30% salary increase for Sunday work.

Grocery retail companies in France exhibit diverse identities, largely shaped by their governance models and historical backgrounds.

These can be classified into three main types:

In 2015, the average basket size and the number of annual visits varied across France, depending on the brand, store format, and catchment area.

Although a comprehensive list is hard to find, the largest French hypermarkets by retail space in 2010, as reported by Linéaires magazine, were noted.

According to Linéaires magazine, the ten largest hypermarkets in France by revenue (excluding fuel sales) in 2015 were identified based on their 2014 financial figures.

In 2014, 12 hypermarkets in France exceeded an annual revenue threshold of €200 million.

Among the top 50 hypermarkets in France by non-fuel revenue in 2014, the breakdown was as follows: 30 belonged to Auchan, 16 to Carrefour, and 4 to Leclerc.

Latin (lingua Latina or Latinum) is a classical language belonging to the Italic branch of the Indo-European languages. Latin was originally spoken by the Latins in Latium (now known as Lazio), the lower Tiber area around Rome, Italy. Through the expansion of the Roman Republic, it became the dominant language in the Italian Peninsula and subsequently throughout the Roman Empire. It has greatly influenced many languages, including English, having contributed many words to the English lexicon, particularly after the Christianisation of the Anglo-Saxons and the Norman Conquest. Latin roots appear frequently in the technical vocabulary used by fields such as theology, the sciences, medicine, and law.

By the late Roman Republic, Old Latin had evolved into standardised Classical Latin. Vulgar Latin refers to the less prestigious colloquial registers, attested in inscriptions and some literary works such as those of the comic playwrights Plautus and Terence and the author Petronius. While often called a "dead language", Latin did not undergo language death. Between the 6th and 9th centuries, natural language change in the vernacular Latin of different regions evolved into distinct Romance languages. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, Latin remained the common language of international communication, science, scholarship and academia in Europe into the early 19th century, by which time modern languages had supplanted it in common academic and political usage.

Late Latin is the literary form of the language from the 3rd century AD onward. No longer spoken as a native language, Medieval Latin was used across Western and Catholic Europe during the Middle Ages as a working and literary language from the 9th century to the Renaissance, which then developed a classicising form, called Renaissance Latin. This was the basis for Neo-Latin, which evolved during the early modern period. Latin was taught to be written and spoken at least until the late seventeenth century, when spoken skills began to erode; Contemporary Latin is generally studied to be read rather than spoken. Ecclesiastical Latin remains the official language of the Holy See and the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church.

Latin grammar is highly fusional, with classes of inflections for case, number, person, gender, tense, mood, voice, and aspect. The Latin alphabet is directly derived from the Etruscan and Greek alphabets.

A number of phases of the language have been recognised, each distinguished by subtle differences in vocabulary, usage, spelling, and syntax. There are no hard and fast rules of classification; different scholars emphasise different features. As a result, the list has variants, as well as alternative names.

In addition to the historical phases, Ecclesiastical Latin refers to the styles used by the writers of the Roman Catholic Church from late antiquity onward, as well as by Protestant scholars.

The earliest known form of Latin is Old Latin, also called Archaic or Early Latin, which was spoken from the Roman Kingdom, traditionally founded in 753 BC, through the later part of the Roman Republic, up to 75 BC, i.e. before the age of Classical Latin. It is attested both in inscriptions and in some of the earliest extant Latin literary works, such as the comedies of Plautus and Terence. The Latin alphabet was devised from the Etruscan alphabet. The writing later changed from what was initially either a right-to-left or a boustrophedon script to what ultimately became a strictly left-to-right script.

During the late republic and into the first years of the empire, from about 75 BC to AD 200, a new Classical Latin arose, a conscious creation of the orators, poets, historians and other literate men, who wrote the great works of classical literature, which were taught in grammar and rhetoric schools. Today's instructional grammars trace their roots to such schools, which served as a sort of informal language academy dedicated to maintaining and perpetuating educated speech.

Philological analysis of Archaic Latin works, such as those of Plautus, which contain fragments of everyday speech, gives evidence of an informal register of the language, Vulgar Latin (termed sermo vulgi 'the speech of the masses', by Cicero). Some linguists, particularly in the nineteenth century, believed this to be a separate language, existing more or less in parallel with the literary or educated Latin, but this is now widely dismissed.

The term 'Vulgar Latin' remains difficult to define, referring both to informal speech at any time within the history of Latin, and the kind of informal Latin that had begun to move away from the written language significantly in the post-Imperial period, that led ultimately to the Romance languages.

During the Classical period, informal language was rarely written, so philologists have been left with only individual words and phrases cited by classical authors, inscriptions such as Curse tablets and those found as graffiti. In the Late Latin period, language changes reflecting spoken (non-classical) norms tend to be found in greater quantities in texts. As it was free to develop on its own, there is no reason to suppose that the speech was uniform either diachronically or geographically. On the contrary, Romanised European populations developed their own dialects of the language, which eventually led to the differentiation of Romance languages.

Late Latin is a kind of written Latin used in the 3rd to 6th centuries. This began to diverge from Classical forms at a faster pace. It is characterised by greater use of prepositions, and word order that is closer to modern Romance languages, for example, while grammatically retaining more or less the same formal rules as Classical Latin.

Ultimately, Latin diverged into a distinct written form, where the commonly spoken form was perceived as a separate language, for instance early French or Italian dialects, that could be transcribed differently. It took some time for these to be viewed as wholly different from Latin however.

After the Western Roman Empire fell in 476 and Germanic kingdoms took its place, the Germanic people adopted Latin as a language more suitable for legal and other, more formal uses.

Initially Latin was also retained by the Eastern Roman Empire (Byzantine Empire) as the language of the government and legislation, even though the vast majority of its population spoke Greek and other Eastern languages such as Syriac and Coptic. It even enjoyed a brief flowering as the language of the great codification of laws, the Corpus Iuris Civilis under Justinian I, himself a native Latin speaker. After Justinian I's death, the gradual territorial retreat of the Empire and its near collapse in the wake of the Muslim conquests led to the near extinction of Latin as a spoken and official language. The surviving rump Roman state replaced Latin with the Greek language. Latin was retained on coinage and in some court ceremonies until the 11th century, albeit often in a ritual and fossilised form. In a surviving letter from the late 9th century, the Carolingian emperor Louis II invoked the fact that the Byzantine imperial chancery struggled to write in proper Latin as an argument in his ideological dispute over who was the rightful Roman emperor.

While the written form of Latin was increasingly standardised into a fixed form, the spoken forms began to diverge more greatly. Currently, the six most widely spoken Romance languages by number of native speakers are Spanish, Portuguese, French, Italian, Romanian and Catalan. Despite dialectal variation, which is found in any widespread language, the languages currently existing in Spain, France, Portugal, and Italy have retained a remarkable unity in phonological forms and developments, bolstered by the stabilising influence of their common Christian (Roman Catholic) culture.

It was not until the Muslim conquest of the Iberian Peninsula in 711, cutting off communications between the major Romance regions, that the languages began to diverge seriously. The spoken Latin that would later become Romanian diverged somewhat more from the other varieties, as it was largely separated from the unifying influences in the western part of the Empire.

Spoken Latin began to diverge into distinct languages by the 9th century at the latest, when the earliest extant Romance writings begin to appear. They were, throughout the period, confined to everyday speech, as Medieval Latin was used for writing.

For many Italians using Latin, though, there was no complete separation between Italian and Latin, even into the beginning of the Renaissance. Petrarch for example saw Latin as a literary version of the spoken language.

Medieval Latin is the written Latin in use during that portion of the post-classical period when no corresponding Latin vernacular existed, that is from around 700 to 1500 AD. The spoken language had developed into the various Romance languages; however, in the educated and official world, Latin continued without its natural spoken base. Moreover, this Latin spread into lands that had never spoken Latin, such as the Germanic and Slavic nations. It became useful for international communication between the member states of the Holy Roman Empire and its allies.

Without the institutions of the Roman Empire that had supported its uniformity, Medieval Latin was much more liberal in its linguistic cohesion: for example, in classical Latin sum and eram are used as auxiliary verbs in the perfect and pluperfect passive, which are compound tenses. Medieval Latin might use fui and fueram instead. Furthermore, the meanings of many words were changed and new words were introduced, often under influence from the vernacular. Identifiable individual styles of classically incorrect Latin prevail.

Renaissance Latin, in use from around 1300 to 1500, and the classicised Latin that followed through to the present are often grouped together as Neo-Latin, or New Latin, which have in recent decades become a focus of renewed study, given their importance for the development of European culture, religion and science. The vast majority of written Latin belongs to this period, but its full extent is unknown.

The Renaissance reinforced the position of Latin as a spoken and written language by the scholarship by the Renaissance humanists. Petrarch and others began to change their usage of Latin as they explored the texts of the Classical Latin world. Skills of textual criticism evolved to create much more accurate versions of extant texts through the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and some important texts were rediscovered. Comprehensive versions of authors' works were published by Isaac Casaubon, Joseph Scaliger and others. Nevertheless, despite the careful work of Petrarch, Politian and others, first the demand for manuscripts, and then the rush to bring works into print, led to the circulation of inaccurate copies for several centuries following.

Neo-Latin literature was extensive and prolific, but less well known or understood today. Works covered poetry, prose stories and early novels, occasional pieces and collections of letters, to name a few. Famous and well regarded writers included Petrarch, Erasmus, Salutati, Celtis, George Buchanan and Thomas More. Non fiction works were long produced in many subjects, including the sciences, law, philosophy, historiography and theology. Famous examples include Isaac Newton 's Principia. Latin was also used as a convenient medium for translations of important works first written in a vernacular, such as those of Descartes.

Latin education underwent a process of reform to classicise written and spoken Latin. Schooling was conducted largely in Latin until approximately 1700. Until the end of the 17th century, the majority of books and almost all diplomatic documents were written in Latin. Afterwards, most diplomatic documents were written in French (a Romance language) and later native or other languages. Education methods gradually shifted towards written Latin, and eventually concentrating solely on reading skills. The decline of Latin education took several centuries and proceeded much more slowly than the decline in written Latin output.

Despite having no native speakers, Latin is still used for a variety of purposes in the contemporary world.

The largest organisation that retains Latin in official and quasi-official contexts is the Catholic Church. The Catholic Church required that Mass be carried out in Latin until the Second Vatican Council of 1962–1965, which permitted the use of the vernacular. Latin remains the language of the Roman Rite. The Tridentine Mass (also known as the Extraordinary Form or Traditional Latin Mass) is celebrated in Latin. Although the Mass of Paul VI (also known as the Ordinary Form or the Novus Ordo) is usually celebrated in the local vernacular language, it can be and often is said in Latin, in part or in whole, especially at multilingual gatherings. It is the official language of the Holy See, the primary language of its public journal, the Acta Apostolicae Sedis, and the working language of the Roman Rota. Vatican City is also home to the world's only automatic teller machine that gives instructions in Latin. In the pontifical universities postgraduate courses of Canon law are taught in Latin, and papers are written in the same language.

There are a small number of Latin services held in the Anglican church. These include an annual service in Oxford, delivered with a Latin sermon; a relic from the period when Latin was the normal spoken language of the university.

In the Western world, many organisations, governments and schools use Latin for their mottos due to its association with formality, tradition, and the roots of Western culture.

Canada's motto A mari usque ad mare ("from sea to sea") and most provincial mottos are also in Latin. The Canadian Victoria Cross is modelled after the British Victoria Cross which has the inscription "For Valour". Because Canada is officially bilingual, the Canadian medal has replaced the English inscription with the Latin Pro Valore.

Spain's motto Plus ultra 'even further', or figuratively "Further!", is also Latin in origin. It is taken from the personal motto of Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor and King of Spain (as Charles I), and is a reversal of the original phrase Non terrae plus ultra ("No land further beyond", "No further!"). According to legend, this phrase was inscribed as a warning on the Pillars of Hercules, the rocks on both sides of the Strait of Gibraltar and the western end of the known Mediterranean world. Charles adopted the motto following the discovery of the New World by Columbus, and it also has metaphorical suggestions of taking risks and striving for excellence.

In the United States the unofficial national motto until 1956 was E pluribus unum meaning "Out of many, one". The motto continues to be featured on the Great Seal. It also appears on the flags and seals of both houses of congress and the flags of the states of Michigan, North Dakota, New York, and Wisconsin. The motto's 13 letters symbolically represent the original Thirteen Colonies which revolted from the British Crown. The motto is featured on all presently minted coinage and has been featured in most coinage throughout the nation's history.

Several states of the United States have Latin mottos, such as:

Many military organisations today have Latin mottos, such as:

Some law governing bodies in the Philippines have Latin mottos, such as:

Some colleges and universities have adopted Latin mottos, for example Harvard University 's motto is Veritas ("truth"). Veritas was the goddess of truth, a daughter of Saturn, and the mother of Virtue.

Switzerland has adopted the country's Latin short name Helvetia on coins and stamps, since there is no room to use all of the nation's four official languages. For a similar reason, it adopted the international vehicle code CH and the Internet top-level domain ch, for Confoederatio Helvetica, the country's full Latin name.

Some film and television in ancient settings, such as Sebastiane, The Passion of the Christ and Barbarians (2020 TV series), have been made with dialogue in Latin. Occasionally, Latin dialogue is used because of its association with religion or philosophy, in such film/television series as The Exorcist and Lost (" Jughead "). Subtitles are usually shown for the benefit of those who do not understand Latin. There are also songs written with Latin lyrics. The libretto for the opera-oratorio Oedipus rex by Igor Stravinsky is in Latin.

The continued instruction of Latin is seen by some as a highly valuable component of a liberal arts education. Latin is taught at many high schools, especially in Europe and the Americas. It is most common in British public schools and grammar schools, the Italian liceo classico and liceo scientifico, the German Humanistisches Gymnasium and the Dutch gymnasium.

Occasionally, some media outlets, targeting enthusiasts, broadcast in Latin. Notable examples include Radio Bremen in Germany, YLE radio in Finland (the Nuntii Latini broadcast from 1989 until it was shut down in June 2019), and Vatican Radio & Television, all of which broadcast news segments and other material in Latin.

A variety of organisations, as well as informal Latin circuli, 'circles', have been founded in more recent times to support the use of spoken Latin. Moreover, a number of university classics departments have begun incorporating communicative pedagogies in their Latin courses. These include the University of Kentucky, the University of Oxford and Princeton University.

There are many websites and forums maintained in Latin by enthusiasts. The Latin Wikipedia has more than 140,000 articles.

Italian, French, Portuguese, Spanish, Romanian, Catalan, Romansh, Sardinian and other Romance languages are direct descendants of Latin. There are also many Latin and Romance loanwords in English and Albanian, as well as a few in German, Dutch, Norwegian, Danish and Swedish. Latin is still spoken in Vatican City, a city-state situated in Rome that is the seat of the Catholic Church.

The works of several hundred ancient authors who wrote in Latin have survived in whole or in part, in substantial works or in fragments to be analysed in philology. They are in part the subject matter of the field of classics. Their works were published in manuscript form before the invention of printing and are now published in carefully annotated printed editions, such as the Loeb Classical Library, published by Harvard University Press, or the Oxford Classical Texts, published by Oxford University Press.

Latin translations of modern literature such as: The Hobbit, Treasure Island, Robinson Crusoe, Paddington Bear, Winnie-the-Pooh, The Adventures of Tintin, Asterix, Harry Potter, Le Petit Prince, Max and Moritz, How the Grinch Stole Christmas!, The Cat in the Hat, and a book of fairy tales, fabulae mirabiles, are intended to garner popular interest in the language. Additional resources include phrasebooks and resources for rendering everyday phrases and concepts into Latin, such as Meissner's Latin Phrasebook.

Some inscriptions have been published in an internationally agreed, monumental, multivolume series, the Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum. Authors and publishers vary, but the format is about the same: volumes detailing inscriptions with a critical apparatus stating the provenance and relevant information. The reading and interpretation of these inscriptions is the subject matter of the field of epigraphy. About 270,000 inscriptions are known.

The Latin influence in English has been significant at all stages of its insular development. In the Middle Ages, borrowing from Latin occurred from ecclesiastical usage established by Saint Augustine of Canterbury in the 6th century or indirectly after the Norman Conquest, through the Anglo-Norman language. From the 16th to the 18th centuries, English writers cobbled together huge numbers of new words from Latin and Greek words, dubbed " inkhorn terms ", as if they had spilled from a pot of ink. Many of these words were used once by the author and then forgotten, but some useful ones survived, such as imbibe and extrapolate. Many of the most common polysyllabic English words are of Latin origin through the medium of Old French. Romance words make up 59%, 20% and 14% of English, German and Dutch vocabularies, respectively. Those figures can rise dramatically when only non-compound and non-derived words are included.

The influence of Roman governance and Roman technology on the less-developed nations under Roman dominion led to the adoption of Latin phraseology in some specialised areas, such as science, technology, medicine, and law. For example, the Linnaean system of plant and animal classification was heavily influenced by Historia Naturalis, an encyclopaedia of people, places, plants, animals, and things published by Pliny the Elder. Roman medicine, recorded in the works of such physicians as Galen, established that today's medical terminology would be primarily derived from Latin and Greek words, the Greek being filtered through the Latin. Roman engineering had the same effect on scientific terminology as a whole. Latin law principles have survived partly in a long list of Latin legal terms.

The Logudorese dialect of the Sardinian language and Standard Italian are the two closest contemporary languages to Latin.

Throughout European history, an education in the classics was considered crucial for those who wished to join literate circles. The prominence of Latin in classical education rested not only on tradition but also on its reputation for clarity, logical structure, and intellectual rigor, a view expressed by the mathematics educator Theodor Haagaas, who remarked that "Latin, it is mathematics, language mathematics."

This also was true in the United States where many of the nation's founders obtained a classically based education in grammar schools or from tutors. Admission to Harvard in the Colonial era required that the applicant "Can readily make and speak or write true Latin prose and has skill in making verse" Latin Study and the classics were emphasised in American secondary schools and colleges well into the Antebellum era.

Instruction in Latin is an essential aspect. In today's world, a large number of Latin students in the United States learn from Wheelock's Latin: The Classic Introductory Latin Course, Based on Ancient Authors. This book, first published in 1956, was written by Frederic M. Wheelock. Wheelock's Latin has become the standard text for many American introductory Latin courses.

The numbers of people studying Latin varies significantly by country. In the United Kingdom, Latin is available in around 2.3% of state primary schools, representing a significant increase in availability. In Germany, over 500,000 students study Latin each year, representing a decrease from over 800,000 in 2008. Latin is still required for some University courses, but this has become less frequent.

The Living Latin movement attempts to teach Latin in the same way that living languages are taught, as a means of both spoken and written communication. It is available in Vatican City and at some institutions in the US, such as the University of Kentucky and Iowa State University. The British Cambridge University Press is a major supplier of Latin textbooks for all levels, such as the Cambridge Latin Course series. It has also published a subseries of children's texts in Latin by Bell & Forte, which recounts the adventures of a mouse called Minimus.

In the United Kingdom, the Classical Association encourages the study of antiquity through various means, such as publications and grants. The University of Cambridge, the Open University, a number of independent schools, for example Eton, Harrow, Haberdashers' Aske's Boys' School, Merchant Taylors' School, and Rugby, and The Latin Programme/Via Facilis, a London-based charity, run Latin courses. In the United States and in Canada, the American Classical League supports every effort to further the study of classics. Its subsidiaries include the National Junior Classical League (with more than 50,000 members), which encourages high school students to pursue the study of Latin, and the National Senior Classical League, which encourages students to continue their study of the classics into college. The league also sponsors the National Latin Exam. Classicist Mary Beard wrote in The Times Literary Supplement in 2006 that the reason for learning Latin is because of what was written in it.

Latin was or is the official language of several European states. It had official status in the Kingdom of Hungary from the 11th to mid-19th centuries, when Hungarian became the exclusive official language in 1844. The best known Latin language poet of Hungarian origin was Janus Pannonius. Similarly, in the Kingdom of Poland and the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, Latin was officially recognised and widely used between the 10th and 18th centuries, commonly used in foreign relations and popular as a second language among some of the nobility. Latin was also the official language of the Croatian Parliament from the 13th to the 19th century (1847). The oldest preserved records of the parliamentary sessions (Congregatio Regni totius Sclavonie generalis)—held in Zagreb (Zagabria), Croatia—date from 19 April 1273. An extensive Croatian Latin literature exists. Latin was used on Croatian coins on even years until 1 January 2023, when Croatia adopted the Euro as its official currency.

The ancient pronunciation of Latin has been reconstructed; among the data used for reconstruction are explicit statements about pronunciation by ancient authors, misspellings, puns, ancient etymologies, the spelling of Latin loanwords in other languages, and the historical development of Romance languages.

The consonant phonemes of Classical Latin are as follows:

/z/ was not native to Classical Latin. It appeared in Greek loanwords starting c. the 1st century BC, when it was probably pronounced (at least by educated speakers) [z] initially and doubled [zz] between vowels, in accordance with its pronunciation in Koine Greek. In Classical Latin poetry, the letter ⟨ z ⟩ between vowels always counts as two consonants for metrical purposes. The consonant ⟨b⟩ usually sounds as [b]; however, when ⟨t⟩ or ⟨s⟩ follows ⟨b⟩ then it is pronounced as in [pt] or [ps]. In Latin, ⟨q⟩ is always followed by the vowel ⟨u⟩. Together they make a [kʷ] sound.

In Old and Classical Latin, the Latin alphabet had no distinction between uppercase and lowercase, and the letters ⟨ J U W ⟩ did not exist. In place of ⟨ J U ⟩, ⟨ I V ⟩ were used, respectively; ⟨ I V ⟩ represented both vowels and consonants. Most of the letter forms were similar to modern uppercase, as can be seen in the inscription from the Colosseum shown at the top of the article.

The spelling systems used in Latin dictionaries and modern editions of Latin texts, however, normally use ⟨ j u ⟩ in place of Classical-era ⟨ i v ⟩. Some systems use ⟨ j v ⟩ for the consonant sounds /j w/ except in the combinations ⟨ gu su qu ⟩ for which ⟨ v ⟩ is never used.

Some notes concerning the mapping of Latin phonemes to English graphemes are given below:

In Classical Latin, as in modern Italian, double consonant letters were pronounced as long consonant sounds distinct from short versions of the same consonants. Thus the nn in Classical Latin annus 'year' (and in Italian anno) is pronounced as a doubled /nn/ as in English unnamed. (In English, distinctive consonant length or doubling occurs only at the boundary between two words or morphemes, as in that example.)

In Classical Latin, ⟨ U ⟩ did not exist as a letter distinct from ⟨ V ⟩ ; the written form ⟨ V ⟩ was used to represent both a vowel and a consonant. ⟨ Y ⟩ was adopted to represent upsilon in loanwords from Greek, but it was pronounced like ⟨ u ⟩ and ⟨ i ⟩ by some speakers. It was also used in native Latin words by confusion with Greek words of similar meaning, such as sylva and ὕλη hū́lē.

Classical Latin distinguished between long and short vowels. Then, long vowels, except for ⟨ i ⟩, were frequently marked using the apex, which was sometimes similar to an acute accent ⟨ Á É Ó V́ Ý ⟩. Long /iː/ was written using a taller version of ⟨ I ⟩, called i longa ' long I ': ⟨ ꟾ ⟩. In modern texts, long vowels are often indicated by a macron ⟨ ā ē ī ō ū ⟩, and short vowels are usually unmarked except when it is necessary to distinguish between words, when they are marked with a breve ⟨ ă ĕ ĭ ŏ ŭ ⟩. However, they would also signify a long vowel by writing the vowel larger than other letters in a word or by repeating the vowel twice in a row. The acute accent, when it is used in modern Latin texts, indicates stress, as in Spanish, rather than length.

Although called long vowels, their exact quality in Classical Latin is different from short vowels. The difference is described in the table below:

This difference in quality is posited by W. Sidney Allen in his book Vox Latina. However, Andrea Calabrese has disputed this assertion, based in part upon the observation that in Sardinian and some Lucanian dialects, each long and short vowel pair merged, as opposed to in Italo-Western languages in which short /i/ and /u/ merged with long /eː/ and /o:/ (cf. Latin siccus, Italian secco, and Sardinian siccu).

A vowel letter followed by ⟨ m ⟩ at the end of a word, or a vowel letter followed by ⟨ n ⟩ before ⟨ s ⟩ or ⟨ f ⟩, represented a short nasal vowel, as in monstrum [mõːstrũ].

Classical Latin had several diphthongs. The two most common were ⟨ ae au ⟩. The former is pronounced like the i in mine, and the latter like the ow in power. ⟨ oe ⟩ was fairly rare, and ⟨ ui eu ei ⟩ were very rare, at least in native Latin words. There has also been debate over whether ⟨ ui ⟩ is truly a diphthong in Classical Latin, due to its rarity, absence in works of Roman grammarians, and the roots of Classical Latin words (e.g. hui ce to huic, quoi to cui) not matching or being similar to the pronunciation of classical words if ⟨ ui ⟩ were to be considered a diphthong.

The sequences sometimes did not represent diphthongs. ⟨ ae ⟩ and ⟨ oe ⟩ also represented a sequence of two vowels in different syllables in aēnus [aˈeː.nʊs] 'bronze' and coēpit [kɔˈeː.pɪt] 'began', and ⟨ au ui eu ei ou ⟩ represented sequences of two vowels or of a vowel and one of the semivowels /j w/, in cavē [ˈka.weː] 'beware!', cuius [ˈkʊj.jʊs] 'whose', monuī [ˈmɔn.ʊ.iː] 'I warned', solvī [ˈsɔɫ.wiː] 'I released', dēlēvī [deːˈleː.wiː] 'I destroyed', eius [ˈɛj.jʊs] 'his', and novus [ˈnɔ.wʊs] 'new'.

Old Latin had more diphthongs, but most of them changed into long vowels in Classical Latin. The Old Latin diphthong ⟨ ai ⟩ and the sequence ⟨ āī ⟩ became Classical ⟨ ae ⟩. Old Latin ⟨ oi ⟩ and ⟨ ou ⟩ changed to Classical ⟨ ū ⟩, except in a few words whose ⟨ oi ⟩ became Classical ⟨ oe ⟩. These two developments sometimes occurred in different words from the same root: for instance, Classical poena "punishment" and pūnīre "to punish". Early Old Latin ⟨ ei ⟩ usually monophthongised to a later Old Latin ⟨ ē ⟩, to Classical ⟨ ī ⟩.

By the late Roman Empire, ⟨ ae oe ⟩ had merged with ⟨ e ē ⟩. During the Classical period this sound change was present in some rural dialects, but deliberately avoided by well-educated speakers.

Syllables in Latin are signified by the presence of diphthongs and vowels. The number of syllables is the same as the number of vowel sounds.

Further, if a consonant separates two vowels, it will go into the syllable of the second vowel. When there are two consonants between vowels, the last consonant will go with the second vowel. An exception occurs when a phonetic stop and liquid come together. In this situation, they are thought to be a single consonant, and as such, they will go into the syllable of the second vowel.

Syllables in Latin are considered either long or short (less often called "heavy" and "light" respectively). Within a word, a syllable may either be long by nature or long by position. A syllable is long by nature if it has a diphthong or a long vowel. On the other hand, a syllable is long by position if the vowel is followed by more than one consonant.

There are two rules that define which syllable is stressed in Classical Latin.

Latin was written in the Latin alphabet (A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, V, X), derived from the Etruscan alphabet, which was in turn drawn from the Greek alphabet and ultimately the Phoenician alphabet. This alphabet has continued to be used over the centuries as the script for the Romance, Celtic, Germanic, Baltic, Finnic and many Slavic languages (Polish, Slovak, Slovene, Croatian, Bosnian, Serbian and Czech); and it has been adopted by many languages around the world, including Vietnamese, the Austronesian languages, many Turkic languages, and most languages in sub-Saharan Africa, the Americas and Oceania, making it by far the world's single most widely used writing system.

The number of letters in the Latin alphabet has varied. When it was first derived from the Etruscan alphabet, it contained only 21 letters. Later, G was added to represent /ɡ/, which had previously been spelled C, and Z ceased to be included in the alphabet, as the language then had no voiced alveolar fricative. The letters K, Y, and Z were later added to represent Greek letters kappa, upsilon, and zeta respectively, in Greek loanwords.

W was created in the 11th century from VV in some areas and UU in others. It represented /w/ in Germanic languages, not Latin, which still uses V for the purpose. J was distinguished from the original I only during the late Middle Ages, as was the letter U from V. Although some Latin dictionaries use J, it is rarely used for Latin text, as it was not used in classical times, but many other languages use it.

Classical Latin did not contain sentence punctuation, letter case, or interword spacing, but apices were sometimes used to distinguish length in vowels and the interpunct was used at times to separate words.

The first line of Catullus 3 ("Mourn, O Venuses and Cupids ") was originally written as:

It would be rendered in a modern edition as:

The Roman cursive script is commonly found on the many wax tablets excavated at sites such as forts, an especially extensive set having been discovered at Vindolanda on Hadrian's Wall in Britain. Most notable is the fact that while most of the Vindolanda tablets show spaces between words, spaces were avoided in monumental inscriptions from that era.

Occasionally, Latin has been written in other scripts:

Latin is a synthetic, fusional language in the terminology of linguistic typology. Words involve an objective semantic element and markers (usually suffixes) specifying the grammatical use of the word, expressing gender, number, and case in adjectives, nouns, and pronouns (declension) and verbs to denote person, number, tense, voice, mood, and aspect (conjugation). Some words are uninflected and undergo neither process, such as adverbs, prepositions, and interjections.

Latin inflection can result in words with much ambiguity: For example, amābit 'he/she/it will love', is formed from amā-, a future tense morpheme -bi- and a third person singular morpheme, -t, the last of which -t does not express masculine, feminine, or neuter gender. A major task in understanding Latin phrases and clauses is to clarify such ambiguities by an analysis of context. Latin word order is relatively free because inflections disambiguate semantic connections, but different word orders can indicate different nuances of meaning.

All regular Latin nouns and adjectives belong to one of five declensions; a grouping of nouns and adjectives with similar inflected forms. The declensions are identified by final letter of the stem (the word without the ending declension) and the genitive singular ending of the word.

There are seven Latin noun cases, which also apply to adjectives and pronouns and mark a noun's syntactic role in the sentence by means of inflections. Thus, word order in Latin is not as important as it is in English, which is less inflected. The general structure and word order of a Latin sentence can therefore vary. The cases are as follows:

Latin lacks both definite and indefinite articles, so puer currit can mean either 'the boy is running' or 'a boy is running'.

There are two types of regular Latin adjectives: first- and second-declension and third-declension. They are so-called because their forms are similar or identical to first- and second-declension and third-declension nouns, respectively. Latin adjectives also have comparative and superlative forms. There are also a number of Latin participles.

Latin numbers are sometimes declined as adjectives; see § Numbers.

First- and second-declension adjectives are declined like first-declension nouns for the feminine forms and like second-declension nouns for the masculine and neuter forms. For example, for mortuus, mortua, mortuum 'dead', mortua is declined like a regular first-declension noun (such as puella 'girl', mortuus is declined like a regular second-declension masculine noun (such as dominus 'lord, master', and mortuum is declined like a regular second-declension neuter noun (such as auxilium 'help'.

Third-declension adjectives are mostly declined like normal third-declension nouns, with a few exceptions. In the plural nominative neuter, for example, the ending is -ia (omnia 'all, everything', and for third-declension nouns, the plural nominative neuter ending is -a or -ia (capita 'heads', animalia 'animals'. They can have one, two or three forms for the masculine, feminine, and neuter nominative singular.

Latin participles, like English participles, are formed from a verb. There are a few main types of participles: Present Active Participles, Perfect Passive Participles, Future Active Participles, and Future Passive Participles.

Latin sometimes uses prepositions, depending on the type of prepositional phrase being used. Most prepositions are followed by a noun in either the accusative or ablative case: apud puerum 'with the boy', with puerum being the accusative form of puer 'boy', and sine puero 'without the boy' – puero being the ablative form. A few adpositions, however, govern a noun in the genitive, such as gratia and tenus.

A regular verb in Latin belongs to one of four main conjugations. A conjugation is "a class of verbs with similar inflected forms". The conjugations are identified by the last letter of the verb's present stem. The present stem can be found by omitting the - re (- rī in deponent verbs) ending from the present infinitive form. The infinitive of the first conjugation ends in -ā-re or -ā-rī (active and passive respectively): amāre 'to love', hortārī 'to exhort'; of the second conjugation by -ē-re or -ē-rī : monēre 'to warn', verērī 'to fear', of the third conjugation by -ere, -ī : dūcere 'to lead', ūtī 'to use'; of the fourth by -ī-re, -ī-rī : audīre 'to hear', experīrī 'to attempt'. The stem categories descend from Indo-European and can therefore be compared to similar conjugations in other Indo-European languages.

Irregular verbs are verbs that do not follow the regular conjugations in the formation of the inflected form. Irregular verbs in Latin are esse 'to be'; velle 'to want'; ferre 'to carry'; edere 'to eat'; dare 'to give'; īre 'to go'; posse 'to be able'; fieri 'to happen'; and their compounds.

There are six simple tenses in Latin (present, imperfect, future, perfect, pluperfect and future perfect), three moods (indicative, imperative and subjunctive, in addition to the infinitive, participle, gerund, gerundive and supine), three persons (first, second and third), two numbers (singular and plural), two voices (active and passive) and two aspects (perfective and imperfective). Verbs are described by four principal parts:

The six simple tenses of Latin are divided into two systems: the present system, which is made up of the present, imperfect and future forms, and the perfect system, which is made up of the perfect, pluperfect and future perfect forms. Each simple tense has a set of endings corresponding to the person, number, and voice of the subject. Subject (nominative) pronouns are generally omitted for the first (I, we) and second (you) persons except for emphasis.

The table below displays the common inflected endings for the indicative mood in the active voice in all six tenses. For the future tense, the first listed endings are for the first and second conjugations, and the second listed endings are for the third and fourth conjugations:

Some Latin verbs are deponent, causing their forms to be in the passive voice but retain an active meaning: hortor, hortārī, hortātus sum 'to urge'.

As Latin is an Italic language, most of its vocabulary is likewise Italic, ultimately from the ancestral Proto-Indo-European language. However, because of close cultural interaction, the Romans not only adapted the Etruscan alphabet to form the Latin alphabet but also borrowed some Etruscan words into their language, including persona 'mask' and histrio 'actor'. Latin also included vocabulary borrowed from Oscan, another Italic language.

After the Fall of Tarentum in 272 BC, the Romans began Hellenising, or adopting features of Greek culture, including the borrowing of Greek words, such as camera 'vaulted roof', sumbolum 'symbol', and balineum 'bath'. This Hellenisation led to the addition of Y and Z to the alphabet to represent Greek sounds. Subsequently, the Romans transplanted Greek art, medicine, science and philosophy to Italy, paying almost any price to entice Greek skilled and educated persons to Rome and sending their youth to be educated in Greece. Thus, many Latin scientific and philosophical words were Greek loanwords or had their meanings expanded by association with Greek words, as ars 'craft' and tekhne 'art'.

Because of the Roman Empire's expansion and subsequent trade with outlying European tribes, the Romans borrowed some northern and central European words, such as beber 'beaver', of Germanic origin, and bracae 'breeches', of Celtic origin. The specific dialects of Latin across Latin-speaking regions of the former Roman Empire after its fall were influenced by languages specific to the regions. The dialects of Latin evolved into different Romance languages.

During and after the adoption of Christianity into Roman society, Christian vocabulary became a part of the language, either from Greek or Hebrew borrowings or as Latin neologisms. Into the Middle Ages, Latin incorporated many more words from surrounding languages, including Old English and other Germanic languages.

Over the ages, Latin-speaking populations produced new adjectives, nouns, and verbs by affixing or compounding meaningful segments. For example, the compound adjective, omnipotens 'all-powerful', was produced from the adjectives omnis 'all', and potens 'powerful', by dropping the final s of omnis and concatenating. Often, the concatenation changed the part of speech, and nouns were produced from verb segments or verbs from nouns and adjectives.

In ancient times, numbers in Latin were written only with letters. Today, numbers can be written with Arabic numerals as well as Roman numerals. The numbers 1, 2, and 3, along with every whole hundred from 200 to 900, are declined as nouns and adjectives with gender-specific endings.

The numbers from 4 to 100 do not change their endings (they are indeclinable). As in modern Romance languages, the default gender for naming a number in isolation is masculine, so counting "1, 2, 3" is given as ūnus, duo, trēs.

The classical work Commentarii de Bello Gallico (The Gallic War), written by Gaius Julius Caesar, begins with the following passage:

Gallia est omnis divisa in partes tres, quarum unam incolunt Belgae, aliam Aquitani, tertiam qui ipsorum lingua Celtae, nostra Galli appellantur. Hi omnes lingua, institutis, legibus inter se differunt. Gallos ab Aquitanis Garumna flumen, a Belgis Matrona et Sequana dividit. Horum omnium fortissimi sunt Belgae, propterea quod a cultu atque humanitate provinciae longissime absunt, minimeque ad eos mercatores saepe commeant atque ea quae ad effeminandos animos pertinent important, proximique sunt Germanis, qui trans Rhenum incolunt, quibuscum continenter bellum gerunt. Qua de causa Helvetii quoque reliquos Gallos virtute praecedunt, quod fere cotidianis proeliis cum Germanis contendunt, cum aut suis finibus eos prohibent aut ipsi in eorum finibus bellum gerunt. Eorum una pars, quam Gallos obtinere dictum est, initium capit a flumine Rhodano, continetur Garumna flumine, Oceano, finibus Belgarum; attingit etiam ab Sequanis et Helvetiis flumen Rhenum; vergit ad septentriones. Belgae ab extremis Galliae finibus oriuntur; pertinent ad inferiorem partem fluminis Rheni; spectant in septentrionem et orientem solem. Aquitania a Garumna flumine ad Pyrenaeos montes et eam partem Oceani quae est ad Hispaniam pertinet; spectat inter occasum solis et septentriones.

The same text may be marked for long vowels using apices over vowel letters, including before nf and ns where long vowels are automatically produced:

Gallia est omnis dívísa in partés trés, quárum únam incolunt Belgae, aliam Aquítání, tertiam quí ipsórum linguá Celtae, nostrá Gallí appellantur. Hí omnés linguá, ínstitútís, légibus inter sé differunt. Gallós ab Aquítánís Garumna flúmen, á Belgís Mátrona et Séquana dívidit. Hórum omnium fortissimí sunt Belgae, proptereá quod á cultú atque húmánitáte próvinciae longissimé absunt, miniméque ad eós mercátórés saepe commeant atque ea quae ad efféminandós animós pertinent important, proximíque sunt Germánís, quí tráns Rhénum incolunt, quibuscum continenter bellum gerunt. Quá dé causá Helvétií quoque reliquós Gallós virtúte praecédunt, quod feré cotídiánís proeliís cum Germánís contendunt, cum aut suís fínibus eós prohibent aut ipsí in eórum fínibus bellum gerunt. Eórum úna pars, quam Gallós obtinére dictum est, initium capit á flúmine Rhodanó, continétur Garumná flúmine, Óceanó, fínibus Belgárum; attingit etiam ab Séquanís et Helvétiís flúmen Rhénum; vergit ad septentriónés. Belgae ab extrémís Galliae fínibus oriuntur; pertinent ad ínferiórem partem flúminis Rhéní; spectant in septentriónem et orientem sólem. Aquítánia á Garumná flúmine ad Pýrénaeós montés et eam partem Óceaní quae est ad Hispániam pertinet; spectat inter occásum sólis et septentriones.

An example of Late Latin is the Latin Vulgate by Saint Jerome. Below is Psalm 1 (Psalmum Unum) from the Clementine Vulgate:

1 Beatus vir qui non abiit in consilio impiorum, et in via peccatorum non stetit, et in cathedra pestilentiae non sedit; 2 sed in lege Domini voluntas ejus, et in lege ejus meditabitur die ac nocte. 3 Et erit tamquam lignum quod plantatum est secus decursus aquarum, quod fructum suum dabit in tempore suo : et folium ejus non defluet; et omnia quaecumque faciet prosperabuntur. 4 Non sic impii, non sic; sed tamquam pulvis quem projicit ventus a facie terrae. 5 Ideo non resurgent impii in judicio, neque peccatores in concilio justorum.

The Monetary Convention of 23 December 1865 was a unified system of coinage that provided a degree of monetary integration among several European countries, initially Belgium, France, Italy and Switzerland, at a time when the circulation of banknotes in these countries remained relatively marginal. In early 1866, it started being referred to in the British press as the Latin Monetary Union, with the intention of making it clear that the United Kingdom would not join, and has been generally referred to under that name (French : union latine) and the acronym LMU since then. A number of countries minted coins according to the LMU standard even though they did not formally join the LMU.

The LMU has been viewed as a forerunner of late-20th-century European monetary union but cannot be directly compared with it, not least since the LMU did not rely on any common institutions. Unlike the Scandinavian Monetary Union established a few years later, the Latin Monetary Union remained limited to coinage and never extended to paper money. That made the LMU increasingly irrelevant, and it was quietly disbanded in 1926.

The LMU adopted the specifications of the French gold franc, which had been introduced by Napoleon I in 1803 and was struck in denominations of 5, 10, 20, 40, 50 and 100 francs, with the 20-franc coin (6.45161 grams or 99.5636 grains of.900 fine gold struck on a 21-millimetre or 0.83-inch planchet) being the most common. In the French system the gold franc was interchangeable with the silver franc based on an exchange ratio of 1:15.5, which was the approximate relative value of the two metals at the time of the law of 1803.

By treaty dated 23 December 1865, France, Belgium, Italy, and Switzerland formed the Latin Monetary Union. They agreed to a combined gold and silver standard (bimetallism) with a gold-to-silver ratio of 15.5 to 1 as established in the French franc. One LMU franc represented 4.5 grams (69 grains) of fine silver or 0.290322 grams (4.48035 grains) of fine gold.

The treaty required that all four contracting states strike freely exchangeable gold coins and silver coins according to common specifications. Before the treaty, for example, the fineness of the silver coins in the four states varied from 0.800 to 0.900. The treaty required that the largest silver coin of 5 francs be struck 0.900 fine and the fractional silver of 2 francs, 1 franc, 50 centimes and 20 centimes all be struck at 0.835 fine. The agreement came into force on 1 August 1866.

The LMU served the function of facilitating trade between different countries by setting the standards by which gold and silver currency could be minted and exchanged. In this manner a French trader could accept Italian lire for his goods with confidence that they could be converted back to a comparable amount of francs.

The original four nations were joined by Greece on 10 April 1867, which took advantage of a clause in the treaty that guaranteed admission of foreign states that agreed to abide by the treaty. Spain and Romania also considered joining. The discussions broke off unsuccessfully, but both countries nevertheless made an attempt to conform their currencies to the LMU standard. Austria-Hungary refused to join the LMU because it rejected bimetallism, but signed a separate monetary treaty with France on December 24, 1867 whereby both states agreed to receive into their treasuries one another's gold coins at specified rates. Austria-Hungary thereafter minted some but not all of its gold coins on the LMU standard, including the 4 and 8 florin, which matched the specifications of the French 10 and 20 francs. Serbia, the Papal States, and San Marino were among other countries that applied to join the LMU but were not accepted. With the tacit agreement of Napoleon III of France, Giacomo Antonelli, the administrator of the Papal Treasury, embarked in 1866 on an ambitious increase in silver coinage, equivalent to Belgium's total. The papal coins excessively circulated in other union states, to the profit of the Holy See (as the lower denominations contained a lower purity of silver compared to the 5 Fr. coin), but Swiss and French banks rejected papal coins and the Papal States were ejected from the Union in 1870, owing 20 million lire.

Other states later adopted the system without formally joining the treaty. Peru had adopted the franc system by law on July 31, 1863. The colonies of France (including Algeria) came under the scope of the treaty in 1865. Colombia and Venezuela followed in 1871. The Grand Duchy of Finland adopted the system on August 9, 1877; Serbia on November 11, 1878; and Bulgaria on May 17, 1880. Coins struck for the Spanish territory of Puerto Rico in 1895 adhered to the standard, with one peso to five Spanish pesetas. In 1904, the Danish West Indies were also placed on this standard but did not join the Union itself. When Albania emerged from the Ottoman Empire as an independent nation in 1912, coins of the Latin Monetary Union from France, Italy, Greece, and Austria-Hungary began to circulate in place of the Ottoman lira. Albania did not, however, mint its own coins or issue its own paper money until it adopted an independent monetary system in 1925.

From the beginning, fluctuations in the relative value of gold and silver on the world market stressed the currency union. This is today recognized as an inevitable effect of a currency based on bimetallism when precious metal prices fluctuate. When the LMU was formed in 1865, silver was nearing the end of a period of high valuation compared to gold. In 1873 the value of silver dropped significantly, followed by a sharp increase in silver imports in the LMU countries, particularly in France and Belgium. By 1873, the decreasing value of silver made it profitable to mint silver in exchange for gold at the Union's standard rate of 15.5 : 1. Indeed, in all of 1871 and 1872 the French mint had received just 5,000,000 francs of silver for conversion to coin, but in 1873 alone received 154,000,000 francs. Fearing an influx of silver coinage, the member nations of the Union agreed in Paris on January 30, 1874, to limit the free conversion of silver temporarily. By 1878, with no recovery in the silver price in sight, minting of silver coinage was suspended absolutely. From 1873 onwards, the Union was on a de facto gold standard. The law still permitted payment in silver, but the 5 franc silver pieces were "essentially upon the same footing as banknotes".

Germany's conversion to gold was one source of the pressure on the Union. The law of 4 December 1871 named one tenth of a new imperial gold coin a mark, divided it into 100 pfennigs and authorized gold coins of 10 and 20 marks. The Coinage Act of 9 July 1873 made the mark the unit of account of the Reich gold currency, which was to replace the state currencies. An imperial ordinance of 22 September 1875 set 1 January 1876 as the date on which the Reich currency came into force throughout Germany.

During the conversion, the German government withdrew old silver coins, melted them and sold the bullion. Germany kept selling off its demonetized silver for several years after the 1871 and 1873 legislation, until mounting losses forced a halt to bullion sales on 19 May 1879. German one-thaler pieces nevertheless remained legal tender at three marks each through 30 September 1907. In both systems, the shift to gold did not immediately clear large legacy silver coins from circulation.

More importantly, because new discoveries and better refining techniques increased the supply of silver, the fixed LMU exchange rate eventually overvalued silver relative to gold. German traders, in particular, were known to bring silver to LMU countries, have it minted into coins, then exchange them for gold coins at the discounted exchange rate. These destabilizing tactics eventually forced the LMU to convert to a pure gold standard for its currency in 1878.

According to the Financial Times, another major problem of the LMU was that it failed to outlaw the printing of paper money based on the bimetallic currency. France and Italy exploited this by printing banknotes to fund their own endeavours.

In 1922 the Latvian lat and in 1924 the Polish złoty adopted the LMU standard.

The political turbulence of the early twentieth century which culminated in the First World War brought the Latin Monetary Union to its final end in practice, even though it continued de jure until 1927, when it came to a formal end.

The last coins made according to the standards (i.e., diameter, weight and silver fineness) of the Union were the Swiss half, one-franc, and two-franc pieces of 1967. However, Austria still mints 4- and 8- florin gold coins to the LMU specifications for collectors and investors, and modern gold rounds to LMU standards are also commercially minted.

A 2018 study in the European Review of Economic History found that the LMU had no significant effects on trade, except during the period 1865–1874.

The Latin Monetary Union inspired the Scandinavian Monetary Union, established in 1873.

Below are examples of five-unit silver coins:

Laurence Rossignol (French pronunciation: [ lɔʁɑ̃s ʁɔsiɲɔl ] ; born 22 December 1957) is a French politician of the Socialist Party (PS) who has served as a member of the French Senate from 2011 to 2014 and again since 2017, representing Oise. From 2014 to 2017, she served as Secretary of State for the Family, Senior Citizens and Autonomy in the governments of Prime Ministers Manuel Valls and Bernard Cazeneuve.

Ahead of the Socialist Party's 2008 convention in Reims, Rossignol publicly endorsed Martine Aubry as candidate to succeed François Hollande at the party's leadership. When Aubry took over as party leader, she became the Socialist Party's spokesperson for environmental policy. In the party's 2011 primaries, she supported Aubry as its candidate for the 2012 presidential election.

From 2014 to 2017, Rossignol served as State Secretary under the leadership of Minister of Health Marisol Touraine. During her time in office, she established the Agency for the Recovery of Unpaid Alimonies (ARIPA) to ensure the recovery of outstanding child support.

In the Socialist Party's presidential primaries, Rossignol endorsed Manuel Valls as the party's candidate for the 2017 French presidential election. At the Aubervilliers Congress in 2017, she also supported Luc Carvounas ’ candidacy to lead the PS.

In 2017, Rossignol was a candidate for the leadership of the Socialist group in the Senate, against Martial Bourquin and incumbent Didier Guillaume ; Guillaume was eventually re-elected. When Guillaume eventually retired in 2008, Rossignol lost out against Patrick Kanner in an internal vote, with 47 against 25 votes.

Ahead of the 2022 presidential election, Rossignol endorsed Arnaud Montebourg as the party’s candidate to replace incumbent President Emmanuel Macron.

In 2015, Rossignol defended the government's policy of testing the bones of foreign minors to determine their age.

In 2016, Rossignol caused controversy when she compared Islamic women who chose to wear veils to "negroes who were for slavery ". She was later reported to have apologized for the use of the word negro but stood by her comparison of veil wearing to slavery.

Laurent Panifous (French pronunciation: [ lɔʁɑ̃ panifus ] ; born 21 December 1976) is a French politician who has served as Minister Delegate for Relations with Parliament in the second government of Prime Minister Sébastien Lecornu since 12 October 2025.

A former member of the Socialist Party, Panifous was elected to the National Assembly for the 2nd constituency of the Ariège department in the 2022 legislative election. Earlier in 2025, he was elected president of the Liberties, Independents, Overseas and Territories group in the National Assembly.

Panifous was the director of an établissement d'hébergement pour personnes âgées dépendantes (EHPAD), a residential aged care.

Locally, Panifous was mayor of Le Fossat from 2014 to 2022 and president of the communauté de communes Arize-Lèze from 2017 to 2022.

In the 2022 legislative election, Panifous was elected to the National Assembly in the 2nd constituency of Ariège. A dissident of the Socialist Party, he benefited in the interval between the two rounds from the presidential majority's call to vote in his favour against Michel Larive, the outgoing deputy and the New Ecological and Social People's Union candidate, an alliance including the Socialist Party. He announced wanting to offer a "responsible opposition" to President Emmanuel Macron.

In early 2025, he was elected president of the Liberties, Independents, Overseas and Territories group in the National Assembly. Later in 2025, he was appointed Minister Delegate for Relations with Parliament upon Prime Minister Sébastien Lecornu 's second government taking office.

Laurent Pietraszewski (born 19 November 1966) is a French politician of La République En Marche! (LREM) who served as Secretary of State for Pensions in the governments of successive Prime Ministers Édouard Philippe and Jean Castex from 2019 to 2022.

Prior to his election, Pietraszewski had never been politically active. He was Director of Human resources at Auchan.

Pietraszewski became a member of the French National Assembly in the 2017 elections, representing department of Nord 's 11th constituency.

In parliament, Pietraszewski served as member of the Committee on Economic Affairs, where he was his parliamentary group's coordinator from 2018 until 2019. Within his parliamentary group, he was one of the proponents of the government's plans for a reform of the pensions system. In late 2019, he briefly served as one of his parliamentary group's spokespersons under the leadership of its chairman Gilles Le Gendre.

In December 2019, Pietraszewski was appointed to replace Jean-Paul Delevoye as Secretary of State for Pensions, serving under the leadership of successive Ministers of Health Agnès Buzyn (2019–2020) and Olivier Véran (since 2020).

For the 2021 regional elections, Pietraszewski was nominated as LREM's candidate to become President of the Regional Council of Hauts-de-France, challenging incumbent Xavier Bertrand.

In the 2022 French legislative election, he lost his seat to Roger Vicot from the Socialist Party (NUPES).

In July 2019, Pietraszewski voted in favor of the French ratification of the European Union ’s Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) with Canada.

Laurent Timothée Marie Wauquiez ([ lɔʁɑ̃ timɔte maʁi vokje ] ; born 12 April 1975) is a French politician who presided over the Regional Council of Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes from 2016 to 2024. He is a member of The Republicans (LR), which he led from 2017 to 2019 following the resignation of Nicolas Sarkozy.

Wauquiez was Secretary of State for European Affairs under the Foreign Minister Alain Juppé ; and previously Secretary of State for Employment under the Minister of the Economy, Industry and Employment from March 2008 in François Fillon 's government. He also was Government Spokesman from June 2007 to March 2008 as Minister of State under the Prime Minister. He was elected as 2nd Vice President of the ORU Fogar at the organisation's General Assembly held in Quito, Ecuador on 16 October 2016.

On 10 December 2017, Wauquiez was elected to the presidency of The Republicans with 74% of the vote. Pundits have described him as moving the party to the right. On 2 June 2019, a week after overseeing the worst result for the right in its history in the European election with 8% of the vote, Wauquiez resigned as party president.

After 2024 legislative election, Wauquiez became president of the LR group in the National Assembly.

Wauquiez graduated from the École normale supérieure in 1994 and Université Panthéon-Sorbonne with a masters in history and studied public law at the Institut d'études politiques de Paris (Sciences Po); he later attended the École nationale d'administration (ÉNA). He worked as professor at Emlyon Business School.

Wauquiez held several governmental positions over the course of Nicolas Sarkozy's presidency. He was named the Secretary of State for Employment in 2008 and also functioned as the government spokesman. He later served as Minister of European Affairs and of Higher Education. In 2012, he was re-elected to the National Assembly and became head of the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes region in 2015.

In 2012, Wauquiez opposed legalisation of same-sex marriage.

On 10 December 2017, Wauquiez was elected as the president of The Republicans, winning over Maël de Calan and Florence Portelli. During his time in office, he overrode party scepticism to appoint François-Xavier Bellamy to lead the LR list in the European elections. He resigned in June 2019, bowing to pressure to step down after a his party’s weak performance in the elections.

In August 2021, Wauquiez decided not to run as the Republicans’s candidate in the 2022 presidential election.

Ahead of the Republicans' 2022 convention, Wauquiez endorsed Éric Ciotti as the party's chairman.

Although he had previously promised not to participate in a government coalition after the 2024 legislative election, LR ultimately joined the Barnier government, led by an LR member. After Michel Barnier's ousting, LR joined the Bayrou government.

In February 2025, Wauquiez announced his candidacy to reclaim the presidency of The Republicans, in 2025 The Republicans leadership election. Wauquiez sparked outrage in France, even within his own conservative circles, after proposing to send migrants awaiting deportation to French overseas territory Saint Pierre and Miquelon. However, he secured only 26% of the vote in the May 18 election, losing to Minister of the Interior Bruno Retailleau.

Wauquiez is known for wearing a red parka coat.

President of the Regional Council of Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes : since 2016

Mayor of Le Puy-en-Velay : 2008-2016 (Resignation). Reelected in 2014.

Municipal councillor of Le Puy-en-Velay : 2008-2016 (Resignation). Reelected in 2014.

The Laval Decree was a law controlling content of motion pictures filmed in French African colonies. It was used to prevent African filmmakers from filming in Africa.

In 1934, the French government passed the Laval Decree to prevent cinema from spreading subversive or anti-colonial messages. It was written by Pierre Laval, who later became the Vichy France minister of colonies. The decree stated that "any person who desire to make cinematographic images or sound recordings must address a written request to the lieutenant Governor of the colony where the applicant intends to operate".

The request included all the information about the applicant's professional references, scripts for film or musical accompaniment (for slides). The Decree restricted the work of both African and European filmmakers, from 1934 until it was overturned in 1960.

The decree required the French government's permission to shoot and show films in French colonies and banned colonized people from filming themselves. In 1960 when colonies became independent the decree ended.

The Archipelago of Lavezzi (French : Îles Lavezzi ; Corsican : Isuli Lavezzi ; Italian : Isole di Lavezzi) is a collection of small granite islands and reefs in the Strait of Bonifacio that separates Corsica from Sardinia in the Mediterranean Sea. They are administered from the town of Bonifacio (French department of Corse-du-Sud) on Corsica.

The archipelago is located in about 4 kilometres (2 miles) from the Corsican mainland, 7 km (4 mi) from Cape Pertusato, and 10 km (6 mi) southeast of Bonifacio. It covers 5,123 ha in area and the highest point is 50 metres (164 feet). They include the southernmost point of Metropolitan France.

The two main islands are Cavallo (112 ha), the only inhabited island in the archipelago, and Lavezzu (Italian: Lavezzo, 66 ha), just on the south of Cavallo. The other islands or islets are, from west to east: Piana, Ratino, Porraggia and Sperduto (or Perduto).

The archipelago was the site of the shipwreck of the French frigate Sémillante on February 15, 1855. On the island of Lavezzu there are two memorial cemeteries with the remains of the victims of the shipwreck.

These islands were the locale for Brigitte Bardot 's 1952 film Manina, la fille sans voiles.

Between 255 and 400 pairs of Scopoli's shearwaters (Calonectris diomedea) breed each year on Lavezzu. The breeding success of the shearwaters has increased since black rats (Rattus rattus) were eradicated from the island in 2000.

The Law of 20 May 1802 was a decree passed by First Consul Napoleon of the French First Republic on 20 May 1802 that reinstated slavery. It decreed the reinstatement and continuation of slavery in French colonies, reversing the Law of 4 February 1794, which had abolished the institution in all of France's overseas possessions but was only implemented in Saint-Domingue, Guadeloupe and Cayenne.

French colonial authorities in Isle de France and Réunion refused to abolish slavery due to opposition from local colonists, while Martinique refused to ratify it due to a royalist insurrection in the colony which began on 16 September 1793 and resulted in Martinican planter Louis-François Dubuc signing the Whitehall Accord with Great Britain in 1794. On 5 February 1794, the British began an invasion of Martinique and established full control over the island by 24 March, and thus the colony, like British-occupied Tobago and Saint Lucia, remained unaffected by the 1794 decree.

The Law of 20 May 1802 explicitly concerned the colonies which had not implemented the Law of 4 February 1794: it was linked to the Treaty of Amiens of 26 March 1802, which returned Martinique, Tobago and Saint Lucia to France. Consequently, it did not apply to Saint-Domingue, Guadeloupe or Cayenne. The reestablishment of slavery in Guadeloupe was formalized by another legislative measure, a consular decree passed on 16 July 1802. The decree discreetly charged Denis Decrès, then Minister of the Navy and the Colonies, with restoring slavery in Guadeloupe. However, the French did not officially reestablish slavery in the colony until 14 May 1803.

In Cayenne, slavery was restored by a consular decree on 7 December 1802, followed by a local decree by Victor Hugues of 24 April 1803 which officially reestablished slavery. The Law of 20 May 1802 had no effect in Saint-Domingue where slavery had been abolished by the 1793 Sonthonax and Polverel proclamation [fr].

Napoleon 's attempts to restore French control and slavery in Saint-Domingue proved futile. This law united opposition to Napoleon's brother-in-law, General Charles Leclerc (commander of the Saint-Domingue expedition), who failed in his attempts to restore French control and slavery in Saint-Domingue.

The Law of 6 June 2000 is a French law aimed at promoting equal access for women and men to electoral mandates and elected offices. Known as the " parity law," it mandates that political parties present an equal number of male and female candidates for municipal, regional, senatorial, and European Parliament elections. For these elections, lists that fail to comply with parity requirements are not registered. For legislative elections, the law is incentivized rather than mandatory, with financial penalties imposed on parties that do not present at least 50% female candidates.

With this law, France became the first country in the world to adopt a parity system for single-round elections.

An ordinance issued by General de Gaulle on 21 April 1944, titled "Ordinance on the Organization of Public Authorities in France After Liberation," stipulated that "women are voters and eligible under the same conditions as men."

On 21 April 1944, during the October 1945 elections, 33 women were elected as deputies, representing 5.6% of the total deputies.

In 1977, Françoise Giroud proposed in her 100 Measures for Women a limit of 85% representation for one gender in municipal elections.

In 1982, Gisèle Halimi, founder of Choisir la cause des femmes, proposed an amendment to a bill on municipal election organization, limiting the proportion of seats held by one gender to 70%. The Socialist Party adjusted this to 75%. The law was adopted on 27 July 1982. However, deputies challenged an unrelated article before the Constitutional Council. In November 1982, the Council upheld the law but struck down the quota amendment, deeming it unconstitutional for categorizing the French population into eligible persons and voters. The United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, ratified by France on 14 December 1983, marked a significant step. It obligated states to take appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women in all areas, allowing differential treatment of women and men.

In 1992, Françoise Gaspard, Claude Servan-Schreiber, and Anne LeGall published Au pouvoir citoyennes! advocating for a parity law that affirms gender equality rather than differences. This concept of equality was incorporated into the constitutional law of 8 July 1999. Women's associations, such as Demain la Parité, founded in 1994 by Françoise Gaspard, Claude Servan-Schreiber, and Colette Kreder, emerged to defend parity. This network included feminist organizations like the Association française des femmes diplômées des universités, Elles aussi, Union féminine civique et sociale, and Union professionnelle féminine. The idea of quotas was abandoned.

In 1993, Colette Kreder, Françoise Gaspard, and Claude Servan-Schreiber published the first study on women's participation in legislative elections. The first round on 21 March 1993 included only 1,015 women out of 5,169 candidates, or 19.6%.

On 19 November 1993, the "Manifesto of the 577 for a Parity Democracy," signed by 289 women and 288 men, was published in Le Monde.

In 1994, women comprised only 5.6% of the French Parliament, compared to a European average of 11.6%, ranking France second-to-last, ahead of Greece. At the initiative of Choisir la cause des femmes, a proposal was submitted to the National Assembly and Senate to amend Article 3 of the Constitution to state, "Equal access for women and men to political mandates is ensured by parity."

On 7 April 1995, the Conseil national des femmes françaises and Colette Kreder, for Demain la Parité, organized the "Presidential 95: Women Enter the Campaign" event at the Palais des Congrès in Paris, attended by over a thousand representatives of women's associations. Major presidential candidates, Jacques Chirac, Édouard Balladur, and Lionel Jospin, addressed activists demanding mandatory parity on electoral lists.

In 1996, with women's representation in assemblies stagnant at 6%, Yvette Roudy published the "Manifesto for Parity" in L'Express. Signed by ten women from both left and right—Michèle Barzach, Frédérique Bredin, Édith Cresson, Hélène Gisserot, Catherine Lalumière, Véronique Neiertz, Monique Pelletier, Yvette Roudy, Catherine Tasca, and Simone Veil —it marked a bipartisan effort.

Constitutional Law No. 99-569 of 8 July 1999 amended the Constitution to affirm that "the law promotes equal access for women and men to electoral mandates and elected offices." The Law of 6 June 2000 implemented this constitutional amendment through various measures. It mandated strict gender alternation for single-round election lists and alternation in groups of six for two-round elections. The law does not apply to cantonal elections, municipal elections in towns with fewer than 3,500 inhabitants, or senatorial elections in departments with fewer than three senators. For legislative elections, parity is optional, but parties failing to field 50% candidates of each gender face fines. France became the first country to adopt a parity system for single-round elections.

In 2014, the parity law's outcomes were mixed. Parity was achieved in regional councils, municipal councils of towns with over 3,500 inhabitants, and the European Parliament. However, results were disappointing for two-round, single-member elections, as financial penalties were not sufficiently dissuasive.

In 2009, financial penalties for non-compliance with parity in legislative elections totaled €5 million. Between 2012 and 2017, penalties reached €28 million, or 8% of total party funding. Many parties opted to field male candidates and accept reduced funding.

The Law of 2 August 2014 doubled the financial penalties for non-compliance to encourage greater adherence.

In the 2017 legislative elections, women's representation surged, with 224 women elected, comprising 38.8% of the National Assembly—a historic high. This positioned France among the top 20 countries for women's representation in their primary legislative chamber.

In the 2017 senatorial elections, anti-parity strategies by political parties limited progress, with women's representation rising slightly from 25% to 29.2%.

In the 2022 legislative elections, parity remained unachieved, with women comprising 37.3% of deputies, a slight decrease from 2017.

French law has a dual jurisdictional system comprising private law (droit privé), also known as judicial law, and public law (droit public).

Together, in practical terms, these four areas of law (civil, criminal, administrative and constitutional) constitute the major part of French law.

The announcement in November 2005 by the European Commission that, on the basis of powers recognised in a recent European Court of Justice ("ECJ") ruling, it intends to create a dozen or so European Union ("EU") criminal offences suggests that one should also now consider EU law (" droit communautaire ", sometimes referred to, less accurately, as " droit européen ") as a new and distinct area of law in France (akin to the "federal laws" that apply across States of the US, on top of their own State law), and not simply a group of rules which influence the content of France's civil, criminal, administrative and constitutional law.

Legislation is seen as the primary source of French law. Unlike in common law jurisdictions, where a collection of cases and practices (known as the "common law") historically form the basis of law, the French legal system emphasizes statutes as the primary source of law. Despite this emphasis, some bodies of law, like French administrative law, were primarily created by the courts (the highest administrative court, the Conseil d'État). Lawyers often look to case law (la jurisprudence) and legal scholarship (la doctrine) for reliable, but non-binding, interpretation and statements of the law.

French legislative sources can be classified into four categories:

French legislation follows a hierarchy of norms (hiérarchie des normes). Constitutional laws are superior to all other sources, then treaties, then parliamentary statutes (loi), then government regulations. Legislation enacted by orders (ordonnances) and regulations issued by the executive under Art. 38 of the constitution (Règlements autonomes) have the same status as parliamentary statutes.

European Union treaties and EU law enacted under the authority of EU treaties are superior to domestic law. French courts consider the French Constitution to be superior to international treaties, including EU treaties and EU law. This is in contrast to EU institutions, which sees EU law as superior to the laws of member states.

There are several categories of legislation:

By contrast, administrative circulaires are not law, but merely instructions by government ministries. Circulaires are nonetheless important in guiding public officials and judges. For example, the Circulaire of 14 May 1993 contains detailed instructions for prosecutors and judges on how to apply new rules in the 1992 revised criminal code. Circularies are not considered sources of law in private courts, but are sometimes considered binding in administrative courts. As such, the binding circulaires règlementaires are reviewed like other administrative acts, and can be found illegal if they contravene a parliamentary statute.

Case law (la jurisprudence) is not binding and is not an official source of law, although it has been de facto highly influential. French courts have recognized their role in gradually shaping the law through judicial decisions, and the fact that they develop judicial doctrine, especially through jurisprudence constante (a consistent set of case law). There is no law prohibiting the citation of precedents and lower courts often do. Although the highest courts, the Court of Cassation and the Council of State do not cite precedents in their decisions, previous cases are prominent in arguments of the ministère public and the commissaire du gouvernement, in draft opinions, and in internal files.

Some areas of French law even primarily consist of case law. For example, tort liability in private law is primarily elaborated by judges, from only five articles (articles 1382–1386) in the Civil Code. Scholars have suggested that, in these fields of law, French judges are creating law much like common law judges. Case law is also the primary source for principles in French administrative law. Many of the Constitutional Council 's decisions are critical for understanding French constitutional law.

The differences between French case law and case law in common law systems appear to be: (1) it is not cited in the highest courts; (2) lower courts are theoretically free to depart from higher courts, although they risk their decisions being overturned; and (3) courts must not solely cite case law as a basis of decision in the absence of a recognized source of law.

French judicial decisions, especially in its highest courts, are written in a highly laconic and formalist style, incomprehensible to non-lawyers. While judges do consider practical implications and policy debates, they are not at all reflected in the written decision. This has led scholars to criticize the courts for being overly formalistic and even disingenuous, for maintaining the facade of judges only interpreting legal rules and arriving at deductive results.

Following the example of the Napoleonic Civil Code, French legal codes aim to set out authoritatively and logically the principles and rules in an area of law. In theory, codes should go beyond the compilation of discrete statues, and instead state the law in a coherent and comprehensive piece of legislation, sometimes introducing major reforms or starting anew.

There are about 78 legal codes in France currently in force, which deal with both the French public and private law categorically. These codes are published for free by the French government on a website called Légifrance.

In 1989, the French government set up the Commission Supérieure de Codification, tasked with codifying laws. The Commission has worked with ministries to introduce new codes and codify existing legislation. Unlike the transformative Civil Code under Napoleon, the goal of the modern codification project is to clarify and make more accessible statutes in by compiling one code in a particular area of law and remove contradictions. Despite this, areas very often overlap and codes necessarily cannot contain all of the law in a given field.

In the High Middle Ages, most legal situations in France were highly local, regulated by customs and practices in local communities. Historians tend to be attracted by the large regional or urban customs, rather than local judicial norms and practices. Beginning in the 12th century, Roman law emerged as a scholarly discipline, initially with professors from Bologna starting to teach the Justinian Code in southern France and in Paris. Despite this, Roman law was largely academic and disconnected from application, especially in the north.

Historians traditionally mark a distinction between Pays de droit écrit in southern France and the Pays de droit coutumier in the north. In the south, it was thought that Roman law had survived, whereas in the north it had been displaced by customs after the Germanic conquest. Historians now tend to think that Roman law was more influential on the customs of southern France due to its medieval revival. By the 13th century, there would be explicit recognition of using Roman law in the south of France, justified by the understanding of a longstanding tradition of using Roman law in the custom of southern France. In the North, private and unofficial compilations of local customs in different regions began to emerge in the 13th and 14th centuries. These compilations were often drafted by judges who needed to decide cases based on unwritten customs, and the authors often incorporated Roman law, procedures from canon law, royal legislation and parliamentary decisions.

In the early modern period, laws in France gradually went through unification, rationalization, and centralization. After the Hundred Years War, French kings began to assert authority over the kingdom in a quest of institutional centralization. Through the creation of a centralized absolute monarchy, an administrative and judicial system under the king also emerged by the second half of the fifteenth century. Royal legislation also greatly increased beginning in the 15th century.

The Ordinance of Montils-les-Tours (1454) [ fr ] was an important juncture in this period, as it ordered the official recording and homologation of customary law. Customs would be compiled by local practitioners and approved by local assemblies of the three estates, with disagreements resolved by the central court. At the time, the wholesale adoption of Roman law and the ius commune would be unrealistic, as the king’s authority was insufficient to impose a unified legal system in all French provinces. In the process of recording, local customs were sometimes simplified or reformed. By the 16th century, around sixty general customs were recorded and given official status, disqualifying any unrecorded customs from having official status. Roman law remained as a reserve, to be used for argumentation and to supplement customary law.

Accompanying the process of centralization and mercantilism, the king effectively initiated processes of codification [ fr ] in the mid 17th century. Jean-Baptiste Colbert, the Minister of Finance and later also Secretary of the Navy in charge of the colonial empire and trade, was main architect of the codes. The first of such codes is the 1667 Ordinance of Civil Procedure (officially known as the Ordonnance pour la reformation de la justice), which established clear and uniform procedural rules, replacing previous rules in all royal jurisdictions and in the colonies. The 1667 Ordinance is the main inspiration of the Code de procedure civile passed in 1806 under Napoleon. Other codes include the 1670 Criminal Ordinance, the 1673 Ordinance for Overland Trade (Code Marchand), and the 1681 Ordinance for Maritime Trade (Code de la Marine). Ordinances would later be drawn up on Donations (1731), Wills (1735), Falsifications (1737), and Trustees (1747), but a unified code of private law would not be passed until 1804, under Napoleon and after the French Revolution. Under King Louis XV, there would be a constant struggle between royal legislation, traditional conceptions of the law of the Realm (customs and Roman law), and parliamentary arrêts de règlements (regulatory decisions). Judges sided with the local parliaments (judicial bodies in France) and the landed aristocracy, undermining royal authority and legislation.

Even before the French Revolution, French enlightenment thinkers like Jean-Jacques Rousseau, with a theory of natural rights, and especially Montesquieu, who advocated for a separation of powers, were major influences on the law throughout Europe and the United States.

The French legal system underwent great changes after the French Revolution beginning in 1789, which swept away the old regime. By 1790, the National Constituent Assembly overhauled the country’s judicial system. A Penal Code would be adopted by 1791. The Civil Code (1804), the Code of Civil Procedure (1806), and the Commercial Code (1807) were adopted under Napoleon, reflecting Roman law, pre-revolutionary ordinances and custom, scholarly legal writings, enlightenment ideas, and Napoleon's personal vision of the law. These codes consisted of numbered articles, were written in elegant French, and were meant to be understood by the layman. In addition, they introduced many classically liberal reforms, such as abolishing remaining feudal institutions and establishing rights of personality, property and contract for all male French citizens.

However, not all the old regime's law were repleted, the articles 110 and 111 of the 1539 Ordinance of Villers-Cotterêts being the oldest still in use in the French legislation.

The term civil law in France refers to private law (laws between private citizens, and should be distinguished from the group of legal systems descended from Roman Law known as civil law, as opposed to common law.

France follows an inquisitorial model, where the judge leads the proceedings and the gathering of evidence, acting in the public interest to bring out the truth of a case. This is contrasted with the adversarial model often seen in common law countries, where parties in the case play a primary role in the judicial process. In French civil cases, one party has the burden of proof, according to law, but both sides and the judge together gather and provide evidence. There is no strict standard of proof in civil cases, like the preponderance of the evidence under American law; instead, primacy is given to the judge's intime conviction, based on the principle of "free evaluation of the evidence."

The court gathers a dossier of pleadings, statements of fact and evidence from the parties and makes it available to them. Proceedings focus on written evidence and written argument, with brief hearings. Witness testimonies are uncommon. The ministère public, an independent judicial official, sometimes plays an advisory role in civil proceedings. In principle, the first level of appellate court reviews questions of both fact and law, and it is able to do so because of the dossier. It can also order additional investigations and production of evidence. The Court of Cassation (highest civil appellate court) generally only decides questions of law and remands the case for further proceedings.

French criminal law is governed first and foremost by the Criminal code and the Code of criminal procedure. The Criminal Code, for example, prohibits violent offenses such as homicide, assault and many pecuniary offenses such as theft or money laundering, and provides general sentencing guidelines. However, a number of criminal offenses, e.g., slander and libel, have not been codified but are instead addressed by separate statutes.

After a crime occurs, the police make initial investigations. The prosecutor (procureur) or, in some serious cases, the juge d’instruction then control or supervise the police investigation and decide whether to prosecute. Unlike common law countries and many civil law countries, French prosecutors are members of the judicial branch. Issuing arrest warrants or formally questioning the accused or witnesses must receive judicial approval, but decisions on searches and phone-tapping are often delegated to the police because of limited judicial resources. There are also simplified procedures for crimes in flagrante delicto and crimes relating to terrorism and drugs.

Other judges then preside at the criminal trial, typically without a jury. However, the most serious cases tried by the cour d’assises (a branch of the Court of Appeal) involve three judges and nine jurors who jointly determine the verdict and sentencing. Like civil proceedings, criminal proceedings focus on written evidence and written argument, although witnesses are usually also heard orally. Judges or prosecutors order independent experts for the proceeding, if necessary. One appeal can be made on questions of fact and law, save for decisions of the cour d’assises. Appeals may also be made to the Court of Cassation on questions of law. Other judges (the juge de l’application des peines) supervise the sentence and deal with parole.

Public law is concerned with the powers and organization of the state and governmental bodies.

French constitutional law includes not only the Constitution itself, but also its preamble which incorporates a list of norms known as bloc de constitutionnalité, including the " Freedom of Association " provision of the Conseil Constitutionnel.

The Constitutional Council (Conseil Constitutionnel) has the exclusive authority to judge the constitutionality of parliamentary statutes. Although originally conceived as a political body, it is now seen much like a judicial one. The President, Prime Minister, the presidents of both houses of Parliament, and a group of 60 members from either of the two houses may refer bills or treaties to the Constitutional Council. In addition, when individuals allege that their constitutional rights are infringed by legislation in a court proceeding, the Court of Cassation or the Council of State may refer the matter to the Constitutional Council for a ruling on its constitutionality.

In France, most claims against local or national governments are handled by the administrative courts, for which the Conseil d'État (Council of State) is a court of last resort. The main administrative courts are the tribunaux administratifs [ fr ] and their appeal courts [ fr ]. The French body of administrative law is called droit administratif. Administrative procedure were originally developed by case law but have been statutorily affirmed in the Code de justice administrative in 2000.

French administrative law focuses on proper functioning of government and the public good, rather than constraining the government. French public bodies include governments and public organizations or enterprises, subject to different sets of rules, with both privileges and additional limitations compared to private actors. Public bodies have tremendous powers, including police powers (pouvoirs de police) to regulate public health or public order, and to expropriate property. Public bodies must exercise their powers in the public interest, according to principles such as continuity of services (which has been used to limit the power to strike), adaptability (changing in accordance with external circumstances), equality and neutrality (in relation to, e.g. one's religion or political beliefs).

All acts must have a legal basis (base légale), follow the right procedure (sometimes including right to a hearing), and done with a purpose to further public interest. The court also reviews facts (including subjective judgments based on facts, like the architectural value of a building), and interpret the law. There are also three levels of scrutiny, namely:

Recourses provided by the court include damages, setting aside contracts, amending contracts, quashing an administrative decision, or interpret the law (only available to the Council of State, although lower courts may refer questions to it). Different procedures exist depending on the recourse sought. Injunctions are rare but can be issued in certain procedures (référés).

Certain executive measures, known as actes de gouvernement, are not subject to judicial review. Examples include the President’s decisions to resume nuclear testing, suspend financial aid to Iraq, dissolve the National Assembly, award honors, or grant amnesty. Other nonjusticiable acts include certain internal affairs of government ministries (Mesures d’ordre interne), e.g. the decision to alter the frequency of services, unless doing so is against the law.

Before judicial recourse, one may request administrative appeals (recours préalable) by the official or his superior, although they are of limited use. Legal aid is available like in civil and criminal cases, although lawyers are unnecessary in many cases because under the French inquisitorial legal system, judges have primary control of cases after their introduction. All administrative decisions must be challenged within two months of their being taken and no waiver is possible for lapses.

To begin a case, an individual only need to write a letter to describe his identity, the grounds of challenging the decision, and the relief sought, and provide a copy of the administrative action; legal arguments are unnecessary in the initial stage. A court rapporteur will gather information (he has the power to request documents from the public body), compile written arguments from both sides, and request expert assessments if necessary. The files and the rapporteur's recommendations are transferred to a Commissaire du gouvernement, who also makes his own recommendations to the judges. Written evidence is relied upon and oral hearings are extremely short. After the hearing, judges deliberate and issue their judgement, in which they will briefly respond to parties' arguments.

Standing requirements in French administrative law are relatively lax. Although merely being a taxpayer is insufficient, those affected in a "special, certain and direct" manner (including moral interests) will have standing. In addition, users of public service can generally challenge decisions on those services. Associations can also have standing in some circumstances.

The French Constitution specifically authorizes France's participation in the European Union (EU), an economic and political union with many legal powers. The Constitution has also been amended, as required by the Constitutional Council, to allow EU citizens to participate in municipal elections and the monetary union. EU treaties and EU law enacted under the treaties are considered international treaties, and the Constitution gives them superior status compared to domestic legislation. Ordinary civil and administrative courts, not the Constitutional Council, determine the compatibility of French law with EU law.

French courts consider the French Constitution itself to be superior to international treaties, including EU treaties and EU law. This is in contrast to EU institutions, which sees EU law as superior to the laws of member states. However, the Constitutional Council would only examine statutes implementing EU directives where it was manifestly contrary to French constitutional principles.

The European Union adopts laws on the basis of EU treaties. The Treaties establish the EU's institutions, list their powers and responsibilities, and explain the areas in which the EU can legislate with Directives or Regulations. European Union laws are a body of rules which are transposed either automatically (in the case of a regulation) or by national legislation (in the case of a directive) into French domestic law, whether in civil, criminal, administrative or constitutional law. The Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) is the main judicial body of EU laws. The EU's view is that if EU law conflicts with a provision of national law, then EU law has primacy ; the view has been gradually accepted by French courts.

French courts go by a number of names, including juridiction, tribunal, and cour. The Constitutional Council and Council of State are nominally councils but de facto courts. French courts are often specialized, with separate public law and private law courts, and subject matter specific courts like general civil and criminal courts, employment, commercial and agricultural lease courts. Judges are typically professional civil servants, mostly recruited through exams and trained at the École Nationale de la Magistrature. There are also non-professional judges, typically in less serious civil or administrative cases.

In public law cases, a public body, such as the national government, local authorities, public agencies, and public services like universities to railways, are always a party in dispute. Public bodies are subject to different rules on their power, contract, employment and liabilities. Instead of rules in the Civil Code and Commercial Code, administrative law statutes and principles developed by the Council of State are applied. Private law disputes between individuals or private entities are heard in civil courts. The Tribunal des conflits resolves questions of appropriate court jurisdiction.

The Council of State (Conseil d’État) is the highest court in administrative law and also the legal advisor of the executive branch. It originated from the King’s Privy Council, which adjudicated disputes with the state, which is exempt from other courts because of sovereign immunity. The Council of State hears appeals on questions of law from lower courts and gives advisory opinions on the law on reference from lower courts. It also decides at first instance the validity of legislative or administrative decisions of the President, the Prime Minister, and certain senior civil servants.

There are 42 lower administrative courts and 8 administrative courts of appeal, which hears appeals on fact and law. Administrative courts can enforce their decisions by ordonnance to the public body. In addition to generalist administrative courts, there are special administrative courts on asylum, social welfare payments, the disciplinary organs of professional bodies, and courts that audit public bodies and local governments. Administrative court judges are selected separately from other judges.

The Court of Cassation (Cour de cassation) is the highest court and the only national court on civil and criminal matters. It has six chambers, five civil chambers: (i) on contract, (ii) on delict, (iii) on family matters, (iv) on commercial matters, (v) on social matters: labour and social security law; and (vi) on criminal law. The court has 85 conseillers, 39 junior conseillers réferendaires, and 18 trainee auditeurs. It typically hears cases in three or five judge panels. A chambre mixte (a large panel of senior judges) or plenary session (Assemblée plénière) can convoke to resolve conflicts or hear important cases. In 2005, it decided over 26,000 cases. The Court of Cassation also gives advisory opinions on the law on reference from lower courts.

At the appellate level, there are 36 Courts of Appeal (cour d’appel), with jurisdiction on appeals in civil and criminal matters. A Court of Appeal will usually have specialist chambers on civil, social, criminal, and juvenile matters. The cour d’appel deals with questions of fact and law based on files from lower courts, and has the power to order additional investigations.

As for courts of first instance, there are 164 tribunaux de grande instance (civil courts for large claims, family matters, nationality, property and patents) and 307 tribunaux d’instance (civil courts for medium-sized claims). Separate commercial courts deal with commercial matters at the first instance, with lay judges elected by the local chamber of commerce. For criminal matters, the tribunal de police, the juges de proximité, the tribunal correctionnel and the cour d’assises hear criminal cases, depending on their seriousness. The cour d’assises is a branch of the Court of Appeal, which hears at first instance the most serious criminal cases. In criminal trials heard by the cour d’assises, three judges and nine jurors together determine the verdict and sentencing. Criminal and civil courts are connected and typically co-located, despite criminal law being a branch of public law.

The Constitutional Council (Conseil constitutionnel) was created in 1958 with exclusive authority to judge the constitutionality of parliamentary statutes. The President may refer a bill in Parliament to the Constitutional Council for constitutional review. The Prime Minister, the presidents of both houses of Parliament, and a group of 60 members from either of the two houses may also refer bills or treaties to the Constitutional Council. In addition, under Art. 61–1 of the Constitution, beginning in 2008, when individuals allege that their constitutional rights are infringed by legislation in a court proceeding, the Court of Cassation or the Council of State may refer the matter to the Constitutional Council for a preliminary ruling on its constitutionality. The Constitutional Council has nine members: three are appointed by the President, three by the head of the National Assembly, and three by the head of the Senate. Members of the Constitutional Council do not necessarily have legal or judicial training; former French Presidents who retired from politics are eligible to join the Constitutional Council if they wish.

Lawyers (avocats) are licensed via two routes in France. The most common one is the educational route via a licence de droit and a Master 1 in law, followed by the bar exam and 18 months of training at a bar school (one of fifteen Écoles d'avocats, EDAs). The second, less common route is the professional route. Candidates that hold specific diplomas can join an EDA without sitting the entrance examination (for example, PhD students), or qualify as a lawyer by directly sitting the final exam.

The Law of Three Years was a French law passed in 1913 to increase the length of military service from two to three years, in order to prepare the French army for a possible war with Germany, which would occur the following year and become World War I.

Since the Tangier crisis (1905) and the Agadir crisis (1911), conflict appeared increasingly inevitable in the eyes of some public opinion, while the nationalist right and part of the republican left demanded revenge against the victor of 1870. Nevertheless, a whole section of the left, from the Radical Socialists to the SFIO, opposed it, in the name of antimilitarism and diplomatic negotiations with Germany to ward off the threat of war. The law was thus one of the major debates of 1913.

The bill had first seen the light of day under the Briand cabinet. Once this was overthrown, it was reintroduced by the Barthou government, with the support of the President of the Republic, Raymond Poincaré.

While the SFIO socialists were opposed to the law, the radical Senator Clemenceau supported it. Although far removed from revanchism, he had been particularly concerned about the outbreak of war with Germany since the Tangier crisis of 1905. In his newspaper L'Homme libre [ fr ], he constantly warned public opinion of the danger posed by the German threat (“ Pour la défense nationale ”, May 21, 1913; “ Vouloir ou mourir ”, May 24; “ Ni défendus ni gouvernés ”, July 15, etc.).

On May 23, 1913, Poincaré received Clemenceau at the Élysée Palace : this sign was intended for the Chamber of Deputies, warning that if it overthrew the government, Clemenceau, rather than Joseph Caillaux, would be appointed President of the Council. L'Humanité got angry, and published a cartoon mocking the reconciliation between these two adversaries.

SFIO deputy and pacifist Jean Jaurès was resolutely opposed to the law, relying on workers' internationalism to prevent the outbreak of war, while preferring a diplomatic and long-term solution for Alsace-Lorraine. On May 25, 1913, the SFIO organized a demonstration against the law at Le Pré-Saint-Gervais, attended by between 70,000 (according to Clemenceau 's L'Homme libre) and 150,000 (according to L'Humanité), with dozens of speakers, including Jaurès. At the time, antimilitarism was widely shared on the left, partly because of the constant use of the French armed forces to suppress strikes (Draveil in 1908, Languedoc in 1907, etc.). Jaurès defended an alternative proposal, aimed at setting up citizen militias (see below).

When conscripts of the 1911 class learned that their time of service was to be extended by a year without delay, discontent was rife. From Toul to Rodez, a wave of unrest swept through French barracks between May 18 and 24. Soldiers protested, sang The Internationale, jostled officers and sometimes tried to leave the barracks collectively.

General Paul Pau, in charge of the investigation, attributed this movement to the anti-militarist action of the CGT and anarchists, who strongly opposed the new law. What followed was a wave of searches and arrests in revolutionary circles, the imprisonment of some twenty CGT leaders and a trial in early 1914. Some, like linguist Paul Passy, founder of the Union of Christian socialists, lost their professorships because of their involvement in the protest campaign.

The bill was debated in the Chamber of Deputies from June 2, 1913. It was passed on July 19, 1913, by 358 votes to 204, with the support of the Right wing against two-thirds of the Radical-Socialist deputies and the SFIO. The bill was then debated in the Senate, from July 31 to August 7, at a time when the Balkans were at war again. With Paul Doumer as rapporteur, the Senate voted overwhelmingly in favor.

Other proposals were discarded: some advocated 30 months' service rather than 36, or even 20 months (Louis Briquet's proposal), while Jaurès advocated a kind of militia theory, close to the Swiss example : 18 months' service, one day of exercise per month for young people aged 17 to 21, two days of maneuvers for reservists per trimester, and, from October 1916, one year's service, then six months in October 1918.

The repeal of the Law of Three Years was one of the themes of the April-May 1914 legislative campaign.

The Law increased the number of French soldiers from 480,000 to 750,000, while the German army was 850,000 strong. New regiments were created, such as the 49th artillery regiment. Armament, however, remained old-fashioned.

Conservative Catholic deputy Albert de Mun, committed defender of the law, joined the Finance Committee to defend its application, supporting the plan to borrow 1,400 million francs for this purpose.

Law No. 2000-1208 of December 13, 2000, on Solidarity and Urban Renewal (SRU Law), is a French statute that significantly reformed urban planning and housing policy. Enacted under the government of Lionel Jospin and introduced by Minister of Infrastructure and Housing [ fr ] Jean-Claude Gayssot, it was published in the Journal Officiel on December 14, 2000.

The law’s most notable provision, Article 55—codified in Articles L. 302-5 and subsequent sections of the Code de la Construction et de l’Habitation [ fr ] (CCH)—requires certain large municipalities to maintain a minimum proportion of social housing. It applies to municipalities with more than 1,500 inhabitants in the Île-de-France region and more than 3,500 inhabitants elsewhere, located within an urban area of over 50,000 inhabitants that includes at least one municipality of more than 15,000 inhabitants. These municipalities must ensure that at least 20% of their housing stock consists of social housing, a rate increased to 25% by the law of January 18, 2013, on the mobilization of public land for housing and the strengthening of social housing production obligations, known as the Duflot I Law.

The SRU Law of December 13, 2000, resulted from a national debate launched in 1999 under the theme “Living, Moving… Living the City,” which emphasized the need for better coordination between urban planning and transportation policies within a sustainable development framework. Six debates, held in Orléans, Perpignan, Nîmes, Lille, Dijon, and Lyon, brought together between 60 and 80 participants, including residents, experts, and representatives of administrative bodies such as the General Council of Bridges and Highways, DATAR, the Interministerial Delegation for the City [ fr ], and various prefectures. Several government ministers also took part, including Jean-Claude Gayssot, Louis Besson, Dominique Voynet, and Jean-Pierre Chevènement. The discussions addressed the expansion of urban areas beyond their traditional boundaries, the challenges faced by historic city centers, and the growing demand for modern transport infrastructure. They concluded that addressing generational, geographic, and social divides was essential to fostering greater cohesion within urban environments.

It also introduced the concepts of environmental protection and urban management in the public interest, in favor of sustainable development.

The SRU Law had an impact in five areas: urban planning law, social diversity, transportation, social landlords, and civil law.

Several associations and elected officials, primarily from left-leaning political groups, have proposed making mayors who fail to comply with the SRU Law’s social housing requirements ineligible for re-election. They argue that noncompliance can weaken national and regional housing solidarity and contribute to the spatial concentration of disadvantaged populations in certain urban areas.

The provisions known as “Article 55 of the SRU Law” correspond to Articles L. 302-5 to L. 302-9-2 of the French Construction and Housing Code. These articles were established or amended by Article 55 of the SRU Law and by several subsequent legislative measures.

At the end of January 2006, the National Assembly modified the social housing provisions through the adoption of an amendment proposed by Patrick Ollier and Gérard Hamel during the first reading of the National Commitment for Housing bill [ fr ] (ENL Law). This amendment allowed certain social homeownership programs to be counted as social housing. The Senate later removed these measures in early April 2006.

On May 30, 2006, during the second reading of the ENL bill in the National Assembly, Patrick Ollier introduced another amendment aimed at adjusting the 20% social housing requirement for 740 municipalities, with the stated purpose of facilitating access to homeownership.

Article 55 of the SRU Law was amended by Article 65 of the National Commitment for Housing Law of July 13, 2006.

The implementation of measures by the National Urban Renewal Agency [ fr ] (ANRU), introduced through the Social Cohesion Law [ fr ] (commonly referred to as the Borloo Law [ fr ]), modified the incentives established by the SRU Law by permitting municipalities within the same urban community to transfer portions of their social housing obligations from one municipality to another.

On July 10, 2008, Christine Boutin presented her housing access bill. The Boutin Bill, which sought to relax the SRU Law, outlined four main priorities:

Following parliamentary debate and revisions, the bill was enacted as Law No. 2009-323 of March 25, 2009, on Mobilization for Housing and the Fight against Exclusion, commonly referred to as the Molle Law or Boutin Law.

Article 123 of this law, which required transport authorities to provide half-price tickets to individuals with incomes below a social security–defined threshold, was codified under Article L1113-1 of the Transport Code.

Article 10 of the Law of January 18, 2013, known as the Duflot I Law—concerning the mobilization of public land for housing and the strengthening of obligations for social housing production—raised the minimum social rental housing requirement from 20% to 25%.

In 2008, among 730 municipalities with less than 20% social housing, 330 did not meet their construction targets.

The 2014–2016 report indicated that cumulative catch-up targets for municipalities subject to the SRU system were exceeded, reaching 188,587 housing units, or 106% of the total objectives. However, of the 1,152 municipalities under the system, 649 did not achieve the production levels mandated by law, and more than 200 municipalities were recommended for deficiency proceedings.

In January 2025, Frédéric Vassy, mayor of Châteauneuf-sur-Isère, announced his resignation, citing the difficulty of reaching the 25% social housing target. He noted that the municipality includes a protected agricultural zone [ fr ] (ZAP), where social housing construction is prohibited, and reported that the municipality paid annual fines of approximately 80,000 euros for not meeting the quotas.

According to the Regional Housing Committee, 44% of municipalities in Île-de-France (83 out of 181) did not meet the SRU law requirement of 20% social housing for the 2005–2007 period. Seventy-seven of these municipalities were subject to potential increased fines following a “deficiency order,” with the amount determined by the gap between the number of social housing units built and the number required.

Among the municipalities with the largest shortfalls were Neuilly-sur-Seine (Hauts-de-Seine), which completed 378 of 774 required units (48.8%), Le Raincy (Seine-Saint-Denis) at 26.7%, and Lésigny (Seine-et-Marne).

The 25% social housing rate required by law applies to primary residences and is expected to be reached by 2025. The Alpes-Maritimes department, along with Paris and the Paris region, is classified as a “high-pressure zone” in metropolitan France due to the shortage of social housing, with 27 out of 36 municipalities not meeting their obligations. Similarly, in the Var department, where the average social housing rate is 9%, 20 of the 24 municipalities also fail to comply. This local situation has been highlighted by regional media, such as the satirical newspaper Le Ravi [ fr ], which in its “annual ranking of cities to avoid” uses the proportion of social housing as one of its indicators. According to this ranking, municipalities with fewer social housing units are considered less desirable, which tends to penalize cities in the eastern part of the region.

Departmental prefectures have established criteria under which municipalities can avoid paying fines, as provided by law. As a result, the application of penalties appears uneven. For example, in the Alpes-Maritimes, Antibes, with a social housing rate of 9.69%, pays nearly €826,000 in penalties, while Cagnes-sur-Mer, at 6.39%, pays none. Menton, with 8.82%, is declared deficient, whereas Nice, at 12.67%, is not considered deficient and incurs no penalty. Conversely, Carros, with a rate of 22.49%, pays over €36,000 in fines. In the Var, Toulon, with a completion rate of 15.41%, is considered exempt from any levy and does not incur financial sanctions.

After twenty years of implementation, approximately half of the 1.8 million new social housing units constructed since the SRU law came into force were built in municipalities subject to the law. However, 600,000 units are still required for all municipalities to meet their obligations by 2025. During the 2017–2019 period, of the 1,035 municipalities subject to the requirement, 485 met their quantitative and qualitative targets, while 550 did not. Overall, the total number of social housing units built during this period exceeded the combined municipal targets, as some municipalities surpassed their goals.

According to the newspaper Le Monde, the SRU law has not succeeded in integrating wealthy and low-income households within the same neighborhoods. Citing the Institute for Advanced Studies in Housing Action (Idheal), it notes that while the law improved the geographical distribution of social housing across urban municipalities, it did not reduce income disparities between neighborhoods or reverse the broader trend of increasing segregation between areas of wealth and poverty.

Geographer Grégoire Fauconnier, who authored a doctoral thesis on the subject, considers that the SRU law contributed to increasing social housing construction in municipalities that previously had little, but that the social diversity intended by the legislation has not been fully achieved due to practices that circumvent its objectives. His conclusions are consistent with those of other researchers. In 2006, Philippe Subra and Didier Desponds highlighted implementation challenges arising from the opposition of local officials and residents. Political scientist Fabien Desage observed that mayors of municipalities subject to the law often construct social housing only after ensuring control over the allocation process, prioritizing households from their own municipality. Such practices limit the law’s intended desegregation effects.

The Law on the fight against terrorism (French : Loi relative à la lutte contre le terrorisme), abbreviated LCT, is a 2006 French counter-terrorism legislation designed to improve state security and strengthen border control. The legislation was passed on 23 January 2006 under the leadership of Nicolas Sarkozy, then the Minister of the Interior. Notably the law increased punitive measures for criminal association and gave the government more power to access personal information online.

After the 2005 London bombings perpetrated by Islamic extremists, Sarkozy pushed to strengthen counter-terrorism measures in France. Sarkozy introduced the bill in the French Senate on 28 October 2005, saying that while France had never yielded to terrorist intimidation and never would, the rise in global terrorism necessitated change in policy.

The legislation amended several previous criminal codes, including the first French counter-terrorism law, introduced in 1986. The 2006 act particularly increased the breadth of government surveillance without judicial control.

The law was criticized for encroaching on personal freedoms and liberties, in particular, accessing phone and Internet data without a signed warrant from a judicial authority. "Internet surveillance has now escaped from any legal proceedings to be placed under the direct control of the state," criticized Le Monde.

The Law on the Freedom of the Press of 29 July 1881 (French : Loi sur la liberté de la presse du 29 juillet 1881), often called the Press Law of 1881 or the Lisbonne Law after its rapporteur, Eugène Lisbonne [ fr ], is a law that defines the freedoms and responsibilities of the media and publishers in France. It provides a legal framework for publications and regulates the display of advertisements on public roads. Although it has been amended several times since its enactment, it remains in force to the present day.

It is often regarded as the foundational legal statement on freedom of the press and freedom of speech in France, inspired by Article 11 of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 26 August 1789. At the same time, the law imposes legal obligations on publishers and criminalises certain specific behaviours (called "press offences"), particularly concerning defamation.

The Press Law was passed under the French Third Republic in 1881 by the then-dominant Opportunist Republicans who sought to liberalise the press and promote free public discussion. The new law swept away a swathe of earlier statutes, stating at the outset the principle that "Printing and publication are free".

Prior to 1881, French law had a complex and unclear set of laws that regulated public commentary. Slander was regulated by a thicket of jurisprudence that had grown during the century, and numerous laws had been enacted to regulate the press and public censorship at various points during the republican and monarchist regimes of the 19th century. In total, 42 different laws containing 325 separate clauses regulating the press were in force, having been passed over a period of 75 years by ten different governments. Slander against public officials attacked in their public functions was criminalised under a law of 1819, but by 1880 the distinction between private and public affronts had become far from clear. The free exercise of published speech was further limited by onerous requirements to obtain prior authorisation from the government and deposit a sum of "caution money".

In place of the confusing mass of legislation that preceded it, the Press Law established a number of basic principles. Publishing was liberalised, with the law requiring only that publishers present their names to the authorities and deposit two copies of every work. The authorities were denied the power to suppress newspapers and the offence of délits d'opinion (crimes of opinion, or types of prohibited speech) was abolished. This had previously enabled prosecutions of critics of the government, monarchy and church, or of those who argued for controversial ideas on property rights. The scope of libel was severely reduced, with the criteria for defamation being much more tightly defined. A limited number of "press offences" was retained, including outraging public morals, and insulting high-ranking public officials including the President of the Republic, heads of foreign states and ambassadors. The law also provided a right of reply for persons to respond to articles in which they were featured.

In addition, the law regulates advertising and permits property owners to forbid the posting of advertisements on their properties. References to the law are frequently seen on French walls where signs proclaim "Defense d'afficher - loi du 29 Juillet 1881" ("posters forbidden - law of 29 July 1881").

One of the most important reforms instituted by the Press Law was a major reduction in the previously extensive range of activities deemed libelous. Libel is defined concisely as "any allegation or imputation of fact striking a blow at the honour or the consideration of a person or a body to which that fact is imputed." It is generally possible to defend oneself from a libel accusation by demonstrating that the libelous facts are true, though this is not accepted in all cases.

An insult (injures) is defined as "an outrageous express, terms of despise or invectives that do not charge any fact to the insulted person."

As originally enacted, the law distinguished between levels of offence and between public officials and private citizens. Defamation of private citizens was treated far less seriously than that of injuring public officials; defaming a man in his public capacity could be punished by a year's imprisonment and a fine of 3,000 francs, while injuring a private citizen could cost as little as 18 francs or six days in prison.

Any statement made in parliament, judicial tribunals or (by implication) administrative councils was exempted from punishment, thereby immunising public officials from liability for slandering colleagues. The law also included differing requirements for protecting public and private individuals. Courts were required to determine the truth of slanderous accusations against public officials, but where private citizens were the victims of slander the law directed magistrates to assess only the degree of offence contained in the slander, specifically forbidding investigation into the truth of the charges. The intention of the legislators was essentially to protect the personal privacy of the accused party.

As enacted, the Press Law's scope was defined as covering "the press, printing, book sales, periodical press, posters, retailing, street sales, crimes, offences, prosecutions, punishment, and temporary provisions." It applies to statements made publicly, whether through oral or printed means. In recent years, French courts have repeatedly ruled that the law also applies to defamatory content communicated via the World Wide Web.

The law provides a number of defences, particularly when reporting on matters of public interest or concern. Truth of the defamatory statement is available as a defence in most libel cases other than those concerning the privacy of the plaintiff. Where privacy is infringed, truth is not an absolute defence, though some latitude is permitted if the plaintiff is a public figure. A plea of good faith is permitted by the courts in circumstances where the issues at stake concern matters of public interest. A defendant may be acquitted on that basis if the court is satisfied that the defendant has carried out at least a basic verification of the source of the information on which the defamatory statement is based.

Some of the more liberal aspects of the 1881 law were overturned in 1944 following the Liberation of France, when new restrictions were introduced on press ownership (with the intention of preventing the concentration of ownership) and greater transparency was introduced in a newspaper's finances and direction.

Racially defamatory comments and incitement to racial hatred were criminalised when the law was amended first by the Marchandeau Decree of 1939 (repealed in 1940 by the Vichy government, reinstated in 1944), then by the Pleven Law of 1 July 1972. The French parliament further amended the Press Law in 2004 to make it a crime to discriminate against or defame individuals on the basis of their sexual orientation. Such offences are punished by jail terms of between six months and a year and a fine of between €22,500 and €45,000.

The passage of the law had an immediate effect, promoting a rapid expansion in the size and range of the French mass media. In 1872, 3,800 periodical publications were published in France; a decade later, aided by the freedoms granted in 1881, that figure had expanded to 6,000. The citizens of Paris found their choice of newspapers expanding from 23 in 1881 to 60 by 1899. By 1914, a total of 309 daily newspapers were being published in France, with four of those dailies - Le Petit Journal, Le Petit Parisien, Le Journal and Le Matin - selling a million copies every day.

The liberalisation of the law of defamation had a less positive effect, enabling an upsurge in personal innuendo and vague allegations. The sociologist Gabriel Tarde commented that "Pornography and slander have become the life-blood of the newspaper." French readers were treated to a daily diet of rumour, speculation and character assassination presented as "echos" and "faits divers". The French press became increasingly dominated by sensationalist and even malicious reporting as it abused the freedoms granted by the 1881 law to "slander and incite to violence with almost total impunity." The writer Émile Zola personified the mixed benefits of the freedom granted by the law. It enabled him to publish his famous denunciation J'accuse in the newspaper L'Aurore in 1898, something that would have been forbidden 20 years previously, but the torrent of lurid newspaper accusations against the unjustly imprisoned Alfred Dreyfus led Zola to denounce the press as being

The excessive liberalisation of the French press is held by some to have contributed to the "decadence" that crippled the Third Republic in the 1930s. Raymond Kuhn suggests that towards the end of the Third Republic in the late 1930s, abuses of the Press Law's freedoms "contribute[d] to the destabilisation of the political system when economic crisis and political scandal rocked the regime."

Law no. 2015-991 of August 7, 2015, on the new territorial organization of the Republic, better known by its acronym Loi NOTRe, is a French law that forms part of Act III of decentralization [ fr ], implemented during the presidency of François Hollande. The law primarily aims to strengthen the powers of regions and public establishments for inter-municipal cooperation [ fr ].

The law strengthened the powers of the regions through several measures, including transfers of powers from the départements, an increase in certain competencies, and an expansion of executive powers. Key provisions include the transfer of:

However, following the first reading by the two assemblies, the transfer of secondary schools and departmental roads was no longer envisaged, nor was social action.

Regarding economic development, the region would be responsible for drawing up a regional plan for economic development, innovation, and internationalization (SRDEII) [ fr ], which would have prescriptive value and define business support schemes. The other levels of local government would also be able to intervene, but only with the agreement of the region, or directly in cases specifically provided for by law. The départements would therefore no longer be able to intervene in this field, with certain exceptions such as loan guarantees for low-income housing organizations. These provisions would come into force on January 1, 2016 (Articles 2 and 3).

In the field of planning and sustainable development, the region would draw up a regional plan for planning, sustainable development, and territorial equality (SRADDET) [ fr ], which would have prescriptive value with regard to urban planning documents, such as the General Urban Ordinance Plan, and would replace existing plans in these fields (Articles 6 and 7).

In the field of tourism, which remains a competence shared between local authorities, the regions would be the lead agencies. They would draw up a regional tourism development plan, which would not be prescriptive in nature. These new provisions would come into force on January 1, 2016 (Article 4).

With intercity and school transport (excluding transport for disabled users) and departmental ports transferred to the regions, the role of the départements will be refocused on territorial and social solidarity.

The département would thus be able to implement any aid or action relating to the prevention or management of situations of fragility, social development, the care of young children, and personal autonomy. It would also be responsible for facilitating access to rights and services for the populations for which it is responsible.

It could provide financial support to communes, groups of communes, or établissement public de coopération intercommunale [ fr ] as part of their territorial projects. It could also contribute to the financing of investment operations in favor of commercial service companies required to meet the needs of the population in rural areas, for which the project is managed by communes or EPCIs for reasons of territorial solidarity and when private initiative is lacking or absent.

The law also provides for the transfer to metropolises of certain responsibilities in the social field, such as social assistance and tourism.

The law outlined the process for transferring specific state responsibilities, such as airports, to local authorities upon request. However, the state would retain control of key airfields essential for regional air services, international flights, and strategic interests, especially in French overseas departments. The airfields of Dijon - after the planned withdrawal of military activities - Montpellier, Nîmes, or Strasbourg, could thus be transferred.

As of January 1, 2017, intercommunalities must have at least 15,000 inhabitants, compared with 5,000 in 2014.

In response to the President's announcement, the Association de Intercommunalités de France [ fr ] points out that 1,507 communities out of the 2,145 existing public establishments for intercommunal cooperation - i.e. almost three-quarters of them - do not meet this threshold and would therefore have to change their boundaries.

New, more precise criteria including proposed derogations were proposed during the first reading of the law on March 10, 2015. The application of these criteria reduces the number of inter-communal cooperation establishments concerned by a possible grouping. However, more than half remain concerned, with strong regional disparities, as shown on the map produced by EDATER.

The text of the bill sets out the terms and conditions for the provision or transfer of State services or parts of services in charge of transferred competencies. Employees of the départements who participate in the exercise of powers transferred to the regions (or possibly, in the case of seaports and inland ports, to another local authority or grouping) will change employer without changing civil service or statutory framework. The text also reinforces employees' rights to supplementary social protection when they are transferred.

In response to requests from local elected representatives, amendments to the bill rewrote the provisions of the Loi de modernisation de l'action publique territoriale et d'affirmation des métropoles [ fr ] concerning the Greater Paris metropolis and the Aix-Marseille-Provence metropolis.

The merger of the two Corsican départements was first rejected by a referendum in 2003. Following a proposal by the Corsican assembly, supported by the government, the territorial collectivity of Corsica and the departmental councils of Haute-Corse and Corse-du-Sud were merged to form the collectivity of Corsica; since January 1, 2018, the powers of the president of the executive council of Corsica, in particular, have been extended.

Law no. 2015-29 of January 16, 2015, on the delimitation of regions provided for the possibility, between 2016 and 2019, for a département to change region after obtaining the approval of the 2 regional councils concerned as well as the département council by a 3/5ths majority.

The Law on transparency, the fight against corruption and the modernization of economic life (French : Loi relative à la transparence, à la lutte contre la corruption et à la modernisation de la vie économique), also known as the Sapin II law —named after the French Minister of the Economy at the time, Michel Sapin, who pushed it through in November 2016—is a French law aimed at fighting corruption, but which has been enriched by various measures from a wide range of other issues.

At the Council of Ministers meeting on March 30, 2016, the Minister of the Economy and Finance, Michel Sapin, presented the draft law on transparency, the fight against corruption, and the modernization of economic life. He claims that the law “will bring France up to the best international standards in the field of transparency and action against corruption.”

Several civil society organizations (Anticor, Attac, BLOOM, CCFD- Terre solidaire, Collectif Roosevelt, Justice et Paix, Observatoire Citoyen pour la Transparence Financière Internationale (OCTFI), ONE, Oxfam France, ActionAid France - Peuples Solidaires, Réseau Foi et Justice Afrique, Sherpa, Solidaires Finances Publiques and Syndicat de la magistrature) have issued their opinions on the “Sapin II” bill. They have published a joint deciphering note containing all their recommendations.

Parliamentary debate took place from May to November 2016. The law was subject to review by the Constitutional Council, which censured a provision aimed at forcing multinationals to make public information on their activities and taxation abroad but validated the rest of the text.

The law was passed in a context that some commentators saw as an economic war between the United States and other countries, mainly in Europe. This war would have been waged through a biased and extraterritorial application of US anti-corruption laws. Michel Sapin puts forward an entirely different analysis: “Justice and the judicial police lack the means. We end up with the current "not seen, not taken" situation. And other countries, such as the United States and Great Britain, are doing the punitive work for us. It's not good for our image or our sovereignty.

In certain international forums, notably at the OECD in 2012 and 2014, France was not considered a country that adequately applied its regulations to combat international corruption. The Sapin II law strengthens the French system in this area. This is a particular source of concern as “French companies are active on international markets and rank at the head of several sectors known to be exposed to high risks of corruption.”

The law establishes the French Anti-Corruption Agency (AFA), a national body reporting to the Minister of Justice and the Minister for the Budget, whose mission is to help the competent authorities and those who come into contact with them to prevent and detect breaches of probity: corruption, influence peddling, misappropriation of public funds and favoritism. The AFA has a wide range of skills, particularly in consulting and control, and is designed to become a key player in the French fight against corruption in the public and private sectors.

The Sapin II law introduces an obligation to prevent corruption, which is binding on managers and legal entities. This obligation, known as “compliance,” aims to prevent and detect acts of corruption, in France or abroad, for companies or groups whose parent company is headquartered in France, which have more than 500 employees and sales over 100 million euros.

Implementation of this obligation implies the adoption by the company of 8 measures: a code of conduct, an internal alert system, risk mapping, a procedure for assessing the situation of customers, first-tier suppliers and intermediaries, accounting control procedures, a training system for the most exposed managers and staff, a disciplinary system and an internal control and assessment system. The AFA checks “the existence, quality, and effectiveness of these various measures before any infringement and independently of investigations and prosecutions for acts of corruption.”

Based on the model of similar systems in other countries, such as the United States, the Sapin II Act introduces a Public Interest Judicial Agreement (CJIP). It enables the public prosecutor to propose that a legal entity implicated in corruption, influence peddling, or the laundering of certain tax fraud offenses enter into an agreement that replaces legal proceedings and enables disputes to be resolved more quickly. The effect is to extinguish public prosecution if the accused legal entity fulfills the obligations it has undertaken in the agreement.

The CJIP requires the company to implement a corruption prevention program. For a maximum period of three years, under the supervision of the AFA, the company must submit to a compliance program designed to ensure the existence and implementation of measures and procedures to prevent and detect corruption. It must also pay a fine to the Treasury, the amount of which must be set in proportion to the benefits derived from the breaches observed, up to a limit of 30% of average annual sales.

A judge must approve the CJIP. The judge decides whether the obligations imposed on the company are appropriate and proportionate. The validation decision by the president of the judicial court does not entail a finding of guilt and is not entered in bulletin no. 1 of the criminal record. Therefore, this decision cannot constitute the first term of recidivism or an automatic cause for exclusion from public contracts.

At the end of the procedure, the agreement, the fine, and the validation order are published.

The list of CJIPs concluded by the AFA can be consulted on the AFA and Ministry of Justice websites.

The definition of “whistleblower” is enshrined in Article 6 of the law. A whistleblower is a natural person who discloses or reports, disinterestedly and in good faith, a crime or misdemeanor, a serious and manifest violation of an international commitment duly ratified or approved by France, of a unilateral act of an international organization taken based on such a commitment, of the law or regulations, or a threat or serious harm to the general interest, of which he or she has personal knowledge.

The law protects whistle-blowers: any employee who has reported a whistle-blowing incident, in compliance with the conditions laid down by law, may not be dismissed (article 12 of the law), excluded from a recruitment procedure, punished, or subjected to a discriminatory measure (art. L1132-3-3 of the French Labor Code).

In addition, the new law establishes the offense of obstructing a whistleblower. Any person obstructing, in any way whatsoever, the transmission of a whistleblowing report (hierarchical superior, employer referent, or employer) is punishable by one year's imprisonment and a fine of 15,000 euros (article 13 of the law).

The law also provides for the creation of a register of lobbyists, reporting (i.e., country-by-country tax declarations by major corporations to combat tax evasion), and more. The law provided for the results of reporting to be made public (article 137 of the law), but the Constitutional Council rejected this measure as contrary to freedom of enterprise.

In June 2020, Nicole Belloubet, then Minister of Justice, issued a circular to public prosecutors' offices designed to “fix the guidelines of French criminal policy in the fight against international corruption.” The circular consolidates the central role of the National Financial Prosecutor's Office in the fight against international corruption (mainly acts of bribery of foreign public officials) and advocates the effective use of all useful information that public authorities and administrations may come into contact with in carrying out their mission - in simple terms, they would become whistle-blowers transmitting information to the judicial authorities. The circular considers, for example, that the AFA could “be led to discover suspicious facts that could justify a report to the judicial authority” as part of its checks on the quality and effectiveness of corruption and influence-peddling prevention programs implemented by entities subject to Article 17 II of the Sapin II law.

The circular also encourages “voluntary disclosure by companies of acts of corruption committed in the course of their international business activities.” The directors of these companies are not “under an obligation to report such acts to the judicial authorities,” but the circular considers that “it may nevertheless be in their interest to do so, to seek in return a certain form of leniency concerning the prosecution methods that may be envisaged,” citing the example of the CJIP.

The ordinances have been published in the Journal officiel de la République française, and are in the process of being ratified.

The Livret de Développement Durable (sustainable development passbook) has become the Livret de Développement Durable et Solidaire (LDDS - Sustainable and Solidarity Development Booklet). Every year, holders of this passbook were offered the opportunity to donate part of the sums deposited in it to a social economy entity (article 80).

Ban on advertising for risky financial product trading sites (article 72 of the law): the law bans advertising for internet platforms offering potentially risky financial products to retail investors. Sponsorship operations to promote these financial products are also prohibited. A procedure involving the blocking of the website may be set up by the financial markets authority.

Early redemption of micro-PERPs (Plan d'Épargne Retraite Populaire -): Article 116 of the law provides for four new cases of early redemption of a PERP.

The Observatoire de la Formation des Prix et des Marges des Produits Alimentaires (OFPM - Observatory of the Formation of Prices and Margins of Food Products) is to examine the distribution of added value throughout the agricultural product marketing chain (article 98 of the law).

Promotions on milk and dairy products displayed in supermarkets may not exceed 30% of the value of the unit price scale, including management fees (article 106 of the law).

The law fights to define the origin of certain products such as milk and meat, and to strengthen the Safer system.

On the economic front, the law also increases penalties for companies condemned for late payment and introduces a binding vote at shareholders' meetings on company directors ' remuneration. On the other hand, the law maintains the cheque validity period at 1 year and 8 days.

It also modifies the rules governing unpacking sales (article 99 of the law).

" Le Chant des Girondins " ('The Chant of the Girondins ') was the national anthem of the French Second Republic, written for the drama Le Chevalier de Maison-Rouge by the writer Alexandre Dumas with Auguste Maquet. The lines of the refrain were borrowed from "Roland à Roncevaux", a song written in Strasbourg by Claude-Joseph Rouget de Lisle, the author of " La Marseillaise ". The music is by conductor-composer Alphonse Varney.

I Par la voix du canon d’alarmes La France appelle ses enfants, – Allons dit le soldat, aux armes! C’est ma mère, je la défends. Refrain : Mourir pour la Patrie Mourir pour la Patrie C’est le sort le plus beau, le plus digne d’envie C’est le sort le plus beau, le plus digne d’envie II Nous, amis, qui loin des batailles Succombons dans l’obscurité, Vouons du moins nos funérailles A la France, à la liberté. Refrain III Frères, pour une cause sainte, Quand chacun de nous est martyr, Ne proférons pas une plainte, La France, un jour doit nous bénir. Refrain IV Du Créateur de la nature, Bénissons encore la bonté, Nous plaindre serait une injure, Nous mourons pour la liberté. Refrain

I By the voice of the alarm gun France calleth her children, – "Come," said the soldier, to arms! It's my mother, her do I defend. Refrain: Dying for the Homeland Dying for the Homeland It's the most beautiful, most desirable fate It's the most beautiful, most desirable fate II We friends who far from battles Succumbing in the darkness, Let us at least take our funeral To France, to freedom. Refrain III Brothers, for a holy cause, When each of us is martyred, Make not a complaint, France, one day ought to bless us. Refrain IV From the Creator of Nature, Let us bless the goodness still, Complaining would an insult be, For freedom we die. Refrain

Le Cordon Bleu ([ lə kɔʁdɔ̃ blø ] ; French : " The Blue Ribbon "; LCB) is a French hospitality and culinary education institution, teaching haute cuisine. Its educational focuses are hospitality management, culinary arts, and gastronomy. The institution consists of 35 institutes in 20 countries and has over 20,000 attendees.

The origin of the school name derives, indirectly, from the French Royal and Catholic Order of the Holy Spirit. This was a select group of the French nobility that had been knighted. The first creation of Royal Knights at the French Court was performed in 1578. The French Order of the Holy Spirit was for many centuries the highest distinction of the French Kingdom. Each member was awarded the Cross of the Holy Spirit, which hung from a blue silk ribbon. According to one story, this group became known for its extravagant and luxurious banquets, known as "cordons bleus". At the time of the French Revolution, the monarchy and the Order were abolished, but the name remained synonymous with excellent French cooking. By the nineteenth century the blue ribbon had become synonymous with excellence. The name was adopted by a French culinary magazine, La Cuisinière Cordon Bleu, founded by Marthe Distel in the late 19th century. The magazine began offering lessons by some of the best chefs in France.

The magazine developed into the original Le Cordon Bleu that Distel and Henri-Paul Pellaprat established in 1895 in Paris, France. In 1945, after the end of WWII, Madame Elisabeth Brassart purchased what remained of the struggling school from a Catholic orphanage which had inherited it after Distel died in the late 1930s. Brassart managed the school until 1984; at the age of 87 she retired and sold the school to André J. Cointreau, a direct descendant of the founding family of Cointreau liqueur and Rémy Martin Cognac.

In 1933, former student Dione Lucas helped to open a school under the Le Cordon Bleu name in London, Great Britain.

In the United States, 16 schools used to operate under the "Le Cordon Bleu North America" name through a licensing agreement with Career Education Corporation (CEC), a for-profit education company based in Chicago, Illinois. In 2009, the license was estimated to be worth $135 million. In 2014, Le Cordon Bleu North America generated $178.6 million in revenue and $70.6 million of operating losses. However, in light of the gainful employment rules implemented by the US Department of Education in 2015, CEC made the decision to sell the 16 campuses. When CEC failed to find a buyer it announced on 16 December 2015 that all 16 campuses in the United States would close by September 2017, giving enrolled students time to finish their programs. The last new students were accepted in January 2016. In June 2016, the Securities and Exchange Commission requested documents and information regarding Career Education's fourth quarter 2014 classification of its Le Cordon Bleu campuses.

Le Cordon Bleu has continued to maintain a presence in the United States through its New York office, Le Cordon Bleu Inc., which places students in the locations abroad.

Le Cordon Bleu played a central role in the 2009 American film Julie & Julia, which was partly based on Julia Child 's memoir My Life in France. In addition, central protagonists in other films attended or were graduates of Le Cordon Bleu such as Audrey Hepburn 's character in the 1954 American film Sabrina, Huo Ting En in the 2017 Taiwanese television series The Perfect Match, Dev D in the 2017 Bengali film Maacher Jhol and Hervé Villechaize 's character Nick Nack in the 1974 James Bond film The Man with the Golden Gun.

The school also plays a central role in publications by its students. For example, American writer Kathleen Flinn 's 2007 book The Sharper Your Knife, the Less You Cry, is the first insider's account of attending the modern Paris flagship school. Flinn's best-selling memoir recounts the day-to-day trials of the contemporary program and provides a further history of the school. The book was translated into several languages.

Le Journal de Mickey is a weekly French comics magazine established in 1934, featuring Disney comics from France and around the world. The magazine is currently published by Unique Heritage Media. It is centered on the adventures of Mickey Mouse and other Disney characters but also contains other comics. Le Journal de Mickey is credited with "the birth of the modern bande dessinée ". It is now the most popular French weekly magazine for children between 8 and 13 years old.

Paul Winkler, owner of the Opera Mundi syndicate, distributed comic strips from King Features Syndicate in France since 1928, including the American Mickey Mouse comic strip which was published in Le Petit Parisien as Les Aventures de Mickey since October 7, 1930. In 1931, Opera Mundi began a collaboration with publisher Librarie Hachette, who published books of French bandes dessinées (comic strips). Working with Opera Mundi, Hachette published reprint collections of the Mickey Mouse comic, with prose captions instead of speech balloons, as was customary in French BD. Their two Mickey Mouse books published in 1931 were a great success, selling more than 500,000 copies.

In 1933, Winkler got the idea to create a children's newspaper. At the time, the only children's publications on the market were des Illustrés, magazines for young children with big print. Winkler was convinced that there was a youth market that wanted "a cheerful and entertaining newspaper" (un journal gai et distrayant). Winkler later said:

Mickey appeared to me designed to be the leader of a newspaper that would apply this formula because his presence on the screens started to attract an audience of all ages who had a common mind: the spirit of youth.

Winkler proposed the creation of a Mickey Mouse newspaper to various periodical publishers, who all turned him down. Finally, Robert Meunier du Houssoy of Librarie Hachette agreed to publish the paper, as long as Winkler would become the editor-in-chief. Le Journal de Mickey would be the second weekly Mickey Mouse magazine produced in the world; the first, Italy's Topolino, preceded it by two years.

Le Journal de Mickey was first published on October 21, 1934. When it began, the front page of the paper was a Sunday strip of the American Mickey Mouse strip by Floyd Gottfredson, complete with its usual topper strip, Silly Symphony. In the first issue, the series launched with the March 11, 1934 Sunday page, which began the "Mickey contre l'Ogre Grognedur" ("Rumplewatt the Giant") story in Mickey Mouse, and "La Famille Vole-Au-Vent" ("Birds of a Feather") in Symphonie Folâtre (Silly Symphony). In the original Silly Symphony comic strip, the dialogue was written in rhyming couplets; Winkler considered this too childish, so the French translation was written in prose.

Initially, the magazine had eight pages, with four in color. Besides the Disney strips, the other three color pages were taken by: Pére Lacloche (Pete the Tramp) topped with Toffou (Pete's Pup), both by Clarence D. Russell ; Jacques Beaunez, Policier (Needlenose Noonan) topped with Tout est bien qui finit bien (Discontinued Stories), both by Walter Hoban ; and Les Malheurs d'Annie (Little Annie Rooney) topped with Si rip le dormeour revenait (Fablettes) by Brandon Walsh and Darrell McClure. The black-and-white pages featured two more half-page comics: Jim-la-Jungle (Jungle Jim) by Alex Raymond, and Qu'en Dites-Vous?, a collection of strange facts similar to the Ripley's Believe It or Not! feature.

The first issue also contained two serialized novels -- "Le Secret du Templier" ("The Templar's Secret") by Clade DaViére, and "La Main Qui Frappe" ("The Striking Hand") by Karl May —as well as a crafts column ("Le Petit Bricoleur"), collections of jokes and puns, puzzles, and a brief interview with Mickey Mouse. An international column, "Dans le Monde Entier" ("In the Whole World"), reported on new technologies around the globe, with much interest in planes, trains and cars.

The paper was an immediate success, with the first issue selling 300,000 copies; that figure would grow over the next several years. Hachette recouped their initial investment within four months. After the first issue was published, Winkler traveled to Hollywood to deliver it to Walt Disney personally.

Winkler's main innovation in children's magazine publishing was framing the imported American comic strips within a French context, with playful text material that used French puns, idioms and literary references. As a result of Le Journal de Mickey's success, older children's publications seemed out-of-date and tired, and many were either cancelled or changed to new formats between 1936 and 1939, including La Jeunesse Moderne, Le Petit Illustré, L'Intrépide, Cri-Cri and L'Épatant. Laurence Grove writes, "Publications such as L'Aventureux and L'As could attract readers with the sophisticated artwork and risqué exoticism, but they generally provided strips and only strips, and as such were unlikely to create a following, a feeling of attachment and involvement, in short a French cultural phenomenon in the way that Winckler [sic] had done through the context he had given his imports."

Major differences with earlier French youth magazines with comics were, apart from printing American comics instead of local productions, the size of the magazine, with Mickey two to three times larger (27 by 40 cm), and the use of speech balloons instead of text captions. These comics were coupled with French stories and with reader interaction through letters, contests, and the Club Mickey.

Starting with issue #4 (November 1934), the column "Le Club Mickey" was signed by "Onc' Léon", the nom de plume for Léon Sée, a former boxing manager who had approached Winkler for a series of articles on boxing for Opera Mundi. Winkler bought Sée's series, and Sée became Winkler's partner in the early development of Le Journal de Mickey. The "Club Mickey" letters column became an irreplaceable link between the magazine and its readers, and Onc' Léon became a wise dispenser of advice. The "Club" also offered discounts on Mickey Mouse books, games and clothes.

The magazine revolutionised the French children's publications market and introduced the American comic strips on a much larger scale. A number of copycat magazines soon followed, including some launched by Winkler himself. In April 1936, Winkler published Robinson (périodique) [ fr ], a 16-page weekly filled with American adventure comics, and he followed this in December 1937 with Hop-là! [ fr ], " L'hebdomadaire de la jeunesse moderne " (the weekly for the modern child). This period was later called the Golden Age of the BD.

Over the course of 1935, the Mickey Mouse comic strip introduced Mickey's cast of characters to the French audience, sometimes with new names. Horace Horsecollar was dubbed Chrysostome, and Clarabelle Cow was known as Yvette. Goofy was originally called Quenotte, but this was subsequently changed to Piloche, Achille Nigaudot and Goofy; the name finally came to rest as Dingo, which is the name that French audiences know today. Peg-Leg Pete debuted as Pierrot Jambe-de-Bois, and became Pat Hibulaire. Mickey, Minnie, Pluto and Donald Duck were known by their original English names.

By 1938, Mickey had a circulation of 400,000, the same as Robinson. The most successful competing magazines only had circulations of 200,000 or less, while the most successful magazines before the start of Mickey only sold about 40,000 copies a week. One of the things that set Le Journal de Mickey apart from its competitors was its production, with quality paper and ink and better printing resulting in brighter colours.

In the pre-war era, the comic strips reprinted in Le Journal de Mickey included Les Durondib et leur chien Adolphe (Dinglehoofer und His Dog Adolph) by Harold Knerr, Les Jumeaux (The Tucker Twins) and P'tit Jules (Snorky) by Clarence D. Russell, Pim-Pam-Poum! (The Captain and the Kids) by Rudolph Dirke, Luc Bradefer (Brick Bradford) by William Ritt and Clarence Gray, Richard le Téméraire (Tim Tyler's Luck) by Lyman Young, Les Petites Fables by Nicolas Anofsky, Cora (Connie) by Frank Godwin, Bernard Tempête (Don Winslow of the Navy) by Frank Victor Martinek and Leon Beroth, Marc Luron (Curley Harper at Lakespur) by Lyman Young, and Prince Vaillant (Prince Valiant) by Hal Foster.

The paper also reprinted two serialized adaptations of Disney animated films from the Silly Symphony strip: Blanche Neige et les Sept Nains (Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs) in 1938, and Pinocchio in 1940. In addition to the regular 8-page weekly, there were occasional 16-page holiday specials for Christmas, Easter and school holidays; these cost 75 centimes instead of the regular 30. For the covers, the specials reprinted the colorful Mickey Mouse Weekly covers from the UK.

World War II broke out in 1939, and France was invaded by German and Italian forces in May and June 1940. As a result, Le Journal de Mickey ceased publication on June 16, 1940 with issue #296, and relocated to Marseille in the unoccupied zone of France. Starting September 22, 1940, two of Winkler's comics magazines -- Le Journal de Mickey and Hop-là! —reappeared as the combined title Le Journal de Mickey et Hop-là Reunis. Winkler, who had published anti-Nazi editorials that attracted the attention of Reich Minister of Propaganda Joseph Goebbels, fled to the United States with his children. Winkler's wife Betty stayed in the unoccupied zone and managed the newspaper in his absence.

Circulation dropped by 86 percent, and the magazine was printed on much lower quality paper and with very limited colours. Paper shortages meant that by the end of 1941, the magazine was reduced to 4 pages of only half the original size, appearing only twice a month. As of issue #389 (July 5, 1942), American comics were dropped from the paper, including all of the Disney material, and the speech balloon comics were replaced with traditional comics with text captions. The final issue of the first run of Le Journal de Mickey appeared on July 2, 1944.

After the war, Winkler returned to liberated France and continued publishing comics magazines, beginning with Hardi Présente Donald, which ran for 313 issues from March 23, 1947 to March 22, 1953. This was a large-format weekly that was similar to the pre-war Journal de Mickey -- Donald Duck comic strips took up half of the front page, and the rest of the paper was made up of King Features adventure strips, including Jim of the Jungle, Flash Gordon, Tarzan and Mandrake the Magician. Unlike the previous paper, Donald was not a big success, and was seen as old-fashioned in the post-war market. Hachette also produced a 32-page comic book, Les Belles Histoires Walt Disney for 61 issues, from May 1948 to January 1954. These printed stories from the US comic books, sometimes retraced to fit the page layout.

In 1949, France passed the "Law of 16 July 1949 on the Publications Intended for Children" (Loi du 16 juillet 1949 sur les publications destinées à la jeunesse), which discouraged the publication of American comics, partly to break the domination of American material over the French comics industry, and also to counter the perceived violence and immorality of the American strips. The Disney comics material was not affected by the law, but the other American strips printed in Donald were eventually removed, contributing to the decline of the paper.

Meanwhile, in Belgium, Armand Bigle began publishing Mickey Magazine in 1950, with great success. The weekly magazine published in Flemish and French was printed in the style of American comic books. Mickey published translated stories from the American Disney comics, as well as some original stories by Belgian creators, led by Louis Santels, known by his pen name Ténas. Based on the success of Mickey Magazine, Bigle persuaded Winkler to adopt some of his new editorial and graphic concepts, and launch a new French periodical.

Le Journal de Mickey was revived in 1952 and reached the height of its success later in the same decade, with a circulation of 633,000 by 1957. This dropped in the following decades to the current 150,000, which still makes it the leading French weekly magazine for 8- to 13-years-old.

At launch, the magazine was smaller than the pre-war newspaper, with half of the pages in color, and half printed in black and red. The cover and first story were French originals, by Ténas.

As of 2019, the magazine is 60 pages long, with 30 pages of both Disney and non-Disney comics. The rest of the pages are filled with games, riddles, animal facts and other editorial content. In 2019, Hachette sold Disney Hachette Presse to Unique Heritage Media.

As of 2019, Unique Heritage Media publishes six ongoing Disney comics in addition to Le Journal de Mickey.

Mickey Junior (1985-on) is a monthly magazine aimed at kindergarten age children. It was first published as Winnie in October 1985, featuring stories about Winnie the Pooh, and was renamed Winnie et ses amis from 2012 to 2016. Starting with issue #376 in January 2017, it became Mickey Junior. The magazine features games and activities, editorial pages about animals, and stories about Mickey and his friends.

Mon Premier Journal de Mickey (2018-on) is a bimonthly magazine aimed at children just starting school, which began in April 2018. The magazine is 50 pages long, with 10 pages of comics; the rest of the content is illustrated stories, puzzles and animal facts. Some of the pages are in English, to encourage bilingual education.

Picsou Magazine (1978-on) is a bimonthly magazine primarily aimed at children 8–14 years old; it also includes features about Disney comics history of interest to fans and collectors of all ages. The magazine began in March 1972, with 116 pages. Named for Balthazar Picsou (the French name for Scrooge McDuck), the publication focuses on Duck comics. Starting in August 1978 (issue #78), the comic grew to 132 pages, and later to 148 pages. Starting with issue #542 in April 2019, the comic doubled its size, growing to 304 pages. The magazine begins with an editorial section about teen interests, including movies, video games, social networks, musicians, Japanese manga and some non-Disney comic pages; the rest of the magazine is devoted to Disney comics. Since #542, the Disney comics section is split into chapters, with the first "volume" devoted to comics by "Le maître de l'univers" (The Master of the Universe), Carl Barks. The other volumes include one "Panorama d'Auteur" section per issue spotlighting the work of another Disney creator, and the rest are grouped by theme. Each section includes several pages on Disney comics history related to the featured creator or theme, and lists the first appearance of each story in its native country and in France.

Super Picsou Géant (1983-on) is a 196-page bimonthly magazine aimed at children 8–14 years old. Started in May 1983 as a larger "géant" version of Picsou, as of 2019, it's dwarfed by Picsou's new "maxi" size. The magazine is primarily made up of Disney comics from Italy and Scandinavia, with some brief sections of puzzles and Picsou -style articles about teen fads.

Le Juif et la France (French pronunciation: [ lə ʒɥif e la fʁɑ̃s ] ; Jews and France) was an antisemitic propaganda exhibition that took place in Paris from 5 September 1941 to 15 January 1942 during the German occupation of France in the Second World War. A film version of the exhibition came out in French cinemas in October 1941.

It was organized and financed by the propaganda arm of the German military administration in France via the Institut d'étude des questions juives (IEQJ) (Institute for the Study of Jewish Questions) under regulation by the Gestapo and attracted around half a million visitors. This exhibition was based on the work of Professor George Montandon at the School of Anthropology in Paris, author of the book Comment reconnaître le Juif? (How to recognize a Jew?) published in November 1940. It had pretensions of being "scientific". It was opened by Carltheo Zeitschel and Theodor Dannecker on 5 September 1941 at the Palais Berlitz.

Le Juif et la France was a multi-media exhibition with large panels, photographs, texts, and sculptures. As its focal point, it included a huge sculpture of an old, bearded Jew with exaggerated features, clutching a globe as if intent on world domination. The intent was to portray Jews as a polluting element on French society, intent on financial and political control of France and the world, in control of the media, and responsible for Marxism, Communism, and most of the ills of society. A large sculpture of a female athlete symbolizing France shown defeating two repulsive, old stereotypically Jewish figures dominated the hall; it was named "France Liberating Itself from the Jews."

The exhibition opened two weeks after the second large Paris roundup of Jews The antisemitic propagandist Paul Sézille, general secretary of the IEQJ, wrote the introduction to the catalog:

By presenting the Jew in his various manifestations, by showing by means of irrefutable and carefully chosen documents how deep the Jewish hold on all the activities of France was, by revealing the depth of the evil which was eating away at us, we wish to convince those of our fellow-citizens who are still of sound mind and good judgment, of the urgency of seeing things as they are and then to act accordingly.

— Paul Sezille, catalog of the exhibition Le Juif et la France

The general theme is the supposed corrupt influence of the Jews on French institutions and business activity: the army, the cinema, the economy and literature: " sexual inversion, destruction of our traditions are the favourite themes of Jewish writers". To help visitors get an accurate and concrete idea of "the enemy," photographs and models showed faces that corresponded to antisemitic stereotypes such as hooked noses or dirty hair.

Presented as public service announcements, to "help" the "French to recognize Jews by their physical characteristics", the propaganda initiative took advantage of this exhibition to try to justify various discriminatory measures against French Jews by the Vichy regime. In reality the financial supporters of the exhibition were the Paris office of the German Security Service (Sicherheitsdienst) and the information section of the German Embassy.

Among other things, a spider symbolized "Jewry feasting on the blood of Our France", and as mentioned, a sculpture of a hideous wandering Jew seizing the world in his talons at the feet of "New France"... Besides that, the exhibition also stigmatized a number of personalities from various professions, and in particular the then-famous furniture merchant Wolff Levitan, radio journalist Jean-Michel Grunebaum, journalist Pierre Lazareff, playwright Henri Bernstein, producer Bernard Natan and politician Léon Blum.

Attendance figures differ according to the source consulted. Some spoke of 155,000 visitors, others claimed 500,000 paid entrants, with as many free and half-off tickets, as claimed by the collaborationist authorities for the Paris region. It seems however, that after some initial success in the first few days based on novelty, interest waned with the suspicion among the French populace of what the occupying force was trying to convey.

Le National was a French daily founded in 1830 by Adolphe Thiers, Armand Carrel, François-Auguste Mignet and the librarian-editor Auguste Sautelet, as the mouthpiece of the liberal opposition to the Second Restoration.

The first issue was published on 3 January 1830, whilst the Ultra-royalist prince de Polignac governed France in the name of Charles X. Le National was subsidised by the banker Jacques Laffitte and also supported by Talleyrand and the duc de Broglie, one of the leader of the liberal Doctrinaires group.

Its title alluded to one of the motto used in 1789 during the French Revolution, la Nation, la Loi, le Roi (Nation, Law and King). The daily advocated a constitutional monarchy and opposed Charles X's interpretation of the 1814 Charter, popularizing in particular the saying " Le roi règne mais ne gouverne pas " (The King reigns but does not rule).

Journalists gathered at the offices of Le National to sign a petition in protest against the July Ordinances restricting freedom of the press, one of the events that led to the July Revolution of 1830.

During the July Monarchy, Le National published Armand Marrast 's call to Parisians to demonstrate on 22 February 1848, following the outlawing of a public meeting by the Paris prefect. Hundreds of students gathered on the place of the Panthéon, before joining workers at the Madeleine. This was the beginning of the 1848 Revolution.

During the Second Republic, Le National became the mouthpiece of the moderate Republican majority (the "bourgeois Republicans") which formed the Constituent Assembly. The new government was headed by General Louis-Eugène Cavaignac, while the moderate Republican parliamentaries were called members of the Parti du National (Party of the National) in reference to the daily.

The National then shifted toward a more Socialist position. It was outlawed following Napoleon III 's 2 December 1851 coup, and disappeared on 31 December 1851. Its final editor, Ernest Caylus, fled to New York City and cofounded the French Benevolent Society of New York, which would eventually found the French Hospital in Manhattan.

Le Pin-au-Haras (French pronunciation: [ lə pɛ̃ o aʁa ]) is a commune in the Orne department in north-western France.

The commune is made up of the following collection of villages and hamlets, La Lune, La Gautellerie, Courgeron, La Hamelinière, La Frênaie, Le Haras du Pin and Le Pin-au-Haras.

The Commune is one of 27 communes that make up the Natura 2000 protected area of Bocages et vergers du sud Pays d'Auge.

The commune has the river Ure running through it and five streams, the Etang des Genets, Etangs de Chagny, Chedouit, Pont de Barges & the Courgeron.

The commune is completely enclosed within the commune of Gouffern en Auge.

Le Pin-au-Haras's Climate is classed as a temperate oceanic climate according to the Köppen–Geiger climate classification.

Haras national du Pin is the national and oldest Stud farm of France, and considered the Versailles for horses. It was created by Louis XIV and built in the 1700s. It is now a tourist attraction and was listed as a Monument historique in 1948.

Le Pot-au-feu: Journal de cuisine pratique et d'économie domestique, later called Le pot-au-feu et les Bonnes recettes réunis (1929-1956), was a biweekly cooking magazine in quarto format published in Paris from 1893 to 1956, and addressed primarily to bourgeois housewives. Its publisher was Saint-Ange Ébrard.

In the early years, each issue began with a cooking lesson written by a professional chef. It might also include recipes, menus, and short articles. Ébrard's wife Marie also wrote a column under the name "La Vieille Catherine".

Many of the recipes published in Le Pot-au-feu were collected into Marie Ébrard's book La bonne cuisine de Madame E. Saint-Ange.

There was also a magazine called Le Pot-au-feu, later renamed Journal pittoresque de gastronomie et d'économie domestique, which may or may not be related.

Le Relais Bernard Loiseau, formerly La Côte d'Or, is a Michelin Guide two-star French restaurant located in Saulieu, France. The restaurant was bought by Claude Verger in 1975, and Bernard Loiseau was installed as the chef de cuisine. The Michelin Guide bestowed a coveted 3-star in 1991, largely due to the fanatic attention to detail, frenetic work ethic and discerning palate of Loiseau.

After the Gault Millau guide downgraded the restaurant from 19/20 to 17/20 in the year of 2003, there were also rumors in Le Figaro that the Michelin Guide was planning to remove one of La Côte d'Or's three stars.

Loiseau was heavily in debt and suffered from severe bouts of depression. Loiseau died by suicide shortly after the restaurant got downgraded.

La Côte d'Or is now run by executive chef Patrick Bertron, after having lost its coveted third star in the year of 2016.

The Lebon Patisserie & Café (Turkish : Lebon Pastanesi, Beyoğlu) was a historic pastry shop and café in the Beyoğlu district of Istanbul. Originally opened in 1810, it went out of business in the 1960s. Two entrepreneurs named, Şakir Ekinci and Abdurrahman Cengiz, revived the business and name in the 1990s. This second Lebon closed at the end of October 2022 because of an increase in rent.

Lebon Patisserie & Café was established in 1886 by Edouard Lebon. Lebon was a French chef at the Embassy of France in Constantinople (present-day Istanbul), the capital of the Ottoman Empire. He left the embassy kitchen, and established the bakery, located at Grand rue de Péra (today İstiklal Avenue), on the corner of "Passage Oriental" in Pera (today Beyoğlu district of Istanbul). Pera was then a district populated mostly by Levantines and non-Muslims. The year of establishment was later corrected to 1810, when a customer brought a chocolate box printed "Lebon 1810" on it, suggesting the establish year is earlier than originally informed. Frenchman Charles Bourdon was recognized as the founder of the pastry shop.

After the death of Edouard Lebon in 1937, his Ottoman Greek chef aid Kostas Litopoulos took over the management of the shop. The bakery became famous for its interior design by the French-Ottoman architect Alexander Vallaury (1850–1921) as well as its French dragées, cakes and profiterole baked in a cake oven imported from Europe. It was also named "Şekerci Lebon" (Confectionery Lebon) or "Maison Lebon".

In the 1920s, tiled wall panels decorated in Art Nouveau style with a four seasons theme were ordered from France for the purpose of changing the interior design. The panel representing winter was destroyed, while the summer panel was later removed and replaced by a mirror. The pastry shop featured Limoges porcelain by Haviland & Co., Christofle tableware and Décugis crystals.

Being well known for its quality and luxury, this place was dubbed "Chez Lebon, tout est bon" ("Everything is good at Lebon"). Some wealthy European travelers, who came to Istanbul by Orient Express train, and prominent local people like poets Ahmet Haşim (1884?–1933), Tevfik Fikret (1867–1915), Abdülhak Hâmid (1852–1937), Yahya Kemal (1884–1958), writers Namık Kemal (1840–1888), Ziya Pasha (1829–1880), İbrahim Şinasi (1826–1871) and French novelist Pierre Loti (1850–1923) were among the visitors of the Lebon Patisserie & Café.

In 1940, Lebon Patisserie moved across the street. In the previous location, Avedis Ohanyan Çakır opened the "Markiz Patisserie", named after the Marquise de Sévigné chocolate shop in Paris. The tiled wall panels of Lebon remained in the Markiz Patisserie, which he ran from 1985 onwards.

Lebon Patisserie was the first pâtisserie in the Ottoman era and the early years of the Turkish Republic.

Even there are a lot of details around Lebon Patisserie, there is no record about it between the 1950s and 1980s because of ambiguous information.. Two entrepreneurs named Şakir Ekinci and Abdurrahman Cengiz opened their own Lebon Patisserie in 1985 close to the original location, but the design and recipes differed from the original. Starting with the year 2021, the owners of the revived Lebon were considered closure because they were unable to pay rent. Finally, it went out of business in October 2022.

The Leeward Islands moist forests ecoregion (WWF ID: NT0134) covers the forested areas of the Leeward Islands on the northeastern edge of the Caribbean Sea, stretching from the Virgin Islands in the west to Guadeloupe to the southeast. The forested areas are typically in the core interior of the islands, and at the higher elevations of the volcanic islands. Non-forested lower elevations in the region receive less rainfall and are typically semi-arid. A notable feature of the ecoregion is its position in the main hurricane track. The frequent damage to trees produces in many places an uneven forest canopy, and an opening of the canopy that allows more pre-climax trees to grow.

The island groups with forests making up this ecoregion are:

There are also small patches of moist forest on the smaller islands in the region. The Leeward Islands are formed on two arcs; the inner (western) arc features active volcanos and higher precipitation; the outer arc tend towards limestone-capped submerged volcanos and less precipitation.

The ecoregion has a Tropical climate with individual islands having different levels of precipitation that classify them into either Tropical rainforest climate (Köppen climate classification (Af)), Tropical savanna climate - dry winter (Köppen climate classification (Aw)), or Tropical monsoon climate (Köppen climate classification (Am)).

Like many island chains, there are many endemic species in the ecoregion. Species diversity and endemism are higher on the larger islands, and those farther from the mainland, such as Guadeloupe. There are small patches of most forest on the smaller islands, such as Saba, and for this ecoregion the term 'moist forest' includes areas that might also be classified as rain forest or cloud forest. Common species are those of genus Miconia and Clusia. In less disturbed areas the common species is Dacroydes excelsa. At higher elevations, palm trees are common, such as the mountain cabbage palm Prestoea acuminata var. montana.

The most common mammals in the ecoregion are bats; the ten recorded species include the endangered Guadeloupe big brown bat (Eptesicus guadeloupensis) and the vulnerable Thomas's yellow-shouldered bat (Sturnira thomasi).

Over 76% of this ecoregion (the forested areas, not the entire islands) is in an officially protected area, including:

The Leeward Islands xeric scrub ecoregion (WWF ID: NT1310) covers the dry ('xeric'), non-forested areas of the Leeward Islands on the northeastern edge of the Caribbean Sea, stretching from the Virgin Islands in the west to Guadeloupe to the southeast. The non-forested areas are generally low scrub shrub, on the low elevations around the peripheries of the islands. Non-forested lower elevations in the region receive less rainfall and are typically semi-arid. A notable feature of the ecoregion is its position in the main hurricane track. The frequent damage to trees allows more pre-climax shrubs and trees to grow. There are a number of endemic species, as in common with islands.

The largest island groups with dry shrub areas making up this ecoregion are:

There are also smaller islands in the region. The Leeward Islands are formed on two arcs; the inner (western) arc features active volcanos and higher precipitation; the outer arc tend towards limestone-capped submerged volcanos and less precipitation.

The ecoregion has a Tropical climate overall, with individual islands having different levels of precipitation that classify them into either Tropical rainforest climate (Köppen climate classification (Af)), Tropical savanna climate - dry winter (Köppen climate classification (Aw)), or Tropical monsoon climate (Köppen climate classification (Am)).

The ecoregion features dry seral (intermediate stage of ecological succession) floral communities. These range from herbaceous strand vegetation (plants that grow on the sandy ground above the high-time line of the beach), shrubland (small woody plants), savanna (mixed woodland and grasslands), and littoral woodlands (transitional communities on the edge of full forest).

Plant communities in the region are often associated with the former agricultural use of the land. In areas that were formerly cotton or sugar cane fields, for example, the characteristic species are often gum arabic tree (Acacia nilotica), (Acacia lutea), twisted acacia (Acacia tortuosa), or sweet acacia (Vachellia farnesiana). Areas associated with charcoal production now feature Bursera and Pisonia fragrans. Savanna areas feature acacias, (Prosopis chilensis), and common guava (Psidium guajava).

Officially protected areas in the ecoregion include:

The National Order of the Legion of Honour (French : Ordre national de la Légion d'honneur [ ɔʁdʁ nɑsjɔnal d(ə) la leʒjɔ̃ dɔnœʁ ]), formerly the Imperial Order of the Legion of Honour (Ordre impérial de la Légion d'honneur), is the highest and most prestigious French national institution, both military and civil. It consists of five classes and was originally established in 1802 by Napoleon Bonaparte. The order has been retained, with occasional minor alterations, by all subsequent French governments and regimes.

The order's motto is Honneur et Patrie ("Honour and Fatherland"); its seat is the Palais de la Légion d'Honneur next to the Musée d'Orsay, on the left bank of the Seine in Paris. Since 1 February 2023, the Order's grand chancellor has been retired general François Lecointre.

The order is divided into five degrees of increasing distinction: Chevalier (Knight), Officier (Officer), Commandeur (Commander), Grand officier (Grand Officer) and Grand-croix (Grand Cross).

While prestigious, the Legion of Honour has sometimes been controversial. The order of merit has been awarded to Harvey Weinstein, Mohammed bin Nayef, Vladimir Putin, Bashar al-Assad, and Manuel Noriega. In 2010, the order's rules were changed to revoke Noriega's award after his extradition to France due to his conviction for money laundering. In 2017, further reforms to the award were made.

Notable individuals who have refused the award include Marjane Satrapi, Albert Camus, and Jean-Paul Sartre.

During the French Revolution, all of the French orders of chivalry were abolished and replaced with weapons of honour. It was the wish of Napoleon Bonaparte, the First Consul, to create a reward to commend civilians and soldiers. From this wish was instituted a Légion d'honneur, a body of men that was not an order of chivalry, for Napoleon believed that France wanted a recognition of merit rather than a new system of nobility. However, the Légion d'honneur did use the organization of the old French orders of chivalry, for example, the Ordre de Saint-Louis. The insignia of the Légion d'honneur bear a resemblance to those of the Ordre de Saint-Louis, which also used a red ribbon.

Napoleon originally created this award to ensure political loyalty. The organization would be used as a façade to give political favours, gifts, and concessions. The Légion d'honneur was loosely patterned after a Roman legion, with legionaries, officers, commanders, regional " cohorts " and a grand council. The highest rank was not a Grand Cross but a Grand aigle (Grand Eagle), a rank that wore the insignia common to a Grand Cross. The members were paid, the highest of them extremely generously:

Napoleon famously declared, "You call these baubles, well, it is with baubles that men are led... Do you think that you would be able to make men fight by reasoning? Never. That is good only for the scholar in his study. The soldier needs glory, distinctions, rewards." This has been often quoted as "It is with such baubles that men are led." Napoleon was also occasionally noted after a battle to ask who the bravest man in a regiment was, and upon the regiment declaring the individual, the Emperor would take the Legion d'honneur from his own coat and pin it on the chest of the man.

The order was one of the first modern orders of merit. Under the monarchy, such orders were often limited to Roman Catholics, all knights had to be noblemen, and military decorations were restricted to officers. The Légion d'honneur, however, was open to men of all ranks and professions; only merit or bravery counted. The only similar modern order, open to everyone, to predate it was the Swedish Order of Vasa. The new legionnaire had to be sworn into the Légion d'honneur. All previous orders were Christian, or shared a clear Christian background, whereas the Légion d'honneur is a secular institution. The badge of the Légion d'honneur has five arms.

In a decree issued on the 10 Pluviôse XIII (30 January 1805), a grand decoration was instituted. This decoration, a cross on a large sash and a silver star with an eagle, symbol of the Napoleonic Empire, became known as the Grand aigle (Grand Eagle), and later in 1814 as the Grand cordon (big sash, literally "big ribbon"). After Napoleon crowned himself Emperor of the French in 1804 and established the Napoleonic nobility in 1808, award of the Légion d'honneur gave right to the title of "Knight of the Empire" (Chevalier de l'Empire). The title was made hereditary after three generations of grantees.

Napoleon had dispensed 15 golden collars of the Légion d'honneur among his family and his senior ministers. This collar was abolished in 1815.

Although research is made difficult by the loss of the archives, it is rumoured that three women who fought with the army were decorated with the order: Virginie Ghesquière, Marie-Jeanne Schelling and a nun, Sister Anne Biget.

The Légion d'honneur was prominent and visible in the French Empire. The Emperor always wore it, and the fashion of the time allowed for decorations to be worn most of the time. The king of Sweden therefore declined the order; it was too common in his eyes. Napoleon's own decorations were captured by the Prussians and were displayed in the Zeughaus (armoury) in Berlin until 1945. Today, they are in Moscow.

Louis XVIII changed the appearance of the order, but it was not abolished. To have done so would have angered the 35,000 to 38,000 members. The images of Napoleon and his eagle were removed and replaced by the image of King Henry IV, the popular first king of the Bourbon line. Three Bourbon fleurs-de-lys replaced the eagle on the reverse of the order. A king's crown replaced the imperial crown. In 1816, the grand cordons were renamed grand crosses and the legionnaires became knights. The king decreed that the commandants were now commanders. The Légion d'honneur became the second-ranking order of knighthood of the French monarchy, after the Order of the Holy Spirit.

Following the overthrow of the Bourbons in favour of King Louis Philippe I of the House of Orléans, the Bourbon monarchy's orders were once again abolished and the Légion d'honneur was restored in 1830 as the paramount decoration of the French nation. The insignia were drastically altered; the cross now displayed tricolour flags. In 1847, there were 47,000 members.

Yet another revolution in Paris (in 1848) brought a new republic (the second) and a new design to the Légion d'honneur. A nephew of the founder, Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, was elected president and he restored the image of his uncle on the crosses of the order. In 1852, the first recorded woman, Angélique Duchemin, an old revolutionary of the 1789 uprising against the absolute monarchy, was admitted into the order. On 2 December 1851, President Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte staged a coup d'état with the help of the armed forces. He made himself Emperor of the French exactly one year later on 2 December 1852, after a successful plebiscite.

An Imperial crown was added. During Napoleon III 's reign, the first American was admitted: Thomas Wiltberger Evans, dentist of Napoleon III.

In 1870, the defeat of the French Imperial Army in the Franco-Prussian War brought the end of the Empire and the creation of the Third Republic (1871–1940). As France changed, the Légion d'honneur changed as well. The crown was replaced by a laurel and oak wreath. In 1871, during the Paris Commune uprising, the Hôtel de Salm, headquarters of the Légion d'honneur, was burned to the ground in fierce street combats; the archives of the order were lost.

In the second term of President Jules Grévy, which started in 1885, newspaper journalists brought to light the trafficking of Grévy's son-in-law, Daniel Wilson, in the awarding of decorations of the Légion d'honneur. Grévy was not accused of personal participation in this scandal, but he was slow to accept his indirect political responsibility, which caused his eventual resignation on 2 December 1887.

During World War I, some 55,000 decorations were conferred, 20,000 of which went to foreigners. The large number of decorations resulted from the new posthumous awards authorised in 1918. Traditionally, membership in the Légion d'honneur could not be awarded posthumously.

The establishment of the Fourth Republic in 1946 brought about the latest change in the design of the Legion of Honour. The date "1870" on the obverse was replaced by a single star. No changes were made after the establishment of the Fifth Republic in 1958.

In 1945, the leader of France’s Vichy regime Philippe Pétain was convicted of high treason and conspiring with the enemy and stripped of his Legion of Honour. He was the only former president of France to have his award revoked until 2025.

Retired general Benoît Puga served as the Grand Chancellor from 2016 to 2023.

In 2010, the former Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega was extradited to France to serve a prison term for money laundering funds from drug trafficking, and he had previously been made a Commandeur in 1987. The code governing the Legion of Honour was changed so that it could be stripped from a foreigner who had been "sentenced for a crime or to a prison term of at least one year without possibility of parole" or if they had "committed acts or behaved in such a way that could be declared dishonourable, or could damage the interests of France abroad or the causes that France supports throughout the world".

On 2 November 2017, Emmanual Macron 's government announced that the conferral of the award would become more selective and "merit-based" in order to "return to the spirit" of the Legion of Honour. The reform would decrease the number of civilians who receive the decoration by 50%, the number of military personnel by 10%, and the number of foreign citizens by 25%. The initiative came after a highly publicised decision in October for Macron to "begin the process" of stripping Harvey Weinstein of his order after accusations of rape and sexual abuse.

In 2025, after former president Nicolas Sarkozy 's conviction for corruption was confirmed in the previous year, he was stripped of his award as any recipient sentenced to a term in prison equal to or greater than a year would be excluded from the order. Emmanuel Macron argued unsuccessfully against the decision, stating that it was "very important that former presidents are respected".

The Legion of Honour is a national order of France, meaning a public incorporated body. The Legion is regulated by a civil law code, the "Code of the Legion of Honour and of the Military Medal". While the President of the French Republic is the Grand Master of the order, day-to-day running is entrusted to the Grand Chancery (Grande Chancellerie de la Légion d'honneur).

Since the establishment of the Legion, the Grand Master of the order has always been the Emperor, King or President of France. President Emmanuel Macron therefore became the Grand Master of the Legion upon his inauguration as President on 14 May 2017.

The Grand Master appoints all other members of the order, on the advice of the French government. The Grand Master's insignia is the Grand Collar of the Legion. The President of the Republic, as Grand Master of the order, receives the Collar as part of his investiture, but the Grand Masters have not worn the Collar since Valéry Giscard d'Estaing.

The Grand Chancery is headed by the Grand Chancellor (grand chancelier), usually a retired general, as well as the Secretary-General (secrétaire général), a civilian administrator.

The Grand Chancery also regulates the National Order of Merit and the médaille militaire (Military Medal). There are several structures funded by and operated under the authority of the Grand Chancery, like the Legion of Honour Schools (Maisons d'éducation de la Légion d'honneur) and the Legion of Honour Museum (Musée de la Légion d'honneur). The Legion of Honour Schools are élite boarding schools in Saint-Denis and Camp des Loges in the forest of Saint-Germain-en-Laye. Study there is restricted to daughters, granddaughters, and great-granddaughters of members of the order, the médaille militaire or the ordre national du Mérite.

There are five classes in the Legion of Honour:

The "eminent merits" required to be awarded the order require the flawless performance of one's trade as well as doing more than ordinarily expected, such as being creative, zealous and contributing to the growth and well-being of others.

The order has a maximum quota of 75 Grand Cross, 250 Grand Officers, 1,250 Commanders, 10,000 Officers, and 113,425 (ordinary) Knights. As of 2010, the actual membership was 67 Grand Cross, 314 Grand Officers, 3,009 Commanders, 17,032 Officers and 74,384 Knights. Appointments of veterans of World War II, French military personnel involved in the North African Campaign and other foreign French military operations, as well as wounded soldiers, are made independently of the quota.

Members convicted of a felony (crime in French) are automatically dismissed from the order. Members convicted of a misdemeanour (délit in French) can be dismissed as well, although this is not automatic.

Wearing the decoration of the Légion d'honneur without having the right to do so is a serious offence. Wearing the ribbon or rosette of a foreign order is prohibited if that ribbon is mainly red, like the ribbon of the Legion of Honour.

In theory, French military personnel in uniform are required to salute other military members in uniform wearing the medal (but not the ribbon), whatever the Légion d'honneur rank and the military rank of the bearer. In practice, however, this is rarely done.

There is not a single, complete list of all the members of the Legion in chronological order. The number is estimated at one million, including about 2,900 Knights Grand Cross.

French nationals, men and women, can be received into the Légion, for "eminent merit" (mérites éminents) in military or civil life. In practice, in current usage, the order is conferred on entrepreneurs, high-level civil servants, scientists, artists, including famous actors and actresses, sport champions, and others with connections in the executive. Members of the French Parliament cannot receive the order, except for valour in war, and ministers are not allowed to nominate their accountants.

Until 2008, French nationals could only enter the Legion of Honour at the class of Chevalier (Knight). To be promoted to a higher class, one had to perform new eminent services in the interest of France and a set number of years had to pass between appointment and promotion. This was however amended in 2008 when entry became possible at Officer, Commander and Grand Officer levels, as a recognition of "extraordinary careers" (carrières hors du commun). In 2009, Simone Veil became the first person to enter the Order at Grand Officer level. Veil was a member of the Académie française, a former Health Minister and President of the European Parliament, as well as an Auschwitz survivor. She was promoted to Grand Cross in 2012.

While membership in the Légion is technically restricted to French nationals, foreign nationals who have served France or the ideals it upholds may receive the honour. Foreign nationals who live in France are subject to the same requirements as the French. Foreign nationals who live abroad may be awarded a distinction of any rank or dignity in the Légion. Foreign heads of state and their spouses or consorts of monarchs are made Grand Cross as a courtesy. American and British veterans who served in either World War on French soil, or during the 1944 campaigns to liberate France, may be eligible for appointment as Chevalier of the Legion of Honour, provided they were still living when the honour was approved.

Collective appointments can be made to cities, institutions or companies. A total of 64 settlements in France have been decorated, as well as six foreign cities: Liège in 1914, Belgrade in 1920, Luxembourg City in 1957, Volgograd (the World War II 'Stalingrad') in 1984, Algiers in 2004, and London in 2020. French towns display the decoration in their municipal coat of arms.

Organisations to receive the honour include the French Red Cross (Croix-Rouge Française), the Abbaye de Nôtre-Dame des Dombes (Abbey of Notre-Dame des Dombes), the French National Railway Company (SNCF, Société Nationale des Chemins de fer Français), the Préfecture de Police de la Ville de Paris (Prefecture of Police of Paris), and various Grandes Écoles (National (Elite) Colleges) and other educational establishments.

The military distinctions (Légion d'honneur à titre militaire) are awarded for bravery (actions de guerre) or for service.

For active-duty commissioned officers, the Legion of Honour award for service is achieved after 20 years of meritorious service, having been awarded the rank of Chevalier of the Ordre National du Mérite. Bravery awards lessen the time needed for the award—in fact decorated servicemen become directly chevaliers of the Légion d'Honneur, skipping the Ordre du Mérite. Non-commissioned officers (NCOs) almost never achieve that award, except for the most heavily decorated service members.

Collective appointments can be made to military units. In the case of a military unit, its flag is decorated with the insignia of a knight, which is a different award from the fourragère. Twenty-one schools, mainly schools providing reserve officers during the World Wars, were awarded the Légion d'Honneur. Foreign military units can be decorated with the order, such as the U.S. Military Academy.

The Flag or Standard of the following units was decorated with the Cross of a Knight of the Legion of Honour:

The order has had five levels since the reign of King Louis XVIII, who restored the order in 1815. Since the reform, the following distinctions have existed:

Due to the order's long history, and the remarkable fact that it has been retained by all subsequent governments and regimes since the First Empire, the order's design has undergone many changes. Although the basic shape and structure of the insignia has remained generally the same, the hanging device changed back and forth and France itself swung back and forth between republic and monarchy. The central disc in the centre has also changed to reflect the political system and leadership of France at the time. As each new regime came along the design was altered to become politically correct for the time, sometimes even changed multiple times during one historical era.

The badge of the Légion is shaped as a five-armed "Maltese Asterisk ", using five distinctive "arrowhead" shaped arms inspired by the Maltese Cross. The badge is rendered in gilt (in silver for chevalier) enameled white, with an enameled laurel and oak wreath between the arms. The obverse central disc is in gilt, featuring the head of Marianne, surrounded by the legend République Française on a blue enamel ring. The reverse central disc is also in gilt, with a set of crossed tricolores, surrounded by the Légion's motto Honneur et Patrie ('Honour and Fatherland') and its foundation date on a blue enamel ring. The badge is suspended by an enameled laurel and oak wreath.

The star (or plaque) is worn by the Grand Cross (in gilt on the left chest) and the Grand Officer (in silver on the right chest) respectively; it is similar to the badge, but without enamel, and with the wreath replaced by a cluster of rays in between each arm. The central disc features the head of Marianne, surrounded by the legend République Française ('French Republic') and the motto Honneur et Patrie.

The badge or star is not usually worn, except at the time of the decoration ceremony or on a dress uniform or formal wear. Instead, one normally wears the ribbon or rosette on their suit.

For less formal occasions, recipients wear a simple stripe of thread sewn onto the lapel (red for chevaliers and officiers, silver for commandeurs). Except when wearing a dark suit with a lapel, women instead typically wear a small lapel pin called a barrette. Recipients purchase the special thread and barrettes at a store in Paris near the Palais-Royal.

The Léonore database (Base Léonore) is a French database that lists the records of the members of the National Order of the Legion of Honour. The database lists the records of those inducted into the Legion of Honour since its 1802 inception and who died before 1977.

As of January 2014, the database contained 390,000 records.

Every year, at least five recipients decline the award. Even if they refuse to accept it, they are still included in the order's official membership. The composers Maurice Ravel and Charles Koechlin, for example, declined the award when it was offered to them.

Other notable examples of people who have refused the award include Marjane Satrapi, Albert Camus, and Jean-Paul Sartre.

The Legion of Honour is sometimes awarded to foreign dignitaries during state visits as "diplomatic reciprocity" useful to French foreign policy; however, they are rarely reported.

Controversial recipients include Russian president Vladimir Putin and Syrian president Bashar al-Assad (awarded by Jacques Chirac in 2006), Muhammad bin Nayef of Saudi Arabia (awarded by François Hollande in 2016), Romanian dictator Nicolae Ceaușescu (awarded by Charles de Gaulle), Zine El Abidine Ben Ali of Tunisia (awarded by François Mitterrand), and Ali Bongo of Gabon (awarded by Nicolas Sarkozy). Bashar al-Assad's decoration in 2001 did not become public knowledge until 2009.

In 2010, the former Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega was extradited to France to serve a prison term for money laundering funds from drug trafficking, and he had previously been made a Commandeur in 1987. The code governing the Legion of Honour was changed so that it could be stripped from a foreigner who had been "sentenced for a crime or to a prison term of at least one year without possibility of parole" or if he or she has "committed acts or behaved in such a way that could be declared dishonourable, or could damage the interests of France abroad or the causes that France supports throughout the world".

The decision to strip the honour can only be made by a French president following the rules surrounding the honour, which states that the award can be revoked from any foreigner who has "committed acts or behaved in such a way that could be declared dishonourable, or could damage the interests of France abroad, or causes that France supports" or a foreigner sentenced to a year or more in prison.

The National Order of Merit has stated that it typically waits for a "final condemnation" before an award is withdrawn, but in the 2017 revocation of Harvey Weinstein 's award, Emmanuel Macron indicated that quicker action could sometimes be taken. Traditionally, the National Order of Merit does not publicly announce the revocation of the award, and revocations are not published in the official journal of the Order.

In 2010, the rules surrounding the order were changed in order to strip Noriega of his award after his extradition to France, where he was convicted for money laundering. The awards of Weinstein, Putin, and al-Assad were later stripped. In 2017, further changes to the decision-making around the award were enacted under Emmanuel Macron 's government.

In 2001, Jacques Chirac awarded former Syrian president Bashar al-Assad with the great cross, however this did not become public knowledge until 2009. In 2018, seven years after the start of the Syrian civil war, Emmanuel Macron began the formal process of withdrawing the award.

In 2025, former president Nicolas Sarkozy was stripped of his award after he was convicted of corruption, despite Macron's opposition..

Other notable examples of people who have been stripped of the award include Harvey Weinstein because of his sexual abuse cases, Lance Armstrong for his use of performance-enhancing drugs, and John Galliano after his use of antisemitic slurs.

The Legitimists (French : Légitimistes) are royalists who adhere to the rights of dynastic succession to the French crown of the descendants of the eldest branch of the Bourbon dynasty, which was overthrown in the 1830 July Revolution. They reject the claim of the July Monarchy of 1830–1848 which placed Louis Philippe, Duke of Orléans, head of the Orléans cadet branch of the Bourbon dynasty, on the throne until he too was dethroned and driven with his family into exile.

Following the movement of Ultra-royalists during the Bourbon Restoration of 1814, Legitimists came to form one of France's three main right-wing factions, which were principally characterized by their counter-revolutionary views. According to historian René Rémond, the other two right-wing factions were the Orléanists and the Bonapartists.

Legitimists believe that the traditional rules of succession, those based upon or found in Salic law, determine the rightful King of France. The last ruling king whom Legitimists acknowledge as legitimate was Charles X, and when the line of his heirs became extinct in 1883 with the death of his grandson Henri, Count of Chambord, the most senior heir to the throne according to the Blancs d'Espagne was Infante Juan, Count of Montizón, a descendant of Louis XIV through his grandson Philip V of Spain.

The fact that all Legitimist claimants since 1883 have been members of the Spanish royal dynasty, as well as the fact that Philip V renounced his and his descendants' claims to the French throne in the Treaty of Utrecht, are irrelevant, according to Legitimists. However, these facts have prompted other French royalists to pivot to support of the Orléans line, members of which would be next in the traditional line of succession if Philip V's heirs were excluded.

The current Legitimist pretender to the French throne is Prince Louis, Duke of Anjou, the senior great-grandson of Alfonso XIII of Spain by male primogeniture, whose line was excluded from the Spanish succession due to the renunciations of Infante Jaime, Duke of Segovia.

Following the Bourbon Restoration in 1814, a strongly restricted census suffrage sent to the Chamber of Deputies an Ultra-royalist majority in 1815–1816 (la Chambre introuvable) and from 1824 to 1827. Known to be more royalist than the king (plus royalistes que le roi), the Ultras were the dominant political faction under Louis XVIII (1815–1824) and Charles X (1824–1830). Opposed to the constitutional monarchy of Louis XVIII and to the limitation of the sovereign 's power, they hoped to restore the Ancien Régime and cancel the liberal, republican and democratic ideas of the French Revolution. While Louis XVIII hoped to moderate the restoration of Bourbon rule to make it acceptable to the population, the Ultras would never abandon the dream of an integral restoration, even after the 1830 July Revolution which set the Orléanist branch on the throne and sent the Ultras back to private life in their country chateaux. Their importance during the Restoration was in part due to electoral laws which largely favored them (on one hand a Chamber of Peers composed of hereditary members and on the other a Chamber of Deputies elected under a heavily restricted census suffrage which permitted approximately 100,000 voters).

Louis XVIII's first ministers, who included Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord, Armand-Emmanuel de Vignerot du Plessis, duc de Richelieu and Élie, duc Decazes, were replaced by the Ultra-dominated Chambre introuvable. Louis XVIII finally decided to dissolve this chaotic assembly, but had an equally difficult relationship with the new liberals who replaced them. After the 1820 assassination of Charles Ferdinand, Duke of Berry, the ultra- reactionary son of the comte d'Artois (Louis XVIII's brother and future Charles X) and a short interval during which Richelieu governed, the Ultras were back in government headed by the Jean-Baptiste de Villèle.

The death in 1824 of the moderate Louis XVIII emboldened the Ultra faction. In January 1825, Villèle's government passed the Anti-Sacrilege Act which punished by death the theft of sacred vessels (with or without consecrated hosts). This anachronistic law (according to Jean-Noël Jeanneney) was in the end never applied (except on a minor point) and repealed in the first months of Louis Philippe 's reign (1830–1848). The Ultras also wanted to create courts to punish radicals and passed laws restricting the press.

After the 1830 July Revolution replaced the Bourbons with the more liberal Orléanist branch, the Ultras' influence declined, although it survived until at least the 16 May 1877 crisis and 1879. They softened their views and made the restoration of the House of Bourbon their main aim. From 1830 on, they became known as Legitimists.

During the July Monarchy of 1830 to 1848, when the junior Orléanist branch held the throne, the Legitimists were politically marginalized, many withdrawing from active political life. Until 1844, the situation was complicated by debate as to who the Bourbon heir was, as Charles X and his son, the Dauphin Louis-Antoine had both abdicated during the 1830 Revolution in favor of Charles's young grandson, Henri, Count of Chambord. Until the deaths of Charles X and his son in 1836 and 1844, many Legitimists continued to recognize each of them in turn as the rightful king, ahead of Chambord.

The fall of King Louis Philippe I in 1848 led to a strengthening of the Legitimist position. Although the childlessness of Chambord weakened the hand of the Legitimists, they came back into political prominence during the Second Republic. Legitimists joined with Orleanists to form the Party of Order which dominated parliament from the elections of May 1849 until Bonaparte's coup on 2 December 1851. They formed a prominent part of Odilon Barrot 's ministry from December 1848 to November 1849, and in 1850 were successful in passing the Falloux Law which brought the Catholic Church back into secondary education.

Through much of this time there was discussion of fusion with the Orléanist party in their common interest of a monarchical restoration. This prospect prompted several sons of Louis Philippe to declare their support for Chambord, but fusion was not achieved, and after 1850 the two parties again diverged. The most committed Orléanists supported the candidacy of Louis Philippe's third son, François d'Orléans, Prince of Joinville, for the presidency while the Legitimists largely supported allowing Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte to run for a second term. In spite of this support for Bonaparte's ambitions, they opposed his scheme to restore universal suffrage in the last months of 1851, and their leaders, like those of the Orléanists, were arrested during Bonaparte's coup.

The period of the Second Empire saw the Legitimists once again cast out of active political life.

Nevertheless, the Legitimists remained a significant party within elite opinion, attracting the support of the larger part of the remaining Ancien Régime aristocracy. After the Siege of Paris in 1870 and the 1871 Paris Commune, the Legitimists returned one final time to political prominence. The 8 February 1871 election, held under universal manhood suffrage, gave the National Assembly a royalist majority supported by the provinces while all the Parisian deputies were republican. This time the Legitimists were able to agree with the Orléanists on a program of fusion largely because of the growing likelihood that the Chambord would die without children. The liberal Orléanists agreed to recognize Chambord as king and the Orléanists claimant himself Prince Philippe, Count of Paris (1838–1894) recognized Chambord as head of the French royal house. In return, Legitimists in the Assembly agreed that should Chambord die childless, Philippe d'Orléans would succeed him as king. Unfortunately for French monarchism, Chambord's refusal to accept the tricolor as the flag of France and to abandon the fleur-de-lys, symbol of the Ancien Régime, made restoration impossible until after his death in 1883, by which time the monarchists had long since lost their parliamentary majority due to the 16 May 1877 crisis. The death of Chambord effectively dissolved the Legitimists as a political force in France.

Affected by sinistrisme, few conservatives explicitly called themselves right-wing during the Third Republic as it became a term associated with the counter-revolution and anti-republican feelings and by the 1900s was reserved for reactionary groups. Those Legitimists who had rallied to the Republic in 1893, after Chambord's death ten years before still called themselves Droite constitutionnelle or républicaine (Constitutional or Republican Right). However, they changed their name in 1899 and entered the 1902 elections under the name Action libérale (Liberal Action). By 1910, the only group which openly claimed descent from the right wing gathered only nostalgic royalists. From 1924 on, the term right-wing practically vanished from the parliamentary right's glossary.

By this time, the vast majority of Legitimists had retired to their country chateaux and abandoned the political arena. Although the Action française (French Action) remained an influential movement throughout the 1930s, its motivations for the restoration of monarchy were quite distinct from older Legitimists' views and Charles Maurras ' instrumental use of Catholicism set them at odds. Thus, Legitimists participated little in the political events of the 1920s and 1930s, in particular in the 6 February 1934 riots organized by far-right leagues. The royalist aristocrats clearly distinguished themselves from the new ultra right which was influenced by the emerging movements of fascism and Nazism. However, Legitimists joined Maurras in celebrating the fall of the Third Republic after the 1940 Battle of France as a divine surprise and many of them entered Philippe Pétain 's Vichy administration, seeing a golden opportunity to impose a reactionary program in occupied France.

French royalism largely receded to irrelevance in World War II and beyond. While before World War II, many French conservatives and other members of the right also harbored royalist aspirations, conservative movements dropped this platform during and after the war. Charles de Gaulle's center-rightist Gaullism explicitly repudiated monarchism, and far-right organizations disdained the old aristocratic elite. According to historian René Rémond 's studies of right-wing factions in France, Legitimists strongly supported the Vichy regime; nevertheless, they received little from the Vichy government, and the regime emphasized Catholic traditionalism rather than a return to aristocracy.

Legitimism revived after the Second World War for several reasons.

Since the accession of King Juan Carlos I of Spain in 1975, the senior Capetian heirs have not laid claim to the throne of Spain. The Legitimist suitor having had French nationality (which he had since birth, owing to his French mother) in 1987, and passing the nationality on to his son (the current suitor), certain arguments of the partisans of Orléans would have become obsolete.

According to René Rémond, Marcel Lefebvre 's Society of Saint Pius X, founded in 1970, shares aspects with the Legitimist movement. Nevertheless, Legitimism is a largely spent force.

Current legitimism has several instances:

A remnant of Legitimists, known as the Blancs d'Espagne (Whites of Spain), by repudiating Philip V 's renunciation of the French throne as ultra vires and contrary to the fundamental French monarchical law, upheld the rights of the eldest branch of the Bourbons, represented as of 1883 by the Carlist pretender to the Spanish throne. This group was initially minuscule, but it began to grow larger after World War II due both to the political leftism of the Orléanist pretender Henri, Count of Paris and to the active efforts of the claimants of the elder line after extinction of the Carlist male line— Infante Jaime, Duke of Segovia, the disinherited second son of Alfonso XIII of Spain ; and his son Prince Alphonse, Duke of Anjou —to secure Legitimist support, such that by the 1980s the elder line had fully reclaimed for its supporters the political title of Legitimists.

The Spanish-born Prince Luis Alfonso is the Bourbon whom the French Legitimists consider to be the de jure king of France under the name Louis XX. A 1987 attempt by the Orléanist heir (and other Bourbons, none of the elder branch) to contest Louis-Alphonse's use of the Anjou title and to deny him use of the plain coat of arms of France was dismissed by the French courts in March 1989 for lack of jurisdiction (the courts did not address the merits of the claims). He is a French citizen through his paternal grandmother and is generally recognised as the senior legitimate representative of the House of Capet.

Legitimists consider the valid rationale for restoration and the order of succession to the French throne derives from fundamental laws of the Ancien Régime, which were formed in the early centuries of the Capetian monarchy.

According to these rules, monarchy is the basic form of government and the monarch the indispensable executive of government, succession to the throne being hereditary and passing by Salic primogeniture. Thus, females and any male who is not the premier né (i.e. the legitimate eldest descendant of the most senior Capetian line) are excluded from the throne. The king must also be Catholic.

Other tenets of the Legitimist position are the following:

It has been a point of contention within the Legitimist camp to what extent French nationality constitutes a precondition for royal succession. While adherents of the Spanish Anjou line argue that princes of foreign nationality can still succeed to the French crown, others hold that French nationality of both the claimant and his ancestors is a requirement.

In the 1870s, the rival Legitimist and Orléanist claimants agreed for the sake of restoration of the monarchy in France to end their rivalry. Philippe d'Orléans, Count of Paris and grandson of Louis Philippe I, accepted the prior claim to the throne of Chambord, who remained childless; Chambord in turn acknowledged that Philippe would claim the right to succeed him as heir, and after his death many Legitimists accepted the descendants of Philippe as the rightful pretenders and became known as Unionists.

Those Legitimists who did not accept the Orléanist line as the successors of Chambord argued that the renunciation of the French throne by Philip V of Spain, second grandson of Louis XIV, was invalid; in 1883 (when Chambord died childless), the throne passed by right to Philip V's heirs in the male-line. In 1883, the senior male of the Spanish branch of Bourbons was Infante Juan, Count of Montizón. His father, Infante Carlos, Count of Molina, had lost Spain's throne in favour of his niece, the non-Salic heiress of his elder brother, Isabella II and his lineage became known as the Carlist pretenders in Spain.

When the Carlist branch died out in 1936, the French claim was inherited by the Isabelline Spanish line. As Isabella II's consort and (official) father of her children was her paternal first cousin, Francisco de Asís, Duke of Cádiz, (a male-line grandson of Charles IV via his third son, Infante Francisco de Paula of Spain) their grandson, Alfonso XIII, was now the most senior agnatic descendant of Philip V (although by that time Alfonso had been dethroned by the Second Spanish Republic). The French and Spanish claims separated at Alfonso's death as his eldest surviving son Infante Jaime, Duke of Segovia renounced his claim to the Spanish throne due to physical disability and some years later asserted a claim to the French succession based on Legitimist principles. The present French Legitimist claimant descends from Jaime while the present king of Spain descends from his younger brother Don Juan.

Second marriage (civil only, not recognized by the Church) Charlotte Luise Auguste Tiedemann 3 August 1949 Vienna No children

These are the results for broadly Legitimist parties in French national elections.

Legrand S.A. is a French industrial group historically based in Limoges in the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region.

Legrand is established in 90 countries and its products are distributed in nearly 180 countries. It generates 85% of its sales internationally. The group has expanded its product range in sustainable development and energy saving technologies, and has developed new products for EV charging/electric vehicles, lighting control and data centers.

The company's origins date back to 1865, when a Limoges porcelain (in France's Limousin region) workshop was set up on the route to Lyon originally making porcelain dishes. In 1904, the company was taken over by Frédéric Legrand who gave his name to the company. In 1919, the company entered into a partnership with an artisan from Limoges, Jean Mondot, who had started a small factory in Exideuil making electric switches using porcelain and boxwood.

Manufacturing subsequently gradually diversified into electrical equipment. At that time, before the appearance of plastic, porcelain was the best available insulating material. In 1949, following a factory fire, the decision was made to exclusively concentrate on electrical wiring devices (switches and sockets). The company very quickly extended its range to cover protection products (fuse-holders and circuit breakers, etc.), cable management products (trunking and mini-trunking), emergency lighting, etc.

Legrand is a manufacturer of electrical and digital building infrastructure products and connected devices, with a portfolio of more than 300,000 products. As of 2021, the company had operations in 90 countries and sold its products in 180 countries.

1966 : First subsidiary outside France established in Belgium.

1970: Legrand was listed on the Paris stock exchange for the first time.

1977 : Development outside Europe with the takeover of Pial in Brazil.

1980 : Bought from GEC in Liverpool, UK. Plugs and sockets company formally Fluvent, transferred works to Milton Keynes, UK.

1984 : First subsidiary in the United States with Pass & Seymour.

1989 : Acquisition of Bticino, Italy 's largest electrical equipment manufacturer.

1996 : Acquired Fael in Poland, Luminex in Colombia, MDS in India, and WattStopper in the United States.

1998 : Acquisition of Ortronics, a US leader in structured cabling and Voice Data Image (VDI).

2000 : Acquisition of Wiremold in the United States (doubling the Group's size there), and Horton Controls, a US lighting controls company, merged into its WattStopper brand, and Quintela and Tegui in Spain.

2001 : Brussels opposes the Schneider-Legrand merger.

2003 : Purchase of the entire share capital by investment funds Kohlberg Kravis Roberts (KKR) and Wendel Investissement. Legrand is withdrawn from the quoted market.

2005 : Acquisition of ICM Group (KZ and Cablofil brands), world leader in wire mesh cable trays.

2006 : Acquisition of the electrical wiring devices division of TCL China (No. 1 in China) and Shidean, Chinese leader in audio and video door entry systems. Acquisition of Vantage Controls, US lighting control specialist. KKR and Wendel Investissement remain majority shareholders. At the end of 2006, the minority shareholders (banks and institutions) sold their holding via an accelerated private institutional placement, thereby taking traded shares to 35% of the capital and increasing the share's liquidity.

2007 : Acquisition of HPM, No. 2 in electrical wiring devices in Australia, and Kontaktor, the leading Russian manufacturer of power circuit breakers. Took over MACSE, the Mexican leader in cable trays, UStec, US specialist in residential networks, TCL Wuxi, Chinese specialist in modular circuit breakers and Alpes Technologies (Annecy, France), specialist in energy compensation and measurement.

2008 : Acquisition of PW Industries, a US cable tray specialist; HDL, the No. 1 in Brazil producer of residential access control (entry phones); Estap, the Turkish leader in VDI enclosures, and Electrak, UK specialist in ground-laid cable trays. The end of the shareholder pact between KKR and Wendel Investissement. Rumors of a possible takeover of Legrand by a competitor (Siemens, ABB or General Electric) abound. In April 2008, KKR and Wendel Investissement decided to renew their shareholder pact until 2012.

2009 : Legrand was severely affected by the economic crisis. The group saw a 15.6% fall in its turnover (to €3.6 billion). It still managed to maintain its operating margin at 17.6%, as against 17.7% in 2008. A return to growth forecasted for the second half of 2010.

2011 : Legrand acquired the American company Electrorack, the French leader in independent living aids for dependent people. In May, Legrand acquired Middle Atlantic Products, a US company specializing in digital infrastructures. The same year, Legrand acquired the Spanish Neat.

2012 : Electrical equipment major Numeric Power Systems sold its UPS (uninterruptible power supply) business to France's Legrand Group for a total of Rs 806.44 crore.

2013: Legrand signed a partnership with the Henry Becquerel High School. The same year, Legrand announced the acquisition of the French Intervox, as well as Tynetec, a UK-based company specializing in assisted living systems.

2014 : In March, Legrand signs an agreement to acquire Lastar, Inc. a Moraine, Ohio cabling and connectivity products supplier which, in 2013, reported more than $140 million in revenue and had nearly 1,000 total employees in nine locations in the U.S., Europe and Asia. Brands falling under the Lastar umbrella are the Quiktron and Cables to Go which became C2G in 2012.

2015 : Legrand North America acquires Raritan Inc., completed in September. The same year, Legrand acquires a stake in Netatmo, a French start-up based in Boulogne-Billancourt (Paris area) and specialized in Internet of Things (LoT). Netatmo has nearly 225 employees and generates annual sales of around €45 million in 2017.

2017 : In June, Legrand started procedures to purchase Milestone AV, the manufacturer of AV racks and mounts in the US and overseas. Milestone manufactures products under the brand names Chief, Sanus, Echogear, Da-Lite, Projecta, and Vaddio. In November, Legrand North America acquired Server Technology.

2018: Legrand acquired the Chinese company Shenzhen Clever Electronic Co Ltd and merged with Netatmo. Same year, Legrand acquired a majority stake at Debflex, a leading French company specialized in the production of electrical equipment.

2019 : Acquisition of Connectrac, floor-based cable management. Legrand acquired leading U.S. data center power system manufacturer American Universal Electric Corporation headquartered near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and Jobo Smartech, a Chinese company of connected controls for hotel rooms.

2020 : Acquisition of Focal Point LLC, a private architectural lighting manufacturer based in Chicago. The same year, Legrand and its subsidiary Netatmo expanded their offer dedicated to the connected home with technologies such as the connected eco meter and digital key. Legrand acquired the entire capital of Borri, a company in Italy.

2021 : Acquisition of Ensto Building systems division of Ensto, a private electrification, lighting and EV charging manufacturer based in Finland, optical networking components provider Champion One, passive data communication specialist Compose, and Borri, a global provider of and single phase and three phase UPS systems. Legrand faced the risk of raw material shortages. Simultaneously, in a post-pandemic context, Legrand established record results, notably in the Data Center, Connected Products and Energy Efficiency sectors. Legrand launched a new brand "Legrand Care", a new structure that gathers Assisted Living and Healthcare brands. Legrand and the CEA Center in Grenoble unveiled a wireless and battery-free connected switch. Legrand announced that it would buy 450,000 of its own shares. Legrand acquired Emos, a company based in the Czech Republic. Legrand announced two acquisitions: Ensto Building Systems based in Provoo in Finland, and Ecotap based in Boxtel, the Netherlands.

In 2022, the company acquired UK cooling firms USystems, and French electrical power force company Voltadis. These acquisitions would be used to strengthen Legrand's position in the data centers sector. The same year, Legrand signed the EcoWatt charter of Réseau de Transport d'Électricité (the French Electricity Transmission Network), through which it committed to reduce its energy consumption and promote the reduction of energy consumption for individuals. In November, Legrand confirms the takeover of the German company A & H Meyer (specialist in connectors for commercial furniture), and the British company Power Control and also announced an increase in net income of 16.1% over the first 9 months of the year. In December, Legrand announced its acquisition of the Canadian company Encelium.

In 2001, Legrand was subject to a friendly takeover bid by Schneider Electric for all of its capital. Schneider Electric acquired up to 98,1% of Legrand's capital. If minority stakeholders and eventually the company's management opposed the bid, a veto from the European Commission about competition issues would cause the transaction to definitely fail. The exchange of shares having been carried out, Schneider was forced to resell all of them. The shares were sold to venture capitalists Wendel Investissement and KKR.

Legrand has more than 300,000 references in a hundred product families.

Since 2010, as a player in the market of electrical equipment in the building industry, Legrand announced that it will enter the sectors of charging infrastructure for electric cars, and energy efficiency.

Legrand proposes services in home automation such as products with the Netatmo technology embedded used to manage operations on a remote control of electrical and heating appliances.

Legrand also specializes in IoT and Home automation. In 2016, the French company launched its connected door. In 2020, during the CES (Consumer Electronics Show) Legrand presented new products with energy efficiency for home automation.

Legrand is present in the data center sector, notably with the following products: VDI (Virtual desktop infrastructure), PDUs (Power distribution unit), etc.

In France, Legrand has 8 production sites based near its headquarters in Limoges (Haute-Vienne).

In 2012, Legrand opened two training centers in the Paris region.

The Lesser Antillean dry forests ecoregion (WWF ID: NT0220) covers the dry forests of the coastal lowlands of the Lesser Antilles, where the eastern Caribbean Sea meets the Atlantic Ocean. These forests generally form a band around the interior wet forests of higher elevations, and because they are often flat, they are under the most pressure for human settlement and agriculture.

The primary islands in this ecoregion with drye forests are Guadeloupe, Dominica, Martinique, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Grenada. The islands are part of a volcanic arc; their interiors generally have mountainous highlands that catch more rainfall, and thus support moist forests of the Windward Islands moist forests ecoregion. The largest area of dry forests on the islands is on Saint Lucia, where the dry forests ring the coast to about 3 km into the interior, where higher elevations grade into moist forest. The same pattern holds on the island of Grenada. On the islands of Saint Vincent and Martinique, the dry forests occur in the thin transition band between the coastal dry shrubland and the upland moist forest.

The climate of the ecoregion is Tropical rainforest climate (Köppen climate classification (Af)). This climate is characterized as hot, humid, and having at least 60 mm of precipitation every month. Precipitation is slightly higher than that of the coasts, which range from 1,000 mm/year on Dominica to 1,600 mm/year on St. Vincent.

The dry forest ecoregion is 35% closed canopy, 20% open forest, 15% built-up urban area, 10% in agricultural use and the remainder in shrubs or open water. Characteristic tree species of the dry forest include those of genus Didymopanax and Miconia. Mosses and ferns are common. The soils are often disturbed by past agricultural use.

Lettres de cachet (French: [ lɛtʁ də kaʃɛ ] ; lit. ' letters of the sign/signet ') were letters signed by the king of France, countersigned by one of his ministers, and closed with the royal seal. They contained orders directly from the king, often to enforce actions and judgments that could not be appealed.

In the case of organized bodies, lettres de cachet were issued for the purpose of preventing assembly, or to accomplish some other definite act. The provincial estates were convoked (called to assembly) in this manner, and it was by a lettre de cachet (in this case, a lettre de jussipri), or by showing in person in a lit de justice, that the king ordered a parlement to register a law despite that parlement 's refusal to pass it.

The best-known lettres de cachet, however, were penal, by which a subject was imprisoned without trial and without an opportunity of defense (after inquiry and due diligence by the lieutenant de police) in a state prison or an ordinary jail, confined in a convent or the General Hospital of Paris, transported to the colonies, or expelled to another part of the realm, or from the realm altogether. The lettres were mainly used against drunkards, troublemakers, prostitutes, squanderers of the family fortune, or insane persons. The wealthy sometimes petitioned such lettres to dispose of inconvenient individuals, especially to prevent unequal marriages (nobles with commoners), or to prevent a scandal (the lettre could prevent court cases that might otherwise dishonour a family).

In this respect, the lettres de cachet were a prominent symbol of the abuses of the monarchy of the ancien régime, and as such were suppressed during the French Revolution. In 1789 and 1790, all cases were reviewed by a commission which confirmed most of the sentences. Historian Claude Quétel has interpreted these confirmations as indicating that the lettres were not as arbitrary and unjust as they have been represented after the Revolution, and he hence speaks of a légende noire ('black legend').

The power to issue lettres de cachet was a royal privilege recognized by the French monarchic civil law that developed during the 13th century, as the Capetian monarchy overcame its initial distrust of Roman law. The principle can be traced to a maxim which furnished a text of the Pandects of Justinian : in their Latin version, " Rex solutus est a legibus ", or "The king is released from the laws". "The French legal scholars interpreted the imperial office of the Justinian code generically and arrived at the conclusion that every 'king is an emperor in his own kingdom', that is, he possesses the prerogatives of legal absolutism that the Corpus Juris Civilis attributes to the Roman emperor."

This meant that when the king intervened directly, he could decide without heeding the laws, and even contrary to the laws. This was an early conception, and in early times the order in question was simply verbal; some letters patent of Henry III in 1576 state that François de Montmorency was "prisoner in our castle of the Bastille in Paris by verbal command" of the late king Charles IX.

In the 14th century, the principle was introduced that the order should be written, and hence arose the lettre de cachet. The lettre de cachet belonged to the class of lettres closes, as opposed to lettres patentes, which contained the expression of the legal and permanent will of the king, and had to be furnished with the seal of state affixed by the chancellor.

The lettres de cachet, on the contrary, were signed simply by a secretary of state for the king; they bore merely the imprint of the king's privy seal, from which circumstance they were often called, in the 14th and 15th centuries, lettres de petit signet or lettres de petit cachet, and were entirely exempt from the control of the chancellor.

In addition to serving the government as a silent weapon against political adversaries or controversial writers and as a means of punishing culprits of high birth without the scandal of a lawsuit, the lettres de cachet had many other uses. They were employed by the police in dealing with prostitutes, and on their authority lunatics were shut up in hospitals and sometimes in prisons.

They were also often used by heads of families as a means of correction, for example, to protect the family honour from the disorderly or criminal conduct of sons. The case of the Marquis de Sade (imprisoned 1777–1790 under a lettre de cachet obtained by his wealthy and influential mother-in-law) is a prominent example. Wives, too, took advantage of them to curb the profligacy of husbands, and vice versa.

In reality, the secretary of state had delegated powers, and could issue them at his own discretion, and in most cases the king was unaware of their issue. In the 18th century the letters were often issued blank, i.e. without containing the name of the person against whom they were directed; the recipient, or mandatary, filled in the name in order to make the letter effective.

Protests against the lettres de cachet were made continually by the Parlement of Paris and by the provincial parlements, and also by the Estates-General. In 1648, during the Fronde, the sovereign courts of Paris, by their Arrêt d'Union, procured their momentary suppression in a kind of charter of liberties which they imposed upon the crown, but which was short-lived.

It was not until the reign of Louis XVI that a reaction against the abuse became clearly perceptible. At the beginning of that reign Malesherbes during his short ministry endeavoured to infuse some measure of justice into the system, and in March 1784 the baron de Breteuil, a minister of the king's household, addressed a circular to the intendants and the lieutenant of police with a view to preventing the most serious abuses connected with the issue of lettres de cachet.

The Comte de Mirabeau wrote a scathing indictment of lettres de cachet while imprisoned in the dungeon of Vincennes (by lettre de cachet obtained by his father). The treatise was published after his liberation in 1782 under the title Les Lettres de cachet et des prisons d'etat and was widely read throughout Europe.

Besides the Bastille, there were thirty prisons in Paris by 1779 in which a person could be detained without trial. Convents were used for the same purpose.

They were reported to have been openly sold, in the reign of Louis XV, by the mistress of one of his ministers.

In Paris, in 1779, the Cour des Aides demanded their suppression, and in March 1788 the Parlement of Paris made some exceedingly energetic remonstrances, which are important for the light they throw upon old French public law. The crown, however, did not decide to lay aside this weapon, and in a declaration to the States-General in the royal session of June 23, 1789 (art. 15) it did not renounce it absolutely.

Lettres de cachet were abolished after the French Revolution by the Constituent Assembly, but Napoleon reestablished their penal equivalent by a political measure in the decree of 8 March 1801 on the state prisons. This was one of the acts brought up against him by the senatus-consulte of 3 April 1814, which pronounced his fall "considering that he has violated the constitutional laws by the decrees on the state prisons."

The levant (Catalan : Llevant, Italian : Levante, Maltese : Lvant, Greek : Λεβάντες, Spanish : Levante) is an easterly wind that blows in the western Mediterranean Sea and southern France, an example of mountain-gap wind. In Roussillon it is called "llevant" and in Corsica "levante". In the western Mediterranean, particularly when the wind blows through the Strait of Gibraltar, it is called the Viento de Levante or the Levanter. It is also known as the Solano.

When blowing moderately or strongly, the levant causes heavy swells on the Mediterranean. Usually gentle and damp, the levant frequently brings clouds and rain. When it brings good weather, it is known as the " levant blanc ", or " levante calma " in Gibraltar.

The origin of the name is the same as that of the name Levant for the region of the eastern Mediterranean: it is the Latin word "levante", the participle of levare "to raise" – as in sol levante "rising sun". It thus referred to the eastern direction of the rising sun.

The name of the wind pattern entered English from Middle French levante (French : rising), the sun rises in the east, the perceived origin point of the wind and rain. It is used to describe the direction east, the wind coming from the east, as well as a general term for the lands bordering the eastern Mediterranean.

The wind rises in the central Mediterranean or around the Balearic Islands and blows westwards reaching its greatest intensity through the Strait of Gibraltar. The winds are moist carrying fog and precipitation in the eastern side of the Strait, but dry in the western side, as the moisture rains on the mountains between Algeciras and Tarifa. The winds are well known for creating a particular cloud formation above the Rock of Gibraltar ; In Almería, the winds are well known for making the temperatures rise as the wind blows across the desert interior of the province. The Levanter winds can occur at any time in the year, but are most common from May to October.

The Strait of Gibraltar, located at the western entrance to the Mediterranean Sea, is frequently associated with strong gap winds that can produce dangerous seas, especially when they blow against tide, current or swell through the Strait, which is a narrow sea-level passage about 15 km (9.3 mi) wide and 55 km (34 mi) long that is surrounded by terrain reaching several thousand feet.

The most pronounced gap wind through the Strait, the Levanter, can produce winds of 20 to 40 kn (40 to 70 km/h) in and to the west of the gap when there is higher pressure to the east, over the Mediterranean, with lower pressure to the west of Gibraltar. The sinking motions accompanying such anticyclonic conditions cause stability in the low-level air flow, strongly suppressing vertical air motion and may result in the formation of an inversion within a few thousand feet of the surface. Such an inversion provides a cap that contains the low-level air and results in greater topographic blocking and the acceleration of the airflow through the gap forming the Strait. Under such circumstances, the winds can go from a moderate or fresh easterly over the Alboran Sea (the western part of the Mediterranean) to gale force strength on the western side of the Strait and to its west. Because the flow is accelerating and there is often a significant pressure gradient through the Strait, the strongest winds are not observed mid-Strait, as might be expected if the funnel mechanism was dominant; rather, the strongest winds are in the western Strait and immediately downwind to the west. Levanters are most frequent during the warm season from April until October and often reach a peak in spring, when the Mediterranean is comparatively cool, increasing the stability of the low-level air flow.

Sometimes the levanter forms a characteristic cloud named "banner-cloud" over the Rock of Gibraltar. However, this is not always the case and a particular set of conditions is required for its formation.

Near the surface, the levanter is moist, but is unsaturated. As the moist air, which must be capped to be stable and so unable to rise by convection, is forced to rise over the Rock, the moisture condenses to form a cloud that streams away west from its top. If wind speeds are too low and stability high in the near-surface layer, the cloud does not form and condensation is also sensitive to small changes in moisture content, such that when the wind across the Rock veers into the southeast, the flow becomes too dry for the cloud to form, bringing drier air from North Africa. When the wind speed is too low, the air is blocked and unable to rise to form the cloud. At high wind speeds, the turbulent mixing to the lee of the Rock distributes the moisture through a comparatively deep layer and the cloud is, at best, very broken. Often it dissolves immediately west of the Rock in these turbulent windy conditions.

In suitable conditions, the characteristic "pennant" cloud forms downwind. It usually extends about 5 km (3 mi) west from the top of the Rock in a turbulent plume. (Similar clouds may sometimes be seen elsewhere – notably the pennant cloud that forms on the Matterhorn in Switzerland.) This cloud hangs over the centre of the city of Gibraltar, while there is usually sunny weather in to the north and south from the southern outskirts of the city.

On the western side of the Rock, the winds near sea level are often from the west or southwest, as the air forms large overturning rolls, more than 350 m (1,100 ft) deep in the lee protection of the mountain, but strong winds tend to alter this flow regime.

The pennant cloud is not seen in westerly winds, although many of the same processes occur - it is just that the air is usually drier and may be warmer, as well as being less stable – so that convection from the surface is deeper and not capped near the mountaintop level. (Low cloud can sometimes be seen on the Rock, early in the morning in westerly winds, but this disappears as temperatures rise. It is also likely that the very steep eastern slope of the Rock tends to make the downwind flow too turbulent for cloud formation.)

Around dawn, the flow is relatively smooth through the cloud, but later in the morning, as it becomes warmer, some convective overturning develops within the plume as temperatures rise.

Formation of the cloud is classically very near the top of the ridge-line of the Rock at nearly 400 m (1,300 ft) altitude, but the base is usually a little lower in the turbulent flow to the west. The top of the cloud is rarely much more than 450 m (1,500 ft) above Gibraltar Bay.

When winds are very strong across the crest of the Rock, usually in excess of 15 m/s (34 mph), the cloud becomes detached from the crest of the Rock forming west of a line parallel to the ridge up to about 100 m (300 ft) from it. At the same time, curved arcs of cloud may be seen within or below the pennant cloud, indicating the formation of a roll cloud. Usually, this produces light and rather variable winds near sea level, at times forming a cyclonic circulation area over Gibraltar Bay and the town. However, at times, the strong winds break away from the crest of the Rock, producing gusts to about the speed of the wind over the crest. These winds are usually northeasterly or easterly and may be several Beaufort forces stronger than the mean wind before and after.

Li livres de jostice et de plet(z) ("The Book of Justice and of Pleas") is an Old French legal treatise compiled by the postglossators of the school of Orléans in the mid-thirteenth century (c. 1260). It was influenced by canon law (especially the decretals of Gregory IX), Roman law (especially the Digest), the customary law of the Orléanais, and the legislation of the Capetian Kings of France. It does not have the sense of a finished work, possesses lacunae, and is somewhat disorganised, being possibly the work of a student of the University of Orléans.

The first book of the Livres is a free translation of the first three paragraphs of the Digest. It is not a coutoumier (compilation of customary law) and most of the customary law it cites is limited to Orléans. Among the royal acts it reproduces is one of Saint Louis from 1254, in which the king depicted as judge declares himself the guardian of the peace and rest of his subjects: nos deserrens de la dete de la real poesté la pez et le respous de nos sojeiz. The Livres may have influenced the later legislation of Philip the Fair.

With regards to the law of fiefs, the Livres states that dukes, counts, viscounts, and barons could all hold their land from one another. The Livres also states that la bone devise de droit des persones, des gens, est tele que tot homes ou il sont franc ou serf : "the good division of the law of persons is that all men are either free or servile." This law is based on the Digest but the meaning of the word servi that the medieval author translates " serf " meant " slave ".

The Livres, by defining treason (traïson) as férir, et l'en ne voie pas le cop venir (to wound [someone], and when the blow could not be seen coming), declared all crossbowmen to be traitors, since nobody could see their blows coming.

The Livres has provided scholars with unique insight into medieval legal attitudes to sexual crimes. It does not lay out punishment for prostitutes, preferring to reintegrate them into society in accordance with canon law. It does, however, prescribe the banishment and confiscation of property of the maquerel des femmes (procurer) and the owner of a brothel (bordelerie). It also describes penalties for male homosexuality and is the first known work to describe penalties for lesbianism as well. On the first offence the male sodomite was to be castrated, on the second dismembered, and on the third burned alive. The lesbian offender was to be dismembered on the first two offences (although exactly what two "members" were to be cut off is uncertain) and burned alive on the third. All their goods accrued to the crown.

Liber Historiae Francorum (English: "The Book of the History of the Franks") is a chronicle written anonymously during the 8th century. The first sections served as a secondary source for early Franks in the time of Marcomer, giving a short breviarum of events until the time of the late Merovingians. The subsequent sections of the chronicle are important primary sources for the contemporaneous history. They provide an account of the Pippinid family in Austrasia before they became the most famous Carolingians.

The Liber Historiae Francorum uses a lot of material from the earlier Historia Francorum by bishop and historian Gregory of Tours, completed in 594.

Richard Gerberding, a modern editor of the text, vindicates the coherence and accuracy of its account while giving reasons for locating the anonymous author in Soissons, who was likely a part of the royal monastery of Saint-Medard. Richard Gerberding characterises the author as Neustrian and as "a staunch Merovingian legitimate, secular as opposed to ecclesiastically minded, and an enthusiastic admirer and probably a member of that aristocratic class based on the Seine - Oise valley whose deeds, wars and kings he describes".

Liber Historiae Francorum is customarily dated to the year 727 because of a reference to the end of the sixth year of Theuderic IV. It offers a Neustrian perspective of the era of mayors of the palace, where the factions of the great territorial magnates could only be held in check and balanced by the consecrated legitimacy of the Merovingian king. Liber Historiae Francorum has been explored and interpreted by Richard Gerberding and more recently by Rosamond McKitterick, in History and Memory in the Carolingian World. As a widely read narrative, it helped create a sense of cultural solidarity among the readership for whom it was intended, whose biases it caters to, and whose political agenda it promotes.

As for that agenda, Fouracre and Gerberding show that the book supports the kings of the Merovingian dynasty only insofar as they rule with the consultation of the major nobles. The nobles, in turn, are supported only insofar as they do not aspire above their station.

It is one of a corpus of new books of history written in the 8th century, and copied and widely distributed in the 9th century, which offered their readers (and listeners) a pure and comprehensive background that set the Franks only distantly in the context of the Roman Empire (the Roman Empire is virtually ignored) and more immediately in the Christian Gallo-Roman world.

From the outset, the book promises to present the origins and deeds of the Frankish kings and people. It states that the Franks originated from a group of Trojan refugees, similar to the Italian refugees of the Aeneid, finding themselves on the north coast of the Black Sea, before making their way across the Danubian Plain to the Rhineland. To accomplish this, the book relies heavily on the Gallo-Roman bishop and historian Gregory of Tours, who died in 594, whose history it adapts and augments.

The last 19 chapters, numbered 35 through 53 in Bruno Krusch's edition, present an independent account of events in the Frankish lands in the 7th and early 8th centuries.

This part of the work begins with Chlothar II (584–629), who started his reign as an infant King of Neustria, one of the smallest territories of Francia. He was under the regency of his mother, Fredegund, and in an uneasy alliance with Chlothar's uncle Guntram, King of Burgundy (d. 592). Chlothar assumed full power over Neustria upon the death of his mother in 597 and continued his mother's feud with Queen Brunhilda of Austrasia with equal viciousness and bloodshed, finally achieving her execution in an especially brutal manner in 613 and uniting Francia under his rule. Like his father, he built up his territories by invading after the deaths of other kings.

Chlothar's reign was lengthy by contemporary standards, but saw the continuing erosion of royal power by the nobility against a backdrop of feuding Merovingians. The Edict of Paris in 614, which was concerned with several aspects of appointments to offices and the administration of the kingdom, has been interpreted in different ways by modern historians. In 617, Chlothar made the Mayor of the Palace a role held for life, an important step in the progression of this office from being first the manager of the royal household to the effective head of government, and eventually the monarch, under Pepin the Younger in 751. Chlothar ceded rule over Austrasia to his young son Dagobert I in 623. Unusually for a Merovingian monarch, he practiced monogamy, though deaths meant that he had three queens. He was generally an ally of the church and, perhaps inspired by the example of his uncle Guntram, his reign seems to lack the outrageous acts of murder perpetrated by many of his relations, with the exception of the execution of Brunhilda.

Chapter 43 relates the attempted usurpation of Austrasia by the Pippinid mayor Grimoald the Elder in summary form. It ends with Grimoald's death by torture under Clovis II who ruled Neustria. Chapter 44 comments on Clovis:

At the same time, he brought ruin to the kingdom of the Franks with disastrous calamities. This Clovis, moreover, had every kind of filthy habit. He was a seducer and a debaser of women, a glutton, and a drunk. About his death and end, nothing of historical worth may be said. Many writers condemn his end because they do not know the extent of his evil. Thus in uncertainty concerning it, they refer from one to another.

The rest of this chapter and the beginning of the next chapter stretch between Clovis's death, usually dated to the late 650s, and the accession of Theuderic III, usually dated to 673, a four-year reign of "the boy king Chlotar ".

Chapters 45ff, as Ursinus the Abbot had done, provide a hostile account of mayor Ebroin of Neustria. In contrast to the description of Clovis II quoted above, the author has nothing but praise for Childebert III, "a famous man", whom he describes as "the glorious lord of good memory, Childebert, the just king." The closing chapters mainly cover Charles Martel.

Liber Historiae Francorum became a primary source for the Continuations to Fredegar's Chronicle, as redacted by Count Childebrand in 751 on behalf of his half-brother, Charles Martel.

Tractatus Theologico-Politicus (1670) Two Treatises of Government (1690) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) The Wealth of Nations (1776) Rights of Man (1791) A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792) Democracy in America (1835) On Liberty (1859) The Protestant Ethic (1905) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The General Theory (1936) The Road to Serfdom (1944) Human Action (1949) Capitalism and Freedom (1962) A Theory of Justice (1971) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974)

Liberalism and radicalism have played a role in the political history of France. The main line of conflict in France in the long nineteenth century was between monarchists (mainly Legitimists and Orléanists but also Bonapartists) and republicans (Radical-Socialists, Opportunist Republicans, and later socialists). The Orléanists, who favoured constitutional monarchy and economic liberalism, were opposed to the Republican Radicals.

The Radical Party and especially the "republican" parties (Democratic Republican Alliance, Republican Federation, National Centre of Independents and Peasants, Independent Republicans, Republican Party, and Liberal Democracy) have since embraced liberalism, including its economic version, and have mostly joined either the Union for a Popular Movement in 2002, later renamed The Republicans in 2015, while a minority are affiliated with the Union of Democrats and Independents, launched in 2012. Emmanuel Macron, a former member of the Socialist Party, launched En Marche! (later re-named Renaissance) in 2016 and has served as President of France since 2017.

The early high points of liberalism in France were:

In France, as in much of Southern Europe, the term liberal was used during the 19th century either to refer to the traditional liberal anti-clericalism or economic liberalism. Economic liberalism in France was long associated more with the Orléanists and with Opportunist Republicans (whose heir was the Democratic Republican Alliance), rather than the Radical Party, leading to the use of the term radical to refer to political liberalism. The Radicals tended to be more statist than most European liberals, but shared liberal values on other issues, especially support for individual liberty and secularism, while the Republicans were keener on economic liberalism than secularism.

Intellectuals played a powerful role in all the movements, for example a major spokesman for radicalism was Émile Chartier (1868–1951), who wrote under the pseudonym of "Alain". He was a leading theorist of radicalism, and his influence extended through the Third and Fourth Republics. He stressed individualism, seeking to defend the citizen against the state. He warned against all forms of power – military, clerical, and economic. To oppose them, he exalted the small farmer, the small shopkeeper, the small town, and the little man. He idealized country life and saw Paris as a dangerous font of power.

After World War II, the Republicans gathered in the liberal-conservative National Centre of Independents and Peasants, from which the conservative-liberal Independent Republicans was formed in 1962. The originally centre-left Radical Party was a declining force and joined the centre-right in 1972, causing the split of the left-wing faction and the foundation of the Radical Party of the Left, closely associated to the Socialist Party. The former was later associated with the Union for a Popular Movement.

In 1978 both the Republican Party (successor of the Independent Republicans) and the Radical Party were founding components, along with the Christian-democratic Centre of Social Democrats, of the Union for French Democracy, an alliance of non- Gaullist centre-right forces. The Republican Party, re-founded as Liberal Democracy and re-shaped as an economic liberal party, left the federation in 1998 and was later merged, along with the Radical Party, into the liberal-conservative Union for a Popular Movement (later The Republicans) in 2002. The Radicals and several former Republicans launched the Union of Democrats and Independents in 2012.

In 2016 Emmanuel Macron, a former member of the Socialist Party, launched La République En Marche!, a liberal party, and was elected President of France in the 2017 presidential election. The party formed an alliance with the Democratic Movement, established in 2017 as a successor of the Union for French Democracy, stripped of most former Republicans, who joined the Union for a Popular Movement (later The Republicans) or the Union of Democrats and Independents.

Liberties and Responsibilities of Universities is the official name of a French law aiming at revamping entirely the French public higher education system. The bill was presented by the French Ministry of Higher Education Valérie Pécresse and was officially voted on 11 August 2007 by the Parliament. The law is commonly referred to as the law LRU (after the acronym of the official name), or Law Pécresse. It is sometimes called the law on the autonomy of universities, because the law give universities more financial autonomy, so that the government will stop funding them.

The text of the bill consists of six titles. The first title recall public service and higher education's mission. The second title is about the management of universities. The third deals with the new responsibilities for universities. The three other titles give additional details about the reform.

The bill was rapidly voted by the Parliament in July 2007, and definitively adopted on 1 August 2007, less than three months after Nicolas Sarkozy's election. The university students, on holidays during the vote of the law, began to express their discontentment in October 2007.

University Reforms had been promised by French President Nicolas Sarkozy before the 2007 Presidential Elections. Prime Minister François Fillon announced the reform would be the most important of his term in office. Therefore, the reform was debated long before the bill was officially presented by the government.

Soon after the presidential elections in May 2007, the Higher Education minister Valérie Pécresse announced to university representatives (students, teachers, researchers, presidents of universities) that her ministry would work on the reform. She said the bill on university autonomy would be voted in July by Parliament, during an extraordinary session, while the other reforms would follow in the next months. The ministry released a first draft on 22 June. Some representatives were dissatisfied, saying that independency was not the main concern. The priority was to address student failure.

University autonomy concerns university management, i.e. the powers of the presidents and the administration councils, also recruitment and paying teachers. The majority of the representatives of students, teachers and researchers said they were strongly opposed to reform:

To satisfy the students, Nicolas Sarkozy said the presentation of the bill would be delayed (the bill was to be examined during the Ministers Council on 26 June). At the end of June, he met and discussed the bill with presidents of universities, then with representatives of researchers, then of teachers, and finally student organizations (mainly UNEF and UNI), along with François Fillon and Valérie Pécresse. The UNEF, the FAGE and the CGT, the main associations of students, withdrew from the discussions. The most controversial measures were the selectiveness in universities and the underrepresentation of students in administration councils.

All the organizations were satisfied by the postponement of the bill. The student organizations (mainly UNEF) said the government had retained the lessons from the CPE discontentment. The organization of university presidents (CPU) said they would have time to pass amendments, notably to make the reform compulsory for all universities, while it was to be initially optional.

Nicolas Sarkozy, François Fillon and Valérie Pécresse declared they were ready to grant some points to the representatives. They said they were ready to modify the text on administration councils to include more people in it, but refused to include more students. They were ready to discuss the selectiveness.

A new bill was released by the Ministry of Higher Education on 26 June. The number of students in the administration councils could be extended to 5, and the total number of members to 30. The reform would apply to all universities (as opposed to the initial draft) by 2012. A vice-president would be appointed by the students to represent them. The measure on selectiveness (diploma at the end of the first year) was abandoned.

Organizations expressed their satisfaction, but criticized the increasing power of presidents of universities and the new management in universities. The bill include measures reinforcing the powers of the administration councils. They would define the missions of each teachers-researchers. Bonuses are decided by the board and the president. Recruitment is managed by the president and a board composed of professionals of companies and teachers-researchers.

On 11 July 2007, just before the examination of the bill by the Senate, more than 800 teacher-researchers signed a petition, to demand various modifications of the bill. The petition expressed concerns about the university directory board choosing itself the teachers instead of electing them, and about the excessive power of university presidents over recruitment.

The bill was submitted to the Senate on 12 July 2007. Senators modified the text so that the external members of the directive board be elected by the other members, instead of being nominated by the president. Thus, these external members would be able to take part in the election of the president with the other members. Valerie Pécresse accepted the modification. The bill was voted on 13 July. The Socialist Party voted against the bill.

On 24 July, the bill was examined by the National Assembly. The Socialist Party said that while if they agreed to reform the higher education system, the management of universities was not a priority, and that the bill was unadapted to the needs. The socialist deputies criticized the law and voted against it. They said they expected a real reform of the higher education system. Valérie Pécresse argued this law was the indispensable basis for further reform.

The deputies removed the senatorial amendment which modified the election of the president. The major change came from an amendment proposed by the UMP deputy Claude Goasguen. The amendment proposed that the president of university be reserved for a teacher-researcher. The amendment was unanimously voted, while Valerie Pécresse had opposed it. However, the minister succeeded in modifying the bill, so that any executive of the university can be elected president.

As the government chose to use the urgency procedure to pass the bill, only one vote was permitted for each house of the parliament. A joint commission of 7 senators and 7 deputies then worked again on the text. The final bill was definitively approved by the houses on 1 August 2007.

The bill attempt at introducing greater freedom and responsibility for institutions of higher learning showed positive advances, as well as negative aspects.

Among the positive aspects of the bill, four points emerge:

Internal governance was limited. Under the aegis of academic freedom, the bill maintained the privileges of the status of academics:

At the beginning of October 2007, period when university classes begin, students began to express their opposition to the bill. Students of the three Toulouse universities call for a general mobilization to demand the removal of the Pécresse law. They said they were ready to go on strike. Students from Lille also announced they were ready to take measures. Various universities began to be blocked by students at the beginning of November, including Le Mirail (Toulouse II), Tours, Paris I (Tolbiac), Rouen, Perpignan, Lille II, Rennes III. Aix-Marseille 1 only decided a strike. The students denounced the privatization of universities. Valerie Pécresse declared these movements were unjustified, arguing the state would remain implicated in the funding of universities.

Students organizations declared the new management of universities would make non-profitable studies disappear. They condemned the inequalities between universities the law would cause, without the support of the government. They also opposed the increasing power of the presidents and the underrepresentation of students in directive boards. They said governmental action should focus on financial aids to students.

The blockages extended on 7 and 8 November to Paris IV Clignancourt, Aix-Marseilles, Nantes, Lille I, while Lyon-II, Lyon-III and Lille III only decided a strike. Other action was planned in other universities, but did not lead to blockages. On 9 November, demonstrations took place in Paris, Rennes, Toulouse and Perpignan, with clashes with police. Around 15 universities (out of 85) were blocked for a week, and more than 50 organized demonstrations. The next week, the movement amplified and 36 universities were blocked on 14 November 42 on 15 November. Students organizations (UNEF, UNI, Cé, Fade) met with Valerie Pécresse, without outcome. Organizations (among them the UNEF) said they would continue the movement unless the government gave guarantee on state fundings. On 22 November, demonstrations were held in Paris, Rennes, Bordeaux, Lyon, along with lycées students. The next week, from 26 November, various lycées began to be blocked.

On 26 November, François Fillon promised to increase the budget dedicated to universities in the next years to satisfy the students. The prime minister said the governmental funding for universities would increase by 50% in the next five-year period, which means an additional one billion euros for each year until 2012, the total budget for the five years passing from 10 to 15 billion euros. On 27 November, while various demonstrations took place in France, with 30.000 participants, discussions were held between students organizations and Valérie Pécresse. The minister of higher education promised various modifications of the law, including a reduction of selectiveness. UNEF representants said they were satisfied by these guarantees. Soon after, the organization chose to stop the blockages. However, the mobilization amplified in lycées. In Paris, more than 30 lycées out of 73 were blocked, and more than 200 in total.

At the end of November, some 100 lycées (out of 1,500 in France) and some 40 universities were still blocked, but at the beginning of December, the classes resumed in most universities and lycées. On 13 December, Valérie Pécresse unveiled a plan to address university students' failure, the second point of the vast reform of university.

A library curator (French : conservateur des bibliothèques) is a senior civil servant in the French civil service, responsible for the management and supervision of state or local government libraries. This corps (or cadre d'emplois in the case of local government) comprises two grades: "curator" (conservateur) and "chief curator" (conservateur en chef). State curators can be promoted to a higher corps as a general library curator (conservateur général des bibliothèques) within the state civil service.

The corps of library curators (state civil service) is governed by decree No. 92-26 of 9 January 1992, as amended by decree No. 2001-946 of 11 October 2001, decree No. 2007-653 of 30 April 2007, decree No. 2010-966 of 26 August 2010, decree No. 2017-144 of 7 February 2017, and decree No. 2017-852 of 6 May 2017. This is the scientific staff corps for libraries, belonging to Category A of the civil service. It is an interministerial corps under the authority of the Ministry of Higher Education and Research.

The employment group (cadre d'emplois) for library curators (local government civil service) is governed by decree No. 91-841 of 2 September 1991, which has been amended several times. The employment framework has similar characteristics to its state counterpart.

Curators are recruited through competitive examinations, organized by the Ministry of Higher Education and Research for state curators and by the CNFPT [ fr ] for local government curators.

Entry into this training requires passing a recruitment examination, which can be:

All successful candidates undergo 18 months of paid training. The training for state curators includes a three-month internship. At the Institut national des études territoriales in Strasbourg, local government curator trainees must complete five internships, lasting between 3 weeks and 3 months.

There is therefore no longer a shared training path for state and local government curators. During this training period, the successful candidates are paid trainee curators.

The library curator diploma does not grant a specific RNCP level.

In addition, librarians who meet certain age and seniority conditions can be promoted to curator without an examination. The new state curators follow a six-month adaptation training at the École nationale supérieure des sciences de l'information et des bibliothèques (ENSSIB).

In the local government civil service, this curator corps includes two successive grades:

Some curators who have reached the grade of chief curator can change corps to be promoted to general library curator. This is a single-grade corps, comprising 4 pay grades. This corps only exists in the state civil service; there is no corresponding employment framework in the local government civil service.

Members of the library curator corps form the senior management of libraries. They are responsible for supervising teams, managing services and budgets, and directing the libraries under their charge.

According to the decrees, they build, organize, enrich, evaluate, and utilize the library collections of all kinds. They are responsible for this heritage. They organize public access to the collections and the dissemination of documents for research, information, or cultural purposes. The collection catalogs are created under their responsibility. They may participate in the training of professionals and the public in the fields of libraries and documentation, as well as in scientific and technical information in these same areas. Chief curators assume special responsibilities due to the importance of the collections or the scientific or administrative missions entrusted to them. They may be assigned management and coordination functions as well as study and advisory roles involving special responsibilities.

A number of local government libraries (municipal libraries, departmental libraries [ fr ]) also employ curators.

State curators who have reached the grade of chief curator, as well as general curators, can be appointed to the corps of the General Inspectorate of Education, Sport, and Research [ fr ] (there are no more than ten positions).

For a long time, the title of "curator" (conservateur) was only recognized for certain positions in French libraries, while other individuals held the title of "librarian" (bibliothécaire) or "chief librarian" (bibliothécaire en chef).

In 1952, decree No. 52-554 of 16 May organized a corps of librarians, in which the highest grades were named "curator" and "chief curator." Following the statutory reform introduced by decree No. 69-1265 of 31 December 1969, two scientific staff corps were established: a corps of curators comprising three grades (2nd class curator, 1st class curator, and chief curator), and a corps of general inspectors of libraries [ fr ].

The reform of January 1992 maintained the corps of curators but created a corps of general curators above it and another Category A corps of "librarians" below it. The corps of general inspectors was phased out, and inspection missions were carried out by chief curators and, primarily, by general curators.

From 1991 (1992 for state curators) to 2010, the curator career comprised three grades: 2nd class curator, 1st class curator, and chief curator. The 2010 reforms (the one in January for local government, in August for the state) merged the grades of 2nd class and 1st class curator.

In France, life imprisonment is a punishment of indeterminate length and may last for the remainder of the convict's life. The sentence is the most severe punishment given under French law and it can be imposed by the courts for aggravated murder, treason, terrorism, drug kingpin and other serious felonies resulting in death or involving torture. There is an average of 25 sentences of life imprisonment per year and there are 550 inmates currently jailed for life. Life sentences for crimes other than aggravated murder are rare.

Inmates jailed for life are required to serve a safety period of 18 to 22 years before they become eligible for parole.

In the case of child murder involving rape or torture, the premeditated murder of a state official (since 2011), and terrorism resulting in death, the court can impose a safety period of up to 30 years, or order that the prisoner is ineligible for parole at all, so-called perpétuité incompressible, or "non-reducible eternity". In all criminal cases, a review can be demanded after 30 years, although in the case of nominal non-parole sentences it is rarely if ever granted.

It is possible to give a reduction of the safety period for serious signs of social re-adaptation (even if the court has ordered that the prisoner is to spend the rest of his or her life in prison), and it is possible to be freed before the safety period for serious health reasons.

From 2011, the maximum penalty for persons who were under 16 years of age at the time of their crime is 20 years' imprisonment, with eligibility for parole in 10 years; life sentences are very rarely imposed to offenders between 16 and 18, the last being Mathieu Moulinas in June 2013 for raping and burning alive Agnès Marin two years earlier and the last before him was Patrick Dils in 1986 for stoning two children before being exonerated.

The Ligue de défense de la race nègre (English: League for the Defense of the Negro Race) was an originally French civil rights organization of Black persons. It was founded in 1927 out of a predecessor organization whose roots went back to 1924. Its headquarters were in Paris, but in 1937 the French organization was disbanded. Under the name Liga zur Verteidigung der Negerrasse, there was a German section in Berlin from 1929 to 1935.

The Ligue universelle de défense de la race noire [ Wikidata ] was founded on April 30, 1924, by Beninese Pan-Africanist Kojo Tovalou Houénou who also acted as chairman. It was the first major rallying organization of specifically Caribbean- as well as African-descended black people in France. It published the bimonthly journal Les Continents from May 1924, headed by Martinican writer René Maran. That same year, Tovalou traveled to the United States and attended a convention of Marcus Garvey 's Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA), where he went on to speak at Carnegie Hall. Upon his return to Paris, these contacts were deemed dangerous by French authorities and Tovalou was forced to leave the country. The simultaneous publication in Les Continents of a sharp text by Maran against the first African member of the French parliament, Blaise Diagne, led to a libel suit. Weakened by the absence of its chairman, the Ligue disbanded.

From the ranks of the dissolved Ligue, former French soldier Lamine Senghor from Senegal and young lawyer Joseph Gothon-Lunion from Guadeloupe founded a new organization, the Comité de défense de la race nègre [ Wikidata ] (CDRN), in March 1926. It edited the magazine La Voix des Nègres. Particularly through the efforts of Senghor, who traveled through French port cities and gave speeches to workers, offshoots of the CDRN were founded there as in West Africa. In 1926, the CDRN had about 1000 members, 250 in Marseille, 150 in Bordeaux, 300 in Le Havre and 200 in Paris.

However, content-related disputes quickly developed in the CDRN. On the one hand, there was the question of whether the term nègre or noir should serve as a self-designator - the retention of the term nègre was important to Senghor; he wanted to reappropriate the term and "pull this word out of the mud through which they drag it to make it a symbol." According to him, nègre symbolized African origins and political radicalism, whereas noir was associated with colonialist political ideas.

At the center, however, was the question of the group's political radicalism. The assimilationist part of the committee was concerned with the decidedly anti-colonial as well as more working-class and consequently communist orientation of the faction around Senghor and its willingness to openly criticize the French government, which could be interpreted as anti-French. These disputes led to a split in the CDRN at a general meeting on February 27, 1927. The moderate faction under Afro-Caribbean leadership took over the CDRN and renamed it Comité de défense de la race noire [ Wikidata ].

As a result of the split, Senghor, Tiemoko Garan Kouyaté from French Sudan, and postal employee Camille Sainte-Rose from Martinique founded the Ligue de Défense de la Race Nègre (LDRN) in May 1927, initially led by Senghor. From June, the monthly magazine La Race Nègre appeared as the publication of the group.

Now without restrictions from the moderate and assimilationist members, the League formulated anti-colonialist positions such as the demand for independence of the colonies and linked them with communist ideas. It had active groups in all major port cities, with a total of about 1,000 members. Like its predecessor and successor organizations, the LDRN was monitored by the authorities. Of the 50 or so members spied on in Paris, about half worked as service providers or laborers, 7 were students and 5 were lawyers, and the rest were mostly small employees.

While there was agreement on the basic anti-colonial principle, the exact demands within the group were quite variable. While some members articulated nationalist positions, others espoused pan-Africanist ideas. Although independence of any kind for the colonies was an undisputed common goal, the group also fought for improvements in the everyday status quo of French Africans. The communist ideas cultivated by the leadership repeatedly met with misgivings in parts of the group because this would keep out anti-imperialist-minded but noncommunist possible members of the group. Ludovic Lacombe, a Haitian member of the group, put it this way, saying that he was a "nationalist but anti-Communist Negro who did not want a master, white or red."

Senghor died in late 1927. He was succeeded by Kouyaté, who in the following years built up an international network, including with a Congolese group in Brussels, a short-lived group around later Kenyan president Jomo Kenyatta in London, with American activists such as W. E. B. Du Bois, and in French colonies such as Senegal and Cameroon. Kouyaté also smuggled propaganda material to Cameroon; for a short time, there was also a direct offshoot of the league in Kribi. These activities in France and the French colonies in West Africa greatly alarmed French authorities, who already surveilled the LDRN and viewed it as an anti-French communist front organisation.

In early 1931, a dispute over the leadership of the group began between the communist wing around Kouyaté and a "merely" anti-imperialist wing around Émile Faure, an engineer from Senegal, resulting in two separate groups claiming to be the LDRN. After Faure filed an official complaint against Kouyaté with the police, many searches, arrests and harassment by the police forces followed. In April 1931, two different issues of La Race Nègre appeared, one by Kouyaté, the other by Émile Faure, the lawyer André Béton of Guadeloupe, and Ludovic Lacombe.

The issue of ownership of the names Ligue de Défense de la Race Nègre and the magazine La Race Nègre was litigated in court between Faure and Kouyaté and in 1932 the court decided, that it was Faure's. In August 1931, Kouyaté had already changed the title of his journal though to Le Cri des Nègres. Either in 1931 or 1932 the Union des travailleurs nègres (UTN) was founded then as an undogmatic communist successor to the Ligue, but it was soon taken over by dogmatic communists and expelled Kouyaté. In 1939, the UTN dissolved itself.

After the split, the now weakened LDRN remained inactive until 1934, when it re-emerged to celebrate the death of Blaise Diagne. Led by Émile Faure as president, it took a resolutely pan-African and anti-colonialist position, attacking assimilationists as well as communist anti-colonialists and the Négritude movement. La Race Nègre was published sporadically until it ceased in 1936, representing "the core of a full-blown doctrine of nationalism, cultural and political, the first breakthrough of this kind among French Negroes". The LDRN was finally suppressed in 1937 by French authorities, and Faure was arrested and banished to the Sahara until the end of World War II.

In Berlin on September 17, 1929, seven men from Douala, Cameroon founded the Liga zur Verteidigung der Negerrasse (LzVN). With this step, they opposed worsening economic difficulties and racial prejudice in Germany and wanted to establish an organisation for political work and some mutual moral and financial support. Over the course of the year, about 30 black men and women came together, some of whom had already met in the Afrikanischer Hilfsverein [ Wikidata ], the first organisation of Black Germans, centered on mutual support, which had disbanded in the mid-1920s. The founding of the German section of the LDRN was supported by Willi Münzenberg, founder of the League Against Imperialism (LgI), who had already been bringing together important people from the African community in Berlin for anti-colonialist motives since 1926. He also established contact with Kouyaté, who was present at the founding meeting. A few months earlier, Kouyaté had already had copies of La Race Nègre distributed in Berlin via Münzenberg.

Most members came from the former German colony of Cameroon, some from West Africa, such as Togo. All black Germans and their spouses could become members of the association. The president was Victor Bell, other board members were actor Louis Brody, Thomasul Kuo Ngambi, Richard Ekamby Menzel and, as secretary general and central figure, the pan-Africanist and communist Joseph Bilé [ Wikidata ], who was increasingly active in international politics with the help of his mentors Kouyaté and the influential and renowned panafrican activist George Padmore. Because of its communist relations, the group was at times surveilled by authorities.

In its statutes, the LzVN declared as its purpose to achieve the "liberation of the Negroes " internationally and to fight nationally for a large, independent African state. It advocated the independence of African states, especially the defense of the independence of Liberia and Ethiopia, encouraged black Germans to join German unions, and urged its members to provide mutual moral and material support, a legacy from the Afrikanischer Hilfsverein.

The LzVN was organizationally part of the LgI, was financed by it and also had its headquarters in its rooms at Friedrichstraße 24. It cooperated with the Comintern and a larger network of black internationalist organizations and activists in Europe and Africa, in addition to its French sister organization. The group smuggled political writings such as the statutes of the LzVN, among others, to Cameroon and maintained contact with activists there; most likely, they were also involved in anti-colonial protests in Douala. In 1930, the group performed Brody's play Sunrise in the Orient in Neukölln, the first half in Duala, the second in French, English and German. The play presented African history and culture of Africans probably for the first time in Germany without resorting to contemporary stereotypes. However, plans to establish its own "race theater" were not realized because the financial resources expected by the French Ligue were not available. Also in 1930, Bilé attended the First International Conference of Negro Workers in Hamburg as a delegate of the LzVN, which enhanced his status within the anti-colonial movement, as did subsequent discussions about him in the LgI and the Comintern, which earmarked him for training in Moscow and deployment as an agitator in Africa.

As the debate over Bilé continued, there were also accusations by the LzVN against the LgI that it was not providing the group with sufficient financial support. According to Bilé, the responsible supervisors, Virendranath Chattopadhyaya and Bohumír Šmeral, had failed to honor several funding pledges; according to Kouyaté, Chattopadhyaya had even opposed any further funding for the group, seeing it as no loss if it disbanded. As a result, the LzVN refused to continue working with the LgI and instead turned to the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) for support. Although this pacified the conflict, the personal hardship of the members led to internal squabbles and intrigue. With the Nazi seizure of power in 1933 the group became defenseless. In 1933, the KPD and the German section of the LgI struggled under the new rule, Padmore and Münzenberg had left the country, and Kouyaté was on his own after being expelled by the Ligue, its successor and the French Communist Party alike. As a result, the LzVN ceased its work completely. Many members of the LzVN left Germany; by August 1934, according to Bell, the group had only two members left. In 1935 the group was officially disbanded.

The Ligue des Anti-propriétaires (English: Anti-Landlords/Owners League) was one of the French anarchist leagues founded in 1886 and active until the repression of 1894. Bringing mostly together anarchists from the Île-de-France region close to those of the Ligue des antipatriotes [ fr ], it is known for playing a central role in the invention and propagation of the practice of squatting.

Founded to meet the anarchists' need for national-scale structures, it brought together several figures of the movement, such as Joseph Tortelier, the theorist of the general strike, or potentially the illegalist Vittorio Pini. It was supported by syndicalist anarchist circles and the anarchist press of the period, such as La Révolte and Le Père Peinard. The League was primarily involved in déménagements à la cloche de bois, which consisted of secretly moving out tenants who were defaulting on rent. Most of these moves were peaceful, although conflicts could arise in some cases. By publicizing its actions, the League succeeded in turning housing into a political issue and making the right to housing a subject of collective struggle, leading some historians to identify it as the organization behind the invention of modern squatting.

The League disappeared during the repression of 1894, but its actions were taken up by very diverse groups and spread thereafter. Several anarchist artists wrote songs about it.

The anarchist movement emerged around the Saint-Imier Congress (1872) before spreading widely. Initially, anarchists were gathered within the Anti-Authoritarian International, which evolved into the Black International in the early 1880s.

This organization disappeared during the 1880s, as did the first anarchist federations in France, which gravitated around Lyon and the Rhône, dissolved by the anarchists themselves to evade the repression of 1883. This left French anarchists without structures capable of uniting them beyond local groups. However, this situation did not last long; as early as 1883, authorities noticed that anarchists were once again coordinating between groups in a fairly uniform manner, despite the suppression of the federations. They thus initiated anarchist companionship.

In 1886, Parisian anarchists founded two leagues in response to the Ligue des patriotes. The first was the Ligue des antipatriotes [ fr ], founded by the Jeunesse anarchiste de Belleville group. This league, intended to conduct anti-militarist and anti-patriotic propaganda activities, brought together a number of Parisian groups and was able to operate in broader French regions and abroad.

A few months later, in December, companion Jean Couchot founded the Ligue des Anti-propriétaires along with other anarchists. According to police official Marie-François Goron, the Italian anarchist Vittorio Pini was reportedly one of the league's founders. This league had no legal status, no legal existence, no official headquarters, and no bylaws; its membership frequently overlapped with that of the other league. Among its members were Octave Jahn and Joseph Tortelier, one of the primary theorists and innovators of the general strike. The police noted that syndicalist anarchists from the Chambre syndicale des hommes de peine reportedly supported the league or were even members of it.

Furthermore, the league was backed by La Révolte and Le Père Peinard, two central anarchist newspapers of the period, allowing it to achieve a national, and even broader, media resonance.

The league was primarily involved in illegalist actions of the nature of the déménagement à la cloche de bois, meaning discreetly moving out tenants who were defaulting on rent, often at night, in order to prevent landlords from collecting the term's rent. To this end, as rent day approached, league members would reportedly offer their services to interested parties looking to call upon them, according to the police.

In the vast majority of cases, these moves were carried out silently and peacefully during the night, but conflicts could occasionally emerge during the action between concierges or police officers and the anarchists extracting themselves from the housing. For instance, in 1887, Paolo Chiericotti and two other Italian anarchists attempting to do so fought with their landlord. Following the landlord's complaint and the conviction of one of the three, his shop was targeted by a bombing during the night. Pini was later one of the main suspects for the attack, though the police could not conclusively prove his involvement.

The fact that almost all actions involved little conflict on the ground is explained by the fact that French law at the time only prevented a tenant from fleeing on the condition that a huissier was present, which made action impossible or complicated for concierges or authorities in most situations. Therefore, these were not violent actions most of the time.

In any case, the league engaged in a very large number of déménagements à la cloche de bois. In doing so, they turned housing into a political issue and, aided by La Révolte and especially Le Père Peinard, publicized their actions. For squatting historian Cécile Péchu, this truly marks the birth of squatting, because the league succeeded in transforming an individual mode of action into a collective, publicized mode of action, celebrated in the anarchist press, and turned it into a political action. She synthetizes, on this subject:

Modes of action always find their origin in daily experience. The occupation of housing stems from the 'déménagements à la cloche de bois' carried out by anarchists at the end of the 19th century, a practice consisting of leaving without paying one's rent. Initially a clandestine and individual form of resistance, squatting progressively became a collective mode of protest.

The league disappeared during the repressions of 1894, but certain groups continued to carry out déménagements à la cloche de bois until at least 1897.

Beyond the league's considerable influence on the birth and trajectory of squatting, with the practice of déménagements à la cloche de bois being taken up later by the Pieds Plats, the General Confederation of Labour (CGT), or the Union syndicale des locataires ouvriers et employés de la Seine, it was also celebrated in art.

Thus, several anarchist songs paid tribute to its activities, including one written by Jules Jouy and published in 1897.

More prosaically, the league emerged at a time when French anarchists were looking to establish structures spanning larger areas than just local groups. It met this need and, according to historian Vivien Bouhey, helped coordinate and unify the actions and thinking of militants during this period.

Ligurian (/ l ɪ. ˈ ɡ j ʊər. i. ə n / lig- YOOR -ee-ən ; endonym: lìgure) or Genoese (/ ˌ dʒ ɛ n. oʊ. ˈ iː z / JEN -oh- EEZ ; endonym: zeneise or zeneize) is a Gallo-Italic language. Ligurian is spoken primarily in the territories of the former Republic of Genoa, now comprising the area of Liguria in Northern Italy, parts of the Mediterranean coastal zone of France, Monaco (where it is called Monégasque), the village of Bonifacio in Corsica, and in the villages of Carloforte on San Pietro Island and Calasetta on Sant'Antioco Island off the coast of southwestern Sardinia. It is part of the Gallo-Italic and Western Romance dialect continuum. Although part of Gallo-Italic, it exhibits several features of the Italo-Romance group of central and southern Italy. Zeneize (literally " Genoese "), spoken in Genoa, the capital of Liguria, is the language's prestige dialect on which the standard is based.

There is a long literary tradition of Ligurian poets and writers that goes from the 13th century to the present, such as Luchetto (the Genoese Anonym), Martin Piaggio [ it ; lij ], and Gian Giacomo Cavalli [ it ; lij ].

The Italian Government does not consider Ligurian a language, but rather a dialect of Italian. Hence, it is not protected by law. Historically, Genoese (the dialect spoken in the city of Genoa) is the written koiné, owing to its semi-official role as language of the Republic of Genoa, its traditional importance in trade and commerce, and its vast literature.

Like other regional languages in Italy, the use of Ligurian and its dialects is in rapid decline. ISTAT (the Italian Central Service of Statistics) says that in 2012 only 9% of the population used a language other than standard Italian with friends and family, which decreased to 1.8% with strangers. Furthermore, according to ISTAT, regional languages are more commonly spoken by uneducated people and the elderly, mostly in rural areas. Liguria is no exception. One can reasonably suppose the age pyramid to be strongly biased toward the elderly who were born before World War II, with proficiency rapidly approaching zero for newer generations. Compared to other regional languages of Italy, Ligurian has experienced a significantly smaller decline which could have been a consequence of its status or the early decline it underwent in the past. The language itself is actively preserved by various groups.

Because of the importance of Genoese trade, Ligurian was once spoken well beyond the borders of the modern province. It has since given way to standard varieties such as Standard Italian and French. In particular, the language is traditionally spoken in coastal, northern Tuscany, southern Piedmont (part of the province of Alessandria around the areas of Novi Ligure and Ovada, and the Province of Cuneo in the municipalities of Ormea, Garessio, Alto and Caprauna), western extremes of Emilia-Romagna (some areas in the province of Piacenza), and in Carloforte on San Pietro Island and Calasetta on Sant'Antioco Island off Southwest Sardinia (known as Tabarchino), where its use is ubiquitous and increasing. It is also spoken in the department of the Alpes-Maritimes of France (mostly the Côte d'Azur from the Italian border to and including Monaco), in the town of Bonifacio at the southern tip of the French island of Corsica. It was spoken by a large community in Gibraltar (UK) until about 1970. It has been adopted formally in Monaco under the name Monégasque – locally, Munegascu – but without the status of official language (that is French). Monaco is the only place where a variety of Ligurian is taught in school, being mandatory in ground school.

The Mentonasc dialect, spoken in the East of the County of Nice, is considered to be a transitional Occitan dialect to Ligurian; conversely, Roiasc and Pignasc spoken further North in the Eastern margin of the County are Ligurian dialects with Occitan influences.

As a Gallo-Italic language, Ligurian is most closely related to the Lombard, Piedmontese and Emilian-Romagnol languages, all of which are spoken in neighboring provinces. Unlike the aforementioned languages, however, it exhibits distinct Italian features. No link has, thus far, been demonstrated by linguistic evidence between Romance Ligurian and the Ligurian language of the ancient Ligurian populations, in the form of a substrate or otherwise. Very little is known about ancient Ligurian itself due to the lack of inscriptions and the unknown origin of the Ligurian people. Only onomastics and toponyms are known to have survived from ancient Ligurian, the name Liguria itself being the most obvious example.

The most important variants of the Ligurian language († = extinct) are:

Semivowels occur as allophones of /i/ and /u/, as well as in diphthongs. /u/ is realized as a semivowel [ w ] after a consonant, or before a vowel (i.e poeivan [pwejvaŋ]), as well as after /k/, when the sequence is spelled ⟨ qu ⟩.

Diphthong sounds include ⟨ ei ⟩ [ej] and ⟨ òu ⟩ [ɔw].

No universally accepted orthography exists for Ligurian. Genoese, the prestige dialect, has two main orthographic standards.

One, known as grafia unitäia (unitary orthography), has been adopted by the Ligurian-language press – including the Genoese column of the largest Ligurian press newspaper, Il Secolo XIX – as well as a number of other publishing houses and academic projects. The other, proposed by the cultural association A Compagna and the Academia Ligustica do Brenno is the self-styled grafia ofiçiâ (official orthography). The two orthographies mainly differ in their usage of diacritics and doubled consonants.

The Ligurian alphabet is based on the Latin alphabet, and consists of 25 letters: ⟨ a ⟩, ⟨ æ ⟩, ⟨ b ⟩, ⟨ c ⟩, ⟨ ç ⟩, ⟨ d ⟩, ⟨ e ⟩, ⟨ f ⟩, ⟨ g ⟩, ⟨ h ⟩, ⟨ i ⟩, ⟨ l ⟩, ⟨ m ⟩, ⟨ n ⟩, ⟨ ñ ⟩ or ⟨ nn- ⟩, ⟨ o ⟩, ⟨ p ⟩, ⟨ q ⟩, ⟨ r ⟩, ⟨ s ⟩, ⟨ t ⟩, ⟨ u ⟩, ⟨ v ⟩, ⟨ x ⟩, ⟨ z ⟩.

The ligature ⟨ æ ⟩ indicates the sound /ɛː/, as in çit(t)æ 'city' /siˈtɛː/. The c-cedilla ⟨ ç ⟩, used for the sound /s/, generally only occurs before ⟨ e ⟩ or ⟨ i ⟩, as in riçetta 'recipe' /riˈsɛtta/. The letter ⟨ ñ ⟩, also written as ⟨ nn- ⟩ (or more rarely ⟨ n-n ⟩, ⟨ n- ⟩, ⟨ nh ⟩, or simply ⟨ nn ⟩), represents the velar nasal /ŋ/ before or after vowels, such as in canpaña 'bell' /kɑŋˈpɑŋŋɑ/, or the feminine indefinite pronoun uña /ˈyŋŋɑ/.

There are five diacritics, whose precise usage varies between orthographies. They are:

Tutte e personn-e nascian libere e pæge in dignitæ e driti. Son dotæ de raxon e coscensa e gh'an da agî l ' unn-a verso l ' atra inte 'n spirito de fradelansa.

Ògni personn-a a gh'à tutti i driti e e libertæ proclamæ inte questa Diciaraçion, sensa nisciunn-a distinçion de razza, cô, sesso, lengoa, religion, òpinion politica ò d ' atro tipo, òrigine naçionale ò sociale, poxiçion econòmica, nascimento, ò quæ se segge atra condiçion. Pe de ciù, no se faiâ nisciunn-a diferensa fondâ in sciâ condiçion politica, giuridica ò internaçionale do Paize ò do teritöio a-o quæ e personn-e apartegnan, segge pe-i Paixi indipendenti che pe-i teritöi sott ' aministraçion fiduciaia, sens'outonomia, ò sotomissi a ògni atra limitaçion de sovranitæ.

Tutti gli esseri umani nascono liberi ed eguali in dignità e diritti. Essi sono dotati di ragione e di coscienza e devono agire gli uni verso gli altri in spirito di fratellanza.

All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.

Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration, without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status. Furthermore, no distinction shall be made on the basis of the political, jurisdictional or international status of the country or territory to which a person belongs, whether it be independent, trust, non-self-governing or under any other limitation of sovereignty.

Some basic vocabulary, in the spelling of the Genoese Academia Ligustica do Brenno :

The language boundary in Brittany is the language border between the part of Brittany where Breton (a Celtic language) is spoken and the area in Brittany where Gallo (a Romance language) is spoken. The existence of this linguistic border led to differentiate the Celtic-speaking Lower Brittany (West) from the Romance-speaking Upper Brittany (East).

The farthest eastern extension of the Breton language was in the ninth century, when the linguistic border was located near Nantes and Rennes. Breton declined inexorably in favor of the Gallo gradually moving westward along a Binic - Guérande line. The border can now be traced along a line from Plouha to Rhuys. The linguistic unification of France, completed after World War II, made somewhat obsolete the linguistic aspect of the distinction between Upper and Lower Brittany, although many people still consider it valid in terms of toponymy, culture and identity.

Place-names are one form of evidence for the linguistic boundary during the Early Middle Ages, suggesting that it was much farther to the east than it is now, near Nantes and Rennes. For example, Pleugueneuc, in Ille-et-Vilaine, combines the Breton element plou (parish) with the name 'Guehenoc'.

The distinction of two Brittanys was made at least as early as the 15th century, when the names used were Britannia gallicana (Gallic Brittany) and Britannia britonizans (Brittonic Brittany). At that time, it appears that Lower Brittany had a separate fiscal status. Since then, the boundary between them has changed slowly as a result of the long retreat of the Breton language.

Under the ancien régime, the boundary between the two was generally in line with the province's division into nine bishoprics, with those of Rennes, Dol, Nantes, St Malo and St Brieuc considered to form Upper Brittany, while Tréguier, Vannes, Quimper and Saint-Pol-de-Léon formed Lower Brittany.

In 1588, the historian Bertrand d'Argentré defined the boundary as running from the outskirts of Binic southwards to Guérande, leaving the towns of Loudéac, Josselin, and Malestroit in Upper Brittany. In 1886, Paul Sébillot noted that the boundary was deeper into what had been Breton territory, the line then running from Plouha on the north coast to Batz-sur-Mer in the south, on the Bay of Biscay.

The boundary between 'Upper' and 'Lower' Brittany is now a purely imaginary line and has no administrative or other status. However, having been based on linguistic areas, the boundary does correspond very roughly to administrative borders. The town of Ploërmel is one point where the two meet.

In area, Upper Brittany now takes in something over half of the 35,000 square kilometres of the whole of Brittany, but it has some 2.5 million people, compared with Lower Brittany's 1.6 million. In the early 20th century, about 60% of the population had lived in the Breton-speaking areas.

The territory of the former Alsace–Lorraine, legally known as Alsace–Moselle, is a region in the eastern part of France, bordering with Germany. Its principal cities are Metz and Strasbourg. Alsace-Moselle was part of the German Empire from 1871 to 1918, and was subsequently reoccupied by Germany from 1940 until its recapture by the Allies at the end of World War II. Consisting of the two departments that make up the region of Alsace, which are Haut-Rhin and Bas-Rhin, and the department of Moselle, which is the northeastern part of Lorraine, there are historical reasons for the continuance of local law in Alsace-Moselle. Alsace–Moselle maintains its own local legislation, applying specific customs and laws on certain issues in spite of its being an integral part of France. These laws are principally in areas that France addressed by changing its own law in the period 1871 – 1919, when Alsace-Moselle was a part of Germany.

Alsace-Moselle has many speakers of a form of High German known as Alsatian, an Alemannic dialect of Upper German. Its native speakers are mostly in Alsace. Several Franconian dialects of West Middle German are also spoken in the district of Moselle, although their number of native speakers has dwindled significantly since the Second World War and the French language is now overwhelmingly heard in these districts. The region's German-language past is now, at the beginning of the 21st century, mostly evident in the names of towns, streets, villages and rivers.

The local law (French : droit local) in Alsace-Moselle is a legal system that operates in parallel with French law. Created in 1919, the local law preserves some French laws that were in force before 1870 and were maintained by the German government but were repealed after 1871 in France. It also maintains some German laws enacted by the German Empire between 1871 and 1918, some specific provisions adopted by the local authorities, and some French laws that have been enacted after 1919 to be applicable only in the three concerned departments.

In 1919, a Commissioner of the Republic (Commissaire de la République), whose duty was to restart the French administration in Alsace-Moselle following German defeat in World War I, had to choose between local law and general law. These provisions were supposed to be temporary. However, two further enactments of 1 June 1924 made them permanent. These laws were extended six times between 1934 and 1951. The 1951 legislation did not have a time limit. Even at the beginning of the 21st century, the German language text for some laws in force in Alsace-Moselle is considered the binding one, the translated French text serving only as a non-binding commentary.

Perhaps the most striking of the legal differences between interior France and Alsace-Moselle is the absence in Alsace-Moselle of a separation of church and state (cf. 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State), even though a constitutional right of freedom of religion is guaranteed by the French government. Alsace-Moselle is still governed by a pre-1905 French law established by the Concordat of 1801 which provides for the public subsidy to the Roman Catholic Dioceses of Metz and of Strasbourg, the Lutheran Protestant Church of Augsburg Confession of Alsace and Lorraine, the Calvinist Protestant Reformed Church of Alsace and Lorraine and the Jewish religion of the three local Israelite consistorial ambits of Colmar, Metz, and Strasbourg, as well as providing for public education in these faiths, although parents are now allowed to refuse religious education for their children. The clergy for these religions are on the state's payroll. Catholic bishops are named by the President of the French Republic following a proposal by the Pope. The heads of the Lutheran and Calvinist churches are appointed by the prime minister, after being elected by the competent religious bodies. The public University of Strasbourg has courses in theology and is famous for its teaching of Protestant theology.

This situation is unusual in a country like France where church and state are more strictly separated than in most other nations. There is debate over whether the second largest religion in France, Islam, should enjoy comparable status with the four official religions.

In the area of work and finance, specific provisions have been made in local law for a local social security system, including additional, compulsory insurance and regulations governing remuneration during a short sickness absence. There are differences with French law also in the areas of personal bankruptcy, voluntary associations and in local work law (Code professionnel local). Working is generally prohibited on Sundays and public holidays. Alsace-Moselle has two more public holidays (Good Friday and 26 December) than the rest of France and there are differences in the status of some crafts and trades, for example, winemakers and brewers.

Communes have to provide aid to resourceless people and they generally have more power than in the rest of France. They manage hunting rights, which are sold by auction for nine years at a time; land owners are not the owners of the game and cannot forbid hunting on their land although the hunters are responsible for game's damage.

During political elections, most election literature is written bilingually in both French and German. The land book (livre foncier) is not held by the tax directorate but by a court service. Trains run on the right of the double tracks, as they did under the administration of the Imperial Railways in Alsace–Lorraine and still do in Germany, whereas in the rest of France they normally run on the left.

Since the end of the 20th century, some of the local laws have been incorporated into general law, especially in the areas of social security, personal bankruptcy and social aid. Some others have been repealed, like the work law and the election literature, which meet now the French general law. A long unenforced law against blasphemy was also repealed in 2016. However, working on Sundays remains restricted as of August 2009.

The loi Carrez, or Carrez law is a French law enacted on 18 December 1996 which obliges the vendor of a property lot (or fraction of a lot) in a condominium to specifically mention the surface area in all documents relating to the property sold. It is named after its author Gilles Carrez, the then RPR member of the National Assembly for the Val-de-Marne's 5th constituency.

The law does not apply to sales of property not yet constructed, which comes under the building code, nor to construction land.

The effective usable surface area, known as the " superficie Carrez ", is the total enclosed floor area of an apartment or other construction discounting walls, partitions, staircases and stairwells, piping and electricity conduits and ducting, window and door embrasures. Parts of the enclosed area which are of less than 1.8 metres (5.9 ft) in height are also excluded.

Lots, or fractions of lots of surface areas of less than 8 square metres (86 ft) are also excluded from the calculation of habitable surface area. Typically, maid's rooms (chambre de bonne) would fall into this category.

Cellars, garages, parking places, and other storage facilities sold as separate lots are also excluded.

The Robien Package (French: Dispositif Robien), also known as the Loi pour l'investissement locatif (English: Law for Real Estate Investment) was a measure created by the law 2003-590 on 2 July 2003 to support the creation of urban rental properties. It replaced the Besson Project (Dispositif Besson) of 1999 (not to be confused with the Besson Law of 1990 (See: fr:Loi visant à la mise en œuvre du droit au logement)), itself the successor of the Périssol amortization that was put into place in 1996. It has since been phased out and has been replaced by the fr:Dispositif Scellier in 2008.

The Robien Package effectively increased the number of urban new constructions, especially in certain medium-sized cities. Named after the politician Gilles de Robien (UMP-UDF) and enacted under the Raffarin government, the law established a project to introduce fiscal benefits to investors owning rental properties meeting certain criteria and certain policyholders of the Société civile de placement immobilier.

The project received some criticism, not least for giving incentive for some private investors, particularly those with little experience, to purchase real estate from unscrupulous real estate developers and in areas under construction in smaller cities where the rental market became quickly saturated. Consequentially, the investors were unable to benefit from the financial benefits of the law as they were unable to rent them out for the duration expected by the project. According to the 2008 report of Jean-Yves Le Bouillonec (MP), some Robien rentals were among the most expensive in medium-sized cities, for example in Angers, where the average rental price of a 65 m apartment was €361 in 2007 compared to €924 of its Robien equivalent. The project had an annual cost a total of €400 million.

The loi pour une République numérique (abr. loi numérique) is a French law first proposed by Axelle Lemaire, Secretary of State for Digital Affairs, voted on 7 October 2016.

This law aims to fulfill a two-fold purpose : "to give France a head start in the digital field by promoting an open data and knowledge policy" and to "adopt a progressive digital approach, based on individuals, to strengthen their power to act and their rights in the digital world". To do so, the law is organized around three lines: the circulation of data and knowledge, the protection of individuals in the digital society and access to digital for all.

The discussion began with an online public consultation, until 18 October 2015, then, enriched with some proposals from Internet users, the law was debated and voted in the National Assembly from 19 to 26 January 2016. It follows the "Digital Ambition" consultation led by Benoit Thieulin and Yann Bonnet, as part of the work of the National Digital Council.

It's a major IT law. It supersedes the Loi pour la confiance dans l'économie numérique (Confidence in the Digital Economy Act) of 2004.

The bill voted by MEPs at first reading introduces in particular the default opening of public data, net neutrality, an obligation of loyalty for online platforms, as well as increased protection for the personal data of Internet users. The law for a digital Republic also provides the conditions of an Internet accessible to the greatest number, through the acceleration of the coverage of the territory in very high bandwidth and in mobile telecommunications, measures for a better access of people with disabilities to online services, and the creation of a right to the continuation of the Internet connection in case of unpaid bills for households in difficulty.

Measures to promote accessibility for people with disabilities on public service websites had been planned. However, they are now only recommended, with an obligation to inform if the site is accessible or not, which is criticized by the association "les aveugles de France", the collective "Pour une France accessible" and the association "Faire Face".

Telephone accessibility is enacted into law in article 105, requiring telecom carriers to provide VRS and Text relay services. Call centers for both large companies and for public services are also required to provide for their own VRS and Text relay. This marks France's first official TRS services, with obligations enforced by the telecom regulator ARCEP.

Included in the project is a default release of public data, and a recommendation for the use of interoperable formats.

Article 16 of the law provides for the encouragement of the use of free software and open formats in public administration information systems, in order to preserve their control, durability and independence.

In addition, the law specifies that source codes are administrative documents that can be communicated and reused, under article 2 of the law. An implementing decree has been issued to specify the list of licenses, all of which are open source, applicable to the distribution of these source codes. A list of these source codes is published by Etalab.

The definition of digital commons was discussed, with great interest during the online consultation, then withdrawn by Matignon. The cabinet of Fleur Pellerin, then Minister of Culture, is against it. Isabelle Attard condemned Matignon's withdrawal of the Commons, then submitted an amendment in favour of the Commons, which was rejected.

Freedom of panorama has also been debated, but the potential commercial use of images is likely to be a problem. A compromise amendment has been accepted, but does not satisfy all the demands of those in favour of freedom of panorama, in particular because it only allows strictly non-commercial use, which is difficult to define on the Internet.

The law promotes open access to scientific publications at no cost. Research publications funded at least 50% by public funds can be made available free of charge after an embargo period: article 30 makes self-archiving possible for all authors after 6 or 12 months from the publication (if publicly funded).

This right of the authors is non-waivable, so any contractual provision to the contrary is superseded, even for articles published before 2016, as the law is meant to encourage green open access irrespective of academic publishers ' policies.

A proposal was also adopted to guarantee a right to the Internet for all, even if limited, allowing access to electronic mail or online public services. Network operators will be encouraged to develop their investments where the needs are greatest, through the prolongation and extension of the scope of over-damping to the deployment of fibre in rural areas.

An amendment in favour of a sovereign OS was also adopted, which provoked rather negative reactions, notably from ANSSI, due to the possible lack of realism of the proposal and of already existing solutions, such as the secure operating system CLIP, based on Linux.

The CNIL 's power would be strengthened, in the event of a recurrence, to reach 4% of turnover or 20 million euros. Amendments in favour of the right to be forgotten for minors and the closure of the online accounts of deceased persons were also approved. Group actions against companies that do not respect privacy are also planned.

Article 63 of the Law incorporates the concept of digital death to define what becomes of a person's digital data upon death. The principles of data protection provided in the Data Protection, Files and Freedoms Act become obsolete. But the Law gives the possibility of defining directives relating to the conservation, erasure and communication of personal data after his death, failing which, it is the legal heirs who may act on these digital data.

In January 2016, the National Assembly amended the bill with amendment No. 376, adding an article 23 bis and ter making anyone renting their property on a platform such as Airbnb without the written permission of its owner liable to imprisonment, heavy fines and even eviction from their home. The amendment was defended by PS member Sandrine Mazetier.

In addition, the Senate proposes that income earned on online sales platforms would be automatically declared to the tax authorities.

In January 2016, Prime Minister Manuel Valls entrusted two MPs, Rudy Salles and Jérôme Durain, with the task of "defining a legislative and regulatory framework to promote the development of video game competitions in France" to the French Secretary of State for Digital Affairs and Innovation, Axelle Lemaire. The report submitted in March 2016 by the two parliamentarians led to participation in the bill for a digital Republic, which in its chapter 4 section 2 recognizes the practice of video games in competition in France, as well as an official status for professional players.

This bill is the first to have been preceded by an online consultation:

The LR group in the National Assembly criticised "a coherent but unfortunately very inadequate package", while the UDI group expressed concern about the digital divide. Environmentalists and the left front regretted the withdrawal of the information commons.

The loi n° 99-586 du 12 juillet 1999 relative au renforcement et à la simplification de la coopération intercommunale ("Law 99-586 of 12 July 1999 relating to the improvement and simplification of inter- communal cooperation"), commonly called the loi Chevènement ("Chevènement law") after its proposer Jean-Pierre Chevènement, then Interior Minister in the Jospin government, is one of the principal laws encouraging inter-municipal cooperation in France.

It defined the roles of three new types of établissements publics de coopération intercommunale (EPCI, "Public establishments for inter-communal cooperation") with their own financing:

Some previous structures such as communautés de ville, districts and syndicats d'agglomération nouvelle ("New town syndicates") were expected to merge into one of these three types of EPCI.

The loi-cadre (Reform Act) was a French legal reform passed by the French National Assembly on 23 June 1956, named after overseas minister Gaston Defferre. It marked a turning point in relations between France and its overseas empire. Under pressure from independence movements in the colonies, the government transferred a number of powers from Paris to elected territorial governments in French African colonies and also removed remaining voting inequalities by implementing universal suffrage and abolishing the multiple electoral college system. It was the first step in the creation of the French Community, comparable to the British Commonwealth of Nations. Most French African colonies held elections under the new universal suffrage Loi Cadre system on 31 March 1957, the exceptions being Cameroon which held its election on 23 December 1956, and Togo which held its election on 17 April 1958 (Cameroon and Togo, being UN trust territories, were subject to a different legal regime).

Lorrain, also known as Lorrain Romance, is a langue d'oïl spoken by a minority of people in the region of Lorraine in northeastern France as well as in some parts of Alsace and Gaume in Belgium. Its use declined at the beginning of the 21st century, having been in serious decline since the 1930s. Despite this, more and more people are taking an interest in it in the 21st century, including linguists who study it.

It is a regional language of France. In Wallonia, it is known as Gaumais and enjoys official recognition as a regional language. It has been influenced by Lorraine Franconian and Luxembourgish, West Central German languages spoken in nearby or overlapping areas.

Lorrain was also spoken in the high valleys of the Vosges, and there it retained archaic forms such as the preservation of affricates (tchaté for château); on the Alsatian side (Pays welche), we distinguish Welche, which is related to the dialects of the Eastern Vosges.

The Linguasphere Observatory distinguishes seven variants:

After 1870, members of the Stanislas Academy in Nancy noted 132 variants of Lorrain from Thionville in the north to Rupt-sur-Moselle in the south, which means that main variants have sub-variants.

Under the Ancien Régime, as in Lorrain, which was still independent, education was a religious matter. From the beginning of the 17th century, the Bishop of Toul mandated that each parish have a school, which was implemented. The "schoolmasters" trained in French, then taught in French. While the children continued to speak the local dialect, they incorporated many neologisms of French origin into their mother tongue. It is likely that many Lorrain words phonetically close to French saw their pronunciation shift towards the latter from this point onward. Thus, a kind of linguistic transformation occurred from this period onward.

The French Revolution 's motto was one nation, one language, which some interpreted as one nation, one single language. Regional languages were thus subjected to fierce attacks in a wide variety of forms from the revolutionary period until the beginning of the 20th century. However, it is deeply unfair to place the blame for the decline of regional languages solely on secular schoolteachers, even those who were staunch defenders of the Republic. This attributes to them more influence than they actually possessed, even if some of them did employ highly coercive methods. Other education officials also worked extensively to transmit this intangible heritage. Léon Zéliqzon was a university professor when he published his seminal work: Dictionnaire des patois romans de Moselle. He had been preceded in this by Lucien Adam, who wrote his lexicon Les patois lorrains, drawing on the contributions of local correspondents, mostly schoolteachers. Henri Labourasse, who is the author of the Glossaire abrégé des patois de la Meuse, was also an officer of Public Instruction.

The definitive abandonment of Lorrain was primarily economic and social in nature. The beginning of the second half of the 19th century saw a massive internal exodus. The population, until then essentially rural, moved to the cities in search of work in the newly emerging industries. While language did not significantly hinder obtaining factory jobs during periods of full employment, speaking the national language was essential for climbing the corporate ladder. The same was true for securing a highly coveted position in the 19th century civil service. The people of Lorraine, and especially Lorraine mothers, quickly understood that French was the language of social advancement and imposed it on their children from a very young age. The monographs written for each town in preparation for the 1889 Exposition Universelle provide valuable information for assessing the state of the regional language. At that time, Lorrain Romance was still known to all but the majority of rural Lorrainers spoke French, outside German Lorraine.

Georges Tronquart, in his work Trois patois de la colline inspirée, provides several examples of the evolution of the regional language in his village. In 1890, the children of Saxon-Sion addressed adults in patois, but by 1900, they were answering adults in French, even those who addressed them in patois. The Saxon-Sion town council meetings were held in patois until 1910. Mr. Thirion, born and died in Saxon-Sion, never uttered a word of French before 1914; he didn't speak a word of patois again after 1918. Conversely, the same author is surprised that the young girls of Praye were still speaking patois among themselves in 1923.

The situation evolved quite differently in the Moselle department. Its annexation in 1871 sparked a renewed interest in the two local languages. In both cases, this allowed for the assertion of local identity and offered the added advantage of not being understood by the "Old Germans " (for the Romance dialect) and even by most of them (for the Germanic dialects). While Standard German was the official language of the Reichsland, French remained the language of administration and education in municipalities considered Francophonie, and its use remained tolerated elsewhere (even if frowned upon by some). In the biography of Hubert Vion, parish priest of Bazoncourt from 1869 to 1896 and author of several works on the Lorrain Romance dialect, it is recounted that he had the audacity to address a compliment in the Romance dialect to Emperor Wilhelm II during a visit to the region. Thus, while Lorrain Romance underwent a very clear and rapid decline in Meurthe-et-Moselle, Meuse and the Vosges, it experienced a certain revival in Moselle. It was only from 1945 onwards that it ceased to be spoken in this department.

In Old Lorrain, the phoneme formed by the letter X and its " French-style " pronunciation did not exist. The letter X, present in numerous place names and some Lorrain surnames, originated as a spelling error. Émile Badel, in his Dictionnaire des noms de rues à Nancy denounces "the verbal corruption of Lorrain place names containing the letter 'x'." He explains that this letter replaced the Greek letter < χ >, whose phonetics are entirely different. To clearly express his disapproval, he concludes the discussion with these words: "The modern incorrect pronunciation is therefore merely the result of a kind of pedantry that presumes to know how to read correctly". Others believe that it was the advent of printing, with its limited set of typefaces, that brought about the substitution between <χ> and <x>.

Originally, the Lorrain phoneme, now misspelled <x>, was a sound [x] resembling the German <ch>, the Spanish jota, or the Breton <c'h>, a sound also found, for example, in Arabic and Russian. In late 19th and early 20th century Lorrain Romance studies, this phoneme is written <hh> by philologists (see, among others, the works of Léon Zéliqzon).

In surnames of Lorrain origin and in Lorrain place names, the pronunciation of the letter <x> is, depending on the case, indicated as <ch, c, s, ss> and <z> in 18th and 19th century works; for example, the pronunciations of Xertigny and Xivray-et-Marvoisin are given as "Certigny" and "Sivray" in 1756, the pronunciations of Xocourt and Vaxy are given as "Chocourt" and "Vachi" in 1861, while the x in Saint-Max is silent at that time: "mâ". Regarding this last town, at the end of the 20th century, one could still hear former inhabitants pronouncing a guttural and very muffled [ʁ], barely audible, at the end of the place name. Example: Saint-Mâr. This "devoicing" of the last letter was not rare. It occurred on the final [e] of Toul pronounced Toue. It is important to understand the difference between this "devoicing" and the elision found in Foug (Fou in Lorrain), in Einville-au-Jard (Einville-au-Ja) and especially in Art-sur-Meurthe (É-su-Meu).

Around Charmes and Épinal, place names with <x> were pronounced [s] until the end of the 20th century: Nomexy was pronounced Nome'si, Vaubexy was pronounced Vaube'si, Ubexy was pronounced Ube'si.

The evolution of name pronunciations in the 19th and 20th centuries is probably not a new phenomenon. It is important to bear in mind that these pronunciations are those of a given historical period and that they were probably very different earlier in history.

Some examples of localities in Romanesque Lorrain from the 19th century: S'li en Sauneu (Silly-en-Saulnois), Aumanv'lé (Amanvillers), Auvlé (Avillers), Circo (Circourt), Ronco (Roncourt), Ansrevelle (Ancerville), Fieuvelle (Fléville), Lech'ire (Lixières), Méch'ly (Marsilly), Ma-lai-tô (Mars-la-Tour), Mékieuf (Mécleuves), Bieu (Beux), Monteu (Montoy), Augondange/Agondanche (Hagondange), Souagsonche (Xouaxange), Chaméni (Xermaménil), Lovni (Louvigny), Coïni (Colligny), Ponteu (Pontoy), Pinaud (Épinal), Giromouè (Gérardmer), Rambièlè (Rambervillers), Nanceye (Nancy), Lâchou (Laxou), L'nainville (Lunéville), Sallebo (Sarrebourg), Ouëpy (Woippy), Virtang (Virton).

Many Lorrain words are found in street names in Metz, including ailli, les rues Wad-Billy, de la Baue, aux Ossons, Paille-Maille, Chambière, Coffe Millet, Taison, de Saulnerie, en Fournirue, en Chandelerue. In Nancy : porte de la Craffe, sentier de la Teulotte, rues de la Boudière, de la Foucotte, des Michottes, de la croix d'Auyot, de l'Atrie. In Malzéville : l'Embanie, du Salvon, du Chazeau. In Laxou : Com des Chicottes ; dans cette ville, le nom lorrain rue du Chaucheu a été traduit en rue du Pressoi. In Épinal : l'Atre, rues du Boudiou, Vautrin (patronyme lorrain), du Saulcy, des Béguinettes, de la Maix. In Moyen: la Ouette charrière. In Dombasle-sur-Meurthe : l'Embanie, du Couaroil, de Behard.

Linguist Stephanie Russo noted the difference of a 'second' imperfect and pluperfect tense between Lorrain and Standard French. It is derived from Latin grammar that is no longer used in modern French.

Since the number of speakers was very small in 2019, it is possible to listen to Aesop 's fable, "la bise et le soleil", in several variants of Lorrain Romance from the page Atlas sonore des langues régionales de France, in France hexagonale.

The Lorrain accent is also tending to disappear. Apart from a few towns in southeastern Meurthe-et-Moselle and in the Vosges countryside, it can only be heard in 2019 by very attentive listeners. However, some Lorrainers can still be recognized who, as in the old regional language, tend to replace demonstrative pronouns with enclitic adverbs. For example: " l'objet là" instead of "cet objet." The gender of objects is also a pitfall for Lorrainers because the old language used the feminine form more often than modern French. Gender errors with words like "arrosoir" (watering can), "anse" (handle), or "éclair" (lightning bolt) are still common in 2020.

The articles le and la, which were systematically placed before proper names (for example: "le Jeannot", "la Marie"), are much less frequent but have not disappeared.

The very characteristic phoneme /x/ was discussed in the Toponymy section.

The letter <h> in Lorrain words is clearly aspirated, as in Harvard English. It should never be linked to the preceding word.

The letter <Y> constitutes another distinctive feature. Some philologists do not hesitate to call it the "consonne lorraine" since it is always pronounced. [Haye], which means hedge, is another phonetic example with [y]. The word was pronounced [eille] as in veille (night/wake).

Philologists have debated at length the Lorrain [in], which also does not exist in French. It is present, notably, in [roncin]. It is a nasal sound that Lucien Adam compares to the Latin [in] such as "in petto", pronounced in such a way that the final [n] is barely audible.

The Lorrain accent, with its drawn-out and heavily stressed [â], [ô], and [î], has often been ridiculed, frequently labeled as "peasantic." In reality, it is an accent of duration and gravity that plays the role of stress accent in the Lorrain language in other languages. The [â], [ô], and [î] should rather be considered additional vowels, since unstressed vowels as used in French are perfectly well known and frequently used in Lorrain; for example, the two [a]s in margatte (a Lorrain word meaning mud) are pronounced exactly as in French. The same is true for the [o] in godot (glass). On the other hand, the drawn-out [î] in rîge (sieve) and nîge (snow) seems to be less common.

Lucien Adam indicates that Lorrain has the following 8 vowels called oral: i, é, è, a, e, o, ou and u. He adds to this 4 vowels called nasal: ain, an, on and un.

While Larousse indicates that modern French no longer has diphthongs, Lucien Adam lists more than thirty for Lorrain, but this remark no longer makes much sense today since there are no longer enough speakers to make these complicated variations heard.

Although Lorrain has no standardized spelling, it does have a grammar, and it is quite complex. Léon Zéliqzon identifies three groups of verbs, each containing irregular verbs as well as strong and weak verbs. Reflexive verbs are always conjugated with the auxiliary verb avoir.

Whereas French has retained a large part of the personal verbal endings of Latin (in the written language), most Lorrain verbs are conjugated with only two inflections: one for the singular and one for the plural. Example of conjugation in the imperfect tense of the verb parler: “dje prakè, te prakè, è prakè, dje prakonne, vos prakonne, è prakonne”.

Where French has only one imperfect tense, the Lorrain dialect has developed a system allowing it to express nuance in this temporality by adding or omitting the adverb or (or or ores, meaning "now" or "at this very moment" in Old French) after the verb in the imperfect tense. The Lorrain dialect distinguishes between a past action expressed in the imperfect tense, close in time, and one situated further in the future or of a more general nature. For example, where French would use the same imperfect tense to speak of the clouds that passed in the sky yesterday and those that passed in the sky when Louis XIV watched the construction of Versailles, the Lorrain dialect will be able to express this nuance and say that the clouds were passing "or" in the sky yesterday, while others were passing in the sky when Louis XIV watched "or" the construction of Versailles (the passing clouds designating a general, passive, and peripheral action, while the focus of the immediate action is that of Louis XIV watching the construction of Versailles).

With very few exceptions, the Lorrain dialect does not use defining adjectives, replacing them with an article and an enclitic adverb. Even today, in 2020, it is not unusual to hear someone from Lorrain say "l'homme là" in place of "cet homme".

Adverbs of place are always emphatic: "to ci" and "to lè" for [ici] and [là]. With rare exceptions, the same is true for interrogative pronouns.

Common nouns do not undergo any change, or very rarely, when changing from singular to plural.

The Lorrain Romance language has been the subject of numerous studies, particularly from the late 18th to the early 20th century. Here, in chronological order, are the main reference dictionaries:

Lucien Adam's work was heavily criticized upon its publication, but it was primarily the historical origin he gave to the regional language that sparked debate.

Lorraine Franconian (native name : Plàtt or lottrìnger Plàtt ; French : francique lorrain or platt lorrain ; German : Lothringisch) is an ambiguous designation for dialects of West Central German (German : Westmitteldeutsch), a group of High German dialects spoken in the Moselle department of the former northeastern French region of Lorraine (See Linguistic boundary of Moselle).

The term Lorraine Franconian has multiple denotations. Some scholars use it to refer to the entire group of West Central German dialects spoken in the French Lorraine region. Others use it more narrowly to refer to the Moselle Franconian dialect spoken in the valley of the river Nied (in Pays de Nied, whose largest town is Boulay-Moselle), to distinguish it from the other two Franconian dialects spoken in Lorraine, Luxembourgish to the west and Rhine Franconian to the east.

The German term Lothringisch refers to Rhine Franconian spoken in Lorraine.

In 1806 there were 218,662 speakers of Lorraine Franconian in Moselle and 41,795 speakers in Meurthe.

In part due to the ambiguity of the term, estimates of the number of Lorraine Franconian speakers in France vary widely, ranging from 30,000 to 400,000 (which would make it the third most-spoken regional language in France, after Occitan and Alsatian).

The most reliable data comes from the Enquête famille carried out by INSEE (360,000 in the 1962 census) as part of the 1999 census, but it gives a somewhat indirect picture of the current situation (see Languages in France for discussion of this survey). About 78,000 people were reported to speak Lorraine Franconian, but fewer than 50,000 passed basic knowledge of the language on to their children. Another statistic illustrating the same point is that of all adult men who used Franconian regularly when they were 5, less than 30% use (or used) the language regularly with their own children.

Louis Joseph Nicolas André (28 March 1838, Nuits-Saint-Georges, Côte-d'Or – 18 March 1913, Dijon) was France 's Minister of War from 1900 until 1904. A Freemason and fiercely loyal to the Third Republic, he was militantly anti-Catholic and anticlerical. He was the instigator of the Affaire Des Fiches, a scandal in which he received reports from Masonic groups on which army officers were practicing Catholics for the purpose of denying their promotions.

In 1876 Louis André married the opera singer Marguerite Chapuy, who had created the role of Micaëla in the premiere run of Bizet's Carmen in March 1875.

According to Piers Paul Read, "The information, as it came in, was entered on cards or fiches. These would be marked either Corinth or Carthage -- the Corinthians being the sheep who should be promoted and the Carthaginians, the goats who should be held back. An officer reported to be 'perfect in all respects; excellent opinions,' would be marked as a Corinthian: another who, 'though a good officer, well reported on, takes no part in politics,' would nonetheless be designated a Carthaginian because he, 'went to Mass with his family,' and sent his six children to Catholic schools. A bachelor officer who went to Mass was by definition of a reactionary disposition. Officers loyal to the republican ideals were encouraged to report the opinions voiced by their colleagues in the mess."

In 1904, Jean Bidegain, the assistant Secretary of Grand Orient de France, secretly sold a selection of the Fiches to Gabriel Syveton of the Ligue de la Patrie Francaise for 40,000 francs. The resulting scandal led directly to the resignation of French Prime Minister Emile Combes.

The Louis Bachelier Prize is a biennial prize in applied mathematics jointly awarded by the London Mathematical Society, the Natixis Foundation for Quantitative Research and the Société de Mathématiques Appliquées et Industrielles (SMAI) in recognition for "exceptional contributions to mathematical modelling in finance, insurance, risk management and/or scientific computing applied to finance and insurance."

The prize is named in honor of French mathematician Louis Bachelier, a pioneer in the field of probability and its use in financial modeling.

The Louis Bachelier Prize was created in 2007 by the Société de Mathématiques Appliquées et Industrielles [Society for Applied and Industrial Mathematics] in collaboration with the Natixis Quantitative Research Foundation and the French Academy of Sciences. The winner receives € 20,000, which includes £5,000 specifically designated to organize a scientific workshop in Europe on their area of research. The prize is awarded biennially to a scientist with less than 20 years of postdoctoral experience "for his/her exceptional contribution to mathematical modelling in finance, insurance, risk management and/or scientific computing applied to finance and insurance".

The candidates must be permanent residents of a country of the European Union. From its creation in 2015, the Louis Bachelier Prize was awarded by the French Academy of Sciences. Since 2015, the prize is administered by the London Mathematical Society.

Louis Besson (6 May 1937 – 2 April 2026) was a French politician who was Minister of Public Works, Housing, Transport, and Maritime Affairs from 1990 to 1991 and Secretary of State for Housing from 1997 to 2001. A member of the Socialist Party, he is remembered for two particular policies, a law enshrining the broad right to housing, and for restructuring the rules to require municipalities to meet a minimum level of social housing.

Louis Besson was born into a staunchly Catholic family on 6 May 1937, in the village of Barby, Savoie, France, of which he was mayor between 1965 and 1989. He then became mayor of the nearby city of Chambéry, from 1989 to 1997, and again from 2001 to 2007. During his time there he built the city's convention centre and library, the latter named after the singer George Brassens. He was president of the Savoie department (1976–1982) and also of the Grand Chambéry urban agglomeration between 2005 and 2014.

From 1973 to 1989 he served five terms in the National Assembly. He was Minister Delegate for Housing from 1989 to 1990 and then Minister of Public Works, Housing, Transport, and Maritime Affairs from December 1990 to May 1991 in Michel Rocard 's government. He then served as Secretary of State for Housing under Lionel Jospin from 1997 to 2001.

His droit au logement (right to housing) law in May 1990 was something of a landmark, in that it enforced the basic right to housing, by establishing access to housing as a legal principle. It was known as loi Besson, Besson's law. The opening two sentences of the legislation set the parameters: "Guaranteeing the right to housing is a duty of solidarity for the entire nation. Anyone experiencing particular difficulties, notably due to inadequate resources or living conditions, is entitled to assistance from the community, under the conditions set forth in this law, to access and maintain decent and independent housing." He supported local housing integration initiatives during his time in office.

Besson championed traveller rights, notably through the Besson 2 law, implemented in July 2000, which requires municipalities over 5,000 residents to provide designated traveller sites. This reinforced the 1990 legislation to set a target of 30,000 additional plots for travellers over five years. This was not a particularly popular initiative, but as minister he had visited a traveller site to pay condolences to a family that had lost a child through drowning, and that had an impact on his approach to the issue.

He was a joint author of the Solidarity and Urban Renewal (SRU) law of December 2000, whose Article 55 obliges larger municipalities to meet social housing targets. Municipalities over 3,500 residents would need to ensure at least 20% of housing development fell into the category of social housing. This legislation was credited by the law's supporters with enabling one million social housing units, around half of the total residential building programme in France, over the last 25 years, and it still remains part of French housing policy.

Besson was known for his support for the protection of agriculture in mountain areas, leading the development of the 1985 Mountain Law, which provided protection to upland areas of France and those who work there. He helped to found the National Association of Elected Mountain Officials, and supporting Albertville 's successful bid for the 1992 Winter Olympics. He campaigned for the implementation of the Turin–Lyon high-speed railway, and chaired the Franco-Italian intergovernmental commission promoting the project until his death.

In 2014 he retired from all his other public offices.

Besson died in Chambéry, France, on 2 April 2026, at the age of 88.

He was described as a man of deep humanity. His successor as mayor of Chambéry, and his former chief of staff, Thierry Repentin, said of him: "Louis Besson was incredibly kind, but he never wavered in his convictions, displaying an irresistible force of persuasion." Another former mayor of Chambéry, Michel Dantin, from the opposing Republicans party said: "We had profound differences of opinion, and his convictions led him to make choices of which I disapproved. But I respect the strength and sincerity of his commitment at both the local and national levels, just as I commend his concern for others and his great sensitivity to all forms of distress."

Besson was appointed to the rank of knight within the Légion d'honneur in January 1992. He was later promoted to the rank of officer in April 2003 and then to commander in July 2012.

Louis Jean Joseph Charles Blanc (/ b l ɑː n / BLAHN ; French: [ blɑ̃ ] ; 29 October 1811 – 6 December 1882) was a French socialist politician, journalist and historian. He called for the creation of cooperatives in order to guarantee employment for the urban poor. Although Blanc's ideas of the workers' cooperatives were never realized, his political and social ideas greatly contributed to the development of socialism in France. He wanted the government to encourage cooperatives and replace capitalist enterprises. These cooperatives were to be associations of people who produced together and divided the profit accordingly.

Following the Revolution of 1848, Blanc became a member of the provisional government and began advocating for cooperatives which would be initially aided by the government but ultimately controlled by the workers themselves. Blanc's advocacy failed; caught between radical worker tendencies and the National Guard, he was forced into exile. Blanc returned to France in 1870, shortly before the conclusion of the Franco-Prussian War, and served as a member of the National Assembly for Seine. He did not support the Paris Commune but later he successfully proposed amnesty to the Communards.

Blanc was born in Madrid. His father held the post of Inspector General of Finance under Joseph Bonaparte. His younger brother was Charles Blanc, who later became an influential art critic. Failing to receive aid from Pozzo di Borgo, his mother's uncle, Louis Blanc studied law in Paris, living in poverty, and became a contributor to various journals. In the Revue du progres, which he founded, he published in 1839 his study on L'Organisation du travail. The principles laid down in this famous essay form the key to Louis Blanc's whole political career. He attributes all the evils that afflict society to the pressure of competition, whereby the weaker are driven to the wall. He demanded the equalization of wages, and the merging of personal interests in the common good—" De chacun selon ses facultés, à chacun selon ses besoins," which is often translated as " from each according to his ability, to each according to his needs." This was to be affected by the establishment of "social workshops," a sort of combined co-operative society and trade union, where the workmen in each trade were to unite their efforts for their common benefit. In 1841 he published his Histoire de dix ans 1830-1840, an attack upon the July Monarchy. It ran through four editions in four years.

In 1847, Blanc published the two first volumes of his Histoire de la Revolution Française. Its publication was interrupted by the Revolution of 1848, when he became a member of the provisional government. It was on his motion that, on 25 February, the government undertook "to guarantee the existence of the workmen by work"; and though his demand for the establishment of a ministry of labour was refused as beyond the competence of a provisional government, he was appointed to preside over the government labour commission (Commission du Gouvernement pour les travailleurs) established at the Luxembourg Palace to inquire into and report on the labour question.

The revolution of 1848 was the real chance for Louis Blanc's ideas to be implemented. His theory of using the established government to enact change was different from those of other socialist theorists of his time. Blanc believed that workers could control their own livelihoods but knew that unless they were given help to get started the cooperative workshops would never work. To assist this process along Blanc lobbied for national funding of these workshops until the workers could assume control. To fund this ambitious project, Blanc saw a ready revenue source in the rail system. Under government control the railway system would provide the bulk of the funding needed for this and other projects Blanc saw in the future.

When the workshop program was ratified in the National Assembly, Blanc's chief rival Émile Thomas [ fr ] was put in control of the project. The National Assembly was not ready for this type of social program and treated the workshops as a method of buying time until the assembly could gather enough support to stabilize themselves against another worker rebellion. Thomas's deliberate failure in organizing the workshops into a success only seemed to anger the public more. The people had been promised a job and a working environment in which the workers were in charge, from these government-funded programs. What they had received was hand outs and government funded work parties to dig ditches and hard manual labor for meager wages or paid to remain idle. When the workshops were closed the workers rebelled again but were put down by force by the National Guard. The National Assembly was also able to blame Blanc for the failure of the workshops. His ideas were questioned, and he lost much of the respect which had given him influence with the public.

Between the sans-culottes, who tried to force him to place himself at their head, and the National Guards, who mistreated him, he was nearly killed. Rescued with difficulty, he escaped with a false passport to Belgium, and then to London. He was condemned to deportation in absentia by a special tribunal at Bourges. He protested against the trial and sentence in a series of articles in the Nouveau Monde, a review published in Paris under his direction. These he afterwards collected and published as Pages de l'histoire de la révolution de 1848 (Brussels, 1850).

During his stay in Britain, he made use of the unique collection of materials for the revolutionary period preserved at the British Museum to complete his Histoire de la Revolution Française (12 vols., 1847–1862). In 1858 he published a reply to Lord Normanby's A Year of Revolution in Paris (1858), which he developed later into his Histoire de la révolution de 1848 (2 vols., 1870–1880). He was also active in the masonic organisation, the Conseil Suprême de l'Ordre Maçonnique de Memphis. His membership in the London-based La Grand Loge des Philadelphes is unconfirmed.

As far back as 1839, Louis Blanc had vehemently opposed the idea of a Napoleonic restoration, predicting that it would be "despotism without glory," "the Empire without the Emperor." He therefore remained in exile until the fall of the Second Empire in September 1870, after which he returned to Paris and served as a private in the National Guard. On 8 February 1871 he was elected a member of the National Assembly, in which he maintained that the Republic was "the necessary form of national sovereignty," and voted for the continuation of the war; yet, though a leftist, he did not sympathize with the Paris Commune and exerted his influence in vain on the side of moderation. In 1878 he advocated the abolition of the presidency and the Senate. In January 1879 he introduced into the chamber a proposal for the amnesty of the Communards, which was carried. This was his last important act. His declining years were darkened by ill-health and by the death, in 1876, of his wife Christina Groh, whom he had married in 1865. He died at Cannes, and on 12 December received a state funeral in Père Lachaise Cemetery.

Blanc possessed a picturesque and vivid style, and considerable power of research; but the fervour with which he expressed his convictions, while placing him in the first rank of orators, tended to turn his historical writings into political pamphlets. His political and social ideas have had a great influence on the development of socialism in France. His Discours politiques (1847–1881) was published in 1882. His most important works, besides those already mentioned, are Lettres sur l'Angleterre (1866–1867), Dix années de l'Histoire de l'Angleterre (1879–1881), and Questions d'aujourd'hui et de demain (1873–1884).

The Paris Metro Station Louis Blanc is named after him.

Blanc is sometimes cited as the first person to use the word capitalism in something like its modern form. While he did not mean the economic system described by Karl Marx in Das Kapital, Blanc sowed the seeds of that usage, coining the word to mean the holding of capital away from others:

What I call 'capitalism' that is to say the appropriation of capital by some to the exclusion of others.

Blanc was unusual in advocating for socialism without revolution first.

Blanc invented the right to work with his Le Droit au Travail.

Blanc resisted what he perceived as the atheism implicit in Hegel, claiming that it corresponded to anarchism in politics and was not an adequate basis for democracy. Friedrich Engels claimed that "Parisian reformers of the Louis Blanc trend" could only imagine atheists as monsters.

Instead, Blanc claimed that religion was foundational for revolution to take place, in keeping with the romantic tradition. He regarded liberalism and Protestantism as part of the same historical and ideological movement and accordingly considered the French Revolution of 1789 as a political outgrowth of the individualistic rejection of authority inherent in Protestantism and heretical movements. Blanc thought the best of the revolution was the Jacobin dictatorship in the communitarian spirit of Catholicism. Blanc himself sought to combine Catholicism and Protestantism in order to synthesize the values of authority, community, and individualism that he both affirmed as necessary for community. He was unusual in combining Catholicism and socialism.

Along with Etienne Cabet, Blanc advocated for what he understood as true Christianity while simultaneously critiquing the religion of Catholic clergy. He was hopeful about the religious innovation taking place in early revolutionary France. His belief in God was shaped by romanticism and was similar to Rousseau, Philippe Buchez and François-Vincent Raspail.

Louis Joseph Buffet (French: [ lwi byfɛ ] ; 26 October 1818 – 7 July 1898) was a French statesman.

He was born at Mirecourt, Vosges. After the revolution of February 1848 he was elected deputy for the department of the Vosges, and in the Assembly sat on the right, pronouncing for the repression of the insurrection of June 1848 and for Louis Napoleon Bonaparte. He was minister of agriculture from August to December 1849 and from August to October 1851.

Re-elected deputy in 1863, he was one of the supporters of the "Liberal Empire" of Émile Ollivier, and was finance minister in Ollivier's cabinet from January to 10 April 1870. He was president of the National Assembly from 4 April 1872 to 10 March 1875, minister of the interior in 1875, and Prime Minister of France from 1875 to 1876. Having made himself obnoxious to the Republican party, he failed to secure a reëlection to the Assembly in 1876. Then, elected senator for life (1876), he pronounced himself in favour of President MacMahon 's failed attempt to seize political control on 16 May 1877.

Buffet had some oratorical talent, but shone most in opposition.

Louis de Béchameil, marquis de Nointel (1630–1703) was a French financier and patron of the arts.

Son of Jean-Baptiste Béchameil, Louis was a rich tax farmer and superintendent to the house of the Duke of Orléans ; he was intendant of Brittany and of the généralité of Tours. In 1697, Béchameil bought the marquisat of Nointel and later became Louis XIV 's head steward.

Following a reorganisation of the Brittany kingdom's Chamber of Accounts of 1669, a commission (1680) was set up and led by Béchameil de Nointel, as an intendant where he wrote a report to attest what he saw. This document, which mentions the frauds of the Chamber's deposits, shows the favors given to the crown and tries to end such abuses, led to a new law proposed by Charles Colbert to the Brittany Chamber in 1681. In 1698, Béchameil published another document focusing on the fiscal system.

Béchameil was an art lover who was directed by the King to found the academy at Angers, for which he delivered the opening address and served as director. He was a patron of Watteau, who painted a series of arabesque panels with figures for the hôtel de Nointel, Paris, doubtless, from the nature of the allegories, for a small dining chamber.

Béchameil and his wife, Marie Colbert (d. April 3, 1686) had two children, Marie Louise Béchameil de Nointel (1661 – April 2, 1740) and Louis Béchameil de Nointel (1649 – December 31, 1718).

The white sauce called béchamel sauce (Fr. sauce béchamel) acquired its name from him for he perfected an older sauce made from cream originally made by François Pierre de la Varenne (1615–1678), the cook of the marquis d'Uxelles. The sauce was dedicated to Béchameil to flatter him, at which the Duke of Escars commented:

"That fellow Béchameil has all the luck! I was serving breast of chicken à la crème more than 20 years before he was born, but I have never had the chance of giving my name to even the most modest sauce."

(« Est-il heureux, ce petit Béchameil! J’avais fait servir des émincés de blancs de volaille à la crème plus de vingt ans avant qu’il fût au monde et, voyez, pourtant je n’ai jamais eu le bonheur de pouvoir donner mon nom à la plus petite sauce! »)

Louis-Antoine Garnier-Pagès (16 February 1803 – 31 October 1878) was a French politician and active freemason who fought on the barricades during the revolution of July.

Garnier-Pagès was born in Marseille. He served as a member of the Provisional Government of 1848 under Jacques-Charles Dupont de l'Eure as well as Mayor of Paris from February to March 1848, and then a member of the Government of National Defense (1870-1871) under Louis Jules Trochu as a minister without portfolio.

He was a keen promoter of reform and was a leading spirit in the affair of the reform banquet fixed for 22 February 1848. He was a member of the provisional government of 1848, and was named mayor of Paris. On 5 March 1848, he was made minister of finance and incurred great unpopularity by the imposition of additional taxes. A surtax of 45 percent was implemented what came to be known as "the forty-five centimes". 1 member of the Constituent Assembly and of the Executive Commission, he was also instrumental in the creation of the nationwide network of comptoirs d'escompte.

Under the Empire he was conspicuous in the Republican opposition and opposed the war with Prussia, and after the fall of Napoleon III became a member of the Government of National Defence. Unsuccessful at the elections for the National Assembly (8 February 1871), he retired into private life. He wrote Histoire de la revolution de 1848 (1860–1862); Histoire de la commission executive (1869–1872); and L'Opposition et l'empire (1872). He died in Paris, aged 75.

Louis Jean-Pierre, marquis de Fontanes (6 March 1757 – 17 March 1821) was a French poet and politician.

Born in Niort (Deux-Sèvres), he belonged to a noble Protestant family of Languedoc which had been reduced to poverty by the revocation of the edict of Nantes. His father Jean-Pierre Marcellin de Fontanes (1719–1774) and grandfather remained Protestant, but he was himself brought up as a Catholic. His parents died in 1774–1775, and in 1777 Fontanes went to Paris, where he found a friend in the dramatist Jean-François Ducis.

His first published poems, some of which were inspired by English models, appeared in the Almanach des Muses ; Le Cri de mon coeur, describing his own sad childhood, in 1778; and La Fort de Navarre in 1780. His translation from Alexander Pope, L'Essai sur l'homme, was published with an elaborate preface in 1783, and La Chartreuse and Le Jour des morts in the same year, Le Verger in 1788 and his Epître sur l'édit en faveur des non-catholiques, and the Essai sur l'astronomie in 1789.

Fontanes was a moderate reformer, and in 1790 he became joint-editor of the Modérateur. He married at Lyon in 1792, and his wife's first child was born during their flight from the siege of that town. Fontanes was in hiding in Paris when the four citizens of Lyon were sent to the Convention to protest against the cruelties of Collot d'Herbois. The petition was drawn up by Fontanes, and the authorship being discovered, he fled from Paris and found shelter at Sevran, near Livry, and afterwards at Andelys.

On the fall of Robespierre he was made professor of literature in the École Centrale des Quatre-Nations, and he was one of the original members of the Institute. In the Memorial, a journal edited by Jean-François de la Harpe, he discreetly advocated reaction to the monarchical principle. He was exiled by the Directory and made his way to London, where he was closely associated with Chateaubriand.

He soon returned to France, and his admiration for Napoleon, who commissioned him to write an éloge on George Washington, secured his return to the Institute and his political promotion. In 1802 he was elected to the legislative chamber, of which he was president from 1804 to 1810. Other honors and titles followed. He has been accused of servility to Napoleon, but he had the courage to remonstrate with him on the judicial murder of the duc d'Enghien, and as grand master of the University of Paris (1808–1815) he consistently supported religious and monarchical principles. He acquiesced in the Bourbon restoration, and was made a marquis in 1817. He died on March 17, 1821, in Paris, leaving eight cantos of an unfinished epic poem entitled La Grèce sauvée.

The verse of Fontanes is polished and musical in the style of the 18th century. It was not collected until 1839, when Sainte-Beuve edited the Œuvres (2 vols.) of Fontanes, with a sympathetic critical study of the author and his career. But by that time the Romantic movement was in the ascendant and Fontanes met with small appreciation.

Lourdes water is water which flows from a spring in the Grotto of Massabielle in the Sanctuary of Our Lady of Lourdes, France. According to Catholic tradition, the location of the spring was described to Bernadette Soubirous by an apparition of Our Lady of Lourdes on 25 February 1858. Since that time, many millions of pilgrims to Lourdes have followed the instruction of the Blessed Virgin Mary to "drink at the spring and bathe in it".

Since the reports on the apparitions, thousands of people have claimed to have been cured by drinking or bathing in the water, and the Lourdes authorities provide it free of charge. The Catholic Church has officially recognized 72 miraculous healings from Lourdes, while some scientists attribute the healings to the placebo effect.

An analysis of the water was commissioned by the French politician Anselme Lacadé [ fr ] in 1858. It was conducted by a professor in Toulouse, who determined that the water was potable and that it contained the following: oxygen, nitrogen, carbonic acid, carbonates of lime and magnesia, a trace of carbonate of iron, an alkaline carbonate or silicate, chlorides of potassium and sodium, traces of sulphates of potassium and soda, traces of ammonia, and traces of iodine.

Essentially, the water is quite pure and inert. Lacadé had hoped that Lourdes water might have special mineral properties which would allow him to develop Lourdes into a spa town, to compete with neighbouring Cauterets and Bagnères-de-Bigorre.

Primitive makeshift bathing installations were constructed in the 1850s by local builders. Until 1880 there were only two pools, filled by a manual pump. In 1880, a wooden bathing-house containing fourteen pools (" piscines ") was constructed.

The French author Émile Zola visited the Sanctuary of Lourdes in 1891 and again in 1892, and wrote of the pools' unsanitary conditions:

And the water was not exactly inviting. The Grotto Fathers were afraid that the output of the spring would be insufficient, so in those days they had the water in the pools changed just twice a day. As some hundred patients passed through the same water, you can imagine what a horrible slop it was at the end. There was everything in it: threads of blood, sloughed-off skin, scabs, bits of cloth and bandage, an abominable soup of ills... the miracle was that anyone emerged alive from this human slime.

During the 1897 Jubilee Pilgrimage to Lourdes, the priest François Picard was thirsty after a long day. Rather than drinking fresh water, he asked an assistant to fill his glass from a bathing pool, heavily contaminated from the sick pilgrims who had been immersed in it. "When the father had received [the water], he made the sign of the cross and drank slowly, right to the end. Then, he gave back the glass and concluded with a smile: "The water of the good Mother of Heaven is always delicious."

The next set of baths was completed in 1891, and tiled in the Virgin's blue. This building was located near to where the water taps are now and can be seen on old photographs of the Domain.

The current baths were constructed in 1955, and upgraded in 1972 and 1980. There are seventeen separate bath cubicles, eleven for women and six for men. Each year about 350,000 people use the baths.

The water is not heated and is usually cold; the temperature is around 12 °C (54 °F). The immersion lasts around a minute, during which time prayers are recited, and veneration of a nearby statue of the Virgin is encouraged. Pilgrims are aided by one or two volunteer attendants; pilgrims with mobility disabilities sometimes require additional accommodations. The water in each bath is constantly topped up and refreshed via a pump. It is now constantly circulated and purified by irradiation.

Lourdes water flows from a spring in the back area of Grotto at the same spot where it was discovered by Bernadette. At maximum, the water flows at 40 litres per minute. The water is collected in a cistern, and dispensed via a system of taps near the shrine, where pilgrims may drink it or collect it in bottles or other containers to take with them. The original spring can be seen within the Grotto, lit from below, and protected by a glass screen.

Over the last few years the system of taps has been progressively altered. As of 2008, water is dispensed from a series of taps set into stone in a circle around the base of one of the smaller towers of the Upper Basilica.

In 2002 the Water Walk was introduced, across the Gave river and slightly downstream from the Grotto. It consists of a series of nine stations at which there is a small Lourdes water font. The stations form a walkway along the Gave which can be followed in either direction. As they walk, pilgrims are invited to wash or drink, and meditate on passages from the Bible. Each station carries a title of the Virgin Mary, such as "Queen of the Apostles", " Mother of Good Counsel ", and " Our Lady of Light ".

Traditionally, pilgrims collect gallons of water at the taps to be given to family and friends unable to make the trip to Lourdes. As of summer 2007, Mistral Air passengers on pilgrimage to Lourdes were forbidden to bring containers of water on the plane. Officials at Tarbes Airport said this was in keeping with new anti- terrorism regulations about liquids following the 2006 transatlantic aircraft plot.

The Lubrizol factory fire occurred on 26 September 2019 in Rouen, France, when the Lubrizol chemical plant caught fire. The facility, subject to the Seveso-III Directive due to hazardous chemicals it stored and produced, created a large plume of smoke and led to a 500-metre (1,600 ft) exclusion zone. While there were no fatalities, the fire caused elevated pollution levels, prompting containment measures and agricultural suspensions. Economic impacts included business disruptions and destroyed harvests. A parliamentary inquiry and legal proceedings followed, and a government report was released in July 2020.

On 26 September 2019, the Lubrizol chemical products plant and warehouses of Normandie Logistique in Rouen caught fire; the plant synthesizes and stores chemical products (phosphorus and organosulfur compounds) intended for use as lubricant additives. Because of the toxic nature of the chemicals it produces, the site is covered by the Seveso-III Directive.

For reasons yet unknown, the fire started in a still unknown location and affected part of the warehouses of Normandie Logistique and Lubrizol's storage area. A thick plume of black smoke formed, reaching more than 20 km (12 mi), and a 500 m (1,600 ft) exclusion zone was imposed. There were no fatalities and only non-fatal injuries. As part of the management of the accident, various measures were taken to protect the population (containment, school closures, suspension of certain agricultural activities, etc.).

In terms of human health, the results of the initial measurements (air, water) showed elevated levels of air pollution, without immediate direct risks, with the exception of benzene. Initial water quality measurements also revealed elevated levels without immediate toxic effects. However, following the publication of the list of products involved in the fire, questions remain as to whether or not hazardous products were present in the combustion by-products, which were not measured. The regional prefecture regularly published their analyses. In July 2020, a government report drawing lessons from the feedback was published.

The direct economic consequences resulted from companies partially ceasing their activity and farmers that had to destroy their harvests. A parliamentary fact-finding mission was launched, and legal proceedings were initiated.

The Seveso-III Directive (2012/18/EU) (full title: Directive 2012/18/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on the control of major-accident hazards involving dangerous substances, amending and subsequently repealing Council Directive 96/82/EC Text with EEA relevance) is a European Union directive aimed at controlling major chemical accident hazards. Seveso-III is implemented in national legislation and is enforced by national chemical safety authorities. Establishments covered by Seveso are split into two categories: lower-tier and upper-tier.

The Lubrizol factory is classified as an "upper-tier" establishment under the Seveso Directive (2012/18/EU). The upper tier covers establishments with dangerous substances present in large quantities, requiring more stringent controls to prevent and minimise the consequences of major accidents. The establishment is listed in the eSPIRS database (electronic Seveso Plant Information Retrieval System).

Article 20 (Inspections) of the Seveso Directive states that, for upper-tier Seveso establishments (the biggest plants subjected to the strictest safety regime), the period between two consecutive inspections/site visits shall not exceed one year. The last date of the inspection of the Lubrizol site was 6-9-2019. The last inspection mainly focused on the process parts of the plant, whereas the fire mainly involved the storage area.

Furthermore, Article 14 states that member states shall ensure that the information referred to in Annex V of the directive is permanently available to the public, so a "safety report" and an "inventory of dangerous substances" must be made available to the public "upon request".

Member states can, however, derogate from this for reasons related to international relations, public security, or national defence. For the Lubrizol site, no inventory of dangerous substances was made publicly available prior to the accident. The full list of products was published shortly after the fire.

LULI2000 is a high-power laser system dedicated to scientific research. It is located in LULI laboratory, at École Polytechnique in France. The main application of this type of laser is related to the very high energy fluxes obtained after focusing onto tiny focal spots, from micrometers to hundreds of micrometers in diameter. The interaction between these focused beams and small targets produces very hot plasmas, up to many hundred million degrees, high densities and high pressures. Depending on the laser and target parameters, these laser-generated plasmas may be compared to stars or planet interiors.

The main research topics addressed on LULI2000 concern laser inertial fusion and all its physical components, fundamental physics of hot and dense plasmas and its applications in astrophysics and geophysics, or the physics and processing of materials.

NANO2000, the nanosecond version of LULI2000, consists in two Nd:Glass laser chains, 200 mm in diameter, delivering each 1 kJ in nanosecond pulses at 1.05 μm wavelength. After frequency doubling or tripling, a large part of the energy may be converted to 0.53 μm or 0.35 μm. These beams are then focussed in the middle of a 2 m diameter vacuum chamber where they irradiate targets of different types. The interaction itself and the characteristics of the laser-generated hot plasmas are diagnosed by a whole set of dedicated diagnostics.

PICO2000, the adaptation of one NANO2000 laser chain in the picosecond regime, will deliver 200 J in 1 ps at 1.05 μm. LULI2000 will be the most energetic laser facility in Europe coupling nanosecond and picosecond pulses. The fast-igniter scheme for laser inertial fusion will be one of the main topics addressed on this facility, in coordination with future installations such as PETAL and HiPER.

The Luxembourg Palace (French : Palais du Luxembourg, pronounced [ palɛ dy lyksɑ̃buʁ ]) is at 15 Rue de Vaugirard in the 6th arrondissement of Paris, France. It was originally built (1615–1645) to the designs of the French architect Salomon de Brosse to be the royal residence of the regent Marie de' Medici, mother of King Louis XIII. After the Revolution it was refashioned (1799–1805) by Jean-François Chalgrin into a legislative building and subsequently greatly enlarged and remodeled (1835–1856) by Alphonse de Gisors. The palace has been the seat of the upper houses of the various French national legislatures (excepting only the unicameral National Assembly of the Second Republic) since the establishment of the Sénat conservateur during the Consulate ; as such, it has been home to the Senate of the Fifth Republic since its establishment in 1958.

Immediately west of the palace on the Rue de Vaugirard is the Petit Luxembourg, now the residence of the Senate President ; and slightly further west, the Musée du Luxembourg, in the former orangery. On the south side of the palace, the formal Luxembourg Garden presents a 25-hectare (62-acre) green parterre of gravel and lawn populated with statues and large basins of water where children sail model boats.

After the death of Henry IV in 1610, his widow, Marie de' Medici, became regent to her son, Louis XIII. Having acceded to a much more powerful position, she decided to erect a new palace for herself, adjacent to an old hôtel particulier owned by François de Luxembourg, Duc de Piney, which is now called the Petit Luxembourg and is the residence of the president of the French Senate.

Marie de' Medici desired to make a building similar to her native Florence 's Palazzo Pitti ; to this effect she had the architect Métezeau (either Louis Métezeau or his brother, Clément Métezeau) sent to Florence to make detailed drawings of the building.

She bought the Hôtel de Luxembourg and its fairly extensive domain in 1612 and commissioned the new building, which she referred to as her Palais Médicis, in 1615. Its construction and furnishing formed her major artistic project, though nothing remains today of the interiors as they were created for her, save some architectural fragments reassembled in the Salle du Livre d'Or. The suites of paintings she commissioned, in the subjects of which she expressed her requirements through her agents and advisers, are scattered among museums.

Marie installed her household in 1625, while work on interiors continued. The apartments in the right wing on the western side were reserved for the Queen and the matching suite to the east, for her son, Louis XIII, when he was visiting (floor plan). The 24 Marie de' Medici cycle canvases, a series commissioned from Peter Paul Rubens, were installed in the Galerie de Rubens on the main floor of the western wing. These paintings were executed between 1622 and 1625 and depicts Marie's struggles and triumphs in life. They are now visible in the Galerie Medicis of the Louvre, one of the treasures of the museum's Flemish paintings department. A series of paintings executed for her Cabinet doré ("gilded study") was identified by Anthony Blunt in 1967.

The gallery in the east wing had been intended for the display of paintings celebrating Henry IV and buildings housing stables and services were planned to either side of the pavilions flanking the entrance on the street, but these projects remained unfinished in 1631, when the Queen Mother was forced from court, following the " Day of the Dupes " in November. Louis XIII commissioned further decorations for the Palace from Nicolas Poussin and Philippe de Champaigne.

In 1642, Marie de' Medici bequeathed the Luxembourg to her second and favourite son, Gaston, Duke of Orléans, who called it the Orléans Palace (Palais d'Orléans) but by popular will it was still known by its original name. Upon Gaston's death, the palace passed to his widow, Marguerite of Lorraine, then to his elder daughter by his first marriage, Anne, Duchess of Montpensier La Grande Mademoiselle. In 1660, Anne de Montpensier sold the Luxembourg to her younger half-sister, Élisabeth Marguerite of Orléans, duchess of Guise who, in turn, gave it to her cousin, King Louis XIV, in 1694.

In 1715, the Luxembourg Palace became the residence of Marie Louise Élisabeth d'Orléans, Duchess of Berry. The widowed Duchess was notoriously promiscuous, having the reputation of a French Messalina, relentlessly driven by her unquenchable thirst for all pleasures of the flesh. The palace and its gardens thus became stages where the princess acted out her ambitions, enthroned like a queen surrounded by her court. In some of her more exclusive parties, Madame de Berry also played the leading part in elaborate "tableaux-vivants" that represented mythological scenes and in which she displayed her person impersonating Venus or Diana. According to various satirical songs which scurrilously evoked her amours "the Lady of the Luxembourg" hid several pregnancies, shutting herself up from society when about to give birth. Her taste for strong liquors and her sheer gluttony also scandalized the court. On 21 May 1717, Madame de Berry received Peter the Great at the Luxembourg. She welcomed the visiting Tsar splendidly dressed in a magnificent sack-back gown which showcased her voluptuous bosom as well as her mischievous face but also helped conceal her swelling for she was then in an "interesting condition".

On 28 February 1718, the Duchess of Berry threw a magnificent party for her visiting aunt, Élisabeth Charlotte d'Orléans, duchess of Lorraine. The entire palace and its gardens were elaborately illuminated. The lavish banquet was followed by a masked ball. Madame de Berry made a dazzling appearance before her guests. She was then in the full splendour of her youthful beauty and pride and acted as if she were the very incarnation of the goddess of love, mirth, beauty and sensual pleasures. On 2 April 1719, after a gruelling four-day labour, shut up in a small room of her palace, the young widow was delivered of a still-born baby girl, supposedly fathered by her lieutenant of the guards, the Count of Riom. Berry's delivery was extremely troublesome and almost killed her. The Church refused her the Sacraments thus adding moral infamy to the physical tortures of the labouring woman. Saint-Simon wrote a very sarcastic description of this childbirth. Hoping to regain her health and undeceive the public that she had been confined, Madame de Berry left Paris and the Luxembourg Palace. She died in her Château de la Muette on 21 July 1719 and, according to Saint-Simon, was found to be again pregnant.

In 1750, the palace became a museum, the forerunner of the Louvre, and was open two days a week until 1779. In 1778, the Luxembourg Palace was given to the Count of Provence by his brother Louis XVI. During the French Revolution, it was briefly a prison, then the seat of the French Directory, and in 1799, the home of the Sénat conservateur and the first residence of Napoleon Bonaparte, as First Consul of the French Republic.

From 1799 to 1805, the architect Jean-François Chalgrin transformed the palace into a legislative building. He demolished the grand central staircase (escalier d'honneur), replacing it with a senate chamber on the first floor, which incorporated and destroyed Marie de' Medici's chapel on the garden side of the corps de logis. Chalgrin also enclosed the flanking terraces, making space for a library. At the same time he created a neo-classical escalier d'honneur in the west wing, a single monumental flight enclosed by an Ionic colonnade and covered with a coffered barrel vault, the construction of which resulted in the destruction of the long gallery that had formerly housed the cycle of paintings by Rubens.

Beginning in 1835, the architect Alphonse de Gisors added a new garden wing parallel to the old corps de logis, replicating the look of the original 17th-century façade so precisely that it is difficult to distinguish at first glance the old from the new. The new senate chamber was located in what would have been the courtyard area in between.

The new wing included a library (bibliothèque) with a cycle of paintings (1845–1847) by Eugène Delacroix. In the 1850s, at the request of Emperor Napoleon III, Gisors created the highly-decorated Salle des Conférences (inspired by the Galerie d'Apollon of the Louvre), which influenced the nature of subsequent official interiors of the Second Empire, including those of the Palais Garnier.

During the German occupation of France (1940–44), Hermann Göring took over the palace as the headquarters of the Luftwaffe in France and took for himself a sumptuous suite of rooms to accommodate his visits to the French capital. His subordinate, Luftwaffe Field Marshal Hugo Sperrle, was also given an apartment in the Luxembourg Palace. He spent most of the war by enjoying the luxurious surroundings. "The Field Marshal's craving for luxury and public display ran a close second to that of his superior, Goering; he was also his match in corpulence", wrote Armaments Minister Albert Speer after a visit to Sperrle in Paris.

The palace was a designated "strong point" for German forces defending the city in August 1944, but thanks to the decision of Commanding General Dietrich von Choltitz to surrender the city rather than fight, the palace was only minimally damaged although furniture was stolen. On 7 November 1944, after the Liberation of France, the Provisional Consultative Assembly held its first meeting at the Luxembourg Palace.

From 29 July to 15 October 1946, the Luxembourg Palace was the site of the talks of the Paris Peace Conference.

Luxembourgers (/ ˈ l ʌ k s əm b ɜːr ɡ ər z / LUK -səm-bur-gərz ; Luxembourgish : Lëtzebuerger [ ˈlətsəbu̯əjɐ ]) are a Germanic ethnic group native to their nation state of Luxembourg, where they make up around half of the population. They share the culture of Luxembourg and speak Luxembourgish, a West Germanic language.

Luxembourgers were, much like Austrians and some aspects of the Swiss, historically considered a regional sub-group of ethnic Germans and viewed themselves as such until the collapse of the German Confederation. Luxembourg became independent, while remaining in personal union with the Netherlands, after the signing of the Treaty of London in 1839. The personal union proved short-lived as it was bilaterally and amicably dissolved in 1890.

Legally, all citizens of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg are considered to be Luxembourgers per Luxembourgish law, although a distinct Germanic ethnolinguistic identification is vocally espoused and promoted. The corresponding adjective is " Luxembourgish ".

Most ethnic Luxembourgers live in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg (Luxembourgish : Lëtzebuerg), a small landlocked country in Western Europe, situated between Germany, France, and Belgium, and are of Celtic / Gallo-Roman and Germanic (Frankish) origin. Luxembourgish is the only native language of Luxembourgers (as taught by parents), although nearly all of them learn French and German in school and are able to communicate in these two languages as well from an early age on. Despite the rather small number of Luxembourgers, there is a relatively large diaspora of their people, both in Europe and elsewhere, most notably overseas in North America. Particularly, there are populations in the surrounding countries of Belgium, France, and Germany. For the most part, this is due to historic reasons, especially the three Partitions of Luxembourg, which led to former territories of Luxembourg being incorporated into each of the three surrounding countries.

As previously mentioned, there are also significant populations of Luxembourgers in the Americas, with the largest contingent being in the United States. Others migrated to the medieval Kingdom of Hungary along with Germans during the first phase of German eastward settlement (German : Ostsiedlung) in the 12th century (and, later on, during the Modern Age). Transylvanian Saxons (in particular) and Banat Swabians (partly) are the descendants of these settlers. Furthermore, the Transylvanian Saxon dialect is very close to Luxembourgish. In addition, the Zipser Germans in the historical region of Zips, Slovakia (but also their descendants in Maramureș and Bukovina, two historical regions of Romania situated in the north of this country) are also part of the Luxembourgish diaspora given the fact that part of their ancestors stemmed from the northwestern Lower Rhineland and adjacent or neighbouring areas.

The explanation for the cultural, ethnic, and linguistic ties between the Saxons in Transylvania and the Luxembourgers is rather simple, namely that the first waves of Transylvanian Saxon settlers who colonised parts of Transylvania, present-day central Romania stemmed from the Rhine-Moselle river valley region and, implicitly, from Luxembourg as well. These settlers were part of the Ostsiedlung colonisation process in Central and Eastern Europe and were invited during the late 12th century, during the High Middle Ages, by the King of Hungary Géza II to develop, fortify, and defend southern and south-eastern Transylvania against invading Asian peoples (e.g. Cumans, Pechenegs, Mongols, or Tatars). Moreover, in 2007, Luxembourg City shared the status of European Capital of Culture with the Romanian town of Sibiu (German : Hermannstadt), one of the most important historical urban centres of the Transylvanian Saxons, both in the past and present, in cultural, administrative, and religious regards as well.

Luxembourgish (/ ˈ l ʌ k s əm b ɜːr ɡ ɪ ʃ / LUK -səm-bur-ghish ; also Luxemburgish, Luxembourgian, Letzebu(e)rgesch ; endonym : Lëtzebuergesch [ ˈlətsəbu̯əjəʃ ]) is a West Germanic language that is spoken mainly in Luxembourg. About 400,000 people speak Luxembourgish worldwide.

The language is standardized and officially the national language of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. As such, Luxembourgish is different from the German language also used in the Grand Duchy. The German language exists in a national standard variety of Luxembourg, which is slightly different from the standard varieties in Germany, Austria and Switzerland. Another important language of Luxembourg is French, which had a certain influence on both the national language, Luxembourgish, and the Luxembourg national variety of German. Luxembourgish, German and French are the three official languages (Amtssprachen) of Luxembourg.

As a standard form of the Moselle Franconian variety, Luxembourgish has similarities with other High German dialects and the wider group of West Germanic languages. The status of Luxembourgish as the national language of Luxembourg and the existence there of a regulatory body have removed Luxembourgish, at least in part, from the domain of Standard German, its traditional Dachsprache. It is also related to the Transylvanian Saxon dialect spoken by the Transylvanian Saxons in Transylvania, contemporary central Romania.

The Codex Mariendalensis, a nearly 6000-line epic poem about the life of the 13th-century Yolanda of Vianden, has been described by the National Library of Luxembourg as the earliest known text written in Luxembourgish. It was published in the early 14th century and discovered in 1999 at Ansembourg Castle.

Luxembourgish was considered a German dialect like many others until about World War II but then the language underwent ausbau, creating its own standard form in vocabulary, grammar, and spelling and therefore is seen today as an independent language. Luxembourgish managed to gain linguistic autonomy against a vigorous One Standard German Axiom by being framed as an independent language with a name rather than as a national pluricentric standard variety of German.

As Luxembourgish has a maximum of some 285,000 native speakers, resources in the language such as books, newspapers, magazines, television and internet are limited. Since most Luxembourgers also speak Standard German and French, there is strong competition with these languages, which both have large language resources. Because of this, the use of Luxembourgish remains limited.

Between 2000 and 2002, Luxembourgish linguist Jérôme Lulling compiled a lexical database of 125,000-word forms as the basis for the first Luxembourgish spellchecker (Projet C.ORT.IN.A).

The LaF (Lëtzebuergesch als Friemsprooch – Luxembourgish as a Foreign Language) is a set of four language proficiency certifications for Luxembourgish and follows the ALTE framework of language examination standards. The tests are administered by the Institut National des Langues Luxembourg.

The "Centre for Luxembourg Studies" at the University of Sheffield was founded in 1995 on the initiative of Professor Gerald Newton. It is supported by the government of Luxembourg which funds an endowed chair in Luxembourg Studies at the university. The first class of students to study the language outside of the country as undergraduate students began their studies at the 'Centre for Luxembourg Studies' at Sheffield in the academic year 2011–2012.

Luxembourgish belongs to the West Central German group of the High German languages and is the primary example of a Moselle Franconian language. Furthermore, it is closely related to Transylvanian Saxon which has been spoken since the High Middle Ages by the Transylvanian Saxons in Transylvania, present-day central Romania.

Luxembourgish is considered the national language of Luxembourg and also one of the three administrative languages, alongside German and French.

In Luxembourg, 77% of residents can speak Luxembourgish, and it is the primary language of 48% of the population. It is also spoken in the Arelerland region of Belgium (part of the Province of Luxembourg) and in small parts of Lorraine in France.

In the German Eifel and Hunsrück regions, similar local Moselle Franconian dialects of German are spoken. The language is also spoken by a few descendants of Luxembourg immigrants in the United States and Canada.

Other Moselle Franconian dialects are spoken by ethnic Germans long settled in Transylvania, Romania (Siebenbürgen).

Moselle Franconian dialects outside the Luxembourg state border tend to have far fewer French loanwords, and these mostly remain from the French Revolution.

The political party that places the greatest importance on promoting, using and preserving Luxembourgish is the Alternative Democratic Reform Party (ADR) and its electoral success in the 1999 election pushed the CSV-DP government to make knowledge of it a criterion for naturalisation. It is currently also the only political party in Luxembourg that wishes to implement written laws also in Luxembourgish and that wants Luxembourgish to be an officially recognized language of the European Union. In this context, in 2005, then- Deputy Prime Minister Jean Asselborn of the LSAP rejected a demand made by the ADR to make Luxembourgish an official language of the EU, citing financial reasons and the sufficiency of official German and French. A similar proposal by the ADR was rejected by the Chamber of Deputies in 2024.

UNESCO declared Luxembourgish to be an endangered language in 2019, adding it to its Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger.

Additionally, some local media have argued that the Luxembourgish language is at risk of disappearing, and that it should be considered an endangered language. Even though the government claims that more people than ever are able to speak Luxembourgish, these are absolute numbers and often include the many naturalized citizens who have passed the Sproochentest, a language test that certifies the knowledge of merely A.2. in speaking and B.1. in understanding.

Luxembourgish language expert and historian Alain Atten argues that not only the absolute number of Luxembourgish speakers should be considered when defining the status of a language, but also the proportion of speakers in a country. Noting that the proportion of native Luxembourgish speakers has decreased in recent decades, Atten believes that Luxembourgish will inevitably disappear, stating:

It is simple math, if there are about 70% foreigners and about 30% Luxembourgers (which is the case in Luxembourg City), then it cannot possibly be said that Luxembourgish is thriving. That would be very improbable.

Atten also argues that the situation is even more dramatic, since the cited percentages take only the residents of Luxembourg into account, excluding the 200,000 cross-border-workers present in the country on a daily basis. This group plays a major role in the daily use of languages in Luxembourg, thus further lowering the percentage of Luxembourgish speakers present in the country.

The following numbers are based on statistics by STATEC (those since 2011) and show that the percentage of the population that is able to speak Luxembourgish has been constantly diminishing for years (The 200,000 cross-border workers are not included in this statistic):

It has also been argued that two very similar languages, Alsatian and Lorraine Franconian, which were very broadly spoken by the local populations at the beginning of the 20th century in Alsace and in Lorraine respectively, have been nearly completely supplanted by French, and that a similar fate could also be possible for Luxembourgish. Another example of the replacement of Luxembourgish by French occurred in Arelerland (historically a part of Luxembourg, today in Belgium), where the vast majority of the local population spoke Luxembourgish as a native language well into the 20th century. Today, Luxembourgish is nearly extinct in this region, having been replaced by French.

According to some Luxembourgish news media and members of Actioun Lëtzebuergesch (an association for the preservation and promotion of the language), the biggest threat to the existence of Luxembourgish is indeed French, since it is the language of most official documents and street signs in Luxembourg; this considerably weakens the possibility for Luxembourgish to be practiced by new speakers and learners. In most cases, this passively forces expats to learn French instead of Luxembourgish.

In 2021 it was announced that public announcements in Luxembourgish (and in German as well) at Luxembourg Airport would cease; it would only be using French and English for future public announcements. This will cause Luxembourgish to go unused at Luxembourg Airport after many decades. Actioun Lëtzebuergesch declared itself to be hugely upset by this new governmental measure, citing that other airports in the world seem to have no problems making public announcements in multiple languages. According to a poll conducted by AL, 92.84% of the Luxembourgish population wished to have public announcements to be made in Luxembourgish at Luxembourg Airport.

ADR politician Fred Keup has claimed that Luxembourgish is already on its way to complete replacement by French.

There are several distinct dialect forms of Luxembourgish including Areler (from Arlon), Eechternoacher (Echternach), Dikrecher (Diekirch), Kliärrwer (Clervaux), Miseler (Moselle), Stater (Luxembourg City), Veiner (Vianden), Minetter (Southwest Luxembourg) and Weelzer (Wiltz). Further small vocabulary differences may be seen even between small villages. These varieties are grouped into North, East, South, and Center dialects which can be automatically categorised with a correctness of about 80%.

Increasing mobility of the population and the dissemination of the language through mass media such as radio and television are leading to a gradual standardisation towards a "Standard Luxembourgish" through the process of koineization.

There is no distinct geographic boundary between the use of Luxembourgish and the use of other closely related High German dialects (for example, Lorraine Franconian); it instead forms a dialect continuum of gradual change.

Spoken Luxembourgish is relatively hard to understand for speakers of German who are generally not familiar with Moselle Franconian dialects (or at least other West Central German dialects). They can usually read the language to some degree. For those Germans familiar with Moselle Franconian dialects, it is relatively easy to understand and speak Luxembourgish as far as the everyday vocabulary is concerned. The large number of French loanwords in Luxembourgish may hamper communication about certain topics or with certain speakers (those who use many terms taken from French).

The consonant inventory of Luxembourgish is quite similar to that of Standard German.

A number of proposals for standardising the orthography of Luxembourgish can be documented, going back to the middle of the 19th century. There was no officially recognised system until the adoption of the "OLO" (ofizjel lezebuurjer ortografi) on 5 June 1946. This orthography provided a system for speakers of all varieties of Luxembourgish to transcribe words the way they pronounced them, rather than imposing a single, standard spelling for the words of the language. The rules explicitly rejected certain elements of German orthography (e.g., the use of ⟨ ä ⟩ and ⟨ ö ⟩, the capitalisation of nouns). Similarly, new principles were adopted for the spelling of French loanwords.

This proposed orthography, so different from existing "foreign" standards that people were already familiar with, did not enjoy widespread approval.

A more successful standard eventually emerged from the work of the committee of specialists charged with the task of creating the Luxemburger Wörterbuch, published in 5 volumes between 1950 and 1977. The orthographic conventions adopted in this decades-long project, set out in Bruch (1955), provided the basis of the standard orthography that became official on 10 October 1975. Modifications to this standard were proposed by the Permanent Council of the Luxembourguish language and adopted officially in the spelling reform of 30 July 1999. A detailed explanation of current practice for Luxembourgish can be found in Schanen & Lulling (2003).

The Luxembourgish alphabet consists of the 26 Latin letters plus three letters with diacritics: ⟨ é ⟩, ⟨ ä ⟩, and ⟨ ë ⟩. In loanwords from French and Standard German, other diacritics are usually preserved:

In German loanwords, the digraphs ⟨ eu ⟩ and ⟨ äu ⟩ indicate the diphthong /oɪ/, which does not appear in native words.

Like many other varieties of Western High German, Luxembourgish has a rule of final n -deletion in certain contexts. The effects of this rule (known as the "Eifel Rule") are indicated in writing, and therefore must be taken into account when spelling words and morphemes ending in ⟨ n ⟩ or ⟨ nn ⟩. For example:

Luxembourgish has three genders (masculine, feminine, and neuter), and three cases (nominative, accusative, and dative). These are marked morphologically on determiners and pronouns. As in German, there is no morphological gender distinction in the plural.

The forms of the articles and of some selected determiners are given below:

As seen above, Luxembourgish has plural forms of en ("a, an"), namely eng in the nominative/accusative and engen in the dative. They are not used as indefinite articles, which—as in German and English—do not exist in the plural, but they do occur in the compound pronouns wéi en ("what, which") and sou en ("such"). For example: wéi eng Saachen ("what things"); sou eng Saachen ("such things"). Moreover, they are used before numbers to express an estimation: eng 30.000 Spectateuren ("some 30,000 spectators").

Distinct nominative forms survive in a few nominal phrases such as der Däiwel ("the devil") and eiser Herrgott ("our Lord"). Rare examples of the genitive are also found: Enn des Mounts ("end of the month"), Ufanks der Woch ("at the beginning of the week"). The functions of the genitive are normally expressed using a combination of the dative and a possessive determiner: e.g. dem Mann säi Buch (lit. "to the man his book", i.e. "the man's book"). This is known as a periphrastic genitive, and is a phenomenon also commonly seen in dialectal and colloquial German, and in Dutch.

The forms of the personal pronouns are given in the following table (unstressed forms appear in parentheses):

The 2pl form is also used as a polite singular (like French vous, see T-V distinction); the forms are capitalised in writing:

Like most varieties of colloquial German, but even more invariably, Luxembourgish uses definite articles with personal names. They are obligatory and not to be translated:

A feature Luxembourgish shares with only some western dialects of German is that women and girls are most often referred to with forms of the neuter pronoun hatt :

Adjectives show a different morphological behaviour when used attributively and predicatively. In predicative use, e.g. when they occur with verbs like sinn ("to be"), adjectives receive no extra ending:

In attributive use, i.e. when placed before the noun they describe, they change their ending according to the grammatical gender, number and case of the noun:

The definite article changes with the use of an attributive adjective: feminine d ' goes to déi (or di), neuter d ' goes to dat, and plural d ' changes to déi.

The comparative in Luxembourgish is formed analytically, i.e. the adjective itself is not altered (compare the use of - er in German and English; tall → taller, klein → kleiner). Instead it is formed using the adverb méi : e.g. schéin → méi schéin

The superlative involves a synthetic form consisting of the adjective and the suffix -st : e.g. schéin → schéin st (compare German schönst, English prettiest). Attributive modification requires the emphatic definite article and the inflected superlative adjective:

Predicative modification uses either the same adjectival structure or the adverbial structure am + - sten : e.g. schéin → am schéinsten :

Some common adjectives have exceptional comparative and superlative forms:

Several other adjectives also have comparative forms, not commonly used as normal comparatives, but in special senses:

Luxembourgish exhibits "verb second" word order in clauses. More specifically, Luxembourgish is a V2 - SOV language, like German and Dutch. In other words, we find the following finite clausal structures:

Non-finite verbs (infinitives and participles) generally appear in final position:

These rules interact so that in subordinate clauses, the finite verb and any non-finite verbs must all cluster at the end. Luxembourgish allows different word orders in these cases:

This is also the case when two non-finite verb forms occur together:

Luxembourgish (like Dutch and German) allows prepositional phrases to appear after the verb cluster in subordinate clauses:

Luxembourgish has borrowed many French words. For example, the word for a bus driver is Buschauffeur (as in Dutch and Swiss German), which would be Busfahrer in German and chauffeur de bus in French.

Some words are different from Standard German, but have equivalents in German dialects. An example is Gromperen (potatoes – German: Kartoffeln). Other words are exclusive to Luxembourgish.

Listen to the words below. Note: Words spoken in sound clip do not reflect all words on this list.

Neologisms in Luxembourgish include both entirely new words, and the attachment of new meanings to old words in everyday speech. The most recent neologisms come from the English language in the fields of telecommunications, computer science, and the Internet.

Recent neologisms in Luxembourgish include:

Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Luxembourgish:

All d’Mënsche gi fräi gebuer, mat gläicher Dignitéit a mat deene selwechte Rechter. Alleguer hu se Verstand a Gewëssen a sollen am Geescht vun der Solidaritéit mateneen ëmgoen.

Alle Menschen sind frei und gleich an Würde und Rechten geboren. Sie sind mit Vernunft und Gewissen begabt und sollen einander im Geist der Brüderlichkeit begegnen.

All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.

LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton SE is a French multinational holding company and conglomerate that specializes in luxury goods and has its headquarters in Paris. The company was formed in 1987 through the merger of fashion house Louis Vuitton (founded in 1854) with Moët Hennessy, which had been established by the 1971 merger between the champagne producer Moët & Chandon (founded in 1743) and the cognac producer Hennessy (founded in 1765). In April 2023, LVMH became the first European company to surpass a valuation of $500 billion. In 2023, the company was ranked 47th in the Forbes Global 2000.

LVMH controls around 60 subsidiaries that manage 75 luxury brands and is extremely popular in France, Japan and the United States. In addition to Louis Vuitton and Moët Hennessy, LVMH's portfolio includes Christian Dior SE, Givenchy, Fendi, Celine, Kenzo, Tiffany & Co., Bulgari, Loewe, TAG Heuer, Sephora and Loro Piana. The subsidiaries are often managed independently, under the umbrellas of six branches: Fashion Group, Wines and Spirits, Perfumes and Cosmetics, Watches and Jewelry, Selective Distribution, and Other Activities. LVMH owns Les Echos-Le Parisien Group, its media subsidiary. The wine estate of Château d'Yquem, whose origins date back to 1593, is under LVMH ownership. Bernard Arnault is the chairman, CEO and largest shareholder of LVMH, making him one of the richest people in the world as of 2026. Chief markets for LVMH include France, Japan and the United States.

In 1987, Moët Hennessy and Louis Vuitton merged to create LVMH. As a result of different visions for the future of the merged entity, Alain Chevalier and Henry Racamier, the respective leaders of the predecessor firms, started to fight. Racamier invited Bernard Arnault to invest in LVMH. Rapidly, Arnault succeeded in taking control of LVMH at the expense of the initial family owners. Contrary to what is often indicated, Arnault did not establish LVMH.

LVMH is a component of the Euro Stoxx 50 stock market index.

Make Up For Ever was established in 1984, and it was acquired by LVMH in 1999.

On 7 March 2011, LVMH announced the acquisition of the 50.4% family-owned shares of the Italian jeweller Bulgari and the intention to make a tender offer for the rest, which was publicly owned. The transaction was about $5.2 billion.

By 2012, LVMH established LCapitalAsia, a continuation of its private-equity arm, focused on Asia. In early 2013, LVMH announced its co-investment of its private equity arm LCapitalAsia and the Chinese apparel company Xin Hee Co., Ltd.

In February 2014, LVMH entered into a joint venture with the Italian fashion brand Marco De Vincenzo, taking a minority 45% stake in the firm.

In 2016, L Catterton Asia and Crescent Point, two private equity firms backed by LVMH, bought a majority stake in GXG.

In April 2017, LVMH announced it would gain ownership of Christian Dior haute couture, leather, men's and women's ready-to-wear, and footwear lines to integrate the entire Dior brand within its luxury group.

In January 2018, LVMH announced record sales of 42.6 billion euros in 2017, up 13% over the previous year, as all divisions turned in strong performances. In the same year, the net profit increased by 29%. On 1 November 2018, co-founder Alain Chevalier died at age 87.

On 12 May 2019, the fashion house Fenty, created by Barbadian singer Rihanna, was launched by LVMH in Paris. It is the first new fashion house by LVMH in 32 years, and she is the first woman of colour to head a brand under LVMH. On 15 July 2019, LVMH announced a new partnership to further develop the Stella McCartney House. On 29 November 2019, LVMH announced its 55% stake in Château d'Esclans, the producer best known for the brand Whispering Angel. The acquisition was part of LVMH's move to offer a beloved high-end rosé portfolio, in addition to reaching customers worldwide. In November 2019, LVMH expressed plans to acquire Tiffany & Co. for approximately US$16.2 billion. The deal was expected to close by June 2020. LVMH issued a statement in September 2020 indicating that the takeover would not proceed and that the deal was "invalid," citing Tiffany's mismanagement during the COVID-19 pandemic. Subsequently, Tiffany filed suit against LVMH, asking the court to compel the purchase or to assess damages against the defendant; LVMH planned to countersuit, alleging that mismanagement had invalidated the purchase agreement.

In mid-September 2020, a reliable source told Forbes that the reason for Arnault's decision to cancel the Tiffany purchase was purely financial: because Tiffany was paying millions in dividends to shareholders despite a financial loss of US$32 million during the pandemic. Some US$70 million had already been paid out by Tiffany, with an additional US$70 million scheduled to be paid in November 2020. LVMH filed a counterclaim against the court action commenced by Tiffany; a statement issued by LVMH blamed Tiffany's mismanagement during the pandemic and claimed that it was "burning cash and reporting losses". In late October 2020, Tiffany and LVMH agreed to go back to the original takeover plan, though at a slightly reduced price of nearly $16 billion, a minor reduction of 2.6% from the aforementioned deal. The new deal reduced the amount paid per share by LVMH from the original price of $135 to $131.50. As of late 2020, LVMH has the largest market capitalization of any company in France, and also in the Eurozone with a record of 261 billion euros ($317.6 billion). As of December 2020, Arnault's own fortune was nearly half that, with a personal net worth of $151.7 billion.

LVMH completed the purchase of Tiffany in January 2021. In 2021, with a valuation of $329 billion, LVMH became the most valuable company in Europe.

In January 2022, LVMH acquired a minority stake in the New York-based label Aimé Leon Dore for an undisclosed sum. The investment was made through the conglomerate's LVMH Luxury Ventures arm. In March 2022, LVMH announced the closure of its 120+ stores in Russia, pointing to "the current circumstances in the region", subsequent to the Russian invasion of Ukraine. An LVMH spokesperson stated the company would continue to pay salary and benefits to its 3,500 employees in Russia. In November 2022, it was announced LVMH had acquired the Piedmont -based jewellery maker Pedemonte Group. In 2025, LVMH's Russian subsidiary extended the lease agreement for its office in the Citidel business centre on Zemlyanoy Val Street in central Moscow.

On 24 April 2023, LVMH became the first European company to reach a $500 billion valuation.

In November 2023, LVMH agreed to acquire the Los Angeles-based eyewear brand Barton Perreira for $80 million.

In June 2024, LVMH acquired Swiza, the owner of L'Epée 1839, a Swiss manufacturer known for high-end clocks and 'horological creations'. L'Epée 1839 produces intricate clocks, including those with perpetual calendars and tourbillons.

In 2024 LVMH's revenue reached 84.68 billion euros, or 1% organic growth for the year.

In 2025, MHCS (part of Moët Hennessy and Louis Vuitton) applied for the registration of four champagne trademarks in Russia. According to Rospatent, these are the Moet & Chandon, Dom Pérignon, Ruinart, and Mercier brands.

In September 2025, following the death of Giorgio Armani, it was disclosed that LVMH had been named in Armani's will as a preferred buyer of a minority stake in the company. The plan provides for an initial 15% purchase within 18 months, with the option to increase this to as much as 54.9% over the following three to five years.

In November 2025, LVMH's watchmaking unit purchased a minority stake in Swiss manufacturer La Joux-Perret—a subsidiary of Citizen Watch Group.

In the first half of 2025, LVMH reported a 4% fall in revenue and a 22% plunge in profits. This is due to unexpected turbulence in the luxury market.

LVMH is headquartered in the 8th arrondissement of Paris, France.

The company is listed on the Euronext Paris exchange and is a constituent of the CAC 40 index.

As of 2009, the group employed more than 83,000 people, 30 per cent of LVMH's staff worked in France, and LVMH operated over 2,400 stores worldwide.

As of 2010, the group had revenues of €20.3 billion with a net income of just over €3 billion. In 2013, with a revenue of $21.7 billion, LVMH was ranked first luxury goods company in Deloitte 's "Global Powers of Luxury Goods" report. By 29 February 2016, the company had a share value of 78,126 million euros, distributed in 506,980,299 shares.

As of 2009, LVMH held 66% of the drinks division, Moët Hennessy, with the remaining 34% held by Diageo.

As of 2013, Christian Dior SE was the leading holding company of LVMH, owning 40.9% of its shares and 59.01% of its voting rights. Bernard Arnault is chairman and CEO of LVMH and Chairman of Christian Dior SE. In 2017, Arnault purchased all the remaining Christian Dior shares in a reported $13.1 billion buyout.

At the end of 2017, the only declared major shareholder in LVMH was the Arnault Family Group, the holding company of Bernard Arnault. The group's control amounted to 46.84% of LVMH's stock and 63.13% of its voting rights.

Bernard Arnault has been LVMH's chairman and CEO since January 1989. Alain Chevalier was chairman from 1987 until Arnault took over the role.

In 2024, Stéphane Bianchi was appointed LVMH Group managing director, responsible for strategic and operational management of the Group Maisons. He also oversees the regional presidents, and the digital and data transformation of the Group. In addition, he is also the Chairman of the LVMH executive committee.

On 2 December 2025, Louis Vuitton CEO Pietro Beccari was appointed as the chief executive of LVMH's fashion division.

Total revenue for Q1 2025: €20,311 million, compared to €20,694 million in Q1 2024, a reported decrease of 2% and an organic decrease of 3% on a constant consolidation scope and currency basis

In 2007, Arnault bought France's leading financial newspaper, Les Echos, from the British company Pearson for 240 million euros (US$262 million) after a negotiating period of four months.

In 2015, LVMH bought the newspapers Le Parisien and Aujourd’hui en France from the Amaury Group. Marie-Odile Amaury, the group's owner, initially hoped for 200 million euros ($218 million) which were later revised to 150 million ($163 million) during a previous sale attempt, but a bid of 50 million euros ($54.5 million) was made. The financial transaction was completed at the end of October 2015.

In 2018, the Lagardère Group sold the stock market information website Boursier.com to Les Echos-Le Parisien Group. In March 2018, Pierre Louette, former CEO of Agence France-Presse from 2005 to 2010, was named CEO of Les Echos-Le Parisien Group, succeeding Francis Morel, who had held this position for seven years.

In 2022, Les Echos-Le Parisien Group acquired 75% of the share capital of the French polling and research institute OpinionWay, which has 140 employees.

Les Echos-Le Parisien Group also acquired Radio Classique, Connaissance des Arts, and Investir and bought 50% of Medici.tv as well as Mezzo TV and EuroArts. Les Echos-Le Parisien Group is also present in business services represented by its subsidiaries, such as Netexplo, Les Echos Etudes, and Les Echos Publishing, as well as communication services for companies such as Les Echos-Le Parisien Partenaires and Pelham Media. ChangeNow, Investir Day, and VivaTech (co-founded with Publicis) are subsidiaries whose objective is to offer trade shows and corporate events.

On 6 August 2024, the Competition Authority grants authorization to LVMH for the acquisition of Paris Match. The group purchased the French weekly publication Paris Match in October 2024.

A partial list, including some of LVMH's best-known brands and subsidiaries:

In May 2018, LVMH launched an e-commerce initiative by investing in online fashion search business Lyst, as a way for LVMH's luxury brands to expand their presence online and capture younger shoppers. LVMH contributed to Lyst's $60 million funding round, which also included access to LVMH's international expertise, designed to drive Lyst's global expansion.

In May 2024, LVMH announced that it would expand its partnership with Alibaba to increase its presence in China.

The key trends of LVMH are (as of the financial year ending 31 December):

LVMH is a major patron of art in France. The group supported about ten exhibitions as " Le grand monde d’Andy Warhol " and " Picasso et les maîtres " at le Grand Palais in Paris. LVMH also endorsed the patronage of " l'atelier d'Alberto Giacometti " and "Yves Klein" at Centre Georges Pompidou.

Since 2005, when the LVMH flagship store opened in Paris at 3, avenue George V, 75008, the company presented close collaborations with contemporary artists. Features included a light sculpture by American James Turrell, a 20-metre (65 feet) long "travelling staircase" showcasing the work of American video artist Tim White-Sobieski and an elevator linking the store to the top floor by Iceland's Olafur Eliasson.

In 2006, a gallery space was inaugurated on the second floor of the same building and named " Espace Culturel ". " Icônes " was one of the first exhibitions. Shigeru Ban, Sylvie Fleury, Zaha Hadid, Bruno Peinado, Andrée Putman, Ugo Rondinone, James Turrell, Tim White-Sobieski and Robert Wilson were the nine artists invited by Louis Vuitton to participate in it. While the original Paris gallery no longer operates, LVMH sponsors six other Espace exhibitions, in Tokyo, Munich, Venice, Beijing, Seoul and Osaka.

In addition, LVMH foundation created the "young creators LVMH award", an international competition opened to French and international beaux-arts students. Each year, six grants are allocated to the winners.

In 2014, LVMH opened the Fondation Louis Vuitton pour la Creation in a new building designed by Frank Gehry in the Bois de Boulogne in Paris. The Fondation is designed as the Group's own museum to present its collections and organize major world-class art exhibitions.

In November 2013, LVMH created the LVMH Young Fashion Designer Prize, which comes with a €300,000 grant with a year of mentoring; it was the brainchild of Delphine Arnault. In February 2014 20 finalists for the inaugural prize were shown in London, including Simone Rocha, Thomas Tait, Meadham Kirchhoff, Marques'Almeida, J JS Lee, and others, and Thomas Tait was the winner. Marques'Almeida won the 2015 prize. In 2019, South African designer Thebe Magugu became the first African to win the prize, and was commended by the President of South Africa, Cyril Ramaphosa.

LVMH underwrites other fashion competitions, including the Andam prize in France, the International Festival of Fashion and Photography in Hyères, France, an investment fund for young designers created by the French Ministry of Culture and Communication, and a scholarship program and sponsored lecture theatre at Central Saint Martins in London.

The group also lends Stradivarius violins to young talented musicians. Maxim Vengerov and Laurent Korcia have used the instruments.

On 26 August 2019, Bernard Arnault declared that LVMH would donate $11 million to help fight the 2019 Brazil wildfires. In 2021, UNESCO and LVMH launched the UNESCO x LVMH Project to protect critical rainforest within 8 biosphere reserves located in Bolivia (Pilón-Lajas and Beni Biosphere Reserves), Ecuador (Yasuní, Sumaco and Podocarpus-El Condor Biosphere Reserves), Brazil (Central Amazon Biosphere Reserve) and Peru (Manu and Oxapampa-Ashaninka-Yanesha Biosphere Reserves).

During the COVID-19 crisis, the group shifted its production of perfume and spirits towards hand sanitizer. This production of 12 tons has been offered to hospitals in Paris, France.

In 2022, Louis Vuitton announced a €1 million donation to UNICEF to help the Ukrainian victims of the Russian invasion. On 2 March 2022, LVMH Group pledged €5 million to the Red Cross to those affected by the war. In addition, the company closed 124 of its stores in Russia.

LVMH sponsored the Paris 2024 Olympic and Paralympic Games as a premium partner. The company spent €150 million to seal the partnership. Chaumet jewellery company was responsible for the design of the medals; one of LVMH's fashion houses, Berluti, dressed the French delegation; and Moët Hennessy provided its products for the events. Also as part of the partnership, LVMH participated in the activities of French Popular Relief, a charity organization that facilitates access to sport for 1,000 children and young people aged 4 to 25 living in vulnerable situations. The group sponsored athletes, which includes French swimmer Leon Marchand, and its beauty retailer Sephora sponsored the Olympic torch relay.

After Formula One 's existing deal with Rolex expired in 2024, LVMH is set to re-enter the sport in 2025, investing $150 million annually in a multi-year deal. Through this partnership, TAG Heuer, having already sponsored the Monaco Grand Prix and Red Bull Racing Formula One teams, is set to return as Formula One timekeeper, with Louis Vuitton set to sponsor the Australian Grand Prix from 2025 onward.

Launched in 2011, Journées Particulières (Particular Days) is a biennial event which allows visitors to enter the various ateliers, studios, caves, and mansions owned by LVMH, for free.

For the first edition we were not at all certain that the public would come. I speak about that with some emotion. I remember coming along avenue Montaigne at 8 am that first morning and seeing hundreds of people, families, elderly ladies and little kids waiting for the doors of avenue Montaigne 30 to open and I thought we are going to write a beautiful page in history.

— Antoine Arnault, referring to Christian Dior's headquarters

It is staged every two years and has opened doors in France, Italy, Switzerland, the UK, the Netherlands, Spain and Germany, with 56 brands welcoming guests into over 70 sites on four continents. The 2017 issue attracted 145,000 visitors.

On 25 February 2011, Christian Dior announced they had suspended designer John Galliano following his arrest over an alleged antisemitic tirade in a Paris bar. In France, it is against the law to make anti-semitic remarks of this nature, and it can be punished by up to six months in prison. On 1 March 2011, Christian Dior officially announced that it had fired Galliano amidst the controversy.

During December 2021, LVMH paid €10 million to settle claims in Paris to end several criminal investigations that a former French intelligence chief, Bernard Squarcini, spied for the company, on competitors and others, including on journalist François Ruffin making a film about its billionaire owner, Bernard Arnault. Prosecutors allege that the intelligence chief used tactics like influence peddling, invasion of privacy, and leveraging his network in intelligence and police on behalf of the company.

Fendi has been very active in building new flagship stores in several places like Doha and Amsterdam. It has been claimed that in 2023 Fendi had not paid, or had only partially paid, invoices from its suppliers, with some amounts remaining outstanding for over a year.

LVMH faced controversy in 2025 when it was revealed that the Olympic medals created by subsidiary Chaumet for the 2024 Summer Olympics had begun to deteriorate and fall apart. By January 2025 over 100 Olympic medalists had requested replacement medals.

In April 2025, a set of investigations launched by PETA (People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals) uncovered disturbing practices at slaughterhouses that supply LVMH. PETA raised concerns about conscious snakes being inflated with water, struck with hammers, and cut with razors. They also reported that minks and foxes were raised in cramped and unsanitary conditions before being electrocuted, gassed, bludgeoned, or skinned alive.

In May 2025, The Financial Times reported that Moët Hennessy, LVMH's wines and spirits division, had undergone a significant financial and strategic crisis under former CEO Philippe Schaus. The investigation cited a reversal from over €1 billion in cash flow in 2019 to a €1.5 billion cash burn in 2024, linked to aggressive price increases, a series of acquisitions, and cultural tensions within the group. The article also raised questions about LVMH's executive oversight during this period.

In December 2025, workers at LVMH's wine and spirits division Moet Hennessy were called by CGT labour union to plan a series of strikes starting on 5 December to urge management to pay year-end bonuses. On 9 December, CGT called for a gathering of workers to decide on further strike action.

Lye rolls are a baked specialty in Germany (especially in Bavaria and Swabia), France (Alsace), Switzerland, and Austria. They are made by immersing bread rolls in a lye solution before baking. The German name, Laugengebäck, is used for any baked good dipped in lye. The perhaps best known shape is the pretzel, while rolls or buns are specifically called Laugensemmel or Kastanie (Bavarian), Laugeweckle or Laugestängle (Swabian), and Laugenwecken, Laugenbrötchen or Laugenstange (everywhere else in Germany); Laugenweckerl in Austria; Silserli or Laugenbrötli in Switzerland. In some parts of Asia they are also known as laugen rolls.

In France, the lye roll is known as a mauricette. It was invented by Paul Poulaillon in the Alsace region when he opened the first Poulaillon bakery in 1973. It was later registered as a trademark with an alternate name, Moricette, in 1985. The lard was then replaced by rapeseed oil.

In order to cause a Maillard reaction during baking for the characteristic browning effect, a lye roll needs to be coated with a high pH (alkaline) solution. The higher the pH, the stronger the reaction. Lye (sodium hydroxide (NaOH) or potassium hydroxide (KOH)) is a highly alkaline agent most commonly used for the purpose. However, lye is not the only way to produce the needed result: a baking soda or washing soda solution, which is easier to handle and safer to use, will provide a similar product but will not provide as strong a reaction, so the effect will be less pronounced. Lye is the strongest agent, followed by washing soda, and then baking soda.

The same solution is also used for preparing pretzels ; outside of German-speaking countries they are often the only baked food commonly glazed with a lye solution.

Both lye rolls and pretzels are typically covered with salt, preferably pretzel salt, a large-grained salt made from compressed smaller salt particles, which reduces the moisture absorption, and hardness of the salt grain. As a snack, lye rolls may also be sold as sandwiches or covered with baked cheese, although this is a more recent development and less common. Typically they are cut in half and buttered, as large soft pretzels often are in Germany and Switzerland as well. Other toppings for lye rolls nowadays also include poppy, sesame, and other seeds as an alternative to the usual salt.

In Germany, they are sold in many shapes and forms, with many having unique names. For example, Laugenstange (“lye bar”) are long oval rolls, while Laugenbrötchen (“lye rolls”) are small round rolls.

Lyonnaise potatoes (French : pommes de terre sautées à la lyonnaise, pronounced [ pɔm də tɛʁ sotez‿a la ljɔnɛz ]) is a French dish where potatoes are boiled, sliced, and shallow-fried, then served together with fried onions.

The culinary term à la lyonnaise – in the style of Lyon – is applied to numerous French dishes and generally means that onions are a key part of the recipe. Potatoes à la lyonnaise are sautéed and served with fried onions. All five recipes mentioned below, dating from 1806 to 1970, call for the potatoes to be boiled, peeled and sliced, before frying.

André Viard, in Le Cuisinier impérial (1806), stipulates that the potatoes are to be sliced and covered with onion purée before being fried in butter and served with sliced onions that have been gently simmered in water. By the mid-19th century, recipes specified that the onions, as well as the potatoes, should be fried. In Alexis Soyer 's recipe (1846) the onions are fried in butter and the sliced boiled potatoes are added to the pan. Soyer adds chopped parsley and lemon juice.

August Escoffier (1907) recommends frying the potatoes and the onions separately in butter before combining them and sprinkling them with chopped parsley. Marcel Boulestin 's recipe (1931) adds the onion raw to the pan in which the potatoes are frying. Elizabeth David (1970) specifies frying the onions first and adding them to the frying potatoes when the latter are very nearly cooked. She recommends either butter or beef dripping for frying both ingredients, and comments that the dish cooked in this way "bears little resemblance... to the greasy mixture of unevenly browned potatoes and frizzled onions which usually passes for pommes lyonnaises ".

Lys (French: [ lis ], Dutch : Leie) was a department of the French First Republic and French First Empire in present-day Belgium. It was named after the river Lys (Leie). It was created on 1 October 1795, when the Austrian Netherlands and the Prince-Bishopric of Liège were officially annexed by the French Republic. Prior to this annexation, its territory was part of the County of Flanders. Its Chef-lieu was Bruges.

The department was subdivided into the following four arrondissements and cantons (as of 1812):

After Napoleon was defeated in 1814, the department became part of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands. Its territory corresponded perfectly with the present-day Belgian province of West Flanders.

The Prefect was the highest state representative in the department.

The General Secretary was the deputy to the Prefect.

Until 1811, the Prefect also held the office of Subprefect of Bruges.

Lèse-nation, also lèze-nation, was a crime defined in France during the French Revolution. It referred to an offence or defamation against the dignity of the nation. Both the name and the corresponding law regarding the crime of lèse-nation trace back to the law concerning the crime of lèse-majesté. Both were adapted by the revolutionaries during the French Revolution so that the focus was no longer on the monarch, but on the nation. The English name for lèse-majesté is a modernised borrowing from the medieval French, where the term means a crime against The Crown. In classical Latin laesa māiestās means hurt or violated majesty. In the context of the term lèse-nation, it refers to a crime that harms the nation.

The law regarding the crime of lèse-nation was in force between 1789 and 1791. It was immediately after the proclamation of the sovereignty of the nation, in the aftermath of the Tennis Court Oath from 20 June 1789, that the foundation for this new law was laid. On 23 June 1789, the National Assembly announced that it will prosecute as criminals all those who, individuals or bodies, attack its existence or the freedom of its members.

Almost over night a new crime was invented. Or as Charles-Élie, Marquis de Ferrières, put it:

"We suddenly beheld a new crime, unknown to our fathers – the crime of lèse-nation."

The events surrounding the Storming of the Bastille on 14 July 1789 played an important role in the development and implementation of the law. Following the Bastille's fall, numerous denunciations and the specter of conspiracy compelled the National Assembly to address the issue of political offences. Quick action was required.

The law regarding the crime of lèse-nation was introduced in the early days of the French Revolution. It came into force on 23 July 1789 by decree of the National Assembly. It defined intentions that harmed the nation and was modelled on the traditional crime of lèse-majesté, thereby illustrating the transfer of sovereignty. The law was introduced to protect the Revolution and its values and also served to define what constituted the nation. Taking into account the emerging regime's growing fears of counter-revolution, it became one of the most important legal measures at the beginning of the Revolution. In the long term, however, this was not the case. The weak judicial effectiveness of the law regarding the crime of lèse-nation contrasted with its political ambition. This explains its brief use. From 1791 onwards, the term crime contre la chose publique (crime against the common good) was preferred as the standard of political justice.

A crime of lèse-nation is the deliberate disregard, in will and in deed, of the inviolable rights of the nation. Or in short, according to the revolutionaries: The criminals guilty of the crime of lèse-nation are those who want to maintain the old despotism and aristocracy. Maximilien Robespierre reminded his fellow revolutionaries in a speech on 25 October 1790 when it came to introducing new laws and establishing the judiciary for the young nation: "The tribunal which you have formed must be endowed with courage and sufficient arms, for it is to contend with the mighty, who are the declared enemies of the people."

Crimes of lèse-nation were defined as attacks committed directly against the rights of society. There are two types: those who attack the physical existence of the nation and those who seek to harm its moral existence. The latter are as guilty as the former. Crimes of lèse-nation are rare in states where a strong constitution and an established government enable the enforcement of the state's monopoly on the use of force. At this point, however, the young nation was still in the process of forming. Under the Constitution of 1791, the crime was to be judged by the Haute Cour Nationale.

The most prominent personalities who were accused of the crime of lèse-nation were: Charles-Eugène de Lorraine, Prince de Lambesc ; Charles Marie Auguste Joseph de Beaumont, Comte d'Autichamp ; Victor François, Duc de Broglie ; Charles Louis François de Paule de Barentin, Seigneur d'Hardivilliers and Louis Pierre de Chastenet de Puységur, Comte de Puységur.

The only death sentence passed under the law of lèse-nation was that of Thomas de Mahy, Marquis de Favras. The Marquis de Favras was sentenced to death on 18 February 1790. He was hanged the next day on the Place de Grève in Paris. The execution of this judgement was seen by the revolutionaries as the first experience of political justice of the French Revolution.

However, the most famous person accused of the crime of lèse-nation was Pierre Victor, Baron de Besenval de Brunstatt, a Swiss military officer in French service. The judicial proceedings against him in connection with the Storming of the Bastille began on 20 November 1789, when the record of the dénonciation and the complaint of the King's Prosecutor were read aloud before the court at the Grand Châtelet in Paris, in accordance with the decree of the Municipal Committee of Inquiry of 18 November, which summarised the charges against him. His trial proper began the following day, on 21 November 1789, with the first judicial questioning. In the court records, the Besenval Case is referred to as: Affaire du Baron de Besenval: Complot contre Paris et l'Assamblée Nationale, 19 novembre 1789 – 1 mars 1790. The baron's case became exemplary. Not only because he was a foreigner, a close friend of Queen Marie Antoinette and one of the first accused of the crime of lèse-nation, but also because of his fame and his famous friends who campaigned for his release, such as the Marquis de Lafayette, Jacques Necker and the Comte de Mirabeau. What was ultimately important for the baron's survival: These gentlemen also enjoyed respect among the revolutionaries. Furthermore, the baron was represented in court by the best and most prominent French lawyer at the time: Raymond Desèze. He later also defended King Louis XVI in court. The court was deeply impressed by Desèze's plaidoyer. The plaidoyer was even published and was considered a reference in court cases regarding the crime of lèse-nation.

In addition, as early as October 1789, the report of the Commission of Inquiry revealed that the only document currently in existence that could convict the Baron de Besenval of a crime of lèse-nation is a copy of an order written to the Governor of the Bastille, Bernard-René Jourdan, Marquis de Launay, in which the baron wrote: "Monsieur de Launay will hold out to the last extremity; I have dispatched to him forces sufficient." The original of this document no longer existed and the copy was not sufficient for a conviction in court, at least that's what was officially claimed.

"The Baron de Besenval replied in court, with seeming confidence, that he had penned no letters to M. de Launay."

— Louis-Marie Prudhomme, his court report in his newspaper Révolutions de Paris on the trial day of 3 December 1789 in the Besenval Case. However, this was obviously fake news as documented by court records and shows the partly incorrect reporting and the partly deliberately defamatory false reports to the detriment of the Baron de Besenval in this controversial court case

Of course, there were also doubts about this official theory that the document was just a copy or a fake. After all, the document was dated and signed le 14 juillet 1789, le B. de Besenval. Critics of the Baron de Besenval saw this as an attempt by the baron's influential friends to save his neck. Later the defense strategy was changed. And on 3 December 1789, Pierre Victor de Besenval acknowledged before the court that the document was genuine, thereby confirming the authenticity of his written order to the Governor of the Bastille. However, circumstances had obviously changed in the meantime and this document alone was no longer enough to convict the baron.

"He [Pierre Victor, Baron de Besenval], confessed that he had recommended to the Sieur de Launay [Bernard-René Jourdan, Marquis de Launay], Governor of the Bastille, that he should maintain the place to the last extremity; but observed, at the same time, that such was the duty of an officer entrusted with the guard of a fortress."

— Pierre Victor, Baron de Besenval, reported statement before the court during the proceedings against him. On 3 December 1789, Pierre Victor de Besenval formally confirmed the authenticity of the written order by affixing his signature

The trial against the Baron de Besenval was highly political and controversial. There were many rumours, intrigues and false reports surrounding the trial, to the detriment of the baron. A fictitious correspondence between the Baron de Besenval and the Marquis de Favras was even published in order to stir up sentiment against the baron. Accordingly, public opinion was largely against him. The people thirsted for revenge, whereby the people had less of an eye on individual personalities than on the nobility as a whole. A scapegoat was needed. Consequently, it is very likely that the court wanted to make an example regarding the crime of lèse-nation. Hence it was probably to the baron's advantage that the example demanded by the people was already made on the Marquis de Favras on 18 February 1790 and the people were therefore already satisfied when the baron's trial ended on 1 March 1790. Although most of the public still believed that the Baron de Besenval was guilty, calls for his execution diminished significantly after the execution of the Marquis de Favras on 19 February 1790. There was even the rumor that it was precisely for this reason that the end of the trial of the Baron de Besenval was postponed to a date after the execution of the Marquis de Favras.

— Comment by Jean-Charles Thilorier, legal advisor of Thomas de Mahy, Marquis de Favras. At the end of January 1790, it became clear to Jean-Charles Thilorier that the court wanted to link the two lèse-nation cases in the sense that Favras should be sacrificed in favour of Besenval

On Monday, 1 March 1790, the Baron de Besenval was acquitted of the crime of lèse-nation. A verdict that was not without controversy. Quite a few regarded this judgement as a courtesy decision in favour of the baron's influential friends.

"Monsieur Necker saved my life. (...) I swear loyalty and gratitude to him unto my dying day."

— Pierre Victor, Baron de Besenval, in conversation with his friends when he was back at his residence, the Hôtel de Besenval

Léon Bertrand (born 11 May 1951) is a French politician. Previously a professor of physics and biology, he was Mayor of Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni from 1983 until 2018. He was elected to the French National Assembly for the Rally for the Republic representing French Guiana's 2nd constituency in 1988 and was reelected at every election till 2007.

He described himself in an article published in the French daily Libération when he was a minister, in 2005: " Born on the banks of the Maroni River, in Guyana, a French département in Amazonia situated 7,000 km afar from Paris, grandson of a convict from Vendée who had married a Black woman after his liberation, son of a Creole father and of an Amerindian Surinamese mother, I am Léon Bertrand, with a name typically French but with a physical appearance typically exotic. "

He joined the UMP in 2002, and, as a known confidant of President Jacques Chirac, he was named Secretary of State for Tourism in 2002 and later Delegate Minister for Tourism in 2004. He held this office until 15 May 2007. When he was a minister, he realized that " several times, when I received in my office people who didn't know my physical appearance, their republican respectful «Monsieur le ministre» was automatically addressed to my advisor, who was white, and not to me. But what's for me quite exceptional and has very minor consequences as a public person is, on the contrary, the daily lot of all those who belong to what people label « Visible minority »."

Running for re-election as deputy in the 2007 French legislative election, he was surprisingly defeated with 47.1% of the votes in the runoff against Chantal Berthelot (PSG), who won 52.9%. Nonetheless, he was re-elected Mayor of Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni in 2008 by a large margin.

He was nominated as the UMP's top candidate in the 2010 regional elections in French Guiana.

During the night of 27–28 November 2009, Léon Bertrand was arrested and put into custody on charges of favoritism and corruption.

Despite still being in custody, he is candidate on the third place of a right wing list not endorsed by the UMP for the March 2010 regional elections in French Guiana. In 2013, he was sentenced to 3 years imprisonment.

Léopold Sédar Senghor (/ s ɒ ŋ ˈ ɡ ɔːr / song- GOR, French: [ leɔpɔl sedaʁ sɑ̃ɡɔʁ ], Wolof : Léwopóol Sedaar Seŋoor ; 9 October 1906 – 20 December 2001) was a Senegalese politician, cultural theorist and poet who served as the first president of Senegal from 1960 to 1980.

Ideologically an African socialist, Senghor was one of the major theoreticians of Négritude. He was a proponent of African culture, black identity, and African empowerment within the framework of French-African ties. He advocated for the extension of full civil and political rights for France's African territories while arguing that French Africans would be better off within a federal French structure than as independent nation-states.

Senghor became the first president of independent Senegal. He fell out with his long-standing associate Mamadou Dia, who was the prime minister of Senegal, arresting him on suspicion of fomenting a coup in 1962 and imprisoning him for 12 years. Following this, Senghor established an authoritarian one-party state where rival political parties were suppressed. In 1976, Senghor permitted opposition parties while retaining an unequal playing field favoring his party. Senghor retired in 1980, handing power to Abdou Diouf.

Senghor was the founder of the Senegalese Democratic Bloc party in 1948. He was the first African elected as a member of the Académie française and won the 1985 International Nonino Prize in Italy. Senghor is regarded by many as one of the most important African intellectuals of the 20th century.

Léopold Sédar Senghor was born on 9 October 1906 in the city of Joal, some 110 kilometres south of Dakar, the capital of Senegal. His father, Basile Diogoye Senghor (pronounced: Basile Jogoy Senghor), was a wealthy peanut merchant belonging to the bourgeois Serer people. Basile Senghor was said to be a man of great means and owned thousands of cattle and vast lands, some of which were given to him by his cousin the king of Sine. Gnilane Ndiémé Bakhoum (1861–1948), Senghor's mother, the third wife of his father, a Muslim with Fula origin who belonged to the Tabor tribe, was born near Djilor to a Christian family. She gave birth to six children, including two sons.

Senghor's birth certificate states that he was born on 9 October 1906; however, there is a discrepancy with his certificate of baptism, which states it occurred on 9 August 1906. His Serer middle name Sédar comes from the Serer language, meaning "one that shall not be humiliated" or "the one you cannot humiliate".

His surname Senghor is a combination of the Serer words Sène (a Serer surname and the name of the Supreme Deity in Serer religion called Rog Sene) and gor or ghor, the etymology of which is kor in the Serer language, meaning male or man. Tukura Badiar Senghor, the prince of Sine and a figure from whom Léopold Sédar Senghor has been reported to trace descent, was a c. 13th-century Serer noble.

At the age of eight, Senghor began his studies in Senegal in the Ngasobil boarding school of the Fathers of the Holy Spirit. In 1922, he entered a seminary in Dakar. After being told that religious life was not for him, he attended a secular institution. By then, he was already passionate about French literature. He won distinctions in French, Latin, Greek and Algebra. With his Baccalaureate completed, he was awarded a scholarship to continue his studies in France.

In 1928, Senghor sailed from Senegal for France, beginning, in his words, "sixteen years of wandering". Starting his post-secondary studies at the Sorbonne, he quit and went on to the Lycée Louis-le-Grand to finish his preparatory course for entrance to the École Normale Supérieure, a grande école. Henri Queffélec, Robert Verdier and Georges Pompidou were also studying at this elite institution. After failing the entrance exam, Senghor prepared for his grammar Agrégation. He was granted his agrégation in 1935 at his second attempt.

Senghor graduated from the University of Paris, where he received the Agrégation in French Grammar. Subsequently, he was designated professor at the universities of Tours and Paris, where he taught during the period 1935–45.

Senghor started his teaching years at the lycée René-Descartes in Tours ; he also taught at the lycée Marcelin-Berthelot in Saint-Maur-des-Fosses near Paris. He also studied linguistics taught by Lilias Homburger at the École pratique des hautes études. He studied with prominent social scientists such as Marcel Cohen, Marcel Mauss and Paul Rivet, director of the Institut d'ethnologie de Paris.

Senghor, along with other intellectuals of the African diaspora who had come to study in the colonial capital, coined the term and conceived the notion of " négritude ", which was a response to the racism still prevalent in France. It turned the racial slur nègre into a positively connoted celebration of African culture and character. The idea of négritude informed Senghor's cultural criticism and literary work, and became a guiding principle for his political thought in his career as a statesman.

In 1939, Senghor was enlisted in the 3rd Colonial Infantry Regiment of the French army with the rank of private (2 Classe) despite his higher education. In June 1940, the invading Germans took him prisoner in la Charité-sur-Loire or Villabon. He was interned in a succession of camps, and finally at Front Stalag 230, in Poitiers. Front Stalag 230 was reserved for colonial troops captured during the war.

According to Senghor, German soldiers wanted to execute him and the others on the day they were captured, but they escaped this fate by yelling Vive la France, vive l'Afrique noire! ("Long live France, long live Black Africa!"). A French officer told the soldiers that executing the African prisoners would dishonour the Aryan race and the German Army. Senghor spent two years in different prison camps, where he spent most of his time writing poems, and learning enough German to read Goethe's poetry in the original. In 1942, he was released for medical reasons.

He resumed his teaching career while remaining involved in the resistance during the Nazi occupation.

Senghor advocated for African integration within the French Empire, arguing that independence for small, weak territories would lead to the perpetuation of oppression, whereas African empowerment within a federal French Empire could transform it for the better.

Once the war was over, Senghor was selected as Dean of the Linguistics Department with the École nationale de la France d'Outre-Mer, a position he would hold until Senegal's independence in 1960. While travelling on a research trip for his poetry, he met the local socialist leader, Lamine Guèye, who suggested that Senghor run for election as a member of the Assemblée nationale française. Senghor accepted and became député for the riding of Sénégal-Mauritanie, when colonies were granted the right to be represented by elected individuals. They took different positions when the train conductors on the Dakar-Niger line went on strike. Guèye voted against the strike, arguing the movement would paralyse the colony, while Senghor supported the workers, which gained him great support among Senegalese.

During the negotiations to write the French Constitution of 1946, Senghor pushed for the extension of French citizenship to all French territories. Four Senegalese communes had citizenship since 1916 – Senghor argued that this should be extended to the rest of France's territory. Senghor argued for a federal model whereby each African territory would govern its own internal affairs, and this federation would be part of a larger French confederation that run foreign affairs, defence and development policies. Senghor opposed indigenous nationalism, arguing that African territories would develop more successfully within a federal model where each territory had its "negro-African personality" along with French experience and resources.

In 1947, Senghor left the African Division of the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO), which had given enormous financial support to the social movement. With Mamadou Dia, he founded the Bloc démocratique sénégalais (1948). They won the legislative elections of 1951, and Guèye lost his seat. Senghor was involved in the negotiations and drafting of the Fourth Republic's constitution.

Re-elected deputy in 1951 as an independent overseas member, Senghor was appointed state secretary to the council's president in Edgar Faure 's government from 1 March 1955 to 1 February 1956. He became mayor of the city of Thiès, Senegal in November 1956 and then advisory minister in the Michel Debré 's government from 23 July 1959 to 19 May 1961. He was also a member of the commission responsible for drafting the Fifth Republic 's constitution, general councillor for Senegal, member of the Grand Conseil de l'Afrique Occidentale Francaise and member of the parliamentary assembly of the Council of Europe.

In 1964, Senghor published the first volume of a series of five, titled Liberté. The book contains a variety of speeches, essays and prefaces.

Senghor supported federalism for newly independent African states, a type of "French Commonwealth", while retaining a degree of French involvement:

In Africa, when children have grown up, they leave their parents' hut, and build a hut of their own by its side. Believe me, we don't want to leave the French compound. We have grown up in it, and it is good to be alive in it. We simply want to build our own huts.

Since federalism was not favoured by the African countries, he decided to form, along with Modibo Keita, the Mali Federation with former French Sudan (present-day Mali). Senghor was president of the Federal Assembly until it failed in 1960.

Afterwards, Senghor became the first President of the Republic of Senegal, elected on 5 September 1960. He is the author of the Senegalese national anthem. The first prime minister, Mamadou Dia, was in charge of executing Senegal's long-term development plan, while Senghor was in charge of foreign relations. The two men quickly disagreed. In December 1962, Mamadou Dia was arrested under suspicion of fomenting a coup d'état. He was held in prison for 12 years. Following this, Senghor took actions to establish an authoritarian presidential regime where all rival political parties were suppressed.

By 1966, Senegal had become a one-party state. Senghor tightly circumscribed press freedom in Senegal where the media market was monopolized by state-run media such as Le Soleil and Radio Sénégal.

On 22 March 1967, Senghor survived an assassination attempt. The suspect, Moustapha Lô, pointed his pistol towards the President after he had participated in the sermon of Tabaski, but the gun did not fire. Lô was sentenced to death for treason and executed on 15 June 1967, even though it remained unclear if he had actually wanted to kill Senghor.

In 1976, Senghor permitted opposition parties to compete, although he limited the number of total parties to three (socialist, communist and liberal), of which Senghor's party would be the designated socialist party. The Senegalese Democratic Party (PDS) was designated as the liberal party, and the African Independence Party was designated as the communist party. The political opposition said that they were constrained and not allowed to compete on equal footing with the regime. The 1978 Senegalese general election was the first multi-party election since 1963.

Following an announcement at the beginning of December 1980, Senghor resigned his position at the end of the year, before the end of his fifth term. He was the first African head of state to retire voluntarily. Abdou Diouf replaced him as the head of the country. One of Diouf's first actions was to remove restrictions on the number of political parties in Senegal. He created a performing education system. Despite the end of official colonialism, the value of Senegalese currency continued to be fixed by France, the language of learning remained French, and Senghor ruled the country with French political advisors.

He supported the creation of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie and was elected vice-president of the High Council of the Francophonie. In 1982, he was one of the founders of the Association France and developing countries whose objectives were to bring attention to the problems of developing countries, in the wake of the changes affecting the latter.

He was one of the signatories of the agreement to convene a convention for drafting a world constitution. As a result, for the first time in human history, a World Constituent Assembly convened to draft and adopt the Constitution for the Federation of Earth.

Senghor was elected a member of the Académie française on 2 June 1983, at the 16th seat where he succeeded Antoine de Lévis Mirepoix. He was the first African to sit at the Académie. The entrance ceremony in his honour took place on 29 March 1984, in presence of French President François Mitterrand. This was considered a further step towards greater openness in the Académie, after the previous election of a woman, Marguerite Yourcenar. In 1993, the last and fifth book of the Liberté series was published: Liberté 5: le dialogue des cultures.

Senghor's first marriage was to Ginette Éboué (1 March 1923 – 1992), daughter of Félix Éboué. They married on 9 September 1946 and divorced in 1955. They had two sons, Francis in 1947 and Guy in 1948. Senghor's second wife, Colette Hubert [fr] (20 November 1925 – 18 November 2019), who was from France, became Senegal's first First Lady upon independence in 1960. Senghor had three sons between his two marriages.

Senghor spent the last years of his life with his wife in Verson, near the city of Caen in Normandy, where he died on 20 December 2001. His funeral was held on 29 December 2001 in Dakar. Officials attending the ceremony included Raymond Forni, president of the Assemblée nationale and Charles Josselin, state secretary for the minister of foreign affairs, in charge of the Francophonie. Jacques Chirac, who said, upon hearing of Senghor's death: "Poetry has lost one of its masters, Senegal a statesman, Africa a visionary and France a friend", and Lionel Jospin, respectively president of the French Republic and the prime minister, did not attend.

Their failure to attend Senghor's funeral made waves as it was deemed a lack of acknowledgement for what the politician had been in his life. The analogy was made with the Senegalese Tirailleurs who, after having contributed to the liberation of France, had to wait more than forty years to receive an equal pension in terms of buying power to their French counterparts. The scholar Érik Orsenna wrote in the newspaper Le Monde an editorial entitled "J'ai honte" (I am ashamed).

Although a socialist, Senghor avoided the Marxist and anti-Western ideology that had become popular in post-colonial Africa, favouring the maintenance of close ties with France and the Western world. Senghor's tenure as president was characterised by the development of African socialism, which was created as an indigenous alternative to Marxism, drawing heavily from the négritude philosophy. In developing this, he was assisted by Ousmane Tanor Dieng.

On 31 December 1980, he retired in favour of his prime minister, Abdou Diouf. Politically, Senghor's stamp can also be identified today. With regards to Senegal in particular, his willful abdication of power to his successor, Abdou Diouf, led to Diouf's peaceful exit from office as well. Senegal's special relationship with France and economic legacy are more highly contested, but Senghor's impact on democracy remains nonetheless.

Senghor managed to retain his identity as a poet and a politician even throughout his busy careers as both, living by his philosophy of achieving equilibrium between competing forces. Whether it was France and Africa, poetics and politics, or other disparate parts of his identity, Senghor balanced the two.

In literature, Senghor's influence on political thought and poetic form are wide-reaching even in the modern day. Senghor's poetry endures as the "record of an individual sensibility at a particular moment in history," capturing the spirit of the Négritude movement at its peak, but also marks a definitive place in literary history. Senghor's thoughts were exceedingly radical for this time, arguing that Africans could only progress if they developed a culture distinct and separate from the colonial powers that oppressed them, pushing against popular thought at the time. Senghor was deeply influenced by poets from the US such as Langston Hughes. Seat number 16 of the Académie was vacant after the Senegalese poet's death. He was ultimately replaced by another former president, Valéry Giscard d'Estaing.

Senghor received several honours in the course of his life. He was made Grand-Croix of the Légion d'honneur, Grand-Croix of the l' Ordre national du Mérite, commander of arts and letters. He also received academic palms and the Grand Cross of the National Order of the Lion. His war exploits earned him the Reconnaissance Franco-alliée Medal of 1939–1945 and the Combattant Cross of 1939–1945. He received honorary doctorates from thirty-seven universities.

Senghor received the Commemorative Medal of the 2500th Anniversary of the founding of the Persian Empire on 14 October 1971.

On 13 November 1978, he was created a Knight of the Collar of the Order of Isabella the Catholic of Spain. Members of the order at the rank of Knight and above enjoy personal nobility and have the privilege of adding a golden heraldic mantle to their coats of arms. Those at the rank of the Collar also receive the official style "His or Her Most Excellent Lord".

In 1978, Senghor received an honoris causa from the University of Salamanca.

In 1983, he was awarded the Dr. Leopold Lucas Prize by the University of Tübingen.

The Senghor French Language International University, named after him was officially opened in Alexandria in 1990.

In 1994, he was awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award by the African Studies Association ; however, there was controversy about whether he met the standard of contributing "a lifetime record of outstanding scholarship in African studies and service to the Africanist community." Michael Mbabuike, president of the New York African Studies Association (NYASA), said that the award also honours those who have worked "to make the world a better place for mankind."

The airport of Dakar was renamed Aéroport International Léopold Sédar Senghor in 1996, on his 90th birthday.

The Passerelle Solférino in Paris was renamed after him in 2006, on the centenary of his birth.

His poetry was widely acclaimed, and in 1978 he was awarded the Prix mondial Cino Del Duca. His poem "A l'appel de la race de Saba", published in 1936, was inspired by the entry of Italian troops in Addis Ababa. In 1948, Senghor compiled and edited a volume of Francophone poetry called Anthologie de la nouvelle poésie nègre et malgache for which Jean-Paul Sartre wrote an introduction, entitled "Orphée Noir" (Black Orpheus).

For his epitaph was a poem he had written, namely:

With Aimé Césaire and Léon Damas, Senghor created the concept of Négritude, an important intellectual movement that sought to assert and valorise what they believed to be distinctive African characteristics, values, and aesthetics. One of these African characteristics that Senghor theorised was asserted when he wrote "the Negro has reactions that are more lived, in the sense that they are more direct and concrete expressions of the sensation and of the stimulus, and so of the object itself with all its original qualities and power."

This was a reaction against the too-strong dominance of French culture in the colonies, and against the perception that Africa did not have a culture developed enough to stand alongside that of Europe. In that respect négritude owes significantly to the pioneering work of Leo Frobenius.

Building upon historical research identifying ancient Egypt with black Africa, Senghor argued that sub-Saharan Africa and Europe are in fact part of the same cultural continuum, reaching from Egypt to classical Greece, through Rome to the European colonial powers of the modern age. Négritude was by no means—as it has in many quarters been perceived—an anti-white racism, but rather emphasised the importance of dialogue and exchange among different cultures (e.g., European, African, Arab, etc.).

A related concept later developed in Mobutu 's Zaire is that of authenticité or Authenticity.

In colloquial French, the term décalage is used to describe jetlag, lag or a general discrepancy between two things. However, Senghor uses the term to describe the unevenness in the African Diaspora. The complete phrase he uses is "Il s'agit, en réalité, d'un simple décalage—dans le temps et dans l'espace", meaning that between Black Africans and African Americans there exists an inconsistency, both temporally and spatially.

The time element points to the advancing or delaying of a schedule or agenda, while the space aspect designates the displacing and shifting of an object. The term points to "a bias that refuses to pass over when one crosses the water". He asks, how can we expect any sort of solidarity or intimacy from two populations that diverged more than 500 years ago?

Ma Gastronomie is a modern French cuisine cookbook created from the notes of legendary French chef Fernand Point. It was first published in French in 1969. 200 recipes are included based on Fernand Point's notes and handwritten recipes.

The book has detailed sections on Fernand Point, La Pyramide (the restaurant), his cuisine, wines, spirits, etc.

The first English edition of the book was published in 1974. In its second English edition published in 2008 by Rookery publishers, the foreword is by noted American chef of The French Laundry restaurant Thomas Keller. He has cited Point's work as being very significant to his training in his introduction to Ma Gastronomie.

The world-famous chef Charlie Trotter described Point's Ma Gastronomie as the most important cookbook :

If someone were to take away all my cookbooks except for one, I would keep Fernand Point’s Ma Gastronomie. For me, his philosophy instilled what cuisine is all about: generosity and hugeness of heart. Point said that if you are not a generous person you cannot be in this field. I think you’ll notice that chefs, as a whole, say yes to any project, fundraiser, or tasting because they have such a generous spirit.

Magique (Magic) and Alpy are the mascots of the 1992 Winter Olympics and Paralympics in Albertville.

Magique is a little imp in the shape of a star and a cube. It is created by Philippe Mairesse and was presented in 1989. His star shape symbolizes dreams and imagination. His colors come from the French flag, with a red hat and a blue costume. Magique was the first mascot that was not an animal since the 1976 Winter Olympics. Several studies, financed by the Organising Committee (OCOG), were conducted to find a name for the mascot, but in the end none was chosen. However, on re-reading his brief, his creator realised that the word “magique” appeared several times and the OCOG decided to name the mascot accordingly.

The mascot had a pedagogical role: with the aim of informing the 7,924 Games volunteers, the OCOG opted for a computer-aided teaching programme. Magique appeared in the various teaching modules and games.

Originally, the chosen mascot was a Chamois, a mountain goat, created by illustrator Michel Pirus. This idea gave way to the star-shaped imp two years before the start of the Games.

Alpy, designed by Vincent Thiebaut, represented the summit of the Grande Motte mountain in Tignes. Alpy was shown on a mono-ski to demonstrate its athleticism and the colours of white, green and blue were used to represent purity/snow, hope/nature and discipline/the lake.

The Maison de la Chimie (French pronunciation: [ mɛzɔ̃ d(ə) la ʃimi ] ; lit. 'House of Chemistry') is an international conference centre at 28, Rue Saint-Dominique in the 7th arrondissement of Paris, France. It is located in the Faubourg Saint-Germain near the National Assembly.

The house is managed by a nonprofit association, the Fondation de la Maison de la Chimie. Its primary objective is to assist and help scientists and engineers working in the field of chemistry, through the organisation of meetings, colloquia and conferences.

The house provides office space to various associations involved in scientific and technological fields. The headquarters of the Société Astronomique de France was located in the house from 1966 to 1974.

Halls and rooms are also rented for meetings whose topics lie outside the field of chemistry; these other usages actually represent 75% to 80% of the activity. Because of its central location in Paris, near the National Assembly and several ministries, the house is particularly sought for meetings with elected officials.

The Hôpital Cochin (French pronunciation: [ opital kɔʃɛ̃ ]) is a public hospital situated on Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Jacques, Paris 14e. It houses the main burn treatment centre of the city. The Hôpital Cochin is an affiliate of the Faculté de Médecine Paris-Cité. It is named after Jean-Denis Cochin, curé of the parish of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas, who founded a hospital for the workers and poor of this quarter of Paris.

Since 1990, a biomedical research centre, the Institut Cochin, has been affiliated with the hospital. It was reorganised in 2002 to encompass genetic research, molecular biology and cellular biology, with a staff of about 600. It is part of both INSERM and CNRS, integrated into the Université Paris Cité.

In 2004, the Maison de Solenn, a shelter for adolescents named after Solenn Poivre d'Arvor, has opened in the hospital with the active support of Bernadette Chirac.

Early in the morning of 30 May 1832, the mathematician Évariste Galois was shot in the abdomen during a duel at the age of 20 and died the following morning at ten o'clock in the Cochin hospital, probably of peritonitis, after refusing the offices of a priest. He was buried in a common grave in the Montparnasse Cemetery nearby.

George Orwell also had a stay at the hospital for a bout of "La Grippe" in March 1929. He describes it in his story " How the Poor Die ".

The Maison des lycéens (High School Students’ House) is a cultural association in French high schools that succeeded the former foyers socio-éducatifs [ fr ] (socio-educational centers). It is administered by students for the benefit of the student community.

The term refers to the student association typically present in every French high school. To promote collaboration among Maisons des lycéens (MDL) and establish a structured network, students founded the Fédération des Maisons Des Lycéen·ne·s (FMDL) on June 26, 2015. The FMDL offers training adapted to the needs of the MDLs and integrates them within the framework of popular education. It also develops collective solutions to common organizational challenges through a network of partners. To support local initiatives, the federation has established academic delegations responsible for organizing regional forums.

The Maison des lycéens is a French association governed by the provisions of the 1901 Law on Associations. It was established to replace the former socio-educational center) in high schools while maintaining its educational mission as both a space for responsibility and creativity. The term foyer socio-éducatif continues to be used in middle schools. The creation of the Maison des lycéens was formalized by a 1991 circular, which aimed to adapt to two major developments: the lowering of the age of majority to 18 by the 1974 law, and the broader democratic evolution of students’ rights. Within this context, the Maison des lycéens was conceived as a central element in the recognition of students’ associative and participatory rights [ fr ], codified by a 1991 decree. The circular defined three key characteristics for the organization.

A 1992 circular specified the following points:

A 1996 circular concerning the status of school principals within extracurricular associations based in EPLEs explicitly excluded the Maison des lycéens from its scope, which continues to be governed by the April 1991 circular.

Changes in the legal framework led to administrative adjustments regarding the capacity of minors within associations. The French Law of July 1901 on associations does not impose restrictions on minors, and the Civil Code allows them to serve as representatives. However, since 1971, the French administration, following the position of Interior Minister Raymond Marcellin, held that minors could not serve as presidents or treasurers of associations. The ratification of the International Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1990, which recognizes minors’ freedom of association, prompted a revision of this position. On November 24, 1995, a minor was elected president of the Maison des lycéens at Henri Bergson High School in Paris. The Associations Office of the Paris Prefecture validated the election, confirming that the international convention took precedence over administrative interpretation of French law. Subsequently, the Ministry of the Interior reminded prefectures that an association's registration could not be denied on the grounds that its founders were minors.

The February 2010 circular addressed the implications of these developments for the Maison des lycéens. It stated that lowering the minimum age for assuming responsibilities within educational associations from 18 to 16 years was a condition for recognizing and supporting student engagement, and that the participation of minor high school students in association management should be encouraged. This was further clarified in July 2011 by Article 45 of the Law on Alternating Education and the Securing of Professional Paths, which allowed minors aged 16 and older to hold administrative positions in associations with written parental consent. At the same time, the Ministry of National Education confirmed that insurers would cover the associated risks.

Furthermore, the 2010 circular introduced slight reformulations compared to that of 1991, which it repealed:

In its March 2012 report, the Mission for Supporting High School Reform observed that, although students were generally very satisfied with the opportunity to participate in the Maisons des lycéens (MDLs), they often did not understand why, in a significant number of high schools, foyers socio-éducatifs (FSEs) continued to exist even though their elimination was normally provided for by the reform. The report also noted that the responsibilities legally available to students were, in practice, often inaccessible: positions such as president and treasurer of the MDLs remained primarily held by adults. According to the report, the resistance of some institutions to transforming FSEs into MDLs was largely motivated by a desire to preserve the financial reserves accumulated by the FSEs. Some school principals cited the absence of a decree implementing the law or the refusal of banks to open an account for an association administered by minors, interpretations that the report indicated were legally incorrect.

The Major General of the Defence Staff (French : Major général des Armées, lit. ' Major General of the Armies ', acronym : M.G.A.) is a high ranking general officer of the French Armed Forces and the deputy to the Chief of the Defence Staff. As such, it is the second highest position in the armed forces. Major Generals are nominated by the Minister of the Armed Forces and appointed by the Commander-in-Chief, the President of the French Republic. The designation of Major General is not indicative of any rank but is rather a position, as the most recent office holders were all four star generals (OF-9).

The office was established on 28 April 1948, during the reorganization of the French higher hierarchy.

The major general leads the Defence Staff and is assisted by three general officers: the Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations (OPS), the Deputy Chief of Staff for Planning (PLANS) and the Deputy Chief of Staff for Performance (PERF).

They replace the chief of staff when necessary. As a flag officer, they are the commanding officer of the Site of Balard, headquarters of the French Armed Forces and the Ministry of the Armed Forces.

Malians in France (French : Maliens en France) are people of Malian origin who live in France. They are one of many diaspora groups represented in France as a result of the French colonial empire.

Malian presence in France dates back as early as the mid-1900s when Mali was still a French colony. Many Malians emigrated from the Senegal River area and from the economically disadvantaged Kayes Region in the south of Mali. Laborers from Mali would travel to France under a system of rotating migration called noria, staying in France for a few years before returning home, although this system was disrupted by a closure of the French borders in 1974 that led many migrant laborers to make more long-term residence in France. Malian immigrants in France send money home and create village solidarity funds which invest in the construction of mosques, schools, health centers, and other needed infrastructure in Mali.

The number of Malians in France has remained relatively steady. In 2023, 150,000 Malians officially registered with their nation's French consulate, with potentially higher numbers if undocumented immigrants, joint nationals, and second- and third-generation Malians are included. Malians in France often occupy densely packed residences in the vicinity of Paris, organized into rooms and floors by village of origin, particularly in Montreuil, Seine-Saint-Denis. Malian ministers visiting Paris rarely miss the chance to visit the Bara residence in Montreuil, the historic political heart of the Malian diaspora.

French immigration policy poses a challenge to Malians in France. In 2005, tensions rose after fires at crowded Paris apartments and hotels killed nearly 50 African immigrants, a majority of whom were children and many of whom came from Mali. The Paris authorities responded by stepping up evictions from substandard housing, angering many in the Malian community who were convinced that the fires were actually arson. On 22 May 2006, then- Minister of the Interior Nicolas Sarkozy visited Bamako to discuss new immigration restrictions; many Malians looking for work began instead immigrating to the United States. Malians in France are also troubled by unrest at home, including jihadist insurgents and economic crisis.

Since the 2020 Malian coup d'état, tensions between Mali and France have curbed immigration. In 2022, France suspended state development aid for Mali due to the actions of the Wagner Group, following which Mali banned the activities of NGOs funded or supported by France. France and Mali both suspended the issuance of visas to citizens of the other country in 2023.

The manche à gigot (French for "leg of lamb handle", also manche d'un gigot) is a specialized piece of tableware created around 1840, designed to hold the bone of a leg of lamb (or venison) while carving meat at the table.

In 1890, the gastronomy guide published in New York described the manche à gigot to be common at the French table, right after the spoons and forks, but before the salt cellar. They are still being manufactured and sold in the 21st century, targeted for niche markets.

The original utensil, appearing c. 1840, was constructed from polished malleable cast iron. It consisted of a rod or stem ending in a ring. The bone of the leg of lamb was inserted into this ring and secured by a screw. This early primitive system had two significant drawbacks: the end of the leg bone often had to be cut because it was too large to fit through the ring, and the tightening screw frequently crushed or broke the bone, rendering the instrument useless.

In 1850, M. Evras, a cutler located at the Galerie Véro-Dodat in Paris, patented a "hinged" system (manche à gigot à charnière) on 22 October to address these issues. The ring was composed of two parts connected by a hinge, allowing the device to be attached to the narrow part of the bone without requiring the bone to be cut. An external screw tightened the ring, applying even pressure around the bone without breaking it.

The "tulip" style (manche à gigot à tulipe) was created in 1866 by Jules Piault (patent of 21 November 1866) and eventually superseded previous designs. Described as the most convenient and graceful version, it features a steel socket shaped like a tulip formed of two parts held by a ring and a screw. While this model requires the bone to be cut to fit, this practice became standard among butchers as the instrument became common on dining tables.

M. Huet of Paris simplified the manufacturing of the device by utilizing a single piece of sheet steel that was stamped into a tulip shape where the two branches acted as a spring under the pressure of the screw. This socket was then screwed onto a malleable cast iron piece forming the base and the tang for the handle.

A smaller version known as the manche à côtelettes (cutlet handle) also existed. These were miniature instruments intended to hold the bone of a cutlet to prevent the diner from soiling their fingers, though they were not as widely adopted as the larger version.

Mandats territoriaux (sing. mandat territorial) were paper government notes issued as currency by the French Directory in 1796 to replace the assignats which had become virtually worthless. They were land-warrants supposedly redeemable in the lands confiscated from royalty, the clergy and the church after the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789. In February 1796, 800,000,000 francs of mandats were issued as legal tender to replace the 24,000,000,000 francs of assignats then outstanding. In all about 2,500,000,000 francs of mandats were issued. They were heavily counterfeited and their value depreciated rapidly within six months. In February 1797, they lost their legal tender quality and by May were worth virtually nothing.

Throughout most of the French Revolution economic instability fueled by inflation, speculation, and disruption of resources and supplies created incredible hardship for average French citizens. The Revolutionary government depended on printing new paper money to fund its operation, which encouraged inflation. The mandats territoriaux was the second paper currency put into circulation by Revolutionary France, it followed the assignats. The cost of basic goods rose out of reach for the urban poor causing severe poverty. Exponential inflation resulted in the assignat being rejected or traded dramatically below face value. Inflation rose throughout 1795 reaching peak levels in October. The Directory attempted to intervene by decree on 23 and 24 December by limiting the total issue of assignats to 40 billion livres. Upon reaching the limit the printing presses and plates would be destroyed, which came to fruition on 19 February 1796. One month later the mandats territoriaux were created to replace the assignats.

For contemporaries of the French Revolution the glut of assignats and their loss of value were viewed as a leading cause of economic turmoil. Previous government attempts to reduce the number in circulation had failed. The mandats were designed to reduce the 36.4 billion livres of assignats in circulation. The exchange rate was set at 30 assignats for 1 mandat, which could then be used to purchase real estate from the biens nationaux. Unlike the assignat land auctions, the mandats could be exchanged for property with a set price of 22 times the rental rate value in 1790. The mandats were limited to 2.4 billion livres based on the biens nationaux, which the currency could theoretically be exchanged for. Legislators hoped the land-backed mandats would stabilize the paper currency situation in the same fashion as metallic backed currency.

Rumors that the mandats would not be accepted outside of Paris started before the currency could be designed and printed. While the mandats were legally given value equal to that of metallic currency, the government structure of the Directory lacked means and desire to force its use. The success of the mandats was left up to the citizens of France to decide, as had been promised by their legislators. Only during the Terror was the use of paper currency made obligatory and the price of goods stabilized. The creation of the mandats was an attempt to return to a natural monetary policy. Both the assignats and the mandats were theoretically backed by the biens nationaux they differed in how those lands could be procured. Unlike the auctions used for properties sold in assignats that capitalized on competitive bidding, the mandats were intended to bring stability to the market and subsequently to itself. The legal wording for both currencies however, was similar and offered little guarantee of stability for French citizens who had reason to distrust paper money.

The mandat was only briefly in circulation. The legislation that created the mandat was passed on 18 March 1796 but rapidly fell into decline and was without real value within months. Rumors that the mandats would not be accepted and a history of hyperinflation lead many merchants to reject the mandats as they had the assignats. The new currency did little to solve the economic problems and workers were angered that new enforcement measures were not put in place to prevent discrimination between mandats and coin.

Those who had large quantities of assignats and chose to convert them early on were able to use them to access cheap lands from the biens nationaux. The supply of land was insufficient for the value of mandats issued and quickly became exhausted. Without real estate backing the currency it became worthless fiat money. The viability of the mandats and paper currency in general were further diminished by a law passed on Thermidor 5 IV that allowed contracts to be negotiated in whatever units individuals preferred. Precious metals were strongly preferred but negotiation also included commodities in situations where specie was not available. The mandats were first issued on 18 March 1796 but by April were already being traded at 20% face value. Three months after the mandats began to be issued they were entirely devalued but they were integral in allowing the government to function during that time. Rapid loss of value forced the government to stop honoring the face value of the currency against the biens nationaux. French citizens who managed to hoard metallic currency, and those with large stockpiles of paper money who acted quickly, were able to benefit from the currency crisis. Those who were of limited means only saw their poverty increase.

The Manifesto of the 121 (French : Manifeste des 121), was an open letter signed by 121 intellectuals and published on 6 September 1960 in the magazine Vérité-Liberté. It called on the French government, then headed by the Gaullist Michel Debré, and public opinion to recognise the Algerian War as a legitimate struggle for independence, denouncing the use of torture by the French army, and calling for French conscientious objectors to the conflict to be respected by the authorities.

The Declaration was drafted by Dionys Mascolo, Maurice Blanchot and Jean Schuster. It stated that the cause of the Algerians was the cause of all free men, and that the struggle was striking a decisive blow to the cause of colonialism. The vast majority of the signatories belonged to the French Left. The signatories included figures from a variety of political and cultural movements, such as Marxism, existentialism, surrealism, and a number of figures associated with the Nouveau Roman and New Wave literary and cinematic trends.

There were later signatories to the declaration, 246 in total.

Maquis (UK : / m æ ˈ k iː / ma- KEE, US : / m ɑː ˈ k iː / mah- KEE, French: [ maki ]) or macchia (/ ˈ m ɑː k i ə / MAH -kee-ə, Italian: [ ˈmakkja ] ; often macchia mediterranea in Italian; Corsican : machja, pronounced [ ˈmaca ] ; Croatian : makija ; Occitan : maquís ; Catalan : màquia, Spanish : maquia) is a savanna -like shrubland biome in the Mediterranean region, typically consisting of densely growing evergreen shrubs. It is typically found in mountainous, coastal regions. The ecosystems typically have humid, temperate winters and dry summers. The soil in maquis is typically highly acidic.

The shrubs in maquis typically top out at around 4-5 metres tall. Maquis has a sizable flora, made up of mostly xerophilous plants, many of which go dormant during the dry summer months. Common plants found in the biome include, but are not limited to:

Marc Ferracci (French pronunciation: [ maʁk fɛʁatʃi ] ; born 19 December 1977) is a French politician who served as Minister for Industry and Energy in the government of Prime Minister François Bayrou from 2024 to 2025 and is currently a Member of the National Assembly for the 6th constituency for French residents overseas (Switzerland and Liechtenstein). A member of Renaissance (RE), he previously briefly served as Minister Delegate for Industry in the government of Michel Barnier from September to December 2024.

Ferracci was elected the deputy to the National Assembly for the sixth constituency for French residents overseas in 2022, which encompasses Switzerland and Liechtenstein. He won reelection in 2024. Previously, he had been Emmanuel Macron 's economy adviser in Macron's 2017 presidential campaign; he was named a special adviser to Labour Minister Muriel Pénicaud following the election. In 2020, he became an adviser to Prime Minister Jean Castex.

Ferracci has been described as a close friend and political ally to President Macron.

An economist by occupation, Ferracci graduated from HEC Paris and Sciences Po. He made academic contributions as a professor at Panthéon-Assas University specialising in economics and labour policy, including his involvement in the reform of employment systems in France. His expertise spans various fields earning him recognition as a nominee for the Best Young French Economist Award in 2016.

Ferracci met Emmanuel Macron in 1999 when they were students at Sciences Po. Both were each other's best men at their weddings; in 2004, Ferracci married Sophie Gagnant, who was Macron's chief of staff in his 2017 presidential campaign before joining Health Minister Agnès Buzyn as chief of staff following the election. She had previously been an aide to Macron in 2016 in the final months of his tenure as Economy Minister.

His family is from Suartone, a Corsican hamlet in the municipality of Bonifacio.

Marc-Philippe Daubresse (born 1 August 1953) is a French politician.

Daubresse was born on 1 August 1953 in Lille, Nord. He is a graduate of the École centrale de Lille, the Institut Industriel du Nord, and the Institut d'Administration des Entreprises. He was a member of Jeunesse Etudiante Chrétienne.

In 1974, Daubresse worked as staff member for telecommunications Minister Norbert Segard. He also served as regional chair of the Union pour la Démocratie Française, and later the Union pour un Mouvement Populaire for the Nord.

From 1980 to 1983, Daubresse worked for Bouygues.

From 1986 to 1992, Daubresse was a member of the regional council of Nord-Pas-de-Calais. From January 2001 to March 2008, he was the Vice-President of the Urban Community of Lille Métropole. Since 2003, he has been the President of the Conseil National de l’Habitat, then the Agence Nationale de l'Habitat.

From March to November 2004, Daubresse was Secretary for housing, from November 2004 to May 2005, Deputy Minister for housing and cities. and frome March to November 2010 Minister for Youth and Active Solidarities.

Daubresse has been the mayor of Lambersart from 1988 to 2017.

In the Republicans’ 2016 presidential primaries, Daubresse endorsed Nicolas Sarkozy as the party's candidate for the office of President of France. In the Republicans' 2025 leadership election, he endorsed Bruno Retailleau to succeed Éric Ciotti as the party's new chair.

The Marcel Duchamp Prize (in French : Prix Marcel Duchamp) is an annual award given to a young artist by the Association pour la Diffusion Internationale de l'Art Français (ADIAF).

The winner receives €35,000 personally and up to €30,000 in order to produce an exhibition of their work in the Modern Art museum (Centre Georges Pompidou).

The prize is named after the artist Marcel Duchamp.

In the early 1990s, an association was created, the ADIAF (Association for the international dissemination of French art), notably by Gilles Fuchs, international lawyer but also art collector, and by the gallery owner Daniel Templon, to participate in better promotion and distribution of the works of French visual artists. Launched by a group of five people, the ADIAF has nearly 400 members in 2020. You become a member by cooptation: you have to be a collector (but this criterion includes exceptions, in particular some gallery owners, brokers and art restorers) and be interested in the French art scene.

Marcel Déat (French pronunciation: [ maʁsɛl dea ] ; 7 March 1894 – 5 January 1955) was a French politician. Initially a socialist and a member of the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO), he led a breakaway group of right-wing Neosocialists out of the SFIO in 1933. During the occupation of France by Nazi Germany, he founded the collaborationist National Popular Rally (RNP). In 1944, he became Minister of Labour and National Solidarity in Pierre Laval 's government in Vichy, before escaping to the Sigmaringen enclave along with Vichy officials after the Allied landings in Normandy. Condemned in absentia for collaborationism, he died while still in hiding in Italy.

Marcel Déat was raised in a modest environment, which shared republican and patriotic values. After brilliant studies, he entered in 1914 the École Normale Supérieure (ENS) after having been the student of Alain, a philosopher who was active in the Radical Party and who would write a deeply anti-militarist book after World War I. The same year, Déat joined the SFIO.

While he attended the ENS and worked to get a philosophy degree, World War I broke out. He joined the French Army and saw active duty, winning the Légion d'honneur and five bravery citations. By the war's end, Déat had achieved the rank of captain. Under the pseudonym of Taëd, he then published Cadavres et maximes, philosophie d'un revenant (approximately translated by "Corpses and Maxims, Philosophy of a Ghost"), in which he expressed his horror of trenches, strong pacifist views, as well as his fascination for collective discipline and war camaraderie. When the war ended in 1918, he finished his studies at the École Normale and passed his agrégation of philosophy, and oriented himself towards sociology under the direction of Célestin Bouglé, a friend of Alain and also member of the Radical Party. In the meanwhile, Déat taught philosophy in Reims.

During the 1920 Tours Congress in which a majority of the SFIO decided to spin off to found the French Communist Party, Marcel Déat positioned himself at the right wing of the SFIO, taking part in the groupe de la Vie socialiste current, alongside Pierre Renaudel. Déat was elected municipal counsellor of Reims in 1925, and then deputy for the Marne during a partial election in 1926. However, he lost his seat after the 1928 elections. In these times, Léon Blum, the leader of the SFIO, tried to favor youths in the party, and decided to name Déat secretary of the SFIO parliamentary group. After having been put in charge of the documentary center of the ENS by Célestin Bouglié, Déat now founded a documentary center for the SFIO deputies.

Marcel Déat published in 1930 Perspectives socialistes (Socialist Perspectives), a revisionist work closely influenced by Henri de Man 's planisme. Along with over a hundred articles written in La Vie Socialiste, the review of the SFIO's right-wing, Perspective socialistes marked the shift of Déat from classical socialism to neosocialism. Déat replaced class struggle by collaboration of classes and national solidarity, advocated corporatism as a social organization model, replaced the notion of " socialism " by " anti-capitalism " and supported an authoritarian state which would plan the economy and from which parliamentarism would be repealed.

During the 1932 elections, he was elected deputy of the 20th arrondissement of Paris, beating the Communist Jacques Duclos — who himself had gained the upper hand against Léon Blum in 1928 in the same electoral district. Déat and other Neosocialists were expelled from the SFIO at the 5 November 1933 Congress, for their revisionist views and disagreements with Léon Blum 's policies toward Prime Minister Édouard Herriot, leader of the second Cartel des Gauches (Left-Wing Coalition). The official position of the SFIO was then to support the Cartel without participating in the government, which it considered "bourgeois." The same year, Déat joined the Socialist Party of France – Jean Jaurès Union (PSdF) created the same year by Planist and Neosocialist elements expelled by the SFIO during the 1933 Congress. The new party's slogan was "Order, Authority and Nation".

The expelled faction was a minority in the SFIO, but represented the majority of the SFIO parliamentary group. They were opposed both by the left wing of the SFIO, represented by Marceau Pivert, and by the SFIO's center, headed by Blum. The Neosocialists wanted to "reinforce the state against the economic crisis ", open themselves to the middle classes and participate in non-Socialist governments. Without the support of the Socialists, Déat lost his seat in the Chamber. Two years later, he joined the Socialist Republican Union (USR). He became Minister of Air in the "bourgeois" government of Albert Sarraut (Radical) but he quickly resigned his post over disputes with the Prime Minister. With the increasing threats represented by Nazi Germany, Déat wanted to maintain peace at any cost.

He returned to the Chamber of Deputies in 1936 as a delegate from Angoulême, and at first supported the Popular Front led by Blum before denouncing "Communist infiltration" of it. After Blum's replacement by Édouard Daladier in 1938, which marked the end of the Popular Front, Déat participated in the "Anti-Communist Rally." In an article published on 4 May 1939 entitled Why Die for Danzig?, published in the newspaper L'Œuvre, Déat argued that France should not go to war for Poland if the Danzig crisis resulted in war. There, he argued that France should avoid war with Germany if the latter seized Poland – the publication caused a widespread controversy, and propelled Déat to national fame. Déat would collaborate with L'Œuvre during the entire period of Vichy France.

A strong supporter of Germany's occupation of northern France in 1940, Déat took up residence in unoccupied France, and was initially a supporter of Philippe Pétain. He attempted to create a single party to fully realize the aims of the " Révolution nationale ", the official, reactionary ideology of Vichy. Thereafter, he founded in February 1941 the National Popular Rally (RNP) which advocated collaboration with Nazi Germany and antisemitism. When the French State, then headed by Pétain, did not become the Fascist state Déat had in mind, he moved to occupied Paris and was funded by the Germans. The Germans forced Déat at first to merge his new party (RNP) with Eugène Deloncle 's MSR (Social Revolutionary Movement), a far-right party, the successor of the Cagoule terrorist group. The merger was a failure and Déat later expelled MSR elements from his party, before trying to form a unified front of Collaborationist parties.

Déat founded, along with fellow collaborationists Jacques Doriot and Marcel Bucard, the Légion des Volontaires Français (LVF), a French unit of the Wehrmacht (later affiliated with the Waffen-SS). While reviewing troops from the LVF with former Prime Minister Pierre Laval in Versailles on 27 August 1941, Déat was wounded in an assassination attempt—carried out by Paul Collette [ fr ]. After recovering, he became a supporter of Laval, who supported more reactionary policies than Pétain, and again became Prime Minister of France in 1942. Under the suggestion of the Germans, Marcel Déat became on 16 March 1944, Minister of Labour and National Solidarity in Laval's cabinet.

After the Allied landings at Normandy the French Government, with Déat, was escorted to Germany and he became an official of the government-in-exile at Sigmaringen. With the defeat of Nazi Germany in May 1945, Déat fled to Italy in April and took his wife's name, temporarily teaching in Milan and Turin. He was later taken in and hidden by a Roman Catholic religious order in the convent of San Vito, near Turin, where he wrote his memoirs and lived undiscovered until his death in 1955. After the war, he was convicted of treason in France and sentenced to death in absentia on 19 June 1945.

Marchois (French pronunciation: [ maʁʃwa ]) or Marchese (marchés in Occitan) is a transitional Occitan dialect between the Occitan language and the Oïl languages spoken in the historical region of La Marche, in northern Limousin and its region. Occitan and Oïl dialects meet there.

It covers the north-western borders of the Massif Central and forms the western part of the dialects of the Croissant which goes from Charente limousine to Montluçon.

Marchois is a transitional dialect between the Occitan language and the langues d'oïl.

It forms the western two-third of the Croissant region where the languages oscillate between the Occitan language in the south and the Oïl languages in the north.

Concerning Occitan traits, they are closer to Limousin than Auvergnat, both North Occitan dialects. It is sometimes classified as a sub-dialect of Limousin characterized by its transition with French.

It is more regularly mentioned as a full-fledged Occitan dialect, due to the difficulties of mutual intercomprehension between the people of Limousin and southern La Marche, and the many features that make it closer to the oïl languages. In transition with the langues d'oïl, Marchois is also in transition between the Occitan dialects of Limousin and Auvergne, respectively to the west and to the east of the latter.

It is sometimes considered a language in its own right, because of its intermediate position between Occitan language and Oïl languages, the same way as the Franco-Provençal language.

The neighboring dialects of Oïl languages like Poitevin-Saintongeais have features in common with Marchois, which has interactions with the latter, and shares an important common substrate.

The area where Marchois is spoken does not coincide with the historical province of La Marche but extends beyond it. Marchois is spoken in the north of Creuse, and Haute-Vienne to which must be added the north of Charente Limousine around Confolens, some southern communes of Poitou but also the south of Boischaut, at the southern tip of Berry in the southern parts of Indre and Cher (Saint-Benoît-du-Sault, Lourdoueix-Saint-Michel, Culan), and finally Montluçon and its region in the Allier (Châtaigneraie).

The rest of the department of Allier once out of the Cher valley and from the center of the Bocage bourbonnais forms the eastern part of the Croissant where the speech is Arverno-Bourbonnais (Bocage, Limagne and Bourbonnaise mountain, Vichy). Guéret and Montluçon are the two main towns in La Marche region, both radiating over half of the Creuse department.

The Marchois dialect is divided into three main varieties.

Three main writing systems can be used to write Marchois. All three are encouraged by the research group on the dialects of the Croissant (CNRS):

The vast county of Marche experienced earlier francization than the rest of the Occitan-speaking countries. From the thirteenth century, an aristocratic class speaking langues d'oïl, e.g. the Lusignans, settled locally in the midst of an endogenous Occitanophone nobility. The region of Montluçon became linked in this period to the seigneury of Bourbon and to a territory whose lords were very close to the kings of France. They also originated in Champagne and brought—as was the case in Poitou and Saintonge —settlers from Champagne who spoke the local langue d'oïl variety. These settlers exerted a notable influence on the Bourbonnais d'Oïl but also on the Occitan dialects of Marche and Arverno-Bourbonnais.

The Bourbons arrived thereafter in the rest of the Marche (e.g., the famous count Jacques de La Marche) and influenced even more the language of the nobles. Neighboring Berry (strongly francized, even if significant parts of Occitan still remain) also influenced from the end of the Middle Ages on the towns and villages of the north of La Marche as in the region of Boussac.

The masons of La Creuse originating in the northern half of this department use Marchois even when displaced to other regions. They play on influences if they do not wish to be understood in certain "foreign" regions: they sometimes use the Occitan features so as not to make themselves understood in a territory where French is spoken, as in Paris, or vice versa, in other Occitan-speaking regions, they rely on langue d'oïl traits.

Marchois is linked to Limousin (dialect) (north-Occitan) but also to its northern neighbors, the southern dialects of oïl (Poitevin-Saintongeais, berrichon, bourbonnais d'oïl). The distinctive features of the rest of the Occitan dialects were in part established by Maximilien Guérin or Jean-Pierre Baldit, founder of the Institut d'études occitanes section La Marche and Combrailles.

Distinctive features vis-à-vis other Occitan dialects

Distinctive features of Arverno-Bourbonnais

Occitan traits nevertheless remain very strong in La Marche, which remains attached to Occitan.

A l'ore de las legendas, quand le clhocher sone mineut, rendam nos dins las eglesias, per i passar le moment pieus.

Vos, las fennas que siatz prias, mesme quos qui que cresan pas. Anatz remplir las eglesias. Las eglesias seran plenas. E tos los cuers sauran chantar, e mesme en plhurant, esperar... Las prieras par le païs, par los absents, par los amics, s'envoleran au Paradis; le petiot Jesus sau escotar; On sau veire le Nadau de guèrre, las misèras, la paubre tèrre.

O sau tot veire e pardonar, Oc-es, raluman nostres amas, a l'ore de las legendas, a l'ore de las prieras.

This is a non-exhaustive list of Marchois authors:

Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Marchois.

Totes las persones naissan lieures e egales en dignitat e en dret. Als son dotades de rason e de consciénçe més i leur fau agir entre als dins une aime de frairesse.

Toutes las persones naissant lieures et égales en dignitat et en dret. Als sont dotades de rason et de conscience mais i leur faut agir entre als dins une aime de frairesse.

Marianne (French pronunciation: [ maʁjan ]) has been the national personification of the French Republic since the French Revolution, as an emblem of liberty, equality, fraternity and reason, as well as a portrayal of the Goddess of Liberty.

Marianne is displayed in many places in France and holds a place of honour in town halls and law courts. She is depicted in the Triumph of the Republic, a bronze sculpture overlooking the Place de la Nation in Paris, as well as represented with another Parisian statue on the Place de la République. Her profile stands out on the official government logo of the country, and appears on French euro coins and on French postage stamps. She was also featured on the former franc currency and is officially used on most government documents.

Marianne is a significant republican symbol ; her French monarchist equivalent is often Joan of Arc. As a national icon Marianne represents opposition to monarchy and the championship of freedom and democracy against all forms of oppression. Other national symbols of Republican France include the tricolor flag, the national motto Liberté, Égalité, Fraternité, the national anthem " La Marseillaise ", the coat of arms, and the official Great Seal of France. Marianne is typically depicted wearing a cockade and a red Phrygian cap, symbolising liberty.

Since classical times it was common to represent ideas and abstract entities by gods, goddesses, and allegorical personifications. During the French Revolution of 1789, many allegorical personifications of ' Liberty ' and ' Reason ' appeared. These two figures finally merged into one: a female figure, shown either sitting or standing and accompanied by various attributes, including the cockade of France and the Phrygian cap. This woman typically symbolised Liberty, Reason, the Nation, the Homeland and the civic virtues of the Republic. In September 1792, the National Convention decided by decree that the new seal of the state would represent a standing woman holding a spear with a Phrygian cap held aloft on top of it.

Historian Maurice Agulhon, who in several works set out on a detailed investigation to discover the origins of Marianne, suggests that it is the traditions and mentality of the French that led to the use of a woman to represent the Republic. A feminine allegory was also a manner to symbolise the breaking with the old monarchy headed by kings and promote modern republican ideology. Even before the French Revolution, the Kingdom of France was embodied in masculine figures, as depicted in certain ceilings of Palace of Versailles. Furthermore, France and the Republic themselves are, in French, feminine nouns (la France, la République), as are the French nouns for liberty (Liberté) and reason (Raison).

The use of this emblem was initially unofficial and very diverse. A female allegory of Liberty and of the Republic makes an appearance in Eugène Delacroix 's painting Liberty Leading the People, painted in July 1830 in honour of the Three Glorious Days (or July Revolution of 1830).

Although the image of Marianne did not garner significant attention until 1792, the origins of this "goddess of Liberty" date back to 1775, when Jean-Michel Moreau painted her as a young woman dressed in Roman style clothing with a Phrygian cap atop a pike held in one hand that years later would become a national symbol across France. Marianne made her first major appearance in the French spotlight on a medal in July 1789, celebrating the storming of the Bastille and other early events of the French Revolution. From this time until September 1792, the image of Marianne was overshadowed by other figures such as Mercury and Minerva. It was not until September 1792 when the First French Republic sought a new image to represent the State that her popularity began to expand. Marianne, the female allegory of Liberty, was chosen to represent the new regime of the French Republic, while remaining to symbolise liberty at the same time.

The imagery of Marianne chosen as the seal of the First French Republic depicted her standing, young and determined. It was symbolic of the First Republic itself, a newly created state that had much to prove. Marianne is clad in a classical gown. In her right hand, she wields the pike of revolution with the Phrygian cap resting on it, which represents the liberation of France. Marianne is shown leaning on a fasces, a symbol of authority. Although she is standing and holding a pike, this depiction of Marianne is "not exactly aggressive", representing the ideology of the moderate-liberal Girondins in the National Convention as they tried to move away from the "frantic violence of the revolutionary days".

Although the initial figure of Marianne from 1792 stood in a relatively conservative pose, the revolutionaries were quick to abandon that figure when it no longer suited them. By 1793, the conservative figure of Marianne had been replaced by a more violent image; that of a woman, bare-breasted and fierce of visage, often leading men into battle. The reason behind this switch stems from the shifting priorities of the Republic. Although the Marianne symbol was initially neutral in tone, the shift to radical action was in response to the beginning of the Terror, which called for militant revolutionary action against foreigners and counter-revolutionaries. As part of the tactics the administration employed, the more radical Marianne was intended to rouse the French people to action. Even this change, however, was seen to be insufficiently radical by the republicans. After the arrest of the Girondin deputies in October 1793, the Convention sought to "recast the Republic in a more radical mold", eventually using the symbol of Hercules to represent the Republic. The use of increasingly radical images to symbolise the Republic was in direct parallel to the beginning of the violence that came to be known as the Reign of Terror.

After the Reign of Terror, there was a need for another change in the imagery, to showcase the more civil and nonviolent nature of the Directory. In the Official Vignette of the Executive Directory, 1798, Marianne made a return, still depicted wearing the Phrygian cap, but now surrounded by different symbols. In contrast to the Marianne of 1792, this Marianne "holds no pike or lance", and leans "languorously" on the tablet of the Constitution of Year III. Instead of looking straight at the observer, she casts her gaze towards the side, thus appearing less confrontational. Similar imagery was used in the poster of the Republic's new calendar.

The symbol of Marianne continued to evolve in response to the needs of the State long after the Directory was dissolved in 1799 following the coup spearheaded by Emmanuel-Joseph Sieyès and Napoleon Bonaparte. Whereas Mercury and Minerva and other symbolic figures diminished in prominence over the course of French history, Marianne endured because of her abstraction and impersonality. The "malleability" of what she symbolised allowed French political figures to continually manipulate her image to their specific purposes at any given time.

On 17 March 1848, the Ministry of the Interior of the newly founded Second Republic launched a contest to symbolise the Republic on paintings, sculptures, medals, money and seals, as no official representations of it existed. After the fall of the monarchy, the Provisional Government had declared: "The image of liberty should replace everywhere the images of corruption and shame, which have been broken in three days by the magnanimous French people." For the first time, the allegory of Marianne condensed into itself Liberty, the Republic and the Revolution.

Two "Mariannes" were authorised. One is fighting and victorious, recalling the Greek goddess Athena : she has a bare breast, the Phrygian cap and a red corsage, and has an arm lifted in a gesture of rebellion. The other is more conservative: she is rather quiet, wearing clothes in a style of Antiquity, with sun rays around her head—a transfer of the royal symbol to the Republic—and is accompanied by many symbols (wheat, a plough and the fasces of the Roman lictors). These two, rival Mariannes represent two ideas of the Republic, a bourgeois representation and a democratic and social representation – the June Days Uprising hadn't yet occurred.

Town halls voluntarily chose to have representations of Marianne, often turning her back to the church. Marianne made her first appearance on a French postage stamp in 1849.

During the Second Empire (1852–1870), this depiction became clandestine and served as a symbol of protest against the regime. The common use of the name "Marianne" for the depiction of "Liberty" started around 1848/1851, becoming generalised throughout France around 1875.

The usage began to be more official during the Third Republic (1870–1940). Much of the popularity of Marianne was due to the fact that she symbolized French republicanism while at the same time being neutral enough to make her into a symbol that appealed to most people. The legacy of the French Revolution tended to divide people in France as different people in France had different revolutionary heroes and villains, and unlike the United States, the French had no cult of "the Founding Fathers" whose memory was venerated by all. For this reason, the French state tended to promote abstract symbols like Marianne as an unifying national symbol instead of using personalities from history as a national symbol in the manner which the United States used George Washington and Venezuela used Simon Bolivar as national symbols in the 19th century. As a symbol of the Revolution and of the republic, Marianne was sufficiently inoffensive enough to appeal to most people without causing any controversy. Marianne's femininity made her appear less threatening as a symbol of the republic than a male figure would have been.

After a turbulent first decade in the 1870s, by the 1880s the republic was accepted by most people in France and as such, the French state did not need history to justify itself, using Marianne as the unifying symbol of the republic. The only historical event that was regularly honored in France was Bastille Day, as the storming of the Bastille in 1789 was the revolutionary occurrence that appealed to most of the French, and the rest of the events of the revolution were not officially honored in order to keep the memory of the revolution as harmonious as possible. It was the strategy of the republican leaders to use symbols and the memory of history in such a way to create as wide a national consensus as possible in favor of the republic, which was why Marianne became such a prominent symbol of the republic. By contrast, the newly unified German Reich had too many historical traditions to draw upon, reflecting the histories of the various German states, none of which could appeal to everybody, leading to a situation where the British historian Eric Hobsbawm noted: "Like many another liberated 'people', 'Germany' was more easily defined by what it was against than in any other way." Hobsbawm argued for this reason, that unlike Marianne who was a symbol of the republic and freedom in general, her German counterpart, Deutscher Michel "...seems to have been essentially an anti-foreign image".

The Hôtel de Ville in Paris (city hall) displayed a statue of "Marianne" wearing a Phrygian cap in 1880, and was quickly followed by the other French cities. In Paris, where the Radicals had a strong presence, a contest was launched for the statue of Place de la République. It was won by the Morice brothers (with Léopold Morice producing the sculpture and the architect François-Charles Morice designing the pedestal), in 1879, with an academical Marianne, with an arm lifted towards the sky and a Phrygian cap, but with her breasts covered. Aimé-Jules Dalou lost the contest against the Morice brothers, but the City of Paris decided to build his monument on the Place de la Nation, inaugurated for the centenary of the French Revolution, in 1889, with a plaster version covered in bronze. Dalou's Marianne had the lictor's fasces, the Phrygian cap, a bare breast, and was accompanied by a Blacksmith representing Work, and allegories of Freedom, Justice, Education and Peace: all that the Republic was supposed to bring to its citizens. The final bronze monument was inaugurated in 1899, in the turmoil of the Dreyfus Affair, with Waldeck-Rousseau, a Radical, in power. The ceremony was accompanied by a huge demonstration of workers, with red flags. The government's officials, wearing black redingotes, quit the ceremony. Marianne had been reappropriated by the workers, but as the representative of the Social and Democratic Republic (la République démocratique et sociale, or simply La Sociale).

From the signing of the Entente Cordiale between France and Britain in April 1904, Marianne and John Bull personalised the agreement in a number of paintings and cartoons, most famously the Punch cartoon by John Bernard Partridge. In the struggles between ideological parties around the turn of the twentieth century, Marianne was often denigrated by right-wing presses as a prostitute. In Imperial Germany, Marianne was usually portrayed in a manner that was very vulgar, usually suggesting that she was a prostitute or at any rate widely promiscuous while at the same time being a hysterically jealous and insane woman who however always cowered in fear at the sight of a German soldier. The German state in the Imperial period promoted a very xenophobic militarism, which portrayed the Reich as forever in danger from foreigners and in need of an authoritarian government. The core of Prussian-German militarism was a cult of machismo that equated militarism with masculinity, and Marianne was used in Germany to portray France as a "weak" and "feminine" nation in contrast to "strong" and "masculine" Germany. The purpose of Marianne in German propaganda was always to promote contempt for France and with it, a warning about what Germans should not be.

The American historian Michael Nolan wrote in the "hyper-masculine world of Wilhelmine Germany" with its exaltation of militarism and masculine power, the very fact that Marianne was the symbol of the republic was used to argue that French men were effeminate and weak. In this regard, it is significant in German cartoons and posters, Marianne usually faced off against a male figure representing Germany, who was either a typical German soldier or Kaiser Wilhelm II himself and Marianne only very rarely took on Germania. In French cartoons and posters, it was Marianne who took on Wilhelm II, whose bombastic pomposity lent itself well for ridicule, and she almost never took on Deutscher Michel, leading Nolan to comment that French cartoonists missed a great chance for satire since even in Germany itself, Deutscher Michel is portrayed as rather "dim-witted". On occasion, Marianne was portrayed slightly more favorably in Germany as in a cartoon from May 1914 in the magazine Kladderadatsch where Deutscher Michel is working in his garden with a seductive and voluptuous Marianne on one side and a brutish muzhik (Russian peasant) on the other; the message of the cartoon was that France should not be allied to Russia, and would be better off allied to Germany, since Deutscher Michel with his well tended garden is clearly a better potential husband than the vodka drinking muzhik whose garden is a disorderly disaster.

Marianne differed from Uncle Sam, John Bull, and Deutscher Michel in that Marianne was not just a symbol of France, but of the republic as well. For those on the French right, who still hankered for the House of Bourbon like Action Française, Marianne was always rejected for her republican associations, and the preferred symbol of France was Joan of Arc. As Joan of Arc was devoutly Catholic, committed to serving King Charles VII, and fought for France against England, she perfectly symbolized the values of Catholicism, royalism, militarism and nationalism that were so dear for French monarchists. Joan was apparently asexual, and her chaste and virginal image stood in marked contrast to Marianne, whom Action Française depicted as a prostitute or as a "slut" to symbolize the "degeneracy" of the republic. The contrast between the asexual Joan vs. the unabashedly sexualized Marianne who was often depicted bare-breasted could not have been greater. Finally, because of Joan's status as one of France' best loved heroines, it was difficult for republicans to attack Joan without seeming unpatriotic. However, the royalist attempt to have Joan of Arc replace Marianne as the symbol of France failed, in large part because most of the French people accepted the republic, and Marianne unlike Joan was the symbol of the republic. In the middle of the 19th century, Marianne was usually portrayed in France as a young woman, but by late 19th century, Marianne was more commonly presented as a middle aged, maternal woman, reflecting the fact that the republic was dominated by a centre-right coalition of older male politicians, who disliked the image of a militant young female revolutionary. After British and German newspapers began to mock the middle-aged Marianne as a symbol of supposed French decline, around 1900 the younger Marianne came back into vogue to symbolize that the republic was not in decline.

In World War I, in German propaganda, Marianne was always depicted as dominating Russia, represented variously as a bear, a thuggish-looking Cossack or by the Emperor Nicholas II, with Marianne being drawn as an angry and emasculating wife. By contrast, John Bull was always depicted in German cartoons as dominating both Marianne and Russia, reflecting the German perception that Britain was the most dangerous of all of Germany's enemies. When John Bull was depicted in the company of Marianne in German cartoons, she was always the submissive one.

Few Mariannes were depicted in the First World War memorials, but some living models of Marianne appeared in 1936, during the government of the Popular Front as they had during the Second Republic (then stigmatized by the right-wing press as "unashamed prostitutes"). During World War II, Marianne represented Liberty against the Nazi invaders, and the Republic against the Vichy regime (see Paul Collin's representation). During Vichy, 120 of the 427 monuments of Marianne were melted, while the Milice took out its statues in town halls in 1943. Under Vichy, Marianne was banned and Joan of Arc became the official symbol of France. In French schools and government offices, the busts of Marianne were replaced with busts of Marshal Pétain. As Marianne was the symbol of the republic and everything it stood for, under Vichy Marianne was demonized as the most "offensive" symbol of the republic. There was a strong misogyny to Vichy's attacks on Marianne under Vichy's ideology there were two sorts of women; the "virgin and the whore" with Joan being cast as the former and Marianne as the latter.

Marianne's presence became less important in French imagery after World War II, although under the presidency of Charles de Gaulle she was often used, in particular on stamps or for referendums. The most recent subversive and revolutionary appearance of Marianne was during the May 68 protests. The liberal and conservative president Valéry Giscard d'Estaing replaced Marianne by La Poste on stamps, changed the rhythm of the Marseillaise and suppressed the commemoration of 8 May 1945.

During the bicentenary of the Revolution, in 1989, Marianne hardly made any public appearance. The Socialist President François Mitterrand aimed to make the celebrations a consensual event, gathering all citizens, recalling more the Republic than the Revolution. The American opera singer Jessye Norman took Marianne's place, singing La Marseillaise as part of an elaborate pageant orchestrated by avant-garde designer Jean-Paul Goude. The Republic, after harsh internal fighting throughout the 19th century and even the 20th century (6 February 1934 crisis, Vichy, etc.), had become consensual; the vast majority of French citizens were now republicans, leading to a lesser importance of a cult of Marianne.

Marianne has featured prominently in the Islamic scarf controversy in France as a symbol of a certain idea of Frenchness and femininity. The American historian Joan Wallach Scott wrote in 2016 that it is no accident that Marianne is often depicted as bare-breasted regardless of where she is or what she is doing, as this reflects the French ideal of a woman, which has been used as an argument for why Islamic dress for women is not French. Scott wrote the topless Marianne has become "...the embodiment of emancipated French women in contrast to the veiled woman said to be subordinated by Islam".

Later in 2016, the French Prime Minister Manuel Valls stated in a speech that the burkini swimsuit was an "enslavement" of women and that Marianne was usually topless which The Economist noted: "The implication seemed to be that women in burkinis are un-French, while true French women go topless." In a speech on 29 August 2016, Valls said: "Marianne has a naked breast because she is feeding the people! She is not veiled, because she is free! That is the republic!". Angelique Chisafis of The Guardian newspaper reported: "The inference that bare breasts were a symbol of France while the Muslim headscarf was problematic sparked scorn from politicians and derision from historians and feminists". The French president François Hollande sparked much debate in France with his controversial statement "The veiled woman will be the Marianne of tomorrow".

At the time of the French Revolution, as the most common of people were fighting for their rights, it seemed fitting to name the Republic after the most common of French women's names: Marie (Mary) and Anne. The account made of their exploits by the Revolutionaries often contained a reference to a certain Marianne (or Marie-Anne) wearing a Phrygian cap. This pretty girl of legend inspired the revolutionaries, and looked after those wounded in the many battles across the country.

A recent discovery establishes that the first written mention of the name of Marianne to designate the Republic appeared in October 1792 in Puylaurens in the Tarn département near Toulouse. At that time people used to sing a song in the Provençal dialect of Occitan by the poet Guillaume Lavabre [ fr ] : " La garisou de Marianno " (French: " La guérison de Marianne "; "Marianne's recovery (from illness)"). At the time Marie-Anne was a very popular first name; according to Agulhon, it "was chosen to designate a régime that also saw itself as popular."

Some believe that the name came from the name of the Spanish Jesuit Juan de Mariana, the 16th century Monarchomach, a theoretician of tyrannicide. Others think it was the image of the wife of the politician Jean Reubell : according to an old 1797 story, Barras, one of the members of the Directoire, during an evening spent at Reubell's, asked his hostess for her name—"Marie-Anne," she replied—"Perfect," Barras exclaimed, "It is a short and simple name, which befits the Republic just as much as it does yourself, Madame."

The description by artist Honoré Daumier in 1848, as a mother nursing two children, Romulus and Remus, or by sculptor François Rude, during the July Monarchy, as a warrior voicing the Marseillaise on the Arc de Triomphe, are uncertain.

The name of Marianne also appears to be connected with several republican secret societies. During the Second Empire, one of them, whose members had sworn to overthrow the monarchy, had taken her name.

In any case, she has become a symbol in France: considered as a personification of the Republic, she was often used on republican iconography – and sometimes caricatured and reviled by those against the republic, especially royalists and monarchists.

The official busts of Marianne initially had anonymous features, appearing as women of the people. From 1969, however, they began to take on the features of famous women, starting with the actress Brigitte Bardot. She was followed by Michèle Morgan (1972), Mireille Mathieu (1978), Catherine Deneuve (1985), Inès de La Fressange (1989), Laetitia Casta (2000) and Évelyne Thomas (2003).

Laetitia Casta was named the symbolic representation of France's Republic in October 1999 in a vote open for the first time to the country's more than 36,000 mayors. She won from a shortlist of five candidates, scoring 36% among the 15,000 that voted. The other candidates were Estelle Hallyday, Patricia Kaas, Daniela Lumbroso [ fr ], Laëtitia Milot and Nathalie Simon [ fr ].

In July 2013, a new stamp featuring the Marianne was debuted by President François Hollande, allegedly designed by the team of Olivier Ciappa and David Kawena. Ciappa claimed that Inna Shevchenko, a high-profile member of the Ukrainian protest group FEMEN who had recently been granted political asylum in France, was a main inspiration for the new Marianne. However, Kawena and his attorney later claimed that Ciappa was falsely representing himself as having had any level of creative input on the artwork. Kawena further stated that Shevchenko, or any other figure that Ciappa claimed to be an inspiration, was in no way the model for the work, and has sued Ciappa for violation of copyright on the Marianne artwork. Ciappa later refuted the claims that Kawena was ignored, and also revealed his legal name ("David Kawena" being a pseudonym taken from the Lilo & Stitch films) in a retaliatory press release; Xavier Héraud, a writer for Yagg (a French LGBT news site), noted that in a 2013 Huffington Post piece by Ciappa he never refers to Kawena and claims authorship of the images within the post. Yagg later reported on a response to their posting from Ciappa where he said that he was not in editorial control of the Huffington Post piece and did not intend to have the phrasing be "My Marianne" as accused by Kawena in his suit; Yagg later contacted Huffington Post who informed them that they sent a draft for Ciappa to look at prior to publishing, which is the current version of the article.

Blue-white-red, Marianne, Liberté-Égalité-Fraternité, the Republic: these national symbols represent France, as a state and its values. Since September 1999, they have been combined in a new "identifier" created by the Plural Left government of Lionel Jospin under the aegis of the French Government Information Service (SIG) and the public relations officials in the principal ministries. As a federating identifier of the government departments, it appears on a wide range of material—brochures, internal and external publications, publicity campaigns, letter headings, business cards, etc.—emanating from the government, starting with the various ministries (which are able to continue using their own logo in combination with this) and the préfectures and départements.

Marianne is one of the elements of the official emblem of the 2024 Summer Olympics and the 2024 Summer Paralympics in Paris, combined with the gold medal and the Olympic and Paralympic flame, which is the first time in history with the same emblem.

Marie-Anne Montchamp (born 1 November 1957) is a French politician who served as a member of the National Assembly, represents a constituency in the Val-de-Marne department. From 2010 to 2012, she served as Secretary of State for Solidarities and Social Cohesion under Minister Roselyne Bachelot-Narquin.

In parliament, Montchamp served on the Committee on Economic Affairs and the Environment (2005–2007) and the Finance Committee (2002–2004, 2007–2010).

When President Nicolas Sarkozy was first publicly confronted with evidence in 2010 that his party received illegal campaign donations in cash from heiress Liliane Bettencourt via Labour Minister Éric Woerth as part of a vast system of patronage, Montchamp publicly urged the president to bring forward a reshuffle.

Montchamp was the party's candidate for the Fourth constituency for French residents overseas in the June 2012 legislative election.

In March 2017, Montchamp announced that she was leaving the Republicans (LR) to join presidential candidate Emmanuel Macron and his movement La République En Marche! (LREM).

In 2017, Montchamp was appointed by Minister of Solidarity and Health Agnès Buzyn and the Secretary of State for the Disabled Sophie Cluzel to the Board of Directors of the National Solidarity Fund for Autonomy (CNSA).

Marie Joseph Pierre François Kœnig (also Pierre Kœnig or Koenig ; 10 October 1898 – 2 September 1970) was a French general who most notably commanded a Free French brigade at the Battle of Bir Hakeim in North Africa in 1942. The battle was a heroic show of strength, as the Free French held their position for 2 weeks and 2 days despite being outnumbered ten to one.

After the war he was made military governor of the French occupation zone in Germany (1945 – 1949) before starting a political career. He served twice as Minister of National Defence and the Armed Forces in the 1950s. He was posthumously elevated to the position of Marshal of France in 1984, being the last titleholder to date.

Marie-Pierre Kœnig was born on 10 October 1898, in Caen, Calvados, France. His parents were from the Alsace region.

Kœnig fought in the French Army during World War I and served with distinction. He obtained his baccalaureate and enlisted in 1917. He served in the 36th Infantry Regiment. He was designated as an aspirant in February 1918 and joined his unit at the front. Decorated with the Médaille militaire, he was promoted to sous-lieutenant on 3 September 1918.

After the war, he served with French forces in Morocco and Cameroon. He served in Silesia as an assistant (French : adjoint) of Captain Adrien Henry [ fr ] in the Alps, in Germany, and in Morocco at the general staff headquarters of the division of Marrakesh.

Kœnig was a captain and assistant to Lieutenant-Colonel Raoul Magrin-Vernerey in the 13th Demi-Brigade of Foreign Legion of the French Foreign Legion.

When World War II broke out, Captain Kœnig returned to France. In the Spring of 1940, he was a member of the French expeditionary force in Norway for which he was later awarded Norway 's Krigskorset med Sverd, or the War Cross with Sword, in 1942. After the fall of France, he escaped to England from Brittany.

In London, Kœnig joined General Charles de Gaulle and was promoted to colonel. He became chief of staff in the first divisions of the Free French Forces. In 1941, he served in the campaigns in Syria and Lebanon. He was later promoted to general and took command of the First French Brigade in Egypt. His unit of 3700 men held ground against five Axis divisions (c. 37,000 men) for 16 days at the Battle of Bir Hakeim until they were ordered to evacuate on 11 June 1942. De Gaulle said to Kœnig, "Know and tell your troops that all of France is watching you and that you are its pride."

Later, Kœnig served as the Free French delegate to the Allied headquarters under General Dwight D. Eisenhower. In 1944, he was given command of the Free French who participated in the Invasion of Normandy. Kœnig also served as a military advisor to de Gaulle. In June 1944, he was given command of the French Forces of the Interior (FFI) to unify the various French Resistance groups under de Gaulle's control. Under his command, the FFI abandoned ranged battle in the maquis and preferred sabotage that was waged in support of the invading army. Important during D-Day, the FFI had a role that became decisive in the battle for Normandy and in the landing in Provence of the US Seventh Army and French Army B.

On 21 August 1944, de Gaulle appointed Kœnig military governor of Paris to restore law and order. In 1945, he was sent to arrest Marshal Philippe Pétain, who had taken refuge in Germany but gave himself up at the frontier with Switzerland.

After the war, Kœnig was the military governor of the French occupation zone in Germany from 1945 to 1949. In 1949, he became inspector general in North Africa, and in 1950, he became the vice-president of the Supreme War Council.

In 1951, after his retirement from the army, Kœnig was elected as Gaullist representative to the French National Assembly and briefly served as Minister of Defense under Pierre Mendès-France (1954) and Edgar Faure (1955).

He gave his strong support to the new State of Israel as president of the Franco-Israeli Committee (Comité franco-israélien), at around the same time when he was France's Defense Minister, as shown from his informing Shimon Peres, then serving as Director-General of the Israeli Ministry of Defense, that France was willing to sell Israel any weapons it wished to purchase, from small arms to tanks (such as the AMX-13 light tank). Kœnig had witnessed the heroism of a battalion of Palestinian Jewish mine layers during the Battle of Bir Hakeim and afterwards allowed them to fly their own Star-of-David flag, against British regulations.

Kœnig died on 2 September 1970, in Neuilly-sur-Seine, and was buried at Montmartre Cemetery, in Paris.

There are streets named after Kœnig in Jerusalem, Netanya and Haifa.

Marisol Touraine (French: [ maʁisɔl tuʁɛn ] ; born 7 March 1959) is a French politician who served as Minister of Social Affairs and Health under Prime Ministers Jean-Marc Ayrault, Manuel Valls, and Bernard Cazeneuve.

Touraine was born on 7 March 1959 in Paris. She graduated from the Paris Institute of Political Studies (Sciences Po). She studied at the École Normale Supérieure, where she specialised in economic and social issues. She also attended Harvard University but did not receive a degree. She is fluent in Spanish.

From 1988 to 1991, Touraine was an advisor to Prime Minister Michel Rocard on geostrategic issues.

Touraine served as a member of the National Assembly of France for Indre-et-Loire (3rd constituency) from 1997 to 2002 for the Socialiste, radical, citoyen et divers gauche political party. She was defeated in the second round of the 2002 elections by Jean-Jacques Descamps (UMP). She regained the district in the 2007 elections with a small majority (50.22%), and served until 2012.

On the regional level, Touraine has been general councillor for Indre-et-Loire since the 2001 elections. She served as Vice-President of the General Council of Indre-et-Loire from 2008 to 2011, and as its President from 2011 to 2012, when she resigned. She has served as General councillor of Indre-et-Loire since 1998, having been re-elected in 2004 and in 2011.

In the French presidential election, Touraine endorsed Dominique Strauss-Kahn before later supporting Hollande.

On 16 May 2012, Touraine was named by Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault as Minister of Health and Social Affairs. The designation was accepted by President of France François Hollande, in line with tradition. In her ministerial post, she worked to improve HIV/AIDS prevention and early diagnosis, promoted universal hepatitis C treatment with innovative drugs, implemented plain tobacco packaging and launched a nutrition labelling system.

In October 2012, Touraine announced that trial centres could open in 2012 in France for drug addicts to safely inject their own drugs. This measure met with criticism coming from both the opposition and members of the majority. She entered into negotiations with doctors and health insurance professional organisations to limit the prices of medical assistance.

During her time in office, Touraine oversaw a 2013 pension reform which gradually extended the mandatory pay-in period from 41.5 years to 43 by 2035 and required workers, retirees and employers to fill in an annual deficit set otherwise to reach 20 billion euros ($26 billion) in 2020. She also worked on implementing a 2015 reform aimed at making it easier for low-earners to get access to a doctor.

Also during her term, Touraine steered France’s response to both a MERS outbreak in 2013 and the Western African Ebola virus epidemic from 2013, during which several French nationals contracted the virus. After a review of the measure from 2012 until 2015, she opted to lift blood donation restrictions on men who have sex with men that had been in place since 1983.

By the end of her term, Touraine was widely expected to join her party’s presidential primaries in 2017 ; she eventually decided not to run for president. When Prime Minister Valls declared that he would seek the Socialist Party’s nomination and quit the government to focus on campaigning, Touraine was seen by news media as possible choice to replace him and lead what would effectively become a caretaker government; instead, the post went to Bernard Cazeneuve. In the ensuing cabinet reshuffle to form the Cazeneuve government, she lost the responsibility for women’s rights to newly appointed minister Laurence Rossignol.

In 2019, Touraine was elected chair of the Executive Board of Unitaid.

In 2009, Touraine belonged to the "Future of Health Club" (Club Avenir de la santé), a lobby group funded by GlaxoSmithKline, the world's No. 7 of pharmaceutical products, producing amongst other things, nicotine patches.

In 2016, Touraine was one of two ministers who came out in open disagreement with the government’s stance on a ban of burkinis. She argued that "to pretend that swimming veiled or bathing on a beach dressed is in itself threatening to public order and the values of the Republic is to forget that those (secular) values are meant to allow each person to safeguard their identity."

Touraine is the daughter of French sociologist Alain Touraine and Chilean academic Adriana Arenas Pizarro (d. 1990). She has a brother, Philippe, who is professor of endocrinology. She is also first cousin of Alberto Arenas, Chile's Budget Director during Michelle Bachelet 's presidency.

Touraine is married to diplomat Michel Reveyrand de Menthon, who is currently French ambassador to Chad. She is a mother of three. When President Hollande published a list of bank deposits and property held by all 38 ministers for first time 2012, Touraine declared personal assets worth 1.4 million euros, mainly property.

In September 2013, Touraine's elder son was sentenced to three years' imprisonment for extortion and sequestration.

The Marseille Commune was an insurrectionary communalist movement declared in solidarity with the Paris Commune uprising of March 18, 1871. It aimed to support the nascent republic against the maneuvers of the "Versaillais" and to enable the city of Marseille to govern its own interests. The movement united republicans, moderates, Blanquists, socialists, and members of the First International of various persuasions.

Officially led by a departmental commission that replaced the prefect, the revolutionary commune appointed lawyer-poet Gaston Crémieux as its leader. However, it quickly faced internal divisions. Unable to fulfill its legal responsibilities, it was overtaken by incompetent and violent Parisian delegates. To prevent it from organizing elections and gaining democratic legitimacy, the Versaillais general Henri Espivent de La Villesboisnet declared it illegal and deployed troops against it. The commune was brutally suppressed between the night of April 4 and April 5, 1871, extinguishing the Paris Commune's last hope of gaining provincial support. While its roots trace back to the first insurrection of November 1, 1870, the Marseille Commune lasted only fourteen days, from March 22 to April 5, 1871.

The origins of the Marseille Commune lie in the final days of the Second Empire. Republican sentiments were strong in the city, with Marseille's mayors, though moderate, being firmly committed to republican ideals. Additionally, from 1865, the most radical Marseille Freemasons developed a robust mutual aid policy through education, uniting a wide range of opponents to Napoleon III.

The " La Réunion des Amis choisis " lodge of the Grand Orient, composed of republicans and Blanquists, established a "Central Initiative Committee of the Lodges" on February 11, 1868, with ten members: lawyer Gaston Crémieux, Barne, Brochier, Carriol, Chappuis, de Pleuc, Dhionnet, Massip, Rouvier, and Adolphe Royannez. Concurrently, the "Phocaean Association for Education, Instruction, and Education of Both Sexes" and the "Central Relief Fund" were founded.

Meanwhile, new press freedoms led to a proliferation of republican newspapers, closely monitored and often prosecuted by the police but highly active, including Le Peuple, edited by Gustave Naquet. In 1869, Léon Gambetta, then a radical, was elected deputy for Bouches-du-Rhône. Crémieux initiated Gambetta into the "La Réforme" lodge, where future commune actors like Rouvier, Naquet, and Esquiros were active.

Following the collapse of the Second Empire in the face of Bismarck 's Prussia, with power vacant, France established a provisional government led by Gambetta. In Marseille, an initial insurrection signaled the fragility and intensity of these new times.

On August 7, 1870, the first popular insurrection, led by Gaston Crémieux, Émile Bouchet, Maurice Rouvier, and Gustave Naquet, stormed the prefecture. That evening, these radicals met on Rue Vacon with socialists, formed an action committee, and the next day seized the town hall, establishing a revolutionary committee led by Crémieux, Paul Giraud, Clovis Hugues, Félix Granet, Cabasse, municipal employee Joseph Tardif, journalists Auguste Sorbier and Armand Elbert, Internationalists Charles Alerini, Étienne-Louis Combes, Victor Bosc, Philibert Gilbert, Frédéric Bordes, Auguste Conteville, and Célestin Matheron, joined by entrepreneur Félix Debray, shoemaker Joseph Maviel, mason Esprit Tourniaire, and employee Eugène Barthélémy.

This initial movement was harshly suppressed by the local administration, loyal to imperial laws. The "rebels" were imprisoned in a dungeon at Fort Saint-Jean. On August 27, a court-martial sentenced the leaders: Pierre Bernard, Tardif, Barthélémy, and Giraud to one month; Tourniaire to three; Crémieux, Combe, Bosc, and Sorbier to six; Bordes to eight; and Conteville, Gilbert, Debray, and Maviel to one year. On September 4, 1870, the day the Republic was proclaimed, they were freed; Gambetta confirmed their release as a large crowd greeted the prisoners. That day, Gambetta appointed Alphonse Esquiros as senior administrator of Bouches-du-Rhône, with Adolphe Carcassonne as president of this first commune; the tricolor flag was raised at the town hall. On September 7, Crémieux welcomed Esquiros at Saint-Charles station and escorted him to the prefecture.

Meanwhile, the creation of the Ligue du Midi (15 departments), led locally by Esquiros, Bastélica, and Crémieux, strengthened the republican pole. However, conflicts emerged within Marseille's municipal council between moderate republicans and Blanquists. These peaked when Esquiros, the senior administrator, lost Gambetta's confidence due to illegal decrees (suspending the legitimist newspaper Gazette du Midi and dissolving Marseille's Jesuit congregation). Unable to openly oppose the provisional government in Tours, Esquiros sent Crémieux to negotiate with Adolphe Crémieux and Gambetta, but the effort failed.

Esquiros resigned, briefly replaced by Louis-Antoine Delpech, who also resigned. Gambetta then appointed Alphonse Gent. Tensions escalated, fueled by rivalry between the bourgeois National Guard and the working-class Civic Guard created by Esquiros.

On October 3, 1870, the "General Commissioner of the Ligue du Midi for the Defense of the Republic" tasked Crémieux with rallying the region, who declared:

We are resolved to make every sacrifice, and, if we stand alone, we will call for revolution, the relentless and inexorable revolution, with all its hatreds, angers, and patriotic furies. We will march from Marseille armed, preaching holy war along the way.

— Sudhir Hazareesingh, From Subject to Citizen: The Second Empire and the Emergence of Modern French Democracy

On October 19, 1870, Crémieux rallied support for the Ligue du Midi and the Revolutionary Commune at a meeting at the Alhambra. As the Civic Guard was disbanded by the provisional government, Gambetta severed ties with the Ligue. The insurrectional departmental commission then called on Marseillais to take up arms.

On October 31, 1870, the town hall was reoccupied, and the commune was proclaimed. The next day, Gustave Cluseret was appointed commander of the National Guard, Clovis Hugues led the Urban Legion, and Esquiros headed the municipal commission. On November 2, Gent was met with gunfire at Saint-Charles station (Crémieux was absent, attending a meeting in Isère). Esquiros's popularity remained strong, but his son's death from typhoid shifted dynamics. Gambetta, sympathetic personally but not politically, allowed Esquiros to be replaced by Gent.

Gent, bolstered by public sympathy after surviving an attack upon arrival, restored government control. By November 13, he telegraphed Tours that order was restored in Marseille.

With peace signed with Germany, the provisional government gave way to legislative elections on February 8, 1871. Esquiros was reelected in Marseille, while Gent resigned, outraged by the armistice terms. The parliament, convening in Bordeaux, was dominated by rural, royalist notables—legitimists and Orléanists

At Bordeaux, Crémieux, from the public gallery, saluted Garibaldi —elected illegally as an Italian citizen and barred from speaking by royalist deputies—with the famous words:

The gallery crowd applauded, to the dismay of another Marseillais, Adolphe Thiers.

On March 18, 1871, the Paris Commune uprising began. On March 22, news reached Marseille of Thiers, now head of government, threatening to disarm Paris. That day, Crémieux led a third insurrection. He galvanized the radical Eldorado club (republican and socialist) and urged the moderate National Guard club to support Paris, denouncing Versailles. Facing lukewarm support, he returned to rally the Eldorado. Ironically, the Versaillais' missteps triggered the commune's true start.

That evening, the new prefect, Rear-Admiral Paul Cosnier, and General Espivent, ordered the National Guard to rally for Versailles. Mayor Jacques-Thomas Bory tried to dissuade them, but their call failed. A National Guard parade on Cours Belsunce turned into a demonstration involving Garibaldians, Marseillais citizens, and remnants of Esquiros's Civic Guard.

The crowd stormed the prefecture without bloodshed. Clovis Hugues, a 20-year-old journalist, marched alongside Crémieux, waving the red flag of the social republic and becoming his right-hand man (later a Boulangist). The Marseille Commune, begun on March 23, lasted until April 5.

With the prefect imprisoned, the mayor resigned, and Espivent in flight, a 12-member departmental commission, including radicals (Job, Étienne), Internationalists (Alérini), National Guard members (Bouchet, Cartoux), and three municipal council delegates, took over. Crémieux, from the departmental hall balcony, declared Marseille's solidarity with Paris, urged order, and proposed freeing Admiral Cosnier, but the crowd refused.

Alarmed, municipal members tried to withdraw from the commune. Crémieux persuaded Bouchet to stay. On March 27, four Parisian delegates—Landeck, Bernard Landeck, born in Poland in 1832, joined the IWA in 1866. After the commune, he fled to London, associating with Karl Marx. Amouroux, Albert May (Séligman), and Méguy—arrived. Landeck took charge, treating moderates as suspects. Crémieux, arrested, released, and threatened, considered resigning. Communal elections were set for April 6. On March 28, Espivent, having withdrawn his troops to Aubagne, illegally declared Bouches-du-Rhône in a state of war, supporting Thiers's government.

As order was restored in other insurgent cities like Lyon, Toulouse, Saint-Étienne, Limoges, and Narbonne, internal strife peaked in Marseille. The commission (Landeck) dissolved the municipal council (Bouchet) and pushed for the red flag as the commune's emblem. Crémieux proposed the black flag as a symbol of mourning, not anarchism, aiming to maintain legal continuity and avoid disorder. However, administrative leaders—telegraph, judiciary, and police—abandoned their posts, leaving the commune with only proclamations.

On April 3, 1871, Espivent marched 6,000–7,000 troops against Marseille. Fighting began the next day. The railway station held, but Versaillais forces reached barricades on Rue Saint-Ferréol, targeting the prefecture where insurgents were entrenched.

Crémieux attempted to negotiate at Castellane's outposts; two battalions of the 6th Chasseurs fraternized with the crowd. Garibaldians defending the station resisted fiercely. Crémieux believed the commune could triumph. After a brief meeting, Espivent feigned retreat. Some soldiers fraternized (many later executed), but shots from a legitimist club in the Christian Brothers' house killed many insurgents.

By noon, Espivent bombarded the city from Notre-Dame-de-la-Garde, earning the nickname "Notre-Dame de la Bombarde." After over 280 shells, the prefecture fell on April 5 at 7 a.m., after ten hours of fierce fighting. Landeck fled to Paris, Bastélica to Spain, Royannez and Clovis Hugues escaped. Caught between marines, chasseurs, and cannon fire from the hill, with the port under two warships, the city and prefecture fell. The insurgents suffered about 150 deaths and over 500 prisoners; Espivent's forces lost 30 dead and 50 wounded. The next day, troops paraded, shouting "Long live Jesus! Long live the Sacred Heart!"

Gaston Crémieux refused to flee and was arrested on April 8, 1871, in the Jewish cemetery. His trial began June 12 before a court-martial with other local leaders, mostly moderates: Bouchet, Ducoin, Breton, Pélissier, Duclos, Novi, Nastorg, Hermet, Genetiaux, Chachuat, Éberard, and Matheron. Many were acquitted, but the prosecution sought an example. On June 28, Crémieux, recognized as a political prisoner, was the only one sentenced to death. Clovis Hugues was captured four months later. The Court of Cassation upheld the verdicts on September 15.

Adolphe Thiers, now president, advocated for clemency for Étienne and Pélissier. He delayed Crémieux's file for four days, but the pardon commission, pressured by Espivent, upheld the sentence.

Crémieux was executed at the Pharo on November 30, 1871; Clovis Hugues received four years in prison and a 6,000-franc fine. With government authority restored, clubs were closed, the National Guard disarmed and disbanded, and censorship reinstated, ushering in five years of "Moral Order."

Marseille-Fos Port (French : Grand port maritime de Marseille, lit. ' Great Seaport of Marseille ' ; Occitan : Grand Port de Marselha) is the main trade seaport of France. In 2011, the port had an overall traffic of 88 million tons. It is the tenth- largest cruise port in the world and the third-largest in the Mediterranean.

It has two main sites: in northern Marseille from La Joliette to l'Estaque as well as in Fos-sur-Mer, about 50 km (31 mi) north west of Marseille. The port generates 41,500 jobs has an annual turnover of €169.5 million and a traffic of €4 billion according to an OECD study.

The port is the biggest French port, the third biggest Mediterranean port and the seventh biggest European port, transporting 79 million tons of goods in 2019, making it the 41st port in the world.

Historically the Old Port of Marseille functioned as the city's primary port. In the 1840s, maritime traffic becomes too intense for its capacities and an extension seemed necessary. As second port of France, the issue was too important and the national government took action, passing a law on August 5, 1844, toward the construction of a new basin at la Joliette, to the north of the Old Port, through an ambitious project (13 million francs). The construction of the large mole used concrete block techniques. The Joliette infrastructures began to be used in 1847. The basin was fully completed in 1853.

The Development Council for the metropolitan area of Marseille-Provence has studied the creation of a technopole, or technoport, to redynamise the port activities. It would include the capacity to repair ships over 270 m (885 ft or 295 yd) long, offshore wind turbines and other innovative technologies.

Mary Elizabeth Plummer (18 March 1849 – 13 September 1922) was an American-born pupil of and later the wife of Georges Clemenceau, Prime Minister of France during Third Republic. Plummer was a native of Springfield, Massachusetts. Clemenceau arrived in the United States in 1865 after fleeing France due to involvement in radical political activism during the regime of Napoleon III. He eventually taught at a girls school in Stamford, Connecticut, which Plummer attended. The two wed in 1869 and moved to France a year later. Together they had three children. Plummer and Clemenceau separated in 1876 and divorced in 1891.

Though Clemenceau had many mistresses, when his wife took as her lover a tutor of their children, he had her put in jail for two weeks and sent her back to the United States on a steamer in third class. He divorced her, obtained custody of their children and had her stripped of her French nationality.

Marylise Lebranchu (French pronunciation: [ maʁiliz ləbʁɑ̃ʃy ] ; born 25 April 1947 in Loudéac, Côtes-d'Armor) is a French politician of the Socialist Party who served as Minister of the Reform of the State and of Decentralisation under Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault.

Lebranchu served a Minister Delegate in charge of SMEs, Trade, Crafts, Liberal Professions and Consumer Affairs in the cabinet of Prime Minister Lionel Jospin from 1997 to 2002. In 1999, she lifted the French government's ban on sales of Coke, Sprite and Fanta produced at Coca-Cola Enterprises ' Dunkirk site. From 2000 to 2002, Lebranchu served as Minister of Justice.

Lebranchu then served as a member of the National Assembly of France, representing Finistère's 4th constituency from 1997 to 2012. During that time, she was part of the Socialiste, radical, citoyen et divers gauche parliamentary group. She served on the Committee for Economic Affairs (2002–2007) and the Committee on National Defence and the Armed Force (2007–2012).

In the Socialist Party's 2011 primaries, Lebranchu endorsed Martine Aubry as the party's candidate for the 2012 presidential election.

On 16 May 2012, Lebranchu was named Minister of the Reform of the State and of Decentralization in the first Cabinet of French President Francois Hollande and Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault and Manuel Valls. In this capacity, she drafted a plan in 2014 for measured wage civil service pay rises covering the 2017-2020 period.

Ahead of the Socialist Party's 2017 primaries, Lebranchu publicly endorsed Benoît Hamon as the party's candidate for the presidential election later that year.

Club de l'hôtel de Massiac or the Massiac Club was a political club in Paris in France during the French Revolution. The club was formed on 20 August 1789 and dissolved after the Haitian Revolution in August 1791.

It was situated in the Hotel Massiac in Paris, hence its name. It was a counter-revolutionary club composed of slave owning planters from the French Antilles with the purpose of promoting their interests in the French parliament, particularly in regards to the issue of slavery, and to lobby against the implementation of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen and the abolition of slavery in the colonies, while also working against the abolitionist Society of the Friends of the Blacks. Through pro-slavery parliamentary lobbying, the club delayed the implementation of the rights introduced in Paris for a long time.

Louis-Claude-René de Mordant (1746-1806), who styled himself Marquis of Massiac, owned a private mansion, formerly Hôtel de Pomponne, located Place des Victoires in Paris. He inherited it in 1770 from his great-uncle, Claude-Louis d'Espinchal, the Minister of the Navy.

In 1787, Brissot had founded the Society of the Friends of the Blacks, which wanted to abolish the slave trade in the colonies. From 20 August 1789, a “White Settlers’ Club” began to meet at the Hotel Massiac, the mansion of the Marquis of Massiac, in order to combat the influence of the Society of the Friends of the Blacks.

The Massiac Club of White Settlers initially brought together 70 members, all slave owners in Saint-Domingue or the Lesser Antilles, and had more than 400 members during the 1791 debate in the Assembly on the colonies.

Since 15 July 1789, a first assembly of "settlers residing in Paris" met at the initiative of Louis-Marthe de Gouy d'Arsy in order to obtain the representation of the colonies in the Assembly and the creation in the colonies of colonial assemblies exercising local political control. The club created correspondence companies in ports. This was to prevent the Assembly from taking measures hindering the interests of the settlers. The Massiac club was dominated by personalities, like Gouy d'Arsy, from the nobility and holders of immense fortunes in Saint-Domingue, as well as by the Martinican Creole Médéric Louis Élie Moreau de Saint-Méry, theoretician of the club.

The group relied in the Assembly on Malouet, Barnave, as well as on Alexandre de Lameth.

In his Monday session of 8 March 1790, Sieur Barnave, rapporteur of the Colonial Committee, read a report on the work of this committee, then submitted to the Assembly a draft decree whose preamble declared that:

"Considering the colonies as a part of the French empire and desiring them to enjoy the happy regeneration which has taken place there, she however never intended to include them in the Constitution which she decreed for the kingdom, and to subject them to laws which could be incompatible with their local conveniences or particulars”.

Six articles followed which indicated the means for each colony to equip itself with the administration which 'best suited' its prosperity and that of its inhabitants by conforming to the principles which bound the colonies to the metropolis by "ensuring the conservation of their respective interests". The Massiac Club campaigned against the equality rights of free men of colour as well as against the most active defenders of equality rights. As such, the club accused Abbé Grégoire of acting under the improper influence of his brother who was married to a woman of colour.

Based on the demographic weight of Saint-Domingue, including slaves, the delegation claimed to obtain twenty seats in the Estates General. The representation of Saint-Domingue was finally reduced to six, but the question of the status of men was raised, opening a breach in the system of slavery.

After the slave revolt of 1791 (Haitian Revolution), many planters fled the island and formed French refugee communities of Saint-Domingue in America, especially in the southern parts of the United States, where the center of gravity of the settler lobby moved.

Louis Marthe de Gouy d'Arsy was guillotined, but other orators and elected officials from Saint-Domingue settled in Philadelphia, the US capital of the time, such as Denis Nicolas Cottineau de Kerloguen.

A matelote (French: [ matlɔt ]) is the name given in French cooking to a fish stew made with white or red wine. It is normally made with freshwater fish, and may contain a mixture of different fish or a single species. It is traditionally garnished with small onions and mushrooms that have been cooked with the fish.

Matelote is the feminine form of matelot, 'sailor'. The Dictionnaire de l'Académie française dates the word from the 16th century and defines it as "A dish consisting of one or more kinds of freshwater fish, stewed with wine and herbs". The term is recorded in English use from the 18th century onward. Matelotes are also called meurettes, pochouses, pauchouses, potchouzes, or waterzoï according to district and method of preparation.

According to Prosper Montagné in Larousse Gastronomique, the only matelote made from sea fish is the matelote à la normande, which is made with sole, conger eel and gurnet. Montagné adds, "The term matelote is also loosely and improperly applied to dishes made of veal and poultry. We confine ourselves merely to mentioning this misnomer. We cannot recommend that it should be used in the drawing-up of menus".

Most matelotes are garnished with small onions and mushrooms cooked with the fish, and often with freshwater crayfish cooked in a court-bouillon. Croutons or other variants of fried bread are generally served with the dish.

Despite the disapproval of Larousse, calves' brains may be served en matelote, poached in stock with sliced onions, carrots and red wine, served sliced, garnished with the glazed onions, mushrooms and heart-shaped croutons typical of matelotes. In the mid-18th-century the English cook Hannah Glasse published a recipe for what she called "A Pig Matelot", which included crayfish, eels, white wine and herbs, but also most of a whole pig, chopped into pieces. In 1909 Auricoste de Lazarque published a recipe for Matelote sans poisson, for those who have been let down by their fishmonger. It uses most of the usual ingredients but replaces the missing fish with slices of firmly cooked omelette.

In cooking, a matignon is a mirepoix in which the ingredients are minced rather than diced, and more flavorings added. Matignon, unlike mirepoix, is not a part of the food preparation itself, but is always served at the table.

Matignon is a combination of evenly diced vegetables, usually onion (and/or leek), celery, and carrot, with thyme and bay leaf, sautéed in butter over a low flame until softened and translucent ("melted" but not browned), seasoned to taste with a pinch of salt (and a pinch of sugar, if needed), and finished with a dash of white wine or Madeira. The vegetarian version is referred to as maigre ("lean"). When ham or bacon is added, it is called gras ("fat," i.e., containing meat). Frequently the vegetables serve as a bed on which to cook meat, poultry, and fish dishes, or as a stuffing, but sometimes the matignon is served as a separate side dish in its own right.

Matthias Fekl (French pronunciation: [ matja(s) fɛkl ] ; born 4 October 1977) is a French politician of the Socialist Party who served as Minister of the Interior in the government of Prime Minister Bernard Cazeneuve in 2017.

Fekl was first elected to the National Assembly in the second constituency of Lot-et-Garonne in 2012, retaining his seat until 2014, when he became Secretary of State for Foreign Trade, Tourism and French citizens abroad. In 2017, he briefly returned to Parliament for the remainder of his term. Since 2019, he has been serving as president of the Association of French Breweries.

Fekl was born on 4 October 1977 in Frankfurt, West Germany. His father is a German university professor and his mother is a French teacher. He grew up in West Berlin before moving to Paris, where he graduated from the Lycée Henri-IV. He later studied at various universities (Sciences Po, École normale supérieure de Lyon, École nationale d'administration).

From 2010 to 2011, Fekl served as chief of staff to Jean-Pierre Bel, then president of the Socialist group in the Senate. When Bel became President of the Senate, Fekl served as his special adviser. Fekl was elected member of the National Assembly in the 2012 legislative election. During his time in Parliament, he was a member of the Committee on Legal Affairs. In 2012, Interior Minister Manuel Valls mandated Fekl with a report on immigration which was later submitted to Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault.

On 11 February 2014, Fekl was among the guests invited to the state dinner hosted by U.S. President Barack Obama in honor of President François Hollande at the White House.

In 2014, Fekl was appointed to be Secretary of State for Foreign Trade at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Development under the leadership of minister successive ministers Laurent Fabius and Jean-Marc Ayrault, succeeding Thomas Thévenoud. During his time in office, France opened a trade office in Tehran in September 2015, leading the charge of European countries angling for a share of the Iranian market after the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.

In October 2016, Fekl launched his own political movement, the Movement for the Life of Ideas and Alternatives (Mouvement pour la vie des idées et des alternatives, Movida). He also briefly belonged to the campaign team of Benoît Hamon for the 2017 presidential election.

Fekl was appointed as Minister of the Interior on 21 March 2017, succeeding Bruno Le Roux, who was forced to resign after it was revealed that he had employed his two daughters, at the age of 15, as parliamentary assistants. In response to the March 2017 social unrest in French Guiana, Fekl and fellow cabinet member Ericka Bareigts were dispatched to the overseas French department by Prime Minister Cazeneuve. He ran for reelection to the National Assembly in the 2017 legislative election but was defeated by Alexandre Freschi, who stood for La République En Marche! (REM).

Ahead of the Socialist Party's 2018 convention in Aubervilliers, Fekl publicly endorsed Olivier Faure as candidate for the party's leadership.

Maurice Bokanowski (31 August 1879 – 2 September 1928) was a French lawyer and left-wing Republican politician who served briefly as Minister of the Navy in 1924, and was Minister of Commerce and Industry in 1926–28. He rationalized tariffs and began a reorganization of aviation in France.

Maurice Bokanowski was born Moïse Bokanowski in Le Havre, Seine-Maritime on 31 August 1879. He was the sixth child of seven. His parents were Léon Bokanowski (born 1847), an ice vendor, and Julie Rasskowska (born 1848). They had married in Paris on 21 April 1868. Both his parents were Polish in origin. They wanted to move to America, and had gone to Le Havre to try to find a passage. They could not afford the cost, and soon moved to Toulon, where Moïse's father founded a novelty shop. Léon Bokanowski died in 1891 when Moïse was twelve years old. Bokanowski undertook his military service in Toulon in 1899.

Bokanowski attended the Ecole de commerce in Marseille. He then went to Paris, where he studied Law and at the same time took a course in Chinese at the National School of Modern Oriental Languages. He also studied at the free school of Political Sciences. Moïse adopted the first name "Maurice" around 1903, since a Jewish name would interfere with his planned political career. On 20 July 1903, he was initiated into the Freemason lodge L'Action of the Grand Orient de France. He remained a Freemason throughout the war, but resigned in June 1919.

Bokanowski became an advocate in the Paris court of appeal in 1904. He submitted his thesis at the Faculty of Law of the University of Paris on 19 March 1908, on the subject of Commissions internationales d'enquête. In his thesis he argued for a Societé des Nations whose laws would govern states and ensure universal peace in the same way that individuals submit to the laws of their country. Bokanowski was a member of the General Association of Parisian Students, and a committee member of the Association of former pupils of H.E.C. He married Marguerite Wolff (born 23 April 1886 in Paris) on 14 April 1908. They had three sons, Jean-François, Olivier, and Michel, and one daughter, Anne.

Bokanowski competed in the legislative elections of 24 April and 8 May 1910 as a radical socialist in the third district of Saint-Denis. He lost, but ran successfully in the legislative elections of 26 April and 10 May 1914 for the fourth district of Saint-Denis after campaigning for three years military service. In the Chamber of Deputies he joined the Radical Socialist group. He was appointed to the committee of commerce and industry, and to the committee of insurance and social welfare. In the pre-war years he was also a secretary of the Republican league for electoral reform and a member of the executive council of the Peace Through Law Association.

Germany declared war on France on 3 August 1914 at the start of World War I (1914–18). As a deputy, Bokanowski was exempt from military service, but joined the army and in October 1914 was a second lieutenant of infantry on the Argonne front. He was assigned to the staff of the 42nd Division. In 1916 he was appointed to the General Staff of the Eastern Army under the command of General Maurice Sarrail, and was decorated with the Legion of Honour. After the sinking of the SS Provence on which he was travelling to his post by a torpedo, he was cited for the order of the army and the navy. In 1917 he was on the staff of the army corps of General Auguste Hirschauer, and participated in the Champagne offensive. He then returned to the Chamber of Deputies.

Bokanowski was appointed to the committees of the army and the budget. He was very active, focusing on economic activities, particularly on laws related to checks and patents, and also on questions of national defense. After the debate about the Bolo Pasha and "Bonnet rouge" affairs, the Chamber of Deputies adopted his resolution of confidence in the government of Paul Painlevé to deliver the full rigors of the law against anyone guilty of passing intelligence to the enemy or engaging in propaganda that would weaken the resistance of the nation. He also questioned "the action the Government intends to take to thwart the diplomatic maneuvers of Germany" and "the use of the economic weapon in the fight against Germany."

On 16 November 1919 Bokanowski was reelected in the Seine on the platform of the Union républicaine et sociale. He was appointed to the committees of finance and commerce and of industry. He distinguished himself as assistant Rapporteur-General and then as Rapporteur-General. He supported solid fiscal management and a balanced budget that did not depend on German reparations. He was in favor of raising indirect taxes, but also wanted to expand the base of direct taxation and improve its administration.

In 1921 Bokanowski was one of the founding members and a member of the directing committee of the National Association of Advocates. He was a member of the legal council of the Syndicat of Journalists and Writers. He founded a think tank the Union pour le franc. He became President of the Société des artistes décorateurs (1923).

On 29 March 1924 Raymond Poincaré made Bokanowski Minister of the Navy, a post he held until the cabinet resigned on 1 June 1924 after the elections. Bokanowski was reelected in the general elections of 11 May 1924 as a radical Republican. He joined the Left Democratic Republicans in the chamber, and resumed his positions on the committees of finance and commerce and of industry. He questioned the government several times on its financial policy. He was concerned both to balance the budget and to improve social conditions, particularly those of women and the family, During the financial crisis in 1925 he toured the country preaching confidence in the franc.

The crisis was resolved when Raymond Poincaré returned to power in 1926. He gave Bokanowski the portfolio of Trade and Industry, and responsibility for Posts and Telegraphs and for Aviation. Bokanowski promoted a policy of balanced trade based on price monitoring and assistance to producers. He prepared a new tariff system to replace the unstable system of agreements and interim tariffs, and concluded the first post-war trade agreement with Germany. He clarified the broadcasting regulations, and proposed a much-needed reorganization of aviation in France. Bokanowski was reelected for the Republican left in the general elections of 22 April 1928 for the fifth district of Saint-Denis, and retained his ministerial position.

Maurice Bokanowski was killed on 2 September 1928 in an air accident when flying from Toul to an aviation meeting in Clermont-Ferrand. His son, Michel Maurice-Bokanowski (1912–2005), was also a leading French politician. His son was authorized to take the name "Maurice-Bokanowski" by a decree of 30 August 1928.

Maurice Bokanowski's wartime journals describe his experiences as a soldier during World War One, and as a politician and statesman.

Maurice Bokanowski was also the author of the following works:

Maurice Faure (2 January 1922 – 6 March 2014) was a member of the French Resistance and a minister in several French governments. He was born in Azerat, Dordogne.

He was a deputy in the French parliament from 1951 to 1983 and a Senator from 1983 to 1988, representing Lot and served 25 years as Mayor of Cahors. Faure was appointed to the Constitutional Council of France by President François Mitterrand.

As secretary to the French foreign minister, he co-signed the Treaty of Rome for France in 1957, thus helping to create the European Union.

In 1957, Faure was awarded the Grand Decoration of Honour in Gold with Sash for Services to the Republic of Austria.

Faure died in March 2014 at the age of 92 in Cahors, Lot. He was the last surviving signatory of the Treaty of Rome at the time of his death. He was a Protestant in his youth.

Maurice André Raymond Herzog (French pronunciation: [ mɔʁis ɑ̃dʁe ʁemɔ̃ ɛʁzɔɡ ] ; 15 January 1919 – 13 December 2012) was a French mountaineer and administrator who was born in Lyon, France. He led the 1950 French Annapurna expedition that first climbed a peak over 8000m, Annapurna, in 1950, and reached the summit with Louis Lachenal. Upon his return, he wrote a best-selling book about the expedition, Annapurna.

On 3 June 1950, Herzog and Louis Lachenal became the first climbers in history to climb a peak over 8000m when, on the 1950 French Annapurna expedition, they summited the Himalayan mountain Annapurna I, the 10th-highest mountain in the world. The ascent was all the more remarkable because the peak was explored, reconnoitered and climbed all within one season; and was climbed without the use of supplemental oxygen. It is also the only 8000 meter summit that was reached at the first attempt. Herzog was awarded the 1950 Gold Medal of the Société de Géographie.

The event caused a huge sensation that was only matched when Everest was summited in 1953 by Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay.

The two-week retreat from the peak proved very challenging. Both climbers had opted for light boots for the summit dash. This, combined with Herzog losing his gloves near the summit and a night spent bivouacked in a crevasse on the descent with one sleeping bag for four climbers (Lachenal, Gaston Rébuffat, Lionel Terray, and Herzog) resulted in severe frostbite, with consequent gangrene requiring the expedition doctor to perform emergency amputations in the field. Both summit climbers lost all of their toes and Herzog most of his fingers.

Annapurna I was not climbed again until 1970, when the French north face route was climbed by a British Army expedition led by Colonel Henry Day, simultaneously with an ascent of the south face by an expedition led by British climber Chris Bonington. The mountain's fourth ascent was not until 1977.

Herzog's account of the expedition was published in French in 1951. It was then translated to English by Nea Morin and Janet Adam Smith in 1952. The book was dictated by Herzog in an American Hospital in Neuilly, France.

The book has sold over 11 million copies as of 2000, more than any other mountaineering title. It is considered to be one of the most successful mountaineering books of all time and was ranked 77th in Sports Illustrated list of the top 100 sports books ever written. In the United States it was published as a Book-of-the-Month Club selection which increased its circulation and popularity.

Some aspects of Herzog's account of the summit day have been called into question with the publication of other members’ accounts of the expedition, most significantly by a biography of Gaston Rébuffat and the posthumous publication, in 1996, of Lachenal's contemporaneous journals. In his book, Herzog says that Lachenal was a mere ghost that had to be persuaded to reach the summit, a telling that Lachenal refutes. Lachenal's diary from the expedition that conflicted on many details with Herzog's accounts. However, a posthumous release of his diary created more controversy and outcry, particularly from Lachenal's family, with Herzog as editor of the book, removing any criticisms of himself. Lachenal told another climber, Jean-Pierre Payot, that he was furious with Herzog and fed up with the way he used the Annapurna legend to further his career.

The 2000 book True Summit: What Really Happened on the Legendary Ascent of Annapurna by David Roberts gives one view of the controversy.

Maurice was born in 1919 in Lyon, France, and was the eldest of eight children. His passion from the mountains was spurred from spending time at a chalet at the foot of the Bossons glacier that his family owned. His father, Robert Herzog, was also an avid alpinist. He studied at HEC Paris where be received his baccalaureate and did a postgraduate course in business studies which he completed in 1944. He fought in the second world war in the French Alps with the Armée Secrète and Francs-Tireurs et Partisans. After the war, Herzog worked for Kléber-Colombes, a tyre manufacturing company.

Herzog married Marie-Pierre de Cossé-Brissac in 1964. They had two children, Laurent and Felicité, and divorced in 1976. He remarried to Elisabeth Gamper in 1976 and had two more children, Sébastien and Mathias.

Eight years after his summit of Annapurna, Herzog became French minister for youth and sport and was tasked by Charles de Gaulle with re-invigorating French sport and inspiring a new generation. In 1968 he was elected mayor of Chamonix. Herzog became a member of the International Olympic Committee for 25 years starting in 1970. In 1995 he was made an honorary member He was International Olympic Committee Chief of Protocol from 1975 to 1978 and was a member of several commissions.

In 2011, he was awarded the Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor, France’s highest civilian honor.

Herzog died in 2012, aged 93. In a tribute, President François Hollande of France said Mr. Herzog’s climb was “engraved enduringly in our collective memory.”

Maurice Lemaire (French pronunciation: [ mɔʁis ləmɛʁ ]) was a French Gaullist politician, born on 25 May 1895 at Gerbépal in the Vosges region: he died in Paris on 29 January 1979.

Lemaire’s background was as a railway engineer. He was the Director General of the SNCF following the liberation of France from German occupation. He was bald from an early age, and thereby acquired the nickname "Saint-Pierre-du-Gros-Caillou".

He represented the Vosges department in the National Assembly between 1951 and 1978. He occupied various senior regional political posts between 1947 and 1977, throughout which period Lemaire also served as the mayor of Colroy-la-Grande. He was also Representative of France in the European Parliament from 1951 to 1955.

Nationally he achieved ministerial office under three of the Fourth Republic prime ministers as follows:

During his political career, Maurice Lemaire promoted the modernization of the tunnel which carries his name.

Maurice Long (15 March 1866 – 15 January 1923) was a French politician. A député for Drôme, he was briefly a Minister of Supply under the government of Paul Painlevé in 1917 and the Governor-General of French Indochina from 10 December 1919 until his death.

Maurice Long was born on 15 March 1866 in Crest, Drôme. From 8 May 1910 until his death, he represented his home department in the Chamber of Deputies as a member of the Radical-Socialist Party. During World War I, Long was the Minister of Supply for the cabinet of Paul Painlevé from 12 September to 17 November 1917. On 10 December 1919, Long was appointed Governor-General of French Indochina, a position he held until his death.

At the age of 57, Maurice Long died in Colombo, Ceylon on 15 January 1923 while returning to Indochina after a stay in France.

The Musée Maurice Long, a former commercial and industrial museum in Hanoi, was named after the late Governor-General. On 1 May 1938, at the museum, "a meeting of many thousands of Hanoi workers demanded 'freedom, democracy, the right to organise trade unions, the improvement of the quality of life', a key event in the build-up to the First Indochina War against the French."

Maurice Thorez (French: [ mɔʁis tɔʁɛz, moʁ- ] ; 28 April 1900 – 11 July 1964) was a French politician and longtime leader of the French Communist Party (PCF) from 1930 until his death. He also served as Deputy Prime Minister of France from 1946 to 1947.

Thorez, born in Noyelles-Godault, Pas-de-Calais, became a coal miner at the age of 12. He joined the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO) in 1919 and was imprisoned several times for his political activism. After the 1920 split in the SFIO led to the formation of the French Communist Party (PCF) in December 1920, Thorez became party secretary in 1923 and, in 1930, general secretary of the party, a position he held until his death. After he took office as secretary general, he was supported by Soviet leader Joseph Stalin and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Throughout his tenure, Thorez was a Stalinist.

In 1932 Thorez became the companion of Jeannette Vermeersch ; they had three sons before marrying in 1947, and remained married until his death.

Thorez was elected to the Chamber of Deputies in 1932 and reelected in 1936. In 1934, following a Comintern directive, he helped form the Popular Front, an alliance between Communists, Socialists, and radical Socialists. The Front, because of strong popular support as France was reeling from the impact of the Great Depression, won the 1936 election. With the support of the Communists under Thorez, the socialist Léon Blum became Prime Minister of a Popular Front government and managed to enact much of the Front's social-legislation programme. Meanwhile, Thorez presided over massive growth of the Communist Party, beginning with the elections of 1936.

Following the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact of 1939 and the subsequent Soviet response to German invasion of Poland, the Communist Party was against the French war effort against the Soviet Union, because the Daladier government planned to send troops to fight against it. The party was outlawed by the French government on September 26th. The Party supported the Soviet Union 's tactical treaty with Germany to direct German aggression away from the USSR and toward the United Kingdom and France. Because they were impeding the fight against the Nazis, the Party's publications were banned, and many Party members were interned. Thorez himself had his passport revoked. Shortly thereafter, he was drafted. On September 3, 1939, Thorez enthusiastically joined his regiment, the 3e RG (3rd Engineer Regiment) [ fr ], in Arras.

Comintern secretary Georgi Dimitrov instructed the French party's leaders to desert after the party was banned. Reluctantly, but dutifully, Thorez deserted on October 4. Thorez arrived in Moscow on November 8, 1939, via Belgium, Stockholm, and Riga. In Moscow, he seems to have been kept on a rather tight leash. In his absence, Thorez was sentenced for desertion on 25 November to six years' imprisonment. On 17 February 1940, he was deprived of his French citizenship.

Following the German invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, the French Communist Party openly declared it would violently resist the German occupation; even before this, the Party organized a demonstration of thousands of students and workers against the occupation on 11 November 1940, and in May 1941 organized a strike of 100,000 miners in the Nord and Pas-de-Calais departments. During this time, articles written by and ghostwritten for Thorez appeared frequently in the party's underground newspaper, Humanité Clandestine. Each of these letters was signed 'Maurice Thorez, somewhere in France'. It was not until several years after the war that the party admitted that this was false, and that Thorez had been in Moscow for the entire war. In his absence, the affairs of the PCF and of the Francs-Tireurs et Partisans, the party's resistance movement, in France were organised by his second in command, Jacques Duclos.

When the Allied Armies liberated France in 1944, Thorez received a pardon from Charles de Gaulle. After the Liberation, Thorez was ordered by Stalin to lead the PCF immediately after the Second World War to a non-revolutionary road to power. The instructions were not to seize power as had been done elsewhere, but to have the reluctant wartime Communist partisans surrender their weapons, and the party would become a powerful force in the post-war governments, since it thought that it would soon win legally.

In November 1944, Thorez returned to France from his exile in the Soviet Union, and in 1945, his citizenship was restored. The PCF emerged from the Second World War as the largest political party in France based on its role in the anti-Nazi resistance movement during the occupation of France, at least after 1941. Thorez was again elected to the Chamber of Deputies and reelected throughout the Fourth Republic (1946–1958).

Forming a popular front with the Socialist Party in the 1945 elections, Thorez became vice premier of France from 1946 to 1947.

Thorez supported the Democratic Republic of Vietnam in the First Indochina War, but did not fully support the DRV because Thorez and other PCF members wanted to keep their positions as ministers.

By 1947 a combination of the emerging Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union and growing social conflicts in France, linked to the increasing gap between wages and prices, put the three party union (SFIO, PCF and MRP) under heavy pressure, culminating in the May 1947 crisis. Prime Minister Paul Ramadier received threats from the United States that the presence of Communist ministers in the government would have consequences, such as the blocking of U.S. aid from the coming Marshall Plan, or worse: "I told Ramadier," Jefferson Caffery, then US ambassador to France, wrote in his diary, "no Communists in gov. or else."

Simultaneously, the 1947 strikes in France caused rumours to spread among the non-Communist members of the government that the PCF would attempt a coup d'état on 1 May: Jules Moch, SFIO Public Works Minister, claimed to have "certain information" on preparations of a coup by the PCF. Ramadier is alleged to have worked secretly with Georges Revers, the Army Chief of Staff, to set up a secret transport and communications network within the military to safeguard against such a coup, all without the knowledge of François Billoux, the Communist Minister of Defence. The crisis was also escalated by the beginnings of the colonial war in Vietnam, with the communist deputies in the National Assembly voting against the war.

Combined, that led Ramadier to look for a pretext to dismiss Thorez and his colleagues from the ruling coalition. On 4 May, the PCF ministers voted against the government over deflationary policies such as wage and price controls, which was given as the reason for the PCF ministers being forced out of the ruling coalition on 7 May 1947. Thorez later recalled the May 1947 events:

All my colleagues were full of praises and kindnesses for us – they were prodigal with their declarations of appeasement. Ramadier told us: 'I have no reproaches to make of you. You have always been loyal.' And Teitgen came forward to say 'We shall miss you a lot!' They all threw flowers on us, the better to bury us. I knew that Ramadier was cooking up something bad, but never did I think he'd go this far…

In 1950, at the height of his popularity among party members, Thorez suffered a stroke and remained in the Soviet Union for medical care until 1953. That March, Stalin died, and Thorez was a member of the French delegation to Stalin's funeral. During the absence of Thorez, the party was de facto controlled by Jacques Duclos. Thorez resumed his duties upon returning to France. Although his health had deteriorated, Thorez remained party leader until shortly before he died in 1964 on a Black Sea cruise.

He published in 1937 an autobiography, Fils du peuple (Son of the People, 1938). The book had been written with the help of Jean Fréville, who had inserted in the story a passage where the initials of the words formed the phrase "Fréville a écrit ce livre" ("Fréville wrote this book"). The passage, present on pages 36–37 of the first edition, was deleted in the following editions.

In 1945, he published Une politique de grandeur française (1945; "Politics of French Greatness").

A French research institution linked to the French Communist Party and set up in the mid-1960s was named the Institut Maurice Thorez. The city of Chystiakove in Ukraine was named Thorez between 1964 and 2016. The Moscow State Linguistic University was named the Maurice Thorez Moscow Institute of Foreign Languages (Russian : Московский институт иностранных языков имени Мориса Тореза) between 1964 and 1990.

Maurice-Mollard Plaza, named after a former mayor of the town, is a public square in the historical center of Aix-les-Bains, in western Savoy. Rich in history, the square has undergone many changes over the centuries. It is home to a number of architectural monuments, some of which are listed as historical monuments : the Arch of Campanus and the Temple of Diana date back to Roman times ; the 18th-century National Thermal Baths were partially built on the foundations of former Roman thermal baths; and the Town Hall which was originally a feudal castle. The latter is also home to an archaeological museum housing the Roman remains of Aquae, the ancient name of Aix-les-Bains.

The square provides access to a number of public services, including the registry office and the municipal council, as well as the tourist office housed in the national thermal baths. Numerous events are organized in the square, such as the "corrida des lumières" (light bullfight), and the departure point of the town's tourist train circuit.

The square is located in the historic center of the renowned spa town Aix-les-Bains (classified as a French Town of Art and History on 3 February 2014). It is about 450 m (1,480 ft) east of the Aix-les-Bains-Le Revard train station, and a few steps from the convention center, Notre-Dame church, and a public park.

It is extended to the north by Les Thermes Plaza and to the south by the adjacent Parc Floral des Thermes.

The square is accessible via the D913 departmental road. The connexion between Rue Davat (to the north) and Lord Revelstoke Avenue (to the south) forms the main road leading to the square.

Pedestrian routes from the town center also lead to the square, via Carnot Plaza, to the north-west and the square of Temple de Diane, to the south-west.

The square has had several successive names. It was first called Petite Place or Place de Campanus, and Place du Marché in the 19th century. It even became known as Place de l'Hôtel de Ville when the Marquis d'Aix's château was converted into the town hall. Under the Vichy regime, the square was named Place du Maréchal Pétain.

On March 20, 1950, the municipal council decided to name the square in memory of Maurice Mollard, mayor of Aix-les-Bains from 1932 to 1937, and later a town councillor, who died in 1947. Maurice Mollard, engineer, was responsible for two major infrastructures in the Aix-les-Bains region, the Chat tunnel and the Mont Revard road.

While many of the square's monumental features have long been known, it was only during the excavation carried out in 1988 and 1989 for the construction of the Hôtel de Ville underground parking lot, that archaeological remains or traces of human occupation were discovered, enabling us to reconstruct the possible chronology of the site, testifying to the long history of Aix-les-Bains.

Occupation levels dating from the late La Tène culture to the early Middle Ages have been identified. In the course of their excavations, archaeologists uncovered a major thermal complex in the immediate vicinity of the square's thermal springs during Ancient history. The town's square is also home to the Arch of Campanus, probably built in the 1st century, but long integrated into a modest agricultural building. It was excavated in 1822.

Little is known about the site during this period. However, during the High Middle Ages, it is assumed that the temple was reused as a place of Christian worship, along with a necropolis built around it.

Up until the Age of Enlightenment, this square was home to a communal cemetery, the entrance to the Château d'Aix-les-Bains (now the Mairie d'Aix-les-Bains), and various other buildings. The château was surrounded by an enclosure, within which the temple of Diana was preserved for cultural performances.

The town square, located just a few hundred meters from the parish church (today's Eglise Notre-Dame), was thus occupied by numerous buildings and public places, but a small, restricted area, known as the Petite Place, was set aside around the church.

In 1867, after numerous alterations to the site, the buildings between the château and the church were expropriated. The aim was to widen another adjacent square, the Place des Bains, currently known as the Les Thermes Plaza. One particular decision was taken at the end of the 19th century: a project to demolish the old church and some of the surrounding buildings was proposed as a method of redesigning the square, but was subsequently abandoned, giving rise to the idea of holding a competition for the urban redevelopment of the square as a form of consultation.

It was during this period that the square was named Place de l'Hôtel de Ville. Rules were then laid down for the competition: sites were to be set aside for a monumental fountain and a statue of the poet Alphonse de Lamartine.

Eight projects were selected by the town council, but in the end, it turned out to be an unplanned, unorganized development that gradually took shape, accompanied by various demolitions and modifications to the square.

The Municipality of Aix-les-Bains carried out numerous works to embellish the square during this contemporary period. To cater to the large influx of tourists and spa-goers, the town also expanded its accommodation capacity by creating a number of luxury hotels, including a palace called Astoria, on the edge of the square in 1904.

At the beginning of the 20th century, Aix-en-Provence's municipal authorities created a number of new facilities. Firstly, in 1902, trees were planted to delineate two alleys. Space was also created for six kiosks, and a former St. Joseph religious school was demolished. By this time, a flower market had been held on the square for several years. In 1911 and 1922, kiosks were built for florists, followed by a flower pergola which was dismantled in 1933.

After World War I, a new beautification project for the square was submitted to the town council by Victor Luya, a town's engineer. He proposed a new pavement, floral arrangements, and a new traffic plan. A final phase of work was carried out in 1927.

Then, between the interwar period, in 1934, a new project was undertaken on the square. Francis Crochon, the town's architect, decided to revisit the previous work by completely redesigning the monument and road infrastructures.

On June 1, 1940, German aircraft bombed the town and surrounding area, including the square. Among other things, the war caused numerous health problems, particularly in the town center due to the massive concentration of prisoners. Diseases could proliferate more rapidly. The resort of Aix suffered badly during this period, particularly in the vicinity of its national thermal baths. In 1945, there were as many as 6,219 prisoners in the heart of the town.

The post-World War II boom in transport (Trente Glorieuses) brought further changes to the area. Traffic modifications, aimed at smoothing and redesigning existing roads, were carried out in 1955.

Further embellishments and modifications followed, including the total destruction of the remains of St. Joseph's School.

All the square's trees were cut down to create the underground parking lot for the town hall, just before a fountain was installed in the center of the square in 1989, which is now used entirely as a floral monument.

There are no shops on the square, only various municipal services and tourist attractions.

Aix-les-Bains town hall is located directly on the square. It houses all the main municipal services. It also houses a museum in the north-western part of the building, on the same site as the Temple of Diana. The theme of the museum, whose collections are mainly composed of archaeological objects, is to describe the ancient history of Aquae (A. Allobrogum). Sightseeing tours are organized in summer.

In addition, the trackless train, designed for guided tours of the town during the summer season, parks on the square in front of the fountain, where the tour begins and ends. In the afternoon, the train visits the shores of Lac du Bourget.

The tourist office, which has been awarded the Qualité Tourisme label, is located at the entrance to the Aix-les-Bains national thermal baths. It is accessible from the departmental road 913, which separates the square from the spa building. There is also a beauty school in this listed building.

Maurice-Mollard Plaza features a monumental, flower-filled fountain at its center, raised on porphyry paving stones. The northern part of the square is embellished with tree-lined avenues, bordering Les Thermes Plaza and the Square du Temple de Diane d'Aix-les-Bains.

A grassy area planted with trees and flowers occupies the southern part of the square, in the middle of which stands a staircase giving access to Lord-Revelstoke Avenue (D913). Here, you'll find the Hôtel de Ville square, located above the entrance to the underground parking lot. Several historic monuments are located on and near the square:

Mauritanians in France consist of migrants from Mauritania and their descendants living and working in France. They are one of the diasporas from Sub-Saharan Africa in France.

The wave of Mauritanians immigrants began in the 1960s. At that time, France requested immigrants from West Africa (Mauritania, Senegal, Mali, Guinea). A lot of male workers came to France, followed by their wives and children. A few thousands of Mauritanians came in France to work in the automotive industry. However, this wave of immigrants stopped in the 1980s, because of the hardening of immigration policy in France.

Most of the Mauritanians are Soninké people from the Senegal River Valley, at the extreme south of Mauritania. There is also a significant number of Mauritanians who are born in France.

Maurrassisme is a political doctrine originated by Charles Maurras (1868–1952), most closely associated with the Action française movement. Maurrassisme advocates absolute integral nationalism, monarchism, corporatism, national syndicalism, and opposition to democracy, liberalism, capitalism, and communism.

Maurrassisme had as its ambition to be a counter-revolutionary doctrine, affirming the cohesion of France and its greatness. It began from a slogan "Politics first", from a postulate, patriotism, which the French Revolution had erased in preference to nationalism, and a state: for Maurras, the French society of the late 19th century was undermined by decadence and corruption. According to him, these ills arose from the Revolution and caused their paroxysm in the Dreyfus affair. Maurras' philosophical influences ranged from Plato and Aristotle to Joseph de Maistre, passing through Dante, Thomas Aquinas and Auguste Comte. His historical influences ranged from Sainte-Beuve to Fustel de Coulanges passing through Hippolyte Taine and Ernest Renan.

At fault, for Maurras, was the revolutionary and romanic spirit, borne by the liberal forces which he called the four confederated states (États confédérés), defined by him in 1949 in Pour un jeune Français : the Jews, the Protestants, the freemasons and foreigners whom Maurras called " metics " (métèques). These represented the "anti-France"; they could not in any way be admitted as part of the French nation.

Maurrassisme seems to have been born from a desire for order in the young Charles Maurras, attributed by some to his deafness.

More precisely with regard to politics, Maurrasisme rested on the following policies to ensure national cohesion:

In the line of positivism, Maurras considered that societal organisation and institution ought to be the fruit of the selection imposed by the centuries, "organising empiricism" being considered more effective than idealized theories, because of its being adapted to each national situation. Monarchy played a part in these institutions, which were necessary notably to restrain Frankish-French rivalries.

The confidence in institutions forged by time led Maurras to distinguish the "Real Country" (pays réel), rooted in the realities of life — locality, work, trades, the parish and the family — from the "Legal Country" (pays légal) which he cast as artificially imposed on the "Real". These thoughts revisited organicist themes of Catholic political tradition.

Maurras' institutional instinct also owed much to his initial federalism and his affiliation to the Félibrige movement of Mistral. He saw in monarchy the key to the vault of decentralisation. He considered that the people's direct attachment to the sovereign's authority and the moral cement of the Catholic Church were unifying forces which would be enough to ensure national unity in a largely decentralized political system. The republic, by contrast, could only achieve these aims by being constrained by the iron belt of Napoleonic centralized administration. His vision was authority on high, with freedom beneath.

It may be noted that it was through pragmatism and obsession with civil war that, in 1914 as in 1940, Maurras remained faithful to his principle of nationalist compromise, or the union nationale in time of crisis, and supported both Georges Clemenceau and Philippe Pétain in this.

In terms of political institutions Maurras had been a legitimist in his youth, then a federalist republican, but rediscovered royalism (although as a supporter of the Orléanists) in 1896 through a political argument: kings had created France, and France had been degenerating since 1789. As a partisan of duc d'Orléans and his descendants (the Duke of Guise, then the Count of Paris), he dreamed of converting the Action française, newly created by nationalist republicans, to the royalist ideal, and of gathering to him the remainder of traditional French royalty, exemplified by the Marquis of la Tour du Pin or General de Charette.

The synthesis between counter-revolutionary ideas and nationalism (but also positivism), triggered by the moral shock of the war of 1870, which had turned some traditionalist forces towards the national idea and largely operated by the Dreyfus affair from 1898 onwards, was to find its apotheosis in Maurrassisme. While there remained some non- Maurrassiste political nationalist movements, such as the many Jacobin expressions of nationalism and the universalist nationalism along the lines of Péguy, counter-revolutionary politics was completely converted to Maurrassisme by 1911 after the consolidation of traditional royalist groups.

Maurrassisisme was to give a second wind to counter-revolutionary ideas, which had been in decline since 1893 which saw Catholics drawn to the Republic. It was to promulgate these ideas beyond their traditionally counter-revolutionary regions, Catholic society and the aristocracy.

Personally an agnostic until the final years of his life (at which time he converted to Catholicism), Maurras appreciated the social and historical role of the Catholic religion in French society, particularly its role as a federating force. His utilitarian vision of the Catholic Church as an institution serving the interest of national cohesion fostered a convergence between devout Catholics and those more distanced from the Church.

The Maurrassist synthesis would develop into a school of thought in France, and indeed extend beyond French borders. Within France, Maurrassisme became a major influence in intellectual and student circles (in law and medical departments, etc.) in the 1910s and 1920s, reaching a peak in 1926 before the pope's condemnation. By way of example, the Maurrassist current had its attraction to the most diverse personalities, "from Bernanos to Jacques Lacan, from T.S. Eliot to Georges Dumézil, from Jacques Maritain to Jacques Laurent, from Thierry Maulnier to Gustave Thibon, up to de Gaulle ".

Maurrassisme was a particular source of inspiration for the Révolution nationale of the Vichy regime of 1940–1941, the regime of Antonio Salazar in Portugal and of Francisco Franco in Spain.

Mayonnaise, colloquially referred to as " mayo ", is a thick, creamy sauce with a rich and tangy taste that is commonly used on sandwiches, hamburgers, bound salads, and French fries. It also forms the base for other sauces, including tartar sauce, fry sauce, remoulade, salsa golf, ranch dressing, and rouille.

Mayonnaise is an emulsion of oil, egg yolk, and an acid, either vinegar or lemon juice ; there are many variants using additional flavorings. The color varies from near-white to pale yellow, and its texture from a light cream to a thick gel.

Commercial eggless versions are available for those who avoid eggs.

Mayonnaise is a French cuisine appellation that seems to have appeared for the first time in 1806. The hypotheses invoked over time as to the origin(s) of mayonnaise have been numerous and contradictory. Most hypotheses do however agree on the geographic origin of the sauce: Mahón in Menorca, Spain during the occupation by French troops in the Seven Years' War. Other theories have been dismissed by some authors as being somewhat a retrospective invention aiming to credit the sauce as an invention of southwestern France, when, most likely, its origin can be found in the port city of Menorca.

Mayonnaise sauce may have its origins in the ancient remoulade. Another hypothesis is that mayonnaise is derived from aioli. Finally, the process of emulsifying egg yolk was known for a long time to pharmacists, who used it to prepare ointments and salves. Some have pointed out that it would make sense that mayonnaise originated in Spain given its requirement of olive oil, a liquid produced and consumed mostly there at the time. This hypothesis is similar to another that places the origins of French fries in Spain using the same rationale.

In 1750, Francesc Roger Gomila, a Valencian friar, published a recipe for a sauce similar to mayonnaise in Art de la Cuina ('Art of the Kitchen'). He calls the sauce aioli bo. If he does not describe precisely the recipe—suggesting that it was known by everyone on the island—the way it is used, the preparations for which it is used as a base and the dishes with which it is associated are most often inconceivable with an aioli. Earlier recipes of similar emulsified sauces, usually containing garlic, appear in a number of Spanish recipe books dating back to the 14th-century Llibre de Sent Soví [ es ], where it is called all-i-oli, literally 'garlic and oil' in Catalan. This sauce had clearly spread throughout the Crown of Aragon, for Juan de Altamiras gives a recipe for it in his celebrated 1745 recipe book Nuevo Arte de Cocinar ('New Art of Cooking').

On April 18, 1756, the Duke of Richelieu invaded Menorca and took the port of Mahon. A theory states that the aioli bo sauce was thereafter adopted by the cook of the Duke of Richelieu, who upon his return to France made the sauce famous in the French court. which would have been known as mahonnaise. A number of legends arose relating how the Duke of Richelieu first tried the sauce, including his discovery of the sauce in a local inn of Mahon where he would have allegedly asked the innkeeper to make him some dinner during the siege of Mahon, and even that he invented it himself as a quick garnish.

Another version is Grimod de La Reynière 's 1808 bayonnaise sauce which is a sort of aspic : "But if one wants to make from this cold chicken, a dish of distinction, one composes a bayonnaise, whose green jelly, of a good consistency, forms the most worthy ornament of poultry and fish salads."

In 1806, André Viard, in Le Cuisinier Impérial, transformed this recipe for remoulade by replacing the roux with egg yolk. In another recipe, an Indian remoulade, without mustard, he specifies that the binding is facilitated by incorporating the oil little by little. This is the first modern mention of a stable cold emulsified sauce.

It is only in 1815 that Antonin Carême mentions a cold "magnonaise" emulsified with egg yolk. The word "mayonnaise" is attested in English in 1815. Auguste Escoffier wrote that mayonnaise was a French mother sauce of cold sauces.

A common theory is that it is named for Mahón (Maó in Catalan), itself named after its founder Mago Barca, in Menorca, in honor of the 3rd Duke of Richelieu 's victory over the British in 1756, and in fact the name mahonnaise is used by some authors. But the name is only attested several decades after that event. One version of this theory says that it was originally known as salsa mahonesa in Spanish, but that spelling too is only attested later.

Alexandre Balthazar Laurent Grimod de La Reynière, a lawyer by qualification who acquired fame during the reign of Napoleon for his sensual and public gastronomic lifestyle, rejected the name mayonnaise because the word "is not French". He also rejected the name mahonnaise because Mahón "is not known for good food", and thus he preferred bayonnaise, after the city of Bayonne, which "has many innovative gourmands and... produces the best hams in Europe." Indeed, the city of Bayonne (sauce à la Bayonnaise) could also have given its name to this type of sauce, by spelling deformation. This form would seem to be confirmed by the fact that there is no written record of the sauce à la mayonnaise before the beginning of the 19th century, long after the capture of the city of Mahón.

Another hypothesis is based, according to Marie-Antoine Carême, a famous contemporary French chef, on a derivative of magnonaise (from the verb magner, or manier) or, according to Prosper Montagné, of moyeunaise (or moyennaise), based on moyeu(x) (or moyen) which means 'egg yolk', in Old French. It has also been suggested that the word be linked to the old verb mailler, meaning 'to beat'.

Joseph Favre, for his part, states in his memoirs that mayonnaise is an alteration of the word magnonnaise, derived from Magnon (Lot-et-Garonne), and that a cook from Magnon would have popularized it first in the South of France ; he notes that this sauce has been variously named mahonnaise, bayonnaise and mayonnaise.

Recipes for mayonnaise date to the early nineteenth century. In 1815, Louis Eustache Ude wrote:

No 58.—Mayonnaise. Take three spoonfuls of Allemande, six ditto of aspic, and two of oil. Add a little tarragon vinegar, that has not boiled, some pepper and salt, and minced ravigotte, or merely some parsley. Then put in the members of fowl, or fillets of soles, &c. Your mayonnaise must be put to ice; neither are you to put the members into your sauce till it begins to freeze. Next dish your meat or fish, mask with the sauce before it be quite frozen, and garnish your dish with whatever you think proper, as beet root, jelly, nasturtiums, &c.

In an 1820 work, Viard describes something like the more familiar emulsified version:

This sauce is made to "take" in many ways: with raw egg yolks, with gelatine, with veal or veal brain glaze. The most common method is to take a raw egg yolk in a small terrine, with a little salt and lemon juice: take a wooden spoon, turn it while letting a trickle of oil fall and stirring constantly; as your sauce thickens, add a little vinegar; put in too a pound of good oil: serve your sauce with good salt: serve it white or green, adding green of ravigote or green of spinach. This sauce is used for cold fish entrees, or salad of vegetables cooked in salt water.

In February 1856, the Huddersfield Chronicle and West Yorkshire Advertiser published a recipe for homemade mayonnaise in a segment entitled "The Housewife's Corner." This recipe included six egg yolks, half a bottle of olive oil (volume not otherwise defined) and one-half teaspoon of vinegar. The serving suggestion was to pour this over roast chicken or turkey, with garnish of lettuce and hard eggs.

Modern mayonnaise can be made by hand with a whisk, a fork, or with the aid of an electric mixer or blender. It is made by slowly adding oil to an egg yolk, while whisking vigorously to disperse the oil. The oil and the water in the yolk form a base of the emulsion, while lecithin and protein from the yolk is the emulsifier that stabilizes it. A combination of van der Waals interactions and electrostatic repulsion determine the bond strength among oil droplets. The high viscosity of mayonnaise is attributed to the total strength created by these two intermolecular forces. Addition of mustard contributes to the taste and further stabilizes the emulsion, as mustard contains small amounts of lecithin. If vinegar is added directly to the yolk, it can emulsify more oil, thus making more mayonnaise.

For large-scale preparation of mayonnaise where mixing equipment is being employed, the process typically begins with the dispersal of eggs, either powdered or liquid, into water. Once emulsified, the remaining ingredients are then added and vigorously mixed until completely hydrated and evenly dispersed. Oil is then added as rapidly as it can be absorbed. Though only a small part of the total, ingredients other than the oil are critical to proper formulation. These must be totally hydrated and dispersed within a small liquid volume, which can cause difficulties including emulsion breakdown during the oil-adding phase. Often, a long agitation process is required to achieve proper dispersal/emulsification, presenting one of the trickiest phases of the production process. As food technology advances processing has been shortened drastically, allowing about 1000 liters to be produced in 10 minutes.

Miracle Whip was developed as a less expensive imitation of mayonnaise. Lacking sufficient oil, it does not meet the legal definition of mayonnaise, and so is marketed as salad dressing.

Egg-free versions of mayonnaise are available for vegans and others who avoid eggs or cholesterol, or who have egg allergies. In the U.S., these versions cannot be labelled as "mayonnaise" because the FDA definition of mayonnaise requires egg. Egg-free versions generally contain soya or pea protein as the emulsifying agent to stabilize oil droplets in water. Well-known brands include Nasoya 's Nayonaise, Vegenaise and Just Mayo in North America, and Plamil Egg Free in the United Kingdom.

Mayonnaise is used commonly around the world, and is also a base for many other chilled sauces and salad dressings. For example, sauce rémoulade, in classic French cuisine, is a mix of mayonnaise and mustard, gherkins, capers, parsley, chervil, tarragon, and possibly anchovy essence.

Chile is the world's third major per capita consumer of mayonnaise and first in Latin America. Commercial mayonnaise became widely accessible in the 1980s.

Guidelines issued in September 1991 by Europe's Federation of the Condiment Sauce Industries recommend that mayonnaise should contain at least 70% oil and 5% liquid egg yolk. The Netherlands incorporated this guideline in 1998 into the law Warenwetbesluit Gereserveerde aanduidingen in article 4. Most available brands easily exceed these targets. In countries influenced by French culture, mustard is also a common ingredient that acts as an additional emulsifier.

Japanese mayonnaise is typically made with rice vinegar, which gives it a flavor different from mayonnaise made from distilled vinegar. Apart from salads, it is popular with dishes such as okonomiyaki, takoyaki and yakisoba and may also accompany katsu and karaage. It is most often sold in soft plastic squeeze bottles. Its texture is thicker than most Western commercial mayonnaise. Kewpie (Q.P.) is the most popular brand of Japanese mayonnaise, advertised with a Kewpie doll logo. The vinegar is a proprietary blend containing apple and malt vinegars. The Kewpie company was started in 1925 by Tochiro Nakashima, whose goal was to create a condiment that made eating vegetables more enjoyable.

Mayonnaise is very popular in Russia, where it is made with sunflower oil and soybean oil. A 2004 study showed that Russia is the only market in Europe where more mayonnaise than ketchup is sold. It is used as a sauce in the most popular salads in Russia, such as Olivier salad (also known as Russian salad), dressed herring, and many others. Leading brands are Calvé (marketed by Unilever) and Sloboda (marketed by Efko).

Commercial mayonnaise marketed in jars originated in Philadelphia in 1907 when Amelia Schlorer began marketing a mayonnaise recipe originally used in salads sold in her family's grocery store. Mrs. Schlorer's mayonnaise was an instant success with local customers and eventually grew into the Schlorer Delicatessen Company. Around the same time in New York City, a family from Vetschau, Germany, at Richard Hellmann's delicatessen on Columbus Avenue, featured his wife's homemade recipe in salads sold in their delicatessen. The condiment quickly became so popular that Hellmann began selling it in "wooden boats" that were used for weighing butter. In 1912, Mrs. Hellmann's mayonnaise was mass-marketed and was trademarked in 1926 as Hellmann's Blue Ribbon Mayonnaise. After numerous corporate iterations, it is sold as Hellmann's in the Eastern United States and as Best Foods Mayonnaise in the Western United States. Mayonnaise sales are about US$1.3 billion per year in the U.S.

A typical formulation for commercially made mayonnaise (not low fat) can contain as much as 80% vegetable oil, typically soybean, rapeseed, sunflower, or corn oil, depending on region of production, but, in specialty products, sometimes olive or avocado oil. Water makes up about 7% to 8% and egg yolks about 6%. Some formulas use whole eggs instead of just yolks. The remaining ingredients include vinegar (4%), salt (1%), and sugar (1%). Low-fat formulas will typically decrease oil content to just 50% and increase water content to about 35%. Egg content is reduced to 4% and vinegar to 3%. Sugar is increased to 1.5% and salt lowered to 0.7%. Gums or thickeners (4%) are added to increase viscosity, improve texture, and ensure a stable emulsion. Mayonnaise is prepared using several methods, but on average it contains around 700 kilocalories (2,900 kJ) per 100 grams, or 94 kilocalories (Cal) per tablespoon. This makes mayonnaise a calorically dense food.

Mayonnaise, both commercially processed and home-made, has been associated with illnesses from Salmonella globally. The source of the Salmonella has been confirmed to be raw eggs. Several outbreaks with fatal cases have been recorded, with a few major incidents. In a 1955 outbreak in Denmark, 10,000 people were affected by Salmonella from contaminated mayonnaise made by a large kitchen. The pH of the mayonnaise was found to be 5.1, with Salmonella counts of 180,000 CFU /g. The second outbreak, also in Denmark, caused 41 infections with two fatalities. The pH of the contaminated mayonnaise was 6.0, with Salmonella counts of 6 million CFU/g. In 1976 there were serious salmonellosis outbreaks on four flights to and from Spain which caused 500 cases and six fatalities. In 1984 in the US, 404 people became ill and nine died in a New York City hospital due to hospital-prepared mayonnaise. In all salmonellosis cases, the major reason was inadequate acidification of the mayonnaise, with a pH higher than the recommended upper limit of 4.1, with acetic acid as the main acidifying agent. Some brands use pasteurized eggs which would reduce this risk factor.

Maître d'art (Master of Art) is a title awarded for life by the French Ministry of Culture to distinguished professionals from the arts and crafts, for their exceptional expertise and their ability to pass on their knowledge. This title is the French version of Living Human Treasures recognized by UNESCO.

Since the creation of the title in 1994, one hundred and forty-one Masters of Art have been appointed in one hundred and one craft trades, classified into sixteen different fields of activity. Eighty of these winners are still active in 2021.

France has 107 appointees since the creation of this title, of which 78 are active.

The title of Maître d'art was created by the Ministry of Culture in 1994 in order to perpetuate the remarkable and rare know-how of the crafts that participate in French economic and cultural life. Like Japan's “living national treasures”, it promotes skills and knowledge considered to be strong components of intangible cultural heritage.

In 2012, the Ministry of Culture entrusted the management of the selection procedure and the master of art - students at the National Institute of Art Trades.

The list of nine winners in 2019 is accessible on the site of the French Ministry of Culture.

The Communauté des maîtresses bouquetières et marchandes chapelières en fleurs (Community of mistress flower sellers and merchants of floral garlands) was a French Guild organisation for female fresh flower sellers within the city of Paris, active from August 1677 until 1791.

Flower seller was a common profession for women in Paris long before the guild was formed. It was a common professions for female relatives to male flower sellers and gardeners, and girls became aprentices for adult flower sellers.

Flower sellers became such a common profession in Paris that in the 1670s, the city authorities saw a need fo establish a guld for them. It was formatted in 1675, when Colbert issued a decree forcing the establishment of guilds in Paris, and was given its formal patent in August 1677.

The profession of flower seller was a common profession for women in Paris. They had the monopoly of selling flowers for all purposes in the capital of Paris. Every flower seller had to spend at least four years as an apprentice of another flower seller before she could legally work in the profession. She was banned from hiring men in her enterprise. A report stated that the majority of those active in the profession where women of low economic circumstances and few became financially successful, merely making enough money to support themselves.

It was one of only three guilds open to women in 17th-century Paris, the other two being the Maîtresses marchandes lingères and the Maîtresses couturières.

Maîtresses couturières was a French guild organisation for seamstresses within the city of Paris, active from 30 March 1675 until 1791. It was one of only three guilds open to women in Paris prior to 1776, the other two being the Maitresses bouquetieres and the Maîtresses marchandes lingères.

They had permission to manufacture clothes for women and children, with the exception of the most expensive court dress for women. This placed them in competition with the tailors ' guild, who had permission to manufacture clothes for both men and women.

The guild was somewhat unusual: though the occupation of seamstress was very common and socially accepted for a woman, it was normally practiced outside of the guilds in Europe prior to the 19th century, and discriminated against by the tailors' guilds. Paris was rare in having an actual guild for seamstresses, and it was further increased with the Marchandes de modes of 1776.

Maîtresses marchandes lingères was a French guild organisation for women linen draper seamstresses and hemp merchants within the city of Paris, active from the Middle Ages until 1791. It was one of only three guilds open to women in Paris prior to 1776, the other two being the Maitresses bouquetieres and the Maîtresses couturières.

The guild was formed in the 13th- or 14th-century, and was one of the strongest guilds in Paris until the French Revolution of 1789, both in money and status. The linen seamstresses sold lace and all manner of clothing made of linen and Cannabis sativa. They manufactured all sorts of products made of linen, on and off commission. In accordance with the privileges of the guild, a linen seamstress did not become a minor under the guardianship of her husband when she married, which was an exception from contemporary law of married women's minority.

The guild was somewhat unusual: though the profession of seamstress was very common and socially accepted for a woman, it was normally practiced outside of the guilds in Europe prior to the 19th-century, and discriminated by the tailor 's guilds. Paris was rare in having an actual guild for seamstresses, and it was further increased with the Maîtresses couturières of 1675 and the Marchandes de modes of 1776.

The Megalithic sites of Charente, France consist mainly of dolmens, while menhirs are rare and few are still standing.

The north-western quarter of the department (the Ruffécois) has a rich concentration of megalithic monuments. Tumuli and dolmens are often grouped in veritable necropolises (Tusson, Ligné, Fontenille, Luxé, Chenon), and it is well known that almost a third of the monuments recorded in this area were destroyed between the mid-19th and late 20th centuries, mainly as a result of the land consolidation that took place in the 1960s and 1970s. On the other hand, the persistence of large wooded areas has locally contributed to the preservation of several concentrations of burial mounds.

In the west of the department, several remarkable dolmens are located on the left bank of the Charente (Châteaubernard, Cognac, Saint-Même-les-Carrières, la Boucharderie). In the south-west, several megaliths that were once reported have now disappeared, victims of the boom in wine-growing; in the south-east, several dolmens are well preserved (Ronsenac, Édon necropolis); as for the north-east of the department, it concentrates the department's main menhirs.

The Angoumois-type dolmen features a quadrangular chamber covered with a monumental slab in its raw state, with a slightly off-center corridor. The walls are made of carefully assembled, bush-hammered orthostats. The corridor is made up of slabs or low dry-stone walls (Les Pérottes, Motte de la Jacquille). But there are also variants with a round or square chamber where the walls are made entirely of small, stacked dry stones, and the roof must have been a corbelled vault or made of perishable materials.

Several dolmens in the Cognaçais region have been considered to be Angevin dolmens due to their characteristics (massive roof slabs, high bush-hammered pillars, rectangular chambers), but none have a portico that is still visible. The simple dolmens in the southeastern part of the department, made of sandstone blocks, reflect the proximity of the neighboring dolmens of the Perigord Causses, with their trapezoidal chambers delimited by just three orthostats.

Some monuments stand out for their originality (dolmen A4 de la Pièce Grande) or unique architectural features (Motte de la Jacquille).

Engraved representations on the walls of dolmens are fairly common, mainly crossbows (Roc dolmen, A and B de la Boixe dolmens), axes (Grosse Pérotte), hooks (Motte de la Garde).

45°57′29″N 0°12′54″E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.95806°N 0.21500°E ﻿ / 45.95806; 0.21500 ﻿ (Dolmens de la Pièce Grande)

45°57′28″N 0°12′56″E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.95778°N 0.21556°E ﻿ / 45.95778; 0.21556 ﻿ (Dolmens de la Pièce Grande)

45°57′37″N 0°12′57″E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.96028°N 0.21583°E ﻿ / 45.96028; 0.21583 ﻿ (Dolmens de la Pièce Grande)

45°30′06″N 0°21′32″E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.50167°N 0.35889°E ﻿ / 45.50167; 0.35889 ﻿ (Necropolis of Édon)

45°29′46″N 0°21′47″E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.49611°N 0.36306°E ﻿ / 45.49611; 0.36306 ﻿ (Necropolis of Édon)

45°56′19″N 0°05′13″E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.93861°N 0.08694°E ﻿ / 45.93861; 0.08694 ﻿ (Tumuli of Tusson)

45°56′01″N 0°04′59″E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.93361°N 0.08306°E ﻿ / 45.93361; 0.08306 ﻿ (Tumuli of Tusson)

Meilleur Ouvrier de France (French: [ mɛjœʁ uvʁije d(ə) fʁɑ̃s ] ; MOF) is a competition for craftsmen held in France every four years. The winning candidates receive a medal.

The title of Meilleur Ouvrier de France is a unique and prestigious award in France, according to category of trades in a contest among professionals. This contest is organized and recognized as a third-level degree by the French Ministry of Labour. The President of the French Republic is granted honorary membership with the title MOF honoris causa. The awarding of medals occurs at the Sorbonne, in Paris, during a large reunion followed by a ceremony at the Élysée in the presence of the President of the French Republic.

This award for special abilities is unique in the world. Created in 1924, initially between the best workers of the era aged 23 and over, this contest was given the title of Meilleur Ouvrier de France (Best Craftsman of France). Today, by the diversity of specialities, the list of which is regularly updated, the award has also been awarded to more modern trades and high technology fields.

In this competition, the candidate is given a certain amount of time and basic materials not only to create a masterpiece, but to do so with a goal of approaching perfection. The chosen method, the organization, the act, the speed, the know-how and the respect for the rules of the trade are verified by a jury just as much as is the final result. The winning candidates receive a medal and retain their title for life, with the indication of the specialty, the year following the one in which they obtain the title.

This prestigious title is equally recognized by professionals and the greater public in France, particularly among artisan-merchants such as pastrymakers, hairdressers, butchers, jewelers, and others whose trades are recognized, particularly those for more luxurious goods.

The Organizing Committee for Labor Exhibitions (COET) is an administrative body, placed under the authority of the French Ministry of National Education. It was created in 1935 and is responsible for the material organization of the “Meilleur Ouvrier de France” competition and the national labor exhibitions that conclude it. It became an association under the law of 1901 in 1961.

The competition recognizes accomplishments in nearly a hundred professions across seventeen trade groups with subcategories including (but not limited to):

Many members of the Compagnons du Devoir are also M.O.F.

Mentonasc (Occitan pronunciation: [ me(n)tuˈnaʃk ] ; Mentonasco in Italian, Mentonnais [ mɑ̃tɔnɛ ] or Mentonasque [ mɑ̃tɔnask ] in French) is a Romance dialect historically spoken in and around Menton, France. It is classified as a dialect of Occitan and a sub-dialect of Vivaro-Alpine, with strong influence from the neighbouring Intemelian Ligurian dialect spoken from Ventimiglia to San Remo.

Mentonasc is considered to be a transitional language; it is an intermediate language between Occitan and Ligurian, which is why the classification of Mentonasc is often debated. However, it is traditionally assigned to the Occitan language but Italian nationalists consider it part of the Ligurian dialects.

The Mentonasc dialect bears strong similarities with the common alpine dialects, such as, Royasque or Pignasque. It differs quite significantly especially in the ear from Ligurian coastal dialects (Northern Italian), like those of Ventimiglia (Intemelio dialect) or Monaco (Monégasque dialect).

When the area of Menton was part of the Kingdom of Sardinia, Mentonasc was used in all of the coastal area between Monaco and Ventimiglia, and in the hinterland.

In the 19th century Mentonasc was used in the territories of the Free Cities of Menton and Roquebrune, an independent statelet created in connection with the Italian Risorgimento.

When France annexed the Free Cities in 1861, Mentonasc began its decline, substituted by the French language.

The Mentonasc dialect is currently spoken by about 10% of the population in Menton, Roquebrune, and the surrounding villages (Castellar, Castillon, Gorbio, Sainte-Agnès, Moulinet and Sospel) in an area called the País Mentonasc. Now the language is being taught within the French educational system, as a variety of Niçard (i.e. Provençal and Occitan), so this may change.

No countries currently have Mentonasc as an official language.

Below is a chart of some nouns and verbs found in French, translated into Mentonasc.

There are some texts and songs that have been published recently in Menton (most from the twentieth century.)

Among the various publications: A Lambrusca de Paigran (la Vigne vierge de Grand-père) by Jean-Louis Caserio, illustrations by M. and F. Guglielmelli, SAHM, Menton, 1987. Brandi Mentounasc, Livret de Poésies Bilingue by Jean Ansaldi, 2010. Ou Mentounasc per ou Bachelerà, le Mentonasque au Baccalauréat, by JL Caserio, 5th edition, 2008., etc.

Video of the Local Anthem of Menton being sung in Mentonasc

Another video of the Local Anthem (Hymne de Menton) with words, accompanied by folk dancing.

Video showcasing the Mentonasc language with the Ligurian orthographic spelling.

Merguez (/ m ɛər ˈ ɡ ɛ z / mair- GHEZ) is a red, spicy lamb - or beef -based fresh sausage in Maghrebi cuisine. In France, merguez became popular in the 1960s and 1970s, as Algerian immigrants and the pieds-noirs of Algeria settled in the country and opened small shops and restaurants that served traditional dishes like merguez. The popularity of merguez in France was also fueled by the rise of fast food chains like Quick and McDonald's, which began to offer merguez sandwiches and burgers to cater to their North African clientele.

Merguez is a sausage made with uncooked lamb, beef, or a mixture stuffed into a lamb-intestine casing. It is heavily spiced with cumin and chili pepper or harissa, which give it its characteristic piquancy and red color, as well as other spices such as sumac, fennel and garlic.

Merguez is usually eaten grilled. While not in traditional Maghrebi couscous, it is often used in couscous royal in France. It is also eaten in sandwiches and with french fries and dijon mustard.

There are several spellings in Arabic (مِركس mirkas, pl. مراكس marākis ; مِركاس mirkās, مَركس markas and مِرقاز mirqāz). The hesitation between k and q probably reflects the pronunciation / ɡ /, for which there is no standard Arabic spelling; further confusing matters is that in some maghrebi dialects, Arabic qāf is sometimes pronounced as / ɡ /, as an allophone of / q /. It is first attested in the 12th century, as mirkās or merkās.

The Arabic term for the food is also the origin of the Spanish names of the foodstuffs morcon and morcilla.

Merienda is a light meal in southern Europe, particularly Spain (merenda in Galician, berenar in Catalan), Portugal (lanche, merenda) and Italy (merenda), whence the word spread to Serbo-Croatian (marenda), and former Yugoslavia as well as France (goûter), Hispanic America, the Philippines (meryenda / merienda), North Africa, and Brazil (lanche, merenda or café da tarde). Usually taken in the afternoon or for brunch, it fills in the meal gap between the noontime meal and the evening meal, being the equivalent of afternoon tea in the English-speaking world, or between breakfast and lunch. It is a simple meal that often consists of a piece of fruit, bread, biscuits, yogurt, and other snacks accompanied by fruit juice, milk, hot chocolate, coffee, spirits, or other beverages.

It is typical for Argentines, Paraguayans, and Uruguayans to have merienda around 5:00 pm, between the midday meal and supper. It generally consists of an infusion such as tea, mate, coffee or mate cocido, and a baked snack such as scones, bread, toast, cake or facturas, etc.), usually accompanied with dulce de leche, honey, butter or jam.

In the Philippines, merienda (Filipino : meryenda) is a generic term encompassing two light meals: the first is a morning snack that may correspond to either brunch, elevenses, or second breakfast ; the second one is the equivalent of afternoon tea. Merienda taken in the early evening around sunset just before or in place of dinner is meanwhile distinctly referred to as merienda cena. Generally speaking, merienda refers to any kind of dish or snack in a portion smaller than the traditional "full meal" consisting of rice and a complementary viand (unless the merienda is taken as brunch or merienda cena), coupled with either a cool or hot drink (usually coffee). Common fare may be sweet or savoury, ranging from breads and pastries (notably pandesal), desserts and sweets, street food, to noodle dishes.

In coastal parts of Croatia, Slovenia, Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina and on the Greek island of Corfu, it is referred to marenda, a meal eaten between breakfast and lunch. Usually it is a light snack, like sandwiches or toast, eaten during a work break.

In France, the merienda is called goûter or quatre-heures ; the latter name refers to its timing at around four in the afternoon. The modern goûter is lighter than a full meal and is more often consumed by children than by adults. It was a full cold meal until the 18th century, before which the goûter was taken at around 17:00 hours, but began to decline in popularity thereafter, since the evening meal was consumed at about 18:00 hours.

Meringue (/ m ə ˈ r æ ŋ / mə- RANG, French: [ məʁɛ̃ɡ ]) is a type of dessert or candy, traditionally made from whipped egg whites and sugar, and occasionally an acidic ingredient such as lemon, vinegar, or cream of tartar. A binding agent such as salt, flour, or gelatin may also be added to the eggs. The key to the formation of a good meringue is the formation of stiff peaks by denaturing the protein ovalbumin (a protein in the egg whites) via mechanical shear.

They are light, airy, and sweet confections. Homemade meringues are often chewy and soft with a crisp exterior, while many commercial meringues are crisp throughout. A uniform crisp texture may be achieved at home by baking at a low temperature (80–90 °C or 176–194 °F) for an extended period of up to two hours.

The Oxford English Dictionary states that the French word is of unknown origin. The name meringue for this confection first appeared in print in François Massialot 's cookbook of 1692. The word meringue first appeared in English in 1706 in a translation of Massialot's book. The first documented recipes recognizable as meringues are found in two considerably earlier 17th-century English manuscript books of recipes which give instructions for confections called "white biskit bread" in the book of recipes written in 1604 by Elinor Fettiplace (c. 1570 – c. 1647) of Gloucestershire and called "pets" in the manuscript of collected recipes written by Lady Rachel Fane (1612/13 – 1680) of Knole, Kent. Slowly baked meringues are still referred to as " pets " in the Loire region of France due to their light and fluffy texture.

Meringues were traditionally shaped between two large spoons, as they are generally at home today. Meringue piped through a pastry bag was introduced by Antonin Carême.

Protein distribution in egg whites is as follows: (54%) ovalbumin, (13%) conalbumin / ovotransferrin, (11%) ovomucoid, (4%) ovoglobulins, (3.5%) lysozyme, and (2%) ovomucin. Ovoglobulins drive foaming, ovomucin is the main stabilization agent, and the remainder of the proteins interact to contribute to overall foaming and stability. When egg whites are beaten, some of the hydrogen bonds in the proteins break, causing the proteins to unfold ("denature") and to aggregate non-specifically. When these egg white proteins denature (due to agitation from beating), their hydrophobic regions are exposed and the formation of intermolecular protein-protein interactions is promoted. These protein-protein interactions, usually disulfide bridges, create networks responsible for the structure of the foam and this change in structure leads to the stiff consistency required for meringues. The use of a copper bowl, or the addition of cream of tartar is required to additionally denature the proteins to create the firm peaks, otherwise the whites will not be firm.

When beating egg whites, they are classified in three stages according to the peaks they form when the beater is lifted: soft, firm, and stiff peaks.

Egg whites and sugar are both hygroscopic (water-attracting) chemicals. Consequently, meringue becomes soggy when refrigerated or stored in a high-humidity environment. This quality also explains the problem called "weeping" or "sweating", in which beads of moisture form on all surfaces of the meringue. It can also happen if the meringue is undercooked (resulting in a puddle of liquid under the meringue) or overcooked (resulting in beading on top). Sweating is a particular problem for French meringues in which the granulated sugar is inadequately dissolved in the egg whites, and for high-moisture pie fillings.

There are three main ingredients in a meringue recipe that interact to form the foam structure: egg whites, sugar, and cream of tartar or acid. The backbone of the foam structure is made up of proteins, amino acid chains. Egg whites provide the meringue with necessary proteins that form the meringue foam. The proteins are originally oriented in a tangled ball but must be uncoiled into strands; this is referred to as denaturation. There are two ways a protein can be denatured: through physical or chemical process. When forming a meringue the egg whites are beat until the proteins are denatured—a physical process. Also by beating the egg whites, air is incorporated into the protein structure creating an air–water protein mixture interface. The friction from beating the eggs adds heat to the process, which causes the proteins to increase in elasticity. As the proteins are being stretched during the denaturation process they are also coagulating together forming a protein network. After the denaturation process the egg whites will become six to eight times their original size. If the proteins are beat for too long they will become stretched out too far and become too weak to support the foam structure.

Cream of tartar, also known as potassium hydrogen tartrate, KC 4 H 5 O 6, is added to the egg whites before the denaturation process. Cream of tartar is an acid that is used to help stabilize and coagulate the proteins, which aids in a stronger protein network to trap air for the foam formation. Cream of tartar has a low pH to help bring the proteins near their isoelectric point to allow them to be denatured easier. The isoelectric point is a specific pH where a molecule, in this case protein, has no net electrical charge. The electrical charge on a protein would normally hold the protein together in its coiled clump.

The cream of tartar also acts as a catalyst affecting the sugar structure. Sucrose is a disaccharide made up of glucose and fructose. Cream of tartar inverts the sugar during the baking process, meaning the molecule is split into two parts containing glucose and fructose. This prevents the sugar from recrystallizing and giving the meringue a gritty, undesirable texture.

Sugar is the final ingredient that is used to help form and stabilize the foam structure. Sugar is hydrophilic, extracting water out of the egg whites. This will lighten the protein network, allowing the foam to be stronger and more elastic. The sugar dissolves in the protein network but does not become part of the protein network. The sugar must be added slowly to the egg whites, while continuously mixing. If it is added all at once, it will not be evenly distributed, causing the protein network to collapse due to the weight of the sugar in one area of the meringue.

After a strong protein network has formed a complete foam, the meringue is ready to be baked. Adding heat to the mixture is the final step to strengthen the foam structure. The meringue must be baked at a low temperature for a long period of time. This allows the proteins to finish coagulating, strengthening the meringue evenly throughout. If the proteins are not baked evenly, the bottom of the meringue will not be able to support the structural weight, causing the meringue to collapse. The heat causes the air bubbles to expand, creating an airier structure. The water in the structure evaporates, causing the meringue to become lighter with a stronger foam structure. It is important to not evaporate all of the water out of the meringue, as some water is necessary to hold the foam together.

Meringue cookies are baked at a very low heat, for a long time. Another name for them is forgotten cookies, as they can be left in an oven for a long time after the cooking is done. They are not supposed to become tan at all, but they need to be very crisp and dry. They will keep for at least a week if stored in an airtight container.

Meringue can be used as the basis for various desserts, including baked Alaska, bruttiboni, dacquoise, Esterházy torte, Eton mess, floating island, key lime pie, Kyiv cake, lemon meringue pie, macarons, merveilleux, pavlova, Queen of Puddings, sans rival, silvana, Spanische Windtorte, turrón, and Zuger Kirschtorte. In some recipes, the meringue may be cooked at a higher temperature for a shorter amount of time, resulting in a soft meringue with slightly browned peaks on top. Meringue by itself is also a dessert called "meringue kisses". In Switzerland, meringues are often associated with Gruyère cream.

Another dish is meringue de angel, which consists of shortbread layered with meringue and lemon curd, topped off with drizzled lemon glaze. Variations include assorted fruits such as raspberries, peaches, mangoes, cherries, strawberries, blueberries, blackberries, pineapple, papayas, honeydew, oranges, and cantaloupe.

Meringue may be used for embellishment. It can be formed into whimsical shapes, such as mushrooms, or piped into a crisp basket that is baked and filled with cake, fruit, or flowers.

Meringue is not a stable structure and has a short shelf life of about two weeks if stored properly. Meringue is a hygroscopic food, thus it absorbs water from the air. The high sugar concentration in the meringue absorbs moisture from the air and will cause the meringue to become soft and chewy. The more water that is absorbed, the heavier the meringue becomes. After enough water is absorbed, the meringue will become too heavy for the foam structure to support itself, and it will start to collapse. Meringue is so susceptible to absorbing water that a rainy day may disrupt the foam structure formation and make it impossible to form a meringue.

Storing meringues in an airtight container will prevent humidity from affecting the sugar. It is also recommended to store the meringue in a cooler area. If the meringue is stored in these conditions, its shelf life will be about two weeks. To extend the shelf life up to about three months, the meringue can be stored in the freezer. The colder temperatures in the freezer decrease the humidity. The meringue should still be stored in an airtight container, preventing water from affecting the meringue.

The principal nutritional components are protein from the egg whites and simple carbohydrates from the refined sugar.

Mesclun (French pronunciation: [ mɛsˈklœ̃ ]) is a mix of assorted small young salad greens that originated in Provence, France. The traditional mix includes chervil, arugula, leafy lettuces and endive, while the term mesclun may also refer to a blend that might include some or all of these four and baby spinach, collard greens, Swiss chard (silver beet), mustard greens, dandelion greens, frisée, mizuna, mâche (lamb's lettuce), radicchio, sorrel, or other fresh leaf vegetables.

On July 10, 1924, in Paris, Philippe Tiranty and Paul Gordeaux reunited with many friends at the Cochon d'Or (a famous restaurant in La Villette), decided to create the foyer des Amitiés niçoises, and to call it Lou Mesclun. For these comedians and humanists, this expression meant "real living together".

The term mesclun for a mixture of young salad greens is quite recent, first used in 1976 according to Merriam-Webster. Of Provençal dialect origin, it derives from the verb mesclar, to "mix thoroughly" and literally means "mixture". According to local lore, mesclun originated with the farmers around Nice, who would each bring their own unique and prized mix of baby greens to the farmers' markets. One of the most representative and authentic versions combined baby dandelion, lettuce and rocket (arugula).

Noted chef Alice Waters comments, "Outdoor markets in Provence display mesclun in profusion, a melange of the first tender young leaves which appear in the garden. Mesclun can be an extraordinary lettuce mixture: rocket, much like the rugola (arugula) found in Italian markets, chervil, mâche or lamb's lettuce and oakleaf lettuce. On occasion, baby curly endive (chicory) or young dandelion greens find their way into the medley, depending solely upon the grower's personal preferences combined with the reality of whatever else might send up shoots in the spot where mesclun grows."

In the North American foodservice industry, the first appearance of mesclun traces to restaurants and farm stands in the early 1980s, with a rise in popularity since. A mesclun mix can be described as comprising baby leaves of lettuces and other greens (and often herbs) in a wide range of leaf shapes, colors, textures and tastes. While the overwhelming amount of mesclun sold approximates the traditional blend of chervil, arugula, leafy lettuces and endive, depending on the season, anywhere from a dozen to three dozen different varieties of baby greens, including red and green oak leaves, romaine and lollo rossa lettuces, frisée, tatsoi, bok choy (joi choi), arugula, spinach, orach, mizuna, dandelion, mustard greens and garden cress may compose what is commercially referred to as a "spring mix". When available, locally grown, direct-from-the-farmer sourcing is recommended over commercial bulk packs for best flavor and freshness.

Mesures usuelles (French pronunciation: [ məzyʁ yzɥɛl ], customary measures) were a French system of measurement introduced by French Emperor Napoleon I in 1812 to act as compromise between the metric system and traditional measurements. The system was restricted to use in the retail industry and continued in use until 1840, when the laws of measurement from 1795 and 1799 were reinstituted.

In the five years immediately before the French First Republic introduced the metric system, every effort was made to make the citizens aware of the upcoming changes and to prepare them for it. The administration distributed tens of thousands of educational pamphlets, private enterprise produced educational games, guides, almanacs, and conversion aids, and metre standards were built into the walls of prominent buildings around Paris. The introduction was phased by district over the next few years, with Paris being the first district to change. The government also realised that the people would need metre rulers, but they had only provided 25,000 of the 500,000 rulers needed in Paris as late as one month after the metre became the sole legal unit of measure. To compensate, the government introduced incentives for the mass-production of rulers. Paris police reported widespread flouting of the requirement for merchants to use only the metric system. Where the new system was in use, it was abused, with shopkeepers taking the opportunity to round prices up and to give smaller measures.

Napoleon I, the French Emperor, disliked the inconvenience of surrendering the high factorability of traditional measures in the name of decimalisation, and recognised the difficulty of getting it accepted by the populace. Under the décret impérial du 12 février 1812 (imperial decree of 12 February 1812), he introduced a new system of measurement, the mesures usuelles or "customary measures", for use in small retail businesses. However, all government, legal, and similar works still had to use the metric system and the metric system continued to be taught at all levels of education.

The prototypes of the metric unit, the kilogram and the metre, enabled an immediate standardisation of measurement over the whole country, replacing the varying legal measures in different parts of the country, and even more across the whole of Europe. The new livre (known as the livre métrique) was defined as five hundred grams, and the new toise (toise métrique) was defined as two metres. Products could be sold in shops under the old names and with the old relationships to one another, but with metric-based and slightly changed absolute sizes. This series of measurements was called mesures usuelles.

Napoleon's decree was eventually revoked during the reign of King Louis Philippe I by the loi du 4 juillet 1837 (law of 4 July 1837), which took effect on 1 January 1840, and reinstated the original metric system. This brought the system of mesures usuelles to a legal end, though the livre remains in some informal use to this day.

The law authorised the following units of measure:

The mesures usuelles did not include any units of length greater than the toise - the myriamètre (10 km) remaining in use throughout this period.

Metropolitan France (French : France métropolitaine or la Métropole), also known as European France (French: le territoire européen de la France), is the part of France geographically located in Europe. It consists of mainland France, popularly known as " the Hexagon " (French: France hexagonale or l'Hexagone), Corsica, and nearby French islands in the Atlantic Ocean, the English Channel, and the Mediterranean Sea.

This term is an official one and is used in everyday life in France but has no administrative meaning, as the overseas regions have the same administrative status as the metropolitan regions. However, only Metropolitan France is part of the Schengen Area. Its borders, especially in the east, changed significantly over the centuries but have remained largely unchanged since the independence of Algeria in 1962, with only minor adjustments, mainly to the border with Switzerland.

In contrast, overseas France (France d'outre-mer) is the collective name for the French departments and territories outside Europe. Together, metropolitan and overseas France form the French Republic. Metropolitan France accounts for 82.0% of the republic's land territory, 3.3% of its exclusive economic zone (EEZ), and 95.9% of its population. Some small parts of France, such as Cerdanya, are part of the Iberian Peninsula.

In overseas France, a person from metropolitan France is often called a métro, short for métropolitain.

The term "metropolitan France" dates from the country's colonial period (from the 16th to the 20th centuries), when France was referred to as la Métropole (literally "the Metropolis"), as distinguished from its colonies and protectorates, known as les colonies or l'Empire. Similar terms existed to describe other European colonial powers (e.g. "metropolitan Spain", España metropolitana). This application of the words "metropolis" and "metropolitan" came from Ancient Greek " metropolis " (from μήτηρ mētēr "mother" and πόλις pólis "city, town"), which was the name for a city-state that created colonies across the Mediterranean (e.g. Marseille was a colony of the city-state of Phocaea ; therefore Phocaea was the "metropolis" of Marseille). By extension "metropolis" and "metropolitan" came to mean "motherland", a nation or country as opposed to its colonies overseas.

Today, some people in Overseas France object to the use of the term la France métropolitaine due to its colonial history. They prefer to call it "the European territory of France", as the Treaties of the European Union do. Likewise, they oppose treating overseas France and metropolitan France as separate entities. For example, INSEE used to calculate its statistics (demography, economy, etc.) for metropolitan France only, and to analyze separate statistics for the overseas departments and territories. People in the overseas departments have opposed this separate treatment, arguing that the then four overseas departments were fully part of France.

As a result, since the end of the 1990s INSEE has included the four overseas departments in its figures for France (such as total population or GDP). The fifth overseas department, Mayotte, has been included in the figures for France since the mid-2010s too. INSEE refers to metropolitan France and the five overseas departments as la France entière ("the whole of France"). "The whole of France" includes the five overseas departments, but does not include the other overseas collectivities and territories that have more autonomy than the departments. Other branches of the French administration may have different definitions of what la France entière is. For example, in contrast to INSEE, when the Ministry of the Interior releases election results, they use the term la France entière to refer to the entire French Republic, including all of overseas France, and not just the five overseas departments.

Since INSEE now calculates statistics for la France entière, this practice has spread to international institutions. For instance, the French GDP published by the World Bank includes metropolitan France and the five overseas departments. The World Bank refers to this total as "France"; it does not use the phrase "the whole of France", as INSEE does.

Metropolitan France covers a land area of 543,940 km (210,020 sq mi), while overseas France covers a land area of 119,396 km (46,099 sq mi), for a total of 663,336 km (256,115 sq mi) in the French Republic (excluding Adélie Land in Antarctica where sovereignty is suspended since the signing of the Antarctic Treaty in 1959). Thus, metropolitan France accounts for 82.0% of the French Republic's land territory.

At sea, the exclusive economic zone (EEZ) of metropolitan France covers 333,691 km (128,839 sq mi), while the EEZ of Overseas France covers 9,825,538 km (3,793,661 sq mi), for a total of 10,159,229 km (3,922,500 sq mi) in the French Republic (excluding Adélie Land). Thus, metropolitan France accounts for 3.3% of the French Republic's EEZ.

According to INSEE, 66,793,000 people lived in metropolitan France as of January 2026, while 2,891,000 lived in overseas France, for a total of 69,684,000 inhabitants in the French Republic. Thus, metropolitan France accounts for 95.9% of the French Republic's population.

In the second round of the 2022 French presidential election, 35,096,478 French people cast a ballot (meaning a turnout of 71.99%). 33,592,754 of these (95.72% of the total voters) cast their ballots in metropolitan France (turnout: 74.04%), 952,238 (2.71% of the total voters) cast their ballots in overseas France (turnout: 48.70%), and 551,486 (1.57% of the total voters) cast their ballots in foreign countries (French people living abroad; turnout: 38.62%).

The French National Assembly is made up of 577 deputies, 539 of whom (93.4% of the total) are elected in metropolitan France, 27 (4.7% of the total) in overseas France, and 11 (1.9% of the total) by French citizens living in foreign countries.

Legislators in 2023 voted to use the name l'Hexagone ("the Hexagon ") to refer to the continental part of metropolitan France in an effort to move away from colonial language. The image of France as a hexagon first appeared in French geography texts of the 1850s. At the "vertices" of the hexagon are the communes of Bray-Dunes, Porspoder, Hendaye, Cerbère, Menton and Lauterbourg.

Mainland or Continental France (French: la France continentale), or just "the mainland" (French: le continent), does not include the French islands in the Atlantic Ocean, English Channel, or Mediterranean Sea, the largest of which is Corsica. In Corsica, people from mainland France are referred to as les continentaux.

The Metz Congress was the seventh national congress of the French Socialist Party (Parti socialiste or PS) which took place on 6, 7 and 8 April 1979. The debate was influenced by the failure to update the Common Programme with the French Communist Party (Parti communiste français or PCF), and the unexpected defeat of the "Union of Left" at the 1978 legislative election.

Eight years after his establishing control of the party, François Mitterrand faced internal opposition. Michel Rocard, who joined the PS in 1974, led the right wing of the party. He criticized the Common Programme, and decried it as being "archaic" and "unrealistic". He advocated an alignment with contemporary European social-democracy and an acceptance of the market economy. For Mitterrand, these propositions threatened to split the "Union of Left".

Rocard was supported by Pierre Mauroy. He had been number 2 of the party since 1971. He represented the survivors of the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO) who denounced the hegemony of Mitterrand's supporters in the party.

Jean-Pierre Chevènement and his left-wing CERES faction advocated a return to closer relations with the PCF.

Mitterrand's faction obtained 47% of the vote, Rocard's won 21.3%, Mauroy's scored 16% and Chevènement secured 14%. Mitterrand was re-elected first secretary thanks to the rallying of Chevènement. Mauroy lost the function of number 2 to Lionel Jospin. In spite of his popularity in the polls, Rocard promised he would not be a candidate at the next presidential election if Mitterrand announced his will to be the PS candidate.

François Mitterrand was re-elected as First Secretary.

The Meuse-Argonne American Cemetery (French: Cimetière Américain (Meuse-Argonne)) is a 130.5-acre (52.8 ha) World War I cemetery in France. It is located east of the village of Romagne-sous-Montfaucon in Meuse. The cemetery contains the largest number of American military dead in Europe (14,246), most of whom lost their lives during the Meuse-Argonne Offensive and were buried there.

The cemetery consists of eight sections behind a large central reflection pool. Beyond the grave sections is a chapel which is decorated with stained glass windows depicting American units' insignias. Along the walls of the chapel area are the tablets of the missing which include the names of those soldiers who fought in the region and in northern Russia, but have no known grave. It also includes the Meuse-Argonne American Memorial. This cemetery is maintained by the American Battle Monuments Commission. It is open daily to the public from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. The cemetery is closed January 1 and December 25, but is open on all other holidays.

The Meuse-Argonne American Memorial (Montfaucon American Monument ; French: Monument Américain de Montfaucon) is an American World War I memorial commemorating "the brilliant victory of the American First Army in the Meuse-Argonne offensive, September 26 – November 11, 1918, and pays tribute to the previous heroic services of the Armies of France on the important battle front upon which the memorial has been constructed." It was erected by the United States Government and is the largest of the American war memorials in Europe. Outside Montfaucon in the Meuse department in Grand Est in north-eastern France, it was unveiled on August 1, 1937. The memorial was designed by John Russell Pope. He designed a massive, Doric column in granite. It is surmounted by a statue symbolic of liberty and towers 71 metres (233 ft) above the hill and the war ruins of the village around it.

The Meuse-Argonne American Memorial is made of a large Doric -style granite column, on top of which stands a statue symbolizing liberty. The memorial was built near the ruins of the ancient village, destroyed during World War I. On the walls of the foyer is an account of the offensive. It pays homage to the troops who served there. The observation platform of the memorial can be reached by ascending 234 stairs, and offers an excellent view of the battlefield.

Located nearby and constructed to memorialize American troops who lost their lives in World War I, the chapel in the Meuse-Argonne American Cemetery in France is a calm and sacred space. Built of light stone in a Romanesque style, it is situated on a hill above the graves. Mosaics, stained glass windows, and an altar honoring the fallen and the 954 missing troops whose names are engraved on the walls can be found within. The chapel represents religion, peace, and the enduring connection between France and the United States. It serves as a reminder to guests of the high price of battle and the importance of sacrifice for one's country.

The memorial was unveiled on August 1, 1937, in the presence of the President of the French Republic, Albert Lebrun. Franklin D. Roosevelt, then the President of the United States, delivered a radio address for the ceremony from Washington, D.C.

Mexicans in France refers to Mexicans and their French-born descendants. Paris is the main point of residence for Mexicans, but there are also considerable numbers in Strasbourg and Marseille.

The House of Mexico in Paris is one of 37 residences in the Cité Internationale Universitaire de Paris (CIUP) and was created by the governments of Mexico and France in 1953 to host young university students from Mexico and other Hispanic American countries.

After resigning from the presidency of Mexico in 1911, Porfirio Díaz and his family began to pack up to retire into exile in Paris, France. After dismissing their former servants paying in gold coins, the Diaz family went to the train station of Santa Clara, south of the capital. Victoriano Huerta was asked to escort the caravan to Veracruz, where one would take steamboat to La Coruña. On May 26, Porfirio and Carmen Romero Rubio, accompanied by the children of General -except Amada- and sisters Carmen, went toward the port of Veracruz. Along the way on the morning of May 27, just before reaching the city of Orizaba, the train was attacked by bandits, which were repelled by federal forces Huerta, and managed to capture more than half the assailants. Arriving in Veracruz the night of that day, and contrary to what happened in other parts of the country, Díaz was greeted with banquets, dinners, dances and parties in his honor. Finally on the morning of May 31, on board the ship German Ypiranga Porfirio Díaz and his family left the country.

Porfirio Díaz began touring Europe and its main capitals with his wife. In April 1912, he was received in the Zarzuela Palace, Madrid by the King of Spain, Alfonso XIII, who invited him to reside in the Iberian Peninsula and presented him with a sword as a gift. Later he toured San Sebastián and Zaragoza. The Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany sent him in Zaragoza tickets to witness the maneuvers of his army in Munich, where they arrived on the eve of the First World War. After fixing his residence in Paris, Diaz used to go to Biarritz and St. Jean de Luz, on the French coast during the winter. In early 1913, began a tour of North Africa and their journey took them to meet in Cairo, where he toured The Sphinx and the Pyramid of Cheops. In the latter, Díaz was portrayed in a photograph owned General National Archive. During his return to Europe, he visited Naples and Rome.

In Paris, Díaz began to be aware of the transgressions that had occurred in Mexico, thanks to several of his old friends used to go visit him. In late 1913, Porfirio was visited by his daughters Amada and Luz, who remained with their father a few months and together toured Switzerland and the Alps. During the last months of 1914 and early 1915, his health began to seriously deteriorate and later, in June 1915, her doctor ordered him to rest in his bed, so he had to leave their daily morning walks in the forest of Bologna. According to the stories of Carmen Romero Rubio, her husband suffered from hallucinations. On July 2, finally the word had lost track of time and his doctor was called at noon and six p.m. and thirty-two minutes (French time), José de la Cruz Porfirio Díaz Mori died at the age of eighty-four years. He was buried in the church of Saint Honoré l'Eylau, and December 27, 1921, his remains were moved to the Montparnasse Cemetery in Paris. When Carmen Romero Rubio returned to the country in 1931, she left Díaz's remains in France. Since the year of 1989, Mexico has expressed intentions to return to Mexico the remains of Díaz, without achieving results.

Michel Aurillac (11 July 1928 – 6 July 2017) was a French lawyer, politician and author. He served as a member of the National Assembly for Indre from 1978 to 1981, and in 1986. He was the Minister of Cooperation from 1986 to 1988. He won the 1987 Prix Narcisse Michaut from the Académie française.

Michel Aurillac was born on 11 July 1928. He grew up in French Indochina, where his father was a governor.

Aurillac was educated at the Lycée Albert-Sarraut in Hanoi, the Lycée Chasseloup-Laubat in Saigon, and the Collège de la Providence in Hué. He graduated from Sciences Po and the École nationale d'administration.

Aurillac began his career at the Conseil d'État in 1953. He was an advisor to Abdelkader Barakrok, the Secretary of State for French Algeria, from 1957 to 1958. In 1959, Aurillac became Léopold Sédar Senghor 's assistant, a year later, Senghor became the first president of Senegal, up until 1980. In 1963, Aurillac joined then-Prime Minister Georges Pompidou 's cabinet as an advisor. He was subsequently Pierre Messmer 's advisor and Michel Poniatowski 's chief of staff. He was the Prefect of Indre in 1965, the Prefect of Essonne in 1969, and the Prefect of Picardy and Somme in 1973–1974.

Aurillac joined the Rally for the Republic, a centre-right political party. He served as a member of the National Assembly for Indre from 1978 to 1981, and in 1986. He served as the Minister of Cooperation and Development by then-Prime Minister Jacques Chirac from 1986 to 1988. He subsequently practised the law until 2001.

Aurillac was the author of several books. He won the Prix Narcisse Michaut from the Académie française for his 1987 book Le royaume oublié. He was an officer of the Legion of Honour and the National Order of Merit.

Aurillac was married to Martine Aurillac, who was also a politician. He died on 6 July 2017, at the age of 89.

Michel Jean Barnier (French: [ miʃɛl baʁnje ] ; born 9 January 1951) is a French politician who was Prime Minister of France from September to December 2024. A member of a series of successive neo-Gaullist parties (UDR, RPR, UMP, LR), Barnier served in several French government positions under prime ministers from Édouard Balladur to François Fillon from 1993 to 2009. At the European Union (EU) level, Barnier was Commissioner for Regional Policy from 1999 to 2004, Commissioner for Internal Market and Services from 2010 to 2014 and vice-president of the European People's Party (EPP) from 2010 to 2015. From 2016 to 2021, he was the EU's chief negotiator on Britain's exit from the EU.

In August 2021, Barnier sought his party's nomination for President of France in the 2022 presidential election, but obtained third place at the 2021 The Republicans congress. In September 2024 President Emmanuel Macron appointed him to the premiership following the 2024 snap legislative election.

At the age of 73, Barnier was the oldest person to take office as prime minister under the Fifth Republic, succeeding Gabriel Attal, who was the youngest at 34. On 4 December 2024, three months into his tenure, his government was brought down by a vote of no confidence in Parliament. The following day, Barnier and his government resigned. Barnier was succeeded on 13 December by François Bayrou. His tenure as prime minister was the shortest under the Fifth Republic. In September 2025, he was elected to the National Assembly to represent Paris's 2nd constituency.

Barnier is a pro-European, Gaullist conservative. He has advocated for stricter controls on non-European immigration, expanding prison capacity and the introduction of mandatory minimum sentences for certain crimes.

Michel Jean Barnier was born at La Tronche in the French Alps, into a Gaullist family in 1951. His father, Jean Barnier, was a leather and textiles craftsman. His mother, Denise Durand, was a practising member of the Christian left, who founded a local chapter of the Ligue contre la violence routière [ fr ] (League against road violence). Barnier is the youngest of the couple's three sons.

In his youth, Barnier was a scout and choirboy. He graduated from the École Supérieure de Commerce de Paris (ESCP) in 1972. During his studies at the ESCP, he was a classmate of Jean-Pierre Raffarin, future prime minister, and a member of the Conférence Olivaint, a student organisation intended to prepare members for political life.

Barnier served on the staff of various Gaullist ministers in the 1970s, before being elected in 1978, aged 27, to the National Assembly as deputy for the department of Savoie representing the neo-Gaullists, Rally for the Republic (RPR), serving until 1993. In the 1980s, he voted for the abolition of capital punishment and against reducing the age of consent for same-sex relationships to that of mixed-sex couples.

Barnier became the youngest president of the departmental council of Savoie in 1982, following a deal called the Union for Savoie [ fr ] between right-wing and centrist parties in the council. In 1992, he co-organised the Winter Olympics in Albertville.

Barnier first joined the government as Minister of the Environment following the right's landslide victory in the 1993 legislative election. In 1995, Jacques Chirac appointed him Minister for European Affairs, a role in which he served until the defeat of the presidential majority in the 1997 legislative election. Barnier then served as a European Commissioner for Regional Policy in the Prodi Commission from 1999 until 2004. He subsequently served as Foreign Minister in Jean-Pierre Raffarin 's government until June 2005 when Dominique de Villepin replaced him with Philippe Douste-Blazy. From 2006 until 2015, Barnier was vice-president of the European People's Party. In 2007, under Nicolas Sarkozy 's presidency, he re-joined the government as Minister of Agriculture.

In 2016, the investigating judge Sabine Kheris requested that the case of Barnier, Dominique de Villepin and Michèle Alliot-Marie be referred to the Court of Justice of the Republic. The former ministers were suspected of having allowed the exfiltration of the mercenaries responsible for the attack on the Bouaké penal camp during the 2004 Ivory Coast conflict, killing nine French soldiers. Supporters of the Ivorian president Laurent Gbagbo accused the French government of using the attack as a pretext for military retaliation against him.

Barnier worked in 2006 as a special adviser to José Manuel Barroso, then President of the European Commission, and presented a report to the Council of Ministers proposing the creation of a European civil-protection force. During 2006–2007, he served as member of the Amato Group, a group of high-level European politicians unofficially working on rewriting the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe into what became known as the Treaty of Lisbon following its rejection by French and Dutch voters.

Barnier led the UMP list in Ile-de-France for the 2009 European Parliament election. In February 2010 he was confirmed as European Commissioner for Internal Market and Services. In charge of European banking system reform, he argued for a "coherent single market with intelligent rules that apply everywhere". As European Commissioner for Internal Market and Services, Barnier handled many important issues, such as the reform of the financial sector (40 pieces of legislation between 2010 and 2014), the banking union (starting with European Banking Supervision) and the digital single market.

Barnier stood unsuccessfully for the nomination of the European People's Party to become President of the European Commission in March 2014, losing to Jean-Claude Juncker. He was twice appointed Acting Commissioner for Industry and Entrepreneurship in Antonio Tajani 's stead – first from 19 April to 25 May 2014, while Tajani was on electoral campaign leave for the 2014 European Parliament elections, and secondly from 1 to 16 July 2014, after Tajani was elected and took up his seat. From 2015, Barnier served as an unpaid special adviser to Juncker on defence policy.

On 27 July 2016, Barnier was announced as the European Commission's chief negotiator with the United Kingdom over leaving the European Union, under Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. Commenting on the appointment, Juncker said: "I wanted an experienced politician for this difficult job."

From 2019 to 2021, Barnier led the European Commission's Task Force for Relations with the United Kingdom (UK Task Force/UKTF). He was the main negotiator for the 2020 trade deal talks between the UK and EU, receiving his negotiating mandate from the European Council on 25 February 2020.

In January 2021, Barnier was appointed special adviser to President Ursula von der Leyen overseeing the ratification of the EU – UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement, under new arrangements that handed responsibility for implementing the agreement to Vice-President Maroš Šefčovič.

In February 2021, Barnier set up a political faction within the Republicans under the name "Patriot and European" in preparation for a possible bid in the 2022 presidential election.

On 27 August 2021, Barnier launched his presidential campaign. At the party's 2021 congress in December, he placed third in the first round of voting with 23.93% of the vote, after Éric Ciotti (25.59%) and Valérie Pécresse (25%); he subsequently endorsed Pécresse. Pécresse was nominated in the second round with 61% of the vote, and proceeded to place in fifth place in the first round of the presidential election, the worst result ever recorded by the Republicans or their Gaullist predecessors She endorsed Macron for the second round of the election. After his defeat, Barnier retreated from front-line politics for most of the three following years.

Following gains by opposition parties in the legislative elections called by President Emmanuel Macron in the summer of 2024, the prime minister, Gabriel Attal, resigned. Macron initially refused his resignation but accepted it on 16 July. On 5 September, Barnier was appointed as prime minister by Macron. The period between Attal's resignation and Barnier's appointment was the longest period that the French Fifth Republic had spent under a caretaker government. Barnier is the oldest prime minister in modern French history. Dominique Moïsi, a French political scientist, described Barnier as a compromise candidate, chosen to be acceptable to parties from the centre, the right and the far right.

Barnier's initial challenges as Prime Minister was forming a new government, passing the vote of confidence (with a minimum of 289 out of 577 votes) and submitting the 2025 budget by 1 October to parliament according to Reuters, further remarking that it would "be no easy task with the budget deficit already this year running billions of euros over target, leaving Barnier tough choices about calibrating spending cuts and tax rises" and risking the government's position in parliament. On 6 September, Barnier stated that he would continue some of Macron's policies, including refusing to repeal the raising of the retirement age to 64. On immigration he said, "There still is a feeling that our borders are sieves and that migration flows aren't being controlled." In an interview, he remarked that the new government would include the "presidential camp" and "maybe maybe ministers of the previous government".

Barnier was faced with a National Assembly divided nearly evenly into three blocs: the leftist New Popular Front with a plurality of seats, Macron's centrist to centre-right Ensemble, and the far-right National Rally. Marine Le Pen, the leader of National Rally, praised Barnier as "respectful of National Rally voters", but expressed caution as to his legislative agenda. The New Popular Front rejected Barnier's appointment and called for demonstrations against Macron. Olivier Faure, the leader of the Socialist Party, accused Macron of a "denial of democracy." Jean-Luc Mélenchon, the leader of the left-wing La France Insoumise, said that Macron had "stolen" the election by not appointing a prime minister from the New Popular Front and called for protests against the new government. According to France's Interior Ministry, around 110,000 people took part in these protests, which were held in Paris, Montauban, Nice, Lille, Strasbourg and Montpellier, as well as in several rural areas.

On 2 December 2024, Barnier invoked article 49.3 of the French Constitution to adopt the Social Security budget for 2025 without submitting it to a parliamentary vote. The decision happened after several last-ditch concessions to find a compromise failed, prompting both the New Popular Front and the National Rally to file motions of no confidence against his government. On 4 December, a majority of deputies voted to oust Barnier's government, which became the first to lose a motion of no-confidence since Georges Pompidou 's in 1962.

In 2025, Barnier returned to the National Assembly after he won a by-election in Paris's 2nd constituency in the heart of the Rive Gauche, succeeding Jean Laussucq, whose 2024 election had been annulled by the Constitutional Council.

Following his appointment as prime minister in 2024, the BBC described Barnier as "a committed, patriotic conservative in the tradition of... Charles de Gaulle ". In a conversation with Politico during July 2024, after the 7 July snap election, Barnier said France's most pressing issues were immigration, the state of its public finances and rebuilding its industrial and agricultural capacities. Upon his appointment as prime minister, he listed his main priorities as education, security and immigration control.

During his 2021 presidential campaign, Barnier stated he would be in favour of proposing a referendum on whether to tighten the legal framework for immigration in France. As a candidate, he stated his intention in "putting a stop to non-European immigration for three to five years," during an interview with French weekly magazine Le Point. He proposed to "immediately stop regularizations, rigorously limit family reunification, reduce the reception of foreign students and the systematic execution of the double penalty". He also proposed expanding prison capacity by 20,000 and imposing mandatory minimum sentences for certain crimes.

On economic issues, Barnier has been characterised as close to the neoliberal policies of Emmanuel Macron, including the reduction of taxes and business regulation. As a presidential candidate, Barnier proposed cutting production taxes by €10 billion, raising the retirement age from 62 to 65, lengthening the working week and tightening the conditions for access to social assistance.

Barnier is regarded as pro-European, as supporting NATO, and as favouring support for Ukraine in its war against Russia. He was described as a "Euro-ecstatic" by François Cornut-Gentille, his supporter and colleague in the Republicans. During his presidential campaign, many media organisations commented that Barnier sounded like a Eurosceptic and Brexit supporter, contradicting previous positions he had taken on the matter.

In 1981, Barnier voted for the abolition of capital punishment, following a number of other right-wing deputies in breaking party instructions not to do so. In the same year, he was among the conservative politicians, including Jacques Chirac and François Fillon, who voted against reducing the age of consent for same-sex relationships to 15, the same as that for mixed-sex couples. He has made few statements on same-sex relations in the years since.

As president of the 1992 Winter Olympics Organising Committee, Barnier continued his ties with the International Olympic Committee, and been a member of the Sustainability and Legacy Commission of the entity, and of the board of trustees of Friends of Europe, a Brussels-based think tank. In 2021, he published My Secret Brexit Diary, a memoir of the EU's negotiations with the UK during its withdrawal from the bloc.

In 1982, Barnier married Isabelle Altmayer, a lawyer; they have three children.

In October 2024, Barnier underwent surgery for a cervical (neck) lesion.

Michel Crépeau (French pronunciation: [ miʃɛl kʁepo ] ; 30 October 1930, Fontenay-le-Comte, Vendée – 30 March 1999, Paris) was a French centre-left politician.

Born in 1930, barrister, he joined the Radical Party. When it split in 1972, he founded the Movement of Left Radicals (MRG) which chosen the alliance with the Socialist Party and the French Communist Party. Elected Mayor of La Rochelle in 1971, and Member of French National Assembly representing of Charente Maritime département in 1973, he kept these terms until his death in 1999.

MRG candidate in the 1981 presidential election, he obtained 2.2% of votes in the first round, then he called to vote for François Mitterrand in the second round. He became his Environment Minister from 1981 to 1983, then his Trade and Craft Industry Minister from 1983 to 1986. When Robert Badinter was nominated President of the Constitutional Council, in February 1986, he succeeded him as Justice Minister but the Left lost the legislative election one month later and, consequently, he was forced to resign.

Michel Crépeau died in Paris on 30 March 1999, after a heart attack which had arisen few days earlier during a parliamentary session of the National Assembly.

Michel d'Ornano (12 July 1924 – 8 March 1991) was a French politician.

Count d'Ornano was born in Paris on 12 July 1924. He was a son of Count Guillaume d'Ornano, a co-founder of Lancôme in 1935 (which was acquired by L'Oreal in 1964). His younger brother was Count Hubert d'Ornano.

He was a descendant of both Marie Walewska and Philippe Antoine d'Ornano.

He was a founder of the perfume houses of Jean d'Albret and, with his brother Hubert, Orlane.

Count d'Ornano began his political career as mayor of Deauville in 1962. He served as president of the General Councils of both Calvados and Basse-Normandie before going on to represent the fourth district of Calvados in the Parliament of France ; in that body he sat first as an Independent Republican and later with the Union for French Democracy. He served in numerous cabinet positions under Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, including as Secretary of State for Ecology, the Minister of Culture, and Minister of Industry.

In September 1960, D'Ornano was married to Anne de Contades, a daughter of the Marquis de Contades of the Château de Montgeoffroy in Anjou, France, and the Marquise de la Rozière of San Ángel, Mexico. Her maternal grandmother was the Hon. Mrs. Fanny Lawrence Vernon of Sudbury Hall, Derbyshire, England. She was later installed as mayor of Deauville. They were the parents of Catherine d'Ornano and Jean-Guillaume d'Ornano.

Count d'Ornano died on 8 March 1991 in Garches after he was struck by a car near his home in the Paris suburb of Saint-Cloud. After his death, in 1991, she became president of the Regional Council of Calvados.

The Stade Michel d'Ornano in Caen was named after him.

Michel Giraud (14 July 1929 – 27 October 2011) was a French politician. He was notably Minister of Labor, deputy of Val-de-Marne, President of the Regional council of Île-de-France and president of the Mayors' Association of France. In 2006, he founded the Cœurs en Chœurs association, which enables disabled singers to perform in mixed (handi-handicapped) choirs. He was the organizer of the first concert held at the Palais des Congrès in Paris, live on Direct 8, presented by Philippe Labro.

A professor of literature, he began his political career as a Gaullist in the late 1960s, becoming a member of the Val-de-Marne departmental council and then mayor of Le Perreux-sur-Marne.

A member of Jacques Chirac RPR party and a staunch supporter of decentralization, he was elected in 1976 as the first president of Île-de-France and is considered the “founding father” of the region. He imposed the term “Francilien,” coined in 1983, and led the region almost uninterruptedly for 22 years.

Finally, he decided not to run for another term in the 1998 regional elections, finding himself at the center of a political and financial scandal involving the funding of high schools in the Île-de-France region, brought to light by Claude-Annick Tissot, head of the tender committee, who was nicknamed the Rally for the Republic clean lady.” On October 26, 2005, after a long trial, he was sentenced to four years' suspended imprisonment and a fine of €80,000 for complicity in corruption involving the RPR, then led by Jacques Chirac. Michel Giraud did not appeal his conviction, unlike most of the other defendants.

He was appointed Minister of Labor in 1993 in Édouard Balladur's coalition government and introduced the five-year law on the annualization of working hours and the use of partial unemployment. He created the first service voucher scheme. He defended the Professional Integration Contract (CIP), which was withdrawn in 1994 under pressure from students who denounced the creation of a “youth minimum wage.”

Having gradually abandoned all political activity, Michel Giraud headed the Fondation de la deuxième chance (Second Chance Foundation) between 1998 and 2011. Recognized as a public utility (Official Journal of February 9, 2006), the foundation was created on the initiative of Vincent Bolloré and is dedicated to helping young people integrate into society.

He is the founder of the Vent d'Est choir, of which he was the amateur choir director in the 1950s. He created a campsite for choir members in Erquy. Vent d'Est still exists today, and many current and former choir members spend their vacations at this campsite.

In 2006, he founded the association Cœurs en Chœurs, which enables singers with disabilities to sing in mixed choirs (disabled and able-bodied). He organized the first concert, which was held at the Convention center in Paris, broadcast live on Direct 8, and presented by Philippe Labro.

Michel Louis Etienne Regnaud, later 1st Count Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély (3 December 1761, Saint-Fargeau – 11 March 1819, Paris) was a French politician.

He was a lawyer in Paris and lieutenant of the maritime provostship of Rochefort. With the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789, he was elected deputy to the Estates-General by the Third Estate in the sénéchaussée of Saint-Jean-d'Angély.

His eloquence made him a prominent figure in the National Constituent Assembly, where he boldly attacked Honoré Mirabeau, and settled the dispute about the ashes of Voltaire by decreeing that they belonged to the nation.

The moderation shown by the measures he proposed at the time of King Louis XVI 's flight to Varennes, by his refusal to accede to the demands for the king's execution, and by the articles he published in the Journal de Paris and the Ami des Patriotes, marked him out for the hostility of the radical parties.

He was arrested after the revolution of 10 August, but succeeded in escaping, and during the Thermidorian Reaction which followed the fall of Maximilien Robespierre, Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély was appointed administrator of the military hospitals in Paris. His powers of organization brought him to Napoleon 's notice.

He accompanied Napoleon during the French invasion of Malta in June 1798, but he became sick and did not participate in the subsequent campaign in Egypt. Regnaud was appointed Commissioner of Government of French-occupied Malta and he was the editor of the propaganda newspaper Journal de Malte before returning to France in November 1798. The following year, he took part in the 18 Brumaire Coup (9 November 1799).

Under the Empire, he enjoyed the confidence of Napoleon Bonaparte, and was made councillor of state, president of election in the Conseil d'État, member of the Académie Française, procureur général of the high court, and was created Count Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély in 1808.

He was dismissed on the first Bourbon Restoration, but resumed his posts during the Hundred Days, and, after the battle of Waterloo, persuaded the Emperor Napoleon to abdicate. He was exiled by the government of the Second Restoration, but subsequently obtained leave to return to France. He died on the day of his return to Paris. His supposed memoirs, Les Souvenirs du Comte Regnault de St Jean d'Angély (Paris, 1817), are spurious.

Regnaud had married in 1795 Laure Guesnon de Bonneuil, the daughter of a former Maître d'Hôtel of the Count of Artois. They had no children, but his natural son Auguste Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély became Marshal of France.

Compagnie Générale des Établissements Michelin SCA ("General Company of the Michelin Enterprises P.L.S."), commonly referred to as Michelin (/ ˈ m ɪ ʃ əl ɪ n, ˈ m ɪ tʃ əl ɪ n / MISH -əl-in, MITCH -əl-in, French: [ miʃlɛ̃ ]), is a French multinational tyre manufacturer based in Clermont-Ferrand in the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes région of France.

In addition to the Michelin brand, it also owns the Kleber Tyre Company, Uniroyal (in North America, Colombia, and Peru), BFGoodrich, Riken, and SASCAR (among various others) brands. Michelin is also notable for its Red and Green travel guides, its roadmaps, the Michelin stars that the Red Guide awards to restaurants for their cooking, and for its company mascot Bibendum, colloquially known as the Michelin Man, who is a humanoid consisting of tyres.

Michelin's numerous inventions include the removable tyre, the pneumatic tyre for automobiles, the pneumatic tyre for trucks, twin tyres on trucks, the asymmetric tyre, the run-flat tyre, the green tyre, the pneurail (a tyre for rubber-tyred metros) and the radial tyre for automobiles, trucks, earthmovers, aircraft, and motorcycles. Michelin manufactures tyres for Space Shuttles, aircraft, automobiles, heavy equipment, motorcycles, and bicycles.

The company has been the world's largest tyre manufacturer by annual revenue since 2021. In 2012, the group produced 166 million tyres at sixty-nine facilities, located in eighteen countries.

In 1889, two brothers, Édouard Michelin (1859–1940) and André Michelin (1853–1931), took over Barbier Daubrée, a struggling farm implement business founded in 1832 in Clermont-Ferrand, France. Barbier-Daubrée manufactured rubber parts for farm machinery such as valves and gaskets and other rubber items such as balls and brake pads. One day a cyclist whose pneumatic tyre needed repair turned up at the factory. The tyre was glued to the rim, and it took over three hours to remove and repair the tyre, which then needed to be left overnight to dry.

The next day, Édouard Michelin took the repaired bicycle into the factory yard to test. After only a few hundred metres, the tyre failed. Despite the setback, Édouard was enthusiastic about the pneumatic tyre, and he and his brother worked on creating their own version, one that did not need to be glued to the rim. Barbier-Daubrée was reincorporated and renamed as Michelin on 28 May 1889. In 1891 Michelin took out its first patent for a removable pneumatic tyre which was used by Charles Terront to win the world's first long-distance cycle race, the 1891 Paris–Brest–Paris. Four years later, Michelin created the world's first pneumatic tyres (originally pioneered in 1888 by John Boyd Dunlop for bicycles) for automobiles, using them in a car called L'Eclair competing in the 1895 Paris-Bordeaux-Paris race.

In the 1920s and 1930s, Michelin operated large rubber plantations in Vietnam. Conditions at these plantations led to the famous labour movement Phú Riềng Đỏ.

In 1934, Michelin introduced a tyre which, if punctured, would run on a special foam lining, a design now known as a run-flat tyre (self-supporting type).

Michelin developed and patented a key innovation in tyre history, the 1946 radial tyre, and successfully exploited this technological innovation to become one of the world's leading tyre manufacturers. The radial was initially marketed as the "X" tyre. It was developed with the front-wheel-drive Citroën Traction Avant and Citroën 2CV in mind.

Michelin had bought the then-bankrupt Citroën in the 1930s. Because of its superiority in handling and fuel economy, use of this tyre quickly spread throughout Europe and Asia. In the U.S., the outdated bias-ply tyre persisted, with a market share of 87% in 1967. Michelin also introduced the XAS, the world's first asymmetric tyre, in 1964.

In 1966, Michelin partnered with Sears to produce radial tyres under the Allstate brand and was selling 1 million units annually by 1970.

In 1968, Michelin opened its first North American sales office, and was able to grow that market for its products rapidly; by 1989 the company had a 10% market share for OEM tyres purchased by American automobile makers.

Also in 1968, Consumer Reports, an influential American magazine, acknowledged the superiority of the radial construction, setting off a rapid decline in Michelin's competitor technology. In the U.S., the radial tyre now has a market share of 100%.

In addition to the private label and replacement tyre market, Michelin scored an early OEM tyre win in North America, when it received the contract for the 1970 Continental Mark III, the first American car with radial tyres fitted as standard.

In 1989, Michelin acquired the recently merged tyre and rubber manufacturing divisions of the American firms B.F. Goodrich Company (founded in 1870) and Uniroyal, Inc. (founded in 1892 as the United States Rubber Company) from Clayton, Dubilier & Rice. Uniroyal Australia had already been bought by Bridgestone in 1980. This purchase included the Norwood, North Carolina manufacturing plant which supplied tyres to the U.S. Space Shuttle Program.

Also in 1989, Michelin created Michelin Okamoto Tire Corporation, a joint venture with Japanese rubber/condom manufacturer Okamoto Industries, who already owned the Riken brand. In Japan, MOTC marketed Michelin, BFGoodrich, and Riken, which Michelin still markets today as a budget performance tyre brand.

In 1994, Michelin Okamoto launched the Green X line of fuel-saving tyres, a line of studless winter tyres: the Maxi-Glace (a version of the XM+S 100 for the Japanese market), W-Edge (rebranded XM+S Alpin), and the Maxi Ice, as well as a high performance tire, the GTX Virage, which was also marketed as the MXF Sport in some countries. The joint venture was later terminated in 2000, with Michelin buying all of Okamoto's shares.

In 1992, Michelin unveiled the green tyre, a tyre featuring Green X technology, advertised as saving fuel, lowering rolling resistance, and reducing emissions, in that year's Paris Motor Show with the MXN, a variant of their MXT tyre.

The green tyres was launched to the public released in 1994, marketed as the Energy in Europe and the rest of the world, and as the Green X in Japan. In Europe, the Energy launched with the Energy MXT, a fuel-saving version of their regular MXT tyre and the Energy MXV3-A for luxury cars. In 1997, the Energy MXV4, an asymmetric luxury performance tyre, was added to the lineup.

In Japan, the Green X line began with the MXGS in 1994. The line later consisted of the MXGS, MXT Green (released in 1996), MXV3-A Green (released in 1997), MXV4 Green (also released in 1997), MXE Green (a successor to the MXT, released in 1998), and the MXK Green (for kei cars, released in 1999). In the early 2000s, the series was unified globally as the Energy, and is still sold today as the Energy Saver line.

As of 1 September 2008, Michelin is again the world's largest tyre manufacturer after spending two years as number two behind Bridgestone. Michelin produces tyres in France, Serbia, Poland, Spain, Germany, the US, the UK, Canada, Brazil, Thailand, Japan, India, Italy and several other countries.

On 15 January 2010, Michelin announced the closing of its Ota, Japan plant, which employs 380 workers and makes the Michelin X-Ice tyre. Production of the X-Ice will be moved to Europe, North America, and elsewhere in Asia. In 2019, Michelin announced that plants in Germany and France are to be closed soon.

In 2010, Michelin introduced its sonic identity, created by the agency Sixième Son, notably presented at the Paris Motor Show and deployed across the brand’s communications. The sonic signature was rolled out internationally across advertising, audiovisual content and brand touchpoints.

Michelin also controls 90% of Taurus Tyre in Hungary, as well as Kormoran, a Polish brand.

In December 2018, Michelin acquired Camso, a manufacturer of off-the-road tyres, tracks, and accessories for power sports, agriculture, material handling and construction markets.

On 22 January 2019, it was announced that Michelin had acquired Indonesian manufacturer Multistrada Arah Sarana, which produces Achilles Radial and Corsa tyres. On 19 June that year, Michelin owns 99.64% of the share capital of Multistrada.

In April 2026, Michelin announced the completion of its acquisition of the American company Flexitallic.

From 1972 to 2008, Michelin was the long-standing supplier for MotoGP.

In 2007, Casey Stoner on Bridgestone tyres won the world championship in dominating fashion, and Valentino Rossi and other top riders complained that Michelins were inferior. Rossi wanted Bridgestones for the 2008 season, but Bridgestone was reluctant to provide them; Dorna threatened to impose a control tyre on the series, after which Bridgestone relented.

In 2008, Michelin committed errors of judgment in allocating adequate tyres for some of the race weekends. Dani Pedrosa 's team switched to Bridgestones in mid-season, a highly unusual move that caused friction between Honda Racing Corporation and their sponsor Repsol YPF. Other riders also expressed concerns and it seemed that Michelin might not have any factory riders for the 2009 season, leading to rumours that Michelin would withdraw from the series altogether.

Dorna and the FIM announced that a control tyre would be imposed on MotoGP for the 2009 season and Michelin did not enter a bid, effectively ending its participation in the series at the end of 2008.

Michelin returned to MotoGP in 2016 as the official tyre supplier after Bridgestone's withdrawal from the series at the end of 2015.

Michelin first competed in the 1977 Formula One season, when Renault started the development of their turbocharged F1 car. Michelin introduced radial tyre technology to Formula One and won the Formula One Drivers' Championship with Brabham and McLaren, before withdrawing at the end of 1984.

The company returned to Formula One in 2001, supplying the Williams, Jaguar, Benetton (renamed Renault in 2002), Prost and Minardi teams. Toyota joined F1 in 2002 with Michelin tyres, and McLaren also signed up with the company. Michelin Tyres were initially uncompetitive but by the 2005 season were dominant.

This was partly because the new regulations stated that tyres must last the whole race distance (and qualifying), and partly because only one top team (Ferrari) was running Bridgestones, and so had to do much of the development work. Michelin in contrast had much more testing and race data provided by the larger number of teams running their tyres.

Following the debacle of the 2005 United States Grand Prix where, because of safety concerns, Michelin would not allow the teams it supplied to race, Michelin's share price fell by 2.5% (though it recovered later the same day). On 28 June, Michelin announced that it would offer compensation to all race fans who had bought tickets for the Grand Prix. The company committed to refunding the price of all tickets for the race. Additionally, it announced that it would provide 20,000 complimentary tickets for the 2006 race to spectators who had attended the 2005 event.

Michelin has had a difficult relationship with the sport's governing body (the FIA) since around 2003 and this escalated to apparent disdain between the two parties during the 2005 season. The most high-profile disagreement was at the United States Grand Prix and the acrimony afterwards. Michelin criticised the FIA's intention to move to a single source (i.e. one brand) tyre from 2008 and threatened to withdraw from the sport.

In a public rebuke, FIA President Max Mosley wrote: "There are simple arguments for a single tyre, and if [Michelin boss Édouard Michelin] is not aware of this, he shows an almost comical lack of knowledge of modern Formula One." Another bone of contention has been the reintroduction of tyre changes during pit-stops from 2006. Michelin criticised the move claiming "this event illustrates F1's problems of incoherent decision-making and lack of transparency".

In December 2005, and as a result of the difficult relationship with the sport's governing body, Michelin announced that it would not extend its involvement in Formula One beyond the 2006 season. Bridgestone was then the sole supplier of tyres to Formula One until the end of the 2010 season, with Pirelli providing tyres for 2011.

The last race won on Michelin tyres in Formula One was the 2006 Japanese Grand Prix, Fernando Alonso benefitted after the Ferrari engine of Michael Schumacher failed during the race. This gave Michelin a second consecutive Constructors' Championship win, with the 2005 and 2006, after Bridgestone's seven-year winning streak, and brought to a total of four the number of titles for Michelin since this championship's inception back in the 1958 Formula One season ; Michelin's other titles were in the 1979, and 1984 seasons.

Michelin is involved in endurance races such as the 24 Hours of Le Mans and the American Le Mans Series. Involvement in Le Mans began with supplying tyres for the winner of the inaugural 1923 24 Hours of Le Mans as well as nine others of the 33 entrants. In 2009 Michelin supplied tyres for 41 of the 55 cars that entered in Le Mans.

In 2016, they provided tyres to the Audi, Porsche and Toyota LMP1 teams, as well as the AF Corse, BMW, Corvette, Ford Ganassi, Porsche and Risi teams in GTE-Pro / GTLM. Beginning in 2019, Michelin will replace Continental as the official tyre of the WeatherTech SportsCar Championship. Along with supplying tyres for IMSA's top three series, the partnership includes naming rights for the Sports Car Challenge series and the North American Endurance Cup.

Michelin has also supplied tyres in the European Le Mans Series. They have been the exclusive supplier of the LMP3 class since 2015.

In the World Rally Championship, Michelin has been the supplier of the Audi, Citroën, Ford, Lancia, Mitsubishi, Peugeot, Toyota and Volkswagen factory teams. Michelin Group brand BFGoodrich represented the brand in 2006 and 2007. The company was absent from 2008 to 2010, when Pirelli was signed as the official supplier, after which they returned to the series as an official supplier from 2011 to 2020 until Pirelli won the tender to once again become an official supplier from 2021 onwards.

Active Wheel from Michelin includes in-wheel electric motors and a motorised suspension to free up space in the front or rear of the vehicle. This model also eliminates the need for other notorious space hogs like transmissions and exhaust systems. The wheels already have a vehicle ready to receive them, the Heuliez Will from Opel, and are also expected to come standard on the Venturi Volage sometime in 2012. The project was interrupted in 2014.

Michelin operates tyre retail and distribution in Europe under Euromaster and Blackcircles brands, and in the US with its wholly owned subsidiary TCI Tire Centers. TCI tire centers was folded into NTW, when Michelin partnered with Sumitomo to form the entity. The company also manages its own e-commerce store, michelinman.com.

Michelin has long published two guidebook series, the Red Guides for Hotels and Restaurants, and the Green Guides for tourism. It now publishes several additional guides, as well as digital maps and guide products. The city maps in both the Red and the Green guides are of high quality, and are linked to the smaller-scale road maps.

Michelin publishes a variety of road maps, mostly of France but also of other European countries, countries in Africa, Thailand and the United States. They have recently embarked on e-commerce selling Michelin maps and guides directly to the public through, for example, their UK website. The Michelin roadmaps were reproduced in England for the Allied invasion during World War II. In 1940, the Germans also reproduced the 1938 edition of Michelin maps for the invasion.

ViaMichelin is a wholly owned subsidiary of Michelin Group, and was started in 2001, to represent Michelin's digital mapping services. As of August 2008, ViaMichelin generates 400 million maps and routes per month on its main website.

ViaMichelin provides mapping for internet, mobile and satellite navigation products with street level coverage of Europe, USA, Australia, and parts of Asia and South America.

The Michelin Challenge Bibendum is a major sustainable mobility event.

In 1952, 6 years after Michelin patented its Radial Casing, Michelin adapted the radial technology to truck tyres.

From 1999, the company was headed by CEO Édouard Michelin. On 26 May 2006, Édouard drowned while fishing near the island of Sein, off the coast of Brittany. His death brought Michel Rollier, a 2nd cousin of Édouard Michelin, to the head of the company. Rollier was replaced in May 2012 by Jean-Dominique Senard. In 2018, Jean-Dominique Senard announced he would not seek re-election at the shareholders' meeting in 2019. As a result, the shareholders elected Florent Menegaux to succeed Senard starting in 2019.

The company also has its headquarters in Greenville, South Carolina, United States as Michelin North America. They first manufactured in the city in 1975 before opening up their headquarters a decade later.

Corporate governance consists of two managers and an executive committee whose members are:

In France, a microbusiness (as an auto-entrepreneur or micro-entrepreneur) is defined in accordance with the European Commission 's definition: micro-enterprises (or microbusinesses) are companies employing a maximum of 10 people with an annual turnover and total balance sheet below 2 million EUR. The vast majority of micro enterprises (over 99%) are run by only one individual. They can be found mainly in emerging markets where they help to foster economic growth.

France has a tax policy specifically designed for companies with low turnovers. This legal status is legally restricted to freelance workers and employers (FWE)——retailers, artisans and a small number of professionals in private practice. This status is not subject to the usual Value-Added Tax regime (the State does not collect it and the company cannot claim it back) and prevents the company from any claim to governmental support programmes. Apart from these specifics, all microbusinesses abide by other FWE-targeted regulations.

Microbusinesses fall into two groups: trading activities or non-trading activities. The tax status of any given micro enterprise is checked and approved by the tax office. The method of taxation depends on the company's annual turnover, up to 32,000 EUR without VAT (or 80,000 EUR without VAT for retailers).

Should a non-trading microbusiness fall into this tax status, the taxation is calculated over two thirds of the company's total sales over the year (regardless of the company's actual profits).

Should a trading microbusiness fall into this tax status, the taxation is calculated using:

The microbusiness legal status was defined in Article 35 of the Economic Growth Incentive Law published on 1 August 2003. Before this law was passed, freelancers were expected to pay taxes either using the micro enterprise tax status defined in Article 50-0 of the General Tax Code or using the Special Declaratory Scheme defined in Article 102 of said General Tax Code. The provisions of the EGI law grant freelancers the ability to opt out of standard conditions for paying social contributions and charges (accounting provisions, regularization, minimum fees to start a business) in favour of the provisions defined in Article L 131-1 and Article L 136-3 of the Social Security Code (SSC).

Article 102 ter of the GTC defines a special declaratory scheme for non-trading profits (classified as BNC, for bénéfices non-commerciaux). This tax status is labelled "micro BNC". Profits from this status is exclusively restricted to people who do not earn more than 32,600 EUR exclusive of VAT over a calendar year (since 2011, the scheme should be valid up to 2013). In this situation, since 2006 the yearly Gross Operating Surplus (GOS) is minored by a 34% rate (was 37%).

Article 50-0 of the GTC defines the microbusiness tax status for crafting/trading/industrial company benefits. In other words, for industrial and commercial benefits (classified as BIC, for bénéfices industriels et commerciaux). This tax status is labelled "micro BIC" and restricted to companies with turnover limitations:

Note: If the business deals with both types of activities, the total turnover of the company must not exceed 82,200 EUR and the turnover related to non-trading activities must not exceed 32,900 EUR.

A minimum flat-rate reduction of 305 EUR is to be applied to the micro enterprise regardless of their tax status.

The Royal Society and Académie des sciences Microsoft Award was an annual award given by the Royal Society and the Académie des sciences to scientists working in Europe who had made a major contribution to the advancement of science through the use of computational methods. It was sponsored by Microsoft Research.

The award was open to any research scientist who had made a significant contribution at the intersection of computing and the sciences covering Biological Sciences, Physical Sciences, Mathematics and Engineering. The prize recognized the importance of interdisciplinary research at the interface of science and computing for advancing scientific boundaries, as well as the importance of investing in European scientists to give Europe a competitive science base. The recipient was selected by a Committee comprising members of the Académie des sciences and Fellows of the Royal Society. The prize consisted of a trophy and monetary amount of €250,000, of which €7,500 is prize money and the rest earmarked for further research.

The first award was made in 2006 and the last in 2009. It has now been replaced by the Royal Society Milner Award.

Today, Microsoft is giving awards for top-performing partners in various countries.

The Mikvah (or Jewish ritual bath) of Strasbourg is a historic site in Strasbourg, in the French department of Bas-Rhin.

The site is unique as it connects to the Jewish heritage of Strasbourg that dates back to the Middle Ages.

The mikvah is located in a cave within a modern building at 20 rue des Charpentiers in the historic center of Strasbourg, midway between the Strabourg Cathedral and the Episcopal Palace of Strasbourg.

The ritual bath has been listed as a monuments historique since November 15, 1985.

It was discovered in 1985 during a 1984 renovation of a group of houses at the corner of Rue des Juifs and Rue des Charpentiers. The buildings housed the ISTRA printing company until the 1980s.

The housing block was long known as being part of the perimeter of the Medieval Jewish life in Strasbourg. Oral traditions conserved the memory of the existence of a mikvah in this building (at 19 Rue des Juifs) to the point that in the 16th century the location was referred to as Zum Judenbad, or the Jewish Bath. Other than these stories, all other information or memory had been lost to history until its rediscovery.

Conscious of the risk that the planned demolition and renovation of the space would do to the ritual bath site, the Société d'Histoire des Israélites d'Alsace et de Lorraine (SHIAL) appealed to then Minister of Culture Jack Lang, and an agreement between the buyers and the public authorities was signed. The agreement allowed for a six-month stoppage in building work to organize an archaeological investigation of the site. The investigations brought to light the Mikvah site in its entirety.

The site currently serves as a public mikvah within a synagogue on site. Another private mikvah exists within a private residence on Rue des Juifs.

The monument is open for visits under certain conditions. Its opening to the public – along with the possibility of guided tours – is organized on certain days of the year by the Department of Culture for the City of Strasbourg.

The first Jews arrived in Strasbourg around 1150, coming from nearby German towns along the Palatinate, including Mayence, Spire, and Worms.

The mikvah was constructed a short time after the arrival of the community, around 1200. At the same time, the Jewish community in Strasbourg was flourishing, with community members working as merchants along European trade routes.

The situation for the Jews in Strasbourg began to deteriorate at the beginning of the 14th century, due to economic competition from local bourgeoise and increased Jewish immigration from other areas. It worsened in 1347, when Jews were accused of having propagated the Black Death. In 1349, the synagogue in Strasbourg was pillaged and hundreds of Jews were massacred in the Jewish cemetery in town (now location of Place de la République). Survivors of the massacre were given the decision to either convert or flee. Some Jews decided to return to Strasbourg in 1362, but Strasbourg banned Jews from settling in the city in 1391, a ban that would stay in place for 400 years, only overturned after the French Revolution.

After the Jewish community was forced out of Strasbourg in the 1390s, the mikvah was turned into a well. This well was found during excavation of the mikvah site.

The Mikvah is an approximately 3m square room of grey sandstone topped by a red brick barrel vault.

At four corners of the room, near the upper part of the vault, are four Romanesque stone corbels.

The basin at the center of the room can hold at least 500 liters of purified water, coming directly from primarily groundwater (rainwater can be used as mikvah water under Jewish law, but it is not relevant in the case of this particular mikvah). Today, the groundwater is no longer visible, as the water table in that neighborhood is 8 meters below street level.

At the center of the barrel vault, there is a circular zenith hole of about 0.9 meters. This hole is believed to be used for the collection of rainwater in addition to the groundwater. In Alsace, groundwater is easily accessible, thus the mikvah primarily uses these two sources for its water.

The remains of a staircase of grey and pink sandstone remain visible at the mikvah. The staircase led from the entrance of the bath, at the basement level of the building, down to the water table. The last step of the staircase opens to the bath itself. Part of the steps in the staircase were reused in the construction of a well following the departure of the Jews from the building.

Two niches are visible on the walls, used for the placement of candles.

At the bottom of the basin lies a wooden structure of about 1.7 m by 1.5 m. This structure, whose interlocking angles are characteristic of the 11th or 12th century, was probably retaining formwork associated with the construction of the bath.

The opening of the well found during the excavation of the area, was off-center in relation to the zenith hole at the top of the vault. This continues archaeological questions about the site. Work to clear the mikvah area has left the base of this well, represented by four large stone slabs 1 meter wide, 1.3 meters high and 12 cm thick.

It is believed that the room next to the square room was used for people to undress before entering the Mikvah.

Brazil–France relations are the bilateral and historical relations between the Federative Republic of Brazil and the French Republic.

France and Brazil share a 730km long-border via the French department of Guiana, the longest international border of France.

The two countries are committed to strengthening their bilateral cooperation in the areas for which working groups have been created: nuclear energy, renewable energies, defence technologies, technological innovation, joint cooperation in African countries and space technologies, medicines and the environment.

Brazil and France entered a formal strategic alliance in 2008. France supports Brazil's ambition to become a global player on the international scene, and has been a strong supporter of the Brazilian bid for a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council. Through significant technology transfers, France intends to help Brazil acquire key technologies of a major world power in the military, space, energy and technology sectors.

According to a 2013 BBC World Service Poll, 54% of French people view Brazil's influence positively, with 32% expressing a negative view, while 50% of Brazilians view France's influence positively, with 19% expressing a negative view.

In 2019, Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro commented that he would only accept $20 million in G7 aid to fight the Amazon rainforest wildfires if French President Emmanuel Macron retracted criticisms which he found offensive, accusing Macron of a "colonialist mentality".

After a period of relative isolation and neglect under Bolsonaro, Brazil re-engaged in partnerships with France under President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, notably in green policies and defense projects such as the extension of the Franco-Brazilian Submarine Development Program.

Brazil is France's leading trade partner in Latin America and its fourth most important partner outside OECD. Over 500 French companies are established directly in Brazil and employ over 250,000 people. Total trade between the two countries surpassed $6.5 billion dollars in 2009.

Brazil is France's leading partner in Latin America for cultural, scientific, and technical cooperation. Three French secondary schools (Brasília, Rio, and São Paulo) have a total of 2,150 students; 1,000 of whom are French. The Alliances françaises in Brazil constitute the oldest and most extensive in the world (74 establishments in 52 cities). Brazil, through its past and present connections to France, is eligible for membership with the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie. Both countries also share the distinction of being the largest Roman Catholic-majority countries by population on their respective continents.

Brazil and France share a 730 km border between the state of Amapá and the overseas department of French Guiana. The cross-border cooperation between the two countries has enjoyed increased vitality. This cooperation makes it possible to better integrate French Guiana into its geographical environment, to respond to the concerns of both parties about the various cross-border risks, to encourage human exchanges and trade and to develop the economy of the Amazon region, respecting the local populations and extraordinary environment. The granting to France, on the initiative of Brazil, of observer status within the Amazon Cooperation Treaty Organization, will strengthen this cooperation. The construction of the Oyapock River Bridge over the Oyapock River, decided during President Lula ’s visit to France, made the Cayenne - Macapá road link possible. The bridge was opened in 2017.

Defence cooperation has undergone major developments in recent years. On July 15, 2005, Brazil and France signed several military cooperation agreements in areas such as aviation and advanced military technologies. On 2008, the two countries entered a Status of Forces Agreement. On 23 December 2008, Brazil and France established a formal strategic alliance.

Brazil and France signed a major defense pact on December 24, 2008. At the occasion, the Brazilian government purchased 50 EC-725 Super Cougar helicopters, a nuclear submarine, and four Scorpène-class submarines from the French government worth an estimated $12 billion. Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva and French President Nicolas Sarkozy signed an accord approving the sale in Rio de Janeiro. All these contracts come with significant technology transfer and offer considerable participation prospects for the Brazilian industry. The helicopters will be built locally by the Brazilian firm Helibras in partnership with Eurocopter. The four conventional Scorpènes will also be built locally, in a new shipyard being built by Odebrecht and DCNS in Itaguaí, state of Rio de Janeiro.

In September 2009, the two countries announced a joint venture between Agrale and Renault Trucks to produce military transport vehicles.

In late 2019, it was reported that, under then-president Jair Bolsonaro, the Brazilian military viewed France as its biggest potential threat due to disputes over the Amazon rainforest.

There are direct flights between Brazil and France with the following airlines: Air France, LATAM Brasil and Azul. A road connects the French city of Cayenne to Macapá in Brazil, via. a bridge over the Oyapock River, which is known as the N2 in French Guiana, and BR-156 in Brazil.

When the Brazilian navy moved to intercept French lobster fisherman off the coast of the state of Pernambuco in 1961, the French Navy deployed vessels in response. This is considered a bloodless war as no casualties occurred nor violence.

France is Brazil's second-leading scientific partner, after the United States. Brazil is France's leading scientific partner in Latin America. The two countries cooperate in the areas of climate change, sustainable development, biodiversity, technological innovation and the genome.

France–Sweden relations are the current and historical relations between France and Sweden. Both nations are members of the Council of Europe, European Union, NATO and the OECD. In August 2022, France fully ratified Sweden's NATO membership application. France strongly supported Sweden's NATO membership during the latter's accession process.

One of the first contacts between France and Sweden was in 799 during the first Viking raids of the Frankish northern coast. In March 845 Viking Danish-Swedish King Ragnar brought 120 ships up the Seine river for the Siege of Paris. The Vikings left Paris after a month of battle when Frankish King Charles the Bald paid them 7,000 lbs of silver and gold. In 911 after multiple Viking invasions, Frankish King Charles the Simple conceded the town of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte to the Vikings.

In 1499, France and Sweden signed a Trade Treaty for which Sweden sent France hides, skins, furs, butter, fish oil, herrings, whales, tar, timber for the navy, iron and copper. In exchange, the French sent salt Brouage, wheat, wine, canvas, sheets, silks and spices. Across the 16th century, French mercenaries such as Claude Collart and Pontus de La Gardie entered Swedish service. In 1570, France, along with Poland and the Holy Roman Empire, helped conclude the peace between Sweden and Denmark at Szczecin ending the Northern Seven Years' War in 1570. In 1631, during the Thirty Years' War, France and Sweden signed the Treaty of Bärwalde which obliged Sweden to maintain an army of 36,000 troops, and France to fund the Swedish army annually with 400,000 Reichsthalers.

In the 1700s, French culture and the French language became a big influence on the Swedish monarchy. Swedish king Gustave III received a French education as a child. Several prominent Swedish nobles studied in France. Influenced by the French Academy of Sciences, Sweden created the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.

In 1805, Sweden entered into the War of the Third Coalition and fought against France in the Franco-Swedish War in an effort to defeat France under Napoleon Bonaparte. The war lasted until January 1810, when Sweden was defeated by France's then-ally, Russia. After the war, France and Sweden signed the Treaty of Paris (1810). The next year, French Marshal Jean-Baptiste Jules Bernadotte, who served under Emperor Napoleon, was elected as the heir-presumptive to King Charles XIII of Sweden, who was childless. Bernadotte was elected partly because a large part of the Swedish Army, in view of future complications with Russia, supported electing a soldier and partly because he was popular with the Swedish army because of the kindness he had shown to the Swedish prisoners in Lübeck. Bernadotte accepted the offer.

In 1813, Bernadotte successfully led Swedish troops against Napoleon during the War of the Sixth Coalition which resulted in Napoleon being exiled to the Island of Elba in 1814. In 1818 Bernadotte was crowned King of Sweden and King of Norway after defeating Norway in the war of 1814 after demanded Denmark to cede Norway to Sweden after the Napoleonic Wars as compensation for the loss of Finland in the Finnish War to which the allies agreed, mainly to prevent further conflict. The Danish king ceded Norway shortly after the demands out of fear of Sweden declaring war on Denmark. After the defeat of Norway in 1814 the creation of the union between Sweden and Norway came through. The union lasted for almost a century until it was peacefully dissolved in 1905. After this he became Charles XIV John of Sweden, and simultaneously founded the House of Bernadotte from which the current Swedish royal family hails from. Sweden declared itself officially neutral in 1818 from future conflicts.

During World War I and World War II, Sweden remained officially neutral during both conflicts, however, unofficially sympathized more with the allies and provided military training to allied soldiers. During World War II, French born Swedish diplomat Raoul Nordling secretly met with German General Dietrich von Choltitz to try to limit the bloodshed and damage to the city of Paris during the Liberation of Paris.

Since the end of the world wars, both France and Sweden have joined the European Union. Both nations have had numerous high-level visits and cooperate jointly in several multilateral organizations. There are approximately 15,000 Swedish nationals living in France and 3,500 French nationals living in Sweden.

Military cooperation between France and Sweden is modest as the Swedish focus on exchanges with their Nordic neighbors. Cooperation is primarily operational and has, during the Libyan crisis, enabled Swedish Gripen fighters to take part in NATO air operations. The Swedish armed forces have cooperated with French forces in Africa on several occasions, particularly during the Operation Artemis, UNIFIL Maritime Task Force, and EUFOR Chad.

The 2020s has seen increased military cooperation between the two countries. A joint declaration was issued in 2021 regarding defence cooperation in international operations and material provision. In 2023, Sweden agreed to acquire and further develop the French Akeron MP anti-tank guided missile. Further agreements on defence collaboration were signed in 2024 and 2025.

In 2015, trade between France and Sweden totaled €10 billion Euros. In 2014, Sweden was France's 16th-largest customer and 18th-largest supplier. At the same time, France was Sweden's 8th-largest customer and 9th-largest supplier.

French foreign direct investment (FDI) in Sweden totalled €3.3 billion in 2013, primarily in the agrifood, equipment and electrical goods sectors. Swedish FDI in France totalled €5.2 billion in 2013, particularly in the automobile industry. Swedish companies such as IKEA and Volvo operate in France.

The Millau Viaduct (French : Viaduc de Millau [ vja.dyk də mi.jo ]) is a multispan cable-stayed bridge completed in 2004 across the gorge valley of the Tarn near (west of) Millau in the Aveyron department in the Occitanie Region, in Southern France. The design team was led by engineer Michel Virlogeux and English architect Norman Foster. It was the tallest bridge in the world for over two decades (until late 2025), with a structural height of 343 metres (1,125 ft).

The Millau Viaduct is part of the A75 – A71 autoroute axis from Paris to Béziers and Montpellier. The cost of construction was approximately € 394 million (£ 345 million). It was built over three years, formally inaugurated on 14 December 2004, and opened to traffic two days later on 16 December. The bridge has been consistently ranked as one of the greatest engineering achievements of modern times, and received the 2006 Outstanding Structure Award from the International Association for Bridge and Structural Engineering.

In the 1980s, high levels of road traffic near Millau in the Tarn valley were causing congestion, especially in the summer due to holiday traffic on the route from Paris to Spain. A method of bypassing Millau had long been considered, not only to ease the flow and reduce journey times for long-distance traffic, but also to improve the quality of access to Millau for its local businesses and residents. One of the solutions considered was the construction of a road bridge to span the river and gorge valley. The first plans for a bridge were discussed in 1987 by CETE, and by October 1991 the decision was made to build a high crossing of the Tarn by a structure of around 2,500 metres (8,200 ft) in length. During 1993–1994, the government consulted with seven architects and eight structural engineers. During 1995–1996, a second definition study was made by five associated architect groups and structural engineers. In January 1995, the government issued a declaration of public interest to solicit design approaches for a competition.

In July 1996 the jury decided in favour of a cable-stayed design with multiple spans, as proposed by the SODETEG consortium led by Michel Virlogeux, Norman Foster and Arcadis. The decision to proceed by grant of contract was made in May 1998; then in June 2000, the contest for the construction contract was launched, open to four consortia. In March 2001, Eiffage established the subsidiary Compagnie Eiffage du Viaduc de Millau (CEVM), and was declared winner of the contest and awarded the prime contract in August.

In initial studies, four potential options were examined:

The fourth option was selected by ministerial decree on 28 June 1989. It envisioned two possibilities:

After long construction studies by the Ministry of Public Works, the low solution was abandoned because it would have intersected the water table, had a negative impact on the town, cost more, and lengthened the driving distance. The choice of the 'high' solution was decided by ministerial decree on 29 October 1991.

After the choice of the high viaduct, five teams of architects and researchers worked on a technical solution. The concept and design for the bridge was devised by French designer and structural engineer Michel Virlogeux. He worked with the Dutch engineering firm Arcadis, responsible for the structural engineering of the bridge.

The 'high solution' required the construction of a 2,500-metre-long (8,200 ft) viaduct. From 1991 to 1993, the structures division of Sétra, directed by Virlogeux, carried out preliminary studies, and examined the feasibility of a single structure spanning the valley. Taking into account technical, architectural, and financial issues, the Administration of Roads opened the question for competition among structural engineers and architects to widen the search for realistic designs. By July 1993, seventeen structural engineers and thirty-eight architects applied as candidates for the preliminary studies. With the assistance of a multidisciplinary commission, the Administration of Roads selected eight structural engineers for a technical study, and seven architects for the architectural study.

Simultaneously, a school of international experts representing a wide spectrum of expertise (technical, architectural, and landscape), chaired by Jean-François Coste, was established to clarify the choices that had to be made. In February 1995, on the basis of proposals of the architects and structural engineers, and with support of the school of experts, five general designs were identified.

The competition was relaunched: five combinations of architects and structural engineers, drawn from the best candidates of the first phase, were formed; each was to conduct in-depth studies of one of the general designs. On 15 July 1996, Bernard Pons, minister of Public Works, announced the decision of the jury, which was constituted of elected artists and experts, and chaired by Christian Leyrit, the director of highways. The solution of a multiple-span viaduct cable-stayed bridge, presented by the structural engineering group Sogelerg, Europe Etudes Gecti and Serf, and the architects Foster + Partners was declared the best.

Detailed studies were carried out by the successful consortium, steered by the highways authority until mid-1998. After undergoing wind tunnel tests, the shape of the road deck was altered, and detailed corrections were made to the design of the pylons. When the details were eventually finalised, the whole design was approved in late 1998.

Once the Ministry of Public Works had taken the decision to offer the construction and operation of the viaduct as a grant of contract, an international call for tenders was issued in 1999. Five consortia tendered:

The Compagnie Eiffage du Viaduc de Millau, working with the architect Norman Foster, was successful in obtaining the tender. Because the government had already taken the design work to an advanced stage, the technical uncertainties were considerably reduced. A further advantage of this process was to make negotiating the contract easier, reducing public expense, and speeding up construction, while minimising such design work as remained for the contractor.

All the member companies of the Eiffage group had some role in the construction work. The construction consortium was made up of the Eiffage TP company for the concrete part, the Eiffel company for the steel roadway (Gustave Eiffel built the Garabit viaduct in 1884, a railway bridge in the neighbouring Cantal département), and the Enerpac company for the roadway's hydraulic supports. The engineering group Setec has authority in the project, with SNCF engineering having partial control. Appia (company) was responsible for the job of the bituminous road surface on the bridge deck, and Forclum (fr) for electrical installations. Management was handled by Eiffage Concessions.

The only other business that had a notable role on the building site was Freyssinet, a subsidiary of the Vinci Group specialising in prestressing. It installed the cable stays and put them under tension, while the prestress division of Eiffage was responsible for prestressing the pillar heads.

The steel road deck, and the hydraulic action of the road deck were designed by the Walloon engineering firm Greisch from Liège, Belgium, also an information and communication technologies (ICT) company of the Walloon Region. They carried out the general calculations and the resistance calculations for winds of up to 225 kilometres per hour (140 mph). They also applied the launching technology.

The sliding shutter technology for the bridge piers came from PERI.

The bridge's construction cost up to €394 million, with a toll plaza 6 kilometres (3.7 mi) north of the viaduct, costing an additional € 20 million. The builders, Eiffage, financed the construction in return for a concession to collect the tolls for 75 years, until 2080. However, if the concession yields high revenues, the French government can assume control of the bridge as early as 2044.

The project required about 127,000 cubic metres (166,000 cu yd) of concrete, 19,000 tonnes (21,000 short tons) of steel for the reinforced concrete, and 5,000 tonnes (5,500 short tons) of pre-stressed steel for the cables and shrouds. The builder claims that the lifetime of the bridge will be at least 120 years.

Numerous organisations opposed the project, including the World Wildlife Fund (WWF), France Nature Environnement, the national federation of motorway users, and Environmental Action. Opponents advanced several arguments:

Two weeks after the laying of the first stone on 14 December 2001, workers started digging deep shafts for the pilings. Each pylon is supported by four concrete pilings. Each piling is 15 metres (49 ft) deep and 5 metres (16 ft) in diameter, assuring the stability of the pylons. At the top of the pilings a large footing was poured, 3–5 metres (10–16 ft) in thickness, to reinforce the strength of the pilings. The 2,000 cubic metres (2,600 cu yd) of concrete necessary for the footings was poured at the same time as pilings.

In March 2002, the pylons emerged from the ground. The speed of construction then rapidly increased. Every three days, each pylon increased in height by 4 metres (13 ft). This performance was mainly due to sliding shuttering. Thanks to a system of shoe anchorages and fixed rails in the heart of the pylons, a new layer of concrete could be poured every 20 minutes.

The bridge road deck was constructed on plateaus at both ends of the viaduct, and pushed onto the pylons using bridge launching techniques. Each half of the assembled road deck was pushed lengthwise from the plateaus to the pylons, passing across one pylon to the next. During the launching, the road deck was also supported by eight temporary towers, which were removed near the end of construction. In addition to hydraulic jacks on each plateau pushing the road decks, each pylon was topped with a mechanism on top of each pylon that also pushed the deck. This mechanism consisted of a computer-controlled pair of wedges under the deck manipulated by hydraulics. The upper and lower wedge of each pair pointed in opposite directions. The wedges were hydraulically operated, and moved repeatedly in the following sequence:

The launching advanced the road deck at 600 millimetres (24 in) per cycle which was roughly four minutes long.

The mast pieces were driven over the new road deck lying down horizontally. The pieces were joined to form the one complete mast, still lying horizontally. The mast was then tilted upwards, as one piece, at one time in a tricky operation. In this way, each mast was erected on top of the corresponding concrete pylon. The stays connecting the masts and the deck were then installed, and the bridge was tensioned overall, and weight tested. After this, the temporary pylons could be removed.

The Millau Viaduct is on the territory of the communes of Millau and Creissels, France, in the département of Aveyron. Before the bridge was constructed, traffic had to descend into the Tarn valley and pass along the route nationale N9 near the town of Millau, causing much traffic congestion at the beginning and end of the July and August holiday season. The bridge now traverses the Tarn valley above its lowest point, linking two limestone plateaus, the Causse du Larzac and the Causse Rouge, and is inside the perimeter of the Grands Causses regional natural park.

The Millau Viaduct forms the last link of the existing A75 autoroute (known as "la Méridienne"), from Clermont-Ferrand to Béziers. The A75, with the A10 and A71, provides a continuous high-speed route south from Paris through Clermont-Ferrand to the Languedoc region, thence to Spain, considerably reducing the cost and time of vehicle traffic travelling along this route. Many tourists heading to southern France and Spain follow this route because it is direct and without tolls for the 340 kilometres (210 mi) between Clermont-Ferrand and Béziers, except for the bridge.

The Eiffage group, which constructed the Viaduct also operates it, under a government contract, which allows the company to collect tolls for up to 75 years. As of 2025, the toll bridge costs €11.20 for light automobiles (or €13.90 during the peak season of 15 June to 15 September).

Each of the seven pylons is supported by four deep shafts, 15 metres (49 ft) deep and 5 metres (16 ft) in diameter.

The abutments are concrete structures that provide anchorage for the road deck to the ground in the Causse du Larzac and the Causse Rouge.

The metallic road deck, which appears very light despite its total mass of around 36,000 tonnes (40,000 short tons), is 2,460 metres (8,070 ft) long and 32 metres (105 ft 0 in) wide. It comprises eight spans. The six central spans measure 342 metres (1,122 ft), and the two outer spans are 204 metres (669 ft). These are composed of 173 central box beams, the spinal column of the construction, onto which the lateral floors and the lateral box beams were welded. The central box beams have a 4 metres (13 ft 1 in) cross-section, and a length of 15–22 metres (49–72 ft) for a total weight of 90 metric tons (99 short tons). The deck has an inverse airfoil shape, providing negative lift in strong wind conditions.

The seven masts, each 87 metres (285 ft) high, and weighing around 700 tonnes (690 long tons ; 770 short tons), are set on top of the concrete pylons. Between each of them, eleven stays (steel cables) are anchored, providing support for the road deck.

Each mast of the Viaduct is equipped with a monoaxial layer of eleven pairs of cable-stays; laid face to face. Depending on their length, the cable stays were made of 55 to 91 high tensile steel cables, or strands, themselves formed of seven strands of steel (a central strand with six intertwined strands). Each strand has triple protection against corrosion (galvanisation, a coating of petroleum wax, and an extruded polyethylene sheath). The exterior envelope of the stays is itself coated along its entire length with a double helical weatherstrip. The idea is to avoid running water which, in high winds, could cause vibration in the stays and compromise the stability of the viaduct.

The stays were installed by the Freyssinet company.

To allow for deformations of the metal road deck under traffic, a special surface of modified bitumen was installed by research teams from Appia (company) [ fr ]. The surface is somewhat flexible to adapt to deformations in the steel deck without cracking, but it must nevertheless have sufficient strength to withstand motorway conditions (fatigue, density, texture, adherence, anti-rutting etc.). The 'ideal formula' was found after two years of research.

The electrical installations of the viaduct are large in proportion to the size of the bridge. There are 30 kilometres (19 mi) of high-current cables, 20 kilometres (12 mi) of fibre optics, 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) of low-current cables, and 357 telephone sockets; allowing maintenance teams to communicate with each other and with the command post. These are situated on the deck, on the pylons, and on the masts.

The pylons, road deck, masts, and cable stays are equipped with a multitude of sensors to enable structural health monitoring. These are designed to detect the slightest movement in the Viaduct, and measure its resistance to wear-and-tear over time. Anemometers, accelerometers, inclinometers, and temperature sensors are all used for the instrumentation network.

Twelve fibre optic extensometers were installed in the base of pylon P2. Being the tallest of all, it is therefore under the most intense stress. These sensors detect movements on the order of a micrometre. Other extensometers, electrical this time, are distributed on top of P2 and P7. This apparatus is capable of taking up to 100 readings per second. In high winds, they continuously monitor the reactions of the Viaduct to extreme conditions. Accelerometers placed strategically on the road deck monitor the oscillations that can affect the metal structure. Displacements of the deck on the abutment level are measured to the nearest millimetre. The cable stays are also instrumented, and their ageing meticulously analysed. Additionally, two piezoelectric sensors gather traffic data: weight of vehicles, average speed, density of the flow of traffic, etc. This system can distinguish between fourteen different types of vehicle.

The data is transmitted by an Ethernet network to a computer in the IT room at the management building situated near the toll plaza.

The toll plaza is on the A75 autoroute ; the bridge toll booths and the buildings for the commercial and technical management teams are situated 4 kilometres (2.5 mi) north of the viaduct. The toll plaza is protected by a canopy in the shape of a leaf, formed from tendrilled concrete, using the ceracem process. Consisting of 53 elements (voussoirs), the canopy is 100 metres (330 ft) long and 28 metres (92 ft) wide. It weighs around 2,500 tonnes (2,500 long tons ; 2,800 short tons).

The toll plaza can accommodate sixteen lanes of traffic, eight in each direction. At times of low traffic volume, the central booth is capable of servicing vehicles in both directions. A car park and viewing station, equipped with public toilets, is situated at each side of the toll plaza. The total cost was €20 million.

The rest area of Brocuéjouls, named Aire du Viaduc de Millau, is situated just north of the viaduct, and is centred on an old farm building named 'Ferme de Brocuéjouls'. It was inaugurated by the prefect of Aveyron, Chantal Jourdan, on 30 June 2006, after 7 months of works. The farm and its surroundings can accommodate entertainment and tourism promotion activities.

The cost of this work amounted to €5.8 million :

Unusually for a bridge closed to pedestrians, a run took place in 2004, and another on 13 May 2007:

A mime artist, or simply mime (from Greek μῖμος, mimos, "imitator, actor"), is a kind of performer who uses mime (also called pantomime), by acting or entertaining through the use of body motions without speech, as a theatrical medium or as a performance art. In earlier times, in English, such a performer would typically be referred to as a mummer.

Jacques Copeau, strongly influenced by commedia dell'arte and Japanese Noh theatre, used masks in the training of his actors. His pupil Étienne Decroux was highly influenced by this, started exploring and developing the possibilities of mime, and developed corporeal mime into a highly sculptural form, taking it outside the realms of naturalism. Jacques Lecoq contributed significantly to the development of mime and physical theatre with his training methods. As a result of this, the practice of mime has been included in the list of Intangible Cultural Heritage elements in France since 2017.

The performance of mime originates at its earliest in Ancient Greece ; the name is taken from a single masked dancer called Pantomimus, although performances were not necessarily silent. The first recorded mime was Telestēs in the play Seven Against Thebes by Aeschylus. Tragic mime was developed by Puladēs of Kilikia; comic mime was developed by Bathullos of Alexandria. Mime (mimus) was an aspect of Roman theatre from its earliest times, paralleling the Atellan farce in its improvisation (if without the latter's stock characters). It gradually began to replace the Atellanae as interludes [embolium] or afterpieces (exodium on the main theatre stages; became the sole dramatic event at the Floralia in the second century BC; and in the following century received technical advances at the hands of Publilius Syrus and Decimus Laberius, who used expressions, situations and titles of Plautus' comedies. Under the Roman Empire mime became the predominant Roman drama, but experienced mixed fortunes under various emperors. Trajan banished mime artists; Caligula favored them; Marcus Aurelius made them priests of Apollo. Nero himself acted as a mime. The mime was distinguished from other dramas by its absence of masks, and by the presence of female as well as male performers. A mime called the archimime (Latin: archimimus) would perform as a part of Roman funeral processions by miming the deeds of the deceased. Mime stock characters included the stooge or stupidus, the gigolo, and cultus adulter in the mimus zelotypi or jealous mime.

In medieval Europe, early forms of mime such as mummer's plays and later dumbshows evolved. In early nineteenth-century Paris, Jean-Gaspard Deburau solidified the many attributes that have come to be known in modern times—the silent figure in whiteface.

Classical Indian musical theatre is a group of theatrical forms in which the performer presents a narrative via stylized gesture, an array of hand positions, and miming to play different characters, actions, and landscapes. Recitation, music, and even percussive footwork sometimes accompany the performance. The Natya Shastra, an ancient treatise on theatre by Bharata Muni, mentions silent performance, or mukabhinaya. In Kathakali, stories from Indian epics are told with facial expressions, hand signals and body motions. Performances are accompanied by songs narrating the story while the actors act out the scene, followed by actor detailing without background support of narrative song.. The Japanese Noh tradition has greatly influenced many contemporary mime and theatre practitioners including Jacques Copeau and Jacques Lecoq because of its use of mask work and highly physical performance style. Butoh, though often referred to as a dance form, has been adopted by various theatre practitioners as well.

Before the work of Étienne Decroux there was no major treatise on the art of mime, and so any recreation of mime as performed prior to the twentieth century is largely conjecture, based on interpretation of diverse sources. However, the twentieth century also brought a new medium into widespread usage: the motion picture. The restrictions of early motion picture technology meant that stories had to be told with minimal dialogue, which was largely restricted to intertitles. This often demanded a highly stylized form of physical acting largely derived from the stage. Thus, mime played an important role in films prior to advent of talkies (films with sound or speech). The mimetic style of film acting was used to great effect in German Expressionist film. Silent film comedians like Charlie Chaplin, Harold Lloyd, and Buster Keaton learned the craft of mime in the theatre, but, through film, they had a profound influence on mimes working in live theatre decades after their deaths. Indeed, Chaplin may be the best-documented mime in history. Harpo Marx, of the Marx Brothers comedy team, continued the mime tradition in the sound film era, his silent persona working in counterpoint to the verbal comedy of his brothers Groucho and Chico. The famous French comedian, writer, and director Jacques Tati achieved his initial popularity working as a mime, and his later films had only minimal dialogue, relying instead on many subtle expertly choreographed visual gags. Tati, like Chaplin before him, would mime out the movements of every single character in his films and ask his actors to repeat them.

Mime has been performed on stage, with Marcel Marceau and his character "Bip" being the most famous. Mime is also a popular art form in street theatre and busking. Traditionally, these sorts of performances involve the actor/actress wearing tight black and white clothing with white facial makeup. However, contemporary mimes often perform without whiteface. Similarly, while traditional mimes have been completely silent, contemporary mimes, while refraining from speaking, sometimes employ vocal sounds when they perform. Mime acts are often comical, but some can be very serious.

Canadian author Michael Jacot 's first novel, The Last Butterfly, tells the story of a mime artist in Nazi-occupied Europe who is forced by his oppressors to perform for a team of Red Cross observers. Nobel laureate Heinrich Böll 's The Clown relates the downfall of a mime artist, Hans Schneir, who has descended into poverty and drunkenness after being abandoned by his beloved.

Minette is a type of mineral deposit, consisting of iron ore of sedimentary origin, found in the south of Luxembourg and in Lorraine. Minette ore was deposited in the Early Jurassic and Middle Jurassic.

The term "minette" came from French miners. It is a diminutive form of "la mine", and might be translated as "little mine, little colliery" or "little vein", referring to its relatively poor iron content of between 28% and 34%.

In other uses, "minette" is also an archaic rock term used to locally describe a particular type of lamprophyre.

The deposit is one of the largest iron reserves in the world. The reserves have been estimated at 6 billion tons, with an iron content of 2 billion tons. The phosphorus content of Minette rendered its industrial processing impossible for a long time, which changed with the introduction of the Thomas - Gilchrist procedure.

After the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-1871, large parts of Lorraine were annexed by Germany. The borders were determined such that much of the known Minette reserves were in German territory. The geologist Wilhelm Hauchecorne, a member of the border commission, had argued for this. Although the German authorities awarded significantly more mining concessions than the French had, iron ore production hardly increased until 1879. This changed in the 1880s, due to a greater number of railway lines in the Minette area and the construction of a railway line from Thionville in France to Völklingen in Germany, which from 1883 enabled a direct link with the Saarland industrial area. Explorations in the 1880s showed that the Minette reserves reached further to the West than had previously been assumed, and increased in volume and iron content the deeper they went. By 1909, 16 mines had been dug in the French part of Lorraine, the département Meurthe-et-Moselle, especially in the basin of Briey, which mined Minette through mine shafts.

After World War I, Lorraine belonged completely to France again. In 1919, yearly production went over 41 million tons, 21 million tons of these in the département Moselle and 20 million tons in the département Meurthe-et-Moselle. Lorraine was, after the United States, the second-largest iron producer in the world. The high point of ore production was reached with 62 million tons in France and 6 million tons in Luxembourg in 1960. Currently, after 150 years of mining, approximately 3 billion tons of ore have been produced. The relatively low iron content, however, meant that Lotharingian Minette-ore was successively replaced by more highly concentrated imported ores (with iron contents around 60%). As a consequence, more and more mines were closed down. The last pit in Luxembourg, Differdange, closed in 1981, the last French one, at Audun-le-Tiche in the Moselle department did so in 1997.

The Minister for Gender Equality, Diversity and Equal Opportunities (French : Ministre chargé des Droits des femmes) is a French government department responsible for developing and enforcing public policies that promote legal and economic equality between women and men, combat gender-based violence and discrimination, improve women's access to employment and political representation, and integrate gender equality objectives across the state. Since 1974, the French government has intermittently included a minister responsible for women's rights. For decades, this Ministry functioned as a junior branch within larger ministries, but it has repeatedly been reshuffled between different cabinets and has operated under a variety of titles.

In 1974, Françoise Giroud became the first minister when President Giscard d'Estaing appointed her as the Secretary of State for Women's Affairs. Françoise Giroud worked as a writer for regional papers during World War II. She later wrote for Elle magazine on women's issues. In 1953 she started a political magazine called L'Express with writer Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber. She wrote thousands of articles about women's positions in French society, their economic autonomy, and rights over their bodies. In 1974, President Giscard d'Estaing created the position of Secretary of State for Women's Affairs. During his election campaign he had promised to create a liberal France and a society that was open for women to prosper and have equal rights. The creation of the ministry aimed to push for women's rights in France and start a stable environment for women to prosper in the workforce, economy, education, and politics. As the first Secretary of State for Women's Affairs, Françoise Giroud pushed for political reform within women's rights with civil service entrance exams, social security benefits for widows/divorcees, and penalties against discrimination of women.

In the early years of the ministry, ministers pushed for reproductive rights, professional equality, regional infrastructures, and anti-sexist laws. In 1978, the position of Secretary of State for Women's Affairs became the Minister for the Status of Women. Monique Pelletier, the new Minister for the Status of Women, advocated for maternity care for women, including state-run child care, compensation for maternity leave, and priority housing.

In 1981, the French Socialist Party came into power under President François Mitterrand, and created a new cabinet post: The Minister for Gender Equality, Diversity and Equal Opportunities.

In 1981, Yvette Roudy was appointed la Ministère des Droits de la Femme (The Minister for Women's Rights). Roudy pushed to improve access to contraceptives and for women's reproductive rights. The ministry launched a campaign to spread awareness about women's reproductive rights. The campaign targeted young women, who were likely to be uneducated about reproductive rights. On March 8, 1982, the ministry succeeded in making contraception and abortions accessible. The Ministry created 1.7 million copies of guides of women's rights campaigns, guides on contraception, etc. Yvette Roudy opened Centres d'Information sur les Droits des Femmes (Information Centers on Women's Rights). Roudy opened 100 centers that helped more than 13 million women receive contraception information and updated abortion laws.

In July 1983, the Ministry helped pass a new law that pushed for professional equality. The legislation was made to reform the 1972 equal pay and hiring law, which argued that women where not to be discriminated against without legitimate reason. Women were expected to be compensated when going through pregnancy and childbirth. The law protected women from unsanitary conditions, heavy labor, and threats to reproduction through unsafe work environments. This legislation also advocated for career training programs for young girls.

In 1985, Roudy took legislative initiative on an anti-sexist law. This law aimed for women's right to control degrading images of women in advertising. It enabled women to defend themselves against sexist ads, by allowing women to be able to press charges against advertisers for sexist ads.The law was made to counter sexism through media and to encourage individuals to rethink how they view women.

Under Véronique Neiertz (1991-1993), the position was first integrated into the Ministry of Labor and later placed under the Ministry of Economy and Finance. Her cabinet was characterized by an intersection between women's rights policy with social and economic policy. Neiertz contributed significantly to French women's rights in two main ways. She pioneered legislation against workplace sexual harassment (Decree no. 92-1179 of November 2, 1992). She also reframed women's rights through consumer protection and everyday economic life (Loi Neiertz – Decree of December 31, 1989). This work highlighted how credit and debt systems, as well as abusive commercial practices, disproportionately affect women.

Under Nicole Péry (1998 - 2002), the Minister played a key role in international forums, such as the Beijing World Conference on Women. Péry argued that prostitution and other forms of exploitation constitute violence against women and urged the French state to treat them as such. Péry's advocacy resulted in Decree No. 2001-1240 of 21 December 2001. The Decree created a National Commission against Violence towards Women under the Minister Responsible for Women's Rights. Its mission was to coordinate state services and associations on prevention and support for victims of violence and prostitution; collect data and produce analyses on violence against women; make legislative and regulatory recommendations; and organize a national event every three years on this issue. The Commission, chaired by the Minister for Women's Rights, includes representatives of the state, specialist associations, and qualified public figures. It meets at least once a year and must submit a three-yearly activity report with proposals to the Prime Minister.

Nicole Ameline 's (2002 - 2005) flagship initiative was the Charter for Equality between Women and Men, presented on 8 March 2004. To address gender-related disparities, the Charter for Equality brought together nearly 100 public and private stakeholders to implement 280 actions across five areas: political and social parity, professional equality, rights and dignity, work-life balance, and European/international solidarity. The legislation also aimed to eliminate the gender pay gap, support women in combining employment and motherhood, promote women in decision-making positions, and diversify vocational training.

Catherine Vautrin (2005 - 2007) focused on evaluating and implementing the Charter's commitments. Two years after its introduction, Vautrin presented an assessment that highlighted several key points: signatory growth, equality plans, remaining pay gaps, monitoring (data collection and analysis), and social integration. Within her assessments, she identified where the Charter was successful, while highlighting shortcomings to address. She turned Ameline's prior work into a measurable policy instrument, allowing the state to target specific weaknesses in the Charter's implementation.

Najat Vallaud-Belkacem (2012 - 2014) launched what she called a "third generation" of women's rights: the creation of the High Council for Equality, work on parity in economic and political decision-making, and policies to fight gender stereotypes in schools and the media. In 2013, she championed a law which imposed fines on those who solicited sex work from prostitutes. This proposed law received backlash from sex workers, who felt legislation would threaten their livelihoods.

Since 2017, Marlène Schiappa, Élisabeth Moreno, Isabelle Lonvis-Rome, Bérangère Couillard and Aurore Bergé have shifted the focus of the Ministry toward combating sexist and sexual violence and intersectional discrimination.

Minister Lonvis-Rome (2022 - 2023) oversaw the 2023–2027 Interministerial Plan for Equality between Women and Men. The plan organized government action around four main axes: combating violence against women, women's health, professional and economic equality, and building a "culture of equality." Lonvis-Rome drew on her 35 years as a magistrate to insist on better protection and accompaniment of victims from the first report of violence, as well as tackling misogyny and gender stereotypes as root causes. She also framed the plan as an acceleration of reforms launched since 2017, and characterized equality as a "combat" that must be sustained across all ministries in order to achieve far-reaching, concrete equality by 2027.

Minister Elisabeth Moreno (2020 - 2022) presented the 2020-2023 National Action Plan to Promote Equal Rights and Combat Anti-LGBT+ Hatred and Discrimination, which aims to include lesbian, gay, bi, and trans people as full citizens of France. During her tenure, the Ministry was responsible for implementing the Government Action Program against Violence and Discrimination based on Sexual Orientation or Gender Identity (est. 2012), as well as the Mobilization Plan against Anti-LGBT Hatred and Discrimination (2016–2019).

The minister is currently responsible for overseeing the 4 main functions of The Inter-ministerial Mission for the Protection of Women against Violence and the Fight against Human Trafficking (MIPROF), which coordinates France's public policies on gender-based and domestic violence, develops training and tools for professionals, and supports prevention, data collection, and victim assistance in cases of both violence against women and human trafficking. The four main functions the Minister is responsible for are:

The minister responsible for women's rights must oversee the implementation of The DILCRAH's (Inter-ministerial Delegation for the Fight against Racism, Anti-Semitism and Anti-LGBT+ Rights) two inter-ministerial plans every six months.

Aurore Bergé (2024 - 2025) is the incumbent minister. In 2024, she presented a plan that aimed to lessen the influence of a 2016 law that repealed the offense of soliciting, and rather criminalized the clients.

As Minister in Charge of Equality Between Women and Men, she presented a national strategy to combat the prostitution system, which focuses on prevention, protection and support for people in prostitution, and stronger action against pimps and traffickers. Bergé's efforts as Minister singles out online prostitution and sexual exploitation linked to rental platforms and social networks. Her efforts also focus on minors in an effort to continue the government's plan against the prostitution of minors, with more prevention in schools, training for professionals, and dedicated reception centers for exploited children. The Minister made these efforts intentionally before the 2024 Olympics and Paralympics, which were hosted in Paris, to address the predicted uptick in soliciting during these times.

The Ministry of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises, Trade, Workmanship, Tourism, and Purchasing Power (in French: Ministère des Petites et Moyennes Entreprises, du Commerce, de l'Artisanat, du Tourisme et du Pouvoir d'achat) is a governmental department in France. It was established in 1812 under the name Ministère des Manufactures et du Commerce, and its designation has evolved over time in accordance with the political periods and governments in power. The current ministry oversees the portfolios of workmanship, trade, tourism, and support for purchasing power. It is a fully operational ministry within the second government of Sébastien Lecornu, with Serge Papin serving as the incumbent minister since 12 October 2025.

The position sometimes included responsibility for other government departments such as Public Works, Interior, Agriculture and Posts, Telegraphs and Telephones. Initially focused on encouraging industry and commerce, the ministry's scope expanded in 1969 to include small and medium-sized industries as well as craftsmanship. Between 2000 and 2002, under the socialist Jospin government, it also incorporated the portfolio of Consumer Affairs. The ministry's remit further broadened to include liberal professions between 2002 and 2007, and again between 2010 and 2012. Under the presidency of Emmanuel Macron, it was incorporated into the Ministry of Economics, Finance, and Industrial and Digital Sovereignty. At that point, it became a fully-fledged ministry with the inclusion of the purchasing power portfolio.

The existence of a dedicated ministry to support craftsmanship and small and medium-sized enterprises is justified by the dominance of such enterprises in the French economy. According to statistics from the Ministry of the Economy and Finance, in 2022, France was home to 4.3 million microenterprises or very small businesses, as well as 172,000 small and medium-sized enterprises. In total, 2.3 million employees worked in microenterprises, and 4.5 million employees were employed in small and medium-sized enterprises.

While policies concerning trade and industrial support were historically overseen by commercial councils under the French monarchy — bodies that functioned similarly to chambers of commerce —these prerogatives were transferred to the state during the French Revolution. This shift marked the beginning of the centralisation of economic policy in France and inaugurated a more interventionist role for public authorities in economic affairs. A dedicated governmental department, the Ministry of Manufactures and Trade, was established in 1811 under Napoleon Bonaparte. This new ministry was vested with broad responsibilities, including oversight of manufacturing, factories, commerce, food supplies, customs, and the mining council.

During the Second Empire, a larger ministry was created — encompassing Agriculture, Trade, and Public Works — which further reinforced the state's supervisory role in economic and industrial development. However, it was only with the advent of the Third Republic in 1870 that the Ministry of Trade became a truly influential department. Reorganised in 1881 under Léon Gambetta, it championed free trade and was tasked with developing foreign trade, promoting technical education, regulating commercial exchanges, and supporting industrial associations deemed beneficial to the economy. For Gambetta, the establishment of a strong Ministry of Trade symbolised both the advancement of French commerce and the consolidation of the relatively young republican regime, leading him to speak of a "Republic of Merchants". While the Second Empire had emphasised economic liberalism, the early Third Republic saw growing academic and political interest in state intervention, thereby justifying the creation of a dedicated ministry for trade. This initiative formed part of broader efforts to modernise and rebuild the economy in the aftermath of the Franco-Prussian War. In this context, the Minister of Trade in the Ferry government, Charles Hérisson, actively promoted French enterprises abroad. He facilitated their participation in international exhibitions, such as the 1876 International Exhibition of Electricity in Philadelphia and the 1885 Vienna exhibition of engines and machinery for small industries. From 1883 onward, foreign trade became a governmental priority. Hérisson established a Bureau of Commercial Information to support exports, encourage participation in overseas exhibitions, and promote international trade. Until 1905, the ministry also played a social role, particularly by overseeing industrial health and safety regulation. Concurrently, France adopted a protectionist tariff policy, notably through the Méline Tariff of 1892, which introduced preferential rates in agriculture. Additionally, France developed a preferential tariff zone with its colonies (the " Franc Zone "), modelled after the British Empire's system of imperial preference.

In 1913, the Ministry of Trade and Industry was expanded to include postal and telegraph services, forming a "super-ministry" tasked with bolstering economic development. This arrangement continued until 1928, when a separate Ministry of Posts and Telegraphs was established.

As World War II approached, the ministry was restructured as the "State Secretariat for Industrial Production" in 1940 — a designation revived in the post-war period. Following the Liberation in 1944, state intervention in commercial affairs intensified. From 1944 to 1947, the ministry was renamed the "Ministry of Industrial Production" and assumed responsibility for commercial professions, domestic trade, intellectual property, and craftsmanship. In the context of post-war reconstruction and the " Trente Glorieuses " (the thirty-year period of economic growth), the ministry was variously linked with portfolios such as Energy (1951–52), Reconstruction and Housing (1956), and others. This era also saw the rise of economic planning and the nationalisation of strategic sectors such as gas, electricity, and mining, driven in part by the demands of the French Communist Party. Simultaneously, France negotiated the establishment of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) within the European Economic Community (EEC) to support its domestic agricultural production. In 1968, the EEC introduced a Common External Tariff (CET), thereby transferring tariff policy competencies to European institutions.

From the 1970s onwards, the ministry's remit increasingly included consumer affairs and was frequently linked to the Ministry of the Economics and Finance, often as a subordinate department. The Directorate for Craftsmanship (Direction de l'Artisanat) was created in 1969 to develop and implement government policy on craftsmanship, oversee the chambers of trades, and support economic initiatives aimed at facilitating the establishment, development, and modernisation of artisanal businesses. In 1984, the ministry's remit was expanded to include tourism. Two years later, in 1986, Prime Minister Jacques Chirac appointed a Minister Delegate to the Minister of the Economy, responsible for Trade, Craftsmanship, and Services, as part of the government's broader programme of public sector privatisation. Between 1993 and 1995, during the cohabitation between Socialist President François Mitterrand and the liberal-conservative government of Édouard Balladur, the ministry was rebranded as the Ministry for Enterprises and Economic Development, with responsibility for SMEs, trade, and craftsmanship.

In 1997, the ministry became a Secretary of State within the Ministry of Economy and Finance, before regaining full ministerial status from 2004 to 2007 in the De Villepin government. During this period, the portfolio was extended to include liberal professions. From 2012 to 2014, under the Socialist Sylvia Pinel, the ministry again alternated between being a delegated ministry and a full ministry.

Absent during President Emmanuel Macron's first term, the ministry was reinstated in 2022, with Olivia Grégoire appointed Minister Delegate to the Minister of the Economy, Finance, and Industrial and Digital Sovereignty. It was briefly attached to the Ministry for Territorial Partnerships and Decentralisation from September to December 2024, during the conservative government of Michel Barnier. It regained full ministerial status on 12 October 2025, in the second government led by Sébastien Lecornu. For the first time, the ministerial title explicitly referenced "purchasing power". Shortly after Serge Papin, former CEO of the cooperative retailer Coopérative U, was appointed as minister, retail expert Dominique Crepy expressed criticism. In a statement to the online newspaper LSA, he questioned whether the ministry's title reflected a deeper conceptual confusion: "Does this not signify a state that no longer sees itself as the guarantor of conditions for economic freedom, but rather as the custodian of economic sentiment?"

In his first interview with La Tribune on 18 October 2025, Serge Papin outlined his agenda, which includes supporting small and medium-sized enterprises, defending the 2003 Dutreil Pact that facilitates the transfer of family businesses by exempting them under certain conditions from inheritance tax, and endorsing a €2 tax on small parcels to combat fast fashion — specifically targeting firms like Shein and Temu, accused of unfair competition against French fashion producers. In an interview with L’Opinion, Papin also advocated for a new form of employee profit-sharing, which would go beyond traditional savings schemes.

In 1812 Napoleon created a Ministry of Commerce and Manufacture (Ministère du Commerce et des Manufactures), which he assigned to Jean-Baptiste Collin de Sussy. That ministry was suppressed in 1814.

A royal ordinance of 22 January 1828 recreated the Ministry of Commerce and Manufacture, which covered manufacture and interior and exterior commerce, which were detached from the Ministry of the Interior. The ministry was suppressed by ordinance of 8 August 1829, and these services were again made part of the department of the interior.

An ordinance of 17 March 1831 created the Ministry of Commerce and Public works (Ministère du Commerce et des Travaux publics), to which the minister had been named on 13 March 1831. This ministry included agriculture, subsistence, stud farms, interior and exterior commerce and statistics, detached from the department of the Interior.

A royal ordinance of 6 April 1834 created the Ministry of Commerce (Ministère du Commerce), with the same functions as the Ministry of Commerce and Public works.

An ordinance of 2 March 1836 recreated the Ministry of Commerce and Public works, with the added responsibilities of bridges, roads and mines.

An ordinance of 19 September 1836 changed the name without changing the function, to the Ministère des travaux publics, d'agriculture et du commerce'.

A royal ordinance of 23 May 1839 reconstituted the ministry as Agriculture and Commerce, with the same duties as that of the ordinance of 6 April 1834.

A decree of 25 January 1852 reunited the Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce with that of the Interior, under the title Ministère de l'intérieur, de l'agriculture et du commerce.

A decree of 23 June 1853 reinstated the Ministry of Agriculture, Commerce and Public Works.

A decree of 17 July 1869 reestablished the Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce as it had been before the decree of 25 January 1852.

The Minister of Higher Education, Research and Space (French: Ministre de l'Enseignement supérieur, de la Recherche et de l'Espace ; formerly Minister of Higher Education, Research and Innovation or Ministre de l'Enseignement supérieur, de la Recherche et de l'Innovation) is a cabinet position in the French Government overseeing university-level education and research. The ministry is headquartered in the 5th arrondissement of Paris. The current minister was appointed on 23 December 2024 and is Philippe Baptiste serving in the Bayrou government, first Lecornu government and the current second Lecornu government — he is an engineer, holder of a doctorate from the University of Technology of Compiègne and a graduate engineer of Mines Nancy ; a researcher with the CNRS ; a professor at École Polytechnique ; and former President of the National Centre for Space Studies (CNES). The minister has either headed a ministry in its own right — as between 1959 and 1974 (as Minister for Scientific Research) and from 1992 to 1993 (as Minister for Research and Space); been attached to the Prime Minister’s Office, as between 1974 and 1981; or served as a delegated minister, as has been the case since 1993, under the supervision of another ministry. Between 1993 and 2025, the delegated minister has been under the authority of the Minister of National Education.

The Ministry is one of the sponsors of the Irène Joliot-Curie Prize, which is awarded to women scientists who have distinguished themselves by the quality of their research.

In October 2021, the ministry released an official translation of its second plan for open science.

The minister exercises her responsibilities for higher education and research. He draws up and implements the Government’s policy on higher education and student life. He proposes — and, in coordination with the other relevant ministers, delivers — the Government’s policy on research and technology.

Together with the Minister of Economics, Finance and Industrial and Digital Sovereignty, he formulates and executes space policy, excluding military matters, which fall exclusively within the remit of the Minister for the Armed Forces. He shares responsibility with the Minister of Economics for the development of artificial intelligence. He is also responsible, jointly with that ministry and in liaison with other interested ministers, for defining and overseeing innovation policy. The decree appointing Philippe Baptiste further specifies that the minister is tasked with “contributing to ecological and energy transition policy” (Decree No. 2025-12 of 8 January 2025).

With the victory of the Popular Front in the spring of 1936, the left-wing coalition bringing together the Communists and the Socialists formed a government and Léon Blum became President of the Council of Ministers. He created the post of Under-Secretary of State for Scientific Research and entrusted it to a woman, Irène Joliot-Curie, a researcher at the Institut du Radium and the 1935 Nobel laureate in Chemistry. She was the first woman to be appointed to government despite the fact that French women still did not have the right to vote at the time. A few months later, in November 1936, she resigned to resume her scientific research. In a letter to Léon Blum, she specified that this departure should not be interpreted as disagreement with the government’s actions, for which she retained her full sympathy.

The under-secretariat was then entrusted to the chemist Jean Perrin, Nobel Prize winner in Chemistry (1926). Perrin created the Central Service for Scientific Research to recruit researchers and technicians, endowed with a substantial budget enabling the funding of major projects. The under-secretariat was abolished in 1937 and re-established after the Second World War, in 1954, in the socialist government of Pierre Mendès France. Holders of the post were often researchers or university professors themselves, such as the mineralogist Henri Longchambon (1954–1956) and the geographer Alice Saunier-Seïté.

From 1962, the office of Minister for Scientific Research also encompassed industrial policy. De Gaulle appointed Gaston Palewski, a career diplomat and promoter of the second atomic plan, which organised collaboration between industry and research and established the Kourou space base in French Guiana. Between 1962 and 1969, the minister’s title covered not only scientific research but also atomic and space affairs. From 1 March to 14 June 1974, responsibility for research was transferred to the Minister for Industry, then to a Secretary of State under the Prime Minister’s authority from 1974 to 1981.

Under President François Mitterrand, the portfolio broadened to include education and was first entrusted to Jean-Pierre Chevènement, former president of the Centre d’études, de recherches et d’éducation socialiste (CERES), who — close to a Marxist outlook — advocated state monopoly capitalism and stressed the importance of education and public research. A full ministry until 1986, it then came under the authority of the Minister of National Education and subsequently the Minister for Industry, Posts and Telecommunications between 1993 and 1997. From 2002, the minister’s title included New Technologies. It returned to full ministerial status between 2007 and 2014, forming the Ministry of Higher Education and Research during Nicolas Sarkozy’s presidency.

In that capacity, Minister Valérie Pécresse introduced the Law on the Liberties and Responsibilities of Universities, which increased universities’ budgetary and administrative autonomy. The “Pécresse law”, which sparked strikes and demonstrations between 2007 and 2009, was criticised for instituting periodic individual evaluation of teaching staff, allowing universities to manage their entire budgets — including the share for salaries — thus liberalising higher education and reducing the powers of student councils.

Once again a full ministry between 2017 and 2022, under Emmanuel Macron’s first term, the portfolio was entrusted to Frédérique Vidal, a specialist in molecular genetics and former professor at the University of Nice–Sophia Antipolis, tasked with reforming access to the first cycle of higher education through the “Students’ Plan”. The stated aim was to reform access to university, in principle hitherto guaranteed by obtaining the baccalauréat. However, the introduction of a new pre-registration platform for first-year higher education, Parcoursup, was viewed as a “tool of social sorting”, and the reform — accused of reinforcing inequalities of access to university without creating more places — prompted strikes in 2018. According to a report by the French Senate on funding, more than two billion euros were lacking to finance the Students’ Plan over 2018–2022. On 8 July 2020, the Economic and Social Council, tasked with delivering an expert opinion on the reform project, judged that the financial programming ‘is not commensurate with the considerable challenges our country must face’. According to the Council’s rapporteur responsible for assessing the reform’s merits, Sylviane Lejeune, ‘We had already identified a loss of ground and warned of the need to invest massively in research. Yet what is proposed is far from sufficient; it is not serious.’ The Council recommended that the government invest €6 billion by 2022, whereas the reform provided for only €400 million of investment in 2021. The ministry did not follow the Council’s unfavourable recommendation.

The minister was later accused of exerting pressure on universities: on 16 February 2021, Frédérique Vidal announced her intention to ask the CNRS to conduct a “scientific inquiry” into universities to establish an “overview of all research” that would distinguish “what falls within academic research and what falls within activism and opinion”, alleging that French universities were not “impervious” to “ Islamo-leftism ”, which “is eating away at society as a whole”. Her remarks were subsequently condemned across academia, notably by a petition signed by 14,000 higher-education and research staff calling for her resignation. The government spokesperson, Gabriel Attal, was obliged to distance himself from the minister, declaring that “the President of the Republic is deeply attached to the independence of academic staff, which is one of the foundations of our Republic and which we must guarantee”. The CNRS eventually admonished the minister, reminding her that “Islamo-leftism” is not a scientific reality and that the study of decolonial and gender theories has its place within scientific research. In March 2023, the French daily Le Monde revealed that the minister had ultimately not commissioned any inquiry into “Islamo-leftism” while in office, contrary to what she had claimed.

During Emmanuel Macron’s second term, the minister Sylvie Retailleau, a former physicist and president of Paris-Saclay University, was instructed by the President to carry out “Act II of university autonomy”, denounced by the Communist Party as a step towards the privatisation of public higher education in France. “Act II of autonomy” aimed to render universities fully autonomous by allowing them to manage their own recruitment and funding and by limiting ministerial intervention in scientific research programmes and universities’ institutional decisions. The reform ultimately did not come to fruition owing to the dissolution of the National Assembly decided by the President of the Republic on 9 June 2024. The Alsatian MP Patrick Hetzel briefly served as minister between September and December 2024 before being succeeded by the former director of the Centre for Space Studies, Philippe Baptiste, in the Bayrou government—not as a full minister but as a minister delegate to the Minister of National Education, Élisabeth Borne.

The current minister, Philippe Baptiste, was appointed on 23 December 2024 in the Bayrou government. He was retained in office in the short-lived first Lecornu government and has continued in post in the second Lecornu government since 12 October 2025.

The Minister in charge of Housing (French : Ministre chargé du Logement) is a cabinet member in the Government of France. Since 12 October 2025, the position is held by Vincent Jeanbrun

In 1925 the position was created and called High Commissioner for Housing, after World War II it became the Minister for Housing and Rebuilding. In 1967 it became attached to the Minister of Public Works in the government of Georges Pompidou then attached to the Minister of Territorial Development. From 2009 to 2012 the position was attached to the Minister of Ecology.

Previous titles have been: Ministre du Logement et de l'Égalité des territoires (Minister of Housing and Territorial Equality), Ministre de l'Emploi, de la Cohésion sociale et du Logement (Minister of Employment, Social Cohesion and Housing).

The Minister of Labour, Employment and Economic Inclusion (Ministre du Travail, de l'Emploi et de l'Insertion), commonly just referred to as Minister of Labour, is a cabinet member in the Government of France. The minister is responsible for employment, labour legislation as well as the integration of foreigners.

Following Sébastien Lecornu 's second appointment as Prime Minister, the minister is Jean-Pierre Farandou.

The position was originally known as Minister of Labour (Ministre du Travail), created in 1906, and later, Minister of Labour and Social Security Provisions (Ministre du Travail et Prévoyance sociale). After its 1906 creation, the Inspection du travail (IT, Labour Inspection) service was integrated to it.

After the Second World War, the position was renamed Minister of Social Affairs. In its current state, the position was brought back in 1981 (after almost a decade) under the presidency of François Mitterrand —as a result of the economic situation of France in the 1980s—to oversee issues of social exclusion, unemployment, racism, sexism and social justice.

The seat of the ministry is the hôtel du Châtelet, an 18th-century neoclassical palace located in the 7th arrondissement of Paris.

The Minister of Posts and Telegraphs, to which was later added the charge of Telephones (the position was later named "Minister of Posts and Telecommunications"), was, in the Government of France, the cabinet member in charge of the French Postal Service and development of the national telecommunication system. The position was occasionally combined with Minister of Commerce and Industry or Minister of Public Works. The ministerial position does not currently exist, and its portfolio has largely been merged into other ministerial positions.

In 1906 Louis Barthou became Minister of Public Works, Posts and Telegraphs. The combined portfolio lasted until 1913.

In March 1913 Alfred Massé became Minister of Commerce, Industry, Posts, and Telegraphs.

The Minister of Public Works (French : Ministre de l'Equipement) was a cabinet member in the Government of France. Formerly known as "Ministre des Travaux Publics" (1830–1870), in 1870, it was largely subsumed by the position of Minister of Transportation. Since the 1960s, the positions of Minister of Public Works has reappeared, often linked with Minister of Housing ("Logement"). It has also been linked to Minister of Transportation, Minister of Tourism, Minister of Territorial Development ("Aménagement du territoire") and Minister of the Sea.

Between 25 October 1906 and 22 March 1913 the Ministry of Public Works was combined with the Ministry of Posts and Telegraphs to form the Ministry of Public Works, Posts and Telegraphs. Posts and Telegraphs was then transferred to the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. Ministers of public works after this included:

The following is a list of all Ministers of Public Works (Ministre de l'Equipement) from 1966 onward:

The Ministry of Partnership with Territories and Decentralization (French : Ministre de l'Aménagement du territoire et de la Décentralisation) is a cabinet member in the Government of France, responsible for territorial cohesion; in particular with the regions and departments; they are also in charge of French decentralization The current officeholder is Catherine Vautrin of La République En Marche! (LREM).

The position has frequently been combined with the portfolios of Public Works (Équipement), Transportation (Transports), Tourism (Tourisme) and the Sea (Mer). The ministry had merged with the Ministry of Ecology, Energy, Sustainable Development and Territorial Development upon the election of Nicolas Sarkozy as President of France. In 2009, it has been separated from the Ecology Ministry and has taken the name of Ministry of Rural Areas and Spatial Planning.

The Minister of the Interior (French : Ministre de l'Intérieur, pronounced [ ministʁ d(ə) lɛ̃teʁjœʁ ]) is the interior minister of the government of France, traditionally responsible for internal security and territorial administration. The minister ensures the maintenance and cohesion of the country's institutions throughout its national territory.

The current Minister of the Interior is Laurent Nuñez, who has held the position since 12 October 2025 under Prime Minister Sébastien Lecornu.

The Minister of the Interior is responsible for the following:

The Minister of the Interior also takes on the role of the former Minister of Worship and is formally consulted in the process of appointment of Catholic diocesan bishops (Briand-Ceretti Agreement). The Minister of Worship used to be a fully-fledged position; the office was abolished in 1912.

While the Ministry of the Interior supervises police forces, it does not supervise criminal enquiries. Those enquiries are conducted under the supervision of the judiciary.

The Minister for the Maison du Roi under the Ancien Régime is considered to be the precursor of the position of Minister of the Interior, which was officially established on 7 August 1790, during the French Revolution, when François-Emmanuel Guignard, comte de Saint-Priest became the inaugural officeholder. Although his tasks included the organisation of elections, relations with local authorities, agriculture, as well as trade, the Minister of the Interior's main duty was to oversee the functioning of police forces. This has been the case since then, with the exception of the period from 1796 to 1818, when a Ministry of Police was in use, which was also briefly restored under the Second Empire.

During the First Empire, the Interior Ministry's tasks were reduced; in 1824, the Ministry of Public Instruction was established to oversee France's education policy. In 1832, the Interior Ministry was primarily occupied with the holding of elections and maintenance of the firefighters force, as the Institut de France and national public libraries were transferred to the Public Instruction Ministry. In 1836, the Ministry of Public Works, Agriculture and Commerce was established.

In 1911, the Directorate of Penitentiary Administration, established in 1858 in the Interior Ministry to oversee prison conditions, was placed under the authority of the Minister of Justice. Nine years later, the Interior Ministry lost its public health policy department to the newly established Ministry of Hygiene, Assistance and Social Security.

The ministry's headquarters have been located on Place Beauvau, facing the Élysée Palace, since 1861. "Place Beauvau" is often used as a metonym for the ministry.

The Minister of the Interior has been Laurent Nuñez since 12 October 2025. He succeeded Bruno Retailleau, who was appointed to the office on 21 September 2024. Nuñez is assisted by Marie-Pierre Vedrenne, who holds the title of Minister-Delegate in the government of Prime Minister Sébastien Lecornu.

The Minister of the Sea (French : Ministre de la Mer) was a cabinet member in the Government of France from 1981 to 2017 and from 2020 to 2022. The position has frequently been combined with the positions of Minister of Transport (Ministre des Transports), Minister of Public Works (Ministre des Travaux publics), Minister of Housing (Ministre du Logement), Minister of Tourism (Ministre du Tourisme) and Minister of Territorial Development (Ministre de l'Aménagement du territoire).

Alain Vidalies was Secretary of State for Transport, the Sea and Fisheries (Secrétaire d'État chargé des Transports, de la Mer et de la Pêche) from 2014 to 2017. The post was a junior minister of cabinet rank within the Ministry of Ecology, Sustainable Development and Energy. When Nicolas Hulot took the direction of the ministry in 2017, the office was abolished and replaced by the State Secretariat for the Sea.

The Minister of the Sea was fully reinstalled on its own between July 2020 and May 2022 as Annick Girardin hold the title of Minister of the Sea. After May 2022, it became again a Secretary of State under the direction of the Prime Minister's services.

The Minister of Transport (French : Ministre des Transports) is a cabinet member in the Government of France.

The position was created in 1870 as a modification to the position of Minister of Public Works (Ministre des Travaux Publics), which had been established in 1830. It has frequently been combined with the position of Minister of Infrastructure (Ministre de l'Équipement), Minister of Housing (Ministre du Logement), Minister of Tourism (Ministre du Tourisme), Minister of Territorial Development (Ministre de l'Aménagement du territoire), as well as Minister of the Sea (Ministre de la Mer). Following the election of Nicolas Sarkozy as President of France in 2007, the Ministry of Transport, Public Works, Tourism and the Sea was absorbed by the Ministry of Ecology and Sustainable and Territorial Development.

The position holder in the Borne, Attal, and Barnier governments held the title of minister delegate (Ministre délégué aux Transports).

The Minister of War (French : Ministre de la guerre) was the leader and most senior official of the French Ministry of War. It was a position in the Government of France from 1791 to 1947, replacing the position of Secretary of State for War and later being merged with the offices of Minister of the Navy and Minister of Air to form a new Minister of the Armed Forces.

In 1791, during the French Revolution, the Secretary of State for War became titled Minister of War.

For most of its existence and until the beginning of the 20th century, ministers had always been Marshals or Generals. The Third Republic saw the gradual replacement of the military by civilian politicians to the office. It was also subject to the governmental instability of the regime, leading to ministers seating only for few days.

On 27 April 1791, the National Constituent Assembly issued a decree organizing the six ministries of Justice, Interior, Finances, War, Navy and Foreign Affairs. The decree was signed into law on 25 May 1791 by King Louis XVI. This law determined the responsibilities of the minister, giving him full authority on the French Army and the sole provost duties of the National Gendarmerie. It also resolved that the minister would be responsible for the administration and finances of his department.

In France, a ministry (French : ministère) is a division of the central government (French central public administration [ fr ]) responsible for implementing government policy in a specific area. The minister, a member of the government who heads the ministry, is appointed by the President of the Republic. They are assisted by a cabinet and have authority over the state administrations.

Under the Ancien Régime, the king governed with the help of his ministers. These ministers were appointed by the king to manage different aspects of the administration. Examples include the Ministry of War, the Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. These ministries played a crucial role in the exercise of royal power and in the management of state affairs.

The French Revolution ended the absolute monarchy and established the First Republic in 1792. The ministerial system underwent major changes during this period. Ministers were now chosen by and accountable to the National Assembly. The role of ministries also expanded to reflect the new republican values.

Under the National Constituent Assembly, the law of April 27–May 25, 1791 abolished four existing secretaries of state —namely: the Secretary of State for War, the Secretary of State for the Navy, the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and the Secretary of State for the King's Household—and replaced them with six ministers—namely: the Minister of Justice, the Minister of War, the Minister of the Navy, the Minister of the Interior, the Minister of Public Contributions and Revenues, and the Minister of Foreign Affairs —whose responsibilities it defined. The creation of ministries thus fell under the purview of the legislature.

Under the French Directory, Article article 150 of the Constitution of the Year III (22/8/1795) reserves to the Legislative Body is to say to the Council of Five Hundred and to that of Ancients — the determination of the powers of the ministers and their number, the latter being to be at least six and at most eight.

Napoleon Bonaparte established the First French Empire and reorganized the government by creating modern ministries with a more formal structure. He appointed ministers responsible for areas such as the Interior, Justice, War, Finance, and so on. These ministers were directly accountable to Napoleon and played a vital role in the administration of the Empire.

After Napoleon's fall, the Bourbon Restoration brought back the monarchy to France, followed by the July Monarchy. The ministerial system was reinstated, and the various regimes had different configurations, but the core ministries were maintained, such as Foreign Affairs, the Interior and Finance.

The Second Republic was proclaimed in 1848, and a provisional government was established. The existing ministries were reorganized, and new ministries were created to meet the needs of the fledgling republic.

Under Article article 66 of the French Constitution of 1848, the determination of the number of ministers and their responsibilities is reserved to the legislative power, to the National Legislative Assembly. The creation of ministries thus falls within the purview of the legislature.

Napoleon III established the Second Empire and appointed ministers to help him govern. The ministries were reorganized to strengthen the Emperor's power, and some ministries were merged to create greater centralization.

After the fall of the Second Empire in 1870, the French Third Republic was proclaimed. French ministries were reorganized to meet the requirements of a parliamentary republic. The Third Republic lasted until the German invasion of 1940 during World War II. During this period, the ministries played a vital role in the stability and governance of the country.

No provision of the constitutional laws of 1875 did not reserve to the legislature the role to determine the number and responsibilities of ministers to the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. Under the presidency of Jules Grévy, by decrees of 14 November 1881 by Léon Gambetta, President of the Council, saw the creation of three ministries: the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Posts [ fr ] and the Ministry of Arts [ fr ]. The French legal doctrine [ fr ], as set forth by Eugène Pierre [ fr ], was that every deputy had the right to introduce a bill [ fr ] to decide either the creation or the abolition of a ministry, or that in the future, the number and responsibilities of the various ministries would be fixed by law.

Article article 8 of the law of 20 June 1920 entrusted to the French Parliament "the creation of ministries" and "the transfer of responsibilities from one ministerial department to another". However it would never be effectively implemented and will be repealed by Article article 2 of Law No. 45-01 on 24 November 1945.

After the end of World War II, the French Fourth Republic was established, and French ministries continued to play a central role in government. However, the Fourth Republic faced governing instability.

In 1958, the French Fifth Republic was established with the adoption of a new constitution. This new system strengthened the role of the president, who appoints the prime minister and ministers. The ministries became more intrenched, and their structure has remained largely unchanged since then.

The titles and positions of ministries in the official hierarchy often reflect the policies pursued by each government. Similarly, the creation, modification, and (rare) merging of ministries correspond to societal changes: the merger of the Ministries of Urban Planning and Public Works to form the Ministry of Equipment in 1966, the creation of the Ministry of the Environment in the 1970s, the creation of the Ministry of Women's Rights in 1981, and the creation of the Ministry of the Social Economy.

Since the 1980s, many political figures have promised a " smaller government ", but during the Fifth Republic, few governments have had fewer than 30 members. Similarly, some politicians have wanted ministries to remain permanent. Under the presidency of Nicolas Sarkozy, the Balladur Committee [ fr ], chaired by Édouard Balladur, after noting that the number of ministries is generally higher in France than in other democracies, nevertheless considered it "neither useful nor appropriate to stipulate that an organic law would determine the structure of the Government". It was also known as the Committee for Reflection and Proposals on the Modernization and Rebalancing of the Institutions. The Committee recommended that the President of France and the Prime Minister of France should have the ability to adapt the governmental structure to current problems and to the reform of the State. It did not advocate for setting a maximum number of members of the Government by law. But in 2008, a draft constitutional revision proposed to limit the number of ministers, but this provision of the draft was rejected by the National Assembly.

However, the Constitution mentions a whole list of positions, including prefects, rectors of academies [ fr ], and directors of central government departments. Thus, the Constitution implicitly recognizes a whole series of ministerial structures: central government departments, prefectures (and therefore, indirectly, the decentralized government departments headed by the prefect), and academies.

The number of ministries is not fixed by the Constitution or by French law. The existence of ministries results from decrees issued " Décret en Conseil d'État [ fr ] ". These decrees remain in force permanently, even if the first act of the executive branch, namely the formation of the government, modifies their responsibilities, structure, and name. At that time, mergers or separations may occur, formalized by new constitutive or amending decrees.

The Council of State ensures the continuity of government ministries: any modification must be submitted to it, and, as the supreme administrative court, it must know which ministry to contact to enforce one of its decisions, relating to a long-standing problem that sometimes arose long before the ministry existed, or even before the birth of the French Fifth Republic contingencies of naming are addressed in two ways:

Within the executive branch, powers initially concentrated at the top are gradually distributed through:

In addition, ministries manage resources (personnel, money, etc.) and provide oversight or control, within their areas of competence, of bodies with their own powers or competencies.

At the head of the ministry is the minister (or minister of state). The recent regrouping of ministries detached over time from the Ministry of the Interior into "super-ministries" has led to the multiplication of junior ministers, secretaries of state or ministers attached to a minister, who are entrusted with the supervision of a sector of the ministry.

On the proposal of the Prime Minister, the President of the Republic appoints the other members of the Government and terminates their functions (Article 8 of the Constitution [ fr ]). Appointments to the executive are made by decree.

The functions of a member of the Government are incompatible with the exercise of any parliamentary mandate, any function of professional representation of a national nature and any public employment or any professional activity (Article 23 of the Constitution).

The powers of each minister are set by decrees deliberated in the council of ministers, after consultation with the Conseil d'État, as well as the administrations over which he has authority, and those at his disposal and to which he appeals.

Members of the Government have access to both houses of the French Parliament (National Assembly and Senate). They are able to contact when they request it (Article 31 of the Constitution [ fr ]).

Ministers' remuneration [ fr ] has, since 2012, been 1.4 times the average of the highest and lowest salaries received by civil servants in state jobs classified in the "hors échelle" category.

"The Government determines and conducts the policy of the Nation. It has at its disposal the administration and the armed forces"

The minister [ fr ] is assisted in his duties by ministerial staff, which comprises between ten and twenty people. These are either close political associates who have worked with the minister for a long time (former parliamentary assistants, activists, or staff members in a local town hall), or senior civil servants recruited from within the administration who have chosen to make their mark politically. The chief of staff is generally drawn from this latter category. The fate of the staff members is directly linked to the minister, and if the minister changes positions, all members are generally replaced, the minister's loyalists follow him, and the civil servants return to their positions within the administration. Since 2001, staff members have received "allowances for special duties" included in their pay slips (previously, these bonuses were paid in cash and were not declared [ fr ]).

Each year, an annex to the draft budget bill, the "budgetary yellow book", details the staffing levels in ministerial offices. According to Socialist MP René Dosière, the cost of a minister and their staff (during François Fillon) was €17 million per year. The largest item was personnel.

"State councillors, the Grand Chancellor of the Legion of Honour, ambassadors and extraordinary envoys, senior advisors to the Court of Auditors, prefects, representatives of the State in the overseas collectivities […] and in New Caledonia, general officers, rectors of academies, and directors of central administrations are appointed by the Council of Ministers"

The following table details the responsibilities of each minister in the Lecornu II government.

Placed under the authority of the Prime Minister and each of the ministers, the civil administrations of the State consist, on the one hand, of central administrations and national services, and on the other hand, of decentralized services. The distribution of missions between the central administrations, national services, and decentralized services is organized according to a number of conventions. Only those missions of a national nature or whose execution cannot be delegated to a territorial level are entrusted to the central administrations and national services. Other missions, and in particular those concerning relations between the State and local authorities, are entrusted to the decentralized services.

The French central public administration [ fr ] governs the central government. The Secretary General is responsible for the overall coordination of services and the modernization of the ministry. By order of the Minister, the Secretary General may be assigned specific coordination tasks relating to certain issues or the activities of certain departments. The organization of each ministry's central services into directorates general, directorates, and departments is established by decree [ fr ] ; their organization into sub-directorates is established by an order [ fr ] of the relevant Minister.

Each minister is assisted by a senior defense and security official [ fr ], a senior official for sustainable development [ fr ], and a ministerial standards officer, responsible for implementing standards within the ministry's scope.

Missions, delegations, and commissions generally refer to smaller, less permanent services tasked with a policy portfolio or specific mission. Interministerial commissions [ fr ] also work on cross-section issues.

Finally, the Inspection Service [ fr ] has a direct link to the minister due to the specific missions entrusted to them.

Central government departments play a key role at the national level in policy design, coordination, guidance, evaluation, and oversight. To this end, they participate in drafting bills and decrees and prepare and implement the decisions of the Government and each of the ministers. Bound by the principle of impartiality in the civil service, the administration embodies the continuity of the State, regardless of the ruling majority.

National services may be entrusted with management functions, technical studies or training, production of goods or provision of services as well as any other operational mission of a national nature corresponding to the responsibilities of the minister under whose authority they are placed.

Members of the government, members of ministerial cabinets and any other person holding a position appointed by the Council of Ministers [ fr ] shall send a declaration of assets and a declaration of interests to the President of the Haute Autorité pour la transparence de la vie publique.

During the formation of the First Philippe government, it was clarified that the respective tasks of members of ministerial cabinets and directors of central administration: cabinets "must focus on political functions and ensure the explanation of actions and related communication", while directors of central administration "are responsible for implementing public policies within the framework of government action". It was recommended against duplicating administrative functions within the cabinet.

See: List of decentralized services of the French State [ fr ]

To carry out their missions, the decentralised services of the civil administrations of the State are, unless otherwise provided by law or as provided by decree in the Council of State, organised within the framework of three types of territorial districts across Metropolitan France : region, department or arrondissement.

The regional constituency is the territorial level:

The departmental district is the territorial level for implementing policies from the national government as well as the European Union. The arrondissement is the territorial framework for promoting local development and local administrative action by the State. The prefect of the department implements national and European Union policies. He has authority over the heads of the decentralized services at the departmental level of the State's civil administrations. The sub-prefect of the arrondissement is the prefect's delegate in the arrondissement.

For example, the rectorate [ fr ] and the departmental directorate of national education services [ fr ] are the decentralized services of the Ministry of National Education.

The services of departmental councils and regional councils do not fall into this category; they are territorial collectivities.

In the organization of ministries, the consideration of sustainable development objectives differs depending on whether one is interested in the internal functioning of the ministries, or in public policies.

Sustainable development objectives concerning actors external to the ministries and their supervised establishments, i.e. falling under the public policies of the State, are taken into account by the major directorates of the ministries, for example, for the Ministry of Agriculture, by the Directorate General for the Economic and Environmental Performance of Enterprises [ fr ] (DGPE), the Directorate General for Food [ fr ] (DGAL), and the Directorate General for Education and Research [ fr ] (DGER)..

As of 31 December 2022, the French civil service had a workforce of 5,694,000 employees, of which 2,543,000 are in the state civil service, who are assigned either to a ministry proper or to a public administrative establishment (EPA).

The state budget represents a portion of public finances [ fr ] (along with the social security budget and the budgets of local authorities). It is set in the annual finance laws [ fr ] (initial laws which may be followed by amending laws).

The budget is divided between missions and programmes [ fr ]. Their allocations may differ from those of the ministries (particularly for the State's external action, school education and civil security).

In 2014, the general budget provided for resources of 227 billion euros and expenditures of 309 billion euros.

Ministerial offices are generally located in former Parisian townhouses, sometimes housing the directors of central government departments. The premises include offices and occasionally official residences.

With each change of government, the General Secretariat of the Government [ fr ] allocates a seat to each ministerial cabinet.

Sites previously occupied by government ministries:

The Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs (French : Ministère de l'Europe et des Affaires étrangères [ ministɛʁ də løʁɔp e dez‿afɛʁ(z‿)etʁɑ̃ʒɛʁ ], MEAE) is the ministry of the Government of France that handles France's foreign relations. Since 1855, its headquarters have been located at 37 Quai d'Orsay, close to the National Assembly. The term Quai d'Orsay is often used as a metonym for the ministry. Its cabinet minister, the minister for Europe and foreign affairs (French : Ministre de l'Europe et des Affaires étrangères) is responsible for the foreign relations of France. The current officeholder, Jean-Noël Barrot, was appointed in September 2024. For a brief period from 1984 to 1986, the office was titled minister for external relations.

In 1547, royal secretaries became specialised, writing correspondence to foreign governments and negotiating peace treaties. The four French secretaries of state where foreign relations were divided by region, in 1589, became centralised with one becoming first secretary responsible for international relations. The Ancien Régime position of Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs became Foreign Minister around 1723; it was renamed Minister of Foreign Affairs in 1791 in the aftermath of early stages of the French Revolution. All ministerial positions were abolished in 1794 by the National Convention and reestablished with the Directory.

There are multiple services under its authority, along with that of some other ministers. Under the authority of the Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Development, that of Cooperation and European Affairs, and that of Foreign and European Affairs, there are numerous services directly related to the ministers. Here is a list of those services.

The Ministry responsible for Human Rights (French: ministère chargé des Droits de l’Homme), which also had responsibility for Humanitarian Action, was a French ministry created in 1986, initially attached to the Office of the Prime Minister and later placed under the authority of the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs. In France, issues of human rights and political support for humanitarian action assume an important place in national politics, consistent with the country's association with the French Revolution, equality before the law, and the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen. The remit of the delegated ministry was set out in 1994 by Minister Lucette Michaux-Chevry as follows: “Humanitarian disasters often stem from grave, large-scale violations of human rights, which then make it essential and urgent to take remedial action… The protection of human rights must, in France’s diplomacy towards international organisations, be a major concern and a constant imperative.”.

The ministry, created in 1986, was abolished in 2009 with the establishment of the post of French Ambassador-at-large for Human Rights, whose first holder was François Zimeray, a senior career diplomat appointed in 2008. The current ambassador is Isabelle Lonvis-Rome. Her full official title is: Ambassador for Human Rights and for Remembrance, with responsibility for the international dimension of the Shoah and for issues of spoliation. Operationally, France combines diplomatic outreach (joint statements, resolutions and pledges) with cooperation across the Geneva ecosystem — UN agencies, international organisations and civil society — to improve humanitarian access, strengthen protection frameworks and keep rights questions on the agenda during crises and protracted situations.

The establishment of a delegated ministry for Human Rights came in March 1986, following the victory of the Union for French Democracy (UDF) and the Rally for the Republic (RPR) in the legislative elections — a defeat for the Socialist President, François Mitterrand, then in office, who was severely punished by left-wing voters for having pursued, since 1983, a so-called austerity policy. On 20 March 1986, Jacques Chirac was appointed Prime Minister by the President of the Republic; MP Claude Malhuret was appointed to head a new State Secretariat reporting to the Prime Minister, the State Secretariat responsible for Human Rights. Malhuret was then known for his humanitarian commitment: a medical doctor by training, he had been a coordinator of Médecins Sans Frontières medical teams in South-East Asia and served as the association's president for eight years. In 1985 he founded the association Liberté sans frontières.

The exact remit of the State Secretariat was subsequently clarified during parliamentary exchanges between deputies and the Secretary of State. The Communist senator from La Ciotat, Louis Minetti, during Government Questions on Friday, 6 June 1986, questioned the Secretary of State about the worsening of repressive measures taken by employers and endorsed by the former Government against the freedoms and dignity of employees in the context of strikes (“Economic and social rights, rights of representation and expression, rights of participation in the management of undertakings… all these rights are being flouted in France today”). In his reply, the Secretary of State stated at the outset that “the fact of authorising the dismissal of an employee holding a representative mandate cannot, in itself, be considered an infringement of human rights”, thereby setting a clear limit to his prerogatives and referring the issue of any infringement of the right to strike to the courts. The left in opposition and the right in government then held divergent views of government action on human rights: for the left, the conditions under which workers exercise their rights in the workplace — or, in short, labour law — lay at the very outer limit of the State Secretariat's competence. Malhuret presented a cautious, diplomatic approach: consult NGOs, coordinate across ministries, and avoid reacting to every news flash. Civil-society groups (notably the Ligue des Droits de l'Homme) worried the post might be a political “alibi” with limited bite.

Malhuret's tenure at the State Secretariat is chiefly marked by the 1987 reform of parental authority : the law extended the exercise of parental authority by both parents to unmarried couples and divorced couples. In order to ensure that the children of divorced parents and children born out of wedlock were as far as possible protected from the tensions between parents in divorce proceedings, the Secretary of State responsible for Human Rights, Claude Malhuret, presented a bill on joint parental authority to the Council of Ministers on 11 March 1987. The bill was adopted unanimously by the National Assembly in May and then promulgated. The 1987 statute is known as the “Malhuret Law”. In May 1988, François Mitterrand was re-elected President of the Republic and the Socialists regained their majority in the National Assembly. Malhuret subsequently remained an active senator on humanitarian matters, speaking regularly in the Senate on such issues — for example, in 2022 on violations of women's rights and human rights in Iran, and in 2024 to support the proposal to enshrine the right to abortion in the French Constitution.

The post evolved into that of Secretary of State responsible for Humanitarian Action between 22 June 1988 and 4 April 1992 in the Socialist governments of Michel Rocard and Édith Cresson, before evolving as the Minister for Health and Humanitarian Action from 4 April 1992 to 30 March 1993 in Pierre Bérégovoy's government. The office was held by Bernard Kouchner, founder of Médecins Sans Frontières and Médecins du Monde, a proponent of the doctrine of humanitarian intervention (droit d’ingérence humanitaire), later formally recognised by the United Nations as the Responsibility to Protect. Jean-Pierre Chevènement, then his colleague as Minister of Defence, criticised this as neo-imperialism.

Minister between 1993 and 1995, during the second cohabitation between Édouard Balladur's conservative government and Socialist President François Mitterrand, the Guadeloupe MP Lucette Michaux-Chevry continued the ministry's international orientation, as initiated by her predecessor Bernard Kouchner. Addressing trainees at a summer university for human-rights educators, Michaux-Chevry cast July 1993–July 1994 as a year of “progress and concern,” urging the construction of a “culture of human rights” through education and training. She tied universality to pedagogy rather than uniformity, noting that fundamental liberties are shared even as cultures differ. Her speech highlighted historic abolitionism (1794/1848) to show that rights advances are reversible, condemns contemporary forms of slavery (including child prostitution) and curbs on freedom of opinion and the press, and encourages support for human-rights defenders. She linked trade and rights by referencing the GATT / Marrakesh context and argues that global economic integration must respect core social rights. Whereas Bernard Kouchner spoke of a right of humanitarian intervention, Michaux-Chevry preferred to popularise the term “duty to assist” (devoir d'assistance): in her view, humanitarian aid is “not merely charity but also the defence of values.”

Between 1997 and 2002, Lionel Jospin's left-wing coalition government redistributed the delegated ministry's competences to other departments, with social action and inclusion assigned to the Minister for Solidarity, and humanitarian aid to the Secretary of State for Cooperation and the Francophonie.

In 2007, following Nicolas Sarkozy's victory in the presidential election, the human-rights portfolio was entrusted to Rama Yade. The decree of 13 July 2007 set out her remit: “Ms Rama Yade, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Human Rights, shall deal with all matters entrusted to her by the Minister of Foreign and European Affairs, to whom she is attached, for the implementation of France’s diplomatic action. She shall prepare and implement the Government’s international policy in the field of human rights. To this end, she conducts, or takes part in, international negotiations; represents the Government, or helps represent it, in international bodies dealing with the promotion and defence of human rights. She shall monitor the actions of the European Community and the European Union, and of the Council of Europe, in the promotion and defence of human rights.”

In December 2007, during Muammar Gaddafi ’s state visit to France, Rama Yade publicly criticised the timing — coinciding with International Human Rights Day —and warned that the visit should not be treated as a “blank cheque” on rights. In an interview the same day, she argued that France should talk with Libya but also extract concrete human-rights commitments; the government's handling of the episode prompted intense media and political debate. According to contemporaneous reporting, she was swiftly summoned to the Élysée Palace after remarks including that France was “not a doormat” for any leader, while the presidency sought to lower the temperature. Yade later explained the institutional tension she faced — reconciling a values brief with diplomatic realpolitik — and subsequently recalled being sternly “reprimanded” by Nicolas Sarkozy, describing the meeting as feeling like “a dentist’s waiting room.”

On 23 June 2009, Rama Yade was appointed Minister for Sport and Youth, and the ministry was permanently abolished.

In French political debate, the pejorative label « droit-de-l’hommisme » (literally “human-rights-ism”) is used by critics to describe what they see as a moralistic, advocacy-led foreign policy that places human-rights rhetoric ahead of strategic interests. The term resurfaced prominently in 2023 amid political attacks on the Ligue des droits de l’homme (LDH) and calls to scrutinise its funding, which the LDH answered by reaffirming a universalist defence of civil liberties and the rule of law. A recurrent line of critique holds that there is a “permanent contradiction” between an assertive, values-first stance and the conduct of state foreign policy, which must balance security, alliances and economic interests. This view was expressed in 2008 by Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner, who publicly regretted the creation of a dedicated human-rights secretariat attached to his office — while his junior minister Rama Yade defended the record of the office and argued for pursuing both realism and rights. Kouchner described the creation of a State Secretariat for Human Rights as a “mistake”, citing a “permanent contradiction” between the defence of rights and the conduct of foreign policy, thereby triggering a public debate on the appropriateness of a dedicated portfolio. During the 2007 visit of Libya's Muammar Gaddafi, Rama Yade acknowledged the difficulty of reconciling commercial, security and diplomatic considerations with human-rights messaging, depicting French policy as walking on “two legs”: realpolitik and rights. For critics, such moments expose the limits of “rights-first” posturing; for defenders, they underline the need to keep rights on the agenda precisely in challenging contexts.

Commentators have argued that, from 2017, human rights became less central as a guiding frame for French external action, with the presidency favouring a pragmatic, case-by-case approach nested in broader goals (multilateralism, development, and global “public goods”). This shift was illustrated, for example, by the relatively low-key official marking of the 70th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights at the Élysée Palace. Observers noted, from 2023–2024 onwards, President Emmanuel Macron's adoption of formulations found in far-right discourse — most notably décivilisation (“decivilisation”) and criticism of a supposed droit-de-l’hommisme. This lexical shift has been contested: some commentators argue that employing décivilisation popularises a historically loaded term open to multiple interpretations, while others emphasise its conceptual vagueness and the variability of its political uses.

Across 2024–2025, independent and UN bodies depict a mixed picture of human rights in France: robust national institutions and legal frameworks coexist with sustained concerns about civic-space pressures, border practices and remedies, detention conditions, discriminatory policing, and the long-term effects of exceptional security on ordinary law. According to France's National Consultative Commission on Human Rights (CNCDH), an independent body accredited to the UN which publishes an annual stocktake, 2024 required heightened vigilance around the rule of law and civic space (freedoms of expression, assembly and association), alongside work on tackling sexual and gender-based violence, prison overcrowding, and universal access to schooling. The commission also highlighted persistently high levels of racist and antisemitic acts. Its thematic 2024 report on racism, antisemitism and xenophobia notes historically high incident levels despite longer-term gains in tolerance indicators.

In 2008, the responsibilities of the delegated ministry were entrusted to a new office-holder, the Ambassador-at-large for Human Rights. This decision to transfer human-rights promotion policy solely to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs came amid criticism of the post as a ministerial portfolio and followed Rama Yade's resignation. The diplomat and lawyer François Zimeray was appointed Ambassador for Human Rights by decree of President Nicolas Sarkozy. Notably, he had worked on drafting the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union when he was an MEP in 1999. As ambassador, Zimeray spoke on France's behalf at the World Congress Against the Death Penalty and, in 2010, at the Kampala Review Conference on the International Criminal Court. In 2012, he chaired the forum on child soldiers held alongside the UN General Assembly. In autumn 2010, he set out the broad lines of his mandate as Ambassador for Human Rights:

“If one regards human rights as amounting to speeches, one confines us to the declaratory sphere… But if, on the contrary, diplomacy sets itself the aim of acting on reality and achieving concrete change, then one must accept the idea of action that is more discreet but no less determined, forgo our narcissistic desires (“France’s image”), and take the world as it is, with the ambition of helping to transform it. I must confess that, on accepting this position as Ambassador for Human Rights, I promised myself never to present us as “the” country of human rights. First, because this is historically debatable — other countries contributed before us to the conceptualisation of these rights — and because, even today, we have much to learn from others.”

In 2013, he was appointed by François Hollande as the new French Ambassador to Denmark and was succeeded by Patrizianna Sparacino, a career diplomat and inspector of foreign affairs. Ambassador for Human Rights from 2013 to 2017, Sparacino focused her mandate on women's rights and the universal abolition of the death penalty.

As France's Ambassador for Human Rights (ambassador-at-large) from 2017, François Croquette coordinated the French human-rights diplomacy and, under a decree that also entrusted him with the international dimension of Holocaust remembrance and issues of spoliation, carried a universalist rights agenda in multilateral forums while liaising closely with NGOs (notably via the Plateforme Droits de l’Homme). He framed the role as a “diplomacy of conviction,” (diplomatie de conviction), emphasising support for civil society and the UN Universal Periodic Review, and rejecting any merely symbolic function. His substantive priorities included the global campaign for abolition of the death penalty and defence of LGBT+ rights — presenting the 2018 IDAHOT “Pour la Liberté” award to Alice Nkom and Mounir Baatour and delivering public messages on the International Day against Homophobia and Transphobia.

On 26 October 2022, the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs announced the appointment of a new Ambassador-at-large for Human Rights, with a specific brief to promote LGBT+ rights: “The ambassador will be tasked with carrying France’s voice and action in this field, with the support of the entire French diplomatic network. They will reiterate France’s commitment to the universal decriminalisation of homosexuality and to the defence of the rights of LGBT+ people.”

In the spring of 2025, after Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán banned the Budapest Pride parade, the Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs issued a joint communiqué with the Ministry for Equality between Women and Men condemning the ban:

“In France, in Europe and across the world, these marches are a reminder that these rights are the fruit of collective struggles against discrimination, criminalisation, pathologisation and violence… Everywhere, reactionary and fundamentalist offensives seek to restrict equality and erase people’s very existence. What can be won through struggle can be destroyed through inaction. Faced with this global threat, visibility, international solidarity and commitment are more indispensable than ever. Respect for and protection of human rights must apply everywhere, at all times, and for everyone. Under no circumstances can LGBT+ citizens be an exception to this fundamental principle, on which France will never compromise.”

The Foreign Ministry tasked Jean-Marc Berthon with attending the Budapest Pride parade to represent France symbolically, prompting sharp criticism from the Hungarian government.

Since May 2024, the current ambassador has been Isabelle Lonvis-Rome, a magistrate by profession, former Inspector-General of Justice, and former Minister Delegate for Equality between Women and Men, Diversity and Equal Opportunities in Élisabeth Borne's government (May 2022–July 2023). She is also active in civil society, notably through the Rhône Committee for the Reception of Refugees and Asylum Seekers and the association ‘Femmes de Liberté’, which she co-founded. In her capacity as ambassador with specific responsibility for combating antisemitism, she took part in the inaugural French-American Dialogue on Countering Antisemitism in Paris in autumn 2024 alongside Deborah Lipstadt, the US Special Envoy to Monitor and Combat Antisemitism, following the initiative announced at the meeting between President Joe Biden and President Emmanuel Macron. The communiquė affirms that antisemitism threatens not only Jewish people but also democracy and social cohesion, and commit to intensified bilateral cooperation to combat it: the statement situates the dialogue within a broader, ongoing French–American effort to coordinate policies and share practices

The Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Souveraineté alimentaire ('ministry of agriculture and food sovereignty') is the French ministry of agriculture – the governmental body charged with regulation and policy for agriculture, food and forestry.

The headquarters are in the Hôtel de Villeroy, at 78 Rue de Varenne in the 7th arrondissement of Paris, adjacent to Hotel Matignon.

Until 21 June 2012 the remit of the ministry was somewhat different; its full title was French : Ministère de l'Agriculture, de l'Alimentation, de la Pêche, de la Ruralité et de l'Aménagement du territoire ('ministry of agriculture, food, fisheries, rural affairs and spatial planning').

The regional directorates for food, agriculture and forests (DRAAFs) oversee the implementation of policies for agriculture, food (particularly health safety), aquaculture and forests. Their missions cover the content and organisation of agricultural education. They contribute to employment policy in the fields of farming, agri-food, forestry and freshwater aquaculture.

The minister of agriculture is a cabinet member in the Government of France.

The Ministry of Armed Forces (French : Ministère des Armées, pronounced [ ministɛʁ dez‿aʁme ], lit. ' Ministry of the Armies ') is the ministry of the Government of France in charge of managing the French Armed Forces inside and outside French territory. Its head is the Minister of the Armed Forces. From 1947 until 2017, the Ministry was designated the Ministry of Defence (French : Ministère de la Défense). It is France's ministry of defence.

The head of the department is the Minister of the Armed Forces. The current officeholder has been Sébastien Lecornu since 2022. He reports directly to the President of the Republic, the Commander-in-Chief of the French Armed Forces.

His mission is to organize and manage the country's Defence Policy in liaison with other departments. He is also in charge of mobilizing troops and managing the military infrastructure. He is responsible for the French Armed forces' security to Parliament.

The Chief of the Defence Staff (CEMA) reports directly to the Minister. He is in charge of conducting operations, troops training, troops inspection, programming the force's future, and gathering and analyzing Intelligence. He is also in charge of maintaining relationships with other countries' armed forces.

The position of Chief of the Defence Staff was held by French Army General Pierre de Villiers until 20 July 2017, when he resigned without an official reason. However, sources suggest that this was done as a protest against the defence budget cuts announced contrary to previous assurances to increase defence spending. French Army General François Lecointre took over as Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces the following day.

The Secretary-General for Administration is in charge of the general administration of the Department. He assists the Minister for:

The position is held by Jean-Paul Bodin.

The Direction Générale de l'Armement is the research and development service of the Department. It is in charge of furnishing equipment to all branches of the Armed Forces and creating future equipment for them. The service manages more than 80 projects and contributed more than 7.5 billion euros to the national industry in 2011.

The headquarters of the Ministry of the Armies is at the Hotel de Brienne, in the 7th Arrondissement of Paris, but all services have since been moved to a new headquarters.

On 5 November 2015, French president François Hollande inaugurated The new French Defence Ministry headquarters at Balard Site, nicknamed Hexagone Balard or "Balardgon" to mimic its American counterpart The Pentagon.

Hexagone Balard concentrates all components of the French Armed Forces, and houses the Chief of Staff of the Army, Chief of Staff of the Navy, Chief of Staff of the Air and Space Force, the Direction générale de l'armement, the General Secretary for the Administration and the Chief of the Defence Staff, while the office of the Minister of the Armed Forces remained in the Hotel de Brienne. It is a 250,000 square metres (2,690,978 Sq Ft) building on grounds measuring 39.5 acres (16.5 hectares).

Its nickname "Hexagon" was given to the project because of the shape of the ministry building. The centre of the quadrilateral that forms the whole of the West plot consists of two buildings of hexagonal shape.

The Ministry of Culture (French : Ministère de la Culture [ ministɛʁ də la kyltyʁ ]) is the ministry of the Government of France in charge of national museums and the monuments historiques. Its goal is to maintain the French identity through the promotion and protection of the arts (visual, plastic, theatrical, musical, dance, architectural, literary, televisual and cinematographic) on national soil and abroad. Its budget is mainly dedicated to the management of the Archives Nationales (six national sites and hundred decentralised storage facilities) and the regional Maisons de la culture (culture centres).

Its main office is in the Palais-Royal in the 1st arrondissement of Paris on the Rue de Valois. It is headed by the Minister of Culture, a cabinet member. The incumbent is Catherine Pégard, a newspaper editor who directed the management of the Palace of Versailles.

Deriving from the Italian and Burgundian courts of the Renaissance, the notion that the state had a key role to play in the sponsoring of artistic production and that the arts were linked to national prestige was found in France from at least the 16th century on. During the pre-revolutionary period, these ideas are apparent in such things as the creation of the Académie française, the Académie de peinture et de sculpture and other state-sponsored institutions of artistic production, and through the cultural policies of Louis XIV 's minister Jean-Baptiste Colbert.

The modern post of Minister of Culture was created by Charles de Gaulle in 1959 and the first officeholder was the writer André Malraux. Malraux established the goals of the droit à la culture ('right to culture'), an idea which had been incorporated in the Constitution of France and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948), by democratising access to culture, while also achieving the Gaullist aim of elevating the "grandeur" ('greatness') of post-war France. To this end, he created numerous regional cultural centres throughout France and actively sponsored the arts. Malraux's artistic tastes included the modern arts and the avant-garde, but on the whole he remained conservative.

Under President François Mitterrand the Minister of Culture was Jack Lang who showed himself to be far more open to popular cultural production, including jazz, rock and roll, rap music, graffiti, bande dessinées, fashion and food. His famous phrase "économie et culture, même combat" ('economy and culture: it's the same fight') is representative of his commitment to cultural democracy and to active national sponsorship and participation in cultural production. In addition to the creation of the Fête de la Musique and overseeing the French Revolution bicentennial (1989), he was in charge of the massive architectural program of the François Mitterrand years (the so-called Grands travaux ; 'Great Works') that gave permission for the building of the Bibliothèque nationale, the new Louvre, the Arab World Institute, the Musée d'Orsay, the Opéra-Bastille, the " Grande Arche " of La Défense (the Parisian business quarter), the new seat of the French Ministry for the Economy and Finance, the Jean-Marie Tjibaou Cultural Centre, and the Cité des Sciences et de l'Industrie and Cité de la Musique, both in the Parc de la Villette.

The Ministry of Jacques Toubon was notable for a number of laws (the " Toubon Laws ") enacted for the preservation of the French language, both in advertisements (all ads must include a French translation of foreign words) and on the radio (35% of songs on French radio stations must be in French), ostensibly in reaction to the presence of English.

The following people were appointed Minister of Culture of France:

Since the French constitution does not identify specific ministers (merely speaking of "the minister in charge of" this or that), each government may label each ministry as they wish, or even have a broader ministry in charge of several governmental sectors. Hence, the ministry has gone through a number of different names:

The Ministry of Culture is made up of a variety of internal divisions, including:

The Ministry has access to one inter-ministerial division:

The Ministry also runs three "delegations" (administrative boards):

Finally, the Ministry shares in the management of the National Centre of Cinema (Centre national de la cinématographie, CNC), a public institution.

The Alliance française is run by the Ministry of Europe and Foreign Affairs.

On the national level, the Ministry also runs:

The Ministry of Culture is responsible for, or a major sponsor of, a number of annual cultural activities, including the Fête de la Musique, the Maison de la culture de Grenoble, the Festival d'Avignon, the Public Establishment of the Palace, Museum and National Estate of Versailles, the Joconde (online database of objects in French museums), the Base Mérimée (database of listed heritage monuments), and the Maître d'art program.

The Ministry of Ecological Transition (French : Ministère de la Transition écologique), commonly just referred to as Ministry of Ecology, is a department of the Government of France. It is responsible for preparing and implementing the government's policy in the fields of sustainable development, climate, energy transition and biodiversity. Monique Barbut was appointed Minister of Ecological Transition on 12 October 2025 in the Second Lecornu government.

The cabinet ministry is in Paris, while the ministry's administration is in the following places: Grande Arche Paroi Sud and Tour Sequoia, both in La Défense.

On 8 January 1971, under President Georges Pompidou, the Ministry of the Environment (Ministère de l'Environnement) was created as a ministry subordinate to the Prime Minister of France. The first Minister of the Environment was Robert Poujade. From 1974 to 1977, the position was renamed Minister of Quality of Life; in 1978 it became Minister of the Environment and Way of Life. Sustainable development was added in 2002.

The ministry's administration is headquartered in Tour Sequoia and La Grande Arche, both in La Défense. The cabinet of the minister is within the Hôtel de Roquelaure, Boulevard Saint-Germain, Paris.

The ministry is responsible for the country's environmental policy (preservation of biodiversity, Climate Kyoto Protocol application, environmental control of industries), transportation (air, road, railway and sea regulation departments), national parks and housing policy. The ministry distributes funds to research agencies or councils. As of 2017, the ministry is also responsible for energy policy.

The Minister delegate of Transport, currently Philippe Tabarot, is in charge of transport policy.

The Minister delegate of Housing, currently Vincent Jeanbrun, is in charge of housing policy.

The Secretary of State in charge of Biodiversity is in charge of biodiversity policy. There is currently no such officeholder.

48°50′21″N 2°22′33″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.83917°N 2.37583°E ﻿ / 48.83917; 2.37583 The Ministry of Economics, Finance and Industrial and Digital Sovereignty (French : Ministère de l'Économie, des Finances et de la Souveraineté industrielle et numérique, pronounced [ ministɛʁ d(ə) lekɔnɔmi e definɑ̃s ]), informally referred to as Bercy, is one of the most important ministries in the Government of France. Its minister is one of the most prominent cabinet members after the prime minister. The name of the ministry has changed over time; it has included the terms "economics", "industry", "finance" and "employment" throughout its history.

The Minister of Economics and Finance oversees:

The officeholder, who has authority on the financial assets of the state, the financial and economic national system and the taxation rules overall, also represents France in the Economic and Financial Affairs Council (ECOFIN).

The Ministry of the Economy and Finance building is situated in Bercy, in the 12th arrondissement of Paris. The building it shares with the Ministry of Public Action and Accounts extends to the Seine, where there is a wharf with fast river boats for faster liaisons to other government agencies. It is also served by Paris Metro lines 6 and 14 at Bercy station.

The 5-hectare complex is made of five buildings: Sully and Turgot buildings (both occupied by the Directorate-General of the Taxes), the Necker building (along the railways), the Vauban building, and the Colbert building (housing the Ministries). The Colbert building contains two 70-meter long arches weighting 8000 tons each (weight of the Eiffel Tower). It is the only administrative building in Paris to have been built at a perpendicular angle against the Seine, and the only one that has part of its foundations in the Seine's water.

The saying "the Bercy Fortress" (French: la forteresse de Bercy) refers to the ministry as a dark department with obscure civil servants, especially of high rank. This is emphasised by the impressive look of the building.

During the Grands Projets of François Mitterrand, it was decided that the Ministry of Finance would leave the Louvre 's Richelieu wing where it had been located for 110 years. Forty other offices of the Ministry spread around the capital would be reunited in the new building.

After an architectural contest, Paul Chemetov and Borja Huidobro were selected in December 1982 to design the Colbert, Necker and Vauban buildings. Louis Arretche and Roman Karasinski were selected in July 1983 to design the Tugot and Sully buildings.

Construction started in 1984. In 1989, the Ministry's employees left the Louvre to move into the new building. Pierre Bérégovoy was the first finance minister to work in the new building.

Roland Lescure has been Minister of Economics and Finance since October 5, 2025. In the government of Prime Minister Sébastien Lecornu, he is assisted by three junior ministers: Amélie de Montchalin as Minister for Public Accounts, Marc Ferracci as Minister for Industry and Véronique Louwagie as Minister for Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises.

The Ministry of Higher Education and Research and Space (French : ministère de l’Enseignement Supérieur et de la Recherche et de l'Espace, or MESRE), formerly associated with the portfolio of Innovation, Technical Progress, and Atomic and Space Affairs, is the cabinet member in the Government of France responsible for implementing the Government's policy in the fields of research and technology, access to and development of higher education, regulation of access to higher education, and vocational training. It also coordinates the promotion of science and technology, as well as the dissemination of scientific, technological, and industrial culture.

The development of scientific research holds a central place in the French Government's policy: the Fourth Plan (1962–1965) marked the “official recognition of the importance of Research at the top of the hierarchy of factors governing the Nation’s development.” The Ministry is responsible for implementing the Research Programming Act.

The Ministry was established in 1936 under the name Sub-secretariat for Scientific Research, first entrusted to Irène Joliot-Curie and then to Jean Perrin within the Socialist Front Populaire government, but it was dissolved in June 1937. Two years later, the government founded the National Council for Scientific Research, dedicated to the encouragement and promotion of scientific research.

The Ministry was re-established in 1954 under the cabinet of Pierre Mendès-France, focusing on technical progress. It was later associated with Atomic Energy under Charles de Gaulle, with Industry under Presidents Pompidou and Mitterrand, and with National Education from 1993 onwards.

The Ministry of Research was responsible for the development of the Commissariat for Atomic Energy (1945), the implementation of the Plan Calcul (1963), the Ariane space exploration programme (1973), and the Research Programming Act (2021).

Since 23 December 2024, the Minister for Higher Education and Research is Philippe Baptiste, former president of the National Centre for Space Studies (Centre national d’études spatiales), serving in the Bayrou government.

The delegated ministry has had various names over the years, depending on the era and the government in power:

Scientific research in France has historically been closely tied to the public authorities. During the French Revolution, the royal universities — deemed too corporatist and too closely associated with the monarchy — were abolished and replaced by public grandes écoles, which were controlled and funded by the State. With the Revolution, the French State began to recognise the importance of universities and higher education. Napoleon centralised the universities between 1808 and 1815.

In 1880, the Ferry Law established the State’s monopoly over the awarding of university degrees in France: private higher education institutions were thus prohibited from using the term “university.” This restriction remains in effect today, which explains why such institutions are officially referred to as Catholic institutes, even though the term “Catholic university” has become commonly used.

Under the Third Republic, higher education experienced significant growth: by the end of the 19th century, there were 24,000 students enrolled in faculties (including 9,000 in private Catholic faculties). In 1885, state faculties were granted legal personality and obtained their own budgets by 1890. The republican regime placed great importance on public education — not only to promote scientific progress, but also to transmit such progress to industry. By 1896, France had fifteen universities, the most important being those in Paris, Lyon, Montpellier, and Aix-en-Provence. In line with the Law on the Separation of Church and State, universities were secularised, and theology chairs were abolished in 1905.

The State played an active role in establishing the first scientific research centres: in 1901, the Scientific Research Fund (Caisse des recherches scientifiques) was created, followed in 1915 by the Directorate of Inventions (Direction des Inventions), in cooperation with the Ministry of War. In 1917, a short-lived Undersecretariat for Inventions (Sous-Secrétariat aux Inventions) was established. In 1930, the National Science Fund was created to provide scholarships to researchers — the first public funding scheme for researchers in France. These bodies were not full ministries, but worked in coordination with government services. The State's interest in scientific research became official in spring 1936, with the creation by the Socialist government of Léon Blum of the Undersecretariat for Scientific Research, entrusted to scientists Irène Joliot-Curie and Jean Perrin. Though short-lived, it was followed by the creation of the High Committee for the Coordination of Scientific Research in May 1938, tasked with coordinating all research and scientific work. Finally, in 1939, the National Centre for Scientific Research (Conseil National pour la Recherche Scientifique, CNRS) was established to “coordinate the activity of laboratories in order to increase the productivity of scientific research.”

After the Second World War, the development of fundamental research was made a national priority, as France was undergoing reconstruction. In the early years of the Fifth Republic, the research budget increased significantly, reaching 2.2% of GDP in the 1960s. This effort dropped to 1.7% of GDP in the 1970s. Successive governments continued to prioritise fundamental research, though the status of universities — still closely tied to the public authorities — remained largely unchanged. Between 1954 and 1974, the Ministry was responsible for technical progress and atomic energy before being placed under the supervision of the Ministry of Industry until 1995.

The events of May 1968 led to a major overhaul of French universities. The student protests began on 22 March 1968 with the sequestration of the Dean of the University of Nanterre by students protesting against the ban on visiting female dormitories, as well as expressing opposition to the Vietnam War. The movement spread rapidly across the country. The Faure Law restructured the university system, granting autonomy to universities, establishing councils that now included students, and definitively ending the idea of selection at university entrance—only the baccalauréat (the secondary school leaving qualification) was required for admission. In several university cities, faculties declared themselves autonomous and adopted more democratic statutes. In Paris, the University of Vincennes, founded in autumn 1968, became a stronghold of the political left. Notable figures teaching there included Gilles Deleuze (who gave a course on Nihilism and Protest), Daniel Bensaïd (a seminar on the nature of workers’ States), Alain Badiou (on Science and Class Struggle), and Henri Weber (on Sino-Soviet relations and Maoism). Michel Foucault chaired the Department of Philosophy. Amid rivalries among various factions of the French left at the time (Maoists, Trotskyists, Communists), the university of Vincennes — labelled the “ enfant terrible of May ’68” — was ultimately dismantled in 1980.

In 1986, the Devaquet bill, which sought to introduce selection at university level, triggered mass student protests, joined by secondary school pupils. At the time, France was in a period of political cohabitation: Socialist President François Mitterrand and conservative Prime Minister Jacques Chirac. President Mitterrand openly opposed the bill, declaring himself "on the same wavelength as the striking students" and expressing admiration for their "maturity." The movement culminated in the police killing of Malik Oussekine, and the proposed law was subsequently withdrawn.

In 1982, the research portfolio was entrusted to the Minister for Industry, Jean-Pierre Chevènement. Under President François Mitterrand (1981–1995), research was made a national priority, as he declared in January 1982 during the General Assembly on Research (États Généraux de la Recherche):

"In his work on the history of Western capitalism, Fernand Braudel shows that no society has ever survived unless it was able to bring together in a mysterious alchemy the talents of researchers, the will of politicians, and the enterprising spirit of workers."

This policy was reflected in initiatives such as the launch of the EUREKA project for technological Europe, support for innovation in small and medium-sized enterprises, and backing for projects such as the crewed space station and the Ariane and Hermès programmes. In 1981, the Industrial Agreements for Training through Research (Conventions industrielles de formation par la recherche, or Cifre) were launched. These enable companies to receive financial support for hiring young PhD students whose research work, supervised by a public research laboratory, leads to a doctoral thesis. The programme is still in place today, with 1,500 projects in 2020 and a target, set by the 2021 Research Programming Act, of reaching 2,150 Cifre per year by 2027.

In 1992, the responsibilities of Research Minister Hubert Curien were expanded to include Space. Between 1995 and 1997, the portfolio for space research was transferred to the Minister for Telecommunications and Posts. In 1993, research was placed under the permanent supervision of the Ministry of National Education: François Fillon became the first “Minister for National Education, Higher Education and Research.” Thereafter, the position was usually held by a delegated minister.

In 2005, under President Jacques Chirac, the government founded the Industrial Innovation Agency (Agence pour l'Innovation Industrielle) with the aim of:

"Steering our industrial fabric towards high-tech sectors, the sectors that will generate the jobs of tomorrow... Just as the State did with Airbus, Ariane, and nuclear energy, it is once again giving itself the means to launch major projects for the future."

The aim was to raise research spending to 3% of GDP.

Since 1981, the delegated Ministry for Higher Education and Research has been based in the former École Polytechnique building, located in the 5th arrondissement of Paris, within the Boncourt Pavilion. The site was home to the Collège de Boncourt as early as 1353, later housed the École Polytechnique from 1805 to 1976, and was subsequently allocated to the ministry’s departments from 1981 onwards.

The Minister for Higher Education and Research holds authority over the General Directorate for Higher Education and Professional Integration, the General Directorate for Research and Innovation, and the ministerial office. Together with the Minister of National Education, they share authority over the General Secretariat, the General Inspectorate of Education, Sport, and Research, the National Education and Higher Education Ombudsman, the senior defense and security official, and the ministerial internal audit mission

The Ministry of Immigration, Integration, National Identity and Codevelopment (French : Ministère de l'Immigration, de l'Intégration, de l'Identité nationale et du Codéveloppement) was a ministry of the Government of France that was created by President Nicolas Sarkozy in 2007. It was abolished in 2010.

Sarkozy had suggested the formation of such a ministry during his 2007 bid for the presidency. When he presented his intention to create this ministry if elected, a spirited debate over its necessity and impact ensued.

He was inaugurated on 16 May 2007 as President of France ; he soon afterward announced the composition of his government. He established the Ministry of Immigration, Integration, National Identity and Codevelopment and appointed Brice Hortefeux to head the newly announced institution. Hortefeux was later replaced by Eric Besson, on 15 January 2009. Besson remained in office until 13 November 2010, when the ministry was abolished. Its functions were redistributed amongst other government agencies.

The Ministry of National Education (the title has changed several times in the course of the Fifth Republic) is the cabinet member in the Government of France who oversees the country's public educational system and supervises agreements and authorisations for private teaching organisations.

The ministry's headquarters is located in the 18th century Hôtel de Rochechouart on the Rue de Grenelle in the 7th arrondissement of Paris. As education is France's largest employment domain, the ministry directs the work of more than half of the state civil servants. The position is thereore traditionally a strategic one.

After the 2024 French legislative election, Anne Genetet was appointed Minister of National Education on 21 September 2024. She was succeeded by Élisabeth Borne from December 2024 to October 2025 in the Bayrou government and the first Lecornu government. On 12 October 2025, Édouard Geffray, former Director-General of the ministry, took the office in the second Lecornu government.

A governmental position overseeing public education was first created in France in 1802. Following the various regime changes in France in the first decades of the 19th century, the position changed official status and name a number of times before the position of Minister of Public Instruction was created in 1828. For much of its history, the position was combined with that of Minister of Public Worship, who dealt with issues related to the Roman Catholic Church, except in instances where the Minister of Public Instruction was a Protestant. The position has also occasionally been combined with Minister of Sports and Minister of Youth Affairs. In 1932, the office's title was changed to Minister of National Education, although it was briefly changed back in 1940–1941, and was renamed Minister of Education during the presidency of Valéry Giscard d'Estaing (1974–1981). In 1975, it created the Comité d'études sur les formations d'ingénieurs which studies the training and job placement of engineers in France.

The Ministry of Police (French : Ministère de la police) was the Government of France department responsible for the police from its creation in 1796 to its suppression in 1818, and briefly again between 1852 and 1853. It was headed by the Minister of Police.

On 2 January 1796 and only two months after its establishment, the Executive Directory created a seventh ministry under the name of Ministry of General Police. The decree of creation mentions in its introduction a resolution of the Council of Five Hundred recognizing that the Ministry of Interior was unable to properly lead the police of the republic due to its size, and as such it declared a state of emergency.

During its existence and after years of troubles, the ministry was able to create a database of known criminals and offenders which reportedly helped to stabilize the regime.

Its administration was merged with the interior portfolio in 1818 by King Louis XVIII. In 1852, President Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte recreated the ministry for his friend Charlemagne de Maupas, but it was definitely abolished a year and a half later.

The headquarters of the department were located at the Hôtel de Juigné, Quai Malaquais.

The Ministry of Public Action and Accounts (French : Ministère de l'Action et des Comptes publics) is a ministry of the Government of France. It was created by President Nicolas Sarkozy in 2007, when he split the Ministry of Finance and the Economy into the Ministry of the Budget, Public Accounts and Civil Administration and the Ministry of the Economy, Industry and Employment. Éric Woerth became the first Budget Minister to have a dedicated ministry since Sarkozy himself in 1995.

Woerth was entrusted with several missions and reforms to be led. The main reforms were to modify the statute of civil servants, to reduce the number of civil servants, to merge the taxation direction and the public compatibility services, to lead a general review of public policies, to reduce the budget deficit, to elaborate a new legislation on online bets.

Budget Minister Jérôme Cahuzac was reattached to the Ministry of the Economy and Finance in 2012; the ministry took its current name and was reestablished again in 2017. It is housed at Bercy, sharing the Economy and Finance Ministry's building on the Seine.

In the government of Prime Minister Jean Castex, Minister for Public Accounts was a junior title held by Olivier Dussopt. Although the officeholder was present at the Council of Ministers, he was administratively attached to the Minister of the Economy, Finance and Recovery, Bruno Le Maire.

The Minister of Public Action and Accounts supervises:

The French taxation system is supervised by two separate board:

The taxation information system are being modernised by the so-called Copernic tax project.

By delegation of the Prime Minister, he supervises also the Public Services (essentially statutes and salaries of the State, local and hospital Public Services) and the modernisation of the State (including computing means).

He is responsible with their colleagues for Health, Youth and Sport and for Labour, Labour Relations and Solidarity of the equilibrium of social accounts.

The Ministry of the Economy and Finance building (French : siège du ministère de l'Économie et des Finances) is the headquarters of the French Ministry of the Economy and Finance or the departments in which it is occasionally redistributed, built in the 1980s in the Bercy area of the 12th arrondissement of Paris. It is commonly known as Bercy, a term also used by metonymy for the ministry itself.

It was commissioned as part of the Grands Travaux of President François Mitterrand, and designed by the architects Paul Chemetov and Borja Huidobro for the main area, as well as Louis Arretche and Roman Karasinsky for the two northwestern buildings. It is a massive complex made of several buildings, named after major French statesmen (Colbert, Necker, Sully, Turgot, Vauban), as well as of a detached convention centre. It includes both a port, where the southern end plunges into the river Seine, and a heliport, although no longer used. In addition, the building spans over two major roads, and has a wing adjacent to the gare de Lyon.

As typical of postmodern architecture, it includes inspirations from the history of architecture, such as the general shape of a viaduct, a (dry) moat, and a large ceremonial bronze gate. The entrance, and postal address (139, rue de Bercy), is a pre-existing and much smaller pavilion. It is sometimes called a " citadel " or " fortress ", in reference to the building's impressive architecture as well as to the power of the department within the Government of France.

Construction lasted between 1984 and 1989. The ministry was previously housed since 1871 in the Richelieu Wing of the Louvre, which needed to be vacated as part of the Grand Louvre project.

The move of the Ministry of the Economy and Finance was decided in 1981, as part of the Grands Travaux launched by the new president François Mitterrand, in order to free up the Richelieu Wing of the Louvre Palace and extend the Louvre Museum to the entire palace for the Grand Louvre project. The department headquarters had been housed there since May 1871, in expansions built during the Second Empire for the Ministry of State and other ministerial offices alongside rue de Rivoli. Most employees, which numbered several thousands, were actually scattered in other government buildings, and another purpose of the move was for a large part of them to work in a single location.

The place chosen was in the Bercy area in eastern Paris, which was being redeveloped; an alternative choice would have been the caserne Dupleix in the 15th arrondissement. The main lot was previously used by the Ministry of Veterans, which moved out in 1983. Other Grands Projets in the area include the opéra Bastille and the new Bibliothèque nationale de France headquarters across the river. Opposite the Colbert building across boulevard de Bercy is the Accor Arena, also built in the 1980s.

There were 137 submissions in the competition, launched in March 1982, from which the jury selected four; the winning entry, that of Paul Chemetov and Borja Huidobro from the Atelier de l'urbanisme et de l'architecture (AUA), was chosen by Mitterrand in December 1982. Additional buildings to the northwest of the initial lot, which became Turgot and Sully, were commissioned to Louis Arretche and Roman Karasinsky in July 1983 based on an earlier submission to the SNCF. Chemetov recalled that Mitterrand took a limited interest in the project by comparison with other of the Grands Travaux, and might have chiefly wanted to symbolically tone down the influence of the powerful department.

Construction lasted between 1984 and 1989, at a cost of 3,7 billion francs. It was described by the civil servant who coordinated the project as the largest office building construction ever carried out in France. There were significant cost overruns, as is common for massive construction projects, but also because the initial stages had been rushed due to the parallel launch of the Grand Louvre operation, and the competition was held with little financial consideration. This was in fact used by Mitterrand to overrule criticism from the department over the cost of his other Grands Projets.

The project was contested by Jean Nouvel in 1984 in L'Architecture d'aujourd'hui. It was not well received by some at the ministry, both due to the modern architecture of the new headquarters and because the area was deemed peripheral by comparison with the main government institutions and offices. Édouard Balladur, who was the main minister in the cohabitation government opposed to Mitterrand, delayed construction for a time when he took office in 1986, and although his predecessor had moved to another government house, hôtel de Roquelaure, he had the prior offices restored at the Louvre and settled there despite the ongoing work for the Grand Louvre, refusing to move to Bercy in 1988. Although Jacques Chirac, the mayor of Paris, was Mitterrand's main opponent in the 1980s, he supported the move, as his urban planners argued for the development of the East of the city. Michel Charasse, who served as budget minister in the left-wing government formed after Mitterrand's re-election, obtained to take the Empire style furniture of his office to Bercy, where it is still used by his successors, contrasting with the modern furniture used everywhere else.

The completed parts of the complex were gradually occupied from the second half of 1986 until late 1989, starting with the Turgot and Sully buildings (called E and D at the time), followed by the Necker and Vauban buildings (C and B) in 1988, ending with the Colbert building (A) in 1989. Pierre Bérégovoy and his junior ministers moved from Rivoli to Bercy on 25 June 1989, and took their permanent offices in January of the next year.

Chemetov and Huidobro donated the project papers, for a total of 170 linear metres, to the departmental archives in 2016.

Although an office building had been commissioned, the architects said they designed it as a republican palace, symbolizing both the power of government and its openness to the city and citizens. Some critics have compared it to Stalinist architecture.

The complex, in which about 6,000 employees work in 225,000 m, has 42 km of corridors, 8,500 doors, and 90 elevators. A degree of harmony is provided by the extensive use of a 90 cm square or cubic building module, down to internal and external decoration: each storey has a height of four modules (3,60 m), and each room as a floor-to-ceiling height of three modules (2,70 m); offices and conference rooms are formed by movable panels following the 90 cm modules, and can be reconfigured as the internal organisation evolves.

As typical of postmodernism, it includes elements from the architecture of previous centuries: the general shape of the Colbert building is inspired by a viaduct, and it is flanked by a (dry) moat, over which a small bridge leads to the ceremonial gate. Its larger arches, which include offices, remind of the old bridges of Paris, which were originally inhabited. Pierre Bérégovoy Hall, a 140 m long and 3,60 m large corridor conceived by Guy de Rougemont and leading to the ministerial offices, has columns and a floor decorated with 28 types of marble, reminding of Italian Renaissance architecture ; it includes a multicoloured “ribbon” that follows simple geometric shapes, and intentionally includes an oblique shape in order to extend the space horizon in the hallway.

In particular, there are references to the Louvre Palace : the Colbert building is about as long as the facade of the department's former offices on rue de Rivoli ; the courtyard of honour is square, like the cour Carrée ; and the inner courtyards of the Vauban building remind of those of the Louvre.

Bercy is a complex of several buildings; the main lot, covering 3,5 ha, has a general "T" shape, with the northern end however expanding westwards over 750 m. The architects were required to envision a link between the gare de Lyon, to the north of the lot, and the river Seine to the south. The Turgot, Sully and (partially) Necker are built over the concrete slab which runs between the station and the rue de Bercy.

Paul Chemetov noted that it is the only major public building perpendicular to the Seine, since others (Louvre, musée d'Orsay, palais de Chaillot etc.) are parallel to the river.

In addition to offices and conference rooms, the complex is a "city within the city" with five restaurants, three cafeterias, a post office, a documentation centre, a nursery, and a gym.

A piece of well-known equipment is Télédoc, an automated mail delivery system which circulates 445 miniature carts between 122 "stations", which was maintained even after the digitization of much of internal communication and still carried five tons of paper every day as of the 2010s.

The pavillon de l'Ancienne-Douane (Former Customs Pavilion) is a pre-existing three-storey building, protected since 1962, which served as the main public entrance to the complex, and as its postal address (139, rue de Bercy). It is close to the location of the former barrière de Bercy (of barrière des Poules), a toll gate of the Wall of the Ferme générale (1780s–1860).

The Colbert building (bâtiment Colbert) is the main axis of the entire complex, north–south along boulevard de Bercy, following the former wall and reaching the northern end of the pont de Bercy. It is named after Jean-Baptiste Colbert, who was controller general of finances (forerunner to the present minister) under Louis XIV.

The layout is inspired by a viaduct, and it is in fact parallel to the viaduct over which Métro line 6 runs on the boulevard. It is 357 m long, with 32 m-wide arches in its central part, and two 72 m-wide ones spanning over rue de Bercy to the north and over quai de la Rapée to the south, plunging into the river Seine. The two larger arches were designed to serve as monumental eastern entry gates to the city, and echo the Grande Arche built as part of the Grands Travaux to the west of the city.

To the east of the building across boulevard de Bercy is a dry moat, used for a sculpture garden.

The river end serves as a small port, where two fast boats dedicated to VIP transportation are moored. A round heliport was also built on the roof, near the Ministers House, but is no longer used.

One section in the southern part of the Colbert building is the Ministers House (hôtel des ministres), a black nine-storey cube where the ministers and their private offices work. It has a 12° tilt from the rest of the building, aligned towards Notre-Dame Cathedral to the west.

The office of the most senior minister is on the 6th floor, and that of the budget minister is on the 5th floor. There has occasionally been disputes between new ministers for the largest or highest-located offices, especially when the ministry was split into several standalone departments.

At the ground lever is the building's ceremonial gate, a 7 m square sculpted in bronze by Georges Jeanclos and weighing 5 tons. It is accessed from boulevard de Bercy by a small bridge spanning over the moat; however, it is only opened for official visits, as well as for European Heritage Days.

The pavillon de la Barrière d'Eau ("Water Gate Pavilion") is identical to the pavillon de l'Ancienne-Douane. It is close to the location of the former barrière de la Rapée, the remnants of which were demolished in the 1980s.

The Pierre Mendès France Convention Centre (centre de conférences Pierre-Mendès-France) is a detached convention venue, also used by other departments. It is named after Pierre Mendès France, who was prime minister during the Fourth Republic and had also served as minister of the national economy at the Liberation.

The Vauban building (bâtiment Vauban) is to the west of the Colbert building in the main lot. It is named after Vauban, who was commissioner general for fortifications to Louis XIV, and although, he never served as a minister, is considered one of the greatest military engineers in French history.

It is laid out as a grid around six inner courtyards.

The Necker building (bâtiment Necker) is to the northern end of the complex, reached by the Colbert building by its main northern arch over rue de Bercy. It is named after Jacques Necker, who was controller general of finances under Louis XVI.

The Sully building (bâtiment Sully) is one of the two northwestern buildings between rue de Bercy and the tracks of the gare de Lyon. It is named after Sully, who was superintendent of finances as well as chief minister to Henry IV.

The Turgot building (bâtiment Turgot) is the northwestern end of the complex, adjacent to the train station. It is named after Turgot, who was controller general of finances under Louis XVI.

The main exterior spaces of the complex are to the west of the Colbert building, with two main alleys named after Paul Ramadier (allée Paul-Ramadier), the first prime minister of the Fourth Republic, and Jean Monnet (allée Jean-Monnet), one of the founding fathers of the European Union. Between the Ministers House (across the ceremonial gate on the eastern facade) and the convention centre is the Robert Schuman Courtyard of Honour (cour d'honneur Robert-Schuman), named after Robert Schuman, another EU founding father, and since 2008 decorated with the twelve stars of the flag of Europe.

The building has over thirty works of art, worth over 4 million euros, including four monumental paintings by Roberto Matta, Pierre Alechinsky, Paul Rebeyrolle and Gérard Titus-Carmel [ fr ] in Pierre Bérégovoy Hall.

The building was labeled Architecture contemporaine remarquable (ACR, "Remarkable Contemporary Architecture") in 2016 by the Ministry of Culture.

The Ministry of War (French : Ministère de la guerre) was the Government of France department responsible for the French Army, the National Gendarmerie and until 1934, the French Air Force. It existed from 25 May 1791 to 31 October 1947, date to which it was merged with the Ministry of the Navy and the Ministry of Air into the Ministry of Armed Forces (then Ministry of National Defence). It was headed by the Minister of War, occasionally taking various titles.

The Ministry of War was the heir of the royal Department for War existing during the Ancien régime. On 27 April 1791, the National Constituent Assembly issued a decree organizing the six ministries of Justice, Interior, Finances, War, Navy and Foreign Affairs. The decree was signed into law on 25 May 1791 by King Louis XVI.

The Committee of Public Safety suspended all six ministries in April 1794 and implemented instead twelve Executive Commissions ; this act dismembered the department into numerous commissions. The ministry was reinstated with the formation of the Directory in November 1795.

In 1817, the State acquired the Hôtel de Brienne, at 14 rue Saint-Dominique (7th arrondissement) to serve as the Ministry of War.

In 1915, during the First World War, an Under Secretariat of State of the Military Aeronautics was created. It would eventually become independent in 1928 as the Ministry of Air.

The ministry remained in place in all subsequent governments, with some temporary name changes, until its final merger with the Ministry of the Navy and the Ministry of Air into the Ministry of Defence on 31 October 1947.

During the Napoleonic Wars, the minister was organised as follows:

Ministry of War Headquarters, at the Ministry of War Building in Paris, France

The Mint of Navarre and Béarn (French: Monnaie de Navarre et Béarn) was formed through the merger of the Mint of Navarre (French: Monnaie de Navarre) in Saint-Palais, whose construction was originally authorized by Charles the Bad in 1351, and placed under the authority of the Chambre des Comptes of Navarre on 4 January 1527, with the two Mints of Béarn (French: Monnaies de Béarn) in Pau and Morlaàs, in Béarn, in 1562.

The physical buildings that housed the mints were typically called the "Hôtel de la Monnaie." In some cases they are called the "Château de la Monnaie". In both Morlaàs and Pau, the mints had their origins in the official residences of the Viscount of Béarn in Morlaàs and of the Kings of Navarre in Pau respectively. The tower of the Château de Pau in which the mint was located was called the "Tour de la Monnaie".

A mint itself, in addition to being called by its proper name, such as the Monnaie de Saint-Palais or Monnaie de Pau, is often referred to as a ferme de monnaie and an atelier de la monnaie, or collectively as ateliers monétaires, in older French literature and records. In Béarnese, one sees the name secque (also seque and socques), as well as moneda and monederie, to designate the mint or monetary workshop. The Béarnese secque has the same meaning as zecca in Italian, and is most likely directly derived from the Arabic word sekkah (English: a die used to strike coins), because of the proximity to Spain.

The three mints still functioning as of the 15th century were subcontracted out to third parties who ran them privately under licenses renewable every six years. They minted coins of differing values in the name of, and for the benefit of, the King of Navarre and Béarn, as well as medals and tokens.

Starting on 19 August 1494, the currency had one-to-one exchange rates with coins of the same value minted in the Kingdom of France.

In Saint-Palais, the former Hôtel de la Monnaie is now called the "Maison des Têtes", located in the Rue du Palais de Justice.

At the time of its creation in 1351, Saint-Palais had a population of about 300 inhabitants, of which 100 worked at the mint (60 workers in the foundry to melt the metal into liquid and 40 striking silver écus bearing the effigies of Navarrese kings Henry III and of Louis II ; the last écus struck bore the effigy of Louis III.

In 1386, Saint-Palais was one of four mints in the Kingdom of Navarre, the other three being Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port, Pamplona and Monreal. At some point after 1402, the mint ceased activity. The Mint of Navarre in Saint-Palais was closed after 1527 for a period, but reopened in 1579. It ceased activity in 1672.

Records show the existence of a mint in Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port in 1386, one of four in the Kingdom of Navarre. Little else is known about this mint from records in French archives.

Coins, called " sols morlans", that were legal tender in all of Gascony as well as Béarn, were minted in Morlaàs at the Château de la Hourquie (Béarnese: Forcas), the official residence of the Viscount of Béarn, since the 9th century. It was situated on a small plateau south of the Place du Marché. In 1096, in the letters of Pope Urban II, it is written that the church of Sainte-Foi of Morlaàs is situated in the County of Béarn, in a town called Furcas.

In the early years, these were simple coins made from copper and bronze, but Gaston Phoebus later ordered that the mint in Morlaàs strike écus in gold and silver. Coins minted in Morlaàs, engraved with the heraldic cows, the symbols of Béarn, were often referred to as "baquettes" (i.e. little cows).

The reputation of Morlaàs currency was great. For this reason, in 1366 Charles the Bad, King of Navarre, who was seeking to give his florins the perfection of those of Aragon and of Florence, called upon Jean d'Estèbe, who was the head of the Mint of Morlaàs. In 1434, Jean de Foix-Grailly, Viscount of Béarn, appointed Peyroten d'Arblade, from Mont-de-Marsan, as Maître Particulier of the Mint of Morlaàs for two years. To this end, he established the mint in the castle in Morlaàs. The new maître particulier contractually committed to mint "morlaàs blancs", which by definition included deniers, the "medalhes morlanes" (i.e. oboles and mailles), and lastly a coin called pogese which had the value of one-fourth of a denier. The viscount contractually committed to provide four hundred marks of silver, based on Cologne weight (French: poids de Cologne), that Peyroton d'Arblade had to mint during the first year of the contract.

In 1484, Jean de Gardey from the County of Pardiac, was removed from office as the maître of the Mint of Morlaàs on the pretext that he was not Béarnese and that he paid seigneurial duties of less than half of the real value of the mint. When Arnaud d'Abbadie was appointed maître of the Mint of Morlaàs, one sees that the mint was still located in the castle in 1484, because it is written that he will stamp coins in "our castle, house and mint in Morlaàs" (Béarnese: "nostre castet, mayson et monederie de Morlàas".)

Before 1488, Morlaàs had the exclusive privilege of minting coins for Béarn, after which Jean d'Albret, then King of Navarre, Count of Foix and Viscount of Béarn, gave privileges to Pau and new letters patent for Saint-Palais.

Bascle de Lagrèze wrote that the Mint of Morlaàs was closed and that the molds, forges and other equipment were transferred to Pau about 1554, but this appears incorrect, because there is evidence that coins continued to be minted in Morlaàs well into the 1660s, if not later.

In 1562, Auger de Lagarde promised to mint coins in "the monetary workshop and castle of the Mint of Morlàas" (Béarnese: "la secque et castet de la moneda de Morlàas".)

Blanchet suspected that production was suspended at the Mint of Morlaàs was around 1619, due to the lack of evidence of any deliveries or shipments after this date. If production was suspended, it was short-lived, because a written decree dated 6 May 1637, issued on the advice of the officers of the mint, ordered that "baquettes" be produced in the Mint of Morlaàs "...up to a maximum value and quantity of 1,000 livres within a period of two weeks, explicitly requiring the officers, laborers and moneyers of the mint, to give the said "baquettes" in this vintage a distinct form, diameter and roundness so that they could be easily distinguished from counterfeits, and that to further ensure this, Messieurs Dupont, First President of the Chambre des Comptes, de Cachalon, Maître des Comptes, and the Prosecutor General, are required to be present during the new production, unless a bigger production run is otherwise ordered by the Chambre to meet to public needs."

The workshop was apparently closed again for an unknown period of time, because in 1662, the moneyers of Morlaàs presented a request to reopen the workshop for the production of gold and silver coins to the Estates of Béarn. Their request was apparently not granted, because at the Assembly of Nobility of the Estates of Béarn in Nay on 10 September 1663, a new request was made that the Estates intercede with His Majesty, "...to obtain his decree that the Mint of Morlaàs be reopened, at least for the production of pieces of five and ten ardit (one ardit was one-sixth of a sol, meaning 15 and 30 denier coins), that are necessary for usage by the public."

The molds, forges and other equipment of the Mint of Morlaàs were finally transferred to Pau about 1690 and the mint ceased operations, after no less than 600 years of operation. The references that can be found concerning the Mint of Morlaàs in 1690 lead to the conclusion that the workshop was no longer functioning. In the registers of the Mint of Pau, there is mention of the payment of 37 livres for "the days employed to assemble the 'presse de la monoje ' from Morlaàs and the one of Pau by Mathieu, Moulat and la Galère, carpenters from Jurançon." In the same register, in an entry dated May 11th of the same year, there is mention of a payment of 3 livres paid "...to the blacksmith of the ' monoje ' for his time and the use of his horse to go and load a scale at the 'Monoje de Morlaas' (sic)." It seems evident that if the workshop in Morlaàs still existed, it no longer was functioning and its equipment was being transported to Pau.

After having rented the old Hôtel de la Monnaie of Morlaàs, the land on which it previously stood was sold at the end of the 18th century. The Château de la Hourquie that housed the Hôtel de la Monnaie is said to have been destroyed in 1708.

In Pau, a Château de la Monnaie, rebuilt in the 14th century during the reign of Gaston Phoebus, was situated in the "Borc Nau" (French: "le Bourg neuf"), between the Hôtel de la Baque and the Motte de la Couète de la Molère, not far from the Moulin de la Dona. The Hôtel de la Baque evidently took its name from the coins of Morlaàs, engraved with the heraldic cows, the symbols of Béarn, commonly referred to as "baquettes" (i.e. "vachettes") at the time.

A Hôtel de la Monnaie was then constructed in the Tour de la Monnaie of the Château de Pau in 1524. When this became too small, a larger Hôtel de la Monnaie was built in 1554 to the east of, but adjoining, the original Tour de la Monnaie. It served as a mint from 1554 until the French Revolution. The equipment and tools of the mint were transferred to Monnaie de Bayonne during the Revolution, and in 1807 the Tour de la Monnaie, Hôtel de la Monnaie, and all their outbuildings were legally separated from the Château de Pau and sold by the government.

In 1617, the Cours des Monnaies de France demanded that the three mints of Saint-Palais, Pau and Morlaàs be placed under its jurisdiction, but this reform was never carried out. A judgement issued by the Parliament of Bordeaux in 1642, specifically mentions the Parliament of Navarre and Béarn and the Chambre des Comptes of Navarre, but does not mention at all the Cours des Monnaies de France.

Blanchet concluded from the lack of documents he was able to find that the Mint of Pau was closed by 1622, at least for some time.

In 1662, Genisseau incorporated the Mint of Pau into the general contract of the Mint of France by surprise, which provoked objections in Pau, and which were finally ruled as valid.

As of 1763, the Mint of Pau was still not under the authority of the Cour des Monnaies de Paris, the reason for which a majority of coins struck in Béarn under the reigns of Louis XIII of France and Louis XIV of France were a special type.

With article 2 of the Edict of October 1775, the King finally placed all of the responsibilities that the Court of Parliament of Pau had had jurisdiction for under the auspices of the Cour des Monnaies, under the authority of the Cour des Monnaies de Paris.

Because the mints were under the authority of the Chambre des Comptes of Navarre, the most senior mint official, the Général des Monnaies, was an officer of the Chambre des Comptes of Navarre. Each of the three mints had their own separate and distinct personnel. The mints officers included a Garde de la Monnaie, a Contre-Garde de la Monnaie, a Prosecutor (French: procureur), a Registrar (French: greffier), and later a Huissier.

Within the mints (French: Hôtel de la Monnaie) themselves, the management consisted of the licensee, often referred to as the " lessee " of the mint (French: fermier), who was normally the operational and financial manager (French: directeur & trésorier particulier), an engraver (French: graveur), a quality controller (French: essayeur), a moneyer provost (French: prévôt des monnayeurs), a finisher provost (French: prévôt des ajusteurs), and a moneyer supervisor (French: lieutenant des monnayeurs). The " monnayeurs " were the operators of the equipment and presses needed to mint the coins. The "ajusteurs" took the freshly-minted coins and deburred and otherwise polished them.

After Navarre and Béarn were joined in union with the Kingdom of France in 1620, certain officers exercised general functions for all three mints.

In 1635, King Louis XIII confirmed the letters of succession granted to the officers of the mints of Pau and Morlaàs in 1631. Each officer paid 293 livres and 5 sous for confirmation of their letters, after which the succession of the offices was by inheritance.

In his Monetary History of Béarn, Blanchet provided detailed, albeit incomplete, listings with references from the Departmental Archives of the Payrénées-Atlantiques, of the persons who held the various offices for the three mints in Saint-Palais, Pau and Morlaàs.

The Général des Monnaies (English: General of the Mint), also known as a Général Provincial (English: Provincial General), was title for the judges established in different provinces of the kingdom to preside over rulings that were issued in jurisdictions under the authority of the Chambre des Comptes of Navarre, before 1691, and by the Cour des Monnaies of the Parliament of Navarre and Béarn, between 1691 and the French Revolution. A ruling of the Conseil d’État dated 1 July 1625 gave them the official title of Conseillers Généraux Provinciaux des Monnaies (English: General Provincial Counselors of the Mints).

They were responsible for the audit and inspection of the mints, and had the gardes, later juges-gardes, reporting directly to them. They were responsible for remitting the minutes of his visits in the form of reports to the Prosecutor General, who, in turn, was responsible for remitting reports to the Court of Parliament. This latter examined the reported abuses committed in the production processes and pronounced punishment on the fermiers/maîtres, officers and laborers of the mints.

In an edict dated 30 June 1696, King Louis XIV replaced the seven Provincial Generals with twenty-eight Conseillers Généraux Provinciaux, of which one was for the city of Pau and under the jurisdiction of the Parliament of Pau. These new counselors, like their counterparts at the Cour de la Monnaie, were responsible for the prevention of counterfeiting and unauthorized alterations of coins, working in parallel with the bailiwicks, seneschals, officers of the Présidial, and the gardes of the mints. The General of the Mint of Navarre and Béarn settled disputes between mint officers, hired skilled and unskilled laborers for the mints, and ruled on objections raised to procedures at, and judgments concerning, the mints, when they arose, except in those cases when they were appealed to the Court of Parliament.

Before 1691, the General of the Mint was hired by, and swore oath to, the Chambre des Comptes of Navarre. After the Chambre des Comptes of Navarre was merged into the Parliament of Navarre and Béarn in 1691, they were hired by, and swore oath to, the Cour des Monnaies of the Parliament of Navarre and Béarn. Their remuneration amounted to 1,333 livres, 6 sols and 8 deniers per year.

On 25 October 1497, Catherine of Navarre named Jean, Seigneur de Candau, Maître Général of the Mint of Morlàas, to replace Gaston de Saint-Jean, who had died. One sees from this document that the Maître Général received the oaths of office from the maîtres particuliers, gardes, essayeurs, prévôts, and skilled and unskilled laborers. But, this title seems to have been purely honorary and other documents show that the management of the mints belonged to the maître particulier who leased the mints and produced coins under license.

The Maître Particulier (English: Individual Master) leased a mint or mints under a renewable six-year contract from the Chambre des Comptes of Navarre, later the Cour des Monnaies of the Parliament of Navarre and Béarn, and produced coins, medals and tokens under the license granted with this lease.

The Maître Particulier is often referred to as the Fermier, a word that has its root and meaning in the fact that the fermier was the individual "…qui affermait la fabrication…" (who leased the production). Fermier, in this sense, means lessee, the one who affermer (present tense) or affermait (past tense). The Chambre des Comptes of Navarre was the lessor of the mints.

At the end of his lease, the lessee was required to present a detailed accounting of the entire production made under his lease, the seigneurial duties paid, the allowances for weight and for law recorded during production, the remuneration of the various mint officers and, in general, all of the expenses incurred. This accounting was subject to a strict verification.

The lease was paid to the Treasurer of Béarn in three installments annually: at Candlemas, Pentecost and Michaelmas.

New mints leases were originally announced by the sounding of trumpets. Later, it was announced throughout the kingdom by posters printed in Lescar.

Towards the end of the 17th century, the Maître Particulier, a lessee, was replaced with a Director, an employee. The office of Director of the Mint cost 13,200 livres and offered 1,200 livres in remuneration. The office holder was also entitled to a bonus, calculated as 5 sols per marc of gold and silver coins minted.

The garde (English: guardian) of the mints were responsible for policing the workshops and for preventing the entry of persons other than those who were duly sworn and employed at the mint. Their responsibilities included ensuring the accuracy of weights, being present at pre-production trials, post-production tests and when weights were measured, as well as during the delivery and crating of finished coins. They were required to keep registers of raw materials used in production and of production delays by laborers and moneyers, as well as for giving of the workers the dénéraux, the monetary weights used to check the weight of coins minted, especially those from gold, to facilitate correct coinage. When the planchet were not perfectly round or otherwise not well worked, the garde was responsible to have them remelted and recast at the expense of the employees involved, as well as to inflicted fines or other penalties on them, including the suspension from work. The gardes were also responsible for removing the stamping tools and instruments used in striking coins and medals from the workshop, when they were not being used.

Prior to the end of the 16th century, the Gardes des Monnaies of Béarn were not required to post a bond, but the Prosecutor General complained to Madame la Gouvernante that their responsibility was so important, yet they were not required to post any bond. Henry III of Navarre made a decree on 6 December 1590, ordering that no one could be hired as a garde without posting a bond of 1,000 écu sols.

At the end of the 17th century, there were two juges-gardes in the Mint of Pau of which Parliament disputed their qualities as juges-gardes, given to them by letters patent by the king. Their offices cost 4,000 livres each and offered 125 livres of remuneration. The juges-gardes were also entitled to a bonus, calculated as 1 sols per marc of newly minted gold coins, 6 denier per marc of silver coins, and 6 deniers per marc of gold and silver coins sent back to the foundry to be remelted and minted a second time (as a result of quality issues).

On 23 November 1606, fr:Maître Pierre de Day was hired as the first contre-garde, and because this office was new, the King fixed the remuneration at 125 livres, in other words, the same as for the gardes at the time. This amount was to be taken out of funds of Chambre des Poids et Alois (English: Chamber of Weights and Values), after the remuneration of the other mint officers and all other expenses were paid. The new contre-garde was required to post a bond.

The contre-garde was an officer responsible for the inspection of the work in the monetary workshop and for keeping a register of the gold, silver and billon metals used in the production of coins. He checked the financial accounts submitted by clerks and exchange dealers, and ensured that they were paid in cash according to the current exchange rate. The contre-garde was ranked organizationally one level lower than the garde or juge-garde, but they replaced each other in their functions in case of absence.

The office of contre-garde cost 8,800 livres, offered 800 livres of remuneration, and entitled the holder to a bonus of 6 deniers per marc of gold and silver brought to the exchange.

With an edict in June 1696, Louis XIV of France replaced the contre-gardes with contrôlers contre-gardes, whose duties remained the same and whose remuneration amounted to 1,066 livres, 13 sols and 4 deniers. The salary was increased by 200 livres in 1700. In addition, each contrôleur contre-garde was allotted housing, inside the mint itself.

A mint worker responsible for coinage (striking coins.)

There were four monnayeurs that had no fixed compensation. Instead, they earned 1 sol per marc of gold minted, 6 deniers per marc of silver, and 6 deniers per marc of gold or silver remelted and reminted.

The essayeur (English: quality controller, tester) in each mint had varying rights depending on the period. This section, unlike the preceding sections, summarizes the position of the essayeur in French Mints during the 16th century. The situation in Navarre and Béarn would have been the same.

The essayeur was responsible for performing quality control by testing the gold, silver and billon delivered to the maître particulier of the mint as raw materials for production, as well as the finished products. He was present for all deliveries. As a bonus, he was entitled to keep one half of the peuilles from all the monnaie blanche (i.e. gold and silver coins) and monnaie noire (i.e. coins of little value, with little precious metal content, such as billon and copper) and the garde the other half. The essayeur and the maître particulier were responsible for measuring value, and the garde was responsible for measuring weight. It was forbidden for the essayeur to be associated with the maître particulier or his clerk, but if he had taken the oath customarily sworn by the laborers and or the minters, he could labor and or mint alongside of them.

In 1723, the essayeurs were ordered to mark gold and silver bullion that were brought to them for testing with their unique stamps and to maintain individual registers.

At the end of the 17th century, the office of the essayeur in the Mint of Pau cost 3,000 livres, offered 125 livres of remuneration, and entitled the holder to a bonus of 8 deniers per marc of gold and 4 deniers per marc of silver currency produced.

At the end of the 17th century, the tailleur (English: sizer), or graveur (English: engraver), had 200 livres of remuneration, and a bonus of 16 deniers per marc of gold and 8 deniers per marc of silver coins remelted.

The Mint of Pau also had four tireurs de barre, without fixed compensation, who shared the bonus with the monnayeurs. The fr:ajusteurs, eight in number, earned 2 sols per marc of gold and 1 sol per sols of silver.

MIPCOM (Marché International des Programmes de Communication, English : International Market of Communications Programmes) is an annual trade show for the television industry held in Cannes, France, traditionally in the month of October and running for 4 days. It is owned and organized by Reed MIDEM, a subsidiary of Reed Exhibitions.

The event is primarily attended by representatives of television studios and broadcasters, who use the event as a marketplace to buy and sell new programmes and formats for international distribution, as well as celebrities to promote programming.

The event also features keynote presentations and panels featuring representatives of the industry discussing new trends and developments. Additionally, MIPCOM has been used to globally premiere highly anticipated new programs.

Prior to MIPCOM, a spin-off event known as MIPJunior is held, which is devoted exclusively to the children's television industry.

MIPCOM also has a sister event, MIPTV Media Market, which is a similar format also in Cannes by the same organizers, in the opposite half of the year (usually April). MIPCOM is slightly better attended than MIPTV.

In 2020 the event moved online due to travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic.

From 2026, MIPCOM expanded its programme to include vertical content, notably the Duanju format, through the Microdrama & Vertical Content Programme, featuring dedicated conferences, networking events and industry sessions.

MIPTV (French : Marché International des Programmes de Télévision) is an event which takes place annually in Cannes, France, using the facilities and infrastructure which the town has developed over the years to host other important events such as the Cannes Film Festival amongst other events.

It is essentially a content market for co-producing, buying, selling, financing and distributing entertainment content. It provides the people involved in the TV, film, digital and audiovisual content, production and distribution industry a market conference and networking forum to discover future trends and trade content rights on a global level.

This event is very closely related to the MIPCOM event, but retains its distinct focus. The MIPCOM event takes place in the same venue in October each year.

MIP-TV was started in Lyon, France, in 1963 three years after MIFED (Mercato internazionale del film e del documentario [ it ; fr ]), the world's first audiovisual market, had started in Milan, Italy. The first MIP-TV was attended by 119 companies from 19 countries.

In 1965, after a one-year hiatus, MIP-TV moved to Cannes, using the town's “old” Palais for the exhibition floors. In 1982 the market moved to the new Palais, while the old one became a hotel. In 1987 the company that organized the market, MIDEM, was sold to the UK's Television South (TVS) for £5 million. Two years later, TVS sold MIDEM to Reed Exhibitions (for a reported $20 million), which renamed it Reed MIDEM.

Conference panelists and keynotes include CEOs from all the major global media companies like: Leslie Moonves, CBS (US), Jana Bennett BBC (UK), Gerhard Zeiler RTL Group (Luxembourg), Harry Sloan MGM (US), Subhash Chandra ZEE Networks (India), Hyun-Oh Yoo SK Communications/Cyworld (Korea), Paula Wagner at United Artists (US), Ronnie Screwvala UTV (India), Philip Rosedale Second Life (US), Ben Silverman NBC (US), Emilio Azcarraga Televisa (Mexico), Mike Volpi Joost (US), Ken Rutkowski, Wayne Scholes Redtouch Media (US) KenRadio Broadcasting (US). Vertice360º (SPAIN)

Since 2010, MIPTV has launched MIPFormats, "the pre-MIPTV formats conference & pitching showcase" that gathers producers, commissioners, buyers, distributors and aspiring creators of breakthrough formats. The event is organised in association with C21FormatsLab.

In 2011, 665 participants and 401 companies from 57 countries came to MIPFormats.

MIPDoc is where international buyers, sellers, producers and commissioners of documentary and factual programmes screen new content and do business. MIPDoc calls itself "the international showcase for documentary screenings". Key MIPDoc 2011 figures:

A mirepoix (/ m ɪər ˈ p w ɑː / meer- PWAH, French: [ miʁ.pwa ]) is a mixture of diced vegetables cooked with fat (usually butter) for a long time on low heat without colouring or browning. The ingredients are not sautéed or otherwise hard-cooked, because the intention is to sweeten rather than caramelise them. Historically including various meats before settling at its current meaning as a vegetable base, mirepoix is a long-standing part of French cuisine and is the flavour base for a wide variety of dishes, including stocks, soups, stews, and sauces.

When the mirepoix is not precooked, the constituent vegetables may be cut to a larger size, depending on the overall cooking time for the dish. Usually the vegetable mixture is onions, carrots, and celery (either common 'Pascal' celery or celeriac), with the traditional ratio being 2:1:1—two parts onion, one part carrot, and one part celery. Further cooking, with the addition of tomato purée, creates a darkened brown mixture called pinçage.

Similar flavour bases include the Italian soffritto, the Spanish and Portuguese sofrito / refogado (braised onions, garlic and tomato), a variation with tomato paste instead of fresh tomato of the Eastern Mediterranean and Balkans region, the German Suppengrün (leeks, carrots and celeriac), the Polish włoszczyzna (leeks, carrots, celeriac and parsley root), the Russian/Ukrainian smazhennya or zazharka (onion, carrot and possibly celery, beets or pepper), the United States Cajun/Creole holy trinity (onions, celery and bell peppers), and possibly the French duxelles (mushrooms and often onion or shallot and herbs, reduced to a paste).

Similar vegetable trios exist in Cantonese cuisine (scallions, ginger, and garlic) and South Asian cuisine (onions, garlic, chilis, and sometimes ginger).

Although the cooking technique is probably older, the word mirepoix dates from the 18th century and derives, as do many other appellations in French cuisine, from the aristocratic employer of the cook credited with establishing and stabilizing it: in this case, Charles-Pierre-Gaston François de Lévis, duc de Lévis-Mirepoix (1699–1757), French field marshal and ambassador and a member of the noble family of Lévis, lords of Mirepoix, Ariège in Languedoc (nowadays in the department of Ariège) since the 11th century. According to Pierre Larousse (quoted in The Oxford Companion to Food), the Duke of Mirepoix was "an incompetent and mediocre individual... who owed his vast fortune to the affection Louis XV felt toward his wife and who had but one claim to fame: he gave his name to a sauce made of all kinds of meat and a variety of seasonings".

The term was not encountered regularly in French culinary texts until the 19th century, so it is difficult to know what a dish à la mirepoix was like in 18th century France. Antoine Beauvilliers, for instance, in 1814, gives a short recipe for a Sauce à la Mirepoix which is a buttery, wine-laced stock garnished with an aromatic mixture of carrots, onions, and a bouquet garni. Marie-Antoine Carême, in 1816, gives a similar recipe, calling it simply "Mire-poix". By the mid-19th century, Jules Gouffé refers to mirepoix as "a term in use for such a long time that I do not hesitate to use it here". His mirepoix is listed among essences and, indeed, is a meaty concoction (laced with two bottles of Madeira), which, like all other essences, was used to enrich many a classic sauce. By the end of the 19th century, the mirepoix had begun to take on its modern meaning, although it still regularly included meat. Joseph Favre, in his Dictionnaire universel de cuisine (c. 1895, reprinted 1978), uses the term to describe a mixture of ham, carrots, onions, and herbs used as an aromatic condiment when making sauces or braising meat. The matignon is very similar to the mirepoix, except that the matignon is designed to be brought to the table and eaten with the dish or alone as a side dish.

According to the 1938 Larousse Gastronomique, a mirepoix may be prepared au gras (with meat) or au maigre (without meat). Mirepoix au maigre is sometimes called a brunoise (although strictly speaking this term more accurately merely designates the technique of dicing with a knife). A mirepoix au gras contains diced ham or pork belly as an additional ingredient. Similar combinations, both in and out of the French culinary repertoire, may include leeks, parsnips, garlic, tomatoes, shallots, mushrooms, bell peppers, chilies, and ginger, according to the requirements of the regional cuisine or the instructions of the particular chef or recipe. The analogous soffritto (frequently containing parsley) is the basis for many traditional dishes in classic Italian cuisine, and the sofrito serves a similar purpose in Spanish cuisines.

Traditionally, the weight ratio for mirepoix is 2:1:1 of onions, celery, and carrots; the ratio for bones to mirepoix for stock is 10:1. When making a white stock, or fond blanc, parsnips are used instead of carrots to maintain the pale colour.

Suppengrün ([ ˈzʊpm̩ˌɡʁyːn ]) means 'soup greens' in German; the Dutch equivalent is soepgroente. Soup greens usually come in a bundle and consists of a leek, a carrot, and a piece of celeriac. It may also contain parsley, thyme, celery leaves, rutabaga (swede), parsley root, and onions. The mix depends on regional traditions, as well as individual recipes. The vegetables used are cold-climate roots and bulbs with long shelf lives. Suppengrün act as herbs and impart hearty, strong flavours to the soup or sauce, providing a foil for other strong tasting ingredients such as dried peas and beans or pot roast. Large chunks of vegetables are slow cooked to make flavourful soups and stocks, and are discarded when the vegetables have given up most of their flavour. Finely chopped suppengrün are browned in fat and used as a basis for a finished sauce. The vegetables may also be cooked long enough until they fall apart, and may become part of the sauce or pureed to form the sauce.

In Italian cuisine, onions, carrots and celery are chopped to form a battuto, and then slowly cooked in butter or olive oil, becoming soffritto. It is used as the base for many pasta sauces, such as ragù (ragoût), but occasionally it can be used as the base of other dishes, such as sauteed vegetables. For this reason, it is a fundamental component in Italian cuisine. It may also contain garlic, shallot, or leek.

According to the Italian restaurateur Benedetta Vitali, soffritto means 'underfried' and is "a preparation of lightly browned minced vegetables, not a dish by itself". At one time it was called "false ragoût ", because soffritto was thought to vaguely recall the flavour of meat sauce.

Włoszczyzna ([vwɔʂˈt͡ʂɨzna]) is the Polish word for soup vegetables or greens. The word literally means 'Italian stuff' because Queen Bona Sforza, who was Italian and married Polish King Sigismund I the Old in 1518, introduced this concept to Polish cuisine. A włoszczyzna may consist of carrots, parsnips or parsley root, celery root or celeriac, leeks, and savoy or white cabbage leaves, and sometimes celery leaves and flat-leaf parsley. The most typical, packaged combination is celery root, parsley root, carrots, and leeks. Włoszczyzna is usually cut up to uniform size and boiled to form a flavor base for soups and stews.

Miss Aquitaine is a French beauty pageant which selects a representative for the Miss France national competition from the region of Aquitaine. Women representing the region under various different titles have competed at Miss France since 1920, although the Miss Aquitaine title was not used regularly until 1985.

The current Miss Aquitaine is Solène Videau, who was crowned Miss Aquitaine 2026 on 15 May 2026. Seven women from Aquitaine have been crowned Miss France:

In 1964 and the 1970s, the department of Gironde competed separately under the title Miss Arcachon.

In 1970, the departments of Gers and Landes competed separately under the titles Miss Armagnac. Women from Gers were eligible to compete, due to the department's historical ties to Armagnac, despite being located in Midi-Pyrénées.

In 1996, 2003, 2004, and 2009, the departments of Landes and Pyrénées-Atlantiques competed separately under the titles Miss Béarn (1996), Miss Bigorre-Béarn (2003; 2004), and Miss Béarn-Gascogne (2009). In 2003 and 2004, women from Hautes-Pyrénées were also eligible to compete, due to the department's historical ties to Bigorre, despite being located in Midi-Pyrénées.

From the 1960s to 1980s, the department of Gironde competed separately under the title Miss Bordeaux. In 1977 and 1978, the title was called Miss Grand-Bordeaux.

From the 1960s to 1990s, the department of Pyrénées-Atlantiques competed separately under the title Miss Côte Basque.

In 1951, 1952, and 1976, the departments of Gironde, Landes, and Pyrénées-Atlantiques competed separately under the title Miss Côte d'Argent. In 1979, a titleholder was crowned under the title Miss Côte-Sud-des-Landes.

In 1976, the department of Gironde competed separately under the title Miss Entre-Deux-Mers.

In 1930 and from the 1970s to 2000s, Aquitaine and Midi-Pyrénées crowned a representative under the title Miss Gascony (French : Miss Gascogne), to represent the historic region of Gascony, located between both Aquitaine and Midi-Pyrénées. Representatives crowned Miss Gascony who hailed from Midi-Pyrénées are included in the Miss Midi-Pyrénées article.

In 1960, the departments of Dordogne and Gironde competed separately under the title Miss Guyenne. In 2003 and 2004, the title was known as Miss Aquitaine-Guyenne.

In 1976, the department of Landes crowned its own representative for Miss France.

In 1973, the department of Lot-et-Garonne crowned its own representative for Miss France. In 1952 and 1970, a representative was crowned under the title Miss Agen, while a representative was crowned under the title Miss Roquefort in 1972.

In 1976, 1977, 1986, and 1987, the department of Gironde competed separately under the title Miss Médoc.

In 1976 and 1978, the department of Dordogne competed separately under the title Miss Monbazillac. In 1977, the title was called Miss Monbazillac-Périgord.

From the 1970s to 2000s, the department of Dordogne competed separately under the title Miss Périgord. In 1983 and 1984, the title was known as Miss Périgord-Agenais.

In 1979, the department of Gironde competed separately under the title Miss Soulac.

Miss Brittany (French : Miss Bretagne ; Breton : Itron Breizh) is a French beauty pageant which selects a representative for the Miss France national competition from the region of Brittany. Women representing the region under various different titles have competed at Miss France since 1920, although the Miss Brittany title was not used regularly until 1981. Until 2010, women from the department of Loire-Atlantique were eligible to compete in Miss Brittany, due to the department's historical ties to the region, despite currently being located within the region of Pays de la Loire.

The current Miss Brittany is Ninon Crolas, who was crowned Miss Brittany 2025 on 26 September 2025. Six women from Brittany have gone on to win Miss France.

From 1977 to 1979, the inland area of Brittany, known as Argoat, competed separately.

Prior to the 1960s, the departments of Côtes d'Armor and Ille-et-Vilaine competed separately under the title Miss Côte d'Émeraude.

In the 1970s, the department of Côtes d'Armor competed separately under the title Miss Côte de Granit.

In 1967, the department of Finistère crowned its own representative for Miss France.

In 1964, the department of Morbihan crowned its own representative for Miss France. In 1979, the department competed under the title Miss Lorient.

Miss Centre-Val de Loire is a French beauty pageant which selects a representative for the Miss France national competition from the region of Centre-Val de Loire. Women representing the region under various titles have competed at Miss France since 1928, although the Miss Centre-Val de Loire title was not used regularly until 2015.

The current Miss Centre-Val de Loire is Justine Bourrelier, who was crowned Miss Centre-Val de Loire 2026 on 26 April 2026. One woman from Centre-Val de Loire has been crowned Miss France:

The regional title has been known as Miss Centre-Val de Loire since 2015, while it was known as Miss Centre from 2010 to 2014.

From 1976 to 1992, the title was called Miss Centre-Ouest.

From 1994 to 2005, the departments of Cher and Indre competed separately under the title Miss Berry. From 2006 to 2009, the title was known as Miss Berry-Val de Loire.

In 1970, the department of Indre crowned its own representative for Miss France.

In 1979, the department of Loir-et-Cher crowned its own representative for Miss France.

From 1993 to 2014, the departments of Eure-et-Loir, Loir-et-Cher, and Loiret competed separately under the title Miss Orléanais. In 1976 and 1977, the title was called Miss Orléans and represented just Loiret.

From 2000 to 2002, the departments of Cher, Loir-et-Cher, and Loiret competed separately under the title Miss Sologne-Val de Loire.

In the 1970s, 1980s, and 2000s, the departments of Indre and Indre-et-Loire competed separately under the title Miss Touraine.

From 1995 to 1999, the region crowned a representative under the title Miss Touraine-Sologne.

In 1970, the department of Indre-et-Loire competed separately under the title Miss Tours.

Miss Champagne-Ardenne is a French beauty pageant which selects a representative for the Miss France national competition from the region of Champagne-Ardenne. Women representing the region under various different titles have competed at Miss France since 1964, although the Miss Champagne-Ardenne title was not used regularly until 1994.

The current Miss Champagne-Ardenne is Ynès Lallemand, who was crowned Miss Champagne-Ardenne 2025 on 12 October 2025. No Miss Champagne-Ardenne titleholders have gone on to win Miss France.

In the 1970s and 1980s, the department of Ardennes crowned its own representative for Miss France.

In 1978, the department of Aube crowned its own representative for Miss France.

In 1964, the 1970s, and the 1980s, the region crowned a representative under the title Miss Champagne. In 1970, the title was called Miss Brie-Champagne.

In 1993, the regions of Champagne-Ardenne and Burgundy crowned a shared representative under the title Miss Pays d'Othe.

Miss France is a national beauty pageant in France held annually in December. The competition was first held in 1920, and has been organized continuously since 1947. The trademark for the pageant is owned by the company Miss France SAS, and is a subsidiary of Endemol Shine France. The competition is currently aired on TF1. The winner of this pageant may represent France at Miss World or Miss Supranational after ending her reign as Miss France.

The Miss France pageant was first organized in 1920, under the name La plus belle femme de France (English: The most beautiful woman of France), and was held for one additional year before being abandoned until 1927. That year, the competition was rebranded into Miss France, and was held annually until it was disrupted in 1940, due to World War II. In 1947, following the end of the war, the competition was revived and has been held annually since. In 1954, Guy Lévy founded the Miss France Committee (French : comité Miss France) to organize the competition. Geneviève de Fontenay took over the Miss France Committee in 1981, until departing in 2007. Following the departure of de Fontenay, Sylvie Tellier served as the national director of Miss France until August 2022, when she was replaced by Cindy Fabre. In October 2021, Alexia Laroche-Joubert was announced as the new president of the Miss France Committee, working alongside Tellier and later Fabre. In March 2023, Frédéric Gilbert, a longtime producer of Miss France, was appointed by Laroche-Joubert as director-general. Laroche-Joubert departed from the Miss France Committee in December 2023, and was replaced by Gilbert. Fabre later departed as well in January 2025.

Contestants of Miss France must meet a number of eligibility requirements and first win a regional title which qualifies them for the national competition, representing their region. A number of these regions also organize local competitions corresponding with cities and departments within the region, which must be won first before one can progress to competing in the regional competition. The winner of Miss France resides in Paris during her year of reign in a rent-free apartment, in addition to winning a number of additional prizes and sponsorship deals while receiving a monthly salary. The winner may represent France at either Miss World or Miss Supranational, while runners-up and former winners may also be appointed to represent the country as well in cases where the reigning Miss France is unable or unwilling to compete.

The current Miss France is Hinaupoko Devèze, who was crowned on 6 December 2025 at Miss France 2026. She had previously been crowned Miss Tahiti 2025, and is the sixth woman from French Polynesia to win the title.

The Miss France was first organized in 1920, under the name La plus belle femme de France (English: The most beautiful woman of France). The competition was founded by journalist Maurice de Waleffe, who chose to have the winner be decided by French filmgoers. After more than 1,700 women applied for the competition, 49 finalists were chosen. The competition was held over the course of several weeks, with filmgoers being given a ballot with seven women, and asked to select their favorite. Agnès Souret was selected as the inaugural winner. The following year, the competition was held again, with Pauline Pô winning the competition. However, La plus belle femme de France was later abandoned after 1921.

Six years later the competition was revived under the name Miss France, with a new format organized by Robert and Jean Cousin. Miss France continued to be held annually until 1940, when World War II disrupted entertainment events. The competition resumed in 1947, and has been held annually since then. Geneviève de Fontenay, who had begun her career with the Miss France Committee in 1954, became its president in 1981, transforming it into a company, and bringing it to a live broadcast in 1986, when the competition became the first edition of Miss France to be broadcast live on national television. The contest was first aired on France Régions 3 [ fr ] and remained on the same channel until 1995. In 1995, the live broadcast of Miss France 1996 was moved to TF1, where it has remained since. In 2011, a dissident competition, Miss Excellence France [ fr ] was launched by Geneviève de Fontenay after her resignation from the Miss France Company in April 2010.

Miss France achieved its first victory at a Big Four international pageant when Sophie Perin won Miss International 1976. Perin had previously won Miss France 1975 and Miss Lorraine 1974. Iris Mittenaere became the company's second major winner when she won Miss Universe 2016. Mittenaere had previously won Miss France 2016 and Miss Nord-Pas-de-Calais 2015.

In October 2021, Alexia Laroche-Joubert was announced as the new president of the Miss France Company, working alongside Sylvie Tellier, the national director. In August 2022, Tellier was reported to have resigned her position as national director of Miss France, and was replaced by Cindy Fabre. Tellier continued to serve in an advisory role with the organization, until her departure at the conclusion of Miss France 2023. In March 2023, Frédéric Gilbert, a longtime producer of Miss France, was appointed by Laroche-Joubert as director-general. In November 2023, Laroche-Joubert announced she would resign from her leadership role with Miss France following the conclusion of Miss France 2024, due to her responsibilities as CEO of Banijay France ; she was replaced by Gilbert as president upon her departure. Fabre later departed as well in January 2025. Beginning with Miss France 2026, it was announced that a former Miss France titleholder would now serve as the official godmother to the incumbent titleholder, accompanying her to events and taking on a similar role that de Fontenay, Tellier, and Fabre had served in with past titleholders; the first godmother selected was Camille Cerf, as the godmother to Hinaupoko Devèze.

In 2021, Osez le féminisme, a French feminist organization, sued Miss France and its parent company, Endemol Production, for sexist and discriminatory employment regulations. The lawsuit argued that the contestants in the pageant should be considered employees of the competition, thereby forbidding Miss France and Endemol from engaging in discrimination. A Paris court later dismissed the group's claims and threw out the lawsuit in January 2023.

In April 2024, it was revealed that a museum dedicated to Miss France would open in the town of Saint-Raphaël in the Var department in 2025. The opening of the museum was later postponed to 2026 for budgetary reasons.

In May 2026, the Miss France Company announced that they had suspended their relationship with the Miss Universe Organization due to the controversy surrounding the 2025 edition of the competition. The following month, the Miss France Company confirmed that they would begin sending representatives to compete at Miss Supranational.

Each year, contestants are chosen through a series of regional pageants held throughout metropolitan and overseas France in the summer and autumn before the national competition. Over time, the regions represented at Miss France have varied slightly. The following 31 regional pageants currently send contestants to Miss France:

The regional competitions are organized by regional committees, and contestants must reside in the region they choose to represent. Regional committees have their own discretion as to how they wish to field candidates for the regional competitions. Some choose to organize a number of local competitions corresponding to cities or departments within the region, while others use open casting processes. Public voting is used to select winners of both regional pageants and the national competition. The winner of the national competition subsequently receives a number of prizes, including a rent-free apartment in Paris, sponsorship deals, and a monthly salary.

In order to compete in Miss France, contestants must meet the following eligibility requirements:

The pageant's code of ethics also requires that contestants not engage in smoking or public alcohol consumption. Failure to comply with pageant rules carries a fine of 5,000 Euro.

Prior to Miss France 2023, contestants also could not have been married, divorced, or widowed; have children or have been pregnant; be above the age of 24 on 1 November of the year of the competition; or have visible tattoos or non-ear piercings.

Miss France Monde or Miss Monde France (English: Miss France World or Miss World France) is a title that has been officially and unofficially conferred upon French representatives to Miss World since 1951. The franchise license holder to crown Miss France for the Miss World contest has varied throughout the years.

The most recent Miss France Monde is Indira Ampiot of Guadeloupe, who was crowned Miss France Monde 2026 on May 18, 2026.

The official sash and title of Miss France Monde/Miss Monde France (Miss France World/Miss World France) first appeared in 1999 at the initiative of Michel Leparmentier, member and organizer of the historic Miss France Committee (also referred to as the Miss France Committee of Paris), with the election of Sandra Bretonès, now a television presenter and host, whose first runner-up was Karine Ferri, currently a presenter on TF1. Before then, the titleholders were mostly referred to as "Miss France" even if they had never won Miss France or participated in the pageant and had won a pageant/title from a competing organization and/or separate pageant. Between 1999 and 2003, five young women were therefore elected by the historic Miss France Committee (Miss France Committee of Paris) founded in 1954. After the 2003 edition of Miss World, the Miss France Committee of Geneviève de Fontenay (also referred to as the Miss France Company or the Miss France Organization) regained the license franchise after de Fontenay sold the pageant to Endemol France, which later became Endemol Shine France and is now Banijay France (the French branch of the Dutch television production company Endemol, later Endemol Shine, now Banijay), after outbidding the historic Miss France Committee of Paris for the Miss World license and has been the license holder/franchise owner since. From 2004 to 2025, they were also the license holder/franchise owner for Miss France Univers.

Miss France Univers or Miss Univers France (English: Miss France Universe or Miss Universe France) is a title that has been officially and unofficially conferred upon French representatives to Miss Universe since 1952. The franchise license holder to crown Miss France for the Miss Universe contest has varied throughout the years.

The most recent Miss France Univers is Ève Gilles of Nord-Pas-de-Calais, who was crowned Miss France Univers 2025 on August 27, 2025.

The early years of the title (and exceptionally afterwards), the ladies representing France at Miss Universe were not from the Miss France Committee and held the title of Miss Cinémonde (named after the French film magazine), most of them were actresses before or after their election. Claude Godard was the very first French woman to compete in Miss Universe at the first edition of the competition in 1952.

Initially, only the young woman holding the title of Miss France obtained the right to compete in Miss Europe and the two main international beauty pageants, namely Miss Universe and Miss World. However, following an internal decision by the Miss France organization, or due to scheduling conflicts between the two events, it is common and permitted for the runners-up of Miss France to participate in one of the two world pageants or Miss Europe. In 1963, Monique Lemaire was the first Miss Universe participant from the Miss France Committee/Miss France Company (then chaired by Louis Poirot/Louis de Fontenay, Geneviève de Fontenay's partner). Marie-Thérèse Tullio, 2nd Runner-Up of Miss France 1965, was the very first runner-up in a national pageant to represent the country at Miss Universe in 1965.

In 1986, while Valérie Pascale was Miss France, Catherine Carew was Miss Overseas at Miss France for that year and was appointed to represent France at Miss Universe and Miss World that year in place of Pascale. A similar decision happened the previous year, with the Miss Overseas at that Miss France contest with Nathalie Jones representing France at Miss World 1985. On May 11, 2001, Élodie Gossuin placed in the top 10 of the Miss Universe 2001 pageant in Bayamón, Puerto Rico, despite rumors questioning whether or not she was actually a woman, which turned out to be false when it was determined that she was actually a woman.

The official sash and title of Miss France Univers/Miss Univers France (Miss France Universe/Miss Universe France) first appeared in 2003 at the initiative of Michel Leparmentier, member and organizer of the historic Miss France Committee (also referred to as the Miss France Committee of Paris), with the appointing of Emmanuelle Chossat as representative for France at Miss Universe 2003. Before then, the titleholders were mostly referred to as "Miss France" even if they had never won Miss France or participated in the pageant and had won a pageant/title from a competing organization and/or separate pageant. In 2003, one young woman was therefore elected by the historic Miss France Committee (Miss France Committee of Paris) founded in 1954. After the 2003 edition of Miss Universe, the Miss France Committee of Geneviève de Fontenay (also referred to as the Miss France Company or the Miss France Organization) regained the license franchise after de Fontenay sold the pageant to Endemol France, which later became Endemol Shine France and is now Banijay France (the French branch of the Dutch television production company Endemol, later Endemol Shine, now Banijay), after outbidding the historic Miss France Committee of Paris for the Miss Universe license and has been the main license holder/franchise owner since.

Two Miss France and Miss Universe France winners were national directors of the Miss France Company: Sylvie Tellier from 2007 to 2022 and Cindy Fabre from 2022 to 2025. Sylvie Tellier also served as a French translator and commentator several times on the Miss Universe election for the French airing of the pageant on Paris Première and Cindy Fabre also held the titles of Miss France Monde and Miss France Europe.

On May 28, 2026, the Miss France Company, on behalf of its president Frédéric Gilbert, announced via a press release its withdrawal from the Miss Universe contest, following the controversies that occurred during the 2025 edition and the questionable outcome of the contest. The last French woman representing France from an external committee was Emmanuelle Chossat, in 2003. Due to the withdrawal of the Miss France Company, the Miss Universe Organization announced that it will directly organize a selection process to choose France's representative for Miss Universe 2026 with Miss Univers France 2026.

France has sent the following to the Miss Universe competition:

France and Canada are the only countries to have participated in every edition of Miss Universe. The United States, the home country of the pageant and its headquarters, only missed out on this feat due to the disqualification of Miss USA 1957 at Miss Universe 1957.

To date, two French women have won the Miss Universe crown:

Miss Franche-Comté is a French beauty pageant which selects a representative for the Miss France national competition from the region of Franche-Comté. Women representing the region under various different titles have competed at Miss France since 1926, although the Miss Franche-Comté title was not used regularly until 1974.

The current Miss Franche-Comté is Emma Ninot, who was crowned Miss Franche-Comté 2026 on 11 September 2026. Two women from Franche-Comté have been crowned Miss France:

In 1970, the city of Besançon competed separately under the title Miss Besançon. The same title has later been used by the city for a separate beauty pageant, not affiliated with Miss France, up until 2015.

In 1926, 1969, 1991, and several years in the 1970s, the department of Jura competed separately under the title Miss Jura.

For several years in the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, the department of Territoire de Belfort competed separately under the title Miss Territoire de Belfort.

Miss Grand France is a French female national beauty pageant, held annually since 2019. The contest's winners represent the country at its international parent platform, Miss Grand International. Before 2019, all country representatives in such an international contest were appointed; most of them were the Miss Prestige National finalists (currently, Miss Excellence France [ fr ]).

The highest achievement reached by French representatives at the Miss Grand International pageant is the 3rd runner-up position, obtained by Safiétou Kabengele in 2024.

France has participated in nearly every edition of the Miss Grand International pageant, with the exception of 2018. During the pageant's early years, French representatives were appointed by various national directors to compete. Following the country's absence in 2018, former Miss Grand France titleholder Sonia Mansour acquired the national franchise in 2019 and organized the first Miss Grand France pageant on 4 July of that year. Cassandra De Sousa was crowned winner among nine national finalists. De Sousa went on to compete at Miss Grand International 2019 in Venezuela that October but did not place.

In 2021, Mansour lost the franchise to another organization, which continued running the Miss Grand France pageant. Due to health restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic, that year's edition was held privately with only five national finalists competing. Elodie Sirulnick, a 24-year-old model from Aquitaine, was crowned the winner, and also received the Elegance and Sympathy special awards. The organization subsequently lost the license to Venezuelan-born Robles Yanez of Celest Productions in 2023. In 2026, the license passed to Léna Abgrall, a former beauty queen based in Caen.

The following are the edition details of the Miss Grand France pageant, since its establishment in 2019.

The following is a list of French representatives at the Miss Grand International contest.

The following list is the candidates of Miss Grand France in each year's edition.

Miss Grand Tahiti is a national beauty pageant title awarded to Tahiti representatives who competed at the national event, Miss Grand France, or an international stage of Miss Grand International. The title was first awarded in 2014 when the 2nd runner-up Miss Tahiti 2014 was appointed to represent Tahiti at the Miss Grand International 2014 pageant in Thailand, followed by 1st runner-up Miss Tahiti 2016, Vaiata Buisson, who competed internationally in Miss Grand International 2016 in Las Vegas.

Tahiti joined the Miss Grand International pageant twice; in 2014 and 2016, but obtained placement only once, in 2016, by Vaiata Buisson.

Tahiti made its debut in Miss Grand International in 2014, when Miss Tahiti acquired the license and appointed the 2014 2nd vice-miss, Kohotu Ariitai, to compete internationally in Thailand. However, Kohotu was unplaced, then no Tahiti delegate in the 2015 international edition.

Miss Tahiti competed in Miss Grand International again in 2016, represented by the 1st runner-up Miss Tahiti 2016, Vaiata Buisson, who qualified to the top 20 finalists in the international pageant held on October 25, in Las Vegas. Since then, no Tahiti candidates in Miss Grand International due to a lack of national licensees.

In 2019, a model Alicia Hoatua-Chave nominated herself as Tahiti representative for the Miss Grand France 2019 pageant, but was unplaced.

In 2014 and 2016, the runners-up of Miss Tahiti were sent to compete internationally in Miss Grand International. Later in 2019, Tahiti sent its representative to participate in Miss Grand France, as detailed below.

The Miss International France is a beauty pageant which selects Miss France to the Miss International pageant.

France was debuted at the Miss International beauty pageant in 1960 by Miss France contest. Along with French representatives for Miss Universe and Miss World, Miss France for Miss International also became the most prestigious title at the Miss France contest. In 1976 Miss France 1975, Sophie Perin won Miss International 1976 in Tokyo, Japan. Between 1960 and 2015 French representatives at the Miss International were selected by runner-up Miss France, Miss National, and Miss Prestige National contests.

In 2016 France comes from Katia Maes directorship in Miss International history. The winner of Miss International France may come at the Miss International beauty pageant, which mostly happens in Japan. The reigning title is expected to serve as Ambassador of Peace in France. In 2017, a new French organisation with Bruno Lestienne as national director, with the help from Katia Maes, will organise the first Miss International Contest in september 2017.

Miss Languedoc (formerly Miss Languedoc-Roussillon) is a French beauty pageant which selects a representative for the Miss France national competition from the departments of Aude, Gard, Hérault and Lozère in the region of Languedoc-Roussillon. Until 2023, the organization was known as Miss Languedoc-Roussillon and also represented the department of Pyrénées-Orientales, sometimes through the Miss Roussillon sister pageant, until the department's separation into the independent Miss Roussillon organization. The first Miss Languedoc-Roussillon was crowned in 1976, although several women have represented the region with various other titles.

The current Miss Languedoc is Candice Gauch, who was crowned Miss Languedoc 2026 on 7 August 2026. Three women from Languedoc have been crowned Miss France:

For several years, the entire region of Languedoc-Roussillon sent one sole contestant under the title Miss Languedoc-Roussillon.

From the 1980s to 2000s, the region also crowned a representative under the title Miss Camargue.

From the 1990s to 2000s, the region also crowned a representative under the title Miss Cévennes.

From the 1980s to 1990s, the region also crowned a representative under the title Miss Littoral Sud.

From the 1970s to 1980s, the region also crowned a representative under the title Miss Grande Motte.

From 2003 to 2005, the region also crowned a representative under the title Miss Camargue-Cévennes.

In 1970, the department of Lozère crowned its own representative for Miss France.

In 1968, the regions of Languedoc-Roussillon and Midi-Pyrénées crowned a shared representative under the title Miss Toulouse-Languedoc.

Miss Limousin is a French beauty pageant which selects a representative for the Miss France national competition from the region of Limousin. Women representing the region under various different titles have competed at Miss France since 1970, although the Miss Limousin title was not used regularly until 1986.

The current Miss Limousin is Élise Escuriol, who was crowned Miss Limousin 2026 on 6 September 2026. No Miss Limousin titleholders have gone on to win Miss France.

From 1999 until 2005, the region competed under the name Miss Marche-Limousin. Prior to 1999 and after 2005, the region has competed as Miss Limousin.

In 1977 and 1978, the department of Corrèze crowned its own representative for Miss France.

In 1976 and 1977, the department of Creuse crowned its own representative for Miss France.

In 1976 and 1977, the department of Haute-Vienne crowned its own representative for Miss France.

Miss Midi-Pyrénées is a French beauty pageant which selects a representative for the Miss France national competition from the region of Midi-Pyrénées. Women representing the region under various different titles have competed at Miss France since 1968, although the Miss Midi-Pyrénées title was not used regularly until 2010.

The current Miss Midi-Pyrénées is Carla Rachail, who was crowned Miss Midi-Pyrénées 2026 on 5 September 2026. One woman from Midi-Pyrénées has been crowned Miss France:

From 1993 to 2002, the department of Tarn competed separately under the title Miss Albigeois.

In 2008 and 2009, the region crowned a representative under the title Miss Albigeois Midi-Pyrénées.

From 2003 to 2007, the region crowned a representative under the title Miss Albigeois Midi-Toulousain.

In 1978, the department of Gers competed separately under the title Miss Armagnac.

In 2003 and 2004, the department of Hautes-Pyrénées competed separately under the title Miss Bigorre-Béare.

In 1964 and from 1993 to 2002, the department of Haute-Garonne competed separately under the title Miss Comminges.

From 2003 to 2007, the region crowned a representative under the title Miss Comminges Pyrénées.

From the 1970s to 2000s, Midi-Pyrénées and Aquitaine crowned a representative under the title Miss Gascony (French : Miss Gascogne), to represent the historic region of Gascony, now located in Midi-Pyrénées and Aquitaine. Representatives crowned Miss Gascony who hailed from Aquitaine are included in the Miss Aquitaine article.

From 1997 to 1999, the region crowned a representative under the title Miss Midi-Pyrénées-Toulouse.

In the 1980s and 1990s, the departments of Lot and Tarn-et-Garonne competed separately under the title Miss Quercy.

From 2001 to 2009, the departments of Aveyron, Lot, and Tarn-et-Garonne competed separately under the title Miss Quercy-Rouergue.

In 1977, 1979, 1983, from 1985 to 1993, and in 1995, the department of Aveyron competed separately under the title Miss Rouergue.

In 1996, the department of Aveyron competed separately under the title Miss Rouergue-Cévennes.

Sporadically in the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, the department of Haute-Garonne competed separately under the title Miss Toulouse.

In 1988, 1993, 1995, and 1996, the region crowned a representative under the title Miss Toulouse Midi-Pyrénées.

In 1968, the regions of Midi-Pyrénées and Languedoc-Roussillon crowned a shared representative under the title Miss Toulouse-Languedoc.

Miss Nord-Pas-de-Calais is a French beauty pageant which selects a representative for the Miss France national competition from the region of Nord-Pas-de-Calais. Women representing the region under various different titles have competed at Miss France since 1920, although the Miss Nord-Pas-de-Calais title was not used regularly until 2010.

The current Miss Nord-Pas-de-Calais is Lola Lacheré, who was crowned Miss Nord-Pas-de-Calais 2024 on 19 October 2024. At Miss France 2025 on 14 December 2024, she placed as first runner-up. Four women from Nord-Pas-de-Calais have been crowned Miss France:

In 1979 and from 1991 to 1994, the department of Pas-de-Calais competed separately under the title Miss Artois, in reference to the historical province in which the department consists of.

In 1996 and 1997, the department of Pas-de-Calais competed separately under the title Miss Artois-Côte d'Opale.

From 1999 to 2009, the region crowned a representative under the title Miss Artois-Hainaut.

From 1973 to 1995, the region crowned a representative under the title Miss Côte d'Opale.

From the 1970s to 2000s, the department of Nord competed separately under the title Miss Flanders (1972–2009: French : Miss Flandre ; 1970: French : Miss Flandres). This title is in reference to the historical province the makes up part of the present-day department.

From the 1995 to 1998, the department of Nord competed separately under the title Miss Hainaut. This title is in reference to the historical province the makes up part of the present-day department. This title is in reference to the historical province the makes up part of the present-day department.

In 1961, 1978, and 1979, the department of Nord competed separately under the title Miss Lille. In 1976, 1977, 1985, and 1986, the department competed as Miss Lille-Métropole.

From the 1970s to 1990s, the department of Nord competed separately under the title Miss Littoral-Nord.

In 1976, the department of Nord competed separately under the title Miss Maubeuge.

In 1978, the department of Nord competed separately under the title Miss Métropole-Nord.

Miss Pays de la Loire is a French beauty pageant which selects a representative for the Miss France national competition from the region of Pays de la Loire. Women representing the region under various different titles have competed at Miss France since 1960, although the Miss Pays de la Loire title was not used regularly until 2006. Until 2010, women from the department of Loire-Atlantique were eligible to compete in Miss Brittany rather than Miss Pays de la Loire, due to the department's historical ties to Brittany despite currently being located within the region of Pays de la Loire.

The current Miss Pays de la Loire is Maëlle Hamon, who was crowned Miss Pays de la Loire 2026 on 10 September 2026. Three women from Pays de la Loire have gone on to win Miss France.

From the 1970s until the 2000s, the department of Maine-et-Loire competed separately under the title Miss Anjou. In 1967, the department competed as Miss Val de Loire.

In 1977 and 1978, the department of Loire-Atlantique competed separately under the title Miss Brière.

In the 1990s and 2000s, the departments of Mayenne and Sarthe competed separately under the title Miss Maine.

In the 1970s and 1980s, the department of Mayenne crowned its own representative for Miss France.

In 1962, the department of Loire-Atlantique competed separately under the title Miss La Baule.

In the 1970s and 1980s, the department of Sarthe crowned its own representative for Miss France.

In 1964 and 1967, the department of Vendée crowned its own representative for Miss France.

Miss Poitou-Charentes is a French beauty pageant which selects a representative for the Miss France national competition from the region of Poitou-Charentes. Women representing the region under various different titles have competed at Miss France since 1957, although the Miss Poitou-Charentes title was not used regularly until 2006.

The current Miss Poitou-Charentes is Mandy Goudal, who was crowned Miss Poitou-Charentes 2026 on 4 september 2026. Three women from Poitou-Charentes have been crowned Miss France:

The regional title has been known as Miss Poitou-Charentes since 1997, while from 1995 to 1996, it was known as Miss Charentes-Poitou.

In 1965, the department of Charente crowned its own representative for Miss France. In 1976, the department crowned its own representative again under the title Miss Angoulême.

In the 1960s and 1970s, the department of Charente-Maritime crowned its own representative for Miss France under various titles, including Miss Aunis (1966), Miss Côte de Beauté (1962; 1970), Miss La Rochelle (1976), Miss Oléron (1967), Miss Royan (1966), Miss Saintes (1962), and Miss Saintonge (1977).

From the 1970s to the 2000s, the departments of Charente and Charente-Maritime competed separately under the title Miss Charentes.

In 1970, the department of Deux-Sèvres crowned its own representative for Miss France.

From the 1950s to the 2000s, the departments of Deux-Sèvres, Vendée, and Vienne competed separately under the title Miss Poitou. Vendée is now located in Pays de la Loire, but women from the department were eligible to compete due to its historical ties to Poitou-Charentes.

In 1979, the department of Vienne crowned its own representative for Miss France.

Miss Provence is a French beauty pageant which selects a representative for the Miss France national competition from the departments of Alpes-de-Haute-Provence, Bouches-du-Rhône, Hautes-Alpes, Vaucluse, and portions of Var in the region of Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur (PACA). The other regional pageant within PACA is Miss Côte d'Azur, which selects a representative from the department of Alpes-Maritimes and the remaining portions of Var. The first Miss Provence was crowned in 1986, although women from the region have competed at Miss France with other titles since 1976.

The current Miss Provence is Ophélie Vitalbo, who was crowned Miss Provence 2026 on 24 July 2026. A total of four women from Guadeloupe have been crowned Miss France One woman from Provence has been crowned Miss France:

From 1976 until 1978, Marseille, the largest city in Provence, crowned its own representative as Miss Marseille. The city was absorbed into Miss Provence following the establishment of Miss Provence in 1986.

In 1990 and 1991, the department of Bouches-du-Rhône crowned its own representative as Miss Côte Bleue, although the department was reabsorbed into Miss Provence in 1992.

In 1986, the department of Vaucluse crowned its own representative as Miss Comtat Venaissin, although the department was absorbed into Miss Provence the following year.

Miss Rhône-Alpes is a French beauty pageant which selects a representative for the Miss France national competition from the region of Rhône-Alpes. Women representing the region under various different titles have competed at Miss France since 1928, although the Miss Rhône-Alpes title was not used regularly until 1987.

The current Miss Rhône-Alpes is Noémie Baiamonte, who was crowned Miss Rhône-Alpes 2025 on 19 September 2025. Seven women from Rhône-Alpes have gone on to win Miss France.

In 1985, 1993, and from 2004 to 2006, the departments of Drôme and Isère competed separately as Miss Dauphiné.

In 1976, 1986, 1987, and 1989, the department of Haute-Savoie crowned its own representative for Miss France. In 1978 and 1979, the title Miss Léman was used instead, while in 1977, the title Miss Léman-Haute-Savoie was used.

In 1970, the department of Isère crowned its own representative for Miss France.

From 1998 to 2009, the department of Loire competed separately as Miss Loire-Forez. Various titles were used to represent the department in the 1990s, including Miss Saint-Étienne, Miss Saint-Étienne Pays du Forez, Miss Nouvelle-Loire, and Miss Saint-Étienne Loire.

In 1928, 1929, 1964, and from the 1970s to 2000s, the Lyon Metropolis and department of Rhône competed separately under various titles, such as Miss Lyon, Miss Grand Lyon, and Miss Lyonnais.

In 1979, 1985, and from 1988 to 2005, the department of Ain competed separately under the title Miss Pays d'Ain. In 1986 and 1987, the title Miss Bresse Bugey was used instead, while in 1970, the title Miss Bugey was used.

From 1993 to 2014, the departments of Savoie and Haute-Savoie competed separately under the title Miss Pays de Savoie.

In 1986, from 1976 to 1979, and from 1990 to 1992, the department of Savoie crowned its own representative for Miss France.

Miss Île-de-France is a French beauty pageant which selects a representative for the Miss France national competition from the region of Île-de-France. Women representing the region under various different titles have competed at Miss France since 1930, although the Miss Île-de-France title was not used regularly until 1984.

The current Miss Île-de-France is Mareva Michel, who was crowned Miss Île-de-France 2025 on 20 September 2025. Sixteen women from Île-de-France have been crowned Miss France, the most of any region:

In 1972 and 1976, the department of Essonne crowned its own representative for Miss France.

In 1979, the department of Hauts-de-Seine crowned its own representative for Miss France.

In 1979, the department of Val-de-Marne crowned its own representative for Miss France under the title Miss Nogeantais.

From the 1930s to 2000s, the city of Paris crowned its own representative for Miss France.

In 1976, 1977, and 1978, the department of Seine-et-Marne crowned its own representative for Miss France.

In 1979, the department of Seine-Saint-Denis crowned its own representative for Miss France.

In 1967 and 1979, the department of Val-d'Oise crowned its own representative for Miss France.

In 1972, 1973, and 1979, the department of Val-de-Marne crowned its own representative for Miss France.

In 1977, the department of Yvelines crowned its own representative for Miss France.

The Missiri Mosque (French : Mosquée de Missiri) is a former French military community center inspired by sub-Saharan Islamic architecture. It was constructed in 1928–1930 for the Senegalese Tirailleurs based in military camps in Fréjus, in the southern France. Although its appearance evokes that of a mosque, its purpose and uses remained secular.

The building was included in the supplementary inventory of French historic monuments on 18 June 1987.

The Senegalese Tirailleurs (French : Tirailleurs Sénégalais) was a corps of colonial infantry in the French Army. They were initially recruited from Senegal and subsequently throughout the sub-Saharan regions of the French colonial empire. These infantry units took on the adjective "sénégalese" since that was where the first African Tirailleur regiment had been formed in 1857 by Louis Faidherbe, governor-general of French West Africa.

At the outbreak of World War I, 37 battalions of French, North African and Senegalese infantry were transferred from Morocco to France. Five Senegalese battalions were soon serving on the Western Front, while others formed part of the reduced French garrison in Morocco. On the Western Front, the Senegalese Tirailleurs served with distinction at Ypres and Dixmude during the First Battle of Ypres in late 1914, at the capture of Fort Douaumont in October 1916, during the Battle of Chemin des Dames in April 1917 and at the Second Battle of the Marne in 1918. Losses were particularly heavy in Flanders (estimated from 3,200 to 4,800) and Chemin des Dames (7,000 out of 15,500 tirailleurs engaged).

In 1915, the French high command realized that the war would last far longer than they had originally imagined. They authorized a major recruitment drive in West Africa and 93 Senegalese battalions were raised between 1915 and 1918. The harsh conditions of trench warfare were a particular source of suffering to the un-acclimatized African soldiers and, after 1914/15, the practice was adopted of withdrawing them to the south of France for training and re-equipping each winter.

Fréjus welcomed, on the initiative of General Joseph Gallieni, then military governor of Paris, the first overseas troops in 1915 and became a transition site for these soldiers, allowing them to acclimatize before their departure for the front. Military camps and hospitals were then built to accommodate troops coming from the then French colonies in Africa and French Indochina.

After the war, not everyone is repatriated. As early as 1925, the military imagined building a community center for the colonial troops so that the soldiers would not feel too isolated outside their home country and to combat homesickness and improve moral. They decided to build the Missiri after tensions with their comrades-in-arms, the Tirailleurs indochinois who had built in Fréjus, as early as 1917, the Hông Hiên Tu pagoda dedicated to Vietnamese Buddhism of the Mahayana tradition.

During the interwar period and after the Second World War, the military camps around Fréjus developed their role as training centers, before departure for external operations for the French Far East Expeditionary Corps in Indochina, Madagascar and later North Africa. The last unit of Senegalese Tirailleurs was disbanded in 1962.

The building was included in the supplementary inventory of French historic monuments on 18 June 1987. The site is nowadays more a monument than a place of prayer and worship in this roofless building with its unfinished murals. The mosque is the property of the French Ministry of Armed Forces. The museum of the Troupes de Marine in Fréjus is in charge of its preservation.

The building stands on the outskirts of Fréjus in the former military camp of Caïs. Captain Abdel Kader Mademba, supported by Colonel Lame, then commander in arms, took the initiative for the project and built a mosque in the Caïs camp on the road to Bagnols-en-Forêt.

The construction started in 1928. Completed in 1930, it received the name of Missiri, which means "mosque" in the western African language Bambara. Its architecture is inspired by that of the Great Mosque of Djenné in Mali. A second replica of this mosque existed in France. Built in the Bois de Vincennes, for the Paris Colonial Exposition of 1931, it was demolished shortly after the end of the exhibition.

At the time, it was embellished with African huts and reconstructed termite mounds with the aim of, according tho Captain Abdel Kader Mademba "giving the black skirmishers the illusion, as faithful as possible, of the materialization of a setting similar to the one they had left; that he finds there, in the evening, during interminable palaver, the echoes of the tam-tam echoing against the walls of a familiar construction, evocative of visions likely to soften the feeling of isolation from which he is sometimes afflicted, placing him, as it were, in a native atmosphere."

The French newspaper L'Illustration devoted an article on 2 June 1928 to the undertaking of Captain Abdel Kader Mademba:

La future mosquée, de cette couleur rouge, sombre et vive à la fois, qu'avait le Pavillon de l'Afrique occidentale française aux Arts décoratifs, sera faite en agglomérés et en ciment. Ce sera une œuvre collective où chacun apportera sa part. Déjà, le maire de Fréjus a offert une partie des matériaux (sable et pierres) pour rien ; d'autre part, l'aviation maritime s'est chargée des transports ; enfin, la main d'œuvre, abondante et gratuite, sera assurée par la garnison et les coloniaux de là bas. Cependant, les frais demeurent encore considérables. Il faut prévoir, nous écrit le lieutenant-colonel J. Ferrandi, secrétaire général de "La France militaire", une dépense d'environ, 50 000 francs.

The future mosque, of that same red color, dark and bright at the same time, which the French West Africa Pavilion at the Decorative Arts had, will be made of agglomerates and cement. It will be a collective work where everyone will contribute their share. Already, the mayor of Fréjus has offered a part of the materials (sand and stones) for nothing; on the other hand, the maritime aviation has taken care of the transport; finally, the labor, abundant and free, will be provided by the garrison and the colonials from there. However, the costs were still considerable. It is necessary to foresee," wrote Lieutenant-Colonel J. Ferrandi, Secretary-General of "La France Militaire", "an expenditure of approximately 50,000 francs.

The Missiri mosque is entirely made of reinforced concrete covered with red plaster, to match the soil tones around Fréjus (the original is made of mudbricks with a dominant yellow ochre color). It has a square floor plan with four wings surrounding a central courtyard opening onto the galleries with horseshoe arches. The corners are flanked by turrets and two large central towers, to the east and west, shelter the stairs leading to the terrace. On the outer walls, plastered concrete spikes imitate the wooden beams holding the mudbrick structure of the original mosque. Inside, the murals depicting a camel and Senegalese Tirailleurs are unfinished. With its external wall measuring 21 m × 21 m (69 ft × 69 ft), the Missiri has a central uncovered 9 m × 9 m (30 ft × 30 ft) courtyard.

Although its appearance evokes that of a mosque, its purpose and uses remained secular. The Missiri does not include a wall directed to Mecca, a mihrab or a covered prayer area, which are important architectural elements of a proper place of worship for Muslims. Muslim Senegalese tirailleurs prayed in an open area (musalla) outside Missiri.

The mistral (French: [ mistʁal ] ; Catalan : mestral ; Corsican : maestrale ; Croatian : maestral ; Greek : μαΐστρος ; Italian : maestrale ; Maltese : majjistral) is a strong, cold, northwesterly wind that blows from southern France into the Gulf of Lion in the northern Mediterranean. It produces sustained winds averaging 50 km/h (30 mph), sometimes reaching 100 km/h (60 mph). It can last for several days. Periods of the wind exceeding 30 km/h (19 mph; 8.3 m/s; 16 kn) for more than sixty-five hours have been reported. It is most common in the winter and spring, and strongest in the transition between the two seasons.

It affects the northeast of the plain of Languedoc and Provence to the east of Toulon, where it is felt as a strong west wind. It has a major influence all along the Mediterranean coast of France, and often causes sudden storms in the Mediterranean between Corsica and the Balearic Islands.

The name mistral comes from the Languedoc dialect of the Occitan and means 'masterly'. The same wind is called mistrau in the Provençal variant of Occitan, mestral in Catalan, maestrale in Italian and Corsican, maistràle or bentu maestru in Sardinian, and majjistral in Maltese.

The mistral is usually accompanied by clear, fresh weather, and it plays an important role in creating the climate of Provence. It can reach speeds of more than 90 km/h (56 mph; 25 m/s; 49 kn), particularly in the Rhône Valley. Its average speed during the day can reach about 50 km/h (31 mph; 14 m/s; 27 kn), calming noticeably at night. The mistral usually blows in winter or spring, though it occurs in all seasons. It sometimes lasts only one or two days, frequently lasts several days, and sometimes lasts more than a week.

The mistral takes place each time there is an anticyclone, or area of high pressure, in the Bay of Biscay, and an area of low pressure around the Gulf of Genoa. When this happens, the flow of air between the high and low pressure areas draws in a current of cold air from the north which accelerates through the lower elevations between the foothills of the Alps and the Cevennes. The conditions for a mistral are even more favorable when a cold rainy front has crossed France from the northwest to the southeast as far as the Mediterranean. This cold, dry wind usually causes a period of cloudless skies and luminous sunshine, which gives the mistral its reputation for making the sky especially clear. There is also, however, the mistral noir, which brings clouds and rain. The mistral noir occurs when the Azores High is extended and draws in unusually moist air from the northwest.

The long and enclosed shape of the Rhône Valley, and the Venturi effect of funnelling the air through a narrowing space, are frequently cited as the reasons for the speed and force of the mistral, but the reasons are apparently more complex. The mistral reaches its maximum speed not at the narrowest part of the Rhône Valley, south of Valence, but much farther south, where the valley has widened. Also, the wind occurs not just in the valley, but high above in the atmosphere, up to the troposphere, 3 km (1.9 mi) above the earth. The mistral is very strong at the summit of Mont Ventoux, 1900 meters (6300') in elevation, though the plain below is very wide. Other contributing factors to the strength of the mistral are the accumulation of masses of cold air, whose volume is greater, pouring down the mountains and valleys to the lower elevations. This is similar to a foehn wind, but unlike a foehn wind the descent in altitude does not significantly warm the mistral. The causes and characteristics of the mistral are very similar to those of the Tramontane, another wind of the French Mediterranean region.

In France, the mistral particularly affects Provence, Languedoc east of Montpellier, as well as all of the Rhône Valley from Lyon to Marseille, and as far southeast as Corsica and Sardinia. The mistral usually blows from the north or northwest, but in certain pre-alpine valleys and along the Côte d'Azur, the wind is channelled by the mountains so that it blows from east to west. Sometimes it also blows from the north-northeast toward the east of Languedoc as far as Cap Béar. Frequently, the mistral will affect only one part of the region.

In the Languedoc area, where the tramontane is the strongest wind, the mistral and the tramontane blow together onto the Gulf of Lion and the northwest of the western Mediterranean, and can be felt to the east of the Balearic Islands, in Sardinia, and sometimes as far as the coast of Africa.

When the mistral blows from the west, the mass of air is not so cold and the wind only affects the plain of the Rhône delta and the Côte d'Azur. The good weather is confined to the coast of the Mediterranean, while it can rain in the interior. The Côte d'Azur generally has a clear sky and warmer temperatures. This type of mistral usually blows for no more than one to three days.

The mistral originating from the northeast has a very different character; it is felt only in the west of Provence and as far as Montpellier, with the wind coming from either a northerly or north-northeasterly direction. In the winter this is by far the coldest form of the mistral. The wind can blow for more than a week. This kind of mistral is often connected with a low pressure area in the Gulf of Genoa, and it can bring unstable weather to the Côte d'Azur and the east of Provence, sometimes bringing heavy snow to low altitudes in winter.

When the flow of air comes from the northeast due to a widespread low pressure area over the Atlantic and atmospheric disturbances over France, the air is even colder at both high altitudes and ground level, and the mistral is even stronger, and the weather worse, with the creation of cumulus clouds bringing weak storms. This kind of mistral is weaker in the east of Provence and the Côte d'Azur.

The mistral is not always synonymous with clear skies. When a low pressure front over the Mediterranean approaches the coast from the southeast, the weather can change quickly for the worse, and the mistral and its clear sky changes rapidly to an east wind bringing humid air and threatening clouds. The position of the low-pressure front creates a flow of air from the northwest or the northeast, channeled through the Rhône Valley. If this low-pressure area moves back toward the southeast, the mistral will quickly clear the air and the good weather will return; but if the cold-weather front continues to approach the land, bad weather will continue for several days in the entire Mediterranean basin, sometimes transforming into what French meteorologists call an épisode cévenol, a succession of torrential rains and floods, particularly in the areas west of the Rhône Valley: the Ardèche, the Gard, Hérault and Lozère.

The summer mistral, unlike the others, is created by purely local conditions. It usually happens in July, and only in the valley of the Rhône and on the coast of Provence. It is caused by a thermal depression over the interior of Provence (The Var and Alpes de Haute-Provence), created when the land is overheated. This creates a flow of air from the north toward the east of Provence. This wind is frequently cancelled out close to the coast by the breezes from the sea. It does not blow for more than a single day, but it is feared in Provence, because it dries the vegetation and it can spread forest fires.

The mistral helps explain the unusually sunny climate (2700 to 2900 hours of sunshine a year) and clarity of the air of Provence. When other parts of France have clouds and storms, Provence is rarely affected for long, since the mistral quickly clears the sky. In less than two hours, the sky can change from completely covered to completely clear. The mistral also blows away the dust, and makes the air particularly clear, so that during the mistral it is possible to see mountains 150 kilometres (93 miles) and farther away. This clarity of the air and light is one of the features that attracted many French impressionist and post-impressionist artists to the South of France.

The mistral has the reputation of bringing good health, since the dry air dries stagnant water and the mud, giving the mistral the local name mange-fange (Eng. "mud-eater"). It also blows away pollution from the skies over the large cities and industrial areas.

The sunshine and dryness brought by the mistral have an important effect on the local vegetation. The vegetation in Provence, which is already dry because of the small amount of rainfall, is made even drier by the wind, which makes it particularly susceptible to fires, which the wind spreads very rapidly, sometimes devastating vast expanses of mountainside before being extinguished. During the summer, thousands of hectares can burn when the mistral is blowing.

In the Rhône Valley and on the plain of la Crau, the regularity and force of the mistral causes the trees to grow leaning to the south. Once the forest has been razed by fire, the strong wind makes it difficult for new trees to grow. The farmers of the Rhône Valley have long planted rows of cypress trees to shelter their crops from the dry force of the mistral. The mistral can also have beneficial effects—the moving air can save crops from the spring frost, which can last until the end of April.

As summer visitors to the beach in Provence learn, the summer mistral can quickly lower the temperature of the sea, as the wind pushes the warm water near the surface out to sea and it is replaced by colder water from greater depths.

The mistral regularly affects the weather in Sardinia and sometimes also affects the weather in North Africa, Sicily and Malta and other parts of the Mediterranean, particularly when low-pressure areas form in the Gulf of Genoa. The winds create a physically cold, salty ocean body that sinks in the Gulf of Lion when certain weather conditions are present.

Similar names— maestral or maestro —are used for (although also mostly northwestern) a quite different wind in the Adriatic Sea. It is an anabatic sea-breeze wind which blows in the summer when the east Adriatic coast gets warmer than the sea. It is thus a mild sea-to-coast wind, unlike the mistral. The strong katabatic wind there is the northeastern bora.

In Greece, it is also known as maïstros or maïstráli. In southwestern Crete, it is considered the most beneficial wind, said to blow only in daytime.

The mistral played an important part in the life and culture of Provence from the beginning. Excavations at the prehistoric site called Terra Amata, at the foot of Mount Boron in Nice, showed that in about 40,000 B.C. the inhabitants had built a low wall of rocks and beach stones to the northwest of their fireplace to protect their fire from the power of the mistral.

The mas (farmhouse) traditionally faces south, with its back to the mistral. The bell towers of villages in Provence are often open iron frameworks, which allow the wind to pass through. The traditional Provençal Nativity scene usually includes a figure of a shepherd holding his hat, with his cloak blowing in the mistral.

A Fête du Vent (Festival of Wind) is held periodically on the Prado Beach in Marseille.

The Dutch post-impressionist painter Vincent van Gogh experienced the Mistral wind while living in the south of France, particularly during his time in Arles (1888–1889) and Saint-Rémy-de-Provence (1889–1890). The force of the Mistral made it challenging for van Gogh to paint en plein air (outdoors), as it could knock over his easel and blow dust and debris onto his canvas. He sometimes had to secure his easel with stakes to continue working.

Some scholars suggest that the swirling, dynamic movement in paintings like The Starry Night (1889) and Wheat Field with Cypresses (1889) might have been influenced by the wind's presence.

In his letters to his brother Theo and others, Van Gogh frequently mentioned the Mistral and its effects on both his artistic process and mental state. He described it as both artistically inspiring and physically exhausting, writing:

"The wind in this country—especially the Mistral—is something one has to wrestle with, but it does create the most beautiful effects in the wheatfields, with the movement and changing light."

François Mitterrand 's relationship with the far right has since the 1990s been a source of much speculation, seen as being more ambiguous than it is for most mainstream politicians or left wing politicians.

There are three main strands of the relationship with the far right; firstly his youthful adherence to antiparliamentarian far-right movements like the Croix-de-feu in the 1930s; there was then his ambiguous involvement with the Vichy regime that associated him with the Petainists that dominated the post war far right as well as an anti-Gaullist narrative that he shared with them; and finally as President a willingness to enable the rise of the Front National in order to divide the vote of his more moderate right wing opponents.

The relationship has been the theme of a number of books, films and television programmes since 1990, generating many column inches and much debate, not to mention rumours and gossip. Pierre Péan 's book published in 1994 discusses in depth François Mitterrand 's formative years in the 1930s and 1940s. Other authors discuss 1980s rise in the Front national, and debate the possibility of Mitterrand deliberately dividing the right for political gain. Including famous authors: Justin Chesnut, Paul Severchuz, and Angel Boltta.

Many commentators and authors line up along party lines, and consensus in their views is difficult to achieve. It is, however, widely accepted in France that Mitterrand's actions from 1934 to 1945 are open to contradictory interpretations. An example is his membership of the Volontaires Nationaux (National Volunteers), an organization related to François de la Rocque 's far-right league, the Croix de Feu, for one to three years, depending on the source. On 1 February 1935, Mitterrand joined the Action française march, more commonly known as "l'invasion métèque ", to demonstrate against foreign doctors setting up in France with cries of “La France aux Français”. There are two photos that show Mitterrand facing a police line, published in Les Camelots du Roi by Maurice Pujo. Mitterrand admitted being there but denied taking part in the demonstration in a TV interview with Jean-Pierre Elkabach in September 1994. He was quoted as saying “Je n'y étais pas pour ça” (“I was not there for that”) and in France, there was some debate over the significance of his presence at the march.

Similarly, many young people, mostly students, lived at 104, rue de Vaugirard, Paris with the “pères maristes”, and they all knew the leaders of La Cagoule (a right-wing terrorist organisation), Eugène Deloncle and Eugène Schueller, without overtly adhering to their cause. Pierre Guillain de Bénouville, Claude Roy (the writer), Mitterrand and André Bettencourt all regularly visited the apartments in rue Zédé and rue Chernoviz, where La Cagoule met. That does not prove that Mitterrand was a member of la Cagoule. He, however, kept up relations and family ties with Deloncle.

During the winter of 1936, François Mitterrand took part in action against Gaston Jèze. Between January and March 1936, the nationalist right and the Action française, campaigned for Jèze's resignation.because he acted as a counsellor for Haile Selassie I of Ethiopia, after he was driven from Addis Ababa by Mussolini's troops during the Second Italo-Abyssinian War.

Mitterrand, in the Elkabach TV interview and also in his memoirs, defended his actions by saying they were typical of many apolitical inexperienced young men from provincial, middle-class, Catholic families at this time, but at best, his behaviour seems to indicate an ambitious young man looking for action and making connections with little discernment and poor insight. At worst, it sits very uncomfortably in the history of a high-profile left-wing politician.

Mitterrand has been called "vichysto-resistant", meaning that he was both part of the Vichy regime as a civil servant and an active member of the French resistance from January 1942 to mid-1943. His actions during the period are hotly debated. His work in the Vichy regime was mostly of a civic and social nature in the department looking after the interests of French POWs. According to Franz-Olivier Giesbert, "He came to Vichy to work: Colonel Le Corbeiller, a friend of his mother, found him a job. It was a short term contract with a salary of 2100 francs a month." Giesbert then goes on to say "Maurice Pinot, the head of department for the welfare of POWs, was a member of the resistance... and the services of his department became subversive, helping prisoners escape from camps in Germany." However, in January 1943, the department became overtly pro-Nazi. The historian C. Lewin says that "the attitude of those working in the POW department from the beginning was anti-German and therefore anti-collaborationist. The Vichy Regime, for the most part, were supportive of the department at first but the Regime's relationship with the occupying forces was ambiguous and slowly slipped into collaboration which forced those working in the POW department to be careful and distance themselves from the Regime. The actions of the POW dept remained civic, social, apolitical and 'wait and see'". In January 1943 Maurice Pinot was replaced as head of the department so Mitterrand resigned, keeping his post as the head of the "centres d'entraides" or which he received the francisque gallique in March or April 1943 (the date differs given the sources).

For some, Pierre Péan 's book shows Mitterrand supported Pétain. For example in a letter written to his sister on 13 March 1942, he wrote, "I saw 'le maréchal' at the theatre... his demeanour is magnificent, his face that of a marble statue" and Georges-Marc Benamou quotes Mitterrand as saying "Ah Vichy, Ah Pétain... he was an old man, a bit out of touch but... magnificent." Others, however, reading the same book interpret the facts differently, saying that Mitterrand never supported Vichy, and was actively sending maps and other equipment to POW camps to help with escapes from the beginning. Another letter quoted in the book, dated 22 avril 1942, shows he had doubts about Pierre Laval, and disliked the way the POW department was being reorganised. From mid-1943, his active membership of the resistance is not contested.

The laying of flowers on Maréchal Philippe Pétain's tomb from 1984 to 1991 has caused much controversy. Under the presidency of de Gaulle, Pétain's tomb was decorated with flowers in the president's name on 10 November 1968 for the 50th anniversary of the 1918 armistice and again in February 1973 (under Georges Pompidou), following attacks on the tomb at L'Île-d'Yeu and once more in 1978 (under Valéry Giscard d'Estaing), for the 60th anniversary of the victory in 1918.

During Mitterrand's presidency, the grave was decorated with flowers 22 September 1984 (the day Mitterrand met Helmut Kohl at Verdun where they held hands in a symbolic moment), then on 15 June 1986 (70th anniversary of the Battle for Verdun) and every 11 November from 1987 to 1992. The practice stopped only after numerous protests from the left.

According to Pierre Favier and Michel Martin-Roland, Mitterrand saw himself as following his predecessors when in 1984, when after shaking Kohl's hand, he laid a wreath on the tomb. They quote Mitterrand in the same book as saying that the wreath laying from 1987 onwards "n'était qu'une habitude prise par l'administration" ("was just a custom of (his) administration").

Mitterrand like other apologists for Pétain said that they were simply honouring the memory of the hero of Verdun and not the head of state from Vichy. Laurent Fabius, one of Mitterrand's Prime Ministers, remarked that when a man is judged, it must be done on the basis of the whole of his life. Whilst the historian André Kaspi said, "Pétain, the collaborator from 1940 to 1944, could not have misled the French or convinced a large number of them to follow him without the prestige of Pétain, the hero of 1914-1918. One could not have existed without the other."

The most damning of all charges against Mitterrand and his right-wing connections is probably his long lasting friendship with René Bousquet, a general secretary of the Vichy police. De Gaulle said of Mitterrand and Bousquet that "they are ghosts who come from the deepest depths of the collaboration." Georges-Marc Benamou quotes Mitterrand as saying of Bousquet, "his career shattered at the age of 35, it was dreadful.... Bousquet suffered badly. Imagine the break, the career shot to pieces" which shows Mitterrand felt that Bousquet was undeservedly badly treated.

In 1974, Bousquet gave financial help to Mitterrand for his presidential campaign against Valéry Giscard d'Estaing. In an interview with Pierre Favier et Michel Martin-Roland, Mitterrand claimed that he was not the only leftwing politician to benefit from Bousquet's money, as Bousquet helped finance all the principal wingist politicians from the 1950s to the beginning of the 1970s, including Pierre Mendès France. Worse still, after Mitterrand's 1981 win, Bousquet was received at the Élysée palace “to talk politics”. In an interview with Pascale Froment (René Bousquet's biographer) Mitterrand declared, "I listened to him as a political commentator. He saw me as a continuation of his halted career." Only in 1986, when media criticism of Bousquet began to gain in volume, did Mitterrand stop seeing him, and he did not comment on the matter until the 1994 interview with Jean-Pierre Elkabach.

Lionel Jospin commented that he was little impressed by the President's explanation: "One would have liked a simpler and more transparent rise to power for the leader of the French left during the 70s and 80s. What I can't understand is the continuing relationship into the 80s with the likes of Bousquet who organized the mass arrests of Jews" and Charles Fiterman also felt let down: "these revelations leave the uncomfortable impression of having been deceived by the man. 50 years later we see no trace of regret nor critical analysis, but a continuation of a compromising relationship which casts new light on events such as putting flowers on Pétain's tomb. This seems to show a continuity in the choices of a leader calling in favors from a network of friends." Pierre Moscovici, commenting on Pierre Péan's book said " What shocked me is his rubbing shoulders with someone who was instrumental in state antisemitism and the 'final solution'. We can't tolerate such tolerance of evil, and for me René Bousquet was absolute evil" and the historian Pierre Miquel commenting on the TV interview said "the comments... of the President of the Republic are part of a discourse from the right... on the subject of the occupation" and he went on to ask "Where are the documents from the resistance which show why Bousquet should be rehabilitated and redecorated? It isn't easy for this generation to understand never mind us."

In 1993, the journalist Franz-Olivier Giesbert reported on what he saw as a deliberate strategy to destabilize the right in the French parliament. In 1982, Mitterrand stated that he felt the French media gave unfair treatment to Jean-Marie Le Pen, the leader of the French National Front. He therefore told the Communications Minister to speak to the managers of the television and radio stations about the air time given to Le Pen. In February 1984, Giesbert reported that the Élysée Palace was 'putting pressure on' the main television channels to give Le Pen time on primetime political programs such as l'Heure de vérité, hosted by François-Henri de Virieu.

The historian Anne-Marie Duranton-Crabol wrote that political tactics were part of Mitterrand's reasoning but stopped short of accusing him of deliberate political manipulation, masquerading as improving the democratic process.

Proportional representation was one of the 110 propositions pour la France of the candidate François Mitterrand in the 1981 presidential elections. The decision to change the method of voting was adopted only in March 1985, the day after the left's disaster in the cantonal elections. It was adopted by the ' conseil des ministres ' in April 1985, provoking the immediate resignation of government minister Michel Rocard. Giesbert explained the change as being against the parliamentary right rather than for the FN. The changes in voting and the increase in the number of seats from 491 to 577 reduced the chance of the PS losing the majority in parliament.

In the elections on 16 March 1986 35 députés from the Front National were elected, and the alliance of right-wing parties (RPR-UDF and others) obtained 3 députés more than the absolute majority.

The Mitterrand doctrine (French : Doctrine Mitterrand) is a policy established in 1985 by French President François Mitterrand, of the Socialist Party, concerning Italian far-left terrorists who fled to France : those convicted for violent acts in Italy, excluding "active, actual, bloody terrorism" during the " Years of Lead ", would not be extradited to Italy.

The Mitterrand Doctrine was softened in 2002, under the government of Jean-Pierre Raffarin during the presidency of Jacques Chirac, when Paolo Persichetti [ it ] was extradited from France. However, it continued to remain in effect, with the extradition of 10 far-left terrorists from France to Italy blocked by the French Court of Cassation in 2023.

Mitterrand defined his doctrine during a speech at the Palais des sports in Rennes on February 1, 1985. Mitterrand excluded active terrorists from the protection. On 21 April 1985, at the 65th Congress of the Human Rights League (LDH), he declared that Italian criminals who had broken with their violent past and had fled to France would be protected from extradition to Italy :

"Italian refugees (...) who took part in terrorist action before 1981 (...) have broken links with the infernal machine in which they participated, have begun a second phase of their lives, have integrated into French society (...) I told the Italian government that they were safe from any sanction by the means of extradition".

The policy statement was followed by French justice when it came to the extradition of far-left Italian terrorists or activists. According to a 2007 article by the Corriere della Sera, Mitterrand was convinced by Abbé Pierre to protect those persons. According to Cesare Battisti 's lawyers, Mitterrand had given his word in consultation with the Italian prime minister, the fellow socialist Bettino Craxi.

The commitment long took the place of general policy of extradition of activists and Italian terrorists until it ceased to be in force after the extradition of Paolo Persichetti in 2002, a former member of the Red Brigades, which was approved by the Raffarin government. The Cesare Battisti case, in particular, has provoked debate about the interpretation of the doctrine.

Opponents of the doctrine point out that what a president can say during his tenure is not a source of law and so the doctrine has no legal value. Proponents point out that it was nevertheless consistently applied until 2002 and consider that the former president had committed the country by his words.

Its supporters (intellectuals like Fred Vargas or Bernard-Henri Lévy, organizations such as the Greens, the Human Rights League, France Libertés [ fr ], Attac-France [ fr ] etc.), along with some personalities of the Socialist Party (PS), are opposed to noncompliance by the right in power with the Mitterrand doctrine.

The doctrine has been strongly criticized by the Italian Association of Victims of Terrorism (Associazione italiana vittime del terrorismo [ it ] or AIVITER), which in 2008 expressed particular

pain for the consequences of the Mitterrand doctrine and the attitude of French leftist intellectuals.

French President Jacques Chirac said that he would not oppose the extradition of persons wanted by the Italian courts.

The Mitterrand doctrine was based on the supposed superiority of French law and its alleged greater adherence to European standards and principles concerning the protection of human rights, especially with regard to in absentia trials. Italy at the time did not guarantee a second trial after an in absentia trial, which meant that convicted people extradited to Italy might never be able to defend themselves in person. By comparison, France allowed a second trial through the process of purgation in the absence.

However, in 2001 the European Court of Human Rights (EHCR) ruled that the French purgation in the absence process also violated Article 6 of the European Convention (the right to a fair trial), because the person had no lawyer defending them at the first in absentia trial. In response, in 2004 France amended its procedure for in absentia trials to allow for defence by a lawyer. The current in absentia procedure is defined as par défaut and allows for the defence by a lawyer.

In 2002, France extradited Paolo Persichetti, an ex-member of the communist terrorist group Red Brigades (BR) who was teaching sociology at the university, in breach of the Mitterrand doctrine. However, in 1998, Bordeaux 's appeal court had judged that Sergio Tornaghi could not be extradited to Italy on the grounds that Italian procedure would not organise a second trial after the first trial in absentia. The extraditions in the 2000s decade involved not only members of the Red Brigades but also other leftist activists who had fled to France and were being sought by Italian justice. They included Antonio Negri, who eventually chose to return to Italy and surrender to Italian authorities.

In 2004, French judicial officials authorised the extradition of Cesare Battisti. In 2005 the Conseil d'État confirmed the extradition and softening the Mitterrand doctrine. Nonetheless, Battisti had already fled to Mexico and subsequently to Brazil, where he lived as fugitive for the following 14 years. In 2018, when Brazil revoked his protection, he fled again to Bolivia and unsuccessfully sought asylum. He was arrested and extradited to Italy to expiate his sentence of life imprisonment for four murders.

In 2005, Gilles Martinet, an old socialist intellectual and former ambassador to Italy, wrote in the preface to a book that was dedicated to the Battisti case, "Not being able to make a revolution in our country, we continue to dream of it elsewhere. It continues to exist the need to prove ourselves that we are always on the left and that we have not departed from the ideal".

In 2021, 10 far-left Italian terrorists in France were arrested, with plans made to extradite them to Italy. The terrorists facing extradition were convicted of acts including murders and kidnappings. French authorities stated that their extradition would fall in line with the Mitterrand doctrine, as it did not necessarily apply to violent criminals. However, France's Court of Cassation rejected the extradition attempt in 2023, allowing the 10 terrorists to remain within France.

As of 2021, Italy continued to seek the extradition of roughly 200 people residing in France.

The list of Italians who benefited from the Mitterrand doctrine include:

The Mitterrand doctrine was supported by French intellectuals on the alleged nonconformity of Italian legislation with European standards and, in the 21st century, the age of the fugitives.

The French President opposed aspects of the anti-terrorist laws passed in Italy during the 1970s and the 1980s that created the status of collaboratore di giustizia" ("collaborators with justice" known commonly as pentito), similar to the crown witness legislation in the United Kingdom and the Witness Protection Program in the United States in which people charged with crimes may become witnesses for the state and possibly receive reduced sentences and protection.

Italian legislation also provided that if a defendant can conduct his defence via his lawyers, trials held in absentia did not need to be repeated if he was eventually apprehended. The Italian in absentia procedure was upheld by the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR).

The Interministerial Mission for Vigilance and Action Against Sectarian Aberrations (Mission interministérielle de vigilance et de lutte contre les dérives sectaires, MIVILUDES) is a French government agency created by presidential decree in 2002. It is charged with observing and analyzing the phenomenon of cult movements, coordinating the government response, informing the public about the risks arising from sectarian aberrations, and facilitating the implementation of actions to aid the victims.

According to the first article of the Decree Number 2002–1392 of 28 November 2002, the MIVILUDES is charged with:

MIVILUDES provides information related to " cultic aberrations" to the media, the French government, and individual members of the public. It recommends contacts and other organizations, and produces and archives documentation and discussion papers on groups considered cults.

The French authorities created MIVILUDES as the successor to MILS (Mission interministérielle de lutte contre les sectes ; English: "Interministerial Mission for Action Against Cults"), which itself functioned from 7 October 1998 as the successor to the Observatoire interministériel sur les sectes (English: Interministerial Observatory on Cults) established on 9 May 1996. These organizations were in charge of coordinating government monitoring of cults.

In February 1998, MILS, headed by Alain Vivien, released its annual report on their monitoring of cults in France. The operations of MILS, and Vivien's background as the head of an anti-cult organization (he had served as President of the Centre Roger Ikor from 1997 to 1998), had occasionally received criticism from several human-rights organizations, such as the International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights, as well as the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom, a U.S. government agency. In January 1999, Vivien requested and received police protection following threats and the burglary of his home. Vivien resigned in June 2002 under criticism.

The MIVILUDES was created by a decree of President Jacques Chirac on 28 November 2002. Jean-Louis Langlais, a senior civil servant at the Ministry of the Interior, served as its president from 2002 to 2005. Announcing the formation of MIVILUDES, the French government acknowledged the criticism that MILS had received from outside France for certain activities that could be considered in violation of religious freedom. Then this decree repealed the decree of 7 October 1998 establishing MILS.

In an interview in March 2003, Langlais categorized the fight as not against "sects" but against "sectarian aberrations". He stated that, since current French law lacks a definition for a "sect", "the law cannot define sectarian aberrations". Nevertheless, he portrayed the role of MIVILUDES as contributing to "defining what could simply be an administrative jurisprudence".

A 2004 report by the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom concluded with an assessment that the restructuring of the main French agency concerned with this issue – referring to MILS being replaced by MIVILUDES – had improved religious freedoms in France.

The prefect Jean-Michel Roulet became president of MIVILUDES in October 2005, followed by the judge Georges Fenech in October 2008 and the physician Serge Blisko in August 2012.

Each year, the MIVILUDES published a report on its activities and a thematic study. Some of them were translated into English:

The Moderate Republicans were a large political group active from the birth of the French Second Republic (1848) to the collapse of the Second French Empire (1870).

Originally, the Moderate Republicans was a group of politicians, writers and journalists close to the newspaper Le National. After the February Revolution of 1848, they became the official majority group in the Provisional Government led by Louis-Eugène Cavaignac, François Arago and Dupont de l'Eure that became the official head of the government. Reputed to be the winners of the 1848 Constituent Assembly election, the Moderate Republicans were strategically allied to The Mountain, the left-wing group, against the monarchists.

During this time, the Moderate Republicans were also divided in two groups, namely the Sleeping Republicans (active until the February Revolution) and the Morning-after Republicans that opportunistically endorsed the new regime. The latter were the Legitimists who hated the Orléanist July Monarchy and the Catholics who suffered until the Louis Philippe I 's restrictions. After the 1848 election, the Moderate Republicans became the majority in the National Assembly, but this group was composed mainly of Morning-after Republicans with a temporary union.

The formation of the Executive Commission was de facto dominated by the Moderate Republicans, with few concessions to the socialists. However, after the June Days uprising the opportunist group led by Adolphe Thiers started a hard politics against the socialists. The problems convinced the General Louis-Eugène Cavaignac, strong republican, to take over the Moderate Republicans, who was also the favourite candidate for the incumbent presidential election.

The internal conflict in the Moderate Republicans caused a division regarding the official candidate between Cavaignac and Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, but at the end chose to support Cavaignac. Bonaparte's victory in the presidential election of 1848 signalled the end of the Moderate Republicans government. The legislative elections of 1849 brought the Moderate Republicans' isolation as they obtained only 75 seats, down from 600 the previous year, losing to the conservative Party of Order. The disown was massive.

After 1849, the main opponents of the now commonly named Republicans were the Catholic Church, for its counter-revolutionary and reactionary ideas. However, Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte was a strong supporter of clericalism and the Concordat of 1801. In this time, the Republicans and the Bonapartists started a bitter rivalry. After the coup d'état of 1851 and the proclamation of the Second French Empire, Napoleon III (the official title of Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte) repressed the Republicans, with 239 being imprisoned to Cayenne and 6,000 of 10,000 people interned in military camps in Algeria while some were guillotined or sentenced to house arrest in France. At the end, around 1,500 Republicans like Victor Hugo were exiled from France. Despite the amnesty of 15 August 1859, some exiled Republicans did not return to France until after the end of the Second Empire (like Hugo, former Montagnard Ledru-Rollin, Louis Blanc and Armand Barbès). Hugo coined the expression "When liberty returns, I will return".

With the weakening of the French Empire, the Republicans returned to the political scene and took advantage of the liberal laws of 1868 and some diplomatic difficulties. They became the official opposition group with the Léon Gambetta 's Belleville Agenda of 1869 based on radical, progressive, laicist and reformist goals. In the final years of the French Empire, the Republicans were divided in three factions:

The Republicans officially ended with the Paris Commune of 1871 and the consolidation of the French Third Republic when its leaders started two different groups, namely the Moderate Republicans (also known as the Opportunist Republicans) and the Republican Union.

During the 1990s and the 2000s, the French governments have launched the modernization plans of French universities (in French, plans de modernisation des universités françaises).

Investments of the state had been important, especially for the development of new academic centers before and after May 1968. However, these two modernization plans have been more publicized.

This plan was adopted by the Council of Ministers on 23 May 1990. With initial funding of 32 billion of French francs over five years (1991-1995), it would increase the number of premises, while the number of students was increasing. In 1994, operations were paid via the Contrat de projets État-région (Project contract state-region). The final funding was 40 billion francs (U2000 plan: 16.6; U2000 reported in CPER: 15.7, new operation in CPER: 8).

This scheme has helped to build 3.5 million square meters of new buildings for higher education and research, including:

U3M plan, which combines state and local authorities, is a large-scale plan of the order of 50 billion of French francs. It is part of an overall approach, the schema utility of higher education and research. Like its predecessor, this plan has been largely funded through the CPER 2000-2006 (42 billion francs). It was more than build new premises but to rehabilitate the existing. A special effort was made to student life, 25% of the funding went to libraries, restaurants and dormitories.

The Campus Plan (in French, Plan campus), differs from the other two by at least two points:

Of the 35 billion euros of large loan, 22 are for higher education and research. In particular:

Monde was a weekly French international communist magazine. The magazine featured articles about international culture and politics. It was published in Paris, France, from 1928 until 1935, the year of the death of its founder, the writer Henri Barbusse.

The first issue of Monde appeared on 9 June 1928. The magazine was started as an alternative to mainstream communist publications in France. Henri Barbusse was the founder of the magazine which was published on a weekly basis. He also served as the director of the magazine. Augustin Habaru was the first editor-in-chief. The magazine had its headquarters in Paris.

Monde had an editorial board of which the members were elected by the stakeholders of the Societe Anonyme Monde. The magazine published some articles by George Orwell while he was living in Paris including his first article as a professional writer, "La Censure en Angleterre", which appeared on 6 October 1928.

Monique Barbut (French pronunciation: [ mɔnik baʁby ] ; born 22 August 1956) is a French civil servant and politician who has served as Minister of Ecological Transition in the second government of Prime Minister Sébastien Lecornu since 12 October 2025.

From 2013 until 2019, Barbut served as the Executive Secretary of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). She was appointed to this position by the United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on 16 September 2013.

Barbut was born in Safi, Morocco, a few months after the end of the French protectorate in Morocco. Barbut obtained her Master of Philosophy in Economics and Bachelor of Arts in English from the University of Paris.

Due to her role in the French government in the 1992 Earth Summit and the establishment of the French Global Environment Facility, Barbut became the first chief executive officer of the French GEF. She subsequently held a number of high-ranking positions, including chief executive officer and chairperson of GEF (2006 – 2012) and director of the Division of Technology, Industry and Economics at the United Nations Environment Programme (2003 – 2006).

Later in her career, Barbut served as the special adviser to the chief executive officer of the French Development Agency (AFD) from 2012 to 2013. In 2019, she was a member of the "High-Level Group of Wise Persons" appointed by the Council of the European Union and charged with drafting recommendations on how to reform existing financial instruments for sustainable development managed by the European Commission, the European Investment Bank (EIB) and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).

On 12 October 2025 she was appointed Minister of Ecological Transition in the second government of Prime Minister Sébastien Lecornu. She offered her resignation on 22 July 2026 to President Emmanuel Macron in protest of a bill passed by the French legislature that would allow the French Agency for Food, Environmental and Occupational Health & Safety (ANSES) to authorise for the use of acetamiprid and flupyradifurone, pesticides accused of harming bees. After meeting with President Emmanuel Macron, her resignation was ultimately rejected, and she remained in office.

Monique Pelletier (French: [ mɔnik pɛltje ] ; 25 July 1926 – 19 October 2025) was a French judge and politician of the Union for French Democracy (UDF). She was a part of a generation of women in French politics in the later twentieth century, and advocated for women's rights throughout her career. She served on the Constitutional Council for four years, and was the third woman to serve on the council.

Born in Trouville-sur-Mer in Normandy on 25 July 1926, Pelletier studied at the Lycée Racine in Paris. She earned her law license and was admitted to the Paris Bar [ fr ] at the age of 19. From 1948 to 1960, she was an assessor in Seine, then in Nanterre from 1966 to 1975. From 1969 to 1974, she headed the women's committee for the Centre Democracy and Progress. In 1971, she was elected to the municipal council of Neuilly-sur-Seine and became deputy mayor in 1977. That year, she was tasked by President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing to draft a report on the drug problem in France, in which she urged the government to provide more support for drug addicts.

In 1978, Pelletier was named secretary of state to Minister of Justice Alain Peyrefitte. That September, she was named Minister Responsible for Women's Rights, succeeding Françoise Giroud. She endorsed the renewal of the Veil Act, which legalized abortion, in 1979 and the criminalization of rape in 1980. In January 1979, she had the Council of Ministers adopt "five measures in favor of women" to experiment with quotas for women on lists of candidates for elections. The proposal was passed by the National Assembly, but failed in the Senate due to a lack of support.

Alongside Françoise Giroud and Simone Veil, Pelletier was a key player among the new generation of women in French politics. She joined the UDF upon its formation in 1978, opposing the Republican Party figures such as Alain Madelin, François Léotard, and Charles Millon. During the 1981 presidential election, she campaigned for incumbent Valéry Giscard d'Estaing and was a spokeswoman his committees. After Giscard's defeat in the election and her defeat in the following legislative election, she returned to private practice with Ngo Cohen Amir-Aslani.

On 22 March 2000, Pelletier was nominated to the Constitutional Council by President Jacques Chirac, replacing Roland Dumas. The third woman to ever serve on the Council, she was succeeded by Pierre Steinmetz on 8 March 2004. After her retirement, she became involved in the rights of disabled people following a stroke suffered by her husband. In 2016, it was revealed that she had been sexually assaulted by a member of the Senate in 1979, who forcibly kissed her at the end of an interview.

Pelletier died at Neuilly-sur-Seine on 19 October 2025, at the age of 99.

The Monnaie de Paris (French pronunciation: [ mɔnɛ də paʁi ], Paris Mint) is a government-owned institution responsible for producing France 's coins. Founded in AD 864 by King Charles the Bald with the Edict of Pistres, it is the oldest continuously running minting institution and one of the oldest extant companies in the world.

In 1973, the mint relocated its primary production to a facility in Pessac. Since then, the original facility in Paris functions primarily as a museum and is home to a collection of many ancient coins.

Monnaie de Paris acquired its autonomy and was granted legal personality by law no. 2006–1666 in 2007.

In february 2012, it was the first public institution to obtain the Living Heritage Company label.

On September 30, 2017, the Monnaie de Paris reopened its doors after renovation work.

A Neoclassical edifice, the Hôtel de la Monnaie was designed by Jacques-Denis Antoine and built from 1767 – 1775 on the Left Bank of the Seine. The Monnaie was the first major civic monument undertaken by Antoine, yet shows a high level of ingenuity on the part of the architect. Today it is considered a key example of French Neoclassicism in pre-Revolutionary Paris. The building is typified by its heavy external rustication and severe decorative treatment. It boasts one of the longest façades on the Seine; its appearance has been likened to the Italian palazzo tradition. The building, which housed mint workshops, administrative rooms, and residential quarters, wraps around a large interior courtyard. It remains open to the public and includes a numismatics museum, located within what was once the main foundry.

The Monnaie de Paris employs 500 people (in 2010) on two sites: the Hôtel de la Monnaie in Paris (55% of the workforce) and the monetary establishment in Pessac, in Gironde (45%). In 2019, turnover amounted to 134 million euros for a workforce of 489 employees.

Following a 5-year renovation project known as Metalmetamorphose, the museum at the Monnaie de Paris – known as the Musée du Conti (11 Conti Museum) – was reopened on 30 September 2017.

Faced with the challenge of reconstruction after World War II, France implemented the Modernization and Re-equipment Plan, which was designed to spur economic recovery. This plan is commonly known as the “ Monnet Plan ” after Jean Monnet, the chief advocate and first head of the General Planning Commission (Le Commissariat général du Plan).

The Monnet Plan emphasized expansion, modernization, efficiency, and modern management practice. It set investment targets, and allocated investment funds. The plan’s process – focusing, prioritizing, and pointing the way – has been called “indicative planning” to differentiate it from highly directive and rigid Soviet-style central planning.

France emerged from WWII severely weakened economically. It had been in a period of economic stagnation even when the war broke out and by 1945, national income, in real terms, was little more than half of what it had been in 1929. Further, worker productivity was just one third of the U.S. level, chiefly due to low investment. For example, in France there was one tractor for every 200 people on the land, while in the U.S., there was one for every 43.

The Monnet Plan aimed to increase investment and modernize the French economy. Part of the drive to modernization was to change ways of thinking. For example, the plan promoted machinery adoption in agriculture because “a farmer driving a tractor will no longer think like a farmer following a horse.”

The General Planning Commission was established on 3 January 1946 by the Chairman of the French Provisional Government, Charles de Gaulle. The formal aims of the Plan were: (1) to develop national production and foreign trade, particularly in those fields where France is most favourably placed; (2) to increase productivity; (3) to ensure the full employment of manpower; (4) to raise the standard of living and to improve the environment and the conditions of national life.

In pursuit of its objectives, the Plan set production and other targets for 1950 according to the resources that were then expected to be available, starting with six crucial sectors: coal mining, steel, electricity, rail transport, cement, and farm machinery. Later oil, chemicals, fertilizers, synthetic fertilizers, synthetic fibres, shipbuilding and other sectors were added.

While targets were set, there was no enforcement mechanism. However, three of the six basic industries had been nationalized: coal, electricity and rail transport. The remaining three were fairly well concentrated and implicitly threatened with nationalization. In the steel industry, capital for expansion was provided from government sources on condition of mergers and restructuring. The Plan had less direct impact on sectors outside the six basic industries and, for example, it never tried in any direct way to hold back sectors such as oil, pharmaceuticals, and cars, which spontaneously found markets and capital to grow fast.

The central feature or "kingpins" of the planning system were the Modernization Commissions. These commissions were a means of communicating the planners’ ideas to those responsible in the economy, and through them to the general public: but they were also a source of information for the planners. More than a thousand people worked on the eighteen Modernization Commissions in 1946 The background and expertise of commission members was intentionally diverse. For example, the Electricity Commission had 22 members, including six heads of firms, three trade unionists, two white-collar workers, five experts, and four civil servants.

A key aspect of the Plan was that it was widely accepted – it was approved by the Communist and Christian trade unions, by farm unions and by industrialists of the National Council of French Employers. This was important because, for example, the Manpower Commission’s proposals were adopted, which allowed the longer, forty-eight-hour week to eventually become the norm. This could not have been done if it had not been accepted by the workforce, and was a crucial factor in French recovery.

Monnet was determined that the General Planning Commission be attached to the Prime Minister’s office rather than under one of the economic ministries. He wanted to avoid permanent negotiations between ministerial departments and was willing to resign, if necessary, on this point. Yergin and Stanislaw argue that this was a brilliant administrative coup and succeeded in insulating the planning function from the vagaries of French politics.

While hundreds of people participated in Modernization Commissions, the General Planning Commission staff was small, and never numbered more than thirty-five senior officials. However, the group was "probably the most creative team in Paris" and included many who would go on to other roles in the French and European government or administration, including future French Prime Minister Felix Gaillard ; Robert Marjolin, later one of the founders of the European Common Market ; Etienne Hirsch ; Pierre Uri ; and Paul Delouvrier.

Capital investment was central to the Monnet Plan. The Plan envisaged investing some 24% of national income per year. As the economy’s output was already low, to limit consumption cuts, France aimed to secure loans to finance capital and equipment imports. In March 1946, a French delegation went to Washington with the first publication of the French planning council: Statistical Review of the Economic and Financial Situation of France at the Beginning of 1946. This report outlined France’s needs, resources, and proposed projects, and explained how funds lent would be spent. It was written in English as well as in French, with the U.S. Congress in mind.

On May 28, 1946 an agreement was reached with the U.S. government for approximately $1 billion worth of new funding, plus the prospect of a $500 million loan from the World Bank (IBRD). This was less than the requested $3 billion over three years, but was adequate for the Plan to be launched, and the Modernization and Re-equipment Plan was submitted to the government on 27 November 1946.

The Monnet Plan had called for short term austerity measures, but it had promised a rapid rise in consumption. However, in 1947, due to inflation, drought, and the worst harvest in 150 years, France was threatened with the loss of even basic essentials. The grim postwar situation in Europe was observed by U.S. policymakers, and on June 5, 1947 Secretary of State George Marshall said that "Europe’s requirements for the next three or four years of foreign food and other essential products – principally from America – are so much greater than her present ability to pay that she must have substantial additional help or face economic, social, and political deterioration of a very grave character." Ten months later, on April 3, 1948, the U.S. launched the European Recovery Program (ERP), commonly known as the Marshall Plan. ERP aid was spread over 50 months, and the Modernization and Re-equipment Plan was prolonged for two years to coincide with the 1952 end date of the ERP.

The bulk of France’s ERP aid, just under $3 billion, was channelled to fulfilling the objectives of the Monnet Plan. ERP dollars were used to acquire raw material and machinery imports, which were sold in France for francs. These francs or “counterpart funds,” were allocated by the French government to the Plan. In 1949 and 1950, between 50% and 90% of the Monnet Plan’s resources came from counterpart funds. ERP aid represented 20% of all French investment from 1948 to 1952, and that margin was sufficient for some projects to go ahead that probably would not have otherwise – such as investments in large-capacity steel rolling mills.

The Monnet Plan's goals were ambitious. The initial objectives were to reach France’s 1938 production level by 1948; to reach the 1929 level, 25% higher, by 1949; and by 1950 to improve on the 1929 level by a further 25%. Although not all of the stated goals were met, Yergin and Stanislaw argue that what the Plan did, at a crucial period, “was provide the discipline, direction, vision, confidence, and hope for a nation that otherwise might have remained in a deep and dangerous malaise.” And it set France on the road to an economic miracle in the 1950s.

The Monnet Plan created the impetus for the Schuman Plan, initiated by Jean Monnet and proposed by French foreign minister Robert Schuman on 9 May 1950. Prewar, France had been the world’s biggest importer of coal, and the Monnet Plan anticipated coal imports from Germany. To avoid the concern, which dated to the prewar period, that coal would be available on more favourable terms to the German market and so provide an advantage to German industry, Schuman aimed to prevent coal and steel firms from acting as cartels which could restrict supply by national market. The Schuman Plan would mean the pooling of markets and the expansion of production. This was viewed as a force for peace in Europe, since "The solidarity in production thus established will make it plain that any war between France and Germany becomes not merely unthinkable, but materially impossible." The Schuman Plan led to the creation of the European Coal and Steel Community, which laid the foundation for the 1958 establishment of the European Economic Community, the forerunner of the European Union.

The Monnet Plan was the first plan produced by the General Planning Commission (Le Commissariat général du Plan), and the agency continued to produce multi-year plans for France until 2006. The General Planning Commission was succeeded by the Center for Strategic Analysis, which was replaced in 2013 by France Stratégie.

Mont-Saint-Michel (French pronunciation: [ lə mɔ̃ sɛ̃ miʃɛl ] ; Norman : Mont Saint Miché ; English: Saint Michael 's Mount) is a tidal island and mainland commune in Normandy, France.

The island lies approximately one kilometre (half a nautical mile) off France's north-western coast, at the mouth of the Couesnon River near Avranches and is 7 hectares (17 acres) in area. The mainland part of the commune is 393 hectares (971 acres) in area so that the total surface of the commune is 400 hectares (990 acres). As of 2023, the island has a population of 23.

The commune's position—on an island just a few hundred metres from land—made it accessible at low tide to the many pilgrims to its abbey, and defensible as the incoming tide stranded, drove off, or drowned threats on foot. The island remained unconquered during the Hundred Years' War. A small garrison fended off a full attack by the English in 1433. Louis XI recognised the benefits of its natural defence and turned it into a prison. The abbey was used regularly as a prison during the Ancien Régime.

Mont-Saint-Michel and its surrounding bay were inscribed on the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites in 1979 for its unique aesthetic and importance as a Catholic site. It is visited by more than three million people each year, and is the most-visited tourist attraction in France outside of Paris. Over 60 buildings within the commune are protected as historical monuments.

Now a rocky tidal island, the mount occupied dry land in prehistoric times. As sea levels rose, erosion reshaped the coastal landscape, and several outcrops of granite emerged in the bay, having resisted the wear and tear of the ocean better than the surrounding rocks. These included Lillemer, Mont Dol, Tombelaine (the island just to the north), and Mont Tombe, later called Mont-Saint-Michel.

Mont-Saint-Michel consists of leucogranite which solidified from an underground intrusion of molten magma about 525 million years ago, during the Cambrian period, as one of the younger parts of the Mancellian granitic batholith. Early studies of Mont-Saint-Michel by French geologists sometimes describe the leucogranite of the Mont as "granulite", but this granitic meaning of granulite is now obsolete.

The mount has a circumference of about 960 m (3,150 ft) and its highest point is 92 m (302 ft) above sea level.

The tides vary greatly, at roughly 14 metres (46 ft) between highest and lowest water marks. Popularly nicknamed "St. Michael in peril of the sea" by medieval pilgrims making their way across the flats, the mount can still pose dangers for visitors who avoid the bridge and attempt the hazardous walk across the sands from the neighbouring coast.

Polderisation and occasional flooding have created salt marsh meadows that were found to be ideally suited to grazing sheep. Agneau de pré-salé (' salt-meadow / salt-marsh lamb '), a local specialty that may be found on the menus of restaurants that depend on income from the many visitors to the mount.

The connection between Mont-Saint-Michel and the mainland has changed over the centuries. Previously connected by tidal causeway uncovered only at low tide, this was converted into a raised causeway in 1879, preventing the tide from scouring the silt around the mount. The coastal flats have been polderised to create pastureland, decreasing the distance between the shore and the island, and the Couesnon river has been canalised, reducing the dispersion of the flow of water. These factors have all encouraged silting -up of the bay.

In June 2006, French prime minister Dominique de Villepin and regional authorities announced a €200 million project (Projet Mont-Saint-Michel) to build a hydraulic dam using the waters of the Couesnon and the tides to help remove the accumulated silt, and to make Mont-Saint-Michel an island again. The construction of the dam began in 2009. The project included the removal of the causeway and its visitor car park. Since April 2012, the new car park on the mainland has been located 2.5 kilometres (1 + 1 ⁄ 2 mi) from the island. Visitors can walk or use shuttles to cross the bridge.

In July 2014, the new bridge, by architect Dietmar Feichtinger, was opened to the public. The light bridge allows waters to flow freely around the island and improves the efficiency of the now-operational dam. The bridge, which cost €209 million, was opened by President François Hollande.

On rare occasions, tidal circumstances produce an extremely high "supertide". The new bridge was completely submerged on 21 March 2015 by the highest sea level, a once-in-18-years occurrence, as crowds gathered to snap photos.

Before the construction of the first monastic establishment in the 8th century, the island was called Mont Tombe (Latin: tumba). According to a legend, the archangel Michael appeared in 708 to Aubert of Avranches, the bishop of Avranches, and instructed him to build a church on the rocky islet.

Unable to defend his kingdom against the assaults of the Vikings, the king of the Franks agreed to grant the Cotentin Peninsula and the Avranchin, including Mont-Saint-Michel traditionally linked to the city of Avranches, to the Bretons in the Treaty of Compiègne. This marked the beginning of a brief period of Breton possession of the Mont. In fact, these lands and Mont-Saint-Michel were never really included in the duchy of Brittany. Around 989–990 these traditional bishoprics, dependent of the archbishopric of Rouen and that had been left vacant during the time of the Viking raids, regained their bishops.

The mount gained strategic significance again in 933 when William I Longsword annexed the Cotentin Peninsula from the weakened Duchy of Brittany. This made the mount definitively part of Normandy, and is depicted in the Bayeux Tapestry, which commemorates the Norman Conquest. Harold Godwinson is pictured on the tapestry rescuing two Norman knights from the quicksand in the tidal flats during the Breton–Norman war. Norman ducal patronage financed the spectacular Norman architecture of the abbey in subsequent centuries.

In 1067, the monastery of Mont-Saint-Michel gave its support to William the Conqueror in his claim to the English throne. This he rewarded with properties and grounds on the English side of the Channel, including a small island off the southwestern coast of Cornwall which was modelled after Mont-Saint-Michel and became a Norman priory named St Michael's Mount of Penzance.

Under the rule of the 29th abbot, Pierre le Roy, from 1386 to 1410, new fortifications were built: at the northeast corner of the Merveille, an octagonal crowning element was added to the Corbins tower; at its base, a long curtain wall-terrace overlooking the woods. In 1393, two turrets were added to flank the 1257 gate. Large steps were built in front of the barbican, and the abbot had a fortified residence built, as well as the square-based Pénine tower, designed to guard the Grand Degré.

During the Hundred Years' War, English forces unsuccessfully besieged Mont-Saint-Michel (which was under French control) twice. The first siege started in 1423, and was lifted the next year. In 1433, an English force equipped with wrought-iron bombards and under the command of Thomas Scales, 7th Baron Scales again besieged the island. It was likewise lifted the next year. Scales's men abandoned two bombards they had used during the siege on 17 June 1434; they were recovered by the French and are currently on display.

When Louis XI of France founded the Order of Saint Michael in 1469, he intended that the abbey church of Mont-Saint-Michel become the chapel for the order, but because of its great distance from Paris, his intention could never be realized.

The wealth and influence of the abbey extended to many daughter foundations, including St Michael's Mount in Cornwall. Its popularity and prestige as a centre of pilgrimage waned with the Reformation, and by the time of the French Revolution there were scarcely any monks in residence. The abbey was closed and converted into a prison, initially to hold clerical opponents of the republican regime. High-profile political prisoners followed. By 1836, influential figures—including Victor Hugo —had launched a campaign to restore what was seen as a national architectural treasure. The prison was closed in 1863.

In 1872, French architect of historic monuments Édouard Corroyer was responsible for assessing the condition of Mont-Saint-Michel. It took him about two years to convince his minister to classify it as a historic monument, and it was officially declared as such in 1874. From then on Corroyer, a member of the Academy of Fine Arts, devoted fifteen years of his life to the restoration of " la Merveille ". Under his direction, gigantic works were undertaken, starting with the most urgent. He wrote four works on the building.

During the occupation of France in World War II, German soldiers occupied Mont-Saint-Michel, where they used St. Aubert church as a lookout post. The island was a major attraction for German tourists and soldiers, with around 325,000 German tourists from July 18, 1940, to the end of the occupation of France.

After the Allies ' initial D-Day invasion of Normandy that began on June 6, 1944, many exhausted German soldiers retreated to strongholds like Mont-Saint-Michel. On August 1, 1944, a single American soldier – Private Freeman Brougher, from Pennsylvania, of the 72nd Publicity Service Battalion (a small Anglo-American psychological warfare unit) – reached and liberated Mont-Saint-Michel accompanied by two British reporters, Gault MacGowan of the New York Sun and Paul Holt with the London Daily Express. Jubilant crowds of locals greeted Brougher, Holt and MacGowan, and Brougher signed the Golden Book, the island's record of visiting nobility, at the mayor's invitation. The abbey was also used as a prison for the first time since the French Revolution when male collaborators with the Germans were jailed there.

Mont-Saint-Michel and its bay were added to the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites in 1979, listed with criteria such as cultural, historical, and architectural significance, as well as human-created and natural beauty.

In June 2023, President Emmanuel Macron visited Mont-Saint-Michel to mark the abbey's millennium. He stated that the changes since the hydraulic dam and the new bridge opened have lessened the silting, making it an island again.

In the 11th century, William of Volpiano, the Italian architect who had built Fécamp Abbey in Normandy, was chosen by Richard II, Duke of Normandy, to be the building contractor. He designed the Romanesque church of the abbey, daringly placing the transept crossing at the top of the mount. Many underground crypts and chapels had to be built to compensate for this weight. These formed the basis for the supportive upward structure that can be seen today. Today Mont-Saint-Michel is seen as a building of Romanesque architecture.

Robert de Thorigny, a great supporter of Henry II of England, who was also Duke of Normandy, reinforced the structure of the buildings and built the main façade of the church in the 12th century. In 1204, Guy of Thouars, regent for the Duchess of Brittany, as vassal of the King of France, undertook a siege of the Mount. After setting fire to the village and massacring the population, he beat a retreat under the powerful walls of the abbey. The fire which he lit extended to the buildings, and the roofs fell prey to the flames. Horrified by the cruelty of his Breton ally, Philip Augustus offered Abbot Jordan a grant for the reconstruction of the abbey in the new Gothic architectural style.

Charles VI is credited with adding major fortifications to the abbey-mount, building towers, successive courtyards, and strengthening the ramparts.

The islet belongs to the French commune of Le Mont-Saint-Michel, in the département of Manche, in Normandy. The nearest significant town, with an SNCF train station, is Pontorson, with a population of slightly over 4,000. Mont-Saint-Michel belongs to the Organization of World Heritage Cities.

Since June 2001, following the appeal addressed to them in 2000 by Jacques Fihey, Bishop of Coutances and Avranches, a community of monks and nuns of the Monastic Fraternities of Jerusalem, sent from the mother-house of St-Gervais-et-St-Protais in Paris, have been living as a community on Mont-Saint-Michel. They replaced the Benedictine monks who returned to the mount in 1966. They are tenants of the centre for national monuments and are not involved in the management of the abbey.

The community has seven sisters and four brothers. Their life revolves around prayer, work and fraternal life. The community meets four times a day to recite the liturgical office in the abbey, or in the crypt of Notre-Dame des Trente Cierges in winter. In 2012, the community undertook the renovation of a house on the mount, the Logis Saint-Abraham, which is used as a guest house for pilgrims on retreat.

In summer, dolphins from the warmer waters of the Atlantic Ocean follow ocean currents into the bay, where they are often seen near local fishermen's traditional boats, known as barquettes. These small boats are about 5 metres long and 2 metres wide, typically fitted with low-powered motors, and the current created by their propellers appears to attract the dolphins. Sightings of dolphins playing near the boats are common during this period.

The Mont-Saint-Michel has long been dominated by a handful of families which shared the businesses in the town and ran the village administration. Tourism is almost the sole source of income of the commune, bringing US$63 million to the small island in 2014. There are about 50 shops for three million tourists. The island is also home to four museums, showcasing the history, culture, and heritage of Mont-Saint-Michel. About 25 people sleep every night on the mount, monks included, except for those in hotels. There are 132 hotel rooms within the island's walls. The main institutions are shared by:

Overtourism is a problem for Mont-Saint-Michel, exacerbated by tourists mostly visiting on day-trips, which causes overcrowding from 10:00 to 16:00, especially in the summer. The Mont-Saint-Michel foundation has introduced measures to change this pattern and reduce daytime overcrowding, including by introducing free parking after 18:30, except during July and August.

The nearest airports to Mont-Saint-Michel are Rennes–Saint-Jacques Airport, located 88 km (55 mi) south and Nantes Atlantique Airport, located 198 km (123 mi) south.

Historically, Mont-Saint-Michel was the Norman counterpart of St Michael's Mount in Cornwall, England, which was given to the Benedictines, the religious order of Mont-Saint-Michel, by Edward the Confessor in the 11th century. The two mounts share the same tidal island characteristics and a similar conical shape, though Mont-Saint-Michel is much taller.

During the medieval period, pilgrims walked from Italy, Germany and England, as well as other parts of France. Such devotees were known as Miquelots. Modern pilgrims can follow the same routes. Ten hiking trails have been created that enable pilgrims from various European countries to retrace the path their ancestors may have taken during a medieval pilgrimage.

Part of the action in Helen MacInnes 's 1943 film thriller Assignment in Brittany takes place at the Mont, including a dramatic nighttime chase across the sands. Alan Lee is said to have taken inspiration from Mont-Saint-Michel in designing Gondor 's capital city, Minas Tirith, in Peter Jackson 's 2003 film The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King.

The Kingdom of Corona in the 2010 Disney film Tangled is based on Mont-Saint-Michel.

Monte-Saint-Michel was also featured in the final episode of the first season of The Walking Dead: Daryl Dixon as well as the second season.

Mindwalk is a 1990 feature film directed by Bernt Capra, adapted from his short story based on The Turning Point, a nonfiction book by physicist Fritjof Capra, his brother. The movie was filmed on site at the Mont Saint-Michel and has views of (and scenes conceptually based around) many structures and features there, including the approach over the tidal flats, the cathedral, the walkways, a torture chamber, and a giant, ancient clock mechanism.

Mont-Saint-Michel makes a brief appearance in the 4th episode of the anime Saint Cecilia and Pastor Lawrence.

Mont-Saint-Michel is a World Wonder in Civilization VI.

Mont-Saint-Michel is featured in Onimusha 3: Demon Siege in which the abbey is overrun by demons in both the 16th and 21st centuries and subsequently destroyed.

A fictionalized version of the island, Beaumont-Saint-Denis, serves as the location for Sniper Elite 5 ' s third mission. The castle is also the inspiration for the site of the climactic final battle in the air combat video game The Sky Crawlers: Innocent Aces, in which it is an abandoned enemy fortress with still-operational anti-air turrets. It also inspires the castle that appears on the cover art of the 1997 video game: Castlevania Symphony of the Night and Dark Souls' New Londo Ruins.

Mont-Saint-Michel serves as an area in Country of the Musketeers in Kingdom Hearts: Dream Drop Distance, where Sora and the Three Musketeers composed of Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck and Goofy attempt to rescue Princess Minnie from Pete.

The map "Corrode" introduced in June 2025 in Valorant takes inspiration from Mont-Saint-Michel.

Mike Oldfield named a song after the island on his 1996 album Voyager.

Aphex Twin, a Cornish electronic composer, has a song named "Mt Saint Michel + Saint Michaels Mount" on the album Drukqs, named after the two similar tidal islands.

American musician Quadeca featured the island in the music video for his song "AT A TIME LIKE THIS". The song was included on his 2025 visual album Vanisher, Horizon Scraper.

It appears in the 1992 music video Queen of Rain by Roxette.

Monte Carlo Doualiya (Arabic : مونت كارلو الدولية), formerly RMC Moyen-Orient (English: Radio Monte Carlo Middle East), is a French public radio service that broadcasts news, talk shows, and sports content across the Arab world. It was established in 1972 and operated as a subsidiary of France Médias Monde, a state-owned holding company.

Headquartered in Paris, the station produces Arabic-language content and broadcasts to audiences across the Middle East and the Maghreb 24 hours a day. Its distribution network includes local FM transmitters, shortwave radio, satellite platforms, and its official website.

In the late 1960s, the French government sought to establish an international pan-Arab radio station to compete with broadcasters from the United Kingdom, the United States, and the USSR. The Société Financière de Radiodiffusion (SOFIRAD), which managed state holdings in broadcast media, selected the Radio Monte-Carlo project due to its reputation in the Mediterranean and OFIRAD's 84% stake in the broadcaster.

Following an agreement with Prince Rainier III of Monaco in June 1968, negotiations began with Nicosia Radio to install a broadcasting antenna at Cape Greco, Cyprus. In February 1969, SOFIRAD and the French Broadcasting and Television Office formed the Monegasque Society for Broadcasting Studies to plan and implement the project. One year later, this entity was replaced by the Monegasque Society for Exploitation and Broadcasting Studies (SOMERA) to oversee the completion of the initiative.

Radio Monte-Carlo Middle East (RMC Middle East) began broadcasting in 1972. The radio established itself as a radio service in several Middle Eastern and Persian Gulf nations, including Lebanon, Jordan, and Syria. The entity managing the station [SOMERA], received an annual funding of 28 francs from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Over time, the service faced competition from local broadcasters and international radio stations such as the BBC World Service and the Voice of America. This competition was coupled with a chronic deficit and declining advertising revenue, which led to a restructuring in the 1990s.

At the end of 1996, SOFIRAD sold RMC Moyen-Orient to the Radio France Internationale group for the sum of 1 franc. Its audience was estimated at 16 million people at the time. The radio station, which had previously broadcast on medium wave, shortwave, and satellite, began broadcasting on FM in some countries. In 1998, after moving to the Maison de la Radio in Paris, it became the first public radio station to switch to all-digital.

In 2005, RMC Middle East's audience began to decline due to the proliferation of local FM stations in Baghdad, Basra, Mosul, Djibouti, and Kuwait. A new team was appointed in November 2005, with Philippe Beauvillard as general manager and Agnès Levallois as news director. The station's programming was updated in an effort to reach younger listeners.

In late 2006 and early 2007, the radio station was rebranded as Monte Carlo Doualiya.

On April 4, 2008, the holding company Audiovisuel extérieur de la France was created under the impetus of French President Nicolas Sarkozy. The aim was to group together the activities of France's external audiovisual sector, namely the television channels TV5 Monde and France 24, and the radio station Radio France Internationale, of which Monte Carlo Doualiya was a subsidiary.

In January 2012, Monte Carlo Doualiya ceased to be a subsidiary of Radio France Internationale when it became a fully-fledged channel of the Audiovisuel extérieur de la France alongside Radio France Internationale and France 24. The legal merger of the group with its channels became effective on February 13, 2012.

In 2013, the radio station launched its own website and adopted a new program schedule. On June 3, Radio France Internationale and Monte Carlo Doualiya launched a temporary bilingual radio station in Marseille called La Méditerranée ensemble. This coincided with Marseille-Provence 2013 and the opening of the Museum of European and Mediterranean Civilisations. The station broadcasts Monte Carlo Doualiya programs in Arabic from noon to 6 p.m., and Radio France Internationale programs in French during the remaining hours.

In 2017, Monte Carlo Doualiya began airing in France for the first time.

In 2019, the parent group France Médias Monde (operator of Monte Carlo Doualiya) signed a cooperation agreement with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).

The partnership aimed to produce media content on food security, nutrition, and sustainable agriculture, involving the editorial teams of Monte Carlo Doualiya, Radio France Internationale, and France 24.

During the 2020s, the station focused heavily on digital platforms, including its website, podcasts, mobile apps, and social media. This shift changed audience consumption patterns towards digital platforms in Arab world. In 2023, the group reported an increase in digital engagement across its platforms, including YouTube and Instagram.

From 1996 to 2012, the Chairman and CEO of Monte Carlo Doualiya was a part of its parent company, Radio France Internationale. In 2012, he was appointed the CEO of its parent company, France Médias Monde (formerly Audiovisuel extérieur de la France).

RMC Moyen-Orient and Monte Carlo Doualiya are the trade names used by the Société Monégasque D'exploitation et D'études de Radiodiffusion (SOMERA). From 1972 to 1996, the latter was 90% owned by the Société Financière de Radiodiffusion (SOFIRAD), which managed the French State's interests in radio and television stations. The remainder was owned by the state of Monaco.

From 1996 to 2012, the radio was a subsidiary of the Radio France Internationale group, an independent national programming company, until 2008 when it joined the Audiovisuel Extérieur de la France.

Since 2012, Monte Carlo Doualiya has been a subsidiary of the national programming company France Médias Monde (formerly Audiovisuel Extérieur de la France), 100% owned by the French State via the State Participation Agency (APE).

From 1996 to 2012, the radio station was a subsidiary of the Radio France Internationale group, from which it received its budget. Since 2012, it was a subsidiary of France Médias Monde (formerly Audiovisuel extérieur de la France). The latter distributes its budget between its channels: France 24, Radio France Internationale, and Monte Carlo Doualiya.

The radio station's headquarters were formerly located in the Palais de la Scala, 1 avenue Henry Dunant in Monaco.

After becoming a subsidiary of Radio France Internationale in 1996, RMC Moyen-Orient relocated to the Maison de la Radio located at 116 avenue du Président-Kennedy in the 16th arrondissement of Paris.

In February 2013, Monte Carlo Doualiya and Radio France Internationale moved to the France 24 in the France Médias Monde building (then known as Audiovisuel extérieur de la France) in Issy-les-Moulineaux, in Hauts-de-Seine.

The Montgaudier Cave is a prehistoric site in Montbron, Charente, France, occupied from the Mousterian (Middle Paleolithic) to the Magdalenian (Upper Paleolithic). It has yielded Neanderthal and Homo sapiens remains, ancient faunal bones, extensive lithic and bone artifacts, and significant examples of parietal art and portable art.

Located in western Montbron, 27 kilometres (17 mi) east of Angoulême in Charente, the Montgaudier Cave is 3 kilometres (1.9 mi) from the Dordogne and 11 kilometres (6.8 mi) from Haute-Vienne. It opens into a cliff overlooking the Tardoire River, upstream from the Placard Cave, beneath a northeast-facing concave bank supporting Montgaudier Castle.

Excavations at Montgaudier began before 1850 with Édouard Lartet, followed by the Marquis de Vibraye, Tremeau de Rochebrune, Abbé Bourgeois, Abbé Delaunay, Fermond, and Albert Gaudry from 1867 to 1886. Further digs continued until 1959. In 1966, Louis Duport, at Jean Piveteau 's request, resumed excavations, systematizing prior findings and discovering a Neanderthal jawbone (12–14½ years old) in 1974. The site has been a classified site since 1942.

The cave comprises a complex system of shelters and cavities, accessed via 13 metres (43 ft) -wide, 10 metres (33 ft) -high porch leading to 20 metres (66 ft) -long cavity. Key areas include the Lartet Shelter (west) and the Tardoire section (east), encompassing the Gaudry and Paignon Shelters. Locus 12, excavated by Duport in 1983–1984, revealed a Magdalenian layer after test pits. Locus 11, 3 metres (9.8 ft) in front of the porch, indicates a post-Magdalenian vault collapse and an ancient Tardoire riverbed.

The Great Porch contains approximately 30 sedimentary levels, dated to about 80,000 years ago, corresponding to loci 1–3, 5–6. The Lartet Shelter (locus 4) has six layers with an intact Mousterian level. The Gaudry Shelter (loci 8–9) includes nine layers, with Upper Magdalenian (layers 1–2) and possible Aurignacian (layer 5). A Quina-type Mousterian hearth exists in the Tardoire section. Locus 12 has four levels, including Magdalenian (layer 2) and possibly Gravettian (layer 4). The complex stratigraphy reflects extensive human activity across multiple periods.

Locus 12 yielded bones of herbivores (horse, wild boar, deer, roe deer, fallow deer) and carnivores (cave lion, gray wolf, spotted hyena, cave bear, Arctic fox), radiocarbon-dated to 12,820 years BP (Magdalenian). Saiga antelope remains were also found. Layer 13 contains archaic fauna: Ursus deningeri (ancestor of Ursus spelaeus), Crocuta crocuta intermedia, and steppe rhinoceros (Dicerorhinus hemitoechus). These findings suggest a diverse paleoenvironment.

The cave was occupied from the Mousterian to Magdalenian, with possible brief Upper Solutrean use of the Paignon Shelter. In 1974, a Neanderthal jawbone (12–14½ years old, likely Riss glaciation) was found, possibly from the Lartet Shelter. In 1988, a child's molar (8 years ±2, Middle Magdalenian) was discovered in locus 12. In 1968, two Homo sapiens skulls (young adult and child, 8–12 years) from the Gaudry Shelter were dated to Magdalenian V–VI, with a skull fragment from the Paignon Shelter's Magdalenian layer.

Layer 13 yielded flint and pebble tools predating the Riss glaciation, resembling worked pebbles.

The Lartet Shelter produced 3,144 objects, including 402 tools (80% scrapers, Charentian Mousterian, Ferrassie/Quina types). A paved floor (~ 30 square metres (320 sq ft)) and hearth were found, with another Quina-type hearth in the Tardoire section.

Layer 5 (Tardoire section) contains a busked burin and sparse artifacts, indicating limited Aurignacian presence.

Locus 6 (layer 4) yielded 650 objects, including 72 tools (scrapers, burins, awls) and a bone spear point. Middle Gravettian Noailles burins suggest Noaillian/Rayssian facies.

Sparse notched points, similar to those at Placard Cave, provide insufficient evidence for Solutrean occupation.

Artifacts include scrapers, knives, bone awls, ivory smoothers, and a barbed harpoon (locus 12). The Paignon Shelter contains a hearth with engraved plaques.

A Neolithic axe blade, bowl, and Bell Beaker vessel with hatched bands were found.

In 1978, a bovid engraving with signs, attributed to Magdalenian Style III, was uncovered on a collapsed block, reflecting symbolic or ritualistic expression.

The Paignon Shelter yielded an engraved sandstone (reindeer, bison, feline, salmon) and ornaments, including a bone pendant (13,320 years BP) and a pierced horse incisor with triangle engravings.

In 1886, Eugène Paignon found a bâton percé (reindeer antler, 30 centimetres (12 in)) engraved with seals, salmon, and eels. Other artifacts include engraved ivory, a bone with a horse frieze, and ibex-decorated antler. Perforated shells and antler pieces served as ornaments. These objects suggest advanced artistic and symbolic practices.

The Moroccan Caliphate or Maghrib Caliphate was an unrealized plan by the French government in 1915–1916, during World War I, to proclaim Sultan Yusef of Morocco as caliph. The purpose of the proposed caliphate was to ideologically control the Muslim population of the French colonial empire, especially in North Africa, and to counteract religious influence over this population by the Ottoman and British empires.

The ' Alawi dynasty seized power in Morocco in the mid-17th century, conquering the entire country over the course of a few decades under Al-Rashid (r. 1666–1672). Since their establishment as a ruling dynasty, the 'Alawis have been claiming descent from the Islamic prophet Muhammad, through his daughter Fatima. Morocco was conquered by France through several invasions in the period 1907–1912. In 1912, the French established the colonial French protectorate in Morocco. The Moroccan sultan, Yusef of Morocco, was allowed to retain his position as sultan but was left with very little real power. Actual power in Morocco was held by the country's French colonial administrator, the resident-general Hubert Lyautey, who nominated all high officials and initiated all royal decrees.

During World War I (1914–1918), Muslims from Morocco fought on the side of France and its allies (the Entente), encouraged by proclamations issued by Yusef. The nominal religious leading figure of Sunni Islam at the time of the French conquest and World War I was the sultan (and caliph) of the Ottoman Empire. The Ottoman Caliphate 's religious influence among Muslims abroad had increased during the reign of Abdul Hamid II (r. 1876–1909), who pursued a Pan-Islamist foreign policy. Morocco had never been under Ottoman control and both religious and political authority in the country was united in the Moroccan sultan, "the one and only imam in Morocco".

By the time of the outbreak of World War I, the French colonial empire governed a large Muslim population. When the Ottoman Empire on 11 November 1914 declared its war against the Entente to be a jihad, French authorities were worried about the effects on their Muslim subjects. Already before the formal Ottoman entry into the war, Tunisian soldiers in French service had openly stated their reluctance to fire on Germans out of fear of "killing friends of the Sultan of Constantinople". During the war, German soldiers several times attempted to demoralize Muslims fighting for France by claiming to be Muslims themselves and servants of the Ottoman caliph. Though Moroccans did not consider the Ottoman caliph to be the head of Islam, many Muslims in other French colonial territories did. Muslim soldiers were more demoralized by being called upon to kill fellow Muslims loyal to the Ottoman caliph than they were by news of increasing French losses in the war.

In addition to the security threat of the Ottoman caliph's potential religious influence, the French were aware of the British support for the Arab nationalism movement and feared that the British planned to create a puppet-caliphate in the Arabian Peninsula to replace the Ottoman Caliphate. Although France ruled over a great Muslim population, the French did not (unlike the British and Ottomans) control any of the great world centres of Islam.

In early 1915, the French secretary-general Felix Gaillard proposed the proclamation of a Moroccan Caliphate. The idea was that a caliphate under direct French control could counteract the threat of religious influence over France's Muslim subjects by the Ottomans or British, and could further serve to ideologically control the Muslim population of the French colonial empire, especially in North Africa. Due to Yusef's claimed descent from Muhammad, French authorities considered him the best candidate for the position. Also in early 1915, Hubert Lyautey incorrectly assumed that the Gallipoli campaign would soon end in a British victory and an Entente occupation of Constantinople, which would terminate the Ottoman Caliphate. Lyautey believed that this would pave the way for an alternative caliphate. French authorities believed the British would nominate the Sharif of Mecca, Hussein bin Ali al-Hashimi, to this position and considered this a worse possibility for France than the existing Ottoman Caliphate. Lyautey suggested that it was in the best interest of France to install Sultan Yusef as "caliph of the West" once the "Eastern Caliphate" (i.e. the Ottomans) had been defeated by the Entente.

In the autumn of 1915, the idea of a Moroccan Caliphate was actively propagated by the French media. Although aware that it would be difficult for the government to legitimately install Yusef as a religious leader, French authorities justified their plans by reasoning that religious problems would become a significant future issue in Muslim countries, that the future of the French colonial empire was tied to the degree in which France could control and influence the future caliphate, and by claiming that Yusef already had some recognition as a religious leader in Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia. French propaganda shifted from portraying the Ottoman sultan as an innocent puppet of the German Empire to portraying him as a "Turkish usurper of the caliphate". Ottoman authorities were aware of the French plans and responded to the French propaganda by publishing their own articles and books in favor of the Ottoman Caliphate. The Ottomans were however significantly more concerned by British plans in regard to the Arabian Peninsula. The status of Islam's holiest sites was considered a far more important issue than Morocco, which was largely out of Ottoman reach.

In 1916, Hussein bin Ali al-Hashimi revolted against the Ottoman Empire with British encouragement and assistance, beginning the Great Arab Revolt (1916–1918). The revolt threatened the religious influence of the Ottoman Caliphate and forced Muslims worldwide into the unprecedented position of having to choose between loyalty to the Ottoman caliph, their symbolic religious leader, or the Sharif of Mecca, the spiritual and political head of Islam's holiest city. In response to the beginning of the revolt, French authorities proclaimed to their Muslim subjects that the Ottoman caliph no longer had the authority to act in the name of Islam.

Once news of Hussein's revolt reached Lyautey, he wrote a long letter to the French foreign ministry, detailing his ideas and concerns. Lyautey supported a French-sponsored western caliphate to balance an eastern one centered in Mecca, which he feared would be created after the revolt. He believed that a possible Mecca-based caliphate under Hussein would both be in the hands of the British and exhibit Pan-Islamist sentiments. If France accepted the idea of a single caliphate, they would thus put themselves at the mercy of the British in regard to religious influence over their Muslim population and France would be reliant on British goodwill in its decision-making. Lyautey further stated that a caliph under French control would act as "a guarantee against a greater evil, namely the unity of all Islam, including our own, under the primacy of a foreign or enemy chief." Lyuatey proposed backing Yusef as the spiritual suzerain of Muslims in northwestern Africa, excluding Tunisia where he preferred the recognition of the Ottoman caliph (rather than a possible future Mecca-based caliph).

France gave up its caliphate plans in 1916, when the secret Sykes–Picot Agreement with Britain promised control of Syria to France in return for giving Britain a free hand in the rest of the Arab world. Hussein would become the head of the Sharifian Caliphate for a few years after the abolition of the Ottoman Caliphate in 1924.

Mort pour la France (French pronunciation: [ mɔʁ puʁ la fʁɑ̃s ], lit. ' died for France ') is a legal expression in France and an honour awarded to people who died during a conflict, usually in service of the country.

The term is defined in L.488 to L.492 (bis) of the Code of Military Disability Pensions and War Victims. It applied to members of the French military forces who died in action or from an injury or an illness contracted during service during the First and Second World Wars, the Indochina and Algeria Wars, and fighting in Morocco and the Tunisian War of Independence, as well as to civilians killed during these conflicts. Both French citizens and volunteers of other citizenship are eligible to be honored.

The words "Mort pour la France" are recorded on the death certificate.

Additionally the diploma «Aux morts de la grande guerre, la patrie reconnaissante» is awarded to the family of

This diploma is awarded by the minister responsible for veterans and war victims.

French copyright law gives a special 30 years extension of copyright to creative artists declared "Mort pour la France" over the usual 70 years post mortem (article L. 123-10).

List of writers officially declared "Mort pour la France".

List of composers officially declared "Mort pour la France".

List of resistance fighters officially declared "Mort pour la France"

Others officially declared "Mort pour la France".

The Moula-Guercy Cave (French: Baume de Moula-Guercy) is a paleontological site located on a calcareous cliff 80 m (260 ft) above the west bank of the Rhône river in France. It is close to the village of Soyons, 10 km (6.2 mi) south of Valence, Ardèche. It was discovered in 1970 or 1972 by M. Moula. The site is composed of six cavities, the majority of which were occupied in the Middle Paleolithic. Moula-Guercy cave was first excavated between 1975 and 1982 by P. Paven, with later excavations conducted by A. Defleur between 1993 and 1999, following an initial survey undertaken in 1991.

The cave was occupied by Neanderthals approximately 100,000 BP. The excavations carried out at the site in the 1990s found abundant faunal, archaeological and paleobotanical remains, including the bone remains of six individuals of the Homo neanderthalensis species.

Evidence has been found at the site which has been inferred to demonstrate Neanderthal cannibalism. The bones showed cut marks and are very well preserved.

However, the director of the Mandrin Cave research project, Ludovic Slimak [ fr ], who was one of the 1990s excavation team, has since highlighted the poor evidence for nutritional cannibalism. He has questioned whether the marks indicate cannibalism at all, due to the differences between the marks on the human bones and the animal bones with which they were mixed, and has suggested ritual flesh stripping as an alternative interpretation.

Moules-frites or moules et frites (French pronunciation: [ mul.fʁit ] ]; Dutch : mosselen-friet) is a main dish of mussels and French fries originating in Northern France and Belgium. The name is French, moules meaning mussels and frites fries, with the Dutch name for the dish meaning the same. It is the national dish of Belgium.

Although moules-frites are popular in many countries, it is thought that the dish originated in Belgium. It is likely that it was originally created by combining mussels, a popular and cheap foodstuff eaten around the Flemish coast, and fried potatoes, which were commonly eaten around the country in winter when no fish or other food was available.

In both Belgium and France, moules-frites are available in most restaurants, depending on season. According to a survey conducted by TNS in 2011, moules-frites was identified as the second-favourite dish in France, receiving a vote of 20 per cent, narrowly losing to magret de canard which received 21 per cent.

On average, between 25 and 30 tonnes of mussels are consumed each year in Belgium as moules-frites. Much of the mussels consumed in Belgium come from mussel farms in nearby Zeeland in the Netherlands.

The ways in which the mussels are cooked in the dish can vary significantly. Some common variants include:

Less commonly, fusion variants are seen in which the stock may be flavoured with non-local ingredients such as Espelette pepper or Pernod liquor. They can also be served with " Mosselsaus ", a sauce that is made with mayonnaise, mustard, and vinegar.

In various forms, frites or friet play an important role in Belgian culture and cuisine. Within Belgium, bintje potatoes are generally preferred as a basis to make fries because of their high starch content. They are generally double-fried (fried, left to cool and then fried again) in order to make them both moist in the core and crisp on the outside.

As a dish, the moules and the frites are usually served separately, to avoid the fries becoming soggy in the sauce. Often, the moules are served in the pan used to cook them. A second dish is generally provided for the discarded mussel shells.

Mussels and French fries are served everywhere in Belgium, from the Belgian coast to the bottom of the Ardennes. In France, the dish is common in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais. It is the typical dish of the braderie of Lille. In 2009, 500 tons of mussels and 30 tons of fries were consumed during this event. During this weekend, restaurant owners pile up the mussels eaten in front of their establishments; most of the time, the restaurants Aux moules (rue de Béthune) and La Chicorée (place Rihour) have the largest quantities.

In 2008, TNS Sofres carried out a survey among the people of the North. Mussels and French fries came in second place with 25%. The dish is outstripped by steak frites which gets 33%. In France, according to the same TNS-Sofres poll, moules-frites are in second place among the favorite dishes of the French with 20%. It is one point behind duck breast.

The dish can be consumed with an abbey lager or a dry white wine; red wine should be avoided because of its tannins. As for sauces, in addition to the marinière sauce that already accompanies the mussels, it is possible to add mayonnaise with the fries. Mussels and fries are also the specialty of the Belgian restaurant chain Chez Léon.

Mounir Mahjoubi (born 1 March 1984) is a French entrepreneur and politician of La République En Marche! (LREM) who served as a member of the National Assembly from June to July 2017 and from 2019 to 2022. From 2017 until 2019 was the Secretary of State for Digital Affairs in the government of Prime Minister Édouard Philippe.

A former President of the French Digital Council, Mahjoubi resigned in January 2017 to join the presidential campaign of Emmanuel Macron as digital manager.

Mahjoubi was born in the 12th arrondissement of Paris to working class Moroccan parents who emigrated in the 1970s from Afourar, Beni Mellal. His father was a decorator and his mother a housekeeper.

Mahjoubi was very technological as a child and even won an Young Inventors competition organized by children's science magazine, Science et Vie Junior He was employed by internet provider, Club Internet, when he was 16 and the company eventually training him to be a network technician. He was also employed as a trade union representative for the union, CFDT.

Mahjoubi obtained a master's degree in finance and strategy from the Paris Institute of Political Studies in 2009. He was a member of the Olivaint Conference, one of the oldest and private student societies in French history.

Mahjoubi founded Equanum along with Guilhem Chéron and Marc-David Choukroun in 2010, a company which develops and gives farmers and artisans a dedicated Internet platform to sell their product. Mahjoubi left the company in 2012 to work on the Hollande campaign.

Mahjoubi was Deputy General Manager for BETC Digital from 2013 to 2016. In September 2016, he founded the "French Bureau", a start-up company that aims to accompany major groups in their innovation process.

Mahjoubi joined the Socialist Party when he was 18. In 2006, he helped create the "Segosphere" movement to assist 2007 Presidential candidate, Ségolène Royal. He supported Francois Hollande 's campaign for the 2012 presidential elections and even worked on it, assisting with the digital aspect.

Mahjoubi was nominated by President Hollande as Chairman of the Conseil national du numérique (French Digital Council) in 2016, succeeding Benoît Thieulin. The priority projects of the council under his guidance were the digital transformation of Small and medium-sized enterprises and universities.

In 2017, he resigned from the council and joined En Marche! serving as digital manager of Macron's campaign team. On 6 April 2017, Mahjoubi was selected as candidate for the 16th constituency of Paris for the legislative elections, running under La République en marche! label. He ran against Jean-Christophe Cambadélis, the First Secretary of the Socialist Party, who had represented the district as lawmaker for 20 straight years. Mahjoubi later won the seat with 51% of the vote in the second round.

Mahjoubi was nominated Secretary of State for Digital Affairs by Édouard Philippe on 17 May 2017. In a 2018 reshuffle of Philippe's government, Mahjoubi's department has been restructured; he now reports to Finance Minister Bruno Le Maire.

Mahjoubi announced on 6 March 2019 his candidacy as LREM candidate for the 2020 Paris municipal election. To be able to devote himself to this candidacy, he left the government on 27 March and thus reinstated his seat in the National Assembly. He subsequently served on the Committee on Foreign Affairs. He did not compete in the 2022 legislative election.

At a parliamentary hearing in 2020, Mahjoubi criticized the head of Amazon 's France unit that the latter was "taking the piss" after telling a parliamentary committee that the company paid the French state 420 million euros ($508 million) in 2019 and had sales of 5.7 billion euros.

In 2015, Mahjoubi became a qualified cook after completing a Certificat d'aptitude professionnelle cuisine course. On the International Day Against Homophobia, Transphobia and Biphobia (17 May) 2018, Mahjoubi came out as gay via Twitter.

Mozzarella sticks are elongated pieces of battered or breaded mozzarella, usually served as hors d'oeuvre.

The history of frying cheese in a batter dates back to at least 1393 in medieval France, when a recipe for fried cheese sticks appeared in Le Ménagier de Paris. However, food historians believe that medieval French fried cheeses had little in common with the preparation and development of modern mozzarella sticks.

Mozzarella sticks most likely have their origins in the United States during the 1970s, through a combination of two factors, as per historian Joel Jensen: "the increasing availability of mass-produced mozzarella cheese beginning in the 1960s", and the development of new efficient frying technologies to be used in fast-paced food-serving businesses (such as bowling alleys and sports bars). Food writer Arthur Schwartz describes mozzarella milanese, an Italian dish of mozzarella dredged in flour, egg, and breadcrumbs and then pan-fried as the "prototype" of the American mozzarella stick. He describes these as typically made from older mozzarella as a midweek meal, and as being eaten "within seconds" of emerging from the pan.

Mozzarella sticks are prepared by coating cheese strings in breadcrumbs or batter. They may be baked or fried in oil. Mozzarella sticks are often served with tomato sauce or marinara sauce. However, they may be served with other dipping sauces such as plum sauce, jalapeño jelly, ketchup, barbecue sauce, honey mustard, and ranch dressing. Restaurants often serve fried mozzarella sticks with a marinara sauce.

Popular fried cheeses other than mozzarella include provolone, Edam, cheddar, and American. Mozzarella sticks with raspberry sauce are part of the regional cuisine of New York 's Capital District. In many public schools throughout the United States, Bosco pizza sticks—soft breadsticks stuffed with mozzarella and served with a side of tomato sauce for dipping—have become a popular staple.

The National Independent Commission Charged With Gathering Evidence to Show the Implication of the French Government in the Genocide Perpetrated in Rwanda in 1994, commonly referred to as the Mucyo Commission after its Chairman, is a Rwandan government commission established by Paul Kagame in order to ascertain the nature of French involvement in the 1994 genocide. It released a report in August 2008, 331 pages in total, claiming to detail that France was not only complicit, but had engaged in actions on the level of conspiracy to genocide. Allegations included covert weapons dealing and training of interahamwe militants before and during the genocide, providing protection and shelter for some of the worst genocidaires, illegitimate humanitarian aims during Operation Turquoise and even French black ops on the ground of Rwanda during the genocide. This report, however, has been subject to great controversy and skepticism in the international community. It has been accused of being politically charged to benefit the Rwandan Patriotic Front.

The commission was established in 2004 when a bill authorizing it was passed through the Council of Ministers Organic Law No. 05/2005. The commission was chaired by Jean de Dieu Mucyo, former Attorney General of Rwanda and included a variety of high level Rwandan officials, including the Vice-President.

According to the scholar Filip Reyntjens :

Mulquinerie is a landmark of French sartorial heritage and high craftsmanship, and is the art of weaving and trading fine fabrics composed exclusively of linen : whether plain flax cloth, 'linon' or batiste. A 'mulquinier' was the artisan textile designer and weaver as well as the merchant of canvases. The mulquiniers were not only a subcategorization of the tisserand(e) artists (hand loom weavers ; French pronunciation: [tisʀɑ̃]) but were also the traders of their own craft. This activity was predominantly developed within villages as a substantial rural proto-industry, hence mulquiniers working on métiers à tisser in their home' basement while breathing from "bahottes" or "blocures" to obtain the most propitious humidity levels.

Mulquinerie originated in the 17th and 18th centuries from metropolitan France ’s Northern Departments now constituting the Hauts-de-France region (French pronunciation: [o d(ə) fʁɑ̃s], translating to "Upper France" in English; Picard : Heuts-d'Franche), following the territorial reform of French Regions (2014) from a merger of Nord-Pas-de-Calais and Picardy. The activity was ubiquitous in the towns of the former Nord-Pas de Calais Mining Basin, the Cambrésis sub-province or the Thiérache including Saint-Vaast-en-Cambrésis, Saint-Hilaire-lez-Cambrai, Haspres, Saint-Quentin or Neuvilly. This also included Caudry, the medieval capital city of French lace, which remains (in collaboration with Calais) the only town in France where lace is still made.

Etymologically, ‘mulquinier’ is derived from the Germanic term "mollquin" meaning 'thin canvas'. First traces of the term are encountered in the 'Charter of the mulquiniers of Valenciennes ' in 1413 through the use of the term 'molekinier'. Among the oldest mulquinerie ancestries are the Lecygne and Legueil families tracing back beyond the 17th century being fabric dyers, textile artists, embroiderers, patternmakers or hand-spinners.

The French mulquiniers' patron was Saint Veronica of Jerusalem whose feast they celebrated biennially (summer and winter) as in many pious Christian countries.

The term ' Mundat Forest' refers to two forests that overlie the modern border between Germany and France near Wissembourg, Alsace. The Upper Mundat Forest is a small part of the mountainous Palatinate Forest. The smaller Lower Mundat Forest forms a fraction of the Bienwald in the Upper Rhine valley.

In the Middle Ages the forests were part of the Wissembourg Mundat, the privileged possessions of the abbey of Weissenburg (now Wissembourg), whose abbot was a territorial magnate, a Prince-abbot of the Holy Roman Empire. The unusual term, Mundat, refers to the immunity (emunitas) granted by the royal conveyor of property, which rendered the abbey immune from obligations of service for the grant of vast privileged domains situated within the diocese of Speyer.

The Upper Mundat Forest is an area of roughly 40 square kilometres (15 sq mi) that stretches north and west from the Alsatian town Wissembourg. Its highest point, at 561 metres (1,841 ft), is the Hohe Derst near the hamlet of Reisdorf. The area includes the remains of Guttenberg Castle, c. 1150. It is part of the cross-border UNESCO biosphere reserve Pfälzerwald–Vosges du Nord.

The Lower Mundat Forest is an area of roughly 20 square kilometres (8 sq mi), east of Wissembourg in the plain formed by the Rhine rift. Geographically it is part of the Bienwald. Its highest elevation is 141 metres (463 ft).

The Upper and Lower Mundat Forests together make up the still-forested part of the Mundat, the former possessions of the 7th–16th century monastery and principality at Wissembourg. To distinguish it from the similar but unrelated Mundat at Rouffach further south, it is also known as the Wissembourg Mundat or, confusingly, the Lower Mundat – the Rouffach Mundat being the Upper Mundat.

Wissembourg was initially a monastery (Weissenburg Abbey), founded around 630–660 and part of the Benedictine order from the 8th century. In 760, Charlemagne 's father Pepin the Short granted immunity from services to the monastery and its possessions in field and forest. These possessions, the Mundat, had dimensions of about 20 km × 16 km (12.4 mi × 9.9 mi) and included the villages of Altenstadt, Schleithal, Oberseebach, Steinseltz, Oberhoffen, Cleebourg, Rott, Weiler, St. Germanshof, Bobenthal, Schlettenbach, Finsternheim, Bärenbach, Schweigen and Rechtenbach, Schweighofen, Kapsweyer, and Steinfeld. The Mundat Forest was known in Carolingian times as the Sylva immunita. In 974 the monastery, along with the Mundat, obtained the independent status of an Imperial abbey headed by a prince-abbot.

In 1524 the monastery was heavily encumbered, so Pope Clement VII transformed it into a collegiate church, and from 1546 it stood under the authority of Speyer.

The forested areas remained the property of the church until they were secularized after the French Revolution.

After Napoleon, the border between France and the Palatinate (then under Bavarian rule) was fixed by the Treaty of Paris in 1815. With the exception of Wissembourg, all the French territories north of the river Lauter fell to the Kingdom of Bavaria. Since then the border has remained unchanged in this area, except for Alsace twice being German, between 1871 and 1919 and again de facto between 1941 and 1944.

There was, however, an anomaly concerning land ownership. As a result of the treaty the town of Wissembourg had 30 square kilometres (12 sq mi) of forest on the German side of the border, in co-ownership with the Bavarian state. It also owned 20 square kilometres (8 mi) on the French side, jointly with the French state. This situation was rectified through land exchanges in the 1930s, in part through a treaty signed in 1959 that became effective retroactively as of 1938.

In 1946, the administration of the French zone of occupied Germany made an area of 7 square kilometres (2.7 sq mi) in the German part of the Upper Mundat Forest administratively a part of France, in order to guarantee the water catchment area for Wissembourg. This was formalized as part of Order No. 212, issued by the French Commander-in-Chief in Germany Koenig in April 1949. The area was put under exclusive French administration, preserving only German territorial sovereignty over the area. Initially the area included the hamlet St. Germanshof, but a correction in 1949 ensured that only uninhabited land was affected. A formal annexation, transferring also the territorial sovereignty to France, seems to have been planned originally, but it was never executed.

Negotiations about the status of the area led to its inclusion in a 1962 treaty that revisited several border issues between the two countries. The treaty would have made the entire area French territory, but as it was not ratified by the German parliament it did not become operative.

In 1984 the final agreement was reached, essentially trading administrative sovereignty against private ownership of the same area. In an exchange of diplomatic notes, the French government agreed to repeal the relevant clause of Order 212. In return, the West German government committed itself to transfer to France the land ownership over the public land in the area. France also obtained perpetual wood, hunting and water rights for the area as well as compensatory land for the castle, which it did not get. Once France, the United States and the United Kingdom had agreed, the Bundestag was able to repeal the clause, which it did effective in February 1986. The transfer of land ownership to France according to the German regulations was completed in 1990.

While the attempts to normalize the situation were ongoing, there was vocal protest by a number of West German citizens who rejected any solution that acknowledged the French claim. In the 1960s one objector pressed criminal charges, a retired appellate court president drew public comparisons to the Soviet occupation zone, and a law journal published criticism. In 1988 a retired notary requested that a local court appoint him to represent the interests of the German Reich against the Federal Republic of Germany. He argued that since the area in question was under French administration when the West German state was founded in 1949, the Weimar constitution was still in force in it. The court did appoint the ex-notary, but this decision was reversed half a year later by the next higher court, which found that there is no reason to doubt that the area is part of the German state of Rhineland-Palatinate.

In 2007 and 2008, German courts decided that French citizens leasing hunting rights in the northern part of the Upper Mundat Forest from the French state must follow German regulations when feeding deer.

In France, a municipal arrondissement (French : arrondissement municipal [ aʁɔ̃dismɑ̃ mynisipal ]) is a subdivision of the commune, and is used in the country's three largest cities: Paris, Lyon and Marseille. It functions as an even lower administrative division, with its own mayor. Although usually referred to simply as "arrondissements", they should not be confused with departmental arrondissements, which are groupings of communes within one département.

There are 45 municipal arrondissements in France: 20 in Paris (see: Arrondissements of Paris), nine in Lyon (see: Arrondissements of Lyon), and 16 in Marseille. However, a law in 1987 assigned the 16 arrondissements of Marseille to eight secteurs ("areas"), two arrondissements per secteur. Thus, in effect, Marseille can be more properly described as being divided into eight secteurs, the sixteen arrondissements having been made merely units of demarcation.

Municipal arrondissements have names only in Paris and are seldom used even there. In Paris, residents are very familiar with the arrondissements and, when asked where they live, they will almost always answer with the number. In Lyon, three arrondissements – Vieux Lyon (fifth), la Croix Rousse (fourth) and Vaise (ninth) – are generally referred to by those names, and the others are referred to by number. In Marseille, it is common for people to refer to the names of the neighborhoods, such as Ste. Anne or Mazargues, but also to the number of the arrondissements.

Municipal arrondissements are used in the five-digit postal codes of France. The first two digits are the number of the département in which the address is located (75 for Paris; 69 for Rhône in which Lyon is located; 13 for Bouches-du-Rhône in which Marseille is located); the last three digits are the number of the arrondissement so the postal code of a person living in the 5th arrondissement of Paris is "75005 Paris", and for a person living in the 14th arrondissement of Marseille it will be "13014 Marseille". The only exception is the 16th arrondissement of Paris, which is divided between two postal codes because of its size: "75016 Paris", in the south of the arrondissement, and "75116 Paris", in the north of the arrondissement.

The arrondissements of Paris form a clockwise spiral or snail pattern beginning from the first in the centre. In Marseille, they form a meandering path from the first down through the southwest, to the southeast, northeast and finally to the northwest. The arrondissements of Lyon do not form any discernible pattern at all, and only two pairs of arrondissements with a common border have consecutive numbers: the first and the second as well as the seventh and the eighth.

Some other large cities of France are also divided between several postal codes, but the postal codes do not correspond to arrondissements.

The first municipal arrondissements were created on 22 August 1795 when the city (commune) of Paris was split into twelve arrondissements. At the time, the National Convention was wary of the municipalities in big cities because of their revolutionary moods (Paris) or because of their counter-revolutionary leanings (Lyon and many other cities in the provinces), and so the Convention decided to split the large cities (communes) of France into smaller communes. Paris, unlike the other large cities, was not split into smaller communes, but into arrondissements, a newly created category, and the central municipality was abolished.

In 1805 Napoleon reunited all the large cities of France, but Paris was left divided. Eventually, in 1834, the city (commune) of Paris was reunited, with a municipal council for the whole city, but without a mayor, the municipality being ruled by the prefect of the department of Seine and by the Prefecture of Police. The twelve arrondissements were preserved, being needed for the local administration of people in such a large and populous city as Paris.

On 31 December 1859, the central government enlarged the city of Paris, annexing the suburban communes surrounding Paris, and the arrondissements were reorganised due to the enlargement. Twenty arrondissements with new boundaries were set up and they are still the arrondissements found today in Paris.

In the case of Lyon, in 1852, after more than fifty years of hesitation, the central government finally allowed Lyon to annex its immediate suburbs, which had become extremely populous due to the Industrial Revolution. The commune of Lyon annexed the communes of Croix-Rousse, La Guillotière, and Vaise. Wary of the new size of the city and the power held by the municipality, the central government decided to divide Lyon into five arrondissements, and the office of mayor of Lyon was abolished. The prefect of the department of Rhône was left to rule the municipality.

In 1881, the office of mayor of Lyon was re-established, and the commune of Lyon reverted to the standard status of French communes. However, the arrondissements were maintained, still being needed in such a populous city. New arrondissements were created in Lyon in 1867, 1912 and 1957 by splitting the third and seventh arrondissements. In 1963, Lyon annexed the commune of Saint-Rambert-l'Île-Barbe, and in 1964, the ninth arrondissement of Lyon was created as a result of the annexation, thus reaching the final arrangement of nine arrondissements found in Lyon today.

In 1977, the office of mayor of Paris was re-established after almost 183 years of abolition, but the arrondissements were left untouched.

In 1981, the Socialists won the French general elections and in the following year, they passed several key laws redefining the powers of the regions, departments, and communes, with the clear objective of ushering in a less centralised France. On 31 December 1982, the so-called " PLM Law [ fr ] " (Loi PLM) was passed, where PLM stands for Paris Lyon Marseille. These three communes were given a special status, derogating from the general status of communes, and were officially divided into municipal arrondissements. Where arrondissements already existed, in Paris and Lyon, the law preserved the already existing boundaries. In Marseille, where there were no arrondissements before 1982, sixteen arrondissements were set up.

The municipal arrondissements were given an official status by the law, each with own their town hall (mairie d'arrondissement) and mayor (maire d'arrondissement). For the first time in history, arrondissement councils (conseils d'arrondissement) were created in the arrondissements, directly elected by the inhabitants of each. The city halls (mairies) of Paris, Marseille and Lyon were preserved above the mairies d'arrondissement, with a central mayor for each city overseeing the arrondissements.

In these three cities, the arrondissements were made the administrative unit dealing directly with citizens. For all necessary queries and official business (for example, birth, marriage and death registrations and records), citizens go to their respective mairie d'arrondissement. The city hall (mairie centrale) does not generally have direct contact with the citizens and is in charge of larger matters such as economic development or local taxation. It was felt that the arrondissements should deal with the individual matters of citizens, the local arrondissement town halls being more accessible than the centralised city hall. (See "Rights and duties of the arrondissement council and mayor" below.)

The law was largely welcomed but some wondered why it was applied only to Paris, Lyon and Marseille. These three cities are the largest in France (with 2,125,246 inhabitants in Paris, 798,430 inhabitants in Marseille, and 466,000 inhabitants in Lyon) and the law was meant to have the local administrations become more accessible and tied to their respective citizens. However, many thought the law could have been applied to other populous cities, in particular to the fourth largest city of France, Toulouse (435,000 inhabitants), and the fifth largest city, Nice (342,738 inhabitants); both cities where the central city halls have to deal with a large number of citizens. Nonetheless, to this day only Paris, Lyon and Marseille are divided into municipal arrondissements.

In 1987, a new law assigned the sixteen arrondissements of Marseille to eight secteurs, two arrondissements per secteur, as explained above; and in Marseille there are now only eight mairies d'arrondissement, each one administering both arrondissements of each secteur.

The PLM Law of 1982 governs the status of the municipal arrondissements.

Unlike French communes, municipal arrondissements have no legal "personality" and so they are not considered legal entities, have no legal capacity and have no budget of their own.

The three communes of Paris, Lyon, and Marseille are ruled by a municipal council and a mayor. In Paris the municipal council is called Paris council (conseil de Paris). Each arrondissement (or secteur in Marseille) has an arrondissement council (conseil d'arrondissement) and an arrondissement mayor. Two thirds of the councillors on the arrondissement council are elected inside the arrondissement; the remaining one third is made up of members of the municipal council elected at the commune level above the arrondissements. The arrondissement mayor is elected by the arrondissement council and must be a member of the municipal council of the commune.

The law of 27 February 2002 on local ("proximity") democracy increased the powers of both the arrondissement councils and the arrondissement mayors.

The council and the mayor of the arrondissement have these rights and duties:

In France, a municipal council (French : conseil municipal, pronounced [ kɔ̃sɛj mynisipal ]) is an elected body of the commune responsible for "executing, in its deliberations, the business of the town" (translated).

The council must meet at least once a quarter, or at a request from at least one third of its members, but usually meets once a month. The council manages the smallest French territorial community with legal and financial autonomy, the commune.

Participation in the Municipal council vote as a candidate or as an elector is a privilege given only to European citizens. The British choice and decision to leave the European Union on 1 February 2020 had the consequence that 800 elected conseillers municipaux of British nationality were no longer eligible to be re-elected on 15 March 2020.

The number of seats in the municipal council depends on the number of inhabitants. This number is set by law: 7 seats for municipalities with less than 100 inhabitants to 69 seats for those with more than 300,000 inhabitants.

The number of councilors depends on the size of the city. The decree of 27 January 1977 gives that number based on segments of the population of the municipality of 9 members for smaller municipalities up to 49 more cities 300,000 inhabitants.

The law of November 1982, which is part of a package of reforms being made by the Law of 31 December 1982 relating to the administrative organization of Paris, Marseille, Lyon and public establishments for cooperation (PLM Act) on the specific case of the three biggest cities of France, changed the composition of municipal councils, maintaining the same segments of the population, from 9 to 49 members.

Finally, the Act of 17 May 2013 has been lowered from 9 to 7 the number of councilors in smaller communities with less than 100 inhabitants:

For Paris, Lyon and Marseille, the number of councilors which should not be confused with the borough or sector' councilors which are more numerous but have limited powers, is determined by the PLM Act :

Councilors are elected by direct universal suffrage for a term of six years, and can be reelected. The vote takes place following the French election procedures.

The electoral system differs depending on the size of the municipality. The term of elected officials is six years. There are no term limits for city councilors.

In 2013, the law distinguished between the municipalities of less than 3500 inhabitants and those larger, the first electing their municipal councilors using a two-round system, the second using proportional representation in two rounds. In municipalities with less than 3500 inhabitants, municipal councilors are elected by majority vote in two rounds, and in the municipalities of less than 2500 inhabitants, the candidate does not have to be registered to be elected.

Beginning with the elections of 2014, the threshold of 3500 inhabitants was reduced to 1000 inhabitants to facilitate the parity between men and women in elected office: Now, plurality-at-large voting is only used in communes with a population less than 1000 inhabitants. For communes with more than 1000 inhabitants, proportional representation is used. In addition, candidates who registered their candidacy with the prefecture or sub-prefecture can be elected, whatever the size of the municipality.

The election of municipal councilors uses a plurality-at-large voting in two rounds, with panachage :

A candidate must registry with the prefecture or sub-prefecture to be elected. Candidates not on a list and incomplete lists are allowed, but can not be elected if they have not previously applied for candidacy. The votes are recorded individually, and panachage is allowed: Voters have the right to change the ballot by selecting candidates from various lists.

The council members are elected using proportional representation with two rounds, with the winning list getting additional seats. The winning list (absolute majority in the first round, relative majority in the second) wins half the seats. The other half is distributed proportionally among all the lists with a minimum of 5% of the vote (the first or second round, as appropriate).

The lists are blocked. Voters may not select individual candidates from lists, but must vote for an entire list. Each list must contain as many names as there are seats to be filled.

A municipal council may be composed of representatives from one list:

The three largest cities in France – Paris, Marseille and Lyon – are divided into electoral areas, corresponding to an arrondissement in Paris and Lyon, or formed by combining two arrondissements in the same area for Marseille.

Each of these sectors elect, following the voting procedure of cities with more than 1,000 residents, municipal councilors Seats for arrondissements councilors are then distributed according to the same rules between list members not appointed to council. All the councilors elected in each electoral area form the council of the arrondissement. The town of Paris is, since 1964, a unique case, being at the same time both a commune and a department, it is represented by only one deliberative assembly, called the council of Paris, which has both the role of a municipal council and a general council. The Mayor of Paris also serves as Chairman of the General Council of the department of Paris.

The municipal council is chaired by the Mayor, and collectively has the legislative authority on the territory of the commune.

The mayor, primarily responsible for preparing and implementing the decisions of the council, is elected by the council, using a two-round system. Since the 2008 municipal elections, the election of deputy mayors in municipalities with more than 3,500 inhabitants is carried out using "party list by absolute majority, without splitting or preferential voting." On each of the lists of candidates for these positions, "the gap between the number of candidates of each gender can not be more than one", to ensure balanced representation of both sexes.

The municipal council has authority to regulate the affairs of the community through its deliberations. The council is empowered to make all decisions regarding communal management, except where the law specifically supports the mayor or other administrative authority.

The council makes decisions on the use of property in the municipality.

The council votes on the municipal budget, prepared by the mayor and his deputies, and local tax rates, creates and removes the jobs of municipal officials, allows acquisitions and disposals of the commune, approves loans and grants for the town, fixed tariffs for communal services and parking on the street.

The council adopts the local development plans, establishes primary and nursery schools.

The town owns public domain property (schools, municipal roads, gardens, etc.) and, if applicable, a private area. The public domain is protected by rules of inalienability and the law provides for sanctions to protect this property.

The council meets at least once per quarter. In practice, it generally meets once a month.

The city council adopts its rules of procedure within the rule of law. The mayor will call the council to order whenever he considers it necessary and also to build the democratic legitimacy of this assembly elected by direct universal suffrage.

City council members are convened by relatively restrictive rules, indeed, the general code of local government imposes a minimum time to call for a meeting well in advance, so the council can prepare for the meeting. In light of this city council members may, if they think that they information, request submission of additional documents. This practice is often cause for cancellation of the city council.

Quorum rules are respected: there must be a minimum number of representatives to be present in order for a decision to be valid. In case the quorum is not obtained, the mayor must postpone deliberation and convene a new council for which no quorum shall be required in order to not block the functioning of the institution.

Any citizen can challenge and argue with the council. In the event of serious malfunction, the council may request a dissolution decree from the Council of Ministers.

The municipal council of each commune elects the Mayor of the town. The mayor presides over the council, which organizes the work and performs the deliberations.

The Mayor also has significant powers and their own responsibilities, such as the responsibility for the activities of the municipal police, or the responsibility for the management of municipal council staff.

There are certain communes with child councils and/or youth councils with multiple names (municipal youth councils, local youth councils, youth forum etc.).

The first municipal youth councils in France were created between 1963 and 1967 (including Sedan and a score of other medium-sized cities). These experiments have not experienced the same durability or the same media that children's councils Schiltigheim (Bas-Rhin) in 1979, often presented as the first French political experience. Other councils have been created in 1980, but especially since 1990 and early 2000s.

These informal bodies are created by municipal councils. Their mode of operation varies by commune, the age (9 to 25) and the input mode (election town hall, schools, designation within representative associations, volunteering, etc. mixed system).

These spaces are advisory (its deliberations carry no regulatory power if they are not approved by resolution of the elected council or mayor), but also allows young people to act for their country and take action. Formally, they are often chaired or served by a municipal councilor.

Each community that wishes to have a children's or youth council freely determines the operating rules of and operates according to the fundamental principles of the Republic, such as principle of non-discrimination. Usually they meet in committee or group projects 1–2 times per month and plenary 2–3 times a year. The average tenure is about 2 years.

According to the National associate of children's and youth councils [ fr ] which includes municipalities that have created one of these groups, there are currently 2000 groups nationally.

Some municipalities have established senior councils, operating according to rules similar to youth councils: for example, Antony, Hauts-de-Seine.

The Loi du 5 avril 1884 sur l'organisation municipale (English : Law of 5 April 1884 on Municipal Organization) is a foundational law of the French Republic. It established the framework for the operation of French communes, marking a significant step toward decentralization in France.

France has historically been a centralized state, with centralization peaking during the First French Empire. Under the Third Republic, while still centralized, there was a push to clarify the organization of communes to complement an 1871 law that outlined the structure of departments. Republicans, notably Léon Gambetta, advocated for revitalizing municipal governance, a cause he championed in his 1869 Belleville speech.

In 1884, a bill was drafted to balance France's centralized system with greater autonomy for communes, aiming to make them the heart of local political life. The bill, proposed by Émile de Marcère, who was cautious about decentralization but supportive of local autonomy, was thoroughly debated in the Senate, where local government representation played a key role.

The 1884 law established a uniform legal framework for all French communes, modeled on the departmental structure. It defined the roles of local public actors, centering on a deliberative body (the municipal council), responsible for passing resolutions, and an executive body (the mayor), tasked with preparing and implementing these resolutions. The mayor was given a dual role as both a representative of the commune and an agent of the state.

The law introduced universal suffrage for electing municipal councils, with councilors serving four-year terms (extended to six years in 1929). The mayor is elected by the municipal council, acting as the commune’s representative.

Article 74 of the law stipulates that the roles of mayor, deputy mayor, and municipal councilor are unpaid, though expenses incurred during special mandates may be reimbursed. Municipal councils may allocate funds from ordinary communal resources for mayoral representation expenses.

The 1884 law is notable for establishing the principle of local self-governance for territorial entities. Article 61, paragraph 1 states: "The municipal council regulates the affairs of the commune through its deliberations." This granted communes a general competence clause, significantly expanding their previous powers.

Despite the principle of self-governance, the law maintained state oversight through the prefect, who supervised the mayor and communal acts. However, in a republican spirit, it reduced state control over municipal councils, introducing safeguards against the executive’s ability to dismiss mayors (Article 86) and limiting the dissolution of municipal councils (Articles 43–45).

The 1884 municipal law, often referred to as the "great republican charter of communes," was a pivotal step toward decentralization. Codified in the Code des communes, it remained in effect until the Loi du 2 mars 1982, which marked France’s first comprehensive decentralization reform.

The Musée des Plans-Reliefs (French pronunciation: [ myze de plɑ̃ ʁəljɛf ]) is a museum of military models located within the Hôtel des Invalides in the 7th arrondissement of Paris, France.

The construction of models dates to 1668, when François-Michel le Tellier, Marquis de Louvois and minister of war to Louis XIV, began a collection of three-dimensional models of fortified cities for military purposes, known as ' plans-relief '. The models gave particular attention to the city fortifications and topographic features such as hills and harbors. In 1700, Louis XIV installed the collection in the Louvre. Initially the models were constructed in the field, by military engineers, but in 1743, two central workshops were established for their construction in Béthune and Lille. A large number of models were built during and after the War of the Austrian Succession (1741–1748) to represent newly captured sites. The collection was updated in 1754, but then fell into some disuse; the final models built under the Ancien Régime were those of Saint-Omer (1758), and the fort Saint-Philippe aux Baléares (1759).

In 1774, the collection was nearly destroyed when its Louvre gallery was rededicated to paintings, but was in 1777, moved to the Hôtel des Invalides where it remains to this day. Under Napoleon, a new set of models was built, including Luxembourg (1802), La Spezia (1811), Brest (1811), and Cherbourg (1811–1813). In 1814, 17 models mainly of German cities were taken to Berlin. Some were replaced and their production then continued until about 1870, when it drew to a close with the disappearance of fortifications bastionnées. The collection was declared a historical monument in 1927, and the museum established in 1943.

All told, some 260 plans-reliefs were created between 1668 and 1870, representing about 150 fortified sites. Today, 112 models are conserved by this museum, of which 15 are kept in the Musée des Beaux-Arts de Lille. Additional models among those taken by the Prussians were later given to the cities of Strasbourg and Landau in der Pfalz. At present, the museum displays 28 plans-reliefs of fortifications along the English Channel, the Atlantic and Mediterranean coasts, and the Pyrenees. It also contains presentations on construction and use of the plans-reliefs.

In 2012, part of the museum's collections were presented at the Grand Palais, as part of the exhibition La France en relief: masterpieces from the collection of relief plans from Louis XIV to Napoleon III, from January 18 as of February 17, 2012.

The museum is open daily except the first Monday of each month; an admission fee is charged.

The Musée Saint-Remi is an archeology and art museum in Reims, France. The museum is housed in the former Abbey of Saint-Remi, founded in the sixth century and which had been keeping since 1099 the relics of Saint Remigius (the Bishop of Reims who converted Frankish king Clovis I to Christianity in 496). The Basilica of Saint-Remi, adjacent to it and consecrated in 1049, was its abbey church. Both buildings have been listed as part of a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1991 because of their outstanding architecture and importance in the early French monarchy.

The obscure origins of the great abbey at Reims lie in a little 6th-century chapel dedicated to Saint Christopher. The abbey's success was founded on its acquisition of the relics of St. Remy in 553; subsequently gifts poured in upon it from pious donors. By the 9th century the abbey possessed about 700 domains and was perhaps the most richly endowed in France. It seems probable that secular priests were the first guardians of the relics, but were succeeded by the Benedictines. From 780 to 945 the archbishops of Reims served as its abbots. At the abbey Charlemagne received Pope Leo III.

In 1005 the abbot Aviard undertook to rebuild the church of St-Remy, and for twenty years the work went on uninterruptedly before vaulting collapsed, no doubt from insufficient buttressing. Abbot Theodoric erected the magnificent surviving basilica which Pope Leo IX dedicated in 1049 and granted many privileges and he used the occasion of the visit to hold the reforming Council of Reims. The abbey library and its schools were of such high repute that Pope Alexander III wrote a commendatory letter to the Abbot Peter, which survives.

The years of around 1170 to 1180 brought further rebuilding, this time to the choir. The purpose of replacing the short eastern section of the Romanesque church was to create a grander and more spacious interior for the shrine of St Remy. The shrine was detached from its previous location, next to the altar, and moved further east.

Among the illustrious later abbots, all drawn from the higher nobility, may be mentioned: Henri de Lorraine (1622–1641), who affiliated the abbey to the Congregation of St. Maur ; Jacques-Nicolas Colbert (1665), later archbishop of Rouen ; Charles Maurice Le Tellier (1680–1710); and Joseph de Rochechouart, appointed abbot by the king in 1745.

Many valuable objects from the abbey were looted in the French Revolutionary period and the Holy Ampulla of the coronation of the kings of France kept in the abbey was destroyed in 1793, but the 12th-century stained glass remains.

The Abbey of Saint-Remi, together with the nearby cathedral of Notre-Dame de Reims and Palace of Tau, became a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1991.

The museum contains tapestries from the 16th century donated by the archbishop Robert de Lenoncourt (uncle of the cardinal of the same name), marble capitals from the fourth century AD, furniture, jewellery, pottery, weapons and glasswork from the sixth to eighth centuries, medieval sculpture, the façade of the 13th-century musicians' House, remnants from an earlier abbey building, and also exhibits of Gallo-Roman arts and crafts and a room of pottery, jewellery and weapons from Gallic civilization, as well as an exhibit of items from the Palaeolithic to the Neolithic periods. Another section of the museum features a permanent military exhibition.

Myriam El Khomri (born 18 February 1978) is a former French politician of the Socialist Party (PS) who served as Minister of Labour in the government of Prime Minister Manuel Valls from 2015 to 2017.

El Khomri was born on 18 February 1978 in Rabat. Her father is Moroccan and her mother is from Brittany. Until the age of nine, she lived in Tangier. She then moved with her family to Thouars and then to Mérignac.

In 1995, El Khomri studied public law at the Montesquieu University. She financed her studies with scholarships and holding several jobs. In 1999, she moved to Paris and continued her law studies at Pantheon-Sorbonne University, where she obtained a specialized graduate diploma (DESS) in political science (political administration) in 2001.

In March 2008, El Khomri was elected as a councillor in the 18th arrondissement of Paris, on the Daniel Vaillant - Bertrand Delanoë 's list. She has since been a member of the Council of Paris and from 2008 to 2011, deputy mayor, in charge of all questions relating to child protection and specialized prevention, then from February 18, 2011, to August 27, 2014, date of her entry into government, deputy mayor responsible for all matters relating to prevention and security.

On April 21, 2008, El Khomri was appointed representative of the Council of Paris on the board of directors of the social action center of the City of Paris and then on May 10, 2008, on the supervisory board of the Bullion Pediatrics and Rehabilitation Hospital and on May 26, 2008, to the pupil surveillance committee of the City of Paris.

El Khomri supported Martine Aubry during the socialist presidential primary in 2011. During the legislative elections of 2012, she was the substitute for Christophe Caresche, deputy for the 18th constituency of Paris.

During the 2014 municipal election campaign in Paris, El Khomri was one of Anne Hidalgo 's spokespersons. Approached by the latter to take over from Daniel Vaillant as mayor of the 18th arrondissement of Paris, the outgoing mayor preferred Éric Lejoindre. She was reappointed as deputy mayor.

El Khomri was appointed, from August 26, 2014, Secretary of State for City Policy under Minister of the city, Youth and Sports Patrick Kanner in the second government of Prime Minister Manuel Valls.

The policy having been defined by the law constructed by François Lamy in the Ayrault government, El Khomri focused on communications. She made its first public appearance in Nantes on September 7, 2014, on the occasion of the foundation of the collective "Pas sans nous", coordination of groups of working-class neighborhoods and then increased travel in the field, especially in municipalities run by the National Front.

On September 2, 2015, El Khomri was appointed Minister of Labor, Employment, Vocational Training and Social Dialogue, after the resignation of François Rebsamen. Her appointment increased the contingent of women in the cabinet to a majority for the first time in the country's history. As when she was appointed to the Secretary of State for the city, El Khomri was the subject of critical comments, sometimes racist and sexist, on social networks.

In her capacity as minister, El Khomri commissioned a study in 2015 that warned about the dangers of “info-obesity,” suggesting that using a smartphone to check work emails at all hours of the day can cause burnout, sleeplessness and relationship problems.

Most notably, El Khomri was responsible for presenting at the beginning of 2016 a controversial bill reforming the legislation relating to work, with in particular a flexibilisation of working time, the bases of the future personal activity account, measures on occupational medicine and provisions on the restructuring of professional branches. She planned to include provisions to protect self-employed workers on collaborative platforms like Uber. The law sparked strike action led by Philippe Martinez and others, with much of the anger targeted at El Khomri. In 2016, the French cabinet gave Prime Minister Valls permission to bypass parliament and enact a sweeping set of labour reforms known widely as the El Khomri law. Later that year, El Khomri announced that the number of people out of work in France had fallen to the lowest point in almost four years.

On December 8, 2016, El Khomri was chosen by the PS 's members as candidate for the 2017 legislative elections in the 18th constituency of Paris. Ahead of the party's 2017 primaries, she endorsed Manuel Valls as the Socialists' candidate for the presidential election later that year. She eventually called on her supporters to vote for Emmanuel Macron in the second round. In return, Macron's La République En Marche! did not field a candidate to challenge her in the legislative elections. She announced that she wanted to carry the values of the left within the presidential majority and faced Pierre-Yves Bournazel, LR 's candidate, who also said he supported the presidential majority. She was beaten at the end of the second round, with 53.6% against 46.4%.

After leaving government, El Khomri moved to consulting by creating in November 2017 a business consultancy, MEK Conseil. In May 2018, she also became a senior advisor to Lee Hecht Harrison Altedia, and in March 2019, she joined the insurance brokerage group Siaci Saint Honoré as director of the consulting division at its consulting and strategy subsidiary S2H Consulting.

In March 2018, El Khomri performed with Roselyne Bachelot and Marlène Schiappa a representation of The Vagina Monologues at the Bobino theater. The profits of the show went to the Feminist Collective against rape.

In July 2019, the Minister of Solidarity and Health Agnès Buzyn appointed El Khomri to head a mission on the attractiveness of professions in the elderly, with the aim of combating the shortage of personnel in this sector.

Mâconnais (endonym : Mâconês) is a dialect of Arpitan (Franco-Provençal) spoken in the region of Mâcon, in the south of the departament of Saône-et-Loire, region of Bourgogne-Franche-Comté, France. It is a transitional dialect between the domains of Franco-Provençal and the langues d’oïl.

Due to a strong influence from French, it is sometimes classified as an oïl dialect. However, the majority of linguistic studies and institutions classify it as a Franco-Provençal variety, as is the case with the Linguasphere Observatory.

Medieval and modern authors from Mâconnais were responsible for the development of a literary tradition in the Mâconnais dialect. These texts are regarded as writings in the Franco-Provençal language, due to the presence of a Franco-Provençal superstratum.

Although the dialect is now rarely spoken, it continues to survive through the efforts of cultural associations dedicated to preserving Burgundy 's linguistic heritage. The commune of Tournus is considered to lie along the boundary between the langues d’oïl and Franco-Provençal.

Mère (French: [ mɛʁ ], lit. ' mother ') is an honorary title given to talented female professional cooks, many of whom had no formal training, in France during the 18th, 19th, and 20th centuries. Between 1759 and the end of the 20th century multiple women have been called Mère. Their work turned the city of Lyon and its environs into the gastronomic center of France and the world, and the most famous of them, Mère Brazier, is regarded as "the mother of modern French cooking".

The first mentions of a Mère were in 1759 when Mère Guy, who cooked at an inn on the banks of the Rhône, became famous for her eel stew and in the early 1800s Mère Brigousse in the Charpennes district became known for her dumplings. Since then multiple talented female cooks, many of whom had no formal training, have been called by the title Mère. The practice of calling female cooks 'Mère' gained popularity during the 19th century, when gastronomic societies were popular, and reached its peak in the interwar years when talented cooks who had been working for wealthy bourgeois families were losing their positions due to changing household economics and automobile tourism was developing, so they set up in business as restaurateurs.

Lyon is known as the "cradle" of the Mères, and the Mères had a profound effect on Lyonnaise cuisine, according to Curnonsky turning Lyon into the food capital of France and the world. According to Jean Vitaux, the Mères of Lyon "shaped an original, feminine and regional definition of gastronomy." Writing for Medium, Francois de Melogue said "(they) brought the gastronomic spotlight to Lyon, the undisputed gastronomical capital of France. Their influence and impact helped define and shape classic French cooking in modern times." According to Eater, their work "secured the city’s reputation for exceptional cuisine."

The first mention of a Mère of Lyons was in 1759 when Mère Guy, who cooked at an inn near the Rhône in Mulatières and became famous for her eel stew or eel matelote and her crawfish gratin. In the 1800s her granddaughter also became known as Mère Guy, "La Génie" (The Spirit). The restaurant, at 35 Quai Jean-Jacques Rousseau, was awarded three Michelin stars in 1936.

In the 1830s in the Charpennes quarter, Mère Brigousse or Brugousse, also known as La Mère des Amoureux (mother of lovers), was famous for a dish called Tétons de Vénus (breasts of Venus), a dish of giant dumplings popular among groups of young men dining stag for bachelor parties.

Mère Filloux or Fillioux, born Françoise Fayolle in 1865 in Puy-de-Dôme, is called La Reine des Poulardes and Empress of the Lyon Mothers. She was the first of the Mères whose recipes were still in use as of the early 21st century. She moved to Lyon in 1890 from Cunlhat and was hired as a cook by a local businessman. She created the dish poulet demi deuil (half-mourning chicken), which featured black truffles inserted under the white skin of the local breed of chicken and is considered a classic of French cuisine. She was also noted for her truffle-flavored cream soup and poached chicken, artichoke hearts stuffed with foie gras, quenelles and crawfish, and lobster with shallots, tomatoes, wine, and brandy. She claimed to have never made more than these five dishes, saying, "I know how to cook them, and I will never make any others." She married Louis Filloux in 1900 and bought a restaurant at 73 Rue Duquesne in Lyon's 6th arrondissement, where frequent customers were Gertrude Stein and Alice B. Toklas, who called her "an artist" at carving a chicken. She hired only women to work in her kitchen. She retired in 1925 and is estimated to have carved a half million chickens during her career. Near the end of her career she became such a celebrated cook that female cooks outside of Lyon started to be called Mère.

Born Eugénie Brazier in 1895, Mère Brazier began working as a maid and then as a cook for a family around 1914 or 1916 at the age of 21. She later worked for Mère Filloux, though Filloux was "endlessly critical." In 1921 at age 26 she bought a former grocery at 12 Rue Royale and turned it into a restaurant with 15 seats which opened in 1922. Like her mentor Filloux she also specialized in poulet demi deuil. The mayor of Lyon, Édouard Herriot, was a frequent customer. She expanded her restaurant but handed it over to her son, moved to the small nearby village of Col de la Luère, and in 1932 opened another restaurant there. Michelin awarded it two stars the year it opened and three the following year, making her the first woman to hold three Michelin stars. The original restaurant was also awarded three stars that year, and Mère Brazier became the first person of either sex to hold six Michelin stars. She trained other Michelin star winners, including Paul Bocuse, who worked for her at the restaurant in Col de la Luère and also specialized in half-mourning chicken, and Bernard Pacaud. She died in 1977. The original restaurant was in 2001 still being operated by her granddaughter. According to the Independent, Mère Brazier is regarded as "the mother of modern French cooking."

Mère Bourgeois, born Marie Humbert in 1870, was hired as a cook for a wealthy family. She married Andre Bourgeois and they bought a former inn in Priay near Lyon. She was known for dishes based on local fish and game, including a lark pate and another pate known as le pâté chaud de la mère Bourgeois, which was internationally known. Herriot was a frequent customer. In 1923 the Club de Cent (Club of One Hundred), a gastronomic society, recognized her. She held three Michelin stars from 1933 until her death in 1937. The restaurant as of 2001 was still in operation.

Mère Léa Bidaut was born in Creusot in 1908 and worked during her teens for wealthy families. She was a cook at a restaurant for four years before opening La Voûte in 1943 on the Rhône in Lyon's 2nd arrondissement. Her specialty was a sauerkraut with champagne, but when other restaurants in the area started to copy it, she took it off her menu and focussed on regional specialities such as tried tripe with chervil, pike quenelles, Lyons salad, baked cardoon with bone marrow, and bugnes. Her menu was not printed and changed daily. She retired at 74 and died in 1997. As of 2001 the restaurant is still in operation.

Mère Castaing, born Paulette Penel in 1911, married Raymond Castaing in 1933 after the two met apprenticing at Hotel Cheynet in Alboussiere in Ardeche. In 1946 the couple opened Beau Rivage in Coindrieu. Her specialties included poached trout, eel stew, and pike mousseline. Mère Castaing was awarded a Michelin star in 1954 and a second in 1964; she held them until she sold the business in 1988. As of 2001 the restaurant was still in operation.

Mère Bizolon was born Marie-Joseph Clotilde Thévenet in 1871 in Coligny. She married and moved to Lyon. During World War I she set up free refreshment stations for soldiers in transit. After the war she turned her husband's shoemaking shop into a restaurant. In 1925 Herriot awarded her a Legion of Honor. In 1940 she was murdered; the crime went unsolved. After World War II a street in Lyon's 2nd arrondissement was named for her.

Other Mères de Lyon include Mère Jean, Mère Vittet, Mère Poupon, La Grande Marcelle, Mère Charles, La Mèlie, and the cheesemonger Mère Richard.

Mère Poulard, born Annette Boutiaut in 1851 in Nevers, started working as a maid for Édouard Corroyer and travelled with him and his family to Mont-Saint-Michel when he was commissioned to restore the Mont-Saint-Michel Abbey. She married Victor Poulard in 1873, and they opened a restaurant where she served a souffle-style omelet that became famous as the omelette de la Mère Poulard. The restaurant, now known as La Mère Poulard, as of 2020 was still in operation.

Mère Blanc, born Élisa Gervais in 1883, married Adolphe Blanc, and the couple took over his parents' restaurant in Vonnas in Bresse. Mère Blanc used many of her own mother's recipes. Her specialties included Bresse chicken, the dish that made her famous and earned her her first Michelin star. In 1930 she was given first prize in the Touring Club de France cooking competition. The restaurant was awarded a Michelin star in 1931 and two in 1932. The celebrated French food critic Curnonsky called her "the best cook in the world" in 1933. In 1934 her son and daughter-in-law took over the restaurant. She died in 1949. In 1968 her grandson Georges Blanc took over; as of 1982 it was still called La Mere Blanc and had received its third Michelin star. Currently called Restaurant Georges Blanc, as of 2020 it is still in operation with her grandson as chef.

Les Mères Allard were a mother-in-law and daughter-in-law in Paris. Marthe Meuriot married Marcel Allard in 1920, and together they opened a bistro in the 13th arrondissement. Her specialties included Burgundy stew, pot-au-feu, and jugged rabbit. They moved to Rue Saint-André-des-Arts in the 5th arrondissement and she continued to produce Burgundian dishes such as poached pike with beurre blanc, roast guinea fowl, and lamb stew. After World War II her son and his wife, Fernande, took over, and Fernande also became known as Mère Allard. Her specialties included pâté en croûte, cassoulet, veal with onions and bacon, lamb stew, lentils with salt pork, braised beef with carrots, and chicken in red wine. As of 2001 the restaurant was still in operation.

Mère Crouzier was born in Périgord and from 1945 to 1986 worked at La Croix-Blanche, one of the oldest inns in France, in Chaumont-sur-Tharonne in Sologne. The restaurant, which was owned by her husband's parents, has had female chefs throughout its history, starting in 1779. She developed her specialty, rabbit Albicocco, in 1969.

Mère Adrienne Biasin, born in a small village near Parme, opened Chez la Vielle at 37 Rue de l'Arbre-Sec in Paris when she was 25 and operated it from 1958 thru 1993, initially serving mostly workers from les Halles. Jacques Maniere and Raymond Oliver were frequent customers. She became well known after Phillippe Couderc, an influential food critic, wrote about her in his column. The restaurant had only 30 seats and reservations were booked three months in advance. Her Christmas menu was published by Marie Claire in 1976 and she afterward complained about the deluge of new customers, saying "They all want only these dishes. They do not understand that food must be different every day." She had a television series for two years and wrote a column for Madame Figaro. As of 2001 the restaurant is still in operation but Mère Adrienne had retired.

Mère Barale was born in Nice in 1916. In 1933 at age 17 she took over the operation of her parents' restaurant, Chez Paulin et Ma, in the Riquier neighborhood. Her specialities were traditional Niçoise dishes including trouchia, an omelet with bay, cheese, and chard, tourta de blea, a chard pie, pissaldiera, a pizza-like onion tart, estocaficada, a tomato-based fish stew, doba a la nissarda, a beef stew served with ravioli, and socca, a crisp garbanzo-flour griddled crepe. Nice-Matin called her "the most delicious monument of Nice's heritage." As of 2001 she was still running the restaurant. Mere Maury (born Marie-Louise Gélibert in 1863 in Bourg-de-Péage), married Annet Maury in 1885. In 1894 she inherited her parents' cafe and added ravioli to the menu. She died in 1941.

Ménessaire (French pronunciation: [ men(ə)sɛʁ ] ; Burgundian : Meunsiâre) is a rural commune in the Côte-d'Or department in the Bourgogne-Franche-Comté region in central-east France.

A Côte-d'Or exclave on the border between the Nièvre and Saône-et-Loire departments, Ménessaire is part of Morvan Regional Natural Park. It comprises the Mont de Gien, the highest point in Côte-d'Or, at 721 metres.

On 25 May 1944 at the end of World War II, amid the Liberation of France, Ménessaire was one of the communes in the Morvan attacked by the German occupying forces because several of its inhabitants supported the French Resistance. The Duc family had sheltered a number of Maquisards, an act for which their farm was burnt down by the Germans, after the Maquisards had fled.

The méreau (plural: méreaux ; obsolete spelling: merel, merelles, marelles, mereaulx) was a token, most often made of metal but sometimes leather or parchment, used in France during the Late Middle Ages and Reformation.

Its name goes back to Latin : merere, "to deserve". Méreaux emerged in churches as tokens that entitled clergy to receive certain amount of bread or other food in substantial amounts (part of which was supposed to be later distributed among the poor). In the 15th century there were méreaux of high denominations: 5, 20, 30 and 45 deniers, and priests could exchange them for real coins.

Méreaux are similar to Notgeld by their function. Later on méreaux came into use by medieval guilds and professional corporations until their decline at the end of the 18th century. After abolition of the Edict of Nantes, Calvinists provided méreaux to their members traveling to other Calvinist communities to distinguish them from Catholic spies. Méreaux entitled their bearers to a Holy Communion and should be collected by the priest serving the Communion.

Collecting méreaux is called merellophilia.

Nadine Morano (née Pucelle ; born 6 November 1963) is a French politician of the Republicans who has been serving as Member of the European Parliament since 2014. She was previously a member of the National Assembly, and a minister under François Fillon.

Morano was born Nadine Yvonne Pucelle on 6 November 1963 in Nancy. Her father was a truck driver. Her mother, Monique Generelli, was a switchboard operator, daughter of a Piedmontese mason from Verbano-Cusio-Ossola. Her original last name was changed to Pugelle by a ministerial decree in 1976.

Morano served as a member of the National Assembly from 2002 to 2008, representing Meurthe-et-Moselle. In parliament, she was a member of the Committee on Cultural Affairs (2002-2007) and the Defense Committee (2007-2008).

Morano served as the Deputy Minister for Apprenticeship and Vocational Training under the Minister of Labour, Employment and Health, Xavier Bertrand. She was previously Secretary of State for Family in the government of François Fillon on 18 March 2008.

Morano was elected Member of the European Parliament in the 2014 European elections, representing East France. She has since been serving on the Committee on Industry, Research and Energy. In addition to her committee assignments, she is a member of the Parliament's delegation for relations with the Pan-African Parliament (PAP).

Ahead of the 2015 French regional elections, the Republicans' chair Nicolas Sarkozy removed Morano – then considered one of his staunchest allies – from the party's list after she state that France was a "white race" country that must stay that way.

Later that year, Morano announced her intention to compete for a presidential nomination in the Republicans' primaries for the 2017 presidential elections. She later supported François Fillon as her party's candidate before urging him to withdraw his bid amid the so-called Fillon affair. In the Republicans' 2017 leadership election, she endorsed Laurent Wauquiez.

Ahead of the 2022 presidential elections, Morano publicly declared her support for Michel Barnier as the Republicans' candidate.

In 2023, the Republicans' chairman Éric Ciotti appointed Morano as member of his shadow cabinet and put her in charge of the party's immigration policies.

She was re-elected as an MEP following the 2024 European Parliament election in France.

Morano is a frequent user of social media whose outspoken style and running commentary are a frequent source of mockery. French daily Le Monde has created a web page, dubbed the "Moranator," that generates real phrases the politician has used and allows visitors to post them to their Twitter pages.

In September 2015, Morano quoted General Charles de Gaulle on On n'est pas couché, saying that "France is a Judeo-Christian country, of white race". This resulted in her removal as head of the Les Républicains (the former UMP) list for the regional elections in Meurthe-et-Moselle.

In 2019, Morano faced allegations of racism when she criticized the way government spokesperson Sibeth Ndiaye dressed as "circus clothes", adding that Ndiaye became a French citizen "only" three years before, "clearly with big gaps over French culture, unworthy of her government post". Gilles Le Gendre, who chaired the La République En Marche group in the National Assembly at the time, called on Morano to withdraw her comments and apologize or be prosecuted.

In 2020, Morano stated that French actress Aïssa Maïga, who was born in Senegal, should "go back to Africa " if she "was not happy with seeing so many white people in France".

On 6 November 2007, Morano was among the guests invited to the state dinner hosted by U.S. President George W. Bush in honor of President Nicolas Sarkozy at the White House.

Morano has been divorced; she has two sons and a daughter. One of her sons, Grégoire, died in July 2024 at the age of 33.

Najat Vallaud-Belkacem (French pronunciation: [ naʒat valo bɛlkasɛm ] ; Arabic: نجاة فالو بلقاسم ; Riffian-Berber : ⵏⴰⵊⴰⵜ ⴱⵍⵇⴰⵙⵎ; born 4 October 1977) is a Moroccan -born French former politician and jurist. A member of the Socialist Party (PS), serving in a number of ministerial positions during the presidency of François Hollande. She was the first woman to serve as Minister of Education, Higher Education, and Research, holding the position from 2014 to 2017 under Prime Ministers Manuel Valls and Bernard Cazeneuve.

In 2014, opinion polling found Vallaud-Belkacem to be among the most popular politicians in the country. Since 2020, she has been the director of the One Campaign in France.

Second in a family of seven children, Vallaud-Belkacem was born on 4 October 1977 in the Moroccan countryside in Bni Chiker, a village near Nador in the Rif region. Her grandmothers were respectively Algerian and Spanish, both married to Moroccans. She spent her early years growing up on her grandparents' farm.

In 1982 Vallaud-Belkacem joined her father, a construction worker, with her mother and elder sister Fatiha. From then on, she grew up in a poor neighborhood of Abbeville, a town in northern France, and then in a suburb of Amiens. She got French nationality at 18.

Vallaud-Belkacem graduated from the Institut d'études politiques de Paris (Sciences Po Paris) in 2002. At Sciences Po, she met Boris Vallaud, whom she married on 27 August 2005.

Vallaud-Belkacem joined the Socialist Party in 2002 and the team of Lyon mayor Gérard Collomb in 2003, leading actions to strengthen local democracy, the fight against discrimination, promotion of citizen rights, and access to employment and housing.

Elected to the Regional Council of Rhone-Alpes in 2004, she chaired the Culture Commission until she resigned in 2008. In 2005, she became adviser to the Socialist Party. In 2005 and 2006 she was a columnist for the cultural programme C'est tout vu on Télé Lyon Municipale alongside Stéphane Cayrol.

In March 2008 Vallaud-Belkacem was elected conseillère générale of the Rhône department in the cantonal elections with 58.52% of the votes in the second round, under the banner of the Socialist Party in the canton of Lyon-XIII. From 2008 until 2014, she also served as a councillor of the city of Lyon, responsible for major events, youth and community life.

In February 2007, Vallaud-Belkacem joined Ségolène Royal 's presidential campaign team as a spokeswoman, serving alongside Vincent Peillon and Arnaud Montebourg. In 2009, Vallaud-Belkacem once again served as Royal's spokesperson ahead of the 2011 French Socialist Party presidential primary, this time alongside Delphine Batho. Following François Hollande 's victory in the presidential primary, Vallaud-Belkacem became his campaign spokeswoman for the 2012 presidential election.

On 16 May 2012, Vallaud-Belkacem was appointed by President Hollande as Minister of Women's Rights and spokeswoman for the government in the Ayrault government and later in the First Valls Government. In the First Valls Government, she subsequently served as Minister of City Affairs (2 April 2012 to 25 August 2014) and Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports (2 April 2012 to 25 August 2014).

In her capacity as minister, Vallaud-Belkacem made headlines in 2012 when she introduced anti-sexism courses with presentations on stereotyping, inappropriate language, wage disparity and domestic violence for her fellow cabinet members. That same year, she announced that she wanted to abolish prostitution in France and in Europe; following her initiative, the National Assembly later voted in favour to give France some of the most restrictive legislation on prostitution in Europe.

In 2013, she declared as officially revoked an old bylaw requiring women in Paris to ask permission from city authorities before "dressing as men", including wearing trousers (with exceptions for those "holding a bicycle handlebar or the reins of a horse").

Vallaud-Belkacem was chosen to serve as Minister of Education, Higher Education, and Research on 27 August 2014, becoming the first woman to hold the role.

In late 2014, shortly after her appointment as Minister of Education, Higher Education and Research, opinion polls ranked Vallaud-Belkacem only second in popularity among French politicians, after Alain Juppé. In early 2015, The New York Times described her as "one of the rising stars" within her party. By the end of Hollande's presidency, she was one of the few officials who had been a member of his various governments throughout his time in office.

After 15 years in public office, Vallaud-Belkacem decided to take a break from politics in June 2017. She supported the presidential campaign of Benoît Hamon in the 2017 French presidential election. Despite speculation, she announced that she would not seek the leadership of the Socialist Party at the Aubervilliers Congress in 2018. Instead, she publicly endorsed Olivier Faure as new chairman.

In March 2018, Vallaud-Belkacem joined research and polling firm Ipsos as CEO of its Global Affairs division. The department carries out research (on impact, public policy evaluation...) that helps international institutions, NGOs, international foundations and other actors which act in the global public interest better make decisions.

After two years at Ipsos, Vallaud-Belkacem announced in 2020 that she would be joining the One Campaign as director for France. In addition, she became the president of France terre d’asile in 2022.

In addition, Vallaud-Belkacem launched and co-directs the Gender Equality and Public Policy programme at the Paris Institute of Political Studies. She also heads Raison de Plus, a collection of progressive essays published by Fayard.

In 2020, Vallaud-Belkacem was appointed as an affiliated professor at the Mohammed VI Polytechnic University in Ben Guerir, Morocco.

Vallaud-Belkacem supports having the French government force Twitter to filter out hate speech that is illegal under French law, such as speech that is homophobic. Regarding same-sex marriage in France, she has stated that its legalisation is a matter of "historic progress".

In 2016, Vallaud-Belkacem was publicly criticized by Prime Minister Manuel Valls after she spoke out against the government's local decrees that ban women from wearing full-body swimsuits – so-called burkinis – on the beach, arguing the ban was "dangerous for national cohesion."

In 2015, former president Nicolas Sarkozy was criticized for appealing to racist sentiments when he, without using explicitly racist words, singled out the two non-white female ministers – Vallaud-Belkacem and Christiane Taubira – in a largely white government for charges of gross incompetence.

In 2000, Belkacem met her husband, Boris Vallaud, at Sciences Po Paris where they were both studying. The pair married on 27 August 2005 in Hontanx, and Belkacem officially hyphenated her husband's family name in front of hers. In 2008, the couple welcomed twins, a boy and a girl: Louis-Adel and Nour-Chloé. As a symbol of the couple's mixed origins, the twins' names each contain one French and one North-African name.

Vallaud-Belkacem describes herself as a "non-practicing Muslim".

The name France comes from Latin Francia (' land of the Franks ').

Originally it applied to the whole Empire of the Franks, extending from southern France to eastern Germany. Modern France is still called Frankreich in German and similar names in some other Germanic languages (such as Frankrijk in Dutch), which means "Frank Reich ", the Realm of the Franks.

Before being named France, the land was called Gaul (Latin : Gallia ; French : Gaule). This name continued to be used even after the beginning of the reign of the Franks' Kings Clovis I, Charles Martel, Pepin the Short, and Charlemagne. In fact, for as long as the cultural elites of Europe used Latin predominantly, the name Gallia continued to be used alongside the name France. In English usage, the words Gaul and Gaulish are used synonymously with Latin Gallia, Gallus and Gallicus. However the similarity of the names is probably coincidental; the English words are borrowed from French Gaule and Gaulois, which appear to have been borrowed themselves from Germanic walha-, the usual word for the non-Germanic-speaking peoples (Celtic-speaking and Latin-speaking indiscriminately) and the source for Welsh in English. The Germanic w is regularly rendered as gu / g in French (cf. guerre = war, garder = ward, Guillaume = William), and the diphthong au is the regular outcome of al before a following consonant (cf. cheval ~ chevaux). Gaule or Gaulle can hardly be derived from Latin Gallia, since g would become j before a (cf. gamba > jambe), and the diphthong au would be incomprehensible; the regular outcome of Latin Gallia would have been * Jaille in French.

Today, in modern French, the word Gaule is only used in a historical context. The only current use of the word is in the title of the leader of the French bishops, the archbishop of Lyon, whose official title is Primate of the Gauls (Primat des Gaules). Gaul is in the plural in the title, reflecting the three Gallic entities identified by the Romans (Celtica, Belgica, and Aquitania). The adjective gaulois (Gallic) is still sometimes used when a French person wants to stress some idiosyncrasies of the French people entrenched in history, such as nos ancêtres les Gaulois ("our ancestors the Gauls"), a phrase sometimes used in French when one wants to assert his own identity. During the Third Republic, the authorities often referred to notre vieille nation gauloise ("our old Gallic nation"), a case in which the adjective gaulois is used with a positive connotation. The word gallicisme is used sometimes in linguistic to express a specific form to the French language. In English, the word Gaul is never used in a modern context. The adjective Gallic is sometimes used to refer to French people, occasionally in a derisive and critical way, such as "Gallic pride". The Coq Gaulois (Gallic rooster in English) is also a national symbol of France, as for the French Football Federation. Astérix le Gaulois (Asterix, the Gaul) is a popular series of French comic books, following the exploits of a village of indomitable Gauls.

In Greek, France is still known as Γαλλία (Gallia). In Breton, meanwhile, the word Gall means "French", and France is Bro C'hall through Breton initial mutation; the second most common family name in Brittany is Le Gall, which is thought to indicate descendants of the inhabitants of Armorica from before the Bretons came from Britain, literally meaning "the Gaul". The word can be used to refer to the French nationality, speakers of French and/or Gallo; an archaic word sense also indicated the generic "foreigner"; the derivative galleg means "French" as an adjective and the French language as a noun. In Irish, meanwhile, the term gall originally also referred to the inhabitants of Gaul, but in the ninth century it was repurposed as "generic foreigner" and used to refer to Scandinavian invaders; it was used later in the twelfth century for the Anglo-Normans.

Under the reign of the Franks ' Kings Clovis I, Charles Martel, Pepin the Short, and Charlemagne, a country that included most of modern France and modern Germany was known as Kingdom of Franks or Francia. At the Treaty of Verdun in 843, the Frankish Empire was divided in three parts: West Francia (Francia Occidentalis), Middle Francia and East Francia (Francia Orientalis).

The rulers of Francia Orientalis, who soon claimed the imperial title and wanted to reunify the Frankish Empire, dropped the name Francia Orientalis and called their realm the Holy Roman Empire (see History of Germany). The history of the Franconian Empire lives on today in place names such as Frankfurt or Franconia (Franken in German). The kings of Francia Occidentalis successfully opposed this claim and managed to preserve Francia Occidentalis as an independent kingdom, distinct from the Holy Roman Empire.

Since the name Francia Orientalis had disappeared, there arose the habit to refer to Francia Occidentalis as Francia only, from which the word France is derived. The French state has been in continuous existence since 843 (except for a brief interruption in 885–887), with an unbroken line of heads of states since the first king of Francia Occidentalis (Charles the Bald) to the current president of the French Republic (Emmanuel Macron). Notably, in German, France is still called Frankreich, which literally means " Reich (empire) of the Franks". In order to distinguish it from the Frankish Empire of Charlemagne, France is called Frankreich, while the Frankish Empire is called Frankenreich.

The name of the Franks itself is said to come from the Proto-Germanic word * frankon which means " javelin, lance ". Another proposed etymology is that Frank means "the free men", based on the fact that the word frank meant "free" in the ancient Germanic languages. However, rather than the ethnic name of the Franks coming from the word frank ("free"), it is more probable that the word frank ("free") comes from the ethnic name of the Franks, the connection being that only the Franks, as the conquering class, had the status of freemen.

In a tradition going back to the 7th-century Chronicle of Fredegar, the name of the Franks itself is taken from Francio, one of the Germanic kings of Sicambri, c. 61 BCE, whose dominion extended all along those lands immediately joining the west-bank of the Rhine River, as far as Strasbourg and Belgium. This nation is also explicitly mentioned by Julius Caesar in his Notebooks on the Gallic War (Commentarii de Bello Gallico).

The name of the former French currency, the franc, comes from the words engraved on the coins of the Frankish King, Rex Francorum, meaning "King of the Franks" or "Roi des Francs" in French.

In most of the Romance languages, France is known by the word "France" or any of its derivatives, for example Francia in Italian and Spanish. This is also the origin of its name in English, "France", which derived from Old French.

In most of the Germanic languages (though notably not in English), France is known as the historical "Land of the Franks", for example Frankreich (Reich of the Franks) in German, Frankrijk (Rijk of the Franks) in Dutch, Frankrike (Rike of the Franks) in Swedish and Norwegian, Frankrig in Danish.

In a first meaning, "France" means the whole French Republic. In that case, "French" refers to a nationality.

The etymology and meaning of the word "France" and "French" have had strong bearings in the abolition of slavery and serfdom, first in Francia and then in its descendant country France.

Indeed, in 1315, King Louis X issued an edict reaffirming that slavery was illegal in France by proclaiming that "France signifies freedom" and that any slave setting foot on Metropolitan French ground should be freed.

Centuries later, this decree served as the basis for a group of crusading lawyers at the parlement of Paris, many of whom were members of the Society of the Friends of the Blacks, winning unprecedented emancipation rights in a series of cases before the French Revolution, which (temporarily) led to the complete abolition of slavery on French overseas territories and colonies in 1794 until Napoleon, propped up by the plantation lobbies, re-introduced slavery in sugarcane-growing colonies in 1802.

In a second meaning, "France" refers to metropolitan France only, meaning mainland France.

In a third meaning, "France" refers specifically to the province of the Île-de-France (with Paris at its centre) which historically was the heart of the royal demesne. This meaning is found in some geographic names, such as French Brie (Brie française) and French Vexin (Vexin français). French Brie, the area where the famous Brie cheese is produced, is the part of Brie that was annexed to the royal demesne, as opposed to Champagne Brie (Brie champenoise) which was annexed by Champagne. Likewise, French Vexin was the part of Vexin inside Île-de-France, as opposed to Norman Vexin (Vexin normand) which was inside Normandy.

In a fourth meaning, "France" refers only to the Pays de France, one of the several pays (Latin: pagi, singular pagus) of the Île-de-France. French provinces were typically made up of multiple pays, which were the direct continuation of the pagi set up by the Roman administration during Antiquity. The Île-de-France included the Pays de France, Parisis, Hurepoix, French Vexin, and others. The Pays de France is the fertile plain located immediately north of Paris which supported one of the most productive agriculture during the Middle Ages and helped to produce the tremendous wealth of the French royal court before the Hundred Years' War, making possible among other things the emergence of the Gothic art and architecture, which later spread all over western Europe. The Pays de France is also called the Plaine de France ("Plain of France"). Its historic main town is Saint-Denis, where the first Gothic cathedral in the world was built in the 12th century, and inside which the kings of France are buried. The Pays de France is now almost entirely built up as the northern extension of the Paris suburbs.

This fourth meaning is found in many place names, such as the town of Roissy-en-France, on whose territory is located Charles de Gaulle Airport. The name of the town literally means "Roissy in the Pays de France ", and not "Roissy in the country France". Another example of the use of France in this meaning is the new Stade de France, which was built near Saint-Denis for the 1998 Football World Cup. It was decided to call the stadium after the Pays de France, to give it a local touch. In particular, the mayor of Saint-Denis made it very clear that he wanted the new stadium to be a stadium of the northern suburbs of Paris and not just a national stadium which happens to be located in the northern suburbs. The name is intended to reflect this, although few French people know this story and the great majority associates it with the country's name.

In Hebrew, France is called צרפת (Tzarfat). In Māori, France is known as Wīwī, derived from the French phrase oui, oui (yes, yes). In modern Greek, France is still known as Γαλλία (Gallia), derived from Gaul. In Thai the Name for France is ฝรั่งเศส (Farang-set)

Calais (UK : / ˈ k æ l eɪ / KAL -ay, US : / k æ ˈ l eɪ / kal- AY, traditionally / ˈ k æ l ɪ s / KAL -iss, French: [ kalɛ ]) is a French major port city in the Pas-de-Calais department, of which it is a subprefecture. Calais is the largest city in Pas-de-Calais. The population of the city proper is 67,585; that of the urban area is 144,488 (2022). Calais overlooks the Strait of Dover, the narrowest point in the English Channel, which is only 34 km (21 mi) wide here, and is the closest French town to England. The White Cliffs of Dover can easily be seen from Calais on a clear day. Calais is a major port for ferries between France and England. The Channel Tunnel has connected Calais and Folkestone since 1994.

Because of its position, Calais has been a major port and an important centre for transport and trading with England since the Middle Ages. Calais came under English control after Edward III of England captured the city in 1347, followed by a treaty in 1360 that formally assigned Calais to English rule. Calais grew into a thriving centre for wool production, and came to be called the "brightest jewel in the English crown" because of its importance as the gateway for the tin, lead, lace and wool trades (or "staples"). Calais remained under English control until its recapture by France in 1558.

During World War II, the town was virtually razed to the ground. In May 1940, it was a strategic bombing target of the invading German forces, who took it during the siege of Calais. The Germans built massive bunkers along the coast, in preparation for launching missiles at England.

The old part of the town, Calais-Nord, is on an artificial island surrounded by canals and harbours. The modern part of the town, St-Pierre, lies to the south and south-east. In the centre of the old town is the Place d'Armes, in which stands the Tour du Guet, or watch-tower, a structure built in the 13th century, which was used as a lighthouse until 1848 when a new lighthouse was built by the port. South east of the Place is the church of Notre-Dame, built during the English occupancy of Calais. Arguably, it is the only church built in the English perpendicular style in all of France. In this church, former French President Charles de Gaulle married Yvonne Vendroux. South of the Place and opposite the Parc St Pierre is the Hôtel-de-ville (the town hall), and the belfry from the early 20th century. Today, Calais is visited by more than 10 million annually. Aside from being a key transport hub, Calais is also a notable fishing port and a centre for fish marketing, and some 3,000 people are still employed in the lace industry for which the town is also famed.

The name Calais first appears in the historical record late in the twelfth century AD in a mention by Count Gerard of Guelders of a charter by his father Matthew of Alsace, Some references mention the Latin name Calesium being used as early as the ninth century but without providing sources for the claim. Medieval Latin Calesium derives ultimately from Latin Caletum, in turn from Caletes, a Belgic or Gallic tribe dwelling in Pays de Caux, in present-day Normandy. The Gaulish ethnonym Caletoi literally means "the hard ones", that is to say "the stubborn" or "the tough" and derives from the Proto-Celtic stem *kaletos - ("hard, cruel, strong") Early French sources use a bewildering array of spellings from Kaleeis to Kalais to Calays together with Latin-based Calaisiacum, Calesetum and Calasium. The modern French spelling of Calais first appeared in 1331.

The earliest English name for the city was the Anglo-Norman Caleis. In Middle and Early Modern English, variants including Caleys, Calais, Calays, Callis and Cales were used. In later Middle English, the name of the city was most commonly spelt Cales, and this spelling survived well into the modern period, but Shakespeare for example used the spelling Callice. Confusingly, the name Cales found in the sarcastic rhyme beginning "A gentleman of Wales, a knight of Cales" and the ballad "The Winning of Cales" collected by Thomas Percy refers not to Calais, but to Cádiz in Spain.

The Cales spelling was also used in other European languages at the time, including Spanish, Italian and German and it is reflected in the city's name in the local Picard language, Calés.

Other archaic names for the city are Portuguese Calêsio and German Kalen. Kales, the city's historic name in Dutch and West Flemish (once spoken in the area) was retained until more recently in the name for the Strait of Dover, Nauw van Kales, and is still used in Dutch sources wishing to emphasise former linguistic ties to the area.

Though the modern French spelling of Calais gradually supplanted other variants in English, the pronunciation / ˈ k æ l ɪ s / (KAL -iss) persisted and survives in other towns named for the European city including Calais, Maine, and Calais, Vermont, in the United States. In " De Gustibus " (1855), Robert Browning rhymes Calais with malice.

The pronunciation shift can be seen in the 19th century where the / ˈ k æ l ɪ s / pronunciation with the s ending was prescribed through much of the century, but was disappearing by the end. In the beginning of the twentieth century, the English pronunciation / ˈ k æ l eɪ / KAL -ay with stress on the first syllable was firmly established.

Sources on the early history of habitation in the area is limited. It is sometimes claimed that the Romans called the settlement Caletum and that it was the departure point for Julius Caesar 's invasion of Britain. However, the name Caletum does not appear in Caesar's accounts of the invasion. Caesar describes his departure point as Portus Itius, which is believed to have been near Boulogne. At that time Calais was an island in the North Sea.

Calais was an English outpost for many centuries while it was an island surrounded by marshes, and difficult to attack from the mainland. At some time before the 10th century, it would have been a Dutch -speaking fishing village on a sandy beach backed by pebbles and a creek, with a natural harbour at the west edge of the early medieval estuary of the river Aa. As the pebble and sand ridge extended eastward from Calais, the haven behind it developed into fen, as the estuary progressively filled with silt and peat. Afterwards, canals were cut between Saint-Omer, the trading centre formerly at the head of the estuary, and three places to the west, centre and east on the newly formed coast: respectively Calais, Gravelines and Dunkirk. Calais was improved by the Count of Flanders in 997 and fortified by the Count of Boulogne in 1224.

The first document mentioning the existence of this community is the town charter granted by Mathieu d'Alsace, Count of Boulogne, in 1181 to Gerard de Guelders ; Calais thus became part of the county of Boulogne. In 1189, Richard the Lionheart is documented to have landed at Calais on his journey to the Third Crusade.

English wool trade interests and King Edward III 's claims to be heir to the Kingdom of France, led to the Battle of Crécy, between England and France, in 1346, followed by Edward's siege and capture of Calais, in 1347. Angered, the English king demanded reprisals against the town's citizens for holding out for so long ("obstinate defence") and ordered that the town's population be killed en masse. He agreed, however, to spare them, on condition that six of the principal citizens would come to him, bareheaded and barefooted and with ropes around their necks, and give themselves up to death. On their arrival, he ordered their execution, but pardoned them when his queen, Philippa of Hainault, begged him to spare their lives. This event is commemorated in The Burghers of Calais (Les Bourgeois de Calais), one of the most famous sculptures by Auguste Rodin, erected in the city in 1895. Though sparing the lives of the delegation members, King Edward drove out most of the French inhabitants, and settled the town with English. The municipal charter of Calais, previously granted by the Countess of Artois, was reconfirmed by Edward that year (1347).

In 1360, the Treaty of Brétigny assigned Guînes, Marck and Calais—collectively the " Pale of Calais "—to English rule in perpetuity, but this assignment was informally and only partially implemented. On 9 February 1363 the town was made an English staple port. It remained part of the Diocese of Thérouanne from 1379, keeping an ecclesiastical tie with France.

The town came to be called the "brightest jewel in the English crown" owing to its great importance as a gateway port for the tin, lead, cloth and wool trades (or "staples"). Its customs revenues amounted at times to a third of the English government's revenue, with wool being the most important element by far. Of its population of about 12,000 people, as many as 5,400 were recorded as having been connected with the wool trade. The governorship or Captaincy of Calais was a lucrative and highly prized public office; the famous Dick Whittington was simultaneously Lord Mayor of the City of London and Mayor of the Calais Staple in 1407.

Calais was an integral part of the English trading economy, though not regarded as being a part of the Kingdom of England until the days of King Henry VIII, from which time the Pale of Calais sent two members to the English Parliament. The continued English hold on Calais however depended on expensively maintained fortifications, as the town lacked any natural defences. Maintaining Calais was a costly business that was frequently tested by the forces of France and the Duchy of Burgundy, with the Franco-Burgundian border running nearby. The British historian Geoffrey Elton once remarked "Calais—expensive and useless—was better lost than kept". The duration of the English hold over Calais was, to a large extent, the result of the feud between Burgundy and France: both sides coveted the town, but preferred to see England control it rather than their domestic rivals. The stalemate was broken by the victory of the French crown over Burgundy following Joan of Arc 's final battle in the siege of Compiègne in 1430, and the later incorporation of the duchy into France.

In 1532, the English King Henry VIII visited Calais and his men calculated that the town had about 2,400 beds and stabling to keep some 2,000 horses. Following the royal visit, the town's governance was reformed in 1536, aiming to strengthen ties with England. As part of this move, Calais became a parliamentary borough sending burgesses to the House of Commons of the Parliament of England. However, despite these attempts to ingratiate Calais within the kingdom, the historian David Potter states that Calais was "never totally anglicised".

In September 1552, the English adventurer Thomas Stukley, who had been for some time in the French service, betrayed to the authorities in London some French plans for the capture of Calais, to be followed by a descent upon England. Stukley himself might have been the author of these plans.

On 7 January 1558, King Henry II of France sent forces led by Francis, Duke of Guise, who laid siege to Calais. When the French attacked, they were able to surprise the English at the critical strongpoint of Fort Nieulay and the sluice gates, which could have flooded the attackers, remained unopened. The loss was regarded by Queen Mary I of England as a dreadful misfortune. When she heard the news, she reportedly said, "When I am dead and opened, you shall find ' Philip ' [her husband] and 'Calais' lying in my heart." In the 1564 Treaty of Troyes, Queen Elizabeth I agreed to a final acknowledgement that the French would retain Calais, with the English receiving a payment of 120,000 crowns. The historian David J. Wildman describes the loss of Calais as a 'Tudor Brexit', and that it had the unintended consequence of forcing the English to look to the New World for economic opportunities.

The region around Calais, then-known as the Calaisis, was renamed the Pays Reconquis ("Reconquered Country") in commemoration of its recovery by the French. Use of the term is reminiscent of the Spanish Reconquista, with which the French were certainly familiar—and, since it occurred in the context of a war with Spain (Philip II of Spain was at the time Queen Mary's consort), might have been intended as a deliberate snub.

The town was captured by the Spanish on 24 April 1596 in an invasion mounted from the nearby Spanish Netherlands by Archduke Albert of Austria, but it was returned to France under the Treaty of Vervins in May 1598.

Calais remained an important maritime city and smuggling centre throughout the 17th century. However, during the next century, the port of Calais began to stagnate gradually, as the nearby ports of Boulogne and Dunkirk began to rise and compete.

The French revolution at the end of the 18th century did not disturb Calais and no executions took place.

In 1805, Calais hosted part of Napoleon's army and invasion fleet for several months before his aborted invasion of Britain. From October to December 1818, the British army used Calais as their departing port to return home after occupying post-Waterloo France. General Murray appointed Sir Manley Power to oversee the evacuation of British troops from France. Cordial relations had been restored by that time and on 3 December, the mayor of Calais wrote a letter to Power to express thanks for his "considerate treatment of the French and of the town of Calais during the embarkation."

The population in 1847 was 12,580, many of whom were English. It was one of the main ports for British travellers to Europe.

In World War I the British Expeditionary Force or BEF arrived in Calais on its way to the nearby frontline cutting through Nord-Pas-de-Calais and Flanders. Calais was a key port for the supply of arms and reinforcements to the Western Front. In the 1930s, the town was known for being a politically socialist stronghold.

Calais was virtually razed to the ground during World War II. In May 1940, it was a key objective of the invading German forces and became the scene of a last-ditch defence—the siege of Calais —which diverted a sizable amount of German forces for several days immediately prior to the Battle of Dunkirk. A total of 3,000 British and 800 French troops, assisted by Royal Navy warships, held out from 22 to 27 May 1940 against the 10th Panzer Division. The town was flattened by artillery and precision dive bombing and only 30 of the 3800-strong defending force were evacuated before the town fell. This may have helped Operation Dynamo, the evacuation of Allied forces at Dunkirk, as 10th Panzer would have been involved on the Dunkirk perimeter had it not been busy at Calais. Between 26 May and 4 June 1940, some 330,000 Allied troops escaped from the Germans at Dunkirk.

During the ensuing German occupation, it became the command post for German forces in the Pas-de-Calais/Flanders region and was very heavily fortified, as the Germans generally believed that the Allies would invade there. It was also used as a launch site for V1 flying bombs and for much of the war, the Germans used the region as the site for railway guns to bombard the south-eastern corner of England. In 1943 they built massive bunkers along the coast in preparation for launching missiles on the southeast of England. Despite heavy preparations for defence against an amphibious assault, the Allied invasion took place well to the west in Normandy on D-Day. Calais was very heavily bombed and shelled in a successful effort to disrupt German communications and persuade them that the Allies would target the Pas-de-Calais for invasion (rather than Normandy). The town, by then largely in ruins, was laid siege to and liberated by General Daniel Spry 's 3rd Canadian Infantry Division between 25 September and 1 October 1944. On 27 February 1945 Calais experienced its last bombing raid—this time by Royal Air Force bombers who mistook the town for Dunkirk, which was at that time still occupied by German forces. After the war there was little rebuilding of the historic city and most buildings were modern ones.

Since 1999 or earlier, an increasingly large number of illegal immigrants and asylum seekers started to arrive in the vicinity of Calais, living in the Calais jungle, the nickname given to a series of makeshift camps. The people lived there while attempting to enter the United Kingdom by stowing away on lorries, ferries, cars, or trains travelling through the Port of Calais or the Eurotunnel Calais Terminal, or while waiting for their French asylum claims to be processed. The people were a mix of asylum seekers and economic migrants from Darfur, Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq, Eritrea and other underdeveloped or conflict-stricken regions in Africa and Asia.

The Calais migrant crisis led to escalating tension between the UK and France in the summer of 2015. The UK blamed France for not doing enough to stop migrants from entering the Channel Tunnel or attempting to scale fences built along the border. The British Prime Minister David Cameron released a statement saying that illegal immigrants would be removed from the UK even if they reached the island. To discourage migrants and refugees from jumping on train shuttles at Calais, the UK government supplied fencing to be installed around the Eurotunnel complex, where the vehicles are loaded onto train shuttles in Calais.

On 26 October 2016, French authorities announced that the camp had been cleared. By January 2017, 500–1,000 migrants, mostly unaccompanied minors, had returned and were living rough in Calais and there has been a presence ever since.

Calais is located on the Pas de Calais, which marks the boundary between the English Channel and North Sea and located at the opposite end of the Channel Tunnel, 40 kilometres (25 miles) from Dover. On a clear day the White Cliffs of Dover can be viewed across the channel. Aside from being an important port and boarding point between France and England, it is at the nucleus of many major railway and highway networks and connected by road to Arras, Lens, Béthune and St. Omer. Dunkirk is located about 37 km (23 mi) to the east. Calais is located 236 km (147 mi) north of the French capital of Paris, or around 295 km (183 mi) by car. The commune of Calais is bordered by the English channel to the north, Sangatte and Coquelles to the west, Coulogne to the south and Marck to the east. The core area of the city is divided into the Old Town area within the old city walls, and the younger suburbs of St. Pierre, which are connected by a boulevard.

Calais is part of the Côte d'Opale (Opal Coast), a cliff-lined section of northern French coast that parallels the white cliffs on the British coast and is part of the same geological formation. It is known for its scenic cliffs such as Cape Blanc Nez and Cape Gris Nez and for its wide area of dunes. Many artists have been inspired by its landscapes, among them the composer Henri Dutilleux, the writers Victor Hugo and Charles Dickens, and the painters J. M. W. Turner, Carolus-Duran, Maurice Boitel and Eugène Boudin. It was the painter Édouard Lévêque [ fr ] who coined the name for this area in 1911 to describe the distinctive quality of its light.

Calais has a temperate oceanic climate (Cfb in the Köppen climate classification). Temperature ranges are moderate and the winters are cool with unstable weather. It rains on average about 700 to 800 mm (28 to 31 in) per year.

The commune of Calais is divided into 13 quartiers :

Changes in the number of inhabitants is known throughout the population censuses conducted since 1793 in Calais. Note the massive growth in population from 13,529 in 1881 to 58,969 in 1886, a growth of 335.9%; this is because the city of Saint-Pierre-lès-Calais merged with Calais in 1885. According to the INSEE census of 2017, Calais has 73,911 people (a decrease of 4.4% from 1999). The town's population ranked 60th nationally, down from 53rd in 1999.

The city's proximity to England has made it a major port for centuries. It is the principal ferry crossing point between England and France, with the vast majority of Channel crossings being made between Dover and Calais. Companies operating from Calais include(d) SeaFrance (1996–2012), DFDS Seaways, and P&O Ferries. The French end of the Channel Tunnel is situated in the vicinity of Calais, in Coquelles some 4 miles (6.4 km) to the west of the town. Calais possesses direct rail links to Paris, 148 miles (238 km) to the south. More than 10 million people visit Calais annually.

From medieval times, English companies thrived in Calais. Calais was a particularly important centre in the production and trade of wool and cloth, which outweighed the costs of maintaining the town as part of England. In 1830 some 113 manufacturers were based in Calais and the St Pierre suburbs, the majority of which were English. There are still two major lace factories in Calais with around 700 looms and 3000 employees. The town exports in the early 20th century were lace, chemicals, paper, wines, especially champagne, spirits, hay, straw, wool, potatoes, woven goods, fruit, glass-ware, lace and metal-ware. Principal imports in the early 20th century included cotton and silk goods, coal, iron and steel, petroleum, timber, raw wool, cotton yarn and cork. During the five years 1901–1905 the average annual value of exports was £8,388,000 (£6,363,000 in the years 1896–1900), of imports £4,145,000 (£3,759,000 in 1896–1900).

As a fishing port, Calais has several notable fishing markets including Les Délices de la Mer and Huîtrière Calaisenne on the Boulevard La Fayette, the latter of which is noted for its oysters, lobster and crabs from Brittany. The Emile Fournier et Fils market on the Rue Mouron sells mainly smoked fish including salmon, trout, herring and halibut.

Calais is part of Pas-de-Calais's 7th constituency for the National Assembly ; the current deputy is Marc de Fleurian of the National Rally, who ousted Pierre-Henri Dumont of The Republicans at the 2024 election.

For elections to the Pas-de-Calais departmental council, the commune of Calais is divided between the cantons of Calais-1, Calais-2, and Calais-3, the first two of which also contain adjoining communes.

The mayor of Calais has been Natacha Bouchart since 2008, first for the Union for a Popular Movement and then its successor The Republicans. From 1971 to 2008, the mayor was a member of the French Communist Party (PCF): Jean-Jacques Barthe (1971–2000) and Jacky Hénin (2000–2008).

Place d'Armes is one of the largest squares in the city of Calais. It adjoins the watchtower, and during medieval times was once the heart of the city. While Calais was a territory of England (1347–1558), it became known as Market Square (place du Marché). Only at the end of English rule did it take the name of Place d'Armes. After the reconquest of Calais in 1558 by Francis, Duke of Guise, Francis II gave Calais the right to hold a fair twice a year on the square, which still exists today, as well as a bustling Wednesday and Saturday market.

The town centre, which has seen significant regeneration over the past decade, is dominated by its distinctive town hall (Hôtel de Ville) at Place du Soldat Inconnu. It was built in the Flemish Renaissance style between 1911 and 1925 to commemorate the unification of the cities of Calais and Saint Pierre in 1885. An extra terrace had been erected at the previous town hall in 1818. One of the most elegant landmarks in the city, its ornate 74-metre (246 ft) high clock tower and belfry can be seen from out to sea and chimes throughout the day and has been protected by UNESCO since 2005 as part of a series of belfries across the region. The building parts have also been listed as a series of historic monuments by government decree of 26 June 2003, including its roofs and belfry, main hall, glass roof, the staircase, corridor serving the first floor, the rooms on the first floor (including decoration): the wedding room, the VIP lounge, the lounge of the council and the cabinet room. The hall has stained glass windows and numerous paintings and exquisite decor. It houses police offices.

Église Notre-Dame is a great church which was originally built in the late 13th century and its tower was added in the late 14th or early 15th century. Like the town hall it is one of the city's most prominent landmarks. It was arguably the only church in the English perpendicular style in France. Much of the current 1,400-capacity church dates to 1631–1635. It contains elements of Flemish, Gothic, Anglo-Norman and Tudor architecture. In 1691, an 1,800-cubic-metre (64,000 cu ft) cistern was added to the church by order of Vauban. The church is dedicated to the Virgin, and built in the form of a cross, consisting of a nave and four aisles— The old grand altar dated to 1628 and was built from Carrara marble wrecked on the coast, during its transit from Genoa to Antwerp. It contained eighteen figures, the two standing on either side of the altarpiece—representing St. Louis and Charlemagne. The organ—of a deep and mellow tone, and highly ornamented by figures in relief—was built at Canterbury sometime around 1700. The pulpit and reading-desk, richly sculptured in oak, is another well-executed piece of ecclesiastical workmanship from St. Omer. The altarpiece, the Assumption, was often attributed to Anthony van Dyck, though in reality it is by Gerard Seghers ; whilst the painting over the side altar, once believed to be by Peter Paul Rubens is in fact by Pieter Van Mol. A high and strongly built wall, partaking more of the fortress than a cathedral in its aspect, flanks the building, and protects it from the street where the old river formerly ran, in its course through Calais to the sea.

The square, massive Norman tower has three-arched belfry windows on each face, surmounted by corner turrets, and a conically shaped tower of octagonal proportions, topped again by a short steeple. The tower was a main viewing point for the Anglo-French Survey (1784–1790) which linked the Paris Observatory with the Royal Greenwich Observatory using trigonometry. Cross-channel sightings were made of signal lights at Dover Castle and Fairlight, East Sussex.

The church was assigned as a historic monument by decree of 10 September 1913, only to have its stained glass smashed during a Zeppelin bombardment on 15 January 1915, falling through the roof. General de Gaulle married Yvonne Vendroux on 6 April 1921 at the cathedral. The building sustained extensive damage during World War II, and was partially rebuilt, although much of the old altar and furnishings were not replaced.

The Tour du Guet (Watch Tower), situated in Calais Nord on the Places d'Armes, is one of the few surviving pre-war buildings. Dating from 1229, when Philip I, Count of Boulogne, built the fortifications of Calais, it is one of the oldest monuments of Calais, although the oldest remaining traces date to 1302. It has a height of 35–39 metres or 115–128 feet (sources differ). An earthquake in 1580 split the tower in two, and at one time it threatened to collapse completely. The tower was repaired in 1606, and then had the purpose of serving as a hall to accommodate the merchants of Calais. It was damaged in 1658 when a young stable boy set fire to it, while it was temporarily being used as royal stables during a visit of King Louis XIV. It was not repaired for some 30 years. In 1770, a bell identical to the original bell of 1348 was cast. Due to its height, from the late 17th century it became an important watchout post for the city for centuries until 1905; the last keeper of the tower was forced to leave in 1926. Abraham Chappe (a brother of Ignace Chappe) installed a telegraph office in the tower in 1816 and operated for 32 years. It was this office which announced the death of Napoleon I to the French public in 1821. It also had the dual function as lighthouse with a rotating beacon fuelled by oil from 1818. The lantern was finally replaced by a new lighthouse on 15 October 1848. During the First World War, it served as a military observation post and narrowly missed destruction during World War II. This tower has been classified as a historic monument since 6 November 1931.

The Calais Lighthouse (Le phare de Calais) was built in 1848, replacing the old watch tower as the lighthouse of the port. The 55-metre-high (180 ft) tower was electrified in 1883 and automated in 1992. The staircase has 271 steps leading up to the lantern. By day it is easily distinguishable from other coastal lighthouses by its white color and black lantern. The lighthouse was classified as a historical monument on 22 November 2010.

The Citadel, located on the Avenue Pierre Coubertin, was built between 1560 and 1571 on the site of a former medieval castle which was built in 1229 by Philippe de Hureprel. The purpose of its construction was to fend off would-be invaders, but it wasn't long until the city was successfully invaded by Archduke Albert of Austria on 24 April 1596. Both Louis XIII and Cardinal Richelieu at one time considered expanding the citadel and Calais into a great walled city for military harbour purposes but the proposals came to nothing.

Fort Risban, located on the coast on the Avenue Raymond Poincaré at the port entrance, was built by the English to prevent supplies reaching Calais by sea during the siege in November 1346 and continued to be occupied by them until 1558 when Calais was restored to France. In 1596, the fort was captured by the Spanish Netherlands until May 1598 when it was returned to the French following the Treaty of Vervins. It was rebuilt in 1640. Vauban, who visited the fort some time in the 1680s, described it as "a home for owls, and place to hold the Sabbath" rather than a fortification. During World War II it served as an air raid shelter. It contains the Lancaster Tower, a name often given to the fort itself.

Fort Nieulay, located along the Avenue Roger Salengro originally dated to the 12th or 13th century. During the English invasion in 1346, sluices gates were added as water defences and a fort was built up around it in 1525 on the principle that the people of the fort could defend the town by flooding it. In April and May 1677, Louis XIV and Vauban visited Calais and ordered a complete rebuilding of Fort Nieulay. It was completed in 1679, with the purpose to protect the bridge of Nieulay crossing the Hames River. By 1815 the fort had fallen into a ruined state and it wasn't until 1903 that it was sold and improved by its farmer tenants. The fort was briefly the site of a low-key scuffle with Germans in May 1940.

Calais contains several museums. These include the Musée des Beaux-Arts et de la Dentelle de Calais, Cité internationale de la Dentelle et de la Mode de Calais and the Musée de la Seconde Guerre Mondiale (World War II museum). Cité internationale de la Dentelle et de la Mode de Calais is a lace and fashion museum located in an old Boulart factory on the canalside and contains workshops, a library and a restaurant and regularly puts on fashion shows. The World War II museum is located at Parc St Pierre opposite the town hall and south of the train station. The building is a former Nazi bunker and wartime military headquarters, built in 1941 by the Todt Organisation. The 194-metre-long (636 ft) structure contains twenty rooms with relics and photographs related to World War II, and one room dedicated to World War I.

Theatres and cultural centres include Le théâtre municipal, Le Centre Culturel Gérard Philipe, Le Conservatoire à rayonnement départemental (CRD), L'auditorium Didier Lockwood, L'École d'Art de Calais, Le Channel, Le Cinéma Alhambra and La Médiathèque municipale. Le théâtre municipal or Calais Theatre is located on the Boulevard Lafayette and was built in 1903 on a plot of land which was used as a cemetery between 1811 and 1871. The theatre opened in 1905. On the first floor of the façade are statues which represent the performing arts subjects of Poetry, Comedy, Dance and Music.

Directly in front of the town hall is a bronze cast of Les Bourgeois de Calais (" The Burghers of Calais "), a sculpture by Auguste Rodin to commemorate six men who were to have been executed by Edward III in 1347. The cast was erected in 1895, funded by a public grant of 10,000 francs. Rodin (who based his design on a fourteenth-century account by Jean Froissart) intended to evoke the viewer's sympathy by emphasizing the pained expressions of the faces of the six men about to be executed.

The Monument des Sauveteurs ("Rescuers' Monument") was installed in 1899 on Boulevard des Alliés, and transferred to the Quartier of Courgain in 1960. It is a bronze sculpture, attributed to Edward Lormier. The Monument Le Pluviôse is a 620 kg (1,367 lb) bronze monument built in 1912 by Émile Oscar Guillaume on the centre of the roundabout near the beach of Calais, commemorating the accidental sinking of the submarine Pluviôse in May 1910, off the beach by the steamer Pas de Calais. Armand Fallières, president of the Republic, and his government came to Calais for a state funeral for its 27 victims. One of these victims, Delpierre Auguste, (1889–1910), drowned at age 21 before the beach at Calais; a dock in the city is named for him. The monument was dedicated on 22 June 1913.

Monument "Jacquard" was erected on the square in 1910, opposite the entrance to the Calais theatre. It commemorates Joseph Marie Jacquard, popular in Calais because of his contribution to the development of lace through his invention of the Jacquard loom. A tall column in the Courgain area of the city commemorates a visit by Louis XVIII.

Parc Richelieu, a garden behind the war memorial, was built in 1862 on the old city ramparts and redesigned in 1956. It contains a statue designed by Yves de Coëtlogon in 1962, remembering both world wars with an allegorical figure, representing Peace, which clutches an olive branch to her breast. Another monument in the Parc Richelieu, erected on 23 April 1994, marks the approximate site of Emma, Lady Hamilton 's last resting place. She died in Calais on 15 January 1815.

For many years the most famous hotel in Calais was the Hôtel d'Angleterre, often called Dessin's or Dessein's, after the family which owned it for almost a hundred years. Its popularity increased after Laurence Sterne set the early chapters of his 1768 novel A Sentimental Journey through France and Italy there. With the arrival of the railway fewer British visitors stopped in Calais and Dessin's closed in 1860.

Hôtel Meurice de Calais is a hotel, established in 1771 as Le Chariot Royal by the French postmaster, Charles-Augustin Meurice, who would later establish the five-star Hôtel Meurice, one of Paris's most famous luxury hotels. It was one of the earliest hotels on the continent of Europe to specifically cater for the British elite. The hotel was rebuilt in 1954–55. It has 41 en-suite rooms.

There are several schools in Calais. These include Groupe Scolaire Coubertin, Eglise Saint-Pierre, Universite du Littoral, Centre Universitaire, Lycée HQE Léonard de Vinci on Rue du Pasteur Martin Luther-King, École d'Art de Calais on Rue des Soupirants, and the Centre Scolaire Saint-Pierre on Rue du Four à Chaux which provides education in the primary grades, high school, and vocational school. There are at least seven colleges in the city, such as Collège Martin Luther King on Rue Martin Luther King, Collège Nationalisé Lucien Vadez on Avenue Yervant Toumaniantz, Collège Les Dentelliers on Rue Gaillard, College Jean Mace on Rue Maréchaux, Collège République on Place République, Collège Vauban on Rue Orléansville, and Collège Privé Mixte Jeanne d'Arc on Rue Champailler.

Calais was represented in association football by the Calais RUFC, who competed in the Championnat National. The club was founded 1902 as Racing Club de Calais and in 1974 was renamed as Calais Racing Union Football Club. Calais RUFC had a good reputation in French cup competitions and went as far as the final in the 1999/2000 season, losing out finally to Nantes. From 2008 they played at the Stade de l'Épopée, a stadium which holds about 12,000 spectators. Calais Racing Union was liquidated in September 2017.

The rugby club in Calais is Amicale Rugby Calaisien. Basketball is popular in Calais with the teams Calais Basket (male) and COB Calais (female) as is volleyball with the Lis Calais (male) and Stella Calais (female) teams. There is also the SOC club which caters in a range of sports including athletics, handball and football and Yacht Club de Calais, a yachting club. Calais also has Les Seagulls, an American football team.

The Port of Calais was the first cable ship port in Europe and is the fourth largest port in France and the largest for passenger traffic. The port accounts for more than a third of economic activity of the town of Calais. Cargo traffic has tripled over the past two decades. In 2007 more than 41.5 million tonnes of traffic passed through Calais with some 11.52 million passengers, 1.4 million trucks and trailers, 2.249 million cars and 4,700 crossings a year. Passenger numbers for the Dover to Calais route in 2018 were 9,168,000. On average, ships sail from the port every 30 minutes. A new 400 million euro project is underway at the port to create a breakwater protecting a pool of 700 meters long, thus allowing virtually all types of ships to stop at Calais.

As well as the large port, the town is served by three railway stations: Gare de Calais-Fréthun, Gare de Calais-Ville, and Gare des Fontinettes, the former being the first stop on mainland Europe of the Eurostar line. Gare de Calais-Ville is the nearest station to the port with trains to Gare de Boulogne-Ville and either Gare de Lille Flandres or Gare de Lille Europe.

Calais was also served by Saint-Pierre and Calais-Maritime. Both now closed.

Saint-Pierre was two separate stations. A temporary station was opened by the Chemins de fer du Nord in 1846, and closed in 1849 when Calais-Ville opened. It subsequently became the site of a marshalling yard. The second Saint-Pierre station was opened by the Chemin de fer d'Anvin à Calais (CF AC) on 1 October 1881. It closed in 1900 when the CF AC extended their line to Calais-Ville. The CF AC closed on 1 March 1955.

Local bus services are provided by STCE. Free car parking facilities are available in front of the Calais ferry terminal and the maximum stay is three days.

Calais is served by an airport and an airfield. Calais–Dunkerque Airport is located at Marck, 7 kilometres (4.3 mi) east north east of Calais. Saint-Inglevert Airfield is located at Saint-Inglevert, 13 kilometres (8.1 mi) south west of Calais.

The Nantes slave trade was the purchase of more than 500,000 black African slaves in Africa and the transportation of them to the Americas, using ships originating from the port of Nantes. They were generally sold into French ownership, mainly in the Antilles. The trade lasted from the late 17th to the beginning of the 19th century. With 1,744 slave voyages, Nantes, France, was the principal French slave-trading port for the duration of this period.

The slave trade was explicitly encouraged by the royal family and described by the church as an "ordinary occupation." The town was the last centre for the slave trade in France, until its abolition in 1831.

The transatlantic slave trade, between Europe and America, transported 12 to 13 million Africans to the New World, the majority of those from the end of the 17th century onwards. In 1997, the historian Hugh Thomas claimed that 13,000,000 slaves left Africa as a result of the slave trade, of which 11,328,000 arrived at their destination, over 54,200 voyages. The larger part of the trade was carried out by ships with their home port in the Americas. Within Europe, every large European port was involved in the slave trade, although to varying degrees. English ports were at the forefront; with 4,894 expeditions departing from Liverpool and 2,704 from London.

Metropolitan France launched around 4,200 slave-ships and finds itself third place amongst slave-trading nations, after Great Britain and Portugal. The town of Nantes alone organised 1,744 expeditions, or 41.3% of the total for France. The following towns, in order of importance, together made up 33.5% of French slave voyages: Bordeaux, La Rochelle and Le Havre.

The importance of Nantes in the slave trade can be explained as very important: the town benefits from its proximity with Lorient, the home of the French East India Company, which allowed the supply of Indiennes and money cowries, which were highly appreciated by slave merchants. This situation compensated for the shallow draft of the Loire estuary, which was limited to eleven feet and so allowed only for ships at a maximum of 150–170 tonnes in fully loaded conditions to reach Nantes. The Gironde estuary, however, had a draft of 14 to 16 feet, as a result of which 250 vessels could reach Bordeaux, a port situated far from the major routes between London and the Po Valley, capable of exporting the riches offered by the Aquitaine Basin. Nantes entered the slave trade relatively late, in 1707. The ship-owners found the triangular trade much more profitable than direct trade, which consisted in undertaking journeys between Europe and the Americas, as at the turn of the 17th century the port dealt mainly in interregional and European trade (encompassing the Iberian Peninsula, the British Isles and the North Sea), of which the majority of the traffic dealt in traditional commerce, in use since the medieval period, with products such as flour, wine and salt.

The first ship in Nantes to be utilised in the slave trade was most likely the Hercule in 1707, launched by the compagnie du Sénégal and belonging to the Montaudouin family.

Then, after a 4-year pause (between 1707 and 1711), traffic began again in 1712 with 7 ships. Over the following 15 years the number of slave-ships launched increased:

Annual number of slave-ships launched from Nantes

From the 1730s onwards, the tonnage of Nantes slave-ships was constantly growing, going from a little over 1,000 tonnes in 1735 to 6,000 tonnes in 1740.

The years which followed were much more chaotic: the War of the Austrian Succession, in which France participated, hindered maritime commerce – which was, at the time, the main battleground for the Anglo-French rivalry. Therefore, the tonnage of slave-ships in Nantes was extremely low, never surpassing 500 tonnes, during the three years of the conflict (1745, 1746 and 1747). The Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, signed in 1748, allowed a gradual increase in commercial activity again, with more than 1,000 tonnes passing through the port. The following year, however, this tonnage reached a record number of 9,000 tonnes.

The years 1750 and 1751 saw a lull in activity, due notably to the fact that ship-owners in Nantes were waiting to discover the results of their post-war investments. A slave-ship's voyage through a system of triangular trade between Europe, Africa and the Americas generally took between 14 and 18 months.

As reassured Nantes ship-owners saw, over the years 1752, 1753 and 1754 their tonnage surpassed 5,000 tonnes. This was considered a period of strong commercial activity, as from 1735 to 1759 this number would only be exceeded five times. In 1755, trade slowed and reached only 3,000 tonnes, before completely crashing between 1756 and 1763 as a result of the Seven Years' War, during which the British captured the French possessions of Gorée and Saint-Louis in Senegal, both of which were major players in the French slave trade; the French colony of Guadeloupe fell in 1759.

The signing of the Treaty of Paris in 1763 allowed trade in Nantes to re-establish itself to a high level of activity, even if the 699 expeditions organised during the following 30 years would represent less than half of the French slave trade as a whole during this period, whereas Nantes had accounted for over 50% before the conflict. From then on until the first abolition of slavery in 1793, this share would continue to fall.

This loss of market-share is explained by several factors, notably:

However, even if the number of slave voyages fell from an average of 29 per year (between 1763 and 1766), to 22.2 (between 1767 and 1771) and 20.6 (between 1772 and 1778, i.e. the beginning of the American Revolutionary War), the overall tonnage fell more slowly (from an average of 3,954 tonnes per year between 1763 and 1766, to 3,556 tonnes between 1772 and 1778), which means that while ship-owners in Nantes deployed less ships, they used vessels with a greater capacity. The average capacity of a slave-ship went from 140 tonnes after the Seven Years' War, to 175.5 tonnes between 1772 and 1778.

After American independence, 32 ships were launched on average per year between 1783 and 1788, making 193 ships departing from Nantes during this period, against 116 from Bordeaux, 111 from Le Havre and 75 from La Rochelle. During the first two years of the French Revolution, 89 slave-ships were launched from Nantes (46 in 1789 and 43 in 1790). Between 1789 and 1793, the port of Nantes accounted for 36.1% of slave trade traffic with 152 ships: as much as the output of their main rivals, Bordeaux and Le Havre, put together.

During the same period, the number of slaves transported by Nantes ships numbered 200,000. These slaves were taken mainly from the Gulf of Guinea (principally the region of Calabar, on the south east coast of what is now Nigeria) and the "Angola coast" (now part of Angola and the Republic of the Congo), numbered as follows :

Nantes traders were not only capable of adapting to market conditions in both America and Africa, but were also capable of changing the point of sale according to competition. It was, nevertheless, in Saint-Domingue that they sold the majority of their human cargo. Making use of a network of relations across the island, it became the exclusive domain of Loire slave traders. Cap Français (now Cap-Haïtien) and Port-au-Prince were the main points of sale and welcomed, respectively, 30 and 25% of Nantes slave-ships. The latter dealt with 46.8% of the supply of provisions to Port-au-Prince, 60.7% in Léogâne, 64.7% in Cayes and 81.6% in Saint-Marc.

The August 1793 decree for the abolition of slavery put an end to all slave trade activity across all French territory for nine years.

The re-establishment of slavery by Napoléon Bonaparte in 1802, revived slave trade activity for 15 years (accounting for 70% of national trade, with more than 300 expeditions), however, this was achieved illegally, as the French Royal Navy fought successfully against illegal traffickers throughout the 1820s until the prohibition of the trade in 1831 which eventually led to the definitive abolition of slavery instigated by Victor Schlœlcher on 27 April 1848.

The 18th century undeniably marked the peak of Nantes trade and the town's development which saw its population double, rising from 40,000 to 80,000 inhabitants over the course of the century

Naturally, the trade's greatest impact was on port activity, even if transatlantic ships (including not only slave-ships, but those involved in direct trade with the American isles, and Privateers) never accounted for more than 25.4% of the total tonnage entering Nantes port in 1772.

Triangular trade also stimulated the rise of "direct" trade between Nantes and the islands, as at the end of their circuit the slave traders themselves only brought back the commodities derived from the sale of slaves in "plantation colonies", such as sugar and coffee, therefore requiring other ships to come from Nantes and load up the surplus.

Commodities brought back to Nantes port from the colonies were varied: sugar, coffee, cotton and indigo were unloaded on the new Fosse quay which from then on took over the majority of port-activity from the former "port au Vin" (now the Place du Commerce). These products were resold with substantial profits, whether to fuel the interior French market or to supply the burgeoning local industry. Sugar (mainly raw or brown sugar, destined for the national market) was, by far, the most greatly imported product in Nantes, amounting to 22,605,000 lbs in 1786, making up 60.8% of the total value of imported merchandise.

The commercial activity produced by triangular trade generated the success of maritime commerce within the kingdom of France and with the rest of the European continent. As a result, the tonnage directed towards foreign ports increased from 8,352 tx in 1702, to 30,428 tx in 1772 (a ratio of 1:3.6), while the tonnage delivered to French ports during the same period passed from 32,276 tx to 61,686 tx (1:1.9), making Nantes therefore the first port of French commerce.

The slave trade increased the wealth of great merchant and ship-owning families, which they invested in as much in agricultural land, in property (in hôtels particuliers or Lustschloss), as in the growing industry which developed alongside traditional artisanal industry. As a result, in 1775, no less than 17 factories were in business in the city.

Triangular trade throughout the 18th century also benefited the development of Shipbuilding. The 18th century was marked by notable growth in the size of Nantes boatyards, which expanded from 3,230 m (34,800 sq ft) at the turn of the century, to 50,067 m (538,920 sq ft) in 1780, as these became the first French merchant ship builders.

A memorial to acknowledge the role of France in the New World slave trade was dedicated in Nantes in 2012.

The Napoleonic Code (French : Code Napoléon), officially the Civil Code of the French (French : Code civil des Français ; simply referred to as Code civil), is the French civil code established during the French Consulate in 1804 and still in force in France, although heavily and frequently amended since its inception. Although Napoleon himself was not directly involved in the drafting of the Code, as it was drafted by a commission of four eminent jurists, he chaired many of the commission's plenary sessions, and his support was crucial to its enactment.

The code, with its stress on clearly written and accessible law, was a major milestone in the abolition of the previous patchwork of feudal laws. Historian Robert Holtman regards it as one of the few documents that have influenced the whole world. The Napoleonic Code was not the first legal code to be established in a European country with a civil-law legal system ; it was preceded by the Codex Maximilianeus bavaricus civilis (Bavaria, 1756), the Allgemeines Landrecht (Prussia, 1794), and the West Galician Code (Galicia, then part of Austria, 1797). It was, however, the first modern legal code to be adopted with a pan-European scope, and it strongly influenced the law of many of the countries formed during and after the Napoleonic Wars. The Napoleonic Code influenced developing countries outside Europe attempting to modernize and defeudalize their countries through legal reforms, such as those in the Middle East, while in Latin America the Spanish and Portuguese had established their own versions of the civil code.

The categories of the Napoleonic Code were not drawn from earlier French law, but instead from Justinian's sixth-century codification of Roman law, the Corpus Juris Civilis, and within it, the Institutes. The Institutes divide into the law of:

Similarly, the Napoleonic Code divided the law into four sections:

Before the Napoleonic Code, France did not have a single set of laws ; law consisted mainly of local customs, sometimes officially compiled in "custumals" (coutumes), notably the Custom of Paris. There were also exemptions, privileges, and special charters granted by kings or other feudal lords. With the Revolution, the last vestiges of feudalism were abolished.

Specifically, as to civil law, the many different bodies of law used in different parts of France were to be replaced by a single legal code. The Constituent Assembly on 5 October 1790 voted for a codification of French laws, the Constitution of 1791 promised one, and the National Assembly adopted a unanimous resolution on 4 September 1791 providing that "there shall be a code of civil laws common for the entire realm." However, it was the National Convention in 1793 which established a special commission headed by Jean-Jacques-Régis de Cambacérès to oversee the drafting process.

His drafts of 1793 (for which Cambacérès had been given a one month deadline), 1794, and 1796 were all rejected by a National Convention and the French Directory of the time was more preoccupied with the turmoil resulting from various wars and strife with other European powers. The first draft contained 719 articles and was very revolutionary, but was rejected for being too technical and criticized for not being radical or philosophical enough. The second, with only 297 articles, was rejected for being too brief and was criticized for being a mere manual of morals. The third, expanded to 1,104 articles, was presented under the conservative Directory regime, but never even came up for discussion.

Another commission, established in December 1799 established a fourth outline drafted in part by Jean-Ignace Jacqueminot [ fr ] (1754–1813). Jacqueminot's draft, the so-called loi Jacqueminot, dealt almost exclusively with persons and emphasized the need to reform the divorce laws, to strengthen parental authority and increase the testator's freedom to dispose of the free portion of his estate. It was rejected.

Napoleon's victory at the Battle of Marengo allowed him to consolidate his power in France. Returning to Paris, he appointed on 12 August 1800 a commission of distinguished jurists and politicians, including Jacques de Maleville, François Denis Tronchet, Félix-Julien-Jean Bigot de Préameneu, Jean-Étienne-Marie Portalis to draft a civil code. For this commission, Cambacérès (now Second Consul), and Napoleon himself chaired the plenary sessions. After this process finished, the Code was sent to the Legislative Body as a preliminary bill in December 1801, where it was rejected by a vote of 142 to 139. In response, Napoleon announced on 2 January 1802 that he was suspending all projects, effectively closing the assemblies' sessions; simultaneously, he went to the Sénat conservateur to berate its members. These tactics cowed the legislature into submission, and gave Napoleon the majority he needed. The code finally came into effect on 21 March 1804.

The process developed mainly out of the various customs, but was inspired by Justinian's sixth-century codification of Roman law, the Corpus Juris Civilis and, within that, Justinian's Code (Codex). The Napoleonic Code, however, differed from Justinian's in important ways:

The Napoleonic Code marked a fundamental change in the nature of the civil law legal system, making laws clearer and more accessible. It also superseded the former conflict between royal legislative power and, particularly in the final years before the Revolution, protests by judges representing views and privileges of the social classes to which they belonged. Such conflict led the Revolutionaries to take a negative view of judges making law.

This is reflected in the Napoleonic Code provision prohibiting judges from deciding a case by way of introducing a general rule (Article 5), since the creation of general rules is an exercise of legislative and not of judicial power. In theory, there is thus no case law in France. However, the courts still had to fill in the gaps in the laws and regulations and, indeed, were prohibited from refusing to do so (Article 4). Moreover, both the code and legislation have required judicial interpretation. Thus a vast body of case law has come into existence, but without any rule of stare decisis.

The preliminary article of the code established certain important provisions regarding the rule of law. Laws could be applied only if they had been duly promulgated, and then only if they had previously been officially published (including provisions for publishing delays, given the means of communication available at the time). In brief, no secret laws were authorized. It prohibited ex post facto laws (i.e. laws that apply to events that occurred before their introduction). The code also prohibited judges from refusing to do justice on grounds of the insufficiency of the law, thereby encouraging them to interpret the law. On the other hand, it also prohibited judges from making general judgements of a legislative nature (see above).

With regard to family, the code established the supremacy of the husband over his wife and children, the status quo in Europe at the time. Women had even fewer rights than children. Divorce by mutual consent was abolished in 1804.

The draft Military Code was presented to Napoleon by the special commission headed by Pierre Daru in June 1805; however, as the War of the Third Coalition progressed, the code was put aside and never implemented.

In 1791, Louis Michel le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau presented a new criminal code to the National Constituent Assembly. He explained that it outlawed only "true crimes", and not "phony offences created by superstition, feudalism, the tax system, and [royal] despotism ". He did not list the crimes "created by superstition". The new penal code did not mention blasphemy, heresy, sacrilege, witchcraft, incest, or homosexuality, which led to these former offences being swiftly decriminalized. In 1810, a new criminal code was issued under Napoleon. As with the Penal Code of 1791, it did not contain provisions for religious crimes, incest, or homosexuality.

The French Revolution's Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen enunciated the presumption of innocence until found guilty. Concerned by the possibility of arbitrary arrest and detention, or excessive remand, Napoleon remarked that care should be taken to preserve personal freedoms, especially before the Imperial Court: "these courts would have a great strength, they should be prohibited from abusing this situation against weak citizens without connections." However, remand still was usual for defendants suspected of serious crimes such as murder.

The possibility of lengthy remand periods was one criticism—particularly voiced in common law countries—of the Napoleonic Code. Another concern was the combination of magistrate and prosecutor into a single role. However, once the work of the juge d'instruction was completed, the trial itself followed the principle of presumption of innocence; for example, the juror's oath explicitly required jurors not to betray the interests of the defendants or ignore their defense.

The rules governing court proceedings gave significant power to the prosecution; however, criminal justice in European countries in those days tended to repression. For instance, it was only in 1836 that prisoners charged with a felony were given a formal right to counsel in England. In comparison, article 294 of the Napoleonic Code of Criminal Procedure allowed the defendant access to a lawyer before a Cour d'assises, and mandated the court to appoint a lawyer for the defendants who did not have one. (Failing to do so nullified the proceedings.)

Whether or not the Cour d'assises, which judges severe crimes, should operate with a jury was a topic of considerable controversy. Napoleon supported jury trials (or petit jury), and they were finally adopted. On the other hand, Napoleon opposed the indictment jury (" grand jury " of common law countries), and preferred to assign this task to the criminal division of the Court of Appeals. Special courts were created to judge criminals who might intimidate the jury.

The French codes, now more than 60 in number, are frequently amended, as well as judicially re-interpreted. Therefore, for over a century all of the codes in force have been documented in the annually revised editions published by Dalloz (Paris). These editions consist of thorough annotations, with references to other codes, relevant statutes, judicial decisions (even if unpublished), and international instruments. The "small (petit)" version of the Civil Code in this form is nearly 3,000 pages, available in print and online. Additional material, including scholarly articles, is added in the larger "expert (expert)" version and the still larger "mega (méga)" version, both of which are available in print and on searchable CD-ROM. By this stage, it has been suggested, the Civil Code has become "less a book than a database".

The sheer number of codes, together with digitization, led the Commission supérieure de codification to reflect in its annual report for 2011:

The Commission observes that the age of drawing up new codes is probably reaching its end. The aim of a nearly complete codification of the law is no longer pursued, for three reasons: firstly, the technical developments by which texts are provided in non-physical form offer to users modes of access that are comparable in many ways to those available through a code; secondly, the creation of new codes encounters a kind of law of diminishing returns in that, the more progress that is made in the development of new codes, the trickier it becomes to determine in which code particular provisions should be located; and, finally, it is clear that certain kinds of provision [...] are unsuitable for codification, since codification makes sense only when it involves provisions that possess sufficient generality.

A year later, the Commission recommended that, after its current codification projects were completed, there should not be any further codes; an additional reason was government delay in publishing reforms that the Commission had completed. The government responded encouragingly in March 2013, but the Commission in 2014 complained that this has not been followed through; in particular, that the government had abandoned its plan for a public service code (code général de la fonction publique).

Even though the Napoleonic Code was not the first civil code, it was the first modern legal code to be widely adopted in Europe, and it influenced the law of many of the countries formed during and after the Napoleonic Wars. In the German regions on the west bank of the Rhine (Rhenish Palatinate and Prussian Rhine Province), the former Duchy of Berg and the Grand Duchy of Baden, the Napoleonic Code was influential until the introduction of the Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch in 1900 as the first common civil code for the entire German Empire.

A number of factors have been shown by Arvind and Stirton to have had a determinative role in the decision by the German states to receive the code, including territorial concerns, Napoleonic control and influence, the strength of central state institutions, a feudal economy and society, rule by liberal (enlightened despotic) rulers, nativism among the governing elites, and popular anti-French sentiment.

A civil code with Napoleonic code influences was also adopted in 1864 in Romania, and remained in force until 2011.

The term "Napoleonic Code" is also used to refer to legal codes of other jurisdictions that are influenced by the French Code Napoléon, especially the Civil Code of Lower Canada (replaced in 1994 by the Civil Code of Quebec), mainly derived from the Coutume de Paris, which the British continued to use in Canada following the 1763 Treaty of Paris. However, most of the laws in Latin American countries are not heavily influenced by the Napoleonic Code, as the Spanish and Portuguese versions of the civil code formed the foundation of the Latin American legal systems e.g. the Chilean, Mexican, and Puerto Rican civil codes.

In Mauritius, the Civil Code, which originates from the Napoleonic Code, represents an important primary source of law and provides for the rights of individuals, matrimonial regimes, contract law, and property law, amongst others. The French Civil Code was extended to Mauritius under the title Code Napoléon by decree of Charles Mathieu Isidore Decaen, Capitaine-General, on 21 April 1808. The Code was modified and embodied in Chapter 179 of the Revised Laws of Mauritius 1945, edited by Sir Charlton Lane, former Chief Justice of Mauritius. The 1808 decree was repealed by Act 9 of 1983, but the Revision of Laws Act which was enacted in 1974, made provision, in section 7, for the publication of the Code under the title "Code Civil Mauricien."

In the United States, the legal system is largely based on English common law. But the state of Louisiana is unique in being strongly influenced by French and Spanish legal traditions in its civil code. Spanish and French colonial forces quarreled over Louisiana during most of the 1700s, with Spain ultimately ceding the territory to France in 1800, which in turn sold the territory to the United States in 1803. The 10th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution grants states control of laws not specifically given to the federal government, so Louisiana's legal system retains many French elements. Examples of the practical legal differences between Louisiana and the other states include the bar exam and legal standards of practice for attorneys in Louisiana being significantly different from other states; Louisiana is the only U.S. state to practice forced inheritance of an estate; additionally, some of Louisiana's laws clash with the Uniform Commercial Code practiced by the other 49 states.

During his rise to power and throughout his reign, Napoleon not only benefitted from circumstance but also cultivated his own image through the use of propaganda. Napoleon excelled at garnering public support and capitalising on his victories to convey a persona associated with success and heroism. He utilised propaganda in a wide range of media including theatre, art, newspapers, and bulletins to "promote the precise image he desired." Napoleon’s bulletins from the battlefield were published in newspapers and were well read throughout the country. He used these publications to exaggerate his victories and spread his glorified interpretation of these successes throughout France. Napoleon also controlled his visual representation through commissioned artworks. He worked with artists such as Jacques-Louis David, whose painting Napoleon Crossing the Alps depicted him as a heroic and almost divine leader on a white horse, symbolizing power, courage, and destiny. This image became one of the most recognizable examples of Napoleonic propaganda.

In addition to more standard methods of propaganda, such as the press, Napoleon capitalised on the popularity of medallions for his own purposes. Specifically, Napoleon used medallions as tools to promote his desired image both before and after he became Emperor. The design of these medallions often borrowed from classical antiquity, featuring Roman gods, warriors, and heroic symbols. This Neoclassical imagery connected Napoleon’s rule to the grandeur of ancient Rome, reinforcing his authority and portraying his empire as a continuation of a glorious past. In the end, he commissioned more medals than Louis XV and Louis XVI combined. Of particular importance was Napoleon’s first set of medallions, the "Five Battles" Series, produced to commemorate his victories during the first Italian campaign.

The Millesimo-Dego medallion features Hercules holding a club and the Hydra of Lerna’s head. In the other hand Hercules is holding a torch of blazing fire, ready to slaughter this beast. Around the borders of the medals reads " Bataille De Millesimo Combat de Dego." The Hercules figure on these coins represents victory but was also a symbol chosen by the French Republic to represent the nation, thereby connecting Napoleon to both triumph and France.

The Po-Adda-Mincio medal depicts Napoleon leading his soldiers across the Adda on the bridge at Lodi. This medallion glorifies the battle in which most of Lombardy, an Italian province, was captured by the French Army. Subsequently, Napoleon was named General-in-Chief at Milan, the Lombard capital. The coin celebrates not only Napoleon’s victory but his ascension to greater power.

The Battle of Castiglione and the combat at Peschiera medallion pays tribute to Napoleon’s victories in Italy. Napoleon faced an Austrian army in both locations and defeated them, strengthening the French Army’s position in the region. The coin displays three naked warriors, two locked in combat while the third lies slain on the ground. Of the two living figures, one, representing Napoleon’s army, stands ready to strike the final blow to the vanquished Austrians. In some versions Napoleon’s name is inscribed on the coin connecting Bonaparte to the victory and promoting his own personal image.

The Capitulation of Mantua coin commemorates the capture of the Northern Italian city by Napoleon. The medal depicts a woman handing the keys of the city to a Roman warrior. On the reverse, " A L’Arméé D’Italie Victorieuse " is inscribed in addition to Napoleon’s name on some editions of the coin. Symbols from antiquity were used throughout the revolutionary period to tie the new French Republic to the glory of Ancient Rome. By using Roman soldiers on the medallions, Napoleon not only connected himself to the grandeur of ancient times, but also promoted his image as a victorious leader of Revolutionary France.

The Tagliamento-Trieste medallion immortalises Napoleon’s 1797 crossing of the Tagliomento River and the capture of Trieste. The medal shows a god-like figure reclining near a river while a charging army rushes a fleeing group of men. The attacking army is headed by a man on horseback, presumably Napoleon. Like the other medallions, one version has Napoleon’s name inscribed on the side. The medallion bolsters Napoleon’s image by directly connecting him to yet another victory.

The Napoléon is the colloquial term for a former French gold coin. The coins were minted (at various times) in denominations of 5, 10, 20, 40, 50, and 100 francs. This article focuses on the 20 franc coins issued during the reign of Napoléon Bonaparte, which are 21 mm in diameter, weigh 6.45 grams (gross weight) and, at 90% pure, contain 0.1867 troy ounces (5.807 g) of pure gold. The coin was issued during the reign of Napoleon I and features his portrait on the obverse. The denomination (known as the Franc Germinal) continued in use through the 19th century and later French gold coins in the same denomination were generally referred to as "Napoléons". Earlier French gold coins are referred to as Louis (the name of eighteen French kings) or écu (an old French word for shield). Gold Napoléons have historically proven more resilient than other gold coins to economic forces, such as after the Suez Crisis when unlike other coins Napoléons did not weaken.

The coins were originally minted in two denominations, 20 and 40 francs for Napoléon Bonaparte. The 40-franc gold piece did not become popular. The 20 franc coins are 21 mm in diameter (about the size of a U.S. five-cent piece or a Swiss 20 Rappen coin), weigh 6.45 grams (gross weight) and, at 90% pure, contain 0.1867 troy ounces (5.807 g) of pure gold. The 40 franc coins are 26 mm in diameter, weigh 12.90 grams (gross weight) and are 90% pure gold.

They were issued during the reign of Napoleon I and feature his portrait, sometimes bare headed and other times wearing a laurel wreath (the ancient Roman symbol of imperial or military glory) and, depending upon the political status of France, the words on the front: either Bonaparte – Premier Consul (First Consul) or Napoléon Empereur (emperor). On the back: the legends read either "RÉPUBLIQUE FRANÇAISE" (French Republic) or after 1809, "EMPIRE FRANÇAIS" (French Empire). There was even a 20 and 40 Lire Napoleon minted under the auspices of the Kingdom of Italy, a client state. "Bonaparte First Consul" pieces of similar size, weight and fineness were struck at the Turin Mint. The obverse (L'Italie Délivrée à Marengo]) recounts that Italy was liberated from Austria by Bonaparte at Marengo, Piedmont on 14 June 1800, whereat the French General Louis Desaix was killed. The reverse indicates the extent liberated lands, known as Gaul Subalpine, Eridania or Northern Italy. The type was created pursuant to the decree of the Gaul Subalpine government established after the Battle of Marengo and which existed from 16 June 1800, through 11 September 1802.

The coin continued in use through the 19th century and later French gold coins in the same denomination were generally referred to as "Napoleons". In particular the coins of Napoleon I were minted not only at the several French mints but also at the mints in Italian territories: Genoa, Turin (1803 to 1813), Rome (1812 to 1813), the Netherlands: Utrecht (1812 to 1813), and Swiss territories: Geneva, during the French occupation of these places. Although the mints came under French administration and minted French Empire coins, it was otherwise business as usual as the incumbent mint masters remained in their posts, for example: Sarwaas in Utrecht, Paroletti in Turin and Mazzio in Rome.

Some coins of King Louis XVIII were minted in London in 1815. The English were supportive of the return of the French king to power after he was deposed by Napoleon in 1815, during the famous Hundred Days. The coins minted at London were purportedly authorized by Louis XVIII himself and were used to pay British troops occupying parts of North Western France. Some coins found their way to Paris and were considered counterfeits by the monetary authorities there and then. There was an exchange of diplomatic letters between France and England and the activity was stopped. The English artist who engraved the London dies, Thomas Wyon, Jr. (1792–1817), a highly accomplished artist, was insulted when his dies which were low relief based on the French struck coins and the original engravings of London born French engraver Pierre Joseph Tiolier (1763–1819) were considered inferior. Allegations also arose that the London Mint did not respect French law regarding fineness and tolerance with these coins and these facts have been offered for the early withdrawal of the coins from circulation. However, contemporaneous assays demonstrated adherence to the French law by the London minters. No coins were struck after 30 November 1815.

Napoleon tried to unify Europe and almost succeeded, especially in terms of the coinage. The Napoleon coin was first authorized by a Monetary Ordinance of 28 March 1803 by the Premier Consul (First Consul) Napoleon Bonaparte. The 20 franc gold pieces which he authorized in 1803, became the model of all the coins of the Latin Monetary Union which circulated in Europe until 1914. The French coin carries the effigy, in profile, Napoleon, who would later become the French Emperor. The coins had the same value as the Louis, which bears the likeness of the pre-French Revolution King Louis XIV. For Napoleon, there were ostensibly seven types or varieties of the coins minted. In general the varieties differed in terms of obverse legend, reverse legends, portraiture, and calendaring system. For each variety, there was a new enabling statute or executive decree: 28 March 1803; 7 April 1803; 26 June 1804; 8 September 1805; 11 February 1807; 5 August 1807; and 22 October 1808. By extension, the term Napoleon is applied today to all the various types of 20 franc French gold pieces.

Although the portraits and legends changed with the political changes in France, the denomination remained in usage until World War I under what was known as the Latin Monetary Union, the "Euro before the Euro", so-to-speak. Switzerland had 20 Swiss franc pieces, Spain had 20 peseta coins, Italy had 20 lira pieces, Belgium had 20 Belgian franc coins, and Greece had 20 drachma coins, all of which circulated and were accepted throughout Europe. Only for political reasons did the United Kingdom and the German Empire refuse to follow this direction. Attempts were even taken to explore the unification of the European currency with the American dollar, which explains the extremely rare U.S. pattern coins carrying $4 marking on the face and 25 franc markings on the reverse.

The coins bear the signature of the master engraver responsible for the engraving of the coins' dies. In later times the engraver used a symbol to identify himself. The coins also bear the mark (a symbol, letter, or monogram) denoting the particular French (or French controlled) mint which struck the coin. These mint marks often signal the rarity of the issue, for example the Napoleon 20 franc gold coin struck in 1809 at Paris and marked with the letter "A" had an issue of 687,508 coins; in the same year at the mint at Bordeaux, marked with the letter "K" only 2,534 coins were struck; while the mint at Lille, marked with a "W" struck 16,911 coins. Over the years there were some twenty-three French mints not only in France but also in annexed or occupied countries, including Italy, Switzerland and the Netherlands.

Jean Pierre Droz (1746–1823), was perhaps the most skillful and certainly the most famous engraver and medallist of his day. Born in La-Chaux-de-Fonds, Switzerland, Droz studied in Paris and won acclaim with his fine pattern piece known as the Écu de Calonne after the French finance minister. This coin was struck with an edge inscription using a six-segmented collar (virole brisée) of Droz' own invention at the Paris Mint. After a brief tenure at Matthew Boulton's Birmingham (Soho) Mint, Droz returned to France and in 1799 was appointed Keeper of the Coins and Medals at the Paris Mint, which post he held throughout the Napoleonic era. Meanwhile, he was much in demand by other governments as a consultant. He struck patterns for Spain, the United States and his native Neuchâtel among others. In French coinage, the effigy of Napoleon as engraved by him appears both on the 20 and 40 franc gold pieces from 1804 through 1814. Droz was also responsible for the pattern of the 5 francs of the "Hundred Days" in 1815. Among his medallic work, the coronation medals for Napoleon in 1804 ("Medal Celebrating the Coronation of Napoleon I by Pope Pius VII at Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris") and several medals and jetons for the Bank of France are the most noteworthy.

Pierre-Joseph Tiolier (1763–1819), born in London, was appointed the engraver-general of the Paris Mint from 1803 to 1816. Tiolier engraved the patterns for the Bonaparte-First Consul coins. Tiolier was trained by his brother-in-law, the notable, Benjamin Duvivier. Many improvements of the coining machinery took place during Tiolier's tenure at the mint. His many medals and coins attest to his high skill. Tiolier's full signature appears on the dies he cut while coins bearing a "Tr" were from dies cut by others.

Thomas Wyon, Jr. (1792–1817) was an English medallist who died at the early age of 25. In both 1810 and again in 1811, he won the Society of Arts gold medal for medal engraving. In only four years, from 1811 to 1815, he rose at the Royal Mint from a probationer to chief engraver.

After a competition among artists who submitted designs: Nicholas Guy Antoine Brenet (1773-1846), André Galle (1761-1844), Romain-Vincent Jeuffroy (1749-1826), the design by the Swiss, Jean-Pierre Droz (1746-1823) was selected. The coins were the work of Joseph Pierre Tiolier (1763-1819), who was appointed Chief Engraver of the Paris Mint on 1 April 1803. There were no reducing machines at the time and the entirety of the engraver's work was completed by directly cutting into the die face with punches and gravers.

In Year XI the government invested in a different method of minting pioneered by Jean-Pierre-Joseph Darcet (1777-1844). And in 1807, new minting equipment was introduced under the supervision of Philippe Joachim Gengembre (1764-1838), Inspector General of the Mints. This equipment, a Balancier Manuel (screw press) included a full ring (closed collar), produced slightly reduced reliefs. The general appearance of the coins is thus slightly modified compared to the coins struck by the prior methods.

In accordance with the Concordat with Pope Pius VII (1742-1823), signed 15 July 1801, a decree put an end to the revolutionary calendar. On 17 Brumaire Year 14 (8 November 1805) the Minister of Finance announced the return to the Gregorian calendar, which had been outlawed in October 1793, with effect from 1 January 1806.

Slight modifications in the portrait make it possible to distinguish the 1807 type from the preceding 1806 type; in particular, the variation is in the space between the rim and the top of the head. The 1807 issues are remarkable because the design was decided during Napoleon's absence. When he returned to Paris he was surprised to discover the new coins which were the result of the engraver's diligence. This is also considered a transitional issue, that is a coin struck after an official series ends, or before an official series starts. It can also refer to a coin struck with either the obverse or the reverse of a discontinued or upcoming series. These coins are a transitional issue because they were minted just before the 1807/08 issues (with laurel crown). The term "tête de nègre" sometimes used for these coins is a colloquial descriptor applied because of the frizzy appearance of Napoleon's hair as that of an African man.

A decree was announced by the Ministry of Finance on 5 August 1807, specifying the addition of a laurel wreath to the bust of Napoleon symbolizing the military victories of the Emperor. The decree of 22 October 1808, specified that for coins issued after 1 January 1809, the legend ― "French Republic" would be replaced by ― "French Empire".

1813CL- Tiolier was responsible for the dies for the Napoleonic coinage of Genoa (15 November 1811 through 1814).

1813Flag- the coining of French coins at Utrecht began on 16 November 1812 and did not continue beyond 1813.

1815 – the beading for the 1815 issue consists of 100 beads rather than the 103 beads used from 1809 to 1814. The 1815 coins show a greater distance between the eyebrows and the points of the "N" in Napoleon which are 2.4 mm for 1815 compared to 1.5 mm for earlier strikes. It is unlikely that at the time of the Emperor's return, Tiolier's original 20 francs dies had been preserved and thus, the dies must have been re-cut for the Hundred Days (21 March 1815 through 14 July 1815). The 1815 issue constitutes a discrete variety and the dies, signed Tr, were cut by Droz.

1815R (London) was struck in a lower relief, therefore, examples are difficult to find in better quality, yielding what is known as "condition rarities". On the obverse, the portrait is unsigned by the engraver, Wyon. On the edge, the word "SALVUM" appears to begin with the letter "Z" and the word "FAC" is not separated by a dot from the word "REGEM." On the reverse, the date is flanked by a fleur de lye, which was not a mark of any mint director, and the letter "R" which was not assigned to any French mint. The issue was considered counterfeit at the time of issue; however, it was authorized by Louis XVIII, in exile, and used for the payment of British troops serving in France.

Between 1802 and 1814 millions of coins were struck and they circulated heavily. The average daily wage in 1805 was 1.50₣ (US 27¢).

The coins carry mottos on the edges. Irregularities of the rims are acceptable and are not considered defects as they were caused by shifts of the coining collar and are characteristic of the edge lettering process. The edge letters are not sharp. There may be adjustment marks on the rims as well. The die axis was not well fixed and oscillates between 5 and 7 o'clock (as illustrated in the above photo of the An IX coin).

In 1814 when Louis XVIII was restored to the throne of France (the Restoration), France changed its flag. Its coins, however, were merely modified to carry the king's portrait. There was a possibility that in modifying the coinage, Louis XVIII could have broken the reforms of the Revolution and returned to the duodecimal system and the livres of the Old Regime. But the new coins were struck with the same weight and fineness envisaged by Napoleon in the law of the 7 Germinal year XI, with one effigy (Louis XVIII) replacing another (Napoleon I).

All issues are 90% fine gold, have a nominal net weight of 6.45 grams and, have a diameter of 21 mm.

Napoléon, comte Daru (11 June 1807 – 20 February 1890), was a French soldier and politician.

Napoléon Daru was born on 11 June 1807 in Paris. He was the son of Pierre Daru and godson of Napoleon and Joséphine. He studied at the Lycée Louis-le-Grand, then at the École polytechnique and at the École militaire d'application in Metz. After becoming second-lieutenant of artillery in 1830, he participated with military honor in the French conquest of Algeria. He became peer of France in 1833.

During the French Second Republic he was a member of the National Constituent Assembly for Manche from 7 January 1849 to 26 May 1849, and a member of the National Legislative Assembly for Manche from 13 May 1849 to 8 December 1851. During the Second French Empire he was a member of the Corps législatif for Manche from 6 June 1869 to 4 September 1870. He was a member of the Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques in 1860, and Minister of Foreign Affairs in the cabinet of Émile Ollivier in 1870.

After Léon Gambetta dissolved the departmental general councils on 26 December 1870, Daru and Arthur Legrand protested the measure. During the French Third Republic Daru was a member of the National Assembly for Manche from 8 February 1871 to 7 March 1876. He belonged to the Orléanist parliamentary group, Centre droit. He was a member of the Senate from 30 January 1876 to 4 January 1879. Napoléon Daru died on 20 February 1890 in Paris.

Nathalie Geneviève Marie Kosciusko-Morizet (French pronunciation: [ natali kɔsjysko mɔʁizɛ ]) (born 14 May 1973), often referred to by her initials NKM, is an engineer and former politician.

She was a Member of Parliament, returned to the National Assembly from the Essonne 4th constituency for three consecutive mandates from 2002 to 2017, mayor of Longjumeau from 2008 to 2013, and an unsuccessful mayoral candidate for Paris in 2014. She has held positions of Regional Councillor for Île-de-France. She was twice a member of the French government and Minister of Ecology, Sustainable Development, Transport and Housing. She was also Assistant General Secretary of then majority party UMP and spokesperson for Nicolas Sarkozy in the 2012 presidential election. Since standing for mayor of Paris in March 2014, she had been leader of the opposition of the Council of Paris until her withdrawal from politics. From December 2014 to December 2015 she was Vice President of then opposition party UMP (renamed The Republicans).

Kosciusko-Morizet was born on 14 May 1973. She is of Polish Jewish descent but was raised Roman Catholic. She comes from a political family, the Kosciusko-Morizets. Her grandfather, Jacques Kosciusko (1913–1994) was an academic, a member of the French Resistance during the war, a Gaullist politician and former French ambassador in the US whose father-in-law, André Morizet, was a socialist senator and mayor of Boulogne-Billancourt. Her father François Kosciusko-Morizet (1940–2015) was the mayor of Sèvres. She is also the sister of Pierre Kosciusko-Morizet (b. 1977), one of the founders of Priceminister.com, the third ranked e-commerce site in France. According to genealogists, she is also related to Lucrezia Borgia from her mother's side, the Treuille family.

Kosciusko-Morizet graduated from the École Polytechnique and the Collège des Ingénieurs.

As a twenty-nine-year-old, Kosciusko-Morizet was elected a member of the French National Assembly in 2002, representing the department of Essonne, to the south of Paris, serving out the term for Pierre-André Wiltzer who was appointed deputy minister. She was reelected in 2007 and 2012. In parliament, she served on the Committee on Legal Affairs. In addition to her committee assignments, she was part of the French-Polish Parliamentary Friendship Group.

In the 2008 French municipal elections, Kosciusko-Morizet was elected mayor of Longjumeau (Essonne).

In the government of Prime Minister François Fillon, Kosciusko-Morizet became a state secretary in the French government responsible for the environment in 2007, serving under Minister of Ecology, Energy, Sustainable Development and the Sea Jean-Louis Borloo. Then in 2009 she became state secretary with responsibility for Forward Planning, Assessment of Public Policies and Development of the Digital Economy, before eventually succeeding Borloo as Minister for Ecology, Sustainable Development, Transport and Housing in November 2010. In this capacity, she chaired the meetings of G8 energy ministers when France held the group's rotating presidency in 2011.

In 2012, Kosciusko-Morizet left her position as minister to become spokesperson for Nicolas Sarkozy during his presidential reelection campaign.

In February 2013, Kosciusko-Morizet announced she would be a candidate for the Mayor of Paris in the 2014 local elections. She faced among others Rachida Dati in the UMP primary election. The polls had Kosciusko-Morizet as a favourite to win the primary. She was endorsed by François Fillon.

On 3 June 2013 Kosciusko-Morizet won UMP 's primaries for the office of Mayor of Paris with 58.16% of the vote.

In the Mayoral elections held on 23 March and 30 March 2014, Kosciusko-Morizet's UMP lists were defeated by the lists led by Socialist Deputy Mayor Anne Hidalgo, who was elected Mayor of Paris on 4 April 2015. The Socialist, Green and Communist parties created a coalition with 91 councillors, while the UMP and UDI-Modem parties were relegated to the opposition with 71 councillors.

After Nicolas Sarkozy 's return in politics in 2014, Kosciusko-Morizet was appointed vice-president of the UMP (since 2015 The Republicans) to represent the moderate fringe of the party, while her rival Laurent Wauquiez represented the hardline part. After the 2015 regional elections, during which Wauquiez successfully ran in Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes, she was ousted by Sarkozy for criticizing his strategy and was replaced by Wauquiez.

Then, Kosciusko-Morizet announced her candidacy for the primary. Despite some difficulties, she got the sufficient number of supports to run. She finished fourth with only 2.6% of the vote, far behind Sarkozy (20.1%). She endorsed Alain Juppé for the second round.

In the French legislative election of 2017, Kosciusko-Morizet stood in Paris's 2nd constituency, previously held by former prime minister François Fillon. During the campaign, she was hospitalised for a night after falling on the pavement and hitting her head when a protester threw a batch of election leaflets in her face. She was defeated in the second round of the election by La République En Marche! candidate Gilles Le Gendre.

In 2017, Kosciusko-Morizet joined Capgemini, where she was in charge of the cyberdefense division in New York. She has since been working for Antin Infrastructure Partners in New York (2021–2024) and Paris (since 2024).

Although considered close to Jacques Chirac throughout his presidency, Kosciusko-Morizet is considered socially liberal and part of the " blue ecologists " group. She supports marriage equality and is a strong advocate of green issues. In an interview to the Daily Telegraph in March 2013, she said she held "a lot of admiration" for former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. During the 2016 primaries, she presented herself as the only solidly pro-European politician among the party's eight presidential candidates. Within the Republicans, she has been one of the sharpest critics of the National Front (FN), warning that the party "would disfigure France".

In a 2016 op-ed published by Sunday newspaper Le Journal du Dimanche, Kosciusko-Morizet joined sixteen other high-profile women from across the political spectrum – including Élisabeth Guigou, Christine Lagarde, and Fleur Pellerin – in making a public vow to expose "all sexist remarks, inappropriate gestures and behaviour".

Kosciusko-Morizet was married to Jean-Pierre Philippe and has two sons, born in 2005 and 2009. In March 2016, she announced that she and JP Philippe had divorced by mutual consent.

The National Assembly (French : Assemblée nationale [ asɑ̃ble nɑsjɔnal ]) is the lower house of the bicameral French Parliament under the Fifth Republic, the upper house being the Senate (Sénat). The National Assembly's legislators are known as députés ([ depyte ]) or deputies.

There are 577 députés, each elected by a single-member constituency (at least one per department) through a two-round system ; thus, 289 seats are required for a majority. The president of the National Assembly, currently Yaël Braun-Pivet, presides over the body. The officeholder is usually a member of the largest party represented, assisted by vice presidents from across the represented political spectrum. The National Assembly's term is five years; however, the president of France may dissolve the assembly, thereby calling for early elections, unless it has been dissolved in the preceding twelve months. This measure has become rarer since the 2000 French constitutional referendum reduced the presidential term from seven to five years; in the four elections between 2002 and 2017, the president of the Republic had always had a coattail effect delivering a majority in the assembly election two months after the presidential election, and it was accordingly of little benefit to dissolve it. In 2024, it was dissolved following the announcement of the results of the European Parliament election. Due to the separation of powers, the president of the Republic may not take part in parliamentary debates. They can address the Congress of the French Parliament, which meets at the Palace of Versailles, or have the address read by the presidents of both chambers of Parliament, with no subsequent debate.

Following a tradition started by the first National Assembly during the French Revolution, the left-wing parties sit to the left as seen from the president's seat and the right-wing parties to the right; the seating arrangement thus directly indicates the left–right political spectrum as represented in the assembly. The official seat of the National Assembly is the Palais Bourbon on the Rive Gauche of the Seine in the 7th arrondissement of Paris. The Assembly also uses other neighbouring buildings, including the Immeuble Chaban-Delmas on the Rue de l'Université, Paris. Like most institutions of importance in Paris, it is guarded by Republican Guards.

Following the May 1958 crisis, the Constitution of France in the Fifth Republic greatly increased the power of the executive at the expense of Parliament, compared with the previous constitutions of the Third and Fourth Republics.

The president of the Republic can decide to dissolve the National Assembly and call for new legislative elections. This is meant as a way to resolve stalemates where the Assembly cannot decide on a clear political direction. This possibility is seldom exercised. In 1997, President Jacques Chirac dissolved the National Assembly due to the lack of popularity of Prime Minister Alain Juppé. However, the plan backfired, as the newly elected majority was opposed to Chirac.

The National Assembly can dismiss the executive government (that is, the prime minister and other ministers) by a motion of no confidence (motion de censure). For this reason, prime ministers and their government are necessarily from the dominant party or coalition in the assembly. In the case of a president of the Republic and National Assembly from opposing parties, this leads to the situation known as cohabitation ; this situation, which has occurred three times (twice under François Mitterrand, once under Jacques Chirac), is likely to be rarer now that terms of the president and Assembly are the same length (5 years since the 2000 referendum) and are elected in the same year.

While motions de censure are periodically proposed by the opposition following government actions that it deems highly inappropriate, they are purely rhetorical; party discipline ensures that, throughout a parliamentary term, the Government is never dismissed by the Assembly, at least when the governing party/coalition holds a working majority in the Chamber (which was no longer the case following the 2022 election). Since the establishment of the Fifth Republic in 1958, there have been only three successful motion de censure. The first occurred on October 5, 1962, when the National Assembly voted against President Charles de Gaulle's proposal to elect the President by direct universal suffrage. De Gaulle responded by dissolving the National Assembly within days. The second motion of censure was passed on December 4, 2024, with 331 deputies voting against the government of Prime Minister Michel Barnier. The third one was passed against the Bayrou Government on 8 September, 2025. It was voted by 364 deputies in response to Bayrou's use of article 49 of the Constitution of France to bypass the National Assembly on a financial bill.

The Government (the prime minister and the minister in charge of relations with Parliament) used to set the priorities of the agenda for the Assembly's sessions, except for a single day each month. In practice, given the number of priority items, it meant that the schedule of the assembly was almost entirely set by the executive; bills generally only have a chance to be examined if proposed or supported by the executive. This, however, was amended on 23 July 2008. Under the amended Constitution, the Government sets the priorities for two weeks in a month. Another week is designated for the Assembly's "control" prerogatives (consisting mainly of oral questions addressed to the Government). The fourth one is also set by the Assembly. Furthermore, one day per month is set by a "minority" (group supporting the Government but which is not the largest group) or "opposition" group (having officially declared it did not support the Government).

Legislators of the assembly can ask written or oral questions to ministers. The Wednesday afternoon 3 p.m. session of "questions to the government" is broadcast live on television. Like Prime Minister's Questions in the United Kingdom, it is largely a show for the viewers, with members of the majority asking flattering questions, while the opposition tries to embarrass the government.

Since 1988, the 577 deputies are elected by direct universal suffrage with a two-round system by constituency, for a five-year mandate, subject to dissolution. The constituencies each have about 100,000 inhabitants. The electoral law of 1986 specifies their variance of population within a department should not exceed 20%, when conducting any redistribution. However, none were redrawn between 1982 and 2009. As a result of population movements, births and deaths inequalities between the less populous rural districts and the urban districts arose. The deputy for the most populous (within Val-d'Oise), represented 188,000 voters, while that for the other extreme (for Lozère at-large), represented 34,000. That for Saint Pierre and Miquelon serves fewer than 6,000. Most were redrawn in 2009 (boundaries officially adopted in 2010, effective in 2012), but this redistribution was controversial, such as the creation of eleven constituencies for French residents overseas without increasing the number of seats. The electoral map is drawn by an independent commission.

To be elected in the first round of voting, a candidate must obtain at least 50% of the votes cast, with a turnout of at least 25% of the registered voters on the electoral rolls. If no candidate is elected in the first round, those who account for in excess of 12.5% (1 ⁄ 8) of the registered voters are entered in the second round of voting. If no three or more meet such conditions, the two highest-placing candidates automatically advance to the second round of voting – at which, the candidate who receives the most votes is elected. Each candidate is enrolled along with a substitute, who takes the candidate's place if during tenure incapacitated or barred – if the deputy becomes a government member, most notably.

The organic law of 10 July 1985 established a system of party-list proportional representation within the framework of the département. It was necessary within this framework to obtain at least 5% of the vote to elect an official. However, the legislative election of 1986, carried out under this system, gave France a new majority which returned the National Assembly to the aforementioned two-round system.

Of the 577 elected deputies, 539 represent metropolitan France, 27 represent the overseas departments and overseas collectivities ; 11 represent French residents overseas.

The agenda of the National Assembly is mostly decided by the Government, although the Assembly can also enforce its own agenda. Indeed, article 48 of the Constitution guarantees at least a monthly session decided by the Assembly.

A law proposal is a document divided into three distinct parts: a title, an exposé des motifs and a dispositif. The exposé des motifs is similar to a preamble and describes the objectives of the legislation The dispositif is the legislation as such, containing articles which contain the bill's content.

A proposal for a law can originate from the Government (projet de loi) or a member of Parliament (proposition de loi). Certain laws must come from the Government, including financial regulations. The law proposals may pass through the National Assembly and Senate in an indifferent order, except for financial laws which must go through the Assembly first, or territorial organisational laws or laws for French citizens living in foreign countries, which must first pass through the Senate.

For an ordinary proposition of law, texts must be first reviewed by a permanent parliamentary commission, or a special commission designated for this purpose. During the discussion in the commission, or in plenary sessions in the assembly, the Government and Parliament can add, modify or delete articles of the proposal. The text is thus amended. Amendments proposed by a parliamentarian cannot mobilise further public funding. The Government has the right to ask the Assembly to pronounce itself in one vote only with the amendments proposed or accepted by the Government itself.

Projects of propositions of laws will be examined succinctly by the two chambers of Parliament (National Assembly and Senate) until the text is identical. After two lectures by the two chambers (or just one if the Government chooses to engage an acceleration of the text adoption, which can happen only in certain conditions) and without any accord, the Prime Minister or the two presidents of the chambers, conjointly with first, can convoke a special commission composed by an equal number of members of Assembly and Senators to reach a compromise and propose a new text. The new proposition has to be approved by the Government before being re-proposed to the two chambers. No new amendments can be added except on the Government's approval. If the new proposal of law fails to be approved by the two chambers, the Government can, after a new lecture by the National Assembly and the Senate, ask the National Assembly to rule a final judgement. In that case, the National Assembly can either take back the text elaborated by the special commission or the last one that they voted for – possibly modified by several amendments by the Senate.

The president of the Republic, on the Government or the two chambers' proposal, can submit every law proposal as a referendum if it concerns the organisation of public powers, reforms on the economy, social and environmental measures, or every proposition that would have an impact on the functioning of the institutions. A referendum on the previous conditions can also be initiated by a fifth of the membership of Parliament, supported by a tenth of the voters inscribed on the electoral lists. Finally, the laws are promulgated by the president of the Republic's signature. The officeholder may call for a new legislative deliberation of the law or one of its articles in front of the National Assembly, which cannot be denied.

Assembly legislators receive a salary of €7,043.69 per month. There is also the "compensation representing official expenses" (indemnité représentative de frais de mandat, IRFM) of €5,867.39 per month to pay costs related to the office, as well as a total of €8,949 per month to pay up to five employees. They also have an office in the assembly, various perquisites in terms of transport and communications, social security, a pension fund and unemployment insurance. Under article 26 of the Constitution, deputies, like Senators, are protected by parliamentary immunity. In the case of an accumulation of mandates, a deputy cannot receive a wage of more than €9,779.11. Deputies' expenses can be scrutinised by a commission; sanctions can be pronounced if expenses were undue.

The position of deputy of the National Assembly is incompatible with that of any other elected legislative position (Senator or since 2000, Member of European Parliament) or with some administrative functions (members of the Constitutional Council and senior officials such as prefects, magistrates, or officers who are ineligible for department where they are stationed).

Deputies may not have more than one local mandate (in a municipal, intercommunal, general, or regional council) in addition to their incumbent mandate. Since the 2017 legislative election, deputies cannot hold an executive position in any local government (municipality, department, region). However, they can hold a part-time councillor mandate. In July 2017, 58% of deputies held such a seat. Since 1958, the mandate is also incompatible with a ministerial function. Upon appointment to the Government, the elected deputy has one month to choose between the mandate and the office. If they choose the second option, then they are replaced by their substitute. Since a change validated by the National Assembly in 2008, deputies can return to their seat in the assembly one month after the end of their cabinet position. Previously, a special election had to be held.

To be eligible to be elected to the National Assembly, one must be at least 18 years old, of French citizenship, as well as not subject to a sentence of deprivation of civil rights or to personal bankruptcy.

1. Eligibility due to personal requirements

The essential conditions to run for elections are the following. First, a candidate must have French citizenship. Secondly, the minimum age required to run for a seat at the National Assembly is set at 18 years old. The candidate must also have fulfilled his National Civic Day, a special day created to replace the military service. Finally, a candidate under guardianship and curatorship cannot be elected to the assembly.

Furthermore, a person cannot be elected if they were declared ineligible following fraudulent funding of a previous electoral campaign. Indeed, the voter could be considered as highly influenced and their decision making could be impacted. The sincerity of the results could thus not be regarded as viable and legitimate.

2. Eligibility due to positions that a person may occupy

The deputy mandate cannot be cumulated with a mandate of Senator, MEP, member of the Government or of the Constitutional Council.

The deputy mandate is also incompatible with being a member of the military corps on duty, as well as with the exercise of one of the following mandates: regional council executive, Corsican Assembly executive, departmental council executive or municipal council executive in a municipality of a least or more than 3,500 inhabitants. Prefects are also unable to be elected in France in every district they are exercising power or exercised power for less than three years before the date of the election.

Since 31 March 2017, being elected deputy is incompatible with most executive local mandates such as mayors, president of a regional council or member of the departmental council.

In 1795, 1797 & 1798, only part of the legislature was elected.

Under the Bourbon Restoration and July Monarchy, the term National Assembly was not in use for any French government organ. The lower house of the French legislature at the time was called the Chamber of Deputies.

Under the Second French Empire, the term National Assembly was not in use for any French government organ. The lower house of the French legislature at the time was called the Corps législatif.

Initially, the National Assembly of the French Third Republic was a unicameral constituent assembly. Following the enactment of the French Constitutional Laws of 1875, the term National Assembly was used to refer to a joint sitting of both Houses of the now-bicameral French legislature. The lower house of the French legislature at the time was called the Chamber of Deputies, while the upper house was called the Senate.

After the Fall of France (1940), the new Vichy regime forced the Assembly to approve the French Constitutional Law of 1940, which made the Assembly effectively powerless. Free France established a Provisional Consultative Assembly in 1943 based in Algiers representing the resistance movements, political parties, and territories that were engaged against the Axis.

The National Automated Genetic Fingerprint File (French : Fichier national automatisé des empreintes génétiques) is the national DNA database owned and operated by the government of France. It is used by both the country's national police force and local gendarmerie.

As of the end of 2024, the database had 4.4 million DNA profiles.

In June 1998, the Guigou law on the prevention of sexually related crimes, passed by the Plural Left Lionel Jospin government, created a national DNA database. The implementation, originally planned for 1999, was finally completed in 2001, with the database itself located at Écully in the Rhône, managed by a sub-directorate of the technical and scientific departments of the French police force.

In the aftermath of the September 11 attacks on the US in 2001, the French government increased the scope of the database to include DNA related to other serious criminal offences, such as voluntary manslaughter, criminal violence and terrorism.

A further 'law for interior safety' introduced on 18 March 2003 expanded the scope still further to cover almost all violent crimes to people or property, serious crimes such as drug trafficking, simple thefts, tags and dégradations, and finally almost all small offenses, but not traffic offenses or crimes committed abroad. Samples are taken from convicted persons and also from simple suspects. The law does not specify a minimum age.

In September 2009, Matthieu Bonduelle, the general secretary of the Syndicat de la Magistrature (the first syndicat of juges) has declared that "nobody defends a universal database, but, in fact, it is being done."

With the expansion of the database in 2003, it also became an offence for suspects to fail to provide a DNA sample, with punishment ranging from a prison sentence of between six months and two years, and a fine of between €7500 and €30000.

At the end of 2006, the media raised the case of individuals refusing to provide DNA samples. Many of them were civil disobedience activists opposed to Genetically modified organism (GMO) (See fr:Faucheurs volontaires). Although this was only around 200 cases, they denounced what they regarded as a threat to personal freedom.

National champions are corporations which are technically private businesses but due to governmental policy are ceded a dominant position in a national economy. In this system, these large organizations are expected not only to seek profit but also to "advance the interests of the nation"; the government sets policies which favor these organizations. The policy is practiced by many governments, in some sectors more than others (such as defense), but by giving an unfair advantage against market competition, the policy promotes economic nationalism domestically and global pre-eminence abroad contrary to the free market. The policy also deters or prevents venture capitalism.

As the policy is the collective form of inequality of opportunity, it is irreconcilable with the paradigm of the neo-liberal (or " laissez-faire ") economy. It was a major part of the dirigiste policy of 1945 – 1975 France.

Under a national champion policy, governments expect one domestic corporation or an oligopoly of such corporations, typically in strategic sectors (whether private or state-sponsored) to seek profit and to "advance the interests of the nation". The policy is practised or acquiesced to by every country in certain sectors (typically national defence and security and the printing of banknotes and often in the philanthropic, performing or subsidizing research and development of new technologies and through those National Institutes which produce marketable innovations). By allowing corporations a real or perceived monopoly due to the amalgamation of enterprises and the active or supportive suppression of domestic and foreign-based market competition, the policy over time operates as a form of economic nationalism as it is contrary to the free market and enhanced innovation.

As the policy is a form of enforced inequality of opportunity, it is irreconcilable with the paradigm of the liberal economy advocated by 18th century economist Adam Smith, considered to be the intellectual father of modern capitalism.

Academics often cite post- World War II Gaullist dirigisme in France as the pinnacle of the national champion policy. Other examples include the creation of the British Steel Corporation by the United Kingdom which acquired the country's largest 14 domestic steel companies in 1967. The prototypical British example was the establishment of Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI) in 1926, formed from the merger of four companies with the support of the British government: in the 1960s this policy was pursued further in the UK, in order to concentrate capital and create firms which could make the large capital investments and establish the large scale production required to exploit economies of scale and scope, with other examples including the General Electric Company (GEC) and British Leyland. The policy was abandoned by the government of Margaret Thatcher at the end of the 1970s, shifting instead to a more laissez-faire strategy aimed at maximising foreign investment. By 2005 all of Britain's "national champions" had come under foreign ownership, with the exceptions of the aerospace (BAE Systems and Rolls-Royce Holdings) and pharmaceutical (GlaxoSmithKline and AstraZeneca) sectors.

The risk involved with such policies is exemplified by the unsuccessful challenges to IBM's period of dominance of the innovative computer market by UK's ICL, France's Bull, and Italy's Olivetti during the 1970s. Successful and rewarding challenges however are shown to be possible in recent years, as exemplified by European aircraft champion Airbus, and Chinese train champion CRRC.

The state-owned national champions received high levels of protection, state financial support, political advice and governmental support for operating in foreign environments, and special rights of management autonomy, profit retention, and investment decisions. State-owned national champions in nonfinancial strategic sectors like energy, civil aviation, infrastructure, and strategic minerals are overseen by the State-Owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of the State Council (SASAC). The Chinese government also brokers partnerships between foreign investors and China's national champions. In addition to CRRC, notable examples of Chinese national champions include Huawei, Bank of China, and Sinopec.

The beginning of China's efforts to develop national champions were the State Council 's early 1980s creation of "general companies," which were large multi-region corporations under the supervision of China's central ministries. These efforts gained further momentum during the piloting of state-owned industry groups and the tenure of Jiang Zemin.

In support of Jiang's aggressive promotion of overseas foreign direct investment as part of going out, China's State Council assembled a team of 120 state-owned industry groups to be national champions between 1991 and 1997. Developing national champions also became increasingly important as China negotiated to enter the World Trade Organization.

During the tenure of Chinese leader Xi Jinping, China has encouraged mergers in of its state-owned enterprises, motivated by a desire to create larger and more competitive national champions with a bigger global market share by reducing price competition among SOEs abroad and increasing vertical integration. Consistent with China's Belt and Road Initiative, national champions "going out" remain a Chinese government priority.

China has promoted its national champions particularly strongly since 2017, with a focus on national champions in the technology sector. In 2018, China designated Baidu, Alibaba, iFlytek, Tencent, and SenseTime as " AI champions".

Academic Chen Li writes that institutional adaptation in China's state sector extends to the late 1950s, and that since the 1990s, "continuous learning, experimentation, and adaptation of CPC central bureaucracy... has not only brought about the rise of China's 'national champions' in finance, but also sustained critical support for the entire 'national team'."

The policy is evident variously in the 21st century: Russia is its maximal exponent among the world's G-20. Other examples are the merger of E.ON with Ruhrgas backed by the German government in 2000 or the merger of GDF with Suez backed by the French government in 2008.

Russian President Vladimir Putin has made "national champions" a central axis of his policy. The concept was introduced by Putin in his 1997 dissertation "Strategic Planning of the Reproduction of the Resource Bases". Putin, in turn, may have gotten the idea from a textbook by University of Pittsburgh analysts William King and David Cleland. Putin later expanded on the subject in an article published in 1999 in the Journal of the St. Petersburg Mining Institute.

Charles de Gaulle had also advocated similar ideas when he was the president of France in the 1950s.

In his dissertation, Putin wrote: "The process of restructuring the national economy must have the goal of creating the most effective and competitive companies on both the domestic and world markets."

Putin's 1999 article proposes that the state should closely regulate and develop the natural resources sector through creating companies with close links to the power vertical, making the firms big enough to compete with multinationals. These companies would become "national champions", representing the state's interest in international commerce.

Most national champions are likely to be 50% or more owned by the Russian government, but there is no reason why predominantly private companies could not also serve as national champions, given the right guidance and pressure.

Instead of allowing the country's oligarch-controlled corporations to focus exclusively on making profit, Putin proposed that they should be used instead to advance the country's national interests, suggesting that Russia should reclaim some of the assets that were privatized during Yeltsin, and integrate them vertically into industrial conglomerates so they could compete better with Western multinational corporations.

Regardless of who is the legal owner of the country's natural resources and in particular the mineral resources, the state has the right to regulate the process of their development and use. The state should act in the interests of society as a whole and of individual property owners, when their interests come into conflict with each other and when they need the help of state organs of power to reach compromises when their interests conflict.

One example of the concept is that energy corporations such as Gazprom should keep the prices inside Russia low, as a form of subsidy for the public, and only strive for maximal profit in foreign countries.

The National Convention (French: Convention nationale, [ kɔ̃vɑ̃sjɔ̃ nɑsjɔnal ]) was the constituent assembly of the Kingdom of France for one day and of the French First Republic for its first three years during the French Revolution, following the two-year National Constituent Assembly and the one-year Legislative Assembly. The National Convention was created after the insurrection of 10 August 1792. It was the first French government organized as a republic, abandoning the monarchy altogether. The Convention sat as a single-chamber assembly from 20 September 1792 to 26 October 1795 (4 Brumaire IV under the Convention's adopted calendar).

The Convention came about when the Legislative Assembly decreed the provisional suspension of King Louis XVI and the convocation of a National Convention to draw up a new constitution with no monarchy. The other major innovation was to decree that deputies to that Convention should be elected by all Frenchmen 21 years old or older, domiciled for a year and living by the product of their labor. The National Convention was, therefore, the first French assembly elected by a suffrage without distinctions of class.

Although the Convention lasted until 1795, power was effectively delegated by the Convention and concentrated in the small Committee of Public Safety from April 1793. The eight months from the fall of 1793 to the spring of 1794, when Maximilien Robespierre and his allies dominated the Committee of Public Safety, represent the most radical and bloodiest phase of the French Revolution, known as the Reign of Terror. After the fall of Robespierre, the Convention lasted for another year until a new constitution was written, ushering in the French Directory.

The indirect election took place from 2 to 10 September 1792 after the election of the electoral colleges by primary assemblies on 26 August. Despite the introduction of universal male suffrage, the turn-out was low, though there was an increase in comparison to the 1791 elections—in 1792 11.9% of a greatly increased electorate votes, compared to 10.2% of a much smaller electorate in the 1791. The low turn-out was partly due to a fear of victimization. In Paris, Maximilien Robespierre presided over the elections and, in concert with the radical press, managed to exclude any candidate of royalist sympathies. In the whole of France, only eleven primary assemblies wanted to retain the monarchy. The electoral assemblies all tacitly voted for a "republic", though only Paris used that word.

On 20 September the Convention held its first session in the "Salle des Cent-Suisses;" the next day it moved to the Salle du Manège, which had little room for the public and bad acoustics. From 10 May 1793 it met in the Salle des Machines, an immense hall in which the deputies were loosely scattered. The Salle des Machines had galleries for the public who often influenced the debates with interruptions or applause.

The members of the Convention came from all classes of society, but the most numerous were lawyers. 75 members had sat in the National Constituent Assembly, 183 in the Legislative Assembly. The full number of deputies was 749, not counting 33 from the French colonies, of whom only some arrived in Paris in time. Thomas Paine and Anacharsis Cloots were appointed in the Convention by Girondins. Besides these, however, the newly formed départements annexed to France from 1782 to 1789 were allowed to send deputations.

According to its own ruling, the Convention elected its president every fortnight (two weeks), and the outgoing president was eligible for re-election after the lapse of a fortnight. Ordinarily, the sessions were held in the morning, but evening sessions also occurred frequently, often extending late into the night. Sometimes in exceptional circumstances, the Convention declared itself in permanent session and sat for several days without interruption. For both legislative and administrative purposes the Convention used committees, with powers more or less widely extended and regulated by successive laws. The most famous of these committees included the Committee of Public Safety and the Committee of General Security.

The National Convention was made up of three major factions: The Montagnards (the Mountain), the Marais (the Plain) and the Girondins, also called Brissotins. Historians are divided on the makeup of the Convention, but the current consensus is that the Mountain was the biggest faction with around 302–309 deputies. The Girondins were represented by 178–227 deputies, and the Plain was represented by 153–250 deputies. Of the three groups the Mountain was the most cohesive, and the Plain was the least cohesive. Over 94% of the Mountain voted similarly on core issues; comparatively the Girondins and the Plain were much more divided with only 70% of Girondins voting similarly on the same issues and only 58% of the Plain voting similarly on the same issues.

The Girondins were more conservative than the Montagnards, although they were still democrats. The Girondins drew their name from the Gironde, a region of France from which many of the deputies of this faction were elected (although many "Girondins" were actually Parisian by origin) and were also known as the Brissotins after their most prominent speaker, Jacques Pierre Brissot. The Montagnards drew their support from the Paris Commune and the popular societies such as the Jacobin Club and the Cordeliers ; they got their name from the high bleachers on which they sat while the Convention was in session.

The Plain was a third faction during the Convention. It derived its name from their place on the floor of the Convention. During the start of the Convention, they sided with the Girondins, however, as it progressed and the Montagnards began to push for the execution of Louis XVI, The Plain began to side with them.

The Convention's unanimous declaration of a French Republic on 21 September 1792 left open the fate of the former king. A commission was therefore established to examine the evidence against him while the Convention's Legislation Committee considered legal aspects of any future trial. Most Montagnards favoured judgment and execution, but the Girondins were divided concerning Louis's fate, with some arguing for royal inviolability, others supporting clemency and still others advocating lesser punishment or banishment. On 13 November Robespierre stated that a constitution which Louis had violated, despite declaring his inviolability, could not be used in his defence. Robespierre had been taken ill and had done little other than support Montagnard leader Louis Antoine de Saint-Just, who gave his first major speech, in his argument against the king's inviolability. On 20 November, opinion turned sharply against Louis following the discovery of a secret cache of 726 documents consisting of Louis's personal communications with bankers and ministers. At his trial, he claimed not to recognise documents that had been clearly signed by him.

Military setbacks from the First Coalition, Charles François Dumouriez 's defection to the enemy, and the War in the Vendée (which began in March 1793) were all used as arguments by Montagnards and sans-culottes to portray Girondins as soft. The Montagnards proposed measures, but the Girondins were reluctant to take such measures. The Girondins were forced to accept the Montagnards' creation of the Revolutionary Tribunal and a Committee of Public Safety. Social and economic difficulties exacerbated the tensions between the groups.

The final showdown, the insurrection of 31 May – 2 June 1793, was precipitated by Jean-Paul Marat 's trial and the arrest of sectional activists. On 25 May, the Paris Commune marched to the Convention to demand the release of the activists.

On 5 September, Parisians tried to repeat the revolt of 2 June. Armed sections again encircled the Convention to demand the setting up of an internal revolutionary army, the arrest of suspects and a purge of the committees. It was probably the key day in the formation of the revolutionary government: the convention yielded, but kept control of events. It put Terror on the agenda on 5 September, on the 6th elected Collot d'Herbois and Billaud-Varenne to the Committee of Public Safety, on the 9th created the revolutionary army, on the 11th decreed the Maximum for grain and fodder (general controls for prices, and wages on the 29th), on the 14th reorganized the Revolutionary Tribunal, on the 17th voted in the law on suspects, and on the 20th gave the local revolutionary committees the task of drawing up lists of them.

As late as September 1793, there were two distinct wings among the revolutionaries. Firstly, those who were later called Hébertists although Jacques Hébert himself was never the official leader of a party that advocated war to the death and adopted the program of the enragés, ostensibly because the sans-culottes approved it. The Hébertists preferred to side with the Montagnards so long as they could hope to control the Convention through them. They dominated the Cordeliers Club, filled Bouchotte 's offices, and could generally carry the Commune with them. The other wing was the Dantonists, which formed in response to the increasing centralization of the Revolutionary Government and the dictatorship of the Committees. The Dantonists were led predominately by deputies of the Convention (rather than the sans-culottes), including Danton, Delacroix, and Desmoulins.

Ultimately, the Committee had undermined its own support by eliminating the Dantonists and Hébertists, both of which had backed the Committee. By compelling the Convention to allow the arrests of the Girondins and Dantonists, the Committee believed that it had destroyed its major opposition. However, the trials demonstrated the Committee's lack of respect for members of the Convention, several of whom had been executed. Many Convention members who had sided with the Committee by mid-1794 no longer supported it. The Committee had acted as mediator between the Convention and the sans-culottes from which they both had acquired their strength. By executing the Hébertists and alienating the sans-culottes, the Committee became unnecessary to the Assembly.

The Terror was meant to discourage support for the enemies of the Revolution by condemning outspoken critics of the Montagnards.

The goal was to strike down alleged enemies of the Revolution, in the provinces and elsewhere, of various classes. According to Marxian historian Albert Mathiez, "The severity of repressive measures in the provinces was in direct proportion to danger of revolt." Many outspoken members of the community were tried and executed for claims of treason. Camille Desmoulins and Georges Danton were two of the more notable men executed for their "threats" against the Revolution.

The monarchy made a distinction between French soil on the mainland and soil under French control such as the colonies. That distinction allowed for slavery to be illegal in France but continue in the colonies. Colonists in Saint Domingue wanted to have representation, 21 members because of their population size and contribution to the economy. That was shot down by the National Convention as the majority of their population were slaves and thus had no rights as citizens and contributed nothing to representative population. The Société des amis des Noirs in France originally opposed slavery during the 1780s, but much of the opposition was ignored as a result of the French Revolution breaking out. The French showed a much greater willingness to act on the issue of slavery when the threat of a war with Spain seemed imminent.

In 1792 the National Convention agreed to delegate 3 commissaries for Saint Domingue. Two of the commissaires, Léger-Félicité Sonthonax and Étienne Polverel, implemented rights for free men of color that were equal to their white counterparts. On 5 May 1793 Sonthonax and Polverel attacked the plantation system and forced the owners to treat the slaves better and care more for their well-being. Sonthonax then attacked slavery itself by freeing any slave Huzards, Latin for hazards, who had been armed by their masters since they could not return to peaceful plantation life. Polverel issued a proclamation in Cap Francais on 21 June 1793, which freed all slaves who agreed to fight for the French Republic from both internal and external threats. The commissaires then ruled that the Republic would pay an indemnity to the owners of female slaves marrying free men and that all children of that union would be free. The National Convention eventually allowed for six representative members for the colony. When pressured by the Society of the Friends of the Blacks to end the slave trade in the colonies, the National Convention refused on the grounds of slavery being too core to the French economic wealth. The committee felt "six million French people relied on the colonies to survive" and continued to stand by the argument.

On 12 October 1790 the National Convention declared the only body of power who could control the status of people in the colonies were committees in the colonies themselves, which meant although free blacks met the requirement for active citizenship, the white colonists would not allow it. That was done in an attempt to please the white colonists and convince them not to join forces with the British. It also gave the colonies the power to control their own laws regarding slavery and allowed for the National Convention to wash their hands of the issue. Three deputies from Saint Domingue traveled to France to attempt to persuade the National Convention to abolish slavery. The National Convention abolished slavery after hearing speeches from the deputies on 4 February 1794. However, the Committee of Public Safety delayed sending the proclamation to the colonies for two months. That was because of the apparent opposition of Robespierre to the abolition of slavery. The issue was eventually resolved by the Committee circumventing Robespierre and ordering the abolition decree to be sent to Saint Domingue. However, Napoleon 's attempt to return to slavery in 1801 removed France's state of being the first to abolish slavery and led to the loss of the most prosperous French colony.

Anchel (1911) concludes, "The work of the Convention was immense in all branches of public affairs. To appreciate it without prejudice, one should recall that this assembly saved France from a civil war and invasion, that it founded the system of public education (Museum, École Polytechnique, École Normale Supérieure, École des langues orientales, Conservatoire), created institutions of capital importance, like that of the Grand Livre de la Dette publique, and definitely established the social and political gains of the Revolution." By a decree of 4 February 1794 (16 Pluviôse) it also ratified and expanded to the whole French colonial empire the 1793 abolition of slavery on Saint-Domingue by civil commissioners Sonthonax and Polverel, though this did not affect Martinique or Guadeloupe and was abolished by the law of 20 May 1802.

In the field of education, a law was introduced on May the 30th 1793 that established a minimum 1,500 livre salary for teachers and mandated (as noted by one study) “that all towns with a population between 400 and 1,500 should have at least one primary school.” A number of social welfare policies and programs were also introduced under the National Convention. Under a public assistance law of 19 March 1793, various principles were established such as state aid to be distributed according to population in each department, while work was to be provided to the able-bodied and home relief "wherever possible for other varieties of the needy," while almsgiving was prohibited. A later public assistance law dated 28 June 1793 provided for state aid to be given through district ‘agencies’ to the aged, children and, for the first time in the history of France, unmarried mothers. In addition, abandoned children were to be received in hospitals until they turned 12, when they were to be apprenticed. A law of 15 October 1793, however, provided for the prohibition of begging and almsgiving and that "departmental maisons de repression are to be established, to set beggars to work." A law on pensions for soldier’s dependents was introduced on 9 February 1794, along with a "Generous and humane" law on pensions for war widows on 4 June 1794. In addition, a law of 11 May 1794 established the Grand Livre de Bienfaisance Nationale, "a register of state pensions benefiting the needy in rural areas."

A decree of June 1793, as noted by one study, "proposed to provide the services of physicians, nurses, midwives, and apothecaries to the sick poor." A variety of local and concrete welfare projects were pursued by the Jacobins, including a program that provided for free healthcare for armaments workers, along with pay for sick leave and disability and death benefits. Other Jacobin welfare projects included the founding of primary schools in some districts, an "egalitarian food policy," and the division and distribution of the land of the emigres. According to one study however, the actual impact of such policies and laws were much more limited, arguing that "Decree after decree proclaimed the eradication of mendacity and the end of chronic deprivation, and ever larger appropriations were ear-marked with seemingly reckless abandon for poor relief…all to no lasting effect."

The National Council of European Resistance (French : Conseil national de la résistance européenne, officially abbreviated as CNRE) is a France -based pan-European far-right political organization co-founded by Renaud Camus and Karim Ouchikh on 9 November 2017 by analogy to the National Council of the Resistance. It has links to the Identitarian movement.

The council is intended to bring together qualified French and European personalities who aspire to "work for the defence of European civilization " —to oppose the Great Replacement, immigration to Europe, and, more generally, to defeat replacist totalitarianism, a concept theorized by Renaud Camus.

Membership in the council is strictly enlarged by co-option. Several high-ranking European officials have taken part, such as former President of the Czech Republic Václav Klaus, former members of the European Parliament Jean-Yves Le Gallou and Paul-Marie Coûteaux, former member of the European Parliament Janice Atkinson, former representative to the National Assembly of France Christian Vanneste, Belgian member of parliament Filip Dewinter, or Africanist historian Bernard Lugan.

The name Conseil national de la résistance européenne is a reference to the coordinating body of the French Resistance during the German occupation of France —the National Council of the Resistance. When asked how the CNRE could be both national and European, Renaud Camus replied:

The Council is national in that each and every nation is responsible for defending its independence and protecting its culture. It is European because our civilisational struggle must be fought in concert with and by all Europeans.

Renaud Camus, a French writer and co-founder of the movement, coined in 2010–2011 the concept of " Great Replacement ", a theory which supposes that "replacist elites" are colluding against the White French and Europeans in order to replace them with non-European peoples—specifically Muslim populations from Africa and the Middle East —through mass migration, demographic growth and a drop in the European birth rate; a process he labeled " genocide by substitution." Camus was a candidate in the 2012 French presidential election, but failed to gain enough elected representatives presentations to be able to run for president, and eventually decided to support Marine Le Pen.

On 9 November 2017, in a public address in Colombey-les-Deux-Églises —the village where Charles de Gaulle is buried—Renaud Camus announced the foundation of the National Council of European Resistance and asked for a collective European commitment.

All the European nations are invited to lead by our side the fight for the salvation of our common civilization, Celtic, Slavic, Greco-Latin, Judeo-Christian, and free-thinking.

According to its official website, members of the CNRE include:

Les Partisans du CNRE is a legal association created concurrently with the Council under the French law of 1901. Its purpose is to welcome natural persons and legal entities of French or foreign nationality, who wish to actively support the action of the CNRE, by relaying its ideas, through militant actions or through financial contributions.

The National Council of Resistance of Iran (NCRI ; Persian : شورای ملی مقاومت ایران, romanized : Šurā-ye melli-e moqāvemat-e Īrān) is an Iranian political organization based in France and Albania. It was founded by Massoud Rajavi and Abolhassan Banisadr in 1981, and is currently led by Maryam Rajavi. It is the longest active political alliance in Iranian history.

The NCRI is a coalition of Iranian dissident groups led by the People's Mojahedin Organization of Iran (MEK), which advocates for the overthrow of the Islamic Republic of Iran. It describes itself as an independent parliament-in-exile prepared to establish a democratic provisional government in Iran upon the fall of its current government. The organization is often described by academics and journalists as the political or diplomatic wing of the MEK.

In 2002, the NCRI exposed the existence of an undisclosed uranium enrichment facility in Natanz, leading to concerns about Iran's nuclear program. It was listed by the U.S. government as a Foreign Terrorist Organization in 1997, but was removed from this list in 2012, along with the MEK.

Abolhassan Banisadr rose to the Iranian presidency with the support of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini in 1979. Banisadr believed the clerics should not govern Iran directly, and became embroiled in a power struggle with Islamic hardliners, and was subsequently impeached by the Majlis on June 17, 1981. Protests against Banisadr's impeachment, such as those on 20 June 1981, were met with violence, and Banisadr, along with his allies in the MEK, including Massoud Rajavi, fled to Paris on 29 June 1981. Khomeini's regime had surpassed Mohammad Reza Pahlavi 's dictatorship in several ways, including the dismantling of women's and minority rights, media censorship, and ban on opposition papers. Exiled in Paris, Massoud Rajavi and Banisadr founded the NCRI. The coalition was also joined by the National Democratic Front and the Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iran and the Minority Fedaian.

The founding of the NCRI allowed Massoud Rajavi to assume leadership within the anti-Islamic Republic faction, and put the MEK in a leading position to build ideological structures for a prospective future government to replace the Islamic Republic. In January 1983, Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq Tariq Aziz and NCRI President Massoud Rajavi signed a peace plan "based on an agreement of mutual recognition of borders as defined by the 1975 Algiers Agreement ". According to James Piazza, this peace initiative became the NCRI's first diplomatic act as a "true government in exile ". In 1983, elements united with NCRI began to depart the alliance because of conflicts with the MEK, particularly its alliance with Iraq. On 24 March 1983, Banisadr officially left the council.

In 1986, the French government closed down NCRI headquarters in Paris to improve relations with the Islamic Republic. Rajavi and the NCRI moved their main operations to Baghdad, Iraq.

In 1993, Maryam Rajavi, the spouse of Massoud Rajavi and then General Secretary of the MEK, became president-elect of the NCRI.

In 1993, NCRI representative Mohammad Hossein Naghdi was killed in Italy by assassins. As a result, the European Parliament issued a condemnation of political murder against the Islamic Republic of Iran.

In 2002 the NCRI exposed nuclear facilities in Natanz and Arak in Iran. Iran was then declared "in breach of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons", which began to limit the nuclear program in Iran.

In 2003, French police rounded up 167 PMOI sympathizers and placed 24 people under formal investigation, including the NCRI president Maryam Rajavi. In 2014, after an 11-year probe, the French courts dropped the charges.

The NCRI has in the past three decades recorded and reported human rights violations in Iran to UN Special Rapporteurs, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Amnesty International and other international human rights organisations.

In June 2020, a majority of members of the US House of Representatives backed a "bipartisan resolution" supporting Maryam Rajavi and the NCRI's "call for a secular, democratic Iran" while "condemning Iranian state-sponsored terrorism ". The resolution, backed by 221 lawmakers (including Louie Gohmert and Sheila Jackson Lee), gave support to the Rajavi's 10-point plan for Iran's future (which include "a universal right to vote, market economy, and a non-nuclear Iran") while calling on the prevention of "malign activities of the Iranian regime's diplomatic missions." A NCRI representative said that "The fact that out of ten diplomats or agents of the Iranian regime expelled or jailed in Europe and the U.S. for terror plots over the past two years, eight of them were tied to operations against our movement, is a vivid testimony that the NCRI is the alternative to this regime." The resolution also called on the U.S. to stand "with the people of Iran who are continuing to hold legitimate and peaceful protests" against the Iranian government.

In February 2021, Belgian court in Antwerp sentenced Assadollah Assadi, who worked at the Iranian embassy in Vienna, to 20-year jail term for plotting to bomb a rally of NCRI outside Paris in June 2018. He was arrested in Germany in June 2018. A Belgian couple of Iranian origin was also arrested with explosives and a detonator. A fourth man, Belgian-Iranian poet Merhad Arefani, was arrested in Paris and accused of being an accomplice. All three were convicted in a Belgian court for taking part in the plot and given jail terms of 15 to 18 years.

The NCRI has been described as a parliament-in-exile comprising more than 450 members, including representatives of ethnic and religious minorities such as Kurds and Armenians. Maryam Rajavi has been designated as its president-elect for a transitional period following the fall of the clerical government.

During the 2025–2026 Iranian protests, NCRI representatives urged that "real steps" be taken toward democracy in Iran.

Rajavi proclaimed the formation of a "Provisional Government of the National Council of Resistance of Iran" on 28 February 2026 with herself as "president-elect" following the commencement of Israeli–United States strikes on Iran. The Friends of a Free Iran group in the European Parliament welcomed the formation of a provisional government.

The NCRI has received support from US officials including Tom Ridge, Howard Dean, Michael Mukasey, Louis Freeh, Hugh Shelton, John Bolton, Bill Richardson, James L. Jones, Rudy Giuliani, Joe Lieberman, Edward G. Rendell, Brian Binley, and Thomas McInerney. Some of its supporters have been paid to speak at NCRI events. The group actively lobbies in the US Congress and the EU parliament, despite official denial.

The NCRI, along with the MEK is regarded by the Islamic Republic of Iran and Iraq as a terrorist organization, and was classified as a Foreign Terrorist Organization by the United States, alleging that the NCRI "is not a separate organization, but is instead, and has been, an integral part of the MEK at all relevant times" and that the NCRI is "the political branch" of the MEK. On September 28, 2012, the US State Department formally removed MEK from its list of terrorist organizations in a decision made by then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, ahead of an October 1 deadline set by a US appeals court.

Dick Armey suggested that the State Department wrongly included MEK in the terrorist list from the beginning. Alireza Jafarzadeh was its official representative in the US until the Washington office was closed by the US State Department in 2002 on the grounds that it was only a front group for the MEK by then listed as a terrorist organisation in the US. It has been alleged that the inclusion of NCRI and MEK in the list was a token offered to the Iranian government rather than based on the facts of the matter. According to the Wall Street Journal "Senior diplomats in the Clinton administration say the MEK figured prominently as a bargaining chip in a bridge-building effort with Tehran." The Journal added that: In 1997, the State Department added the MEK to a list of global terrorist organizations as "a signal" of the US's desire for rapprochement with Tehran's reformists, said Martin Indyk, who at the time was assistant secretary of state for Near East Affairs. President Khatami 's government "considered it a pretty big deal," Indyk said.

The European Union in May 2004 implied that NCRI is part of the People's Mujahedin of Iran and excluded the NCRI itself from a list of organisations considered to be terrorist organisations, including the People's Mujahedin of Iran "minus the National Council of Resistance of Iran" on its list of terrorist organisations. On January 26, 2009, EU Council of Ministers agreed to remove the MEK from the EU terror list. The group said it was the outcome of a "seven-year-long legal and political battle". The European Union had previously listed the MEK on its list but excluded the NCRI itself from the list of organizations considered to be terrorist organizations. According to some sources, it has an active global network.

The Middle East department of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) in the United Kingdom stated in early 2006 that it is widely understood that "Iran's [nuclear] program, which was kept secret from the IAEA for 18 years, became public knowledge largely because of revelations of the NCRI, and this led to heightened international concern." At the same time Michael Axworthy, former head of the Iran section at the FCO, claimed that the NCRI is a "tightly disciplined front organization for the MEK" and deemed them unreliable.

In a meeting at the Council of Europe in April 2006, Maryam Rajavi elaborated on the movement's vision for a future Iran and presented a Ten Point Plan for Future Iran, according to the organisation's website. The plan has been supported by British MPs, some arguing that it is a potential programme that "would transform Iran" since it calls for the abolition of the death penalty, the creation of a modern legal system and the independence of judges. At a debate on the human rights situation in Iran in the House of Lords on December 8, 2016, Lord Alton of Liverpool said, "The manifesto says: Cruel and degrading punishments will have no place in the future Iran. Madam Rajavi would end Tehran's funding of Hamas, Hezbollah and other militant groups and is committed to peaceful coexistence, relations with all countries and respect for the United Nations charter."

The NCRI styles itself as a parliament-in-exile representing the Iranian opposition, with Maryam Rajavi serving as its president-elect and advocating for the creation of a democratic Islamic republic in Iran. According to a RAND report, the organization launched campaigns to highlight human rights abuses in the Islamic Republic and provided intelligence on state activities to Western governments. It communicated its positions through dedicated media outlets, including newspapers and a radio station.

On 31 July 2025, Maryam Rajavi proposed the overthrow of the Islamic Republic and the establishment of a democratic, non-nuclear state during a rally in Rome organized by NCRI. The event drew support from notable Western political figures.

The National directory of elected officials (French : Répertoire national des élus) is a publicly available list of all elected officials of France, from municipal to national, maintained by the French ministry of the interior, as authorised by decree No. 2001-777 of August 30, 2001.

The purpose of the directory includes providing information and the enforcement of legislation;

Candidates and political parties in this list (with the exception of municipal councillor candidates other than mayors for municipalities with populations under 3,500) are categorised into different ideological groups, referred to as nuances, and these labels are listed on official documents relating to elections. Candidates may request correction of the classification assigned to them. This allocation of all candidates to a nuance effectively eliminates the category of Independent.

This compulsory categorisation, unique in Europe, is regularly contested, when candidates disagree with their assigned affiliation. Nuances sparked controversy during the 2022 French legislative elections, as the Ministry created a common affiliation for the governing coalition Ensemble but not for the left-wing opposition, the New Ecological and Social People's Union (NUPES). This situation led NUPES to appeal to the judge of the summary proceedings division of the Council of State to be assigned a distinct political affiliation. The judge ultimately ruled in NUPES favor and consequently ordered the Minister of the Interior to assign it a affiliation before 10 June 2022. Acknowledging the Council of State's decision, the Ministry announced the same day that it would make the requested change.

A national forest (French : forêt domaniale) is a forest owned by the French state. This status originates with the Edict of Moulins of 1566. French national forests are managed by the National Board of Forestry (NFB) under the national forestry law, the successor of ordinances and regulations that have taken place since the time of Charlemagne "at the discretion of political, economic and demographic context of France, making the first state-owned natural forest areas whose management is rigorously controlled".

National forests have existed in some form since ancient times: in fact state ownership is a legal system distinct from inheritance and private property that dates back to the Edict of Moulins (1566).

Thus, a number of royal forests are the "property" of the state, which has delegated the management of the Ministry of Agriculture who has himself told NFB and sometimes about national parks.

This "heritage of the nation" is legally different from ordinary property: the state holds or the usus, which amounts to the public or the fructus that does not exist (translated)

or the abusus, the public domain is inalienable.

Prior to 2006, Article L. 62 in French national code stated:

The State-owned forestry and wood can not be alienated by virtue of a law. However, it may be conducted in the ordinary form, the sale of State-owned timber holding less than 150 hectares that could not bear the costs of care and are not necessary to ensure the rivers, streams and rivers are separated and at a distance of at least one kilometer from other woods and forests of great extent. (Translated)

This article therefore specified that forests can be sold by decree or order in France) ("ordinary form"), of woods of less than 150 hectare, at least 1 kilometre (0.62 mi) from other large forests.

In 2006, an ordonnance which codifies the legislative part of the general code of the property of public persons ; former Article L. 62 was renumbered Article L. 3211-5 of the CGPPP. But the renumbering was accompanied by a significant change.

The woods and forests of the State can not be alienated by virtue of a law. Notwithstanding the first paragraph, the State may, in the conditions specified by order in Council of State proceed with the sale of woods and forests that meet the following conditions: 1st: Be a capacity of fewer than 150 hectares; 2nd: Not to be necessary and to the maintenance and protection of mountain land, or to stabilize the water system and the protection of water quality, or to the ecological balance of a region or the well being of the population; 3rd: And whose revenues do not cover their management operating expenses. Notwithstanding the first paragraph, woods and forests of the state included in the scope of declaration of public utility are assigned in accordance with the last paragraph of Article L. 12-4 of code of expropriation for public utility under the conditions specified by Order in Council of State. (Translated)

Under the Forest Code, the National Forests Office (NFB) manages state forests. Management is made under a contract of objectives and performance between the state and the NFB, which organizes details of national forest policy. Following the Grenelle Environment a dual general purpose is to Produce more wood, while better preserving the biodiversity. This sentence does not apply to the management of national forests, but to objective of sable harvesting.

Each forest has a forest management (plan) written for a period of 15–25 years and approved by the Minister of Agriculture. This arrangement establishes guidelines and management plans cuts during the period.

Revenues from state-owned forests are used for operation of the NFB, which manages both profitable forests and unprofitable forests (especially in the mountains or in Provence). The potential benefit of the NFB could return to the state.

In France there are approximately 1,300 National Forests for a combined forest area of about 1,800,000 hectare.

690,000 hectare were originally royal forests ; 340,000 hectare are former abbey forests confiscated by the State during the Revolution; 65,000 hectare are forested dunes under the order of February 5, 1817; 390,000 hectare consists of eroding land acquired under the land restoration mountain; 200,000 hectare acquired from private forests since 1914.

The National Forests Office (French : Office national des forêts), or ONF, is a Government of France agency that manages the state forests, city forests and biological reserves. ONF is based in Paris.

The office is responsible for the sustainable management of France's approximately 10 million hectares of public forests. The ONF takes over their protection and carries out forestry policing tasks. Around 9,000 civil servants work at the ONF and its regional offices. ONF is under legislation of Ministère de l'Agriculture and Ministère de la Transition écologique et solidaire.

ONF was founded in 1964. Since 1980, almost a third of the ONF workforce has been cut. The agency had gone through a series of structural reforms in the 2000s. Le Monde reported in 2012 that 30 forest officials took their own lives between 2002 and 2012. An internal analysis reported demotivation at the workplace, a high level of stress and a serious risk of psychosocial disorder for ONF employees.

The French Autorité Nationale des Jeux (English: "National Gaming Authority"), usually referred to as ANJ, is an independent administrative authority, specifically designed to regulate online gambling in France. It was created by Article 34 of Law No 2010-476 of the 12 May 2010 (French Gambling Act) introduced to enhance the competition and sector regulation of gambling and online gaming.

The members of this authority are currently:

The term of office of all members is six years and cannot be extended or renewed.

In Article 35 of the French Gambling Act, it prescribes that ANJ should consist of:

Currently only online operators offering sportsbooks betting, horse racing betting and poker games can get ANJ's license. At ANJ's site there's a list of approved operators and their websites. Also, a special section of the site is reserved for published decisions of the board (approvals and rejections).

In June 2010, ANJ contacted unlicensed gambling operators that accepted French players and requested that they stop doing so. That was the first step towards banning those sites that didn't get ANJ's approval and operated without licenses. Then organisation focused on blocking access to these sites rather than attempting to prosecute operators based overseas. It turned to French ISPs asking them to block the unlicensed sites in August, 2010. Despite the initial reluctance of ISPs to obey ANJ, the Tribunal de grande instance de Paris held that they must act towards preventing French gamblers from accessing such websites. The fine for the failure to block the domain was estimated at €10,000 per day. Although ANJ can fine the unlicensed operators (up to €100,000), it was more effective to act through ISPs.

ANJ's predecessor ARJEL was the subject of Parliamentary debate as to whether or not to it should be maintained. An amendment introduced by the deputy Jean-Luc Warsmann (LR) to the draft law on the general status of independent administrative authorities and public authorities aimed to dissolve ARJEL in February 2020. ARJEL was supposed to be merged with another entity or institution FDJ and the PMU.

The National Gendarmerie (French : Gendarmerie nationale [ ʒɑ̃daʁməʁi nɑsjɔnal ] -) is one of two national law enforcement forces of France, along with the National Police.

The Gendarmerie is a branch of the French Armed Forces placed under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of the Interior, with additional duties from the Ministry of Armed Forces. Its responsibilities include policing smaller towns, suburbs and rural areas (around 51% of the French population and 96% of its territory), crowd and riot control, and criminal investigation, including cybercrime. By contrast, the National Police is a civilian law enforcement agency that is in charge of policing cities and larger towns. Because of its military status, the Gendarmerie also fulfills a range of military and defence missions.

The Gendarmerie has a strength of around 102,162 people (as of 2023).

The Gendarmerie is the heir of the Maréchaussée, the oldest police force in France, dating back to the Middle Ages. Historically, the term " gens d'armes " (Man-at-arms) referred to armed soldiers or units associated with the royal or noble forces in France. The Gendarmerie has influenced the culture and traditions of gendarmerie forces around the world, especially in independent countries from the former French colonial empire.

The Gendarmerie is the direct descendant of the Maréchaussée ("Marshalcy") of the ancien regime.

During the Middle Ages, there were two Grand Officers of the Kingdom of France with police responsibilities: The Marshal of France and the Constable of France. The military policing responsibilities of the Marshal of France were delegated to the Marshal's provost, whose force was known as the Marshalcy because its authority ultimately derived from the Marshal. The Marshalcy dates back to the Hundred Years' War, with some historians tracing it back to the early 12th century.

The second organisation, the Constabulary (Connétablie), was under the command of the Constable of France. The constabulary was regularised as a military body in 1337.

In 1415 the Maréchaussée fought in the Battle of Agincourt and their commander, the Prévôt des Maréchaux (Provost of the Marshals), Gallois de Fougières, was killed in battle. This history was rediscovered in 1934, and Gallois de Fougières was then officially recorded as the first known gendarme to have died in the line of duty. His remains are now buried under the monument to the gendarmerie in Versailles.

Under King Francis I (r. 1515–1547), the Maréchaussée was merged with the Constabulary. The resulting force was also known as the Maréchaussée, or, formally, the Constabulary and Marshalcy of France (connétablie et maréchaussée de France). Unlike the former constabulary, the new Maréchaussée was not a fully militarized force.

In 1720, the Maréchaussée was officially attached to the Household of the King (Maison du Roi), together with the gendarmerie of the time, which was not a police force at all, but a royal guard. During the eighteenth century, the marshalcy developed in two distinct areas: increasing numbers of Marshalcy Companies (compagnies de marechaussée), dispersed into small detachments, were stationed around the French countryside to maintain law and order, while specialist units provided security for royal and strategic sites such as palaces and the mint (e.g., the garde de la prévôté de l'hôtel du roi and the prévôté des monnaies de Paris.)

While its existence ensured the relative safety of French rural districts and roads, visitors from England, which had nothing but the not very effective parish constables, saw the Maréchaussée, with its armed and uniformed patrols, as royal soldiers with an oppressive role and so a symbol of foreign tyranny. On the eve of the 1789 French Revolution, the Maréchaussée numbered 3,660 men divided into small brigades (a "brigade" in this context being a squad of ten to twenty men). Their limited numbers and scattered deployment rendered the Maréchaussée ineffective in controlling the " Great Fear " of July through August, 1789.

During the revolutionary period, the Maréchaussée commanders generally placed themselves under the local constitutional authorities. Despite their connection with the king, they were therefore perceived as a force favoring the reforms of the French National Assembly.

As a result, the Maréchaussée Royale was not disbanded but simply renamed as the gendarmerie nationale. Its personnel remained unchanged, and the functions of the force remained much as before. However, from this point, the gendarmerie, unlike the Maréchaussée, became a fully militarized force. During the revolutionary period, the main force responsible for policing was the National Guard. Although the Maréchaussée had been the main police force of the ancien regime, the gendarmerie was initially a full-time auxiliary to the National Guard militia.

In 1791 the newly named gendarmerie nationale was grouped into 28 divisions, each commanded by a colonel responsible for three départements. In turn, two companies of gendarmes under the command of captains were based in each department. This territorial basis of organisation continued throughout the 19th and 20th centuries.

Under Napoléon, the numbers and responsibilities of the gendarmerie—renamed gendarmerie impériale —were expanded significantly. In contrast to the mounted Maréchaussée, the gendarmerie were both horse and foot personnel; in 1800, these numbered approximately 10,500 of the former and 4,500 of the later, respectively.

In 1804 the first Inspector General of Gendarmerie was appointed and a general staff established—based out of the rue du Faubourg-Saint-Honoré in Paris. Subsequently, special gendarmerie units were created within the Imperial Guard for combat duties in French occupied Spain.

Following the Second Restoration of 1815, the gendarmerie was reduced in numbers to about 18,000 and reorganised into departmental legions. Under King Louis Phillippe a "gendarmerie of Africa" was created for service in Algeria and during the Second Empire the Imperial Guard Gendarmerie Regiment was re-established. The majority of gendarmes continued in what was now the established role of the corps—serving in small, sedentary detachments as armed rural police. Under the Third Republic the ratio of foot to mounted gendarmes increased and the numbers directly incorporated in the French Army with a military police role reduced.

In 1901, the École des officiers de la gendarmerie nationale was established to train its officers.

Five battles are remembered on the flag of the Gendarmerie:

The National Gendarmerie is still sometimes referred to as the maréchaussée (being the old name for the service). The gendarmes are also occasionally called pandores, which is a slang term derived from an 18th-century Hungarian word for "frontier guards." The symbol of the gendarmerie is a stylized grenade, which is also worn by the Italian Carabinieri and the Grenadier Guards in Britain. The budget in 2008 was approximately 7.7 billion euros.

The equivalent Dutch force, Royal Marechaussee, uses officially the old French term—which King William I, when assuming power after the fall of Napoleon, considered preferable to "gendarmerie".

In French, the term "police" not only refers to the forces, but also to the general concept of "maintenance of law and order" (policing). The Gendarmerie's missions spans three categories:

The Gendarmerie, while remaining part of the French armed forces, has been attached to the Ministry of the Interior since 2009. Criminal investigations are run under the supervision of prosecutors or investigating magistrates. Gendarmerie members generally operate in uniform, and, only occasionally, in plainclothes.

The Director-general of the Gendarmerie (DGGN) is appointed by the Council of Ministers, with the rank of Général d'Armée. The current Director-General is Général Hubert Bonneau who took office on October 31, 2024.

The Director-General organizes the operation of the Gendarmerie at two levels:

The Gendarmerie headquarters, called the Directorate-General of the National Gendarmerie (Direction générale de la Gendarmerie nationale (DGGN))), long located in downtown Paris, relocated in 2012 to the southern suburb of Issy-les-Moulineaux.

The Directorate-General of the national gendarmerie includes:

The main components of the organization are Departmental Gendarmerie, Mobile Gendarmerie, Republican Guard, Overseas Gendarmerie, five specialized Gendarmerie branches, Provost Gendarmerie and Intervention Group of the National Gendarmerie. The above-mentioned organizations report directly to the Director General (DGGN) with the exception of the Republican Guard, which reports to the Île-de-France region.

The Departmental Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie Départementale), also named «La Blanche» (The White), is the most numerous part of the Gendarmerie, is in charge of policing small towns and rural areas. Its territorial divisions are based on the administrative divisions of France, particularly the departments from which the Departmental Gendarmerie derives its name. The Departmental Gendarmerie carries out the general public order duties in municipalities with a population of up to 20,000 citizens. When that limit is exceeded, the jurisdiction over the municipality is turned over to the National Police.

It is divided into 13 metropolitan regions (including Corsica), themselves divided into groupements (one for each of the 100 département, thus the name), themselves divided into compagnies (one for each of the 342 arrondissements).

It maintains gendarmerie brigades throughout the rural parts of the territory. There are two kind of brigades:

In addition, the Gendarmerie runs a national criminal police institute (Institut de recherche criminelle de la gendarmerie nationale) specializing in supporting local units for difficult investigations.

The research units may be called into action by the judiciary even within cities (i.e. in the National Police's area of responsibility). As an example, the Paris research section of the Gendarmerie was in charge of the investigations into the vote-rigging allegations in the 5th district of Paris (see corruption scandals in the Paris region).

Gendarmes normally operate in uniform. They may operate in plainclothes only for specific missions and with their supervisors' authorisation.

The Mobile Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie Mobile), also named La Jaune ("The Yellow"), is organized in seven Regions of the Mobile Gendarmerie (one for each of the seven military regions of metropolitan France, called (Zones de Défense). It comprises 18 Groupements de Gendarmerie mobile (Groupings) featuring 109 squadrons for a total of approx. 11,300 personnel.

Nearly 20% of the Mobile Gendarmerie squadrons are permanently deployed on a rotational basis in the French overseas territories. Other units deploy occasionally abroad alongside French troops engaged in military operations (called external operations or OPEX).

The civilian tasks of the mobile gendarmerie are similar to those of the police units known as Compagnies Républicaines de Sécurité (CRS), for which they are often mistaken. Easy ways to distinguish them include:

The Mobile Gendarmerie includes Groupement Blindé de la Gendarmerie Nationale (GBGM), an armoured group of seven squadrons equipped with the Berliet VXB-170 armored personnel carrier, known in the Gendarmerie as the Véhicule Blindé à Roues de la Gendarmerie (VBRG, "Gendarmerie armoured wheeled vehicle"). It is based at Versailles - Satory. The unit also specializes in CBRN defense.

The Republican Guard is a ceremonial unit based in Paris. Their missions include:

The non-metropolitan branches include units serving in the French overseas départements and territories (such as the Gendarmerie of Saint-Pierre and Miquelon), staff at the disposal of independent States for technical co-operation, Germany, security guards in French embassies and consulates abroad.

The Air Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie de l'Air) is placed under the dual supervision of the Gendarmerie and the Air Force, it fulfills police and security missions in the air bases, and goes on the site of an accident involving military aircraft.

Placed under the dual supervision of the Gendarmerie and the Navy, its missions include:

The Air Transport Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie des Transports Aériens) is placed under the dual supervision of the Gendarmerie and the direction of civilian aviation of the transportation ministry, its missions include:

The Ordnance Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie de l'Armement) fulfills police and security missions in the establishments of the Délégation Générale pour l'Armement (France's defence procurement agency).

The Nuclear ordnance security Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie de la sécurité des armements nucléaires, GSAN) was created in 1964. It is directly subordinated to the Ministry of Armed Forces and plays a major role in the security chain of the nuclear devices.

The main mission of this specific branch is to secure the government's control over all the nuclear forces and weapons. The security of the civil nuclear powerplants and research establishments is provided by specialized units of the Departmental Gendarmerie. More specifically, the gendarmes of this unit are responsible for ensuring the protection and the readiness of the different kinds of missiles used by the French Navy and Air Force.

In order to do so, the GSAN is composed of its own units and of units from other branches of the gendarmerie, temporary placed under its command like squadrons of the Mobile Gendarmerie to protect the convoys of nuclear weapons components. For instance, a special security platoon can be deployed on board of the French aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle to secure the nuclear weapons carried on the ship.

The Provost Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie prévôtale), created in 2013, is the military police of the French Army deployed outside metropolitan France. The functions of military police for the French Army on French soil are fulfilled by units of the Departmental Gendarmerie.

GIGN (Groupe d'intervention de la Gendarmerie nationale) is one of the two premier counter-terror formations in France. Its counterpart within the National Police is the RAID. Operatives from both formations make up the protective detail of the French President (the GSPR). Its missions include counter-terrorism, hostage rescue, surveillance of national threats, protection of government officials and targeting of organized crime.

GIGN was established in 1974 following the Munich massacre. Created initially as a relatively small police tactical unit specialized in sensitive hostage situations, it has since grown into a larger and more diversified force of nearly 400 members.

Many of its missions are classified, and members are not allowed to be publicly photographed. Since its formation, GIGN has been involved in over 1,800 missions and rescued more than 600 hostages, making it one of the most experienced counter-terrorism units in the world. The unit came into prominence following its successful assault on a hijacked Air France flight at Marseille Marignane airport in December 1994.

The uniform of the Gendarmerie has undergone many changes since the establishment of the corps. Throughout most of the 19th century a wide bicorne was worn with a dark blue coat or tunic. Trousers were light blue. White aiguillettes were a distinguishing feature. In 1905 the bicorne was replaced by a dark blue kepi with white braiding, which had increasingly been worn as a service headdress. A silver crested helmet with plume, modelled on that of the French cuirassiers, was adopted as a parade headdress until 1914. Following World War I a relatively simple uniform was adopted for the Gendarmerie, although traditional features such as the multiple-cord aiguillette and the dark blue/light blue colour combination were retained.

Since 2006 a more casual "relaxed uniform" has been authorised for ordinary duties (see photograph below). The kepi however continues in use for dress occasions. Special items of clothing and equipment are issued for the various functions required of the Gendarmerie. The cavalry and infantry of the Republican Guard retain historic ceremonial uniforms dating from the 19th century.

As of 31 December 2018, the National Gendarmerie consisted of approx. 98,000 personnel units. Career gendarmes are either commissioned or non-commissioned officers. The lower ranks consist of auxiliary gendarmes on limited-time/term contracts. The 102,269 personnel of the National Gendarmerie is divided into:

This personnel mans the following units:

The Gendarmerie nationale's Prospective Centre (CPGN), which was created in 1998 by an ordinance of the Minister for Defence, is one of the gendarmerie's answers to officials' willingness to modernise the State. Under the direct authority of the general director of the gendarmerie, it is located in Penthièvre barracks on Avenue Delcassé in Paris and managed by Mr Frédéric LENICA, (assisted by a general secretary, Colonel LAPPRAND) "maître des requêtes" in the Conseil d'Etat.

The National Gendarmerie uses varieties of different European cars in the fleet, such as the Renault Megane, Peugeot Partner, Renault Scénic, Ford Ranger, Peugeot 5008, and the Škoda Kodiaq. The design of Gendarmerie cars are blue cars with white stripes on the side. and chevrons on the front and rear of the car. With the word "GENDARMERIE" on both sides of the car.

The first armoured unit of the National Gendarmerie was formed in 1933, in Satory, the special grouping of Mobile Republican guard. This special grouping took part in the Battle of France, among the 3rd Armoured Division as the 45th Tank Bataillon.

Other units were formed after World War II, equipped with various vehicles such as the M4 Sherman, M3 Stuart or M24 Chaffee, with the purpose of being used in case of a war.

Following the fall of the Berlin Wall and the end of the Cold War, most of these squadrons were disbanded in the 1990s, except the grouping of Satory which has centralized all the armoured squadrons of the Gendarmerie, named the Armoured Grouping of the Mobile Gendamerie. [ fr ]

The Berliet VXB-170 entered into service in 1974, in Satory squadrons as well as in other units, located throughout French territory. 155 were received.

In 2023, the multipurpose gendarmerie intervention vehicle, nicknamed Centaur, is the new main combat system of the Versailles Armoured Grouping.

Armoured units and their equipment were used in overseas operations such as the Opération Licorne, the European Union Monitoring Mission in Georgia and Afghanistan. Some operations were conducted with different armoured vehicles provided by the French Army.

The Gendarmerie has used helicopters since 1954. They are part of the Gendarmerie air forces (Forces aériennes de la Gendarmerie or FAG—not to be confused with the Air Gendarmerie or the Air Transport Gendarmerie). FAG units are attached to each of the seven domestic "zonal" regions and six overseas COMGEND (Gendarmerie commands). They also operate for the benefit of the National Police which owns no helicopters (the Police also has access to Civil Security helicopters).

As of 2014, Gendarmerie air forces (FAG) operate a fleet of 56 machines belonging to three types and specialized in two basic missions: surveillance/intervention and rescue/intervention.

The National Institute for Preventive Archaeological Research (Inrap, French: Institut national de recherches archéologiques préventives) is a French public administrative establishment dedicated to archaeological research, created under the law of January 17, 2001, concerning preventive archaeology. It replaced the Association for National Archaeological Excavations (AFAN), a 1901 law association.

Inrap operates under the joint supervision of the French Ministry of Culture and the Ministry of Higher Education and Research.

In 1973, the Association for National Archaeological Excavations (AFAN) was established. The Ministry of Culture allocated funds to AFAN, which distributed them between planned and rescue excavations. AFAN negotiated excavation costs among three parties: the state, AFAN, and the developer. Despite increased resources, challenges persisted. AFAN created the national archaeological map, an inventory to assess the archaeological potential of municipalities. In 1977, AFAN established the Emergency Archaeology Intervention Fund (FIAS). That same year, Article R.111-3-2 of the Urban Planning Code allowed the refusal of a building permit if it endangered an archaeological site or remains. In 1979, the Sub-Directorate of Archaeology was created within the Ministry of Culture's Heritage Directorate, recognizing archaeology as an integral part of cultural heritage.

In 1999, following numerous scandals involving the destruction of archaeological sites, the Minister of Culture, Catherine Trautmann, commissioned a working group to propose a new law to protect archaeological heritage from land development. The group included Jean-Paul Demoule, a university professor, Bernard Pêcheur, a state councilor, and Bernard Poignant, mayor of Quimper. On January 7, 2001, the preventive archaeology law was enacted, based on the European Convention on the Protection of the Archaeological Heritage, signed in Malta in January 1992. This law introduced a fee to fund archaeological diagnostics and excavations, dissolved AFAN, and established a public administrative institution with staff employed under public contracts. On February 1, 2002, Inrap was officially founded.

The law mandates that, before any development project or upon submission of a building permit, the archaeology service of the Regional Directorate for Cultural Affairs may require an archaeological diagnostic if deemed necessary.

Inrap's primary mission is to conduct these preventive archaeology diagnostics. When a land development project is subject to an archaeological prescription by the regional archaeology service—indicating potential or confirmed archaeological significance—a diagnostic is performed before construction begins. This may lead to preventive excavations, assigned through a tender process. Inrap also ensures the scientific exploitation of preventive archaeology operations and disseminates their results. It contributes to education, cultural outreach, and the promotion of archaeology (Article L.523-1 of the French Heritage Code).

Diagnostics involve mechanically testing approximately 10% of a project's land area to assess archaeological potential. These tests, conducted with mechanical diggers, vary in depth based on the burial level of remains. They aim to confirm or rule out the presence of remains, and if present, to identify their nature, density, extent, and preservation state. A report summarizing the findings is submitted to the Regional Archaeology Service. Excavations are prescribed when remains are deemed significant, occurring before construction starts. Excavations focus on areas with the most important remains to collect and analyze data, providing a comprehensive understanding of the site's evolution. Post-excavation analysis allows archaeologists to interpret field data, culminating in a final operation report, which may serve as the basis for scientific publication.

Research is central to Inrap's mission. The institute extends its diagnostic and excavation work through research, contributing to international archaeological studies. Inrap's discoveries align with global research themes, and the institute participates in colloquia, seminars, publications, and scientific conferences. It collaborates with French universities, the CNRS, and international partners, including the Europeae Archaeologiae Consilium, the European Association of Archaeologists, and European projects like Planarch and NEARCH.

Under the January 17, 2001 law, Inrap is tasked with the "scientific exploitation of preventive archaeology operations and the dissemination of their results," contributing to education, cultural outreach, and archaeology promotion (Article L.523-1 of the Heritage Code). Inrap undertakes various public engagement activities:

Since the law of August 1, 2003, preventive archaeology operations are funded through two mechanisms:

Inrap is governed by a board of directors, assisted by a scientific council. Members of both councils are appointed or elected for three-year terms, with a limit of two consecutive terms. Both councils are chaired by Inrap's president, selected for archaeological expertise and appointed by a presidential decree upon the joint proposal of the Ministers of Culture and Research. The president is supported by a deputy director general, responsible for administration and management, appointed by interministerial order.

The board includes the president, seven state representatives, two representatives from research and higher education institutions, two from territorial authorities, two from public or private entities involved in preventive archaeology, four elected Inrap staff members, and four qualified archaeology experts.

The state representatives are the secretary general of the Ministry of Culture, the director general of heritage, the director of research at the Ministry of Research, the director of higher education, the budget director, the director general of urban planning, housing, and construction, and a regional archaeology curator designated by the Minister of Culture. Research and higher education representatives include the director general of the CNRS and the first vice-president of the Conference of University Presidents. Territorial authority and public/private entity representatives are jointly appointed by the Ministers of Culture and Research. The four qualified experts are appointed similarly. Non-voting attendees include Inrap's director general, scientific and technical director, financial controller, and accounting officer.

The scientific council comprises the Inrap president, the vice-president of the National Archaeological Research Council, seven elected members from scientific archaeology roles (two from higher education, two from research institutions, one from territorial archaeology services, and two from Ministry of Culture regional archaeology staff), four experts in preventive archaeology (two appointed by each minister), and five elected Inrap scientific and technical staff members.

The National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies (French : Institut national de la statistique et des études économiques, pronounced [ ɛ̃stity nɑsjɔnal də la statistik e dez‿etyd(z‿)ekɔnɔmik ]), abbreviated INSEE or Insee (/ ˈ ɪ n s eɪ / in- SAY, French: [ inse ]), is the national statistics bureau of France. It collects and publishes information about the French economy and people and carries out the periodic national census. Headquartered in Montrouge, a commune in the southern Parisian suburbs, it is the French branch of Eurostat. The INSEE was created in 1946 as a successor to the Vichy regime 's National Statistics Service (SNS). It works in close cooperation with the Institut national d'études démographiques (INED).

The INSEE is responsible for the production and analysis of official statistics in France. Its best known responsibilities include:

The INSEE is the responsibility of MINEFI, the French Ministry of Finance. The current director is Jean-Luc Tavernier. However, Eurostat considers INSEE as an independent body, although its independence is not written in the law.

Research and teaching for the INSEE is undertaken by GENES or Group of the National Schools of the Economy and Statistics (French: Groupe des Écoles Nationales d'Économie et Statistique) which includes:

INSEE gives numerical indexing codes (French: les Codes INSEE) to various entities in France:

The INSEE was preceded by several related statistical agencies in France. In 1833, the Statistics Bureau (French: Bureau de la statistique) was created by Adolphe Thiers. In 1840 it was renamed SGF or General Statistics of France.

Under the direction of Lucien March, the SGF expanded its activities. It began an investigation of consumption habits in 1907, following with periodic investigations on retail prices in 1911.

In 1920 Alfred Sauvy introduced competitive entrance exams for SGF recruitment. However, it was René Carmille, a pioneer of the use of the calculator, who laid the foundations of the modern organization. In 1940, the Demographic Service (Service de la démographie) was created under the Ministry of Finance in order to replace the military recruitment office prohibited by the June 1940 Armistice with Nazi Germany. In order to better conceal its undertakings, the Demographic Service absorbed the SGF on 11 October 1941. The new organization was called the SNS or National Statistics Service. As part of this reorganization, six new offices were created in the Northern (occupied) zone whose regional structure is maintained today in INSEE.

René Carmille created an Applied Sciences School (predecessor of the current ENSAE) to specially train members for the SNS.

Carmille worked for Vichy France but he was actually a double agent for the French underground. From his position in the SNS he sabotaged the Nazi census of France, which saved untold numbers of Jewish people from death camps. He also used his department to help mobilize French resistance in Algeria. He was caught by the Nazis and sent to Dachau where he died in 1945.

The SNS was finally transformed into the INSEE by the law of 27 April 1946; the National Institute of Statistics and Economic Surveys for the metropolis and overseas France (L'Institut national de la statistique et des études économiques pour la métropole et la France d'outre-mer).

IRIS is the name for France's unit of division of geographical regions for the purposes of taking a census. In order to prepare for the dissemination of the 1999 French population census, INSEE developed a system for dividing the country into units of equal size, known as IRIS2000, now known simply as 'IRIS'. The acronym stands for 'Ilots Regroupés pour l'Information Statistique' ('aggregated units for statistical information') and the 2000 in the name referred not only to the upcoming millennium year but to the target size of 2,000 residents per basic unit.

Since 1999, IRIS has represented the fundamental unit for dissemination of infra-municipal data in France and its overseas departments and regions. Towns with more than 10,000 inhabitants, and a large proportion of towns with between 5,000 and 10,000 inhabitants, are divided into several IRIS units. France is composed of around 16,100 IRIS in total, of which 650 are in the overseas departments. There are 3 types of IRIS unit in use; residential IRIS (pop. between 1,800 and 5,000), business IRIS (containing more than 1,000 employees) and miscellaneous IRIS (specific large zones which are sparsely inhabited and have large surface areas (leisure parks, ports, forests etc.).

The following is a list of directors of the INSEE since it was founded:

The National Office for Veterans and Victims of War (French : Office national des anciens combattants et victimes de guerre (ONACVG)) is a French governmental agency under the Ministry of the Armed Forces. Its purpose is recognition and support of the nation's war veterans and victims, and directing national policy about war memorials and remembrances.

The current agency is the successor to the veteran's organisation first set up in 1916 during the First World War. It underwent several mergers with related veterans and war victims organisations. Its charter was expanded to include victims of terrorist incidents following the November 2015 Paris attacks.

The first office to be created was the National Office of Disabled and Discharged War Veterans created by ministerial decree on 2 March 1916, during the First World War. At the outset the latter was an interagency autonomous public institution managed by a board of directors. The law of 2 July 1917 established the National Office of Wards of the Nation and that of 19 December 1926 created the National Soldiers Office. During the years 1933 and 1934, successive mergers of the three organisations created the National Office of Veterans, Disabled, War Victims, and Wards of the Nation. In 1946 this organisation took over the management of social services of the Ministry of Prisoners, Deportees and Refugees and was renamed the National Office of Veterans and Victims of War. Since 1991, it also handles assistance to victims of terrorism.

It carries out these goals by handling applications, assigning honors, and disbursing allocations according to the rights established by the law, including handling applications and requests for

as well as disbursing funds owed to constituents via departmental branches, as part of reparations for

The agency is constituted as a legal person (établissement public à caractère administratif) with financial autonomy. It maintains delegates in every French department.

It has a board of directors whose role it is to define institutional policy. The board chair is appointed by the Council of Ministers. The board consists of 40 members divided into four colleges. The first one has eight members representing the assemblies and the administrations to which they belong and serve for four years. The second college has 2 members and represents veterans and war victims selected from among the different citizen categories. The third college consists of six members representing the foundations and national associations that work for memorials and citizenship. It is chaired by the Minister Delegate for Veterans Affairs. Finally the council includes two representatives from the staff of the national office.

The National Movement of the Iranian Resistance (NAMIR; Persian : نهضت مقاومت ملی ایران) was a political organization founded by Shapour Bakhtiar in 1979.

NAMIR was inspired by the resistance movement that emerged immediately after the 1953 Iranian coup d'état, taking its name from there. In 1979, the National Resistance Movement of Iran was founded by Shapoor Bakhtiar and a group of pro-opposition figures to fight against the ruling regime in Iran. Its purpose is to achieve the following goals: Establishing a government based on national sovereignty and social justice; Separation of religion from government in all aspects of the country; Maintaining the independence and territorial integrity of the country and national solidarity.

NAMIR considered its struggle in the sequence of the struggles of the National Movement of Iran and the National Front. The struggles that have been ongoing since the beginning of the constitutional revolution until today to achieve the demands of the Iranian nation, namely democracy, independence, territorial integrity, and law-based military establishment. NAMIR considered itself one of the guardians of the national movement of Iran and in turn tries to make a more effective contribution to the struggle of the Iranian nation to build a free and prosperous Iran by expanding the range of activities and uniting with other Iranian nationalists.

Other than Bakhtiar, who was the leader of the party, three senior members served in the capacity of the Chairman of Executive Committee: Abdolrahman Boroomand (1980–1987; March–August 1991) Mohammad Moshiri (March 1987–July 1989), Sadegh Sadireh (July 1989–March 1991).

The National Resistance Movement of Iran had a newspaper, and also had a weekly magazine called Qiyam Iran edited by Iraj Pezeshkzad for ten years.

In Iran, a group called " Naqab " was formed from army officers and some civilians. They expressed concern about the consolidation of a new dictatorship in Iran and supported Bakhtiar as the true leader of Mossadegh and the leader of democracy. On July 16, 1359 (1980), the Iranian authorities claimed that they had destroyed a network of military and civilian supporters of Bakhtiar who were conspiring to overthrow the Islamic regime. During the following months, more than one hundred people were executed for being members of "Naqab" and supporting Bakhtiar and the Iranian National Resistance Movement.

Shapour Bakhtiar, the founder of Iran's National Resistance Movement, was the target of an unsuccessful assassination attempt in the summer of 1359 by a group led by Anis Naghash. According to the statements of Anis Naqash, both assassination attempts were planned by the order of the authorities of the Islamic Republic of Iran and with the help of professional terrorists.

Soroush Katibeh was the special secretary of Dr. Shapour Bakhtiar and a member of the Iranian National Resistance Movement, who was murdered by three criminals on August 6, 1991, along with Dr. Shapour Bakhtiar, in his residence in Soren, a suburb of Paris.

Abdur Rahman Boroumand (born in 1306 in Isfahan - 1370 in Paris) was an Iranian political activist and the head of the executive board of the National Resistance Movement of Iran. He was stabbed to death in front of the elevator of his residence in Paris on Thursday, April 29, 1370 (April 18, 1991).

Colonel Hadi Aziz Moradi Kurd, after the defeat of the uprising on the 27th of Tir, 1359 (known as the "Nojeh coup"), due to his active and direct role in this plan, he went to Turkey and then to France at the end of Tir 1359 and joined the military branch. Iran's national resistance movement joined. He was shot dead by three unknown people on the 2nd of Dey, 1364 (December 23, 1985), while leaving his home in Bakirkoy area, Yeni neighborhood in Istanbul city.

Captain Behrouz Shahverdiloo (born in 1321 in Rezaieh) was one of the former officers of the Imperial Army of Iran, who went abroad after the 1357 revolution and joined the military branch of the Iranian National Resistance Movement. He was assassinated in Istanbul, Turkey on 25th of Mordad 1364 (August 16, 1985).

The national symbols of Catalonia are objects, icons or cultural expressions that are emblematic, representative or otherwise characteristic of Catalonia or Catalan culture.

The oldest Catalan symbol is the coat of arms of Catalonia, which was the royal arms of the Crown of Aragon, though a number of theories trace its origin to even older times. It is one of the oldest coats of arms in Europe. Owing to a common history and shared experiences, some of the traditional Catalan symbols overlap with those of Aragon, Valencia and the Balearic Islands. This is often cause of controversies regarding differing perceptions of the culture, the history and the language issues surrounding the former Crown of Aragon and the culturally Catalan lands.

Catalonia 's national symbols as defined in the Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia are the flag, Catalonia's day, and the anthem. These symbols have often a political and revindicative significance. Other symbols may not have official status, for different reasons, but are likewise recognised at a national or international level.

Those of public law were suspended by the Nueva Planta Decree of 1716, however, the ones of private law survived until present day, being codified and modernized in the Civil Code of Catalonia, one of the main differential elements of Catalan society.

A national treasure of France is a cultural good of major importance to the heritage of France from the point of view of art, history, or archaeology. It is officially designated as such when a particular object has had an export certificate refused, which temporarily prevents its exit from the territory of France. Once authorities confer national treasure status on an object, they have 30 months (during which the object may not leave France) to raise the funds for its purchase. If France acquires a declared treasure, this entitles its seller to exercise a 90% tax reduction. Of the 266 items declared a national treasure in the first 30 years of the program, nearly 75% had been successfully acquired for France.

Gustave Caillebotte 's 1877 – 78 painting, Boating Party, was described as the most important national treasure acquired by the French Republic in the history of the National Treasure program. Boating Party had been owned by Caillebotte's descendants until a donation by LVMH made it possible for the Musée d'Orsay to acquire the declared national treasure for $47million ($ 51.7 million in 2025) or €43 million (€ 45.3 million in 2023) in 2022. In 2021, Caillebotte's Young Man at His Window (also a National Treasure of France) was sold by the estate of Edwin L. Cox at auction at Christie's New York to the collection of the J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles for $53 million ($ 63 million in 2025) or €48.9 million (€ 55.9 million in 2023), marking the Getty's first Caillebotte work.

If a declared item is being listed at auction in France, the auction for that item can be shut down as it was in 2017 when the original version of Marquis de Sade 's 1785 novel The 120 Days of Sodom, which was appraised at €6 million (€ 7.3 million in 2023) or £5.3 million (£ 7.1 million in 2025), and André Breton 's Surrealist Manifesto, which was appraised at €4million (€ 4.8 million in 2023), were listed at an Aguttes auction house in Paris.

If the auction has been completed, an object can be declared a national treasure to halt export and allow 30 months to attempt to raise funds as was the case with The Mocking of Christ, which had been won at auction in 2019 for €24.2 million (€ 28.4 million in 2023) or $26.8 million ($ 33.7 million in 2025). In 2023, this work landed in the Louvre.

National treasures remain at risk of unsavory and illegal activity. In November 2024, a national treasure work of 138 figures showing the Life of Christ, encrusted with diamonds and rubies set in marble, known as Via Vitae, was stolen from the Hiéron Museum in Paris. Its estimated value at the time was €7m (£5.8m).

National treasures of France are defined in article L.111-1 of the French heritage code:

National Workshops (French : Ateliers Nationaux) refer to areas of work provided for the unemployed by the French Second Republic after the Revolution of 1848. The political crisis which resulted in the abdication of Louis Philippe caused an industrial crisis adding to the general agricultural and commercial distress which had prevailed throughout 1847. It rendered the problem of unemployment in Paris acute.

On February 25, 1848 a group of armed workers interrupted a session of the provisional government to demand "the organization of labor" and "the right to work ". The provisional government under the influence of one of its members, Louis Blanc, passed a decree (25 February 1848) guaranteeing government-funded jobs. The following is an extract: "The provisional government of the French Republic undertakes to guarantee the existence of the workmen by work. It undertakes to guarantee work for every citizen."

For the carrying out of this decree, Blanc wanted the formation of a ministry of labor, but this was shelved by his colleagues, who as a compromise appointed a government labor Commission, under the presidency of Blanc, with power of inquiry and consultation only. The implementation of the February decree was entrusted to the minister of public works, M. Marie, and various public works were immediately started. The initial stages of the national works prompted the following account:

The workman first of all obtained a certificate from the landlord of his house, or furnished apartments, showing his address, whether in Paris or the department of the Seine. This certificate was visaed and stamped by the police commissary of the district. The workman then reported to the office of the maire of his ward, and, on delivering this document, received in exchange a note of admission to the national works, bearing his name, residence and calling, and enabling him to be received by the director of the workplaces in which vacancies existed. All went well while the number of the unemployed was less than 6000, but as soon as that number was exceeded, the workmen of each arrondissement, after having visited all the open works in succession without result, returned to their mayor’s offices tired, starving and discontented.

In June 1848, the Workshops were closed down, leading to the June Days uprising.

The natural borders of France (French : Frontières naturelles de la France) were a nationalist model of French state-building developed during the French Revolution that called for the expansion of France's borders to prominent natural boundaries. These boundaries correspond to the Rhine, the Alps, the Mediterranean Sea, the Pyrenees and the Atlantic Ocean.

The first mention of the natural borders appeared in 1642 in an apocryphal statement by Cardinal Richelieu.

However, it was not until 1786 that the idea started to develop again. The Prussian Anacharsis Cloots published that year the Wishes of a Gallophile (French: Voeux d'un gallophile) and pronounced himself in favor of the annexation by France of the left bank of the Rhine, "natural boundary of the Gauls " (French: borne naturelle des Gaules). This notion was influential among the French revolutionaries after 1790, notably among the Jacobins. After the victory of Valmy on September 20, 1792, the National Convention urged the soldiers to go after the Prussian armies of the other bank of the Rhine. For General Adam Philippe, Comte de Custine, commander of the Army of the Rhine, "if the Rhine is not the limit of the Republic, it will perish" (Si le Rhin n'est pas la limite de la République, elle périra). On December 17, the Convention adopted the Declaration of the French Revolutionary Administration of Conquered Lands (French: Décret sur l'administration révolutionnaire française des pays conquis), prelude to the annexation of Belgium by France. This was demanded by Georges Danton on January 21, 1793, justifying that "the limits of France are marked by nature, we will reach the four corners of the horizon, to the edge of the Rhine, to the edge of the ocean, to the edge of the Pyrenees, to the edge of the Alps. The boundaries of our Republic must be there."

In his seminal lecture What Is a Nation?, which criticizes primordialist accounts of the nation, the French historian Ernest Renan argues against the notion that France's borders are natural: "The frontiers of France in 1789 had nothing natural or necessary about them."

The theory of France's natural borders was commonplace in French textbooks until the mid-20th century. Peter Sahlins writes "most historians of France today dismiss the "doctrine" of natural frontiers as too teleological a reading of France's history.... As a model of French identity, it formed part of a constitutive myth of the state."

The Army of the Alps invaded Savoy, part of the Kingdom of Sardinia allied with Austria, and took it with very little resistance between the September 21 and 22, 1792. On October 26, an assembly of Savoyard élites met at Chambéry. The assembly ceased to recognise Victor Amadeus III of Sardinia as the sovereign. On October 29, they pronounced the annexation of Savoy to France. This unification was decreed by the Convention on November 17, 1792, and Savoy became the département of Mont-Blanc. On January 31, 1793, the Convention annexed the County of Nice and the Principality of Monaco to form the département of Alpes-Maritimes.

Danton's rhetoric was spread throughout the occupied territories by the representatives of the Convention and the local supporters of the French, in order to prepare and justify the annexation of the territories. Even so, the French were beaten at the Battle of Neerwinden on March 18, 1793, and were forced to leave Belgium. The decisive French victory at the Battle of Fleurus in July 1794 and the founding of the Batavian Republic in January 1795 confirmed the French occupation of Belgium. Prussia started the negotiations that finished with the first treaty of Basel, signed April 5, 1795, by which Prussia ceded to France its territories on the left bank of the Rhine. The victories of Napoleon Bonaparte in Italy forced Austria to sign the treaty of Campo Formio on October 27, 1797. Austria ceded to France all its territories to the west of the Rhine. The French government reorganised the newly enlarged left bank of the Rhine and created four new departments: Mont-Tonnerre, Rhin-et-Moselle, Roer and Sarre.

After the victory at Fleurus, long debates took place at the Convention to decide the fate of the Austrian Netherlands. Pushed by Merlin de Douai, the Convention feared that a separate Belgian republic, along the lines of the Batavian Republic, would be too weak to resist the British and the Austrians, and would become a buffer state against the French republic. The convention finally voted for annexation of Belgium on October 1, 1795, creating the nine Belgian départements: Dyle, Deux-Nèthes, Escaut, Forêts, Jemmape, Lys, Ourte, Meuse-Inférieure, and Sambre-et-Meuse. This annexation was confirmed by the Treaty of Campo Formio, by which the Austrian Empire ceded the Austrian Netherlands to France, followed by the Treaty of Lunéville in 1801.

Under the Consulate and the First French Empire, Napoleon expanded France to its theoretical natural borders through his conquests, mainly with the goal of controlling the coasts. In fact, the war against the United Kingdom rested partly on the ban on all commerce with Great Britain. In 1812, France had 130 departments (134 including the four departments in Catalonia, which were only partially integrated). France's territory was stretched beyond the Rhine by the annexation of the Kingdom of Holland (1810), and the north coast of Germany to Lübeck (1811), beyond the Pyrenees by the annexation of part of Catalonia (1812), and beyond the Alps by the annexation of parts of Italy between 1801 and 1805. After the first abdication of Napoleon on April 6, 1814, France lost, by the Treaty of Paris, all its territories conquered after 1792. France only kept a small part of Savoy. After Waterloo, by the second Treaty of Paris in 1815, France was taken back to its 1790 borders and therefore lost Savoy. Savoy and Nice were definitively annexed by France in 1860 by the Treaty of Turin.

The debate over France's borders continued throughout the nineteenth century. Jules Michelet, in his History of France, saw in it a deterministic cause of the history of France. The debate resurged in 1830 during the Belgian Revolution and then between 1871 and 1918, when Alsace-Lorraine was annexed and incorporated by the German Empire.

In France, a natural region (French : région naturelle), traditionally called " a country " (~“pais” in romance languages, who also gave the words “peasant” and “pagan” in english), is a territory of often limited extent (at most a few hundred square kilometers) with homogeneous physical characteristics (geomorphology, geology, climate, soils, water resources) associated with a human occupation that shares a distinct cultural identity (perception and management of land that develop specific landscapes). In some cases, traditional "pays" are subdivided into smaller territories; for example, the Bresse region is divided into Bresse bourguignonne (including Bresse louhannaise and Bresse chalonnaise), Bresse savoyarde, and Bresse comtoise. In Corsica, the term microrégion is used, with the island being divided into about fifteen such regions. The word "pays" derives from the Latin " pagus ".

Many natural regions in France have historically corresponded to political boundaries from the Middle Ages, inherited from the Gallo-Roman pagi, and sometimes, through them, the territory of a Gallic people or the influence of a city on its hinterland (such as Vendômois). The definition of a natural region may stem from the work of a local scholarly society, local scholars (for example, the Chinonais studied by the Amis du Vieux Chinon or the Lochois described in the works of local scholar Jacques-Marie Rougé and illustrated by the terroir museum in Loches), or ancient rural identities, particularly since the 16th century.

Over time, natural regions, conflated with the political power that administered them, may have given their names to much larger entities. This sometimes leads to confusion, as the same name often designates very different areas, sometimes unrelated to the original regions bearing that name (the natural region, its more or less enduring historical zone of influence, and its possible administrative forms). There are many examples:

Bénédicte and Jean-Jacques Fénié list 546 "pays" from Pays d'Ach to Pays d'Yveline. Frédéric Zégierman, on the other hand, identifies 426 with 1800 natural units. The relatively vague notion of traditional "pays" or natural regions limits the possibility of establishing a precise list. Different entities, each equally relevant but based on different criteria or perspectives, may overlap in the same geographic area.

Naval Group is a French industrial group specialising in naval defense design, development and construction. Its headquarters are located in Paris, France.

Heir to the French naval dockyards initiated in 1631 by Cardinal Richelieu and to the Direction des Constructions et Armes Navales (DCAN), which became Direction des Constructions Navales (DCN) in 1991 and then DCNS in 2007, the company was rebranded Naval Group in 2017. Its two main shareholders are the French State (62.25%) and Thales Group (35%).

As of 2024, Naval Group employs 15,261 people across 17 countries.

Naval Group has a heritage of almost 400 years. Major shipyards were built in France in Brest (1631), Nantes-Indret (1771), Lorient (1778) and, subsequently, Cherbourg (1813). Others were to follow. As early as 1926, what we know as the Naval Group today already had all the facilities now owned by the group in mainland France.

In 1624, Cardinal Richelieu, who was King Louis XIII 's Prime Minister, devised a policy meant to expand France's maritime capabilities. This policy was put into practice from 1631, with the creation of the Ponant fleet in the Atlantic and the Levant fleet in the Mediterranean, the foundation of the Brest dockyards as well as the extension of the Toulon dockyards built under King Henri IV.

The policy was continued by Colbert, Louis XIV 's Navy Minister, who developed several major dockyards. He extended the dockyards in Toulon, ordered the excavation of the docks in Brest and founded the Rochefort dockyards. His son, Seignelay, who succeeded him in 1683, followed in his footsteps.

The French Royal Navy's network of dockyards was further strengthened in the 18th century. In 1750, the Marquis de Montalembert converted a former paper mill into a forge producing cannons at Ruelle-sur-Touvre. In 1777, Antoine de Sartine, Louis XVI 's Navy Minister, opened a cannon foundry near the naval shipyards in Indret. In the same year, work started on the development of the port in Cherbourg, which was completed in 1813. In 1778, the Lorient naval dockyards succeeded La Compagnie des Indes du port de L’Orient.

The naval dockyards in Rochefort were closed in 1926. In 1937, the establishment in Saint-Tropez was opened on the former site of the company Schneider, which specialised in torpedoes. By this time, most of the Naval Group's French sites already existed, and they have not changed since then.

During the 19th century, the naval dockyards underwent a transformation as the fleet of sailing ships and were replaced by motorised vessels. The sites were industrialised and gradually specialised. In 1865, the naval dockyards in Brest became exclusively military, with the closure of the Penfeld port to commercial vessels. In 1898, after specialising in the building of vessels with propellers rather than sails, the shipyards in Cherbourg were tasked exclusively with the construction of submarines. Finally, in 1927, a decree definitively laid out the missions of the various naval dockyards: Brest and Lorient were tasked with the construction of large vessels, Cherbourg with building submarines, while Toulon, Bizerte and Saigon took charge of the maintenance of the fleet.

This rationalisation of the roles of the naval dockyards was accompanied by technical and military innovations and the production of vessels at a higher pace, against the backdrop of an arms race and colonisation. In 1858, Gloire, the first ocean-going battleship in the world sailed out of the dockyards in Toulon. The 1860s saw the arrival of the first torpedo boats and military submarines, with the launch of Plongeur in 1863. The technical problems experienced by this first-ever motorised submarine meant that it remained a prototype rather than an operational war vessel. But it did open the way for the construction of Gymnote in 1886 and Le Narval in 1899, which were the first operational torpedo submarines in history.

The production of heavy surface vessels was also stepped up in the 1910s. Several battleships were built before the start of the First World War, and the fleet was strengthened by the 35,000-ton Richelieu in 1939.

In 1946, a review of the French naval dockyards completed the attributions of the various sites announced in the 1927 decree. Brest was tasked with the production and repair of large vessels, Lorient with the construction of medium-sized vessels, Cherbourg with submarines and Toulon with repairing and maintaining the fleet. Amongst the inland sites, Indret took over the vessel propulsion activities, Ruelle the construction of guns, large parts and electronics, Saint-Tropez the production of torpedoes and Guérigny the construction of naval chains and anchors. Five sites are located overseas: Mers el-Kébir, Bizerte, Dakar, Diego-Suarez and Papeete.

Until 1961, the French navy maintained and repaired its fleet itself, through the Directions des Constructions et Armes Navales (DCAN) in the naval dockyards. The engineers working in the DCANs were officers in the French navy's engineering division. At this time, the dockyards broke away from the Navy, creating the opportunity for the diversification of their activities in the 1970s.

A single DCAN covered all the mainland and overseas naval dockyards, reporting to the Direction Technique des Constructions Navales (DTCN). In turn, the DTCN was answerable to the Délégation Ministérielle pour l’Armement (DMA), set up by Michel Debré. In 1977, the DMA became the Délégation Générale de l’Armement (DGA). The purpose of this reform was to centralise all the armed forces' design and construction capacities in a single inter-armed forces delegation operating under the government's authority.

In 1958, the official launch by General de Gaulle of the French military nuclear programme and deterrent policy prompted the restructuring of the defence industry and defence technology.

The Cœlacanthe project brought together the DTCN and the French Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission, and in 1971, Redoutable, the first French missile-launching nuclear submarine, came into service.

The international economic climate and decolonisation in the 1970s lead the DCAN to venture into new markets. The loss of the overseas naval dockyards was compounded by the French Navy 's reduced need for vessels and the increased difficulty in obtaining funding. This trend gathered more pace after the end of the Cold War, despite the diversification of the DCAN activities, which now included maintaining the electric power network and clearing mines from the coastline. Some sites also specialised in civilian projects: Brest built trucks, Guérigny made agricultural machinery and Toulon produced civilian vessels (yachts, liners).

But, looking beyond the order books, it was the public status of the DCAN that was gradually called into question, and it came to be considered as an administrative obstacle to the development of the potential of France's naval dockyards.

This transformation occurred in several stages. In 1991, the DCAN was christened the DCN (Direction des Construction Navales). In the same year, DCN International was created. The mission of this PLC was to promote the activities of the DCN on an international scale and to facilitate the export of its products.

In 1992, the DCN's activities for the state were attached to the Naval Programmes department (SPN), which was the contracting authority for vessels for the French navy. Since then, the DCN has only been responsible for industrial activities, while remaining part of the DGA. This change of status has allowed DCN International to provide the DCN with commercial and legal support in the development of its international trade since the end of the 1990s.

The development strategy pursued by DCN International resulted in the signing of several major contracts. In 1994, three Agosta -class submarines were delivered to Pakistan, and, in 1997, two Scorpène-class submarines were built for Chile. A contract was also won in 2000 to supply six Formidable -class frigates to Singapore. In 2007, a contract was signed with Malaysia for two Scorpène submarines, through the subsidiary Armaris.

The DCN has also won contracts in the field of off-shore drilling for oil. In 1997, the Brest site modernised the Sedco 707 platform and now builds SFX type oil rigs.

In 1999, the DCN became an agency with national authority (SCN), reporting directly to the Ministry of Defence. Finally, in 2001, the French government decided to transform the DCN into a fully state-owned private limited company. The change of status came into effect in 2003. The DCN became just DCN, which no longer stood for Direction des Constructions Navales.

In 2007, DCN acquired the French naval activities branch of Thales, Armaris, a former subsidiary that was equally shared between DCN and Thales, and MOPA2, the company in charge of the project to build a second aircraft carrier. To stress its new identity, the resulting group was named DCNS. Thales acquired a 25% stake in the group's capital. In 2011, Thales increased its share of DCNS' capital to 35%.

Construction of the stealthy multi-function frigates (FREMM) started in 2007. In 2008, an aerial drone landed on the deck of a frigate at sea for the first time in history. In 2013, the group set up DCNS Research to promote its research activities. DCNS India, today Naval Group India was founded in 2008, thanks to two contracts signed in 2005 and 2008 for the delivery of six conventional Scorpène-class submarines. Similarly, in 2013, a submarine construction site was opened in Brazil. The group created the DCNS University in 2013 to deliver internal and external training.

On 28 June 2017, DCNS changed its name to Naval Group.

Naval Group's activities can be broken down into two main sectors: naval defence, the group's historical core business (ships, submarines, operational readiness management of the forces). In 2021, Naval Group stops its activities in the area of maritime renewable energy.

Naval Group designs, develops and manages the operational readiness of surface and underwater naval systems, and their associated systems and infrastructures. As a project manager and integrator of armed vessels, Naval Group intervenes all along the value chain, from strategic programme planning, to design, construction and the management of operational readiness.

The group works with the French navy and other navies, for conventional products, and with the authorisation of the French government. It also offers its military expertise to the French Air Force to design automated navigation and combat systems, and to renovate aircraft.

The group collaborates with EDF, the CEA and AREVA in the construction of EPR power plants and the maintenance of nuclear power plants. Naval Group also builds thermal electric power plants and naval bases. The group designed the electric power plants in Mayotte, La Réunion and Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon. Since 2008, they have been studying a concept of a small nuclear power plant (50 to 250 MWe) named Flexblue. The project was put on hold in 2014.

Naval Group was investing in four renewable marine technologies: wave energy, marine current turbines, ocean thermal energy conversion (OTEC), and floating wind turbines. Naval created Naval Energies in 2017. Since it gained control of the Irish company OpenHydro in 2013, Naval Group has been able to progress from the research and development phase to industrial production. In 2021, Naval Group stopped the Naval Energies activities.

Naval Group is a private limited company in which the French state holds a 62.49% stake. The Thales groups holds 35% of the capital, and the remaining 2.51% is made up of company and employee shares. At the end of 2016, Naval Group employed 12,771 people, more than half of whom are private sector workers, while the other half are public sector workers. The group is present in 18 countries and has entered several partnerships outside France through its subsidiaries and joint ventures. Sites:

Naval Group operates 10 sites in France. Each site is specialised in a particular activity.

Naval Group owns representative offices in Australia, Saudi Arabia, Brazil, Chile, the United Arab Emirates, Greece, India, Indonesia, Malaysia. The group is also represented all over the world by its subsidiaries and joint ventures, which are wholly owned or operated in association with other companies.

The Karachi affair (French : affaire Karachi) was a major military scandal that took place in the second administration of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, involving the presidencies of François Mitterrand and Jacques Chirac in 1992–97. The scandal involved the payment of massive commissions and kickbacks between France and Pakistan over the negotiations to acquire Agosta 90B-class submarines.

The DCN / DCNS plays a major role in "one of France's biggest political and financial scandals of the last generation [that left] a trail of eight unexplained deaths, nearly half a billion dollars in missing cash and troubling allegations of government complicity" connected to a sale of warships to Taiwan in the 1990s.

Apart from the issues surrounding the sale of ships to Taiwan mentioned above, French prosecutors started investigating a wide range of corruption charges in 2010 involving different submarine sales, with possible bribery and kickbacks to top officials in France. In particular interest by the prosecutors are sales of Scorpène-class submarines to countries like India and Malaysia.

The investigation in Malaysia has been prompted by human rights group Suaram as it involved Prime Minister Najib Razak when he was defence minister and his friend Abdul Razak Baginda whose company Primekar was alleged to be paid a huge commission during the purchase of two Scorpène submarines. French investigators are interested in the fact that Primekar was formed only a few months before the contract was signed with the Malaysian government and DCNS and that Primekar had no track record in servicing submarines and did not have the financial capability to support the contract. Investigations have also revealed that a Hong Kong-based company called Terasasi Ltd in which the directors are Razak Baginda and his father, sold classified Malaysian navy defence documents to DCNS. Also under scrutiny are allegations of extortion and the murder of Shaariibuugiin Altantuyaa, a translator who worked on the deal.

On 15 December 2015, French courts indicted Bernard Baiocco, former president of Thales International Asia for paying kickbacks to Abdul Razak Baginda. At the same time director of shipbuilder DCN International was indicted for misuse of corporate assets.

On 24 August 2016, it was reported by the newspaper The Australian that a 22,000-page report leak has taken place regarding the unrelated Scorpène-class submarine currently being built by India as a part of a 3.5 billion dollar deal. The suspected leak of sensitive information for the Scorpène was claimed to contain information regarding stealth, sensors, the noise level of the submarine at different sea depths, acoustic information and more. The Indian Navy passed the blame for the data leak onto unnamed overseas sources, possibly from the hacking of sensitive data. Naval Group filed a complaint against the newspaper with the Supreme Court of the State of New South Wales in Australia for having illegally published documents containing old technical information about the Scorpene. The Australian court ruled in favour of Naval Group on 29 August and confirmed its decision on 1 September.

Naval Group operates several programmes to promote training and professional integration. The group has signed the Pacte PME, which fosters relations between large companies and smaller enterprises and sets up partnerships with leading universities and academic institutions. Between 2006 and 2013, DCNS organised the Trophée Poséidon for students in engineering schools, which rewarded student projects in the fields of innovation and the maritime environment.

Between 2008 and 2014, Naval Group also ran a professional integration programme for both persons with technical qualifications and persons without any qualifications, called the Filières du Talent. In 2010, this programme was rewarded by the Trophée national 2010 de l’entreprise citoyenne.

DCNS has also been involved in the world of yachting for many years by sharing its technologies and through its sponsoring and mentoring activities. The group is a partner of the Grand-Prix de l' École Navale, a regatta that has been held near the Crozon peninsula since 2001. It has also been a partner of the Pôle France Voile in Brest since 2007, and works for the professional integration of former sportsmen and sportswomen.

In 2008, DCNS built the single-hull DCNS 1000, a yacht designed for round-the-world races, which featured in the 2013 film En Solitaire, by Christophe Offenstein, starring François Cluzet.

Today, Naval Group also shared its technical expertise in composites for hulls and in navigation systems by building the experimental trimaran L' Hydroptère, and it partnered with the Areva Challenge team that took part in the America's Cup in 2007. The Naval Group industrial site in Toulon has been a partner of Toulon rugby club since 2005.

The Naval Hydrographic and Oceanographic Service (French : Service hydrographique et océanographique de la Marine or SHOM) is a French public establishment of an administrative nature (French : établissement public à caractère administratif) administered by the Ministry of Armed Forces. It is the successor to the Dépôt des cartes et plans de la Marine, founded in 1720 which became the Naval Hydrographic Service in 1886 and the Naval and Oceanographic Service in 1971. Its present form was set up by decree number 2007-800 on 11 May 2007. Its board is presided over by the Chief of Staff of the French Navy (French : Chef d'État-Major de la Marine) and the body is directed by a director-general.

This public body has several aims, including the provision of :

SHOM is made up of oceanographic and hydrographic groups, as well as a school, and employs 500 naval and civil personnel. Its fleet, which is placed at its disposal by the French navy, consists of 5 boats: the Beautemps-Beaupré, the Borda, the La Pérouse, the Laplace and the Pourquoi-Pas?. SHOM works in cooperation with many other national organisations, including IFREMER (with whom it shares the Pourquoi-Pas?), Météo-France, the CNRS, the University of Western Brittany and the IGN.

It participates in international hydrographic projects and programmes co-ordinated by the International Hydrographic Organization, of which France is a member.

Among the SHOM's nautical publications are

Negrita (sometimes referred to as Negrita Rum or Rhum Negrita) is a French rum brand. It has origins back to the mid-1800s and is currently owned by French spirit company La Martiniquaise.

Negrita was first blended and labeled by the Bardinet Company of France in the mid-1800s. It was founded by Paul Bardinet who was a young producer of liqueurs in the French commune of Limoges. He experimented with different blends of tafia to create the new rum. The brand was advertised through billboards with the slogan "el ron de la Negrita" (en. "the rum of the little black girl") with a picture of a Caribbean girl wearing Madras ribbons in her hair. The image became the symbol of the brand and the name was trademarked in 1886.

Bardinet's son, Edouard Bardinet, moved the operations to Bordeaux in 1895. He added whiskey and brandies to the company portfolio, with Negrita staying as the symbol of the Bardinet Company.

In 1993, the company became part of La Martiniquaise.

By 1994, Negrita was the flagship brand of dark rum, accounting for 41% of grocery sales in Europe.

Negrita is a blended rum which is distilled on the French islands of Réunion, Guadeloupe, and Martinique. It is made from a blend of mollasses rhums and rhum agricoles (pure sugar cane rhums).

Nellie Yu Roung Ling (Chinese : 裕容齡 ; pinyin : Yù Rónglíng ; Wade–Giles : Yü Jung-ling ; 1882 – 16 January 1973), also spelt Nelly, was a Hanjun Plain White bannerwoman and dancer, who is considered "the first modern dancer of China". She was the younger daughter of Yu Keng and Louisa Pierson, the other one being Lizzie Yu Der Ling. Although not a member of the Qing imperial family, Roung Ling was given the title of " commandery princess [ zh ] " while serving as a lady-in-waiting for Empress Dowager Cixi. She was also known as Yu Roon(g) Ling, especially in the works of her sister Der Ling. She was referred to as Madame Dan Pao Tchao after her marriage to the General Dan Pao Tchao (唐寳潮 ; 1887–1958), and Princess Shou Shan, a title appeared on the cover of her 1934 historical novella about the Fragrant Concubine (Hsiang Fei), a name Sir Reginald Johnston claimed she never used.

Born in an upper-class family, to a Chinese father and a Chinese-American mother who was the daughter of an American naval officer. The Yu sisters, like their two brothers Charles Yu Hsingling and John Yu Shuinling, received Western education in American missionary school—then an almost unheard-of proceeding amongst high Manchu officials—and were fluent in English. The British diplomat Sir Robert Hart described them as "a noisy family of English-speaking children, were fluent also in Japanese and French". She was also well versed in poetry, especially E. B. Browning 's works.

In 1895, Roung Ling's father Yu Keng was appointed minister to Japan, he later took his family there. It was in Japan she discovered her vocation for dance, where she gave an impromptu performance of a Japanese dance Tsurukame [ ja ] (crane-tortoise) she had learned from a servant, before the assembled Japanese dignitaries.

In 1899, Roung Ling left for France with her father for taking up his new post as minister-plenipotentiary to the French Third Republic. In Paris, she was placed in charge of the sisters of the Sacred Heart Convent School (ancien Couvent du Sacré-Cœur) located at 77 Rue de Varenne.

The Yu family quickly adopted Parisian fashion, a media coverage at the time reported that all the children of Minister Yu Keng "wear European costume and follow the fashions closely", and called Roung Ling "a charming Chinese girl who is Parisian in all but name". The New York Times wrote, "[Der Ling and Roung Ling] are adorably pretty, and they dress in the European style with a finish and skill to which something of Oriental charm is added which makes them the cynosure of all eyes when they enter a drawingroom [ sic ] ".

The Yu siblings led a cosmopolitan life in Paris, they socialised, frequented the theatre and performed at their parents' parties. The weekly magazine Armée et Marine reported that the four children of Minister Yu Keng "superbly performed" the English comedy in three acts, Sweet Lavender, at a soirée organised by their father.

In March 1901, the Yus threw a fancy dress ball at the Chinese Embassy to celebrate Chinese New Year, at which Roung Ling was costumed as Prince Charming, her siblings Der Ling, Hsingling and Shuin Ling, were dressed respectively as a doll in the fairy tale, Napoleon and Pluto. The Chicago Sunday Tribune reported that "Lord Yu is particularly proud of his Europeanised family". The Yu couple gave their daughters unheard-of freedom to enjoy European-style ballroom dancing with close body contact with foreign men. Their lifestyle caused outrage for other Manchu mission officials, the family was denounced to the throne. But the Empress Dowager liked what they were doing and waited impatiently for their return.

After attending the coronation of Edward VII and Alexandra, Prince Zaizhen and his entourage were greeted by the Yu family on their return from London. Both Sir Liang Cheng and Prince Zaizhen were quite taken with the Yu sisters. Liang reported back to the court that both girls "would quite fascinate the Empress Dowager if they go to Peking". The Yu sisters liked Prince Zaizhen too, "immensely", as Der Ling remembered, he was "very handsome, well educated, and his tastes were the same as ours in many things". She added that while she and the prince were prone to quarrel, Zaizhen paid court to her softer, prettier sister. Liang Cheng also found himself drawn to Roung Ling, the two had been engaged at least as early as January 1903, but for some unknown reason, they were never married to each other.

During her stay in Paris, apart from studying acting with Sarah Bernhardt, Roung Ling also got the opportunity to study modern dance with Isadora Duncan. For the latter she improvised a few dance steps during their first meeting, Duncan was deeply impressed by her talent and decided to teach her for free; she thus became one of the first Chinese to learn Western choreography. In 1902, she played the part of a Loie Fuller inspired butterfly girl in Rose and Butterfly, and also danced in Greek Dance, in both of which she was well received by audiences. In the same year, the Yus travelled through Spain, Germany, Italy and Russia before arriving back in China in January 1903.

Soon after her return to China, Roung Ling was installed as one of the court ladies to the Empress Dowager Cixi, together with her sister Der Ling. While in the court, she studied traditional Chinese dance, and integrated it with Western elements in her own way to creating a unique style. She developed from this combination a series of dance styles of Eastern aesthetic with Western technique known as " Bodhisattva Dance", " Fan Dance", " Ruyi Dance", "Sword Dance" and "Lotus Fairy Dance". She also introduced Western dance to the imperial court, she performed Greek Dance at Summer Palace in 1904, and a Spanish dance [ es ] on the eve of the Dragon Boat Festival.

She had a love affair with the Guangxu Emperor, but probably in secret on account of the empress dowager's informers. The French writer Marc Chadourne called her the emperor's " Saint Helena "; years later, she told the former with melancholy, that the emperor had proposed to her to be his concubine.

Roung Ling temporarily moved to Shanghai in 1905 due to her father's illness. In 1908, she left the court after the death of the empress dowager. "It is amusing now to think of those days", she recalled almost twenty years later, in 1926, "I was so young and so little that I could not possibly wear the beautiful and elaborate Manchu head dress and without it the court costume wasn't complete; so they dressed me in boy's clothes. I was glad because they were so much more comfortable to wear but still it took more than an hour every morning to have my hair dressed. We had to get up early, always by half past six or seven o'clock to be ready to go to the empress' apartments to wish her 'good morning'. [...] I always went to audiences with the empress. It was quite a long way to go in the palace; but it was easy for me in my boy's clothes to get about. I used to stand or sit on the floor behind a screen where I could hear everything, but of course I was too young to understand much of what was said."

Shortly after the fall of the Qing Empire, in 1912, Roung Ling married Dan Pao Tchao, a nephew of Tang Shao-yi, who studied at the École spéciale militaire de Saint-Cyr in France, and was counsellor in the office of the Republican president with the rank of general. During the Republican era (1912–1949), she was appointed Mistress of Ceremonies to President Li Yuan-hung, and the couple enjoyed a prominent position in Peking high society. It was a happy marriage; however, she probably had a secret relationship with Saint-John Perse, a French poet-diplomat who served as secretary to the French embassy in Peking from 1916 to 1921. A few years later, she confided in Hélène Hoppenot [ fr ] that Perse never loved her, but she was useful to him for obtaining information from the Republic's high society.

During the 1920s, she organised numerous charity performances and participated in many other charity events. In 1921, she gave a speech in English about her life in the Manchu imperial court at the Teng Shih K'ou Congregational Church, in aid of the "School for Poor Children" charity funds.

The American writer Grace Seton-Thompson met Roung Ling while being greeted in a public audience with President Li Yuan-hung. "The event was organised by Madame Dan, mistress of ceremonies to the president. She is also Madame President 's (吳敬君) contact with the diplomatic circles in Peking", Thompson wrote in her travelogue Chinese Lanterns ; "she skillfully combines the elegance of the West and the nobility of the East, forming a charm beyond imagination. [...] But, these are not all the factors that make up her personality. The 'secret' lies in her femininity from the inside out, in a warm and loving heart. Those cumbersome rituals actually take up very little of her time. She has devoted her life to charity, which has almost become a habit."

In addition to charitable activities, Roung Ling was involved in English teaching projects and a fashion design programme; for the latter she founded China's first women's clothing design research society. Her opinion on the changes in women's fashion in China contradicted a 1933 Vogue article—"Sometimes the Twain Do Meet"—which held that Western influence was the source of change in China. She stated, " Chinese fashions have been completely transformed by the Manchu influence which substituted the long dress for the old-fashioned tunic blouse. This dress must be long and straight and have a stiff, high collar." She brought up the New Life Movement 's opposition to Chinese women's dressing in ways that seemed too Western or flamboyant, to argue that Western fashions appeared immodest in China and were not accepted. She also acted as hostess for an exhibition of excavated textiles and robes titled Marco Polo's invitation. The British writer Harold Acton acknowledged Roung Ling's pivotal cultural role in the new Republic in his book Memoirs of an Aesthete.

In the mid 1920s she expressed her desire to become a film actress, but that dream was not realised.

In 1926, the American diplomat John Van Antwerp MacMurray filmed a three-minute sequence of Roung Ling performing a "Sword Dance" in front of the Temple of Heaven.

In 1930, she published in English a historical novella about the Fragrant Concubine of the Qianlong Emperor titled Hsiang Fei: A Love Story of the Emperor Ch’ien Lung. A second edition was released in 1934. In 1936, she wrote a foreword for the Chinese translation of Der Ling's Imperial Incense, at the invitation of its translator Chin Shou-ou [ zh ]. In 1937, she performed an American dance at the Peiping Charity Fair.

After the communist takeover of China in 1949, Roung Ling and her husband managed by various strategies to negotiate their survival during the early years of Mao's regime. After an interview in April 1957, the photojournalist Zhang Zudao (張祖道) gave a description of his first impression of Roung Ling which shed some light on her later life: "She has a well-featured face, no wrinkles except for the forehead. Bright eyes, fair skin, she is of well-proportioned, medium stature, with a tidy haircut with both sides tucked neatly behind the ears. A thin coat of face powder and lipstick, close-fitting black velvet dress in Chinese style with shiny antique silver buttons, making her look elegant especially in a ' workerised, peasantised and soldierised ' society where the monotonous short hair for everyman, pigtails for everywoman and bluish-grey uniform for everyone."

She penned a memoir titled Qinggong suoji (Chinese : 清宮瑣記 ; lit. ' Fragmentary Records of the Qing Palaces ', or more idiomatically, 'Memoir of My Life at the Manchu Imperial Court'), which was published in 1957 recounting her early years in the imperial palace as a lady-in-waiting. It was a bestseller when it was published, and was later severely criticised for its "propaganda of the Four Olds ".

At the height of the sociopolitical purge movement of Cultural Revolution (1966–1976), labelled a symbol of "feudalism, bourgeoisie and revisionism " due to her early years in France and the imperial Qing court, and the social status she held during the Republican era, she was dragged from her apartment by a group of Red Guards who broke both her legs as a symbolic action. She had to live in a dilapidated single-storey bungalow because of the forcible occupation of her residence by a residents' committee. According to the children of her longtime friends, despite her two broken legs and the unpleasant living conditions, her composure and sense of humour remained intact. Every time they visited her, she chatted about funny stories from her youth, and the younger generation roared with laughter. She died of pulmonary infection in Peking University First Hospital, in 1973.

The Dan couple had no children of their own, but left an adopted daughter, Lydia Dan (唐麗題, 1915–2002; the future Lydia na Ranong [ ลิเดีย ณ ระนอง ]), whose biological father was Wang Tseng Sze (王曾思, 1890–1944), the first secretary of the Chinese Legation in Paris during the 1920s. Lydia married Chok na Ranong (โชค ณ ระนอง) and became a confidante of senior royals of Bangkok. Lydia began studying political science at Radcliffe College in 1941, then attended Harvard University from 1942 to 1944.

Nelly Olin (23 March 1941 – 26 October 2017) was a Minister of Environment in France from 2005 to 2007, as part of the cabinet of prime minister Dominique de Villepin. Earlier, from 2004 to 2005, Olin had been the Minister-Delegate for Social Security. She has also been a Senator for Val-d'Oise. She died on 26 October 2017, aged 76.

The daughter of a cleaning lady and a workshop manager, a graduate of the École Nationale de Commerce, and an executive assistant, she was elected mayor of Garges-lès-Gonesse in June 1995 and, three months later in September, senator (UMP) for Val-d'Oise.

A member of the Senate Delegation for Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities for Men and Women, she has held a number of local offices, including Regional Council of Île-de-France and vice-president of the Val-d'Oise General Council.

Between 1999 and 2004, she was chair of the parliamentary study group on the fight against drugs and drug addiction.

In 2003, she was a member of the Stasi Commission on Secularism.

Minister Delegate for Combating Precariousness and Exclusion, then Minister Delegate for Integration, Equal Opportunities and Combating Exclusion in Jean-Pierre Raffarin's government (3), she became Ministry of Ecological Transition (France) and Sustainable Development in Dominique de Villepin's government on 2 June 2005, a position she may owe to her past work as a member of the National Noise Council.

On 30 December 2004, she created the French Equal Opportunities and Anti-Discrimination Commission.

On 13 July 2007, Nelly Olin resigned from her position as first deputy mayor of the municipality of Garges-lès-Gonesse. On 5 October, she decided to leave politics and announced her decision to her supporters in the UMP party in Garges.

From 2007 to 2015, she was involved in the Christophe Bridou case, a former municipal police officer who accused her of slanderous denunciation of pedophilia, which led to his dismissal in 2002.

Nelly Olin was made a Knight of the Legion of Honour in 2008.

She lived in Meulan-en-Yvelines, where the mayor, Cécile Zammit-Popescu, is her niece. She died on 26 October 2017, at her home after a long illness and was buried in the cemetery in Garges-les-Gonesse.

Neo-Babouvism is a revolutionary socialist current in French political theory and political action in the 19th century. It hearkened back to the May 1796 Conspiracy of the Equals of Gracchus Babeuf and his associates, who tried to overthrow the Directory in May 1796 during the French Revolution. After Babeuf's execution (1797), his programme of radical Jacobin republicanism and economic collectivism (Babeufism or Babeuvism or Babouvism, French : babouvisme) was propagated by Philippe Buonarroti, who had been associated with the Conspiracy of the Equals but had survived. Buonarroti's writings influenced many French revolutionaries in the 1830s and 1840s, among them Théodore Dézamy, Richard Lahautière, Albert Laponneraye and Jean-Jacques Pillot.

The neo-Babouvists represented the extreme left-wing of the neo-Jacobin republican movement. Many of them participated in the revolutionary events of the 19th century such as the Revolution of 1848 and the Paris Commune of 1871. They provided a link or a contrast between the utopian socialism of the French Revolution and Marxism.

Louis-Auguste Blanqui (1805-1881) is sometimes grouped with the followers of Babeuf. Babouvists and Blanquists were often allies - such as in the Paris Commune. However, Blanqui regarded himself as a political descendant of Jacques Hébert (1757-1794) and his followers, not of Babeuf. Blanqui also had no organisational ties to the societies of the Babouvists and lacked the clear commitment to economic communism of the Babouvists. The writings of Buonarroti and through them the doctrines of Babeuf also had a considerable influence on some socialists, such as those within the British Chartist movement of 1838-1858, notably on James Bronterre O'Brien (1804-1864).

Neo-Babouvism largely disappeared in the second half of the 19th century, although an echo of it may be found in the small non-Marxist Revolutionary Communist Alliance that existed briefly in the 1890s.

New Caledonia is a French territory consisting of a group of islands in the southwest Pacific Ocean, 220 km (140 mi) southwest of Vanuatu and 1,210 km (750 mi) east of Australia. Located 16,100 km (10,000 mi) from Metropolitan France, it forms a sui generis collectivity of the French Republic, having a unique legal status enshrined in a dedicated chapter of the French Constitution.

The archipelago, part of the Melanesia subregion, includes the main island of Grande Terre, the Loyalty Islands, the Chesterfield Islands, the Belep archipelago, the Isle of Pines, and a few remote islets. The Chesterfield Islands are in the Coral Sea. French people, especially locals, call Grande Terre le Caillou, a nickname also used more generally for New Caledonia itself. Pro-independence Kanak parties use the name (la) Kanaky to refer to New Caledonia, a term coined in the 1980s from the ethnic name of the indigenous Melanesian Kanak people, who make up 41% of New Caledonia's population. New Caledonia is associated with the European Union as an overseas country and territory (OCT).

New Caledonia has a land area of 18,575 km (7,172 sq mi) divided into three provinces. The North and South Provinces are on the New Caledonian mainland, while the Loyalty Islands Province is a series of four inhabited islands off the east coast of mainland (from north to south: Ouvéa, Lifou, Tiga, and Maré). New Caledonia's population of 264,596 (April 2025 census) is of diverse origins and varies by geography; in the North and Loyalty Islands Provinces, the indigenous Kanaks predominate, while the wealthy South Province contains significant populations of European (Caldoches and Metropolitan French), Kanak, and Polynesian (mostly Wallisian) origin, as well as smaller groups of Southeast Asian, Pied-Noir, and North African heritage. The capital of New Caledonia is Nouméa.

New Caledonia was part of the continent Zealandia, which broke off from the supercontinent Gondwana and sank between 79 million and 83 million years ago. The earliest traces of human presence in New Caledonia date back to the period when the Lapita culture was influential in large parts of the Pacific, c. 1600 –500 BC or 1300–200 BC. The Lapita were highly skilled navigators and agriculturists. The first settlements were concentrated around the coast and date back to the period between c. 1100 BC and AD 200.

British explorer James Cook was one of the first Europeans to sight New Caledonia, on 4 September 1774, during his second voyage. The northeast of the island reminded him of Scotland, so he named it New Caledonia, after the Latin name of that country. The west coast of Grande Terre was approached by the Comte de Lapérouse in 1788, shortly before his disappearance, and the Loyalty Islands were first visited between 1793 and 1796 when Mare, Lifou, Tiga, and Ouvea were mapped by English whaler William Raven. Raven encountered the island then named Britania, and today known as Maré (Loyalty Is.), in November 1793. From 1796 until 1840, only a few sporadic contacts with the archipelago were recorded. About 50 American whalers left record of being in the region (Grande Terre, Loyalty Is., Walpole and Hunter) between 1793 and 1887. Contacts with visiting ships became more frequent after 1840, because of their interest in sandalwood.

As trade in sandalwood declined, it was replaced by a new business enterprise, " blackbirding ", a euphemism for taking Melanesian or Western Pacific Islanders from New Caledonia, the Loyalty Islands, New Hebrides, New Guinea, and the Solomon Islands into slavery, indentured or forced labour in the sugarcane plantations in Fiji and Queensland by various methods of trickery and deception. Blackbirding was practised by both French and Australian traders, but in New Caledonia's case, the trade in the early decades of the twentieth century involved kidnapping children from the Loyalty Island to the Grand Terre for forced labour in plantation agriculture. New Caledonia's primary experience with blackbirding revolved around a trade from the New Hebrides (now Vanuatu) to the Grand Terre for labour in plantation agriculture, mines, as well as guards over convicts and in some public works. In the early years of the trade, coercion was used to lure Melanesian islanders onto ships. In later years indenture systems were developed; however, when it came to the French slave trade, which took place between its Melanesian colonies of the New Hebrides and New Caledonia, very few regulations were implemented. This represented a departure from contemporary developments in Australia, since increased regulations were developed to mitigate the abuses of blackbirding and 'recruitment' strategies on the coastlines.

The first missionaries from the London Missionary Society and the Marist Brothers arrived in the 1840s. In 1849, the crew of the American ship Cutter was killed and eaten by the Pouma clan. Human cannibalism was widespread throughout New Caledonia.

On 24 September 1853, under orders from Emperor Napoleon III, Admiral Febvrier Despointes took formal possession of New Caledonia. Captain Louis-Marie-François Tardy de Montravel founded Port-de-France (Nouméa) on 25 June 1854. A few dozen free settlers settled on the west coast in the following years. New Caledonia became a penal colony in 1864, and from the 1860s until the end of the transportations in 1897, France sent about 22,000 criminals and political prisoners to New Caledonia. The Bulletin de la Société générale des prisons for 1888 indicates that 10,428 convicts, including 2,329 freed ones, were on the island as of 1 May 1888, by far the largest number of convicts detained in French overseas penitentiaries. The convicts included many Communards, arrested after the failed Paris Commune of 1871, including Henri de Rochefort and Louise Michel. Between 1873 and 1876, 4,200 political prisoners were "relegated" to New Caledonia. Only 40 of them settled in the colony; the rest returned to France after being granted amnesty in 1879 and 1880.

In 1864, nickel was discovered on the banks of the Diahot River ; with the establishment of the Société Le Nickel in 1876, mining began in earnest. To work the mines the French imported labourers from neighbouring islands and from the New Hebrides, and later from Japan, the Dutch East Indies, and French Indochina. The French government also attempted to encourage European immigration, without much success.

The indigenous Kanak people were excluded from the French economy and from mining work, and ultimately confined to reservations. This sparked a violent reaction in 1878, when High Chief Ataï [ fr ] of La Foa managed to unite many of the central tribes and launched a guerrilla war that killed 200 Frenchmen and 1,000 Kanaks. A second uprising [ fr ] occurred in 1917, with Protestant missionaries like Maurice Leenhardt functioning as witnesses to the events of this war. Leenhardt would pen a number of ethnographic works on the Kanak of New Caledonia. Noël of Tiamou led the 1917 rebellion, which resulted in a number of orphaned children, one of whom was taken into the care of Protestant missionary Alphonse Rouel. This child, Wenceslas Thi, would become the father of Jean-Marie Tjibaou (1936–1989).

Europeans brought new diseases such as smallpox and measles, which caused the deaths of many natives. The Kanak population declined from around 60,000 in 1878 to 27,100 in 1921, and their numbers did not increase again until the 1930s.

In June 1940, after the fall of France, the General Council of New Caledonia voted to reject the Vichy government and continue supporting the Allied military effort against Germany. However, the colonial governor Georges-Marc Pélicier promulgated the Vichy government's Constitutional Law, which sparked street demonstrations and an assassination attempt. By this time the Caldoches had been in contact with Charles de Gaulle who encouraged them to form a Free French committee and appointed Henri Sautot as governor. The Vichy government dispatched the warship Dumont d'Urville at Pélicier's request, but soon deemed him incompetent and appointed an acting governor. By this time the Australian government had agreed to intervene and dispatched HMAS Adelaide to oversee the installation of Sautot as governor. A stand-off between Dumont d'Urville and Adelaide followed, with Pélicier and other pro-Vichy officials ultimately deported to French Indochina.

In 1941, some 300 men from the territory volunteered for service overseas. They were joined, in April, by 300 men from French Polynesia ('the Tahitians'), plus a handful from the French districts of the New Hebrides: together they formed the Bataillon du Pacifique. The Caledonians formed two of the companies, and the Polynesians the other two. In May 1941, they sailed to Australia and boarded the RMS Queen Elizabeth for the onward voyage to Africa. They joined the other Free French (FF) battalions in Qastina in August, before moving to the Western Desert with the 1st FF Brigade (1 BFL). There they were one of the four battalions who took part in the breakout after the Battle of Bir Hakeim in 1942. Their losses could not easily be replaced from the Pacific and they were therefore amalgamated with the Frenchmen of another battalion wearing the anchor of la Coloniale, the BIM, to form the Bataillon de l'infanterie de marine et du Pacifique. The combined battalion formed part of the Gaulliste 1 Division Motorisée d'Infanterie / Division de Marche d'Infanterie, alongside three divisions from the French North African forces, in the French Expeditionary Corps during the Italian Campaign. They landed in Provence in 1944, when they were posted out and replaced by local French volunteers and résistants.

Meanwhile, in March 1942, with the assistance of Australia, New Caledonia became an important Allied base, and the main South Pacific Fleet base of the United States Navy in the South Pacific moved to Nouméa in 1942–1943. The fleet that turned back the Japanese Navy in the Battle of the Coral Sea in May 1942 was based at Nouméa. American troops stationed on New Caledonia numbered as many as 50,000, matching the entire local population at the time.

In 1946, New Caledonia became an overseas territory. By 1953, French citizenship had been granted to all New Caledonians, regardless of ethnicity.

During the late 1940s and early 1950s, New Caledonia strengthened its economic links with Australia, particularly as turmoil within France and its empire weakened New Caledonia's traditional economic links to metropolitan France; New Caledonia supplied nickel to Australia in exchange for coal vital for smelting nickel. New Caledonian exports of iron ore and timber to Australia also increased during this time period.

The European and Polynesian populations gradually increased in the years leading to the nickel boom of 1969–1972, and the indigenous Kanak Melanesians became a minority, though they were still the largest ethnic group.

Between 1976 and 1988, a period referred to as "the Events" (French : Les Événements), conflicts between French government actions and the Kanak independence movement saw periods of serious violence and disorder. In 1983, a statute of "enlarged autonomy" for the territory proposed a five-year transition period and a referendum in 1989. In March 1984, the Front Indépendantiste, a Kanak resistance group, seized farms and the Kanak and Socialist National Liberation Front (FLNKS) formed a provisional government. In January 1985, the French Left-wing government offered sovereignty to the Kanaks and legal protection for European settlers. The plan faltered as violence escalated. The government declared a state of emergency; however, regional elections went ahead, and the FLNKS won control of three out of four provinces. The centre-right government elected in France in March 1986 began eroding the arrangements established under the Socialists, redistributing lands mostly without consideration of native land claims, resulting in over two-thirds going to Europeans and less than a third to the Kanaks. By the end of 1987, roadblocks, gun battles and the destruction of property culminated in the Ouvéa cave hostage taking, a dramatic hostage crisis just days before the 1988 French presidential election began. Pro-independence militants on Ouvéa killed four gendarmes and took 27 hostage. The military assaulted the cave to rescue the hostages. Nineteen Kanak hostage takers were killed and another three died in custody, while two soldiers were killed during the assault.

The Matignon Agreements, signed on 26 June 1988, ensured a decade of stability. The Nouméa Accord, signed 5 May 1998, set the groundwork for a 20-year transition that gradually transfers competences to the local government.

Following the timeline set by the Nouméa Accord that stated a vote must take place by the end of 2018, the groundwork was laid for a referendum on full independence from France at a meeting chaired by the French Prime Minister Édouard Philippe on 2 November 2017, to be held by November 2018. Voter list eligibility was the subject of a long dispute, but the details were resolved in an electoral list that granted automatic eligibility to voters of Kanak origin but excluded those of other origins who had not been longtime residents of the territory. The referendum was held on 4 November 2018, with independence being rejected.

Another referendum was held in October 2020, with voters once again choosing to remain a part of France. In the 2018 referendum, 56.7% of voters chose to remain in France. In the 2020 referendum, this percentage dropped with 53.4% of voters choosing to remain part of France.

The third referendum was held on 12 December 2021. The referendum was boycotted by pro-independence forces, who argued for a delayed vote due to the impact caused by the COVID-19 pandemic ; when the French government declined to do so, they called for a boycott. This led to 96% of voters choosing to stay with France.

In May 2024, riots broke out amid debate over a proposed electoral reform in the territory. In October 2024, then-French Prime Minister Michel Barnier scrapped the bill, citing the need to restore calm and telling the National Assembly that "avoiding further unrest" was a priority. On 2 December 2024, curfew was officially lifted as the riots were over. As of early 2026, the National Gendarmerie maintained a significant presence in New Caledonia, with five squadrons kept on standby in the case of further unrest.

In July 2025, a deal was struck between the French Government and New Caledonia, to establish a new “État de Nouvelle-Calédonie”, the “State of New Caledonia”, with the status to be enshrined in the Constitution of the French Republic. Residents of New Caledonia who have lived in New Caledonia for at least ten years will be given the right to vote, starting with the 2031 provincial elections. Such deal is to be confirmed by the French Parliament in the fourth quartile of 2025, with the deal to then be voted on by New Caledonians in 2026 as a referendum.

New Caledonia is a territory sui generis to which France has gradually transferred certain powers. As such its citizens have French nationality and vote for the president of France. They have the right to vote in elections to the European Parliament. It is governed by a 54-member Territorial Congress, a legislative body composed of members of three provincial assemblies. The French State is represented in the territory by a High Commissioner. At a national level, New Caledonia is represented in the French Parliament by two deputies and two senators. At the 2012 French presidential election, the voter turnout in New Caledonia was 61.19%.

For 25 years, the party system in New Caledonia was dominated by the anti-independence The Rally–UMP. This dominance ended with the emergence of a new party, Avenir Ensemble, also opposed to independence, but considered more open to dialogue with the Kanak movement, which is part of the Kanak and Socialist National Liberation Front, a coalition of several pro-independence groups. In January 2025, Alcide Ponga was sworn in as President of the Government of New Caledonia, forming a new government following the collapse of the pro-independence government led by Louis Mapou. His leadership has been described as bringing stability following the 2024 unrest and a continuation for the country to remain within the French Republic. In October 2025, it was reported that that French MPs are fighting over the bill to delay New Caledonia's provincial elections to June 2026 under the Bougival Agreement. FLNKS and left MPs objected, filing approximately 1,600 amendments, and forced a referral to a joint committee.

In January 2026, 5 parliamentary groups adopted the Elysée-Oudinot Accord to further clarify the language within the Bougival Agreement. Despite being adopted by the French Senate, a bill to further the agreements was rejected by the National Assembly after a resolution by pro-independence deputy Emmanuel Tjibaou.

Kanak society has several layers of customary authority, from the 4,000–5,000 family-based clans to the eight customary areas (aires coutumières) that make up the territory. Clans are led by clan chiefs and constitute 341 tribes, each headed by a tribal chief. The tribes are further grouped into 57 customary chiefdoms (chefferies), each headed by a head chief, and forming the administrative subdivisions of the customary areas.

The Customary Senate is the assembly of the various traditional councils of the Kanaks, and has jurisdiction over the law proposals concerning the Kanak identity. The Customary Senate is composed of 16 members appointed by each traditional council, with two representatives per customary area. In its advisory role, the Customary Senate must be consulted on law proposals "concerning the Kanak identity" as defined in the Nouméa Accord. It also has a deliberative role on law proposals that would affect identity, the civil customary statute, and the land system. A new president is appointed each year in August or September, and the presidency rotates between the eight customary areas.

Kanak people have recourse to customary authorities regarding civil matters such as marriage, adoption, inheritance, and some land issues. The French administration typically respects decisions made in the customary system. However, their jurisdiction is sharply limited in penal matters, as some matters relating to the customary justice system, including the use of corporal punishment, are seen as clashing with the human rights obligations of France.

The Armed Forces of New Caledonia (French : Forces armées de Nouvelle-Calédonie, or FANC) include about 2,000 soldiers, mainly deployed in Koumac, Nandaï, Tontouta, Plum, and Nouméa. The land forces consist of a regiment of the Troupes de marine, the Régiment d'infanterie de marine du Pacifique. About 80 percent of the 700-member regiment is composed of soldiers on short-term (four month) deployments from metropolitan France. As of 2018, only about 30 personnel in the regiment were locally recruited.

The naval forces incorporate several vessels of the French Navy including: one Floréal -class frigate, Vendémiaire, the patrol and support vessel D'Entrecasteaux and two vessels of the Félix Éboué class of patrol vessels, Auguste Benebig and Jean Tranape. One EDA-S landing craft (Sabre) is also deployed to support operations in the territory, along with two RP10 -class harbour tugboats.

As of 2025/26, French naval aviation and air force elements in New Caledonia included two Navy Falcon 200 Gardian maritime surveillance aircraft (drawn from Flotilla 25F), which, as of 2025/26 are being replaced, on an interim basis, by the more advanced Falcon 50 aircraft. These aircraft will in turn be superseded by the new Falcon 2000 Albatros starting in about 2030. Two Casa CN235 transport aircraft and three Puma helicopters from the Air Force's 52 "Tontouta" Squadron are also deployed in New Caledonia. Prior to 2022, the frigate Vendémiaire operated the Alouette III helicopter. However, with the retirement of the type in 2022, it is being replaced by the Eurocopter Dauphin N3. In 2022, the French Air Force demonstrated a capacity to reinforce the territory by deploying three Rafale fighters, supported by A400M transport aircraft and A330 MRTT Phénix tankers, from France to New Caledonia for a three-week exercise.

In addition, some 855 personnel from the National Gendarmerie are stationed on the archipelago, divided into 4 companies, 27 brigades and several specialized, and mobile Gendarmerie units. During periods such the 2021 referendum on independence, these forces have been significantly reinforced with personnel deployed from metropolitan France. The air component includes two Écureuil helicopters while the Maritime Gendarmerie deploys the patrol boat Dumbea in the territory.

New Caledonia has been a member of the Pacific Community since 1983 with Nouméa the home of the organization's regional headquarters. Since 1986, the United Nations Committee on Decolonization has included New Caledonia on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories. An independence referendum was held the following year, but independence was rejected by a large majority.

Under the Nouméa Accord, signed in 1998 following a period of secessionist unrest in the 1980s and approved in a referendum, New Caledonia was granted special status. Twenty years after inception, the Nouméa Accord required an referendum on independence which was held on 4 November 2018. The result was that 56.9% of voters chose to remain with France. The Nouméa Accord required another independence referendum, which was held on 4 October 2020. The result was that 53.26% of voters chose to remain with France. The third and last referendum permitted by the Nouméa Accord was held on 12 December 2021, confirming New Caledonia as part of the French Republic with 96% voting "no" to independence after the vote was boycotted by the bulk of the Kanak population.

The official name of the territory, Nouvelle-Calédonie, could be changed in the near future due to the accord, which states that "a name, a flag, an anthem, a motto, and the design of banknotes will have to be sought by all parties together, to express the Kanak identity and the future shared by all parties." To date, however, there has been no consensus on a new name for the territory, although Kanak Republic is popular among 40% of the population. New Caledonia has increasingly adopted its own symbols, choosing an anthem, a motto, and a new design for its banknotes. In July 2010, the Congress of New Caledonia voted in favour of a wish to fly the Kanak flag of the independence movement FLNKS alongside the French tricolour, as dual flags of the territory. The wish, legally non-binding, proved controversial. A majority of New Caledonian communes, but not all, now fly both flags, the rest flying only the French Tricolour. The non-official adoption made New Caledonia one of the few countries or territories in the world with two flags. The decision to wish for the use of two flags has been a constant battleground between the two sides and led the coalition government to collapse in February 2011.

On 24 June 2025, President Emmanuel Macron extended an invitation to both pro‑ and anti‑independence leaders from New Caledonia to participate in talks in Paris starting 2 July 2025, aimed at negotiating the territory's future governance and status. Objectives of the talks include a revised political framework for New Caledonia, potentially including greater autonomy and redesigned electoral rules, socioeconomic challenges, such as the nickel-dependent economy, youth employment, and post‑unrest recovery.

On 13 July 2025, weeks of negotiations concluded with an agreement between all parties that New Caledonia should remain within France, but with far greater levels of autonomy, the status of a state, and a dual citizenship arrangement for those that wish it. The agreement will require ratification by both chambers of the French parliamentary system, followed by a referendum in New Caledonia in 2026. Initial thoughts on the deal suggest it is not what independence supporters hoped for, but statehood is a major concession by France.

On 13 August 2025, the FLNKS stated in a press conference that they had voted to reject the agreement on the basis that an independence referendum prior to France's 2027 presidential election was absent from the deal.

On 16 September 2025, the New Caledonia Congress approved once again for the third time, another postponement, regarding the election within the territory. The votes were divided to 39 out of 52 Congress members (75%) voted in favor of the postponement, while the FLNKS pro-independence group cast 13 votes against (25%).

The institutional organization is the result of the organic law and ordinary law passed by the Parliament on 16 February 1999.

The archipelago is divided into three provinces:

New Caledonia is further divided into 33 communes (municipalities). One commune, Poya, is divided between two provinces. The northern half of Poya, with the main settlement and most of the population, is part of the North Province, while the southern half of the commune, with only 210 inhabitants in 2019, is part of the South Province.

New Caledonia is part of Zealandia, a fragment of the ancient Gondwana super-continent, which is part of Oceania. It is speculated that New Caledonia separated from Australia roughly 66 million years ago, subsequently drifting in a north-easterly direction, reaching its present position about 50 million years ago.

The mainland is divided in length by a central mountain range whose highest peaks are Mont Panié (1,629 m or 5,344 ft) in the north and Mont Humboldt (1,618 m or 5,308 ft) in the southeast. The east coast is covered by lush vegetation. The west coast, with its large savannahs and plains suitable for farming, is a drier area. Many ore-rich massifs are found along this coast.

The Diahot River is the longest river of New Caledonia, flowing for some 100 kilometres (62 mi). It has a catchment area of 620 km (240 sq mi) and opens north-westward into the Baie d'Harcourt, flowing towards the northern point of the island along the western escarpment of the Mount Panié. Most of the island is covered by wet evergreen forests, while savannahs dominate the lower elevations. The New Caledonian lagoon, with a total area of 24,000 square kilometres (9,300 sq mi) is one of the largest lagoons in the world. The lagoon and the surrounding New Caledonian barrier reef was named a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2008 for its exceptional beauty and marine biodiversity. In May 2023, there was an earthquake and tsunami in New Caledonia. This triggered a tsunami warning here as well as in other nearby countries.

The climate is tropical, with a hot and humid season from November to March with temperatures between 27 and 30 °C (81 and 86 °F), and a cooler, dry season from June to August with temperatures between 20 and 23 °C (68 and 73 °F), linked by two short interstices. The tropical climate is strongly moderated by the oceanic influence and the trade winds that attenuate humidity, which can be close to 80%. The average annual temperature is 23 °C, with historical extremes of 2.3 and 39.1 °C (36.1 and 102.4 °F).

The rainfall records show that precipitation differs greatly within the island. The 3,000 millimetres (120 in) of rainfall recorded in Galarino are three times the average of the west coast. There are also dry periods, because of the effects of El Niño. Between December and April, tropical depressions and cyclones can cause winds to exceed a speed of 100 kilometres per hour (62 mph), with gusts of 250 kilometres per hour (160 mph) and very abundant rainfall. The last cyclone affecting New Caledonia was Cyclone Niran, in March 2021.

New Caledonia has many unique taxa, especially birds and plants. It has the richest diversity in the world per square kilometre. The biodiversity is caused by Grande Terre's central mountain range, which has created a variety of niches, landforms and micro-climates where endemic species thrive.

Largely due to its nickel industry, New Caledonia emits a high level of carbon dioxide per person compared to other countries. In 2019, it emitted 55.25 tons of CO 2 per person, compared to 4.81 for France. The combination of the exceptional biodiversity of New Caledonia and its threatened status has made it one of the most critical biodiversity hotspots on Earth.

In 2001, Bruno Van Peteghem was awarded the Goldman Environmental Prize for his efforts on behalf of the Caledonian ecological protection movement in the face of "serious challenges" from Jacques Lafleur 's RPCR party. Progress has been made in a few areas in addressing the protection of New Caledonia's ecological diversity from fire, industrial and residential development, unrestricted agricultural activity and mining (such as the judicial revocation of INCO 's mining licence in June 2006 owing to claimed abuses).

In 2008, six lagoons of the New Caledonian barrier reef, the world's longest continuous barrier reef system, were inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List.

New Caledonia's fauna and flora derive from ancestral species isolated in the region when it broke away from Gondwana many tens of millions of years ago. Not only endemic species have evolved here, but entire genera, families, and even orders are unique to the islands.

More tropical gymnosperm species are endemic to New Caledonia than to any similar region on Earth. Of the 44 indigenous species of gymnosperms, 43 are endemic, including the only known parasitic gymnosperm (Parasitaxus usta). Also, of the 35 known species of Araucaria, 13 are endemic to New Caledonia. New Caledonia also has the world's most divergent lineage of flowering plant, Amborella trichopoda, which is at, or near, the base of the clade of all flowering plants.

The world's largest extant species of fern, Sphaeropteris intermedia, also is endemic to New Caledonia. It is very common on acidic soil, usually found on fallow ground or in forest clearings, and grows about one metre per year on the east coast. There also are other species of tree ferns, notably Sphaeropteris novae-caledoniae and the New Caledonian fork fern, (Tmesipteris oblanceolata) which has the largest genome known in a eukaryotic organism.

New Caledonia also is one of five regions on the planet where species of southern beeches (Nothofagus) are indigenous; five species are known to occur here.

New Caledonia has its own version of maquis (maquis minier) occurring on metalliferous soils, mostly in the south. The soils of ultramafic rocks (mining terrains) have been a refuge for many native flora species which are adapted to the toxic mineral content of the soils, to which most foreign species of plants are poorly suited, which has therefore prevented invasion into the habitat or displacement of indigenous plants.

Two terrestrial ecoregions lie within New Caledonia's territory: New Caledonia rain forests and New Caledonia dry forests.

In addition to its outstanding plant diversity and endemism, New Caledonia also provides habitat for a wide diversity of animals. Over 100 bird species live in New Caledonia, of which 24 are endemic. One of these endemic bird species is the New Caledonian crow, a bird noted for its tool-making abilities, which rival those of primates. These crows are renowned for their extraordinary intelligence and ability to fashion tools to solve problems, and make the most complex tools of any animal yet studied apart from humans.

The endemic kagu, agile and able to run quickly, is a flightless bird, but it is able to use its wings to climb branches or glide. Its sound is similar to the bark of a dog. It is the surviving member of monotypic family Rhynochetidae, order Eurypygiformes.

There are 11 endemic fish species and 14 endemic species of decapod crustaceans in the rivers and lakes of New Caledonia. Some, such as Neogalaxias, exist only in small areas. The nautilus —considered a living fossil and related to the extinct ammonites —occurs in Pacific waters around New Caledonia. There is a large diversity of marine fish in the surrounding waters, which are within the extents of the Coral Sea.

Despite its large number of bird, reptile, and fish species, New Caledonia has remarkably few mammal species: nine, of which six are endemic.

Several species of New Caledonia are remarkable for their size: Ducula goliath is the largest extant species of arboreal pigeon; Rhacodactylus leachianus, the largest gecko in the world; Phoboscincus bocourti, a large skink thought to be extinct until rediscovered in 2003.

Much of New Caledonia's fauna present before human settlement is now extinct, including Sylviornis, a bird over a metre tall not closely related to any living species, and Meiolania, a giant horned turtle that diverged from living turtles during the Jurassic period.

In January 2024, a court in the Capital Nouméa issued a ruling banning the culling of sharks citing it as disproportionate. The culls began after an Australian tourist was killed by a shark in the previous year.

At the last census in April 2025, New Caledonia had a population of 264,596, down from 271,407 at the September 2019 census, as people left the territory due to an economic crisis and recent unrest. Of these 264,596 people, 18,671 lived in the Loyalty Islands Province, 50,947 in the North Province, and 194,978 in the South Province.

Between the 2019 and 2025 censuses, the North Province and the Loyalty Islands registered a population increase of 2.1% and 1.7% respectively, whereas the South Province registered a population decline of 4.0%, as newcomers recently arrived in the Greater Nouméa area, in particular Kanak people, left Nouméa and relocated in the rest of New Caledonia due to the depressed economy in the Greater Nouméa area following the 2024 unrest and urban riots.

30% of the population was under the age of 20, with the ratio of older people in the total population increasing. Two out of three residents of New Caledonia live in Greater Nouméa. 78% were born in New Caledonia. The total fertility rate decreased from 2.2 children per woman in 2014 to 1.9 in 2019.

At the 2019 census, 41.2% of the population reported belonging to the Kanak community (up from 39.1% at the 2014 census) and 24.1% to the European (Caldoche and Zoreille) community (down from 27.2% at the 2014 census). A further 7.5% of the population either self-identified as "Caledonian" or refused to declare an ethnic group (down from 9.9% at the 2014 census). Most of the people who self-identify as "Caledonian" or refuse to declare an ethnic group are thought to be ethnically European.

The other self-reported communities were Wallisians and Futunians (8.3% of the total population, up from 8.2% at the 2014 census), Indonesians who are from the Javanese ethnic group (1.4% of the total population, the same as in 2014), Tahitians (2.0% of the total population, down from 2.1% at the 2014 census), Ni-Vanuatu (0.9%, down from 1.0% at the 2014 census), Vietnamese (0.8%, down from 0.9% at the 2014 census), and other Asians (primarily ethnic Chinese ; 0.4% of the total population, the same as in 2014).

11.3% of the population reported belonging to multiple communities (mixed race) (up from 8.6% at the 2014 census). The question on community belonging, which had been left out of the 2004 census, was reintroduced in 2009 under a new formulation, different from the 1996 census, allowing multiple choices (mixed race) and the possibility to clarify the choice "other" (which led many Europeans to self-identify as "Caledonian" in the category "other", or to select several ethnic communities, such as both European and Kanak, thus appearing as mixed race, which is particularly the case for the Caldoches living in the bush, who often have mixed ancestry).

Finally, 2.1% of the population reported belonging to other communities to the exclusion of "Caledonian" (up from 1.3% at the 2014 census).

The Kanak people, part of the ethnic Melanesian group, are indigenous to New Caledonia. Their social organization is traditionally based on clans, which identify as either "land" or "sea" clans, depending on their original location and the occupation of their ancestors. According to the 2019 census, the Kanak constitute 95% of the population in the Loyalty Islands Province, 72% in the North Province and 29% in the South Province. The Kanak tend to be of lower socio-economic status than the Europeans and other settlers.

Europeans first settled in New Caledonia when France established a penal colony on the archipelago. Once the prisoners had completed their sentences, they were given land to settle. According to the 2014 census, of the 73,199 Europeans in New Caledonia, 30,484 were native-born, 36,975 were born in Metropolitan France, 488 were born in French Polynesia, 86 were born in Wallis and Futuna, and 5,166 were born abroad. The Europeans are divided into several groups. The Caldoches are usually defined as those born in New Caledonia who have ancestral ties that span back to the early French settlers. They often settled in the rural areas of the western coast of Grande Terre, where many continue to run large cattle properties.

Distinct from the Caldoches are those who were born in New Caledonia from families that had settled more recently, and are called simply Caledonians. The Metropolitan French -born migrants who come to New Caledonia are called Métros or Zoreilles, indicating their origins in metropolitan France. There is also a community of about 2,000 pieds noirs, descended from European settlers in France's former North African colonies; some of them are prominent in anti-independence politics, including Pierre Maresca, a leader of the RPCR.

A 2015 documentary by Al Jazeera English asserted that up to 10% of New Caledonia's population is descended from around 2,000 Arab - Berber people deported from French Algeria in the late 19th century to prisons on the island in reprisal for the Mokrani Revolt in 1871. After serving their sentences, they were released and given land to own and cultivate as part of colonisation efforts on the island. As the overwhelming majority of the Algerians imprisoned on New Caledonia were men, the community was continued through intermarriage with women of other ethnic groups, mainly French women from nearby women's prisons. Despite facing both assimilation into the Euro-French population and discrimination for their ethnic background, descendants of the deportees have succeeded in preserving a common identity as Algerians, including maintaining certain cultural practices (such as Arabic names) and in some cases Islamic religion. Some travel to Algeria as a rite of passage, though obtaining Algerian citizenship is often a difficult process. The largest population of Algerian-Caledonians lives in the commune of Bourail (particularly in the Nessadiou district, where there is an Islamic cultural centre and cemetery [ fr ]), with smaller communities in Nouméa, Koné, Pouembout, and Yaté.

The French language began to spread with the establishment of French settlements, and French is now spoken even in the most secluded villages. For a long time the level of fluency varied significantly across the population as a whole, primarily due to the absence of universal access to public education before 1953, and also due to immigration and ethnic diversity, but the French language has now become universal among the younger generations as shown by the censuses of population. At the 2009 census, 97.3% of people aged 15 or older reported that they could speak, read and write French, whereas only 1.1% reported that they had no knowledge of French. No questions regarding the knowledge of French were asked in the 2014 and 2019 censuses, on account of the population's nearly universal understanding of it.

The 28 Kanak languages spoken in New Caledonia are part of the Oceanic group of the Austronesian family. Eight of these can be chosen by parents as optional subjects for their children from kindergarten to high school (four languages are taught up to the bachelor's degree) and an academy is responsible for their promotion. The three most widely spoken indigenous languages are Drehu (spoken in Lifou), Nengone (spoken on Maré) and Paicî (northern part of Grande Terre). Others include Iaai (spoken on Ouvéa). At the 2019 census, 44.0% of people whose age was 15 or older reported that they had some form of knowledge of at least one Kanak language (up from 41.3% at the 2009 census), whereas 56.0% reported that they had no knowledge of any of the Kanak languages (down from 58.7% at the 2009 census).

Other significant language communities among immigrant populations include speakers of Wallisian, Futunian, Tahitian, Javanese, Vietnamese, Chinese, and Bislama.

The predominant religion is Christianity ; half of the population is Catholic, including most of the Europeans, West Uveans, and Vietnamese and half of the Melanesian and Polynesian minorities. Catholicism was introduced by French colonists. The island also has numerous Protestant churches, of which the Free Evangelical Church and the Evangelical Church in New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands have the largest number of adherents; their memberships are almost entirely Melanesian. Protestantism gained ground in the late 20th century and continues to expand. There are also numerous other Christian groups and more than 6,000 Muslims. (See Islam in New Caledonia and Baháʼí Faith in New Caledonia.) Nouméa is the seat of the Archdiocese of Nouméa.

Education in New Caledonia is based on the French curriculum and delivered by both French teachers and French-trained teachers. Under the terms of the 1998 Nouméa Accord, primary education is the responsibility of the three provinces. As of 2010, secondary education was in the process of being transferred to the provinces. The majority of schools are located in Nouméa but some are found in the islands and the north of New Caledonia. When students reach high school age, most are sent to Nouméa to continue their secondary education. Education is compulsory from the age of six years.

New Caledonia's main tertiary education institution is the University of New Caledonia (Université de la Nouvelle-Calédonie), which was founded in 1993 and comes under the supervision of the Ministry of Higher Education, Research and Innovation. It is based in Nouméa and offers a range of vocational, Bachelor, MA, and PhD programs and courses. The University of New Caledonia consists of three academic departments, one institute of technology, one PhD school, and one teachers' college. As of 2013, the university has approximately 3,000 students, 107 academics, and 95 administrative and library staff. Many New Caledonian students also pursue scholarships to study in metropolitan France. As part of the Nouméa Accord process, a Cadre Avenir provides scholarships for Kanak professionals to study in France.

New Caledonia has one of the largest economies in the South Pacific, with a GDP of US$9.48 billion in 2019. The nominal GDP per capita was US$34,939 (at market exchange rates) in 2019. It is lower than the nominal GDP per capita of Hawaii, Australia, New Zealand, and Guam, but higher than all other independent and non-sovereign countries and territories in Oceania, although there is significant inequality in income distribution, and long-standing structural imbalances between the economically dominant South Province and the less developed North Province and Loyalty Islands. The currency in use in New Caledonia is the CFP franc, as of May 2020, pegged to the euro at a rate of 119.3 CFP to 1.00 euros. It is issued by the Institut d'Émission d'Outre-Mer.

Real GDP grew by an average of +3.3% per year in the first half of the 2010s, boosted by rising worldwide nickel prices and an increase in domestic demand due to rising employment, as well as strong business investments, but by only +0.2% per year in the second half of the 2010s, as the local nickel industry entered a period of crisis and the repeated independence referendums have generated economic uncertainty. In 2017, exports of goods and services from New Caledonia amounted to 1.93 billion US dollars, 77.5% of which were mineral products and alloys (mainly nickel ore and ferronickel) and 5.0% exports of hotel and restaurant services (i.e. international tourism in New Caledonia). Imports of goods and services amounted to 3.48 billion US dollars. 40.9% of the imports of goods came from Metropolitan France and its overseas departments, 11.7% from Singapore (essentially fuel), 11.5% from Australia, 5.0% from other countries in the European Union, 4.2% from China and Hong Kong, 4.1% from New Zealand, 3.7% from South Korea, 2.4% from Japan, 2.0% from the United States, 1.9% from Canada, and 12.6% from other countries. The trade deficit in goods and services stood at 1.55 billion US dollars in 2017.

Financial support from France is substantial, representing more than 15% of the GDP, and contributes to the health of the economy. Tourism is underdeveloped, with 100,000 visitors a year, compared to 400,000 in the Cook Islands and 200,000 in Vanuatu. Much of the land is unsuitable for agriculture, and food accounts for about 20% of imports. According to FAOSTAT, New Caledonia is a significant producer of: yams (33rd); taro (44th); plantains (50th); coconuts (52nd). The exclusive economic zone of New Caledonia covers 1.4 million square kilometres (0.54 million square miles). The construction sector accounts for roughly 12% of GDP, employing 9.9% of the salaried population in 2010. Manufacturing is largely confined to small-scale activities such as the transformation of foodstuffs, textiles and plastics.

New Caledonian soils contain about 25% of the world's nickel resources. The late-2000s recession has gravely affected the nickel industry, as the sector faced a significant drop in nickel prices (−31.0% year-on-year in 2009) for the second consecutive year. The fall in prices has led a number of producers to reduce or stop altogether their activity, resulting in a reduction of the global supply of nickel by 6% compared to 2008.

This context, combined with bad weather, has forced the operators in the sector to revise downwards their production target. Thus, the activity of mineral extraction has declined by 8% in volume year on year. The share of the nickel sector as a percentage of GDP fell from 8% in 2008 to 5% in 2009. A trend reversal and a recovery in demand have been recorded early in the second half of 2009, allowing a 2.0% increase in the local metal production. A March 2020 report stated that "New Caledonia is the world's fourth largest nickel producer, which has seen a 26% rally in prices in the past year". According to industry sources however, the Goro mine has never met its potential capacity to produce "60,000 tpy of nickel in the form of nickel oxide, due to design flaws and operational commissioning issues" In 2019, it produced slightly over a third of its annual capacity".

In March 2021, Tesla agreed to a partnership with the Goro Mine, a "technical and industrial partnership to help with product and sustainability standards along with taking nickel for its battery production, according to the agreement", according to a BBC News report. The majority owner, Vale, said that the deal will be of long-term benefit in terms of jobs and the economy. Tesla is a heavy user of nickel for making the lithium-ion batteries and wanted to "secure its long-term supply".

Also in March 2021, a part of Vale's nickel business was sold "to a consortium called Prony, which includes Swiss commodity trader Trafigura ". Provincial authorities and businesses in New Caledonia would have a 51% stake in the Vale operation.

Wood carving, especially of the houp (Montrouziera cauliflora), is a contemporary reflection of the beliefs of the traditional tribal society, and includes totems, masks, chambranles, or flèche faîtière, a kind of arrow that adorns the roofs of Kanak houses. Basketry is a craft widely practised by tribal women, creating objects of daily use.

The Jean-Marie Tjibaou Cultural Centre, designed by Italian architect Renzo Piano and opened in 1998, celebrates Kanak culture.

The Kaneka is a form of local music, inspired by reggae and originating in the 1980s.

The Mwâ Ka is a 12-metre (39 ft) totem pole commemorating the French annexation of New Caledonia, and was inaugurated in 2005.

Les Nouvelles Calédoniennes is the only daily newspaper in the archipelago. A monthly publication, Le Chien bleu, parodies the news from New Caledonia.

There are five radio stations: the public service broadcaster RFO radio Nouvelle-Calédonie, Océane FM (the collectivity's newest station), the youth-oriented station NRJ, Radio Djiido (established by Jean-Marie Tjibaou), and Radio Rythmes Bleus. The last two stations are primarily targeted to the various Kanak groups who are indigenous to New Caledonia ("Djiido" is a term from the Fwâi language, spoken in Hienghène in the North Province, denoting a metal spike used to secure straw thatching to the roof of a traditional Kanak house).

As for television, the public service broadcaster France Télévisions operates a local channel, Réseau Outre-Mer 1re, along with France 2, France 3, France 4, France 5, France 24 and Arte which all broadcast from Paris. Canal Plus Calédonie carries 17 digital channels in French, including Canal+ and TF1. Analogue television broadcasts ended in September 2011, completing the digital television transition in New Caledonia. Bids for two new local television stations, NCTV and NC9, were considered by the French broadcasting authorities. NCTV was launched in December 2013.

The media are considered to be able to operate freely, but Reporters Without Borders raised concerns in 2006 about "threats and intimidation" of RFO staff by members of a pro-independence group.

The largest sporting event to be held in New Caledonia is a round of the FIA Asia Pacific Rally Championship (APRC).

The New Caledonia football team began playing in 1950, and was admitted into FIFA, the international association of football leagues, in 2004. Prior to joining FIFA, New Caledonia held observer status with the Oceania Football Confederation, and became an official member of the OFC with its FIFA membership. They have won the South Pacific Games five times, most recently in 2007, and have placed third on two occasions in the OFC Nations Cup. Christian Karembeu is a prominent New Caledonian former footballer. The under-17 team qualified for the FIFA under 17 World Cup in 2017.

Basketball gets much public attention in New Caledonia by both press and fans. Its national team has won plenty of medals in the Oceania region. New Caledonia's top basketball club teams are AS 6e Km and AS Dumbea.

Horse racing is also very popular in New Caledonia, as are women's cricket matches.

The rugby league team participated in the Pacific Cup in 2004. In 2020, plans were formed to create a Rugby League team in New Caledonia, Pacifique Trieze, to eventually join the majority Australian Queensland Cup.

New Caledonia also has a national synchronised swimming team, which tours abroad.

The "Tour Cycliste de Nouvelle-Calédonie" is a multi-day cycling stage race that is held usually in October. The race is organised by the Comite Cycliste New Caledonia. The race attracts riders from Australia, New Zealand, France, Réunion (Overseas France), Europe and Tahiti (French Polynesia). Australian Brendan Washington has finished last three times in the race between 2005 and 2009, and is known in New Caledonia as "The Lanterne Rouge ".

The New Caledonia Handball team won the Oceania Handball Nations Cup in 2008 held in Wellington, New Zealand. They beat Australia in the final.

The Internationaux de Nouvelle-Calédonie is a tennis tournament that is held in the first week of January. Since 2004, the tournament is part of the ATP Challenger Tour, and players usually compete as a preparation for the Australian Open. the first Grand Slam of the year.

The New Caledonia women's national volleyball team won the gold medal on several occasions.

Due to low levels of domestic horticulture, fresh tropical fruits feature less highly in New Caledonian cuisine than in other Pacific nations, instead relying on rice, fish and root vegetables such as taro. One way this is frequently prepared is in a buried-oven-style feast, known as bougna. Wrapped in banana leaves, the fish, taro, banana and other seafood are buried with hot rocks to cook, then dug up and eaten.

La Tontouta International Airport is 50 km (31 mi) northwest of Nouméa, and connects New Caledonia with Sydney, Auckland, Brisbane, Singapore, Bangkok, Papeete, Nadi, Wallis and Port Vila. Most internal air services are operated by the international carrier Aircalin. Cruise ships dock at the Gare Maritime in Nouméa. The passenger-and-cargo boat Havannah sails to Port Vila, Malicolo and Santo in Vanuatu once a month.

New Caledonia's road network consists of:

New Energy (French: Nouvelle Énergie, NE) is a French classical liberal, right-wing political party, founded in 2014 by David Lisnard, mayor of Cannes and president of the Association of Mayors of France [ fr ] (AMF).

The party is organizing nationally in 2021 with the aim of playing a significant role on the right in the run-up to the 2027 French presidential election.

The party then benefited from the support of right-wing elected officials, particularly from the Republicans. Claiming to be rather classical liberal, New Energy proposes new initiatives on various subjects such as entrepreneurial freedom, creativity, the fight against bureaucracy, ecological growth, strengthening pensions, French culture, and "international downgrading".

Six senators were elected under this label during the 2023 French Senate election.

The party presented several candidates in the 2024 French legislative election, forming alliances with Les Républicains and The Centrists - Le Nouveau Centre in certain constituencies. Alexandra Martin was re-elected as MP for the Alpes-Maritimes's 8th constituency, under the Nouvelle Énergie label, with David Lisnard as substitute, after winning the election against the National Rally candidate.

The party claims to have more than 11,000 members in 2025.

Chaired by David Lisnard, Nouvelle Énergie has as its secretary general Alexandra Martin, deputy for the 8th constituency of Alpes-Maritimes.

Romain Marsily is the general director and is in charge of the party's working groups. Since 2024, Hervé Novelli, former Secretary of State for Trade and SMEs, has been in charge of leading the party's political project. In 2025, Quentin Hoster, former journalist for Valeurs actuelles, joined the party as deputy general director.

To date, the party is represented in more than 70 departments in metropolitan France and in the overseas territories, by local representatives responsible for running their respective departments.

The party's youth movement, called Les Jeunes Énergies, is represented by Marion Beaudin.

Coming from classical liberalism and ordoliberalism, Nouvelle Énergie positions itself as a reformist right-wing party. It is attached to republican values, decentralization and the defense of economic freedoms, while advocating rigorous management of public affairs.

New Energy proposes an ambitious plan for national recovery, centred on freedom, prosperity, dignity, and national unity. Its president firmly opposes the policies pursued for more than 40 years, which he describes as "social-statism" and the "rule of technocrats " in France.

Here is a non-exhaustive list of his proposals:

The livre was the currency of New France, the French colony in modern-day Canada. It was subdivided into 20 sols, each of 12 deniers. The New France livre was a French colonial currency, distinguished by the use of paper money.

After an initial period during which barter prevailed, the French livre began to circulate. In order to encourage coins into the colony, those circulating in New France were valued at a premium, creating a monnoye de pays (French monnaie de pays in Modern French) worth less than the French currency (monnoye de France, monnaie de France in Modern French). The premium was set at one-eighth in 1664, raised to one-third in 1680. The New France currency was distinguished by the extensive use of paper money. However, early issues did not maintain their value. In 1717, the premium for coins was abolished, the card money was redeemed at half its face value and the New France livre was set equal to the French livre. Further paper money was issued. In the 1750s, the backing of paper money by coins was discontinued, causing the hoarding of coins. Following the British conquest of New France, the paper money lost its value and the livre was replaced by the pound.

A variety of coins circulated in New France, including Spanish dollars, Spanish reales and Spanish colonial reales. In 1670, silver 5 and 15 sols were introduced for use in New France. In 1709, billon 30- denier coins were issued in the colony, followed by billon 15 deniers in 1711. Copper 9 deniers followed in 1722. In 1738, billon 1- and 2- sol coins were introduced in France which also circulated in New France. These coins were also known as 1 ⁄ 2 and 1 sols marqués.

In 1685, "card money" was introduced. These were simple notes, hand written on the back of playing cards, which were used due to a shortage of coins. The first issue was redeemed after 3 months. Despite the French authorities' displeasure, further issues were made into the 1690s. Inflation reduced the card money's value, until it was redeemed at half face value in 1717.

In the 1720s, the government introduced promissory notes, known as ordonances. Card money was reintroduced in 1729. Denominations of 6, 12 and 24 livres were issued in 1729, followed by 30 sols in 1733, 20 sols in 1734, 3 livres in 1742, and 7 + 1 ⁄ 2 and 15 sols in 1749. In 1753, treasury notes were introduced (also known as ordonances). 48- livre notes were introduced in 1753, followed by 20 sols in 1754, 3 and 24 livres in 1756, 12 and 96 livres in 1757, and 6 livres in 1758.

The French New Code of Civil Procedure is the name used to refer to the Code gathering all laws related to civil procedure in France between 1975 and 2007. It is now simply referred to as the Civil Procedure Code.

The New Civil Procedure Code formally replaced the former Napoleonic Code of Civil Procedure of 1807 in accordance with Article 26 of the 20 December 2007 Legal Simplification Act (n 2007-1787). The Napoleonic Civil Procedure Code had already undergone drastic changes since 1973, with the adoption of the Decree n 75-1123 and other legislative changes adopted in 2005. Changes introduced in the civil procedure legislation between 1973 and 2007 referred to the 'New' Civil Procedure Code as, despite the reforms, the old Napoleonic Civil Procedure Code still applied for parts and had not been officially abrogated. Since 2007 and the repealing of the Napoleonic Code, the current Civil Procedure Code is simply referred to as 'the Civil Procedure Code'.

Ni Putes Ni Soumises (which roughly translates as Neither Whores nor Submissives) is a French feminist movement, founded in 2002, which has secured the recognition of the French press and the National Assembly of France. It is generally dependent on public funding. It is also the name of a book written by Fadela Amara, one of the leaders of the movement, with the help of Le Monde journalist Sylvia Zappi.

In 2005 this movement inspired the creation of the similarly named Varken Hora eller Kuvad [ sv ] movement in Sweden.

Fadela Amara was appointed as junior minister for urban policy in François Fillon 's first government in May 2007. She left the government in 2010, and was named France's inspector general for social affairs in January 2011.

NPNS was set up by a group of young French women, including Samira Bellil, in response to the violence being directed at them in the predominantly Muslim immigrant suburbs (banlieues) and public housing (cités) of cities such as Paris, Lyon and Toulouse, where organised gang-rapes are referred to as tournantes, or "pass-arounds".

Ni Putes Ni Soumises fights against violence targeting women, including domestic violence and gang rape, as well as social pressures.

The movement's platform for victims of domestic violence helps women and their children escape dangerous situations and supports them in the rebuilding of their lives after the fact. Its support team is made up of lawyers, psychologists, an educational specialist and a legal counsel.

Ni Putes Ni Soumises also supports the White Ribbon Campaign, which runs from 25 November to 6 December every year, and uses this as an opportunity to promote 3919, the national domestic violence helpline.

Ni Putes Ni Soumises also carries out awareness-raising seminars in schools in order to encourage students to think about gender equality and break the cycle of sexism. In this way, the movement was able to reach out to 950 students in 2016.

The slogan used by the movement is meant both to shock and mobilise. Members particularly protest against changes of attitudes toward women, claiming there is an increased influence of Islamic extremism in those French suburbs with large immigrant populations. A particular concern is the treatment of Muslim women. Members claim that they may be pressured into wearing veils, leaving school, and marrying early. However, the movement represents women of all faiths and ethnic origins, all of whom may find themselves trapped by poverty and the ghettoisation of the cités.

A translation of the key points of NPNS's national appeal on its official website:

Two high-profile cases gave a particular impetus to NPNS during 2003. The first was that of Samira Bellil, who published a book called Dans l'enfer des tournantes ("In Gang Rape Hell"). In the culture of the banlieues, organised gang-rapes are referred to as tournantes, or "pass-arounds".

In her book, Bellil recounts her life as a girl under la loi des cités (the law of the ghetto) where she was gang raped on more than one occasion, the first time at age 13, afraid to speak out, and ultimately seen only as a sexual object, alienated and shunned by her family and some of her friends.

The second case was that of 17-year-old Sohanne Benziane, who was burned alive by an alleged small-time gang leader.

In the wake of these events, members of Ni Putes Ni Soumises staged a march through France, which started in February 2003 and passed through over 20 cities before culminating in a 30,000-strong demonstration in Paris on 8 March 2003. The march was officially called la Marche des femmes des quartiers contre les ghettos et pour l'égalité (The March of Women from the public housing against ghettoes and for equality).

Representatives of Ni Putes Ni Soumises were received by French Prime Minister Jean Pierre Raffarin. Their message was also incorporated into the official celebrations of Bastille Day 2003 in Paris, when 14 giant posters each of a modern woman dressed as Marianne, the symbol of the French Republic, were hung on the columns of the Palais Bourbon, the home of the Assemblée nationale (the lower house of the French parliament).

The following five propositions were accepted by the French government:

The inauguration of the Maison de la Mixitié, the movement's premises in Paris' 20th arrondissement, took place in 2006. Then-President Jacques Chirac and then-future-President François Hollande both attended the event.

In November 2016 Ni Putes Ni Soumises elected a new leadership team, with Stéphanie Rameau, a long-serving member and activist in the movement, voted president.

In May 2017 Ni Putes Ni Soumises moved into its new premises at 80 rue de Paris in Montreuil, a largely working-class suburb of Paris.

Ni Putes Ni Soumises has been criticized by various French feminists and left-wing authors (Sylvie Tissot, Houria Bouteldja,), who claimed that it overshadowed the work of other feminist NGOs and that it supported an Islamophobic instrumentalization of feminism by the French Right.

Houria Bouteldja qualified Ni Putes ni Soumises as an Ideological State Apparatus (AIE). The debate among the French Left concerning the 2004 law on secularity and conspicuous religious symbols in schools, mainly targeted against the Hijab, is to be seen under this light. They underline that, first, sexism is not specific to immigrant populations, French culture itself not being devoid of sexism, and second, that the focus on mediatic and violent acts passes under silence the precarization of women.

Sylvie Tissot writes that Amara collaborated with the Cercle de l'Oratoire, and Mohammed Abdi, the current president of the NGO, is a member of this think-tank.

Nicolas Jacques André Hulot (French: [ nikɔla ʒak ɑ̃dʁe ylo ] ; born 30 April 1955) is a French journalist and environmental activist. He is the founder and honorary president of the Nicolas Hulot Foundation, an environmental group established in 1990.

Hulot ran as a candidate in the primary for the Europe Ecology – The Greens (EELV) party in 2011, but lost to Eva Joly in the second round. He declined offers to be a government minister for Jacques Chirac, Nicolas Sarkozy and François Hollande, but in May 2017, he agreed to serve under Emmanuel Macron and was appointed Minister of Ecological and Solidary Transition in the first government of Prime Minister Édouard Philippe. In August 2018, he announced his resignation from the Second Philippe government, citing policy disagreements and leadership issues.

Hulot is an officer in the Legion of Honour and a knight in the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres. In 2021, he announced his retirement from public life in response to a documentary outlining a series of sexual assault allegations against him.

Hulot was born 30 April 1955 in Lille to Monique Marguerite Marie Hulot (née Moulun), a pharmaceutical sales representative, and Philippe Marie Joseph Hulot, a gold miner in Venezuela. Hulot had one brother, Gonzaga, and a sister, Beatrice.

Hulot's father Philippe died when Hulot was fifteen years old. Gonzaga Hulot committed suicide on 24 December 1974 when Hulot was 19 years old.

Hulot took up rallying as a hobby when he was growing up and took part in the 1980 Dakar Rally, though he didn't finish the race due to difficulties with his vehicle.

From 1973 to 1978, Hulot worked as an agency photographer for Sipa Press where he documented the 1976 Guatemala earthquake and interviewed Ian Smith during the Rhodesian Bush War.

Hulot left Sipa Press in 1978 to move to France Inter after being offered work as a radio journalist and producer. Hulot debuted on television during the children's program Les Visiteurs du mercredi. Hulot also presented the short-lived educational programme Les Pieds au mur. Following this, Hulot became an evening reporter focusing on motorcycle events. Hulot left France Inter in 1987.

Hulot presented the television programme, Ushuaïa, le magazine de l'extrême which was focused around extreme sport and natural landscapes throughout the world. The programme was broadcast on TF1 and was co-produced by Hulot's then-girlfriend Dominique Cantien. Ushuaïa, le magazine de l'extrême made Hulot a household name in France. Ushuaïa, le magazine de l'extrême ran from 1987 to 1995. Hulot went on to present Opération Okavango (1996–1997) and Ushuaïa Nature (1998–2012). Hulot's contract with TF1 ended in December 2011 though four of the remaining Ushuaïa Nature episodes aired in 2012.

In 1990, Hulot founded the Ushuaia Foundation which became La Fondation Nicolas-Hulot pour la nature et l'homme in 1995 and which changed its name to La Fondation pour la nature et l'homme (The Foundation for Nature and Mankind) in April 2011.

Hulot and Gérard Feldzer, a former French airline pilot, experimented with airship prototypes originally developed by Didier Costes in 1992, and in 1993, the pair attempted to cross the Atlantic Ocean from Spain using an airship with pedals. The pair made it as far as 1,500 km before failing near the Cape Verde Islands.

Hulot set up partnerships for the Foundation with companies such as EDF, L'Oréal and TF1. In 2006, the National Museum of Natural History formed a partnership with La Fondation pour la nature et l'homme, organising annual events to bring people together to combat climate change.

In 2013, the foundation launched a think tank based around ecology.

In 2007, Nicolas Hulot told candidates in the presidential election that he would stand as a candidate if ecology were not one of the main themes of the election. Some polls estimated his support at around 15%. In response to his announcement, five of the twelve candidates in the election, including Nicolas Sarkozy, signed his Pacte écologique (ecology pact), stating that ecological issues would be central to all future political decisions.

On 13 April 2011, while speaking in Sevran, Seine-Saint-Denis, Nicolas Hulot announced his candidacy in the Europe Écologie-Les Verts primary for the 2012 French presidential election. The announcement came a month after Hulot's calls for a referendum on nuclear energy following the Fukushima nuclear accident. Hulot was invited to a televised interview on the France Inter show 7/9 by Bruno Duvic.

Before the first round of the primary, some polls put Hulot ahead of Eva Joly, but he finally finished second with 40.22%, behind Joly with 49.75%. Hulot lost during the second round and Joly became the Europe Ecologie-Les Verts candidate.

For the French presidential election of 2012, Nicolas Hulot stated that he had voted for the Left Front 's candidate, Jean-Luc Mélenchon, during the first round. He said he found Melenchon more efficient on environmental issues than Joly. He supported François Hollande in the second round.

On 17 May 2017, he was appointed Minister for the Ecological and Inclusive Transition. This is following Hulot turning down offers for ministerial positions from Jacques Chirac, Nicolas Sarkozy and François Hollande 's governments. The position's responsibilities are focused around climate, air pollution, energy and transport. (The latter being done in collaboration with Transport minister, Élisabeth Borne.)

On 24 June 2017, he joined Emmanuel Macron in calling for the adoption of a Global Pact for the Environment along with public figures such as Laurent Fabius, Anne Hidalgo, Arnold Schwarzenegger, and Ban Ki-moon.

On 6 July 2017, Hulot announced the government's five-year plan to outlaw all petrol and diesel vehicles by 2040. The plan would also attempt to make France carbon-neutral by 2050. Financial incentives would be offered to people who try to look for cleaner alternatives. This followed a proposal by Norway to ban all petrol and diesel vehicle sales by 2025.

On 10 July 2017, Hulot said on RTL Radio that France may close up to 17 nuclear reactors by 2025 in a new plan to reduce its share of nuclear power. Liberal think-tank Institut Montaigne released a report stating that the plan to convert from nuclear energy to wind and solar will cost €217 billion by 2035. In 2016, France's Court of Audit estimated that prolonging the lifespan of France's nuclear reactors would cost €100 billion. France currently derives 75 percent of its electricity from nuclear power.

In December 2017, to combat global warming, France adopted a law banning new fossil fuel exploitation projects and closing current ones by 2040 in all of its territories, becoming the first country to schedule the end of fossil fuel exploitation.

On 28 August 2018, Hulot resigned as Minister of Ecology during a live interview on France Inter radio, citing President Emmanuel Macron 's record on environmental issues and his own frustration over feeling alone in prioritising reform. He said that his time in office had been an "accumulation of disappointments", and that he did not want to "create the illusion that we're facing up to these challenges". The Guardian wrote that "Hulot's departure is a major blow to Macron and calls into question the president's credibility on the environment".

Nicolas Hulot received the title of Doctor Honoris Causa from the University of Mons in 2019.

Hulot has been criticised by some commentators, like Le Canard enchaîné and supporters of uneconomic growth and political ecology, who have criticised his use of the media and acceptance of funds from large firms, like EDF, L'Oréal and Rhône-Poulenc.

Hulot was in a relationship with Dominique Cantien, the TF1 director. Hulot married world champion rock-climber Isabelle Patissier in Saint-Malo on 2 September 1993. Hulot and Patissier divorced on 9 April 1996. Hulot remarried in Viens on 2 October 2002 to Florence Lasserre, a former municipal councillor and mother to his two sons.

In 2017, Hulot declared a personal wealth of over €7 million and stated he owned six cars.

In February 2018, French magazine Ebdo [ fr ] reported that Hulot had been accused of sexual assault, related to events that took place in the 1990s. The accuser was later reported to be Pascale Mitterrand, granddaughter of former President François Mitterrand. Mitterrand had filed a police report in 2008, but no judicial charges were laid because the statute of limitations had run out.

In 2021, French investigative news show Envoyé spécial announced that it would be releasing a documentary in which a further six women accused Hulot of assaulting them. Before the broadcast of the documentary, Hulot appeared on BFM TV to deny the allegations and to announce that he would be retiring from public life. The documentary was screened, in which four women detailed their allegations, and subsequently reported.

The 2020 trial in France for the former French President Nicolas Sarkozy dealt with allegations that he bribed a judge with a retirement package in return for information on an investigation into alleged campaign finance violations due to payments he is said to have received from heiress Liliane Bettencourt. The trial opened on 24 November 2020. Prosecutors asked for a four-year jail sentence (of which two would be suspended) for Sarkozy, the implicated judge (Gilbert Azibert), and Sarkozy's lawyer Thierry Herzog. On 4 December 2020, Ziad Takieddine, a Lebanese businessman who allegedly helped finance Sarkozy's 2007 presidential election campaign with help from former Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi, was detained in Lebanon, although he was allowed a conditional prison release a few days later after agreeing to abide by a travel ban. The defendants denied the accusations. The trial concluded on 10 December; the verdict was rendered on 1 March 2021. Sarkozy, Azibert, and Herzog were found guilty and sentenced to three years in jail for corruption. Two years of this sentence are suspended, and one to be served in prison. Sarkozy appealed, suspending the ruling. On 17 May 2023, Sarkozy, as well as his co-defendants, was convicted on appeal and given a three-year sentence; they appealed to the Court of Cassation.

On 20 May 2021, a new criminal trial related to illegal campaign funding began for Sarkozy, as well as 13 other defendants who were said to have been involved in the Bygmalion scandal. Sarkozy's second corruption trial involved allegations of diverting tens of millions of euros intended to be spent on his failed 2012 re-election campaign and then hiring a PR firm to cover it up. Rather than spend this illicit money on his re-election campaign, Sarkozy instead overspent it on lavish campaign rallies and events. On 30 September 2021, Sarkozy, as well as his co-defendants, was convicted at the conclusion of this corruption trial. For this conviction, he was given a one year prison sentence, although he was also given the option to instead serve this sentence at home with an electronic bracelet. On 18 December 2024, the Court of Cassation rejected Nicolas Sarkozy's appeal in cassation and the co-defendants, thus making Nicolas Sarkozy's conviction final, who immediately announced that they would refer the matter to the European Court of Human Rights.

In November 2025, Nicolas Sarkozy spent a few weeks in jail (at La Santé jail in Paris)

Nicole Ameline (born 4 July 1952) is a French politician, lawyer, diplomat and women's rights advocate. She served as a member of the National Assembly of France for several terms between 1991 and 2017, and held various roles in the Government of France from 1995; she was Minister of the Sea in 2002 and Minister of Gender Equality from 2002 to 2005. She has been a member of the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women since 2008 and was the committee's chairperson from 2013.

She represented the department of Calvados as a member of The Republicans.

Ameline also currently serves as the chair of the International Institute of Human Rights and Peace, Normandy.

Titled a Doctor of Law, specialising in the environment, she entered the office of the Minister for the Environment, Michel d'Ornano. A powerful man from Calvados, he convinced her to invest in her native department. After administrative posts at Honfleur then on the General council of Calvados, she entered politics as deputy to Michel d'Ornano on the National Assembly of France in 1988, and took over from him on his death in 1991.

In 1993, with Yves Boisseau as deputy, she was elected with a large majority in the second round on the UDF ticket. She was opposed by a National Front candidate, and on the left by Corinne Lepage, who failed to qualify for the second round.

In May 1995, with the victory of Jacques Chirac, she left her post in order to enter the Government of Alain Juppé. The same year, she headed the Hornfleur Majorité Présidentielle list for the municipality, but lost by 37 votes to an independent ecologist. She left the government in November with the other "Juppettes" and she easily regained her seat in December.

Re-elected following the dissolution of 1997, she was the only member on the Calvados right. The following year, she joined the Regional Council of Lower Normandy, as vice president, deputy to René Garrec, president of the region since 1986.

Re-elected as a member in 2002 under the banner of the Union pour la majorité présidentielle, newly created from the UMP, she was a minister in the Raffarin government, responsible for the Sea for one month, then had full responsibility for Parity and Professional Equality, up until Jean-Pierre Raffarin 's resignation on 31 May 2005.

She lost her seat in the 2017 French legislative election.

Nicole Belloubet (born 15 June 1955) is a French jurist and politician who served as Minister of National Education in the government of Prime Minister Gabriel Attal in 2024.

A former member of the Socialist Party (PS), Belloubet served as Minister of Justice in the government of Prime Minister Édouard Philippe from 21 June 2017 to 6 July 2020; she had been appointed by President Emmanuel Macron following the resignation of François Bayrou. She previously served on the Constitutional Council, to which she was appointed in 2013 by Jean-Pierre Bel, President of the Senate.

Belloubet was born to an engineer from a modest farming family and the manager of a small Parisian hotel.

Belloubet began her career in teaching before becoming, at the age of 42, rector of the University of Limoges. She served in that office between 1997 and 2000 before becoming rector of the Academy of Toulouse until 2005. In 2005, she resigned from her post to protest against decisions made by the government of Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin which wanted to reduce the number of teachers, among other reforms.

Belloubet joined the Socialist Party (PS) in 1983.

From 2000 to 2005, Belloubet chaired the French government's Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee for the Promotion of Gender Equality in the Education System. In particular, she drafted reports on "the future of the lycée " (2002) and on "combating gender-based and sexual violence in schools" (2001). She has also written on secularism and co-education in schools.

In parallel to her teaching, Belloubet later pursued a career in local politics, in particular as first deputy to the Socialist Mayor of Toulouse, Pierre Cohen, between 2008 and 2010. In 2010, she became regional councillor for Midi-Pyrénées, of which she was also first vice-president.

On 12 February 2013, Belloubet was appointed by Jean-Pierre Bel, President of the Senate, to serve on the Constitutional Council for a nine-year term, succeeding Jacqueline de Guillenchmidt. She became the first woman professor of law appointed to the Constitutional Council, and the seventh female member of the institution.

As Minister of Justice, Belloubet's first major project was to steer through the legislative process two bills on public ethics that were meant to help clean up national politics after hard-fought debates over a clause scrapping lawmakers’ constituency funds, which critics argued encourage clientelism. Internationally, she made headlines in 2019 when she publicly rejected U.S. President Donald Trump ’s call for European allies to repatriate hundreds of Islamic State fighters from Syria and instead announced that France would be taking back militants on a “case-by-case” basis.

In early 2020, the Mila affair erupted over a 16-year-old girl insulting Islam on social media and then receiving violent threats. Belloubet was scrutinised for having erroneously said that insulting religion is against "freedom of conscience" in French law. She later corrected herself on the matter.

When she joined the government in June 2017, Belloubet omitted to declare part of her shares in several real estate assets, including a house in Aveyron and two apartments in Paris.

Belloubet was married to Pierre-Laurent Frier, professor of public law at the University of Paris 1 Pantheon-Sorbonne, until his death in 2005. The couple had three sons.

Nicole Bricq (French pronunciation: [ ni.kɔl bʁik ] ; 10 June 1947 – 6 August 2017) was a member of the Senate of France, representing the Seine-et-Marne department.

Bricq received a degree in private law from Montesquieu University in 1970.

From 1972 on Bricq was a member of the Socialist Party.

On 16 May 2012 Bricq was appointed Minister of Ecology, Sustainable Development and Energy in the government of Jean-Marc Ayrault. After the 2012 legislative election, she was appointed Minister for Foreign Trade. She was replaced at the Ministry of Ecology by Delphine Batho. Whereas some members of the government, such as Cécile Duflot, considered this nomination like a promotion, many felt that it was due to the decision taken by Bricq to stop all drilling contracts signed with Shell in French Guiana, a decision that has been reversed since then.

In 2013, Bricq complained in a television interview that President of the European Commission José Manuel Barroso had “done nothing during his term”, suggesting that Barroso’s reappointment in 2009 had been a mistake. She also emerged as a vocal critic of how the European Commission led the negotiations on a Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.

On 11 February 2014, Bricq was among the guests invited to the state dinner hosted by U.S. President Barack Obama in honor of President François Hollande at the White House.

Bricq was one of the earliest supporters of Emmanuel Macron and his party, La République En Marche!, instead of supporting Socialist Party candidate, Benoît Hamon.

On 6 August 2017, Bricq died in hospital in Poitiers after an accidental fall.

Night prides (French : prides de nuit) are protest demonstrations of LGBTI people alternative to the Pride marches, which are considered depoliticized.

The movement was launched by ACT UP, OUTrans, Femmes en Lutte 93 and other associations in Paris in 2015, opposing what they perceived as a depoliticization of Pride marches and their loss of autonomy against public powers and pink capitalism.

In Paris, two other editions were organized in 2016 and 2017, although in 2018 they decided not to summon a fourth protest in order to avoid converting it in a symbolic institutionalized event that would not lead to do other actions. However, since 2016 the movement were already extended to other French cities, such as Toulouse, Lyon or Nice.

There are similar actions in other countries too, specially in the context of the movement Gay Shame.

Niçard (Classical orthography), nissart / Niçart (Mistralian orthography, IPA: [ niˈsaʀt ]), niçois (/ n iː ˈ s w ɑː / nee- SWAH, French: [ niswa ]), or nizzardo (Italian: [ nitˈtsardo ]) is the dialect that was historically spoken in the city of Nice, in France, and in a few surrounding communes. Niçard is generally considered a subdialect of Provençal, itself a dialect of Occitan. Some Italian irredentists have claimed it as a Ligurian dialect.

Most residents of Nice and its region no longer speak Niçard, and the very few who do are fully bilingual in French as Niçard has lost its function of a vernacular language decades ago. Nonetheless, today there is a developing revival of the use of the language. Some local television news is presented in Niçard (with French subtitles) and street signs in the old town of Nice are written in the dialect as well as in French. The Niçard song Nissa La Bella is often regarded as the "anthem" of Nice.

An Italian orthography was abandoned when Nice joined the French Empire in 1861. It was briefly reinstated in 1942 and 1943 when Italy occupied and administered the city.

The classifications of Occitan in dialects hesitate between defining Niçard as a specific dialect or including it in Maritime Provençal. Niçard shares some phonetical archaisms with Occitan areas as distant as Aranese, which is also using proparoxytone words. It is also sharing with Aranese a quite heavy influence of a neighbouring language (Catalan for Aranese, Italian for Niçard). Regional differences are broadly accepted by linguists and French national education authorities in Occitan. Domergue Sumien defined in his PhD thesis Occitan as a pluricentric language, and included Niçard among the seven regional standards to be taught. The French Ministry of National Education uses either “nissart-langue d’oc” or “occitan-langue d’oc nissart”.

Niçard Italians (Italian : nizzardi italiani pronounced [ nitˈtsardi itaˈljaːni ] ; Occitan : Italians de Niça) are Italians who have full or partial Nice heritage by birth or ethnicity.

Niçard Italians have roots in Nice and the County of Nice. They often speak the Ligurian language after Nice joined the Genoa league formed by the cities of Liguria at the end of the 7th century. In 729, with Genoese help, Nice expelled the Saracens from its territory.

During the Middle Ages, as an Italian city, Nice participated in numerous Italian wars. As an ally of the Republic of Pisa, it was also an enemy of the Republic of Genoa. In 1388, Nice placed itself under the protection of the Comital family of Savoy, led by Amadeus VII, Count of Savoy, in an anti-Provençal function (creating the County of Nice). On 25 October 1561, following the Edict of Rivoli, Italian replaced Latin as the language for drafting official documents of the County of Nice. Niçard Italians, with their Niçard dialect, considered themselves completely Italian during the Renaissance, according to Nice scholars such as Enrico Sappia.

The French penetration began in the early 18th century when numerous Occitan peasants moved to the mountainous hinterland of the county of Nice occupied by the French, and reached its apogee at the time of the French Revolution when Nice was annexed to France for the first time. Italians from Nice reacted with the guerrilla warfare of "Barbetismo".

The so-called "Savoy period" (which lasted from 1388 to 1860) ended with Risorgimento. After the Treaty of Turin was signed in 1860 between the Sardinian king and Napoleon III as a consequence of the Plombières Agreement, the county was again and definitively ceded to France as a territorial reward for French assistance in the Second Italian War of Independence against Austria, which saw Lombardy united with the Kingdom of Sardinia. King Victor-Emmanuel II, on April 1, 1860, solemnly asked the population to accept the change of sovereignty, in the name of Italian unity, and the cession was ratified by a regional referendum. Italophile manifestations and the acclamation of an “Italian Nice” by the crowd were reported on this occasion. These manifestations could not influence the course of events. A plebiscite was voted on April 15 and April 16, 1860. The opponents to annexation called for abstention, hence the very high abstention rate. The “yes” vote won 83% of registered voters throughout the county of Nice and 86% in Nice, partly thanks to pressure from the authorities. This was the result of a masterful operation of information control by the French and Piedmontese governments, in order to influence the outcome of the vote in relation to the decisions already taken. The irregularities in the plebiscite voting operations were evident. The case of the village of Levens is illustrative: the same official sources recorded that 481 votes were cast, naturally almost all of them in favor of joining France, when the voting roll listed only 407 voters.

The Italian language, the official language of the County, used by the Church, at the town hall, taught in schools, used in theaters and at the Opera, was immediately abolished and replaced by French. Discontentment over annexation to France led to the emigration of a large part of the Italophile population, also accelerated by Italian unification after 1861. A quarter of the population of Nice, around 11,000 people from Nice, decided for voluntarily exile to Italy. The emigration of a quarter of the Niçard Italians to Italy took the name of the Niçard exodus. Many Italians from Nizza then moved to the Ligurian towns of Ventimiglia, Bordighera and Ospedaletti, giving rise to a local branch of the movement of the Italian irredentists which considered the re-acquisition of Nice to be one of their nationalist goals.

Giuseppe Garibaldi, born in Nice, tenaciously opposed the cession of his hometown to France, arguing that the Plebiscite he ratified in the treaty was vitiated by electoral fraud. In 1871, during the first free elections in the County, the pro-Italian lists obtained almost all the votes in the legislative elections (26,534 votes out of 29,428 votes cast), and Garibaldi was elected deputy at the National Assembly. Pro-Italians took to the streets cheering “Viva Nizza! Viva Garibaldi!”. The French government sent 10,000 soldiers to Nice, closed the Italian newspaper Il Diritto di Nizza and imprisoned several demonstrators. The population of Nice rose up from February 8 to 10 and the three days of demonstration became known as the " Niçard Vespers ". The revolt was suppressed by French troops. On February 13, Garibaldi was not allowed to speak at the French parliament meeting in Bordeaux to ask for the reunification of Nice to the newborn Italian unitary state, and he resigned from his post as deputy. The failure of Vespers led to the expulsion of the last pro-Italian intellectuals from Nice, such as Luciano Mereu and Giuseppe Bres, who were expelled or deported.

The pro-Italian irredentist movement persisted throughout the period 1860-1914, despite the repression carried out since the annexation. The French government implemented a policy of Francization of society, language and culture. The toponyms of the communes of the ancient County have been francized, with the obligation to use French in Nice as well as certain surnames (for example the Italian surname "Bianchi" was francized into "Leblanc", and the Italian surname "Del Ponte" was francized into "Dupont"). This led to the beginning of the disappearance of the Niçard Italians. Many intellectuals from Nice took refuge in Italy, such as Giovan Battista Bottero who took over the direction of the newspaper La Gazzetta del Popolo in Turin. In 1874, it was the second Italian newspaper by circulation, after Il Secolo in Milan.

Italian-language newspapers in Nice were banned. In 1861, La Voce di Nizza was closed (temporarily reopened during the Niçard Vespers), followed by Il Diritto di Nizza, closed in 1871. In 1895 it was the turn of Il Pensiero di Nizza, accused of irredentism. Many journalists and writers from Nice wrote in these newspapers in Italian. Among these are Enrico Sappia, Giuseppe André, Giuseppe Bres, Eugenio Cais di Pierlas and others.

Another Niçard Italian, Garibaldian Luciano Mereu, was exiled from Nice in November 1870, together with the Garibaldians Adriano Gilli, Carlo Perino and Alberto Cougnet. In 1871, Luciano Mereu was elected City Councilor in Nice during the term of Mayor of Augusto Raynaud (1871–1876) and was a member of the Garibaldi Commission of Nice, whose president was Donato Rasteu. Rasteu remained in office until 1885.

In 1881, The New York Times compared that before the annexation to France, the Nice people were as Italian as the Genoese, and that their dialect was an Italian dialect.

This led to the beginning of the disappearance of the Niçard Italians. Many intellectuals from Nice took refuge in Italy, such as Giovan Battista Bottero who took over the direction of the newspaper La Gazzetta del Popolo in Turin. In 1874, it was the second Italian newspaper by circulation, after Il Secolo in Milan.

Giuseppe Bres tried to counter the French claim that the Niçard dialect was Occitan and not Italian, publishing his Considerations on Niçard dialect in 1906 in Italy.

In 1940, Nice was occupied by the Italian army and the newspaper Il Nizzardo ("The Niçard") was restored there. It was directed by Ezio Garibaldi, grandson of Giuseppe Garibaldi. Only Menton was administered until 1943 as if it were an Italian territory, even if the Italian supporters of Italian irredentism in Nice wanted to create an Italian governorate (on the model of the Governorate of Dalmatia) up to the Var river or at least a "Province of the Western Alps".

Another reduction of Niçard Italians took place after the Second World War, when Italy's defeat in the conflict led to the cession of other territories in the area to France following the Paris treaties. A quarter of the population emigrated to Italy from Val Roia, La Brigue and Tende in 1947.

In a historical period that was characterized by nationalism, between 1850 and 1950, Niçard Italians were reduced by the absolute majority (about 70 percent of the resident population of the region, which was about 125,000 inhabitants in 1859) at the time of the annexation to France, to the current minority of about 2,000 inhabitants in the vicinity of Tende and Menton.

Even at the end of the 19th century, the coastal area of Nice was mostly Niçard dialectal (Nice) and Ligurian (Menton/ Monte Carlo). There was also the figun dialect to the west of the Var river.

Currently there are numerous residents of Italian nationality in Nice, especially southerners who emigrated after the Second World War. With their descendants, they are about 10 percent of the city population, but they are almost never related to the native Italians of the Savoy era.

La Voce di Nizza ("The Nice Voice") was an Italian-language newspaper that was founded around 1800 in Nice. Suppressed following the annexation of Nice to France in 1860, the newspaper was never reinstated.

Il Pensiero di Nizza ("The Thought of Nice") was founded after the fall of Napoleon; it was suppressed by the French authorities in 1895 (35 years after the annexation) on charges of irredentism, while it was almost exclusively autonomist. The major Italian writers of County of Nice collaborated with them: Giuseppe Bres, Enrico Sappia, Giuseppe André and many others.

Fert was a renowned periodical, the voice of the Italians from Nice who took refuge in Italy after the annexation of Nice to France in 1860 and remained active until 1966.

Il Pensiero di Nizza was revived after the Second World War as a periodical and as the voice of the Italian-speaking Nice people by Giulio Vignoli, a Genoese scholar of Italian minorities. In this sheet, in several numbers, the Italian literature of Nice has been summarized, from the early beginnings (16th century) to present day.

The Niépce Prize has been awarded annually since 1955 to a professional photographer who has lived and worked in France for over 3 years and is younger than 50 years (previously 45 years) of age. It was introduced in honour of Joseph Nicéphore Niépce by Albert Plécy and Paul Almásy for the l'Association Gens d'Images.

The Prix Niépce Gens d'images "rewards each year the work of a professional photographer residing in France for more than three years, and aged under 50 at most on January 1 of the year for which he competes. It is supported by the Ministry of Culture and by the National Library of France, a historical institutional partner which hosts the deliberations and the proclamation of the prize.

From 2011 to 2015, it is financially endowed by the film company MK2, directed by Marin Karmitz. Since 2016, it is endowed by the Picto Foundation, the endowment fund of the Picto laboratories which rewards the winner, designs and produces with The Eyes Publishing an artist's book. Since 2019, it has also benefited from the patronage of ADAGP, Society of authors in the graphic and plastic arts.

The Alsatian Nordgau was a medieval Gau in an area roughly comparable to the present-day French Bas-Rhin department.

In the Middle Ages, what was then Alsace was divided into two districts, called Nordgau (“Nordgowe”, Unterelsass) and Südgau (“Suntgowe”, Sundgau, Oberelsass). The border roughly corresponded to that which was established in 297, when the Roman province of Germania Superior was divided into Maxima Sequanorum in the south and Germania Prima in the north.

The Alsatian Nordgau is to be distinguished from the Bavarian Nordgau, that existed at the same time.

From the 9th to the end of the 11th century, the Alsatian Nordgau was almost entirely in the hands of the Etichonids family. The family developed into the Counts of Egisheim and Dagsburg, whose possessions were however situated more in Upper Alsace.

The last Count was Hugues VII de Dabo who was dispossessed of Nordgau by Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor, during the Investiture Controversy, and killed in 1089 in an attempt of its recover. The Nordgau was later largely merged into the Prince-Bishopric of Strasbourg, other parts came to the Habsburgs and the Décapole.

Norman or Norman French (Normaund, French : Normand [ nɔʁmɑ̃ ], Guernésiais : Normand, Jèrriais : Nouormand) is a langue d'oïl spoken in the historical and cultural region of Normandy.

The name "Norman French" is sometimes also used to describe the administrative languages of Anglo-Norman and Law French used in England. For the most part, the written forms of Norman and modern French are mutually intelligible. The thirteenth-century philosopher Roger Bacon was the first to distinguish it along with other dialects such as Picard and Bourguignon.

Today, although it does not enjoy any official status outside of Jersey, some reports of the French Ministry of Culture have recognized it as one of the regional languages of France.

When Norse Vikings from modern day Scandinavia arrived in Neustria, in the western part of the Kingdom of the Franks, and settled the land that became known as Normandy, these North-Germanic –speaking people came to live among a local Gallo-Romance –speaking population. In time, the communities converged, so that Normandy continued to form the name of the region while the original Norsemen were largely assimilated by the Gallo-Romance people, adopting their speech but still contributing some elements from Old Norse language and Norse culture. Later, when conquering England, the Norman rulers in England would eventually assimilate, thereby adopting the speech of the local English. In both cases, the elites contributed elements of their own language to the newly enriched languages that developed in the territories.

In Normandy, the Norman language inherited only some 150 words from Old Norse. The influence on phonology is disputed, although it is argued that the retention of aspirated / h / and / k / in Norman is due to Norse influence.

Norman is spoken in mainland Normandy in France, where it has no official status, but is classed as a regional language. It is taught in a few colleges near Cherbourg-Octeville.

In the Channel Islands, the Norman language has developed separately, but not in isolation, to form:

The British and Irish governments recognize Jèrriais and Guernésiais as regional languages within the framework of the British–Irish Council. Sercquiais is in fact a descendant of the 16th-century Jèrriais used by the original colonists from Jersey who settled the then uninhabited island.

The last first-language speakers of Auregnais, the dialect of Norman spoken on Alderney, died during the 20th century, although some rememberers are still alive. The dialect of Herm also lapsed at an unknown date; the patois spoken there was likely Guernésiais (Herm was not inhabited all year round in the Norman culture's heyday).

An isogloss termed the " Joret line " (ligne Joret) separates the northern and southern dialects of the Norman language (the line runs from Granville, Manche to the French-speaking Belgian border in the province of Hainaut and Thiérache). Dialectal differences also distinguish western and eastern dialects.

Three different standardized spellings are used: continental Norman, Jèrriais, and Dgèrnésiais. These represent the different developments and particular literary histories of the varieties of Norman. Norman may therefore be described as a pluricentric language.

The Anglo-Norman dialect of Norman served as a language of administration in England following the Norman conquest of England in 1066. This left a legacy of Law French in the language of English courts (though it was also influenced by Parisian French). In Ireland, Norman remained strongest in the area of south-east Ireland, where the Hiberno-Normans invaded in 1169. Norman remains in (limited) use for some very formal legal purposes in the UK, such as when the monarch gives royal assent to an Act of Parliament using the phrase, " Le Roy (la Reyne) le veult " ("The King (the Queen) wills it").

The Norman conquest of southern Italy in the 11th and 12th centuries brought the language to Sicily and the southern part of the Italian Peninsula, where it may have left a few words in the Sicilian language. See: Norman and French influence on Sicilian.

Literature in Norman ranges from early Anglo-Norman literature through the 19th-century Norman literary renaissance to modern writers (see list of Norman-language writers).

As of 2017, the Norman language remains strongest in the less accessible areas of the former Duchy of Normandy : the Channel Islands and the Cotentin Peninsula (Cotentinais) in the west, and the Pays de Caux (Cauchois dialect) in the east. Ease of access from Paris and the popularity of the coastal resorts of central Normandy, such as Deauville, in the 19th century led to a significant loss of distinctive Norman culture in the central low-lying areas of Normandy.

Norman French preserves a number of Old French words which have been lost in Modern French. Examples of Norman French words of Old French origin:

Examples of Norman French words with -ei instead of -oi in Standard French words

Examples of Norman French words with c- / qu- and g- instead of ch- and j in Standard French

Examples of Norman words of Norse origin:

In some cases, Norse words adopted in Norman have been borrowed into French; more recently, some of the English words used in French can be traced back to Norman origins.

Following the Norman conquest of England in 1066, the Norman and other languages and dialects spoken by the new rulers of England were used for several hundred years, developing into the unique insular dialect now known as Anglo-Norman French, and leaving traces of specifically Norman words that can be distinguished from the equivalent lexical items in Standard French:

Other borrowings, such as canvas, captain, cattle and kennel, exemplify how Norman retained Latin /k/ that was not retained in French.

In the United Kingdom, Acts of Parliament are confirmed with the words " Le Roy le veult " ("The King wishes it") and other Norman phrases are used on formal occasions as legislation progresses.

Norman immigrants to North America also introduced some "Normanisms" to Quebec French and the French language in Canada generally. Joual, a working class sociolect of Quebec, in particular exhibits a Norman influence. For example, the word "placoter," which can mean both to splash around or to chatter, comes from the Normand French word "clapoter," which means the same thing.

The Normandy Format (French : Format Normandie), also known as the Normandy contact group or Normandy Four, was a grouping of states who met between 2014 and 2022 in an effort to resolve what was then referred to as the war in Donbas and prevent its widening into a Russo-Ukrainian war. The four countries who made up the group— Germany, Russia, Ukraine, and France —first met informally in 2014 during the 70th anniversary of D-Day celebrations in Normandy, France. The group had a substantial role in mediating the Minsk agreements between 2014 and 2015 while further meetings in 2022 failed to deescalate rising tensions prior to Russia's invasion of Ukraine.

The Normandy Format was predated by the Joint Geneva Statement (Agreement), signed by Ukraine, Russia, the European Union, and the United States in April 2014. As Paul D'Anieri writes, "In Russia’s interpretation, it committed the Ukrainian government to refraining from the use of force against the separatists. Second, it intervened in Ukraine’s constitutional process, where Russia strongly supported decentralization. Third, it dealt with the crisis as an internal Ukrainian conflict – Russia itself took on no obligations."

The group, compared to the previous Geneva process, did not include the United States. This development has been described by observers as being in Russia's favor and helped to "cleave off" Europe from the US. The format operated mainly through telephone calls between the leaders and foreign ministers, with meetings occasionally occurring between all four leaders. Normandy Format meetings at times included Belarus, Italy, and the United Kingdom.

The group was created on 6 June 2014, when leaders from France, Germany, Russia, and Ukraine met on the margins of the 70th anniversary of the D-Day allied landings in Normandy. Petro Poroshenko of Ukraine participated in these talks before his inauguration as president a day later.

Early talks in 2014 led to the establishment of the Trilateral Contact Group in order to facilitate further talks between Russia and Ukraine. This, along with mediation through the Normandy Format, directly led to the establishment of Minsk Protocol. This agreement, signed in September 2014, outlined several provisions for peace in the Donbas Region and Crimea.

A meeting was held 16–17 October 2014 in Milan, Italy as part of the 10th Asia–Europe Meeting.

Following a continued break-down of relations in early 2015, the Normandy Format met during talks in Minsk, Belarus from 11 to 12 February 2015. This was precipitated by a joint French-Germany diplomatic plan, which was negotiated overnight for over sixteen hours while the group met in Minsk. The emerging package, Minsk II, negotiated ceasefires as well as planned domestic reforms in Ukraine.

A meeting of the Normandy Format was held on 2 October 2015 in Paris, France. The meeting lasted four hours and resulted in the participants agreed that elections in territories controlled by DPR and LPR should be held according to the rules set out by Minsk II. These elections were repeatedly postponed and ultimately held in 2018.

A meeting of the Normandy Format was held on 19 October 2016 in Berlin, Germany.

Negotiations and talks were stalled from 2016 until autumn 2019, with Vladimir Putin refusing to participate in further talks after the meeting.

Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy, in his May 2019 inaugural address made peace talks with Russia his top priority. He reaffirmed that priority in July that year when he invited via YouTube the other nations to a dialogue. He said: "Let's discuss who Crimea belongs to and who isn't in the Donbas region."

On 18 July 2019, a "comprehensive" cease-fire was agreed with arbitration by the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine.

In early September 2019, French President Emmanuel Macron and Russian President Vladimir Putin stated their intention to hold a Normandy Format meeting. On 21 September, "continuing bickering" was cited as causing "a political tug-of-war" over the preliminaries to negotiations, as they had been since the Normandy Format meeting in 2016 in Berlin. Also in late September, a phone call between US President Donald Trump and Zelenskyy in which the latter described the support of France and Germany as lukewarm damaged Zelenskyy's image in Europe. On 10 October, Zelenskyy repeated his statement in a public news conference. On 16 October, French and German leaders decided in favour of another Normandy Format meeting, which took place on 9 December 2019 in Paris, France, when Putin and Zelenskyy met the first and only time until 2022.

In his 2024 book The Showman, Time magazine journalist Simon Shuster, based on interviews with Ukrainian officials, claimed that Putin during the meeting said Ukraine hadn't met its obligations under the Minsk agreements and that Merkel agreed with his complaints. Shuster explains that both sides failed to fulfill the treaty, with Ukraine not granting autonomy for the Donbas and Russia not withdrawing its troops.

Later in the same year, then-Foreign Minister Vadym Prystaiko said that the meeting should have happened in the summer but was delayed due to Zelenskyy's inexperience. When it did happen, the Ukrainian President backed out of the details of the disengagement of forces that had been agreed upon before the meeting, asking Putin to withdraw all Russian forces from Ukraine completely before Ukraine took any action on its part. Prystaiko claimed that this irritated Putin and caused fear in Merkel and Macron.

A Normandy Format meeting between the four countries' representatives was held in Paris, France on 26 January 2022 in the context of the escalation of tensions on the Russo-Ukrainian border, to be followed by a telephone conversation between the French and Russian presidents on 28 January. The representatives of the four governments confirmed their support for Minsk II and committed themselves to resolving existing disagreements. They supported an unconditional ceasefire, and supported strengthening of the 22 July 2020 ceasefire, independent of their disagreements about implementing other components of Minsk II. A follow-up meeting was agreed upon to take place in Berlin a fortnight later.

A meeting was held in Berlin, Germany on 10 February 2022. No joint declaration was agreed upon at the conclusion of that nine-hour-long meeting, but the representatives planned to meet again in March. This would never occur as Russia invaded Ukraine on 24 February.

In April 2022, Zelenskyy announced that the Normandy Format was "destroyed" due to Russia's actions. France and Germany continue to be involved in peace negotiations between the two countries, while also providing support to Ukraine and denouncing Russia.

The Normans (Norman : Normaunds ; French : Normands ; Latin : Nortmanni/Normanni) were a population arising in the medieval Duchy of Normandy from the intermingling between Norse Viking settlers and locals of West Francia. The Norse settlements in West Francia followed a series of raids on the French northern coast mainly from what is now Denmark, although some also sailed from Norway and Sweden. These settlements were finally legitimized when Rollo, a Scandinavian Viking leader, agreed to swear fealty to King Charles III of West Francia following the siege of Chartres in 911, leading to the formation of the County of Rouen. This new fief, through kinship in the decades to come, would expand into what came to be known as the Duchy of Normandy. The Norse settlers, whom the region as well as its inhabitants were named after, adopted the language, religion, social customs and martial doctrine of the West Franks but their offspring nonetheless retained many of their traits, notably their mercenary tendencies and their fervour for adventures. The intermixing between Norse folk and native West Franks in Normandy produced an ethnic and cultural "Norman" identity in the first half of the 10th century, an identity which continued to evolve over the centuries.

The Norman dynasty had a major political, cultural and military impact on medieval Europe and the Near East. The Normans were historically famed for their martial spirit, and eventually for their Catholic piety as adherents of the Catholic orthodoxy of the Romance community. The original Norse settlers adopted the Gallo-Romance language of the Frankish land they settled, with their Old Norman dialect becoming known as Norman, Normaund or Norman French, an important literary language which is still spoken today in parts of mainland Normandy (Cotentinais and Cauchois dialects) and the nearby Channel Islands (Jèrriais and Guernésiais). The Duchy of Normandy, which arose from the Treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte, was a great fief of medieval France. The Norman dukes exercised autonomous control of their holdings in Normandy, while at the same time being vassals owing fealty to the King of France, and under Richard I of Normandy (byname Richard sans Peur, meaning "Richard the Fearless"), the duchy was forged into a cohesive and formidable principality in feudal tenure.

Between 1066 and 1204, as a result of the Norman conquest of England, most of the kings of England were also dukes of Normandy. Gradually, an Anglo-Norman culture developed in the British Isles. In 1204, Philip II of France seized mainland Normandy by force of arms, having earlier declared the Duchy of Normandy to be forfeit to him. It remained a disputed territory until the Treaty of Paris of 1259, when the English sovereign ceded his claim to the Duchy, except for the Channel Islands. In the present day, the Channel Islands (the Bailiwick of Guernsey and the Bailiwick of Jersey) are considered to be officially the last remnants of the Duchy of Normandy, and are not part of the United Kingdom but are instead self-governing Crown Dependencies.

The Normans are noted both for their culture, such as their unique Romanesque architecture and musical traditions, and for their significant military accomplishments and innovations. Norman adventurers played a role in founding the Kingdom of Sicily under Roger II after conquering southern Italy and Malta from the Saracens and Byzantines, and an expedition on behalf of their duke, William the Conqueror, led to the Norman conquest of England at the Battle of Hastings in 1066. Norman and Anglo-Norman forces contributed to the Iberian Reconquista from the early eleventh to the mid-thirteenth centuries.

Norman cultural and military influence spread from these new European centres to the Crusader states of the Near East, where their prince Bohemond I founded the Principality of Antioch in the Levant, to Scotland and Wales in Great Britain, to Ireland, and to the coasts of north Africa and the Canary Islands. The legacy of the Normans persists today through the regional languages and dialects of France, England, Spain, Quebec and Sicily, and also through the various cultural, judicial, and political arrangements they introduced in their conquered territories.

The English name "Normans" comes from the French words Normans / Normanz, plural of Normant, modern French normand, which is itself borrowed from Old Low Franconian Nortmann "Northman" or directly from Old Norse Norðmaðr, Latinized variously as Nortmannus, Normannus, or Nordmannus (recorded in Medieval Latin, 9th century) to mean "Norseman, Viking ".

The 11th century Benedictine monk and historian, Goffredo Malaterra, characterised the Normans thus:

Specially marked by cunning, despising their own inheritance in the hope of winning a greater, eager after both gain and dominion, given to imitation of all kinds, holding a certain mean between lavishness and greediness, that is, perhaps uniting, as they certainly did, these two seemingly opposite qualities. Their chief men were specially lavish through their desire of good report. They were, moreover, a race skillful in flattery, given to the study of eloquence, so that the very boys were orators, a race altogether unbridled unless held firmly down by the yoke of justice. They were enduring of toil, hunger, and cold whenever fortune laid it on them, given to hunting and hawking, delighting in the pleasure of horses, and of all the weapons and garb of war.

Medieval Latin documents referred to them as Nortmanni, which means "men of the North". This name provides the etymological basis for the modern words "Norman" and "Normandy", with -ia (Normandia, like Neustria, Francia, etc.). After 911, this name replaced the term Neustria, which had formerly been used to describe the region that included Normandy. Today, nordmann (Norwegian pronunciation: [ 'nuɾmɑn ]) in the Norwegian language denotes a Norwegian person. In the Swedish language the word for the Norwegian person is norrman.

Between 790 and 800, the first Scandinavian Viking raiders targeted the coasts of northern Gaul. Several coastal areas were lost during the reign of Louis the Pious (814–840).

The Seine became the main route by which they entered the Kingdom of France. In 820, the first Viking attack sailed up the river; these raids became more frequent primarily in summer, while the Vikings initially wintered in Scandinavia.

In the course of the 10th century, the initially destructive incursions of Norse war bands penetrated further into the rivers of France, and evolved into more permanent encampments that included local French women and personal property. From 885 to 886, Odo of Paris (Eudes de Paris) succeeded in defending Paris against Viking raiders by fighting skill, fortification of Paris and tactical shrewdness.

Before Rollo's arrival, Normandy's populations did not differ from Picardy or Île-de-France, which were considered Frankish. Earlier Viking settlers had begun arriving in the 880s, but were divided between colonies in the east (Roumois and Pays de Caux around the lower Seine valley) and in the west in the Cotentin Peninsula, and were separated by traditional pagii, where the population remained about the same with almost no foreign settlers. Rollo's contingents from Scandinavia who raided and ultimately settled Normandy and other parts of the European Atlantic coast included Danes, Norwegians, Norse–Gaels, Orkney Vikings, possibly Swedes, and Anglo-Danes from the English Danelaw territory which earlier came under Norse control in the late 9th century.

In 911, Robert I of France, brother of Odo, again defeated another band of Viking warriors in Chartres with his well-trained horsemen. This victory paved the way for Rollo 's baptism and settlement in Normandy. The Duchy of Normandy, which began in 911 as a fiefdom, was established by the treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte between King Charles III (Charles the Simple) (879–929, ruled 893–929) of West Francia and the famed Viking ruler Rollo also known as Gaange Rolf (c. 846 – c. 929), from Scandinavia, and was situated in the former Frankish kingdom of Neustria. The treaty offered Rollo and his men the French coastal lands along the English Channel between the river Epte and the Atlantic Ocean coast in exchange for their protection against further Viking incursions. As well as promising to protect the area of Rouen from Viking invasion, Rollo swore not to invade further Frankish lands himself, accepted baptism and conversion to Christianity and swore fealty to King Charles III. Robert I of France stood as godfather during Rollo's baptism. He became the first Duke of Normandy and Count of Rouen. The area corresponded to the northern part of present-day Upper Normandy down to the river Seine, but the Duchy would eventually extend west beyond the Seine. The territory was roughly equivalent to the Ecclesiatical province of Rouen, and reproduced the old Roman Empire 's administrative structure of Gallia Lugdunensis II (part of the former Gallia Lugdunensis in Gaul).

Within a generation, the Norman elite abandoned Old Norse for the Gallo-Romance language that would evolve into Norman French. They also converted to Christianity, but did so while retaining a distinct warrior ethos. This fusion is evident in the popularity of given names; while Old Norse names like Hrólfr (Rollo) and Ansteinn (Osten) were initially common, they were quickly Latinized or replaced by Christian names, yet the martial spirit remained central to their identity. In many ways they would seem "more French than the French".

The descendants of Vikings replaced the Norse religion and Old Norse language with Catholicism (Christianity) and the Langue d'oil of the local people, descending from the Latin of the Romans. The Norman language (Norman French) was forged by the adoption of the indigenous langue d'oïl branch of Romance by a Norse-speaking ruling class, and it developed into the French regional languages that survive today.

The new Norman rulers were culturally and ethnically distinct from the old French aristocracy, most of whom traced their lineage to the Franks of the Carolingian dynasty from the days of Charlemagne in the 9th century. By intermarrying with the local aristocracy and adopting the growing feudal doctrines of the rest of France, the Normans would progressively work these principles into a functional hierarchical system in their own duchy, and later export it to Norman dominated England. The Norman population outside the Viking settler elite were overwhelmingly locals of West Francia.

As the proliferation of aristocratic families throughout the French kingdom limited the prospects of most heirs, young knights were encouraged to seek land and riches beyond their homeland, with Normandy becoming a major source of such adventurers. Many Normans of Italy, France and England eventually served as avid Crusaders soldiers under the Italo-Norman prince Bohemund I of Antioch and the Angevin-Norman king Richard the Lion-Heart, one of the more famous and illustrious Kings of England.

Aside from the conquest of England and the subsequent invasions of Wales and Ireland, the Normans expanded into other areas. Norman families, such as that of Tancred of Hauteville, Rainulf Drengot and Guimond de Moulins played important parts in the conquest of southern Italy and the Crusades.

The Drengot lineage, de Hauteville's sons William Iron Arm, Drogo, and Humphrey, Robert Guiscard and Roger the Great Count progressively claimed territories in southern Italy until founding the Kingdom of Sicily in 1130. They also carved out a place for themselves and their descendants in the Crusader states of Asia Minor and the Holy Land.

Opportunistic bands of Normans successfully established a foothold in southern Italy. Probably as the result of returning pilgrims' stories, the Normans entered southern Italy as warriors in 1017 at the latest. In 999, according to Amatus of Montecassino, Norman pilgrims returning from Jerusalem called in at the port of Salerno when a Muslim attack occurred. The Normans fought so valiantly that Prince Guaimar III begged them to stay, but they refused and instead offered to tell others back home of the Prince's request. William of Apulia tells that, in 1016, Norman pilgrims to the shrine of the Archangel Michael at Monte Gargano were met by Melus of Bari, a Lombard nobleman and rebel, who persuaded them to return with more warriors to help throw off the Byzantine rule, which they did.

The two most prominent Norman families to arrive in the Mediterranean were descendants of Tancred of Hauteville and the Drengot family. A group of Normans with at least five brothers from the Drengot family fought the Byzantines in Apulia under the command of Melus of Bari. Between 1016 and 1024, in a fragmented political context, the County of Ariano [ it ] was founded by another group of Norman knights headed by Gilbert Buatère and hired by Melus of Bari. Defeated at Cannae, Melus of Bari escaped to Bamberg, Germany, where he died in 1022. The county, which replaced the pre-existing chamberlainship, is considered to be the first political body established by the Normans in the south of Italy. Then Rainulf Drengot, from the same family, received the county of Aversa from Duke Sergius IV of Naples in 1030.

The Hauteville family achieved princely rank by proclaiming Prince Guaimar IV of Salerno "Duke of Apulia and Calabria ". He promptly awarded their elected leader, William Iron Arm, with the title of count in his capital of Melfi. The Drengot family thereafter attained the principality of Capua, and Emperor Henry III legally ennobled the Hauteville leader, Drogo, as " dux et magister Italiae comesque Normannorum totius Apuliae et Calabriae " (" Duke and Master of Italy and Count of the Normans of all Apulia and Calabria ") in 1047.

From these bases, the Normans eventually captured Sicily and Malta from the Muslims, under the leadership of the famous Robert Guiscard, a Hauteville, and his younger brother Roger the Great Count. Roger's son, Roger II of Sicily, was crowned king in 1130 (exactly one century after Rainulf was "crowned" count) by Antipope Anacletus II. The Kingdom of Sicily lasted until 1194, when it was transferred to the House of Hohenstaufen through marriage. The Normans left their legacy in many castles, such as William Iron Arm 's citadel at Squillace, and cathedrals, such as Roger II's Cappella Palatina at Palermo, which dot the landscape and give a distinct architectural flavor to accompany its unique history.

Institutionally, the Normans combined the administrative machinery of the Byzantines, Arabs, and Lombards with their own conceptions of feudal law and order to forge a unique government. Under this state, there was great religious freedom, and alongside the Norman nobles existed a meritocratic bureaucracy of Jews, Muslims and Christians, both Catholic and Eastern Orthodox. The Kingdom of Sicily thus became characterized by Norman, Byzantine, Greek, Arab, Lombard and "native" Sicilian populations living in harmony, and its Norman rulers fostered plans of establishing an empire that would have encompassed Fatimid Egypt as well as the crusader states in the Levant. One of the great geographical treatises of the Middle Ages, the " Tabula Rogeriana ", was written by al-Idrisi for King Roger II of Sicily, and entitled " Kitab Rudjdjar " (" The Book of Roger ").

The Normans began appearing in the military confrontations between Christians and Muslims in the Iberian Peninsula since the early eleventh century. The first Norman who appears in the narrative sources was Roger I of Tosny who according to Ademar of Chabannes and the later Chronicle of St Pierre le Vif went to aid the Barcelonese in a series of raids against the Andalusi Muslims c. 1018. Later in the eleventh century, other Norman adventurers such as Robert Crispin and Walter Giffard participated in the probably papal organised siege of Barbastro of 1064. Even after the Norman conquest of England in 1066, the Normans continued to participate in ventures in the peninsula. After the Frankish conquest of the Holy Land during the First Crusade, the Normans began to be encouraged to participate in ventures of conquest in the northeast of the peninsula. The most significant example of this was the incursion of Rotrou II of Perche and Robert Burdet in the 1120s in the Ebro frontier. By 1129 Robert Burdet had been granted a semi-independent principality in the city of Tarragona by the then Archbishop of this see, Oleguer Bonestruga. Several others of Rotrou's Norman followers were rewarded with lands in the Ebro valley by King Alfonso I of Aragon for their services.

With the rising popularity of the sea route to the Holy Land, Norman and Anglo-Norman crusaders also started to be encouraged locally by Iberian prelates to participate in the Portuguese incursions into the western areas of the Peninsula. The first of these incursions occurred when a fleet of these Crusaders was invited by the Portuguese king Afonso I Henriques to conquer the city of Lisbon in 1142. Although this Siege of Lisbon (1142) was a failure it created a precedent for their involvement in Portugal. So in 1147 when another group of Norman and other groups of crusaders from Northern Europe arrived in Porto on their way to join the crusading forces of the Second Crusade, the Bishop of Porto and later Afonso Henriques according to De expugnatione Lyxbonensi convinced them to help with the siege of Lisbon. This time the city was captured and according to the arrangement agreed upon with the Portuguese monarch many of them settled in the newly sacked city. The following year the remainder of the crusading fleet, including a substantial number of Anglo-Normans, was invited by the count of Barcelona, Ramon Berenguer IV, to participate in the siege of Tortosa (1148). Again the Normans were rewarded with lands in the newly conquered frontier city.

Between 1135 and 1160, the Norman Kingdom of Sicily conquered and kept as vassals several cities on the Ifriqiya coast, corresponding to Tunisia and parts of Algeria and Libya today. They were lost to the Almohads.

Soon after the Normans began to enter Italy, they entered the Byzantine Empire and then Armenia, fighting against the Pechenegs, the Bulgarians, and especially the Seljuk Turks. Norman mercenaries were first encouraged to come to the south by the Lombards to act against the Byzantines, but they soon fought in Byzantine service in Sicily. They were prominent alongside Varangian and Lombard contingents in the Sicilian campaign of George Maniaces in 1038–40. There is debate whether the Normans in Greek service actually were from Norman Italy, and it now seems likely only a few came from there. It is also unknown how many of the "Franks", as the Byzantines called them, were Normans and not other Frenchmen.

One of the first Norman mercenaries to serve as a Byzantine general was Hervé in the 1050s. By then, however, there were already Norman mercenaries serving as far away as Trebizond and Georgia. They were based at Malatya and Edessa, under the Byzantine duke of Antioch, Isaac Komnenos. In the 1060s, Robert Crispin led the Normans of Edessa against the Turks. Roussel de Bailleul even tried to carve out an independent state in Asia Minor with support from the local population in 1073, but he was stopped in 1075 by the Byzantine general and future emperor Alexius Komnenos.

Some Normans joined Turkish forces to aid in the destruction of the Armenian vassal-states of Sassoun and Taron in far eastern Anatolia. Later, many took up service with the Armenian state further south in Cilicia and the Taurus Mountains. A Norman named Oursel led a force of "Franks" into the upper Euphrates valley in northern Syria. From 1073 to 1074, 8,000 of the 20,000 troops of the Armenian general Philaretus Brachamius were Normans—formerly of Oursel—led by Raimbaud. They even lent their ethnicity to the name of their castle: Afranji, meaning "Franks". The known trade between Amalfi and Antioch and between Bari and Tarsus may be related to the presence of Italo-Normans in those cities while Amalfi and Bari were under Norman rule in Italy.

Several families of Byzantine Greece were of Norman mercenary origin during the period of the Comnenian Restoration, when Byzantine emperors were seeking out western European warriors. The Raoulii were descended from an Italo-Norman named Raoul, the Petraliphae were descended from a Pierre d'Aulps, and that group of Albanian clans known as the Maniakates were descended from Normans who served under George Maniaces in the Sicilian expedition of 1038.

Robert Guiscard, another Norman adventurer previously elevated to the dignity of count of Apulia as the result of his military successes, ultimately drove the Byzantines out of southern Italy. Having obtained the consent of Pope Gregory VII and acting as his vassal, Robert continued his campaign conquering the Balkan peninsula as a foothold for western feudal lords and the Catholic Church. After allying himself with Croatia and the Catholic cities of Dalmatia, in 1081 he led an army of 30,000 men in 300 ships landing on the southern shores of Albania, capturing Valona, Kanina, Jericho (Orikumi), and reaching Butrint after numerous pillages. They joined the fleet that had previously conquered Corfu and attacked Dyrrachium from land and sea, devastating everything along the way. Under these harsh circumstances, the locals accepted the call of Emperor Alexios I Comnenos to join forces with the Byzantines against the Normans. The Byzantine forces could not take part in the ensuing battle because it had started before their arrival. Immediately before the battle, the Venetian fleet had secured a victory in the coast surrounding the city. Forced to retreat, Alexios ceded the city of Dyrrachium to the Count of the Tent (or Byzantine provincial administrators) mobilizing from Arbanon (i.e., ἐξ Ἀρβάνων ὁρμωμένω Κομισκόρτη; the term Κομισκόρτη is short for κόμης της κόρτης meaning "Count of the Tent"). The city's garrison resisted until February 1082, when Dyrrachium was betrayed to the Normans by the Venetian and Amalfitan merchants who had settled there. The Normans were now free to penetrate into the hinterland; they took Ioannina and some minor cities in southwestern Macedonia and Thessaly before appearing at the gates of Thessalonica. Dissension among the high ranks coerced the Normans to retreat to Italy. They lost Dyrrachium, Valona, and Butrint in 1085, after the death of Robert.

A few years after the First Crusade, in 1107, the Normans under the command of Bohemond, Robert's son, landed in Valona and besieged Dyrrachium using the most sophisticated military equipment of the time, but to no avail. Meanwhile, they occupied Petrela, the citadel of Mili at the banks of the river Deabolis, Gllavenica (Ballsh), Kanina and Jericho. This time, the Albanians sided with the Normans, dissatisfied by the heavy taxes the Byzantines had imposed upon them. With their help, the Normans secured the Arbanon passes and opened their way to Dibra. The lack of supplies, disease and Byzantine resistance forced Bohemond to retreat from his campaign and sign a peace treaty with the Byzantines in the city of Deabolis.

The further decline of Byzantine state-of-affairs paved the road to a third attack in 1185, when a large Norman army invaded Dyrrachium, owing to the betrayal of high Byzantine officials. Some time later, Dyrrachium—one of the most important naval bases of the Adriatic —fell again to Byzantine hands.

The Normans were in contact with England from an early date. Not only were their original Viking brethren still ravaging the English coasts, they occupied most of the important ports opposite England across the English Channel. This relationship eventually produced closer ties of blood through the marriage of Emma, sister of Duke Richard II of Normandy, and King Ethelred II of England. Due to this, Ethelred fled to Normandy in 1013, when he was forced from his kingdom by Sweyn Forkbeard. His stay in Normandy (until 1016) influenced him and his sons by Emma, who stayed in Normandy after Cnut the Great 's conquest of the isle.

When Edward the Confessor finally returned from his father's refuge in 1041, at the invitation of his half-brother Harthacnut, he brought with him a Norman-educated mind. He also brought many Norman counsellors and fighters, some of whom established an English cavalry force. This concept never really took root, but it is a typical example of Edward's attitude. He appointed Robert of Jumièges Archbishop of Canterbury and made Ralph the Timid Earl of Hereford.

On 14 October 1066, William the Conqueror gained a decisive victory at the Battle of Hastings, which led to the conquest of England three years later; this can be seen on the Bayeux Tapestry. The invading Normans and their descendants largely replaced the Anglo-Saxons as the ruling class of England. The nobility of England were part of a single Norman culture and many had lands on both sides of the channel. Early Norman kings of England, as Dukes of Normandy, owed homage to the King of France for their land on the continent. They considered England to be their most important holding (it brought with it the title of King—an important status symbol). While in England, locals often referred to the Normans as Franci.

Eventually, the Normans merged with the natives, combining languages and traditions, so much so that Marjorie Chibnall says "writers still referred to Normans and English; but the terms no longer meant the same as in the immediate aftermath of 1066." In the course of the Hundred Years' War, the Norman aristocracy often identified themselves as English. The Anglo-Norman language became distinct from the French spoken in Paris, something that was the subject of some humour by Geoffrey Chaucer. The Anglo-Norman language was eventually absorbed into the Anglo-Saxon language of their subjects (see Old English) and influenced it, helping (along with the Norse language of the earlier Anglo-Norse settlers and the Latin used by the church) in the development of Middle English, which, in turn, evolved into Modern English.

The Normans had a profound effect on Irish culture and history after their invasion at Bannow Bay in 1169. Initially, the Normans maintained a distinct culture and ethnicity. Yet, with time, they came to be subsumed into Irish culture to the point that it has been said that they became " more Irish than the Irish themselves ". The Normans settled mostly in an area in the east of Ireland, later known as the Pale, and also built many fine castles and settlements, including Trim Castle and Dublin Castle. The cultures intermixed, borrowing from each other's language, culture and outlook. Norman surnames still exist today. Names such as French, (De) Roche, Devereux, D'Arcy and Lacy are particularly common in the southeast of Ireland, especially in the southern part of County Wexford, where the first Norman settlements were established. Other Norman names, such as Furlong, predominate there. Another common Norman-Irish name was Morell (Murrell), derived from the French Norman name Morel. Names beginning with Fitz- (from the Norman for "son") usually indicate Norman ancestry. Hiberno -Norman surnames with the prefix Fitz- include Fitzgerald, FitzGibbons (Gibbons) as well as Fitzmaurice. Families bearing such surnames as Barry (de Barra) and De Búrca (Burke) are also of Norman extraction.

One of the claimants of the English throne opposing William the Conqueror, Edgar Atheling, eventually fled to Scotland. King Malcolm III of Scotland married Edgar's sister Margaret, and came into opposition to William who had already disputed Scotland's southern borders. William invaded Scotland in 1072, riding as far as Abernethy where he met up with his fleet of ships. Malcolm submitted, paid homage to William and surrendered his son Duncan as a hostage, beginning a series of arguments as to whether the Scottish Crown owed allegiance to the King of England.

Normans went into Scotland, building castles and founding noble families that would provide some future kings, such as Robert the Bruce, as well as founding a considerable number of the Scottish clans. King David I of Scotland, whose elder brother Alexander I had married Sybilla of Normandy, was instrumental in introducing Normans and Norman culture to Scotland, part of the process some scholars call the " Davidian Revolution ". Having spent time at the court of Henry I of England (married to David's sister Maud of Scotland), and needing them to wrestle the kingdom from his nephew Máel Coluim mac Alaxandair, David had to reward many with lands. The process was continued under David's successors, most intensely of all under William the Lion. The Norman-derived feudal system was applied in varying degrees to most of Scotland. Scottish families of the names Bruce, Gray, Ramsay, Fraser, Rose, Ogilvie, Montgomery, Sinclair, Pollock, Burnard, Douglas and Gordon to name but a few, and including the later royal House of Stewart, can all be traced back to Norman ancestry.

Even before the Norman Conquest of England, the Normans had come into contact with Wales. Edward the Confessor had set up the aforementioned Ralph as Earl of Hereford and charged him with defending the Marches and warring with the Welsh. In these original ventures, the Normans failed to make any headway into Wales.

After the Conquest, however, the Marches came completely under the dominance of William's most trusted Norman barons, including Bernard de Neufmarché, Robert Fitzhamon, Roger of Montgomery in Shropshire and Hugh Lupus in Cheshire. These Normans began a long period of slow conquest during which almost all of Wales was at some point subject to Norman interference. Norman words, such as baron (barwn), first entered Welsh at that time.

The legendary religious zeal of the Normans was exercised in religious wars long before the First Crusade carved out a Norman principality in Antioch. They were major foreign combatants in the Reconquista in Iberia. In 1018, Roger de Tosny travelled to the Iberian Peninsula to carve out a state for himself from Moorish lands, but failed. In 1064, during the War of Barbastro, William of Montreuil, Roger Crispin and probably Walter Guiffard led an army under the papal banner which took a huge booty as they captured the city from its Andelusi rulers. Later a group of Normans led by a certain William (some have suggested this was William the Carpenter) participated in the failed siege of Tudela of 1087.

In 1096, Crusaders passing by the siege of Amalfi were joined by Bohemond of Taranto and his nephew Tancred with an army of Italo-Normans. Bohemond was the de facto leader of the Crusade during its passage through Asia Minor. After the successful Siege of Antioch in 1097, Bohemond began carving out an independent principality around that city. Tancred was instrumental in the conquest of Jerusalem and he worked for the expansion of the Crusader kingdom in Transjordan and the region of Galilee..

After the First Crusade to the Levant, the Normans continued with their involvement in Iberia as well as other areas of the Mediterranean. Among them was Rotrou of Perche and his followers Robert Burdet and William Giffard who joined multiple expeditions into the Ebro Valley to aid Alfonso I of Aragon in his campaigns of conquest. Robert Burdet managed to acquire the position of Alcide of Tudela by 1123 and later that of Prince of the city Tarragona in 1129.

The conquest of Cyprus by the Anglo-Norman forces of the Third Crusade opened a new chapter in the history of the island, which would be under Western European domination for the following 380 years. Although not part of a planned operation, the conquest had much more permanent results than initially expected.

In April 1191, Richard the Lion-hearted left Messina with a large fleet in order to reach Acre. But a storm dispersed the fleet. After some searching, it was discovered that the boat carrying his sister and his fiancée Berengaria was anchored on the south coast of Cyprus, together with the wrecks of several other ships, including the treasure ship. Survivors of the wrecks had been taken prisoner by the island's despot Isaac Komnenos. On 1 May 1191, Richard's fleet arrived in the port of Limassol on Cyprus. He ordered Isaac to release the prisoners and the treasure. Isaac refused, so Richard landed his troops and took Limassol.

Various princes of the Holy Land arrived in Limassol at the same time, in particular Guy de Lusignan. All declared their support for Richard provided that he support Guy against his rival Conrad of Montferrat. The local barons abandoned Isaac, who considered making peace with Richard, joining him on the crusade, and offering his daughter in marriage to the person named by Richard. But Isaac changed his mind and tried to escape. Richard then proceeded to conquer the whole island, his troops being led by Guy de Lusignan. Isaac surrendered and was confined with silver chains, because Richard had promised that he would not place him in irons. By 1 June, Richard had conquered the whole island. His exploit was well publicized and contributed to his reputation; he also derived significant financial gains from the conquest of the island. Richard left for Acre on 5 June, with his allies. Before his departure, he named two of his Norman generals, Richard de Camville and Robert de Thornham, as governors of Cyprus.

While in Limassol, Richard the Lion-Heart married Berengaria of Navarre, first-born daughter of King Sancho VI of Navarre. The wedding was held on 12 May 1191 at the Chapel of St. George and it was attended by Richard's sister Joan, whom he had brought from Sicily. The marriage was celebrated with great pomp and splendor. Among other grand ceremonies was a double coronation: Richard caused himself to be crowned King of Cyprus, and Berengaria Queen of England and Queen of Cyprus as well.

The rapid Anglo-Norman conquest proved more important than it seemed. The island occupied a key strategic position on the maritime lanes to the Holy Land, whose occupation by the Christians could not continue without support from the sea. Shortly after the conquest, Cyprus was sold to the Knights Templar and it was subsequently acquired, in 1192, by Guy de Lusignan and became a stable feudal kingdom. It was only in 1489 that the Venetians acquired full control of the island, which remained a Christian stronghold until the fall of Famagusta in 1571.

Between 1402 and 1405, the expedition led by the Norman noble Jean de Bethencourt and the Poitevine Gadifer de la Salle conquered the Canarian islands of Lanzarote, Fuerteventura and El Hierro off the Atlantic coast of Africa. Their troops were gathered in Normandy, Gascony and were later reinforced by Castilian colonists.

Bethencourt took the title of King of the Canary Islands, as vassal to Henry III of Castile. In 1418, Jean's nephew Maciot de Bethencourt sold the rights to the islands to Enrique Pérez de Guzmán, 2nd Count de Niebla.

When Norse Vikings from Scandinavia arrived in the then-province of Neustria and settled the land that became known as Normandy, they originally spoke Old Norse, a North Germanic language. Over time, they came to live among the local Gallo-Romance -speaking population, with the two communities converging to the point that the original Norsemen largely assimilated and adopted the local dialect of Old French while contributing some elements from the Old Norse language. This Norse-influenced dialect which then arose was known as Old Norman, and it is the ancestor of both the modern Norman language still spoken today in the Channel Islands and parts of mainland Normandy, as well as the historical Anglo-Norman language in England. Old Norman was also an important language of the Principality of Antioch during Crusader rule in the Levant.

Old Norman and Anglo-Norman literature was quite extensive during the Middle Ages, with records existing from notable Norman poets such as Wace, who was born on the island of Jersey and raised in mainland Normandy.

The customary law of Normandy was developed between the 10th and 13th centuries and survives today through the legal systems of Jersey and Guernsey in the Channel Islands. Norman customary law was transcribed in two customaries in Latin by two judges for use by them and their colleagues: These are the Très ancien coutumier (Very ancient customary), authored between 1200 and 1245; and the Grand coutumier de Normandie (Great customary of Normandy, originally Summa de legibus Normanniae in curia laïcali), authored between 1235 and 1245.

Norman law during the ducal period, between 1000 and 1144, blended local Frankish traditions, Carolingian legal structures, and Viking influences. This unique combination created a legal system distinct from both its Norse and Frankish predecessors. The Norse customs that were adopted emphasized community-based dispute resolution, honor, and reparation. The Carolingian legal principles that the Normans utilized were the written codes, administrative structure, and practices such as the use of oaths and ordeals. Lastly, the Normans wanted to preserve some of the existing customary practices in Normandy, particularly in rural areas, such as land ownership and inheritance, governance through local assemblies, and customary taxation and resource management.

In England, the Normans replaced the Anglo-Saxon landholding customs with a feudal system. Under this system, all land was held by the king, who granted it to nobles in exchange for military service and other obligations. The nobles, in turn, granted portions of their land to vassals, land holders for the king, which created a hierarchal structure of land tenure. The Domesday Book, written in 1086 formalized land ownership and feudal obligations in England, creating a legal framework form resolving disputes over property.

Legal obligations under this feudal system included required military service to the land's respective lords. Failure to meet these duties often resulted in forfeiture of land or other penalties. The disputes over land and feudal obligations were resolved in feudal courts. These courts operated at various levels: local, manorial, or baronial - and reinforced the feudal hierarchy by emphasizing the lord's role as the arbiter of justice within his domain.

Norman architecture typically stands out as a new stage in the architectural history of the regions they subdued. They spread a unique Romanesque idiom to England, Italy and Ireland, and the encastellation of these regions with keeps in their north French style fundamentally altered the military landscape. Their style was characterised by rounded arches, particularly over windows and doorways, and massive proportions.

In England, the period of Norman architecture immediately succeeds that of the Anglo-Saxon and precedes the Early Gothic. In southern Italy, the Normans incorporated elements of Islamic, Lombard, and Byzantine building techniques into their own, initiating a unique romanesque style known as Norman-Arab architecture within the Kingdom of Sicily and precedes the Early Gothic.

In the visual arts, the Normans did not have the rich and distinctive traditions of the cultures they conquered. However, in the early 11th century, the dukes began a programme of church reform, encouraging the Cluniac reform of monasteries and patronising intellectual pursuits, especially the proliferation of scriptoria and the reconstitution of a compilation of lost illuminated manuscripts. The church was utilised by the dukes as a unifying force for their disparate duchy. The chief monasteries taking part in this "renaissance" of Norman art and scholarship were Mont-Saint-Michel, Fécamp, Jumièges, Bec, Saint-Ouen, Saint-Evroul, and Saint-Wandrille. These centres were in contact with the so-called " Winchester school", which channeled a pure Carolingian artistic tradition to Normandy. In the final decade of the 11th and first of the 12th century, Normandy experienced a golden age of illustrated manuscripts, but it was brief and the major scriptoria of Normandy ceased to function after the midpoint of the century.

The French Wars of Religion in the 16th century and the French Revolution in the 18th successively destroyed much of what existed in the way of the architectural and artistic remnant of this Norman creativity. The former, with their violence, caused the wanton destruction of many Norman edifices; the latter, with its assault on religion, caused the purposeful destruction of religious objects of any type, and its destabilisation of society resulted in rampant pillaging.

By far the most famous work of Norman art is the Bayeux Tapestry, which is not a tapestry but a work of embroidery. It was commissioned by Odo, the Bishop of Bayeux and first Earl of Kent, employing natives from Kent who were learned in the Nordic traditions imported in the previous half century by the Danish Vikings.

In Britain, Norman art primarily survives as stonework or metalwork, such as capitals and baptismal fonts. In southern Italy, however, Norman artwork survives plentifully in forms strongly influenced by its Greek, Lombard, and Arab forebears. Of the royal regalia preserved in Palermo, the crown is Germanic and Byzantine in style and the coronation cloak is of Arab craftsmanship with Arabic inscriptions. Many churches preserve sculptured fonts, capitals, and more importantly mosaics, which were common in Norman Italy and drew heavily on the Greek heritage. Lombard Salerno was a centre of ivorywork in the 11th century and this continued under Norman domination.

Normandy was the site of several important developments in the history of classical music in the 11th century. Fécamp Abbey and Saint-Evroul Abbey were centres of musical production and education. At Fécamp, under two Italian abbots, William of Volpiano and John of Ravenna, the system of denoting notes by letters was developed and taught. It is still the most common form of pitch representation in English- and German-speaking countries today. Also at Fécamp, the staff, around which neumes were oriented, was first developed and taught in the 11th century. Under the German abbot Isembard, La Trinité-du-Mont became a centre of musical composition.

At Saint Evroul, a tradition of singing had developed and the choir achieved fame in Normandy. Under the Norman abbot Robert de Grantmesnil, several monks of Saint-Evroul fled to southern Italy, where they were patronised by Robert Guiscard and established a Latin monastery at Sant'Eufemia Lamezia. There they continued the tradition of singing.

The Northeastern Spain and Southern France Mediterranean forests is a Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub ecoregion in southwestern Europe. It occupies the Mediterranean coastal region of northeastern Spain, Southern France, the Balearic Islands and a small part of Italy.

The ecoregion extends along the Mediterranean coastal region of northeastern Spain, including the coastal Valencian and Catalonian regions and the Balearic Islands, the coastal Languedoc and Provence regions of southeastern France and parts of Ligurian Alps in Italy. It includes coastal plains, hills, and mountains.

The ecoregion has a Mediterranean climate. The ecoregion has hot and dry summers, and mild temperate and rainy winters. Average annual temperature ranges from 10 to 17º C. The coldest winter temperatures average 5 to 10º C. Average annual rainfall varies from 350 to 800 mm. Interior Spain to the west has a more continental Mediterranean climate with colder winters. Central France to the north has a more humid, temperate, and continental climate, with rainier summers and colder winters.

The plant communities of the ecoregion are varied, and include forests, woodlands, shrublands, and grasslands.

Broadleaf forests are principally of oaks, including evergreen holm oak (Quercus ilex), Quercus rotundifolia, Quercus coccifera, Quercus robur, Quercus petraea, and cork oak (Quercus suber), and deciduous oaks – Quercus pubescens in southern france, and Quercus faginea in mainland Spain, together with Quercus canariensis and Quercus pyrenaica in northern Catalonia's coastal mountains. Oak forests on the Balearic Islands.

Mixed forests of oaks and stone pine (Pinus pinea) grow on rocky silicaceous coastal mountain slopes. Forests of maritime pine (Pinus pinaster) grow on sandstone-derived soils in some coastal mountains. Mixed forests of Aleppo pine (Pinus halepensis) and holly oak (Quercus coccifera) are found on soils derived from limestone and marl.

High shrublands, known as maquis or mattoral, are common. They are composed of low trees and woody shrubs, with an understory of herbs and grasses. Dominant maquis/matorral trees are wild olive (Olea europaea) and carob (Ceratonia siliqua).

Low shrubland, known as garrigue, grows on dry rocky slopes, often near the seacoast. Garrigue is characterized by low aromatic and medicinal shrubs, along with herbs and grasses. Maquis of stone pines and the shrubs Juniperus phoenicea, Pistacia lentiscus, Myrtus communis and Chamaerops humilis grow on stabilized coastal dunes.

The ecoregion has wetlands, particularly in the Rhone and Ebro deltas. Freshwater and semi-saline wetlands are characterized by Agropyron spp., Puccinellia spp., and Juncus maritimus. Saline wetlands are dominated by Salicornia herbacea and Salicornia fruticosa.

Large mammals include wild boar (Sus scrofa), red deer (Cervus elaphus elaphus), roe deer (Capreolus capreolus) and Iberian wolf (Canis lupus signatus). The Camargue (Rhone Delta) and Ebro Delta are important habitats for water birds.

35,864 km², or 40%, of the ecoregion is in protected areas. Protected areas include:

The medieval Collegiate Church of Our Lady of Mantes, (French : Collégiale Notre-Dame de Mantes-la-Jolie), is a large and historically important Catholic church constructed between c.1155 and 1350 in the small town of Mantes-la-Jolie, about 50 km (30 mi) west of Paris. Although not a cathedral, it was built on a cathedral-like scale. Its grandeur, its quirky design and its strong associations with the Capetian dynasty make the church particularly interesting to architectural historians.

Throughout the Middle Ages, Mantes' strategically important position on a navigable river on the boundary between the powerful Duchy of Normandy (based in Rouen) and the lands of the Capetian Kings (based in Paris) was a double edged sword, contributing to its commercial wealth but also placing it in the front line of many conflicts. King William of England attacked Mantes in 1087 and razed the old Carolingian town to the ground (in the process sustaining a mortal injury that killed him soon after), prompting a rebuilding programme that lasted through the subsequent two centuries. The town was granted 'commune' status by King Louis VI in 1110, the first town within the royal domains to receive this lucrative privilege (in medieval France, being granted commune status meant a town was effectively a self-governing free-trade zone). Within the commune the de facto civil authority rested with a powerful lay confraternity dedicated to the Assumption of the Virgin, while religious authority rested with the College of Canons. A Collegium dedicated to the Virgin had been founded at Mantes some time before 978, in which year the Countess of Blois bequeathed it several local villages and a considerable amount of farmland in her will. The College retained strong associations with the Counts of Blois and also with the royal family - the two abbots who governed between 1134 and 1159 were both brothers of King Louis VII.

Construction of the present building began some time between 1155 and 1170, funded by income from the Commune and by the generous support of the Crown. Building work started with the raising and reinforcing of the ground along the north of the site, where the land slopes steeply down to the river. The design was on a grand scale but with a relatively simple plan, initially featuring neither transepts nor radiating chapels (though the latter were added later). The nave was completed up to the gallery vault level by around 1190. The high vaults were in place by around 1200 (c.1225 for the eastern bays) with the roof completed by 1240. The western facade was completed up to the base of the towers some time before 1225. The western towers are mainly 13th century work, except for the upper parts of the north tower, which was only completed in the late 15th century. Both towers had become dangerously unstable by the mid 19th century and were substantially rebuilt to a simpler design by the local architect Alphonse Durand (a student of Viollet le Duc 's). Its proximity to a strategic river crossing meant that the church was at the centre of heavy aerial bombardment following the allied invasion of France in 1944. In spite of this the church survived WWII relatively unscathed, even though most of the surrounding town was flattened.

The Collegiate Church of Notre Dame dominates views of Mantes, particularly when approaching from the north or east, where it sits on a bluff above a bend in the River Seine. From the exterior, its most distinctive features are the large round windows (oculi) at gallery level (see below), the cage-like flying buttresses and the general pock-marked appearance, caused by the unusually prominent putlog holes (left over from where the original builders attached their wooden scaffolding).

Internally, the nave has a three-part elevation (arcade, gallery and triforium), topped by a typical early-Gothic sexpartite vault, the vault responds resting on alternating compound and columnar piers. The outer walls at arcade level are massively built, around 180 cm thick, while those at gallery level are a mere 42 cm thick. This suggests that the original design didn't feature flying buttresses but that these had been incorporated into the plan by the time that construction began on the upper levels (possibly inspired by developments at Paris Cathedral, some 30 km to the east). The most distinctive feature, however, is the vaulting of the gallery level. Originally the bays of the gallery were given pointed transverse tunnel vaults, with the outer wall penetrated by a large oculus, possibly inspired by the ones used in the original triforium at Notre Dame de Paris. This kind of gallery vaulting is unique in France, the only similar example elsewhere being William of Sens ' false gallery on the north side of the choir at Canterbury. Although it is an efficient way of minimising the lateral thrusts generated by the gallery vaulting, at Mantes it results in a relatively dark interior. This architectural experiment was not repeated elsewhere and was clearly regarded as something of a failure here too, as in the second half of the 14th century the gallery was remodelled in eight of the bays; the barrel vaults were replaced with more conventional quadripartite vaults and the oculi replaced with pointed-arch windows. The resulting bays are noticeably lighter than their unmodified neighbours.

The west facade retains two 12th-century portals. The sculpture of the left portal (c. 1170) shows the Resurrection of Christ with the Quem quaeritis?, while the central portal (slightly later) shows the Death, Assumption and coronation of the Virgin. The west facade sculpture has clear affinities to that of the west portal of Senlis Cathedral and also to the Porte des Valois at St Denis and was probably made by a workshop familiar with both of those earlier projects. The rose window above the central portal is quite an early 'centripetal' type in which the spoke-like colonnettes have their bases outwards and their capitals towards the centre, resulting in a rather awkward arrangement of the segments. Jean Bony regarded this rose window, dated to c. 1215, as being a 'clumsy copy' of the ones at Laon Cathedral and St Yved in Braine and predating the more developed version at Notre Dame, Paris (normally dated to 1225). The stained glass, heavily restored and largely replaced in the 19th century, shows a typical Last Judgement theme. Unusually the glass panels are mounted flush with the inside wall, rather than being inserted into glazing slots - a system also found in the west rose at Notre Dame de Paris.

C. 1300 the right portal was remodelled in the latest style (probably inspired by the Portail de la Calende at Rouen Cathedral). This new portal was funded by the local magistrates and is hence known as the Portail des Echevins. Shortly afterwards, work began on modifications to the eastern apse, which was remodelled to incorporate a series of radiating chapels, also decorated in the Rayonnant style.

The largest of these new chapels was the Chapel of the Rosary, commonly known as the Chapel of Navarre, which was paid for by two prominent women of the French court, Jeanne d'Evreux (wife of King Charles IV) and Jeanne de France (Queen of Navarre). Although most of the original stained glass at Mantes has been lost (mostly during an outbreak of Revolutionary iconoclasm in 1794), the south side of the Navarre Chapel retains four excellent early 14th century roundels depicting Passion scenes, which show a restrained early use of silver stain. The other windows are early 20th century pastiches.

Notre-Dame de Paris (French : Cathédrale Notre-Dame de Paris French: [ nɔtʁ(ə) dam də paʁi ] : " Cathedral of Our Lady of Paris "), often referred to simply as Notre-Dame, is a medieval Catholic cathedral and basilica on the Île de la Cité (an island in the River Seine), in the 4th arrondissement of Paris, France. It is the cathedral church of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Paris.

The cathedral, dedicated to the Virgin Mary ("Our Lady"), is considered one of the finest examples of French Gothic architecture. Several attributes set it apart from the earlier Romanesque style, including its pioneering use of the rib vault and flying buttress, its enormous and colourful rose windows, and the naturalism and abundance of its sculptural decoration. Notre-Dame is also exceptional for its three pipe organs (one historic) and its immense church bells.

The construction of the cathedral began in 1163 under Bishop Maurice de Sully and was largely completed by 1260, though it was modified in succeeding centuries. In the 1790s, during the French Revolution, Notre-Dame suffered extensive desecration ; much of its religious imagery was damaged or destroyed. In the 19th century, the cathedral hosted the coronation of Napoleon and the funerals of many of the French Republic's presidents. The 1831 publication of Victor Hugo 's novel Notre-Dame de Paris (English title: The Hunchback of Notre-Dame) inspired interest which led to restoration between 1844 and 1864, supervised by Eugène Viollet-le-Duc. On 26 August 1944, the Liberation of Paris from German occupation was celebrated in Notre-Dame with the singing of the Magnificat. Beginning in 1963, the cathedral's façade was cleaned of soot and grime. Another cleaning and restoration project was carried out between 1991 and 2000. A fire in April 2019 caused serious damage, closing the cathedral for extensive and costly repairs; it reopened in December 2024.

Notre-Dame is a widely recognised symbol of both the city of Paris and the French nation. In 1805, Pope Pius VII awarded it honorary status as a minor basilica. As the cathedral of the archdiocese of Paris, Notre-Dame contains the cathedra or seat of the archbishop of Paris (currently Laurent Ulrich). In the early 21st century, about 12 million people visited Notre-Dame annually, making it the most visited monument in Paris.

Since 1905, Notre-Dame, like the other cathedrals in France, has been owned by the French government, with the exclusive rights of use granted to the French Roman Catholic Church. The French government is responsible for its maintenance.

Over time, the cathedral has gradually been stripped of many decorations and artworks. It still contains Gothic, Baroque, and 19th-century sculptures, 17th- and early 18th-century altarpieces, and some of the most important relics in Christendom, including the crown of thorns, and a sliver and nail from the True Cross.

4th century – Cathedral of Saint Étienne, dedicated to Saint Stephen, built just west of the present cathedral

It is believed that before the arrival of Christianity in France, a Gallo-Roman temple dedicated to Jupiter stood on the site of Notre-Dame. Evidence for this includes the Pillar of the Boatmen, discovered beneath the cathedral in 1710. In the 4th or 5th century, a large early Christian church, the Cathedral of Saint Étienne, was built on the site, close to the royal palace. The entrance was situated about 40 metres (130 ft) west of the present west front of Notre-Dame, and the apse was located about where the west façade is today. It was roughly half the size of the later Notre-Dame, 70 metres (230 ft) long—and separated into nave and four aisles by marble columns, then decorated with mosaics.

The last church before the cathedral of Notre-Dame was a Romanesque remodelling of Saint-Étienne that, although enlarged and remodelled, was found to be unfit for the growing population of Paris. A baptistery, the Church of Saint-John-le-Rond, built about 452, was located on the north side of the west front of Notre-Dame until the work of Jacques-Germain Soufflot in the 18th century.

In 1160, the bishop of Paris, Maurice de Sully, decided to build a new and much larger church. He summarily demolished the earlier cathedral and recycled its materials. Sully decided that the new church should be built in the Gothic style, which had been inaugurated at the royal abbey of Saint Denis in the late 1130s.

The chronicler Jean de Saint-Victor [ fr ] recorded in the Memorial Historiarum that the construction of Notre-Dame began between 24 March and 25 April 1163 with the laying of the cornerstone in the presence of King Louis VII and Pope Alexander III. Four phases of construction took place under bishops Maurice de Sully and Eudes de Sully (not related to Maurice), according to masters whose names have been lost. Analysis of vault stones that fell in the 2019 fire shows that they were quarried in Vexin, a county northwest of Paris, and presumably brought up the Seine by boat.

Five years after the devastating fire, Notre-Dame de Paris formally reopened with a two-hour ceremony inside its newly renovated interior following an estimated $739 million restoration. This was then followed by an event that was attended by global leaders including French president Emmanuel Macron and US president-elect Donald Trump. This celebration honoured the successful completion of the 2,000-plus day rebuilding effort that destroyed the spire and wooden roof structure. Macron hailed the cathedral as a metaphor for the nation's ability to "accomplish the impossible".

The first phase began with the construction of the choir and its two ambulatories. According to Robert of Torigni, the choir was completed in 1177 and the high altar consecrated on 19 May 1182 by Cardinal Henri de Château-Marçay, the Papal legate in Paris, and Maurice de Sully. The second phase, from 1182 to 1190, concerned the construction of the four sections of the nave behind the choir and its aisles to the height of the clerestories. It began after the completion of the choir but ended before the final allotted section of the nave was finished. Beginning in 1190, the bases of the façade were put in place, and the first traverses were completed. Patriarch Heraclius of Jerusalem called for the Third Crusade in 1185 from the still-incomplete cathedral.

Saint Louis IX deposited the relics of the passion of Christ, which included the crown of thorns, a nail from the True Cross and a sliver of the True Cross, which he had purchased at great expense from the Latin Emperor Baldwin II, in the cathedral during the construction of the Sainte-Chapelle. An under-shirt, believed to have belonged to Louis, was added to the collection of relics at some time after his death.

Transepts were added at the choir, where the altar was located, in order to bring more light into the centre of the church. The use of simpler four-part rather than six-part rib vaults meant that the roofs were stronger and could be higher. After Bishop Maurice de Sully's death in 1196, his successor, Eudes de Sully oversaw the completion of the transepts, and continued work on the nave, which was nearing completion at the time of his death in 1208. By this time, the western façade was already largely built; it was completed around the mid-1240s. Between 1225 and 1250 the upper gallery of the nave was constructed, along with the two towers on the west façade.

Another significant change came in the mid-13th century, when the transepts were remodelled in the latest Rayonnant style; in the late 1240s Jean de Chelles added a gabled portal to the north transept topped by a spectacular rose window. Shortly afterward (from 1258) Pierre de Montreuil executed a similar scheme on the southern transept. Both these transept portals were richly embellished with sculpture; the south portal depicts scenes from the lives of Saint Stephen and of various local saints, and the north portal features the infancy of Christ and the story of Theophilus in the tympanum, with a highly influential statue of the Virgin and Child in the trumeau. Master builders Pierre de Chelles, Jean Ravy [ fr ], Jean le Bouteiller, and Raymond du Temple [ fr ] succeeded de Chelles and de Montreuil and then each other in the construction of the cathedral. Ravy completed de Chelles's rood screen and chevet chapels, then began the 15-metre (49 ft) flying buttresses of the choir. Jean le Bouteiller, Ravy's nephew, succeeded him in 1344 and was himself replaced on his death in 1363 by his deputy, Raymond du Temple.

Philip the Fair opened the first Estates General in the cathedral in 1302.

An important innovation in the 12th century was the introduction of the flying buttress. Before the buttresses, all of the weight of the roof pressed outward and down to the walls, and the abutments supporting them. With the flying buttress, the weight was carried by the ribs of the vault entirely outside the structure to a series of counter-supports, which were topped with stone pinnacles which gave them greater weight. The buttresses meant that the walls could be higher and thinner, and could have larger windows. The date of the first buttresses is not known with precision beyond an installation date in the 12th century. Art historian Andrew Tallon has argued, based on detailed laser scans of the entire structure, that the buttresses were part of the original design. According to Tallon, the scans indicate that "the upper part of the building has not moved one smidgen in 800 years," whereas if they were added later some movement from prior to their addition would be expected. Tallon thus concluded that flying buttresses were present from the outset. The first buttresses were replaced by larger and stronger ones in the 14th century; these had a reach of fifteen metres (50 ft) between the walls and counter-supports.

John of Jandun recognized the cathedral as one of Paris's three most important buildings [prominent structures] in his 1323 Treatise on the Praises of Paris :

That most glorious church of the most glorious Virgin Mary, mother of God, deservedly shines out, like the sun among stars. And although some speakers, by their own free judgment, because [they are] able to see only a few things easily, may say that some other is more beautiful, I believe, however, respectfully, that, if they attend more diligently to the whole and the parts, they will quickly retract this opinion. Where indeed, I ask, would they find two towers of such magnificence and perfection, so high, so large, so strong, clothed round about with such multiple varieties of ornaments? Where, I ask, would they find such a multipartite arrangement of so many lateral vaults, above and below? Where, I ask, would they find such light-filled amenities as the many surrounding chapels? Furthermore, let them tell me in what church I may see such a large cross, of which one arm separates the choir from the nave. Finally, I would willingly learn where [there are] two such circles, situated opposite each other in a straight line, which on account of their appearance are given the name of the fourth vowel [O]; among which smaller orbs and circles, with wondrous artifice, so that some arranged circularly, others angularly, surround windows ruddy with precious colours and beautiful with the most subtle figures of the pictures. In fact, I believe that this church offers the carefully discerning such cause for admiration that its inspection can scarcely sate the soul.

— Jean de Jandun, Tractatus de laudibus Parisius

On 16 December 1431, the boy-king Henry VI of England was crowned king of France in Notre-Dame, aged ten, the traditional coronation church of Reims Cathedral being under French control.

During the Renaissance, the Gothic style fell out of style, and the internal pillars and walls of Notre-Dame were covered with tapestries.

In 1548, rioting Huguenots damaged some of the statues of Notre-Dame, considering them idolatrous.

The fountain [ fr ] in Notre-Dame's parvis was added in 1625 to provide nearby Parisians with running water.

Since 1449, the Parisian goldsmith guild had made regular donations to the cathedral chapter. In 1630, the guild began donating a large altarpiece every year on 1 May. These works came to be known as the grands mays. The subject matter was restricted to episodes from the Acts of the Apostles. The prestigious commission was awarded to the most prominent painters and, after 1648, members of the Académie Royale.

Seventy-six paintings had been donated by 1708, when the custom was discontinued for financial reasons. Those works were confiscated in 1793 and the majority were subsequently dispersed among regional museums in France. Those that remained in the cathedral were removed or relocated within the building by the 19th-century restorers.

Thirteen of the grands mays hang in Notre-Dame; these paintings suffered water damage during the fire of 2019 and were removed for conservation.

An altarpiece depicting The Visitation, painted by Jean Jouvenet in 1707, was also in the cathedral.

The canon Antoine de La Porte commissioned for Louis XIV six paintings depicting the life of the Virgin Mary for the choir. At this same time, Charles de La Fosse painted his Adoration of the Magi, now in the Louvre. Louis Antoine de Noailles, archbishop of Paris, extensively modified the roof of Notre-Dame in 1726, renovating its framing and removing the gargoyles with lead gutters. Noailles also strengthened the buttresses, galleries, terraces, and vaults. In 1756, the cathedral's canons decided that its interior was too dark. The medieval stained-glass windows, except the rosettes, were removed and replaced with plain, white glass panes. Lastly, Jacques-Germain Soufflot was tasked with the modification of the portals at the front of the cathedral to allow processions to enter more easily.

After the French Revolution in 1789, Notre-Dame and the rest of the church's property in France were seized and made public property. The cathedral was rededicated in 1793 to the Cult of Reason, and then to the Cult of the Supreme Being in 1794. During this time, many of the treasures of the cathedral were either destroyed or plundered. The twenty-eight statues of biblical kings located at the west façade, mistaken for statues of French kings, were beheaded. Many of the heads were found during a 1977 excavation nearby, and are on display at the Musée de Cluny. For a time the Goddess of Liberty replaced the Virgin Mary on several altars. The cathedral's great bells escaped being melted down. All of the other large statues on the façade, with the exception of the statue of the Virgin Mary on the portal of the cloister, were destroyed. The cathedral came to be used as a warehouse for the storage of food and other non-religious purposes.

With the Concordat of 1801, Napoleon Bonaparte restored Notre-Dame to the Catholic Church; this was finalised on 18 April 1802. Napoleon also named Paris's new bishop, Jean-Baptiste de Belloy, who restored the cathedral's interior. Charles Percier and Pierre-François-Léonard Fontaine made quasi-Gothic modifications to Notre-Dame for the coronation of Napoleon as Emperor of the French within the cathedral. The building's exterior was whitewashed and the interior decorated in Neoclassical style, then in vogue.

In the decades after the Napoleonic Wars, Notre-Dame fell into such a state of disrepair that Paris officials considered its demolition. Victor Hugo, who admired the cathedral, wrote the novel Notre-Dame de Paris (published in English as The Hunchback of Notre-Dame) in 1831 to save Notre-Dame. The book was an enormous success, raising awareness of the cathedral's decaying state. The same year as Hugo's novel was published, anti- Legitimists plundered Notre-Dame's sacristy. In 1844 King Louis Philippe I ordered that the church be restored.

The architect who had been in charge of Notre-Dame's maintenance, Étienne-Hippolyte Godde, was dismissed. Jean-Baptiste Lassus and Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, who had distinguished themselves with the restoration of the nearby Sainte-Chapelle, were appointed in 1844. The next year, Viollet-le-Duc submitted a budget of 3,888,500 francs, which was reduced to 2,650,000 francs, for the restoration of Notre-Dame and the construction of a new sacristy building. This budget was exhausted in 1850, and work stopped as Viollet-le-Duc made proposals for more money. In totality, the restoration cost over 12 million francs. Supervising a large team of sculptors, glass makers and other craftsmen, and working from drawings or engravings, Viollet-le-Duc remade or added decorations if he felt they were in the spirit of the original style. One of the latter items was a taller and more ornate flèche, to replace the original 13th-century flèche, which had been removed in 1786. The decoration of the restoration included a bronze roof statue of Saint Thomas that resembles Viollet-le-Duc, as well as the sculpture of mythical creatures on the Galerie des Chimères.

The construction of the sacristy was especially financially costly. To secure a firm foundation, it was necessary for Viollet-le-Duc's labourers to dig nine metres (thirty feet). Master glassworkers meticulously copied styles of the 13th century, as written about by art historians Antoine Lusson and Adolphe Napoléon Didron.

During the Paris Commune of March through May 1871, the cathedral and other churches were closed, and some two hundred priests and the Archbishop of Paris were taken as hostages. In May, during the Semaine sanglante of "Bloody Week", as the army recaptured the city, the Communards targeted the cathedral, along with the Tuileries Palace and other landmarks, for destruction; the Communards piled the furniture together in order to burn the cathedral. The arson was halted when the Communard government realised that the fire would also destroy the neighbouring Hôtel-Dieu hospital, filled with hundreds of patients.

During the liberation of Paris in August 1944, the cathedral suffered some minor damage from stray bullets. Some of the medieval glass was damaged, and was replaced by glass with modern abstract designs. On 26 August, a special Mass was held in the cathedral to celebrate the liberation of Paris from the Germans; it was attended by General Charles De Gaulle and General Philippe Leclerc.

In 1963, on the initiative of culture minister André Malraux and to mark the 800th anniversary of the cathedral, the façade was cleaned of the centuries of soot and grime, restoring it to its original off-white colour.

On 19 January 1969, vandals placed a North Vietnamese flag at the top of the flèche, and sabotaged the stairway leading to it. The flag was cut from the flèche by Paris Fire Brigade Sergeant Raymond Belle in a helicopter mission, the first of its kind in France.

The Requiem Mass of Charles de Gaulle was held in Notre-Dame on 12 November 1970. On 26 June 1971, Philippe Petit walked across a tight-rope strung between Notre-Dame's two bell towers entertaining spectators.

After the Magnificat of 30 May 1980, Pope John Paul II celebrated Mass on the parvis of the cathedral.

The Requiem Mass of François Mitterrand was held at the cathedral, as with past French heads of state, on 11 January 1996.

The stone masonry of the cathedral's exterior had deteriorated in the 19th and 20th centuries due to increased air pollution in Paris, which accelerated erosion of decorations and discoloured the stone. By the late 1980s, several gargoyles and turrets had fallen or become too loose to remain safely in place. A decade-long renovation programme began in 1991 and replaced much of the exterior, with care given to retain the authentic architectural elements of the cathedral, including rigorous inspection of new limestone blocks. A discreet system of electrical wires, not visible from below, was also installed on the roof to deter pigeons. The cathedral's pipe organ was upgraded with a computerised system to control the mechanical connections to the pipes. The west face was cleaned and restored in time for millennium celebrations in December 1999.

The Requiem Mass of Cardinal Jean-Marie Lustiger, former archbishop of Paris and Jewish convert to Catholicism, was held in Notre-Dame on 10 August 2007.

The set of four 19th-century bells at the top of the northern towers at Notre-Dame were melted down and recast into new bronze bells in 2013, to celebrate the building's 850th anniversary. They were designed to recreate the sound of the cathedral's original bells from the 17th century. Despite the 1990s renovation, the cathedral had continued to show signs of deterioration that prompted the national government to propose a new renovation program in the late 2010s. The entire renovation was estimated to cost €100 million, which the archbishop of Paris planned to raise through funds from the national government and private donations. A €6 million renovation of the cathedral's flèche began in late 2018 and continued into the following year, requiring the temporary removal of copper statues on the roof and other decorative elements.

Notre-Dame began a year-long celebration of the 850th anniversary of the laying of the first building block for the cathedral on 12 December 2012. On 21 May 2013, Dominique Venner, a historian and white nationalist, placed a letter on the church altar and shot himself, dying instantly. Around 1,500 visitors were evacuated from the cathedral.

French police arrested two people on 8 September 2016 after a car containing seven gas canisters filled with diesel fuel was found near Notre-Dame.

On 10 February 2017, French police arrested four people in Montpellier known to have ties to radical Islamist organisations on charges of plotting to travel to Paris and attack the cathedral. On 6 June, visitors were shut inside Notre-Dame cathedral in Paris after a man with a hammer attacked a police officer outside.

On 15 April 2019 the cathedral caught fire, destroying the flèche and the "forest" of oak roof beams supporting the lead roof. It was speculated that the fire was linked to ongoing renovation work.

The fire broke out in the attic of the cathedral at 18:18, investigators concluded. The smoke detectors immediately signalled the fire to a cathedral employee, who did not summon the fire brigade but instead sent a cathedral guard to investigate. The guard was sent to the wrong location, to the attic of the adjoining sacristy, and reported there was no fire. About 15 minutes later the error was discovered and the guard's supervisor told him to go to the correct location. The fire brigade was still not notified. By the time the guard had climbed the 300 steps to the cathedral attic, the fire was well advanced. The alarm system was not designed to automatically notify the fire brigade, which was summoned at 18:51 after the guard had returned from the attic and reported a now-raging fire, and more than half an hour after the fire alarm had begun sounding. Firefighters arrived in less than ten minutes.

The cathedral's flèche collapsed at 19:50, bringing down 750 tonnes of stone and lead. The firefighters inside were ordered down. By this time the fire had spread to the north tower, where the eight bells were. The firefighters concentrated their efforts in the tower. They feared that, if the bells fell, they could wreck the tower, and endanger the structure of the other tower and the whole cathedral. They had to ascend a stairway threatened by fire, and to contend with low water pressure for their hoses. As others watered the stairway and the roof, a team of 20 firefighters climbed the narrow stairway of the south tower, crossed to the north tower, lowered hoses to be connected to fire engines outside the cathedral, and sprayed water on the fire beneath the bells. By 21:45, they brought the fire under control.

The main structure was intact; firefighters saved the façade, towers, walls, buttresses, and stained-glass windows. The stone vaulting that forms the ceiling of the cathedral had several holes but was otherwise intact. The Great Organ, which has over 8,000 pipes and was built by François Thierry in the 18th century, was also saved but damaged by water. Because of the renovation, the copper statues on the flèche had been removed before the fire. About 500 firefighters helped to battle the fire, President Emmanuel Macron said. One firefighter was seriously injured and two police officers were hurt during the blaze.

No Christmas Mass was held in 2019 for the first time in more than 200 years. The first cathedral choir performance since the fire took place in December 2020; only eight members sang because of COVID-19 pandemic restrictions. A video of the event aired just before midnight on 24 December.

Immediately after the fire, Macron promised that Notre-Dame would be restored, and called for the work to be completed within five years. An international architectural competition was announced to redesign the flèche and roof. The announcement drew criticism in the international press from heritage academics and professionals who faulted the French government for being too focused on quickly building a new flèche, and neglecting to frame its response holistically as an inclusive social process encompassing the whole building and its long-term users. A new law was drafted to make Notre-Dame exempt from existing heritage laws and procedures, which prompted an open letter to Macron signed by over 1,170 heritage experts urging respect for existing regulations. The law, which passed on 11 May 2019, was hotly debated in the French National Assembly, with opponents accusing Macron's administration of using Notre-Dame for political grandstanding, and defenders arguing the need for expediency and tax breaks to encourage philanthropic giving.

Macron suggested he was open to a "contemporary architectural gesture". Even before the competition rules were announced, architects around the world offered suggestions: the proposals included a 100-metre (330 ft) flèche made of carbon fibre, covered with gold leaf; a roof built of stained glass; a greenhouse; a garden with trees, open to the sky; and a column of light pointed upwards. A poll published in the French newspaper Le Figaro on 8 May 2019 showed that 55% of French respondents wanted a flèche identical to the original. French culture minister Franck Riester promised that the restoration would not be hasty. On 29 July 2019, the French National Assembly enacted a law requiring that the restoration must "preserve the historic, artistic and architectural interest of the monument."

In October 2019, the French government announced that the first stage of reconstruction, the stabilising of the structure against collapse, would last until the end of 2020. In December 2019, Monseigneur Patrick Chauvet, the rector of the cathedral, said there was still a 50% chance that Notre-Dame could not be saved due to the risk of the remaining scaffolding falling onto the three damaged vaults. Reconstruction could not begin before early 2021. Macron announced that he hoped the reconstructed Cathedral could be finished in time for the opening of the 2024 Summer Olympics.

The first task of the restoration was the removal of 250–300 tonnes of melted metal tubes, the remains of the scaffolding, which could have fallen onto the vaults and caused further structural damage. This began in February 2020. A crane 84 metres (276 ft) high was put in place next to the cathedral to help remove the scaffolding. The work was completed in November 2020. Wooden support beams were added to stabilise the flying buttresses and other structures.

On 10 April 2020, the archbishop of Paris, Michel Aupetit, and a handful of participants, all in protective clothing to prevent exposure to lead dust, performed a Good Friday service inside the cathedral. Music was provided by the violinist Renaud Capuçon ; the lectors were the actors Philippe Torreton and Judith Chemla. Chemla gave an a cappella rendition of Ave Maria.

In February 2021, the selection of oak trees to replace the flèche and roof timbers destroyed by the fire began. A thousand mature trees were chosen from the forests of France, each of a diameter of 50 to 90 centimetres (20 to 35 in) and a height of 8 to 14 metres (26 to 46 ft), and an age of several hundred years. Once cut, the trees had to dry for 12 to 18 months. The trees were to be replaced by new plantings. Two years after the fire, a news report stated that: "there is still a hole on top of the church. They're also building a replica of the church's spire". More oak trees needed to be shipped to Paris, where they would need to be dried before use.

On 18 September 2021, the public agency overseeing the Cathedral stated that the safety work was completed, the cathedral was fully secured, and that reconstruction would begin within a few months.

In 2022, a preventive dig carried out between February and April before the construction of a scaffold for reconstructing the cathedral's flèche unearthed several statues and tombs under the cathedral. One of the discoveries was a 14th-century lead sarcophagus found 20 m (65 ft) below where the transept crosses the church's 12th-century nave. On 14 April 2022, France's National Preventive Archaeological Research Institute (Inrap) announced that the sarcophagus was extracted from the cathedral and that scientists had examined the casket using an endoscopic camera, revealing the upper part of a skeleton. An opening was discovered below the cathedral floor, likely made around 1230 when the Gothic cathedral was first under construction; inside were fragments of a choir screen dating from the 13th century that had been destroyed in the early 18th century. In March 2023, archaeologists uncovered thousands of metal staples in various parts of the cathedral, some dating back to the early 1160s. The archaeologists concluded that "Notre Dame is now unquestionably the first known Gothic cathedral where iron was massively used to bind stones as a proper construction material."

The cathedral reopened on 7 December 2024 in a ceremony presided over by Laurent Ulrich, the Archbishop of Paris, and attended by 1,500 world leaders and dignitaries such as US President-elect Donald Trump, US first lady Jill Biden, Britain's Prince William, and Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy. Pope Francis declined an invitation from Macron to attend the reopening, holding a consistory in Rome to create 21 new cardinals on that day and planning a visit to the French island of Corsica the following week.

The colour of the restored interior would be "a shock" to some returning visitors, according to General Jean-Louis Georgelin, the French army officer heading the restoration. "The whiteness under the dirt was quite spectacular". The stone was sprayed with a latex solution to remove accumulated grime and soot. The cleaning of the church interior with latex solutions was criticised by Michael Daley of Artwatch UK, referring to the earlier cleaning of St Paul's Cathedral in London. He asked, "Is there any good basis for wishing to present an artificially brightened and ahistorical white interior?" Jean-Michel Guilemont of the French Ministry of culture responded, "The interior elevations will regain their original colour, since the chapels and side aisles were very dirty. Of course it is not a white colour. The stone has a blonde colour, and the architects are very attentive to obtaining a patina which respects the centuries".

In 2023 Emmanuel Macron announced a competition sponsored by the French government to replace stained-glass windows, and the creation of a museum dedicated to Notre-Dame within the Hôtel-Dieu.

A new controversy arose in late 2024 over a proposal by French president Macron and the archbishop Laurent Ulrich to replace six stained-glass windows installed in chapels in the 19th century by Viollet-le-Duc and undamaged by the fire, whose value is considered more historical than aesthetic, with six modernist windows designed by contemporary artist Claire Tabouret, who had won the competition for new window designs. Her proposed windows are described as inclusive and representative of the modern world, intending to realistically depict people from different cultures and backgrounds praying together. The proposed windows are strongly opposed by preservationists, who want the cathedral to be restored exactly as it was before the fire. They were being made as of 2026.

The two towers are 69 metres (226 ft) high. The towers were the last major element of the cathedral to be constructed. The south tower was built first, between 1220 and 1240, and the north tower between 1235 and 1250. The newer north tower is slightly larger, as can be seen when they are viewed from directly in front of the church. The contrefort or buttress of the north tower is also larger. The cathedral's main peal of bells is within these towers.

The south tower is accessible to visitors by a stairway, whose entrance is on the south side of the tower. The stairway has 387 steps, and has a stop at the Gothic hall at the level of the rose window, where visitors could look over the parvis and see a collection of paintings and sculpture from earlier periods of the cathedral's history.

The cathedral's flèche (or spirelet) was located over the transept. The original flèche was constructed in the 13th century, probably between 1220 and 1230. It was battered, weakened and bent by the wind over five centuries, and was removed in 1786. During the 19th-century restoration, Viollet-le-Duc recreated it, making a new version of oak covered with lead. The entire flèche weighed 750 tonnes.

The cockerel weathervane on top of the flèche has both a religious and political symbolism. The cockerel is the symbol of the French state, which since 1905 has owned Notre-Dame and the other 86 cathedrals in France. It is found over all French cathedrals, as well as over the entrance of the Elysée Palace, the residence of the French president, on other government buildings, and on French postage stamps.

Following Viollet-le-Duc's plans, the flèche was surrounded by copper statues of the Twelve Apostles ‍ — ‌ a group of three at each point of the compass. In front of each group is a symbol representing one of the four evangelists: a winged ox for Saint Luke, a lion for Saint Mark, an eagle for Saint John and an angel for Saint Matthew. Just days prior to the fire, the statues were removed for restoration. While in place, they had faced outwards towards Paris, except one: the statue of Saint Thomas, the patron saint of architects, faced the flèche, and had the features of Viollet-le-Duc.

The cockerel weathervane at the top of the flèche contained three relics: a tiny piece from the Crown of Thorns in the cathedral treasury, and relics of Saint Denis and Saint Genevieve, patron saints of Paris. They were placed there in 1935 by Archbishop Jean Verdier, to protect the congregation from lightning or other harm. The cockerel was recovered in the rubble shortly after the fire, and has since been on display inside the reopened cathedral.

The new flèche was put in place on 16 December 2023, and a new gilded cockerel sculpture, designed by architect Philippe Villeneuve, was also installed, containing the same relics as old flèche, as well as the names of two thousand people who had participated in the reconstruction. Getting to work, Villeneuve's team scrutinised the journal in which Viollet-le-Duc had entered all the details of Notre-Dame's 19th century restoration work.

The Gothic cathedral was a liber pauperum, a "poor people's book", covered with sculptures vividly illustrating biblical stories, for the vast majority of parishioners who were, at the time, illiterate. To add to the effect, all of the sculpture on the façades was originally painted and gilded.

The tympanum over the central portal on the west façade, facing the square, vividly illustrates the Last Judgment, with figures of sinners being led off to hell, and good Christians taken to heaven. The sculpture of the right portal shows the coronation of the Virgin Mary, and the left portal shows the lives of saints who were important to Parisians, particularly Saint Anne, the mother of the Virgin Mary.

The exteriors of cathedrals and other Gothic churches were also decorated with sculptures of grotesques or monsters. These included the gargoyle, the chimera, a mythical hybrid creature which usually had the body of a lion and the head of a goat, and the strix or stryge, a creature resembling an owl or bat, which was said to eat human flesh. The strix appeared in classical Roman literature; it was described by the Roman poet Ovid, who was widely read in the Middle Ages, as a large-headed bird with transfixed eyes, rapacious beak, and greyish white wings. They were part of the visual message for the illiterate worshipers, symbols of the evil and danger that threatened those who did not follow the teachings of the church.

The gargoyles, which were added about 1240, had a more practical purpose. They were the rain spouts of the cathedral, designed to divide the torrent of water which poured from the roof after rain, and to project it outwards as far as possible from the buttresses and the walls and windows where it might erode the mortar binding the stone. To produce many thin streams rather than a torrent of water, a large number of gargoyles were used, so they were also designed to be a decorative element of the architecture. The rainwater ran from the roof into lead gutters, then down channels on the flying buttresses, then along a channel cut in the back of the gargoyle and out of the mouth away from the cathedral.

Amid all the religious figures, some of the sculptural decoration was devoted to illustrating medieval science and philosophy. The central portal of the west façade is decorated with carved figures holding circular plaques with symbols of transformation taken from alchemy. The central pillar of the central door of Notre-Dame features a statue of a woman on a throne holding a sceptre in her left hand, and in her right hand, two books, one open (symbol of public knowledge), and the other closed (esoteric knowledge), along with a ladder with seven steps, symbolising the seven steps alchemists followed in trying to transform ordinary metals into gold. On each side of the west façade, there are statues of Ecclesia and Synagoga. The statues represent supersessionism, the Christian belief that Christianity has replaced Judaism.

Many of the statues, particularly the grotesques, were removed from the façade in the 17th and 18th centuries, or were destroyed during the French Revolution. They were replaced with figures in the Gothic style, designed by Viollet-le-Duc, during the 19th-century restoration.

The stained-glass windows of Notre-Dame, particularly the three rose windows, are among the most famous features of the cathedral. The west rose window, over the portals, was the first and smallest of the roses in Notre-Dame. It is 9.6 metres (31 ft) in diameter, and was made in about 1225, with the pieces of glass set in a thick circular stone frame. None of the original glass remains in this window; it was recreated in the 19th century.

The two transept windows are larger and contain a greater proportion of glass than the rose on the west façade, because the new system of buttresses made the nave walls thinner and stronger. The north rose was created in about 1250, and the south rose in about 1260. The south rose in the transept is 12.9 metres (42 ft) in diameter; with the claire-voie surrounding it, a total of 19 metres (62 ft). It was given to the cathedral by King Louis IX of France, known as Saint Louis.

The south rose has 94 medallions, arranged in four circles, depicting scenes from the life of Christ and those who witnessed his time on earth. The inner circle has twelve medallions showing the twelve apostles. During later restorations, some of these original medallions were moved to circles farther out. The next two circles depict celebrated martyrs and virgins. The fourth circle shows twenty angels, and saints important to Paris, such as Saint Denis, Margaret the Virgin with a dragon, and Saint Eustace. The third and fourth circles also have some depictions of Old Testament subjects. The third circle has some medallions with scenes from the New Testament Gospel of Matthew which date from the last quarter of the 12th century. These are the oldest glass in the window.

Additional scenes in the corners around the rose window include Jesus's Descent into Hell, Adam and Eve, the Resurrection of Christ. Saint Peter and Saint Paul are at the bottom of the window, and Mary Magdalene and John the Apostle at the top.

Above the rose was a window depicting Christ triumphant seated in the sky, surrounded by his Apostles. Below are sixteen windows with painted images of Prophets. These were painted during the restoration in the 19th century by Alfred Gérenthe, under the direction of Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, based upon a similar window at Chartres Cathedral.

The south rose had a difficult history. In 1543 it was damaged by the settling of the masonry walls, and not restored until 1725–1727. It was seriously damaged in the French Revolution of 1830. Rioters burned the residence of the archbishop, next to the cathedral, and many of the panes were destroyed. The window was rebuilt by Viollet-le-Duc in 1861 who rotated it by fifteen degrees to give it a clear vertical and horizontal axis, and replaced the destroyed pieces of glass with new glass in the same style. The window now contains both medieval and 19th-century glass.

In the 1960s, after three decades of debate, it was decided to replace many of the 19th-century grisaille windows in the nave designed by Viollet-le-Duc with new windows. The new windows, made by Jacques Le Chevallier, are without human figures and use abstract designs and colour to try to recreate the luminosity of the cathedral's interior in the 13th century.

The fire left the three great medieval rose windows mostly intact, but with some damage. The rector of the cathedral noted that one rose window would have to be dismantled, as it was unstable and at risk. Most of the other damaged windows were of much less historical value.

In early 2024 Macron proposed removing six of the seven undamaged 19th-century stained-glass windows created by Eugène Viollet-le-Duc in the chapels along the south aisle of the nave, and replacing them with new windows with more contemporary designs. He invited contemporary artists to submit designs for the new windows. This proposal inspired a backlash in the press, and 140,000 people signed a petition to keep the old windows. The plan for contemporary windows was rejected by the French Commission on Architectural Monuments and Patrimony in July 2024. However, the plans went ahead, and the windows were being made as of 2026.

Unlike some other French cathedrals, Notre-Dame was originally constructed without a crypt. In the medieval period, burials were made directly into the floor of the church, or in above-ground sarcophagi, some with tomb effigies (French: gisant). High-ranking clergy and some royals were buried in the choir and apse, and many others, including lower-ranking clergy and lay people, were buried in the nave or chapels. There is no surviving complete record of the burials.

In 1699, many of the choir tombs were disturbed or covered over during a major renovation project. Remains which were exhumed were reburied in a common tomb beside the high altar. In 1711, a small crypt measuring about six by six metres (20 by 20 ft) was dug out in the middle of the choir which was used as a burial vault for the archbishops, if they had not requested to be buried elsewhere. It was during this excavation that the 1st-century Pillar of the Boatmen was discovered. In 1758, three more crypts were dug in the Chapel of Saint-Georges to be used for burials of canons of Notre-Dame. In 1765, a larger crypt was built under the nave to be used for burials of canons, beneficiaries, chaplains, cantors, and choirboys. Between 1771 and 1773, the cathedral floor was repaved with black and white marble tiles, which covered over most of the remaining tombs. This prevented many of these tombs from being disturbed during the French Revolution.

In 1858, the choir crypt was expanded to stretch most of the length of the choir. During this project, many medieval tombs were rediscovered. Likewise the nave crypt was also rediscovered in 1863 when a larger vault was dug out to install a vault heater. Many other tombs are also located in the chapels.

One of the earliest organs at Notre-Dame was built in 1403 by Frédéric Schambantz. It was rebuilt many times over the course of 300 years; however, twelve pipes and some wood survive from Schambantz. It was replaced between 1730 and 1738 by François Thierry, then once again rebuilt by François-Henri Clicquot. During the mid-19th-century restoration of the cathedral by Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, Aristide Cavaillé-Coll used pipework from earlier instruments to build a new organ, which was dedicated in 1868.

In 1904, Charles Mutin modified and added several stops upon the suggestions of titular organist Louis Vierne. In 1924, the installation of an electric blower was financed by Rolls-Royce CEO Claude Johnson. An extensive restoration and cleaning was carried out by Joseph Beuchet in 1932 which mostly included changes to the Récit. Between 1959 and 1963, the mechanical action with Barker levers was replaced with an electric action by Jean Hermann, and a new organ console was installed.

The stoplist was gradually modified by Robert Boisseau, who in 1968 added three chamade stops (8′, 4′, and 2′/16′) and by Jean-Loup Boisseau after 1975, all upon the orders of Pierre Cochereau. In autumn 1983, the electric combination system was disconnected due to short-circuit risk.

Between 1990 and 1992, Jean-Loup Boisseau, Bertrand Cattiaux, Philippe Émeriau, Michel Giroud, and the Société Synaptel revised and augmented the instrument. A new frame for the Jean Hermann console was created. Between 2012 and 2014, Bertrand Cattiaux and Pascal Quoirin restored, cleaned, and modified the organ. The stop and key action was upgraded, a new frame for selected components of the Hermann-Boisseau-Cattiaux console was created, a new enclosed division ("Résonnance expressive", using pipework from the former "Petite Pédale" by Boisseau, which can now be used as a floating division), the organ case and the façade pipes were restored, and a general tuning was carried out. The current organ has 115 stops (156 ranks) on five manuals and pedal, and more than 8,000 pipes.

In addition to the great organ in the west end, the quire of the cathedral carries a medium-sized choir organ of 2 manuals, 30 stops and 37 ranks in a nineteenth-century case from the 1960s. During the fire of 2019, it was heavily damaged by waterlogging, but is at least partially reusable. It also had a 5-stop single-manual continuo organ, which was completely destroyed by water from firefighters.

The great organ itself suffered minimal damage (mostly to a single pipe of the Principal 32' and substantial dust) in the fire of April 2019 and underwent maintenance for cleaning and tuning. It was formally reblessed in 2024.

Couplers : II/I, III/I, IV/I, V/I; III/II, IV/II, V/II; IV/III, V/III; V/IV, Octave grave général, inversion Positif/Grand-orgue, Tirasses (Grand-orgue, Positif, Récit, Solo, Grand-Chœur en 8; Grand-Orgue en 4, Positif en 4, Récit en 4, Solo en 4, Grand-Chœur en 4), Sub and Super octave couplers and Unison Off for all manuals (Octaves graves, octaves aiguës, annulation 8′); octaves aiguës Pédalier

Additional features : Coupure Pédalier ; Coupure Chamade; Appel Résonnance; s ostenuto for all manuals and the pedal; cancel buttons for each division; 50,000 combinations (5,000 groups each); replay system

The position of titular organist ("head" or "chief" organist; French: titulaires des grandes orgues) of the great organ of Notre-Dame is considered one of the most prestigious organist posts in France, along with the post of titular organist of Saint Sulpice in Paris, Cavaillé-Coll's largest instrument.

After the death of Pierre Cochereau, the cathedral authorities controversially decided to return to the Clicquot practice of having several titulaires, and also to guarantee that no one organist would have so much influence over the organ.

During the late 12th and early 13th centuries, while the present Gothic cathedral was under construction, Notre-Dame de Paris became the birthplace and leading centre of the Notre-Dame school of polyphony.

Notre-Dame currently has ten bells. The two largest bells, Emmanuel and Marie, are mounted in the south tower. The eight others; Gabriel, Anne Geneviève, Denis, Marcel, Étienne, Benoît-Joseph, Maurice, and Jean-Marie; are mounted in the north tower. In addition to accompanying regular activities at the cathedral, the bells have also rung to commemorate events of national and international significance, such as the armistice of 11 November 1918, the liberation of Paris, the fall of the Berlin Wall, and the September 11 attacks.

The bells are made with bronze for its resonance and resistance to corrosion. During the medieval period, they were often founded on the grounds of the cathedral so they would not need to be transported long distances. According to tradition, the bishop of Paris held a ceremony in which he blessed and baptized the bells, and a godparent formally bestowed a name on the bell. Most of the cathedral's early bells were named after the person who donated them, but they were also named after biblical figures, saints, bishops, and others.

After the baptism, the bells were hoisted into the towers through circular openings in the vaulted ceilings and mounted to headstocks to allow the bells to swing. Notre-Dame's bells swing on a straight swinging axis, meaning the axis of rotation is just above the crown of the bell. This style of ringing produces a clearer tone, as the clapper strikes the bell on the upswing, called a flying clapper. It also causes horizontal forces, which can be up to one and a half times the weight of the bell. For this reason the bells are mounted within wooden belfries which are recessed from the towers' stone walls. These absorb the horizontal forces and prevent the bells from damaging the relatively brittle stonework. The current belfries date to the 19th-century restoration.

Before the French Revolution, it was common for the bells to break, and they were often removed for repairs or to be entirely recast, and sometimes renamed. The bell Guillaume, for example, was renamed three times and recast five times between 1230 and 1770.

The practice of bell-ringing at Notre-Dame is recorded as early as 1198. By the end of the 14th century the bells were marking the civil hours, and in 1472 they began to call to prayer for the Angelus three times a day, both practices which continue today. During the French Revolution, most of the cathedral's bells were removed and melted down. Many of them bore the names of the medieval bells, and were relatively recent recastings made from most of the same metal. During the 19th-century restoration, four new bells were made for the north tower. These were replaced in 2012 with nine as part of the cathedral's 850th anniversary celebration.

In addition to the main bells, the cathedral also had smaller secondary bells. These included a carillon in the medieval flèche, three clock bells on the north transept in the 18th century, and six bells added in the 19th century – three in the reconstructed flèche and three within the roof to be heard in the sanctuary. These were destroyed during the 2019 fire.

The first clocks used at Notre-Dame were clepsydras. These were used to tell the hours, which were marked by striking bells. In the 14th century Notre-Dame had two clepsydras running simultaneously, one in the cloister and one in the church itself. A lay chamberlain was responsible for keeping the clocks filled with water and to notify a churchwarden when it was time to strike the bells for the hour.

In 1766, Guillot de Montjoye and Jean-Bernard de Vienne, canons and stewards of the church fabric, donated a mechanical clock to the cathedral. The movement was installed in a glass cabinet in the gallery beneath the north rose window and rang three bells outside above the north portal. Between 1812 and 1813, the clock and bells were moved to the north tower. A 1.34-metre (4.4 ft) clock face was installed inside the church below the organ platform.

During Viollet-le-Duc's restoration in the 19th century, a new clock was made. The 1867 Collin-Wagner movement, measuring two metres (6.6 ft) across, was located in the forest underneath the central flèche within a glass-enclosed room. This controlled four dormer clock faces visible on the transept roofs, two on each side. This clock was destroyed by the 2019 fire. Shortly after the fire, French clockmaker Jean-Baptiste Vior discovered an almost identical 1867 Collin-Wagner movement in storage at Sainte-Trinité Church in northern Paris. Olivier Chandez, who had been responsible for the upkeep of Notre-Dame's clock, described the find as "almost a miracle." The clock cannot be installed in Notre-Dame, but it was hoped that the clock could be used to create a new clock for Notre-Dame to the same specifications as the one which was destroyed.

Until the French Revolution, Notre-Dame was the property of the archbishop of Paris and therefore the Catholic Church. It was nationalized on 2 November 1789 and since then has been the property of the French state. Under the Concordat of 1801, use of the cathedral was returned to the Church, but not ownership. Legislation from 1833 and 1838 clarified that cathedrals were maintained at the expense of the French government. This was reaffirmed in the 1905 law on the separation of Church and State, designating the Catholic Church as having the exclusive right to use it for religious purposes in perpetuity. Notre-Dame is one of seventy historic churches in France with this status. The archdiocese is responsible for paying the employees, for security, heating and cleaning, and for ensuring that the cathedral is open free of charge to visitors. The archdiocese does not receive subsidies from the French state.

The Nouveau marché (New Market) was a French equity market that was a division of the Paris Bourse, now called Euronext Paris.

The Nouveau marché was founded in 1996 to facilitate access to the financial market by new start-ups with high growth potential but insufficient financing. Only newly formed companies were allowed access to the Nouveau marché, which was envisioned as a French equivalent to NASDAQ in the United States.

Created simultaneously with the Nouveau marché was a German counterpart, Neuer Market, and a British counterpart, the Alternative Investment Market.

To be allowed on the Nouveau marché, companies needed a minimum of 1.5 million euros in capital, among other requirements.

Most of the companies listed on the Nouveau marché companies were in the technology sector.

A November 2000 article in the Wall Street Journal stated that the Nouveau marché was “headed into hibernation.” During the first half of the year, there had been 40 initial public offerings, but during the rest of the year only eight IPOs had been added to the market. According to “market watchers,” wrote Mathilde Richter, “Nouveau Marche IPOs are going to become as rare as black truffles.” The problem, she explained, was a “glutted” IPO market and investors who had “tired of unprofitable Internet companies coming to market and disappointing at earnings season.” Richter quoted Francois Dubrule of the Paris-based venture-capital fund Angel Invest as saying that the market was “saturated.” In short, the “rosy days” of the Nouveau marché were apparently over.

On February 21, 2005, Euronext Paris created a single regulated market, Eurolist, to replace the Premier Marché, Second Marché, and Nouveau Marché.

Nouvelle cuisine (French: [ nuvɛl kɥizin ], ' new cuisine ') is an approach to cooking and food presentation in French cuisine. In contrast to cuisine classique, an older form of haute cuisine, nouvelle cuisine is characterized by lighter, more delicate dishes and an increased emphasis on presentation. It was popularized in the 1960s by the food critic Henri Gault, who coined the phrase, and his colleagues André Gayot and Christian Millau in a new restaurant guide, the Gault Millau, or Le Nouveau Guide.

The term nouvelle cuisine has been used several times in the history of French cuisine, to mark a clean break with the past.

In the 1730s and 1740s, several French writers emphasized their break with tradition, calling their cooking "modern" or "new". Vincent La Chapelle published his Cuisinier moderne in 1733–1735. The first volumes of Menon 's Nouveau traité de la cuisine was published in 1739. It was in 1742 that Menon introduced the term nouvelle cuisine as the title of the third volume of his Nouveau traité. François Marin worked in the same tradition.

In the 1880s and 1890s, the cooking of Georges Auguste Escoffier was sometimes described with the term.

The modern usage is variously attributed to authors Henri Gault, Christian Millau, and André Gayot, who used nouvelle cuisine to describe the cooking of Paul Bocuse, Alain Chapel, Jean and Pierre Troisgros, Michel Guérard, Roger Vergé, and Raymond Oliver, many of whom were once students of Fernand Point. Paul Bocuse claimed that Gault first used the term to describe food prepared by Bocuse and other top chefs for the maiden flight of the Concorde airliner in 1969.

The style Gault and Millau wrote about was a reaction to the French cuisine classique placed into "orthodoxy" by Escoffier. Calling for greater simplicity and elegance in creating dishes, nouvelle cuisine is not cuisine minceur ('thin cooking'), which was created by Michel Guérard as spa food. It has been speculated that the outbreak of World War II was a significant contributor to nouvelle cuisine's creation—the short supply of animal protein during the German occupation made it a natural development.

Gault and Millau discovered the "formula" contained in ten characteristics of this new style of cooking. The ten characteristics identified were:

There is a standing debate as to whether nouvelle cuisine has been abandoned. Much of what it stood for—particularly its preference for lightly presented, fresh flavours—has been assimilated into mainstream restaurant cooking. By the mid-1980s, some food writers stated that the style of cuisine had reached exhaustion and many chefs began returning to the cuisine classique style of cooking, although much of the lighter presentations and new techniques remained.

The Nouvelle Droite (French: [ nuvɛl dʁwat ], lit. ' New Right '), sometimes shortened to the initialism ND, is a far-right political movement which emerged in France during the late 1960s. The Nouvelle Droite is the origin of the wider European New Right (ENR). Various scholars of political science have argued that it is a form of fascism or neo-fascism, although the movement eschews these terms.

The Nouvelle Droite began with the formation of the GRECE (Groupement de recherche et d'études pour la civilisation européenne ; Research and Study Group for European Civilization), a French group guided largely by the philosopher Alain de Benoist, in Nice in 1968. De Benoist and other early GRECE members had long been involved in far-right politics, and their new movement was influenced by older rightist currents of thought like the German conservative revolutionary movement. Although rejecting left-wing ideas of human equality, the Nouvelle Droite was also heavily influenced by the tactics of the New Left and some forms of Marxism. Particularly influential were the sociocultural ideas of the Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci, with ND members describing themselves as the "Gramscians of the Right". The ND achieved a level of mainstream respectability in France during the 1970s, although their reputation and influence declined following sustained liberal and leftist anti-fascist opposition. Members of the Nouvelle Droite joined several political parties, becoming a particularly strong influence within the far-right French National Front, while ND ideas also influenced far-right groups elsewhere in Europe. In the 21st century, the ND has influenced multiple far-right groups, such as the Identitarian movement and forms of national-anarchism.

The ND opposes multiculturalism and the mixing of different cultures within a single society, opposes liberal democracy and capitalism, and promotes localised forms of what it terms "organic democracy", with the intent of rooting out elements of oligarchy. It pushes for an " archeofuturistic " or a type of non-reactionary " revolutionary conservative " method to the reinvigoration of the Pan-European identity and culture, while encouraging the preservation of certain regions where Europeans and their Caucasian descendants may reside. Concurrently, it attempts to sustain the protection of the variance of ethnicities and identities around the globe, defending the right of each group of people to keep their own lands and regions to occupy. To achieve its goals, the ND promotes what it calls "metapolitics", seeking to influence and shift European culture in ways sympathetic to its cause over a lengthy period of time rather than by actively campaigning for office through political parties.

Following the end of the Second World War and the collapse of the Vichy regime, the French extreme-right was driven underground. It resurfaced as a force able to contest elections in the mid-1950s, when some far-right activists successfully returned to the public arena through the Poujadist movement. In the following two decades, the country's extreme-right movement then rallied around the cause of the French Empire, opposing the decolonisation movements that were gaining strength in Indochina and Algeria. A number of far-right paramilitary groups were formed in this environment, including the Secret Army Organisation (Organisation armée secrète - OAS) and the Revolutionary Army (Armée Révolutionnaire - AR). Adopting another approach, a number of extreme-right intellectuals decided that they would try to make many of their ideas more socially respectable through the creation of the Research and Study Group for European Civilisation (GRECE). The acronym means " Greece " in French, and the organization has emphasized the pagan values of Ancient Greece.

GRECE was founded in the southern French city of Nice in January 1968, shortly before the May 1968 events in France. It initially had forty members, among the most prominent of whom were Alain de Benoist, Pierre Vial, Jean-Claude Valla, Dominique Venner, Jacques Bruyas and Jean-Jacques Mourreau. The political scientist Tamir Bar-On has stated that "the intellectual evolution of both GRECE and leading ND intellectuals is definitely situated within the revolutionary Right milieu". GRECE has been described as a "logical alternative" for those "young French nationalist militants" to join, given the 1958 dissolution of the Jeune Nation group, the 1962 collapse of the OAS, and the defeat of the European Rally for Liberty in the 1967 legislative election. These young radicals were ultra-nationalists and anti-communists, and centred their beliefs around a defence of Western society, scientific racism, and eugenics. They were opposed to the migration of non-white peoples from former French colonies into France itself, and this led them to adopt anti-colonial and anti-imperialist perspectives.

De Benoist came to be regarded as the "undisputed leader" of the Nouvelle Droite, and its "most authoritative spokesman". He had previously been a member of the ultra-nationalist Fédération des Étudiants Nationalistes and involved with the racialist Europe-Action journal, both of which have been characterised as reflecting ND ideas in their "embryonic form". GRECE inherited a number of key themes from Europe-Action, among them "the anti-Christian stance, a marked elitism, the racial notion of a united Europe, the seeds of a change from biological to cultural definitions of "difference," and the sophisticated inversion of terms like racism and anti-racism". De Benoit was also influenced by the Conservative Revolutionary movement of interwar Germany—including thinkers like Ernst Jünger, Arthur Moeller van den Bruck, and Oswald Spengler —and in the 1970s the ND helped to promote a revived interest in these conservative revolutionaries.

GRECE circulated an internal document in which it urged members not to employ "outdated language" that might associate the group with older fascist sectors of the far right. It also urged its members to socialise with some of France and Europe's most important decision-makers, so as to better set the ground for its goals. GRECE did not remain a homogeneous intellectual movement but contained different and sometimes conflicting perspectives. The ND learned from the unrest of 1968 as well as from the wider New Left movement of that decade, adopting the idea that the promotion of cultural ideas is a precondition for political change. De Benoist noted that the French left had not been elected into office since the end of the Second World War but that nevertheless leftist ideas had gained considerable traction in French society, particularly among intellectuals. He sought to change the values and assumptions of French society in a similar way, by shifting the prevailing ideology without the need for any electoral victories.

GRECE held a number of seminars and colloquia with varying degrees of success. It also began to issue a number of semi-academic publications through which it could promote its views. Its journal, Nouvelle École, initially circulated among the group's members although went into public circulation from 1969 onwards. A review, Éléments, was then made public in 1973. Over the course of 1975 and 1976 it issued bulletins promoting its message among medical, educational, and military circles. In 1976, GRECE launched its own publishing house, known as Copernic.

Though it took nearly ten years for this Nouvelle Droite to be discovered by the media, its elitist discourse, its claims to be scientific and its emphasis on European culturalism were influential throughout the 1970s in rehabilitating a number of ideas previously held to be indefensible. The New Right's strategy of intellectual rearmament was the polar opposite of commando activism, but continuity of personnel and, in substance (though not in form), of major tenets can be traced back to the OAS and beyond.

The expression nouvelle droite was not originally a term of self-appellation. It first appeared in a series of articles on GRECE written by the journalist Gilbert Comte and published in Le Monde in March 1978 which were titled "Une nouvelle droite?". It was applied at a time when the appellation "nouvelle" was being given to a wide range of developments in French intellectual and cultural life, including the nouveaux philosophes, the nouveaux historiens, and nouveaux économistes, as well as nouvelle cuisine.

By the late 1970s, the ND had captured the political zeitgeist in France, reaching its mass media heyday. During these years, intellectuals affiliated with the movement published articles in the mainstream magazine Le Figaro, edited by Louis Pauwels. In 1978, De Benoist's Vu de droite won the prestigious Prix de l'essai from the Académie Française. The ND's growth raised concerns among many liberal and leftist intellectuals in France, who claimed that it was a racist, fascist, and Vichyite movement that sought to undermine liberal democracy, egalitarianism, and the legacy of the French Revolution of 1789. A campaign calling for the rejection of the ND was embraced by media outlets like Le Monde, Le Nouvel Observateur, L'Express, and La Croix, resulting in Le Figaro withdrawing its patronage of the movement. The ND claimed that it was facing a form of intellectual persecution akin to McCarthyism. Now deprived of a popular platform, the ND accelerated away from biological racism and toward the claim that different ethno-cultural groups should be kept separate in order to preserve their historical and cultural differences.

In 1974, a group called The Club was established by several GRECE members—notably Jean-Yves Le Gallou and Yvan Blot, along with Henry de Lesquen,—to serve as an elite think tank for ND ideas. The club was frustrated with GRECE's long-term metapolitical strategy and sought to hasten the speed of change, with its members joining political parties like the Rally for the Republic (RFR) and Union for French Democracy (UDF). By the late 1970s, the Club de l'Horloge had moved away from GRECE by both endorsing economic neoliberalism and embracing Roman Catholicism as a core aspect of France's national identity, something in contrast to GRECE's anti-Christian bent.

In the early 1980s, a number of ND-affiliated intellectuals—among them Jean Haudry, Jean Varenne, Pierre Vial, Jean-Claude Bardet, and Pierre de Meuse—came out in support of the extreme-right National Front (FN) party, which was then growing in support under the leadership of Jean-Marie Le Pen. The FN were influenced by the ND in their platforms and slogans, adopting the ND's emphasis on ethno-cultural differentialism. The Club called for the RFR and UDF to enter into a political alliance with the FN to defeat the Socialist Party government of President François Mitterrand, although this did not happen.

In 1994, there were four ND-affiliated individuals on the FN politburo, making it the second most influential faction within the party. Within the FN, there were tensions between the ND-affiliated factions and other groups, most particularly the Catholic faction which rejected the ND's exultation of paganism. There were also tensions between the FN nouvelle droitistes and the wider ND, in particular with the wing influenced by De Benoist.

De Benoist openly criticised Le Pen's party, condemning its populism as being at odds with GRECE's emphasis on elitism, and expressing opposition to the FN's use of immigrants as scapegoats for France's problems. He may have been seeking to distinguish his GRECE with the FN, being aware that the two had much overlap.

In 1993, a group of 40 French intellectuals signed "The Appeal to Vigilance", which was published in Le Monde. This warned of "the resurgence of anti-democratic currents of far Right thought in French and European intellectual life" and called for a boycott against ND-affiliated intellectuals. In 1994, the appeal was again published, this time having been signed by 1500 European intellectuals.

The ND has gone through several doctrinal renewals since its creation in 1968 and, according to political scientist Stéphane François, "it has never been a centralized and homogeneous school of dogmatic thought. The positions supported by New Right thinkers vary enormously, ranging from extreme right wing to variants of anarchism. Despite these,... GRECE and ex-GRECE thinkers are united by common doctrinal references." Philosopher Pierre-André Taguieff has distinguished five ideological periods within the history of the ND: the rejection of the Judeo-Christian heritage and the ethnocentric "religion of human rights"; a critique of the liberal and socialist "egalitarian utopias" in the 1970s; a praise of the " Indo-European heritage" and paganism, perceived as the "true religion" of the Europeans; a critique of a market-driven and "economist" vision of the world and liberal utilitarianism ; the advocacy of a radical ethnic differentialism, eventually evolving in the 1990s towards a cultural relativism inspired by Claude Lévi-Strauss and Robert Jaulin.

Some of the prominent names that have collaborated with GRECE include Arthur Koestler, Hans Eysenck, Konrad Lorenz, Mircea Eliade, Raymond Abellio, Thierry Maulnier, Anthony Burgess and Jean Parvulesco.

The majority of political scientists locate the ND on the extreme-right or far-right of the political spectrum. A number of liberal and leftist critics have described it as a new or sanitized form of neo-fascism or as an ideology of the extreme right that significantly draws from fascism. The political scientist and specialist of fascism Roger Griffin agrees, arguing that the ND exhibits what he regards as the two defining aspects of fascism: a populist ultra-nationalism and a call for national rebirth (palingenesis). McCulloch believes that the ND had a "distinctly fascist–revivalist character" in part because of its constant reference to earlier right-wing ideologues like the German Conservative Revolutionaries and French figures the likes of Robert Brasillach, Georges Valois, Pierre Drieu La Rochelle, and Thierry Maulnier. The Nouvelle Droite has also revered the Italian far right thinker Julius Evola, who remains a potent symbol in the movement. In 1981, the editorial team of the ND journal Éléments wrote that "[w]ithout sharing all his views and all his analysis, the writers of Éléments agree to recognize in [him] one of the most lucid and insightful observers of our times."

McCulloch saw parallels in the ND's desire for ethnically and culturally homogeneous European societies, its hostility to egalitarianism and universalist modernity, and its call for a cultural rebirth. The ND rejects the labels of "fascism" and "extreme right". De Benoist has himself been described as a neo-fascist, although he has rejected the label of "fascist", claiming that it has only been used by his critics "for the sole purpose of delegitimizing or discrediting" his ideas. The ND's members have argued that their critique of capitalism and liberal democracy are different from the criticisms articulated by Nazism and older forms of fascism and the far right.

The Nouvelle Droite has distinguished itself from the mainstream right by embracing anti-capitalist, anti-American, pro-Third World, anti-nationalist, federalist, and environmentalist positions which were traditionally associated with left-wing politics. This blend of traditionally leftist and rightist ideas, which has long been recognised as a characteristic of fascism, has generated much ambiguity surrounding the ND's ideological position, and has led to confusion among political activists and even academics. The ND describes itself as situated beyond both left and right.

The political scientist Alberto Spektorowski espoused the view that the ND "has indeed seriously moved from its positions of old-style right-wing nationalism and racism to a new type of leftist regionalism and ethno-pluralism". Cultural critics have largely characterised the ND as a right-wing phenomenon, a categorisation endorsed by the political scientist Tamir Bar-On, who expresses the view that "ND thinkers have never fully transcended their original revolutionary right-wing roots." Bar-On interpreted the ND's use of leftist ideas as part of its "survival strategy", also noting that it was "a subtle attempt to resurrect some of the ideals of the revolutionary Right". McCulloch believed that the ND was "a deliberate attempt to paint certain ideological concepts in less compromised colours", while Griffin stated that the ND's claims to transcend the Left and Right was "an impressive piece of sleight of hand by the ND which disguises its extreme right-wing identity".

The Nouvelle Droite was deeply indebted to ideas drawn from the New Left movement. ND thinkers borrowed heavily from the Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci, and its proponents have described themselves as "Gramscians of the Right". Among the other Marxist thinkers whose work has been utilised by the ND have been Frankfurt School intellectuals Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer and Neo-Marxists like Louis Althusser and Herbert Marcuse. Other leftists have also been cited as influences by various ND figures, with former GRECE secretary-general Pierre Vial for instance praising Che Guevara, the Italian Red Brigades and the German Red Army Faction for their willingness to die fighting against capitalist liberal democracy. During the 1984 election to the European Parliament, De Benoist announced his intention to vote for the French Communist Party, deeming them to be the only credible anti-capitalist, anti-liberal, and anti-American political force then active in France. In 1997, he referred to The Greens as the only French political party that challenged the materialist and industrialist values of Western society.

De Benoist states that the Nouvelle Droite "has a certain number of characteristics of the Left and a certain number of characteristics of the Right." He has also expressed the view that the left-right political divide has "lost any operative value to analyze the field of ideological or political discourse", for "the new divides that have been emerging for the last few decades no longer coincide with the old left-right distinction".

GRECE has promoted the project of slowly infusing society with its ideas and rhetoric in the hope of achieving cultural dominance, which would then allow for the assumption of political power. Vial stated that "Politics is not the affair of GRECE. It is to be placed on another, more fundamental level. GRECE intends to work on the meta-political level [...] where a collective mentality and therefore a popular consensus is elaborated". De Benoist has called for the overthrow of liberal democracy through a long-term metapolitical strategy. Although it rejects liberal democracy, the Nouvelle Droite is not inherently anti-democratic, calling instead for a localised form of what it calls "organic democracy". De Benoist has maintained that the Nouvelle Droite has never endorsed a particular political party, and that its purpose has been as having "always adopted a position of observer, never of actor. It produces analyses and thought; it offers a theoretical corpus; it accomplishes intellectual and cultural work. Nothing else."

The Nouvelle Droite critiques both modernity and post-modernity. It opposes global capitalism and liberalism, and valorises regionalism, federalism, socialism and local forms of democracy. It rejects the principle of human equality, arguing that humans are not born free and equal and that society is inherently hierarchical. It stressed the need for elites, claiming that this would allow for harmonious social hierarchy in which all people are aware of their particular responsibilities and tasks.

Inspired by the French example, Italian activists were soon closely aligned. One quote from that era goes:

For this reason we chose a metapolitical strategy that, according to Gramsci 's teachings, allows us to gain cultural power before political power, which does not exclude that in the near future someone could bring our cultural programs to a more political plane. Since I do not think that the same people should do the cultural and political work, and also because people have natural predispositions for one or the other, I have chosen to be a cultural operator and I have no intention of transforming myself into a political man.

Another influential quote to this effect:

Right in front of us the path of “metapolitics” became clear. That is to say, it was something that did not disregard political needs but transcended them, to comprehend them in a more vast, more complex design that implicated profound ideological revisions (without changing the vision of the world) and cultural roots [...] And certainly, talking about cinema and comic books, of politology and the sciences, of etiology and energy, of sexuality and celebration, of community and sport, of literature and art was different from evoking the past and envisioning apotheosis. The New Right is this as well, a project for taking back daily life, free time, the world of personal interests, a recognition of that which is different-from-us. Perhaps less than we believe. An admission of plurality against monomaniacal ends. A proposal not for leaving the world, but for taking it back.

The ND has criticised the liberal emphasis on the rights of individuals and instead foregrounded the rights of groups. The ND exhibits a hostility to multiculturalism and to cultural mixing. Multicultural societies are viewed by the ND as a form of "ethnocide". GRECE has stated that it is against immigration but that it would not expect settled ethno-cultural minorities in France to emigrate en masse. Instead it favours separation of the different ethno-cultural groups within France, with each emphasising its own cultural identity and not integrating and mixing with the others. It supports homogeneity within a society. GRECE called on Europe and the Third World to work together on establishing this global ethno-cultural segregation and combating any homogenizing identities. Critics have argued that the ND's attitude in this regard is akin to older fascist preoccupations with the ideas of cultural or racial purity. It shares this belief in diversity in isolation with the FN. Spektorowski suggests that the ND's views on cultural difference and segregation seek to relegate the Third World to an inferior position on the world stage, by advising agrarian societies to remain as they are and not industrialise while allowing Europe to retain its more technologically advanced position.

The ND does not espouse the view that Europe's technological superiority marks Europeans out as a superior race. De Benoit has stated that "the European race is not the absolute superior race. It is only the most apt to progress".

De Benoit long adhered to ethnic nationalist ideas although sought to develop a form of nationalism that deconstructed the nation-state. GRECE promoted the replacement of the French Republic with a "federal republic of French peoples" which would in turn form part of a wider ethnic federation of European peoples. According to the ND, the ethnic-region would not have need to establish draconian laws against immigrants who were ethnically different, but would have impenetrable cultural barriers to keep them out. Ideas about such a regionalised federal Europe are akin to those of earlier far right and fascist thinkers like Drieu La Rochelle, Dominique Venner and Jean Mabire. In his analysis of the ND's beliefs about their ideal future, Spektorowski states that any society established along the ND lines would resemble apartheid-era South Africa, would be a form of totalitarianism based on the politics of identity, and would be "a permanent nightmare for old immigrants and for political and ideological dissenters".

Opposing global capitalism and an unrestricted free market, GRECE promoted a communitarian form of capitalism. While celebrating and defending Western civilisation, GRECE condemned Westernisation. The ND was equally critical of both the Soviet Union and the United States. The ND exhibits an intense Anti-Americanism, rejecting what it perceives as the hyper-capitalist ethos of the United States. It claims that both Europe and the Third World are allies in a struggle against American cultural imperialism. Within the ND, there is no overt anti-Semitism. McCulloch argued that anti-Semitic conspiracy theories were nevertheless present in the ND-affiliated members of the FN. In the early 1990s, Georges Charbonneau announced that GRECE officially repudiated Holocaust denial. However, one of the organisation's founders, Jean-Claude Valla, has stated that he personally believes the claims of Holocaust deniers.

The ND rejects the monotheistic legacy of the Judeo-Christian tradition. They claim that the Christian heritage of Europe has generated an egalitarian ethos which has since developed into such secular variants as liberalism, social democracy, and socialism. It condemns the monotheism of Christianity as exhibiting a totalitarian ethos which seeks to impose a Western ethos on the world's many different cultures. According to Vial, "totalitarianism was born 4000 years ago... It was born the day monotheism appeared. The idea of monotheism implies the submission of the human being to the will of a single, eternal God". GRECE was avowedly pro-pagan, viewing pre-Christian Europe in positive terms as a healthy and diverse, polytheistic continent. The ND's opposition to Christianity has resulted in it rejecting the ideas of the Old Catholic Right and the neo-liberal Anglo–American Right. It nevertheless accepts that other cultural groups should be free to pursue monotheistic beliefs if they see fit, expressing the view that "Judaism is certainly right for the Jews, as Islam is for the Arabs, and we cannot accept the racist practice of imposing our cultural model on foreign peoples."

Under the GRECE umbrella have been found a variety of thinkers and activists, including "European imperialists, traditionalists influenced by Julius Evola and René Guénon, communitarians, post-modernists, Völkisch nostalgics, anti-Judeo-Christian pagans". Taguieff has distinguished four different currents within the Nouvelle Droite: the traditionalists – influenced by integral traditionalism, the "revolutionary Traditionalism" of Evola, and often by anti-Catholicism –, the "modern", then " post-modern " neo-conservatives – inspired by the German Conservative Revolution –, the ethnic communitarianists – influenced by the "populist-racist" Völkisch movement –, and the positivist – who exalt science and modern technique in a form of scientism. Amidst this diversity, the ideological core of the ND remains "the defence of identity (of whatever kind) and a refusal of egalitarianism".

The Nouvelle Droite, and its German counterpart the Neue Rechte, have influenced the ideological and political structure of the European Identitarian Movement. Part of the alt-right also claims to have been inspired by De Benoist's writings.

By the end of the 1980s, publications espousing Nouvelle Droite ideas had appeared in various European countries, namely Belgium, Spain, Italy, and Germany. Works by Alain de Benoist and Guillaume Faye have been translated into various European languages, in English in particular by Arktos Media, described as the "uncontested global leader in the publication of English-language Nouvelle Droite literature."

Although mostly known in France, according to Minkenberg, the Nouvelle Droite borders to other European "New Right" movements, such as Neue Rechte in Germany, New Right in the United Kingdom, Nieuw Rechts in the Netherlands and Flanders, Forza Nuova in Italy, Imperium Europa in Malta, Nova Hrvatska Desnica in Croatia, Noua Dreapta in Romania and the New Right of Paul Weyrich and the Free Congress Foundation in the United States.

After 2006, Faye has taken part in conventions organized by American white supremacist Jared Taylor, who have favourably reviewed his book in his magazine American Renaissance. Both of them believe that white people need to join in a worldwide fight for their racial, cultural, and demographic survival. His ideas have also been discussed by the American alt-right website Counter-Currents, and the writings of Faye and de Benoist, especially their metapolitical stance, have influenced American far-right activist Richard B. Spencer.

The American New Right cannot, however, be ideologically confused with its European counterpart. The European New Right is similar to the Cultural Conservatism movement led by Paul Weyrich and the Free Congress Foundation, and to the related traditionalism of paleoconservatives such as Pat Buchanan and the Chronicles magazine of the Rockford Institute (Diamond, Himmelstein, Berlet and Lyons). However these subgroups of the New Right coalition in the United States are closely tied to Christianity, which the Nouvelle Droite rejects, describing itself as a pagan movement. Both Jonathan Marcus, Martin Lee and Alain de Benoist himself have highlighted these important differences with the US New Right coalition.

By rejecting Christianity as an alien ideology that was forced upon the Indo-European peoples two millennia ago, French New Rightists distinguished themselves from the so-called New Right that emerged in the United States during the 1970s. Ideologically, [the European new Right group] GRECE had little in common with the American New Right, which [the European new Right ideologue] de Benoist dismissed as a puritanical, moralistic crusade that clung pathetically to Christianity as the be-all and end-all of Western civilization.

The Nouvelle Droite also developed a presence in the United Kingdom, where the term "New Right" was more closely associated with the Thatcherite policies introduced under the Conservative Party administration of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. Britain's far right first collaborated with the Nouvelle Droite in 1979, when a GRECE delegation met with the League of St. George in London. It was claimed that the meeting went well, although there was no further collaboration between the groups. The Nouvelle Droite's ideas were pursued in a more sustained way in Britain when far right activist Michael Walker launched the National Democrat magazine in 1981, renaming it The Scorpion in 1983. Walker had been a senior member of Britain's fascist National Front, and believed that the latter party had failed to achieve its goals because it had neither engaged with culture nor won over intellectuals to its cause. He felt that the Nouvelle Droite thinkers could aid the British far right by challenging two of its "sacred cows": biological racism and conspiracy theories. In his publication, Walker produced translations of some of De Benoit and Faye's writings. During the 1980s and into the early 1990s, Walker co-organised several conferences with a group called Islands of the North Atlantic (IONA), which was led by Richard Lawson; these conferences were attended by Nouvelle Droite figures like De Benoist.

After Walker left Britain for Cologne, his role as promoter of the Nouvelle Droite in Britain was taken on by Lawson, who launched the meta-political magazine Perspectives in the early 1990s; this was re-launched as Radical Shift in 1997, but remained uninfluential. In the mid-1990s, some hard right Conservatives co-operated with members of the fascist British National Party (BNP) to establish the Bloomsbury Forum, a self-described "New Right" group based in Bloomsbury which modelled itself on GRECE. After Nick Griffin took over the BNP in 1999, he reformed it in a manner closely based on the French National Front and thus influenced by the Nouvelle Droite. In certain ways Griffin's BNP remained distinct from the Nouvelle Droite, however, for instance by not embracing the latter's wholesale rejection of Christianity. The terminology of the Nouvelle Droite, in particular that surrounding "ethno-pluralism", has also been adopted by the British National Anarchist Troy Southgate.

The Identitarian Movement UK launched in 2017 espouses the ideas of the Nouvelle Droite citing Guillaume Faye and Alain de Benoist as inspirations.

The Nouvelle Droite has been the subject of various studies since its emergence in the 1970s and had gained a wide range of enemies as well as some unexpected supporters. Although many liberals and socialists have claimed that the ND has not ideologically shifted away from earlier forms of the far right, and that it should be socially ostracised, the leftist journal Telos has praised the ND's ability to transcend the left-right paradigm. The ND has been equally criticized by sectors of both the left and the right, for instance having been condemned by both the Anglo-American right for its anti-capitalist and anti-American views, and by the French Catholic right for its anti-Christian views.

The nuclear fuel cycle in France comprises all the operations involved in supplying fuel to French nuclear reactors and managing irradiated fuel. These operations include ore extraction, uranium concentration, conversion, enrichment, fuel fabrication, irradiation in reactors, recycling, and waste management.

In France, the upstream and downstream parts of the cycle are handled by companies in the Orano Group (formerly Areva).

Ore, mined in mainland France from the 1950s until the late 1990s, is now entirely imported. It is then converted at the Comurhex plants in Malvési (Aude) and Pierrelatte (Drôme), then enriched at the Georges-Besse II plant on the Tricastin nuclear site. The original Georges-Besse plant closed in 2012. Reactor fuel assemblies are manufactured by Framatome on the Romans nuclear site for normal fuel and by Orano Melox on the Marcoule nuclear site for Mox, a fuel composed of uranium and plutonium. Orano also conducts reprocessing, which separates fission products and actinides from spent nuclear fuel.

After three years of irradiation, spent nuclear fuel has been transformed, with the appearance of plutonium, fission products, and minor actinides. What's more, around 1% of the fissile 235 isotope remains, more than in natural uranium (0.7%), and it may be worth enriching this spent uranium for recycling.

After being stored for a year in a deactivation pool at a nuclear power plant, spent nuclear fuel assemblies are transported to the La Hague reprocessing plant in the Manche region of France, where all the recoverable radionuclides are separated from the other elements, which are treated as waste. This operation is undertaken after a further three to five years of storage in a pool to allow radioactivity to decay.

La Hague has the capacity to reprocess about 1,700 tons of spent fuel per year. One-third of the uranium recovered at La Hague (i.e. 280 tons per year) is re-enriched, enabling the annual production of 35 tons of enriched reprocessed uranium (ERU) fuel. Plutonium and reprocessed uranium are then sent to the Melox plant to manufacture Mox for use in one of the 22 authorized power plants.

On December 31, 2007, a total of 1,150,969 m of waste was stored at the various sites, including 2,293 m of high-level waste. The Morvilliers repository in the Aube region of France receives very low-level waste, while the nearby Soulaines repository accepts low- and intermediate-level short-lived waste. Long-lived and high-level (HL) waste will be accepted at these deep sites, which will be defined before 2015.

On November 28, 2008, EDF communicated its cycle development forecasts for the period 2007-2017 to the supervisory authorities based on four scenarios. On May 9, 2011, the ASN requested that an additional study be carried out within a year, taking into account the lessons learned from the Fukushima nuclear accident, particularly about deactivation pools and a downward revision of annual production.

The nuclear fuel cycle includes uranium mining, uranium concentration, conversion, enrichment, fuel fabrication, irradiation in reactors, recycling, and waste management.

This cycle can be open, whereby spent fuel irradiated in reactors undergoes no further treatment and is sent to storage sites of varying design depending on the country, as is the case in Sweden and the United States. It can be closed, with the spent fuel undergoing treatment in specialized plants to recover plutonium and uranium for recycling and eventual reuse, while the final waste is permanently stored on specialized sites.

France has opted for the so-called “closed cycle” with reprocessing, as have the Netherlands, Russia, and Japan.

Depending on the source of supply, uranium arrives in France either in its natural state, with a simple concentration treatment carried out at the extraction site, after which it is converted and enriched in France, or already enriched. For example, Kazakh uranium is converted and enriched in Russia, while uranium from Niger is converted and enriched in France.

After irradiation in the reactors, the fuel is processed to extract plutonium and so-called reprocessed uranium, some of which is stored, thus constituting a reserve, and some of which can be used to manufacture new nuclear fuel, enriched reprocessed uranium. The plutonium, mixed with depleted uranium from the enrichment stage, is recycled into new MOX (mixed oxide fuel). This new fuel is then used in nuclear power plants that accept this type of fuel, saving 900t of natural uranium out of the 8400t consumed annually.

In 2022, Bernard Doroszczuk, Chairman of the French Nuclear Safety Authority, called for “a major overhaul of Orano's aging fuel cycle processing facilities.” In February 2024, the French Nuclear Policy Council approved the continuation of nuclear fuel reprocessing and recycling in France for new reactors to be built between now and 2040-2045. With a minimum lifespan of 60 years, France is looking ahead to 2100. To accomplish this, the government is planning a program to extend the lives of La Hague and Melox beyond 2040, and launched studies on a new MOX fabrication plant and a new reprocessing plant.

Uranium mining in France began immediately after the Second World War, with the creation of the Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique (Atomic Energy Commission) by General de Gaulle on October 18, 1945. In the early 1950s, numerous deposits were discovered: in Limousin from 1948 to 1950, then in Vendée in 1951, in Forez in 1954, and finally in Hérault in 1957. At the same time, significant deposits were discovered abroad: the Arlit mine in Niger and the Cluff Lake deposit in Canada came on stream in 1968.

The first oil crisis boosted prospecting and production, and uranium prices rose in 1973. New deposits were discovered and brought on stream in Aveyron, Allier, Creuse, Corrèze, and, in 1974, Gironde. The latter was not exploited, however, as it was insufficiently rich. In 1976, the CEA handed over the exploitation of its metropolitan deposits to its subsidiary, Compagnie Générale des Matières Nucléaires (Cogema). New deposits were discovered in the Hérault region in 1981.

In 1988, the French nuclear industry produced 3,420 tons of uranium in the course of the year, or 5.6% of the world's total, estimated at 61,000 tons at the time. However, the necessity was growing, and the conditions for exploiting deposits in mainland France were becoming less profitable. From then on, France's uranium supply came from mines in Australia (Ranger in particular), Niger, Gabon and Canada.

In 1995, the last operating shaft in the Limousin region, at Margnac, was closed.

In 2001, the last mine in operation, the Jouac mine in the Haute-Vienne region, ceased production. Reputed to be France's richest deposit, with over 5 kg of uranium per tonne of ore, mining at depths of over 400 meters was no longer profitable.

Uranium can occur naturally in rocks, soils, continental waters, or seawater. In France, the deposits that have been mined are located either in magmatic rocks or in sedimentary soils.

Ore from magmatic rocks results from the migration and precipitation of granitic magma solutions into the earth's upper crust along zones of disturbance. The Morvan, Limousin, and Vendée sites fall into this category. The Morvan deposits are associated with the Luzy granitic batholith, those in Limousin with the Monts d'Ambazac granitic massif, and those in Vendée with the Mortagne granitic massif. Sedimentary deposits result from the alteration of igneous rocks and the concentration of debris in other types of sedimentary rock, consolidated or unconsolidated. The Lodève deposit, located in the Permian sandstones of the Hérault region, falls into this category.

Ore is extracted and mined either in open-pit mines, which account for 30% of France's metalliferous mines, or in underground galleries. While open-cast mining offers the advantages of lower costs and greater production capacity, it also has a greater impact on the landscape and the environment. In Limousin, for example, the Brugeaud mine created an excavation 15 ha in size and 130 m deep. Between 1955 and 1972, an estimated 20 million tonnes of rock were extracted from the quarry alone, while only 2,124 tons of uranium were extracted from the quarry and gallery site as a whole. IRSN lists 217 mining sites in France, spread over 25 departments.

The low-grade ore requires concentration. Processing involves both physical operations (pre-concentration and conditioning) and chemical operations (acid etching of the ore and purification of the concentrate). It requires fairly extensive facilities that discharge large quantities of solid and liquid waste. Ten uranium concentration processing plants have existed in France. Each of Cogema's mining divisions had such a facility: l'Escarpière for the Vendée division, Bessines for the La Crouzille division, Saint-Priest-la-Prugne for the Forez division.

Three other private mine operators have existed in France: Société Industrielle et Minière de l'Uranium (SIMURA), which exploited deposits in the Bonote region near Pontivy (Morbihan); Compagnie Française des Minerais d'Uranium (CFMU) in Lozère ; and Société Centrale de l'Uranium et des Minerais Radioactifs (SCUMRA), which operated the Saint-Pierre deposit in the Cantal region. Each has its conversion plant.

These sites supplied 52 million tons of ore, including 76,000 tons of uranium, and left around 166 million tons of waste rock and 51 million tons of tailings.

Uranium production trends in France between 2000 and 2010, according to World Nuclear Association statistics, are shown in the table below. Following the closure of the last French mine in 2001, a few tons of uranium are still produced annually, through the treatment of resins from mine drainage water at the former Lodève mine in southern France.

Since the closure of the last French mine in 2001, France no longer produces uranium directly and imports it in its entirety. Its supply strategy, through its main operator EDF, is based on diversification of sources, both geographically, with materials from deposits in Canada, Australia, Kazakhstan, or Africa, and in terms of suppliers. In 2011, EDF sourced 40% of its materials from Areva and 60% from other suppliers. In line with the conclusions of the Roussely report on the future of the French nuclear industry, published by the Élysée Palace in June 2010, in February 2011 EDF examined the possibility of becoming a reference shareholder in Areva's mining division.

Orano, which has been present in Mongolia for 25 years, is carrying out a pilot on-site test from July 2021 to December 2022 to extract uranium from the Zuuvch Ovoo deposit, in partnership with the Mongolian state-owned company Mon-Atom. Mongolia has the largest reserves in Asia, but they are still poorly exploited. Emmanuel Macron supported the uranium mine project during his visit to Mongolia in May 2023. In 2023, despite sanctions linked to the war in Ukraine, France imports almost 54% of its enriched uranium from Russia.

Conversion involves transforming uranium concentrate from the mines into a gaseous state for use in enrichment plants. Conversion takes place in two stages. The uranium concentrate is first transformed into uranium tetrafluoride (UF 4) and then into uranium hexafluoride (UF 6).

In the first stage, the pulverized “ yellowcake ” uranium concentrate is dissolved in nitric acid, yielding a solution of uranyl nitrate UO 2 (NO 3) 2. After filtration, this is purified by solvent extraction with a TBP solution. This step yields uranyl nitrate UO 2 (NO 3) 2 of high purity (> 99.95%). The actual conversion consists of precipitating the uranyl nitrate with ammonia gas to obtain ammonium diuranate (NH 4) 2 U 2 O 7 (UAN), which is then calcined at around 400°C to produce UO 3. The latter is reduced by hydrogen to obtain UO 2, which is ultimately transformed into uranium tetrafluoride UF 4 by hydrofluorination with hydrofluoric acid HF in a furnace.

These operations are carried out at the Comurhex plant at Malvési, an Areva subsidiary located near Narbonne (Aude). To renew this plant, as well as the one at Tricastin, Areva has invested €610 million in new uranium conversion plants at both sites. Civil engineering work began in November 2009, and commissioning is scheduled for 2013. Full production capacity, based on 15,000 tons per year, is scheduled for 2015, with possible expansion to 21,000 tons per year.

The Comurhex plant in Pierrelatte processes uranium tetrafluoride from Malvési, producing materials for various industrial sectors:

Annual tonnages of finished products are as follows:

Orano inaugurated its new Comurhex 2 natural uranium-to-uranium hexafluoride conversion plant at Tricastin in September 2018; the investment was six years behind schedule and saw its bill double to €1.15 billion. Comurhex 2 reduces ammonia, nitric acid, and water consumption compared with the old plant, which was shut down at the end of 2017. In 2018, Orano expected production to reach 5,000 tons by mid-2019, then 15,000 tons by the end of 2020, its maximum capacity. Since then Orano has lowered maximum capacity to 14,000 tons and in 2025 said Comurhex 2 produced "more than 12,000 metric tons."

Annual production of tons UF6 is as follows:

The material produced by the Comurhex plant at Pierrelatte is then enriched by gaseous diffusion at the Tricastin nuclear site, in the Georges-Besse II plant operated by Orano.

The original Georges-Besse plant operated by Eurodif Production shut down in 2012. The process is based on the very small mass difference between molecules of uranium 235 hexafluoride (mass 349), which are lighter than those of uranium 238 hexafluoride (mass 352). By filtering them through suitable membranes, a sufficiently large number of cycles can be used to obtain enriched uranium. However, this technique is very energy-intensive: around 2,500 kWh are required per separation work unit (SWU) (5 SWUs are needed to produce one kilogram of 3.7% enriched uranium from 9 kg of natural uranium). To operate the Georges Besse plant (Eurodif) at its full production capacity of 10.8 million SWU per year, three of the four 900 MWe EDF reactors at the Tricastin site needed to be mobilized.

Built in 1988, the plant had a design life of 25 years at the time of construction, which should have led to the end of operations in 2003. However, maintenance operations and building modernization will extend this lifespan by at least ten years, bringing the end of activity to 2013. Given the time required to appraise and build a new plant, in 2003 Areva began thinking about a new project that would be technically and commercially acceptable.

Three processes were competing to replace the Georges-Besse plant: gaseous diffusion, Laser SILVA enrichment, and centrifugation. For reasons of economics, reliability, and speed of implementation, Areva opted for centrifugation, acquiring the technology from its European competitor Urenco. Industrial agreements were signed on November 24, 2003, providing for Areva to acquire a 50% stake in ETC (Enrichment Technology Company), the Urenco subsidiary that develops the technology and manufactures the centrifuges, as well as transferring the right to use the technology and purchase centrifuges from Areva. This agreement was conditional on the signature of a quadripartite intergovernmental agreement between France and the three signatories of the Treaty of Almelo (Germany, the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands) and on the agreement of the European competition authorities. The agreement was signed in Cardiff on July 8, 2005. The contract covers 30 years, extendable by tacit agreement for a further 10 years. Construction took 4 years, and the new plant was inaugurated on December 14, 2010, by Areva CEO Anne Lauvergeon, in the presence of over a hundred customers.

Georges-Besse II has current capacity of 7.5 million SWU per year. In 2023 Orano's board of directors approved a 30% expansion that will add 2.5 million SWU per year capacity by 2028 at an estimated cost of €1.7 billion.

To produce 1 kg of enriched uranium, 9 kg of natural uranium is required and 8 kg of depleted uranium is produced in the form of hexafluoride. To facilitate storage, the hexafluoride must be defluorinated, after which it is transformed into stable triuranium octaoxide known as “depleted U 3 O 8.” This operation is carried out at Areva NC's plant W on the Tricastin site.

U 3 O 8 comes in the form of a gray-black powder with low radioactivity. The powder is stable up to 1,300°, incombustible, non-corrosive, and insoluble, and is comparable to the natural uranium oxide found in mined deposits. It is packaged in sealed metal containers, known as “green cubes,” with an average capacity of around 7 tU. These are then stored either at Bessines-sur-Gartempe, in the Haute-Vienne region of France, or on the Tricastin site itself.

This depleted uranium can either be used in the manufacture of Mox at the Melox plant in Marcoule (around 100 tons per year) or be re-enriched and used in the composition of conventional fuel assemblies. The latter solution is only conceivable in the event of a sharp rise in uranium prices. This was the case in 2008 when some 7,700 tU of depleted U 3 O 8 were shipped from Bessines to Malvesi for conversion before re-enrichment. By the end of 2008, 6146 tU had been reconverted into UF 6. However, these quantities remain marginal in accumulated stocks.

According to the Haut Comité pour la transparence et l'information sur la sécurité nucléaire (the tonnage of depleted uranium stored at various sites in France), at December 31, 2008 was as follows.

With the commissioning of the Georges-Besse II enrichment plant in 2012, the conditions for re-enrichment will be much more cost-effective, thanks to the ultracentrifugation process, which consumes much less energy than the gaseous diffusion process currently in use. All of these stocks could then be reused, for 30 to 50 years. These stocks are therefore an important strategic reserve.

Two types of fuel are manufactured for nuclear power plants: uranium oxide (UO 2) and mixed uranium and plutonium oxide (MOX).

Uranium oxide pellets are manufactured at the Areva subsidiary Franco-Belge de Fabrication du Combustible (FBFC) plant on the Romans nuclear site.

After enrichment, uranium hexafluoride is converted to uranium oxide (UO 2) using a dry process. The UF 6 is vaporized by heating in an oven and bringing it into contact with superheated steam. UF 6 is hydrolyzed to UO 2 F 2 between 250°C and 300°C. The UO 2 F 2 compound is then reduced by hydrogen at around 700 to 800°C, producing UO 2 in powder form. The yield is greater than 99.5%. The powder thus obtained is compacted in the presence of a lubricant (zinc stearate) to obtain cylindrical pellets 13.5 mm high and 8 mm in diameter. The pellets are then fired in a sintering furnace at 1,700°C, in a reducing atmosphere containing hydrogen, machined to adjust their shape and facilitate insertion into the sheaths, and finally tested.

The fuel pellets are placed in a tube around 4 meters long, containing a stack of around 360 pellets, forming what is known as a rod. The cladding surrounding the pellets is made of a zirconium alloy. The advantage of this material is that it can withstand high temperatures and a highly corrosive environment and does not absorb neutrons.

The alloy is supplied by producers in the form of a zirconium sponge. This is transformed by heating in an electric arc furnace into ingots, which are then forged, heat-treated, and quenched into cylindrical billets 20 cm in diameter. To be transformed into tubes, the bar undergoes hot extrusion, cold rolling, and annealing. The sheath tube is then precision-rolled to the required dimensions: 9.5 mm outside diameter and 0.57 mm thickness. Areva subsidiary Cezus is the world leader in the manufacture of zirconium alloy cladding for fuel assembly tubes.

The rods are then assembled in vertical arrays of around 250 parallel rods. Horizontal grids hold the rods together, while a gripping device at the top of the assembly facilitates handling and allows them to be hooked into the core. The same Romans plant manufactures the assemblies.

MOX fuel is a nuclear fuel made from around 7% plutonium and 93% depleted uranium. It is part of a uranium cycle loop, as it enables the reuse of plutonium produced in nuclear reactors and depleted uranium produced in enrichment plants. In its elemental state, it takes the form of pellets 0.8 cm in diameter and weighs around ten grams, similar to uranium oxide pellets. The raw material is a mixture of plutonium oxide, depleted uranium oxide, and chamotte powders obtained from scrap pellets, to which depleted uranium is added to obtain the precise content required by customers (between 3 and 12%). This powder is then fired in a furnace and shaped into pellets. These are then placed in zirconium alloy tubes, which are then assembled.

At the CEA/Cadarache center, the Atelier de Technologie du Plutonium (ATPu - Plutonium Technology Workshop) was commissioned in 1962 to manufacture Mox fuel for the Phénix and Superphénix fast neutron reactors. On the same site, the Laboratoire de Purification Chimique (LPC - Chemical Purification Laboratory) carries out quality controls on this production and handles scrap. In 1987, ATPu was authorized to manufacture mox for light water reactors, and in 1991 capacity was increased to 40 tons per year of mox, mainly for the German manufacturer Siemens. However, following an IPSN report on the site's extreme exposure to seismic risk, the DSIN (which became the ASN in 2006) called for its closure in 1995. Production was not finally halted until 2003. Dismantling began in 2008 and will be completed in 2012.

Today, the Melox plant on the Marcoule site manufactures this type of fuel, with a production capacity of around 200 tons per year. Authorized in 1990, the plant went into production in 1997, then increased its output from 100 t/year to 145 t/year in 2003, then to 195 t/year in 2007. Melox production fell consistently from 2016 to a low of 51 tons in 2021 after a change in the production of depleted uranium led to a high discard rate for depleted uranium grains. But production has been increasing since 2021 and reached 100 t/year again in 2025.

In 2011, 22 reactors were authorized to use MOX fuel, which accounted for just under 10% of nuclear power generation. As of 2024, all 32 of EDF's 900-megawatt reactors were authorized to use MOX fuel and EDF hopes to test 'MOX2' fuel -- MOX fuel that is recycled again after irradiation.

Fuel assemblies are irradiated in various civil or military reactors to produce electricity, or in research reactors to produce various isotopes for the industrial and medical sectors.

In 2020, France will have 18 nuclear power plants in operation, for a total of 56 nuclear power reactors. Each of these plants comprises two or four reactors, except the Gravelines plant (Nord), which has six. These reactors are pressurized water reactors. The 56-reactor fleet comprises 32 900 MWe reactors, 20 1,300 MWe reactors, and 4 1,450 MWe reactors. A lower-power fast reactor was also in operation (connected to the grid) at the Marcoule site until September 2009. A Generation III PWR reactor, known as the EPR for “European Pressurized Reactor,” is due to come on stream around 2023 alongside the two existing reactors at the Flamanville nuclear power plant (Manche).

Fuel assemblies remain in the core of each reactor for around three years. As the fuel burns, it is depleted in fissile elements and enriched in fission products, some of which act as poisons, slowing down fission reactions. After three years, it becomes necessary to replace the fuel that was spent with new fuel. To avoid shutting down the reactor for too long, the replacement operation is not carried out all at once, but every year in thirds.

The reactor is shut down, the primary circuit depressurized, and the vessel opened. Once the core has been extracted, the assemblies are stored in the reactor pool and then in the plant's storage pool, which is also used to store new fuel. They remain in the storage pool for at least a year to reduce radioactivity, particularly that of the extremely radioactive short-lived elements. These pools have a characteristic blue color due to flashes resulting from the emission of certain faster-than-light beta electrons into the water; this phenomenon is known as the Vavilov-Cherenkov effect.

After three years of irradiation, the fuel has been transformed into plutonium, fission products, and minor actinides. The composition of irradiated fuel extracted from a reactor core depends on the initial quantity of fissile material and the energy extracted from it.

When introduced into the core, uranium oxide fuel contains fissile uranium 235, which in pressurized water reactors averages 3.5%, the remainder being uranium 238. It is this uranium 235 that gives rise to the fission reaction and energy production. However, after three years of irradiation, not all of it is consumed: for one ton of fuel irradiated in a conventional PWR with an electrical output of 1 gigawatt, out of 33 kg of uranium 235 at the start, 10.3 kg remains after irradiation. This leaves around 1% fissile 235 isotopes, more than in natural uranium (0.7%), and it may be worth enriching this spent uranium for recycling.

The fertile uranium 238 isotope initially represents 96.7% of the total. During irradiation, uranium 238 is partly transformed by the capture of a thermal neutron into unstable uranium 239, which emits neptunium with a very short half-life, which in turn transforms into plutonium 239. This in turn can capture a thermal neutron as it undergoes fission under the action of fast neutrons, and so on, with several plutonium isotopes eventually coexisting. For one ton of fuel, 967 kg of uranium 238 are present at the start, 941 kg after irradiation, and 9.74 kg of plutonium (0.18 kg of Pu238, 5.67 kg of Pu239, 2.21 kg of Pu240, 1.19 kg of Pu241 and 0.49 kg of Pu242).

Fission products result from the fission of uranium 235 and plutonium formed during irradiation. Some of the fission products are stable when the reactor is unloaded, but the rest are highly radioactive. The initial ton of fuel contained 34.1 kg of fission products, 31.1 of which were short- and medium-lived, and 3 long-lived, including 0.81 kg of technetium 99, 0.17 kg of iodine 129, 1.31 kg of cesium 135 and 0.71 kg of zirconium 93.

Actinides are elements whose nuclei are heavier than uranium. They are produced when uranium captures one or more neutrons without fissioning. In addition to plutonium, less abundant minor actinides are produced, totaling around 800 grams per ton of fuel: 0.43 kg neptunium 237, 0.22 kg americium 241, and a tiny amount of curium.

After one year, the activity of the fuel has fallen to around two million curies per ton. Despite this high level of activity, the fuel can now be transported to the La Hague reprocessing plant, as its handling has been robotized. Of all transports of radioactive materials, the transport of spent fuel to the La Hague plant is the most dangerous. Nuclear medicine products, which account for 90% of all shipments, are not very radioactive. The same applies to products recycled after processing at La Hague. However, this is not the case for spent fuel, which is simply stored for a year in a deactivation pool.

Fuel assemblies are transported in steel canisters, each containing twelve 500 kg assemblies, under dry conditions. These containers are highly resistant and form a containment barrier thanks to their thick walls, which prevent the spread of radioactive materials and enable the fuel element to be transported by road or rail.

These casks destined for La Hague are Class B packages, according to the classification for the transport of nuclear materials. As such, they must be able to withstand impacts at 50 km/h (9 m drop) on a non-deformable surface, withstand a fall from a height of one meter, withstand a fire at 800°C for 30 minutes, and resist immersion up to 200 m for the most radioactive packages.

Almost all irradiated fuel for reprocessing is transported by rail to the Valognes rail terminal, then by road to the La Hague plant. On arrival, the flask containing the irradiated fuel elements is unloaded. The fuel elements are deposited in one of the deactivation pools, where they will wait for several more years before being reprocessed.

The La Hague reprocessing plant receives fuel assemblies from various nuclear reactors and transforms them using a variety of processes to isolate the materials that can be reused in the fuel, such as uranium or plutonium, from materials containing fission products emitting beta and gamma rays and minor actinides (neptunium, americium, and curium), which are treated as waste and undergo specific conditioning before final storage. The aqueous treatment process used is known as PUREX (Plutonium Uranium Refining by Extraction).

On arrival at the plant, the assemblies are removed from their steel containers, underwater and with the aid of a robot, given their high level of radioactivity. They are then stored in baskets at the bottom of one of the plant's five pools. Each pool is at least 9 m deep, to limit radioactivity given that each assembly is 4.50 m long. The baskets are made of boron-coated steel to avoid any risk of criticality. The assemblies will remain there for three to five years, to reduce radioactivity sufficiently for subsequent stages.

After this period, the assemblies are dismantled. The end fittings are first separated, then a large guillotine shears the rod bundles into 35 mm-long sections. The sheath fragments and shells with their contents fall into a bath of boiling nitric acid. The pieces of metal structure (cladding, shells), insoluble in the acid, are evacuated by a bucket wheel to a conditioning unit, to be treated as “type B” waste.

The nitric acid solution, freed of insoluble products and containing recyclable products, is then sent to a chemical separation plant. In a set of mixer settlers and pulsed columns, a solvent (tributylphosphate) carries away the heavy elements (uranium and plutonium) without extracting the fission products. All these actions are automated, given the high level of radioactivity.

The uranium is purified by separation in a series of mixer-settlers in two successive cycles (extraction and re-extraction). The uranium solutions are then concentrated by evaporation into liquid form, to obtain uranyl nitrate, which can then be stored for processing in a specialized plant at the Tricastin nuclear site.

The plutonium is converted by calcination in a furnace into plutonium dioxide powder, which is then packaged in stainless steel cans weighing around 3 kg each, in batches of five. The French plutonium is then shipped to the Melox fuel fabrication plant at Marcoule.

The first processing unit (UP 2) went into industrial operation in 1966. A pilot workshop for fast neutron fuel processing operated from 1969 to 1979, and has now been dismantled. To meet growing processing needs, Cogema was authorized to build a new processing plant (UP 3 -A), with an annual capacity of around 800 tons of light-water spent fuel, which increased in 2003 to 1,000 tons per year, with a limit of 1,700 tons per year for all facilities. This plant went into service in 1990. A second plant with the same purpose and capacity (UP 2 -800) came on stream in 1994. The first (UP 2 -400) was shut down in 2003. The following quantities of fuel have been processed since 1966.

Areva NC's TU 5 plant at the Tricastin nuclear site, authorized by decree on July 7, 1992, and commissioned in 1996, converts uranyl nitrate from irradiated fuel processed at Areva's La Hague plant into uranium tetrafluoride (UF 4) or double salt (UF 4 NH 4 F), then oxidizes to uranium sesquioxide (U 3 O 8). This takes the form of a grey-black powder with a density of around 1.75, stable up to 1,300°C, non-combustible, non-corrosive and insoluble. It is packaged in 220-liter blue metal containers, with an average capacity of around 250 kg of uranium.

Reprocessed uranium contains around 1% uranium 235, and its isotopic composition is more complex, with the presence of uranium 234 in particular.

The Malvési site in the Aude region of France carried out UF 4 fluorination campaigns on reprocessed uranium from the Marcoule site between 1960 and 1983.

In the public perception, there has always been confusion between reprocessing and recycling on the one hand, and between “recyclable” and “actually recycled” on the other. According to some associations, this confusion is skillfully maintained by the main recycling operator. In Areva's 2009 reference report, for example, we read: “Recycling (or closed cycle) takes into account the fact that spent fuel contains a significant quantity of reusable material capable of producing a large amount of energy. 96% of the material is recyclable (95% uranium and 1% plutonium). On leaving the reactor, the spent fuel is processed to separate the recoverable materials, uranium and plutonium, from the final waste (4%). The recovered uranium and plutonium are recycled into new fuel in the form of MOX (a mixture of plutonium and depleted uranium) and enriched reprocessed uranium.” While all the statements taken separately are true (96% of the material is recyclable, and uranium and plutonium are recycled), the conclusion the user might draw on first reading is false: 96% of the material is not recycled, or even reprocessed. It had to wait for the Parliamentary Office for the Evaluation of Scientific and Technological Choices to hear from EDF, ASN, IRSN, CEA, and Areva officials on this subject, and above all for the publication in July 2010 of the opinion of the French High Committee for Transparency and Information on Nuclear Safety (HCTISN) on the transparency of the management of nuclear materials and waste produced at the various stages of the fuel cycle, to find out the true flows of materials and waste, and therefore the rates of reprocessing and recycling.

In average annual flows over the years 2007, 2008, and 2009, 8,100 tons of natural uranium were enriched to produce 1,033 tons of enriched uranium, which was used to manufacture fuel for France's 59 reactors (58 today), and 7,330 tons of depleted uranium. Of these 1,033 tons of new fuel, 850 tons were reprocessed after 3 years in the reactor. Areva extracted 8.5 tons of plutonium (used to manufacture Mox fuel) and 800 tons of reprocessed uranium. The remainder is final waste.

Of the 800 tons of reprocessed uranium, 300 tons are sent to Tomsk in Russia for re-enrichment, while the remaining 500 tons are added to the “strategic stock” every year. After processing, Russia returns 37 tons of enriched reprocessed uranium (ERU) and keeps the remaining 273 tons of depleted reprocessed uranium.

The quantity of recycled material is thus 37 (ERU) + 8.5 (Pu) = 45.5 tons. As the annual tonnage of spent fuel discharged is 1170, the recycling rate is therefore 3.9% (45.5/1170), which is a long way from the 96% that can be recycled.

If we add the 91.5 tons of depleted uranium reused to manufacture Mox, we obtain 137 tons of uranium saved. The rate of uranium saved is therefore 11.7% (137/1170). According to the HCTISN, this rate should rise from 12% to 17% by 2010.

The French R&D program on Multirecycling in PWRs (MRREP), organized by CEA, EDF, Framatome, and Orano as part of the French nuclear industry's Strategic Contract 2019-2022, involves studying the benefits of recycling plutonium from the processing of spent MOX assemblies in PWRs; several “MOX 2” fuel concepts are envisaged. The aim is to increase the proportion of recycled materials in French reactors from 20% to 40% and to reduce stocks of materials and waste from spent fuel. This program is a transitional cycle preparing the closure of the cycle with the deployment of Fast-neutron reactor (FBNRs).

According to the IAEA definition, radioactive waste is “any material for which no use is foreseen, and which contains radionuclides in concentrations exceeding the values that the competent authorities consider acceptable in materials suitable for uncontrolled use.” In France, radioactive waste is radioactive material that cannot be reused or reprocessed (under current technical and economic conditions).

The electronuclear program is not the only one to produce radioactive waste. In terms of volume, it generates just under two-thirds (62%), but it accounts for most of the activity. The remainder comes from research services (17%), the national defense sector (17%), the non-electronuclear industry (3.5%), and the medical sector (1%).

The French national radioactive waste management agency (Andra) designs and operates storage facilities for each category of radioactive waste. This involves waste collection, conditioning, storage, and monitoring. Since the law of June 28, 2006, Andra has also been responsible for long-term storage. The management of radioactive waste and materials is the subject of a national plan reviewed every three years: the National Radioactive Waste and Materials Management Plan (PNGMDR). This plan defines the French classification of radioactive waste, based on two key parameters for defining the appropriate management method: the activity level of the radioactive elements contained, and their half-life (referred to as short-lived or long-lived, with a cut-off point of 30 years).

The vast majority of nuclear waste in France is low- to medium-level short-lived waste (792,625 m on December 31, 2007, or 69%). This represents 0.0276% of total radioactivity. These are mainly objects and tools used in the operation of nuclear facilities that have been contaminated to a greater or lesser extent by the radioelements with which they have come into contact (protective clothing, gloves, etc.), and those used in the operation of nuclear facilities (treatment of liquid effluent or filtration of gaseous effluent). Since 1992, they have been stored above ground, in the Aube region, at the Centre de stockage des déchets de faible et moyenne activité (CSFMA, or Low- and medium-level waste storage facility), which took over from the Manche storage centre (CSM), closed in 1994.

The volume of very low-level waste (VLLW) in storage on December 31, 2007, was 231,688 m, or 20.1% of the total, representing an insignificant level of radioactivity. Since August 2003, this waste has been stored at the Morvilliers facility in the Aube region, near the CSFMA plant.

MA-VL waste represented a volume of 41,757 m, i.e. 3.6% of the total volume and 4.98% of total radioactivity. FA-VL waste represented a volume of 82,536 m, i.e. 7.2% of total volume and 0.0087% of total radioactivity.

High-level waste (HLW) is by far the biggest problem facing the nuclear industry. It is made up of fission products such as cesium, strontium, and iodine, which have a relatively short lifespan, as well as minor actinides (produced in small quantities) (isotopes of neptunium, americium, and curium), whose lifespan can be counted in thousands of years. On December 31, 2007, the accumulated volume was 2,293 m. This is equivalent to a cube just over 13 meters on a side, or the volume of an Olympic-size swimming pool. So, even if the future storage center has to be vast in size, as there have to be spaces between the containers of waste that generate heat due to its high radioactivity, the overall footprint will remain limited. The waste, consisting of vitrified boulders enclosed in steel containers, will be stored in a deep repository, the site and conditions of which have yet to be specified. Since the main enemy is water, which is liable to attack the steel of the containers and then the glass, a geological layer with very low permeability will be chosen. Studies are being carried out by Andra, which operates the Meuse/Haute-Marne underground research laboratory. The law of June 28, 2006 calls for the project to be submitted to Parliament in 2015 and, subject to its approval, for the repository to be opened in 2025.

To ensure the overall coherence of operations carried out within the French fuel cycle, a formalized approach to studying the functioning of this cycle, embodied in a file known as the “cycle file,” was put in place at the end of the 1990s. This dossier is regularly updated in a process overseen by EDF and involving all cycle operators (EDF, Areva, Andra, etc.). The penultimate version, entitled “Cycle 2000,” was reviewed in 2002. The latest update of this dossier, entitled “Impact Cycle 2007,” was communicated by EDF to the ASN and all stakeholders on November 28, 2008. The IRSN issued its opinion on June 30, 2010, and the ASN on May 9, 2011.

The dossier presents a material balance based on four scenarios which, for a single annual production level of 430 TWh, correspond to two envelope fuel processing tonnages (850 tML then 1050 tML from 2008) and may or may not involve the application of forward-looking management measures.

ASN notes that this value of 430 TWh corresponds to a peak in nuclear power generation, which was reached in 2004. Since then, this level has fallen steadily. It, therefore, requests that a new study be produced within a year, taking into account the greater variability of nuclear power generation (400 ± 40 TWh), and in particular a situation of lower and longer-lasting consumption.

IRSN also considers that the overall capacity available in spent fuel storage pools at EDF reactors and AREVA's La Hague facility is low, and could prove insufficient by 2017-2019.

ASN considers that it is essential to learn the lessons from the Fukushima nuclear accident, and in particular that special attention must be paid to spent fuel storage pools. It, therefore, asks EDF to submit a study within a year “specifying the criteria likely to support or modify its strategy for spent fuel management and storage, and assessing the current availability of ‘underwater’ spent fuel storage.”

The tables below show the material balance according to one of the four scenarios of the 2007 cycle. They have been drawn up based on the following assumptions:

Nuit debout is a French social movement that began on 31 March 2016, arising out of protests against proposed labor reforms known as the El Khomri law or Loi travail. The movement was organized around a broad aim of "overthrowing the El Khomri bill and the world it represents". It has been compared to the Occupy movement in the United States and to Spain's anti-austerity 15-M or Indignados movement.

The movement began at the Place de la République in Paris, where protestors held nightly assemblies following the 31 March protest. The protests spread to dozens of other cities and towns in France as well as to neighbouring countries in Europe and to countries further afield. Turnout at these protests dwindled after the first weeks; activists maintained the movement's presence on the Internet.

Nuit debout has been translated into English as "up all night", "standing night", and "rise up at night", among other variants.

In 2011, in the wake of the Great Recession, several developed countries saw the rise of civil disobedience movements protesting against issues such as inequality and corporate greed. In Spain, the 15-M or Indignados movement saw large-scale demonstrations and occupations of public squares; the movement led eventually to the rise of the anti-austerity political party Podemos. The United States saw the rise of Occupy Wall Street, in which protestors occupied Zuccotti Park in Lower Manhattan. In the wider Occupy movement, many major cities around the world saw similar protests. These movements inspired some protests in France at the time, such as an indignados -style protest at La Défense in November 2011. However, these protests had a limited impact in the country before 2016. The French commentator Pierre Haski explains:

The delayed reaction of the French youth has a lot to do with President François Hollande. In 2011 and 2012, when Occupy was the rallying cry of many cities, giving rise to political movements such as Podemos in Spain, the French were looking forward to electing a Socialist president instead of the highly unpopular Nicolas Sarkozy. Why occupy when the polls will do the job?

Over time, many in France became disappointed with Hollande's government, believing that it had failed to deliver on its promises. In particular, his government failed to reduce chronically high unemployment rates in the country: in early 2016 the rate was at 10.6 percent, up from 9 percent when Hollande took office, while the youth unemployment rate was above 25 percent. By early 2016, opinion polls said that four in five voters were opposed to Hollande running for re-election in 2017.

In an effort to reduce the unemployment rate, Hollande's government had embarked on a program of labor market liberalization. As part of this program, the government set out proposals, named after the Labor Minister Myriam El Khomri, designed to make France's labor market more flexible. If adopted, the El Khomri law would make sweeping changes to the country's labor code, with the effect of making it easier for companies to lay off workers, and loosening restrictions on working hours, including reducing overtime payments for hours worked beyond France's statutory 35-hour workweek. The changes would also reduce severance payments that workers are entitled to if their company has made them redundant.

The proposals were met with significant public resistance. The country's youth organizations and unions organized a series of large-scale street protests in opposition to the reforms, the first of which was held on 9 March 2016. The largest of these protests, on 31 March attracted 390,000 participants nationwide, according to the French authorities (unions put the figure at 1.2 million). According to the Belgian sociologist Geoffrey Pleyers, these demonstrations gained traction not just because of the unpopularity of the proposed changes to the labor code, but because of widespread opposition to the government's policies generally:

What distinguishes social movements from mere protests is that they have a larger purpose, not one specific demand. From the first meetings of university and high school students on 9 March the El Khomri law served as an opportunity to express general indignation. In protest leaflets, students called for resistance "against government policy" rather than just this one bill. During marches, protesters expressed their disappointment with the political left in general and the ruling Socialist Party in particular.

The Nuit debout movement has its origins at a meeting held in Paris on 23 February 2016 which was organized by François Ruffin, the founder of the left-wing journal Fakir and the director of the documentary film Merci patron!. Ruffin stated that the aim of the meeting was to bring together a number of active protest groups, including people protesting against a proposed airport at Notre-Dame-des-Landes, factory workers protesting against the Goodyear tire company, and teachers protesting against education reforms. A retired delivery driver who attended the meeting was quoted as saying, "There were about 300 or 400 of us at a public meeting in February and we were wondering how can we really scare the government?. We had an idea: at the next big street protest, we simply wouldn't go home." Those attending the meeting agreed that they would occupy Paris's Place de la République on 31 March 2016, following organized street protests that were scheduled to take place on that day against the El Khomri law.

The organizers of the occupation refused to set out a specific list of political demands in advance, although they did denounce the government's proposed reforms as regressive, and they called for the construction of a new political project that would be "ambitious, progressive, and emancipatory". The economist Frédéric Lordon was invited to speak at the Place de la République on the evening of 31 March. He delivered a speech in which he highlighted the goal of uniting disparate protest movements.

Following the initial night of occupation at the Place de la République, protesters continued to gather over the following days, defying a ban on mass demonstrations under the ongoing state of emergency declared by the government in the wake of the November 2015 Paris attacks. Participants began gathering every night at 6 p.m. to conduct a popular assembly (assemblée générale), individuals taking turns to speak for two minutes at a time. A system of hand gestures was established, with crowd members waving their fingers above their heads to indicate agreement, and crossing their wrists to indicate disagreement.

On the morning of Monday 11 April, the twelfth day of the protests, police evacuated the square, removing temporary structures that protestors had built, though protestors were given permission to return the same evening. The occupation of the square had earlier been criticized by politicians from France's two main parties. Valérie Pécresse, the Republican President of the Île-de-France region, declared that the square should either be evacuated, or that the protestors should police the square themselves. Anne Hidalgo, the Socialist Mayor of Paris, expressed her sympathy for the movement but warned the protestors against occupying the square during the daytime, saying that the square was a public space and that it should be available for the use of all members of the public.

On the evening of 14 April, President François Hollande participated in a televised interview, which was projected live on a giant screen in the Place de la République, in which he vowed to press ahead with the labor reforms. Following the interview, a group of protesters (300, according to the police) left the square in the direction of the Élysée Palace, the president's official residence. The protestors were diverted by the police and eventually dispersed. Several banks, commercial premises, and vehicles were vandalized, and there were some violent clashes between protestors and security forces. In the days following these events, the movement failed to adopt a collective position distancing itself from these actions. A substantial majority of participants at the Place de la République, however, declared themselves opposed to violent protest.

Over the first week the protests spread to over 30 cities across France. The academic David Graeber, a leading figure in the Occupy Wall Street protests of 2011, said that the protests had spread much faster than those of 2011. Explaining the spread of the protests, Graeber was quoted as saying, "There seems to be this sense of betrayal. [It's] the fact that it is an ostensibly left-wing government that did the state of emergency, that did the labor law, that's done a whole series of different things. These [the protestors] are the people that voted for them… [They] assumed that such a government would somehow speak for their concerns. They're just really pissed off."

During the first two weeks, assemblies took place mostly in city center locations, and some critics accused the movement of being predominantly white, bourgeois, and unrepresentative of the wider population. In response to this concern, participants in Paris argued in favor of expanding the movement into the banlieues. Several Nuit debout events were held in Paris suburbs such as Saint-Denis and Saint-Ouen in mid-April, however these failed to attract local participants in large numbers. An event organized in the northern parts of Marseille on 23 April likewise failed to greatly engage the local population. Activists suggested that the movement's message, such as its opposition to changes to the labor code, had little traction in the area because many residents there were already unemployed, and because such areas had for decades been marginalized and ignored by wider society.

The movement quickly spread to neighbouring countries in Europe. Within the first ten days, protests were held in cities including Brussels, Berlin, Lisbon, and Madrid. On 22 April 2016, around 200 people gathered in Montreal, Quebec, Canada to conduct a general assembly. Participants discussed issues surrounding the environment, feminism, and indigenous people's rights, as well as economic issues including the fight for a $15 minimum wage. An event was organized in Glasgow, Scotland on 2 May; its organizers suggested that trade unions should get involved, stating that the movement "presents a great opportunity for unions to adapt to the twenty-first century".

Nuit debout's organizers called for a global day of protests, under the name Global debout, to take place on Sunday, 15 May, a date chosen to coincide with the fifth anniversary of the Spanish Indignados movement. Events were scheduled to take place in 266 locations in France, and in 130 cities outside France, across 28 countries. Turnout on the day was low: in Brussels around 150 people participated; in Berlin the number was around 100; in Paris's Place de la République around 1,500 people attended.

While the initial street protests arose out of opposition to the El Khomri labor reforms, the Nuit debout movement itself coalesced from the beginning around a much broader set of themes. Among recurring themes of discussion are: calls for a universal basic income ; opposition to labor arrangements which place workers in competition with one another, as enshrined in trade treaties such as the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership ; amnesty for undocumented migrants and solidarity with refugees; and feminist issues including the gender pay gap and the safety of sex workers.

Some within the movement have called for a general strike along the lines of previous major strikes in France, in 1936 and in May 1968, with the aim of forcing the withdrawal of the El Khomri law. Frédéric Lordon has argued that the movement should seek to rewrite the French constitution, abolishing private ownership of the means of production as enshrined in the existing constitution, and granting ownership instead to those who derive use value from capital. A discussion group was set up in the Place de la République on the question of what should be included in such a rewritten constitution; some suggested that government should be selected by sortition, or that elected officials should be subject to recall by voters.

As with the French Revolution, the movement rewrote the calendar: all dates following the 31 March protest were renamed as a continuation of the month of March. 7 April, for example, is 38 mars, or 38 March.

Protestors in the movement have declared themselves wary of mainstream media coverage, preferring to communicate via alternative channels. In Paris's Place de la République, activists set up their own radio and TV stations, broadcasting over the Internet. The initial set-up for Radio debout involved a table, four chairs, three microphones, a mixing desk, two computers, and a 4G USB stick. It was set up by individuals with a background working for France's national radio stations, and streamed on the site Mixlr.

TV debout, meanwhile, was set up with the intention of broadcasting the general assemblies taking places in the square, interspersed with interviews and analysis. The interviews were initially conducted on a white sofa with a cardboard sign suspended in the background with the letters of "TV debout" cut out. The channel was streamed over YouTube.

Other channels of communication established by the movement include a newspaper titled 20 mille luttes, and various Facebook and Twitter accounts. In addition, several people began live-streaming events over the smartphone app Periscope. The most notable of these is Rémy Buisine, a 25-year-old online community manager whose stream attracted as many as 80,000 viewers simultaneously on the evening of 3 April. Buisine presents himself as independent of the movement, and as a neutral observer of events.

The movement received broad public support, with polls showing that a majority of the French public held a favourable view towards it. A survey conducted by the polling agency Odoxa on behalf of the television news channel i-Télé, and published on 9 April 2016, found that 71% of respondents had heard of the movement, and that 60% supported it. An Ifop poll of 18–25-year-olds, published by Metronews on 13 April indicated that 61% of this age group supported the movement, and that 47% declared themselves willing to participate in it. A later Odoxa poll, published on 15 May, found that the movement had lost some support among the public, with 49% of respondents saying they supported the movement.

The French media analysis organization Acrimed likewise criticized French media coverage of the movement, suggesting that many journalists were only interested in covering the movement in order to discredit it. In particular, the organization pointed to media coverage of an incident involving the philosopher Alain Finkielkraut, who was videoed being heckled by protesters at the Place de la République. Acrimed criticized journalists for reporting the incident without verifying the facts, and argued that coverage of the incident was disproportionate and that the media had failed to provide a similar level of information about the movement itself: about the movement's demands, or about its existence outside Paris.

Laurent Joffrin, in an editorial for the left-leaning newspaper Libération written shortly after the Finkielkraut incident, defended his own paper's coverage of the movement, pointing out that its reporters had repeatedly been sent to document the debates taking place at the popular assemblies in Paris. He suggested that Nuit debout had benefited from a degree of media goodwill out of proportion to the size of the movement.

During its first month, the movement received support from politicians on the left of the political spectrum, while being condemned by parties on the right. The governing left-of-center Socialist Party broadly called for the movement to be tolerated. Emmanuel Macron is a supporter of the law. He became the most vocal proponent of the economic overhaul of the country.

On 11 April, Socialist Prime Minister Manuel Valls met with the country's student leaders, offering concessions on the proposed labor reforms in an effort to defuse the protests, saying, "The government is listening. It understands the youths' worries." The concessions included between €400 million and €500 million in aid for job seekers and other state support. In a televised interview broadcast on 14 April 2016, President François Hollande vowed to press ahead with the proposed labor reforms. During the interview, Hollande said of the movement, "I find it legitimate that the youth - in relation to the world as it is, in relation to politics as they are - want to express themselves and want to have their say."

On 10 May, facing opposition to the El Khomri law from a group of his own MPs, Prime Minister Valls announced that the government planned to force the bill through parliament without a vote, using Article 49.3 of the French Constitution. The measure forces a vote of confidence in the government itself, meaning that in order to prevent the bill from being passed the Socialist Party's rebels would have to vote in favour of toppling their own government. Hundreds of Nuit debout participants gathered outside France's National Assembly to protest the move. Similar protests occurred in other cities in France. Nuit debout's organizers called the move "an insult to the people of this country", while a number of unions called for further days of strike action. The government survived the confidence vote on 12 May, meaning that the labor bill would be passed directly to the Senate, France's upper house, for debate.

In the NUTS (Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics) codes of France (FR), the three levels are:

Below the NUTS levels, the LAU (Local Administrative Units) are:

The LAU codes of France can be downloaded here:

Up until 2016, the first level NUTS regions of France consisted of Ile de France, Bassin Parisien, Nord-Pas-de-Calais, Est, Ouest, Sud-Ouest, Centre-Est, Méditerranée and the Départements d'outre-mer. The Départements d'outre-mer consisted of all the overseas departments of France, while the remaining eight statistical regions were made up of the 22 regions of France.

A law passed in 2014 by the French parliament reduced the number of metropolitan regions in the country from 22 to 13. The decrease took effect from 1 January 2016. As a result, the first level NUTS statistical regions were altered to reflect the changes. The number of first level regions was increased to 14 so that each of the 13 metropolitan regions of France became a separate first level statistical region.

Although the Départements d'outre-mer, as integrated departments of France, have always been a part of the European Union and its predecessors, they were only officially included as a permanent NUTS statistical area of France in 1989. When they did appear in previous statistics the first and second level NUTS areas were one and the same; from 1989, Guadeloupe, Martinique, French Guiana and La Réunion were designated as separate level 2 regions.

The Observatoire National de la Pauvreté et de l'Exclusion Sociale (ONPES) is an agency of the French government. It aims at assessing poverty and exclusion in France.

The Observatoire National de la Pauvreté et de l'Exclusion Sociale was created in 1998. It comprises 22 members, with oversight by a president every three years. The current president is Agnès de Fleurieu. Members are representatives of the Conseil National des Politiques de Lutte contre l’Exclusion (CNLE), the Direction de la Recherche, des Etudes, de l’Evaluation et des Statistiques (DREES), the Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques (INSEE), the Centre d’Analyse Stratégique (CAS), the Direction de l’Animation de la Recherche et des Etudes Statistiques (DARES), the Direction Générale du Trésor et de la Politique Economique (DGTPE), the Caisse nationale des Allocations Familiales (CAF), as well as seven researchers or academics, and seven more qualified people. They produce an annual report for the Prime Minister.

Occitan is a community currency started in 2010 in Pézenas, Languedoc-Roussillon, France. It is named after the Occitan language.

The Occitan program is intended to promote local commerce. The Occitan operates with a fixed exchange rate: 1 Occitan = € 1. There is a fixed commission of 4% for members (shops) and 6% for individuals.

An initiative of a local shopkeeper organization, ACA, the Occitan is intended to stimulate of local economy.

Bills of 1, 2, 5, and 10 Occitans are issued. They feature an Occitan cross and the portrait of Molière who started his career in Pézenas.

To maintain an individual bill's validity, a stamp corresponding to 2% of the banknote value must be paid every six months. This system, called demurrage, is a form of currency circulation tax and was invented by Silvio Gesell.

Occitan (English: / ˈ ɒ k s ɪ t ən, - t æ n, - t ɑː n / ; Occitan pronunciation: [ utsiˈta, uksiˈta ]), also known by its native speakers as lenga d'òc (Occitan: [ ˈleŋɡɒ ˈðɔ(k) ] ; French : langue d'oc), sometimes also referred to as Provençal, is a Romance language spoken in southern France, Monaco, Italy's Occitan Valleys and the Val d'Aran in northeast Spain; collectively, these regions are sometimes referred to as Occitania. It is also spoken in the southern Italian province of Cosenza (mostly in Guardia Piemontese), where it is referred to as Gardiol, which is considered a separate Occitanic language. The linguistic distance between Catalan and some Occitan dialects (such as the Gascon language) is similar to the distance between different Occitan dialects, and Catalan was considered a dialect of Occitan until the end of the 19th century and still today remains its closest relative. Occitan has a particularly rich lexicon. Lo Panoccinari, considered the most comprehensive dictionary ever published in this language, records over 250,000 unique words (more than 310,000 including dialectal variations).

Occitan is an official language of Catalonia, including the Val d'Aran, where a subdialect of Gascon known as Aranese is spoken. Since September 2010, the Parliament of Catalonia has considered Aranese Occitan to be the officially preferred language for use in the Val d'Aran.

Across history, the terms Limousin (Lemosin), Languedocien (Lengadocian), Gascon, in addition to Provençal (Provençal, Provençau or Prouvençau) later have been used as synonyms for the whole of Occitan; nowadays, the term "Provençal" is understood mainly as the Occitan dialect spoken in Provence, in southeast France.

Unlike other Romance languages such as French or Spanish, Occitan does not have a single written standard form, nor does it have official status in France, home to most of its speakers. Instead, there are competing norms for writing Occitan, some of which attempt to be pan-dialectal, whereas others are based on a particular dialect. These efforts are hindered by the rapidly declining use of Occitan as a spoken language in much of southern France, as well as by the significant differences in phonology and vocabulary among different Occitan dialects.

According to the UNESCO Red Book of Endangered Languages, four of the six major dialects of Occitan (Provençal, Auvergnat, Limousin and Languedocien) are considered severely endangered, whereas the remaining two (Gascon and Vivaro-Alpine) are considered definitely endangered.

The name Occitan comes from the term lenga d'òc ("language of òc "), òc being the Occitan word for yes. While the term would have been in use orally for some time after the decline of Latin, as far as historical records show, the Italian medieval poet Dante was the first to have recorded the term lingua d'oc in writing. In his De vulgari eloquentia, he wrote in Latin, "nam alii oc, alii si, alii vero dicunt oil" ("for some say òc, others sì, yet others say oïl "), thereby highlighting three major Romance literary languages that were well known in Italy, based on each language's word for "yes", the òc language (Occitan), the oïl language (French), and the sì language (Italian).

The word òc came from Vulgar Latin hoc ("this"), while oïl originated from Latin hoc illud ("this [is] it"). Old Catalan and now the Catalan of Northern Catalonia also have hoc (òc). Other Romance languages derive their word for "yes" from the Latin sic, "thus [it is], [it was done], etc.", such as Spanish sí, Eastern Lombard sé, Italian sì, or Portuguese sim. In modern Catalan, as in modern Spanish, sí is usually used as a response, although the language retains the word oi, akin to òc, which is sometimes used at the end of yes–no questions and also in higher register as a positive response. French uses si to answer "yes" in response to questions that are asked in the negative sense: for example, "Vous n'avez pas de frères?" "Si, j'en ai sept." ("You don't have any brothers, do you?" "Yes I do, I have seven.").

The name "Occitan" was attested around 1300 as occitanus, a crossing of oc and aquitanus (Aquitanian).

For many centuries, the Occitan dialects (together with Catalan) were referred to as Limousin or Provençal, after the names of two regions lying within the modern Occitan-speaking area. After Frédéric Mistral 's Félibrige movement in the 19th century, Provençal achieved the greatest literary recognition and so became the most popular term for Occitan.

According to Joseph Anglade, a philologist and specialist of medieval literature who helped impose the then- archaic term Occitan as the standard name, the word Lemosin was first used to designate the language at the beginning of the 13th century by Catalan troubadour Raimon Vidal de Bezaudun in his Razós de trobar :

La parladura Francesca val mais et [es] plus avinenz a far romanz e pasturellas; mas cella de Lemozin val mais per far vers et cansons et serventés; et per totas las terras de nostre lengage son de major autoritat li cantar de la lenga Lemosina que de negun'autra parladura, per qu'ieu vos en parlarai primeramen.

The French language is worthier and better suited for romances and pastourelles ; but [the language] from Limousin is of greater value for writing poems and cançons and sirventés ; and across the whole of the lands where our tongue is spoken, the literature in the Limousin language has more authority than any other dialect, wherefore I shall use this name in priority.

The term Provençal, though implying a reference to the region of Provence, historically was used for Occitan as a whole, for "in the eleventh, the twelfth, and sometimes also the thirteenth centuries, one would understand under the name of Provence the whole territory of the old Provincia romana Gallia Narbonensis and even Aquitaine ". The term first came into fashion in Italy.

Currently, linguists use the terms Provençal and Limousin strictly to refer to specific varieties within Occitan, using Occitan for the language as a whole. Many non-specialists, however, continue to refer to the language as Provençal.

One of the oldest written fragments of the language found dates back to 960, shown here in italics mixed with non-italicized Latin:

De ista hora in antea non decebrà Ermengaus filius Eldiarda Froterio episcopo filio Girberga ne Raimundo filio Bernardo vicecomite de castello de Cornone... no·l li tolrà ni no·l li devedarà ni no l'en decebrà... nec societatem non aurà, si per castellum recuperare non o fa, et si recuperare potuerit in potestate Froterio et Raimundo lo tornarà, per ipsas horas quæ Froterius et Raimundus l'en comonrà.

Carolingian litanies (c. 780), though the leader sang in Latin, were answered to in Old Occitan by the people (Ora pro nos ; Tu lo juva).

Other famous pieces include the Boecis, a 258-line-long poem written entirely in the Limousin dialect of Occitan between the year 1000 and 1030 and inspired by Boethius 's The Consolation of Philosophy ; the Waldensian La nobla leyczon (dated 1100), Cançó de Santa Fe (c. 1054 –1076), the Romance of Flamenca (13th century), the Song of the Albigensian Crusade (1213–1219?), Daurel e Betó (12th or 13th century), Las, qu'i non-sun sparvir, astur (11th century) and Tomida femina (9th or 10th century).

Occitan was the vehicle for the influential poetry of the medieval troubadours (trobadors) and trobairitz : At that time, the language was understood and celebrated throughout most of educated Europe. It was the maternal language of the English queen Eleanor of Aquitaine and kings Richard I (who wrote troubadour poetry) and John.

With the gradual imposition of French royal power over its territory, Occitan declined in status from the 14th century on. The Ordinance of Villers-Cotterêts (1539) decreed that the langue d'oïl (French – though at the time referring to the Francien language and not the larger collection of dialects grouped under the name langues d'oïl) should be used for all French administration. Occitan's greatest decline occurred during the French Revolution, in which diversity of language was considered a threat.

In 1903, the four Gospels ("Lis Evangèli", i.e. Matthew, Mark, Luke and John) were translated into Provençal as spoken in Cannes and Grasse. The translation was given the official Roman Catholic Imprimatur by vicar general A. Estellon.

The literary renaissance of the late 19th century (in which the 1904 Nobel Prize in Literature winner, Frédéric Mistral, among others, was involved) was attenuated by World War I, when (in addition to the disruption caused by any major war) many Occitan speakers spent extended periods of time alongside French-speaking comrades.

Because the geographical territory in which Occitan is spoken is surrounded by regions in which other Romance languages are used, external influences may have influenced its origin and development. Many factors favored its development as its own language.

Catalan in Spain's northern and central Mediterranean coastal regions and the Balearic Islands is closely related to Occitan, sharing many linguistic features and a common origin (see Occitano-Romance languages). The language was one of the first to gain prestige as a medium for literature among Romance languages in the Middle Ages. Indeed, in the 12th and 13th centuries, Catalan troubadours such as Guerau de Cabrera, Guilhem de Bergadan, Guilhem de Cabestany, Huguet de Mataplana, Raimon Vidal de Besalú, Cerverí de Girona, Formit de Perpinhan, and Jofre de Foixà wrote in Occitan.

At the end of the 11th century, the Franks started to penetrate the Iberian Peninsula through the Ways of St. James via Somport and Roncesvalles, settling in various locations in the Kingdoms of Navarre and Aragon enticed by the privileges granted them by the Navarrese kings. They settled in large groups, forming ethnic boroughs where Occitan was used for everyday life, in Pamplona, Sangüesa, and Estella-Lizarra, among others. These boroughs in Navarre may have been close-knit communities that tended not to assimilate with the predominantly Basque -speaking general population. Their language became the status language chosen by the Navarrese kings, nobility, and upper classes for official and trade purposes in the period stretching from the early 13th century to the late 14th century.

Written administrative records were in a koiné based on the Languedocien dialect from Toulouse with fairly archaic linguistic features. Evidence survives of a written account in Occitan from Pamplona centered on the burning of borough San Nicolas from 1258, while the History of the War of Navarre by Guilhem Anelier (1276), albeit written in Pamplona, shows a linguistic variant from Toulouse.

Things turned out slightly otherwise in Aragon, where the sociolinguistic situation was different, with a clearer Basque-Romance bilingual situation (cf. Basques from the Val d'Aran cited c. 1000), but a receding Basque language (Basque banned in the marketplace of Huesca, 1349). While the language was chosen as a medium of prestige in records and official statements along with Latin in the early 13th century, Occitan faced competition from the rising local Romance vernacular, the Navarro-Aragonese, both orally and in writing, especially after Aragon's territorial conquests south to Zaragoza, Huesca and Tudela between 1118 and 1134. It resulted that a second Occitan immigration of this period was assimilated by the similar Navarro-Aragonese language, which at the same time was fostered and chosen by the kings of Aragon. In the 14th century, Occitan across the whole southern Pyrenean area fell into decay and became largely absorbed into Navarro-Aragonese first and Castilian later in the 15th century, after their exclusive boroughs broke up (1423, Pamplona 's boroughs unified).

Gascon-speaking communities were called to move in for trading purposes by Navarrese kings in the early 12th century to the coastal fringe extending from San Sebastian to the river Bidasoa, where they settled down. The language variant they used was different from the ones in Navarre, i.e. a Béarnese dialect of Gascon. Gascon remained in use in this area far longer than in Navarre and Aragon, until the 19th century, thanks mainly to the fact that Donostia and Pasaia maintained close ties with Bayonne.

The area where Occitan was historically dominant has approximately 16 million inhabitants. Recent research has shown it may be spoken as a first language by approximately 789,000 people in France, Italy, Spain and Monaco. In Monaco, Occitan coexists with Monégasque Ligurian, which is the other native language. Up to seven million people in France understand the language, whereas twelve to fourteen million fully spoke it in 1921. In 1860, Occitan speakers represented more than 39% of the whole French population (52% for francophones proper); they were still 26% to 36% in the 1920s, but less than 7% in 1993.

Though it was still an everyday language for most of the rural population of southern France well into the 20th century, the language is now declining in every region where it was spoken.

A 2020 study conducted by the Office Public de la Langue Occitane on the territories of the Nouvelle-Aquitaine and Occitanie regions estimated around 540,000 speakers in these two regions. It is worth noting that the survey was conducted in the Occitan language for respondents who declared they were proficient in it. However, the regions including Auvergne and Provence were effectively excluded from this census, as the Office in question does not currently have a partnership with these territories.

According to the 1999 census, there were 610,000 native speakers (almost all of whom were also native French speakers) and perhaps another million people with some exposure to the language. Following the pattern of language shift, most of this remainder is to be found among the eldest populations. Occitan activists (called Occitanists) have attempted, in particular with the advent of Occitan-language preschools (the Calandretas), to reintroduce the language to the young.

Nonetheless, the number of proficient speakers of Occitan is thought to be dropping precipitously. A tourist in the cities in southern France is unlikely to hear a single Occitan word spoken on the street (or, for that matter, in a home), and is likely to only find the occasional vestige, such as street signs (and, of those, most will have French equivalents more prominently displayed), to remind them of the traditional language of the area.

Occitan speakers, as a result of generations of systematic suppression and humiliation (see Vergonha), seldom use the language in the presence of strangers, whether they are from abroad or from outside Occitania (in this case, often merely and abusively referred to as Parisiens or Nordistes, which means northerners). Occitan is still spoken by many elderly people in rural areas, but they generally switch to French when dealing with outsiders.

Occitan's decline is somewhat less pronounced in Béarn because of the province's history (a late addition to the Kingdom of France), though even there the language is little spoken outside the homes of the rural elderly. The village of Artix is notable for having elected to post street signs in the local language.

The following section describes the pronunciation of the Languedocian dialect which is central geographically and the most conservative among Occitan dialects. For that reason it serves as a basis for standardization of Occitan.

Words ending with a vowel or s, as well as verb forms ending with n, have stress on the penultimate syllable. Words ending with a diphthong or a consonant (except s but including n) have stress on the last syllable. Exceptions have marked stress.

La mecan i ca ; destri a r; cu é lher; c a ntan; pen ó s; gat o n.

The following section describes the grammar of the Languedocian dialect which is central geographically and most conservative among Occitan dialects. For that reason it serves as a basis for standardization of Occitan.

Personal pronouns are shown in the following table.

Possessives are shown in the following table.

Demonstratives (this, that, these, those) are shown in the following table.

There are 2 genders: masculine, and feminine. Feminine nouns are usually created by adding termination -a. Plural is created by adding -s to nouns.

Occitan utilizes indefinite articles (compare English "a/an"). There are two indefinite articles in the singular: a masculine form un and a feminine form una, as well as a plural indefinite article: de. The plural form de before vowels is shortened to d'. Observe the summary in the following table.

Unlike the invariable definite article "the" in English, the definite article of Occitan is inflected for number and gender, as shown in the following table.

l' is used before a vowel in the singular forms.

Prepositions a, de, per and sus followed by articles lo and los are merged with them according to the following table.

Verbs inflect for person, number, tense and mood. There are 3 conjugations : -ar, -ir and - re. Verbs ending with -ir have two subconjugations: with and without a suffix.

Pattern of inflection of regular verbs belonging to the first conjugation is presented in the following table.

Parlar (= to speak), parlat (= spoken), parlant (= speaking).

Conjugation -ir with the suffix is shown below.

Dormir (= to sleep), dormit (= slept), dormint (= sleeping).

Second conjugation without the suffix is shown below.

Sentir (= to feel), sentit (= felt), sentent (= feeling).

Batre (= to beat), batut (= beaten), beatent (= beating)

Two very important irregular verbs are èsser/èstre (= to be) and aver (= to have).

Conjugation of èsser/èstre is shown below.

Reflexive verbs are verbs which require a reflexive pronoun. Reflexive pronouns inflect for person and number according to the noun or pronoun to which they refer. An example is se levar (= to get up). The following table demonstrates the inflection patterns.of the reflexive pronouns.

Negation is done by adding pas after a verb. For example:

Occitan is fundamentally defined by its dialects, rather than being a unitary language, as it lacks an official written standard. Like other languages that fundamentally exist at a spoken, rather than written, level (e.g. the Rhaeto-Romance languages, Franco-Provençal, Astur-Leonese, and Aragonese), every settlement technically has its own dialect, with the whole of Occitania forming a classic dialect continuum that changes gradually along any path from one side to the other. Nonetheless, specialists commonly divide Occitan into six main dialects:

The northern and easternmost dialects have more morphological and phonetic features in common with the Gallo-Italic and Oïl languages (e.g. nasal vowels ; loss of final consonants; initial cha/ja- instead of ca/ga- ; uvular ⟨ r ⟩ ; the front-rounded sound /ø/ instead of a diphthong, /w/ instead of /l/ before a consonant), whereas the southernmost dialects have more features in common with the Ibero-Romance languages (e.g. betacism ; voiced fricatives between vowels in place of voiced stops; - ch - in place of - it -), and Gascon has a number of unusual features not seen in other dialects (e.g. /h/ in place of /f/ ; loss of /n/ between vowels; intervocalic -r- and final -t/ch in place of medieval - ll -).

There are also significant lexical differences, where some dialects have words cognate with French, and others have Catalan and Spanish cognates. Nonetheless, there is a significant amount of mutual intelligibility and some of the words with two cognates can be used in the same dialect as synonymous (totjorn/sempre in provençal or maison/ostau in gascon for instance).

There is also no particular geographical distribution of the cognates, with some shared by distant dialects and other not shared with bordering foreign languages (for instance maison in both Gascon and Niçard, cognate of French but not of Spanish or Italian, although these dialects are geographically closer to these languages).

Gascon is the most divergent, and descriptions of the main features of Occitan often consider Gascon separately. Max Wheeler notes that "probably only its copresence within the French cultural sphere has kept [Gascon] from being regarded as a separate language", and compares it to Franco-Provençal, which is considered a separate language from Occitan but is "probably not more divergent from Occitan overall than Gascon is".

There is no general agreement about larger groupings of these dialects.

Max Wheeler divides the dialects into two groups:

Pierre Bec divides the dialects into three groups:

In order to overcome the pitfalls of the traditional romanistic view, Bec proposed a "supradialectal" classification that groups Occitan with Catalan as a part of a wider Occitano-Romanic group. One such classification posits three groups:

According to this view, Catalan is an ausbau language that became independent from Occitan during the 13th century, but originates from the Aquitano-Pyrenean group.

Domergue Sumien proposes a slightly different supradialectal grouping.

Occitan has 3 dialects spoken by Jewish communities that are all now extinct.

A sociolect of the Gascon dialect spoken by Spanish and Portuguese Jews in Gascony. It, like many other Jewish dialects and languages, contained large amounts of Hebrew loanwords. It went extinct after World War 2 with the last speakers being elderly Jews in Bayonne. About 850 unique words and a few morphological and grammatical aspects of the dialect were transmitted to Southern Jewish French.

Judeo-Provençal was a dialect of Occitan spoken by Jews in Provence. The dialect declined in usage after Jews were expelled from the area in 1498, and was probably extinct by the 20th century.

The least attested of the Judeo-Occitan dialects, Judeo-Niçard was spoken by the community of Jews living in Nice, who were descendants of Jewish immigrants from Provence, Piedmont, and other Mediterranean communities. Its existence is attested from a few documents from the 19th century. It contained significant influence in both vocabulary and grammar from Hebrew.

All three of these dialects have some influence in Southern Jewish French, a dialect of French spoken by Jews in southern France. Southern Jewish French is now estimated to only be spoken by about 50–100 people.

Several IETF language variant tags have been registered:

All regional varieties of the Occitan language have a written form; thus, Occitan can be considered as a pluricentric language. Standard Occitan, also called occitan larg (i.e., 'wide Occitan') is a synthesis that respects and admits soft regional adaptations (which are based on the convergence of previous regional koinés). The standardization process began with the publication of Gramatica occitana segon los parlars lengadocians ("Grammar of the Languedocien Dialect") by Louis Alibert (1935), followed by the Dictionnaire occitan-français selon les parlers languedociens ("French-Occitan dictionary according to Languedocien") by the same author (1966), completed during the 1970s with the works of Pierre Bec (Gascon), Robèrt Lafont (Provençal), and others. However, the process has not yet been completed as of the present. Standardization is mostly supported by users of the classical norm. Due to the strong situation of diglossia, some users thusly reject the standardization process, and do not conceive Occitan as a language that can be standardized as per other standardized languages.

There are two main linguistic norms currently used for Occitan, one (known as "classical") based on that of Medieval Occitan, and one (sometimes known as "Mistralian", due to its use by Frédéric Mistral) based on modern French orthography. Sometimes, there is conflict between users of each system.

There are also two other norms but they have a lesser audience. The Escòla dau Pò norm (or Escolo dóu Po norm) is a simplified version of the Mistralian norm and is used only in the Occitan Valleys (Italy), besides the classical norm. The Bonnaudian norm (or écriture auvergnate unifiée, EAU) was created by Pierre Bonnaud and is used only in the Auvergnat dialect, besides the classical norm.

Note that Catalan version was translated from the Spanish, while the Occitan versions were translated from the French. The second part of the Catalan version may also be rendered as "Són dotades de raó i de consciència, i els cal actuar entre si amb un esperit de fraternitat", showing the similarities between Occitan and Catalan.

Several IETF language subtags have been registered for the different orthographies:

The majority of scholars think that Occitan constitutes a single language. Some authors, constituting a minority, reject this opinion and even the name Occitan, thinking that there is a family of distinct lengas d'òc rather than dialects of a single language.

Many Occitan linguists and writers, particularly those involved with the pan-Occitan movement centered on the Institut d'Estudis Occitans, disagree with the view that Occitan is a family of languages; instead they believe Limousin, Auvergnat, Languedocien, Gascon, Provençal and Vivaro-Alpine are dialects of a single language. Although there are indeed noticeable differences between these varieties, there is a very high degree of mutual intelligibility between them partly because they share a common literary history; furthermore, academic and literary circles have identified them as a collective linguistic entity—the lenga d'òc —for centuries.

Some Provençal authors continue to support the view that Provençal is a separate language. Nevertheless, the vast majority of Provençal authors and associations think that Provençal is a part of Occitan.

This debate about the status of Provençal should not be confused with the debate concerning the spelling of Provençal.

For example, the classical system writes Polonha, whereas the Mistralian spelling system has Poulougno, for [puˈluɲo], 'Poland'.

The question of Gascon is similar. Gascon presents a number of significant differences from the rest of the language; but, despite these differences, Gascon and other Occitan dialects have very important common lexical and grammatical features, so authors such as Pierre Bec argue that they could never be considered as different as, for example, Spanish and Italian. In addition, Gascon's being included in Occitan despite its particular differences can be justified because there is a common elaboration (Ausbau) process between Gascon and the rest of Occitan. The vast majority of the Gascon cultural movement considers itself as a part of the Occitan cultural movement. And the official status of Val d'Aran (Catalonia, Spain), adopted in 1990, says that Aranese is a part of Gascon and Occitan. A grammar of Aranese by Aitor Carrera, published in 2007 in Lleida, presents the same view.

The exclusion of Catalan from the Occitan sphere, even though Catalan is closely related, is justified because there has been a consciousness of its being different from Occitan since the later Middle Ages and because the elaboration (Ausbau) processes of Catalan and Occitan (including Gascon) have been quite distinct since the 20th century. Nevertheless, other scholars point out that the process that led to the affirmation of Catalan as a distinct language from Occitan started during the period when the pressure to include Catalan-speaking areas in a mainstream Spanish culture was at its greatest.

The answer to the question of whether Gascon or Catalan should be considered dialects of Occitan or separate languages has long been a matter of opinion or convention, rather than based on scientific ground. However, two recent studies support Gascon's being considered a distinct language. For the first time, a quantifiable, statistics-based approach was applied by Stephan Koppelberg in attempt to solve this issue. Based on the results he obtained, he concludes that Catalan, Occitan, and Gascon should all be considered three distinct languages. More recently, Y. Greub and J.P. Chambon (Sorbonne University, Paris) demonstrated that the formation of Proto-Gascon was already complete at the eve of the 7th century, whereas Proto-Occitan was not yet formed at that time. These results induced linguists to do away with the conventional classification of Gascon, favoring the "distinct language" alternative. Both studies supported the early intuition of the late Kurt Baldinger, a specialist of both medieval Occitan and medieval Gascon, who recommended that Occitan and Gascon be classified as separate languages.

Jules Ronjat has sought to characterize Occitan with 19 principal, generalizable criteria. Of those, 11 are phonetic, five morphologic, one syntactic, and two lexical. For example, close rounded vowels are rare or absent in Occitan. This characteristic often carries through to an Occitan speaker's French, leading to a distinctive méridional accent. Unlike French, it is a pro-drop language, allowing the omission of the subject (canti : I sing; cantas you sing)—though, at least in Gascon, the verb must be preceded by an "enunciative" in place of the pronoun, e for questions, be for observations, que for other occasions: e.g., que soi (I am), E qu'ei? (He/she is?), Be qu'èm. (We are.). Among these 19 discriminating criteria, 7 are different from Spanish, 8 from Italian, 12 from Franco-Provençal, and 16 from French.

Most features of Occitan are shared with either French or Catalan, or both.

Examples of pan-Occitan features shared with French, but not Catalan:

Examples of pan-Occitan features shared with Catalan, but not French:

Examples of pan-Occitan features not shared with Catalan or French:

Examples of dialect-specific features of the northerly dialects shared with French, but not Catalan:

Examples of dialect-specific features of the southerly dialects (or some of them) shared with Catalan, but not French:

Examples of Gascon -specific features not shared with French or Catalan:

Examples of other dialect-specific features not shared with French or Catalan:

A comparison of terms and word counts between languages is not easy, as it is impossible to count the number of words in a language. (See Lexicon, Lexeme, Lexicography for more information.)

Some have claimed around 450,000 words exist in the Occitan language, a number comparable to English (the Webster's Third New International Dictionary, Unabridged with 1993 addenda reaches 470,000 words, as does the Oxford English Dictionary, Second edition). The Merriam-Webster website estimates that the number is somewhere between 250,000 and 1 million words.

The magazine Géo (2004, p. 79) claims that American English literature can be more easily translated into Occitan than French, excluding modern technological terms that both languages have integrated.

A comparison of the lexical content can find more subtle differences between the languages. For example, Occitan has 128 synonyms related to cultivated land, 62 for wetlands, and 75 for sunshine (Géo). The language went through an eclipse during the Industrial Revolution, as the vocabulary of the countryside became less important. At the same time, it was disparaged as a patois. Nevertheless, Occitan has also incorporated new words into its lexicon to describe the modern world. The Occitan word for web (as in World Wide Web) is oèb, for example.

The separation of Catalan from Occitan is seen by some as largely politically (rather than linguistically) motivated. However, the variety that has become standard Catalan differs from the one that has become standard Occitan in a number of ways. Here are just a few examples:

Despite these differences, Occitan and Catalan remain more or less mutually comprehensible, especially when written – more so than either is with Spanish or French, for example, although this is mainly a consequence of using the classical (orthographical) norm of the Occitan, which is precisely focused in showing the similarities between the Occitan dialects with Catalan. Occitan and Catalan form a common diasystem (or a common Abstandsprache), which is called Occitano-Romance, according to the linguist Pierre Bec. Speakers of both languages share early historical and cultural heritage.

The combined Occitano-Romance area is 259,000 km (100,000 sq mi), with a population of 23 million. However, the regions are not equal in terms of language speakers. According to Bec 1969 (pp. 120–121), in France, no more than a quarter of the population in counted regions could speak Occitan well, though around half understood it; it is thought that the number of Occitan users has decreased dramatically since then. By contrast, in the Catalonia administered by the Government of Catalonia, nearly three-quarters of the population speak Catalan and 95% understand it.

In the modern era, Occitan has become a rare and highly threatened language. Its users are clustered almost exclusively in Southern France, and it is unlikely that any monolingual speakers remain. In the early 1900s, the French government attempted to restrict the use and teaching of many minority languages, including Occitan, in public schools. While the laws have since changed, with bilingual education returning for regions with unique languages in 1993, the many years of restrictions had already caused serious decline in the number of Occitan speakers. The majority of living speakers are older adults.

One of the most notable passages of Occitan in Western literature occurs in the 26th canto of Dante 's Purgatorio in which the troubadour Arnaut Daniel responds to the narrator:

Tan m'abellís vostre cortés deman, / qu'ieu no me puesc ni voill a vos cobrire. / Ieu sui Arnaut, que plor e vau cantan; / consirós vei la passada folor, / e vei jausen lo joi qu'esper, denan. / Ara vos prec, per aquella valor / que vos guida al som de l'escalina, / sovenha vos a temps de ma dolor.

Tan m'abelís vòstra cortesa demanda, / que ieu non-pòdi ni vòli m'amagar de vos. / Ieu soi Arnaut, que plori e vau cantant; / consirós vesi la foliá passada, / e vesi joiós lo jorn qu'espèri, davant. / Ara vos prègui, per aquela valor / que vos guida al som de l'escalièr, / sovenhatz-vos tot còp de ma dolor.

So pleases me your courteous demand, / I cannot and I will not hide me from you. / I am Arnaut, who weep and singing go;/ Contrite I see the folly of the past, / And joyous see the hoped-for day before me. / Therefore do I implore you, by that power/ Which guides you to the summit of the stairs, / Be mindful to assuage my suffering!

Another notable Occitan quotation, this time from Arnaut Daniel's own 10th Canto :

"Ieu sui Arnaut qu'amas l'aura e chatz le lebre ab lo bou e nadi contra suberna"

"Ieu soi Arnaut qu'aimi l'aura e caci [chaci] la lèbre amb lo buòu e nadi contra subèrna.

"I am Arnaut who loves the wind, and chases the hare with the ox, and swims against the torrent."

French writer Victor Hugo 's classic Les Misérables also contains some Occitan. In Part One, First Book, Chapter IV, " Les œuvres semblables aux paroles ", one can read about Monseigneur Bienvenu :

Né provençal, il s ' était facilement familiarisé avec tous les patois du midi. Il disait: — E ben, monsur, sètz saget? comme dans le bas Languedoc. — Ont anaratz passar? comme dans les basses Alpes. — Pòrti un bon moton amb un bon formatge gras, comme dans le haut Dauphiné. [...] Parlant toutes les langues, il entrait dans toutes les âmes.

[Born a Provençal, he easily familiarized himself with the dialect of the south. He would say, E ben, monsur, sètz saget? as in lower Languedoc; Ont anaratz passar? as in the Basses-Alpes; Pòrti un bon moton amb un bon formatge gras as in upper Dauphiné. [...] As he spoke all tongues, he entered into all hearts.]

Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights :

Occitan: Totes los èssers umans naisson liures e egals en dignitat e en dreches. Son dotats de rason e de consciéncia e se devon comportar los unes amb los autres dins un esperit de fraternitat.

[All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.]

Aside from Dante and Hugo, sampled above, the Occitan language has appeared in several non-Occitan dramatic, literary and musical works.

The 16th-Century Spanish playwright Lope de Rueda included a Gascon servant for comical effect in one of his short pieces, La generosa paliza.

John Barnes 's Thousand Cultures science fiction series (A Million Open Doors, 1992; Earth Made of Glass, 1998; The Merchants of Souls, 2001; and The Armies of Memory, 2006), features Occitan. So does the 2005 best-selling novel Labyrinth by English author Kate Mosse. It is set in Carcassonne, where she owns a house and spends half of the year.

Michael Crichton features Occitan in his Timeline novel.

The French composer Joseph Canteloube created five sets of folk songs entitled Songs of the Auvergne, in which the lyrics are in the Auvergne dialect of Occitan. The orchestration strives to conjure vivid pastoral scenes of yesteryear.

The American poet Ezra Pound made extensive use of Old Occitan, in particular excerpts from Troubador poetry, throughout his long serial poem The Cantos.

This article describes the phonology of the Occitan language.

Below is a consonant chart that covers multiple dialects. Where symbols for consonants occur in pairs, the left represents a voiceless consonant and the right represents a voiced consonant.

In an unstressed position, some vowels cannot be realized and become more closed vowels:

One typical characteristic of Auvergnat (also a feature of some neighbouring dialects of Vivaro-Alpine) is the transformation of the following phonemes:

In an unstressed position, some vowels cannot be realized and become more closed vowels:

A strong characteristic of Limousin (also a feature of some neighbouring dialects of Vivaro-Alpine) is the neutralization of the phonemes /e/ and /ɛ/ in one single phoneme /e/, that can have various degrees of opening.

In words of popular formation, the sequences ⟨ as, es, is, òs, os, us, ues ⟩ [as, es, is, ɔs, us, ys, œs], when at the end of a syllable, first became [ah, eh, ih, ɔh, uh, yh, œh] and have now become long vowels, [aː, (ej), iː, ɔː, uː, yː, œː], which tends to create new phonemes with a relevant opposition between short vowels and long vowels. The same phenomenon exists in one part of Vivarais, and also occurred in the transition from Old to Middle French.

In unstressed positions, vowels /i, y, u/ become lax sounds [ɪ, ʏ, ʊ].

In an unstressed position, some vowels cannot be realized and become more closed vowels:

Word stress has limited mobility. It can only fall on:

These proparoxytones are equivalent to paroxytones in all other dialects. For instance (stress underlined):

The stress is oxytone if the last syllable ending in a consonant or a diphthong ending in -u or -i (occi tan /utsiˈta/, ver ai); while the stress is penultimate if the last syllable ending in a vowel (or vowel + -s) and vowel + -n when in the case of third-person plural verb forms (li bre, li bres, par lan), the stress is also penultimate when the syllable ending in two different vowels (esta tu a). Irregular stresses is normally marked orthographically by acutes (á, é, í, ó, ú) and graves (à, è, ò).

As a Romance language, Occitan developed from Vulgar Latin. Old Occitan (around the eighth through the fourteenth centuries) had a similar pronunciation to present-day Occitan; the major differences were:

Occitania is the historical region in southern Europe where the Occitan language was historically spoken and where it persists today as a local language. This cultural area roughly encompasses much of the southern third of France (except the French Basque Country and French Catalonia) as well as part of Spain (Aran Valley), Monaco, and parts of Italy (Occitan Valleys).

Occitania has been recognized as a linguistic and cultural concept since the Middle Ages. The territory was united in Roman times as the Seven Provinces (Latin : Septem Provinciae) and in the Early Middle Ages (Aquitanica or the Visigothic Kingdom of Toulouse, or the share of Louis the Pious following Thionville divisio regnorum in 806).

Currently, the region has a population of 16 million, and between 200,000 and 800,000 people are either native or proficient speakers of Occitan. More commonly, French, Piedmontese, Catalan, Spanish and Italian are spoken. Since 2006, the Occitan language has been an official language in Catalonia, which includes the Aran Valley, where Occitan gained official status in 1990.

At the time of the Roman empire, most of Occitania was known as Aquitania. The territories conquered early were known as Provincia Romana (see modern Provence), while the northern provinces of what is now France were called Gallia (Gaul). Under the late Roman empire, both Aquitania and Provincia Romana were grouped in the Seven Provinces or Viennensis. Provence and Gallia Aquitania (or Aquitanica) have been in use since medieval times for Occitania (i.e. Limousin, Auvergne, Languedoc and Gascony).

The historic Duchy of Aquitaine should not be confused with the modern French region called Aquitaine : this is a reason why the term Occitania was revived in the mid-19th century. The terms "Occitania" and "Occitan language" (Occitana lingua) appeared in Latin texts from as early as 1242–1254 to 1290 and during the early 14th century; texts exist in which the area is referred indirectly as "the country of the Occitan language" (Patria Linguae Occitanae). The name Lenga d'òc was used in Italian (Lingua d'òc) by Dante in the late 13th century. The somewhat uncommon ending of the term Occitania is most likely from a French clerk who joined the òc [ɔk] and Aquitània [ɑkiˈtanjɑ] in a portmanteau term, thus blending the language and the land in just one concept.

On 28 September 2016, Occitanie became the name of an administrative region that merged the previous regions of Midi-Pyrénées and Languedoc-Roussillon ; it is a small part of Occitania.

The extent of Occitania may vary according to the criteria used:

On the other hand Occitan is still spoken in the French Basque Country and in the Catalan Countries (the Val d'Aran and the Fenolheda), and internal allophone enclaves (Petite Gavacharie of Poitevin-Saintongeais language, ancient Ligurian enclaves of eastern Provence, the quasi-Ligurian-Occitan enclave of Monaco...). This leads to variations in whether small internal or external enclaves are taken into account. The definition of a contiguous and compact Occitan-speaking territory is currently the most widespread.

Northern Italy and the Catalan Countries were also homes of troubadour using the Koiné Occitan literary. In the same way, the Basque Country and Aragon benefited from Occitan stands, old or newer, which notably gave rise to the appearance of an Occitan dialect south of the Pyrenees. We can also note the historical use of an Occitan scripta as official language.

The name Occitanie appeared in the Middle Ages on the basis of a geographical, linguistic and cultural concept, to designate the part of the French royal domain speaking the langue d’oc.

Its current definition is variable. In the most common usage, Occitania designates the territory where the Occitan has remained in use until today, within the limits defined between 1876 and the 20th century. If Occitan language and culture are almost always associated with it, we also find references to a common history, an ethnic group, a homeland, to a people or to a nation. The first sociological study in the Occitan language to learn how the Occitan define themselves was started in 1976. The survey shows that the Occitan reality is defined by language for 95% of people, culture (94%), characterization by a common history (69%), an ethnic group (50%), a nation (20%). Occitania, as defined by the modern Occitan linguistic territory, covers most of the current Southern France, the Alpine valleys of the Western Piedmont, in Italy, Val d'Aran in Spain and Monaco an area of approximately 190,000 km2. It had about fifteen million inhabitants in 1999 with about 20% inhabitants born outside the territory and about 20% of natives who left. On the other hand, in the absence of a linguistic census, we only imperfectly know the number of speakers of Occitan.

If the preceding notions are generally limited to the modern linguistic boundaries of Occitan, this term can also be used to designate a larger territory. The term "Occitania" becomes commonplace more and more in the vocabulary of scientists. It is used particularly in a historical sense and anthropological by designating a region extending north to the Loire, ignoring contemporary linguistic boundaries. In a book written by experts in medieval history, are included in Occitania of the year 1000 both the provinces of the north (now mainly in Poitou-Charentes) and Catalonia (without the Balearic Islands and the Valencian country) – p. 484. The seven-pointed star, adopted as emblem by the Felibritge symbolized the seven provinces of Occitania, one of which was Catalan. Occitanie is indeed divided by this association into seven maintenances (sections) of which one was that of Catalonia-Roussillon.

In 2016, the name Occitanie is used for the French administrative region Languedoc-Roussillon-Midi-Pyrénées which is located on part of the traditional Occitania and includes the Roussillon.

Occitania comes from the medieval Latin Occitania. The first part of the name, Occ-, comes from Occitan òc and the expression langue d'oc, in Italian lingua d'oc. It is an appellation promoted by Dante Alighieri of Occitan by the way of saying "yes" in Old Occitan-Catalan ; as opposed to the "langue de si" (Italian) and the "langue d'oïl" (Old French). The ending -itania is probably an imitation of the name [Aqu] itania (Aquitaine). The term Occitania is a synonym for Languedoc and the Mediterranean coast in the Middle Ages.

The first attestation of the use of Occitanie in French dates from 1556. The first certificate of Occitania in Italy dates 1549. In German, the word Occitania was found in 1572.

All of the Occitan language countries have had various designations throughout history. The word Occitania has been the subject of whimsical etymologies (for example, Languedoc was formerly understood as "land of the Goths" or "language of the Goths"), as well as the rapprochement to the Occitan language exemplified in the names of the regions Languedoc and Occitania, we find in La Minerve Française, a collective work published in Paris in 1818, a history of name-changes of the provinces which reveals the word Occitanie to be a doublet of the word Occident formed in the Lower Empire, giving it the original meaning of "western regions", and not a region where (necessarily) the Occitan language was spoken.

Like the Occitan language, Occitania has been designated under various successive names. The terms are not exclusive: one can find authors who use different terms in the same time period. Occitania or Pays d'Oc are the most frequently used terms today. However the term Provence is still used when the Felibritge sing the Copa Santa for example during the annual festival of Estello.

The term "Occitania" now covers a linguistic region. This meaning was used in medieval times attested since 1290. On 29 May 1308, during the Council of Poitiers, it appears that the king of France was declared to reign over two nations: one of lingua gallica and the other of lingua occitana. This partition between Occitan language and langue d'oïl in the Gallo-Roman space is very ancient since it started with Romanisation itself. In 1381, the King Charles VI of France considered that his kingdom comprised two parts: the country of langue d'oc, or Occitania, and the oil-language country or Ouytanie " Quas in nostro Regno occupare solebar tam in linguae Occitanae quam Ouytanae ". "Occitania" remained in force in the administration until the French Revolution of 1789. It was taken up again in the 19th century by the literary association of Felibritge then it is again claimed since the 20th century, especially since the end of the 1960s. According to Frédéric Mistral's dictionary " Treasury of Felibritge ", the term Occitania is sometimes used by scholars to describe Southern France in general but mainly for the former province of Languedoc.

The langue d'oc is a territorialized language, that is to say, spoken mainly on a territory whose boundaries can be described. This part attempts to describe the origins of the Occitanie concept, the different names that this territory has taken and the creation of the modern concept of Occitania.

The speakers of the Occitan language do not use a single meaning of their language because Occitan is not a monolithic language with for example a single dictionary where each speaker finds exactly their vocabulary, but a juxtaposition of dialects. Also, many studies have focused on the differences between Provençal, Languedoc, etc. We must also remember the many common features of the Occitan cultural space, which are generally considered partisans.

Robert Lafont develops this idea in the introduction of the "History and Anthology of Occitan Literature". The reference to troubadours is essential. This socio-linguistic argument is modulated according to the authors but it is accepted by all the current scholarship, including the authors who speak of "domain d'oc", since by definition, their study of the d'oc domain rests on the consciousness of the existence of a common culture.

The different speakers of the language share many common traits (tonic accentuation, close vocabulary, frequent use of the subjunctive, etc.) that allow mutual understanding. For Occitanists, this intercomprehension means that Occitan is one language; for others, it means that these languages are very close but all agree that the speakers in this defined space understand each other.

The social characteristics of Occitania are not eternal and intangible because factors of endogenous mutations and European influences, especially of Northern France, can blur these social peculiarities.

The best studied example is that of Roman Law which is better maintained in the Occitan Early Middle Ages society than in Northern France thanks to the promulgations of Visigoth and Burgundians laws. From the mid-11th century, the teaching of the Corpus Juris Civilis taken shortly after Bologna in the universities of Toulouse, Montpellier, Avignon, Perpignan... will promote a massive renaissance of Roman Law in Occitania.

With regard to education: Pierre Goubert and Daniel Roche write, to explain the low literacy in Occitania in the 18th century, that there exists in these territories a confidence maintained in the old vulgar languages. The relations to education are today completely reversed between Northern and Southern France thanks to the anthropological imprint of the family strain.

From a demographic point of view, the influence of the family was still felt in 2007 because of the small number of families with many children.

In politics, many debates have also taken place around the expression Red Southern coined by Maurice Agulhon to find out if the "pays d'oc" was more " republic " than the northern half of France. Emmanuel Todd analyzing the regions that voted for Jean-Luc Mélenchon, calling himself a "Republican" in the 2012 presidential elections, declares that " what is obvious is his general inscription in the Occitan family[...] that loves vertical structures, the state or the church."

Finally, for André Armengaud, these common social characteristics make it possible to write a historical synthesis. But since 1979, no other "History of Occitan" has been undertaken.

If the term Occitania appeared in French from the mid-16th century, then in 1732 in a collection of laws of the ancien régime, it only becomes current at 19th century. Thus, the duke of Angoulême conspired with a view to the establishment of a Kingdom of Occitania or of a Vice-Royalty of Occitania at the time of the Restoration. The term was popularized by the publications of Raynouard and Rochegude, and known in its contemporary sense by the English historian Sharon Turner.

It appeared in the Treasury of Felibritge and in the statutes of this organization in 1911. In the Interwar period, a Felibritgan school, the Escòla Occitana was created in 1919 in the Toulousean Languedoc. The Institute of Occitan Studies was born in 1930. These initiatives (as well as others) remain closely linked, notably because of the dual membership of their main animators at Felibritge.

After the Second World War, the creation of the Institute of Occitan Studies was presided over by a resistant (at a time when the Felibritge like the SEO were tainted by lawsuits of collaboration), but above all its action in terms of linguistic reform, particularly its desire to adapt the classical norm to Provençal, marked a break with a large fraction of the Felibritge François Fontan created the first overtly Occitan nationalist party in 1959.

In France, Occitania has been confronted with a problem of recognition of Occitan since 1992; the French is the only "language of the Republic". In 1994, it was made compulsory in the public space (places of commerce and work, public transport, etc.) and in the administration (laws, regulations, documents, judgments, etc.).

In 2015, with the prospect of creating a large region gathering " Midi-Pyrénées " and " Languedoc-Roussillon ", the name "Occitanie" came at the head of an online survey organized by the regional press (23% of the 200,000 voting, in front of "Occitanie-Pays catalan" 20%). Note, however, a variable support rate depending on the geographical origin of the voters. As part of the territorial reform, a consultation on the name of the region, organized by the Regional Council Languedoc-Roussillon-Midi-Pyrénées took place in spring 2016 to give a name to the new region regrouping Midi-Pyrenees and Languedoc-Roussillon. Occitanie came first (44.90% of the vote), with 91,598 voters. Second was Languedoc-Pyrenees with 17.81% of the votes, then Pyrenees-Mediterranean (15.31%), Occitanie-Catalan Country (12.15%) and finally Languedoc (10.01%). This new region was renamed Occitanie (with the subtitle Pyrenees-Mediterranean), according to the vote of the regional councillors on 24 June 2016, and after final validation by the Government of France and Conseil d'État.

Despite the historic and political dependencies between the 10th and 13th centuries that eventually led to the creation of a common Occitan-Catalan cultural environment during Middle Ages, neither the Principality of Catalonia nor the Catalan Countries have ever been part of Occitania. On the contrary, from the 11th century the Catalan expansion towards the Occitan regions of Languedoc and Provence (through family ties of feudal nobility) gave rise to a long-term confrontation between the countal dynasties of Barcelona and Toulouse, but finally they had to ally against the Cathar Crusade promoted by France and the Papacy in the beginning of the 13th century. The great defeat resulting from the Battle of Muret (1213) and the subsequent Treaty of Corbeil (1258) ratified the loss of Catalan influence in Occitania and its gradual replacement by the French dynasty of the House of Capet.

Regarding to linguistic affinity and closeness, after some early Romance-language scholars considered them to be the same language, Catalan intellectuals (among them Pompeu Fabra and Joan Coromines) solemnly proclaimed in a 1934 manifesto that Catalan was a distinct language from Occitan, as established by the common consensus of current scientific linguistics.

Moreover, the Parliament of Catalonia passed in 2015 a law recognizing Aran Valley 's "national identity", understood as an "Occitan national reality" apart from the Catalan nation.

Occitania includes the following regions:

Occitan or langue d'oc (lenga d'òc) is a Latin-based Romance language in the same way as Spanish, Italian or French. There are six main regional varieties, with easy inter-comprehension among them: Provençal (including Niçard spoken in the vicinity of Nice), Vivaroalpenc, Auvernhat, Lemosin, Gascon (including Bearnés spoken in Béarn) and Lengadocian. All these varieties of the Occitan language are written and valid. Standard Occitan is a synthesis which respects soft regional adaptations.

Catalan is a language very similar to Occitan and there are quite strong historical and cultural links between Occitania and Catalonia.

The regions of Ancien Régime that make up Occitania are the following: Auvergne (Auvèrnhe), Forez (west and south fringe), Bourbonnais (southern half), Couserans (Coserans), Dauphiné (southern half), County of Foix (County of Fois), County of Nice (County of Nissa), Périgord (Peiregòrd), Gascony, Guyenne (Guiana), Languedoc (Lengadòc), Angoumois (eastern end), Limousin (Lemosin), Poitou (Poetou) (southeastern extremity), La Marche (la Marcha), Provence (Provença), Comtat Venaissin (lo Comtat Venaicin), Velay, Vivarais (Vivarés).

Traditional Occitan Provinces (currently in France):

X. Bourbonnais (southern half) – approx. 3,200 km2 (est.)

The administrative regions covering Occitania are the following: Occitanie region (except the Pyrénées-Orientales where a majority speak Catalan, although the Fenouillèdes region, in the North-West of the department, that is to say of Occitan language and culture), Nouvelle-Aquitaine (except the peripheries where one speaks basque, poitevin and saintongeais), Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes (in the southern half, namely almost all the Drôme and the Ardèche, the southern Isère and some fringes of the Loire) and Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur. In the Centre-Val de Loire Occitan is spoken in some communes in southern Cher and Indre.

The geographical delimitation of Occitania most commonly accepted was specified between 1876—beginning of research on the linguistic boundaries —and the 20th century. Occitania roughly covers a southern third of France (commonly known as Midi, including Monaco), the Occitan Valleys and Guardia Piemontese, in Italy, as well as the Val d'Aran, in Spain.

The practice of Occitan is not the same uniformly throughout the territory. In addition, there is a linguistic transition area in the north called Croissant where the terms of d'oil and Occitan interfere strongly (see Croissant). Instead, some territories are not generally considered to be part of Occitania according to the modern definition:

Written texts in Occitan appeared in the 10th century: it was first used in legal texts, and then in literary, scientific, and religious texts. Spoken dialects of Occitan are many centuries older and appeared as soon as the 8th century, at least, as revealed through toponyms and Occitanized words left in Latin manuscripts.

Occitania was often politically united during the Early Middle Ages, under the Visigothic Kingdom and several Merovingian and Carolingian sovereigns. In the year 805 in Thionville, Charlemagne declared the partition of his empire into three autonomous territories along linguistic and cultural boundaries: what is now modern Occitania was to be formed from the reunion of a broader Provence and Aquitaine. Instead, however, at the 9th century division of the Frankish Empire, Occitania was split into different counties, duchies and kingdoms, bishops and abbots. Since then, the country has never been politically united, although Occitania remained intact through a common culture. Nonetheless, Occitania suffered a tangle of varying loyalties to nominal sovereigns: from the 9th to the 13th centuries, the dukes of Aquitaine, the counts of Foix, the counts of Toulouse and the Counts of Barcelona competed for control over the various pays of Occitania.

Occitan literature flourished during this time period: in the 12th and 13th centuries, the troubadours invented courtly love (fin'amor), and the Lenga d'Òc spread throughout European cultivated circles; the terms Lenga d'Òc, Occitan, and Occitania first appeared at the end of the 13th century.

From the 13th to the 17th centuries, the kings of France gradually conquered Occitania. By the end of the 15th century, the nobility and bourgeoisie had started learning French, while the peasantry generally continued to speak Occitan; this process began from the 13th century in the two northernmost regions, northern Limousin and Bourbonnais. In 1539, Francis I issued the Ordinance of Villers-Cotterêts that imposed the use of French in administration. But despite measures such as this, a strong feeling of national identity against the French occupiers remained as Jean Racine wrote on a trip to Uzès in 1662: "We call here 'France' the entire country beyond the Loire, which is considered a foreign province."

In 1789, the revolutionary committees tried to re-establish the autonomy of the "Midi" regions, using the Occitan language; however, Jacobin power prevented its realization.

The 19th century witnessed a strong revival of the Occitan literature, exemplified by the writer Frédéric Mistral, who was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1904. But from 1881 onwards, children who spoke Occitan at school were punished in accordance with minister Jules Ferry 's recommendations; this led to a deprecation of the language known as la vergonha (the shaming). In 1914, fourteen million inhabitants in the region spoke Occitan, but French overtook Occitan in prominence during the 20th century. The situation got worse with the media excluding the use of the langue d'oc. In spite of this decline, however, the Occitan language is still alive and gaining fresh impetus.

Although not really a colony in a modern sense, there was an Occitan enclave in the County of Tripoli, founded in 1102 by Raymond IV of Toulouse during the Crusades north of Jerusalem. Most people in this county came from Occitania and Italy.

Around the 14th century, some "Provençal" settlements were founded by Valdenses in S southern Italy: the Capitanata? area, Basilicata, and Calabria. Most of them were destroyed by the Inquisition during the 16th century, but the Guardia Piemontese managed to keep its language and Occitan identity until now.

At the end of the 17th century, Valdenses fleeing persecution in the Occitan valleys settled in Baden, Hesse, and Wurtemberg (modern Germany). The use of the Occitan language vanished during the 20th century, but some Occitan placenames are still in use.

In the 19th century, Occitans settled in the Americas. Some Valdense colonies have retained their use of the language down to the present day, such as those in Uruguay and the United States.

The oldest Occitanist association is the Felibritge, founded in 1854. In 1945, after the Second World War, some of the association's members founded a distinct movement, the Institut d'Estudis Occitans (Institute of Occitan Studies). Other organisations include the Calandreta, private associations of Occitan schools, and the Conselh de la Lenga Occitana (CLO), a scientific organization promoting codification of Occitan in the classical norm.

Some associations adhering to Felibritge and Parlaren claim a Provençal language distinct from Occitan.

Other associations claim distinct "languages d'oc", even if, paradoxically, some of them are grouped together in an Alliance of Oc languages:

Some associations have no affiliation with other oc countries:

On the other hand, some groups claim an Occitan-Roman identity including the Catalan Countries (France-Spain).

In Spain, Aranese political parties alternately run the Conselh Generau d'Aran, the principal institution of government in the Val d'Aran. They also have elected officials in the municipalities of Aran, the Parliament of Catalonia and the Spanish Senate. They are close to Catalan parties with the exception of the localist party Partit Renovador d'Arties-Garòs who has, however, made alliances with Unity of Aran. Unity of Aran (UA-PNA) is a social-democratic and regionalist-autonomist party affiliated to Socialists' Party of Catalonia (PSOE-PSC), while Aranese Democratic Convergence (CDA-PNA), currently in power, is a centrist and autonomist party linked to the Democratic Convergence of Catalonia. Esquèrra Republicana Occitana (ÈRO) founded in 2008, Left/Social Democracy and Independence, is a local section of Republican Left of Catalonia. Corròp is a citizen movement born in February 2015 that aims to break with the Aranese bipartisanship and is inspired by the Catalan independence movement Popular Unity Candidacy (CUP), but with a view to Occitania.

In the 2017 Catalan regional election, the electors of the Val d'Aran voted mostly for "constitutionalists," parties which support continued union with Spain.

In France, Occitan political parties and movements (such as the Occitan Nationalist Party, Occitan Party, Freedom!,...) have had difficulty winning a large audience and getting officials elected. They had never had elected representatives in national or European institutions, or in general councils. However, in the 2010 French regional elections, the Occitan Party, within the framework of the participation of the federation Regions and Peoples with Solidarity to Europe Écologie, elected representatives to five regional councils: Dàvid Grosclaude in Aquitaine., Guilhem Latrubesse in Midi-Pyrénées, Gustau Aliròl in Auvergne, Anne-Marie Hautant and Hervé Guerrera in Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur. The latter was also elected to the city council of Aix-en-Provence and counselor to the Agglomeration Community of Aix Country. The movement Bastir! ran for the first time in the 2014 municipal elections and won 55 seats. The president of the Occitan Party, Gustave Alirol, is currently also president of the " Regions and Peoples with Solidarity " party and vice-president of the "European Free Alliance," which participates in a group of 50 deputies in the European Parliament.

There are currently no Occitan political movements in Monaco.

The Occitan language is only recognized as official, protected and promoted in the Val d'Aran (in Spain); in Italy it has the status of a protected language; and in France it only has acceptance in the educational network but without legal recognition.

The Fédération des langues régionales pour l'enseignement public calculated the number of students in the Occitan language in October 2005 at 4,326.

According to a 2002 report by the French Ministry of Culture (Report to Parliament on the use of the French language, 2003), in public schools, collèges and lycées and private schools: in the academic year 2001–02, 67,549 students had enrolled in classes of or in Occitan.

Despite this precarious social position, Occitan was one of the official languages of the 2006 Turin Winter Olympics.

Romantic composer Gabriel Fauré was born in Pamiers, Ariège in the Pyrenees region of France. Déodat de Séverac, another Romantic music composer, was also born in the region, and, following his schooling in Paris, he returned to Occitania to compose; he sought to incorporate the music indigenous to the area into his compositions.

Occitan cuisine is considered Mediterranean, but has some specific features that separate it from Catalan cuisine or Italian cuisine. Indeed, because of the size of Occitania and the great diversity of landscapes- from the mountaineering of the Pyrenees and the Alps, rivers and lakes, and finally the Mediterranean and Atlantic coast – it can be considered as a highly varied cuisine. Compared to other Mediterranean cuisines, Occitan gastronomy significantly uses basic elements and flavors, such as meat, fish and vegetables, along with the frequent usage of olive oil ; elements from Atlantic coast cuisine are also common, such as cheeses, pastes, creams, butters and other high-calorie foods. Well-renowned meals common on the Mediterranean coast include ratatolha (the equivalent of Catalan samfaina), alhòli, bolhabaissa (similar to Italian Brodetto alla Vastese), pan golçat (bread with olive oil), and salads with mainly olives, rice, corn and wine. Another significant aspect that distinguishes Occitan cuisine from that of its Mediterranean neighbors is the abundant amount of aromatic herbs; some of them are typically Mediterranean, like parsley, rosemary, thyme, oregano or again basil.

Some world-renowned traditional meals are Provençal ratatolha (ratatouille), alhòli (aioli) and adauba (Provençal stew), Niçard salada nissarda (Salad Niçoise) and pan banhat (Pan-bagnat), Limousin clafotís (clafoutis), Auvergnat aligòt (aligot), Languedocien caçolet (cassoulet), or again Gascon fetge gras (foie gras).

Occitania is also home of a great variety of cheeses (like Roquefort, Bleu d'Auvergne, Cabécou, Cantal, Fourme d'Ambert, Laguiole, Pélardon, Saint-Nectaire, Salers), and a great diversity of wines (such as Bordeaux, Rhône wine, Gaillac wine, Saint-Émilion wine, Blanquette de Limoux, Muscat de Rivesaltes, Provence wine, Cahors wine, Jurançon). Alcohols such as Pastis and Marie Brizard or brandies such as Armagnac and Cognac are also produced in the area.

Occitano-Romance (Catalan : llengües occitanoromàniques ; Occitan : leng(u)as occitanoromanicas ; Aragonese : luengas occitanoromanicas) is a branch of the Romance language group that encompasses, in the narrowest sense, the Catalan / Valencian and Occitan languages spoken in parts of southern France and eastern Spain, with Aragonese also occasionally included.

The classification of Occitano-Romance languages within the wider Romance language family has been a subject of a long-standing debate due to its transitional nature in the Western Romance dialect continuum.

The Gardiol language has been classified by Glottolog as an independent language in the Occitanic language family, but has also been classified as a dialect of Occitan.

The group covers the languages of the southern part of France (Occitania including Northern Catalonia), eastern Spain (Catalonia, Valencian Community, Balearic Islands, La Franja, Carche, Northern Aragon), together with Andorra, Monaco, parts of Italy (Occitan Valleys, Alghero, Guardia Piemontese), and historically in the County of Tripoli and the possessions of the Crown of Aragon. The existence of this group of languages is discussed on both linguistic and political bases.

The classification of Occitano-Romance languages has been debated since the middle of the 19th century. According to some linguists, both Occitan and Catalan / Valencian should be considered genealogically Gallo-Romance languages. Other linguists concur in regards to Occitan but consider Catalan and Aragonese to be part of the Ibero-Romance languages. The matter is complicated by the group's transitional nature and qualities within the Western Romance dialect continuum ; Occitano-Romance languages maintain a level of mutual intelligibility as well as shared characteristics with both neighboring Gallo-Romance and Ibero-Romance. They have also historically been heavily influenced by and borrowed from both of those language groups which further obscures clear classification.

The issue is as political as it is linguistic as the division into Gallo-Romance languages and Ibero-Romance languages was contemporaneous with nation-building of the current nation states of France and Spain and so is based more on territorial criteria than historic and linguistic criteria. In the early 21st century, Occitan and Catalan, the group's two major representatives, are generally spoken regionally alongside the dominant state languages, namely French and Spanish. One of the main proponents of the unity of the languages of the Iberian Peninsula was Spanish philologist Ramón Menéndez Pidal, and for a long time, others such as Swiss linguist Wilhelm Meyer-Lübke (Das Katalanische, Heidelberg, 1925) have supported the kinship of Occitan and Catalan. Also, due to Aragonese not having been studied as much as both Catalan and Occitan, many people still label it as a Spanish dialect.

From the 8th century to the 13th century, there was no clear sociolinguistic distinction between Occitania and Catalonia. For instance, the Provençal troubadour, Albertet de Sestaró, says: "Monks, tell me which according to your knowledge are better: the French or the Catalans? And here I shall put Gascony, Provence, Limousin, Auvergne and Viennois while there shall be the land of the two kings." In Marseille, a typical Provençal song is called 'Catalan song'.

Aragonese is a language which has not been studied as much as Catalan and Occitan. On many occasions throughout history, people have disregarded it and labeled it as a Spanish dialect, mainly because of extralinguistic reasons such as its small extension and the fact that it's spoken in rural areas.

The language has been minoritized for centuries and labelled as either a broken dialect or as a second class language. Spanish became the language of prestige right away after the union of Aragon with Castile and the use of Aragonese started to decline. Even though it had been used by the government and administration for many years, it rapidly became a language that was used informally and looked down upon.

This situation of diglossia meant the beginning of a period (that still lasts) of a strong Spanish influence. Many Spanish loanwords entered Aragonese and its evolution from that moment on was tied to Spanish. Some grammatical features documented in medieval Aragonese were lost, such as the usage of the Latin ending -ŪTUM for the creation of the participle verb forms such as in perduto (lost) instead of -ĪTUM that ended up being perdito, which later became perdiu in many dialects due to Spanish influence as well. Many of the loanwords that entered Aragonese were names of new concepts, but many others were basic words of the everyday life such as numbers or the days of the week. Aragonese morphology could have been affected as well. One example of the morphological influence of Spanish is the treatment of the terminal Latin vowels -Ĕ, -Ŭ (later -e, -o). Aragonese tends to lose the final unstressed -e that Spanish preserves (compare the word for milk in Aragonese leit and in Spanish leche), while the final -o is maintained more depending on the dialect and the degree of Spanish influence. Some dialects, such as Belsetan, a central dialect, tend to have the apocope of -o when the word ends with -n, -r and -l, such as in camín (path), rar (rare) and pel (hair). However, this apocope of -o but also the apocope of -e have been receding in territory and usage, and the final vowels have been reintroduced in many dialects.

On the other hand, the recent studies have allowed us to get a better insight into the core of the Aragonese language. Despite the previously mentioned influence, there are still many features that bring Aragonese closer to both Occitan and Catalan. The lexicon of everyday life is harder to change after being influenced by other languages. The lexicon of plants, animals and the rural life poses a great example of this:

Another example would be the use of the verb "to be". Aragonese and Occitan use one verb for what Catalan and the Ibero-Romance languages use two:

The conjugation of the Aragonese and Occitan forms comes close to the conjugation of ser in Catalan, and this sets the three languages apart from the Ibero-Romance languages with the kind of uses that the verb "to be" has. For example with the sentence "We are here" we can see the difference in use of the verb "to be" when used to talk about a location:

Romance languages form what is called a dialect continuum. Each language within this continuum tends to be linked to another via a dialect that shares many traits with the other language. Usually these dialects are far enough from the standard forms of the two languages they link, and sometimes they can be difficult to classify as a dialect of language X or language Y. Between Aragonese and Catalan there is a linguistic variety called Ribagorçan. This constitutive dialect makes a clean transition between Aragonese and Catalan. Some linguists consider that it belongs to the Aragonese language, some others that it belongs to the Catalan language and some others that it constitutes a micro-language on its own. Nowadays, most of the dialect is considered to be Aragonese and it is recognized as such by the regional governments. The matter is that the Ribagorçan variety has more characteristics that take it closer to Catalan than other Aragonese dialects. Therefore some of the people that argue that Ribagorçan is Catalan, could argue that it should be classified alongside Catalan.

It's important to note that, unlike between Aragonese and Catalan, there isn't a constitutive dialect between Aragonese and Spanish. During the Middle Ages, there were two linguistic varieties (Riojan and Navarrese respectively) between Old Spanish and Medieval High Aragonese. However these two varieties were replaced by Spanish and the dialect continuum was broken between the Ibero-Romance languages and Aragonese plus the other Romance languages.

Most linguists separate Catalan and Occitan, but both languages have been treated as one in studies by Occitan linguists attempting to classify the dialects of Occitan in supradialectal groups, as is the case of Pierre Bec and, more recently, of Domergue Sumien.

Both join together in an Aquitano-Pyrenean or Pre-Iberian group including Catalan, Gascon and a part of Lengadocian, leaving the rest of Occitan in one (Sumien: Arverno-Mediterranean) or two groups (Bec: Arverno-Mediterranean, Central Occitan).

The answer to the question of whether Gascon or Catalan should be considered dialects of Occitan or separate languages has long been a matter of opinion or convention, rather than based on scientific grounds. However, two recent studies support Gascon's being considered a distinct language. For the very first time, a quantifiable, statistics-based approach was applied by Stephan Koppelberg in an attempt to solve this issue. Based on the results he obtained, he concludes that Catalan, Occitan, and Gascon should all be considered three distinct languages. More recently, Y. Greub and J.P. Chambon (Sorbonne University, Paris) demonstrated that the formation of Proto-Gascon was already complete on the eve of the 7th century, whereas Proto-Occitan was not yet formed at that time. These results induced linguists to do away with the conventional classification of Gascon, favoring the "distinct language" alternative. Both studies supported the early intuition of late Kurt Baldinger, a specialist of both medieval Occitan and medieval Gascon, who recommended that Occitan and Gascon be classified as separate languages.

This evolution does not occur when the ellision of -e or -o results in a terminal consonant cluster.

Due to the evolution of the word ÁRBORE(M) in Aragonese, this example doesn't show the conservation of -e or -o that prevents a terminal consonant cluster.

Most of the differences of the vowel system stem from neutralizations that take place on unstressed syllables. In both languages a stressed syllable has a great number of possible different vowels, while phonologically different vowels end up being articulated in the same way in an unstressed syllable. Although this neutralization is common to both languages, the details differ markedly. In Occitan the form of neutralization depends on whether a vowel is pretonic (before the stressed syllable) or posttonic (after the stressed syllable). For example /ɔ/ articulates as [u] in pretonic position and as [o] in posttonic position, and only as [ɔ] in stressed position. In contrast, neutralization in Catalan is the same regardless of the position of the unstressed syllable (although it differs from dialect to dialect). Many of these changes happened in the 14th or late 13th century.

Slightly older are the palatalizations present in Occitan before a palatal or velar consonant:

The diphthongs and also set all these three languages apart, having each language different patterns and systems. Most of these come from the diphthongisation of Latin words with monophthongs, such as the descendants of the words like FĒSTA (party) or OCULUS (eye), or the monophthongization of Latin words that already had a diphthong, like CAUSA (thing). Some examples:

A noticeable difference heard by speakers of Catalan and Aragonese is the use of rounded vowels in Occitan. Both Catalan and Aragonese lack rounded vowels. However, Occitan has /y/ and /œ/ in words like luna and fuèlha respectively.

The treatment of the Latin geminate -nn- also differs in Occitan. While Catalan and Aragonese tend to reduce the -nn- into a [ɲ], in Occitan it turned into a [n]:

On another page, while Occitan uses exclusively the simple past tense, Catalan (most dialects) and Aragonese (Eastern dialects) use another past tense called the periphrastic past. This tense is made of the sum of the conjugation of the verb to go plus the verb performing the action in infinitive form:

Something that sets apart Aragonese and some Catalan dialects (such as central Valencian or Ribagorçan Catalan) from Occitan and most of the Catalan dialects is the devoicing or desonorization that happened in the former group. Phonemes such as /dʒ/ and /z/, which were replaced by /tʃ/ and /θ/.

Aragonese is the only of the three languages to have the -mbr- consonant cluster between vowels. Note that Ribagorçan tends to lose them as well:

Catalan also has some things that sets it apart from the other two is the palatalization of the initial L. From /l/ to /ʎ/.

Those dialects of Aragonese that palatalize the consonant clusters mentioned before, also palatalize the initial L:

Another trait is the use of the descendants of the pronoun EGO when used as the object of a preposition. Most Catalan dialects and the Ibero-Romance languages distinguish between the pronoun used as a subject EGO and the object of a preposition MIHĪ̆, while both Aragonese and Occitan use the descendant of EGO :

Moreover, Aragonese and Occitan do not have proparoxytones, words with stress on the antepenultimate (third last) syllable. However, Catalan has them. The word "music" can be an example of this:

Variations in the spellings and pronunciations of numbers in several Occitano-Romance dialects:

The numbers 1 and 2 have both feminine and masculine forms agreeing with the object they modify.

The occupation of the Ruhr (German: Ruhrbesetzung) was the period from 11 January 1923 to 25 August 1925 when French and Belgian troops occupied the Ruhr region of Germany.

The occupation of the heavily industrialized Ruhr district came in response to Germany's repeated defaults on the reparations payments required under the terms of the Treaty of Versailles. The French and Belgians intended to force Germany to supply the coal and other raw materials that were part of the reparations. With the support of the German government, civilians in the area engaged in passive resistance and civil disobedience which largely shut down the economy of the region. Acts of sabotage and retaliation took place as well. An estimated 137 civilians were killed and 600 injured during the occupation.

The ongoing economic crisis in Germany worsened considerably as a result of the occupation. The government paid for its support of idled workers and businesses primarily by printing paper money. This contributed to the hyperinflation that brought major hardships to Germans across the country. After Germany stabilized its currency in late 1923, France and Belgium, facing economic and international pressures of their own, accepted the 1924 Dawes Plan drawn up by an international team of experts. It restructured and lowered Germany's war reparations payments and led to France and Belgium withdrawing their troops from the Ruhr by August 1925.

The occupation of the Ruhr contributed to the growth of radical right-wing movements in Germany. Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party used the occupation as part of their justification for the Beer Hall Putsch of November 1923, which brought them wide public attention for the first time.

Under the terms of the Treaty of Versailles (1919) which formally ended World War I, the west bank of the river Rhine was occupied by the Allies, and the east bank within 50 kilometres of the river – which included the Ruhr – was demilitarized (Article 42). In addition, Germany was forced to accept responsibility for the damages caused in the war and was obliged to pay reparations to the Allies. Since the war in the west was fought predominantly on French soil, the bulk of the reparations were owed to France. The total sum demanded from Germany – 226 billion gold marks (US $ 888 billion in 2024) – was determined by the Inter-Allied Reparation Commission. In 1921, the amount was reduced to 132 billion (at that time US $31.4 billion; US $ 436 billion in 2024). Since part of the payments were in raw materials, some German factories ran short and the German economy suffered, further damaging the country's ability to pay. France was also suffering from a high deficit accrued during World War I, which resulted in a depreciation of the French franc. France increasingly looked towards German reparations payments as a way to stabilize its economy.

Due to delays in reparations deliveries, French and Belgian troops, with British approval, occupied Duisburg and Düsseldorf in the demilitarized zone of the Rhineland on 8 March 1921. In the London ultimatum of 5 May 1921, the Allies attempted to enforce their payment plan for 132 billion gold marks by threatening to occupy the Ruhr if Germany refused to accept the terms. The German government of Chancellor Joseph Wirth accepted the ultimatum on 11 May and began its "policy of fulfilment" (Erfüllungspolitik). By attempting to meet the payments, it intended to show the Allies that the demands were beyond Germany's economic means.

As a consequence of Germany's failure to make timber deliveries in December 1922, the Reparation Commission declared Germany in default. Particularly galling to the French was that the timber quota the Germans defaulted on was based on an assessment of capacity the Germans made themselves and subsequently lowered. The Allies believed that the government of Chancellor Wilhelm Cuno, who had succeeded Joseph Wirth in November 1922, had defaulted on the timber deliveries deliberately as a way of testing the will of the Allies to enforce the treaty. Raymond Poincaré, the French prime minister, hoped for joint Anglo-French economic sanctions against Germany but opposed military action. By December 1922, however, he saw coal for French steel production and payments in money as laid out in the Treaty of Versailles draining away. French and Belgian delegates on the Reparation Commission urged occupying the Ruhr as a way of forcing Germany to pay more, while the British delegate favoured lowering the payments. The conflict was brought to a head by a German default on coal deliveries in early January 1923, which was the thirty-fourth coal default in the previous thirty-six months. After much deliberation, Poincaré decided to occupy the Ruhr on 11 January 1923 in order to exact the reparations. Poincaré knew that it would cost France as well as Germany and told reporters on 29 January 1923:

Paralyzing the mining industry in the Ruhr may inflict hardships on France as well as Germany, but Germany is the greater loser and France will show the endurance necessary to outwit the German Government.... French metallurgy is ready to suspend all operations, if necessary, to prove to the Germans that we are in earnest and intend to pursue our policy even if we suffer also.

According to historian Sally Marks, the real issue during the Ruhrkampf (Ruhr campaign), as the Germans labelled the resistance to the French occupation, was not the German defaults on coal and timber deliveries but the sanctity of the Versailles Treaty. Poincaré often argued to the British that letting the Germans defy Versailles in regards to reparations would create a precedent that would lead to the Germans dismantling the rest of the Versailles treaty. Finally, Poincaré argued that once the chains that had bound Germany in Versailles were destroyed, it was inevitable that Germany would plunge the world into another world war.

Between 11 and 16 January 1923, French and Belgian troops under the command of French General Jean Degoutte, initially numbering 60,000 men and later climbing to 100,000, occupied the entire Ruhr area as far east as Dortmund.

The French immediately took over civil administration from the Germans. In order to determine the capacity of the smelters and mines to fulfil the reparations, the Inter-Allied Mission for Control of Factories and Mines (MICUM) also moved in with the French and Belgian expeditionary corps. MICUM consisted of 72 French, Belgian and Italian experts, most of whom were engineers.

It is not entirely clear whether Poincaré was concerned with more than just providing reparations. According to some historians, he sought a special status for the Rhineland and the Ruhr comparable to that of the Saar region, in which affiliation with Germany would have been purely formal and France would have assumed a dominant position.

The government of the United Kingdom categorised the occupation of the Ruhr as illegal. The United States government condemned the occupation as a reprehensible "policy of force".

The occupation was met by a campaign of both passive resistance and civil disobedience from the German inhabitants of the Ruhr. Chancellor Cuno immediately encouraged the passive resistance, and on January 13, the Reichstag voted 283 to 12 to approve it as a formal policy. Officials were told not to cooperate with the occupying forces, and deliveries of reparation material were stopped. Protests against the occupation broke out across Germany. The Reichstag, recognizing that the extraordinary nature of the event could not be met using normal parliamentary measures, passed an enabling act on 24 February. It gave the Cuno government the power to use all necessary measures to resist the French, but Cuno made relatively little use of it.

The French initially planned to resume normal operation of German factories and mines using the workers already in place. Given the Germans' refusal to work under French oversight, that proved to be impossible. Instead, strike leaders were arrested and French strikebreakers were brought in. Attempts to ship out reserves of coal failed when German railroad officials and workers walked off the job and in some places removed signage from stations and signal boxes. The French once again brought in their own people to take control of the railways, although it took several months to get them running properly. The situation for the French was further complicated by the fact that the Rhenish-Westphalian Coal Syndicate moved its headquarters (including, crucially, its archives and operational plans) out of the occupied district and thus from control by MICUM. Coal taken out of the Ruhr dropped to less than the French had been receiving previous to the occupation. The Germans also stopped importing iron ore, which caused significant financial losses in the French iron mining region of Lorraine.

Even though relatively little violence accompanied the passive resistance, French authorities imposed between 120,000 and 150,000 sentences against resisting Germans. Some involved prison sentences, but the overwhelming majority were deportations from the Ruhr district and the Rhineland to the unoccupied part of Germany. Among those arrested were Fritz Thyssen of the Thyssen steel company for his refusal to deliver coal and Gustav Krupp, who held a large public funeral following an incident at the Krupp works in which thirteen striking workers were killed by French troops. Krupp was sentenced to fifteen years in prison and fined 100 million marks, but he served only seven months and was released when passive resistance was called off. The French also set up a blockade between the Ruhr and the rest of Germany. Deliveries of food, which were not included in the blockade, were nevertheless so badly disrupted that between 200,000 and 300,000 undernourished or starving children were evacuated from the Ruhr.

Acts of sabotage were carried out by both nationalists and communists. They blew up train tracks and canal bridges to stop the delivery of reparations material to France, attacked French and Belgian posts and killed at least eight collaborators. Some of the arms used by adherents of right-wing paramilitary groups were clandestinely supplied by the Reichswehr, the German armed forces of the Weimar Republic. In one incident of sabotage that gained wide public attention, the National Socialist Albert Schlageter was executed by the French for destroying a section of railroad track. He became a martyr figure in Germany, most notably to Adolf Hitler and the Nazis.

On the night of Sunday, 10 June 1923, two Frenchmen were shot dead in Dortmund by unknown persons. At midday the occupying forces imposed a curfew from 9 p.m. to 5 a.m. Dortmund residents who had gone on an excursion into the surrounding countryside were not informed of the measure. Six men from Dortmund and a Swiss citizen were shot without warning on their return. The burial of the Dortmunders on 15 June was attended by 50,000 people.

Acts of violence and accidents caused by the occupying forces had resulted in 137 deaths and 603 injuries by August 1924, shortly before the passive resistance was called off. Monetary damages to the economy of the Ruhr caused by the occupation were estimated at between 3.5 and 4 billion gold marks.

In addition to calling for passive resistance, Chancellor Cuno and his government undertook to support the workers idled by the shutdown of factories and mines. Ruhr industrial firms agreed not to lay off their employees and have them stay on to repair and maintain equipment. The government in return provided the firms with low interest loans and direct compensation. It also paid the salaries of civil service employees who were not working. From 60 to 100 percent of all wages in the Ruhr were in the end paid by the government. Since it lacked any other means to meet the enormous costs, it printed more and more paper money. The move helped spark the hyperinflation of 1923, during which Germany's currency, the Papiermark, fell from 17,000 to the US dollar at the beginning of the year to 4.2 trillion at the peak of the inflation. Germany's financial system broke down. There were food riots in the Ruhr and a nationwide wave of strikes against the Cuno government, which resigned on 12 August 1923.

Germany's new government, led by Gustav Stresemann of the German People's Party announced the end of passive resistance on 26 September. Two months later, the government replaced the Papiermark with the Rentenmark and restored the value of Germany's currency. In order to handle the economic fallout from the Ruhr occupation, Stresemann made extensive use of a second enabling act of 13 October.

Chancellor Stresemann returned to the policy of fulfilment introduced by Joseph Wirth. Stresemann's goal, however, was to improve international relations by making a good faith effort to comply with the terms of the Treaty of Versailles. He ordered striking workers (from the Cuno strikes) back to work and announced Germany's intention to once again make reparations payments. The moves restored enough international confidence in Germany so that when Stresemann sought discussions with the Allied Powers which would take into consideration what Germany was financially capable of paying, the Reparations Commission set up the Dawes committee, headed by the American economist Charles Dawes. It recommended that total reparations be reduced from 132 billion to 50 billion marks. Germany also received a loan of 800 million gold marks, financed primarily by American banks.

British Labour Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald, who viewed the 132 billion figure as impossible for Germany to pay, successfully pressured French Premier Édouard Herriot into a series of concessions to Germany. The British diplomat Sir Eric Phipps commented that "The London Conference was for the French man in the street one long Calvary as he saw M. Herriot abandoning one by one the cherished possessions of French preponderance on the Reparation Commission, the right of sanctions in the event of German default, the economic occupation of the Ruhr, the French-Belgian railroad Régie, and finally, the military occupation of the Ruhr within a year". Under heavy Anglo-American financial pressure as well – the decline in the value of the franc made the French open to pressure from Wall Street and the City of London – the French agreed to the Dawes Plan. Following approval by the German Reichstag, the plan went into effect on 1 September 1924. The financial burden on Germany was eased, and its international relations improved.

On 3 September 1924, the Inter-Allied Rhineland High Commission returned control of local administration and the economy to the Germans. An amnesty was decreed, and most outward signs of the occupation largely disappeared from public view. The last French troops evacuated Düsseldorf and Duisburg along with the city's important harbour in Duisburg- Ruhrort on 25 August 1925.

The French invasion of Germany did much to boost sympathy for the German republic internationally, although no action was taken at the League of Nations since the occupation was technically legal under the Treaty of Versailles. France's allies Poland and Czechoslovakia opposed the occupation because of their commercial links with Germany and their concern that the action would push Germany into a closer alliance with the Soviet Union.

Back on 12 July 1922 when Germany demanded a moratorium on reparation payments, tension developed between the French government of Poincaré and the coalition government of David Lloyd George. The British Labour Party demanded peace and denounced Lloyd George as a troublemaker. It saw Germany as the martyr of the postwar period and France as vengeful and the principal threat to peace in Europe. The tension between France and the United Kingdom peaked during a conference in Paris in early 1923, by which time the coalition led by Lloyd George had been replaced by the Conservatives. The Labour Party opposed the occupation of the Ruhr throughout 1923, which it rejected as French imperialism. The British Labour Party believed it had won when Poincaré accepted the Dawes Plan in 1924.

Despite his disagreements with the United Kingdom, Poincaré desired to preserve the Anglo-French entente and moderated his aims to a degree. His major goal was winning the extraction of reparation payments from Germany. His inflexible methods and authoritarian personality led to the failure of his diplomacy. After Poincaré's coalition lost the 1924 French legislative election to Édouard Herriot 's Radical -led coalition, France began making concessions to Germany.

According to historian Sally Marks, the occupation of the Ruhr "was profitable and caused neither the German hyperinflation, which began in 1922 and ballooned because of German responses to the Ruhr occupation, nor the franc's 1924 collapse, which arose from French financial practices and the evaporation of reparations". Marks suggests that the profits, after Ruhr-Rhineland occupation costs, were nearly 900 million gold marks.

After the government in Berlin called an end to passive resistance to the Ruhr occupation, the government of Bavaria declared a state of emergency and named its minister president, Gustav Ritter von Kahr, state commissioner general with dictatorial powers. In response, German President Friedrich Ebert instituted a state of emergency throughout the country and transferred executive power to Minister of Defence Otto Gessler. Kahr and two associates advocated a march on Berlin to overthrow the government, but on 8 November 1923 Adolf Hitler and members of the Nazi Party broke into their meeting and began the Beer Hall Putsch. They justified the attempt, which brought them wide public attention for the first time, in part by the "chaos" caused by the occupation of the Ruhr.

The French occupation of the Ruhr accelerated the formation of right-wing parties. The ruling centre-left coalition was discredited by its inability to address the crisis, while the far left Communist Party of Germany remained inactive for much of the period under the direction of the Soviet Politburo and the Comintern. Disoriented by the defeat in the war, conservatives in 1922 founded a consortium of nationalist associations, the Vereinigten Vaterländischen Verbände Deutschlands (VVVD, "United Patriotic Associations of Germany"). Their goal was to forge a united front of the right. In the climate of national resistance against the French Ruhr invasion, the VVVD reached its peak strength. It advocated policies of uncompromising monarchism, corporatism and opposition to the Treaty of Versailles. However, it lacked internal unity and money and so never managed to unite the right. It had faded away by the late 1920s, as the NSDAP (Nazi party) grew in strength.

Odette Kahn (French pronunciation: [ ɔdɛt kan ], 1923–1982) was a leading authority on wine and editor of the La Revue du vin de France (Review of French wine) and of Cuisine et Vins de France (Food and Wines of France). She was a judge at the historic Paris Wine Tasting of 1976. Kahn was outraged at the results of the tasting, unsuccessfully demanded her ballot back, refused later to speak to organizer Steven Spurrier after the event, claimed fraud, and wrote disparagingly about the wine competition. This event was later portrayed in the movie Bottle Shock.

Kahn was an expert in the field of French gastronomy and wines, for which she was a well-known ambassador throughout the world.

After completing studies in business at HEC Jeunes Filles, she became assistant director and later editor-in-chief of two magazines, Cuisine et Vins de France [ fr ] and Revue du Vin de France. In 1968, after the death of Madeleine Decure, Kahn became director of Société Française d'Éditions Vinicoles, publisher of Cuisine et Vins de France and Revue du Vin de France.

She was a member of the International Academy of Wine, as well as 40 wine and gastronomy fraternities throughout the world. She is the author of the cookbook La Petite et la Grande Cuisine, published by Calmann-Lévy in 1977. She also collaborated in the writing of several other books, including Cuisine sans Souci (1974) and La Vraie Cuisine de l'Alsace (1976).

Until the early 1980s, she was in charge of the national Meilleur sommelier de France [ fr ] competition and served as general secretary of the Association des Restauratrices Cuisinières, which she cofounded with Annie Desvignes [ fr ]. Kahn also founded the Amitiés Gastronomiques Internationales association.

She participated in numerous radio and television broadcasts, and was a member of the jury in some of the most renowned gastronomic contests. She received many awards, including the Chevalier du Mérite National, Chevalier du Mérite Agricole, and the Medal of the City of Paris.

During the 1976 Judgement of Paris wine tasting, she unsuccessfully demanded her scorecard back after rating two Californian wines higher than any French one.

Camille Hyacinthe Odilon Barrot (English: / b ɑː ˈ r oʊ / ba-ROH, French: [ kamij jasɛ̃t ɔdilɔ̃ baʁo ] ; 19 July 1791 – 6 August 1873) was a French politician who was briefly head of the council of ministers under the presidency of Louis Napoleon Bonaparte.

Barrot was born at Villefort, Lozère. He belonged to a legal family, his father, an advocate of Toulouse, having been a member of the Convention who had voted against the death of Louis XVI. Odilon Barrot's earliest recollections were of the October insurrection of 1795. He was sent to the military school of Saint-Cyr, but later moved to the Lycee Napoleon to study law and was called to the Parisian bar in 1811. He married the granddaughter of the liberal politician Guillaume-Xavier Labbey de Pompières (1751–1831). He was the brother of Adolphe Barrot and Ferdinand Barrot.

He was placed in the office of the politician Jean Mailhe, who was advocate before the council of state and the court of cassation and was proscribed at the second restoration. Barrot eventually succeeded him in both positions. His dissatisfaction with the Restoration government was shown in his conduct during some political trials. For his opposition in 1820 to a law by which any person might be arrested and detained on a warrant signed by three ministers, he was summoned before a court of assize, but acquitted. Although intimate with Lafayette and others, he took no share in their schemes for the overthrow of the government, but in 1827 he joined the association known as " Aide-toi, le ciel t'aidera ".

He presided over the banquet given by the society to the 221 deputies who had signed the address of March 1830 to Charles X, and threatened to reply to force by force. After the ordinances of 26 July 1830, he joined the National Guard and took an active part in the revolution. As secretary of the municipal commission, which sat at the hôtel-de-ville and formed itself into a provisional government, he was charged to convey to the chamber of deputies a protest embodying the terms which the advanced Liberals wished to impose on the king to be elected. He supported the idea of a constitutional monarchy against the extreme Republicans, and he was appointed one of the three commissioners chosen to escort Charles X out of France.

On his return he was nominated prefect of the Seine département. His concessions to the Parisian mob and his extreme gentleness towards those who demanded the prosecution of the ministers of Charles X led to an unflattering comparison with Jérôme Pétion under similar circumstances. Louis-Philippe I 's government was far from satisfying his desires for reform, and he persistently urged the "broadening of the bases of the monarchy," while he protested his loyalty to the dynasty. He was returned to the chamber of deputies for the department of Eure in 1831. The day after the demonstration of June 1832 on the occasion of the funeral of General Lamarque, he made himself indirectly the mouthpiece of the Democrats in an interview with Louis Philippe, which is given at length in his Mêmoires. Subsequently, in pleading before the court of cassation on behalf of one of the rioters, he secured the annulling of the judgments given by the council of war.

The death of the Duke of Orleans in 1842 was a blow to Barrot's party, which sought to substitute the regency of the Duchess of Orleans for that of the Duke of Nemours in the event of the succession of the Comte de Paris. In 1846 Barrot made a tour in the Near East, returning in time to take part for a second time in the preliminaries of revolution. He organized banquets of the disaffected in the various cities of France, and demanded electoral reform to avoid revolution. He did not foresee the strength of the outbreak for which his eloquence had prepared the way, and clung to the programme of 1830. He tried to support the regency of the duchess in the chamber on 24 February, only to find that the time was past for half-measures.

After the Revolution of 1848, Barrot acquiesced to the republic and gave his support to General Cavaignac.

In the December 1848 election for President of the republic, Napoleon won with 5,434,266 votes to 1,448,107 for Cavaignac. Napoleon took his oath on 20 December 1848 a day ahead of schedule, and appointed a ministry that included Barrot and the conservative Frédéric Alfred Pierre, comte de Falloux. Barrot was Minister of Justice and "president of the council of ministers when Napoleon was absent". Following national elections, the Constituent Assembly was replaced by the Legislative Assembly, which sat for the first time on 28 May 1849. On 2 June 1849 a new ministry was announced, again headed by Barrot. It included de Tocqueville as Minister of Foreign Affairs. This ministry was dissolved by Napoleon on 31 October 1849. The new ministry did not have a "president when Napoleon was absent". A biographer said that Barrot had hoped to extract Liberal measures, but was dismissed as soon as he had served the president's purpose of avoiding open conflict.

After the coup d'état of December 1851 Barrot was one of those who sought to accuse Napoleon of high treason. He was imprisoned for a short time and retired from active politics for some ten years. He was drawn once more into affairs by the hopes of reform held out by Émile Ollivier, accepting in 1869 the presidency of an extraparliamentary committee on decentralization. After the fall of the empire he was nominated by Adolphe Thiers, whom he had supported under Louis Philippe, as president of the council of state, but his powers were failing, and he had only filled his new office for about a year when he died at Bougival.

Barrot was described by Paul Thureau-Dangin as "the most solemn of the undecided, the most meditating of the unwise, the happiest of the ambitious, the most austere of the courtiers of the crowd" (le plus solennel des indécis, le plus méditatif des irréfléchis, le plus heureux des ambitieux, le plus austere des courtisans de la foule).

This article deals with the conventions and uses of odonymy in France.

It is possible to distinguish several eras where we observe a similar typology of street names on French territory:

At the end of the 13th century, with the expansion and population of cities like Paris, the need is felt to separate the houses from each other. The names respond at this time to a functional logic. The name of the road is that of the place it serves, this place being religious ("place de l'Eglise", "rue des Capucins") or civil ("place du marché", "rue des Bouchers", often names in reference to the trades which are grouped together in a street which takes the name or "houses where the sign hangs"), and so on.

From 1600, on an idea of the Duke of Sully, the streets adopted names that had no direct connection with the designated place, while their name gradually became a public and royal monopoly: according to researcher Dominique Badariotti, the latter "is therefore exercised as best it can, functioning better in Paris than in the provinces and valuing the powerful of the kingdom or regional notables"

In 2016 in France, the following 15 odonyms are the most frequently cited on street maps.

Several odonyms recalling important dates in the history of France also approach or exceed a thousand occurrences, if we combine the types of roads and the spelling variants; among others:

The Public Office for the Breton Language (Breton : Ofis Publik ar Brezhoneg ; French : Office public de la langue bretonne) was established on 15 October 2010 as a public institution, with state and regional cooperation and funding, to promote and develop teaching and use of the Breton language in daily life. It is an example of language revival efforts for minority languages in France.

One of its missions is to collect and distribute socio-linguistic data, in order to approach language revival with a basis in science and facts. Its remit is to collect data on the Breton language (Arsellva ar brezhoneg) and publish it, and advise communes on bilingual signage and place names.

It supports TermBret, the cooperative terminology service which publishes glossaries. In addition, it assists individuals, administrations and businesses who want to use the Breton language. (From 1 July 1999 to September 15, 1999, 42 administrations, associations or companies have made an appealed to the national government to allow use of Breton as an official language.)

It was established to replace the Ofis ar Brezhoneg/Office de la langue bretonne, which had been created on 1 May 1999 by the Region of Brittany. That office had a similar mission and worked mostly to promote use of Breton in daily life. In 2001 it initiated Ya d'ar brezhoneg (French : Oui au breton, English: Yes to Breton), an effort to encourage businesses to adopt use of Breton and provide bilingual resources, as well as to encourage communes to establish bilingual signs and tourist materials.

The Office is now an Établissement public de coopération culturelle [ fr ], a public institution run by a board of directors. They represent local authorities and the French state. It was presided over by Lena Louarn, a councillor elected in the Regional Council of Brittany until October 2021, when she was succeeded by regional councillor and deputy Paul Molac. The Office is based in Carhaix, where its director Fulup Jacq works. The Observatory of the Breton Language (l'Observatoire de la langue bretonne), led by the deputy director Olier ar Mogn, is located in Rennes.

Before October 2010, the OPB was an independent regional association, led by Lena Louarn between 1999 and 2010. Its budget of €1 million was primarily funded by the Brittany Region.

The Office participates in the promotion of Breton courses for adults. It has published data on participation in and centers for Breton courses for adults:

In the year 1998–1999, 9,300 adults followed a course (e.g. evening courses, correspondence). Of those, 1,200 were in Upper Brittany (550 in Ille-et-Vilaine and 462 in Loire-Atlantique). At the time, a total of 165 organizations organised evening courses in Brittany and 28 outside Brittany (of the latter, 15 are in the region of Paris).

In 2003, the Office prepared and published a road map of Brittany in the Breton language. (The map includes Loire-Atlantique, which was historically considered part of the region until 1941.)

In June 2024, the Office opened "Desketa", its free website for learning Breton.

In linguistics, Old Dutch (Modern Dutch : Oudnederlands) or Old Low Franconian (Modern Dutch: Oudnederfrankisch) is the set of dialects that evolved from Frankish spoken in the Low Countries during the Early Middle Ages, from around the 6th to the 12th century. Old Dutch is mostly recorded on fragmentary relics, and words have been reconstructed from Middle Dutch and Old Dutch loanwords in French.

Old Dutch is regarded as the primary stage in the development of a separate Dutch language. It was spoken by the descendants of the Salian Franks who occupied what is now the southern Netherlands, northern Belgium, part of northern France, and parts of the Lower Rhine regions of Germany. It evolved into Middle Dutch around the 12th century. The inhabitants of northern Dutch provinces, including Groningen, Friesland, and the coast of North Holland, spoke Old Frisian, and some in the east (Achterhoek, Overijssel, and Drenthe) instead spoke Old Saxon.

Within the field of historical philology, the terminology for the oldest historical phase of the Dutch language traditionally includes both Old Dutch as well as Old Low Franconian. In English linguistic publications, Old Netherlandic is occasionally used in addition to the aforementioned terms.

Old Low Franconian, derives from the linguistic category first devised by the German linguist Wilhelm Braune (1850–1926), who used the term Franconian as a wastebasket taxon for the early West Germanic texts that he could not readily classify as belonging to either Saxon, Alemannic or Bavarian and assumed to derive from the language of the Franks. He subsequently further divided this new grouping into Low, Middle and High Franconian based on the absence or presence of the Second Germanic consonant shift. With the exception of Dutch, modern linguistic research has challenged the direct diachronical connection to Old Frankish for most of the varieties grouped under the broader "Franconian" category. Nevertheless, the traditional terminology of the West Germanic varieties along assumed Late Classical tribal lines, typical of 19th and early 20th century Germanic linguistics, remains common.

Within historical linguistics Old Low Franconian is synonymous with Old Dutch. Depending on the author, the temporal boundary between Old Dutch and Old Frankish is either defined by the onset of the Second Germanic consonant shift in Eastern Frankish, the assimilation of an unattested coastal dialect showing North Sea Germanic -features by West Frankish during the closing of the 9th century, or a combination of both. Some linguists use the terms Old Low Franconian or West Frankish to specifically refer to the (very sparsely attested) varieties of Old Dutch spoken prior to its assimilation of the coastal dialect.

Old Dutch itself is further divided into Old West Dutch and Old East Dutch, with the descendants of Old West Dutch forming the dominant basis of the Middle Dutch literary language and Old East Dutch forming a noticeable substrate within the easternmost Dutch dialects, such as Limburgish.

Before the advent of Old Dutch or any of the Germanic languages, Germanic dialects were mutually intelligible. The North Sea Germanic languages were spoken in the whole of the coastal parts of the Netherlands and Belgium. Old Frisian was one of these languages, and elements of it survived through the Frisian language, spoken in the province of Friesland in the North of the Netherlands. In the rest of the coastal region, these languages were mostly displaced following the withdrawal to England of the migrating Angles, Saxons and Jutes, who gave rise to Old English.

It was largely replaced by Weser–Rhine Germanic dialects, spoken by the Salian Franks. It spread from northern Belgium and the southern Netherlands to the coast and evolved into Old Dutch. It has, however, a North sea Germanic substrate. Linguists typically date this transition to around the 5th century.

Old Dutch is divided into Old West Low Franconian and Old East Low Franconian (Limburgian); however, these varieties are very closely related, the divergence being that the latter shares more traits with neighboring historical forms of Central Franconian dialects such as Ripuarian and Moselle Franconian. While both forms of Low Franconian were instrumental to the framing of Middle Dutch, Old East Low Franconian did not contribute much to Standard Dutch, which is based on the consolidated dialects of Holland and Brabant.

During the Merovingian period, the Central Franconian dialects were influenced by Old Low Franconian (Old Dutch), resulting in certain linguistic loans which yielded a slight overlap of vocabulary, most of which relates to warfare. In addition is the subsumption of the High German consonant shift, a set of phonological changes beginning around the 5th or 6th century that did not influence Old Dutch but extensively influenced Central Franconian and other Old High German dialects.

Old English, Old Frisian and (to a lesser degree) Old Saxon share the application of the Ingvaeonic nasal spirant law. Old Dutch was considerably less affected than those other three languages, but a dialect continuum formed/existed between Old Dutch, Old Saxon and Old Frisian. Despite sharing some particular features, a number of disparities separate Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old English and Old Dutch. One such difference is that Old Dutch used -a as its plural a-stem noun ending, while Old Saxon and Old English employed -as or -os. Much of the grammatical variation between Old Dutch and Old Saxon is similar to that between Old Dutch and Old High German.

It is also found that Old Dutch had lost the dual number for its pronouns, unlike Old English, which used wit to refer to "the two of us". Old Dutch would have used we both to refer to that and to refer to many more people in the "us" group, much like Modern Dutch and English.

Old Dutch naturally evolved into Middle Dutch with some distinctions that approximate those found in most medieval West Germanic languages. The year 1150 is often cited as the time of the discontinuity, but it actually marks a time of profuse Dutch writing whose language is patently different from Old Dutch.

The most notable difference between Old and Middle Dutch is vowel reduction. Back vowels (a, o) in non-stressed syllables are rather frequent in Old Dutch, but in Middle Dutch, they are reduced to a schwa :

The following is a translation of Psalm 55 :18, taken from the Wachtendonck Psalms ; it shows the evolution of Dutch, from the original Old Dutch, written c. 900, to modern Dutch, but so accurately copies the Latin word order of the original that there is little information that can be garnered on Old Dutch syntax. In Modern Dutch, recasting is necessary to form a coherent sentence.

Old Dutch texts are extremely rare and much more limited than for related languages like Old English and Old High German. Most of the earliest texts written in the Netherlands were written in Latin, rather than Old Dutch. Some of the Latin texts, however, contained Old Dutch words interspersed with the Latin text. Also, it is hard to determine whether a text actually was written in Old Dutch, as the Germanic languages spoken at that time were not standardised and were much more similar to one another.

Several words that are known to have developed in the Netherlands before Old Dutch was spoken have been found, and they are sometimes called Oudnederlands (English: "Old Netherlandic" or "Old Dutch") in a geographic sense. The oldest known example, wad 'mudflat', is already mentioned c. 107–108 AD in Tacitus ' Histories (Book 5), in Latinised form as vadam (acc. sg.), as the name of a village, Vada, probably reflecting Early Germanic *wada. The word exclusively referred to the region and ground type that is now known as the Wadden Sea. However, since the word existed long before Old Dutch did (and even before its parent language, Frankish), it cannot be considered part of the vocabulary of Old Dutch but rather of Proto-Germanic.

This sentence has been interpreted as "Haþuþyw's. I/He grant(s) a flame (i.e. brand, sword) to the select". It was discovered on a sword sheath mounting, excavated in 1996 in the Dutch village of Bergakker and is perhaps better described as Frankish than Old Dutch (Frankish was the direct parent language of Old Dutch). The text however, shows the beginning of Old Dutch morphology. The word ann, found in the partially-translated inscription is coined as the oldest Dutch by linguists Nicoline van der Sijs and Tanneke Schoonheim from Genootschap Onze Taal. They attribute that word to the ancestor of the modern Dutch verb root gun, through the addition of the prefix ge-. (An English cognate probably survives in to own (up) in the sense of 'to acknowledge, concede'.) Its modern meaning is roughly "to think someone deserves something, to derive satisfaction from someone else's success", and it is commonly translated as "grant" or "bestow".

Glosses to the Salic law code (the Malberg glosses) contain several Old Dutch words and this full sentence written in the early 6th century, which is likely the earliest in the language. It translates as "I tell you: I am setting you free, serve". The phrase was used to free a serf. A lito (English: half-free) was a form of serf in the feudal system, a half-free farmer, who was connected to the land of the lord for whom he worked but not owned by that lord. In contrast, a slave was fully owned by the lord. The Old Dutch word and the Modern Dutch counterpart laat are both etymologically and in meaning undoubtedly related to the verb root laat (English: 'let go', 'release'), which may indicate the fairly free status of such person in relation to that a slave. The Old Dutch word lito is particularly recognisable in the verb's past tense lieten.

End ec forsacho allum dioboles uuercum and uuordum, Thunær ende Uuôden ende Saxnôte ende allum thêm unholdum thê hira genôtas sint.

The Utrecht Baptismal Vow, or Old Saxon Baptismal Vow, is a 9th-century baptismal vow that was found in a monastery library in the German city of Mainz but was written in the Dutch city of Utrecht. The sentence translates as "And I renounce all the deeds and words of the devil, Thunear, Wōden and Saxnōt, and all those fiends that are their companions". It mentions three Germanic pagan gods of the early Saxons which the reader is to forsake: Uuôden (" Woden "), Thunaer and Saxnōt. Scholar Rudolf Simek comments that the vow is of particular interest because it is the sole instance of the god Saxnōt mentioned in a religious context. One of many baptismal vows, it is now archived in the Vatican Codex pal. 577. Sometimes interpreteted as Old Saxon, a number of Dutch scholars have concluded the Baptismal Vow was actually written in the 8th century in Old Dutch. The difficulty in establishing whether the text was written in Old Saxon or Old Franconian is that those languages were very much alike.

Irlôsin sol an frithe sêla mîna fan thên thia ginâcont mi, wanda under managon he was mit mi

The Wachtendonck Psalms are a collection of Latin psalms, with a translation in an eastern variety of Old Dutch (Old East Low Franconian) which contains a number of Old High German elements. The example sentence above translates as "He will deliver my soul in peace from those who attack me, for, amongst many, he was with me." Probably based on a Central Franconian original, very little remains of the psalms. They were named after a manuscript that has not survived but was the source from which scholars believe the surviving fragments must have been copied. The manuscript was once owned by Canon Arnold Wachtendonck. The surviving fragments are handwritten copies made by the Renaissance scholar Justus Lipsius in the sixteenth century. Lipsius made a number of separate copies of what appeared to be the same material, but the versions do not always agree. In addition, scholars conclude that the numerous errors and inconsistencies in the fragments point not only to some carelessness or inattentiveness by the Renaissance scholars but also to errors in the now-lost manuscript out of which the material was copied. The language of the Psalms suggests that they were originally written in the 10th century.

Thes naghtes an minemo beddo vortheroda ich minen wino. Ich vortheroda hine ande ne vand sin niet.

This example sentence taken from the Leiden Willeram translates as "All night long on my bed I looked for the one my heart loves; I looked for him but did not find him". The manuscript, now in the library of the Leiden University in the Netherlands, contains an Old Dutch translation of an Old High German (East Franconian) commentary on Song of Solomon, written by the German abbot Williram of Ebersberg. The translation was done by a monk of the Abbey of Egmond, and so the manuscript's other name is Egmond Willeram. The text represents an imperfect attempt to translate the original into the local Old Dutch vernacular. The text contains many Old Dutch words as well as mistranslated words since the scribe must have been unfamiliar with some Old High German words in the original. It could nevertheless be regarded as the first book written in Old Dutch. However, since the book never left the abbey, it cannot be regarded as the start of a Dutch literature and did not influence later works.

Hebban olla vogala nestas hagunnan hinase hic enda thu, uuat unbidan uue nu.

Arguably the most famous text containing Old Dutch, the fragment is translated as "All birds have started making nests, except me and you, what are we waiting for?" The text is dated from around 1100 and written by a West Flemish monk in a convent in Rochester, England. For a long time, the sentence was commonly but erroneously considered to be the earliest in Dutch. However, it could be considered the oldest Dutch non-religious poetry. The text is usually considered a West Flemish dialect, but certain Ingvaeonic forms might be expected in any of the coastal dialects of Old English, Old Frisian, Old Saxon or Old Dutch. However, the -n of the third-person plural hebban, which is absent in both Old English and Frisian, identifies the language as Old Dutch (Old High German habent uses a different stem). Hagunnan and hi(c) have a prothetic h, which points also to West Flemish in which the h was frequently dropped or, in the written language, added before vowels (compare abent in the Latin version). However, it has been postulated that the text could equally well be Old English, more specifically Old Kentish.

nu saget mir einen kuning other greven, the an uren got wille gelouven, that se sagent, that ist gelogen, thes ist thaz arme volc bedrogen.

Translated as "Mention one king or earl who wants to believe in their god, what they say is a lie, that's how the people are being deceived", this fragment comes from an important source for Old Dutch: the Rhinelandic Rhyming Bible (Dutch: Rijnlandse Rijmbijbel ; German: Rheinische Reimbibel). The verse translation of biblical histories is attested only in a series of fragments from different writers. It contains Old Dutch (Low Franconian), Low German (Low Saxon) and High German (Rhine-Franconian) elements. It was likely composed in the northwest of Germany in the early 12th century, possibly in Werden Abbey, near Essen.

Phonologically, Old Dutch stands in between Old Saxon and Old High German, sharing some innovations with the latter, and others with the former.

The table below lists the consonantal phonemes of Old Dutch. For descriptions of the sounds and definitions of the terms, follow the links on the headings.

Final-obstruent devoicing of Proto-Germanic [β] to [f] occurred across the West Germanic languages, and thus also in Old Dutch. Old Dutch spelling also reveals final devoicing of other consonants, namely:

Final devoicing was countered by the syllable-initial voicing of voiceless fricatives, which made [v] and [f] allophones of each other.

Final devoicing appears much earlier in Old Dutch than it does Old Saxon and Old High German. In fact, by judging from the find at Bergakker, it would seem that the language already had inherited this characteristic from Old Frankish whereas Old Saxon and Old High German are known to have maintained word-final voiced obstruents much later (at least 900).

In unstressed syllables, only three vowels seem to have been reliably distinguished: open, front and back. In the Wachtendonck Psalms, the e and i merged in unstressed syllables, as did o and u. That led to variants like dagi and dage ("day", dative singular) and tungon and tungun ("tongue", genitive, dative, accusative singular and nominative, dative, accusative plural). The forms with e and o are generally found later on, showing the gradual reduction of the articulatory distinction, eventually merging into a schwa (/ə/). A short phrase from the gospel book of Munsterbilzen Abbey, written around 1130, still shows several unstressed vowels distinguished:

That was a late monument, however, as the merging of all unstressed short vowels was already well underway by that time. Most likely, the difference was maintained only in spelling traditions, but it had been mostly lost in speech. With the introduction of new scribal traditions in the 12th and 13th century, the practices were abandoned, and unstressed vowels were consistently written as e from that time onward.

Old Dutch was spelt using the Latin alphabet.

The length of a vowel was generally not represented in writing probably because the missionaries, who were the ones capable of writing and teaching how to write, tended to base the written language on Latin, which also did not make a distinction in writing: dag "day" (short vowel), thahton "they thought" (long vowel). Later on, the long vowels were sometimes marked with a macron to indicate a long vowel: ā. In some texts long vowels were indicated by simply doubling the vowel in question, as in the placename Heembeke and personal name Oodhelmus (both from charters written in 941 and 797 respectively).

Old Dutch may have preserved at least four of the six cases of Proto-Germanic: nominative, accusative, genitive and dative. A fifth case, the instrumental, could have also existed.

The -s ending in the masculine plural was preserved in the coastal dialects, as can be seen in the Hebban Olla Vogala text where nestas is used instead of nesta. Later on, the -s ending entered Hollandic dialects and became part of the modern standard language.

During the Old Dutch period, the distinction between the feminine ō -stems and ōn -stems began to disappear, when endings of one were transferred to the other declension and vice versa, as part of a larger process in which the distinction between the strong and weak inflection was being lost not only in feminine nouns but also in adjectives. The process is shown in a more advanced stage in Middle Dutch.

Old Dutch reflects an intermediate form between Old Saxon and Old High German. Like Old High German, it preserved the three different verb endings in the plural (-on, -et and -unt) while the more northern languages have the same verb ending in all three persons. However, like Old Saxon, it had only two classes of weak verb, with only a few relic verbs of the third weak class, but the third class had still largely been preserved in Old High German.

The Old Port of Marseille (French: Vieux-Port de Marseille, [ vjøpɔʁ də maʁsɛj ] ; Occitan : Vieu Port de Marselha) is at the end of the Canebière, the major street of Marseille. It has been the natural harbour of the city since antiquity and is now the main popular place in Marseille. It became mainly pedestrian in 2013.

In 600 BC, Greek settlers from Phocaea landed in the Lacydon, a rocky Mediterranean cove, now the site of the Old Port of Marseille. They set up a trading post or emporion in the hills on the northern shore. Until the nineteenth century the Old Port remained the centre of maritime activity in Marseille. In the Middle Ages the land at the far end of the port was used to cultivate hemp for the local manufacture of rope for mariners, which is the origin of the name of the main thoroughfare of Marseille, the Canebière.

The great St. Victor's Abbey was gradually built between the third and ninth centuries on the hills to the south of the Old Port, on the site of a Hellenic burial ground.

Between the fifteenth and seventeenth centuries, quays were constructed under Louis XII and Louis XIII and an important shipyard for galleons put in place. Following a revolt against their governor by the citizens of Marseille, Louis XIV ordered the erection of the forts of St Jean and St Nicolas at the entrance to the harbour and established an arsenal and fleet in the Old Port itself. The notorious arsenal des galères was situated on the left side of the Old Port between the Cours Jean-Balard and the Cours Estienne-d'Orves: those condemned to be galley slaves in the royal war fleet were branded with the letters GAL.

According to John Murray, in 1854 the Old Port had a capacity of between 1,000 and 1,200 ships. Roughly 18,000 merchant ships passed through the port each year, carrying about 20 million barrels worth of freight; this represented a quarter of the trade in Liverpool at the time. The 6 metre depth of the harbour, however, proved problematic for steamships later in the century; much deeper docks had to be constructed at La Joliette. In World War II the Old Port was left in complete ruins. According to eye-witness accounts, in January 1943, the Nazis, aided by the French police, dynamited much of the historic old town and demolished the gigantic aerial ferry or "transbordeur", an engineering tour de force that had become a major landmark of Marseille, comparable to the Eiffel Tower in Paris. This became known as the " Battle of Marseille ". In 1948 Fernand Pouillon was put in charge of the reconstruction of the devastated old quarter.

When, beginning in the 1840s, new harbour moles, quays and the Docks were built along the coast of the La Joliette quarter to the north-west, many port activities were moved out of the Old Port. Over time, new harbour installations were built further north-west, resulting in what is today the Grand Port Maritime de Marseille : continuous harbour installations as far as L'Estaque and the southern entrance to the Rove Tunnel, and "satellite" extensions around Fos-sur-Mer and along the shore of the Étang de Berre. The Old Port is used today as a marina, as a terminal for local boat trips, and hosts a local fish market. In 2013, for the European Capital of Culture, the Old Port was largely pedestrianized. It has been renovated as a large public square following an international competition won by Michel Desvigne Paysagistes, with Foster and Partners. The project is also to have a second phase with parks to be built around the port in 2020 for a sum of €64 million.

The Omelette de la mère Poulard (Omelette of Mother Poulard) is an omelette developed by Anne Boutiaut Poulard, also known as Mother Poulard, in the 19th century in Mont-Saint-Michel, France. It is served at La Mère Poulard, her restaurant there, and at many other restaurants on the small island.

It has been described as the most famous omelette in the world and, along with the Mont Saint Michel Abbey, is one of the major tourist attractions in Mont-Saint-Michel, the island itself being the second most-visited tourist destination in France after Paris. Those who have eaten it include European and Japanese royalty, United States presidents, British prime ministers, multiple presidents of France, and celebrities from various fields. It is considered the gastronomic emblem of Mont-Saint-Michel.

The omelette de la mère Poulard was created by Annette Boutiaut Poulard, and is a specialty in the Mont-Saint-Michel area of Normandy. In 1873, Poulard and her husband were innkeepers on the island. Because of the changing tides, it was impossible to predict when and how many travellers would arrive, which made planning ahead for service difficult. The omelette was created to solve this problem and was served as an appetizer that could be produced quickly while guests awaited the rest of the meal. The omelette eventually became famous as a gastronomic emblem of the town of Mont-Saint-Michel; a 1932 account described the omelette as being on the menu of all the restaurants in the town.

Sources vary on the method of preparation. According to some sources, the yolks and whites are beaten separately, the whites until stiff, and then folded together to form the mixture. According to a contemporary, Poulard told him she "took the eggs and beat them as they were."

Depending on the source, butter or crème fraîche is dropped into a hot long-handled copper pan, the pan is placed into a hot oven until the butter is melted, then the egg mixture is added, and the pan placed over a wood-fired flame to cook. Poulard responded to a request for the recipe with

Monsieur Viel, Here is the recipe for the omelette: I break some good eggs in a bowl, I beat them well, I put a good piece of butter in the pan, I throw the eggs into it, and I shake it constantly. I am happy, monsieur, if this recipe pleases you.

Cookery writer Felicity Cloake in 2019 gave instructions to whisk whole eggs vigorously for four minutes until "almost like a mousse", then pour into a hot oiled pan.

In an 1897 novel, Stella's Story, the heroine takes a lesson in omelette-making from Poulard, and describes the process as "simple in the extreme; [Poulard] broke a dozen eggs into the pan of boiling fat, as fast as she could break them, gave them a shake, and held them over the fire for a minute, shaking them the while; then she took an iron ladle, gave the omelette a couple of folds, and popped it onto a dish."

The finished omelette is rolled onto a plate and served plain or with a variety of garnishes. It has been described as "gently wood-scented".

In Poulard's time the omelettes were served as part of a meal which was always the same, and included ham, fried sole, saltmarsh lamb cutlets with potatoes, roast chicken, salad, and dessert. Before World War I the meal was priced at 2.50 (old) francs, equivalent to USD $0.50 at the then-current exchange rate.

As of 2017, the omelette was priced at €34 at La Mère Poulard, a price described as "certainly one of the heftiest tariffs charged for same anywhere in France". As of 2018, 450,000 eggs are used each year by the restaurant.

Felicity Cloake, writing in The Guardian, called it "the world's most famous omelette". Along with the Mont Saint Michel Abbey, is one of the major tourist attractions in Mont-Saint-Michel, itself one of the most-visited tourist destinations in the country, second only to Paris. Those who have eaten it include European and Japanese royalty, United States presidents, British prime ministers, presidents of France, and celebrities such as Ernest Hemingway and Yves Saint Laurent.

A superstition surrounding the omelette holds that if a French presidential candidate visits Mont-Saint-Michel and does not eat the omelette, the candidate will lose. The story of " Omelette tu mangeras, président tu seras," roughly "eat the omelette, and president you will become," started with Georges Clemenceau, who visited but did not eat the omelette before his defeat by Paul Deschanel. Charles de Gaulle, Georges Pompidou and François Mitterrand all ate the omelette before their victories; Édouard Balladur visited Mont-Saint-Michel but due to a late arrival did not eat the omelette and was defeated by Jacques Chirac, who ate the omelette. Nicolas Sarkozy launched his successful 2007 campaign from Mont-Saint-Michel and ate the omelette.

Onion Johnnies (Welsh : 'Sioni Winwns' or 'Sioni Nionod') were Breton farmers and agricultural labourers who travelled, originally on foot and later on bicycles, selling distinctive pink onions door to door in Great Britain. They were especially active in Wales, where they share linguistic similarities.

They adapted this nickname for themselves in Breton as ar Johniged or ar Johnniged.

Declining since the 1950s to only a few, the Onion Johnny was once very common. Dressed in a striped Breton shirt and beret, riding a bicycle hung with onions, the Onion Johnny became the stereotypical image of the Frenchman in the United Kingdom. In many cases these tradesmen may have been the only contact that ordinary British people had with France and French people.

With renewed interest since the late 1990s by farmers and the public in small-scale agriculture, the number of Onion Johnnies made a small recovery. The profession was eventually wiped out due to Brexit and the COVID-19 pandemic.

The trade may have begun in 1828 when the first successful trip is said to have been made by Henri Ollivier. From the area around Roscoff in Brittany known as Bro Rosko, Johnnies found a more profitable market in Britain than in France. They typically took their harvest across the English Channel in July to store in rented barns, returning home in December or January. They could have sold their produce in Paris, but the roads and the railways were bad in the 19th century and going up the river Seine was a longer and more difficult trip. Crossing the Channel to England was shorter and easier.

As the early Johnnies were all Breton-speakers, Wales was a favoured destination. Breton is a Brythonic language related to Welsh and Cornish, so the Johnnies would have had an easier time picking up Welsh than Germanic-descended English. The Johnnies who regularly visited Wales in the nineteenth century became known as Sioni Winwns and subsequently as Johnny Onions or Onion Johnny in English.

The golden age for Johnnies across the UK was during the 1920s; in 1929 nearly 1,400 Johnnies exported more than 9,000 tonnes of onions to the UK. The Great Depression, followed by the devaluation of the Pound in the early 1930s, ended the era. Trade suddenly fell, reaching a low in 1934, when fewer than 400 people imported under 3,000 tonnes.

In the aftermath of World War II, in common with other goods, onions were subject to import restrictions in the UK and had to be traded through a single company. By 1973 the number of Johnnies had dropped to 160, trading 1,100 tonnes. By the end of the 20th century, the number of Johnnies fell to around 20. By 2008, reportedly only 15 Johnnies remained, and by 2022, with travel restrictions caused by Brexit and the COVID-19 pandemic, the profession was "wiped out".

The Channel crossings are now made by ferry, but small sailing ships and steamers were used previously. The crossing could be hazardous. Seventy Johnnies died when the steamer SS Hilda sank at Saint-Malo in 1905.

The Onion Johnny museum opened in Roscoff in 2004, with a two-day Fête de l'Oignon (Onion Festival) that has since been held every summer. Since 2009 the Oignon de Roscoff has been protected under the French Appellation d'Origine Contrôlée designation.

Onion soup is a type of vegetable soup with sliced onions as the main ingredient. It is prepared in different variations in many countries, the most famous of which is French onion soup or Parisian onion soup. Because of the affordable ingredients, it has primarily been a dish for the poor for a long time.

Common for all variations of onion soup is the use of thinly sliced or chopped onions soaked in fat, and a liquid base such as water or broth, possibly including white wine, after which the soup is cooked for a while so that the onions lose their strong flavour and the soup gains a sweet, spicy flavour. In many recipes the soup is thickened with flour or egg yolks.

An early recipe called soupe à l'oignon appears in the recipe collection Le Viandier by Guillaume Tirel in the 15th century. François Pierre La Varenne, the chef of Marie de' Medici, described the use of bread as an addition to onion soup in his 1651 cookbook Le Cuisinier François.

The French or Parisian onion soup (soupe à l'oignon or soupe d'oignons aux Halles) was already offered as food for merchants, customers and tourists in the Quartier des Halles in the 18th century.

The classic way to prepare the dish is to slowly cook thinly sliced onions, sometimes also garlic, in butter or vegetable oil, until they gain a golden yellow colour, then to sprinkle them with flour and soak them in white wine. Then water and vegetable broth or more commonly, meat broth is added and the soup is slowly cooked. It is also common to soak roasted bits of white bread (croutons) in the soup, add shredded cheese and gratinate the whole dish (soupe à l'oignon gratinée or soupe au fromage, see also cheese soup).

Strasbourg onion soup is similar to Parisian, the difference being the use of croutons and a raw egg yolk.

A further variety is the soupe soubise, where the onions are puréed and the soup is thickened with béchamel sauce. Instead of roast bread the soup is served with croutons and bits of choux pastry. Similarly to Soubise sauce, the soup was named after its creator, the field marshal and gourmet Charles, Prince of Soubise.

Onion soup similar to the French variety is also known in Germany. The Palatinate onion soup is prepared with cream and wine, spiced with caraway, and served with roast bread without cheese. The south German onion soup is thickened with light roux, run through a sieve, thickened with egg yolk and served with bits of roast bread. Marie Buchmeier's 1885 cookbook Praktischem Kochbuch für die bürgerliche, sowie feine Küche contains an extremely simple recipe for the soup, where sliced dark bread is soaked in a terrine, soaked with boiling water and served with sliced onions turned yellow with butter. Onion soup from the Rhine area contains onions, meat broth, bits of carrot and roasted bratwurst. The soup is run through a sieve and spiced with vinegar, the bratwurst is sliced and served along the soup. Hamburgian onion soup is prepared with shallots, meat broth and sherry and served with croutons and cheese.

As well as the French onion soup, there is also a variety in Italy, where milk is substituted for the broth and the wine. It is served with croutons and shredded Parmesan cheese, which are not roasted.

The Cipollata is a dish of its own, resembling the German Eintopf soup. It is prepared with onions, sliced bacon and tomatoes, which are thoroughly boiled and added to the soup with a mix of Parmesan and whipped eggs. If the soup becomes too thick it is watered down. Cipollata is also served with roast bread.

Chorba is a category of onion-based soups common in the Middle East and West Asia, often made with varying ingredients relative to regional and national cuisines. They typically also include vegetables, a type of meat (beef, chicken, lamb and mutton or goat meat) and legumes, which are simmered together with onions in broth.

In France, open access to scholarly communication is relatively robust and has strong public support. Revues.org, a digital platform for social science and humanities publications, launched in 1999. Hyper Articles en Ligne (HAL) began in 2001. The French National Center for Scientific Research participated in 2003 in the creation of the influential Berlin Declaration on Open Access to Knowledge in the Sciences and Humanities. Publishers EDP Sciences and OpenEdition [ fr ] belong to the international Open Access Scholarly Publishers Association.

There are a number of collections of scholarship in France housed in digital open access repositories. They contain journal articles, book chapters, data, and other research outputs that are free to read. The main open repository platform in use for French higher education and research institutions is HAL. It hosts over 520 000 fulltext documents and about 1.5 million references. More than 120 institutions have opened their own institutional portals on the HAL platform.

France's main actor in open access publishing is Openedition. This set of publishing platforms is specialized in Human and Social Sciences. It hosts 490 journals, 5,600+ books, 2,600+ blogs and 39,000 events. Openedition is operated by an institutional unit called CLEO, and funded by the Centre national de la recherche scientifique, Ecole des hautes etudes en sciences sociales, Université d'Aix-Marseille, and Université d'Avignon et des Pays de Vaucluse. It uses a "freemium" business model for books and journals: most content is available in HTML format for free, and the other formats (pdf, epub) are available to the subscribed institutions.

Key events in the development of open access in France include the following:

Online access to legal information was implemented in France in 1999 and complemented in 2002. In that regard, France has been at the forefront of Open Data in Europe.

Civic groups like Wikimedia France, OpenStreetMap France, Libertic or Regards Citoyens had been lobbying for Open Data for many years before public administrations took action.

Amongst public administrations, some cities pioneered the change: Rennes, then Paris thanks to the decision taken by the municipal council on June 8, 2010 relative to the publication of public data and the "Paris Data" portal made public on January 27, 2011.

The inter-ministerial Task Force " Etalab [ fr ] ", under the authority of the Prime Minister, is in charge of creating and updating the portal for public Open Data data.gouv.fr, which has been made available since December 5, 2011 and hosts more than 19,000 datasets.

The role of Chief Data Officer in the French public administration was created by decree of September 16, 2014. The Chief Data Officer's attributions were specified so that "He/she may request from administrations that they hand over the inventory of the data they produce, receive, or collect. He/she shall hand in to the Prime Minister a yearly report on the inventory, the governance, the production, the dissemination and the use of data by administrations. Finally, he/she is authorized to conduct experimentations on the use of data, to reinforce the efficiency of public policies, to contribute to a better management of public spending and resources, and to improve the quality of public services provided to citizens."

The Open Data Barometer, a project of the Web Foundation, had France ranked 10th in 2013, 4th in 2014 and 2d in 2015. The Open Knowledge Foundation created in 2013 the Open Data Index which compares data availability across countries in which France was ranked 16th in 2013, 3rd in 2014 and 10th in 2015.

The right to access public data is inscribed in the Declaration of rights of man and of the citizen of 1789, under the article XV which mentions that "The society has the right of requesting account from any public agent of its administration." According to the preamble of the Constitution of the French Fifth Republic (adopted on 4 October 1958, and the current constitution), the principles set forth in the Declaration have constitutional value today.

Law 78-753 of July 17, 1978 on the liberty of access to public information in France (for the most part abrogated in 2015) did not require public administrations to publish their numerical data, nor to proactively publish information.

Nonetheless, it implemented a cornerstone for open public data by broadly and precisely defining administrative documents as "whatever their date, their place of conservation, their type or their support, the documents produced or received, within their exercise of the public tasks, by the State, the territorial collectivities and the other legal persons under public law or the legal persons under private law tasked with such public tasks. Are constitutive of such documents files, reports, studies, minutes of meetings and proceedings, statistics, directives, instructions, circulars, notes and ministerial responses, correspondence, notices, previsions and decisions."

It required administrative documents that were not under elaboration to be communicated to "those who asked for it".

In 2003, directive 2003/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 November 2003 details the conditions for use of public sector information. It is transposed into French law in 2005, so as to facilitate the use of existing documents or data held by public organizations.

In 2011, the decree 2011-577 of May 26 relative to the re-use of public sector information sets forth the principle of gratuity of re-use of public sector data and documents. Under this decree, an administrative agency may consider applying licence fees to the re-use of the State's immaterial property such as data, but this decision must be published by decree after consultation of the Public edition and Administrative Information Council.

The bill was jointly prepared with Internet users before being submitted to the Council of State and adopted by the Council of Ministers. It was adopted on January 26, 2016.

It moved forward the access to public data by:

In order to implement at their level the law on Energy Transition, many agents including territorial collectivities and citizens need access to updated and precise data on the production of energy and the effective consumption of energy by building, neighborhood, city, etc. while abiding by the rules on the protection of private data.

The law on Energy Transition has those data become progressively accessible online for free re-use by any party (open data). The network operators (electricity, gas, heat and coal networks) and the providers of fuel products must provide certain data to the Statistics service of the Ministry of Energy every year by the June 30. These will be in turn published online within two months (before September 1). Legal provisions have been made through three decrees published in 2016 relative to the confidentiality of some information.

Under French law, public data is likely to contain sensitive information, either because it allows the identification of a person, or because it is subject to copyright, State secret or considerations of national defense. In this context, data must at the very least be made anonymous before being published.

Once the publication rights are clear, licences will apply. Various organizations have elaborated free licences applicable to all types of content and audiences. These are templates and need not be conformed to.

In France, up to five different licences for data re-use have been set fort. In 2013, the harmonization of practices has led to two equally used licences: the Licence Ouverte and the Open Database Licence.

This licence created by ETALAB, the French Prime Minister's task force for Public Data is meant to be used widely in France. The website data.gouv.fr operates under this licence.

The ODbL licence has been translated into French by the city of Paris so as to adapt it to a national use. A variety of projects have been using this licence, from OpenStreetMap to local authorities (Paris, Nantes, Toulouse...).

Opinel is a French manufacturer of pocket or pen knives. The company has made its line of eponymous wooden-handled knives since 1890 from its headquarters in Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne, Savoie. The company sells approximately 15 million knives annually. Opinel knives are made of both high carbon and stainless steel, the latter being Sandvik steel from Sweden.

Originally sold as a working man's knife, an Opinel knife has become emblematic of French culture. Pablo Picasso is said to have used one of the company's knives as a sculpting tool. In 1989, the Larousse dictionary cited "Opinel" as a registered trademark.

Joseph Opinel began making knives in 1890 in Savoie, France as a simple working man's or peasant's knife. It proved popular with the local farmers, herdsmen, and paysans-vignerons (peasant winemakers) of the area. In 1897, a series of twelve sizes, numbered 1 to 12, was developed. From 1901 to 1903, Joseph Opinel built his first factory in Pont de Gévoudaz and produced a machine for mass production of the knife's wooden handles.

The company hired peddlers to sell the knives and opened a small shop near the Chambéry railway junction, where the knives became popular with PLM railroad workers, who in turn spread word of the brand throughout France. By 1909, Opinel had registered his first trademark for the Opinel knife, choosing the main couronnée ("crowned hand") as his emblem. A few years later Opinel annual sales were in the hundreds of thousands, and by the start of World War II as many as 20 million knives had been sold.

The Opinel Virobloc or safety twistlock mechanism was invented by Marcel Opinel in 1955, increasing the safety and versatility of the knife by allowing the blade to be locked in the open position. In 2000, the Virobloc locking mechanism was improved to allow locking the blade in either the open or closed position.

In 1985 the Victoria and Albert Museum in London selected the Opinel knife as part of an exhibit celebrating the “100 most beautiful products in the world”, featuring the Opinel alongside the Porsche 911 sports car and the Rolex watch. The Opinel was also selected as one of the 999 classic designs in Phaidon Design Classics, and has been exhibited by the New York's Museum of Modern Art (MOMA) as a design masterpiece.

The traditional Opinel knife has a beechwood handle and a high carbon XC90 steel (acier au carbone) blade. Opinel also offers most of its models with a Sandvik 12C27M stainless steel (acier inox) blade. Custom Opinel models are available using luxurious or exotic handle woods such as oak, walnut, olive wood, bubinga (African rosewood), ebony and stained hornbeam, as well as other materials such as cowhorn.

The Opinel Slim Effilé series uses a tapered handle with a slender clip point blade made of Sandvik stainless steel, and the handle may be obtained in a variety of different materials, including bubinga, olive, ebony and cowhorn.

The current Opinel knife consists of a blade, wooden handle, stainless steel metal clamping band, stainless pivot pin (axle), and (except in the case of the smaller models) a stainless steel Virobloc locking collar, which locks the blade open or closed.

Smaller Opinel models (Nos. 2 through 5) have no locking blade mechanism, and use only the friction of the clamping band against the compressed handle and knife tang to hold the blade open, much the same as all Opinel knives sold before 1955. This simple design was sometimes known as a " penny knife " or "peasant's knife".

The locking collar (Virobloc) was patented in 1955 by Marcel Opinel, and is only found on the larger Opinel models (#6 and up). While simple, the locking mechanism is quite sturdy. Due to the way in which the locking collar tapers, the blade does not loosen over time and can be fixed firmly even once the mechanism is quite worn. In 2000 the locking collar was modified slightly to allow the blade to be locked in the closed as well as the open position. This feature prevents the blade from opening by accident when carried in a pocket.

Eighty percent of all Opinel knives use traditional beechwood for the handle. The company's large demand for beechwood not infrequently results in a shortage of precut handle blanks, forcing the use of rectangular (bulk) sheets, which generate considerable wood waste. The excess wood waste and sawdust generated is subsequently recycled.

The curve of the original Opinel blade is a yatagan (more commonly described as a drop point with a blade slightly angled downwards from the handle centerline), while the flared butt at the base of the wood handle is referred to as a fishtail. The modern No. 8 knife consists of five pieces (formerly four); the handle, the blade, the pivot or axle, the metal collar and the locking ring or "Virobloc". The blade is quite thin, only 1.68mm (.066 inches), which helps keep its weight to only 45g (1.6 ounces). Original Opinels and the smallest sizes today are still made of only four parts, lacking the simple Virobloc locking mechanism. The locking ring can easily be removed with simple tools for use in countries where locking knives are prohibited; some sources claim that opening the blade with the ring in the locked position causes the ring to pop off; it can be replaced easily later if desired. The No. 8 Couteau du Jardin or Garden Knife uses a folding drop-point blade with a slim, tapered wood handle, while the Opinel No. 8 and No. 10 Pruning Knives, designed for pruning shrubs and vines, feature a large folding hawkbill blade fitted to an elegantly curved wooden handle. The Opinel Slim Effile series use a thinner-profile stainless steel blade fitted to a tapered wood handle. Available in several sizes and handle materials, the Slim Effile knives are intended for tasks such as cleaning and fileting fish and thinly slicing meats and cheeses.

The traditional Opinel is designed to be opened with two hands, and a nail nick is provided on the blade. It is possible to adjust the fitting of the safety locking collar if it is too tight or too loose. Those practiced in the art of coup du savoyard grip the metal collar between index finger and thumb and tap the heel of the handle firmly on a hard surface, as if using it as a drumstick; the blade should open slightly from the handle, allowing it to be rotated into position with the thumb.

The main couronnée ("crowned hand") device was already present on the blade of very early models. Later the words OPINEL and FRANCE were added, as well as INOX ("stainless", from "INOXidable", meaning "non-oxidizable) in the case of stainless steel blades.

The image of the hand comes from the arms of Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne, and represents the relics of John the Baptist, three of whose finger-bones were supposedly brought back from Alexandria by Saint Tecla in the 5th century. The crown comes from the arms of Savoy, the larger region containing Savoie.

Opinel knives are currently offered in eleven numbered sizes: 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, and 13. The No. 1 Opinel was discontinued in 1932. With its tiny 2 cm (0.787-inch) blade and boxwood handle, it was meant to be attached to a key fob or watch chain and used as a tobacco pipe cleaner or nail cleaner, but was judged to be too small. The No. 11 Opinel was discontinued in 1935, its size being considered too similar to Opinels Nos. 10 and 12.

With its 8.5 cm blade, the No. 8 Opinel is perhaps the most widely used size, though Nos. 4, 6, and 10 are consistent sellers. There is a considerable difference in size between No. 12 (12 cm blade) and the recently-added novelty No. 13, Le Géant ("the Giant") with its 22 cm blade. There is now a No. 7 round-ended knife without the sharp point, intended for children and others as "My first Opinel".

A variety of different Opinels have been offered over the years. A few are sold more for their novelty value than for practical purposes, such as Le Géant. Besides the Slim Effile series and the Couteau du Jardin, Opinel also offers a hawkbill-bladed pruning knife designed for use in the garden or vineyard, and a large folding wood saw with locking blade using the same Virobloc mechanism as found on large Opinel knives. For the kitchen, the company sells vegetable peelers, chefs knives, paring knives, knives with corkscrews (couteau tire-bouchon), and prep knives for the kitchen, including a mushroom knife (couteau à champignon), with an integral boar's hair cleaning brush. In 2014, Opinel again released new varieties of knives for cooking.

Excavations took place at the oppidum de Moulay or oppidum du Mesnil, an oppidum in the commune of Moulay in the Mayenne in the Pays de la Loire region between 1972 and 1975, when the commune was subdivided. The excavation of the first rampart uncovered suggestions an area of 12 hectares, as well as a number of artifacts now exhibited at the Musée archéologique départemental de Jublains. On 26 May 1986, the site was declared a monument historique.

In 2004, road construction in Moulay and Mayenne uncovered a second rampart 1,200 meters long. The total area of the enclosure is 135 hectares, making it one of the ten largest oppida in France and the largest on the Armorican Massif. An 11-hectare excavation ended in June 2011.

The location of Moulay favored settlement there. At the confluence of the Mayenne and the Aron rivers, whose rugged valleys outline a trapezoid, it apparently guarded access to a ford over the Mayenne.

The site has long been known as "Camp de César", (Caesar's Camp), even though a preliminary excavation between 1972 and 1975 determined that its origins were Gaulish. It also brought to light a murus gallicus type defensive wall surrounding an area of twelve hectares.

The first rampart, 370 m long, initially was six meters high and 20 meters wide, preceded by a ditch. To the north, a postern gate with a dry stone wall three meters thick overlooks the site.

Excavations inside the first wall found little beyond hearths and a few sparse items. Some of these were linked to bronze handicrafts : molds for bracelets and lapilli. Also, a lovely pottery vase decorated with cordons was discovered, of a type known in Armorica, and whose clay came from present-day Lamballe. Apart from the furniture, dated to the end of the Gaulish era, wattle and daub elements have been found.

More than 200 grindstones were discovered 800 meters from the first enclosure, dating from the late La Tène period.

A diagnostic excavation in 2004 prior to the construction of a detour identified a second rampart 1,000 m from the first, also known as the rempart du Petit Mesnil, a murus gallicus, 2.50 m high. The estimated footprint of the oppidum was revised upward to 135 hectares, and the site seemed related to the barred spur type, with multiple bars.

A team of 29 archaeologists took over. The archeological work at the oppidum was to finish up in mid-2011 then for another eight months excavate two farms.

The second phase of the excavations st this site was authorized and funded in part through the framework of the French 2008-2009 economic stimulus plan.

The oppidum was no doubt the capital of the Aulerques Diablintes in the 1 first and second century BCE. Besides the oppodium wall, two Gaulish farms have been identified, one in Moulay, the other in Aron. Preliminary results of excavation indicate but do not quite prove the hypothesis of a densely occupied space, of 80 hectares or possibly even larger, The oppidum is organised orthogonally into residential neighborhoods and artisanal and religious land uses. The residential enclosures mostly consist of a house and a storehouse, and are delimited by ditches. An artisanal and commercial quarter occupied the centre of the oppidum enclosure.

Water supply points and a sewer network have been uncovered. The space between the first and second walls may have been caused by an expansion of the settlement in the 1st century BCE. No trace of destruction, violence or sudden abandonment explains the depopulation of this site, in the centre of a territory as large as a modern département, surrounded by secondary centers such as Entrammes and Jublains.

The dating and function of the first enclosure are difficult to understand, particularly with respect to its relationship to the second; perhaps a matter for future research.

The site was abandoned in the Roman era in favor of Jublains; there is no evidence of violence or a fire. The site was developed in a planned manner, which implies a local élite. Moulay constitutes the largest fortified settlement in the area, according to E. Le Goff. Surrounded by secondary centers, among which may have been Jublains, Moulay also seemed to Le Goff to have been the heart of a powerful political system.

Orange S.A. (French pronunciation: [ ɔʁɑ̃ʒ ] ; formerly known as France Télécom S.A., stylised as france télécom) is a French multinational telecommunications corporation founded in 1988 and headquartered in Issy-les-Moulineaux, near Paris.

Orange has been the corporation's main brand for mobile, landline, internet and Internet Protocol television (IPTV) services since 2006. It traces its origins back to Hutchison Whampoa acquiring a controlling stake in Microtel Communications in 1994 in the United Kingdom. Microtel Communications became a subsidiary of Mannesmann in 1999 and then was acquired by France Télécom in 2000. The former French public telecoms monopoly thus became internationalized following this takeover and has pursued an expansionist policy since. The group now operates in many countries in Europe, Africa and in the French West Indies. Since February 2012, as a result of the company's decision to transfer its fixed-line telephony operations to its Orange brand, all offers marketed by France Télécom are Orange -branded; and on 1 July 2013, France Télécom itself was rebranded Orange S.A.. In 2019, Orange S.A. employed nearly 148,000 people worldwide, including 88,000 in France.

The corporation has throughout the years expanded its activities to include content sales (music, cinema, downloads, etc.), e-commerce, online advertising, M2M, home automation and remote assistance solutions. In 2023, it generated over €43 billion in revenue across all its businesses.

In 1792, under the French Revolution, the first communication network was developed to enable the rapid transmission of information in a warring and unsafe country. That was the optical telegraphy network of Claude Chappe.

In 1878, after the invention of the electrical telegraph and then the invention of the telephone, the French State created a Ministry of Posts and Telegraphs. Telephone services were nationalised and added to the ministry in 1889. However, it was not until 1923 that the second 'T' (for 'telephones') appeared and the department of P&T (Posts and Telegraphs) became PTT.

In 1941, a General Direction of Telecommunications was created within this ministry. Then, in 1944, the National Centre of Telecommunications Studies (CNET) was created to develop the telecommunications industry in France.

In the 1970s, France attempted to make up for its delay in developing communications infrastructure, compared to other countries, by launching the programme "Delta LP" (increasing the main lines). It was at that time that the majority of the local loop was built (that is all the cables linking the users to the operator). Moreover, with the help of French manufacturers, digital switching -- Minitel and the GSM standard—were invented by engineers and CNET researchers.

In 1982, Telecom introduced Minitel online ordering for its customers.

Until 1988, France Télécom was known as the direction générale des Télécommunications, a division of the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications. It became autonomous in 1990. This was in response to a European directive, aimed at making competition mandatory in public services from 1 January 1998. The 2 July 1990 Bill changed France Télécom into an operator of public law, with Marcel Roulet as the first chairman. Since then, the company has had a separate body corporate from the State and acquired financial autonomy. It was privatised by Lionel Jospin 's Plural Left government starting on 1 January 1998. The French government, both directly and through its holding company ERAP, continues to hold a stake of almost 27% in the company. In addition, the French government has a role in naming the CEO. In September 1995, Michel Bon was appointed to run France Télécom Group.

In 1997, the capital of the new public company was successfully floated whereas the dot-com bubble phenomenon made the stock exchanges bullish. A second share offering occurred in 1998. France Télécom got behind in the internationalisation launched by its international competitors such as Vodafone, thus, it started looking for targets at the highest speculation rate of the dot-com bubble. Moreover, its alliance with Deutsche Telekom based on a reciprocal capital contribution of 2% broke off when Deutsche Telekom announced that they were planning to do business with Telecom Italia without letting the French know; even if this project ended up failing.

In July 1991, Hutchison Telecom, a UK subsidiary of the Hong Kong-based conglomerate Hutchison Whampoa, acquired a controlling stake in Microtel Communications Ltd, which by then had acquired a licence to develop a mobile network in the United Kingdom. Hutchison renamed Microtel to Orange Personal Communications Services Ltd, and on 28 April 1994 the Orange brand was launched in the UK mobile phone market. A holding company structure was adopted in 1995 with the establishment of Orange plc. In April 1996, Orange went public and floated on the London Stock Exchange and NASDAQ, majority-owned by Hutchison (48.22%), followed by BAe (21.1%). In June 1996, it became the youngest company to enter the FTSE 100, valued at £2.4 billion.

In October 1999, the German conglomerate Mannesmann AG acquired Orange for a price equivalent to €7,900 per customer, i.e. US$33 billion. Mannesmann's acquisition of Orange triggered Vodafone to make a hostile takeover bid for Mannesmann. Shortly thereafter, in February 2000, Vodafone acquired Mannesmann for US$183 billion, and decided to divest Orange because EU regulations would not allow it to hold two mobile licences.

In August 2000, France Télécom bought Orange plc from Vodafone for a total estimated cost of €39.7 billion. At the time, France Télécom also bought stakes in several other international firms (GlobalOne, Equant, Internet Telecom, Freeserve, EresMas, NTL and Mobilcom), of which some have since been sold back. Through this process, France Télécom became the fourth-biggest global operator. The mobile telephone operations of Orange plc were merged with the majority of the mobile operations of France Télécom, forming the new group Orange S.A.

On 13 February 2001, Orange S.A. was listed on the Euronext Paris stock exchange with an initial public offering of €95 per share, with a secondary listing in London. In May 2001, Orange S.A. was listed on the CAC 40, the benchmark stock market index of the top 40 French companies in terms of market capitalisation.

In June 2001, the France Telecom Mobile brands Itinéris, OLA, and Mobicarte were replaced by the Orange brand. On 21 November 2003, France Telecom withdrew the 13.7% of Orange's shares traded on the Paris stock exchange.

On 2 October 2002, the CEO, Thierry Breton was given the task of turning the company around after the company became crippled by debt following the drop of the company's stock price. On 30 September 2002, the company's stock price was €6.94, down from €219 on 2 March 2000. France Télécom was the second most indebted company worldwide in terms of short-term liabilities. The company obtained €15 billion of debt adjustment that needed to be borne by banks and investors, another €15 billion as a capital increase from the French State since it was still the majority shareholder, and an additional 15bn in cash from internal savings. On 25 February 2005, Thierry Breton was appointed Minister of Finance and Industry and Didier Lombard, who had been head of the firm's new technologies division, replaced him as CEO.

The NeXT scheme was the recovery plan for France Télécom which aimed at, among other things, reducing costs, especially wage costs, carrying on a converging policy for its products and services, and grouping together all the brands under a single brand, except for the activities dealing with fixed-line telephone which would stay under the designation 'France Télécom'. Consequently, this led to the disappearance of a number of brands.

From 1 June 2006, France Télécom tried to commercialise all its products under a single worldwide brand, becoming the sole brand of the France Telecom group for Internet, television and mobile services in the majority of countries in which Orange operated. Orange Business Services became the brand for all its business services offerings worldwide, replacing the Equant brand. In June 2007, Orange and Mid Europa Partners acquired Austrian mobile network company One, re-branding it as Orange Austria. In 2012, it was sold to Hutchison 3G and the Orange Austria brand was terminated.

In November 2008, Orange launched five Orange Cinema Series channels. To do so, Orange bought the exclusive rights from Warner Bros. for first runs of all new films, previously held by TPS Star (a subsidiary of the Canal+ Group), as well as all films in its catalogue and rights to the film catalogues of Gaumont, HBO and MGM. Orange also secured exclusive rights to broadcast Saturday evening Ligue 1 football matches from the French Football Federation. Free accused Orange of tied-selling as the Orange channels were only available to its subscribers. In June 2008, the firm abandoned a €27 billion bid for Swedish operator TeliaSonera after the two companies failed to agree terms.

In 2008, Orange was given permission from Apple to sell the iPhone in Austria, Belgium, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, Jordan, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Switzerland and Orange's African markets. On 8 September 2009, Orange and T-Mobile parent Deutsche Telekom announced they were in advanced talks to merge their UK operations to create the largest mobile operator with 37% of the market. Both T-Mobile and Orange brands were kept due to differences in their targeted markets. T-Mobile remained the budget-conscious offering and Orange the premium one, although there was some overlap as of February 2011.

On 5 April 2009, Orange won an Arbitration Court case against Orascom Telecom, forcing Orascom to transfer its stake in Mobinil to Orange at a price of E£441,658 per Mobinil share. On 28 October 2009, Orange changed the name of its Luxembourgish telecommunication company VOXMobile to Orange. On 5 November 2009, Orange Armenia launched telecommunication services in Armenia. On 11 December 2009, Egypt's regulator approved an offer from a unit of France Telecom (Orange) to buy Mobinil. In 2010, Orange's CEO, Didier Lombard, was replaced by Stéphane Richard. The company was also reorganised internally, most notably with the arrival of former Culture Minister Christine Albanel as head of communications for the group. In mid-April 2010, Orange UK announced that it would outsource the management of its broadband network to BT. This announcement was greeted positively by broadband commentators, who felt that the move was likely to improve Orange's broadband quality and customer services.

On 2 March 2012, Didier Lombard, who remained special advisor to Stéphane Richard, left the company. His departure was shadowed by controversy over his stock options: he was suspected of having stayed with the company longer to wait for the France Telecom share to recover and then exercise his stock option. The share was trading at around €16, whereas his stock options were at €23. On 3 February 2012, Hutchison Whampoa announced that it would buy Orange Austria for US$1.7 billion. The deal closed on 3 January 2013, and the Orange brand was phased out on 19 August 2013, when its operations were merged into 3. In March 2012, France Télécom bought 93.9% of Mobinil, an Egyptian mobile operator, from Naguib Sawiris 's Orascom Telecom Media and Technology (OTMT) in an effort to double its revenue in MENA by 2015. On 28 May 2013 at the Annual Shareholders' Meeting, shareholders approved changing the name of the group to Orange S.A. This became effective on 1 July 2013. In September 2014, Orange agreed a deal to acquire Spanish firm Jazztel for a fee of around €3.4 billion.

As of October 2018, Orange has teamed up with Google in order to install a transatlantic undersea cable, Dunant, to share data between the United States and France at faster speeds. Planned to begin operation in 2020, the fibre-based cable has a design capacity of 250 terabits per second (Tbit/s) and will span approximately 6600 kilometres in length.

In July 2020, Orange launched a satellite-based home broadband service utilising the Eutelsat Konnect satellite.

The major shareholders of Orange as of 31 December 2015 are the state of France through Agence des participations de l'État and Banque publique d'investissement (replacing Fonds stratégique d'investissement) for 23.04%. As of mid-2013, Orange employees owned 4.81%, and the company itself owned 0.58%.

Orange is the sole brand used in the marketing of the company's mobile offers; the Itineris, Ola and Mobicarte brands have been combined since 2001, and Mobicarte became a special prepaid calling offer. As of 31 December 2010, Orange has 150 million mobile customers worldwide, 17.9% of whom are in France. Orange France is the leading mobile telecommunications operator in France, with a market share of 45.38% as of 2 November 2009.

The Orange brand name was previously licensed to a number of operators which Orange S.A. did not own. These include:

Orange took over the landline and Internet businesses of France Telecom and Wanadoo in 2006. Since then, Orange is the sole brand of France Telecom for landline and Internet services worldwide, with a few exceptions, such as Mobistar in Belgium and TPSA in Poland. Orange's triple-play broadband Internet offers are supplied through the Livebox. As of 31 December 2010, Orange has 13.7 million broadband ADSL customers worldwide, 67% of whom are in France40.

The Livebox is the ADSL modem supplied to Orange's ADSL and FTTH customers in France, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Spain and Tunisia, and to WiMAX customers in Cameroon. It serves as a bridge between the Internet access and the home network through several communication interfaces (Bluetooth, Ethernet, Wi-Fi). The Livebox has evolved over time. The Livebox 1.0 was replaced by version 1.1, the Mini Livebox, followed by the Livebox 2.0. The newest version was scheduled to be rolled out in 2012. The Livebox is offered on a monthly contract for €3 per month or for purchase for €59. The Number of Liveboxes rented in 2008,this statistic reflects Orange's significant market penetration and growth in the broadband internet sector. With 7.3 million Liveboxes rented out, Orange experienced a notable 12.3% increase in just one year.

Beginning in 2003, Orange's strategy has centred on the acquisition, creation and diffusion of content. This starts with the creation of MaLigne.tv in 2003, later renamed Orange TV, an ADSL television access service and a video-on-demand service. In 2004, Orange organised a television access service for mobile phones. In 2007, Orange created Studio 37 [ fr ] and, in 2008, entered into a partnership with France Televisions to broadcast pre-recorded programming from the public national television and to roll out themed channels for sports, cinema and television series. Orange dubbed the strategy Content Everywhere in 2008, announcing it simultaneously with the launch of the Orange cinema series television channels and aimed to offer customers access to all content available through Orange's services, anywhere and from any device.

Orange Cinema Series is launched 13 November 2008, along with Orange Sport; it comprises five channels devoted to movies (Orange Ciné Max, Ciné Happy, Ciné Choc, Ciné Novo, Ciné Géant). The channels primarily show films from the Warner Bros. and HBO catalogues. Orange installs additional VOD services on its channels, allowing viewers to watch programmes broadcast in the previous 30 days whenever they like, as well as supplementary programmes from the previous month.

Orange Sport is launched 13 November 2008. Orange secures the broadcast rights for the Saturday evening line-up of Ligue 1 matches from season 2008/2009 to season 2011/2012, and the rights to home matches of eight Serie A clubs (Sampdoria, Atalanta, Chievo, Reggina, Siena, Palermo, Udinese and Napoli). The acquisition of these rights marks the start of competition for sports programs with the Canal+ group.

Orange offers services for video on demand access using the Orange decoder, a computer or a mobile phone. Orange offers free programming from the catalogues of available works of France Television, M6 and TF1 for one week after their initial broadcast.

In 1997, France Telecom created Goa, an online entertainment subsidiary. The site is launched as a platform for players of massively multiplayer online games. In 2002, Goa acquires the operating license for Dark Age of Camelot. In 2007 Goa ceases to be a subsidiary and is merged into Orange. In 2009 Orange refocuses Goa.com on online entertainment and gradually ceases to operate massively multiplayer online games. In August 2010, goa.com disappears to become the Orange Jeux portal.

Liveradio [ fr ] : Created by Orange in 2008, Liveradio is a free, live, on-demand IP radio streaming service. Users gain access through this service to more than 10,000 FM and web radio stations and 11,000 podcasts from 100 countries.

Orange is a communications access provider offering customers access through multiple platforms. The four key platforms Orange operates are:

France Télécom merged the different internal divisions managing each platform and now all operate under the Orange brand.

Orange is present in the U.S. through its Orange Business division and its venture capital historical partner Innovacom as well as two R&D labs: one in Boston, Massachusetts and the other in South San Francisco, California.

OpenTransit is Orange's backbone network. It covers Europe, the United States, Japan, Hong Kong, and loops back to Paris.

Orange and Deutsche Telekom merged their UK businesses in 2010 to form a joint venture branded as EE. In December 2014, Orange were in talks with BT Group regarding the acquisition of EE for an estimated £12.5 billion. On 5 February 2015, it was announced that BT would be acquiring EE in a £12.5 billion deal, in which Orange S.A would take a 4% stake in the BT Group. The acquisition of EE was completed on 29 January 2016.

Globecast is a provider of managed services for the media and broadcast industry, such as TV channel distribution via satellite and Internet, live event production, contribution and distribution services, channel content preparation and playout. GlobeCast World TV was a brand by Globecast for its north-American direct-to-home satellite broadcast of international channels. In 2012, Globecast also began launching a direct-to-consumer OTT IPTV service called MyGlobeTV in the United States using NetGem set top boxes. The MyGlobeTV service was discontinued In December 2013.

Viaccess Orca is a provider of IPTV and OTT TV service platforms and security services. It is headquartered in Paris La Defense. Viaccess-orca acquired Squadeo company in 2017 and is able to supply video secured player. Viaccess Orca is also involved in content tracking over internet, providing anti-piracy services.

Orange Labs (formerly France Télécom R&D) is the research and development division of Orange. This division was derived from different previous entities, such as CNET (Centre national d'études des télécommunications) created in 1944, the CCETT created in 1972, as well as other entities. In 2007, France Télécom R&D became known as Orange Labs, a global network of R&D entities.

CCETT/France Télécom R&D contributed to various international standards, such as ISO / IEC MPEG and JPEG standards or DAB and DVB standards. CCETT, IRT and Philips developed a digital audio two-channel compression system known as Musicam or MPEG Audio Layer II (Emmy Award in Engineering 2000).

In 2010, Orange devoted 1.9% of its revenue, or €845 million, to research and development. Since January 2007 Orange has unified its research laboratories and technocentres in the Orange Labs network. As of 31 December 2010 Orange held a portfolio of 7,892 patents, 327 which were filed in 2010. Orange employs 3,700 people in research and development per year throughout the organisation, including more than 200 doctoral candidates and post-doctorates. Orange's research and development is based on partnerships with industry, suppliers and operators, universities and schools, academic institutes and research programs such as the following:

Two types of infrastructure coexist in Orange's research and development: the research laboratories and the technocentres. The latter are responsible for Orange innovations and consist of multidisciplinary teams of researchers, engineers, and marketing and sales personnel.

Cityvox is a network of websites with local content (restaurants, cultural happenings, etc.) created in 1999. Orange purchased the network site in 2008.

In late August 2010 Orange acquired an 11% share in the streaming site Deezer. With this acquisition, the operator offered its subscribers a new "Deezer Premium" option: paid streaming music service with no advertising and 7 million titles. In 2016 Orange sold Deezer to Access Industries, the parent of Warner Music Group.

On 25 January 2011 Orange announced the acquisition of 49% of Dailymotion, a French online video platform, at a cost of €58.8 million. The group also secured an option to acquire all of the shares in the platform in 2013. This is indicative of a new strategy by Orange, which seeks to offer a full range of multi-screen video to its subscribers. In 2015 Vivendi acquired 90% of Dailymotion.

Created in 2007 under the name Studio 37, Orange Studio [ fr ] co-produces films, acquires film rights for sales abroad, and distributes select films in France. The producer Frédérique Dumas started the studio, which had an initial budget of 30 million Euros. For its growth, Orange negotiated exclusivity agreements with Warner, HBO, Fidélité Films and Gaumont, ensuring a stream of films for its TV Orange Cinema Series package. In 2011, Studio 37 co-produced The Artist which went on to win best picture and four further awards at the 84th Academy Awards. This makes it the first silent film to win an award since the original ceremony in 1929.

In 2013, Studio 37 was renamed Orange Studio.

Cloudwatt is a cloud services provider set up in 2012 by Orange (44%), the French government through Caisse des Dépôts (33%) and Thales (22%). In March 2015, Orange acquired all remaining shares of Cloudwatt to strengthen its enterprise cloud services offering.

In January 2019 Orange acquired a minority shareholding in Aire Labs, a credit data platform in the UK.

In February 2019 Orange acquired UK cybersecurity provider SecureData for an undisclosed sum, merging it with Orange Cyberdefense Division.

Orange acquired SecureLink, a Netherlands -based cybersecurity company, in 2019 for € 515 million.

In November 2019 Orange España, a subsidiary of Orange, acquired SUMA Móvil Spain from Grupo-Ingenium for an undisclosed sum.

In early August 2020 Orange reached an agreement with the Ministry of Communications and Information Society (MCSI) to purchase Telekom Romania and establish a new telecommunications entity. As part of this agreement, the Romanian government would own a 20% stake in the new entity, and Orange would take over fixed operations. The MCSI had first entered talks to sell Telekom Romania in September 2019, when Deutsche Telekom announced that it was prepared to sell its stake in Telekom Romania to Orange.

In June 2021, Orange partners with Sanofi, Capgemini and Generali to launch Future4care. This all-European start-up accelerator will help develop upcoming companies focused on digital health.

In November 2024, Orange announced its multi-year partnership with OpenAI in Europe which will give the French Telecoms access to the pre-release AI models. Orange signed an agreement with both Meta and OpenAI for the purposes of translating regional African languages for the telecom groups.

Between January 2008 and April 2011, more than 60 France Télécom employees died by suicide, some leaving notes blaming stress and misery at work. In October 2009, the wave of suicides led then Deputy CEO Louis-Pierre Wenes to resign under trade union pressure, to be replaced by Stéphane Richard. Faced with multiple suicides of employees, the company promoted Stéphane Richard to the chief executive officer on 1 February 2010, while Didier Lombard remained as chairman.

The suicide rate among France Télécom's 102,000 domestic employees was 15.3 per year in that year, compared with an average of 14.7 suicides per 100,000 in the overall French population.

Following an investigation, the Inspection du travail (Labour Inspection) told the labour union Sud-PTT that the work organisation at France Télécom "was conducive to generating suffering at work" and "health risks" for employees. An investigation was conducted by the audit firm Technologia at the request of France Télécom's management. Of the 102,843 employees in the group's parent company, 80,080 responded, i.e. a response rate of 77.9%. The fact-finding report revealed a "very poor general feeling", "strained physical and mental health", and a "tense and even violent working environment" for some categories of personnel. Working conditions were deemed difficult, mainly for personnel in charge of sales and customer interventions.

On 20 December 2019, former CEO Didier Lombard and Orange were found guilty of moral harassment towards their employees.

In 2011, following complaints by Internet users, Megaupload accused Orange of not providing sufficient connectivity to its site, thus severely limiting throughput from France, an allegation Orange denied.

In November 2009, three users lodged a complaint against Orange for false advertising concerning its "Unlimited 3G Key" service. These customers criticised the operator for the misleading way in which this service is presented, since it isn't in fact unlimited. While it is true that there is no time limit, the user cannot download more than 1 gigabyte per month, thus limiting browsing. Unaware of this, the three plaintiffs browsed beyond plan limits and had to pay additional fees as a result.

In March 2011, the information website OWNI uncovered a questionable financial deal that enabled the Orange group to acquire a 3G license.

On 28 July 2011, the Competition Authority fined France Télécom €27.6 million for having improperly impeded the development of new competing operators in the French overseas departments (primarily Réunion).

France Télécom used its dominant position, resulting in particular from its former monopoly, to take unfair advantage of its competitors.

The practices identified by the Authority were:

On 1 January 2011, Orange users' SMS and MMS were sent and billed multiple times. The operator agreed to reimburse the excess costs to consumers, explaining that the error came from a "third party operator" (which turned out to be Bouygues Telecom), said not to have sent acknowledgements, which caused the messages to be resent. A computer problem at the Bouygues platform was blamed. During the night of 31 December 2010 to 1 January 2011, more than 930 million text messages were exchanged in France (for the three operators combined), setting a new record compared with the peaks of the previous years.

On 21 March 2007 Watchdog, a BBC television series focusing on consumer protection, published the results of a broadband survey they carried out. According to the survey Orange was the worst ISP in the UK. 68% of Orange customers that took part in the survey said they were unsatisfied with Orange's customer service, it was voted as the most unreliable broadband provider, and it had the highest number of dissatisfied customers. Two thirds of Orange customers experienced problems cancelling their Orange broadband.

In response to the problems with Orange UK broadband and 3G broadband during March 2009 and April 2009 the 3G data network has been upgraded to 3.5G and increased signal coverage. 3G networks for all telecommunication suppliers still struggle to get the throughput that was originally advertised when these networks were announced. The UK Telecoms Regulator has reported on the challenges for all suppliers.

A consumer organisation forum web site known as OrangeProblems.co.uk focuses on the poor level of service provided by Orange Broadband in the UK. Initially set up as WanadooProblems.co.uk, the site focuses on the infamous Orange local loop unbundling and poor customer service but covers a wider range of Orange operations such as lost email, significantly delayed SMTP and outages, suspicions of eavesdropping, et al.

Orange Mobile was criticised during a Channel 4 News investigation for a lack of security, which potentially exposed customer records to fraud.

In August 2007 Orange was criticised for summarily deleting email accounts tied to old Freeserve and Wanadoo 'pay as you go' dial-up accounts with no warning.

In August 2008, after well-publicised problems with iPhone 3G performances, customers compared their download speed and discovered that Orange in France was capping 3G download bandwidth. Orange admitted capping to 384 kbit/s, well below the theoretical 7.2 Mbit/s provided by the iPhone. Orange uncapped 3G and 3G+ by mid-September 2008.

The French chairman and CEO of the Orange telecommunications company, Stéphane Richard said in Cairo regarding his company operations in Israel, "Believe me, I would cancel the contract tomorrow if I could. We want to end this and to fix this; we don't want it." Later, Orange announced its desire to discontinue use of its popular brand name by its Israeli operator Partner Communications Company. The president of the State of Israel Reuven Rivlin said in response "Just yesterday Israel faced attacks from anti-Israel and anti-Semitic bodies, who have chosen to delegitimise the state of Israel, and to launch rockets at us from the Gaza Strip. We must face these challenges together, right and left," Rivlin said.

Israeli culture minister Miri Regev said, "I call on Jews of France and the world to disconnect from Orange unless Stéphane Richard takes back his words. The time has come for them to understand that Jews in the world and sane voices that oppose anti-Semitism and racism also have power." The statement on the company's website announced in response that "The Orange Group is a telecoms operator and as such its primary concern is to defend and promote the value of its brand in markets in which it is present," the statement began. "The Group does not engage in any kind of political debate under any circumstance." Later, Richard visited Israel to clarify his remarks. He met Israeli PM Benyamin Netanyahu and former president, Shimon Peres. Richard told both Netanyahu and Peres that Orange has not and will not support anti-Israel boycott efforts, and said that its announced decision to abrogate its relationship with Partner was purely commercial and not political.

On 30 June 2015, Orange and Partner announced a change to their 10-year licensing agreement. Orange paid Partner €40 million to add an opt out clause to the contract, with which Partner conducted a market survey which is determine the best course of action moving forward. In the first year only Partner can opt out, with either party being able to opt out in the second year. Regardless of which party opts to exercise the out clause, Orange will pay Partner an additional €50 million to end the arrangement. Orange stated that the money paid to Partner was purely for re-branding purposes and affirmed their previous statement that their wish to leave Israel is based on desire to discontinue license agreements and maintain only subsidiaries that they control, rather than a boycott. Orange would make the relevant payments over the course of two years and charge it to their books as a mix of marketing, sales, customer services and related expenses. As part of the agreement Orange's research and development activities within Israel would transition to the Orange name, but would be restricted from entering the telecommunications services market.

In September 2015, Orange reaffirmed their commitment to Israel with an investment in Hola, a video distribution network.

In February 2016, Orange and Partner decided to terminate their agreement. As a result, Orange Israel has become part of Partner.

In 2024, after twelve years of proceedings, Orange was fined €860,000 for infringement and violation of the GNU general public license, and therefore of the copyright of Entr'ouvert, the cooperative company that authored the free identity management library LASSO. The April association produced several text explanations to comment on the case.

Governance of the Orange group is centered in its board of directors, executive committee and three committees that steer Orange's strategy:

The company is headed either by the chairman of the board of directors, whose title in that case is the chairman and chief executive officer, or by another person appointed by the board of directors and given the title of chief executive officer.

The Orange group is governed by a board of directors composed of a minimum of twelve members and a maximum of twenty-two members, divided as follows: three are appointed by the French State, three are elected by the employees, one is elected by the shareholders and represents employee shareholders, the fifteen other members are appointed by the shareholders. The board members serve for a term of four years. In 2011, the board of directors was composed of 15 members:

The executive committee reports to the chairman and CEO. Its purpose is to coordinate the implementation of Orange's strategic orientations and to oversee the achievement of operational, social, technical and financial resource allocation objectives. It comprises fifteen members.

Orange's head office, since 2012, is based at 78, Rue Olivier de Serres in the 15th arrondissement of Paris.

The company's former head office was based at 6, Place d'Alleray in the 15th arrondissement of Paris. The building was the head office from 1998 until 2012. Eight hundred employees worked at the site.

In 1987 France Télécom established the France Télécom Foundation. On 16 January 2007, the foundation changed its name to Orange Foundation. In 1990 France Telecom Foundation received the top award for corporate philanthropy from ADMICAL. In 1995 France Telecom Foundation received the top award for solidarity from ADMICAL. The board of directors of Orange Foundation consists of representatives of Orange, independent personalities and employee representatives. Its purpose is to support projects related to health, particularly autism; education, particularly schooling for girls in developing countries; and culture, particularly group vocal music. Projects supported by Orange Foundation are chosen by committees of experts devoted to each major theme. The Foundation has been involved in 300 to 400 projects per year since 1987. The Foundation works with international NGOs and local associations involved in long-term projects in countries in which Orange is based for better follow-up of these projects.

From 2000 to 2002, Orange was a major sponsor of British Formula One team Arrows.

Orange was the major sponsor for the Essendon Football Club in the Australian Football League for the 2001 and 2002 premiership seasons.

Orange was the sponsor for UEFA Euro 2012 and UEFA Euro 2016.

The company was the official jersey sponsor of the national basketball teams of the Central African Republic and Senegal at the 2015 FIBA Africa Championship.

Orange was the kit sponsor of the French association football club Olympique de Marseille for the 2017/18 and 2018/19 seasons.

The company became a sponsor of esports organisation Team Vitality in 2018.

In 2021, the application for Orange customers called My Orange was named winner of the "Janus of the digital experience" by the French Institute of Design. In the same year, this application won the "Red Dot" award. In 2023, the demo application of the "Orange Design System" also won this award in the "Brand and Communication Design" category.

Orano SA is a French multinational nuclear fuel cycle corporation headquartered in Châtillon, Hauts-de-Seine. The company is engaged in uranium mining, conversion-enrichment, spent fuel recycling, nuclear logistics, dismantling, and nuclear cycle engineering activities. It was created in 2017 as a result of restructuring and recapitalizing of the nuclear conglomerate Areva. Orano is majority owned by the French state. Orano has shifted from the second largest uranium producer in the world with a 9% share in global uranium production in 2021 to the third largest uranium producer in the world with an 11% share of global uranium production in 2024. As of 2025 Orano accounted for 11% of global enrichment capacity and 24% of global conversion capacity.

The name Orano is derived from Ouranos, the Greek god, and it refers to uranium. The company's circular yellow logo refers to yellowcake uranium concentrate and to the nuclear fuel cycle.

Orano dates back to 1976 when based on the production division of the French Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission (CEA), the Compagnie générale des matières nucléaires (COGEMA, now Orano Cycle) was created. In 2001, COGEMA was merged with Framatome and CEA Industrie [ fr ] to form Areva.

In 2016, due to financial difficulties, Areva initiated a restructuring process. As part of this, it created a new fuel cycle company, dubbed as New Co or New Areva. The new company combined Areva Mines, Areva NC, Areva Projects, and Areva Business Support companies. It was created as a wholly owned subsidiary of Areva; however, Areva lost control over the company as the French government invested to recapitalize the company. On 23 January 2018 the company changed its name to Orano. In February 2018, Japan Nuclear Fuel Limited and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries took 5% stakes in the company each.

In September 2018, the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission terminated the license of Orano to construct the Eagle Rock Enrichment Facility, which was to be built in Bonneville County, Idaho. The project had been suspended since December 2011. At the same time Orano opened the Philippe Coste uranium conversion plant in France.

In 2023 Orano's board of directors approved a 30% expansion of the Georges-Besse II enrichment facility in France that will add 2.5 million SWU per year capacity by 2028 at an estimated cost of €1.7 billion.

On January 17, 2025, Orano signed a uranium deal with the Mongolian government to develop the Zuuvch-Ovoo uranium deposit located in the Gobi Desert.

On March 12, 2025, in Uzbekistan, Orano signed an agreement with the producer Navoiyuran.

In January 2026 Orano won a $900 million award from the U.S. Department of Energy to start enriching uranium in the U.S. and it now plans to construct a "Project Ike" enrichment facility in Oak Ridge, Tennessee at a cost of $5 billion.

Orano continues to conduct business in Russia despite international sanctions and widespread criticism following Russia's invasion of Ukraine. The company has faced backlash for its decision to maintain its presence in the Russian market, as critics argue that such operations indirectly support the Russian economy.

Orano faced controversies related to its uranium mining operations in Niger, including environmental issues and the impact on local communities. Geopolitical tensions have also raised concerns about the security and control of uranium resources in the region. Reports have emerged indicating that Orano is at risk of losing its Niger uranium mine to interests associated with Russia, heightening worries about the company's operations and involvement in international affairs.

In December 2024, the French state‑owned nuclear company Orano announced that the junta had taken operational control of its subsidiary Somaïr. Efforts to resume exports had already been blocked for months, pushing Somaïr into financial crisis. The disruption forced France and the European Union to seek alternative suppliers, and EU uranium imports from Russia also rose significantly, complicating efforts to reduce dependence on Moscow during the war in Ukraine.

The junta’s stance reflected both nationalist sentiment, long critical of France’s dominant role in Niger’s uranium sector, and political retaliation against Paris, which condemned the coup and supported the West African bloc ECOWAS in its pressure campaign. In June 2024, Niger cancelled Orano’s rights to develop the large Imouraren deposit, further undermining French interests.

Niger was considering exporting yellowcake to Iran and contacts between the two governments have deepened, with Niger's Prime Minister Ali Mahamane Lamine Zeine visiting Tehran in Jan 2024.

As consequence the Somaïr mine got into a financial crisis, threatening hundreds of jobs in the northern town of Arlit. Communities in the desert region, long dependent on uranium mining, face severe economic hardship as stockpiled uranium worth over $200 million remains unsold. The cancellation of Orano’s rights to develop the Imouraren deposit has further undermined prospects for future growth in the sector.

On 23 September 2024 the ICSID ordered Niger to halt the sale or transfer of uranium mined before the suspension of operations at the Somaïr site in case Orano Mining SAS versus Republic of Niger No. ARB/25/8, following a complaint by the French state‑owned nuclear company Orano. The ruling came after Niger’s military government expropriated Orano’s 63.4% stake in the mine, part of a broader regional trend in which military‑led governments in Mali, Burkina Faso, and Guinea have asserted greater control over natural resources.

Orano is engaged in uranium mining, conversion and enrichment, spent fuel recycling, nuclear logistics, dismantling, and nuclear cycle engineering activities. Its main subsidiaries include Orano Cycle, COGEMA and Areva NC, which is active in all stages of the nuclear fuel cycle; Orano Mining, which is active in mining activities, including exploration, extraction, and processing of uranium ore, Orano Med which focuses on the development of therapies to fight cancer; Orano TN, which deals with the transport of nuclear materials; and Orano Projects, which is responsible for the fuel cycle engineering.

As of 2024, Orano is the third largest uranium producer in the world with an 11% share of global uranium production. Orano operates uranium production sites in Canada, Kazakhstan, and has uranium production sites in Niger that are currently the subject of legal disputes. The operations of Orano Canada include interests in the McClean Lake uranium mill, Cigar Lake mine, McArthur River mine, and Key Lake uranium mill. In Kazakhstan, Orano has a joint venture with Kazatomprom named Katco. In Niger, Orano previously two mines near Arlit, in northern Niger, called Somair and Cominak, and was also developing the Imouraren project situated 80 kilometres (50 mi) from Arlit. In addition, it owns the mothballed Trekkopje mine in Namibia, together with the Desalination Plant near Swakopmund. In Gabon, it owns the site of former Mounana uranium mine where mining activities were carried out between 1961 and 1999.

The conversion and enrichment operations are carried out in Malvési and Tricastin sites in France.

Nuclear material transport and storage services are provided through Orano TN subsidiary. In 2017 the NUHOMS Matrix advanced used nuclear fuel storage overpack, a high-density system for storing multiple spent fuel rods in canisters, was launched.

Orano provides nuclear recycling activities at the La Hague and Melox sites in France.

Orano provides nuclear fuel cycle engineering services through its subsidiary Orano Projects. Its engineering sites are located in Equeurdreville, Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, and Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France. The subsidiary Orano Temis is involved in mechanical engineering and manufactures special equipment, relating to the nuclear fuel cycle, as well as serving external customers in the aerospace and defense sectors. In at least one case Orano has been contracted for feasibility studies.

Orano's subsidiary Orano Med deals with nuclear medicine, including the development of therapies to fight cancer. It has laboratories in Bessines-sur-Gartempe, France, and Plano, Texas, United States.

The Order of La Pléiade (French pronunciation: [ la ple.jad ] ; French : Ordre de la Pléiade de l'Association des parlementaires de langue française) is an honorary order of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie. It recognizes people who particularly distinguished themselves in the service of its ideals of cooperation and friendship, promoting the role of the French language in their own countries or in the world. It was created in 1976 on initiative of the Assemblée parlementaire de la Francophonie.

In this reverse chronological list, each item intentionally referred to the following (historically preceding) one:

There are five classes (in descending order of precedence):

The badge of the Order of La Pléiade is a seven-pointed star, blue enameled at both sides. The obverse silver central disc features a silver-colored compass rose, surrounded by a blue enamel and silver edged ring with the text "la Pléiade, ordre de la Francophonie", itself surrounded by seven small silver stars. The reverse silver central disc features the Adolphe Bridge in Luxembourg, where the Assemblée parlementaire de la Francophonie was founded, and symbolizes unity.

The ribbon is sky blue with small yellow stripes near each border.

The order of precedence (French : ordre de préséance) for public ceremonies in France is established by Décret n°89-655 du 13 septembre 1989 relatif aux cérémonies publiques, préséances, honneurs civils et militaires (Decree no. 89–655 of 13 September 1989 relating to public ceremonies, precedence, and civil and military honours). The original order has been modified since 1989, for example inserting the Defender of Rights after that office's 2011 creation. As of 17 October 2025 the order is as follows:

There are analogous orderings for local officials at events in Metropolitan France outside Paris, for Overseas France, and on naval bases. There are also provisions to allow subordinate to take the place of certain head officers, if absent. For events organised by a public body other than the national government, the body's head ranks second after the representative of the State (President, prefect, or sub-prefect).

The Ordinance of 9 August 1944 was a constitutional law enacted by the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF) during the Liberation of France which re-established republican rule of law in mainland France after four years of occupation by Nazi Germany and control by the collaborationist Vichy regime.

The refusal to consider the Vichy regime as a legally constituted authority was a constant in the Free France founded by Charles de Gaulle. Already in his Brazzaville Manifesto of 27 October 1940, the general had proclaimed that there was no longer a French government, and that "the Vichy-based organization that claims to bear this name is unconstitutional and submits to the invader", even as he published on the same day the first Ordinance of Free France establishing the Empire Defense Council, which organized "the legal authority in all parts of the [colonial] Empire liberated from control of the enemy... based on French legislation prior to 23 June 1940."

Promulgated in Algiers by the GPRF led by General de Gaulle, the ordinance expunged all trappings of legality from the Vichy regime, declaring all constitutional regulatory texts enacted by the regime of Pétain and Laval to be void ab initio, beginning with the Constitutional Law of 10 July 1940. As a consequence, the GPRF did not have to explicitly proclaim the return of the Republic, as the latter had never legally been dissolved. More generally, this ordinance organized the conditions for the transition from the norms in force under Vichy, to republican norms, in the historical context of the Liberation.

Through the text of this ordinance Free France, embodied by the GPRF and led by General de Gaulle, retroactively constituted itself as the continuous and uninterrupted extension of the French Republic. It proclaimed the Vichy regime stripped of all right to present itself as the legal successor of the Third Republic.

This ordinance thus ratified the definitive victory of the government in exile established by de Gaulle as early as 1940 with the Empire Defense Council, which disputed Vichy's claim to legitimate authority, with both parties then claiming sole right to represent France during the war.

Additionally, by explicitly linking France's mode of government to the Republic, the ordinance endorsed a republican vision of France that precluded any legitimacy for a modification of this form of government.

Although the ordinance declared that all Vichy laws were null and void, as reversing all Vichy decisions during the previous four years was impractical, it also stated that only those explicitly listed were invalid.

The order was promulgated pursuant to a 3 June 1943 order establishing the French Committee of National Liberation and another a year later which established the Provisional Government of the French Republic. Article 1 states that: "The form of government is and remains the Republic. Legally, it has never ceased to exist." Hence, article 2 follows with, "Consequently, all constitutional, legislative or regulatory acts, as well as the decrees issued for their implementation, under whatever name, promulgated on the mainland territory after 16 June 1940 and until the restoration of the Provisional Government of the French Republic are nullified and made ineffective. This nullification must be expressly acknowledged."

Article 3 lists the specific constitutional acts that were nullified as follows:

Other canceled acts are mentioned in the ordinance's appendices.

Articles 6-9 organize the transition from the Vichy legal system. Article 6 organizes the entry into force of acts published in official non-Vichy French government journals. Conversely, article 7 governs the termination of Vichy legal acts, which, for acts not mentioned in article 2, must be expressly declared as still in force. This article describes the Vichy regime as "the de facto authority calling itself the 'government of the French State'" and rejects its legality. Article 9 provisionally validates administrative acts dated after 16 June 1940.

Article 10 dissolves all collaborationist organizations and parties, such as the milice. It places their assets under sequestration and punishes any attempt to maintain or reconstitute these organizations.

Article 11 states that the ordinance will be applied to the mainland territory upon its liberation, and that a special ordinance will be issued for the departments of Bas-Rhin, Haut-Rhin and Moselle, which was done on 15 September 1944. Five additional ordinances followed with the last of them passing on 2 November 1945.

In an explanatory memorandum, the ordinance states: "This is the ordinance restoring republican legality on the mainland territory, that is to say in metropolitan France, with the exception of Corsica where the legislative situation, resulting from a liberation prior to the provisions thus taken, calls for a specific text which will be issued shortly."

In French law, an ordonnance (French: [ ɔʁdɔnɑ̃s ], "order") is a statutory instrument issued by the Council of Ministers in an area of law normally reserved for primary legislation enacted by the French Parliament. They function as temporary statutes pending ratification by the Parliament; failing ratification they function as mere executive regulations.

Ordonnances should not be confused with décrets issued by the prime minister (an order-in-council) or president, or with ministerial orders (arrêtés); these are issued either in matters where the Constitution allows primary legislation from the Council or as secondary legislation implementing a statute.

In the French justice system, the word can also refer to a summary ruling made by a single judge for simple cases.

Article 34 of the Constitution of France restricts certain legal matters to primary legislation to be enacted by Parliament. All other areas of law fall within the domain of delegated legislation in the form of orders-in-council (OIC) issued by the Prime Minister or ministerial orders issued by individual cabinet ministers.

Orders-in-council and other delegated legislation issued in areas reserved for primary legislation are illegal, unless they are specifically authorized by statute. Such orders define implementation measures and details left out by the originating statute.

For various reasons explained below, the Executive may sometimes want to pass primary legislation in a field reserved by statute. The ordonnances are the constitutional means to do so.

Delegated legislation can be nullified or invalidated through litigation before the Council of State (acting in their role of legislative review) if they violate general legal principles or constitutional rights, whereas primary legislation may be ruled unconstitutional only through judicial review before the Constitutional Council. Statutes are thus relatively more solid.

The decisions made by the French President under art. 16 of the French Constitution, enabling him to take emergency measures in times where the existence of the Republic is at stake (a form of reserve powers) are not called ordonnances, but simply décisions.

The introductory sentence of an ordonnance, as published in the Journal Officiel de la République Française, is: "The President of the Republic [...], after hearing the Council of State, after hearing the Council of Ministers, orders:". The word ordonnance comes from the same root as ordonner "to order".

In the French Fifth Republic, most ordonnances operate pursuant to article 38 of the French Constitution.

The Council of Ministers first introduces a bill before Parliament authorizing it to issue ordonnances to implement its program. The bill specifies a limited period of time, as well as a topic for the proposed ordonnances. If the bill passes in Parliament, the French Cabinet can issue ordonnances on the given legal matter within the specified time period. The Executive must consult the Council of State on every ordonnance ; the advice of the Council is compulsory but nonbinding.

An ordonnance must be signed by the French President, the Prime Minister and relevant ministers. This proved in 1986 to be a source of tension, during a period of cohabitation when President François Mitterrand and Prime Minister Jacques Chirac were of opposite political opinions, and the President refused to sign ordonnances requested by the Prime Minister, forcing him to go through the normal parliamentary procedure, but it was then controversial at the time whether he had the right to refuse to sign them.

Before the time period has elapsed, the Cabinet must introduce before Parliament a bill of ratification for the ordonnances, otherwise these lapse at the end of the period. Until Parliament has voted the ratification bill, the ordonnances, similar to executive orders, can be challenged before the Council of State.

If they are ratified, they become like ordinary statutes. There is, however, no obligation that they should be ratified, and they are then mere regulations. In fact, between 1960 and 1990, out of 158 ordonnances, only about 30 were ratified. That can happen because even though the ratification bill has been brought before Parliament, it is not necessarily scheduled for examination and vote. If Parliament votes down the ratification bill, it does not go into effect.

The Constitutional Council and the Council of State decided that ratification can be explicit (a vote on the ratification bill or a ratification amendment added to another bill) but also be performed implicitly by Parliament referring to an ordonnance as if it were a statute. However, implicit ratification has been prohibited by a 2008 constitutional amendment.

Occasionally, the executive fails to use the authorization that it requested and obtained.

It is of particular importance that budget bills should be voted in a timely manner, since they authorize taxes and spending. For this reason, the Government can adopt the budget by ordonnances if Parliament has not been able to agree on it within 70 days after the proposal of the budget (Constitution, article 47). The same applies for social security budget bills, but with a 50-day period (Constitution, article 47-1).

Neither of these procedures has ever been used.

Article 74-1 of the Constitution allows the Government to extend legislation applicable to Metropolitan France to overseas territories by ordonnances. These ordonnances lapse if they have not been ratified within 18 months by Parliament.

The use of ordonnances is uncontroversial when used for technical texts (such as the ordinances that converted all sums in French francs to euros in the various laws in force in France). Ordonnances are also used to adopt and adapt European Directives into French law to avoid delayed adoption of a directive, which often happens, is criticized by the EU Commission and exposes France to fines.

Ordonnances are also used to codify law into codes to rearrange them for the sake of clarity without substantially modifying them. Such usage has, however, been criticized for the legal risks that it poses if the ratification act is never voted on.

The use of ordonnances for controversial laws is generally criticised by the opposition as antidemocratic and demeaning to Parliament (Guillaume, 2005) in much the same way as the use of article 49§3 to force a bill to be passed.

Ordonnances have been extensively used as a form of rule by decree in periods where the government operated without a working Parliament: Vichy France, where the executive had dismissed Parliament and other democratic structures, the Provisional Government of the French Republic, until it could establish a legislature, and in the last days of the French Fourth Republic and the early days of the French Fifth Republic, until the new constitution had come into force and legislative elections had been held (article 92 of the Constitution, now repealed).

Certain legal texts enacted by the King in the medieval and ancien régime eras were called ordonnances, the best known of which today is the Ordinance of Villers-Cotterêts.

Oreilles d'âne (lit. ' donkey's ears ') is a traditional recipe of the Valgaudemar and Champsaur valleys and the region around La Salette-Fallavaux in the French Alps. It is a gratin casserole of wild spinach and either lasagna or crêpes.

The dish acquires its name from its key ingredient of wild spinach, which at maturity have leaves likened in shape to a donkey's ear.

The tradition recipe was to use small round pastas cut into pieces, which were poached in salted water, layered in a gratin alternating with spinach leaves cooked au jus, béchamel sauce and grated tomme, and baked.

In the village of La Salette-Fallavaux, oreilles d'âne were made of large ravioli garnished with chard or poached spinach, topped with béchamel sauce and au gratin.

Today lasagna or crouzet [ fr ] (see crozets de Savoie) is used in alternating layers with creamed spinach and grated cheese.

An organic law is a law, or system of laws, that form the foundation of a government, corporation or any other organization's body of rules. A constitution is a particular form of organic law.

Under Article 46 of the Constitution of France, organic laws (in French, lois organiques ; in English sometimes translated as Institutional Acts) are a short, fixed list of statutes (in 2005, there were about 30 of them) specified in the Constitution. They overrule ordinary statutes. They must be properly enacted by the Parliament of France following a special procedure and must be approved for constitutionality by the Constitutional Council of France before they can be promulgated.

Organic laws allow flexibility if needed. An important category of organic laws includes the budgets of the French state and French social security. Other organic laws give the practical procedures for various elections. Organic laws reduce the need for amendments to the constitution.

The Basic Law of Hong Kong is a national law of China that serves as the organic law for the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR). Comprising nine chapters, 160 articles and three annexes, the Basic Law was composed to implement Annex I of the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration.

The Basic Law was enacted under the Constitution of China when it was adopted by the National People's Congress on 4 April 1990 and came into effect on 1 July 1997 when Hong Kong was transferred from the United Kingdom to China. It replaced Hong Kong's colonial constitution of the Letters Patent and the Royal Instructions.

The Basic Law lays out the basic policies of China on Hong Kong until 2047, including the " one country, two systems " principle, the sources of law, the relationship between Hong Kong and the Central Government (State Council), the fundamental rights and duties of Hong Kong residents and the branches of local government.

Under the current Spanish Constitution of 1978, an Organic Law has an intermediate status between that of an ordinary law and of the constitution itself. It must be passed by an absolute majority of the Congress of Deputies. The Spanish Constitution specifies that some areas of law must be regulated by this procedure, such as the laws developing fundamental rights and freedoms recognized in the first section of Chapter Two of Title I of the Constitution, as well as the laws that approve the Statutes of Autonomy of the autonomous communities of Spain, among others. Prior to the 1978 constitution, the concept did not exist in Spain, but it is inspired by the similar concept in the 1958 French Constitution.

The organic laws of the United States of America can be found in Volume One of the United States Code which contains the general and permanent laws of the United States. The following texts are classified in the U.S. Code as organic laws: the Declaration of Independence, the Articles of Confederation, the Northwest Ordinance, and the US Constitution.

Organized crime in France is primarily based in major cities in France like Marseille, Grenoble, Paris, and Lyon. It is often referred to in France as grand banditisme or milieu.

From the 1900s to the late 1930s, le milieu primarily engaged in prostitution, bookmaking, fencing, and hijacking. The favored criminal activity in France turned to bank robbery, drug trafficking, and smuggling from 1940 to the late 1970s. The 1980s saw a resurgence of large-scale bank robberies and heists. From 1990 to 2000, criminal organizations established complex extortion rings in Marseille extending to Aix-en-Provence and the greater French Riviera. Since 2002, Le Milieu is known for, in addition to its extortion rings, large counterfeiting and white-collar crime operations. Due to increased financial regulation, Le Milieu has collectively pushed to integrate their crime profits into the legal economy.

France's geographical location makes it an attractive venue for trafficking (i.e. smuggling) and counterfeiting. The port of Marseille is a hub for Le Milieu to move large amounts of product into domestic and European markets. Low economic development continues to be the largest factor in youth joining French criminal organizations.

The most prominent criminal organization within Le Milieu is the Corsican mafia (milieu corse). Although the mafia has encompassed many criminal groups from the 1960s to the 1980s, modern (1990s–present) criminal activity is managed by the Marseille-based Unione Corse and Northern Corsica–based Gang de la Brise de Mer (i.e. "the sea breeze gang"). In 2007, an internal conflict led to the deaths of 102 people on the island of Corsica fracturing the influence of the two larger groups in the island (Brise de mer gang and Colonna family). Both mobs remain powerful as of 2024 and often control nightclubs, bars, restaurants, apartments, and hotels in Aix-en-Provence, Marseille and the French Riviera. In 2016, it was estimated that France's organized crime net US$ 23 billion in its underground economy.

The term milieu literally means middle or environment and figuratively society or environment, used as shorthand for le milieu criminel (criminal environment) or le milieu interlope (illegal environment). The generic term can designate any type it criminal society (e.g.: le milieu chinois, short for le milieu criminel chinois, the Chinese criminal underworld), when used without additional info or context (Le milieu) it is inferred as native historical French criminal society and it refers to the set of criminal figures operating in the French metropolitan areas who are known to the public for being involved in high level organized crime. Members working within the milieu are collectively known as the French mob. This category does not include criminal organizations that were formed in another country and operate within France (e.g. the Campanian Camorra, Serbian mafia, Albanian mafia, Chinese Triads, or Kurdish terrorist PKK). French gangs considered part of the milieu usually have long-standing ties to the country. An increase in youth-centered gang activity lead to the separation of the Milieu.

Due to the early historical connection the Corsican mafia shares with the Sicilian one, the modern structure of most French mobs typically break down into crime families with a strict hierarchy. Usually the goodfellas that carry out "orders" are known as une équipe multi-qualifiée (i.e. a multi-skilled team) composed of les beaux voyous (i.e. "the good fellows"). Most of these groups of members maintain and protect "mouvances" (i.e. territory). Members of the French Mob are highly professional as compared to lower-level crime groups in that they usually split their work by specialty (e.g. some members serve as the "brain", while others the "muscle" and/or "specialist").

Externally, and more generally, the organization of the French mob is as follows:

According to a 2004 study on organized crime, the activities of criminals within the French underworld typically fall into three broad categories:

The history of organized crime in France can be traced to the French Revolution (1789 to 1799). It is however with the turn of the 20th century that local mobsters became highly organized and created crime families. During the 1910s and the 1920s, Pigalle and Rue Saint-Denis (in Paris) served as a hub for prostitution. Due to decentralized political control in Corsica during the 1900s, many criminal organizations flourished. Members of these gangs moved from the island of Corsica to the southern coasts of France during the early 20th century. From 1920 to 1930, prostitution was the most important criminal activity and was controlled in Marseille by the Corsican Godfather, Paul Carbone and the Italian-French Godfather, François Spirito. In Paris, the Pigalle area were fought over by Corsican godfathers such as Jean-Paul Stefani and Ange Saliceti.

During the 1940s and 1950s, many gangs — most notably the Tractions Avant gang – committed large scale bank robberies. During the 1970s, the most powerful gang in Paris was the Zemmour crime family, a Jewish / pied noir clan. The Zemmour brothers controlled prostitution in the French capital and were considered to be Godfathers of Paris. As prostitution decreased, criminal activities turned to more white-collar crimes. In 1930, the two godfathers (Carbone and Spirito) spearheaded the French Connection, a global heroin -smuggling ring reaching its peak in the 1960s and 1970s. Drugs were smuggled from Turkey to France and then to the United States through Canada. The French Connection was guided by various crime families into the late 1970s before it was disbanded by French authorities. The " Milieu of Marseille " (i.e. "the underworld of Marseille") was left without political leadership after the French Connection was destroyed. The Unione Corse established widespread infrastructure in the 1930s and helped guide the Milieu out of the French Connection era.

During the 1980s, many "godfathers" (e.g. Tany Zampa, Jacky Imbert, and Francis Vanverberghe) fought for control over racketeering and drug trafficking in the port area of Marseille. It was during this time that the Zemmour brothers, known as "The Godfathers of Paris," were killed. Claude Genova quickly assumed the gap the brothers left and continued running low-level prostitution rings until his 1994 assassination. The Gang des postiches robbed nearly 30 banks during their run from 1981 to 1986. Claude Genova's connections and infrastructure was overtaken by the Hornec brothers in 1994.

At the start of the 1990s, cities were split up by families or "godfathers" (parrains). Larger cities, however, were fractured into various "mouvances" (territories). Many of these crime families established complex extortion rings in Marseille extending to Aix-en-Provence and the greater French Riviera.

The Rédoine Faïd gang, during the mid-1990s committed armed robbery, jewel theft, and extortion in the Paris area. The leader of the gang, Rédoine Faïd, was arrested in 2011. He broke out of prison on 13 April 2013 with a staged bombing and fled, but was captured on 29 May 2013.

Minority members of French society are being lured into crime families as a way of "fitting in". Low economic growth in the south of France is also leading youth to join the ranks as drug mules to gain an income alternative. An increase in youth-centered gang activity lead to the separation of the Milieu. Since the 1990s, the French Corsican mafia (Milieu corso-marseillais has encompassed the newer, modern criminals in an effort to distinguish them from the "traditional Milieu " (1930s to 1980s).

In the early 2000s, minorities (notably French Maghrebis : Algerians, Tunisians and Moroccans) living in impoverished suburbs participate in the construction of new criminal networks, not as hierarchical and centralized as gangs, but involved in different types of trafficking, particularly drug trafficking. These networks are built into neighborhoods, and their location and the semi-organized nature their crimes make them difficult to identify and dismantle.

Inter-gang fighting led to a spike in murder rates on Corsica in 2008. In 2010, The " Venzolasca Gang " penetrated large amounts of territory previously occupied by the Brise de Mer Gang.

In 2011, it was reported that various North African gangs had moved to the suburbs of Paris to sell crack cocaine. Members of these gangs introduced heroin and pure cocaine to their business operations in 2015. On 18 October 2011, a large holding of art was stolen from the Musée des Beaux-Arts in Ajaccio, Corsica, by the Valinco, Brise de Mer, and Venzolasca gangs.

In 2014, there was also an influx of "Voyageurs" or "Traveller" gangs in Paris, Marseille, Grenoble, and Montpellier. The most famous of them is the Hornec crime family ; they regularly participate in robberies, extortion, drug trafficking, prostitution, and illegal slots machines. Their hubs of operation are in the Camargue and the Étang de Berre regions.

In 2023, a war erupted in Marseille between the Yoda and DZ Mafia gangs left 49 people dead and more than 120 injured.

The following list contains historical and contemporary renditions of organized crime groups originating and/or operating in France. Mobs that also serve as crime families are denoted accordingly.

Crime families in France are smaller units of mobs, (i.e. a crime syndicate) which are in-turn either smaller units of a mafia group or the general Milieu. Alternately the phrase "crime family" could also mean the entirety of a mob, if it is small enough. The following list encompasses groups that are solely crime families and do not double as French mobs:

Orléanist (French : Orléaniste) was a 19th-century French political label originally used by those who supported a constitutional monarchy expressed by the House of Orléans. Due to the radical political changes that occurred during that century in France, four different phases of Orléanism can be identified:

Orleanism was opposed by the two other monarchist trends: the more conservative Legitimism that was loyal to the eldest branch of the House of Bourbon after 1830, and the Bonapartism that supported Napoleon 's legacy and heirs.

On 26 July 1830, the revolution of the so-called Three Glorious Days (or July Revolution) erupted due to the authoritarian and anti- Gallican tendencies showed by Charles X and his Prime Minister Jules de Polignac, expressed by the recently approved Saint-Cloud Ordinances. Despite the abdication of Charles X and the Dauphin Louis in favor to Charles X's grandson Henri, Duke of Bordeaux, on 2 August 1830, only seven days later Louis Philippe I, still Duke of Orléans, was elected by the Chamber of Deputies as new "King of the French". The enthronement of Louis Philippe was strongly wanted by Doctrinaires, the liberal opposition to Charles X's ministries, under the concept "nationalize the monarchy and royalize France". On 14 August 1830, the Chamber approved a new Constitution, which became the de facto political manifesto for the Orléanists, containing the basis for a constitutional monarchy with a central Parliament. The Orléanism, became the dominant tendency within political life, easily divided inside the Chamber of Deputies between the centre-left of Adolphe Thiers and the centre-right of François Guizot. Louis Philippe showed himself more aligned with Guizot, entrusted to the higher offices of government, and rapidly became associated with the rising "new men" of the banks, industries and finance, gaining the epithet of " Roi bourgeois ". In the early 1840s, Louis Philippe's popularity decreased, due to his strong connection to upper classes and repression against workers' strikes, and showed few concerns for his weakened position, leading the writer Victor Hugo to describe him as "a man with many little qualities". The Orléanist regime finally fell in 1848, when a revolution erupted and on 24 February Louis Philippe abdicated in favor to his grandson Philippe, Count of Paris, under regency of his mother Helene, Duchess of Orléans, who was quickly ousted out from the Chamber of Deputies during the regency's formalization, who was interrupted by republican deputies who instead proclaimed the Second Republic.

After 18 years of reign, Louis Philippe left the Orléanist base well-defined inside the magistrature, the press, universities and academies, especially the Académie française. However, also some great aristocratic families joined the court, like the Dukes of Broglie, as well former Bonapartist officers like the Marshal Soult and Édouard Mortier. This establishment constituted the majority of the Party of Order, led by Thiers, who represented the conservatives and monarchists under the Second Republic.

Orléanism revived after the French defeat in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-1871 which caused the fall of the Second Empire which had succeeded to the Second Republic under Emperor Napoleon III, the former president of France who had been enthroned after the coup d'état of 1851. The Second Empire was succeeded itself officially in 1871 by the Third Republic. A National Assembly, composed by 638 on 778 seats, was formed and new elections were called for the 8 February of the same year, which resulted in a victory for the monarchist right: 396 seats won, divided to 214 Orléanists and 182 Legitimists, nicknamed "cavalrymen". Initially divided about the dynastic issue, the Orléanists found a compromise with the Legitimists, supporting the rights of Henri, Count of Chambord (former Duke of Bordeaux, currently childless) in return of the recognition of the Count of Paris as his heir, echoing an 1862 statement of Chambord. Although Chambord never mentioned the Count of Paris as his heir, probably fearing the defection of his ultraconservative supporters, the informal agreement sanctioned the "fusion" of Legitimists and Orléanists, who quite easily formed a conservative coalition. The monarchist majority, led by the Duke of Aumale (son of Louis Philippe), and the centre-left endorsed the centre-right candidate Thiers as president of the Republic, but due to the continued arguments between Legitimists and Orléanists and the memory of the dynastic divisions of the past 40 years, Thiers moved to support a "conservative republic" instead of a divided monarchy.

Due to Chambord's dislike of Aumale, the "fusionists" rapidly passed under the leadership of the Duke of Broglie, who in 1873 successfully managed the election of President Patrice de MacMahon, former general and national hero who showed Legitimist sympathies, considering him as a kind of "lieutenant-general of the kingdom" before the fully restoration of Chambord on the throne. Broglie was shortly after awarded with the premiership by MacMahon, supported by monarchists and the centre-right. Restoration appeared imminent when a parliamentary commission was established in October 1873 to adopt a monarchist constitution. But in the same month the majority was weakened by the refusal of Chambord to accept the French Tricolour, used since 1830, preferring instead the return of the royal white flag, symbol of the Ancien Régime. The question was apparently resolved with a compromise between Broglie and Chambord: the last will accept the tricolour flag while a future agreement about a new flag will be considered. In October the majority was shocked when the centre-right representative Charles Savary rashly misinformed the press of Chambord's full acceptance of the tricolour flag,. The pretender had to harshly clarify his position, causing the left of the centre-right, Orléanists disappointment and the dissolution of the "restoration" commission on 31 October 1873. A last attempt by Chambord was made on 12 November, when he asked President MacMahon via the Duke of Blacas to join with him into the National Assembly and spoke toward the representatives, hoping to convince them to restore the monarchy, but MacMahon refused due to his institutional position, toward he was formally even if not ideologically attached, causing the project's failure. Due to the impossibility to restore the monarchy in a short time, the Orléanists waited the death of the sickly Chambord, occurred in 1883, but by that time, enthusiasm for a monarchy had faded, and as a result the Count of Paris was never offered the French throne.

The monarchists, however, still controlled the National Assembly, and under MacMahon's partisan presidency they launched the so-called " moral order government ", in reference to the Paris Commune, whose political and social innovations were viewed as morally degenerate by large conservative segments of the French population. In February 1875, a series of parliamentary acts established the constitutional laws of the new republic. At its head was a President of the Republic. A two-chamber parliament consisting of a directly elected Chamber of Deputies and an indirectly-elected Senate was created, along with a ministry under the President of the council (prime minister), who was nominally answerable to both the President of the Republic and the legislature. Throughout the 1870s, the issue of whether a monarchy should replace the republic dominated public debate. On 16 May 1877, with public opinion swinging heavily in favour of a republic after the election of March, President MacMahon made one last desperate attempt to salvage the monarchical cause by dismissing the "conservative republican" prime minister Jules Simon and appointing the Duke of Broglie to office. He then dissolved parliament and called a general election for the following October. If his hope had been to halt the move towards republicanism, it backfired spectacularly, with the president being accused of having staged a constitutional coup d'état known as " 16 May Crisis " after the date on which it happened. Republicans returned triumphantly after the October elections for the Chamber of Deputies. The crisis ultimately sealed the defeat of the royalist movement, and was instrumental in creating the conditions of the longevity of the Third Republic: in January 1879 the Republicans gained control of the Senate, formerly monopolized by monarchists. MacMahon himself resigned on 30 January 1879, leaving a seriously weakened presidency in the hands of Jules Grévy, leader of the Republican Left.

The end of the presidency of MacMahon and the Senate's loss caused the end of the monarchist bloc. Although there were Orléanist deputies in the Chamber for all the 19th century, they were only a minority. At the end, many monarchists accepted the republic, moving toward the centre. Some Orléanists, especially from their bourgeoise core base, accepted the republic even since the 1870s, like Thiers and press baron Émile de Girardin. In 1892, after Pope Leo XIII 's approval to the Third Republic, breaking the historical alliance between Church and Crown, some monarchists led by Orléanist Jacques Piou and Legitimist Albert de Mun formed the group of the " ralliés " ("supporters"), that in 1901 constituted the base of the first Christian Democratic party in France, the Liberal Action, while many other royalists were still attached to the Crown.

The elections of 1898 confirmed the exclusion of the monarchists from any possible government. However, 4 years earlier, the Dreyfus affair shook public opinion, dividing the republican camp: socialists, radicals and liberals defended the innocence of Dreyfus, while other republicans joined the nationalists and monarchists against Dreyfus. The election also introduced 10 overtly anti-Semitic representatives, led by Édouard Drumont. The following year, on 20 June 1899, the academic Henri Vaugeois and journalist Maurice Pujo founded the nationalist association Action française, initially absent of any specific ideology. However, the Action was joined by many Catholics and monarchists who were anti-Dreyfus, contributing to the move of the association toward the right. Particularly, the adhesion of Charles Maurras, considered a "pragmatic" anti-Dreyfusard rather than a true anti-Semite, contributed to the creation of the ideology of the Action, which rapidly became the main monarchist group. Maurras, despite becoming the movement's ideologist, supported not a classical monarchy on religious term (divine right) but a positivist one, stating that a monarchy would grant more order and stability than a parliamentary republic. The largest group of French monarchists, after the death of Chambord in 1883, endorsed the Count of Paris until his death in 1894, recognizing the claim of his son Philippe, Duke of Orléans, who was also supported by the Action. However, monarchism inside the Action was always integrated secondary to its semi-official ideology of " integral nationalism " theorized by Maurras, and many Action activists were still republicans, like the founder Vaugeois. The movement grew to be one of the largest organizations in France, but in 1926 a condemnation from Pope Pius XI against the Action caused the defection of many Catholic sympathizers. The Pope judged that it was folly for the French Church to continue to tie its fortunes to the unlikely dream of a monarchist restoration, and distrusted the movement's tendency to defend the Catholic religion in merely utilitarian and nationalistic terms, and the Action Française never recovered from the condemnation.

By 1934, the Action was still a considerable force, with over 60,000 members across France. In that year, they joined other far-right leagues on 6 February demonstrations against political corruption and the Parliament, causing the resignation of Prime Minister Édouard Daladier the day after and provoking fear of a nationalist coup d'état. The papal condemnation, the aggressive tactics, and Maurras's disrespectful attitude toward constitutional monarchists finally ended the organization as a major power. The Orléanist pretender Jean, Duke of Guise, who in 1937 broken ties with the Action, also lost many supporters. From this moment, Orléanism ceased to be associated with the Action or the far-right. Instead, the Duke of Guise's son and heir Henri, Count of Paris, launched his own magazine Courier Royale and secretly dealt with anti-fascist conservative General La Rocque, leader of the French Social Party, about the possibility of a restoration.

In 1946, the Count of Paris (who succeeded his father in 1940) moved to Portugal due to the ban on former royals still present in France. As a result of the unstable situation of the Fourth Republic, characterized like its predecessor by short governments and a high number of political parties, the Count of Paris made a serious attempt to restore the French monarchy. He endorsed the Christian Democratic Popular Republican Movement (MPR), and formed a kind of political committee composed of the academics Bertrand de Jouvenel, Gustave Thibon and Michel de Saint Pierre, publishing on 5 February 1948 the manifesto Esquisse d'une constitution monarchique et démocratique, that promoted the idea of a constitutional monarchy. Thanks to the MPR deputy Paul Hutin-Desgrées (co-founder of Ouest-France), the exile law was abrogated on 24 June 1950, permitting the return of the Count of Paris to the capital, where he met with President Vincent Auriol. The count and his family made their home in the Parisian suburbs of Louveciennes, and quickly became media darlings. Orléans frequently went to parties and meetings which were attended by prominent French politicians of the Fourth Republic, such as Antoine Pinay, Jacques Soustelle, Pierre Mendès France and Maurice Schumann. Through his newsletter Courier 50, the Count of Paris expressed support for the policies of Mendès France, like the peace in Indochina, the refusal of a US-controlled European Defence Community (EDC) and decolonization of French Africa.

Orléans' relationship with Charles de Gaulle was also promising, as the general and the pretender had similar political views and were both devout Roman Catholics. When De Gaulle became prime minister in 1958, it was expected by the Count of Paris that the general would move to restore the French monarchy, but instead De Gaulle preferred to strengthen the republican institutions, eventually becoming the driving force behind the establishment of the present-day Fifth Republic. De Gaulle was elected president of the new government in 1959, and seems to have promised the Count of Paris that he wouldn't run again in the election of 1965, instead supporting the candidacy of the pretender that would promote a campaign to transform the republic into a constitutional monarchy. However, in 1963 De Gaulle confided to his minister Alain Peyrefitte that, despite his respect and esteem for the Count of Paris, he never considered him to be his successor as the head of state, stating that the idea of a monarchy was incompatible with the modern world. Disappointed by the false hopes and unfulfilled promises, the Count of Paris retired from French political life in 1967, ending also the publications of his newsletter.

Orléanist pretenders from 1883 to the present follow these principles:

The Duke of Orléans The Duchess of Orléans

Princess Hélène, Countess of Limburg Stirum

Princess Chantal, Baroness of Sambucy de Sorgue

The Orléanist party, despite the different regimes, maintained its bourgeois platform, constituted by those academics, journalists and financiers who backed Louis Philippe during his reign, and was intended as the liberal centre of politics, far from reactionary Legitimists and revolutionary republicans. However, for all the span of Louis Philippe's reign, the Orléanists were not a homogeneous party, but simply the majority who supported the constitutional system. It was only after the establishment of the Second French Republic in 1848 and the division inside right-wing factions over the monarchy that the Orléanist party found unity, supporting a parliamentary system instead of an executive one.

In the early 20th century, the majority of Orléanists accepted the republican institutions, approving the parliamentary system and pro-business policy realized by the republican majority, who reflected the historical Orléanist purposes. French historian René Rémond included the presidency of Valéry Giscard d'Estaing as part of the Orléanist tradition, due to his liberal views and equidistance from the nationalist right (descending from Bonapartism) and the conservative right (from Legitimism). The term "Orléanist parliamentarism" was also used by jurist and sociologist Maurice Duverger to define the form of government of the Fifth Republic, which presents a parliamentary system with a powerful head of state.

In 1974, before the presidential election, the New Royal Action (NAR), born by a moderate faction spilled from the Action française, endorsed Bertrand Renouvin for the presidency, with the purpose of restoring a constitutional monarchy led by Orléans, followed by centrist and liberal positions on other issues. Renouvin gained only 43,722 votes (0.17%).

The ortolan (Emberiza hortulana), also called ortolan bunting, is a Eurasian bird in the bunting family Emberizidae, a passerine family now separated by most modern scholars from the finches, Fringillidae. The genus name Emberiza is from Alemannic German Embritz, a bunting. The specific name hortulana is from the Italian name for this bird, ortolana. The English ortolan is derived from Middle French hortolan, "gardener".

The ortolan is served in French cuisine, typically cooked and eaten whole. Traditionally, diners cover their heads with their napkin or a towel while eating the delicacy. The ortolan was so widely eaten that its French populations had dropped dangerously low by the 1990s. French laws protecting the bird, and an EU-wide prohibition against killing or capturing it, have had little effect on the ortolan's numbers.

The ortolan bunting was described by the Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus in 1758 in the tenth edition of his Systema Naturae and retains its original binomial name of Emberiza hortulana. The species is monotypic. A molecular phylogenetic study of the buntings published in 2008 found that the ortolan bunting is most closely related to Cretzschmar's bunting (Emberiza caesia).

The ortolan bunting is 16–17 centimetres (6 + 1 ⁄ 4 – 6 + 3 ⁄ 4 inches) in length and has a wing-span of 23–29 cm (9– 11 + 1 ⁄ 2 in). In appearance and habits it much resembles its relative the yellowhammer, but lacks the bright colouring of that species; the ortolan's head, for instance, is greenish-grey, instead of a bright yellow. The song of the male ortolan resembles that of the yellowhammer.

A native of most European countries and West Asia, it reaches as far north as Scandinavia and beyond the Arctic Circle, frequenting cornfields and their neighbourhoods. It is an uncommon vagrant in spring, and particularly autumn, to the British Isles. Sightings in the UK are less common than they were, owing to the species' population decline due to overexploitation in France.

It was spotted at Kenjar Coastal Karnataka, India, in November 2018 and photographed by birdwatchers. Some birders commented that it is the first photographic record of an ortolan bunting in India.

Ortolan nests are placed on or near the ground.

The maximum age recorded is six years and ten months for a bird found dead in Switzerland.

Seeds are the natural diet, but beetles and other insects are taken when feeding their young.

For centuries, a rite of passage for French gourmets was the eating of the Ortolan. These tiny birds—captured alive, force-fed, then drowned in Armagnac —were roasted whole and eaten that way, bones and all, while the diner draped his head with a linen napkin to preserve the precious aromas and, some believe, to hide from God.

The birds are caught with nets set during their autumn migratory flight to Africa. They are then kept in covered cages or boxes, where they are force-fed grain, usually millet seed. Once they have doubled in bulk, they are suspended upside down over a container of Armagnac, and by dipping, are drowned before being marinated in the brandy.

The birds are then plucked, salted and peppered and cooked in their own fat for seven minutes. Many consumers place the bird feet first into their mouth while holding onto the bird's head, eating the ortolan whole, with or without the head. Some spit out the larger bones, while others eat the whole bird head, bones and all. The traditional way French gourmands eat ortolans is to cover their heads and face with a large napkin or towel while consuming the bird. The purpose of the towel is debated. Some claim it is to retain the maximum aroma with the flavour as they consume the entire bird at once, while according to The Daily Telegraph, "Tradition dictates that [the towel] is to shield – from God's eyes – the shame of such a decadent and disgraceful act", and others have suggested the towel simply hides the consumers spitting out bones. This use of the towel was begun by a priest, a friend of Jean Anthelme Brillat-Savarin.

At one time, the island of Cyprus formed a chief depot for the export of ortolans, which were pickled in spices and vinegar and packed in casks containing from 300 to 400 each. In the early 20th century, between 400 and 500 casks were annually exported from Cyprus.

Ortolan hunting was banned in France in 1999, but the law was poorly enforced and it is thought that up to 50,000 ortolans were illegally killed each year during the autumn migration: mostly birds from breeding grounds in Finland and the Baltic area. According to France's League for the Protection of Birds, France's ortolan population fell 30% between 1997 and 2007. In 2007, the French government vowed to strictly enforce some existing rules about banning the practice, with the maximum fine set at €6,000. Killing and cooking ortolans is banned across the European Union. In 2007, the pressure from France's League for Protection of Birds and from the EU resulted in the French government promising to enforce the EU directive protecting the ortolan. After several years of active citizen watch revealing little if any change in the field situation, the local representative of the government repeated this statement in 2016.

As of 2018, the overall ortolan bunting's population is listed by the IUCN as Least Concern (LC). However, a 2019 study using stable isotopes, archival light geologgers, and population genetics suggests the species is in decline.

In France, an overseas collectivity (French : collectivité d'outre-mer, abbreviated as COM) is a first-order administrative division, on the same level as a region, but with a semi-autonomous status. The COMs include some former French overseas colonies and other overseas entities with a particular status, all of which became COMs by constitutional reform on 28 March 2003. The COMs differ from overseas regions and overseas departments, which have the same status as metropolitan France but are located outside Europe. As integral parts of France, overseas collectivities are represented in the National Assembly, Senate and Economic and Social Council. Though some are outside the European Union, all can vote to elect members of the European Parliament (MEPs). (All of France became one multi-member EU constituency in 2019.) The Pacific COMs use the CFP franc, a currency pegged to the euro, whereas the Atlantic COMs use the euro itself. As of 31 March 2011, there were five COMs:

COM is one possible status in Overseas France, the other inhabited territories are the less-autonomous overseas departments and regions (DROM), and the more-autonomous New Caledonia.

The overseas departments and regions of France (French : départements et régions d'outre-mer, pronounced [ depaʁtəmɑ̃ e ʁeʒjɔ̃ dutʁəmɛʁ ] ; DROM) are the five departments and regions of the French Republic which are located outside European France (also known as " Metropolitan France "). These overseas entities have exactly the same status as European France's departments and regions. The Constitution of France provides that, in general, French laws and regulations (France's civil code, penal code, administrative law, social laws, and tax laws) apply to French overseas departments and regions the same way as in metropolitan France, but can be adapted as needed to suit the region's particular needs. Hence, the local administrations of French overseas departments and regions cannot themselves pass new laws. On occasion, referendums are undertaken to re-assess the sentiment in local status.

Since March 2011, the five overseas departments and regions of France are:

French Guiana, Martinique, and Mayotte are single territorial collectivities, and so (along with Corsica) have a single government that operates as both a region and a department. Guadeloupe and Réunion have separate regional and departmental governments that cover the same territory.

Other parts of Overseas France have more autonomy, namely the overseas collectivities and New Caledonia.

France's earliest, short-lived attempt at setting up overseas departments was after Napoleon 's conquest of the Republic of Venice in 1797, when the hitherto Venetian Ionian Islands fell to the French Directory and were organised as the departments of Mer-Égée, Ithaque and Corcyre. In 1798, the Russian Admiral Fyodor Ushakov evicted the French from these islands, and though France regained them via the Treaty of Tilsit in 1807, the three departments were not revived.

Under the 1946 constitution of the Fourth Republic, the French colonies of Guadeloupe and Martinique in the Caribbean; French Guiana in South America; and Réunion in the Indian Ocean were defined as overseas departments, joining Algeria in North Africa, which had previously been divided into three departments and a territory in 1848.

Since 1982, following the French government 's policy of decentralization, overseas departments have elected regional councils with powers similar to those of the regions of metropolitan France. As a result of a constitutional revision that occurred in 2003, these regions are now to be called "overseas regions"; indeed, the new wording of the Constitution gives no precedence to the terms "overseas department" or "overseas region", though the latter is still virtually unused by the French media.

The overseas collectivity of Saint Pierre and Miquelon was an overseas department from 1976 to 1985. All five of France's overseas departments have between 200,000 and 1,000,000 people each, whereas Saint Pierre and Miquelon has only about 6,000, and the smaller collectivity unit therefore seemed more appropriate for the islands.

The overseas collectivity of Mayotte held a referendum on 29 March 2009. Of the votes, 95% were for becoming an overseas department. Mayotte became an overseas department on 31 March 2011.

Each overseas department is the sole department in its own overseas region (French : région d'outre-mer) with powers identical to the regions of metropolitan France. Because of the one-to-one correspondence, informal usage does not distinguish the two, and the French media use the term département d'outre-mer (DOM) almost exclusively.

As integral parts of France and the European Union, overseas departments are represented in the National Assembly, Senate, and Economic and Social Council. The areas also vote to elect members of the European Parliament (MEP), and also use the euro as their currency. The overseas departments and regions are not the same as the overseas collectivities, which have a semi-autonomous status.

Guadeloupe and Réunion each have separate departmental and regional councils, while in Mayotte, Guiana and Martinique, the two layers of government are consolidated so one body wields both sets of powers. The overseas departments acquired these additional powers in 1982, when France's decentralisation policy dictated that they be given elected regional councils and other regional powers; however, the term "overseas region" was only introduced with the French constitutional amendment of 28 March 2003.

Due to distance from the EU and local proximity, some areas participate in economic fora and organizations of mutual interest geographically close-by, such as Martinique and Guadeloupe, which each take part in both the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) and Association of Caribbean States (ACS); or French Polynesia, which takes part in the Pacific Islands Forum (PIF).

Overseas France (French : France d'outre-mer, also France ultramarine) consists of 13 French territories outside Europe, mostly the remnants of the French colonial empire that remained a part of the French state under various statuses after decolonisation.

"Overseas France" is a collective name; while used in everyday life in France, it is not an administrative designation in its own right. Instead, the five overseas regions have exactly the same administrative status as the thirteen metropolitan regions; the five overseas collectivities are semi-autonomous; and New Caledonia is an autonomous territory. Overseas France includes island territories in the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian oceans, French Guiana on the South American continent, and several peri-Antarctic islands as well as a claim in Antarctica. Excluding the district of Adélie Land, where French sovereignty is effective de jure by French law, but where the French exclusive claim on this part of Antarctica is frozen by the Antarctic Treaty (signed in 1959), overseas France covers a land area of 120,396 km (46,485 sq mi) and accounts for 18.0% of the French Republic's land territory. Its exclusive economic zone (EEZ) of 9,825,538 km (3,793,661 sq mi) accounts for 96.7% of the EEZ of the French Republic.

Outside Europe, four broad classes of overseas French territorial administration currently exist: overseas departments/regions, overseas collectivities, the sui generis territory of New Caledonia, and uninhabited territories. From a legal and administrative standpoint, these four classes have varying legal status and levels of autonomy, although all permanently inhabited territories have representation in both France's National Assembly and Senate, which together make up the French Parliament. Six of these regions are considered Outermost Regions of the European Union, with the rest, excepting Clipperton, considered overseas countries and territories that cooperate with the European Union.

2,891,000 people lived in overseas France in January 2026. Most of these residents are citizens of France and citizens of the European Union. This makes them able to vote in French and European elections.

Overseas regions have exactly the same status as France's mainland regions. The French Constitution provides that, in general, French laws and regulations (France's civil code, penal code, administrative law, social laws, tax laws, etc.) apply to French overseas regions just as in metropolitan France, but can be adapted as needed to suit the region's particular needs. Hence, the local administrations of French overseas regions cannot themselves pass new laws.

The category of "overseas collectivity" (French : collectivité d'outre-mer or COM) was created by France's constitutional reform of 28 March 2003. Each overseas collectivity has its own statutory laws.

In contrast to overseas departments and regions, the overseas collectivities are empowered to make their own laws, except in certain areas reserved to the French national government (such as defense, international relations, trade and currency, and judicial and administrative law). The overseas collectivities are governed by local elected assemblies and by the French Parliament and French Government, with a cabinet member, the Minister of the Overseas, in charge of issues related to the overseas territories.

With 2,891,000 inhabitants in 2026, overseas France accounts for 4.15% of the population of the French Republic. They enjoy a corresponding representation in the two chambers of the French Parliament and, in the 16th legislature of the French Fifth Republic (2022–2027), overseas France is represented by 27 deputies in the French National Assembly, accounting for 4.7% of the 577 deputies in the National Assembly:

Since September 2011, overseas France has been represented by 21 senators in the French Senate, accounting for 6.0% of the 348 senators in the Senate:

The territories used to be collectively represented in the European Parliament by the Overseas Territories of France constituency until the 2019 European elections, when all French constituencies merged to form a single constituency.

Overseas France and other special territories of EU member states are not separately represented in the EU Council. Every member state represents all its citizens in the council.

The eleven inhabited French overseas territories are:

Several of these territories are generally only transiently inhabited by researchers in scientific stations.

Ranked by population in the metropolitan area :

For elections in the European Union, Overseas Territories (French: Circonscription Outre-Mer) was a European Parliament constituency in France until the 2019 European Parliament election. It consisted of all the inhabited French overseas departments and collectivities (including the sui generis overseas territory of New Caledonia, but excluding the non-permanently inhabited overseas territories that have no registered voters), even if their territory is not part of the European Union. Constitutionally, all French citizens are also granted the same European citizenship, consequently all of them elected representatives in the European Parliament, independently of their area of residence.

In 2019, France decided to switch to a single constituency for EU elections, putting an end to all regional constituencies, including the Overseas Territory of France constituency.

The aim of the single constituency was to advance participation and electoral equality. Critics claimed that participation did not increase and that overseas territories became less represented.. The number of overseas MEPs was unchanged, however, at 3. Voter turnout increased to approximately 50% in 2019 and 52% in 2024.

According to the provisions of Law No. 2007-224 of 21 February 2007:

The Overseas Territories electoral constituency consists of three sections. Each list in this constituency has at least one candidate per section. [A] decree... shall allocate seats in the constituency between the three sections. The sections are described as follows:

Those eleven territories have different status with the European Union (none of them are part of the Schengen Area):

The legal currency in those overseas territories is the Euro since 1999 (before then, it was the French franc), including in OCTs (by special agreement with the European Union) except those in the Pacific section which still use the CFP franc (bound to the Euro by a special agreement between France and the European Union, but with a revocable rate of 8.38 EUR for 1,000 XPF).

The Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP) is an intergovernmental organisation based in Apia, Samoa with more than 90 staff members. The organisation is held accountable by the governments and administrations of the Pacific region to ensure the protection and sustainable development of the region's natural resources. The organisation actively promotes the understanding of the connection between Pacific island people and their natural environment and the impact that these have on their sustenance and livelihoods. The organisation was established in 1982. Previously South Pacific Regional Environment Programme, the word "South" was replaced with "Secretariat" in 2004, in recognition of the members north of the equator. The French equivalent name is Programme régional océanien de l’environnement (PROE).

SPREP Members comprise 21 Pacific island countries and territories, and five developed countries* with direct interests in the region:

SPREP oversees the following agreements, conventions and protocols, each of which is enacted by International treaty :

The SPREP Annual General Meeting is the main governance mechanism of the organisation. SPREP Members meet once every year to discuss the workplan and budget and other matters relating to administration and corporate affairs. The 25th SPREP Meeting was held in the Republic of the Marshall Islands in October 2014.

SPREP began life in the late 1970s as a joint initiative of SPC, SPEC, ESCAP and UNEP - eventually functioning as a component of UNEP's Regional Seas Programme. The Programme received further impetus as a result of the 1982 Conference on the Human Environment in the South Pacific. Following a period of expansion and long deliberations, SPREP left SPC in Nouméa in 1992 and relocated to Samoa. It achieved autonomy as an independent inter-governmental organisation with the signing of the Agreement Establishing SPREP in Apia on 16 June 1993.

SPREP (the Secretariat) is the region’s key inter-governmental organisation for environment and sustainable development, and is one of several inter-governmental agencies comprising the Council of Regional Organisations in the Pacific (CROP). Under the Agreement Establishing SPREP, the purposes of SPREP are to promote cooperation in the South Pacific Region and to provide assistance in order to protect and improve the environment and to ensure sustainable development for present and future generations (Art.2). SPREP's vision is: the Pacific environment - sustaining our livelihoods and natural heritage in harmony with our cultures. SPREP also functions as the Secretariat of 2 (formerly 3) regional conventions: the Nouméa Convention, the Waigani Convention and the Apia Convention (suspended).

Paimpont Forest (French : Forêt de Paimpont, Breton : Koad Pempont), also known as Brocéliande Forest (French : Forêt de Brocéliande), is a temperate forest located around the village of Paimpont in the department of Ille-et-Vilaine in Brittany, France. Covering an area of 9,000 hectares, it is part of a larger forest area that covers the neighboring departments of Morbihan and Côtes-d'Armor. It contains the castles Château de Comper and Château de Trécesson as well as the Forges of Paimpont, a national historical site. It has been associated with the forest of Brocéliande and many locations from Arthurian legend, including the Val sans retour, the tomb of Merlin, and the fountain of Barenton.

The forest is located in the northwestern French region of Brittany, about 30 km southwest of the city of Rennes. It occupies mainly the territory of the commune of Paimpont but extends to bordering communes in the departments of Ille-et-Vilaine and Morbihan, mainly Guer and Beignon in the south, Saint-Péran in the northeast, and Concoret in the north.

The woodland surrounding Paimpont is the remains of a denser and much larger forest. It is mainly a broadleaved forest, mostly oaks and beech, with areas of conifers either inside after clear-felling or on the periphery as a transition to moorland, for example towards the west in the area of Tréhorenteuc and the Val sans retour. The relative altitude of the forested massif helps produce a climate close to the oceanic climate of the Finistère coast. This, in addition to west and southwest winds that carry clouds and rain, supports ample vegetation. The surplus of water feeds the many brooks at the bottoms of small valleys before flowing into the river Aff, then into the Vilaine, and on to the area around Redon in the south of Ille-et-Vilaine.

The road from Forges to Concoret, which goes north through Paimpont, separates the western "high forest" (haute forêt) and the eastern "low forest", both of comparable size. In the high forest, the altitude decreases regularly from the highest point to 258 m, regularly offering views southwest towards the department of Morbihan ; similarly, to the north are views towards the commune of Mauron on the edge of Côtes-d'Armor.

Paimpont Forest was known as Brocélien in the 15th century. In Breton, it was called Brec'Helean. It has been repeatedly logged for construction needs of the city of Rennes, in particular in the 15th century. Because of its importance, the forest was put under royal jurisdiction.

The Forges of Paimpont were the most important wood-fueled forges of Brittany, operating from the 16th century until the end of the 19th century. Their location was enabled by the proximity of an open-cast deposit of iron ore at Gelée (a site near the village of Paimpont), the existence of a major river system, and the easy supply of locally produced charcoal. The forest was overexploited for the needs of the forges.

During the French Revolution, the abolition of protection triggered massive clear-cutting of the forest as the wood was excessively exploited to power the blast furnaces of local industry, which employed charcoal. In 1804, the prefect of the department wrote that the forest at Paimpont was in a state of degradation and threatened by complete destruction.

In 1875, the forest was bought from Prince Philippe, Count of Paris by shipowner and industrialist Louis Levesque, for rest and pleasure. The new owner created the Domaine de Paimpont and organized hunts of wild boars and deer. Exploitation of the forest by the local population was limited to be only under licenses and the supervision of private forest rangers.

During World War I, the forest, deprived of most of its guards, was affected by major fires of unknown origin. During World War II, paratroopers of the SAS of Free France were dropped to join the partisans of the FFI in the forest with the mission of delaying German reinforcements as part of the Normandy landings in 1944. In the 1990s, a dam project on the Aff for the water supply of the Rennes region caused controversy and protests before being abandoned.

The forest has experienced many fires since the start of the 20th century. In September 1990, a large wildfire devastated 450 hectares of the forest of Paimpont, especially the area of the Val sans retour, raging for five days. Afterward, from 1991 to 1992, thousands of volunteers planted more than a half-million new trees. Other major fires have occurred in 1955, 1984, 2003, and in particular in 1976, when a fire ravaged a thousand hectares. Another massive blaze (preceded by a lesser one started by a man illegally burning garden waste two months earlier) occurred during three days in August 2022 as part of the 2022 European wildfires, which completely destroyed nearly 400 hectares of woodlands and moors and damaged some 230 more.

The forest is an area of ZNIEFF and Natura 2000. It is mostly privately owned by landowners who maintain and exploit it for timber and for hunting; only a small part in the northeast (10%) is state-owned and managed by the National Forest Office. This situation prevents free movement in the forest, even on the outskirts of the village and its lake. However, landowners have signed an agreement authorizing hiking, although some forest paths are closed during the hunting season. Forest guards watch for behaviors that threaten the forest and its flora and fauna.

The Paimpont forest benefits from its association, since the 13th century, with the legendary forest of Brocéliande, which has become the site of many stories of Arthurian legend in the French romance tradition. The identification with Brocéliande became institutionalized with the creation of the communauté de communes de Brocéliande, which was itself regrouped within a supra-intercommunal structure named the Pays de Brocéliande.

The area has been a tourist destination site since the 19th century, especially after 1945. Since 1951, followers of Neo-Druidism also meet there periodically, including in organized ceremonies. The Paimpont sites are implemented through signs and pedestrian trails designed to introduce visitors to Arthurian locations, with explanatory panels linking each place to a legendary tale.

The Abbey Notre-Dame de Paimpont is a tourist and cultural location at the edge of Lake Paimpont. It is built in medieval Gothic style (walls, openings, baptistery and the Blessed Sacrament chapel, vault) with an interior (pulpit, statues, altars, altarpieces) in the Baroque style of the 17th century.

The abbey was built in the 13th century on the site of a priory founded in 645 by Judicaël, king of Domnonée. It was originally a Benedictine monastery but was inhabited by canons from the 13th century until the Revolution, when the abbey was nationalized and sold as biens nationaux in 1790.

This historical industrial site has been listed as a historic monument since 2001, and was restored before it was opened to the public. Located in Ille-et-Vilaine, it is actually closer to Plélan-le-Grand than to Paimpont.

The Château de Comper is a former castle and mansion located in northern part of the forest, two kilometers east of the village of Concoret. From the 13th century, Comper has been one of the strongest positions of Upper Brittany. The castle has been the scene of much fighting—including being badly damaged by fire in out-of-control riots in the forest during the Revolution in 1790 —and has passed into the hands of several families. The mansion at the site now houses the exhibitions of the Centre de l'Imaginaire Arthurien (Center of the Arthurian Imagination). Adjoining it is a pond where, according to a local legend, the Lady of the Lake Viviane lived in her underwater crystal palace.

Located outside the village and the forest, immediately in its extension to the southwest, this castle was rebuilt in its current state in the 15th century. The most famous of the legends associated with it is that of the Mariée de Trécesson (of "white lady" type), which, unusual for the region, has no Arthurian connections but instead seems to be inspired by a true story.

The biological station of Paimpont, under the University of Rennes, was built in 1966–1967; its buildings accommodate about 70 people. The forest and its varied environments provide a framework for university biology courses as well as student and foreign researchers. Although the first researchers extensively studied moor ecology, soils, and hydrology, other works concern subjects far removed from the local biotope, such as the behavior of primates.

The Hotié de Viviane, also called the Maison de Viviane (lit. ' House of Viviane ') or the Tombeau des Druides (lit. ' Tomb of the Druids '), it is a funeral circle of stones dating from about 4,500 ago. It is located near the Val sans retour and has been known under this name since 1843.

In the northern part of the forest is the "Tomb of Merlin", a remnant of a Neolithic covered dolmen structure. The site was largely destroyed with dynamite by treasure hunters after it became associated with the Arthurian figure of Merlin in 1889.

According to the legend, having seduced Merlin, Viviane imprisoned him in an invisible prison, and then locked him in a tomb: Merlin, having lain down in a pit, had two enormous stones cast down on him. Today, it is an important site of Neopagan pilgrimages. Visitors to the site might leave flowers and a note to Merlin, often with a wish, or some kind of devotional object.

The Fontaine dite de Jouvence (lit. ' Fountain of Youth ') is a water hole near the Tomb of Merlin. Also nearby there is an old tree known as the chêne des Hindrés.

This tumulus consists of four Neolitihic menhirs originally erected some 5,000–4,500 years ago, each over four meters long and one meter wide. Three menhirs were reused in the Bronze Age around 2,000–1,500 BC as a funerary vault; the fourth is on the ground about ten meters away. Formerly covered with a mound of earth, the site is by its impressive dimensions nicknamed "Tomb of a Giant". According to local tradition, it is the tomb of a giant defeated by the Knights of the Round Table. The Tombeau du Géant was reported as completely destroyed by the 2022 fire, but was in fact saved by firefighters, along with the first few rows of trees surrounding it.

The "Garden of Monks", located in Néant-sur-Yvel, also called Jardin aux tombes (lit. ' Garden of Tombs '), is a megalithic tumulus dating from 5,000 to 4,500 years ago. It is one of the many such mounds present in this region.

The Val sans retour (lit. ' Vale of No Return '), is the most famous tourist place of the forest, located near Tréhorenteuc, west of Paimpont. It is a steep valley dug deep in red shale, the color resulting from the oxidation of the iron ore it contains. During the 19th century, there were two competing locations of the Vale in the forest, the other having been in the vallée de la Marette near the Tomb of Merlin and also including the initial location of the Tomb of Viviane. In 1896, Félix Bellamy decided that the Val sans retour was the place that inspired the anonymous 13th-century author to write the episode of the Vale in Lancelot-Grail.

According to the French tradition of Arthurian legend, Queen Morgan le Fay, half-sister of King Arthur, betrayed by her lover, decided to keep all the unfaithful knights as prisoners in a vale of that name. Only Lancelot, faithful to Queen Guinevere, was able to break the spell, escape, and free the captive knights.

High above the Vale, the rocher des Faux-Amants (lit. ' Rock of False Lovers ') is the spot where Morgan le Fay is said to have turned her lover who betrayed her into stone. Another location is the Siège de Merlin (lit. ' Seat of Merlin '), a rock overlooking the valley.

A lake that since the 1940s has been known as the Miroir aux Fées (lit. ' Fairy Mirror ') marks the entrance to the Vale. Nearby stands the Eglise du Graal (lit. ' Church of the Holy Grail '), a Catholic church featuring imagery of Morgan and other Arthurian characters associated with the Vale reimagined as Christian-themed scenes, painted by two German prisoner-of-war artists after WWII, as commissioned by eccentric local priest Father Henri Gillard.

The forest of Paimpont contains several special trees. One of them is the hêtre de Ponthus (the beech of Ponthus), associated with the tale of Ponthus and Sidonia.

The most famous is an old oak about 1,000 years old and more than 9 meters in circumference: the chêne à Guillotin (the oak of Guillotin), located between Concoret and Tréhorenteuc. According to a local legend, a refractory priest named Pierre-Paul Guillotin took refuge there during the French Revolution, continued to administer sacraments and blessings in the region, and wrote a valuable journal of revolutionary events.

The Fountain of Barenton (also known as Berenton, Belenton, or Balenton) is located west of the forest, near the hamlet of Folle-Pensée, and is quite difficult to access. As quoted in medieval literature, and retained to this day, this fountain occasionally has rosaries of bubbles rise to its surface. The site first become associated with the legendary fountain of Brocéliande by Auguste Brizeux in 1836. A local custom made young men and women visit the fountain in search of marriage.

It is here that Ywain, as described by Chrétien de Troyes in Yvain, the Knight of the Lion, challenged the Black Knight, guardian of the fountain. According to a later legend, this is also where Merlin met Viviane, and the water of this fountain had the power to cure mental illnesses.

Pain petri is a braided bread of Moroccan Jewish origin, that is traditionally baked for Shabbat, the Jewish sabbath, as well as Rosh Hashanah and other holidays, and is popular among the Moroccan Jewish community of Morocco, France, and Israel.

The name Pain petri in French translates literally to "kneaded bread", due to the historically long time required to knead pain petri prior to the invention of stand mixers, and other kitchen appliances. Traditionally the women of the Moroccan Jewish community would knead the dough for a long period of time for the pain petri to obtain a lighter consistency.

Pain petri is made with an enriched dough, contained flour, egg, oil, sugar, salt, and anise seeds. It is braided into a shape similar to a narrower challah, or it is braided into an oblong ring shape similar to a Jerusalem bagel. It is traditionally served for Shabbat as the bread used for HaMotzi, as well as the bread served with Shabbat meals, it is also served on some other Jewish holidays and special occasions. A special round variation is traditionally made for Rosh Hashanah.

Pain petri has been traditionally prepared by members of the Moroccan Jewish community for hundreds of years, since before the Spanish Inquisition. It is somewhat similar to other Shabbat breads such as the Algerian Jewish mouna, the Ethiopian Jewish dabo, the Yemenite Jewish kubaneh, and challah. Though it has a number of key differences from these other Jewish breads. For most of its history, pain petri was baked in communal ovens, as the members of the Moroccan Jewish community did not have their own ovens at home and had to share a communal, outdoor oven amongst the community. It has only been since the expulsion of Jews from Morocco, and their subsequent return to Israel, or emigration to France in the mid-20th century, that this bread has been baked in home ovens. With the exodus of their community from Morocco, pain petri has been brought by the Moroccan Jewish diaspora to France, Israel, the United States, and Canada, though it is still baked by the remaining Jewish community in Morocco.

Pain petri differs from challah, and indeed many other breads in general, in that it is typically made relatively quickly, with the process from start to finish taking an hour. Many recipes for the bread only require 90 minutes of preparation until the pain petri is ready. A dough is made with flour, water, eggs, yeast, oil, sugar, and anise seeds, and a hole is poked through the middle of the dough which is allowed to rest for 15 minutes. It is then shaped into logs, and then braided to form a number of small loaves in a braided oblong oval-shape, or a braided " baguette "-style shape (similar to a narrow challah). It is brushed with an egg wash, and topped with toasted sesame seeds, and baked. It can also be made in a monkey bread -style shape, similar to kubaneh. It is traditionally served with the Moroccan Jewish shabbat meal of chamin, chrain, or tagine, with couscous.

Pain petri was featured in The Encyclopedia of Jewish Food by Rabbi Gil Marks. It was also featured in Joan Nathan ’s 2004 cookbook The Jewish Holiday Cookbook, as well as her 2010 cookbook Quiches, Kugel, and Couscous: My Search For Jewish Cooking in France, where she wrote of encountering a version of the bread originating from a member the Jewish community that formerly resided Fez, Morocco.

The Palace of Europe (French : Palais de l'Europe) is a building located in Strasbourg, France, that has served as the seat of the Council of Europe since 1977 when it replaced the "House of Europe". Between 1977 and 1999 it was also the Strasbourg seat of the European Parliament.

The first assemblies of the Council of Europe used to take place in the stately, 1880s main building of Strasbourg University, the former Kaiser-Wilhelms-Universität. Between 1950 and 1977, they took place in a provisory concrete building of purely functional architecture, the House of Europe (Maison de l'Europe), that stood where there now is the lawn leading up to the Palace of Europe. The architect of this building was Bertrand Monnet.

The first stone of the Palace of Europe was laid on 15 May 1972 by the Swiss politician Pierre Graber. The building, designed by architect Henry Bernard, was inaugurated on 28 January 1977. It was built on the site of a tennis court that had been inaugurated in the 1930s and also used to serve as an ice rink in winter.

The Palace of Europe is square in shape, 106 metres on each side, with a height of 38 metres (nine stories). Its total working area is 64,000 square metres. It has 17 meeting rooms and a thousand offices for staff of the Council of Europe secretariat. The exterior of the building is red, silver, and brown. The Palace of Europe is located in the "European District" of Strasbourg, about two kilometres northeast of the Grande Île.

From the outside, the Palace of Europe resembles a fortress, since the rows of windows are arranged like arrow slits. The Parliament chamber is covered by a giant dome and resembles an enormous shell.

The Committee of Ministers, normally represented by the Ministers Deputies, meets in a circular room projecting from a corner of the eastern wing of the building. The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe uses the large debating chamber in the centre of the building, called the Hemicycle, famous for its unusual architecture. The Congress of the Council of Europe also holds its plenary sessions in the Hemicycle. The Palace of Europe also accommodates the part of the Council of Europe Secretariat, including the Private Office of the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.

Until 1999, the building also hosted plenary sessions of the European Parliament (an institution of the European Union, which is separate from the Council of Europe). The European Parliament now has its own building, Immeuble Louise Weiss, across the Ill River.

The Palace of Versailles (French: Château de Versailles) is a château and historic monument in Versailles in the Yvelines department of France, southwest of Paris. It served as the principal residence of the French kings Louis XIV, Louis XV, and Louis XVI.

The king, the court, and the royal government lived there permanently from 6 May 1682 until 6 October 1789, except during the Regency years (1715–1723). Conceived by Louis XIV to glorify the French monarchy, the palace became the most important architectural project of his reign and is considered one of the masterpieces of French classical architecture. It exerted major influence across Europe in the 18th and 19th centuries in architecture and the decorative arts.

The palace forms a vast and complex ensemble of courtyards and buildings designed to maintain architectural harmony. It covers about 63,154 square metres and contains roughly 2,300 rooms, around 1,000 of which belong to the National Museum of the History of France housed in the Palace and the Trianons.

The park of the Palace of Versailles covers 815 hectares today, compared with more than 8,000 hectares before the French Revolution. Of this area, 93 hectares are formal gardens. The estate includes numerous features, such as the Petit Trianon and Grand Trianon —later used by Napoleon I, Louis XVIII, Charles X, Louis Philippe I, and Napoleon III —as well as the Hameau de la Reine, the Grand and Petit Canal, a former menagerie, the Orangerie, and the Pièce d'Eau des Suisses. As one of the most visited sites in Europe, the estate is central to ongoing discussions about managing overtourism.

The Palace of Versailles is located in the north‑west part of the commune of Versailles, on the Place d’Armes, about 16 kilometres south‑west of Paris. The term “Palace of Versailles” refers both to the main palace building and its immediate surroundings, as well as to the entire Versailles estate, which includes — among other elements — the Grand Trianon, the Petit Trianon, the Grand Canal, and the palace park.

The site of Versailles is first mentioned in 1038 in a charter of the Abbey of Saint‑Père de Chartres. During the Middle Ages, the area consisted of small villages, farmland, and woodland. In the 16th century, the lands that would become Versailles were owned by the Gondi family, who were influential at the French court. Louis XIII acquired part of the land in 1623 and purchased the remainder in 1632.

Before the later palace existed, Louis XIII built a modest brick‑and‑stone hunting lodge in 1623. The building consisted of a central block flanked by two wings and measured about 35 metres in length. Surrounded by marshland, it was sometimes mocked by contemporaries as the “chétif château” (“puny château”) or the “château de cartes” (“house of cards”) because of its red brick, white stone, and slate colours. The lodge included a small gallery, several rooms hung with tapestries, and a central salon that later became the location of Louis XIV’s bedchamber. In 1630, the château was the site of the political event known as the Day of the Dupes, during which Cardinal Richelieu regained the king’s favour.

After the death of Louis XIII in 1643, the estate fell into neglect for nearly two decades. The lodge and its grounds were poorly maintained, and disputes arose among the estate’s staff. The captain of the hunt, Louis Lenormand de Beaumont, was assassinated in 1660, contributing to the disorder on the estate.

Louis XIV began to take an interest in Versailles shortly after his marriage in 1660. He ordered the reorganization of the gardens, the dismissal of corrupt staff, and the repair of the buildings. His valet, Jérôme Blouin, was placed in charge of restoring order to the estate. These early improvements prepared the site for the larger construction campaigns that began in 1664.

In 1623, Louis XIII, king of France, built a hunting lodge on a hill in a favourite hunting ground, 19 kilometres (12 mi) west of Paris, and 16 kilometres (10 mi) from his primary residence, the Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye. The site, near a village called Versailles, was a wooded wetland that Louis XIII's court scorned as being generally unworthy of a king; one of his courtiers, François de Bassompierre, wrote that the lodge "would not inspire vanity in even the simplest gentleman". From 1631 to 1634, architect Philibert Le Roy replaced the lodge with a château for Louis XIII, who forbade his queen, Anne of Austria, from staying there overnight, even when an outbreak of smallpox at Saint-Germain-en-Laye in 1641 forced Louis XIII to relocate to Versailles with his three-year-old heir, the future Louis XIV.

When Louis XIII died in 1643, Anne became Louis XIV's regent, and Louis XIII's château was abandoned for the next decade. She moved the court back to Paris, where Anne and her chief minister, Cardinal Mazarin, continued Louis XIII's unpopular monetary practices. This led to the Fronde, a series of revolts against royal authority from 1648 to 1653 that masked a struggle between Mazarin and the princes of the blood, Louis XIV's extended family, for influence over him. In the aftermath of the Fronde, Louis XIV became determined to rule alone. Following Mazarin's death in 1661, Louis XIV reformed his government to exclude his mother and the princes of the blood, moved the court back to Saint-Germain-en-Laye, and ordered the expansion of his father's château at Versailles into a palace.

Louis XIV had hunted at Versailles in the 1650s, but did not take any special interest in Versailles until 1661. On 17 August 1661, Louis XIV was a guest at a sumptuous festival hosted by Nicolas Fouquet, the Superintendent of Finances, at his palatial residence, the Château de Vaux-le-Vicomte. Louis XIV was impressed by the château and its gardens, which were the work of Louis Le Vau, the court architect since 1654, André Le Nôtre, the royal gardener since 1657, and Charles Le Brun, a painter in royal service since 1647. Vaux-le-Vicomte's scale and opulence led him to imprison Fouquet that September, as he had also built an island fortress and a private army. But Louis XIV was also inspired by Vaux-le-Vicomte, and he recruited its authors for his own projects. Louis XIV replaced Fouquet with Jean-Baptiste Colbert, a protégé of Mazarin and enemy of Fouquet, and charged him with managing the corps of artisans in royal employment. Colbert acted as the intermediary between them and Louis XIV, who personally directed and inspected the planning and construction of Versailles.

Work at Versailles was at first concentrated on gardens, and through the 1660s, Le Vau only added two detached service wings and a forecourt to the château. But in 1668–69, as a response to the growth of the gardens, and the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1668), Louis XIV decided to turn Versailles into a full-scale royal residence. He vacillated between replacing or incorporating his father's château, but settled on the latter by the end of the decade, and from 1668 to 1671, Louis XIII's château was encased on three sides in a feature dubbed the enveloppe. This gave the château a new, Italianate façade overlooking the gardens, but preserved the courtyard façade, resulting in a mix of styles and materials that dismayed Louis XIV and that Colbert described as a "patchwork". Attempts to homogenize the two façades failed, and in 1670 Le Vau died, leaving the post of First Architect to the King vacant for the next seven years.

Le Vau was succeeded at Versailles by his assistant, architect François d'Orbay. Work at the palace during the 1670s focused on its interiors, as the palace was then nearing completion, though d'Orbay expanded Le Vau's service wings and connected them to the château, and built a pair of pavilions for government employees in the forecourt. In 1670, d'Orbay was tasked by Louis XIV with designing a city, also called Versailles, to house and service Louis XIV's growing government and court. The granting of land to courtiers for the construction of townhouses that resembled the palace began in 1671. The next year, the Franco-Dutch War began and funding for Versailles was cut until 1674, when Louis XIV had work begun on the Ambassadors' Staircase [ fr ], a grand staircase for the reception of guests, and demolished the last of the village of Versailles.

Following the end of the Franco-Dutch War with French victory in 1678, Louis XIV appointed as First Architect Jules Hardouin-Mansart, an experienced architect in Louis XIV's confidence, who would benefit from a restored budget and large workforce of former soldiers. Mansart began his tenure with the addition from 1678 to 1681 of the Hall of Mirrors, a renovation of the courtyard façade of Louis XIII's château, and the expansion of d'Orbay's pavilions to create the Ministers' Wings in 1678–79. Adjacent to the palace, Hardouin-Mansart built a pair of stables called the Grande and Petite Écuries from 1679 to 1682 and the Grand Commun [ fr ], which housed the palace's servants and general kitchens, from 1682 to 1684. Hardouin-Mansart also added two entirely new wings in Le Vau's Italianate style to house the court, first at the south end of the palace from 1679 to 1681 and then at its north end from 1685 to 1689.

War and the resulting diminished funding slowed construction at Versailles for the rest of the 17th century. The Nine Years' War, which began in 1688, stopped work altogether until 1698. Three years later, however, the even more expensive War of the Spanish Succession began and, combined with poor harvests in 1693–94 and 1709–10, plunged France into crisis. Louis XIV thus slashed funding and cancelled some of the work Hardouin-Mansart had planned in the 1680s, such as the remodelling of the courtyard façade in the Italianate style. Louis XIV and Hardouin-Mansart focused on a permanent palace chapel, the construction of which lasted from 1699 to 1710.

Louis XIV's successors, Louis XV and Louis XVI, largely left Versailles as they inherited it and focused on the palace's interiors. Louis XV's modifications began in the 1730s, with the completion of the Salon d'Hercule, a ballroom in the north wing, and the expansion of the king's private apartment, which required the demolition of the Ambassadors' Staircase. In 1748, Louis XV began construction of a palace theatre, the Royal Opera of Versailles at the northernmost end of the palace, but completion was delayed until 1770; construction was interrupted in the 1740s by the War of the Austrian Succession and then again in 1756 with the start of the Seven Years' War. These wars emptied the royal treasury and thereafter construction was mostly funded by Madame du Barry, Louis XV's favourite mistress. In 1771, Louis XV had the northern Ministers' Wing rebuilt in Neoclassical style by Ange-Jacques Gabriel, his court architect, as it was in the process of falling down. That work was also stopped by financial constraints, and it remained incomplete when Louis XV died in 1774. In 1784, Louis XVI briefly moved the royal family to the Château de Saint-Cloud ahead of more renovations to the Palace of Versailles, but construction could not begin because of financial difficulty and political crisis. In 1789, the French Revolution swept the royal family and government out of Versailles forever.

The Palace of Versailles was key to Louis XIV's politics, as an expression and concentration of French art and culture, and for the centralization of royal power. Louis XIV first used Versailles to promote himself with a series of nighttime festivals in its gardens in 1664, 1668, and 1674, the events of which were disseminated throughout Europe by print and engravings. As early as 1669, but especially from 1678, Louis XIV sought to make Versailles his seat of government, and he expanded the palace so as to fit the court within it. The moving of the court to Versailles did not come until 1682, however, and not officially, as opinion on Versailles was mixed among the nobility of France.

By 1687, however, it was evident to all that Versailles was the de facto capital of France, and Louis XIV succeeded in attracting the nobility to Versailles to pursue prestige and royal patronage within a strict court etiquette, thus eroding their traditional provincial power bases. It was at the Palace of Versailles that Louis XIV received the Doge of Genoa, Francesco Maria Imperiale Lercari in 1685, an embassy from the Ayutthaya Kingdom in 1686, and an embassy from Safavid Iran in 1715.

Louis XIV died at Versailles on 1 September 1715 and was succeeded by his five-year-old great-grandson, Louis XV, then the duke of Anjou, who was moved to the Château de Vincennes and then to Paris by Louis XV's regent, Philippe II, Duke of Orléans. Versailles was neglected until 1722, when Philippe II removed the court to Versailles to escape the unpopularity of his regency, and when Louis XV began his majority. The 1715 move, however, broke the cultural power of Versailles, and during the reign of Louis XVI, courtiers spent their leisure in Paris, not Versailles.

During Christmas 1763, Mozart and his family visited Versailles and dined with the King. The 7-year-old Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart played several works during his stay and later dedicated his first two harpsichord sonatas, published in 1764 in Paris, to Madame Victoria, daughter of Louis XV.

In 1783, the palace was the site of the signing of the last two of the three treaties of the Peace of Paris (1783), which ended the American Revolutionary War. On 3 September, British and American delegates, led by Benjamin Franklin, signed the Treaty of Paris at the Hôtel d'York (now 56 Rue Jacob) in Paris, granting the United States independence. On 4 September, Spain and France signed separate treaties with Britain at the Palace of Versailles, formally ending the war.

The King and Queen learned of the Storming of the Bastille in Paris on 14 July 1789, while they were at the palace, and remained isolated there as the Revolution in Paris spread. The growing anger in Paris led to the Women's March on Versailles on 5 October 1789. A crowd of several thousand men and women, protesting the high price and scarcity of bread, marched from the markets of Paris to Versailles. They took weapons from the city armoury, besieged the palace, and compelled the King and royal family and the members of the National Constituent Assembly to return with them to Paris the following day.

As soon as the royal family departed, the palace was closed. In 1792, the National Convention, the new revolutionary government, ordered the transfer of all the paintings and sculptures from the palace to the Louvre. In 1793, the Convention declared the abolition of the monarchy and ordered all of the royal property in the palace to be sold at auction. The auction took place between 25 August 1793 and 11 August 1794. The furnishings and art of the palace, including the furniture, mirrors, baths, and kitchen equipment, were sold in seventeen thousand lots. All fleurs-de-lys and royal emblems on the buildings were chambered or chiselled off. The empty buildings were turned into a storehouse for furnishings, art and libraries confiscated from the nobility. The empty grand apartments were opened for tours beginning in 1793, and a small museum of French paintings and art school was opened in some of the empty rooms.

By virtue of an order issued by the Versailles district directorate in August 1794, the Royal Gate was destroyed, the Cour Royale was cleared and the Cour de Marbre lost its precious floor.

When Napoleon became Emperor of the French in 1804, he considered making Versailles his residence but abandoned the idea because of the cost of the renovation. Prior to his marriage with Marie-Louise in 1810, he had the Grand Trianon restored and refurnished as a springtime residence for himself and his family, in the style of furnishing that it is seen today.

In 1815, with the final downfall of Napoleon, Louis XVIII, the younger brother of Louis XVI, became king, and considered returning the royal residence to Versailles, where he had been born. He ordered the restoration of the royal apartments, but the task and cost was too great. Louis XVIII had the far end of the south wing of the Cour Royale demolished and rebuilt (1814–1824) to match the Gabriel wing of 1780 opposite, which gave greater uniformity of appearance to the front entrance. Neither he nor his successor Charles X lived at Versailles.

The French Revolution of 1830 brought a new monarch, Louis Philippe I to power, and a new ambition for Versailles. He did not reside at Versailles but began the creation of the Museum of the History of France, dedicated to "all the glories of France", which had been used to house some members of the royal family. The museum was begun in 1833 and inaugurated on 30 June 1837. Its most famous room is the Galerie des Batailles (Hall of Battles), which lies on most of the length of the second floor of the south wing. The museum project largely came to a halt when Louis Philippe was overthrown in 1848, though the paintings of French heroes and great battles still remain in the south wing.

Emperor Napoleon III used the palace on occasion as a stage for grand ceremonies. One of the most lavish was the banquet that he hosted for Queen Victoria in the Royal Opera of Versailles on 25 August 1855.

During the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1871, the palace was occupied by the general staff of the victorious German Army. Parts of the château, including the Hall of Mirrors, were turned into a military hospital. The creation of the German Empire, combining Prussia and the surrounding German states under Wilhelm I, was formally proclaimed in the Hall of Mirrors on 18 January 1871. The Germans remained in the palace until the signing of the armistice in March 1871. In that month, the government of the new French Third Republic, which had departed Paris during the war for Tours and then Bordeaux, moved into the palace. The National Assembly held its meetings in the Opera House.

The uprising of the Paris Commune in March 1871, prevented the French government, under Adolphe Thiers, from returning immediately to Paris. The military operation which suppressed the Commune at the end of May was directed from Versailles, and the prisoners of the Commune were marched there and put on trial in military courts. In 1875 a second parliamentary body, the French Senate, was created and held its meetings for the election of a President of the Republic in a new hall created in 1876 in the south wing of the palace. The French Senate and National Assembly continue to meet in the palace in joint session on special occasions, such as the amendment of the Constitution of France.

The end of the 19th and the early 20th century saw the beginning of restoration efforts at the palace, first led by Pierre de Nolhac, poet and scholar and the first conservator, who began his work in 1892. The conservation and restoration were interrupted by two world wars but have continued until the present day.

The palace returned to the world stage in June 1919, when, after six months of negotiations, the Treaty of Versailles, formally ending the First World War, was signed in the Hall of Mirrors. Between 1925 and 1928, the American philanthropist and multi-millionaire John D. Rockefeller, Jr. gave $2,166,000, the equivalent of about 38 million dollars in 2024, to restore and refurbish the palace.

More work took place after World War II, with the restoration of the Royal Opera of Versailles. The theatre was reopened in 1957, in the presence of Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom.

In 1978, parts of the palace were heavily damaged in a bombing committed by Breton terrorists.

Starting in the 1950s, when the museum of Versailles was under the directorship of Gérald van der Kemp, the objective was to restore the palace to its state – or as close to it as possible – in 1789 when the royal family left the palace. Among the early projects was the repair of the roof over the Hall of Mirrors; the publicity campaign brought international attention to the plight of post-war Versailles and garnered much foreign money including a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation.

One of the more costly endeavours for the museum and the French Fifth Republic has been to repurchase as much of the original furnishings as possible. Consequently, because furniture with a royal provenance – and especially furniture that was made for Versailles – is a highly sought-after commodity on the international market, the museum has spent considerable funds on retrieving much of the palace's original furnishings.

The Palace of Versailles is currently owned by the French state. Its formal title is the Public Establishment of the Palace, Museum and National Estate of Versailles. Since 1995, it has been run as a Public Establishment, with an independent administration and management supervised by the French Ministry of Culture.

Several restoration activities were initiated during the 2000s. In 2003, a new restoration initiative – the "Grand Versailles" project – was started, which began with the replanting of the gardens, which had lost over 10,000 trees during Cyclone Lothar on 26 December 1999. One part of the initiative, the restoration of the Hall of Mirrors, was completed in 2006. Another major project, the further restoration of the backstage areas of the Royal Opera of Versailles, occurred from 2007 to 2009.

The palace and its grounds continue to be the site of several events in the 2020s. During the 2024 Summer Olympics, the palace's grounds hosted the equestrian and modern pentathlon competitions. In 2026, American singer-songwriter Olivia Rodrigo filmed the music video of her single " Drop Dead " in and around the palace, which is referenced in the song's lyrics. Months later, on 17 June 2026, U.S. President Donald Trump signed the Islamabad Memorandum – the memorandum of understanding to end the 2026 Iran war – during his dinner at the palace with French President Emmanuel Macron, which was held after the G7 summit in Évian-les-Bains. His Iranian counterpart, President Masoud Pezeshkian also remotely signed the document in Tehran.

The Palace of Versailles is a visual history of French architecture from the 1630s to the 1780s. Its earliest portion, the corps de logis, was built for Louis XIII in the style of his reign with brick, marble, and slate, which Le Vau surrounded in the 1660s with Enveloppe, an edifice that was inspired by Renaissance-era Italian villas. When Jules Hardouin-Mansart made further expansions to the palace in the 1680s, he used the Enveloppe as the model for his work. Neoclassical additions were made to the palace with the remodelling of the Ministers' Wings in the 1770s, by Ange-Jacques Gabriel, and after the Bourbon Restoration.

The palace was largely completed by the death of Louis XIV in 1715. The eastern facing palace has a U-shaped layout, with the corps de logis and symmetrical advancing secondary wings terminating with the Dufour Pavilion on the south and the Gabriel Pavilion to the north, creating an expansive cour d'honneur known as the Royal Court (Cour Royale). Flanking the Royal Court are two enormous asymmetrical wings that result in a façade of 402 metres (1,319 ft) in length. Covered by around 10 hectares (1.1 million square feet) of roof, the palace has 2,143 windows, 1,252 chimneys, and 67 staircases.

The palace and its grounds have had a great influence on architecture and horticulture from the mid-17th century to the end of the 18th century. Examples of works influenced by Versailles include Christopher Wren 's work at Hampton Court Palace, Berlin Palace, the Palace of La Granja, Stockholm Palace, Ludwigsburg Palace, Karlsruhe Palace, Rastatt Palace, Nymphenburg Palace, Schleissheim Palace, and Esterházy Palace.

The construction in 1668–1671 of Louis Le Vau 's enveloppe around the outside of Louis XIII 's red brick and white stone château added state apartments for the king and the queen. The addition was known at the time as the château neuf (new château). The grands appartements (Grand Apartments, also referred to as the State Apartments) include the grand appartement du roi and the grand appartement de la reine. They occupied the main or principal floor of the château neuf, with three rooms in each apartment facing the garden to the west and four facing the garden parterres to the north and south, respectively. The private apartments of the king (the appartement du roi and the petit appartement du roi) and those of the queen (the petit appartement de la reine) remained in the château vieux (old château). Le Vau's design for the state apartments closely followed Italian models of the day, including the placement of the apartments on the main floor (the piano nobile, the next floor up from the ground level), a convention the architect borrowed from Italian palace design.

The king's State Apartment consisted of an enfilade of seven rooms, each dedicated to one of the known planets and their associated titular Roman deity. The queen's apartment formed a parallel enfilade with that of the grand appartement du roi. After the addition of the Hall of Mirrors (1678–1684) the king's apartment was reduced to five rooms (until the reign of Louis XV, when two more rooms were added) and the queen's to four.

The queen's apartments served as the residence of three queens of France – Maria Theresa of Spain, wife of Louis XIV, Maria Leszczyńska, wife of Louis XV, and Marie Antoinette, wife of Louis XVI. Additionally, Louis XIV's granddaughter-in-law, Princess Marie-Adélaïde of Savoy, duchess of Burgundy, wife of Louis, Duke of Burgundy, occupied these rooms from 1697 (the year of her marriage) to her death in 1712.

The Ambassadors' Staircase [ fr ] (Escalier des Ambassadeurs) was an imperial staircase built from 1674 to 1680 by François d'Orbay. Until Louis XV had it demolished in 1752 to create a courtyard for his private apartments, the staircase was the primary entrance into the Palace of Versailles and the royal apartments especially. It was entered from the courtyard via a vestibule that, cramped and dark, contrasted greatly with the tall, open space of the staircase – famously lit naturally with a skylight – so as to overawe visitors.

The staircase and walls of the room that contained it were clad in polychrome marble and gilded bronze, with decor in the Ionic order. Charles Le Brun painted the walls and ceiling of the room according to a festive theme to celebrate Louis XIV's victory in the Franco-Dutch War. On the wall immediately above the staircase were trompe-l'œil paintings of people from the Four Parts of the World looking into the staircase over a balustrade, a motif repeated on the ceiling fresco. There they were joined by allegorical figures for the twelve months of the year and various Classical Greek figures such as the Muses. A marble bust of Louis XIV, sculpted by Jean Warin in 1665–66, was placed in a niche above the first landing of the staircase.

The construction of the Hall of Mirrors between 1678 and 1686 coincided with a major alteration to the State Apartments. They were originally intended as his residence, but the King transformed them into galleries for his finest paintings, and venues for his many receptions for courtiers. During the season from All-Saints Day in November until Easter, these were usually held three times a week, from six to ten in the evening, with various entertainments.

This was originally a chapel. It was rebuilt beginning in 1712 under the supervision of the First Architect to the King, Robert de Cotte, to showcase two paintings by Paolo Veronese, Eleazar and Rebecca and Meal at the House of Simon the Pharisee, which was a gift to Louis XIV from the Republic of Venice in 1664. The painting on the ceiling, The Apotheosis of Hercules, by François Lemoyne, was completed in 1736, and gave the room its name.

The Salon of Abundance was the antechamber to the Cabinet of Curios (now the Games Room), which displayed Louis XIV's collection of precious jewels and rare objects. Some of the objects in the collection are depicted in René-Antoine Houasse 's painting Abundance and Liberality (1683), located on the ceiling over the door opposite the windows.

This salon was used for serving light meals during evening receptions. The principal feature in this room is Jean Warin 's life-size statue of Louis XIV in the costume of a Roman emperor. On the ceiling in a gilded oval frame is another painting by Houasse, Venus subjugating the Gods and Powers (1672–1681). Trompe-l'œil paintings and sculpture around the ceiling illustrate mythological themes.

The Salon of Mercury was the original State Bedchamber when Louis XIV officially moved the court and government to the palace in 1682. The bed is a replica of the original commissioned by King Louis Philippe I in the 19th century when he turned the palace into a museum. The ceiling paintings by the Flemish artist Jean Baptiste de Champaigne depict the god Mercury in his chariot, drawn by a rooster, and Alexander the Great and Ptolemy surrounded by scholars and philosophers. The Automaton Clock was made for the King by the royal clockmaker Antoine Morand in 1706. When it chimes the hour, figures of Louis XIV and Fame descend from a cloud.

The Salon of Mars was used by the royal guards until 1782, and was decorated on a military theme with helmets and trophies. It was turned into a concert room between 1684 and 1750, with galleries for musicians on either side. Portraits of Louis XV and his Queen, Marie Leszczyńska, by the Flemish artist Carle Van Loo decorate the room today.

The Salon of Apollo was the royal throne room under Louis XIV, and was the setting for formal audiences. The eight-foot-high silver throne was melted down in 1689 to help pay the costs of an expensive war, and was replaced by a more modest throne of gilded wood. The central painting on the ceiling, by Charles de la Fosse, depicts the Sun Chariot of Apollo, the King's favourite emblem, pulled by four horses and surrounded by the four seasons.

The Salon of Diana was used by Louis XIV as a billiards room, and had galleries from which courtiers could watch him play. The decoration of the walls and ceiling depicts scenes from the life of the goddess Diana. The celebrated bust of Louis XIV by Bernini made during the famous sculptor's visit to France in 1665 is on display here.

The apartments of the King were the heart of the château; they were in the same location as the rooms of Louis XIII, the creator of the château, on the first floor (second floor US style). They were set aside for the personal use of Louis XIV in 1683. He and his successors Louis XV and Louis XVI used these rooms for official functions, such as the ceremonial lever ("waking up") and the coucher ("going to bed") of the monarch, which was attended by a crowd of courtiers.

The King's apartment was accessed from the Hall of Mirrors from the Oeil de Boeuf antechamber or from the Guardroom and the Grand Couvert, the ceremonial room where Louis XIV often took his evening meals, seated alone at a table in front of the fireplace. His spoon, fork, and knife were brought to him in a golden box. The courtiers could watch as he dined.

The King's bedchamber had originally been a Drawing Room before Louis XIV transformed it into his own bedroom in 1701. He died there on 1 September 1715. Both Louis XV and Louis XVI continued to use the bedroom for their official awakening and going to bed. On 6 October 1789, from the balcony of this room Louis XVI and Marie-Antoinette, joined by the Marquis de Lafayette, looked down on the hostile crowd in the courtyard, shortly before the King was forced to return to Paris.

The bed of the King is placed beneath a carved relief by Nicolas Coustou entitled France watching over the sleeping King. The decoration includes several paintings set into the panelling, including a self-portrait of Antony van Dyck.

The petit appartement de la reine is a suite of rooms that were reserved for the personal use of the queen. Originally arranged for the use of the Maria Theresa of Spain, consort of Louis XIV, the rooms were later modified for use by Marie Leszczyńska and finally for Marie Antoinette. The Queen's apartments and the King's Apartments were laid out on the same design, each suite having seven rooms. Both suites had ceilings painted with scenes from mythology; the King's ceilings featured male figures, the Queen's featured females.

The Hall of Mirrors is a long gallery at the westernmost part of the palace that looks out onto the gardens. The hall was built from 1678 to 1681 on the site of a terrace Le Vau built between the king and queen's suites. The hall is clad in marble and decorated in a modified version of the Corinthian order, with 578 mirrors facing 17 windows and reflecting the light provided by them. The ceiling fresco, painted by Le Brun over the next four years, embellishes the first 18 years of Louis XIV's reign in 30 scenes, 17 of which are military victories over the Dutch. The fresco depicts Louis XIV himself alongside Classical figures in the scenes celebrating moments in his reign such as the beginning of personal rule in 1661, breaking from earlier frescoes at Versailles that used allegories derived from Classical and mythological scenes.

The Salon of War [ fr ] and the Salon of Peace [ fr ] bookend the Hall of Mirrors on its northern and southern ends respectively. The Salon of War, constructed and decorated from 1678 to 1686, celebrates French victories in the Franco-Dutch War with marble panels, gilded bronze trophies of arms, and a stucco bas-relief of Louis XIV on horseback riding over his enemies. The Salon of Peace is decorated in the same fashion but according to its eponymous theme.

The Royal Chapel of Versailles is located at the southern end of the north wing. The building stands 40-metre (130 ft) high, and measures 42 metres (138 ft) long and 24 metres (79 ft) wide. The chapel is rectangular with a semicircular apse, combining traditional, Gothic royal French church architecture with the French Baroque style of Versailles. The ceiling of the chapel is constituted by an unbroken vault, divided into three frescos by Antoine Coypel, Charles de La Fosse, and Jean Jouvenet. The palette of motifs beneath the frescoes glorify the deeds of Louis IX, and include images of David, Constantine, Charlemagne, and Louis IX, fleur de lis, and Louis XIV's monogram. The organ of the chapel was built by Robert Clicquot and Julien Tribuot in 1709–1710.

Louis XIV commissioned the chapel, its sixth, from Hardouin-Mansart and Le Brun in 1683–84. It was the last building constructed at Versailles during Louis XIV's reign. Construction was delayed until 1699, however, and it was not completed until 1710. The only major modification to the chapel since its completion was the removal of a lantern from its roof in 1765. A full restoration of the chapel began in late 2017 and lasted into early 2021.

The Royal Opera of Versailles was originally commissioned by Louis XIV in 1682 and was to be built at the end of the North Wing with a design by Hardouin-Mansart and Carlo Vigarani. However, due to the expense of the King's continental wars, the project was put aside. The idea was revived by Louis XV with a new design by Ange-Jacques Gabriel in 1748, but this was also temporarily put aside. The project was revived and rushed ahead for the planned celebration of the marriage of the Dauphin, the future Louis XVI, and Marie Antoinette. For economy and speed, the new opera was built almost entirely of wood, which also gave it very high quality acoustics. The wood was painted to resemble marble, and the ceiling was decorated with a painting of the Apollo, the god of the arts, preparing crowns for illustrious artists, by Louis Jean-Jacques Durameau. The sculptor Augustin Pajou added statuary and reliefs to complete the decoration. The new Opera was inaugurated on 16 May 1770, as part of the celebration of the royal wedding.

In October 1789, early in the French Revolution, the last banquet for the royal guardsmen was hosted by the King in the opera, before he departed for Paris. Following the Franco-German War in 1871 and then the Paris Commune until 1875, the French National Assembly met in the opera, until the proclamation of the French Third Republic and the return of the government to Paris.

Shortly after becoming king in 1830, Louis Philippe I decided to transform the palace into a museum devoted to "All the Glories of France," with paintings and sculpture depicting famous French victories and heroes. Most of the apartments of the palace were entirely demolished (in the main building, practically all of the apartments were annihilated, with only the apartments of the king and queen remaining almost intact), and turned into a series of several large rooms and galleries: the Coronation Room (whose original volume was left untouched by Louis-Philippe), which displays the celebrated painting of the coronation of Napoleon I by Jacques-Louis David ; the Hall of Battles; commemorating French victories with large-scale paintings; and the 1830 room, which celebrated Louis-Philippe's own coming to power in the French Revolution of 1830. Some paintings were brought from the Louvre, including works depicting events in French history by Philippe de Champaigne, Pierre Mignard, Laurent de La Hyre, Charles Le Brun, Adam Frans van der Meulen, Nicolas de Largillière, Hyacinthe Rigaud, Jean-Antoine Houdon, Jean-Marc Nattier, Élisabeth Vigée Le Brun, Hubert Robert, Thomas Lawrence, Jacques-Louis David, and Antoine-Jean Gros. Others were commissioned especially for the museum by prominent artists of the early 19th century, including Eugène Delacroix, who painted Saint Louis at the French victory over the British in the Battle of Taillebourg in 1242. Other painters featured include Horace Vernet and François Gérard. A monumental painting by Vernet features Louis Philippe himself, with his sons, posing in front of the gates of the palace.

The overthrow of Louis Philippe in 1848 put an end to his grand plans for the museum, but the Gallery of Battles is still as it was, and is passed through by many visitors to the royal apartments and grand salons. Another set of rooms on the first floor has been made into galleries on Louis XIV and his court, displaying furniture, paintings, and sculptures. In recent years, eleven rooms on the ground floor between the Chapel and the Opera have been turned into a history of the palace, with audiovisual displays and models.

The estate of Versailles consists of the palace, the subsidiary buildings around it, and its park [ fr ] and gardens. As of June 2021, the estate altogether covers an area of 800 hectares (8.0 km ; 2,000 acres), with the park and gardens laid out to the south, west, and north of the palace. The palace is approached from the east by the Avenue de Paris, measuring 27 kilometres (17 mi) from Paris to a gate between the Grande and Petite Écuries. Beyond these stables is the Place d'Armes, where the Avenue de Paris meets the Avenue de Sceaux and Avenue de Saint-Cloud (see map), the three roads that formed the main arteries of the city of Versailles. Exactly where the three roads meet is a gate leading into the cour d'honneur, hemmed in by the Ministers' Wings. Beyond is the Royal Gate and the main palace, which wraps around the Royal [ fr ] and finally Marble Courts [ fr ].

The estate was established by Louis XIII as a hunting retreat, with a park just to the west of his château. From 1661, Louis XIV expanded the estate until, at its greatest extent, the estate was made up by the Grand Parc [ fr ], a hunting ground of 15,000 hectares (150 km ; 37,000 acres), and the gardens, called the Petit Parc, which covered 1,700 hectares (17 km ; 4,200 acres). A 40-kilometre-long (25 mi), 3-metre-high (10 ft) wall with 24 gateways enclosed the estate.

The landscape of the estate had to be created from the bog that surrounded Louis XIII's château using landscape architecture usually employed in fortress building. The approach to the palace and the gardens were carefully laid out via the moving of earth and construction of terraces. The water from the marsh was marshalled into a series of lakes and ponds around Versailles, but these reservoirs were not sufficient for the palace, city, or gardens. Great lengths were taken to supply Versailles with water, such as the damming of the river Bièvre to create an inflow in the 1660s, the construction of an enormous pumping station at the river Seine near Marly-le-Roi in 1681, and an attempt to divert water from the river Eure with a canal in the later 1680s.

The gardens of Versailles, as they have existed since the reign of Louis XIV, are the work of André Le Nôtre. Le Nôtre's gardens were preceded by a simple garden laid out in the 1630s by landscape architects Jacques Boyceau and Jacques de Nemours, which he rearranged along an east–west axis that, because of Louis XIV's land purchases and the clearing of woodland, were expanded literally as far as could be seen. The resulting gardens were a collaboration between Le Nôtre, Le Brun, Colbert, and Louis XIV, marked by rigid order, discipline, and open space, with axial paths, flowerbeds, hedges, and ponds and lakes as motifs. They became the epitome of the French formal garden style, and have been very influential and widely imitated or reproduced.

The first of the subsidiary structures of the Palace of Versailles was the Versailles Menagerie [ fr ], built by Le Vau between the years 1662 and 1664, at the southern end of the Grand Canal. The apartments, overlooking the pens, were renovated by Hardouin-Mansart from 1698 to 1700, but the Menagerie fell into disuse in 1712. After a long period of decay, it was demolished in 1801. The Versailles Orangery, just to the south of the palace, was first built by Le Vau in 1663, originally as part of the general moving of earth to create the Estate. It was also modified by Mansart, who, from 1681 to 1685, totally rebuilt it and doubled its size.

In late 1679, Louis XIV commissioned Mansart to build the Château de Marly, a retreat at the edge of Versailles's estate, about 8.0 kilometres (5 mi) from the palace. The château consisted of a primary residential building and twelve pavilions, in Palladian style placed in two rows on either side of the main building. Construction was completed in 1686, when Louis XIV spent his first night there. The château was nationalized and sold in 1799, and subsequently demolished and replaced with industrial buildings. These were themselves demolished in 1805, and then in 1811 the estate was purchased by Napoleon. On 1 June 2009, the grounds of the Château de Marly were ceded to the Public Establishment of the Palace, Museum and National Estate of Versailles.

La Lanterne, is a hunting lodge named after the lantern that topped the nearby Menagerie that was built in 1787 by Philippe Louis de Noailles, then the palace governor. It has since 1960 been a state residence.

In 1668, Louis XIV purchased and demolished the hamlet of Trianon, near the northern tip of the Grand Canal, and in its place, he commissioned Le Vau to construct a retreat from court, remembered as the Porcelain Trianon. Designed and built by Le Vau in 1670, it was the first example of Chinoiserie (faux Chinese) architecture in Europe, though it was largely designed in French style. The roof was clad not with porcelain but with delftware, and was thus prone to leaks, so in 1687 Louis XIV ordered it demolished. Nevertheless, the Porcelain Trianon was itself influential and copycats were built across Europe.

To replace the Porcelain Trianon, Louis XIV tasked Hardouin-Mansart with the construction in 1687 of the Grand Trianon, built from marble in three months. The Grand Trianon has a single story, except for its attached service wing, which was modified by Hardouin-Mansart in 1705–06. The east façade has a courtyard while the west faces the gardens of the Grand Trianon, and between them a peristyle. The interiors are mostly original, and housed Louis XIV, the Madame de Maintenon, Marie Leszczyńska, and Napoleon, who ordered restorations to the building. Under Charles de Gaulle, the north wing of the Grand Trianon became a residence of the President of France.

The Petit Trianon, whose construction from 1762 to 1768 led to the advent of the names "Grand" and "Petit Trianon", was constructed for Louis XV and the Madame du Barry in the Neoclassical style by Gabriel. The building has a piano nobile, basement, and attic, with five windows on each floor. On becoming king, Louis XVI gave the Petit Trianon to Marie Antoinette, who remodeled it, relaid its gardens in the then-current English and Oriental styles, and formed her own court there.

Near the Trianons are the French pavilion, built by Gabriel in 1750 between the two residences, and the Queen's Theatre and Queen's Hamlet, built by architect Richard Mique in 1780 and from 1783 to 1785 respectively. These were both built at the behest of Marie Antoinette; the theatre, hidden in the gardens, indulged her appreciation of opera and is absolutely original, and the hamlet to extend her gardens with rustic amenities. The building scheme of the Queen's Hamlet includes a farmhouse (the farm was to produce milk and eggs for the queen), a dairy, a dovecote, a boudoir, a barn that burned down during the French Revolution, a mill and a tower in the form of a lighthouse.

The palace still serves political functions. Heads of state are regaled in the Hall of Mirrors; the bicameral French Parliament —consisting of the Senate (Sénat) and the National Assembly (Assemblée nationale)—meet in joint session (a congress of the French Parliament) in Versailles to revise or otherwise amend the French Constitution, a tradition that came into effect with the promulgation of the 1875 Constitution. For example, the Parliament met in joint session at Versailles to pass constitutional amendments in June 1999 (for domestic applicability of International Criminal Court decisions and for gender equality in candidate lists), in January 2000 (ratifying the Treaty of Amsterdam), in March 2003 (specifying the "decentralized organization" of the French Republic), and in March 2024 (to enshrine the freedom of women to have recourse to abortion).

In 2009, President Nicolas Sarkozy addressed the Great Recession before a congress in Versailles, the first time that this had been done since 1848, when Louis Napoleon Bonaparte gave an address before the French Second Republic. Following the November 2015 Paris attacks, President François Hollande gave a speech before a rare joint session of parliament at the Palace of Versailles. This was the third time since 1848 that a French president addressed a joint session of the French Parliament at Versailles. The president of the National Assembly has an official apartment at the Palace of Versailles. In 2023 a state visit by Charles III to France included a state banquet at the Palace.

The Palace of Versailles Research Centre (in French: Centre de recherche du château de Versailles - CRCV) is the first research centre established in a French palace. It originated as part of a French government project called "Digital Great Versailles" (in French, "Grand Versailles Numérique") to improve public access to the Palace of Versailles. It is located in the Jussieu pavilion, near the Grand Trianon and the Petit Trianon, on the grounds of the Palace of Versailles, which is in the Île-de-France region of France.

The Centre serves as a resource to scholars and curators researching European court culture of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. For example, such research would seek to explore the sites and expressions of power, such as those represented at Versailles and in other European courts of the same era, and join researchers interested in this era. In addition to facilitating research, it also organises symposia and training activities such as seminars and summer schools. The websites of the Research Centre and of Grand Versailles Numérique are among those recommended by France's Ministry of Culture and Communication as "sites préférés."

The building now used by the Research Centre was once occupied by Bernard de Jussieu, a member of the family of famous botanists and historians of the natural world, after whom the Paris metro station Jussieu was named. Many of the Jussieu family were associated with France's main botanical garden, the Jardin des Plantes in Paris.

Initially under the direction of the Public Establishment of Versailles, the Research Centre became a Public Interest Group on 27 October 2006, with nine founding members:

This very flexible arrangement allows for the sharing of human, intellectual, material, financial, public and private resources that are necessary for the development of scientific research.

The Centre considers Court civilisation in all its aspects:

The study of these themes is allowed a flexible time frame because they often require tracing origins that strictly speaking, predate the modern period, as well as exploring more recent times. While focusing on Europe and its royal and princely courts, the geographical scope encourages comparative studies, expanding when necessary to other parts of the world. Faced with the dispersion of works and the paucity of comparative studies, the Palace of Versailles Research Centre is both a meeting place and an incentive for further research.

The Versailles Research Centre aspires to be multidisciplinary and international. It gives unity to the various works that it leads or initiates, supports new research and assures its dissemination. The missions of the centre are:

The Research Centre publishes the Bulletin du Centre de recherche du château de Versailles.

The Palais de l'Alma (French pronunciation: [ palɛ d(ə) lalma ] ; English: Palace of the Alma) is a national palace of the French Republic in Paris 's 7th arrondissement. It is located just east of the Musée du Quai Branly, almost in front of the Pont de l'Alma. The name of the palace comes from the Battle of the Alma (1854).

The palace was built between 1861 and 1864 by Jacques-Martin Tétaz in the objective to become stables for Napoleon III, as well as house their personnel. In 1881, it became a dependency of the presidency under the Third Republic. Then in 1947, it housed the French meteorology office. The palace has become a French Monument historique since 30 October 2002.

The palace now houses approximately 70 official housings, amongst those some of them are used for close collaborators to the President of France. François Mitterrand used an apartment to house his mistress Anne Pingeot and their daughter Mazarine when he was president. François de Grossouvre was also living there at the same time.

Alexandre Benalla, who served as a security officer and deputy chief of staff to President Emmanuel Macron, was housed there from 9 July 2018, one week before being taken into custody for the judicial and political case which took his name.

The Process for Advanced Management of End-of-Life Aircraft (PAMELA) Project, initiated in 2006, is an enterprise set up by Airbus at Tarbes Airport in Southern France, with the aim of recycling aircraft parts. The project was initially supported by the European Commission ; they later partnered with the waste management company SITA, Sogerma Services and EADS CCR.

The project's ultimate goal is protecting the environment. Instead of letting old passenger aircraft deteriorate in airport perimeters or in " boneyards ", aircraft will be decommissioned and recycled.

Airbus estimates that more than 4,000 aircraft will finish active service between 2004 and 2023, a rate of over 200 aircraft per year, and that between 85% and 95% of their components can easily be recycled, reused, or otherwise recovered.

The Panama scandals (also known as the Panama Canal Scandal or Panama Affair) was a corruption affair that broke out in the French Third Republic in 1892, linked to a French company's failed attempt at constructing a Panama Canal. Close to half a billion francs were lost and members of the French government had taken bribes to keep quiet about the Panama Canal Company's financial troubles in what is regarded as the largest monetary corruption scandal of the 19th century.

On 4 February 1889, the Tribunal Civil de la Seine ordered the winding up of the Panama Canal Company in Paris. Work on the isthmus was stopped in the meantime, while the court-appointed liquidator arranged to maintain the existing buildings, tools and machinery. Within a few years, however, high losses were incurred due to the damp, warm climate. The French government repeatedly delayed the liquidation, because the take-over offers by various American companies seemed insufficient. An intermediate company could not be started for lack of capital. The liquidator appointed a commission of inquiry, whose 1890 report recommended continuation of the sluice canal and renewal of the 1878 contract with Colombia. The renewal was agreed in 1890 in Bogotá, to run until 1904.

The dimensions of the bankruptcy were clear by 1892. Some 800,000 French people, including 15,000 single women, had lost their investments in the stocks, bonds and founder shares of the Panama Canal Company, to the considerable sum of approximately 1.8 billion gold Francs. From the nine stock issues, the Panama Canal Company received 1.2 billion gold Francs, 960 million of which were invested in Panama, a large amount having been pocketed by financiers and politicians.

In 1892/1893, a large number of ministers (including Clemenceau) were accused by French nationalists of taking bribes from Ferdinand de Lesseps in 1888 to permit the stock issue, leading to a corruption trial against Lesseps and his son Charles. Meanwhile, 510 members of parliament – including six ministers – were accused of receiving bribes from the Panama Canal Company to hide the company's financial status from the public. Lesseps, his son Charles, members of the management as well as the engineer Gustave Eiffel, were at first given long jail sentences, later annulled.

In the bribery trial, the former city development minister, Charles Baïhaut, received five years imprisonment, of which he served three years. Baron Reinach – the financial adviser of the Canal Company and agent for the various bribes – committed suicide. Other defendants fled to England. On 7 December 1894, Lesseps died.

Politicians accused of involvement included Léon Bourgeois and Alfred Joseph Naquet. One hundred and four legislators were found to have been involved in the corruption, and Jean Jaurès was commissioned by the French parliament to conduct an enquiry into the matter, completed in 1893. The investigations into the Panama affair were resumed in 1897, but the defendants were acquitted.

Georges Clemenceau was defeated in the 1893 election because of his association with Cornelius Herz. Although three governments collapsed, this crisis differed from the Boulanger affair in that the Republic was never really at risk of being overthrown. However, it did raise doubts in the public eye and meant that politicians were no longer trusted. To monarchists it proved that the republic was corrupt.

Hannah Arendt argues that the affair had an immense importance in the development of French antisemitism, due to the involvement of two Jews of German origin, Baron Jacques Reinach and Cornelius Herz. Although they were not among the bribed Parliament members and not on the company's board, according to Arendt they were in charge of distributing the bribe money, Reinach among the right wing of the bourgeois parties, Herz among the anti-clerical radicals. Reinach was a secret financial advisor to the government and handled its relations with the Panama Company. Herz was Reinach's contact in the radical wing, but Herz's double-dealing blackmail ultimately drove Reinach to suicide.

However, before his death Reinach gave a list of the suborned members of Parliament to the Libre Parole, Edouard Drumont 's antisemitic daily, in exchange for the paper covering up Reinach's own role. Overnight, the story transformed La Libre Parole from an obscure sheet into one of the most influential papers in the country. The list of culprits was published morning by morning in small installments, so that hundreds of politicians had to live on tenterhooks for months. The scandal showed, in Arendt's view, that the middlemen between the business sector and the state were almost exclusively Jews, thus helping to pave the road for the Dreyfus Affair.

In 1894, a second French company, the Compagnie Nouvelle du Canal de Panama (New Panama Canal Company), was created to manage the assets, and potentially finish construction. The new company sought a buyer for the assets, with an asking price of US $109 million. The construction of the canal was taken over by the United States which bought out the lease, the shares and assets in the Hay–Bunau-Varilla Treaty of November 1903, for US $40 million. Work resumed in 1904 and the canal opened 3 August 1914.

The term pantouflage refers to a practice by which high-level French civil servants, usually former students of the École Polytechnique or the École nationale d'administration, obtain work in private enterprise. In use, the term can be applied to all civil servants, not just those who attain notoriety. In American contexts, this concept is known by economists as a revolving door. The practice is often viewed negatively by the public.

Early on, in slang usage at the École Polytechnique, the word "pantoufle" (French for slipper) referred to the act of avoiding public service after study. Those who "trained in the pantoufle," the "pantouflards," carried the title of "former student of the École Polytechnique," and gave up the right to the "Diploma of the École Polytechnique". Later, the term also came to refer to the repayment of education costs by individuals who had failed to serve ten years in civil service after obtaining their degree (this is comparable to the practice of "dedit-formation" in France, in which employers might be eligible for reimbursement of expenses by employees who resign prematurely).

As frequently as civil servants leave public work and acquire the "pantoufle," private enterprises recruit students at the conclusion of their studies.

The term "pantouflage" also applies to politicians who, following an electoral loss or a termination from a ministerial position, assume a private industry, high-paying position without significant responsibilities. This is often undertaken during an interim period when formerly elected politicians vet new opportunities to assume elected office. French popular phrasing describes this scenario as "Emploi fictif," or fake employment.

Between 1985 and 1990, the Conseil d'État experienced at least four resignations per year. In 1993, the diplomatic corps lost some twenty of its members. The 1992 directory of the corps préfectoral lists some one hundred members in the private sector or in semi-public employment. In May 1990, the review "ENA-mensuel" estimated that of 4,400 former students of the École nationale d'administration, 737 worked in the private sector. Among these, 6.1% had carried out roles in the Conseil, 8.3% the Court of Audit of France and 18.8% in Financial Oversight. The same year, the Corps of Mines (France) registered 16.8% incidence of pantouflage and in the Corps of Bridges and Roads (France), 14.7% incidence.

The term "pantouflage" carries a particularly pejorative meaning when it is applied to former civil servants who worked in an administration exercising control over private-sector industry.

In France, such movements are supervised under strict legal structures.

Thus, according to article 423-13 of the French criminal code, concerning illegal gains through conflicts of interest:

Punishable by two years imprisonment and/or compensatory fines of up to 30,000 Euros, for a person who is charged as having left civil service or public office to assume a private-sector position in an industry over which they had previously exercised influence as a public servant, including:

before the passing of three years from the date of conclusion of a civil service role.

The Commission on Ethics for Civil Servants is charged with verifying whether an agent of civil service who assumed a private sector position did so legitimately. Investigations and determinations are undertaken at the request of the manager of the governmental administration from which the individual in question resigned.

Pantouflage is regulated by Article 53, paragraph 16- ter introduced in Legislative Decree no. 165/01 (Consolidated Act on Public Employment) by Law no. 190/12, the anti-corruption law (“ Provisions for the prevention and punishment of corruption and illegality in the public administration”).

Paragraph 16-ter must then be read in conjunction with Article 21 of Legislative Decree No. 39 of 8 April 2013 (containing “ Provisions detailing appointments that cannot be conferred by public authorities and by publicly controlled private entities and that are to be construed as incompatible ”), which states that “ for the sole purpose of applying the prohibitions provided for under paragraph 16-ter”, those holding of one of the positions provided for under Legislative Decree No. 39/13 (which also include external parties with whom the authority “ the public body or the publicly controlled private law entity” has established a working, employment or free-lance relationship) are also considered to be public employees.

The anti-corruption law is expressly intended to implement (i) Article 6 of the United Nations Convention against Corruption, adopted by the UN General Assembly on October 31, 2003 and ratified under Law no. 116 of 3 August 2009, and (ii) Articles 20 and 21 of the Criminal Convention against Corruption, adopted in Strasbourg on 27 January 1999 and ratified under Law no. 110 of 28 June 2012. It identifies at a national level the Italian Anti-Corruption Authority and the other bodies responsible for carrying out control, prevention and punishment activities against corruption and illegality in the public administration in such a way as to ensure a coordinated action.

The phenomenon of pantouflage exists in Japan where it is termed amakudari, literally, "descent from paradise or the sky," in reference to the Japanese mythological shinto descent of gods to earth, and concerns the retirement of civil servants into the private sector. On April 1, 2009, the Aso administration adopted a bill to eliminate this practice by creating a special agency to lure former civil servants back into government employment, as long as former officials do not directly negotiate for higher salaries

In his election bid in 2009, the administration of Yukio Hatoyama, pledged to establish this agency upon his assuming power; this was a direct response to critics who assailed him as an "amakudari," and to reduce administrative inneficiency.

In Quebec, a law on lobbying restricts former executive directors and assistant executive directors of municipalities in their post-electoral careers. They must not have used information obtained in their former public positions to profit in another enterprise. However, no law forbids private enterprises in communities from hiring former public officials.

Papier d'Arménie (Armenian paper) is a type of paper incense or room deodorizer that has been produced in France since 1885. The paper is soaked in a solution of benzoin resin that has been dissolved in alcohol; with varieties, such as Rose, which have additional fragrances or essential oils. It was developed in the late 19th century by a French chemist, Auguste Ponsot, who, after visiting Armenia where he saw the locals burning benzoin resin to refresh and cleanse their homes, created the incense paper with pharmacist Henri Rivier. The recipe and method of production is a trade secret.

Papier d'Arménie brand is a registered trademark throughout the world and does not constitute a generic name for burning paper. There are variations though, such as Carta d'Armenia which is sold by Santa Maria Novella in Italy, and Carta Aromatica Eritrea.

At the end of the 19th century, Auguste Ponsot discovered that Armenian households would burn plants in the genus Styrax as a fragrance. Ponsot adopted this habit, and, with the help of the pharmacist Henri Rivier, created his own recipe wherein benzoin (resin) was dissolved in alcohol then let to soak into blotting paper. The product has been steadily produced in Montrouge, France since 1885. In 2006, during the Year of Armenia in France (Année de l'Arménie en France), the celebrated French perfumer of Armenian origin Francis Kurkdjian gave his own recreation of the historical recipe.

The company Papier d'Arménie, based in Montrouge in the suburbs of Paris, has been managed by the co-founder's great grand-daughter, Mireille Schvartz, since 1991. By 2023, the company was producing 3.5 million booklets a year and exporting 15% of its production.

Typically, a strip of Papier d'Arménie is torn from the booklet, folded accordion-style, and placed on a heat-resistant support. The strip is lit and blown on until the paper begins to glow and release the vanilla scent characteristic of resin compounds. The smell is pleasant and subtle. Traditionally, the product was sold as a disinfectant, though it has no such properties. This belief began with a demonstration in 1889 of burning Papier d'Arménie in a closed cylinder above a piece of raw meat, which spoiled less than a comparable untreated piece of meat after a week. Today Papier d'Arménie is sold primarily as a form of incense or perfume, as a form of candle, or as a form of air freshener.

It is typical to burn 3 or 4 strips per week, and to air the area regularly.

Multiple studies show that burning incense in closed areas poses a significant health risk.

Paprika is a spice made from dried and ground red peppers, Capsicum annuum. It is traditionally made from Capsicum annuum varietals in the Longum group, and while it can have varying levels of heat, the peppers used tend to be milder and have thinner flesh than those used to produce chili powder. The milder, sweet paprika is mainly composed of the fruit of the pepper with most of the seeds removed; whereas some seeds and stalks are retained in the peppers used for hotter paprika.

Paprika, like all capsicum varieties and their derivatives, is descended from wild ancestors from the Amazon River, cultivated in ancient times in South, Central and North America, particularly in central Mexico. The peppers were introduced to Europe via Spain and Portugal in the 16th century. The trade in paprika expanded from the Iberian Peninsula to Africa and Asia and ultimately reached central Europe through the Balkans.

European cuisines in which paprika is a frequent and major ingredient include those of Hungary, Spain and Portugal; it is also found in many French and German dishes. It is widely used in North Africa and the Middle East.

Paprika is a spice made from dried and powdered red peppers, and while the modern spice is usually made from European varieties of Capsicum annuum in the Longum group, Capsicum annuum itself is native to northern regions of South America and to southwestern North America. Peppers were being gathered and eaten in Mexico c. 7000 BC, and were cultivated before 3500 BC. The food writer Alan Davidson comments that Christopher Columbus probably came across them on his first voyage in 1492, and may have brought plants back to Europe. The Spaniards and Portuguese also took them to India and south-east Asia and they were quickly taken up and grown in the Middle East, the Balkans and Europe – to Italy by 1526, Germany by 1543 and known in Hungary by 1569.

Paprika was also taken up in the Ottoman Empire, which for much of the 16th and 17th centuries, ruled the central region of Hungary. Industrialized production of paprika started near the end of the 17th century and grew to be highly developed by the 18th century. The long period of Turkish presence introduced several foodstuffs to the region, including filo pastry (which evolved into the strudel), pilafs, pita bread and paprika. The plant used to make the Hungarian version of the spice was first grown in 1569. Central European paprika was hot until the 1920s, when a Szeged breeder found a plant that produced sweet fruit, which he grafted onto other plants. According to George Lang in his Cuisine of Hungary (1994), the earliest reference to paprika peppers in a Hungarian dictionary was in 1604, when the name used was Török-bors (Turkish pepper). The name "paprika" did not come into currency in Hungary until 1775, when J. Csapé, in his Herbarium, called it "paprika garden pepper".

The first recorded use of the word paprika in English is from 1830. The Times mentioned " A' borsos levecskét – the pepper soup, or paprika soup, made of the capsicum annuum of Linne... a favourite dish among the Magyars, Turks, and Servians". In Spices, Salt and Aromatics in the English Kitchen (1970), Elizabeth David notes that in cookery books of the Edwardian era, paprika is sometimes referred to as "Krona pepper".

The word "paprika" is from Hungarian paprika, a diminutive from Serbo-Croatian papar (pepper), which in turn was derived from the Latin piper or modern Greek piperi. "Paprika" and similar words, including "peperke", "piperke" and "paparka", are used in various languages for peppers.

Paprika (and similar words such as peperke, piperke and paparka) are used in various languages and regional varieties of English to refer to the plant and the fruit from which the spice is made, as well as to peppers in the Grossum group such as bell peppers.

Paprika can have varying levels of heat, but the chili peppers used for hot paprika tend to be milder and have thinner flesh than those used to produce chili powder. Sweet paprika is mostly composed of the pericarp, with more than half of the seeds removed; hot paprika contains some seeds, stalks, ovules and calyces. Whether paprika is red, orange, or yellow depends on its mix of carotenoids. Yellow-orange shades of paprika derive primarily from α-carotene and β-carotene (provitamin A compounds), zeaxanthin, lutein and β-cryptoxanthin ; reds derive from capsanthin and capsorubin. One study found high concentrations of zeaxanthin in orange paprika. The same study found that orange paprika contains much more lutein than red or yellow paprika. Other studies have found that yellow paprika powder exhibits a significantly higher antioxidant capacity than other varieties of paprika. Paprika peppers also have several shape varieties, such as blocky, mini, and conical.

Paprika is commonly produced by sun drying the peppers, a process that can take up to 10 days in optimal conditions. In addition to drying method, pepper cultivar and duration of storage also affect paprika color qualities.

China and India, which together account for more than 22 million tonnes of paprika annually, are major producers, with Hungary and Spain also having significant production.

Hungary is a major source of paprika, and it is the spice most closely associated with Hungary.

The five commercial grades of Hungarian paprika, ranked by quality, are:

The two principal growing areas in Hungary are in the south of the country, one around the city of Szeged and the other in Kalocsa, on the Danube.

Pimentón is a powdered spice produced in Spain from the small round fruits of several varieties of capsicum annuum. According to the Oxford Companion to Food :

it may reasonably be regarded as a Spanish version of paprika: it is almost sweet in taste and it is used both as a colouring agent and as a spice in itself. It is added to seafood, sausages, rice, and many other savoury dishes.

There are three versions of Spanish paprika: mild (pimentón dulce), mildly spicy (pimentón agridulce) and spicy (pimentón picante). The most common, pimentón de la Vera, has a distinct smoky taste and smell, as it is dried by smoking, typically using oak wood. Currently, according to the Denomination of Origin Regulation Council (Consejo Regulador de la DOP "Pimentón de La Vera"), the crop of La Vera paprika covers around 1,500 hectares (3,700 acres) and has an annual production of 4.5 million kg (5,000 short tons), certified as Denomination of Origin. Pimentón de Murcia is an unsmoked variety made with bola/ñora peppers and traditionally dried in the sun or in kilns.

Paprika is used as an ingredient throughout the world in dishes such as rice, stews and soups and in the preparation of sausages, mixed with meats and other spices.

Hungary's best-known national dishes both incorporate paprika: a meat soup, gulyás, and a stew internationally known as goulash but called in Hungary pörkölt, porkélt or paprikás. Paprikash, a sauce combining paprika, onions and sour cream, is used in chicken and veal dishes and with savoury crèpes. David comments on paprika:

In a 2016 study Zsuzsa Gille writes that paprika is:

In Spanish cuisine, paprika is an essential ingredient of chorizo pork sausages. In contrast to the less well-known chorizo from the French side of the Pyrenees, which is traditionally spiced with piment d'Espelette, Spanish chorizos are spiced with pimentón. The sausage may be mild or spicy depending on the type of paprika used. Valencian paella uses both paprika and saffron in the mix of rice, meat and vegetables. Paprika features in Basque cuisine. David instances Moules au riz à la Basquaise (mussels with spiced rice, Basque style) and Faisan au riz Basquais (pheasant with spiced rice). In sofrito, the aromatic mixture of diced vegetables used as the basis of many stews and casseroles, Spanish cooks typically add paprika to the mix.

In Portuguese cuisine, where it is known as colorau, paprika plays an important part. It accounts for the orange shade and piquant taste of many of Portugal's pork and poultry dishes, and is similar to a hot Hungarian paprika. Paprika is also much used in fish dishes including eels, cuttlefish and the mixed fish stew caldeirada. It deepens the shade of some Portuguese cheeses, and adds spice to the local equivalent of chorizo, chouriço.

Paprika plays a part in French cuisine. In their Mastering the Art of French Cooking, Simone Beck, Louisette Bertholle and Julia Child give recipes for fricassée de poulet au paprika (chicken fricassee with paprika) and suprêmes de volaille Archiduc (chicken breasts with paprika, onions and cream). Some French dishes featuring paprika as an important ingredient are called "hongroise" (Hungarian). Most of them use sauce hongroise – chopped onions cooked with paprika and white wine – and generally have cream added to the cooked sauce. They include potage de haricots hongroise (bean and bacon soup with paprika and sour cream), anguille hongroise (eel), pieds de veau à la hongroise (calves' feet), oeufs hongroise (hard-boiled eggs), grenouilles hongroise (frogs' legs), homard hongroise (lobster), sole hongroise, turbot hongroise and escalope de veau hongroise. Pommes de terre hongroise – Hungarian potatoes – consist of large rounds of potatoes, with chopped onions, cooked in butter and paprika, with diced tomatoes and moistened with consommé. Rouille, a French sauce with paprika and garlic, is traditionally served with bouillabaisse.

In German cookery, paprika is used in many dishes, from fish stews to braised duck, casseroled hare, braised veal, fried goose liver, stuffed cabbage leaves, meat dumplings, and beef goulash (known in German as Rindergulasch). According to the chef Rick Stein, "The people of Vienna love goulash so much they’ve taken the Hungarian dish and made it their own. The secret is to use lots of onion". The recipe calls for both sweet and hot paprika.

In Moroccan cuisine, paprika (tahmira) is much used in dishes such as bissara and chermoula. In Arabian food paprika is an ingredient of the spice mix Baharat. Throughout the Middle East, paprika may be sprinked onto hummus just before it is served, and it is frequently used to garnish baba ghanoush.

Paprika is little used in Italian cuisine. The Friuli region in the north-east, a former part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, features a spread called Liptauer, in which salted anchovies are mixed with ricotta, butter, paprika, chopped onion and other ingredients, and further south, in Molise, paprika is used in the salami ventricina. Unlike the Spanish sofrito, Italian soffritto typically uses garlic rather than paprika.

The Parade of the Fat Ox, also referred to as the "Festival of the Fat Ox," "Cavalcade of the Fat Ox," "Festival of the Town Ox" (paraded through the city), or "Festival of the Violled Ox" (paraded to the sound of the viol or hurdy-gurdy), is an ancient festive tradition held during the Paris Carnival. It involves Parisian butchers or butcher boys, often adorned in costumes representing savages, sacrificers, or victims, solemnly parading one or more decorated fat oxen accompanied by music. The presence of other costumed participants and floats further augments the procession. Before the conclusion of the 20th century, the slaughter of oxen occurred after the conclusion of the festivities, with the meat subsequently being made available for commercial sale. From 1845 to the early 20th century, the animals were given names inspired by current events, popular songs, operettas, or contemporary literature.

The oldest known reference to this festival dates to 1712, yet it was already regarded as ancient. Several authors claim that it is a remnant of a pagan ritual, often thought to have originated in ancient Egypt. Alternatively, some scholars have proposed that its origins lie in astrological worship, specifically the celebration of the entry of the Sun into the constellation of Taurus. Additionally, the tradition has been linked to a Lenten butcher who, upon producing the fattest ox, was granted the exclusive right to sell meat during Lent to those exempted from fasting. From a more pragmatic perspective, the Carnival and the Fat Ox symbolize a season of abundance and represent the final opportunity for feasting before the onset of the fasting period.

The parade was banned during the French Revolution (1789–1799) and then revived in 1806, continuing almost uninterrupted until 1870, with a hiatus from 1848 to 1850 due to the 1848 revolution. However, France's defeat in the Franco-Prussian War (1870), the Paris Commune (1871), and legal issues led to the suspension of this tradition. The Fat Ox returned to the Carnival in 1896, albeit with intermittent participation in the early 20th century, and made a brief reappearance in 1951 and 1952. Following these events, the Fat Ox Parade and the Paris Carnival ceased to be organized, reemerging only in 1998.

The Fat Ox Parade has attracted significant public attention, garnering the attention of the general public and prominent figures in the intellectual and artistic spheres. This event has served as a source of inspiration for a variety of artistic and cultural expressions, including theatrical plays, operettas, references in La traviata, political, satirical, comedic, and carnival songs, as well as poetry. Romantic literature also refers to the Fat Ox. The ox has been depicted in drawings, prints, caricatures, paintings, magic lantern slides, and photographs. The parade's popularity attracted the attention of merchants, industrialists, and politicians, who sought to use it for advertising purposes.

The precise origins and date of this festival, also referred to as Bœuf violé or viellé, Bœuf villé, or Bœuf violé, remain a subject of scholarly debate. The festival's historical evolution, particularly the role of the ox in parading through the city to the sound of the viol or hurdy-gurdy, is a topic of interest.

A document dating to 1274 makes reference to a "House of the Three Estaulx and the Violled Ox," which is understood to be a sign depicting three market stalls and an ox parading to music. This house is also depicted on Sheet 9 of the Berty Archaeological Map of Paris. However, there is an absence of definitive evidence linking this reference explicitly to the Parade of the Fat Ox.

Some explanations claim that the event is a remnant of an ancient pagan ritual. In a 1739 issue of Mercure de France describing the Parade of the Fat Ox, it states: "This very old custom appears to be a remnant of certain pagan festivals, particularly sacrifices offered to false gods. Indeed, the butcher boys dress for this ceremony much like the slaves of sacrificers; the Fat Ox is adorned in the same manner as those sacrificed as victims, and the butchers carry instruments similar to those used in sacrifices." In a 1783 issue of Correspondance Secrète, the festival reminded a spectator of "the Bacchanalia and the mysteries of the Egyptians." In the 1805 program, the poet, songwriter, playwright, and satirist Antoine-Pierre-Augustin de Piis compared it to a "procession of the Apis bull." This interpretation was later echoed by Louis-Charles Bizet and Théophile Gautier in 1847, and by Léo Delibes, who composed music in his youth for a comic text illustrating the ancient festival. This work gained some fame and was sung in 1891 at the Théâtre des Bouffes-Parisiens by Désiré and Léonce:

Now that he's a bull, My God, how beautiful he is!

However, the Egyptian god Apis is not a bull but a sacred ox. In 1852, Edmond Auguste Texier claimed that the festival of the god Apis was passed down to the Greeks and Romans in the form of the cult of Mithras —though he overlooked its Eastern origins—and subsequently spread to Gaul through conquest. Some authors also suggest that the Gaulish deity Tarvos Trigaranos may be a likely origin for the Fat Ox.

Jacques Antoine Dulaure posited that the festival was initially celebrated at the spring equinox, when the sun entered the sign of Taurus, potentially deriving from astral worship. This interpretation was endorsed by the authors of Paris Pittoresque.

An additional explanation is provided in a document printed in 1896, which is preserved in the Carnival Archives of the Historical Library of the City of Paris :

For a long time, civil and religious laws prohibited the consumption of fatty foods during Lent, except for the sick. Butchers were forbidden from displaying or selling meat during this period without facing severe penalties. Nevertheless, to meet the needs of those exempt from abstinence, someone had to supply this food upon a doctor's order. Thus, the Lenten butcher was established. To avoid offending sensitivities, a contest was held among all the butchers, and the privilege was granted to the one who produced the largest and fattest ox, as judged by the local butchers. The ox, crowned with flowers, was triumphantly paraded through the streets and squares of the city to the sound of trumpets so that everyone could recognize the Lenten butcher and his marvelous product.

According to the authors of the Dictionary of Crafts and Trades (2012), Carnival and the Fat Ox symbolize abundance and the final opportunity to indulge before the Lenten fast. Ethnologist Arnold van Gennep viewed the Parade as the emblem of the butchers' guild. The Carnival, a period of meat consumption, honored butchers, who profited from this demand. He believed it likely emerged during the height or formation of medieval guilds and thus served an advertising function.

Folklore group leader Suzanne Manot synthesized a series of theories, proposing that the Parade of the Fat Ox symbolizes the Christianization of ancient festivals—including Egyptian, Greek, Roman, and Gaulish traditions—observed at the spring equinox in tribute to oxen believed to possess divine abilities. She further suggested that butchers' guilds have played a pivotal role in preserving this tradition, adapting it into a carnival and a promotional event.

The first documented reference to the Promenade of the Fat Ox in Paris was recorded in 1712, cited in a theatrical placard presented during the Carnival : Placards of Parisian Festivities Presented to the Public by the Great Troupe of Rope Dancers from the Jeu de paume d'Orléans at the Saint-Germain Fair, February 1712. The inclusion of the Fat Ox in this piece indicates the early existence of this celebration.

A particularly thorough account of the promenade on Fat Thursday was published in the Mercure de France in 1739. The following day, a second parade was organized by a different group of butchers. From the mid-18th century onward, references to the event became increasingly prevalent.

The Fat Ox, in conjunction with the Paris Carnival, was prohibited during the Revolution, which commenced in 1790. Carnival festivities recommenced under the First Empire. The resurgence of the Fat Ox occurred on 23 February 1805, as part of a lavish procession. The parade transpired annually in Paris until 1870, with the exception of 1814 and 1848 to 1850.

During the First Empire, for example, in February 1813, the Child dressed as Cupid was occasionally replaced by the god Mars. Seven years later, Louvel attended the Fat Ox parade before fatally stabbing the Duke of Berry, and street festivities were subsequently banned by Police Prefect Jules Anglès. Printed programs, titled Order and Procession of the Fat Ox and decorated with engravings, were regularly distributed until the end of the Second Empire. On 14 February 1831, clashes occurred on the same day as the Fat Ox parade. Informed of the unrest, the Foreign Minister reportedly left the Legislative Body to go to his residence, where the parade was set to pass, announcing, "I'm going to see the masks."The following year's parade, initially uncertain, was eventually held under heavy police supervision. In 1846, the organizers of the parade proposed a novel innovation: the Fat Ox would be placed on a float pulled by six horses. The vehicle was tested with 258 paving stones weighing six tons—three times the ox's weight—but it broke down. As a result, Dagobert paraded on foot.

The Fat Ox parade, a tradition with deep historical roots in Paris, faced significant challenges in the years leading up to 1848. This period was marked by a series of revolutions that led to the cancellation of the parade in 1848. The authorities in Paris initially opposed the reorganization of the procession. However, in 1849, the parade was held in Versailles, and in 1850, it took place in the neighboring communes of Montmartre, Batignolles, and La Chapelle. It is noteworthy that these communes would only be annexed to Paris a decade later. The following year, Lucien Arnault, known as Arnault the Elder, director of the Hippodrome, revived the Fat Ox parade in Paris after a three-year hiatus, drawing two to three hundred thousand spectators. He organized it again in 1852 but did not purchase the ox.

From 1855 to 1868, the responsibility of organizing the majority of the festivities fell to the butchers Fléchelle and Duval [ fr ], who alternated in this role. Fléchelle purchased the Fat Ox on nine occasions, escorting it through the city in a procession, while Duval acquired the ox on two separate occasions. Despite the decline in popularity of the Fat Ox parade, Arnold Mortier, in his reminiscences in 1880, recalled the resplendent grandeur of the parades orchestrated by Fléchelle and Duval.

At the onset of 1871, the Franco-Prussian War reached its conclusion with the ratification of the general armistice on 15 February, a development that left France in a state of defeat and occupation. The annual Mardi Gras festivities, scheduled for 21 February, were met with preemptive prohibition by the authorities, who had taken action to quell any potential unrest. However, this did not deter a group of pranksters, who, undeterred, proceeded to stage a satirical protest. This document featured a song and a caricature of the newly elected head of state and government, Adolphe Thiers, who had assumed office just a week earlier. Thiers was depicted as Cupid, attired in a ridiculous hat and seated on the back of a tearful Fat Ox. In his hand, he held an oversized quill pen intended to sign the capitulation. The word FRANCE was written in large letters on the Fat Ox. The two traditional sacrificers escorting the animal were attired in caricatured spiked helmets, thereby identifying them as Prussians. The song's lyrics mirrored the mocking tone, commencing as follows:

Although Carnival resumed in 1872, the Fat Ox did not reappear.

The restoration of the parade was a topic of debate in 1873 and again in 1874, when proposals were made to raise funds for the festival. Ten years later, the Paris Butchers' Union, with support from the Food Trade Unions, appeared poised to revive the event, especially since the Paris Police Prefect was inclined to approve their request. However, the change in government following the fall of the Floquet administration in 1889, as documented by M. Champimont, prevented the Fat Ox's revival that year, thus necessitating the restart of negotiations that had been progressing with the former Minister of the Interior.

In 1891, there was a brief resurgence of interest in the Fat Ox, a traditional parade character from the Mardi Gras celebration in New Orleans, Louisiana. However, this attempt at reviving the tradition was met with opposition from Prime Minister and Minister of War Charles de Freycinet, who vetoed the request to use cavalry troops from the Paris garrison. These troops had been scheduled to participate in the parade dressed in costume. This decision was met with regret in several newspapers, which expressed disappointment that the Fat Ox would not be making a comeback. In the 1891 Mardi Gras parade, the Fat Ox appeared as a giant effigy. The parade included the following elements: "A vast float depicting the Fat Ox, on whose back a child dressed as Cupid offered bouquets of violets." In the subsequent years, informal Parisian parades during Mardi Gras or Mid-Lent featured the Fat Ox as a giant effigy. In 1892, the central theme of the Moulin-Rouge cavalcade featured a colossal red cardboard ox with a bobbing head, upon which Cupid—a child with blond wigs—was perched. This cavalcade continued to be featured in subsequent parades for the next two years. However, in 1894, a dancer in a pink bodysuit replaced Cupid, blowing kisses and smiles to the crowd throughout the parade. In the same year, a parade organized by Parisian students featured a young man dressed as a maiden accompanied by a diminutive "mayor" who performed mock marriages. Among the entourage was a Fat Ox in the form of a large artificial pig.

By 1895, Parisians had eagerly awaited the return of the Fat Ox for twenty-five years. However, financial issues remained the primary obstacle to its return. Its absence was deeply felt:

You cannot convince many honest folk that the absence of the Fat Ox hasn't caused the decline of Carnival. Every year, at Mardi Gras, sighs of regret escape many chests, mourning the disappearance of this ancient custom. Some Parisians are so loyal to the tradition that they still come to the boulevards during the three days of festivities, certain they will see the Fat Ox. This results in cruel disappointment.

The situation seemed to improve, however. On 25 March 1895—four days after a lively and successful Mid-Lent Thursday [ fr ] — M. Caplain submitted a proposal to the Paris Council in favor of bringing back the Fat Ox. He was joined by Caumeau, and together they issued a report on 28 November 1895, explaining that the Butchers' Union planned to organize the Fat Ox Parade through funds raised via a lottery worth 500,000 francs. They sought authorization from the Minister of the Interior, and on 6 December, the Council supported the project. "The Municipal Council, dreaming of calmer recreations for us, is reportedly preparing a prodigious Fat Ox. Let us give thanks."

In 1896, preparations for the Fat Ox Festival unfolded on a grand scale. A Fat Ox Festival Committee was formed, led by Charles Zidler, a former butcher, son of a butcher, and entertainment organizer. A subscription campaign was launched, and the Parisian authorities contributed 25,000 francs toward the estimated 100,000-franc cost of the parade. On Sunday, 16 February 1896, at 11 am, the commencement of the parade was marked by a cannon blast. The ox, a specimen of the Norman breed, embarked from the Palais de l'Industrie on the Champs-Élysées. Over the subsequent two days, two additional animals were exhibited: a Limousin ox on Monday and a Charolais ox on Tuesday. It is noteworthy that neither of these animals appear to have been assigned a name. The event garnered widespread enthusiasm. However, during this period, authorities were actively discouraging the practice of advertising, as evidenced by the Paris Police Prefecture 's General instructions for municipal police, which included directives such as "Do not allow advertising floats to join the parade."

In response to the Fat Ox Parade, which took place on Mid-Lent Thursday [ fr ], 12 March 1896, Parisian students organized a procession through the Latin Quarter. The students carried a papier-mâché ox, which they had named Minosdaure. This ox served as a mount for a Prince Carnival, who was dressed as winged Cupid. Surrounding the float were young "female students" dressed as gold mines. These students had costumes similar to those worn in year-end revues. They handed out food vouchers to the public.

Despite the deficit recorded for the 1896 parade, the procession was organized again on 28 February 1 March, and 2 March 1897. It was filmed by the Lumière brothers ' teams and Georges Méliès. Once again, it was a success. The Quebec newspaper La Patrie reported: "The crowd along the parade route for the Fat Ox yesterday numbered six hundred thousand people."

In 1896 and 1897, in response to the ostentatious Fat Ox Parade, the artistic community of Montmartre organized a competing carnival procession known as the Promenade de la Vache Enragée [ fr ] (Starving Cow Parade), also referred to as Vachalcade, a term derived from the French phrase "vache" (cow) and "cavalcade" (carnival). The organizers of this event were confronted with financial constraints, which ultimately led to its discontinuation.

On 10 November 1897, Charles Zidler, the organizer of the 1896 and 1897 Fat Ox parades, passed away. The loss of this former butcher and key organizer of the traditional butchers' festival in Paris may have led to a diminution in the event's resilience, despite the financial challenges it faced.

In 1898, the Paris authorities allocated a budget of 25,000 francs for the organization of the Bœuf Gras parade, offering a monetary incentive to any individual willing to assume responsibility for its coordination. A strategic plan was formulated, entailing the leadership of a Bœuf Gras parade by the Duke of Beaufort as a constituent element of the King of Les Halles ' procession. However, the Bœuf Gras Committee determined that the financial deficit was too substantial to justify the undertaking of the festival. During the Mid-Lent festivities on 17 March, Parisian students employed humor to highlight the apparent disappearance of the Bœuf Gras. The Petit Journal documented this development, noting: "The first float appears immediately: The End of the Bœuf Gras. The unfortunate beast has been thrown alive into a massive pot simmering on a gigantic stove. A massive, fantastical cardboard Carnival, wearing a student's beret, holds a skimmer and gazes at the stewpot with greedy eyes." Upon the parade's arrival at Place du Panthéon, La Croix reported that the cardboard animal was removed from the pot, doused in petroleum, and burned. Surrounding it, an enormous circle danced, and Sarcey, too heavy to join, patted his belly in rhythm.

Many municipal councilors expressed the opinion that traditional carnival celebrations had become obsolete. They emphasized the moral education of Parisians through performances combining science and art with high-concept themes. This shift in perspective is evidenced by the significant reduction in subsidies allocated to the Mid-Lent and Bœuf Gras Committees, from a total of 65,000 francs in the previous year to a mere 12,000 francs on 29 December 1898. In contrast, a substantial budget of 65,000 francs was allocated to a "grand historical procession of guilds during the time of Étienne Marcel," scheduled to take place on 17–18 June 1899.

In the early 20th century, the Bœuf Gras parade emerged as a prominent feature of the Food Festival held in the La Villette district, including a procession on 25 February. However, by the close of the year, the city council decided to eliminate the annual allocation of 25,000 francs for the Bœuf Gras celebration, citing its sporadic occurrence. This decision was accompanied by the stipulation that the possibility of reconsideration would be evaluated if a dedicated committee were to be established. In February 1901, a group of merchants and residents from the 19th arrondissement planned a parade with 16 symbolic floats. However, due to a lack of municipal funding, the event was canceled.

On the morning of Mid-Lent Thursday, 6 March 1902, the Marché Lenoir store organized a parade through the streets of the 19th arrondissement. The procession featured a float carrying a bœuf gras adorned with flowers and accompanied by beautiful women, as well as an allegorical float depicting Pierrot and Columbine riding a crescent moon, escorted by numerous carriages. A subsequent parade, organized with a budget of 5,000 francs—a sum derived from the remaining funds of the 1900 Bœuf Gras festival and substantial contributions from merchants and residents of the 19th and 10th arrondissements, following the rejection of a municipal subsidy request —occurred ten days later in the La Villette district. Initially, two bœufs gras were planned to participate in the parade. However, one of the bovine subjects resisted being loaded onto its float, and could not be taken along. Le Petit Parisien reported the event as a success, though it was confined to a small part of Paris. The festivities included musicians and 500 costumed participants dressed as heralds, nobles, kitchen boys, reapers, and harvesters. The newspaper wrote: "Never has a plump ox exhibited for the public's amusement aroused such delighted curiosity, and laughter erupted in bursts as the floats passed by, where picturesque allegories proclaimed the glory of wine and the Rabelaisian triumph of feasting." The bœuf gras was the grand prize in a raffle organized by the festival committee. The parade also included an animated float featuring a giant Gargantua devouring food, seemingly inspired by a similar float that had accompanied the Bœuf Gras in 1866. At the end of the festival, the organizers found themselves in a serious financial deficit. They appealed to Paris's municipal finances for assistance. On 20 June, the City Council approved an exceptional grant of 4,400 francs to help cover the deficit and avoid legal action against the merchants involved, whom they deemed undeserving of such consequences.

From 1903 to 1908, and again in 1913 and 1914, a series of Bœuf Gras parades were meticulously organized, predominantly in the 19th arrondissement. The procession on 9 April 1905, was particularly notable, with 1,800 participants and musicians, as well as 400 horses, taking part in the event to commemorate the centenary of the festival's restoration in 1805, following its suspension from 1790 to 1804. The event featured an open-air concert performed by seven hundred musicians. In 1907, no fewer than three parades were held: on 10 February, the Bœuf Gras of the Left Bank, also referred to as that of the Vaugirard slaughterhouses, took place; four days later, another parade was held on the Right. Bank, also known as that of the La Villette slaughterhouses; and on 7 March, in the procession for Mid-Lent Thursday, a large papier-mâché Bœuf Gras, humorously described as "not having cost much to fatten," was featured. No parade was organized in 1909, nor, it seems, in 1910, despite a subsidy having been allocated. In 1913, the parade occurred during an Agricultural Festival following the conclusion of the General Agricultural Competition [ de ]. The subsequent year, a large papier-mâché Bœuf Gras marched during the Mid-Lent festival in Paris [ fr ]. However, World War I interrupted the festivities.

The Bœuf Gras first appeared on 27 March 1924, and was characterized by a parade that included a heifer, four prize-winning bulls from the Agricultural Competition, and fattened sheep (Jones, 1998). In 1926, during the student parade on Mardi Gras, 16 February, organized by the Latin Quarter festival committee, a lean bull was paraded as a symbol of protest against the excessive increase in university fees and the high cost of living. The Bœuf Gras made its final appearance of the 20th century on 19 March 1936.

For fifteen years, the tradition of Bœuf Gras parades was nonexistent. However, in May 1951, the Paris Bi-millennium Committee revived this tradition in the slaughterhouse district of La Villette. The following year, on 20 April 1952, the 19th arrondissement festival committee revived the tradition, accompanied by a hundred students from the School of Butchery. These students were attired in work attire and held up the corporation's coats of arms aloft. For the subsequent fifty years, the festival remained dormant. The resurgence of the Paris Carnival was initiated by Basile Pachkoff and Catherine Poulain, who established the APCP (Association for the Revival of the Paris Carnival) before reemerging in September 1998 with the support of Alain Riou [ fr ]. The inaugural "Bœuf Gras" featured an 800-kilogram cow named Impatiente-Saint-Fargeau or Pimprenelle, rather than a bull. This bovine was not slaughtered after the festival but rather allowed to return to its pastures in Saint-Priest-les-Fougères. This tradition continued until 2014, with four cows participating in the event, until its final recorded appearance in the context of the Paris Carnival.

In the 18th and 19th centuries, the Bœuf Gras parades featured several consistent elements, including the selection of particularly corpulent animals. The term "gras" (fat) was used to describe an animal with a high meat-to-fat ratio. Some breeders were selected to provide animals on multiple occasions. For instance, in 1829, Mr. Cornet, a breeder hailing from Caen, brought the Bœufs Gras from Cotentin to the market in Poissy on six occasions, including the year 1829, to be paraded through Paris. The two animals in question weighed 1,180 kilograms each. Cornet continued to provide numerous others during the 1830s.

As demonstrated in Louis-Charles Bizet's Du commerce de la boucherie et de la charcuterie de Paris et des commerces qui en dépendent, the Bœuf Gras tradition functioned as a publicity operation for the butcher purchaser and the breeder. The Bœuf Gras tradition was regarded as "a stimulant for livestock breeders, a prize for the noble work of agriculture, an honor for the one who provided the Bœuf Gras." From 1821 onward, the future Bœufs intended for the parade were selected by a group of butchers at the livestock markets near Paris. The buyers then assumed responsibility for organizing the festival, a role previously held by apprentice butchers. During the 1830s and 1840s, the butcher merchant Rolland thus monopolized the Bœuf Gras. The financial demands of the event, including the costs associated with floats, costumes, and participant compensation, were offset by a variety of sources. These included donations from the communities where the bovine was showcased, the butcher's union, material assistance from the police prefecture, and the anticipated revenue from advertising. Beginning in 1896, the selection of the bovine took place at the Palais de l'Industrie during the General Agricultural Competition [ fr ]. However, the destruction of the building in 1900 led to the relocation of the competition to the La Villette district.

Beginning in 1845, bulls were assigned specific names that reflected contemporary events. For instance, the war in Mexico prompted the naming of a bull Mexico, while a victory by Napoleon III led to another bull being named Magenta. The nomenclature could also be inspired by popular operettas of the era, such as Rothomago and Lalla-Roukh in 1863, or musical hits like Tu-vas-me-l'payer in 1862 and L'pied qui remue in 1863, which were based on popular songs. The bull was also named after literary works of the moment, as evidenced by its naming after Balzac 's novel Goriot in 1845. The following year, it was named Dagobert, after the novel Le Juif errant by Eugène Sue.The procession that followed the bull included the main characters of the novel: Dagobert riding Jovial, with Rose and Blanche, Prince Djalma, Marshal Simon, Rodin holding his open umbrella, etc. Over time, it became said that an author honored in this way had "entered the slaughterhouse." The expression "being Bœuf Gras" came to signify success, a notion that was commented on in 1847 by Théophile Gautier and Charles Monselet, the latter employing a tone of irony in his commentary.

Besides, no form of glory will have been lacking (to Alexandre Dumas). This year's Bœuf Gras has just been named Monte-Cristo, which is no small honor, you can believe it. This literary animal, which has been called Goriot and Dagobert, has now passed into the realm of prizes and is now awarded to the best feuilleton novelist. One has the Bœuf Gras, just as one has a chair at the Institute. It is the complement to any reputation, the bouquet, the apotheosis, the laurel of the Capitol. Eugène Sue and Balzac each had it in turn; M. Dumas could not remain behind for long. Prepare the triumphal float with the bloated Cupid, the plumed Hercules, and the savage brandishing his club; here comes the Orosmanes of the stall and the Almavivas of the charcuterie. It's Monte-Cristo passing by, it's the feuilleton novel being led to the slaughterhouse.

Sixty-five years later, Le Gaulois published a commentary on this practice on 27 February 1913, stating, "Thus, it was a great honor to see—butchers voted amongst themselves—the name of one of their works given to the victorious bull of the year. They called this, by extension, being Bœuf Gras: Timothée Trimm [ fr ] was, as were Mlle Thérésa, Émile Augier, Offenbach, and Sardou, among others."

In 1853, the names of the three Bœufs Gras parading were changed to characters from Harriet Beecher Stowe 's novel Uncle Tom's Cabin due to its immense success. Specifically, the names Shelby and Saint-Clare were adopted, and following the translation of the novel by Émile de La Bédollière, the name Père-Tom was used instead of Uncle Tom. This change led to a linguistic controversy.

In 1867, several newspapers played along by suggesting names in advance. Some of these names were indeed given to the twelve oxen that would parade in turn during the carnival. The artist André Gill, who participated in the event, had the honor of naming one after the satirical newspaper La Lune, to which he contributed. All the animals were acquired by the Parisian butcher merchant Fléchelle for no less than 40,000 francs, marking his seventh time supplying the bœuf gras. "Never has the triumph of corpulence been observed on such weighty specimens..." stated Timothée Trimm [ fr ]. Their weight ranged from 1,100 to 1,500 kg. Aged 4 to 6 years, of the Cotentin breed, they had been fattened for two years and presented at the 1867 World's Fair : "These giants, whose fattening lasts at least two years, are not models of structure, as we know, but their feeder spends as much science to select and prepare them as would be required to win the honorary cup at Poissy. It is true that, last year, he sold his students at a pretty good price."

It has been observed that, on occasion, bœufs gras undergo a second name change subsequent to their baptism for the festival. For instance, in 1868, the four bœufs gras, initially announced under the names Gulliver, la Cagnotte, Blondin, and Rumford, subsequently paraded under the names La Nièvre, Mignon, Le Lutteur Masqué (adorned with a black taffeta wolf), and Paul Forestier.

In 1857, the Promenade des Bœufs Gras attracted unusual interest due to the presence of Sarlabot, an ox of a new Norman breed, called Cotentin, raised and fattened by Henry Dutrône [ fr ] on his estate in Sarlabot, Trousseauville-Dives in Calvados. It was a hornless ox, obtained by crossing with hornless English breeds. The Journal d'agriculture pratique [ fr ] published an engraved portrait of the animal, which was later used to illustrate two brochures. The dairy qualities were particularly emphasized. Sarlabot, named after the estate where it was born, was slaughtered on 19 April 1857. It was later known as Sarlabot I, with another Sarlabot of the same breed participating in the parade the following year. This one was bought after Carnival by butcher Duval, the organizer of the 1858 bœufs gras parade, whose budget reached 14,187 francs 10 centimes. Duval came into conflict with breeder Dutrône, who refused to deliver it immediately as demanded by the butcher.

During Carnival, a festival that was celebrated until the mid-19th century, a parade consisting of one or more animals adorned with various ornaments was held. This parade also featured a group of butchers and butcher boys disguised as savages, sacrificers, or victims, Turks, accompanied by a child playing the role of Love, often perched on the back of the animal, musicians, and occasionally horsemen. Before the parade, the oxen were led through a procession in a slaughterhouse courtyard, accompanied by the resonant beat of drums, thereby acclimating them to the auditory environment. During the event, ropes, held by butcher boys, were strategically positioned as obstacles, designed to subdue any erratic behavior exhibited by the animals.

The earliest known description of this tradition dates back to 1739. The ox was adorned with garlands of flowers and other ornaments, and it carried "a large branch of cherry laurel " instead of a crest on its head. It was also covered with a carpet that served as a saddle blanket," served as the mount for the "young King of the Festival, who, mounted on the Fat Ox, had a large blue ribbon passed over his shoulder, holding a golden scepter in one hand and a bare sword in the other." The entourage was led on the eve of Mardi Gras by an escort of fifteen butcher boys, attired in Turkish style with red corsets, white trousers, and red turbans or hats bordered with white. Two of the butcher boys guided the animal by its horns, while others played the violin, flute, and drum, and still others carried a stick.

In 1783, the animal, adorned with floral embellishments on its horns, was permitted to succumb to weakness to avert potential accidents. It was led by a group of butcher boys attired in Turkish garb and mounted on horseback, marching to the melody of wind instruments performing the composition Malbrough s'en va-t-en guerre. However, on Sunday, 10 February 1812, in the Place du Théâtre-des-Italiens, the Parisian Bœuf Gras, or bull, dropped the child it was carrying, ran off, and knocked over several people, and was only caught with great difficulty. The following year, the child dressed as Cupid was replaced by an actor portraying the god Mars. This innovation was not adopted thereafter. In 1817, an American traveler, marveling at the Parisian carnival, noted the presence of "a well-fed little Cupid " on the back of the animal. In 1821, the Journal des débats, describing the arrival of the Bœuf Gras parade at the Tuileries Palace, noted that "the child who is usually mounted on the ox was carried by a man. The colossal size of the animal rendered its gait unstable, and the child would have been at risk of falling from it." However, according to a 1903 newspaper article, the 1821 Bœuf Gras had eliminated the palanquin carrying the child representing Love for two consecutive days. From that point, it was decided that the ox would no longer serve as a mount for anyone, and the son of Venus later took his place in a float. Edmond Auguste Texier hypothesizes that in bygone eras, the ox was believed to bear a child adorned not with the image of Love, but rather with that of Horus or Mithras.

In February 1825, a diverse group of individuals, including four savages, three sacrificers, three Turks, twenty-five musicians and trumpet players, one Love, a Father of Love, Mercury, and Mars, were present to present Love on a float led by Time, accompanied by goddesses of Abundance and Peace, four Romans (two of whom held attributes of Commerce), three heralds, two runners, five knights, and an elephant driver to guide the ox.

Non-allegorical, mythological, or historically unimportant characters were gradually incorporated into the procession. By the end of February 1843, the traditional gods and goddesses of the Seasons, mounted on a crimson-velvet float with golden fringes and drawn by four richly harnessed horses, were joined by Folly, mounted municipal guards, and the band of Musicians of the 59th Line. The bœuf gras, adorned with golden horns and a head crowned with an immense laurel wreath and tricolored ribbon garlands, was led by four Roman sacrificers. The remainder of the parade comprised effigies of Francis I, Henry III, Louis XIII, Louis XIV, and Louis XV.

According to Le Constitutionnel, the parade underwent significant changes in 1850. The classic savages, lictors, executioners, and traditional Love were no longer present. Instead, archers from the 13th century, heralds from Charles VI, musketeers from Louis XIII, Montenegrins on horseback, and Empire hussars with completely renewed costumes appeared in the parade. The following year, upon its return to Paris, the Norman Bœuf Gras Liberté, adorned with a golden embroidered cover trimmed with gold and flowers, is preceded by a detachment of cavalry from the Republican Guard and a company of drummers dressed as janissaries. It is surrounded by the four traditional savages adorned with colorful feathers and ferocious animal skins. A delegation of Norman cattle breeders follows, along with a float carrying five women representing Ceres and the four seasons, knights "in the medieval style," and cavalry from the Republican Guard bringing up the rear. The costumes were chosen by a council that included Gérard de Nerval.

In 1829, two oxen were paraded, but beginning in 1853, the practice of parading multiple animals became commonplace. In 1861, a novel element was introduced to the Bœuf Gras procession: a fat sheep, pulled in a small cart by a donkey dressed in blue, was surrounded by cherubs.

Beginning in 1855, there was a marked increase in the number of floats, and a diversification of themes. By the end of February 1865, Duval, a former butcher who had become a restaurateur, had organized a grand parade. This parade featured no fewer than eight Bœufs Gras, purchased from breeder Mesnage. This was an increase from the previous maximum of six in a single edition. On the first day of the parade, four of the floats were featured. The procession commenced "as usual," with four trumpets from the Paris Guard leading the way. They were followed by two heiduques with long staffs topped with large golden apples, a drum major, drummers, and musicians dressed in Louis XV-style costumes, light blue with silver trim. Following them came halberdiers, light cavalry, Louis XV-style dragoons, and musketeers. The first float was led by the Bœuf Ba-ta-clan, accompanied by Chinese soldiers and flanked by Roman and Gallic executioners. The second float featured trees and foliage with shepherds, possibly representing Estelle and Némorin or a subject in the style of Florian. The third float carried the Bœuf Capitaine Henriot, and the fourth featured numerous sheep grazing on a painted rock. The fifth float showcased the Cotentine breed ox Maître Guérin, touted as "the finest specimen," with a recorded weight of 1,303 kilograms. The sixth float was the Olympian float led by Time, bearing Love under a purple and gold canopy. The second-to-last float was an allegory of Agriculture, and the final float carried the Bœuf Vieux Garçon. The floats of breeder Mesnage and buyer Duval, accompanied by mounted musicians and a cavalry unit from the Paris Guard, formed the rear guard. A substantial number of mounted guards were deployed to manage the crowd.

The following year marked one of the parade's most significant popular successes, as reported by a New Zealand newspaper. The Boys Butchers were attired in the guise of druids, an allegorical float shaped like a large ship represented the city of Paris, and finally, Gargantua, a colossal figure, continually devoured various culinary offerings provided by a group of diminutive boys attired as cooks. The Bœuf Gras procession traversed the city streets of Paris on Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday, making its way to the residences of high-ranking officials. On Monday, in accordance with tradition, the Bœuf Gras procession paid homage to the emperor at the Tuileries. The fate of the poor beast, doomed, like ancient gladiators, to perish, is believed to have been saluted by Napoleon in his own manner, as the ancient Caesar is said to have done, with the words, "Ave, Caesar, moriturus te salutat, after which it continued its triumphal march. The Bœuf Gras this year was a magnificent animal, and weighed 1,360 kilogrammes." A fat pig, carried on a float, was also part of the procession.

By the early 20th century, the Bœuf Gras parade had evolved into a component of a broader array of carnival festivities. In 1907, the parade incorporated the Bœuf Gras procession with thematic floats representing each of Paris's arrondissements, as well as a procession of the Queen of Queens of Paris. Parisian students were occasionally part of the procession, as evidenced in 1913 and 1924. In 1914, the Bœuf Gras procession, featuring a cardboard representation of an executioner on a float, participated in a grand parade that included numerous floats, all centered around the theme of "Festivals and Carnivals Through the Ages." The event also featured the newly elected queens, who were received at City Hall and the Élysée Palace.

The route of the parade, which traverses the streets of Paris, is subject to frequent alterations. However, it tends to make periodic stops in the vicinity of buildings associated with authority: the residence or seat of the French head of state, ministers, ambassadors, and the prefect. In 1739, the procession traversed various neighborhoods, including the first floor of the palace where the Parliament of Paris convened. In 1806, for instance, the Bœuf Gras stopped in front of the Tuileries Palace to be greeted by Empress Joséphine de Beauharnais. In 1821, the Bœuf was brought into the Tuileries Courtyard and the Palais-Royal. In 1851, it passed in front of the Élysée Palace, where President and future Emperor Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte lived. In 1863, the Bœuf Gras and its substantial procession entered the Tuileries Courtyard, where they paraded twice in front of the King and his family, who appeared to derive pleasure from the spectacle. From the Tuileries, the Bœuf Gras was subsequently led to Élysée-Bourbon, the Palais-Royal, the Palais Bourbon, and the hotels of prominent Parisian officials. The following year, a significant gathering of onlookers had amassed in the Tuileries Courtyard, where the event was open to the public. The procession made its way through the crowd, passing beneath the balconies where the emperor, empress, and imperial prince were situated. The procession then formed a semi-circle and proceeded to perform several symphonies. During the first half of the 19th century, after the day's festivities, the disguised members of the procession were invited to partake in a feast with the event organizer. This tradition resurfaced in 1870 in the Tuileries Courtyard.

At the close of December 1895, the Paris City Council articulated its desire for the procession, which was to be reinstated in 1896 "due to its extraordinary proportions," to commence at the Arc de Triomphe and traverse the Avenue des Champs-Élysées. This distinguished thoroughfare was partially used commencing the subsequent year. During the early 1900s, the route frequently remained constrained to the 19th arrondissement.

In 1907, the Bœuf Gras procession, which was one component of a larger series of events, began at Rue de Rivoli, traversed the Avenue des Champs-Élysées and the Avenue de Marigny [ fr ], and culminated at the Élysée Palace. There, it was received by the secretary-general of the Presidency of the Republic, who presented a jewel to the Queen of Queens of Paris. However, by 1914, the scope of the parade had diminished significantly, with the procession limited to the main streets of the 5th and 13th arrondissements. While the queens elected for the festival were received at City Hall and the Élysée Palace, the Bœuf Gras did not receive the same honors. The participation of students in the procession persisted until 1924, and in 1926, they marched separately, with an ox fashioned from papier-mâché.

Following the parade, the Bœuf Gras (oxen) were slaughtered, and their meat was sold at a premium price by prominent butchers, who set the price at double the usual amount. In 1851, however, the breeder Adeline sold the meat of his animals at auction, similar to regular meat. As was often said, this allowed both the poor and the rich to enjoy Bœuf Gras. The purchase of an animal, or parts thereof, could be executed in bulk. In March 1867, a restaurateur placed an advertisement in Le Petit Journal for tripe à la mode de Caen, asserting that he was the sole buyer and owner of the tripe from the Bœuf Gras.

Rumors occasionally spread that the animal had not made it to the slaughterhouse. Thus, on 1 March 1840, the first day of the Bœuf Gras parade, there was considerable commotion.

Arriving at Rue Sainte-Apolline [ fr ], this king of the carnival, succumbing under the weight of its grandeur and enormous corpulence, collapsed into the gutter. Its death was determined on the spot, and the butchers, improvising unworthy funerals, slaughtered it in the street. The death of the monstrous animal led to a scuffle and a few punches. It seems that when the Bœuf Gras dies, it is traditional for all those present to remove their hats as a sign of mourning and respect. The procession members did not fail to shout Chapeau bas! to the curious, ignorant of the tradition. When they did not think to comply with this custom, some boys from the procession detached themselves and began to attack, with punches, the hats of the defiant. This led to a scuffle that lasted for some time. A new Bœuf Gras was crowned that morning as the king of the carnival.

However, two days later, Le Moniteur parisien refuted the narrative of the street slaughter, asserting that the animal, unable to continue the parade, was subsequently transferred to the Poissy stockyard, where it spent the night. It was not slaughtered until ten days after its collapse. In 1861, according to La Semaine des familles, once more, an alleged Bœuf Gras collapsed in the street with a broken knee, and it was immediately euthanized. This incident, however, was not documented by La Presse littéraire.

Prior to the conclusion of the 20th century, the sole ox to have evaded the slaughterhouse was "L'Évènement." The newspaper's editor-in-chief, who had christened it with its name, declined to allow its demise and repurchased it for a sum of one thousand écus. Subsequently, he leased it to the Théâtre du Châtelet, where it made multiple appearances alongside the performers of the revue La Lanterne magique.

The critical reception of the Bœuf Gras parades is overwhelmingly positive in the press, with descriptions highlighting the parade. However, it does not bring joy to all spectators. In 1834, a commentator for the Journal des artistes [ fr ] finds it silly. A few years later, in 1844, Delphine de Girardin writes about the Paris Carnival : "On the boulevard, the carnival was sad and ugly. […] The only magnificent thing was the Bœuf Gras: it was peach blossom, a beautiful color for a victim." In 1839, Gérard de Nerval objects to the view that the Promenade du Bœuf Gras should be transformed into an agricultural event to encourage French farmers. For him, it is a mystic remembrance of Roman antiquity that should be preserved in a society whose institutions parody those of that ancient time:

We will admit, seeing last Tuesday on our quays, crowded with people, the sacred ox, preceded by victim-lictors, and watching the heavy golden cart roll by, shaped in ancient style, where the old Saturn, regretted now more than ever, presides as in the days of Rome, we could not help but feel a sense of respect for this image of our fathers' old beliefs! No matter how poor this masquerade was, and how poorly it was executed, it was a joyful spectacle to see the pale glow of our sun fall upon these cheerful symbols, upon these crowned foreheads, upon these brilliant garments of gold and purple.

According to Philippe Busoni, the Bœuf Gras was considered "the most beautiful piece of festivity" during the Carnival in 1851. Two years later, Gustave Flaubert wrote to Louise Colet :

If you want to measure what public esteem is worth, and what a beautiful thing it is to be 'pointed at,' as the Latin poet says, you have to go out in the streets of Paris on Mardi Gras. Shakespeare, Goethe, Michelangelo never had 400,000 spectators at once, like this ox! What brings it closer to genius is that it is then cut into pieces.

At the conclusion of February 1860, Louis Jourdan, a prominent publisher who harbors a strong animosity toward the Paris Carnival, expresses his discontent regarding the Parisians' profound devotion to the Bœuf Gras tradition. He asserts that he finds no occurrence more disheartening and distressing than this "funeral masquerade," wherein "despicable individuals in disguise" exert "herculean efforts to feign amusement." However, Jourdan acknowledges that he perceives no government willing to take action against this tradition due to the potential backlash from the public. The popularity of the Bœuf Gras is also highlighted by A. Rolet in La Presse littéraire in March 1861. In 1857, Pierre Véron, in a poem that expresses disdain for the Paris Carnival, titled Un Mardi-Gras à Saint-Cloud, lamented:

For Victor Hugo, in Les Misérables (1862), the Bœuf Gras celebration is part of the "magnificent and joyful processions." The crowds that usually gather for the Bœuf Gras make it a reference in terms of notoriety. In La Nouvelle revue parisienne, H. de Pène writes in 1864: "Around the same days when the carnival threw its last little bells out the windows, a brochure appeared on and against the French Academy : La Conspiration des Quarante, with a title designed to attract as many people to the windows as the passage of the Bœuf Gras."

According to the perspective of illustrator and caricaturist Bertall, the conclusion of the Bœuf Gras in 1876 signaled the termination of the Paris Carnival, with only private nocturnal festivities persisting as authentically traditional. In 1889, Anatole France —under the pseudonym Gérôme—recalled the pleasure he had experienced as a child during the procession's passage. Two years prior, he had humorously suggested that Parisians, unable to witness the Bœuf Gras procession in Paris, could at least hear its Brussels counterpart via the recently introduced telephone. He asserted that this was a satisfactory solution, and that the rulers, who had refused for so many years to bring back the traditional Bœuf Gras, could at least offer a small compensatory pleasure to the Parisian population. While they would not witness the procession, the telephone would provide an auditory experience, offering a modest consolation." In 1891, when the Bœuf Gras had not paraded for twenty years, Richard O'Monroy [ fr ] asserted that the Bœuf Gras parade constituted a cherished memory for many Parisians, particularly those who experienced it during their childhood. Three years later, he voiced his opposition to what he regarded as specious justifications for the organization of the parade, namely the lack of financial resources and the absence of riders willing to participate in the procession. In the year of its return, 1896, John Grand-Carteret [ fr ] expressed his elation, and Le Figaro published a special issue containing the program of festivities.

During its last revival in 1998, ethnologist Anne-Marie Brisebarre [ fr ] criticized a project she viewed as political and lacking cultural value, as it kept little of the original tradition and its festive, religious, and professional meaning. She notes, for instance, that the celebration now takes place in September for climatic reasons rather than at Easter, which is generally colder, and that the consumption of the animal, the crowning symbol of the celebration, no longer occurs under the pretext of a less barbaric modern world. This last point, for her, is "revealing of the disturbing confusion in human-animal relations in urban environments."

The Bœuf Gras has been a source of inspiration in the arts, particularly in theater. The animal appears in a play with signboards performed during the 1712 Carnival by the Great Troupe of Rope Dancers from the Jeu de paume d'Orléans, at the Saint-Germain fair. In 1745, the revival of Lully 's Thésée inspired a parody of the same name, written by Charles-Simon Favart, Pierre Laujon, and Parvy, performed on 17 February at the Opéra-Comique. In this play, Thésée triumphs, mounted on a Bœuf Gras. A comical incident occurred during this performance, reported in 1812 by the Annales dramatiques : two men were in charge of moving the cardboard Bœuf Gras, one handling the front, the other the rear. The front man "released a flatulence that suffocated his colleague. The latter, in his first move, and to take revenge for the effect on the cause, bit what he found under his teeth. It made a terrifying moo." This led to a backstage fight that almost resulted in one of the two actors' death. The Bœuf Gras is also the more or less central subject of several other comic tragedies: La Mort du Bœuf Gras by Toussaint-Gaspard Taconet (1767), La Mort de Mardi-Gras by Voltaire (1809), La Descente de la Courtille by Théophile Marion Dumersan (1841), Le Bœuf Enragé (between 1842 and 1848), the famous Bœuf Gras by Paul de Kock (1845), Grande Complainte du Bœuf Gras 1859 by Boucher (1859), L'Ordre et la Marche du Bœuf Gras (1860), Les Bergers by Hector Crémieux and Philippe Gille with music by Jacques Offenbach (1865), Les Déesses du Bœuf Gras (1866), La Déesse du Bœuf Gras by Élie Frébault [ fr ] and Alphonse Lemonnier (1866). In 1866, in the 10th tableau of La Lanterne magique, Grande Revue de l'Année, a show by Louis-François Nicolaïe Clairville, A. Monnier, and E. Blum, the Bœuf Gras procession parades on stage, with the star being the Bœuf Gras L'Événement, which participated in that year's Promenade. The revival of Le Juif-Errant by the Théâtre de la Porte-Saint-Martin in 1877 included a Bœuf Gras cavalcade that impressed critics with its success. In 1914, the play Le Dialogue des Bœufs Gras by Louis Sonolet was published. After the death of caricaturist Cham in 1879, William Busnach proposed a fantasy at the Théâtre des Variétés, L'Œil du Commodore, in which the caricaturist dreams of finding one of his late uncles, now reincarnated in the body of the Bœuf Gras.

The Bœuf Gras also makes an appearance in opera. In the fifth act of La traviata (1853), set in Paris, as Violetta is dying, she hears from below her windows the Parisians – a chorus offstage – accompanying the animal during the carnival: "Hail to the Bœuf Gras; it's the most beautiful in the world, it is the king of the feast; it's our god: Parisians, let us sing the Bœuf Gras, etc."

A burlesque symphony, La Promenade du Bœuf Gras, for two violins, viola, cello, and nine children's toy instruments, was composed by Adolphe Blanc in 1870. Several songs are also dedicated to it. The oldest known written song, Le bœuf gras. Complainte, by Antoine Antignac [ fr ], was published in a song collection in 1817. It includes the following verse:

Toute la capitale Peut admirer, pendant trois jours, Ma pompe triomphale. Sans être bien fin, Sur ma triste fin Je ne puis me méprendre; Car on dit : hélas! Plus il sera las, Plus le bœuf sera tendre.

The entire capital Can admire, for three days, My triumphant pomp. Without being too clever, I cannot mistake My sad end; For it is said: alas! The more tired it is, The more tender the ox will be.

The chansonnier Pierre Dupont dedicates a verse of his 1845 song Les Bœufs to it, and Eugène Désaugiers references it in Le Balcon from the same year. Following the French Revolution of 1848, the Bœuf Gras emerged as a recurring theme in revolutionary songs, including Louis-Philippe ou le Bœuf Gras détrôné (1848) and Du fouet à tous ces gros chiens-là! In the subsequent years, from 1852 to 1871, a significant proliferation of songs emerged that either referenced or were centered around the Bœuf Gras. In 1871, following the establishment of the Commune of Paris, the Communard song La marche du bœuf gras et la promenade du roi Guillaume dans Paris was written. Subsequently, in 1896 and 1910, comedic or carnival songs La Ballade du Bœuf-Gras and La Promenade du Bœuf Gras were released.

The theme is also reflected in the romantic literature and poetry. Honoré de Balzac references it in a dialogue in La dernière incarnation de Vautrin (1852), Victor Hugo marvels at its procession in Les Misérables (1862), and Pierre Lachambeaudie devotes a fable to it. Pierre Véron incorporates it into a poem that denounces the carnival (Un Mardi-Gras à Saint-Cloud, 1857), as do Maxime (Mes crêpes, 1873) and Raoul Ponchon (L'intrépide vide-bouteilles, 1820). Charles Audigé de Preuilly (Le Bœuf gras, before 1866), Arthur de Boissieu [ fr ] (La promenade du bœuf gras, 1870), and Charles Monselet (Bœufs gras, before 1880), Achille Millien (Au bœuf gras, 1896), and Georges Gillet (Rondel du bœuf gras, 1904) also dedicate poems to it. Georges Gillet writes:

A substantial corpus of iconographic documentation exists on the Bœuf Gras, encompassing various forms of visual representation such as drawings, engravings, paintings, and photographs. Among these photographs, notable figures include Hippolyte Bayard, who is known for his pioneering work in the field of stereoscopic photography, and anonymous photographers. The Bœuf Gras has also been captured on film by the Lumière brothers and Georges Méliès, further contributing to its visual documentation. The programs of the Bœuf Gras are adorned with anonymous woodcuts that illustrate the festival, caricatures published in newspapers – particularly by the caricaturist Cham — and images that illustrate poems, songs, and printed plays. The artists who have contributed to this subject include Gabriel de Saint-Aubin (1750), André Gill (1869), Alphonse-Charles Masson [ fr ] (1840), Guillaume-Frédéric Ronmy [ fr ] (1830), and Auguste Vimar [ fr ] (1902). The presence of the animal is also notable in early Empire period furniture. In the caricatures depicting butchers, the emphasis is often on the indecent opulence of the butcher, suggested by exaggerated corpulence or their rich costumes, their greed, and their prideful satisfaction.

An integral component of popular culture, numerous private organizations have adopted the theme of the Bœuf Gras.On 15 March 1849, to commemorate Mi-Carême, the 2nd Children's Ball was orchestrated at the Jardin d'Hiver. The culmination of this event featured a Bœuf-Gras, a structure that was modeled and painted by Mr. Hallé and decorated by Mr. Godillot in a style reminiscent of the Bœuf-Californie of 1849. This Bœuf-Gras was topped with a love figure in a palanquin, from which candies were distributed to the attendees.

Three years later, on 24 February 1852, at an opulent masked ball hosted by Charles Ponchard and his wife, attended by numerous artists including Jacques Offenbach, a miniature Bœuf Gras paraded:

After three encores of the Cris de Paris (a comic waltz composed for the occasion by Victor Parizot) and the comical performance of Polka des Bêtes Fauves, a very pleasant lyrical hors d'œuvre, created by the whimsical conductor of the Montansier, Mr. Hervé, the march of the Bœuf-Gras appeared with its banners and halberds, trumpets, and led by Mr. Cerclier from the Opéra-Comique. Strauss, in the role of a village fiddler, led the procession, drum in hand, for on this solemn occasion he had abandoned his bow, which would have made the dead dance. The Bœuf-Gras, brought at great expense from Lilliput to Paris, had no more than a decimeter in circumference and weighed just half a kilo. It was led by Levassor and Malézieux, preceded by the figure of Love, humorously represented by the blonde nephew of Mrs. Dorus-Gras. Verses in honor of the carnival were read by Charles Ponchard.

On the eve of the procession, 15 February 1896, an additional Bœuf Gras paraded at the Opéra ball, where a masked nocturnal celebration was underway. This procession proceeded to the accompaniment of a triumphant march performed by two prominent orchestras, with Egyptian trumpets, heralds, and 200 costumed participants serving as a prelude. Attendees of the ball were encouraged to adopt a domino adorned with a mask.

The significance of the Bœuf Gras in popular culture attracted merchants and industrialists. These individuals capitalized on the animal's image for advertising materials or integrated it into the festivities. For example, after slaughter, the purchase of the animal's meat or offal by butchers or restaurateurs was intended to attract customers.

In 1864, Duval and other Parisian butcher merchants sued butcher Achille Fléchelle on the grounds that he displayed advertising on his storefront and his cart, using the merits of the animals he had purchased, specifically those from the Bœufs Gras of the 1854, 1855, 1857, 1859, 1860, 1861, 1862, and 1864 Paris Carnivals. The plaintiffs, who worked in the vicinity of Fléchelle, claimed that he was unjustly claiming the merit of the breeders and was misleadingly trying to make customers believe he was selling exceptionally high-quality meat. They lost their first trial on 9 July 1864, but won on appeal on 12 May 1865.

Advertising floats sometimes joined the parade. After a first participation in 1865, Rozières of Romainville, known for inventing pot-au-feu tablets, followed the procession in 1866 with a new stain remover product, Panamine : "It is because, after showing women how to color their broth, Mr. Rozières now shows them how to clean their clothes," exclaims Timothée Trimm [ fr ], who criticizes "this contemporary materialism in its most vulgar expression." In the same procession, a Similor-liquid float, for cleaning kitchenware, took part. The following year, among the advertising floats, the presence of Mr. Galopin, a pedicure artist, stood out, claiming to cure various foot ailments in one day using a pump of his invention. In 1868, Breton peasants on horseback carried colorful banners with the inscription "Duval, purchaser" and preceded a musical group escorting the butcher Duval's float.

In 1896, authorities sought to limit the proliferation of advertisements and banned advertising floats from joining the procession. Photographs from the 1927 and 1928 Bœuf Gras parades demonstrate that Auguste Sabatier, president of the Paris Festival Committee and organizer, used the occasion to advertise his business. This practice aligns with a tradition established by prominent butchers such as Porret, Fléchelle, and Duval, the latter being the creator of the renowned Duval broths [ fr ]. In 1928, Sabatier's actions indirectly served as political propaganda, as evidenced by the Bœuf Gras parade on 15 March, which extolled the virtues of Auguste Sabatier's butcher shops. Concurrently, Sabatier was campaigning for elections in Paris, ultimately being elected deputy for the 2nd district of the 18th arrondissement, the Clignancourt neighborhood [ fr ], on 29 April.

Paris is the capital and largest city of France, with an estimated city population of 2.04 million in an area of 105.4 km (40.7 sq mi), as of January 2026, and a metropolitan population of 13.3 million (2023). Located on the river Seine in the centre of the Île-de-France region, it is the largest metropolitan area and fourth-most populous city in the European Union (EU). Paris is nicknamed the "City of Light", partly because of its role in the Age of Enlightenment.

Administratively, Paris is divided into twenty arrondissements (districts), each having their own cultural identity. Haussmann's renovation of Paris, which created new boulevards, parks, and public works, gave birth to a modern city known as the " capital of the 19th century ". Paris is a major railway, motorway, and air-transport hub; in 2024 Charles de Gaulle Airport was the EU's busiest airport. Paris has one of the most sustainable transportation systems in the world and is one of only two cities that have received the Sustainable Transport Award twice. Its Art Nouveau -decorated Métro has become a symbol of the city. Paris is known for its museums and architectural landmarks: the Musée d'Orsay, Musée Marmottan Monet, and Musée de l'Orangerie are noted for their collections of French Impressionist art, while the Musée National d'Art Moderne, Musée Rodin, and Musée Picasso are noted for their collections of modern and contemporary art. Parts of the city along the Seine have been designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1991.

The president of France and both houses of the French Parliament sit in Paris. Paris is home to several United Nations organisations, including UNESCO, as well as other international organisations such as the OECD, the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (in neighbouring Saint-Cloud), the International Energy Agency, the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie, the International Federation for Human Rights, and the Fédération internationale de l'Automobile, along with European bodies such as the European Space Agency, the European Banking Authority, and the European Securities and Markets Authority. The city hosts many sporting events, such as the French Open, and is the home of the association football club Paris Saint-Germain and the rugby union club Stade Français. Paris has also hosted the Summer Olympics three times, in 1900, 1924 and 2024.

The ancient oppidum that corresponds to the modern city of Paris was first mentioned in the mid-1st century BC by Julius Caesar as Lutetia Parisiorum (' Lutetia of the Parisii ') and is later attested as Parision in the 5th century AD, then as Paris in 1265. During the Roman period, it was commonly known as Lutetia in Latin, which is interpreted as either stemming from the Celtic root *lukot- ('mouse'), or from * luto- ('marsh, swamp').

The name Paris is derived from its early inhabitants, the Parisii, a Gallic tribe from the Iron Age and the Roman period. The meaning of the Gaulish ethnonym remains debated. According to Xavier Delamarre, it may derive from the Celtic root pario- ('cauldron'). Alfred Holder interpreted the name as 'the makers' or 'the commanders', by comparing it to the Welsh peryff ('lord, commander'), both possibly descending from a Proto-Celtic form reconstructed as * kwar-is-io -. Alternatively, Pierre-Yves Lambert proposed to translate Parisii as the 'spear people', by connecting the first element to the Old Irish carr ('spear'), derived from an earlier * kwar-sā.

Residents of the city are known in English as Parisians and in French as Parisiens ([ paʁizjɛ̃ ]). They are also pejoratively called Parigots ([ paʁiɡo ]).

The Parisii people inhabited the Paris area from around the middle of the 3rd century BC. One of the area's major north–south trade routes crossed the Seine on the Île de la Cité, which gradually became an important trading centre. The Parisii traded with many river towns, some as far away as the Iberian Peninsula, and minted their own coins.

Julius Caesar conquered the Paris Basin for the Roman Republic in 52 BC and began the Roman settlement on Paris's Left Bank. The Roman town was originally called Lutetia, more fully, Lutetia Parisiorum, "Lutetia of the Parisii", modern French Lutèce. It became a prosperous city with a forum, baths, temples, theatres, and an amphitheatre.

By the end of the Western Roman Empire, the town was known as Parisius, a Latin name that later became Paris in French. Christianity was introduced in the middle of the 3rd century AD by Saint Denis, the first Bishop of Paris: according to legend, when he refused to renounce his faith before the Roman occupiers, he was beheaded on the hill which became known as Mons Martyrum (Latin "Hill of Martyrs"), later " Montmartre ", from where he walked headless to the north of the city; the place where he fell and was buried became an important religious shrine, the Basilica of Saint-Denis, and many French kings are buried there.

Clovis the Frank, the first king of the Merovingian dynasty, made the city his capital from 508. As the Frankish domination of Gaul began, there was a gradual immigration by the Franks to Paris, and the Parisian Francien dialects were born. Fortification of the Île de la Cité failed to avert sacking by Vikings in 845. Still, Paris's strategic importance—with its bridges preventing ships from passing—was established by successful defence in the Siege of Paris (885–886), for which the then Count of Paris (comte de Paris), Odo of France, was elected king of West Francia. From the Capetian dynasty that began with the 987 election of Hugh Capet, Count of Paris and Duke of the Franks (duc des Francs), as king of a unified West Francia, Paris gradually became the largest and most prosperous city in France.

By the end of the 12th century, Paris had become the political, economic, religious, and cultural capital of France. Maurice de Sully, bishop of Paris, started the construction of the Notre Dame Cathedral in 1163, and was completed after 182 years. After the marshland between the river Seine and its slower 'dead arm' to its north was filled in from around the 10th century, Paris's cultural centre began to move to the Right Bank. In 1137, a new city marketplace (today's Les Halles) replaced the two smaller ones on the Île de la Cité and Place de Grève (Place de l'Hôtel de Ville). The latter location housed the headquarters of Paris's river trade corporation. This organisation later became, unofficially (although formally in later years), Paris's first municipal government.

In the late 12th century, Philip Augustus extended the Louvre fortress to defend the city against river invasions from the west, gave the city its first walls between 1190 and 1215, rebuilt its bridges to either side of its central island, and paved its main thoroughfares. In 1190, he transformed Paris's former cathedral school into a student-teacher corporation that became the University of Paris and drew students from all of Europe.

With 200,000 inhabitants in 1328, Paris, then already the capital of France, was the most populous city of Europe. By comparison, London in 1300 had 80,000 inhabitants. Around 1340 the city had between 250,000 and 300,000 inhabitants. By the early fourteenth century, so much filth had collected inside urban Europe that French and Italian cities were naming streets after human waste. In medieval Paris, several street names were inspired by merde, the French word for "shit".

During the Hundred Years' War, Paris was occupied by England-friendly Burgundian forces from 1418, before being occupied outright by the English when Henry V of England entered the French capital in 1420; despite a 1429 effort by Joan of Arc to liberate the city, it would remain under English occupation until 1436.

In the late 16th century French Wars of Religion, Paris was a stronghold of the Catholic League, the organisers of 24 August 1572 St. Bartholomew's Day massacre in which thousands of French Protestants were killed. The conflicts ended when pretender to the throne Henry IV, after converting to Catholicism to gain entry to the capital, entered the city in 1594 to claim the crown of France. This king made several improvements to the capital during his reign: he completed the construction of Paris's first uncovered, sidewalk-lined bridge, the Pont Neuf, built a Louvre extension connecting it to the Tuileries Palace, and created the first Paris residential square, the Place Royale, now Place des Vosges. Despite Henry IV's efforts to improve city circulation, the narrowness of Paris's streets was a contributing factor in his assassination near Les Halles marketplace in 1610.

During the 17th century, Cardinal Richelieu, chief minister of Louis XIII, was determined to make Paris the most beautiful city in Europe. He built five new bridges, a new chapel for the College of Sorbonne, and a palace for himself, the Palais-Cardinal. After Richelieu died in 1642, it was renamed the Palais-Royal.

Due to the Parisian uprisings during the Fronde civil war, Louis XIV moved his court to a new palace, Versailles, in 1682. Although no longer the capital of France, arts and sciences in the city flourished with the Comédie-Française, the Academy of Painting, and the French Academy of Sciences. To demonstrate that the city was safe from attack, the king had the city walls demolished and replaced with tree-lined boulevards that would become the Grands Boulevards. Other marks of his reign were the Collège des Quatre-Nations, the Place Vendôme, the Place des Victoires, and Les Invalides.

Paris has been one of the world's major centres of finance, diplomacy, commerce, culture, fashion, and gastronomy since the 17th century.

Paris grew in population from about 400,000 in 1640 to 650,000 in 1780. A new boulevard named the Champs-Élysées extended the city west to Étoile, while the working-class neighbourhood of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine on the eastern side of the city grew increasingly crowded with poor migrant workers from other regions of France. Paris's role in education and sciences led Paris to be known as the City of Light during the age of Enlightenment in the 18th century.

In the summer of 1789, Paris became the centre stage of the French Revolution. On 14 July, a mob seized the arsenal at the Invalides, acquiring thousands of guns, with which it stormed the Bastille, a principal symbol of royal authority. The first independent Paris Commune, or city council, met in the Hôtel de Ville and elected a Mayor, the astronomer Jean Sylvain Bailly, on 15 July.

Louis XVI and the royal family were brought to Paris and incarcerated in the Tuileries Palace. In 1793, as the revolution turned increasingly radical, the king, queen, and mayor were beheaded by guillotine in the Reign of Terror, along with more than 16,000 others throughout France. The property of the aristocracy and the church was nationalised, and the city's churches were closed, sold, or demolished. A succession of revolutionary factions ruled Paris until 9 November 1799 (coup d'état du 18 brumaire), when Napoleon Bonaparte seized power as First Consul.

The population of Paris had dropped by 100,000 during the Revolution, but after 1799 it surged with 160,000 new residents, reaching 660,000 by 1815. Napoleon replaced the elected government of Paris with a prefect who reported directly to him. He began erecting monuments to military glory, including the Arc de Triomphe, and improved the neglected infrastructure of the city with new fountains, the Canal de l'Ourcq, Père Lachaise Cemetery and the city's first metal bridge, the Pont des Arts. The Arc de Triomphe was eventually completed in 1836.

During the Restoration, the bridges and squares of Paris were returned to their pre-Revolution names; the July Revolution in 1830, commemorated by the July Column on the Place de la Bastille, brought to power a constitutional monarch, Louis Philippe I. The first railway line to Paris opened in 1837, beginning a new period of massive migration from the provinces to the city. In 1848, Louis-Philippe was overthrown by a popular uprising in the streets of Paris. His successor, Napoleon III, alongside the newly appointed prefect of the Seine, Georges-Eugène Haussmann, launched a huge public works project to build wide new boulevards, a new opera house, a central market, new aqueducts, sewers and parks, including the Bois de Boulogne and Bois de Vincennes. In 1860, Napoleon III annexed the surrounding towns and created eight new arrondissements, expanding Paris to its current limits.

During the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871), Paris was besieged by the Prussian Army. Following several months of blockade, hunger, and then bombardment by the Prussians, the city was forced to surrender on 28 January 1871. After seizing power in Paris on 28 March, a revolutionary government known as the Paris Commune held power for two months, before being harshly suppressed by the French army during the " Bloody Week " at the end of May 1871.

In the late 19th century, Paris hosted two major international expositions: the 1889 Universal Exposition, which featured the new Eiffel Tower, was held to mark the centennial of the French Revolution; and the 1900 Universal Exposition gave Paris the Pont Alexandre III, the Grand Palais, the Petit Palais and the first Paris Métro line. Paris became the laboratory of Naturalism (Émile Zola) and Symbolism (Charles Baudelaire and Paul Verlaine), and of Impressionism in art (Courbet, Manet, Monet, Renoir).

By 1901, the population of Paris had grown to about 2,715,000. At the beginning of the century, artists from around the world, including Pablo Picasso, Modigliani, and Henri Matisse made Paris their home. It was the birthplace of Fauvism, Cubism and abstract art, and authors such as Marcel Proust were exploring new approaches to literature.

During the First World War, Paris sometimes found itself on the front line; 600 to 1,000 Paris taxis played a small but highly important symbolic role in transporting 6,000 soldiers to the front line at the First Battle of the Marne. The city was also bombed by Zeppelins and shelled by German long-range guns. In the years after the war, known as Les Années Folles, Paris continued to be a mecca for writers, musicians and artists from around the world, including Ernest Hemingway, Igor Stravinsky, James Joyce, Josephine Baker, Eva Kotchever, Henry Miller, Anaïs Nin, Sidney Bechet and Salvador Dalí.

In the years after the peace conference, the city was also home to growing numbers of students and activists from French colonies and other Asian and African countries, who later became leaders of their countries, such as Ho Chi Minh, Zhou Enlai and Léopold Sédar Senghor.

On 14 June 1940, the German army marched into Paris, which had been declared an " open city ". On 16–17 July 1942, following German orders, the French police and gendarmes arrested 12,884 Jews, including 4,115 children, and confined them during five days at the Vel d'Hiv, from which they were transported by train to the extermination camp at Auschwitz. None of the children came back. On 25 August 1944, the city was liberated by the French 2nd Armoured Division and the 4th Infantry Division of the United States Army. General Charles de Gaulle led a huge and emotional crowd down the Champs Élysées towards Notre Dame de Paris and made a rousing speech from the Hôtel de Ville.

Paris became involved in the Algerian War for independence, which occurred in the 1950s and 1960s; in August 1961, the pro-independence FLN, targeted and killed 11 Paris policemen, leading to the imposition of a curfew on Muslims of Algeria (who, at that time, were French citizens). On 17 October 1961, an unauthorised but peaceful protest demonstration of Algerians against the curfew led to violent confrontations between the police and demonstrators, in which at least 40 people were killed. The anti-independence Organisation armée secrète (OAS) carried out a series of bombings in Paris throughout 1961 and 1962.

In May 1968, protesting students occupied the Sorbonne and put up barricades in the Latin Quarter. Thousands of Parisian blue-collar workers joined the students, and the movement grew into a two-week general strike. Supporters of the government won the June elections by a large majority. The May 1968 events in France resulted in the break-up of the University of Paris into 13 independent campuses. In 1975, the National Assembly changed the status of Paris to that of other French cities and, on 25 March 1977, Jacques Chirac became the first elected mayor of Paris since 1793.

The Tour Maine-Montparnasse, the tallest building in the city at 57 storeys and 210 m (689 ft) high, was built between 1969 and 1973. It was highly controversial, and it remains the only building in the centre of the city over 32 storeys high. The population of Paris dropped from 2,850,000 in 1954 to 2,152,000 in 1990, as middle-class families moved to the suburbs. A suburban railway network, the RER (Réseau Express Régional), was built to complement the Métro; the Périphérique expressway encircling the city was completed in 1973. The bank of the Seine in the city centre, which includes the Louvre and the Eiffel Tower was classified as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1991.

Most of the postwar presidents of the Fifth Republic wanted to leave their own monuments in Paris; President Georges Pompidou started the Centre Georges Pompidou (1977), Valéry Giscard d'Estaing began the Musée d'Orsay (1986); President François Mitterrand had the Opéra Bastille built (1985–1989), the new site of the Bibliothèque nationale de France (1996), the Arche de la Défense (1985–1989) in La Défense, as well as the Louvre Pyramid with its underground courtyard (1983–1989); Jacques Chirac (2006), the Musée du quai Branly.

In the early 21st century, the population of Paris began to increase slowly again, as more young people moved into the city. It reached 2.25 million in 2011. In March 2001, Bertrand Delanoë became the first socialist mayor; he was re-elected in March 2008. Bertrand Delanoë also transformed a section of the highway along the Left Bank of the Seine into an urban promenade and park, the Promenade des Berges de la Seine, which he inaugurated in June 2013.

In 2007, President Nicolas Sarkozy launched the Grand Paris project to integrate Paris more closely with the towns in the region around it. After many modifications, the new area, named the Metropolis of Grand Paris, with a population of 6.7 million, was created on 1 January 2016. The City of Paris and the national government approved the plans for the Grand Paris Express four years later, totalling 205 km (127 mi) of automated metro lines to connect Paris, the innermost three departments around Paris, airports and high-speed rail (TGV) stations, at an estimated cost of €35 billion. The system is scheduled to be completed by 2030.

A series of attacks occurred in the Paris region, especially in Paris, in January 2015, the most serious being the shooting at the offices of Charlie Hebdo. 17 people died in the attacks, which Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula claimed responsibility. 1.5 million people marched in Paris in a show of solidarity against terrorism and in support of freedom of speech. Terrorist attacks, claimed by ISIL, occurred again in November, which killed 130 people and injured more than 350.

In an aim to limit the effects of climate change below 2 °C, the Paris Agreement was signed by 196 nations of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change on 22 April 2016 in Paris. The following year, billionaire François Pinault received a 50‑year lease to convert the historic Bourse de Commerce into a contemporary art museum, overseen by Japanese architect Tadao Ando. Construction was delayed by the COVID-19 pandemic, reopening in May 2021. The Notre Dame Cathedral caught fire on 15 April 2019, beginning in the eaves of its roof, engulfing the spire and most of the roof. Firefighters were able to control the blaze, saving the main structure including the bell towers and rose windows, and there were no injuries; it was reopened on 7 December 2024.

In terms of international connectedness, as of 2024, Paris was one of eight cities worldwide that was classified as an "Alpha+" city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network.

Paris is located in northern central France, in a north-bending arc of the river Seine, whose crest includes two islands, the Île Saint-Louis and the larger Île de la Cité, which form the oldest part of Paris. The river's mouth on the English Channel (La Manche) is about 233 mi (375 km) downstream from Paris. Paris is spread widely on both banks of the river. Overall, Paris is relatively flat, and the lowest point is 35 m (115 ft) above sea level. Paris has several prominent hills, the highest of which is Montmartre at 130 m (427 ft).

Excluding the outlying parks of Bois de Boulogne and Bois de Vincennes, Paris covers an oval measuring about 87 km (34 sq mi) in area, enclosed by the 35 km (22 mi) ring road, the Boulevard Périphérique. Paris's last major annexation of outlying territories in 1860 gave it its modern form, and created the 20 clockwise-spiralling arrondissements (municipal boroughs). From the 1860 area of 78 km (30 sq mi), the city limits were expanded marginally to 86.9 km (33.6 sq mi) in the 1920s. In 1929, the Bois de Boulogne and Bois de Vincennes forest parks were annexed to the city, bringing its area to about 105 km (41 sq mi). The metropolitan area is 2,300 km (890 sq mi).

Paris has a Oceanic climate (Köppen : Cfb), typical of western Europe. This climate type features cool winters and warm summers, with average temperatures between 15 and 25 °C (59 and 77 °F) in July. Each year there are a few days when the temperature rises above 32 °C (90 °F). Longer periods of more intense heat sometimes occur, such as the heat wave of 2003, when temperatures exceeded 30 °C (86 °F) for weeks, reached 40 °C (104 °F) on some days, and rarely cooled down at night.

The weather in spring and autumn is generally mild during the day and cool at night, but is unstable. In winter, sunshine is scarce, days are cool, and nights are cold but generally above freezing, with low temperatures around 3 °C (37 °F). Light night frosts are quite common, but the temperature seldom dips below −5 °C (23 °F). Paris sometimes sees light snow or flurries with or without accumulation. In summer, the weather is warm, averaging 22 °C (72 °F), and there is 8 hours of sunshine on average per day.

Paris has an average annual precipitation of 641 mm (25.2 in), and experiences light rainfall distributed evenly throughout the year. As of 2025, the highest recorded temperature was 42.6 °C (108.7 °F), on 25 July 2019. The lowest was −23.9 °C (−11.0 °F), on 10 December 1879.

For almost all of its long history, except for a few brief periods, Paris was governed directly by representatives of the king, emperor, or president of France. In 1974, Paris was granted municipal autonomy by the National Assembly. The first modern elected mayor of Paris was Jacques Chirac, elected in March 1977, becoming the city's first mayor since 1871 and only the fourth since 1794. The current mayor is Emmanuel Grégoire, a member of the Socialist Party, who was elected in 2026.

The mayor of Paris is elected indirectly by Paris voters. The voters of each of the city's 20 arrondissements elect members to the Conseil de Paris (Council of Paris), which elects the mayor. The council is composed of 163 members. Each arrondissement is allocated many seats, dependent upon its population, from 10 members for each of the least-populated arrondissements to 34 members for the most populated. The council is elected using closed list proportional representation in a two-round system.

Party lists winning an absolute majority in the first round – or at least a plurality in the second round – automatically win half the seats of an arrondissement. The remaining half of the seats are distributed proportionally to all lists which win at least 5% of the vote, using the highest averages method. This ensures that the winning party or coalition always wins a majority of the seats, even if they do not win an absolute majority of the vote.

Before the 2020 Paris municipal election, each of Paris's 20 arrondissements had its own town hall and a directly elected council (conseil d'arrondissement), which elects an arrondissement mayor. The council of each arrondissement is composed of members of the Conseil de Paris, and members who serve only on the council of the arrondissement. The number of deputy mayors in each arrondissement varies depending on its population. As of 1996, there were 20 arrondissement mayors and 120 deputy mayors. The creation of Paris Centre, a unified administrative division with a single mayor covering the first four arrondissements, took effect with the said 2020 election. The other 16 arrondissements continue to have their own mayors.

In January 2016, the Métropole du Grand Paris came into existence. It is an administrative structure for co-operation between the City of Paris and its nearest suburbs. It includes the City of Paris, plus the communes of the three departments of the inner suburbs, Hauts-de-Seine, Seine-Saint-Denis and Val-de-Marne, plus seven communes in the outer suburbs, including Argenteuil in Val d'Oise and Paray-Vieille-Poste in Essonne, which were added to include the major airports of Paris. The Metropole covers 814 km (314 sq mi). In 2015, it had a population of 6.945 million people.

The new structure is administered by a Metropolitan Council of 210 members, not directly elected, but chosen by the councils of the member Communes. By 2020, its basic competencies will include urban planning, housing, and protection of the environment. In January 2016, Patrick Ollier was elected the first president of the metropolitan council. Though the Metropole has a population of nearly seven million people and accounts for 25 percent of the GDP of France, it has a very small budget: just 65 million Euros, compared with eight billion Euros for the City of Paris.

The Region of Île de France, including Paris and its surrounding communities, is governed by the Regional Council, composed of 209 members representing the different communes. In December 2015, a list of candidates of the Union of the Right, a coalition of centrist and right-wing parties, led by Valérie Pécresse, narrowly won the regional election, defeating a coalition of Socialists and ecologists. The Socialists had governed the region for seventeen years. The regional council has 121 members from the Union of the Right, 66 from the Union of the Left and 22 from the extreme right National Front.

As the capital of France, Paris is the seat of France's national government. For the executive, the two chief officers each have their own official residences, which also serve as their offices. The President of the French Republic resides at the Élysée Palace. The Prime Minister 's seat is at the Hôtel Matignon. Government ministries are located in various parts of the city, many near the Hôtel Matignon.

Both houses of the French Parliament are located on the Rive Gauche. The upper house, the Senate, meets in the Palais du Luxembourg. The more important lower house, the National Assembly, meets in the Palais Bourbon. The President of the Senate, the second-highest public official in France, with the President of the Republic being the sole superior, resides in the Petit Luxembourg, a smaller palace annexe to the Palais du Luxembourg.

France's highest courts are located in Paris. The Court of Cassation, the highest court in the judicial order, which reviews criminal and civil cases, is located in the Palais de Justice on the Île de la Cité. The Conseil d'État, which provides legal advice to the executive and acts as the highest court in the administrative order, judging litigation against public bodies, is located in the Palais-Royal in the 1st arrondissement. The Constitutional Council, an advisory body with ultimate authority on the constitutionality of laws and government decrees, meets in the Montpensier wing of the Palais Royal.

Paris and its region host the headquarters of several international organisations, including UNESCO, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the International Chamber of Commerce, the Paris Club, the European Space Agency, the International Energy Agency, the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie, the European Union Institute for Security Studies, the International Bureau of Weights and Measures, the International Exhibition Bureau, and the International Federation for Human Rights.

The security of Paris is mainly the responsibility of the Prefecture of Police of Paris, a subdivision of the Ministry of the Interior. It supervises the units of the National Police who patrol the city and the three neighbouring departments. It is also responsible for providing emergency services, including the Paris Fire Brigade. Its headquarters is on Place Louis Lépine on the Île de la Cité.

There are 43,800 officers under the prefecture, and a fleet of more than 6,000 vehicles, including police cars, motorcycles, fire trucks, boats, and helicopters. The national police has its own special unit for riot control and crowd control, and security of public buildings, called the Compagnies Républicaines de Sécurité (CRS). Vans of CRS agents are frequently seen in the centre of Paris when there are demonstrations and public events. The police are supported by the National Gendarmerie, a branch of the French Armed Forces. Their police operations are supervised by the Ministry of the Interior.

Crime in Paris is similar to that in most large cities. Violent crime is relatively rare in the city centre. Political violence is uncommon, though very large demonstrations may occur in Paris and other French cities simultaneously. These demonstrations, usually managed by a strong police presence, can turn confrontational and escalate into violence.

Paris is one of the few world capitals that has rarely seen destruction by catastrophe or war. As a result, even its earliest history is visible in its street map, and centuries of rulers adding their respective architectural marks on the capital have resulted in an accumulated wealth of history-rich monuments and buildings whose beauty plays a large part in giving Paris the reputation it has today. At its origin, before the Middle Ages, Paris was composed of several islands and sandbanks in a bend of the Seine. Of those, two remain today: Île Saint-Louis and the Île de la Cité. A third one is the 1827 artificially created Île aux Cygnes.

Modern Paris owes much of its downtown plan and architectural harmony to Napoleon III and his Prefect of the Seine, Baron Haussmann. Between 1853 and 1870 they rebuilt the city centre, created the wide downtown boulevards and squares where the boulevards intersected, imposed standard facades along the boulevards, and required that the facades be built of the distinctive cream-grey " Paris stone ". They built the major parks around central Paris. The high residential population of the city centre makes Paris much different from most other major western cities.

Paris's urbanism laws have been under strict control since the early 17th century, particularly where street-front alignment, building height and building distribution is concerned. The 210 m (690 ft) Tour Montparnasse was both Paris's and France's tallest building from 1973 until 2011, when the record was taken by the La Défense district's Tour First in the commune of Courbevoie.

In 2018, the most expensive residential street in Paris by average price per square metre was Avenue Montaigne, at 22,372 euros per square metre. In 2011, the number of residences in the City of Paris was 1,356,074. Among these, 1,165,541 (85.9 percent) were main residences, 91,835 (6.8 percent) were secondary residences, and the remaining 7.3 percent were empty.

Sixty-two percent of buildings date from 1949 and before, with 20 percent built between 1949 and 1974. 18 percent of Paris buildings were built after 1974. Two-thirds of the city's 1.3 million residences are studio and two-room apartments. Paris averages 1.9 people per residence, a number that has remained constant since the 1980s, which is less than Île-de-France's 2.33 people-per-residence average. Only 33 percent of Parisian principal residents own their habitation, against 47 percent for the wider Île-de-France region. Most of Paris's population rents their residence. In 2017, social or public housing was 19.9 percent of Paris's residences. Its distribution varies widely throughout Paris, from 2.6 percent of the housing in the wealthy 7th arrondissement to 39.9 percent in the 19th arrondissement.

In February 2019, a Paris NGO conducted its annual citywide count of homeless persons. They counted 3,641 homeless persons in Paris, of whom twelve percent were women. More than half had been homeless for more than a year. 2,885 were living in the streets or parks, 298 in train and metro stations, and 756 in other forms of temporary shelter. This was an increase of 588 persons since 2018.

Aside from the 20th-century addition of the Bois de Boulogne, the Bois de Vincennes, and the Paris heliport, Paris's administrative limits have remained unchanged since 1860. A greater administrative Seine department had been governing Paris and its suburbs since its creation in 1790, but the rising suburban population had made it difficult to maintain as a unique entity. To address this problem, the parent "District de la région parisienne" ('district of the Paris region') was reorganised into several new departments from 1968: Paris became a department in itself, and the administration of its suburbs was divided between the three new departments surrounding it. The district of the Paris region was renamed " Île-de-France " in 1977, but this abbreviated "Paris region" name is still commonly used today to describe the Île-de-France, and as a vague reference to the entire Paris agglomeration. Long-intended measures to unite Paris with its suburbs began in January 2016, when the Métropole du Grand Paris came into existence.

Paris's disconnect with its suburbs, its lack of suburban transportation, in particular, became all too apparent with the Paris agglomeration's growth. Paul Delouvrier promised to resolve the Paris-suburbs mésentente when he became head of the Paris region in 1961. Two of his most ambitious projects for the Region were the construction of five suburban "villes nouvelles" ("new cities") and the RER commuter train network.

Many other suburban residential districts (grands ensembles) were built between the 1960s and 1970s to provide a low-cost solution for a rapidly expanding population. These districts were socially mixed at first, but few residents actually owned their homes. The growing economy made these accessible to the middle classes only from the 1970s. Their poor construction quality and their haphazard insertion into existing urban growth contributed to their desertion by those able to move elsewhere, and their repopulation by those with more limited resources.

These areas, quartiers sensibles ("sensitive quarters"), are in northern and eastern Paris, namely around its Goutte d'Or and Belleville neighbourhoods. To the north of Paris, they are grouped mainly in the Seine-Saint-Denis department, and to a lesser extent, to the east in the Val-d'Oise department. Other difficult areas are located in the Seine valley, in Évry et Corbeil-Essonnes (Essonne), in Mureaux, Mantes-la-Jolie (Yvelines), and scattered among social housing districts created by Delouvrier 's 1961 "ville nouvelle" political initiative.

The Paris agglomeration's urban sociology is basically that of 19th-century Paris: the wealthy live in the west and southwest, and the middle-to-working classes are in the north and east. The remaining areas are mostly middle-class, dotted with wealthy islands in areas of historical importance, namely Saint-Maur-des-Fossés to the east and Enghien-les-Bains to the north of Paris.

The population of the City of Paris was 2,102,650 in January 2023, down from 2,165,423 in January 2022. Between 2013 and 2023, the population fell by 122,919, or about five percent. The Mayor of Paris, Anne Hidalgo, declared that this illustrated the "de-densification" of the city, creating more green space and less crowding. Despite the drop, Paris remains the most densely populated city in Europe, with 252 residents per hectare, not counting parks. This drop was attributed partly to a lower birth rate, the departure of middle-class residents, and the possible loss of housing in Paris, due to short-term rentals for tourism.

Paris is the fourth largest municipality in the European Union, after Berlin, Madrid and Rome, and is the 34th most densely populated city in the world as of 2020. Eurostat places Paris (6.5 million people) behind London (8 million) and ahead of Berlin (3.5 million), based on the 2012 populations of what Eurostat calls "urban audit core cities". The population of Paris today is lower than its historical peak of 2.9 million in 1921. The principal reasons are a significant decline in household size and a dramatic migration of residents to the suburbs between 1962 and 1975. Factors in the migration included de-industrialisation, high rent, the gentrification of many inner quarters, the transformation of living space into offices, and greater affluence among working families. Paris's population loss came to a temporary halt at the beginning of the 21st century. The population increased from 2,125,246 in 1999 to 2,240,621 in 2012, before declining again between 2012 and 2023.

Paris is the core of a built-up area that extends well beyond its limits: commonly referred to as the agglomération Parisienne, and statistically as a unité urbaine (a measure of urban area), the Paris agglomeration's population of 11,013,774 in 2023 made it the largest urban area in the European Union. City-influenced commuter activity reaches further, in a statistical aire d'attraction de Paris, ("functional area", a statistical method comparable to a metropolitan area), that had a population of 13,320,752 in 2023, 19.6% of the population of France, and the largest metropolitan area in the Eurozone.

In 2012, the Commune of Paris was the most densely populated city in the European Union. There were 21,616 people per square kilometre within the city limits, the NUTS-3 statistical area, ahead of Inner London West, which had 10,374 people per square kilometre. In the same census, three departments bordering Paris, Hauts-de-Seine, Seine-Saint-Denis and Val-de-Marne, had population densities of over 10,000 people per square kilometre, ranking among the 10 most densely populated areas of the EU.

Under French law, people born in foreign countries with no French citizenship at birth are defined as immigrants. In the 2012 census, 135,853 residents of the City of Paris were immigrants from Europe, 112,369 were immigrants from the Maghreb, 70,852 from sub-Saharan Africa and Egypt, 5,059 from Turkey, 91,297 from Asia outside Turkey, 38,858 from the Americas, and 1,365 from the South Pacific.

In the Paris Region, 590,504 residents were immigrants from Europe, 627,078 were immigrants from the Maghreb, 435,339 from sub-Saharan Africa and Egypt, 69,338 from Turkey, 322,330 from Asia outside Turkey, 113,363 from the Americas, and 2,261 from the South Pacific.

In 2012, there were 8,810 British citizens and 10,019 United States citizens living in the City of Paris (Ville de Paris), and 20,466 British citizens and 16,408 United States citizens living in the entire Paris Region (Île-de-France).

In 2020–2021, about 6 million people, or 41% of the population of the Paris Region, were either immigrants (21%) or had at least one immigrant parent (20%). These figures do not include French people born in Overseas France and their direct descendants.

At the beginning of the twentieth century, Paris was the largest Catholic city in the world. French census data does not contain information about religious affiliation. In a 2011 survey by the Institut français d'opinion publique (IFOP), a French public opinion research organisation, 61 percent of residents of the Paris Region (Île-de-France) identified themselves as Roman Catholic. In the same survey, 7 percent of residents identified themselves as Muslims, 4 percent as Protestants, 2 percent as Jewish, and 25 percent as without religion.

According to the INSEE, between 4 and 5 million French residents were born, or had at least one parent born, in a predominantly Muslim country, particularly Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia. An IFOP survey in 2008 reported that, of immigrants from these predominantly Muslim countries, 25 percent went to the mosque regularly. 41 percent practised the religion, and 34 percent were believers, but did not practice the religion. In 2012 and 2013, it was estimated that there were almost 500,000 Muslims in the City of Paris, 1.5 million Muslims in the Île-de-France region and 4 to 5 million Muslims in France.

In 2014, the Jewish population of the Paris Region was estimated to be 282,000, the largest concentration of Jews in the world outside of Israel and the United States.

The economy of the City of Paris is based largely on services and commerce. Of the 390,480 enterprises in Paris, 80.6 percent are engaged in commerce, transportation, and diverse services, 6.5 percent in construction, and 3.8 percent in industry. The story is similar in the Paris Region (Île-de-France): 76.7 percent of enterprises are engaged in commerce and services, and 3.4 percent in industry.

At the 2012 census, 59.5% of jobs in the Paris Region were in market services (12.0% in wholesale and retail trade, 9.7% in professional, scientific, and technical services, 6.5% in information and communication, 6.5% in transportation and warehousing, 5.9% in finance and insurance, 5.8% in administrative and support services, 4.6% in accommodation and food services, and 8.5% in various other market services), 26.9% in non-market services (10.4% in human health and social work activities, 9.6% in public administration and defence, and 6.9% in education), 8.2% in manufacturing and utilities (6.6% in manufacturing and 1.5% in utilities), 5.2% in construction, and 0.2% in agriculture.

The Paris Region had 5.4 million salaried employees in 2010, of whom 2.2 million were concentrated in 39 pôles d'emplois or business districts. The largest of these by number of employees is known in French as the QCA, or quartier central des affaires. In 2010, it was the workplace of 500,000 salaried employees, about 30 percent of the salaried employees in Paris and 10 percent of those in the Île-de-France. The largest sectors of activity in the central business district were finance and insurance (16 percent of employees in the district) and business services (15 percent). The district includes a large concentration of department stores, shopping areas, hotels and restaurants, as well a government offices and ministries.

The second-largest business district in terms of employment is La Défense, just west of the city. In 2010, it was the workplace of 144,600 employees, of whom 38 percent worked in finance and insurance, 16 percent in business support services. Two other important districts, Neuilly-sur-Seine and Levallois-Perret, are extensions of the Paris business district and of La Défense. Another district, including Boulogne-Billancourt, Issy-les-Moulineaux and the southern part of the 15th arrondissement, is a centre of activity for the media and information technology.

In 2021, the top French companies listed in the Fortune Global 500 all have their headquarters in the Paris Region. Six are in the central business district of the City of Paris, four are close to the city in the Hauts-de-Seine Department, three are in La Défense, and one is in Boulogne-Billancourt. Some companies, like Société Générale, have offices in both Paris and La Défense. The Paris Region is France's leading region for economic activity, with a GDP of € 865 billion, of which €280 billion was in Paris city. In 2021, its GDP ranked first among the metropolitan regions of the EU, and its per-capita GDP PPP was the 8th highest. While the Paris region's population accounted for 18.8 percent of metropolitan France in 2019, the Paris region's GDP accounted for 32 percent of metropolitan France's GDP.

The Paris Region economy has gradually shifted from industry to high-value-added service industries (finance, IT services) and high-tech manufacturing (electronics, optics, aerospace, etc.). The Paris region's most intense economic activity through the central Hauts-de-Seine department and suburban La Défense business district places Paris's economic centre to the west of the city, in a triangle between the Opéra Garnier, La Défense and the Val de Seine. While the Paris economy is dominated by services, and employment in manufacturing sector has declined sharply, the region remains an important manufacturing centre, particularly for aeronautics, automobiles, and eco industries.

In the 2017 worldwide cost of living survey by the Economist Intelligence Unit, based on a survey made in September 2016, Paris ranked as the seventh most expensive city in the world, and the second most expensive in Europe. In 2018, Paris was the most expensive city in the world along with Singapore and Hong Kong. Station F is a business incubator for startups, noted as the world's largest startup facility. In 2022, Paris was the city with the ninth-highest cost of living in the world.

In 2007, the majority of Paris's salaried employees filled 370,000 businesses services jobs, concentrated in the north-western 8th, 16th and 17th arrondissements. Paris's financial service companies are concentrated in the central-western 8th and 9th arrondissement banking and insurance district. Paris's department store district in the 1st, 6th, 8th, and 9th arrondissements employs ten percent of mostly female Paris workers, with 100,000 of these in the retail trade. Fourteen percent of Parisians worked in hotels and restaurants and other services to individuals.

Nineteen percent of Paris employees work for the State in either administration or education. The majority of Paris's healthcare and social workers work at the hospitals and social housing, concentrated in the peripheral 13th, 14th, 18th, 19th, and 20th arrondissements. Outside Paris, the western Hauts-de-Seine department La Défense district specialising in finance, insurance, and scientific research, employs 144,600. The north-eastern Seine-Saint-Denis audiovisual sector has 200 media firms and 10 major film studios.

Paris's manufacturing is mostly focused in its suburbs. Paris has around 75,000 manufacturing workers, most of whom are in the textile, clothing, leather goods, and shoe trades. In 2015, the Paris region's 800 aerospace companies employed 100,000. Four hundred automobile industry companies employ another 100,000 workers. Many of these are centred in the Yvelines department, around the Renault and PSA-Citroën plants. This department alone employs 33,000. In 2014, the industry as a whole suffered a major loss, with the closing of a major Aulnay-sous-Bois Citroën assembly plant.

The southern Essonne department specialises in science and technology. The south-eastern Val-de-Marne, with its wholesale Rungis food market, specialises in food processing and beverages. The Paris region's manufacturing decline is quickly being replaced by eco-industries. These employ about 100,000 workers.

Incomes are higher in the Western part of Paris and in the western suburbs, than in the northern and eastern parts of the urban area. While Paris has some of the richest neighbourhoods in France, it also has some of the poorest, mostly on the eastern side of the city. In 2012, 14 percent of households in Paris earned less than €977 per month, the official poverty line. Twenty-five percent of residents in the 19th arrondissement lived below the poverty line. In Paris's wealthiest neighbourhood, the 7th arrondissement, 7 percent lived below the poverty line. The unemployment rate in Paris in the 4th trimester of 2021 was six percent, compared with 7.4 percent in the whole of France. This was the lowest rate in thirteen years.

As of 2024, Paris was considered the most attractive city in the world for 4 years in a row by the Euromonitor Global Cities Destination Index. However, by the number of tourists coming from other countries, it was only in 9th place.

Tourism continued to recover in the Paris region in 2022, increasing to 44 million visitors, an increase of 95 percent over 2021, but still 13 percent lower than in 2019.

Greater Paris, comprising Paris and its three surrounding departments, received a record 38 million visitors in 2019, measured by hotel arrivals. These included 12.2 million French visitors. Of the foreign visitors, the greatest number came from the United States (2.6 million), the United Kingdom (1.2 million), Germany (981 thousand), and China (711 thousand).

In 2018, Paris was the second-busiest airline destination in the world, with 19.10 million visitors, behind Bangkok (22.78 million) but ahead of London (19.09 million). In 2016, 393,008 workers in Greater Paris, or 12.4 percent of the total workforce, were engaged in tourism-related sectors such as hotels, catering, transport and leisure.

Paris's top cultural attractions in 2022 were the Louvre Museum (7.7 million visitors), the Eiffel Tower (5.8 million visitors), the Musée d'Orsay (3.27 million visitors) and the Centre Pompidou (3 million visitors).

In 2019, Greater Paris had 2,056 hotels, including 94 five-star hotels, with a total of 121,646 rooms. In 2019, in addition to the hotels, Greater Paris had 60,000 homes registered with Airbnb. Under French law, renters of these units must pay the Paris tourism tax. The company paid the city government 7.3 million euros in 2016.

A minuscule fraction of foreign visitors suffer from Paris syndrome, when their experiences do not meet expectations.

For centuries, Paris has attracted artists from around the world. As a result, Paris has acquired a reputation as the "City of Art". Italian artists were a profound influence on the development of art in Paris in the 16th and 17th centuries, particularly in sculpture and reliefs. Painting and sculpture became the pride of the French monarchy, and the French royal family commissioned many Parisian artists to adorn their palaces during the French Baroque and Classicism era. Sculptors such as Girardon, Coysevox, and Coustou acquired reputations as the finest artists in the royal court in 17th-century France. Pierre Mignard became the first painter to King Louis XIV during this period. In 1648, the Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture (Royal Academy of Painting and Sculpture) was established to accommodate the dramatic interest in art in the capital.

Paris was in its artistic prime in the 19th century and early 20th century, when it had a colony of artists established in the city and in art schools associated with some of the finest painters of the times: Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, Édouard Manet, Claude Monet, Berthe Morisot, Paul Gauguin, Pierre-Auguste Renoir and others. Paris was central to the development of Romanticism in art, with painters such as Géricault. Impressionism, Art Nouveau, Symbolism, Fauvism, Cubism and Art Deco movements all evolved in Paris. In the late 19th century, many artists in the French provinces and worldwide flocked to Paris to exhibit their works in the numerous salons and expositions and make a name for themselves. Artists such as Pablo Picasso, Henri Matisse, Vincent van Gogh, Paul Cézanne, Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Henri Rousseau, Marc Chagall, Amedeo Modigliani became associated with Paris.

The most prestigious sculptors who made their reputation in Paris in the modern era are Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi (Statue of Liberty), Auguste Rodin, Camille Claudel, Antoine Bourdelle, Paul Landowski (Christ the Redeemer in Rio de Janeiro) and Aristide Maillol. The Golden Age of the School of Paris ended between the two world wars.

The Louvre received 2.8 million visitors in 2021, holding its position as the world's most-visited museum. Its treasures include the Mona Lisa, the Venus de Milo statue, and Liberty Leading the People. The second-most visited museum, with 1.5 million visitors in 2021, was the Centre Georges Pompidou, also known as Beaubourg, which houses the Musée National d'Art Moderne. The National Museum of Natural History followed with 1.4 million visitors. It is famous for its dinosaur artefacts, mineral collections, and its Gallery of Evolution.

The Musée d'Orsay, featuring 19th-century art and the French Impressionists, had one million visitors. Paris hosts one of the largest science museums in Europe, the Cité des sciences et de l'industrie (984,000 visitors in 2020), and one of the oldest, the Musée des Arts et Métiers (opened in 1794). The other most-visited museums in 2021 were the Fondation Louis Vuitton (691,000), the Musée du Quai Branly – Jacques Chirac, featuring indigenous art and cultures of Africa, Asia, Oceania, and the Americas. (616,000); the Musée Carnavalet (History of Paris) (606,000), and the Petit Palais, the art museum of the City of Paris (518,000).

The Musée de l'Orangerie, near the Louvre and the Orsay, also exhibits Impressionists and Post-Impressionists, including most of Claude Monet 's large Water Lilies murals. The Musée national du Moyen Âge, or Cluny Museum, presents Medieval art. The Guimet Museum, or Musée national des arts asiatiques, has one of the largest collections of Asian art in Europe. There are also notable museums devoted to individual artists, including the Musée Picasso, the Musée Rodin, and the Musée national Eugène Delacroix.

The military history of France is presented by displays at the Musée de l'Armée at Les Invalides. In addition to the national museums, run by the Ministry of Culture, the City of Paris operates 14 museums, including the Carnavalet Museum on the history of Paris, Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris, Palais de Tokyo, the House of Victor Hugo, the House of Balzac and the Catacombs of Paris. There are also notable private museums. The Contemporary Art museum of the Louis Vuitton Foundation, designed by architect Frank Gehry, opened in October 2014 in the Bois de Boulogne.

The largest opera houses of Paris are the 19th-century Opéra Garnier (historical Paris Opéra) and modern Opéra Bastille. The Opéra Garnier tends toward the more classic ballets and operas. The Paris Opéra provides a mixed repertoire of classic and modern. In the mid-19th century, there were three other active and competing opera houses: the Opéra-Comique (which still exists), Théâtre-Italien and Théâtre Lyrique (now the Théâtre de la Ville). Philharmonie de Paris, the modern symphonic concert hall of Paris, opened in January 2015. Another musical landmark is the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées, where the first performances of Diaghilev's Ballets Russes took place in 1913.

Theatre traditionally has occupied a large place in Parisian culture, and many of its most popular actors today are also stars of French television. The oldest and most famous Paris theatre is the Comédie-Française, founded in 1680. Run by the Government of France, it performs mostly French classics at the Salle Richelieu in the Palais-Royal. Other famous theatres include the Odéon-Théâtre de l'Europe, also a state institution and theatrical landmark; the Théâtre Mogador; and the Théâtre de la Gaîté-Montparnasse.

The music hall and cabaret are famous Paris institutions. The Moulin Rouge opened in 1889 and became the birthplace of the Cancan dance. It helped make famous the singers Mistinguett and Édith Piaf and the painter Toulouse-Lautrec, who made posters for the venue. In 1911, the dance hall Olympia Paris invented the grand staircase as a setting for its shows, competing with its great rival, the Folies Bergère.

The Casino de Paris presented many famous French singers, including Mistinguett, Maurice Chevalier and Tino Rossi. Other famous Paris music halls include Le Lido, on the Champs-Élysées, opened in 1946; and the Crazy Horse Saloon, featuring strip-tease, dance, and magic, opened in 1951. A half dozen music halls exist today in Paris, attended mostly by visitors to the city.

The first book printed in France, Epistolae ("Letters"), by Gasparinus de Bergamo, was published in Paris in 1470 by the press established by Johann Heynlin. Paris has since been the centre of the French publishing industry, the home of some of the world's best-known writers and poets, and the setting for many classic works of French literature. Paris did not become the acknowledged capital of French literature until the 17th century, with authors such as Boileau, Corneille, La Fontaine, Molière, Racine, Charles Perrault, several coming from the provinces, as well as the foundation of the Académie française. In the 18th century, the literary life of Paris revolved around the cafés and salons; it was dominated by Voltaire, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Pierre de Marivaux, and Pierre Beaumarchais.

During the 19th century, Paris was the home and subject for some of France's greatest writers, including Charles Baudelaire, Stéphane Mallarmé, Mérimée, Alfred de Musset, Marcel Proust, Émile Zola, Alexandre Dumas, Gustave Flaubert, Guy de Maupassant and Honoré de Balzac. Victor Hugo's The Hunchback of Notre-Dame inspired the renovation of its setting, the Notre-Dame de Paris. Another of Hugo's works, Les Misérables, described the social change and political turmoil in Paris in the early 1830s. One of the most popular of all French writers, Jules Verne, worked at the Theatre Lyrique and the Paris stock exchange while he did research for his stories at the National Library.

In the 20th century, the Paris literary community was dominated by figures such as Colette, André Gide, François Mauriac, André Malraux, Albert Camus, and, after World War II, by Simone de Beauvoir and Jean-Paul Sartre. Between the wars, it was the home of many important expatriate writers, including Ernest Hemingway, Samuel Beckett, Miguel Ángel Asturias, Alejo Carpentier, and Arturo Uslar Pietri. The winner of the 2014 Nobel Prize in Literature, Patrick Modiano, based most of his literary work on the depiction of the city during World War II and the 1960s–1970s.

In the 1970s, 80 percent of French-language publishing houses were found in Paris. It is also a city of small bookstores. There are about 150 bookstores in the 5th arrondissement alone, plus another 250 book stalls along the Seine. Small Paris bookstores are protected against competition from discount booksellers by French law; books, even e-books, cannot be discounted more than five percent below their publisher's cover price.

In the late 12th century, a school of polyphony was established at Notre-Dame. Among the Trouvères of northern France, a group of Parisian aristocrats became known for their poetry and songs. Troubadours, from the south of France, were also popular. During the reign of François I, in the Renaissance era, the lute became popular in the French court. The French royal family and courtiers "disported themselves in masques, ballets, allegorical dances, recitals, and opera and comedy", and a national musical printing house was established. In the Baroque-era, noted composers included Jean-Baptiste Lully, Jean-Philippe Rameau, and François Couperin. The Conservatoire de Musique de Paris was founded in 1795. By 1870, Paris had become an important centre for symphony, ballet, and operatic music.

Romantic-era composers include Hector Berlioz, Charles Gounod, Camille Saint-Saëns, Léo Delibes and Jules Massenet, among others. Georges Bizet 's Carmen premiered in 1875 and has become one of the most popular operas in the classical canon. Among the Impressionist composers who created new works for piano, orchestra, opera, chamber music and other musical forms, stand in particular Claude Debussy, Erik Satie and Maurice Ravel. Several foreign-born composers, such as Frédéric Chopin, Franz Liszt, Jacques Offenbach, Niccolò Paganini, and Igor Stravinsky, established themselves or made significant contributions both with their works and their influence in Paris.

Bal-musette is a style of French music and dance that first became popular in Paris in the 1870s; by 1880, Paris had some 150 dance halls. Patrons danced the bourrée to the accompaniment of the cabrette (a bellows -blown bagpipe locally called a "musette") and the vielle à roue (hurdy-gurdy) in the cafés and bars of the city. Parisian and Italian musicians who played the accordion adopted the style and established themselves in Auvergnat bars, and Paris became a major centre for jazz and still attracts jazz musicians from all around the world to its clubs and cafés. Paris is the spiritual home of gypsy jazz, and many of the Parisian jazzmen who developed in the first half of the 20th century began by playing Bal-musette in the city. Django Reinhardt rose to fame in Paris and performed with violinist Stéphane Grappelli and their Quintette du Hot Club de France in the 1930s and 1940s.

Immediately after the war, the Saint-Germain-des-Prés quarter and the nearby Saint-Michel quarter became home to many small jazz clubs, including the Caveau des Lorientais, the Club Saint-Germain, the Rose Rouge, the Vieux-Colombier, and the most famous, Le Tabou. They introduced Parisians to the music of Claude Luter, Boris Vian, Sydney Bechet, Mezz Mezzrow, and Henri Salvador. Most of the clubs closed by the early 1960s, as musical tastes shifted toward rock and roll.

Some of the finest manouche musicians in the world are found here playing the cafés of the city at night. Some of the more notable jazz venues include the New Morning, Le Sunset, La Chope des Puces and Bouquet du Nord. Several yearly festivals take place in Paris, including the Paris Jazz Festival and the rock festival Rock en Seine. The Orchestre de Paris was established in 1967. Édith Piaf is widely regarded as France's national chanteuse and one of France's greatest international stars.

Paris has a big hip hop scene. This music became popular during the 1980s.

The movie industry was born in Paris when Auguste and Louis Lumière projected the first motion picture for a paying audience at the Grand Café on 28 December 1895. Many of Paris's concert/dance halls were transformed into cinemas when the media became popular beginning in the 1930s. Paris's largest cinema room today is in the Grand Rex theatre with 2,700 seats. Big multiplex cinemas have been built since the 1990s. UGC Ciné Cité Les Halles, with 27 screens, MK2 Bibliothèque with 20 screens, and UGC Ciné Cité Bercy with 18 screens are among the largest.

Parisians tend to share the same movie-going trends as many of the world's global cities, with cinemas primarily dominated by Hollywood-generated film entertainment. French cinema comes a close second, with major directors (réalisateurs) such as Claude Lelouch, Jean-Luc Godard, and Luc Besson, and the more slapstick/popular genre with director Claude Zidi as an example.

Since the late 18th century, Paris has been famous for its restaurants and haute cuisine, food meticulously prepared and artfully presented. La Taverne Anglaise, opened in 1786 in the arcades of the Palais-Royal by Antoine Beauvilliers ; it became a model for future luxury Paris restaurants. The restaurant Le Grand Véfour in the Palais-Royal dates from the same period. The famous Paris restaurants of the 19th century, including the Café de Paris, the Rocher de Cancale, the Café Anglais, Maison Dorée and the Café Riche, were mostly located near the theatres on the Boulevard des Italiens. Several of the best-known restaurants in Paris today appeared during the Belle Époque, including Maxim's on Rue Royale, Ledoyen in the gardens of the Champs-Élysées, and the Tour d'Argent on the Quai de la Tournelle.

Today, owing to Paris's cosmopolitan population, every French regional cuisine and almost every national cuisine in the world can be found there; the city has more than 9,000 restaurants. The Michelin Guide has been a standard guide to French restaurants since 1900, awarding its highest award, three stars, to the best restaurants in France. In 2018, of the 27 Michelin three-star restaurants in France, ten are located in Paris. These include both restaurants that serve classical French cuisine, such as L'Ambroisie, and those that serve non-traditional menus, such as L'Astrance, which combines French and Asian cuisines. Several of France's most famous chefs, including Pierre Gagnaire, Alain Ducasse, Yannick Alléno, and Alain Passard, have three-star restaurants in Paris.

Paris has several other kinds of traditional eating places. The café arrived in Paris in the 17th century, and by the 18th century, Parisian cafés were centres of the city's political and cultural life. The Café Procope on the Left Bank dates from this period. In the 20th century, the cafés of the Left Bank, especially Café de la Rotonde and Le Dôme Café in Montparnasse and Café de Flore and Les Deux Magots on Boulevard Saint Germain, all still in business, were important meeting places for painters, writers and philosophers.

A bistro is a type of eating place loosely defined as a neighbourhood restaurant with a modest decor and prices and a regular clientele, and a congenial atmosphere. Real bistros are increasingly rare in Paris, due to rising costs, competition, and different eating habits of Parisian diners. A brasserie originally was a tavern located next to a brewery, which served beer and food at any hour. Beginning with the Paris Exposition of 1867, it became a popular kind of restaurant which featured beer and other beverages served by young women in the national costume associated with the beverage. Now, brasseries, like cafés, serve food and drinks throughout the day.

Since the 19th century, Paris has been an international fashion capital, particularly in the domain of haute couture (clothing hand-made to order for private clients). It is home to some of the largest fashion houses in the world, including Dior and Chanel, as well as many other well-known and more contemporary fashion designers, such as Karl Lagerfeld, Jean-Paul Gaultier, Yves Saint Laurent, Givenchy, and Christian Lacroix. Paris Fashion Week, held in January and July in the Carrousel du Louvre among other renowned city locations, is one of the top four events on the international fashion calendar.

Paris is also the home of the world's largest cosmetics company, L'Oréal, as well as three of the top five global makers of luxury fashion accessories: Louis Vuitton, Hermés, and Cartier. Most of the major fashion designers have their showrooms along the Avenue Montaigne, between the Champs-Élysées and the Seine.

The inventor Nicéphore Niépce produced the first permanent photograph on a polished pewter plate in Paris in 1825. In 1839, Louis Daguerre patented the Daguerreotype, which became the most common form of photography until the 1860s. The work of Étienne-Jules Marey in the 1880s contributed considerably to the development of modern photography. Photography came to occupy a central role in Parisian Surrealist activity, in the works of Man Ray and Maurice Tabard.

Numerous photographers achieved renown for their photography of Paris, including Eugène Atget, noted for his depictions of street scenes; Robert Doisneau, noted for his playful pictures of people and market scenes (among which Le baiser de l'hôtel de ville has become iconic of the romantic vision of Paris); Marcel Bovis, noted for his night scenes; Jacques-Henri Lartigue ; and Henri Cartier-Bresson. Poster art also became an important art form in Paris in the late nineteenth century, through the work of Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, Jules Chéret, Eugène Grasset, Adolphe Willette, Pierre Bonnard, Georges de Feure, Henri-Gabriel Ibels, Paul Gavarni and Alphonse Mucha.

Paris and its close suburbs are home to numerous newspapers, magazines and publications including Le Monde, Le Figaro, Libération, Le Nouvel Observateur, Le Canard enchaîné, La Croix, Le Parisien (in Saint-Ouen), Les Échos, Paris Match (Neuilly-sur-Seine), Réseaux & Télécoms, Reuters France, l'Équipe (Boulogne-Billancourt) and L'Officiel des Spectacles. France's two most prestigious newspapers, Le Monde and Le Figaro, are the centrepieces of the Parisian publishing industry. Agence France-Presse is France's oldest continually operating news agency and is headquartered in Paris. France 24 is a television news channel owned and operated by the French government. France Diplomatie, owned and operated by the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs, pertains solely to diplomatic news and occurrences.

The most-viewed network in France, TF1, is in nearby Boulogne-Billancourt. France 2, France 3, Canal+, France 5, M6 (Neuilly-sur-Seine), Arte, D8, W9, NT1, NRJ 12, La Chaîne parlementaire, France 4, BFM TV, and Gulli are other stations located in and around the capital. Radio France, France's public radio broadcaster, and its various channels, is headquartered in Paris's 16th arrondissement. Radio France Internationale, another public broadcaster, is also based in the city. Paris also holds the headquarters of the La Poste, France's national postal carrier.

Bastille Day, a celebration of the storming of the Bastille in 1789, the biggest festival in the city, is a military parade taking place every year on 14 July on the Champs-Élysées, from the Arc de Triomphe to Place de la Concorde. It includes a flypast over the Champs Élysées by the Patrouille de France, a parade of military units and equipment, and a display of fireworks in the evening, the most spectacular being the one at the Eiffel Tower.

Other yearly festivals include Paris-Plages, a festive summertime event when the Right Bank of the Seine is converted into a temporary beach; Journées du Patrimoine, Fête de la Musique, Techno Parade, Nuit Blanche, Cinéma au clair de lune, Printemps des rues, Festival d'automne, and Fête des jardins. The Carnaval de Paris, one of the oldest festivals in Paris, dates back to the Middle Ages.

The Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF) operates public libraries in Paris, among them the François Mitterrand Library, Richelieu Library, Louvois, Opéra Library, and Arsenal Library.

The Bibliothèque Forney, in the Marais district, is dedicated to the decorative arts; the Arsenal Library occupies a former military building, and has a large collection on French literature; and the Bibliothèque historique de la ville de Paris, also in Le Marais, contains the Paris historical research service. The Sainte-Geneviève Library, designed by Henri Labrouste and built in the mid-1800s, contains a rare book and manuscript division. Bibliothèque Mazarine is the oldest public library in France. The Médiathèque Musicale Mahler opened in 1986 and contains collections related to music. The François Mitterrand Library (nicknamed Très Grande Bibliothèque) was completed in 1994 to a design of Dominique Perrault and contains four glass towers.

There are several academic libraries and archives in Paris. The Sorbonne Library is the largest university library in Paris. In addition to the Sorbonne location, there are branches in Malesherbes, Clignancourt-Championnet, Michelet- Institut d'Art et d'Archéologie, Serpente-Maison de la Recherche, and Institut des Etudes Ibériques. Other academic libraries include Interuniversity Pharmaceutical Library, Leonardo da Vinci University Library, Paris School of Mines Library, and the René Descartes University Library.

Paris's major sports clubs are the association football club Paris Saint-Germain F.C. (PSG) and the rugby union clubs Stade Français and Racing 92. The 80,000-seat Stade de France, built for the 1998 FIFA World Cup, is located just north of Paris in the commune of Saint-Denis. It is used for football, rugby union, and track and field athletics. It hosts the France national football team for friendlies and major tournaments qualifiers, the French national rugby team 's home matches of the Six Nations Championship, and several important matches of the Stade Français rugby team. The city and closer suburbs have several other professional and amateur football clubs, including Paris FC and Red Star FC.

Rugby league is not as popular in Paris as in other areas of France. Despite this, the capital has hosted several major events in the sport's history since the country's first game, an exhibition match between the Australia national team and a British League Select XIII, in December 1933. The Rugby League World Cup was first held in 1954 with the Parc des Princes hosting the opening match and the final in which France finished as runners-up to Great Britain. The newly rebuilt Parc des Princes was later used for a group game of the 1972 Rugby League World Cup. A rugby league department of PSG was created to participate in the Super League. In 2006, Catalans Dragons became the first French side to enter the British rugby league system following PSG's withdrawal.

Paris was the first city to host the Summer Olympics twice and the second to host three times, hosting in 1900, 1924 and 2024. The city also hosted the finals of the 1938 FIFA World Cup, 1998 FIFA World Cup, 2007 Rugby World Cup and 2023 Rugby World Cup, at the Stade de France. Paris hosted the finals of the 1960, 1984 and 2016 UEFA European Championships. Paris held six UEFA Champions League finals, including the 2022 edition.

The final stage of the Tour de France finishes in Paris; since 1975, the race has finished on the Champs-Elysées. Two annual tennis tournaments are held in Paris: the French Open, held every year on the red clay of the Stade Roland Garros, one of the four Grand Slam events of the world professional tennis tour, and the Paris Masters, held in the Bercy Arena.

Basketball teams Levallois SCB and Paris Basket Racing merged in 2007 to create club Metropolitans 92, which plays some of its games at the Stade Pierre de Coubertin. Paris also features Paris Basketball in Basketball, Paris Saint-Germain in handball and Paris Musketeers in American football.

Paris is a major rail, highway, and air transport hub. The Île-de-France Mobilités (IDFM) oversees the transit network in the region. The syndicate coordinates public transport. The RATP operates 347 bus lines, the Métro, eight tramway lines, and sections of the RER. The SNCF operates suburban rails, one tramway line, and other sections of the RER. The Optile consortium of private operators manages 1,176 bus lines.

Paris has one of the most sustainable transportation systems in the world and is one of only two cities that received the Sustainable Transport Award twice, in 2008 and 2023. In 2022–2023, 53.3% of trips in Paris were made on foot, 30% on public transport, 11.2% on bicycles and 4.3% on cars. Paris has banned the most polluting automobiles from key districts and is doubling bike lanes. The concept of the 15-minute city was created by Carlos Moreno, a professor from Paris, and began to be implemented by its mayor Anne Hidalgo.

Paris is a highly walkable city and tries to increase its mode share beyond 53% of all trips in 2024. The number of trips made by foot in the Grand Paris metropolis increased by 50% from 2000 to 2018.

A central hub of the national rail network, Paris's six major railway stations (Gare du Nord, Gare de l'Est, Gare de Lyon, Gare d'Austerlitz, Gare Montparnasse, Gare Saint-Lazare) and a minor one (Gare de Bercy) are connected to three networks: high-speed rail lines (TGV inOui, TGV Lyria, TGV Ouigo, Eurostar, Intercity Express, Frecciarossa), normal speed trains (Intercités, Ouigo Train Classique, Intercités de nuit, European Sleeper, TER), and the suburban rails (Transilien). The Transilien is the commuter rail network serving Paris region, through 9 lines, 392 stations and 1,294 km (804.1 mi) of rails.

Since the inauguration of its first line in 1900, Paris's Métro network has grown to become the city's most widely used local transport system. In 2015, it carried about 5.23 million passengers daily. There are 16 lines, 321 stations (405 stops) and 245.6 km (152.6 mi) of rails. Superimposed on this is a regional express network, the RER, whose five lines, 257 stops, and 602 km (374 mi) of rails connect Paris to more distant parts of the urban area. With over 1.4 million passengers per day, RER A is the busiest metro line in Europe. The Paris region is served by a light rail network, the tramway. Opened in 1992, fifteen lines are now operational, spanning 196.6 kilometres (122.2 mi) with 283 stations.

Paris is served by three commercial international airports: Charles de Gaulle Airport, the third-busiest airport in Europe as of 2018, Orly Airport and Beauvais–Tillé Airport. In 2019, these three airports recorded traffic of 112 million passengers, making them the 5th busiest airport system in the world. There is also one general aviation airport, Paris–Le Bourget Airport, historically the oldest Parisian airport and closest to the city centre, which is now used only for private business flights and air shows. Charles de Gaulle Airport, located on the edge of the northern suburbs of Paris, opened to commercial traffic in 1974 and became the busiest Parisian airport in 1993. In 2023, it was the 4th busiest airport in the world by international traffic and it is the hub for the nation's flag carrier, Air France. Beauvais-Tillé Airport, located 69 km (43 mi) north of Paris's city centre, is used by charter airlines and low-cost carriers.

Paris is the most important hub of France's motorway network, and is surrounded by three orbital freeways: the Périphérique, which follows the approximate path of 19th-century fortifications around Paris, the A86 motorway in the inner suburbs, and the Francilienne motorway in the outer suburbs. Paris has an extensive road network with over 2,000 km (1,243 mi) of highways and motorways.

The Paris region is the most active water transport area in France. Most of the cargo is handled by the Ports of Paris, in facilities located around Paris. The rivers Loire, Rhine, Rhône, Meuse, and Scheldt can be reached by canals connecting with the Seine, which include the Canal Saint-Martin, Canal Saint-Denis, and the Canal de l'Ourcq.

As of 2025 there were 1,565 km (972 mi) of cycle paths and routes in Paris. These include piste cyclable, bike lanes separated from other traffic by physical barriers, and bande cyclable, a bicycle lane denoted by a painted path on the road. Some 29 km (18 mi) of specially marked bus lanes are free for use by cyclists, with a protective barrier against encroachments from vehicles. Cyclists have the right to ride in both directions on certain one-way streets. Paris has a bike sharing system called Vélib' with more than 20,000 public bicycles distributed at 1,800 parking stations.

In 2012, around 50% of electricity generated in the Île-de-France came from cogeneration energy plants. Other energy sources included thermal power (35%), waste incineration (9% – with cogeneration plants, these provide the city with heat as well), methane gas (5%), hydraulics (1%), and solar power (0.1%). A quarter of the city's district heating is to come from a plant in Saint-Ouen-sur-Seine, burning a 50/50-mix of coal and wood pellets.

Paris in its early history had only the rivers Seine and Bièvre for water. From 1809, the Canal de l'Ourcq provided Paris with water from less-polluted rivers to the north-east of the capital. From 1857, the civil engineer Eugène Belgrand, under Napoleon III, oversaw the construction of a series of new aqueducts that brought water from locations all around the city to several reservoirs.

From then on, the new reservoir system became Paris's principal source of drinking water. The remains of the old system, pumped into lower levels of the same reservoirs, were from then on used for the cleaning of Paris's streets. This system is still a major part of Paris's water-supply network. Today, Paris has more than 2,400 km (1,491 mi) of underground sewers.

Air pollution in Paris, from the point of view of particulate matter (PM10), is the highest in France with 38 μg/m. Paris has one of the highest levels of nitrogen dioxide pollution in the EU.

Paris has more than 421 municipal parks and gardens, covering more than 3,000 hectares and containing more than 250,000 trees. Two of Paris's oldest and most famous gardens are the Tuileries Garden, created in 1564 for the Tuileries Palace and redone by André Le Nôtre between 1664 and 1672, and the Luxembourg Garden, for the Luxembourg Palace, built for Marie de' Medici in 1612, which today houses the Senate. The Jardin des plantes was the first botanical garden in Paris, created in 1626.

Between 1853 and 1870, Emperor Napoleon III and the city's first director of parks and gardens, Jean-Charles Adolphe Alphand, created the Bois de Boulogne, Bois de Vincennes, Parc Montsouris and Parc des Buttes-Chaumont, located at the four compass points around Paris, as well as many smaller parks, squares and gardens in the Paris's quarters. Since 1977, the city has created 166 new parks, most notably the Parc de la Villette (1987), Parc André Citroën (1992), Parc de Bercy (1997) and Parc Clichy-Batignolles (2007). One of the newest parks, the Promenade des Berges de la Seine (2013), has floating gardens.

During the Roman era, Paris's main cemetery was located on the outskirts of the left bank settlement. This changed with the rise of Catholic Christianity, where almost every inner-city church had adjoining burial grounds for use by their parishes. With Paris's growth, many of these, particularly the city's largest cemetery, the Holy Innocents' Cemetery, were filled to overflowing. When inner-city burials were condemned from 1786, the contents of all Paris's parish cemeteries were transferred to a renovated section of Paris's stone mines, today place Denfert-Rochereau in the 14th arrondissement.

After a tentative creation of several smaller suburban cemeteries, the Prefect Nicholas Frochot under Napoleon Bonaparte provided a more definitive solution in the creation of three massive Parisian cemeteries outside the city limits. Open from 1804, these were the cemeteries of Père Lachaise, Montmartre, Montparnasse, and later Passy. New suburban cemeteries were created in the early 20th century: The largest of these are the Cimetière parisien de Saint-Ouen, the Cimetière parisien de Pantin, also known as Cimetière parisien de Pantin - Bobigny, the Cimetière parisien d' Ivry, and the Cimetière parisien de Bagneux. Famous people buried in Parisian cemeteries include Oscar Wilde, Frédéric Chopin, Jim Morrison, Édith Piaf and Serge Gainsbourg.

In 2009, around 40 percent of Parisians held a licence -level diploma or higher, the highest proportion in France. 13 percent have no diploma, the third-lowest percentage in France. Education in Paris and the Île-de-France region employs approximately 330,000 people, 170,000 of whom are teachers and professors, teaching approximately 2.9 million students in around 9,000 primary, secondary, and higher education schools and institutions.

The University of Paris, founded in the 12th century, is often called the Sorbonne after one of its original medieval colleges. In 1970, it was broken up into thirteen autonomous universities following the student demonstrations in 1968. Most of the campuses today are in the Latin Quarter, where the old university was located, while others are scattered around the city and the suburbs.

The Paris region hosts France's highest concentration of the grandes écoles – 55 specialised centres of higher education outside or inside the public university structure. The prestigious public universities are usually considered grands établissements. Most of the grandes écoles were relocated to the suburbs of Paris in the 1960s and 1970s, in new campuses much larger than the old campuses within the crowded City of Paris. The École Normale Supérieure, PSL University has remained on rue d'Ulm in the 5th arrondissement.

Paris is the home of prestigious universities in science and technology (Conservatoire national des arts et métiers, Polytechnic Institute of Paris, Paris Cité University, Paris-Saclay University, Sorbonne University), political science (Sciences Po), management (HEC Paris, ESSEC Business School, ESCP Business School, INSEAD) archaeology, art history, anthropology and epigraphy (École du Louvre), as well as multidisciplinary universities (Paris Sciences et Lettres University).

Health care and emergency medical service in the City of Paris and its suburbs are provided by the Assistance publique – Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), a public hospital system that employs more than 90,000 people, including practitioners, support personnel, and administrators, in 44 hospitals. It is the largest hospital system in Europe. The hospitals receive more than 5.8 million annual patient visits.

One of the most notable hospitals is the Hôtel-Dieu, founded in 651, the oldest hospital in Paris and the oldest worldwide still operating, although the current building is the product of a reconstruction of 1877. Other hospitals include Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, one of the largest in Europe, Hôpital Cochin, Bichat–Claude Bernard Hospital, Hôpital Européen Georges-Pompidou, Bicêtre Hospital, Beaujon Hospital, the Curie Institute, Lariboisière Hospital, Necker–Enfants Malades Hospital, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Hôpital de la Charité and the American Hospital of Paris.

The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has had its headquarters in Paris since November 1958. Paris is also the home of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Paris hosts the headquarters of the European Space Agency, the International Energy Agency, European Securities and Markets Authority and the European Banking Authority.

Since April 1956, Paris is exclusively and reciprocally twinned with Rome, Italy.

Seule Paris est digne de Rome; seule Rome est digne de Paris. (in French) Solo Parigi è degna di Roma; solo Roma è degna di Parigi. (in Italian) "Only Paris is worthy of Rome; only Rome is worthy of Paris."

Paris has agreements of friendship and co-operation with:

Paris has been the setting for many movies, TV shows, and other forms of media, including the Netflix streaming series Emily in Paris and the kids' animated superhero show Miraculous Ladybug.

The Paris Basin (French : Bassin parisien) is one of the major geological regions of France. It developed since the Triassic over remnant uplands of the Variscan orogeny (Hercynian orogeny). The sedimentary basin, no longer a single drainage basin, is a large sag in the craton, bordered by the Armorican Massif to the west, the Ardennes-Brabant axis to the north, the Massif des Vosges to the east, and the Massif Central to the south.

The region usually regarded as the Paris Basin is rather smaller than the area formed by the geological structure. The former occupies the centre of the northern half of the country, excluding Eastern France. The latter extends from the hills just south of Calais to Poitiers and from Caen to the brink of the middle Rhine Valley, east of Saarbrücken.

The landscape is one of very broad valleys (flood plains), modest watershed hills and well-drained plateaux of comparatively little altitude. In the south-east and east the plain of Champagne and the Seuil de Bourgogne (Threshold of Burgundy) differential erosion of the strata has left low scarps with the dip slopes towards the centre. The varying nature of the clays, limestones and chalk gives rise to the characteristics of the regions such as Champagne Humide (Damp Champagne), Champagne Pouilleuse (poor Champagne), the Pays de Caux and the Pays de Bray.

Due to the millions of years of later deposition, erosion and other changes since, five drainage basins today drain almost all of the Basin.

These are two flowing north, the basins/specified parts of basins as follows:

The Paris Basin is a geological basin of sedimentary rocks. It overlies geological strata folded by the Variscan orogeny.

It forms a broad shallow bowl in which marine deposits from throughout periods from the Triassic to the Pliocene were laid down. Their extent generally decreases with time. Based on analysis of fossils recognized in the basin's strata during the 1820s and 1830s, the pioneering geologist Charles Lyell divided the Tertiary into three ages he named the Pliocene, the Miocene and the Eocene.

To the west, the strata folded by the Variscan rise below the more recent marine deposits in the hills of Brittany and, to the east, the Ardennes, Hunsrück and Vosges. To the south, the basin borders on the Massif Central and the Morvan. To the north, its early strata match those of the bed of the English Channel and south-eastern England. Other boundaries lie on ridges in more recent deposits and scarps (escarpments). These include the Côte d'Or in the south-east (on an Alpine fault line) and, at a north end, the Hills of (French : Collines d') Artois which overlie the margin of London-Brabant Massif.

The fossil record of the Paris Basin is critically important for Paleogene paleontology and stratigraphy. The basin's continuous, well-exposed, and richly fossiliferous marine and non-marine successions provide a comprehensive record of biotic changes across the Paleocene and Eocene epochs. The detailed documentation of species like Crassispira tenuicrenata allows paleontologists to:

Two notable oil fields are the Chaunoy Field, the other is the Villeperdue Field. They are centred at about 1850 metre depth.

The Paris Bourse crash of 1882 was a stock market crash in France, and was the worst crisis in the French economy in the nineteenth century. The crash was triggered by the collapse of l'Union Générale in January. Around a quarter of the brokers on the bourse were on the brink of collapse. The closure of the exchange was prevented by a loan from the Banque de France which enabled sufficient liquidity to support settlement.

The stock price of l’Union Générale rose from 500 francs a share in 1879 to over 3,000 francs at its peak. Investors saw the booming market for new securities and jumped into the forward market. Speculators also printed counterfeit money; they renewed their forward contracts in hopes for a continuous rise in prices.

As the market grew, so did the demand for cash, and interest rates began to rise to the point where lenders began demanding a premium. This situation foretold that a collapse would occur when investors would repay their loans, not wanting to pay this premium or to incur refinancing debt at high interest rates. This could mean the bank would lose its primary revenue source, with the resultant stock overvaluation and share price decline. These events are very similar to the events leading up to the American 1929 crash. As this happened, the price of l'Union Générale began to deteriorate. The bank failed to repay its debts and to honor its clients’ accounts, falsifying public reports to avoid the complete crash of its value and credit-worthiness. Between January 5, 1882 and January 14, 1882 the cash price of a share dropped from 3,040 to 800 francs.

The crash led to a recession which lasted until the end of the decade. Immediately after the crash, the bank's founder attributed its downfall to conspiratorial aims of Jewish-German banks and Freemasons, intent on destroying banks which backed conservative, Catholic political agendas.

It is now generally accepted that there was no conspiracy to destroy the bank, but it remains unclear why the collapse of the bank was so devastating.

During the 1882 crash, 14 of 60 stock brokers appeared to be in imminent danger of failure and seven were completely bankrupt. The famous painter Paul Gauguin had been working as a stock broker until the crash; after that, he decided to dedicate himself to painting full-time.

The Paris meridian is a meridian line running through the Paris Observatory in Paris, France – now longitude 2°20′14.02500″ East. It was a long-standing rival to the Greenwich meridian as the prime meridian of the world. The "Paris meridian arc" or "French meridian arc" (French: la Méridienne de France) is the name of the meridian arc measured along the Paris meridian.

The French meridian arc was important for French cartography, since the triangulations of France began with the measurement of the French meridian arc. Moreover, the French meridian arc was important for geodesy as it was one of the meridian arcs which were measured to determine the figure of the Earth via the arc measurement method. The determination of the figure of the Earth was a problem of the highest importance in astronomy, as the diameter of the Earth was the unit to which all celestial distances had to be referred.

In the year 1634, France, then ruled by Louis XIII and Cardinal Richelieu, decided that the Ferro Meridian through the westernmost of the Canary Islands should be used as the reference on maps, since El Hierro (Ferro) was the most western position of the Ptolemy's world map. It was also thought to be exactly 20 degrees west of Paris. The astronomers of the French Academy of Sciences, founded in 1666, managed to clarify the position of El Hierro relative to the meridian of Paris, which gradually supplanted the Ferro meridian. In 1666, Louis XIV had authorized the building of the Paris Observatory. On Midsummer's Day 1667, members of the Academy of Sciences traced the future building's outline on a plot outside town near the Port Royal abbey, with Paris meridian exactly bisecting the site north–south. French cartographers would use it as their prime meridian for more than 200 years. Old maps from continental Europe often have a common grid with Paris degrees at the top and Ferro degrees offset by 20 at the bottom.

A French astronomer, Abbé Jean Picard, measured the length of a degree of latitude along the Paris meridian (arc measurement) and computed from it the size of the Earth during 1668–1670. The application of the telescope to angular instruments was an important step. He was the first who in 1669, with the telescope, using such precautions as the nature of the operation requires, measured a precise arc of meridian (Picard's arc measurement). He measured with wooden rods a baseline of 5,663 toises, and a second or base of verification of 3,902 toises; his triangulation network extended from Malvoisine, near Paris, to Sourdon, near Amiens. The angles of the triangles were measured with a quadrant furnished with a telescope having cross-wires. The difference of latitude of the terminal stations was determined by observations made with a sector on a star in Cassiopeia, giving 1° 22′ 55″ for the amplitude. The terrestrial degree measurement gave the length of 57,060 toises, whence he inferred 6,538,594 toises for the Earth's diameter.

Four generations of the Cassini family headed the Paris Observatory. They directed the surveys of France for over 100 years. Hitherto geodetic observations had been confined to the determination of the magnitude of the Earth considered as a sphere, but a discovery made by Jean Richer turned the attention of mathematicians to its deviation from a spherical form. This astronomer, having been sent by the Academy of Sciences of Paris to the island of Cayenne (now in French Guiana) in South America, for the purpose of investigating the amount of astronomical refraction and other astronomical objects, observed that his clock, which had been regulated at Paris to beat seconds, lost about two minutes and a half daily at Cayenne, and that to bring it to measure mean solar time it was necessary to shorten the pendulum by more than a line (about ⁄ 12 th of an in.). This fact, which was scarcely credited till it had been confirmed by the subsequent observations of Varin and Deshayes on the coasts of Africa and America, was first explained in the third book of Newton ’s Principia, who showed that it could only be referred to a diminution of gravity arising either from a protuberance of the equatorial parts of the Earth and consequent increase of the distance from the centre, or from the counteracting effect of the centrifugal force. About the same time (1673) appeared Christiaan Huygens ’ De Horologio Oscillatorio, in which for the first time were found correct notions on the subject of centrifugal force. It does not, however, appear that they were applied to the theoretical investigation of the figure of the Earth before the publication of Newton's Principia. In 1690 Huygens published his De Causa Gravitatis, which contains an investigation of the figure of the Earth on the supposition that the attraction of every particle is towards the centre.

Between 1684 and 1718 Giovanni Domenico Cassini and Jacques Cassini, along with Philippe de La Hire, carried a triangulation, starting from Picard's base in Paris and extending it northwards to Dunkirk and southwards to Collioure. They measured a base of 7,246 toises near Perpignan, and a somewhat shorter base near Dunkirk ; and from the northern portion of the arc, which had an amplitude of 2° 12′ 9″, obtained 56,960 toises for the length of a degree; while from the southern portion, of which the amplitude was 6° 18′ 57″, they obtained 57,097 toises. The immediate inference from this was that, with the degree diminishing with increasing latitude, the Earth must be a prolate spheroid. This conclusion was totally opposed to the theoretical investigations of Newton and Huygens, and accordingly the Academy of Sciences of Paris determined to apply a decisive test by the measurement of arcs at a great distance from each other – one in the neighbourhood of the equator, the other in a high latitude. Thus arose the celebrated French Geodesic Missions [ fr ], to the Equator and to Lapland, the latter directed by Pierre Louis Maupertuis.

In 1740 an account was published in the Paris Mémoires, by Cassini de Thury, of a remeasurement by himself and Nicolas Louis de Lacaille of the meridian of Paris. With a view to determine more accurately the variation of the degree along the meridian, they divided the distance from Dunkirk to Collioure into four partial arcs of about two degrees each, by observing the latitude at five stations. The results previously obtained by Giovanni Domenico and Jacques Cassini were not confirmed, but, on the contrary, the length of the degree derived from these partial arcs showed on the whole an increase with increasing latitude.

Cesar-François Cassini de Thury completed the Cassini map, which was published by his son Cassini IV in 1790. Moreover, the Paris meridian was linked with international collaboration in geodesy and metrology. Cesar-François Cassini de Thury (1714–1784) expressed the project to extend the French geodetic network all around the world and to connect the Paris and Greenwich observatories. In 1783 the French Academy of Science presented his proposal to King George III. This connection and a proposal from General William Roy led to the first triangulation of Great Britain. France and Great Britain surveys' connection was repeated by French astronomers and geodesists in 1787 by Cassini IV, in 1823–1825 by François Arago and in 1861–1862 by François Perrier.

Between 1792 and 1798 Pierre Méchain and Jean-Baptiste Delambre surveyed the Paris meridian arc between Dunkirk and Barcelona (see meridian arc of Delambre and Méchain). They extrapolated from this measurement the distance from the North Pole to the Equator which was 5,130,740 toises. As the metre had to be equal to one ten-millionth of this distance, it was defined as 0,513074 toises or 443,296 lignes of the Toise of Peru (see below) and of the double-toise N° 1 of the apparatus which had been devised by Lavoisier and Borda for this survey at specified temperatures.

In the early 19th century, the Paris meridian's arc was recalculated with greater precision between Shetland and the Balearic Islands by the astronomer François Arago, whose name now appears on the plaques or medallions tracing the route of the meridian through Paris (see below). Biot and Arago published their work as a fourth volume following the three volumes of by Delambre and Méchain 's " Bases du système métrique décimal ou mesure de l'arc méridien compris entre les parallèles de Dunkerque et Barcelone " (Basis for the decimal metric system or measurement of the meridian arc comprised between Dunkirk and Barcelona).

In the second half of the 19th century, Carlos Ibáñez e Ibáñez de Ibero directed the survey of Spain. From 1870 to 1894 the Paris meridan's arc was remeasured by Perrier and Bassot in France and Algeria. In 1879, Ibáñez de Ibero for Spain and François Perrier for France directed the junction of the Spanish geodetic network with Algeria. This connection was a remarkable enterprise where triangles with a maximum length of 270 km were observed from mountain stations over the Mediterranean Sea. The triangulation of France was then connected to those of Great Britain, Spain and Algeria and thus the Paris meridian's arc measurement extended from Shetland to the Sahara.

The fundamental co-ordinates of the Panthéon were also obtained anew, by connecting the Panthéon and the Paris Observatory with the five stations of Bry-sur-Marne, Morlu, Mont Valérien, Chatillon and Montsouris, where the observations of latitude and azimuth were effected.

In 1860, the Russian Government at the instance of Otto Wilhelm von Struve invited the Governments of Belgium, France, Prussia and Britain to connect their triangulations to measure the length of an arc of parallel in latitude 52° and to test the accuracy of the figure and dimensions of the Earth, as derived from the measurements of arc of meridian. To combine the measurements it was necessary to compare the geodetic standards of length used in the different countries. The British Government invited those of France, Belgium, Prussia, Russia, India, Australia, Austria, Spain, United States and Cape of Good Hope to send their standards to the Ordnance Survey office in Southampton. Notably the geodetic standards of France, Spain and United States were based on the metric system, whereas those of Prussia, Belgium and Russia where calibrated against the toise, of which the oldest physical representative was the Toise of Peru. The Toise of Peru had been constructed in 1735 for Bouguer and De La Condamine as their standard of reference in the French Geodesic Mission to the Equator, conducted in what is now Ecuador from 1735 to 1744 in collaboration with the Spanish officers Jorge Juan and Antonio de Ulloa.

Alexander Ross Clarke and Henry James published the first results of the standards' comparisons in 1867. The same year Russia, Spain and Portugal joined the Europäische Gradmessung and the General Conference of the association proposed the metre as a uniform length standard for the Arc measurement and recommended the establishment of an International Metre Commission.

The Europäische Gradmessung decided the creation of an international geodetic standard at the General Conference held in Paris in 1875. The Metre Convention was signed in 1875 in Paris and the International Bureau of Weights and Measures was created under the supervision of the International Committee for Weights and Measures. The first president of the International Committee for Weights and Measures was the Spanish geodesist Carlos Ibáñez e Ibáñez de Ibero. He also was the president of the Permanent Commission of the Europäische Gradmessung from 1874 to 1886. In 1886 the association changed name for the International Geodetic Association (German: Internationale Erdmessung) and Carlos Ibáñez e Ibáñez de Ibero was reelected as president. He remained in this position until his death in 1891. During this period the International Geodetic Association gained worldwide importance with the joining of United States, Mexico, Chile, Argentina and Japan. In 1883 the General Conference of the Europäische Gradmessung proposed to select the Greenwich meridian as the prime meridian in the hope that Great Britain would accede to the Metre Convention.

The United States passed an Act of Congress on 3 August 1882, authorizing President Chester A. Arthur to call an international conference to fix on a common prime meridian for time and longitude throughout the world. Before the invitations were sent out on 1 December, the joint efforts of Abbe, Fleming and William Frederick Allen, Secretary of the US railways' General Time Convention and Managing Editor of the Travellers' Official Guide to the Railways, had brought the US railway companies to an agreement which led to standard railway time being introduced at noon on 18 November 1883 across the nation. Although this was not legally established until 1918, there was thus a strong sense of fait accompli that preceded the International Meridian Conference, although setting local times was not part of the remit of the conference.

In 1884, at the International Meridian Conference in Washington DC, the Greenwich meridian was adopted as the prime meridian of the world. San Domingo, now the Dominican Republic, voted against. France and Brazil abstained. The United Kingdom acceded to the Metre Convention in 1884 and to the International Geodetic Association in 1898. In 1911, Alexander Ross Clarke and Friedrich Robert Helmert stated in the Encyclopædia Britannica :

"According to the calculations made at the central bureau of the international association on the great meridian arc extending from the Shetland Islands, through Great Britain, France and Spain to El Aghuat in Algeria, a [the equatorial radius of the Earth] = 6,377,935 metres, the ellipticity being assumed as 1/299.15. [...] The net does not follow the meridian exactly, but deviates both to the west and to the east; actually, the meridian of Greenwich is nearer the mean than that of Paris (Helmert, Grösse d. Erde)."

In 1891, timetabling for its growing railways led to standardised time in France changing from mean solar time of the local centre to that of the Paris meridian: 9 minutes 20.921 seconds ahead of Greenwich Mean Time (GMT). In 1911 the country switched to GMT for timekeeping; in 1914 it switched to the Greenwich meridian for navigation. Despite this, French cartographers continue to indicate the Paris meridian on some maps.

With the arrival of wireless telegraphy, France established a transmitter on the Eiffel Tower to broadcast a time signal. The creation of the International Time Bureau, seated at the Paris Observatory, was decided upon during the 1912 Conférence internationale de l'heure radiotélégraphique. The following year an attempt was made to regulate the international status of the bureau through the creation of an international convention. However, the convention wasn't ratified by its member countries due to the outbreak of World War I. In 1919, after the war, it was decided upon to make the bureau the executive body of the International Commission of Time, one of the commissions of the then newly founded International Astronomical Union (IAU).

From 1956 until 1987 the International Time Bureau was part of the Federation of Astronomical and Geophysical Data Analysis Services (FAGS). In 1987 the bureau's tasks of combining different measurements of Atomic Time were taken over by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM). Its tasks related to the correction of time with respect to the celestial reference frame and the Earth's rotation to realize the Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) were taken over by the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service (IERS) which was established in its present form in 1987 by the International Astronomical Union and the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG).

In 1994 the Arago Association and the city of Paris commissioned a Dutch conceptual artist, Jan Dibbets, to create a memorial to Arago. Dibbets came up with the idea of setting 135 bronze medallions (although only 121 are documented in the official guide to the medallions) into the ground along the Paris meridian between the northern and southern limits of Paris: a total distance of 9.2 kilometres/5.7 miles. Each medallion is 12 cm in diameter and marked with the name ARAGO plus N and S pointers.

Another project, the Green Meridian (An 2000 – La Méridienne Verte), aimed to establish a plantation of trees along the entire length of the meridian arc in France. Several missing Arago medallions appear to have been replaced with the newer 'An 2000 – La Méridienne Verte' markers.

In certain circles, some kind of occult or esoteric significance is ascribed to the Paris meridian; sometimes it is even perceived as a sinister axis. Dominique Stezepfandts, a French conspiracy theorist, attacks the Arago medallions that supposedly trace the route of "an occult geographical line". To him the Paris meridian is a "Masonic axis" or even "the heart of the Devil."

Henry Lincoln, in his book The Holy Place, argued that various ancient structures are aligned according to the Paris meridian. They even include medieval churches, built long before the meridian was established according to conventional history, and Lincoln found it obvious that the meridian "was based upon the ' cromlech intersect division line'." David Wood, in his book Genesis, likewise ascribes a deeper significance to the Paris meridian and takes it into account when trying to decipher the geometry of the myth-encrusted village of Rennes-le-Château : The meridian passes about 350 metres (1,150 ft) west of the site of the so-called " Poussin tomb," an important location in the legends and esoteric theories relating to that place. A sceptical discussion of these theories, including the supposed alignments, can be found in Bill Putnam and Edwin Wood's book The Treasure of Rennes-le-Château – A mystery solved.

The confusion between the Greenwich and the Paris meridians is one of the plot elements of Tintin book Red Rackham's Treasure.

The meridian line, dubbed the "Rose Line" by author Dan Brown, appeared in the novel The Da Vinci Code.

The Paris metropolitan area (French : Aire urbaine de Paris) is a statistical area that describes the reach of commuter movement to and from Paris, France and its surrounding suburbs.

In 2020, France's national INSEE statistical bureau introduced the concept "aire d'attraction d'une ville" (functional area), replacing the former "aire urbaine" (urban area). A functional area consists of an urban cluster and the surrounding commuting zone. This concept is consistent with the functional urban area as defined by Eurostat.

Created and used from 1996 by France's national INSEE statistical bureau to match international demographic standards, the aire urbaine (literally: 'urban area') was a statistical unit that described the suburban development around centres of urban growth. In 2011, the INSEE reclassified its largest aires urbaines into aires métropolitaines (literally: metropolitan areas) and grandes aires urbaines ('large urban areas'). With this change, the Paris metropolitan area became the largest in France.

In France, use of the term 'Paris metropolitan area' is limited to demographic and statistical studies, and, to date, it is not used in economic statistics — the traditional administrative subdivisions commune, département, and région are still referenced for this — though the media will employ it when referring to the electoral tendencies of France's largest cities. In 2010 the government passed a law that invited France's largest city 'metropoles' to work together as an intercommunitary entities (more or less described by the INSEE concept), but the lack of response by the following year moved the government to make the cooperation for many of France's largest cities obligatory, and Paris became a case study all on its own.

This latter initiative created the " Métropole du Grand Paris " (official translation: 'Greater Paris metropolitan authority'), a Paris-centred intercommunal cooperation effort enacted from January 1, 2016. The territory it covers is much smaller than the INSEE 'Paris metropolitan area' statistical area: it includes Paris, its neighbouring three departments (or ' petite couronne '), and a few bordering communes in the departments beyond.

As of 2022, the INSEE statistical Paris metropolitan area covers 1,929 communes. With its 18,941 km (7,313 sq mi), it extends significantly beyond Paris' administrative Île-de-France region (12,012 km (4,638 sq mi)). Outside the Île-de-France region, it covers part of the departments Aisne, Aube, Eure, Eure-et-Loir, Loiret, Marne, Oise, Seine-Maritime and Yonne.

The Paris metropolitan area expands at each population census due to the rapid population growth in the Paris area. New communes (municipalities) surrounding Paris are included when they meet the commuter threshold required. At the 1968 census, the earliest date for which population figures were retrospectively computed for French aire urbaines, the Paris metropolitan area had 8,368,459 inhabitants in an area that only encompassed 279 communes in central Île-de-France.

By the 1999 census the Paris metropolitan area was slightly larger than Île-de-France and had 11,174,743 inhabitants in 14,518 km. At the 2010 revision, the aire urbaine of Paris had 1,750 communes.

The area had a population of 13,064,617 as of 2018. Nearly 20% of France's population resides in the region.

The table below shows the population growth of the Paris metropolitan area (aire urbaine), i.e. the urban area (pôle urbain) and the commuter belt (couronne périurbaine) surrounding it. (Note: the area shown in red and pink in the map above):

Paris Saint-Germain FC were initially fan-owned, with around 20,000 members under a non-profit association governed by 1901 French law (Association PSG). The club was led by board members Guy Crescent, Pierre-Étienne Guyot and Henri Patrelle. In 1973, a group of French businessmen led by Daniel Hechter and Francis Borelli took control of the club. PSG changed ownership in 1991 when Canal+ created a professional sports company (SASP) structure, followed by another takeover in 2006 by Colony Capital. Since 2011, Qatar Sports Investments (QSI) have been the majority owners, currently holding 85.9% of shares, with Arctos Partners (12.5%) and Boardroom (1.6%) holding the remainder.

Backed by the Qatari state, QSI acquired a controlling stake in 2011 and became sole owner in 2012. Since then, PSG have been widely described as a state-backed club and among the wealthiest in world football. QSI chairman Nasser Al-Khelaifi has served as PSG president since the takeover. However, the Emir of Qatar, Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, as head of the Qatar Investment Authority (QIA) and founder of QSI, is widely regarded as the ultimate decision-maker on major strategic matters. Upon arrival, QSI pledged to build a squad capable of winning the UEFA Champions League. Since 2011, PSG have invested heavily in transfer fees and wages. This spending has led to domestic dominance and two consecutive Champions League titles, but also scrutiny under UEFA Financial Fair Play Regulations.

As of May 2026, PSG ranked fourth globally in football revenue with €837 million according to Deloitte, and were valued at around €5 billion by Forbes, making them the fifth-most valuable club in the world. This growth has been driven by sustained investment, sporting success, global branding, and commercial partnerships. Deloitte also ranked PSG's women's team among the top revenue-generating sides in world women's football, while the club's handball section operates with one of the largest budgets in European handball.

The development of football in Paris was considered a major objective in the late 1960s, as the French capital lacked an elite football club. In January 1969, the French Football Federation (FFF) announced a project to create a major new club in Paris and established a study committee. The initiative was led by Fernand Sastre, general secretary and future president of the FFF, Henri Patrelle, president of Stade Saint-Germain, and Guy Crescent, businessman and CEO of Calberson. Following a large consultation across the Paris region, the Paris FC project was officially launched in the summer of 1969 under the co-presidency of Guy Crescent and Pierre-Étienne Guyot. However, the project faced financial difficulties, prompting Crescent and Guyot to seek external advice from Real Madrid president Santiago Bernabéu, who recommended launching a subscription campaign. As a result, 17,400 subscriptions were secured by February 1970. The club was therefore initially fan-owned, with annual membership fees ranging between 25 and 40 francs.

Despite this initial success, Paris FC remained a virtual entity, lacking a stadium, players, and a coach. In spring 1970, the club failed to secure a merger with any regional team, while the FFF declined to grant direct entry into the top division. Facing the risk of reimbursing subscribers, a merger with Stade Saint-Germain became the preferred solution. In May 1970, the FFF and the clubs involved approved the proposal. Paris Saint-Germain was subsequently founded on 12 August 1970 following the merger process. It became the first club in French football history to be created with financial contributions from supporters through a subscription campaign.

PSG was managed by Crescent, Guyot and Patrelle until 1972, when it split from Paris FC following internal disagreements and structural changes. In 1973, after a season marked by significant debt and the loss of most of its subscribers, Patrelle sought new financial backing. He obtained support from French fashion designer and investor Daniel Hechter and his associates. They subsequently took control of the club, with Hechter appointed president and Francis Borelli as vice-president. Borelli later became president in 1978, following Hechter's lifetime ban from football imposed by the FFF in connection with a ticketing scandal at the Parc des Princes.

PSG's first major trophies were won during Borelli's presidency. The club benefited from relatively stable management and regular qualification for European competitions, which contributed to improved financial conditions. The competitive landscape in Paris changed in 1984 with the rise of Racing CFF, rebranded as Matra Racing and supported by the Matra conglomerate. The club briefly emerged as a rival to PSG for status as the capital's leading team. However, the project proved short-lived, and by 1989 Matra Racing had returned to the lower divisions following financial collapse. During this period, Borelli accumulated significant debt in an effort to maintain PSG's position in Paris. Financial irregularities in his management were later exposed in 1991, by which time the club had already accrued substantial liabilities and faced the risk of insolvency. He ultimately resigned under pressure from the Council of Paris.

Eager to revive interest in Ligue 1 and attract more subscribers, French media company Canal+ invested in PSG in May 1991. Canal+ paid off the club's debts and saved it from bankruptcy. Until June 1991, the Association Paris Saint-Germain Football Club (Association loi 1901), a non-profit organization, had managed the club's amateur and professional activities for two decades. When Canal+ took control of PSG in May 1991, it created the Société Anonyme Sportive Professionnelle Paris Saint-Germain Football (SASP, i.e., a professional sports private limited company) shortly afterwards, initially holding 39.8% of the shares. The association transferred the professional section to the SASP.

The takeover revitalized PSG. Backed by its shareholders, rising attendance at the Parc des Princes, and increasing domestic and European television revenues driven by improved sporting performances, PSG became one of the richest clubs in France and in Europe. The club's budget rose to 120 million francs, and high-profile signings such as Valdo, David Ginola, George Weah, Raí and Youri Djorkaeff helped secure several trophies between 1993 and 1998. The club was managed by several delegated presidents during this period; Michel Denisot was the first and by far the most successful.

After the creation of the SASP, the Association Paris Saint-Germain retained 51% of the shares. Canal+ became the majority shareholder in 1997 (56.8%) following the transfer of 17% of shares from the PSG Association (reduced to 34%). The association withdrew in 2001 in favor of Canal+, which reinvested tens of millions of euros in the club and increased its stake to 90.8%. Canal+ became sole owner in 2005 after buying out historical shareholders Charles Talar (4.5%) and Bernard Brochand (2.9%) in 2004, and Alain Cayzac (1.8%) in 2005.

Between 1991 and 1998, PSG president Michel Denisot ensured the club's financial stability, supported by sporting success and rising broadcasting revenues. His departure at the end of the 1997–98 season marked a turning point, after which PSG struggled on the pitch and began to accumulate debt off it. Despite recapitalization in 2004, financial losses continued to rise, and between 2004 and 2006 PSG remained the only major French club with significant losses, despite an increase of the turnover. Led by players such as Marco Simone, Ronaldinho and Pauleta, the club won four trophies after the departure of Michel Denisot between 1998 and 2006, but performances gradually declined.

A separation from Canal+ eventually became inevitable. In April 2006, Canal+ sold the club to investment firms Colony Capital, Butler Capital Partners and Morgan Stanley for €41 million, forming a consortium with equal ownership. But the negative spiral continues and PSG spent two seasons narrowly avoiding relegation. Colony Capital gradually increased its stake between 2008 and 2009 to 98.42%, while Butler retained 1.58%. After significantly reducing losses and won 2 trophies despite poor sporting performances in the league and numerous scandals with supporters, Colony Capital announced in 2010 that it was seeking new investors to help transform PSG into a title contender in the coming years.

Paris Saint-Germain were transformed in June 2011 when Qatar Sports Investments (QSI), a state-backed investment fund linked to the Qatar Investment Authority (QIA), acquired a 70% stake in the club. Colony Capital (29%) and Butler Capital Partners (1%) initially remained minority shareholders. QSI chairman Nasser Al-Khelaifi was appointed club president following the takeover, on behalf of Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, the Emir of Qatar. Al Thani is also the founder and chairman of the QIA, QSI's parent organization. QSI subsequently acquired full ownership in March 2012, valuing the club at approximately €100 million. Through QSI and other state-linked entities, including Qatar Tourism Authority (QTA), QNB Group (QNB) and Ooredoo, PSG has been described as a state-supported club among the wealthiest in world football.

The strategy behind Qatar's acquisition of PSG has been linked to efforts to project a global sporting image ahead of the 2022 FIFA World Cup. In November 2010, shortly before the vote, UEFA president Michel Platini met with the Emir of Qatar, the Qatari prime minister, and French president Nicolas Sarkozy, a known supporter of PSG, at a time when the club was struggling financially under Colony Capital. Following this meeting, Platini reportedly changed his voting intention from the United States to Qatar, and six months later QSI acquired PSG.

Since the takeover, PSG have developed from Ligue 1 strugglers into one of Europe's leading clubs and regular UEFA Champions League contenders, driven by significant investment in player recruitment. The club has dominated French football during this period and has won back-to-back UEFA Champions League titles in 2025 and 2026. PSG's spending has also resulted in scrutiny under UEFA Financial Fair Play Regulations (FFP).

In August 2012, PSG signed a major nation branding agreement with the QTA to promote Qatar internationally. The agreement was reported to be worth up to €1 billion over five seasons, including €100 million for the first season. The partnership was formally announced in October 2013, but the contract included retroactive payments of €100 million and €200 million for the 2011–12 and 2012–13 seasons, respectively, effectively offsetting reported losses during that period.

In October 2013, UEFA's Club Financial Control Body (CFCB) concluded that the QTA agreement, valued at €200 million per year and partially backdated, was not in line with fair market value and reduced its assessed value to €100 million. As a result, UEFA ruled in April 2014 that PSG's financial deficit for the 2013–14 season exceeded Financial Fair Play limits, which at the time restricted aggregate losses to €45 million over a monitored period. UEFA's revised valuation saw PSG's deficit for the 2013–14 season reach €107m — more than double the amount allowed under FFP rules, which limit losses to €45m over the last two years. In May 2014, UEFA imposed sanctions on PSG, including a €60 million fine. In September 2015, the restrictions were lifted. In August 2016, PSG and QTA renewed their partnership until June 2019.

In August 2017, PSG activated the €222 million release clause of Barcelona player Neymar, making him the most expensive transfer in football history. Later that month, Kylian Mbappé joined PSG from Monaco for €180 million, structured in three installments. UEFA subsequently opened a new FFP investigation into PSG. In June 2018, UEFA cleared the club of breaching FFP rules but reduced the assessed value of its Qatar-based sponsorship deals from €100 million to €58 million. UEFA also stated that the QTA agreement would no longer be taken into account beyond June 2019. PSG met UEFA's requirement to generate €50 million in player sales before the end of June 2018.

PSG appealed to the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) in November 2018. In March 2019, the CAS upheld PSG's appeal, allowing the club to avoid sanctions for the 2015–17 assessment period. The club also met the €60 million requirement in player sales before the end of June 2019. The club did not renew its long-term agreement with the QTA after its expiry in June 2019, instead moving towards more conventional commercial partnerships. These included deals with Accor (€65m/year), Nike (€80m/year), and Air Jordan (€67m/year), but also continued Qatar-linked sponsorship agreements, including Qatar Airways as shirt sponsor (€70m/year until 2028).

In December 2023, Arctos Partners acquired a 12.5% minority stake in PSG, valuing the club at around €4.25 billion, while QSI retained 87.5% control. Arctos reportedly invested around €530 million for its minority stake. Arctos focused on international growth and infrastructure projects, including the women's team and the Campus PSG training centre, while discussions continued over the future of the Parc des Princes. In June 2025, Boardroom, the company co-founded by Kevin Durant, acquired a 1.6% minority stake in PSG. The club stated that the partnership would support its multi-sport strategy, including future developments in basketball.

Paris Saint-Germain recorded a profit of 1.5 million francs in their inaugural 1970–71 season, but subsequently accumulated increasing debt. By the early 1990s, the club faced severe financial difficulties, with debts of around 50 million francs, which the Council of Paris refused to cover. Canal+ invested in the club in May 1991, clearing its debts and restructuring it as a professional sports public limited company (SASP), after which PSG became one of the richest clubs in France. Between 1991 and 1998, PSG benefited from rising television revenues, strong sporting performances and increased attendance at the Parc des Princes. The club opened its first official store in 1998 and entered the Deloitte Football Money League, before dropping out the following season amid sporting and financial decline.

PSG recorded negative net income between 1998 and 2011, with cumulative losses of nearly €300 million under Canal+ and Colony Capital ownership. At the time, the club generated €101 million in revenue by season and was valued at €100 million. In June 2011, Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, Emir of Qatar, acquired PSG through Qatar Sports Investments (QSI), which covered €15–20 million in debt and €19 million in losses from the 2010–11 season. Backed by the Qatari state, PSG became one of the wealthiest clubs in world football.

Ahead of the 2011–12 campaign, club president Nasser Al-Khelaifi announced plans to restore profitability, a feat not achieved since the tenure of Michel Denisot in the 1990s. The club returned to the Deloitte rankings that season. PSG posted profits in 2014–15, 2015–16, 2017–18 and 2018–19. Following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020, PSG suffered a major financial setback. Combined with high wage costs, the club recorded losses in each of the next five seasons, peaking at €368 million in 2021–22. After moving away from a star-driven wage structure, PSG's losses have sharply decreased since 2022, from €110 million in 2022–23 to €60 million in 2023–24 and €40 million in 2024–25.

As of May 2026, PSG ranked fourth globally in revenue (€837 million) according to Deloitte and fifth in club valuation (€5 billion) according to Forbes. Growth has been driven by sustained investment, sporting success, high-profile signings such as Zlatan Ibrahimović, Neymar, Kylian Mbappé and Lionel Messi, and commercial partnerships with the Qatar Tourism Authority (QTA), Nike, Air Jordan, Accor and Qatar Airways. PSG's women's team generated €4.6 million in revenue, while the handball section operated with one of the largest budgets in European handball.

Paris Saint-Germain played without a shirt sponsor until 1972, when the club signed a deal with Canadian grocery chain Montreal. PSG then signed with Canadian soft-drink brand Canada Dry for the 1973–74 season in what was the biggest sponsorship contract in Division 2 history at the time. The club also reached an agreement with French radio station RTL worth 1.2 million francs for the 1974–75 season, conditional on promotion to the top flight. PSG achieved promotion and the RTL partnership lasted until 1991.

Between 1986 and 1995, the club featured multiple shirt sponsors, including French media company Canal+, French television channel La Cinq, Japanese electronics company TDK, computer manufacturer Commodore, dairy company Müller, Spanish car manufacturer SEAT and British tea brand Lipton. German automobile manufacturer Opel became the sole shirt sponsor in 1995 and remained until 2002. It was succeeded by French multimedia company Thomson (2002–2006) and Dubai-based airline Emirates (2006–2019).

Following the end of the Emirates partnership, French hospitality company Accor became PSG's shirt sponsor in 2019. Its Accor Live Limitless (ALL) loyalty platform appeared on the front of the shirts until 2022. Accor reportedly paid around €65 million per year, compared to approximately €25 million under the Emirates deal. In June 2022, Qatari carrier Qatar Airways replaced Accor as shirt sponsor under a contract reportedly worth close to €70 million per season until 2028.

French sportswear manufacturer Le Coq Sportif became Paris Saint-Germain's first kit supplier in 1970 and served in three separate spells: 1970–1975, 1976–77, and 1978–1986. French sportswear brand Kopa and American sportswear company Pony supplied the club's kits during the intervening 1975–76 and 1977–78 seasons, respectively. German sportswear manufacturer Adidas then served as PSG's kit supplier from 1986 to 1989.

Nike replaced Adidas ahead of the 1989–90 season and has remained the club's kit supplier ever since. The deal was renewed until the end of the 2021–22 campaign in December 2013. The American sportswear brand increased the €6.5m annual commitment it had with the club to €25m. In June 2019, PSG and Nike signed a long-term extension through 2032, reportedly worth €80 million per year, making it one of the most lucrative kit deals in European football and the largest sponsorship agreement in the club's history. The agreement covers the men's and women's football teams as well as the handball section.

In September 2018, PSG and Nike-owned basketball brand Air Jordan announced a partnership under which Jordan would produce selected PSG kits and apparel. Originally signed for three years and subsequently extended several times, the agreement is currently expected to run until at least 2027 and is reportedly worth around €67 million per year. The 2021–22 home shirt was the first PSG home kit to feature the Jordan logo, after the brand had previously produced only the club's away, third and fourth kits.

Paris Saint-Germain have spent billions on player transfers since Qatar Sports Investments (QSI) acquired the club in 2011. However, PSG were also active in the transfer market in earlier decades, particularly under presidents Daniel Hechter and Francis Borelli in the 1970s and 1980s. Jean-Pierre Dogliani became the club's first record signing in the summer of 1973, when Hechter paid Monaco €10k for the French playmaker. He was soon surpassed by François M'Pelé, who joined from Ajaccio in December 1973 for €130k.

After becoming president in June 1974, Hechter signed Mustapha Dahleb from Sedan for a French record €205k, regarded as PSG's first star signing. A year later, the club paid the same fee for Humberto Coelho from Benfica. He later became the club's record sale when he returned to Benfica for €107k in 1977. Carlos Bianchi arrived that same year from Stade de Reims for €230k, becoming PSG's most expensive player at the time and Hechter's final signing as president. His right-hand man, vice-president Francis Borelli, succeeded him.

When Bianchi left in 1979 to join Strasbourg for €230k, he also became PSG's most valuable sale up to that point. He was eventually surpassed by Ivica Šurjak, sold for €460k to Udinese in 1982. Borelli continued his predecessor's transfer policy, breaking the club record in 1979 with the signing of João Alves from Benfica for €760k. Jules Bocandé nearly doubled this figure in 1986, joining from Metz for €1.5 million.

PSG also made waves in the transfer market during the 1990s and early 2000s. Backed by French media group Canal+, which acquired the club in May 1991, PSG broke its transfer record twice ahead of the 1991–92 season. Brazil international Ricardo arrived from Benfica for €4.6m, while French right back Jocelyn Angloma was sold to Marseille for €6m. Both records were later surpassed by Liberian striker George Weah. The Parisian club paid €6.5m to sign him from Monaco in 1992 and then sold him for €6.9m to AC Milan in 1995.

The spending continued with French prodigy Florian Maurice, who became the most expensive transfer in France when he joined the capital club from Lyon for €7m in 1997. PSG then broke the national transfer record twice more, signing Jay-Jay Okocha from Fenerbahçe for €12.4m in 1998, and later paying Real Madrid €34.5m for Nicolas Anelka in 2000. In terms of departures, Brazilian winger Leonardo was sold to AC Milan for €8.5m in 1997, becoming the club's record sale at the time. This was later surpassed by Laurent Robert 's €14.33m move to Newcastle United for €14.33m in 2001, followed by Anelka's €15m transfer to Manchester City in 2002, and Ronaldinho 's €30m move to Barcelona for €30m in 2003.

Following their takeover by QSI in June 2011, Paris Saint-Germain broke the French transfer record with the purchase of Argentine playmaker Javier Pastore from Palermo for €42m that summer. This fee was matched by Thiago Silva, who was signed from AC Milan in 2012, and then eclipsed by the €64m capture of Edinson Cavani from Napoli in 2013. The club also spent heavily on several other stars, including Zlatan Ibrahimović, David Luiz and Ángel Di María. On the sales side, David Luiz and Gonçalo Guedes also commanded significant fees, with both surpassing Ronaldinho in PSG's list of record sales. Chelsea paid €35m for David Luiz in the 2016 winter transfer window, while Valencia acquired Guedes for €40m in the 2018 summer window.

In August 2017, PSG broke the world transfer record with the signing of Neymar. Dubbed by media outlets as "the transfer of the century," the Brazil playmaker became the most expensive player in history after PSG activated his €222m release clause to sign him from Barcelona. Later that month, young French forward Kylian Mbappé joined from Monaco in a deal worth €180 million, paid in instalments over several years. The transfer made him the second-most expensive player in football history.

Since then, PSG have been required to moderate their transfer spending due to UEFA Financial Fair Play Regulations. In the summer of 2019, the club recorded €106m in sales and €95m in signings, marking the first time in the QSI era that PSG posted a positive transfer balance, with a surplus of €11m. They still signed Mauro Icardi for €50m in 2020–21 and Achraf Hakimi for €60m in 2021–22. In addition to Hakimi, PSG signed Lionel Messi, Sergio Ramos, Gianluigi Donnarumma and Georginio Wijnaldum on free transfers, while Nuno Mendes arrived on an initial loan, which was later made permanent in 2022 for €38m. PSG's summer of 2021 has been described as one of the most notable transfer windows in football history.

In June 2022, PSG president Nasser Al-Khelaifi announced the end of the club's "superstar era", shifting its focus towards a team-first approach centred on financial sustainability and youth development. Several high-profile players departed in 2023, including Lionel Messi and Sergio Ramos upon the expiration of their contracts, while Neymar was sold to Al Hilal for a club-record €90 million as PSG recorded a club-record €210 million in transfer sales. Kylian Mbappé left for Real Madrid on a free transfer in 2024 after running down his contract.

As part of the rebuild, PSG invested in young French players such as Ousmane Dembélé, Warren Zaïre-Emery, Bradley Barcola and Désiré Doué, alongside international prospects including Vitinha, Lucas Beraldo, Manuel Ugarte, João Neves, Willian Pacho and Lee Kang-in. In September 2025, PSG sold Gianluigi Donnarumma to Manchester City for €30m after failing to agree on a contract renewal, with the goalkeeper seeking a salary that would have destabilized the club's wage structure. Sporting director Luís Campos reiterated the club's merit-based approach to salaries and playing time, reflecting its continued focus on financial discipline.

The 2026 summer transfer window continued this approach, with the departures of several key players, including Gonçalo Ramos, Lee Kang-in, Ibrahim Mbaye and Bradley Barcola, generating a club-record €334 million in sales. Nearly half of this total came from Barcola's transfer to Liverpool for €125 million, surpassing Neymar as the most expensive sale in the club's history. The previous PSG record for transfer revenue was €210 million in 2023. PSG signed Ferran Torres, Mika Godts, Maghnes Akliouche and Lucas Digne as replacements for the departing players, for a combined fee of €152 million. With a positive transfer balance of €182 million, PSG recorded the highest positive transfer balance in the club's history, marking the second time in the QSI era and the first time since 2019 that the club recorded a positive transfer balance.

Paris-Saclay is a research-intensive and business cluster currently under construction in the south of Paris, France. It encompasses research facilities, two French major universities with higher education institutions (grandes écoles) and also research centers of private companies. In 2013, the Technology Review put Paris-Saclay in the top 8 world research clusters. In 2014, it comprised almost 15% of French scientific research capacity.

The earliest settlements are from the 1950s, and this area was subsequently extended several times during the 1970s and 2000s. Several projects are underway to continue the development of the campus, including the relocation of some facilities.

The area is now home to many of the Europe's largest high-tech corporations, and to the two French universities Paris-Saclay University (CentraleSupélec, ENS Paris-Saclay, Paris-Saclay Faculty of Science, etc.) and the Polytechnic Institute of Paris (École Polytechnique, Telecom Paris, etc.). The Paris-Saclay University was ranked 15th in the world in the 2023 ARWU ranking. It was also placed 1st in the world for Mathematics and 9th in the world for Physics (1st in Europe).

The goal was to strengthen the cluster to build an international scientific and technological hub that can compete with other high-technology business districts, such as Silicon Valley or Cambridge, MA. This project started in 2006 and is likely to end in 2022. The main part is the construction of the campus du plateau de Saclay.

Several French national institutions settled on the plateau after the end of World War II. The CNRS is the first to settle there, headed by Frédéric Joliot-Curie, who bought the estate Button at Gif-sur-Yvette in 1946. The following year, the newly created CEA (the High Commissioner is also Joliot-Curie) to purchase land. The same year, ONERA settles on the plateau in Palaiseau. The Saclay center was inaugurated in 1952.

At the same time, higher education institutions settled nearby. The University of Paris is also up in the region in 1955 with the purchase of 50 hectares in the communes of Orsay and Bures. This Orsay campus brings laboratories of the Paris Faculty of Sciences (later the University of Paris-Sud) and moved to 1956. Other institutions followed with the installation of HEC in 1964 with its move to the town of Jouy-en-Josas, then with the arrival of the École supérieure d'optique in 1965 on the Orsay campus.

Research centers related to private companies also settled at that time in 1968 with the arrival of the Central Research Laboratory of Thomson-CSF.

In the 1970s, the École polytechnique and Supélec settled on the plateau, the first in 1976 in the Palaiseau area, the other in 1975 in the Moulon area. The project had a scheduled time to install other schools soon after. The Moulon farm which currently houses the genetics and plant breeding was restored in 1978.

Institutions on the plateau at this time begin to join together in an association d'établissements scientifiques (association of scientific institutions, AES) to reflect future developments of the area.

At the beginning of the twenty-first century, research centers of private companies settled on the campus. In 2000, Danone chooses to establish a center for Research and Development in the area of Palaiseau, joined in 2006 by Thales laboratories, and in 2009 by Kraft Foods which invests €15 million to install one of its expertise global centers. Other projects removal were also studied, including a research center of EDF, studied in 2010.

Two thematic advanced research are also on the campus, with the creation of Digiteo and Triangle de la physique in 2006. SOLEIL, which creation was decided in 2000 after three years of opposition of Claude Allègre, was inaugurated the same year, built with a budget of 313 million euros. The project of neuroimaging center NeuroSpin is launched in 2006 also on the plateau.

The first building constructed specifically for the campus is the Pôle commun de recherche en informatique (Joint Research Cluster Computing), which was inaugurated in November 2011.

The proposed new construction and renovation of campus was launched by President Nicolas Sarkozy who wants to create a "French Silicon Valley ". The entire project is estimated to three billion euros funding.

The different steps to set up the campus are part of several government operations.

In February 2001, the Versailles Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines University became a founding member of the scientific cooperation foundation foreshadowing the future campus on the Saclay plateau.

In November 2011, the Mines ParisTech finally withdrew the project.

Three administratives structures have been created for this project:

The last institutions to move on campus are mainly schools from the Paris-Saclay University, such as:

Institutions that have already moved on campus, such as:

Along with other institutions already located in the cluster, these education institutions are to be merged in Paris-Saclay University, such as:

This Paris-Saclay University was ranked 14th in the world in the 2020 ARWU ranking. The Polytechnic Institute of Paris, formed around the École Polytechnique, was ranked 61st internationally by the QS World University Rankings 2021, 93rd by the Times Higher Education World University Rankings 2020, and 2nd by the Times Higher Education Small University Rankings.

The campus has currently three main areas:

The area, located in the cities of Orsay and Gif-sur-Yvette, includes the main campus of Paris-Saclay University, which has 15,000 students in the area, with its graduate schools CentraleSupélec and the École normale supérieure Paris-Saclay, its Faculty of Science, its Polytechnic University School and the Paris-Saclay University Institute of Technology. There should then be around 8,100 staff, 5,000 students for engineering schools and 8,000 students only in the university's faculty of science.

The French National Centre for Scientific Research is located at Gif-sur-Yvette since 1946. The area has a dozen research units and service, and also 1,500 people.

It should accommodate several components of the Paris-Saclay University (earth sciences, economics and management, law and sport) as part of the development in the 2010s, but also several facilities pooled projected by the campus operation (conference center, students and international doctoral students accommodation centers, home business, documentation, logistics).

The area, located in the city of Palaiseau, includes the main campus of the Polytechnic Institute of Paris, the second research university of Paris-Saclay, with the École Polytechnique, the ENSTA Paris, the ENSAE Paris, the Telecom Paris and Telecom SudParis.

It also includes the ONERA and the Paris-Saclay University's Institut d'Optique Graduate School and AgroParisTech / INRAE in 2021. The IPSA aerospace College moved to Ivry-sur-Seine in 2009.

HEC Paris, associate member of the Polytechnic Institute of Paris, has been located at Jouy-en-Josas since 1964. INRAE has 1,400 people in the area, and facilities for experimentation on livestock and microbiology. An extension of these activities provided for the arrival of more than 300 people in 2012, with the construction of Biosafety P3 facilities for virology.

It includes the CEA 's Saclay Nuclear Research Centre, member of Paris-Saclay University, the Orphée reactor and SOLEIL in Saint-Aubin.

It includes Nokia in France (former Alcatel-Lucent), in Nozay.

The Satory site is located in the immediate vicinity of the Palace of Versailles, in the historic heart of the city. At the hinge between the Bièvre valley and Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, it is divided into two parts. The western part includes Army establishments and companies linked to the defence sector, such as Nexter Systems and Renault Trucks Defense. It also brings together several players in the field of mobility, with the presence of IFSTTAR, a public transport research organisation, the Citroën Racing motor sports team and the Val d'Or circuit, which also includes test tracks. The eastern part is home to logistics and training units of the Gendarmerie Nationale and the French Army, as well as 5,000 housing units for staff and their families.

As part of the Paris-Saclay project, the EPA Paris-Saclay is being asked to support development operations undertaken by the Yvelines departement and Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines. The rail corridor, which separates the latter in two, constitutes a reserve of space available for construction.

The ESTACA Paris-Saclay institution moved to Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines in 2015.

Various extensions of the campus were criticized by environmental movements in the early 1990s who accuse it of reducing the size of the agricultural areas. These criticisms are reformulated in the expansion projects of the 2000s.

Some also criticize a project that promotes the Grandes Ecoles too much, especially with regard to the governance of the Campus. The Snesup (Syndicat national de l'enseignement supérieur) denounces "a project based on an elitist vision of higher education" and the exclusion of many institutions from the board of directors. The management project initiated by the "campus plan" has also been criticized by local politicians who criticize the state for being the sole leader of the project, or other project stakeholders who criticize the state of exercising too much intervention.

The organization referred to as a business cluster is also criticized by the actors who doubt its effectiveness or fear that its development would be detrimental to other geographical areas, as in the case of the University of Paris-Sud and the École normale supérieure Paris-Saclay leaving towns in the Paris region, or in the case of grandes écoles leaving Paris.

Parkour (French: [ paʁkuʁ ]) is a self-led movement practice where practitioners use only the abilities of their bodies to interact with obstacles in any given environment. With roots in military obstacle course training and martial arts, parkour includes flipping, running, climbing, swinging, vaulting, jumping, plyometrics, rolling, and whatever is suitable for a given situation. Parkour is an activity that can be practiced alone or with others, and is usually carried out in urban spaces, though it can be done anywhere. It involves seeing one's environment in a new way, and envisioning the potential for navigating it by movement around, across, through, over and under its features.

Historically, flips and other acrobatic movements were not considered essential to the discipline of parkour, and the term freerunning was applied to parkour-like movement that emphasized artistry rather than efficiency. However, as the parkour culture evolved, its distinction from freerunning became increasingly blurred. Parkour athletes now broadly agree that flips are unambiguously part of parkour.

The practice of similar movements had existed in communities around the world for centuries, notably in Africa and China, the latter tradition (qinggong) popularized by Hong Kong action cinema (notably Jackie Chan) during the 1970s to 1980s. The label of Parkour in reference to this kind of movement was established by David Belle when he and others founded the Yamakasi in the 1990s. The discipline was popularised in the 1990s and 2000s through films, documentaries, video games, and advertisements.

Competitive parkour began to grow in popularity during the mid-2000s, and today, several disjoint organizations produce competitions under the title of Parkour World Championships.

The word parkour derives from parcours du combattant (obstacle course), the classic obstacle course method of military training proposed by Georges Hébert. Raymond Belle used the term " les parcours " to encompass all of his training including climbing, jumping, running, balancing, and the other methods he undertook in his personal athletic advancement. His son, David, further developed his father's methods and achieved success as a stuntman, and one day on a film set showed his 'Speed Air Man' video to Hubert Koundé. Koundé suggested he change the "c" of " parcours " to a "k" because it was stronger and more dynamic, and to remove the silent "s" for the same reason, forming " parkour ".

A practitioner of parkour is called a "Parkour Athlete" or simply a "Parkourist." Historically, practitioners of parkour were called traceurs, with the feminine form being traceuse. These terms were nouns derived from the French verb tracer, which normally means "to trace", as in "tracing a path", in reference to drawing. The verb tracer used familiarly means: "to hurry up". The term traceur was originally the name of a parkour group headed by David Belle which included Sébastien Foucan and Stéphane Vigroux.

A jam refers to a meeting of traceurs, involving training lasting anywhere from hours to several days, often with people from different cities. The first parkour jam was organised in July 2002 by Romain Drouet, with a dozen people including Sébastien Foucan and Stéphane Vigroux.

The practice of similar movements existed in various communities around the world for centuries prior to the foundation of a parkour movement, which was influenced by these earlier traditions. Such athletic traditions had existed among various indigenous peoples in Africa for centuries. A similar discipline in Chinese culture is qinggong, a Chinese martial arts training technique that also dates back centuries. It was notably taught at the Peking Opera School in the 20th century; the school's most notable students are the Seven Little Fortunes, including Sammo Hung and most famously Jackie Chan, providing a basis for their acrobatic stunt work in Hong Kong action cinema from the 1970s onwards.

In Western Europe, a forerunner of parkour was developed by French naval officer Georges Hébert, who before World War I promoted athletic skill based on the models of indigenous tribes he had met in Africa. He noted, "their bodies were splendid, flexible, nimble, skillful, enduring, and resistant but yet they had no other tutor in gymnastics but their lives in nature." His rescue efforts during the 1902 eruption of Mount Pelée on Saint-Pierre, Martinique reinforced his belief that athletic skill must be combined with courage and altruism. Hébert became a physical education tutor at the college of Reims in France. Hébert set up a "méthode naturelle" (natural method) session consisting of ten fundamental groups: walking, running, jumping, quadrupedal movement, climbing, balancing, throwing, lifting, self-defence, and swimming. These were intended to develop "the three main forces": energetic (willpower, courage, coolness, and firmness), moral (benevolence, assistance, honour, and honesty), and physical (muscles and breath). During World War I and World War II, teaching continued to expand, becoming the standard system of French military education and training. Inspired by Hébert, a Swiss architect developed a " parcours du combattant " —military obstacle course—the first of the courses that are now standard in military training and which led to the development of civilian fitness trails and confidence courses.

Born in 1922 in the US, John Ciampa was an acrobatic stuntman and entertainer known by the stage names of the Human Fly, the Flying Phantom and the Brooklyn Tarzan whose acrobatic buildering and freestyle tree climbing bear striking resemblance to late 20th Century parkour. Those feats were featured in two 1942 Paramount Pictures newsreels coincident with the release of the feature film Tarzan's New York Adventure.

Born in 1939 in Vietnam, Raymond Belle was the son of a French physician and Vietnamese mother. During the First Indochina War, his father died and he was separated from his mother, after which he was sent to a military orphanage in Da Lat at the age of seven. He took it upon himself to train harder and longer than everyone else in order never to be a victim. At night, when everyone else was asleep, he would be outside running or climbing trees. He would use the military obstacle courses in secret, and also created courses of his own that tested his endurance, strength, and flexibility. Doing this enabled him not only to survive the hardships he experienced during his childhood, but also eventually to thrive. After the Battle of Dien Bien Phu in 1954, he returned to France and remained in military education until the age of 19, when he joined the Paris Fire Brigade, a French Army unit.

Raymond's son, David Belle, was born in 1973. He experimented with gymnastics and athletics but became increasingly disaffected with both school and the sports clubs. As he got older, he learned of his father's exploits and was increasingly curious about what had enabled his father to accomplish these feats. Through conversations with his father, he realised that what he really wanted was a means to develop skills that would be useful to him in life, rather than just training to kick a ball or perform moves in a padded, indoor environment.

Through conversations with his father, David learned about this way of training that his father called " parcours ". He heard his father talk of the many repetitions he had done in order to find the best way of doing things. He learned that for his father, training was not a game but something vital which enabled him to survive and to protect the people he cared about. David realised that this was what he had been searching for, and so he began training in the same way. After a time, he found it far more important to him than schooling and he gave up his other commitments to focus all his time on his training.

David initially trained on his own, and after moving to Lisses, found other young men (including his cousins) who had similar desires, and they began to train together. The group eventually included David Belle, Sébastien Foucan, Châu Belle Dinh, Williams Belle, Yann Hnautra, Laurent Piemontesi, Guylain N'Guba Boyeke, Malik Diouf, and Charles Perrière. The group began calling themselves the Yamakasi, from the Lingala ya makási, meaning strong in one's person, or "strong man, strong spirit" (see § Name and split below).

The group drew inspiration from Asian culture and Asian martial arts, notably the acrobatics of Jackie Chan such as qinggong displays in his Hong Kong action films, and the training philosophy of Bruce Lee, considering the latter to be the "unofficial president" of their group. The group also was influenced by the martial arts films of Belgian actor Jean-Claude Van Damme.

The group put themselves through challenges that forced them to find the physical and mental strength to succeed. Examples included training without food or water, or sleeping on the floor without a blanket to learn to endure the cold. For example, no one in the group was permitted to be late for training, as it would hold back the whole group. If any member completed a challenge, everyone else had to do the same thing. During their training, no one was allowed to complain or be negative. Few excuses were allowed. For instance, if someone claimed that his shoes were too worn out in to make a jump, he had to do it anyway, even if it meant doing the jump barefoot. At the same time, everyone was required to have knowledge of their own limits.

Respecting one's health and physical well-being was one of the foundations of the group. If any member hurt himself during or after the execution of a movement, the movement was deemed a failure. A movement executed only once was not considered an achievement; only with repetition was the challenge complete. Every movement had to be repeated at least ten times in a row without the traceur having to push his limits or sustaining any injury. If any mistake was made by any traceur in the group everyone had to start all over again.

Humility was an important principle. No traceur was allowed to feel superior to someone else, for example, by executing a movement only to show off in front of someone who could not perform the movement. If any traceur in the group claimed that he had completed a difficult and dangerous challenge that should not be attempted unaided, he had to prove his claims by doing the challenge again. Anyone who lied violated the principle of humility.

To join the group, new members had to be recommended by an existing member and then pass tests to evaluate their motivation for joining. Despite the huge emphasis on the collective, each traceur had to progress and develop independently—"to create the means to be yourself" —and there was a complete trust within the group. Every traceur was to encourage the others and show confidence through their behaviour. If a member violated the principles, the group could meet without the offending person to discuss various punishments. Anyone deemed unsuitable could be temporarily or even permanently banned from the group in order to uphold its disciplines and values.

In 1997, David Belle's brother Jean-François invited the group to perform for the public in a firefighter show in Paris. For the performance, the group named themselves Yamakasi, from the Congolese Lingala ya makási, meaning strong in one's person, or "strong man, strong spirit". Sébastien Foucan also invented a name for what they were doing: " l'art du déplacement " (French for "the art of movement"). The firefighter performance caused both positive and negative attention. Some members of the group were concerned how the public would view their discipline since the performance did not demonstrate all aspects of it, such as their hard training and their values and ethics. Jean-François also sent pictures and video of the group to a French TV programme, and the popularity of parkour began to increase. A series of television programmes in various countries subsequently featured video footage of the group, and they began to get more requests for performances. During this time, conflicting interests arose within the group. Sébastien Foucan wanted to teach more rather than to train more, and David Belle had the ambition to become an actor. David and Sébastien chose to leave the group, and used the name "parkour" to describe their activity (see § Etymology above). The seven remaining Yamakasi members continued to use the term l'art du déplacement (see § Derivative terminologies and disciplines below).

International parkour organisations include the World Freerunning and Parkour Federation (WFPF), established in 2008, who have worked with MTV to produce parkour-related shows. Other notable parkour governing bodies include International Parkour Federation (IPF), and Parkour Earth (PKE).

Parkour, as a competitive sport, started in the mid-2000s. Sport parkour is governed by various international governing bodies, including the International Parkour Federation (IPF), the World Freerunning Parkour Federation (WFPF), and Parkour Earth (PKE), as well as numerous national governing bodies, such as the United States Parkour Association (USPK). Notable tournaments include World Parkour Championship (WPC), Red Bull Art of Motion, Sport Parkour League (SPL) World Championships, and FIG World Parkour Championship.

World Freerunning and Parkour Federation (WFPF) was formed in 2008, being the first organization with the goal of creating a competitive format for Parkour. A rival governing body, the International Parkour Federation (IPF), was established in 2014.

Parkour appeared in the 2016 Winter Youth Olympics as a demonstration sport ran by International Gymnastics Federation (FIG). FIG has attempted to develop parkour as a new discipline for gymnastics, organised their own run tournaments, and to add parkour to the Olympics as neither an independent sport nor run by established parkour governing bodies. Most of the parkour community reacted negatively, seeing FIG as appropriating and capitalising on the sport, and that part of the culture of parkour would be lost. The hashtag #wearenotgymmastics became a popular hashtag used by parkour athletes. Several national governing bodies came together to create Parkour Earth (PKE) in 2017 to oppose FIG. Parkour Earth representing various national governing bodies wrote an open letter to ask the International Olympic Committee to reject any submission by the FIG to include Parkour on the Olympic programme.

In 2020 IPF and World Obstacle signed a memorandum of understanding to form a unified international federation governing obstacle sports, disciplines and events to have a single, collaborative governance framework to further the development and growth of obstacle sports worldwide. On March 6th 2023 The United States Parkour Association (USPK) and Sport Parkour League (SPL) formed a partnership focused on cooperating in creating and formalizing rules and regulations for the US national competitive parkour league, a circuit of 40+ competitions across the United States. On 22 December 2026 Parkour Earth (PKE) and Sport Parkour League (SPL) have signed a Memorandum of Understanding, not merging systems or creating joint events but to create official dialogue, calendar coordination, and potential aligned qualification pathways while having open system for athletes and organizers.

Parkour has adjacent related sports such as World Chase Tag, World Ninja League, Obstacle course racing, and Adventure racing.

Competitive sport parkour is divided into 3 major disciplines: speed, skill, and style, each with its own sub-events. The specific rules vary between governing bodies and tournaments. The layout of obstacles and structures used in competitions varies by tournament.

Speed discipline has parkour athletes going from point A to point B as fast as possible through an obstacle course.

Skill discipline has parkour athletes perform a series of predefined, difficult, highly technical movements or set challenges that have to be completed in a set sequence in a limited amount of time or attempts.

Style discipline focuses on parkour athletes performing high-difficulty moves, such as complex flips, vaults, and transitions during a limited time and then given points by judges based on criteria sometimes including, but not always limited to Flow, Creativity, Difficulty, Execution, and Environment Interaction. Style tournament formats vary, and can use a single style event or a combination of style events combining scores together to determine a winner.

According to Williams Belle, the philosophies and theories behind parkour are an integral aspect of the art, one that many non-practitioners have never been exposed to. Belle says he trains people because he wants it "to be alive" and "for people to use it". Châu Belle explains it is a "type of freedom" or "kind of expression"; that parkour is "only a state of mind" rather than a set of actions, and that it is about overcoming and adapting to mental and emotional obstacles as well as physical barriers. Traceur Dylan Baker says, "Parkour also influences one's thought processes by enhancing self-confidence and critical thinking skills that allow one to overcome everyday physical and mental obstacles". A study by Neuropsychiatrie de l'Enfance et de l'Adolescence (Neuropsychiatry of Childhood and Adolescence) in France found traceurs seek more excitement and leadership situations than gymnasts do.

Academic research on parkour has tended to describe how parkour provides a novel way of interacting with the urban environment that challenges the use and meaning of urban space, metropolitan life, and embodiment.

A newer convention of parkour philosophy has been the idea of "human reclamation". Andy Tran of Urban Evolution clarifies it as "a means of reclaiming what it means to be a human being. It teaches us to move using the natural methods that we should have learned from infancy. It teaches us to touch the world and interact with it, instead of being sheltered by it." Another traceur writes, "It is as much as a part of truly learning the physical art as well as being able to master the movements; it gives you the ability to overcome your fears and pains and reapply this to life, as you must be able to control your mind in order to master the art of parkour."

A campaign was started on 1 May 2007 by the Parkour.NET portal to preserve parkour's philosophy against sports competition and rivalry. In the words of Erwan Le Corre, "Competition pushes people to fight against others for the satisfaction of a crowd and/or the benefits of a few business people by changing its mindset. Parkour is unique and cannot be a competitive sport unless it ignores its altruistic core of self-development. If parkour becomes a sport, it will be hard to seriously teach and spread parkour as a non-competitive activity. And a new sport will be spread that may be called parkour, but that won't hold its philosophical essence anymore." Red Bull's sponsored athlete for parkour, Ryan Doyle, has said, "Sometimes people ask, 'Who is the best at parkour?' and it is because they don't understand what Parkour is; 'Who is the best?' is what you would say about a sport, and parkour is not a sport—it is an art, it's a discipline. That's like saying, 'What's the best song in the world?'" This seems to be the consensus among many professional traceurs who view parkour as a lifestyle more than as a set of tricks, as has been popularised by YouTube and most media exposure.

There are competitions that use parkour as the main influence for formatting and judging criteria. Sport Parkour League's "North America Parkour Championships" hosts a series of local and regional qualifier events which culminate in a final event in Vancouver, B.C. Red Bull's Art of Motion event is the longest running and highest profile professional freerunning competition.

In his 2009 book Parkour, David Belle stressed that the most important aspect of parkour is not the physical movements, but rather the practitioner's mentality and understanding of its principles. "When young trainees come to see me and give me videos telling me to check out what they are doing, I just take the tape and throw it away. What I'm interested in is what the guy's got in his head, if he has self-confidence, if he masters the technique, if he has understood the principles of parkour. I just can't deal with guys who do Parkour because they saw videos on the Internet and thought it was kinda cool and want to do even better." Further, he states the importance of traceurs being aware of their abilities and limitations, and developing in their own way. "When a young person asks me, 'Can you show me how to do this?' I simply answer, ‘No, I am going to show you how I do it. Then, you'll have to learn with your own technique, your own way of moving, your style, your abilities and your limitations. You are going to learn to be yourself, not someone else along the way.’"

The philosophy of parkour has been compared to that of martial arts. In an interview with The New Yorker, Ryan Ford, an early American adopter of parkour, acknowledges the influence of martial arts: "There's a quote by Bruce Lee that's my motto: 'There are no limits. There are plateaus, but you must not stay there, you must go beyond them. A man must constantly exceed his level.' If you're not better than you were the day before, then what are you doing—what's the point?" In an interview with the press, Belle explained that parkour is a training method for warriors. "So many people try to train easy—'Come do parkour! It's really cool!' But if tomorrow I made you do real training, you would end up crying. That's what you need to know: you are going to cry, you are going to bleed and you are going to sweat like never before." In his book, Belle also quotes his father Raymond, "If two roads open up before you, always take the most difficult one. Because you know you can travel the easy one."

Belle is an influential proponent of discipline and control in parkour, saying, "Precision is all about being measured," and going on to describe parkour as an art that requires huge amounts of repetition and practice to master. "With parkour, I often say, 'Once is never'. In other words, someone can manage a jump one time but it does not mean anything. It can be luck or chance. When you make a jump, you have to do it at least three times to be sure you can actually do it. It's an unavoidable rule. Do it the hard way and stop lying to yourself. When you come for training, you have to train. Even if it means doing the same jump fifty or a hundred times." To its founder, parkour is a method of self-refinement, used for learning to control and focus oneself.

While there is no official list of "moves" in parkour, the style in which practitioners move often sets them apart from others, and there are a number of named movements that are characteristic, for example:

Parkour is practiced without traditional equipment, though items such as bars, walls, and boxes found in the environment in which the parkour is being practiced in, are utilised to better navigate the area. Practitioners normally train wearing light, non-restrictive casual clothing. Traceurs who wear gloves are rare—bare hands are considered better for grip and tactile feedback. Light running shoes with good grip and flexibility are encouraged because they allow for more natural and fluid movements. Practitioners often use minimalist shoes, sometimes as a progression to bare feet, for better sensitivity and balance, while others prefer more cushioning for better absorption of impacts from large jumps. Barefoot training is done by some for movement competency without gear—David Belle noted that "bare feet are the best shoes." Various sneaker manufacturers have developed shoes specifically for parkour and freerunning. Many other companies around the world have started offering clothing targeted at parkour.

Parkour is not widely practiced in dedicated public facilities. Although efforts are being made to create places for it, many traceurs do not like the idea, as it is contradictory to parkour's values of adaptation, creativity, and freedom. Traceurs practice parkour in both rural and urban areas such as gyms, parks, playgrounds, offices, and abandoned structures. Concerns have been raised regarding trespassing, damage of property, and use of inappropriate places such as cemeteries. Many parkour organizations around the globe support the Leave No Trace initiative, an urban version of the outdoor conservation ethic created by the Seattle nonprofit Parkour Visions in 2008, promoting safety, respect for the spaces used and their other users, and sometimes includes picking up rubbish to leave areas in better condition than they were found.

Concerns have been raised by law enforcement and fire and rescue teams about the risks inherent in jumping off high buildings. They argue that practitioners are needlessly risking damage to both themselves and rooftops by practicing at height, with police forces calling for practitioners to stay off the rooftops. Some practitioners of parkour agree that such behaviour should be discouraged.

Because parkour philosophy is about learning to control oneself in interaction with the environment, many parkour experts consider serious injury evidence of the traceur's failure to follow the precepts of the discipline, specifically, knowing one's limitations. Daniel Ilabaca, co-founder of the World Parkour and Freerunning Federation, said, "Thinking you're going to fail at something gives you a higher risk of doing just that. Committing to something you're thinking or knowing you will land gives you a higher chance of landing or completing the task." On biomechanical grounds, studies found parkour landing techniques result in lower landing forces in comparison with traditional sport techniques. In a survey of parkour-related emergency department visits in the United States between 2009 and 2015, most injuries were reportedly caused by landing or from striking objects.

American traceur Mark Toorock said injuries are rare "because participants rely not on what they can't control—wheels or the icy surfaces of snowboarding and skiing—but their own hands and feet." Lanier Johnson, executive director of the American Sports Medicine Institute, said that many of the injuries are not reported.

In 2013, a person in Russia attempted a backflip on the ledge of a roof of a 16-story building, but when attempting to land on the ledge, fell from the building and died. On 16 August 2019, it was reported that another person in Russia was "engaged in parkour on the roof" of a 9-story building and during a jump, fell off the roof and died from the fall.

Initially featured in films of French director/producer Luc Besson, parkour was first introduced to the British public by the BBC One TV channel trailer Rush Hour in April 2002. It featured David Belle leaping across London's rooftops from his office to home, in an attempt to catch his favourite BBC programme, and captured the imagination of many viewers, especially when they learned no special effects or wires were used. This advertisement, along with others for Coca-Cola, Nike, and Toyota, had a large-scale impact on public awareness of parkour.

The creation of parkour show-reels and documentaries has been crucial to the spread of parkour, and is common in the parkour community. Jump London is a 2003 documentary explaining some of the background of parkour, culminating with Sébastien Foucan, Johann Vigroux, and Jérôme Ben Aoues demonstrating their parkour skills. Jump London changed the presence of parkour in the UK almost overnight and is widely credited for inspiring a new generation of traceurs. It was followed by Jump Britain in 2005. Both Jump films were shown in more than 80 countries, thereby introducing the discipline and its philosophy to an unprecedented global audience. Both films have been cited by numerous practitioners as their motivation for taking up the discipline.

The Australian version of 60 Minutes broadcast a segment about parkour on 16 September 2007, featuring Foucan and Stephane Vigroux.

Parkour is not defined by a set of rules or guidelines, a feature which has proven particularly attractive to young people, allowing them to explore and engage in the activity on their own terms. It can be easily accepted by all cultures as a means of personal expression and recreation. For example, in 2010 The New York Times published a short video featuring three young men from the Gaza Strip who were active members of the parkour community. In 2014, the BBC covered youth parkour participation in Jammu and Kashmir. Zahid Shah founded the Kashmir Freerunning and Parkour Federation, finding hope in the non-violent discipline of parkour.

Parkour has become a popular element in action sequences, with film directors hiring parkour practitioners as stunt performers. The first director to do so was Luc Besson, for the film Taxi 2 in 1998, followed by Yamakasi in 2001 featuring members of the original Yamakasi group, and its sequel Les fils du vent in 2004. Also in 2004, Besson wrote District 13, another feature film involving advanced parkour chase sequences, starring David Belle and Cyril Raffaelli, followed by the sequel District 13: Ultimatum in 2009 and remade in English as Brick Mansions in 2014.

In 2006, the James Bond film Casino Royale featured Sébastien Foucan in a chase taking place early in the movie, sparking renewed media interest in parkour. Along with The Bourne Ultimatum (2007), Casino Royale is credited with starting a new wave of Parkour-inspired stunts in Western film and television. Parkour was prominent in Live Free or Die Hard (2007), again with stuntman/actor Cyril Raffaelli, and Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time (2010), choreographed by David Belle. Several films besides Yamakasi are about thieves who use parkour, such as Breaking and Entering (2006), Run (2013), and Tracers (2015). The 2011 film Freerunner is about eight freerunners racing through a city for survival. The 2019 Netflix film 6 Underground featured several parkour scenes choreographed and performed by team Storror. Parkour also featured in Dhoom 3 (2013), Bang Bang! (2014), and Aadhi (2018).

Parkour is also featured on TV. MTV 's show Ultimate Parkour Challenge premiered as a one-hour special in October 2009, starring the athletes of the World Freerunning & Parkour Federation. This was followed in May 2010 by a six-episode series of the same name. The athletes were Daniel Ilabaca, Tim Shieff, Ryan Doyle, Michael Turner, Oleg Vorslav, Ben Jenkin, Daniel Arroyo, Pip Andersen and King David. The programme format was a two-part weekly competition in different Southern California locations.

Professional wrestler John Hennigan is a long-time practitioner of parkour and often incorporates it into his wrestling style, with the WWE giving him the nickname "The Prince of Parkour". Actor Stephen Amell learned parkour at Tempest Academy in preparation for his role as Oliver Queen in the television series Arrow, and co-star Caity Lotz is also a practitioner.

Modern video games frequently include aspects of parkour as major gameplay elements. Since its inception, the Tomb Raider series has included increasingly numerous parkour elements. The Assassin's Creed series also makes heavy use of parkour movement (called freerunning in the games). The Mirror's Edge games are heavily inspired by parkour, consisting entirely of efficiently moving around buildings, rooftops, and other obstacles. Brink introduced a parkour mechanic into a realistic first-person shooter. Prince of Persia and Dying Light include a central parkour mechanic, while Crackdown and Crackdown 2 include an emphasis on gripping and vaulting from ledges and protruding objects. Tony Hawk's American Wasteland allows the player character to use several freerunning techniques while not on the skateboard. Tron Evolution ' s basic movements and combat were based on parkour and capoeira.

Although parkour itself grew out of military obstacle-course training, it has become a separate discipline. After the attention that parkour received following the 2006 film Casino Royale, military forces around the world began looking for ways to incorporate elements from parkour into military training. A physical trainer with the Royal Marines trained with parkour practitioners with hopes of introducing some of their techniques to his own students. Colorado Parkour began a project to introduce elements from parkour into the U.S. military and one San Diego staff sergeant trained US Marines in parkour.

Studies have found that in exercises such as the standing long jump, depth jump, and vertical jump, parkour athletes outperform physical educators, gymnasts, and power athletes. Parkour training is especially linked with the development of eccentric load resistance and jumping ability.

A study into the mechanics of the standing long jump showed that experienced traceurs use a lower take off angle than beginners (~25.6° vs ~34°). Wakai and Linthorne had previously estimated the optimal angle to be close to 22.6°.

Studies and experiments have integrated parkour kinaesthetics into robotics.

Freerunning is an athletic and acrobatic discipline incorporating an aesthetic element, and can be considered either a sport or a performance art, or both. Freerunning is similar to parkour, from which it is derived, but emphasizes artistry over efficiency and speed. It involves interacting with physical obstacles in creative ways, such as by climbing, jumping or running; the obstacles may be purpose-built or may be part of a pre-existing natural or man-made environment. The movements are usually adopted from other sports, such as gymnastics, tricking or breakdancing. Freerunners can create their own moves, flows and lines in different landscapes. Both parkour and freerunning encompass the ideas of overcoming obstacles and self-expression; in freerunning, the greater emphasis is on self-expression.

The central principle of freerunning is that one should express oneself by moving fluidly in one's environment; there are no limitations on the form of this movement. Foucan expands on a number of basic principles of the sport in his book, Freerunning. Other practitioners have suggested other principles. For example, Daniel Ilabaca encourages people to think positively, suggesting that practitioners of freerunning will sometimes fall—largely because they think they might.

The word "freerunning" was first used in Mike Christie's documentary Jump London, starring Sébastien Foucan, released in September 2003. In the documentary, the term "freerunning" was used as an attempt to translate "parkour", in order to make it more appealing to the English-speaking audience. Foucan decided to keep using the term "freerunning" to describe his discipline, to distinguish it from David Belle's methods. The remaining seven Yamakasi members continued to use the term " l'art du déplacement ", also not wanting to associate it too closely with parkour. Similar to Sébastien's freerunning, l'art du déplacement is less about the hard discipline of the original Yamakasi group; rather, it takes a participatory approach focused on making the teaching more accessible. David Belle kept the term "parkour", saying the group contributed to the development of it, but that his father was the source of his motivation and had verbally communicated this method only to him.

Foucan wanted to create a discipline that was more personal to the individual than parkour and more easily adapted to suit each person's individual goals. His idea was similar to that of Bruce Lee 's creation of Jeet Kune Do. Foucan wanted to take everything that he had found useful and that he liked from his parkour experiences and combine it into one sport. Foucan's early ideas were first spread through the Jump London documentary (2003) and its sequel, Jump Britain (2005). Foucan has appeared in other productions, such as Casino Royale and Madonna's Confessions Tour. With each appearance both the discipline and Foucan himself increased in fame.

The French National Assembly, the lower house of the Parliament of France, set up a Parliamentary Commission on Cults in France (French : Commission parlementaire sur les sectes en France), also known as the Guyard Commission, on 11 July 1995 following the events involving the members of the Order of the Solar Temple in late 1994 and in 1995 in the Vercors, Switzerland and in Canada. Chaired by deputy Alain Gest, a member of the Union for French Democracy conservative party, the commission had to determine what should constitute a cult. It came to categorize various groups according to their supposed threat or innocuity (towards members of the groups themselves or towards society and the state). The Commission reported back in December 1995.

The Commission held various hearings with persons involved in new religious movement (NRM) activities or involved in anti-cult movements. Some organizations, including the Church of Scientology and the United States Department of State, criticized its categorization-methodology.

Subsequent French Parliamentary Commissions on cults reported in 1999 and in 2006.

The first Parliamentary Commission on Cults in France was created in 1995, but the cults had long been watched by the Direction centrale des renseignements généraux. A report had already been done on this issue in 1983 by Alain Vivien, on a request by the prime minister.

The commission was established following a wave of mass suicides —and very likely murders—orchestrated by members of the "Order of the Solar Temple" in Canada, Switzerland, and France in 1994, as a 2023 bill reiterated. These events claimed a total of 53 lives, including 22 in France ; they deeply affected public opinion.

The day after the publication of the report of the Commission, namely on 23 December 1995, the second mass murder of the Solar Temple happened, giving "much more media attention, given that it coincided with the tragedy of the Order of the Solar Temple that took place in the Vercors", although it did not mention the Ordre of the Solar Temple.

In 2008, a Union for a Popular Movement deputy, Jacques Myard, submitted a proposal for a parliamentary commission on cults, especially in medical and paramedical fields.

The Commission's report was unanimously adopted on 20 December 1995 by the 7 deputies who were present (out of 21; the other members had not received their notification because of a postal service strike). Jean-Pierre Brard, vice-chairman of the commission, considered that the propositions were "insufficient" and wanted to adopt a "special legislation" to effectively fight against dangerous cults. He said: "This vote is thus not representative of the whole commission. If I had been present, I would have abstained." The rules of the National Assembly say the report is still valid regardless of the number present.

The report says: "Twenty hearings were conducted in these conditions, for a total of twenty-one hours. They have allowed the Commission to take note of information, experience and analysis of people having, for various reasons, a thorough knowledge of the cult phenomenon, whether administrators, doctors, lawyers, clergymen, representatives of organizations that assist victims of cults, and of course, former members of cults and leaders of cultic associations. The Commission has also requested assistance from various agencies in an attempt to refine the best knowledge of the scope of his study." The Minister of the Interior was the most important source of information.

Given the difficulty of defining the concept of cult, the Commission decided to resume the criteria followed by the Direction centrale des renseignements généraux, which it considers as "a body of evidence, each of which could lead to lengthy discussions."

The Commission believes that it "was aware that neither the novelty nor the small number of followers, or even eccentricity could be retained as criteria" and explains: "The scope of its study has been voluntarily restricted to a certain number of associations gathering, usually around a spiritual leader, people sharing the same belief in a being or a number of transcendental ideas, situated or not at odds with "traditional" religions (Christian, Muslim, Hindu, Buddhist) which were excluded from this study, and on which have, at one time or another, been suspected of any activity contrary to public policy or individual freedoms."

Mindful not to give a result exactly impartial, the Commission nevertheless chose these criteria to conduct a partial analysis of reality, holding the common sense that the public ascribes to the notion of cult.

The published report of the Parliamentary Commission of 1995 (also known as the Rapport Gest-Guyard), appeared on 22 December 1995.

One of the first criticism came from Bishop Jean Vernette, the national secretary of the French episcopate to the study of cults and new religious movements, which stressed that these criteria can be applied to almost all religions. Moreover, sociologists like Bruno Étienne emphasized that the mental manipulation should not be defined by the policemen of the Renseignements généraux (RG). The list of cults was based on the criteria defined by the RG, but without specifying which of their practices are specifically criticized.

In addition, the secrecy of the work led to questions about the presence or absence of certain organizations in the list. Étienne questioned on the presence of the CEDIPAC SA company, formerly known as European Grouping of Marketing Professionals (GEPM), while its activity is not in the religious field. The absence of Opus Dei or the Freemasons also raised questions.

In addition, Yves Bertrand, General Director of the Renseignements généraux from 1992 to 2003, spoke in 2007 about his collaborative work with the parliamentary reports on cults, and believed that Scientology and Jehovah's Witnesses do not deserve to be diabolized and "to put on the same level some companies of thought and genuine cultic movements that alienate the freedom of their members, the result is the opposite of the desired goals".

Some movements have sought access to documents that led to their classification onto the list of cults by the parliamentary commission. The government refused, invoking the risk to public safety and security of the State in case of disclosure of information from Renseignements généraux.

Several movements engaged in legal proceedings that lasted several years before they can access these secret documents. Jehovah's Witnesses finally succeeded in 2006, after the request was filed to the Council of State. The first judgments on this issue were given in 2005 by the Administrative Court of Appeal of Paris after examining the documents to assess the merits of the refusal of the Ministry of Interior, who mentioned the risk to public safety. On 3 July 2006, the Council of State rejected the appeal of the Minister of Interior and confirmed the same day the annulment of the decision of the Minister of Interior who refused to provide to the Christian Federation of Jehovah's Witnesses the documents made by the Renseignements généraux for the second report. On 18 December 2006, at a press conference in Paris, Jehovah's Witnesses released the files prepared by the Renseignements généraux for the commission on cults in 1995. According to Le Monde, this work, "which was released after eight years of proceedings, only includes a form of presentation and a list their places of worship."

The Church of Scientology obtained access to documents of the Renseignements généraux, and its spokesman said: "There was nothing in the files."

The Universal Church of the Kingdom of God also obtained the right of access to the file made by the Renseignements généraux which justified its classification as cults in the parliamentary report. In a decision of 1 December 2005 validated by the Council of State, the Administrative Court of Appeal in Paris overturned the refusal of the Minister of Interior to grant the request of the association and ordered the files release.

The parliamentary report was strongly criticized by U.S. officials. In 1999, a report on religious freedom around the world conducted by the State Department accused it of not having heard from the groups accused and the lack of opposing debate.

On 27 May 2005 (just before he left office), the then Prime Minister of France, Jean-Pierre Raffarin, issued a circulaire which stressed that the government must exercise vigilance in taking account of the evolution of the cult-phenomenon, which, he wrote, made the list of movements attached to the Parliamentary Report of 1995 less and less pertinent, based on the observation that small groups form in a scattered, more mobile and less-easily identifiable manner, making use in particular of the possibilities of spreading offered by the Internet.

The Prime Minister asked his civil servants to update a number of instructions issued previously, to apply criteria set in consultation with the Interministerial Commission for Monitoring and Combating Cultic Deviances (MIVILUDES), and to avoid falling back on lists of groups for the identification of cultic deviances.

A further French parliamentary commission reported in 1999 on cults in connection with money and the economy. Several groups previously omitted in the 1995 report were added (Ancient Mystical Order Rosae Crucis, Anthroposophy, At the Heart of the Communication, Prima Verba, Energo-Chromo-Kinese). The report said that the Jehovah's Witnesses and the Church of Scientology were the richest "cults", whose annual budget reached respectively FF200,000,000 and FF60,000,000 (€30,500,000 and €9,147,000 respectively). Sōka Gakkai, Ancient Mystical Order Rosae Crucis, Sukyo Mahikari, New Apostolic Church, Unification Church, Dianova, Association of the Triumphant Vajra (Mandarom) and Anthroposophy had an annual income between FF20,000,000 and FF50,000,000 (approximately between €3,000,000 and €7,600,000).

The publication of this report provoked strong reactions; however, the Union des associations médicales anthroposophiques de France, the Société financière de la NEF and the Fédération des Écoles Steiner, owned by Anthroposophy, attempted legal action. After presenting the report on France 2, a complaint for defamation was filed against the president of the parliamentary commission Jacques Guyard. The Tribunal de grande instance de Paris said that Guyard was "unable to justify of a serious investigation" to support his allegations, that he "repeatedly referred to "secret" nature of the work of the commission", and that "the contradictory nature of the investigation conducted just consisted of sending a questionnaire to sixty movements considered as cultic". In addition, "the judges felt that the injury of plaintiffs was important (…) since the defamatory statements were made by a deputy president of the commission, whose authority and competence could not have been doubted by the public". In September 2001, the Cour d'Appel de Paris maintained this conclusion but Guyard obtained his discharge on the ground of good faith.

The 2000 annual report of the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom, released by the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor of the U.S. Department of State, stated:

The ensuing publicity [by the release of a parliamentary report against "sectes" contributed to an atmosphere of intolerance and bias against minority religions. Some religious groups reported that their members suffered increased intolerance after having been identified on the list.

In its 2004 annual report, the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom stated:

[...] official government initiatives and activities that targets "sects" or "cults" have fueled an atmosphere of intolerance toward members of minority religions in France. [...] These initiatives [the publication of reports characterizing specific groups as dangerous and the creating of agencies to monitor and fight these groups] are particularly troubling because they are serving as models for countries in Eastern Europe where the rule of law and other human rights are much weaker than in France.

The 2004 report concluded with an assessment that the restructuring of the main French agency concerned with this issue (referring to the new MIVILUDES replacing its predecessor, the Mission Interministérielle pour la Lutte contre les Sectes [Interministerial Commission to Combat the Cults] (MILS), had reportedly improved religious freedoms in France.

In a press-release dated 28 June 2006, several deputies from the Socialist Party, from the UDF, and others, stated that "certain people had believed that they could celebrate a so-called turning-point in the French policy of defending individual and collective liberties against the dangerous conduct of cults and a renewed questioning of the parliamentary reports of 1995 and 1999, as a result of the appearance of the Prime Minister's circulaire. The spokespersons said that the issue addressed by the Prime Minister related to the data collected in 1995 and 1999 becoming stale. They added that setting up a new Commission of Enquiry would permit a "coming to grips with a new state-of-play in the cultic movement".

On 28 June 2006, in response to a unanimous resolution of the Law Commission (commission des lois), the French National Assembly unanimously passed a resolution to set up a Parliamentary Commission of Enquiry into the influence of cultic movements and the consequences of their practices on the physical and mental health of minors. The 30 members of the Commission included Georges Fenech (President), Philippe Vuilque (rapporteur), Martine David and Alain Gest (Vice-Presidents) and Jean-Pierre Brard and Rudy Salles (Secretaries).

The Commission presented its report to the Assembly on 19 December 2006. The report contained 50 recommendations which aimed to protect endangered children. George Fenech accused public officials (and especially the bureau des cultes of the Ministry of the Interior), of "negligence, even complaisance". He expressed his astonishment at the lack of a good definition of the profession of psychotherapeutics, which he described as a "mine for cults" where gurus flourish.

Parliamentary immunity (French : immunité parlementaire) is an aspect of French politics. Members of the Parliament of France enjoy irresponsibility for what they did as parliamentarians, and partial inviolability – that is, severe restrictions for the police or justice to arrest or detain them. Both irresponsibility and inviolability are mandated by article 26 of the Constitution of France.

These dispositions are somewhat controversial, following abuse of such privileges.

Members of the Parliament may not be sought, prosecuted, judged or imprisoned for actions that they have accomplished within their duties as parliamentarians. In particular, parliamentarians are immune from prosecution for defamation committed in the exercise of their functions. This includes speeches and votes in public sittings of the assemblies, law proposals, amendments, as well as reports and other actions commissioned by parliamentary instances. This, according to the jurisprudence, does not include interviews on broadcast radio, nor does it include reports commissioned by the executive branch – since such actions are not specific to the duties of a parliamentarian.

For interventions in public sitting, members of parliament are however still subject to the disciplinary rules of their assembly.

There is no way to lift this irresponsibility clause, and the parliamentarian himself or herself cannot renounce it. The termination of the parliamentary term does not allow the prosecution of former parliamentarians for actions committed within their parliamentarian duties.

While members of parliament are not criminally responsible for their actions as parliamentarians, they are, however, responsible for their actions as private citizens. There are, however, strong limitations as to their prosecution.

Members of Parliament may be arrested or otherwise deprived of their freedom, or face restrictions thereof, only with the permission of the desk of their assembly. This authorization is not needed in case of a flagrant felony (e.g. the parliamentarian was caught red-handed) or in case of a definitive condemnation by a court of law. The assembly of which the parliamentarian is a member may oppose any such measure for the duration of the parliamentary session.

Requests for the arrest or detention of a parliamentarian are issued by the general prosecutor of the competent Court of Appeal, sent to the Minister of Justice, who transmits them to the Desk of the relevant assembly. The Desk examines the requests and rules on it; its ruling is published in the Journal Officiel.

The topic of parliamentarian immunity is somewhat controversial in France, especially in the context of scandals of corruption or graft involving politicians. Many resent such a mechanism, in which some influential members of society enjoy special rights and are not made accountable for their own actions.

In 2004, Charles Pasqua was voted in as a senator by conservative electors of the Paris region (the Senate is elected by an electoral college). This was denounced by critics, including the Canard Enchaîné, as a way to prevent Pasqua from being prosecuted for various alleged crimes of corruption and misuse of public funds. See corruption scandals in the Paris region.

Likewise, in early 2005, the idea was suggested that former Presidents of France should become senators-for-life, instead of being able to sit in the Constitutional Council. Ostensibly, this idea was a means to solve the problem of such former presidents as Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, who may not have kept to the strict duty of political neutrality in their speech expected from members of the council. This, however, was criticized as a way to provide Jacques Chirac with immunity for related scandals.

The Parliamentary Office for the Evaluation of Scientific and Technological Choices (French : Office parlementaire d'évaluation des choix scientifiques et technologiques or OPECST) is responsible for informing the French Parliament of the consequences of scientific and technological choices in order to inform its decisions. It collects information, implements study programs and carries out evaluations. It plays the role of interlocutor recognized by the entire scientific community. It has thus established a partnership with the French Academy of Sciences and has a regular contact with other academies and major research organizations. Being the only parliamentary office, it is also called more briefly “Parliamentary Office” or “Office”.

OPECST is created by law n 83-609 of July 8, 1983, which provides that the Office must “inform Parliament of the consequences of choices of a scientific and technological nature, in order, in particular, to inform its decisions." This is the only common member in the National Assembly and the Senate.

The OPECST is made up of eighteen deputies and eighteen senators, appointed in such a way as to ensure proportional representation of the political groups. These deputies and senators are appointed by their political group and not co-opted by the members of the Office.

The Office is chaired, alternatively, by a member of one or the other assembly for a period of three years, the first vice-president belonging to the other assembly.

It has a scientific council of 24 "high-level personalities", chosen for their skills in scientific and technological questions.

The problems addressed by the OPECST are divided into five main themes:

Certain files have been renewed for several years in a row, for example those related to nuclear energy and waste management through the regular evaluation of the National Plan for the Management of Radioactive Materials and Waste (PNGMDR).

In recent years, the Office has also been dealing with topical issues through a public hearing open to the press, which allows all the stakeholders concerned to be brought together quickly.

In March 2011, OPECST, then chaired by deputy Claude Birraux, was jointly seized by the Office of the National Assembly and by the committee of economy, sustainable development and spatial planning of the Senate, following the events of Fukushima, of a study on "nuclear security, the place of the nuclear industry and its future".

During its meeting of March 30, 2011, the Office appointed two reporters responsible for this study:

During its first meeting on April 14, 2011, the parliamentary mission decided on a work program: open hearings to the press, trips to nuclear sites and trips abroad (Germany, Japan). Two unannounced checks, at the Paluel plant and at the Blayais plant, were also carried out.

The proposed long-term strategy would allow an optimal adjustment of each sector, and a gradual reduction, in parallel with the maturation of storage technologies which will make it possible to manage the intermittence of renewable energies without increasing CO 2 emissions, the share of nuclear power in French electricity production.

The share of nuclear production would thus drop from around 75% today to “50 or 60% around 2050”, by not replacing one in two end-of-life reactors, in favor of EPR reactors. The decision to shut down a reactor would be left to ASN, whose necessary independence is underlined.

The independence of the OPECST on nuclear-related issues has long been questioned by environmentalists, including Michèle Rivasi, socialist related MP for Drôme from 1998 to 2002 and founder of CRIIRAD, who claimed to have had a "lot of difficulties to be admitted to sit on the Office" and declared in particular: "One cannot imagine to what extent the nuclear lobby permeates the work of the Office."

However, a national radioactive waste management plan to improve the readability and overall effectiveness of the initiatives of the public authorities and the various operators, central proposal of Michèle Rivasi's report relating to the consequences of storage of nuclear waste on health, had been implemented. In fact, following its report, a 2006 law known as the “Birraux law” created a legal framework for the establishment of a National Radioactive Materials and Waste Management Plan (PNGMDR). The first PNGMDR was released in 2007, and the second in 2010.

In 2021, physicist and engineer Sébastien Point denounced the recommendations formulated by the OPECST, then chaired by the mathematician and deputy Cédric Villani, to recognize the use of geobiology pseudoscience (not to be confused with scientific geobiology) to address certain health issues in the agricultural world, despite its nature. The physicist qualified geobiology as a " charlatan network" and "a profitable business which seems to find political relays".

This article is a list of lists for the 2024 European Parliament election in France. It shows the political parties that presented a list for this election. The lists had to be filed with the Ministry of the Interior between 6 May and 17 May 2024.

On 17 May 2024, 37 lists were filed and their order were drawn by lot. The Official Journal published the names of the candidates on 18 May. This number once again constituted a record for a national election in France. Following a decision by the Council of State, a 38th list was added on 23 May 2024. With 81 candidates per list, there was a total of 3,078 candidates in the election.

The professions of faith are visible on the website of the Ministry of the Interior.

The lists are classified according to the order of the drawing of the Ministry of the Interior.

La droite pour faire entendre la voix de la France en Europe

Parti animaliste - Les animaux comptent, votre voix aussi

Liste Asselineau - Frexit, pour le pouvoir d'achat et pour la paix

PACE - Parti des citoyens européens, pour l'armée européenne, pour l'Europe sociale, pour la planète!

Pour un monde sans frontières ni patrons, urgence révolution!

Liste Équinoxe: écologie pratique et renouveau démocratique

Non à l'UE et à l'OTAN, communistes pour la paix et le progrès social

Forteresse Europe — Liste d'unité nationaliste

Pour une démocratie réelle: Décidons nous-mêmes!

Cette liste, candidate pour la première fois aux élections européennes, de la coalition démocratique Décidons Nous-Mêmes, soutenue par le parti Decidemos prône la démocratie directe, avec le référendum d'initiative citoyenne constitutionnel comme en Suisse, la souveraineté populaire, ainsi que l’instauration du référendum d’initiative citoyenne européen confédéral. Y candidate en particulier en No. 11 Yvan Bachaud, militant du référendum d'initiative citoyenne (RIC) depuis 1977.

This list, candidate for the first time in the European elections, of the democratic coalition Décidons Nous-Mêmes, supported by the Decidemos party, advocates direct democracy, with the constitutional citizens' initiative referendum as in Switzerland, popular sovereignty, as well as the establishment of the European confederal citizens' initiative referendum. In particular, candidate no. 11 Yvan Bachaud [ fr ], activist of the citizens' initiative referendum (RIC) since 1977.

On 3 September 2023, Jordan Bardella announced: "I will naturally lead the National Rally list for the European elections". Fabrice Leggeri announced on 17 February 2024, that he would appear in third place on the list. On 24 March, Malika Sorel announced that she was joining the list; as in second position. On 1 May, the party unveiled the first 35 names of its list during a meeting of Jordan Bardella and Marine Le Pen in Perpignan, list closed by the mayor of Perpignan, also vice-president of the party, Louis Aliot, who appeared in 81st place.

A number of parties intended to stand lists but later withdrew before the election.

The New Anticapitalist Party – The Anticapitalist (NPA-A) decided on 4 January 2024 to not to present a list alone in the European elections but instead to try to forge an agreement with La France insoumise (LFI) with a view to uniting the anti- liberal left. Finally, the party announces theFebruary 22The failure of negotiations: LFI does not wish to find itself in an alliance solely with the far-left party, after the other members of the NUPES refused to participate in a joint list, and points to fundamental disagreements on the issue of the war in Ukraine, with the NPA-A advocating for Ukraine's entry into the European Union. Philippe Poutou, one of the party's spokespeople, was nevertheless a candidate in Belgium in the French-speaking constituency, in 3rd position on the Anticapitalist Left list.

On 29 February 2024, Le Monde reveals that the General Directorate for Internal Security began investigating a list "serving the interests of Moscow" named "Truth and Justice for Peace Forum" and led by former National Rally MEP Jean-Luc Schaffhauser (who has since left the RN), notably behind the loan to this party by a Russian bank, "aided by pro-Russian figures close to the far right" including Pierre Plas, "former military man", journalist Dimitri de Kochko and former RN members like Guillaume Pradoura [ fr ]

The member of parliament for Essonne's 8th constituency and the leader of Debout la France, Nicolas Dupont-Aignan, announced on 26 March 2024, that he was giving up on presenting a list for the European elections for financial reasons following polls showing his party below the campaign reimbursement threshold. Weeks after the election, Nicolas Dupont-Aignan was unseated in the 2024 French legislative election.

For the Génération.s party, the European elections period began with significant internal tensions stemming from a vote held without consulting party members regarding a possible alliance with the La France insoumise, prompting the leadership to change its national coordinators. The party, a member of the New Ecological and Social People's Union (NUPES), decided on 2 April 2024 to not present a candidate list (unlike the 2019 European Parliament election) and by not allying with any party in the NUPES, chose not to divide the left-wing bloc. This was to avoid involvement in the criticism between the political formations within the alliance in order to prepare for their gathering for the 2027 French presidential election. However, the former national coordinator of the movement in office before the internal discord regarding the alliance with LFI, Arash Saeidi, was to be placed in 6th position on the list headed by Manon Aubry, leaving Génération.s at the same time to join La France Insoumise.

The Independent Ecological Movement (MEI) announced on 22 April 2024 that they would ultimately not present a list for the European elections due to budgetary reasons. This list would have been led by Iris Nakov of the MEI and Grégory Berthault of Écologie autrement.

On 31 March 2024, following a rapprochement between their movements, Philippe Folliot of the Centrist Alliance and Jean-Christophe Fromantin of Territories in Movement merged their proposed lists. They hoped to bring Utiles [ fr ] on board with this list headed by Gilles Mentré. Ultimately, they announced they were withdrawing on 3 May 2024 due to insufficient funds.

As in every European election since 2004, the Alliance Royale intended to field candidates. However, unable to find enough candidates to complete its list, the party had to withdraw on 16 May 2024.

Fair Europe planned to present a list headed by Thierry-Paul Valette [ fr ], under the banner "Union for a Rainbow Europe". Ultimately, the party did not submit any list to the Minister of the Interior, due to an insufficient number of candidates, according to a party statement published on 18 May 2024.

Antonin Duarte, president of the Green Party and the Union of Centrists and Greens [ fr ], wanted his parties to compete in these elections. Ultimately, the parties did not submit any lists to the Ministry of the Interior on 18 May 2024. According to Antonin Duarte, they withdrew to avoid multiplying the number of Green lists in the face of the rise of the far right. According to Mediapart on 7 May 2024, they had not raised enough funds to stand.

The Federalist Party, ed by Yves Gernigon, intended to participate in the election, as it had in the 2019 European Parliament election where it won 0.05% of the vote. Ultimately, the party did not submit any list to the Minister of the Interior, citing financial reasons according to a press release published on 19 May 2024.

The Rue de Poitiers Committee (French : Comité de la rue de Poitiers), best known as the Party of Order (French : Parti de l'Ordre), was a political group formed by monarchists and conservatives in the French Parliament during the French Second Republic. It included monarchist members from both the Orléanist and Legitimist factions and also some republicans who admired the United States model of government.

After the 1848 elections to the French Parliament, the Party of Order was the second-largest group of deputies after the Moderate Republicans, with 250 of the 900 seats in the French Parliament. Prominent members included Adolphe Thiers, François Guizot and Alexis de Tocqueville. The party won an absolute majority in the 1849 general election and were opposed to the presidency of Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, although he included members of the party in his administration in order to court the political centre-right.

The party enjoyed widespread support in the north of France in the 1849 elections, the departments of Finistère, Côtes-du Nord, Manche, Calvados, Eure, Somme and Aisne as well as Deux-Sèvres, Vienne, Vaucluse and Haute-Garonne returned exclusively Party of Order members to the French Parliament. Support was lower in the east of the country.

After the Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte's coup d'état in December 1851, the party was forcibly dissolved and its members were exiled.

Pathé SAS (French: [ pate ] ; styled as PATHÉ!) is a French major film production and distribution company, owning a number of cinema chains through its subsidiary Pathé Cinémas and television networks across Europe. Pathé is also the second-oldest operating film company, behind Gaumont, which was established in 1895.

It is the name of a network of French businesses that were founded and originally run by the Pathé Brothers of France starting in 1896. In the early 1900s, Pathé became the world's largest film equipment and production company, as well as a major producer of phonograph records. In 1908, Pathé invented the newsreel that was shown in cinemas before a feature film.

Since Gaumont studio sold its cinemas to Pathé in 2017, Pathé Cinéma has become the oldest cinema circuit in the world still active and is currently the biggest circuit in France and the Netherlands.

Pathé is also still one of the biggest production companies in France and Europe today, regularly producing films with budgets around $50 million. For example, in 2024, the historic group has released the successful The Count of Monte Cristo.

The company was founded as Société Pathé Frères (French: [ pate fʁɛʁ ] ; "Pathé Brothers Company") in Paris, France on 28 September 1896, by the four brothers Charles, Émile, Théophile and Jacques Pathé. During the first part of the 20th century, Pathé became the largest film equipment and production company in the world, as well as a major producer of phonograph records.

At its peak, Charles Pathé 's company had almost 50% of the world film market, including in the United States.

The driving force behind the film operation and phonograph business was Charles Pathé, who had helped open a phonograph shop in 1894 and established a phonograph factory at Chatou on the western outskirts of Paris. The Pathé brothers began selling Edison and Columbia phonographs and accompanying cylinder records and later, the brothers designed and sold their own phonographs that incorporated elements of other brands. Soon after, they also started marketing pre-recorded cylinder records. By 1896 the Pathé brothers had offices and recording studios not only in Paris, but also in London, Milan, and St. Petersburg. Pathé manufactured cylinder records until approximately 1914. In 1905, the Pathé brothers entered the growing field of disc records.

In France, Pathé became the largest and most successful distributor of cylinder records and phonographs. These, however, failed to make headway in foreign markets such as the United Kingdom and the United States where other brands were already in widespread use.

In December 1928, the French and British Pathé phonograph assets were sold to the British Columbia Graphophone Company. In July 1929, the assets of the American Pathé record company were merged into the newly formed American Record Corporation.

The Pathé and Pathé-Marconi labels and catalogue still survive, first as imprints of EMI and now currently EMI's successor Parlophone Records. In 1967 EMI Italiana took control of the entire catalog. In turn, the Universal Music Group acquired EMI Italiana in 2013.

As the phonograph business became successful, Pathé saw the opportunities offered by new means of entertainment and in particular by the fledgling motion picture industry. Having decided to expand the record business to include film equipment, the company expanded dramatically. To finance its growth, the company took the name Compagnie Générale des Établissements Pathé Frères Phonographes & Cinématographes (sometimes abbreviated as CGPC) in 1897, and its shares were listed on the Paris Stock Exchange. In 1896, Mitchell Mark of Buffalo, New York, became the first American to import Pathé films to the United States, where they were shown in the Vitascope Theater.

In 1901, Ferdinand Zecca and Charles Pathé decided to capitalize on the public's morbid penchant for gory crime stories by creating Histoire d'un crime, which is considered the first realistic drama in the history of cinema. Histoire d'un crime also invented the first flashback in the cinema. The final scene, which shows a beheading, caused a scandal. The film was a notable success, launching a wave of similar films.

In 1904, Pathé produced the first Western films in cinema, and in 1910, it opened the first studio entirely dedicated to this genre, which was located in Los Angeles, shortly before the birth of the film industry in the Hollywood district of Los Angeles.

In 1906, Charles Pathé opened one of the first permanent movie theater with the Omnia-Pathé (as cinema had until then been a Fairground Attraction), which also became the oldest cinema of the Pathé group. By the following year, more than 300 Pathé theaters already existed, and the network was rapidly expanding in the rest of the world. As with production and distribution, the French company established itself as the world leader in movie theaters for several years. Today, Pathé Cinemas remains the leading theater operator in France and the Netherlands, and the oldest still in operation worldwide.

In 1907, Pathé acquired the Lumière brothers ' patents and then set about to design an improved studio camera and to make their own film stock. Their technologically advanced equipment, new processing facilities built at Vincennes, and aggressive merchandising combined with efficient distribution systems allowed them to capture a huge share of the international market. They first expanded to London in 1902 where they set up production facilities and a chain of cinemas.

By 1909, Pathé had built more than 200 cinemas in France and Belgium and by the following year they had facilities in Madrid, Moscow, Rome and New York City plus Australia and Japan. Slightly later, they opened a film exchange in Buffalo, New York. Through its American subsidiary, it was part of the MPPC cartel of production in the United States. It participated in the Paris Film Congress in February 1909 as part of a plan to create a similar European organisation. The company withdrew from the project in a second meeting in April which fatally undermined the proposal. In 1906, Pathé Frères had pioneered the luxury cinema with the opening of the Omnia Cinéma-Pathé in Paris.

Prior to the outbreak of World War I, Pathé dominated Europe's market in motion picture cameras and projectors. It has been estimated that at one time, 60 percent of all films were shot with Pathé equipment. In 1908, Pathé distributed Excursion to the Moon by Segundo de Chomón, an imitation of Georges Méliès 's A Trip to the Moon. Pathé and Méliès worked together in 1911. Méliès made a film Baron Munchausen's Dream, his first film to be distributed by Pathé. Pathé's relationship with Méliès soured, and after he went bankrupt in 1913, his last film was never released by Pathé.

After World War I, Charles Pathé started divesting himself from various film interests, believing that the French film industry would never recover after 1918. The company's subsequent decline relegated Pathé primarily as a distributor of short subjects and it became a minor player in the mainstream film industry.

In 1929, Charles Pathé retired from cinema and entrusted the management of the company to Bernard Natan. Bernard Natan partially revived Pathé, which once again became the leading player in French cinema. He relaunched film production, notably with Les Misérables (1934), and expanded the Pathé Cinema network in France, including the construction of the Pathé Bellecour in Lyon, which remains in operation under the Pathé group today.

Deported to Auschwitz during the Second World War as he was Jewish, Bernard Natan was murdered by the Nazi regime in 1942. Despite severe weakening, Pathé survived and gradually resumed its activities towards the end of the Second World War, most notably with the release of Children of Paradise (1945).

Worldwide, the company emphasised research, investing in such experiments the synchronisation of film and gramophone recordings. In 1908, Pathé invented the newsreel that was shown in theatres prior to the feature film. The news clips featured the Pathé logo of a crowing rooster at the beginning of each reel. In 1912, it introduced 28 mm non-flammable film and equipment under the brand name Pathescope. Pathé News produced cinema newsreels from 1910, up until the 1970s when production ceased as a result of mass television ownership.

In 1907, the Pathé group decided to abandon the outright sale of film prints and instead establish a novel rental system for cinema operators. This measure, motivated by the market's profitability crisis and the saturation caused by the resale of worn-out prints, marked a decisive break in the film industry: for the first time, a producer-distributor retained ownership of the prints and rented them to cinemas, ensuring the quality of screenings and regular revenue. This innovation, initiated by Charles Pathé, laid the foundations for the modern film distribution model, still based today on the rental of films.

In the United States, beginning in 1914, the company built film production studios in Fort Lee and Jersey City, New Jersey, where their building still stands. The Heights, Jersey City produced the extremely successful serialised episodes called The Perils of Pauline. By 1918 Pathé had grown to the point where it was necessary to separate operations into two distinct divisions. With Emile Pathé as chief executive, Pathé Records dealt exclusively with phonographs and recordings. Brother Charles managed Pathé-Cinéma, which was responsible for film production, distribution, and exhibition.

In 1922 they introduced the Pathé Baby home film system using a new 9.5 mm film stock, which became popular during the next few decades. In 1921, Pathé sold off its United States motion picture production arm. It was renamed " Pathé Exchange " and later merged into RKO Pictures, disappearing as an independent brand in 1931. Pathé sold its British film studios to Eastman Kodak in 1927, while maintaining the theatre and distribution arm.

Pathé was already in substantial financial trouble when Bernard Natan took control of the company in 1929. Studio founder Charles Pathé had been selling assets for several years to boost investor value and keep the studio's cash flow healthy. The company's founder had even sold Pathé's name and "rooster" trademark to other companies in return for a mere two percent of revenue. Natan had the bad luck to take charge of the studio just as the Great Depression convulsed the French economy.

Natan attempted to steady Pathé's finances and implement modern film industry practices at the studio. He acquired another film studio, Société des Cinéromans, from Arthur Bernède and Gaston Leroux, which let Pathé expand into projector and electronics manufacturing. He also bought the Fornier chain of motion picture theatres and rapidly expanded the chain's nationwide presence. The French press, however, attacked Natan mercilessly for his stewardship of Pathé. Many of these attacks were antisemitic.

Pathé-Natan did well under Natan's guidance. Between 1930 and 1935, despite the world economic crisis, the company made 100 million francs in profits, and produced and released more than 60 feature films (just as many films as major American studios produced at the time). He resumed production of the newsreel Pathé News, which had not been produced since 1927.

Natan also invested heavily into research and development to expand Pathé's film business. In 1929, he pushed Pathé into sound film. In September, the studio produced its first sound feature film, and its first sound newsreel a month later. Natan also launched two new cinema-related magazines, Pathé-Revue and Actualités Féminines, to help market Pathé's films and build consumer demand for cinema. Under Natan, Pathé also funded the research of Henri Chrétien, who developed the anamorphic lens (leading to the creation of CinemaScope and other widescreen film formats common today).

Natan expanded Pathé's business interests into communications industries other than film. In November 1929, Natan established France's first television company, Télévision-Baird-Natan. A year later, he purchased a radio station in Paris and formed a holding company (Radio-Natan-Vitus) to run what would become a burgeoning radio empire.

To finance the company's continued expansion, Pathé's board of directors (which still included Charles Pathé) had voted in 1930 to issue shares worth 105 million francs. Then the Great Depression hit France in 1931, and only 50 percent of the shares were purchased. One of the investor banks collapsed due to financial difficulties unrelated to Pathé's problems, and Pathé was forced to follow through with the purchase of several cinema chains it no longer could afford to buy. Although the company continued to make a profit, it lost more money thanks to these acquisitions than it could bring in. In 1935, a commercial court began examining Pathé's accounts, and by 1936 it was declared bankrupt and Natan was dismissed. The studios were not doing badly and continued to make films, but his companies went into receivership and were claimed by the state.

French authorities pursued charges of fraud against Natan, including financing the purchase of the company without any collateral, of bilking investors by establishing fictitious shell corporations, and financial mismanagement. He was also accused of hiding his Romanian and Jewish heritage by changing his name. In 1938, Natan was arrested and imprisoned, never to regain his freedom. In 1939 he was indicted and sentenced to four years in jail. As a result, he was in prison when France fell to the Nazis, a time when other Jewish filmmakers fled or went into hiding. On his release from prison in 1942, he was delivered to the Nazis, and by September 1942 had been deported to Auschwitz, where he was murdered.

In 1943, the company was forced to undergo a restructuring, and was acquired by Adrien Ramauge, changing its name to Société Nouvelle Pathé Cinema. Over the years, the business underwent a number of changes including diversification into producing programmes for the burgeoning television industry. During the 1970s, operating theatres overtook film production as Pathé's primary source of revenue.

In the late 1980s, Italian financier Giancarlo Parretti tried to make a bid for Pathé, even taking over Cannon and renaming it Pathé Communications in anticipation of owning the storied studio. Parretti's shady past, however, raised enough eyebrows in the French government that the deal fell through. It turned out to be a fortunate decision, as Parretti later took over Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, and merged it with his Pathé Communications Group to create MGM-Pathé Communications in 1990, only to lose it in bankruptcy in late 1991.

In 1990 Chargeurs, a French conglomerate led by Jérôme Seydoux, took control of the company. As a result of the deregulation of the French telecommunications market, in June 1999 Pathé merged with Vivendi, with the exchange ratio for the merger fixed at three Vivendi shares for every two Pathé shares. The Wall Street Journal estimated the value of the deal at US$2.59 billion. Following the completion of the merger, Vivendi retained Pathé's interests in British Sky Broadcasting and CanalSatellite, a French broadcasting corporation, but then sold all remaining assets to Jérôme Seydoux's family-owned corporation, Fornier SA, which changed its name to Pathé.

In 2004, Pathé co-produced and distributed the cult film The Chorus by Christophe Barratier, which drew nearly 9 million admissions at the French box office. The film is also a remake of A Cage of Nightingales from the Gaumont studio.

In 2008, Pathé released the film Bienvenue Chez Les Ch'tis, with over 20 million admissions in France, it is still today the biggest box office success in France, ahead of all American productions and other French movie, except Titanic (1997).

As of 2024, Pathé is the largest cinema chain in France, with 78 theaters and a 20% market share, as well as the country's leading French producer and distributor in terms of box office admissions, notably boosted by the big success of its French blockbuster The Count of Monte Cristo, the movie having had 9 million admissions in France theaters and generated 100 million dollars worldwide.

In 2026, in addition to the release of its two-part blockbuster on the Second World War De Gaulle, the group is launching Emotion pictures, a subsidiary (created with other partners) which will shoot big productions in English but with people mainly from French cinema. The aim of this new subsidiary is to once again offer an alternative to American blockbusters for films shot in English. In parallel, Pathé also became involved in the Yapluka investment fund launched by Dimitri Rassam (producer with Pathé of The Count of Monte Cristo), which is involved in making European blockbusters. In July 2026, Pathé acquired a 50% stake in the Benelux film distributor The Searchers; the company will become the exclusive distributor for Pathé films in the Benelux, starting with the two-part film De Gaulle, while continuing to acquire independent titles.

The group's headquarters are located in Paris, currently in the Pathé Palace, which is also one of the group's cinemas.

A list of current and former assets of Pathé.

In its home country France, Pathé self-distributes its films through Pathé Films, formerly called AMLF (Agence méditerranéenne de location de films) from 1972 to 1998.

In August 1992, Pathé's then-parent company Chargeurs purchased Guild Entertainment from Wembley PLC, becoming Pathé's de facto UK distributor. Initially, PolyGram Video distributed Guild's VHS releases until March 1995, when Chargeurs formed a UK rental joint-venture with 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment, who became Guild/Pathé's home video distributor, the rental joint-venture would be named Fox Guild Home Entertainment.

After the Chargeurs demerger in 1996, Pathé began retiring the Guild brand, initially rebranding the theatrical arm as Guild Pathé Cinema and eventually in June 1997, as Pathé Distribution after securing a deal to produce films in the country. The home video division followed suit toward the end of the year, rebranding under the Pathé name, the video rental division Fox Guild Home Entertainment would be renamed Fox Pathé Home Entertainment the following year. Despite this, Guild Home Video remained as an in-name-only dormant business of Pathé until folding on 17 December 2019.

On 12 March 2009, Pathé announced that they would close their UK/Ireland theatrical distribution unit and form a new partnership with Warner Bros. Pictures to handle the theatrical distribution of their titles in the UK, following a handful of films that flopped at the box office. The move was made so Pathé could focus more on the development and production of its own titles instead of acquisitions. The partnership would allow the two companies working together to identify co-production opportunities. Pathé would remain as an international sales agent for films, while 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment would remain as the distributor for home video. Select film acquisitions that were planned to be distributed by Pathé, such as Chatroom and Dead Man Running, were sold to Revolver Entertainment.

On 1 February 2011, it was announced that 20th Century Fox would take over as Pathé's theatrical distributor. Pathé UK's co-CEO Francois Ivernel deemed it easier for one company to handle the licensing process for both theatrical and home video.

With the purchase of 20th Century Fox by the Walt Disney Company on 20 March 2019, Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures took over distribution of Pathé's material, but would only release two films (those being Misbehaviour and The Human Voice), Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment would release the two films on home video. The longstanding deal with Fox/Disney deal expired on 30 June 2021, and Pathé decided not to renew. Pathé UK managing director Cameron McCracken was pleased with Disney's treatment of the company's films, deeming them to have given the films the same treatment that Fox did.

On 7 June 2021, a few weeks before the expiration of the Fox deal, Pathé UK announced they would revert their distribution to Warner Bros. Pictures, with the first films being released under the new deal being Parallel Mothers and The Duke. Unlike the 2009 deal, this new deal would also include home video and digital rights as well, which Fox/Disney previously handled.

On 15 November 2023, Pathé UK announced that it would exit the UK theatrical market to focus a move into the premium television market. The exit was due to structural changes in the film industry following the impact of the Coronavirus pandemic, issues with the structure of independent distribution in the country (which led to their rival, Entertainment One UK closing their UK distribution arm in the middle of the year), some of their films flopping at the box office, and the retirement of Cameron McCracken. Some time later, StudioCanal UK took over distribution of their material on home video through their Elevation Sales joint-venture with Lionsgate UK.

In October 2024, Pathé UK acquired most of the Celador Films catalogue from owner Paul Smith, putting several Pathé-distributed films like Slumdog Millionaire under full ownership. The Celador Films division itself was also sold and renamed to Pathé CFL Limited, functioning as a copyright holder for the five film catalogue.

In May 2025, Pathé UK announced a possible return to the UK theatrical market.

In November 2025, Ben Browning was appointed CEO of Pathé UK and president of global film at Pathé, with a mandate to expand the company’s English-language film production.

Patranque (Occitan : Patranchus) is a rural dish from Auvergne in France made by soaking stale bread in milk and tome fraîche (which is very different from actual tomme cheese : the recipe will fail if tomme cheese is used, since that melts in a very different way) or young Cantal cheese.

Chop the stale bread or cut it into cubes into a hollow dish. Pour the milk over it and let it soak. Cut the Cantal cheese into thin cubes, as finely as possible, and set aside. Drain the bread, then press it into a colander to remove the milk. Heat the butter in a large, thick-bottomed skillet. As soon as it starts foaming, add the bread crumb and stir with a wooden spatula to soak up melted butter. Then add the cheese gradually without ceasing to stir. Continue the operation on medium heat, while the cheese starts to melt. Season with pepper, salt, onions and garlic. Halfway through cooking, the patranque can be turned over like a large patty.

Patrick Devedjian (26 August 1944 – 28 March 2020) was a French politician of the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) party. A close adviser of Nicolas Sarkozy since the 1990s, he was Minister under the Prime Minister in charge of the Implementation of the Recovery Plan, a special ministerial post created for two years after the 2008 financial crisis, a tenure which commenced in December 2008. He was of Armenian descent. On 28 March 2020, he died of complications from COVID-19 during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Devedjian was born in Fontainebleau, Seine-et-Marne. He was the grandson of the Armenian zoologist and Ottoman bureaucrat Karekin Deveciyan. His father was born in Sivas, Ottoman Empire and arrived in France after the First World War. Devedjian received his early education in an Armenian school in Sèvres. He continued his education at the Panthéon-Assas University. He joined the far-right group Occident in 1963, at the age of 17. In a 2014 interview, he stated he regretted his past membership in the organization, and that he had "never condoned any crime". He was admitted to the Paris Bar in 1970. He became a militant in the Gaullist movement in 1971 and took part in the foundation of the Rally for the Republic (RPR) party in 1976.

In 1983, Devedjian was elected Mayor of Antony, a position he would hold until 2002 with re-elections in 1989, 1995 and 2001. In 1986, he also became a Deputy in the National Assembly from the Hauts-de-Seine department and was re-elected six times in 1988, 1993, 1997, 2002, 2007 and 2012. He was a member of the Assembly Committee on Finance and was rapporteur of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade Committee.

In 1992, he was one of the few members of the RPR who voted to support the Maastricht Treaty. During the 1995 presidential campaign, he supported Édouard Balladur together with Nicolas Sarkozy, and suffered unpopularity with the RPR after Balladur's defeat against Jacques Chirac. He became a close adviser to Nicolas Sarkozy and came back into favour during the presidential campaign of 2002.

After Jacques Chirac ’s reelection in 2002, Nicolas Sarkozy, who became Minister of the Interior and de facto Number 2 of Jean-Pierre Raffarin 's government, chose Patrick Devedjian to be his Deputy Minister for Local Liberties, in charge of local government. As President Chirac had requested that ministers did not carry local executive powers, Devedjian resigned as Mayor of Antony and was succeeded by Raymond Sibille. He was also replaced in Parliament by his substitute Georges Siffredi.

When Nicolas Sarkozy became Minister of the Economy and Finance in 2004, Patrick Devedjian followed him as Deputy Minister for Industry.

In June 2005, new Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin did not include Patrick Devedjian in his government. As a result, Georges Siffredi resigned from Parliament in October in order for Devedjian to be reelected in the Hauts-de-Seine 13th constituency.

Devedjian proposed an amendment to a proposed bill penalizing denial of the Armenian Genocide on 9 October 2006 that read, "These regulations do not apply to academic and scientific researches and studies." Devedjian added a statement to the amendment that according to media would "prevent any provocations and political demonstrations organized by a foreign country."

When Nicolas Sarkozy resigned from Government and became President of the Union for a Popular Movement party, Patrick Devedjian became his political advisor.

After the 2007 presidential election and Nicolas Sarkozy ’s election as President of the Republic, tensions appeared between Sarkozy and Devedjian, who had wished and been predicted to become Minister of Justice. Instead, Sarkozy chose Rachida Dati, the first woman of Northern African ancestry to hold a Ministry in France. Devedjian was not included in François Fillon ’s government. On that occasion, Devedjian bitterly remarked: "I am in favour of a government open to a wide range of people—even to Sarkozists." The joke earned him the 2007 Prize for Political Humour.

Instead, Devedjian took the presidency of the Hauts-de-Seine General Council on 1 June, becoming head of the richest département in France. He was also named Deputy Secretary-General of the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP), replacing Brice Hortefeux, then Secretary-General on 25 September, sharing the party leadership with First Vice President Jean-Pierre Raffarin.

From 8 December 2008 to 13 November 2010, Devedjian was appointed Minister under the Prime Minister in charge of the Implementation of the Recovery Plan, a special ministerial post created for two years after the 2008 financial crisis and the announcement of a recovery package by President Sarkozy on 4 December. He left the UMP leadership to Xavier Bertrand on 8 December.

Minister of Economic Recovery Plan: 2008–2010.

Member of the National Assembly of France for Hauts-de-Seine (13th constituency): 1986–2002 (Became minister in 2002) / 2005–2008 (Became minister in 2008) / 2010–2017. Elected in 1986, reelected in 1988, 1993, 1997, 2002, 2005 (by-election), 2007 and 2012.

President of the Hauts-de-Seine General Council : 2007–2020 (Replacement after the resignation of Nicolas Sarkozy, who became president of the French Republic)

Vice-president of Hauts-de-Seine General Council : 2004–2007.

Hauts-de-Seine general councillor: 2004–2020.

Mayor of Antony, Hauts-de-Seine : 1983–2002 (Resignation). Elected in 1983, reelected in 1989, 1995, 2001.

Deputy-mayor of Antony, Hauts-de-Seine : 2002–2005 (Resignation).

Municipal councillor of Antony, Hauts-de-Seine : 1983–2005. (Resignation)

President of the Agglomeration community of Hauts de Bièvre : 2002–2005 (Resignation).

Member of the Agglomeration community of Hauts de Bièvre : 2002–2008.

General Secretary of the Union for a Popular Movement : 2007–2008.

Spokesman of the Rally for the Republic : 1999–2001.

After the 2007 legislative elections, Télé Lyon Métropole (TLM) filmed a conversation during which a UMP Deputy of Bouches-du-Rhône introduced new MP Michel Havard to Patrick Devedjian, saying that Havard had beaten Democratic Movement candidate Anne-Marie Comparini. Devedjian congratulated Havard and then added " … cette salope! " ("… that bitch!") about Comparini. That evening, Devedjian apologized in private, then issued a press release deploring the broadcast of "stolen images of a private conversation". He said he regretted his "inappropriate exclamation about Mrs. Anne-Marie Comparini" and said, "he sent her his regards and esteem". He apologized again in public at a press conference the next day, but it was too late to forestall a storm of criticism. The president of TLM said that Devedjian had asked for the interview not to be broadcast "but Mr. Devedjian knew he was being filmed".

Patrick Ollier (French pronunciation: [ patʁik ɔlje ] ; born 17 December 1944) is a French politician. He is the Mayor of Rueil-Malmaison. He was a national assembly deputy for Hauts-Alpes's 2nd constituency from 1988 to 2002, as a member of the UMP. Secondly for Hauts-de-Seine's 7th constituency from 2002 to 2017. He was briefly the President of the National Assembly in 2007. He is the partner of Michèle Alliot-Marie, Minister of Foreign and European Affairs in the government of François Fillon.

He was elected on 16 June 2002, representing the Hauts-de-Seine, near Paris. He is president of the French National Assembly 's committee on Economic Affairs, the Environment, and Territory. He is interested in renewable energies, and Africa, being head of the French-Libyan friendship group in the National Assembly.

On 14 January 2007 he announced that he would be candidate to the presidency of the National Assembly, replacing Jean-Louis Debré, who would join the Constitutional Council. He ended up as the only candidate, as the opposition refused to take part in the vote, and was elected on 7 March 2007. However, and although he had expressed the wish to remain President of the Assembly, he was not chosen by the UMP group as its candidate for the presidency after the legislative election, and was succeeded by Bernard Accoyer on 26 June of the same year.

He is also the partner of Michèle Alliot-Marie, who was the French minister of Foreign and European Affairs in the Government of François Fillon from 14 November 2010 to 27 February 2011. Mr Ollier is an Honorary member of the Rotary Club of Rueil Malmaison and a public officer.

Ollier is Mayor in the city of Rueil Malmaison. Rueil is a high-class suburb of Paris.

He was a deputy of the national assembly, and was its president from March to June 2007.

Ollier, following General de Gaulle's social positions, is the inventor of the "Work's dividend" who has been taken back in many Government decisions and parliamentary works.

In 2005, during a debate on energy law, Patrick Ollier presented an amendment on wind power known as the "Ollier Amendment." It aimed to raise the minimum electrical output of wind farms that qualify for automatic electricity repurchase by the EDF to those that produce more than 30MW (from the previous 12MW.) It also limited construction of wind farms to designated areas that were to be defined later. This caused an outcry from various environmental organizations. When faced with this opposition, the amendment was withdrawn.

Patrick Ollier took often clear position: signature of the anti- PACS petition (civilian agreement of common life for hetero- and homosexual), opposition to the ("IVG" - Voluntary Pregnancy Interruption) (abortion) reform in 2000. He refused to acknowledge the date of 19 March 1962 as " Journée nationale du souvenir et de recueillement à la mémoire des victimes civiles et militaires de la guerre d'Algérie et des combats du Maroc et de Tunisie ". (National Remembrance Day in memory of civilian and military victims of the Algerian war and the combats in Morocco and Tunisia)

In June and July 2006, he worked actively for the privatization of the French public company of gas Gaz de France and its fusion with Suez to form GDF Suez.

A patronal feast or patronal festival (Spanish : fiesta patronal ; Catalan : festa patronal ; Portuguese : festa patronal ; Italian : festa patronale ; French : fête patronale) is a yearly celebration dedicated – in countries influenced by Christianity – to the 'heavenly advocate' or ' patron ' of the location holding the festival, who is a saint or virgin. The day of this celebration is called patronal feast day, patronal day or patron day of said location.

Patronal festivals may reflect national holidays (e.g. the feast of Saint George, patron saint of England, Georgia, Bulgaria, Romania, Portugal, and various regions of Spain), but they usually reflect the celebration of a single city or town. In larger cities, there may even be several festivals, usually about the patron saint of the local parish.

Depending on the budget and tradition, patronal festivals may typically run from one day to one week, though some festivals may exceed that length. The festivities usually include religious processions honoring its Catholic heritage. However, elements of local culture have been incorporated as well.

Usually, town members adorn the town streets with colorful decorations and other things.

Most patronal festivals feature traditional fairs known as verbenas (Italian : sagra, plural: sagre), possibly including elements typical of the travelling carnivals. They feature parades, artisans, street vendors, regional food stands, amusement rides, games, and live entertainment, among other things. There are usually alcoholic beverages – wine and beer – and music and dancing, either organized or spontaneously; in Southern Italy and Argentina, for example, folk dances known as tarantellas are very common.

The Italian national patronal day, on 4 October, celebrates Saints Francis and Catherine. Each city or town also celebrates a public holiday on the occasion of the festival of the local patron saint, for example: Rome on 29 June (Saints Peter and Paul), Milan on 7 December (Saint Ambrose), Naples on 19 September (Saint Januarius), Venice on 25 April (Saint Mark the Evangelist) and Florence on 24 June (Saint John the Baptist). Notable traditional patronal festivals in Italy are the Feast of Saints Francis and Catherine, the Festival of Saint Agatha, the Feast of Saints Peter and Paul, the Feast of San Gennaro and the Feast of Our Lady of the Hens.

Most Latin American countries dedicate the first day to the saint or virgin being celebrated, the others to entertainment, but in the US territory of Puerto Rico the musical and entertainment festivities begin right away.

In addition to major secular festivals and national religious holidays, nearly every city, town, and barangay in the Philippines, regardless of size, has an annual Catholic patronal festival known as a fiesta (Tagalog : pyesta). Many of which date back to the Spanish colonial period. A fiesta celebrates the patron saint of the community and commonly features a Catholic mass, communal feasts, traveling carnivals, fairs, parades, competitions, outdoor dancing, and other events. Locals would open their houses and offer meals, even to strangers. The streets are also typically decked with colorful banderitas and other decorations.

In Serbian culture, instead of local patron saints, people celebrate family's patron saints. These celebrations are known as ' slava ' in Serbia.

Paul Bacon (1 November 1907 – 6 December 1999) was a French politician.

Bacon was born in Paris. During World War II, he was active in the French Resistance, specifically with the MLN. He was a member of Georges Bidault 's National Liberation Movement, and distributed a manifesto about trade unionism in December 1940. Bacon was arrested by the Gestapo in 1943.

After the war, Bacon continued his political career. A member of the Christian Democratic Popular Republican Movement (MRP), he was Member of the two National Constituent Assemblies (1945–46) and then of the National Assembly from 1946 to 1958 representing the Seine Department. He was Secretary of state in the prime minister's office in 1959-1960, Minister of Labour and Social security (with some interruptions during the cabinets of Pinay and of Mendès France) from 1950 to 1956 and again in 1957-1959.

He was Minister of Labour in De Gaulle, Debré and Pompidou governments from 1958 to 1962. With the other MRP ministers, he resigned in protest after De Gaulle's press conference about European integration in May 1962. He sat in the Economic and Social Council from 1962 to 1964. Bacon was also a municipal councillor at Saint-Maur-des-Fossés.

A trade unionist and an adept of social harmony, Paul Bacon was one of the major figures who built French social security and was the father of the Interprofessional Guaranteed Minimum Wage (salaire minimum interprofessionnel garanti, or SMIG).

Paul Coste-Floret (9 April 1911 – 27 August 1979) was a French politician. He was born and died in Montpellier, France.

Coste-Floret was originally an academic, becoming Doctor of Law in 1935 and teaching law at the University of Algiers.

During the Second World War, Coste-Floret was active in the French Resistance. He also advised André Philip and François de Menthon, ministers in the Free French provisional government. After the war Coste-Floret was an assistant prosecutor at the Nuremberg trials.

He was elected as a député to the Assemblée Nationale in 1946 as a member of the Mouvement Républicain Populaire, for the department of Hérault, and served until 1958.

Coste-Floret supported the political return of General de Gaulle and was a member of the Constitutional Consultative Committee which prepared the Constitution of 1958. He was re-elected député of the MRP in 1958, and served with the centrist group until 1967. He was nominated by the president of the Senate, Alain Poher, to the Conseil constitutionnel from 23 February 1971, and served on this until his death.

As minister of the French Overseas Territories, Coste-Floret worked on the Halong Bay Agreements (Accords de la baie d’Along) in 1949. He modified the law of Cochinchina, which became part of Vietnam. He proposed increased family benefits. As a député he defended the wine producers of Midi. In principle he supported the statute of Algeria in 1957, but still said that he would vote against it. He recommended greater autonomy for French Black Africa.

From 1967 to 1971 he was vice-president of Centre Démocrate.

Coste-Floret was mayor of Lamalou-les-Bains from 1953 to 1959 and mayor of Lodève from 1959 to 1967. He was president of the departmental council of Saint-Gervais-sur-Mare from 1967 to 1973. He was chair of the University of Montpellier from 1977 to 1979.

He was the twin brother of the politician Alfred Coste-Floret [ fr ].

Paulilles (Catalan : Polilles) is a protected area on the Mediterranean Sea, located between the towns of Port-Vendres, and Banyuls-sur-Mer in Pyrénées-Orientales, North Catalonia, France.

Paulilles Recreational Park occupies a rehabilitated dynamite factory site protected as an ecological network by the Natura 2000 European organisation. Originally serving as the French Nobel Dynamite Factory, it was created by Nobel's associate in France, Paul François Barbe, and built in 1870. Several accidents over the years caused multiple deaths: the most important ones killed 20 workers in 1882 and 5 in 1885.

In July 1991, the installations were closed by the Société nationale des poudres et des explosifs (SNPE), and later sold to the Conservatoire du littoral in 1998 to protect the area from real estate developers. In 2005, the General Council of the Pyrénées-Orientales launched the renovation to ready 9 buildings, destroy nearly 70, and landscape 17 hectares to turn Paulilles into a free and ecological recreational park, a museum on the industrial heritage of the factory and a traditional Catalan boat repair facility. Paulilles opens to the public in June 2008.

Paulilles is located about 2 miles (3 km) south of Port-Vendres behind the Las Portas pass along the scenic Route départementale 914. It is a small scale Mediterranean bay, forming a prairie down to the sea between the Béar cape, and the Oullestrell cape and forms three beaches: Bernardi, del Mitg, Fourat separated by small cliffs in the bay. The original forest has been well preserved and is typical of the Mediterranean region. It is composed of Aleppo pine (Pinus halepensis), maritime pine (Pinus pinaster), stone pine (Pinus pinea), for the Pinaceae) family. Also holm oak (Quercus ilex), cork oak (Quercus suber) and olive trees (Olea europaea). Local flora is well represented with the Armeria of Roussillon (Armeria ruscinonensis), the polycarpon of Catalonia (Polycarpon polycarpoides), Thymelaea hirsuta, Limonium tremolsii, and also Tamarix (Tamaricaceae), and gattiliers (Vitex agnus-castus).

All the waters around Paulilles are also protected by Natura 2000, for its Posidonia oceanica, a species of seagrass that is endemic to the Mediterranean Sea and Coralline algaes that offers shelter and nursing home for the rich aquatic life. This marine plants forms large underwater meadows of high importance to the environmental conservation of the region.

In France, pays (French: [ pɛ.i ]) is an area (French for country) whose inhabitants share common geographical, economic, cultural, or social interests, who have a right to enter into communal planning contracts under a law known as the Loi Pasqua or LOADT (Loi d'Orientation pour l'Aménagement et le Développement du Territoire ; English: Directive law concerning territorial planning and development), which took effect on February 4, 1995.

It was augmented on June 25, 1999, by the Loi Voynet or LOADDT (Loi d'Orientation de l'Aménagement Durable du Territoire). The LOADDT enables the citizens of a community to form a legally recognized pays after deciding to do so by mutual consent; its aim is to help bring the inhabitants of urban and neighboring rural districts into dialogue and agreement.

The Council of Development in each pays assembles together the elected officials and the economic, social, and cultural actors, and their associates, into a deliberative forum to discuss the development policies which should be followed by the community. While the Council can give advice, submit proposals, and monitor development projects, it does not have the authority to make official decisions.

The Charter of the Pays makes it possible to fix the stakes and the objectives of the community. Few structures are recognized as pays Voynet, meaning nationwide, because the recognition criteria are sometimes far from what the pays are. Then again, several pays are recognized by the Commission Régionale d'aménagement et de développement du Territoire.

In France, the contract of the Pays can be signed among the members of the pays, or between the pays and its surrounding area, the department, the region, or with the national state when the stakes are well-identified.

In this context, the French term pays is not used in the modern sense of " country " but preserves the original meaning of the Latin word from which it was derived, pagus, which designated the territory controlled by a medieval count. The majority of pays are roughly coextensive with the old counties (e.g., county of Comminges, county of Ponthieu, etc). Today Pays de France still refers to a tiny area in northwest Ile-de-France, hence city names such as Roissy-en-France or Tremblay-en-France.

Although this word is frequently translated into English as country, its usage can mean a region or territory of a nation (bounded by borders and constituting a geographical entity) considered from the point of view of a certain identity or community of interest of its inhabitants. However, this usage is also sometimes found in English word country, for example for the constituent countries of the United Kingdom. It is held to be the geographical basis of the state. The word is also used less precisely as an alternative for état (state).

Brittany, consisting administratively of four departments, is also subdivided into 21 pays.

La Franche-Comté, consisting of four departments, is also subdivided into 16 pays :

The Pays des Impressionnistes (French pronunciation: [ pei dez‿ɛ̃pʁesjɔnist ], lit. ' Land of the Impressionists ') is a certification mark created by the Syndicat intercommunal à vocations multiples des Coteaux de Seine in 2001 to promote the cultural heritage of this touristic area.

Nine communes in the Yvelines department of France bordering the loop of the Seine, where, during the second half of the 19th century, Impressionist painters exercised their art, were initially associated with this creation: Bougival, Carrières-sur-Seine, Chatou, Croissy-sur-Seine, Le Pecq, Le Port-Marly, Louveciennes, Marly-le-Roi and Noisy-le-Roi. There is the Path of the Impressionists, four hiking trails dotted with reproductions of paintings, reflecting the still remarkable character of this landscape of Impressionist sites which has been proposed for inclusion as a World Heritage Site since 2009.

Rueil-Malmaison, in the neighbouring Hauts-de-Seine department, joined them in 2010, when eight of these communes entrusted the development of the Pays des Impressionnistes to the visitor centre of Marly-le-Roi, which organises 'Impressionist cruises' along the Seine, as well as visits of ateliers of contemporary painters.

There are four Impressionists' Trail paths with more than 30 reproductions of Claude Monet, Auguste Renoir, Camille Pissarro and Alfred Sisley paintings on the spot of their creation.

From 2011, the visitor centre of Marly-le-Roy became that of the Pays des Impressionnistes, gathering Carrières-sur-Seine, Chatou, Croissy-sur-Seine, Le Pecq, Le Port-Marly, Louveciennes, Marly-le-Roi and Rueil-Malmaison.

It organises 'Impressionists cruises' from April to October along the shores and islands of the loop of the Seine.

It also organises visits of contemporary painters ateliers, such as those of Catherine Vaes in Croissy in 2012, and Claude-Max Lochu in Carrières-sur-Seine in 2014.

The Pays-de-Monts national forest (French : Forêt domaniale des Pays-de-Monts), also known as the Monts forest (French : forêt de Monts), is a French national forest (French : forêt domaniale) stretching over the dunes of the northern Vendée coast.

25 km long between Fromentine (municipality of La Barre-de-Monts) to the north and Sion-sur-l'Océan (municipality of Saint-Hilaire-de-Riez) to the south, its width does not exceed 2.3 kilometres (1.4 miles). It has a total area of 2,280 hectares (5,600 acres) - La Barre-de-Monts alone totals 600 hectares (1,500 acres) hectares, making it the largest forest area on the Vendée coast. It also impacts on the town planning of coastal municipalities such as those of Saint-Jean-de-Monts and Notre-Dame-de-Monts by separating the waterfronts from their town centres with wooded avenues forming a " greenway " of a hundred meters width. Its altitude ranges from sea-level of the bordering coasts and marshes to a high point of 20m at the Pic de la Blet near La Barre-de-Monts.

The national forest of Pays-de-Monts was planted at the end of the 19th century under the Second Empire as part of a broader process of fixing the dunes and draining the marshes for cultivation.

The predominant tree species of the forest is the maritime pine which covers 75% of the forest but is however now experiencing a real decline. Other tree species include stone pine, Corsican black pine (Pinus nigra var. corsicana), holm oak, and Montpellier maple.

According to Natura 2000, the forest is part of a larger geographical framework also encompassing the marshes of the Marais Breton, the Bay of Bourgneuf, and the island of Noirmoutier.

This same geographical area was designated on February 2, 2017 as a Wetland of International Importance under the Ramsar Convention.

In France, pensions fall into five major divisions;

This minimum pension (French: Allocation de solidarité aux personnes âgées) is the first level of the first pillar of the French pension system. The ASPA is a monthly benefit paid to low-income seniors, whether or not they are former employees. It is not a retirement pension: it is financed by the State, not by social contributions. It is a "social minimum", like the RSA (revenu de solidarité active). Since January 1, 2006, it has replaced the multiple components of the minimum old-age pension or the "Minimum vieillesse" in french. This pension is paid by the CNAV, the Caisse Nationale d'Assurance Vieillesse, the French social security organization that manages the basic pension; or by the MSA, the agricultural social security, when the elderly person depends on the agricultural system. This minimum pension is targeted to ensure that individuals with low salary contributions during their working lives can receive a base level of pension. The mechanism for this is the minimum contributory pension (minimum contribution), which ensures that retirees receive a minimum monthly pension if their basic pension is below a certain threshold. As of early 2024, the monthly ceiling for personal pensions required to qualify for the minimum contributive pension was revised to €1,367.51 following a rise in the SMIC (minimum wage). This adjustment ensures that the sum of the primary and supplementary pension does not exceed this ceiling, aligning retirees' total pensions to the new amount if they are entitled to the minimum contributive pension.

There are several conditions for receiving this pension:

The amount of the ASPA is calculated by taking into account the difference between the required resource ceiling and your income. In 2022, the maximum amount of the allowance is 11,001.44 euros per year for a single person (916.78 euros per month) and 17,079.77 euros per year for a couple (1,423.31 euros per month). When a beneficiary receives other income, it is deducted from the ASPA.

The ASPA is not a simple allowance, it must be seen as an advance from the state: a recovery of the allocated sums can take place in the form of a levy on the eventual inheritance (if the amount of the inheritance exceeds 39,000 euros of net assets). The ASPA, therefore, has a redistributive character among recipients.

The expression "minimum old-age pension" (French: Minimum vieillesse) corresponds to a former allowance that no longer exists, but it is still used in everyday language to designate the ASPA The minimum old-age pension was created in 1956 and replaces the old workers' allowance AVTS of 1942. The objective is close to that of the ASPA. Unlike the ASPA, however, the minimum old-age pension is made up of different allowances (and not a single allowance in the case of the ASPA). The conditions for obtaining this benefit are similar to those of the ASPA; in particular, since the law of May 1998, which eliminates all nationality requirements.

This allowance is divided into two levels:

The mandatory state pension is an unfunded contributory pension based on the redistribution of contributions from those working to those in retirement. The scheme aims to provide up to a maximum of 50% of the retiree's income during their 25 highest earning years up to the Plafond de la sécurité sociale (€41,136 annually in 2022).

The state scheme is financed by a payroll tax known as "social security contributions". The rate in 2013 is 15.15% (8.4% for the employer and 6.75% for the employee) of pay up to the social security contribution ceiling of €37,032, and 1.7% (1.6% for the employer and 0.1% for the employee) on the remainder of the salary. Management of the scheme is the responsibility of the Caisse Nationale d'Assurance Vieillesse (National Old-age Insurance Bank).

The mandatory state pension in France operates on a pay-as-you-go basis, redistributing contributions from current workers to retirees. It aims to provide 50% of a retiree's income based on their 25 highest earning years, up to a set ceiling (€41,136 annually in 2022). The pension system is funded through social security contributions, which in 2013 consisted of a total rate of 15.15%—8.4% by employers and 6.75% by employees—up to a contribution ceiling of €37,032, with an additional 1.7% on salaries above this amount.

In 2024, the French mandatory state pension scheme will continue to be financed through employer and employee contributions to social security, which cover various aspects of social welfare, including pensions. The overall contribution for old-age insurance, crucial for funding the pension system, is 15.45% of salaries up to the social security ceiling. This total is split between employers, 8.55%, and employees, 6.90%. For earnings above this ceiling, the contribution rate for old-age insurance is lower, at 2.42%, with employers paying 2.02% and employees paying 0.40. In addition, there is a 0.3% employee-only contribution to the Solidarity Autonomy Fund (CSA), which supports autonomy for older people. The General Social Contribution (CSG), another significant payroll deduction, is split into deductible and non-deductible parts at rates of 6.8% and 2.4%, respectively, complemented by a 0.5% Contribution for the Repayment of Social Debt (CRDS).

The mandatory occupational pension is a defined contribution scheme that is mainly based on redistribution, but also has elements of investment. The aim of the schemes is to supplement the state pension increasing income of retirees from the 50% level to between 70% and 80%.

There are several schemes, the main ones being: – Arrco (for non-managers) – Agirc (for managers) – Ircantec (for civil servants) One third of this contribution is paid by the employee and the other two-thirds by the employer.

The schemes pay out based on a points system. The schemes are managed so that they are non-loss making. Surpluses are invested and are maintained as a reserve fund. This reserve fund amounts to approximately €50 billion in 2010. Both Arrco and Agirc are state administered pensions but managed by a private provider. As such they may affect pensions in other countries. For example, pension payments from both Agirc and Arrco must be declared in New Zealand and are abated from the New Zealand "superannuation" provided by the New Zealand Government. They would also have to be declared in Australia, as income or an overseas pension, but would affect Australian super or pension entitlements.

The collective retirement savings plans (plan d'épargne pour la retraite collectif) were introduced by François Fillon in 2006. They are company plans that enable employees to get tax credits when they contribute to these funds.

Employee contributions are strictly regulated. The following is a list of the sources of funds that may be used to contribute tax-free to these funds:

All the contributions (employee and employer) are not considered as income for income tax purposes. At retirement the capital is not taxable (income tax), however, the annuities are taxable as income.

The retirement savings account plans (plan d'épargne retraite populaire) were created in 2004. 10% of annual income may be invested tax-free in these individual funds.

The Pensions Reserve Fund (Fonds de réserve pour les retraites) was set up in July 2001 with the aim of using funds from privatisations of state holdings to finance the future shortfall of the state PAYG system. The target was to create a fund totaling €150 billion by 2020. As of September 2010, the total funds managed by the fund amounted to €35.7 billion.

In recent updates, as of 2023, the Pensions Reserve Fund (FRR) achieved a net performance of +9.68%, reflecting a solid recovery in stock markets and effective management amid fluctuating interest rates. This performance is part of the FRR's broader strategy to secure the financial sustainability of France's PAYG pension system, which has significantly evolved from its initial funding via state privatizations. The fund continues to adapt its investment approach, focusing on sustainable and responsible investments, aligning with its original purpose of bridging future pension shortfalls.

The French Pension Reserve Fund (French : Fonds de Réserve pour les Retraites, FRR) is a public entity created by law n°2001-624 dated 17 July 2001. Its mission is to invest monies entrusted to it by the public authorities on behalf of the community with the aim of financing the French pension system. Its investment policy is to optimize returns on the investments it makes as prudently as possible. Its policy must be consistent with those collective values that are designed to promote balanced economic, social and environmental development.

In 2009, FRR had €31.9 billion in assets under management. As of December 2016 the FRR's assets were 36 billion Euros. At the end of 2024 FRR's assets were estimated to be around €36 billion.

At its creation the target was to build a reserve fund of 150 billion Euro by 2020. The funds were to come from 4 sources:

After initially receiving funds from the FSV and 1.2 billion from the privatization of the Autoroute company (Autoroutes du sud de la France) since 2003 the fund has been funded mainly by 65% of the investment tax of 2%. The fund was set up to guarantee the financial stability of:

First payments were set to start in 2020.

The fund had a return of 9.68% in 2023, with an average net return of 3.9% per year since 2011.

The FRR is a long-run investor. Its mission as conferred by law is to “manage the sums that are allocated to it, to build up reserves to help ensure the long-term future of eligible retirement plans”. The Fund is also responsible for the financial management of a portion of the exceptional, one-off, lump-sum contribution owed to the CNAV (Caisse Nationale d'Assurance Vieillesse).

The government has set out a timetable for the payout of the Fund's assets. Under the terms of the social security financing law 2011,“the sums allocated to the Fund are held in reserve until 1st January 2011. As from this date and up until 2024, the Fund shall each year, and at the latest by 31 October, pay 2.1 billion euros to the national social debt amortization fund (Caisse d'Amortissement de la Dette Sociale - CADES) to help finance, between 2011 and 2018” the deficits of the entities that administer the basic pension.

On this basis the FRR determines the general investment policy guidelines consistent with"the principles of prudence and risk diversification given the target timetable for utilisation of the Fund's resources, in particular the above-mentioned payout obligations".In its implementation, the aim of the FRR's investment policy is also to help finance economic actors in general and businesses in particular. This in turn helps to consolidate their prospects for long-term growth and promote sustainable wealth creation and job growth. At the same time, it is consistent with certain shared values that promote balanced economic, social and environmental development. In 2008, the Supervisory Board adopted a responsible investment strategy which seeks to enable the Fund to honour its commitments as a signatory to the UN's PRI (Principles for Responsible Investment).

The management of its assets is entrusted to authorized investment services providers permitted to conduct portfolio management services on behalf of third parties as referred to in paragraph 4 of article L.321-1 of the monetary and financial Code. As an administrative public establishment, the FRR is required to select its contractors using the French government procurement process (RFP procedures). The employees are mainly coming from the asset management industry, and are specialised in investment services providers selection.

The FRR is a publicly owned, state-funded agency governed by

Consistent with its stated purpose and in light of the volumes of funds it manages, the FRR has set up structures of management and government intended to ensure:

Supervisory Board members include legislators, labor/management stakeholders, representatives of the ministries under whose general supervision the FRR operates (i.e., the ministries of Social Security and of the Economy, Finance and Industry) and individuals with recognized credentials in fields that are relevant to Fund's stated missions. The Board, which currently counts twenty members, is required to meet a minimum of twice yearly.

In November 24, 2011, Alain Vasselle became President of the Supervisory Board of the FRR. In 2020, Sandrine Lemery was appointed chair of the supervisory board.

The Executive Board is responsible for directing the agency and for ensuring its smooth operation. It executes investment policy guidelines and ensures compliance with them. The Executive Board reports regularly to the Supervisory Board on its management of the agency, and in particular relates information on the way in which investment policy guidelines take into account social, environmental and ethical considerations.

Pernod Ricard (French: [ pɛʁno ʁikaʁ ]) is a French company best known for its anise -flavoured pastis apéritifs Pernod Anise and Ricard Pastis (often referred to simply as Pernod or Ricard). The world's second-largest wine and spirits seller, it also produces several other types of pastis.

In 1975, the companies of Pernod Fils and Ricard, the two largest French aniseed aperitif producers and fierce competitors, merged creating the Pernod Ricard group.

In 1988, Pernod Ricard acquired Irish Distillers makers of Jameson Irish whiskeys.

In 1989, Pernod Ricard acquired Orlando Wyndham makers of Jacob's Creek.

In 1993, Pernod Ricard worked with Cuban companies to create Havana Club.

In 1999, Pernod Ricard acquired the Yerevan Brandy Company.

In 2001, Pernod Ricard acquired 38% of Seagram 's Wines and Spirits business including Chivas Brothers Ltd makers of Chivas Regal and owner of 13 Scotch malt distilleries, 1 grain distillery and 2 gin distilleries.

In 2001, Pernod Ricard acquired Jan Becher, makers of Becherovka.

In 2005, Pernod Ricard acquired Allied Domecq, makers of Ballantine's.

In 2008, Pernod Ricard announced its acquisition of Swedish-based V&S Group, which produces Absolut Vodka, from the Swedish government.

In 2013, Pernod Ricard joined leading alcohol producers as part of a producers' commitments to reducing harmful drinking.

In December 2018, Elliott Management Corporation purchased a 2.5% stake in Pernod Ricard.

According to the Anti-Corrida Alliance, Pernod Ricard was the major funder of bullfighting in France, financing bullfighting clubs and sponsoring corridas despite the opposition of a majority of French citizens to blood sports. In 2020, Pernod Ricard ended the association with bullfighting clubs.

In 2022, Pernod Ricard acquired the French ready-to-serve cocktail brand, Cockorico.

In December 2022, Pernod Ricard announced plans to open a US$250 million carbon-neutral whiskey distillery in Marion County, Kentucky in 2025.

In 2023, Pernod Ricard decided to resume limited exports of Beefeater Gin and Jameson Irish Whiskey to Russia. After being faced with protests and calls for a portfolio-wide boycott of all its brands Pernod Ricard decided to end all exports of its international brands to Russia.

In December 2023, Pernod Ricard has released The Chuan Pure Malt Whisky, its inaugural Chinese whisky.

In July 2024, Pernod Ricard announced the sale of its entire portfolio of strategic international wine brands to Australian Wine Holdco Ltd (AWL, owner of Accolade Wines). This included Jacob's Creek, Orlando, St Hugo (Australia), Stoneleigh, Brancott Estate, Church Road (New Zealand), and Campo Viejo, Ysios, Tarsus, Azpilicueta (Spain). Pernod will retain its US and French wine brands, as well as labels in Argentina and China. The brands generated over 10 million cases annually and the divestment allowed Pernod Ricard to sharpen its focus on premium spirits and champagne. The deal was finalized in April 2025.

In October 2024, Pernod Ricard agreed to sell Minttu liqueur and its portfolio of Nordic local brands to the Finnish beverage company Hartwall.

In February 2025, Pernod Ricard acquired the South African gin Inverroche. In July 2025 they sold the Irish whiskey brands Clontarf and Knappogue Castle to Cobblestone Brands, and the Indian whisky Imperial Blue to Tilaknagar Industries.

In December 2025, it was announced that Pernod Ricard had agreed to sell its US sparkling wine assets associated with the Mumm Napa, Mumm Sparkling California and DVX brands to Trinchero Family Wine & Spirits. The transaction, which excluded Champagne and Mumm operations outside the United States, formed part of Pernod Ricard's ongoing portfolio rationalisation, with financial terms not disclosed.

Pernod Ricard previously owned the non-alcoholic chocolate beverage Yoo-hoo, which was acquired from a group of private investors in 1989. Pernod Ricard also previously owned the carbonated citrus drink Orangina. Both brands were sold in 2001 to Cadbury Schweppes.

Persillade (French pronunciation: [ pɛʁsijad ]) is a sauce or seasoning mixture of parsley (French : persil) chopped together with seasonings including garlic, herbs, oil, and vinegar.

In its simplest form, just parsley and garlic, it is a common ingredient in many dishes, part of a sauté cook's mise en place. If added early in cooking, it becomes mellow, but when it is added at the end of cooking or as a garnish, it provides a garlicky jolt. It is extensively used in French and French-influenced cuisines, as well as in Cajun, Louisiana Creole, and Québécois cuisines.

A classic French and Quebec bistro dish is pommes persillade, cubed potatoes fried in a small amount of oil, with persillade added at the end of the cooking, and can sometimes be combined with Quebec poutine to produce a hybrid dish called poutine persillade. Persillade is also popular in Louisiana ; New Orleans chef Austin Leslie 's signature dish was fried chicken with persillade.

There are many variations, either adding other ingredients or substituting other herbs, such as bay leaf, oregano, basil, or tarragon, for the parsley. Combined with bread crumbs, it is used as crust for roasted veal or lamb chops. The addition of lemon zest creates gremolata, a traditional garnish for braised lamb shanks. Anchovy is a common addition in Provençal cooking. A small amount of olive oil is often added to persillade to make it easier to use.

The Petit Luxembourg (pronounced [ pəti lyksɑ̃buʁ ] ; "Little Luxembourg") is an hôtel particulier and the official residence of the President of the French Senate. It is located at 17–17 bis, Rue de Vaugirard, just west of the Luxembourg Palace, which serves as the seat of the Senate, in the 6th arrondissement of Paris. Originally built around 1550 to the designs of an unknown architect, it is especially noted for the surviving Rococo interiors designed in 1710–1713 by the French architect Germain Boffrand. Further west, at 19 rue de Vaugirard, is the Musée du Luxembourg.

The original sixteenth-century building is of obscure origin, but became known as the Hôtel de Luxembourg after its acquisition in 1570 by François de Luxembourg, who in 1581 became Duc de Piney, Pair de France. Marie de Médicis purchased the hôtel in 1612 when she began acquiring property for the construction of the adjacent Luxembourg Palace. The old hôtel soon became known as the Petit Luxembourg to distinguish it from the larger building.

In 1627 Marie de Médicis gave the Petit Luxembourg to Cardinal de Richelieu, who occupied it while his own grand palace, the Palais-Cardinal, was constructed on the rue Saint-Honoré. Richelieu left the Petit Luxembourg to his niece, the Duchess of Aiguillon. It was inherited in turn by the Grand Condé, who left it to his son, Henri Jules de Bourbon-Condé. The latter's widow, Anne of Bavaria, Princess Palatine, engaged the architect Germain Boffrand to enlarge and redecorate it between 1710 and 1713.

Boffrand demolished the service buildings to the west of the courtyard, replacing them with a new wing for the Palatine officers. The new wing preserved the style of the old corps de logis to the east and incorporated vestiges of the Couvent des Filles-du-Calvaire, founded by Marie de Médicis in 1622. These can still be seen in the winter garden and the Mannerist interior of the Queen's Chapel. Between the street and the courtyard Boffrand added an entrance screen which connected the old to the new. Its portal is flanked by Tuscan columns on the concave courtyard side and Ionic on the convex street side. The upper floor contains a corridor connecting the east and west wings.

Although Boffrand preserved the façades of the older wing, he completely redesigned the interior. A modest vestibule with Ionic columns leads directly to a grand two-storey stair hall decorated on the upper floor with pilasters of the Composite order, elaborate carvings, and a coffered vault. The staircase, much admired in its day, sweeps up to the piano nobile in a single flight, its grandeur enhanced with balustrades of stone, rather than the more usual wrought iron. The princess's apartments lead directly off the landing. The first room no longer has the original décor, but the next (the Salon des Tapisseries) still has Boffrand's ceiling, cornices, and frieze. The following room, the Grand Salon also retains these elements.

In large rooms, such as the stair hall and the Grand Salon, Boffrand's unit of design was not the wall (as seen with Pierre Lepautre), but rather the entire room. Each wall consisted of a great arcade, which "pulled the space together and subordinated doors, windows, and mirrors to a regular rhythm." The focus of the décor was high in the spandrels between the arches, not in the wall panels as seen with Lepautre. This principle, first employed by J. H. Mansart at the Grand Trianon, kept the main part of the wall surface free for hangings, such as tapestries and paintings. The band of ornate spandrels running around the room achieves a unity, which is further emphasized by the slightly vaulted ceiling. Boffrand's decorative motifs, "the linked C-scrolls entwined with palmettes and festoons," are more similar to those of Jean Bérain than Lepautre.

Boffrand also added another hôtel for the household, with kitchens and stables, on the other side of rue de Vaugirard; an underground passage linked the two residences.

During the French Revolution, from 6 October 1789 until their departure into exile on 20 June 1791, the Petit Luxembourg was the assigned residence of the Count of Provence (the future Louis XVIII) and his wife.

After Napoleon 's coup of 18 Brumaire (on 9 November 1799), he became First Consul on 11 November, and he and his wife Joséphine moved from the Hôtel de la Victoire into the west wing of the Petit Luxembourg, evicting the directors he had just brought down. Napoleon took the former apartment of Louis Gohier on the ground floor, and Joséphine, the former apartment of Jean-François Moulin on the floor above. They used the east wing for official functions. Finding their living quarters at the Petit Luxembourg "too cramped", they moved to the Tuileries after three months. Under Napoleon, the Conseil d'État (Council of State) was seated at the Petit Luxembourg from 25 December 1799.

Since 1958, the Petit Luxembourg has been the official residence of the president of the French Senate.

Petit pâté de Pézenas is a specialty of the town of Pézenas in the Hérault département of France.

The size and shape of a spool of sewing thread, these little meat pies are a golden brown, crispy pastry with a moist, sweet inside, composed of lean roast mutton, sheep suet, brown and white sugar, lemon peel, salt, and pepper. They can be eaten as an hors d'oeuvre, with a salad or as a dessert. They are cooked in patisseries all over the town. According to legend, Lord Clive or his cook invented the recipe using spices from India and taught it to the pastry makers of Pézenas when they were staying at the Château de Larzac in 1768. The same filling is also used in Tourte de Pézenas, made with flaky pastry.

The Confrérie du petit pâté de Pézenas was created in 1991 to "promote and defend the Petit pâté de Pézenas". To prevent the recipe going abroad or being stolen, the fraternity has filed it with the Institut national de la propriété industrielle (National Institute of Industrial Property, INPI), giving legal protection.

In the BBC TV programme MasterChef: The Professionals, broadcast on 27 November 2012, Michel Roux, Jr. demonstrated how to cook the dish and set it as the "classic recipe" for contestants to make.

Philippe Douste-Blazy (French pronunciation: [ filip dust blazi ] ; born 1 January 1953) is a French United Nations official and former centre-right politician. Over the course of his career, he served as Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations, Special Adviser on Innovative Financing for Development in the UN and chairman of UNITAID.

He previously served as French Minister for Health (1993–1995 and 2004–2005), Minister of Culture (1995–1997) and as Foreign Minister in the cabinet of Dominique de Villepin (2005–2007). He was mayor of Lourdes 1989–2000 and mayor of Toulouse 2001–2004.

Originally a member of the Centre of Social Democrats (CDS), the Christian Democrat component of the Union for French Democracy (UDF) party, he later joined the Union for a Popular Movement.

A cardiologist by profession, he became professor at Toulouse Sciences University in 1988.

Born in Lourdes in the Hautes-Pyrénées, Douste-Blazy studied medicine in Toulouse, where he had his first job in 1976. He then worked as a cardiologist in Lourdes and Toulouse, namely in Purpan's hospital from 1986. He then joined the French Society of Cardiology. He became Professor of Medicine at Toulouse Sciences University in 1988. Since 2016, he has also been a visiting professor at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health.

A member of the Centre of Social Democrats (CDS), the Christian Democrat component of the Union for French Democracy (UDF), Douste-Blazy entered politics in March 1989, being elected mayor of Lourdes. He was also elected national director of the association of research against elevations of cholesterol.

In the 1989 European elections, Douste-Blazy was elected Member of the European Parliament in June of the same year. He was then a member of the European People's Party.

During his time in parliament, Douste-Blazy served on the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection. In addition to his committee assignments, he was a member of the parliament's delegation to the Joint Assembly of the Agreement between the African, Caribbean and Pacific States (ACP countries) and the European Economic Community.

Elected deputy for Hautes-Pyrénées département in March 1993, Douste-Blazy was appointed to the cabinet of Edouard Balladur as Minister-Delegate (a junior minister) at the Ministry for Health.

In May 1994, in his capacity as minister, Douste-Blazy visited Rwanda and refugee camps in neighboring Tanzania to witness the consequences of the genocidal mass slaughter of Tutsi by members of Rwanda's Hutu majority government. During his time in office, France approved a bill which prohibited postmenopausal pregnancy, which Douste-Blazy said was "...immoral as well as dangerous to the health of mother and child."

Douste-Blazy stayed at the ministry until the 1995 presidential election. In March 1994, he was elected at Hautes-Pyrénées 's General Council. He became general secretary of the CDS in December and Government's spokesman one month later.

In May 1995, after the election of Jacques Chirac as President of France, a candidacy he was backing, Douste-Blazy was nominated Minister of Culture. In June, he was also re-elected Mayor of Lourdes then, five months later, elected general secretary of Democratic Force, the party which replaced the CDS.

In June 1997, the overwhelming defeat of the Presidential Majority during legislative election made him lose his position as Minister of Culture, but he remained deputy of Hautes-Pyrénées and became president of the UDF parliamentary group at the French National Assembly. During the election campaign he was badly hurt when a mentally unstable man stabbed him in the back as he was campaigning in Lourdes. It turned out that the Minister's assailant was an Albanian refugee who had already tried to attack Mr. Douste-Blazy in 1992.

At the head of the centrist parliamentary group, he was often opposed to the UDF party leader François Bayrou. Indeed, while the latter advocated the emancipation of the UDF towards its Gaullist allies, Douste-Blazy proposed the union of the right-wing parties behind President Chirac.

Seeking one of the country's most important municipal seats, Douste-Blazy narrowly won the election for Mayor of Toulouse in 2001, which saw the left making its best showing in decades. Once in office, he had to deal with a reinvigorated political opposition, as well as with the dramatic explosion of the AZF plant in late 2001.

Douste-Blazy supported Jacques Chirac in the two rounds of the 2002 presidential election, in spite of the candidacy of François Bayrou. Consequently, he participated to the unification of some right-wing groups in the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) and appeared as a possible prime minister. However, once re-elected, President Chirac choose Jean-Pierre Raffarin and Philippe Douste-Blazy refused to resign from its mayoralty to be minister. The same year, he changed of constituency and was elected deputy for Haute-Garonne département.

After the electoral crash of the UMP in the 2004 regional election, Douste-Blazy left its function in Toulouse and returned at the Ministry of Health. His predecessor Jean-François Mattéi was discredited due to his response to the 2003 European heat wave. He was the instigator of a new reform of medical insurances.

In a government reshuffle following the rejection of the European constitution in 29 May 2005's referendum, Douste-Blazy replaced Michel Barnier and became Minister of Foreign Affairs in the government of Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin.

In his capacity as minister, Douste-Blazy summoned Iran 's ambassador to France in October 2005, demanding an explanation for President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad 's public call for Israel to be "wiped off the map." He announced France's support for the Israeli separation barrier on 25 October 2006. In November 2006, he summoned Israel's ambassador to Paris, Daniel Shek to express "serious concern" about violations of a ceasefire that ended the 33-day war between Israel and Hezbollah guerrillas.

During his time in office, France played a central role in international attempts to end the bloodshed in the 2006 Lebanon War. In October 2006, the French National Assembly, despite Douste-Blazy's opposition, passed a bill which if approved by the Senate and would make Armenian genocide denial a crime.

Douste-Blazy left the position with the departure of Jacques Chirac from the Presidency in May 2007. He did not run for a new parliamentary term in the 2007 elections.

On 6 November 2007, Douste-Blazy was among the guests invited to the state dinner hosted by President George W. Bush in honor of President Nicolas Sarkozy at the White House.

While serving as foreign minister of France, Douste-Blazy became chairman of the executive board of UNITAID, the International Drug Purchase Facility hosted by the World Health Organization which France co-founded in 2006.

On 19 February 2008, Douste-Blazy was appointed by United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon as Special Adviser on Innovative Financing for Development, with the rank of UN Under-Secretary-General. From 2008 until 2009, he was a member of the High Level Taskforce on Innovative International Financing for Health Systems, co-chaired by Gordon Brown and Robert Zoellick. He is also the chairman of the board of the Millennium Foundation for Innovate Finance for Health.

His main responsibilities as the Special Adviser included promoting UNITAID and other sources of financing for the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), advising the United Nations Secretary-General on financing solutions to the implementation of the Monterrey consensus, coordinating with the High-Level Group on the MDGs, and liaising with various UN and non-UN related institutions, such as the main Bretton Woods institutions, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development-Development Assistance Committee (OECD-DAC), the United Nations Development Group and the Millennium Communication Campaign.

Douste-Blazy was also in charge of organizing the first World Conference of Non-Governmental Donors, with a special focus on the financing for development provided by citizens, local and regional authorities, foundations, non-governmental organizations, economic and social representatives, faith groups and the private sector. It is hoped that these sources of funding could compensate the insufficient official development assistance in achieving the Millennium Development Goals.

Ahead of the 2012 presidential elections, Douste-Blazy announced in January 2012 that he no longer supported Nicolas Sarkozy and instead was lending his support to centrist candidate François Bayrou.

Minister of Health and government's spokesman : 1993–1995.

Minister of Culture and government's spokesman : 1995–1997.

Minister of Solidarity, Health and Family : 2004–2005.

Minister of Foreign Affairs : 2005–2007.

Member of European Parliament : 1989–1993 (Became minister in 1993 and elected in parliamentary elections in March 1993).

President of the group of Union for French Democracy : 1998–2002.

Member of the National Assembly of France for Hautes-Pyrénées : Elected in March 1993 but he became minister / 1997–2001 (Resignation). Elected in 1993, reelected in 1997.

Member of the National Assembly of France for Haute-Garonne : 2001–2004 (Became minister in 2004). Elected in 2001, reelected in 2002.

General councillor of Hautes-Pyrénées : 1994–2001.

Municipal councillor of Toulouse : 2001–2008.

Mayor of Lourdes : 1989–2000 (Resignation). Reelected in 1995.

Municipal councillor of Lourdes : 1989–2001. Reelected in 1995.

President of the Urban community of Greater Toulouse : 2001–2008.

Member of the Urban community of Greater Toulouse : 2001–2008.

General secretary of the Union for a Popular Movement : 2002–2004.

Philippe Martin (French pronunciation: [ filip maʁtɛ̃ ] ; born 22 November 1953) is a French politician of the Socialist Party (PS) who has been serving as president of the French Agency for Biodiversity (AFB) since 2017. Prior this, he served as Minister for Environment, Sustainable Development and Energy in the government of Prime Minister of France Jean-Marc Ayrault from 2013 to 2014.

Martin was prefect of Gers department from 1992 to 1994 and prefect of Landes department from 1994 to 1995.

Martin was a member of the National Assembly from 2002 until 2013, representing Gers's 1st constituency. In parliament, he was a member of the "Socialist, Radical, Citizen and Miscellaneous Left" (SRC) political group and served on the Finance Committee.

During his brief term as minister, Martin put off plans for France's transition towards less carbon-intensive energy sources until 2014. In 2014, as part of a wider effort to deter poachers and traffickers, Martin publicly destroyed a stock of about three tons of confiscated ivory from the tusks of African elephants, making France the first European country to take such a step. Shortly after, in an effort to protect the citizens of Paris against pollution triggered by an exceptionally warm spring, he ordered a 20 kilometer-hour reduction of the speed limits, made parking free in the city and diverted large trucks from the city.

Martin is a fierce critic of genetically modified organisms (GMO).

On 1 July 2012, Martin asked French restaurateurs and wine merchants to stop selling Californian wines in protest against the entry into force of a California law prohibiting the sale of foie gras on grounds of animal welfare.

In the Socialist Party's 2017 primaries, Martin publicly endorsed Benoît Hamon as the party's candidate for the French presidential election later that year.

Philippe Séguin (French pronunciation: [ filip seɡɛ̃ ] ; 21 April 1943 – 7 January 2010) was a French political figure who was President of the National Assembly from 1993 to 1997 and President of the Cour des Comptes of France from 2004 to 2010.

He entered the Court of Financial Auditors in 1970, but he began a political career in the Neo-Gaullist party RPR. In 1978, he was elected to the National Assembly as a deputy for the Vosges département. He was Mayor of Épinal between 1983 and 1997.

Representing the social tradition of Gaullism, he was Minister of Social Affairs in Jacques Chirac 's cabinet, from 1986 to 1988. After Chirac's defeat at the 1988 presidential election, he allied with Charles Pasqua and criticized the abandonment of Gaullist doctrine by the RPR executive. He accused Alain Juppé and Édouard Balladur of wanting an alignment on liberal and pro-European policies.

In 1992, he played a leading role in the No campaign against the Maastricht Treaty. On the eve of the vote he opposed President François Mitterrand in a televised debate.

As president of the National Assembly from 1993 to 1997, he supported the winning candidacy of Jacques Chirac at the 1995 presidential election. He inspired the theme of Chirac's campaign which was named "the social fracture".

Their relations deteriorated when he took the lead of the RPR, after the right-wing defeat at the 1997 legislative election. He failed to change the name of the party to "The Rally". He criticized the ascendancy of President Chirac within the party, refusing to be the leader of a "Chirac's fan-club". He resigned in 1999 just before the European elections, leaving his deputy Nicolas Sarkozy in charge.

As the RPR's official candidate, he lost the 2001 mayoral election in Paris, mostly due to a heavily criticized campaign marred by gaffes and controversy. Refusing the merger of the Neo-Gaullist party with the right-wing classical forces in the Union for a Popular Movement, he quit politics in 2002.

He died at the age of 66 on 7 January 2010 from a heart attack.

Picard (/ ˈ p ɪ k ɑːr d / PIK -ard, also US : / p ɪ ˈ k ɑːr d, ˈ p ɪ k ər d / pih- KARD, PIK -ərd ; French: [ pikaʁ ]) also known as 'Roman Flemish' or 'Romane flamande' is a langue d'oïl of the Romance language family spoken in the northernmost region of France and parts of Hainaut province in Belgium. Administratively, this area is divided between the French Hauts-de-France region and the Belgian Wallonia along the border between both countries due to its traditional core being the districts of Tournai and Mons (Walloon Picardy).

The language or dialect is referred to by different names, as residents of Picardy call it simply Picard, but in the more populated region of Nord-Pas-de-Calais it is typically called Ch'ti or Ch'timi (sometimes written as Chti or Chtimi). This is the area that makes up Romance Flanders, around the metropolis of Lille and Douai, and northeast Artois around Béthune and Lens. Picard is also named Rouchi around Valenciennes, Roubaignot around Roubaix.

In 1998, Picard native speakers amounted to 700,000 individuals, the vast majority of whom were elderly people (aged 65 and over). Since its daily use had drastically declined, Picard was declared by the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) a "severely endangered language ". However, as of 2023, the Picard language was listed as "vulnerable" by UNESCO.

The word ch'ti, chtimi or ch'timi to designate the Picard language was invented during the First World War by Poilus from non-Picard speaking areas to refer to their brothers in arms from Picardy and Nord-Pas-de-Calais. It is an onomatopoeia created based on the frequent use of the /ʃ/ (ch-) phoneme and of the /ʃti/ (chti) sound in Picard: " ch'ti " means the one, as in the sentence " ch'est chti qui a fait cha" (he is the one who has done that), for instance.

Belgium's French Community gave full official recognition to Picard as a regional language along with Walloon, Gaumais (Lorraine), Champenois (Champagne) and Lorraine German in its 1990 decree. The French government has not followed suit and has not recognized Picard as an official regional language (in line with its policy of linguistic unity, which allows for only one official language in France, as per the French Constitution), but some reports have recognized Picard as a language distinct from French.

A 1999 report by Bernard Cerquiglini, the director of the Institut national de la langue française (National Institute of the French Language) stated:

The gap has continued to widen between French and the varieties of langues d'oïl, which today we would call "French dialects"; Franc-comtois, Walloon, Picard, Norman, Gallo, Poitevin, Saintongeais, Bourguignon-morvandiau, Lorrain must be accepted among the regional languages of France ; by placing them on the list [of French regional languages], they will be known from then on as langues d'oïl.

Even if it has no official status as a language in France, Picard, along with all the other languages spoken in France, benefits from actions led by the Culture Minister's General Delegation for the French language and the languages of France (la Délégation générale à la langue française et aux langues de France).

Picard, like French, is one of the langues d'oïl and belongs to the Gallo - Roman family of languages. It consists of all the varieties used for writing (Latin : scriptae) in the north of France from before 1000 (in the south of France at that time the Occitan language was used). Often, the langues d'oïl are referred to simply as Old French. Picard is phonetically quite different from the North-central langues d'oïl, which evolved into modern French. Among the most notable traits, the evolution in Picard towards palatalization is less marked than in the central langues d'oïl in which it is particularly striking; /k/ or /ɡ/ before /j/, tonic /i/ and /e/, as well as in front of tonic /a/ and /ɔ/ (from earlier *au ; the open /o/ of the French p o rte) in central Old French but not in Picard:

The effects of palatalization can be summarised as this:

There are striking differences, such as Picard cachier ('to hunt') ~ Old French chacier, which later took the modern French form of chasser. Because of the proximity of Paris to the northernmost regions of France, French (that is, the languages that were spoken in and around Paris) greatly influenced Picard and vice versa. The closeness between Picard and French causes the former to not always be recognised as a language in its own right, but rather a "distortion of French" as it is often viewed.

Despite being geographically and syntactically affiliated according to some linguists due to their inter-comprehensible morphosyntactic features, Picard in Picardy, Ch'timi and Rouchi still intrinsically maintain conspicuous discrepancies. Picard includes a variety of very closely related dialects. It is difficult to list them all accurately in the absence of specific studies on the dialectal variations, but these varieties can probably provisionally be distinguished: Amiénois, Vimeu-Ponthieu, Vermandois, Thiérache, Beauvaisis, "chtimi" (Bassin Minier, Lille), dialects in other regions near Lille (Roubaix, Tourcoing, Mouscron, Comines), "rouchi" (Valenciennois) and Tournaisis, Borain, Artésien rural, Boulonnais. The varieties are defined by specific phonetic, morphological and lexical traits and sometimes by a distinctive literary tradition.

The Ch'ti language was re-popularised by the 2008 French comedy film Welcome to the Sticks (French : Bienvenue chez les Ch'tis ; French pronunciation: [bjɛ̃vny ʃe le ʃti]) which broke nearly every box office record in France and earned over $245,000,000 worldwide on an 11 million euro budget.

Picard is not taught in French schools (apart from a few one-off and isolated courses) and is generally only spoken among friends or family members. It has nevertheless been the object of scholarly research at universities in Lille and Amiens, as well as at Indiana University. Since people are now able to move around France more easily than in past centuries, the different varieties of Picard are converging and becoming more similar. In its daily use, Picard is tending to lose its distinctive features and may be confused with regional French. At the same time, even though most Northerners can understand Picard today, fewer and fewer are able to speak it, and people who speak Picard as their first language are increasingly rare, particularly under 50.

The 2008 film Welcome to the Sticks, starring comedian Dany Boon, deals with Ch'ti language and culture and the perceptions of the region by outsiders, and it was the highest-grossing French film of all time at the box office in France.

Today Picard is primarily a spoken language, but in the medieval period, there is a wealth of literary texts in Picard. However, Picard was not able to compete with French and was slowly reduced to the status of a regional language.

A more recent body of Picard literature, written during the last two centuries, also exists. Modern written Picard is generally a transcription of the spoken language. For that reason, words are often spelled in a variety of different ways (in the same way that English and French were before they were standardized).

One system of spelling for Picard words is similar to that of French. It is undoubtedly the easiest for French speakers to understand but can also contribute the stereotype that Picard is only a corruption of French rather than a language in its own right.

Various spelling methods have been proposed since the 1960s to offset the disadvantage and to give Picard a visual identity that is distinct from French. There is now a consensus, at least between universities, in favor of the written form known as Feller-Carton (based on the Walloon spelling system, which was developed by Jules Feller, and adapted for Picard by Professor Fernand Carton).

The first person plural often appears in spoken Picard in the form of the neutral third person in ; however, the written form prioritizes os (as in French, where on is used for nous). On the other hand, the spelling of conjugated verbs will depend on the pronunciation, which varies within the Picard domain. For instance southern Picard would read il étoait / étoét while northern Picard would read il étot. This is noted as variants in the following:

The majority of Picard words derive from Vulgar Latin.

Many words are very similar to French, but a large number are unique to Picard—principally terms relating to mining or farming.

Here are several typical phrases in Picard, accompanied by French and English translations:

Cardinal numbers in Picard from 1 to 20 are as follows:

Picard, although primarily a spoken language, has a body of written literature: poetry, songs (" P'tit quinquin " for example), comic books, etc.

A number of dictionaries and patois guides also exist (for French speakers):

Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights

Preume artike: Ches honmes pi ches fanmes is vien't tertous au monne libe, aveuc ches minmes drots pi l'minme dignité. Leu raison pi leu conschienche is font qu'is ont l'dévoér dé s'conduire inter eus conme des frères.

The Pieds plats (English: Flat feet) were an individualist and illegalist anarchist group founded in the 1880s in Paris. Bringing together workers from the Île-de-France region in the carpentry trade, some of its members participated in the Ère des attentats (1892–1894), such as Théodule Meunier, Jean-Pierre François, and Fernand Bricout, who carried out the Véry bombing or the Lobau bombing in the first half of 1892. Through their extensive use of propaganda by the deed during this period, they positioned themselves as counter-powers to the authority of prominent anarchist figures like Charles Malato, Errico Malatesta, or Peter Kropotkin, whom the Pieds plats and broader individualist anarchists openly opposed.

The group also gained influence through its combination of direct action, illegalism, and propaganda by the deed. Its members are thus credited with pioneering and theorizing ' déménagements à la cloche de bois ' (‘silent move-outs’)—the practice of leaving a residence without notifying the landlord or paying rent. This became one of the ideological foundations for the later practice of squatting.

The Pieds plats were founded in the 1880s among carpentry workers in Paris. The group emerged from anarchist circles organized by the anarcho-syndicalist wine merchant Paul Rousseau at his home, located at 131 rue Saint-Martin. Le Maitron lists as members, among others, companions Théodule Meunier, Jean-Pierre François, Fernand Bricout, Bruneau, Sentenac, Cler, and Soulage. Ferter was also linked to the group and participated in fundraising efforts for its activities.

According to their opponent Jean Grave, their name originated from the popular expression ‘Je ne marche pas, j’ai les pieds plats’ (‘I won’t budge/walk; I have flat feet’). Grave described them as primarily engaging in illegalist tactics, such as individual reclamation, notably targeting Parisian wine merchants—either by accumulating debts before disappearing or simply stealing dishes, linens, and drinks from those merchants or restaurant owners. Later, during the Era of Attacks (1892–1894), members like Meunier, François, and Bricout participated in the Véry bombing, one of the first major attacks of the period, which followed the arrest of Ravachol.

Their ideology, blending illegalism, direct action, and propaganda by the deed, played a key role in developing the concept of ' déménagements à la cloche de bois ' (‘silent move-outs’)—leaving a residence without notifying the landlord or paying rent. This practice became an early precursor to squatting.

The Pieds plats also engaged in fierce polemics against prominent anarchist figures like Charles Malato, Errico Malatesta, and Peter Kropotkin, whom they derided as ‘[anarchomoralists, cowardly anarchists, personalities, petty popes, doctrinaires, or prelates]’. Conversely, these three anarcho-communist viewed the Pieds plats and individualist anarchists with suspicion, arguing that their circles were infiltrated by police and that their use of violence and propaganda by the deed undermined the broader anarchist cause.

Pierre Louis Ernest Armand Abelin (16 May 1909 – 23 May 1977) was a French Christian Democratic politician, parliamentarian and government minister. Abelin took part in the founding of the Popular Republican Movement (MRP). An adherent of the notion of building a 'third force' in French politics, he retained a staunch anti- Gaullist stance. He later became the general secretary of the Democratic Centre.

Abelin was born and died in Poitiers. He represented the Vienne constituency in the first and second Constituent National Assemblies. He was Member of Parliament from Vienee between 1946 and 1958, and again from 1962 to 1974.

He served as Secretary of State to the Presiding Council November 1947-July 1948, and in September 1948, as Secretary of State for Finances September 1952 to January 1953 and Secretary of State for Economic Affairs March 1955 to January 1956.

Abelin moved to Châtellerault, where he was elected to the municipal council. He later became the mayor of Châtellerault.

Abelin served as president of the High Council on Cooperation with Foreign Countries between 1956 and 1958. On June 17, 1957 he became the president of the Economic Affairs Committee of the National Assembly. He also held positions in the United Nations.

After the split in the Democratic Centre following the 1969 presidential election, the group led by Abelin and Jean Lecanuet (who rejected any reconciliation with the Gaullists) moved to form an alliance with the Radical Party. Abelin became one of the leaders of the new alliance, the Reforming Movement.

He was Minister of Cooperation between May 27, 1974 to January 12, 1976. In his function as minister he initiated the process which would lead to the signing of the Lomé Convention in 1975.

Pierre Abelin was the father of Jean-Pierre Abelin, who (as of 2009) is the mayor of Châtellerault.

Pierre Claude Georges Chassigneux (French pronunciation: [ pjɛʁ klod ʒɔʁʒ ʃasiɲø ] ; 25 December 1941 – 22 January 2024) was a French businessman and government official.

Born in Neuilly-sur-Marne on 25 December 1941, Chassigneux's parents were doctors. He attended secondary school at the Lycée Marcelin-Berthelot [ fr ] and the Lycée Louis-le-Grand before graduating from the Faculty of Law of Paris, Sciences Po, and the École nationale d'administration. After university, he joined the Ministry of the Interior in 1969 and became chief of staff to Prefect of Tarn [ fr ] Bernard Couzier.

Chassigneux was appointed secretary-general of Orne in 1976 and then Manche the following year. He became deputy chief of staff to Prefect of Police Pierre Somveille [ fr ] in 1980. He served as Prefect of Nièvre [ fr ] from 1982 to 1983, directed the Direction centrale des renseignements généraux from 1983 to 1986, served as Prefect of Oise [ fr ] from 1986 to 1988, and was Prefect of Gironde [ fr ] from 1988 to 1992. From 1992 to 1995, he was Director of the Office of the President of the French Republic [ fr ] under François Mitterrand.

After Mitterrand left the Élysée Palace in 1995, Chassigneux served as president of the Association technique de l'importation charbonnière until 2001. There, he supervised the privatization of the Compagnie française de navigation rhénane [ fr ]. He joined the board of directors of Aéroports de Paris the day after the September 11 attacks with the objective of strengthening airport security. In 2003, he became president of the Société des Autoroutes du Nord et de l'Est de la France (SANEF), succeeding Pierre Chantereau. He was also vice-president of the Association des sociétés françaises d'autoroutes et d'ouvrages à péages and treasurer of the Institut François-Mitterrand [ fr ]. In 2007, he became president of Taxis bleus, owned by his old acquaintance André Rousselet. In December 2011, he ended his mandate as president of SANEF. As president of Taxis bleus, he fought against the rise of the vehicle for hire industry during the 2010s.

Pierre Chassigneux died on 22 January 2024, at the age of 82.

Pierre Jules Cot (20 November 1895, in Grenoble – 21 August 1977, Coise-Saint-Jean-Pied-Gauthier), was a French politician and leading figure in the Popular Front government of the 1930s.

Born in Grenoble into a conservative Catholic family, he entered politics as an admirer of the World War I conservative leader Raymond Poincaré, but moved steadily to the left over the course of his career. Through the decrypting of 1943 Soviet intelligence cables through the Venona Project it was established that Cot was an agent of the Soviet Union with the code name of "Dedal". However, other sources suggest that Cot was a communist fellow-traveller rather than an agent. The British Secret Intelligence Service describes him as "a highly controversial figure, vilified at the time by the French Right, and since accused of having been a Soviet agent".

In the 1920s Cot was a supporter of Aristide Briand, an independent socialist. In 1928 he was elected to the National Assembly as a Radical Deputy for Savoy. In December 1932 he was appointed Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs in the centre-left government of Joseph Paul-Boncour.

In January 1933, he became Minister for Air in the Radical government of Édouard Daladier. He oversaw the establishment of Air France, and advocated a major expansion of the French Air Force. He was conscious of the real aim of the Nazi policy of creating sailgliding clubs through the Hitlerjugend and supported the expansion of working class aero-clubs movement called Aviation Populaire as a countermeasure, but left office in February 1934 when the Stavisky Affair forced Daladier from power. He was again Minister for Air in three brief governments led by Camille Chautemps.

In 1936, Cot, by this time a socialist, became a leading support of the Popular Front, an alliance of the Radicals and the Socialists led by Léon Blum, with the support of the French Communist Party. An antiwar activist, though not a pacifist, he was president of the International Peace Conference from 1936 to 1940. He received the Stalin Peace Prize in 1953.

When Blum became Prime Minister in June 1936, Cot returned to the Air Ministry. He oversaw the nationalisation of the aeronautical industry and the launch of a re-armament program to meet the challenge of the fast-growing German Luftwaffe.

When the Spanish Civil War broke out, Blum's government reluctantly supported the policy of non-intervention, but Cot became a leading organiser of clandestine aid to the Spanish Republic. He organized a fictitious sale to Hejaz, Finland and Brazil of war planes, that made a flight scale in Spain. The head of his ministerial office, Jean Moulin (later a leader of the French Resistance), made several trips to Spain. This brought Cot into close collaboration with the communists, with whom he had increasingly sympathised since a visit to the Soviet Union in 1933. His activities were one of the factors leading to the withdrawal of the right wing of the Radical Party from the government and Blum's resignation in June 1937. In Blum's second government in March and April 1938, Cot was Minister for Commerce.

When Daladier returned to office and signed the Munich Agreement with Hitler, Cot broke finally with the Radical Party.

In May 1940, Prime Minister Paul Reynaud sent Cot on a mission to buy arms, particularly aircraft, from the Soviet Union, despite the fact that the Hitler-Stalin Pact of August 1939 had in effect made the Soviet Union a German ally. The fall of France the following month rendered his mission pointless. He flew to London and offered his services to Charles de Gaulle 's Free French movement, but de Gaulle considered him to be too pro-communist and offered him no position. Cot then went to the United States, where he spent the war years teaching at Yale University.

During this period in the United States operating as a Soviet spy, his controller was Vasiliy Zarubin, the chief NKVD " Rezident " for the United States who operated under the name of Vasiily Zubilin.

Cot was an influential figure among French political exiles, and in 1943 de Gaulle appointed him a member of the provisional French advisory assembly based in Algiers. De Gaulle also sent him to Moscow to negotiate Soviet recognition of the Free French government in exile.

In 1945, Cot was again elected as Deputy for Savoy, styling himself a republican although everyone knew he remained close to the communists. In 1951, he shifted to the Rhône, but when de Gaulle came to power in 1958 he lost his seat. In 1967 he made a final return to politics when he was elected as an independent Deputy for Paris, with the backing of the Communist Party. He was again defeated in the right-wing landslide election of 1968. He died in Paris in 1977.

Cot's son, Jean-Pierre Cot, was a minister in the Socialist government of Pierre Mauroy in 1981–82 and was a member of the European Parliament in 1978–1979 and 1984–1999. Since 2002 he has been a member of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea.

Pierre Ferri (3 September 1904 – 23 November 1993) was a French stockbroker and conservative politician who was Minister of Posts, Telegraphs, and Telephones in 1953–54.

Pierre Ferri was born in Paris on 3 September 1904. His father was Louis Ferri, a stockbroker. Pierre Ferri obtained a degree in Law, and graduated from the Ecole libre des sciences politiques (Free School of Political Science). He then became a stockbroker. He was mobilized in 1939 at the outbreak of World War II (1939–45) and participated in the fighting in France. He fought again in 1944 and 1945. He was awarded the Croix de guerre 1939–1945 and was made a Knight of the Legion of Honour.

Pierre Ferri was a Gaullist who leaned towards the right. In the elections for the first Constituent Assembly on 21 October 1945, he ran for the 2nd district of the Seine on the platform of the Union républicaine nationale démocratique (National Democratic Republican Union) but was not elected. He ran again in the 2 June 1946 elections for the second Constituent Assembly for the Parti républicain de la liberté (PRL, Republican Party of Liberty) but was not elected. In the parliamentary elections of 10 November 1946, Ferri again failed to win a seat.

Ferri was a member of the national council of the Rassemblement du peuple français (RPF, Rally of the French People), a coalition that included the PRL. In November 1947, Ferri was elected municipal councillor of Paris and general counsel of the Seine on the PRL platform. He was one of nine PRL councilors. From 1947, he was chairman of the Budget Committee of the city of Paris, and from 1950 was deputy chairman of the city council. In 1950 Ferri was a committee member of Les Bibliophiles de France.

Ferri ran successfully for election to the legislature for the 2nd district of the Seine on 17 June 1951 on the RPF platform. In 1951, Ferri supported Henri Ulver and several other Gaullist deputies in proposing a law to restore various powers to the Paris municipal council that had been removed, and to make some changes to the way its assemblies functioned. In 1953, there were just 27 RPF members on the council, including Ferri. Ferri was reelected in the Paris municipal elections of the Spring of 1953, one of a number of deputies to also sit on the council, but resigned soon after.

In the legislature, Ferri sat on the Finance Committee and on the subcommittee that monitored spending on national defence. He submitted many bills or amendments related to financial issues. On 28 June 1953, he joined the cabinet of Joseph Laniel as Minister of PTT. The cabinet fell on 12 June 1954, and Ferri again sat on the Finance committee. In the elections of 2 January 1956, Ferri was not reelected. He was again elected to the legislature in November 1958 as a member for Paris's 22nd constituency. Ferri was elected deputy for the Plaine Monceaux in the 17th arrondissement, running against a Gaullist Union for the New Republic candidate. He held his seat until 1962.

In 1966, Ferri was president of the Paris regional federation of the Independent Republicans led by Valéry Giscard d'Estaing. Jacques Feron, another former deputy, was secretary-general. Pierre Ferri died in Paris on 23 November 1993, aged 89.

Pierre Jean Marie Laval (French: [ pjɛʁ laval ] ; 28 June 1883 – 15 October 1945) was a French politician. He served as Prime Minister of France three times: 1931–1932 and 1935–1936 during the Third Republic, and 1942–1944 during Vichy France. After the war, Laval was tried as a Nazi collaborator and executed for treason.

A socialist early in his life, Laval became a lawyer in 1909 and was famous for his defence of strikers, trade unionists and leftists from government prosecution. In 1914, he was elected to the Chamber of Deputies as a member of the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO), and he remained committed to his pacifist convictions during the First World War. After his defeat in the 1919 election, Laval left the SFIO and became mayor of Aubervilliers. In 1924 he returned to the Chamber as an independent, and was elected to the Senate three years later. He also held a series of governmental positions, including Minister of Public Works, Minister of Justice and Minister of Labour. In 1931, Laval became prime minister, but his government fell only a year later.

Laval joined the conservative government of Gaston Doumergue in 1934 and served as Minister of the Colonies and then Foreign Minister. In 1935, Laval again became prime minister. Seeking to contain Nazi Germany, he pursued foreign policies favourable to Italy and the Soviet Union, but his handling of the Abyssinia Crisis, which was widely denounced as appeasement of Benito Mussolini, prompted his resignation in 1936.

After France's defeat by the blitzkrieg invasion of Nazi Germany, Laval, by this time a well-known fascist sympathizer, served in prominent roles in Philippe Pétain 's Vichy France, first as the vice-president of the Council of Ministers from July 1940 to December 1940 and later as the head of government from April 1942 to August 1944.

After the Liberation of France in 1944, Laval was imprisoned by the Germans. In April 1945, he fled to Spain but was soon extradited to France, where he was arrested by the French government. Laval was found guilty of plotting against the security of the state and of collaboration with the Nazis and was sentenced to death. After a thwarted suicide attempt, Laval was executed by firing squad in October 1945.

Laval was a chain smoker, he was noted to have smoked 80 'tabac brun' each day.

Pierre Jean Marie Laval was born on 28 June 1883 in Châteldon, near Vichy in the northern part of Auvergne, the son of Gilbert Laval and Claudine Tournaire. His father worked as a café proprietor and postman. The family was comfortably off compared to the rest of the village: the café also served as a hostel and a butcher's shop, and Gilbert Laval owned a vineyard and horses. The last name "Laval" was widespread in the region at that time. The family branch was commonly named Laval-Tournaire, and his father had himself called "Baptiste Moulin".

Laval was educated at the village school in Châteldon. At age 15, he was sent to the lycée Saint-Louis in Paris where he obtained his baccalauréat in July 1901. He then continued his studies in Southwestern France, in Bordeaux and Bayonne, where he learnt Spanish and met Pierre Cathala. Returning to Lyon, he spent the next year reading for a degree in zoology and served as a supervisor in various collèges and lycées of Lyon, Saint-Étienne and Autun to pay for his studies.

Laval joined the socialist Central Revolutionary Committee in 1903, while he was living in Saint-Étienne, 55 km (34 mi) southwest of Lyon. During this period, Laval became familiar with the left-wing doctrines of Georges Sorel and Hubert Lagardelle. "I was never a very orthodox socialist", he declared more than forty years later in 1945, "by which I mean that I was never much of a Marxist. My socialism was much more a socialism of the heart than a doctrinal socialism... I was much more interested in men, their jobs, their misfortunes and their conflicts than in the digressions of the great German pontiff."

In 1903, he was called up for military service and, after serving in the ranks, was discharged for varicose veins. Laval returned to Paris in 1907 at the age of 24. In April 1913 he said that "barrack-based armies [were] incapable of the slightest effort, because they are badly-trained and, above all, badly commanded." Laval favoured abolition of the army and replacement by a citizens' militia.

Abandoning natural science studies, Laval eventually turned to law and became in 1909 a "lawyer of the poor people", who was near syndicalists of the CGT. The years before the First World War were characterised by labour unrest, and Laval defended strikers, trade unionists and left-wing agitators against government attempts to prosecute them. At a trade union conference, Laval said:

I am a comrade among comrades, a worker among workers. I am not one of those lawyers who are mindful of their bourgeois origin even when attempting to deny it. I am not one of those high-brow attorneys who engage in academic controversies and pose as intellectuals. I am proud to be what I am. A lawyer in the service of manual laborers who are my comrades, a worker like them, I am their brother. Comrades, I am a manual lawyer.

The first case that led him to fame was the acquittal of Gustave Manhès, a revolutionary trade unionist who had been charged with possession of explosives and anarchist manuals.

Laval married Jeanne Claussat in 1909, the daughter of the Socialist politician Dr Joseph Claussat. Their only child, a daughter named Josée, was born in 1911. Josée married René de Chambrun, whose uncle, Nicholas Longworth III, married Alice Roosevelt, the daughter of US President Theodore Roosevelt. Although Laval's wife came from a political family, she never participated in politics. Laval was generally considered to be devoted to his family.

In 1911, he stood for the National Assembly in the Neuilly - Boulogne electoral district and caused the conservative candidate Édouard Nortier to win since Laval stood in the second round despite the Radical candidate, Alexandre Percin, doing so as well.

In April 1914, as fear of war swept the nation, the Socialists and Radicals geared up their electoral campaign in defence of peace. Their leaders were Jean Jaurès and Joseph Caillaux. The Bloc des Gauches ("Lefts Bloc") denounced the law passed in July 1913 that extended compulsory military service from two to three years.

In the 1914 legislative election, held three months before the outbreak of World War I, the trade unions sought Laval as the Socialist candidate for the Seine, the district comprising Paris and its suburbs. Laval was elected to the Chamber of Deputies in the second electoral district of Saint-Denis. At nearly 31, he was the youngest member of the Chamber.

The Radicals, with the support of Socialists, held the majority in the French Chamber of Deputies. Together, they hoped to avert war, but the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria on 28 June 1914 and of Jean Jaurès on 31 July 1914 shattered those hopes. Laval's brother, Jean, died in the first months of the war.

Laval was listed in the Carnet B, a compilation of potentially subversive elements that might hinder mobilisation. In the name of national unity, Minister of the Interior Jean-Louis Malvy, despite pressure from chiefs of staff, refused to have anyone apprehended. Laval remained true to his pacifist convictions during the war. In December 1915, Jean Longuet, the grandson of Karl Marx, proposed to Socialist parliamentarians that they communicate with socialists of other states in the hope of pressing governments into a negotiated peace. Laval signed on, but the motion was defeated.

With France's resources geared for war, goods were scarce or overpriced. On 30 January 1917, in the National Assembly Laval called upon Supply Minister Édouard Herriot to deal with the inadequate coal supply in Paris. When Herriot said, "If I could, I would unload the barges myself", Laval retorted, "Do not add ridicule to ineptitude". Those words delighted the Assembly and attracted the attention of Georges Clemenceau but left the relationship between Laval and Herriot permanently strained.

Laval scorned the conduct of the war and the poor supply of troops in the field. When mutinies broke out after General Robert Nivelle 's offensive of April 1917 at Chemin des Dames, he spoke in defence of the mutineers. When Marcel Cachin and Marius Moutet returned from St. Petersburg in June 1917 with the invitation to a socialist convention in Stockholm, Laval saw a chance for peace. In an address to the Assembly, he urged the chamber to allow a delegation to go: "Yes, Stockholm, in response to the call of the Russian Revolution.... Yes, Stockholm, for peace.... Yes, Stockholm the polar star." The request was denied.

The hope of peace in spring 1917 was overwhelmed by discovery of traitors, some real and some imagined, as with Malvy, who became a suspect because he had refused to arrest Frenchmen on the Carnet B. Laval's "Stockholm, étoile polaire" speech had not been forgotten. Many of Laval's acquaintances, the publishers of the anarchist Le Bonnet rouge and other pacifists were arrested or interrogated. Though Laval frequented pacifist circles (it was said that he was acquainted with Leon Trotsky), the authorities did not pursue him. His status as a deputy, his caution and his friendships protected him. In November 1917, Clemenceau became prime minister and offered Laval a post in his government. Laval refused, as the Socialist Party refused to enter any government, but he questioned the wisdom of such a policy in a meeting of Socialist deputies.

In the 1919 elections the Socialists' record of pacifism, their opposition to Clemenceau and anxiety arising from the excesses of the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia contributed to their defeat by the conservative National Bloc. Laval lost his seat in the Chamber of Deputies.

The General Confederation of Labour (Confédération Générale du Travail - CGT), with 2,400,000 members, launched a general strike in 1920, which petered out with thousands of workers being laid off. In response, the government sought to dissolve the CGT. Laval, with Joseph Paul-Boncour as chief counsel, defended the union's leaders and saved the union by appealing to Interior Minister Théodore Steeg and Commerce and Industry Minister Auguste Isaac.

Laval's relations with the Socialist Party drew to an end. The last years with the Socialist caucus, combined with the party's disciplinary policies, eroded Laval's attachment to the cause. With the Bolshevik victory in the Russian Civil War, the party was changing. At the Congress of Tours in December 1920, the Socialists split into two ideological components: the French Communist Party (SFIC, later PC-SFIC), which was inspired by Moscow, and the more moderate French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO). Laval let his membership lapse and did not take sides as both factions battled over the legacy of Jean Jaurès.

In 1923, Aubervilliers, north of Paris, needed a mayor. As a former deputy of the constituency, Laval was an obvious candidate. To be eligible for election, Laval bought farmland, Les Bergeries. Few were aware of his defection from the Socialists. Laval was also asked by the local SFIO and Communists to head their lists. Laval chose to run under his own list of former Socialists whom he had convinced to leave the party and to work for him. The independent Socialist Party of sorts existed only in Aubervilliers. In a four-way race, Laval won in the second round. He served as mayor of Aubervilliers until just before his death.

Laval was seen as malin ; a joke stated that he was so clever that he was born with a name that is spelled the same from left or from right. Laval won over those whom he had defeated by cultivating personal contacts. He developed a network among the humble and the well-to-do in Aubervilliers and with mayors of neighbouring towns. He was the only independent politician in the suburb and avoided entering the ideological war between socialists and communists.

In the 1924 legislative elections, the SFIO and the Radicals formed a national coalition, known as the Cartel des Gauches. Laval headed a list of independent socialists in the Seine. The Cartel won, and Laval regained a seat in the National Assembly. His first act was to bring back Joseph Caillaux, a former prime minister, Cabinet member and member of the National Assembly who had once been the star of the Radical Party. Clemenceau had had Caillaux arrested toward the end of the war for collusion with the enemy. Caillaux spent two years in prison and lost his civic rights. Laval successfully fought for Caillaux's pardon, and Caillaux became an influential patron.

Laval's reward for support of the Cartel was appointment as Minister of Public Works in the government of Paul Painlevé in April 1925, but six months later, the government collapsed. Laval from then on belonged to the club of former ministers from which new ministers were drawn. Between 1925 and 1926, Laval participated three more times in governments of Aristide Briand, once as under-secretary to the Prime Minister and twice as Minister of Justice (garde des sceaux). When he first became Minister of Justice, Laval abandoned his law practice to avoid a conflict of interest.

Laval's momentum was frozen after 1926 by a reshuffling of the Cartel majority orchestrated by the Radical-Socialist mayor and deputy of Lyon, Édouard Herriot. Founded in 1901, the Radical Party became the hinge faction of the Third Republic, and its support or defection often meant the survival or the collapse of governments. Through that latest swing, Laval was excluded from the government of France for four years. Author Gaston Jacquemin suggested that Laval chose not to partake in a Herriot government, which he judged to be incapable of handling the financial crisis. Although 1926 marked the definitive break between Laval and the left, he maintained friends on the left.

In 1927, Laval was elected Senator for the Seine, which withdrew him from and placed himself above the political battles for majorities in the Chamber of Deputies. He longed for a constitutional reform to strengthen the executive branch and to eliminate political instability, a major flaw of the Third Republic.

On 2 March 1930, Laval returned as Minister of Labour in the second André Tardieu government. Tardieu and Laval knew each other from the days of Clemenceau and had come to appreciate each other's qualities. Tardieu needed men he could trust since his previous government had collapsed a little over a week earlier because of the defection of Labour Minister Louis Loucheur. However, when the Radical Socialist Camille Chautemps failed to form a viable government, Tardieu was called back.

From 1927 to 1930, Laval began to accumulate a sizeable personal fortune. After the war, his wealth resulted in charges that he had used his political position to line his own pockets. "I have always thought", he wrote to the examining magistrate on 11 September 1945, "that a soundly based material independence, if not indispensable, gives those statesmen who possess it a much greater political independence". Until 1927, his principal source of income had been his fees as a lawyer and in that year, they totalled 113,350 francs, according to his income tax returns. Between August 1927 and June 1930, he undertook large-scale investments in various enterprises that totalled 51 million francs. Not all of that money was his own, but some came from a group of financiers that had the backing of an investment trust, the Union Syndicale et Financière, as well as two banks, the Comptoir Lyon Allemand and the Banque Nationale de Crédit.

Two of the investments that Laval and his backers acquired were provincial newspapers, Le Moniteur du Puy-de-Dôme and its associated printing works at Clermont-Ferrand, and the Lyon Républicain. The circulation of the Moniteur had stood at 27,000 in 1926 before Laval took it over. By 1933, it had more than doubled, peaking at 58,250 but declining thereafter. Profits varied, but during the 17 years of his control, Laval earned some 39 million francs in income from the paper and the printing works combined. The renewed plant was valued at 50 million francs, which led the High Court expert in 1945 to say with some justification that it had been "an excellent deal for him".

More than 150,000 textile workers were on strike, and violence was feared. As Minister of Public Works in 1925, Laval had ended the strike of mine workers. Tardieu hoped he could do the same as Minister of Labour. The conflict was settled without bloodshed. The Socialist politician Léon Blum, never one of Laval's allies, conceded that Laval's "intervention was skilful, opportune and decisive".

Social insurance had been on the agenda for ten years. It had passed the Chamber of Deputies but not the Senate, in 1928. Tardieu gave Laval until May Day to get the project through. The date was chosen to stifle the agitation of Labour Day. Laval's first effort went into clarifying the muddled collection of texts. He then consulted employer and labour organisations. Laval had to reconcile the divergent views of Chamber and Senate. "Had it not been for Laval's unwearying patience", Laval's associate Tissier wrote, "an agreement would never have been achieved". In two months, Laval presented the Assembly a text that overcame its original failure. It met the financial constraints, reduced the control of the government and preserved the choice of doctors and their billing freedom. The Chamber and the Senate passed the law with an overwhelming majority.

When the bill had passed its final stages, Tardieu described his Minister of Labour as "displaying at every moment of the discussion as much tenacity as restraint and ingenuity".

Tardieu's government ultimately proved unable to weather the Oustric Affair. After the failure of the Oustric Bank, it appeared that members of the government had improper ties to it. The scandal involved Justice Minister Raoul Péret and Under-Secretaries Henri Falcoz and Eugène Lautier. Tardieu had not been involved, but on 4 December 1930, he lost his majority in the Senate. President Gaston Doumergue called on Louis Barthou to form a government, but Barthou failed to do so. Doumergue turned to Laval, who fared no better. The following month, the government that was formed by Théodore Steeg floundered.

Doumergue renewed his offer to Laval. On 27 January 1931, Laval successfully formed his first government.

In the words of its leader, Léon Blum, the Socialist opposition was amazed and disappointed that the ghost of Tardieu's government had reappeared within a few weeks of being defeated with Laval at its head "like a night bird surprised by the light". Laval's nomination as prime minister led to speculation that Tardieu, the new agriculture minister, held the real power in the government.

Although Laval thought highly of Tardieu and Aristide Briand and applied policies in line with theirs, however, Laval was not Tardieu's mouthpiece. Ministers who formed the Laval government were in great part those who had formed Tardieu's governments but that was a function of the composite majority that Laval could find at the National Assembly. Raymond Poincaré, Briand and Tardieu had offered ministerial posts to Herriot's Radicals but to no avail.

Besides Briand, André Maginot, Pierre-Étienne Flandin and Paul Reynaud, Laval brought in as his advisors, friends such as Maurice Foulon from Aubervilliers and Pierre Cathala. Laval had known Cathala in Bayonne, and Cathala had worked in Laval's Labour Ministry. Cathala began as Under-Secretary of the Interior and was appointed as Minister of the Interior in January 1932. Blaise Diagne of Senegal, the first African deputy, had been elected to the National Assembly at the same time as Laval in 1914. Laval invited Diagne to join his cabinet as Under-Secretary to the Colonies. Diagne was the first Black African appointed to a cabinet position in a French government. Laval also called on financial experts such as Jacques Rueff, Charles Rist and Adéodat Boissard. André François-Poncet was appointed as Laval's Under-Secretary and then as ambassador to Germany. Laval's government included an economist, Claude-Joseph Gignoux, when economists in government service were still rare.

France in 1931 was mostly unaffected by the world economic crisis. Laval declared on embarking for the United States on 16 October 1931, "France remained healthy thanks to work and savings". Agriculture, small industry, and protectionism were the bases of France's economy. With a conservative policy of contained wages and limited social services — and with its colonies — France had accumulated the largest gold reserves in the world after the United States. France reaped the benefit of devaluation of the franc that had been orchestrated by Poincaré, which made French products competitive on the world market. In all of France, only 12,000 people were recorded as unemployed.

Laval and his cabinet considered the economy and gold reserves as means to diplomatic ends. Laval left to visit London ; Berlin ; and Washington, DC. He attended conferences on the world crisis, World War I reparations and debt, disarmament and the gold standard.

In 1931, Austria underwent a banking crisis when its largest bank, the Creditanstalt, was revealed to be nearly bankrupt. That threatened a worldwide financial crisis, and world leaders began negotiating the terms for an international loan to Austria's central government to sustain its financial system. However, Laval blocked the proposed package for nationalist reasons and demanded for France to receive a series of diplomatic concessions in exchange for its support, including renunciation of a prospective German-Austrian customs union. That proved to be fatal for the negotiations, which ultimately fell through. As a result, the Creditanstalt declared bankruptcy on 11 May 1931 and precipitated a crisis that quickly spread to other nations. Within four days, bank runs in Budapest, Hungary, were underway, and bank failures began spreading to Germany, Britain and elsewhere.

The Hoover Moratorium on 20 June 1931, a proposal made by US President Herbert Hoover to freeze all intergovernmental debt repayments for a one-year period, was according to the author and political advisor McGeorge Bundy "the most significant action taken by an American president for Europe since Woodrow Wilson 's administration." The United States had enormous stakes in Germany since long-term German borrowers owed the US private sector more than $1.25 billion, and the short-term debt neared $1 billion. By comparison, the entire US national income in 1931 was only $54 billion. To put that into perspective, the authors Walter Lippmann and William O. Scroggs stated in The United States in World Affairs, an Account of American Foreign Relations, that "the American stake in Germany's government and private obligations was equal to half that of all the rest of the world combined".

The proposed moratorium would also benefit Britain's investment in Germany's private sector by making more likely that those loans would be repaid while the public indebtedness was frozen. It was in Hoover's interest to offer aid to an ailing British economy in the light of the British debt to the United States. France, on the other hand, had a relatively small stake in Germany's private debt but a huge interest in German reparations, and payments to France would be compromised under the Hoover Moratorium.

The scheme was further complicated by ill timing; the perception of collusion by the Americans, British and Germans; and its breaching of the Young Plan. Such breach could be approved in France only by the National Assembly, and the survival of Laval's government rested on the legislature's approval of the moratorium. Seventeen days elapsed between the proposal and the vote of confidence in the legislature. That delay was blamed for the lack of success of the Hoover Moratorium although the US Congress did not approve it until December 1931.

In support of the Hoover Moratorium, Laval undertook a year of personal and direct diplomacy by which he traveled to London, Berlin and Washington. There were considerable domestic achievements to his name, but his international efforts were short on results. British Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald and British Foreign Secretary Arthur Henderson were preoccupied by internal political divisions and the collapse of the pound sterling and so were unable to help. German Chancellor Heinrich Brüning and Foreign Minister Julius Curtius were eager for Franco-German reconciliation but were under siege on all sides. They faced a very weak economy, which made meeting the government payroll a weekly miracle. Private bankruptcies and constant layoffs had the Communists on a short fuse. At the other end of the political spectrum, the German Army spied on the Brüning cabinet and fed information to Der Stahlhelm and the Nazis, which effectively froze any overtures towards France.

In the United States, the conference between Hoover and Laval was an exercise in mutual frustration. Hoover's plan for a reduced military had been rebuffed, albeit gently. A solution to the Danzig Corridor problem had been retracted. The concept of introducing a silver standard for countries that left the gold standard was viewed by Laval and François Albert-Buisson as a frivolous proposal. Hoover thought that it might have helped "Mexico, India, China and South America", but Laval dismissed the silver solution as an inflationary proposition and added that "it was cheaper to inflate paper."

Laval did not get a security pact without which the French would never consider disarmament, and he did not obtain an endorsement for the political moratorium. The promise to match any reduction of German reparations with a decrease of the French debt was not put in the communiqué. The joint statement declared the attachment of France and the United States to the gold standard.

Both governments also agreed that the Banque de France and the Federal Reserve would consult each other before transfers of gold. That was welcome news after the run on American gold in the preceding weeks. In light of the financial crisis, the leaders agreed to review the economic situation in Germany before the Hoover Moratorium had run its course.

There were meagre political results. The Hoover–Laval encounter, however, had other effects by making Laval more widely known and raising his standing in the United States and France. The American and French press were smitten. His optimism was such a contrast to his grim-sounding international contemporaries that in Time magazine named him as the 1931 Man of the Year, an honour that had never bestowed before on a Frenchman. Laval followed Mohandas K. Gandhi and preceded Franklin D. Roosevelt in receiving the honour.

The second Cartel des Gauches resigned after the 6 February 1934 crisis had involved anti-parliamentarist groups of far-right leagues, veterans organizations and the French Communist Party (PCF). Laval and Marshal Philippe Pétain had contacts with some conservative politicians among the groups involved. Laval became Minister of Colonies in the new conservative government of Gaston Doumergue. In October, Foreign Minister Louis Barthou was assassinated. Laval succeeded him and held that office until 1936.

Laval was then opposed to Germany, the "hereditary enemy" of France, and pursued anti-German alliances. He met with Benito Mussolini in Rome, and both signed the Franco-Italian Agreement on 4 January 1935. It ceded parts of French Somaliland to Italy and allowed it a free hand in Abyssinia in exchange for support against any German aggression. Laval denied that he had given Mussolini a free hand in Abyssinia and even wrote to Il Duce on the subject. Also in January, Laval became the first member of a French Government to visit the Vatican since Napoleon ; he was enthusiastically received by Pope Pius XI, and awarded with the Grand Cross of the Order of Pius IX. In April 1935, Laval persuaded Italy and Britain to join France in the Stresa Front against German ambitions in Austria. On 2 May 1935, he signed the Franco-Soviet Treaty of Mutual Assistance, and he met with Josef Stalin, Premier Vyacheslaff Molotoff and Foreign Commissar Maxim Litvinoff in Moscow about 13 May 1935 to seal the alliance.

Laval's primary aim before the Italo-Abyssinian War was to retain Italy as an anti-German power and to avoid driving it into Germany's hands by adopting a hostile attitude to an invasion of Abyssinia. According to the British historian Correlli Barnett, in Laval's view, "all that really mattered was Nazi Germany. His eyes were on the demilitarised zone of the Rhineland; his thoughts on the Locarno guarantees. To estrange Italy, one of the Locarno powers, over such a question as Abyssinia did not appeal to Laval's Auvergnat peasant mind".

In June 1935, Laval became prime minister as well. In October 1935, Laval and British Foreign Minister Samuel Hoare proposed a realpolitik solution to the Abyssinia Crisis. After its leak to the media in December, the Hoare–Laval Pact was widely denounced as appeasement of Mussolini. Laval was forced to resign on 22 January 1936, and was driven completely out of ministerial politics. The victory of the Popular Front in the 1936 French legislative election meant that Laval was out of power, but he had a left-wing government to target in his media.

During the Phoney War, Laval was cautiously ambivalent towards the conflict. He was on record as saying in March 1940 that although the war could have been avoided by diplomatic means, it was now up to the government to prosecute it with the utmost vigour.

On 9 June 1940, the Germans were advancing on a front more than 250 kilometres (160 mi) long across the entire width of France. As far as General Maxime Weygand was concerned, "if the Germans crossed the Seine and the Marne, it was the end". Simultaneously, Marshal Philippe Pétain was increasing the pressure upon Prime Minister Paul Reynaud to call for an armistice. Meanwhile, Laval was in Châteldon. On 10 June, in view of the German advance, the government left Paris for Tours. Weygand had informed Reynaud that "the final rupture of our lines may take place at any time". Then, "our forces would continue to fight until their strength and resources were extinguished. But their disintegration would be no more than a matter of time". Weygand had avoided using the word "armistice", but it was on the minds of all of those who were involved and was opposed to by Reynaud.

Laval had meanwhile left Châteldon for Bordeaux, where his daughter nearly convinced him of the necessity of going to the United States. Instead, it was reported that he was sending "messengers and messengers" to Pétain.

As the Germans occupied Paris, Pétain was asked to form a new government. To everyone's surprise, he produced a list of his ministers, which was convincing proof that he had been expecting and had been prepared for the President's summons. When he was informed that he was to be appointed Minister of Justice, Laval's temper and ambitions became apparent as he ferociously demanded of Pétain, despite the objections of other men of government, to make him Minister of Foreign Affairs. Laval realised that only through that position could he effect a reversal of alliances and bring himself to favour with Nazi Germany, the military power that he viewed as the inevitable victor. However, Permanent Under-Secretary François Charles-Roux refused to serve under Laval. One consequence of those events was that Laval was later able to claim that he had not been part of the government that requested the armistice. His name did not appear in the chronicles of events until June, when he began to assume a more active role in criticising the government's decision to leave France for French North Africa.

Although the final terms of the armistice were harsh, the French colonial empire was left untouched, the French Navy was maintained, and the French government was nominally allowed to administer the occupied and unoccupied zones if it obeyed German directives. The concept of "collaboration" had been written into the Armistice Convention before Laval joined the government. The French representatives who affixed their signatures to the text accepted the term:

Article III. In the occupied areas of France, the German Reich is to exercise all the rights of an occupying power. The French government promises to facilitate by all possible means the regulations relative to the exercise of this right, and to carry out these regulations with the participation of the French administration. The French government will immediately order all the French authorities and administrative services in the occupied zone to follow the regulations of the German military authorities and to collaborate with the latter in a correct manner.

By then, there was very little left of Laval the socialist. He now openly sympathized with National Socialism and was convinced that Germany would win the war. For that reason, Laval felt France needed to emulate the Third Reich and its totalitarian regime as much as possible. To that end, when he was included in the Cabinet as minister of state, Laval set about with the work for which he is remembered: dismantling the Third Republic and its democracy and taking up the fascist cause.

In October 1940, Laval understood collaboration more or less in the same sense as Pétain. For both, that meant giving up the least possible to get the most in return. Laval, in his role of go-between, was forced to be in constant touch with the German authorities, to shift ground, to be wily and to plan ahead. All of that under the circumstances drew more attention to him than to the Marshal and made him appear to many Frenchmen as "the agent of collaboration", and to others, he was "the Germans' man".

The meetings between Pétain and Adolf Hitler and between Laval and Hitler are often used as evidence of Vichy collaboration with the Nazis. In fact, Montoire (24–26 October 1940) was a disappointment to both sides. Hitler wanted France to declare war on Britain, and the French wanted improved relations with their conqueror. Neither happened, and virtually the only concession that the French obtained was the 'Berlin Protocol' of 16 November 1940, which provided for the release of certain categories of French prisoners-of-war.

In November 1940, Laval took a number of pro-German decisions of his own, without consulting with colleagues. The most notorious examples concerned turning the RTB Bor copper mines and the Belgian gold reserves over to German control. After the war, Laval's justification, apart from a denial that he acted unilaterally, was that Vichy was powerless to prevent the Germans from gaining something that they were clearly so eager to obtain.

Laval's actions were a factor in his dismissal on 13 December 1940. Pétain asked all of the ministers to sign a collective letter of resignation during a full cabinet meeting. Laval did so since he thought that it was a device to get rid of Labour Minister M. Belin. Laval was therefore stunned when Pétain announced, "the resignations of MM. Laval and Ripert are accepted". That evening, Laval was arrested and driven by the police to his home in Châteldon. The following day, Pétain announced his decision to remove Laval from the government and replace him with Pierre-Étienne Flandin. The reason was a fundamental incompatibility with Pétain. Laval's methods of working appeared slovenly to Pétain's precise military mind, and Laval showed a marked lack of deference, as instanced by a habit of blowing cigarette smoke in Pétain's face. By doing so, he aroused Pétain's irritation and the anger of the entire cabinet.

Laval was detained under house arrest for some time, but was released after the intervention of German ambassador Otto Abetz, who had him brought to Paris, where he lived under German protection, while continuing to take part in the public and political life.

On 27 August 1941, several top Vichyites, including Laval, attended a review of the Légion des Volontaires Français (LVF), a collaborationist militia. Paul Collette, a member of the Croix-de-Feu, shot Laval (and also Marcel Déat, another prominent collaborationist), during a troop review and slightly wounded him, but Laval soon recovered from the injury.

Laval returned to power in April 1942. In an infamous radio speech on 22 June 1942, Laval outlined his policy objectives by expressing his "desire to re-establish normal and trusting relations with Germany and Italy". He added he "wished for a German victory" because otherwise " Bolshevism [would] establish itself everywhere". The effect of such speech on public opinion was disastrous, since it made clear to everyone that the Vichy government was de facto subservient to the Germans; Pétain and the other ministers were also bewildered and highly irritated by Laval's nerve.

Laval had been in power for a mere two months when he was faced with the decision of providing forced labour to Germany, which was short of skilled labour because it needed troop replacements on the Eastern Front. Unlike other occupied countries, France was technically protected by the armistice, and its workers could not be simply rounded up for transportation. In the occupied zone, the Germans used intimidation and the control of raw materials to create unemployment and thus create reasons for French labourers to volunteer to work in Germany. Laval received German demands to send more than 300,000 skilled labourers immediately to factories in Germany. Laval delayed by making a counteroffer of one worker in return for one French prisoner-of-war. The proposal was sent to Hitler, and a compromise was reached that one prisoner-of-war would be repatriated for every three workers arriving in Germany.

Laval's precise role in the deportation of Jews has been hotly debated by both his accusers and his defenders. The Germans never told the Vichy French authorities about the extermination camps ; instead, the French were told that Jews were being deported as forced labour for the Axis war effort. When ordered to have all Jews in France rounded up to be transported to German-occupied Poland, Laval negotiated a compromise by allowing only Jews who were not French citizens to be forfeited to German control. It was estimated that by the end of the war, the Germans had killed 90% of the Jewish population in other occupied countries, but in France, 50% of the prewar French and foreign Jewish population, with perhaps 90% of the purely-French Jewish population still remaining alive. Laval went beyond the orders given to him by the Germans, as he included Jewish children under 16, whom the Germans had given him permission to spare, in the deportations. In his book Churches and the Holocaust, Mordecai Paldiel claims that when the Protestant leader Marc Boegner visited Laval to remonstrate, Laval claimed that he had ordered children to be deported along with their parents because families should not be separated, and "children should remain with their parents". According to Paldiel, when Boegner argued that the children would almost certainly die, Laval replied that "not one [Jewish child] must remain in France". It was believed that Laval also attempted to prevent Jewish children gaining visas to the United States that had been arranged by the American Friends Service Committee and that Laval was committed less to expelling Jewish children from France than to making sure they reached Nazi camps.

Laval outright spurned the efforts of Pope Pius to stop the deportation of Jews from France.

More and more, the insoluble dilemma of collaboration faced Laval and his chief of staff, Jean Jardin [ fr ] ; Laval had to maintain Vichy's authority to prevent Germany from installing a puppet government, which would be made up of French Nazis such as Jacques Doriot.

When the Allied landings in French North Africa (Operation Torch) began in November 1942, Germany and Italy occupied the Zone libre, thus ending any factual sovereignty of the Vichy government over Metropolitan France. Hitler continued to ask whether the French government was prepared to fight at his side and required Vichy to declare war against Britain: Laval and Pétain agreed to maintain a firm refusal, struggling against ultracollaborationist ministers.

In 1943, Laval became the nominal leader of the newly created Milice, but its operational leader was Secretary General Joseph Darnand. In a speech broadcast during the Normandy landings in June 1944, Laval appealed to the nation:

You are not in the war. You must not take part in the fighting. If you do not observe this rule, if you show proof of indiscipline, you will provoke reprisals the harshness of which the government would be powerless to moderate. You would suffer, both physically and materially, and you would add to your country's misfortunes. You will refuse to heed the insidious appeals, which will be addressed to you. Those who ask you to stop work or invite you to revolt are the enemies of our country. You will refuse to aggravate the foreign war on our soil with the horror of civil war.... At this moment fraught with drama, when the war has been carried on to our territory, show by your worthy and disciplined attitude that you are thinking of France and only of her".

In August 1944, as Allied forces were approaching Paris, Laval attempted a last-ditch plot to prevent de Gaulle or the Communist Party from taking power: with permission from the Germans, he attempted to call back the National Assembly (which had not been meeting since 1940) with the goal of giving it the power to form a government that could be seen as legitimate. With the endorsement of German ambassador Otto Abetz, Laval had Édouard Herriot, President of the Chamber of Deputies, released from imprisonment and brought back to Paris, so that he could re-convene the Parliament; the President of the Senate Jules Jeanneney was also sought, but could not be found. Laval's machinations failed: after being initially collaborative, Herriot refused to go on with the plan due to the absence of Jeanneney, while the Germans changed their minds after the intervention of the ultracollaborationists Marcel Déat and Fernand de Brinon. On 17 August Herriot was arrested by the Germans and deported to Laxou and then to Potsdam, thus ending any possibility of recalling the Assembly.

On the same day, Laval and some others were also arrested by the Germans and transported to Belfort, where they arrived on 19 August. In view of the speed of the Allied advance, what was left of the Vichy government was moved on 7 September 1944 from Belfort to the Sigmaringen enclave in Germany. Pétain took residence at the Hohenzollern castle in Sigmaringen. At first, Laval also resided in that castle. In January 1945 Laval was assigned to the Stauffenberg castle in Wilflingen, 12 km outside the Sigmaringen enclave. By April 1945, US General George S. Patton 's army approached Sigmaringen and so the Vichy ministers were forced to seek their own refuge. Laval received permission to enter Spain and was flown to Barcelona by a Luftwaffe plane. However, 90 days later, Charles de Gaulle pressured Spain to expel Laval. The same Luftwaffe plane that had flown him to Spain then flew him to the American-occupied zone of Austria. He had attempted to seek refuge in Liechtenstein, but was turned away. The American authorities immediately arrested Laval and his wife and turned them over to the Free French. They were flown to Paris to be imprisoned at Fresnes Prison. Madame Laval was later released, but Pierre Laval remained in prison to be tried for treason.

Prior to his arrest, Laval had planned to move to Sintra, Portugal, where a house had been leased for him.

Two trials were to be held. Although it was said to have had its faults, the Pétain trial permitted the presentation and examination of a vast amount of pertinent material. Numerous scholars, including Robert Paxton and Geoffrey Warner, believe that Laval's trial demonstrated the inadequacies of the judicial system and the poisonous political atmosphere of that purge-trial era. During his imprisonment pending the verdict of his treason trial, Laval wrote his only book, the posthumously published Diary (1948). His daughter, Josée de Chambrun, smuggled it out of the prison page by page.

Laval firmly believed that he would be able to convince his fellow countrymen that he had been acting in their best interests all along. "Father-in-law wants a big trial which will illuminate everything", René de Chambrun told Laval's lawyers: "If he is given time to prepare his defence, if he is allowed to speak, to call witnesses and to obtain from abroad the information and documents which he needs, he will confound his accusers". "Do you want me to tell you the setup?" Laval asked one of his lawyers on 4 August. "There will be no pre-trial hearings and no trial. I will be condemned – and got rid of – before the elections".

Laval's trial began at 1:30 pm on 4 October 1945. He was charged with plotting against the security of the State and intelligence (collaboration) with the enemy. He had three defence lawyers (Jaques Baraduc, Albert Naud and Yves-Frédéric Jaffré). None of his lawyers had met him before. He dealt mostly with Jaffré, who sat with him, talked, listened and took down notes that he wanted to dictate. Baraduc, who quickly became convinced of Laval's innocence, kept contact with the Chambruns and at first shared their conviction that Laval would be acquitted or at most would receive a sentence of temporary exile. Naud, who had been a member of the Resistance, believed Laval to be guilty and urged him to plead that he had made grave errors but had acted under constraint. Laval would not listen to him and was convinced that he was innocent and could prove it. "He acted", said Naud, "as if his career, not his life, was at stake".

All three of his lawyers declined to be in court to hear the reading of the formal charges: "We fear that the haste which has been employed to open the hearings is inspired, not by judicial preoccupations, but motivated by political considerations". In lieu of attending the hearing, they sent letters stating the shortcomings and asked to be discharged as counsel. The court carried on without them. The president of the court, Pierre Mongibeaux, announced that the trial had to be completed before the general election scheduled for 21 October. Mongibeaux and Mornet, the public prosecutors, were unable to control the constant and relentless hostile, vulgar outbursts and heckles from the jury. They occurred as heated exchanges between Mongibeaux and Laval became louder and louder. On the third day, Laval's three lawyers were with him as the President of the Bar Association had advised them to resume their duties.

After the adjournment, Mongibeaux announced that the part of the interrogation dealing with the charge of plotting against the security of the state was concluded. To the charge of collaboration, Laval replied, "Monsieur le Président, the insulting way in which you questioned me earlier and the demonstrations in which some members of the jury indulged show me that I may be the victim of a judicial crime. I do not want to be an accomplice; I prefer to remain silent". Mongibeaux called the first of the prosecution witnesses, but they had not expected to testify so soon, and none were present. Mongibeaux adjourned the hearing for the second time so that the witnesses could be located. When the court reassembled half an hour later, Laval was no longer in his place.

Although Pierre-Henri Teitgen, the Minister of Justice in Charles de Gaulle 's cabinet, personally appealed to Laval's lawyers to have him attend the hearings, they declined to do so. Teitgen freely confirmed the conduct of Mongibeaux and Mornet and professed that he was unable to do anything to curb them. A sentence of death was handed down in Laval's absence. His lawyers were refused a retrial.

The execution was fixed for the morning of 15 October at Fresnes Prison. Laval attempted to commit suicide before the sentence by taking poison from a vial stitched inside the lining of his jacket. He did not intend, he explained in a suicide note, that French soldiers should become accomplices in a "judicial crime". The poison, however, was so old that it was ineffective and so repeated stomach-pumpings revived Laval. Laval requested for his lawyers to witness his execution. He was shot and shouted, "Vive la France!" Laval's wife declared to an English newspaper, "It is not the French way to try a man without letting him speak. That's the way he always fought against – the German way."

His corpse was initially buried in an unmarked grave in the Thiais cemetery until it was buried in the Chambrun family mausoleum at the Montparnasse Cemetery in November 1945.

His daughter, Josée Laval, wrote a letter to Winston Churchill in 1948 and suggested that the firing squad who killed her father "wore British uniforms". The letter was published in the June 1949 issue of Human Events, an American conservative newspaper.

The High Court, which functioned until 1949, judged 108 cases and pronounced eight death penalties, including one for an elderly Pétain, whose appeal failed. Only three of the death penalties were carried out: those of Laval; Fernand de Brinon, Vichy's Ambassador in Paris to the German authorities; and Joseph Darnand, the head of the Milice.

Laval's manifold political activities left a complicated and controversial legacy, which have resulted in more than a dozen conflicting biographies of him.

In his memoirs, Otto Abetz, German Ambassador to France from 1940 to 1944, subsequently described Laval in high terms:

He was one of the greatest statesmen of our time, and, in any case, its last truly great liberal politician.

A more balanced approach was laid down by Charles de Gaulle in his own memoir:

Naturally inclined, accustomed by the regime, to approach matters from below, Laval held that, whatever happens, it is important to be in power, that a certain degree of astuteness always controls the situation, that there is no event that cannot be turned around, no men that cannot be handled. He had, in the cataclysm, felt the misfortune of the country but also the opportunity to take the reins and apply on a vast scale the capacity he had to deal with anything. But the victorious Reich was a partner who did not intend to compromise. For, despite everything [...] he had to embrace the disaster of France. He accepted the condition. He judged that it was possible to take advantage of the worst, to use even the point of servitude, to even associate oneself with the invader, to make oneself an asset of the most terrible repression. To carry out his policy, he renounced the honor of the country, the independence of the State, and national pride. Now, these elements reappeared alive and demanding as the enemy weakened. Laval had played. He had lost. He had the courage to admit that he was responsible for the consequences. No doubt, in his government, deploying all the resources of ruse, all the resources of obstinacy to support the unsustainable, he sought to serve his country. Let that be left to him!

According to historian Michèle Cointet, Laval, cynically believing in a German victory, saw himself as a realist saving the French people from "their misfortunes and patriotic daydreams".

A few changes after Aristide Briand's retirement and the death of André Maginot on 7 January 1932:

Pierre Isaac Isidore Mendès France (French pronunciation: [ pjɛʁ izak izidɔʁ mɑ̃dɛs fʁɑ̃s ] ; 11 January 1907 – 18 October 1982) was a French politician who served as prime minister of France for eight months from 1954 to 1955. As a member of the Radical Party, he headed a government supported by a coalition of Gaullists (RPF), moderate socialists (UDSR), Christian democrats (MRP) and liberal-conservatives (CNIP). Pierre-Mendès France is primarily remembered as the French Prime Minister who was in office at the outbreak of the Algerian independence war in 1954. During his tenure, France initiated close military cooperation with Israel, selling arms and aircraft to the young state. Mendès-France laid the groundwork for France’s military nuclear program and the early transfer of nuclear technology to Israel.

Mendès France was born on 11 January 1907 in Paris, the son of a textile merchant from Limoges. He was descended from Portuguese Jews who settled in France in the 16th century. He studied at the École des sciences politiques and the Faculty of Law of Paris, graduating with a doctorate in law and becoming the youngest member of the Paris bar association in 1926, at age 19. In 1924, Mendès France joined the Radical Party, the traditional party of the French middle-class centre-left (not to be confused with the mainstream SFIO, often called the Socialist Party). He married Lili Cicurel, the niece of Salvator Cicurel.

In 1932, Mendès France was elected member of the Chamber of Deputies for the Eure department; he was the Assembly's youngest member. In 1936 he came within 700 votes of losing to Modeste Legouez, the president of the radical agrarian group the Comités de défense paysanne in what he said was his hardest electoral fight. His ability was soon recognized, and in 1938 the government of Léon Blum appointed him Under Secretary of State for Finance.

In October 1940, France was put on trial by the Vichy regime at the courthouse in Clermont-Ferrand for desertion after he boarded the liner SS Massilia for Casablanca in Morocco to continue the fight against the Nazis. He was imprisoned for desertion. He escaped and succeeded in reaching Britain, where he joined the Free French forces led by Charles de Gaulle. Mendès France later described his trial, conviction and subsequent escape in the celebrated documentary " The Sorrow and the Pity ".

During the latter years of the war, Mendès France served in the Free French Air Forces and flew in a dozen bombing raids. After the Liberation of Paris in August 1944, he was appointed Minister for National Economy in the French provisional government by de Gaulle. He later headed the French delegation to the 1944 United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference at Bretton Woods.

Mendès France soon fell out with the Finance Minister, René Pleven. Mendès France supported state regulation of wages and prices to control inflation, while Pleven favoured generally laissez-faire policies. When de Gaulle sided with Pleven, Mendès France resigned. Nonetheless, de Gaulle valued Mendès France's abilities, and appointed him as a director of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and as French representative to the United Nations Economic and Social Council.

In 1947, after democratic French politics resumed under the Fourth Republic, Mendès France was re-elected to the National Assembly. He first tried to form a government in June 1953, but was unable to gain the numbers in the Assembly. From 1950 he had been a consistent opponent of French colonialism, and by 1954 France was becoming hopelessly embroiled in major colonial conflicts: the First Indochina War and the Algerian War of Independence. In Indochina (including Vietnam), France not only wanted to reoccupy its colony but also acted under the name of supporting indigenous anti-communist allies. However, Vietnamese Communists gradually weakened France on the battlefield and inflicted a serious defeat on French forces at the Dien Bien Phu in May 1954. The government of Joseph Laniel resigned on June 12, and Mendès France formed a government with support from the centre-right.

Mendès France immediately negotiated an agreement with Ho Chi Minh, the Vietnamese Communist leader. There was, he said, no choice but total withdrawal from Indochina including Vietnam, and the Assembly supported him by 471 votes to 14. Nevertheless, nationalist opinion was shocked, and Roman Catholic opinion opposed abandoning the Vietnamese believers to Communism. A tirade of abuse, much of it anti-Semitic, was directed at Mendès France. Jean-Marie Le Pen, then a Poujadist member of the Assembly, described his "patriotic, almost physical repulsion" for Mendès France. On 20 July 1954, France signed the Geneva Accords to establish ceasefires in Indochina, under which Vietnam was temporarily divided at the 17th parallel into the State of Vietnam (anti-communist) in the South and the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (communist) in the North. Hostilities in Indochina ceased completely on August 11 and a general election to reunify Vietnam was scheduled to take place in July 1956. French troops were concentrated in the South, and the timeline for their withdrawal was to be agreed upon by France with South Vietnam or a future unified Vietnam. The State of Vietnam did not sign the agreement on Vietnam and declared its opposition, while also asserting its freedom of action.

After France under Laniel recognized independence of the State of Vietnam on 4 June 1954, on July 22, Mendès France pledged to the National Assembly that France would transfer power to the State of Vietnam and other two associated states in Indochina. On July 30, French Minister for associated states Guy La Chambre stated unequivocally that policy of the Mendes France government was to grant total independence to the State of Vietnam "without retaining anything in the back of bureau drawer." They intended to do so without delay but not through conventions supporting treaties of independence and association which were initialed under Laniel government on June 4. Formula would be entirely discarded in favor of following stages: First, transfer of all possible technical services to the State of Vietnam without delay. Orders had already been issued to the French Commissioner General in Indochina (Paul Ély) to do so before July 31. Secondly, those functions which required quadrilateral decision to be examined at Four-Power meeting of 3 associated states and France to take place in Paris on or about August 10. They included question of common currency, attachment to Franc Zone, etc. Finally any remaining functions to be turned over to the State of Vietnam government as soon after Four-Power meeting as possible. At that time it was envisaged that permanent basis of relationship between two countries would be as stated in two basic treaties (totally independent and thereafter associated within French Union on free and equal basis). There would be no further haggling about petty details.

At the outbreak of the Algerian War of Independence in 1954, Pierre Mendès France firmly reaffirmed that Algeria was an integral part of France and rejected any notion of negotiation with nationalist movements. He declared to the French parliament : "There can be no compromise when it comes to defending the internal peace of the nation, its unity, and the integrity of the Republic. The departments of Algeria are an integral part of the French Republic [...] The idea of secession is unthinkable".

Later, Mendès France next came to an agreement with Habib Bourguiba, the nationalist leader in Tunisia, for the independence of that colony by 1956, and began discussions with the nationalist leaders in Morocco for a French withdrawal. He also favoured concessions to the nationalists in Algeria ; but the presence of a million Pied-noirs there left the colonial power no easy way to extricate itself from that situation. The future mercenary Bob Denard was convicted in 1954 and sentenced to fourteen months in prison for an assassination attempt against Mendès France.

Mendès France hoped that the Radical Party would become the party of modernization and renewal in French politics, replacing the SFIO. An advocate of greater European integration, he helped bring about the formation of the Western European Union, and proposed far-reaching economic reform. He also favoured defence co-operation with other European countries, but the National Assembly rejected the proposal for a European Defence Community, mainly because of misgivings about Germany's participation.

His cabinet fell in February 1955. In 1956 he served as Minister of State in the cabinet headed by the SFIO leader Guy Mollet, but resigned over Mollet's handling of the Algerian War, which was coming to dominate French politics. His split over Algeria with Edgar Faure, leader of the conservative wing of the Radical Party, led to Mendès France resigning as party leader in 1957.

Like most of the French left, Mendès France opposed de Gaulle's seizure of power in May 1958, when the mounting crisis in Algeria brought about a breakdown in the Fourth Republic system and the creation of a Fifth Republic. He led the Union of Democratic Forces, an anti- Gaullist group, but in the November 1958 elections he lost his seat in the Assembly. After being expelled from the Radical Party, whose majority faction supported de Gaulle, in late 1959 he joined the Autonomous Socialist Party (PSA), a breakaway group from the SFIO.

In April 1960, the PSA merged with several other groups to form the Unified Socialist Party (PSU). He made an unsuccessful bid to regain his seat in the National Assembly representing Eure in the 1962 election.

In 1967 he returned to the Assembly as a PSU member for the Isère, but again lost his seat in the 1968 landslide election victory of the Gaullist party UDR. Mendès France and the PSU expressed sympathy for the sentiments and actions of the student rioters during the events of May 1968, a position unusual for a politician of his age and status. One year later, Pompidou's socialist opponent in the presidential election of 1969, Gaston Defferre of the SFIO, designated him his preferred Prime Minister prior to the election. The two campaigned together in what was the first – and so far only – dual "ticket" in a French presidential election. Defferre gained only 5% of the vote and was eliminated in the election's first round. When François Mitterrand formed a new Socialist Party in 1971, Mendès France supported him, but did not attempt another political comeback. He lived long enough to see Mitterrand elected president.

Pierre Moscovici (French pronunciation: [ pjɛʁ mɔskɔvisi ], Romanian: [ moskoˈvitʃʲ ] ; born 16 September 1957) is a French politician who served as the European Commissioner for Economic and Financial Affairs, Taxation and Customs from 2014 to 2019. He previously served as Minister of Finance from 2012 to 2014 and as Minister for European Affairs between 1997 and 2002.

Previously a member of the Trotskyist group the Revolutionary Communist League, Moscovici joined the French Socialist Party (PS) in 1984 and has since that time been a member of the Departmental Council of Doubs and of the French Parliament and the European Parliament.

In May 2014 he was entrusted by the Prime Minister of France with a six-month mission to assess how European policies can better contribute to growth and employment. In July 2014 French President François Hollande proposed him to be France's representative in the next European Commission. In September 2014, he was named as European Commissioner for Economic and Financial Affairs, Taxation and Customs by President-designate of the European Commission Jean-Claude Juncker.

Born in Paris, Moscovici is the son of the influential Romanian Jewish social psychologist Serge Moscovici and of the Polish psychoanalyst Marie Bromberg-Moscovici.

Moscovici obtained his Baccalauréat at the Lycée Condorcet in 1974, a DEA in economics and in philosophy, and he graduated from Sciences Po Paris and the École nationale d'administration, where he studied under Dominique Strauss-Kahn, who became a friend and mentor in politics. He was a president of À gauche en Europe, a group founded by Strauss-Kahn and Michel Rocard and also created his own group "Besoin de Gauche".

After graduating from the École nationale d'administration in 1984, Moscovici was appointed to the Court of Audit, of which he is currently a senior member.

Initially active in the Revolutionary Communist League, he left in 1984 to join the PS and, in 1986, became secretary of the "experts' group" created by Claude Allègre.

In 1988, he moved on to the Ministry for National Education in Minister Lionel Jospin's cabinet, first as conseiller technique, then as chargé de mission.

From 1990 to 1994, he headed the Public Service Modernisation and Financing Department at the Commissariat général du Plan – French Planning Office.

From 1994 to 1997, Moscovici was a Member of the European Parliament. In parliament, he served on the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs. In addition to his committee assignments, he was part of the Parliament's delegation for relations with the countries of Central America and Mexico.

Elected to the French Parliament from the Doubs département in 1997, he went on to become a Member of the Franche-Comté Regional Council from 1998 to 2004, and of the Doubs département General Council from 1994 to 2002.

From 1997 to 2002, Moscovici was Minister delegate for European Affairs in the government of Lionel Jospin. At the request of Chirac, he represented the French authorities at the Convention on the Future of Europe in 2002.

On 20 July 2004, Moscovici was elected one of the 14 Vice-presidents of the European Parliament and was re-elected on 17 January 2007. In addition, he served on the Committee on Foreign Affairs.

Of Romanian origin, he was one of the supporters of Romania's EU integration. He stated that he identifies itself as a half Romanian.

From 2007 to 2012, Moscovici was a Member of the French National Assembly (4th constituency in the Doubs), serving on the Committee on Foreign Affairs, and subsequently the Finance Committee. He also served as vice-president of the Assembly's Committee on European Affairs.

He was President of the Pays de Montbéliard Agglomération (PMA – Greater Montbéliard Authority) from 2008 to 2012.

In 2011, Moscovici endorsed François Hollande and ran his successful campaign for the 2012 French presidential election. In the subsequent legislative election, Moscovici was re-elected to the National Assembly from the 4th constituency in the Doubs.

Moscovici served as a Member of the French National Assembly. In May 2014 he was entrusted by the Prime Minister of France with a six-month mission to assess how European policies can better contribute to growth and employment.

Moscovici served as France's Minister for Finance and Economy from May 2012 to April 2014.

Ahead of the Socialist Party's 2012 convention in Toulouse, Moscovici publicly endorsed Harlem Désir as candidate to succeed Martine Aubry at the party's leadership.

Moscovici was among the guests invited to the state dinner hosted by U.S. President Barack Obama in honor of Hollande at the White House on 11 February 2014.

In July 2014 President Francois Hollande nominated Moscovici to be France's candidate for the European Commission led by Jean-Claude Juncker. Juncker subsequently nominated Moscovici as Commissioner for Economic and Financial Affairs, Taxation and Customs.

Moscovici served as Commissioner from 2014 until 2019. In this capacity, he was in charge of the application of the Stability and Growth Pact, as well as ensuring the economic soundness of Commission proposals and deepening the Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union to create the conditions for jobs, growth and investment, and encouraging further structural reforms. On taxation matters, he was responsible for developing a value added tax system at the European level, improving the functioning of the internal market in both direct and indirect taxation and fighting tax fraud and tax evasion. His responsibilities also included the development and management of an efficient European Union Customs Union.

By 2017, Moscovici openly advocated a fully formed eurozone finance minister, and admitted that he would be interested in that position. In the meantime, the as Commissioner for Economic and Financial Affairs, Taxation and Customs should also assume the presidency of the Eurogroup.

In a 2018 letter to Sergei Stanishev, then chairman of the Party of European Socialists (PES), Moscovici ruled himself out of the race to succeed Jean-Claude Juncker and become the commission's next president, "due to profound disagreements with [the French Socialist Party’s] political line and strategy on Europe."

In 2015, WikiLeaks revealed that the U.S. National Security Agency wiretapped Moscovici's communication during his time as Minister of Finance.

"We sincerely hope that Greece remains in the Eurozone", Moscovici said.

Pierre Sudreau (13 May 1919 – 22 January 2012) was a French politician. He served as minister of Construction (1958–1962), minister of Education (1962), member of the French National Assembly (1967–1981) and mayor of Blois (1971–1989).

His childhood correspondence with Antoine de Saint-Exupéry helped inspire the title character of the 1943 novel The Little Prince. During the German occupation of France in World War II, Sudreau was a resistance fighter in the Brutus Network. He was imprisoned in the Buchenwald concentration camp.

After the war, he made a rapid career in civil service and was responsible for the planning of major construction and infrastructure projects during General de Gaulle's government. A convinced pro-European, he presided European Movement France from 1962 to 1968. He was also a lobbyist for the French railway industry and chaired its association FIF from 1963 to 1996.

Sudreau was born in Paris, the son of businessman Jean Sudreau and Marie-Marguerite (née Boyer) Sudreau. Sudreau studied law and history at the University of Paris (Sorbonne). He was preparing for the agrégation (state examination for high school teachers) in history but was prevented from taking it by the outbreak of the Second World War. While training as a fighter pilot at the École de l'air in Bordeaux-Mérignac, France fell to the German Wehrmacht and was forced to surrender in June 1940. Unlike some of his fellow students, he did not flee to England for family reasons (he had just married and had become the father of a child). Instead, he stayed in the so-called free zone in the south of France and served as an officer in the air force of the Vichy regime.

Returning to France in May 1945, Sudreau was promoted by de Gaulle and made a career in civil service. He was appointed subprefect, then subdirector at the ministry of the Interior. From 1951 to 1955, he served as prefect of the Central French department of Loir-et-Cher whose seat is in Blois. At the time, he was the youngest prefect of any French department. He then took the post of Commissioner for Construction and Urban Planning in the Paris region where he oversaw projects like the construction of large "functional" complexes, the commencement of the RER suburban rail, the Boulevard Périphérique ring road, and the launch of the La Défense business district in western Paris.

When de Gaulle returned to power as Prime minister in June 1958, he appointed Sudreau to the newly created office as minister of Construction, a position he also retained after the founding of the Fifth Republic under de Gaulle as President of the Republic. In Georges Pompidou 's first premiership, Sudreau became minister of Education in April 1962. He resigned from this post in October 1962 in protest against a proposal by Charles de Gaulle to amend the constitution, introducing direct presidential elections.

In 1985, Sudreau sat on the "Jury of Honor" that assessed whatever the film Des terroristes à la retraite should be aired in France or not. Sudreau referred to the recent Palestinian bombings of American and Israeli targets and stated: "at the very moment when we are again talking about direct action, this broadcast legitimizes terrorist methods.” The "Jury of Honor" in its report stated “though it is highly desirable that a film inform French of all generations about the saga of the FTP-MOI, such a film nevertheless still remains to be made”.

He was married to France Brun; they had three children: Jean Sudreau (predeceased), Anne Sudreau O'Connor (predeceased), and Bernard Sudreau. His son Jean died of lung cancer and was married to Danièle Louis-Dreyfus, daughter of French Resistance fighter and businessman Pierre Louis-Dreyfus.

Pierrot Jocelyn Rajaonarivelo (born 17 June 1946) is a Malagasy politician who served in the government of Madagascar as Minister of Foreign Affairs from 2011 to 2013. He previously served as Deputy Prime Minister from 1997 to 2002, under President Didier Ratsiraka, and he was also National Secretary of the AREMA party at that time. He went into exile when Ratsiraka was ousted in 2002, and he was subsequently convicted of abuse of office in absentia. He was seen by many as the main potential challenger to President Marc Ravalomanana in the December 2006 presidential election ; however, he was barred from standing.

Rajaonarivelo was born on the island of Sainte-Marie, Analanjirofo Region. He served as Madagascar's Ambassador to the United States from 20 December 1989 to 1997. Following the election of Ratsiraka as president, he became Deputy Prime Minister in charge of the Budget and Decentralization in the government named on 27 February 1997. He was also elected as National Secretary of AREMA on 29 November 1997 at a national congress of the party.

Following the December 2001 presidential election, a dispute arose between Ratsiraka and Ravalomanana regarding the results; after months of struggle, this dispute led to defeat for Ratsiraka and his supporters. A few days before Ratsiraka fled Madagascar in early July 2002, with the situation having turned clearly in Ravalomanana's favor, Rajaonarivelo announced his willingness to work with Ravalomanana. Like Ratsiraka, however, Rajaonarivelo went into exile in France when Ravalomanana prevailed.

In a meeting with representatives of the African Union on 29 October 2002, Ravalomanana said that he was prepared to form a national unity government that would include members of AREMA, and he said that consultations with Rajaonarivelo regarding AREMA's participation would follow. AU representatives subsequently met with Rajaonarivelo in Pretoria on 22 November 2002; at that meeting, Rajaonarivelo stated again that AREMA recognized Ravalomanana's election as president, and he said that AREMA was prepared to work with Ravalomanana for the sake of national reconciliation and stability. He also said that AREMA was willing to participate in a planned parliamentary election, as long as the election was free, fair, and transparent, although he proposed that the election be delayed to ensure that it would occur under the proper conditions. He complained that members of AREMA were being harassed, intimidated, and arrested. Although the AU agreed with Rajaonarivelo's position on a delay, the election was nevertheless held as planned in December 2002.

While in exile, Rajaonarivelo was sentenced to five years in prison on 14 March 2003 for abuse of office; he was subsequently convicted on charges of misuse of funds in August 2006 and sentenced to 15 years of hard labor, as well as barred from holding public office. Rajaonarivelo faced arrest upon return to Madagascar; he argued that the charges against him were politically motivated.

In spite of the convictions and sentences, Rajaonarivelo sought to run for president in 2006; he officially announced his candidacy on 26 May 2006. On 7 October 2006, he attempted to return to Madagascar from nearby Réunion to register as a presidential candidate before the 14 October deadline, although his spokesman said he was afraid of being met by a "death squad" upon arrival; the airport at Toamasina was closed to prevent his arrival, however. He then went to Mauritius and tried again to return to Madagascar on 12 October, but he was not allowed to board a flight by Air Mauritius, being described as a security risk; this measure had been requested by the government in Madagascar. Because he could not reach Madagascar, he could not sign his registration papers personally, and on 18 October he was barred from participating in the election by the Constitutional Court for that reason. Rajaonarivelo said that "by preventing my participation Marc Ravalomanana's regime invalidates the election", and he accused the international community of supporting "tyrannical practices" with "complicit silence".

President Ravalomanana was forced out of office by popular protests and military intervention in March 2009; the leader of the protests, Andry Rajoelina, assumed the presidency. When he was sworn in as president on 21 March 2009, Rajoelina said that he would pardon political prisoners and exiles; Rajaonarivelo then returned to Madagascar on 25 April 2009. Prime Minister Monja Roindefo had requested on 23 April that political exiles not return for the time being, but Rajaonarivelo, citing Rajoelina's inauguration statement, returned anyway.

Pig trotters à la Sainte-Menehould (French : Pieds de porc à la Sainte-Menehould) is a French cuisine dish of pig's trotters that is simmered for hours, breaded, and pan-fried ; the bones are soft enough to eat. The dish is a delicacy of Sainte-Menehould, dating to at least the 15th century.

The dish was first attested to during the reign of Charles VII of France, where he was served the dish in Sainte-Menehould in 1435. The dish began to be prepared with "sauce à la Sainte-Menehould" in the 17th century; the sauce was later documented by August Escoffier.

According to Camille Desmoulins, during the 1791 Flight to Varennes, Louis XVI and the French royal family stopped in Sainte-Menehould and partook in pig trotters à la Sainte-Menehould. The royals were ultimately arrested in Varennes-en-Argonne, having been recognized and reported to revolutionary authorities from their stop in Sainte-Menehould.

Alexandre Dumas popularized the dish when it was published in the 1873 Grand dictionnaire de cuisine [ fr ].

The trotters are trussed to hold their shape and simmered with onion, carrots, shallots, garlic, bouquet garni, cloves, and white wine for at least four hours; some recipes call for twelve or 24 hours. The cooked trotters are cut lengthwise, breaded with breadcrumbs and eggs, and pan-fried before serving.

Pig's trotters à la Sainte-Menehould are traditionally served with "sauce à la Sainte-Menehould", a butter-based sauce including onion, white wine or champagne, vinegar, Reims mustard [ fr ], bay leaf, parsley and thyme.

In 1784, Fernand Benoit [ fr ] wrote that the Polish count August Fryderyk Moszyński was served sheep's trotters à la Sainte-Menehould at an inn in Avignon. In the short story The System of Doctor Tarr and Professor Fether by Edgar Allan Poe, a dish of veal à la Sainte-Menehould is described.

Pigeon pie is a savoury game pie made of pigeon meat and various other ingredients traditional to French cuisine and present in other European cuisines. It has been eaten at least as early as 1670 in French cuisine.

Similar dishes to pigeon pie exist in other cultures. In Morocco, a version made with a thin, phyllo -like pastry crust is called bastila. Early versions of the traditional Canadian dish of tourtière, currently made with meats such as pork or beef, were probably made of pigeon, likely the now extinct passenger pigeon.

An early recipe for pigeon pie was given in A Proper Newe Booke of Cokerye, published in London in 1575. James Hart, a Scottish physician, wrote in 1633 that pigeon pies were usually served with far too much pepper. The diary of Samuel Pepys recounts his attendance at a dinner party on May 24, 1667, in Islington, London, where the guests "dined upon nothing but pigeon-pyes". Cookery books of the seventeenth century show that pigeons were 'well spiced with nutmegs, cloves, pepper and salt, and sealed in butter within the cold pie, which could then be kept for several days. But with the advent of potting (preserving food, especially meat or fish, in a sealed pot or jar) pies of this type became less common'. Records in the British National Archives show that pigeon pie was a menu item at Kew Palace during the reign of George III. For the working classes however, without access to the dovecotes of the gentry, pigeon pie was a rare treat.

In 1879, the British Medical Journal reported a group of sailors aboard the Troop ship HMS Tamar (1863) were poisoned by a bad pigeon pie which spawned an Admiralty investigation.

Before the late 19th century in the United States, pigeon pie was a common dish. Archival records show that pigeon pie was a traditional dish for the American holiday of Thanksgiving, though is currently uncommon at Thanksgiving meals. Similarly, during the earlier part of the 19th century pigeon pie was a common Christmas meal in Detroit, but later was replaced by other meats. The reviewers in The Pacific Northwest Quarterly of the 1976 The Homestead Cookbook edited by Victoria Paul, noted that without publications of cookbooks like it, the traditional dish of pigeon pie would become culturally extinct in the United States.

In Spain, pigeon eating was a common practice as early as the 14th century under the 1379 Order of the Pigeon created by King Juan I of Castile. The order ate pigeon regularly at their order banquets. In 1611, a recipe book by the royal chef at the court of Philip III of Spain included recipes for pigeon pie. Similarly, a chef at a university residence hall in Spain included recipes for pigeon pies in his 1607 collection of recipes.

Pilaf (US : / ˈ p iː l ɑː f / or pilau UK : / ˈ p iː l aʊ, p iː ˈ l aʊ /) is a rice dish, or in some regions, a wheat dish, whose recipe usually involves cooking in stock or broth, adding spices, and other ingredients such as vegetables and meat, and employing some technique for achieving cooked grains that do not adhere.

During the Abbasid Caliphate, such methods of cooking rice first spread across a vast territory from South Asia to Spain, and eventually to a wider world. The Spanish paella, and the South Asian pilau or pulao, and biryani, evolved from such dishes.

Pilaf and similar dishes are common to Middle Eastern, West Asian, Balkan, Caribbean, South Caucasian, Central Asian, East African, Eastern European, Latin American, Maritime Southeast Asia, and South Asian cuisines; in these areas, they are regarded as staple dishes.

According to the Oxford English Dictionary Online Edition's summary, the English word pilaf, which the OED refers to the version with spelling "pilau," is a borrowing from Persian by way of Turkish. In more detail, the English pilau, of first use 1609 CE, has come from Persian pulaw (16th cent. as palāv), in turn from Hindi pulāv dish of rice and meat, from Sanskrit pulāka (ball of rice), probably from Dravidian (cf Tamil puḷukku (adjective) simmered, (noun) boiled or parboiled food, puḷukkal cooked rice); probably partly via French pilau (1654; 1680 as pilaw; 1833 as pilaf), Italian pilao (1542).

Although the cultivation of rice had spread much earlier from India to Central and West Asia, it was at the time of the Abbasid Caliphate that methods of cooking rice which approximate modern styles of cooking pilaf at first spread through a vast territory from Spain to Afghanistan, and eventually to a wider world. The Spanish paella, and the South Asian pilau or pulao, and biryani, evolved from such dishes.

According to food historian Charles Perry, pilaf is a post-10th-century eastern Arabic innovation. Kitab al-Wusla, an early 13th–century cookbook authored by Ibn al-Adim of Aleppo, provides the first recipe for a dish resembling modern pilaf, utilizing a base of rice, meat, chickpeas, and garlic.

The food historian K. T. Achaya suggested that the Sanskrit epic Mahabharata mentions an instance of rice and meat cooked together. Also, according to Achaya, the terms " pulao " and " pallao " are used to refer to a rice dish in ancient Sanskrit works such as the Yājñavalkya Smṛti. However, according to food writers Colleen Taylor Sen and Charles Perry, and social theorist Ashis Nandy, these references do not substantially correlate to the commonly used meaning and history implied in pilafs, which appear in Indian accounts after the medieval Central Asian conquests. Food historian Charles Perry characterized K. T. Achaya's claim as a myth and stated that the term used by Achaya for pilaf refers to "raw meat or fish". He further stated that Achaya mostly reported conclusions drawn by other people from primary evidence without verification. According to Charles Perry, there is no sign of pulao in ancient India, and the Sanskrit word that became pulao in later Indian languages originally meant "shriveled, blighted, empty, or bad grain"—which points to some other dish rather than pilaf.

Similarly Alexander the Great and his army, many centuries earlier, in the 4th century BCE, have been reported to have been so impressed with the Eastern Iranic Bactrian and Sogdian palāvs that his soldiers brought the recipes back to Macedon when they returned. Similar stories exist of Alexander bringing pilaf to the ancient Sogdian Samarkand ; however, they are considered apocryphal by archaeologist John Boardman. Similarly, it has been reported that pilaf was consumed in the Byzantine Empire and in the Republic of Venice.

Thirteenth-century texts describing the consistency of pilaf state that the grains should be plump and somewhat firm to resemble peppercorns with no mushiness, and each grain should be separate with no clumping.

According to Encyclopaedia Iranica, the earliest attestation of pilaf (in any of its various spellings) is found in the 14th-century Persian satirical poem Mūš-o gorba by Ubayd Zakani. The earliest known recipe for a rice dish to be explicitly called "pilaf" (in any of its various spellings) appears in the cookbook Kārnāma dar bāb-e tabbākhī-o san'at-e ān (A Manual of Cookery and Its Art), written in 1521 by Muhammad-Ali Bāvarchī-i Baghdādī, a cook associated with the court of Ismail I.

آن یکی شیشهٔ شراب به کف وان دگر بره‌های بریانا آن یکی طشتکی پر از کشمش وان دگر یک طبق ز خرمانا آن یکی ظرفی از پنیر به دست وان دگر ماست با کره نانا آن یکی خوانچه پلو بر سر افشره آب لیمو عمانا نزد گربه شدند آن موشان با سلام و درود و احسانا

One carried a glass of wine The other some roasted lamb One other had a bowl of raisins Another a plate of dates in hand Bread and cheese another had brought "Yoghurt and butter!" another had thought The last came in with a tray of polow Upon its head, splashed with juice of lime All of it to the cat the mice presented Along with a thousand praises and honors

Another primary source for pilaf dishes comes from the 17th-century Iranian philosopher Molla Sadra.

Some cooks prefer to use basmati rice because it is easier to prepare a pilaf where the grains stay "light, fluffy and separate" with this type of rice. However, other types of long-grain rice are also used. The rice is rinsed thoroughly before use to remove the surface starch. Pilaf can be cooked in water or stock. Common additions include fried onions and fragrant spices like cardamom, bay leaves and cinnamon.

Pilaf is usually made with meat or vegetables, but it can also be made plain which is called sade pilav in Turkish, chelo in Persian and ruzz mufalfal in Arabic. Persian pilaf uses saffron which gives Persian rice flavor and a yellow color. Pilaf is often made by adding the rice to hot fat and stirring briefly before adding the cooking liquid. The fat used varies from recipe to recipe. Cooking methods vary with respect to details such as pre-soaking the rice and steaming after boiling.

There are thousands of variations of pilaf made with rice or other grains like bulgur. Some include different combinations of meats, fruits or vegetables, while others are simple and served plain.

Central Asian, South Asian, Iranian and Caribbean cuisine are some with distinctive styles of making pilaf.

In Afghan cuisine, Kabuli palaw (Persian : کابلی پلو) is made by cooking basmati with mutton, lamb, beef or chicken, and oil. Kabuli palaw is cooked in large shallow and thick dishes. Fried sliced carrots and raisins are added. Chopped nuts like pistachios, walnuts, or almonds may be added as well. The meat is covered by the rice or buried in the middle of the dish. Kabuli palaw rice with carrots and raisins is very popular in Saudi Arabia, where it is known as roz Bukhari (Arabic : رز بخاري), meaning ' Bukharan rice'.

In Albanian cuisine, pilaf is a very common dish. It is typically accompanied by yogurt and eaten with bean stew, meat soup or baked meats such as chicken and lamb. Medium-long grain rice is used, and it is cooked plainly with butter, resulting in a soft yet non-sticky texture.

There are various rice dishes in Albania, which are all commonly referred to as pilaf.

Albania ranks among the top three countries in Europe for rice consumption.

Armenians use a lot of bulgur ("cracked wheat") in their pilaf dishes. Armenian recipes may combine vermicelli or orzo with rice cooked in stock seasoned with mint, parsley and allspice. One traditional Armenian pilaf is made with the same noodle rice mixture cooked in stock with raisins, almonds and allspice.

Armenian kinds of rice are discussed by Rose Baboian in her cookbook from 1964 which includes recipes for different pilafs, most rooted in her birthplace of Antep in Turkey. Baboian recommends that the noodles be stir-fried first in chicken fat before being added to the pilaf. Another Armenian cookbook written by Vağinag Pürad recommends to render poultry fat in the oven with red pepper until the fat mixture turns a red color before using the strained fat to prepare pilaf.

Lapa is an Armenian word with several meanings one of which is a "watery boiled rice, thick rice soup, mush" and lepe which refers to various rice dishes differing by region. Antranig Azhderian describes Armenian pilaf as a "dish resembling porridge".

Azerbaijani cuisine includes more than 40 different plov recipes. Traditional Azerbaijani plov consists of three distinct components, served simultaneously on separate platters: rice (warm, never hot), meat, and herbs.

In Bangladesh, polao (পোলাও), is a popular ceremonial dish cooked only with aromatic rice. Bangladesh cultivates many varieties of aromatic rice, which can be found only in this country and some surrounding Indian states with predominantly Bengali populations. Historically, there were many varieties of aromatic rice. These included short-grain rice with buttery and other fragrances depending on the variety. Over a long span of time, many recipes were lost and then reinvented.

Since the 1970s in Bangladesh pulao has referred to aromatic rice (বাসন্তী পোলাও) Bashonti polao, first fried either in oil or clarified butter with onions, fresh ginger and whole aromatic spices such as cardamom, cinnamon, black pepper, and more, depending on each household and region. This is then cooked in stock or water, first boiled and then steamed. It is finished off with a bit more clarified butter and fragrant essences such as rose water or kewra water. For presentation, beresta (fried onions) are sprinkled on top. Chicken pulao, (morog pulao) is a traditional ceremonial dish among the Bangladeshi Muslim community. There are several different types of morog pulao found only in particular regions or communities.

In Sylhet and Chittagong, a popular ceremonial dish called akhni polao. Aqni being the rich stock in which mutton is cooked and then used to cook the rice. Another very spicy Polao dish very popular and unique to Bangladesh is called Tehari. It is very different in taste to the tahris found in some parts of neighboring India. They are most popularly eaten with beef and chevon (goat meat) but are also paired with chicken. Young small potatoes, mustard oil (which is alternated with clarified butter or oil depending on individual taste), and a unique spice blend found in teharis distinguish them from other meat polaos. The most famous tehari in the capital city of Dhaka is called Hajir biryani. Although here the name biryani is a misnomer, in usage among the urban young population it differentiates the popular dish mutton biryanis (goat meat).

A significantly modified version of the recipe, often seen as influenced by what is called arroz pilau there, is known in Brazil as arroz de frango desfiado or risoto de frango (Portuguese: [ ɐˈʁoz dʒi ˈfɾɐ̃ɡu dʒisfiˈadu ], "shredded chicken rice"; [ ʁiˈzotu ], "chicken risotto "). Rice lightly fried (and optionally seasoned), salted and cooked until soft (but neither soupy nor sticky) in either water or chicken stock is added to chicken stock, onions and sometimes cubed bell peppers (cooked in the stock), shredded chicken breast, green peas, tomato sauce, shoyu, and optionally vegetables (e.g. canned sweet corn, cooked carrot cubes, courgette cubes, broccolini flowers, chopped broccoli or broccolini stalks or leaves fried in garlic seasoning) or herbs (e.g., mint, like in canja) to form a distantly risotto -like dish – but it is generally fluffy (depending on the texture of the rice being added), as generally, once all ingredients are mixed, it is not left to cook longer than five minutes. In the case shredded chicken breast is not added, with the rice being instead served alongside chicken and sauce suprême, it is known as arroz suprême de frango (Portuguese: [ ɐˈʁos suˈpɾẽm(i) dʒi ˈfɾɐ̃ɡu ], "chicken supreme rice").

In the Eastern Caribbean and other Caribbean territories there are variations of pelau which include a wide range of ingredients such as pigeon peas, green peas, green beans, corn, carrots, pumpkin, and meat such as beef or chicken, or cured pig tail. The seasoned meat is usually cooked in a stew, with the rice and other vegetables added afterwards. Coconut milk and spices are also key additions in some islands.

Trinidad is recognized for its pelau, a layered rice with meats and vegetables. It is a mix of traditional African cuisine and "New World" ingredients like ketchup. The process of browning the meat (usually chicken, but also stew beef or lamb) in sugar is an African technique.

In Tobago, pelau is commonly made with crab.

Central Asian, e.g. Uzbek, Kyrgyz and Tajik (Uzbek : Osh, Palov, Kyrgyz : Аш, палоо, Tajik : Палов) Kazakh, Turkmen, Karakalpak (Kazakh : Палау, Palaw) or osh differs from other preparations in that rice is not steamed, but instead simmered in a rich stew of meat and vegetables called zirvak (зирвак), until all the liquid is absorbed into the rice. A limited degree of steaming is commonly achieved by covering the pot. It is usually cooked in a kazon (or deghi) over an open fire. The cooking tradition includes many regional and occasional variations. Commonly, it is prepared with lamb or beef, browned in lamb fat or oil, and then stewed with fried onions, garlic and carrots. Chicken palov is rare but found in traditional recipes originating in Bukhara. Some regional varieties use distinct types of oil to cook the meat. For example, Samarkand -style plov commonly uses zig'ir oil, a mix of melon seed, cottonseed, sesame seed, and flaxseed oils. Plov is usually simply spiced with salt, peppercorns, and cumin, but coriander, barberries, red pepper, or marigold may be added according to regional variation or the chef's preference. Heads of garlic and chickpeas are sometimes buried into the rice during cooking. Sweet variations with dried apricots, cranberries and raisins are prepared on special occasions.

Plov is the national dish of Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, which was recognized by UNESCO and inscribed on its Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity list in 2016. However, neighbouring countries, including Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan, also consider plov a staple dish, with their own regional variations reflecting local ingredients and cooking.

Although often prepared at home, plov is made on special occasions by an oshpaz (Tajik : ошпаз) or ashpoz (osh/ash master chef), who cooks it over an open flame, sometimes serving up to 1,000 people from a single cauldron on holidays or occasions such as weddings. Oshi nahor, or "morning palov", is served in the early morning (between 6 and 9 am) to large gatherings of guests, typically as part of an ongoing wedding celebration.

Plov is found in the post- Soviet countries and Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region of China. In Xinjiang, where the dish is known as polu, polo, or pola (Uyghur : پولو، پولۇ، پولا), it is often served with pickled vegetables, including carrots, onion and tomato.

In Greek cuisine, piláfi (πιλάφι) is fluffy and soft, but neither soupy nor sticky, rice that has been boiled in a meat stock or bouillon broth. In Northern Greece, it is considered improper to prepare piláfi on a stovetop; the pot is properly placed in the oven. Gamopílafo ("wedding pilaf") is the prized pilaf served traditionally at weddings and major celebrations in Crete : rice is boiled in lamb or goat broth, then finished with lemon juice. Although it bears the name, Gamopílafo is not a pilaf but rather a kind of risotto, with a creamy and not fluffy texture.

Pilaf (piláf or rízseshús) is a popular national dish in Hungary. It is believed to have been popularised in Hungary during the Ottoman period. It is characterised by rice cooked in broth, with meat, onions and paprika, along with a choice of vegetables and additional herbs and/or spices.

Pulao is usually a mixture of rice with vegetables, usually peas, potatoes, green beans, carrots and sometimes includes any one kind of meat like chicken, fish, lamb, goat, pork or prawns. A typical Bengali style pulao is prepared using vegetarian ingredients like Long grain rice or aromatic rice, cashewnut, raisin, ghee and various spices like nutmeg, bay leaf, cinnamon, cardamom, cumin, clove and mace. There are also a few very elaborate pulaos with Persian names like hazar pasand ("a thousand delights"). In Karnataka palav along with a variant called Rice Bath is a staple breakfast available in most of the restaurants. It is usually served on special occasions and weddings, though it is not uncommon to eat it for a regular lunch or dinner meal. It is considered very high in food energy and fat. A pulao is often complemented with either spiced yogurt or raita.

The Arab community in Indonesia, largely descended from migrants from Hadhramaut in Yemen who arrived in Java between the 18th and 19th centuries through Indian Ocean trade networks, brought not only coffee, culture, and Islamic religious traditions, but also culinary practices. Among these is a pilaf called nasi kebuli, an accultured dish within Arab Indonesian cuisine and said to derive its name from the kabuli pulao of Afghanistan, along with nasi kebuli, another type of pilaf that has become popular among Arab Indonesians is nasi mandi. According to Gagas Ulung and Deerona in their book Jejak Kuliner Arab di Pulau Jawa (2014), the origin of nasi kebuli indicate that prior to settling in Java, Hadhrami migrants spent time in Gujarat, where interaction with local food traditions, transmitted in part by Kerala cooks working aboard Gujarati trading vessels, contributed to the formation of the dish before it was further adapted to Indonesian tastes through intermarriage and cultural blending. Nasi kebuli is characterized by long grain Basmati rice, cooked in goat meat broth, milk and ghee, and seasoned with garlic, shallots and spices such as cardamom, cloves, cumin, coriander, nutmeg, black pepper, and cinnamon; it is typically served with goat meat or chicken, and may be accompanied by raisins or dates, sambal goreng ati, maraq soup, acar or pickled pineapples, sambal, and emping crackers. In Indonesia, particularly within Betawi and Arab Indonesian communities, nasi kebuli is closely associated with Islamic religious festivals such as Eid al Fitr, Eid al Adha, and Mawlid, as well as weddings, cultural gatherings, and official state banquets.

Persian culinary terms referring to rice preparation are numerous and ancient and have influenced and found their way into the neighbouring languages: polow (from which the word "pilaf" is derived around the world; rice cooked in broth while the grains remain separate, straining the half cooked rice before adding the broth and then "brewing"), chelow (white rice with separate grains), kateh (sticky rice) and tahchin (slow cooked rice, vegetables, and meat cooked in a specially designed dish). One of the many unique ingredients used in Persian rice is saffron. There are a wide variety of Persian rice dishes (upto 100 dishes) with vegetables and herbs which are very popular among Iranians.

There are four primary methods of cooking rice in Iran:

Japanese style Pilaf (ピラフ) is commonly eaten with Japanese school lunch, or kyūshoku (給食). The most common pilaf eaten with Japanese school lunch is a corn pilaf.

In Kenya pilau is mostly eaten in coastal regions. The spices are similar to Indian varieties. Potatoes are typically added to the masala and the dish can be eaten with meat, fish or meatless. It is often served with a side of kachumbari.

In Pakistan, pulao (پلاؤ), also romanized as pulāv, is a popular dish made with fragrant basmati rice cooked in a seasoned meat or bone broth. Typically non-spicy, it features tender pieces of meat, such as chicken, lamb, or beef, though vegetarian variations are also popular. As with Afghan cuisine, Kabuli pulav is a staple dish in Pakistan, especially in the western regions. This variation of pulav is often adorned with sliced carrots, almonds, and raisins fried in a sweet syrup, adding a unique touch of sweetness and texture to the dish. Bannu Beef Pulao, also known as Bannu Gosht Pulao, is a traditional and popular variation of pulav recipe hailing from the Bannu district of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province in Pakistan. The dish is made with beef, basmati rice, and a blend of local spices, resulting in a flavor profile characteristic of the region. The beef is first cooked in a separate preparation known as Beef Yakhni, made using a combination of salt, ginger, garlic, onions, and garam masala. This broth enhances the flavor and ensures the meat is tender. The rice is then combined with the cooked beef, allowing the flavors to meld together. This delicacy is often served during special occasions and family dinners and is a staple of the Pashtun culinary tradition.

Pulao is popular in all parts of Pakistan, but the cooking style can vary slightly in other parts of the country. It is prepared by Sindhi people of Pakistan in their marriage ceremonies, condolence meetings, and other occasions.

Romanian style pilaf is often more watery in consistency, more akin to congee, and uses chicken breast meat along with chopped red peppers, onion, and carrot.

Traditional Levantine cooking includes a variety of Pilaf known as " Maqlubeh ", known across the countries of the Eastern Mediterranean. The rice pilaf which is traditionally cooked with meat, eggplant, tomatoes, potatoes, and cauliflower also has a fish variety known as " sayadieh ", or the Fishermen's Dish.

Historically, mutton stock was the most common cooking liquid for Turkish pilavs.

Turkish cuisine contains many different pilav types. Some of these variations are pirinç (rice) pilav, bulgur pilav, and arpa şehriye (orzo) pilav. Using mainly these three types, Turkish people make many dishes such as perdeli pilav, and etli pilav (rice cooked with cubed beef). Unlike Chinese rice, if Turkish rice is sticky, it is considered unsuccessful. To make the best rice according to Turkish people, one must rinse the rice, cook in butter, then add the water and let it sit until it soaks all the water. This results in a pilaf that is not sticky and every single rice grain falls off of the spoon separately.

The Greek Orthodox Pontian minority had their own methods of preparing pilav. Pontians along the Black Sea coast might make pilav with anchovies (called hapsipilavon) or mussels (called mythopilavon). Other varieties of Pontian pilav could include chicken, lamb, and vegetables. Typical seasonings are anise, dill, parsley, salt, pepper, and saffron. Some Pontians cooked pine nuts, peanuts, or almonds into their pilav. While pilav was usually made from rice, it could also be made with buckwheat.

Traditional Crimean Tatar pilyav (pilâv) is prepared from rice; meat, onions, or raisins can be added.

Lithuanian pilaf is often referred to as plovas. It tends to consist of rice and vegetables; depending on the region the vegetables can be tomatoes, carrots, cabbage, and/or mushrooms. It often contains chicken pieces or cut-up pieces of pork, usually the meat around the neck or the stomach; seasonings can be heavy or light, and some plovas might be made with rice that is very soft, unlike other variants.

Latvian pilaf is often referred to as plovs or plov. It tends to contain the same ingredients as the Lithuanian plovas and can vary from county to county.

The Pirate Party (French : Parti pirate, PP) is a political party in France based on the model of the Swedish Pirate Party.

The party proposes the reform of the copyright law, free access to scientific knowledge, as well as protection of individual freedom. Like other pirate parties in Europe, it is affiliated to European Pirate Party (PPEU). The youth organisation is called Parti Pirates Jeunes (PPJ; Pirate Party Youth) respectively Les Jeunes du Parti pirate (The Youth of Pirate Party).

The French Pirate party movement was founded on 21 June 2006, relating to the vote of the French Law on Copyright and Related Rights in the Information Society better known as DADVSI. Due to dissension a new section of the Pirate Party emerged in 2007, called Parti pirate français Canal historique (PPFCH). On 4 April 2009, the foundation of the Pirate Party as an organisation was published in the Journal officiel de la République française (page 1663, no. 1795). PP and PPFCH had similar aims and reunited in summer of 2009. Already during the debate on the HADOPI law a further pirate party named Parti pirate français (PPF) appeared, founded by Rémy Cérésiani. The PPF, which had an identical logo combined with a similar name to the PP was finally disbanded in September 2009.

The PP took part in the 10th Yvelines department election on 20 September 2009, and received 472 votes in the first round (turnout: 22.76%), which was 2.08%. There was no record of voting in the second round (turnout: 25.99%), which was won by the conservative UMP candidate.

The Pirate Party has continued to run in French elections as a minor party. In the 2022 French legislative elections, the party received 19,389 votes, 0.09% of the ballots cast in that election.

The Pirate Party, participated in the 2012 legislative election presenting 101 candidates. Their aim was 50 candidates to receive over 1% to allow them to receive public funding, they only received 24 candidates over 1%. They achieved an average of 0.85% across the districts they stood in. Their best result in metropolitan France was the district of Haut-Rhin with 2.41% but their overall best showing was in the 7th district of oversea French Nationals where they achieved 2.85%.

Pissaladière (UK : / ˌ p ɪ s æ l æ d ˈ j ɛər /, US : / ˌ p iː s ɑː l ɑː d ˈ j ɛər /, French: [ pisaladjɛʁ ] ; Niçard : pissaladiera [ pisalaˈdjeɾɔ ] or pissaladina [ pisalaˈdinɔ ] ; Ligurian : piscialandrea [ piʃalaŋˈdɾeːa ] or sardenaira) is a dish of flatbread with toppings from the region of Provence and the French city of Nice. It is often compared to pizza. The dough is usually a bread dough thicker than that of the classic pizza Margherita, and the traditional topping in Nice usually consists of caramelised (almost pureed) onions, black olives (generally caillettes) and anchovies (whole, and sometimes also with pissalat, a type of anchovy paste).

The etymology of the word seems to originate from the Latin piscis "fish", which in turn originated pissalat, the name of an anchovy paste (via peis salat, "salted fish" Niçard).

The first written recipe was found in a document of the year 879 in Provence. This old recipe included onions and pissalat, confirming that the name derives from this anchovy puré.

The dough is usually a bread dough thicker than that of the classic pizza margherita (i.e. Pizza al taglio), and the traditional topping usually consists of caramelised (almost pureed) onions, black olives, and anchovies (whole, and sometimes also with pissalat). In the version of Menton the dough is enriched with tomatoes.

Pissalat or pissala, is a condiment originating from the Nice region of France. The name comes from peis salat in Niçard and means 'salted fish'. It is made from anchovy puree flavoured with cloves, thyme, bay leaf and black pepper mixed with olive oil. Pissalat is used for flavouring hors d'oeuvres, fish, cold meats, and, especially, the local specialty, pissaladière.

The word pissala (in Nissard) or pissalat (in French) is composed of the old Provençal word peis for 'fish', and sala, the past participle of salar, which corresponds to the French saler ('to salt'). Together, they describe "preserves of small crushed and salted fish" or, similarly, "a piquant sauce made from the maceration of salted fish."

The pissalat is similar to the siqqu, from the Mesopotamian Culinary Treatise of the 2nd millennium BC. J.-C. (c. 1700 BC) or with garum (juice or sauce, in Latin, from Roman antiquity). Since the time of ancient Rome, garum has been produced (with many variants) throughout the Mediterranean basin. It is a sauce obtained by macerating the heads and intestines of mackerel, sardines, anchovies, and aromatic plants in salt. The sauce thus obtained passed through a fine sieve, was recovered with a ladle, and was preserved in olive oil.

The manufacture of pissalat was a centuries-old local industry in the Nice-Côte d'Azur region, where the salting of sardines and anchovies employed roughly a dozen families at the beginning of the 19th century. The Niçois writer, Louis Roubaudi, notes in his 1843 book Nice and its surroundings : "The pissalat is very suitable for reviving the appetite when it is seasoned with olive oil, vinegar, and salted olives."

The sauce largely disappeared from commerce during the Second World War, and exists today only in the form of local traditional artisanal and family production (it is often replaced by salted anchovies or anchovy purée), in particular for the preparation of pissaladière.

The pissalat sauce is traditionally made from a mixture of anchovies, sardines, or poutine. These ingredients are pounded in a mortar, then macerated and fermented for several months in a large Provençal terracotta terrine with a brine of salt, pepper, olive oil, spices and herbs, thyme, bay leaf, cinnamon, and ground cloves (for preservation by salting).

The mixture is then stored in a cool place and stirred daily so as to quickly form a paste. The oil that rises to the surface must be skimmed every week. The resulting paste is passed through a fine sieve after one month. The pissalat can then be kept for some time in glass jars, covered with olive oil.

It can be eaten on slices of bread and accompany soups, vegetables, salads, meats, or other dishes of Provençal cuisine.

Jaude Square (French : Place de Jaude) is a major city square and meeting place in the centre of Clermont-Ferrand, France. It is bordered by Rue Blatin on the North and Avenue Julien on the south. The square is home to many attractions, such as the Opera Theatre, the Jaude Shopping Mall and Saint-Pierre-des-Minimes Church.

Jaude Square was founded in the Roman times but was abandoned in the Middle Ages.

Overlooking the square is a massive statue of the ancient Gallic leader Vercingetorix. Erected in 1903, it was created by Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi, who also made the Statue of Liberty.

The modern square was inaugurated on 17 June 2006, with over 30,000 people coming to attend the opening ceremony.

As the excavations carried out during the construction of the Fond de Jaude (1978), Carré Jaude I (1995) and Carré Jaude II (2009-2010) have shown, the plain of Jaude, almost devoid of construction in the Middle Ages, was on the contrary a densely urbanized sector during Roman times. Archaeological research shows that the Place de Jaude was a public district, a place of passage and merchant. This proto-square was parallel to the hill of Clermont, which hosts the forum under the current Place de la Victoire and the cathedral.

In the Middle Ages, the square was a vast, unsuitable swampy area (it was in fact an old crater lake), bordered in the west by a branch of the South Tiretaine, fitted to serve tanneries and mills, in the north and east by the limit of the urbanized sector. The only elevated building in the depression was then the chapel of Jaude, in the southwest of the square.

The Saint-Pierre-des-Minimes church was built in 1630. In 1663 a fountain and a pond were installed. In 1750, the square was transformed into a fairground to sell horses and firewood.

In the 19th century, the square became a popular place to walk for the inhabitants. On the east side of the square, the Halle aux Toiles, built in 1812, was transformed to accommodate a large theater in 1894. Two monuments were erected: the statue of General Desaix in 1848 and the equestrian statue of Vercingétorix in 1903.

The Café de Paris (1839), the Café Riche, the Grand café Lyonnais, the Café de L'Univers later opened their terraces on the square. The commercial orientation of the square was confirmed in the 20th century, with the opening of the Paris-Clermont store (the current Crédit commercial de France building) built in 1900, then with one of the Galeries de Jaude in 1907 (which became Galeries Lafayette in April 1997) which quickly supplant their competitors. In the 1960s and 1970s, the square was renovated in the south: the Fond de Jaude district was destroyed to make way, in 1980, for a large shopping center, the Jaude Centre.

A parking lot was dug under the northern part of the square. Above, a bus station and a T2C shop are located. Almost all of the city buses pass through the square. Two ponds with water jets were created in 1985 in the center of the square, which is bordered by green spaces and magnolias. Near the Jaude Centre, a park is decorated with a fountain designed by the sculptor Jean Chauchard.

The municipal council decided on the 24th of September 1999 to completely redo the square and install a first tramway line. The development project made by the winning team of the international architecture and landscape competition of Alain Marguerit (Atelier des Paysages Alain Marguerit), Bernard Paris (Atelier d'Architecture Bernard Paris), Jean-Max Llorca (fountain engineer), LEA (Laurent Fachard, lighting technician).

The project recalls the facilities which existed in the 19th century. A space mainly reserved for pedestrians and tree lanes (141 in total) between which the new Clermont-Ferrand tramway has passed since November 13, 2006.

The square is almost entirely reserved for pedestrians. Vehicles cross it only from east to west between boulevard Desaix and rue Blatin or from west to east from avenue Julien. The northern part is made up of a dark basalt forecourt illuminated at night by 250 red and yellow diodes which symbolize the movement of lava. The rest of the square is paved with light limestone.

The work began in January 2003 and was completed in late 2005 at a cost of 15 million euros. The square reopened to the public on the 10th of December 2005 in the presence of 30,000 people and was inaugurated on the 17th of June 2006.

The Place de la Comédie (French pronunciation: [ plas də la kɔmedi ] ; Occitan : Plaça de la Comèdia) is a square in Montpellier, Hérault in Southern France. It is at the southeast point of the city centre, at 43°36′31.19″N 3°52′47.63″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.6086639°N 3.8798972°E ﻿ / 43.6086639; 3.8798972, where the fortifications of the city were formerly located.

The Place became the focal point of the city when, in the mid-19th century the railway station Gare de Montpellier Saint-Roch was built some 200 metres (660 ft) south of it. At that time, a smaller train going to the nearby beach at Palavas-les-Flots also had its point of origin on the Place.

At its northeastern corner, the square continues into the Esplanade de Charles de Gaulle, a small park connecting the Place to the Corum, a large concrete and granite complex built by Claude Vasconi. At its southeastern corner it is linked to the Lycée Joffre, formerly the Citadel of Montpellier.

Place de Verdun (French pronunciation: [ plas də vɛʁdœ̃ ]) is a public square in the French commune of Grenoble in the French department of Isère, in the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes region.

This vast square, located in the hyper-center district, notably houses the Isère prefecture hotel [ fr ], the building of the former musée-bibliothèque de Grenoble [ fr ] and the hôtel des troupes de montagne de Grenoble [ fr ].

Starting from the north, and going clockwise, Place de Verdun provides access to the following routes, according to the toponymic references provided by the geoportal site of the National Geographic Institute :

The square, located in the hyper-center Grenoble district, near the Exposition-Bajatière [ fr ] district, is accessible to passers-by from any point in the city.

The square is directly served by line A [ fr ] of the Grenoble metropolitan area tram network with a station located to the southwest of the square: Verdun - Préfecture. The place is also served by numerous bus lines (Proximo lines 12, 13, 14), as well as by the Transisère line 6020 [ fr ] (Verdun-Préfecture stop).

This square, surrounded by monumental buildings dating, for the most part, from the end of the 19th century, forms a square of 150 meters on each side, sheltering a square with a basin equipped with a water jet in its center. The place also houses an underground car park, the entrance to which is located on the north side. The tram line runs along this square between rue Général Marchand (to the north) and rue Fantin-Latour (to the south).

The Place de Verdun was named by this name in 1918, in memory of the Battle of Verdun which took place from February 21 to December 18, 1916 in the Verdun region in Lorraine, during the First World War.

Originally, the Place de Verdun was called the « Place d’Armes » because it hosted the city’s main military parades. It was designed in the 1840s on the site of a former bastion of the Lesdiguières fortifications. The prefecture was completed in 1867. At the start of the Third Republic (in 1870) it changed its name to « Place de la Constitution ». In 1885, a banker built a private mansion which would become the current administrative court.

The statue of Napoleon on his horse, made by Emmanuel Frémiet, was inaugurated on the square in 1868 then dismantled in 1870, under the Third Republic before being reinstalled near lac de Laffrey (site of the Laffrey prairie). To replace it, the statue called « Le Torrent » by Urbain Basset [ fr ] was installed. This will, in turn, be moved to the Jardin de Ville. A pool will be installed at this location.

Below is the list of buildings on the square, most of them for public purposes in order of number:

Place Ducale is the central and historical main square of Charleville, the northern part of Charleville-Mézières, in the Ardennes department of France.

The history of the square goes back to 1606, when it was planned as the centre of the new town Charleville, founded by Charles I Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua. Duke Charles commissioned architect Clément II Métezeau to make the plans for the square. He was the younger brother of Louis Métezeau, who might have designed Place des Vosges in Paris; the similarity between the two squares is striking.

The square consists of three symmetrical sides, each one centred around a central pavilion, originally with a dome. On the fourth side the Duke originally intended to erect a palace for himself, but this was never built. Instead, the present-day town hall, erected with a bell tower in 1840, partially occupies the fourth side.

The Place Harvey Milk is a public square in Paris, France. It lies at a junction in Le Marais, at the intersection of the Rue des Archives and the Rue de la Verrerie [ fr ], at the heart of the French capital.

The nearest métro station is Hôtel de Ville.

The La Verrerie bus stop on RATP Bus Network line 75 is located on the square, which can also be reached by lines 67 69 70 72 74 at Place du Châtelet and Rue de Rivoli bus stops.

In 2019, the Council of Paris decided to pay homage to the late San Francisco politician and pioneer of gay rights Harvey Milk. The square was inaugurated by local officials on June 19 of that year, in the presence of Milk's nephew Stuart Milk.

The same day, the city of Paris also honoured the American artist Gilbert Baker, gay rights activist, creator of the Rainbow Flag and friend of Harvey Milk, with an official plaque in his memory at the nearby Place des Émeutes-de-Stonewall.

The square stands 100m from the Paris City Hall, the seat of the Council of Paris, whose members voted to pay tribute to their late counterpart from San Francisco, who was assassinated in November 1978. Looking from the place Harvey Milk towards the Hôtel de Ville, Notre-Dame-de-Paris can be seen in perspective.

One year prior to the renaming of the junction, rainbow zebra crossings in the vicinity, which had been painted to commemorate Paris Pride, were tagged with homophobic graffiti. In response, the city council made the rainbow crossings permanent. The naming of the junction after Harvey Milk was praised by anti-homophobia organizations.

An entrance to the famous department store Bazar de l'Hôtel de Ville stands at one corner of the square.

The Place Masséna (French pronunciation: [ plas masena ]) is a historic square in Nice, Alpes-Maritimes, France. It was named for André Masséna. Its layout was designed by Joseph Vernier in 1843-1844.

The Place Masséna is the main square of the city. Before the Paillon River was covered over, the Pont-Neuf was the only practicable way between the old town and the modern one. The square was thus divided into two parts (North and South) in 1824. With the demolition of the Masséna Casino in 1979, the Place Masséna became more spacious and less dense and is now bordered by red ochre buildings of Italian architecture.

The recent rebuilding of the tramline gave the square back to the pedestrians, restoring its status as a real Mediterranean square. It is lined with palm trees and stone pines, instead of being the rectangular roundabout of sorts it had become over the years. Since its construction, the Place Masséna has always been the spot for great public events. It is used for concerts, and particularly during the summer festivals, the Corso carnavalesque (carnival parade) in February, the military procession of 14 July (Bastille Day) or other traditional celebrations and banquets.

The Place Masséna is a two-minute walk from the Promenade des Anglais, old town, town centre, and Albert I Garden (Jardin Albert Ier). It is also a large crossroads between several of the main streets of the city: avenue Jean Médecin, avenue Félix Faure, boulevard Jean Jaurès, avenue de Verdun and rue Gioffredo.

There are seven statues on high poles along the tram lines. In 2007, Catalan artist Jaume Plensa created the contemporary art installation, comprising statues of kneeling men representing the seven continents known as Conversation in Nice.

The Place Saint-Jacques (French pronunciation: [ plas sɛ̃ ʒak ], "St. James's Square") is situated in the centre of Metz, France, in front of the centre Saint-Jacques, a three-storey mall. It is located between the Rue Fabert and the Rue Ladoucette, in the heart of the historic and pedestrian centre, near the cathedral.

The current name of the square appeared in the 12th century and derives from the Église Saint-Jacques (Church of St. James) which was on the square before being demolished in 1574. The name of the square has changed several times over the course of history. Most recently, the name changed due to events surrounding the Franco-Prussian War, World War I, and World War II.

The Place Saint-Jacques is situated near the main crossroads of the Roman city (Rue Taison and En Fournirue) and its location almost corresponds with the placement of the Roman Forum.

A fountain was built in the Place Saint-Jacques in 1498 but it was torn down in 1730; it was rebuilt in 1759 between the Rue Ladoucette and the Rue du Petit Paris. It was again destroyed in the French Revolution and later relocated to rue du Pont-des-Morts.

Beginning in 1832, a covered vegetable and flower market filled the square. Market contracts began and ended on December 26 of each year; on that day, people seeking employment gathered there. The building was demolished in 1907 due to unsanitary conditions.

Today, the square is known by Messins for its numerous coffeehouses and restaurants with outside tables for when the weather is fine.

During the German retreat at the end of World War I in 1918, Catholics in Metz feared that the city might become a second Verdun, so they asked Reverend Willibrord Benzler, Bishop of Metz from 1901 to 1919, to pledge to erect a statue to the Blessed Virgin so that the city would be spared from armed combat. The prelate accepted. However, he was expelled by the French authorities in July 1919 and died in Germany in 1921. The statue was inaugurated on the Feast of the Assumption in 1924. The Place Saint-Jacques was chosen as the location for its centrality and its proximity to the cathedral. The sanctification was celebrated by Reverend Jean-Baptiste Pelt, the new Bishop of Metz, in the presence of Reverend Charles Ruch, Bishop of Strasbourg, and Reverend Alphonse-Gabriel Foucault, Bishop of Saint-Die, after an address by Reverend du Bois Jagu de la Villerabel, Archbishop of Rouen and Primate of Normandy. The bronze statue by Jacques Martin is 1.90 metres (6.2 ft) tall and stands on an Ionic column of fine stone of Jaumont 8 metres (26 ft) high, by Max Braemer.

Again on 15 August 1940, in spite of the assembly ban imposed by the Nazis then occupying the city and the presence of many armed soldiers, nothing could prevent the citizens of Metz from showing their devotion to Our Lady of Metz and demonstrating their patriotic attachment to France. They gathered silently on the jam-packed square. The statue was surrounded by flowers in the three colors of France and a huge Cross of Lorraine embellished with thistles and a ribbon in yellow and red, the colours of Lorraine, was attached to the column on which the motto of Lorraine could be read: Qui s'y frotte s'y pique (who rubs himself on it pricks himself on it), a reference to the cotton thistle, the symbol of Lorraine. Suddenly in the silent crowd a chant began: Reine de France – Priez pour nous – Notre espérance – Venez et sauvez-nous (Queen of France - Pray for us - Our hope - Come and save us), and was taken up immediately by all the faithful present. The chant was started by Sister Helen Studler, a Daughter of Charity, who had the courage to express her desire to see the tricolor flag of France waving again in Metz. The crowd then returned to the cathedral in silence and many spent the whole night in prayer.

The tradition is honoured each year on August 15, the day of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary. First of all, the Pontifical Mass is celebrated in the morning at the Cathedral of Saint Étienne. Then, after vespers is sung, the bishop conducts a procession from the cathedral to the historic column in the middle of the Place Saint-Jacques.

The Place Stanislas is a large pedestrianised square in the French city of Nancy, in the Lorraine historic region. Built between 1752 and 1756 on the orders of Stanislaus I, former King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania, then Duke of Lorraine, the square is one of the oldest examples of an architecturally consistent monumental public square and is an excellent example of 18th-century urban architecture. Since 1983, the architectural ensemble comprising the Place Stanislas, the extension of its axis, the Place de la Carrière and the Place d'Alliance, has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

After the War of the Polish Succession in 1737, the Duchy of Upper Lorraine, of which Nancy was the capital, was given to Stanislaus I Leszczyński (Stanisław in Polish, Stanislas in French), former King of Poland and father-in-law to King Louis XV of France. An earlier ruler, Leopold, Duke of Lorraine, had undertaken much reconstruction in Lorraine, which had been ravaged by a series of wars. He had recruited numerous artists and architects for this work, including Germain Boffrand, who trained Emmanuel Héré. Hence, Stanislaus found a pool of talent and experience to draw from on his arrival.

The square was a major project in urban planning, conceived by Stanislaus I of Poland as a way to link the medieval old town of Nancy and the "new" town built in the 17th century under Charles III, Duke of Lorraine. The square was also intended as a place royale to honour Stanislaus' son-in-law, Louis XV. The design created a large urban square or place that linked two handsome existing buildings: the Hôtel de Ville (city hall, now centred on its grand square) and the Hôtel du Gouvernement, the seat of the duchy. The seat of city government and the seat of Ducal government thus faced each other as complements through a series of rational, symmetrical but varied urban spaces, unequalled in Europe at the time.

The square and the surrounding buildings, unified by their colossal orders, were designed by the royal architect Emmanuel Héré de Corny (1705–1763). Construction began in March 1752, and ended in November 1755. Barthélémy Guibal and Paul-Louis Cyfflé created a bronze statue of Louis XV that was erected in the center of the square. It was removed during the iconoclasm of the Revolution, when it was replaced with a simple winged figure. The square was renamed the ' Place du Peuple ', and later the ' Place Napoléon '.

In 1831, a bronze statue of Stanislaus was placed in the middle of the square; since then it has been known as the 'Place Stanislas'.

The square has always been used for public assemblies and festivities. It has undergone several makeovers in its history and, in a low period of appreciation, served as a car parking area for nearly a quarter of a century, between 1958 and 1983.

The city has since reserved it for pedestrian use. In 2004 and 2005, the city undertook a massive restoration of the square, based on the original 18th-century plans. The ten-month project cost approximately 9 million euros. It was financed by a combination of city and local, regional, national and private funds. The inauguration of the new Place Stanislas, in May 2005, coincided with the square's 250th anniversary.

The Place Stanislas is 125 metres (410 ft) long and 106 metres (348 ft) wide. It is paved with light ochre stones, with two lines of darker stones forming a diagonal cross motif. The square is surrounded by an architecturally harmonious ensemble of buildings, most notably these:

The Arc Héré, a triumphal arch built by Emmanuel Héré de Corny, stands in the centre of the fourth side, leading to the adjoining Place de la Carrière, where the main axis is developed as a double avenue of trees, with symmetrical buildings facing each other down its length.

The far end is defined by the hemi-cycles of colonnades that enclose the sides and are carried across the pre-existing façade of the Palais du Gouvernement.

The four corners and the west and east sides of the square feature gilded wrought iron gates and lanterns, created by Jean Lamour (1698–1771) ; who was also responsible for the wrought iron balustrade on the main staircase in the Hôtel de Ville, and the balcony across the centre of its main façade. The north-west and north-east corners also feature ornate fountains designed by Barthélémy Guibal (1699–1757). Because of these gates, Nancy is nicknamed City with Golden Gates (Ville aux Portes d'Or).

The statue in the centre of the Place Stanislas, created by Georges Jacquot, represents Stanislas standing, dressed in flowing robes, holding a sword in his left hand and pointing towards the north with his right hand. The inscriptions on the high marble pedestal read:

The Hôtel de Ville (City Hall), also known as Palais de Stanislas (Stanislas's Palace), is the largest building in the square at 98 metres long, and occupies the whole south side of the square. Built in 1752–1755, it has served as the city hall since its construction. It was designated as a monument historique on 12 July 1886.

Plan Bleu was a shipbuilding effort by the French Navy proposed in 1972 to reform and modernize the fleet by 1985. Ordered as a 15-year procurement plan under Georges Pompidou, it was intended to bolster the surface fleet to avoid obsolescence and over-emphasis on ballistic missile submarines. However, a lack of funds and continued emphasis on submarines forced the plan to be reduced, with many of the envisioned ships cancelled.

In 1969, French Premier Charles de Gaulle retired. His successor, Georges Pompidou, reiterated de Gaulle's policy of autonomy from NATO and a comprehensive French military. In 1972, Pompidou ordered the French Navy, Air Force, and Army to plan out the next 15 years of procurement. The French Navy (Marine Nationale) was eager to use the opportunity to modernize, as the post-World War II surface fleet built during the 1950s risked bulk obsolescence. De Gaulle emphasized developing ballistic missile submarines to establish a French nuclear deterrence independent from the United States, which left less funds to modernize the conventional fleet. Previous five-year plans fell apart due to a lack of money and will, and the Navy intended to use the 15-year plan to envision the size and form of the entire fleet.

The resulting plan was named Plan Bleu. The accompanying doctrine reaffirmed de Gaulle-era policy—maintain a sea-based nuclear deterrent, operate an ocean-going fleet, and defend waters around France — but differed in regards to French overseas territories. While previous policy was to maintain an active presence in the territories, it was reformed to only require the capability to defend the territories. The change occurred after France lost most of its colonies in Africa and Asia, but maintained a fleet in the Indian Ocean.

By 1985, Plan Bleu envisioned the French Navy operating two aircraft carriers, two helicopter carriers, and 300,000 tons worth of escorts and logistical vessels, including six ballistic missile submarines and 20 fleet submarines. Older surface escorts—the T 47, T 53, and T 56-class destroyers—were to be replaced by the Georges Leygues -class frigate split in two sub-designs that emphasized anti-submarine or anti-air warfare. Existing conventionally-powered submarines were to be replaced by nuclear-powered boats, and the D'Estienne d'Orves -class aviso were ordered for patrol and coastal anti-submarine operations.

Plan Bleu was approved by the National Assembly on 29 February 1972, but did not progress further in parliament. The primary issues were a lack of governmental funds due to France's economic situation and continued prioritization of ballistic missile submarines. Plan Bleu was first of the military's plans to be published, and the political push back caused the Ministry of Defence to keep the Army and Air Force's plans secret.

In June 1977, one carrier, eight fleet submarines, and eight avisos were struck from the plan. Two resulting five-year construction plans, one starting in 1971 and another in 1977, did not meet the expectation required by Plan Bleu as construction of submarines and escorts fell even shorter. Over the next decade, Plan Bleu was seen as overly optimistic, with many of the planned ships simplified or cancelled. Work on new helicopter carriers were designated PH 75 and abandoned by the late 1980s, and what was intended to be 30 new fast attack craft entered service as four Trident-class patrol boats [ fr ] which were too small for their intended use. Of the initial 24 Georges Leygues -class frigates planned, only seven anti-submarine and two Cassard -class anti-air frigates were completed. The failure of Plan Bleu was in line with similar long-term development plans of the French military, with a successor, Plan Marine 2000, having a similar fate.

Plan Calcul was a French governmental program to promote a national or European computer industry and associated research and education activities.

The plan was approved in July 1966 by President Charles de Gaulle, in the aftermath of two key events that made his government worry about French dependence on the US computer industry. In the mid-1960s, the United States denied export licenses for American-made IBM and CDC computers to the French Commissariat à l'énergie atomique in order to prevent it from perfecting its H bomb. Meanwhile, in 1964, General Electric had acquired a majority of Compagnie des Machines Bull, the largest French computer manufacturer, which had the second highest market share in France, after IBM, and was a leading IT equipment maker in Europe. Following this partial takeover, known as "Affaire Bull", GE-Bull dropped two Bull computers from its product line.

Responsibility for administering the plan was given to a newly created government agency, Délégation générale à l'informatique [ fr ] (Information Bureau), answering directly to the prime minister.

As part of the program, in December 1966, the Compagnie Internationale d'Informatique (CII) was established as a manufacturer of commercial and scientific computers, initially under licence from Scientific Data Systems. The new company was intended to compete not only in the process control and military market, where its staff was already seasoned, but also in the office computing sector of the French market, where IBM and Bull were dominant at the time. The plan enacted government subsidies for CII between 1967 and 1971, and was reconducted for another four years. A minor side of the plan was devoted to peripherals, while CII's main parent company, Thomson-CSF, received government support to develop its semiconductor plants and R & D. Overall, while CII mainframes benefitted from preferential procurement by the French government, the Plan Calcul left peripherals, components and small computers makers to compete on the free market. The same went for software companies, which were already thriving in France.

On the research side, the program also led to the creation of L'Institut de recherche en informatique et en automatique (IRIA) in 1967, which later became INRIA. It was accompanied with a vast educational effort in programming and computer science.

In the late 1960s, CII announced its new, internally designed mainframes Iris 50 [1970] and Iris 80 [1971], and developed a mini-computer, Mitra 15 (1971), which became a commercial success in the following decade. The company also was a minority participant in the production of magnetic peripherals thru part ownership of Magnetic Peripherals Inc.

As of 1971 IBM had more than 50% market share in almost every European country. Information Bureau head Maurice Allègre [ fr ] warned that international cooperation was necessary, however, as "something must happen or there won't be a European computer industry". The French government had spent more than $100 million on Plan Calcul in the first five years, and planned to spend more than that amount in the next five. France expected CII to reach $200 million in revenue before 1975. That year, CII began negotiations with Siemens and Philips to form a joint European company, Unidata, which shipped its first computers in 1974. Yet a new President of the Republic was elected then, former Finance minister Giscard d'Estaing, who was a strong opponent of the Plan Calcul; meanwhile, CII's sleeping partner, CGE-Alcatel, woke up to oppose the domination of its archrival Siemens over the European computer industry. Unidata was terminated and CII was absorbed into Honeywell-Bull in 1976.

This government initiative was ultimately deemed a failure.

The Paris–Lyon–Marseille Laws, commonly abbreviated to the PLM Laws (lois PLM), are a set of French laws that define how the municipal councils and mayors of the country’s three largest cities— Paris, Lyon and Marseille —are elected. The first of these PLM laws dates from 1982, and the second from 2025.

The legislation was championed by Interior Minister Gaston Defferre and was adopted in the context of the Defferre laws, or decentralisation laws, passed in March of that year. Under the Defferre laws, the arrondissements of each city had their local town halls (mairies d'arrondissement) — which were previously local annexes of the central city hall run by city appointees — converted into arrondissement councils (conseils d'arrondissement) in Paris and Lyon and elected sector councils in Marseille (where sectors group multiple arrondissements). While being locally elected and similar in operation to a municipal council (conseil municipal), they have very few powers and are not full-service municipalities. They cannot raise taxes and instead administer budgets delegated by the central city hall.

The first of the PLM laws, Law No. 82-1170 of 31 December 1982, amended provisions of the French Electoral Code relating to the election of members of the Council of Paris and the municipal councils of Lyon and Marseille, establishing a special electoral status for the three most populous communes in France. Under the 1982 PLM electoral system, municipal elections in Paris, Lyon and Marseille were organised at the arrondissement (Paris and Lyon) or sector level (Marseille). Voters elected an arrondissement/sector council using the two-round proportional list system used in French communes of 1,000+ inhabitants. Approximately one third of those elected also sat on the citywide municipal council (or on the Council of Paris), and it is that citywide council that then elected the city’s mayor (as in other French communes). The arrondissement/sector council then elected its own mayor (the arrondissement/sector mayor) after the city mayoral election.

In 2025, the second PLM law, Law No. 2025-795 of 11 August 2025, was passed. It substantially modifies the municipal electoral system in Paris, Lyon and Marseille and applies for the first time at the municipal elections scheduled for March 2026. The reform replaces the earlier “single, arrondissement/sector-based” election with two simultaneous ballots: one citywide ballot to elect councillors of Paris / the municipal councillors of Lyon and Marseille, and a second ballot to elect arrondissement/sector councillors. Both ballots use a two-round proportional list system, but the majority bonus is reduced to 25% for the citywide municipal ballot (while remaining 50% for the arrondissement/sector ballot). As elsewhere in France, the mayor of the city continues to be elected indirectly by the citywide council at its first sitting following the election.

Members of the Council of Paris and the municipal councils of Marseille and Lyon are elected using a specific electoral system: each of these communes is divided into sectors (in Lyon each arrondissement constitutes a sector; in Marseille two arrondissements form a sector; in Paris, arrondissements 1, 2, 3 and 4 are grouped into one sector, and each of the other arrondissements constitutes its own sector). In each sector, an election is held according to the rules applicable to communes with more than 1,000 inhabitants—every six years, by direct universal suffrage, using party-list proportional representation with a majority bonus.

Within each sector, one third of elected members sit both on the municipal council and on the arrondissement/sector council; the others sit only on the arrondissement/sector council:

The PLM law creates an elected arrondissement or sector council (conseil d'arrondissement ou de secteur), chaired by an elected arrondissement or sector mayor (maire d'arrondissement ou de secteur), for each municipal arrondissement (or sector) in the three cities. The arrondissement/sector council includes the municipal councillors elected in the arrondissement (or sector), as well as additional councillors in a number that varies by arrondissement (or sector), taken from the candidate lists immediately following those elected to the municipal council. The number of arrondissement/sector councillors is double the number of municipal councillors, but may not be fewer than ten or more than forty.

The arrondissement/sector council is chaired by the arrondissement/sector mayor, elected from among the municipal councillors of the relevant arrondissement or sector. This election takes place eight days after the election of the mayor of the commune.

The mayor prepares and implements the deliberations of the arrondissement/sector council. The mayor authorises expenditure and receipts within the arrondissement/sector budget framework. Deputy mayors of arrondissement/sectors are elected under the same conditions as the arrondissement/sector mayor and may receive delegated responsibilities.

The arrondissement/sector mayor and their deputies serve as civil registry officers and are responsible within the arrondissement/sector for the functions that fall to the commune’s mayor in matters of civil registration, school affairs linked to the enforcement of compulsory education, and responsibilities under the National Service Code.

The arrondissement/sector mayor chairs the arrondissement school fund (caisse des écoles) and gives opinions on planning authorisations (building permits, etc.) and road occupation permissions issued by the mayor of the commune in the commune’s name. The mayor is also consulted on proposed acquisitions or sales of buildings planned by the commune within the arrondissement or sector, as well as on declarations submitted by owners under the right of first refusal (droit de préemption urbain).

As noted above, the arrondissement/sector council elects the arrondissement/sector mayor from among the members of the municipal council, using the same procedures as the election of commune mayors.

The arrondissement/sector council may submit written questions to the commune mayor or request a debate in the municipal council on any matter affecting the arrondissement or sector.

Meetings of arrondissement/sector councils are public.

To exercise these powers, the arrondissement/sector mayor has commune employees assigned to them. Authority over evaluation, promotion, or disciplinary action is exercised by the commune mayor after consultation with the arrondissement/sector mayor.

The PLM law provides that the two local authorities established on the territory of Paris (the commune and the department) are henceforth administered by common bodies: the Mayor of Paris and the Council of Paris.

The powers of the Mayor of Paris remain limited by the specific powers of the Prefecture of Police, stemming in particular from the decree of the consuls of 12 Messidor Year VIII (1 July 1800), which set out the functions of the Prefect of Police in Paris, and by subsequent amending texts.

At the promulgation of the PLM law carried by Interior Minister Gaston Defferre, the sectors in Paris and Lyon followed arrondissement boundaries, while in Marseille the sectors were defined by a special division, each grouping between one and four arrondissements. Two months later, during the March 1983 municipal election in Marseille, Gaston Defferre was re-elected mayor of Marseille with fewer votes than Jean-Claude Gaudin, while nonetheless winning a majority of sectors.

In 2001, Gérard Collomb and Bertrand Delanoë became mayors of Lyon and Paris for the first time in similar circumstances, as did Anne Hidalgo in Paris in 2020, and—according to some—also in 2014.

Thus, the electoral system used to elect the mayors of Paris, Lyon and Marseille can result in the election of a mayor who is in the minority in the popular vote, a phenomenon also observed with the indirect system used to elect the President of the United States, which has on several occasions produced presidents without a popular-vote majority.

Although it has never happened, it is theoretically possible for a mayor to be elected while being in the minority both in votes and in sectors won. For example, in Paris in 2020, a candidate receiving 50.1% of the vote in head-to-head races in the 10th, 13th to 16th, and 18th to 20th arrondissements (8 sectors out of 17), and 0% in the others, would obtain 82 of the 163 seats in the Council of Paris—enough to be elected mayor—with only 31.65% of the citywide popular vote. This share could be lowered further by imagining three- or four-way races rather than head-to-head contests in those arrondissements.

This same two-round party-list proportional system with a 50% majority bonus by sector was adopted for the election of the Metropolis of Lyon council under the 2015 MAPTAM law. However, the effects of electing a majority of metropolitan councillors with a minority of votes would be far more problematic than for municipal elections in Paris, Marseille and Lyon, given that the metropolitan level now holds nearly all powers in the Lyon urban area.

While he could have only been a candidate in only one arrondissement of Lyon, Louis Pradel came up with the idea during the 1965 municipal election of having all of his running-mates join an association called “P.R.A.D.E.L.” (P our la R éalisation A ctive D es E spérances L yonnaises) and including on ballot papers used in each of the city’s nine arrondissements the wording “Liste P.R.A.D.E.L.” (the Electoral Code preventing him from including his name). Voters for any of his nine lists thus knew which potential future mayor they were supporting. The strategy was so successful that Pradel won all arrondissements in the first round—thus winning all nine arrondissement town halls and the central city hall—and his four successors used the same tactic.

The law modifying the rules for electing the mayors of Paris, Lyon and Marseille was assented to on 11 August 2025 and published in the Journal officiel on 12 August 2025. The new law will apply for the first time at the municipal elections scheduled for March 2026. The 2025 law introduces two separate elections held at the same time. Voters therefore vote on the same day both to elect arrondissement/sector councillors and to elect municipal councillors for the commune as a whole. These elections use a two-round party-list proportional representation system. For the municipal election only, the new law reduces the majority bonus for the list finishing first in the first or second round to 25% (compared with 50% in other French communes and in arrondissements/sectors).

An article was added by MPs to codify the Paris City Hall practice of regularly convening arrondissement mayors to discuss topics of their choosing, and to extend this possibility to Lyon and Marseille. The General Code of Territorial Collectivities was therefore amended to provide in the three cities for a new coordination body known as the “conference of mayors” (conférence des maires).

Plombières is a type of French ice cream made with almond extract, kirsch, and candied fruit.

The origin of plombières ice cream is disputed. It is unclear whether its name refers to the commune of Plombières-les-Bains. A folk etymology suggests that the dish was first served to Napoleon III at the signing of the Treaty of Plombières in 1858; but Marie-Antoine Carême provided a recipe for "plombière cream" in his 1815 book, Pâtissier royal parisien. Similar recipes can be found in other French cookbooks from the 19th century.

According to Pierre Lacam in 1893, "plombière cream" takes its name from a utensil used to make it. A similar etymological theory was proposed by Joseph Favre in his book Dictionnaire universel de cuisine, which says that "plombière is a synonym for bombe, which is used to grind the ingredients of the dish". Other scholars have suggested that the dessert takes its name from the mold in which the cream is pressed.

Plombières ice cream is mentioned in Splendeurs et misères des courtisanes, published in 1844 by Honoré de Balzac.

Plombières should not be confused with Malaga ice cream, a vanilla ice cream served with dried raisins soaked in Malaga wine or rum.

In the Soviet Union, plombir (Russian : пломбир) became a popular dish that is still seen in post-Soviet states.

Plover eggs were a form of eggs as food, and a seasonal delicacy of western Europe. Gathered from wild green-plover nests, a practice called plover egging, these eggs were perceived to be particularly flavorful and were snatched up by avid rural foragers and, in turn, their urban customers, as soon as nesting season began each year. In the manorial accounts of Nathaniel Bacon of Stiffkey in Norfolk, there is an entry in the 3 months to 24 March 1593 for 9 shillings paid "to Lodes & Tayler for 12 daies worke in makeinge of neaces {niches} for pewetes at Langham water", suggesting that plover egg collecting was here a commercial activity. The ground-nesting green plover is more formally the northern lapwing, binomial name Vanellus vanellus. Golden plover (Pluvialis apricaria) nests were egged when they could be found.

According to British forager and food writer Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall, for the better part of a century, from the age of Victoria until the coming of the Second World War, plover eggs were "the sine qua non of the society picnics of the early Summer Season." In 1977, New York Times food writer Craig Claiborne mentioned plover eggs as a luxury foodstuff in the rarefied company of truffles, cockscomb, foie gras, caviar, and "nightingale's tongue." Plover eggs are called œufs de pluvier in French, and regenvogel-eier in German.

In the late 19th century, from March through May each year, plover eggs were sold in "enormous quantities" at "extraordinary" prices in London and other major cities of Britain. Plover eggs were said to have a flavor of "supreme delicacy." When unavailable in England, supplies came from Scotland, Ireland, and the Netherlands, and when genuine plover eggs were unavailable, fake plover eggs were sometimes passed into the market. Redshank and seabird eggs were said to be the most convincing counterfeits, and if nothing else was available a quick paint job of any eggs approximately the right size might do the trick. Seagull's eggs, especially the eggs of black-headed gulls, had the right look but one writer claimed "an epicure must at once detect the difference in flavor." True lapwing eggs are "pear-shaped" with a buff background and black speckles. Another source described them as "olive-brown, spotted and dashed at the larger end with a darker umber color." In the 1920s, "nice little moss-covered baskets with spotted green eggs" were served at fine restaurants and hotels.

One 1934 newspaper in West Lothian, Scotland wrote about plover egging, and an apparent decline in the regional population of lapwings:

...our native lapwings are found in very small numbers when compared with a past generation. Long ago all marsh lands gave local employment in gathering plovers' eggs for the London epicures. From an old diary I note that one man in Norfolk alone sent away between 500 and 600 eggs weekly during March, April, and May.

A Shropshire gamekeeper 's son wrote a memoir of his childhood, spent hunting and foraging the Long Mynd, in which he described the annual process of plover egging. Come spring, London retailer Fortnum & Mason would send their family empty wooden crates, each meant to hold 36 eggs.

Plovers always nested on the drier spots using mole hills to use for their scratching (scrapes) or nests. If the hen had started to sit the eggs would all be in a circle, pointing in, they were no use for eating and were left to hatch. The eggs we would collect would be on sale in London the next day. As with oysters, eaten raw. Our reputation at Fortnum & Mason relied on freshness, a definite must. Daily on our way home from school [we hunted for eggs]. At home, a bit of Ahub's fine sawdust in the boxes, eggs placed in always pointing the same way, looking most professional...Fortnum's always paid by postal order but we never saw any of the money, it all went into Mother's rainy-day fund to pay for the material to make all our clothes or buy shoes.

— Bill Tuer, A Prince Among Poachers (2004)

Despite Tuer's claim that plover's eggs were always eaten raw, Escoffier has several recipes for cooked plover eggs. Boiling them seems to have been particularly common. Another source says plover's eggs were typically served as hors d'oeuvres. An 1802 British cookery book recommended two possible approaches: "Boil them 20 minutes, and when they are cool, peel and wipe them dry; then lay them in a dish, and put chopped savory jelly round and between them, with slices of lemon and bunches of pickled barberries round the rim of the dish. Or they may be served, either peeled or not, in ornamental paper or wax baskets, with picked parsley under them; or they may be sent to table hot in a napkin."

During World War I, a British newspaper writer suggested that citizens supplement their limited wartime diets with plover eggs, gull eggs, jackdaw eggs, and moorhen eggs. After World War II, gull's eggs filled the niche once occupied by plover's eggs, which had become harder to obtain because of diminishing lapwing populations and increased regulation. In 1955, the American magazine The Atlantic quoted a Londoner about the transition: "There were two reasons for plover eggs. They were expensive, and it enraged the nature lovers to have people eating them. Perhaps the same will be true of gull eggs. It’s fun, you know, to stir up the nature lovers every so often."

Collecting wild bird eggs has generally been illegal in the UK since 1954 (although black-headed gull-egg collection is permitted under special licence), although one of several exemptions that existed until 1969 was that plover eggs could legally be collected until April 15 of each year. By the 1970s, once-declining populations of the northern lapwing were said to have made a "splendid recovery." Since the 1990s, Fortnum & Mason, the "epicurean Mecca on Piccadilly," no longer sells wild-bird eggs due to possible inadvertent ecological damage and concerns about illegal egg harvesting.

This food provides crucial atmospherics in Evelyn Waugh 's 1945 novel Brideshead Revisited, wherein "the importance of beauty, good wine, amusing banter, and fresh plover's eggs" serve as central motivations for the main characters.

Podium girls, formally known as "tour hostesses" (French : hôtesses du Tour), are women who are best known for presenting prizes and kisses to the winners of the Tour de France and other major cycle races, including the Giro d'Italia and Vuelta a España. In the Tour de France, a team of four podium girls is employed by the race's main sponsor, the French bank LCL S.A. They are responsible for entertaining clients of the sponsors before the morning departure of the race and in parties after the end of the race, but their most visible and prestigious role is in the award ceremony at the close of each day's racing. The job requires working long hours in all weather conditions but is well-paid and sought-after, with candidates selected on the basis of their looks, endurance, personalities, and linguistic abilities. Although they are forbidden to interact with the riders, other than kissing them in the award ceremonies, several podium girls have ended up marrying cyclists.

The employment of podium girls has prompted a certain amount of criticism about sexism in professional cycling, though current and former podium girls have defended their role as part of the sport's traditions. In 2020, the Tour de France no longer has podium girls; instead, one male and one female host carry out the prize presentations.

The women work as ambassadors for the race's sponsors, serving drinks and snacks to clients and VIPs in the morning, presenting prizes in the afternoon and hosting parties in the evening. According to one Tour de France podium girl, Anne-Marie, "we start every day between 6 am and 7 am. We're present in the 'departure village' at the LCL stand to attend the departure of the caravan and the race." During the awards ceremony at the end of each stage, two of the women, working in pairs on alternate days, present the winning riders with their jerseys and prizes and give them a kiss on the cheek. In the evening, says Anne-Marie, "we often host parties for LCL with gifts to win."

The most prestigious part of a podium girl's Tour is the final presentation ceremony in Paris, which is seen worldwide in photographs and on television. However, only two of the four women get to carry out the ceremony. According to Sophie Moressee-Pichot of LCL, the decision on which women to select comes down to "who will photograph the best on that day, and some women might have a pimple or might look tired in the eyes."

Podium girls were originally selected from the population of the town where each day's finishing stage was held, and the only requirements were for them to be under 30 and about the same height as each other. Today, they are selected from applications put forward by modelling agencies or individual applicants. The women are chosen by the sponsors of the four coloured racing jerseys (yellow, green, polka dot, and white) awarded to those leading in particular categories. Although the hours are long – often over 12 hours per day and in all weather conditions – the job is well-paid, at a rate of about €1,000–2,000 for three weeks' work, and food and accommodation are provided.

The women are selected not just for their looks, but for their endurance, personality and linguistic abilities as well. Many are students; in the 2009 Tour de France, three of the four podium girls were students. One woman, Elisabeth Petzl, was a doctoral candidate in political science who could speak four languages. Laura Antoine, a former showgirl from Paris who worked as a podium girl in the 2010 Tour de France, was chosen because of "her upbeat personality, her willingness to work long hours without complaint and her ability to speak French and English". According to Laura, "They asked me if I could share a bathroom with two other girls for a month and if I could drive a car up a mountain if I needed to. Then they asked me about my endurance level and if I could smile even if I’m tired. And I said I could work all day, with a smile. I quickly realized that hey, this isn’t as glamorous as I thought it was."

The podium girls are only allowed very limited interaction with the riders; they can present prizes and jerseys, help the riders put the jerseys on, and kiss the riders on their cheeks, but are not allowed to talk with them. Transgressions are a disciplinary offence for both sides; during the 2003 Tour de France, one of the podium girls, Melanie Simonneau, was dismissed for accepting a note from rider George Hincapie, while in April 2013, Slovak cyclist Peter Sagan videoed an apology after he pinched the buttocks of Tour of Flanders podium girl Maya Leye during an awards ceremony.

Following Simonneau's departure from the Tour, she eventually married Hincapie, and now has three children with him. Hincapie admits that he "pretty much ended up chasing her throughout the entire Tour de France," though she told him that she was "totally not allowed to talk to you." Nonetheless, they began exchanging text messages and meeting in the departure villages before she was given an ultimatum to choose Hincapie or the job. She chose Hincapie, left the Tour three days before the finish, and now says that it was "the best thing I ever did." Another podium girl, Laura Leturgie from Bethune, married Belgian rider Gert Steegmans after the 2007 Tour de France. According to the German cyclist Jens Voigt, they are not the only podium girls who have married riders: "I could name 10 off the top of my head."

Although podium girls are a long-standing tradition in European cycle racing, they have attracted some controversy. Laura Weislo of Cyclingnews.com has criticised the way that professional cycling has reduced women to "just beautiful ornaments to stand beside successful men". She comments that "the only time that you see a female presence on television in professional cycling is the models on the podium, and it only heightens the inequality in the sport." Kelly Riordan, a former cyclo-cross podium girl who now works as a journalist, rejects this: "It wouldn't be a proper ceremony without them. These are talented women in their own right. They shouldn't be dismissed simply as eye candy." Magalie Thierry, who has worked as a Tour de France podium girl in 2012 and 2013, describes the podium as "just 'a plus'". Maybe the ceremony could seem out of date, but most of the public loves it. I think podium girls give a little touch of femininity to this sport."

While acknowledging that the Tour de France is very male-dominated – there were no Women's Tours before 2022 – Tour director Christian Prudhomme has said that he is trying to bring women into the management of the Tour. For the 2009 Tour, he selected champion cyclist Claire Pedrono to ride pillion on a motorcycle ahead of the riders, holding up the tour blackboard to give them time information. It is regarded as a prestigious role, and Prudhomme says that he gave it to Pedrono "because of her accomplishments as a cyclist. But I have to be honest with you, it also doesn’t hurt that she has a nice smile."

The Vuelta a España stopped using podium girls in 2017.

Beginning with the 2020 edition of the race, the role of podium girl was removed from the Tour de France. Instead, one male and one female host present the prizes. This decision was attributed to the sexism of viewing women as "objects or rewards", but also to the need to reduce the number of people on the podium and the physical contact of cheek kissing as a social distancing measure during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Poitevin (French pronunciation: [ pwat(ə)vɛ̃ ] ; endonym : poetevin) is a dialect of Poitevin–Saintongeais, one of the regional languages of France, spoken in the historical province of Poitou, now administratively divided between Pays de la Loire (Loire countries) and Nouvelle-Aquitaine (New Aquitaine). It is not as commonly spoken as it once was, as the standard form of French now predominates. Poitevin is now classified as one of the langues d'oïl but is distinguished by certain features adopted from Occitan (lenga d'òc).

The language is spoken on what was the border between the two language families of oïl and oc (placenames in the region clearly show historical settlement of oc speakers). The langue d’oïl subsequently spread south, absorbing oc features.

Poitevin is also widely referred to as parlanjhe (the language). François Rabelais wrote that he learned this dialect, along with many other languages and dialects, since he was educated in Fontenay-le-Comte. François Villon spoke some Poitevin as well.

The earliest attested written use of the language is in charters and legal documents dating from the 13th century; people who spoke it were known as the Poitevins. The earliest printed text is dated 1554 (La Gente Poitevinrie). A tradition of theatrical writing and dramatic monologues for performance typifies the literary output in the language, although from the 19th century and in the 20th century (especially with the publication of a weekly paper Le Subiet from 1901) regular journalistic production was also established. Geste Editions publishes a number of books in/about the Poitevin–Santongeais language. Some linguists assert that the Serments de Strasbourg, the first text in French according to the official state position in France, were actually written in Poitevin.

In 1973, a standard orthography was proposed.

The easternmost part of the Poitou région is home to a minority of Occitan -speakers.

Police collaboration in Vichy France was part of the Vichy government's external political objectives and emerged as an essential tool of collaboration in meeting its policy of collaboration with Nazi Germany during World War II.

On 14 August 1941, a decree signed by Philippe Pétain required all civil servants to take an oath of loyalty to him. An official ceremony took place for the police on 20 January 1942, during which 3,000 delegates from the Paris Guard, the National Police and the Police Prefecture met in the great hall of the Palais de Chaillot, under the presidency of Pierre Pucheu, Minister of the Interior. After the Peacekeepers' Band played La Marseillaise, the oath was taken in these terms: "I swear loyalty to the Head of State in everything he commands in the interest of the service, public order and the good of the country". To which all the police officers present responded by raising their arms and saying: "I swear it".

French police carried out numerous round-ups (French: rafles) of Jews during World War II, including the Green ticket roundup in May 1941, the round-up in the 11th arrondissement of Paris in August 1941 in which 4,200 persons were arrested and interned at Drancy, the massive Vélodrome d'Hiver round-up in 1942 in which over 13,000 Jews were arrested, the rafle of Clermont-Ferrand (25 November 1943), and the roundup in the Old Port of Marseille in 1943. Almost all of those arrested were deported to Auschwitz or other death camps.

The Centre for Analysis, Planning and Strategy (Centre d’analyse, de prévision et de stratégie, or CAPS, formerly known as Centre d'analyse et de prévision (or Centre for Analysis and Planning), and then as Direction de la prospective (or Directorate for Foresight) is a think tank within the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs, tasked with making strategic recommendations to the Foreign Minister and ensuring a French presence in European and international debates and institutions. It is the French counterpart to the US State Department ’s Policy Planning Staff. It is currently headed by diplomat Manuel Lafont Rapnouil, who was appointed by Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian in July 2019.

The director of the CAPS reports directly to the Minister and is sometimes a member of his cabinet. The CAPS is tasked with performing three tasks with complete independence of approach and expression:

In spite of its small size, the Centre enjoys a solid reputation and has become known internationally for being a source of intellectual and diplomatic talent.

Its PIPA program (Programme d’invitation des personnalités d’avenir – an invitation program for young foreign leaders), established in 1989, which hosts about 75 young leaders (under 45) a year, seeks to present the select few who are chosen with an unvarnished image of contemporary France and establish friendly ties with them. Since its creation, the program has hosted over 2,000 personalities from over 150 countries.

The CAPS is made quite unique by the diversity of its team: it is made up of career diplomats, but also civil servants from different ministries, most often Defence and Finance, academics and other experts. Its specificity is particularly marked in the manner with which its team handles topics: indeed, its officials frequently assess situations by using data that originates out of the traditional diplomatic channels, whether in universities, think tanks or specialised services at home or abroad. It also has the resources necessary to commission expert analyses from external sources.

This makes it a source of independent and sometimes critical analyses vis-à-vis the government’s policies. It is for instance mentioned for its dissenting analyses, carried out by external consultants, in the Duclert report on France, Rwanda and the Tutsi genocide. Its mission is also to present alternatives and new options and ideas. It has a certain liberty of speech outside of the administration, and its members frequently publish and partake in conferences, activities which serve to heighten its status on the international scene.

The Centre d’analyse et de prévision, as it was first called, was set up on 18 May 1974 by then-Foreign Minister Michel Jobert, who wanted to implement some institutionalised out-of-the-box thought. The decree establishing its existence states its purpose as “contributing to the preparation of decisions in foreign affairs” by “analysing current situations” and “conducting attempts at foreseeing future evolutions”. Despite having changed names two times since then, it has remained a constant source of doctrine for ministers.

The CAPS has a history of renowned directors, either academics or career diplomats.

Polish immigration to the Nord-Pas-de-Calais coalfield took place before and especially after the First World War. It took place mainly in the second half of the 1920s, when the mines, drowned in October and November 1918 by the Germans at the end of the war, were once again usable. Half of the Polish immigrants had initially entered Germany as Westphalian miners.

Several thousand were sent home in the five years following the 1929 crash, sometimes for strike action. A number of them were killed in the International Brigades, during the Spanish Civil War and then in the Resistance, particularly during the Patriotic Strike of the 100,000 miners of Nord-Pas-de-Calais in May–June 1941.

Between 1945 and 1949, when the battle for coal was being waged to combat electricity shortages in several countries, 62,000 Poles from France; returned to Poland via a " reemigracja ", first spontaneous and then organized, including 5,000 miners from Nord-Pas-de-Calais, many of them communists who wanted to rebuild their country, despite or because of the arrival in power of the socialist government set up by the Soviet Union in September 1944.

Between 1900 and 1913, the mines of Lorraine had been under German control since 1871, when the region was annexed by the German Empire, and only a third of French miners were still housed in the corons since the workforce came from Belgium for the Nord département, and from neighboring villages for the Pas-de-Calais.

French coal production rose by a quarter in the first decade of the century, from 33 to 40 million tonnes. Productivity was still low: only one tonne per man per day in 1913, but the expansion of electric power created strong demand, which companies were anxious to make profitable. In 1906, the terrible Courrières mine disaster killed nearly 1,100 miners working for Compagnie de Courrières, France's leading mining company. The company first recruited 900 miners in Kabylia, followed by the first Poles in 1909 and 1910.

The Poles who first arrived at the Compagnie de Courrières were called Westphalian miners because they had come from the German Ruhr, where they had learned to handle the jackhammer. Among them was union leader Thomas Olszanski. On the recommendation of Polish Prince Witold Czartoryski, a shareholder in the Compagnie des Mines d'Anzin, the company also recruited 620 Westphalians. Satisfactory Westphalian miners were also recruited in Barlin, Lallaing, Guesnain, and Wallers by the Compagnie de Nœux and the Compagnie d'Aniche. At the beginning of 1913, Polish families settled in Méricourt, in the old housing estates known as "Méricourt-Coron", according to the testimony of a Polish miner of the time.

In January 1915, at the start of the First World War, the companies decided to disperse some of the "Westphalians" to the Massif Central, to Cransac in Aveyron, Roche-la-Molière and Saint-Etienne in the Loire, and Alais in the Gard. In a context of heightened patriotism, the aim was to guard against the mistrust aroused by their long stay in Germany, where many of them had even been born. Around 80 of them arrived in Cransac, Aveyron, including Thomas Olszanski from Compagnie de Courrières.

Throughout France, around two-thirds of the Poles recruited as farm workers went into industry as soon as they could, as the demand for labor was very high due to the accelerating growth of the French economy from 1924 onwards.

Under pressure from the Allies, Germany gave Westphalians of Polish origin the option of Polish nationality from 1919, enabling them to return to Poland. The trend in the 19th century was to " Germanize ", although this was mitigated by the German Empire from 1887 onwards. The Westphalians who returned, whose numbers are not well known, discovered very high unemployment and the crushing of the Silesian uprising by 21,000 Reichswehr soldiers in the summer of 1919. Faced with the beginnings of the Polish-Soviet War, they often preferred to leave again, but for France, which had set out to seduce them, via Myslowice and Toul, where Paris had set up an immigration office, rather than return to Germany, where the social situation was very tense, leading in March 1920 to the Ruhr uprising.

By the end of 1919, the French Ministry of Labor had opened a "Mission française de la Main d'œuvre" in Warsaw, which organized the first convoy from Poland to France on 14 December 1919. It soon had to move to Czestochowa, against the backdrop of the Polish-Soviet War, which began on 14 February 1920, with a first conflict near Biaroza, in Belarus. Employers tried to avoid hiring workers from the Dąbrowa Górnicza mining basin in the Silesian Voivodeship, where numerous strikes had accompanied the attempted Russian Revolution of 1905. However, the labor shortage meant that many workers were hired from 1923 onwards, especially as they had professional credentials. Competence criteria were introduced. At Myslowice, on the outskirts of Katowice in Silesia, applicants were only accepted if they had two years of experience in the underground, including eight months in coal mining.

French mining companies increased their efforts to recruit in Germany, a country defeated by the world war, where mining activity was in any case made difficult by the confrontations in the Ruhr, which caused 2,400 deaths, in addition to 35,600 political assassinations. In response, from 6 April, France temporarily occupied Frankfurt and Darmstadt. In March 1921, the Allies decided to occupy Duisburg and Düsseldorf. In March 1922, the Coal Committee opened an office in Duisburg, in the Ruhr, and it was in the summer of 1922 that the largest number of Polish miners arrived in Pas-de-Calais.

Bruay-en-Artois became known as the "Polish capital" or "Czestochowa" and Poles became the majority, sometimes accounting for as much as 70% of the population in the western part of the coalfield: Sallaumines, Aniche, Ostricourt, Libercourt.

The Compagnie de Bruay was the only one immediately operational. It had mined 4.5 million tonnes in 1917, compared with two million in 1914, and was once again faced with a severe productivity constraint. In September 1920, it succeeded in recruiting Westphalian miners accustomed to using jackhammers in the German Ruhr: initially, 80 came to Marles-les-Mines, and 14 to Bruay, the companies hoping that they would then quickly convince their compatriots in the Ruhr to follow them.

After the Franco-Polish governmental conference of 5 June 1920, the Compagnie de Bruay built 1,600 houses for them in three years. They came with their families demanding high-quality housing and set up some forty associations in Bruay. In Marles-les-Mines, 3,000 houses were built by the Compagnie des Mines de Marles to accommodate the "Westphalians". In neighboring Lapugnoy, other Poles arrived from Poland, without family or furniture, by boat and then by train, via the Chocques station, this time to be installed in barracks. Some left because of the poor reception conditions, others after a one-year trial period.

Around 800 Poles arrived in France in the first convoy on 14 December 1919. This was followed by 2,500 families in May 1922. But it was not until 1923–1924 that the first arrivals took place, as the reconstruction of the mines after the 1914–1918 war took five years.

By 1931, some 30,000 Polish families, or 200,000 people were living in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais coalfield. In the Nord département, 60.4% of Polish immigrants worked in the mines, and 90% in the Pas-de-Calais.

The mid-1920s also saw the widespread use of heavy mining machinery (jackhammers, then cutters), with no attempt to neutralize the dust, which led to a higher incidence of silicosis. Overall, French companies found it difficult to recruit in Poland, even though in March 1922 Poles were rounded up in Poznań and sent to Sallaumines, where they made up 40% of the population.

In all, between 100,000 and 130,000 Westphalian miners arrived in France, including their families.

The number of Westphalian miners of Polish origin increased a hundredfold in the decade following the First World War, but they were not the only Poles to settle in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais coalfield. Employers also recruited them directly from Poland, where some of the "Westphalians" had returned in 1919, but were unable to find work immediately because the Polish mines were in poor condition. There were also young, inexperienced miners from Poznań, whom some Frenchmen sometimes blamed for lowering shift yields.

At the turn of the century, those who came from Germany were envied for the jobs they had obtained thanks to their qualifications. In Sallaumines, between 1921 and 1926, around 30 Poles improvised as bakers, butchers, and grocers, rising to 36 by 1931, and 46 by 1936. In Bruay-en-Artois, one in three Polish miners' wives ran a store or a drinking establishment. The companies kept a watchful eye on them to "monitor their political development and union activity", as many had been union members in the German Ruhr region, but they were unable to prevent it: despite jealousies, integration was achieved through political parties and unions.

The crash of 1929 triggered the economic crisis of the 1930s. Initially, between 1930 and 1933, Polish miners were laid off for 5 to 10 days a month, depending on the coalfield.

From 1934 onwards, the dismissals accelerated. They were used to intimidate. Often, an expulsion bill was discovered by the miner on the way up, "the famous bill that scared everyone", remembers Jean Wroblewsky, a former miner and former mayor of Marles-les-Mines. In 1934 alone, the coal companies chartered 17 special trains to take their Polish workers back to the Belgian border. Between 1933 and 1936, some 20,000 Poles, either from Poznań or via the Ruhr, had to leave France, under very brutal conditions: only 48 hours to get ready, with a maximum of 30 kilos of luggage. Many had to give up everything in their homes and keep only the essentials.

In 1932, union leader Thomas Olszanski, a naturalized French citizen since 1922, who contributed to one of the two Polish-language union newspapers, Robotnik Polski ("The Polish Worker"), was stripped of his French citizenship, in the wake of his commitment to and stance in defense of the working class. A support committee for Thomas Olszanski was formed by André Malraux, Paul Nizan, Henri Barbusse, Eugène Dabit, Paul Signac, Jean and André Lurçat and Georges Friedmann.

Having exhausted his appeals, he was expelled from France in 1934, at the same time as another Polish trade unionist, Edward Gierek, who would later become Prime Minister of Poland. After returning to Belgium in 1937, Gierek returned to Poland in 1948, where he became the "strong man" of Silesia and then number one of the Polish United Workers' Party (PZPR), after the Baltic events of December 1970, initiating links with the USA and West Germany, before being ousted by General Jaruzelski 's 1981 Martial law instituting a state of siege to put an end to the growing role of the Solidarność trade union. His visit to France from 2 to 6 October 1972 was hailed by the press, even though he was still banned from the country, with an interpreter in miner's clothing and the honors of French President Georges Pompidou.

A new wave of Polish refugees, mainly military personnel fleeing from Hungary, Romania, and the Baltic states, flocked to France, and not just to the north of the country, at the time of the September 1939 defeat and formed part of the Polish Army in the Battle of France. Of a total of 34,000 Poles who had taken refuge in France and Great Britain by mid-June 1939, around 85%, or nearly 30,000, remained in France.

A Franco-Polish agreement was signed on 9 September 1939, and later expanded: what was to be a simple military division became the Polish Army in France. In June 1940, when the French were defeated, the Polish Armed Forces in the West numbered 84,461 men, including over 75,000 in France.

A quarter of these Polish soldiers (around 20,000) managed to retreat to Great Britain with the Polish government in exile in London. The units that remained in France were disbanded, and their fighters tried, often unsuccessfully, to make their way to London. From the very start of the Polish Resistance in France, which was less frequently victimized by the Gestapo because it was more experienced overall, two trends emerged: one linked to the Polish government in London, the other to workers' organizations, including the French Communist Party (PCF).

The Polish embassy and consulates in France, initially evacuated to Lisbon, took charge on their return of demobilizing some of them in some twenty "labor companies" under Polish command, mainly in the "free zone" of southern France, supervised by General Franciszek Kleeberg, appointed head of the "Polish Armed Forces in France" by General Ladislas Sikorski, Minister-president. These were the foreign workers' groups of the Vichy regime, created by the law of 27 September 1940, which set up internment camps and succeeded the foreign workers' companies, tasked with providing cheap labor: heavy work, mining, major works, agriculture, and forestry but which also provided semi-legal material aid to Polish soldiers and civilian refugees.

When the German occupation of the Nord-Pas-de-Calais coalfield began in July 1940, Polish political, cultural, and religious associations had to suspend their activities.

Many Poles had joined the Polish army before being taken prisoner in Germany, and as early as the summer of 1940, the first clandestine combat organizations bringing together Poles were created: the Polish-language sections of the PCF, which from the end of 1941 would be integrated into the MOI (Main-d'Œuvre Immigrée) branch of the Francs-Tireurs et Partisans. They suffered harsh repression. Most of the arrests of Polish resistance fighters were carried out by officers of the Renseignements Généraux of the French police, who had spied on their population in the pre-war years.

Polish miners then took part en masse in the patriotic strike of one hundred thousand miners in Nord-Pas-de-Calais in May–June 1941 which was the largest strike of the war in occupied Europe and the longest, lasting from 27 May to 10 June 1941, throughout Nord-Pas-de-Calais region and its coalfield.

Young Poles formed the military and militant backbone of the group, as many of the youngest had been at the origin of the small armed groups of the Special Organization in the Pas-de-Calais department in the summer of 1940. Their mission was to protect the miners responsible for spreading the strike message from mine to mine. Polish militants were particularly hard hit by repression in the camps to which they were deported. In the Mauthausen concentration camp, where they were most numerous, their compatriots did not support them because they were associated with the Popular Front, suspected of having contributed to Poland's situation and the German-Soviet pact of 1939.

From 1942 onwards, the German occupying forces deported several thousand Ukrainian civilians and Soviet prisoners of war to the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region to boost coal production, which had continued to decline. With this in mind, a prisoner-of-war camp was set up at Marles-les-Mines, at the foot of the slag heap at shaft number 5.

The Poles' knowledge of Russian and French facilitated contacts between Soviet nationals and the FTPF, as well as their escapes. By early 1944, the total number of Polish "language groups" in the MOI had risen to 1,370 members, then to around 2,500 by September 1944, according to written reports. Some commanded multi-national detachments, such as the 35th Brigade of the FTP-MOI, led in the South-West by Jan Gerhard and Marcel Langer.

On 15 March 1942, to counter the Polish resistance, German propaganda created an association in Douai, the "Communauté culturelle des Allemands d'origine du Nord de la France" headed by a man called "Muller", of the Kreiskommandantur, which included a majority of miners of Polish origin, notably Westphalian miners who had worked in the Ruhr and those from Poznań and Silesia, which were German before Poland gained its independence in November 1918. It also recruited Flemings, Ukrainians, and Czechoslovaks. In September 1943, it claimed 5,500 members. Its leadership was entrusted to a German from the Douai Kommandantur.

On 6 September 1941, at the request of Consul General Aleksander Kawałkowski, Poles in France were called upon to echo the founding in southern France of an organization dependent on the Polish government in exile in London, the POWN-W, commanded by Colonel Daniel Zdrojewski and linked in London with General Marian Kukiel and the French Resistance. In 1943, this resistance organization claimed some 4,000 members.

In the summer of 1943, the Polish authorities in London, in liaison with the British secret services, decided to launch the main operations under the code names of Monica (or Monika), Monique-bas (in the free zone), and Monique-haut (in the occupied zone), and then to develop a more general intelligence plan: this was Operation Bardsea, entrusted to the Polish Ministry of National Defense (MON).

Lieutenant-Colonel Antoni Zdrojewski parachuted into France to head the special "Monique-W" network, responsible for executing the plan. The operation provided the Allies with data on 120 German weapons launching pads, helping to destroy 82 of them.

But on 20 March 1944, the Polish government-in-exile issued a directive instructing the POWN to avoid "any interference with the French Resistance and Communist movements". Despite this, on 29 May 1944, Daniel Zdrojewski and Jacques Chaban-Delmas agreed to place the fighting units under the tactical command of the Forces françaises de l'intérieur.

In June 1944, Polish resistance fighters in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais coalfield were arrested in large numbers, following in the footsteps of those in southern France and Paris. Among those arrested was Jerzy Paczkowski, later executed in Hamburg-Neuengamme.

Polish resistance fighters were also active in other regions. The Mario group, in German-annexed Lorraine, was studied by Pierre Schild. According to him, out of 900 active members, 30% were non-French, including 1/3 Poles, almost all of them fellow travelers or PCF activists. In Roche-la-Molière, in the Loire department, resistance was organized by chaplain Macla Kapok. In the south-east of the département, towards Ponthieu, Polish miners joined the Francs Tireurs et Partisans (FTP) maquis, where 23 Resistance fighters were killed, including the young Polish woman Thérèse Polanski, aged 19.

In the summer of 1944, when the Allied forces were no longer very far from the regional mining basin8, Polish miners took part in the liberation battles in very large numbers, according to reports in the archives8. This was partly through the creation of the Polish Patriotic Militia, which was very active in Libercourt, Marles-les-Mines, Noeux-les-Mines, and Montigny-en-Gohelle. The Poles were particularly active in Bruay-en-Artois, where seven Poles were killed. They killed 52 German soldiers, burned two tanks and took around 300 prisoners, 4 cannons, a radio transmitter, 200 rifles and machine guns and 11 machine guns but also lost at least 19 men.

Clashes also took place in La clarence, Barlin, Hersin-Coupigny, Labourse, Courrières, Hénin-Liétard, and Lens, on the Lens-Béthune road, in Armentières, Calonne-Ricouart, and Hulluch. In the town of Sallaumines, a Polish unit pursued the Germans as far as Hazebrouck. Other Poles took part in the pursuit of the Germans to the Dunkirk pocket, where they remained besieged until April 1945. In particular, they took part in the first stage of the blockade of this port.

In the Nord department, they took part in the battles to liberate Lille and Valenciennes. Further south, they made a major contribution to the liberation of Auby, a small mining commune near Douai, where they lost six men, as well as Waziers. Putting a German column to flight near Bruay-Thiers, they freed a hundred Moroccan prisoners.

Once the fighting was over, the Poles, led by commanders Boleslaw Jelen and Boleslaw Maslankiewicz, assisted by Captain Jôzef Migos, formed units in the region, stationed at Seclin, Lewarde, Montigny-en-Ostrevent, Denain, Onnaing, and Valenciennes, then transferred to the Guesnain, Hérin and Seclin barracks. However, the French military administration (Intendance) refused to recognize the soldiers' right to pay, supplies, and family assistance.

They then joined a "Polish grouping" of the French 1st Army, comprising 1,650 soldiers, as the 29th Polish Infantry Group, under the command of Major Jan Gerhard, with the 201st RPNA, in the Besançon region, Doubs.

In the years following the Liberation of France, between 1945 and 1949, some 62,000 Poles from France are said to have returned to the mother country, first through spontaneous and then organized "reemigracja", including 5,000 miners from Nord-Pas-de-Calais, many of them former resistance fighters, to answer the call of their country, which needed to be repopulated and rebuilt.

Most went to the Polish mining basin of Silesia, where the coal was produced that Poland needed to rebuild itself, as it suffered from energy and electricity shortages, like the rest of Europe. The "reemigracja" was organized by the communist authorities in Warsaw, and gave rise to a political conflict between supporters of Poland's new government and Polish anti-communist activists in France.

Poles arriving from France then gave the streets, replacing the German names, those of resistance fighters they had met in France who had fought against Nazism, according to historian Jacques Kmieciak, a specialist in this aspect of the country's history. Among them was future Polish Prime Minister Edward Gierek, who arrived in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais mining basin in 1926 and, along with trade unionist Thomas Olszanski, led the great strike of August 1934 at the Compagnie des mines de l'Escarpelle, which resulted in the expulsion of 77 trade unionists. Broneslaw Kania, from Fouquières-les-Lens, guillotined in 1943 by the Nazis, and Joseph Burczykowski, who died in deportation to Sachsenhausen, and whose 3 sons were shot by the Nazis, and Marcel Kolorz, a member of the PCF leadership who led miners' strikes in Upper Silesia from 1920 to 1922. He also fell in 1938 at the Battle of the Ebro, the largest battle of the Spanish Civil War, as part of one of the International Brigades, the Dombrowski Battalion, named after the Polish officer Jarosław Dombrowski who took part in the Paris Commune.

Polish immigration strongly influenced mining and cultural traditions in France. A "little Poland" was born in several mining towns. The proportion of Poles reached 70% in Fouquières-lès-Lens, in the area of the Compagnie des mines de Courrières, but the arrondissement of Béthune accounted for 90% of the 135,000 Poles living in the Pas-de-Calais, which itself was home to a third of France's 150,000 Poles, including families, a proportion that rises to a third if the Nord département is added.

Poles in Westphalia played an important role in trade unionism and community life, as they had done in Germany in the 1890s. Some associations created in Westphalia were transferred to France, sometimes with the same people. The schoolteacher and the parish priest often came with the miners. Mining companies encouraged religious practice, as in Marles-les-Mines, where the Compagnie des Mines de Marles helped build a church. The Catholic religion, which had been discouraged in Germany, flourished freely in France, in all its dimensions. Numerous Rosary associations came into being, as did the Sainte-Barbe and Saint-Adalbert societies, the Sokół, a Polish youth movement founded in 1867, and the Strezelec (sports group).

The first issue of Wiarus Polski in France was published on 1 July 1924, in Lille, and printed by Le Grand Echo du Nord. Three months later, its left-wing rival Narodowiec moved to Lens in October 1924. Both titles grew very rapidly and achieved significant penetration of the Polish population. In 1926–1928, Wiarus Polski had a circulation of 10,000 but was outstripped by its left-wing rival Narodowiec, which had a circulation of 15,000. Their combined readership is estimated at 100,000. The other branch of the trade union movement, the CGT, fought back with the first issue of Prawo Ludu, another Polish-language newspaper, on 26 January 1924.

In Pas-de-Calais, the first issue of the Polish-language underground newspaper Nasz Głos ("Our Voice") was published in 1940 by Polish PCF groups, edited by Communist Józef Spira. Reports from the German police, attentive to everything that was happening in the strategic Nord-Pas-de-Calais coalfield, immediately reported the circulation of Nasz Głos among local Poles.

A "Polish Workers' Union" (ZRPF), which arrived with miners from Westphalia in 1924, already had around 100 sections and 10,000 members by 1926. But its existence in France was short-lived. The CGT organized a large proportion of Polish miners. However, in the early 1930s, the CFTC, a new religiously oriented French trade union founded in 1919 in the Paris region, had around fifteen Polish sections in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais mining basin.

Polish immigration to the Ronchamp coalfield is the largest and most influential immigration of people of Polish origin to the Ronchamp coalfield. It took place in three phases during the interwar period and strongly influenced the mining and cultural traditions of Ronchamp, which has been twinned with the town of Sułkowice in southern Poland since 2003.

In the 1850s, the Ronchamp collieries were booming, and the number of workers tripled over the decade, from 500 to 1,500. Demand for labor was so great that the neighboring communes were no longer sufficient, and the company was forced to hire foreign workers. In 1861, a dozen Piedmontese were hired at the Ronchamp mines. However, they were poorly received by the local population and management, and soon left. Later, in the 1870s, following the Kulturkampf, several Poles left their homeland, and a small number settled in Ronchamp.

During the First World War, many mobilized workers were injured, killed, or reported missing, and the government decided to recruit foreign workers to replace them. In Ronchamp, the labor problem was less acute, as miners from the Nord-Pas-de-Calais and Belgium coalfields, as well as German prisoners of war, had been employed in the mines since 1916. But at the end of the war, workers from the Nord and German prisoners (400 at the Ronchamp mines) returned home and reconstruction began. To make up for this sudden shortfall, the mines hired 200 Chinese workers. However, these workers were still frowned upon by the local population, and the miners went on strike to demand that they be removed from the shafts. These workers were hired without being trained in mining techniques, and although they represented only 20% of the workforce, they were responsible for 30% of accidents at the bottom of the mines. In 1919, Poland was experiencing strong demographic growth, while France was short of workers. On September 3, 1919, the two countries signed an immigration agreement governing the introduction of Polish workers into France. In December of the same year, the Ronchamp collieries received 112 Polish farm workers from the Warsaw region to replace the Chinese. The Poles were generally well received by the Ronchamp population, but their integration remained difficult. They had come to Ronchamp without their families, to work in an unfamiliar profession. Added to this is the language barrier and unfamiliar territory. For these reasons, most of them left. Nevertheless, with a family of five children and twenty-six singles, Polish nationality was still the third largest in Ronchamp in 1921, when immigration intensified.

When France occupied Düsseldorf and Duisburg, many Polish miners moved to Westphalia with their families, a movement that gained momentum in January 1923. The German miners went on strike, while the Poles continued to work. The French and Polish authorities advised the miners to seek employment in French mines. The Ronchamp collieries benefited from a large influx of skilled miners until 1925. In January 1924, 403 of the 972 miners were Polish. The peak of the Polish workforce was reached in September of the same year, with 581 workers.

In 1925, the proportion of Poles dropped sharply following a halt in recruitment and a poor trading situation. However, the following year, the administration noted that there were as many departures as arrivals. In 1926, Poincaré's monetary stabilization halted inflation, triggering an economic crisis in France. Many mining companies, including Ronchamp, laid off Polish workers until 1927. In 1929, the number of Polish workers at the Ronchamp mines was at its lowest, at 132.

In April 1929, the reopening of borders encouraged the return of foreigners to Ronchamp. The number of Poles arriving increased from 308 in February 1930 to 450 in January 1931. 70% of them lived in the communes of Ronchamp, Champagney, and Magny-Danigon, as close as possible to their place of work. The rest lived in neighboring communes such as Clairegoutte, Frédéric-Fontaine, and Palante. At the beginning of 1931, the Ronchamp coalfield was home to 1,017 Poles, including 424 workers, representing 90% of the foreign population and half of the workforce.

In the 1930s, the Ronchamp collieries were hit hard by the economic crisis. Despite these financial difficulties, the company remained optimistic about recovery, choosing to halt new hiring, promote voluntary redundancies, and limit layoffs. In 1934, the company suddenly decided to massively lay off its Polish workforce, and 124 miners were dismissed from the Ronchamp mines. Some were retrained as farm workers thanks to government aid, while others preferred to move to other mining areas or work in factories around Belfort and Montbéliard. The decline in the Polish workforce continued the following year when 112 workers were laid off. Additionally, Polish workers' identity cards were restricted to the département where they were issued, which limited their mobility in seeking new employment opportunities.

After 1936, mining activity picked up slightly and the mines needed new miners, so previously dismissed Poles returned to work in Ronchamp. The number of underground miners rose from 491 in December 1937 to 542 in March 1938. In 1938, the Daladier government took measures against foreigners, limiting their freedom of movement, making naturalization more difficult, and requiring them to have a health booklet. In 1939, their freedom of association was curtailed. These measures triggered social unrest in Ronchamp, which, unlike other coalfields, was not suppressed. In 1939, before France was mobilized for the Second World War, several sons of Polish immigrants refused to be naturalized in order to escape the war but were still liable to be called up to fight. In August 1940, the German authorities counted 509 Poles living in the coalfield, 163 of them employed by the mine.

Polish immigration strongly influenced Ronchamp's mining and cultural traditions. In all French coalfields, measures were taken to foster social ties between immigrants in order to boost their productivity. For example, mining housing estates were built for immigrant families, and special educational and religious programs were set up. The Poles regularly organized processions and pilgrimages specific to their customs, but local residents sometimes also took part, as on the Polish national holiday, when the “ Harmonie des houillères ”, made up entirely of French musicians, took part. Associations are also set up to maintain Polish culture in Ronchamp, including music, dance, sport, theater, art, and religion. The company and local associations also seek to bring the two communities closer together, notably through sports clubs, a Franco-Polish festival committee and small businesses. Additionally, both communities shared common mining traditions, further connecting their experiences.

After the “ Retrofolies ” came to an end in 2000, the Ronchamp festival committee decided to organize a Franco-Polish festival in honor of the former Polish miners of Ronchamp from September 14 to 16, 2001. The festival was motivated by the desire of the miners' descendants to reconnect with their homeland. Following the festival, the commune and the festival committee decided to set up a twinning arrangement with a Polish town. Research was carried out in the Krakow region, as this is where the Polish miners from Ronchamp were thought to have come from (a belief disproved by subsequent historical research). A rapprochement was quickly made with the town of Sułkowice, which was the most motivated. Over the following years, several trips were organized between the two towns. The twin town was formalized on September 21, 2003, when the two mayors, Raymond Massinger and Joseph Mardaus, signed a parchment. The twinning took place against the backdrop of Poland's accession to the European Union.

As part of the cultural development policy of the Ballons des Vosges regional nature park, a contemporary dance show is created in Ronchamp by the festival committee to pay tribute to former Polish miners and celebrate the twinning with Sułkowice. The show, entitled Swiatlo, which means “light” in Polish, was performed during the European Heritage Days in September 2004 by a troupe of three musicians and four dancers from Belfort. In 2005, the show was performed in two other towns in the nature park: Giromagny and Gérardmer. It was also performed in China.

Masses in Polish are organized once a month in Ronchamp's Notre-Dame-du-Bas church by the Polish Catholic Mission of the North-East, one of the consequences of Polish immigration still visible in 2005.

The political culture in France, as of the beginning of the 21st century, can be summed up by the people's main expectations for governments to ensure a degree of social welfare. France exhibits labour protections and democracy with a multiparty system dominated by conservative, social-liberal and social democratic forces, with a strong influence of nationalist, socialist, and Green parties. Coalition governments are uncommon, similar to the United Kingdom.

The system of government of France is a semi-presidential one, even though it may be seen as presidential since the legislative elections usually happen after the presidential elections, which allows a president to hold a legislative majority, thus the President of the Republic has many powers. Some parties, such as La France Insoumise, qualify the system as a "presidential monarchy."

As the President has many powers and is elected directly, all eyes are turned on him/her and s/he is usually held accountable. The President of the Republic is usually unpopular, because s/he is often seen as accountable, and strikes, or sometimes the establishment of movements against the government, are common.

The political history of France covers the history of political movements and systems of government in the nation of France, from the earliest stages of the history of France until the present day. This political history might be considered to start with the formation of the Kingdom of France, and continue until the present day.

Political history is the narrative and survey of political events, ideas, movements, organs of government, voters, parties and leaders. It is closely related to other fields of history, including diplomatic history, constitutional history, social history, people's history, and public history. Political history studies the organization and operation of power in large societies.

The Kingdom of France is the historiographical name or umbrella term given to various political entities of France in the medieval and early modern period. It was one of the most powerful states in Europe since the High Middle Ages. It was also an early colonial power, with colonies in Asia and Africa, and the largest being New France in North America.

France originated as West Francia (Francia Occidentalis), the western half of the Carolingian Empire, with the Treaty of Verdun (843). A branch of the Carolingian dynasty continued to rule until 987, when Hugh Capet was elected king and founded the Capetian dynasty. The territory remained known as Francia and its ruler as rex Francorum ("king of the Franks") well into the High Middle Ages. The first king calling himself rex Francie ("King of France") was Philip II, in 1190, and officially from 1204. From then, France was continuously ruled by the Capetians and their cadet lines under the Valois and Bourbon until the monarchy was abolished in 1792 during the French Revolution. The Kingdom of France was also ruled in personal union with the Kingdom of Navarre over two time periods, 1284–1328 and 1572–1620, after which the institutions of Navarre were abolished and it was fully annexed by France (though the King of France continued to use the title "King of Navarre" through the end of the monarchy).

France in the Middle Ages was a decentralised, feudal monarchy. In Brittany and Catalonia (now a part of Spain), as well as Aquitaine, the authority of the French king was barely felt. Lorraine and Burgundy were states of the Holy Roman Empire and not yet a part of France. West Frankish kings were initially elected by the secular and ecclesiastical magnates, but the regular coronation of the eldest son of the reigning king during his father's lifetime established the principle of male primogeniture, which became codified in the Salic law.

During the Late Middle Ages, rivalry between the Capetian dynasty, rulers of the Kingdom of France and their vassals the House of Plantagenet, who also ruled the Kingdom of England as part of their so-called competing Angevin Empire, resulted in many armed struggles. The most notorious of them all are the series of conflicts known as the Hundred Years' War (1337–1453) in which the kings of England laid claim to the French throne. Emerging victorious from said conflicts, France subsequently sought to extend its influence into Italy, but was defeated by Spain and the Holy Roman Empire in the ensuing Italian Wars (1494–1559).

The Capetian dynasty, also known as the "House of France", is a dynasty of European origin, and a branch of the Robertians and the Karlings. It is among the largest and oldest royal houses in Europe and the world, and consists of Hugh Capet, the founder of the dynasty, and his male-line descendants, who ruled in France without interruption from 987 to 1792, and again from 1814 to 1848. The senior line ruled in France as the House of Capet from the election of Hugh Capet in 987 until the death of Charles IV in 1328. That line was succeeded by cadet branches, the Houses of Valois and then Bourbon, which ruled without interruption until the French Revolution abolished the monarchy in 1792. The Bourbons were restored in 1814 in the aftermath of Napoleon 's defeat, but had to vacate the throne again in 1830 in favour of the last Capetian monarch of France, Louis Philippe I, who belonged to the House of Orléans. Cadet branches of the Capetian House of Bourbon are still reigning over Spain and Luxembourg.

The dynasty had a crucial role in the formation of the French state. Initially obeyed only in their own demesne, the Île-de-France, the Capetian kings slowly but steadily increased their power and influence until it grew to cover the entirety of their realm. For a detailed narration on the growth of French royal power, see Crown lands of France.

Members of the dynasty were traditionally Catholic, and the early Capetians had an alliance with the Church. The French were also the most active participants in the Crusades, culminating in a series of five Crusader kings – Louis VII, Philip Augustus, Louis VIII, Louis IX, and Philip III. The Capetian alliance with the papacy suffered a severe blow after the disaster of the Aragonese Crusade. Philip III's son and successor, Philip IV, humiliated Pope Boniface VIII and brought the papacy under French control. The later Valois, starting with Francis I, ignored religious differences and allied with the Ottoman sultan to counter the growing power of the Holy Roman Empire. Henry IV was a Protestant at the time of his accession, but realized the necessity of conversion after four years of religious warfare.

The Capetians generally enjoyed a harmonious family relationship. By tradition, younger sons and brothers of the king of France were given appanages for them to maintain their rank and to dissuade them from claiming the French crown itself. When Capetian cadets did aspire for kingship, their ambitions were directed not at the French throne, but at foreign thrones. As a result, the Capetians have reigned at different times in the kingdoms of Portugal, Sicily and Naples, Navarre, Hungary and Croatia, Poland, Spain and Sardinia, grand dukedoms of Lithuania and Luxembourg, and in Latin and Brazilian empires.

In modern times, King Felipe VI of Spain is a member of this family, while Grand Duke Henri of Luxembourg is related to the family by agnatic kinship ; both through the Bourbon branch of the dynasty. Along with the House of Habsburg, arguably its greatest historic rival, it was one of the two oldest European royal dynasties. It was also one of the most powerful royal family in European history, having played a major role in its politics for much of its existence. According to Oxford University, 75% of all royal families in European history, are related to the Capetian dynasty.

The Ancien Régime also known as the Old Regime, was the political and social system of the Kingdom of France from the Late Middle Ages (c. 1500) until 1789 and the French Revolution which abolished the feudal system of the French nobility (1790) and hereditary monarchy (1792). The Valois dynasty ruled during the Ancien Régime up until 1589 and was subsequently replaced by the Bourbon dynasty. The term is occasionally used to refer to the similar feudal systems of the time elsewhere in Europe such as that of Switzerland.

France in the early modern era was increasingly centralised; the French language began to displace other languages from official use, and the monarch expanded his absolute power in the administrative system of the Ancien Régime, complicated by historic and regional irregularities in taxation, legal, judicial, and ecclesiastic divisions, and local prerogatives. Religiously France became divided between the Catholic majority and a Protestant minority, the Huguenots, which led to a series of civil wars, the Wars of Religion (1562–1598). The Wars of Religion crippled France, but triumph over Spain and the Habsburg monarchy in the Thirty Years' War made France the most powerful nation on the continent once more. The kingdom became Europe's dominant cultural, political and military power in the 17th century under Louis XIV. In parallel, France developed its first colonial empire in Asia, Africa, and in the Americas.

The administrative and social structures of the Ancien Régime in France evolved across years of state-building, legislative acts (like the Ordinance of Villers-Cotterêts), and internal conflicts. The Valois dynasty's attempts at reform and at re-establishing control over the scattered political centres of the country were hindered by the Wars of Religion from 1562 to 1598. During the Bourbon dynasty, much of the reigns of Henry IV (r. 1589–1610) and Louis XIII (r. 1610–1643) and the early years of Louis XIV (r. 1643–1715) focused on administrative centralization. Despite the notion of " absolute monarchy " (typified by the king's right to issue orders through lettres de cachet) and efforts to create a centralized state, Ancien Régime France remained a country of systemic irregularities: administrative, legal, judicial, and ecclesiastic divisions and prerogatives frequently overlapped, while the French nobility struggled to maintain their rights in the matters of local government and justice, and powerful internal conflicts (such as The Fronde) protested against this centralization.

The French Wars of Religion were a series of civil wars between French Catholics and Protestants (called Huguenots) from 1562 to 1598. Between two and four million people died from violence, famine or disease directly caused by the conflict, and it severely damaged the power of the French monarchy. One of its most notorious episodes was the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre in 1572. The fighting ended with a compromise in 1598, when Henry of Navarre, who had converted to Catholicism in 1593, was proclaimed King Henry IV of France and issued the Edict of Nantes, which granted substantial rights and freedoms to the Huguenots. However, Catholics continued to disapprove of Protestants and of Henry, and his assassination in 1610 triggered a fresh round of Huguenot rebellions in the 1620s.

Tensions between the two religions had been building since the 1530s, exacerbating existing regional divisions. The death of Henry II of France in July 1559 initiated a prolonged struggle for power between his widow Catherine de' Medici and powerful nobles. These included a fervently Catholic faction led by the Guise and Montmorency families, and Protestants headed by the House of Condé and Jeanne d'Albret. Both sides received assistance from external powers, with Spain and Savoy supporting the Catholics, and England and the Dutch Republic backing the Protestants.

Moderates, also known as Politiques, hoped to maintain order by centralising power and making concessions to Huguenots, rather than the policies of repression pursued by Henry II and his father Francis I. They were initially supported by Catherine de' Medici, whose January 1562 Edict of Saint-Germain was strongly opposed by the Guise faction and led to an outbreak of widespread fighting in March. The Edict of Amboise' also known as the Edict of Pacification, was signed at the Château of Amboise on 19 March 1563 by Catherine de' Medici, acting as regent for her son Charles IX of France. The Edict ended the first stage of the French Wars of Religion, inaugurating a period of official peace in France by guaranteeing the Huguenots religious privileges and freedoms. However, it was gradually undermined by continuing religious violence at a regional level and hostilities renewed in 1567. Catherine de' Medici later hardened her stance and backed the 1572 St. Bartholomew's Day massacre in Paris, which resulted in Catholic mobs killing between 5,000 and 30,000 Protestants throughout France.

The wars threatened the authority of the monarchy and the last Valois kings, Catherine's three sons Francis II, Charles IX, and Henry III.

Their Bourbon successor Henry IV of France responded by creating a strong central state and extending toleration to Huguenots. Henry IV successfully ended the civil wars. He and his ministers appeased Catholic leaders using bribes of about 7 million écus, a sum greater than France's annual revenue. Huguenot leaders were placated by the Edict of Nantes, which had four separate sections. The articles laid down the tolerance which would be accorded to the Huguenots including the exact places where worship may or may not take place, the recognition of three Protestant universities, and the allowance of Protestant synods. The king also issued two personal documents (called brevets) which recognized the Protestant establishment. The Edict of Nantes signed religious tolerance into law, and the brevets were an act of benevolence that created a Protestant state within France.

Despite this, it would take years to restore law and order to France. The Edict was met by opposition from the parlements, which objected to the guarantees offered to Protestants. The Parlement de Rouen did not formally register the edict until 1609, although it begrudgingly observed its terms.

The latter policy would last until 1685, when Henry's grandson Louis XIV revoked the Edict of Nantes.

The House of Bourbon is a dynasty that originated in the Kingdom of France as a branch of the Capetian dynasty, the royal House of France. Bourbon kings began to rule France and Navarre in 1589. A branch descended from the French Bourbons came to rule Spain in the 18th century and is the current Spanish royal family.

The royal Bourbons originated in 1272, when Robert, the youngest son of King Louis IX of France, married the heiress of the lordship of Bourbon. The house continued for three centuries as a cadet branch, serving as nobles under the direct Capetian and Valois kings. The senior line of the House of Bourbon became extinct in the male line in 1527 with the death of Duke Charles III of Bourbon. This made the junior Bourbon-Vendôme branch the genealogically senior branch of the House of Bourbon.

In 1589, at the death of Henry III of France, the House of Valois became extinct in the male line. Under the Salic law, the head of the House of Bourbon, as the senior representative of the senior-surviving branch of the Capetian dynasty, became King of France as Henry IV. Bourbon monarchs then united to France the part of the Kingdom of Navarre north of the Pyrenees, which Henry's father had acquired by marriage in 1555, ruling both until the 1792 overthrow of the monarchy during the French Revolution.

Restored briefly in 1814 and definitively in 1815 after the fall of the First French Empire, the senior line of the Bourbons was finally overthrown in the July Revolution of 1830. A cadet Bourbon branch, the House of Orléans, then ruled for 18 years (1830–1848), until it too was overthrown

The first Bourbon king of France was Henry IV. He was born on 13 December 1553 in the Kingdom of Navarre. Antoine de Bourbon, his father, was a ninth-generation descendant of King Louis IX of France. Jeanne d'Albret, his mother, was the Queen of Navarre and niece of King Francis I of France. He was baptized Catholic, but raised Calvinist. After his father was killed in 1562, he became Duke of Vendôme at the age of 10, with Admiral Gaspard de Coligny (1519–1572) as his regent. Seven years later, the young duke became the nominal leader of the Huguenots after the death of his uncle the Prince de Condé in 1569.

In 1572, Catherine de' Medici, mother of King Charles IX of France, arranged for the marriage of her daughter, Margaret of Valois, to Henry, ostensibly to advance peace between Catholics and Huguenots. Many Huguenots gathered in Paris for the wedding on 24 August, but were ambushed and slaughtered by Catholics in the St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre. Henry saved his own life by converting to Catholicism. He repudiated his conversion in 1576 and resumed his leadership of the Huguenots. The period from 1576 to 1584 was relatively calm in France, with the Huguenots consolidating control of much of the south with only occasional interference from the royal government.

A major civil war erupted in 1584, when François, Duke of Anjou, younger brother of King Henry III of France, died, leaving Navarre next in line for the throne. Thus began the War of the Three Henrys, as Henry of Navarre, Henry III, and the ultra-Catholic leader, Henry of Guise, fought a confusing three-cornered struggle for dominance. After Henry III was assassinated on 31 July 1589, Navarre claimed the throne as the first Bourbon king of France, Henry IV.

Much of Catholic France, organized into the Catholic League, refused to recognize a Protestant monarch and instead recognized Henry IV's uncle, Charles, Cardinal de Bourbon, as rightful king, and the civil war continued. Henry won a crucial victory at Ivry on 14 March 1590 and, following the death of the Cardinal the same year, the forces of the League lacked an obvious Catholic candidate for the throne and divided into various factions. Nevertheless, as a Protestant, Henry IV was unable to take Paris, a Catholic stronghold, or to decisively defeat his enemies, now supported by the Spanish. He reconverted to Catholicism in 1593 and was crowned king retroactively to 1589 at the Cathedral of Chartres on 27 February 1594.

The Huguenot rebellions, sometimes called the Rohan Wars'after the Huguenot leader Henri de Rohan, were a series of rebellions of the 1620s in which French Calvinist Protestants (Huguenots), mainly located in southwestern France, revolted against royal authority. The uprising occurred a decade after the death of Henry IV who, himself originally a Huguenot before converting to Catholicism, had protected Protestants through the Edict of Nantes. His successor Louis XIII, under the regency of his Italian Catholic mother Marie de' Medici, became more intolerant of Protestantism. The Huguenots responded by establishing independent political and military structures, establishing diplomatic contacts with foreign powers, and openly revolting against central power. The Huguenot rebellions came after two decades of internal peace under Henry IV, following the intermittent French Wars of Religion of 1562–1598.

Louis XIV (Louis-Dieudonné; 5 September 1638 – 1 September 1715), also known as Louis the Great (Louis le Grand) or the Sun King (le Roi Soleil), was King of France from 1643 until his death in 1715. His verified reign of 72 years and 110 days is the longest of any sovereign. Although Louis XIV's France was emblematic of the Age of Absolutism in Europe, the King surrounded himself with a variety of significant political, military, and cultural figures, such as Bossuet, Colbert, Louvois, Le Brun, Le Nôtre, Lully, Mazarin, Molière, Racine, Turenne, Condé, and Vauban.

Louis began his personal rule of France in 1661, after the death of his chief minister Cardinal Mazarin, when the King famously declared that he would take over the job himself. An adherent of the divine right of kings, Louis continued his predecessors' work of creating a centralised state governed from the capital. He sought to eliminate the remnants of feudalism persisting in parts of France; by compelling many members of the nobility to reside at his lavish Palace of Versailles, he succeeded in pacifying the aristocracy, many of whom had participated in the Fronde rebellions during his minority. He thus became one of the most powerful French monarchs and consolidated a system of absolute monarchy in France that endured until the French Revolution. Louis also enforced uniformity of religion under the Catholic Church. His revocation of the Edict of Nantes abolished the rights of the Huguenot Protestant minority and subjected them to a wave of dragonnades, effectively forcing Huguenots to emigrate or convert, virtually destroying the French Protestant community.

During Louis's long reign, France emerged as the leading European power and regularly asserted its military strength. A conflict with Spain marked his entire childhood, while during his personal rule, Louis fought three major continental conflicts, each against powerful foreign alliances: the Franco-Dutch War, the Nine Years' War, and the War of the Spanish Succession. In addition, France also contested shorter wars, such as the War of Devolution and the War of the Reunions. Warfare defined Louis's foreign policy and his personal ambition shaped his approach. Impelled by "a mix of commerce, revenge, and pique", he sensed that war was the ideal way to enhance his glory. His wars strained France's resources to the utmost, while in peacetime, he concentrated on preparing for the next war. He taught his diplomats that their job was to create tactical and strategic advantages for the French military. Upon his death in 1715, Louis XIV left his great-grandson and successor, Louis XV, a powerful kingdom, albeit in major debt after the War of the Spanish Succession that had raged on since 1701.

Significant achievements during Louis XIV's reign which would go on to have a wide influence on the early modern period, well into the Industrial Revolution and until today, include the construction of the Canal du Midi, the patronage of artists, and the founding of the French Academy of Sciences.

The Fronde was a series of civil wars in the Kingdom of France between 1648 and 1653, occurring in the midst of the Franco-Spanish War, which had begun in 1635. King Louis XIV confronted the combined opposition of the princes, the nobility, the law courts (parlements), as well as most of the French people, and managed to subdue them all. The dispute started when the government of France issued seven fiscal edicts, six of which were to increase taxation. The parlements resisted and questioned the constitutionality of the King's actions and sought to check his powers.

The Fronde was divided into two campaigns, the Parlementary Fronde and the Fronde of the Princes. The timing of the outbreak of the Parlementary Fronde, directly after the Peace of Westphalia (1648) that ended the Thirty Years' War, was significant. The nuclei of the armed bands that terrorized parts of France under aristocratic leaders during that period had been hardened in a generation of war in Germany, where troops still tended to operate autonomously. Louis XIV, impressed as a young ruler with the experience of the Fronde, came to reorganize French fighting forces under a stricter hierarchy, whose leaders ultimately could be made or unmade by the King. Cardinal Mazarin blundered into the crisis but came out well ahead at the end.

The Fronde represented the final attempt of the French nobility to do battle with the king, and they were humiliated. In the long term, the Fronde served to strengthen royal authority, but weakened the economy. The Fronde facilitated the emergence of absolute monarchy.

The Spanish Empire, which had promoted the Fronde to the point that without its support, it would have had a more limited character, benefited from the internal upheaval in France since it contributed to the Spanish military's renewed success in its war against the French between 1647 and 1656, so much so that the year 1652 could be considered a Spanish annus mirabilis. Only the later English intervention in the form of the Anglo-Spanish War (1654–1660) in favor of France would change the situation.

In the 16th to the 17th centuries, the First French colonial empire stretched from a total area at its peak in 1680 to over 10,000,000 square kilometres (3,900,000 mi), the second-largest empire in the world at the time behind the Spanish Empire. Colonial conflicts with Great Britain led to the loss of much of its North American holdings by 1763.

The Seven Years' War (1756–1763) was a global conflict that involved most of the European great powers, and was fought primarily in Europe, the Americas, and Asia-Pacific. Other concurrent conflicts include the French and Indian War (1754–1763), the Carnatic Wars (1744–1763), and the Anglo-Spanish War (1762–1763). The opposing alliances were led by Great Britain and France respectively, both seeking to establish global pre-eminence at the expense of the other. Along with Spain, France fought Britain both in Europe and overseas with land-based armies and naval forces, while Britain's ally Prussia sought territorial expansion in Europe and consolidation of its power. Long-standing colonial rivalries pitted Britain against France and Spain in North America and the West Indies. They fought on a grand scale with consequential results. Prussia sought greater influence in the German states, while Austria wanted to regain Silesia, captured by Prussia in the previous war, and to contain Prussian influence.

In a realignment of traditional alliances, known as the Diplomatic Revolution of 1756, Prussia became part of a coalition led by Britain, which also included long-time Prussian competitor Hanover, at the time in personal union with Britain. At the same time, Austria ended centuries of conflict between the Bourbon and Habsburg families by allying with France, along with Saxony, Sweden, and Russia. Spain aligned formally with France in 1761, joining France in the Third Family Compact between the two Bourbon monarchies. Smaller German states either joined the Seven Years' War or supplied mercenaries to the parties involved in the conflict.

Anglo-French conflicts broke out in their North American colonies in 1754, when British and French colonial militias and their respective Native American allies engaged in small skirmishes, and later full-scale colonial warfare. The colonial conflicts would become a theatre of the Seven Years' War when war was officially declared two years later, and it effectively ended France's presence as a land power on that continent. It was "the most important event to occur in eighteenth-century North America" prior to the American Revolution. Spain entered the war on the French side in 1762, unsuccessfully attempting to invade Britain's ally Portugal in what became known as the Fantastic War.

The alliance with France was a disaster for Spain, with the loss to Britain of two major ports, Havana in Cuba and Manila in the Philippines, returned in the 1763 Treaty of Paris between France, Spain and Great Britain. In Europe, the large-scale conflict that drew in most of the European powers was centred on the desire of Austria (long the political centre of the Holy Roman Empire of the German nation) to recover Silesia from Prussia. The Treaty of Hubertusburg ended the war between Saxony, Austria and Prussia, in 1763.

Britain began its rise as the world's predominant colonial and naval power. France's supremacy in Europe was halted until after the French Revolution and the emergence of Napoleon Bonaparte. Prussia confirmed its status as a great power, challenging Austria for dominance within the German states, thus altering the European balance of power.

French intervention in the American Revolutionary War helped the United States secure independence from King George III and the Kingdom of Great Britain, but was costly and achieved little for France.

Following the French Revolution, which began in 1789, the Kingdom of France adopted a written constitution in 1791, but the Kingdom was abolished a year later and replaced with the First French Republic. The monarchy was restored by the other great powers in 1814 and, with the exception of the Hundred Days in 1815, lasted until the French Revolution of 1848.

The underlying causes of the French Revolution were the Ancien Régime 's inability to manage rising social and economic inequality. Population growth and interest payments on government debt led to economic depression, unemployment, and high food prices. Combined with a regressive tax system and resistance to reform by the ruling elite, the result was a crisis Louis XVI proved unable to resolve.

Between 1700 and 1789, the French population grew from an estimated 21 to 28 million, while Paris alone had over 600,000 inhabitants, of whom roughly one third had no regular work. Food production failed to keep up with these numbers, and although wages increased by 22% between 1770 and 1790, in the same period prices rose by 65%, which many blamed on government inaction. Combined with a series of poor harvests, by 1789 the result was a rural peasantry with nothing to sell, and an urban proletariat whose purchasing power had collapsed.

High levels of state debt, which acted as a drag on the wider economy, are often attributed to the 1778–1783 Anglo-French War. However, one economic historian argues "neither [its] level in 1788, or previous history, can be considered an explanation for the outbreak of revolution in 1789". In 1788, the ratio of debt to gross national income in France was 55.6%, compared to 181.8% in Britain, and although French borrowing costs were higher, the percentage of revenue devoted to interest payments was roughly the same in both countries.

The problem lay in the assessment and collection of the taxes used to fund government expenditure. Rates varied widely from one region to another, were often different from the official amounts, and collected inconsistently. Complexity, as much as the financial burden, caused resentment among all taxpayers; although the nobility paid significantly less than other classes, they complained just as much. Attempts to simplify the system were blocked by the regional Parlements which controlled financial policy. The resulting impasse in the face of widespread economic distress led to the calling of the Estates-General, which became radicalised by the struggle for control of public finances.

Although willing to consider reforms, Louis XVI often backed down when faced with opposition from conservative elements within the nobility. The court became the target for popular anger, particularly Queen Marie-Antoinette, who was viewed as a spendthrift Austrian spy, and blamed for the dismissal of 'progressive' ministers like Jacques Necker. For their opponents, Enlightenment ideas on equality and democracy provided

The French Revolution was a period of radical political and societal change in France that began with the Estates General of 1789 and ended with the formation of the French Consulate in November 1799. Many of its ideas are considered fundamental principles of liberal democracy, while the values and institutions it created remain central to French political discourse.

Its causes are generally agreed to be a combination of social, political and economic factors, which the Ancien Régime proved unable to manage. In May 1789, widespread social distress led to the convocation of the Estates General, which was converted into a National Assembly in June. Continuing unrest culminated in the Storming of the Bastille on 14 July, which led to a series of radical measures by the Assembly, including the abolition of feudalism, the imposition of state control over the Catholic Church in France, and extension of the right to vote.

The next three years were dominated by the struggle for political control, exacerbated by economic depression and civil disorder. Austria, Britain, Prussia and other external powers sought to restore the Ancien Régime by force, while many French politicians saw war as the best way to unite the nation and preserve the revolution by exporting it to other countries. These factors resulted in the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars in April 1792, abolition of the French monarchy and proclamation of the French First Republic in September 1792, followed by the execution of Louis XVI in January 1793.

Following the Paris -based Insurrection of 31 May – 2 June 1793 the constitution was suspended and effective political power passed from the National Convention to the more radical Committee of Public Safety. An estimated 16,000 "counter-revolutionaries" were executed during the subsequent Reign of Terror, which ended with the so-called Thermidorian Reaction in July 1794. Weakened by a combination of external threats and internal opposition, in November 1795 the Republic was replaced by the Directory. Four years later in November 1799, the Consulate seized power in a military coup led by Napoleon Bonaparte. This is generally seen as marking the end of the Revolutionary period.

The National Convention (French: Convention nationale) was the constituent assembly of the Kingdom of France for one day and the French First Republic for its first three years during the French Revolution, following the two-year National Constituent Assembly and the one-year Legislative Assembly. Created after the great insurrection of 10 August 1792, it was the first French government organized as a republic, abandoning the monarchy altogether. The Convention sat as a single-chamber assembly from 20 September 1792 to 26 October 1795 (4 Brumaire IV under the Convention's adopted calendar).

The Convention came about when the Legislative Assembly decreed the provisional suspension of King Louis XVI and the convocation of a National Convention to draw up a new constitution with no monarchy. The other major innovation was to decree that deputies to that Convention should be elected by all Frenchmen twenty-one years old or more, domiciled for a year and living by the product of their labor. The National Convention was, therefore, the first French assembly elected by a suffrage without distinctions of class.

Although the Convention lasted until 1795, power was effectively delegated by the convention and concentrated in the small Committee of Public Safety from April 1793. The eight months from the fall of 1793 to the spring of 1794, when Maximilien Robespierre and his allies dominated the Committee of Public Safety, represent the most radical and bloodiest phase of the French Revolution, known as the Reign of Terror. After the fall of Robespierre, the Convention lasted for another year until a new constitution was written, ushering in the French Directory.

The Directory (also called Directorate) was the governing five-member committee in the French First Republic from 26 October 1795 (4 Brumaire an IV) until 10 November 1799, when it was overthrown by Napoleon Bonaparte in the Coup of 18 Brumaire and replaced by the Consulate. Directoire is the name of the final four years of the French Revolution. Mainstream historiography also uses the term in reference to the period from the dissolution of the National Convention on 26 October 1795 to Napoleon's coup d’état.

The Directory was continually at war with foreign coalitions, including Britain, Austria, Prussia, the Kingdom of Naples, Russia and the Ottoman Empire. It annexed Belgium and the left bank of the Rhine, while Bonaparte conquered a large part of Italy. The Directory established 29 short-lived sister republics in Italy, Switzerland and the Netherlands. The conquered cities and states were required to send France huge amounts of money, as well as art treasures, which were used to fill the new Louvre museum in Paris. An army led by Bonaparte tried to conquer Egypt and marched as far as Saint-Jean-d'Acre in Syria. The Directory defeated a resurgence of the War in the Vendée, the royalist-led civil war in the Vendée region, but failed in its venture to support the Irish Rebellion of 1798 and create an Irish Republic.

The French economy was in continual crisis during the Directory. At the beginning, the treasury was empty; the paper money, the Assignat, had fallen to a fraction of its value, and prices soared. The Directory stopped printing assignats and restored the value of the money, but this caused a new crisis; prices and wages fell, and economic activity slowed to a standstill.

In its first two years, the Directory concentrated on ending the excesses of the Jacobin Reign of Terror ; mass executions stopped, and measures taken against exiled priests and royalists were relaxed. The Jacobin political club was closed on 12 November 1794 and the government crushed an armed uprising planned by the Jacobins and an early socialist revolutionary, François-Noël Babeuf, known as " Gracchus Babeuf". But after the discovery of a royalist conspiracy including a prominent general, Jean-Charles Pichegru, the Jacobins took charge of the new Councils and hardened the measures against the Church and émigrés. They took two additional seats in the Directory, hopelessly dividing it.

In 1799, after several defeats, French victories in the Netherlands and Switzerland restored the French military position, but the Directory had lost all the political factions' support, including some of its Directors. Bonaparte returned from Egypt in October, and was engaged by Abbé Sieyès and others to carry out a parliamentary coup d'état on 9–10 November 1799. The coup abolished the Directory and replaced it with the French Consulate led by Bonaparte.

The French Revolutionary Wars were a series of sweeping military conflicts lasting from 1792 until 1802 and resulting from the French Revolution. They pitted France against Britain, Austria, Prussia, Russia, and several other monarchies. They are divided in two periods: the War of the First Coalition (1792–1797) and the War of the Second Coalition (1798–1802). Initially confined to Europe, the fighting gradually assumed a global dimension. After a decade of constant warfare and aggressive diplomacy, France had conquered territories in the Italian Peninsula, the Low Countries and the Rhineland. French success in these conflicts ensured the spread of revolutionary principles over much of Europe.

Initially, the rulers of Europe viewed the French Revolution as a dispute between the French king and his subjects, and not something in which they should interfere. As revolutionary rhetoric grew more strident, they declared the interest of the monarchs of Europe as one with the interests of Louis XVI and his family; this Declaration of Pillnitz (27 August 1791) threatened ambiguous, but quite serious, consequences if anything should happen to the royal family. The position of the revolutionaries became increasingly difficult. Compounding their problems in international relations, French émigrés continued to agitate for support of a counter-revolution. Finally, on 20 April 1792, the French National Convention declared war on Austria. In this War of the First Coalition (1792–98), France ranged itself against most of the European states sharing land or water borders with her, plus Portugal and the Ottoman Empire.

Despite some victories in 1792, by early 1793, France was in terrible crisis: French forces had been pushed out of Belgium; also there was revolt in the Vendée over conscription; widespread resentment of the Civil Constitution of the Clergy ; and the French king had just been executed. The armies of the French Republic were in a state of disruption; the problems became even more acute following the introduction of mass conscription, the levée en masse, which saturated an already distressed army with thousands of illiterate, untrained men.

The Committee of Public Safety was formed (6 April 1793) and the levée en masse drafted all potential soldiers aged 18 to 25 (August 1793). The new French armies had better results. In several campaigns during 1794, the French won the battles of Kortrijk, Tourcoing and Fleurus in June. The French armies drove the Austrians, British, and Dutch beyond the Rhine, occupying Belgium, the Rhineland, and the south of the Netherlands..

In the 1795 military campaigns, although the Rhine Campaign of 1795 proved to be disastrous, the French achieved success in other theaters of war such as the War of the Pyrenees (1793–95). The French established the Batavian Republic as a sister republic (May 1795) and gained Prussian recognition of French control of the Left Bank of the Rhine by the first Peace of Basel. With the Treaty of Campo Formio, Austria ceded the Austrian Netherlands to France and Northern Italy was turned into several French sister republics. Spain made a separate peace accord with France, the Second Treaty of Basel, and the French Directory annexed more of the Holy Roman Empire.

In the 1796 military campaigns, Napoleon Bonaparte, at the time serving as a commander in the French Army, was successful in a daring invasion of Italy. In the Montenotte Campaign, he separated the armies of Sardinia and Austria, defeating each one in turn, and then forced a peace on Sardinia. Following this, his army captured Milan and started the Siege of Mantua. Bonaparte defeated successive Austrian armies sent against him under Johann Peter Beaulieu, Dagobert Sigmund von Wurmser and József Alvinczi while continuing the siege.

In the 1797 military campaigns, Bonaparte carried all before him against Sardinia and Austria in northern Italy (1796–1797) near the Po Valley, culminating in the Peace of Leoben and the Treaty of Campo Formio (October 1797). The First Coalition collapsed, leaving only Britain in the field fighting against France.

The consulate was the top-level Government of France from the fall of the Directory in the coup of 18 Brumaire on 10 November 1799 until the start of the Napoleonic Empire on 18 May 1804. By extension, the term The Consulate also refers to this period of French history.

During this period, Napoleon Bonaparte, as First Consul (Premier consul), established himself as the head of a more authoritarian, autocratic, and centralized republican government in France while not declaring himself sole ruler. Due to the long-lasting institutions established during these years, historian Robert B. Holtman has called the Consulate "one of the most important periods of all French history." By the end of this period, Napoleon had engineered authoritarian personal rule which has been viewed as military dictatorship.

The First French Empire, officially the French Republic, then the French Empire after 1809 and also known as Napoleonic France, was the empire ruled by Napoleon Bonaparte, who established French hegemony over much of continental Europe at the beginning of the 19th century. It lasted from 18 May 1804 to 3 May 1814 and again briefly from 20 March 1815 to 7 July 1815.

Although France had already established a colonial empire overseas since the early 17th century, the French state had remained a kingdom under the Bourbons and a republic after the French Revolution. Historians refer to Napoleon's regime as the First Empire to distinguish it from the restorationist Second Empire (1852–1870) ruled by his nephew Napoleon III. The First French Empire is considered by some to be a " Republican empire."

On 18 May 1804, Napoleon was granted the title Emperor of the French (Empereur des Français) by the French Sénat conservateur and was crowned on 2 December 1804, signifying the end of the French Consulate and of the French First Republic. Despite his coronation, the state continued to be formally called the "French Republic" until October 1808. The Empire achieved military supremacy in mainland Europe through notable victories in the War of the Third Coalition against Austria, Prussia, Russia, Britain and allied states, notably at the Battle of Austerlitz in 1805. French dominance was reaffirmed during the War of the Fourth Coalition, at the Battle of Jena–Auerstedt in 1806 and the Battle of Friedland in 1807, before Napoleon's final defeat at the Battle of Waterloo in 1815.

A series of wars, known collectively as the Napoleonic Wars, extended French influence to much of Western Europe and into Poland. At its height in 1812, the French Empire had 130 departments, ruled over 44 million subjects, maintained an extensive military presence in Germany, Italy, Spain, and Poland, and counted Austria and Prussia as nominal allies. Early French victories exported many ideological features of the Revolution throughout Europe: the introduction of the Napoleonic Code throughout the continent increased legal equality, established jury systems and legalized divorce, and seigneurial dues and seigneurial justice were abolished, as were aristocratic privileges in all places except Poland.

France's defeat in 1814 (and then again in 1815), marked the end of the First French Empire and the beginning of the Bourbon Restoration.

The Napoleonic Wars (1803–1815) were a series of conflicts fought between the First French Empire under Napoleon (1804–1815), and a fluctuating array of European coalitions. The wars originated in political forces arising from the French Revolution (1789–1799) and from the French Revolutionary Wars (1792–1802) (the War of the First Coalition (1792–1797) and the War of the Second Coalition (1798–1802)), and produced a period of French domination over Continental Europe. There were seven Napoleonic Wars, five named after the coalitions that fought Napoleon, plus two named for their respective theatres: (i) the War of the Third Coalition (1803–1806), (ii) the War of the Fourth Coalition (1806–1807), (iii) the War of the Fifth Coalition (1809), (iv) the War of the Sixth Coalition (1813–1814), (v) the War of the Seventh Coalition (1815), (vi) the Peninsular War (1807–1814), and (vii) the French invasion of Russia (1812).

Upon realising the Coup of 18 Brumaire, whereby he became the First Consul of France in 1799, Napoleon assumed control of the politically chaotic French First Republic. He then organised a financially stable French state with a strong bureaucracy and a professional army. War broke out soon after, with Britain declaring war on France on 18 May 1803, ending the Peace of Amiens, and forming a coalition made up of itself, Sweden, Russia, Naples, and Sicily. Frank McLynn argues that Britain went to war in 1803 out of a "mixture of economic motives and national neuroses—an irrational anxiety about Napoleon's motives and intentions." The British fleet under Admiral Nelson decisively crushed the joint Franco-Spanish navy in the Battle of Trafalgar in October 1805. This victory secured British control of the seas and prevented a planned invasion of Britain. In December 1805, Napoleon defeated the allied Russo- Austrian army at Austerlitz, effectively ending the Third Coalition and forcing Austria to make peace. Concerned about increasing French power, Prussia led the creation of the Fourth Coalition with Russia, Saxony, and Sweden, which resumed war in October 1806. Napoleon soon defeated the Prussians at Jena-Auerstedt and the Russians at Friedland, bringing an uneasy peace to the continent. The treaty failed to end the tension, and war broke out again in 1809, with the badly prepared Fifth Coalition, led by Austria. At first, the Austrians won a significant victory at Aspern-Essling, but were quickly defeated at Wagram.

Hoping to isolate and weaken Britain economically through his Continental System, Napoleon launched an invasion of Portugal, the only remaining British ally in continental Europe. After occupying Lisbon in November 1807, and with the bulk of French troops present in Spain, Napoleon seized the opportunity to turn against his former ally, depose the reigning Spanish royal family and declare his brother King of Spain in 1808 as José I. The Spanish and Portuguese revolted with British support and expelled the French from Iberia in 1814 after six years of fighting.

Concurrently, Russia, unwilling to bear the economic consequences of reduced trade, routinely violated the Continental System, prompting Napoleon to launch a massive invasion of Russia in 1812. The resulting campaign ended in disaster for France and the near-destruction of Napoleon's Grande Armée.

Encouraged by the defeat, Austria, Prussia, Sweden, and Russia formed the Sixth Coalition and began a new campaign against France, decisively defeating Napoleon at Leipzig in October 1813 after several inconclusive engagements. The Allies then invaded France from the east, while the Peninsular War spilled over into southwestern France. Coalition troops captured Paris at the end of March 1814 and forced Napoleon to abdicate in April. He was exiled to the island of Elba, and the Bourbons were restored to power. However, Napoleon escaped in February 1815, and reassumed control of France for around One Hundred Days. The allies formed the Seventh Coalition, defeated him at Waterloo in June 1815, and exiled him to the island of Saint Helena, where he died six years later.

The wars had profound consequences on global history, including the spread of nationalism and liberalism, advancements in civil law, the rise of Britain as the world's foremost naval and economic power, the appearance of independence movements in Spanish America and subsequent decline of the Spanish and Portuguese Empires, the fundamental reorganization of German and Italian territories into larger states, and the introduction of radically new methods of conducting warfare. After the end of the Napoleonic Wars, the Congress of Vienna redrew Europe's borders and brought a relative peace to the continent, lasting until the Crimean War in 1853.

The Bourbon Restoration was the period of French history during which the House of Bourbon returned to power after the first fall of Napoleon on 3 May 1814. Briefly interrupted by the Hundred Days in 1815, the Restoration continued until the July Revolution of 26 July 1830. The monarchy was again restored after the July Revolution, and continued until 1848.

Louis XVIII and Charles X, brothers of the executed King Louis XVI, successively mounted the throne and instituted a conservative government intended to restore the proprieties, if not all the institutions, of the Ancien Régime. Exiled supporters of the monarchy returned to France but were unable to reverse most of the changes made by the French Revolution. Exhausted by decades of war, the nation experienced a period of internal and external peace, stable economic prosperity and the preliminaries of industrialization.

After the July Revolution of 1830, royal power was once again secured and the July Monarchy was established. The July Monarchy governed under principles of moderate conservatism, and improved relations with the UK. The July Revolution was a second French Revolution. It led to the overthrow of King Charles X, the French Bourbon monarch, and the ascent of his cousin Louis Philippe, Duke of Orléans. After 18 precarious years on the throne, Louis-Philippe was overthrown in the French Revolution of 1848.

The 1830 Revolution marked a shift from one constitutional monarchy, under the restored House of Bourbon, to another, the July Monarchy; the transition of power from the House of Bourbon to its cadet branch, the House of Orléans ; and the replacement of the principle of hereditary right by that of popular sovereignty. Supporters of the Bourbons would be called Legitimists, and supporters of Louis Philippe were known as Orléanists. In addition, there continued to be Bonapartists supporting the return of Napoleon's descendants.

The July Monarchy, officially the Kingdom of France, was a liberal constitutional monarchy in France under Louis Philippe I, starting on 26 July 1830, with the July Revolution of 1830, and ending 23 February 1848, with the Revolution of 1848. It marks the end of the Bourbon Restoration (1814–1830). It began with the overthrow of the conservative government of Charles X, the last king of the main line House of Bourbon.

Louis Philippe, a member of the more liberal Orléans branch of the House of Bourbon, proclaimed himself as Roi des Français (" King of the French ") rather than "King of France", emphasizing the popular origins of his reign. The king promised to follow the juste milieu, or the middle-of-the-road, avoiding the extremes of both the conservative supporters of Charles X and radicals on the left.

The July Monarchy was dominated by wealthy bourgeoisie and numerous former Napoleonic officials. It followed conservative policies, especially under the influence (1840–48) of François Guizot. The king promoted friendship with the United Kingdom and sponsored colonial expansion, notably the French conquest of Algeria. By 1848, a year in which many European states had a revolution, the king's popularity had collapsed, and he abdicated.

The French Second Republic, officially the French Republic, was the second republican government of France. It existed from 1848 until its dissolution in 1852.

In 1848, Europe erupted into a mass revolutionary wave in which many citizens challenged their royal leaders. Caught up in the revolutionary wave, France underwent the February Revolution that overthrew the July Monarchy of King Louis-Phillipe, Radical and liberal factions of the population convened the French Second Republic in 1848. Attempting to restore the First French Republic's values on human rights and constitutional government, they adopted the motto of the First Republic ; Liberté, Égalité, Fraternité. The republic was plagued with tribalist tendencies of its leading factions: royalists, proto-socialists, liberals, and conservatives. In this environment, the nephew of Napoleon, Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, established himself as a popular anti-establishment figure. He was elected as president in 1848. Under the Second Republic's constitution, the president was restricted to a single term.

Louis-Napoléon overthrew the republic in an 1851 coup d'état, proclaimed himself Emperor Napoleon III, and created the Second French Empire.

The coup d'état of 2 December 1851 was a self-coup staged by Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte (later Napoleon III), at the time President of France under the Second Republic. Code-named Operation Rubicon and timed to coincide with the anniversary of Napoleon I's coronation and victory at Austerlitz, the coup dissolved the National Assembly, granted dictatorial powers to the president and preceded the establishment of the Second French Empire a year later, which lasted until 1870.

Faced with the prospect of having to leave office in 1852, Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte (nephew of Napoleon Bonaparte) staged the coup in order to stay in power and implement his reform programs; these included the restoration of universal male suffrage previously abolished by the legislature. The continuation of his authority and the power to produce a new constitution were approved days later by a constitutional referendum, resulting in the Constitution of 1852, which greatly increased the powers and the term length of the president. A year after the coup, Bonaparte proclaimed himself " Emperor of the French " under the regnal name Napoleon III.

The Second French Empire, officially the "French Empire," was an Imperial Bonapartist regime of Napoleon III from 14 January 1852 to 27 October 1870, between the Second and the Third Republic of France. The Second French Empire oversaw some of the most significant achievements in infrastructure and economy, and reasserted itself as the dominant power in Europe for a decade.

Historians in the 1930s and 1940s often disparaged the Second Empire as a precursor of fascism, but by the late 20th century it emerged as an example of a modernising regime.

Historians have generally given the Second Empire negative evaluations on its foreign policy, and somewhat more positive evaluations of domestic policies, especially after Napoleon III liberalised his rule after 1858. He promoted French business and exports. The greatest achievements included a grand railway network that facilitated commerce and tied the nation together with Paris as its hub. This stimulated economic growth and brought prosperity to most regions of the country. The Second Empire is given high credit for the rebuilding of Paris with broad boulevards, striking public buildings and elegant residential districts for higher class Parisians.

In international policy, Napoleon III tried to emulate his uncle Napoleon I, engaging in numerous imperial ventures around the world as well as several wars in Europe. He began his reign with French victories in Crimea and in Italy, gaining Savoy and Nice.

Using very harsh methods, he built up the French Empire in French North Africa and in French Indochina in Southeast Asia. Napoleon III also launched an intervention in Mexico seeking to erect a Second Mexican Empire and bring it into the French orbit, but this ended in a fiasco.

He badly mishandled the threat from Prussia, and by the end of his reign, the French emperor found himself without allies in the face of overwhelming German force. His rule was ended during the Franco-Prussian War, when he was captured by the Prussian Army at Sedan in 1870, and dethroned by French republicans. He died in exile in 1873 in England.

The French Third Republic was the system of government adopted in France from 4 September 1870, when the Second French Empire collapsed during the Franco-Prussian War, until 10 July 1940, after the Fall of France during World War II led to the formation of the Vichy government.

The early days of the Third Republic were dominated by political disruptions caused by the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–1871, which the Republic continued to wage after the fall of Emperor Napoleon III in 1870. Harsh reparations exacted by the Prussians after the war resulted in the loss of the French regions of Alsace (keeping the Territoire de Belfort) and Lorraine (the northeastern part, i.e. present-day department of Moselle), social upheaval, and the establishment of the Paris Commune. The early governments of the Third Republic considered re-establishing the monarchy, but disagreement as to the nature of that monarchy and the rightful occupant of the throne could not be resolved. Consequently, the Third Republic, originally envisioned as a provisional government, instead became the permanent form of government of France.

The French Constitutional Laws of 1875 defined the composition of the Third Republic. It consisted of a Chamber of Deputies and a Senate to form the legislative branch of government and a president to serve as head of state. Calls for the re-establishment of the monarchy dominated the tenures of the first two presidents, Adolphe Thiers and Patrice de MacMahon, but growing support for the republican form of government among the French populace and a series of republican presidents in the 1880s gradually quashed prospects of a monarchical restoration.

The Third Republic established many French colonial possessions, including French Indochina, French Madagascar, French Polynesia, and large territories in West Africa during the Scramble for Africa, all of them acquired during the last two decades of the 19th century. The early years of the 20th century were dominated by the Democratic Republican Alliance, which was originally conceived as a centre-left political alliance, but over time became the main centre-right party.

The period from the start of World War I to the late 1930s featured sharply polarized politics, between the Democratic Republican Alliance and the Radicals. The government fell less than a year after the outbreak of World War II, when Nazi forces occupied much of France, and was replaced by the rival governments of Charles de Gaulle 's Free France (La France libre) and Philippe Pétain 's French State (L'État français).

During the 19th and 20th centuries, the French colonial empire was the second largest colonial empire in the world only behind the British Empire ; it extended over 13,500,000 km (5,200,000 sq mi) of land at its height in the 1920s and 1930s. In terms of population however, on the eve of World War II, France and its colonial possessions totaled only 150 million inhabitants, compared with 330 million for British India alone.

Adolphe Thiers called republicanism in the 1870s "the form of government that divides France least"; however, politics under the Third Republic were sharply polarized. On the left stood reformist France, heir to the French Revolution. On the right stood conservative France, rooted in the peasantry, the Roman Catholic Church, and the army. In spite of France's sharply divided electorate and persistent attempts to overthrow it, the Third Republic endured for seventy years, which as of 2023 makes it the longest lasting system of government in France since the collapse of the Ancien Régime in 1789.

The French Fourth Republic was the republican government of France from 27 October 1946 to 4 October 1958, governed by the fourth republican constitution of 13 October 1946. It was in many ways a revival of the Third Republic, which governed from 1870 during the Franco-Prussian War to 1940 during World War II, and it suffered many of the same problems.

Despite political dysfunction, the Fourth Republic saw an era of great economic growth in France and the rebuilding of the nation's social institutions and industry after World War II, with assistance from the United States through the Marshall Plan. It also saw the beginning of the rapprochement with France's longtime enemy Germany, which led to Franco-German co-operation and eventually to the European Union.

The new constitution made some attempts to strengthen the executive branch of government to prevent the unstable situation before the war, but instability remained and the Fourth Republic saw frequent changes of government – there were 21 administrations in its 12-year history. Moreover, the government proved unable to make effective decisions regarding decolonization of the numerous remaining French colonies. After a series of crises culminating in the Algerian crisis of 1958, the Fourth Republic collapsed. Wartime leader Charles de Gaulle returned from retirement to preside over a transitional administration empowered to design a new French constitution. The Fourth Republic was dissolved on 5 October 1958 following a public referendum which established the current Fifth Republic with a strengthened presidency.

The May 1958 crisis, also known as the "Algiers putsch" or "the coup of 13 May", was a political crisis in France during the turmoil of the Algerian War of Independence (1954–1962) which led to the collapse of the Fourth Republic and its replacement by the Fifth Republic led by Charles de Gaulle who returned to power after a twelve-year absence. It started as a political uprising in Algiers on 13 May 1958 and then became a military coup d'état led by a coalition headed by Algiers deputy and reserve airborne officer Pierre Lagaillarde, French Generals Raoul Salan, Edmond Jouhaud, Jean Gracieux, and Jacques Massu, and by Admiral Philippe Auboyneau, commander of the Mediterranean fleet. The coup was supported by former Algerian Governor General Jacques Soustelle and his activist allies.

The coup had as its aim to oppose the formation of Pierre Pflimlin 's new government and to impose a change of policies in favor of the right-wing partisans of French Algeria.

After his tour as Governor General, Jacques Soustelle had returned to France to organize support for de Gaulle's return to power, while retaining close ties to the army and the settlers. By early 1958, he had organized a coup d'état, bringing together dissident army officers and colonial officials with sympathetic Gaullists. On 13 May, right-wing elements seized power in Algiers and called for a Government of Public Safety under General de Gaulle. Massu became chairman of the Public Safety Committee and one of the leaders of the revolt. General Salan assumed leadership of a Committee of Public Safety formed to replace the civil authority and pressed the junta 's demands that de Gaulle be named by French president René Coty to head a government of national union invested with extraordinary powers to prevent the "abandonment of Algeria".

Salan announced on radio that the Army had "provisionally taken over responsibility for the destiny of French Algeria". Under the pressure of Massu, Salan declared Vive de Gaulle! from the balcony of the Algiers Government-General building on 15 May. De Gaulle answered two days later that he was ready to "assume the powers of the Republic". Many worried as they saw this answer as support for the army. At a 19 May press conference, de Gaulle asserted again that he was at the disposal of the country. When a journalist expressed the concerns of some who feared that he would violate civil liberties, de Gaulle retorted vehemently:

Have I ever done that? Quite the opposite, I have reestablished them when they had disappeared. Who honestly believes that, at age 67, I would start a career as a dictator?

On 24 May, French paratroopers from Algeria landed on Corsica by aircraft, taking the French island in a bloodless action called " Opération Corse." Subsequently, preparations were made in Algeria for " Operation Resurrection," which had as objectives the seizure of Paris and the removal of the French government, through the use of paratroopers and armoured forces based at Rambouillet. "Operation Resurrection" was to be implemented if one of three scenarios occurred: if de Gaulle was not approved as leader of France by Parliament, if de Gaulle asked for military assistance to take power, or if it seemed that the French Communist Party was making any move to take power in France.

Political leaders on many sides agreed to support the General's return to power with the notable exceptions of François Mitterrand, who was a minister in Guy Mollet 's Socialist government, Pierre Mendès-France (a member of the Radical-Socialist Party, former Prime Minister), Alain Savary (also a member of the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO)), and the Communist Party. The philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre, a noted atheist, said, "I would rather vote for God", as he would at least be more modest than de Gaulle. Mendès-France and Savary, opposed to their respective parties' support of de Gaulle, would form together, in 1960, the Parti socialiste autonome (PSA, Socialist Autonomous Party), ancestor of the Parti socialiste unifié (PSU, Unified Socialist Party).

On 29 May President René Coty told parliament that the nation was on the brink of civil war, so he was "turning towards the most illustrious of Frenchmen, towards the man who, in the darkest years of our history, was our chief for the reconquest of freedom and who refused dictatorship in order to re-establish the Republic. I ask General de Gaulle to confer with the head of state and to examine with him what, in the framework of Republican legality, is necessary for the immediate formation of a government of national safety and what can be done, in a fairly short time, for a deep reform of our institutions."

De Gaulle accepted Coty's proposal under the precondition that a new constitution would be introduced creating a powerful presidency in which a sole executive, the first of which was to be himself, ruled for seven-year periods. Another condition was that he be granted extraordinary powers for a period of six months.

De Gaulle's newly formed cabinet was approved by the National Assembly on 1 June 1958, by 329 votes against 224, while he was granted the power to govern by ordinances for a six-month period as well as the task to draft a new Constitution.

The May 1958 crisis indicated that the Fourth Republic by 1958 no longer had any support from the French army in Algeria, and was at its mercy even in civilian political matters. This decisive shift in the balance of power in civil-military relations in France in 1958 and the threat of force was the main immediate factor in the return of de Gaulle to power in France.

During the Fifth Republic, founded in 1958 amid the troubles brought by the Algerian War (1954–62), France was ruled by successive right-wing administrations until 1981. The successive governments generally applied the Gaullist program of national independence, and modernization in a dirigiste fashion.

The political instability characteristic of the Fourth Republic was gone. The far-right extremists who had threatened military coups over the question of French Algeria largely receded after Algeria was granted independence. The French Communist Party 's image gradually became less radical. Politics largely turned into a Gaullists vs left-wing opposition.

The Gaullist government, however, was criticized for its heavy-handedness: while elections were free, the state had a monopoly on radio and TV broadcasting and sought to have its point of view on events imposed (this monopoly was not absolute, however, since there were radio stations transmitting from nearby countries specifically for the benefit of the French).

Although Gaullism, which had gained legitimacy during World War II, initially also attracted several left-wing individuals, Gaullism in government became decidedly conservative.

In 1962, de Gaulle had the French citizens vote in a referendum concerning the election of the president at universal suffrage, something which had been discredited since Napoleon III 's 1851 coup. 3/5 of the voters approved however the referendum, and thereafter the President of the French Republic was elected at universal suffrage, giving him increased authority on the Parliament. De Gaulle won the 1965 presidential election, opposed on his left by François Mitterrand who had taken the lead of the Federation of the Democratic and Socialist Left, a coalition of most left-wing parties (apart from the French Communist Party, then led by Waldeck Rochet who did call to vote for Mitterrand).

In May 1968, a series of worker strikes and student riots rocked France. These did not, however, result in an immediate change of government, with a right-wing administration being triumphantly reelected in the snap election of June 1968. However, in 1969 the French electorate turned down a referendum on the reform of the French Senate proposed by de Gaulle. Since the latter had always declared that in the eventuality of a "NO" to a referendum he would resign, the referendum was also a plebiscite. Thus, the rejection of the reform by more than 52% of the voters was widely considered to be mostly motivated by weariness with de Gaulle, and ultimately provoked his resignation that year.

May '68 and its aftermaths saw the occupation of the LIP factory in Besançon, one of the major social conflict of the 1970s, during which the CFDT and the Unified Socialist Party, of which Pierre Mendès-France was a member, theorized workers' self-management. A part of the PSU, the autonomist movement, inspired by Italian operaismo, made its first appearance on the political scene.

Georges Pompidou, de Gaulle's Prime Minister, was elected in 1969, remaining President until his death in 1974. In 1972, 3/5 of the French approved by referendum the enlargement of the European Economic Community (CEE) to the United Kingdom, Denmark, Ireland, and Norway.

After Pompidou's sudden death, Valéry Giscard d'Estaing managed to overhaul the remaining Gaullist barons – with the help of Jacques Chirac —, and won the subsequent election against François Mitterrand on the left. Giscard transformed the ORTF, the state organism in charge of media, and created several different channels, including Radio France. However, it was not until François Mitterrand 's accession to the Élysée Palace in 1981 that media were liberalized.

In 1981, François Mitterrand, a Socialist, was elected president, on a program of far-reaching reforms (110 Propositions for France). This was enabled by the 1972 Common Program between the PS, the PRG and the PCF – which had remained, just as in Italy, a strong party throughout the Cold War. Mitterrand served until 1995.

After securing a majority in parliament through a snap election, his government ran a program of social and economic reforms:

However, in 1983, high inflation and economic woes forced a dramatic turnaround with respect to economic policies, known as rigueur (rigor) – the Socialist-Communist government then embarked on policies of fiscal and spending restraint. Though the nationalizations were subsequently reversed by both subsequent left-wing and right-wing governments, the social reforms undertaken have remained standing.

Furthermore, the end of the Trente Glorieuses (Thirty Glorious) period of growth witnesses the beginning of a structural unemployment, which became an important political issue. Since the 1980s, unemployment has remained permanently high, at about 10% of the population, regardless of the policies applied to fight it.

In 1986, Jacques Chirac 's neo-Gaullist Rally for the Republic (RPR) party won the legislative election.

For the first time in the Fifth Republic, a left-wing President was forced to work together with a right-wing Prime minister, leading to the first cohabitation. Although many commentators were surprised at the time, and considered it to be an institutional crisis, some claiming the Fifth Republic could not accommodate itself of such rivalry at the head of the state, cohabitation repeated itself after the 1993 elections, when the RPR again won the elections, and then after the 1997 elections, when the Socialist Party won, leading to the constitution of Lionel Jospin 's Plural Left government while Chirac was only at the beginning of his first presidential term.

The tradition in periods of "cohabitation" (a President of one party, prime minister of another) is for the President to exercise the primary role in foreign and security policy, with the dominant role in domestic policy falling to the prime minister and his government. Jospin stated, however, that he would not a priori leave any domain exclusively to the President, as that was a tradition issued from de Gaulle.

Since then, the government alternated between a left-wing coalition (composed of the French Socialist Party (PS), the French Communist Party (PCF) and more recently Les Verts, the Greens) and a right-wing coalition (composed of Jacques Chirac 's Rally for the Republic (RPR), later replaced by the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP), and the Union for French Democracy, UDF). Those two coalitions are fairly stable; there have been none of the mid-term coalition reorganizations and governments frequently overthrown which were commonplace under the Fourth Republic.

The 1980s and 1990s saw also the rise of Jean-Marie Le Pen 's National Front (FN), a far-right party which blames immigration, more particularly immigration from North African countries such as Algeria, for increased unemployment and crime. The social situation in the French suburbs (banlieues : literally, "suburbs", but in France a euphemism for large suburban housing projects for the poor, with a high proportion of the population of North African descent) still have to be successfully tackled. Jean-Marie Le Pen's relative success at the French Presidential election, 2002 has been attributed in part to concerns about juvenile criminality.

Massive general strikes followed by all the trade-unions were triggered in November–December 1995, paralyzing France, in protest against the Juppé plan of libéral (in French, free market) reforms. These strikes were generally considered a turning point in the French social movement. It remains to be seen how much of these reforms will now be enacted by Sarkozy's first government, as Sarkozy was elected president on a similar platform in May 2007.

During his first two years in office, President Jacques Chirac 's prime minister was Alain Juppé, who served contemporaneously as leader of Chirac's neo- Gaullist Rally for the Republic (RPR). Chirac and Juppé benefited from a very large, if rather unruly, majority in the National Assembly (470 out of 577 seats).

Mindful that the government might have to take politically costly decisions in advance of the legislative elections planned for spring 1998 in order to ensure that France met the Maastricht criteria for the single currency of the EU, Chirac decided in April 1997 to call early elections.

The Left, led by Socialist Party leader Lionel Jospin, whom Chirac had defeated in the 1995 presidential race, unexpectedly won a solid National Assembly majority (319 seats, with 289 required for an absolute majority). President Chirac named Jospin prime minister on 2 June, and Jospin went on to form a Plural Left government composed primarily of Socialist ministers, along with some ministers from allied parties of the left, such as the Communist Party and the Greens.

Jospin stated his support for continued European integration and his intention to keep France on the path towards Economic and Monetary Union, albeit with greater attention to social concerns.

Chirac and Jospin worked together, for the most part, in the foreign affairs field with representatives of the presidency and the government pursuing a single, agreed French policy. Their "cohabitation" arrangement was the longest-lasting in the history of the Fifth Republic.

However, it ended subsequent to the legislative elections that followed Chirac's decisive defeat of Jospin (who failed even to make it through to the runoff) in the 2002 presidential election.

This led to President Chirac's appointment of Jean-Pierre Raffarin (UMP) as the new prime minister.

On 29 May 2005, French voters in the referendum on the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe turned down the proposed charter by a wide margin.

This was generally regarded as a rebuke to Chirac and his government as well as the PS leadership, the majority save for the leftist faction and Laurent Fabius – had supported the proposed constitution. Two days later, Raffarin resigned and Chirac appointed Dominique de Villepin, formerly Foreign Minister as Prime Minister of France.

An enduring force is Jean-Marie Le Pen 's National Front party, whose anti-immigration, isolationist policies have been described by critics as inspired by xenophobia. Le Pen's survival into the runoff of 2002 had many observers worried this time, but in the 2007 first round Le Pen finished a distant fourth.

The 23 February 2005 French law on colonialism was met by a public uproar on the left-wing. Voted by the UMP majority, it was charged with advocating historical revisionism, and after long debates and international opposition (from Abdelaziz Bouteflika or Aimé Césaire, founder of the Négritude movement), was repealed by Jacques Chirac himself.

In Autumn 2005, civil unrest erupted in a number of lower classes suburbs due to the violence of the police. As a result, the government invoked a state of emergency which lasted until January 2006.

In 2006, Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin enacted amendments that established a First Employment Contract, known as the CPE, a special kind of employment contract under which workers under the age of 26 could be hired and fired liberally.

Proponents of the measure argued that French workforce laws, which put the burden of proof on the employer for dismissing employees, dissuaded employers from hiring new employees; according to them, this is one reason while the unemployment rate of those under 26 is 23% and that of youngsters from some lower classes neighbourhoods as high as 40%, and not the refusal of exploitation to enrich the wealthy class.

However, the plan backfired, with criticism both on the way the law was passed (using an exceptional legislative procedure) and on the law itself, which was criticized both for weakening workers' rights in general, and for singling out the young disfavourably instead of attempting to cure more general issues. Following the 2006 protests against the CPE, the government had to withdraw the legislation.

Following from these events, Villepin lost all hopes of winning the presidency, and his government no longer tried to enact reforms.

Conservative Nicolas Sarkozy was elected and took office on 16 May 2007. The problem of high unemployment has yet to be resolved. Sarkozy was very actively involved in the military operation in Libya to oust the Gaddafi government in 2011.

In 2012 election for president, Socialist François Hollande defeated Sarkozy's try for reelection. Hollande advocated a growth policy in contrast to the austerity policy advocated by Germany's Angela Merkel as a way of dealing with the Euro area crisis. In 2014, Hollande stood with Merkel and US President Obama in imposing sanctions on Russia for its actions against Ukraine. In December 2016, Hollande announced he will not seek re-election as president of France.

In the 2017 election for president the winner was Emmanuel Macron, the founder of a new party " La République En Marche! ". It declared itself above left and right. He called parliamentary elections that brought him the absolute majority of députés. He appointed a prime minister from the centre right, and ministers from both the centre left and centre right.

In the 2022 presidential election president Macron was re-elected after beating his far-right rival, Marine Le Pen, in the runoff. He was the first re-elected incumbent French president since 2002.

In May 2022, President Emmanuel Macron's centrist party, La République en Marche, changed its name to Renaissance. However, Macron's coalition lost its parliamentary majority in June 2022 election, meaning the first time in 20 years that French president lost absolute majority in parliament. Macron's centre-right alliance won 234 seats, the leftist coalition 141 seats, the far-right National Rally 90 seats, and the conservative Les Républicains and its allies 75 seats. The opposition left-wing coalition has been dominated by La France Insoumise (LFI) and its leader Jean-Luc Mélenchon. The other members of the left-wing alliance are the Socialist Party (PS), French Communist Party (PCF), and the Greens Europe Ecologie les Verts (EELV).

One of the great questions of current French politics is that of libéralisme – that is, economic liberalism, individualism society and the market system, as opposed to government intervention in the economy. Broadly speaking, supporters of libéralisme want to let the forces of the free market operate with less regulation. For example, they want little regulation of the workforce and repeal of French laws setting a 35-hour work week rather than leaving this to contract negotiations. Critics of libéralisme argue that governmental intervention is necessary for the welfare of workers; they point out that great gains in workers' rights were historically achieved by government intervention and social mobilization, as during the Popular Front. Similarly, proponents of libéralisme favour free markets and the free movement of goods, which critics contend benefit the wealthy class at the expense of the ordinary worker.

According to historian René Rémond 's famous classification of the right-wings in France, this libérale tradition belongs to the Orleanist inheritance, while Gaullists inherited from Bonapartism and a tradition of state intervention issued from the National Council of Resistance (CNR)'s welfare state program after the war. However, neo-Gaullists have since rallied economic liberalism, with the result that modern French conservatives – such as the UMP, or before that the RPR, the UDF or the Independent Republicans – all supported economic liberalism. The so-called right-wing of the Socialist Party : François Hollande, Dominique Strauss-Kahn, Ségolène Royal have done likewise.

Some rightists, such as Nicolas Sarkozy, favour radical change in the relationship between the government and the free-market. They argue that for the last 30 years, under both left-wing and right-wing governments, the French have been misled into believing that things could go on without real reforms. One may say that they favour a Thatcherite approach. Others on the right (including Dominique de Villepin) as well as some on the left argue in favour of gradual reforms. In comparison, the 2005 refusal of the French electorate to vote for the proposed European Constitution was interpreted by some – in particular the French Communist Party and far-left parties such as LO or the LCR – as a popular refusal of libéralisme, which the European Union is perceived to embody. Some such as Laurent Fabius have argued that the Socialist Party should thus have a more "left-wing" line.

Libertarianism as such is rare in France; it is considered a form of ultra-liberalism or neo-liberalism and upheld only by very few right-wingers, such as Alain Madelin.

Since the 1789 French Revolution, the political spectrum in France has obeyed the left–right distinction. However, due to the historical association of the term droite (right) with monarchism, conservative or right-wing parties have tended to avoid officially describing themselves as representing the "right wing".

French politics was for a long time characterised by two politically opposed groupings: one left-wing, centred on the French Socialist Party, and the other right-wing, centred previously around the Rassemblement pour la République (RPR) and its successor the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP), today called Les Republicains.

Liberal and centrist political party, Renaissance (RE) (formerly known as En Marche! and later La République En Marche!), has been the biggest political party in France since 2017.

At the beginning of the 20th century, the French Left divided itself into:

After 1959, both parties were in opposition until 1981. They had formed a coalition (with the Party Radical de Gauche) called the "Union de la Gauche" between 1972 and 1978.

The Old Left was contested on its left by the New Left parties including the:

However, the emblem of the New Left was the Unified Socialist Party, or PSU.

The right-wing has been divided into three broad families by historian René Rémond.

Counter-revolutionaries who opposed all change since the French Revolution. Today, they are located on the far-right of the French political spectrum.

Orleanists had rallied the Republic at the end of the 19th century and advocated economic liberalism (referred to in French simply as libéralisme). Today, they are broadly classified as centre-right or centrist parties.

Large majority of the politicians of Nicolas Sarkozy 's then-ruling Union for a Popular Movement could have been classified in this family.

then the Union of Democrats for the Republic

The Gaullist UDR was then transformed by Jacques Chirac in the Rally for the Republic (RPR) in 1976, a neo-Gaullist party which embraced economic liberalism.

In 2002, the Gaullist RPR and the Union for French Democracy merged into the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP), although some elements of the old UDF remained outside the new alliance. In 2015, the party's name was changed from Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) to The Republicans.

In 2007, a section of the remaining UDF, headed by François Bayrou, refused to align themselves on Nicolas Sarkozy and created the MoDem in an attempt to make space for a center-right party.

In conclusion, Jean-Marie Le Pen managed to unify most of the French far-right in the National Front (FN), created in 1972 in the aftermaths of the Algerian War, which succeeded in gaining influence starting in the 1980s. Despite Le Pen's success in the 2002 presidential election, his party has been weakened by Bruno Mégret 's spin-out, leading to the creation of the National Republican Movement, as well as by the concurrence of Philippe de Villiers ' Movement for France, and also by the internal struggles concerning Le Pen's forthcoming succession. In 2018, far-right National Front party (FN), led by Marine Le Pen, changed its name to the National Rally (Rassemblement National, RN). Since then, the party has seen several electoral successes, including in the 2022 presidential election and the first round of the 2024 legislative snap elections.

Residual monarchists movements, inheritors of Charles Maurras ' Action française, also managed to survive, although many of them joined Le Pen's FN in the 1980s. Some neo-fascists who considered Le Pen to be too moderate broke away in 1974 to form the Parti des forces nouvelles, which maintained close links to the far-right students' union Groupe Union Défense.

Another important theoretical influence in the far-right appeared in the 1980s with Alain de Benoist 's Nouvelle Droite movement, organized into the GRECE.

The politics in Corsica is that of a territorial collectivity with a specific organization and competences. This politics results from an institutional evolution since the in Corsica, linked to the existence of significant nationalist movements, autonomist or independence-oriented.

Annexed to France in 1768, Corsica was integrated into the French administrative organization during the Revolution by a decree of 30. The department of Corsica was created on 4 March 1790 [ fr ]. From 1796 to 1811, Corsica was divided into two departments [ fr ] (Liamone and Golo).

In 1960, with the creation of regional action constituencies, Corsica was part of the Provence-Côte d'Azur-Corsica region. A decree of 9 made Corsica a region, and then, on 1, the island was again divided into two departments : Haute-Corse and Corse-du-Sud.

With the exception of the competences exercised by the territorial collectivity of Corsica and specific tax adaptations, these departments are similar to other metropolitan departments.

Each is equipped with a general council elected by universal direct suffrage every six years. Each general council elects its president, who is the executive body of the department.

Following the decentralization laws, two laws establishing a "special status" for the Corsica region were adopted in 1982. In a decision, the Constitutional Council validated the principle of the existence of a collectivity with a unique status.

Unlike other French regions, Corsica is equipped with the Corsican Assembly (and not a regional council) elected from 8 (the first regional elections were held in 1986 in other regions) by universal direct suffrage and by party-list proportional representation. The executive is entrusted to the president of the Assembly of Corsica.

The Corsica region then exercises the competences of a French region but also has responsibilities in the areas of cultural affairs and local development, planning, it operates the railway network, and enters into agreements with the State on air and maritime transport. The Assembly of Corsica can also formulate opinions and recommendations to the Prime Minister on the island's public services.

However, the full proportional system and the fact that 2,231 votes are sufficient for a list to obtain a seat make the Assembly difficult to govern. It was thus dissolved by the Council of Ministers in 1984 before a law of 10 modified its voting system to align with that of the regional councils.

In 1988, the Assembly of Corsica adopted a resolution affirming the existence of the Corsican people. This issue sparked new discussions about the island's status.

In 1991, the Minister of the Interior Pierre Joxe had a new status for Corsica adopted. Drawing inspiration from the regime in place in French Polynesia, the new law created a "territorial collectivity of Corsica", with a special status, in place of the region:

The first article of the adopted law states:

The French Republic guarantees to the living historical and cultural community that constitutes the Corsican people, a component of the French people, the rights to the preservation of its cultural identity and the defense of its specific economic and social interests. These rights, linked to insularity, are exercised in respect of national unity, within the framework of the Constitution, the laws of the Republic, and this status.

However, the Constitutional Council censured this article, considering it "contrary to the Constitution, which recognizes only the French people, composed of all French citizens without distinction of origin, race, or religion".

During the elections that followed, nationalist lists obtained 25% of the votes.

In the years following the adoption of the Joxe status, several laws granted the island a specific tax status.

The nationalist movement organized violence, including between rival nationalist factions. In 1998, the prefect Claude Érignac was assassinated in the street in Ajaccio. His successor, Bernard Bonnet, launched a "clean hands" operation. The following year, he was implicated in the paillotes affair [ fr ] as attacks multiplied.

The denunciation of violence by the nationalist parties represented in the Assembly of Corsica and the formation of a platform, Unita, to dialogue with the government enabled the opening of new discussions: the Matignon process.

A new law was finally adopted in 2002. It strengthened the competences of the collectivity.

In 2003, the Constitution was amended to allow the organization of a local referendum [ fr ] on the evolution of territorial institutions. That same year, the Parliament adopted a law providing for such a consultation aimed at creating a single territorial collectivity replacing the current territorial collectivity and the two departments. This law was supported by the nationalist movements, but on 6, 51% of voters rejected the proposal.

The law # 2003-486 “organizing a consultation of Corsican voters on the modification of the institutional organization of Corsica” was promulgated. The proposed reform notably provided for the replacement of the territorial collectivity of Corsica and the two departments (Haute-Corse and Corse-du-Sud) with a single collectivity and the creation of two territorial councils, one in Haute-Corse and the other in Corse-du-Sud. It received the support of the nationalist movements.

The single collectivity project was relaunched in 2015 through discussions between Corsican elected officials and the government. The Law on the new territorial organization of the Republic (NOTRe law) of 7 provided for the creation of a "collectivity of Corsica" on 1 in place of the current territorial collectivity and the two departments.

During the 2017 presidential election, Emmanuel Macron achieved one of his lowest scores (18.48% of the votes in the first round and 51.48% in the second), suffering from the support of the Giacobbi radical left family, which led Haute-Corse until the last municipal elections and the judicial conviction of Paul Giacobbi earlier that year. In contrast, the autonomists led by Gilles Simeoni and the independentists led by Jean-Guy Talamoni benefited from the “degagist” wave and won three of the four legislative constituencies in the election held that same year

On 30, the Council of Ministers adopted the draft constitutional law on the autonomy status of Corsica within the French Republic. To be adopted, this constitutional reform must be voted on by the National Assembly, then the Senate, and then during their joint meeting in Congress.

Corsica is divided into two departments: the prefecture of Haute-Corse is located in Bastia and that of Corse-du-Sud in Ajaccio. The departments also have three sub-prefectures in Calvi, Corte, and Sartène. Until 1811, an additional sub-prefecture was located in Vico.

The Law on the new territorial organization of the Republic created a single territorial collectivity on 1 in place of the territorial collectivity of Corsica and the two departments. The central administrative levels have nevertheless been preserved: Corsica thus retains two departmental prefectures and the associated State services at the deconcentrated level, but sees the two departments at the decentralized level merge. A similar project had been rejected during the 2003 referendum.

Equipped with the same bodies as the former territorial collectivity of Corsica, the Collectivity of Corsica additionally exercises the competences devolved to the departmental councils, which are thus abolished. The Assembly of Corsica is composed of 63 members, and the majority bonus granted to the list that comes first in the election is increased from 9 to 11 seats.

Corsica forms a French territorial collectivity similar to a region but with a special status.

Its deliberative body is the Assembly of Corsica, elected by universal direct suffrage every six years, concurrently with the regional elections, via a two-round proportional list system.

The Assembly elects its president, but, unlike the regions, the latter is not responsible for executive power. This belongs to the executive council, composed of a president and ten members, elected by the Assembly. The executive council can be overthrown by a motion of no confidence from the Assembly of Corsica.

There is also an Economic, Social and Cultural Council of Corsica [ fr ], which is consultative.

The Collectivity of Corsica has specific competences, set by the General Code of Local Authorities [ fr ] :

The collectivity has seven public establishments responsible for implementing its policy:

Corsica has 360 communes (236 in Haute-Corse and 124 in Corse-du-Sud) grouped into 19 intermunicipalities (12 in Haute-Corse and 7 in Corse-du-Sud).

France is a semi-presidential system determined by the Constitution of the Fifth Republic. The nation declares itself to be an "indivisible, secular, democratic, and social Republic ". The constitution provides for a separation of powers and proclaims France's "attachment to the Rights of Man and the principles of National Sovereignty as defined by the Declaration of 1789 ".

The political system of France consists of an executive branch, a legislative branch, and a judicial branch. Executive power is exercised by the president of the republic and the Government. The Government consists of the prime minister and ministers. The prime minister is appointed by the president, and is responsible to Parliament. The Government, including the prime minister, can be revoked by the National Assembly, the lower house of Parliament, through a motion of no-confidence; this ensures that the prime minister is practically always supported by a majority in the lower house (which, on most topics, has prominence over the upper house).

Parliament consists of the National Assembly and the Senate. It passes statutes and votes on the budget; it controls the action of the executive through formal questioning on the floor of the houses of Parliament and by establishing commissions of inquiry. The constitutionality of the statutes is checked by the Constitutional Council, members of which are appointed by the president of the republic, the president of the National Assembly, and the president of the Senate. Former presidents of the Republic can also be members of the Council if they wish (Valéry Giscard d'Estaing and Jacques Chirac are the only former presidents to have participated in the Council's work).

The independent judiciary is based upon civil law system which evolved from the Napoleonic Codes. It is divided into the judicial branch (dealing with civil law and criminal law) and the administrative branch (dealing with appeals against executive decisions), each with their own independent supreme court of appeal: the Court of Cassation for the judicial courts and the Conseil d'Etat for the administrative courts. The French government includes various bodies that check abuses of power and independent agencies.

While France is a unitary state, its administrative subdivisions— regions, departments and communes —have various legal functions, and the national government is prohibited from intruding into their normal operations. France was a founding member of the European Coal and Steel Community, later the European Union. As such, France has transferred part of its sovereignty to European institutions, as provided by its constitution. The French government therefore has to abide by European treaties, directives and regulations. According to the V-Dem Democracy indices France was in 2023 the 10th most electoral democratic country in the world.

A popular referendum approved the constitution of the French Fifth Republic in 1958, greatly strengthening the authority of the presidency and the executive with respect to Parliament.

The constitution does not contain a bill of rights in itself, but its preamble mentions that France should follow the principles of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, as well as those of the preamble to the constitution of the Fourth Republic. This has been judged to imply that the principles laid forth in those texts have constitutional value, and that legislation infringing on those principles should be found unconstitutional if a recourse is filed before the Constitutional Council. Also, recent modifications of the Constitution have added a reference in the preamble to an Environment charter that has full constitutional value, and a right for citizens to contest the constitutionality of a statute before the Constitutional Council.

The foundational principles of the constitution include: the equality of all citizens before law, and the rejection of special class privileges such as those that existed prior to the French Revolution ; presumption of innocence ; freedom of speech ; freedom of opinion including freedom of religion ; the guarantee of property against arbitrary seizure; the accountability of government agents to the citizenry.

France has a semi-presidential system of government, with both a president and a prime minister. The prime minister is responsible to the French Parliament. A presidential candidate is required to obtain a nationwide majority of non-blank votes at either the first or second round of balloting, which implies that the president is somewhat supported by at least half of the voting population.

As a consequence, the president of France is the pre-eminent figure in French politics. He appoints the prime minister and chairs the Council of Ministers (Cabinet meeting). Though the president may not de jure dismiss the prime minister, nevertheless, if the prime minister is from the same political side, they can, in practice, have them resign on demand (De Gaulle is said to have initiated this practice "by requiring undated letters of resignation from his nominees to the premiership," though more recent presidents have not necessarily used this method). The president appoints the ministers, ministers-delegate and secretaries on the prime minister's proposal. When the president's political party or supporters control parliament, the president is the dominant player in executive action, choosing whomever he wishes for the government, and having it follow his political agenda (parliamentary disagreements do occur, though, even within the same party).

However, when the president's political opponents control parliament, the president's dominance can be severely limited, as they must choose a prime minister and government who reflect the majority in parliament, and who may implement the agenda of the parliamentary majority. When parties from opposite ends of the political spectrum control parliament and the presidency, the power-sharing arrangement is known as cohabitation. Before 2002, cohabitation occurred more commonly, because the term of the president was seven years and the term of the National Assembly was five years. With the term of the president shortened to five years, and with the presidential and parliamentary elections separated by only a few months, this is less likely to happen.

Emmanuel Macron became president on 14 May 2017, succeeding François Hollande. In the 2022 presidential election President Macron was re-elected after beating his far-right rival, Marine Le Pen, in the runoff. He was the first re-elected incumbent French president since 2002.

The prime minister leads the government, which comprises junior and senior ministers. It has at its disposal the civil service, government agencies, and the armed forces. The government is responsible to Parliament, and the National Assembly may pass a motion of censure, forcing the resignation of the government. This, in practice, forces the government to reflect the same political party or coalition which has the majority in the Assembly. Ministers have to answer questions from members of Parliament, both written and oral; this is known as the questions au gouvernement ("questions to the government"). In addition, ministers attend meetings of the houses of Parliament when laws pertaining to their areas of responsibility are being discussed.

Government ministers cannot pass legislation without parliamentary approval, though the prime minister may issue autonomous regulations or subordinated regulations (décrets d'application) provided they do not infringe on the Parliament domain, as detailed in the constitution. Ministers, however, can propose legislation to Parliament; since the Assembly is usually politically allied to the ministers, such legislation is, in general, very likely to pass (unless there is a hung parliament). However, this is not guaranteed, and, on occasion, the opinion of the majority parliamentarians may differ significantly from those of the executive, which often results in a large number of amendments.

The prime minister can commit the government's responsibility on a bill (effectively treating the bill as an issue of a confidence vote), under the provisions of article 49.3 of the Constitution. The bill is then considered passed unless the National Assembly votes a motion of no-confidence (French: motion de censure), in which case the bill is defeated and the government has to resign. As of 2006, the use of this article was the " First Employment Contract " proposed by Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin, a move that greatly backfired.

Traditionally, the government comprises members of three ranks. Ministers are the most senior members of the government; deputy ministers (ministres délégués) assist ministers in particular areas of their portfolio; state secretaries (secrétaires d'État) assist ministers in less important areas, and attend government meetings only occasionally. Before the founding of the Fifth Republic in 1958, some ministers of particular political importance were called "Ministers of State" (ministres d'État); the practice has continued under the Fifth Republic in a mostly honorific fashion: ministers styled "Minister of State" are of higher importance in the gouvernement and have the ability to deputize for the PM and the authority to hold inter-ministerial meetings.

The number of ministries and the division of responsibilities and administrations between them varies from government to government. While the name and exact responsibility of each ministry may change, one generally finds at least:

(For more on French ministries, see French government ministers.)

The government has a leading role in shaping the agenda of the houses of Parliament. It may propose laws to Parliament, as well as amendments during parliamentary meetings. It may make use of some procedures to speed up parliamentary deliberations.

The government holds weekly meetings (usually on Wednesday mornings): this weekly meeting, known as the Council of Ministers, is chaired by the president and usually takes place at the Élysée Palace. The Council of Ministers is the executive's formal decision-making body since government bills need to be approved by the Council to be introduced in Parliament, some decrees are signed during the meeting (decrees in Council of Ministers) and some constitutional powers have to be approved by the Council beforehand to be invoked.

The current French prime minister is Sébastien Lecornu since 9 September 2025.

The French executive has a limited power to establish regulation or legislation. (See below for how such regulations or legislative items interact with statute law.)

Only the president and prime minister sign decrees (décrets), which are akin to US executive orders. Decrees can only be taken following certain procedures and with due respect to the constitution and statute law.

The individual ministers issue ministerial orders (arrêtés) in their fields of competence, subordinate to statutes and decrees.

Contrary to a sometimes used polemical cliché, that dates from the French Third Republic of 1870–1940, with its decrees-law (décrets-lois), neither the president nor the prime minister may rule by decree (outside of the narrow case of presidential emergency powers).

The executive cannot issue decrees in areas that the Constitution puts under the responsibility of legislation, issued by Parliament. Still, Parliament may, through a habilitation law, authorize the executive to issue ordinances (ordonnances), with legislative value, in precisely defined areas. Habilitation laws specify the scope of the ordinance. After the ordinance is issued, the government has to propose a ratifying bill in order that the ordinance becomes a law. If Parliament votes "no" to ratification, the ordinance is cancelled. Most of the time, ratification is made implicitly or explicitly through a Parliament act that deals with the subject concerned, rather than by the ratification act itself.

The use of ordinances is normally reserved for urgent matters, or for technical, uncontroversial texts (such as the ordinances that converted all sums in French francs to euros in the various laws in force in France). There is also a practice of using ordinances to transpose European Directives into French law, to avoid late transposition of Directives, which happens often and is criticized by the EU Commission. Ordinances are also used to codify law into codes – to rearrange them for the sake of clarity without substantially modifying them. They are also sometimes used to push controversial legislation through, such as when Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin created new forms of work contracts in 2005. The opposition then criticizes the use of ordinances in such contexts as anti-democratic and demeaning to Parliament. Note however that since the National Assembly can dismiss the government through a motion of censure, the government necessarily relies on a majority in Parliament, and this majority would be likely to adopt the controversial law anyway.

The general rule is that government agencies and the civil service are at the disposal of the government. However, various agencies are independent agencies (autorités administratives indépendantes) that have been statutorily excluded from the executive's authority, although they belong in the executive branch.

These independent agencies have some specialized regulatory power, some executive power, and some quasi-judicial power. They are also often consulted by the government or the French Parliament seeking advice before regulating by law. They can impose sanctions that are named "administrative sanctions" sanctions administratives. However, their decisions can still be contested in a judicial court or in an administrative court.

Public media corporations should not be influenced in their news reporting by the executive in power, since they have the duty to supply the public with unbiased information. For instance, the Agence France-Presse (AFP) is an independent public corporation. Its resources must come solely from its commercial sales. The majority of the seats in its board are held by representatives of the French press.

The government also provides for watchdogs over its own activities; these independent administrative authorities are headed by a commission typically composed of senior lawyers or of members of the Parliament. Each of the two chambers of the Parliament often has its own commission, but sometimes they collaborate to create a single Commission nationale mixte paritaire. For example:

In addition, the duties of public service limit the power that the executive has over the French Civil Service. For instance, appointments, except for the highest positions (the national directors of agencies and administrations), must be made solely on merit (typically determined in competitive exams) or on time in office. Certain civil servants have statuses that prohibit executive interference; for instance, judges and prosecutors may be named or moved only according to specific procedures. Public researchers and university professors enjoy academic freedom ; by law, they enjoy complete freedom of speech within the ordinary constraints of academia.

The government also provides specialized agencies for regulating critical markets or limited resources, and markets set up by regulations. Although, as part of the administration, they are subordinate to the ministers, they often act with a high degree of independence.

Each ministry has a central administration (administration centrale), generally divided into directorates. These directorates are usually subdivided into divisions or sub-directorates. Each directorate is headed by a director, named by the President in Council. The central administration largely stays the same, regardless of the political tendency of the executive in power.

In addition, each minister has a private office, which is composed of members whose nomination is politically determined, called the cabinet. Cabinets are quite important and employ numbers of highly qualified staff to follow all administrative and political affairs. They are powerful, and have been sometimes considered as a parallel administration, especially (but not only) in all matters that are politically sensitive. Each cabinet is led by a chief-of-staff entitled directeur de cabinet.

The state also has distributive services spread throughout French territory, often reflecting divisions into régions or départements. The prefect, the representative of the national government in each région or département, supervises the activities of the distributive services in his or her jurisdiction. Generally, the services of a certain administration in a région or département are managed by a high-level civil servant, often called director, but not always; for instance, the services of the Trésor public (Treasury) in each département are headed by a treasurer-paymaster general, appointed by the president of the republic. In the last several decades, the departmental conseil général (see "Local Government" below) has taken on new responsibilities and plays an important role in administering government services at the local level.

The government also maintains public establishments. These have a relative administrative and financial autonomy, to accomplish a defined mission. They are attached to one or more supervising authorities. These are classified into several categories:

Note that in administrations and public establishments of an administrative character operate under public law, while establishments of an industrial and commercial character operate mostly under private law. In consequence, in the former, permanent personnel are civil servants, while normally in the latter, they are contract employees.

In addition, the government owns and controls all, or the majority, of shares of some companies, like Electricité de France, SNCF or Areva.

Social security organizations, though established by statute and controlled and supervised by the state, are not operated nor directly controlled by the national government. Instead, they are managed by the "social partners" (partenaires sociaux) – unions of employers such as the MEDEF and unions of employees. Their budget is separate from the national budget.

A Shadow Cabinet is sometimes formed by the opposition parties in the National Assembly, though this is uncommon.

The Parliament of France, making up the legislative branch, consists of two houses: the National Assembly and the Senate; the National Assembly is the pre-eminent body.

Parliament meets for one nine-month session each year: under special circumstances the president can call an additional session. Although parliamentary powers have diminished from those existing under the Fourth Republic, the National Assembly can still cause a government to fall if an absolute majority of the total Assembly membership votes to censure. It has happened twice under the 5th Republic: in 1962 against the government of George Pompidou and in 2024 against the government of Michel Barnier.

The government has a strong influence in shaping the agenda of Parliament (the cabinet has control over the parliamentary order of business 50% of the time, 2 out of 4 weeks per month). The government can also 'commit its responsibility' on a bill it has proposed (effectively treating the bill as an issue of a vote of confidence), and unless a motion of no confidence is introduced (within 24 hours after the proposal) and passed (within 48 hours of introduction – thus full procedures last at most 72 hours), the bill is considered adopted without a vote.

Members of Parliament enjoy parliamentary immunity. Both assemblies have committees that write reports on a variety of topics. If necessary, they can establish parliamentary enquiry commissions with broad investigative power.

The National Assembly is the principal legislative body. Its 577 deputies are directly elected for five-year terms in local majority votes, and all seats are voted on in each election.

The National Assembly may force the resignation of the government by voting a motion of censure. For this reason, the prime minister and their government are necessarily from the dominant party or coalition in the assembly. In the case of a president and assembly from opposing parties, this leads to the situation known as cohabitation. While motions of censure are periodically proposed by the opposition following government actions that it deems highly inappropriate, they are usually purely rhetorical; party discipline ensures that, throughout a parliamentary term, the government is never overthrown by the Assembly provided that the governing party/coalition has a working majority in the Chamber (which is no longer the case for the current ruling coalition as a result of the 2022 legislative election).

Following the 2024 legislative election, the left-wing New Popular Front (NFP) alliance became the largest faction in parliament with 182 seats. President Emmanuel Macron's Ensemble came in second place, while the far-right National Rally (RN) came in third. As a result of this hung parliament, Macron was unable to appoint a stable government, triggering the 2024–2025 French political crisis.

Senators are chosen by an electoral college of about 165,000 local elected officials for six-year terms, and half of the Senate is renewed every three years. Before the law of 30 July 2004, senators were elected for nine years, renewed by thirds every three years. There are currently 348 senators: 326 represent the metropolitan and overseas départements, 10 the other dependencies and 12 the French established abroad.

The Senate's legislative powers are limited; on most matters of legislation, the National Assembly has the last word in the event of a disagreement between the two houses.

Since the beginning of the Fifth Republic, the Senate has almost always had a right-wing majority. This is mostly due to the over-representation of small villages compared to big cities. This, and the indirect mode of election, prompted socialist Lionel Jospin, who was prime minister at the time, to declare the Senate an "anomaly".

Statute legislation may be proposed by the government (council of ministers), or by members of Parliament. In the first case, it is a projet de loi (English: government bill); in the latter case, a proposition de loi (English: private members' bill).

All projets de loi must undergo compulsory advisory review by the Conseil d'État before being submitted to parliament. Since 2009, the bill submitted to Parliament must also come with a study of the possible impact of the law: other possible options, interactions with European law, economical, social, financial and environmental consequences.

Propositions de loi cannot increase the financial load of the state without providing for funding.

Projets de loi start in the house of the government's choice (except in some narrow cases). Propositions de loi start in the house where they originated. After the house has amended and voted on the text, it is sent to the other house, which can also amend it. If the houses do not choose to adopt the text in identical terms, it is sent before a commission made of equal numbers of members of both houses, which tries to harmonize the text. If it does not manage to do so, the National Assembly can vote the text and have the final say on it (except for laws related to the organization of the Senate).

The law is then sent to the president of France for signature. At this point, the president of France, the speaker of either house or a delegation of 60 deputies or 60 senators can ask for the text to undergo constitutional review before being put into force; it is then sent before the Constitutional Council. The president can also, only once per law and with the countersigning of the prime minister, send the law back to parliament for another review. Otherwise, the president must sign the law. After being countersigned by the prime minister and the concerned ministers, it is then sent to the Journal Officiel for publication.

Financing Acts (lois de finances) and the Social Security Financing Acts (lois de financement de la sécurité sociale) are special Acts of Parliament voted and approved through specific procedures.

Because of the importance of allowing government and social security organizations to proceed with the payment of their suppliers, employees, and recipients, without risk of a being stopped by parliamentary discord, these bills are specially constrained. In the past, parliamentarians would often add unrelated amendments (cavaliers budgétaires) to the finance bills, to get such amendments passed – because of the reduced time in which the budget is examined. These are now considered unconstitutional. If Parliament cannot agree on a budget within some specified reasonable bounds, the government is entitled to adopt a budget through ordinances : this threat prevents parliamentarians from threatening to bankrupt the executive.

The way the Finance Bill is organized, and the way the government has to execute the budget, were deeply reformed in 2001 by the Loi organique n°2001-692 du 1er août 2001 relative aux lois de finances, generally known as the LOLF. Because of the major changes involved, the application of the law was gradual, and the first budget to be fully passed under LOLF will be the 2006 budget, passed in late 2005.

The LOLF divides expenses according to identifiable "missions" (which can be subdivided into sub-missions etc.). The performance of the administration and public bodies will be evaluated with respect to these missions.

The budget of the national government was forecast to be 290 billion Euro in 2011. This includes neither Social Security, nor the budgets of local governments.

It has long been customary for Parliament members to hold, in addition to the office of deputy or senator, another local office such as city mayor, hence titles like "Deputy and Mayor" (député-maire) and "Senator and Mayor" (sénateur-maire). This is known as the cumul of electoral offices. Proponents of the cumul allege that having local responsibilities ensures that members of parliament stay in contact with the reality of their constituency; also, they are said to be able to defend the interest of their city etc. better by having a seat in parliament.

In recent years, the cumul has been increasingly criticized. Critics contend that lawmakers that also have some local mandate cannot be assiduous to both tasks; for instance, they may neglect their duties to attend parliamentary sittings and commission in order to attend to tasks in their constituency. The premise that holders of dual office can defend the interest of their city etc. in the National Parliament is criticized in that national lawmakers should have the national interest in their mind, not the advancement of the projects of the particular city they are from. Finally, this criticism is part of a wider criticism of the political class as a cozy, closed world in which the same people make a long career from multiple positions.

As a consequence, laws that restrict the possibilities of having multiple mandates have been enacted.

The Economic and Social Council is a consultative assembly. It does not play a role in the adoption of statutes and regulations, but advises the lawmaking bodies on questions of social and economic policies.

The executive may refer any question or proposal of social or economic importance to the Economic and Social Council.

The Economic and Social Council publishes reports, which are sent to the prime minister, the National Assembly and the Senate. They are published in the Journal Official.

The most distinctive feature of the French judicial system is that it is divided into judicial and administrative streams. French law provides for a separate judicial branch with an independent judiciary which does not answer to or is directly controlled by the other two branches of government. France has a civil law legal system, the basis of which is codified law; however, case law plays a significant role in the determination of the courts.

The judicial stream of courts adjudicates civil and criminal cases. The judicial court stream consists of inferior courts, intermediate appellate courts, and the French Court of Cassation, the supreme court.

Judges are government employees but are granted special statutory protection from the executive. Judges have security of tenure and may not be promoted (or demoted) without their consent. Their careers are overseen by the Judicial Council of France.

The public prosecutors, on the other hand, take orders from the Minister of Justice. In the past, this has bred suspicion of undue political pressure to dismiss suits or claims against government officials charged with corruption, and the status of public prosecutors and their ties to government are frequently topics of debate.

Trial by jury is available only for severe criminal cases, which are the jurisdiction of the Courts of Assizes. A full Court is made up of a 3-judge panel and a petty jury of 9 jurors (vs. 12 jurors on appeal), who, together, render verdicts, and if a conviction is handed down, also determine a sentence. Jurors are selected at random from eligible voters.

In most other courts, judges are professional, except that the criminal court for minors is composed of one professional and two lay judges. Also, several specialty courts of original jurisdiction are sat by judges who are elected into office. For instance, labor tribunals are staffed with an equal number of magistrates from employers' unions and employees' unions. The same applies to land estate tribunals.

Pre-trial proceedings are inquisitorial by nature, but open court proceedings are adversarial. The burden of proof in criminal proceedings is on the prosecution, and the accused is constitutionally presumed innocent until proven guilty.

Courts of administrative law adjudicate on claims and suits against government offices and agencies. The administrative stream is made up of administrative courts, courts of administrative appeal, and the Council of State as the court of last resort.

The Council of State hears cases against executive branch decisions and has the power to quash or set aside executive-issued statutory instruments such as orders and regulations when they violate constitutional law, enacted legislation, or codified law.

Court proceedings mostly involve written hearings and are inquisitorial, with judges having the parties submit written testimony or arguments.

Any jurisdictional dispute between the judicial and administrative streams are settled by a special court called Tribunal des conflits, or "Court of Jurisdictional Dispute", composed of an equal number of Supreme Court justices and councillors of State.

Neither judicial nor administrative courts are empowered to rule on the constitutionality of acts of Parliament. While technically not part of the judicial branch, the Constitutional Council examines legislation and decides whether or not it violates the Constitution. This applies, prior to their enactment, to all forms of organic laws, but only by referral from the French president, president of the Senate, president of the National Assembly, the prime minister, or any of the 60 senators or 60 assembly members of the other types of laws or treaties. After their enactment, laws can all be reviewed by referral from the highest administrative court, the Conseil d'Etat, or by the highest judicial court, the Cour de Cassation. The Constitutional Council may declare acts to be unconstitutional, even if they contradict the principles of the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (cited in the Preamble of the Constitution).

Council members to the Constitutional Council are appointed for nine years (three every three years); three are appointed by the president, three by the president of the National Assembly, and three by the president of the Senate. The former presidents are also members for life of the Constitutional Council.

France's main Court of Audit (Cour des Comptes) and regional audit courts audit government finances, public institutions (including other courts), and public entities. The court publishes an annual report and can refer criminal matters to public prosecutors. It can also directly fine public accountants for mishandling funds, and refer civil servants who misused funds to the Court of Financial and Budgetary Discipline.

The main and regional audit courts do not judge the accountants of private organizations. However, in some circumstances, they may audit their accounting, especially when an organization has been awarded a government contract over a public utility or a service requiring the permanent use of the public domain or if an organization is a bidder on a government contract. The Court is often solicitated by various state agencies, parliamentary commissions, and public regulators, but it can also be petitioned to act by any French citizen or organization operating in France.

The Court's finances are overseen by financial commissions of the two Houses of the French Parliament which also set the Court's working budget in the annual Act of finances.

In 1973 the position of médiateur de la République (the Republic's ombudsman) was created. The ombudsman is charged with solving, without the need to a recourse before the courts, the disagreements between citizens and the administrations and other entities charged with a mission of a public service; proposing reforms to the Government and the administrations to further these goals; and actively participating in the international promotion of human rights.

In 2008, the office was enshrined in the French Constitution and three years later, in 2011, it was renamed Défenseur des droits (Defender of Rights).

The ombudsman is appointed for a period of six years by the president of the republic in the Council of Ministers. He cannot be removed from office and is protected for his official actions by an immunity similar to parliamentary immunity. He does not receive or accept orders from any authority. The current ombudsman is Claire Hédon.

France uses a civil law system; that is, law arises primarily from written statutes; judges are not to make law, but merely to interpret it (though the amount of judge interpretation in certain areas makes it equivalent to case law).

Many fundamental principles of French Law were laid in the Napoleonic Codes. Basic principles of the rule of law were laid in the Napoleonic Code: laws can only address the future and not the past (ex post facto laws are prohibited); to be applicable, laws must have been officially published (see Journal Officiel).

In agreement with the principles of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, the general rule is that of freedom, and law should only prohibit actions detrimental to society. As Guy Canivet, first president of the Court of Cassation, said about what should be the rule in French law:

That is, law may lay out prohibitions only if they are needed, and if the inconveniences caused by this restriction do not exceed the inconveniences that the prohibition is supposed to remedy.

France does not recognize religious law, nor does it recognize religious beliefs as a motivation for the enactment of prohibitions. As a consequence, France has long had neither blasphemy laws nor sodomy laws (the latter being abolished in 1789).

French law differentiates between legislative acts (loi), generally passed by the legislative branch, and regulations (règlement, instituted by décrets), issued by the prime minister. There also exist secondary regulation called arrêtés, issued by ministers, subordinates acting in their names, or local authorities; these may only be taken in areas of competency and within the scope delineated by primary legislation. There are also more regulations issued by independent agencies, especially relating to economic matters.

According to the Constitution of France (article 34):

Statutes shall likewise determine the rules concerning:

Statutes shall determine the fundamental principles of:

Finance Acts shall determine the resources and obligations of the State in the manner and with the reservations specified in an institutional Act. Social Security Finance Acts shall determine the general conditions for the financial balance of Social Security and, in light of their revenue forecasts, shall determine expenditure targets in the manner and with the reservations specified in an institutional Act. Programme Acts shall determine the objectives of the economic and social action of the State.

The provisions of this article may be enlarged upon and complemented by an organic law.

Other areas are matters of regulation. This separation between law and regulation is enforced by the Conseil constitutionnel : the government can, with the agreement of the Conseil constitutionnel, modify by decrees the laws that infringe on the domain of regulations. At the same, the Conseil d'État nullifies decrees that infringe on the domain of the law.

When courts have to deal with incoherent texts, they apply a certain hierarchy: a text higher in the hierarchy will overrule a lower text. The general rule is that the Constitution is superior to laws which are superior to regulations. However, with the intervention of European law and international treaties, and the quasi- case law of the administrative courts, the hierarchy may become somewhat unclear. The following hierarchy of norms should thus be taken with due caution:

Traditionally, decision-making in France is highly centralized, with each of France's departments headed by a prefect appointed by the central government, in addition to the conseil général, a locally elected council. However, in 1982, the national government passed legislation to decentralize authority by giving a wide range of administrative and fiscal powers to local elected officials. In March 1986, regional councils were directly elected for the first time, and the process of decentralization has continued, albeit at a slow pace. In March 2003, a constitutional revision has changed very significantly the legal framework towards a more decentralized system and has increased the powers of local governments. Albeit France is still one of the most centralized major countries in Europe and the world.

Administrative units with a local government in Metropolitan France (that is, the parts of France lying in Europe) consist of:

The conseil général is an institution created in 1790 by the French Revolution in each of the newly created departments (they were suppressed by the Vichy government from 1942 to 1944). A conseiller général (departmental councillor) must be at least 21 years old and either live or pay taxes in the locality they are elected from. (Sociologist Jean Viard noted [ Le Monde, 22 Feb 2006] that half of all conseillers généraux were still fils de paysans, i.e. sons of peasants, suggesting France's deep rural roots). Though the central government can theoretically dissolve a conseil général (in case of a dysfunctional conseil), this has happened only once in the Fifth Republic.

The conseil général discusses and passes laws on matters that concern the department; it is administratively responsible for departmental employees and land, manages subsidized housing, public transportation, and school subsidies, and contributes to public facilities. It is not allowed to express "political wishes." The conseil général meets at least three times a year and elects its president for a term of 3 years, who presides over its "permanent commission," usually consisting of 5-10 other departmental councillors elected from among their number. The conseil général has accrued new powers in the course of the political decentralization that has occurred past in France during the past thirty years. There are in all more than 4,000 conseillers généraux in France.

Different levels of administration have different duties, and shared responsibility is common; for instance, in the field of education, communes run public elementary schools, while départements run public junior high schools and régions run public high schools, but only for the building and upkeep of buildings; curricula and teaching personnel are supplied by the national Ministry of Education.

The three main cities, Paris, Lyon and Marseille have a special statute. Paris is at the same time a commune and a département with an institution, the Conseil de Paris, that is elected at the same time as the other conseil municipaux, but that operates also as a conseil général. The three cities are also divided into arrondissement each having its conseil d'arrondissement and mayor.

French overseas possessions are divided into two groups:

All inhabited French territory is represented in both houses of Parliament and votes for the presidential election.

The main issues in France were crime and violence, inflation, heat waves, health care, immigration, poverty and taxes according to a 2026 Ipsos poll.

During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, politiques (French pronunciation: [ pɔlitik ]) were Western European statesmen who prioritized the strength of the state above all other organs of society, including religion. During the French Wars of Religion, this included moderates of both religious faiths (Huguenots and Catholics) who held that the country could only be saved by the restoration of a strong monarchy which rose above religious differences. The term politique often had a pejorative connotation of moral or religious indifference, especially after 1576 in contrast with the radical Catholic League calling for the eradication of Protestantism in France. By 1588, the politiques were seen by pious detractors as a faction more pernicious than heretics. Similar clashes emerged during the same period in the Netherlands and England.

In early critical writings, the politiques (largely jurists and intellectuals) were sometimes confused with another group, the " malcontents " (nobles who opposed the political influence of the Guise family). Many moderate politique Catholics defended the idea of Gallicanism, of making a distinction between the State and Religion, of a unitary and undivided royal sovereignty (against external influence or internal divisions), and of privileging national security and peace.

It can be argued that anyone who believed in the necessity of a strong monarchy to national security was a politique. For example, the politique policies of Henry IV of France, such as the Edict of Nantes (a document granting political and religious liberties to the minority French Protestants), directly contributed to the centralized administrative system of seventeenth century France and the absolutism embodied by Louis XIV, which included an eventual revocation of the Edict. Another example of a politique was Elizabeth I of England, who was (or claimed to be) a Catholic during the time of her sister Mary I but moved to Protestantism when attaining the throne. The later monarch Charles II - long flirting with Catholicism and holding out a promise to convert to it as a means of getting support from Louis XIV, but only actually converting on his deathbed - could also be considered to have acted as a Politique, though by his time the term was less often used.

Jonathan I. Israel emphasizes the important role played by various "Politiques" in the Dutch Revolt of the 16th Century and the 17th Century Dutch Republic created by that revolt. Specifically, he notes as the most important of them William the Silent, who moved from the Catholic Church to the Calvinist one - the opposite direction to that taken by his contemporary Henry IV of France, but taken out of similar motives. In Jonathan Israel's view, the long-term influence of such Dutch Politiques was positive, helping to mitigate the more intransigent forms of Calvinism and to create in the Netherlands a climate of (relative) religious toleration, greater than in other European countries at the time. Likewise, Blair Worden makes the point that during the Commonwealth of England, while the Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell was broadly Calvinist, his circle contained non-sectarian ‘merciful men’ or politiques who were more tolerant of other doctrines.

Polysynody (from Greek πολυς numerous, several, and Greek συνοδος meeting, assembly) was an experimental system of government in use in France between 1715 and 1718 and in which each minister (secretary of state) was replaced by a council. It was introduced early into the Regency of Philippe d'Orléans following the death of Louis XIV.

The Polysynody was inspired by enlightenment ideals, however the system saw mixed successes but historians generally agree that the Polysynody didn't effectively alter either daily life nor the political culture of the Ancien régime. Throughout the Polysynody, enabled notable events such as the economic experiments of John Law.

While generally presented as an attempt to reestablish the political strength of the second estate, historians which examine this short period conclude that d'Orléans didn't allow the system much strength so it wouldn't undermine his authority and power as regent.

The Reign of Louis XIV had positioned the monarch as the sovereign under an Absolutist conception of the state over his reign had significantly disempowered the Parlements and the second estate. Nearing his death in 1714-1715, the majority of family who were eligible for Kinghood had died or were illegitimate, leaving only his grandson the Duke of Anjou as an acceptable heir despite his age. To govern France until the Duke of Anjou reached maturity, Louis XIV had no other choice than to appoint a Regent, with the two choices for the position being his nephew, Philippe II, Duke of Orléans or the contemporary King of Spain, Philip V, whom had only ascended to the country's throne by renouncing his claim to the French's, and to go back on that would risk another European war if young Duke of Anjou were to die.

Louis XIV tried to precede this by limiting the future regent to only being the head of a council of peers that would be the ones to actually decide on matters of state or the king. d'Orléans circumvented this by promising to relax the state over the Unigenitus bull to Jansenist and Gallican parlimentaires and offering both the restoration the Parliaments right to remonsterance adding that they did not have to consult the king beforehand, which greatly bolstered the power of the Parliaments.

An aristocratic ideal of government emerged around the personalities of Fénelon (the famous archbishop of Cambrai and tutor of the Duke of Burgundy, grandson of Louis XIV and heir to the throne), the duc de Beauvilliers (governor of the duke of Burgundy), the duc de Chevreuse (son-in-law of Colbert), and the duc de Saint-Simon who particularly urged d'Orléans to replace the Louis XIV's minister lead goverment with a system of councils.

Fénelon wrote that "[...]the supreme and perfect government consists in governing those who govern,[...]" in his magnum opus book, the Telemachus which heavily inspired the second estate including d'Orléans. The book was composed of enlightnment sentiment endoring a vision of the King as a somewhat God-like figure in their guiding of society.

At the death of Louis XIV, the regent Philippe d'Orléans, in search of political support, satisfied the aristocracy by replacing the ministers and secretaries of state with eight councils (declarations of September 15 and December 14, 1715) which were dominated by the ancient aristocracy (descending from medieval knights, as opposed to the newer aristocracy of recently ennobled lawyers and civil servants). The Council of the Regency, chaired by the regent, had no real power. The other councils shared government power. They were:

Each council had ten members and elected one president.

d'Orléans would appoint Jansenist prelate Louis Antoine de Noailles to serve as president of the Council of Conscience in spite of Louis XIV prior legal persecution of the sect.

Although the regent Philippe d'Orléans was cautious enough to admit all the ministers of the last government of Louis XIV (except for Nicolas Desmarets, controller-general, i.e. minister of finance, dismissed by the regent), as well as many of the high officers and civil servants of Louis XIV, to sit in the councils alongside the aristocrats, this system of government worked poorly due to the absenteeism and ineptitude of the aristocrats, as well as to conflicts of personalities.

From the creation of these councils, many careered statesmen of Louis XIV were now equal to inexperienced nobles. The Polysynody also failed to permit powersharing in the provinces where the intendants under Louis XIV went about business unimpeded much to the disappointment of various parties

d'Orléans own actions also served to weaken the executive power of the councils, made clear an atmosphere whereby any actions which could threaten or weaken the centralism of the state would not be permitted. The councils main effect in essence was just allowing more room for those appointed in government positions to engage in their own agendas rather than allowing any sections of the government to democratically decide on their own objectives.

Though d'Orléans appointed Jansenists to power, this didn't amount to new political or religious power for the sect as d'Orléans was apathetic to both them and their persecution, and did not assist the Jansenists with their fight against the Pope despite their hopes.

As a result, between 1718 and 1723 the regent gradually abolished the councils despite the passionate defense of the abbot de Saint-Pierre (Discours sur la polysynodie, 1718), and he reestablished the offices of minister and secretary of state, reverting to the "ministerial despotism" of Louis XIV.

Colin Jones proposes that the Polysynody was fundamentally limited in nature regardless of d'Orléans or any in the government or civil societies wish for it, given the regency itself was an inherently limited affair and that if the often sick Louis XV were die young (an ever present possibility), meaning d'Orléans would assume the throne. in this scenario, it's better for d'Orléans to keep his options open to assume an absolutist rule akin to Louis XIV instead of foreclosing himself to the option if the Polysynody were to become entrenched and more radical.

Several historians such as James Hardy Jr and Harold A. Ellis and Jean Meyer believe that the d'Orléans was deeply concerned about the Polysynody's empowerment of officials during his legitimacy conflict and wars with Phillip V could allow those with unfirm loyalties greater capacity to subvert the Sovereign's more contensious political descions. Jones goes further that Polysynody was existed as a whole to sure up goodwill among the nobility and buy time for his rule to become more entrenched which by 1718 had been made thorough and now the diversion risked becoming real and used to attack him, namely on foreign policy. French historian Jean Meyer particularly notes the Polysynody's foreign minister, Nicolas Chalon du Blé who was a supporter of Phillip V.

J. H. Shennan views that the Polysynody helped give legitimacy to the Regent by appealing Magistrates eager to regain power alongside balancing the extremes in politics without the possibility of him having to resort to the support of any particular faction.

Pommes Anna, or Anna potatoes, is a classic French dish of sliced, layered potatoes cooked in a very large amount of melted butter. There are several variants of the dish, containing, in addition to potatoes and butter, other ingredients, which may include artichoke hearts, black truffles, mushrooms and cheese.

The recipe calls for firm-fleshed potatoes and butter only. Potatoes are peeled and sliced very thin. The slices, salted and peppered, are layered into a pan (see below), generously doused with clarified butter, and baked until they form a cake. Then the cake is flipped every ten minutes until the outside is golden and crisp. At the end of the cooking period, the dish is unmoulded and forms a cake 15 to 20 centimetres (6 to 8 in) in diameter and about five centimetres (2 in) high. It is then cut in wedges and served immediately on a hot plate, usually accompanying cooked meat.

A special double baking dish made of copper called la cocotte à pommes Anna is still manufactured in France for the cooking of this dish. It consists of upper and lower halves which fit into each other so that the whole vessel with its contents can be inverted during cooking.

The dish is generally credited with having been created during the reign of Napoleon III by the chef Adolphe Dugléré, a leading pupil of Carême. Dugléré was head chef at the Café Anglais, the most fashionable restaurant in Paris during the Second Empire, and reputedly named the dish for one of the grandes cocottes (society beauties) of the period. There is disagreement about which beauty the dish was named after: the actress Anna Judic or Anna Deslions. In Mastering the Art of French Cooking, Simone Beck and Julia Child comment that to many people, " pommes Anna is the supreme potato dish of all time".

Traditionally, Pommes Anna accompanies sirloin of beef à la française (roast and garnished with tartlets filled with spinach purée) or Cavour (sautéed, blanched beef marrow slices on top), or du couvent (browned, braised in white wine and demi-glace mixed with truffle, ox tongue, mushroom strips and peas). The dish is also a traditional accompaniment to tournedos steaks, such as Armenonville (garnished with creamed morels; deglazed with Madeira and veal gravy), à la basque (with stuffed tomatoes, and creamed celery), carignan (with artichoke hearts and asparagus), and Louis XV (garnished with a tartlet filled with minced mushrooms with a truffle slice on top and served with tournedos covered with sauce à la diable). Pommes Anna is also served with sautéed chicken dishes such as Rivoli (deglazed with sherry, demi-glace and tomato purée, with chopped truffles), and with veal, such as longe de veau à la française (roast loin, with creamed spinach and Madeira sauce).

Pommes boulangère or pommes à la boulangère – "baker's potatoes" – is a savoury dish of sliced potato and onion, cooked slowly in liquid in an oven.

The name of the dish is said to derive from an old practice in French villages, where householders without their own ovens would take the prepared dish to the village bakery. After the baker had finished making his bread, the potato dish would cook slowly while the oven gradually died down.

The basic ingredients are potatoes, onions and cooking liquid. The dish, cooked slowly in a low oven, gradually absorbing the cooking liquid, has a crisp top layer of sliced potatoes, with a softer mixture of onion and potato beneath. It is usual to season it with some or all of garlic, herbs (particularly rosemary or sage), salt and pepper, and to top the dish with dabs of butter before cooking, but there are several published variations:

Despite the French name, the dish is not unique to France. The Yorkshire -born chef Brian Turner recalled in his memoirs (2000) being given an identical potato dish in his childhood, and Bobby Freeman in a 1997 book about Welsh cuisine gives a recipe for traditional Teisen nionod (onion cake), which she describes as "the same dish as the French pommes boulangère ".

When diced bacon is added to the potatoes and onions, and the dish is topped with grated cheese before baking, it is known as pommes savoyarde (or alternatively as pommes Chambéry).

Pommes soufflées are a variety of French fried potato. Slices of potato are fried twice, once at 150 °C (302 °F) and a second time after being cooled, at 190 °C (374 °F). The potato slices puff up into little pillows during the second frying and turn golden brown.

Pommes soufflées were, according to a famous legend, discovered by chance on 24 August 1837, when Queen Marie-Amélie and other notables were delayed in their arrival for a meal at the Pavillon Henri IV [ fr ] in Yvelines after inaugurating the first passenger steam-powered railway in Paris, France. Chef Jean-Louis-François Collinet, reputedly also the inventor of sauce béarnaise, removed the potatoes from the fryer half cooked. After the royal party had arrived, during serving time, he observed the potatoes expand when they were returned to the oil. This story has been disputed on a number of grounds.

A gibassier (pronounced [ ʒi.ba.sje ] ; French : gibassier, Occitan : gibassié, formerly gibacier) is an olive oil -based galette originating in Provence, and a type of viennoiserie. It is generally spiced with anise, candied orange peel, and orange flower water, and dusted with baker's sugar.

The gibassier is often confused with the pompe à l'huile (pronounced [ pɔ̃p alɥil ] ; Occitan : poumpo à l'oli, pompa a l'òli, literally "oil pump"), but these are distinct dishes. The pompe à l'huile is more moist and is raised. It is part of the thirteen desserts of a Provençal Christmas, which is the only time of year that it is produced whereas the gibassier is drier, pierced with holes, and is a pastry made year-round for everyday consumption. Both replace butter with olive oil as butter is not traditionally used in Provence whereas olive oil is readily found. Moreover, with olive oil, the pastries can be kept longer without drying than with butter.

According to the great dictionary of Occitan Lou Tresor dóu Felibrige, by Frédéric Mistral, the pompe is a « fouace, galette, gâteau que l'on envoie en présent aux fêtes de Noël » (a fouace, airy bread cognate to focaccia, galette, sent as a present on Christmas time) while gibassié is a « gâteau à jour, une galette percée de trous, un craquelin » (a cake, galette pierced with holes, a type of craquelin).

The gibassier is traditional and common in Provence but is rarely available in the English-speaking world.

In the United States, it was popularized in 2002 by Michel Suas (founder of the San Francisco Baking Institute) and Pearl Bakery bread baker, Tim Healea, when he introduced it in the Coupe De Monde competition (World Cup of Bread Baking) held in Paris in which the U.S.A. won the silver medal for bread baking. It continues to be made commercially by Pearl Bakery owned by the Lester family in Portland, Oregon, and hence available at shops around town and local farmers' market. It is also available at Clear Flour Bakery in Brookline, MA.

In addition, Midwife & the Baker, in California's Bay Area produces their version seasonally, usually making it available sometime during the months of November, December, and January.

The etymology is unclear – see gibassier. Some suggest that it is named after the mountain peak Le Gibas in the Luberon mountains. Alternatively, the old form gibacier is also a flat bag, used to carry game (from the French word for game, gibier, from Latin); these words may be homophones, or the origin, the pastry having a similar shape to the bag.

As a traditional dish, there is significant variation between preparations (compare bouillabaisse). A more unusual variation is to prepare it as a hard biscuit (cookie), rather than as a cake, but with the same pierced shape. This is a specialty of Lourmarin.

The Ponente (/ p ə ʊ ˈ n ɛ n t i / ; poh- NEN -tee ; Italian : Ponente ; French : Ponant ; Spanish : Poniente ; Catalan : Ponent ; Sicilian : Punenti ; Corsican : Punenti ; Croatian : Pulenat ; Aragonese : Ponient ; Lombard : Punant ; Macedonian : Пуленат ; Greek : πουνέντες) is a west wind in the Mediterranean Sea. It blows from the Atlantic through the Strait of Gibraltar and is one of the prevailing winds in the western Mediterranean.

Ponente originates from Latin pōnō meaning "to place, put". In Italian the word was also used to refer to the setting sun and became synonymous with the west, similarly to how Levant ("to raise") refers to the east. With the spread of the Mediterranean Lingua Franca the term got established as both a wind and a traditional mediterranean compass point though the region, as well as the Atlantic Ocean. In 1852 Pope Pius IX added these traditional winds to the wind rose of St. Peter's Square.

In the west the Ponente has two different characters depending on the season. The first is a monsoon-like seasonal wind that mostly blows from November to March. This is due to the Iberian landmass being colder than the water, combined with a High-pressure area over the Maghreb leading to a strong flow from the Atlantic through the Strait of Gibraltar into the western mediterranean. This is reinforced by the Atlantic Low-pressure area moving towards the Bay of Biscay. The effect is reinforced by the Venturi effect caused by the Sierra Nevada and the Atlas Mountains. This results in stormy rain showers and strong gusts across the whole western mediterranean with windspeeds between 4 to 7 Beaufort. These strong gusts are also known as Vendavales.

During the summer the Ponente is usually created by the Azores High over the atlantic and the Genoan Low over the mediterranean. Thermals further strengthen the effect, leading to a strong cool and dry wind with few gusts with a speed of up to 7 Beaufort. These characteristics are ideal for sailing and bring refreshments on the southern Spanish coast. Either variation often switches with the easterly levant, the Ponente being more prevalent in winter.

Moving eastwards, the Ponente becomes less intensive. The corresponding greek and roman winds Zephyrus and Favonius are described as gentle and favourable and are associated with a tender breeze. This characteristic is also observed in France and Adriatic countries. In Italy and particularly Sicily the Ponente is temperate and responsible for good weather and clearing air pollution. Even further east, towards Turkey, the Etesian is sometimes misidentified as a Ponente, due to their similar directions.

The Pont de Normandie (English: Normandy Bridge) is a cable-stayed road bridge that spans the river Seine linking Le Havre to Honfleur in Normandy, northern France. Its total length is 2,143.21 metres (7,032 ft) – 856 metres (2,808 ft) between the two piers. It is also the last bridge to cross the Seine before it empties into the ocean. It is a motorway toll bridge with a footpath and a narrow cycle lane in each direction allowing pedestrians and cyclists to cross the bridge free of charge, while motorcycling is also toll-free.

The bridge was designed by Michel Virlogeux, the general studies having been led by Bernard Raspaud from Bouygues. The works management was shared between G. Barlet and P. Jacquet. The architects were François Doyelle and Charles Lavigne. Construction by Bouygues, Campenon Bernard, Dumez, Monberg & Thorsen, Quillery, Sogea and Spie Batignolles began in 1988 and lasted seven years. The bridge opened on 20 January 1995.

At the time it was both the longest cable-stayed bridge in the world, and also had a record distance between piers for a cable-stayed bridge. It was more than 250 metres (820 ft) longer between piers than the previous record-holder. This record was lost in 1999 to the Tatara Bridge in Japan. Its record for length for a cable-stayed bridge was lost in 2004 to the 2883 meters of the Rio-Antirrio. The total cost of the bridge, ancillary structures and financing was $465 million. The bridge proper cost €233 million (US$250 million).

The cable-stayed design was chosen because it was both cheaper and more resistant to high winds than a suspension bridge. Shortly after opening, the longest cables exhibited excessive vibrations, so several damping systems were quickly retrofitted.

The span, 23.6 metres (77 ft) wide, is divided into four lanes for vehicular traffic and two lanes for pedestrians. The pylons, made of concrete, are shaped as upside-down Ys. They weigh more than 20,000 t (20,000 long tons; 22,000 short tons) and are 214.77 metres (705 ft) tall. More than 19,000 t (19,000 long tons; 21,000 short tons) of steel and 184 cables made by fr:Freyssinet were used.

The Pont du Gard is an ancient Roman aqueduct bridge built in the first century AD to carry water over 50 km (31 mi) to the Roman colony of Nemausus (Nîmes). It crosses the river Gardon near the town of Vers-Pont-du-Gard in southern France. The Pont du Gard is one of the best preserved Roman aqueduct bridges. It was added to UNESCO 's list of World Heritage sites in 1985 because of its exceptional preservation, historical importance, and architectural ingenuity.

The bridge has three tiers of arches made from Shelly limestone and stands 48.8 m (160 ft) high. The aqueduct formerly carried an estimated 40,000 m (8,800,000 imp gal; 11,000,000 US gal) of water a day over 50 km (31 mi) to the fountains, baths and homes of the citizens of Nemausus (Nîmes). The structure's precise construction allowed an average gradient of 1 cm (0.39 in) in 182.4 m (598 ft). It may have been in use as late as the 6th century, with some parts used for significantly longer, but lack of maintenance after the 4th century led to clogging by mineral deposits and debris that eventually stopped the flow of water.

After the Roman Empire collapsed and the aqueduct fell into disuse, the Pont du Gard remained largely intact with a secondary function as a toll bridge. For centuries the local lords and bishops were responsible for its upkeep, with a right to levy tolls on travellers using it to cross the river. Over time, some of its stone blocks were looted, and serious damage was inflicted in the 17th century. It attracted increasing attention starting in the 18th century, and became an important tourist destination. A series of renovations between the 18th and 21st centuries, commissioned by local authorities and the French state, culminated in 2000 with opening of a new visitor centre and removal of traffic and buildings from the bridge and area immediately around it. Today it is one of France's most popular tourist attractions, and has attracted the attention of a succession of literary and artistic visitors.

The location of Nemausus (Nîmes) was somewhat inconvenient when it came to providing a water supply. Plains lie to the city's south and east, where any sources of water would be at too low an altitude to be able to flow to the city, while the hills to the west made a water supply route too difficult from an engineering point of view. The only real alternative was to look to the north and in particular to the area around Ucetia (Uzès), where there are natural springs.

The Nîmes aqueduct was built to channel water from the springs of the Fontaine d'Eure near Uzès to the castellum divisorum (repartition basin) in Nemausus. From there, it was distributed to fountains, baths and private homes around the city. The straight-line distance between the two is only about 20 km (12 mi), but the aqueduct takes a winding route measuring around 50 km (31 mi). This was necessary to circumvent the southernmost foothills of the Massif Central, known as the Garrigues de Nîmes. They are difficult to cross, as they are covered in dense vegetation and garrigue and indented by deep valleys. It was impractical for the Romans to attempt to tunnel through the hills, as it would have required a tunnel of between 8 and 10 kilometres (5 and 6 mi), depending on the starting point. A roughly V-shaped course around the eastern end of the Garrigues de Nîmes was therefore the only practical way of transporting the water from the spring to the city.

The Fontaine d'Eure, at 76 m (249 ft) above sea level, is only 17 m (56 ft) higher than the repartition basin in Nîmes, but this provided a sufficient gradient to sustain a steady flow of water to the 50,000 inhabitants of the Roman city. The aqueduct's average gradient is only 1 in 3,000. It varies widely along its course, but is as little as 1 in 20,000 in some sections. The Pont du Gard itself descends 2.5 cm (0.98 in) in 456 m (1,496 ft), a gradient of 1 in 18,241. The average gradient between the start and end of the aqueduct is far shallower than was usual for Roman aqueducts – only about a tenth of the average gradient of some of the aqueducts in Rome.

The reason for the disparity in gradients along the aqueduct's route is that a uniform gradient would have meant that the Pont du Gard would have been infeasibly high, given the limitations of the technology of the time. By varying the gradient along the route, the aqueduct's engineers were able to lower the height of the bridge by 6 metres (20 ft) to 48.77 metres (160.0 ft) above the river – still exceptionally high by Roman standards, but within acceptable limits. This height limit governed the profile and gradients of the entire aqueduct, but it came at the price of creating a "sag" in the middle of the aqueduct. The gradient profile before the Pont du Gard is relatively steep, descending at 0.67 metres (2 ft 2 in) per kilometre, but thereafter it descends by only 6 metres (20 ft) over the remaining 25 kilometres (16 mi). In one section, the winding route between the Pont du Gard and St Bonnet required an extraordinary degree of accuracy from the Roman engineers, who had to allow for a fall of only 7 millimetres (0.28 in) per 100 metres (330 ft) of the conduit.

It is estimated that the aqueduct supplied the city with around 40,000 cubic metres (8,800,000 imp gal) of water a day that took nearly 27 hours to flow from the source to the city. The water arrived in the castellum divisorum at Nîmes – an open, shallow, circular basin 5.5 m in diameter by 1 m deep. It would have been surrounded by a balustrade within some sort of enclosure, probably under some kind of small but elaborate pavilion. When it was excavated, traces of a tiled roof, Corinthian columns and a fresco decorated with fish and dolphins were discovered in a fragmentary condition. The aqueduct water entered through an opening 1.2 metres (3 ft 11 in) wide, and ten large holes in the facing wall, each 40 centimetres (16 in) wide, directed the water into the city's main water pipes. Three large drains were also located in the floor, possibly to enable the nearby amphitheatre to be flooded rapidly to enable naumachia (mock naval battles) to be held.

The spring still exists and is now the site of a small modern pumping station. Its water is pure but high in dissolved calcium carbonate leached out of the surrounding limestone. This presented the Romans with significant problems in maintaining the aqueduct, as the carbonates precipitated out of the water during its journey through the conduit. This caused the flow of the aqueduct to become progressively reduced by deposits of calcareous sinter. Another threat was posed by vegetation penetrating the stone lid of the channel. As well as obstructing the flow of the water, dangling roots introduced algae and bacteria that decomposed in a process called biolithogenesis, producing concretions within the conduit. It required constant maintenance by circitores, workers responsible for the aqueduct's upkeep, who crawled along the conduit scrubbing the walls clean and removing any vegetation.

Much of the Nîmes aqueduct was built underground, as was typical of Roman aqueducts. It was constructed by digging a trench in which a stone channel was built and enclosed by an arched roof of stone slabs, which was then covered with earth. Some sections of the channel are tunnelled through solid rock. In all, 35 km (22 mi) of the aqueduct was constructed below the ground. The remainder had to be carried on the surface through conduits set on a wall or on arched bridges. Some substantial remains of the above-ground works can still be seen today, such as the so-called "Pont Rue" that stretches for hundreds of metres around Vers and still stands up to 7.5 m (25 ft) high. Other surviving parts include the Pont de Bornègre, three arches carrying the aqueduct 17 m (56 ft) across a stream; the Pont de Sartanette, near the Pont du Gard, which covers 32 m (105 ft) across a small valley; and three sections of aqueduct tunnel near Sernhac, measuring up to 66 m (217 ft) long. However, the Pont du Gard is by far the best-preserved section of the entire aqueduct.

Built on three levels, the Pont is 49 m (161 ft) high above the river at low water and 274 m (899 ft) long. Its width varies from 9 m (30 ft) at the bottom to 3 m (9.8 ft) at the top. The three levels of arches are recessed, with the main piers in line one above another. The span of the arches varies slightly, as each was constructed independently to provide flexibility to protect against subsidence. Each level has a differing number of arches:

The first level of the Pont du Gard is adjacent to a bridge that was added in the 18th century. The water conduit or specus, which is about 1.8 m (6 ft) high and 1.2 m (4 ft) wide, is carried at the top of the third level. The upper levels of the bridge are slightly curved in the upstream direction. It was long believed that the engineers had designed it this way deliberately to strengthen the bridge's structure against the flow of water, like a dam wall. However, a microtopographic survey carried out in 1989 showed that the bend is caused by the stone expanding and contracting by about 5 mm (0.20 in) a day under the heat of the sun. Over the centuries, this process has produced the current deformation.

The Pont du Gard was constructed largely without the use of mortar or clamps. It contains an estimated 50,400 tons of limestone with a volume of some 21,000 m (740,000 cu ft) ; some of the individual blocks weigh up to 6 tons. Most of the stone was extracted from the local quarry of Estel located approximately 700 metres (2,300 ft) downstream, on the banks of the Gardon River. The coarse-grained soft reddish shelly limestone, known locally as "Pierre de Vers", lends itself very well to dimension stone production. The blocks were precisely cut to fit perfectly together by friction and gravity, eliminating the need for mortar. The builders also left inscriptions on the stonework conveying various messages and instructions. Many blocks were numbered and inscribed with the required locations, such as fronte dextra or fronte sinistra (front right or front left), to guide the builders.

The method of construction is fairly well understood by historians. The patron of the aqueduct – a rich individual or the city of Nîmes itself – would have hired a large team of contractors and skilled labourers. A surveyor or mensor planned the route using a groma for sighting, the chorobates for levelling, and a set of measuring poles five or ten Roman feet long. His figures and perhaps diagrams were recorded on wax tablets, later to be written up on scrolls. The builders may have used templates to guide them with tasks that required a high degree of precision, such as carving the standardised blocks from which the water conduit was constructed.

The builders would have made extensive use of cranes and block and tackle pulleys to lift the stones into place. Much of the work could have been done using simple sheers operated by a windlass. For the largest blocks, a massive human-powered treadmill would have been used; such machines were still being used in the quarries of Provence until as late as the start of the 20th century. A complex scaffold was erected to support the bridge as it was being built. Large blocks were left protruding from the bridge to support the frames and scaffolds used during construction. The aqueduct as a whole would have been a very expensive undertaking; Émile Espérandieu estimated the cost to be over 30 million sesterces, equivalent to 50 years' pay for 500 new recruits in a Roman legion.

Although the exterior of the Pont du Gard is rough and relatively unfinished, the builders took care to ensure that the interior of the water conduit was as smooth as possible so that the flow of water would not be obstructed. The walls of the conduit were constructed from dressed masonry and the floor from concrete. Both were covered with a stucco incorporating minute shards of pottery and tile. It was painted with olive oil and covered with maltha, a mixture of slaked lime, pork grease and the viscous juice of unripe figs. This produced a surface that was both smooth and durable.

Although the Pont du Gard is renowned for its appearance, its design is not optimal as the technique of stacking arches on top of each other is clumsy and inefficient (and therefore expensive) in the amount of materials it requires. Later aqueducts had a more sophisticated design, making greater use of concrete to reduce their volume and cost of construction. The Aqueduct bridge of Segovia and the Pont de les Ferreres are of roughly similar length but use far fewer arches. Roman architects were eventually able to do away with "stacking" altogether. The Acueducto de los Milagros in Mérida, Spain and the Chabet Ilelouine aqueduct bridge, near Cherchell, Algeria utilise tall, slender piers, constructed from top to bottom with concrete-faced masonry and brick.

The construction of the aqueduct has long been credited to the Roman emperor Augustus 's son-in-law and aide, Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa, around the year 19 BC. At the time, he was serving as aedile, the senior magistrate responsible for managing the water supply of Rome and its colonies. Espérandieu, writing in 1926, linked the construction of the aqueduct with Agrippa's visit to Narbonensis in that year. Newer excavations suggest the construction may have taken place between 40 and 60 AD. Tunnels dating from the time of Augustus had to be bypassed by the builders of the Nîmes aqueduct, and coins discovered in the outflow in Nîmes are no older than the reign of the emperor Claudius (41–54 AD). On this basis, a team led by Guilhem Fabre has argued that the aqueduct must have been completed around the middle of the 1st century AD. It is believed to have taken about fifteen years to build, employing between 800 and 1,000 workers.

From the 4th century onwards, the aqueduct's maintenance was neglected as successive waves of invaders disrupted the region. It became clogged with debris, encrustations and plant roots, greatly reducing the flow of the water. The resulting deposits in the conduit, consisting of layers of dirt and organic material, are up to 50 cm (20 in) thick on each wall. An analysis of the deposits originally suggested that it had continued to supply water to Nîmes until as late as the 9th century, but more recent investigations suggest that it had gone out of use by about the sixth century, though parts of it may have continued to be used for significantly longer.

Although some of its stones were plundered for use elsewhere, the Pont du Gard remained largely intact. Its survival was due to its use as a toll bridge across the valley. In the 13th century the French king granted the seigneurs of Uzès the right to levy tolls on those using the bridge. The right later passed to the Bishops of Uzès. In return, they were responsible for maintaining the bridge in good repair. However, it suffered serious damage during the 1620s when Henri, Duke of Rohan made use of the bridge to transport his artillery during the wars between the French royalists and the Huguenots, whom he led. To make space for his artillery to cross the bridge, the duke had one side of the second row of arches cut away to a depth of about one-third of their original thickness. This left a gap on the lowest deck wide enough to accommodate carts and cannons, but severely weakened the bridge in the process.

In 1703 the local authorities renovated the Pont du Gard to repair cracks, fill in ruts and replace the stones lost in the previous century. A new bridge was built by the engineer Henri Pitot in 1743–47 next to the arches of the lower level, so that the road traffic could cross on a purpose-built bridge. The novelist Alexandre Dumas was strongly critical of the construction of the new bridge, commenting that "it was reserved for the eighteenth century to dishonour a monument which the barbarians of the fifth had not dared to destroy." The Pont du Gard continued to deteriorate and by the time Prosper Mérimée saw it in 1835 it was at serious risk of collapse from erosion and the loss of stonework.

Napoleon III, who had a great admiration for all things Roman, visited the Pont du Gard in 1850 and took a close interest in it. He approved plans by the architect Charles Laisné to repair the bridge in a project which was carried out between 1855 and 1858, with funding provided by the Ministry of State. The work involved substantial renovations that included replacing the eroded stone, infilling some of the piers with concrete to aid stability and improving drainage by separating the bridge from the aqueduct. Stairs were installed at one end and the conduit walls were repaired, allowing visitors to walk along the conduit itself in reasonable safety.

There have been a number of subsequent projects to consolidate the piers and arches of the Pont du Gard. It has survived three serious floods over the last century; in 1958 the whole of the lower tier was submerged by a giant flood that washed away other bridges, and in 1998 another major flood affected the area. A further flood struck in 2002, badly damaging nearby installations.

The Pont du Gard was added to UNESCO 's list of World Heritage Sites in 1985 on the criteria of "Human creative genius; testimony to cultural tradition; significance to human history". The description on the list states: "The hydraulic engineers and... architects who conceived this bridge created a technical as well as artistic masterpiece."

The Pont du Gard has been a tourist attraction for centuries. The outstanding quality of the bridge's masonry led to it becoming an obligatory stop for French journeyman masons on their traditional tour around the country (see Compagnons du Tour de France), many of whom have left their names on the stonework. From the 18th century onwards, particularly after the construction of the new road bridge, it became a famous staging-post for travellers on the Grand Tour and became increasingly renowned as an object of historical importance and French national pride.

The bridge has had a long association with French monarchs seeking to associate themselves with a symbol of Roman imperial power. King Charles IX of France visited in 1564 during his Grand Tour of France and was greeted with a grand entertainment laid on by the vicomte d'Uzès. Twelve young girls dressed as nymphs came out of a cave by the riverside near the aqueduct and presented the king with pastry and preserved fruits. A century later, Louis XIV and his court visited the Pont du Gard during a visit to Nîmes in January 1660 shortly after the signature of the Treaty of the Pyrenees. In 1786 his great-great-great-grandson Louis XVI commissioned the artist Hubert Robert to produce a set of paintings of Roman ruins of southern France to hang in the king's new dining room at the Palace of Fontainebleau, including a picture depicting the Pont du Gard in an idealised landscape. The commission was meant to reassert the ties between the French monarchy and the imperial past. Napoleon III, in the mid-19th century, consciously identified with Augustus and accorded great respect to Roman antiquities; his patronage of the bridge's restoration in the 1850s was essential to its survival.

By the 1990s the Pont du Gard had become a hugely popular tourist attraction but was congested with traffic – vehicles were still allowed to drive over the 1743 road bridge – and was cluttered with illegally built structures and tourist shops lining the river banks. As the architect Jean-Paul Viguier put it, the "appetite for gain" had transformed the Pont du Gard into "a fairground attraction". In 1996 the General Council of the Gard département began a major four-year project to improve the area, sponsored by the French government, in conjunction with local sources, UNESCO and the EU. The entire area around the bridge was pedestrianised and a new visitor centre was built on the north bank to a design by Jean-Paul Viguier. The redevelopment has ensured that the area around the Pont du Gard is now much quieter due to the removal of vehicle traffic, and the new museum provides a much improved historical context for visitors. The Pont du Gard is today one of France's top five tourist attractions, with 1.4 million visitors reported in 2001.

Since it became a tourist destination, many novelists and writers have visited the Pont du Gard and written of the experience. Jean-Jacques Rousseau was overwhelmed when he first visited it in 1738:

I had been told to go and see the Pont du Gard; I did not fail to do so. It was the first work of the Romans that I had seen. I expected to see a monument worthy of the hands which had constructed it. This time the object surpassed my expectation, for the only time in my life. Only the Romans could have produced such an effect. The sight of this simple and noble work struck me all the more since it is in the middle of a wilderness where silence and solitude render the object more striking and the admiration more lively; for this so-called bridge was only an aqueduct. One asks oneself what force has transported these enormous stones so far from any quarry, and what brought together the arms of so many thousands of men in a place where none of them live. I wandered about the three storeys of this superb edifice although my respect for it almost kept me from daring to trample it underfoot. The echo of my footsteps under these immense vaults made me imagine that I heard the strong voices of those who had built them. I felt myself lost like an insect in that immensity. While making myself small, I felt an indefinable something that raised up my soul, and I said to myself with a sigh, "Why was I not born a Roman!"

The novelist Henry James, visiting in 1884, was similarly impressed; he described the Pont du Gard as "unspeakably imposing, and nothing could well be more Roman." He commented:

The hugeness, the solidity, the unexpectedness, the monumental rectitude of the whole thing leave you nothing to say – at the time – and make you stand gazing. You simply feel that it is noble and perfect, that it has the quality of greatness... When the vague twilight began to gather, the lonely valley seemed to fill itself with the shadow of the Roman name, as if the mighty empire were still as erect as the supports of the aqueduct; and it was open to a solitary tourist, sitting there sentimental, to believe that no people has ever been, or will ever be, as great as that, measured, as we measure the greatness of an individual, by the push they gave to what they undertook. The Pont du Gard is one of the three or four deepest impressions they have left; it speaks of them in a manner with which they might have been satisfied.

The mid-19th-century writer Joseph Méry wrote in his 1853 book Les Nuits italiennes, contes nocturnes that on seeing the Pont du Gard:

[O]ne is struck dumb with astonishment; you are walking in a desert where nothing reminds you of man; cultivation has disappeared; there are ravines, heaths, blocks of rock, clusters of rushes, oaks, massed together, a stream which flows by a melancholy strand, wild mountains, a silence like that of Thebaid, and in the midst of this landscape springs up the most magnificent object that civilization has created for the glory of the fine arts.

[W]hen one sees the thing all that is said of it comes true. Its isolation, its dignity, its weight, are all three awful. It looks as though it had been built long before all record by beings greater than ourselves, and were intended to stand long after the dissolution of our petty race. One can repose in it. I confess to a great reluctance to praise what has been praised too much; but so it is. A man, suffering from the unrest of our time, might do worse than camp out for three days, fishing and bathing under the shadow of the Pont du Gard.

The foreign relations between Pope Pius IX and France reflected Pope Pius IX 's hostility to the French Third Republic 's anticlerical politics, as well as Napoleon III 's influence over the Papal States. But this did not prevent church life in France from flourishing during much of this pontificate.

When Pius IX assumed the papacy in 1846, French Catholics were divided into a liberal faction under Charles Forbes René de Montalembert and a conservative faction under Louis Veuillot. They agreed on the right to private schools, freedom of instruction, financial support by the State and a rejection of gallicanism. Pius addressed the French bishops with his encyclical Inter Multiplices, in which he asked for concord of mind and will among the French. Under Napoleon III, French Catholics got much of what they wanted. Napoleon III, because of his defense of the Papal States, was also seen as a defender of the Church and of Catholic interests.

French religious life blossomed under Pius IX. Many French Catholics were in favour of the dogmatization of Papal infallibility and the assumption of Mary in the forthcoming ecumenical council. The French bishops, with some notable exceptions, were faithful to the Holy See. During the pontificate of Pius IX, some five Catholic universities were founded, in the cities of Lille, Angers, Lyon and Toulouse, in which clerics were educated in a strict (although some argued, scientifically less than desirable) manner.

When the Revolutions of 1848 in the Italian states broke out, there was a rebellion against Pope Pius IX in Rome, forcing him to flee to Gaeta. The Pope appealed for support; and French President Louis Napoleon (the future Napoleon III) encouraged Pius IX and assured him of reinforcements from France. In April 1849, General Oudinot 's expeditionary force arrived at Civitavecchia to attack the revolutionary Roman Republic, and the Constituent Assembly in Rome passed a resolution of protest (7 May 1849). Although Louis Napoleon had himself engaged in a liberal insurrection in the Papal States in 1831, it was his troops that crushed the republic (29 June), although Pius IX did not return to Rome until April 1850.

Pius was met with a sullen reception on his return to Rome, as the Romans were unimpressed by the return of the pontiff at the point of French bayonets. He blessed the French troops, held a Te Deum and signalized his return to Rome by an extension of his 1846 amnesty and by a new Indulgence. He frequently repeated his main message that he had returned as a pastor and not as an avenger: in urbem reversus pastor et non ultor.

Napoleon III and Cavour, Prime Minister of Sardinia, agreed to go to war with Austria. After the Battle of Magenta (4 July 1859) the Austrian forces withdrew from the Papal States, precipitating their loss to Sardinia. Revolutionaries in Romagna called upon Sardinia for annexation. In February 1860, King Victor Emmanuel II demanded Umbria and the Marches ; when his demand was refused, he took them by force, uniting all of Italy except Lazio and San Marino into the new Kingdom of Italy.

Throughout the 1860s the remnant of the Papal States came under increased pressure from anti-Papal nationalists, in particular from Giuseppe Garibaldi. The Pope was obliged to rely on French soldiers to maintain order and to protect his territories. An army of volunteers was created in 1860: the Papal Zouaves (zuavi pontifici) under the command of General Lamoricière. They came from different countries including France, Netherlands (the majority), Belgium, Canada and Britain ; there were even some from the United States and from Italy.

A French garrison remained in Rome from 1849 to protect the Pope, but this force was withdrawn in 1864 following the September Convention. However a new attack by Garibaldi in 1867 resulted in the hurried return of French troops, defeating him at the Battle of Mentana. The French garrison remained until, facing defeat in the Franco-Prussian War, they were withdrawn in 1870. Thus, for twenty years, the pope ruled the Papal States under French military or diplomatic protection, a fact which further limited his popularity among fervent Italian nationalists.

With the defeat of the French Second Empire in the Franco-Prussian War, the new French Third Republic was more hostile to the Catholic Church, and relations between Pius IX and France deteriorated until the Pope's death.

The Popular Front (French : Front populaire [ fʁɔ̃ pɔpylɛːʁ ]) was an alliance of left-wing movements in France, including the French Communist Party (PCF), the socialist SFIO and the Radical-Socialist Republican Party, during the interwar period. Three months after the victory of the Spanish Popular Front, the Popular Front won the May 1936 legislative election, leading to the formation of a government first headed by SFIO leader Léon Blum and composed of republican and SFIO ministers.

Blum's government implemented various social reforms. The workers' movement welcomed this electoral victory by launching a general strike in May–June 1936, resulting in the negotiation of the Matignon Agreements, one of the cornerstones of social rights in France. All employees were assured a two-week paid vacation, and the rights of unions were strengthened. The socialist movement's euphoria was apparent in SFIO member Marceau Pivert 's " Tout est possible! " (Everything is possible). However, the economy continued to stall, with 1938 production still not having recovered to 1929 levels, and higher wages had been neutralized by inflation. Businessmen took their funds overseas. Blum was forced to stop his reforms and devalue the franc. With the French Senate controlled by conservatives, Blum lost power in June 1937. The presidency of the cabinet was then taken over by Camille Chautemps, a Radical-Socialist, but Blum came back as President of the Council in March 1938, before being succeeded by Édouard Daladier, another Radical-Socialist, the next month. The Popular Front dissolved itself in autumn 1938, confronted by internal dissensions related to the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939), opposition of the right-wing, and the persistent effects of the Great Depression.

After one year of major activity, it lost its spirit by June 1937 and could only temporize as the European crisis worsened. The Socialists were forced out; only the Radical-Socialists and smaller left-republican parties were left. It failed to live up to the expectations of the left. The workers obtained major new rights, but their 48 percent increase in wages was offset by a 46 percent rise in prices. Unemployment remained high, and overall industrial production was stagnant. Industry had great difficulty adjusting to the imposition of a 40-hour workweek, which caused serious disruptions while France was desperately trying to catch up with Germany in military production. France joined other nations and bitterly disappointed many French leftists in refusing to help the Spanish Republicans in the Spanish Civil War, partly because the right threatened another civil war in France itself.

There are various reasons for the formation of the Popular Front and its subsequent electoral victory, including the economic crisis caused by the Great Depression, which affected France starting in 1931, financial scandals and the instability of the Chamber of Deputies elected in 1932 that had weakened the ruling parties, the rise of Adolf Hitler in Nazi Germany, the growth of violent far-right leagues in France and in general of fascist-related parties and organisations (Marcel Bucard 's Mouvement Franciste, which was subsidised by Italian leader Benito Mussolini, Neosocialism etc.)

The elections of 1932 had resulted in a victory for the two largest parties of the left, the Marxist SFIO and the Radical-Socialist PRRRS, as well as several smaller parties ideologically close to Radicalism (an electoral pact known as the Cartel des Gauches); the Communist Party had run on its own, accusing the Socialists of social-fascism and opposing the subsequent centre-left governments. However, major differences between the SFIO and PRRRS prevented them from forming a cabinet together, as all had expected, leaving France governed by a series of short-lived cabinets formed exclusively of the six Radical parties.

The Socialist Party reliably granted its confidence to these cabinets but fundamentally disagreed with their budget cuts, and the various small liberal centre-right parties who agreed with the budget cuts refused to support centre-left governments in which they were not represented. With government paralyzed, tensions grew greater and greater both between the different parties in parliament and within public opinion. The tensions finally erupted into the infamous 6 February 1934 crisis in which massive riots by authoritarian paramilitary leagues caused the collapse of the Cartel. The Radical-Socialists and other republican centre-left parties accepted entry into a government dominated by the centre-right (the liberal conservative Democratic Alliance) and hard right (the Catholic conservative Republican Federation). The support by extreme-right paramilitaries for the National Unity government alarmed the left, which feared that plans to reform the constitution would lead to the abandonment of parliamentary government for an authoritarian regime, as had recently occurred in other European democracies.

The idea of a "Popular Front" therefore came simultaneously from three directions:

Thus, antifascism became the order of the day for a growing number of Communists, Socialists and Republicans as a result of a convergence of influences: the collapse of the centre-left coalition of 1932, the fear of the consequences of the 1934 riots and the broader European policy of the Comintern. Maurice Thorez, secretary general of the SFIC, was the first to call for the formation of a "Popular Front", first in the party press organ L'Humanité in 1934 and then in the Chamber of Deputies. The Radical-Socialists were at the time the largest party in the Chamber, and had often been the dominant party of government during the second half of the Third Republic.

Beside the three main left-wing parties, Radical-Socialists, SFIO and PCF, the Popular Front was supported by several other parties and associations.

These included several civil society organisations, chief among whom were:

The Communist, Socialist and Radical-Socialist parties were also joined by several smaller parties, mostly formed by dissidents who in previous years had exited the main three parties:

The Popular Front won the general election of 3 May 1936, with 386 seats out of 608. For the first time, the Socialists won more seats than the Radical-Socialists, and the Socialist leader, Léon Blum, became the first Socialist Prime Minister of France and the first Jew to hold that office. The first Popular Front cabinet consisted of 20 Socialists, 13 Radical-Socialists and two Socialist Republicans (there were no Communist Ministers) and, for the first time, included three women (who were then not able to vote in France).

The members of the Popular Front parties too small to form their own parliamentary grouping (the PUP, PF, PRS-CP and PJR) joined with several independents to sit together as the Independent Left (Gauche indépendante) parliamentary caucus.

Through the 1936 Matignon Accords, the Popular Front government introduced new labor laws that did the following:

The government sought to carry out its reforms as rapidly as possible. On 11 June, the Chamber of Deputies voted for the forty-hour workweek, the restoration of civil servants' salaries, and two weeks' paid holidays, by a majority of 528 to 7. The Senate voted in favour of these laws within a week.

The Blum administration democratised the Bank of France by enabling all shareholders to attend meetings and set up a new council with more representation from government. By mid-August the parliament had passed:

The legislative pace of the Popular Front government meant that before parliament went into recess, it had passed 133 laws within the space of 73 days, a pace of nearly two enactments a day.

Other measures carried out by the Popular Front government improved the pay, pensions, allowances, and taxes of public-sector workers and ex-servicemen. The 1920 sales tax, opposed by the Left as a tax on consumers, was abolished and replaced by a production tax, which was considered to be a tax on the producer instead of the consumer. The government also made some administrative changes to the civil service, such as a new director-general for the Paris police and a new governor for the Bank of France. In addition, a secretariat for sports and leisure was established, and opportunities for the children of workers and peasants in secondary education were increased. In 1937, careers guidance classes (classes d'orientation) were established in some lycées as a means of helping pupils to make a better choice of their subsequent course of secondary schooling. Secondary education was made free to all pupils; previously, it had been closed to the poor, who were unable to afford to pay tuition.

In aviation, a decree in December 1936 established a psycho-physiological service for military aviation "with the task of centralising the study of the adaptation of the human system to the optimum utilisation of aeronautical material." A Decree of 12 July 1936 extended compensation to cover diseases contracted in sewers, skin diseases due to the action of cement, dermatitis due to the action of trichloronaphthaline (acne), and cutaneous and nasal ulceration from potassium bichromate. An Act of August 1936 extended to workers in general supplementary allowances that had previously been confined to workers injured in accidents prior to 9 January 1927. An order dealing with rescue equipment in mines was issued on 19 August 1936, followed by two orders concerning packing and caving on 25 February 1937. In relation to maritime transport, a Decree of 3 March 1937 issued instructions concerning safety. A decree of 18 June 1937 promulgated the Convention "concerning the marking of the weight on heavy packages transported by vessels which was adopted by the International Labour Conference at Geneva in 1929".

In October 1936, the government ratified a League of Nations Convention dating back to October 1933, which granted Nansen refugees "travel and identity documents that afforded them protection against arbitrary refoulement and expulsion." The Walter-Paulin Law of March 1937 set standards for apprenticeship teachers and set up a corps of salaried inspectors, while a decree of June 1937 decided on the "creation of the workshop schools, close to schools [...] that should awaken the skills and curiosity of students, open up more to life school work, let them know about the local history and geography." In June 1937, holiday camps ('colonies') received a nationwide public statute through their first comprehensive state regulation.

An act of 26 August 1936 that amended the social insurance scheme for commerce and industry raised the maximum daily maternity benefit from 18 to 22 francs, and an order of 13 February 1937 prescribed a special sound signal for road-rail coaches. Improvements were made in unemployment allowances, and an Act of August 1936 increased the rate of pensions and allowances payable to miners and their dependents. In August 1936, regulations extending the provisions of the Family Allowances Act to agriculture were signed into law. A decree was introduced that same month for the inspection of farm dwellings, and at the beginning of January 1937, an Advisory Committee on Rents was appointed by decree. To promote profit-sharing, an Act of January 1937 (that regulated the working of the State mines, the Alsatian potash mines, and the potash industry), provided that 10% of the net yield of the undertaking "must be set aside, to be used, at least to the extent of one half, to enable the staff to share in the profits of the industry."

Blum persuaded the workers to accept pay raises and go back to work, ending the massive wave of strikes that disrupted production in 1936. Wages increased sharply, in two years the national average was up 48 percent. However inflation also rose 46%. The imposition of the 40-hour week proved highly inefficient, as industry had a difficult time adjusting to it. At the end of 40 hours, a shop or small factory had to shut down or replace its best workers; unions refused to compromise on this issue. The limitation was ended by the Radicals in 1938. The economic confusion hindered the rearmament effort; the rapid growth of German armaments alarmed Blum. He launched a major program to speed up arms production. The cost forced the abandonment of the social reform programs that the Popular Front had counted heavily on.

Blum dissolved the far-right leagues. In turn, the Popular Front was actively fought by right-wing and far-right movements, which often used antisemitic slurs against Blum and other Jewish ministers. The Cagoule far-right group even staged bombings to disrupt the government.

The Spanish Civil War broke out in July 1936 and deeply divided the government, which tried to remain neutral. The French left massively supported the Republican government in Madrid, and the right mostly supported the Nationalist insurgents, some even threatening to bring the war to France. Blum's cabinet was also deeply divided. Fear of the war spreading to France was one factor that made him decide on a policy of non-intervention. He collaborated with Britain and 25 other countries to formalize an agreement against sending any munitions or volunteer soldiers to Spain.

The air minister defied the cabinet and secretly sold warplanes to Madrid. Jackson concludes that the French government "was virtually paralyzed by the menace of Civil War at home, the German danger abroad, and the weakness of her own defenses." The Republicans in Spain found themselves increasingly on the defensive, and over 500,000 political refugees crossed the border into France, where they lived for years in refugee camps.

After 1937, the precarious coalition went into its death throes with rising extremism on left and right, as well as bitter recriminations. The economy remained stagnant, and French policy became helpless in the face of rapid growth of the German threat.

By 1938, the Radicals had taken control and forced the Socialists out of the cabinet. In late 1938, the Communists broke with the coalition by voting against the Munich agreement, in which the Popular Front had joined with the British by handing over part of Czechoslovakia to Germany. The government denounced the Communists as warmongers, who provoked large-scale strikes in late 1938. The Radical government crushed the Communists and fired over 800,000 workers. In effect, the Radical Party stood alone.

Radical cultural ideas came to the fore in the era of the Popular Front and often were explicitly supported by the governments, as in the 1937 Exposition Internationale des Arts et Techniques dans la Vie Moderne.

An "art for the masses" movement flourished, led by efforts of three of the most influential art magazines to legitimize a visual imagery: Cahiers d'art, Minotaure, and Verve. The prevailing leftist anti-capitalist discourse against social inequality was a feature of the Popular Front cultural policy.

The government proposed a draft law concerning intellectual property right, based on a new philosophy that did not consider the author as an "owner" (propriétaire) but as an "intellectual worker" (travailleur intellectuel). However, the draft failed to pass.

The new cross-class coalition of the Popular Front forced the Communists to accept some bourgeois cultural norms that they had long ridiculed. These included patriotism, the veterans' sacrifice, the honor of being an army officer, the prestige of the bourgeois, and the leadership of the Socialist Party and the parliamentary Republic. Above all, the Communists portrayed themselves as French nationalists. Young Communists dressed in costumes from the revolutionary period and the scholars glorified the Jacobins as heroic predecessors.

The Communists in the 1920s saw the need to mobilize young women but saw them as auxiliaries to male organizations. The 1930s had a new model of a separate-but-equal role for women. The party set up the Union des Jeunes Filles de France (UJFF) to appeal to young working women through publications and activities that were geared to their interests. The party discarded its original notions of Communist femininity and female political activism as a gender-neutral revolutionary. It issued a new model more attuned to the mood of the late 1930s and one more acceptable to the middle class elements of the Popular Front. It now portrayed the ideal young Communist woman as a paragon of moral probity with her commitment to marriage and motherhood and gender-specific public activism.

With the 1936 Matignon Accords, the working class gained the right to two weeks' vacation a year for the first time. This signaled the beginning of tourism in France. Although beach resorts had long existed, they had been restricted to the upper class. Tens of thousands of families who had never seen the sea before now played in the waves, and Léo Lagrange arranged around 500,000 discounted rail trips and hotel accommodation on a massive scale. However, the Popular Front's policy on leisure was limited to the enactment of the two-week vacation. While this measure was thought of as a response to workers' alienation, the Popular Front gave Lagrange (SFIO), named Under-Secretary for Sports and the organisation of Leisure, responsibility for organizing the use this leisure time with priority to sports.

The fascist conception and use of sport as a means to an end contrasted with the SFIO's official stance, which had ridiculed sports as a bourgeois and reactionary activity. However, confronted with an increasing possibility of war with Nazi Germany and affected by the scientific racist theories of the time, which were common beyond the fascist parties, the SFIO began to change its ideas concerning sports during the Popular Front, because its social reforms permitted to the workers' to participate in such leisure activities and also because of the increasing risks of a confrontation with Nazi Germany, particularly after the March 1936 remilitarization of the Rhineland. That new sign of German's revisionism towards the conditions of the 1919 Treaty of Versailles violated the 1925 Locarno Treaties, which had been reaffirmed in 1935 by France, Britain and Italy, allied in the Stresa Front. That led parts of the SFIO in supporting a conception of sport used as a training field for future conscription and, eventually, war.

The complex situation did not stop Lagrange from holding fast to an ethical conception of sports that rejected fascist militarism and indoctrination, scientific racist theories and the professionalisation of sports, which he opposed as an elitist conception that ignored the main popular aspect of sport. He considered that sport should aim for the fulfilment of the personality of the individual. Thus, Lagrange stated, "It cannot be a question in a democratic country of militarizing the distractions and the pleasures of the masses and of transforming the joy skillfully distributed into a means of not thinking." Léo Lagrange further declared in 1936:

"Our simple and human goal is to allow the masses of French youth to find in the practice of sport, joy and health and to build an organization of the leisure activities so that the workers can find relaxation and a reward to their hard labour."

"We want to make our youth healthy and happy. Hitler has been very clever at that sort of thing, and there is no reason why a democratic government should not do the same."

Thus, as shown by the hierarchy of the ministers, which placed the sub-secretary of sport under the authority of the Minister of Public Health, sport was considered above all as a public health issue. From this principle, it was only one step to relating sport to the " degeneration of the race" and other scientific racist theories. It was done by Georges Barthélémy, deputy of the SFIO, who declared that sports contributed to the "improvement of relations between capital and labour, henceforth to the elimination of the concept of class struggle " and that they were a "means to prevent the moral and physical degeneration of the race."

Such corporatist conceptions had led to the neo-socialist movement, whose members had been excluded from the SFIO on 5 November 1933. However, scientific racist positions were upheld inside the SFIO and the Radical-Socialist Party, who supported colonialism and found in this discourse a perfect ideological alibi to justify colonial rule. After all, Georges Vacher de Lapouge (1854–1936), a leading theorist of scientific racism, had been a SFIO member, although he was strongly opposed to the "Teachers' Republic" (République des instituteurs) and its meritocratic ideal of individual advancement and fulfillment through education, a Republican ideal founded on the philosophy of the Enlightenment.

The International Olympic Committee chose Berlin over Barcelona for the 1936 Olympic Games. In protest against holding the event in a fascist country, the Spanish Popular Front, decided to organize rival games in Barcelona, under the name People's Olympiad. Blum's government at first decided to take part in it, on insistence from the PCF, but the games were never held because the Spanish Civil War broke out.

Léo Lagrange played a major role in the co-organisation of the People's Olympiad. The trials for these Olympiads proceeded on 4 July 1936 in the Pershing stadium in Paris. Through their club, the FSGT, or individually, 1,200 French athletes were registered with these anti-fascist Olympiads.

However, Blum finally decided not to vote for the funds to pay the athletes' expenses. A PCF deputy declared: "Going to Berlin is making oneself an accomplice of the torturers...." Nevertheless, on 9 July, when the whole of the French right wing voted for the participation of France in the Olympic Games of Berlin, the left wing (PCF included) abstained. The motion passed, and France participated at Berlin.

In 1937, the Popular Front organized the Million Franc Race to induce automobile manufacturers to develop race cars capable of competing with the German Mercedes-Benz and Auto Union racers of the time, which were backed by the Nazi government as part of its sports policy. Hired by Delahaye, René Dreyfus beat Jean-Pierre Wimille, who ran for Bugatti. Wimille would later take part in the Resistance. The next year, Dreyfus succeeded in overwhelming the legendary Rudolf Caracciola, and his 480 horsepower (360 kW) Silver Arrow at the Pau Grand Prix, becoming a national hero.

The Popular Front initiated the 1936 Blum-Viollette proposal, which was supposed to grant French citizenship to a minority of Algerian Muslims. Opposed both by colons and by Messali Hadj 's pro-independence party, the project was never submitted to the National Assembly's vote and was abandoned.

Many historians judge the Popular Front to be a failure in terms of economics, foreign policy and long-term stability. "Disappointment and failure," says Jackson, "was the legacy of the Popular Front." Philippe Bernard and Henri Dubief concluded, "The Front Populaire came to grief through its own economic ineffectiveness and because of external pressures over which it had no control." There is general agreement that at first it created enormous excitement and expectation on the left, but in the end, it failed to live up to its promise. There is also general agreement, that the Popular Front provided a set of lessons and even an inspiration for the future. It began a process of government intervention into economic affairs that grew rapidly during the Vichy and postwar regimes into the modern French welfare state.

Charles Sowerwine argues that the Popular Front was above all a coalition against fascism, and it succeeded in blocking the arrival of fascism in France until 1940. He adds that it "failed to make the great changes its supporters anticipated and left many ordinary French people deeply disillusioned."

The reasons for the failure continue to be debated. Many historians blame Blum for being too timid and thereby dissolving the revolutionary fervor of the workers. MacMillan says that Blum "Lacked the inner convictions that he was the man to resolve the country's problems by bold and imaginative leadership," leading him to avoid a showdown with the financial powers, and forfeiting the support of the working class.

Other scholars blame the complex coalition of Socialist and Radicals, who never really agreed on labor policy. Others point to the Communists, who refused to turn the general strike into a revolution, as well as their refusal to join the government. From the perspective of the far left, "The failure of the Popular Front government was the failure of the parliamentary system," says Allen Douglas.

Economic historians point to numerous bad financial and economic policies, such as delayed devaluation of the franc, which made French exports uncompetitive. Economists especially consider the bad effects of the 40-hour week, which made overtime illegal, forcing employers to choose whether stop work or to replace their best workers with inferior and inexperienced workers when 40 hours had been reached. More generally, the argument is made that France could not afford the labor reforms in the face of poor economic conditions, the fears of the business community, and the threat of Nazi Germany. The forty hour week was particularly problematic in light of German weapons production - France was trying to compete with a nation which not only had a larger population but one which was working fifty to sixty hour work weeks. The limits on working hours particularly limited aircraft production, weakening French aviation and thus encouraging concessions at the Munich Agreement.

Population without double counting is an English translation of the French phrase Population sans doubles comptes.

In France, for the purposes of the census, the INSEE has defined several population indicators that allow people who live in more than one place to be counted in each place, to study and keep count of population movement. So each commune in France does not have only one figure for the population, but several; for example students may be counted both where they study and where they live when not studying. A parallel may be drawn to English laws that allow students to register and vote in local elections in more than one place.

The population figures of France depend on the definition of "French". INSEE, the French national statistics bureau has two definitions:

The figures given by INSEE for a particular commune are:

The population sans doubles comptes is therefore always no smaller than the population municipale and no larger than the population totale.

To evaluate the population properly, one should use the population sans doubles comptes.

Since 1999, places with fewer than 10,000 inhabitants have had a census every five years, with one-fifth of the places each year being subject to census.

Since 2004, places with 10,000 inhabitants or more have an annual census of a sample 8% of the population. This is carried out in January and February. A census collector leaves a questionnaire and collects it at a later date. Since this time, population municipale and population sans doubles comptes have had the same meaning.

The population totale is used when applying rules and regulations to budget and finance, in particular in section R2151-2 of the Code of Territorial Collectives. But the population municipale determines the size of a council and the scrutiny of municipal elections, R2151-3.

A pork chop is a thick slice of meat cut from the domestic pig, particularly one adjacent to a rib and usually served with it. It may be cooked in many ways, the simplest being fried or grilled, plain or coated with flour and dipped in egg and breadcrumbs. Numerous combinations of vegetables, fruits, spices and herbs are cooked with pork chops in the cuisines of many countries, including Austria, Britain, China, France, Germany, Italy, Spain and the US.

Although pork was favoured in classical and medieval times it was not until the nineteenth century that pork chops became popular. Modern breeding techniques mean that it is no longer necessary on food hygiene grounds to cook pork, including chops, for as long as used to be recommended, with the result that a juicier result can be obtained.

The Oxford English Dictionary (OED) defines a pork chop as "A thick slice of pork, esp. one adjacent to a rib and usually served with it".. The first use of the term cited in the OED dates from c. 1752, but the cut has been familiar for considerably longer: the Dictionnaire de l'Académie Française dates the French term for it, Côtelette de porc, back to the fourteenth century. In her 1954 Food in England, Dorothy Hartley wrote of the Anglo-Saxons enjoying a grilled pork chop with apple sauce and ale, but although pork was a favoured meat in classical and mediaeval times it was not until the nineteenth century that pork chops became widely popular. Hanna Glasse (1747) makes no mention of pork chops in The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy, but Mrs Beeton (1861) gives two recipes for pork chops in Beeton's Book of Household Management.

Old cookery books insist that pork must be thoroughly cooked, erring if at all on the overcooked rather than the undercooked side. Modern breeding techniques have made it possible to cook pork, including chops, to a lower temperature, helping the meat to remain juicy while still being safe to eat. Pork chops are sometimes sold marinated, or they can be marinated at home. In their Mastering the Art of French Cooking, Simone Beck, Louisette Bertholle and Julia Child suggest marinating pork chops in brine, lemon juice or wine.

Among Austrian ways of serving pork chops is Schweinkotelett auf Sauerkraut – braised with sauerkraut. Jägerschnitzel, familiar in Austrian and German cuisines is made of pork chops, deboned, beaten thin, breadcrumbed and shallow fried, served with a mushroom gravy. German dishes using pork chops include Schweinkotelett in Senfsosse – cooked with mustard in white wine, and Paprika Schweinkotelett – cooked with paprika, Speck, peppers and sour cream.

The traditional British way with pork chops is to trim them of superfluous fat, brush with lard, dredge in flour and grill quickly; they are served with hot apple sauce, brown gravy and boiled potatoes. Gordon Ramsay suggests pork chops fried and served with fried sage leaves and champ. Alternative British methods of cooking pork chops include braising with honey and cranberries or cherries, and casseroling with lemon peel, sherry or Madeira, sultanas and apple.

A Chinese way of cooking pork chops is marinating them in oyster and soy sauces and then frying with white and red onion, ginger, garlic and wine. The meat of a pork chop is sometimes sliced whole from the bone and beaten thin, resembling an escalope, before being marinated in wine and soy sauce and then fried.

The pork chop plays a prominent part in French cuisine. Among the ways of serving it are:

Among Spanish recipes for pork chops are Chuletas de cerdo a la naranja – braised with orange juice and ginger, served with sour cream, Chuletas de cerdo picante – with garlic, oregano, cumin, cloves, coriander seed, cinnamon cooked in red wine vinegar and orange juice, served with a pineapple and lime sauce (Salsa de lima y piña), and Chuletas de cerdo al romero con pimienta – cooked with garlic, rosemary, fennel seeds, chili flakes lemon juice and olive oil.

In his 1972 book James Beard's American Cookery the American chef James Beard gives recipes for pork chops with cream gravy, breaded pork chops, pork chops Creole, chilled pork chops, pork chops with mushrooms, pork chops with onions, pork chop sauerkraut casserole and pork chop and potato scallop.

Chops vary in size from smaller foreloin chops (or cutlets), through to the middle loin chops, both of which have the bone in. Chump chops are boneless and the biggest of the three. They all come from the loin and can be cooked in the same way. In American butchery rib chops come from the rib portion of the loin, and are similar to rib eye steaks ; blade or shoulder chops come from the spine and tend to contain much connective tissue. The sirloin chop is taken from the (rear) leg end and also contains much connective tissue. The shoulder end produces chops that are considerably fattier than the chops taken from the loin end.

The "Iowa Chop" is a large thick middle cut, its name coined in 1976 by the Iowa Pork Producers Association due to the state producing more pork than any other in the US. The middle-cut loin is often over 1 inch (2.5 cm) thick, and likened to a quality cut of beef for its size and tenderness.

Pork ribs are a cut of pork popular in Western and Asian cuisines. The rib cage of a domestic pig, meat and bones together, is cut into usable pieces, prepared by smoking, grilling, or baking – usually with a sauce, often barbecue – and then served.

Several different types of ribs are available, depending on the section of the rib cage from which they are cut. Variations in the thickness of the meat and bone, as well as levels of fat in each cut, can alter the flavor and texture of the prepared dish. The inner surface of the rib cage is covered by a layer of connective tissue (pleura) that is difficult to cook tender; it is usually removed before marinating or cooking.

Back ribs (also back ribs or loin ribs) are taken from the top of the rib cage between the spine and the spare ribs, below the loin muscle. They have meat between the bones and on top of the bones and are shorter, curved, and sometimes meatier than spare ribs. The rack is shorter at one end due to the natural tapering of a pig's rib cage. The shortest bones are typically only about 8 centimetres (3 inches) and the longest is usually about 15 cm (6 in), depending on the size of the hog. A pig side has 13 - 16 ribs (depending on the breed), but usually, two or three are left on the shoulder when it is separated from the loin. A rack of back ribs contains a minimum of eight ribs (some may be trimmed if damaged) but can include up to 13 ribs, depending on how the butcher has prepared it. A typical commercial rack has 10–13 bones. If fewer than ten bones are present, butchers call them "cheater racks."

Rib tips are short, meaty sections of rib attached to the lower end of the spare ribs, between the ribs and the sternum. Unlike back ribs or spare ribs, the rib structure is provided by dense costal cartilage, not bone. Rib tips are cut away from the spare ribs when preparing St. Louis-style spare ribs. Smoked rib tips are an important part of Chicago-style barbecue.

Riblets are sometimes prepared by butchers by cutting a full set of spare ribs approximately in half. This produces a set of short, flat ribs where the curved part of the rib is removed and gives them a more uniform look. Loin back ribs do not always have this removed. When not removed, they look rounded and are often referred to as baby back ribs. Riblets, as defined by the North American Meat Processors Association as pork cut number 424, the pork loin riblet, is the transverse processes of the lumbar vertebrae and any accompanying lean meat that is left after the loin and tenderloin are removed. These riblets, number 424, must include at least four transverse processes from the lumbar spine but no more than two rib bones. Riblets used to be thrown out by butchers but have become popular due to their excellent flavor and lower cost.

Button ribs (or feather bones) are often confused with riblets mostly because Applebee's sells these as riblets. What Applebee's sells is found just past the ribs near the backbone, just underneath the tenderloin. This cut of meat has no bones but instead has "buttons" of cartilaginous material with meat attached.

Rib tips (or brisket) are found at the bottom of the spare ribs by the sternum. The rib tips have a high proportion of cartilage. The rib tips give the spare ribs a rounded appearance. This piece is sometimes removed to provide the meat with a more uniform appearance and make it easier to eat, and the remaining spare ribs are referred to as Saint Louis-style ribs.

About half of Norwegian families eat oven-cooked ribs on Christmas Eve. Normally, they are referred to as ribbe or juleribbe. Traditional recipes include steaming for half an hour before cooking in the oven to achieve a crisp surface.

The Port of Boulogne-sur-Mer is a seaport located on the western coast of the Hauts-de-France region, on the edge of the Pas de Calais, the world's busiest strait for international shipping. It is France's leading fishing port, with a diversified fleet of almost 150 boats. It was also an important link port with England until the end of the 20th century.

It became a “regional port” in 2007 as part of the port decentralization.

Due to the configuration of the Strait, the tidal range (difference in height between high and low tide) in this port is the highest in the region: 8 meters on average at Boulogne-sur-Mer (compared with 5.2 at Dunkirk).

This ancient Liane estuary was occupied in prehistoric times, as evidenced by the skulls of prehistoric men (Cro-Magnon, according to their 19th-century discoverers) found in the port of Boulogne.

The port of Boulogne-sur-Mer is one of the former strategic ports of the Pas de Calais and northern France (formerly a military and fishing port), and a departure base for potential landings in France or to England from France.

Legend has it that in the year 633 or 636, during the reign of King Dagobert, a ship without oars or sailors entered the port of Boulogne in unusually calm weather. According to legend, it was illuminated and contained a wooden relief Virgin Mary “of excellent carving, about three and a half feet high, holding the infant Jesus on her left arm, at the origin of a pilgrimage still alive in the 19th century”, according to Abbé Daniel Haigneré [ fr ]. Local tradition also has it that this vessel contained a relic of Christ and another of the Virgin Mary, along with a handwritten Bible, said to have been enshrined by Saint Éloy, Bishop of Noyon. Various illuminations, engravings, seals, etc. have alluded to this religious legend.

In the 18th century, the port of Boulogne was a major center for maritime smuggling with England, known as smogglage or smoglage, particularly for tea, wine and brandy exports.

It also played a role in controlling the level of the Liane, thanks to a lock that became known as the “Pont-Barrage Marguet” lock.

In the 20th century, Boulogne gradually became an industrial and passenger port, as well as a marina, a period during which the port was affected by both world wars. On July 6, 1903, the President of the Republic, Émile Loubet, laid the 1st stone of the tidal basin.

While lighthouses are tending to disappear in Europe, the Boulogne lighthouse is still in operation.

The Quai de l'Europe (800 m), created in 1967, is accessible without a lock to 230-meter ships with 34-foot (11-meter) berths.

The port specializes in forestry / paper products, but has a storage area of almost 500,000 m, and can also handle cement, aggregates and riprap produced in the Boulonnais region.

It benefits from several motorway access points (A16, A26) but, unlike Calais and Dunkirk, is not connected to the canal network.

Its industrial vocation diminished in 2004 with the closure of the Comilog plant, whose blast furnaces had previously contributed significantly to the port's industrial activity. As a result of the plant's closure, the port fell back to 20th place among metropolitan commercial ports (2005 figures).

The freeing-up of the former Comilog plant in October 2007 enabled the Boulogne-sur-Mer Côte d'Opale Chamber of Commerce and Industry, then managing the port, to dispose of part of the land to extend the seafood processing industry zone. The second part, covering some 20 hectares, saw the inauguration on September 19, 2009, of a new freight-passenger terminal featuring a double-deck, double-lane gangway capable of adapting to the width of all types of ship. This new facility can accommodate ships over 200 m long, which make up the bulk of the cross-Channel fleet and the ro-ro fleet in general. It also marks the creation of a “hub port” (so named because it is the meeting point of three modes of transport: sea, road and rail), the initial aim of which was to develop freight services for the seafood industry, enabling the loyalty and development of foreign fish deliveries to Boulogne. Indeed, every year, 85% of the 380,000 tonnes of seafood products shipped to the Port of Boulogne are imported by road. Shipments from Boulogne to Southern Europe are made in the same way.

The port also boasts a shipbuilding business, Socarenam.

The port, which covers a total area of almost 820 hectares in the communes of Boulogne, Le Portel and Outreau, remains France's leading fishing port.

Located in Place Frédéric-Sauvage, Pont-Barrage Marguet takes its name from the engineer Pierre Joseph Marguet (1785-1870), who designed it (with Peyronnet) in the mid-19th century. It was rebuilt in the mid-20th century.

It replaces a “service bridge” and replaced the old lock that was located further downstream at the beginning of the 19th century Album monumental et archéologie, based on a project drawn up in 1845 by P.J. Marguet, and was inaugurated by Napoleon III himself on September 28, 1853. It was restored between 1955 and 1958, following a bridge collapse in May 1955, and re-inaugurated in June 1959.

This dam plays an important role as a gateway to the sea, via the Frédéric Sauvage reservoir. Conversely, it also helps to conserve water in the Liane during low-water periods, perhaps by reducing the risk of nocturnal asphyxia of fish in a context of eutrophication and anoxia. This dam on the liana has limited the effects of flushing, which is a source of worsening siltation in the port. De-silting operations are periodically necessary.

It is designed to limit the introduction of tides into the lower Liane valley and within the Boulogne-sur-mer urban area; it evacuates floods (at ebb tide or if the level of the Liane is higher than that of the sea). By regulating the water level in the marina (upstream of the dam), it facilitates yachting and other nautical activities.

The “central pass” of the Marguet dam used to have a fixed section, which was replaced in the 2000s by a double gate to increase the speed of flood discharge when necessary (the maximum discharge rate of the river during low-water periods was tripled). However, its opening has little influence on flood discharge upstream of Boulogne-sur-mer (Wirwignes...). It is considered a major obstacle to the upstream migration of migratory fish, yet the Liane is home to a very large eel population.

From the 1850s onwards, industrial fishing in Boulogne was organized around a few shipowning families. By 1868, more than half of all drifters were owned by 4 fishing companies: Vidor, Huret-Dupuis, Bouclet [ fr ] and Ancel-Joly. These pioneers developed the industry considerably, drawing inspiration from the English model. In 1894, Bouclet and then Vidor acquired the first steam-powered herring boats. As a result, steam-powered herring boats were no longer produced from 1905 onwards.

At the beginning of the 20th century, Boulogne was France's leading port in terms of tonnage landed. Herring made its fortune, with over 30,000 tonnes landed in 1921 (equivalent to fifty million francs at the time). These herring were netted in the English Channel/North Sea from July to the end of January by Boulonnais drifters, and also fished by trawlers sent to the Small's region, south-west of Ireland and west of the Bristol Channel, from July to December.

To supply its salting and curing plants all year round, the Boulogne herring industry nevertheless had to import herring from abroad (mainly Norway) to meet its needs (particularly from August to February, with, for example, in 1924, 185 tons of fresh herring in ice and 8,575 tons of salted herring imported between January 1 and August 31, 1924, for Boulogne and Fécamp).

In Boulogne, as elsewhere in Europe, small-scale fishing from the late 19th century onwards, followed by industrial fishing, had to cope with the depletion of certain fish stocks as a result of overfishing, and probably later exacerbated by global warming and pollution.

After record Norwegian herring catches (in 1919, an exceptional year, 4,861,556 hectoliters of herring were landed and sold in Norway, worth 78,731,889 kroner), at the request of the “Syndicat des Armateurs boulonnais”, experts were sent to study Norwegian fishing techniques, and the possibility of Boulonnais herring fishermen going to Norway to fish on the Viking Bank (with drift nets or tidal nets).

Today, optimizing the value of catches, diversifying the use of wild resources and developing aquaculture are among the themes addressed by the Aquimer national competitiveness cluster.

In 2008, 47,000 tonnes of fish were landed (-5.7% on 2007), including 37,309 tonnes landed at port (valued at around 83 million euros) and 10,075 tonnes processed at sea by three Euronor freezer trawlers. This decrease can be explained in part by the decommissioning of one of Euronor's six fresh fishing boats, by the protection of spawning stocks (cod quotas) and by the “biological stoppages” of part of the fleet in summer and winter 2008. However, at the end of 2008, the European Fisheries Ministers granted a 30% increase in cod catches in the North Sea and Eastern Channel, where trawlers from Boulonnais are active, and fishermen are allowed to keep dead fish that are undersized or not authorized for fishing, but in exchange fishermen must limit their days at sea (from 180 to 150 days).

In 2010, almost 45,000 tonnes of fish were counted, including 35,964 tonnes landed at the port and 8,934 tonnes frozen at sea (Euronor).

In November 2008, the regional council announced the creation of a fishing mission with “an audit for the Port of Boulogne's fishing platform strategy for the next 10 to 15 years”.

In 2009, a “Capécure-Bis” was set up on 14 ha (out of a total of 40) of the former Comilog industrial wasteland (the plant was closed in December 2003). These installations have been delayed by 6 months due to the extra time needed to clean up the Comilog site.

Between 2000 and 2013, the fishing port will benefit from a €35 million modernization program. In both cases, High Environmental Quality criteria are announced, as well as a green corridor on the activity zone.

In 2015, the Port of Boulogne remained France's leading fishing port (in terms of tonnage landed) ahead of Lorient, despite a significant decline (50,965 tons in 2001, 43,952 tons in 2006, 36,096 tons in 2012 and 35,850 tons in 2015).

In 2020, the Port of Boulogne was France's leading fishing port, with a tonnage of 27,859 tonnes.

According to the portboulognecalais website, in 2023 the fishing port of Boulogne-sur-Mer had 89.1 millions of euros in value terms (up 2%), it has even reached its highest level for 20 years for the second year running. Fish volumes are up by 8% compared with 2022, and have passed the symbolic 30,000 tonnes threshold (30,437 t), returning to their pre-Brexit level. The drop in catches of certain species such as sole, mackerel and whiting has been offset by ever greater volumes of cephalopods (squid and cuttlefish), red mullet and scallops, whose stocks are in excellent condition. The port of Boulogne-sur-Mer remains the leading French fishing port in terms of tonnage and value.

Boulogne's ideal geographical position made it a major port for links with England. In the 13th century, the first commercial link with England was established in Boulogne. From the eighteenth century onwards, numerous passenger services across the Channel were launched in Boulogne, so that by 1913, Boulogne had a monopoly on cross-Channel transport over Calais, and was France's leading passenger port. Until the 1990s, Boulogne was the 2nd largest passenger port in France.

But the construction of the Channel Tunnel and the development of the port of Calais at the end of the 20th century led to a decline in traffic at the port of Boulogne, and the gradual closure of the lines orchestrated by the various cross-Channel operators, who preferred to focus their efforts on the Calais-Dover line.

For a few years, the port of Boulogne still handled a significant flow of passengers to England. In May 2004, SpeedFerries launched the world's 1st low-cost fast ferry service from Boulogne. Traffic reached 710,000 passengers in 2007. However, the company was forced to cease operations in November 2008. In February 2009, LD Lines reactivated the Boulogne-Dover route with a traditional ferry: the “ Côte d'Albâtre ”. From June to November 2009, LD Lines operated its fast catamaran “ Norman Arrow ” on this route. In November, this vessel was replaced by the “ Norman Spirit ”, a slower conventional ferry offering higher freight capacity. In March 2010, following a commercial agreement with Transeuropa Ferries, LD Lines made another change of vessel, with the “ Norman Bridge ” operating a mixed freight-passenger service. In May 2010, this service was reinforced by a second identical vessel, the “ Norman Trader ”, for a few months, until early September 2010, when LD Lines finally ceased its cross-Channel activities at Boulogne. Since then, except in exceptional circumstances, no passenger ships have operated between Boulogne and England, but there is still hope that the link will soon be revived.

The Port of Boulogne has three main cross-Channel terminals:

In 1968 a hoverport was built to service the Seaspeed hovercraft operation from Dover Hoverport. A major reconstruction took place in 1978, in anticipation of larger passenger number stemming from the rebuild of the SR.N4 hovercraft and introduction of the N.500 Naviplane hovercraft. The hoverport closed when Hoverspeed abandoned their Boulogne hovercraft service to focus on their SeaCat service in 1993 and remains in situ, albeit in a derelict condition.

Ranked 10th largest commercial port in mainland France in 1960, and 9th in 1990, the closure of Comilog's blast furnaces in 2004 brought the port's volume of business to a halt. Indeed, almost 58% of Boulogne's port activity was directly linked to Comilog's industrial activity. As a result, the commercial port of Boulogne-sur-Mer slipped to 20th place in 2005. In 2010, the port's total commercial traffic amounted to 1,755,164 tonnes, thanks in particular to the cross-Channel activity of LD Lines.

The Boulogne marina, managed by the Chambre de Commerce et Littoral Hauts-de-France, is located in the eastern part of the port and has 590 berths in three basins (108 in the outer harbor, including 70 for visitors, 202 in the inner harbor, and 280 in the Bassin Napoléon). It can accommodate all types of pleasure craft, including sailboats up to 25 m long. A Club House welcomes yachtsmen. At the end of 2017, the Bassin Napoléon underwent major renovation work, financed by the Communauté d'Agglomération du Boulonnais, with new pontoons and berths available since May 2018.

The harbor is equipped with 10-meter catways and 2 22-meter long berths for larger boats. Fuel (diesel-gasoil) is available on the port itself, quai Chanzy (diesel pump open 3 h before and 3 h after high tide during office hours), as well as fresh water and electricity (220 V/16 A). A wastewater pumping station is also available, on a pontoon. A 35-tonne gantry crane operated by S.E.P.D. (Société d'Exploitation des Ports du Détroit) handles launching and lifting operations. The port has a free 'Boulogne Marina' wi-fi system, and provides weather forecasts, waste sorting facilities and WC/shower facilities.

In October 2017, the marina was equipped with an automatic defibrillator located outside the reception building, as well as 6 carts distributed across the 3 basins to enable boaters to transport their equipment. Bicycle racks were also installed in July 2018 to meet boater demand.

In summer 2018, new services are being offered to subscribers and visitors such as the bread/viennoiserie service at the foot of the port office between July 10 and August 17, 2018, as well as numerous partnerships with downtown bakeries, restaurants and delicatessens in the form of discounts or benefits by presenting the port membership card.

A multilingual (French-English-Dutch) website boulogne-marina.fr has also been created, as well as a facebook page 'Marina Boulogne sur Mer' where all the latest marina news can be found.

In 2017, the port welcomed 2,740 visitors for 7,377 overnight stays, with the majority of customers being Dutch, Belgian, English, German and French.

High-speed vessels are known to pose water safety problems by crossing the “rail” at high speed, and therefore with high kinetic energy. Highly fuel-intensive, their speed could be limited in the future by the price of oil.

Seismic risk is low in Boulogne (zone 2 out of 5 in the zoning established in May 2011), as in most of Nord-Pas-de-Calais. However, a seismogenic fault exists in Belgium, parallel to the Franco-Belgian border. Historically, several major earthquakes appear to have had an epicenter in the Pas de Calais region, between France and England. These include the earthquake of April 6, 1580, which affected Boulogne-sur-Mer and Calais, as well as a small tsunami which is also thought to have affected ships at sea, but in this region, which has suffered many wars, there is little precise evidence of this period. More recently, on September 19, 1810, a small tsunami also hit the port of Boulogne-sur-Mer, assessed by the BRGM as a grade 3 tsunami, of fairly high intensity, which could cause flooding of gently sloping coasts, damage to light constructions near the coast or reversal of watercourses in estuaries up to a certain distance upstream.

The former Nord-Pas-de-Calais region became the new owner of the Port of Boulogne on January 1, 2007, as part of a process of port decentralization.

In 2009, it decided to entrust the management and development of the yachting sector to the local authorities (town or CAB).

The other port facilities continue to be operated by the CCI, which became the new Côte d'Opale Chamber of Commerce and Industry on January 1, 2011.

Comilog is a subsidiary of Eramet, a world-class mining and metallurgical group. The Boulogne plant produced ferromanganese for the steel industry. It also has direct and indirect or delayed environmental effects (for example, for currentological and hydrosedimentary reasons, the discharge of sediments into the sea, and the extension of the harbour jetty in the early 1970s may also have played a role in accelerating shoreline erosion at Wissant (Clabaut, 1988, cited by Aernouts (2006)), was once home to a polluting industry (the Comilog plant), and like all ports, it contributes to greenhouse gas emissions and the spread of invasive species worldwide (for example, the first appearance of the crepidula in the northern Seine estuary was reported here). In the past, the company may well have contributed to the ecotoxicity of port sediments, with delayed effects when port sediments cleaned in the harbour were dumped at sea off Boulogne. Its beach has long been considered the most polluted in France (and high levels of metals, including mercury, have been recorded in the port in the past). Water and sediment quality should improve with the closure and treatment of the Comilog wasteland and work on the wastewater treatment plant.

In 1988, 50% of the poor-quality bathing waters in mainland France were located in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region. Significant efforts have enabled us to achieve 100% compliance in 10 years, with a few black spots still remaining after rainfall (overflow from wastewater treatment plants), which explains why the beach near the port of Boulogne-sur-Mer is closed to bathing.

The port is equipped with wind turbines, and Nausicaa helps to raise visitor awareness of the marine environment.

Having depended in particular on passenger transport (currently at a standstill since September 2010), tourism in the Port of Boulogne remains linked to the success of Nausicaá, the region's leading tourist site, and to the tourist appeal of the town and its surrounding area (the beaches of the Côte d'Opale, the Haute Ville, the château-museum, the Napoleonic Column of the Grande Armée, the regional nature park) and the Fête de la mer de Boulogne-sur-Mer.

It is essentially linked to the valorization of fish products. The 4 main species fished in 2006 were (according to the CCI Boulogne and the CCIBCO):

The DRIRE reports only one plant, Société Maritime de Combustible Liquides de Boulogne-sur-Mer (SMCL) classified as Sévéso - seuil bas (for fire risks).

In a global context of climate change, managers will have to deal with a probable rise in sea levels, and an increased risk of high tides and storms. A tide gauge has been measuring tide levels in Boulogne for many years. The Marel Carno Station (automatic) monitors a number of parameters of the marine environment, including;

It is to be integrated into the Mersea project (Marine Environment and Security for the European Area), which is a global ocean observation, modeling and forecasting system set up for 4 years (2004-2008) by federating the efforts of 40 European institutes and agencies.

As oil prices inevitably rise, the fishing and port industries will have to find alternatives to this energy source. Some are talking about a return to sailing, but in a modernized version, or new engines (using hydrogen or solar energy), or even various fishing adaptations to be developed around a more sustainable management of fishery resources, which we are seeking to better understand with organizations such as Ifremer, universities...).

49°14′N 0°17′W ﻿ / ﻿ 49.23°N 0.29°W ﻿ / 49.23; -0.29

The Port of Caen (French: Port de Caen) is the harbour and port authority of the Norman city of Caen, France.

The port of Caen is composed of a series of basins on the Canal de Caen à la Mer, linking Caen to Ouistreham, 15 km (9.3 m) downstream, on the English Channel.

The port of Caen was originally composed solely of the Bassin Saint-Pierre, in the centre of Caen. Increase in traffic explains the digging up and creation of four more; the Nouveau Bassin (cruises), Bassin de Calix, Bassin de Hérouville (miscellaneous) and Bassin de Blainville (cereals). A new canal, as well as a new concert venue (the Cargö), were built next to the junction between the Canal and the Bassin Saint-Pierre, creating a sharp contrast with the disused warehouses.

The Bassin Saint-Pierre is used as a marina and is kept afloat with a height adjustable dam on the River Orne. The Nouveau Bassin, directly east of Saint-Pierre, although it receives cruise ships and ferries in need of berthing or repairs, is not in regular use.

The Viaduc de Calix, a large concrete viaduct, passes over the Orne valley and the canal. It has been built high enough to permit the transit of large tonnage ships. The Bassin de Calix, directly below the viaduct, is the only basin in regular use. Several cranes are used to load and unload cargo, mostly wood, onto lorries or trains.

Ships transporting cereals use Blainville wharf. Ships are stationed directly against the canal wall and load and unloaded by cranes and cereal silos.

At the entrance of the canal is the Port of Caen's cross-channel ferry port.

The terminal building is situated in the western part of the terminal. Two sets of locks, beyond the seaport, keep the canal navigable towards Caen. The lock is composed to two lock basins and a lock keeper's tower.

The entrance to the port is a dredged channel, 8 m deep, below the hydrographic zero and 90 m long. The access channel itself is two nautical miles (4 km) long, on a 184°5 axis, indicated by aligned luminous signalling. The channel, 150 m wide is bordered, to the west and the east by three sea mark buoys.

The outer harbour is a 250 m in diameter avoidance zone, permitting ferries to turn around.

Ouistreham possesses two ferry berths; Poste T1 and Poste T2.

The terminal itself is divided in two areas, T1 and T2, respectively 15 400 m and 56 100 m in area. The terminal's total area is 100 000 m.

Up to three sailings of Brittany Ferries depart Ouistreham per day. It is the Port of Caen's English Channel ferry port.

In the summer season, the MV Guillaume de Normandie and MV Mont St Michel operate the back-to-back, six-hour ferry crossing. Ferries depart both Ouistreham and Portsmouth International Port at 08:15 (and arrive at 14:30), 16:30 (and arrive at 21:15) and 22:00 (and arrive the next morning).

This schedule begins in May and is carried through until October, when ferries start to go in for refits; hence they are deployed on different routes.

The traffic has decreased during the last twenty years. The port of Caen has however been used to accommodate several racing yachts such as the Kingfisher (2nd - Vendée Globe 2001, sailed by Ellen MacArthur, and 1st Route du Rhum 2002) and Gartmore (9th - Vendée Globe 2001). As well as racing ships, the port of Caen is the regular port-of-call for sailing ships, the Belem and the HMY Britannia.

During July 2006 the Port of Caen transported 317 274 tons of cargo and 133 959 passengers (32 538 cars and 9 483 lorries).

Between 2004 and 2006, the Port of Caen transported (in tons per year):

The Port of Calais in northern France is the country's fourth largest port and the largest for passenger traffic. It accounts for more than a third of economic activity in the town of Calais.

The Port of Calais was the first cable ship port in Europe and is the fourth largest port in France and the largest for passenger traffic.

After the Treaty of Le Touquet was signed by France and the UK on 4 February 2003, juxtaposed controls were established in the port. Passengers travelling from the port to Dover, UK go through French exit checks (conducted by the French Border Police and French Customs) as well as UK immigration entry checks (by the UK Border Force) before embarkation. UK Border Force officers have the power to arrest and detain individuals in the immigration control zone in the port. Customs checks remain unaffected by the Treaty. Therefore, on arrival in Dover, travellers might still be stopped by UK Border Force customs officers for a customs inspection.

The harbour entrance is to the north-west of the main harbour, coming after a dredged channel due west. Once past the harbour entrance and in Avant Port (or Outer Harbour), the waterway splits into two directions, south-east to Canal de Calais or east-north east to Bassin Président Henri-Ravisse.

On the Bassin Président Henri-Ravisse not far in lie ferry berths on the southern side of the channel, while on the northern side lies a RoRo dock. These ferry berths are capable of handling a ship up to 215 metres long. Further past the berths lie the cargo ship docks, with the northern shoreline hosting four ship-to-shore cranes. The southern side of the channel has nothing as all the space is taken by the ferry cargo handling facilities, so it is instead used as a general mooring station. The Bassin Président Henri-Ravisse ends with three RoRo berths at the end.

The Canal de Calais goes to the south of the ferry terminal, and turns right, to the south into Arrière Port. Behind a sluice gate and a moveable bridge lies Bassin de Ouest, which is used as a mooring space for yachts and other pleasure boats. In Arrière Port however, there the channel branches off into Le Canal de Calais à Saint-Omer, which leads into a lock. Behind the lock lies Bassin Carnot, which is used as a secondary cargo terminal. After that, to the south-west lies another set of locks, which branch off into Calais' canal system.

As of June 2021, three companies operate regular scheduled services to Calais:

On 1 April 1969 a hoverport was built by Calais Chamber of Commerce to service the Hoverlloyd hovercraft operation from Ramsgate Hoverport. The hoverport closed when Hoverspeed ceased operations and has since been incorporated into the wider workings of the port after demolition in 2016.

Cargo traffic has tripled over the past two decades. In 2007 more than 41.5 million tonnes of traffic passed through Calais with some 11.52 million passengers, 1.4 million trucks and trailers, 2.249 million cars and 4,700 crossings a year. On average, ships sail from the port every 30 minutes. Most of the traffic in Calais comes from the Port of Dover.

In 2015, A new 400 million euro project was underway at the port to create a breakwater protecting a pool of 700 metres long, thus allowing Calais to have the capability to handle vessels of all shapes and sizes, from the smallest private yachts to supersize cruise ships, like the Oasis class cruise ships.

Buses connect the port with Gare de Calais-Ville on the SNCF network. There are regular TER Hauts-de-France trains through Hazebrouck to Lille Flandres (for SNCB/NMBS into Belgium, for example to Gent-Sint-Pieters), Calais-Fréthun, Boulogne, as well as along the coast via Gravelines to Dunkerque.

There are also direct TGV trains which run from Calais-Ville then via Calais-Fréthun (served by Eurostar) to Lille-Europe and Paris Gare du Nord.

The Port of Deauville is the harbour of the town of Deauville, France.

The large town's position on the estuary of the River Touques was ideal for the establishment of a constructed harbour to supplement the fishing docks of Trouville-sur-Mer.

There are two harbours, the oldest is the Port Morny, situated 500 m upstream the Touques and kept level with a lock. The first dock was opened in 1855, enlarged 11 years later and named the Bassin Morny, inaugurated in 1866 by Emperess Eugénie. The avant-port basin, Bassin des Yachts, was built in 1890.

In 1968, hydraulic doors were fitted to keep the basins full, even at low tide. These automated in 1989 and replaced in 2005.

The pleasure port possesses 360 berths of which 60 are reserved for visitors. The port can accommodate ships of up to 15 m in length, 4.5 m in width with a draft of 2.5 m.

The Marina, built within the residential complex of Port Deauville was built in 1972 to compensate for the saturation of the yacht basin at Port Morny. It can accommodate up to 850 yachts, with 150 berths reserved for visitors. The marina is kept full with a lock, controlled by the harbour's capitainerie.

The Port of Dives-sur-Mer, Port de Dives-sur-Mer, is the harbour of the Norman town of Dives-sur-Mer, France. It is from this harbour that William the Conqueror left for England to claim the throne.

The river Dives ' estuary used to be larger than it is now. A large head of land protects the natural haven and gives adequate protection to light craft from the sea.

William the Conqueror chose the port of Dives as the starting point of his campaign to claim the throne of England. The port has always been known as a thriving port and under Louis XIV, one of his ministers Colbert, decided, in 1676 to begin remodel the area. During the 13th century, the port of Dives was a commercial place for Spanish and Portuguese merchants, their trade in leathers and wine from Cordoba interested the monks of the Saint-Etienne abbey of Caen who imposed import taxation. It is then that the Dives swamps were irrigated and drained and that the course of the Dives was modified. During the many centuries of war between France and England, the port showed a strategic and military importance.

Several naval battles occurred outside the port. On 29 May 1798, the frigate la Confiante and the corvette la Vésuve, having left Le Havre were pursued by three English ships and tried to gain shelter in the port of Dives. To prevent them from doing so, the English ships began to fire on the French for five hours. Finally, la Confiante, having sustained heavy damage, ran ashore on the pointe de Beuzeval, where it was burnt down.

Around 1860, project to enlarge the port came to fruition. Activity increased. In 1881, the port's registry logged 203 ship movements. Ships with a draft of up to 4 m regularly used the port which had 29 registered fishing boats. The port was then used by all types of ships, fishing, sailing and Cabotage.

The site as we know it today was built between 1845 and 1859, and modified in 1880. It was a port of call for merchant ships and fishing boats and also the place of regattas organised by the Count of Dramard. Sécrétan built Tréfimétaux steel works inside the large meander of the Dives in 1891. Three mast sailing ships provided the works with coal from England and copper from Le Havre.

As of 2006, four independent fishermen still sail from Dives-sur-Mer. They sell their seafood at port of Dives' fish market. Fish caught in the Baie de Seine range from sole to lemon sole, turbot, mackerel, bass, mussel and shrimp.

Beyond the fish dock, a lock protects Port Guillaume. South of the lock is a sailing club, the CAPAC, (Comité des Amis du Plein Air du Calvados).

Port Guillaume is a pleasure harbour built in the 1990s on the site of the Tréfimétaux steel works. The project was initiated by the Catherine Mamet construction and leisure group and built by Toffolutti. Catherine Mamet had built the marina as well as two buildings, consisting of two 5-storey mock Norman residential buildings. One of the buildings, built along one of the marina's dock walls, possesses a few shops. These two buildings were the only two to be built for more than ten years until the Groupe George V took over the project at the end of the 1990s. Although the "new" project was a success, with the construction of the lighthouse and of several more houses as well as a private railway station, it received bad publicity following a television report on M6 's Capital business program. The program described how prices had been inflated to create a buzz around the project and how the group had neglected fitting guttering onto houses built in the notoriously rainy Normandy.

The harbour is capable of berthing 600 pleasure sailing ships as well as 192 additional moorings in the estuary and has a depth of 2 m. The marina was built with locks, open 6 hours per tide.

The Port of Gennevilliers is the largest port in the Ile-de-France (greater Paris area) and the largest French river port (covering 401 hectares). It is an inland port, located in the commune of Gennevilliers in the north of the Hauts-de-Seine. It is the second most important in Europe, just behind Duisburg in Germany.

The port is primarily of a commercial nature. It is an important delivery terminal for semi-finished non-perishable freight from lower-Seine (via Le Havre), and also for heavy materials carried by the French canal system.

Every year, more than 20m tonnes of goods go through this port, that handles 13% of the region’s goods supplies. The main categories of port traffic are construction materials, metals, agro-industrial products, finished products, environmental and waste recycling activities, energy products, containers and heavy packages.

The port is suitable for use by river barges, but accepts more and more container barges carrying finished industrial products (furniture, electric and electronic goods), chemicals, petroleum and heating products, grains and other bulk non-perishable agricultural goods. Modifications are underway to allow the port to accept refrigerated river traffic (such as fishing products and meat and fruit and vegetable processors). The refrigerated section will allow the Marché d'Intérêt National de Rungis to become less dependent on road traffic.

The Port of Honfleur, Port de Honfleur, is the harbour of the Norman town of Honfleur, France. Expeditions to Quebec from this harbour led to its foundation.

Jacques Cartier founded Canada in 1534 and gave it to France. He adopts the name Canada which signifies village in Huron. The King of France, Francis 1st, disappointed by the lack of gold or diamonds, decided not to exploit the land. It is only two hundred years later, in the 17th century, that Samuel de Champlain received orders to settle the vast territory. Having left Honfleur, he founded Québec. The orders of Louis XIV made the first settlements true Norman colonies. More than 4,000 peasants settled and planted the land. Fishing, hunting and the fur trade flourished.

The port was remodelled in 1681 by Abraham Duquesne, under orders from Colbert. The former port was a brushed-upon shore in a small haven. Due to the expansion of the port, the Western fortifications of the town were demolished. The port is bordered on three sides, by buildings of two distinct styles; large stone houses on the Southside (Quai Saint-Etienne) and high and narrow wooden houses to the North (Quai Sainte Catherine).

The lieutenancy building (la Lieutenance) is at the entrance to the old harbour. It is an old building of the 18th century, and the former home of the Governor of Honfleur. One of the sides of the building is an old gate of the city, the Port de Caen, which was to be part of the city's fortifications. It was between 1684 and 1789 home to the Lieutenant of the king. It became, in 1793, the commerce tribunal.

At the end of each year, an almanac, called the Annuaire administratif du Département, used to be published, showing statistics relevant to Calvados. Some data of the Port of Honfleur can be found in these books and in 1865, traffic to and from Honfleur was as follows:

The 1881 annuaire was far more precise, detailing the number of passengers to and from several destinations; 199,789 to and from Le Havre, 2,320 to and from Rouen. It also added 115 to and from Southampton and 91 to Littlehampton, a total of 345,992 passengers that year.

Fishing boats were present in numbers, and in 1881, 75 ships were registered and stationed in Honfleur. The sum from the selling of seafood amounted to 391,390 francs. Most of the seafood fished was eaten nearby, but some was exported to Paris and other cities and transported by train by the Chemins de Fer de l'Ouest. The catch amounted to 183,491 kb of moules (mussels) and 185,190 kg of fresh fish.

Notable imports were wood from Norway, coal from England, wheat from America and lime.

The largest ships to have entered the Port of Honfleur were the Aneroïd, an English, three-mast sailing ship, the Italian three-mast sailing ship, the Nostra-Madre and the English passenger ship, the Newsleydale, with 5.3 m draft.

The port is but a series of basins, linked to the Seine by an access channel.

The Port of Kergroise is a commercial port located in the district of Kergroise, Lorient, on the south coast of Brittany, France. It is owned by the Region of Brittany since 2007 and managed by the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Morbihan. Based on the annual tonnage processed, it is ranked as the 14th most important commercial port in France.

The harbors and arsenals of Lorient experienced modernization through the 19th century, a period that converted Lorient into a naval base. In 1889, arsenal workshops in Lorient transitioned from cast iron into cast steel production, which required increasing the amount of coal. In order to meet this demand, the city started trading with Wales, from where its coal was imported for the city's steam engines and from which maritime pine timber from Lorient was exported for shoring up Welsh mines, thus allowing the city to balance up its trade.

Built in 1910, it was expanded during the post-war reconstruction of the city. The docks were once again expanded in the 1970s and the installation of new equipment allowed it diversify. The access channel was dredged in the early 2010s, allowing easier access to Panamax size ships.

The port's activities are mainly import-oriented, consisting of hydrocarbons, food products and construction materials. It is also occasionally used for passenger transport and for military vessels trading with the arsenal of Lorient.

The Port of Le Havre is the port and port authority of the French city of Le Havre. It is the second-largest commercial port in France in terms of overall tonnage, and the largest container port, with three sets of terminals. It can accommodate all sizes of world cruise liners, and a major new marina is being planned. Le Havre is linked to Portsmouth, England by Brittany Ferries.

The port consists of a series of canal-like docks, the Canal de Tancarville and the Grand Canal du Havre, that connect Le Havre to the Seine, close to the Pont de Tancarville, 24 km (14.9 m) upstream.

The Port of Le Havre is managed by a state agency called Grand Port Maritime du Havre, created by Decree 2008-1037 on 9 October 2008 and replacing the former "Port Autonome du Havre" that had been created along with Bordeaux by the first bill on port autonomy in 1920, a status granted on January 1, 1925 and confirmed by the second bill on port autonomy in 1965.

The "Grand Port Maritime du Havre" is a public institution taking care of administrative public service tasks and missions of industrial and commercial public service. It is operated as a public institution of trade and industry and is responsible for the management of all port facilities in its district. It is run by a Management Board of four members. Its surveillance council is composed of State representatives, employees, territorial community (Upper Normandy, Seine Maritime, CODAH and Le Havre) and the Chamber of Commerce and Industry.

Le Havre is currently served by Brittany Ferries, linking it to Portsmouth. The service is to cease in September 2026. Formerly, it was also operated by LD Lines until 2014, when it ceased operations.

The main responsibility of the Harbour office is to constantly manage sea transport through traffic forecasts, traffic control, berthing of ships, navigation assistance, radar coverage, radio connections, collection and dissemination of information, co-ordination of operations, and remote control of peripheral equipment. It also has to control the flow of navigation on its territory and manage the arrivals and departures of ships. It is also in charge of policing the harbour area, monitoring dangerous goods and organising pollution control.

Ships longer than 70 metres or transporting dangerous goods must receive the help of a pilot from the pilot station of Le Havre. If masters of the ships have received a pilot's licence, they are allowed to do it alone.

As a door to the most frequented seas (The English Channel and the North Sea), Le Havre offers a pilotage service to enhance the safety of cruising in these areas.

The port of Le Havre is the second commercial port in France in terms of overall tonnage after Marseille and the largest container port in the country.

Between December 2004 and December 2005, the Port of Le Havre handled (in tons per year):

In 2022, the port handled more than 3 million containers. Of the 27 tonnes of cocaine seized in France in 2022, more than two thirds came from this port.

The Port de Plaisance accepts boats 24/7 at all tides. It offers around 1160 berths, a boat launch ramp and a bunkering station. Several services such as electricity and water supplies are available for the users.

Port Vauban is located in an old dock in the city close to the railway station, behind the Sas Quinette lock and the Pont de l'Eure bridge. Port Vauban is accessible at high tide after advance notice and offers about 190 berths with a minimum stay of 1 month. It is created as part of a redevelopment project of the neighbourhood, with the creation of a commercial centre (Docks Vauban) and the Les Bains Des Docks swimming complex designed by the famous French architect Jean Nouvel.

Le Havre receives the famous Jacques Vabre transatlantic.

The port of Le Havre can accommodate all sizes of world cruise liners.

Le Havre is one of the UNESCO cities. Due to its geographical location, on the Seine River mouth, at the entrance of the Channel, Le Havre is a gateway to Normandy and Paris.

In 2010, Le Havre cruise port hosted 70 calls and 130,000 passengers and should, in 2011, accommodate 90 calls and 170,000 (+23%) with several maiden calls, including : AIDASol, MS Queen Elizabeth, MSC Opera, MSC Magnifica, Mein Schiff 2, Ventura and also calls from Aida Cruises, Costa Cruises, Princess Cruises or Cunard.

Le Havre will open a new terminal in 2026 to accommodate passengers in optimum conditions. The terminal is fully equipped with a new baggage scanner, baggage handling area and check in counters.

With the increasing popularity of cruises in Europe, Le Havre is becoming a handy starting port, especially for Northern Europe cruises.

It includes a shore power connection that allows compatible ships to plug-in and turn off their engines whilst docked

The port of Le Havre deals with every type of commodities thanks to the diversity of its terminals. Le Havre was the first container port in France and as a consequence retains a lot of facilities. Nowadays, the port of Le Havre includes three sets of terminals dedicated to containers and 6.5 kilometres of docks: The north terminal has approximately 96 ha of central reservation and consists of three terminals:

It is 887 metres in length and comprises 2 Over-panamax cranes with 18 container carriers. Moreover, it is equipped with 1 "LHM 500" mobile crane which has a maximum load of 100 tonnes. The draught is 14.3 metres at constant level. Each crane returns a productivity of 18 containers per hour. The ground slots correspond to 7 800 TEUS and the empty blockstow correspond to 2 400 TEUS.

It is 484 metres length and comprises 4 Over-panamax cranes including 3 with 18 container carriers and 1 with 20 container carriers. The draught is 14.5 metres at low tide. Each crane returns a productivity of 22 containers per hour. The ground slots corresponds to 3 400 TEUS.

It was put into service in 1968 and has a total area of 20 square metres. The wharf is 800 metres in length. It comprises 4 Over-panamax cranes of 60T with 18 container carriers. The yard facilities and the quay equipment belong to the company C.N.M.P.

The south terminal with approximately 80 ha consists of the Normandy terminal with the Asia and Osaka wharf: They are located before the lock in a tidal basin. The 2 quays offer a capacity of 1075 M dredged at 14 M. It is a private terminal : The yard facilities and the quay equipment belong to the company SETN. It is equipped with 5 super overpanamax gantry cranes.

The Ocean terminal with the Bougainville quay which is a public Terminal is located after the lock (constant level basin), its total area is 40 HA. There are 2 sheds, total area 15 000 square metres. The quay is 1.666 metres long with a water depth of 12.90 metres in a constant level basin. There are 7 ships to shore gantry cranes and 1 x 100 T crane.

In addition, five firms are capable of handling and storing the liquid bulk and two firms manage the flows of gasoil and fuel. Moreover, the port of Le Havre is competent to accommodate full bulk carriers.

Furthermore, this port is a real international facility for the vehicles flows. Thus, it is equipped, with a RoRo centre, with specific facilities to RoRo ships of all size.

Containers road traffic and hinterland increased by 13%, railway traffic by 5% and barge river by 16%. Beside the modern harbour infrastructures, Le Havre enjoys all necessary networks allowing logistic companies to despatch arriving goods:

The "Port 2000" terminal includes the France terminal and Oceana gate terminal with Le Havre wharf. The France terminal is managed by G.M.P and was put into service in 2006. The Oceana gate terminal is managed by T.P.O.

The Port of Nantes (Breton : Porzh Naoned) is a commercial port on the innermost part of the Loire estuary [ fr ]. This name refers to the facilities of the Grand Port Maritime of Nantes-Saint-Nazaire [ fr ] that are in Nantes, in the French department of Loire-Atlantique, and are intended to receive commercial vessels for port handling operations.

The two main sites of the Port of Nantes are the Cheviré [ fr ] terminals (a Nantes enclave on the left bank of the Loire, at the foot of the bridge bearing the same name) and the Roche-Maurice terminals on the right bank, both in the Bellevue – Chantenay – Sainte-Anne district [ fr ]. Relatively unknown to the general public due to their distance from downtown Nantes [ fr ], these industrial-port zones [ fr ] nevertheless account for 10% of the traffic of the Grand Port Maritime of Nantes Saint-Nazaire, amounting to about 3 million tons of goods handled per year (wood, peat, scrap metal, sand, wine at Cheviré; cereals and fertilizers at Roche-Maurice, among others). It also includes the Émile-Cormerais quay on the right bank of the river in Saint-Herblain, mainly used for importing liquid bulk goods (oils, molasses).

The port facilities are served by a 60-kilometre (37 mi) maritime channel. The allowable drafts vary depending on the tidal coefficients. For 98% of tides, an allowable draft of 8.40 metres (27 ft 7 in) is available in the Nantes channel. The turning basin has a diameter of 230 m (750 ft). The air draft under the Cheviré bridge is 52 m (171 ft), which is sufficient to allow the passage of the largest commercial vessels.

The terminal consists of the Cheviré upstream quay, 305 m (1,001 ft) long, and the Cheviré downstream quay, 350 m (1,150 ft) long. It has two sand berths and a roll-on/roll-off (ro-ro) dock.

Cheviré is the leading hub for imported lumber in France and hosts the country's largest concentration of equipment and professionals in the timber industry. Other types of traffic are handled in this zone, such as recycling products, particularly metals. Cheviré also includes a sand terminal.

The terminal is also an urban logistics platform, next to the Nantes ring road, close to Nantes Atlantique Airport, and directly connected to the road network. It is linked to the rail network and, via the river, to the port terminals of Montoir-de-Bretagne (notably for transporting Airbus aircraft sections by barge), thanks to a ro-ro berth in operation since 2002. The Grand Port Maritime of Nantes Saint-Nazaire has been authorized to directly operate handling equipment at the Cheviré sites starting from 1 January 2023.

The Cheviré coal, gas and oil power station operated here from 1954 to 1986. A 200 MWh / 100 MW grid battery is France's largest as of 2025.

The Roche-Maurice [ fr ] terminal faces the Cheviré terminal, on the right bank of the Loire at the foot of the Cheviré bridge. At 750 m (2,460 ft) long, it is one of the main grain depots in western France. On average, just over one million tons of cereals pass through its facilities each year.

The Émile-Cormerais port site has two liquid berths that allow for the unloading and storage (behind the quay) of vegetable oil, fish oil, and molasses. It also hosts service activities related to the maritime world (shipyard).

The Port of Nantes also includes quays closer to the city center, which are today closed to maritime traffic due to the shift in activity toward Cheviré and Roche-Maurice. Some still receive boats for various uses:

The history of the Port of Nantes predates that of the city itself. It began with the advent of bronze metallurgy—an alloy of copper and tin. Tin (cassiterite) extracted from the Nozay deposit or the Abbaretz mine [ fr ] was transported by barge via the Erdre River to its confluence with the Loire, where a primitive port emerged. For over a millennium, the ore thus transported—along with that from a vein formerly beneath today's François-Bruneau Street in the city center—was involved in commercial exchanges via the Loire. By the end of the Bronze Age, around 900 BCE, a local bronze industry appeared, as evidenced by traces of three foundries discovered in the Mauves plain, the Jardin des Plantes, and Croix-Bonneau [ fr ]. The copper needed for production was imported from Spain. Other traded goods included salt, preserved foods, leather, and cereals. The early port likely consisted of beaching areas or wooden docks stretching from the Jardin des Plantes upstream to the Chézine downstream. The port name at that time is unknown—it might have been Corbilo, a Gallic port mentioned in Greek geographic tradition as being on the Loire, though this remains unconfirmed.

The first Celtic groups arrived in Gaul at the end of the Bronze Age and organized locally into tribes between 500 and 100 BCE. The Namnetes occupied the north bank of the Loire (present-day Nantes), while the Pictones occupied the southern bank (present-day Rezé). During the Gallic Wars, the Pictones supported the Roman occupiers. The final battle occurred in August 56 BCE and ended with a Roman victory. This favored the Pictones and spurred the development of the port of Ratiatum, which had served as a fleet base for the victorious Roman army.

The chief town of the Namnetes (modern-day Nantes) was given the Latin name Portus Namnetum (Port of the Namnetes) and also known as Condevincum [ fr ] in Latinized Gaulish. It was a simple trading post (emporium) facilitating the transit of tin, marble, pottery, salt, cereals, Italian wine, and oils from the Iberian Peninsula. There were also shipyards on the Chézine and a fishing port. Goods transported via the river were partly unloaded, with the rest transshipped onto barges for further navigation to other ports along the Loire, such as Ancenis. The limits of the Gallo-Roman port extended from Rue de Richebourg [ fr ] (north of the current Nantes train station) upstream to Port-Maillard [ fr ] (between the current Château des Ducs de Bretagne and the Loire) downstream. The arrival of Roman civilization fostered the growth of a city around the port, and in 276 CE, the Gallo-Roman wall of Nantes was built to protect the city and its port from barbarian invasions. This was followed by a series of invasions and civil wars from the 4th to the 10th century, plunging the city into a dark period and causing the port's decline.

The port was revived thanks to the trade of wine and salt. The production of salt increased due to the abandonment of the old method of ignigenous salt (obtained by evaporating brine through the action of heat) in favor of the Roman technique of salt marshes, which had the effect of concentrating production in the Guérande peninsula and the Bay of Bourgneuf. In Nantes, in the 13th century, Pierre I of Brittany redeveloped two ports on either side of the castle on ancient sites: the port of Pierre-de-France upstream and the port-Maillard downstream, named after the seneschal Briand-Maillard. Further downstream, developments at the Bouffay Wharf [ fr ] and the Port-au-Vin [ fr ] (now Place du Commerce [ fr ]) became essential links in Nantes' port infrastructure of the time. The port was then mainly devoted to transit, focused on French and European coastal trade. Wine from the Loire Valley was brought down to Nantes to be transshipped and sent to Breton ports and the British Isles. In the opposite direction, salt from Guérande [ fr ] traveled up the Loire to be transported via Nantes to the port of Orléans, destined to supply Paris. In the 14th century, trade expanded to include Spain (iron, alum, textiles) and ports of the Hanseatic League. The port slowly migrated westward: Richebourg declined in favor of Port-Maillard, and the development of the Fosse began with the construction of warehouses next to the Salorges. Beyond the city limits, outports at Port Lavigne, Couëron, and Le Pellerin allowed goods to be unloaded onto smaller vessels that in turn ascended the estuary. During the same century, Nantes became a military port to protect itself against acts of piracy, which were increasing in parallel with the growth of commercial trade.

While the Portuguese embarked on colonial ventures across the oceans, soon followed by the Dutch, the Spanish, and the English, the merchants of the port of Nantes cautiously continued their wine and salt trade throughout the 16th century. The Union of the Duchy of Brittany with the Crown of France, completed in 1532, had no significant impact on trade. The port of Nantes remained vulnerable to acts of piracy and consequently became one of the two bases for the kingdom's galleys in the Atlantic—the other being Marseille for the Mediterranean. These defensive ships were built at the Port-au-Vin shipyard before it was relocated to Île Gloriette [ fr ]. In 1554, the port of Nantes hosted twenty-two of the kingdom's sixty-eight royal galleys.

The French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) interrupted the country's economic growth for thirty years. The Duke of Mercœur, appointed governor of Brittany on 5 September 1582, turned Nantes into a stronghold of the Catholic League. The powerful Spanish Empire of Philip II, an ally of the League, took control of the port of Nantes, and for years, trade was conducted solely with Spain. That same year, Port-Maillard was equipped with its first wharf, strengthening its activity. The abjuration of Henry IV eventually forced Mercœur to submit, allowing the king to re-enter the city and sign the Edict of Nantes there on 13 April 1598.

The 17th century marked a turning point in the history of the port of Nantes. Traditional trades, especially in wine and salt, went through a crisis between the 1630s and 1670s, and the sites of Port-Maillard, Quai du Bouffay, and Port-au-Vin lost their leading position in the port infrastructure. On the other hand, during these years, the port of Nantes was integrated into the trade networks of the first French colonial empire [ fr ]. Benefiting from its geographic position on the Atlantic coast, the port expanded from a regional scope to an international dimension within just twenty years, from 1660 to 1680. This major transformation, encouraged by Colbertism, benefited the Quai de la Fosse, downstream from the city center. Used since the Middle Ages, it was developed from 1516 onward and enlarged in 1632. A sharp increase in traffic occurred in 1670, mainly driven by trade with the French West Indies. Goods essential to colonial life—wine, brandy, flour, cloth, copper, tin, oil, candles, building stones, crockery, and rifles—were shipped to the islands, initially through direct routes. In return, large quantities of cane sugar were imported to be refined. By 1671, the city had at least five sugar refineries, and by 1700, up to twelve. Other tropical products were also imported, such as tobacco, cocoa, and cotton. Following the Spanish merchants who had settled in Nantes in the 16th century and from whom they learned maritime trade techniques, the Dutch, Portuguese, and later the Irish of Nantes were succeeded in the 17th century by local shipowning families [ fr ], who rose to become part of the city's economic elite. Around the mid-17th century, Paimboeuf became the main outport of Nantes, while in Nantes itself, the Quai de la Fosse—better suited to the new demands of navigation and port handling—established itself as the city's modern port, displacing the medieval port sites, which gradually lost their functions and were eventually buried, like other wharves in the city center [ fr ], during the land reclamation [ fr ] works carried out between 1926 and 1946. The development of sugar plantations in the West Indies required labor, justifying the population policy supported by Colbert. Nantes merchants recruited young emigrants, generally aged 14 to 25, from the artisan class burdened by the guild [ fr ] system, landless peasants, and some younger sons from ruined families, all from western France. Required to work for three years for a planter to repay the cost of the crossing, they were then offered a small plot of land to develop and a modest amount of money.

However, this primitive system had two major drawbacks: it inadequately met the colonies' high labor needs, and there was an imbalance between outbound cargo (ships left Nantes with half-empty holds) and return cargo. To address this, the system gradually evolved into a slave trade integrated into a triangular trade system.

The slave trade in Nantes began at the end of the 17th century. The first confirmed expedition from the port dates to 1688, several years after the start of the slave trade in La Rochelle [ fr ] (1643) and Bordeaux [ fr ] (1672). French merchants were following the example of the Portuguese, pioneers in the field, followed by the Spanish, Dutch, and English. In Nantes, ten expeditions took place by 1698, requiring the payment of a fee to the French East India Company, whose headquarters were at the citadel of Port-Louis. Following the principles of Colbertism, which aimed to minimize foreign expenditures, Nantes merchants loaded inexpensive trade goods (" pacotille ")—glassware, printed cottons, weapons—which they exchanged in West Africa with local rulers for captives. In the West Indies, these captives were sold as slaves, and the merchants returned with ships full of tropical goods.

The triangular trade expansion in Nantes took off in 1713, following the War of Spanish Succession, leading to a significant increase in port activity. Shipbuilding in the Loire estuary [ fr ] became a priority, and the local industry adapted to the booming sugar cane trade. Nantes rose to become the leading French port until the mid-18th century. However, this growth was not continuous and was interrupted by periods of recession, mainly due to major conflicts such as the War of Austrian Succession and the Seven Years' War, which caused an economic collapse.

The medieval walls of Nantes [ fr ] were demolished to allow the city, which had become too confined, to expand toward its port. Enriched slave-trading shipowners built elegant private mansions [ fr ] in the districts of La Fosse, Île Feydeau, and Île Gloriette, reflecting their newfound social status. From there, they could oversee their fleets and conduct business while also constructing countryside estates along the banks of the Erdre River.

During the French Revolution, particularly during the Reign of Terror, prisoners from the War in the Vendée were held in the Coffee Warehouse Prison [ fr ] near the port district. The fear of an epidemic led to the infamous " Drownings of Nantes " between November 1793 and February 1794. The Quai de la Sécherie (later Quai Saint-Louis) in Chantenay was the site of two mass executions by drowning in 1793:

The last known slave ship to depart from Nantes did so in 1833. The abolition of slavery in France in 1848 and the development of the Second French Colonial Empire transformed the port, which adapted to the Industrial Revolution 's shift in trade models. Port activity adjusted to supply the emerging industries with raw materials and to distribute their products to foreign markets. As a result, industrial production gradually surpassed trade, and the pace of industrial output and shipbuilding (notably at Chantiers Dubigeon and Ateliers et Chantiers de la Loire) remained strong throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries. Several industrial establishments were founded, including the forges of Basse-Indre [ fr ] and Brissonneau & Lotz. In the agri-food sector, sugar refineries were joined by canneries, pioneered by Pierre-Joseph Colin (1785–1848), who established the first sardine canning factory in 1824 at 9 Rue des Salorges [ fr ], sourcing fish from the port of La Turballe. Similar businesses multiplied throughout the city, including Cassegrain [ fr ] (founded in 1856) and Saupiquet (founded in 1891 at 13 Rue Crucy [ fr ]). Louis Lefèvre-Utile [ fr ] took over the LU biscuit company from his parents in 1882, industrializing production by founding a factory on Île de la Madeleine along the Loire. Biscuiterie Nantaise (BN) was established in 1896 near Place François-II [ fr ] on Île de la Prairie-au-Duc [ fr ] by a group of local traders.

To support increasing activity, the Antilles Wharf was developed starting in 1840, directly across from Quai de la Fosse. However, the Loire River posed navigational challenges—it was shallow, while ships were becoming larger and required greater draft clearance. As a response, the port of Saint-Nazaire was created in 1856 as a new outport for Nantes, replacing Paimbœuf. By the mid-19th century, the port of Nantes had a continuous line of quays along its right bank from the Palais de la Bourse to the boundary with Chantenay-sur-Loire. Beyond that, private quays were developed by companies like Kuhlmann [ fr ], Saint-Gobain, Talvande, and Chantiers Dubigeon, restricting public access to the river except in specific locations such as Cale Crucy [ fr ] and the village of Roche-Maurice.

Starting in 1887, passenger transport services were provided by steamships called Roquio, operating within the port and stopping at various points along Fosse Wharf, Antilles Wharf, and Trentemoult. This service was discontinued in 1970.

By the late 19th century, sandbanks between the communes of Le Pellerin and Frossay made it impossible for large ships to navigate to Nantes. In response, construction of a canal parallel to the river was ordered in 1882, and in 1892, the Canal de la Martinière [ fr ] was inaugurated. Used for commercial navigation for twenty years, it became obsolete as technological advancements allowed for more efficient dredging of the Loire River's bed. Additionally, Île Mabon [ fr ] was leveled starting in 1902 to facilitate entry into the port of Nantes.

With navigation issues resolved, port traffic in Nantes surpassed one million tons per year at the beginning of the 20th century. The Roche-Maurice quay was commissioned around 1912, dedicated to grain exports, further confirming the right bank's role in cereal trading following the earlier development of the Saint-Louis quay for milling operations. That same year, the Crédit Nantais [ fr ] bank was established by local industrialists. The Président-Wilson quay was developed in 1913, and the Cormerais quay was built in 1917 downstream from Roche-Maurice. A petroleum terminal with three docking stations was constructed in the Saint-Herblain area at a site known as "L'Usine Brûlée." It was later integrated into Quai Émile Cormerais in 1921, named in honor of the Nantes Chamber of Commerce and Industry [ fr ] president from 1913 to 1920.

The Nantes Transporter Bridge [ fr ] was built on the port's grounds as early as 1903. It allowed workers, especially those at the shipyards, to cross the Madeleine branch of the Loire. Considered obsolete, the transporter bridge was dismantled in 1958. In 1913, the Lechalas [ fr ] launch, built at the Blasse et Fils shipyard in Chantenay, entered service. It was used from 1913 to 1968 by the Public Works Department for the port inspection tours by engineers. On Sunday, 14 June 1931, the ship Saint-Philibert took on passengers bound for the island of Noirmoutier for a day trip. On the return trip in the late afternoon, it sank due to a storm, resulting in the deaths of between 450 and 500 people (passengers and crew).

During the Second World War, the German occupiers strictly prohibited civilian access to the port areas. Only personnel with a pass issued by the Hafenkommandantur were authorized. Following the destruction of the port of Saint-Nazaire, the port of Nantes gained increased importance for the Kriegsmarine. As a result, it was visited by Großadmiral Karl Dönitz on 25 August 1943. However, this strategic value also made it a target for the Allies. Consequently, just a few weeks later, it was subjected to bombings on 16 and 23 September 1943, primarily targeting the Quai de la Fosse. Due to the inaccuracy of the airstrikes, the port itself was relatively spared, but the bombs caused significant destruction and resulted in 1,463 civilian deaths in the city center. A few months later, on 9, 10 and 11 August 1944, the port's infrastructure was ransacked by the Germans themselves. Before leaving the city on 12 August 1944, and retreating to the Saint-Nazaire pocket, they destroyed the majority of the port infrastructure in Nantes that had survived the September 1943 bombings: 3 km (1.9 mi) of quays were mined, 60 cranes and 80% of the warehouses were put out of service, the shipyards and all bridges were destroyed, and ships were scuttled to block the Loire River.

After the war, the Marthe Richard Law of 13 April 1946, abolished the system of regulated prostitution in France, leading to the prohibition and closure of the thirteen brothels still operating in Nantes, on rue d'Ancin, rue des Marins, and rue des Trois Matelots, behind the Quai de la Fosse. In 1964, a first quay station measuring 146 meters in length was built at Cheviré and brought into service in June 1966, facing the Roche-Maurice terminal, on land reclaimed from former islands [ fr ] (Île Cheviré and Île Pointière) attached to the left bank of the Loire within the municipality of Nantes, along with some land in the neighboring communes of Bouguenais and Rezé. The terminal became the leading hub for timber trade in France.

Port handling equipment was managed by the Nantes Chamber of Commerce and Industry [ fr ], while development works were under the responsibility of the Ponts et Chaussées administration until 1 April 1966. On that date, the Port of Nantes and the Port of Saint-Nazaire merged into a single entity, a public establishment of the State called the "Autonomous Port of Nantes-Saint-Nazaire," which incorporated the terminals of Donges (established from 1917) and those of Montoir-de-Bretagne (established from 1971).

In 1983, the harbor master's offices of Nantes and Saint-Nazaire were reorganized into a single service with authority over the entire estuary.

The growing importance of the Cheviré and Roche-Maurice sites led to the gradual cessation of operations at the Quai des Antilles and the Quai de la Fosse at the end of the 1980s.

Two incidents occurred four years apart at the port facilities:

The Wilson quay was closed in 2005, and its cranes were transferred to the Cheviré and Roche-Maurice sites, which also absorbed the associated traffic. That same year, 2005, the Navibus river shuttle service—heir to the historical Roquio ferry—was inaugurated. Operating within the waters managed by the Grand Port Maritime authority, it connects various port locations.

The Autonomous Port of Nantes-Saint-Nazaire officially became the Grand Port Maritime de Nantes-Saint-Nazaire [ fr ] on 9 October 2008.

The port of Nantes (specifically the terminals at Roche-Maurice and the Quai de la Fosse) appears in scenes from Lola, a film by Jacques Demy, shot between June and July 1960.

The Port of Orléans is a French river port located on the Loire in the city of Orléans, with origins predating Julius Caesar ’s conquest of Gaul.

It historically served as a major storage and trade hub between the Atlantic Ocean and the Rhône Valley and functioned as a supply center for Paris. From the mid-19th century onward, its activity declined due to competition from road and, especially, rail transport, leading to the gradual disappearance of river traffic during the 20th century.

The city of Orléans is located at the intersection of three major natural routes: the upper Loire, which connects it to the Rhône Valley and facilitated the arrival of Mediterranean goods; the lower Loire, which links it to the Atlantic coast and maritime trade; and the overland route leading north to Paris, later complemented by the construction of the Orléans Canal in the late 17th century.

The Loire, which flows east to west along its middle and lower course—a distinctive feature among major European rivers—was navigable by sail from its mouth [ fr ] to the city of Orléans.

Even before the Roman conquest, a trading post and market existed on the banks of the Loire, where Roman merchants resided and traded grain from the Beauce region. In Géographie, Strabo referred to the city (Κήναβον) as the emporium of the Carnutes (τὸ τῶν Καρνούντον ἑμπόριον). Julius Caesar later established a grain supply center in Cenabum (Orléans), confirming that it already functioned as an active river port from which grain was transported along the Loire in flat-bottomed boats.

The most active trade relations were long maintained along the upper Loire, with Lyon, Italy, Marseille, and the Mediterranean countries, from which came the most valuable cargoes such as wines, oils, fruits from Provence, and gold and silk fabrics. This was still noted in 1738 by François de Baussan, the intendant of Orléans: “Above the Châtelet begins a port called La Poterne, and it is the one in the whole city where goods arrive in the greatest quantity; these are even the most precious, coming from Italy, Marseille, Lyon, and all the upper provinces.”

Navigation along the lower Loire, historically focused on transporting salt from the Nantes region, diversified from the late 13th century. Key cargoes included the wine and vinegar of Orléans, salted or dried fish, Spanish wool, copper, and lead. In the 16th century, trade expanded with the Newfoundland fisheries and reached a peak in the second half of the 17th century through commerce with the West Indies, particularly in sugar. During the 18th century, Orléans became noted for sugar refining. Slates produced in the Angers region also constituted a significant portion of upriver cargoes until the First World War.

This major river traffic made the 18th century a golden age for the city, prompting Régnard, the king’s prosecutor at the city’s Bureau des Finances, to write in 1780: “Orléans is the general warehouse of France.”

By the end of the 18th century, Orléans, with its 40,000 inhabitants, was the second most populous city along the Loire after Nantes (80,000 inhabitants), while Tours then had only 20,000.

The port of Cenabum was situated upstream of the bridge over the Loire on its right bank, where two small tributaries provided a natural shelter for boats. It primarily facilitated downstream traffic. Archaeological excavations in 1993 in the Dessaux district uncovered the remains of five quays, built successively during the 1st century and extending gradually into the river. These quays were supported by rows of posts with wooden decking. Remains of buildings, possibly warehouses, dating from the late 1st or early 2nd century were also identified.

The downstream port likely originated around the same period as the Bourg Dunois, also known as Avenum, a merchant suburb located downstream from the bridge and outside the fortified walls, which is documented as early as 1020.

At that time, loading and unloading occurred on a narrow strip of land between the river and the city walls, with access to the city limited to a few openings in the fortifications.

In 1356, the city walls were extended to incorporate the Bourg Dunois, providing protection for both the upstream and downstream ports. In the second half of the 15th century, Louis XI reinforced earthen embankments along the ramparts with bundles of brushwood, creating the first quays since the Gallo-Roman period.

At its height, the port extended along both the north and south banks of the Loire. On the north bank, the ports of La Poterne (upstream of the bridge) and Recouvrance (downstream) were located, while the south bank had facilities both upstream and downstream of the bridge. The north bank was primarily used for rapid loading and unloading, benefiting from its proximity to the city and improved accessibility during low water periods through a submersible dike known as the duit. The south bank mainly accommodated boats with longer stays or carrying less valuable cargo.

The duit, documented as early as 1360, was periodically extended and heightened. In 1684, a general inspection declared it “entirely ruined,” leading to its reconstruction at the king’s expense. The most extensive rebuilding occurred in the second half of the 18th century, coinciding with major public works that included the construction of the new Royal Bridge ; during this period, the central island was leveled and the duit was completely reconstructed.

During these major works, the old ramparts and the Châtelet were demolished to allow the construction of larger stone quays on the right bank for the ports of La Poterne and Recouvrance. Paved ramps were added on both banks to facilitate loading and unloading, and rings were installed in the masonry to secure boats.

Under the July Monarchy, a warehouse was established to mitigate the irregularity of river transport. Initially built inland near Saint-Euverte Church in 1831, it was later relocated downstream from the port of Recouvrance on Quai Saint-Laurent. However, with the decline of port activity, particularly the reduced arrival of raw sugar from the West Indies, the warehouse soon became largely redundant.

Trade with Marseille remained a major commercial route for an extended period. As a free port since 1669, Marseille was connected to the Mediterranean basin and, via the Strait of Gibraltar, to the Atlantic. Trade with Nantes expanded from the second half of the 17th century and became predominant, largely driven by colonial commerce with the West Indies, which produced significant profits.

Orléans exported “Tunis-style caps” to Marseille, which were intended for distribution along the Mediterranean coasts of North Africa and the Ottoman Empire.

The majority of trade between the two cities, however, was directed from Marseille to Orléans. Goods arriving in Marseille from the Mediterranean basin, combined with local products from Marseille and Provence, were transported to Orléans. These included olive oil, wines, spices, cotton, Marseille soap, and fruits from Provence.

Transport along the Rhône typically involved convoys of barges linked together and hauled upstream by horses or oxen, taking on average 30 to 40 days to travel from Arles to Lyon. When faster travel was required, water coaches were used; these boats held a monopoly on downstream passenger transport but generally traveled upstream with few passengers, taking approximately eight days to connect Avignon and Lyon.

Upon arrival in Lyon, cargoes were unloaded south of the city and transported by cart to Roanne, where they were reloaded onto boats navigating the Loire. The journey from Roanne to Orléans took about eight days before the construction of the lateral canal to the Loire. In some cases, such as with cotton, which was sensitive to humidity, the entire route from Marseille to Roanne was made overland.

Not all goods bound for Paris were transported via the Loire and Orléans. During the 18th century, the maritime route through the Strait of Gibraltar to the ports of Le Havre and Rouen was more commonly used, as it was longer but less expensive. This route was primarily served by ships from Saint-Malo, which sold cod caught in Newfoundland in Marseille and carried return cargoes at low freight rates.

Trade with the port of Nantes was historically secondary to that with Marseille. Initially based on the salt produced in the Nantes region, its significance increased from the late 13th century with the transport of salted or dried fish and later with goods linked to Nantes’ maritime connections, including Spanish wool, copper, and lead. In the 16th century, trade from Nantes expanded further through the Newfoundland fisheries.

Trade between Orléans and Nantes peaked in the second half of the 17th century due to commerce with the West Indies. Economic ties between the two cities were closely linked: Nantes handled colonial goods through maritime trade, while Orléans processed and redistributed these goods and supplied Nantes with products to support colonial trade, including the triangular trade and direct commerce with the colonies.

Orléans provided Nantes with food, consumer goods, and materials for both the colonies and the provisioning of ships engaged in colonial trade. Local products from Orléans included molds and pots for processing sugar, as well as flints for firearms.

Among the colonial goods received by Orléans, sugar was the most significant. The city processed the majority of raw sugar arriving from Nantes, and during the 18th century, Orléans became renowned for its refined sugar production.

Paris, located approximately 120 km from Orléans, represented a major market for goods transported along the Loire as well as for local products from the Orléans region. Connections between the two cities date back to Roman times, with the road linking Cenabum (Orléans) and Lutetia (Paris). The opening of the Briare Canal in 1642 and the Orléans Canal in 1692 further facilitated transport between the Loire and Seine river basins, particularly for heavy goods.

Wines were transported to Paris via the Orléans Canal, the navigable Loing (from 1723), and the Seine. Shipments included wines from both upstream and downstream regions, such as Touraine and Anjou, as well as local productions from areas including the parish of Saint-Marceau and Olivet. In Saint-Marceau, on the south bank of the Loire, much of the wine was loaded in the riverboat district of Portereau.

Some boatmen went to Paris to sell Loire Valley fruits directly, setting up their barges—converted into shops—at the “apple market,” along the Hôtel de Ville quay.

Lighter goods, such as groceries, were typically transported by road, which provided the most direct and fastest route. The transporters, known as voituriers par terre or rouliers, were often peasants earning additional income outside the farming season, with the Place du Martroi serving as a common departure point.

Orléans was not the only route for supplying Paris with goods from the Atlantic; some shipments also arrived via the Seine, through the ports of Le Havre and Rouen. In the 19th century, the introduction of steam navigation eliminated the need for towage, making the Seine route more efficient despite its previously challenging meanders between Rouen and Paris.

In addition to port operations—such as loading, unloading, and storage—and long-established trading activities, production-related industries developed in Orléans, taking advantage of the port’s access for import and export. These industries included textiles, sugar refining, and vinegar production.

Numerous trades lived directly or indirectly from the port activity of Orléans. The maintenance of boats required carpenters, sailmakers, and rope -makers, whose ropes were produced either on an island in the middle of the Loire, known as the Motte aux Cordiers, or on the left bank, in the Plaine des Cordiers. Barrels, used for the transport of most goods—not only wine or vinegar—were made or repaired by coopers. Transport and handling also required many laborers: haulers, porters, and other dockworkers, as well as carters.

The banks of the Loire supported various water-dependent activities, including laundries, leather and hide processing, and fabric dyeing. The river was also used by boatmen, fishermen, and millers. Some mills, located either on floating barges or suspended from bridge arches, occasionally obstructed navigation and created conflicts with boat traffic.

In 1737, the mayor and aldermen of Orléans described trade as follows: “The principal activity of Orléans merchants consists in commission trading. All goods are consigned to commission agents, through whom correspondence is established between merchants at the place of dispatch and those at the place of consumption. These goods are then distributed—some to the lower country, others transported by land to Paris, Normandy, Picardy, Flanders, and even to Germany.”

Trade was a significant source of wealth for the merchant families of Orléans. This prosperity enabled them to construct notable residences, including the sixteenth-century Renaissance-style Hôtel d’Euverte Hatte (now the Charles Péguy Center), the house of Jean d’Alibert, and the Maison de la Porte Renard built for Philippe Lendormy. In the late eighteenth century, the twin hôtels on Rue de la Bretonnerie were built for the Tassin brothers by Pierre-Adrien Pâris, who was responsible for works at the cathedral.

Merchant families in Orléans often had multiple children. To prevent the division of the family business, the eldest son typically took over the enterprise, sometimes in partnership with his brothers, many of whom remained unmarried. Two or three younger brothers were usually supported within the family home, while others pursued livelihoods elsewhere, with at least one often entering the clergy.

Because commerce played such a central role in Orléans’ economy, merchants were extremely influential: “In Orléans, more than in any other city along the Loire, the bourgeoisie was made up of merchants, and nowhere was the alliance between municipal and commercial interests more intimate or more complete.”

In the nineteenth century, the decline of traditional industries, including textiles and cane-sugar refining, led the bourgeoisie of Orléans to pursue more profitable ventures, notably investing in land in the fertile agricultural region of Beauce.

In the mid-eighteenth century, the dominant industry in the Orléans region was hosiery, employing approximately 10,000 people at its peak around 1750. Merchants sourced wool locally or from Spain, which was primarily knitted by peasant women in Beauce before being marketed. The industry produced “Tunis-style caps,” dyed red in Orléans, as well as gloves, slippers, stockings, and corsets. From 1680 onward, woven fabrics were also produced, mainly in Orléans, including some luxury items made from vicuña wool imported from South America.

In the second half of the eighteenth century, the hosiery industry in Orléans declined due to a reduction in quality associated with increased use of looms and unfavorable external conditions, including the loss of Canada in 1763, an important export market, and a decline in French wool production that required costly imports. In response, Benoist-Héry established a hosiery manufactory at the end of the century, officially recognized as royal in 1774, where all stages of production were centralized.

The Motte-Sanguin [ fr ] spinning mill was established in the late eighteenth century near the Port de la Poterne under the initiative of the Duke of Orléans and the direction of the English engineer Foxlow. It was intended to process cotton imported from America via the port of Rouen, the Seine, and the Orléans Canal. Designed by the city architect Benoît Lebrun, the seven-story building featured 365 windows and was the first spinning mill in France planned to operate with steam power. Constructed between 1789 and 1791, the mill encountered operational difficulties during and after the French Revolution, was converted into a grain mill in 1823, and was destroyed by fire in 1858.

Sugarcane, primarily cultivated in Saint-Domingue, was initially processed on site to produce raw sugar, or muscovado. In France, refining was monopolized, reinforced by the 1671 ban on exporting raw sugar from the kingdom and the 1684 prohibition on establishing refineries in the Antilles. These restrictions were partially circumvented through the local production of molded sugar, known as sucre terré.

Sugar refineries were established in Nantes, Angers, Saumur, and Orléans. The first refinery in Orléans processing raw sugar from the Antilles was founded in 1653 by the Dutchman Vandebergue. The city’s sugar production eventually surpassed that of other Loire Valley towns, facilitated by transport to Paris via the Canal d’Orléans and the recognized quality of Orléans sugar.

The expansion of refineries stimulated related industries, including the production of boilers, sugar molds, string, and wrapping paper for sugar loaves.

In the first half of the nineteenth century, the decline of colonial trade with the Antilles led to the closure of cane-sugar refineries, which were subsequently replaced by beet-sugar refineries.

Vinegar production was an established industry in Orléans, benefiting from the direct arrival of wine at the port. This included wines transported from upstream regions, such as Allier and Burgundy, and from downstream areas, including Nantes, Saumur, Anjou, and Touraine, which had deteriorated during transport. Lower-quality local wines from Orléans vineyards, which covered approximately 25,000 hectares at the end of the eighteenth century, were also used and could be distilled to produce alcohol. In the second half of the nineteenth century, the expansion of the railway network enabled vinegar producers to source wine from regions beyond the Loire Valley, including Sologne, Poitou, and Charente.

The vinegar makers’ guild in Orléans was established [ fr ] in 1394 and deregulated in April 1777. The resulting decline in quality and prices prompted protests from traditional producers, leading to the reinstatement of regulations in January 1778. The guild system was permanently abolished in March 1791.

By that year, Orléans had approximately 200 vinegar producers. The artisanal phase of production was later succeeded by an industrial phase, exemplified by the establishment of the Dessaux company.

Navigation on the Loire led to the development of various types of boats, each adapted to specific purposes, all characterized by a shallow draft to minimize the risk of grounding on the river’s numerous sandbanks.

This mode of navigation remained predominant on the Loire until the introduction of steamships. It ceased entirely for passenger transport but continued to be used for freight.

Sapines were used for downstream transport, primarily from the upper Loire and the Allier, carrying goods such as wood, wine, and pottery. These vessels were designed for a single voyage and were constructed from pine, allowing them to be easily dismantled for the reuse of the material.

Chalands, or gabares, were the most common vessels on the Loire, operating primarily between Orléans and Nantes in both downstream and upstream directions. Downstream navigation relied on the current, with boatmen guiding the vessels using poles known as bâtons de quartier, while upstream journeys were aided by sails and a rudder specific to these boats, called a piautre [ fr ].

These vessels were typically organized in convoys of two to eight boats, sometimes up to ten. In such convoys, the first two or three boats—referred to as the sentine-mère, tirot, and sometimes sous-tirot—carried sails, while the remaining boats, known as soubres and soubriquets, lacked sails and rudders.

The cabanes, or toues cabanées, were boats featuring a central covered shelter, primarily used for passenger transport on downstream journeys. Upstream, the vessels, which were slower, were generally used for carrying freight. Depending on their size, they could accommodate up to twenty passengers.

At the end of the eighteenth century, a regular service was established between Nantes and Orléans using sailing vessels known as bateaux accélérés (“accelerated boats”), designed to complete the journey as quickly as possible without stopping for trade. The service was subject to delays during periods of low water or unfavorable winds.

Le Nantais, the first steamboat to navigate upstream from Nantes, arrived in Orléans on May 1, 1823. Its owner, the Nantes merchant Tranchevent, limited its operation, as well as that of his second vessel, L’Angevin, to the Nantes–Angers route.

Regular steamboat service began several years later with the Société anonyme de la navigation accélérée sur la Loire et ses affluents par les Accélérés (“Limited Company for Accelerated Navigation on the Loire and Its Tributaries”). Its first vessel, Ville de Nantes, reached Orléans on May 1, 1829. After competing with the Compagnie des Riverains du Haut de la Loire (“Upper Loire Riparian Company”), the Accélérés ceased operations in 1832 and became the Compagnie de l’Aigle, providing a weekly service between Nantes and Orléans with the steamboat L’Aigle.

Later, other types of steamboats were introduced, including lightweight sheet-metal vessels designed by the English engineer Thomson. Following a boiler explosion on one such vessel, the Vulcain No. 1, which resulted in six fatalities, a new type of low-pressure, paddle- wheel steamboat, described as “inexplosive,” was developed. The first of these “Inexplosibles” operated between Nantes and Orléans from 1838 and could carry 150 passengers, with the fleet expanding to ten vessels by 1840. From 1839, five additional boats served the Nantes– Nevers route. These vessels had a shallow draft of 28 centimeters (11 inches) when carrying an eleven-ton load. The last two (No. 20 and No. 21), delivered in 1841, had a capacity of up to 250 passengers.

The Loire river fleet reached its peak around 1840, when the port of Orléans was nearly overwhelmed. A contemporary observer wrote: “In February 1844, a fleet such as had not been seen for a long time set sail in the port of Orléans. From February 7 to 13, 197 boats had arrived. Our quays were congested with goods. There were not enough hands to unload this immense cargo, whose value amounted to no less than 12 to 13 million.”

Activity on the Loire gradually declined thereafter due to competition from steam navigation on the Seine and the development of railways along the Loire corridor.

The first railway connection between Paris and Orléans was established in 1843. While Orléans temporarily served as the terminus, passenger river transport experienced a brief resurgence, which ended with the completion of the railway to Tours in 1846 and to Nantes in 1851. Rail transport gradually assumed the transport of goods, limiting river navigation on the Loire to heavy and bulky materials. By the mid-19th century, the port had already lost most of its activity.

By around 1856, the decline of the port was considered complete. An article in the Journal du Loiret described its condition at that time: “In seeing this beautiful river, once ceaselessly crossed by a flourishing fleet and now marked only occasionally by a few convoys of slate or coal, this monumental warehouse whose gates rust without ever being opened, these vast quays completely deserted… one feels an indescribable sense of regret arise within.”

An extension of the Orléans Canal between Orléans and Combleux, where it connects to the Loire, was opened in 1920 to facilitate upstream navigation. The canal did not reverse the decline in traffic and was decommissioned in 1954 between Combleux and Châlette-sur-Loing.

In the 2000s, the city of Orléans initiated projects to revive its river port, supported by the urban community and the department. These initiatives included the organization of the Loire Festival [ fr ], held biennially since 2003 in September, and the restoration of the canal between Combleux and Orléans.

The Port of Trouville-sur-Mer is the harbour of the city of Trouville-sur-Mer, France. The large town's position on the estuary of the River Touques was a natural establishment of a fish dock.

The docks of Trouville constitute a district within the city. It is situated on the River Touques, along the Boulevard Fernand Moureaux and downstream from the Pont des Belges. The main building on the docks is the fish market (marché aux poissons).

In 1934, mayor Fernand Moureaux, desiring to emphasise the traditional character of Trouville, as opposed to Deauville's grand chic hired local architect Eugène-Maurice Vincent to build, in 1936, a modern building inspired by the Lieutenance house and the porch of Saint Catherine's church of Honfleur. Due to its significance as an example of 20th-century Norman architecture, it was placed on the Protected Heritage list by the French Institute of Architecture in 1992.

On 23 October 1992, fishing trawler the Laiss'dire shipwrecked one nautical mile from the entrance to the port of Trouville-sur-Mer.

Due to bad weather, the search for the bodies of the ships' three sailors was in vain. The ship was run ashore two weeks later and left on the beach. No bodies were found aboard, but the bodies of two men were seen floating in the river and were fished out near Villers-sur-Mer the same day. The body of the third sailor was found in early December near Le Havre. The ship was left there as a curiosity and was taken into port a month and a half later.

Port Vauban is a French yachting harbor located in Antibes on the French Riviera. Originally a natural harbor in use since before the Roman Empire, the port was fortified by Sébastien Le Prestre, Seigneur de Vauban, later Marquis de Vauban, King Louis XIV 's military engineer.

Port Vauban now serves as the home of the Yacht Club d'Antibes and is the largest marina (in terms of total tonnage of the boats and yachts moored there) in the Mediterranean Sea. Some of the world's largest and most lavishly appointed yachts have Port Vauban as their home port, including Russian oil businessman Roman Abramovich 's 86 m Ecstasea and his gift to fellow Russian businessman Eugene Shvidler (Le Grand Bleu). Co-founder of Microsoft Paul Allen 's yacht Octopus is a regular visitor to the harbor.

In the early part of the 20th century, Port Vauban also accommodated numerous seaplanes and a seaplane manufacturer.

As of 2012, typical rates for a berth in Port Vauban are between €1m to €1.4m.

43°35′12″N 7°7′37″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.58667°N 7.12694°E ﻿ / 43.58667; 7.12694

The Porte de Paris, or Porte des Malades, is a city gate part of the Lille fortifications, partially built at the end of the 17th century as a triumphal arch to celebrate the victories of Louis XIV. Completed at the end of the 19th century, it was classified as a monument historique in 1875.

The gate for the sick originally stood on this site, located on the part of the city wall built during the 13th century expansion of the city, encompassing the parishes of Saint-Sauveur and Saint-Maurice. This gate was the southern exit of the city, an extension of the street of the sick, named because it led to a leper colony or "maladrerie" in Lille, reserved for the bourgeois of Lille, founded around 1233 outside the city on the site of the current Arts and Crafts school and Saint-Sauveur station. This leper colony was closed around 1670 during the construction of Fort Saint-Sauveur.

Louis XIV showed a certain interest in the city and commissioned the architect Simon Vollant to build the Porte de Paris in front of the Porte des Malades. It was built from 1686 to 1694, in memory of the annexation of Lille to France, glorifying the entry of the "Sun King" into his "beautiful and good city" of Flanders.

The post-Napoleonic Depression was an economic depression in Europe and the United States after the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815. In England and Wales, an agricultural depression led to the passage of the Corn Laws (which were to polarize British politics for the next three decades), and placed great strain on the system of poor relief inherited from Elizabethan times.

In England, the Corn Laws exacerbated the situation. They imposed a tariff on foreign grain in an effort to protect English grain producers (agricultural landowners). The cost of food for working people rose as people were forced to buy the more expensive and lower quality British grain, and periods of famine and chronic unemployment ensued, increasing the desire for political reform both in Lancashire and in the country at large.

After the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815, a brief boom in textile manufacture in England was followed by periods of chronic industrial economic depression, particularly among textile weavers and spinners (the textile trade was concentrated in Lancashire). Weavers who could have expected to earn 15 shillings for a six-day week in 1803, saw their wages cut to 5 shillings or even 4s 6 d by 1818. The industrialists, who were cutting wages without offering relief, blamed market forces generated by the aftershocks of the Napoleonic Wars.

At the same time, the Corn Laws (the first of which was passed in 1815) exacerbated the situation. They imposed a tariff on foreign grain in an effort to protect English grain producers (agricultural landowners). The cost of food for working people rose as people were forced to buy the more expensive and lower quality British grain, and periods of famine and chronic unemployment ensued, increasing the desire for political reform both in Lancashire and in the country at large.

In Ireland, wheat and other grain prices fell by half, and alongside continued population growth, landlords converted cropland into rangeland by securing the passage of tenant farmer eviction legislation in 1816, which led, because of the Irish workforce's historic concentration in agriculture, to a greater subdivision of remaining land plots under tillage and increasingly less efficient and less profitable subsistence farms.

In Scotland, the depression ended in 1822.

Samuel Jackson of Pennsylvania theorised that the Panic of 1819 and resulting depression in the United States were caused by the post-Napoleonic depression, holding that the end of the Napoleonic wars had led to the collapse of export markets and resulting underconsumption.

Postes, Télégraphes et Téléphones (French pronunciation: [ pɔst teleɡʁaf e telefɔn ]), also known as P&T, P et T and PTT, was the French administration of postal services and telecommunications, founded in 1879 during the Third Republic.

The French PTT pioneered the virtual circuit variant of packet switching in the early 1970s through the work of Rémi Després.

The company rolled out Minitel, a Videotex online service accessible through telephone lines, experimentally between July 1980 in Saint-Malo, France, and from autumn 1980 in other areas, and introduced it commercially throughout France in 1982. Minitel was the world's most successful online service prior to the World Wide Web.

The name Postes, Télécommunication et Télédiffusion never received official recognition from the French state. It was above all used in French campaigns, in unofficial texts and in film credits. In effect, Télédiffusion, which grouped together television and radio channels, was always independent.

It was divided in 1991 into France Télécom and La Poste.

A potée is a savoury dish cooked in an earthenware pot. Potées are found all around France, but among the best-known is the potée Lorraine, a speciality of Lorraine, in north-eastern France. Its main ingredient is pork or ham, slowly cooked in water with haricot beans and seasonal vegetables. The cooking liquid may be served as a soup, followed by the meat and vegetables as the main course.

Potées, like other one-pot stews, are familiar throughout France and in many other countries. In France they may have alternative names such as hochepot, garbure and oille. The potée Lorraine differs from many well-known one-pot stews in using pork or ham rather than beef as its main meat. It is among the best-known such French dishes.

Salted pork (porc salée) is widely available in France but some recipes for potée Lorraine use ham hock (jambonneau salé) instead. The meat is thoroughly desalted before being slowly simmered in water in an oven with haricot or other white beans together with vegetables. Anne Willan comments that the dish "has the particular charm of using almost all the available garden vegetables". Various recipes call for a permutation of: broad beans, cabbage, carrots, celery, green beans, leeks, mange-tout, onions, peas, potatoes and turnips. A large sausage (or several small sausages) is usually added towards the end of cooking.

In many cases the broth from the cooking pot is served as a soup before the meat and vegetables are eaten as the main course. The stew is usually served with hot Dijon mustard ; cold leftovers may be served with vinaigrette.

Poverty in France is concerned with the incidence and impact of absolute and relative poverty in modern France. Poverty has fallen by 60% over thirty years. Although it affected 15% of the population in 1970, in 2001 only 6.1% (or 3.7 million people) were below the poverty line (which, according to INSEE 's criteria, is half of the median income).

An OECD study from the early 1970s estimated that 16% of the French population lived in poverty, compared with 13% in the United States, 11% in Canada, 7.5% in the United Kingdom, and 3% in Germany. Other national estimates at the time were 13% (the United States), 11% (Canada), 8% (Australia), 5% (Norway), and 3.5% (Sweden).

In 1975, a basic tax-free cash allowance starting at £665 for children under the age of ten provided a considerable amount of support for families living on low incomes, and its combination with direct taxation meant greater support to poor families than in any other country in the EEC. A two-parent family with four dependent children on 66% of average earnings gained an amount after tax and allowances equal to 49.4% of its income compared with 8.2% in the United Kingdom. Nevertheless, that same year, INSEE found that at any wage level disposable income per head was still much lower in large families than those with no or very few children, while the cost of bringing up a family weighed particularly heavily on households headed by a low-paid worker. According to one estimate from the early 1970s, using 1500 francs net per month for those in full-time employment, 44% of women and 24.5% of men were low paid. The percentage of workers who were low paid was particularly high in personal services, such as hairdressing (74%), hotel and catering (60%) and textiles (51%).

In comparison with the average French workers, foreign workers tended to be employed in the hardest and lowest-paid jobs. They also live in poor conditions. A 1972 study found that foreign workers earned 17% less than their French counterparts, although this national average concealed the extent of inequality. Foreign workers were more likely to be men in their prime working years in the industrial areas, which generally had higher rates of pay than elsewhere.

In 1974, the National Assembly's Commission on Cultural, Family and Social Affairs estimated that 5% of the population should be considered as "living in a state of destitution or on the borderline of destitution". Studies by Serge Milano, Lionel Stoleru, and Rene Lenoir estimated that between 10% and 14% of the population lived in poverty from 1970 to 1980. A report by the EEC estimated that 14.8% of households in France lived in poverty in 1975, defined as living below the threshold of 50% mean annual income.

European Community policies on combatting poverty have applied across the European Economic Community and European Union, including France.

Previously, the poor were for the most part retirees. The trend reversed itself in the 1980s with an increase in unemployment among young people; while poverty among the elderly dropped 85% (from 27.3% to 3.8%), among those still in the workforce it increased by 38% over the same 30 years (from 3.9% to 5.4%). Various social welfare programs have had an important impact in low-income households, and in 2002, they may in some cases have represented more than 50% of the household's income.

In 2008, the OECD claimed that France was "one of only five OECD countries where income inequality and poverty have declined over the past 20 years".

As a result of the European migrant crisis, beginning in 2015, makeshift and squalid migrant camps have begun regularly appearing around the capital city with French officials routinely clearing and dismantling them as of October 2016. Such camps are also becoming a common occurrence in Northern France, along the coast of La Manche, which migrants hope to cross in an attempt to reach Britain. The Calais Jungle is perhaps the best known example of this.

The poverty threshold was fixed at 645 euros per person per month. By comparison, the revenu minimum d'insertion (RMI, which idea draws on guaranteed minimum income, although it is not distributed to everyone) was at that time 440.86 euros per month for a person living alone. The French poverty threshold is slightly higher than that of the United States, suggesting that some who would be considered living in poverty in France would not be if they had the same income in the United States. However, it is difficult to compare them as they are not calculated in the same way, notwithstanding differences in cost or standards of living. While the French poverty threshold is calculated as being half of the median income, the U.S. poverty threshold is based on dollar costs of the economy food plan, that is, on income inequality

Nevertheless, social services allow France to have one of the lowest child mortality rates despite this poverty.

Despite the positive developments, it seems that rural areas have been attracting more and more of those left behind; a non-negligible segment of at-risk city populations have been moving to the country and joining the ranks of small-time farmers among "rural" welfare recipients. This phenomenon is partly explained by the lower cost of rural living compared with that in cities.

Another indicator of poverty is the RMI. In 1994, in metropolitan France, the number of RMI recipients was 783,436; ten years later (in June 2004), it rose to 1,041,026. In the overseas departments, it was 105,033 at the end of 1994 and 152,892 in June 2004. From December 2004 to December 2005, the number of RMI recipients increased by 4.7% according to the Secours catholique NGO.

Bidonvilles ("can towns") are shanty towns that exist in the urban outskirts of France and often have little access to roads or public services (such as electricity or access to water). Although once thought to be a phenomenon exclusive to the 1960s and 1970s, bidonvilles again gained attention in the French media in the 2000s. Often populated by immigrants, bidonvilles produce a degree of residential segregation between French nationals and recently arrived immigrant groups at a scale higher than any other western European city in the postwar years. However, most attention on residential poverty in France is now associated with the Parisian suburbs, or banlieues.

In the late 1960s, there were eighty-nine bidonvilles on the outskirts of Paris. During this time, bidonvilles were often associated with immigrant groups from North Africa. However this is partly an exaggerated stereotype, as the largest bidonville of the Paris area in the 1960s (Champigny-sur-Marne) was populated mostly by Portuguese. That being said, a Ministry of the Interior census carried out in 1966 suggested that the majority of the 46,827 people living in the 119 Parisian bidonvilles were of North African origin. Other bidonvilles were concentrated north-west of Paris, including near Nanterre, Gennevilliers, Asnières, and Colombes.

In 1964, the Loi Debré sought to eliminate bidonvilles, and the urban formation was erroneously thought to have disappeared in the 1970s with the transformation of Nanterre 's bidonville into a modern city. However, a 1973 count estimated at least 8,600 still living in bidonvilles around Paris.

First-hand accounts describe the hardship of living in bidonvilles in the 1960s: "We live amongst mud and rubbish. There's no difference between us and animals...It's not life that we lead here: even the rats come to eat us...I tell you – even the animals live better than we do." A former occupant recalled the emotional legacy of life in the Nanterre bidonville even after its destruction: "Now they've got rid of almost all the bidonvilles at Nanterre, but they still exist in our heads and in our thinking. Life in a bidonville is something you never forget."

However, bidonvilles may have provided certain measures of social freedom and political space for disadvantaged or marginalized groups, albeit at the cost of appalling daily living conditions. For example, established bidonvilles with more experienced immigrant communities could provide a network of support or feeling of solidarity to a newly arrived migrant greater than what they might find in the city center.

Despite persistent attempts to rehouse individuals living in bidonvilles (and the more fragmented "micro-bidonvilles"), they remain a reality in places like Villeurbanne (Lyon), where a bidonville contains 500 persons of Romani origins, a third of them children. In February 2007, bulldozers destroyed a bidonville in Bobigny, a northeastern suburb of Paris, where 266 Romanian and Bulgarian citizens had been registered. Another huge bidonville exists near Calais, inhabited by migrants from the Middle-East, North Africa and sub-Saharan Africa hoping to get to the United Kingdom. It has been destroyed several times, but since the people are in France illegally, they have nowhere else to go, and eventually they return to the same place.

Bidonvilles are also common in the overseas departments.

A prefect (French : préfet, plural préfets, both [ pʁefɛ ]) in France is the State's representative in a department or region. Regional prefects are ex officio the departmental prefects of the regional prefecture. Prefects are tasked with upholding the law in the department they serve in, including controlling the actions of local authorities. Prefects are appointed by decree by the President of the French Republic when presiding over the government 's Council of Ministers, following a proposal by the Prime Minister and the Minister of the Interior. They serve at the government's discretion and can be replaced at any meeting of the Council of Ministers.

To uphold the law, they are authorised to undertake a wide variety of actions, such as coordinating police forces, enforcing immigration rules, controlling authorities' finances, as well as suing local collectivities in the name of the State. The prefects in Lille, Rennes, Bordeaux, Marseille, Lyon and Strasbourg each have additional tasks as heads of their regional defence and security zone (zone de défense et de sécurité). In the Paris area, the prefect of police is the head of the local zone. Overseas France has a similar zones system.

Subprefects (sous-préfets) are responsible for the subdivisions of departments, known as arrondissements, when the arrondissement is not that of the prefecture. The office of a prefect is known as a prefecture and that of a subprefect a subprefecture. From 1982 to 1988, under the Socialist administration of President François Mitterrand, prefects were called commissaires de la République (the Republic's commissioners) and subprefects commissaires adjoints de la République (the Republic's deputy commissioners).

The post of prefect was first created on 17 February 1800 by then- First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte.

Their roles were initially similar to those of the pre-revolutionary intendants. Prefects were initially charged with supervising local governments in their department, ensuring that taxes flowed to Paris and supervising conscription at the local level.

Currently, the main role of the prefect is defined in article 72 of the Constitution of France :

In the local governments of the Republic, the representative of the State, representing each member of the Government, is in charge of national interests, of administrative checks, and the respect of Law.

The exact role and attributions are defined in decrees, most notably decrees of 1964, 1982, 2004, each replacing the preceding one.

The prefect of the département containing the chef-lieu de région is also the préfet de région, or the prefect of the région.

Prefects operate under the Minister of the Interior. Their main missions include:

Prefects may issue administrative orders in areas falling within the competency of the national government, including general safety. For instance, they may prohibit the use of certain roads without special tyres in times of snow. The prohibition on smoking or leaving the motor running while filling the fuel tank of a motor vehicle is another example of a matter typically decided by a prefectoral administrative order.

On official visits, prefects wear uniforms. In metropolitan France and Saint Pierre and Miquelon, the uniforms are dark blue; in the rest of overseas France, the uniforms are white.

For much of the time after 1800, the departments largely functioned as transmission belts for policies developed in Paris. As such, prefects originally had fairly extensive powers of supervision and control over departmental affairs. This was especially true during the Consulate and the First and Second Empires, when even the most trivial local matter had to be referred to the prefect. Since 1982, local government has been progressively decentralised, and the prefect's role has largely been limited to preventing local policies from conflicting with national policy.

At the commune level, prefects appoint a special delegation in cases of dissolution or resignation of the municipal council.

In France, a prefecture (French : préfecture, pronounced [ pʁefɛktyʁ ]) may be:

Although the administration of departments and regions is distinct, a regional prefect is ex officio prefect of the department in which the regional prefecture is located. The officeholder has authority upon the other prefects in the region on a range of matters.

There are 101 prefectures in France, one for each department. The official in charge is the prefect (French : préfet). The prefecture is an administration that belongs to the Ministry of the Interior ; it is therefore in charge of the delivery of identity cards, driving licenses, passports, residency and work permits for foreigners, vehicle registration, registration of associations (creation, status modification, dissolution), as well as of the management of the National Police and firefighters, although as of 2018, 79% of firefighters in France are part-time volunteers.

Prefectures are usually located near the geographic centre of their departments; they were originally chosen for being within a day's travel on horseback from anywhere in the department. Therefore, the largest settlement in a department may not always be its prefecture: the department of Marne, for example, has its prefecture at Châlons-en-Champagne despite the city of Reims, near the Aisne border, being four times its size.

The prefect represents the national government at the local level and as such exercises the powers that are constitutionally attributed to the national government. The prefect issues ordinances written for the application of local law: to close a building that does not conform to safety codes, or modify vehicular traffic regulations (speed limit, construction permits).

The governing body of the department is the departmental council (French : Conseil départemental), which is elected through a system of cantons. It is in charge of the building and maintenance of middle schools (collèges) and departmental roads, financial assistance to dependent people (disabled and elderly), as well as promotion of local economic development, amongst other matters. In the past, the prefect was head of the department, but since 1982, the President of the Departmental Council has assumed the role of chief executive of the department.

There is an exception in Paris in the Île-de-France region and its three surrounding departments, known as the Petite Couronne ("Small Crown"): Hauts-de-Seine to the west, Seine-Saint-Denis to the northeast and Val-de-Marne to the southeast. These departments are administered by an additional separate unitary prefecture for law enforcement and security purposes, a Prefecture of Police (French : préfecture de police), known as the Paris Police Prefecture, a situation inherited from the Paris Commune of 1871. The power of law enforcement is usually vested in the mayor in other communes. This power is held by the Prefect of Police of Paris in the Petite Couronne.

In 2012, a similar structure was established in Bouches-du-Rhône, the Bouches-du-Rhône Police Prefecture, headed by the Prefect of Police of Bouches-du-Rhône, although it is formally less independent than that of Paris.

Departments are divided into arrondissements, themselves divided into cantons. The chef-lieu d'arrondissement is the subprefecture (French : sous-préfecture). The official in charge is the subprefect (French : sous-préfet). There are relatively few competences associated to cantons, the most important one being the local organisation of elections, as cantons are electoral subdivisions.

Prehistoric France is the period in the human occupation (including early hominins) of the geographical area covered by present-day France which extended through prehistory and ended in the Iron Age with the Roman conquest, when the territory enters the domain of written history.

The Pleistocene is characterized by long glacial periods accompanied by marine regressions, interspersed at more or less regular intervals by milder but shorter interglacial stages. Human populations during this period consisted of nomadic hunter-gatherers. Several human species succeeded each other in the current territory of France until the arrival of modern humans in the Upper Palaeolithic.

The earliest known fossil man is Tautavel Man, dating from 570,000 years ago. Neanderthal Man is attested in France from about 335,000 years before present. Homo sapiens, modern humans, are attested since around 54,000 years ago in the Mandrin Cave.

In the Neolithic, which begins in the south of France in the middle of the 6th millennium BC, the first farmers appeared. The first megaliths were erected in the early 5th millennium BC.

The Lower Paleolithic period began with the first human occupation of the region. Stone tools discovered at Lézignan-la-Cèbe indicate that early humans were present in France from least 1.2 million years ago.

5 prehistoric sites in France are dated from between 1 and 1.2 million years ago:

None of these sites have thus far revealed any evidence of lithic industry which prevents identification of the human species responsible for them.

France includes Olduwan (Abbevillian) and Acheulean sites from early or non-modern (transitional) Hominini species, most notably Homo erectus and Homo heidelbergensis. Tooth Arago 149 - 560,000 years. Tautavel Man (Homo erectus tautavelensis), is a proposed subspecies of the hominid Homo erectus, the 450,000-year-old fossil remains of whom were discovered in the Arago cave in Tautavel.

The Grotte du Vallonnet near Menton contained simple stone tools dating to 1 million to 1.05 million years BC. Cave sites were exploited for habitation, but the hunter-gatherers of the Palaeolithic era also possibly built shelters such as those identified in connection with Acheulean tools at Grotte du Lazaret and Terra Amata near Nice in France. Excavations at Terra Amata found traces of the earliest known domestication of fire in Europe, from 400,000 BC.

The Neanderthals are thought to have arrived earlier than 300,000 BC, but seem to have died out by about by 30,000 BC, presumably unable to compete with modern humans during a period of cold weather. Numerous Neanderthal, or " Mousterian ", artifacts (named after the type site of Le Moustier, a rock shelter in the Dordogne region of France) have been found from this period, some using the " Levallois technique ", a distinctive type of flint knapping developed by hominids during the Lower Palaeolithic but most commonly associated with the Neanderthal industries of the Middle Palaeolithic. Importantly, recent findings suggest that Neanderthals and modern humans may have interbred.

Important Mousterian sites are found at:

The first identified Neanderthal burials were discovered at La Chapelle-aux-Saints in 1908 (dating from 70 ka) then at La Ferrassie in 1909. The identification of burial practices in Neanderthals at these sites led to new insights concerning the capacity of Neanderthals to develop spiritual or metaphysical beliefs, extending understanding of the human species beyond what had been hitherto assumed.

The earliest indication of Upper Palaeolithic early modern human (formerly referred to as Cro-Magnon) migration into France, and indeed in the whole of Europe, is a series of modern human teeth with Neronian industry stone tools found at the Mandrin Cave, Malataverne in France, dated in 2022 to between 56,800 and 51,700 years ago. The Neronian is one of the many industries associated with modern humans classed as transitional between the Middle and Upper Palaeolithic. When they arrived in Europe, they brought with them sculpture, engraving, painting, body ornamentation, music and the painstaking decoration of utilitarian objects. Some of the oldest works of art in the world, such as the cave paintings at Lascaux in southern France, are datable to shortly after this migration.

European Palaeolithic cultures are divided into several chronological subgroups (the names are all based on French type sites, principally in the Dordogne region):

From the Paleolithic to the Mesolithic, the Magdalenian culture evolved. The Early Mesolithic, or Azilian, began about 14,000 years ago, in the Franco-Cantabrian region of northern Spain and Southern France. This was ahead of other parts of Western Europe, where the Mesolithic began by 11,500 years ago at the beginning of the Holocene. It ended with the introduction of farming.

The Azilian culture of the Late Glacial Maximum co-existed with similar early Mesolithic European cultures such as the Tjongerian of North-Western Europe, the Ahrensburgian of Northern Europe and the Swiderian of North-Eastern Europe, all succeeding the Federmesser complex. The Azilian culture was followed by the Sauveterrian in Southern France and Switzerland, the Tardenoisian in Northern France, the Maglemosian in Northern Europe.

Archeologists are unsure whether Western Europe saw a Mesolithic immigration. Populations speaking non-Indo-European languages are obvious candidates for Mesolithic remnants. The Vascons (Basques) of the Pyrenees present the strongest case, since their language is related to none other in the world, and the Basque population has a distinct genetic profile. The disappearance of Doggerland affected the surrounding territories and the hunter gatherers living there are believed to have migrated to northern France and as far as eastern Ireland to escape from the floods.

The Neolithic period lasted in northern Europe for approximately 3,000 years (c. 5000 BC – 2000 BC). It is characterised by the so-called Neolithic Revolution, a transitional period that included the adoption of agriculture, the development of tools and pottery (Cardium pottery, LBK), and the growth of larger, more complex settlements. There was an expansion of peoples from southwest Asia into Europe; this diffusion across Europe, from the Aegean to Britain, took about 2,500 years (6500 BC–4000 BC). According to the leading Kurgan hypothesis, Indo-European languages were introduced to Europe later, during the succeeding Bronze Age, and Neolithic peoples in Europe are called " Pre-Indo-Europeans " or " Old Europe ". Nevertheless, some archaeologists believe that the Neolithic expansion, and the eclipse of Mesolithic culture, coincided with the introduction of Indo-European speakers. In what is known as the Anatolian hypothesis, it is postulated that Indo-European languages arrived in the early Neolithic. Old European hydronymy is taken by Hans Krahe to be the oldest reflection of the early presence of Indo-European languages in Europe.

Many European Neolithic groups share basic characteristics, such as living in small-scale family-based communities, subsisting on domestic plants and animals supplemented with the collection of wild plant foods and with hunting, and producing hand-made pottery (that is made without the potter's wheel). Archeological sites from the Neolithic in France include artifacts from the Linear Pottery culture (c. 5500 – c. 4500 BC), the Rössen culture (c. 4500 —4000 BC), and the Chasséen culture (4,500 - 3,500 BC; named after Chassey-le-Camp in Saône-et-Loire), the name given to the late Neolithic pre- Beaker culture that spread throughout the plains and plateaux of France, including the Seine basin and the upper Loire valleys.

The 'Armorican' (Castellic culture) and Northern French Neolithic (Cerny culture) is based on traditions of the Linear Pottery culture or "Limburg pottery" in association with the La Hoguette/Cardial culture. The Armorican culture may also have origins in the Mesolithic tradition of Téviec and Hoedic in Brittany.

It is most likely from the Neolithic that date the megalithic (large stone) monuments, such as the dolmens, menhirs, stone circles and chamber tombs, found throughout France, the largest selection of which are in the Brittany and Auvergne regions. The most famous of these are the Carnac stones (c. 3300 BC, but may date to as old as 4500 BC) and the stones at Saint-Sulpice-de-Faleyrens.

During the Chalcolithic or Copper Age, a transitional age from the Neolithic to the Bronze Age, France shows evidence of the Seine-Oise-Marne culture and the Beaker culture.

The Seine-Oise-Marne culture or "SOM culture" (c. 3100 to 2400 BC) is the name given by archaeologists to the final culture of the Neolithic in Northern France around the Oise River and Marne River. It is most famous for its gallery grave megalithic tombs which incorporate a port-hole slab separating the entrance from the main burial chamber. In the chalk valley of the Marne River rock-cut tombs were dug to a similar design. In the Southeast, several groups whose culture had evolved from Chasséen culture also built megaliths.

Beginning about 2600 BC, the Artenacian culture, a part of the larger European Megalithic Culture, developed in Dordogne, possibly as a reaction to the advance of Danubian peoples (such as SOM) over Western France. Armed with typical arrows, they took over all Atlantic France and Belgium by 2400 BC, establishing a stable border with the Indo-Europeans (Corded Ware) near the Rhine that would remain stable for more than a millennium.

The Bell Beaker culture (c. 2800 –1900 BC) was a widespread phenomenon that expanded over most of France, excluding the Massif Central, in the third and early second millennia BC.

In the Kurgan Hypothesis, Indo-European languages spread to Europe in the Bronze Age. The culture of the Kurgans is also known as Yamnaya Culture and recent results from acheaogenetics have linked this culture with genetic ancestry components of the Western Steppe Herders, and it has been possible to reconstruct migrations of these people across Europe co-extensive with the arrival of the Yamnaya and Corded Ware cultures.

In France, the first studies on the Bronze Age date from the 19th century. The "Manuel d'archéologie préhistorique, celtique et gallo-romaine," (Manual of Prehistoric, Celtic and Gallo-Roman Archaeology), by Joseph Déchelette, published in 1910, was for a long time the reference for the study of this period. In the 1950s, Jean-Jacques Hatt proposed a subdivision of the French Bronze Age, and in 1958 he published a tripartate division. This model divided the Bronze Age into three parts, Early Bronze, Middle Bronze and Late Bronze Age and serves as a reference for the majority of subsequent studies on the Bronze Age in France.

The Bronze Age archeological cultures in France include the transitional Beaker culture (c. 2800 –1900 BC), the Early Bronze Age Rhône culture (c. 2300 -1600 BC) and Armorican Tumulus culture (c. 2200 – c. 1400 BC), the Middle Bronze Age Tumulus culture (c. 1600 -1200 BC), and the Late Bronze Age Atlantic Bronze Age (c. 1300 – c. 700 BC) and Urnfield culture (c. 1300 -800 BC). Early Bronze Age sites in Brittany (Armorican Tumulus culture) are believed to have grown out of Beaker roots, with some Wessex culture and Unetice culture influence. Some scholars think that the Urnfield culture represents an origin for the Celts as a distinct cultural branch of the Indo-European family (see Proto-Celtic). This culture was preeminent in central Europe during the late Bronze Age; the Urnfield period saw a dramatic increase in population in the region, probably due to innovations in technology and agricultural practices.

Some archeologists date the arrival of several non-Indo-European peoples to this period, including the Iberians in southern France and Spain, the Ligures on the Mediterranean coast, and the Vascons (Basques) in southwest France and Spain.

The spread of iron-working led to the development of the Hallstatt culture (c. 700 to 500 BC) directly from the Urnfield. Proto-Celtic, the latest common ancestor of all known Celtic languages, is generally considered to have been spoken at the time of the late Urnfield or early Hallstatt cultures, in the early 1st millennium BC.

The Hallstatt culture was succeeded by the La Tène culture, which developed out of the Hallstatt culture without any definite cultural break, under the impetus of considerable Mediterranean influence from Greek, and later Etruscan civilizations. The La Tène culture developed and flourished during the late Iron Age (from 450 BC to the Roman conquest in the 1st century BC) in eastern France, Switzerland, Austria, southwest Germany, the Czech Republic, and Hungary. Farther to the north extended the contemporary Pre-Roman Iron Age culture of Northern Germany and Scandinavia.

In addition, Greeks and Phoenicians settled outposts like Marseille in this period (c. 600 BC).

By the 2nd century BC, Celtic France was called Gaul by the Romans, and its people were called Gauls. The people to the north (in what is present-day Belgium) were called Belgae (scholars believe this may represent a mixture of Celtic and Germanic elements) and the peoples of the south-west of France were called the Aquitani by the Romans, and may have been Celtiberians or Vascons.

Prehistoric and Iron Age France - all dates are BC

Première dame d'honneur (French pronunciation: [ pʁəmjɛʁ dam dɔnœʁ ], lit. ' first lady of honour '), or simply dame d'honneur (lit. ' lady of honour '), was an office at the royal court of France. It existed in nearly all French courts from the 16th-century onward. Though the tasks of the post shifted, the dame d'honneur was normally the first or second rank of all ladies-in-waiting. The dame d'honneur was selected from the members of the highest French nobility.

The term Dame d'honneur has also been used as a general term for a (married) French lady-in-waiting. Initially, the married ladies-in-waiting who attended the queen of France had the title Dame. This was simply the title of a married lady-in-waiting, who was not the principal lady-in-waiting.

From 1523, the group of 'Dame' (married) ladies-in-waiting who attended the court as companions of the queen had the formal title Dame d'honneur ('Lady of Honour', commonly only 'Dame'), hence the title 'Première dame d'honneur' ('First lady of honour') to distinguish between the principal lady-in-waiting and the group of remaining (married) ladies-in-waiting. In 1674, the position of Fille d'honneur was abolished, and the 'Dames' were renamed Dame du Palais. Thus, the title Dame d'honneur was henceforth reserved for one office holder.

The task of the dame d'honneur was to supervise the female courtiers, control the budget, order necessary purchases, and organize the annual account and staff list; she supervised the daily routine and attended both ordinary and ceremonial court functions, as well as escorting and introducing those seeking audience with the queen. She had the keys to the queen's personal rooms in her possession.

When the Dame d'honneur was absent, she was replaced by the Dame d'atour, who normally had the responsibility of overseeing the queen's wardrobe and jewelry in addition to dressing the queen.

In 1619, the office of the Surintendante de la Maison de la Reine, or simply surintendante, was created. The surintendante had roughly the same tasks as the Dame d'honneur—receiving the oath of the female personnel before they took office, supervising the daily routine of the staff and the queen, organizing the accounts and staff list—but she was placed in rank above the dame d'honneur. Whenever the surintendante was absent, she was replaced by the dame d'honneur. The post of Surintendante could be left vacant for long periods, such as between the death of Marie Anne de Bourbon in 1741 and the appointment of Princess Marie Louise of Savoy in 1775.

The position of Dame d'honneur was revived during the First Empire, when the principal lady-in-waiting to the empress held the same title.

During the Second Empire, the dame d'honneur had the same position as before, but was now formally ranked second below a surintendante with the title Grande-Maîtresse.

Though the office was commonly only referred to as "Dame d'honneur", this list use the full title of "Première dame d'honneur".

For the first years in France, before her Spanish entourage was sent back to Spain, Anne had both a French and a Spanish office holder in several posts of her court.

The Household of the wife of the heir to the throne were normally appointed one year before the royal bride arrived to France, so that they could be a part of the royal welcome entourage.

The president of France (French : Président de la France), officially the president of the French Republic (French: Président de la République française) or president of the Republic (Président de la République), is the executive head of state of France, and the commander-in-chief of the French Armed Forces. As the presidency is the supreme magistracy of the country, the position is the highest office in France. The powers, functions and duties of prior presidential offices, in addition to their relation with the prime minister and government of France, have over time differed with the various constitutional documents since the Second Republic.

The president of France is the ex officio co-prince of Andorra, grand master of the Legion of Honour and of the National Order of Merit, and protector of the Institut de France in Paris. The officeholder is also honorary proto-canon of the Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran in Rome, although some have rejected the title in the past.

The current president is Emmanuel Macron, who succeeded François Hollande on 14 May 2017 following the 2017 presidential election, and was inaugurated for a second term on 7 May 2022 following the 2022 presidential election.

The presidency of France was first publicly proposed during the July Revolution of 1830, when it was offered to the Marquis de Lafayette. He demurred in favour of Prince Louis Phillipe, who became King of the French.

Eighteen years later, during the opening phases of the Second Republic, the title was created for a popularly elected head of state, the first of whom was Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, nephew of Emperor Napoleon. Bonaparte served as president until he staged a self-coup against the republic, proclaiming himself Napoleon III, Emperor of the French.

Under the Third Republic the president was at first quite powerful, mainly because the royalist party was strong when the constitutional laws of 1875 were established, and it was hoped that a member of one of the two branches of the royal family would be able to serve as president and turn France into a constitutional monarchy. However, the next legislature was dominated by Republicans, and after President Patrice de MacMahon had unsuccessfully tried to obtain a new royalist majority by dissolving the Chambre des Députés, his successor Jules Grévy promised in 1879 that he would not use his presidential power of dissolution, and therefore lost his control over the legislature, effectively creating a parliamentary system that would be maintained for 80 years until the accession of Charles de Gaulle as president in 1959.

Indeed, when the Fourth Republic was created, after the Second World War, it was a parliamentary system, in which the office of President of the Republic was a largely ceremonial one.

The Constitution of the Fifth Republic, adopted in 1958, greatly increased the president's powers. A 1962 referendum changed the constitution, so that the president would be directly elected by universal suffrage and not by the electoral college established in 1958. In 2000, a referendum shortened the presidential term from seven years (Septennat) to five years (Quinquennat). A maximum of two consecutive terms was imposed after a 2008 constitutional reform.

Since the 1962 presidential referendum, the president has been directly elected by universal suffrage ; previously, an electoral college decided the head of state. The length of the presidential term was reduced from seven years to five years following a 2000 referendum ; the first election for a shorter term was held in 2002. Then-president Jacques Chirac was first elected in 1995 and again in 2002, and would have been able to run in 2007 had he chosen to, given the lack of term limits.

Following a further change, the constitutional law of 2008 on the modernization of the institutions of the Fifth Republic, a president cannot serve more than two consecutive terms. François Mitterrand and Jacques Chirac were previously the only presidents to date who have served a full two terms (14 years for the former, 12 years for the latter). Incumbent Emmanuel Macron is the fourth president (after de Gaulle, Mitterrand, and Chirac) to win re-election, having done so in 2022.

French presidential elections are conducted using run-off voting, which ensures that the elected president always obtains a majority: if no candidate receives a majority of votes in the first round of voting, the two highest-scoring candidates arrive at a run-off. After a new president is elected, they go through a solemn investiture ceremony called a passation des pouvoirs ("handing over of powers").

In order to be admitted as an official candidate, potential candidates must receive signed nominations (known as parrainages, for "sponsors") from more than 500 elected local officials, mostly mayors. These officials must be from at least 30 départements or overseas collectivities, and no more than 10% of them should be from the same département or collectivity. Furthermore, each official may nominate only one candidate.

There are exactly 45,543 elected officials, including 33,872 mayors. Spending and financing of campaigns and political parties are highly regulated. There is a cap on spending (at approximately €20 million) and government public financing of 50% of spending if the candidate scores more than 5%. If the candidate receives less than 5% of the vote, the government funds €8,000,000 to the party (€4,000,000 paid in advance). Advertising on TV is forbidden, but official time is given to candidates on public TV. An independent agency regulates election and party financing.

The French Fifth Republic is a semi-presidential system. Unlike most other European heads of state, the French president is quite powerful. Although the Prime Minister of France, through their government as well as Parliament, oversees much of the nation's actual day-to-day domestic affairs, the French president wields significant influence and authority, especially in the fields of national security and foreign policy. The president's greatest power is the ability to choose the prime minister. However, since it is the French National Assembly that has the sole power to dismiss the prime minister's government, the president is forced to name a prime minister who can command the support of a majority in the assembly. Since 2002, the legislative elections are held a few weeks after the presidential; a majority supporting the president's party or at the very least not opposing the president's choice is therefore very likely to be obtained. The president also has the duty of arbitrating the functioning of governmental authorities for efficient service, as the head of state of France.

Since 2002, the mandate of the president and the Assembly are both five years, and the two elections are close to each other. Therefore, the likelihood of a cohabitation is lower. Among the powers of the president:

All decisions of the president must be countersigned by the prime minister, except dissolving the National Assembly, choice of prime minister, and other dispositions referred to in Article 19.

The constitutional attributions of the president are defined in Title II of the Constitution of France.

Article 5 : The president of the republic shall see that the Constitution is observed. He shall ensure, by his arbitration, the proper functioning of the public authorities and the continuity of the State. He shall be the guarantor of national independence, territorial integrity and observance of treaties.

Article 8 : The president of the republic shall appoint the prime minister. He shall terminate the appointment of the prime minister when the latter tenders the resignation of the Government. On the proposal of the prime minister, he shall appoint the other members of the Government and terminate their appointments.

Article 9 : The president of the republic shall preside over the Council of Ministers.

Article 10: The president of the republic shall promulgate acts of parliament within fifteen days following the final adoption of an act and its transmission to the Government. He may, before the expiry of this time limit, ask Parliament to reconsider the act or sections of the Act. Reconsideration shall not be refused. While the President has to sign all acts adopted by parliament into law, he cannot refuse to do so and exercise a kind of right of veto; his only power in that matter is to ask for a single reconsideration of the law by parliament and this power is subject to countersigning by the Prime minister.

Article 11: The president could submit laws to the people in a referendum with advice and consent of the cabinet.

Article 12 : The president of the republic may, after consulting the prime minister and the presidents of the assemblies, declare the National Assembly dissolved. A general election shall take place not less than twenty days and not more than forty days after the dissolution. The National Assembly shall convene as of right on the second Thursday following its election. Should it so convene outside the period prescribed for the ordinary session, a session shall be called by right for a fifteen-day period. No further dissolution shall take place within a year following this election.

Article 13: The president of the republic shall sign the ordinances and decrees deliberated upon in the Council of Ministers. He shall make appointments to the civil and military posts of the State. [...]

Article 14 : The president of the republic shall accredit ambassadors and envoys extraordinary to foreign powers; foreign ambassadors and envoys extraordinary shall be accredited to him.

Article 15 : The president of the republic shall be commander-in-chief of the armed forces. He shall preside over the higher national defence councils and committees.

Article 16 : Where the institutions of the republic, the independence of the nation, the integrity of its territory or the fulfilment of its international commitments are under serious and immediate threat, and where the proper functioning of the constitutional public authorities is interrupted, the president of the republic shall take the measures required by these circumstances, after formally consulting the prime minister, the presidents of the assemblies and the Constitutional Council. He shall inform the nation of these measures in a message. The measures must stem from the desire to provide the constitutional public authorities, in the shortest possible time, with the means to carry out their duties. The Constitutional Council shall be consulted with regard to such measures. Parliament shall convene as of right. The National Assembly shall not be dissolved during the exercise of the emergency powers.

Article 16, allowing the president a limited form of rule by decree for a limited period of time in exceptional circumstance, has been used only once, by Charles de Gaulle during the Algerian War, from 23 April to 29 September 1961.

Article 17 : The president of the republic has the right to grant pardon.

Article 18 : The president of the republic shall communicate with the two assemblies of Parliament by means of messages, which he shall cause to be read and which shall not be the occasion for any debate. He can also give an address in front of the Congress of France in Versailles. Outside sessions, Parliament shall be convened especially for this purpose.

Article 19 : Acts of the president of the republic, other than those provided for under articles 8 (first paragraph), 11, 12, 16, 18, 54, 56 and 61, shall be countersigned by the prime minister and, where required, by the appropriate ministers.

Before the 2008 constitutional reform forbidding them, there was a tradition of so-called "presidential amnesties", which are something of a misnomer: after the election of a president, and of a National Assembly of the same party, parliament would traditionally vote a law granting amnesty for some petty crimes (it was also a way of reducing jail overpopulation). This practice had been increasingly criticized, particularly because it was believed to inspire people to commit traffic offences in the months preceding the election. Such an amnesty law would also authorize the president to designate individuals who have committed certain categories of crimes to be offered amnesty, if certain conditions are met. Such individual measures have been criticized for the political patronage that they allow. The difference between an amnesty and a presidential pardon is that the former clears all subsequent effects of the sentencing, as though the crime had not been committed, while pardon simply relieves the sentenced individual from part or all of the remainder of the sentence.

Articles 67 and 68 organize the regime of criminal responsibility of the president. They were reformed by a 2007 constitutional act in order to clarify a situation that previously resulted in legal controversies. The president of the Republic enjoys immunity during their term: they cannot be requested to testify before any jurisdiction, they cannot be prosecuted, etc. However, the statute of limitations is suspended during their term, and enquiries and prosecutions can be restarted, at the latest one month after they leave office. The president is not deemed personally responsible for their actions in their official capacity, except where their actions are indicted before the International Criminal Court (France is a member of the ICC and the president is a French citizen as another following the Court's rules) or where impeachment is moved against them. Impeachment can be pronounced by the Republican High Court, a special court convened from both houses of Parliament on the proposal of either House, should the president have failed to discharge their duties in a way that evidently precludes the continuation of their term.

Upon the death in office, removal, or resignation of the president, the Senate 's president takes over as acting president. Alain Poher is the only person to have served in this temporary position, and has done so twice: the first time in 1969 after Charles de Gaulle 's resignation and a second time in 1974 after Georges Pompidou 's death while in office. In this situation, the president of the Senate does not have to resign from their position while acting as president.

The first round of a new presidential election must be organized no sooner than twenty days and no later than thirty-five days following the vacancy of the presidency. Fifteen days can separate the first and second rounds of a presidential election; this means that the president of the Senate can only act as President of the Republic for a maximum period of fifty days.

During this interim period, acting presidents are not allowed to dismiss the national assembly, nor are they allowed to call for a referendum or initiate any constitutional changes. If there is no president of the Senate, the powers of the president of the republic are exercised by the Gouvernement, meaning the Cabinet. This has been interpreted by some constitutional academics as meaning first the prime minister and, if they are themselves not able to act, the members of the cabinet in the order of the list of the decree that nominated them. This is in fact unlikely to happen, because if the president of the Senate is not able to act, the Senate will normally name a new president of the Senate, who will act as President of the Republic.

During the Third French Republic the president of the Council of Ministers acted as president whenever the office was vacant. According to article 7 of the Constitution, if the presidency becomes vacant for any reason, or if the president becomes incapacitated, upon the request of the Gouvernement, the Constitutional Council may rule, by a majority vote, that the presidency is to be temporarily assumed by the president of the Senate. If the Council rules that the incapacity is permanent, the same procedure as for the resignation is applied, as described above. If the president cannot attend meetings, including meetings of the Council of Ministers, they can ask the prime minister to attend in their stead (Constitution, article 21). This clause has been applied by presidents travelling abroad, ill, or undergoing surgery. During the Second French Republic, there was a vice president. The only person to ever hold the position was Henri Georges Boulay de la Meurthe.

Four French presidents have died in office:

The president of the Republic is paid a salary according to a pay grade defined in comparison to the pay grades of the most senior members of the French Civil Service ("out of scale", hors échelle, those whose pay grades are known as letters and not as numeric indices). In addition they are paid a residence stipend of 3%, and a function stipend of 25% on top of the salary and residence indemnity. This gross salary and these indemnities are the same as those of the prime minister, and are 50% higher than the highest paid to other members of the government, which is itself defined as twice the average of the highest (pay grade G) and the lowest (pay grade A1) salaries in the "out of scale" pay grades. Using the 2008 "out of scale" pay grades, it amounts to a monthly pay of 20,963 euros, which fits the 19,000 euros quoted to the press in early 2008. Using the pay grades starting from 1 July 2009, this amounts to a gross monthly pay of €21,131. The salary and the residence stipend are taxable for income tax. The official residence and office of the president is the Élysée Palace in Paris. Other presidential residences include:

According to French law, former presidents of the Republic have guaranteed lifetime pension defined according to the pay grade of the Councillors of State, a courtesy diplomatic passport, and, according to the French Constitution (Article 56), membership of the Constitutional Council. They also get personnel, an apartment or office, and other amenities though the legal basis for these is disputed. The current system for providing personnel and other amenities to the former French presidents was devised in 1981 by Michel Charasse, then advisor to President François Mitterrand, in order to care for former president Valéry Giscard d'Estaing and the widow of former President Georges Pompidou. In 2008, according to an answer by the services of the prime minister to a question from René Dosière, a member of the National Assembly, the facilities comprised: a security detail, a car with a chauffeur, first class train tickets and an office or housing space, as well as two people who service the space. In addition, funds are available for seven permanent assistants. President Hollande announced a reform of the system in 2016. Former presidents of France will no longer receive a car with chauffeur and the personnel in their living space was cut as well. Additionally, the number of assistants available for their use has been reduced, but a state flat or house remains available for former officeholders. Train tickets are also available if the trip is justified by the office of the former officeholder as part of official business. The security personnel around former presidents of France remained unchanged.

Pressed duck (French : canard à la presse, caneton à la presse, canard à la rouennaise, caneton à la rouennaise or canard au sang) is a traditional French dish. The complex dish is a specialty of Rouen and its creation attributed to an innkeeper from the city of Duclair. Since the 19th century, it has also been a specialty of the Tour d'Argent restaurant in Paris where it is formally known as the Caneton Tour d'Argent (Tour d'Argent duckling). It consists of various parts of a duck served in a sauce of its blood and bone marrow, which is extracted by way of a press. It has been considered "the height of elegance ".

First, a duck (preferably young and plump) is asphyxiated to retain the blood. The duck is then partially roasted. Its liver is ground and seasoned, then the legs and breast are removed.

The remaining carcass (including other meat, bones, and skin) is then put in a specially designed press, similar to a wine press. Duck presses tend to be substantial and heavy pieces of equipment, generally made of solid brass or iron. Pressure is then applied to extract duck blood and other juices from the carcass. The extract is thickened and flavoured with the duck's liver, butter, and cognac, then combined with the breast to finish cooking.

Other ingredients that may be added to the sauce include foie gras, port wine, Madeira wine, and lemon. The breast is sliced and served with the sauce in a first serving; the legs are grilled and served as the next course.

A pretzel (/ ˈ p r ɛ t s əl / PRET -səl. From German : Breze or Brezel, pronounced [ ˈbʁeːtsl̩ ] or [ ˈbʁɛtsl̩ ] ; Bavarian : Brezn) is a type of baked pastry made from dough that is commonly shaped into a knot. The traditional pretzel shape is a distinctive symmetrical form, with the ends of a long strip of dough intertwined and then twisted back onto itself in a particular way (a pretzel loop or pretzel bow). Today, pretzels come in various shapes, textures, and colors, but the original soft pretzel remains one of the most common pretzel types.

Salt is the most common seasoning, or topping, for pretzels, complementing the washing soda or lye treatment that gives pretzels their traditional skin and flavor acquired through the Maillard reaction. Other toppings are mustard, cheeses, sugar, chocolate, cinnamon, sweet glazing, seeds, and nuts. Regional specialties like Spundekäs have been designed to go along with pretzels. Varieties of pretzels include soft pretzels, which should be eaten shortly after preparation, and hard-baked pretzels, which have a long shelf life.

There are numerous accounts regarding the origin of pretzels, as well as the origin of the name; most state that they have Christian backgrounds and were invented by European monks. According to some scholars and various sources, the most popular story is that the pretzel was made in 610 AD by an Italian monk when he decided to make a special treat to help motivate his students to keep on learning. He rolled out a few strips of dough and crossed them to try to resemble two hands praying, and after he baked it, the pretzel was born. After they were done baking, he handed them out to his students and said "pretiola" (little rewards). Another source locates the invention in a monastery in southern France. In Germany, there are stories that pretzels were the invention of desperate bakers held hostage by local dignitaries.

The German name " Brezel " may derive also from Latin bracellus (a medieval term for 'bracelet'), or bracchiola ('little arms').

The pretzel has been in use as an emblem of bakers and formerly their guilds in southern German areas since at least the 12th century. A 12th-century illustration of the banquet of Queen Esther and King Ahasuerus in the Hortus deliciarum from the Alsace region (today France) may contain the earliest depiction of a pretzel.

Within the Christian Church, pretzels were regarded as having religious significance for both ingredients and shape. Pretzels made with a simple recipe using only flour and water could be eaten during Lent when Christians were forbidden to eat eggs, lard, or dairy products such as milk and butter (cf. Daniel Fast). As time passed, pretzels became associated with both Lent and Easter. Pretzels were hidden on Easter morning just as eggs are hidden today, and are particularly associated with Lent, fasting and prayers before Easter.

Like the holes in the hubs of round Finnish flatbread, ruisreikäleipä, which let them be hung on poles suspended just below the kitchen ceiling, the loops in pretzels may have served a practical purpose: bakers could hang them on sticks, for instance, projecting upward from a central column, as shown in a painting by Job Berckheyde (1630–1693) from around 1681.

Pretzel baking has most firmly taken root in the region of Franconia and adjoining Upper German -speaking areas, and pretzels have been an integral part of German baking traditions for centuries. Lye pretzels are popular in southern Germany, Alsace, Austria, and German-speaking Switzerland as a variety of bread, a side dish or a snack, and come in many local varieties. Examples for pretzel names in various Upper-German dialects are Breze, Brezn, Bretzel, Brezzl, Brezgen, Bretzga, Bretzet, Bretschl, Kringel, Silserli, and Sülzerli. Baked for consumption on the same day, they are sold in every bakery and in special booths or stands in downtown streets. Often, they are sliced horizontally, buttered, and sold as Butterbrezel, or come with slices of cold meats or cheese. Butter-filled pretzels are also commonly sold under this name. Sesame, poppy, sunflower, pumpkin, or caraway seeds, melted cheese, and bacon bits are other popular toppings. Some bakeries offer pretzels made of different flours, such as whole wheat, rye or spelt.

In Bavaria, lye pretzels accompany a main dish, such as Weisswurst sausage. The same dough and baking procedure with lye and salt is used to make other kinds of "lye pastry" (Laugengebäck): lye rolls, buns, croissants, and even loaves (Laugenbrötchen, Laugenstangen, Laugen croissants, Laugenbrot). Yet, in some parts of Bavaria, especially in lower Bavaria, unglazed "white" pretzels, sprinkled with salt and caraway seeds are still popular. Basically, with the same ingredients, lye pretzels come in numerous local varieties. Sizes are usually similar; the main differences are the thickness of the dough, the content of fat and the degree of baking. Typical Swabian pretzels, for example, have very thin "arms" and a "fat belly" with a split, and a higher fat content. The thicker part makes it easier to slice them for the use of sandwiches. In Bavarian pretzels, the arms are left thicker so they do not bake to a crisp and contain very little fat. Oversized pretzels are often sold at fairs or beer festivals.

The pretzel shape is used for a variety of sweet pastries made of different types of dough (flaky, brittle, soft, crispy) with a variety of toppings (icing, nuts, seeds, cinnamon). Around Christmas, they can be made of soft gingerbread (Lebkuchen) with chocolate coating. In southern Germany and adjoining German-speaking areas, pretzels have retained their original religious meanings and are still used in various traditions and festivals. In some areas, on 1 January, people give each other lightly sweetened yeast pretzels for good luck and good fortune. These "New Year's pretzels" are made in different sizes and can have a width of 50 centimetres (20 in) and more. Sometimes children visit their godparents to fetch their New Year's pretzel. On 1 May, love-struck boys used to paint a pretzel on the doors of the adored. On the other hand, an upside-down pretzel would have been a sign of disgrace. Especially Catholic areas, such as Austria, Bavaria, or some parts of Swabia, the "Palm pretzel" is made for Palm Sunday celebrations. Sizes can range from 30 cm (0.98 ft) up to 1 m (3 ft 3 in) and they can weigh up to 2.5 kg (5.5 lb). An old tradition on Palm Sunday dating back to 1533 is the outdoor pretzel market (Brezgenmarkt) in the Hungerbrunnen Valley near Heldenfingen.

In the Rhineland region, sweet pretzels are made with pudding-filled loops (pudding pretzels). On Laetare Sunday in Luxembourg, the fourth Sunday in Lent, there is a festival called "Pretzel Sunday". Boys give their girlfriends pretzels or cakes in pretzel form. The size symbolizes how much he likes her. In return, if a girl wants to increase his attention, she will give him a decorated egg on Easter. The pretzel custom is reversed on Pretzel Sunday during leap years. This custom also still exists in some areas of the Swabian Alb. On the same occasion in Rhenish Hesse and the Palatinate, people have parades carrying big pretzels mounted on colourful decorated poles.

During Lent in Biberach, "Lent pretzels" are popular. These are briefly boiled in water before baking and then sprinkled with salt. Schloss Burg is renowned for a 200-year-old specialty, the "Burger pretzel". Its texture and flavour resemble rusk or zwieback. A local story says that the recipe came from a grateful Napoleonic soldier in 1795, whose wounds were treated by a baker's family in the little town of Burg. The cultural importance of the pretzel for Burg is expressed by a monument in honour of the pretzel bakers, and by an 18 km hiking trail nearby called "Pretzel Hiking Trail".

A variety typical for Upper Franconia is the "anise pretzel". The town of Weidenberg celebrates the "Pretzel weeks" during the carnival season when anise flavored pretzels are served with special dishes such as cooked meat with horseradish or roast. In the city of Lübeck, the 500-year-old guild of boatmen on the Stecknitz Canal call their annual meetings in January Kringelhöge (Pretzelfun). The elaborate affair, with about 200 participants, is celebrated as a breakfast with beer and includes Mass in the Lübeck Cathedral and a presentation of songs by a children's choir. In earlier times, the children were very poor, coming from an orphanage, and each received a Kringel (pretzel) as a reward. Hence, the name "Pretzelfun" was adopted, because this gift was considered a highlight. Today, the children come from schools, but they still get the pretzels.

The city of Osnabrück celebrates the anniversary of the Peace of Westphalia (1648) and organizes an annual hobby horse race for grade-four children. On finishing the race, they are presented with a sweet pretzel. In heraldry, the city seal of Nörten dates from around 1550 and depicts two facing lions holding a pretzel at the center.

The lye pretzel is the theme for a number of festivals in Germany. The city of Speyer prides itself to be the "pretzel town", and around the second weekend of July, from Friday to Tuesday, it holds an annual funfair and festival called " Brezelfest ", which is the largest beer festival in the Upper Rhine region, and attracts around 300,000 visitors. The festival includes a parade with over 100 bands, floats, and clubs participating from the whole region, and 22,000 pretzels are thrown among the crowds. On the market square of Speyer, there is a fountain with a statue of a boy selling pretzels. The pretzel booths on the main street are permanently installed and were specially designed when the whole downtown area was redone for the 100th anniversary. One-day pretzel fests and markets in other German towns are in Kirchhellen, a borough of Bottrop, or in Kornwestheim. In 2003 and 2004, "Peace Pretzels" were baked for a UNICEF charity event and other charity purposes in Munich. Instead of the typical pretzel loop, they were made in the similar shape of a peace symbol.

In the late 18th century, southern German and Swiss German immigrants introduced the pretzel to North America. The immigrants became known as the Pennsylvania Dutch, and in time, many handmade pretzel bakeries populated the central Pennsylvania countryside, and the pretzel's popularity spread.

In the 20th century, soft pretzels became popular in other regions of the United States. Cities such as Philadelphia, Chicago, and New York became renowned for their soft pretzels. The key to success was the introduction of the new mass production methods of the industrialized age, which increased the availability and quantity, and the opening up of multiple points of distribution at schools, convenience and grocery stores, and entertainment venues such as movie theaters, arenas, concert halls, and sport stadiums. Prior to that, street vendors used to sell pretzels on street corners in wooden glass-enclosed cases.

In the U.S., pretzels come in many varieties of flavors and coatings, such as yogurt, chocolate, strawberry, mustard, cinnamon sugar, cheese and others, and chocolate-covered hard pretzels are popular around Christmas time and given as gifts. The variety of shapes and sizes became a contest of imagination in the marketing of the pretzels taste. During the 1900s, people in Philadelphia would use the small slender pretzel stick as a common accompaniment to ice cream or would crumble pretzels as a topping. This combination of cold sweet and salty taste was very popular for many years. Eventually, this led to the development of an ice cream cone tasting like a pretzel. Mars, Incorporated manufactures M&M's with a small spherical pretzel covered in milk chocolate and candy coated in all of the standard M&M's colors, called "Pretzel M&M's". Soft pretzels are frequently sold in shopping malls, with notable chains including Auntie Anne's and Wetzel's Pretzels /Pretzel Time.

Southeastern Pennsylvania, with its large population of German background, including the Pennsylvania Dutch, is considered the birthplace of the American pretzel industry, and many pretzel bakers are still located in the area. Pennsylvania produces 80% of the nation's pretzels.

Hard pretzels originated in the United States, where, in 1850, the Sturgis bakery in Lititz, Pennsylvania, became the first commercial hard pretzel bakery. Snack food hard pretzels are made in the form of loops, braids, letters, little pretzels, or sticks around 3 millimetres (1 ⁄ 8 in) thick and 12 centimetres (5 in) long; they have become a popular snack in many countries around the world. A thicker variety of sticks can be 1.5 centimetres (1 ⁄ 2 in) thick; in the U.S. these are called Bavarian pretzels or pretzel rods. Unlike the soft pretzels, these were durable when kept in an airtight environment and marketable in a variety of convenience stores. Large-scale production began in the first half of the 1900s, more so during 1930 to 1950. A prime example was in 1949, when highly innovative American Machine and Foundry Co., of New York City, developed the "pretzel bender": a new automatic crispy-styled baked pretzel-twisting machine that rolled and tied them at the rate of 50 a minute—more than twice as fast as skilled hand twisters could make them—and conveyed them through the baking and salting process.

The annual United States pretzel industry is worth over $1.2 billion. The average American consumes about 1.5 pounds (0.7 kg) of pretzels per year. The privately run Pretzel Museum opened in Philadelphia in 1993, but it is now defunct. In 2003, Pennsylvania Governor Ed Rendell declared April 26 as "National Pretzel Day" to acknowledge the importance of the pretzel to the state's history and economy. Philly Pretzel Factory stores offer a free pretzel to each customer on this day. In Altoona, Pennsylvania, the Benzel's pretzel company calls them "bretzels", both for the alliteration and as a nod to their German heritage.

The S-shaped soft pretzel, often served with brown mustard, became very popular in Philadelphia and was established as a part of Philadelphia's cuisine for snacking at school, work, or home, and considered by most to be a quick meal. The average Philadelphian today consumes about twelve times as many pretzels as the national average.

Freeport, Illinois, which sits about 100 miles outside of Chicago, is another city known for its rich pretzel history. In 1869, a German immigrant named John Billerbeck established the first Billerbeck Bakery which was known for selling German style pretzels to complement the large number of breweries that existed in Freeport during this time. Prohibition eventually shut down the breweries which led to the decline of pretzel sales in Freeport, but the city never lost its pretzel pride. For more than 100 years, Freeport has been known as "Pretzel City, USA." Their high school athletic mascot is the Pretzel and the football stadium has been appropriately named "Pretzel Field." In 2003, local citizens launched Freeport's first Pretzel Festival which is a large community event where residents get together to celebrate the city's pretzel history. Contestants are chosen to be crowned Pretzel Prince and Princess and a festival mascot by the name of "Pretzel Bill" (stemming from the Billerbeck Bakery name) dresses as a 6-foot tall walking talking pretzel who hands out pretzels from floats and takes photos with the local festival goers.

The looped pretzel is known in other European countries and in other countries around the world.

In Hungary it is called perec, a softer variant of the German pastry, usually eaten with cheese or salt-syrup baked on it.

Pretzel sticks, known as Paluszki, are a popular snack in Poland, often consumed alongside beer.

In Romania, the pretzel is known as a variety of covrigi ; it is a very common street food.

In Sweden it is called kringlor, a small pretzel often covered with chocolate.

The pretzel is well known in popular culture for its unique twisted shape, and celebrated as a beloved snack food.

Landscape architecture and sculpture memorialized the strong identity that the city of Philadelphia had with pretzel cuisine of local bakers and popularity in Philadelphia. The Philadelphia Recreation Department renamed in 2004 a facility formerly identified as Manayunk Park, located on the 4300 block of Silverwood Street as "Pretzel Park". The re-designed park includes pretzel-like looped pathways and a public art statue in the shape of a pretzel sculpted by Warren C. Holzman. The municipal government of the City of Freeport, Illinois, also known as "Pretzel City USA", have also adopted a pretzel logo as their trademark.

The pretzel dance move was part of swing dancing in the 1920s.

The "pretzel" bikini bathing suit design, a variant of the sling swimsuit, emerged in the early 1990s, produced by Spandex. It is a haltered maillot that crisscrosses the front and fastens to the waistline. Made from Lycra, these bikinis became most popular on the beaches of Europe, including Saint-Tropez, Marbella, Mykonos, and Ibiza.

A circulating internet video shows a press conference of US president George W. Bush from January 2002, in which he recalls choking on a pretzel: "When you're eating pretzels, chew before you swallow. Listen to your mother."

In SNK 's Fatal Fury series (and the succeeding The King of Fighters series), one of Geese Howard 's Super Special Moves called "Raging Storm" requires an intricate motion input of down-back, half-circle backward, and down-forward—a motion that, in total, resembles the shape of a pretzel, and has resulted in the fighting game community naming it the "pretzel motion".

The prime d'activité (English: employment bonus) is a French social security benefit created on August 17, 2015, relative to labor relations and employment. Stemming from the fusion of the Revenu de solidarité active (RSA) and the Prime pour l'emploi (PPE), the prime d'activité supports the occupation and buying power of low-income workers, rectifying certain problems posed by both the RSA and the PPE. As of January 1, 2016, the prime d'activité is issued by Caisse d'allocations familiales and Mutualité sociale agricole (fr).

The prime d'activité was created by the August 17 law #2015-994 relative to labour relations and employment:, title IV, and took effect on January 1, 2016. It is codified in book 8 of the social security code, specifically L 841-1 to L 847-1, R 842-1 to R 848-1 and D 843-1 to D 848-5. The provisions were finalised by simple decree (fr) #2015-1710 on 21 December 2015 and was published in the Journal officiel de la République française on 22 December 2016.

The creation of the prime d'activité is the result of several reports on two previous insufficient provisions regarding labor and low-income support, namely the RSA and the PPE.

The RSA, whose goal was to promote re-entry into the workforce without fear of earning less than unemployment benefits, was only used by a third of potential beneficiaries due to administrative complexities, fear of overcompensation (and thus repayment), and social stigma. Furthermore, in all but rare cases, the RSA was not issued to those under 25.

The PPE, a tax credit supplementing low-wage incomes, however, reached between 95% and 97% of potential beneficiaries, but allocated relatively low amounts (a monthly average of 33€ in 2014) with a one-year discrepancy in relation to employment.

The prime d'activité corrects these drawbacks. It is unconnected to the RSA and is issued monthly at a "fixed" three-month rate irrespective of any changes in employment, reducing the incidence of overcompensation, and can be claimed at age 18 with a simplified administrative process. The average amount allocated in 2015 was €170 per month.

The objective remains to encourage re-entry into the workforce, even into low-paying positions, and supplementing low incomes.

All earnings cited here are legally defined in relation to SMIC (fr) and are shown in monthly net in practice. On January 1, the net monthly SMIC was 1,130€.

The prime d'activité is inversely proportional to earnings.

Example for a single childless earner in 2017

The Princes of Canino and Musignano formed the genealogically senior line of the Bonaparte family following the death of Joseph Bonaparte in 1844. The line was succeeded by one of Emperor Napoleon 's younger brothers, Lucien Bonaparte. It became extinct in the male line in 1924. The dynastic Bonapartist pretenders descend in the male line from Prince Jérôme Napoléon, Napoleon's youngest brother.

Canino and Musignano are two neighbouring villages in the Province of Viterbo in Italy. They were bestowed on Lucien Bonaparte by papal authority on 18 August 1814 (Prince of Canino) and on 21 March 1824 (Prince of Musignano).

Article 7 of the monarchical constitution of the First French Empire, promulgated 20 May 1804, established that upon extinction of the legitimate natural and adopted male, agnatic descendants of Napoleon I (1769–1821), and those of two of his brothers, Prince Joseph Napoléon (1768–1844) and Prince Louis Napoléon (1778–1846), the throne was to be awarded to a man selected by the non-dynastic princely and ducal dignitaries of the empire, as ratified by plebiscite. On 24 September 1806, the emperor's youngest brother, Jérôme Napoléon (1784–1860), was made a French prince, along with the future issue of his second marriage to Duchess Catharina of Württemberg, and he and his heirs were added into the succession.

On 22 March 1815, during the Hundred Days, Napoleon also recognized his brother Lucien and Lucien's sons as Imperial French princes. At no time, however, were Lucien and his issue recognized during the First Empire as eligible by law to inherit the French throne, or any other throne. The title of Principe di Canino e Musignano borne by Lucien and his heirs male was a papal title of nobility, never legally recognized in France.

Therefore, upon the death without issue in 1832 of the Duke of Reichstadt, titular Emperor Napoleon II, the claim to the Bonaparte crown of France devolved upon Joseph Bonaparte, formerly King of Naples and then King of Spain. Following his death without sons in 1844, the Imperial claim bypassed Lucien's sons and devolved upon Louis Bonaparte, formerly King of Holland, even though Louis had been younger than Lucien.

Louis's two elder sons pre-deceased their father, but his third son became Emperor Napoleon III in 1852. The Second Empire 's constitution recognized the dynasticity of all of Napoleon I's brothers and their issue, but allowed the emperor to choose the order in which they would inherit the throne in the event he died without male issue. On 18 December 1852 the emperor appointed his only remaining uncle, Prince Jérôme Napoléon, former King of Westphalia, as heir presumptive, again bypassing the male line of Lucien.

In May 1870, that order of succession was confirmed by referendum, except that Prince Napoléon Joseph (1822–1891), Jérôme's surviving son by his second wife, Duchess Catharina of Württemberg, was named to follow the emperor's son, the Prince Imperial Napoléon Eugène in the succession line. However, a few months later the French Empire was abolished, and has not been restored. Meanwhile, the agnatic descendants of Jérôme Napoléon's branch (the Prince Napoléon Line) are still extant, and still hold the dynastic claim to the Napoleonic legacy.

Lucien Bonaparte (1775–1840) married twice: first to Christine Boyer, who gave birth to a stillborn son and three daughters; and second to Alexandrine de Bleschamp and had eight children.

Children from his second marriage include:

The Principality of Aigues-Mortes (French : Principauté d'Aigues-Mortes) is a micronation that claims the city of Aigues-Mortes. It is not recognised by any country or government.

Aigues-Mortes was founded in 2010 as a humorous parody of the Principality of Monaco, to gain media attention and boost tourism. The micronation is also registered in France as the organisation LOUPAM. Together with local merchants and the tourist office of Aigues-Mortes, it created the BPAM (Bourse princière d'Aigues-Mortes) to handle currency exchange with the local currency, the flamant.

Aigues-Mortes has been present at several international conferences on micronations, in Perugia (2015), Aigues-Mortes (2016), Atlanta (2017) and Vincennes (2018).

The founders of the micronation invented their own legend to legitimize their claims. The legend is a humoristic story about Pierrot Pitchoun, a squire of the French king. In 1240, Louis IX of France obtained the town and the surrounding lands by exchange of properties with the monks of the abbey to whom the city belonged so far. Aigues-Mortes was the city from which Louis IX twice departed for the Seventh Crusade in 1248 and for the Eighth Crusade in 1270, during which he died of dysentery at Tunis. According their story the dying king granted his faithful squire the title Prince of Aigues-Mortes, the squire's hometown, as a reward for faithful service during his last days. The current Prince is Jean-Pierre IV who is purported to be the 22nd of this princely line.

A Priority Urbanization Zone (ZUP), originally termed "Zone à urbaniser par priorité", was an administrative urban planning procedure used in France between 1959 and 1967 to address the growing demand for housing. ZUPs were designed to create new districts from initial inception, including residential buildings, commercial and community facilities.

Taking the form of large housing estates, ZUPs helped alleviate housing shortages but are generally considered to have fallen short of creating vibrant, dynamic neighborhoods. By metonymy, the term "ZUP" also refers to the districts and urban complexes resulting from this planning process.

ZUPs are frequently targeted by France's "urban policy" initiatives and the national urban renewal program led by the National Agency for Urban Renewal (ANRU).

Urban development between the world wars primarily occurred through suburban housing estates, subdivided and sold by speculators. These developments often suffered from limited scale, poor integration with urban plans established under the 1919 and 1924 laws, and inadequate infrastructure, resulting in makeshift constructions by low-income populations.

Post-World War II, France faced a severe housing crisis. Of the 12.6 million housing units in 1946, one-third were overcrowded, and half lacked running water. In Paris, 42% of residents lived in substandard or overcrowded conditions. The crisis was exacerbated by the destruction of approximately 500,000 homes during the war, coupled with population growth from the rural flight, the baby boom, and the arrival of immigrant populations and repatriates from Algeria.

The push for new housing led to a steady increase in France's housing stock, growing from 18.2 million units in 1968 to 21.078 million in 1975, 23.7 million in 1982, 26.2 million in 1990, and 28.7 million in 1999. ZUPs significantly contributed to this growth, providing millions of people access to modern amenities.

The ZUP framework was established by Decree No. 58-1464 on 31 December 1958. It aimed to facilitate the rapid development of new urban areas by planning and financing housing and community infrastructure in "municipalities or agglomerations where the scale of housing construction programs necessitates the creation, reinforcement, or expansion of collective facilities." The goal was to address housing shortages driven by population growth, improve urban planning, and eliminate substandard housing.

ZUPs enabled the swift equipping of land designated for new urban projects. The responsible local authority, often a commune or the state, partnered with a public entity or a mixed economy company to expropriate land, develop infrastructure, and sell it to developers. Funding was partially provided by the state, with the local prefect approving key elements such as master plans and programs.

To maximize construction efforts, ZUPs required a minimum of 500 housing units, though most exceeded this threshold. Between 1957 and 1969, 197 ZUPs were developed, resulting in 2.2 million housing units. In Dunkirk, heavily impacted by wartime destruction, local officials secured the creation of one of the first ZUPs in 1959 at " Nouvelles Synthes," alongside the development of a large industrial-port zone to accommodate major industries like Usinor Dunkerque.

However, the large housing estate model quickly revealed its limitations. Despite intentions to avoid creating dormitory towns, ZUPs often resulted in standardized architecture (notably the "crane path" design) and a predominance of social housing. Recognizing these shortcomings, ZUPs were replaced by Concerted Development Zones [ fr ] (ZACs) under the Land Planning Law of 1967. After 1969, no new ZUPs could be created, and existing ones were either phased out or transitioned to other planning mechanisms.

In the 1970s, France shifted to a new towns policy, aiming to create fully functional cities rather than mere planned neighborhoods. A notable exception is the ZUP of Les Ulis in Essonne, established in 1960, which became an independent municipality in 1977.

Below is a non-exhaustive list of ZUPs, organized by region.

In 1959, two ZUPs were created in French Algeria, in the city of Algiers :

These projects were abandoned in 1962 following Algerian independence.

The ZUP procedure was applied to 22 sites in the region between 1958 and 1969, covering 5,900 ha (15,000 acres) (roughly half the area of Paris) to create 140,000 housing units.

With the exception of Seine-et-Marne, the departments listed below, established under the law of 10 July 1964, did not exist when most ZUPs were created.

The Prix Alexis de Tocqueville is an international prize for political literature. It is awarded every two years to a person who has demonstrated outstanding humanistic qualities and attachment to public liberties and seeks to perpetuate Alexis de Tocqueville’s ideals.

It was created in 1979 by Pierre Godefroy, mayor of the nearby town of Valognes and Alain Peyrefitte, a noted author, member of the Académie Francaise and politician.

The jury of this prestigious award is currently chaired by former French President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing, and includes Sandra O'Connor, professor Harvey C Mansfield and a number of other eminent members. The last two American recipients of the Prize were General Colin Powell and Mr. Zbigniew Brzezinski.

The Association organizing the Prize is now headed by the Countess Stéphanie de Tocqueville. The Prize is awarded at the Chateau de Tocqueville.

The Prix Bordin (French pronunciation: [ pʁi bɔʁdɛ̃ ]) is a series of prizes awarded annually by each of the five institutions making up the Institut Français since 1835.

The prize was created by Charles-Laurent Bordin, a notary in Paris from 1794 to 1820, who bequeathed 12,000 Francs to the Institut de France in his testament dated April 7, 1835, for the foundation of an annual prize to be given to each of the five:

Iznogoud (French pronunciation: [ iznoɡud ] ; from "he's no good" pronounced with a French accent) is a French comics series featuring an eponymous character, created by the comics writer René Goscinny and comics artist Jean Tabary. The comic series chronicles the life and times of Iznogoud, the Grand Vizier of the Caliphate of Baghdad at an undefined period. His greatest desire is to dethrone the Caliph and replace him, leading him to repeatedly utter the phrase "I want to be Caliph instead of the Caliph" –– a phrase that has been adopted in French and some other European languages to characterize overly ambitious people. Iznogoud is supported by his dimwitted yet faithful servant, Dilat Laraht (from French "dilate la rate", literally "dilates the spleen", an old idiom meaning "causes one to burst out laughing"), rendered in English as Wa'at Alahf (from "what a laugh").

After the death of Goscinny in 1977 Tabary continued with writing the character. The stories have been translated into several languages, including English, and the title has been adapted to animated and live-action film.

So far 30 graphic novels featuring Iznogoud have been published in French, with at least 26 of those published in English and a number of other languages. In 1974-1979, and again since 2021, Iznogoud also ran as a political-satirical newspaper comic, L'Ignoble Iznogoud Commente L'Actualité, with jokes referring directly to French politics and current events. Iznogoud was also adapted into a cartoon series produced by Saban Entertainment, with 52 episodes to its name, again with most of them having been translated to other languages as well.

The series made its debut in the Franco-Belgian comics magazine Record on 15 January 1962 under the title, Les aventures du Calife Haroun el Poussah. It was eventually recognised that the wicked supporting character ought to be the focus of the strip, and it was renamed Iznogoud. In 1968, it resumed serial publication in Goscinny's Pilote magazine.

Goscinny's taste for sharp satirical writing keeps the repetitive format of the stories constantly fresh, making Iznogoud one of the most popular villains in the French comic strip world. Goscinny's skill with puns, made famous in Astérix, is also evident in Iznogoud. Most of the puns in the original French make little sense if translated directly into English, requiring of translators (Anthea Bell and Derek Hockridge in the case of the English translations) to find creative solutions for equivalent puns while still keeping within the spirit of the original text.

When Goscinny died in 1977, Tabary eventually decided to carry on the work himself, just as Albert Uderzo did with Asterix. While the Goscinny period was characterized by "albums" comprising several short-length tales each, Tabary turned the series in a new direction, by dedicating every new album entirely to a single story, larger and much more detailed, usually revolving around a new unique concept.

In 1987 a game was produced by Infogrames entitled Iznogoud. The series was adapted to animated film in 1995 with a cartoon TV series, where the caliph is referred to as a sultan. A live-action Iznogoud film starring Michaël Youn and Jacques Villeret, Iznogoud: Calife à la place du calife, was released in France in February 2005.

The publisher Cinebook Ltd is currently publishing English language translations of the books in the Iznogoud series. The first book in the series, "The Wicked Wiles of Iznogoud", was published in March 2008. Further volumes continue to appear at approximately six month intervals. In India, Euro Books published the English versions of 12 Iznogoud titles in 2009.

Iznogoud is Grand Vizier to the Caliph of Baghdad, Haroun El Poussah (Haroun al Plassid in English, a pun on the historical Caliph, Harun al-Rashid ; poussah is roughly translated as "oaf"). His sole aim in life is to overthrow the Caliph and take his place. This is frequently expressed in his famous catchphrase, "I want to be Caliph instead of the Caliph" (je veux être calife à la place du calife), which has passed into everyday French for qualifying over-ambitious people who want to become chief. Iznogoud is always assisted in his plans by his faithful but dimwitted henchman, Dilat Larath (Wa'at Alahf in English; se dilater la rate meaning "to have a good laugh").

Goscinny and Tabary occasionally make appearances themselves. In one episode, Tabary uses a magical time-travelling closet to help Iznogoud seize the Caliph title. In another episode, Iznogoud gets a magical calendar that lets him travel in time when he rips off its pages. He rips too many and he is transported to the 20th century, inside the studio of Tabary. In another episode, Iznogoud gets a magical drawing paper set that makes anybody or anything drawn on it disappear once the paper is torn apart. Unfortunately, the drawing needs to be realistic, and Iznogoud is a poor artist. In search of an art teacher, he meets Tabary, renamed Tabary El-Retard (retard meaning "delay").

There are occasionally "behind-the-scenes" moments, as when Iznogoud travels in a country in a mirror, and all is reversed, including text in balloons. Tabary is shown complaining to Goscinny about going through this frustrating "reversal" work, and even threatens him with a gun, to convince him into making a non-reversed "translated" version. They also appear debating after a contemporary crowd demands that they make Iznogoud caliph.

Other recurring characters include Sultan Pullmankar (Sultan Streetcar in English), the Caliph's neighbour who is described as a touchy man with a powerful army. Iznogoud often tries to provoke Pullmankar to become angry at the Caliph, in order to instigate a war. However, Pullmankar never gets angry with the caliph, only with Iznogoud.

The crew of Redbeard, another comics series published in Pilote, appears in A Carrot for Iznogoud, as it did in many stories of René Goscinny's most famous creation Asterix.

The Prix Jules Janssen is the highest award of the Société astronomique de France (SAF), the French astronomical society.

This annual prize is given to a professional French astronomer or to an astronomer of another nationality in recognition of astronomical work in general, or for services rendered to Astronomy. The first recipient of the prize was Camille Flammarion, the founder of the Société astronomique de France, in 1897. The prize has been continuously awarded since then with the exception of the two World Wars. Non-French recipients have come from various countries including the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Germany, Belgium, Sweden, Italy, Spain, Hungary, India, the former Czechoslovakia, and the former Soviet Union.

It was established by the French astronomer Pierre Jules César Janssen (known as Jules Janssen) during his tenure as president of SAF from 1895 to 1897. Janssen announced the creation of the new prize at a meeting of the Société Astronomique de France on 2 December 1896.

The medal was designed in 1896 by the Parisian engraver Alphée Dubois (1831–1905). It is minted by the Monnaie de Paris.

This prize is distinct from the Janssen Medal (created in 1886), which is awarded by the French Academy of Sciences and also named for Janssen.

The processional giants and dragons (French : Géants et dragons processionnels) of Belgium and France are a set of folkloric manifestations involving processional giants, which have been inscribed by UNESCO on the lists of Intangible Cultural Heritage in 2008, originally proclaimed in November 2005.

Through these festivals and their giants, this concerns the set of gigantic manifestations specific to each country. In the case of Belgium, these are the festivities of Dendermonde (Ommegang van Dendermonde), Mechelen (Ommegang van Mechelen), Mons (the Ducasse de Mons, and the fight which is named the "Lumeçon"), Ath (the Ducasse d'Ath) and Brussels (the Meyboom). For France, these are the feasts at Douai (feasts of Gayant) and Cassel (carnival) and the totemic animals and their celebrations in Tarascon and Pézenas (Mardi Gras, inauguration of the Mirondela dels Arts on the first Sunday in July).

This proclamation allows for a valorisation of these popular festivals and their protection.

The processional giant is a gigantic costumed figure that represents a fictitious or real being. Inherited from medieval rites, tradition has it that it is carried, and that it dances in the streets during processions or festivals. Its physiognomy and size are variable, and its name-giving varies according to the regions; among the Flemings, it is known by the name of reus, among the Picards it is called gayant. The large biblical figures in the procession also served the purpose of catechising a largely illiterate population.

Belgium has nearly 1500 giants on its soil. Their appearance dates back to the 15th century; Goliath of Nivelles, which is mentioned as early as 1457, is the oldest known Belgian giant. Belgium also has the largest giant in Europe; Jean Turpin of Nieuwpoort, which exceeds 11 metres (36 ft).

The Belgian cultural heritage includes the following events:

The giant is one of the symbols of the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region. It is the object of ancestral cultural practices that are still kept alive. Present at regional festivals and events, he represents the northern community.

The region currently has more than 450 giants, spread over the whole territory. There are nevertheless more dynamic intra-regional zones, located around central points. The Flemish part of the region is a land of giants; each city has one or more of them. Examples include Reuze Papa and Reuze Maman of Cassel, Tisje Tasje of Hazebrouck, Jean de Bûcheron and La Belle Hélène in Steenvoorde, and Totor of Steenwerck. In the South, in the Languedoc region, there is the Pézenas colt, and in the Provence, the tarasque of Tarascon (Bouches-du-Rhône).

The Professional tax (French : Taxe professionnelle or TP) was prior to 2010 a tax levied on businesses (professionals and corporations) whose proceeds financed territorial collectivities. It was created by the Law 75-678 voted on 29 July 1975 that repealed the centuries-old patente and replaced it with the professional tax.

Up until the mid-1970s, the local tax system consisted of 4 outdated taxes whose creation dated back to 1791 amidst the French Revolution. Under the premierships of Pierre Messmer and Jacques Chirac, all of them would be substantially reformed:

Starting in 1978, tax rates for these three taxes are set freely on an annual basis by each general council, municipal council and other local bodies entitled to collect the taxes.

Up until the fiscal year 2002, the tax base for the professional tax consisted of:

In 1985 the professional tax was capped at 5% of the added value of the taxpayer recorded in the second year prior to the fiscal year where the tax is assessed (i.e. 1983 for fiscal year 1985).

The later was progressively repealed between 2000 and 2002 as it was considered harmful for employment. Salaries were completely excluded from the tax base starting 1 January 2003.

President Jacques Chirac announced on 6 January 2004 the imminent abolition of the professional tax. The tax was however not repealed at this time and instead was capped at 1.5% of the value added and investments made after 1 January 2004 are excluded from the tax base. The French state provided territorial collectivities with additional transfer payments to compensate for the resulting loss in revenues.

On 23 October 2008 President Nicolas Sarkozy announced that any investment made prior to 1 January 2010 would be 100% excluded from the professional tax base.

A few months later, in a televised interview, Nicolas Sarkozy announced that the professional tax would be abolished in 2010. The president costed that measure at €8 billion per year. The Finance Law for 2010 repealed the professional tax and instead replaced it with two new taxes:

The French State promised that territorial collectivities would be fully compensated for any loss in revenues arising for the replacement of the professional tax by the CFE and CVAE.

The programme of the National Council of the Resistance (French: programme du Conseil national de la Résistance), commonly abbreviated as CNR programme and originally titled Les Jours heureux par le CNR, is a French text unanimously adopted by the National Council of the Resistance on March 9 1944.

This document, spanning fewer than ten pages, consists of two parts: an "immediate action plan," addressing the actions of the French Resistance in preparation for the Liberation of France, and "measures to be implemented upon the liberation of the territory," a government programme encompassing measures for post-war purges and long-term reforms, such as the restoration of universal suffrage, nationalizations, and the establishment of social security.

The second part has garnered more historical attention, as most of its programmatic proposals shaped debates and general policy between the 1944 Liberation and early 1946. Unlike other government programmes, a distinctive feature of the CNR programme is its adoption by the full spectrum of political groups represented within the French Resistance.

The first part, the "immediate action plan," begins with observations and emphasizes the necessity of armed struggle and recognition of Charles de Gaulle and the authority of the French Committee of National Liberation (CFLN):

through the intensification of the struggle led by the armed forces and the organizations formed by the masses, the true union of all patriotic forces can be achieved for the realization of national liberation, inseparable, as General de Gaulle stated, from the national insurrection, which... will be directed by the CNR under the authority of the CFLN.

A significant portion of the text is dedicated to the creation of Departmental Committee of Liberation (CDLs). The roles of these committees are distinguished from those of the French Forces of the Interior (FFI), whose responsibilities are also defined.

In the second part, "measures to be implemented upon the liberation of the territory," the programme first addresses "ensuring the punishment of traitors and the removal, in the realms of administration and professional life, of those who collaborated with the enemy or actively participated in the policies of collaborationist governments" and the confiscation of property belonging to traitors and black market profiteers.

The first part of the CNR programme has few precedents in French history, as it concerns the organization of an armed insurrection under foreign domination, a situation unprecedented in modern France. The second part, "reforms to be implemented upon liberation," aligns with the tradition of joint government programmes. The first such programme was the "Réunion de la Montagne" published in April 1849. Its preamble highlighted the role of programmes in democratic processes. Generally, right-wing factions, described as "empirical and conservative," were less inclined to develop programmes. Charles de Gaulle himself expressed doubts about the utility of political programmes when elected president of the Provisional Government of the French Republic. While the left-wing tradition was more open to government programmes, the only historical precedents before 1940 were those of 1849 and 1936.

From 1934, convergence within the left, initially in an anti-fascist perspective and later within the National Conference of the Popular Front, which united left-wing forces supporting the Popular Front, the establishment of a joint programme was not straightforward. The inclusion of nationalizations, often termed "socializations," was a demand of the socialists from the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO), met with reluctance by French communists, as articulated by Maurice Thorez in a January 1935 article in L'Humanité : "The smallest action is worth more than twelve programmes (...) what Marx meant to convey, what Lenin and the Bolsheviks understood (...) is that what matters most is to act." During the adoption of a joint programme by the National Conference of the Popular Front, established on June 17, 1935, to prepare for victory in the 1936 legislative elections, the communists, supported by the radicals, favored a minimalist approach to nationalizations. The resulting compromise provided only for "the nationalization of war industries," and the term "nationalization" was avoided for the Bank of France, despite its impending nationalization. Léon Blum persisted until 1942, while imprisoned in Puy-de-Dôme, in advocating for a government programme, as evidenced by letters to his socialist friends and de Gaulle.

Events at the onset of World War II, such as the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, the dissolution of the Communist Party [ fr ], and the Phoney War, created a divide between socialists and communists, which only resolved by late 1942 through direct contacts between the Socialist Action Committee (CAS) and the Communist Party, both operating clandestinely. The communists prioritized national unity and alliance with Gaullist resistance over forming a clandestine Popular Front. Consequently, the CAS independently published Our Programme in January 1943, the first post-war political programme from a clandestine party, outlining five sets of measures, including women's suffrage, the "total elimination of trusts from national life," the "progressive elimination of competition and profit," the "nationalization of credit and banks, insurance companies, key industries, and foreign trade," and the maintenance and improvement of pre-1939 labor laws. Months later, the socialists, fully aligned with de Gaulle, proposed a "Common Programme" to the French Resistance at the National Council of the Resistance, formed on May 27, 1943, which dropped the abolition of competition but introduced worker and technician participation in management. This programme was likely not discussed by CNR members, as it was overshadowed by a programme from the French Committee of National Liberation (CFLN), presented by Émile Laffon [ fr ] on July 15, 1943.

The Laffon project closely resembled the socialist programme, possibly due to contributions from London-based socialists like André Philip or Georges Boris [ fr ]. It is unclear whether all CFLN members were aware of the project. The Laffon project included an Economic and Social Charter advocating dirigisme, defined as "the orientation and control of production by the State for the benefit of the community," requiring "the prior elimination of economic feudalisms." The term "socialization" was used instead of "nationalization" for major credit-distributing banks. The charter limited worker participation in company management to technical aspects but provided for profit-sharing, either individually or for social initiatives. Internationally, the Laffon project proposed "surrenders of national sovereignty" to a "superior Community of States" or "Universal League," an idea also present in the socialist programme.

André Mercier [ fr ], the communist representative at the CNR, opposed the Universal League concept and the economic aspects of the Laffon project, criticizing its "lack of Marxism," according to historian Claire Andrieu [ fr ]. Right-wing CNR representatives, such as Joseph Laniel of the Democratic Alliance and Louis Marin of the URD, opposed the Laffon project for opposite reasons. Laniel favored a return to complete liberalism within a national framework, while Marin reportedly called it a "Nazi, fascist, and Vichyst project." The project received favorable responses from other CNR organizations, but the National Front tipped the balance toward rejection, advocating a unanimous stance to avoid alienating any French Resistance members. Communist Pierre Villon, representing the National Front at the CNR, played a key role in the adoption of the final text in March 1944.

The representatives of the trade unions, CGT and CFTC, supported the Laffon project. After the 1939 split, the confederal and communist (unitary, recalling the CGTU) factions had reconciled and reunified following the Perreux Agreements [ fr ]. The Post-War Action Programme proposed by Louis Saillant on behalf of the CGT to the CNR in September 1943 included sections agreed upon by both factions, such as restoring republican legality, but also sections with separate motions. For instance, the closed shop principle, granting unions a monopoly on hiring, was proposed only by the communist unitaries, while the ex-confederals favored state primacy in employment offices and dismissal authorizations, with unions in a supervisory role. Another disagreement concerned the future of the Industrial organization committees, public professional syndicates established by Vichy, reflecting the corporatism and dirigisme of the National Revolution. The confederals proposed reforming these committees by expelling "trusts" and strengthening state and union roles, while the unitaries demanded their complete abolition, arguing they reinforced "trusts."

While the CGT document necessarily contains contradictions due to the divergent expressions of the two tendencies, another document also published in the fall of 1943 contains enough contradictions to render it completely unusable. This is the Report on Post-War Economic Policy prepared by the National Studies Committee, created under the name Committee of Experts in June 1942, at the initiative of Jean Moulin and François de Menthon. The voluminous 1943 report, often called the Courtin Report, was the work of nine members of the Committee, including René Courtin, Pierre-Henri Teitgen, and Emmanuel Monick. According to Claire Andrieu, the Courtin report is torn between its liberal convictions and its desire to satisfy "public opinion," which was unanimously judged to favor nationalizations. In the PCF's "Remarks," which tear the report apart, it appears that the PCF was interested in nationalizations, presenting them as a means to "free France from the anti-national and anti-social domination of the men of the trusts." This apparent acceptance of nationalizations without the prior abolition of the capitalist regime was a novelty for the PCF, which definitively rallied to this idea at the beginning of 1945.

From November 1943 to August 1944, there were no plenary meetings of the CNR. The CNR bureau thus played an essential role in developing the text adopted on March 15, 1944. The five members of the CNR bureau were Georges Bidault, president, representing the Radical Party and the Democratic Alliance ; Louis Saillant, who represented the CGT but also the Socialists, Libération-Nord, and the CFTC ; Pascal Copeau [ fr ], a member of Libération-Sud, who also represented the Mouvements unis de la Résistance (MUR); Maxime Blocq-Mascart, a member of the Civil and Military Organization (OCM), who also represented Ceux de la Résistance and Ceux de la Libération ; and finally, Pierre Villon, secretary of the National Front for the Struggle for the Liberation and Independence of France, who also represented the PCF and the Republican Federation. Ultimately, with one man from the right (Blocq-Mascart), two socialists (Saillant and Copeau), and one communist (Villon), according to Claire Andrieu, the bureau was representative of the entire CNR. Within the bureau, Villon played a driving role, which he recalled in his memoirs:

In the summer of 1943, Émile Laffon... proposed to the CNR a charter, a sort of manifesto for the post-war period. We could not confine ourselves to a negative attitude; I opted for drafting a counter-project... but before submitting the counter-project, I had a meeting—the only one I had during this entire period—with Jacques Duclos and Benoît Frachon.

It was at the Beaudreville farm in Gometz-la-Ville, in the Hurepoix, that Villon met with André Mercier the two clandestine PCF leaders, Jacques Duclos and Benoît Frachon. This was the only time the two leaders had direct contact with a party official not a member of the secretariat within their clandestine apparatus.

Following this meeting with Duclos and Frachon, Villon drafted a Project for a Resistance Charter Proposed by the F.N., the essence of which consisted of a call for immediate action against the occupier and which ended with a succinct set of measures, both liberal and social, desired for the period following the Liberation. Claire Andrieu notes that these reforms were "no more revolutionary than the Popular Front programme." The CNR bureau met once or twice a week between December 1943 and January 1944. In addition to the five members, Jacques Bingen, the CFLN delegate, attended the sessions. Most of the meeting time was devoted to examining the F.N. project and designating provisional administrators, future provisional Secretaries General of the ministries. In January 1944, the CNR bureau unanimously adopted a Charter of the Resistance, close to the F.N. project, where the post-liberation reforms were modified in a slightly more "socializing" direction.

This Charter of the Resistance was sent to all CNR members for review. A number of criticisms were expressed, and the CNR bureau entrusted the revision of the text to the steering committee of the M.U.R., whose three members were Pascal Copeau, Claude Bourdet, and Antoine Avinin. The three M.U.R. members appealed to representatives of three other resistance movements, France au Combat, Défense de la France, and Résistance, thus forming the steering committee of a new structure, the National Liberation Movement. This committee of six sent a revised project, adopted by the CNR bureau on February 28, 1944, under the name Resistance Action Programme.

It remained to have this text approved by all CNR members. While the right-wing parties were convinced fairly quickly, the socialists took much longer to decide. Since December 1943, the most heated debates had not been about the measures to implement after the Liberation, but about the immediate action programme. The socialists suspected the communists of wanting to develop immediate action to position themselves to seize political power. The communists were not the only ones promoting the development of immediate action; they were joined by right-wing men such as Pierre de Bénouville, Jacques Renouvin, and Henri Frenay. When the socialists proposed a "committee of understanding" to the communists, the latter refused in the name of resistance unity and rejected any reference to class struggle "so as not to provide a reason for division among the French." The turning point came with a long article titled The Fear of the People and the Betrayal of the Fatherland published in l'Humanité on March 15, 1944, where the author, Jacques Duclos, relaunched the theme of resistance as the struggle of the people and its party, the communist party.

After a final modification of the text in the first half of March by Copeau, Bourdet, and Daniel Mayer, the call for immediate action was very slightly toned down, and the social reform aspect was emphasized. The final text was adopted by the CNR bureau on March 15, 1944. Contrary to the assertion in the text's introduction, there was no plenary assembly, but a careful examination of the different versions of the text reveals that the Resistance Action Programme benefited from the participation of all tendencies represented within the CNR.

It is difficult to determine whether all measures outlined in the "immediate action plan" were implemented, as the adoption of the programme in March 1944 did not end discussions on the unity of the Resistance. While the Departmental Committee of Liberation (CDLs) outlined in the programme were legally established by the French Committee of National Liberation (CFLN) in Algiers through the ordinance of April 21, 1944, the Milices Patriotiques, assigned to the CDLs and established by the communists starting in June 1944, quickly became a source of contention among organizations claiming allegiance to the programme. The Liberation of Paris in August 1944 largely rendered the "immediate action plan" obsolete. From then on, the second part, commonly referred to as the "CNR programme," became the guide for reforms implemented by the Provisional Government of the French Republic, and from October 21, 1945, by governments supported by elected legislative assemblies.

Until the liberation of most of France in August 1944, the CNR programme had relatively little impact. After its adoption in Paris in March 1944, the programme quickly became known in Algiers, but despite a unanimous vote by the delegates of the Provisional Consultative Assembly in Algiers requesting the provisional government to "establish the conditions for the return to the nation of the major means of production claimed by the National Council of the Resistance," the CNR programme did not receive official approval from the CFLN. At the time of the Liberation of Paris, on the proposal of Daniel Mayer, the CNR had planned to solemnly present the programme to General de Gaulle and invite him to proclaim the Republic, but no one delivered the programme to de Gaulle, who did not proclaim the Republic, as he maintained that it had never ceased to exist.

On July 27, 1944, one of the measures in the CNR programme was implemented before the Liberation of Paris: the GPRF in Algiers restored trade union freedom and abolished the Labour Charter of October 4, 1941.

Overall, the dissemination of the Resistance programme was limited and uneven. A small number of clandestine publications gave significant coverage to the Resistance Programme. Only Libération published it in full, while Combat and Franc-Tireur published it only partially. Many publications, such as L'Humanité, Témoignage Chrétien [ fr ], and Défense de la France, did not even mention it during the clandestine period.

From September 1944, implementing its programme became the primary purpose of the CNR, which continued until 1947. Louis Saillant succeeded Georges Bidault, who was appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs. On October 7, 1944, the CNR organized a large gathering at the Vélodrome d'Hiver and had the main points of its programme acclaimed by a vast crowd.

At the time of the Liberation, the socialists of the SFIO, along with the reunified CGT trade unionists, were the most committed supporters of the CNR programme. The socialists viewed nationalizations not only as socialist measures but also as patriotic ones. The PCF seemed to waver between promoting its own programme and that of the CNR, but it more clearly endorsed the CNR programme after Maurice Thorez 's return to France and the acceptance of the dissolution of the Milices patriotiques in November 1944. In January 1945, Thorez advocated for "the return to the nation of the major monopolized means of production," i.e., nationalizations, but this demand was less pressing than that of purges. The third major tendency within the Resistance, the Christian democrats, founded a party, the Popular Republican Movement (MRP), in November 1944. Until the spring of 1945, they were driven by a "revolutionary faith," in the words of Claire Andrieu, who notes that, alongside the socialist daily Le Populaire, the Christian democratic-inspired newspaper L'Aube repeatedly called for "Revolution," while communist newspapers did not mention it at the time. The MRP, according to its objectives announced on September 5, sought to "end the capitalist regime and the dictatorship of money" but expressed reservations about nationalizations, invoking the "liberalization of the economy." In December 1944, Emmanuel d'Astier de La Vigerie tabled a motion at the Provisional Consultative Assembly urgently calling for the nationalization of major companies, a motion that received unanimous support from the delegates who voted. In July 1945, Jacques Duclos secured the adoption of a motion urgently demanding nationalizations and economic purges. Only Joseph Denais, a member of the Republican Federation, attempted to oppose it by submitting a proposal to keep the state in a role of control and coordination, excluding any nationalization or socialization.

The Provisional Government of the French Republic itself never officially recognized the CNR programme. De Gaulle avoided referencing the CNR when, on September 12, 1944, at the Palais de Chaillot, he announced the "principles" guiding his actions:

[...] while ensuring maximum freedom for all and promoting the spirit of enterprise in all matters, [France] aims to ensure that private interests are always subordinate to the general interest, that the major sources of common wealth are exploited and managed [...] for the benefit of all, that coalitions of interests [...] are abolished once and for all, and that each of its sons and daughters can live, work, and raise their children in security and dignity.

Between December 1944 and October 1945, the Provisional Government issued a series of ordinances in line with the measures advocated by the CNR programme:

The 1945 French legislative election resulted in a victory for the three parties that prioritized the implementation of the CNR programme, securing 75% of the votes: the PCF, the SFIO, and the MRP.

A brief look back is necessary to note a rapprochement that had begun between the PCF and the SFIO, which led to the publication of a manifesto of the socialist-communist understanding committee. This manifesto expanded the scope of nationalizations compared to a communist text submitted to the Assembly three days earlier. The list of nationalizations included coal mines, iron and bauxite mines, cement production, land and air transport, and heavy industry. This rapprochement between the two main left-wing parties reached its limits when, on June 12, the PCF proposed to the SFIO a charter of working-class unity but conditioned their reunification with the SFIO on the acceptance of the "dialectical materialism of Marx and Engels, enriched by Lenin and Stalin." The reunification did not occur, but attempts to unify the left were revived in late August 1945 by the CGT, which formed a left-wing delegation excluding the MRP. This effort resulted, on November 6, 1945, in a programme intended as a refinement of the CNR programme. The 1945 programme was no more detailed than the CNR programme regarding social security but specified the conditions for the nationalizations envisioned in the manifesto: transfer of capital to the state and management by bipartite councils composed of workers and representatives of the general interest.

Clear divergences appeared in the MRP programme, published on November 8, two days after the left-wing programme. The MRP programme provided for the nationalization of the Bank of France but not other banks. However, the scope of enterprises was no less extensive than that of the left, though the state's management methods varied, ranging from state-run enterprises to production cooperatives. Both the left and the MRP sought to revise the February 22 ordinance on works councils to introduce worker participation in management.

Charles de Gaulle, unanimously elected president of a tripartite government on November 21, 1945, initially expressed reservations about programmes but ultimately implemented a nationalization programme, in line with promises made by René Pleven to the Provisional Consultative Assembly in July 1945, that was a compromise between the left-wing and MRP programmes:

In disagreement with the Constituent Assembly over the conception of the state and the role of parties, de Gaulle resigned on January 20, 1946. Regarding the nationalization of banks, he had to use his full authority to ensure that the two largest investment banks (Bank of Paris and the Netherlands and Banque de l'Union Parisienne) were not nationalized. De Gaulle also ensured, with the support of the MRP and SFIO, that former shareholders were properly compensated. The confiscation of Renault was an exception.

After de Gaulle's departure, the new President of the Council, Félix Gouin, announced that defending the franc was a priority. Among the proposed savings was a significant reduction in the overhead costs of nationalized establishments. The adoption of the law on the nationalization of electricity and gas was laborious, with the MRP and SFIO advocating for a more decentralized system than that proposed by the communist minister Marcel Paul. MRP deputies ultimately voted for the law after submitting 77 amendments, which were generally not adopted. The nationalization of insurance companies was also a source of contention, with the communists demanding the total nationalization of the sector, while the socialists called for the nationalization of 48 companies, representing 65% of the sector. A series of measures was adopted by the Constituent Assembly in the week of April 23 to April 26, before it adjourned for the referendum on May 5:

The constitutional referendum was a failure for the left-wing parties and thus a success for the MRP, which campaigned for a "no" vote. The Assembly was dissolved, and the MRP, becoming France's leading party, saw one of its members, Georges Bidault, appointed President of the Council. During the election campaigns, the three major parties continued to affirm their loyalty to the CNR programme. In reality, there was no longer a consensus for further nationalizations. The PCF alone proposed the nationalization of thermal resources and the steel industry. The law on the status of the French civil service, presented by Maurice Thorez, was the only measure that could be described as a structural reform.

With 28% of the vote, the PCF emerged strengthened from the legislative elections of November 10, 1946 and sought to present itself as a governing party. Thus, Maurice Thorez declared in an interview with the British newspaper The Times that there were "other paths for the progress of socialism than that followed by the Russian communists". However, after failing to secure the presidency of the government, Thorez was disavowed by his party's central committee, which declared on November 27 that "nationalizations are not socialist measures... The primary condition for introducing socialism in a country is the establishment of a socialist state." The PCF thus reverted to its 1943 positions. The MRP, while continuing to affirm its fidelity to the CNR programme, increasingly emphasized the return of economic freedom. The SFIO was practically alone in advocating for further nationalizations. The project concerning the main maritime shipping companies was significantly watered down by the MRP and the radicals. The start of the Cold War and the dismissal of communist ministers on May 5, 1947, marked the end of a phase of French political life tied to the CNR programme.

While the legislators of the 1944–1947 period explicitly linked their legislative work to the CNR programme, these economic and social measures can also be placed in a broader perspective. Various authors have addressed the question of rupture or continuity with the preceding period, that of the Vichy regime.

Regarding social rights, the restoration of trade union freedoms appears as a clear break from the Labour Charter of October 4, 1941 of Vichy, or more precisely, the Labour Charter was a parenthesis in the evolution of French labour law.

In terms of social protection and planning, continuity predominates. The set of social measures follows the main lines of social protection, spanning from the Third Republic to the Fourth Republic through the Vichy regime and the Liberation of France. For Richard Kuisel, in certain aspects, Vichy and the Resistance together opposed the Third Republic :

Despite obvious differences, the reforms proposed by Vichy and the Resistance had many points in common. Both aimed at national renewal, social reconciliation, moral restoration, a fairer planned economy, and a more dynamic state.

Robert Paxton also highlights the continuity of the senior administrative personnel implementing the reforms:

Certainly, the Fourth Republic would revert, in this case as in many others, to the practices of the Third Republic—some of the five-year plans would be submitted to parliamentary review—but civil servants retained a role in the national economy that was far more reminiscent of Vichy than the pre-war period.

In the pension system, the principle of pay-as-you-go was not explicitly provided for in the CNR programme but had already been implemented by the Vichy regime. Pierre Laroque, considered the "father of social security," was a member of the cabinet of the Minister of Labour René Belin at the start of the occupation. This cabinet published a report in September 1940 that proposed replacing various affinity-based funds with a single departmental fund responsible for managing paid leave, family allowances, and the health component of social insurance. It was also planned that a National Solidarity Fund would take responsibility for the entire pension branch. While Laroque was familiar with the social protection system established by Belin, having joined London in June 1943, he was also aware of the ideas developed by William Beveridge in his 1942 report, from which the principles of the welfare state in the Anglo-Saxon world largely derive. According to Belin himself, Laroque drew more from the Beveridge reports than from the September 1940 project in which he was involved.

After serving as an emblematic symbol recognized by the actors of the Liberation during the 1944–1947 period, the CNR programme faded from public discourse for nearly half a century, starting in 1947 with the onset of the Cold War and the founding of the RPF, which marked the definitive end of the unity born from the Resistance.

From 1972 to 1981, during discussions of the Common Programme among left-wing parties, the memory of the CNR programme was not revived. Claire Andrieu explains this oversight by noting that the bipolarization of political life and the issue of the Union of the Left made references to an experience of national unity inopportune. It was only after the collapse of communist regimes in Eastern Europe, symbolized by the Fall of the Berlin Wall, and the apparent success of liberal economic concepts termed neoliberalism, that the reference to the CNR programme, with its strong dirigiste content, regained relevance.

In 1994, the President of the Republic presided over a commemoration honoring the CNR and its programme. However, as early as 1993, the communist daily L'Humanité rediscovered the text, making it a symbol of an economy based on a strong public service.

A communist, Jacques Nikonoff, president of the ATTAC France movement, organized an appeal on the occasion of the sixtieth anniversary of the CNR programme's adoption, launched on March 10, 2004, by former resistants. The appeal drew a parallel between neoliberalism and the financial powers denounced in the original text, concluding with the slogan "To create is to resist. To resist is to create." Thirteen particularly illustrious resistants signed the text: Lucie Aubrac, Raymond Aubrac, Henri Bartoli [ fr ], Daniel Cordier, Philippe Dechartre [ fr ], Georges Guingouin, Stéphane Hessel, Maurice Kriegel-Valrimont, Lise London, Georges Séguy, Germaine Tillion, Jean-Pierre Vernant, and Maurice Voutey.

In 2010, one of the signatories of the sixtieth anniversary appeal, Stéphane Hessel, then aged 93, published a pamphlet, Indignez-vous!, which met with great success. In the text, Hessel extensively referenced the CNR programme, asserting that "the entire foundation of the social achievements of the Resistance is now being called into question." The text concluded with the same slogan from the sixtieth anniversary appeal: "To create is to resist. To resist is to create."

During the 2022 French presidential election, Fabien Roussel, the French Communist Party candidate, used the slogan and title "For a France of Happy Days" for his programme, in homage to the CNR programme.

In an editorial in the magazine Challenges in October 2007, which Claire Andrieu described in 2011 as brilliant and provocative before refuting its arguments, Denis Kessler, former vice-president of the MEDEF, also used "the CNR programme" to refer to the set of 1945 reforms:

The French social model is the pure product of the National Council of the Resistance. A compromise between Gaullists and communists. It is high time to reform it, and the government is working on it. The successive announcements of various reforms by the government may give an impression of a patchwork, as they seem varied, of unequal importance, and with diverse impacts: the status of the French civil service, special pension schemes, overhaul of social security, paritarism... On closer inspection, one realizes there is a profound unity to this ambitious programme. The list of reforms? It's simple: take everything established between 1944 and 1952, without exception. That's it. Today, it's about moving beyond 1945 and methodically dismantling the National Council of the Resistance programme!

The Programme commun was a reform programme, signed 27 June 1972 by the Socialist Party, the French Communist Party and the centrist Radical Movement of the Left, which provided a great upheaval in the economic, political and military fields in France. That alliance, known as the "Union of the Left", opened a political repositioning for the left that lasted 30 years, contributing particularly to the election of François Mitterrand in the presidential election of 1981. Between 1981 and 1983, he began putting Programme commun into action.

The Keynesian -inspired policies led to an increase in the fiscal deficit and the trade deficit. To keep France in the European Monetary System, a different approach was needed.

In March 1983, Mitterrand did a U-turn by cancelling the parts of Programme commun that had been already passed, which was sometimes referred to as the "austerity turn".

The Sixth Republic (French : Sixième République) is a potential successor to the present republican system in France, proposed as a solution to alleged issues of the current Fifth French Republic.

Following 82.6% of voters supporting Charles de Gaulle 's proposal in the constitutional referendum, the Fifth Republic was established on 4 October 1958 under the Constitution of the Fifth Republic. While the Fourth Republic was a parliamentary republic, the Fifth Republic is a semi-presidential republic with a powerful presidency able to force through legislation without the consent of parliament.

The Fifth Republic has received various criticisms from some politicians and scholars, such as maintaining a poor or incorrect delineation of powers between the presidency and the legislature, with some describing the system as a presidential monarchy or as hyperpresidential.

Within the late 1950s, France was experiencing instability as the Fourth Republic began decolonisation. This resulted in protests among the pieds-noirs and French Army, particularly in the context of the Algerian War, which resulted in the attempted Algiers Putsch of 1958.

Despite having retired from politics a decade earlier, Charles de Gaulle, placed himself in the midst of the crisis when he called on the nation to suspend the government and create a new constitution. With parliament unable to choose a government in the midst of popular protest, De Gaulle was carried to power when the last parliament of the Fourth Republic voted for its own dissolution and the convening of a constitutional convention.

On 1 June 1958, Charles de Gaulle was appointed head of the government ; on 3 June 1958, a constitutional law empowered the new government to draft a new constitution of France. Designed by De Gaulle and drafted by Michel Debré, the new constitution saw a greatly empowered president, with the Prime Minister being appointed by the president, and accountable to both them and the Parliament. The constitution was put to referendum in 1958, and achieved 82.6% of voters support.

The constitution included various provisions to allow the president to force through legislation, such as Article 49.3 of the Constitution, which has been used 100 times Between 4 October 1958 and 6 May 2023.

François Mitterrand was initially a leading critic of the establishment of the Fifth Republic, likening it to the 1851 French coup d'état by Louis Napoléon Bonaparte. Mitterrand would publish many of his criticisms of the new constitution, as well as Charles de Gaulle, in the Permanent Coup of State [ fr ]. Mitterrand would later give some legitimacy to the Fifth Republic when he was elected president.

In 1992, Jean-Luc Mélenchon, Marie-Noëlle Lienemann and Julien Dray founded the Convention for the 6th Republic, a group within the Socialist Party (PS) advocating for constitutional reform. Mélenchon promoted the return of strong legislature by weakening the executive powers held by the president.

While campaigning for the 1995 presidential election, Jean-Marie Le Pen 's included National Front's support for a Sixth Republic. Under Marine Le Pen the party has rebranded as National Rally and since distanced itself from the policy.

In the 2002 presidential election, part of Christiane Taubira 's platform included support for a Sixth Republic, emphasising that it should decentralise power to French territories, and that it should abolish the position of Prime Minister.

In the 2007 presidential election, part of Ségolène Royal 's and Francois Bayrou 's platform included support for a Sixth Republic, including decentralisation, the strengthening of the Parliament, limiting the President to two terms, and removing the "exceptional powers" of the President during a state of emergency.

In the 2012 presidential election, Jean-Luc Mélenchon, having left the PS and formed the Left Party (PG), ran under the Left Front platform, which supported the formation of a Sixth Republic.

In 2014, Movement for a Sixth Republic released an open letter calling for a Sixth Republic and gained over 100,000 signatures. Both Mélenchon, as well as Éric Coquerel, Coordinator of PG stated that support for a new republic couldn't come from any singular party, but had to build up broad consensus.

In the leadup to the 2017 presidential election, Mélenchon running under his new La France Insoumise (LFI) and endorsed by PG, held a march for the Sixth Republic in Paris during his campaign.

In the 2022 presidential election, Mélenchon ran again as the LFI candidate, and once more supported the formation of a new republic.

For the 2022 legislative election, the New Ecological and Social People's Union (NUPES) was formed as a joint left-wing slate of candidates between parties such as the PS and LFI. Mélenchon, the founder of LFI, was considered a leading figure within NUPES, and support for a Sixth Republic was included on the alliance's platform. This policy was carried onto NUPES' successor, the New Popular Front, going into the 2024 legislative election.

The 2023 pension reform law sparked debate about a Sixth French Republic after President Macron forced through the law. During the 2023 pension reform strikes, "Down with the Fifth Republic!" became a frequent slogan of protestors. Some politicians and academics described the protests as a political crisis that could spiral into a constitutional one, while others dismissed these notions.

The common platform of the NFP calls for a constituent assembly to prepare a new constitution and establish a Sixth Republic. Additionally, members of the New Popular Front (La France Insoumise, French Communist Party, The Ecologists, and Left Party) have all supported a Sixth Republic independently of the NFP.

Jean-Luc Mélenchon has been a long time advocate of a Sixth Republic.

Patrick Martin-Genier has accused the Fifth Republic of authoritarianism that "allows the president to do what he wants" and stated that the current system must not continue.

Political scientist Raphaël Porteilla, has also described the Fifth Republic as authoritarian and as having hyperpresidency. Discussing the prospects of a Sixth Republic, and constitutional reform more broadly, Porteilla has said "the issue is not whether France should change its constitution, but whether it should change constitutions altogether"

Multiple books and academic texts have been written about the prospects of a Sixth Republic.

Following the election of Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, French journalist Michèle Cotta wrote La Sixième République.

Constitutional academic Bastien François [ fr ] has written extensively about a Sixth Republic, such as La Constitution de la République (co-written with Arnaud Montebourg).

In 2021, Patrick Martin-Genier published Towards a Sixth Republic.

Some texts have also been written about the longevity of the current French Republic and unlikelihood of a Sixth Republic.

In 2008 marking the semicentennial of the Fifth French Republic, Ben Clift wrote The French Republic at 50, which discussed the longevity of the current regime.

In 2018 Julie Benetti published The Myth of the Sixth Republic in the journal Pouvoirs, as part of an issue analysing the Fifth Republic more broadly.

Protectorate of missions is a term for the right of protection exercised by a Christian power in a Muslim or other non-Christian country with regard to the persons and establishments of the missionaries. The term does not apply to all protection of missions, but only to that permanently exercised in virtue of an acquired right, usually established by a treaty or convention (either explicit or tacit), voluntarily consented to or accepted by the non-Christian power after some amount of compulsion. The object of the protectorate may vary in its extent, as it may embrace only the missionaries who are subjects of the protecting power or apply to the missionaries of all nations or even to the native Christians who are their recent converts.

Both Einhard and Notker the Stammerer refer to envoys traveling between the courts of Charlemagne, king of the Franks, and Harun al-Rashid. They mention the exchange of gifts and friendly discussions about Christian access to holy sites. This exchange of embassies was due to the fact that they both were interested in subduing the Umayyad emirs of Córdoba. Charlemagne and his successors made use of any concessions to establish pious and charitable foundations there, to protect the Christian inhabitants and pilgrims, and to ensure the availability of Christian worship.

The destruction of the Arab Empire by the Turks put an end to this first protectorate, and for reasons that were not purely religious, led to the Crusades, as a result of which Palestine was conquered from the Saracens and became a Latin, French-speaking kingdom. The Christian rule was later replaced by that of Islam, but during the three centuries of Crusades, which had been undertaken and supported mainly by France, the Christians of the East had grown accustomed to look to that country for assistance in oppression or to gain more leverage in their dealings with the Ottomans, while France valued its increasingly important role in the region and its accompanying geopolitical benefits.

The protectorate began to assume a contractual form in the sixteenth century, in the treaties concluded between the kings of France and the Ottoman Sultans, which are historically known as Capitulations. At first this name designated the commercial agreement conceded by the Sublime Porte to Latin merchants (first to Italians, starting with Genoese in 1453), and arose from the fact that the articles of these agreements were called capitoli ('chapters' in the Italian redaction).

Francis I was the first king of France who sought an alliance with the Ottomans. The pretext used by Francis was the protection of the Christians in Ottoman lands. The objective was to find an ally against the House of Habsburg. By compelling Austria to spend its forces in defense against the Ottomans in the East, he hoped to weaken it and render it unable to maintain its power in the West.

As early as 1528, Francis I had appealed to Suleiman the Magnificent to restore to the Christians of Jerusalem a church which the Ottomans had converted into a mosque. The Sultan refused on the plea that his religion would not permit alteration of the purpose of a mosque, but he promised to maintain the Christians in possession of all the other places occupied by them and to defend them against all oppression. The Franco-Ottoman alliance caused quite a scandal in the Christian world, but endured for many years, since it served the objective interests of both parties.

Henry IV continued the policy of a Franco-Ottoman alliance and received an embassy from Sultan Mehmed III in 1601. In 1604, a "Peace Treaty and Capitulation " was signed between Henry IV and the Ottoman Sultan Ahmed I. It granted numerous advantages to France in the Ottoman Empire. The capitulations were made to entice and encourage commercial exchange with Western merchants. According to their terms traders entering the Ottoman Empire were exempt from local prosecution, local taxation, local conscription, and the searching of their domicile. Ahmed expanded the capitulations given to France, specifying that merchants from Spain, Ragusa, Genoa, Ancona and Florence could trade under the French flag. In the capitulations of 20 May 1604 appear two clauses relative to the protection of pilgrims and of the religious in charge of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in consideration of and for the honor and friendship of the French king.

The result of this friendship was the development of the Catholic missions, which began to flourish through the assistance of Henry IV and his son Louis XIII, who introduced the system of capitulations to Morocco. The Franco-Moroccan Treaty (1631) gave France preferential tariffs, the establishment of a Consulate and freedom of religion for French subjects. Before the middle of the seventeenth century, various religious orders (Capuchin, Carmelite, Dominican, Franciscan and Jesuit) were established, as chaplains of the French ambassadors and consuls, in major Ottoman cities (Istanbul, Alexandria, Smyrna, Aleppo, Damascus, etc.), Lebanon and the islands of the Aegean Archipelago. They assembled the Catholics to instruct and confirm them in the Catholic faith, opened schools to which flocked the children of all rites, relieved the spiritual and corporal miseries of the Christians in the Turkish prisons, and nursed the pest-stricken, which last office made many martyrs of charity.

French influence reached its peak during the reign of Louis XIV, whose prestige, due to his victories and conquests, was significant at the Porte. Louis XIV gave the missionaries material and moral support. Thanks to him, the often precarious tolerance, on which the existence of the missions had previously depended, was officially recognized in 1673, when on 5 June, Mehmed IV not only confirmed the earlier capitulations guaranteeing the safety of pilgrims and the religious guardians of the Holy Sepulchre, but signed four new articles, all beneficial to the missionaries. The decrees secured the tranquil possession of their churches, explicitly to the Jesuits and Capuchins, and in general "to the French at Smyrna, Saïd, Alexandria, and in all other ports of the Ottoman Empire".

The reign of Louis XIV marked the apogee of the French Protectorate in the East, for not only the Latin missionaries of all nationalities, but also the heads of all Catholic communities, regardless of rite or nationality, appealed to the king, and at the recommendation of his ambassadors and consuls to the Porte and the pashas, obtained justice and protection.

In 1740 the French succeeded in securing the renewal of the capitulations, with additions which explicitly confirmed the right of the French Protectorate. By the eighty-seventh of the articles signed on 28 May 1740, Sultan Mahmud I declared: "...The bishops and religious subject to the Emperor of France living in my empire shall be protected while they confine themselves to the exercise of their office, and no one may prevent them from practicing their rite according to their custom in the churches in their possession, as well as in the other places they inhabit."

In subsequent treaties between France and Turkey, the capitulations were not repeated verbatim, but they are recalled and confirmed (e. g. in 1802 and 1838). The various regimes which succeeded the monarchy of Louis IX of France and of Louis XIV all maintained in law, and in fact, the ancient privilege of France in the protection of the missionaries and Christian communities of the Orient.

In 1860 conflict broke out between the local Druze and Christians at Mount Lebanon. The unrest spread leading to riots and mob violence which devastated the Christian quarter of Damascus. Following the massacres and an international outcry, the Ottoman Empire agreed on 3 August 1860 to the dispatch of up to 12,000 European soldiers to reestablish order. France, under Emperor Napoleon III supplied half.

Beginning in the 15th century, popes granted to the Crown of Portugal the right to designate candidates for the sees and ecclesiastical benefices in the vast domains acquired through the expeditions it sponsored in Africa and the East Indies. This is sometimes called the Portuguese Protectorate of Missions, but more properly the "Portuguese Patronage" (Padroado). It allowed the King of Portugal to benefit from a certain portion of the ecclesiastical revenues of his kingdom, and it carried the condition that he should send good missionaries to his new subjects, and that he should provide with a fitting endowment the dioceses, parishes and religious establishments established in his acquired territories. The Holy See contested Portugal's assertion of these rights to regions it claimed but never conquered, including the greater part of India, Tong-king, Cochin-China (both in present Vietnam), Siam and especially China. Portugal tried to exert influence through its ambassadors to China in the 18th century, instructing them to intervene as much as possible to protect missionaries and native Christians from ongoing persecution in the provinces.

Portugal's authority was not comparable to the protectorate regime exercised by France in the Near East or Far East in later centuries and Portugal's rights as protector were never recognized by a host nation. No Christian power exercised a protectorate in China before the 19th century.

From approximately the 1840s through the 1920s (historical framings vary), France asserted a religious protectorate over the Catholic Church in China. It used the privileges it had extracted from the Qing dynasty in the unequal treaties following the Opium Wars to obtain privileges and benefits for Catholic missionaries operating in China. With these privileges, France established a role in providing Catholic missionaries with access to China's interior, providing French extraterritoriality over missionaries, and providing a mechanism through which foreign missionaries could seek French judicial intervention on behalf of Chinese Catholics, to the exclusion of Chinese legal authorities. France used its religious protectorate as a means to assert its diplomatic interests and standing.

France's religious protectorate in China also created tensions with the Holy See. France blocked attempts by several Popes to establish bilateral relations with China. In 1919, Pope Pius XI issued the encyclical Maximum Illud which supported the increased localisation of the Catholic Church in China. Some missionary societies ignored the encyclical and in 1922, Pius XI sent Celso Benigno Luigi Costantini to China as an apostolic delegate to implement it. One historical view deems Constantini's arrival in China as the end of the French religious protectorate.

In 1875, at the time of the negotiations between France and (nominally Ottoman) Egypt with regard to judiciary reform, the German government declared that it "recognized no exclusive right of protection of any power in behalf of Catholic establishments in the East, and that it reserved its rights with regard to German subjects belonging to any of these establishments". Against French claims to an exclusive protectorate and in support of its own claims to exercise the privileges of a protectorate, Germany later cited the language agreed to by Austria-Hungary, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Russia, and the Ottoman Empire in article 62 of the Treaty of Berlin in 1878: "Ecclesiastics, pilgrims and monks of all nationalities traveling in Turkey in Europe or Turkey in Asia shall enjoy the same rights, advantages and privileges. The official right of protection of the diplomatic and consular agents of the Powers in Turkey is recognized, with regard both to the above-mentioned persons and to their religious, charitable and other establishments in the Holy Places and elsewhere." The passage immediately following this paragraph in the article was overlooked: "The acquired rights of France are explicitly reserved, and there shall be no interference with the statu quo in the Holy Places." Thus the protection guaranteed to all ecclesiastics, etc., no matter what their nationality or religion, as well as the generally recognized right of all the powers to watch over this protection, was to be understood with the reservation of the "acquired rights" of France, i.e. of its ancient protectorate in behalf of Catholics. This protectorate was therefore really confirmed by the Treaty of Berlin.

But as a matter of fact, the influence of Russia, which assumed the protectorate of Orthodox Christians, already greatly affected the standing which the ancient French Protectorate had assured to Catholics in Palestine and especially in Jerusalem.

Moreover, Emperor Wilhelm II of Germany installed Protestantism with a magnificent church beside the Holy Sepulchre in 1898. As a sort of compensation he ceded to German Catholics the site of the Dormition of the Blessed Virgin which he obtained from the Sultan, where a church and a monastery were erected and, together with the other German establishments, placed under the protection of the German Empire, without deference to the ancient prerogative of France.

A similar situation prevailed in China. First, in 1888, Germany obtained from the Chinese imperial Government that German passports should insure the same advantages to the missionaries as those secured at the French legation. At the same time the German Catholic missionaries of Shandong, who had much to endure from the infidels, were on several occasions offered the powerful protection of the German Empire. Anzer, the vicar Apostolic, decided to accept it, after having, as he declares, several times sought unsuccessfully the aid of the French minister. In 1896 the German ambassador at Peking received from Berlin the command to support energetically the claims of the Catholic missionaries and even to declare that the German Empire would pledge itself to defend against all unjust oppression the persons and property of the mission of Shandong, together with freedom of preaching, in the same measure in which such had been formerly guaranteed by the French Protectorate. The murder of two of the Shandong missionaries in November 1897 afforded the occasion for a more solemn affirmation of the new protectorate, while it furnished a long-sought pretext for the occupation of the Jiaozhou Bay area.

Austria concluded various treaties with the Ottoman Empire in 1699 (Treaty of Karlowitz), 1718 (Treaty of Passarowitz), and 1739 (Treaty of Belgrade) that secured a right of protection over "the religious" in the Empire and even at Jerusalem, though never including a guarantee of liberty of worship. Austria never exercised authority as a protector except in the countries bordering on Habsburg Austria, notably Albania and Macedonia. In 1848 the Austrian Protectorate was extended to the Christian missions in the Sudan and Nigritia, which were in the care of Austrian priests. When the Coptic Catholic hierarchy was restored in Egypt by Pope Leo XIII in 1895, the new patriarch and his suffragans placed themselves under the protection of Austria.

The Holy See defended the French Protectorate on several occasions. Whenever missionaries sought protection from any other country, the French diplomatic corps complained to Rome, and the Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith reprimanded the missionaries and reminded them that France had the sole right to safeguard their interests in non-Christian nations. This happened in 1744 and 1844. Italy sought to establish its own protectorate by patronizing missionary activities and winning the allegiance of those it supported, but the Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith refused to support its efforts. Instead, on 22 May 1888, the Congregation wrote to the Italian missionaries in the Levant and the Far East to remind them that "the Protectorate of the French Nation in the countries of the East has been established for centuries and sanctioned even by treaties between the empires. Therefore, there must be absolutely no innovation in this matter; this protectorate, wherever it is in force, is to be religiously preserved, and the missionaries are warned that, if they have need of any help, they are to have recourse to the consuls and other ministers of France." On 1 August 1898, Pope Leo XIII wrote to Cardinal Benoît-Marie Langénieux, Archbishop of Reims :

France has a special mission in the East confided to her by Providence—a noble mission consecrated not alone by ancient usage, but also by international treaties.... The Holy See does not wish to interfere with the glorious patrimony which France has received from its ancestors and which beyond a doubt it means to deserve by always showing itself equal to its task.

In parallel with this recognition of French exclusivity, the Holy See declined to establish its own diplomatic relations with Turkey and China, even when supported by those governments. Leo XIII rejected any proposal to exchange legates or ambassadors at the instance of French diplomats, who told him those countries had less interest in amicable relations with the Holy See than in evading the authorities granted to the French protectorate.

Critics of the protectorate said that the authorities that granted the privilege to a Christian nation did so under duress, that the system contributed to and exacerbated anti-Christian sentiment in those countries, and that it allowed Christian missionaries to disregard the sensibilities of the non-Christian population. Those who see benefits in the protectorate system contend that it was the best means of protecting missionaries and their activities and allow that it required that the foreign power minimize its meddling and exercise discretion in asserting its rights. As an example, one study noted that the superior of the mission of southeast Chi-li resolved its issues directly with local authorities and sought intervention from the French legation only three times during the difficult period from 1862 to 1884. They believed abuses were minimal, especially in comparison with the benefits.

Miel de Provence (honey from Provence ; Occitan : Mel de Provença) is protected by a Label Rouge (Red Label) associated to a protected geographical indication both for the all flowers honey and for the lavender and lavandin honey

From 14 November 2005, the IGP (" Protected Geographical Indication ") "Miel de Provence" is recorded in the European range of IGPs and AOPs (Appellation d'Origine Protégée, meaning "Protected Designation Origin"). Ever since, the name "Provence", applied to honey, is protected and reserved for traders who comply with IGP specifications and/or the technical baseline quality sign which are associated with them. A decree signed on 30 July 2009, and relative to the Red Label award associated to a Protected Geographical Indication for Provence honey was published in the Journal Officiel (n°0195, 25 August 2009).

Beekeeping brings together many producers. Some estimated 4500 whose 700 own between 70 and 150 beehives. The area numbers many professional beekeepers : more than 300 own at least 150 hives. Production in that area amounts to 2000 tons per year (this being 8% of the national production). Many of these beekeepers practice transhumance along a route going from the coastline towards Haute-Provence, across the Southern Alps. Some of them practice transhumance bringing their own beehives on the areas of production of acacia, chestnut and fir honey into the Rhône valley and beyond. In Provence, summer is the privileged season for lavender honey production, and hives are set up on an area limited in the North by the line Montélimar / Digne, and in the South by the Mont Ventoux, the plateau d'Albion [ fr ], the mountain of Lure, the Vaucluse Mountains, and the Luberon. In the department of Alpes-de-Haute-Provence, lavender honey is produced in the Banon sector and on the plateau of Valensole. All flowers honey is elaborated on a wide area delimited by Nîmes, Montélimar, Gap, Digne, Nice, Toulon, Marseille and Avignon. But other great amounts of honey are produced by beekeepers in the guarrigue (rosemary and thyme honey), or in the maquis (heather and arbutus honey).

Provence honey has earned its fame ever since the 15th century. It is then that it came to increase greatly in production, thanks to the request of Italian merchants, who considered it "the best of all good honeys". Its quality and prestige remain intact to the extent that it long withstood massive sugar consumption. It was during the 20th century that honey harvested in the areas of Grasse, Brignoles, Alpes provençales, the Mont Ventoux or Barcelonnette built its reputation for quality which enabled it to obtain the "IGP", in 2005. For example, in the mountain of Lure, the family apiary stems from a long tradition. It provided additional income, and was the only resource to sweeten.

Until the middle of the 20th century, beehives were built in hollow tree-trunks – the bruscs – and their number varied depending on the swarms harvested in spring, since each honey harvest killed the bees. The division of labor in each family was identical. The man was in charge of the brusc and also had to get the honey out, while the woman extracted these from the honeycombs, using the heat of the hearth. It was an all flowers honey, used to sweeten drinks, make cakes, cook nougat, candy fruits or achieve ointments. The Lure drug-merchants stirred beeswax and honey into their drug mixture. The wax was also used to polish furniture, its surplus sold to joiners and cabinet-makers, or to make candles or votive candles. Beekeeping evolved throughout the twenties with the cultivation of lavender and wild lavandin. Then the progressive " bruscs " were progressively replaced by beehives in the thirties and these were widely used for the following decade. From then on, transhumance of the beehives in the lavender fields had become one of the main features of Provençale beekeeping. Those displacements were initially made by local producers, thanks to a trailer harnessed to the coach linking Forcalquier to Banon and serving Lardiers, the Hospitalet and Saumane. This behaviour was adopted by beekeepers from the Vaucluse, who organized their hive displacements by carts to the Basses-Alpes

Under the Ancien Régime, the Kingdom of France was subdivided in multiple different ways (judicial, military, ecclesiastical, etc.) into several administrative units, until the National Constituent Assembly adopted a more uniform division into departments (départements) and districts in late 1789. The provinces (French pronunciation: [ pʁɔvɛ̃s ]) continued to exist administratively until 21 September 1791.

The country was subdivided ecclesiastically into dioceses, judicially into généralités, militarily into general governments. None of these entities was called "province" by their contemporaries. However, later interpretations confused the term of "general government" (a military division) with that of a cultural province, since the general governments often used the names and borders of a province. It was not always the case, which causes confusion as to the borders of some provinces.

Today, the term "province" is used to name the resulting regional areas, which retain a cultural and linguistic identity.

Borrowed from the institutions of the Roman Empire, the word first appeared in the 15th century and has continued to spread, both in official documents and in popular or common usage. Whatever the century or dictionary consulted, the definition of the word often remains vague, due to the coexistence of several territorial division systems under the Ancien Régime. Some geographers, even some of the most famous, such as Onésime Reclus, have widely criticised the idea of provinces and provincial identity, sometimes denying that the word covers any tangible reality. In fact, the many lists and maps showing the provinces of France are neither perfectly superimposable nor exactly comparable. The fact remains, however, that the names of many of the territorial subdivisions of the Ancien Régime refer to Gallic civitates.

Before the French Revolution, France was made up of territorial divisions resulting from history, geography and settlement, which differed according to the different powers that were exercised there, with different categories such as metropolises, dioceses, duchies, baronies, governments, states, elections, generalities, intendances, parliaments, countries, bailliages, seneschaussées, etc. Each of these categories took the name of a province, without covering the same geographical area. For example, the jurisdiction of the parlement d'Artois did not correspond to the same territory as the gouvernement d'Artois or the intendance d'Artois.

The Constituent Assembly of 1789, having abolished all the rights and customs specific to the different regions (also known as privileges, such as those of the classes, nobility and clergy) during the night of 4 August, decided to establish a uniform division of the territory, the départements, and that this division would be the same for the different functions of the State: military, religious, fiscal, administrative, university, judicial, etc. The town chosen as the capital of each department would have to be the seat of each of these functions, and at the same time have a prefecture, a court, a university, a military post, a bishopric, a stock exchange, a fair, a hospital, etc. The protests of the towns which had always fulfilled one of these functions and which were thus deprived of their court of appeal, their arsenal, their university or their fair, prevented this plan from being completely implemented.

In some cases, modern regions share names with the historic provinces; their borders may cover roughly the same territory.

It's worth noting that the old Gallic states retained their names, their boundaries and a kind of moral existence in people's memories and affections until very recently. Neither the Romans, nor the Germans, nor feudalism, nor monarchy destroyed these enduring units; they can still be found in the provinces and countries of present-day France.

— Numa Denis Fustel de Coulanges, Histoire des institutions politiques de l'ancienne France

Gaul was occupied by fifty-four main peoples and more than a hundred individual peoples (300 according to Flavius Josephus), some with very different customs. Julius Caesar called each of these independent states civitas (city, without the word in this case referring to the idea of town or village), some of which were subdivided into pagi. Many of the smaller Gallic peoples were clients of their neighbors, and therefore dependent on them, sometimes paying them tribute. These confederations, the best-known of which are those of the Arverni, Aedui and Armoricans, formed a kind of province before Roman reorganization.

The Gallic cities, with their territory and the name given to their chief town, became dioceses under the Lower Empire; their status as "mainmorte", having escaped the division of patrimonial domains, explains why they remained almost intact until the end of the Ancien Régime. These divisions were subsequently taken over and partly regrouped to form the generalités, then the départements, but replacing their former ethnic names (e.g. Poitou for the country of Pictons, Auvergne for the country of Arverni, Rouergue for the country of Ruteni, Périgord for country of Pétrocores, etc.) with a physical geographic name (giving respectively the départements of Vienne, Puy-de-Dôme, Aveyron, Dordogne, etc.).

The Latin etymology of the term provincia gives us an idea of its original meaning: pro vincere, conquered in advance. Each of Gaul's Roman provinces had a precise legal definition, clearly defined boundaries and codified administrative structures. The number of provinces, their organization and boundaries varied widely over the course of five centuries, and each was headed by a proconsul or propraetor. In addition to Provincia (Provence), which was already Roman, Caesar divided Gaul into three provinces: Aquitanica, Celtica and Belgica. Over the course of four centuries of Roman control, the number of provinces increased from three to eleven, due to both the expansion of the empire and the reduction in size of the original provinces: 1st and 2nd Germania, 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th Lugdunensis, 1st and 2nd Aquitanica, 1st and 2nd Belgica, 1st and 2nd Narbonensis, Novempopulanie, Sequanorum, Viennensis, Alpes Cottiarum, Alpes Maritimae, Alpes Graiae et Poeninae. These provinces were subdivided into cities (civitas or civitates in the plural), the number of which rose from 33 to 113.

Metropolises are territories under the jurisdiction of a metropolitan archbishop, also known as provinces because they originate from the Roman provinces administered by the first bishops after the fall of the Roman Empire.

They are made up of the dioceses which, by the same process, succeeded the ancient civitas or romanized Gallic cities, and which almost always retained the name of an ancient Gallic people, also given to the diocesan capital. Dioceses were made up of parishes, groups of inhabitants who could gather in the same church, whose names and boundaries have been preserved in the 36,000 French communes.

Ecclesiastical districts, by virtue of their mainmortal status, are the oldest and most stable territorial circumscriptions, from late antiquity to the general reorganization of 1802. Today, these 130 or so districts are grouped into the 90 départements and their capital cities, although their ethnonyms have been replaced by names related to physical geography: rivers, mountains, coasts.

Depending on their laws, customs and languages, the territory of the kingdom is divided into countries of written law (roughly south of a line from La Rochelle to Geneva) and countries of customary law (north of the same line).

Each of these groups includes several parliaments, which are appeal courts whose jurisdictions form as many judicial provinces, and to which belong all the royal jurisdictions, baillages (bailiwicks) and seneschaussées (seneschalties). They are made up of several countries, each corresponding to a general custom, or even a particular custom corresponding to former vici that have retained local customs. For example, the seneschalty of Quercy is made up of five secondary bailiwicks, corresponding to five former vigueries.

Some authors attempt to equate the concept of province with that of generality. The concepts do occasionally coincide, when the extent of a generality more or less overlaps that of an older territorial entity, but they are not synonymous.

These are the fiefs that depend directly on the crown (duchies, counties and marches) and owe it military aid.

In addition to the Duchy of France, which became part of the royal domain, the first six major fiefs have the title of peerage:

Their holders were considered electors of the King of France, along with six other ecclesiastical peers:

The number of grand fiefs varies with history (inheritances, confiscations, conquests, losses, treaties) and increases with the definitive attachment of the County of Provence, the Duchy of Anjou, the Duchy of Burgundy, the Duchy of Brittany, the Duchy of Lorraine, and so on. Some of these provinces were simply the return to the crown of a former fiefdom, such as the Duchy of Burgundy, which had been held by Hugues Capet's brother. Others, such as the Duchy of Savoy, Corsica, Comtat-Vénessin and the County of Nice, were acquired from the Empire or the Holy See.

Unlike the ecclesiastical provinces, their extent varies over the course of history according to the possessions of their holders, or to political reorganizations. For example, the Duchy of Gascony disappeared in the 11th century, and the Duchy of Normandy was divided into two military governments.

In modern times, the "thirty-six governments" corresponded to the provinces on which all the fiefs and arrière-fiefs depended, providing territorial districts for defense and marshaling, the raising of men-at-arms, the construction of squares, arsenals and castles, judges-at-arms, and therefore also all questions of nobility, armorial bearings, etc.

At the end of the Ancien Régime, not counting overseas territories such as the French islands of America, Pondicherry, Mauritius or New France (a province from 1663 to 1763, when it was ceded to Great Britain and Spain), there were thirty-six regions with a governor in charge of defense, called governments. Each had its own nobility.

Together with the regions attached to France since 1791, these thirty-six governments correspond to what are usually known today as the "former provinces of France".

The list below shows the major provinces of France at the time of their dissolution during the French Revolution. Capital cities are shown in parentheses. Bold indicates a city that was also the seat of a judicial and quasi-legislative body called either a parlement (not to be confused with a parliament) or a conseil souverain (sovereign council). In some cases, this body met in a different city from the capital.

Areas that were not part of the Kingdom of France, though they are currently parts of Metropolitan France :

Peugeot S.A., commonly known by the abbreviations PSA and PSA Group (French pronunciation: [ ɡʁup pe ɛs ɑ ]) (formerly PSA Peugeot Citroën and PSA Peugeot Talbot Citroën) was a French multinational automotive manufacturing company which produced automobiles and motorcycles under the Peugeot, Citroën, DS, Opel and Vauxhall brands.

On 18 December 2019, PSA Group and Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA) announced that they had agreed to the terms of a binding £38 billion merger. On 16 July 2020, both companies announced the new name for their merged operations, Stellantis. The deal closed on 16 January 2021. As of 2022, Stellantis is the fourth largest automaker by sales behind Toyota, Volkswagen, and Hyundai.

Peugeot was the largest PSA brand. PSA was listed on the Euronext Paris stock exchange and was a constituent of the CAC 40 index.

Beginning in 2016, PSA began to outline a strategy which entailed the rapid expansion of the company, through both geographic expansion and acquisitions of other car companies. PSA announced plans to enter the Indian, American, Canadian, Southeast Asian, and other markets in the coming years.

Headquartered in Rueil-Malmaison, PSA, with sales of 3.88 million units in 2018, was the third-largest Europe-based automaker, distantly trailing industry leader Volkswagen's 10.8 million and just a fraction behind Renault.

In 2019, PSA Group was the ninth largest automaker in the world, after Volkswagen, Toyota, the Renault–Nissan–Mitsubishi Alliance, General Motors, Hyundai, Ford, Honda, and Fiat Chrysler Automobiles.

In December 1974, Peugeot acquired a 38.2% share of Citroën. On 9 April 1976 they increased their stake of the then bankrupt company to 89.95%, thus creating PSA Peugeot Citroën (where PSA is short for Peugeot Société Anonyme). Since Citroën had two successful new designs in the market at this time (the GS and CX) and Peugeot was typically prudent in its own finances, the PSA venture was a financial success from 1976 to 1979.

In late 1978, PSA purchased the failing Chrysler Europe (which had been Rootes and Simca) from the troubled US parent firm for a nominal £0.76, plus assumption of outstanding debt, leading to losses for the consortium from 1980 to 1985. Further investment was required because PSA decided to create a new brand for the entity for the disparate French and British models, based on the Talbot sports car last seen in the 1950s. From then on, the whole Chrysler/Simca range was sold under the Talbot badge until production of Talbot-branded passenger cars was shelved in 1987 and on commercial vehicles in 1992. In 1979 the company rebranded as PSA Peugeot Talbot Citroën.

All of this investment caused serious financial problems for the entire PSA group; PSA lost money from 1980 to 1985. There were some bright spots, however: mainly thanks to the success of the Peugeot 205 and in spite of Talbot sales withering away, PSA surpassed Renault in sales in the domestic French market for the first time in 1983. In 1987, the company dropped the Talbot brand for passenger cars when it ceased production of the Simca-developed Horizon; the Samba and Alpine/Solara had been discontinued a year earlier. The company's name was reverted to PSA Peugeot Citroën. What was to have been the Talbot Arizona became the Peugeot 309, with the former Rootes plant in Ryton and Simca plant in Poissy being turned over for Peugeot assembly from October 1985. Producing Peugeots in Ryton was significant, as it signaled the first time that PSA would build cars in the UK (car assembly at Ryton stopped in 2006 and the plant was closed). The Talbot name survived for a little longer on commercial vehicles until 1992 before being shelved completely. From 1987 to 1995, the Ryton plant also produced the Peugeot 405 saloon.

On 29 February 2012, PSA announced the creation of a major alliance with General Motors (GM), as part of which GM became PSA's second-largest shareholder, after the Peugeot family, with a holding of 7%. The alliance was intended to enable £1.5 billion per year of cost savings through platform sharing, common purchasing and other economies of scale.

In July 2012, a union official said that PSA would cut as much as 10 percent (8,000-10,000) of its French workforce of 100,356 employees on permanent and temporary contract. The jobs cut was more than previously announced.

On 24 October, PSA said it was close to an agreement with creditor banks on €11.5 billion (£11.3 billion) of refinancing and had won state guarantees on €7 billion in further borrowing by its Banque PSA Finance.

On 12 December 2013, General Motors announced it was selling its 7% stake in PSA to Padmapriya Automobile Investment Group.

In 2014, Dongfeng Motor Group, the Chinese partner that builds PSA cars in China, and the French government each took a 13% stake in PSA, in a financial rescue operation, reducing the Peugeot family share from 25% to 14%.

Following Dongfeng and the French government each acquiring stakes in PSA, various cost-cutting measures at the company turned its fortune around and gradually reduced PSA's debt, until the company began to turn a profit beginning in 2015. A new CEO, Carlos Tavares, was engaged and began to implement various cost-cutting measures and expanded the model range of all three core brands, alongside the creation of a new brand, DS Automobiles.

In early 2016, PSA unveiled a roadmap detailing its plan to re-enter the North American car market for the first time since 1991. The same year the company rebranded as PSA Group.

On 10 February 2017, PSA announced a 50:50 joint venture with the CK Birla Group, the owner of the Hindustan Motors to sell Peugeot, Citroën, and DS vehicles in India and purchase of the Ambassador brand from Hindustan Motors at the cost of ₹ 80 Crore (€11 million).

On 14 February 2017 PSA announced that it was in talks to acquire Opel and Vauxhall from General Motors. The talks were in an advanced stage, but were a surprise to the press and to much of Opel's leadership as they had plans to transform the company into an electric-car-only brand using the platform of the Opel Ampera-e for a wide range of models. GM agreed to continue to supply PSA with Ampera-e and other electric vehicle technology. In August 2017, PSA completed the acquisition deal of Opel and Vauxhall.

GM reported a loss of £195.1 million from its European operations in 2016, sixteenth consecutive loss-making year for GM in Europe, bringing its amount of losses on the continent since 2000 to more than £11.4 billion. Some expressed concerns about what this major acquisition might do to PSA's bottom line. However, due to this amount of debt, it is likely that GM may give the brands to PSA, or sell Opel and Vauxhall at a highly reduced price. Tavares expects synergies a decade after the takeover.

PSA CEO Carlos Tavares met with German Chancellor Angela Merkel and British Prime Minister Theresa May at separate meetings where he toured some of Opel and Vauxhall's operations in Germany and the UK, respectively. He assured the leaders that jobs would be safeguarded and that Vauxhall's Ellesmere Port plant was to be used by PSA at least until 2021.

Tavares announced that he wants Opel to keep its German brand identity and to embrace it, and that he would leverage Opel's pedigree of German engineering and Motorsport and use the company's heritage to reach markets and customers that may not consider a French car due to perceived reliability issues. He also announced that the Opel and Vauxhall brands would be elevated to new heights within PSA Group, including the sale of Opel and Vauxhall-branded vehicles outside Europe for the first time in many decades.

On 17 February 2017, PSA announced its bid to acquire Proton Holdings, which owns the Proton and Lotus brands, but lost out to Geely a few months later.

In May 2019 Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA) announced its intention to seek a merger with Groupe Renault. However, in early June merger talks were suspended, and never resumed. On 31 October 2019, PSA announced intent to merge with FCA. The merger would be on a 50-50 all stock basis. On 18 December 2019, FCA and PSA announced that they had agreed to the terms of a binding £38 billion merger, expected to be implemented in the next 12 months. The new group is incorporated in the Netherlands and has John Elkann as Chairman of the Board and Carlos Tavares as CEO. On 15 July 2020, the two companies announced that the merged entity will be named Stellantis, from the "Latin verb 'stello' meaning 'to brighten with stars.'" On 4 January 2021, both shareholders of PSA and FCA approved the merger and the deal was closed on 16 January 2021.

The Peugeot, Citroën and DS brands retain separate sales and marketing structures, but share common technology, development and assembling assets.

Jean-Martin Folz was PSA's CEO between 1996 and early 2007, when he was replaced by former Airbus head Christian Streiff. Streiff was sacked on 29 March 2009, a day after the company posted a full year loss for 2008. Streiff was replaced by Corus Group chief executive Philippe Varin. Carlos Tavares became CEO in 2014.

PSA wanted to develop its market presence and sales in many fast growing developing countries and regions of the world.

In Argentina, Citroën produced the 3CV, Ami 8 and Méhari from 1960 to 1979. Peugeot began producti9n in 1960. Peugeot and Fiat merged their operations in 1980 to form Sevel Argentina, and Franco Macri became the controller two years later amid the economic crisis. Fiat left the Sevel joint venture in 1996, and the PSA Group became the sole owner of the operations in 1999. In Brazil, Peugeot opened a plant in Porto Real in 2001.

Iran Khodro has produced Peugeot models in Iran since 1991. Its first model was the Peugeot 405, which later spawned the derivatives Peugeot RD, Peugeot Pars and IKCO Samand.

In China, the Guangzhou Peugeot Automobile Company joint venture produced the Peugeot 504 and Peugeot 505 from 1989 to 1997. Dongfeng Peugeot-Citroën was founded in 1992 in collaboration with the Dongfeng Motor Corporation. Its first model was the Citroën Fukang, followed by the Citroën Xsara Picasso and Peugeot 307 in 2001.

In 2011, PSA announced announced plans to invest €650 million in a manufacturing plant in Sanand, India. However the plan was abandoned the following year. In 2017, PSA announced a joint venture with CK Birla to build cars in the former Hindustan Motors plant in Tiruvallur. PSA also purchased Ambassador brand from Hindustan Motors. The Citroën C3 and C5 Aircross were launched in 2022.

In Kazakhstan, assembly of the Peugeot passenger cars will start in June 2013 with a production capacity of 4,000 units per year at the beginning and more than 10,000 units in the near future. A PSA plant was opened in 2018 in Tunisia and in 2019 in Kenitra in Morocco.

The manufacturer of Peugeot, Citroën and DS-branded cars and vans, 100% owned by PSA and formed from the combination of Automobiles Citroën and Automobiles Peugeot. Automobiles Citroën, Automobiles Peugeot, and DS remain in operation in relation to specific retail operations in various countries but not in the development or manufacture of vehicles.

PSA PowerTrain is a manufacturer of petrol and diesel engines for a range of companies including BMW, Ford, Jaguar, and Land Rover. It was founded by Peugeot in 1898 in Lille and later named Compagnie Lilloise de Moteurs (CLM). In 1992 SCM-CLM as it was then known became Peugeot Citroën Moteurs.

The company has had a partnership with Ford Motor Company since 1998.

PSA and BMW have an agreement to develop the 1.6 Prince engine. PSA also sells their engines, gearboxes and other parts to small independent manufacturers such as De La Chapelle and PGO. This PSA Peugeot Citroën 1.6-litre turbo petrol engine has received the International Engine of the Year awards a total of eight times, from 2007 to 2014.

Process Conception Ingénierie (PCI) is a French-based manufacturer of machine-tools for the automotive and aircraft industry.

PSA owns 57.43% of automotive supplier Faurecia, a company created by a 1997 merger between Bertrand Faure and PSA-owned ECIA. It provides various components to Peugeot, Citroën, DS and significant interior and exterior parts to companies such as Audi, BMW and Mercedes-Benz.

Gefco is a large international logistics company, established by Peugeot in 1949 and named Les Groupages Express de Franche-Comté. In November 2012, PSA sold a 75% share to Russian Railways (RZD) for €800m, but retains Gefco as the main logistics provider.

Motaquip is an all-makes aftermarket parts company and was established in the UK by PSA Peugeot Citroën in 1981. In December 2014 Motaquip was sold to an outside company to become independent of PSA as "Motaquip Limited". The head office is now based in Nuneaton, UK, with all parts distributed from a warehouse in Luton, UK.

PSA wholly owns Banque PSA Finance which provides financial services, and 98.67% of GIE PSA Tresorerie which was founded in 1990 as a treasury and cash management services division.

A number of marques were inherited following the acquisition of Chrysler Europe in 1978, and some were merged to re-establish Talbot, a previously dormant marque.

Chrysler Europe marques included the British Sunbeam (1901–1976), Humber (1868-1976), Singer (1905–1970), Commer (1905–1979), Hillman (1907–1976), Karrier (1908–1977), the French Simca (1934–1977) and the Spanish Barreiros (1959–1978).

Cycles Peugeot produced bicycles from 1882 until 2005. In 1987, ProCycle of Canada acquired the rights to distribute French-made Peugeots in North America and in 1990, Cycles Peugeot sold the North American rights to market bicycles under the Peugeot name to ProCycle. In 2001, ProCycle discontinued the Peugeot bicycle brand. In Europe, the licence to produce Peugeot-branded bicycles was sold to Cycleurope, a company making bicycles under different names, on condition that it would be reconsidered in 2004. That license was later withdrawn for Europe, though production of bicycles for export continued for another year.

Peugeot Motocycles manufactures a range of mopeds and scooters. In 2014, Mahindra & Mahindra acquired a 51% stake in the company, and in 2019, PSA sold its remaining stake. The company owned 50% of the Chinese Jinan Qingqi Peugeot Motocycles joint venture, which became a wholly owned subsidiary of China South Industries Group in 2013.

Citer is a French-based car rental company established by Citroën in 1968. It was sold to Enterprise Holdings in 2011.

Sevel (Société Européenne de Véhicules Légers and Società Europea Veicoli Leggeri) was established in 1978 and is equally owned by PSA and Fiat. As a result of this, two factories have been built assembling three ranges of vehicles, Sevel Nord and Sevel Sud. Peugeot and Fiat's Argentine operations were also joined under the name of Sevel Argentina (Sociedad Europea de Vehículos para Latinoamérica), although Fiat withdrew from Sevel in 1995. Currently Sevel builds the Fiat Ducato, Peugeot Boxer, and Citroën Jumper.

The joint venture with the Chinese company Dongfeng Motor Corporation was established in 1992 and produces the Citroën C-Triomphe, 207, 307 and 408 models at factories in Wuhan and Xiangyang.

The Kaluga factory was built by the Russian-based joint venture between PSA (70%) and Mitsubishi Motors (30%) established in 2011. The site builds the Mitsubishi Outlander, Pajero Sport, and the Peugeot 308 and Citroën C4. From 2018, the Peugeot Expert and Citroën Jumpy are built on site.

The joint venture with Iran Khodro was established in 2016 and produces some Peugeot models and imports other models in CBU for Iran market. IKAP is a 50–50 joint venture with the Iran Khodro, based in Tehran.

In 2020, PSA Aftermarket, the post-sales division of the PSA Group, expanded its operations in the circular economy by acquiring B-Parts, a platform specializing in the sale of used car parts. This move aligned with the group's "3R" strategy—repair, reuse, and remanufacture—focusing on sustainable automotive solutions. The acquisition also aimed to support PSA Aftermarket's goal of tripling its revenue from circular economy initiatives between 2018 and 2023, aligning with its sustainability goals.

In 2008, the company investigated the option to buy Mitsubishi Motors but a deal could not be concluded and was called off in 2010. One outcome of the talks resulted in the Mitsubishi Outlander and Mitsubishi i-MiEV to be sold as Peugeot and Citroën in Europe.

The head office of PSA is located in Rueil-Malmaison. The group has been renting the building since 2017, right after its construction. It is 16,250-square-metre (174,900 sq ft) and was housing around 700 employees in 2017.

In the United Kingdom, Peugeot Motor Company is a wholly owned United Kingdom subsidiary of PSA Peugeot Citroën that operates the Peugeot, Citroën, and DS brands. Peugeot UK's retail arm is Robins & Day, which was part of Rootes Group before becoming a wholly owned subsidiary of Peugeot Motor Company in 1970.

PSA has a number of manufacturing and development sites around the world. Vigo, in Galicia, has PSA's biggest factory in the world. The PSA Mangualde Plant in Portugal produced its millionth vehicle in 2012.

PSA invested ₹ 4 billion to establish a new plant in Chennai, India.

The group announced on 29 November 2016 at Tunisia's investment conference 2020 it will open a factory plant in the country in mid-2018. The factory will have a planned annual production of 1,200 units.

In January 2018, PSA Group had chosen to establish its new North American headquarters in Atlanta after a yearlong, nationwide search to find the optimal balance of business environment, standard of living and workforce. However, with PSA Group's 2021 merger with Fiat Chrysler Automobiles to form Stellantis, plans to bring the Peugeot brand back to North America were cancelled in favour of focusing on FCA's existing American brands Chrysler, Dodge, Jeep, and Ram.

PSA Group exhibited the "Hybrid Air" engine, an experimental petro-hydraulic hybrid, at the 2013 Geneva Motor Show. The engine is the result of a secret development project involving about 100 people. The basic technology is not new—it has been used in heavy vehicles such as garbage trucks or buses which frequently start and stop—but its application to passenger cars is. The vehicle uses nitrogen gas compressed by energy harvested from braking or deceleration to power a hydraulic drive which supplements power from its conventional gasoline engine. The hydraulic and electronic components were supplied by Robert Bosch GmbH. Production versions were scheduled for 2015 or 2016 to sell at about €22,560 (£18,983). Mileage was estimated to be about 3.5 L/100 km or 80 miles per gallon for city driving if installed in a Citroën C3.

Peugeot and Citroën have won many awards for their vehicles including: ten times the European Car of the Year award, 12 times the "Car of the year" Auto Europa award in Italy, 18 times the "car of the year" in Spain, and five times the "Irish Car of the Year" award.

Public housing in France (French : logement social, also called Habitations à loyer modéré, or HLM) is a central, local or social program designed to provide subsidized assistance for low-income and poor people.

France has a long tradition of social and state intervention in the provision of housing. In 1774, Louis XV, shortly before his death, commissioned architect Claude-Nicolas Ledoux to design the Royal Saltworks of Arc-et-Senans. The Saltworks are considered one of the first examples of industrial architecture. The complex included technical facilities, workers’ housing, and gardens, functioning as an integrated site where much of the working community resided.

In the 19th century, in a context of industrialization, the cités ouvrières (company towns) appeared, inspired by the Phalanstère of Charles Fourier. These were an early form of social housing — by private initiative — in the form of workers’ housing estates and other “corons” built by industrialists to house their workforce.

From 1898 until 1949, these private initiatives would be governed by a legal framework, the Siegfried Law. This law offered financial support to private initiatives to encourage the construction of low-rent housing (loan facilities and tax advantages). Within that framework, the first international congress of "Low-Cost Housing" (Habitations à Bon Marché [ fr ]) was held, and Jules Siegfried, the deputy-mayor of Le Havre, founded the Société Française des Habitations à Bon Marché, which promoted the construction of housing for middle and working classes. In 1906, the Strauss Law strengthened the subsidies granted to private builders and managers of low-cost housing. The duration of tax benefits was extended from 5 to 12 years. The law encouraged municipalities and departments to support low-cost housing societies through financial aid. This provided further impetus to private construction of low cost housing.

After World War II the French population increased rapidly, while rural exodus brought many people to the cities. In many regions, the war had damaged housing. In order to slow the rapid rise of rents, the government passed a rent control law in 1949. That effectively ended the economic benefits of housing investment. Also, housing construction was strictly regulated, which made building difficult without political support. Also in 1949, another law was adopted, championed by Eugène-Claudius Petit, Minister of Reconstruction and Urban Planning, that promoted a movement toward "superior comfort" – these were the Habitations à Loyers Modérés (H.L.M.) which then replaced the Habitations à Bon Marché (H.B.M.).

The government launched a huge construction plan, including the creation of new towns ("villes nouvelles") and new suburbs with HLM (Habitation à Loyer Modéré, "low-rent housing") in 1949. The state had the money and the legal means to acquire the land and could provide some advantages to the companies that built the huge housing complexes of hundreds of apartments. Quality was also effectively regulated, resulting in decent or even top-quality housing, relative to the standards of the 1950s and 1960s.

HLM construction was also a major source of political financing, and building companies were sometimes made to pay back the political party of the mayor who launched an HLM program. That resulted in corruption scandals in the Paris region and elsewhere.

In 1983, the National Housing Council (Conseil National de l'Habitat) was established as an official advisory body to the French government for consultation on housing assistance, social diversity, and home ownership.

In 2000, the Law on Urban Solidarity and Renewal (Loi Solidarite et Renouvellement Urbain) required every town in France to have at least 20% HLM.

In 2013, the Duflot I law increased the HLM requirement to 25% by 2025.

According to a study by the Banque des Territoires in 2025, building new or renovated social housing seems impossible given the budgetary equation in France.

Sometimes the heat problems, especially in 1950s social housing, pose problems of convenience.

The social housing programs in France have an obvious positive effect on the consumption of the households that benefit from them. There is no consensus about the influence on either the rents of the private sector or the prices of real estate.

In France, a public inquiry (enquête publique) is a formal public consultation procedure. concerning a finalized dossier (project, plan or programme) that is sufficiently formalized in principle to be subject to environmental assessment, of which the public inquiry is a part. It involves, on the one hand, a dual obligation to provide prior information on the existence of the project and its content and, on the other hand, a register (paper / electronic) allowing the public to record their comments, which is open for a minimum period determined by law. The inquiry is conducted by an independent and impartial third party, the investigating commissioner. The prior publicity formalities are organised by the administrative authority empowered to rule on the case (usually the prefect, sometimes the mayor, or the president of a public establishment of intercommunal cooperation (EPCI), depending on the potential impacts of the project) to complete the information before the decision is made.

The public inquiry is therefore a mechanism that serves participatory democracy. It is therefore:

A provision with constitutional value, Article 17 of the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, proclaims that:

"Property being an inviolable and sacred right, no one may be deprived of it, except when public necessity, legally ascertained, clearly requires it, and under the condition of a just and prior indemnity."

To legalize the declaration of public necessity, the first basis for the French public inquiry system was an imperial law of 1810 passed to guarantee respect for property rights during expropriations. The royal ordinance of May 1829 extended the measure to include a preliminary inquiry with the submission of the project in simplified form, with universal access and the collection of comments. The ordinance of February 28, 1831 required public works to undergo such a preliminary inquiry with a commission of inquiry, comment registers open for at least one month, and the commission's conclusions. A law passed in 1833 requires this preliminary inquiry (then called commodo et incommodo) for the Declaration of public utility (DUP).

A 1958 ordinance requires the inquiry and a favourable opinion before a DUP is issued. A 1959 decree, revised in 1977, specifies the characteristics of the preliminary inquiry before the DUP, intending to defend the rights of property owners before validating the administration projects. A 2014 ordinance amended this regulation in Sections L110-1 and L112-1 and R112-1 to −24 of the Code of Expropriation for Public Utility. This inquiry, known as a "public utility inquiry," therefore formed the historical basis for public inquiries in France. It is now only a minority special case among public inquiries. It is opened and organized by the prefect of the department, and its conclusions are communicated to interested parties only upon request.

The 1983 law, known as the " Bouchardeau " law, relating to the democratization of public inquiries and environmental protection, imposed a system for informing and gathering public opinion to ensure that public and general interests were better taken into account. Its implementing decrees were signed on April 23, 1985, and had a fairly broad scope. They were then transposed into the Environmental Code. In 1985, an initial European Union directive on the assessment of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment required Member States to ensure "that the public concerned is allowed to express its opinion before the project is started". Amending directives were adopted to supplement it in 1997 and 2011. A 2010 law harmonized the various types of public inquiries with those of the Environmental Code, while ensuring compliance with various international legal texts. A decree issued in 2011 reformed this procedure: the scope of application was revised, the content of the investigation file was clarified, and the investigation procedure was rewritten. An order issued in 2016, followed by a decree issued in 2017, revised its scope and many elements of its procedure and process (e.g. appointment of the investigating commissioner, duration, digitization of the file submitted for investigation, the register, etc.). The entire public inquiry procedure is now contained in Articles L123-1 to −18 and R123-1 to −27 of the Environmental Code. For environmental permits, a law passed in 2023 added a procedure to speed up the review process, followed by an implementing decree in 2024.

Since the end of 2015, the few public inquiries that do not fall under either the code governing expropriation for public use or the environmental code have been regulated by Sections L134-1 to −2, L134-31 to −34 and R134-3 to −30 of the Code of Relations between the Public and the Administration and are organized by the prefect.

Over the years, public participation in projects affecting their environment has grown; local government officials are taking participatory approaches and encouraging citizens to participate in their communities' projects. Investigating commissioners, who hold a judicial mandate, facilitate this participation and ensure the security of environmental assessment procedures, and administrative courts are often called upon by local authorities to carry out this task.

In France, starting in 2016, public inquiries tended to be classified into three main categories: environmental inquiries, public utility inquiries, and other inquiries. This classification is now obsolete: the Environmental Code. The “Environmental Code applies to most "construction, engineering, or development projects requiring an environmental assessment or requiring environmental authorization linked to another investigation requirement. This concerns two-thirds of public inquiries:

The public inquiry is a legal part of the process of assessing a project's environmental impact and public participation in the decision-making process. It may incorporate other procedures:

The public inquiry may concern a declaration of public interest, a project for a facility classified for environmental protection, a structure relating to water and aquatic environments, and may be subject to special provisions where applicable.

It is mandatory for projects of public interest, such as those requiring expropriation following a declaration of public utility, or those requiring the establishment of public utility easements, particularly for urban planning purposes.

Investigations before a declaration of public utility, most often with a view to expropriation, or before the creation of a public utility easement, are conducted on this basis alone if there is no environmental impact.

The so-called public utility inquiry, which concerns approximately one quarter of public inquiries, may be open to the public for only 15 days. The parcel inquiry, which is restricted to the owners of the parcels concerned (list of owners, individual notification, and Art. R131-8 of the Code of Expropriation for Public Utility), falls outside the scope of the public inquiry proper. Others may have a limited scope, such as departmental or municipal roads or rural paths.

The Environmental Code reiterates the principles that, on the one hand, "everyone has the right to access information relating to the environment held by public authorities" and, on the other hand, "everyone shall be informed of draft public decisions affecting the environment in such a way as to enable them to submit their comments, which shall be taken into consideration by the competent authority." The Charter for the Environment specifies that it is the duty of every citizen to protect their environment.

Public inquiries are one of the means used to ensure the public participation necessary for the development of certain public decisions, with the aim of "improving the quality of public decision-making and contributing to its democratic legitimacy.”. They are therefore legally required before any administrative decision that may affect either private property, particularly in the case of expropriation, or the environment. Its purpose is, respectively, to formally establish public utility before expropriation by means of a declaration of public utility or "to ensure public information and participation and to take into account the interests of third parties" so that "the comments and proposals received during the inquiry period" are "taken into consideration by the project owner and by the authority competent to make the decision. ”

It was conducted before decision-making and in a relatively impartial manner, the public inquiry therefore aims to,:

In France, a public inquiry must precede the implementation of:

Certain projects, particularly those relating to national defense, or those carried out due to a serious and immediate danger, are subject to legal exemptions from these procedures.

When a public debate is organized in advance on a major project (e.g., highway, decommissioning of a nuclear power plant, etc.), the minutes and summary of the debate must be included in the public inquiry file. In this case, the State must launch the public inquiry within five years of the publication of the minutes and summary of the public debate.

The file submitted for investigation consists of various documents,,:

In addition, there is an inquiry register for receiving comments from the public. These documents are available to the public in all locations (town hall(s)) where the inquiry is officially open, in paper format and optionally in electronic format (on a website),.

The main stages of the public inquiry process are:

The commissioner or commission of inquiry is appointed by the president of the administrative court before the opening of the public inquiry (Sections L123-4 and R123-5 of the Environment Code). Once appointed, usually two to three months before the start of the inquiry, the commissioner or commission begins its investigations and may request the necessary documents from the petitioner or the organizing authority to prepare the information for the public. These preliminary investigations are often difficult because feasibility and impact studies are complex and often carried out by multiple parties involved in the environmental impact assessment. Impact studies are difficult to carry out because they cover many areas governed by laws and regulations (AIR, WATER, SOIL, SUB-SOIL, WILD FAUNA AND FLORA, LANDSCAPES, NEIGHBORHOOD CONVENIENCE, RATIONAL USE OF ENERGY). Its role, which is not very visible before the public inquiry is opened, requires investigating the project to fully assess the issues and impacts on the environment. In practice, petitioners or communities organizing inquiries may tend to limit access to information on sensitive projects, which can sometimes complicate the exercise of their missions.

In France, the Public Prosecutor is the magistrate of the public prosecutor's office responsible for criminal prosecution within the jurisdiction [ fr ] of a judicial court [ fr ]. The prosecutor is assisted by deputy prosecutors and assistant prosecutors, who are also magistrates, and together they form the prosecutor's office of a judicial court.

The French Ministry of Justice explains that:

the term "parquet" refers to the area where the magistrates of the public prosecutor's office were positioned: an enclosed space in the grand chamber, defined on three sides by the judges' seats and on the fourth by the bar, forming the heart of the courtroom—a sacred, enclosed space, a small park or parquet. It was crossed by the King's representatives to reach their place, and armed officers advanced there to report their investigations and draw up the official record for the parquet..

The role of the prosecutor emerged in the 14th century within the legal profession, at the request of the parliaments. Its title and functions were inspired by procedures developed within the courts of the Inquisition.

As Jean-Louis Nadal [ fr ], Prosecutor General at the Court of Cassation [ fr ], recalled in his opening speech at the symposium on 19 January 2006 :

From a historical perspective, the unique role of the public prosecutor's office, both as a prosecuting body and a guardian of individual freedoms, can be traced back, to my knowledge, to the great ordinance of Philip the Fair of 23, which outlined the oath of the King's representatives, demonstrating that the prosecutor must also be responsible for seeking the truth and ensuring the proper application of the law..

Prosecutors of the Republic and their deputies, as well as prosecutors general, their respective deputies, advocates general [ fr ], judges, and justice auditors [ fr ], are part of the magistracy. They are therefore subject to the provisions of the ordinance of 22 establishing the organic law on the status of the magistracy.

Unlike judges, the prosecutor, along with their deputies [ fr ], is part of the "standing magistracy," so named because its members stand during hearings to present their requisitions [ fr ], in contrast to the Sitting magistracy [ fr ] (or Judicial bench [ fr ]), whose members, the judges, remain seated throughout the proceedings.

Several factors distinguish them from judicial bench magistrates in their status. Article 5 of the aforementioned ordinance states:

The magistrates of the prosecutor's office are placed under the direction and control of their hierarchical superiors and under the authority of the Keeper of the Seals, Minister of Justice. During hearings, their speech is free.

Thus, the prosecutor's office is hierarchical, meaning that the Public Prosecutor has authority over their deputies and is, in turn, subject to the instructions and directives of the Prosecutor General at the court of appeal [ fr ] within their jurisdiction. All members of the prosecutor's office are ultimately accountable to the Keeper of the Seals, Minister of Justice, and thus to the executive branch.

While judicial bench magistrates are appointed with the binding opinion of the High Council of the Judiciary [ fr ] under Article 28 of the ordinance, prosecutor's office magistrates are appointed based on a non-binding opinion, which does not constrain the Keeper of the Seals.

Like judicial bench magistrates, Prosecutors of the Republic are appointed by decree [ fr ] of the President of the Republic. Prosecutors General, however, are appointed by decree in the Council of Ministers [ fr ].

As a result of the hierarchical structure of the prosecutor's office, prosecutors and their deputies do not benefit from the immovability guarantee afforded to judicial bench magistrates. However, the 1958 ordinance grants them freedom of speech during hearings to present requisitions they deem appropriate, including requests for discharge or acquittal.

From a statutory perspective, the Public Prosecutor is a magistrate of the "first grade" (or "outside hierarchy" for larger courts). This means that appointment as a Public Prosecutor is only possible after being listed on the first-grade advancement table (after at least 7 years of career). In practice, the magistrate will typically have held at least one first-grade position (e.g., assistant prosecutor or deputy president) before being appointed prosecutor.

Like judicial bench magistrates, Prosecutors of the Republic wear attire specified in Table 1, annexed to the Code of Judicial Organization [ fr ]. For the Court of Cassation and Courts of Appeal, this consists of a black robe for regular hearings and a red robe for solemn hearings [ fr ]. In other jurisdictions, a black robe is worn. Deputies typically wear only the black robe.

On 10, the European Court of Human Rights, in its Medvedyev 1 ruling, determined that the prosecutor cannot be considered a judicial authority under Article 5 of the Convention :

The Prosecutor of the Republic is not a 'judicial authority' as understood in the Court's case law: as the applicants point out, the prosecutor notably lacks independence from the executive branch to be so qualified.

In France, the Public Prosecutor has a dual role: a "political" mission and a sovereign mission. Their responsibilities are defined in the Code of Criminal Procedure.

As a member of the judicial hierarchy, the Prosecutor must implement the government's criminal policy, pursuant to, among others, Article 30 of the Code of Criminal Procedure:

The Minister of Justice conducts the criminal prosecution policy determined by the Government. They ensure its consistent application across the Republic. To this end, they issue general criminal prosecution instructions to the magistrates of the public prosecutor's office.

Thus, based on government priorities, such as road safety, prevention of violence against individuals, or combating terrorism, the prosecutor will redirect the efforts of their office, reporting to the General Prosecutor. In recent years, successive governments have implemented "urban policies" in which prosecutor's offices are sometimes closely involved, through prosecutors' participation in local bodies, awareness campaigns, and educational initiatives in schools.

The responsibilities of the Public Prosecutor are outlined in Articles 1 and 31 of the Code of Criminal Procedure:

The prosecutor's mission involves identifying and investigating offences (contraventions, misdemeanors [ fr ], and crimes) and deciding on the appropriate course of action under Article 40-1:

When they consider that the facts brought to their attention under Article 40 constitute an offence committed by a person whose identity and residence are known, and for which no legal provision prevents the initiation of criminal prosecution, the territorially competent Public Prosecutor decides whether it is appropriate:

In the French judicial system, under the principle of discretionary prosecution, the Public Prosecutor has sole authority to determine the course of action for an offence, subject to the Prosecutor General's independent powers within the jurisdiction.

In this context, the Public Prosecutor, who holds the powers of a judicial police officer, oversees the activities of judicial police officers and agents within their jurisdiction.

When investigations lead to the referral of an alleged offender to a trial court (police court, criminal courts, assize court), the Public Prosecutor, personally or through their deputies, represents the public prosecutor's office to present appropriate requisitions. Under Article L122-4 of the Code of Judicial Organization [ fr ] :

Any magistrate of a prosecutor's office or general prosecutor's office may perform the functions of the public prosecutor's office within that office.

This reflects the principle of indivisibility of the prosecutor's office, meaning any magistrate in the office can perform procedural acts. This principle applies generally and is not limited to specific matters.

Based on the nature of the offence and resulting harm, the Public Prosecutor may opt for alternatives to prosecution:

If it appears that such a measure is likely to ensure compensation for the victim's harm, end the disturbance caused by the offence, or contribute to the offender's rehabilitation, the Prosecutor of the Republic may, before deciding on criminal prosecution, directly or through a judicial police officer, a prosecutor's delegate, or a mediator:

1º Remind the offender of their legal obligations; 2º Refer the offender to a health, social, or professional organization (...); 3º Request the offender to regularize their situation under the law or regulations; 4º Request the offender to repair the harm caused by the offence; 5º With the parties' consent, initiate mediation between the offender and the victim; 6º In cases of offences committed against a spouse, partner, or their children, request the offender to reside outside the family home or residence, avoid appearing near it, and, if necessary, undergo health, social, or psychological support; (...) This procedure suspends the statute of limitations for criminal prosecution. (...)

If the measure is not executed due to the offender's behavior, the Public Prosecutor, absent new elements, implements a penal composition or initiates prosecution.

Unlike the alternative measure under Article 41-1, which suspends the statute of limitations [ fr ], the full execution of a penal composition, recorded in the No. 1 bulletin of the criminal record, extinguishes criminal prosecution, equivalent to an executed sentence.

The Public Prosecutor is not obligated to pursue prosecution for an offence and may decide to close a case without further action for reasons such as:

Under Article 40-2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the prosecutor must notify complainants of a decision to close a case without further action, specifying the legal or discretionary reasons justifying it.

This is the least known function to the general public but remains highly significant.

The civil and administrative responsibilities of a prosecutor's office are managed by the civil service within the judicial court, where the prosecutor's office is based. These include handling matters related to:

Additionally, the civil service manages relations with labor courts.

Under Articles 421 to 429 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the prosecutor's office may—and in some cases must—intervene as a principal or joined party in civil proceedings through written submissions handled by the civil service. Articles 423 and 424 specify that the public prosecutor's office may act as a principal party "to defend public order in response to facts that undermine it" and as a joined party "to provide its opinion on the application of the law in a case it has been notified of."

The role of the Public Prosecutor in addressing priority constitutional questions [ fr ] is limited to providing an opinion. They must be informed of each question raised and may provide an opinion through oral requisitions or a written submission. If the opinion is a separate, reasoned written document, it is forwarded to the Court of Cassation if the question is referred. Between 1 September 2010 and 1 September 2011, the prosecutor provided a favorable opinion in 55% of cases referred to the Court of Cassation for priority constitutional questions.

As an exception to the principle of confidentiality of investigations, the Public Prosecutor may, "on their own initiative or at the request of the investigating court or parties, disclose objective procedural elements that do not assess the merits of charges against the accused" to "prevent the spread of incomplete or inaccurate information or to address a disturbance to public order."

This provision was introduced by the law of 15 June 2000 strengthening the protection of the presumption of innocence and victims' rights [ fr ]. Previously, journalists relied on investigating judges. Communication with the media is now part of prosecutors' continuing education.

The Prosecutor General has the following exclusive prerogatives:

While the Public Prosecutor has a 10-day period from the pronouncement of a judgment by the police court (where appeal is available) or correctional court to file an appeal [ fr ], the Prosecutor General has a 20-day period under Articles 548 and 505 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. This right is exclusive, meaning it can be exercised even if the Public Prosecutor waived their right to appeal.

This right is granted to complainants under Article 40-3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

While the initiation of public action is typically the responsibility of the Public Prosecutor, the Prosecutor General, as their hierarchical superior, may, under Article 36 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, "instruct Prosecutors of the Republic, through written instructions included in the case file, to initiate or have initiated prosecutions or to refer such written requisitions [ fr ] to the competent court as the Prosecutor General deems appropriate."

These provisions highlight the hierarchical nature of the prosecutor's office, further reinforced by the Prosecutor General's authority to directly requisition public forces, whose members, including agents and judicial police officers [ fr ], are under their supervision (Arts. 35 and 36, Code of Criminal Procedure).

Publicis Groupe S.A. is a French multinational advertising and public relations company. As of 2024, the company is the largest advertising company in the world by revenue. Based in Paris, it is one of the 'Big Three' advertising companies, alongside WPP and Omnicom. Publicis Groupe S.A. is headed by Arthur Sadoun, and its agencies provide digital and traditional advertising, media services and marketing services to national and multinational clients.

The company was founded by 20-year-old Marcel Bleustein-Blanchet in 1926.

After 1945, the company grew rapidly in France's post-war economic boom, becoming the world's fourth-largest agency. Its close ties with top officials of the French government and wide client base across industries contributed to its success.

In 2011, Publicis was named the third-largest marketing group worldwide by revenue, surpassing Interpublic. By the end of 2010, the twin sectors of digital activities and high-growth emerging countries represented one-half of Publicis Groupe's total revenue.

The group had operations in over 202 cities in 105 countries, including a strategic alliance with Dentsu.

In July 2012 it was announced that Publicis Groupe and Omnicom Group would merge to form Publicis Omnicom Group, but by May 2014 it was announced that the deal had fallen through and the Publicis-Omnicom merger would not happen.

In February 2015, Publicis acquired Sapient Corporation to form Publicis.Sapient as the world's largest digital network, which at the time included SapientNitro, Sapient Consulting, the community, DigitasLBI and RazorfishGlobal.

In September 2015, The Publicis Groupe acquired the South African marketing, promotions and activations agency The Creative Counsel. The acquisition was reported as the largest agency buyout ever to happen in South Africa, with an unconfirmed valuation of between R1bn and R1.5bn.

In December 2015, Publicis announced a new organisation with four main divisions:

In addition, in January 2016, Laura Desmond became chief revenue officer.

Since 2016, Publicis has co-organised, with Groupe Les Echos, the annual technology conference, Viva Technology.

In 2017, CEO Maurice Lévy took over as chairman of the supervisory board from Élisabeth Badinter (Bleustein-Blanchet's daughter) and handed over the CEO position to Arthur Sadoun.

In 2018, Publicis partnered with Microsoft to introduce Marcel, an AI-powered internal platform to improve collaboration among its employees.

On 21 January 2019, Publicis announced the deal to sell two of their Latin American agencies, NovaDigitas and Pixeldigital, to BancroftX to form a new marketing firm under the group umbrella BancroftX.

On 14 April 2019, Publicis announced a $4.4 billion deal to acquire data marketing firm Epsilon.

On 4 February 2020, Publicis Groupe India announced the merging of existing agencies – Arc Worldwide, Solutions and Ecosys OOH – to create 'Publicis In-Motion'. In January 2014, Publicis acquired Law & Kenneth, an Indian advertising and digital agency.

On 3 May 2022, French advertising holding company Publicis Groupe acquired Profitero, an e-commerce software company that provides analytics for brands, as marketer clients are increasingly seeking services in commerce.

In September 2022 Publicis Groupe brings home Vietnam's only Effie Award in 2022 with 'Keep Stories Alive'.

On 5 June 2023, Publicis Groupe announced the acquisition of Corra, an e-commerce leader recognised by Adobe as one of the top commerce firms in North America.

In June 2025, the company acquired the advertising mandate for Mars Inc., estimated to be worth $1.7 billion.

In May 2026, Publicis announced its acquisition of data connectivity company LiveRamp for $2.2 billion.

The company owns several full-service advertising groups that undertake a range of media activities: mobile and interactive online communication, television, magazines & newspapers, cinema and radio, and outdoor. The company's SAMS services include direct marketing / customer relationship management services, sales promotion, healthcare communications, multicultural and ethnic communications, corporate and financial communications, human resource infrastructure, public relations, design services, interactive communications, events marketing and management, sports marketing, and production and pre-press services. Its media services include media planning, media buying, and media sales. Publicis Groupe's Vivaki developed a technological platform supported by Microsoft, Google, Yahoo! and AOL Platform A technologies that offers advertisers the possibility to target specifically defined audiences in a single campaign across multiple networks.

Qorvis, a U.S. subsidiary of Publicis, has represented the country of Saudi Arabia since the September 11 attacks and has been accused of helping to whitewash its record on human rights. More recently, the writer Ken Klippenstein obtained leaked documents from Qorvis, which show the PR company pitched a private company on a four- to five-minute propaganda video, which hoped to improve the reputation of its Homestead, Florida shelter for "unaccompanied alien children".

As of October 2015, the main subsidiary companies of this group are:

PublicisLive is a global event management and strategic communication firm founded in 1995. It has offices in Abu Dhabi, Dubai, Geneva, Istanbul, Kigali, and Paris. PublicisLive is part of Publicis Groupe.

The Puisaye (French pronunciation: [ pɥizɛ ]) is a natural and historical region of France, now divided between the departments of Loiret, Nièvre and Yonne. Its historical and administrative center is the town of Saint-Fargeau. Its inhabitants are known as Poyaudins (or Puisayens).

According to local 19th-century historian Ambroise Challe [ fr ], the name Puisaye first appeared in 12th-century charters. It was variously spelled Poiseia, Puseium, Pusaya, Puiseia, Puteacia, or Poidaceia.

Since the Puisaye is not an administrative region, its exact definition and limits can vary depending on time and context. Its core is a land of forests and ponds, traversed by several rivers including the Loing. It is bordered by Sancerrois to the west across the Loire river, Gâtinais to the northwest, Auxerrois to the northeast, Forterre to the southeast, and Donziais to the south.

The Communauté de communes de Puisaye-Forterre [ fr ], created in 2017, covers most of the historical Puisaye, though not its Western fringe in the Loiret. It also includes the geologically distinct land of Forterre as well as parts of the Auxerrois, both to the east. The name Puisaye appears to exert a certain attraction, leading communities that are not historically part of Puisaye to adopt it. This has been the case of Sougères-en-Puisaye, which changed its name from Sougères-les-Simon in 1955, and of Charny-Orée-de-Puisaye, which adopted this name when it was formed by the merger of 14 villages in 2016. As a result, the contemporary usage of the word Puisaye can cover a broader territory than has been the case in the past.

The Lac du Bourdon is the largest body of water in Puisaye, albeit far from the only one. It is a reservoir formed in 1901 to help regulate water levels of the Briare Canal. The Bourdon is a small tributary of the Loing that feeds into and from the lake.

The territory of Puisaye was Christianized in late antiquity. Some villages are traditionally associated with late-Antiquity saints, e.g. Priscus [ fr ] in Saints-en-Puisaye. A Carolingian manuscript lists several Puisaye parishes on the itinerary of Saint Aunarius, Bishop of Auxerre in the late 6th century, namely Neuvy-sur-Loire (Novus Vicus), Briare (Brioderus), Bléneau (Blanoilus), Bitry (Vitriacus), and Arquian (Arcuncius), and also refers to Toucy (Tociacus).

The lordship of Toucy was prominent in the High Middle Ages, as several of its leaders and family affiliates played significant roles, not least as associates of the House of Courtenay in their overseas endeavors. Meanwhile, the south of the Puisaye was in the orbit of the County of Nevers and specifically of the Barony of Donzy.

The crisis of the late Middle Ages and specifically the Hundred Years' War marked a rupture in the history of the region. Toucy was devastated in the runup to the Battle of Cravant, and was subsequently displaced by Saint-Fargeau as the main urban center of the Puisaye. Antoine de Chabannes significantly developed Saint-Fargeau, reconstructing its castle but also founding a hospital there. Generally, the century between 1450 and 1550 was a time of prosperity and renewal in the region, still represented in the landscape by numerous village churches built during that era. This period of prosperity ended with the Wars of Religion and troubles of the early 17th century.

By the end of France's Ancien Régime, the core of Puisaye including Bléneau, Saint-Fargeau, Toucy and Saint-Sauveur was part of the province of Orléanais. It was a provincial borderland, with parts of the present communauté de communes de Puisaye-Forterre in Champagne (e.g. Charny), Burgundy (e.g. Pourrain, Courson-les-Carrières), and Nivernais (e.g. Saint-Vérain). Moreover, Île-de-France (e.g. Courtenay) was close by to the north, and Berry just across the Loire river.

The Lordship of Puisaye is attested under that name from the late 13th century to the late 16th century, corresponding to an area that varied across time but generally included the towns of Bléneau, Mézilles, Saint-Fargeau, and until the early 16th century, Toucy.

The lordship of Puisaye was inherited by the Counts, then Dukes of Bar following the 1255 marriage between Theobald II, Count of Bar and Joanna of Toucy, heiress of a lineage that started with Ythier de Narbonne in the 11th century (Maison de Toucy [ fr ]). On Joanna of Toucy's death in 1317 the lordship went to Edward I, Count of Bar and then to his son Henry IV, Count of Bar, and grandson, Robert, Duke of Bar. One of Robert's sons, John of Bar, inherited the lordship (but not the Duchy of Bar) when Robert died in 1411, but he was himself soon killed at the Battle of Agincourt in October 1415. The Lordship of Puisaye was then seized, together with the Duchy (whose ruler Edward III was also killed in Agincourt) by Cardinal Louis of Bar, brother of John and Edward and a significant political figure of the era.

On Louis's death the lordship of Puisaye went to John Jacob, Marquis of Montferrat, son of Marquis Theodore II who had married Louis's sister Joanna. John Jacob sold parts of the lordship to Georges de La Trémoille, but he was not able or willing to pay and John Jacob's sons recovered them in the late 1440s. They in turn sold the entire lordship to Jacques Coeur in February 1450. After Jacques Coeur's downfall in 1451, the lordship was taken by Antoine de Chabannes. Charles VII 's decision of 29 May 1453 specifically granted him: "(1) the lands, castles and lordships of Saint-Fargeau, of Lavau, of La Couldre, of Perreuse, of Champignelles, of Mézilles, or Villeneuve-les-Genêts and their dependencies; (2) the lands of Saint-Maurice-sur-Aveyron, Melleroy, La Frenaie, Fontenelles, and their dependencies; (3) the Barony of Toucy with its belongings and dependencies." Jacques Coeur's family sued, but eventually the Chabannes were able to keep their Puisaye domains.

After the death of Antoine's son John of Chabannes in 1503, the lordship was divided between his two young daughters. Antoinette (1498-ca. 1527) received most of Puisaye including Saint-Fargeau. In 1515 she married René d'Anjou- Mézières (1483-1521) who thus became lord of Puisaye as later was his son Nicolas (1518-1569). These domains later went to François, Duke of Montpensier following his 1566 marriage with Renée d'Anjou-Mézière [ fr ], daughter of Nicolas d'Anjou. John of Chabannes's elder daughter Avoye (1492-ca. 1545) kept other Chabannes domains including Toucy, and in 1504 she married Aymon du Prie (or Prye, a locale near La Fermeté and home of the château de Prye [ fr ]). The latter's family kept the Barony of Toucy following Aymon's death in 1510.

In 1575, King Henry III elevated the County of Saint-Fargeau to a Duché- Pairie. After that, the reference to Puisaye as a lordship or political entity, which had already been infrequent under Nicolas d'Anjou, appears to fade away. In the archives of the château de Saint-Fargeau, however, there are references to the "duché de Saint-Fargeau et de Puisaye" in a document from 1606 and "duché de Saint-Fargeau et du païs de Puisaie" in another one from 1714.

The Pyrenees conifer and mixed forests is a temperate broadleaf and mixed forests ecoregion in southwestern Europe. It extends along the Pyrenees mountains which run east and west along the border between France and Spain, and includes all Andorra. The ecoregion extends from the lower slopes of the Pyrenees to its highest peaks, which include Aneto (3,404 m), Posets (3,375 m), and Vignemale (3,298 m).

The Pyrenees forests are at the transition between the Mediterranean climate regions of Spain and France, which lie to the south and east, and the more humid and temperate forests of Western Europe, which lie to the west and north.

The ecoregion's elevational range, and its various climatic regions (maritime temperate to the west, continental in the center, and Mediterranean to the east) support a variety of plant communities and species. The ecoregion has 3500 native plant species, including 200 endemic species.

The forested foothills of the southern slope, known as the Pre-Pyrenees, have a transitional Mediterranean climate with dry summers. Characteristic trees include evergreen holm oak (Quercus rotundifolia), holm oak (Quercus ilex), Cork oak (Quercus suber), Kermes oak, Wild olive (Olea europaea), Sweet bay (Laurus nobilis), Strawberry tree (Arbutus unedo), Rhamnus alaternus, Pistacia terebinthus, Erica arborea, Erica scoparia, Pinus pinaster, Juniperus oxycedrus and deciduous Quercus faginea, Quercus pubescens, Quercus pyrenaica, Tilia platyphyllos, and Acer opalus.

Middle-elevation forests include deciduous broadleaf trees like Quercus robur, Quercus petraea, Q. pubescens, Castanea sativa, Ulmus glabra, Acer pseudoplatanus, Taxus baccata, Populus tremula, Betula pendula, Betula pubescens and European beech (Fagus sylvatica), and conifer forests of Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris) and Pyrenean pine (Pinus nigra subsp. salzmannii var. salzmannii). Heathlands dominated by Calluna vulgaris, Ulex and Juniperus communis grow in the western part of the ecoregion.

High-elevation forests are predominantly of European beech and silver fir (Abies alba). Mountain pine (Pinus mugo subsp. uncinata) is common in continental-climate areas of the central Pyrenees with colder winters.

Subalpine and alpine plant communities occur above the timberline, are dominated by Juniperus communis and Calluna vulgaris and include many endemic species.

Large mammals include Eurasian brown bear (Ursus arctos), Iberian wolf (Canis lupus signatus), Pyrenean chamois (Rupicapra pyrenaica pyrenaica), wild boar (Sus scrofa), red deer (Cervus elaphus elaphus), and roe deer (Capreolus capreolus). The reclusive Pyrenean desman (Galemys pyrenaicus) is a vulnerable small mammal that lives here and in the Cantabrian Mountains.

The Cantabrian brown bear, a distinct southwest-European subspecies of Eurasian brown bear, is now extinct in the Pyrenees; the last Cantabrian brown bear was shot in 2004. The Cantabrian brown bear now survives further west in the Cantabrian Mountains. Starting in 1996, the French government reintroduced Eurasian brown bears from Slovenia to the French Pyrenees. As of 2019, there were 40 to 50 brown bears in the Pyrenees.

The Pyrenean ibex (Capra pyrenaica pyrenaica) went extinct in 2000. In 2014 a small number of Western Spanish ibex (Capra pyrenaica victoriae) were introduced to Pyrenees National Park. By 2020 the population had increased to 400 individuals in the national park and neighboring Ariège Regional Park.

The Pyrenees are home to 120 species of birds, including limited populations of lammergeier (Gypaetus barbatus), Pyrenean capercaillie (Tetrao urogallus aquitanicus) and rock ptarmigan (Lagopus muta).

3,863 km, or 10%, of the ecoregion is in protected areas. Only 1% of the unprotected area is still covered with natural forest. Protected areas include Valles Occidentales Natural Park, Ordesa y Monte Perdido National Park, and Posets-Maladeta Natural Park in Aragon, Aigüestortes i Estany de Sant Maurici National Park, Alt Pirineu Natural Park, and Cadí-Moixeró Natural Park in Catalonia, and Pyrénées National Park, Pyrénées ariégeoises Regional Natural Park, and Pyrénées catalanes Regional Natural Park in France.

Pâté (UK : / ˈ p æ t eɪ / PAT -ay, US : / p æ ˈ t eɪ, p ɑː -/ pa(h)- TAY, French: [ pɑte ]) is a forcemeat. Originally, the dish was cooked in a pastry case and called pâté en croute ; in more recent times it is more usually cooked without pastry in a terrine, and called pâté en terrine or simply terrine. Various ingredients are used, which may include meat from pork, poultry, fish or beef; fat; vegetables; herbs; spices; wine; and brandy.

Both the Dictionnaire de l'Académie française and the Oxford English Dictionary (OED) date the term back to the 12th century. The former gives the original meaning as a "culinary preparation consisting of minced meat or fish surrounded by dough and baked in the oven"; the OED's definition is "a pie or pastry usually filled with finely minced meat, fish, vegetables, etc." The French words pâte (pastry) and pâté are both derived from the Latin pasta meaning paste or dough (as is the English "pastry"). By the 19th century the pastry case was often dispensed with. According to Larousse Gastronomique, when there is a pastry case the dish is pâté en croute and when there is not, and the mixture is cooked in a dish (called a terrine), it is pâté en terrine, often abbreviated to terrine or pâté, terms used interchangeably in both French and English usage. A patty is a similar dish, and its name comes from a 19th-century English corruption of the French word pâté.

Pâté was known to the Romans, who generally made it with pork, although other main ingredients might include marinated and spiced birds' tongues. In the Middle Ages, there were numerous recipes for pâtisseries (meats — pork, poultry, game or fish — cooked in pastry).

Tinned pâté, being shelf-stable, has sometimes been included in military rations, for, among others, the French Armed Forces, whose rations have included tinned pâté for more than 100 years.

There are numerous varieties of French pâtés or terrines, including:

Chicken liver parfait is a subtype of pâté. Instead of first cooking the livers in butter, for a parfait they are initially puréed when raw and then passed through a sieve or put in a blender before being mixed with, typically, eggs, fortified wine, shallots, thyme, garlic and cognac and cooked in a bain-marie until set. This allows for a smoother texture.

In Central and Eastern Europe, pâté from poultry liver is very popular and it is commonly known as pashtet (Russian : паштет, "pâté", Polish : pasztet, Czech : paštika, Croatian : pašteta). Liver from other animals (such as cow) can also be used. The liver is first cooked (boiled or fried) and mixed with butter or fat and seasonings such as fresh or fried onions, carrots, spices, and herbs. It can be further cooked (usually baked), but most often used without any other preparation. In Russia, the pâté is served on a plate or in a bowl, and is typically moulded into the shapes of animals, such as hedgehogs.

In Ashkenazi Jewish cuisine, a similar recipe is known as chopped liver, with schmaltz used instead of butter and hard-boiled eggs frequently added. Another common type of pâté in Jewish cuisine, also popular in Russia and Ukraine, is vorschmack, or gehakte herring (chopped herring). In Vietnamese cuisine, pâté is commonly used on bánh mì baguette -type sandwiches.

The pâté aux pommes de terre, pronounced [ pɑte o pɔm də tɛʁ ] (Occitan : pastís de patanas), or pâté de pommes de terre is a speciality of the Centre-Val de Loire, Limousin and Allier (Bourbonnais) regions in Central France. It can be served either as a side dish or as the main course. Today it is often eaten with a green salad. Its main ingredients are potato slices and crème fraîche, which are used to fill a puff pastry crust. The pie is then baked in the oven until the dish is covered with a golden-brown crust.

There are different ways to prepare the pâté aux pommes de terre, and the seasonings vary from family to family. Parsley and onion are common ingredients in the Allier, while the use of garlic and meat is common in the Limousin, Haute-Vienne, and Creuse.

Before potatoes began to be used widely in France in the 19th century, this dish was made with leftover bread dough and was baked with a simple garnish of chopped garlic, flat-leaved parsley, and fatty bacon.

Pâté lorrain is a savoury dish from Lorraine in north-east France. It now usually consists of a meat terrine or pâté covered in pastry, usually puff, occasionally shortcrust, but was formerly made without a pastry case. It may be served warm or cold. The dish is regarded as emblematic of Lorraine, and there is a fraternity devoted to its promotion and protection.

Curnonsky, the twentieth-century food writer dubbed Prince élu des gastronomes, published a recipe for pâté lorrain which called for a mixture of veal, fresh pork and game (according to the season) seasoned with pepper, spices, cloves and nutmeg in layers alternating with a forcemeat made of meat scraps, shallots, onions, parsley and fat bacon, moistened with a glass of white wine and baked for two to three hours. Once cooked, the pâté was covered in goose fat and chilled.

More recent recipes call for the mixture to be wrapped in puff pastry (pâte feuilletée) before being put in the oven, although shortcrust (pâte brisée) is sometimes suggested. Marinating the meat overnight or longer in marc de Champagne, white wine or sometimes red wine in a refrigerator is widely recommended. In most recipes the only vegetables in the minced meat are shallots or onions, but occasionally chopped cooked Brussels sprouts are added. The finished dish may be served warm from the oven or cold.

The dish is regarded as emblematic of Lorraine and is traditionally served on festive days, accompanied by a green salad. Like several other revered French dishes, the pâté lorrain has its own society dedicated to promoting it, La Confrérie du Pâté Lorrain de Chatenois. It was founded by members of the management team of the Châtenois Easter Festival together with local shopkeepers, and inaugurated on Easter Day 1990 under the auspices of the Confrérie des Tastes-Cuisses de Grenouilles de Vittel (Fraternity of the Frogs' Legs Tasters of Vittel). There is a gastronomic and festive event, the Fête du Pâté Lorrain, held in Baccarat every September. It has been held for more than 55 years and celebrates pâté lorrain with a parade of a giant pâté, tastings and other entertainments, attracting around 20,000 pâtés and thousands of visitors over a weekend.

Pô (French: [ po ]) was a department of the French First Republic and of the First French Empire in present-day Italy. It was named after the river Po. It was formed in 1802, when the Subalpine Republic (formerly the mainland portion of the Kingdom of Sardinia) was directly annexed to France. A provisional department called Eridan was planned in 1799 and established in 1801 in the French-occupied Piedmont. After the annexation, Eridan was divided between Pô and Doire. Its capital was Turin.

The department was disbanded after the defeat of Napoleon in 1814. At the Congress of Vienna, the Savoyard King of Sardinia was restored in all his previous realms and domains, including Piedmont. Its territory is now part of the Italian province of Turin.

The department was subdivided into the following arrondissements and cantons (situation in 1812):

Its population in 1812 was 399,237, and its area was 414,526 hectares.

Both Old World and New World quail include edible species. The common quail used to be much favoured in French cooking, but quail for the table are now more likely to be domesticated Japanese quail. The common quail is also part of Polish, Maltese, Italian, Mexican, Spanish, Egyptian and Indian cuisines. Quail are commonly eaten complete with the bones, since these are easily chewed and the small size of the bird makes it inconvenient to remove them. Quails were domesticated in China. China is also the largest producer of quail meat in the world.

Quail meat can be toxic with symptoms similar to rhabdomyolysis after consumption. This is referred to as coturnism. It was assumed that this was due to quail having fed on hemlock (e.g., during migration), but hemlock is not necessary for quail being poisonous, and other food sources have been proposed and the reason is unclear. The toxicity of quail meat is limited to certain geographic regions and the migration direction of the quail.

A persistent assumption holds that it is impossible to eat quail every day for a month. This has been the subject of a number of proposition bets; However, it has been achieved on several occasions.

Quails were eaten back in ancient times. In the letter of Shepsi to his mother, one of the Egyptian letters to the dead, he wrote reminding her of all the good deeds he performed during her lifetime. saying … you said to me, your son, “you shall bring me some quails that I may eat them” and I, your son, then brought you seven quails and you ate them …,

A 19th-century recipe from California for Codornices a la española (Spanish-style quail) was prepared by stuffing quails with a mixture of mushrooms, green onion, parsley, butter, lemon juice and thyme. The birds were brushed with lard, bread crumbs and beaten eggs and finished in the oven. A savory pie could be made with quail, salt pork, eggs and fresh herbs.

Only certain species of quail are considered kosher. The Orthodox Union certifies Coturnix coturnix as kosher based upon the masorah of Rabbi Shlomo Zev Zweigenhaft.

The " wage for life " (salaire à vie) or " individual qualification-based wage " (salaire à la qualification personnelle) refers to a form of remuneration proposed by Bernard Friot and the French popular education non-profit Réseau Salariat. At its core is the distinction between work and employment. Publicly funded using social contributions, it would be the building block for a new mode of socioeconomic system.

The qualification-based wage for life consists in paying every citizen a wage by socialising wealth through social contributions (cotisations sociales in French).

According to this conception of economic value, every citizen is entitled to a wage for life that is attached to an irrevocable level of qualification. This theory advocates a new common definition of work that clearly diverges from employment.

Such a wage would not be tied to a particular post—owned by an employer—but to a political status of value-producing individuals. Incidentally, this would enable to clearly identify, in the GDP, the value produced by workers presently considered as unproductive such as house workers, retired workers, unemployed people, volunteers, and students.

It is therefore a profound challenge and alternative to the capitalist logic concerning the fundamental relationship between work and remuneration: instead of paying someone after they have realised a certain number of subordinated tasks for a capitalist or company owner, citizens are paid first as a precondition to then be able to work freely.

According to Bernard Friot, a third of French citizen aged 18 or more already receive a wage based on their qualification rather than their employment status, and are thus, to different degrees, freed from the labour market or market for capitalist goods and services.

This fraction includes civil servants [ fr ] (5.5 millions in 2017), retired people (7.5 millions receiving a lifelong pension greater than 75% of their last wage), self-employed health professionals [ fr ], employees from various formerly nationalised companies— SNCF ; IEG [ fr ] ; Orange ; La Poste —and finally employees who benefit from a minimum wage negotiated through a branch agreement.

According to this economic model, the wage for life directly challenges the notion of profit-making private ownership of the means of production in favour of the notion of co-ownership of use.

Profit-based (or "lucrative") ownership refers to the right to profit or generate an income from private capital, whatever it may be (work tools, pecuniary capital, stock market shares, real estate, rented cars, etc.)

Use-based ownership refers to an asset that is consumed for personal use and from which no income is derived: a house, a car, a work tool, savings for use...etc.

In this model, workers would collaboratively own the means of production and be paid in a socialised manner by a fund of social contributions that all production collectives would feed. The notion of individual qualification would thus be accompanied by the end of the exercise of profit-based private ownership of the means of production while generalising use-based ownership.

The notion of individual qualification (qualification personnelle) needs to be distinguished from that of a mere certification, because in such a system the qualification would imply a compulsory remuneration from the employer, fixed by the collective agreements of a branch. Having a diploma does not necessarily guarantee access to a wage. Instead it provides the legitimacy to claim a post on the labour market.

Individual qualifications aim at granting irrevocable levels following the model of the current French civil service. Thus, according to a democratically chosen wage scale, wage progression would take place through a grade increase throughout an individual's career.

Multiple objections have been raised against the qualification-based wage for life. These are often similar critiques to those initially formulated against the idea of universal basic income, and thought by their authors to be equally applicable in that case.

Some objections may be of a moral nature, requiring the definition of a standard discerning contribution from idleness, or related to a certain conception of justice : should we remunerate an activity that "does not contribute" to production such as voluntary work? Does this not break the social contract that binds individuals according to a logic of cooperation?

The French economist Frédéric Lordon, drawing on Spinoza 's theory of value, points out that Bernard Friot's contribution is precisely to demoralise the notions of economic value and work. He does that by shifting the focus from the economic value of things produced to the individuals who make them, a priori and unconditionally. Freed for the constraints of the labour market, people will continue to produce effects, effects whose objective measurement is fundamentally impossible. Thereby, it removes contributivity and its moral dimension from work itself:

Tout est contribution, donc, plus rien n'appelle d'être regardé comme contribution... et nous sortons de la morale de la contribution.

English translation: "Everything is contribution, therefore nothing calls for being seen as contribution... and we so leave the morality of contribution."

Other objections have an economic motive, concerning the mode of funding for the qualification-based wage or its real transformation of the social relations of capitalism.

Montjoyeux or Montjoyeux-Grandmont is a district of the French city of Tours. It had a population of nearly 3,800 in 2012. Defined by Insee in its division of the Tours commune into 22 statistical information groupings [ fr ] (îlots regroupés pour l'information statistique - IRIS), the district is located in the southern part [ fr ] of the commune. It borders the other Tours districts of Les Fontaines [ fr ] to the north and La Bergeonnerie [ fr ] to the west, as well as the communes of Saint-Avertin to the east, Chambray-lès-Tours to the south and Joué-lès-Tours to the west.

The district is essentially made up of three distinct parts. To the south is the Grandmont park, which includes the university campus [ fr ] of the same name with its scientific faculties and some 1,000 student housing units. To the north, a vast school complex combines two high schools with a middle school, while the residential area to the east comprises detached houses and a large housing estate built in the 1960s. Thanks to the strong presence of the University of Tours, this is one of the city's youngest neighborhoods, while the largest student residence is located here. Its protected park is a biodiversity reserve.

The Montjoyeux-Grandmont district is defined by Insee in its division of the Tours commune into 22 statistical information groupings [ fr ]. It is bounded by the Route de Saint-Avertin to the north, the A10 freeway to the east, the route départementale 943 [ fr ] to the south, and the Avenues de l'Alouette and de Bordeaux to the west. Neighboring districts are Les Fontaines to the north and La Bergeonnerie to the west, with the communes of Saint-Avertin to the east, Chambray-lès-Tours to the south and Joué-lès-Tours to the west.

Today's Montjoyeux-Grandmont district was once a vast forest stretching from the banks of the Cher to Montbazon. Part of it was ceded in 1176 by King Henry II to the Order of Grandmont, a monastic order originally from the Limousin region, which established itself in the area then known as “Bois Rahier”. In 1385, the monastery even briefly became the order's headquarters during the Hundred Years' War. After the order's closure in the 18th century, the Grandmontains left the woods.

Just a few years later, around 1787, François de Conzié [ fr ], Archbishop of Tours, took over the former priory of the Grandmont order, whose dissolution he had also been one of the advocates. In 1788, he began building a château on the site of the former Grandmont priory as his personal country residence. However, the French Revolution interrupted the work, and the archbishop went into exile. The château then changed owners several times, including the lawyer Adrien Lecointre, who carried out restoration work and brought to light the remains of the former monastery.

In 1921, the château was finally acquired by the city of Tours, which used it as a nursery and kindergarten. Together with the surrounding forest park, it became an important leisure and walking area for the people of Tours, who took the old tramway [ fr ] to get there. Mayor Camille Chautemps wanted to turn it into a Touraine-style “ Bois de Boulogne ”, and attendance reached 6,000 people a day. During World War II, the site was occupied by the German army, which took advantage of its height to set up an observation post and anti-aircraft defences.

After World War II, the Château de Grandmont became a youth hostel, and various other projects were envisaged to develop it. However, at the end of the 1950s, the town ceded the site to the State for the construction of the new Lycée de Grandmont, to cope with the growing number of students during the Trente Glorieuses period. Work began in 1959 and the château was demolished in 1961, as the State did not wish to take charge of this old heritage.

In the early 1960s, the town turned to Montjoyeux for its urban development, while awaiting the development of the Cher river. Construction began on the Montjoyeux housing estate to the east of the Lycée de Grandmont, with a total of 520 multi-family dwellings built between 1963 and 1966 on the site of former small agricultural plots. The project comprises six towers and seven bars with simple, white architecture. Between 1964 and 1969, around 100 single-family homes were built further south, to the east of avenue Saint-Vincent-de-Paul, along with a further 200 multi-family dwellings. In 1965, Saint-Jean Church was built between these two areas, on avenue Montjoyeux. It was the first church to be built in the city since the end of World War II, seven years before Saint-Paul in Sanitas [ fr ].

It was also in the 1960s and 1990s that the University of Tours moved its scientific faculties and sports facilities to the new Grandmont university campus [ fr ], in the heart of the woodland to the south of the district. The Faculty of Pharmacy, for example, moved here from the Tonnellé [ fr ] campus.

The urbanization of the neighborhood continued in the following decades. In 1993, the Maryse Bastié social housing company built a complex of 36 detached houses with large apartments on the Bellevue lane. In 2019, however, these units began to be privatized.

In the mid-1990s, mayor Jean Royer and then his successor Jean Germain planned to continue developing the neighborhood. The former even called for the park's protection to be withdrawn, while the latter envisaged the future passage of the tramway through its heart. These projects were abandoned, however, due to the lack of declassification of the protected areas and pressure from a citizens' collective.

Established in 1980 on a two-hectare site in the heart of the district, avenue Goüin, in 2016 Orange abandoned its 8,400 m office space to relocate its 350 employees to Les Deux-Lions [ fr ]. The buildings were immediately demolished and the area was handed over to a property developer, who in 2017 began construction of the first of a series of three residences for a total of 300 homes.

Today's Grandmont Park grew out of a vast area of forest known as Bois Rahier, which once covered some 100 hectares within the city of Tours. Today, the park is reduced in size to around 22 hectares.

The area boasts a high level of diversity, with six shrub formations and 470 animal species, 50 of which are protected. Bird species include the marsh tit, the wood warbler, and the common whitethroat. There are also rabbits and squirrels, while large mammals (foxes, wild boars, and deer) have been absent from the park since the late 19th century, except in exceptional cases. Many amphibian and reptile species have also disappeared. The only remaining species are fire salamanders and palmate newts, themselves in danger of extinction. Some measures have been taken to preserve this biodiversity, such as reducing the number of secondary roads.

The park's biodiversity has been significantly reduced as a result of the downsizing of the forest area, which began in the 17th century to exploit timber and create agricultural zones. In 1728, the forest area fell to 18 hectares, before a policy of reforestation brought the area back to 34 hectares in 1791 and 45 in 1840. However, it was not until the 20th century that the loss of biodiversity accelerated. The park's transformation into a popular public park in 1920 led to extensive damage to the natural area, accentuated by the construction of the Grandmont stadium in 1921 and, above all, from the 1960s onwards by urban development, businesses, and the university, in addition to the traffic arteries that cross the park and the freeway to the east.

Montjoyeux-Grandmont is a relatively diverse neighborhood, with a predominantly middle-class and student population. Residents' average incomes are intermediate: 19,730 euros per year per household on average, or around 1,875 euros per month per household in 2009. The unemployment rate is slightly higher than the municipal average.

Nearly 58% of employees in the neighborhood are white-collar workers, and 16% are retired. Around a third of residents own their own homes and 12% are social housing tenants, compared with 33% and 27% respectively for the commune as a whole in 2012. Only 10% of dwellings are houses, the remainder being apartments and student rooms. Some 44% of dwellings have just one room, and 49% of residents are in the 18-24 age bracket, illustrating the large number of students in the district thanks to the Crous residences.

The district has a modest-sized shopping center, located in the Montjoyeux complex on the allée Jacques Duthoo. In 2011, it included a mini-market, a butcher's shop, a bakery, a brasserie, a hairdressing salon, a La Poste office, a pharmacy, and a tobacconist. In the same year, it was hit by a fire that partially handicapped its operations for several months. While the post office was threatened with closure, the town agreed in 2017 to take it over in the form of a communal postal agency after pressure from residents to do so. This was the only cash dispenser in the neighborhood, which had no other shopping center.

Since 2014, the neighborhood has been home to a small weekly market where farmers sell their produce. It takes place in the Montjoyeux shopping center and is run by an association.

One of the neighborhood's main employers is Électricité de France (EDF), which owns an office complex along the A10 freeway and Avenue Goüin. More than 600 employees work on this site, which was extensively renovated and expanded in 2015. While the regional sales department left the district this year to move to Les Deux-Lions, the state-owned company has strengthened its technical teams on the Montjoyeux site, including engineers from CNEPE [ fr ], responsible for nuclear power plant maintenance.

The district is particularly well known for its secondary schools, which are among the largest in the departement. Grandmont general and technological high school is the largest, with almost 2,000 students in 2017, having been commissioned in 1959 with 600 students, then 950 the following year, while extension work continued for several more years. In 1977, the school complex was divided into three institutions with the creation of the collège Jean-Philippe Rameau and the lycée professionnel Victor Laloux, which took over part of the Grandmont buildings. However, it was not until 1998 that the three schools became independent.

The Lycée professionnel Victor Laloux was completely renovated and extended in 2012, with a concrete and wood structure. The ambitious work began in 2008, with 4,000 m renovated and 8,400 m added, at a cost of around 20 million euros. A gymnasium and boarding facilities were also installed. The Lycée is now home to around 500 students specializing in distribution, commerce, sales, photography, and dental prosthetics.

Lycée Grandmont is also home to nine advanced technician diplomas (brevets de technicien supérieur - BTS) specializing in commerce, engineering, and industry, for a total of about 2200 students.

The University of Tours moved into the southern part of the district in the mid-1960s and expanded again in the 1990s to create a new campus in the middle of the Grandmont park. The two science faculties are located here, with disciplines in computer science, mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology, and geology. The Faculty of Pharmacy joined the campus in 1993, having previously been linked to the Faculty of Medicine on the Tonnellé [ fr ] campus. The campus is also home to the Electrical Engineering and Industrial Computing department of the Tours IUT. SUAPS sports services also joined the campus in the 1990s, with the construction of a sports hall. In 2024, the campus counted 26,010 students, making it the city's fourth-largest and fastest-growing campus.

The Grandmont campus also includes two Crous student residences. The Grandmont residence is the largest in the city, with 1,066 nine-square-meter rooms in eight buildings in the shape of a three-pointed star. The second is called “Les Garennes” and contains 228 larger studios, mostly 18 square meters in size.

One of the district's biggest infrastructures is the Grandmont stadium, located close to the school complex and mainly dedicated to athletics. Its grandstand seats almost 3,000. Prior to the construction of the Stade de la Vallée du Cher in 1978, the Stade de Grandmont was also used for soccer, playing host to Tours FC. In 2011, its lighting, track, and synthetic turf were renovated at a cost of almost one million euros.

The Montjoyeux-Grandmont district is served by the Fil bleu [ fr ] bus network. The “tempo 2” line, the most important after the tramway line, mainly serves the Grandmont campus. Five other bus lines cross the district, making it one of the most served by public transport.

A quenelle (French pronunciation: [ kə.nɛl ]) is a mixture of creamed fish or meat, sometimes combined with breadcrumbs, with a light egg binding, formed into an egg-like shape, and then cooked. The usual preparation is by poaching. Formerly, quenelles were often used as a garnish in haute cuisine. Today, they are more commonly served sauced as a dish in their own right. Similar items are found in many cuisines.

By extension, a quenelle may also be another food made into a similar shape, such as ice cream, sorbet, butter, or mashed potato quenelles.

The word quenelle is attested from 1750. The commonly accepted etymology is that it derives from the German Knödel (noodle or dumpling).

Lyon and Nantua are famous for their quenelles de brochet (pike quenelles), often served with sauce Nantua (crayfish sauce) or sauce mousseline (cream sauce) and run under a grill. The classic dish of quenelles de brochet Nantua or simply quenelles Nantua consists of pike quenelles with sauce Nantua, both pike and crayfish being specialties of the Nantua area. Pike quenelles were invented by a chef named Bontemps to deal with the pike's "multitude of long, fine, forked bones".

Quenelles de brochet are prepared in many ways, but most recipes first prepare a panade, essentially a thick white sauce, then combine the panade with fish, and put the mixture through a sieve such as a tamis, yielding a forcemeat. The quenelles are shaped from the forcemeat and then poached. They may be served sauced and grilled, or with a variety of sauces.

The term race as used in Article One of the French Constitution, which states that France "ensures equality for all citizens without distinction of origin, race, or religion", has been the subject of numerous challenges from across the political spectrum. Nevertheless, no amendments to this wording have been successful since the 2000s.

One challenge arises because the noun race is not defined in official texts and has taken on many meanings in French. It is a technical term in the natural sciences, a pseudo-concept in racist discourse, a reference to The Holocaust, and a sociological and legal tool. The proposed removal of the term from the Constitution—and more broadly from French criminal law —is driven by a desire to erase the legitimizing effect that mentioning race confers to the concept. However, this removal also risks weakening the denunciation of racism.

In France, this debate has been a significant point of contention among anti-racist activists and political figures for decades. Arguments for and against removing the term from the Constitution have persisted since the early 1990s, and the discussions are often highly charged. Some have criticized the word race for its historical connotations or its evocation of a supposed biological reality that has been disproven by scientific evidence. In contrast, others have employed the term in its sociological sense, emphasizing its utility in combating racism.

France is an indivisible, secular, democratic, and social Republic. It ensures equality before the law for all citizens without distinction of origin, race, or religion. It respects all beliefs.

— Article One of the current Constitution.

The phrase "without distinction of race" was originally located in the first paragraph of Article 2 of the French Constitution [ fr ]. It was later relocated to Article 1 of the French Constitution [ fr ] by the constitutional amendment of 4 August 1995.

The term race was not included in the preliminary draft of 29 July 1958, adopted by the government and drafted under the authority of General de Gaulle and the Minister of Justice, Michel Debré. However, the Council of Ministers incorporated it into the final draft on 3 September, possibly as a last-minute addition to circumvent potential controversy surrounding its absence. The identity of the minister who proposed this modification remains uncertain.

The 1946 Constitution only used the word race in the first sentence of its preamble : "…the French people proclaim again that every human being, without distinction of race, religion, or belief, possesses inalienable and sacred rights." This sentence was added by the Constitutional Commission chaired by socialist André Philip, and the wording of the first paragraph was adopted by a show of hands on 28 August 1946, without anyone in the Assembly perceiving it as anything other than a condemnation of racism. A few months earlier, in the April 1946 draft prepared in March, three attempts to include race or racial discrimination had been rejected.

Article 1 of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 1789, which constitutes part of the constitutional framework, states that "men are born and remain free and equal in rights" and that "social distinctions may only be based on common utility." This assertion was in contradiction with the continued practice of slavery, which was not abolished until 1794 and definitively in 1848. Some members of the Assembly were concerned that questioning slavery and the slave trade would result in the collapse of the kingdom and a return to the Ancien régime.

From a linguistic standpoint, the wording of Article One is open to interpretation. It can be interpreted as "some classify humanity into races; French law does not recognize this classification", or "There are races, but the French Republic does not consider them in its treatment of citizens." The positioning of the word race within the list of origin/race/religion lends implicit validation to the existence of such races. This closed list affords significant weight to each of the three terms.

The term race was included in this list when the notion was widely accepted as a biological reality. It is juxtaposed with religion, which is not of the same nature, because, unlike differences in political opinions or languages, race and religion are frequently the basis for discrimination.

According to Arthur Joyeux, the phrase "without distinction of..." does not clarify the meaning of the sentence, as its beginning already states that it concerns "every human being." It merely emphasizes opposition to the decisions made by the Vichy regime.

As early as 1950, shortly after the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on 10 December 1948—which mentions race twice — UNESCO experts argued that "the serious errors caused by the use [of this word] in common language make it desirable to abandon this term when applied to the human species." They recommended using "ethnic groups" instead, although this term is equally difficult to define.

In France, the complete elimination of the term race from legal texts became the subject of public debate from 1990 onwards, with the publication of the implementing decree for the Data Protection and Liberties Law : the legislation permitted judicial and administrative authorities to retain data that revealed an individual's "racial origins." The term race was further discredited by the resurgence of the concept of " ethnic cleansing " during the Bosnian War and by the rediscovery of the " Jewish file " in Fontenay-sous-Bois.

The debate regularly resurfaced in Parliament from the early 2000s.

The question of removing the concept of race from the Constitution inevitably gives rise to the issue of amending the entire body of legislation, particularly criminal law. The term race first emerged in French legislation in 1928 and subsequently in the period preceding World War II. It was subsequently employed by proponents and opponents of racist theories. To emphasize that the concept of the human race is biologically irrelevant, the term has been gradually replaced in anti-racist legislation by expressions such as "true or supposed race" or "so-called race."

The term race, which had long been absent from French legal vocabulary, first appeared in the Journal Officiel with the decree of 8 November 1928, which permitted the naturalization of children born in Indochina to a French father who had not acknowledged them and an indigenous mother, contingent upon the presentation of evidence in court substantiating their affiliation with the "French race." This designation encompassed both biological and cultural criteria. To substantiate their claim to "Frenchness", legal experts considered a range of physical characteristics, including skin pigmentation, as well as cultural attributes such as politeness, participation in sports, and preferences for coastal or mountainous locales.

The term race was subsequently employed in the Marchandeau decrees [ fr ] of 21 April 1939, which were designed to restrict Nazi propaganda by imposing penalties on defamation in the press against "a group of persons belonging by their origin to a particular race or religion with the intent of inciting hatred among citizens." The explanatory text for this decree indicated that race or religion was to be understood based on origin ("a hereditary circumstance").

The Vichy regime revoked the Marchandeau decrees and enacted the law that established the "status of Jews." This law employed the term race to implement antisemitic policies by defining the criteria for belonging to the "Jewish race."

The inclusion of the phrase "without distinction of race" in the preamble of the 1946 Constitution and later in the 1958 Constitution was a direct response to the racial theories that had been used to justify the Holocaust and which had underpinned Nazism.

The legislation enacted on 1 July 1972, which was designed to combat racism, prohibited the consideration of an individual's racial identity. This prohibition was not intended to establish an objective or official definition of race; rather, it was intended to prevent the targeting of specific groups of people based on their racial identity. Consequently, the assertion that "races" are inherently unequal, as Jean-Marie Le Pen said in 1996, remains a valid position.

By the late 1970s, the scientific community had reached a consensus that the concept of race is irrelevant when applied to the human species. During the trial of Klaus Barbie, Albert Jacquard posited that the term "human race" is devoid of meaning, as it is impossible to define races without falling into complete scientific arbitrariness.

The term "belonging, true or supposed, to a race" was introduced into French legislation on 7 June 1977, as a complement to the 1972 law. Nevertheless, the Gayssot Law of 13 July 1990, proscribed "any discrimination based on belonging or not belonging to an ethnic group, nation, race, or religion." The expression "true or supposed race" was only generalized after the 1994 criminal code reform led by Robert Badinter. Clémence Lavigne posited that the adjective "true" introduced ambiguity and should be removed. Bernard Herszberg, a representative of the association Galilée 90, which advocates for the removal of the word race from the Constitution, expressed regret that the formulation "belonging […] to a particular race"—whether "true or supposed"—relativized the notion of belonging without affecting the race itself.

In a 2007 ruling on the law of 20 November 2007, regarding immigration control, integration, and asylum [ fr ], the Constitutional Council stated that the prohibition on distinctions outlined in Article One of the Constitution barred the collection of statistical data based on "ethnic origin or race", even for research purposes.

The expression "so-called race", which underscores the notion that "races" are a mere construct and that it is not French lawmakers who invoke the concept of "race", but rather those who espouse racist ideologies, has been used in Belgian legislation since 2003. However, it was only in 2016 that this terminology was introduced in French legislation.

In 2021, French anti-racist legislation was expanded to prohibit not only the consideration of so-called "race" as a basis for discrimination, but also any consideration of this so-called race, even for affirmative action.

The decree of 10 October 2023, concerning the implementation of the "Information System for Monitoring Priority Criminal Policies" (SISPoPP), authorizes the collection of "data revealing racial or ethnic origin." This authorization has prompted several unions and associations to petition the Council of State to ban the system.

Since the 1990s, a number of proposals have been put forth to remove the term race from either all legislative texts or solely from Article One of the Constitution. An examination of the proceedings of a 1992 symposium dedicated to this issue reveals that the arguments and counterarguments presented have remained largely unchanged. While there is a consensus that the negative connotations associated with the term race should be condemned, there is also a recognition that the removal of the term could potentially have the unintended consequence of undermining anti-racist efforts.

I am pleased with the removal of the word race, a term under which not only were the worst theories in human history constructed, but they were also implemented during the first half of the 20th century.

This is an opportunity to strike the word race from our Constitution. For years, our fellow citizens have relegated it to the dustbin of history, as it represents concepts and values that are no longer theirs.

Public law professor Gwénaële Calvès notes the pervasiveness of historical references in discussions surrounding the removal of the term race from legal discourse. Mario Stasi [ fr ], the president of LICRA since 2017, articulated in 2018 that the term race should be eliminated from the legal framework, emphasizing that its presence in the Constitution reflects a historical era when its usage was prevalent. The Constitution was drafted during a period when racial distinctions were widely accepted as factual.

Magali Bessone offers a counterargument, proposing that racism persists because it is not merely an issue of outdated concepts and values. Calvès asserts that the historical argument is inadequate for justifying a revision of Article 1, as it is evident that the term is not employed in its genocidal sense within the French law context. In contrast to the Vichy regime, where race was defined in legal texts, it is currently used in a context of negation. Legal scholar Clémence Lavigne posits that this usage implies that lawmakers do not recognize any classification of humanity into different races.

This argument posits that, since the scientific validity of the concept of the human race has been refuted, using the word race in the Constitution creates a contradiction between law and science that must be resolved.

This contradiction between law and science can no longer persist.

— Michel Vaxès (PCF), in the rationale for his 2003 bill

A variation of this argument seeks to align the Constitution with a fundamental anthropological truth:

Sixty years ago, Claude Lévi-Strauss declared that there was only one race, that of humanity as a whole. Removing the word race acknowledges human beings in their shared humanity, culture, and dignity.

— Serge Letchimy (Martinican Progressive Party, affiliated with the Socialist group in the National Assembly)

In contrast, the drafters of the 1972 law on combating racism (commonly, though inaccurately, referred to as the Pleven Law) — initiated to align French legislation with the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination — and the Gayssot Law (1990) asserted that the law must provide the means to combat racism precisely because race does not exist.

Some legal scholars posit that the law does not merely reflect reality; rather, it is the law that creates the world, particularly through fundamental principles such as the declaration that "all men are born and remain free and equal in rights." It is therefore imperative that the discourses of science and law be kept distinct: racism is not penalized because it is a false theory, but rather because it is deemed inimical to the democratic values enshrined in the Constitution. Geneticist Albert Jacquard also posits that "the issue of racism is not a scientific problem but a philosophical and moral challenge." Furthermore, he asserts that the scientific evidence disproving the existence of biological races is unlikely to persuade those who perceive differences in others daily. Jacquard adds that biology cannot provide a scientific foundation for the philosophical conviction of equal human dignity.

Moreover, the possibility of essentializing the concept of race persists, including in scientific literature. Many researchers caution that relying on biological arguments is a double-edged sword. If new scientific discoveries were to validate the notion of "biological race", it would challenge the notion that racism must be repressed on the grounds of its falsehood.

It is not about replacing the word race with others: it is about removing it, eradicating it. No concept of race should persist in our society.

— Laetitia Avia (LREM deputy, chair of the mission to combat racism and anti-Semitism on the internet)

In 2013, communist deputy François Asensi addressed the National Assembly, explaining that the presence of the word in the law contributes to "normalizing its use, even among the youngest of our citizens," and gives "racist discourse [a] form of legitimization."

As posited by Gwénaële Calvès, the notion that racism is correlated with a dearth of knowledge regarding scientific advancement may have been a pivotal factor in the discussions that culminated in the criminalization of Holocaust denial [ fr ] in 1990.

The legal significance is strong. Removing the word race is, of course, a powerful symbol.

— Nicole Belloubet (Minister of Justice in the second Philippe government, under President Emmanuel Macron)

The signal that France sends to the world will necessarily be seen as perfect.

— Gabriel Serville (deputy from French Guiana, member of the Democratic and Republican Left group)

This argument posits that the reformulation is performative, whereby the act of removing the term race from the equation is an explicit expression of equality among all citizens.

In contrast, philosopher Étienne Balibar posits that the symbol would be negative. He encourages consideration of the implications of a potential constitutional amendment in France that would remove the existing stipulation of equality before the law without distinction of race. Such a move, he argues, would symbolically eliminate a significant expression and condemnation of discrimination, as well as one of the key means of resisting its institutionalization. Constitutionalist François Borella [ fr ] posits that the removal of a word from our Constitution, which was originally introduced in reaction to Nazism and to condemn racial discrimination in the constitutions of all states and all international human rights treaties, would inevitably be interpreted in a manner contrary to the intentions of its proponents.

Regarding the aspiration of the expressivist interpretation of the law, political theory professor Cécile Laborde posits that "the crucial point is not what the government intends to convey, nor how citizens subjectively perceive the messages, but rather whether the government's messages objectively reflect appropriate attitudes towards citizens." In the context of Critical race theory, many scholars in France and the United States argue that eliminating race is an act of ignorance and the disqualification of situated knowledge, rather than a gesture of emancipation. They contend that the act of "naming race" (in its constructivist sense) most clearly expresses anti-racism. They further assert that removing the word means refusing to take the perspective of those concerned and risks erasing the trace of their discrimination.

This rewriting of the first article of the Constitution, in accordance with our republican universalist tradition, would restore France to what it should never have ceased to be: a model for protecting citizens' equality before the law.

— Ferdinand Mélin-Soucramanien, professor of public law at the University of Bordeaux.

The elimination of the term is consistent with France's " color-blind " policy, which is based on the republican universalist ideal [ fr ] that combating racism necessitates the elimination of all attention to racial criteria.

Mario Stasi [ fr ], the president of the LICRA, posits that the removal of the term race would assist in "countering those who endeavor to suggest the existence of a form of ' state racism ' in France by citing Article 1 of our Constitution." He further posits that this is particularly crucial at a juncture when "identity-based threats" are giving rise to a resurgence of "neo-colonial" discourse, thereby reinvigorating the very concept of "race" and its attendant terminology, including "racialized workshops", "racially segregated union training", and "racial whiteness."

Legal scholar Danièle Lochak [ fr ] offers a contrasting perspective, proposing that universalism should be conceptualized not as a preexisting state, but as a goal to be pursued. She posits that universalism must be constructed upon accepting plural identities, rather than their negation. Lochak asserts that attempts to erase the concept of race are akin to a form of political correctness that creates the impression of action while failing to address the underlying issues. She situates herself within the ongoing discourse between those who advocate for a universalist anti-racism approach, which some critics have labeled as "moral", and those who favor a political anti-racism stance, which others have characterized as "identity-based." Lochak also cautions against the phenomenon of "reverse essentialism", which she believes risks confining individuals to fixed and exclusive identities.

No, race doesn't exist. Yes, race exists. No, it's not what we say it is, but it remains the most tangible, real, and brutal of realities."

The assertion that " human races do not exist" is predicated on a naturalistic interpretation of the concept, while simultaneously disregarding its socio-constructivist interpretation, which has been the dominant paradigm in French social sciences since the seminal work of sociologist Colette Guillaumin. Despite the lack of biological legitimacy attributed to race, it is a social construct and a social reality. Contemporary sociologists employ the concepts of racialization and racialism to describe race, emphasizing the racist process of othering.

In this context, the term race is widely used in the social sciences to describe a "powerful imaginary category" that serves to justify social hierarchies. Simone Bonnafous [ fr ] and Pierre Fiala posit that "the imaginary race has real effects in social practices, and Article 2 of the Constitution denies any legal validity to this imaginary race." Philosopher Chantal Delsol further asserts that "the law must not ignore social reality; it must account for even invented or irrational differences, especially those that matter."

Historian Pap Ndiaye defends the retention of the term race in the Constitution, emphasizing that the use of the racial category does not imply a questionable ontological commitment by legislators or scholars to the existence of "races." Rather, he asserts, it is a pragmatic use of a situated category to describe discriminatory phenomena.

Many commentators have drawn attention to the potential risks associated with the weakening of anti-racist legislation if the term race is removed. These include constitutional scholar Didier Maus [ fr ], law professors Bertrand Mathieu [ fr ] and Jean-Philippe Derosier [ fr ], philosopher Éric Deschavanne, and historian Pap Ndiaye, who, in 2018, expressed opposition to the removal of the controversial term from Article 1, arguing that it would represent "one of those grand legislative gestures full of good intentions but with negative consequences."

Philosopher Pierre-André Taguieff characterizes the removal as a "symbolic victory", suggesting that it would also necessitate the removal of derivative terms like "racist", which could be interpreted as implying that racial discrimination is no longer prohibited. In 2013, Dominique Baudis, then the Defender of Rights, was consulted regarding a proposal to eliminate the concept of race from French legislation. He acknowledged the symbolic value of the project but expressed concern about its practical consequences. Similarly, philosopher Antonia Soulez warns that "the explicit denial, especially in a constitutional text, has the effective force of a stance against race as a criterion." She further states that "if the denial disappears, along with the word 'race,' the Constitution will no longer respond when, in the face of resurgent racism, it is needed."

Nevertheless, some scholars contend that the legal framework would remain robust even if race were removed from Article 1. In 1992, constitutional scholar Olivier Duhamel posited that incorporating a "rejection of racism" into the Constitution would permit the exclusion of race without compromising the efficacy of anti-racist legislation. In 2018, Minister of Justice Nicole Belloubet underscored the multitude of legal safeguards enshrined in the 1958 Constitution, which cites the 1946 Constitution and the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen, both of which are integral to the constitutional block. Nevertheless, Magali Bessone observes that Belloubet's remarks indicate that race is not an inherently antiquated category but rather a crucial legal instrument. Conversely, Françoise Vergès posits that the 1946 Constitution's preamble, which has never been invoked to challenge racial discrimination before the Constitutional Council, does not afford the same protection against racism as Article 1 of the 1958 Constitution.

Since 2002, at least ten legislative initiatives have been proposed to remove the term race from the French Constitution or penal code. Among these, one may cite a bill passed by the National Assembly in 2013 but never debated in the Senate, as well as a constitutional revision abandoned in 2018.

In November 2002, during the review of the constitutional bill on the decentralized organization of the Republic, Socialist Victorin Lurel proposed an amendment to remove the reference to race from the Constitution. This proposal was rejected by the UMP group. In March 2003, Communist deputy Michel Vaxès proposed an amendment to replace the terms race and racial in French legislation with " ethnicity " and "ethnic." However, the right-wing majority rejected this amendment, arguing that it would weaken the requirement to combat racism. In the same year, the Communist and Republican group in the National Assembly introduced a bill intending to remove the term race from French legislation. However, they specified that they had elected not to propose amendments to the preambles of the 1946 Constitution and the 1958 Constitution, which they regarded as the foundational texts of the Republic and therefore of historical significance. In 2004 and 2007, Victorin Lurel and the Socialist group once again presented a constitutional bill to eliminate the term race from Article 1 of the Constitution. Additionally, an amendment was proposed to replace the term race with "origins." These two initiatives were ultimately rejected by the National Assembly. On 15 May 2008, Arnaud Montebourg introduced another amendment during discussions on a constitutional reform aimed at modernizing the institutions of the Fifth Republic. This amendment sought to remove the term race from Article 1. However, the proposal faced significant opposition in the Senate, notably from Robert Badinter. Ultimately, the amendment was rejected by the rapporteur.

During a public meeting on overseas territories in the 2012 presidential campaign, Socialist candidate François Hollande articulated a commitment to remove race from the Constitution, offering a rationale for this position.

The Republic does not fear diversity because diversity is movement, it is life. Diversity of backgrounds, origins, and colors, but not diversity of races.

During the 2012 presidential campaign, those who opposed the removal of the term race from the French Constitution offered vehement criticism of the proposal. On 26 March 2012, Nicolas Sarkozy stated in Ormes that modifying the text would be "blasphemous, a denial of our country's identity and history, and an insult to those who drafted it." He underscored his dedication to upholding the Constitution's historical anti-racist intent. Similarly, Marine Le Pen opposed the change, arguing for the retention of tools to combat what she termed anti-white racism. Political analysts, such as Camille Bouzereau, interpreted these stances as attempts to ridicule François Hollande's proposal. Sarkozy, for instance, made a sarcastic remark on 30 March 2012, suggesting that eliminating the word "unemployed" would solve the unemployment problem.

Following François Hollande's election, the constitutional amendment that had been promised was notably absent from the revision draft that was presented in March 2013. Nevertheless, the Socialist Party endorsed a legislative proposal introduced by Alfred Marie-Jeanne, a deputy from Martinique, and supported by the Left Front. The objective of this legislative proposal was to modify existing French legislation, specifically the Penal Code, the French code of criminal procedure, and the Press Freedom Act, without amending the Constitution. The proposed amendments asserted that the French Republic is committed to combating racism, anti-Semitism, and xenophobia and does not recognize the existence of any so-called race. Additionally, the proposed legislation aimed to replace the term race with expressions such as "based on racist criteria" or "motivated by racism" throughout French legislation. At the time, Christiane Taubira, Minister of Justice, commended the initiative as "a necessary, noble, and powerful act during a period marked by the resurgence and uninhibited expression of rejection toward others." Despite being adopted by the National Assembly on 16 May 2013, the bill was never debated by the Senate. In 2015, the Left Front attempted to revive the issue in the Senate following a controversial statement by European Parliament member Nadine Morano (Les Républicains), who referred to a "white race." However, their efforts were unsuccessful.

During Emmanuel Macron 's presidency, the National Assembly's commission voted unanimously on 27 June 2018 (with 119 members present) to remove the word race from Article 1 of the Constitution. The vote was part of a broader review of the constitutional bill " for a more representative, responsible, and effective democracy. [ fr ] " The word was retained in the preamble of the 1946 Constitution. Furthermore, the amendment proposed the inclusion of a prohibition against "distinction based on sex." The revised Article 1 was to read as follows: "France is an indivisible, secular, democratic, and social republic. The aforementioned article ensures equality before the law for all citizens, without distinction of sex, origin, or religion. The amendment was adopted in a plenary session on July 12, 2018, by unanimous vote, except for opposition from those representing the far-right. However, the constitutional reform process was interrupted by the Benalla affair and ultimately abandoned. In the following year, the proposed modification was omitted from a new version of the constitutional reform bill, which was now titled " for a renewal of democratic life. [ fr ] " Delphine Batho, an independent MP at the time, attempted to reintroduce the amendment to Article 1. However, the government insisted that the discussions remain focused on the recommendations of the Citizens Convention for Climate, which led to the rejection of the amendment by the Law Commission. This second attempt at constitutional reform was also abandoned.

In June 2020, amidst a surge in anti-racist activism following the murder of George Floyd, Minister of City and Housing Julien Denormandie (LREM) endeavored to reopen the discourse surrounding the removal of the term race from the French Constitution. Subsequently, in March 2021, the Socialist group proposed a series of five amendments to a proposed modification of Article 1 of the Constitution, in conjunction with the legislation aimed at combating climate change and enhancing resilience to its effects [ fr ]. These amendments were rejected, and the constitutional reform project was once again abandoned. In July 2021, a constitutional bill was presented by François Jolivet (LREM), who had been absent during the vote in 2018. The only argument provided in the bill's explanatory notes was that "the persistence of [the mention of the word race] is now misunderstood, contrary to its original intent." However, this proposal ultimately went without further action.

The day we remove the word racism, will we have removed the idea? I mean, it's absurd!

Even if the intention is commendable, abolishing 'race' in social sciences or the Constitution will not make the discrimination based on it disappear.

Scholars of the field, Simone Bonnafous [ fr ] and Pierre Fiala, have observed that the legal prohibition of a word has never resulted in the desired positive social behavioral change. The proposal to simply remove the word race from the Constitution, which is advocated by the Galilée Association and supported by certain legislators, is often viewed as symbolically dangerous, absurd, naive, or futile. Liberal-conservative philosopher Chantal Delsol characterizes this approach as a form of "magical thinking" or ideological belief, likening it to an attempt to reinvent reality by erasing words. This perspective echoes the world depicted in George Orwell 's 1984. Despite the assertion by parliamentarians who voted for its removal in 2013 that this measure would not eliminate racism, many argue that it would not achieve this goal.

Gwénaèle Calvès posits that replacing the term race with "racist" or "for racist reasons", a change approved only by the National Assembly in 2013, would have prompted inquiries into the motives of the perpetrator of discrimination. However, such motives are not pertinent when defining a criminal offense. In the absence of a criminal context, the proposed change would have had the effect of absolving several forms of discrimination, including indirect and unintentional discrimination. The replacement of race with an expression using the adjective "racist" was also discussed by lawyer Emmanuel Derieux, who posited that this would render judicial work more subjective, as it would be challenging to ascertain the racist intent of an individual engaging in discriminatory behavior. Furthermore, the use of the plural form in the expression "for racist reasons" gives rise to questions: does it imply that there must be at least two reasons?

In 1992, constitutionalist Olivier Duhamel presented four alternative solutions for replacing the term "race." "Denunciation" (replacing race with pretended race); "substitution" (replacing race with ethnicity); "abstraction" (replacing race with a prohibition such as any category that discriminates between human beings); and "rectification" (replacing race with, say, genetic traits). He believes that "denunciation" is an ineffective strategy, noting that in the modern media landscape, attempts at denial are largely futile. The term "pretended race" may not be an effective solution, as it may still be perceived as a reference to race by the general public. From a political standpoint, the use of " ethnicity " is merely a euphemism, which Étienne Balibar asserts contributes to racist discourse. The use of an abstract circumlocution fails to achieve its intended educational objective. However, "rectification" would provide "protection against sociobiologists and racialists of all kinds." He proposes a formula that he deems both politically and legally useful, assuming the effect of redundancy: "without distinction based on origin, religion, real or pretended genetic traits, real or supposed ethnic affiliation, or any category aimed at discriminating between human beings."

Simone Bonnafous [ fr ] and Pierre Fiala critique the potential dangers of judicially regulating language and propose replacing the ternary list (sex/race/religion) with an open list, as seen in Article 2 of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This list includes explicit non-exhaustive marks with the repetition of "any other", thereby mitigating the adverse effects of the term race and underscoring the universal rights of each individual.

In the Senate in 2008, Robert Badinter also proposed complementing the enumeration "without distinction of origin, race, or religion" because he believed that "there is no reason to forget other forms of discrimination and the harm they cause." He even suggested removing it entirely, so that Article 1 would simply read: "France is an indivisible, secular, democratic, and social Republic. It guarantees equality before the law for all citizens."

Clémence Lavigne proposes a solution that has not been previously considered by lawmakers, potentially due to its lack of a strong symbolic impact. She suggests including a preamble that would clarify the use of the term race, as seen in several European texts.

While combating racism is not merely a matter of words, this debate is not futile. Sociologist Didier Fassin, cited by Lavigne, offers a compelling perspective on this matter.

The difficulty of expressing ourselves places us under the obligation to think; in other words, our awkwardness in addressing these 'racial' questions and categories is not a handicap to overcome, but a truth we must confront.

In the aftermath of the First World War, the term race was still not widely employed in Europe. The term "without distinction of race" is found in the Austrian Constitution of 1920, the Czechoslovak Constitution of 1920, and the Soviet Constitution of 1936. In the aftermath of World War II, the 1946 Yugoslav Constitution, as outlined in Article 21, asserts the equality of all citizens "without distinction of race." The preamble to the French Constitution of 1946 subsequently adopted this formula, applying it to all human beings. The expression then appeared in the peace treaties of 10 February 1947, the 1947 Italian Constitution, the 1949 German Basic Law, and in all constitutions adopted after 1945 by former communist states in Europe, America, Asia, and Africa.

The 1961 South African Constitution represents a notable exception, marking a significant break with the Commonwealth. Notably, it does not include a declaration of rights, with the principles of apartheid being governed by other laws. In stark contrast to the preceding South African constitutional texts, those adopted after the end of apartheid prohibit discrimination on the grounds of race. This is enshrined in the 1996 Constitution. The Constitution permits positive discrimination based on "race" (affirmative action), in contrast to "unfair discrimination", and denounces racial hatred. The South African Constitutional Court has stated that the Constitution's long-term goal is to create a "non-racial" society where the significance of "race" would disappear. However, the text is not racially neutral because one cannot ignore "the country's glaring history in which race, combined with class and gender, was the determining factor in the distribution of resources in our society for more than 300 years." Constitutional scholar Pierre de Vos takes issue with the colorblind viewpoint, which he believes "denies the reality of race." He asserts that the South African Constitution "differs from those that start with the principle that everyone is equal and, in doing so, merely ratify existing inequalities."

The Constitution of Australia is the only one that still permits its national parliament to discriminate against individuals based on their "race." The Constitution of Australia came into effect in 1901 with several articles mentioning the "aboriginal race." The first Prime Minister, Edmund Barton, asserted that the Commonwealth should have the authority to "regulate the affairs of people of color or inferior race." The Constitution has been amended on several occasions, the most recent being in 1967, to recognize the rights of Aboriginal people. However, it still includes Article 25, which stipulates that states may exclude people from voting based on their "race", and Article 51 (the Race power), which grants the Commonwealth the authority to pass special laws for people "of any race." In the context of the controversy surrounding the construction of the Hindmarsh Island Bridge in 1998, the High Court of Australia made a ruling that highlighted the constitutional authority of the national parliament to enact legislation that could be perceived as discriminatory. In the 2017 Uluru Statement, Indigenous peoples called for establishing a body, designated as "the Voice", which would be empowered to issue opinions on laws and public policies affecting Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. The decision was submitted to a referendum in 2023, which ultimately resulted in a rejection. During the campaign, those in opposition asserted that "the constitutional amendment is based on race, so it is racist", whereas proponents contended that the Australian Constitution has been inherently racist since its inception and that the amendment would recognize Indigenous peoples without validating the existence of biological races.

Austria spearheaded the initial efforts to remove the term race from its legislative framework. In 2004, it replaced it with the term "ethnic affiliation" (ethnische Zugehörigkeit) in the Federal Equal Treatment Act [ fr ] (Gleichbehandlungsgesetz) and the Federal Equal Treatment Act applicable to the public service sector (Bundesgleichbehandlungsgesetz). However, it did not extend this change to its penal code. The Finnish penal code employs the terms race and racial, but in 2000, the term origin (alkuperän) was established as the preferred term in the Constitution. In Sweden, the term race was removed from the text of the Non-Discrimination Act (Diskrimineringslagen) in 2008, and the term "ethnicity" was introduced in its place.

In Germany, the use of the word race in the Constitution (Grundgesetz) was questioned in 2008 by the German Institute for Human Rights, which argued that the text should not contain a term "used since the late 17th century to categorize and hierarchize groups of people." This argument was reiterated in 2015 by the Black People's Initiative. The debate was rekindled in Germany following the murder of George Floyd, and a revision procedure was initiated in 2021 to replace the term race with a reference to racism. However, the process was postponed due to a lack of consensus. The arguments presented in this debate are largely analogous to those presented in France.

In contrast, the term race does not engender debate in English-speaking countries. It is employed in the Fifteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, adopted in 1870, and has become a routine term in administrative, legal, and common usage. In the United Kingdom, the Race Relations Act has been in force since 1965, condemning racial discrimination. However, in contrast to critical race theory, which employs the concept of race in a liberating manner, there is an "eliminativist" trend in North American philosophical literature, primarily represented by Anthony Appiah, who posits that combating racism can be achieved by ceasing to use the term race.

The condemnation of all racial discrimination is a fundamental tenet of all major international treaties, with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948, serving as the foundational document in this regard.

The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, opened for signature by the United Nations on 21 December 1965, defines racial discrimination as "any distinction, exclusion, restriction, or preference based on race." France signed the Convention on 18 April 1971, at a time when neither the government nor the parliamentary majority anticipated that it would result in legislative changes. However, this did occur with the 1972 anti-racism law.

The term race is also employed in European texts, most notably in Article 10 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, signed by France on 25 March 1957. This article states that "in the definition and implementation of its policies and actions, the Union seeks to combat any discrimination based on […] race or ethnic origin." Similarly, the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, adopted on 7 December 2000, prohibits discrimination based on race, color, or ethnic origin in Article 21. The Directive of 29 June 2000, further clarifies the principle of equal treatment among individuals "without distinction of race or ethnic origin", prefacing the text with a warning about the meaning of "race."

Raclette (/ r ə ˈ k l ɛ t /, French: [ ʁaklɛt ]) is a dish of Swiss origin, also popular in other countries, based on heating cheese and scraping off the melted part, then typically served with boiled potatoes. Raclette is historically a dish originating from the canton of Valais in Switzerland. This cheese from Valais benefits from an AOP. Raclette cheese is also a Swiss-type cheese marketed specifically to be used for this dish.

Raclette is also served as street food, but often with bread instead of potatoes.

Dishes of melted cheese were mentioned in medieval texts from Swiss convents as early as 1291. Melted cheese was originally consumed by peasants in the mountainous Alpine regions of the cantons of Valais and Fribourg (Switzerland), and Savoie and Haute-Savoie (France). It was then known in the German-speaking part of Switzerland as Bratchäs or Bratkäse, "roasted cheese". Traditionally, cow herders carried cheese with them when they were moving cows to or from pastures up in the mountains. In the evening, the cheese would be placed next to a campfire for softening, then scraped onto bread. Melting raclette-type cheese in front of a fire is attested in Valais as early as 1574. Since 1875, the French term raclette is commonly used for this dish. At the 1909 Cantonal Exhibition of Sion, raclette was promoted as a national dish of Valais. Raclette eventually gained national (and international) popularity from the 1964 National Exhibition.

In Valais, raclette is typically served with potatoes, cornichons (fermented, pickled cucumbers), pickled onions, black tea, other warm beverages, or Fendant wine. A popular French option is to serve it with white wine, such as Savoy wine, but Riesling and pinot gris are also common. Traditionally, it is consumed with black tea, since a warm beverage is considered to aid digestion.

Raclette is a dish native to parts of Switzerland. The raclette cheese round is heated, either in front of a fire or by a special machine, then scraped onto diners' plates.

A modern way of serving raclette involves an electric table-top grill with small pans, known as coupelles, in which slices of raclette cheese are melted.

Radical Network (French : Réseau radical was a French far-right study group from 2002 to 2006. Formed in June 2002, a number of its early members came from those who split from Unité Radicale that April, notably Christian Bouchet, Luc Bignot and Giorgio Damiani.

Adhering to solidarism, the group avowedly rejected Left-Right politics and claimed to be inspired not only by rightists like Aleksandr Dugin, François Duprat, Julius Evola and Jean-François Thiriart but also by socialists such as Louis Auguste Blanqui. It used the trident as its emblem and also organised a youth movement, Jeune dissidence. In keeping with their status as a study group it numbered around 40 hardcore activists.

With their activities co-ordinated by a Conseil solidariste radical, it adopted a position of Anti-Americanism, Anti-capitalism and Anti-Zionism, whilst leaning towards the ideas of Neo-Eurasianism. In keeping with such ideas, it supported Saddam Hussein, Serbia and Montenegro, Carlos the Jackal and Hugo Chávez, amongst others. It was close to the magazine Résistance, a National Bolshevik publication produced by sometime member Bouchet.

The group was dissolved by its creators in early 2006, with some regrouping as Les nôtres.

Radio Forces Françaises de Berlin (Radio FFB) was a broadcaster catering to the French military contingent in the French Sector of West Berlin. It was located in the Quartier Napoléon near Tegel Airport in the French sector.

Radio broadcasts began on 8 May 1957. FFB began broadcasting on 93.6 MHz FM in 1959. Most programmes were from the French national broadcaster RTF (later ORTF). This was initially a mixture of France Inter, France Culture and France Musique, but by the 1980s, only France Inter programmes were being broadcast.

On 15 September 1963, the French-language programmes were supplemented with German-language broadcasts to listeners in the Berlin area. Consisting of hour-long programmes aired between 1800 and 1900 local time, these were later produced by the German service of Radio France Internationale. There were also locally produced short bulletins for members of the French garrison in Berlin.

The departure of the Allies from Berlin in 1994 signalled the end of the FFB radio service. The 93.6 MHz frequency has been used ever since by Radio France Internationale, meaning that from July 1995, French radio broadcasts could still be received in Berlin and Brandenburg on 93.6 MHz and 106.0 MHz.

In 1980, a TV station, Télévision Française à Berlin, was established, for which, like the radio station, programming was acquired from the French domestic channels, TF1 and Antenne 2 (now France 2). From 1984, the international French-language channel TV5 (now TV5Monde) was carried. In addition to programming from TF1 and Antenne 2, it also carried programming from FR3 (now France 3). The service was available in West Berlin over the air on channel 31 (SECAM G, after December 1990: PAL G) and also via cable, but only in the French Sector.

Following the withdrawal of French forces from the reunified Berlin, FFB radio and TFB television broadcasts ceased in June 1994.

Radio France (French pronunciation: [ ʁadjo fʁɑ̃s ]) is the French national public radio broadcaster.

The two principal missions of Radio France are to create and develop programming across all of its stations, and to oversee the development and management of its musical ensembles. These consist of the Orchestre National de France (National Orchestra of France), the Orchestre Philharmonique de Radio France (Radio France Philharmonic Orchestra), the Chœur de Radio France (Choir of Radio France), and the Maîtrise de Radio France, a choir school that includes a choir of children and teenagers.

Radio broadcasting in France began to develop at the end of the 19th century. In 1897, a year after the experiments of Marconi, Eugène Ducretet began trials of radio transmission using a mast installed on the third level of the Eiffel Tower. By 1921, regular information broadcasts were taking place from a studio in the tower, including weather forecasts and stock market prices.

On 6 November 1922, eight days before the creation of the BBC, Radiola began regular broadcasts as the first private French radio transmitter. In 1924 it was renamed Radio Paris. Other stations soon followed, including Radio Toulouse and Radio Lyon, and later Radio Luxembourg in 1932 and 1933. By the outbreak of World War II, France had 14 commercial and 12 public radio stations.

Between 1940 and 1944, radio broadcasting in both the German-occupied zone and the southern territory governed by the Vichy regime was taken over by the state. During 1942 and 1943, with the agreement of the Vichy authorities, Radio Monte Carlo and its financial holding company, SOFIRAD, were established. Following the Liberation of France in 1944, the state maintained a broadcasting monopoly for practical and ideological reasons. Public service radio was provided by the RDF, which soon became the RTF, and later the ORTF in 1964.

In 1955, the commercial station Europe No. 1 began broadcasting from the Saarland region of Germany, which had been released from French occupation that year. A decade later, in 1965, the French radio services were reorganised under the direction of Roland Dhordain. France I and France II were merged to form RTF Inter, later renamed France Inter. France III became RTF Promotion, later France Culture, while France IV was renamed RTF Haute Fidélité and later France Musique.

A major restructuring occurred in 1975 when the ORTF was dissolved. Its activities were divided among several new organisations, including television channels (TF1 (Télévision française 1), Antenne 2 and France Région 3), the technical transmission operator (TDF — Télédiffusion de France), archive and training services (INA — Institut National de l'Audiovisuel), and production services (SFP — Société Française de Production). At that point, Radio France became an independent public service radio broadcaster under state control.

In 1981, after pressure from independent and pirate broadcasters as well as commercial radio interests, the newly elected president François Mitterrand authorised the licensing of “free radio” stations. These became known as radios locales privées. Initially supported by state subsidies, they were later funded through commercial advertising from 1984, and by 1986 many had formed national networks. This marked the re-emergence of a private radio sector broadcasting from within France.

By 1999, radio listening remained widespread in the country. The daily radio audience reach was 83%, with listeners spending on average more than three hours per day listening. Radio sets were present in 99% of French homes, 80% of households had a car radio, and 26.8% owned a personal stereo.

In 2000, Radio France reorganised its network of stations. France Bleu became a purely regional network mainly broadcasting on FM, while the national AM frequencies were reassigned to France Info. Several FIP stations in major cities were closed and replaced by the youth-oriented station Le Mouv'.

In 2015, Radio France announced that it would end its Medium Wave (AM) broadcasts on 31 December of that year.

Radio France offers seven national networks:

In September 2019, a bill emanating from the Ministry of Culture announces the creation of "France Médias", a parent company which will bring together France Télévisions, Radio France, France Médias Monde and the INA. This bill also provides for the end of the appointments of directors of Radio France by the CSA, a power which will be attributed to the board of directors of the radiophonic entity, which will continue to operate independently, but also in synergy with the other entities of France Médias.

Mathieu Gallet, former president and CEO of the Institut national de l'audiovisuel (National Audiovisual Institute (INA)) from 2010 to 2014, was unanimously appointed by the members of the Higher Audiovisual Council (CSA)

Thus, he was revoked by the CSA and Sibyle Veil took over.

Beyond its primary profession which is to make radio, Radio France works on many political, social or cultural projects. The group deploys resources to support various causes, is committed on several fronts, and makes it known through communication actions. Thus, in 2018 Radio France indicates that:

Radio France has its headquarters at the Maison de la Radio et de la Musique, a circular building designed by the architect Henry Bernard (architect) and inaugurated in December 1963 by President Charles de Gaulle, which stands beside the River Seine in the 16th arrondissement of Paris. In addition to housing Radio France's central services and the studios of several of its channels, the building is home to the Musée de Radio France, a museum of radio and television broadcasting and recording techniques. The building caught fire in October 2014.

In application of the law of 14 November 2016 and its implementing decree of 21 March 2017, an ethics committee is created to strengthen freedom, the independence and pluralism of the media. […] This committee is made up of five independent individuals appointed for three years, and whose mandate is renewable.

The headquarters of Radio France is constituted of roughly a hundred studios dedicated to radio broadcasts and concerts, as well as an auditorium, which stands on the site of the former studios 102 and 103. Public broadcasts and concerts are generally held in studio 105 (with 237 seats) and studio 106 (with 137 seats). Studios 611, 621, 511, and 521 are dedicated to the France Inter channel. Studio 221 is described as the "telegenic" studio, where programs such as "Les Informés", "8.30 Franceinfo", or "Questions Politiques" are recorded and aired on the television channel France Info.

The Radio France group is 100% owned by the French State. Nearly 80% of Radio France's funding comes from Television licence, the remaining 20% comes from own resources, mainly from advertising and diversification activities developed by Radio France.

When Television licence was repealed in 2022, it was decided that it would be financed through a portion of VAT (4 B€ per year for both France Télévisions and Radio France).

The investigation unit of Radio France, the usual name of the investigation and investigation department of Radio France, is divided into three poles: production, digital, and investigation. This last pole includes five investigators.

The investigation unit has been a partner of Disclose since 2018.

When the news so requires, Radio France stations resort to event programming, which is no longer subject to the program schedules. These events, whether political, economic, societal, cultural or sporting, can be found in the pages retracing the annual chronologies of the radio media.

Since 1975, Radio France has been broadcasting in FM on almost the entire territory.

Radio France broadcast between 1975 and 2016 in AM : France Inter GO (1939–2016); France Inter PO (1956–1996); France Inter OC (1975–1981), France Culture PO (1975–1980); Radio Bleu PO (1980–2000); France Info PO (2000–2016).

In 2016, Radio France's programs were broadcast in RNT (DAB +) over the Paris region via an experiment. In 2019, the CSA allocates to all the national frequencies of Radio France, via a call for tenders procedure, broadcast in DAB +. This technology mainly aims to allow better sound quality, the addition of data synchronized or not with the radio (scrolling texts, images, information, websites, etc.) and a lower broadcasting cost than that of FM.

Since 2006, Radio France has produced its programs entirely in digital and since 2012 has offered numerous programs in podcast in MP3 format. From 2014, faced with the boom in the consumption of videos on the Internet, and the development of the use of tablets or smartphones, Radio France introduced the concept of "enriched radio" which consists of filming the studio during the recording some radio broadcasts. The video is then put online live (in streaming) on the station's website or inserted into a video catalog so that it can be viewed after the broadcast on air.

Radio nationale, commonly called Radio-Vichy, was a radio station operated by the Vichy government of France between 6 July 1940 and 26 August 1944.

The armistice of 22 June 1940 signed by officials of Nazi Germany and the French Third Republic outlawed all French radio broadcasts in Nazi-occupied France and made those active in the Zone libre subject to special authorization. Philippe Pétain, leader of the collaborationist Vichy state, obtained from the Germans the creation of two radio stations in the Zone libre : Radio nationale in 1940 and La Voix de la France in 1941.

Radio nationale broadcast from the Vichy Casino, hence its nickname Radio-Vichy. Pro-Nazi journalists from the antisemitic weekly Je suis partout — Alain Laubreaux and Lucien Rebatet, working under the direction of Jean-Louis Tixier-Vignancour —were among the founders, and gave through their programs an extremist image of the Vichy regime among the French, contradicting the initial Pétainist strategy. As the head of Radio-Vichy, Tixier-Vignancour offered a large broadcast time to collaborationist Marcel Déat. Concerned not to shock the listeners with excessive propaganda, Pierre Laval eventually dismissed the team in September 1940. Laval entrusted the direction of information to René Bonnefoy, who became in charge of developing the themes of the Révolution Nationale over the radio.

In the summer of 1940, a "radio war" (guerre des ondes) broke out, marked by oratory battles between the "totalitarian radio stations" (Radio Paris and Radio-Vichy) and the "resistant" BBC and Radio Londres which increased the power of their transmitters and the intensity of slogans, in response to radio jamming and threats to listeners by the Germans. From 1942, Philippe Henriot was the main propagandist of the station.

On 26 August 1944, the French Forces of the Interior invaded the recording studio of Radio Nationale in the city of Vichy, which definitively ceased broadcasting.

Radio Paris was a French radio broadcasting company best known for its Axis propaganda broadcasts in Vichy France during World War II.

Radio Paris evolved from the first private radio station in France, called Radiola, founded by pioneering French engineer Émile Girardeau in 1922. It became Radio Paris on 29 March 1924, and remained so through 17 June 1940, transitioning to state ownership in December 1933 as the premier station in the country. It kept its name from July 1940 until August 1944, but the station was then run by Nazis and French collaborators.

From 1940, collaborationist voices on Radio Paris included Jacques Doriot and Philippe Henriot. From 1942, Jean Hérold-Paquis broadcast daily news reports on Radio Paris, in which he regularly called for the "destruction" of the United Kingdom. His catch phrase was "England, like Carthage, shall be destroyed!", echoing Cato the Elder 's slogan Carthago delenda est.

On 19 September 1941, Maurice Chevalier sang in Le Poste Parisien his last success, "Notre Espoir", composed by his accompanist Henri Betti.

Radio Paris broadcasts were intended to counter the BBC broadcasts of Radio Londres by Free French figures like Pierre Dac, who sang the taunting refrain, Radio Paris ment, Radio Paris ment, Radio Paris est allemand ("Radio Paris lies, Radio Paris lies, Radio Paris is German"), to the tune of " La Cucaracha ". On 8 May 1942 its transmitter in Bourges was blown up by the Resistance.

The station was shut down on the evening of 15 August 1944 by a trained police commando action, as part of the liberation of Paris.

Ragout (/ r æ ˈ ɡ uː /, French : ragoût, French: [ ʁaɡu ]) is a stew served as a main dish.

The term comes from the French ragoûter, meaning 'to revive the taste'.

The basic method of preparation involves slow cooking over a low heat. The main ingredients are many; ragouts may be prepared with or without meat, a wide variety of vegetables may be incorporated, and they may be more or less heavily spiced and seasoned.

The Roman-era cookbook Apicius includes a recipe for ragout with ostrich meat. According to a translation by Patrick Faas, it incorporated dates, honey, vinegar, garum (a fish sauce), passum (a dessert wine), and spices such as pepper, mint, roast cumin, and celery seed. The Apicius recipe suggests boiling all the ingredients save for the ostrich meat together in a pot, binding them with starch, and pouring the mixture over boiled ostrich meat, while Faas, in his reconstruction, tells the reader to first make a roux with flour and olive oil and add passum, spices, honey, vinegar, dates, and garum in a certain order, after which the reader can then stir in the ostrich meat, which he says can be roasted or fried.

Two 18th-century English dishes from The Complete Housewife show some of the varying meats, vegetables, seasonings, garnishes and procedures which can be applied to the ragoût.

A Ragu for made Dishes TAKE claret, gravy, sweet-herbs, and savoury spice, toss up in it lamb-stones (i.e. lamb's testicles), cock's-combs, boiled, blanched, and sliced, with sliced sweet-meats, oysters, mushrooms, truffles, and morels; thicken these with brown butter ; use it when called for.

To make a Ragu of Pigs-Ears TAKE a quantity of pigs-ears, and boil them in one half wine and the other water; cut them in small pieces, then brown a little butter, and put them in, and a pretty deal of gravy, two anchovies, an eschalot or two, a little mustard, and some slices of lemon, some salt and nutmeg : stew all these together, and shake it up thick. Garnish the dish with barberries.

In his 19th-century culinary dictionary, Alexandre Dumas credits ragouts with making "the ancient French cuisine shine". He gives several examples including salpicons, made with a variety of meats and vegetables like mushrooms, artichokes, truffles, quenelles, and sweetbreads. According to Dumas each ingredient is cooked separately. The "Ordinary Salpicon" includes veal sweetbreads, ham, mushrooms, foie gras and truffles served in espagnole sauce. Celery ragout is cooked in bouillon seasoned with salt, nutmeg and pepper. Cucumber ragout is made with velouté sauce. One ragout is made with madeira, chestnuts and chipolata sausages cooked in bouillon with espagnole sauce.

The 1731 patriotic ballad " The Roast Beef of Old England " by the British writer Henry Fielding comically attributes Britain's traditional military prowess to the eating of roast beef, suggesting that this has been lost since the introduction of ragout from "all-vapouring France".

In Robert Burns ' " Address to a Haggis " (1786), the poet suggests nobody could possibly choose French ragout when presented with the titular delicacy.

In the novel Pride and Prejudice, the character Mr. Hurst reacts with disdain when Elizabeth Bennet opts for a "plain dish" instead of a ragout at dinner.

In the Haddawy translation of The Arabian Nights, the Steward's tale about "The Young Man from Baghdad and Lady Zubaida's Maid" (beginning during the 121st night and continuing through the 130th night) tells of the suffering of a young man who attempts to consummate his marriage without having washed his hands after having eaten a large quantity of ragout spiced with cumin.

Rally the Centrists (French : Rassembler les centristes) is a French political association founded on July 16, 2008 by Jean Arthuis, a centrist Senator of Mayenne. The association unites elected officials and activists of centrist political ideology, most of which used to be members of the Union for French Democracy (UDF). The association's goal is to prepare the creation of a new centrist political party which would unite all the centrist forces, currently divided between parties such as the Democratic Movement, New Centre, Radical Party, Civic Alliance for Democracy in Europe.

Upon the dissolution of the UDF into the MoDem in 2007, a number of UDF officials, including Arthuis, were skeptical about the new party. However, they at first joined the MoDem, participating in the Villepinte Congress, but they later distanced themselves from the independent strategy of the MoDem's President François Bayrou. This came to a climax following the MoDem's poor showing in the municipal and cantonal elections in March 2008.

On May 21, 2008, Arthuis and Thierry Cornillet (MoDem MEP who has since joined the Radical Party) published a petition signed by 17 Centrist Union Senators, one deputy and four MEPs.

Since the organization is not a political party, signatories may opt to remain members of their respective parties.

Michel Mercier, former President of the Centrist Union group and now Minister of Agriculture, was also a signatory. According to Laurent de Boissieu, a political journalist, as of April 16, 2009, the organization included 16 Senators; of which 6 were members of the MoDem, 4 of the NC and 6 were members of neither of these parties.

On January 31, 2009, at the association's executive team meeting, the members re-affirmed their desire to transform the association into a political party.

The newspaper Ouest France said on April 7, 2009 said that Arthuis wanted to run candidates in upcoming regional, cantonal and Senate elections. In a May 2009 by-election in the canton of Poissy-Sud, the organization ran a candidate who obtained 2.93% of the vote, last place.

Finally, the Centrist Alliance emerged as a political party on June 27, 2009. It has, however, been slow to get off the ground.

Ramadan in France is a significant religious and cultural observance, combining Islamic traditions with Western cultural practices. France is home to one of the largest Muslim populations in Europe, estimated between 6.8 and 9 million people (10–13% of the population), predominantly Sunni of Maghrebi origin.

The start and end of Ramadan in France are determined by lunar observation, as in other Muslim-majority countries, often announced by Islamic organizations such as the French Council of the Muslim Faith (CFCM) and the Grand Mosque of Paris.

During this holy month, Muslims abstain from food, drink, and other physical needs from dawn to sunset, engaging in additional prayers and charitable activities.

Ramadan also serves as a communal observance. Participants engage in nightly prayers (Taraweeh) and Quran recitation. Each day concludes with Iftar, the meal breaking the fast, bringing together families and communities.

Public events such as the Paris Ramadan Festival facilitate interfaith dialogue and cultural exchange.

A central practice during Ramadan is Zakat al-Fitr, a compulsory charity given before Eid al-Fitr, the festival marking the end of fasting. Mosques and Islamic organizations in France play a key role in collecting and distributing donations. Volunteer initiatives, including food drives and free Iftar meals, foster solidarity across socioeconomic divides.

Ramadan observance in France intersects with the country's strict secular policies, creating challenges.

In 2024, the French Football Federation (FFF) faced criticism over policies perceived as limiting support for Muslim players observing Ramadan, sparking debates on religious freedom and discrimination.

In 2023, reports highlighted violations of secular rules in schools, with students and staff openly practicing religious observances. Government scrutiny increased, and in some cases disciplinary measures were applied.

Despite diplomatic tensions, the French government continued to issue visas to Algerian imams to lead Ramadan prayers.

Islamophobic incidents, including mosque vandalism and restrictions on hijab wearing, have increased, framed by debates on secularism.

Moon-sighting disputes occur as some communities follow their countries of origin, resulting in variations in Ramadan observance.

Ratatouille (/ ˌ r æ t ə ˈ t uː i / RAT -ə- TOO -ee, French: [ ʁatatuj ] ; Occitan : ratatolha [ ʀataˈtuʎɔ ]) is a traditional French vegetable dish originating in the Provence region of southern France, particularly associated with Nice and its surrounding region. It developed within the context of rural Provençal cuisine, where seasonal vegetables were stewed together as a practical means of putting surplus summer produce to use. The dish consists of a stew or saute of seasonal summer vegetables cooked in olive oil and is sometimes referred to as ratatouille niçoise (French: [ niswaz ]).

Although preparation methods and cooking times vary considerably by region and household, ratatouille is typically made with tomatoes, onions, garlic, courgettes (zucchini), aubergines (eggplants) and bell pepper, seasoned with herbs characteristic of Provençal cuisine. These may include fresh herbs such as basil, marjoram or fennel, as well as dried herbs such as thyme, bay leaves, or blended herbs de Provence.

The term ratatouille derives from the Occitan ratatolha and the related French verbs ratouiller and tatouiller, which are expressive forms of touiller, meaning "to stir" or "to toss".

In the early 19th century, the word was originally used to describe a coarse stew or mixed dish, sometimes with a pejorative connotation, rather than a specific vegetable preparation. Early printed references show that the term applied broadly to rustic mixtures, indicating that the name predates the standardized recipe known today.

The development of ratatouille in its modern form depended on the gradual incorporation of several vegetables introduced into European diets. Tomatoes, peppers, and squash were introduced to France after the 16th century following contact with the Americas during the New World, but were not widely accepted as food until the 18th and 19th centuries. Aubergine, introduced earlier through Mediterranean culinary influence, became established in southern France before spreading northward. Once these ingredients became commonplace in Provence, they were combined with olive oil, onions, garlic and local herbs into vegetable stews resembling modern ratatouille.

Although vegetable stews had long been prepared in Provence, historical evidence suggests that no fully developed recipe identifiable as modern ratatouille appears in printed cookbooks before the late 19th or early 20th century. Earlier preparations varied considerably and did not consistently include the now-standard combination of aubergines, tomatoes, courgettes and peppers. The consolidation of these ingredients into a recognized dish appears to be a relatively recent culinary development, where a modern version does not appear in print until 1930.

By the early 20th century, ratatouille became increasingly associated with the cuisine of Nice. Regional cookery texts describe variations in preparation, including methods in which vegetables are cooked either together or sautéed separately before being combined. The inclusion of ratatouille in major culinary reference works during this period contributed to its codification as a distinct Provençal specialty, and facilitated its recognition beyond its regional origins.

The international recognition of ratatouille expanded significantly in the mid-20th century, particularly through the growing interest in Mediterranean cuisines outside France. Cookbooks aimed at English-speaking audiences presented ratatouille as emblematic of southern French cooking, emphasizing olive oil, ripe seasonal vegetables and simplicity of preparation. Through these publications, ratatouille transitioned from a regional peasant dish to a widely recognized component of French cuisine.

From the late 20th century onward, professional chefs began reinterpreting ratatouille using refined techniques and modern presentation. One influential variation, known as Confit byaldi, arranged the vegetables in thin, carefully layered slices rather than preparing them as a stew, aligning the dish with contemporary haute cuisine aesthetics. While Confit Byaldi and similar interpretations influenced later fine-dining adaptations and popular representations, they differ substantially from the traditional rustic preparation associated with Provençal home cooking.

The Guardian ' s food and drink writer Felicity Cloake wrote in 2016 that, considering ratatouille's relatively recent origins, there is a great variety of methods of preparing it. The Larousse Gastronomique says, "according to the purists, the different vegetables should be cooked separately, then combined and cooked slowly together until they attain a smooth, creamy consistency."

Dishes of similar ingredients or preparation style exist in many cuisines. These include: piperade (South-West of France), bohémienne (Vaucluse), chichoumeille (Languedoc), tian (South east of France), Confit byaldi (created by Michel Guérard), pisto (Castilian-Manchego, Spain), samfaina (Catalan, Spain), tombet (Mallorcan), ciambotta, caponata and peperonata (Italy), briám and tourloú (Greek), şakşuka and türlü (Turkish), ajapsandali (Georgian), lecsó (Hungarian), pinakbet (Filipino), ghiveci (Romanian) and zaalouk (Moroccan). Different parts of the Indian subcontinent have their own versions of winter vegetable stew. Gujarat makes undhiyu, Kerala avial (with coconut and local spices), and Bengal shukto.

In 2007, Walt Disney Pictures and Pixar Animation Studios released the film Ratatouille. The movie gave widespread exposure to this dish around the world.

The RATP Group (French : Groupe RATP) is a French state-owned enterprise (EPIC) that operates public transport systems primarily in Paris, France, with growing presence internationally. Headquartered in Paris, it originally operated under the name Régie autonome des transports parisiens (English: Parisian Autonomous Transport Administration, lit. ' Autonomous Management of Parisian Transportation '). Its logo represents the Seine 's meandering path through the Paris Region stylised as the face of a person looking up.

Describing itself as the third largest actor in public transport worldwide, in 2024, RATP Group consolidates a total revenue of 7.1 billion euros, employs over 73,500 people, and provides for over 4 billion passenger journeys annually.

RATP Group was established in 1949 with the express purpose of operating Paris's public transport system. During the twentieth century, it focused solely on the provision of the capital's various forms of transit, from the Paris Métro, Île-de-France tram, and the RATP bus network, as well as part of the regional express rail (RER) network. However, since 2002, RATP Group's operations have no longer been geographically restricted; it has competitively pursued contracts to operate transit systems around the world. It also had a partnership with, and a minority shareholding in, Transdev, which has further involved RATP Group in various global transport operations. During 2002, RATP Dev was created as the Group's dedicated international operations and maintenance subsidiary; it is present in 16 countries across Africa, Asia, Australia, Europe and North America.

RATP Group's Paris-related activities are still a major part of its business through to the present day; in 2019, it was recorded that, in the Île-de-France region, it carried roughly 3.3 billion passengers per year. In 2019, RATP Group's consolidated revenue was € 5.704 billion ; it employed 64,000 people at that time. In recent decades, the company has operated on an increasingly competitive basis as a result of legislative changes.

The RATP was created on 1 January 1949 by combining the assets of the Compagnie du chemin de fer métropolitain de Paris (CMP), which operated the Paris Métro, and the Société des Transports en Commun de la Région Parisienne (STCRP), which operated the city's bus system.

Prior to this, the CMP had absorbed the Nord-Sud Company in 1930 and the Ligne de Sceaux in 1937, which operated commuter rail to the suburbs. The STCRP had been created on 1 January 1921 by the merger of about half a dozen independent bus and streetcar operators in the Paris area. By the time the STCRP was merged into the RATP, all of its streetcars had been replaced by bus routes.

A major change in French law came on 3 November 2009, when article 5 of the ARAF (French rail regulatory body) law came into effect. This law opens public transport operation to competition. The law was part of a broader push by the European Union to open all passenger transport operation to competition. Under this law, the RATP Group lost the exclusive right to operate all new public transport lines immediately. The company's exclusive operation rights for existing lines would expire over time, with the bus network going out to bid 15 years later in 2024, the tram network (Lines T1, T2 & T3) going out to bid 20 years later in 2029, and the Metro and RER lines out to bid 30 years later in 2039.

With the RATP anticipating this shift to a competitive environment, the company began to reorganize itself.

In the early years of the 21st century, a partnership with Transdev resulted in RATP acquiring a minority shareholding in that group, with its many worldwide transport operations. However, in 2009, the Caisse des dépôts et consignations, the majority owner of the Transdev, started negotiations with Veolia to merge Transdev with Veolia Transport. As part of the resulting agreement, made in May 2010, it was agreed that RATP would take over ownership of some of Transdev's operations in lieu of cash payment for its holdings in Transdev. This gave RATP a considerable number of international operations.

In 2009, RATP entered the United States by purchasing transit contractor McDonald Transit Associates. McDonald operated Fort Worth Transportation Authority (now Trinity Metro) in Texas, Votran in Florida, and Waco Transit System in Texas, among others. On 1 August 2011, the RATP Group purchased Stagecoach Metrolink's contract to operate the Metrolink light rail system in Greater Manchester, England until July 2017. Two years later, in 2013, RATP purchased the nearby long-established coach company, Selwyns Travel, a National Express operator.

In 2023, RATP Dev definitively left Algeria following the transfer of all its interests in Algerian tramways to an Algerian state-owned group. Since 2012, and growing with the progressive opening of networks, RATP Dev managed up to seven tramway networks in Algiers, Oran, Constantine, Sidi Bel Abbès, Ouargla, and Sétif, thus marking over a decade of strong development of this mode of transport in the country. From 2011 to 2020, RATP Dev was also responsible for the operation and maintenance of the Algiers metro.

As of 1 January 2025, RATP Dev took over the operation and maintenance of Lyon 's heavy public transport modes for a period of at least 10 years, marking a major new step in its development, particularly its presence in France outside the Île-de-France region. The contract with SYTRAL Mobilités, won against one of its main competitors, Keolis, includes the Lyon metro, tramway, the Rhônexpress airport link, the funiculars, and the Navigône river shuttle on the Saône.

In December 2025, the sale of RATP Dev's remaining UK activities – Tootbus London and Tootbus Bath – to FirstGroup was announced. Following this transaction, RATP Dev exited the UK market and discontinued its tourist bus operations outside of Paris and Brussels.

The current president and CEO of the RATP, Jean Castex, is in office since 28 November 2022.

Hiba Farès is the Chairman of the Board of RATP Dev since January 2022.

In Paris, RATP operates, under its own name, on behalf of and under contract with Île-de-France Mobilités (IDFM), the Paris region transit authority. RATP's services constitute, in their own right, a multi-mode public transportation infrastructure, but also contribute to a larger multi-mode system extending out into the surrounding Île-de-France communities.

RATP's services in the Greater Paris area include:

Paris bus route 341 was RATP's first line equipped with 100% electric full-size buses (starting June 2016). By early 2021, there were over 150 full battery electric buses in the fleet with a target of 1,500 by 2025.

With regard to the future Grand Paris Express orbital metro network of which all lines will be fully automated and driverless, RATP will act as the infrastructure manager for lines 15, 16, 17 and 18, and operate Paris Métro Line 15 through the ORA consortium led by RATP Dev with minority partners ComfortDelGro and Alstom.

RATP Dev (Dev being a contraction of Développement, French for development), established in 2002 as a 100% subsidiary of the RATP Group, provides operations and maintenance of passenger transport services outside of the "historical" RATP network in the Greater Paris area.

RATP Dev is currently present in 16 countries, namely Australia, Belgium, Canada, Hong Kong, Egypt, France, Italy, Morocco, the Philippines, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Singapore, South Africa, Switzerland, and the United States. Wholly and partly owned operations include the following:

In December 2022, RATP Dev launches hydrogen training center in La Roche-sur-Yon.

In June 2024, RATP partnered with Wabtec to equip all its RER A trains with a new brake lining that eliminates 70-90% of the health-damaging fine particles found on platforms. Similar tests are being carried out on some metro lines. The same year, RATP and Île-de-France Mobilités signed an accessibility charter to make it easier for blind and partially-sighted people to travel on Île-de-France's transport network.

RATP Dev's presence in the United Kingdom is mainly concentrated in London with its portfolio of bus services on behalf of Transport for London. Through its three subsidiaries London United, Quality Line (acquired as Epsom Coaches in April 2012) and London Sovereign (acquired in April 2014), RATP Dev manages 1129 vehicles on 96 routes out of 10 garages, and has 3387 employees, as of 2020. Early 2021, RATP Dev announced that it is to close its Quality Line subsidiary and Epsom depot. The closure was effective as of July 2021.

On 16 June 2021, the firm announced it had placed an order for 195 electric buses for its London operations to be delivered jointly by Alexander Dennis and BYD Auto, the by then largest ever full battery electric bus order in the UK.

On 22 September 2021, RATP Dev and SeaLink Travel Group (now Kelsian Group) announced that their respective West London bus operations (including London United, London Sovereign and Tower Transit 's Westbourne Park garage) would merge into a new joint venture called RATP Dev Transit London, with RATP Dev holding 87.5% of shares and SeaLink 12.5%. The incorporation of the joint venture was finalised on 11 December 2021. Tower Transit's Lea Interchange garage, located in East London, was not part of the joint venture and remained unaffected until sold off separately to Stagecoach London.

On 28 February 2025, RATP Dev sold their London operations to FirstGroup, which was announced in December 2024. FirstGroup also took over their London and Bath sightseeing operations, as well as the Bath to Bristol Airport service.

RATP operates various transit systems in the United States through its American entity, RATP Dev USA:

RATP Dev operates hop-on hop-off tours using double-decker buses under the Tootbus brand in several cities:

Since 2013, RATP Dev, in a consortium with TPG and Pomagalski, manages the Salève cable car, in the French Alps. Ridership of the cable car has increased by 50% since 2013, notably after the introduction of shuttle buses from Annemasse and Saint-Julien-en-Genevois. The contract of the RATP Dev-led consortium has been renewed in 2019 for 12 additional years, until 2031.

In September 2020, RATP Dev announces a partnership with Getlink to jointly bid under the "Régionéo" brand name for regional rail services in France which will gradually opened to competitive tendering. Ultimately, this partnership would not succeed, and RATP Dev wins its first contract in French regional rail, in Normandy, in 2025, acting alone without any partners.

In February 2023, Sepulveda Transit Corridor Partners (STCP), one of the two private sector teams executing the project development agreement with the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority for the future Sepulveda Transit Corridor, announced to have selected RATP Dev as its operations and maintenance partner.

In October 2024, RATP Dev and the East Japan Railway Company announce their association to jointly bid for operations and maintenance of the North–South Commuter Railway (NSCR), in the Philippines.

Ravioles du Dauphiné (English: "Dauphiné ravioli"), also known as Ravioles de Romans ("Ravioli of Romans"), are a French regional speciality, similar to a very tiny ravioli and consisting of two layers of pasta made out of soft wheat flour, eggs and water, surrounding a filling of Comté or French Emmental cheese, faisselle made of cow's milk, butter and parsley. As the name suggests, they are usually associated with the historical region of Dauphiné in South-Central France, particularly around the town of Romans-sur-Isère in the department of Drôme, Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes. The Ravioles du Dauphiné appellation has been legally protected since 1989, and received the Label Rouge in 1998 and is also protected by a PGI since 1989.

The first texts mentioning raviole date from 1228. They were widely consumed in the Dauphiné region during the Middle Ages, filled with either meat or root vegetables. Meatless ravioles were often consumed either by poor people or around Lent or other periods of fasting. The first mention of ravioles specifically from the town of Romans dates from 1807, when the use of vegetables started to be replaced by cheese as the local population became more prosperous.

By the 1960s, ravioles started to become produced on an industrial scale, with 100 tonnes of ravioles being produced annually by 1975. Since the 1990s ravioles have also become available in supermarkets.

Ravioles du Dauphiné are produced in Romans-sur-Isère and more generally in the region of Royans overlapping the two departments of Drôme and Isère, Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes. Any eggs or creme cheese used in the making of ravioles must also come from this region.

Around 2,500 tonnes of ravioles were produced in 2005, which by 2007 had more than doubled to 5,103 tonnes.

Ravioles are usually sold in plaques of 48 pieces, with each plaque weighing around 60–65 grams, and are often eaten in regional restaurants and notably during the Ravioles and Pognes (a large doughnut shaped brioche which is another local specialty) festival held in the town of Romans every September, or at the traditional Raviole Festival of Eymeux.

Ravioles can be poached in hot water or grilled in a frying pan, and then served in meat broth, in a gratin or as part of a salad.

Raúl Ernesto Ruiz Pino (French : Raoul Ruiz ; 25 July 1941 – 19 August 2011) was an experimental Chilean filmmaker, writer and teacher whose work is best known in France. He directed more than 100 films.

The son of a ship's captain and a schoolteacher in southern Chile, Raúl Ruiz abandoned his university studies in theology and law to write 100 plays with the support of a Rockefeller Foundation grant. He went on to learn his craft working in Chilean and Mexican television and studying at film school in Argentina (1964). Back in Chile, he made his feature debut Three Sad Tigers (1968), sharing the Golden Leopard at the 1969 Locarno Film Festival. According to Ruiz in a 1991 interview, Three Sad Tigers "is a film without a story, it is the reverse of a story. Somebody kills somebody. All the elements of a story are there but they are used like a landscape, and the landscape is used like story." He was something of an outsider among the politically oriented Chilean filmmakers of his generation such as Miguel Littín and Patricio Guzmán, his work being far more ironic, surrealistic and experimental. In 1973, shortly after the military coup d'état led by Augusto Pinochet, Ruiz and his wife (fellow director Valeria Sarmiento) fled Chile and settled in Paris, France.

Ruiz soon developed a reputation among European critics and cinephiles as an avant-garde film magician, writing and directing a remarkable number of amusing, eccentric, complex, and highly literary low-to-no-budget films in the 1970s and 1980s (often for France's Institut national de l'audiovisuel and then for Portuguese producer Paulo Branco). The best known of these often oneiric, fabulist films are: Colloque de chiens (1977), a short which marked the start of Ruiz's long-term working relationship with Chilean composer Jorge Arriagada ; The Suspended Vocation (1978); The Hypothesis of the Stolen Painting (1978); On Top of the Whale (1982); Three Crowns of the Sailor (1982); City of Pirates (1983); Manoel's Destinies (1985); Treasure Island (1985) and Life is a Dream (1986). A special issue of Cahiers du cinéma was devoted to Ruiz in March 1983.

In the 1990s, Ruiz began working with larger budgets and "name" stars like John Hurt in Dark at Noon (1992) and Marcello Mastroianni in Three Lives and Only One Death (1996). The following year, he made Genealogies of a Crime starring Catherine Deneuve, winning the Silver Bear at the 47th Berlin International Film Festival. A second major French actress, Isabelle Huppert, worked with Ruiz on Comedy of Innocence (2000), which was nominated for the Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival. The American John Malkovich acted in the star-studded Marcel Proust adaptation Time Regained (1999) and the somewhat less successful Savage Souls (2001) and Klimt (2006). That Day (2003) was the fourth and last Ruiz film to be shown in the main competition of the Cannes Film Festival. He also made forays into the English-language mainstream with the thrillers Shattered Image (1998) and A Closed Book (2010). In the final decade of his life, Ruiz wrote and directed several low-budget productions in his native Chile, but his final international success was the Franco-Portuguese epic Mysteries of Lisbon (2010).

Ruiz claimed that he was "always trying to make this connection between different ways of producing: film, theater, installations, and videos" – he hoped his "films would have to be seen many times, like objects in the house, like a painting. They have to have a minimum of complexity." Over the years, he taught his own particular brand of film theory, which he explained in his two books Poetics of Cinema 1: Miscellanies (1995) and Poetics of Cinema 2 (2007), and actively engaged in film and video projects with university and film school students in many countries, including the US, France, Colombia, Chile, Italy and Scotland.

Ruiz died in August 2011 as a result of complications from a lung infection, having successfully undergone a liver transplant in early 2010 after being diagnosed with a life-threatening tumour. The Presidents of France and Chile both praised him. The Church of Saint George-Paul in Paris held a memorial service which was attended by many notable friends, including Catherine Deneuve, Chiara Mastroianni, Melvil Poupaud, Paulo Branco, Arielle Dombasle, Michel Piccoli and Jorge Edwards. Ruiz's body was then returned to Chile to be buried as specified in his will and a National Day of Mourning was declared in Chile.

Ruiz's final completed feature Night Across the Street (2012) was selected to be screened posthumously in the Directors' Fortnight section of the 2012 Cannes Film Festival. His widow Valeria Sarmiento, who was also his collaborator and frequent editor for several decades, completed Lines of Wellington (2012), the Napoleonic epic that Ruiz was preparing when he died and the film was in competition for the Golden Lion at the 69th Venice International Film Festival and as a Zabaltegi Special at the 2012 San Sebastián International Film Festival. Both films were also shown at the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival and the 2012 New York Film Festival.

On 25 July 2014, Serpentine Galleries in London launched "Pirates and Disappearances: A Homage to Raúl Ruiz", a weekend of Ruiz-related talks and screenings. The most complete retrospective yet of Ruiz's work took place at the Cinémathèque française in Paris between 30 March and 30 May 2016. Another retrospective commemoration was held at Lincoln Center in New York City which ran during the week ending 22 December 2016 with Part 2 in February 2018. The next major retrospective took place at the Viennale from October 2023 to January 2024 and was followed by another at the Cinemateca Portuguesa in February 2024. In late 2025, two further retrospectives will take place at the Filmoteca de Catalunya and the Cineteca Madrid.

The feature film The Wandering Soap Opera, which Ruiz had shot in Chile in 1990 but left unfinished, was completed by Sarmiento and premiered at the Locarno Film Festival in August 2017. Ruiz's feature debut The Tango of the Widower and its Distorting Mirror, filmed in 1967 but shelved following budgetary problems, was restored by Sarmiento for a February 2020 premiere in the 70th Berlin International Film Festival.

A third Ruiz film, Socialist Realism as One of the Fine Arts, has been restored and completed by Sarmiento for its official premiere in 2023. Ruiz was not able to give the film a final edit as a result of the Chilean coup in 1973 and it was presumed lost for many years. A fifty-minute rough cut was shown at the Valdivia International Film Festival in 2008, but four-and-a-half hours of footage was recovered from the archives of Duke University in 2016.

The 2005 French riots led to a domestic and international response.

Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy, who has consistently advocated a tough approach to crime and restoring law and order, was a major probable contender for the 2007 presidential election. Success or failure on his part in quelling violence in suburban ghettos may thus have had far-ranging implications. Any action by Sarkozy was likely to be attacked by the political opposition, as well as by members of his Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) political coalition who also expect to run for the presidency. Le Monde, in a 5 November editorial reminisced about the "catastrophic" elections of 2002 where right-wing candidate Jean-Marie Le Pen managed to enter the second round of voting, showing concern that a similar situation might arise in the upcoming elections as a backlash to the riots.

After the fourth night of riots, Sarkozy declared a zero tolerance policy towards urban violence and announced that 17 companies of riot police (C.R.S.) and 7 mobile police squadrons (escadrons de gendarmerie mobile) would be stationed in contentious Paris neighborhoods. Sarkozy has said that he believes that some of the violence may be at the instigation of organized gangs. "... All of this doesn't appear to us to be completely spontaneous", he said. Undercover police officers were sent to identify "gang leaders, drug traffickers and big shots." Sarkozy's approach was criticized by left-wing politicians who called for greater public funding for housing, education, and job creation, and refraining from "dangerous demagoguery". Sarkozy was further criticized after he referred to the rioters as racaille and voyous (translating to "scum", "riff-raff", "thugs" or "hoodlums"). During his visit to Clichy-sous-Bois, the Interior Minister was to meet with the families of the two youths killed, but when a tear gas grenade was thrown into the Clichy mosque, the families pulled out of the meeting. Bouna Traoré's brother Siyakah said, "There is no way we're going to see Sarkozy, who is incompetent. What happened in the mosque is really disrespectful." The families finally met Prime minister Dominique de Villepin on 3 November.

The left-wing newspaper Libération cited the exasperation of suburb youth at the harassment by the police and Interior Minister Sarkozy ("lack of respect"). The declaration of a pupil's parent that "Torching a school is unacceptable, but the one who put on the fire is Sarkozy" was reported throughout the French press, including in the conservative newspaper Le Figaro.

Azouz Begag, delegate minister for the promotion of equal opportunity, made several declarations about the recent unrest, opposing himself to Interior minister Nicolas Sarkozy for the latter's use of "imprecise, warlike semantics", which he says cannot help bring back calm in the affected areas.

On November 5, Paris (right-wing) prosecutor Yves Bot told Europe 1 radio that "This is done in a way that gives every appearance of being coordinated." Some Aulnay-sous-Bois residents, as reported by Reuters, suspect that the riots were linked to the drug trade or even coordination by Islamic fundamentalists. Meanwhile, other Aulnay-sous-Bois residents interviewed considered this unjustified. Jérémie Garrigues, 19, doubted this was the case. "If those kids had been organized, they would have done much worse -- they would have used guns and bombs against the town hall and the prefecture", he argued. "Those are all politicians' theories", remarked an Algerian woman named Samia, whose main concern was how frightened her children were by the unrest. "We live here in reality." International News Article | Reuters.com Jean-Marie Huet, director of criminal affairs and graces, after visiting an artisanal factory of molotov cocktails, said that "this is not really spontaneous trouble anymore"; he further stated "Correlations are made and situations are compared. No one has yet established that there should be any sort of underground organisation".

Muslim leaders of African and Arab communities in France have also issued a fatwa, or religious order, against the riots, without many effects. "It is strictly forbidden for any Muslim... to take part in any action that strikes blindly at private or public property or that could threaten the lives of others", said the fatwa by the controversial Union of Islamic Organisations of France (UIOF), favored by Nicolas Sarkozy.

The BBC reports that French society's negative perceptions of Islam and of immigrants have alienated some French Muslims and may have been a factor in the causes of the riots; "Islam is seen as the biggest challenge to the country's secular model in the past 100 years". The BBC questioned whether such alarm is justified, citing that France's Muslim ghettos are not hotbeds of separatism and that "the suburbs are full of people desperate to integrate into the wider society."

Upon his nomination as interior minister, populist hardliner Nicolas Sarkozy promised to lead both a strict policy of zero tolerance against underground crime, promote law and order, and to promote social integration of the rejected. His actions are often criticised because of his use of television and the media. This, along with the relaxing of rules allowing the deportation of foreign offenders, and his declarations of support for positive discrimination and the participation of legal immigrants in local elections, has angered some suburban residents. However, Nicolas Sarkozy was the one to propose to expel all foreigners involved in the riots, which amounted to reinstate the "double penalty", a decision which has been widely criticized, for example by NGO SOS Racisme.

On Wednesday, October 19, Sarkozy announced a crackdown on urban violence and black marketeers, ordering specially trained police to tackle 25 neighbourhoods across the country. Sarkozy went there and declared he wanted to "clean out the city with a Kärcher " (nettoyer la cité au Kärcher). On October 25, as he went to Argenteuil, Nicolas Sarkozy used the word " racaille " ("trash"). Certain people say that inhabitants of these neighbourhoods felt insulted, feeling that all the inhabitants were considered offenders and criminals. Stones and bottles were tossed at him.

Jean-Marie Le Pen, a hardliner right-wing politician and a longtime critic of immigration from poorer countries, declared that the events vindicated what he had long said. He regretted the caution of the government in not sending law enforcement forces straight against the rioters. Another hardliner right-winger, Philippe de Villiers, made similar criticism.

UMP politician Bernard Accoyer called polygamy in France "certainly one of the causes, though not the only one" for the riots. Pierre Cardo of the UMP stated that "products of polygamous families" were among the participants. Historian Hélène Carrère d'Encausse of the Académie française stated that "African children [were] in the streets and not at school" because "in an apartment, there are three or four wives and 25 children". MRAP criticized such statements, stating that they were "playing an extremely dangerous role in feeding our country with the racism that causes the damage we know".

On 8 November, President Jacques Chirac declared a state of emergency using a 1955 law. On 16 November, the French parliament, dominated by Nicolas Sarkozy 's UMP (right-wing) party, approved a three-month extension of the state of emergency, which was to end on 21 February 2006. On 17 November, the French police declared a return to a normal situation throughout France, saying that the 98 vehicles torched the previous night corresponded to the usual average. On December 10, France's highest administrative body, the Council of State, ruled that the three-month state of emergency decreed to guarantee calm following unrest was legal. It rejected a complaint from 74 law professors (led by Frédéric Rolin) and the Green party, declaring that the conditions that led to the unrest, the quick spread of violence and the possibility that it could recur justify the state of emergency. The Council of State argued that "each night, between 40 to 60 cars are torched, and {that} we have to be cautious with New Year's Eve approaching". The complaint challenged the state of emergency's necessity, and said it compromised fundamental liberties.

Left-wing organizations, including SOS Racisme, the CIMADE, Syndicat de la Magistrature (magistrate trade-union), have criticized the "state of emergency" and the expulsions of foreigners born in France who didn't have a chance to demand French nationality (even though they are full-time residents). According to the accounts of some police trade-unions, the "state of emergency" wasn't really useful, with the situation seeming to become calmer without having to activate the possibilities allowed by the proclamation of the state of emergency.

An official of Action Police CFTC, an "ultra-minority" police trade union, described the riots as a " civil war ", and called on the French Army to intervene. This caused outrage, notably triggering responses from the UNSA-Police union, which represents the majority of riot police (CRS), describing the situation in less dramatic terms. In response to the riots, Sarkozy stated that police officers should be armed with non-lethal weapons to combat urban violence. Other voices in the public sphere have encouraged the use of deadly force as offering a more permanent solution to the problem of rioters. The French government, even prior to these riots, has been equipping law enforcement forces with less-lethal weapons (such as " flash-balls " and Tasers) to better deal with petty delinquency and urban unrest, especially in poor suburban communities. Amnesty International, among others, has criticized the use of these "less-lethal" weapons.

French national police spokesman, Patrick Hamon, was quoted in the Wall Street Journal as saying that there appeared to be no coordination among gangs in different areas. But he said youths in individual neighborhoods were communicating by cellphone text messages or email — arranging meetings and warning each other about police operations. According to the Guardian, (November 6, 2005), Hamon said, "what we notice is that the bands of youths are, little by little, getting more organized, arranging attacks through cell phone text messages and learning how to make gasoline bombs." The police have found a gasoline bomb-making workshop in a derelict building; Justice Ministry official Jean-Marie Huet told The Associated Press that gasoline bombs "are not being improvised by kids in their bathrooms." The apparent role of the Internet in helping to coordinate and cause unrest was also noted. It is generally noted, though, that making a Molotov cocktail does not need any special skill.

The Paris Fire Brigade developed an "Urban Violence Plan", inspired by the experience of firefighters in Northern Ireland (Libération, Oct. 29). The "hot zone" is identified and the fire engines wait outside this zone. When a fire is reported, a minimal team is engaged (two men outside the fire engine) under cover of the police forces; when the fire does not show any risk of spreading or causing casualties, the firefighters withdraw without attempting to put it out. While in the zone, firefighters stay alert for projectiles. The layout of the area is taken into account so that firefighters may not be trapped in a dead end.

During the current event, fire engines and firefighters from other départements were called for reinforcement; they were placed to defend calm areas (i.e. Paris intra muros), whereas the Paris Fire Brigade, which is a military unit, dealt with the hot zones.

A few firefighters were injured by broken glass or Molotov cocktails, while there are reports of an attack using fine pellet air guns.

Jean-Claude Dassier, News director general at TF1 who is one of France's leading TV news executives has admitted self censoring the coverage of the riots in the country for fear of encouraging support for far-right politicians while public television station France 3 has stopped reporting the numbers of torched cars town by town. Media have generally agreed to give only a total national number of torched cars. French TV boss admits censoring riot coverage French journalists have reported that some American TV shows and politicians (i.e. members of the Republican Party) exaggerated the riots (i.e. Fox News) for making a connection between the Islamic terrorist group Al-Qaeda and the rioters.

Travel warnings for France were issued, for citizens of their respective countries, by the governments of:

On the night of 13 November 2015, Paris suffered a series of terror attacks. In reaction to those events, many individuals, governments, and other organisations around the world expressed their solidarity with France and with the victims. Many world leaders issued statements, mostly strongly condemning the attacks and vowing to stand by and support France. Public vigils took place in many international cities, and a number of world landmarks were illuminated in the colours of the French flag. Members of the public expressed their solidarity through social media by sharing images, notably the "Peace for Paris" symbol, designed by the French graphic designer Jean Jullien, and through the slogans, "Pray for Paris" and "Je suis Paris" (itself a reference to the phrase " Je suis Charlie ", which was shared widely in the aftermath of the Charlie Hebdo shootings in Paris on 7 January 2015).

The attack interrupted final negotiations over the Budget of the European Union, with participants taking breaks to watch TV news of the events. Commission Vice-President Kristalina Georgieva said that the events encouraged shocked negotiators to end the talks quickly, with a final agreement five days before 18 November deadline. Commission Vice-President Federica Mogherini and EU defence ministers backed France's request for help in military missions after they invoked Article 42.7 of the Treaty of the European Union for the first time since its creation.

As a result, the United Kingdom has already stated its intention to help France directly in operations in Syria, while some countries intend to aid France by taking over activities in Africa, namely in Mali and the Central African Republic. Germany will send up to 650 troops to Mali and 50 military trainers to Kurdish forces in Iraq. Spain, Lithuania and Slovenia announced similar actions.

Jean-Claude Juncker, President of the European Commission, rejected calls to rethink the European Union's policy on migration. Dismissing suggestions that open borders led to the attacks, Juncker said he believed that the attacks should be met with a stronger display of liberal values, including internal open borders. The Czech Prime Minister expressed disappointment over Juncker's response.

The attacks prompted European officials—particularly German officials—to re-evaluate their stance on EU policy toward migrants, especially in light of the ongoing European migrant crisis. Many German officials believed a higher level of scrutiny was needed, and criticised the position of German Chancellor Angela Merkel, while the German Vice-Chancellor Sigmar Gabriel defended her stance, saying that a lot of migrants were fleeing terrorism.

French Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve said that he would be meeting with EU ministers on 20 November in Brussels to discuss how to deal with terrorism across the European Union. Meeting reports indicated that Schengen area border controls have been tightened for EU citizens entering or leaving, with passport checks and systematic screening against biometric databases. This is based on a temporary measure; changing the rules on a long-term basis could take months.

Poland's European affairs minister designate Konrad Szymański declared that, in the wake of the attacks, he saw no possibility of enacting the recent EU refugee relocation scheme. The new Prime Minister of Poland, Beata Szydło, while acknowledging that Poland is bound by international treaties, said she would ask the EU to change its decision on refugee quotas. Szydlo later stated that Poland would honour the commitment made by the previous government to accommodate 9,000 refugees.

Hungary's prime minister, Viktor Orbán, rejected the concept of mandatory resettlement quotas.

Andrej Babiš, Czech deputy prime minister, proposed closing the Schengen border. Czech Prime Minister, Bohuslav Sobotka, said the attacks were a wake-up call for Europe. Sobotka also criticized president Miloš Zeman for supporting anti-Islamic groups and spreading hatred, according to Reuters, whose report adds that the Sobotka government has been deporting migrants.

Slovakia's prime minister, Robert Fico, said he was proven right about the links between Middle East migrants and security.

Canada maintained its commitment to accept 25,000 Syrian refugees, and in early November, set a challenging deadline, the end of 2015. By 24 November however, it was clear that no more than 10,000 could be accommodated by year end; the rest would arrive by March 2016. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said that the accompanying security measures would protect Canadians. By 20 November, financial plans were being made for the proposed funding for six years, estimated at $1.1 billion. Discussions as to how and where refugees would be resettled were also under way. However, an expert, Gerard Van Kessel, retired director-general of the refugees branch at Citizenship and Immigration Canada, warned on 23 November 2015 that a five or six weeks is not adequate to complete security checks and resettle 25,000 people.

All of the provinces had agreed to accept refugees and all but one provided specifics as to the number they would be able to support. On 22 November 2015, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation reported that (according to unnamed sources) Canada will limit the acceptance of Syrian refugees to only women, children and families, screening out unaccompanied men. Public Safety Minister Ralph Goodale assured Canadians that a robust screening process would be used overall, but admitted that some checks would be done once the refugees were already in Canada. However, a criminologist, Barry Cartwright of Simon Fraser University is convinced that it's impossible to do thorough security checks "in a region where there are basically no recognized police departments."

The US House of Representatives passed the American SAFE Act of 2015, which makes it more difficult for Syrian and Iraqi refugees to enter the United States. The bill failed to pass the Senate. At least 31 state governors said that they opposed accepting Syrian refugees into their states, although the decision to accept refugees belongs to the federal government; numerous mayors of major US cities have said they would welcome more refugees.

The United Nations asked Congress and governors to continue accepting Syrian refugees who had been vetted by security measures as an example to other countries.

Many world leaders and governments expressed their condemnation of the attacks and their condolences to the victims. These included:

Following the attacks, multiple landmarks around the world were lit in the colours of the French flag.

French foreign exchange students gathered in Union Square in New York City where they lit candles and sang " La Marseillaise ". Vigils took place in Sydney, Montreal, London, New York City, Glasgow, and Manila among others.

On 14 November, German pianist Davide Martello towed his grand piano by bike to the Bataclan theatre, where a reported 80 people had died in the attack. There, he played John Lennon 's " Imagine " to a crowd gathered outside in tribute to the victims. Martello is known for travelling around conflict zones to play the piano and previously performed at the sites of the Charlie Hebdo attacks.

At the 800th annual Lord Mayor's Show in London, a two-minute silence was held with flags at half-mast while fireworks were cancelled. At the City Hall of Athens, the flags of France, Greece, and the European Union were at half-mast to mourn for the victims. The Christmas decorations of Athens have been left unlit.

The European Union declared 13 November a European Day of Mourning and member states held a minute's silence on 16 November at 12 p.m. Central European Time to show a sign of respect and solidarity to those who lost their lives in the attacks. In the UK, all public places and many government offices and officials were to have both UK and French flags flown at half mast as a sign of respect.

On 17 November, England played France at Wembley Stadium, London with fans of both teams uniting to sing the French national anthem, "La Marseillaise", before a minute's silence. On the first weekend of English Premier League matches since the attack, "La Marseillaise" was played before every game. French football club Paris Saint-Germain was granted permission to wear the message 'Je suis Paris' on the team's jersey for two matches.

A number of residents of the Syrian city of Damascus, caught in fierce fighting between the Syrian government, ISIS and Western air strikes wrote an open letter stating, "We extend our hands to all the people that love peace and freedom, most of all the French people."

In the hours after the attack, some Parisians used social media, in particular the Twitter hashtag #PorteOuverte (French for "#OpenDoor"), to offer overnight shelter to strangers stranded by the attacks. The hashtag trended worldwide. A modified version of the International Peace Symbol by London-based French graphic designer Jean Jullien, in which the centre fork was modified to resemble the Eiffel Tower, was also widely spread. The symbol was widely shared with the hashtags #PeaceForParis, #PrayForParis, #PrayForFrance and #JeSuisParis. Facebook reintroduced its safety check-in system so users in Paris could notify friends and family that they were safe. Facebook also encouraged users to temporarily overlay a transparent image of the French flag to "support France and the people of Paris".

In the wake of the attack, phrases such as "Je Suis Paris" and "We are all Parisians" appeared on news broadcasts and social media websites worldwide to show solidarity with the victims. This was similar to the reactions after the January 2015 Charlie Hebdo shooting with the phrase " Je Suis Charlie " and reflects the historic phrases ich bin ein Berliner in the 1961 Berlin crisis and the phrase "Tonight, we are all Americans" spoken on air by France 2 reporter Nicole Bacharan after the September 11 attacks. The French embassies and institutions used the hashtag #NousSommesUnis (French We are united).

The slogan #PrayforParis has been object to critical discussion due to its religious and imperative character. The Dalai Lama said " Humans created this problem and humans must solve it ". The French Artist Joann Sfar suggested to use the hashtag #ParisIsAboutLife instead.

Some ISIL supporters used the hashtag #باريس_تشتعل (Paris burns, Paris is burning or Paris is on fire), the same hashtag that appeared in the January 2015 attacks on Charlie Hebdo ' s office and a Paris grocery store. In response, social media users urged saturation with #Parisburns, re-purposing the hashtag as support for the victims and Paris. Muslims also rebuked the attacks by using the hashtag #NotInMyName and #MuslimsAreNotTerrorist, the former of which had been utilized by Muslims in the past to condemn ISIS actions.

Following the attack, a Facebook campaign was created with the goal of getting Eagles of Death Metal 's cover of the Duran Duran song " Save a Prayer " to number one on the UK Singles Chart. The song ultimately peaked at number 53 for the chart dated the week after the attack.

Google attached a black ribbon to the bottom of their page "in memory of the victims of the Paris attacks". Skype and other websites have allowed users to make free calls to France to allow users to connect and communicate with loved ones or relatives/friends to ensure their safety.

NBC's Saturday Night Live opted not to open the show with a comedic cold open as it usually does; instead, cast member Cecily Strong addressed the City of Paris in English on behalf of New York City, which was followed by a French translation of her comments. After saying the show's opening line, SNL returned to its usual format. The show has only removed its usual cold open after five other occasions—the September 11 attacks in 2001, the Sandy Hook shooting in 2012, Donald Trump 's victory in the 2016 United States presidential election, the Las Vegas shooting in 2017, and the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.

In the days following the attacks, the French news and entertainment show Le Petit Journal sent its reporters on to the streets of Paris to document the public's reactions. Their reporter Martin Weill recorded an interview with a six-year-old boy named Brandon, who, when asked if he understood why the attackers had done what they had done, responded: "Yes, because they're really, really mean. Bad guys are not very nice. And we have to be really careful because we have to change houses." Videos of the interview went viral in both the French- and English-speaking world.

The hacktivist group Anonymous declared "war" on ISIL in its largest operation to date, and by the second day claimed to have taken down 3,824 pro-ISIL Twitter accounts and doxxed multiple recruiters.

The National Football League has implemented metal detectors and increased security inside and outside its stadiums for the games that played during week 10 of the 2015 season as spectators were discouraged from bringing non-plastic clear bags into the venues. All teams that played held a moment of silence to honor the victims of the attacks.

The WWE has changed its security guidelines and held a moment of Silence prior to the 16 November episode of Monday Night Raw displaying the French Flag and the Eiffel Tower in the form of Peace for Paris.

At a football match against Greece, some Turkish supporters booed during a minute of silence in commemoration of the attacks, and a section reportedly shouted " Allahu akhbar," an incident echoing what had previously happened during a minute of silence for the victims of the October Ankara bombings, in which minority Alevis and Kurds made up the majority of the Ankara bombing victims. During a moment of silence in a match between Moldova and Azerbaijan, Azerbaijani soccer fans booed.

Various Muslim religious leaders and organisations from around the world condemned the attacks. Some took to social media to say that the attacks went against the teachings of Islam. Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Kuwait, Qatar and Egypt have been among the Arab states leading condemnations of the simultaneous attacks in Paris, in addition to Morocco, Bahrain, Iraq, Turkey, and Iran. Al-Azhar university in Cairo, the Muslim world's top theological institution of learning and oldest university, strongly condemned the attack, saying, "The time has come for the world to unite to confront this monster... Such acts are contrary to all religious, humanitarian and civilized principles." Mirza Masroor Ahmad, the head of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community, issued a press release from London condemning the attack by expressing his heartfelt sympathies and condolences to the French nation, and said that these attacks are against the teachings of the Quran. Les Fédérations Musulmanes, a French Muslim federation, strongly condemned the attacks in Paris denouncing it as "abject barbarism." The Luxembourg Shoura, a federation of Muslim leaders in Luxembourg condemned the attacks in a statement released on the Tuesday following the attacks saying "We are outraged and express loud and clear our deep disgust and our unequivocal condemnation of these criminal acts committed against civilians done at random."

The Muslim Council of Britain described the attacks as "horrific and abhorrent" and participated in one of the Trafalgar Square vigils. The Council added that "There is nothing Islamic about such people and their actions are evil, and outside the boundaries set by our faith...there is no justification for such carnage whatsoever." The Association of British Muslims said that "The Muslim faith condemns such acts of violence" and "The attacks in Paris were not aimed just at France or Paris, they are attacks against the values and freedoms we cherish and live by in Europe, they were aimed at all of us."

The Syrian branch of Al-Qaeda, al-Nusra Front, praised the attacks, saying that even though they view ISIL as "dogs of hellfire", they applaud when "infidels" get attacked by ISIL.

In a press release by the Australian National Imams Council, the Grand Mufti of Australia Ibrahim Abu Mohamed made some controversial remarks that: "These recent incidents highlight the fact that current strategies to deal with the threat of terrorism are not working. It is therefore imperative that all causative factors such as racism, Islamophobia, curtailing freedoms through securitisation, duplicitous foreign policies and military intervention must be comprehensively addressed". He received criticism from politicians and the press for not directly condemning the Paris attacks. Which led to a further statement: "We wish to emphasise it is incorrect to imply that the reference to causative factors provides justification for these acts of terrorism." and "Dr. Ibrahim Abu Mohamed have consistently and unequivocally condemned all forms of terrorist violence."

The attacks called attention to existing controversy over mass surveillance and calls for prohibition of strong encryption or otherwise hard-to-monitor communications. Shortly after the reports it was reported that a PlayStation 4 unit had been found in the home of one of the suspects, which correlated with Belgian home affairs minister Jan Jambon 's statement three days before the attack that "The most difficult communication between these terrorists is via PlayStation 4". Though not encrypted, PlayStation chats allow millions of customers to speak with people they would not otherwise know, complicating the traffic analysis that can expose patterns even in encrypted communications when the participants in a conversation are identified. Comments after the attack by American CIA Director John Brennan blamed disclosures by Edward Snowden and availability of encryption for aiding terrorist networks, though this idea was opposed in a New York Times editorial as "a new and disgraceful low".

At the second political debate in the 2016 U.S. Democratic presidential primary, when Bernie Sanders was asked whether after the attacks he still believed that the greatest threat to national security was climate change, he explained that climate change was related to rising terrorism, because it caused competition over resources.

The Recueil des rois de France (Collection of the Kings of France) is an illuminated manuscript containing a text by Jean du Tillet. Dedicated to Charles IX in 1566, it provides a history of the French monarchs from the early Merovingians to Francis I and is illustrated with portraits of 29 sovereigns. It is currently held at the Bibliothèque nationale de France under the shelfmark Fr.2848.

The manuscript is the luxury presentation copy offered to Charles IX in 1566 by Jean du Tillet, the civil registrar (greffier) of the Parlement of Paris. Du Tillet had previously authored an earlier version of this collection presented between 1553 and 1555 to Charles's father, Henry II, which contained a genealogy of French kings followed by the author's observations on various elements of French history. Authorized to consult and inventory royal archives as early as the 1540s under Francis I, it is unclear exactly when he decided to expand this work. His progress was likely delayed by the King's death and his subsequent involvement in writing pamphlets supporting the House of Guise or opposing Protestant factions. By the time he completed the current manuscript, its volume had doubled compared to the version offered to Henry II.

The miniatures are likely older than the manuscript itself and were added to it later. Originally, each miniature was placed on the verso (left-hand) page facing the start of a chapter. In the current manuscript, they are generally pasted back-to-back on a single leaf (recto-verso), suggesting they were removed from an earlier volume. Furthermore, the style of the miniatures is relatively primitive compared to the 1566 dedication date. Historians attribute them to the Master of the Hours of Henry II, an artist active in Paris during the mid-16th century and a likely successor to Noël Bellemare. Some elements may have been added or updated specifically for the current manuscript, such as a frontispiece with the arms of Charles IX, portraits of Chlothar III and Charlemagne, and various floral borders. Notably, Francis I is the only king depicted twice—once as a young man and once as an elder—and no subsequent kings (Henry II, Francis II, or Charles IX) are included. This suggests the miniatures might have been executed during the reign of Francis I but left unfinished following his death, which would explain the absence of a portrait for Louis XII.

Two other manuscripts produced during the era of Charles IX exist: one currently in the Library of Geneva (Fr.84), perhaps intended for du Tillet himself or another member of the Parlement; and another in the National Library of Russia (SP Fr.f.v.IV, no. 9). Both contain identical illustrations to the primary manuscript. The St. Petersburg copy may have served as a "pitch" book, rapidly produced for Charles IX or his mother Catherine de' Medici to secure funding for the final work. Records suggest that even after completing the masterpiece, du Tillet was never reimbursed for his expenses. Consequently, the work was not printed during his lifetime. The text was first published in 1578—eight years after du Tillet's death—in clandestine editions in Rouen and Troyes. An official edition commissioned by his descendants followed in 1580, featuring engravings of the royal portraits and remaining in print until 1618.

Upon the death of Charles IX, his library was dispersed. The manuscript reappeared in the collection of Gaston, Duke of Orléans and entered the royal library following Gaston's death in 1660.

The work is written on thick parchment in a script distinct from other contemporary manuscripts, as it utilizes the legal hand (écriture de greffe) used by the Parliament of Paris. The first section contains a biographical description of each king from Merovech to Francis I. In these chapters, du Tillet cites extracts from archival documents he consulted or refers to significant legal acts. The second part consists of general observations on the history of France, royal institutions, customs, and the origins of the French people. Du Tillet synthesized a wide array of sources, including royal archives, Latin authors like Gregory of Tours, and medieval chroniclers like Jean de Joinville. He also relied on physical evidence, such as royal tombs he observed at the Basilica of Saint-Denis, Saint-Germain-des-Prés, and Abbey of Saint-Médard, Soissons. The text is punctuated by illustrations of seals and coats of arms. The manuscript has been described by Brown and Dickman Orth, in their joint study, as "the most splendid and most substantial of several works that Jean du Tillet (c. 1500-1570) offered in presentation copies to Henri II and Charles IX."

The manuscript contains 30 portraits of 29 kings (Francis I is depicted twice). Unlike the fictionalized portraits common in contemporary manuscripts, these images were inspired by models taken from surviving funerary monuments and royal seals.

Beginning with Louis VI, the miniatures were based on seals found in the royal archives. As a result, the kings are shown in hieratic poses—either standing or seated on a throne—matching their source material. Only the faces of Francis I appear more lifelike, potentially based on life drawings by Jean Clouet or François Clouet from circa 1520 and 1540.

The miniatures are dated between 1547 and 1555 based on their frames, which resemble those in the Hours of Anne de Montmorency and the Hours of Henry II. This stylistic link supports the attribution to the Master of the Hours of Henry II. Only two portraits—Charlemagne and Chlothar III—show a different hand and likely date from the 1560s.

The Reform of French universities is an extensive overhaul of the French public higher education system. The reform was initiated by Nicolas Sarkozy soon after his election as President of France, in line with his campaign policies. His government passed the bill, Liberties and Responsibilities of Universities in 2007. Its intent was to allow universities more financial autonomy, while reducing the need for government funding. The reform programme was modified by the subsequent François Hollande government in 2013, with the introduction of the Law on Higher Education and Research. The new law aimed to rationalise the geographic coverage of higher education courses and research areas, encouraging merging of some institutions. National limits on certain professional and technical degrees were introduced, along with measures that permitted greater selectivity of students, in alignment with high school academic achievement. Most recently, the "Law on Orientation and Academic Success" was enacted in 2018, extending the measures begun by the Hollande reform.

The Regional Council of Pays de la Loire is the deliberative assembly of the French region of Pays de la Loire. The regional council is made up of 93 regional councilors elected for a period of six years by direct universal suffrage and chaired by Christelle Morançais (LR) since 2017. It sits in Nantes, at the Hôtel de Région.

The seats in this region are divided by department:

The current council was elected in June 2021 for a term of office until 2028.

Following the installation session of the July 2, 2021, the regional council is chaired by Christelle Morançais.

The president of the regional council was Olivier Guichard (RPR).

The president of the regional council was Olivier Guichard (UPF).

The president of the regional council was François Fillon (RPR) until 2002 (resigned following his appointment to the government), then Jean-Luc Harousseau (UMP).

The president was Jacques Auxiette (PS).

The president of the Council was Bruno Retailleau.

A Regional Health Agency (Agence régionale de santé) is an administrative public body of the French State responsible for implementing health policy in its region. Created on 1 April 2010, the regional health agencies are governed by Title III of Book IV of the first part of the Public Health Code (code de la santé publique).

These institutions, created under the law 2009-879 of July 21, 2009 entitled "Hospital, Patients, Health and Territory", are intended to ensure a unified management of health in the regions, better meet the needs of the population and increase the effectiveness of the system. In concrete terms, one of their roles is to modernize and rationalize the supply of care and to ensure the proper management of hospital and medical expenses. The agencies act within the framework of a Regional Health Project which can be the subject of local health contracts concluded by the agency, in particular with the local authorities and their groupings, concerning the promotion of health, prevention, care policies and medico-social support.

They are financed by a State subsidy, contributions from the health insurers and the Caisse nationale de solidarité pour l'autonomie, as well as, possibly, their own resources and voluntary payments from local authorities or institutions.

They replace the former regional hospitalization agencies (agences régionales de l'hospitalisation), created in 1996 which had the status of public interest groups (groupements d'intérêt public), the regional directorates of health and social affairs, the departmental directorates of health and social affairs and the directorates of health and social development in Guadeloupe, French Guiana and Martinique. They also replace the regional unions of the health insurance funds (unions régionales des caisses d'assurance maladie).

They are supervised by the ministers responsible for health, social security, the elderly and the disabled, administered by a Director General with a supervisory board. The Director General grants authorizations of health facilities and services and medico-social institutions and services.

The supervisory board is chaired by the regional prefect and has 24 members:

The supervisory board approves the budget and the financial accounts. It issues an opinion on the regional strategic plan and the multi-year contract of objectives and means.

Each agency has a regional health and autonomy conference that contributes to the development of health policy in the region and two public health policy coordination commissions, one for prevention, school health, occupational health and maternal and child health, the other for care and medico-social support.

In each region, the agency implements public health policies in services responsible for health at work, school and university health and maternal and child health:

external environment: noise pollution, outdoor air quality, healthcare waste, impact on the health of human activities.

The regional health agency located in the administrative center of the defense and security zone is known as the regional zone agency. It is responsible for assisting the zone prefect in the implementation of national security and especially health defense missions, and thus to prepare and apply, if necessary, the ORSEC plan.

Since 2016 there have been 17 regional health agencies.

The establishment of regional health agencies has disrupted practices within hospitals. Initially supporting the role of the ARS as local relays of health and social strategies of the State, and supporting the institutions in their governance choices, the Hospital Federation of France has complained about the bureaucratic drift which imposes on institutions choices sometimes guided solely by economic imperatives and profitability. Since 2010, the federation has requested that the role and prerogatives of the agencies be reviewed, and regularly underlines the difficult dialogues between the directorates of the institutions and the agencies. The intervention of Guy Collet gives a reflection of a generally very mixed assessment of the agencies:

"The operation of ARS is marked by an excess of bureaucracy" [...] "Hospitals have the feeling of a constant intrusion into their management and management" [...] "they must leave professionals the choice of ways and means to achieve these goals."

Notre-Dame de Reims (/ ˌ n ɒ t r ə ˈ d ɑː m, ˌ n oʊ t r ə ˈ d eɪ m, ˌ n oʊ t r ə ˈ d ɑː m / ; French: [ nɔtʁə dam də ʁɛ̃s ] ; meaning " Our Lady of Reims "), known in English as Reims Cathedral (also spelt Rheims Cathedral), is a Catholic cathedral in the French city of the same name, the seat of the Archdiocese of Reims. The cathedral was dedicated to the Virgin Mary and was the traditional location for the coronation of the kings of France. The cathedral is considered to be one of the most important works of Gothic architecture. A major tourist destination, it receives about a million visitors annually. It became a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1991.

The cathedral is thought to have been founded by the bishop Nicasius in the early 5th century. Clovis was baptized a Christian here by Saint Remigius, the bishop of Reims, about a century later. He was the first Frankish king to receive this sacrament. Construction of the present cathedral began in the 13th century and concluded in the 14th century. A prominent example of High Gothic architecture, it was built to replace an earlier church destroyed by fire in 1210. Although little damaged during the French Revolution, the present cathedral saw extensive restoration in the 19th century. It was severely damaged during World War I and was again restored in the 20th century.

Since the 1905 law on the separation of Church and state, the cathedral has been owned by the French state, while the Catholic Church has an agreement for its exclusive use. The French state pays for its restoration and upkeep.

The settlement of a tribe of Gauls called the Remes, named Durocortorum, had been recorded by Julius Caesar in his accounts of the Gallic Wars. During the High Roman Empire, it became the capital of a province extending to the delta of the Rhine, and in the 3rd century A.D. was capital of the Roman province known as Second Belgium. The first Christian church there was founded by the first bishop, Saint Sixtus of Reims between 250 and 300.

At the beginning of the 5th century, in the Merovingian period, the bishop Nicasius transferred the cathedral its present location, the site formerly occupied by Gallo-Roman bath built by the Emperor Constantine. The new church was dedicated to the Virgin Mary, anticipating the decision of the Council of Ephesus in 431 establishing her enhanced status. The new cathedral, with the plan of a square exterior and a circular interior, measured approximately 20 m (66 ft) by 55 m (180 ft). In the 1990s, the Baptistry of this original Merovingian church, directly under the present cathedral, was excavated and fragments of the old structure were brought to light.

Clovis I, the king of the Franks, was baptised there in about 496 A.D. by Saint Remigius (also known as Saint Remi). This was the event that inspired the long tradition of royal coronations at Reims.

In 816, Louis the Pious, the king of the Franks and emperor of the Holy Roman Empire, was crowned in Reims by Pope Stephen IV. The coronation and ensuing celebrations revealed the poor condition and inadequate size of the early cathedral. Beginning in about 818, the archbishop Ebbo and the royal architect Rumaud began to build a much larger church from the ground up on the same site, using stone from the old city ramparts.

The work was interrupted in 835, and then resumed under a new archbishop, Hincmar, with the support of Emperor Charles the Bald. The interior of the church was adorned with gilding, mosaics, paintings, sculptures and tapestries. On 18 October 862, in the presence of the Emperor, Hincmar dedicated the new church, which measured 86 m (282 ft) and had two transepts.

At the beginning of the 10th century, an ancient crypt underneath the original church was rediscovered. Under the archbishop Heriveus, the crypt (which had been the initial centre of the previous churches above it) was cleared, renovated, and then rededicated to the sainted bishop Remigius. The cathedral altar is still in the same place, directly over the crypt, where it has been for 15 centuries.

Beginning in 976, the archbishop Adalbero began to enlarge the Carolingian cathedral. The historian Richerus, a pupil of Adalbero, gives a very precise description of the work carried out by the archbishop:

"He completely destroyed the arcades which, extending from the entrance to nearly a quarter of the basilica, up to the top, so that the whole church, embellished, acquired more extent and a more suitable form (...). He decorated the main altar of the golden cross and enveloped it with a resplendent trellis (...). He lit up the same church with windows in which various stories were represented and endowed it with bells roaring like thunder."

The prestige of the Holy Ampulla, the sacred vial filled with myrrh with which French Kings were anointed, the fact that Clovis I had been baptised there, and the political power of the archbishop of Reims led to Reims becoming the regular site of the coronation of the French monarch, a tradition that was established with the coronation of Henry I of France in 1027. All but seven of France's future kings -- Hugh Capet, Robert II, Louis VI, John I, Henry IV, Louis XVIII, and Louis Philippe I -- were crowned at Reims.

The cathedral hosted other royal ceremonies as well. On 19 May 1051, Henry I of France and Anne of Kiev were married in the cathedral. While conducting the Council of Reims in 1131, Pope Innocent II anointed and crowned Louis VII, the son of the ruling king Louis VI in the cathedral.

By the 12th century, the Carolingian cathedral was considered too small for the ambitions of the archbishop, Samson of Mauvoisin (1140–1160). He preserved the existing nave and transept but rebuilt and enlarged the two ends of the cathedral. He demolished the west front and adjoining tower in order to build two matching flanking towers, in imitation of the Royal Abbey of Saint Denis outside of Paris, whose choir dedication Samson himself had attended a few years earlier. The new church was longer than the old cathedral, 110 m (360 ft). On the east end, he created a larger choir and a disambulatory and ring of radiating chapels. At the end of the century, the nave and the transept were still of the Carolingian style while the apse and façade were in the Early Gothic style.

On 6 May 1210, the partly Carolingian and partly Early Gothic cathedral was destroyed by fire, allegedly due to "carelessness." One year to the day afterwards, archbishop Aubrey laid the first stone of the new cathedral's chevet. The work on the new cathedral moved with exceptional speed, because Reims was one of the first buildings to use stones and other materials of standardised sizes, so each stone did not have to be cut to measure. In July 1221, the chapel at the east end of the cathedral entered use. In 1230, work began on the west front, indicating that the nave was nearly complete.

In 1233, a long-running dispute between the cathedral chapter and the townsfolk (regarding issues of taxation and legal jurisdiction) boiled over into open revolt. Several clerics were killed or injured during the resulting violence and the entire cathedral chapter fled the city, leaving it under an interdict (effectively banning all public worship and sacraments). Work on the new cathedral was suspended for three years, only resuming in 1236 after the clergy returned to the city and the interdict was lifted following mediation by the king and the pope. Construction then continued more slowly.

In 1241, the members of the Chapter were able to meet in the choir, showing that the vaults of the apse and the five last traverses of the nave on the east, where the stalls were located, were finished, but the nave was not roofed until 1299 (when the French king lifted the tax on lead used for that purpose). Work on the western façade did even not begin until 1252, and the portals were not completed until after 1260. Thereafter work moved from the west to the east, with the completion of the nave; the level of the rose windows was completed between 1275 and 1280. The roof of the nave and upper galleries were finished in 1299. A comparison of the roses of the western façade to the roses of the transepts demonstrates the temporal stylistic progress: the rose windows of the transepts are decorated by bar tracery, but all glass is inside the round frames – that is, a mix between Classic Gothic and High Gothic. In the rose windows of the western façade, however, the glass exceeds the round frames to fill the whole pointed-arched areas available (i.e. Rayonnant, an advanced form of High Gothic).

Unusually, the names of the cathedral's successive architects, succeeding each other until the completion of the cathedral's structural work in 1275, are known. A labyrinth built into floor of the nave at the time of construction or shortly after (similar to examples at Chartres and Amiens) included the names of these four master masons (Jean d'Orbais, Jean-le-Loup, Gaucher of Reims and Bernard de Soissons) and the number of years they worked there, though art historians still disagree over who was responsible for which parts of the building. The labyrinth itself was destroyed in 1779, but its details and inscriptions are known from 18th-century drawings. The clear association here between a labyrinth and master masons adds weight to the argument that such patterns were an allusion to the emerging status of the architect (through their association with the mythical architect Daedalus, who built the Cretan labyrinth of Minos). The cathedral also contains further evidence of the rising status of the architect in the tomb of Hugues Libergier (d. 1268, architect of the now-destroyed Reims church of St-Nicaise). Not only is he given the honour of an engraved slab; he is shown holding a miniature model of his church (an honour formerly reserved for noble donors) and wearing the academic garb befitting an intellectual.

Even after the structural work had been completed in 1275, a lot of work remained to be done. The Gallery of Kings on the west front, and the octagonal upper towers were not finished until the 1460s. Documentary records show the acquisition of land to the west of the site in 1218, suggesting the new cathedral was substantially larger than its predecessors, the lengthening of the nave presumably being an adaptation to afford room for the crowds that attended the coronations.

The towers, 81 m (266 ft) tall, were originally designed to rise 120 m (390 ft). The south tower holds just two great bells; one of them, named "Charlotte" by Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine in 1570, weighs more than 10,000 kg (10 t).

Following the death of the infant King John I, his uncle Philip was hurriedly crowned at Reims, 9 January 1317.

During the Hundred Years' War 's Reims campaign the city was under siege by the English from 1359 to 1360, but the siege failed. In 1380, Reims Cathedral was the location of Charles VI 's coronation and eight years later Charles called a council at Reims in 1388 to take personal rule from the control of his uncles.

After Henry V of England defeated Charles VI 's army at the Battle of Agincourt on 25 October 1415, most of northern France including Reims fell to the English. They held Reims and the cathedral until 1429, when it was captured by Joan of Arc, allowing the dauphin Charles to be crowned king on 17 July 1429. For her feat – a turning point in the Hundred Years' War – Joan is memorialized at Reims Cathedral with two statues: an equestrian statue outside the church and another within the church.

On 24 July 1481, a fire caused by the negligence of workers covering the high wood-and-lead flèche (spire) that was being constructed over the transept destroyed the part of the spire's framework, the cathedral's central bell tower, and the galleries at the base of the cathedral roof, while dripping molten roofing lead caused further damage. However, recovery was quick with kings Charles VIII and Louis XII making donations to the cathedral's reconstruction. In particular, they granted the cathedral an octroi of the Gabelle salt tax. In gratitude, the new roof was adorned by fleur-de-lis and the royal coat of arms "affixed to the top of the façade". However, this work was suspended before the arrows were completed in 1516. The upper galleries of the nave were completed in 1505. These were so expensive that the remaining planned projects, including a 170-meter-tall (560 ft) bell tower over the transept, spires on the west front and the planned upper towers flanking the transept, were never built.

Following the death of Francis I, Henry II was crowned King of France on 25 July 1547 in Reims Cathedral.

The 18th century saw the first major reconstruction inside the cathedral. Between 1741 and 1749, the lower windows and the medieval furniture, the principal altar, the choir stalls, and the choir screen were all replaced with furnishings more in keeping with the theological requirements and taste of the era. The sculpture of the portals was also restored.

In 1793, during the French Revolution, the cathedral was closed and briefly turned into a storehouse for grain, and then for a time into a pseudo 'temple of reason'. Most of the remaining furniture and funeral monuments were destroyed, the reliquaries in the treasury melted down for the gold, and the bells melted down to make cannon. Mobs hammered much of the sculpture of the grand portal and the more evident symbols of royalty, such as the fleur-de-lis emblems, and the royal Hand of Justice were burned. However, most of the medieval sculpture survived relatively intact.

With the restoration of the French monarchy after the downfall of Napoleon, the practice of royal coronations at Reims resumed, but only briefly. The last king of France to be crowned there was Charles X in 1825. His reign was deeply unpopular in Paris, and he was overthrown in the Revolution of 1830 and replaced by a constitutional monarch, Louis Philippe I, who was sworn in at the Parliament in Paris rather than crowned in Reims.

A series of restoration projects were carried out in the later 19th century, focusing first on the gables and statues on the west front (1826–30), and then the upper galleries, windows and towers (1845–60), under Jean-Jacques Arveuf. In 1860 He was replaced by Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, who modified the gallery of the choir and the apse closer to their original medieval appearance. He was succeeded by two more architects, Eugene Millet and Victor Ruprich-Robert, who took considerable liberties in remaking the galleries of the nave in a more imaginative 13th-century Gothic style. In 1888. they were followed by Denis Darcy and Paul Gout, who followed more closely the historic architecture, particularly in the restoration of the west rose window.

On the outbreak of the First World War, the cathedral was commissioned as a hospital, and troops and arms were removed from its immediate vicinity. On 4 September 1914, the XII Saxon corps arrived at the city and later that day the Imperial German Army began shelling the city. The guns, located 7 km (4.3 mi) away in Les Mesneux, ceased firing when the XII Saxon Corps sent two officers and a city employee to ask them to stop shelling the city.

On 12 September, the occupying German Army decided to place their wounded in the cathedral over the protests of the Abbe Maurice Landrieux, and spread 15,000 bales of straw on the floor of the cathedral for this purpose. The next day French soldiers under General Franchet d'Esperey re-entered the city, but German wounded were left in the cathedral.

Six days later, a shell exploded in the bishop's palace, killing three and injuring 15. On 18 September a prolonged bombardment began and on the 19th shells struck the "forest" of wooden timbers under the lead-covered roof, setting it on fire, and completely destroying the roof. The bells melted, windows were blown out, and the sculpture and parts of the walls were damaged. The lead in the roofing melted and poured through the mouths of the stone gargoyles, damaging, in turn, the adjoining bishop's palace. Images of the cathedral in ruins were shown during the war by the indignant French, accusing the Germans of the deliberate destruction of buildings rich in national and cultural heritage, while German propaganda blamed the deaths of prisoners on the French, who at gunpoint prevented them fleeing the fire. Single shells continued to strike the ruined building for several years, despite repeated pleas by Pope Benedict XV.

At the end of the war, it was proposed to keep the cathedral in its damaged state as a monument to victims of the war, but this idea was finally rejected. A major restoration project began in 1919, led by Henri Deneux, chief architect of the service of French historic monuments. The restoration received major funding from the Rockefeller Foundation, and sometimes made use of modern techniques and materials, including prefabricated reinforced concrete, to strengthen the structure. In the 1920s, the foundations of the earlier church from the Carolingian period were discovered under the cathedral and excavated. The work was completed and the cathedral was reopened in 1938.

Restoration work on the church has continued since 1938, repairing the damage caused by the war and by pollution. In 1955 Georges Saupique made a copy of the Coronation of the Virgin, which can be seen above the cathedral entrance and with Louis Leygue copied many of the other sculptures on the cathedral façade. He also executed a statue of St Thomas for the north tower.

Beginning in 1967, many of the statues from the exterior, such as the smiling angel, were moved to the interior of the Tau Palace for protection, and replaced by copies.

The Franco-German reconciliation was symbolically formalized in July 1962 by French president Charles de Gaulle and German chancellor Konrad Adenauer, where, in 1914, the Imperial German Army deliberately shelled the cathedral in order to shake French morale.

The cathedral, former Abbey of Saint-Remi, and the Palace of Tau were added to the list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites in 1991.

On his 74th Pastoral Visit, Pope St. John Paul II visited Reims on 26 September 1996 for the 1500th anniversary of the baptism of King Clovis. While there, the pope prayed in the same chapel where St. Jean-Baptiste de La Salle celebrated his first Mass in 1678.

On 8 October 2016, a plaque bearing the names of the 31 kings crowned in Reims was placed in the cathedral in the presence of Archbishop Thierry Jordan and Prince Louis-Alphonse, Duke of Anjou, the main of the three pretenders to the French throne.

The west façade, the entry to the cathedral, particularly glorifies royalty. Most of it was completed at the same time, giving it an unusual unity of style. It is harmonic or balanced, with two towers of equal height and three portals entering into the nave. The porches of the portals, with archivolts containing many sculptures, protrude from the main wall.

Above and slightly behind the central portal is a large rose window at the level of the clerestory, with tall arched windows flanked by statuary under pointed canopies projected forward. Above this level is the gallery of kings, composed of 56 statues with a height of 4.5 m (15 ft), with Clovis I, the first Christian king of the Franks, in the center, Clotilde to his right, and Saint Remigius to his left. The two bell towers were originally planned to have spires making them three times taller than the nave, but these were never rebuilt.

The three portals contain an elaborate sculptural program that illustrates to the illiterate churchgoers the messages of the Bible. The central portal is devoted to the Virgin Mary, the patron of the cathedral. The principal scene under the gable of the top of the portal shows the symbolic marriage of Christ with his church, represented by Mary. Mary is also the figure on the statue-column in the centre of the doorway.

The statuary of the south portal depicts the Last Judgement and the Apocalypse of John, the only major Gothic cathedral to combine these two themes. The figure of Christ passing judgement is placed under the gable over the top of the portal, with angels carrying symbols of the Passion of Christ. Other figures represent the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, as well as a multitude of angels, and allegorical symbols of the vices and virtues.

The sculpture of the north portal depicts the Crucifixion of Christ, which is shown under the gable at the top of the portal; other scenes show the Resurrection, and the Ascension of Jesus to heaven. To the left of the north portal is one of the most recognisable of all the sculptures of Reims, the Smiling Angel, Gabriel, with Mary, on the north side. The angel was damaged during the First World War, but repaired and returned to its place.

Fire destroyed the original roof and the spires in 1481: of the four towers that flanked the transepts, nothing remains above the height of the roof.

The southwest tower contains the massive bourdon, a bell 2.46 meters in diameter, and weighing ten tons, given to the cathedral in 1570 by the cardinal Charles of Lorraine; it also contains the second bourdon, weighing seven tons, and 2.2 meters in diameter. This bell was made in 1849.

The north transept, like the west façade, has three portals surrounded by sculpture. They are dedicated to the Virgin Mary (left); Christian saints (centre) and the Last Judgement (right). Above and set back from the portals are three small rose windows, and then a large rose window covered with an arcade full of sculpture. The north rose window is one of the earliest examples of the use of bar tracery, with the panes of stained glass separated by thin stone mullions. Twelve stone mullions radiate outward from a central eye. This became a major characteristic of Rayonnant Gothic architecture.

Above this window an arch full of sculpture, and above the continuation of the gallery of kings from the west façade, with seven statues of apostles and prophets. At the top is a triangular pigeon with a sculptural depiction of the Annunciation. The pignon is decorated with crockets and other elaborate ornament that became characteristic of the late Gothic Flamboyant style.

The north transept is flanked by two tall buttresses, which are crowned by slender tabernacles containing statues of kings, covered with spires decorated with more late Gothic crockets.

The south transept has a similar plan to the north transept, but lacks portals. Instead, there is a group of three narrow lancet windows divided by slender columns and topped by small rose windows, and above them a large rose window. The original south rose window was destroyed by a hurricane in 1580, and was replaced by a window with a simpler design of tracery. The upper gallery of statues underwent major restoration in the 19th century. The triangular pignon at the top is in the Flamboyant style, with sculpture depicting the Assumption of the Virgin. At the peak of the pignon is a statue of a Sagittarius, an ancient Roman archer, with his bow.

The north and south walls of the long nave are supported by eleven flying buttresses on each side. These counterbalance the outward thrust of the ceiling vaults, and make possible the great height, thin walls and large windows that bring abundant light into the nave. The double arches of each buttress make a leap from heavy pillars to the upper walls. The buttresses are topped by slender booth-like tabernacles containing statues, decorated with slender spires. The statuary gives additional weight to the buttresses, helps conceal the arches, and complements the decoration of the upper level of the cathedral. The buttresses have a secondary function; the arches have narrow channels that carry rain water to the mouths of the sculpted gargoyles which spout it away from the building.

An additional decorative blind gallery was added to the upper walls after a fire of 1481, composed of a series of arches, pinnacles, trilobe rosettes and gables. This conceals the base of the roof, which rises up sixteen meters to its peak. The peak of the roof is decorated with a line of gilded fleur-de-lis ornaments.

The apse, the east end of the cathedral, has one axial chapel at the end and four radiating chapels. The exterior is lavishly decorated with arcades, pinnacles, spires and an abundance of statuary. Much of the sculpture was added in the 19th century by Viollet-le-Duc.

Above the choir rises a slender, lead-covered timber flèche, or spire, that is 18 m (about 59 feet) tall. It was reconstructed in the 15th century and in the 1920s.

One distinctive feature of Reims Cathedral not found in other High Gothic cathedrals is the wall of sculpture on the inside of the west façade. Some of the statues, particularly around the doors, were badly damaged by fire after the bombardment of the church in 1914, but the wall has been substantially restored. Some of the sculpture continues the biblical stories illustrated on the west façade, such as the Apocalypse, while other themes are found only in the interior. Some scenes link Biblical events to more recent historical events; the wall illustrates the baptism of Christ by John the Baptist, parallel with the baptism of Clovis by Saint Remigius. Particularly attention is given to local saints such as Nicasius. One celebrated scene is the communion of the knight; the Old Testament patriarch Abraham, in the medieval armor of a knight, is being offered bread and wine by the priest-king Melchizedek, a preview of the Eucharist in the New Testament.

The nave, the central body of the church running from the west end to the transept, is the section where ordinary parishioners worship. It occupies about half the length of the church, and has exceptional length and unity of style. It is somewhat narrower than the adjoining transept and apse. Its height is made possible through the use of a newer and stronger four-part rib vault, reinforced by the flying buttresses outside. The four-part vaults also made it possible to have arcades of identical pillars, rather than the alternating pillars and piers of earlier Gothic churches such as Sens Cathedral and Notre-Dame de Paris, giving greater unity to the appearance.

The elevation of the church was divided in three sections, following the model introduced slightly earlier in the 1190 Soissons Cathedral : high arcades on the ground floor, above that a narrower gallery called the triforium, and above that tall windows, equal in height to the galleries. Reims combined this unity and simplicity with the enormous size and scale of the nave first introduced at Chartres Cathedral. The architects adapted another element from Chartres; the pillars of the arcade were composed of groups of colonettes clustered together around a pillar, rising dramatically as a group into the high arches of the vaults. The multiple lines of the colonettes greatly emphasised the sensation of height. The capitals of the columns were another distinctive Reims characteristic; they were composed of delicate floral and vegetal sculpture, decorated in places with imaginary creatures.

The transept is the section of the cathedral between the nave and the choir, which extends on the north and south of the structure. The transept is both wider and higher than the nave, because it was originally intended to have four towers and a higher central tower. The four towers on the ends of the transept were begun but were not completed above the roofline. Four large piers are in place in the transept which were originally intended to support the central tower.

The transept was reserved especially for the coronation ceremony of the French kings. A monumental rood screen, or jubé, separated this portion of the church from the nave in the Middle Ages. The stalls for the ordinary clergy were located in the three sections of the nave just west of the transept, while the area just to the east of the transept was reserved for ceremonies and celebrations of the high clergy.

The organ of the cathedral is locked on the north wall of the transept, just below the rose window.

The transept contains the main altar, made of French and Italian griotte, or red marble. It is a copy of the original altar, made in 1747, and destroyed by the bombardment of the First World War.

The Renaissance retable in the rosary chapel of the south transept is another notable work, filled with sculptures of the body of Christ on the knees of the Virgin Mary, and other figures of the apostles, Saint John and Saint Madeleine, and the donor of the retable, the canon Grandraoul. It was created by the Reims sculptor Pierre Jacques in 1541.

On the northwest wall of the north transept in a medieval clock, dating to the 14th century. The clock is in the form of the façade of a church, with elaborate tracery, gables and carved angels. On the hour, a series of figures, representing the seasons, the phases of the moon, and the Biblical Magi appear and disappear from the doors on the face of the clock. It is one of the oldest examples of this kind of mechanical clock.

Another unusual feature of the transept is the floor of the chapel on the south side. This includes a Gallo-Roman mosaic, which was discovered under the floor of the archbishop's palace in 1845 and moved to its present location.

The choir, the area of the cathedral traditionally reserved for the clergy, is much shorter than the nave, but is wider and higher. It features a double ambulatory, or walkway, that gives access to the five radiating chapels at the east end. An ornamental grille separates the ambulatory from the choir and the altar. The pillars around the ambulatory are massive single columns, with richly decorated capitals, mixed with clustered columns, continuing the same program found in the nave. The dramatic arched vaults of the ambulatory spring directly from the columns.

The five chapels at the east end are arranged like a horseshoe, placed between the massive supporting buttresses on the exterior. The chapel on the axis is the longest, and is preceded by an additional ceiling vault. The furnishings and decoration of the apse chapels date from between 1763 and 1777, under the cardinal-archbishop Charles Antoine de La Roche-Aymon. The chapel of the saint Joan of Arc, who had famously attended the coronation of Charles VII in the cathedral, contains her statue, dressed in full armour with a banner. It was made in 1901 by the sculptor Prosper d'Épinay.

The original grand pipe organ in the cathedral dated to the 15th century but was largely destroyed by the fire of 1481. The organ-case was reconstructed in 1487 and reconstructed again in 1647. The grand organ is located in the north transept, just below the rose window, and is surmounted by a sculpture of Christ giving a blessing and two angels playing trumpet. The lower portion of the woodwork, with carved panels and pilasters, dates to the 18th century.

The organ suffered further damage in the First World War, and was rebuilt again. It was inaugurated in 1938. It is the fifth largest in France, with six thousand six hundred pipes, eighty-five stops or distinct sounds played by four keyboards, sixty-one notes, and thirty-two foot pedals. It is used frequently for concerts.

A smaller organ, installed in 1927, is installed in the choir.

In the interior of the west façade, much of the original glass remains, though it has gone through several restorations. The centre of the west rose window depicts the Dormition of the Virgin. It complements the scene of the crowning of the Virgin Mary in sculpture on the exterior of the façade The circles of glass medallions in the window, from the centre outwards, represent the twelve apostles, angel musicians, and the kings and prophets of the Old Testament. The windows in the bays of the triforium, just below the rose window, depict the coronations of the kings of France, and are the stained glass equivalent of the gallery of kings on the façade.

The windows in the west portals are more modern; the small rose over the central portal was made by Jacques Simon in 1938, and is devoted to scenes related to the Virgin Mary, while the glass in the lateral tympanums is from 1959, with scenes from the life of Christ.

Up until the First World War, the upper windows of the nave preserved nearly all of their original glass. Each of the thirty-six windows depicted a bishop on the lower level, and a king of France on the upper level. The arcades depicted in glass over the heads of the kings were crowded with angels, suggesting that the kings were the earthly representatives of the celestial kingdom. Only four of these original windows survived intact in traverses eight to eleven of the nave, in the two bays closest to the transept, protected by the towers of the transept. The others were recreated with a mixture of medieval and modern glass.

The north rose window in the transept represents the biblical Creation, and still has much of its original 13th-century glass. The central figure is God the creator, matching the sculptural theme on the exterior of the transept. The Virgin Mary in the window is depicted as the new Eve.

The upper windows of the Transept are largely composed of white grisaille glass; many of which also date to the 13th century; these brought a maximum of light into the transept, the part of the cathedral used for the coronation ceremony.

The lower windows of the south façade of the transept, in the Chapel of Saint Remi, have an unusual theme, particular to the region. They celebrate the role of the monk Dom Perignon in the history of the French wine industry, and the making of champagne and other local wines. The windows were created in the 1950s by Jacques Simon. Another group of unusual modern windows is found in the bays of the transept and the two right chapels of the choir. These are grisaille or white glass windows, in abstract patterns, conceived and painted by Brigitte Simon beginning in 1961.

A few of the higher windows in the Choir have their original 13th-century glass, though most have been heavily restored or reassembled. One example is the window depicting the archbishop Henri de Braine, in the axial chapel of the Choir.

Some of the best-known windows in the cathedral are modern, and are found in the axial chapel at the east end of the cathedral. These are the three windows made by Marc Chagall in association with glass artist Charles Marq. They represent the Tree of Jesse (the genealogy of Christ); the Old and New Testament; and the "Grandes Heures de Reims".

The episcopal palace, known as the Palace of Tau, adjoins the cathedral on the south side of the apse. It was the residence of the archbishop, and also was the setting for the banquet given in honour of the new kings of France after their coronation.

The episcopal palace has its own chapel, in the High Gothic style, directly alongside the cathedral. It has no collateral aisles and three levels, with tall lancet windows, and is more sober in its decoration than the neighbouring cathedral. It previously had its own flèche or spire, a symbol of the status of an archbishop. The adjoining residential wing was originally constructed in the Flamboyant Gothic style, but was largely reconstructed between 1686 and 1693 by the architect Robert de Cotte in a more classical style, including a triangular fronton over its façade a monumental double stairway. The upper floor of this wing contains the hall used for the coronation banquets.

The cathedral art collection includes a very fine collection of tapestries, which formerly hung in the choir of the cathedral, and now are displayed in the cathedral aisles in summer season and in the Palace of Tau during the rest of the year. Two tapestries, made in Flanders, depict scenes from life of the Clovis. They were presented, as part of a larger set to the cathedral in 1573 by Cardinal Charles of Lorraine. Another set of tapestries was presented to the cathedral in 1530 by Robert de Lenoncourt, archbishop under Francis I (1515–1547). They are of either local or possibly Flemish manufacture, and represent the life of the Virgin, and the how her role may have been prefigured in the Old Testament.

The cathedral treasury contains an important collection of precious objects, particularly reliquaries, some of which were used in coronations or donated by French monarchs at the time of their coronation. These include the Holy Ampulla (French : Sainte Ampoule, lit. ' holy ampulla '), the successor of the ancient one that contained the oil with which French kings were anointed. It was broken during the French Revolution, but a fragment is contained in the present flask. The Talisman of Charlemagne (12th century), contains a purported fragment of the True Cross, and is decorated with sapphires, gold, emeralds and pearls. The "Chalice of Saint Remigius" is said to be the cup used in the coronation of Clovis, and was used in later coronations. It is a 12th-century cup adorned in the 19th century with pearls and precious stones.

In 2011, the city of Reims celebrated the cathedral's 800th anniversary. The celebrations ran from 6 May to 23 October. Concerts, street performances, exhibitions, conferences, and a series of evening light shows highlighted the cathedral and its 800th anniversary. In addition, six new stained glass windows designed by Imi Knoebel, a German artist, were inaugurated on 25 June 2011. The six windows cover an area of 128 m (1,380 ft) and are positioned on both sides of the Chagall windows in the apse of the cathedral.

Remoulade (English: / r eɪ m ə ˈ l ɑː d / ; French: [ ʁemulad ] ; Occitan : salsa remolada) is a cold sauce. Although similar to tartar sauce, it is often more yellowish, sometimes flavored with curry, and often contains chopped pickles or piccalilli. It can also contain horseradish, paprika, anchovies, capers and a host of other condiments.

It is often used as a condiment or dipping sauce, primarily for sole, plaice, and seafood cakes (such as crab or salmon cakes) but also served with meats.

In French cuisine, remoulade is a derivative of mayonnaise, with the addition of mixed herbs (parsley, chives, chervil and tarragon), capers, diced cornichons and, optionally, some anchovy essence or chopped anchovies.

The sauce is made from mayonnaise with vinegar, mustard, shallots, capers, chopped pickles, and/or fresh herbs (chives, tarragon, chervil, burnet). It is commonly served as céleri remoulade, a mustard -flavored remoulade variation with shredded raw celeriac. Often it is served as a condiment for red meats, fish, and shellfish.

The remoulade used in céleri-rave remoulade is different: it is based on a simple mustard-flavoured vinegar and oil dressing spiced with salt, pepper, and chopped green herbs.

In Louisiana Creole cuisine, remoulade tends to have a tannish or pink tint due to the use of Creole mustard, small amounts of ketchup, cayenne pepper, and paprika.

Louisiana remoulade styles include French-African Creole, Afro-Caribbean Creole, and Cajun; like local variants of roux, each is different from the French original.

Creole versions often have tan or pink hues and are usually piquant.

Each version may have finely chopped vegetables, usually green onions, celery, and parsley ; most are made with either Creole mustard or stone-ground mustard. Salt, black pepper, and cayenne pepper are also standard ingredients.

In the oil- and mayonnaise-based versions, the reddish hue often comes from the addition of a small amount of ketchup or paprika.

The sauce is often topped with paprika for the aesthetics as well as the flavor. Generally, lemon juice or vinegar are added for acidity. Other additions include hard-boiled egg or raw egg yolks, minced garlic, hot sauce, vinegar, horseradish, capers, cornichons, and Worcestershire sauce.

Today, shrimp remoulade is a common cold appetizer in New Orleans Creole restaurants, although, historically, hard-boiled eggs with remoulade were a less expensive option on some menus.

Shrimp remoulade is most often served as a stand-alone appetizer (usually on a chiffonade of iceberg lettuce). One might also see crawfish remoulade, but restaurants seldom offer remoulade sauce as an accompaniment with fish, where cocktail sauce and tartar sauce are generally preferred. However, food columnist and cookbook author Leon Soniat suggests serving remoulade "over seafood or with sliced asparagus."

Remúlaði is a condiment commonly served with fried fish and on hot dogs, together with mustard, ketchup, and raw and fried onions.

RENATER (Réseau national de télécommunications pour la technologie, l'enseignement et la recherche) is the national research and education network in France.

Deployed at the beginning of the 1990s, RENATER (National telecommunications network for Technology, Education and Research) provides a national and international connectivity via the pan-European GÉANT network, to more than 1,000 education and research sites in Metropolitan France and Overseas Departments and Territories. The RENATER network is an important and added value tool for research and education. It makes easier the collaborative work of the French researchers with their colleagues (data transfers and acquisitions, videoconferencing, spreadsheets etc.).

RENATER is connected to international networks through two nx10 Gbit/s links to GÉANT and directly to the Internet through four nx10 Gbit/s links.

The following services are offered to RENATER's community:

Renaud Dutreil (born 12 June 1960) is a French government official. He was Lauréat du Concours Général de Philosophie in 1978.

Dutreil served in the highest offices of French government for over fifteen years prior to his joining LVMH. His ministerial appointments included Minister of Small & Medium-Sized Businesses, Commerce, Crafts and Liberal Professions (2005–2007), Minister of the Civil Service and State Reform (2004–2005) and Secretary of State for Small & Medium-Sized Businesses, Commerce, Crafts and Liberal Professions (2002–2004). He was a Member of Parliament from 1994–2008 and of the French Council of State (Supreme Court for Public Law) from 1989 to 1992. He is currently non serving Maître des Requêtes au Conseil d'Etat, where he was admitted in 1989 with rank 1st.

Dutreil is a graduate of the Paris Institute of Political Sciences, École Normale Supérieure and École Nationale d'Administration in Paris.

In 2002, he was the first President and founder of the Union pour un Mouvement Populaire, which is the currently leading political party in France. As Minister in the French government, he is known for the "Dutreil Acts", which have modernized the French tax system, the distribution system, the professional education system and encouraged a pro-entrepreneurial culture and environment in France

A strong advocate of national artisanal and Luxury traditions, Dutreil co-authored among other books Le Geste et La Parole des Métiers d'Art, an important reference work on the subject. In 2003, he created a Government sponsored label, "Entreprise du Patrimoine vivant" (Living Heritage Companies) which has been granted to more than 600 French companies selected for their exceptional know how and heritage.

Dutreil argued strongly for 'fonctions régaliennes' in the French administration (army, police, justice and heritage) to be reserved for French citizens (i.e. not open to other European citizens) (speech at the Ecole Normale Supérieure, 2005).

He is member of the Advisory Board of L Capital, a Private Equity fund part of LVMH.

He has developed an expertise in Brand development and management and initiated, during the crisis in 2008 and 2009, a strategic focus of the brands on the values of Artisanship, heritage and narrative communication, exclusive store experience and controlled distribution, which are now the core of the Luxury marketing and distribution strategies. He has also developed a strong network in Asia (China and India) and Brazil. As a "multi cultural" leader, familiar with distribution and marketing in the emerging markets as well as in Europe and the US, Dutreil believes growth in consumer goods will more and more come from the "globalization of exception", implying a double focus on brand identity as well as global distribution, executed by multinational management teams.

Dutreil is a Trustee of Museum of Arts and Design, New York City ; Member of the Board of New School and of Parsons School of Design ; Member of the Board of Maison Française Columbia University; Member of Partnership for New York ; he is the Chairman of Friends of Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientifiques, a French institute supporting advanced research in mathematics and theoretical physics.

Dutreil is Knight of the Legion of Honour.

Renault S.A., commonly referred to as Groupe Renault (UK : / ˈ r ɛ n oʊ / REN -oh, US : / r ə ˈ n oʊ / rə- NOH ; French: [ ʁəno ], also known as the Renault Group in English), is a French multinational corporation and automobile manufacturer established in 1899. The company produces a range of cars and vans; it has previously manufactured trucks, tractors, tanks, buses / coaches, aircraft and aircraft engines, as well as autorail vehicles.

Headquartered in Boulogne-Billancourt, a suburb of Paris, the Renault group is made up of the namesake Renault marque along with subsidiaries Alpine, Dacia from Romania, and Mobilize. It has been part of the Renault–Nissan–Mitsubishi Alliance (previously Renault–Nissan Alliance) since 1999. The French state and Nissan of Japan each own a 15% share of the company.

Renault also has other subsidiaries such as RCI Banque (automotive financing), Renault Retail Group (automotive distribution), and Motrio (automotive parts). Renault has various joint ventures, including Horse Powertrain (engine development), Oyak-Renault (Turkish manufacturing), Renault Nissan Automotive India (Indian manufacturing), and Renault Korea (previously Renault Samsung Motors, South Korean manufacturing). Renault Trucks, previously known as Renault Véhicules Industriels, has been part of the Volvo Group since 2001. Renault Agriculture became fully owned by German agricultural equipment manufacturer CLAAS in 2008.

Renault is known for its role in motor sport, particularly rallying, Formula One and Formula E. The company's early work on mathematical curve modeling for car bodies is significant in the history of computer graphics.

The Renault corporation was founded on 25 February 1899 as Société Renault Frères by Louis Renault and his brothers Marcel and Fernand. Louis was a bright, aspiring young engineer who had already designed and built several prototypes before teaming up with his brothers, who had honed their business skills working for their father's textile firm. While Louis handled design and production, Marcel and Fernand managed the business.

The first Renault car, the Renault Voiturette 1CV, was sold to a friend of Louis' father after giving him a test ride on 24 December 1898.

In 1903, Renault began to manufacture its own engines; until then it had purchased them from De Dion-Bouton. The first major volume sale came in 1905 when Société des Automobiles de Place bought Renault AG1 cars to establish a fleet of taxis. These vehicles were later used by the French military to transport troops during World War I which earned them the nickname " Taxi de la Marne." By 1907, a significant percentage of London and Paris taxis had been built by Renault. Renault was also the best-selling foreign brand in New York in 1907 and 1908. In 1908 the company produced 3,575 units, becoming the country's largest car manufacturer.

The brothers recognised the value of publicity that participation in motor racing could generate for their vehicles. Renault made itself known through succeeding in the first city-to-city races held in Switzerland, producing rapid sales growth. Both Louis and Marcel raced company vehicles, but Marcel was killed in an accident during the 1903 Paris-Madrid race. Although Louis never raced again, his company remained very involved, including Ferenc Szisz winning the first Grand Prix motor racing event in a Renault AK 90CV in 1906.

Louis took full control of the company as the only remaining brother in 1906 when Fernand retired for health reasons. Fernand died in 1909 and Louis became the sole owner, renaming the company Société des Automobiles Renault (Renault Automobile Company).

Renault fostered its reputation for innovation from very early on. At the time, cars were luxury items manufactured without assembly line advances. The price of the smallest Renaults at the time was 3000 francs (₣); an amount equal to ten years pay for the average worker. In 1905, the company introduced mass production techniques and Taylorism in 1913. In 1911, Renault visited Henry Ford at the Highland Park factory and adopted some of the manufacturing principles from his trip.

Renault manufactured buses and commercial cargo vehicles in the pre-war years. The first real commercial truck from the company was introduced in 1906. Renault were also an important pre-war manufacturer of aircraft engines. The firm entered the business in 1907 with the first of what would become a series of air-cooled V8 engines. In 1911 the Renault 90 hp became the world's first V12 aircraft engine when it was exhibited at the Salon de l’Aéronautique at the Grand Palais in Paris.

During World War I, the company branched out into ammunition and military vehicles such as the revolutionary Renault FT tank. Production of aero engines also ramped up with additional licensed production of the firms' products being undertaken by various companies, including Rolls-Royce who got their start in the aircraft engine business producing a batch of Renault 70 hp air-cooled V8s. Renault's most successful aircraft engine was the 300 hp 12Fe with around 5,300 built during the war. The company's military designs were so successful that Louis was awarded the Legion of Honour for his company's contributions. The company exported engines to American automobile manufacturers for use in such automobiles as the GJG, which used a Renault 26 horsepower (19 kW) or 40 hp (30 kW) four-cylinder engine.

Louis Renault enlarged Renault's scope after 1918, producing agricultural and industrial machinery. The war from 1914 until 1918 led to many new products. The first Renault tractor, the Type GP was produced between 1919 and 1930. It was based on the FT tank. Renault struggled to compete with the increasingly popular small, affordable "people's cars," while problems with the United States stock market and the workforce slowed the company's growth. Renault also had to find a way to distribute its vehicles more efficiently. In 1920, Louis signed one of its first distribution contracts with Gustave Gueudet, an entrepreneur from Amiens, France.

The pre-First World War cars had a distinctive front shape caused by positioning the radiator behind the engine to give a so-called " coal scuttle " bonnet. This continued through the 1920s. Only in 1930 did all models place the radiator at the front. The bonnet badge changed from circular to the familiar and continuing diamond shape in 1925. The practice of installing the radiator behind the engine against the firewall continued during the 1950s and 1960s on vehicles where the engine was installed longitudinally in the rear of the vehicle.

Renault introduced new models at the Paris Motor Show, which was held in September or October of the year. This led to confusion about model years. For example, a "1927" model was mostly produced in 1928.

Renault cars during this time period had two model lines; the economy four-cylinder engine models that in the 1930s had the suffix "Quatre" and the luxury six-cylinder models that were sold with the suffix "-six", later becoming "Stella." For example, in 1928, when Renault produced 45,809 cars, its seven models started with a 6CV, a 10CV, the Monasix, 15CV, the Vivasix, the 18/22CV and the 40CV. Renault offered eight body styles. The longer rolling chassis were available to coachbuilders. The smaller were the most popular while the least produced was the 18/ 24CV. The most expensive body style in each range was the closed car. Roadsters and tourers (torpedoes) were the cheapest.

The London operation was important to Renault in 1928. The UK market was quite large and North America also received exports for the luxury car market. Lifted suspensions, enhanced cooling, and special bodies were common on vehicles sold abroad. Exports to the US by 1928 had declined to near-zero from their high point prior to WWI. A Type NM 40CV Tourer had a US list price of over US$4,600 ($ 86,250 in 2025 dollars), about the same as a Cadillac V-12, Packard Eight, Fiat 520, or Delahaye. Closed 7-seat limousines like the Renault Suprastella started at US$6,000 ($ 112,500 in 2025 dollars).

Cars were conservatively engineered and built. The Renault Vivasix, model PG1, was sold as the "executive sports" model beginning in 1927. Lighter weight factory steel bodies powered by a 3,180 cubic centimetre (cc) six-cylinder motor provided a formula that lasted until the Second World War.

"de Grand Luxe Renaults", those with a wheelbase over 12-foot (3.7 m), were produced in small numbers in two major types – six- and eight-cylinder. The 1927 six-cylinder Grand Renault models NM, PI and PZ introduced the new three spring rear suspension that considerably aided stability that was needed since some vehicles surpassed 90 mph (140 km/h).

The straight 8-cylinder Reinastella was introduced in 1929 and expanded to a range culminating in 1939 Suprastella. Coachbuilders included Kellner, Labourdette [ fr ], J. Rothschild et Fils and Renault bodies. Closed car Renault bodies were often trimmed with interior woodwork by Rothschild.

In 1928, Renault introduced an upgraded specification to its "Stella" line. The Vivastella 's and Grand Renaults had upgraded interior fittings and a small star fitted above the front hood logo. This proved to be a winning differentiator and in the 1930s all cars changed to the Stella suffix from the previous two alpha character model identifiers.

The Grand Renaults were built using a considerable amount of aluminium. Engines, brakes, transmissions, floor and running boards and all external body panels were aluminium. Of the few that were built, many went to scrap to aid the war effort.

In 1931, Renault introduced diesel engines for its commercial vehicles.

Renault was one of the few French vehicle manufacturers that pursued the production of aircraft engines after World War I. In the late 1920s, it attempted to produce a high-power military engine to compete with the American Pratt & Whitney units, which proved unsuccessful, although its civil engines achieved better results. In the 1930s, the company took over the aircraft manufacturer Caudron, focusing its production in small airplanes, acquired a stake in Air France and partnered to establish the airmail company Air Bleu. Renault Caudron airplanes settled several speed world records during the 1930s. Renault continued developing tanks as part of France's rearming effort, including the D1 and the FT's replacement, the R 35.

During the late 1920s and early 1930s, Renault was surpassed by Citroën as the largest car manufacturer in France. Citroën models at the time were more innovative and popular than Renault's. However, by mid-1930s the French manufacturers were hit by the Great Depression. Renault could initially offset losses through its tractor, railroad and weaponry businesses, while Citroën filed for bankruptcy, and was later acquired by Michelin. Renault became again the largest car manufacturer, a position it would keep until the 1980s.

Renault was finally affected by the Great Depression economic crisis in 1936. The company spun off Caudron and its foundry and aircraft engine divisions into related but autonomous operations, keeping its core automotive business. Between 1936 and 1938, a series of labour disputes, strikes, and worker unrest spread throughout the French automobile industry. The disputes were eventually quashed by Renault in a particularly intransigent way, and over 2,000 people lost their jobs.

After the French capitulation in 1940, Louis Renault refused to produce tanks for Nazi Germany, which took control of his factories. As Renault was manufacturing the Renault UE tank for the Allies, he produced trucks instead. On 3 March 1942, the British Royal Air Force (RAF) launched 235 low-level bombers at the Île Seguin, Billancourt, Paris plant, the largest number aimed at a single target during the war. 460 metric tons (450 long tons; 510 short tons) of bombs were dropped on the plant and the surrounding area, causing extensive damage along with heavy civilian casualties. Renault resolved to rebuild the factory as quickly as possible, but bombardments continued a year later, on 4 April, this time delivered by the Americans, and on 3 and 15 September 1943.

A few weeks after the Liberation of Paris, at the start of September 1944, the factory gates at Renault's Billancourt plant reopened. Operations restarted slowly, in an atmosphere poisoned by plotting and political conspiracy. In 1936, the Billancourt factory had been the scene of violent political and industrial unrest that had surfaced under Léon Blum 's Popular Front government. The political jostling and violence that followed liberation ostensibly reflected the rivalries between capitalist collaboration and communist resistance; many of the scores settled predated the invasion.

Responding to the chaotic situation at Renault, a 27 September 1944 meeting of the Council of Ministers (fr) took place under de Gaulle's presidency. Postwar European politics had quickly become polarised between communists and anti-communists, and in France de Gaulle was keen to resist Communist Party attempts to monopolise the political dividends available to resistance heroes: politically Billancourt was a communist stronghold. The government decided to "requisition" the Renault factories. A week later, on 4 October, Pierre Lefaucheux, a resistance leader with a background in engineering and top-level management, was appointed provisional administrator of the firm, assuming his responsibilities at once.

Meanwhile, provisional government accused Louis Renault of collaborating with the Germans. In the frenzied atmosphere of those early post-liberation days, with many wild accusations, Renault was advised by his lawyers to present himself to a judge. He appeared before Judge Marcel Martin, on 22 September 1944 and was arrested on 23 September 1944, as were several other French automobile-industry leaders. Renault's harsh handling of the 1936–1938 strikes had left him without political allies and no one came to his aid. He was incarcerated at Fresnes prison where he died on 24 October 1944 under unclear circumstances, while awaiting trial.

On 1 January 1945, by de Gaulle's decree, the company was posthumously expropriated from Louis Renault. On 16 January 1945, it was formally nationalised as Régie Nationale des Usines Renault. Renault's were the only factories permanently expropriated by the French government. In subsequent years, the Renault family tried to have the nationalisation rescinded by French courts and receive compensation. In 1945, and again in 1961, the Courts responded that they had no authority to review the government's actions.

Under the leadership of Pierre Lefaucheux, Renault experienced both a commercial resurgence and labor unrest, that was to continue into the 1980s.

In the early 1950s, Renault assembled at least two Frégate variants in England, the "Standard Saloon" and the "De Luxe Saloon".

In secrecy during the war, Louis Renault had developed the rear engine 4CV which was subsequently launched under Lefacheux in 1946. Renault debuted its flagship model, the largely conventional 2-litre 4-cylinder Renault Frégate (1951–1960), shortly thereafter. The 4CV proved a capable rival for cars such as the Morris Minor and Volkswagen Beetle ; its sales of more than half a million ensured its production until 1961.

After the success of the 4CV, Lefacheux continued to defy the postwar French Ministry of Industrial Production, which had wanted to convert Renault solely to truck manufacture, by directing the development of its successor. He oversaw the prototyping of the Dauphine (until his death), enlisting the help of artist Paule Marrot in pioneering the company's textile and color division.

The Dauphine sold well as the company expanded production and sales further abroad, including Africa and North America. The Dauphine sold well initially in the US, although it subsequently became outdated against increased competition, including from the country's nascent domestic compacts such as the Chevrolet Corvair. Renault also sold the Renault Caravelle roadster, which was called the Floride outside North America.

During the 1950s, Renault absorbed two small French heavy vehicle manufacturers (Somua and Latil) and in 1955 merged them with its own truck and bus division to form the Société Anonyme de Véhicules Industriels et d'Equipements Mécaniques (Saviem).

Renault then launched two successful cars – the Renault 4 (1961–1992), a practical competitor for the likes of the Citroën 2CV, and the rear-engined Renault 8. The larger Renault 10 followed the success of the Renault 8, and was the last rear-engined Renault. The company achieved success with the more modern and more upmarket Renault 16, a pioneering hatchback launched in 1966, followed by the smaller Renault 6.

On 16 January 1970, the manufacturer celebrated the 25th anniversary of its 1945 rebirth as the nationalised Régie Nationale des Usines Renault. The 1960s had been a decade of aggressive growth: a few months earlier, in October 1969, the manufacturer had launched the Renault 12, combining the engineering philosophy of its hatchbacks with the more conservative "three-box" design. The four-door Renault 12 model slotted between the Renault 6 and Renault 16. The model was a success. 1970 was also the first year during which Renault produced more than a million cars in a single year, building 1,055,803.

The company's compact and economical Renault 5 model, launched in January 1972, was another success, anticipating the 1973 energy crisis. The Renault 18 was introduced in 1978 and the larger Renault 20 in 1975.

During the mid-seventies, the already broad-based company diversified into more industries and continued to expand globally, including South East Asia. The energy crisis led Renault to again attempt to attack the North American market. Despite the Dauphine's success in the United States in the late 1950s and an unsuccessful assembly project in Saint-Bruno-de-Montarville, Quebec (1964–72), Renault began to disappear from North America at the end of the decade.

Renault acquired a controlling stake in Automobiles Alpine in 1973, and over the decades, Renault developed a collaborative partnership with Nash Motors Rambler and its successor American Motors Corporation (AMC). From 1962 until 1967, Renault assembled complete knock down (CKD) kits of the Rambler Classic sedans in its factory in Belgium. Renault did not have large or luxury cars in its product line and the "Rambler Renault" was positioned as an alternative to the Mercedes-Benz "Fintail" cars. Later, Renault continued to make and sell a hybrid of AMC's Rambler American and Rambler Classic called the Renault Torino in Argentina (sold through IKA-Renault). Renault partnered with AMC on other projects, such as a rotary concept engine in the late 1960s.

In the late 1960s and 1970s, the company established subsidiaries in Eastern Europe, most notably Dacia in Romania, and South America (many of which remain active) and forged technological cooperation agreements with Volvo and Peugeot, (for instance, for the development of the PRV V6 engine, which was used in Renault 30, Peugeot 604, and Volvo 260 in the late 1970s). In the mid-1960s, Renault Australia was set up in Melbourne. The company produced and assembled models including the R8, R10, R12, R16, sporty R15, R17 coupes, R18, and R20. The unit closed in 1981 and the factory closed with LNC Industries taking over import and distribution of Renaults in Australia.

When Peugeot acquired Citroën and formed PSA, the group's collaboration with Renault was reduced, although established joint production projects were maintained. Prior its merging with Peugeot, Citroën sold to Renault the truck and bus manufacturer Berliet in December 1974, merging it with its subsidiary Saviem in 1978 to create Renault Véhicules Industriels, which became the only French manufacturer of heavy commercial vehicles. In 1976, Renault reorganised the company into four business areas: automobiles (for car and light commercial vehicles or LCVs), finance and services, commercial vehicles (coaches and trucks over 2.5 tons GVW), and minor operations under an industrial enterprises division (farm machinery, plastics, foundry, etc.). In 1980, Renault produced 2,053,677 cars and LCVs. The cars at the time were the Renault 4, 5, 6, 7, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, and 30; the LCVs were the 4, 5, and 12 Société and the Estafette. The company added 54,086 buses/coaches and trucks.

In North America, Renault partnered with American Motors Corporation (AMC), lending AMC operating capital and buying a minority 22.5% stake in the company in late 1979. The first Renault model sold through AMC's dealerships was the R5, renamed Renault Le Car. Jeep was keeping AMC afloat until new products, particularly the XJ Cherokee, could be launched. When the bottom fell out of the four-wheel drive (4×4) truck market in early 1980, AMC was in danger of bankruptcy. To protect its investment, Renault bailed AMC out with cash – at the price of a controlling 47.5% interest. Renault replaced some AMC executives, and Jose Dedeurwaerder of Renault became President of AMC.

The partnership resulted in the marketing of Jeep vehicles in Europe. The Jeep Cherokee (XJ) Motor vehicle may have been a joint AMC/Renault project since some early sketches of the XJ series were made in collaboration by Renault and AMC engineers (AMC insisted that the XJ Cherokee was designed by AMC personnel; even though a former Renault engineer designed the Quadra-Link front suspension for the XJ series). The Jeep also used wheels and seats from Renault. Part of AMC's overall strategy was to save manufacturing costs by using Renault's parts and engineering expertise when practical. This led to the improvement of the venerable AMC inline six – a Renault/Bendix-based port electronic fuel injection system (usually called Renix) transformed it into a modern, competitive powerplant with a jump from 110 to 177 hp (82 to 132 kW) with less displacement (from 4.2 to 4.0 litres). The XJC Cherokee concept, which was conceived in 1983 as a successor to the XJ series, was also a joint collaboration with AMC and Renault engineers until the design was inherited by the Chrysler Corporation in late 1987 after Renault divested AMC – which debuted in 1989 as the Jeep Concept 1 (evolving into the Jeep Grand Cherokee in April 1992).

The Renault-AMC marketing effort in passenger cars was unsuccessful compared to the popularity of Jeep vehicles. This was because, by the time the Renault range was ready, the second energy crisis was over, taking with it much of the desire for economical, compact cars. One exception was the Renault Alliance (an Americanised version of the Renault 9), which debuted for the 1983 model year. Assembled at AMC's Kenosha, Wisconsin plant, the Alliance received Motor Trend ' s domestic Car of The Year award in 1983. The Alliance's 72% US content allowed it to qualify as a domestic vehicle, making it the first car with a foreign nameplate to win the award. (In 2000, Motor Trend did away with separate awards for domestic and imported vehicles.) A surprising side effect of the AMC linkup was that Renault felt the effects of the Arab League boycott of companies doing business with Israel, as AMC built Jeeps there under license. Plans to sell the Renault 9 in the Middle East were mothballed as a result.

Introductions in the US during the 1980s included the Renault Alliance GTA and GTA convertible – an automatic-top convertible with a 2.0 L engine – big for a car of its class and the Renault Fuego coupé. The Alliance was followed by the Encore (US version of the Renault 11), an Alliance-based hatchback. In 1982, Renault become the second European automaker to build cars in the US, after Volkswagen. However, bland styling and poor product quality proved insurmountable.

Eventually, Renault sold AMC to Chrysler in 1987 after the assassination of Renault's chairman, Georges Besse by Action directe. The Renault Medallion (Renault 21 in Europe) sedan and wagon was sold from 1987 until 1989 through Jeep-Eagle dealerships. Jeep-Eagle was the division Chrysler created out of the former AMC. Renault imports ended after 1989. A completely new full-sized 4-door sedan, the Eagle Premier, was developed during the partnership between AMC and Renault. The Premier design, as well as its state-of-the-art manufacturing facility in Bramalea, Ontario, Canada, were the starting point for the sleek LH sedans such as the Eagle Vision and Chrysler 300M.

In early 1979, as part of its attempts to expand into the US market, Renault bought a 20% stake in truck manufacturer Mack. The aim of this operation was to make use of the company's extensive dealership network to distribute light trucks. In 1983, Renault increased its stake in Mack to 44.6%. In 1987, it transferred the ownership of a 42% stake to Renault Véhicules Industriels.

In the late 1970s and early 1980s, Renault increased its involvement in motorsport, with novel inventions such as turbochargers in its Formula One cars. Renault's Head of Engines, Georges Douin, orchestrated the installation of turbocharged engines across much of the Renault range beginning in 1980. 10% of all turbocharged European cars in 1984 were Renaults. The company's road car designs were revolutionary in other ways also – the Renault Espace was one of the first minivans and was to remain the most well-known minivan in Europe for the next two decades. The second-generation Renault 5, the European Car of the Year-winning Renault 9, and the most luxurious Renault yet, the aerodynamic 25, were all released in the early 1980s. At the same time, poor product quality damaged the brand. The ill-fated Renault 14 may have been the culmination of these problems in the early 1980s.

Renaults were somewhat successful on both road and track, including the 1984 Espace launch, which was Europe's first multi-purpose vehicle, a dozen years before any competitor. However, Renault was losing a billion francs a month totaling ₣12.5 billion in 1984. The government intervened and Georges Besse was installed as chairman; he set about cutting costs dramatically, selling many of Renault's non-core assets (Volvo stake, Gitane, Eurocar, and Renix), withdrawing almost entirely from motorsports, and laying off many employees. This halved the deficit by 1986, but Besse was murdered by the communist terrorist group Action Directe in November 1986. He was replaced by Raymond Lévy, who continued Besse's initiatives, slimming the company enough that by the end of 1987, Renault was more or less financially stable. However, while Besse was convinced that Renault needed a presence in the North American market and wanted to push forward with restructuring AMC, Lévy, facing domestic losses from Renault at home, and losses from AMC in the US, along with the political climate that led to Besse's assassination, decided to sell AMC to Chrysler that same year.

The Renault 9, a small four-door family saloon, was voted European Car of the Year on its 1981 launch. It sold well in France, but was eventually eclipsed by its sister vehicle, the Renault 11 hatchback, as the hatchback body style became more popular in this size of the car. The Renault 5 entered its second generation in 1984 and continued to sell well. The long-running Renault 18 was replaced by the Renault 21 early in 1986, adding a seven-seater estate badged as the Nevada or Savanna depending on where it was sold. Renault's top-of-the-range model in the 1980s was the Renault 25, launched at the end of 1983.

In 1990, Renault strengthened its collaboration with Volvo by signing an agreement that allowed both companies to reduce vehicle conception costs and purchasing expenses. Renault had access to Volvo's expertise in upper market segments and in return, Volvo exploited Renault's designs for low and medium segments. In 1993, the two companies announced their intention to merge operations by 1 January 1994 and increased their cross-shareholding. The French accepted the merger, while Volvo shareholders rejected it.

A revitalised Renault launched successful new cars in the early 1990s, accompanied by an improved marketing effort on European markets, including the 5 replacement, the Clio in May 1990. The Clio was the first new model of a generation that replaced numeric identifiers with traditional nameplates. The Clio was voted European Car of the Year soon after its launch, and was one of Europe's best-selling cars in the 1990s, proving even more popular than its predecessor. Other important launches included the third-generation Espace in 1996 and the innovative Twingo in 1992, the first car to be marketed as a city car MPV (multi-purpose vehicle). The Twingo was roomier than any prior cars of its size range. Twingo sales reached 2.4 million in Europe, even though the original was only built for (Continental) left-hand drive markets.

It was eventually decided that the company's state-owned status was a detriment. By 1994, plans to sell shares to public investors were officially announced. The company was privatised in 1996. This new freedom allowed the company to venture once again into markets in Eastern Europe and South America, including a new factory in Brazil and upgrades for its infrastructure in Argentina and Turkey. In December 1996, General Motors Europe and Renault began to collaborate in the development of LCVs, starting with the second generation Trafic (codenamed X83).

Renault's financial problems were not all fixed by the privatisation, and Renault's president, Louis Schweitzer gave to his then deputy, Carlos Ghosn, the task of confronting them. Ghosn elaborated a plan to cut costs for the period 1998–2000, reducing the workforce, revising production processes, standardising vehicle parts and pushing the launch of new models. The company also undertook organisational changes, introducing a lean production system with delegate responsibilities inspired by Japanese systems (the "Renault Production Way"), reforming work methods, and centralising research and development at its Technocentre to reduce vehicle conception costs while accelerating such conception.

After Volvo's exit, Renault searched for a new partner to cope with an industry that was consolidating. Talks with BMW, Mitsubishi, Nissan, PSA and others were held and yielded a relationship with Nissan, whose negotiations with Daimler had stalled. Starting on 27 March 1999, the Renault–Nissan Alliance is the first of its kind involving a Japanese and a French company, including cross-ownership. Renault initially acquired a 36.8% stake at a cost of £2.7 billion in Nissan, while Nissan, in turn, took a 15% non-voting stake in Renault. Renault continued to operate as a stand-alone company, but with the intent to collaborate with its alliance partner to reduce costs. The same year, Renault bought a 51% majority stake of the Romanian company Dacia for £408.5 million, thus returning after 30 years, in which time the Romanians had built over 2 million cars that primarily consisted of local versions of the Renault 8, 12 and 20. In 2000, Renault acquired a controlling stake of the newly formed South Korean Samsung Group 's automotive division for £59.5 million.

In Japan, Renault was formerly licensed by Yanase Co, Japan's premier seller of imported cars. However, as a result of Renault's purchase of an interest in Nissan in 1999, Yanase cancelled its licensing contract with Renault in the spring of 2000, and Nissan took over as the sole licensee, hence sales of Renault vehicles in Japan were transferred from Yanase Store locations to Nissan Red Stage Store locations.

In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Renault sold various assets to finance its inversions and acquisitions, refocusing itself as a car and van manufacturer. In 1999, the company sold its industrial automation subsidiary, Renault Automation, to Comau and its engine parts division to TWR Engine Components. In 2001, Renault sold its 50% stake in bus/coach manufacturer Irisbus to co-owner Iveco and its logistics subsidiary, CAT France, to Global Automotive Logistics. Following the sale of Renault Véhicules Industriels to Volvo in 2001, the company retained a minority (but controlling) stake (20%) in the Volvo Group. In 2010 Renault reduced its shareholding to 6.5% and in December 2012 sold its remaining shares. In 2004, Renault sold a 51% majority stake in its agricultural machinery division, Renault Agriculture, to CLAAS. In 2006, CLAAS increased its ownership to 80% and in 2008 took full control.

In the twenty-first century, Renault developed a reputation for distinctive, outlandish design. The second generation of the Laguna and Mégane featured ambitious, angular designs that turned out to be successful, The 2000 Laguna was the second European car to feature "keyless" entry and ignition. Less successful were the company's more upmarket models. The Avantime, a unique coupé multi-purpose vehicle, sold poorly and was quickly discontinued while the luxury Vel Satis model also disappointed. However, the design inspired the lines of the second-generation Mégane, the maker's most successful car. As well as its distinctive styling, Renault was to become known for its car safety by the independent company Euro NCAP Thus, in 2001, the Laguna achieved a five-star rating, followed in 2004 by the Modus, and acquired control of AvtoVAZ in 2008.

In April 2010, Renault–Nissan announced an alliance with Daimler. Renault supplied Mercedes-Benz with its brand new 1.6-litre turbo-diesel engine and Mercedes-Benz provided a 2.0 litre four-cylinder petrol engine to Renault–Nissan. The resulting new alliance was to develop a replacement for the Smart based on the Twingo.

In February 2010, Renault opened a new production factory near Tangier, Morocco, with an annual output capacity of 170,000 vehicles. Initially, it manufactured the Dacia Lodgy and Dacia Dokker models followed in October 2013 by the second generation Dacia Sandero. The output capacity increased to 340,000 vehicles per year with the inauguration of a second production line. The site is located in a dedicated free trade area, neighboring Tanger Automotive City. According to Renault, the new factory emits zero carbon and industrial liquid discharges. Over 100,000 vehicles were produced there in 2013. Renault expects to eventually increase production at the Tangier plant to 400,000 vehicles per year.

In the 2010s, Renault increased its efforts to gain market share in the Chinese market. In 2013, it formed a joint venture with Dongfeng Motor Group named as Dongfeng Renault, based on a failed previous venture with the Chinese company Sanjiang. In December 2017, it signed an agreement with Brilliance Auto to create a new joint venture (Renault Brilliance Jinbei) aimed at producing light commercial vehicles and minivans under the Renault, Jinbei and Huasong marques. In December 2018, Renault announced it would acquire a "significant" stake in JMCG 's electric vehicle subsidiary JMEV. In July 2019, Renault took a 50% majority stake from JMEV through capital increase. In April 2020, Renault announced it planned to withdraw from the Dongfeng Renault venture, transferring its stake to Dongfeng.

In December 2012, the Algeria's National Investment Fund (FNI), the Société Nationale de Véhicules Industriels (SNVI), and Renault signed an agreement to establish a factory near the city of Oran, Algeria, with the aim of manufacturing Symbol units from 2014 onwards. The production output was estimated at 25,000 vehicles. The Algerian State has a 51% stake in the facility.

In September 2013, Renault launched its brand in Indonesia, the world's fourth most populous country, with the aim of becoming one of the top European brands there until 2016. The model range at the time of the launch consisted of the Duster (locally assembled), the Koleos and the Mégane RS. Later, the Clio and the Captur were also added.

In April 2015, the French government upped its stake in Renault from 15% to 19.73% with the aim of blocking a resolution at the next annual general meeting that could reduce its control over the company. In 2017, the government sold back shares and returned to a 15% stake as agreed with Renault.

During 2016, Renault changed position on the viability of small (B-segment) diesel cars in Europe, as they become significantly more expensive when re-engineered to comply with new emissions regulations as a result of the Volkswagen emissions scandal. Renault believes that all small and some mid-size (C-segment) will no longer be diesels by 2020. However, on Friday, 13 January 2017, Renault shares fell as the Paris prosecutor started an investigation into possible exhaust emissions cheating. The company later recalled 15,000 cars for emission testing and fixing. Renault, along with several other automobile companies, has been accused of manipulating the measurement equipment for NO x pollution from diesel cars. Independent tests carried out by the German car club ADAC proved that, under normal driving conditions, diesel vehicles, including the Renault Espace, exceeded legal European emission limits for nitrogen oxide (NO x) by more than 10 times. Renault denied any foul play, stating compliance with French and European standards.

In November 2018, Renault's CEO Ghosn was arrested by Japanese officials for allegedly underreporting his Nissan's salary, following an internal review conducted by the Japanese company. Renault traded shares fell more than 15% after the arrest was known. After Ghosn's arrest, the chief operating officer and company deputy chief Thierry Bolloré became the acting CEO and the board director Philippe Lagayette the acting chairman. In January 2019, following Ghosn's resignation, Renault announced it had appointed Jean-Dominique Senard as chairman and the acting CEO Bolloré as CEO. In October 2019, Bolloré was fired and replaced by Renault's CFO Clotilde Delbos as acting CEO. Bolloré said his dismissal was a "coup" by Senard. In January 2020, Renault announced it had named Italian Luca de Meo as its new CEO, with him taking his post on 1 July. Delbos was named as his deputy.

In May 2020, Renault announced a cost-cutting plan aimed at eliminating 15,000 jobs worldwide, about 10% of the company's workforce, due to falling sales and the COVID-19 pandemic.

In January 2021, as part of a company revamp, Renault said it would divide its automotive division into four business units: Renault, Dacia and Lada, Alpine, and Mobilize (the latter for new "new mobility services").

In April 2021, Renault said that its revenue fell by 1.1% from the beginning of 2021 until March and it will reduce car production and focus on models with higher margins.

Following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, many international, particularly Western companies pulled out of Russia. Unlike most of its Western competitors, Renault was slow to announce divestment or scaling back of its operations in Russia, drawing criticism. On 21 March 2022, after a brief halt, Renault resumed production at the Renault Russia car plant near Moscow. In May 2022, Renault sold 100% of its shares in Renault Russia to the city of Moscow and its 67.69% interest in AvtoVAZ to the Russian Central Research and Development Automobile and Engine Institute for a symbolic one rouble. The agreement provides an option for Renault to buy back its interest in AvtoVAZ within six years.

In November 2022, Renault said it plans to spin off the electric car development into a subsidiary company tentatively called Ampère. It also plans to spin off its powertrain production and development operations (including internal combustion engines and hybrid systems) into a joint venture company named Horse with Geely as co-owner.

In January 2023, Renault said it intended to transfer almost 30% of its controlling stake in Nissan to a French trust (pending approval by both companies), reducing its shares with voting rights to a minority 15% and, in doing so, making Nissan shares in Renault to gain voting rights. The shareholding and voting ratio of both companies is set to be fixed in the future. The agreement also included Nissan investing in Ampere and projects in various markets. In February 2023, both companies approved the going-ahead for the shareholding changes. Final details and regulatory clearances for the transaction were set to be completed by the first quarter of 2023 and it would be done by the fourth quarter. The companies also approved joint projects and Nissan's Ampere investment. The share transfer was completed in November 2023.

On March 31, 2025, Renault announced plans to acquire Nissan’s 51% stake in its Indian manufacturing unit

In June 2025, Renault announced Luca de Meo had resigned as its CEO. Renault began production of drones in Ukraine in 2025. The decision was opposed by the Confédération Genérale du Travail and Force Ouvrière unions.

In July 2026, amid the Dieselgate scandal, British courts dismissed the allegations against five manufacturers, including Renault, ruling in their favor.

Renault took part in motorsport at the beginning of the 20th century, promoted by Marcel Renault 's racing interests and over the years acquired companies with a sporting connection such as Gordini and Alpine.

In the 1970s, Renault set up a dedicated motorsport division called Renault Sport, and, in 1978, won the 24 Hours of Le Mans with the Renault Alpine A442. Renault has also achieved success in both rallying and in Formula One over the past few decades.

The company has also backed various one-make single-seater series such as Formula Renault and the Formula Renault 3.5. These two racing series were a step in the career of thousands of drivers, including Formula One champions Fernando Alonso, Sebastian Vettel, Kimi Räikkönen and Lewis Hamilton, as well as IndyCar champion Will Power.

Renault Sport develops and manufactures the Renault Sport-badged cars, as the Renault Clio RS (for Renault Sport) and the Renault Mégane RS, which own the world records in their categories, such as the Nürburgring, and the Suzuka circuit and awards from What Car?, Evo, and other magazines.

Renault introduced the turbo engine to Formula One when it debuted its first car, the Renault RS01 at Silverstone in 1977. The Renault team continued until 1986. From 1989 Renault supplied engines for the successful Williams-Renault car.

Renault took over the Benetton Formula team in 2000 for the 2001 season and renamed it Renault F1 in 2002. In 2005 and 2006 the team won the Constructors' and Drivers' titles (with Fernando Alonso). At the 2005 French Grand Prix Carlos Ghosn set out his policy regarding the company's involvement in motorsport:

Renault powered the winning 2010 Red Bull Racing team, and took a similar role with its old team in December 2010, when it sold its final stake to the investment group Genii Capital, the main stakeholder since December 2009, ending Renault's direct role in running a F1 team for the second time.

Renault bought the Enstone-based team for the 2016 season, rebranding it Renault. In 2021, the team was renamed Alpine F1 Team and became part of the new Alpine business unit, with Renault retained as the engine nameplate. Renault will stop manufacturing F1 engines at Viry-Châtillon after the 2025 season.

Renault has been involved in rallying from an early era. Marcel Renault won the 1902 Rallye Paris-Vienna, but lost his life while competing in the 1903 Paris-Madrid rally.

During the 1950s and 1960s, Renault manufactured several small cars with rear wheel drive in some cases, as the 4CV, the R8 or the Dauphine. These cars were well-adapted to the rally of the time, and the tuner Amedee Gordini collaborated with its performance. In the 1950s the Renault Dauphine won several international rallies, including the 1956 Mille Miglia and the 1958 Monte Carlo Rally.

In 1973, Renault took control of Automobiles Alpine, a related company for several years, which was responsible for building successful rally cars such as the A110. A highly evolved A110 won the first World Rally Championship, representing Alpine-Renault.

In 1976, the Alpine's competition department and the Gordini factory at Viry-Chatillon were merged into Renault Sport. The focus shifted to Formula One, although Renault achieved several victories including the 1981 Monte Carlo Rally with the Renault 5 Turbo before retirement from the world rally in late 1994.

Renault cars also participate of cross-country races, most prominently the Dakar Rally. The Marreau brothers won the 1982 edition driving a Renault 20 Turbo 4x4 prototype.

Later, Renault provided a Renault Megane platform and sponsored the Schlesser -Renault Elf buggies that won the 1999 and 2000 editions. The 1999 car was the first two-wheel drive Dakar's winner.

Renaults won the European Rally Championship four times, in 1970, 1999, 2004 and 2005.

Below is the ranking of vehicle production in Renault group factories in 2023:

Below is the production of engines, Horse division for thermal engines and Ampere division for electric motors, in the Renault group factories in 2023:

Below is the production of gearboxes in the Renault group factories in 2023:

Renault's head office is in Boulogne-Billancourt. The head office is located near the old Renault factories; Renault has maintained a historical presence in Boulogne-Billancourt since the company's opening in 1898.

Renault is administered through a board of directors, an executive committee and a management committee. As of January 2019, members of the 19-seat board include Jean-Dominique Senard (as chairman), Cherie Blair, Catherine Barba and Pascale Sourisse. François Provost is the current CEO as of 2025.

Current model line up, with calendar year of introduction:

Dacia vehicles, sold in some markets under the Renault marque:

Renault Samsung vehicles, sold in some markets under the Renault marque:

Dacia light commercial vehicles, sold in some markets under the Renault marque:

Renault concept cars show future design and technology directions. Since 2008, Renault has displayed various all-electric car concepts under the name "Z.E.", for zero emission, starting with a concept based on the Renault Kangoo Be Bop. Further concepts and announcements followed, with the production of the Fluence Z.E. saloon beginning in 2011 and the Renault Zoe in 2012.

Renault revealed the Ondelios hybrid concept in 2008. but this was overtaken by the Z.E. programme. However, Renault presented a new hybrid car in September 2014, the Eolab, which incorporates various innovations that the company said will be added to production models by 2020.

In 2014 at the New Delhi Auto Show, Renault announced a new model, the Kwid Concept, which comes with helicopter drone.

In 2013, Renault became the leader of electric vehicles sales in Europe, thanks to its large range of vehicles (Twizy, Zoe, Fluence, Kangoo). The Renault Zoe was Europe's best selling all-electric car in 2015 and 2016. Global Zoe sales reached the 50,000 unit mark in June 2016, and achieved the 150,000 unit milestone in June 2019. Groupe Renault global electric vehicle sales passed the 100,000 unit milestone in September 2016. Since the launch of the Renault electric program, the Group has sold more than 273,550 electric vehicles worldwide through December 2019. Since inception, a total of 181,893 Zoe city cars, 48,821 Kangoo Z.E. electric vans, 29,118 Twitzy heavy quadricycles, and 10,600 Fluence Z.E. cars have been sold globally through December 2019.

Beginning in 2008, Renault made agreements for its planned zero-emissions products, including with Israel, Portugal, Denmark and the US states of Tennessee and Oregon, Yokohama in Japan and the Principality of Monaco. Serge Yoccoz is the electric vehicle project director.

In 2008, Renault–Nissan signed a deal to produce electric cars for an initiative in Israel with Better Place, a US company developing new non-petroleum–based transport infrastructure. Renault aimed to sell 10–20,000 cars a year in Israel. Renault also agreed to develop exchangeable batteries for the project. Renault collaborated with Better Place to produce a network of all-electric vehicles and thousands of charging stations in Denmark, planned to be operational by 2011. The Renault Fluence Z.E., was selected for the Israel project. It became the first zero-emission vehicle with a switchable battery, with trials in 2010 undertaken with the Renault Laguna. Renault ended the partnership in 2013, following Better Place's bankruptcy, with only 1,000 vehicle sales in Israel and 240 in Denmark.

Renault–Nissan and the largest French electric utility, Électricité de France (EDF), signed an agreement to promote electric vehicles in France. The partnership planned to pilot projects on battery management and charging infrastructure. Renault–Nissan also signed deals with Ireland's Electricity Supply Board (ESB), and in Milton Keynes as part of the UK's Plugged in Places national project.

We have decided to introduce zero-emission vehicles as quickly as possible in order to ensure individual mobility against the background of high oil prices and better environmental protection

— Carlos Ghosn, CEO of Renault and Nissan

According to Ghosn, the Renault–Nissan alliance was a fundamental step in electric car development, and that they needed each other for other issues such as battery manufacturing, charging infrastructure and business strategy.

I don't think either Renault or Nissan would have been able to launch an EV alone successfully. You can have an electric car alone. But what you cannot have is an EV business system, from batteries to recycling to cars to infrastructure to negotiation, by being alone.

— Carlos Ghosn, CEO of Renault and Nissan

The Renault–Nissan group is a member of the PHEV Research Center. In September 2013, Renault and Bolloré announced an agreement to collaborate on a new electric vehicle and in car-sharing project.

In 2021, Renault launched a new EV and mobility brand called Mobilize and showed a prototype for a small Twizy-style EV called the EZ-1. Renault Group also invested into a start-up company Verkor, that should develop EV batteries and about in 2026 build a gigafactory in France.

By 2025, the yearly output of 400,000 electric vehicles is planned.

In 2007 Renault introduced a new line of eco-friendly derivatives marked eco² that were based on production platforms. A minimum of 5% recycled plastic was used and the vehicle's materials were 95% reusable. Eco²'s CO emissions were not to exceed 140g/km, or would be biofuel compatible. At the 2008 Fleet World Honours, Renault received the Environment Award. The chairman of Judges, George Emmerson, commented, "This was the most hotly contested category in the history of the Fleet World Honours, such is the clamour for organizations' green credentials to be recognised. There were some very impressive entries, but the panel felt that Renault's impressive range of low-emission vehicles was the most tangible, and the most quantifiable.

Renault plans to introduce autonomous vehicle technology by 2020. The company unveiled a prototype, the Next Two (based on the Zoe), in February 2014.

During its early years, Renault only manufactured the cars' chassis, while the bodywork was completed by coachbuilders. The first car with Renault's bodywork was the "Taxi de la Marne" introduced in 1905. Most Renault-made bodyworks were simple and utilitarian until the Reinastella unveiling in 1928. In the 1930s, Renault developed streamlined cars such as the Viva Grand Sport. In the 1950s, the company worked with Ghia designers.

In 1961, with the assistance of the independent designer Philippe Charbonneaux (responsible for the R8), the company created Renault Styling as a design department, led by Gaston Juchet since 1963. In 1975, Robert Opron was named chief designer and Renault Styling was divided into Interior, Exterior and Advanced Design groups.

In the 1960s, an in-house computer-aided design (CAD) computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) system called UNISURF was introduced, led by Pierre Bézier (who popularised Bézier curves and worked at Renault from 1933 until 1975).

In 1987, Renault named Patrick le Quément as chief designer and created the Industrial Design Department to replace Renault Styling. The new division incorporated a new management system, with more technology and personnel. Renault gave it the same importance as Engineering and Product Planning, participating in product development.

Le Quément was responsible for bold designs such as the Mégane II and the Vel Satis, giving Renault a more coherent and stylish image. In 1995, Design and Quality were merged under le Quément's direction. Later, the new department moved to Guyancourt 's Technocentre, which also became the base for Engineering and Product Planning. The group was organised in three sections: Automobile Design; Truck, LCV and Bus Design; and Concept Cars and Advanced Design. During the next years, satellite centres opened in Spain (1999), Paris (2000), South Korea (2003), Romania (2007), India (2007), Brazil (2008) and China (2019).

At the end of 2009, le Quément was replaced by Laurens van den Acker, who introduced the "cycle of life" concept to Renault's design.

Most of Renault engineering was decentralised until 1998, when the Technocentre became the main Renault's engineering facility. Satellite centres exist, including Renault Technologies Americas (with branches in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Mexico), Renault Technologies Romania (branches in Morocco, Russia, Slovenia and Turkey) and Renault Technologies Spain (branch in Portugal). As of 2013, Renault's engineering section had over 6,500 employees worldwide, of which 34% were engineers and 63% technicians. Engine development is in charge of a specific division, Renault Powertrains, with nearly 65 engineers. Overseas engineering is increasing and research and design teams are in charge of adjusting existing vehicles to local needs and budgets.

As of 2014, Engineering, and Product Planning, are directed by Gaspar Gascon Abellan and Philippe Klein respectively.

The Renault Technocentre (French pronunciation: [ ʁəno tɛknɔˈsɑ̃tʁ ]) is the main research and development facility. It is located in Guyancourt. It covers 150 hectares (370 acres) and integrates all departments involved in developing products and industrial processes (design, engineering and product planning) as well as supplier representatives. The Technocentre gathers more than 8,000 employees and comprises three main sections: The Advance Precinct, The Hive and the prototype build centre. The Advance Precinct, a stepped structure surrounded by a lake, has design studios and other departments related to early design stages. The Hive is the tallest structure and includes research and engineering facilities dedicated to the development process of new vehicles. The prototype build centre is an extension of The Hive. The three main structures are accompanied by smaller technical buildings.

The Technocentre was one of the first enterprises to have real-time life-size 3D modelling systems.

Renault Tech is a division of Renault Sport Technologies, headquartered in Les Ulis. It was established in 2008 and is in charge of modifying cars and vans for special purposes (mobility cars, driver's school cars, and business fleets).

In 1999, Renault acquired a 51% controlling stake from the Romanian-based manufacturer Automobile Dacia, which was later increased to 99.43%. As part of the Renault group, Dacia is a regional marque of entry-levels cars focused on Europe and Northern Africa which shares various models with the Renault marque.

RCI Banque is a wholly owned subsidiary that provides financial services for Renault marques worldwide and Nissan marques in Europe, Russia and South America.

Renault Retail Group is Renault's wholly owned automobile distributor for Europe. In 1997, the French branches were merged to establish the subsidiary Renault France Automobiles (RFA). In 2001, it served as the basis for Renault Europe Automobiles (REA), which managed sales in Europe. In 2008, the company adopted its current name. Renault Retail Group operates in France, Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Poland, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.

For many years, Renault had a 43.4% stake in Nissan, thereby giving it effective control de jure, and Nissan held a 15% stake (with no voting rights) in Renault. As of November 2023 Renault owns 15% shares with voting rights. It has more shares in a French trust which it can use for voting in a few limited situations.

As well as sharing engines and joint-development of zero-emissions technology, Nissan increased its presence in Europe by badging various Renault van models such as the Renault Kangoo / Nissan Kubistar, Renault Master / Nissan Interstar and the Renault Trafic / Nissan Primastar. Some passenger cars have also been badge-engineered, such as the Renault Clio-based Nissan Platina in Brazil. The "Renault Production System" standard used by all Renault factories borrowed extensively from the "Nissan Production Way" and resulted in Renault productivity improving by 15%. The alliance led to the loss of 21,000 jobs, and the closure of three assembly and two powertrain plants.

In March 2010 the Renault-Nissan alliance opened its first joint facility in Chennai, India, investing 45 billion rupees (US$991.1 million). The facility builds the Nissan Micra. The Renault Fluence and Renault Koleos are intended to be assembled there from completely knocked-down units. As a result of opening its own factory, Renault ended its five-year Mahindra Renault joint venture with Mahindra & Mahindra company to make and sell the Renault Logan in India.

On 7 April 2010 Ghosn and Daimler AG CEO Dieter Zetsche announced a partnership between the three companies. Daimler acquired a 3.10 per cent stake in Renault-Nissan and Renault and Nissan each took a 1.55 per cent stake in Daimler.

In January 2022, Renault and Chinese manufacturer Geely signed an agreement by which Renault's South Korean subsidiary, Renault Korea, would produce vehicles based on Geely Compact Modular Architecture platform, initially intended for the domestic market. In December 2022, Geely acquired a 34% stake of Renault Korea through capital increase as part of their partnership, although the company would continue to be majority owned by Renault and a consolidated subsidiary of it.

In May 2024, Renault and Geely established a joint venture holding aimed at producing powertrains, including internal combustion engines (ICE) and hybrid systems. The venture dates back to an agreement between the two companies in November 2022. Both Geely and Renault were set to transfer their intellectual property for ICEs and hybrid systems to the venture holding, and plans to supply engines to Dacia (part of Renault Group), Volvo, Lynk & Co, Proton (part of Geely) as well as Nissan and Mitsubishi Motors from the Renault–Nissan–Mitsubishi Alliance.

In June 2025, Renault, Geely Auto and Geely Holding announced to establish a joint venture to manufacture electric vehicle in Brazil. The JV company would be owned 73.57% by Renault, 21.29% by Geely Auto, 5.11% by Geely Holding, and 0.03% by an independent third party. The company would produce and distribute vehicles under the Renault and Geely brands in Brazil, with shared distribution infrastructure and a nationwide dealer network.

In 1979, Renault entered into an agreement with American Motors Corporation (AMC) to sell cars in the US. A year later, Renault acquired a 22.5% interest in AMC. This was not the first time the two companies had worked together. In the early 1960s, Renault assembled CKD kits and marketed Ramblers in France. In 1982, Renault increased its stake in AMC to 46.4%. The Renault Alliance/Encore (a modified version of the Renault 9 and 11) entered production in the US, but following AMC's continued decline, Renault withdrew from the US in 1987 and sold its share to Chrysler.

On 30 June 2006, the media reported that General Motors convened an emergency board meeting to discuss a proposal by shareholder Kirk Kerkorian to form an alliance with Renault- Nissan. However, GM CEO Richard Wagoner felt that an alliance would disproportionately benefit Renault's shareholders and that GM should receive compensation accordingly. Talks between GM and Renault ended on 4 October 2006.

In 2007, Renault-Nissan entered talks with Indian manufacturer Bajaj Auto to develop a new ultra-low-cost car along the lines of the Tata Nano. Renault's existing partner in India, Mahindra, was not interested in the project. The proposed joint venture did not come to fruition and in late 2009 the companies announced that Bajaj would develop and manufacturer the vehicle and supply Renault-Nissan with completed cars.

On 7 October 2008 a Renault executive said the company was interested in acquiring or partnering with Chrysler. On 11 October 2008, The New York Times reported that General Motors, Nissan and Renault had all been in discussions over the past month with Chrysler's owner Cerberus Capital Management about acquiring Chrysler.

In May 2019, Fiat Chrysler Automobiles proposed merging its business with Renault. The proposal was later withdrawn.

Renault models have won the European Car of the Year award eight times :

Renault cars have won numerous national-level awards in Spain, Australia, Ireland, the United States, Denmark, and elsewhere. Renault and its Dacia subsidiary have won three "Autobest" car of the year awards for the Duster, Logan, and Symbol models.

Under the patronage of the Italian Ministry of Culture, in the 2016 edition of the Corporate Art Awards Renault received by pptArt the award for its Art Collection that inspired the creativity of its car designers.

Renault markets its products under the marques Renault, Dacia and Alpine. Renault founded in 2021 the Mobilize brand, which started in 2024 with the marketing of electric mobility services and vehicles.

Renault's first badge was introduced in 1900 and consisted of the Renault brothers' intertwined initials. When the company started mass production in 1906, it adopted a gear-shaped logo with a car inside it. After World War I the company used a logo depicting an FT tank. In 1923 it introduced a new circle-shaped badge, which was replaced by the "diamond" or lozenge in 1925. The lozenge of Renault means a diamond that expresses the brand's firm desire to project a strong and consistent corporate image.

The Renault diamond logo has been through many iterations. To modernise its image, Renault asked Victor Vasarely to design its new logo in 1972. The transformed logo maintained the diamond shape. The design was later revised to reflect the more rounded lines of the brand's new styling cues. The current badge has been in use since 1992.

The logo for web and print use was updated three times thereafter. In 2002 a more realistic representation inside a yellow rectangle was made which is still used as the Renault Trucks logo albeit in red. In 2004 the logo received the Renault Identité typeface. In 2007, Saguez & Partners produced a version with the wordmark and logo inside a square.

In April 2015, Renault introduced new designs to differentiate the company from the product brand, as part of the 'Passion for life' campaign. The new brand logo replaced the yellow background with a yellow stripe. A new typeface was also introduced. A corporate logo was unveiled at the 2015 Annual General Meeting, incorporating Renault, Dacia and Renault Samsung Motors.

January 2021 saw the introduction of a new flat diamond logo alongside the Renault 5 Prototype electric concept car. The logo received so much positive feedback that Renault officially introduced the new symbol as its logo in March 2021, according to Renault's design director Gilles Vidal, who joined the group in 2020. They plan to introduce the new diamond on many online platforms in June 2021 and the first model with the new logo featured will be revealed in 2022.

The yellow associated with the company appeared initially in the diamond badge of 1946, when Renault was nationalised.

Both the Renault logo and its documentation (technical as well as commercial) historically used Renault MN, a custom typeface developed by British firm Wolff Olins. This type of family is said to have been designed mainly to save costs at a time when the use of typefaces was costly.

A retail version of the font family was sold by URW++ as Renault.

In 2004, French typeface designer Jean-François Porchez was commissioned to design a replacement. This was shown in October of that year and was called Renault Identité. The OpenType font family was developed from the Renault logotype created by Éric de Berranger.

Since 2007, as part of the Saguez & Partners revamp, all graphic advertising makes use of Helvetica Neue Condensed.

The Renault Life font family was built by Fontsmith Limited, based on the foundry's FS Hackney font family.

The family consists of six fonts in three weights (Life, Regular, and Bold) and one width, with complimentary italic.

Renault's flagship showroom, L'Atelier Renault (French pronunciation: [ latəlje ʁəno ]), is located on the Champs-Élysées in Paris, with other manufacturers such as Peugeot, Citroën and Toyota. It opened in November 2000, located on the site of Pub Renault, which operated from 1963 until 1999. The first Renault venue at the location was the Magasin Renault in 1910, a pioneering car showroom.

L'Atelier features a Renault Boutique as well as regular exhibitions featuring Renault and Dacia cars. An upmarket restaurant is located on the second floor, looking out onto the Champs-Élysées. The ground floor can hold up to five exhibitions at any one time. As of March 2009, 20 million visitors had visited L'Atelier Renault.

Renault Classic is a department within Renault that seeks to collect, preserve and exhibit notable vehicles from the company's history. Originally named Histoire & Collection, the collection was assembled in 2002 and its workshops formally opened on 24 April 2003.

Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Renault's European advertising made extensive use of Robert Palmer 's song " Johnny and Mary ". Television advertisements initially used Palmer's original version, while a range of special recordings in different styles were produced during the 1990s, most famously the acoustic interpretation by Martin Taylor that he released on his album Spirit of Django.

Renault has sponsored films as an advertising technique since 1899. A Renault Voiturette Type A, driven by Louis Renault, appeared in one of the Lumières ' early films. Between 1914 and 1940, the company commissioned a series of documentary films to promote its industrial activities. Renault also backed some films set in Africa during the 1920s to promote the reliability of its products on tough conditions. Since 1983, the company sponsors the Cannes Film Festival and it has also sponsored other festivals as the Venice Film Festival, the Marrakech Film Festival and the BFI London Film Festival.

Through its foundations and institutes, Renault funds projects around the world that focus on: education through scholarships, road safety and diversity.

René Belin (French pronunciation: [ ʁəne bəlɛ̃ ] ; 14 April 1898 – 2 January 1977) was a French trade unionist and politician. In the 1930s he became one of the leaders of the French General Confederation of Labour.

He was strongly opposed to communism. In the prelude to World War II (1939–45) he favored a policy of appeasement. After the defeat of France, he was Minister of Industrial Production and Minister of Labour in the collaborationist Vichy Government, holding the latter office until April 1942. He oversaw the destruction of unionism. As a result, he was expelled from the CGT in 1944. After the war he tried to form an anti-communist union movement, but with limited success.

René Belin was born on 14 April 1898 at Bourg-en-Bresse, Ain.

Belin was a clerk at the telephone company, then a writer at the PTT (Posts, Telegraphs, and Telephones) in 1920. In 1926 he became secretary of the Confédération Générale du Travail (CGT: General Confederation of Labour) union of postal workers in the Lyon region. He then became secretary of the national federation of the PTT. He was dismissed in 1930 for going on strike. In 1933 he joined the national office of the CGT as permanent secretary, with Léon Jouhaux. After the PTT was reunified in 1935, Belin opposed the Communist faction. He gathered like-minded activists around the journal Syndicats, whose purpose he defined as resistance to communist colonization.

During the Munich Crisis in September 1938 Belin endorsed Édouard Daladier 's policy of appeasement and revision of the Treaty of Versailles. At the November 1938 national meeting of the CGT in Nantes Belin obtained the support of one third of the attendees for a pacifist and violently anti-communist resolution. Belin had no difficulty in getting the communists excluded from the CGT after the signature of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact in August 1939. Georges Bonnet, together with his allies in the "peace lobby" both within and without the government such as Anatole de Monzie, Jean Mistler, Marcel Déat, Paul Faure, Paul Baudouin, Pierre Laval, René Belin, Adrien Marquet, and Gaston Bergery, all spent 1–3 September 1939 lobbying the Daladier government, the Senate and the Chamber against going to war with Germany.

During World War II (1939–1945), after the defeat of France in June 1940 Belin said it was necessary to completely rethink unionism within the national framework. He resigned from the CGT national office soon afterwards. He was appointed Minister of Industrial Production and Minister of Labour in Marshal Philippe Pétain 's government on 12 July 1940. He appointed Jean Bichelonne and Henri Lafond to the two senior positions in the ministry. In November 1940 he signed a decree dissolving the trade unions. He also helped restore the economic order of France after the defeat.

Under German pressure Belin handed over the Ministry of Industrial Production in February 1941, but remained the Minister of Labour. He developed the Charte du travail (Charter of Labour), a compromise between retaining some autonomy for unions and complete "corporatization" of the economy in the Fascist model. There was now just one union, with mandatory membership, no right to strike and no social insurance funds. Workers' social committees were excluded from the union, and became a strong competitor. On 18 April 1942 Belin was forced out of office. In 1944 he was thrown out of the CGT as the "principal architect of union destruction."

After the war, René Belin was involved in 1947 with the creation of the Confédération du Travail indépendant (CTI), renamed Confédération Générale des Syndicats Indépendants (CGSI) in 1949 as the original acronym was already used by Confédération des Travailleurs intellectuels. The movement was joined by former members of the Confédération des syndicats professionnels français, a union created by François de La Rocque in 1936. The CGSI declared that it was formed by "men of different origins who agreed to denounce the malfeasance of the communist CGT". CGSI developed mostly in the automobile industry, for instance in the Simca factory of Poissy.

René Belin died on 2 January 1977 at Lorrez-le-Bocage.

Gustave Jules René Coty (French: [ ʁəne kɔti ] ; 20 March 1882 – 22 November 1962) was President of France from 1954 to 1959. He was the second and last president of the Fourth French Republic.

René Coty was born in Le Havre and studied at the University of Caen, where he graduated in 1902 with degrees in law and philosophy. He worked as a lawyer in his hometown of Le Havre, specialising in maritime and commercial law.

He also became involved in politics, as a member of the Radical Party, and in 1907 was elected as a district councillor. The following year, he was elected to the communal council of Le Havre as a member of the Republican Left group. He retained both of these positions until 1919. Coty also served as a member of the Conseil Général of Seine-Inférieure from 1913 to 1942, holding the post of vice president from 1932.

When the First World War broke out, Coty volunteered for the army, joining the 129th Infantry Regiment. He fought at the Battle of Verdun. He entered the Chamber of Deputies in 1923, succeeding Jules Siegfried as Deputy for Seine-Inférieure. However, by this stage of his political career, Coty had moved away from the Radical Party and sat as a member of the Republican Union. Between 13 and 23 December 1930 he served as Under-secretary of State for the Interior in the government of Théodore Steeg.

In 1936, Coty was elected to the Senate for Seine-Inférieure. He was one of the French parliamentarians who, on 10 July 1940, voted to give extraordinary powers to Philippe Pétain, thereby bringing about the Nazi -backed Vichy government. Coty remained relatively inactive during the Second World War, although he was rehabilitated after the war.

He was a member of the Constituent National Assembly from 1944 to 1946, and chaired the right-wing Independent Republican group, which later became part of the National Center of Independents and Peasants. Coty was elected to the National Assembly in 1946 as a Deputy for Seine-Inférieure, and from November 1947 to September 1948, he served as Minister for Reconstruction and Urban Planning in the governments of Robert Schuman and André Marie. Coty was elected as a member of the Council of the Republic in November 1948, and served as Vice President of the Council from 1952.

Coty stood as a candidate for president in 1953, although it was thought unlikely that he would be elected. Nonetheless, and despite twelve successive ballots, right-wing favourite Joseph Laniel failed to obtain the absolute majority required. Following the withdrawal of another key right-wing candidate, Louis Jacquinot, Coty was finally elected in the thirteenth ballot on 23 December 1953, winning 477 votes against the 329 of socialist Marcel-Edmond Naegelen. He succeeded Vincent Auriol as president on 16 January 1954.

As President of the Republic, Coty was even less active than his predecessor in trying to influence policy. His presidency was troubled by the political instability of the Fourth Republic and the Algerian question. With the deepening of the crisis in 1958, on 29 May of that year, President Coty appealed to Charles de Gaulle, the "most illustrious of Frenchmen" to become the last Prime Minister of the Fourth Republic. Coty had threatened to resign if de Gaulle's appointment was not approved by the National Assembly.

De Gaulle drafted a new constitution, and on 28 September, a referendum took place in which 79.2% of those who voted supported the proposals, which led to the Fifth Republic. De Gaulle was elected as president of the new republic by an electoral college in December, and succeeded Coty on 9 January 1959. Coty was a member of the Constitutional Council from 1959 until his death in 1962.

A photo of President Coty is a running joke in the 2006 French spy spoof OSS 117: Cairo, Nest of Spies.

The Restitution of African Cultural Heritage. Toward a New Relational Ethics (in French: Rapport sur la restitution du patrimoine culturel africain. Vers une nouvelle éthique relationnelle) is a report written by Senegalese academic and writer Felwine Sarr and French art historian Bénédicte Savoy, first published online in November 2018 in a French original version and an authorised English translation.

Commissioned by the president of France, Emmanuel Macron, the aim of the report was to assess the history and present state of publicly owned French collections of African artworks originating from illicit or otherwise disputed acquisitions, as well as claims and a plan for subsequent steps for eventual restitutions. More specifically, the report also presents recommendations for the preparation of restitutions, such as international cultural cooperation, provenance research, legal frameworks, and ends with a list of the cultural objects involved, as well as ways to present them in the near future in African museums.

The commission of this report marks the first time a French president announced the restitution of African artefacts, and it has since prompted numerous debates and plans for a decolonization of museums in a number of countries.

In 2020, their report and its public response earned Bénédicte Savoy and Felwine Sarr the third place in the annual ranking of the "most influential people in the international art world", established by ArtReview magazine; and Time magazine listed them among the "100 most Influential People of 2021".

The report followed a speech by Emmanuel Macron, president of France, on 28 November 2017 at Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, in which he addressed the policy of France in sub-Saharan Africa. The French president commissioned two academics to assess the history and composition of state-owned collections in France, as well as claims and reasons and subsequent steps for eventual restitutions. His motivation for a fundamental reorientation of the cultural policy of France with regard to Africa was expressed in the following words: "I am from a generation of French people for whom the crimes of European colonization cannot be disputed and are part of our history."

For the first time, a French president and his government recognized a moral right of restitution of cultural heritage, items of which are, according to French law, considered to be the inalienable property of the French state. Macron's predecessors never supported the return of African artefacts and other cultural objects in France; for example, Jacques Chirac supported collections of African art and is named in the official title of the Musée du quai Branly - Jacques Chirac. Macron's declaration has therefore been regarded as historic, regardless of how much art will eventually be returned to African countries.

The report was presented to the public on 23 November 2018, and since then has triggered numerous reactions in the French and international discussion about its claims for restitution of African art from museums in Europe or America. Despite Macron's announcement of a timely restitution, the legal requirements for such restitutions pose considerable obstacles: in France, all public assets, including the contents of publicly owned collections, such as museums, libraries or other cultural institutions, are regarded as inalienable possessions.

The Senegalese social scientist, musician and economist Felwine Sarr became known for his essay Afrotopia, where he proposes postcolonial theories for a present and future understanding of African countries. He argues that the further development of African democracies should not be brought about by reproducing Western models; instead Africa should reinvent itself through a synthesis of traditional and contemporary forms of social organization. His lectures and academic research focus on postcolonial theory, economic policies, development, economy, econometrics, epistemology and the history of religious ideas. Formerly a professor of economics at the Gaston Berger University (Senegal), he joined Duke University in the United States in 2020.

The French art historian Bénédicte Savoy teaches art history at Technische Universität Berlin in Germany and is also a professor at the Collège de France in Paris. Savoy has published several works on topics such as world art on Western markets, on museums in international contexts or on the illicit acquisition of cultural heritage. Since publication of the report, she has also become known as a proponent for the restitution of African cultural heritage in German collections and actively participates in research and public discussions about this issue.

In his official letter of appointment, Macron instructed the two authors to engage in discussions and workshops with various stakeholders in Africa as well as in France, including research on the colonial history of African cultural heritage. Furthermore, Macron requested concrete proposals and a timetable with proposed actions for the return of cultural objects. Through his explicit statement, "Dialogue and participation must accompany all stages of this work", Macron not only indicated a specific approach, but also opened the door for public debate about his new cultural policy and the resulting report. Since then, this public debate has intensified both in Africa, Europe and the U.S.

In this report, the authors discuss the reasons and suggest measures for restitutions of African cultural objects from French publicly owned collections to their countries or communities of origin. In accordance with Macron's commission, the scope of the report specifically relates to former French sub-Saharan colonies, and whose cultural heritage has been largely taken to France during and following colonial times.

The introductory chapter, entitled "A Long Duration of Losses" describes the history of African cultural heritage in the context of European colonisation. Central themes are the forceful appropriation of cultural objects as crime against the communities of origin. Also, the importance of collecting, studying and exhibiting African heritage, first as curios and later as ethnological objects, by European museums and scientists is presented as a central aspect of a "history of violence" and domination.

Referring to similar intentions to those expressed in their own report, Sarr and Savoy recall that in 1978, Amadou-Mahtar M’Bow, who was then the director of UNESCO, pleaded in favour of a rebalancing of global cultural heritage between the northern and the southern hemispheres. They quote M'Bow's speech "A plea for the return of an irreplaceable cultural heritage to those who created it":

The peoples who have been victims of this plunder, sometimes for hundreds of years, have not only been despoiled of irreplaceable masterpieces, but also robbed of a memory which would doubtless have helped them to greater self-knowledge and would certainly have helped others understand them better. [...] They know, of course, that art is for the world and are aware of the fact that this artwork, which tells the story of their past and shows what they really are, does not speak to them alone. They are happy that men and women elsewhere can study and admire the work of their ancestors. They also realize that certain works of art have for too long played too intimate a part in the history of the country to which they were taken for the symbols linking them with that country to be denied and for the roots that have taken hold to be severed. [...] These men and women who have been deprived of their cultural heritage therefore ask for the return of at least the art treasures which best represent their culture, which they feel are the most vital and whose absence causes them the greatest anguish. This is a legitimate claim.

— Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, former Director of UNESCO, Paris, 1978

Furthermore, the report considers the advocacy of public opinion since the beginning of the 2010s to be one of the main motivations for a change of attitudes in Europe. Based on their assessment that approximately 90% of all cultural heritage from sub-Saharan Africa is in the possession of Western collections, the authors understand their report primarily as a call for the timely restitution of artefacts and for the establishment of a new relationship of Europe towards Africa on the basis of mutual recognition.

After this brief, but focused history of African colonial art in Western collections and earlier claims for restitution, the three following chapters entitled "To Restitute", "Restitutions and Collections" and "Accompanying the Returns" discuss the central aspects of the tasks associated with such restitutions. Here, the authors suggest both criteria for restitution as well as a concrete timetable for the French and African authorities to follow. Finally, the appendices of the report describe the methods and steps followed by the authors, supported by corresponding documents, charts and figures on the collections in France as well as information on museums in Africa. Due to its extensive holdings of approximately 70,000 objects from Africa and its detailed archives on the provenance of the objects, the Musée du quai Branly in Paris occupies a special position in the report's list. It ends with photographs and detailed information on thirty outstanding objects in this museum, which are considered as priorities for future restitution.

The report also identifies the following important measures for a comprehensive reorientation of cultural relations: only through respectful international cooperation, with access to research, archives and documentation for people in Africa or in the African diaspora can the wide gaps between Africa and the West relating to the preservation, study and wider appreciation of African culture be narrowed. These measures include joint research and training by the participating museums, the exchange of temporary exhibitions—also among African countries—as well as the material support for appropriate networks or infrastructures for the museums in Africa and the experts working for them. To ensure that knowledge of African cultural heritage reaches younger generations, the authors also recommend effective educational initiatives.

The historical window that opened up in Ouagadougou on November 28, 2017 [...] establishes a new era in cultural relations between France and Africa, and in a larger and more general manner, between Europe and Africa. By recognizing the legitimacy of the requests made by African countries to recover a significant part of their cultural heritage and their memory, while at the same time working toward a better understanding about this moment of colonial history, the process of restitution allows for the possibility of writing a new page of a shared and peaceful history, where each protagonist can provide his or her fair piece of the common story.

— Felwine Sarr and Bénédicte Savoy, The restitution of African cultural heritage. Toward a new relational ethics: Conclusion, p. 87

Although the Sarr/Savoy report and the accompanying debates refer to the restitution of cultural heritage from Africa, Macron's announcement on his first visit to Africa as president of France stands in the wider context of the history, present and future of French political relations with Africa. In view of the growing political emancipation of some African countries from France, as well as the influence of China in Africa, French foreign policy is interested to maintain and develop its privileged relationship with West African countries and the wider Francophone world. Finally, the discussions and ethical justification of restitutions are examples of a changing view of European colonialism in Africa. Due to each country's colonial past and the present public assessment of this past, this historical re-evaluation has taken different paths in France, Great Britain, Belgium or Germany.

Since the report was published, its analysis and recommendations have provoked numerous critical, affirmative or negative comments, both in France and other European countries. Museums and government sources in Germany and the Netherlands have issued new guidelines on future restitutions, provenance research and international cooperation. Subsequent restitutions have been made to Namibia from Germany and to Indonesia from the Netherlands. In April 2021, the Ethnological Museum in Berlin and the University of Aberdeen in Scotland announced the return of Benin Bronzes by 2022.

Contrary to some public reactions by art historians and journalists, who evoked the vision of almost empty museums, the report does not recommend a sweeping return of all African cultural heritage from France. Rather, Sarr and Savoy propose that bilateral diplomatic arrangements be made with African governments for the restitution of significant pieces on the basis of proposals by African experts. As a general recommendation, however, the authors plead for a permanent restitution of illegally acquired cultural objects. They explicitly reject a temporary return of such items as mentioned by Macron and favoured by some museum curators, such as Stéphane Martin, former director of the quai Branly museum. At a conference in June 2019, attended by some 200 academics and representatives of Ministries of Culture from Europe and Africa, the French Minister of Culture pledged that "France will examine all requests presented by African nations", but asked them not to "focus on the sole issue of restitution".

On 24 December 2020, the French government enacted a new law that allows for the permanent restitution of several cultural objects from French collections to Senegal and the Republic of Benin. Already in November 2019, the French prime minister had presented an historic sabre to the Museum of Black Civilisations in Dakar, Senegal, that is said to have belonged to Omar Saïdou Tall, a prominent 19th-century West African spiritual leader who fought French colonialists in the 1850s. This symbolic item, as well as 26 African statues that had been looted by French troops during the sacking of the Royal Palaces of Abomey in 1892 and donated by the French general Alfred Dodds to a predecessor of the Musée du quai Branly in Paris, constitute the first permanent restitutions under the new law. This restitution had already been demanded by the government of Benin in 2016, but was denied by earlier French governments.

In May 2021, new signboards explaining their future restitution were added to a group of three anthropomorphic statues representing historical kings Glélé, Ghézo and Béhanzin of Dahomey. Prior to the return of 26 objects to Benin, the museum hosted a week of lectures, discussions and historical documentary films, dedicated to the history of Dahomey. Further, a loan of 20 million Euros from the French Development Agency was allocated towards a new museum and to rehabilitate the four historical royal palaces in Abomey, a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1985.

On 19 February 2022, an exhibition presenting contemporary Benin art as well as the 26 returned artworks was opened by the president of Benin at the Palais de la Marina in Cotonou. The opening ceremony was attended by artists, traditional chiefs and politicians, and more than 1000 visitors came the next day to see the wooden sculptures, celebrating their homecoming.

On 28 April 2025, French senators voted on a bill to allow the return to Ivory Coast of an object seized in 1916, the Djidji Ayokwe. The bill was unanimously adopted on first reading in the Senate.

Among other recommendations, the report called for digitisation of all information of collections of African cultural objects and research and for making this information available worldwide by free access over the Internet. In a statement on this suggestion, more than 100 international experts on digitisation and research of cultural objects pointed out their specific reservations. In particular, they cautioned against a unilateral action by Western collections and demanded that African countries must participate in such decisions. Further, African institutions should obtain copyrights for such data, since digital information is considered be of equal importance as the restitution of physical cultural objects.

In September 2021, the webpage " Le Monde en musée ", was published by the Institut National d’Histoire de l’Art (INHA). It provides access to an annotated map of objects from Africa and Oceania in more than 240 French public collections. It was designed as a publicly accessible research tool and link between museums and research institutions, regardless of their location in the world. For each of the collections, the official name with description of its holdings, as well as information on their provenance is given.

On 27 April 2023, the French Ministries of Foreign Affairs and of Culture published a report by Jean-Luc Martinez, Ambassador for International Cooperation in the Field of Heritage and Honorary President and CEO of the Louvre, entitled Shared heritage: universality, restitution and circulation of works of art. This report presents a rationale and methods for reviewing and processing restitution requests. As central recommendations, it proposes a future law with nine criteria as the legal basis of future restitutions, the establishment of bilateral commissions composed of experts and researchers from France and the countries of origin, and common restitution policies with Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands. Finally, a special category for "shared heritage" is envisioned for "certain symbolic works that do not meet all the criteria" and therefore should stay in French collections, albeit under a new status of shared ownership. This report was commissioned as a guideline for consultation with parliamentarians with the aim of preparing a framework bill to be submitted to the French parliament. According to an article published by Cambridge University library, however, only a small proportion of artworks in French collections would meet the conditions for restitution.

In April 2026, the French houses of parliament moved closer to creating a faster process for returning colonial-era artworks, replacing the previous slow, item-by-item approval system with a broader legal framework. The measure is meant to make restitution easier for countries that have long asked for the return of objects taken during French colonial rule. This legislation applies to artworks taken by France between June 1815 and April 1972, with disputes over objects stolen after 1972 to be handled in civil courts. It still needs final approval through a joint parliamentary process, but it already reflects years of pressure from African governments and a long delay since Emmanuel Macron first promised faster returns. Several requests are pending, including claims from Algeria, Benin, Chad, Ethiopia, Ivory Coast, Madagascar, and Mali. Before this, France repatriated the Djidji Ayokwe drum, also known as the Talking Drum, to the Ivory Coast. The drum had been looted by French colonial troops from the country in 1916. After approval of the restituion by the French parliament, the drum was returned to Abidjan in March 2026.

As commentators from African countries such as Benin, Ethiopia, Mali, Nigeria, or Namibia have, for several decades, made requests for restitution to France, Great Britain, Germany and other countries, the report by Sarr and Savoy has prompted positive comments and generated high expectations: Kwame Opoku, a Ghanaian cultural journalist and former staff member of the United Nations office in Vienna, reported in 2019 that the International Council of African Museums (AFRICOM) has "formally addressed support" for the restitutions as suggested by the Sarr/Savoy report. Some African curators also have reacted critically to one-sided Western initiatives regarding restitutions. Flower Manase, a curator at the National Museum of Tanzania, said that first of all, African experts have to be involved as equal partners, share their own narratives and involve the communities of origin.

Other African cultural commentators, like Tanzanian journalist Charles Kayuka, have pointed to the ethnocentric Western nature of museum exhibitions, which explains why they tend not to find much interest with local visitors in Africa. Another argument of his questions the importance of traditional cultural heritage for modern, globalized African societies:

It's time to repair our stolen identity. (...) But the masks and fetishes that are now stored in European museums—there would be no point in giving them back, because these pieces have no value for the Africans. They are empty, dead, de-souled—they have lost their original meaning because they are torn from their context and thus have become meaningless objects. Because they were not art objects, but religious, ritual, and magic objects. That's why they were so important to African societies back then.

In their report, Sarr and Savoy have, however, taken account of such differences by calling for international cooperation and community involvement. With regard to the consequences for national cultural policy in African states, Felwine Sarr said in an interview with a German newspaper:

"We want to advise the African participants (on restitution efforts) to steer the discussion in their countries. There is already a place at the Museum for Black Civilizations in Dakar. The infrastructures vary across countries, but the museums as institutions are similar."

The Republic of Montmartre (République de Montmartre) is a Parisian philanthropic association, often referred to as a micronation. It was proposed in 1920 by the cartoonist Jean Barrez (aka Joe Bridge) at a meeting attended by an audience that included several other artists. In the face of modern art and modern architecture, the association aimed to provide mutual support to Montmartre's artists and to protect the area of Paris from the excesses of developers. It quickly developed into a charitable organization, working with poor children.

Montmartre has had a long history of claiming independence, going back to the time when Louis XVI issued a proclamation on 22 June 1790, authorizing the inhabitants of the hill (la Butte) of Montmartre to form a municipality outside the walls of Paris. The inhabitants took advantage of this to consolidate their autonomy. In 1871, Montmartre, the main part of the 18th arrondissement of Paris, whose mayor was Georges Clemenceau, witnessed mob uprisings, which were considered to be the beginning of the Paris Commune that seized control of the city on 18 March 1871. Construction of the Sacré-Cœur Basilica in Montmartre began shortly after the insurgents were massacred in May 1871, making the church controversial among some of the French left-wing, who saw it as a symbol of the repression of the Communards.

At the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th century, cabarets developed in the lower part of Montmartre, while the upper area became bohemian, attracting painters and writers as well as some small farmers. World War I shook Paris, creating a desire for greater modernity, and developers moved into Montmartre. In April 1920, the cartoonist Jules Depaquit, and a few companions, including the singer and songwriter Roger Toziny, reacted to this by creating the "Free Commune of Montmartre", aimed at maintaining the festive village spirit in the arrondissement.

In November 1920, Jean Barrez, a draftsman and printer, and several other artists and art enthusiasts, including Adolphe Willette, Jean-Louis Forain, Francisque Poulbot, Lucien Métivet, Maurice Milliere, Maurice Neumont, Clément Vautel, and Depaquit, decided to extend the spirit of the Free Commune of Montmartre by creating the Republic of Montmartre. Announcing that all political and religious discussion was expressly forbidden in the Republic, they aimed to assert a distinctive community identity and to try to limit urban encroachment. There was also a strong charitable dimension to their plans. The body was formally registered on 7 May 1921, with Willette as the first president. In 1923, songwriter Lucien Boyer wrote the lyrics for the official anthem of the Republic.

At the time, the neighbourhood was impoverished, and children often went barefoot in the streets. Under the influence of Poulbot, the Republic quickly began to emphasize philanthropy. In 1923, Poulbot opened a dispensary on Rue Lepic to help such children. This provided healthcare, hygiene, food, and clothing, but Poulbot and other founders wanted to offer them something more, so they organised Christmas festivities. These parties, with performances and presents for the children, took place at the Moulin Rouge, the Moulin de la Galette, and the Cirque Medrano. Poulbot remains highly regarded for his work, as miniature statues of him can be purchased at tourist shops in Montmartre.

In 1929 they opposed a construction project that would have altered the rural character of the area. Instead they created a green space, named "Liberty Square", intended for the children of Montmartre. Unfortunately, the park, situated between the Lapin Agile cabaret and the former home of the cabaret singer and nightclub owner, Aristide Bruant, failed to attract the support of the municipal authorities, so the idea of planting vines there was then born, grapes having been grown in the area as early at the time of Roman occupation under Julius Caesar. The first grape harvest took place in 1934 in the presence of the president of France, Albert Lebrun, and with the support of the leading actors, Fernandel and Mistinguett. Since then, the Montmartre Grape Harvest Festival has been held every October, in the presence of distinguished artistic personalities and bands from various countries.

In 1973, the traditional costume of the Republic was created, based on the costume worn by Aristide Bruant. In 1985, the mayor of the Free Commune of Montmartre officiated in a joke marriage of two famous comedians, Coluche, who took the part of the bride and Thierry Le Luron, the groom, who swore to take each other "for better and for laughs". Since the early 2000s, the Republic has organized two biennale, for books and for contemporary art. True to its origins, it continues to organize Christmas parties for children and invites 5000 poor children to the circus.

The Republic is twinned with several other towns and micronations in France. On 29 September 2013, it celebrated its twinning with Skadarlija, a bohemian district of Belgrade, Serbia. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Republic was unable to celebrate its centenary in 2021. Nevertheless, it is still active, and is run along similar lines to those imagined by its founders, following its motto, "Faire le bien dans la joie" - rejoice in doing good.

The Republic of Saugeais (French : La République du Saugeais, pronounced [ so.ʒɛ ] ; Arpitan : Rèpublica libra dou Sâget) is a self-proclaimed micronation located in eastern France, in the département of Doubs. The republic comprises the 11 municipalities of Les Alliés, Arçon, Bugny, La Chaux-de-Gilley, Gilley, Hauterive-la-Fresse, La Longeville, Montflovin, Maisons-du-Bois-Lièvremont, Ville-du-Pont, and its capital Montbenoît.

Around the year 1000, the Saugeais Valley was a wild and deserted country like a large part of the Jura mountains. A hermit named Benedict is said to have settled there in the 11th century. Subsequently, the sire of Joux gave this territory to canons regular of Saint-Augustin from Saint-Maurice-en-Valais, living under the rule of Saint Augustine, and dependent on Saint-Maurice d'Agaune. The first prior mentioned in Narduin's texts in 1130. The limits of the territory are fixed in the charter of Henri de Joux [ fr ] in 1228. The Coutumier du Val du Saugeais in 1458 lists the laws and rules in force in the territory. The abbey was built in several stages. In order to redeem mistakes, Landry, lord of Joux, donated this uncultivated land covered with forests to Humbert de Scey [ fr ], an archbishop of Besançon. The latter called on the canons of the Abbey of Saint-Maurice d'Agaune, as well as to Savoyards [ fr ] to clear it and build the abbey of Montbenoît.

Organized by a hermit named Benedict, who had come to retire since the end of the previous century to "a solitude in the snows and among the bears", the religious community of the abbey exercised seigniorial power over this land until the Revolution and contributes greatly to the development of this portion of the Doubs Valley. Of diverse origins, the settlers bring with them their dialect and their traditions. As for the abbey, it is today the only medieval religious ensemble thus preserved in the department of Doubs. The cloister dates from the 12th 15th century. The church has twenty-six carved wooden stalls, particularly expressive (heads, figures) as well as an old vaulted kitchen with oven. Other migratory traces on this land date back to 1348 and 1349, at the time of the great black plague, including the arrival of a Chaboz (Chabod) at the farm of “Chez la graine”, who after a myth taken up in the anthem, will give birth to a whole line of Saugeais (Chabod, Bole-Richard, Bolle-Reddat, etc.) Speak Sauget [ fr ], whose use was still common around 1900 but which has since been lost with only a few people knowing bits of it, differs from other local patois; its roots lie with the first settlers from the canton of Grisons and the Savoyards who accompanied the canons regular of Saint-Augustin.

In 1947, the prefect of the Doubs, Louis Ottaviani, passing through Montbenoît, had lunch at the Hôtel de l'Abbaye, whose boss was Georges Pourchet. When the prefect entered the hotel, the owner jokingly asked him if he has a pass to come to the Republic of Saugeais. Surprised, the prefect asked him: "Mr. Pourchet, explain this to me." After the explanations, the prefect also joked to him: "A republic needs a president. Well, I appoint you President of the Free Republic of Saugeais. Georges Pourchet then decided to take charge of this title.

Martial Jeantet, parish priest of Montbenoît from 1964 to 1982, also participated in reactivating the folklore of this community. Indeed, this architecture enthusiast found the necessary funds to renovate the abbey. The dynamic initiated by these works saw the reappearance of an increasingly important regional folk current.

After the death of Georges Pourchet in 1968, the Republic remained without a president for four years. In 1972, after his widow Gabrielle Pourchet organized a dinner for the benefit of the restoration of the abbey, she was elected president for life. She then tried to structure the Republic by appointing ambassadors, minting coins and creating a passport.

There is a Hymn of the Saugeais [ fr ], composed in 1910 to music by Théodore Botrel, the Breton bard, by Canon Joseph Bobillier, born in Montbenoît. In addition, a French stamp of 2,50 francs, including the symbols of Saugeais (medieval coat of arms, Montbenoît abbey, river), was published in 1987.

President Gabrielle Pourchet appointed a prime minister, a general secretary, twelve ambassadors and more than 300 honorary citizens. A song written in the Langue Saugette, a Franco-Provençal dialect, by Joseph Botillon in 1910 was adopted as the republic's national anthem. A banknote was released in 1997, and the French Postal Service issued a postal stamp commemorating the republic in 1987.

In 1999, the sub-prefect of the district of Pontarlier, Jean-Luc Fabre, was stopped at a Saugeais customs checkpoint, and asked for his Saugeais laissez-passer, but he took offence to this and turned around rather than continue his journey. Following the incident, he decided that French state officials should stop attending official Saugeais events, suggesting that the folkloric side was starting to take a turn "incompatible with the principles that apply to those in positions of public authority". However, after the story was run by the French newspaper Le Canard enchaîné he apologised - before being transferred to Corsica.

In 2006, to succeed her mother who had died the previous year, Georgette Bertin-Pourchet was elected by thirty grand electors "co-opted in proportion to the number of inhabitants" of the 11 communes. In 2022, in order to succeed Georgette Bertin-Porchet, of whom he was Prime Minister, Simon Marguet was elected president of the Republic of Saugeais. He is the first president not to come from the Pourchet family.

The French National Research Institute for Sustainable Development, or Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), is a French science and technology establishment under the joint supervision of the French Ministries of Higher Education and Research and Foreign Affairs. It operates internationally from its headquarters in Marseille, and two metropolitan centres of Montpellier and Bondy. It was created as the Office de la recherche scientifique et technique outre-mer or ORSTOM (Overseas Scientific and Technical Research Office) in 1943.

The IRD institute has three main missions: research on developing countries and French overseas territories development, overseas consultancy and training.

It conducts scientific programs contributing to the sustainable development of the countries of the South, with an emphasis on the relationship between man and the environment.

Since 1955, the Institute has maintained an institutional archive to preserve and disseminate its scientific productions. The Institute develops an open access policy for its documents. The archive currently contains over 96,000 documents and constitutes the IRD documentary collection (FDI "Fonds Documentaire IRD").

The IRD's scientific activities are organised through five scientific departments coordinated by a deputy director for science:

IRD has established new scientific cooperation bodies in recent years that promote co-construction of research projects. These structures provide funding and autonomy to associated young research teams (JEAI), Mixed International Laboratories (LMI), Mixed International Units (UMI), and International Research Laboratory Networks (GDRI). Additionally, these programs encourage collaborations between countries in the global South.

IRD is also a public scientific publisher. IRD Éditions publishes interdisciplinary and multilingual works (in French, English, Spanish, Portuguese, Arabic and Vietnamese), designed for a range of audiences (both scientific and non-scientific).

A number of notable researchers are or have been associated with Institut de recherche pour le développement, including:

The Revenu de solidarité active (RSA) is a French social welfare benefit that supplements the income of a person who is destitute or has few resources, in order to guarantee a minimum income. It replaced the former RMI in 2009. In return, depending on the situation, its beneficiaries are obliged to look for a job, to take up an activity and to define and pursue a professional project aimed at improving their financial situation and their professional or social integration.

It was implemented on 1 June 2009 by the French government. As of 1 April 2020, the monthly RSA allocation is €550.93 for a single person.

RSA replaces the Revenu minimum d'insertion ; its goal is to provide a minimum income for unemployed and underemployed workers, with the aim of encouraging them to find work, and provide a complement for low-wage workers so that they do not suffer the perverse effects of earning less through employment than unemployment.

RSA is also intended to replace Allocation de parent isolé (API) and ultimately various other government-sponsored back-to-work incentives and initiatives such as contrat unique d'insertion, contrat d'accompagnement dans l'emploi and contrat initiative emploi.

Although the initial programme applied only to workers over the age of 25, "La loi de finances pour 2010 (article 135)" extended benefits to young people aged 18 to 25 who have worked the equivalent of at least two years over the preceding three calendar years.

If a person's revenue from work does not reach the RSA threshold, the state pays a negative income tax to the employee. It is the difference between the RSA and the person's own earnings. It is intended to prevent work disincentives.

The monthly RSA benefit decreases as the income from work increases until the income from work reaches the minimum wage, €17,451 per person in 2014.

The Revenu minimum d'insertion (RMI) was a French form of social welfare. It is aimed at people without any income who are of working age but do not have any other rights to unemployment benefits (such as contributions-based unemployment benefits). It was created in 1988 by Jean-Michel Belorgey, by the government of Michel Rocard (Socialist Party), and aimed at helping people who had the most problems with finding work.

The RMI has been fully replaced by the Revenu de solidarité active (RSA) in 2009, after a transition starting in 2007.

Recipients must fulfill the following conditions:

According to an INSEE 2001 study, a quarter of the RMI beneficents were either employed or in a remunerated internship. During the 21 months preceding the study, half of the beneficents passed through a period of employment, generally part-time, and a quarter only contrat à durée indéterminée (indeterminate length contract). The medium wage of the active people was of €610, after taxes.

In 1994, in Metropolitan France, the number of claimants of RMI was 783,436; ten years later (in June 2004), it had increased to 1,041,026. In the DOM, it was 105,033 in 1994, and 152,892 in June 2004. By 31 December 2005, the figure stood at 1,112,400. From December 2004 to December 2005, the number of RMI claimants increased by 4,7% according to Secours catholique NGO

In 2004, the government of Jean-Pierre Raffarin created the Revenu minimum d'activité (RMA), which is designed to replace the RMI. The RMA enforces the obligations for claimants to find work much more strictly.

The Revue de l'Orient Latin is a 12-volume set of medieval documents which was published from 1893 to 1911. It was a continuation of the Archives de l'Orient Latin, two volumes of which were published from 1881 to 1884. Various medieval documents and letters from the sets are often cited in scholarly works about the Crusades. The Revue is often abbreviated ROL and the "Archives" are abbreviated AOL, but often the two groups of documents are referred to together.

The Archives were published in Paris. The Revue was the official journal of the archaeological foundation "Société de l'Orient latin" founded in 1875 by Count Paul Riant (1836–1888), and was published at the society's headquarters in Geneva. Initial publications were divided into geographical and historical series. The geographical portions contained the itineraries of pilgrims. The historical series included chronicles, letters, and charters.

The Richard Lounsbery Award is given to American and French scientists, 45 years or younger, in recognition of "extraordinary scientific achievement in biology and medicine."

The Award alternates between French and American scientists, and is awarded by the National Academy of Sciences and the French Academy of Sciences in alternating years to a scientist from the other country. The award is selected by a seven-member jury representing both the French and the US Academies. The recipient receives a $75,000 prize, funding to visit a lab or research institution in the awarding country, and an invitation to give the Lounsbery Lecture in the awarding country.

The Lounsbery Award was established in 1979 by Vera Lounsbery in memory of her husband, Richard Lounsbery, and is funded by the Richard Lounsbery Foundation. Richard and Vera met in Paris after World War I, and the couple divided their time between Paris and New York.

Richerenches (French pronunciation: [ ʁiʃʁɑ̃ʃ ] ; Occitan : Richarenchas) is a commune in the Vaucluse department in the Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur region in southeastern France.

The village is famous for its truffle market as well as for its messe aux truffes in the church located in the village center. Donations are this time not given in money but in 'truffes'. After the service the traditionally dressed brotherhoods of the rabassiers (the people who search for truffles in the ground with trained dogs or pigs) take the donated truffles to a small square in front of the Hôtel de Ville, where they are auctioned. The revenues are for the maintenance of the church and parochial expenses. The village is crowded at this event, that takes place every third Sunday of January.

In 1136, a local lord, Hugh of Bourbouton, gave the Knights Templar land at Richerenches. Two years later he gave even more, and the next day he took his vows as a Templar. He eventually became the Commander of the Templar commandery of Richerenches, which rose to be one of the most important Templar commanderies in Provence.

The village is mentioned in Season 4 Episode 1 of the TV series Warehouse 13 as being the location for a fictitious cult derived from the Knights Templar called the Brotherhood of the Black Diamond.

Rillettes (/ r ɪ ˈ l ɛ t s, r i ˈ j ɛ t /, also UK : / ˈ r iː j ɛ t /, French: [ ʁijɛt ]) is a preservation method similar to confit in which meat is seasoned, submerged in fat, and cooked slowly over the course of four to ten hours. The meat is shredded and packed into sterile containers covered in fat. Rillettes is traditionally made with goose or duck, and are commercially most commonly made with pork, but also made with other meats such as chicken, game birds, rabbit and sometimes with fish such as anchovies, tuna, pike or salmon. Rillettes are typically served at room temperature spread thickly on toasted bread.

Sarthe (Le Mans), Tours, and Anjou, all in central France, are notable sources of rillettes.

The term rillette can refer to the final product and its appearance when spread on sliced bread. Rillettes were traditionally made with fatty pork belly or pork shoulder. The meat was cubed, salted and cured, cooked slowly over low heat until very tender, then raked into small shreds and blended with the warm cooking fat to form a rustic paste. Rillettes could be stored in crocks for several months. In Anjou, rillaud was a speciality, plated in the shape of a pyramid and topped with the pig's tail; the rillettes were proudly displayed to the guest of honor. In time the rillette cooking style was applied to game birds, wild rabbit, and fish. Eventually several preparations for seafood rillettes were developed including an anchovy, tuna, and salmon version. Though the fish is not typically cooked in the fat, it is blended with fat to form the characteristic paste-spread. The soft, smooth texture is a deciding factor in determining a good rillette dish.

Like cassoulet or fondue, this French dish has its many regional definitions. In general most rillettes are served at room temperature, as a spread with toast points, much like a pâté. Pork rillettes from the northwestern regions of Tours and Anjou are famous for the rich texture and bronze color achieved during the cooking process. Rabelais called rillettes "brown pig jam" (brune confiture de cochon). Rillettes from the adjacent département of Sarthe are distinguished by a more rustic texture, complete with larger pieces of pork and less color.

In Quebec, cretons are similar to rillettes.

The French word rillettes is first evidenced in 1845. It derives from the Old French rille, meaning a slice of pork, which is first attested in 1480. This is a dialect variation of the Old French reille, meaning a lath or strip of wood, from the Latin regula.

A rissole (from Latin russeolus, meaning reddish, via French rissoler, meaning "to redden") is "a ball or flattened cake of chopped meat, fish or vegetables mixed with herbs or spices, then coated in breadcrumbs and fried."

In France, rissoles can be served as a dessert cooked in the Savoy region. They are made of pears in batter and are baked, not fried.

In the north of France, rissoles de Coucy [ fr ] are made with meat or fish and can be baked or fried.

Different versions exist in Auvergne or in the east of France, with different kinds of meat or potatoes and cheeses.

The dough used is generally puff pastry or a kind of shortcrust pastry made with less butter. They can be baked or fried. Some versions made with shortcrust pastry are breaded before frying.

In the 19th century, Mrs Beeton said French rissoles were "Pastry, made of light puff-paste, and cut into various forms, and fried. They may be filled with fish, meat, or sweets." However her recipes for everyday British meals described rissoles which contained breadcrumbs but were not coated with anything, just fried (see illustration). She gave recipes for beef, veal and potato rissoles.

In the United Kingdom during and after World War II, rissoles were typically an economy measure, made from cooked meat remaining from the Sunday roast dinner. They were not pastry-covered. Rissoles are sold in chip shops in south Wales, north-east England and Yorkshire, served with chips. These rissoles are meat (typically beef), or fish in Yorkshire, mashed up with potato, herbs and sometimes onion. They are coated in breadcrumbs or less frequently battered and deep-fried.

Fried rissoles are common in Ireland, especially in the county of Wexford, where boiled potatoes are mashed, mixed with herbs and spices, battered or breadcrumbed, and served with chips, chicken or battered sausages.

In Portugal, rissoles are known as rissóis (singular "rissol") and are a very popular snack that can be found in many cafes, barbecues, house parties, receptions, birthday and baptism parties. Rissóis are a breaded pastry shaped like a half-moon, the classic version is filled with shrimp but they can also be filled with meat in béchamel sauce and then deep fried. The most common filling is shrimp (meat is also a choice in small parts of the country, but not very popular) (from pork, including piglet meat, or beef), although hake, tuna, octopus, vegetables, cod, duck, cockle and spinach are sometimes used too. Other and less common variations use chicken or a combination of cheese, normally slices of queijo Flamengo (Flemish cheese) and cubes or slices of pork ham as a filling. Sometimes lobster is also used. Rissóis are usually eaten cold, as a snack or as an appetizer, but can also be a main course, usually served with salad or rice, the rice could be peas rice, tomato rice, carrot rice, beans rice or greens rice.

The Australasian rissole is somewhat similar to a hamburger patty in ingredients, being made from minced meat, usually beef, bound with beaten egg, and with or without a coating of breadcrumbs. As for size and shape, it usually resembles a slightly flattened, medium to large-sized meatball. There are a variety of different recipes: along with the aforementioned main ingredients, rissoles commonly have a small amount of chopped onion as well as breadcrumbs directly included in the mix. Australian and New Zealand families will have their own family recipes : many will include various herbs and spices, certain types of diced vegetables (potato, carrot, zucchini etc), and sauces. As mentioned, while they are usually made from beef, rissoles can be made from other minced meats such as pork, chicken or especially lamb. Replacing meat altogether and using ingredients such as tuna and pumpkin is also not unheard of for vegetarian meals.

Rissoles are either fried in oil in a frypan or grilled on a barbecue and are usually eaten hot as part of a meal, e.g. as part of a traditional “meat and three veg” (i.e. meat served with mashed potato and two other boiled, steamed or roasted vegetables) meal. They are not usually eaten between bread with salad or cheese when hot: if they are then they’ll be considered to be hamburger patties, not rissoles, even though the recipe may be the same. Cold rissoles, either those made to be eaten once cold or those eaten as leftovers, can be eaten “as is” or as filling in a sandwich or bread roll.

The Australian rissole became popular during both World Wars as a means of stretching meat rationing set by the Australian government. Rissoles were made by butchers and housewives to use offcuts of meat, then finely minced with the adding of leftover bread crumbs, abundant flour, eggs, vegetables and herbs to improve the flavour. The Australian rissole has evolved over the past 100 years with some Australian families having special recipes and secret ingredients including beer, Vegemite, peanut butter, cornflakes, carrot, chilli, chicken noodle soup packet mix and spices.

In Brazil, they are often filled with heart of palm, cheese, ham, ground meat, chicken or shrimp. A rissole may also be an empanada or a papa rellena 'stuffed potato'.

Rissole is a snack food in Indonesia, where they are called risoles (Indonesian: [ ɾɪsɵleːs ]) or just risol. The skin is made from batter in the same fashion as flat crepes. They are commonly filled with bechamel, chicken, egg, and diced vegetables - including carrot, celery, common beans and potato. The filling is wrapped inside the skin, then the package is rolled upon breadcrumbs and fried in ample amounts of hot cooking oil. It is eaten with bird's eye chili, chilli sauce, tomato sauce, mayonnaise or mustard.

Rissóis are a popular snack in Goa, India, introduced during the period of Portuguese rule and reflecting enduring Portuguese culinary influence. The most common variety found in Goa is rissóis de camarão, which is filled with a seasoned prawn mixture. Sausage-filled rissóis, known locally as rissóis de chorizo, are prepared using a spiced Goan sausage known as choris, while versions made with meat filling are referred to as rissóis de carne. Vegetarian variations are also common and are typically filled with cheese, spinach, mushroom, or corn.

Roast chicken is chicken prepared as food by roasting whether in a home kitchen, over a fire, or with a rotisserie (rotary spit). Generally, the chicken is roasted with its own fat and juices by circulating the meat during roasting, and therefore, is usually cooked exposed to fire or heat with some type of rotary grill so that the circulation of these fats and juices is as efficient as possible. Roast chicken is a dish that appears in a wide variety of cuisines worldwide.

Hendl is the Austro-Bavarian word for chicken, most commonly in its roasted form (Brathendl). Another popular form is the fried Backhendl (French : poulet frit à la viennoise) version, a specialty of the Viennese cuisine. The Standard German term is Hähnchen ("cockerel"). In the new states of Germany it is often called Broiler.

Hendls are traditionally served in Bavarian beer gardens or at festivals such as Oktoberfest, and are generally eaten with potato salad or a Breze, possibly accompanied by a Maß of beer. They are also widely available from mobile rotisserie trucks that park near well-frequented locations such as supermarkets or large parking lots.

Paprika Hendl (paprika chicken) is mentioned in Bram Stoker 's Dracula, as a dish enjoyed by J. Harker who wishes to get the recipe for his wife-to-be, Mina.

Pollo a la brasa, also known as pollo asado, Peruvian chicken or Blackened chicken in the United States and charcoal chicken in Australia. The original version consisted of a chicken cooked in charcoal but the preparation has evolved and marinated meat is now roasted in the heat of the coals of a special oven called a rotombo which rotates the bird on its own axis, consistently receiving heat from the coals. The oven can be operated using coal, gas, or wood, with the more traditional wood being from the Prosopis pallida tree.

Rotisserie chicken has become a growing trend in the United States since the mid 1990s. American supermarkets commonly roast rotisserie chickens using either horizontal or vertical rotisseries. These chickens are a means of using unsold fresh chickens and are often sold at lower prices than fresh chickens. Wholesale club Costco does not recycle fresh chickens but is noted for selling 60 million of its US$4.99 whole roasted chickens each year. The Boston Market fast casual restaurant chain originally specialized in roast chicken.

Tandoori chicken is a dish popular on the Indian subcontinent consisting of chicken roasted in a cylindrical clay oven, a tandoor, and prepared with yogurt and spices.

The Levantine Arab shawarma, Turkish döner kebab and Greek gyros can be made from a variety of meats, one of which is chicken. The Taiwanese version of shawarma, shāwēimǎ (Chinese: 沙威瑪), is nearly always chicken.

Oven roasted chicken is often served in the United States for special family meals including holidays such as Rosh Hashanah, Christmas and sometimes Easter or Thanksgiving. Considered a "comfort food" by many, oven roasted chicken had a resurgence of popularity in the mid to late 1990s as more restaurants and recipe publishers started to refocus on classic American fare. The basic roasting process involves removing the neck and giblets from the cavity, trussing the bird and folding the wings underneath, seasoning the skin and/or cavity, and then placing the bird in a pre-heated oven. The bird should be basted regularly, and is considered done when a meat thermometer registers 170 °F (77 °C) for white meat or 185 °F (85 °C) for dark meat. It is commonly stuffed with oyster stuffing, chestnut stuffing or potato stuffing, or other varieties of stuffings.

Chicken under a brick is a manner of preparation in which the chicken is weighed down by a brick or other heavy object.

Robert Galley (11 January 1921 – 8 June 2012) was a French politician and member of the Free French Forces during World War II, for which he received the Ordre de la Libération.

Galley was born in Paris on January 11, 1921. He was the son of a doctor. During the Fall of France in 1940, Galley was able to escape to the United Kingdom disguised as a Polish soldier. He joined the Free French Forces and was sent to North Africa, including the Battle of El Alamein. Galley was next stationed within General Philippe Leclerc de Hauteclocque 's 2nd Armored Division, through which he participated in the Liberation of Paris and the Western Allied invasion of Germany. Galley later married General Leclerc de Hauteclocque's daughter, Jeanne Leclerc de Hauteclocque, following the end of World War II.

During his service with the 2nd Armored Division (2e DB), Galley's battlefield conduct became a subject of historical scrutiny regarding the treatment of prisoners of war (POWs). On September 12, 1944, during the liberation of Andelot-Blancheville, official photographs taken by military photographer Alexandre Krementchousky documented Galley executing captured German soldiers. Two notable images housed in the collection of the Musée de la Libération de Paris include Photo No. 1301, showing Galley standing over three dead German soldiers with a Colt.45 pistol, and Photo No. 1302, titled "Robert Galley at Andelot avenging Adjudant-Chef Roger Deschamps", which captures Galley aiming his pistol at the back of a moving German soldier in retaliation for a fallen French tank commander.

Further allegations surfaced in 1997 with the publication of the wartime memoir Le chemin le plus long by fellow 501e RCC veteran Pierre Quillet. Quillet detailed other battlefield executions ordered or committed by Galley, including the killing of a disguised Waffen-SS soldier at Écouché and the execution of captured SS troops in Bavaria just days before the war ended. Galley faced no post-war prosecution or military tribunals for these events.

After the war, Galley passed the entrance examinations to the French graduate engineering schools and was admitted to the Ecole Centrale Paris, from which he graduated in 1949.

He worked and held various positions in areas of petroleum, nuclear energy, and informatics. From 1955 to 1966, he headed the construction of various nuclear plants and research facilities for the CEA. He was the Deputy Information Officer to the French Prime Minister and Chairman of the Board of Directors of INRIA in 1967.

Galley began his political career in 1968. He served as a government minister for fourteen consecutive years within the administrations of three French Presidents - Charles de Gaulle, Georges Pompidou and Valéry Giscard d'Estaing. Galley held the portfolios of Minister of Infrastructure, Minister of Housing, Minister of Research and Space, Minister of Telecommunications, Minister of Transportation, Minister of Defence from 1973 to 1974, and Minister of Cooperation from 1976 to 1980.

Galley also served as Mayor of Troyes from 1972 to 1995.

Robert Galley died in Troyes, France, on June 8, 2012, at the age of 91.

Robert Lacoste (5 July 1898 – 8 March 1989) was a French politician. He was a socialist MP of the Dordogne from 1945 to 1958, and from 1962 to 1967. He then served as senator from 1971 to 1980.

Robert Lacoste was born at Azerat (Dordogne). He studied at the law school in Paris, and became a civil servant and CGT trade unionist. He participated in the resistance. In 1944, he was Joint Delegate General of the French Committee of National Liberation for occupied France, and become minister for industrial production in the provisional government of general De Gaulle. A member of both houses of parliament, and socialist MP for the Dordogne, he was Minister of Industry until 1950. He was Minister of Finance and the Economy in 1956.

After Guy Mollet 's visit to Algeria, greeted by colons (French-Algerian colonists) throwing tomatoes at him, Lacoste replaced general Catroux in February 1956, becoming resident minister and governor general of Algeria. He remained the minister of Algeria until May 1958. A proponent of forceful action, he played a principal role in the Algerian War. He also promoted accelerated social and economic programmes, highlighted by his efforts to "Algerianise" the administration. He increased Algeria's départements to twelve and drafted the Loi Cadre (enabling or framework law) designed to enhance internal autonomy and Muslim representation.

He sat in the National Assembly once more from 1962 to 1967. From 1971 to 1980, he was elected socialist senator of the Dordogne, assuming from 1974 to 1979 the vice-presidency of the regional council of Aquitaine. President of the superior council of electricity and gas of France in 1950, he was mayor of Azerat until 1983. He died, aged 90, at Périgueux.

He was Secretary General of Industrial Production from 26 August to 4 September 1944 and then Minister of Industrial Production from 10 September 1944 to 11 August 1947, also serving as Minister of Work and Social Security (temporary) under the government of Paul Ramadier from 4 to 9 May 1947. He was then Minister of Industry and Commerce from 11 August 1947 to 7 February 1950. He served as Minister of Economic and Financial Affairs from 1 to 9 February 1956. He was Resident Minister in Algeria from 9 February 1956 to 13 June 1957 then Minister of Algeria from 13 June 1957 to 14 May 1958.

Robert Poujade (French pronunciation: [ ʁɔbɛʁ puʒad ] ; 6 May 1928 – 8 April 2020), born in Moulins, Allier, was a French politician. He was the first French Minister of the Environment and was mayor of Dijon from 1971 to 2001.

The son of a professor of literature, Poujade became a teacher in literature after having studied at the École normale supérieure.

Initially politically active for environmental causes, and a member in the successive Gaullist parties (RPF, UNR, UDR, RPR), Poujade became the first Minister of the Environment in France in 1971. He served in the government of Prime Minister Jacques Chaban-Delmas, under the presidency of Georges Pompidou.

As an opponent to the mayor of Dijon Félix Kir, Robert Poujade ran for Member of Parliament for the first time in 1962. He succeeded only in 1967, and stayed at the parliament to 1981, year of Mitterrand 's victory. He was returned at the National Assembly in year 1986 and held the post continuously until his retirement in 2002.

In Dijon, Robert Poujade entered the city council in 1968. After Felix Kir's death in 1971, he became the first Gaullist mayor of Dijon. He retired in 2001, and his successor Jean-François Bazin lost the election against François Rebsamen, who became the first Socialist mayor of the City since before the Second World War. Robert Poujade died in Paris on 8 April 2020 at the age of 91.

Robin Rivaton (born July 17, 1987) is a French entrepreneur, investor, and essayist. He is known for his work on real estate, housing policy, AI, and the impact of new technologies on urban development.

Rivaton grew up in Firminy, a former steelmaking town in the suburbs of Saint-Étienne, and has described his background as working-class. He completed his secondary education at the Albert Camus public high school in Firminy. He then pursued higher education at Sciences Po, where he earned a master’s degree in economic law in 2011, followed by a degree in management from ESCP Europe in 2012.

In 2012, Rivaton joined the Boston Consulting Group (BCG) as an associate. In April 2016, he joined the office of Valérie Pécresse at the Île-de-France Regional Council as an advisor in charge of economic attractiveness and development. In September 2016, he was appointed to the executive management of Paris Region Enterprises (PRE), the agency responsible for promoting the Île-de-France region, later renamed Choose Paris Region. He left the organization in 2018, following initiatives aimed at attracting companies relocating from London after Brexit.

After working as a venture capitalist, he became a partner and president of Stonal in 2022. Stonal raised € 20 million in 2022 and € 100 million in 2024 to expand its AI-powered real estate SaaS platform. He is also a co-founder of Vibiscus, a deep tech company specializing in acoustics.

In March 2019, Julien Denormandie, then Minister for Housing and Urban Affairs, tasked Rivaton with examining the digital transformation of the construction and real estate sectors. He was later appointed to the board of directors of Sogeprom, a subsidiary of Société Générale, and joined the supervisory board of CDC Habitat in 2022. Rivaton has published eight essays on economy and real estate. He appears regularly as a commentator on BFM Business and has contributed to major newspapers including Le Monde and Le Figaro.

Roger Bontemps is semi-mythical French figure who personifies a state of leisure and freedom from care. According to Pierre-Jean de Béranger, Roger Bontemps is the epitome of "Never say die".

The figure first appears as a literary character in Le Livre du Cuers d'Amours Espris (The Book of the Love-Smitten Heart) attributed to René of Anjou (1409–1480), also known as "Good King René". In this allegory of love, written ca. 1457–77, "Rogier Bon Temps" is the only character who refuses to surrender his heart to the God of Love.

Roger Bontemps appears several times in French literature, such as in a play by André Rivoire.

The figure also appears in a poem by William Makepeace Thackeray, first published in his 1852 anthology The Paris Sketchbook.

Roger Karoutchi (French pronunciation: [ ʁɔʒe kaʁutʃi ] ; born 26 August 1951) is a French teacher and politician who has been serving as the first Vice President of the French Senate since 2020. He previously served as the French Ambassador to the OECD and as Secretary of State to the French Prime Minister, with responsibility for Relations with Parliament.

Karoutchi was born in Casablanca into a Moroccan Jewish family. His ancestors were Livornese Jews (Grana) from Italy who had settled in Morocco in the 18th century.

He received a master's degree from the Sciences Po Aix.

Karoutchi became a history teacher, first in Goussainville, and then in Paris, teaching from 1975 to 1985. He continued his political activity, which he had started at the age of 16, during that period, being a national delegate of the Rassemblement pour la République (RPR) from 1981 to 1986.

At that time, Karoutchi joined the office of Philippe Séguin, the Minister of Social Affairs and Employment, eventually becoming Séguin's chief of staff when he became president of the National Assembly.

Karoutchi was a Member of the European Parliament from 1997 to 1999 and Senator from Hauts-de-Seine from 1999 to 2007.

Karoutchi was very active in the 2007 presidential campaign of Nicolas Sarkozy, with whom he has a close personal relationship.

From 2009 to 2011, Karoutchi served as the French Ambassador to the OECD.

As part of a reorganization of the Union for a Popular Movement (later Republicans) leadership under their chairman Jean-François Copé in January 2013, Karoutchi became – alongside Henri de Raincourt, Jean-Claude Gaudin, Brice Hortefeux, Christian Estrosi and Gérard Longuet – one of the party's six vice-presidents.

Karoutchi has held various governmental and electoral positions throughout his career. He served as the Secretary of State for Relations with Parliament from 2007 to 2009. Prior to this, he was a member of the European Parliament from 1997 to 1999, and then became a senator of Hauts-de-Seine until 2007 when he joined the government.

Karoutchi has also served as a Vice-president of the Regional Council of Ile-de-France from 1994 to 1998, and as a Regional councillor of Ile-de-France since 1992, being reelected in 1998 and 2004. He has also held various municipal council positions, including deputy-mayor of Villeneuve-la-Garenne since 2008, municipal councillor of Villeneuve-la-Garenne since 2008, municipal councillor of Nanterre from 1989 to 1995, and municipal councillor of Boulogne-Billancourt from 1995 to 2001.

In the 2012 leadership election of the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP), Karoutchi endorsed Jean-François Copé.

In the Republicans' 2016 presidential primaries, Karoutchi endorsed Sarkozy as the party's candidate for the office of President of France. Ahead of the 2022 presidential elections, he publicly declared his support for Valérie Pécresse as the Republicans’ candidate.

Following the 2023 Nigerien coup d'état, Karoutchi joined forces with fellow Senators Christian Cambon and Bruno Retailleau on an open letter to President Macron in Le Figaro, criticizing France's Africa policy and arguing that the failure of Operation Barkhane was in great part the reason why France and its economic, political and military presence have been rejected in Mali, Burkina Faso, Niger and the Central African Republic; the letter was signed by 91 other Senators.

In January 2009, Karoutchi publicly announced that he is gay, becoming the first French minister to come out while in office.

Roger Quilliot (19 June 1925 – 17 July 1998) was a French politician. He served as Housing Minister from May 22 to June 23, 1981, under former French President François Mitterrand. He was also a Socialist member of the French Senate for the Puy-de-Dôme from 1974 to 1981, then from 1983 to April 1998, and again from September 1986 to 1998. He also served as the mayor of Clermont-Ferrand from 1973 to 1998.

Roger Quilliot was born on June 19, 1925, in Hermaville, France. He received a PhD and the agrégation in Literature, and he edited the oeuvre of Albert Camus in La Pléiade. He was a personal friend of Camus's. Politically, he was close to Gaston Defferre and Pierre Mauroy.

He committed suicide on July 17, 1998. He was survived by his wife, Claire Quilliot. The Musée d'Art Roger-Quilliot in Clermont-Ferrand was named after him.

Roger-Gérard Schwartzenberg (born 17 April 1943) is a French politician of the Radical Party of the Left (French: Parti Radical de Gauche, PRG).

He has been a Member of the European Parliament (1979-1983), a Deputy to the (French) National Assembly (1986-2007; he was defeated in the 2007 elections, but regained his seat in 2012) and a Government Minister (1983-1986 et 2000-2002). He is a professor at Panthéon-Assas University. From 1981 to 1983 he was President of the Movement of Radicals of the Left (Mouvement des Radicaux de Gauche, the forerunner of the PRG) in the French Parliament.

He is also known as a popular political theoretician especially in his book L'etat Spectacle originally written in 1977 (Flammarion) and subsequently rewritten to include female political role models (Angela Merkel in particular) in 2009 (Plon) and his other major work La Politique du Mensonge (Odile Jacob 1998). He posits politics as a shadow show with stereotypical characters and plots. Main actors include "The Man of the People" (Jimmy Carter), "The Hero" (Putin), "Father/Mother of the Nation" (originally François Mitterrand and subsequently Angela Merkel) and "The charmer" (Blair).

Strategically his analysis is allied to game theory where politicians play roles to contrast with their opponents and provides a tool for analysing electoral tactics. His work is virtually unknown in the Anglo-Saxon world.

Romani (/ ˈ r ɒ m ə n i, ˈ r oʊ -/ ROM -ə-nee, ROH - ; also Romanes / ˈ r ɒ m ə n ɪ s / ROM -ən-iss or Romany ; Romani: rromani ćhib) is an Indo-Aryan macrolanguage of the Romani people. The largest Romani dialects are Balkan Romani (about 600,000 speakers), Vlax Romani (500,000), and Sinte Romani (300,000). Some Romani communities speak mixed languages based on the surrounding language with retained Romani-derived vocabulary, which are known by linguists as Para-Romani varieties rather than dialects of the Romani language itself.

The differences between the various varieties can be as large as, for example, the differences between the Slavic languages.

Speakers of the Romani language usually refer to the language as rromani ćhib "the Romani language" or rromanes (adverb) "in a Rom way". This derives from the Romani word rrom, meaning either "a member of the (Romani) group" or "husband". This is also the origin of the term "Roma" in English, although some Romani groups refer to themselves using other demonyms (e.g. 'Kaale', 'Sinti').

In the 18th century, it was shown by comparative studies that Romani belongs to the Indo-European language family. In 1763 István Vályi, a Calvinist pastor from Satu Mare in Transylvania, was the first to notice the similarity between Romani and Indo-Aryan languages by comparing the Romani dialect of Győr with the language (perhaps Sinhala) spoken by three Sri Lankan students he met in the Netherlands. This was followed by the linguist Johann Christian Christoph Rüdiger (1751–1822) whose book Von der Sprache und Herkunft der Zigeuner aus Indien (1782) posited that Romani was descended from Sanskrit. This prompted the philosopher Christian Jakob Kraus to collect linguistic evidence by systematically interviewing the Roma in Königsberg prison. Kraus never published his findings, but they may have influenced or laid the groundwork for later linguists, especially August Pott and his pioneering Darstellung der Zigeuner in Europa und Asien (1844–45).

By the mid-nineteenth century the linguist and author George Borrow was able to state categorically his findings that it was a language with its origins in India, and he later published a glossary, Romano Lavo-lil. Research into the way the Romani dialects branched out was started in 1872 by the Slavicist Franz Miklosich in a series of essays. However, it was the philologist Ralph Turner 's 1927 article "The Position of Romani in Indo-Aryan" that served as the basis for the integration of Romani into the history of Indian languages.

Romani is an Indo-Aryan language that is part of the Balkan sprachbund. Romani is the only Indo-Aryan language, other than Domari, to be spoken exclusively outside the Indian subcontinent. The Romani language has considerable influence from Persian, Armenian and Byzantine Greek. South Slavic influence is also notable, but is principally limited to grammar and phonology. Balkan Romani has been significantly influenced by Turkish.

Romani is sometimes classified in the Central Zone or Northwestern Zone Indo-Aryan languages, and sometimes treated as a group of its own. Romani shares a number of features with the Central Zone languages. The most significant isoglosses are the shift of Old Indo-Aryan r̥ to u or i (Sanskrit śr̥ṇ-, Romani šun- 'to hear') and kṣ- to kh (Sanskrit akṣi, Romani j-akh 'eye'). However, unlike other Central Zone languages, Romani preserves many dental clusters (Romani trin 'three', phral 'brother', compare Hindi tīn, bhāi). This implies that Romani split from the Central Zone languages before the Middle Indo-Aryan period. However, Romani shows some features of New Indo-Aryan, such as erosion of the original nominal case system towards a nominative/oblique dichotomy, with new grammaticalized case suffixes added on. This means that the Romani exodus from India could not have happened until late in the first millennium.

Many words are similar to the Marwari and Lambadi languages spoken in large parts of India. Romani also shows some similarity to the Northwestern Zone languages. In particular, the grammaticalization of enclitic pronouns as person markers on verbs (kerdo 'done' + me 'me' → kerdjom 'I did') is also found in languages such as Kashmiri and Shina. This evidences a northwest migration during the split from the Central Zone languages consistent with a later migration to Europe.

Based on these data, Yaron Matras views Romani as "kind of Indian hybrid: a central Indic dialect that had undergone partial convergence with northern Indic languages."

In terms of its grammatical structures, Romani is conservative in maintaining almost intact the Middle Indo-Aryan present-tense person concord markers, and in maintaining consonantal endings for nominal case – both features that have been eroded in most other modern Indo-Aryan languages.

Romani shows a number of phonetic changes that distinguish it from other Indo-Aryan languages – in particular, the devoicing of voiced aspirates (bh dh gh > ph th kh), shift of medial t d to l, of short a to e, initial kh to x, rhoticization of retroflex ḍ, ṭ, ḍḍ, ṭṭ, ḍh etc. to r and ř, and shift of inflectional -a to -o.

After leaving the Indian subcontinent, Romani was heavily affected by contact with European languages. The most significant of these was Medieval Greek, which contributed lexically, phonemically, and grammatically to Early Romani (10th–13th centuries). This includes inflectional affixes for nouns, and verbs that are still productive with borrowed vocabulary, the shift to VO word order, and the adoption of a preposed definite article. Early Romani also borrowed from Armenian and Persian.

Romani and Domari share some similarities: agglutination of postpositions of the second layer (or case marking clitics) to the nominal stem, concord markers for the past tense, the neutralisation of gender marking in the plural, and the use of the oblique case as an accusative. This has prompted much discussion about the relationships between these two languages. Domari was once thought to be the "sister language" of Romani, the two languages having split after the departure from the Indian subcontinent, but more recent research suggests that the differences between them are significant enough to treat them as two separate languages within the Central Zone (Hindustani) group of languages. The Dom and the Rom therefore likely descend from two different migration waves out of India, separated by several centuries.

The following table presents the numerals in the Romani, Domari and Lomavren languages, with the corresponding terms in Sanskrit, Hindi, Odia, and Sinhala to demonstrate the similarities. Note that the Romani numerals 7 through 9 have been borrowed from Greek.

The first attestation of Romani is from 1542 AD in western Europe. The earlier history of the Romani language is completely undocumented, and is understood primarily through comparative linguistic evidence.

Linguistic evaluation carried out in the nineteenth century by Pott (1845) and Miklosich (1882–1888) showed the Romani language to be a New Indo-Aryan language (NIA), not a Middle Indo-Aryan (MIA), establishing that the ancestors of the Romani could not have left India significantly earlier than 1000 AD.

The principal argument favouring a migration during or after the transition period to NIA is the loss of the old system of nominal case, and its reduction to just a two-way case system, nominative vs. oblique. A secondary argument concerns the system of gender differentiation. Romani has only two genders (masculine and feminine). Middle Indo-Aryan languages (named MIA) generally had three genders (masculine, feminine and neuter), and some modern Indo-Aryan languages retain this old system even today.

It is argued that loss of the neuter gender did not occur until the transition to NIA. Most of the neuter nouns became masculine while a few feminine, like the neuter अग्नि (agni) in the Prakrit became the feminine आग (āg) in Hindi and jag in Romani. The parallels in grammatical gender evolution between Romani and other NIA languages have been cited as evidence that the forerunner of Romani remained on the Indian subcontinent until a later period, perhaps even as late as the tenth century.

There is no historical proof to clarify who the ancestors of the Romani were or what motivated them to emigrate from the Indian subcontinent, but there are various theories. The influence of Greek, and to a lesser extent of Armenian and the Iranian languages (like Persian and Kurdish) points to a prolonged stay in Anatolia, Armenian highlands/Caucasus after the departure from South Asia. The latest territory where Romani is thought to have been spoken as a mostly unitary linguistic variety is the Byzantine Empire, between the 10th and the 13th centuries. The language of this period, which can be reconstructed on the basis of modern-day dialects, is referred to as Early Romani or Late Proto-Romani.

The Mongol invasion of Europe beginning in the first half of the thirteenth century triggered another westward migration. The Romani arrived in Europe and afterwards spread to the other continents. The great distances between the scattered Romani groups led to the development of local community distinctions. The differing local influences have greatly affected the modern language, splitting it into a number of different (originally exclusively regional) dialects.

Today, Romani is spoken by small groups in 42 European countries. A project at Manchester University in England is transcribing Romani dialects, many of which are on the brink of extinction, for the first time.

Today's dialects of Romani are differentiated by the vocabulary accumulated since their departure from Anatolia, as well as through divergent phonemic evolution and grammatical features. Many Roma no longer speak the language or speak various new contact languages from the local language with the addition of Romani vocabulary.

Dialect differentiation began with the dispersal of the Romani from the Balkans around the 14th century and on, and with their settlement in areas across Europe in the 16th and 17th centuries. The two most significant areas of divergence are the southeast (with epicenter of the northern Balkans) and west-central Europe (with epicenter Germany). The central dialects replace s in grammatical paradigms with h. The northwestern dialects append j-, simplify ndř to r, retain n in the nominalizer -ipen / -iben, and lose adjectival past-tense in intransitives (gelo, geli → geljas 'he/she went'). Other isoglosses (esp. demonstratives, 2/3pl perfective concord markers, loan verb markers) motivate the division into Balkan, Vlax, Central, Northeast, and Northwest dialects.

Matras (2002, 2005) has argued for a theory of geographical classification of Romani dialects, which is based on the diffusion in space of innovations. According to this theory, Early Romani (as spoken in the Byzantine Empire) was brought to western and other parts of Europe through population migrations of Rom in the 14th–15th centuries. These groups settled in the various European regions during the 16th and 17th centuries, acquiring fluency in a variety of contact languages. Changes emerged then, which spread in wave-like patterns, creating the dialect differences attested today. According to Matras, there were two major centres of innovations: some changes emerged in western Europe (Germany and vicinity), spreading eastwards; other emerged in the Wallachian area, spreading to the west and south. In addition, many regional and local isoglosses formed, creating a complex wave of language boundaries. Matras points to the prothesis of j- in aro > jaro 'egg' and ov > jov 'he' as typical examples of west-to-east diffusion, and of addition of prothetic a- in bijav > abijav as a typical east-to-west spread. His conclusion is that dialect differences formed in situ, and not as a result of different waves of migration.

According to this classification, the dialects are split as follows:

SIL Ethnologue has the following classification:

In a series of articles (beginning in 1982) linguist Marcel Courthiade proposed a different kind of classification. He concentrates on the dialectal diversity of Romani in three successive strata of expansion, using the criteria of phonological and grammatical changes. Finding the common linguistic features of the dialects, he presents the historical evolution from the first stratum (the dialects closest to the Anatolian Romani of the 13th century) to the second and third strata. He also names as "pogadialects" (after the Pogadi dialect of Great Britain) those with only a Romani vocabulary grafted into a non-Romani language (normally referred to as Para-Romani).

The first stratum includes the oldest dialects: Mećkari (of Tirana), Kabuʒi (of Korça), Xanduri, Drindari, Erli, Arli, Bugurji, Mahaʒeri (of Pristina), Ursari (Rićhinari), Spoitori (Xoraxane), Karpatichi, Polska Roma, Kaale (from Finland), Sinto-manush, and the so-called Baltic dialects.

In the second there are Ćergari (of Podgorica), Gurbeti, Jambashi, Fichiri, Filipiʒi (of Agia Varvara)

The third comprises the rest of the Romani dialects, including Kalderash, Lovari, Machvano.

Some Roma have developed mixed languages (chiefly by retaining Romani lexical items and adopting second language grammatical structures), including:

Romani is the only Indo-Aryan language spoken almost exclusively in Europe.

The most concentrated areas of Romani speakers are found in the Balkans and central Europe, particularly in Romania, Bulgaria, North Macedonia and Slovakia. Although there are no reliable figures for the exact number of Romani speakers, the estimated amount of Romani speakers in the European Union is around 3.5 million, this makes it the largest spoken minority language in the European Union.

The language is recognized as a minority language in many countries. At present the only places in the world where Romani is employed as an official language are the Republic of Kosovo (only regionally, not nationally) and the Šuto Orizari Municipality within the administrative borders of Skopje, North Macedonia 's capital.

Portions and selections of the Bible have been translated to many different forms of the Romani language. The entire Bible has been translated to Kalderash Romani.

Attempts to publish in Romani were undertaken in the interwar Soviet Union (using the Cyrillic script) and in socialist Yugoslavia.

Some traditional communities have expressed opposition to codifying Romani or having it used in public functions. However, the mainstream trend has been towards standardization.

Different variants of the language are now in the process of being codified in those countries with high Romani populations (for example, Slovakia). There are also some attempts currently aimed at the creation of a unified standard language.

A standardized form of Romani is used in Serbia, and in Serbia's autonomous province of Vojvodina, Romani is one of the officially recognized languages of minorities having its own radio stations and news broadcasts.

In Romania, a country with a sizable Romani minority (3.3% of the total population), there is a unified teaching system of the Romani language for all dialects spoken in the country. This is primarily a result of the work of Gheorghe Sarău, who made Romani textbooks for teaching Romani children in the Romani language. He teaches a purified, mildly prescriptive language, choosing the original Indo-Aryan words and grammatical elements from various dialects. The pronunciation is mostly like that of the dialects from the first stratum. When there are more variants in the dialects, the variant that most closely resembles the oldest forms is chosen, like byav, instead of abyav, abyau, akana instead of akanak, shunav instead of ashunav or ashunau, etc.

An effort is also made to derive new words from the vocabulary already in use, i.e., xuryavno (airplane), vortorin (slide rule), palpaledikhipnasko (retrospectively), pashnavni (adjective). There is an ever-changing set of borrowings from Romanian as well, including such terms as vremea (weather, time), primariya (town hall), frishka (cream), sfïnto (saint, holy). Hindi -based neologisms include bijli (bulb, electricity), misal (example), chitro (drawing, design), lekhipen (writing), while there are also English -based neologisms, like printisarel < "to print".

Romani is now used on the internet, in some local media, and in some countries as a medium of instruction.

In 2024, Romani was added to Google Translate.

The following is the core sound inventory of Romani. Gray phonemes are only found in some dialects.

Loans from contact languages often allow other non-native phonemes.

The Romani sound system is not highly unusual among European languages. Its most marked features are a three-way contrast between unvoiced, voiced, and aspirated stops, and the presence in some dialects of a second rhotic ⟨ ř ⟩.

Eastern and Southeastern European Romani dialects commonly have palatalized consonants [Cʲ], either distinctive or allophonic.

In some varieties such as Slovak Romani, at the end of a word, voiced consonants become voiceless and aspirated ones lose aspiration. Some examples:

Vowel length is often distinctive in Western European Romani dialects.

Conservative dialects of Romani have final stress, with the exception of some unstressed affixes (e.g. the vocative ending, the case endings added on to the accusative noun, and the remoteness tense marker). Central and Western European dialects often have shifted stress earlier in the word.

Historically, Romani was an exclusively unwritten language; for example, Slovak Romani's orthography was codified only in 1971.

The overwhelming majority of academic and non-academic literature produced currently in Romani is written using a Latin-based orthography.

The proposals to form a unified Romani alphabet and one standard Romani language by either choosing one dialect as a standard, or by merging more dialects together, have not been successful – instead, the trend is towards a model where each dialect has its own writing system. Among native speakers, the most common pattern is for individual authors to use an orthography based on the writing system of the dominant contact language: thus Romanian in Romania, Hungarian in Hungary and so on.

To demonstrate the differences, the phrase /romani tʃʰib/, which means "Romani language" in all the dialects, can be written as románi csib, románi čib, romani tschib, románi tschiwi, romani tšiw, romeni tšiv, romanitschub, rromani čhib, romani chib, rhomani chib, romaji šjib and so on.

A currently observable trend, however, appears to be the adoption of a loosely English- and Czech-oriented orthography, developed spontaneously by native speakers for use online and through email.

Nominals in Romani are nouns, adjectives, pronouns and numerals. Some sources describe articles as nominals.

The indefinite article is often borrowed from the local contact language.

General Romani is an unusual language, in having two classes of nominals, based on the historic origin of the word, that have a completely different morphology. The two classes can be called inherited and borrowed, but this article uses names from Matras (2006), ikeoclitic and xenoclitic. The class to which a word belongs is obvious from its ending.

The first class is the old, Indian vocabulary (and to some extent Persian, Armenian and Greek loanwords). The ikeoclitic class can also be divided into two sub-classes, based on the ending.

The ending of words in this sub-class is -o with masculines, -i with feminines, with the latter ending triggering palatalisation of preceding d, t, n, l to ď, ť, ň, ľ.

All words in this sub-class have no endings, regardless of gender.

The second class is loanwords from European languages. (Matras adds that the morphology of the new loanwords might be borrowed from Greek.)

The ending of borrowed masculine is -os, -is, -as, -us, and the borrowed feminine ends in -a.

Romani has two grammatical genders (masculine / feminine) and two numbers (singular / plural).

Nouns are marked for any of eight cases; nominative, vocative, accusative, genitive, dative, locative, ablative, and instrumental. The former three are formed by inflections on the noun itself, but the latter five are marked by adding postpositions to the accusative, used as an "indirect root".

The vocative and nominative are a bit "outside" of the case system as they are produced only by adding a suffix to the root.

Example: the suffix for singular masculine vocative of ikeoclitic types is -eja.

The oblique cases disregard gender or type: -te / -de (locative), -ke / -ge (dative), -tar/-dar (ablative), -sa(r) (instrumental and comitative), and -ker- / -ger- (genitive).

Example: The endings for o/i ending nominals are as follows:

Example: the suffix for indirect root for masculine plural for all inherited words is -en, the dative suffix is -ke.

There are many declension classes of nouns that decline differently, and show dialectal variation.

Parts of speech such as adjectives and the article, when they function as attributes before a word, distinguish only between a nominative and an indirect/oblique case form. In the Early Romani system that most varieties preserve, declinable adjectives had nominative endings similar to the nouns ending in -o (masculine -o, feminine -i) but the oblique endings -e in the masculine, -a in the feminine. The ending -e was the same regardless of gender. So-called athematic adjectives had the nominative forms -o in the masculine and the feminine and -a in the plural; the oblique has the same endings as the previous group, but the preceding stem changes by adding the element -on-.

Romani shows the typically Indo-Aryan pattern of the genitive agreeing with its head noun.

Adjectives and the definite article show agreement with the noun they modify.

Romani derivations are highly synthetic and partly agglutinative. However, they are also sensitive to recent development – for example, in general, Romani in Slavic countries show an adoption of productive Aktionsart morphology.

The core of the verb is the lexical root, verb morphology is suffixed.

The verb stem (including derivation markers) by itself has non-perfective aspect and is present or subjunctive.

Similarly to nominals, verbs in Romani belong to several classes, but unlike nominals, these are not based on historical origin. However, the loaned verbs can be recognized, again, by specific endings, which are Greek in origin.

Some words are irregular, like te jel – to be.

The next three classes are recognizable by suffix in 3rd person singular.

The first class, called I., has a suffix -el in 3rd person singular.

Words in the second category, called II., have a suffix -l in 3rd person singular.

All the words in the third class are semantically causative passive.

Borrowed verbs from other languages are marked with affixes taken from Greek tense/aspect suffixes, including -iz-, -in-, and -is-.

The Romani verb has three persons and two numbers, singular and plural. There is no verbal distinction between masculine and feminine.

Romani tenses are, not exclusively, present tense, future tense, two past tenses (perfect and imperfect), present or past conditional and present imperative.

Depending on the dialect, the suffix -a marks the present, future, or conditional. There are many perfective suffixes, which are determined by root phonology, valency, and semantics: e.g. ker-d- 'did'.

There are two sets of personal conjugation suffixes, one for non-perfective verbs, and another for perfective verbs. The non-perfective personal suffixes, continued from Middle Indo-Aryan, are as follows:

These are slightly different for consonant- and vowel-final roots (e.g. xa-s 'you eat', kam-es 'you want').

The perfective suffixes, deriving from late Middle Indo-Aryan enclitic pronouns, are as follows:

Verbs may also take a further remoteness suffix whose original form must have been -as(i) and which is preserved in different varieties as -as, -ahi, -ys or -s. With non-perfective verbs this marks the imperfect, habitual, or conditional. With the perfective, this marks the pluperfect or counterfactual.

All the persons and numbers of present tense of the word te kerel in East Slovak Romani.

Various tenses of the same word, all in 2nd person singular.

All the persons and numbers of present tense of the word te paťal in East Slovak Romani.

Various tenses of the word te chal, all in 2nd person singular.

All the persons and numbers of present tense of the word te pašľol in East Slovak Romani. Note the added -uv-, which is typical for this group.

Various tenses of the same word, all in 2nd person singular again.

Valency markers are affixed to the verb root either to increase or decrease valency. There is dialectal variation as to which markers are most used; common valency-increasing markers are -av-, -ar-, and -ker, and common valency-decreasing markers are -jov- and -áv-. These may also be used to derive verbs from nouns and adjectives.

Romani makes use of valency-changing morphology which increases or decreases the valency of its verbs.

Romani syntax is quite different from most Indo-Aryan languages, and shows more similarity to the Balkan languages.

Šebková and Žlnayová, while describing Slovak Romani, argue that Romani is a free word order language and that it allows for theme-rheme structure, similarly to Czech, and that in some Romani dialects in East Slovakia, there is a tendency to put a verb at the end of a sentence.

However, Matras describes it further. According to Matras, in most dialects of Romani, Romani is a VO language, with SVO order in contrastive sentences and VSO order in thetic sentences. The tendency of some dialects to put the verb in final position may be due to Slavic influence.

Clauses are usually finite. Relative clauses, introduced by the relativizer kaj, are postponed. Factual and non-factual complex clauses are distinguished.

Romani has lent several words to English such as pal (ultimately from Sanskrit bhrātar "brother"). Other Romani words in general British slang are gadgie (man), shiv or chiv (knife). Urban British slang shows an increasing level of Romani influence, with some words becoming accepted into the lexicon of standard English (for example, chav from an assumed Anglo-Romani word, meaning "small boy", in the majority of dialects). There are efforts to teach and familiarise Vlax-Romani to a new generation of Romani so that Romani spoken in different parts of the world are connected through a single dialect of Romani. The Indian Institute of Romani Studies, Chandigarh published several Romani language lessons through its journal Roma during the 1970s.

Occasionally loanwords from other Indo-Iranian languages, such as Hindi, are mistakenly labelled as Romani due to surface similarities (due to a shared root), such as cushy, which is from Urdu (itself a loan from Persian xuš) meaning "excellent, healthy, happy".

Roselyne Cora Marcelle Bachelot-Narquin (French pronunciation: [ ʁozlin baʃlo ] ; born 24 December 1946) is a French former politician who most recently served as Minister of Solidarity and Social Cohesion (2010–2012) in the third government of François Fillon and Minister of Culture (2020–2022) in the government of Jean Castex. She was a member of the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP), which was part of the European People's Party (EPP).

Bachelot was born as Roselyne Narquin on 24 December 1946 in Nevers, France. Her father Jean Narquin, was a résistant and gaullist député, and her mother was Yvette Le Dû, a native from Gourin, both dentists. She has a brother, Jean-Yves Narquin, who ran for the European Parliament as a member of the National Front in 2015. Bachelot received a Doctorate in Pharmacy.

From 1988 until 2002 and again in 2007, Bachelot was a member of the National Assembly, representing Maine-et-Loire's 1st constituency. During that time, she served on the Committee on Cultural Affairs.

From 2004 until 2007, Bachelot served as a Member of the European Parliament for the west of France. She was a member of the European Parliament 's Committee on Employment and Social Affairs. She also was a substitute on the Committee on Industry, Research and Energy, a member of the Delegation for relations with the Palestinian Legislative Council, and a substitute for the Delegation for relations with Israel.

From 2007 until 2010, Bachelot served as French Minister for Health and Sports. Since French ministers cannot be members of Parliament, she was forced to give up her seat in the European Parliament.

During her time in office, Bachelot implemented the planned prohibition on smoking in restaurants, bars, discos, casinos and other commercial pleasure enterprises in 2008. She notably issued a warning against excessive mobile phone use, especially by children. Also in 2008, she publicly endorsed legislation introduced by Valérie Boyer which would have made the promotion of extreme dieting a crime punishable by up to two years in prison and a fine of some $45,000; it passed the French lower house, but later failed in the Senate. She also encouraged the National Assembly of France to change the legal age to purchase alcohol in France from 16 to 18; the new law took effect in July 2009.

In 2009, Bachelot ordered 94 million vaccines from Sanofi Pasteur, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis and Baxter International for the French Government at a cost of 869 million euros (and an option on 34 million additional vaccines in 2010) to fight against the H1N1 influenza virus ; however, less than 10% of French population (about 6 million people) had been vaccinated by the end of the winter. She later canceled over half the flu vaccines ordered to combat the virus, in an effort to head off criticism after reserving too many shots.

In June 2010, Bachelot made headlines when she reduced some players of the France national football team to tears after the French players protested by refusing to practice in the 2010 FIFA World Cup. Domenech, head coach at the time, called the strike "an aberration, an imbecility, a stupidity without name" Monday. During a following meeting, Roselyne Bachelot said "It's your kids, our children, for whom perhaps you will no longer be heroes. It is the dreams of your partners, your friends, your fans that you have perhaps broken. You have tarnished the image of France."

In November 2010, Bachelot was appointed Minister of Social Affairs alongside Marie-Anne Montchamp and Claude Greff in the third François Fillon government. She was supposed to reform the public healthcare system for elderly people, but, due to the budgetary restrictions made necessary by the Great Recession, she had to abandon any reform project. After the victory of François Hollande at the French presidential election in 2012, she was replaced by Marisol Touraine. She announced that she would support former Prime Minister François Fillon for the Presidency of the Union for a Popular Movement.

From 2012, Bachelot was a contributor in the French adaptation of The View alongside to former evening news anchor Laurence Ferrari and others.

In March 2016, Bachelot commented on Rafael Nadal 's 2012–2013 injury stating: "On sait à peu près que la fameuse blessure de Rafael Nadal qui a entraîné sept mois d’arrêt de compétition est très certainement due à un contrôle positif." In response Nadal sued Bachelot over her comments in April 2016. The case was won by Nadal in November 2017 with Bachelot ordered to pay him 12,000 Euros.

In a 2016 op-ed published by Sunday newspaper Le Journal du Dimanche, Bachelot joined sixteen other high-profile women from across the political spectrum – including Élisabeth Guigou, Christine Lagarde, and Valérie Pécresse – in making a public vow to expose “all sexist remarks, inappropriate gestures and behaviour.”

On the eve of International Women's Day in 2018, Bachelot – alongside Marlène Schiappa and others – appeared in a performance of Eve Ensler 's Vagina Monologues at the Bobino theater in Paris.

On 6 July 2020, Bachelot was appointed Minister of Culture in the government of Prime Minister Jean Castex, under the presidency of Emmanuel Macron.

During her time in office, Bachelot oversaw efforts to stabilize the financial situation of museums, cinemas and theatres affected by public health measures amid the COVID-19 pandemic in France. She also worked on a 2021 agreement with Benin 's President Patrice Talon on the return of 26 artworks seized by France in the 19th century from the Royal Palaces of Abomey. His ministry applies from 2022 massive cuts in funding for archaeology, in the order of -25% to -50% depending on the region.

Bachelot is a long-time supporter of same-sex marriage, and defied her party by speaking on the Assembly floor in favor of passing the PACs in 1999.

In 2005, Bachelot was one of the few prominent politicians who early and publicly defended Ségolène Royal 's presidential bid – the first made by a woman in French history – ahead of the 2007 elections and denounced the sexist comments aimed at Royal.

In 2012, Bachelot successfully pleaded the case of two French feminist organizations – "Osez le féminisme!" ("Dare to be feminist!") and Les Chiennes de Garde (The Watchdogs) – with Prime Minister François Fillon who subsequently ordered the honorific " mademoiselle " – akin to "damsel" and the equivalent of "miss" – banished from official forms and registries across France.

Bachelot is married to Jacques Bachelot. Her brother-in-law, François Bachelot, served in the National Assembly from 1986 to 1988 as a member of the National Front.

On 20 March 2021, Roselyne Bachelot tested positive for COVID-19. On 24 March 2021, she was hospitalized but her condition was determined as "stable and not worrisome."

Rotisserie chicken is a chicken dish that is cooked on a rotisserie by using direct heat in which the chicken is placed next to the heat source.

Electric- or gas-powered heating elements may be used by using adjustable infrared heat. These types of rotisseries have proven quite functional for cooking rotisserie-style chicken. Leftover rotisserie chicken may be used in a variety of dishes such as soup, chicken salad, and sandwiches.

Rotisserie chickens are often sold at a lower price than raw whole chickens in grocery stores. Two explanations are often given to justify this phenomenon. First, some grocery stores may use rotisserie chickens as loss leaders to bring shoppers into the store. The logic behind this theory is that if customers come to a store for its rotisserie chickens, they will buy other products while they are there, as well, particularly higher-margin side dishes and alcoholic beverages to accompany the chicken. Second, rotisserie chickens are often made with poultry that is about to reach its " best by " date and would otherwise have to be destroyed unsold. By cooking and selling the chickens, the grocery stores are able to recoup some of their expenditures.

Three major supermarket chains in Australia, Coles, IGA and Woolworths, along with the Australian outlets of the American chain Costco, sell rotisserie chicken. When packaged in a disposable plastic carry bag with a handle, a whole roast chicken purchased hot from an Australian supermarket is referred to by the slang expression "bachelor's handbag", which was the "people's choice" as the country's word [ sic ] of the year for 2022. Such a product requires no further preparation before being consumed, and is thus seen as an easy meal for a single person.

To comply with the Safe Food Australia guidelines for hot food published by Food Standards Australia New Zealand, supermarkets in Australia remove any unsold hot rotisserie chicken from sale after it has been on the shelves for four hours. At Coles, the chicken is then shredded and marketed in the refrigerated deli section as "shredded chicken". Woolworths follows a similar approach. Costco places unsold hot chicken into a blast chiller, and then sells it as a refrigerated product at a reduced price.

Since the 1950s, many family-run takeaway shops in Australia's suburbs have sold meals based on charcoal chicken, a variety of the rotisserie product cooked above charcoal. In some cases, immigrant proprietors also offered further variations such as Greek-style lemon and oregano chicken, Italian salads, and later Portuguese marinades and Lebanese sides. By the late 1970s, charcoal chicken shops had become a suburban staple.

In Australia, charcoal chicken has broad appeal, including amongst older and younger people sensitive to strong flavours. From the late 1980s, chains such as Oporto and Frango emerged as competitors to the family-run charcoal chicken shops.

As of 2025, another chain, Chargrill Charlie’s, founded by two South African families in Coogee, Sydney, in 1989, had nearly 30 outlets across Sydney and Melbourne, and a store in Brisbane. At the end of that year, an even bigger chain, El Jannah, founded in the Sydney suburb of Granville in 1998, had 50 stores across New South Wales, Victoria and the Australian Capital Territory.

Previously, in the early 1970s, a more American-style fast food chain selling roast chicken, Red Rooster, was founded in Perth. Its menu was initially based on rotisserie chicken. Between about the mid-1980s and 1995, the chain replaced its rotisserie ovens with combi ovens, which reduced the cook time from 1½ hours to 55 minutes. Despite that change, Red Rooster, now a national chain, continues to sell "rotisserie-style chicken".

Rotisserie chicken has been a popular food in Canada since the 1950s, and is a staple of Canadian pop culture.

Two Canadian casual dining restaurant chains, Swiss Chalet and St-Hubert, dominate the market for chicken, though the dish is also the central item for other Canadian chains, popular international chains such as Nandos, or individual restaurants. Swiss Chalet owns a cable channel that exclusively airs content related to rotisserie chicken, "twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week." It typically airs chickens rotating on a rotisserie. Occasionally, a dancing man appears wearing a costume that looks "like a container of Swiss Chalet's dipping sauce."

Most Canadian supermarket chains (including Costco) sell rotisserie chicken as a loss leader, similar to supermarkets in the United States.

Napoleon Bonaparte was a frequent consumer of rotisserie chickens.

In Mexico, rotisserie chicken is called "pollo rostizado" (which literally means "roasted chicken"). Rotisserie chicken is often sold at restaurants specializing in rotisserie chicken and is eaten with tortillas, salsa, and sides of arroz rojo and refried beans; it can also be found at supermarkets or warehouse clubs such as Costco or Sam's Club, similar to supermarkets in the United States. "Pollo asado" ("grilled chicken") is also popular.

Pollo a la brasa (literally "roasted chicken") is a national dish, with Peruvians consuming it an average of three times per month and with rotisserie chicken restaurants accounting for 40% of the fast food industry in the country.

In 2025, the supermarket Morrisons lost a legal challenge over whether VAT should be charged on its rotisserie chickens. On 17 December 2025, a tribunal judge said HM Revenue and Customs had not ruled the chickens to be zero-rated for VAT and Morrisons failed to disclose key facts about special packaging it used to control the meat's temperature. In 2012, the government had tried to simplify the tax treatment of hot takewaway food, a proposal which was known as the pasty tax.

In the United States, ready-to-eat rotisserie chickens were available in supermarkets and some butcher shops during much of the twentieth century. However, they did not become a widely available option for consumers until the early 1990s, when Boston Market helped popularize the selling of packaged rotisserie chickens.

Rotisserie chickens are now highly popular. In 2010, 600 million rotisserie-cooked chickens were purchased by consumers "in U.S. supermarkets, club stores and similar retail outlets". In 2018, over 900 million rotisserie chickens were sold by foodservice outlets and retail stores.

In the U.S., chickens used for rotisserie cooking may be injected with brine to retain moisture. Additional ingredients may be used to add flavor and to brown the chicken, such as oleoresin, yeast extract, sodium tripolyphosphate, and natural flavorings.

Most American large supermarkets (including Costco and Sam's Club) sell rotisserie chicken as a loss leader.

Costco is one of the largest producers and vendors of rotisserie chickens in the United States, with one commentator describing it as "the undisputed king of rotisserie chickens". In 2017, Costco sold approximately 87 million rotisserie chickens in the United States. That number rose to 106 million chickens in 2021. Costco's CFO, Richard Galanti, has repeatedly rebuffed suggestions that Costco might eventually increase the cost of its chickens above $4.99, which has been the price of a Costco rotisserie chicken since 2009.

In 2017, Costco broke ground on a new 414-acre facility in Fremont, Nebraska designed to include a hatchery, feed mill, and processing plant. The facility – which is expected to produce around 100 million chickens per year, or roughly 40 percent of Costco's needs – has been reported as costing between $275 million and $400 million. The plant opened in 2019, and is operating as Lincoln Premium Poultry.

In 2024, CEO Ron Vachris reiterated how Costco has gone to "great lengths" to maintain the prices of its hot dog combo and rotisserie chicken, and promised that raising those prices would not happen on his watch.

In 2022, Alexander Tominsky, a waiter in Philadelphia, became a local celebrity after eating a rotisserie chicken every day for 40 consecutive days.

Also in 2022, Spanish-speaking TikTok user @donpollo2982 gained notoriety in June after sharing videos of him eating food in his car, usually rotisserie chicken, while often being interrupted by sounds emitted from his Android smartphone.

L’aut’ jour, j’tos au bistrot pou y déquinte eun’ pinte Avec mes comarat’s Anatole et Lucas. Mais i minquot Gaston ; Li, ch’est vraimint eun cas : Il est toudis in r’tard… Tout d’eun cop, v’là qu’i rinte.

[The other day, I was at the tavern, drinking a pint, With my good mates Anatole and Lucas. But Gaston was nowhere to be found; That fellow truly is a case: He's always running late... Then all at once, there he comes walking in.]

Rouchi or Rouchy is a local variety of Picard spoken in the Rouchi country ("Pays Rouchi") which includes the Valenciennois, as well as Saint-Amand, Lille, Tournai, Cambrai and Douai.

This dialect is attested in documents dating back to the Middle-Ages: Serventois et sottes chansons (13th century), Chronique de Flandres (14th century) although the most popular of them remain Mirouer des simples ames anienties et qui seulement demourent en vouloir et desir d'amour (Mirror of simple and shattered souls), written by Marguerite Porete in 1290.

Rouchi is not an homogeneous dialect and present many variants:

A roulade (/ r uː ˈ l ɑː d /) is a culinary term for a savory or sweet dish that is filled and rolled into a spiral shape. The dish is usually made from a flat piece of meat, fish, bread, pastry, meringue or sponge cake wrapped around a soft filling to create a spiral pattern. A Swiss roll exemplifies a sweet roulade. Various European cuisines produce roulades. The name "roulade" originates from the French word rouler, meaning "to roll".

A savoury roulade consists of a slice of meat, fish or pastry rolled around a filling such as cheese, vegetables, or other meats or fish. A roulade, like a braised dish, is often browned then covered with wine or stock and cooked. Such a roulade is commonly secured with a toothpick, metal skewer or a piece of string. The roulade may be sliced into rounds.

Sweet roulades are made with a flat sponge cake (either made with genoise or chiffon cake), meringue or pastry.

The flat sponge, meringue or pastry is covered with filling and then rolled up. Fillings can include whipped cream, fruit, fruit preserves, nuts and chocolate.

The Royal Almanac (French : Almanach royal) was a French administrative directory founded in 1683 by the bookseller Laurent d'Houry, which appeared under this title from 1700 to 1792, and other titles until 1919.

Each year the Alamanc presented, in the official order of precedence, the list of members of the royal family of France, the princes of blood, and the main body of the kingdom: great crown officers, senior clerics, abbots of large abbeys (with income of each abbey), marshals of France, colonels and general officers, ambassadors and consuls of France, presidents of the main courts, state councilors, and bankers.

Despite the fact that it consisted of a series of supposed lists, the publication enjoyed a wide circulation with a readership consisting primarily of financiers, politicians, and all persons who had an interest in knowing the administrative organization of France.

Although its edition was due to the action of a private publisher, being included in the lists of the Royal Almanac had an air of legitimacy and abuse was therefore punished. Consequently, a Poitevin, Pierre Joly, was interned in the Bastille at the end of the eighteenth century due to having seized the banking profession by having himself registered as a Poitevin in the Almanac.

The regular edition was in the 8vo format with a leather publisher's binding adorned with a sprinkling of golden fleur de lys.

Laurent d'Houry, a book binder and publisher, first envisioned a calendar, or Almanac, in 1683. The first edition contained only a few pages with a calendar and omens for the coming year. The last edition in this form, published in 1699, already shows some lists that foreshadow the upcoming Royal Almanac. Thus, we find lists of counselors of state with their ordinary homes, the commissioners of the Board, auditors general and stewards of finances, the Chancellor, archbishops and bishops of France, universities, the list of major exhibitions, sessions of the courts of Paris and the log of the Palace, and finally the addresses of messengers and post offices with indication of departure days.

In 1699, Louis XIV asked that the author describe his work in detail. His widow explained this work's beginnings as follows:

The same year, Louis Tribouillet, chaplain of the king and canon of Meaux, published the State of France. This book describes in detail the functioning of the Court of the King, all his ministers, the treatments they receive, and the various expenses of the state and clergy.

The first edition of the Almanac Royal appeared in 1700, at the same time as another book, Calendar of the Court, which was printed by John Colombat, one of the printers of the king. Parisians had a choice between three books with similar content: Houry's Almanach Royal, Colombat 's Calendar of the Court, and Tribouillet's State of France. At that time, the court around Louis XIV was highly structured, and since the expansion of the Palace of Versailles in 1684, it had continued to grow. In this context, recognition of peers was a valuable asset. The multiplicity of these publications showed the king's desire to "officially" refer his courtiers to positions created to keep them at his side at Versailles, and maintain jealousies between each other.

Even if the king gave his approval, publishing such a book was not without risk. In December 1708, Laurent d'Houry was being prosecuted for having established a printing press in his home and was forced to sell the equipment two months later. Then, in February 1716, he was imprisoned in the Bastille on complaint of the Earl of Stair, the British Ambassador, "to have been disrespectful in his almanac towards King George for not naming him as king of England, or rather of Great Britain", and mentioning the king as son of Jacques II Stuart, exiled to St. Germain.

The Almanac and the Royal Court Calendar coexist peacefully for ten years and are highly profitable for their authors, but from 1710, Laurent d'Houry integrates more and more topics similar to those in Colombat's work. The conflict starts in 1717 when Houry releases his Abridged Almanac that follows the format of the Calendar of the Court and, simultaneously, files a lawsuit against his competitor. A Judgement of Solomon was made: Houry was now forbidden to continue the publication of his Abridged Almanac and from counterfeiting the Court Calendar. Meanwhile, Colombat was obliged to freeze the format of his calendar and was forbidden from expanding its content. This stops any development of the calendar of the Court, leaving the way open to the Almanac.

Upon the death of Laurent d'Houry in 1725, his family was destitute. Revenues from sales of the Almanac were not sufficient to cover the expenses of printing and bookselling. In these circumstances, his widow, Elizabeth Dubois, took over the business. Their son Charles-Maurice, who had, until then been a mere proofreader of the Almanac, was trying to dismiss his mother and filed a lawsuit against her. He prepared the 1726 edition, but a ruling forbade him from publishing it in his name alone. The ruling of 11 December 1726 forbade him from disturbing the affairs of his mother and from participating directly or indirectly in the development of the Almanac. That is why Charles-Maurice is mentioned as editor of the Almanac in the edition of 1726.

In 1731, Elizabeth Dubois filed a new lawsuit against Colobat, who had expanded the Court Calendar despite the ruling in 1717 that prohibited him from doing so. Unsuccessful, she resumed the publication of the Abridged Almanac, and Colombat files a complaint in turn. She agrees to abandon the publication of the Abridged Almanac "if Colombat returns to the 1718 format." The disputes became extinct with the death of the parties.

With the privilege of the Almanac being about to expire, Charles-Maurice d'Houry tried one last time to seize it, but a royal letter on March 27, 1744 confirmed definitively André-François Le Breton as sole owner of the rights.

In 1728, d'Houry's widow joined hands with her grandson André-François Le Breton, who was 18 years old at the time and an orphan under the guardianship of Charles-Maurice d'Houry. André-François had inherited, according to the will of the estate of Laurent Houry, half of the rights of the Almanac, and his widow having inherited the rest.

Under his leadership, the Almanac takes a new breath and adds new sections, which sometimes does not go without difficulties. For example, in 1768, Voltaire sent him an incendiary letter:

In 1773, Le Breton moved his print shop in a wing of the former Hotel d'Alegre, at 13 rue de Hautefeuille, which he acquired from William Louis Joly de Fleury and was previously occupied by the Portuguese Ambassador.

In the late eighteenth century, the weather was bad, and so were the wheat harvests. The price of this staple food increases disproportionately. At the time, a rumour was circulating that the government had a monopoly on wheat, thus perpetuating the high cost of this staple. This rumour became official when, in his edition of 1774, Le Breton accidentally added a "Treasurer of grain on behalf of the King" in the person of Sr. Mirlavaud. The edition of the Almanac had been proofread and approved by the Chancellor, but he was still sentenced to close his shop for three months and publish a revised edition, without the line in question.

In 1777, Le Breton was again being accused of inserting information seen as treasonous. It has, according to its critics, cited "Fleuri & les Polissons de Vergès & de Vaucresson", among the prosecutors and attorneys general of the Parlement of Paris, despite these being people who had been involved in a reform of parliament made by Maupeou against the venality of Parliament desired by Louis XV, but annulled by Louis XVI. In rebuke, Le Breton was made to cancel this section on any of the Almanacs that had not yet been sold, and to replace at no cost, the litigious Almanac issues of those who so request it.

Le Breton died on October 4, 1779 and his cousin, Charles-Laurent Houry, son of Charles-Maurice d'Houry, took over the business.

The privilege granted to the family of Houry for the Almanac was threatened in 1789 when Camille Desmoulins, in his speech at the Lantern to the Parisians, said he would cease in favour of Baldwin, another Parisian publisher. This threat was not brought into effect since ownership of the Almanac remained with Houry.

Following the death of Joan Nera, widow of Laurent-Charles Houry, publication of the Almanac was taken over by Jean-François-Noël Debure, husband of their daughter, Anne-Charlotte d'Houry. Debure was from a prominent and wealthy family of Parisian booksellers, especially allied with the Didot family. He has been a printer since 1784 with the title of printer to the Duke of Orleans.

Debure took over the printing of the family of Houry for a time, but his other businesses faced hardships, and he was forced to file for bankruptcy. To keep the property inherited from her family, Anne-Charlotte d'Houry initiated separation proceedings. In November 1791, the bankruptcy was declared, and she fought the creditors to preserve her inheritance. This opposition was ultimately futile, and a ruling allowed creditors to seize her belongings, but that does not appear to have been necessary due to a following decision allowing her to recover property that creditors had not taken from her husband.

Francois-Jean-Noel Debure died in 1802 in Loiret.

Stephen Lawrence Testu worked as a clerk in the Debure family home since 1788, and had gradually won the confidence of the household. Because of the absence of Mr. Debure, Anne-Charlotte was left alone with her two sons. Despite their age difference, he was 20 years younger than her; she married Testu in July 1795. Testu highlights his knowledge in the profession to convince her to transfer the management of printing to him. She accepted in 1797 and offered him priority over the rights of the Almanac in exchange for a perpetual annuity of 800 francs, and subsequently completely abandoned the Almanac. This influx of money appears to get to Testu's head, who indulges in gambling and develops a taste for the easy life. He neglects the direction of his establishment and constantly runs out of money. He takes on many loans, which gradually ruin his business. Relations were strained with his wife because he left the marital home in September 1801, and the only ties that bind the couple were the result of the multiple lawsuits they initiated against each other.

In 1810, Testu secretly sold the rights of the Almanac to Guyot, with whom he partnered. Anne-Charlotte d'Houry opposes this sale, who saw it as theft, but lost the case in 1812. In return, she got a pension of 1200 francs, which Testu failed to pay. Indeed, a decree in 1820 declared him in debt of more than 90000 francs. In 1814, due to the large sums invested by Guyot in the case, a legal order confirmed him to be the owner of the Almanac. Testu still obtains from Guyot the repayment of his debts and a life annuity of 2400 francs.

Guyot pushed Testu away from his business in 1820 and stopped paying his annuity. The latter, again running out of money, turned against his wife in 1823, demanding that she return to the marital home and pay all household expenses, or pay him an annuity of 6000 francs. Judges dismissed Testu's claim for the marital home, since he himself had deserted it 22 years earlier and has no housing to offer his wife, even though she already lives in a very beautiful home, but still requires his wife, who was very rich, to pay him a pension of 1,800 francs by invoking the solidarity between spouses.

The hegemony of the family of Houry on the Almanac established in 1683 finally ceased in 1814 when, by order, the company was transferred to the association Guyot-Testu. Anne-Charlotte d'Houry died on July 22, 1828, aged 83 years.

The 1867 edition of the Almanac was transferred to the widow Berger-Levrault, who already published the Diplomatic yearbook of the French empire, and Military Yearbook of the French empire, both published like the Almanac based on documents provided by the administration.

The publishing of the Almanac stops definitively in 1919 after four years of interruption due to war; the latter number compiles the years 1915 to 1919. The reasons that prompted the shutdown of publication cannot be found in the literature, but it can be assumed that the combination of the very large volume of the book (more than 1650 pages in 1900) and the hard times that the French economy and politics were going through at that time made the management of such a volume of information extremely complex and unprofitable for the publisher. It is also possible that the new government formed after the elections of 1919 no longer supported the development of the Almanac.

The Almanac or Calendar, as it was called in its early editions, was just a simple calendar to which were associated topics on astronomical events, the days of fairs, the newspaper of the Palace, the residence of messengers, the departure of mail, the price of currencies and the list of collectors' offices. After its presentation to the king in 1699, many items were constantly being added, including the clergy, the royal family of France, then the families of other sovereign nations, officers, ambassadors, etc.

In 1705, Houry added the list of knights of the Holy Spirit and peer and marshal of France. In 1707, he added the state of the clergy and, in 1712, the birth of kings, princes and princesses of Europe. After the death of Louis XIV, the Duke of Orleans, now the Regent, had the members of the House of Orleans added to the list of members of the royal family. Later, on top of his own, he had the full house of the Queen and princes added.

The table of contents of the Almanac takes up ten pages.

The Almanac also stands abreast of scientific advances. In the middle of the eighteenth century, with the improvement in the accuracy of clocks, many wealthy fans began to observe and study the stars. It is indispensable to know the difference between true solar time of sundials and mean solar time clocks, especially since the advent of clock seconds. This is the equation of the pendulum, also called the equation of time. The table was added shortly before 1750.

With the French Revolution, the Almanac changed its title and its content was modified to match the new institutions.

The abolition of all noble distinctions requires an overhaul of the Almanac's topics, the calendar of the vulgar era was replaced by the Republican calendar, the spot reserved for kings and princes of Europe was replaced by a note on the foreign forces friendly to France, the administrative organs of the royal house are replaced by the new ministries.

The content changes again with the reforms of the Consulate and the Empire, the Restoration, the Hundred Days, the July Monarchy, the Second Republic followed the Second Empire and the Third Republic who sees the end of the publication of the Almanac. In each case, the binding of the Almanac was updated with the times.

As the number of entries doesn't cease increasing, the number of pages follows the same trend: they numbered one hundred in 1699, nearly five hundred in 1760, and seven-hundred just before the French Revolution. The thousand page mark was reached in 1840, and exceeds 1,600 pages in 1900. On average, about thirty names are listed per page, the total number of people or places listed annually in the tens of thousands, although there is no table to search for a particular name.

All the editions of the Almanac make it a very useful book for historians that can follow, year after year, ministries and other administrative bodies, movements of people in these offices, and the details of public service organizations for a resident of Paris (such as places of mailboxes, timetables and fares for coaches and royal messengers).

After the death of Laurent d'Houry, his descendants continued his work until 1814. The edition continued until 1919. It would be tedious to describe in words the evolution of the Almanac over the 237 years that have elapsed since the first edition by Laurent d'Houry in 1683, hence the choice of this table layout.

Throughout its existence, the Almanac has crossed eleven political regimes, changed editors fourteen times, and changed the title nine times.

Since its inception in 1700, following a royal demand, the Almanac invented by Laurent d'Houry aimed to be an official handbook.

Until the French Revolution, contributors were cordially invited to provide information to the bookseller, as pointed by a note of the printer in the first pages of the Almanac. In 1771, for example, we read in the Historical Journal of the Revolution that the Bar Association, in the person of a certain Gerbier, asserted that "there would be no change in the order of the table, and that it would be printed in the Royal Almanac as it was last year, leaving out only the dead."

With the French Revolution, the order was given to government to provide all information to the publisher. In 1802, Testu even obtained exclusive rights to it.

Later, the collection of information for the Almanac is even part of the operating budget of the ministries and can be seen in an order of December 31, 1844 signed by Louis-Philippe I "on the organization of the Ministry Administration Navy" Article 6 of which list in the items in the budget "the formation of the Royal Almanac".

The print quality improved significantly when Laurent d'Houry became the printer. He multiplied the number of bands and cul-de-lampes used to decorate titles and ends of sections. The Almanac is still very minimal in prints because the image was not its goal. The only print that the reader will be able to find are the diagrams explaining the oppositions of the planets and eclipses, present every year, and the map of departments of France from the 1791 and 1792 editions.

Despite the short time to prepare the book, the printer takes care with the presentation and uses, as appropriate, many variations in the size and shape of characters for easy reading of long lists, special characters to emphasize certain lines, compositions tables or columns and groupings in braces.

The more modern nineteenth-century Almanacs benefit from technological advances. The design of characters is modernized and the use of fonts with varied graphics increases, sometimes in excess: we can count at least 7 fonts in 11 different typefaces on the cover page of the National Almanac of 1850 printed by Guyot et Scribe.

Announcements, the ancestors of advertising, are introduced by the publisher Berger-Levrault in the late nineteenth century.

The deadline for submitting this information to the editor was set to the first ten days of October (or November). The last-minute changes are incorporated in an erratum at the end of the book. When they are too large, they may even delay the release. In late December, a proof was sent to the administration for approval of the content. This approval was required before the publication went on sale.

This leaves only two months to integrate the information of the year in the text of the previous edition and call all of the pages before submitting the book for the final page proof. The editing step, at least for the test in 1706, has not been done with great care as can be seen by very many shells and mistakes which have crept into the table of contents presented in thumbnail to the right.

Once the administrative agreement was obtained, it was inserted at the end of the book, the Almanac was stapled or bound and was then distributed to customers at the end of the year.

Early Almanacs were not printed by Laurent d'Houry. The Almanac of 1706 was printed by Jacques Vincent, installed Huchette street, at the sign of the Angel. On November 15, 1712, Laurent Houry became printer and immediately began printing his work. From then on, all the almanacs were printed by their publishers.

There is no source detailing the circulation of the Almanac. The only figures available are the annual profits generated by sales.

In 1782, Mercier reported a pension of more than 40 000 francs. Diderot, at the same time, puts the figure at 30,000 pounds. For a price of sale of 5 to 6 pounds, the number of sales must necessarily be greater than about 7,500 almanacs.

Around 1820, during the trials that brought the widow and Debure Testu, the income of the Almanac was estimated between 25 and 30,000 francs. In 1834, another almanac, the Almanac of France, said that its cost is 35 cents for a sale price of 50 cents. Booksellers then purchase the item for 38 cents to resell at a suggested retail price of 50 cents. The publisher earns so 3 cents per pound sold, the bookseller earns 12 (minus shipping costs, dependent). If one considers - arbitrarily - a four-volume Almanac was sold directly into the library Testu (priced at 10 francs 50), the remainder being passed through intermediaries, we can prorate that to generate an annual income of 30,00 francs, Testu must sell approximately 25,000.

In the absence of more precise information, we can only estimate at about 15,000, the number of copies sold per year between the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century.

The almanac was sold either stapled or bound by the printer. The paperback version allowed the purchaser to connect his book as he wishes, and so it was possible to find books with bindings very ornate, with lace, coats of arms of families, many colors brightened or gilding Biblio 24, etc.

The bound version of the almanac provided by the printer was usually presented in a bound in calf or Morocco, full, and lilies in the boxes back. With the revolution, the lilies are replaced with Phrygian caps in roundels.

The Almanac was normally available from the bookseller, but it could also be found in the province in other bookstores that serve as intermediaries, for example in 1816, at Pesche, bookseller at Le Mans, or by correspondence through the Sorbonne, as did Voltaire.

The Almanac has a very great interest because of the number of subjects it addresses, including the organization of the French administration. In 1785, Mairobert wrote that "the Almanach Royal is in the hands of everyone and is among the Princes, the King's office, the foreign ministers would cater. Louis-Sebastien Mercier, in a pamphlet, the Tableau de Paris that stands in 1782, explains that "Those who are thrown into the paths of ambition, study Almanac Royal with serious attention," "more a beautiful royal consult the almanac to see if her lover is a lieutenant or sergeant,..." that everyone was buying the almanac to find out exactly where they stand. "And finally," even Fontenelle said, "that it was the book which contained the greatest truths."

Adages use the almanac as a reference. According to Jean-François de La Harpe is "the only book to read to get rich is the Royal Almanac.", Jean-Joseph Regnault-Warin uses the phrase "having the memory of a Royal Almanac" or the Memoirs of the Academy of hawkers explains that "it is enough to read the Almanac for education."

In the eyes of justice, the book can be used as a basis for comparison: during a police investigation in 1824, a defendant defends himself by explaining that the volume of documents he was accused of having carried "could be equal to that of a royal Almanac or a related trade."

Whether to have a certain level of resources to purchase this item, the customer extended beyond the financial and political world.

The Royal Almanac is competing at its inception with the Almanac of the Court of Colombat, which cannot make it evolve since 1717. If it essentially describes the royal court and the Parisian institutions, other major cities also have their almanacs, such as the city of Lyon, equally voluminous. The Almanac is, however, considered a reference book.

Since 1717, the Calendar of the Court can not change, its sections are limited to an ephemeris of the celestial motions (30 years) increased by astronomical tables with sky conditions, and timing of the court to the family and royal house, lists of boards, departments and secretaries of state finances, births and deaths of kings, queens, princes and princesses of Europe, the knights of various orders, the archbishops and bishops of the kingdom and Cardinals of the Sacred College.

It is primarily sought for its astronomical calendar.

The Almanac of Business, published by Sébastien Bottin in the eighteenth century contains, besides the addresses of shops in Paris, many useful statistics financiers. It is supplementary to the Almanach oyal, which concerns only the French administration.

Further details concerning the organization of the administration of the French state, and persons who occupied positions, many other topics are discussed in the Almanacs, for example in the eighteenth century:

This section is only found in the Almanacs of the early eighteenth century, and stops just before 1726.

There are prices for masonry, carpentry and joinery, roofing, locksmithing, painting and glazing that are usually in Paris, for example:

With these data, the historian is able to quantify fully the construction of a building in Paris at that time.

The Almanac explains in great detail some official ceremonies:

The detailed description of the ceremonies to stop mid-eighteenth century to make room for a still more comprehensive directory. A reference is then made towards the end of the book "guides for all kinds of ceremonies to be observed in the receipt of any office or employment whether in dress or in the Sword."

Transportation of persons is ensured by the coaches, carriages, wagons and other carriages. Found in the Almanac schedules and rates of major roads.

In 1715, a passenger wishing to travel from Paris to Caen would go rue Saint-Denis on Monday at six o'clock in the morning. He has previously "sent his clothes the night before early." Fifteen years later, the starting time is advanced to 5 am in summer and in 1750, the departure is 5 hours throughout the year. In 1780, two flights were scheduled on Tuesdays and Fridays at 23:30, and the journey took two days. A van, slower, except on Sunday at noon and made the trip in four and a half days in summer and five days in winter. In 1790, transportation was provided by the General Department of stagecoaches and the Royal Mail of France. Three coaches liaise on Tuesday, Thursday and Sunday and the van on Sunday. The departure is now Notre-Dame-des-Victoires.

Rates are rarely reported but in 1725 and 1761 it is 18 pounds per person tournaments. He is 21 pounds in 1770 to reach 42 pounds in 1790 (Fortunately for the traveler, it is stated that the "sleeping bag weighing 10 pounds is free.").

In 1716, the king appoints François Perrier Dumouriez as Director General of public pump to remedy fire, without the audience is obliged to pay anything. In 1722, he founded the Compagnie des Gardes Pumps du Roy, under the direction of the same. This company later became the Brigade of firefighters in Paris.

The Almanac of 1719 lists these pumps and their wardens and deputy wardens. We then learned that a brigade is made up of four guards and four sub-custodians who are responsible for maintaining the material deposited in each district. What became three years later the Society of King's Guards Pumps were not at that time that 41 people, 17 pumps distributed in groups of 8 men and 4 or 3 pumps in the City Hall, the convent of the Grands Augustins The Carmelite convent in the Place Maubert, Convent of Mercy, and the Fathers of Little Place des Victoires, in addition to a pump at the Director General of the pumps, Rue Mazarine. Except Dumouriez guards are not professional fire but shoemakers, carpenters, locksmiths, etc.

Almanacs are found regularly in auctions and in the antiquarian booksellers. Given their importance documentary and the fact that there are beautiful copies, these books are particularly sought after by historians, writers, bibliophiles and enthusiasts.

Volumes in the first round of the seventeenth century often exceed several thousand euros, the other is generally negotiated between a few tens and five hundred euros, sometimes more, depending on their rarity, condition and quality bookbinding. Just over half are available for free download on Gallica or Google Books.

Almanacs contain some handwritten notes left by their readers. The value of the book can then be influenced upward or downward depending on the quality and content of these notes, and especially the person who wrote them - when you can identify it. They are usually found on page intentionally left blank for the ephemeris. Some of these notes can provide very interesting information, such as notes written on the page in August 1715 a copy of the BNF. It relates the circumstances of the death of Louis XIV, who was suffering from gangrene:

Royal manufactories in France during the 17th and 18th centuries were privileged establishments benefiting from a royal charter, meaning they operated under special regulations granted by letters patent. These privileges allowed them to bypass certain restrictions imposed on traditional trade guilds. For example, they were not subject to verification by guild inspectors, could employ more journeymen and apprentices than was typically allowed, could combine multiple trades under one roof, or even hold exclusive monopolies. These regulations, often comprising dozens of articles, replaced the traditional guild statutes and effectively created a separate legal framework for the manufactories.

These manufacturing centers often received state support through financial aid, technology transfers, public contracts, and protectionist measures such as temporary monopolies.

They are generally associated with the policies of Barthélemy de Laffemas, a minister under Henry IV, who in 1596 issued a General Regulation for Establishing Manufactories in This Kingdom, and of Jean-Baptiste Colbert, minister under Louis XIV from 1661 to 1683. Colbert implemented a state-driven industrial policy [ fr ], founding manufactories in textiles, ironworking, ceramics, tobacco, shipbuilding, and glassmaking. The most famous was the Manufacture des Glaces de Miroirs, which supplied mirrors for the Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles.

During the 17th century, the number of manufactories continued to grow in an environment favorable to the spread of knowledge. This period saw the publication of the Descriptions des Arts et Métiers by the Royal Academy of Sciences (founded by Colbert), followed in the mid-18th century by the first Encyclopédie by Denis Diderot and Jean Le Rond d'Alembert.

The historical legacy of Colbert's industrial policies is significant. Several major French companies trace their origins to former royal manufactories, such as Saint-Gobain (formerly the Manufacture des Glaces de Miroirs), Balsan (formerly the Châteauroux Cloth Manufactory), and the Baccarat Crystalworks. This tradition of state-driven industry continued into the 20th century with the creation of major state-owned enterprises like SNCF (French National Railways), Électricité de France, France Télécom, Sud-Aviation (which became Airbus Industrie in 1957), and SEREB (which became Ariane Espace in 1959). This trend was described by economist Élie Cohen [ fr ] as " high-tech Colbertism [ fr ] ", in homage to Louis XIV 's former minister.

However, the long-term impact of Colbert's industrial policies remains controversial. Some liberal economists and historians argue that this interventionist approach was inefficient or even harmful compared to the economic liberalism that emerged in Great Britain by the late 18th century, paving the way for the Industrial Revolution. Others, however, praise these interventionist and protectionist measures, advocating for their revival, especially in light of France's significant deindustrialization [ fr ] since the late 20th century.

From the 15th century onward, the Renaissance spread across Europe, marked by groundbreaking technological advancements, mainly the printing press, invented by Johannes Gutenberg in the 1450s. This innovation was a major step toward mechanization and the widespread dissemination of written knowledge.

Other fields also experienced significant technical progress, including navigation, clockmaking, mining, and banking methods.

While the modern concept of a factory did not yet exist, certain forms of production based on home subcontracting began to emerge. For instance, in the watchmaking industry, a system known as établissage relied on decentralized production. Additionally, early examples of scientific work organization [ fr ] could be seen in the Venetian Arsenal, which specialized in the mass production of warships and galleys.

By the late 16th century, the rise of cotton calicoes [ fr ] —which required sophisticated manufacturing processes—led to the development of a proto-industrial economy in Europe, particularly in small rural workshops. At the same time, silk production, which had traditionally been imported from Asia via the Silk Roads, was gradually mastered in Europe. In France, King Louis XII encouraged the establishment of silk workshops in Languedoc through letters patent.

In the 16th century, the Protestant Reformation, led by Martin Luther and John Calvin, profoundly reshaped Europe, introducing a new set of values that transformed conceptions of work and life. According to Max Weber, Protestantism rejected the idea that work was merely a punishment for original sin; instead, it elevated labor to a fundamental virtue, a means through which individuals could strive toward God.

While the Catholic Church condemned usury, John Calvin permitted it, making Protestantism more compatible with capitalism and financial speculation. Early economic expansion often occurred in regions that had already begun to break free from feudalism. Venice was dominated by merchant elites, while the Dutch Republic and England had both established parliamentary systems, granting greater political influence to the commercial class.

Starting in the 16th century, political thought was no longer dominated by theologians but by secular thinkers primarily concerned with the power of the state. They developed a new school of thought: mercantilism. According to mercantilist thinkers, the state alone embodied the national interest and had to defend it against the actions of other nations, leading to authoritarian, protectionist, and highly aggressive policies. By the 16th century, various branches of mercantilism emerged across European countries: bullionism in Spain, Colbertism (followed by physiocracy under François Quesnay) in France, and commercialism in the Netherlands and England.

This school of thought was pre-capitalist, as it prioritized the power of the state over private wealth accumulation. However, by promoting the idea of a planned, deliberate, and structured economic development—favoring activities with increasing returns—mercantilism inspired political choices that contributed to economic growth in Europe from the 16th century onward.

When Henry IV came to power in 1589, he ended the Wars of Religion by issuing the Edict of Nantes in 1598. However, the kingdom was devastated, and the economy had to be rebuilt. French cloth production had plummeted to a quarter of its pre-war levels between the outbreak of civil war in 1562 and its conclusion in 1598, while the number of silk artisans dropped from 40,000 to fewer than 1,000 over the same period.

Henry IV and his minister, Duke of Sully, sought to end massive tapestry imports from Flanders, which were disrupting France's trade balance. They also aimed to unlock the nation's creative potential, which was stifled by the restrictive guild system.

In 1596, Barthélemy de Laffemas, economist and trade advisor to Henry IV, published a report titled General Regulation for Establishing Manufactories and Workshops in This Kingdom. It outlined a series of recommendations to revive the industry, including banning the import of manufactured goods, naturalizing foreign workers to attract them to France, and creating public workshops for able-bodied unemployed workers.

In 1601, weavers Marc de Comans and François de La Planche [ fr ] received permission to establish a royal tapestry manufactory in workshops in the Saint-Marcel district [ fr ], later known as the Gobelins Manufactory. In 1606, Henry IV transformed the galleries of the Louvre into a nursery for artists and artisans, competing with the guilds and integrating a wide variety of trades.

At the same time, Barthélemy de Laffemas and the gardener from Nîmes, François Traucat, drew inspiration from agronomist Olivier de Serres and played a crucial role in silk production by planting millions of mulberry trees in Languedoc. In 1605, work began on the Briare Canal, linking the Seine and the Loire —France's first artificial waterway for transportation.

The reign of Louis XIII (1610–1643) was primarily marked by the expansion of the kingdom and the strengthening of royal power, orchestrated by Cardinal Richelieu, rather than by proactive economic policies. However, Richelieu did establish the Maritime Company of New France in 1627 to promote the colonization of North America. Meanwhile, France officially entered the transatlantic slave trade in 1642.

Louis XIV ascended the French throne in 1643 after his father died. However, due to his young age, his mother, Anne of Austria, served as regent until 1651. During this period, the Trudon wax manufactory (1643) was established to supply candles for churches and royal palaces, while Anne of Austria supported the revival of the Rouen faience industry (1644).

In March 1661, seven years after his formal coronation, Louis XIV appointed Jean-Baptiste Colbert as Intendant of Finances, later promoting him to Controller-General of Finances in December 1665. Like his predecessors Sully and Richelieu, Colbert sought to close the gap between France's economic potential and its underperforming economy, aiming to eliminate its trade deficit. To reduce imports of luxury goods from Italy and Flanders, he launched a program to establish state-sponsored manufactories and encouraged technology transfers by hiring foreign workers—sometimes even engaging in industrial espionage.

In 1664, Colbert founded the Royal Manufactory of Mirrors (which would later become Saint-Gobain), responsible for producing the Hall of Mirrors at the Palace of Versailles (1678–1684). The same year, he authorized the creation of the royal manufactories of high- and low-warp tapestries in Beauvais. Also in 1664, Colbert founded the French East India Company, which significantly expanded France's economic reach—while further entrenching the kingdom in the slave trade. This allowed France to import low-cost raw materials from its colonies.

At the start of the 1670s, Louis XIV revived the Franco-Ottoman alliance, which supported his expansionist policies against the Habsburgs and secured lucrative markets for French industry in the Levant. Large quantities of goods, mainly textiles, were shipped from the ports of Sète and Marseille. In the following years, benefiting from these export subsidies, a dozen royal cloth manufactories were established in Languedoc.

To improve the circulation of goods, Colbert developed new waterways, including the Orléans Canal (1676–1692) and the Canal du Midi (1666–1681), connecting the Atlantic Ocean to the Mediterranean via the Garonne.

In 1678, France's victory in the Dutch War enabled territorial expansion eastward and facilitated exports through the Treaty of Nijmegen, which abolished customs duties at French borders.

However, the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685 (two years after Colbert's death) led to a massive exodus of French Protestants, including many merchants, artisans, and skilled workers. This weakened France's economy while benefiting countries that welcomed them, such as Great Britain, the Dutch Republic, Switzerland, and various German principalities. These economic challenges were partially offset by military expenditures and large-scale construction projects, which sustained domestic demand through public procurement and boosted production and trade.

In the late years of the 17th century, a new war led by Louis XIV against neighboring powers, the War of the League of Augsburg, allowed him to considerably weaken the British and Dutch economies, which benefited French producers and merchants in the textile sector.

From the beginning of the 18th century, a phase of growth in the French manufacturing industry began, lasting—despite some setbacks (wars, plague epidemics, commercial crises)—until the Seven Years' War (1756–1763). The Council and Bureau of Commerce [ fr ], a royal institution and ancestor of the chambers of commerce, intended to stimulate exports, was founded in 1700. The 18th century was thus characterized by a close symbiosis between provincial manufacturing regions and the dominant capital, which provided financial support and the conveniences of its commercial structures.

After the death of Louis XIV in 1715, his great-grandson Louis XV succeeded him, ascending the throne at the age of five, like his predecessor (his uncle Philippe d'Orléans served as regent until 1723).

Two years later, Tsar Peter I the Great of Russia undertook a three-month journey to France [ fr ] with the express intention of drawing inspiration from the kingdom's industrial development to modernize his empire. He met the seven-year-old King Louis XV and visited the royal manufactories of the Gobelins (tapestry), Abbeville (luxury cloth), and Charleville [ fr ] (firearms), as well as the Marly pumping system in the Versailles Park, the Champagne cellars in Reims, and the Royal Academy of Sciences (founded by Colbert in 1666). Upon his return to Russia, he founded the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences in 1724. Thus, barely half a century after the beginning of Colbert's interventionist policies, the industrial development of the Kingdom of France had become an example for Europe.

In 1730, Louis XV tasked his Secretary of State for War, Nicolas-Prosper Bauyn d'Angervilliers, with creating a bladed weapons manufactory in Klingenthal, Alsace. In the context of the emerging exploitation of coal mines, a decree of the Council of State was issued in 1744, reaffirming that mines were subject to the rights attached to the Crown's Domain and Sovereignty.

At the same time, the reign of Louis XV, which occupied most of the 18th century, was marked by the " Age of Enlightenment," characterized by great literary, philosophical, and cultural richness, as well as an ambition to combat obscurantism and promote knowledge.

In this context, the first Encyclopédie was written between 1751 and 1772, with the aim of synthesizing and disseminating the technical and scientific knowledge of the time, with several articles describing industrial techniques and processes. Some drew inspiration from or reproduced engravings included in Descriptions des arts et métiers, a collection of works published at the same time by the Royal Academy of Sciences. These works of compilation, synthesis, and dissemination of knowledge in science and engineering benefited the national economy by spreading artisanal and industrial expertise. For example, the article by physicist René-Antoine Ferchault de Réaumur (who directed Descriptions des arts et métiers at the beginning of its publication), The Art of Converting Wrought Iron into Steel, enabled the Kingdom of France to manufacture this metal, which had previously been imported.

The reign of Louis XVI was relatively short compared to his predecessors: ascending the throne in May 1774, he was overthrown eighteen years later by the French Revolution before being executed in January 1793 at the age of thirty-eight. The very year of his accession to the throne, in October 1774, he granted the title of royal manufactory to the Dugny factory of wax, candles, tapers, and torches [ fr ]. His reign was marked by France's intervention in the American War of Independence in 1778, which benefited French industries, particularly the firearms manufactories of Charleville [ fr ] and Saint-Étienne, as well as the sailcloth manufactory [ fr ] in Agen. The playwright, writer, and businessman Pierre-Augustin Caron de Beaumarchais was commissioned by Louis XVI to organize the logistics of exporting French-made weapons to the American insurgents.

However, this intervention proved extremely costly for the kingdom, and the deterioration of public finances, combined with poor harvests exacerbated by a particularly harsh winter, created the conditions for the French Revolution, which ended the monarchy in 1792.

Nevertheless, the reign of Louis XVI was marked by several progressive reforms, such as the abolition of serfdom [ fr ] in 1779 and the Edict of Versailles, which in 1787 reinstated the principles of the Edict of Nantes a century after its revocation by Louis XIV. That same year, Louis XVI ennobled Christophe-Philippe Oberkampf, a Protestant industrialist of German origin, four years after granting his Indian cotton print manufactory [ fr ] the title of the royal manufactory. Finally, it was under Louis XVI that the Paris School of Mines was created— one of France's oldest [ fr ] and most selective engineering schools—by an ordinance issued on March 19, 1783, at a time when the mining industry was in full expansion.

In the following century, capitalizing on the technological and organizational innovations of the 17th and 18th centuries, part of Europe, including France, transitioned from a predominantly agrarian and artisanal society to a commercial and industrial one, in a process known as the " Industrial Revolution."

The industrial policy initiated by Jean-Baptiste Colbert and continued by his successors emphasized the creation of protected and privileged manufactories, often through royal monopolies, subsidies, and tax exemptions. These manufactories were typically established in major urban centers or alongside existing guilds. Colbert viewed state support as a form of educational protectionism, intended to foster domestic industry until it could become self-sustaining. Monopolies and privileges were usually temporary, often limited to twenty years.

In a letter to the aldermen of Lyon, Colbert wrote: "The inhabitants of this city would do well to consider the favors granted to their industry as crutches with which they should quickly learn to walk on their own, as I intend to take them away afterward."

State intervention also aimed to enhance competitiveness through the transfer of skills and technology, facilitated by the recruitment of foreign specialists and by imposing quality standards through royal ordinances. While many royal manufactories were founded directly by the Crown, existing workshops could also be granted royal status. Examples include the textile workshops of Aubusson and Alençon (1665), the Jouy manufactory (1770), and the Portieux glassworks [ fr ] after the annexation of Lorraine to France (1767).

The Gobelins Manufactory manufactory is a historic tapestry factory located in Paris, France. It was officially established in April 1601 under the reign of Henry IV, with the support of his commerce advisor Barthélemy de Laffemas. A royal privilege was granted to two Flemish tapestry weavers, Marc de Comans and François de La Planche [ fr ], allowing them to operate tapestry workshops in France. The privilege prohibited others from founding similar establishments for a period of fifteen years.

Initially, the workshops operated independently in various locations. In 1662, Jean-Baptiste Colbert, minister of finance under Louis XIV, centralized the operations by merging them into a single manufactory on the current site of the Gobelins. He placed the institution under the direction of Charles Le Brun, the king's first painter, who oversaw production until his death in 1690.

During the 18th century, the manufactory was directed by several architects and designers, including Robert de Cotte, Jules-Robert de Cotte, Jean-Charles Gasnier d'Isle [ fr ], and Jacques-Germain Soufflot.

After the French Revolution, the manufactory continued to operate under the First Empire, producing tapestries that celebrated the military achievements of Napoleon Bonaparte.

In 1937, the Gobelins Manufactory was incorporated into the Mobilier National, the government agency responsible for furnishing official buildings. As of the 21st century, the manufactory employs approximately thirty artisans and operates fifteen looms, producing an average of six to seven tapestries annually.

The Savonnerie Manufactory was founded in Paris in 1650 for the production of luxury pile carpets. In 1663, it was reorganized by Jean-Baptiste Colbert and placed under the artistic direction of Charles Le Brun, alongside the Gobelins Manufactory. It was officially integrated into the Gobelins by King Charles X in 1825.

The Beauvais tapestry manufactory was founded in 1664 by Colbert to develop domestic production and reduce the importation of Flemish tapestries. Unlike the Gobelins manufactory, whose production was mainly for the king, the Beauvais manufactory initially targeted the private market. In 1684, it became royal property, passing from one king to the next until the French Revolution. The painter Jean-Baptiste Huet took over its direction in 1790. Closed in 1793, the Beauvais manufactory reopened the following year as property of the Republican government, but its activity declined in the 19th century.

Administratively attached to the Mobilier National (which belongs to the French Ministry of Culture) in 1936 (as the Gobelins was in 1937), the manufactory was transferred to Aubusson in 1939 after its buildings in Beauvais were bombed during World War II, before being relocated back to Paris.

Weaving workshops have been documented in the town of Aubusson, near Limoges, since the mid-16th century. By the time of Louis XIV, the industry was in decline. In 1665, the king sought to revive it by granting all private workshops the designation of "royal manufacture" and providing them with work-related privileges. The royal painter Isaac Moillon was made available to the workshops and created numerous cartoons for tapestries produced in Aubusson. The distinctiveness of the Aubusson royal manufacture lay in the fact that it was not a centralized industrial establishment, but rather a collection of existing workshops that had received a royal designation.

In 1732, a royal edict provided further support by assigning a painter appointed by the monarchy to assist with design execution, as well as a dyer to advise the various manufacturers. The edict also regulated the use of colors in tapestries, mandating, among other things, the inclusion of blue borders and requiring that the manufacturer's mark follow the mention of "Aubusson," rather than indicate the original workshop. These regulations, however, were not always strictly observed; several surviving examples show that producers often prioritized emphasizing their status as a Royal Manufacture.

Many Aubusson tapestries are now housed in the Cité Internationale de la Tapisserie [ fr ], which opened in 2016 and succeeded the previous museum that operated from 1982 to 2016. The institution also hosts temporary exhibitions of contemporary works, including those inspired by the creations of J.R.R. Tolkien and Hayao Miyazaki.

The Manufacture of Toile de Jouy was established in 1760 in the town of Jouy-en-Josas, near Paris, by Christophe-Philippe Oberkampf, a German-born industrialist who became a naturalized French citizen around 1770, and Antoine de Tavannes [ fr ]. The location was selected due to the favorable chemical properties of the Bièvre River for washing textiles. Known as the "Oberkampf Manufacture," it quickly became one of the most prominent textile printing factories (indienneries) in Europe during the 18th century and played a significant role in the history of decorative arts.

In 1783, more than two decades after its founding, King Louis XVI conferred the title of "royal manufacture" upon the factory. In 1787, Oberkampf was ennobled by a letter of merit. Despite the upheaval of the French Revolution, the manufacture continued operations. In 1797, Oberkampf introduced the first machine for printing Indian textiles and developed new colors in the following years. By the early 19th century, when he had almost a monopoly on printed fabrics, Napoleon I visited his workshops in 1806 and awarded him the Legion of Honor. At its peak, the enterprise employed more than 1,300 weavers, engravers, and colorists. However, its growth halted with Oberkampf's death in October 1815, following the fall of the First French Empire.

In the years that followed, industrial production gradually overtook traditional craftsmanship, leading to lower textile prices that the Oberkampf Manufacture struggled to match. The factory closed in 1843. By that time, the cotton industry—greatly advanced by Oberkampf's efforts—employed approximately 300,000 workers in France.

In 1667, Colbert brought the Flemish artisan Philippe Leclerc to Abbeville in Picardy to establish a carpet manufacturing workshop specializing in "mocades" (a type of textile). The business was taken over in 1686 by Jacques d'Homassel and later his son-in-law Jacques Hecquet, remaining in the family until 1823.

The company was then succeeded by the brothers Pierre-Antoine and Joseph Maximilien Vayson [ fr ]. During their administration, the manufacture was relocated to the former buildings of the Notre-Dame de Willencourt Abbey [ fr ] and provided carpets for the coronation of Charles X. In 1867, Abbeville's main carpet manufacture [ fr ] closed, allowing Jean-Antoine Vayson, son of Pierre-Antoine, to centralize all his operations there. Carpet and rug production in Abbeville continued until 1912.

In the 18th century, Louis XIV and Colbert initiated the development of the cloth industry, hoping to compete with English and Dutch production. In 1670, at Colbert's request, the Levant Company [ fr ] was created to sell Languedocian cloth in the Ottoman Empire, through the port cities of Constantinople, Smyrna, and Alexandria. This industry expanded in the late 17th century when the War of the League of Augsburg weakened English and Dutch competitors, and Marseille merchants took control of the trade with the creation of the Bureau des Draps in 1693, which established a long trade route connecting Languedoc to the Échelles du Levant (trading posts in the Eastern Mediterranean).

From approximately 10,000 pieces in 1700, shipments from the port of Marseille to the Eastern Mediterranean (Ottoman Empire and Persia) reached nearly 85,000 by 1775. Between 1757 and 1776, this region absorbed nearly 90% of Languedocian cloth production.

Producers and merchants were particularly attentive to product quality, a crucial factor in gaining access to distant markets. They relied on the "label" system to facilitate product identification based on origin and characteristics. To ensure the market received selected, competitive products, Colbert subjected production to strict regulations. Cloth underwent multiple inspections by a corps of manufacture inspectors before being shipped to the Échelles du Levant. Meanwhile, Marseille merchants' agents in the Levant provided insights into consumer preferences, tastes, and local fashion trends, prompting French producers to adapt by varying raw material and dye imports.

Several cloth manufactures were established in the Languedoc region, as well as in Île-de-France (Chevreuse), Alsace (Sedan), Berry (Châteauroux), and Picardy (Abbeville).

Languedoc, historically very active in textile production and export, was particularly encouraged by the monarchy to host manufactures dedicated to cloth production. At the beginning of the 18th century, Languedoc had around a dozen royal manufactures—nine near Carcassonne—of varying sizes, along with about fifty private ones. The main royal manufactures were:

In the northern part of the Kingdom of France, the main royal cloth manufactures included:

Unlike the other cloth manufactures mentioned above, the Châteauroux Manufacture, founded in 1665 as a "collective royal manufacture," remains active today under the name Balsan.

A significant development occurred in 1751 when Louis XV authorized the establishment of a royal cloth manufacture within the park of Châteauroux Castle [ fr ], where workshops specifically designed for textile production were constructed. Their simple, regular layout enabled efficient organization of labor, facilitated supervision, and contributed to improved production quality.

Beginning in the 19th century, the workshops were mechanized, with production supplemented by home-based spinning performed by numerous workers. In 1859, the manufacture was acquired by Pierre Balsan [ fr ], who gave his name to the company and relocated operations to a new six-hectare facility west of the original site. The Balsan family [ fr ] managed the enterprise until 1974. In 1973, Balsan shifted its focus to carpet manufacturing and relocated once more, this time to Arthon, near Châteauroux, where it continues to operate.

The establishment of the silk stocking manufacture in Neuilly-sur-Seine in 1656 resulted from a royal privilege granted to Jean Hindret. However, this monopoly was not respected, and several other silk stocking manufactures were founded in Lyon and Orange in 1662, followed by others in Nîmes, Montauban, and Chambéry. Facing difficulties due to competition and a shortage of skilled labor after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685, the silk stocking manufacture ceased operations by the late 17th century.

In the 1650s, the Venetian Point lace technique was introduced to Alençon, Normandy, by Marthe La Perrière, a French noblewoman and engineer. She refined the technique to create Point d'Alençon lace, for which she received a royal privilege from Louis XIV in 1665. Anticipating principles later associated with Taylorism, she implemented a scientific work organization [ fr ], assigning specialized tasks to different workers and providing employment to thousands in the Alençon area. Her designs were influenced by Charles Le Brun, the king's chief painter and director of the Gobelins, until his death in 1690.

In the 18th century, competition from Flemish bobbin lace and shifting fashion trends—affecting both men's and women's clothing—led to a decline in demand for Alençon lace, resulting in reduced orders up to the French Revolution. In February 1794, the revolutionary leader Saint-Just granted a subsidy to Alençon in an effort to preserve the needle lace industry, a concern later echoed by Napoleon I as part of his broader policy of supporting luxury industries.

At the beginning of the 19th century, production was revived by the Congregation of the Sisters of Providence of Alençon [ fr ], who preserved the craft despite increasing competition from machine-made lace. Their efforts allowed the tradition to survive through a small clientele of dedicated patrons. Alençon lace was inscribed on UNESCO 's Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity on November 16, 2010, after being included in the Inventory of Intangible Cultural Heritage in France. The manufacture, still in operation with about ten specialized workers, has been attached to the Mobilier National since 1976.

Upholstery velvet was used to decorate the interiors of homes, particularly furniture such as armchairs and sofas. Since the Middle Ages, the city of Amiens had been renowned for its cloth production, made possible by woad cultivation. Velvet, however, did not appear until the 17th century, when it was made from linen and mohair.

After revocating the Edict of Nantes by the Edict of Fontainebleau in 1685, Huguenot manufacturers had to leave France to maintain their religion. Many of them, including some from Amiens, settled in Utrecht in the Dutch Republic. The quality of their production established the reputation of upholstery velvet, which became known as "Utrecht velvet."

To compete with Dutch [ fr ] and Italian [ fr ] production, a Royal Manufacture of Floral Fabrics was established in Amiens in 1755 by Alexandre Bonvallet, a cloth merchant from Picardy. He developed the embossing of velvet using a cylinder and relief printing with a copper plate. This type of production gave rise to Amiens Velvet [ fr ], which brought the city great fame until the 20th century. The manufacture ceased operations during the interwar period, but its technique and several cylinders were taken over by the company Tosccan, which has been located since 2017 in the former premises of the Cosserat Velvet Manufacture [ fr ] in Amiens.

A second royal manufacture, Morgan et Delahaye, was established in 1765 in the Picardy capital and began producing cotton velvet for clothing and "Utrecht velvet" for furnishings. It was so successful that it dominated the industrial production of Amiens for two centuries.

The Royal Sailcloth Manufacture was built between 1764 and 1780 in Agen by the merchant Pierre Gounon, under authorization from the financial intendant Daniel-Charles Trudaine, from whom it derived its royal status. Like the royal firearms manufactures, the Agen sailcloth manufacture benefited greatly from the American War of Independence, which spurred significant growth.

However, the manufacture quickly entered a period of decline at the beginning of the 19th century, suffering from the effects of Napoleon I 's Continental Blockade against Great Britain and the decline of sailing ships in favor of steamships. Currently, the building serves as a barracks for the Agen Gendarmerie.

The use of glass for making windows, known since Roman antiquity, remained rare during the Middle Ages except for stained glass. At the end of the 13th century, Venetian glassworks were established on the island of Murano to prevent fire hazards in the city. Their isolation allowed them to innovate and refine their expertise while protecting their manufacturing secrets. As Venetian glass became a valuable export, Colbert sought to replicate their methods and founded several glassworks in France. The three royal manufactures detailed below, dedicated to the production of glass and mirrors, have since merged into today's major company Saint-Gobain.

Colbert quickly took an interest in the glass and mirror industry, which was monopolized by the Republic of Venice, exporting Venetian glass across Europe at high costs. To uncover their manufacturing secrets, Colbert ordered the espionage of Venetian glassmakers and successfully lured some to France with financial incentives—although several were later assassinated by Venetian agents.

In October 1665, Colbert founded the Royal Mirror Glass Manufacture and appointed financier Nicolas du Noyer, general tax collector in Orléans, as its first director, giving the manufacture the name "Compagnie du Noyer." Nicolas du Noyer and his partners received a 20-year monopoly on the production of glass and mirrors, beginning operations the following year in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine district of Paris. However, the first flawless glass sheets were not produced until 1672. The Hall of Mirrors at the Palace of Versailles, built between 1678 and 1684, spanning 73 meters and adorned with 357 mirrors, demonstrated the manufacturing prowess of the Royal Mirror Glass Manufacture. In 1692, the company relocated to the former Château of the Lords of Coucy in Saint-Gobain, as the new production process required large quantities of wood, which were abundantly available in the Retz Forest, then managed primarily to supply wood for Paris. That same year, the manufacture was renamed the Compagnie Plastrier.

At the end of the 18th century, the Saint-Gobain site alone employed between 2,000 and 3,000 workers, but the French Revolution led to the abolition of the manufacture's monopoly, causing the international market to collapse. It was not until 1830 that its activities resulted in the creation of the Saint-Gobain company, which in 1858 absorbed its main competitor, the Saint-Quirin glassworks [ fr ], and became publicly traded in 1902.

Still operating in 2015 with more than 170,000 employees, Saint-Gobain is the oldest company listed on the CAC 40 and a major historical legacy of Colbert. However, its historical premises in the town of Saint-Gobain are no longer used by the company and have since been repurposed for the manufacture of carousels.

Glass manufacturing in the village of La Glacerie dates back to the early 16th century, with King Francis I granting a royal privilege to the Belleville family in 1540. The site benefited from its natural surroundings: a large supply of wood from the Brix Forest, the Trottebec River to power mills, and seaweed for producing soda ash, an essential ingredient in glassmaking. Additionally, its geographic position provided a double advantage: proximity to the port of Cherbourg [ fr ] for shipping products via sea and river transport and seclusion to protect manufacturing secrets.

Starting in 1655, the glassworks were managed by Richard Lucas de Néhou [ fr ], who modernized it by diversifying production to include crystals, window glass, and spectacle lenses. He partnered with Colbert to make the factory a subcontractor for the Royal Mirror Glass Manufacture. In 1667, the La Glacerie factory was officially integrated into the royal manufacture, contributing to the production of mirrors for the Hall of Mirrors at the Palace of Versailles. The factory produced the glass, which was then polished in Parisian workshops. Closed in 1834, the La Glacerie factory was later converted into a museum but was destroyed by Allied bombings in Normandy in 1944.

The glass and mirror manufactures of Saint-Quirin, Cirey, and Monthermé consisted of three factories built between 1737 and 1762 in these villages in Champagne. The Saint-Quirin glassworks was granted the title of "Royal Manufacture" by Louis XV in 1755, adopting the name "Royal Manufacture of Crystals and Table Glass." The three establishments merged in 1766, becoming a major competitor to the Royal Mirror Glass Manufacture for a century. Eventually, the two companies merged in 1858.

The Compagnie des Cristalleries de Saint-Louis was founded in 1586 in the Münzthal Valley, making it France's oldest crystal manufacturer. Specializing in decorative arts, tableware, lighting, and furniture, it has been owned by Hermès since 1994. The Portieux crystalworks was established in Lorraine around 1690. It was granted royal status in 1767, the year after Lorraine was annexed to France. Currently, it is a subsidiary of the Paris-based company The Pretty Kaolin Ceramics [ fr ].

The Baccarat crystalworks was founded in 1764 by Bishop Louis-Joseph de Montmorency-Laval of Metz, under permission from King Louis XV. Production included window panes, mercury -silvered mirrors, and glassware. After a period of rapid growth, the manufacture struggled economically after the French Revolution, eventually going bankrupt in 1806. It was later revived and modernized following its purchase in 1820 by industrialist Aimé-Gabriel d'Artigues [ fr ], then in 1822 by three associates, including businessman Pierre Antoine Godard-Desmarest [ fr ]. The factory experienced renewed growth during the Industrial Revolution. Still in operation today, the Baccarat crystalworks employed 650 workers in 2018.

During the 17th and 18th centuries, the numerous wars involving the Kingdom of France necessitated the establishment of weapons factories, which gained international fame after supplying firearms to the American revolutionaries during the American Revolutionary War.

The Charleville weapons manufacture [ fr ] was established in 1675 by Maximilien Titon [ fr ], Director-General of Royal Arms Manufactures and Warehouses, along with merchant Toussaint Fournier. In 1688, the city was granted the title of Royal Manufacture, along with a warehouse on Rue de Nevers, managed by Victor Fournier, which then became an exclusive supplier of firearms to the king. Firearms were assembled in Charleville using parts produced in two other main sites: Nouzonville, located on the Goutelle [ fr ] River, and Mohon, as well as in numerous small artisanal workshops scattered throughout the Meuse and Semois valleys. In 1717, Peter the Great, Tsar of Russia, visited the Charleville arms factory on his way back [ fr ] from Paris, where he had met Louis XV.

At the end of the 18th century, the Charleville musket, designed by engineer Gribeauval, was produced. This firearm became widely known for its massive use on European battlefields (French Revolution, War in the Vendée, Napoleonic Wars) as well as in America (United States War of Independence). The Charleville manufacture was shut down in 1836, as it was deemed too close to the borders established in 1815 by the Congress of Vienna following Napoleon I 's defeat. This closure triggered an economic crisis in the region but benefited another former royal manufacture, the Saint-Étienne arms factory.

The Alsace Edged Weapons Manufacture was established in 1730 by order of Louis XV. It was the first of its kind in France, where edged weapons had previously been crafted by local blacksmiths and sword makers. The Ehn [ fr ] Valley, upstream from Obernai, was chosen as the site due to the river's energy production, as well as the abundant raw materials needed for the factory's construction and operation (wood, sandstone). Additionally, the Rhine River's proximity facilitated steel imports from Siegen and the distribution of weapons via Strasbourg 's arsenal. The Alsatian dialect, commonly spoken in the region, also helped the first workers from Solingen integrate more easily.

The village of Klingenthal was built from scratch around the manufacture in 1730. By the mid-19th century, Alsace was seen as a vulnerable region (it was eventually annexed by Germany in 1870), leading to the relocation of the manufacture to Châtellerault, near Poitiers. In the 1990s, a museum was opened in the original Klingenthal buildings.

The Saint-Étienne Royal Arms Manufacture was founded in 1764 with the approval of Louis XV and under the direction of M. de Montbéliard, an inspector of the Charleville manufacture [ fr ]. The title of "Royal Manufacture," granted in the late 18th century, allowed it to become the official supplier of French and foreign troops. However, it was not an industrial facility in the modern sense but rather an administrative grouping of nine existing workshops.

Starting in 1775, during the American War of Independence, Louis XVI used this manufacture to support the American insurgents, in collaboration with poet Pierre-Augustin Caron de Beaumarchais and shipowner Jean Peltier Dudoyer [ fr ] from Nantes.

In 1864, a century after receiving its royal title, the Saint-Étienne arms manufacture was transformed into a fully operational factory, covering 12 hectares. The closures of the Charleville and Klingenthal manufactures significantly increased its production. Its workforce grew from 10,000 workers in 1890 to 16,000 during World War I. However, after World War II, the factory suffered a severe decline and eventually closed in 1990.

The Tulle arms manufacture was founded in 1690 by Martial Fénis de Lacombe, King's Prosecutor at the Presidial Court of Tulle. It was officially granted royal recognition in 1777.

The Royal Company of Mines and Foundries of Languedoc was founded in 1666 to exploit lead and copper deposits in the province, as well as those in Rouergue and Foix, and to establish foundries to refine the ore. The Company sought Colbert's support to bring miners from Sweden experienced in finding copper and lead veins, as well as ore processing, and sent engineers to Germany to study the mining systems of the Harz and Saxony regions. However, the knowledge transfer operation failed, and the project was abandoned in 1670.

The Royal Tinplate Manufacture of Bains-les-Bains in Lorraine was established in 1733 through a patent letter from Duchess Élisabeth Charlotte, granddaughter of King Louis XIII and wife of Duke Leopold I of Lorraine. In the 19th century, the site was converted into a horse nail factory, before ceasing operations in 1950. In the 2000s, the site was privatized and turned into a gîte.

The techniques for manufacturing faience were known in France at the beginning of the 16th century, after developing in Spain and Northern Italy. Ceramists Masséot Abaquesne and Bernard Palissy were pioneers in France and significantly contributed to introducing this craft under the reign of Francis I. The faience of Rouen, founded by Masséot Abaquesne, was one of the oldest in the kingdom but ceased operations after its founder's death in 1564, only to be revived a century later by Regent Anne of Austria.

The 17th and 18th centuries were marked by a rapid increase in the number of faience manufactories in France, driven by several factors. On the one hand, Louis XIV's foreign policy, aimed at financing his wars against foreign powers, required the melting down of all gold and silver objects and furniture in the kingdom. This decision directly impacted the noble families' tableware, leading them to turn to faience. On the other hand, France's economic boom allowed the bourgeoisie to become a new clientele for faience. Additionally, in the second half of the 18th century, the discovery of kaolinite, a white clay used in porcelain production, further contributed to the growth of this industry. Benefiting from these favorable circumstances, many private companies were founded alongside the royal manufactories: in Marseille (from 1677) and Varages nearby (1695), in Quimper (1708), in Strasbourg (1721), in Angoulême (1731), in Bourg-la-Reine (1735), in Malicorne in Sarthe (1747), in Martres-Tolosane in Languedoc (1748), in Desvres in the North (1748), and Moustiers in the Alps (1749).

The faience of Niderviller, while not receiving the title of Royal Manufacture, was one of the main faience factories in the kingdom when it was founded in 1730. The Lorraine village of Niderviller was attached to it before the Duchy of Lorraine by the Treaty of Vincennes in 1661, and it remains one of the last active faience factories in France, purchased in 1993 by the group "Les Jolies Céramiques sans Kaolin." Except for Rouen faience, Colbert was relatively uninvolved in the development of this sector in France, most of whose growth occurred after he died in 1683.

The faïence of Rouen was founded in the 16th century by Masséot Abaquesne, who created pharmacy and grocery containers with Italian influences. His masterpiece is a series of tiles produced between 1540 and 1548 to decorate Château d'Écouen, now the National Renaissance Museum. The enterprise ceased operations after the death of its founder in 1564.

It was revived in 1644 thanks to a 50-year monopoly granted by Regent Anne of Austria to entrepreneurs Nicolas Poirel and Edme Poterat, becoming a Royal Manufacture. In the 1660s, Colbert supported the workshop with an order for tiles for the Trianon of Porcelain. In 1673, Louis Poterat, Edme's son, obtained royal permission to manufacture soft porcelain. Later, with the end of the Poterat monopoly, numerous competing factories opened (at its peak, Rouen had 22 factories), employing hundreds of workers. This growth was followed by a decline in the second half of the 18th century due to increasing competition, and by the end of the century, most of these factories ceased operations (including Edme Poterat's factory in 1795).

On November 13, 1714, Jacques Hustin, the treasurer of the Bordeaux navy, obtained patent letters with an exclusive privilege for the production and marketing of stanniferous faience within a 10-league radius. Thanks to this royal privilege, which was renewed until 1762, he held the monopoly on faience production in his Bordeaux workshops.

In the 19th century, the Bordeaux faience factories were consolidated into the David Johnston [ fr ] Manufacture, an entrepreneur of Irish origin and Mayor of Bordeaux from 1838 to 1842. This manufacture was later acquired in 1845 by Jules Vieillard [ fr ] under the name " J. Vieillard & Cie [ fr ] ", employing 1,300 workers in 1870, but ultimately ceased operations in 1895.

The Vincennes manufacture, dedicated to producing soft porcelain, was established with the support of Louis XV in 1740 within the Vincennes Castle grounds, then transferred in 1756 to Sèvres to form the Sèvres Manufacture. The manufacture was attached to the Crown in 1759, and hard porcelain was commercialized at Sèvres starting in 1770.

From 1800 to 1847, the manufacture flourished and gained international renown under the leadership of Alexandre Brongniart, a mineralogist and geologist appointed by Claude Berthollet. In 1875, the manufacturer was relocated to specially built buildings by the French state, on the edge of Saint-Cloud Park, and it continues to operate in these historically protected sites, employing 120 official ceramists.

In 1767, a kaolin deposit, white clay used in porcelain manufacturing, was discovered in Saint-Yrieix-la-Perche, near Limoges. The deposit was purchased by Louis XV in 1769, making porcelain production a royal privilege. The first Limoges porcelain factory was founded in 1771 and came under the protection of Count of Artois in 1774.

Throughout the 19th century, many factories were created in the Haute-Vienne, either near the forests (such as Saint-Léonard-de-Noblat, Sauviat-sur-Vige, and Rochechouart) or along rivers, or close to kaolin quarries (in Saint-Yrieix and Coussac-Bonneval), with industrialists like François Alluaud, who innovated and improved manufacturing processes, and the American David Haviland.

During the second half of the 19th century, the American market absorbed up to three-quarters of the value of production, and to meet demand, production became concentrated in Limoges. The Casseaux kiln [ fr ], built in 1884, was used until 1959, and it is now preserved by the city of Limoges as a symbol of the city's porcelain tradition. The kiln has been listed as a historical monument since July 6, 1987.

The Lunéville and Saint-Clément earthenware factories were founded in 1730 and 1758 by Jacques Chambrette, who entrusted the management of the Saint-Clément factory to his son Gabriel. Like the tinplate factory in Bains-les-Bains, the Lunéville factory became "royal" by the decision of Duchess Élisabeth Charlotte, who granted it tax exemptions. The Saint-Clément factory was officially authorized by Louis XV in 1758, located 7 km from Lunéville but on the territory of the Bishopric of Metz, allowing the Chambrette family to trade with the Kingdom of France without paying customs duties.

The Saint-Clément site was purchased in 1763 by sculptor Paul-Louis Cyfflé [ fr ] and royal architect Richard Mique, who also obtained public orders for their earthenware. The two sites were merged in 1892 to form the Lunéville-Saint-Clément earthenware factory [ fr ], which remains in operation and is currently owned by the company Les Jolies Céramiques sans kaolin.

The Antony factory for wax bleaching and candle making, known as the Royal Wax Factory, was founded in 1702 in Antony (south of Paris) by Brice Péan de Saint-Gilles and was acquired in 1737 by the Trudon family, active since 1643 also in Antony. Initially founded to supply candles to the Palace of Versailles, churches, and other royal castles, the company " Trudon," still in business today and currently based in Paris, now largely exports its products.

In March 2020, the buildings of the former factory were sold to a property developer by the Congregation of the Sisters of Saint Joseph of Cluny, which had owned the site since 1890. Historian and heritage defender Stéphane Bern, informed of plans to destroy part of the site to build housing, intervened with local officials to halt the project and preserve the historic factory. The mayor of Antony, Jean-Yves Sénant [ fr ], responded positively, stating the city's intent to purchase and restore the site as a cultural venue.

The Royal Wax Factory of Dugny [ fr ], specializing in the production of wax, candles, tapers, and torches, was granted the title of royal factory in 1774. It participated in the Industrial Revolution by being one of the first French factories to use steam engines for pressing candles.

In 1674, Colbert established a state monopoly on tobacco products and granted royal privileges to the tobacco operations in Morlaix, Dieppe, and Paris. These were managed by the General Farm, founded in 1680 by Louis XIV on Colbert's recommendation, with the mission of handling indirect tax collection, customs duties, stamp acts, and domain products.

In 1724, the French East India Company, founded by Colbert in 1664, established a tobacco factory in Le Havre [ fr ], initially set up in an old handball court and later constructed in 1726 by engineers Jean-Jacques Martinet [ fr ] and Jacques III Jules Gabriel. Active until the early 20th century, it was destroyed in 1944 by Allied bombings in Normandy.

The Morlaix factory was built starting in 1736 by Jean-François Blondel, architect of the Royal Academy of Architecture, and employed nearly 1,800 workers in the 19th century. Active until the mid-20th century, the building was classified as a historical monument in 1997 and became a branch of the Espace des sciences [ fr ] in Rennes in 2020. The royal tobacco monopoly was abolished by the French Revolution in 1789, but other public monopolies on tobacco were established by the regimes that succeeded the Ancien Régime.

While Jean-Baptiste Colbert undeniably left his mark on French history with his determination to advance the country's economic development under Louis XIV, contemporary economists and historians are somewhat divided in evaluating his legacy.

Regarding the successes of Colbert's economic policies, historians and economists highlight:

Colbert has been criticized by historians and proponents of economic liberalism, who accuse him of:

At the start of the French Revolution, the new power rushed to "liberate market forces" by abolishing corporations (Allarde decree, 1791) and banning any coalitions [ fr ] (Le Chapelier law, 1791). This legislation established the freedom of trade and industry, which became the foundation of economic liberalism in France. The bourgeoisie, the triumphant class of the Revolution, became the main driving force behind the industrialization of France, as it now had the most significant financial resources.

Several former royal manufactures thrived and modernized in the 19th century as private enterprises, such as the Oberkampf factory (which became royal 20 years after its founding in 1760), the Le Dijonval cloth factory [ fr ], the Rames factory, and most of the glass and ceramics factories. The Charleville and Klingenthal armaments factories, deemed too vulnerable due to their proximity to the Eastern border, were closed or relocated, benefiting the nationalized Saint-Étienne armaments factory in 1838, which was modernized with steam engines in 1864. In 1858, the Saint-Gobain factories merged with the Saint-Quirin, Cirey, and Monthermé glass and mirror factories [ fr ] and went public in 1902, making it the oldest company on the CAC 40 index.

Although the economic system was now liberal, the state financially invested in territorial development (like Colbert, who developed river and port infrastructures) to promote economic growth. The Guizot law (1842) and the Freycinet Plan (1879–1882) favored the expansion of the railway system across the country, while Baron Haussmann carried out large-scale transformations of Paris under the Second Empire (1853–1870). Another occasional persistence of Colbertist policies was the introduction of protectionist measures during unfavorable economic conditions, such as the Méline tariff of 1892, which created a dual customs tariff.

The French colonial empire, largely established and organized by Richelieu and Colbert, also contributed to supporting industrialization by supplying raw materials to the mainland, primarily from the Caribbean, such as cotton, sugar, tobacco, and wood.

In 1992, French economist Élie Cohen [ fr ] published an essay analyzing, among other things, France's industrial successes during the Thirty Glorious Years in the export sectors of capital goods, with state support. He defined "high-tech Colbertism" as a combination of public initiative in research, off-market financing, and public orders in service of companies and industries promoted as "attributes of sovereignty." While he focused on the telecommunications sector (the General Telecommunications Directorate [ fr ] and Minitel), he also mentioned other industrial successes resulting from collaboration between the public and private sectors, particularly in transportation (Ariane, Airbus, or the TGV), energy (the Framatome nuclear sector, later Areva), and oil technologies (Coflexip, Technip).

In 2013, the French government launched a major reindustrialization project for France titled "34 Plans for a New Industrial France," led by President François Hollande and Minister for Productive Recovery [ fr ] Arnaud Montebourg. Among the 34 plans for reconquest announced by the government were the development of robotics, renewable energy, supercomputers, and the production of autonomous vehicles. "Plan leaders," mostly industrialists, were appointed to organize collective work and collaborative projects and report on the progress of their plan under the predefined roadmaps.

This government-driven initiative to foster the growth of certain sectors considered strategic is seen by some economists as a "resurrection of Colbertism," especially since it includes sectors already considered strategic in the 18th century, such as textiles and the timber industry. In his autobiography, published in 2020, Arnaud Montebourg gives particularly high praise to Colbert and states that he regularly drew inspiration from his industrial development plans under the Ancien Régime to revive the French industry [ fr ] at the start of the 21st century.

The Royal Monastery of Brou is a religious complex located at Bourg-en-Bresse in the Ain département, central France. Made out of monastic buildings in addition to a church, they were built at the beginning of the 16th century by Margaret of Austria, daughter of the Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I and Governor of the Habsburg Netherlands. The complex was designed as a dynastic burial place in the tradition of the Burgundian Champmol and Cîteaux Abbey, and the French Saint-Denis. The church is known as the Église Saint-Nicolas-de-Tolentin de Brou in French.

The church was built between 1506 and 1532 in a lavishly elaborate Flamboyant Gothic style, with some classicizing Renaissance aspects. The tall roof is covered in coloured, glazed tiles. Margaret, her second husband Philibert II, Duke of Savoy, and his mother, Margaret of Bourbon, are all buried in tombs by Conrad Meit within the church, which have avoided the destruction that most royal tombs in France have suffered.

The monastery is the property of the town of Bourg-in-Bresse, which installed the municipal art collection in the buildings in 1922. The museum presents religious statues of the 13th to 17th centuries on the ground floor, and a collection of paintings of the 16th to the 20th centuries on the upper floor.

The church and monastery have been classed as a monument historique since 1862. The buildings are in the care of the French state, and are managed by the Centre des monuments nationaux.

Conrad Meit's career led him from his birthplace at Worms on the Rhine, to the Wittenberg court and finally to Cranach's workshop in Mechelen. There he is recorded as court sculptor for Archduchess Margaret of Austria, Regent of the Netherlands from 1512 to 1530. For her Meits completed his most famous masterpieces, the group of monumental royal tombs for Margaret, her husband Philibert II, Duke of Savoy and his mother Margaret of Bourbon, produced from 1526 onwards. These are at the then newly built Royal Monastery of Brou, today in France, but then in the province of Bresse, part of the Duchy of Savoy.

Philibert had died at the age of 24 in 1504, so Meit's images of him are based on other portraits. His majestic grave monument is placed in the middle of the Abbey's choir, with the two female tombs set against the wall on either side of it. The three aligned figures are turned towards each other, as though in communication. Though to the side, Margaret's tomb is the largest. Philibert's tomb consists of two levels and two effigies, one above the other. The upper part, in expensive imported white Carrara marble, represents the Duke in ceremonial costume, surrounded by Italian-style angels (putti). Below this, ten little female figures, the sibyls point towards the effigy. To the north, the tomb of Margaret of Bourbon consists of a single effigy placed within an enfeu and lying upon a piece of black marble, with pleurants beneath, a traditional Burgundian feature. The princess is dressed in an ermine cloak and her feet rest on a greyhound, symbol of loyalty. Behind the effigy, putti bear escutcheons with the initials of Margaret and her husband.

Margaret of Austria's tomb also has an upper effigy in marble and a lower one in alabaster. In the upper one she is shown as an older woman in dress of state, wearing the crown-like archducal hat. Below she is shown in her youth, wearing a loose robe with her long hair unbound, and somewhat idealized. The two lower figures of the married couple vary the normal "transi" or cadaver tomb iconography, where a lower figure is shown as decayed remains, and connects to a broader theme of Resurrection in the abbey's art. Below their formal effigies, the couple are shown in their most perfect state, as they would be at the resurrection of the dead.

Royasc is a dialect bridging the gap between the Ligurian language and the Occitan language. It is spoken in Italy and France.

The Royasc dialect is spoken in the Upper Roya valley, at the boundary of France and Italy. In France, it is spoken in the communes of Breil-sur-Roya, La Brigue, Fontan, Saorge, Tende (Alpes Maritimes). In Italy, it is spoken in the province of Imperia, Liguria - communes of Olivetta San Michele and Triora (only in the villages of Realdo and Verdeggia) and in the province of Cuneo, Piedmont - communes of Briga Alta and the village of Viozene in the commune of Ormea.

The dialect of La Brigue, Briga Alta, Realdo, Viozene, and Verdeggia is also named Brigasc.

Royasc is the mountainous adaptation of the western Ligurian dialect. It received influence from the Occitan language as the Upper Roya valley was partly ruled by the County of Nice.

Its structure is Ligurian, but its position is discussed: some include it in the Ventimiglia dialect (intemelian) but others consider it a member of a very distinct group of Alpine Ligurian dialects, along with Pignasc and Triorasc.

Italian Royasc-speaking communes put themselves under the State Law for the protection of minorities, using the Occitan name to do so.

The Rue Spontini is a street in the 16th arrondissement of Paris, France.

The Rue Spontini is a public way in the 16th arrondissement of Paris, part of the Porte-Dauphine district [ fr ], an upscale residential neighborhood. It begins at 73, avenue Foch and ends at 2, rue Benjamin-Godard [ fr ], level with the Avenue Victor-Hugo and the Place Mike-Brant [ fr ].

The district is served by RER line C at the avenue Foch station and the avenue Henri-Martin station, as well as by the terminus of line 2 at the Porte Dauphine station and the extension of line 3b of the Île-de-France tramway.

The street is named after the Italian composer Gaspare Spontini (1774–1851).

This street, which once formed part of the Rue du Petit-Parc, was created in 1825 when the road running east along the former La Muette pheasantry [ fr ] separated the communes of Passy and Neuilly.

The street is also the western boundary of the plaine de Passy housing estate created in 1825 by the Société des terrains de la plaine de Passy. The western part of this subdivision, which extended eastwards to the boulevard outside the Fermiers généraux enclosure, was not built until after 1850. Single-family homes were replaced by apartment blocks from the late 19th century onwards.

Classified as a Paris roadway [ fr ] by a decree of May 23, 1863, it took on its present name by a decree of October 2, 1865.

The section between the Rue de la Tour and the Avenue Henri-Martin became part of the Rue Mignard [ fr ] in 1881.

In 1881, the current Square Lamartine [ fr ] also included the part of the Rue Spontini between the Avenues Henri-Martin and Victor-Hugo.

Russians are a small diaspora in France but one of the most important groups in the Russian diaspora.

The French Riviera was a favorite spot, where the European aristocracy had launched the fashion of the rainy season. Some also came there to treat tuberculosis which was then rampant. The Empress Alexandra Feodorovna, wife of the late Nicolas I, visited annually after she became a widow, and raised money for an Orthodox church to be built on the Rue Longchamp.

The Église Saint-Nicolas-et-Sainte-Alexandra [ fr ] was consecrated on December 31, 1859 in the city of Nice, which at that time had more than 45 000 inhabitants and was part with its County of the Kingdom of Sardinia, belonging to the House of Savoy, before being annexed to the French Empire by plebiscite a few months later in April 1860. In December 1912, half a century later, the Russian Orthodox Cathedral would be consecrated in memory of Nicholas Alexandrovich, Tsarevich of Russia, who died in Nice. The building itself and the parcel of land on which it stands remain the property of the Russian state to this day.

Of approximately 1.5 million exiles during the Russian Civil War, about 400,000 took up residence in France. Political refugees, White émigrés gathered around charities like the Zemgor Committee and the company of the Russian Red Cross, the St. Sergius Orthodox Theological Institute (founded in 1924) and the Action chrétienne des étudiants russes (ACER) (1926), which provided to their community an associative link, political and religious, as well as material aid.

As a symbol of this massive immigration, 10,000 Russians are buried at Sainte-Geneviève-des-Bois Russian Cemetery.

The ship "Rion", carrying some 3422 refugees (Russians, Ukrainians and Cossacks) from Constantinople to Brazil had stopped in Ajaccio, on May 15, 1921 at 2 am. Ajaccio, an island city of 20,000 inhabitants, saw in one day its population increase by 20%. On May 25, 10 days after the arrival of the ship, some 600 refugees were finally allowed to land and settle at the Livrelli barracks, located in the center of Ajaccio.

The Réacteur Universitaire de Strasbourg (RUS) was a 100 kW thermal Argonaut-class reactor built at the University Louis-Pasteur, located in the commune of Schiltigheim near Strasbourg. RUS went critical on 22 November 1966 and ended operations on 31 May 1995. Its decommissioning was finalized in 2009.

The design of university training reactor RUS was based on the Argonaut research reactor developed by the Argonne National Laboratory in the mid-1950s, in the United States. A second Argonaut-class reactor, the Ulysse reactor, was already in operation in France at the Saclay research centre of the French Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission. The University Reactor of Strasbourg was the Basic Nuclear Installation (BNI) No. 44.

The reactor core consisted of an internal graphite neutron reflector surrounded by a ring of MTR -type nuclear fuel elements with an average U enrichment of 92.5% and an external graphite neutron reflector. The highly enriched uranium (93%) was supplied by the United States.

The reactor was primarily a research instrument for conducting experimental irradiations, activation-based analysis of nuclear chemistry, solid-state physics, biology and the production of short-lived radioisotopes. A variety of cavities were available, including a 7.3-metre "biological cavity", to perform those experiments. Pneumatic conveyor systems make short irradiations possible to immediately study the irradiated materials in the laboratories adjacent to the reactor hall.

The final shutdown of the RUS reactor was decided in February 2006. The RUS reactor was dismantled from August 2006 to December 2008. The final decommissioning of INB No. 44 was pronounced in October 2012.

The Réaumur scale (French pronunciation: [ ʁeomy(ː)ʁ ] ; °Ré, °Re, °r), also known as the "octogesimal division", is a temperature scale for which the freezing point and boiling points of water are defined as 0 and 80 degrees respectively. The scale is named for René Antoine Ferchault de Réaumur, who first proposed a similar scale in 1730.

Réaumur's thermometer contained diluted alcohol (ethanol) and was constructed on the principle of using 0° for the melting temperature of water, and graduating the tube into degrees, each of which was one -thousandth of the volume contained by the bulb and tube up to the zero mark. He suggested that the concentration of alcohol employed be such that it began boiling at 80 °Ré – that is, when it had expanded in volume by 8%. He chose alcohol instead of mercury because it expands more visibly, but this posed problems: his original thermometers were very bulky, and the low boiling point of alcohol made them unsuitable for many applications. Instrument-makers generally chose different liquids, and then used 80 °Ré to signify the boiling point of water, causing much confusion.

During 1772 Jean-André Deluc studied the several substances then used in thermometers and concluded that mercury thermometers were the best for practical use, on the grounds that among these substances its volume varies the most linearly with the method of mixtures. In detail, if two portions of water of equal masses A, B were mixed, and let the resulting water be C, and if we immerse a thermometer in A, B, C, we obtain lengths l A, l B, l C {\displaystyle l_{A},l_{B},l_{C}}. Deluc expected that l C = 1 2 (l A + l B) {\displaystyle l_{C}={\frac {1}{2}}(l_{A}+l_{B})}, and similarly for other ratios of mixtures. He found that thermometers made using mercury allowed the closest fit to his expectation of linearity.

From the late 18th century, mercury was used almost without exception.

The Réaumur scale was used widely in Europe, particularly in France, Germany and Russia, and was referenced in the works of Thomas Jefferson, Thomas Mann, Fyodor Dostoevsky, Gustave Flaubert, James Joyce, Leo Tolstoy, and Vladimir Nabokov. For example, in Query VII of Notes on the State of Virginia, Jefferson converts readings from the Fahrenheit thermometer at Williamsburg to the Réaumur scale. At the beginning of Book X of The Brothers Karamazov, the narrator says, "We had eleven degrees of frost", i.e. −11 °Ré, equivalent to −14 ° C or 7 ° F. By the 1790s, France had chosen the centigrade scale as part of the metric system, rather than the Réaumur measurement, but the Réaumur scale continued to be used in some parts of Europe until at least the mid-19th century, and in parts of Russia until the early 20th. Its main modern uses are in some Italian and Swiss factories for measuring milk temperature during cheese production, and in the Netherlands for measuring temperature when cooking sugar syrup for desserts and sweets.

Uses outside of Europe include a Mexican colonel in Santa Anna 's army in San Antonio, Texas, in 1836 recording the night's temperature as 34 ° F and 1 °Ré.

Régismont-le-Haut is a prehistoric archaeological site near the rural commune of Poilhes in the Hérault department in southern France. The site was probably inhabited for a short period in the late Aurignacian period.

The site was discovered in 1961 by André Bouscaras, and the French archaeologist Guy Morin conducted an initial archaeological excavation of 60 m during the winter of 1961–62. Initial studies of the Lithic industry at the site were carried out by the French prehistorian Georges Laplace and later by Dominique Sacchi. Interdisciplinary research has been taking place at the site since 2000 under the direction of François Bon, professor of prehistory at the University of Toulouse-Jean Jaurès, and the geoarchaeologist Romain Mensan.

The site is located about 1.6 km east of the village of Poilhes and about 1.1 km southwest of the Oppidum d'Ensérune, covers an area of about 400 m and contains slight depressions corresponding to ancient channels filled with silt that protected the archaeological remains. The site provides evidence of rare settlement patterns for the Aurignacian period, such as buildings composed of organized limestone blocks.

The site contained remains of man-made tools, mostly made of flint or quartzite. Although preservation of organic material is generally problematic, fragments of charcoal and burnt and unburnt bones were found at the site, and among the few identifiable remains were a bison skull and several shells, most of which were pierced. These archaeological remains are considered relatively rare and were discovered at the site around 27 centers, which apparently define areas of activity with different purposes. The centers are unusually surrounded by round stones and are 50 to 80 cm in diameter.

The stone tools discovered at the site are small in size: about 80% of the thousands of finds uncovered are less than one centimeter in length. Archaeologists explain that in this site tools were used and repaired, actions that produced many fragments, however tools were not produced in this site; the few large blades found at this site were probably manufactured elsewhere, with some of the findindgs originating in northern Aquitaine, others in Costières du Gard.

The site was likely active in the late Aurignacian period, as indicated by SMA radiocarbon dating, between 27,900 and 29,200 years ago.

The Répertoire opérationnel des métiers et des emplois (ROME), or, in English, the Operational Directory of Trades and Jobs, is a French job skillset directory. It was made in 1989 by the Agence nationale pour l'emploi, which became the Pôle emploi, in France. It puts jobs into categories of skill sets. It catalogs more than 10,000 jobs. Its nomenclature and classifications are used by other organizations. ROME is used to characterize professional families (FAP).

ROME is one of nine databases created by the loi pour une République Numérique on 7 October 2016, collectively called Lemaire. The decree of application 2017-331 of 14 March 2017 relating to public service established the system. The current version is 4.0.

The 2009 version listed 531 records, listing over 10,000 jobs. Each job is characterized by a code made up of four characters and three parts:

Réseau Canopé is a French public institution under the supervision of the Ministry of National Education of France. It is the publishing arm of the National Education service, and as such it performs editing, production and dissemination of educational and administrative resources for professional education, both for the ministry and for itself since 1992 (decree n 92-56). It contributes to the development of information and communication technologies in education (ICTs) as well as artistic and cultural education. Réseau Canopé's baseline is "Le réseau de création et d'accompagnement pédagogiques" ("The network of creation and learning support").

In 2014, it replaced the National Centre for Educational Documentation (Centre national de documentation pédagogique, CNDP) and its regional (CRDP) and departmental (CDDP) branches, with Directions Territoriales and Ateliers Canopé as a unified structure under the name Réseau Canopé (decree 2014-1631, December 26, 2014), totalizing 102 places where teachers and people from the teaching community can borrow resources and attend training sessions. These and a few other institutions formed the Scérén network (Services, Culture, Éditions, Ressources pour l'Éducation nationale : "Services, Culture, Publishing, Resources for National Education").

The name "National Centre for Educational Documentation" (Centre national de documentation pédagogique, CNDP) was first given in 1932 by the International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation. It became a public institution in 1954, following the merge of the National Museum of Education (created in 1879) with the central library, sounds archive and film library of the National Education, and the publishing service of the National Education. At that time, regional branches (CRDP) and departmental branches (CDDP) are only branches of the National Center for Educational Documentation (CNDP).

In 1956, CNDP becomes the "National Pedagogical Institute" ("Institut pédagogique national", IPN).

On September 9, 1970, two decrees separate the IPN into two distinct structures: the French Office of Modern Educational Techniques ("Office français des techniques modernes d'éducation", OFRATEME) and the National Institute for Research and Educational Documentation ("Institut national de recherche et de documentation pédagogique", INRDP).

In 1976, the OFRATEME takes the name of the CNDP, and the INRDP becomes the National Institute for Educational Research ("Institut national de recherche pédagogique", INRP).

In 1992, the status of the structure is modified, making CRDP independent structures.

Between 2002 and 2014, the documentation network of the French Ministry of Education was called Scérén. It gathered the CNDP, the Centre de liaison de l'enseignement et des médias d'information, the 30 CRDP and 86 CDDP and some local branches as well. Scérén is also the commercial brand under which the various network branches sold their publications.

On January 1, 2011, CNDP takes charge of the National Museum of Education, managed by the INRP.

In February, 2014, the Scéren-CNDP network becomes the Réseau Canopé. It follows the rules of articles D314-70 et seq. of the French Code of Education.

Réseau de Transport d'Électricité (French pronunciation: [ ʁezo də tʁɑ̃spɔʁ delɛktʁisite ], "Electricity Transmission Network"), usually known as RTE, is the electricity transmission system operator of France. It is responsible for the operation, maintenance and development of the French high-voltage transmission system, which at approximately 100,000 kilometres (62,000 mi), is Europe's largest.

RTE is a société anonyme headquartered in Paris and mostly owned by the French state through Électricité de France and Caisse des dépôts et consignations.

RTE was formed as a result of European Directive No. 96/92/EC of December 1996, which directed that at least 26% of member countries' electricity sales be open to competition, and became law in France in February 2000. The directive required France to liberalise its electricity market by unbundling its generation and transmission activities, which until then had been fully controlled by EdF. RTE was established in July 2000 as a division of EdF, with a public charter to guarantee equitable access to its electricity market, and to secure the continuity and quality of electricity supply.

Further legal acts in July 2004 and August 2005 enforced the legal separation of RTE from EdF, transforming it into a limited liability subsidiary, and granted it trademark rights to its logo and the name Réseau de Transport d'Électricité.

RTE's activities are overseen by the Government regulatory body Commission de régulation de l'énergie (Commission for Energy Regulation) (CRE). CRE's duties in this regard include ensuring RTE facilitates access to its network, and to survey and regulate the electricity market while opening it up to competition.

RTE declared a turnover of € 4,126 million in 2007, and yielding a profit of €466 million, both up slightly from the previous year, which RTE attributed to increases in network access payments and revenue derived from interconnector capacity auctions. The workforce in the same year was 8,279.

RTE operate an open data portal named Open Data RTE which serves French electricity system data for public reuse.

RTE's transmission system operates at voltages of 63 kV, 90 kV, 150 kV, 225 kV and 400 kV. RTE deems the 63 to 150 kV circuits to be "high voltage" and the 225 kV and 400 kV "extra high voltage". As of the end of 2006, there were 99,676 km (61,940 mi) of transmission lines interconnecting 2,490 substations. Most of the transmission network is carried on 77,544 route-kilometres (48,180 mi) of overhead power lines ; only 3,258 km (2,020 mi) of the network consists of underground cable. In common with the rest of Europe, the supply frequency is a nominal 50 Hz.

France's peak demand occurs during the winter, and in 2007 was 88,960 MW. The annual production of electricity was 544.7 TWh, generated from an installed capacity of 108,319 MW, almost 60% of which was nuclear.

RTE's network interconnects with those of its counterparts in most of France's neighbouring countries, and the international trade (both import and export) of electricity is a major contribution to RTE's business activities. France is the largest exporter of electricity in Europe, and the country is linked via a total of 44 high voltage interconnections to Spain, Italy, Switzerland, Germany, Belgium and the United Kingdom, the last of which by means of an HVDC submarine power cable. France's balance of trade in this market is normally positive; in 2007, exports of electrical energy totalled 83.0 TWh and imports 27.5 TWh. The largest trading partner was Switzerland, which imported 26.1 TWh of French electricity and exported 4.4 TWh back.

" Résistancialisme " (French ; lit. ' Resistance-ism ') is a neologism coined by historian Henry Rousso to describe exaggerated historical memory of the French Resistance during World War II. In particular, résistancialisme refers to exaggerated beliefs about the size and importance of the resistance and anti-German sentiment in German-occupied France in post-war French thinking. The term was coined by Rousso in 1987. He argued that résistancialisme rose among Gaullists and Communists soon after the war and became mainstream during the Algerian War. In particular, it was used to describe the belief that resistance was both unanimous and natural during the period, and justify the lack of historiographical interest in the role of French collaboration and the Vichy government.

Rousso emphasises that résistancialisme should not be confused with " résistantialisme " (with a "t", literally "Resistor-ism"), which is a pejorative term used by Jean-Marie Desgrange to criticize individuals who retrospectively exaggerated or faked their own involvement in the wartime resistance in an attempt to enhance their own status after the war, for instance François Mitterrand. The concept of résistancialisme has gained some spread through artistic works in France, including movies, novels, television and music; in turn, popular culture has become affected by résistancialisme.

The challenge for the French government in the aftermath of World War II was enormous. The end of German occupation immediately created an atmosphere of confidence and hope in the future and La Resistance became associated to this renewal. However, this positive and unitary attitude did not last. Soon, French people called for tougher measures against women and men suspected of collaboration. In addition to the legal purge (French : épuration légale) conducted by the French government from 1944 to 1949, France underwent a wave of public executions and humiliations known as the wild purge (French : épuration sauvage). These purges included the execution of at least 9000 people, and the head shaving of women who had had relationships with the German enemy.

In this period of complete disorder and confusion, different voices from the resistance emerged; the two main voices being the Gaullist and the Communist. Hence the need for France to come up with a dominant unifying narrative that would later be referred to as the resistancialist myth, or simply resistancialism. This narrative presented the Vichy Regime as a parenthesis in French history which did not question "the righteousness of the French nation".

The myth is often embodied by de Gaulle 's Liberation of Paris speech, delivered at the Paris City Hall on the 25th of August 1944.

"Paris! Paris outraged! Paris broken! Paris martyred! But Paris liberated! Liberated by itself, liberated by its people with the help of the French armies, with the support and the help of all France, of the France that fights, of the only France, of the real France, of the eternal France!"

At a time when the French nation had never been so fragmented, the resistancialist myth was introduced soon after the war, in 1947, in order to counter the emerging tensions of the Cold War and face the communist memorial discourse. The collectively built memory had the purpose of, in the words of French historian Pierre Laborie, "give a reassuring vision of the dark years" in minimizing the influence of Vichy in the French society and portraying the Résistance as having much more support that it actually had.

All discourse not in accordance with the official memory was to be carefully monitored. Censorship intervened in numerous cases where the Occupation was depicted too dramatically. For instance, movies such as Les Honneurs de la Guerre (1962) had to be modified several times in order to be released, because the role of the Milice was deemed too important. Another example is the removal of a scene which portrayed a French policeman participating in the arrest of Jews in Alain Resnais 's movie Night and Fog (1956). The censors went not only to the point of amending fictions, they actually stood to hide actual facts and depictions of reality.

When de Gaulle returned to power in 1958, he participated actively to the creation of the resistancialist myth. The memory of Résistance was sacralized and elevated as the cement of the French nation. Landmark events such as the transfer of the Jean Moulin 's remains to the Panthéon are representative of such efforts. The message the government aimed to transmit was a syllogism, present in the famous discourse of Minister of Culture André Malraux at this event: if the Resistance is embodied by de Gaulle, and that de Gaulle represents France, then logically Resistance equals France.

This national narrative had also progressively come to shape popular culture. Cinema had been considered a useful tool both to create the myth in the aftermath of the war and to question it after 1968. The Battle of the Rails (La Bataille du rail) is 1946 a war movie by René Clément illustrating the French Resistance among railway workers which consisted in sabotaging the German rail network. This movie is one of the most famous French Résistance movie and greatly contributed to Resistancialism. A few years later, René Clément directed the historical film Is Paris Burning (1966) based on a book by Larry Collins and Dominique Lapierre. This movie depicts the liberation of Paris staged by the French Resistance and the Free French forces.

Not only did the aftermath of World War II French cinema silence the existence of collaboration to favor the myth of Resistancialism but it also buried the memory of foreign forms of resistance such as the Manouchian group.

The Communists were the quickest to present themselves as the inheritors of the Liberation. Dubbing themselves the " party of the 75,000 martyrs ", whereas about 35,000 French in total, and not all communists, were executed. The communists "probably lost only a few thousand men to German firing squads", but the figure of 75 000 became an accepted truth and contributed to the legacy of the resistance remaining central to the Party's identity. Right after the Liberation, several ceremonies were held honoring fallen communists and eighteen squares and streets in Paris were almost immediately renamed after communist martyrs.

The Gaullist party was also keen to take ownership of the legacy of the resistance. The official discourse was that, apart from a few traitors, France had supported the French Résistance and France had liberated itself alone. The central power invested time and energy to make the occupation look like a dark parenthesis, insisting on the idea that the Vichy regime did not represent France. Among these efforts were for example the Ordinance of 9 August 1944, which rendered all the legislation enacted since 16 June 1940 null and void, the renaming of the avenue Maréchal Pétain to the avenue Dr Louis Mallet, who had been a French Résistant, or the refusal to proclaim the restoration of the Republic on August 24 at the Hôtel de Ville as it implied that it had for a moment ceased to exist. The goal was to separate the image of France from the one of Vichy. Traces of the construction of that myth can be found in the de Gaulle 's speeches during the Liberation and at the end of the war. For instance, during his first speech on a liberated French territory on 14 June 1944, de Gaulle assured the inhabitants of Bayeux to "continue the struggle today, as you have not ceased to do since June 1940". When he returned to power as a result of the political crisis of 1958, de Gaulle reinforced the mythology of the Resistance, notably though the pantheonization ceremony of Jean Moulin.

While both factions shared differences with each other, there was consensus between both on that "the Resistance had represented the real France and incarnated the true feelings of the French people throughout the Occupation". This helped foster and spread the myth of a highly-resistant France during the Occupation period.

The myth of the resistance became so overpowering that for a long period of time, it squeezed out alternative memories of the Occupation period. Many resistants were for instance critical of the idea that a majority of the French population had taken part in the Resistance. The resistance fighter Alban Vistel expressed this frustration, stating that "it is time to unmask a pious myth which has not really deceived anyone. The great majority of the people of this country played only a small and fleeting part in the events. Their activity was passive, except at the last moments".

While traditional conservatism and the far-right in France had been discredited due to its role in the Vichy government, many rehabilitated former collaborators challenged the prevailing Resistance narrative. Rather than attacking the Resistance as a whole, they created the term "resistentialism" to criticise those who they saw as pseudo-resisters while also attempting to rehabilitate the memory of Pétain and his collaborationist government.

With the myth of the resistance requiring heroes, the memories of victims of the Nazi regime not involved in the resistance were often buried within the collective memory. This is visible in the way different groups of deportees were recognised as victims by the Government. While political and resistant deportees were recognised as victims of the Vichy and Nazi regime, Service du travail obligatoire (STO) workers, French workers who had been sent to Germany to work as forced labour, were not. During the post-war period, there was an enduring suspicion that these men could have avoided the STO and joined the Resistance instead.

Shortly after the Général de Gaulle 's death in November 1970, a new approach to the History of World War II which was less anxious to write a " récit national" (national narrative) started to emerge.

Georges Pompidou who had not been part of the résistance, succeeded de Gaulle to the French Presidency in 1969. In a desire to formally end "this time when French people did not love each other", he abandoned the resistancialist tradition. Concomitantly, a new generation affirmed itself after the May 1968 events in France, greatly liberalizing French society.

In 1971, The Sorrow and the Pity by Marcel Ophüls definitively brought to an end the patriotic myth of mass resistance by depicting a country which wallowed in the collaboration. Time (magazine) wrote that the film punctured "the bourgeois myth—or protectively askew memory—that allows France generally to act as if hardly any Frenchmen collaborated with the Germans". This was followed in 1972 by the publication of Vichy France: Old Guard and New Order, 1940–1944 by Robert Paxton, which directly challenged the traditional view pioneered by Robert Aron 's Histoire de Vichy (1954). Paxton argued that the Vichy government was in fact eager to collaborate with Nazi Germany and did not practice "passive resistance" to German rule. The book was translated into French in 1973 and was welcomed by both communists and the Jewish community, while receiving mixed reactions among resistance groups because of the claim that there was no real resistance until 1941.

In the 1970s, the emergence of a memory around anti-Jewish policies under the Vichy regime led to a first prosecution in France for crimes against humanity in 1979, 15 years after a law made this crime imprescriptible. Jean Leguay, second in command in the French National Police during the Nazi Occupation of France had been one of the main instigator of the Vel' d'Hiv Roundup in which 13,152 Jews were arrested and sent into deportation, including 4 000 children. Although Leguay died before the end of the instruction, this prosecution opened a path for the French justice and the trials followed one another in the 1980s. Klaus Barbie was extradited from Bolivia in 1983 and sentenced to life imprisonment in 1987 for his role in the roundup of the Izieu Children and the murder of numerous resistants fighters, including Jean Moulin. Paul Touvier was arrested in 1989 and also sentenced to life imprisonment in 1994 for the execution of 7 Jewish hostages at the Rillieux-la-Pape cemetery in 1944. After serving as budget minister under Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, Maurice Papon was in 1998 convicted of crimes against humanity for his participation in the deportation of more than 1600 Jews during the occupation.

Simultaneously, stories emerged from the Nazi concentration camps survivors, and the complicity of occupied states in these atrocities. In 1985, Shoah by Claude Lanzmann gave a voice to these former detainees in a 9 hours long documentary. French Jews organized themselves in associations like the Sons and Daughters of Jewish Deportees from France created by Serge Klarsfeld. The 50th anniversary of the Vel' d'Hiv round up was commemorated in 1992 by François Mitterrand, but it was not until July 1995 that President Jacques Chirac formally recognized the responsibility of the state in the deportation of French Jews during the Second World War.

A réveillon (French: [ ʁevɛjɔ̃ ]) is a long dinner held on Christmas Eve or New Year's Eve. Its name descends from the word réveil (meaning "waking"), because participation involves staying awake until morning, as the meal finishes.

The practice is observed in Belgium ; France ; Brazil ; Romania ; the Canadian provinces of Quebec, Manitoba, Ontario, Alberta and New Brunswick ; the US city of New Orleans ; and some other French-speaking places. In Portuguese-speaking countries, it is also a designation for the party preceding New Year's Day. In the United States, the réveillon tradition is still observed in New Orleans due to the city's strong French-Creole heritage, with a number of the city's restaurants offering special réveillon menus on Christmas Eve. It is also observed by many Franco-American families throughout New England.

The term is first documented in 18th-century France, and was used by the French as a name for the night-long party dinners held by the nobility. Eventually the word began to be used by other courts (amongst them the Portuguese courts) and after the French Revolution it was adopted as a definition of the New Year's Eve.

The food consumed at réveillons is generally exceptional or luxurious. For example, appetizers may include lobster, oysters, escargots or foie gras, etc. One traditional dish is turkey with chestnuts. Réveillons in Quebec will often include some variety of tourtière.

Dessert may consist of a Yule log, known as a bûche de Noël. In Provence, the tradition of the thirteen desserts is followed: 13 desserts are served, almost invariably including pompe à l'huile (a flavoured bread), dates, etc.

Quality wine is usually consumed at such dinners, often with champagne or similar sparkling wines as a conclusion.

There are certain traditional differences of character between the Christmas and New Year's Day réveillons.

Christmas is traditionally a Christian occasion, celebrated within the family, and this family character is retained even among non-believers.

The New Year's Eve, or Saint-Sylvestre, réveillon, on the other hand, is commonly a party with friends, etc. People may also go out to a cabaret show, or watch live relays of such shows on television.

The Révolution nationale (French pronunciation: [ ʁevɔlysjɔ̃ nɑsjɔnal ], National Revolution) was the official ideological program promoted by Vichy France (the "French State") which had been established in July 1940 and led by Marshal Philippe Pétain, after whom the ideological underpinning of Vichy France has also been referred to as Pétainism, also referred to as Vichyism (Vichyisme). Pétain's regime was characterized by anti-parliamentarism, personality cultism, xenophobia, state-sponsored antisemitism, promotion of traditional values, rejection of the constitutional separation of powers, and state corporatism, as well as opposition to the theory of class conflict. Despite its name, the ideological policies were reactionary rather than revolutionary as the program opposed almost every change introduced to French society by the French Revolution. Vichy France is often described as traditional right-wing and authoritarian conservative as opposed to fascism ; at the same time, the regime featured characteristics of fascism, and the definition of Vichy as fascist has been advocated by some historians.

As soon as it was established, Pétain's government took measures against the "undesirables", namely Jews, métèques (foreigners), Freemasons, and Communists. The persecution of these four groups was inspired by Charles Maurras ' concept of the "Anti-France", or "internal foreigners", which he defined as the "four confederate states of Protestants, Jews, Freemasons and foreigners". The regime also persecuted Romani people, homosexuals, and left-wing activists in general. Vichy imitated the racial policies of the Third Reich and also engaged in natalist policies aimed at reviving the "French race" (including a sports policy), although these policies never went as far as Nazi eugenics.

Although Pétainism ended with the dissolution of Vichy France, such terms as Neo-Pétainism have been used to describe modern French far-right movements.

The ideology of the French State (Vichy France) was an adaptation of the ideas of the French far-right, including monarchism and Maurrassisme, by a crisis government that was a client state, born out of the defeat of France against Nazi Germany. It included:

None of these changes was forced on France by Germany. The Vichy government instituted them voluntarily as part of the National Revolution, while Germany interfered little in internal French affairs for the first two years after the armistice as long as public order was maintained. It was suspicious of the aspects of the National Revolution that encouraged French patriotism, and banned Vichy veteran and youth groups from the Occupied Zone.

Vichy was intensely anti-communist; it also exhibited certain characteristics of fascism. Among historians, there have been different views on whether to call Vichy France fascist or traditional right.

There is evidence for both views, and it has been noted that the features described as conservative were shared by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy as well. The proponents of the approach of defining Vichy as authoritarian conservative as opposed to fascist also emphasized the absence of fascist mass mobilization and relative freedom of traditional and economic authorities; the opposing argument is that although the regime did not display the same desire for a mobilized national community as Germany and Italy did, it still had aspirations of mobilization, while in Germany and to a greater extent in Italy, the traditional and economic elites similarly preserved their "latitude".

American historian Stanley G. Payne found that it was "distinctly rightist and authoritarian but never fascist". Similarly, French historian Olivier Wieviorka rejects the idea that Vichy France was fascist on the grounds that "Pétain refused to create a single party state, avoided getting France involved in a new war, hated modernization, and supported the Church."

The political scientist Robert Paxton wrote that genuinely fascist elements had only minor roles in the range of supporters from reactionaries to moderate liberal modernizers; at the same time, Paxton argued that since fascism and conservatism had much in common, Vichy qualified as fascist.

French historian Alain-Gérard Slama [ fr ] argues that Vichy established a specific kind of totalitarian dictatorship which at the same time was not fascist, since it sought "total subordination of civil society to state supervision", but did not "claim to resolve social conflicts, achieve its ends and mobilize the energies of its recruits by using a "scapegoat" and adhered to cultural continuity in contrast to the Fascist "rupture and complete rejection of the past."

According to Roger Austin, "whilst [Vichy's] ideological atmosphere may have betrayed its conservative origins," in its attempts at mass mobilization, surveillance policies and exectutive repression advanced to fascism more than it may be supposed. Roger Griffin noted the similarities of Vichy with fascist regmies and described it as para-fascist, on the one hand, stemming from not a populist Fascist movement, but a wide spectrum of right-wing opponents of liberalism and socialism among the upper echelons of society, but on the other hand, relying on various fascist-like institutions of social control and engineering (such as the youth organization Compagnons de France [ fr ]), a grassroots organization of mobilization of men (Légion Française des Combattants), paramilitary elite (the Milice) and the secret Service du Contrôle Technique (SCT), designed both to reveal the public opinion of the Pétainist regime and persecute any dissent to it, from public pro-German critics to the listeners of BBC; Martin Blinkhorn calls the activities of the SCT the strongest argument in defining Vichy France as a totalitarian regime.

The historian Zeev Sternhell described Vichy France as "totalitarian" and "no less fascist than Mussolini's Italy," with a racial legislation harsher than the one of Italy and even the Nuremberg Laws, and the ideology of the regime, determined not only to dismantle the intstitutions of democracy, "but to kill its spirit," as grounded in the traditions of the "war" of the French "revolutionary right" against "liberalism, democracy and socialism", and in terms of philosophy, against the Enlightenment. Some proponents of the definition of Vichy as fascist put an emphasis on the last two years of the regime marked by the organization of the Milice, fascist by its ideology. The historian H. R. Kedward wrote: "Much of Vichy's ideology, it is often argued, was of a traditional, right-wing, nationalist nature, harking back to a pre-Revolutionary, rural age, with the accent on hierarchy and provincial values, and this competed with the technocratic modernism of some of its ministries. And yet it is this very synthesis of opposites, a familiar characteristic of fascist regimes, which suggests that Vichy, at least in its last two repressive vears, was indeed a variant of fascism."

The Vichy government's "francisque" insignia featured two symbols from the Gallic period: the baton and the double-headed hatchet (labrys) arranged so as to resemble the fasces, the symbol of the Italian Fascists.

Joan of Arc replaced Marianne as the national symbol of France under Vichy, as her status as one of France's best-loved heroines gave her widespread appeal, and the image of Joan as a devout Catholic and patriot also fit well with Vichy's traditionalist message. Vichy literature portrayed Joan as an archetypal virgin and Marianne as an archetypal whore. Under the Vichy regime, the school textbook Miracle de Jeanne by René Jeanneret was required reading, and the anniversary of Joan's death became an occasion for school speeches commemorating her martyrdom. Joan's encounter with angelic voices, according to Catholic tradition, were presented as literal history. The textbook Miracle de Jeanne declared "the Voices did speak!" in contrast with republican school texts, which had strongly implied Joan was mentally ill. Vichy instructors sometimes struggled to square Joan's military heroism with the classical virtues of womanhood, with one school textbook insisting that girls ought not follow Joan's example literally, saying: "Some of the most notable heroes in our history have been women. But nevertheless, girls should preferably exercise the virtues of patience, persistence and resignation. They are destined to tend to the running of the household... It is in love that our future mothers will find the strength to practise those virtues which best befit their sex and their condition".

Summarizing Pétain's speeches, the British historian Christopher Flood wrote that Pétain blamed la décadence on "political and economic liberalism, with its divisive, individualistic and hedonistic values – locked in sterile rivalry with its antithetical outgrowths, Socialism and Communism". Pétain argued that rescuing the French people from décadence required a period of authoritarian government that would restore national unity and the traditionalist morality, which Pétain claimed the French had forgotten. During the Riom Trial, the Third Republic, in particular the Popular Front government, despite the fact that Léon Blum ’s left-wing government prepared France for the war by launching a new military effort, Communists, Jews, etc, were blamed for the military defeat of France to Germany. The defendants of the Riom Trial included Blum, Édouard Daladier, Paul Reynaud, Georges Mandel and Maurice Gamelin : they were largely successful in rebutting the charges, and won sympathetic coverage in the international press, leading to the suspension of the trial in 1942 and its closure in 1943.

Despite his highly-negative view of the Third Republic, Pétain argued that la France profonde ("deep France", denoting profoundly French aspects of French culture) still existed, and that the French people needed to return to what Pétain insisted was their true identity. Alongside this claim for a moral revolution was Pétain's call for France to turn inwards and to withdraw from the world, which Pétain always portrayed as a hostile and threatening place full of endless dangers for the French.

The Vichy government tried to assert its legitimacy by symbolically connecting itself with the Gallo-Roman period of France's history, and celebrated the Gaulish chieftain Vercingetorix as the "founder" of the French nation. It was asserted that just as the defeat of the Gauls in the Battle of Alesia (52 BC) had been the moment in French history when a sense of common nationhood was born, the defeat of 1940 would again unify the nation.

To advance his message, Pétain frequently spoke on French radio. In his radio speeches, Pétain always used the personal pronoun je (French for the English word "I"), portrayed himself as a Christ-like figure sacrificing himself for France and assuming a God-like tone of a semi-omniscient narrator who knew truths about the world that the rest of the French did not.

Jews, national or not, were excluded from the Nation, and prohibited from working in public services. The first law on the status of Jews was promulgated on 3 October 1940. Thousands of naturalized Jews were deprived of their citizenship, while all Jews were forced to wear a yellow badge. The next day, Pétain signed another edict, this one authorizing detainment of foreign Jews in France. The Crémieux Decree of 1870 was abrogated on 7 October by Interior Minister Marcel Peyrouton, stripping Algerian Jews of their French citizenship as well. A numerus clausus drastically limited their presence at the University, among physicians, lawyers, filmmakers, bankers or small traders. Soon the list of off-limits works was greatly increased. In less than a year, more than half of the Jewish population in France was deprived of any means of subsistence. Foreign Jews first, then all Jews were at first detained in concentration camps in France, before being deported to Drancy internment camp where they were then sent to Nazi concentration camps.

No other nation was attacked as frequently and violently as Britain was in Vichy propaganda. In Pétain's radio speeches, Britain was always portrayed as the " Other ", a nation that was the complete antithesis of everything good in France, the blood-soaked " Perfidious Albion " and the relentless "eternal enemy" of France whose ruthlessness knew no bounds. Joan of Arc, who had fought against England, was made into the symbol of France partly for that reason. The chief themes of Vichy Anglophobia were British "selfishness" in using and then abandoning France after instigating wars, British "treachery" and British plans to take over French colonies. The three examples that were used to illustrate these themes were the Dunkirk evacuation in May 1940, the Royal Navy attack at Mers-el-Kébir on the French Mediterranean fleet that killed over 1,300 French sailors in July 1940 and the failed Anglo-Free French attempt to seize Dakar in September 1940. Typical of Vichy anti-British propaganda was the widely distributed pamphlet published in August 1940 and written by self-proclaimed "professional Anglophobe" Henri Béraud entitled, Faut-il réduire l'Angleterre en esclavage? ("Should England Be Reduced to Slavery?"); the question in the title was merely rhetorical. Additionally, Vichy mixed Anglophobia with racism and antisemitism to portray the British as a racially degenerate "mixed race" working for Jewish capitalists, in contrast to the "racially pure" peoples on the continent of Europe who were building a "New Order". In an interview conducted by Béraud with Admiral Darlan published in Gringoire newspaper in 1941, Darlan was quoted as saying that if the "New Order" failed in Europe, it would mean "here in France, the return to power of the Jews and Freemasons subservient to Anglo-Saxon policy".

Catholic social teaching of the time, particularly the encyclical Quadragesimo anno of Pope Pius XI, was influential in the Vichy regime, which was also active in defending traditional Catholic values, eulogising national religious figures such as Joan d'Arc and restoring some privileges of the clergy that had been abolished by the 1905 law on the Separation of the Churches and the State, though the law was never fully repealed and Catholicism was not reinstated as a state religion. While the Catholic Church in France welcomed these changes and expressed a certain degree of support towards the regime until 1944, the Church was also strongly critical of some Vichy policies, such as the deportation of the Jews and institutional racism. Additionally, a consistent number of Catholics took part in the French Resistance with the support of some segments of the clergy, among whom Georges Bidault, who later became the founder of the Popular Republican Movement.

"I have never known what the National Revolution was, it was never defined and it was an expression that personally I never used [...] Everyone put his own desire, ideal and the regime that he saw into these words, but the National Revolution was never defined in any form at any time."

The Révolution nationale was never fully defined by the Vichy regime although it was frequently invoked by its most enthusiastic supporters. Philippe Pétain himself was rumoured to dislike the term and only used it four times in his wartime speeches. As a result, different factions formed different views of what it meant which conformed with their own ideological views about the regime and the postwar future.

The Pétainistes gathered those who supported the personal figure of Marshal Pétain, considered at that time a war hero of the Battle of Verdun. The Collaborateurs include those who collaborated with Nazi Germany or advocated collaboration, but who are considered more moderate, or more opportunistic, than the Collaborationistes, advocates of a French fascism.

Supporters of collaboration were not necessarily supporters of the National Revolution, and vice versa. Pierre Laval was a collaborationist but was dubious about the National Revolution, while others like Maxime Weygand opposed collaboration but supported the National Revolution because they believed that reforming France would help it avenge its defeat.

Those who supported the ideology of the National Revolution rather than the person of Pétain himself could be divided, in general, into three groups: the counter-revolutionary reactionaries; the supporters of a French fascism ; and the reformers who saw in the new regime an opportunity to modernize the state apparatus. The last current would include opportunists such as the journalist Jean Luchaire who saw in the new regime career opportunities.

These were part of the counter-revolutionary branch of the French far right, the oldest one being composed of Legitimists, monarchist members of the Action française (AF), etc. But the Vichy regime also received support from large sectors of the liberal Orleanists, in particular from its mouthpiece, Le Temps newspaper.

The supporters were, however, in the minority. Although the Vichy government initially had substantial support from those who were glad that the war was over and expected that Britain would soon surrender, and Pétain remained personally popular during the war, by late autumn 1940 most French hoped for a British victory and opposed collaboration with Germany.

In 1941, Nobel Prize winner Alexis Carrel, who had been an early proponent of eugenics and euthanasia and was a member of Jacques Doriot 's French Popular Party (PPF), went on to advocate the creation of the French Foundation for the Study of Human Problems (Fondation Française pour l’Etude des Problèmes Humains), using connections to the Pétain cabinet (specifically, French industrial physicians André Gros and Jacques Ménétrier). Charged with the "study, under all of its aspects, of measures aimed at safeguarding, improving and developing the French population in all of its activities," the Foundation was created by decree of the Vichy regime in 1941, and Carrel appointed as "regent".

Vichy's policy concerning sports found its origins in the conception of Georges Hébert (1875–1957), who denounced professional and spectacular competition, and like Pierre de Coubertin, founder of the modern Olympic Games, who was a supporter of amateurism. Vichy's sport policy followed the moral aim of "rebuilding the nation", was opposed to Léo Lagrange 's sport policy during the Popular Front, and was specifically opposed to professional sport imported from the United Kingdom. They also were used to engrain the youth in various associations and federations, as done by the Hitler Youth or Mussolini's Balilla.

On 7 August 1940, a Commissariat Général à l’Education Générale et Sportive (General Commissioner to General and Sport Education) was created. Three men in particular headed this policy:

In October 1940, the two General Commissioners prohibited professionalism in two federations (tennis and wrestling), while permitting a three-year delay for four other federations (football, cycling, boxing and Basque pelota). They prohibited competitions for women in cycling or association football. Furthermore, they prohibited, or spoiled by seizing the assets of, at least four uni-sport federations (rugby league, table tennis, Jeu de paume and badminton) and one multi-sport federation (the FSGT). In April 1942, they additionally prohibited the activities of the UFOLEP and USEP multi-sport federations, also seizing their goods which were to be transferred to the “National Council of Sports”.

Petainism and Neo-Petainism have been used as labels to define some right-wing far-right political movements in France which emerged after World War II.

The founder of the far-right Front National (FN) Jean-Marie Le Pen and its prominent member Bruno Gollnisch have been described as politicians "true to their roots on the ultra-nationalist, Neo-Petainist right," loyal to the nostalgia for the Vichy regime "in and around the FN". The activities of the FN included promoting historical revisionism of Vichy France, the Holocaust and the conclusions of the Nuremberg Trials.

The Sacred Union (French : Union Sacrée, French: [ ynjɔ̃ sakʁe ]) was a political truce in the French Third Republic in which the left-wing agreed during World War I not to oppose the government or call any strikes. Made in the name of patriotism, it stood in opposition to the pledge made by the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO), internationalism, and its former leader Jean Jaurès not to enter any "bourgeois war". Although an important part of the socialist movement joined the Union sacrée, some trade unionists such as Pierre Monatte opposed it.

On 3 August 1914, Germany declared war on France. The next day, Prime Minister Rene Viviani read an address written by President Raymond Poincaré :

In the coming war, France... will be heroically defended by all her sons, whose sacred union will not be broken in the face of the enemy

This political movement may have been an attempt to create solidarity during a time when the largely pacifist SFIO threatened a general strike, while many French Catholics were slighted by anticlerical policies, such as the separation of church and state. Elements of nationalism, that the Germans attacked rather than the French, anti-German propaganda, and a desire to regain the former French territory of Alsace–Lorraine may have provided further impetus for the movement.

Similar movements existed in other countries, such as the Burgfriedenspolitik in Germany or the União Sagrada in Portugal.

The Basilica of the Sacred Heart of Montmartre (French : Basilique du Sacré-Cœur de Montmartre), commonly known as Sacré-Cœur Basilica (French: Basilique du Sacré-Cœur) or simply Sacré-Cœur (French: Sacré-Cœur, pronounced [ sakre kœr ]), is a Catholic church and minor basilica in Paris dedicated to the Sacred Heart of Jesus.

Sacré-Cœur Basilica is located at the summit of the butte of Montmartre. From its dome two hundred meters above the Seine, the basilica overlooks the entire city of Paris and its suburbs. It is the second most popular tourist destination in the capital after the Eiffel Tower.

The basilica was first proposed by the former Bishop of Nantes, Felix Fournier, in 1870, after France's defeat and Napoleon III 's capture at the Battle of Sedan in the Franco-Prussian War. Attributing the defeat to the country's moral decline since the French Revolution, he proposed a new Parisian church dedicated to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. Although early proposals were discussed some months before the Paris Commune, its prominent hilltop location—overlooking the site of the uprising—was only built upon after the Commune's defeat, making it continuously controversial among some of the French left-wing, who view it as a symbol of the violent repression of the Communards.

The basilica was designed by Paul Abadie, whose neo-Byzantine - Romanesque plan was selected from among seventy-seven proposals. Construction began in 1875 and continued for forty years under five different architects. Completed in 1914, the basilica was formally consecrated in 1919 after World War I. It was formally approved as a monument historique on 8 December 2022.

Sacré-Cœur Basilica has maintained perpetual adoration of the Holy Eucharist since 1885. The site is traditionally associated with the martyrdom of Saint Denis, the patron saint of Paris.

The proposal to build a new Parisian church dedicated to the Sacred Heart of Jesus was first made on 4 September 1870, by Felix Fournier, the Bishop of Nantes, following the defeat of France and the capture of Emperor Napoleon III by the Prussians at the Battle of Sedan in the Franco-Prussian War. Until his death in 1877, Fournier was an active builder who completed the long-delayed restoration of Nantes Cathedral. He wrote that the defeat of France in 1870 was a divine punishment for the moral decline of the country since the French Revolution.

In January 1871, Fournier was joined by the philanthropist Alexandre Legentil, who was a follower of Frédéric Ozanam, the founder of the Society of Saint Vincent de Paul. Legentil declared that France had been justly punished for its sins by the defeat of the French Army at Sedan and the imprisonment of the Pope in Italy by Italian nationalists. He wrote,

We recognize that we were guilty and justly punished. To make honourable amends for our sins, and to obtain the infinite mercy of the Sacred Heart of our Lord Jesus Christ and the pardon of our sins, as well as extraordinary aid which alone can delivery our sovereign Pontiff from captivity and reverse the misfortune of France, we promise to contribute to the erection in Paris of a sanctuary dedicated to the Sacred Heart of Jesus.

The influence of Legentil led to a successful fundraising campaign based entirely on private contributions.

Montmartre was selected as the site of the new basilica due to its prominent height and visibility from many parts of the city and for its association with Saint Denis of Paris. Since the location included land belonging to the local government as well as private owners, the French parliament assisted in securing the site by declaring that the construction of the basilica was in the national interest. In July 1873, the proposal was finally brought forward and approved in the National Assembly with the official statement that "it was necessary to efface by this work of expiation the crimes which have crowned our sorrows." The groundbreaking for the new church finally took place in 1875.

Apart from its physical attributes, Montmartre or the "Hill of the Martyrs" was also chosen for its association with the early Christian church. According to tradition, it was the place where the patron saint of Paris, Saint Denis of Paris, was beheaded by the Romans. His tomb became the site of the Basilica of Saint Denis, the traditional resting place for the kings of France until the French Revolution.

In addition, Montmartre was the birthplace of the Society of Jesus, one of the largest and most influential religious orders in the history of the Catholic Church. In 1534, Ignatius of Loyola and a few of his followers made their vows in Saint-Pierre de Montmartre, one of the oldest churches in Paris. The church survived the Revolution although the Montmartre Abbey to which it belonged was destroyed.

A competition was held for the design of the basilica and attracted seventy-seven proposals. Architect Paul Abadie was selected, and the cornerstone finally laid on 16 June 1875.

The early construction was delayed and complicated by unstable foundations. Eighty-three wells, each thirty meters deep, had to be dug under the site and filled with rock and concrete to serve as subterranean pillars supporting the basilica. Construction costs, estimated at 7 million francs drawn entirely from private donors, were expended before any above-ground structure became visible. A provisional chapel was consecrated on 3 March 1876, and pilgrimage quickly brought in additional funding.

Not long after the foundation was completed in 1884, Abadie died and was succeeded by five other architects who made extensive modifications: Honoré Daumet (1884–1886), Jean-Charles Laisné (1886–1891), Henri-Pierre-Marie Rauline (1891–1904), Lucien Magne (1904–1916), and Jean-Louis Hulot (1916–1924).

During construction, opponents of the basilica were relentless in their effort to hinder its progress. In 1882, the walls of the church were barely above its foundations when the left-wing coalition led by Georges Clemenceau won the parliamentary election. Clemenceau immediately proposed halting the work, and the parliament blocked all further funding for the project. However, faced with enormous liabilities of twelve million francs from project cancellation, the government had to allow the construction to proceed.

In 1891, the interior of the basilica was completed, dedicated and opened for public worship. Still, in 1897, Clemenceau made another attempt to block its completion in the parliament, but his motion was overwhelmingly defeated since the cancellation of the project would require repaying thirty million francs to eight million people who had contributed to its construction.

The dome of the church was completed in 1899, and the bell tower finished in 1912. The basilica was completed in 1914 and formally dedicated in 1919 after World War I.

Criticism of the church by leftist journalists and politicians for its alleged connection with the destruction of the Paris Commune has been continuously espoused since the 19th century. In 1898, Emile Zola wrote sarcastically,

France is guilty. It must do penitence. Penitence for what? For the Revolution, for a century of free speech and science, and emancipated reason... for that they built this gigantic landmark that Paris can see from all of its streets, and cannot be seen without feeling misunderstood and injured.

Shortly after the completed Statue of Liberty was transported from France to the United States, opponents of Sacré-Cœur came up with a new strategy. They proposed installing a full-size copy of the Statue of Liberty on top of Montmartre, directly in front of the basilica, which would entirely block the view of the church. This idea was eventually dropped as expensive and impractical.

A bomb was exploded inside the church in 1976.

To make their feelings about the church clear, in 2004 the socialist mayor of Paris Bertrand Delanoë and the mayor of the 18th arrondissement Daniel Vaillant, also member of the Socialist Party, renamed the square in front of and below the church in honor of Louise Michel, the prominent anarchist and participant in the Paris Commune.

Lionel Jospin, socialist Prime Minister between 1997 and 2002 also expressed his wish that the basilica be demolished as a symbol of " obscurantism, bad taste and reactionism."

In 2021, to avoid celebrating the church's history in the same year as the 150th anniversary of the Paris Commune, leftist members of the French parliament blocked a measure to declare the church a monument historique (national historic monument) and postponed it until 2022.

The church was finally named as a national historic monument by a unanimous vote of the National Commission of Patrimony and Architecture on 8 December 2022. This decision was immediately criticized by the leftist politician Jean-Luc Mélenchon, who called it "a glorification of the assassination of 32,000 Paris Communards shot in just 8 days".

Voices on the French left have since have continued their opposition to the designation, as, for the time a building is listed as such, it cannot be demolished or significantly modified.

The church is 85 meters long and thirty-five metres wide. It is composed of a large central rotunda, around which are placed a small nave, two transepts, and an advance-choir, which form a cross. The porch of the church has three bays, and is modelled after the porch of Périgueux Cathedral. The dominant feature is the immense elongated ovoid cupola, 83.33 metres high, surrounded by four smaller cupolas. At the north end is the campanile, or bell tower, 84 metres high, containing the "Savoyarde", the largest bell in France.

The overall style of the structure is a free interpretation of Romano - Byzantine architecture. This was an unusual architectural style at the time, and was in part a reaction against the neo-Baroque of the Palais Garnier opera house by Charles Garnier, and other buildings of the Napoleon III style. The construction was eventually handed on to a series of new architects, including Garnier himself, who was a counsellor to the architect Henri-Pierre Rauline between 1891 and 1904,

Some elements of the design, particularly the elongated domes and the structural forms of the windows on the south façade, are Neo-classical, and were added by the later architects Henri-Pierre Rauline and Lucien Magne.

The campanile, or bell tower, on the north front, houses the nineteen-ton Savoyarde bell (one of the world's heaviest), cast in 1895 in Annecy. It alludes to the attachment of Savoy to France in 1860.

The porch of the south façade, the main entrance, is loaded with sculpture combining religious and French national themes. It is topped with a statue representing the Sacred Heart of Christ. The arches of the façade are decorated with two equestrian statues of French national saints Joan of Arc (1927) and King Saint Louis IX, both executed in bronze by Hippolyte Lefèbvre.

The white stone of Sacré-Cœur is travertine limestone of a type called Chateau-Landon, quarried in Souppes-sur-Loing, in Seine-et-Marne, France. The particular quality of this stone is that it is extremely hard with a fine grain, and exudes calcite on contact with rainwater, making it exceptionally white.

The nave is dominated by the very high dome, which symbolises the celestial world, resting upon a rectangular space,symbolising the terrestrial world. The two are joined by massive columns, which represent the passage between the two worlds.

The plan of the interior is a Greek cross, with the altar in the center, modelled after Byzantine churches. More traditional Latin features, the choir and the disambulatory, were added around the altar. The light in interior of the church is unusually dim, due to the height of the windows above the altar, and this contributes to the mystical effect. Other Byzantine features in the interior include the designs of the tile floor and the glasswork.

The mosaic over the choir, entitled The Triumph of the Sacred Heart of Jesus, is the largest and most important work of art in the church. It was created by Luc-Olivier Merson, H. M. Magne and R. Martin, and was dedicated in 1923. The mosaic is composed of 25,000 enamelled and gilded pieces of ceramic, and covers 475 square metres, making it one of the largest mosaics in the world.

The central figure is Jesus Christ, dressed in white, with open arms offering his heart, decorated with gold. He is joined by his mother, the Virgin Mary, and by the Archangel Michael, the protector of the church and of France. At his feet, kneeling, is Saint Joan of Arc offering him a crown. A figure of Pope Leo XIII offers a globe to Christ, symbolising the world.

To the right of Christ is a scene titled "The Homage of France to the Sacred Heart;" a group of popes and cardinals present a model of the basilica to Christ. On his left is "The Homage of the Catholic Church to the Sacred Heart": where people in the costumes of the five continents pay their homage to the Sacred Heart. At the base of the mosaic is a Latin inscription, stating that the basilica is a gift from France. "To the Sacred Heart of Jesus, France fervent, penitent and grateful." The word "grateful" was added after World War I.

At the top of the mosaic is another procession, called "the Saints of France and Saints of the Universal Church". In all of the mosaic, the artists adapted elements of Byzantine art in the organization of the figures, the altered perspective, and the use of polychrome colours enhanced with silver and gold.

The basilica complex also includes a garden for meditation, with a fountain. The top of the dome is open to tourists and affords a spectacular panoramic view of the city of Paris, which spreads out to the south of the basilica.

The use of cameras and video recorders is forbidden inside the basilica.

The interior of the basilica is surrounded by a series of chapels, mostly offered by professional groups or religious orders. The chapels are decreed with sculpture, relief sculpture, and tapestries, often relating to the professions of the donors. For example, the Chapel of the Order of Notre Dame of the Sea is decorated with tapestries illustrating Christ walking on the water and the Miraculous Catch of fish. Beginning to the right of the main entrance, they are:

The apse itself is ringed by an additional seven chapels.

The crypt below Sacré-Cœur is different from traditional crypts, which are usually underground. At Sacré-Cœur, the crypt has stained glass windows, thanks to a "saut-de-loup", a trench about four meters wide around it, which allows light to enter through windows and oculi of the crypt wall. In the centre of the crypt is the chapel of the Pieta, whose central element is a monument statue of the Virgin Mary at the foot of the cross, at the altar. The statue was made by Jules Coutain in 1895. A series of seven chapels is placed on the east side and seven on the west side of crypt, corresponding to the chapels on the level above. The crypt contains the tombs of important figures in the creation of the basilica, including Cardinals Guibert and Richard.

Decoration covers the walls, the floor, and the architecture. Much of the decoration is in a distinctly neo-Byzantine style, with intricate patterns, and abundant color.

The basilica contains a large and very fine pipe organ built by Aristide Cavaillé-Coll, the most celebrated organ builder in Paris in the 19th century. His other organs included those of Saint-Denis Basilica (1841), Sainte-Clotilde Basilica (1859), Saint-Sulpice church and Notre Dame de Paris (1868). The organ is composed of 109 ranks and 78 speaking stops spread across four 61-note manuals and the 32-note pedalboard (unusual before the start of the 20th century; the standard of the day was 56 and 30), and has three expressive divisions (also unusual for the time, even in large organs).

The organ was originally built in 1898 for the Biarritz chateau of the Baron Albert de L'Espée. It was the last instrument built by Cavaillé-Coll. The organ was ahead of its time, containing multiple expressive divisions and giving the performer considerable advantages over other even larger instruments of the day. It was almost identical (tonal characteristics, layout, and casework) to the instrument in Sheffield 's Albert Hall, which was destroyed by fire in 1937. However, when installed in Paris in 1905 by Cavaillé-Coll's successor and son-in-law, Charles Mutin, a much plainer case was substituted for the original ornate case.

The organ was recognised as a national landmark in 1981. It has undergone several restorations. The most recent, begun in 1985, replaced only the most severely damaged pneumatic parts, but others have deteriorated and some are no longer usable. The pipes are now covered with a thick layer of dust which impacts the pitch and timbre. Both the organ and the church itself have been recognized as national landmarks.

The belfry of the Basilica of the Sacred Heart of Montmartre houses five bells. The four small bells named from largest to smallest are Félicité, Louise, Nicole and Elisabeth, which were the original bells of the church of Saint-Roch and moved to the basilica in 1969.

Below the four bells is a huge bourdon called " The Savoyarde ", the biggest bell in France. The full name of the bourdon is “ Françoise Marguerite of the Sacred Heart of Jesus ". It was cast on 13 May 1891, by the Paccard foundry (Dynasty of Georges, Hippolyte-Francisque and Victor or "G & F") in Annecy-le-Vieux.

The Savoyarde itself only rings for major religious holidays, especially on the occasion of Easter, Pentecost, Ascension, Christmas, Assumption and All Saints. One exception was on the night of 24 August 1944 when La Nueve – 9th Company, Régiment de marche du Tchad of the French 2nd Armored Division – broke into Paris and arrived at the Hôtel de Ville during the Liberation of Paris from Nazi German occupation, becoming the first French Army troops to return to the city since 1940. The bell then rang when Pierre Schaeffer broadcast the news on a Radiodiffusion Nationale broadcast and then, after a playing of "La Marsellaise", asked any priests who were listening to ring their churches' bells. The Savoyarde can be heard from 10 km away.

This bell is the fifth largest in Europe, ranking behind the Petersglocke of Cologne (Germany), the Olympic Bell of London, Maria Dolens of Rovereto (Italy), and the Pummerin of Vienna (Austria). It weighs 18,835 kg, measures 3,03 m of diameter for 9.60 m of outer circumference, with a base thickness of 22 cm and a leaf of 850 kg. With its accessories, its official weight reaches 19,685 kg. It was offered by the four dioceses of Savoy. It was transported to the basilica on 16 October 1895, pulled by a team of 28 horses. In the late 1990s, a crack was noticed in the bell.

The church is dedicated to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, which was an increasingly popular devotion after the visions of Saint Margaret Mary Alacoque (1647–1690) in Paray-le-Monial. In response to requests from French bishops, Pope Pius IX promulgated the feast of the Sacred Heart in 1856. The basilica itself was consecrated on 16 October 1919.

Since 1885 (before construction had been completed) the Blessed Sacrament (Christ's body, consecrated during the Mass) has been continually on display in a monstrance above the high altar. Perpetual adoration of the Blessed Sacrament has continued uninterrupted in the basilica since 1885.

Christian de Chergé, one of the killed monks of Tibherine, was chaplain at the basilica in the years 1964–1969.

Tourists and others are asked to dress appropriately when visiting the basilica and to observe silence as much as possible, so as not to disturb persons who have come from around the world to pray in this place of pilgrimage, especially since the Blessed Sacrament is displayed. Photos are not allowed to be taken in the central seating area of the Basilica.

The basilica is accessible by bus or metro line 2 at Anvers station. Sacré-Cœur is open from 06:00 to 22:30 every day. The dome is accessible from 09:00 to 19:00 in the summer and to 18:00 in the winter.

A much smaller version of the basilica, Sacré-Cœur de la Balata, is located north of Fort-de-France, Martinique, on N3, the main inland road. Built for the refugees driven from their homes by the eruption of Mount Pelée, it was dedicated in 1915.

SAFARI was an attempt by the French government, under the presidency of Georges Pompidou, to create a centralized database of personal data. SAFARI stands for Système Automatisé pour les Fichiers Administratifs et le Répertoire des Individus, "Automated System for Administrative Files and the Repertory of Individuals".

The first mention of the project was made in a three-page article in the INSEE central review in March 1970. The French government began secretly working on the SAFARI project in 1973. The project aimed to identify French citizens with a unique number that would connect the information about them from various databases. In particular, it would use the INSEE code (also used as a Social Security number). The system was to be based on the Iris-80 computer.

On March 21, 1974, an article in the newspaper Le Monde by journalist Philippe Boucher revealed the existence of the project. The public outcry was immense, some critics comparing it to the national identity database created by the Vichy regime during Nazi occupation. The massive popular rejection of SAFARI prompted the minister of justice to create the Commission on Data Processing and Freedom, also known as the Tricot Commission after its leader Bernard Tricot. This led to the creation of the CNIL to ensure data privacy, as well as an accompanying 1978 law, the Data Protection and Liberties Act, restricting the storage and processing of personal data.

Safran S.A. (French pronunciation: [ safʁɑ̃ ]) is a French multinational aerospace, defence and security corporation headquartered in Paris. It designs, develops and manufactures both commercial and military aircraft engines ; launch vehicle, spacecraft and missile propulsion systems; as well as various other aerospace and military equipment and devices. The main products manufactured are engines for various aircraft. The company was founded in 2005 through a merger between the aerospace engine manufacturer SNECMA and the electronics specialist SAGEM. Safran's subsequent acquisition of Zodiac Aerospace in 2018 significantly expanded its aeronautical activities.

Employing over 92,000 people and generating 31.32 billion euros in revenue in 2025, the company is listed on the Euronext stock exchange and is part of the CAC 40 and Euro Stoxx 50.

The name Safran was chosen from 4,250 suggestions, including 1,750 proposed by employees. As a holding company for many subsidiaries, the name was deemed suitable for the suggestion of direction, movement, and strategy. Safran translates as " rudder blade" and as " saffron ", which the company highlights as one of the catalysts for early international trade.

In 1905, Louis Seguin created the company Gnome. Production of the first rotary engine for airplanes, the Gnome Omega, started in 1909. This company merged with Le Rhône, a company created in 1912 by Louis Verdet, to form the Gnome et Rhône engine company. Gnome & Rhône was nationalized in 1945, creating Snecma. In 2000, this company gave its name to the "Snecma Group", and carried out a number of acquisitions to form a larger group with an array of complementary businesses.

Sagem (Société d'Applications Générales de l'Electricité et de la Mécanique) was created in 1925 by Marcel Môme. In 1939, Sagem entered the telephone and transmissions market by taking control of Société anonyme des télécommunications (SAT). It acquired Société de Fabrication d'Instruments de Mesure (Sfim), a measurement instrument specialist, in 1999. However, by 2008, Sagem Mobile and Sagem Communications had been sold. Sagem Mobile became Sagem Wireless in January 2009.

The Safran Group was created on 11 May 2005 with the merger of Snecma and Sagem SA.

In June 2014, Arianespace CEO Stéphane Israël announced that European efforts to remain competitive in response to SpaceX 's recent success have begun in earnest. This included the creation of a new joint venture company from Arianespace 's two largest shareholders : the launch-vehicle producer Airbus and engine-producer Safran.

By May 2015, Safran had created with Airbus Group a launcher joint venture called Airbus Safran Launchers. This entity developed the Ariane 6 launch vehicle for its initial flights in July 2024.

In January 2017, Safran initiated a takeover of the aircraft interior supplier Zodiac Aerospace to create the third largest aerospace supplier with $22.5 billion revenue, behind United Technologies with $28.2 billion and GE Aviation with $24.7 billion; the new group will be 92,000-employee strong, with 48% of its business in aircraft systems and equipment, from landing gears to seats, 46% in propulsion and 6% in defense.

In February 2017, Christopher Hohn, a London-based investor and CEO of TCI Fund Management, opposed the acquisition deal with Zodiac, citing concerns about the target's debt levels. At the time, Hohn held 4% of Safran shares.

In May 2017, Safran announced the completion of the sale of its identity and security activities to Advent International for Euro 2.4 billion.

In February 2018, Safran took control of Zodiac Aerospace, significantly expanding its aircraft equipment activities. Zodiac Aerospace has 32,500 employees and generated sales of 5.1 billion euros for its fiscal year ended 31 August 2017.

On 4 June 2018, Boeing and Safran announced their 50-50 partnership to design, build and service auxiliary power units after regulatory and antitrust clearance in the second half of 2018. This could threaten the dominance of Honeywell and United Technologies.

In July 2023, Safran agreed to acquire Raytheon subsidiary Collins Aerospace 's actuation and flight controls business unit in an all-cash deal worth $1.8 billion. However, the Italian government used its Golden Share in Microtecnica to veto the sale in the belief it would give Safran the commercial ability to sabotage Eurofighter components production. RTX legally challenged the use of the veto. The deal eventually successfully closed in July 2025. The transaction is expected to yield about $50m in annual pre-tax run-rate cost synergies by 2028 for Safran.

In September 2024, Safran acquired Preligens, a company that specialises in artificial intelligence for aerospace and defense, for $243.3 million and announced it would become a part of the Safran Electronics & Defense business area.

As of June 2025, Safran Aircraft Engines and Safran Electricals & Power operate facilities in Hyderabad in India to manufacture rotating turbine seals for the LEAP engine and electrical harnesses for the LEAP engine, Rafale jets, Falcon 10X and FADEC, respectively. Additionally, Safran plans to establish a new subsidiary — Safran Aircraft Engine Services India — in Hyderabad for maintenance and overhaul of Rafale's Snecma M88 engines of the Indian Air Force fleet by 2026-end. The project is expected to generate 150 jobs by inauguration and eventually an additional 750 jobs.

Safran is expected to establish an assembly line in M88 engine in India to support the 144 Rafale acquisition of the Indian Air Force.

In May 2026, Safran Electronics & Defense and Baykar signed a strategic partnership agreement covering the development of integrated unmanned aerial systems, advanced navigation technologies, and smart weapon systems. The agreement includes the integration of Safran’s Euroflir electro-optical systems onto Bayraktar TB2 platforms. The partnership combines Safran’s expertise in optronic sensors and navigation with Baykar’s experience in UAV development and operations.

The Safran group is divided into three main branches:

The aerospace propulsion branch groups all operations concerning the propulsion of aeroplanes, helicopters, missiles, and launchers, for the civil aviation, military aviation, and space markets: design, production, marketing, testing, maintenance, repair, and overhaul (MRO).

At the October 2018 NBAA convention, Safran presented its ENGINeUS electric motor range up to 500 kW (670 hp) designed for electric aircraft, starting with a 45 kW (60 hp) one with integrated control electronics, with an energy efficiency of over 94% and a power-to-weight ratio of 2.5 kW / kg at 2,500 rpm and 172 N⋅m (127 lb⋅ft) of torque, for a 18-kilogram (40 lb) weight with the controller, 12 kilograms (26 lb) without. Flight-testing may happen in 2019 or 2020.

The aircraft equipment branch groups all design, production, sales, and support operations for systems and equipment used by civil and military airplanes and helicopters.

The Saint Martin–Sint Maarten border, or France – Netherlands border, is the international border between the Collectivity of Saint Martin, an overseas collectivity of the French Republic, and Sint Maarten, a constituent country of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, on the island of Saint Martin in the Caribbean. The 87-square-kilometre (34 sq mi) island is divided roughly 60:40 between the French Republic (53 km, 20 sq mi) and the Kingdom of the Netherlands (34 km, 13 sq mi) by the 16 km (10 mi) border. However, the two parts are roughly equal in population.

The border is completely open and can be crossed freely. There is a movement in both Sint Maarten and Saint Martin promoting the unification of the island, which would remove the border between the two territories.

The border starts in the west at Cupecoy Bay and then proceeds eastward, cutting across Rue de Terre-Basses/Rhine Road. It then runs through the Simpson Bay Lagoon between the island of Little Key (Dutch) and Grand Islet (French). Back on land it crosses Rue de Hollande/Union Road and then turns north-eastwards, running across Sint Peter Hill, Mont des Accords, Concordia Hill, Marigot Hill, Mount Reward and Mount Flagstaff. It then turns south-eastwards and then eastwards, terminating in the east at Oyster Pond bay.

Historically the home of native Arawak and Carib people, the island of Saint Martin was first discovered by Europeans in 1493 when Christopher Columbus sailed by on his second voyage to the Americas. Initially disputed between the Netherlands and Spain, the Spanish withdrew their claim in the 1640s, only for the French to begin settling on the north of the island. To avoid fighting over the matter, France and the Netherlands signed the Treaty of Concordia on 23 March 1648 which formally split the island into two jurisdictions.. The final border was confirmed in 1817. Various local legends relate how the border was supposedly decided by a French and Dutch official walking round the island, the Dutch gaining less land due to their representative being drunk on genever.

In 1994, France and the Netherlands signed the Franco-Dutch treaty on Saint Martin border controls, which improved the mutual border controls at their airports on the island.

For many centuries, the treaty of Concordia did not provide clarity on the exact allotment of various border zones. This appeared especially problematic when debris needed to be cleared in disputed Oyster Pond waters in the wake of hurricane Irma (2017). A quadripartite committee containing Dutch, French, Saint-Martin and Sint Maarten government delegations prepared a final settlement signed in 2023. The French gained additional water rights in Oyster Pond, whereas Sint Maarten obtained a few square kilometres in land mass.

On 16 July 2026, the French National Assembly approved legislation authorizing the ratification of the 2023 agreement defining the border between France's Saint-Martin and Sint Maarten of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. The move formally advanced the settlement of a centuries-old border ambiguity, with the Netherlands still required to complete its own ratification process before the agreement enters into force.

Saint-Bertrand-de-Comminges (French pronunciation: [ sɛ̃ bɛʁtʁɑ̃ də kɔmɛ̃ʒ ], literally Saint-Bertrand of Comminges ; Gascon : Sent Bertran de Comenge) is a commune (municipality) and former episcopal see in the Haute-Garonne department in southwestern France. It is a member of the Les Plus Beaux Villages de France ("The Most Beautiful Villages of France") association.

In 406, Saint Jerome wrote that the Roman General Pompey, while on the way back to Rome after a military campaign in Spain, founded a Roman colony there, presumably to defend the passage to the Aran Valley in the Pyrenees and the Iberian peninsula. However, extensive archaeological investigations have failed to find any evidence of this. The colony, built on the valley floor below the current hilltop village, was named Lugdunum Convenarum. This Roman town dates from the Augustan period and had reached around 30,000 people at its highest point. It belonged to the Roman province of Novempopulana and had a growing Christian community, which by the late fourth century got its own Diocese of Comminges, which was suffragan of the Metropolitan Archdiocese of Eauze. It is claimed to have been the place of exile from 39 AD of Herod Antipas, with his wife Herodias, under Emperor Caligula 's orders, although this is based on an unclear point in Josephus. In 405 the Vandals sacked the city and forced the peasantry to move to the citadel.

In 585 another Germanic invasion, by the Burgundians under king Guntram, attacked the city in the course of their pursuit of Gundoald. It remained in decline for nearly five centuries. The bishopric however persisted under the name of Comminges and was transferred in the ninth century to the ecclesiastical province of the Metropolitan Archdiocese of Auch.

In 1083 a knight related to the Counts of Toulouse, Bertrand de l'Isle-Jourdain, canon of Saint Augustine in Toulouse, was nominated bishop of Comminges. He ordered the construction of the cathedral and of the Romanesque cloister. The place became used by pilgrims as a stage on the route to Santiago de Compostela.

Bertrand de l'Isle was canonised and became known as Saint-Bertrand in the 13th century and Lugdunum Convenarum became known as Saint-Bertrand-de-Comminges. The term Comminges itself comes from the Latin word "Convenae", meaning "those who came together" at Pompey's new settlement.

On 19 July 2012, during the 99th edition of Tour de France, it was one of the villages which cyclists passed by.

In addition to the former cathedral, the village has a Romanesque basilica as well as Roman ruins. There is an archeological site close to the Cathedral in which it is possible to identify the remains of a Roman thermae and of a theatre.

The village itself is a medieval one, with several arches and vaults. It has several gates entering it; on the Cabirole Gate it is possible to read about the tax set by Louis XIV on fish. Another gate, the Majou Gate, is interesting in that it is the one pilgrims used. Following the ramparts it is possible to observe the Matacan Rock from which, according to the legend, Gondoald had been executed by Gunther.

Entering the nave people will see three distinct architectural styles at the same time:

The narthex ends by two huge pillars with a circumference of no less than 11.45m. Over the northern and southern walls one can see the Romanesque arches, the floors are made of marble and include some tombs and sepulchres. The choir is also clearly Romanesque and offers an impressive view over the entire valley.

The Gothic part is built in the Meridional Gothic style. There is a single nave that is 55m long, 16m wide and 28m tall. Over the arrow arches there are "coat of arms" from the founding bishops. The stained glasses are impressive by their level of details, almost comparable to those of Auch.

The stalls within the choir were commissioned by Jean de Mauléon [ fr ] but because of the lack of documentation it is impossible to name the artist that made them. Although and by comparison with other stalls it is often considered it was the work of Nicolas Bachelier, or rather of his school which had been using artists from France, Spain and Italy. Most of the work had been done in oak and walnut, the choir seems cut off from the rest of the church contrasting so much with the Gothic and Romanesque parts.

The sixty-seven stalls represent characters from both the Old and the New Testaments, including scenes like: temptation, envy and lust.

The former cathedral has been listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site as part of the World Heritage Sites of the Routes of Santiago de Compostela in France.

The inhabitants of the commune are known as Commingeois. This demonym and the name of the village refer to the ancient region, Comminges.

The mediaeval scholar and ghost story writer M. R. James used Saint-Bertrand, and more particularly, its cathedral, as a setting for his classic tale of terror " Canon Alberic's Scrap-Book ", which can be found in the collection Ghost Stories of an Antiquary (1904). The English composer Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji (1892–1988) wrote a piano piece inspired by James's story entitled St. Bertrand de Comminges: "He was laughing in the tower" (1941).

According to ancient Jewish historian Flavius Josephus (books Antiquities and Wars, combined information), Lugdunum Covenarum – then in the Roman province of Spain – was the place of exile of Herod Antipas, who had been the Tetrarch (ruler) of Galilee in the time of Jesus Christ. Herod and his wife Herodias were sent there under the orders of the Emperor Caligula in AD 39, and they remained there until their death about two years later. Confusion of this place with present-day Lyon, then also called Lugdunum, is still frequent nowadays, though the Hispanic reference makes this geographically impossible.

Compagnie de Saint-Gobain S.A. (French pronunciation: [ sɛ̃ ɡɔbɛ̃ ]) is a French multinational corporation, founded in 1665 in Paris as the Manufacture royale de glaces de miroirs, and today headquartered on the outskirts of Paris, at La Défense and in Courbevoie. Originally a mirror manufacturer, it also produces a variety of construction, high-performance, moderate-performance, lower-performance and other materials. Saint-Gobain is present in 76 countries and as of 2022 employs more than 170,000 people.

Since the mid-17th century, luxury products such as silk textiles, lace, and mirrors were in high demand. In the 1660s, mirrors had become very popular among the upper classes of society: Italian cabinets, châteaux, ornate side tables, and pier-tables were decorated with these expensive and luxurious products. At the time, however, the French were not known for mirror technology; instead, the Republic of Venice was known as the world leader in glass manufacturing, controlling a technical and commercial monopoly of the glass and mirror business. As a result, French Minister of Finance Jean-Baptiste Colbert wanted France to become completely self-sufficient in meeting domestic demand for luxury products, thereby strengthening the national economy.

Colbert established, by letters patent, the public enterprise Manufacture royale de glaces de miroirs (French pronunciation: [ manyfaktyʁ ʁwajal də ɡlas də miʁwaʁ ], Royal Mirror-Glass Factory) in October 1665. The company was created for a period of twenty years and would be financed in part by the state. The beneficiary and first director was the French financier Nicolas du Noyer, a receiver of taxes of Orléans, who was granted a monopoly of making glass and mirror-glass for twenty years. The company had the informal name Compagnie du Noyer.

To compete with the Italian mirror industry, Colbert commissioned several Venetian glassworkers he had enticed to Paris to work for the company. The first unblemished mirrors were produced in 1666. Soon the mirrors created in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, under the French company, began to rival those of Venice. The French company was capable of producing mirrors that were 40 to 45 inches long (1.0 to 1.1 m), which at the time, was considered impressive. Competition between France and the Venetians became so fierce that Venice considered it a crime for any glass artisan to leave and practice their trade elsewhere, especially in foreign territory. Nicolas du Noyer complained in writing that the Venetians were unwilling to impart the secrets of glassmaking to the French workers and that the company was hard-pressed to pay its expenses. Life in Paris proved distracting to the workers, and supplies of firewood to stoke the furnaces were dearer in the capital than elsewhere. In 1667, the glass-making was transferred to a small glass furnace already working at Tourlaville, near Cherbourg in Normandy, and the premises in Faubourg Saint-Antoine were devoted to glass-grinding and polishing the crude product.

Though the Compagnie du Noyer was reduced at times to importing Venetian glass and finishing it in France, by September 1672 the royal French manufacturer was on a sufficiently sound footing for the importation of glass to be forbidden to any of Louis' subjects, under any conditions. In 1678, the company produced the glass for the Hall of Mirrors at the Palace of Versailles.

In 1683, the company's financial arrangement with the State was renewed for another two decades. However, in 1688, a competitor in the form of the Compagnie Thévart was created, which was also partially financed by the French state. Compagnie Thévart used a new pouring process that allowed it to make plate glass mirrors measuring at least 60 by 40 inches wide (1.5 by 1.0 m), much bigger than the 40 inches (1.0 m) that the Compagnie du Noyer could create.

The two companies competed for seven years, until 1695 when the economy slowed down and their technical and commercial rivalry became counterproductive. Under an order from the French government, the two companies were forced to merge, creating the Compagnie Plastier. A mirror factory in the village of Saint-Gobain in Picardie gave its name to the present company.

In 1702, Compagnie Plastier declared bankruptcy. A group of Franco-Swiss Protestant bankers rescued the collapsing company, changing the name to Compagnie Dagincourt. At the same time, the company was provided royal patents which allowed it to maintain a legal monopoly in the glass-manufacturing industry up until the French Revolution (1789), despite fierce, sometimes violent, protests from free enterprise partisans.

In 1789, as a consequence of the French Revolution, the state financial and competitive privileges accorded to Compagnie Dagincourt were abolished. The company had to depend on the participation and capital of private investors, although it continued to remain partly under the control of the French state.

In the 1820s, Saint-Gobain continued to function as it had under the Ancien Régime, manufacturing high-quality mirrors and glass for the luxury market. However, although in 1824, a new glass manufacturer was established in Commentry, France, and in 1837, several Belgian glass manufacturers were also founded. While Saint-Gobain continued to dominate the luxury high-quality mirror and glass markets, its newly created competitors focused their attention on making medium and low-quality products. The manufacture of products of such quality made mirrors and glass affordable for the masses. In response, the company extended its product line to include lower-quality glass and mirrors.

In 1830, around the same time as Louis Philippe I became the King of the French as a result of the Bourbon Restoration, Saint-Gobain was transformed into a Public Limited Company and became independent from the state for the first time.

While mirrors remained their primary business, Saint-Gobain began to diversify their product line to include glass panes for skylights, roofs, and room dividers, thick mirrors, semi-thick glass for windows, laminated mirrors and glass, and finally embossed mirrors and windowpanes. Some of the more famous buildings that Saint-Gobain contributed to during that period were the Crystal Palace in London, Jardin des Plantes, the Grand Palais and adjacent Petit Palais in Paris, and the Milan Central railway station.

Saint-Gobain merged with another French glass and mirror manufacturer, Saint-Quirin, in the mid-19th century. After the merger, the company was able to gain control of 25% of European glass and mirror production (before, it had only controlled 10–15%). In response to growing international competition, the company began to establish up new manufacturing facilities in countries without any domestic manufacturers.

Saint-Gobain cast the glass blanks of some of the largest optical reflecting telescopes of the early 20th century, including the ground-breaking 60-inch (1.5 m) Hale telescope (online in 1908), the 61-inch (1.54 m) Bosque Alegre telescope built in 1912, for the Argentine National Observatory, directed by Charles D. Perrine, and 100 inch (2.5 m) Hooker telescope (online 1917) at Mount Wilson Observatory (United States), and the 72-inch (1.8 m) Plaskett telescope (online in 1918) at Dominion Astrophysical Observatory (Canada).

By the end of the 19th century, Saint-Gobain named the Casa Pellandini “its sole representative and exclusive depositary throughout the Mexican Republic."

Saint-Gobain experienced significant success in the early 20th century. In 1918, the company expanded its manufacturing to bottles, jars, tableware, and domestic glassware.

In 1920, Saint-Gobain extended its businesses to fibreglass manufacturing. Fibreglass was being used to create insulation, industrial textiles, and building reinforcements. In 1937, the company founded Isover, a subsidiary fibreglass insulation manufacturer.

During this period, the company developed three new glassmaking techniques and processes; first, a dipping technique used to coat car windows, which prevented the glass from shattering in the event of an accident. As a result of that technique, 10% of Saint-Gobain's 1920 sales came from the car industry, and 28% in 1930. Second, a few years later, another technique was developed that allowed glass to be shaped and bent. Finally, a process was developed to coat glass with aluminum, allowing it to be used as a conductor, and allowed the company to create products such as the ‘radiavers’ (French for “radiating glass”), a unique type of electric heater with the heating element encased in glass.

Between 1950 and 1969, Saint-Gobain's sales rose at a rate of 10% per year. Its workforce grew from 35,000 in 1950 to 100,000 in 1969. By the end of the 1960s, Saint-Gobain had more than 150 subsidiaries under its control.

Glass and fibreglass sales benefited from the booming construction industry and the rise in mass consumption after the Second World War. Saint-Gobain's yearly glass production went from 3.5 million square metres (38 million square feet) in 1950 to 45 million square metres (480 million square feet) in 1969. In 1950, fibreglass only represented 4% of the company's turnover, but by 1969, this had grown to 20%.

Domestic sales in France accounted for only a fifth of the company's revenue. Spain, Germany, Italy, Switzerland, and Belgium were also important markets.

In 1968, Boussois-Souchon-Neuvesel, a French industrial group, made a hostile takeover bid for Saint-Gobain. The company looked for a " white knight " to help fend off the bid. Multinational corporation Suez suggested that Saint-Gobain and Pont-à-Mousson (another French industrial group) should merge, to maintain independence from Boussois-Souchon-Neuvesel. After the merger, Saint-Gobain-Pont-à-Mousson, later known simply by the name "Saint-Gobain", produced pipes in addition to glass and fibreglass.

The next fifteen years were a time of change and reorganization for the newly merged companies. In the 1970s, Western economies were suffering a sharp downturn. Saint-Gobain's financial performance was adversely affected by the economic and petrol crises.

In 1981 and 1982, ten of France's top-performing companies were nationalized by the socialist party -controlled Fifth Republic of France. By February 1982, Saint-Gobain was officially controlled by the state. However, the company did not last long as a government-owned corporation; it was re-privatized in 1987.

When Saint-Gobain once again became a private enterprise, control of the company quickly changed hands. Jean-Louis Beffa, an engineer and graduate of the École Polytechnique, became the CEO. At Beffa's direction, the company invested heavily in research and development and pursued the production of various engineered materials, such as abrasives and ceramics. Under Beffa, the company continued its strategy of international expansion, which included both the setting up of foreign factories and the acquisition of various competitors, foreign and domestic alike. In 1996, the company bought Poliet (the French building and construction distribution group) and its subsidiaries, such as Point P. and Lapeyre; this transaction expanded Saint-Gobain's product line into construction materials and their distribution. In 2005, Olivier Bluche took the helm of Supply Chain Operations and set about modernising the company's lengthy and dated processes.

In December 2005, Saint-Gobain purchased the British company BPB plc, the world's largest manufacturer of plasterboard, for US$6.7 billion. In September 2006, on the back of strong fiscal performance, Saint Gobain purchased the Turkish glass and stone wool supplier Izocam as well as a controlling stake in the Chilean supplier BO Glass. In August 2007, the company acquired Maxit Group, doubling the size of its Industrial Mortars business and adding the manufacture of expanded clay aggregates (LECA)to its business portfolio.

In March 2008, as the economic consequences of the Great Recession set in, Saint Gobain recorded a year-on-year net income of £1.2 billion, a 10 per cent decline that was largely attributed to the North American market and partially offset by stronger performance in Asia. One year later, the company launched a £1.3 billion rights issue aimed at increasing its cash reserves amid the protracted downturn.

In November 2010, Saint-Gobain acquired a 50 percent of SAGE Electrochromics, a manufacturer of specialist glass that tints on command; the companies aimed to collaborate on electrochromic glass technology, research and development, and the construction of a large-scale electrochromic glass plant in Faribault, Minnesota. In May 2012, the company announced they had acquired total ownership of SAGE, making it a wholly owned subsidiary. That same year, its BPB subsidiary purchased Celotex. In 2018, Saint Gobain acquired UK-based Farécla Products, one of the largest polishing compound manufacturers in the world. In 2024, Saint-Gobain agreed to acquire Australian building materials maker CSR Limited for A$ 4.5 billion (US$2.95 billion).

In August 2018, via the divestment of part of its business to the US-based private equity firm CoBe Capital, Saint-Gobain withdrew from the British glass installation sector. Around this same time, the company was working on 3D printing concrete techniques.

Recently, the company sold its cosmetic glass manufacturing business, including a plant in Newton County, Georgia, United States. In 2021, the company acquired GCP Applied Technologies from W.R. Grace. Grace Construction Products (GCP) was a Grace subsidiary as well as a public traded company on the NYSE. GCP and Saint-Gobain's CHRYSO were joined into the new Construction Chemicals division.

In October 2022, Saint-Gobain Films & Fabrics was renamed Saint-Gobain Composite Solutions. In June 2023, the company's Indian arm acquired Twiga Fiberglass, a manufacturer of glass wool with production facilities located near Delhi and Mumbai. In late 2024, the company acquired the UK-based chemicals specialist Kilwaughter. In May 2005, Saint-Gobain confirmed its intention to establish its first UK-based production site for low-carbon stone wool insulation at the former Holwell Foundry Works in Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire.

The company has its head office in Les Miroirs in La Défense and in Courbevoie. The 97-metre (318 ft) building served as the company head office since 1981.

Saint-Gobain is organized into three major sectors (% by 2014 net sales restated excluding Verallia): Building Distribution (49%), Construction Products (27.5%), Innovative Materials (23.5%).

Saint-Gobain's Building Distribution (building supplies) division was created in 1996. Since then it has grown both internally and through acquisitions (in France with Point P. and Lapeyre, the UK with Jewson and Graham, in Germany, the Netherlands and Eastern Europe with Raab Karcher and in the Nordic countries with Dahl). The division has 3,500 stores in 23 countries and employs 52,000 people worldwide. Its 2006 sales amounted to 17.6 billion euros. The divisions current subsidiaries are:

On 1 March 2023, the UK business was divested and sold to Stark Group.

As part of the deal to acquire BPB plc in 2005, Saint-Gobain acquired the Gyproc brand. The name was formally adopted in 2009, and in April 2010, the company's first plasterboard manufacturing plant opened on a seven-hectare site in Abu Dhabi.

Gyproc products have been used on some of the largest projects in the region, including the stations and main depot for Dubai Metro; Atlantis Hotel – Palm Jumeirah, Capital Gate – Abu Dhabi, Ferrari Experience – Abu Dhabi and Masdar Institute – Abu Dhabi.

Saint-Gobain India Private Limited – Glass Business (formerly Saint-Gobain Glass India Limited) is a subsidiary of Saint Gobain that manufactures and markets solar control glass, fire-resistant glass and other various types of float glasses in India. It has its manufacturing plant at Sriperumbudur, 40 kilometres (25 mi) from Chennai.

Saint-Gobain started its venture in India in 1996 by acquiring a majority stake of Grindwell Norton. Later in 2000, it started its own glass manufacturing unit at Sriperumbudur. In June 2011, Saint Gobain Glass India acquired Sezal Glass float-line business, based in the state of Gujarat, India. The acquisition adds about 550 tons per day additional capacity, and the deal was inked at around US$150 million. In addition, Saint-Gobain Glass invested in Bhiwadi, Rajasthan in 2014, which adds another 950 tons of glass per day. And recently in 2018, Saint-Gobain again invested in Sriperumbudur with 950-ton capacity, which results in the production of 3850 tons of glass per day from India.

The Construction Products division is organized into the following business areas:

The Construction Products division employs 45,000 people worldwide and in 2006 had sales revenues of 10.9 billion euros.

The Innovative Materials division conducts research into various areas of materials science, energy, the environment, and medicine, such as fuel cells or particle filters. It operates centres in Cavaillon, Northborough, Massachusetts and Shanghai, employing 35,800 people. Overall, the division's sales are made up of at least 30% new products. In 2006, total sales revenue was 4.9 billion euros. Innovative Materials also manufactures glass products, including self-cleaning, electrochromic, low-emissivity and sun-shielding glass. It is active in 39 countries, targeting emerging economies, a market that now accounts for more than one-third of the division's sales. It employs a global workforce of 37,100 and in 2006 had sales revenues of 5.1 billion euros.

In November 2006, Saint Gobain announced a JV, Avancis, with Shell to produce PV modules based on CIS film technology. Three years later, the company acquired total ownership of Avancis from Shell, and its two plants in Germany manufacturing thin CIS film modules for some time, it was sold to China National Building Materials Group Corporation (CNBM) in 2014.

Saint-Gobain also has a division that focuses on connecting entrepreneurs, startups, and innovators to the 50+ bin Saint-Gobain called: NOVA External Venturing. The External Venturing unit has staff in Boston, Paris, and Shanghai interested in connecting with entrepreneurs working in advanced materials, construction products, and environmental sustainability.

Saint-Gobain comprises several brands, including: Saint-Gobain Glass, Saint-Gobain PerformancePlastics, RIW, GCPAppliedTechnologies, Weber, BritishGypsum, Decoustics, Glassolutions, LECA, Gyproc, Artex, Isover, Ecophon, Pasquill and PAM.

Saint-Gobain had contaminated ground water supply with PFAS (perfluorooctanoic acid – a highly persistent contaminant) in multiple towns in southern New Hampshire, USA. Elevated levels of perfluorooctanoic acid were found near the Saint-Gobain plant in Merrimack in 2016. Pollution has been occurring for over 20 years, and in 2025 Saint-Gobain announced it had demolished the Merrimack facility.

Saint-Gobain deliberately and intentionally constructed a bypass stack to thwart environmental inspections and avoid PFAS removal. Despite this flagrant violation of their permit they were allowed to continue to operate. Former state representative and environmental scientist Mindi Messmer has claimed links between exposure to Saint-Gobain’s PFAS emissions and kidney and renal pelvis cancer, testicular cancer, female breast cancer, prostate cancer, ulcerative colitis, thyroid disease, high cholesterol, cardiovascular impacts.

Saint Gobain is involved in multimillion-dollar class-action lawsuits that are ongoing as of 2025. Its former company lawyer was terminated after he repeatedly urged "the company to do more to address contamination from their plants in Merrimack; Bennington, Vermont ; and Hoosick Falls, N.Y".

The French port of Saint-Goustan is a former fishing port and trading centre situated beside the river Auray (or river Loc'h.) In modern times it has become one of the quarters of the commune of Auray in the department of Morbihan in Brittany.

The port is named after Saint Goustan, the patron saint of sailors and fishermen.

In the early 17th century, the town of Auray decided to build a port on the left bank of the Loc'h. Quays and ramps were constructed to allow for the unloading of trade ships where previously vessels had used cruder pontoon structures to dock at the side of the river.

An examination of port taxation in 1537 illustrates the commercial activity in Saint-Goustan. The city imports wine, salt, leather, iron and Biscay steel. Conversely, wheat, rye, oats, butter, meat, fish, cloth and fabric are exported. The Auray region was a surplus producer of grain at that time.

The development of the larger Auray port in 1641 was completed with the construction of a wharf and two ramps between the old pier which had been built in 1615. This work included the place Saint-Sauveur and continued south to the construction of the current Franklin dock. The stone moorings were placed in 1692.

The creation of the Lorient port (1665–1670) and the lack of major roads connecting Saint-Goustan to the hinterland were the cause of a decline in activity in the port. This further decreased with the arrival of the railway and the creation, in 1865, of a new road to Auray which isolated the port and further reduced its trade. The only activity on the Franklin wharf in the early 20th century was the transport of wooden beams for coal mines in Wales.

The name of this wharf is a tribute to Benjamin Franklin, the famous diplomat, physicist and engineer who landed at Auray on 3 December 1776 to ask for French aid in the War of Independence. The port, dates back much further, however, to at least the 12th century.

Work began on the dock in 1614 and was extended in 1630. Around 1680, the dock in front of the place Saint-Sauveur was extended further and repaired in 1742. In 1791 it required further repairs which took place from June 1846 to the end of 1852. The quay pavement dates from this time.

The dock deteriorated again, and in 1902 subsided more than 50 cm towards the water. The town council did not want to finance plans proposed by engineers to completely rebuild the wharf 68m away. In 1935, the mayor warned that the dock continued to be a problem and in 1936, it collapsed by about 30m. It took three years before repairs were begun, but the work was completed in 1939.

The dock measures 220m and is classified ZPPAUP (as a protected area) as a monument of the Gulf of Morbihan. The dock is adjacent to restaurants and hotels, and is a venue for markets, art exhibitions, sales of postcards, a carousel and other seasonal activities, as well as sailing instruction. A boat tour to the islands sails from here and an old rigged ship is permanently docked there too. The latter contains a small museum which includes a replica of Saint-Goustan.

The port has been painted by many artists, including Odilon Redon and Mathurin Méheut.

The port became a marina containing approximately 155 moorings next to the dock. It was classified as a departmental port and now receives over 1300 visitors vessels per year (as of 2007).

During the 20th century Saint-Goustan became one of the most popular tourist areas in the Auray area as a result of its picturesqueness and the timbered houses in the town centre. However, the large granite stones of the wharf are gradually disintegrating and tidal erosion has created pockets behind the retaining wall.

At the end of 2008 part of the wharf had subsided and was in danger of collapse. This area is important for the stability of the houses bordering and had to be consolidated with an emergency embankment of large stones. This part of the wharf now need major repairs costing 1.88M Euros which should be undertaken in January 2009. In December 2008, an association was created with the aid of the Heritage Foundation to gather donations to restore the dock.

The quasi-estuary location and the aid of the presence of mudflats mean that the port and the valley host many species of seabirds. The docks are covered with kelp and local oysters.

The river Auray plays an important part as a natural route for fish and birds. As such it is one of the components of the national environmental framework which is promoted by the Department of the Environment.

The Saint-Martin-au-Val Sanctuary is a monumental Gallo-Roman temple complex still undergoing excavation in Chartres. It is one of the largest sanctuaries from Roman Gaul and is notable for its rare preservation of an ornate wooden ceiling. It featured a cult site to Diana and Apollo.

The sanctuary is part of the monumental complex known today as Saint-Martin-au-Val, which lay outside the limits of the ancient city of Autricum, in modern-day Chartres. It is beneath what is now the Saint-Brice district. Autricum was a principle settlement in the territory of the Carnutes.

The site was a swamp that fell within the floodplain of the river Eure at the time construction originally began. Workers raised and cleared the low-lying wetland with thousands of tons of backfill from nearby quarries.

Research has been conducted by the municipal archaeological service of the city of Chartres since 2006, with excavations focusing primarily on the north-east corner of the site so far. The site receives benefits such as annual grants to support its research, after interest led to it getting programmed by the Ministry of Culture in 2011.

The massive sanctuary forms a quadriporticus 6 hectares (200 by 300 m) in size. The inner courtyard is 4.5 hectares, enclosed by walls and galleries with a pavilion at each of the four corners. The exterior facade is punctuated with alternating rectangular exedras and semi-circular apses, with the northern exedra providing direct access to the pavilion.

A temple is built in the center of the western facade while the eastern facade featured a monumental fountain.

What remains of the temple's floor is white limestone. The remaining base of the walls is marble, with elevations indicating decorated frescoes or sculpted stone patterns.

More than 1,500 pieces of building 2's painted and engraved wooden ceiling have been uncovered at the site. The wood has been preserved by first being charred and hardened in a fire from building 2 being razed, after which it was extinguished and submerged when it fell into the white marble basin of a monumental fountain. Flooding from the Eure helped to seal the wood in sustainable conditions for its preservation.

The wood, along with the fountain that preserved it, dates to the first half of the 2nd century. The large pieces recovered so far are the beams, joists, and planks of a hexagonal coffered ceiling. 90% of the structural elements are constructed from fir wood and 10% from oak, while the decorations are sculpted in linden. The decorations include sculpted acanthus leaves, ovals, spearheads, rais-de-cœurs, as well as pearls and pirouettes

This is one of only two instances of such significant amounts of wooden architecture surviving from antiquity, offering a rare glimpse into joinery techniques and other wood craftsmanship from the period.

Outside the sanctuary walls, a series of structures extends the religious complex towards the river valley. One such religious structure, excavated in 2013, is an approximately square temple (fanum) that was built on an older gallery that had been refitted several times. Built on a high podium, only the base of its walls and parts of the floor remain. Its facade features eight columns and opens the central room (cella) towards the Eure.

The floor of the building was paved with limestone and its walls decorated with colored rock. Either an altar or idol of the god worshiped there occupied the back of the cella.

Ground broke on construction of the sanctuary sometime around 70-80 CE. The rectangular and semi-circular rooms (exedra and apses) along the facade appeared half a century later. In the northeast portion that has been studied so far, construction seemingly ground to a premature halt by 130. The absence of wall lighting and painted plaster, the scarcity of roofing elements, as well as some major defects, suggest the sanctuary complex had possibly not even started to function. That part of the building appears to have been totally abandoned from that point until the early decades of the 3rd century, when plundering for materials began. This abandonment and decline took place quite early compared to similar major temple sites. A century later, lime kilns were installed at the site.

The fanum outside of the sanctuary was built and demolished at around the same time as the sanctuary itself. Fragments of statues found outside the fanum indicate that Diana and Apollo were worshiped there.

By the 3rd century, the religious purpose of the sanctuary had changed. A large recovery pit outside the north-eastern corner pavilion was the burial site of more than one hundred bodies between 270 and 280 CE, thought to have died in an epidemic. People of all ages were buried along with domestic artifacts like game tokens, dishes, ornaments, and pottery, as well as with animal remains.

The fire that burned the wooden ceiling of building 2 probably took place at the end of the 3rd century or beginning of the 4th. The fire was set to eliminate vegetation that had overgrown the site so that the masonry could be plundered for reuse.

Sainte-Honorine-la-Guillaume is a commune in the Orne department in north-western France.

The commune is made up of the following collection of villages and hamlets, La Fégrinière, Le Degré, La Thiboudière, La Guilminière, La Joasiére, La Dandière, La Héroudière, L'Être aux Roux, La Basserie, La Boscherie, La Briconnière, La Séramberie, L'Épierrière, L'Être Bisson and Sainte-Honorine-la-Guillaume.

The commune is part of the area known as Suisse Normande.

There are 5 watercourses that run through the commune, The river Rouvre plus 4 streams, Guesnerie, Onfrairies, Vallees and the Maufy.

Serge Clérembaux was mayor between 1971 and 2020. Pierre Madeline was elected mayor in 2020.

Saintongeais (French pronunciation: [ sɛ̃tɔ̃ʒɛ ] ; endonym : séntunjhaes) is a dialect of Poitevin–Saintongeais spoken halfway down the western coast of France in the former provinces of Saintonge, Aunis and Angoumois, all of which have been incorporated into the current departments of Charente and Charente-Maritime as well as in parts of the neighbouring department of Gironde and a town in Dordogne. Although many of the same words are used in both Charente departments, they differ in what they mean or in how they are pronounced.

Saintongeais, which is a langue d'oïl variety, and Gascon, which is a langue d'oc variety, have significantly influenced the Acadian and Cajun dialects of French spoken in Canada and the United States respectively.

Its area covers the entire department of Charente-Maritime (except the very north), the west and centre of the department of Charente, and the northern part of the department of Gironde with its Pays Gabaye and its enclaves around Saintonge, Monségur. Today, Saintongeais is no longer widely spoken except in the countryside. It is still used in television shows, magazines and radio programs. Some words from Saintongeais are still used in the region. Words like since (floorcloth) are so widespread that they are considered by some to be French.

The Limousin dialect of Occitan used to be spoken in this area and left a substrate on Saintongeais.

Along with French, Saintongeais is used in the magazine Xaintonge, which is published twice a year. The great promoters of spoken Charentais at the beginning of the twentieth century were "le Barde Saintongeais" Goulebenéze [ fr ], succeeded by Odette Comandon [ fr ], author of comedy and folk tales, patois actress and storyteller. Athanase Jean, a country doctor, also wrote several plays in the dialect and helped promote the Saintonge culture.

Salade niçoise (French pronunciation: [ salad niswaz ] ; Occitan : salada niçarda, pronounced [ saˈlaðo niˈsaɾðo ], or salada nissarda in the Niçard dialect) is a salad that originated in the French city of Nice. It is traditionally made of tomatoes, hard-boiled eggs, Niçoise olives and anchovies or tuna, dressed with olive oil or, in some historical versions, a vinaigrette. It has been popular worldwide since the early 20th century, and has been prepared and discussed by many chefs. Delia Smith called it "one of the best combinations of salad ingredients ever invented" and Gordon Ramsay said that "it must be the finest summer salad of all".

Salade niçoise can be served either as a composed salad or as a tossed salad. Freshly cooked or canned tuna may be added. For decades, traditionalists and innovators have disagreed over which ingredients should be included; traditionalists exclude cooked vegetables. The salad may include raw red peppers, shallots, artichoke hearts and other seasonal raw vegetables. Raw green beans harvested in the spring, when they are still young and crisp, may be included. However, cooked green beans and potatoes are commonly served in variations of salade niçoise that are popular around the world.

The version known in Nice in the late 19th century was a basic combination of tomatoes, anchovies and olive oil, described as "simple food for poor people". Over time, other fresh and mostly raw ingredients were added to the salad as served in Nice. A 1903 recipe by Henri Heyraud in a book called La Cuisine à Nice included tomatoes, anchovies, artichokes, olive oil, red peppers and black olives, but excluded tuna and lettuce. The dressing included olive oil, vinegar, mustard and fines herbes.

Former Nice mayor and cookbook author Jacques Médecin was a strict salad traditionalist. His 1972 cookbook Cuisine Nicoise: Recipes from a Mediterranean Kitchen called for the salad to be served in a wooden bowl rubbed with garlic, and excluded boiled vegetables: "never, never, I beg you, include boiled potato or any other boiled vegetable in your salade niçoise." Médecin wrote that the salad should be made "predominantly of tomatoes" which should be "salted three times and moistened with olive oil". Hard-boiled eggs were added, and either anchovies or canned tuna, but not both. He incorporated raw vegetables such as cucumbers, purple artichokes, green peppers, fava beans, spring onions, black olives, basil and garlic, but no lettuce or vinegar. According to Rowley Leigh, Médecin believed that salade niçoise "was a product of the sun and had to be vibrant with the crisp, sweet flavours of the vegetables of the Midi." Médecin advocated presenting the dish as a composed salad, commenting, "As the various ingredients that go into salade niçoise are of bright and contrasting colours, they can be arranged most decoratively in the salad bowl."

An organization called Cercle de la Capelina d'Or, led for many years by Renée Graglia until her death in 2013, continues to protest against deviation from traditional local recipes. The group, which certifies restaurants in Nice, sticks with Médecin's standards. They reject commonly included ingredients such as green beans and potatoes, as well as innovations such as including sweet corn, mayonnaise, shallots and lemon.

In 2016, French Michelin-starred chef Hélène Darroze posted a salade niçoise recipe on Facebook that included cooked potatoes and green beans. According to journalist Mathilde Frénois, the reaction on Facebook was quick and hostile from the "purists". Darroze's version was called "a massacre of the recipe", a "sacrilege", and a violation of the "ancestral traditions" of the salad. She was warned that it is "dangerous to innovate".

The question of the proper ingredients appropriate for a salade niçoise has long been the subject of debate and even controversy. The British cook Nigella Lawson observed, "Everyone seems to have a very strong opinion as to what should or should not go into a Salade Niçoise". Chef and cookbook author Auguste Escoffier (1846–1935), born in Villeneuve-Loubet near Nice, added potatoes and green beans, an innovation that remains controversial as a "questionable idea" a century later.

Salade niçoise has been known in the United States since at least the 1920s, when a cookbook for hotel chefs included two variations. The first was vegetarian, was dressed with mayonnaise, and included lettuce, tomatoes, potatoes, stringless beans and pimento -stuffed olives, while the second version was a composed salad, including the same ingredients, plus anchovies.

The dish was included in the 1936 cookbook L'Art culinaire moderne by Henri-Paul Pellaprat, which was first translated for American cooks in 1966 as Modern French Culinary Art. His version included cold cooked potatoes and cold cooked green beans.

A 1941 U.S. version by chef Louis Diat of the Ritz-Carlton Hotel included the anchovies, was dressed with vinaigrette, and added capers.

The highly influential 1961 American cookbook Mastering the Art of French Cooking included a recipe that incorporated a potato salad, green beans, both tuna and anchovies and a vinaigrette dressing. Co-author Julia Child later demonstrated the recipe on her television show, The French Chef, in 1970.

A recipe was included in Prosper Montagné 's Larousse Gastronomique in 1938. It called for "equal parts diced potatoes and French beans. Season with oil, vinegar, salt and pepper. Mix with anchovy fillets, olives and capers. Garnish with quartered tomatoes."

French chef Paul Bocuse included a vegetarian version of the salad, garnished with chopped onion and chervil, in the 1977 English translation of his cookbook.

A 1979 variation by Pierre Franey is called Salade Niçoise aux Poires d'Avocat. Franey wrote, "I am convinced that had avocados been native to Provence they would have been an inevitable ingredient in the celebrated salad of that region, the salad niçoise." This version also included mushrooms and both black and green olives.

Claudia Roden is an advocate of innovation, and observed in 1984 that "There are not one or two or three versions of salade Nicoise — but dozens, depending on what is available."

In 1984, James Beard created a version incorporating rice for an Uncle Ben's advertising campaign.

In 1991, Jacques Pépin wrote an article that called the inclusion of canned tuna the "conventional choice", and recommended sautéed fresh tuna instead as "more elegant". Mimi Sheraton disagrees, commenting, "Salade Nicoise with fresh tuna is a travesty... if you like it, you are wrong!" In 1999, Pépin joined with Julia Child in a TV series, Julia and Jacques: Cooking at Home. Each prepared a salad they called "Near Nicoise". Child's version was a composed salad including tuna and anchovies canned in olive oil, and blanched green beans. Pépin's was a tossed salad including sauteed fresh tuna and potatoes.

Many chefs have developed variations using seafood other than anchovies or tuna. Ina Garten, Jamie Oliver and Rachael Ray have published variations using salmon as the fish component. Bobby Flay has published variations incorporating shrimp and swordfish, both of which he describes as "Nicoise" in quotation marks. Sara Moulton also has a recipe incorporating shrimp. Instead of a conventional salad dressing, she uses an Italian tuna sauce. A wide variety of seafoods can be used in non-traditional variations, with San Francisco chef Jay Harlow commenting, " Mackerel, and even milder fish like rockfish, cod or halibut are also delicious served this way, as are good canned sardines."

Nigella Lawson has published a quick recipe that substitutes croutons for potatoes.

Cat Cora has published a variation that presents the salad as a lettuce wrap.

Emeril Lagasse has a recipe that uses a mayonnaise -based creamy Parmigiano-Reggiano dressing, and incorporates grilled yellowfin tuna loin along with Picholine olives in addition to the traditional black olives.

Guy Fieri has a recipe that incorporates couscous and mushrooms.

Mark Bittman has a variation that incorporates farro.

Many other chefs and food writers have written recipes for the salad. Among them are Daniel Boulud, Anthony Bourdain, Melissa d'Arabian, Hélène Darroze, Tyler Florence, Simon Hopkinson, Robert Irvine, Gordon Ramsay, Nigel Slater, Delia Smith, Martha Stewart, Michael Symon and Alice Waters.

The Saladin tithe, or the Aid of 1188, was a tax (more specifically a tallage) levied in England and, to some extent, France, in 1188, in response to the capture of Jerusalem by Saladin in 1187.

In July 1187, the Kingdom of Jerusalem 's army was defeated by Saladin at the Battle of Hattin ; in October, Saladin captured Jerusalem itself. When news of the city's capture reached Europe by the end of the year, a new crusade was promulgated. In January 1188, Henry II of England and Philip II of France discussed the crusade at Le Mans, with Joscius, Archbishop of Tyre in attendance; on February 11, Henry began to organize crusade preaching in England at Geddington. There he also discussed the "Saladin tithe."

The Saladin tithe was a literal tithe of 10% on revenues and movable properties. The tithe was assessed by dioceses, rather than by shires, and local sheriffs had no role in the collection of the tithe. The money was collected instead by the local priest or bishop, the dean of the local church, the local baron, and a sergeant of the king, as well as, notably, a Knight Templar and a Knight Hospitaller, whose orders were especially concerned with the defense of the Holy Land. Assessments were made by oaths in rural areas, and by a jury in urban areas. Certain items were exempt from assessment:

This year each man shall give in alms a tenth of his revenues and movables with the exception of the arms, horses and garments of the knights, and likewise with the exception of the horses, books, garments and vestments, and all appurtenances of whatever sort used by clerks in divine service, and the precious stones belonging to both clerks and laymen.

Anyone who joined the crusade was exempt from the tithe altogether. This was meant to encourage participation, and many did indeed join in order to avoid the tallage. All other landowners, both clerics and laymen, had to pay the tithe; if anyone disagreed with the assessment of their property, they were imprisoned or excommunicated. While taxes were usually collected by the Exchequer, a separate office with ten tellers was set up to collect the tithe in Salisbury.

According to Gervase of Canterbury, £ 70,000 was collected from Christians, and another £ 60,000 was collected from Jews. The amount collected from Jews was more likely £ 10,000, with another £ 2,000 collected in 1190. (£82k ≈ £150m 2016). At the time, this was the largest-ever tax collected in England, although Henry had previously levied other taxes for assistance to the Holy Land, in 1166 and 1185. The tithe was extremely unpopular, despite the general acknowledgement that it was, at least in English eyes, for a worthy cause. Because assessments were made by dioceses, Baldwin of Exeter, the Archbishop of Canterbury, was especially blamed. He spent most of the year (perhaps wisely) in Wales, preaching the crusade, accompanied by the chronicler Giraldus Cambrensis.

The same tithe was levied in France, but Philip did not have the same centralized government there, and faced much opposition which he could not control. The tithe was also levied less successfully in England's territories in France. Henry suggested that William the Lion levy the tithe in Scotland, but William refused, as English power did not yet extend so far north as to force the tithe upon the Scots.

In the end, Henry never went on crusade. In 1189, he was involved in a war with Philip and his own son Richard the Lionheart, and was accused of spending the tithe on provisions for this war. Henry died later in the year before the crusade was underway; according to Girardus, this was divine punishment for such a harsh tithe. Richard succeeded him and found the treasury full, although he collected even more money by selling land and imposing various fines throughout England. Altogether, Henry and Richard succeeded in raising 100,000 silver marks with the Saladin tithe.

The subsequent Third Crusade helped capture the Mediterranean coast for the remnant of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, but King Richard could not conquer Jerusalem. On his return home he was taken hostage by Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor. In 1194, another massive tax was imposed on England in order to raise his ransom money. It was essentially a repeat of the Saladin tithe of 1188, but in this case the tax was set at the much higher rate of 25%. The same organizational structure and machinery of collection was used to raise money for King John 's wars in France in 1207.

The Salic law (/ ˈ s æ l ɪ k / or / ˈ s eɪ l ɪ k / ; Latin : Lex salica), also called the Salian law, was a Frankish civil law code compiled around 500 AD by Clovis, the first Frankish king. The name may refer to the Salii, or " Salian Franks ", but this is debated. The written text is in Late Latin, and contains some of the earliest known instances of Old Dutch. It remained the basis of Frankish law throughout the early medieval period, and influenced future European legal systems. The best-known tenet of the old law is the principle of exclusion of women from inheritance of thrones, fiefs, and other property. The Salic laws were arbitrated by a committee appointed by the Frankish king. Dozens of manuscripts dating from the 6th to 8th centuries and three emendations as late as the 9th century have survived.

Salic law provided written codification of both civil law, such as the statutes governing inheritance, and criminal law, such as the punishment for murder. Although it was originally intended as the law of the Franks, it has had a formative influence on the tradition of statute law that extended to modern history in much of Europe, especially in the German states and Austria-Hungary in Central Europe, the Low Countries in Western Europe, the Balkan kingdoms in Southeastern Europe, and parts of Italy and Spain in Southern Europe. Its use of agnatic succession governed the succession of kings in kingdoms such as France and Italy.

The original edition of the code was commissioned by the first king of all the Franks, Clovis I (c. 466 –511), and published sometime between 507 and 511. He appointed four commissioners to research customary law that, until the publication of the Salic law, had been recorded only in the minds of designated elders, who would meet in council when their knowledge was required. Transmission was entirely oral. Salic law, therefore, reflects ancient usages and practices. A written code was desirable for monarchs and their administrations, allowing them to govern more effectively.

For the next 300 years, the code was copied by hand, and was amended as required to add newly enacted laws, revise laws that had been amended, and delete laws that had been repealed. In contrast with printing, hand copying is an individual act by an individual copyist with ideas and a style of his own. Each of the several dozen surviving manuscripts features a unique set of errors, corrections, content, and organization. The laws are called "titles", as each one has its own name, generally preceded by de, "of", "concerning". Different sections of titles acquired individual names, which revealed something about their provenances. Some of these dozens of names have been adopted for specific reference, often given the same designation as the overall work, lex.

The recension of Hendrik Kern organizes all of the manuscripts into five families according to similarity and relative chronological sequence, judged by content and dateable material in the text. Family I is the oldest, containing four manuscripts dated to the eighth and ninth centuries, but containing 65 titles believed to be copies of originals published in the sixth century. In addition, they feature the Malbergse Glossen, " Malberg Glosses ", marginal glosses stating the native court word for some Latin words. These are named from native malbergo, "language of the court". Kern's Family II, represented by two manuscripts, is the same as Family I, except that it contains "interpolations or numerous additions, which point to a later period".

Family III is split into two divisions. The first, comprising three manuscripts, dated to the eighth–ninth centuries, presents an expanded text of 99 or 100 titles. The Malberg Glosses are retained. The second division, with four manuscripts, not only drops the glosses, but also "bears traces of attempts to make the language more concise". A statement gives the provenance: "in the 13th year of the reign of our most glorious king of the Franks, Pipin". Some of the internal documents were composed after the reign of Pepin the Short, but it is considered to be an emendation initiated by Pepin, so is termed the Pipina Recensio.

Family IV also has two divisions – the first comprised 33 manuscripts; the second, one manuscript. They are characterized by the internal assignment of Latin names to various sections of different provenances. Two of the sections are dated to 768 and 778, but the emendation is believed to be dated to 798, late in the reign of Charlemagne. This edition calls itself the Lex Salica Emendata, or the Lex Reformata, or the Lex Emendata, and is clearly the result of a law code reform by Charlemagne.

By that time, Charlemagne's Holy Roman Empire comprised most of Western Europe. He added laws of choice (free will) taken from the earlier law codes of Germanic peoples not originally part of Francia. These are numbered into the laws that were there, but they have their own, quasisectional title. All the Franks of Francia were subject to the same law code, which retained the overall title of Lex Salica. These integrated sections borrowed from other Germanic codes are the Lex Ribuariorum, later Lex Ribuaria, laws adopted from the Ripuarian Franks, who, before Clovis, had been independent. The Lex Alamannorum took laws from the Alamanni, then subject to the Franks. Under the Franks, they were governed by Frankish law, not their own. The inclusion of some of their law as part of the Salic law must have served as a palliative. Charlemagne goes back even earlier to the Lex Suauorum, the ancient code of the Suebi preceding the Alemanni.

The Salic law code contains the Malberg glosses, which, despite the name, are not technically glosses in the traditional sense, but rather Germanic terms interspersed through the Latin legal docoment. These Germanic words and several short sentences are, though heavily corrupted by subsequent copyists unfamiliar with the original language, have been used to reconstruct the earliest stage of the Dutch language, Old Dutch, containing what is likely the earliest surviving full sentence in the language:

This sentence is also given as the following:

These laws and their interpretations give an insight into Frankish society. The criminal laws established damages to be paid and fines levied in recompense for injuries to persons and damage to goods, theft, and unprovoked insults. One-third of the fine paid court costs. Judicial interpretation was by a jury of peers.

The civil law establishes that an individual person is legally unprotected if he or she does not belong to a family. The rights of family members were defined; for example, the equal division of land among all living male heirs, in contrast to primogeniture.

One tenet of the civil law is agnatic succession, explicitly excluding females from the inheritance of a throne or fief. Indeed, "Salic law" has often been used simply as a synonym for agnatic succession, but the importance of Salic law extends beyond the rules of inheritance, as it is a direct ancestor of the systems of law in use in many parts of continental Europe today.

Salic law regulates succession according to sex. "Agnatic succession" means succession to the throne or fief going to an agnate of the predecessor – for example, a brother, a son, or nearest male relative through the male line, including collateral agnate branches, for example very distant cousins. Chief forms are agnatic seniority and agnatic primogeniture. The latter, which has been the most usual, means succession going to the eldest son of the monarch; if the monarch had no sons, the throne would pass to the nearest male relative in the male line.

Concerning the inheritance of land, Salic law said:

But of Salic land no portion of the inheritance shall come to a woman: but the whole inheritance of the land shall come to the male sex.

[C]oncerning terra Salica, no portion or inheritance is for a woman, but all the land belongs to members of the male sex who are brothers.

The law merely prohibited women from inheriting ancestral "Salic land"; this prohibition did not apply to other property (such as personal property); and under Chilperic I sometime around the year 570, the law was actually amended to permit inheritance of land by a daughter if a man had no surviving sons (This amendment, depending on how it is applied and interpreted, offers the basis for either Semi-Salic succession or male-preferred primogeniture, or both).

The wording of the law, as well as common usage in those days and centuries afterwards, seems to support an interpretation that inheritance is divided between brothers, and if it is intended to govern succession, it can be interpreted to mandate agnatic seniority, not direct primogeniture. In its use by continental hereditary monarchies since the 15th century, aiming at agnatic succession, the Salic law is regarded as excluding all females from the succession, and prohibiting the transfer of succession rights through any woman. At least two systems of hereditary succession are direct and full applications of the Salic Law: agnatic seniority and agnatic primogeniture.

The Semi-Salic version of succession order stipulates that firstly all-male descendance is applied, including all collateral male lines, but if all such lines are extinct, then the closest female agnate (such as a daughter) of the last male holder of the property inherits, and after her, her own male heirs according to the Salic order. In other words, the female closest to the last incumbent is "regarded as a male" for the purposes of inheritance and succession. This has the effect of following the closest extant blood line (at least in the first instance) and not involving any more distant relatives. The closest female relative might be a child of a relatively junior branch of the whole dynasty, but still inherits due to her position in the male line, due to the longevity of her own branch; any existing senior female lines come behind that of the closest female.

From the Middle Ages, another system of succession, known as cognatic male primogeniture, actually fulfills apparent stipulations of the original Salic law; succession is allowed also through female lines, but excludes the females themselves in favour of their sons. For example, a grandfather, without sons, is succeeded by a son of his daughter, when the daughter in question is still alive. Or an uncle, with no children of his own, is succeeded by a son of his sister, when the sister in question is still alive. This fulfils the Salic condition of "no land comes to a woman, but the land comes to the male sex". This can be called a "quasi-Salic" system of succession and it should be classified as primogenitural, cognatic, and male-preferred.

A title in the Salic law code required the unanimous consent of a village for any newcomer wishing to move and settle there, with the disapproval of just a single resident being sufficient to deny settlement rights. A migrant's tenure in a settlement would only become secure if no objections were received within 12 months of arrival.

The Merovingian kings divided their realm equally among all living sons, leading to much conflict and fratricide among the rival heirs. The Carolingians did likewise, but they also possessed the imperial dignity, which was indivisible and passed to only one person at a time. Primogeniture, or the preference for the eldest line in the transmission of inheritance, eventually emerged in France, under the Capetian kings. The early Capetians had only one heir, the eldest son, whom they crowned during their lifetimes. Instead of an equal portion of the inheritance, the younger sons of the Capetian kings received an appanage, which is a feudal territory under the suzerainty of the king. Feudal law allowed the transmission of fiefs to daughters in default of sons, which was also the case for the early appanages. Whether feudal law also applied to the French throne, no one knew, until 1316.

For a remarkably long period, from the inception of the Capetian dynasty in 987 until the death of Louis X in 1316, the eldest living son of the King of France succeeded to the throne upon his demise. No prior occasion existed to demonstrate whether or not females were excluded from the succession to the crown. Louis X died without a son, but left his wife pregnant. The king's brother, Philip, Count of Poitiers, became regent. Philip prepared for the contingencies with Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy, maternal uncle of Louis X's daughter and prospective heiress, Joan. If the unborn child were male, he would succeed to the French throne as king; if female, Philip would maintain the regency until the daughters of Louis X reached their majority. The opportunity remained for either daughter to succeed to the French throne.

The unborn child proved to be male, John I, to the relief of the kingdom, but the infant lived for only a few days. Philip saw his chance and broke the agreement with the Duke of Burgundy by having himself anointed at Reims in January 1317 as Philip V of France. Agnes of France, daughter of Louis IX, mother of the Duke of Burgundy, and maternal grandmother of the Princess Joan, considered it a usurpation and demanded an assembly of the peers, which Philip V accepted.

An assembly of prelates, lords, the bourgeois of Paris, and doctors of the university, known as the Estates-General of 1317, gathered in February. Philip V asked them to write an argument justifying his right to the throne of France. These "general statements" agreed in declaring that "Women do not succeed in the kingdom of France", formalizing Philip's usurpation and the impossibility for a woman to ascend the throne of France, a principle that remains in force to this day. The Salic law, at the time, was not yet invoked; the arguments put forward in favor of Philip V relied only on the degree of proximity of Philip V with Louis X. Philip had the support of the nobility and had the resources for his ambitions.

Philip won over the Duke of Burgundy by giving him his daughter, also named Joan, in marriage, with the counties of Artois and Burgundy as her eventual inheritance. On March 27, 1317, a treaty was signed at Laon between the Duke of Burgundy and Philip V, wherein Joan renounced her right to the throne of France.

Philip, too, died without a son, and his brother Charles succeeded him as Charles IV unopposed. Charles, too, died without a son, but also left his wife pregnant. It was another succession crisis, the same as that in 1316; it was necessary both to prepare for a possible regency (and choose a regent) and prepare for a possible succession to the throne. At this point, it had been accepted that women could not claim the crown of France (without any written rule stipulating it yet).

Under the application of the agnatic principle, the following were excluded:

The widow of Charles IV gave birth to a daughter. Isabella of France, sister of Charles IV, claimed the throne for her son, Edward III of England. The French rejected the claim, noting that "Women cannot transmit a right which they do not possess", a corollary to the succession principle in 1316. The regent, Philip of Valois, became Philip VI of France in 1328. Philip became king without serious opposition, until his attempt to confiscate Gascony in 1337 made Edward III press his claim to the French throne.

As far as can be ascertained, Salic law was not explicitly mentioned either in 1316 or 1328. It had been forgotten in the feudal era, and the assertion that the French crown can only be transmitted to and through males made it unique and exalted in the eyes of the French. In 1358 the monk Richard Lescot invoked it to dispute the claim of Charles II of Navarre to the French crown, an argument that would later be echoed by other jurists in defence of the Valois dynasty.

In its origin, therefore, the agnatic principle was limited to the succession to the crown of France. Prior to the Valois succession, Capetian kings granted appanages to their younger sons and brothers, which could pass to male and female heirs. The appanages given to the Valois princes, though, in imitation of the succession law of the monarchy that gave them, limited their transmission to males. Another Capetian lineage, the Montfort of Brittany, claimed male succession in the Duchy of Brittany. In this they were supported by the King of England, while their rivals who claimed the traditional female succession in Brittany were supported by the King of France. The Montforts eventually won the duchy by warfare, but had to recognize the suzerainty of the King of France.

This law was by no means intended to cover all matters of inheritance – for example, not the inheritance of movables — only to lands considered "Salic" – and debate remains as to the legal definition of this word, although it is generally accepted to refer to lands in the royal fisc. Only several hundred years later, under the direct Capetian kings of France and their English contemporaries who held lands in France, did Salic law become a rationale for enforcing or debating succession.

Shakespeare says that Charles VI rejected Henry V 's claim to the French throne on the basis of Salic law's inheritance rules, leading to the Battle of Agincourt. In fact, the conflict between Salic and English law was a justification for many overlapping claims between the French and English monarchs over the French throne.

More than a century later, during the French wars of religion, Philip II of Spain attempted to claim the French crown for his daughter Isabella Clara Eugenia, born of his third wife, Elisabeth of Valois in order to prevent the Huguenot candidate Henry of Navarre from becoming king. Philip's agents were instructed to "insinuate cleverly" that the Salic law was a "pure invention". Even if the "Salic law" did not really apply to the throne of France, though, the very principle of agnatic succession had become a cornerstone of the French royal succession; they had upheld it in the Hundred Years' War with the English, and it had produced their kings for more than two centuries. The eventual recognition of Henry of Navarre as King Henry IV of France following his conversion to Catholicism, the first of the Bourbon kings, further solidified the agnatic principle in France.

Although no reference was made to the Salic law, the imperial constitutions of the Bonapartist First French Empire and Second French Empire continued to exclude women from the succession to the throne. In the lands that Napoleon Bonaparte conquered, Salic law was adopted, including the Kingdom of Westphalia, the Kingdom of Holland, and under Napoleonic influence, Sweden under the House of Bernadotte.

Several military conflicts in European history have stemmed from the application of, or disregard for, Salic law. The Carlist Wars occurred in Spain over the question of whether the heir to the throne should be a female or a male relative. The War of the Austrian Succession was triggered by the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713, in which Charles VI of Austria, who himself had inherited the Austrian patrimony over his nieces as a result of Salic law, attempted to ensure the inheritance directly to his own daughter Maria Theresa of Austria, which was an example of an operation of quasi-Salic law.

In the modern Kingdom of Italy, under the House of Savoy, succession to the throne was regulated by Salic law.

The British and the Hanoverian thrones separated after the death of King William IV of the United Kingdom and of Hanover in 1837 because Hanover practiced quasi-Salic law, unlike Britain. King William's niece, Victoria, ascended to the British throne, but the Hanover throne went to William's brother Ernest, Duke of Cumberland.

Salic law was also an important issue in the Schleswig-Holstein Question and played a day-to-day role in the inheritance and marriage decisions of common princedoms of the German states, such as Saxe-Weimar, to cite a representative example. European nobility would have confronted Salic issues at every turn in the practice of diplomacy, particularly when they negotiated marriages, since the entire male line had to be extinguished for a land title to pass (by marriage) "to a female's husband". Women rulers were anathema in the German states well into the modern era.

In a similar way, the thrones of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg were separated in 1890, with the succession of Princess Wilhelmina as the first Queen regnant of the Netherlands. As a remnant of Salic law, the office of the reigning monarch of the Netherlands is always formally known as "King", though her title may be "Queen". Luxembourg passed to the House of Orange-Nassau 's distantly related agnates, the House of Nassau-Weilburg, but that house also faced extinction in the male line less than two decades later. With no other male-line agnates in the remaining branches of the House of Nassau, Grand Duke William IV adopted a quasi-Salic law of succession to allow him to be succeeded by his daughters.

Shakespeare uses the Salic law as a plot device in Henry V, saying it was upheld by the French to bar Henry V's claiming the French throne. Henry V begins with the Archbishop of Canterbury being asked if the claim might be upheld despite the Salic law. The archbishop replies, "That the land Salique is in Germany, between the floods of Sala and of Elbe ", implying that the law is German, not French. The archbishop's justification for Henry's claim, which Shakespeare intentionally renders obtuse and verbose (for comedic, as well as politically expedient reasons) is also erroneous, as the Salian Franks settled along the lower Rhine and Scheldt, which today is for the most part in the Flemish Region.

The concept of Salic law figures heavily into the story of French author Maurice Druon 's historical fiction novel series, The Accursed Kings (known as Les Rois maudits in French, published between 1955 and 1977). The series, which revolves around the Capetian succession crisis in the early-to-mid 14th century after Philip IV's sons all three die without a male heir, contains seven books which were published between the 1950s-1970s. In the fourth book (The Royal Succession), Philip V uses his position as regent while his sister-in-law is pregnant to get his lawyers to come up with a plan to use Salic law to get his niece Joan out of the line of succession. He becomes king after his nephew John I (who'd been swapped with another baby) is ostensibly poisoned by Philip's mother-in-law Mahaut, Countess of Artois. John I of France during his christening. In reality, it is widely believed that John died of natural causes and Giannino Baglioni, the man who claimed to be him, was a Pretender. During the fifth and sixth books, Queen Isabella begins to press her son Edward III's claim to the French throne as the last-living grandson of Philip IV. However, the French nobility are more inclined to bypass her claim under Salic Law in lieu of that of her cousin, Philip VI, the next male-line descendant. The relationship between the two men begins to sour once Edward III reaches his majority and begins to rule on his own, eventually ending with Robert of Artois (who's also fallen out with Philip) convincing him to stake his claim once and for all at the end of the sixth book. The seventh book, A King Without a Kingdom, skips ahead significantly in time to the lead-up to the devastating defeat of the French at The Battle of Poitiers, which ends with the capture of Philip VI's son John II at the hand of Edward III's son Edward the Black Prince.

In the 1970 novel Royal Flash, by George MacDonald Fraser, the hero, Harry Flashman, on his marriage, is presented with the royal consort's portion of the crown jewels, and "The Duchess did rather better"; the character, feeling hard done-by, thinks, "It struck me then, and it strikes me now, that the Salic law was a damned sound idea".

In his 1814 novel Waverley, Sir Walter Scott quotes "Salique Law" when discussing the protagonist's prior requests for a horse and guide to take him to Edinburgh.

The hostess, a civil, quiet, laborious drudge, came to take his orders for dinner, but declined to make answer on the subject of the horse and guide; for the Salique Law, it seems, extended to the stables of the Golden Candlestick.

A salmis [ sal.mi ] is a preparation from classical French cooking. When a roast or sautéed piece of meat is sliced and reheated in sauce, the result is a salmis.

Typical salmis preparations involve roasted game birds such as squab or duck. In these preparations it is typical to enrich de-fatted roast drippings or reduced game stock with wine, cognac or brandy, and a small amount of puréed liver or foie gras, resulting in a rather muddy sauce. Slices of rare roasted duck or squab breast are napped in the sauce and reheated, though not long enough to boil the sauce or further cook the meat, which would render it overdone (i.e., medium or " well done "). These preparations tend toward the luxurious, often containing rare or expensive game meats and ingredients like truffles and foie gras.

The salons of early modern France were social and intellectual gatherings that played an integral role in the cultural development of the country. The salons were seen by contemporary writers as a cultural hub for the upper middle class and aristocracy, responsible for the dissemination of good manners and sociability. Salons became a center of intellectual conversation, as well as a debate stage for social issues, playing host to many members of the Republic of Letters. In contrast to other early modern institutions, women played an important and visible role within the salons. Each woman, or salonnière, played a different role within these salons. Some were actively involved in conversation and debate, while others used their connections to bring others together and spread Enlightenment ideas.

The historiography of the salons is far from straightforward. The salons have been studied in depth by a mixture of feminist, Marxist, cultural, social and intellectual historians. Each of these methodologies focuses on different aspects of the salons, and thus there are varying analyses of the salons’ importance in terms of French history and the Enlightenment as a whole.

Major historiographical debates focus around the relationship between the salons and the public sphere, as well as the role of women within the salons.

Breaking down the salons into a historical periods is complicated due to the various historiographical debates that surround them. Most studies stretch from the early sixteenth century up until around the end of eighteenth century. Goodman is typical in ending her study at The French Revolution where, she writes: 'the literary public sphere was transformed into the political public'. Steven Kale is relatively alone in his recent attempts to extend the period of the salon up until Revolution of 1848. Kale points out:

A whole world of social arrangements and attitude supported the existence of french salons: an idle aristocracy, an ambitious middle class, an active intellectual life, the social density of a major urban center, sociable traditions, and a certain aristocratic feminism. This world did not disappear in 1789.

In the 17th century “penny universities” started to pop up across Western Europe. These “universities” appeared in coffee shops, where they got the name “penny university”. This name came because people could go to these shops, and for a very low cost (the cost of a cup of coffee), one could learn the newest scholarly information, discuss local politics and other news. Anyone of any social class could frequent the coffeehouses, and so they became associated with equality and republicanism; however, in many cities and countries, women were excluded because at this point in time they were widely considered the “weaker” sex, incapable of debating or learning in a male-dominated area. These coffeehouses can be seen as a predecessor to the Salons of the French Revolution in that they provided non-aristocracy with access to knowledge and were a hub for discussion on Enlightenment ideals, political reform, and the arts.

In the 1500s with colonialism and mercantilism rising, wealth and luxury items made their way into Europe. This opulence nurtured elitism among those in the upper class and ideas such as “Art for arts sake”.

For decades Court Life was how upper class French men and women communicated, spread new ideas, and created cultural trends. The lower members of the aristocracy would send their daughters to court, where they would learn about the arts and culture, but also make social connections and gain status, with the ultimate goal of making a profitable marriage arrangement. Over time courts became a half open, half closed place, with members of somewhat different status all mingling. Since court culture focused mainly on the arts, women held an almost equal position to men. However, as Enlightenment ideas spread across Europe and in France, monarchies and courtlife fell out of favor with the public. This allowed bourgeois women in the home to create a culture and atmosphere similar to that of Royal life, but with more equality.

The content and form of the salon must be studied in order to understand the character and historical importance of the salon. Contemporary literature about the salons is dominated by idealistic notions of politeness, civility and honesty, but whether the salons lived up to these standards is matter of debate. Older texts on the salons tend to paint an idealistic picture of the salons, where reasoned debate takes precedence and salons are egalitarian spheres of polite conversation. Today, however, this view is rarely considered an adequate analysis of the salon.

The period in which salons were dominant has been labeled the 'age of conversation'. The topics of conversation within the salons - that is, what was and was not 'polite' to talk about - are thus vital when trying to determine the form of the salons. There is no universal agreement among historians as to what was and was not appropriate conversation. Marcel Proust 'insisted that politics was scrupulously avoided'. Others suggested that little other than government was ever discussed. The disagreements that surround the content of discussion partly explain why the salon's relationship with the public sphere is so heavily contested.

Recent historiography of the salons has been dominated by Jürgen Habermas ' work, The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere (triggered largely by its translation into French, in 1978, and then English, in 1989), which argued that the salons were of great historical importance. Theatres of conversation and exchange – such as the salons, and the coffeehouses in England – played a critical role in the emergence of what Habermas termed the ‘ public sphere ’, which emerged in ‘cultural-political contrast’ to court society. Thus, while women retained a dominant role in the historiography of the salons, the salons received increasing amounts of study, much of it in direct response to, or heavily influenced by Habermas’ theory.

The dominance of Habermas’ work in salon historiography has come under criticism from some quarters, with Pekacz singling out Dena Goodman's Republic of Letters for particular criticism because it was written with ‘the explicit intention of supporting [Habermas’] thesis’, rather than verifying it. The theory itself, meanwhile, has been criticized for a fatal misunderstanding of the nature of salons. The main criticism of Habermas’ interpretation of the salons, however, is that the salons were not part of an oppositional public sphere, and were instead an extension of court society.

This criticism stems largely from Norbert Elias ’ The History of Manners, Book 1 of The Civilizing Process 1939, in which Elias contends that the dominant concepts of the salons – politesse, civilité and honnête – were ‘used almost as synonyms, by which the courtly people wished to designate, in a broad or narrow sense, the quality of their own behaviour’. Joan Landes agrees, stating that, ‘to some extent, the salon was merely an extension of the institutionalised court’ and that rather than being part of the public sphere, salons were in fact in conflict with it. Erica Harth concurs, pointing to the fact that the state ‘appropriated the informal academy and not the salon’ due to the academies’ ‘tradition of dissent’ – something that lacked in the salon. But Landes’ view of the salons as a whole is independent of both Elias’ and Habermas’ school of thought, insofar that she views the salons as a ‘unique institution’, that cannot be adequately described as part of the public sphere, or court society. Others, such as Steven Kale, compromise by declaring that the public and private spheres overlapped in the salons. Antoine Lilti ascribes to a similar viewpoint, describing the salons as simply ‘institutions within Parisian high society’.

The most prominent defense of salons as part of the public sphere comes from Dena Goodman's The Republic of Letters, which claims that the ‘public sphere was structured by the salon, the press and other institutions of sociability’. Goodman's work is also credited with further emphasizing the importance of the salon in terms of French history, the Republic of Letters and the Enlightenment as a whole, and has dominated the historiography of the salons since its publication in 1994.

When dealing with the salons, historians have traditionally focused upon the role of women within them. Works in the nineteenth and much of the twentieth century often focused on the scandals and ‘petty intrigues’ of the salons. Other works from this period focused on the more positive aspects of women in the salon. Indeed, according to Jolanta T. Pekacz, the fact women dominated history of the salons meant that study of the salons was often left to amateurs, while men concentrated on 'more important' (and masculine) areas of the Enlightenment.

A woman who hosted a salon would be known as the hostess, and would be responsible for when the salon would take place, who was invited, the schedule of events, and which philosophes would have their ideas highlighted that evening.

Philosophes, who were integral to the Enlightenment becoming as widespread as it did, relied on Salonnières to give them an audience with people who held political influence to share their ideas. salonnières also played governess roles during political debate between philosophes and more traditional thinkers, often keeping conversation from erupting into argument when there were disagreements.

Historians tended to focus on individual Salonnières, creating almost a 'great-woman' version of history that ran parallel to the Whiggish, male dominated history identified by Herbert Butterfield. Even in 1970, works were still being produced that concentrated only on individual stories, without analysing the effects of the Salonnières' unique position. The integral role that women played within salons, as salonnières, began to receive greater - and more serious - study in latter parts of the twentieth century, with the emergence of a distinctly feminist historiography. The salons, according to Caroyln Lougee, were distinguished by 'the very visible identification of women with salons', and the fact that they played a positive public role in French society. General texts on the Enlightenment, such as Daniel Roche's France in the Enlightenment tend to agree that women were dominant within the salons, but that their influence did not extend far outside of such venues.

It was, however, Goodman's The Republic of Letters that ignited a real debate surrounding the role of women within the salons and – so Goodman contends – the Enlightenment as a whole. According to Goodman: ‘The salonnières were not social climbers but intelligent, self-educated, and educating women who adopted and implemented the values of the Enlightenment Republic of Letters and used them to reshape the salon to their own social intellectual, and educational needs’. While few historians doubt that women played an important, significant role in the salons, Goodman is often criticised for her narrow use of sources. Very recent historiography has tended to moderate Goodman's thesis, arguing that while women did play a significant role in the salons they facilitated - rather than created, as Goodman argues - the ideas and debates generally associated with the Enlightenment.

Madame du Deffand was an upper class French woman, who held weekly salons in Paris. Known for her intelligence and cynicism, Deffand became friends with Enlightenment writer Voltaire, with whom she kept regular contact with throughout her life. Her salons were some of the most popular in Paris and drew a multitude of Parisian nobles and Enlightenment thinkers; including Charles de Montesquieu, Bernard Bovier de Fontenelle, and Marguerite de Launay, baronne de Staal.

Madame Roland was a salonnière, writer, and revolutionary. Roland moved to Paris in 1791 with her husband Jean-Marie Roland de la Platière, and soon thereafter joined the political group known as the Girondins. Roland ultimately would become a leader of this moderate Republican group. She began holding salons in her home multiple times per week. Rolands Salons were an important meeting place for many politicians of the time and her husband, Jean-Marie, became secretary of the interior in 1792, expanding her political influence. Records say Roland never actively participated in the conversations held during her salons, she instead sat in the corner of the room, doing some other task such as writing or needlework, but listened carefully to the debates happening around her. Her advocacy happened primarily behind closed doors via letters and private conversations. Despite her active participation in the Revolution, Roland was not an advocate for women's political rights like some other salonnières, it is recorded she believed women should have very moderate public and political lives, and held fairly traditional views of modesty.

Sophie de Condorcet, the wife of the Marquis de Condorcet, ran a salon at the Hôtel des Monnaies in Paris, opposite the Louvre. Her salons were attended by several prominent philosophes and, at various times, Anne-Robert Turgot, Thomas Jefferson, the Scottish economist Adam Smith, Olympe de Gouges and Madame de Staël. Unlike Madame Roland, a fellow member of Girondins, Condorcet was a feminist and openly supported equal political and legal rights for women.

Enlightenment ideals sparked the conversation on women's rights, but not all republicans were fans of this.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau, an Enlightenment philosopher highly praised among historians for his pieces on government and inequality and known for his proposal of the ‘ Social Contract ’, was opposed to Salonnières and the involvement of women in political debate. Rousseau believed women were intellectually inferior to men and would taint any scientific and philosophical discussion.

Antoine-Leonard Thomas was a distinguished member of a French Academy, but opposed women's involvement in the revolution. He agreed with Rousseau, and published Essay on the character, nature of morals and spirit of women where he stated it was engraved in nature that women were inferior to men in most ways.

A salon is a gathering of people held by a host. These gatherings often consciously followed Horace 's definition of the aims of poetry, "either to please or to educate" (Latin : aut delectare aut prodesse). Salons in the tradition of the French literary and philosophical movements of the 17th and 18th centuries are still being conducted.

The salon first appeared in Italy in the 16th century, then flourished in France throughout the 17th and 18th centuries. It continued to flourish in Italy throughout the 19th century. In 16th-century Italy, some brilliant circles formed in the smaller courts which resembled salons, often galvanized by the presence of a beautiful and educated patroness such as Isabella d'Este or Elisabetta Gonzaga.

Salons were an important place for the exchange of ideas. The word salon first appeared in France in 1664 (from the Italian salone, the large reception hall of Italian mansions; salone is actually the augmentative form of sala, room). Literary gatherings before this were often referred to by using the name of the room in which they occurred, like cabinet, réduit, ruelle, and alcôve. Before the end of the 17th century, these gatherings were frequently held in the bedroom (treated as a more private form of drawing room): a lady, reclining on her bed, would receive close friends who would sit on chairs or stools drawn around.

This practice may be contrasted with the greater formalities of Louis XIV 's petit lever, where all stood. Ruelle, literally meaning "narrow street" or " lane ", designates the space between a bed and the wall in a bedroom; it was used commonly to designate the gatherings of the " précieuses ", the intellectual and literary circles that formed around women in the first half of the 17th century. The first renowned salon in France was the Hôtel de Rambouillet not far from the Palais du Louvre in Paris, which its hostess, Roman -born Catherine de Vivonne, marquise de Rambouillet (1588–1665), ran from 1607 until her death. She established the rules of etiquette of the salon which resembled the earlier codes of Italian chivalry.

In Britain, mathematician and inventor Charles Babbage is credited with introducing the scientific soirée, a form of salon, from France. Babbage began hosting Saturday evening soirées in 1828.

The history of the salon is far from straightforward. The salon has been studied in depth by a mixture of feminist, Marxist, cultural, social, and intellectual historians. Each of these methodologies focuses on different aspects of the salon, and thus have varying analyses of its importance in terms of French history and the Enlightenment as a whole.

Major historiographical debates focus on the relationship between the salons and the public sphere, as well as the role played by women within the salons.

Breaking down the salons into historical periods is complicated due to the various historiographical debates that surround them. Most studies stretch from the early 16th century up until around the end of the 18th century. Goodman is typical in ending her study at the French Revolution where, she writes: 'the literary public sphere was transformed into the political public'. Steven Kale is relatively alone in his recent attempts to extend the period of the salon up until Revolution of 1848:

A whole world of social arrangements and attitude supported the existence of French salons: an idle aristocracy, an ambitious middle class, an active intellectual life, the social density of a major urban center, sociable traditions, and a certain aristocratic feminism. This world did not disappear in 1789.

In the 1920s, Gertrude Stein 's Saturday evening salons (described in Ernest Hemingway 's 1964 novel A Moveable Feast and depicted fictionally in Woody Allen 's 2011 film Midnight in Paris) gained notoriety for including Pablo Picasso and other twentieth-century luminaries like Alice B. Toklas.

Her contemporary Natalie Clifford Barney 's handmade dinner place setting is on display at The Brooklyn Museum. Like Stein, she was also an author and American ex-pat living in Paris at the time, hosting literary salons that were attended by Ernest Hemingway and F. Scott Fitzgerald as well. She bought a home with an old Masonic temple in the backyard which she dubbed Temple d'Amitié, the Temple of Friendship, for private meetings with attendees of her salons.

In 2018, Barnard College professor Caroline Weber 's book Proust's Duchess: How Three Celebrated Women Captured the Imagination of Fin-de-Siècle Paris was shortlisted for the Pulitzer Prize and was the first in-depth study of the three Parisian salon hostesses Proust used to create his supreme fictional character, the Duchesse de Guermantes.

Contemporary literature about the salons is dominated by idealistic notions of politeness, civility, and honesty, though it is debated whether they lived up to these standards. These older texts tend to portray reasoned debates and egalitarian polite conversation. Dena Goodman contends that, rather than being leisure-based or "schools of civilité", salons were at "the very heart of the philosophic community" and thus integral to the process of Enlightenment. In short, Goodman argues, the 17th and 18th century saw the emergence of the academic, Enlightenment salons, which came out of the aristocratic "schools of civilité". Politeness, argues Goodman, took second place to academic discussion.

The period in which salons were dominant has been labeled the "age of conversation". The topics of conversation within the salons – that is, what was and was not "polite" to talk about – are thus vital when trying to determine the form of the salons. The salonnières were expected, ideally, to run and moderate the conversation (See Women in the salon). There is, however, no universal agreement among historians as to what was and was not appropriate conversation. Marcel Proust "insisted that politics was scrupulously avoided". Others suggested that little other than government was ever discussed. The disagreements that surround the content of discussion partly explain why the salon's relationship with the public sphere is so heavily contested. Individuals and collections of individuals that have been of cultural significance overwhelmingly cite some form of engaged, explorative conversation regularly held with an esteemed group of acquaintances as the source of inspiration for their contributions to culture, art, literature and politics, leading some scholars to posit the salon's influence on the public sphere as being more widespread than previously appreciated.

Recent historiography has been dominated by Jürgen Habermas ' work, The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere (triggered largely by its translation into French in 1978, and then English in 1989), which argued that the salons were of great historical importance. Theaters of conversation and exchange – such as the salons and the coffeehouses in England – played a critical role in the emergence of what Habermas termed the public sphere, which emerged in cultural-political contrast to court society. Thus, while women retained a dominant role in the historiography of the salons, the salons received increasing amounts of study, much of it in direct response to or heavily influenced by Habermas' theory.

The most prominent defense of salons as part of the public sphere comes from Dena Goodman's The Republic of Letters, which claims that the "public sphere was structured by the salon, the press and other institutions of sociability". Goodman's work is also credited with further emphasizing the importance of the salon in terms of French history, the Republic of Letters and the Enlightenment as a whole, and has dominated the historiography of the salons since its publication in 1994.

Habermas' dominance in salon historiography has come under criticism from some quarters, with Pekacz singling out Goodman's Republic of Letters for particular criticism because it was written with "the explicit intention of supporting [Habermas'] thesis", rather than verifying it. The theory itself, meanwhile, has been criticized for a fatal misunderstanding of the nature of salons. The main criticism of Habermas' interpretation of the salons, however, is that the salons of most influence were not part of an oppositional public sphere, and were instead an extension of court society.

This criticism stems largely from Norbert Elias ' The History of Manners, in which Elias contends that the dominant concepts of the salons – politesse, civilité and honnêteté – were "used almost as synonyms, by which the courtly people wished to designate, in a broad or narrow sense, the quality of their own behavior'. Joan Landes agrees, stating that, "to some extent, the salon was merely an extension of the institutionalized court" and that rather than being part of the public sphere, salons were in fact in conflict with it. Erica Harth concurs, pointing to the fact that the state "appropriated the informal academy and not the salon" due to the academies' "tradition of dissent" – something that lacked in the salon. But Landes' view of the salons as a whole is independent of both Elias' and Habermas' school of thought, insofar that she views the salons as a "unique institution" that cannot be adequately described as part of the public sphere or court society. Others, such as Steven Kale, compromise by declaring that the public and private spheres overlapped in the salons. Antoine Lilti ascribes to a similar viewpoint, describing the salons as simply "institutions within Parisian high society".

Historians have traditionally focused upon the role of women within salons. Works in the 19th and much of the 20th centuries often focused on the scandals and "petty intrigues" of the salons. Other works from this period focused on the more positive aspects of women in the salon. According to Jolanta T. Pekacz, the fact that women dominated the history of the salons meant that the study of salons was often left to amateurs, while men concentrated on "more important" (and masculine) areas of the Enlightenment.

Historians tended to focus on individual salonnières, creating almost a "great woman" version of history that ran parallel to the Whiggish, male-dominated history identified by Herbert Butterfield. Even in 1970, works were still being produced that concentrated only on individual stories without analysing the effects of the salonnières' unique position. The integral role that women played within salons as salonnières began to receive greater – and more serious – study in latter parts of the 20th century, with the emergence of a distinctly feminist historiography. The salons, according to Carolyn Lougee, were distinguished by "the very visible identification of women with salons" and the fact that they played a positive public role in French society. General texts on the Enlightenment, such as Daniel Roche's France in the Enlightenment, tend to agree that women were dominant within the salons, but that their influence did not extend far outside of such venues.

It was, however, Goodman's The Republic of Letters that ignited a real debate surrounding the role of women within the salons and the Enlightenment as a whole. According to Goodman: "The salonnières were not social climbers but intelligent, self-educated, and educating women who adopted and implemented the values of the Enlightenment Republic of Letters and used them to reshape the salon to their own social intellectual, and educational needs".

Wealthy members of the aristocracy have always drawn to their court poets, writers and artists, usually with the lure of patronage, an aspect that sets the court apart from the salon. Another feature that distinguished the salon from the court was its absence of social hierarchy and its mixing of different social ranks and orders. In the 17th and 18th centuries, "salon[s] encouraged socializing between the sexes [and] brought nobles and bourgeois together". Salons helped facilitate the breaking down of social barriers which made the development of the enlightenment salon possible. In the 18th century, under the guidance of Madame Geoffrin, Mlle de Lespinasse, and Madame Necker, the salon was transformed into an institution of Enlightenment. The enlightenment salon brought together Parisian society, the progressive philosophes who were producing the Encyclopédie, the Bluestockings and other intellectuals to discuss a variety of topics.

At that time, women had powerful influence over salons, where they carried very important roles as regulators who could select their guests and decide the subjects of their meetings, which could be social, literary, or political topics of the time. They also served as mediators by directing discussions. Salons were an informal form of education where women were able to exchange ideas, receive and give criticism, read their own works, and hear about the works and ideas of other intellectuals. Many ambitious women used salons to pursue a form of higher education.

Two of the most famous 17th-century literary salons in Paris were the Hôtel de Rambouillet, established in 1607 near the Palais du Louvre by the marquise de Rambouillet, where gathered the original précieuses, and, in 1652 in Le Marais, the rival salon of Madeleine de Scudéry, a long time habituée of the Hôtel de Rambouillet. Les bas-bleus, borrowed from England's " blue-stockings ", soon found itself in use upon the attending ladies, a nickname continuing to mean "intellectual woman" for the next three hundred years.

Paris salons of the 18th century hosted by women include the following:

Some 19th-century salons were more inclusive, verging on the raffish, and centered around painters and "literary lions" such as Madame Récamier. After the shock of the 1870 Franco-Prussian War, French aristocrats withdrew from the public eye. However, Princess Mathilde still held a salon in her mansion, rue de Courcelles, later rue de Berri. From the middle of the 19th century until the 1930s, a lady of society had to hold her "day", which meant that her salon was opened for visitors in the afternoon once a week, or twice a month. Days were announced in Le Bottin Mondain. The visitor gave his visit cards to the lackey or the maître d'hôtel, and he was accepted or not. Only people who had been introduced previously could enter the salon.

Marcel Proust called up his own turn-of-the-century experience to recreate the rival salons of the fictional duchesse de Guermantes and Madame Verdurin. He experienced himself his first social life in salons such as Mme Arman de Caillavet 's one, which mixed artists and political men around Anatole France or Paul Bourget ; Mme Straus ' one, where the cream of the aristocracy mingled with artists and writers; or more aristocratic salons like Comtesse de Chevigné 's, Comtesse Greffulhe 's, Comtesse Jean de Castellane's, Comtesse Aimery de La Rochefoucauld's, etc. Some late 19th- and early 20th-century Paris salons were major centres for contemporary music, including those of Winnaretta Singer (the princesse de Polignac), and Élisabeth, comtesse Greffulhe. They were responsible for commissioning some of the greatest songs and chamber music works of Fauré, Debussy, Ravel and Poulenc.

Until the 1950s, some salons were held by ladies mixing political men and intellectuals during the IVth Republic, like Mme Abrami, or Mme Dujarric de La Rivière. The last salons in Paris were those of Marie-Laure de Noailles, with Jean Cocteau, Igor Markevitch, Salvador Dalí, etc., Marie-Blanche de Polignac (Jeanne Lanvin 's daughter) and Madeleine and Robert Perrier, with Josephine Baker, Le Corbusier, Django Reinhardt, etc.

Salon sociability quickly spread through Europe. In the 18th and 19th centuries, many large cities in Europe held salons along the lines of the Parisian models.

Prior to the formation of Belgium, Béatrix de Cusance hosted a salon in Brussels in what was then the Spanish Netherlands in the mid-17th century. In the late 18th century, the political salon of Anne d'Yves played a role in the Brabant Revolution of 1789.

In Belgium, the 19th-century salon hosted by Constance Trotti attracted cultural figures, the Belgian aristocracy and members of the French exiled colony.

In Denmark, the salon culture was adopted during the 18th century. Christine Sophie Holstein and Charlotte Schimmelman were the most notable hostesses, in the beginning and in the end of the 18th century respectively, both of whom were credited with political influence. During the Danish Golden Age in the late 18th century and early 19th century, the literary salon played a significant part in Danish culture life, notably the literary salons arranged by Friederike Brun at Sophienholm and that of Kamma Rahbek at Bakkehuset.

In the German-speaking palatinates and kingdoms, the most famous were held by Jewish ladies, such as Henriette Herz, Sara Grotthuis, and Rahel Varnhagen, and in Austria in the late 18th and early 19th centuries by two prominent Jewish Patrons of the Arts: Adele Bloch-Bauer and Berta Zuckerkandl. Increasingly emancipated German-speaking Jews wanted to immerse themselves in the rich cultural life. However, individual Jews were faced with a dilemma: they faced new opportunities, but without the comfort of a secure community. For Jewish women, there was an additional issue. German society imposed the usual gender role restrictions and antisemitism, so cultivated Jewish women tapped into the cultural salon. But from 1800 on, salons performed a political and social miracle. The salon allowed Jewish women to establish a venue in their homes in which Jews and non-Jews could meet in relative equality. Like-minded people could study art, literature, philosophy or music together. This handful of educated, acculturated Jewish women could escape the restrictions of their social ghetto. Naturally the women had to be in well-connected families, either to money or to culture. In these mixed gatherings of nobles, high civil servants, writers, philosophers and artists, Jewish salonnières created a vehicle for Jewish integration, providing a context in which patrons and artists freely exchanged ideas. Henriette Lemos Herz, Fanny Mendelssohn Hensel, Dorothea Mendelssohn Schlegel, Amalie Wolf Beer and at least twelve other salonnières achieved fame and admiration.

Italy had had an early tradition of the salon; Giovanna Dandolo became known as a patron and gatherer of artists as wife of Pasquale Malipiero, the doge in Venice in 1457–1462, and the courtesan Tullia d'Aragona held a salon already in the 16th century, and in the 17th century Rome, the abdicated Queen Christina of Sweden and the princess Colonna, Marie Mancini, rivaled as salon hostesses. In the 18th century, Aurora Sanseverino provided a forum for thinkers, poets, artists, and musicians in Naples, making her a central figure in baroque Italy.

The tradition of the literary salon continued to flourish in Italy throughout the 19th century. Naturally there were many salons with some of the most prominent being hosted by Clara Maffei in Milan, Emilia Peruzzi [ it ] in Florence and Olimpia Savio in Turin. The salons attracted countless outstanding 19th-century figures including the romantic painter Francesco Hayez, composer Giuseppe Verdi and naturalist writers Giovanni Verga, Bruno Sperani and Matilde Serao. The salons served a very important function in 19th-century Italy, as they allowed young attendees to come into contact with more established figures. They also served as a method of avoiding government censorship, as a public discussion could be held in private. The golden age of the salon in Italy could be said to coincide with the pre-unification period, after which the rise of the newspaper replaced the salon as the main place for the Italian public to engage in intellectual discourse.

Argentina 's most active female figure in the revolutionary process, Mariquita Sánchez, was Buenos Aires ' leading salonnière. She fervently embraced the cause of revolution, and her tertulia gathered all the leading personalities of her time. The most sensitive issues were discussed there, as well as literary topics. Mariquita Sánchez is widely remembered in the Argentine historical tradition because the Argentine National Anthem was sung for the first time in her house, on 14 May 1813. Other notable salonnières in colonial Buenos Aires were Mercedes de Lasalde Riglos and Flora Azcuénaga. Along with Mariquita Sánchez, the discussions at her houses led up to the May Revolution, the first stage in the struggle for Argentine independence from Spain.

In the vast Commonwealth of Poland-Lithuania, Duchess Elżbieta Sieniawska held a salon at the end of the 17th century. They became very popular there throughout the 18th century. Most renowned were the Thursday Lunches of King Stanisław II Augustus at the end of the 18th century, and among the most notable salonnières were Barbara Sanguszko, Zofia Lubomirska, Anna Jabłonowska, a noted early scientist and collector of scientific objects and books, Izabela Czartoryska, and her later namesake, Princess Izabela Czartoryska founder of Poland's first museum and a patron of the Polish composer Frederic Chopin.

The salon culture was introduced to Imperial Russia during the Westernization Francophile culture of the Russian aristocracy in the 18th century. During the 19th century, several famous salon functioned hosted by the nobility in Saint Petersburg and Moscow, among the most famed being the literary salon of Zinaida Volkonskaya in 1820s Moscow.

In Spain, salons were popular during the French influenced Spanish enlightenment. One of the most known salons were held by María del Pilar Teresa Cayetana de Silva y Álvarez de Toledo, 13th Duchess of Alba at the end of the 18th century.

In Iberia or Latin America, a tertulia is a social gathering with literary or artistic overtones. The word is originally Spanish and has only moderate currency in English, in describing Latin cultural contexts. Since the 20th century, a typical tertulia has moved out from the private drawing-room to become a regularly scheduled event in a public place such as a bar, although some tertulias are still held in more private spaces. Participants may share their recent creations (poetry, short stories, other writings, even artwork or songs).

In Sweden, the salon developed during the late 17th century and flourished until the late 19th century. During the 1680s and 1690s, the salon of countess Magdalena Stenbock became a meeting where foreign ambassadors in Stockholm came to make contacts, and her gambling table was described as a center of Swedish foreign policy.

During the Swedish Age of Liberty (1718–1772), women participated in political debate and promoted their favorites in the struggle between the Caps (party) and the Hats (party) through political salons. These forums were regarded influential enough for foreign powers to engage some of these women as agents to benefit their interests in Swedish politics. The arguably most noted political salonnière of the Swedish age of liberty was countess Hedvig Catharina De la Gardie (1695–1745), whose salon has some time been referred to as the first in Sweden, and whose influence on state affairs exposed her to libelous pamphlets and made her a target of Olof von Dahlin 's libelous caricature of the political salon hostess in 1733. Magdalena Elisabeth Rahm was attributed to have contributed to the realization of the Russo-Swedish War (1741–1743) through the campaign for the war she launched in her salon. Outside of politics, Hedvig Charlotta Nordenflycht acted as the hostess of the literary academy Tankebyggarorden and Anna Maria Lenngren did the same for the Royal Swedish Academy.

During the reign of Gustavian age, the home of Anna Charlotta Schröderheim came to be known as a center of opposition. Salon hostesses were still attributed influence in politic affairs in the first half of the 19th century, which was said of both Aurora Wilhelmina Koskull in the 1820s as well as Ulla De Geer in the 1840s.

In the 19th century, however, the leading salon hostesses in Sweden became more noted as the benefactors of the arts and charity than with politics. From 1820 and two decades onward, Malla Silfverstolpe became famous for her Friday nights salon in Uppsala, which became a center of the Romantic era in Sweden and, arguably the most famed literary salon in Sweden. During the 1860s and 1870s, the Limnell Salon of the rich benefactor Fredrika Limnell in Stockholm came to be a famous center of the Swedish cultural elite, were especially writers gathered to make contact with wealthy benefactors, a role which was eventually taken over by the Curman Receptions of Calla Curman in the 1880s and 1890s.

In Switzerland, the salon culture was extant in the mid-18th century, represented by Julie Bondeli in Bern and Barbara Schulthess in Zürich, and the salon of Anna Maria Rüttimann-Meyer von Schauensee reached in influential role in the early 19th century.

In Coppet Castle close to Lake Geneva, the exiled Parisian salonnière and author, Madame de Staël, hosted a salon which played a key role in the aftermath of the French Revolution and especially under Napoleon Bonaparte 's Regime. It has become known as the Coppet group. De Staël is author of around thirty publications, from which On Germany (1813) was the most well known in its time. She has been painted by such famous painters as François Gérard and Elisabeth Vigée-Lebrun.

In 18th-century England, salons were held by Elizabeth Montagu, in whose salon the expression bluestocking originated, and who created the Blue Stockings Society, and by Hester Thrale. In the 19th century, the Russian Baroness Méry von Bruiningk hosted a salon in St. John's Wood, London, for refugees (mostly German) of the revolutions of 1848 (the Forty-Eighters). Clementia Taylor, an early feminist and radical held a salon at Aubrey House in Campden Hill in the 1860s. Her salon was attended by Moncure D. Conway, Louisa May Alcott, Arthur Munby, feminists Barbara Bodichon, Lydia Becker, Elizabeth Blackwell, and Elizabeth Malleson. Holland House in Kensington under the Fox family in the late 18th and early 19th centuries was akin to a French salon, largely for adherents to the Whig Party. Charles Babbage's Saturday night soirées from 1828 and into the 1840s were a related phenomenon attracting men and women, scientists and writers.

Martha Washington, the first American First Lady, performed a function similar to the host or hostess of the European salon. She held weekly public receptions throughout her husband's eight-year presidency (1789–1797). At these gatherings, members of Congress, visiting foreign dignitaries, and ordinary citizens alike were received at the executive mansion. More recently, "society hostesses" such as Perle Mesta have done so as well. The Stettheimer sisters, including the artist Florine Stettheimer, hosted gatherings at their New York City home in the 1920s and '30s. During the Harlem Renaissance, Ruth Logan Roberts, Georgia Douglas Johnson and Zora Neale Hurston hosted salons that brought together leading figures in African-American literature, and in the culture and politics of Harlem at the time.

Modern-day versions of the traditional salon (some with a literary focus, and others exploring other disciplines in the arts and sciences) are held throughout the world, in private homes and public venues.

Sally Quinn and her husband Ben Bradlee hosted influential salons in Washington DC from the 1970s until the 2000s. "An invitation to the couple's historic Georgetown home was one of the most coveted status symbols in the nation's capital, an entry to an elite salon of the powerful, talented and witty." In the 1980s, former nun and musician Theodora di Marco and her sister Norma hosted musical and debating soirées in their home in Notting Hill, London.

In 2014, in response to the isolation of the digital life, in-person events and salons grew in popularity. In 2021 response to the isolation of the pandemic, Susan MacTavish Best, who was part of the movement, launched an educational resource for those who wish to host salons in their community called The Salon Host. In late 2024 Peyton Kullander/Ophelie started a movement to bring salons back into the public consciousness, called The Temptations Artist Salon and Zine, aiming to encourage the discussion and banter of the past.

The word salon also refers to art exhibitions. The Paris Salon was originally an officially sanctioned exhibit of recent works of painting and sculpture by members of the Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture, starting in 1673 and soon moving from the Salon Carré of the Palace of the Louvre.

The name salon remained, even when other quarters were found and the exhibits' irregular intervals became biennial. A jury system of selection was introduced in 1748, and the salon remained a major annual event even after the government withdrew official sponsorship in 1881.

The related terms salon-style exhibition or salon-style hang describe the practice of displaying large numbers of paintings, thus requiring placing them close together at multiple heights, often on a high wall.

The Salon des indépendants is an annual art exhibition in Paris, begun in 1884. Organised by the Société des Artistes Indépendants, it aims to show works by all artists claiming a certain independence in their art and was formed – like the Société – in reaction to artists refused by the juries of the Paris Salon and the dominance of academic art.

It has no jury or prizes, though it still has an admission commission. In the 1950s Fernand Léger specified that for him the Salon des Indépendants was "above all a salon of painters for painters,... a salon for artistic display,... its eternal renewal... is its reason for existence. Here, there must always be a place for searchers and their concerns.... The salon des indépendants is a salon of lovers,... the Salon of Inventors.... The middle classes who come to laugh at these palpitations never suspect that its a whole play which plays out there, with all its joys and its stories. If they were aware of it, because deep down they are good people, they would enter it with respect, as if it was a church".

The Salon's founders also believed art could contribute to the common good, as expressed by one of its founders, Paul Signac – "Justice in sociology, harmony in art ; [they are the] same thing". It has been representative of the major art movements of the late 19th and 20th centuries - Pointillism, Nabism, Symbolism, Fauvism and Cubism. It attracted many artists from across Europe.

It was created in 1884 in Paris by artists wishing to exhibit their works freely and free from all juries. The Groupe des indépendants organised a first salon which had some public and critical success. The painter Albert Dubois-Pillet, also a captain in the Republican Guard, gained authority for a site, the "barquement B", rue des Tuileries, though it was disorganised.

Hundreds of artists took part, including Georges Seurat, Charles Angrand, Odilon Redon, Henri-Edmond Cross and Paul Signac, but also mediocre painters – as a 1939 article on it observed "As usual, turnips abounded there, as in all salons whatever colour they may be". Erratic cash management put an end to this first Salon, which had to be financially liquidated. Forty artists thus regrouped under the presidency of Odilon Redon, first meeting on 31 May in the salle Montesquieu at a Duval bouillon at 5 Rue Montesquieu. At that meeting they aimed to create a more viable salon. Among its founder members, Redon and were the first joint-presidents and other founder members were Seurat, Signac, Cross, Marie-Edmond Höner and Angrand.

The general assembly pronounced the salon's foundation on 4 June 1884 and it was constituted that 11 June by depositing its statutes before master Coursault, a notary in Montmorency. On 14 June its statutes were published in the Affiches Parisiennes and on 30 June the legal declaration on the Société's functioning was made at the Préfecture de police. A committee of eleven members was formed on 29 July, presided over by Alfred André Guinard, who signed its statutes, which the artistic press reported on, such as the Le Moniteur des arts of 3 October 1884.

It gained its legal status under the 1 July 1901 law of associations on 4 December 1903 and published its first Journal officiel the following day. It was recognised as a public utility on 30 March 1923.

Its site and date varied year on year. The first exhibition preceded the official foundation of the Société, taking place as the "Groupe des artistes indépendants" from 15 May 1884 the " Salon des Tuileries ", rue des Tuileries under the name – it included some painters such as Alfred Guinard who are now mostly forgotten. Very quickly after the Société's formation it opened a "Salon d'hiver" (winter salon) at the pavillon de la ville de Paris on avenue des Champs-Élysées from 10 December 1884, the first official exhibition – it included Georges Seurat 's Bathers at Asnières, Paul Signac 's Pont d'Austerlitz and Henri-Edmond Cross 's In the jardin du Luxembourg.

The Salons then continued every year except 1885 and from 1914 to 1918. There were also other one-off exhibitions organised by the Société and from 1966 a thematic exhibition alongside the Salon. Since 19 November 2006 the Salon has been held alongside the Salon des artistes français, the Salon de la Société nationale des beaux-arts, the Salon Comparaisons (set up in 1950) and the Salon de dessin et peinture à l'eau (set up in 1953), with the five together known as "Art en capital" ("Art in the capital").

Salut Casa! (or Casablanca Boom Town for English audiences) is a 1952 pseudo-documentary propaganda short film about Casablanca under the French Protectorate. Directed by Jean Vidal, it was screened at the 1953 Cannes Film Festival. The film presents Casablanca to French audiences as a miracle of the French mission civilatrice, a modern city in North Africa with high-rise buildings and wide avenues, a bustling economy and rapid development and masterful French planning and administration. The French urbanist Michel Écochard, the director of the Service de l'Urbanisme, Casablanca's urban planning office at the time, featured prominently in the film and discussed how challenges such as internal migration and rapid urbanization were being handled in Casablanca.

The film was dubbed into English and Spanish.

Sandre stands for Service d'administration nationale des données et des référentiels sur l'eau, or National Service for Water Data and Common Repositories Management of France. The Sandre service establishes the common water data language of the French national Water Information System (SIE: Système d’information sur l’eau).

Sandre is a division of the National Agency of Water and Aquatic Environments (Onema: Office national de l’eau et des milieux aquatiques). Its technical secretariat is entrusted to the International Office for Water (OIE: Office International de l’Eau).

The Sandre is in charge of describing water data and defining technical scenarios to allow data interchange between producers, users and databanks. These data are based on reference datasets (code lists) managed by the Sandre.

The Sandre makes available specification documents (1) free of charge for water data interchanges. It maintains a permanent helpdesk for implementation of these (2). It manages reference datasets (code lists - ex : taxa, monitoring parameters...) (3).

(1) Sandre specification documents are specifications freely available for the definition, interchange and dissemination of water data and datasets. These documents help designing databases, exchange files, web services, etc.

(2) Sandre technical support is a helpdesk for the use of Sandre’s specifications. The Sandre proposes especially compliance checks. Compliance checks are test sets implemented and applied to a system (software, databases, etc) to check its compliance to Sandre‘s specifications.

(3) Sandre reference datasets are elementary alphanumerical (ex : chemical substances code lists) or geographic information (BDCarthage via the online metadata catalogue or the geoviewer) whose use is free of charge, and necessary for the well functioning of a system (software such as LIMS, databases, etc).

Sanofi S.A. is a French multinational pharmaceutical and healthcare company headquartered in Paris. The corporation was established in 1973 and merged with Synthélabo in 1999 to form Sanofi-Synthélabo. In 2004, Sanofi-Synthélabo merged with Aventis and renamed to Sanofi-Aventis, which were each the product of several previous mergers. It changed its name back to Sanofi in May 2011. The company trades as "SAN" on Euronext Paris and "SNY" on Nasdaq in the United States, and is a component of the Euro Stoxx 50 stock market index. In 2023, the company was ranked 89th in the Forbes Global 2000.

Sanofi engages in the research and development, manufacturing, and marketing of pharmacological products, principally in the prescription market, but the firm also develops over-the-counter medications. The corporation covers seven major therapeutic areas: cardiovascular, central nervous system, diabetes, internal medicine, oncology, thrombosis, and vaccines. It is one of the world's largest producer of vaccines through its subsidiary Sanofi Pasteur.

Sanofi was founded on February 15, 1973 as a subsidiary of Elf Aquitaine (a French oil company subsequently acquired by Total), when Elf Aquitaine took control of the Labaz group, a pharmaceutical company formed in 1947 by Sociéte Belge de l'Azote et des Produits Chimiques du Marly. Labaz had developed benziodarone in 1957.

In 1993, Sanofi made a move into the Eastern Europe market by acquiring a controlling interest in Chinoin, a Hungarian drug company whose 1992, sales totaled about US$104 million. In the same year, Sanofi made its first significant venture into the US, and strengthened its presence in Eastern Europe, by first partnering with Sterling Winthrop and then acquiring the prescription pharmaceuticals business in 1994. Sanofi was incorporated under the laws of France in 1994, as a société anonyme, a form of limited liability company.

Synthélabo was founded in 1970, through the merger of two French pharmaceutical laboratories, Laboratoires Dausse (founded in 1834) and Laboratoires Robert & Carrière (founded in 1899). In 1973, the French cosmetics group L'Oréal acquired the majority of its share capital. In 1991, Synthelabo acquired Laboratories Delalande and Laboratoires Delagrange and, as a result of that deal, picked up the product metoclopramide.

Sanofi-Synthélabo was formed in 1999 when Sanofi merged with Synthélabo. At the time of the merger, Sanofi was the second largest pharmaceutical group in France in terms of sales and Synthélabo was the third largest. The merged company was based in Paris, France.

The merged companies focused on pharmaceuticals, divesting several businesses soon after the merger, including beauty, diagnostics, animal health and nutrition, custom chemicals, and two medical equipment businesses.

Aventis was formed in 1999, when the French company Rhône-Poulenc S.A. merged with the German corporation Hoechst Marion Roussel, which itself was formed from the 1995 merger of Hoechst AG with Cassella, Roussel Uclaf, and Marion Merrell Dow. Hoechst AG, the majority partner at the time in Hoechst Marion Roussel, was itself a merger of two of the three forcibly separated subsidiaries of IG Farben, exploiter of Auschwitz slave labor and supplier of Zyklon B during The Holocaust. The merged company was based in Schiltigheim, near Strasbourg, France.

At the time of the merger, Rhône-Poulenc's business included the pharmaceutical businesses Rorer, Centeon (blood products), and Pasteur Merieux (vaccines), the plant and animal health businesses Rhône-Poulenc Agro, Rhône-Poulenc Animal Nutrition, and Merial, and a 67 percent share in Rhodia, a specialty chemicals company. Hoechst, one of the companies that resulted from the post-WWII split of IG Farben, had seven primary businesses: Hoechst Marion Roussel (pharmaceuticals), AgrEvo (a joint venture with Schering in crop protection agents and pest control products), HR Vet (veterinary products), Dade Behring (diagnostics), Centeon, Celanese (chemicals), and Messer (chemicals). Merieux has been in the business of selling blood products, and in the 1980s, during the AIDS epidemic, Merieux and other companies were involved in scandals related to HIV- contaminated haemophilia blood products that were sold to developing nations.

In 2000, Aventis and Millennium Pharmaceuticals, a US biotechnology company formed to discover new drugs based on the then-new science of genomics, announced that Aventis would make a $250M investment in Millennium and would pay $200M to Millennium in research fees over five years, one of the largest such deals between a big pharmaceutical company and a biotech company at the time.

In late 2000, in the midst of the recall of Starlink, its genetically modified maize product, Aventis announced that it had determined to sell off Aventis Cropscience, the seed and pesticide business unit it had created from the agriculture businesses of its predecessors. In October 2001, Bayer and Aventis announced that Bayer would acquire the unit for about $6.6 billion; the unit became Bayer CropScience, making Bayer the world's second-largest agrochemical company behind Syngenta.

In 2003, Aventis entered into a collaboration with Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, a New York biotechnology company, to develop Regeneron's VEGF -inhibiting drug, aflibercept, which was then in Phase I clinical trials. Aventis invested $45 million in Regeneron and made an upfront payment of $80 million in cash. Regeneron partnered the use of the drug with Bayer Healthcare in the field of proliferative eye diseases, and under the name Eylea it was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2011; after several setbacks in clinical trials, Regeneron and Sanofi got the drug approved for metastatic colorectal cancer in combination with other agents, under the brand name Zaltrap in 2012.

Sanofi-Aventis was formed in 2004, when Sanofi-Synthélabo acquired Aventis. In early 2004, Sanofi-Synthélabo made a hostile takeover bid for Aventis worth €47.8 billion. Initially, Aventis rejected the bid because it felt that the bid offered inferior value based on the company's share value, and the board of Aventis went so far as to enact poison pill provisions and to invite Novartis to enter merger negotiations. The three-month takeover battle concluded when Sanofi-Synthélabo launched a friendly bid of €54.5 billion in place of the previously rejected hostile bid. The French government played a strong role, desiring what it called a "local solution", by putting heavy pressure on Sanofi-Synthélabo to raise its bid for Aventis and for Aventis to accept the offer and by rejecting Aventis's poison pill proposal. One of the largest risks in the deal for both sides was the fate of the patents protecting Clopidogrel (Plavix), which was one of the top-selling drugs in the world at the time and the major source of Sanofi's revenue.

In 2006, Iraqis infected with HIV sued Sanofi and Baxter over HIV- contaminated haemophilia blood products sold by Merieux in the 1980s. In 2006, the US patents on clopidogrel (Plavix) were challenged when a Canadian generics company, Apotex, filed an Abbreviated New Drug Application under the Hatch-Waxman Act, received FDA approval, and started marketing a generic formulation of clopidogrel. While Sanofi-Aventis and its partner in the drug, Bristol Myers Squibb (BMS), were able to get an injunction to stop Apotex from selling it, the case became complicated when settlement negotiations fell apart twice – the second time because of an oral agreement made by BMS CEO Peter Dolan that BMS failed to disclose to the Federal Trade Commission during the review of the settlement agreement to ensure that it did not violate antitrust law. When Apotex disclosed the oral agreement to the FTC, the FTC launched an investigation that led to Dolan's dismissal by BMS. Apotex finally lost on the patent litigation issues after its third appeal was decided in favor of BMS/Sanofi in November 2011; Apotex had to pay ~$442 million in damages and ~$108 million in interest for infringing the patent, which it paid in full by February 2012. Apotex also sued BMS and Sanofi for $3.4 billion for allegedly breaching the settlement agreement; Apotex lost a jury trial in March 2013.

In 2007, Sanofi-Aventis expanded on Aventis's prior relationship with Regeneron Pharmaceuticals ; in the new deal Sanofi-Aventis agreed to pay Regeneron $100 million per year for five years, under which Regeneron would use its monoclonal antibody discovery platform to create new biopharmaceuticals, to which Sanofi-Aventis gained the exclusive right to co-develop. In 2009, the companies expanded the deal to $160 million per year and extended it to 2017. As of 2009, the collaboration had four antibodies in clinical development and had filed an IND for a fifth. Two were against undisclosed targets, one targeted the interleukin-6 receptor as a treatment for rheumatoid arthritis, another targeted nerve growth factor for the treatment of pain, and another targeted delta-like ligand 4 as a cancer treatment.

Between 2008, when Chris Viehbacher was hired as CEO, and 2010, the company spent more than $17 billion in mergers and acquisitions to strengthen its consumer healthcare and generics platforms, especially in emerging markets, in the face of looming patent cliffs and the growth of the consumer healthcare segment. In September, Zentiva was acquired for €1.8 billion, expanding the group's presence in eastern European markets.

In 2009, Medley Farma, the third largest pharmaceutical company in Brazil and a leading generics company there, was acquired for about $635 million. Sanofi outbid Teva Pharmaceuticals. The deal was approved by Brazil's antitrust authorities in May 2010. Later that year, Indian vaccine manufacturer Shantha Biotechnics was acquired for $784 million. In October Sanofi-Aventis announced that it would lay off about 1700 US employees (about 25% of its US workforce) because of restructuring triggered by growing generic competition and other factors, and that the company would focus its US operations on diabetes, atrial fibrillation, and oncology.

In 2010, US consumer healthcare company Chattem, Inc. was acquired for around $1.9 billion. In the same year, Nepentes Pharma was acquired for $130 million and BMP Sunstone Corporation for $520.6 million.

The company dropped the -Aventis suffix of its name on May 6, 2011, after receiving approval at its annual general meeting. The reason given by the company for the change was to make its name easier to pronounce in countries such as China.

In 2011, Genzyme Corporation was acquired for around $20.1 billion. This biotechnology company, headquartered in Cambridge, Massachusetts, specializes in the treatment of orphan diseases, renal diseases, endocrinology, oncology, and biosurgery.

In January 2012, Sanofi co-invested in the $125 million Series A financing of Warp Drive Bio. Sanofi sought support for its internal cancer research program and also took on an obligation to acquire Warp Drive if certain milestones were met.

In January 2014, Genzyme and Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, a US biotechnology company developing RNAi therapeutics, announced that Genyzme would invest $700 million in Alnylam. Under the deal, Genzyme obtained further rights to patisiran, an RNAi treatment for transthyretin -mediated amyloidosis – a condition that can result in familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy and familial amyloidotic cardiomyopathy and obtained rights to other compounds in Alnylam's pipeline.

In March 2014, Sanofi joined the bidding for Merck & Co.'s over-the-counter health-products unit, the maker of Coppertone sunblock and the antihistamine Claritin ; bids were expected to range between $10 billion and $12 billion.

In October 2014, Sanofi's directors fired US-resident chief executive Chris Viehbacher, blaming his alleged lack of communication with the board and poor execution of his strategy. Board chairperson Serge Weinberg took over as interim CEO until 2 April 2015 when Bayer Healthcare board chairman Olivier Brandicourt (appointed by Sanofi on 19 February 2015) took over. Before Brandicourt even started his new job, French government ministers Stéphane Le Foll and Ségolène Royal attacked the $4.5 million golden handshake he was getting from Sanofi – and his pay of about $4.7 million a year. Furthermore, in 2014, the business took a 66% stake in Globalpharma, a Dubai-based generics manufacturer.

In July 2015, Genzyme announced that it would acquire the cancer drug Caprelsa (vandetanib) from AstraZeneca for up to $300 million. In the same month, the company announced a new global collaboration with Regeneron Pharmaceuticals to discover, develop, and commercialize new immuno-oncology drugs, which could generate more than $2 billion for Regeneron, with $640 million upfront, $750 million for proof of concept data, and $650 million from the development of REGN2810.

In June 2016, the company announced that it had struck an asset-swap deal with Boehringer Ingelheim. Sanofi would sell its Merial animal health division (valuing it at €11.4 billion), while acquiring Boehringer's consumer health division (valuing it at €6.7 billion) and €4.7 billion in cash. The deal meant that Sanofi was now one of the global consumer healthcare leaders by market share.

In July 2017, the company announced its intention to acquire Protein Sciences, a privately held Connecticut-based vaccines biotechnology company, for $650 million and with up to $100 million in milestone achievements.

In January 2018, Sanofi announced that it would acquire Bioverativ for $11.6 billion and days later announced that it would acquire Ablynx for €3.9 billion ($4.8 billion).

In December 2019, the company announced that it would acquire Synthorx for $2.5 billion ($68 per share), adding the lead product candidate THOR-707 (SAR444245), a form of interleukin-2 (IL-2) being developed for use against multiple solid tumors. In October 2022, Sanofi announced that it had stopped Phase 2 studies of THOR-707 (SAR444245) because the drug's efficacy “was lower than projected”. Sanofi would take a roughly $1.6 billion impairment charge because of delays to the program.

In May 2020, Regeneron announced that it would repurchase around $5 billion of its shares held directly by Sanofi. Before the transaction, Sanofi had held 23.2 million Regeneron shares. In June, the company announced that it had agreed a potential $2 billion deal with Translate Bio, expanding an already existing collaboration for COVID-19 treatments. The company agreed to produce 60 million doses of a coronavirus vaccine for the United Kingdom government in July 2020. It used recombinant protein-based technology for Sanofi's flu vaccine along with GSK 's pandemic technology and was seeking regulatory approval by the first half of 2021. Sanofi also agreed to a $2.1 billion deal with the United States for 100 million doses. In August, Sanofi announced that it would acquire Principia Biopharma for $3.7 billion, acquiring its BTK inhibitor program. The acquisition was completed in September 2020. In November, Sanofi announced that it would acquire Kiadis Pharma for €308 million (around $359 million, or €5.45 per share), expanding its immuno-oncology pipeline with the acquisition of Kiadis's three clinical compounds: K-NK002 in Phase II trials for hematopoietic stem cell transplants in blood cancer, K-NK003 for relapsed or refractory acute myeloid leukemia, and K-NK-ID101 for COVID-19.

In January 2021, Sanofi announced that it would buy the British biotech Kymab Ltd and its potential first-in-class drug candidate – KY1005 –- for $1.45 billion. In April, the business announced that it would acquire Tidal Therapeutics for up to $470m. in August the company announced that it would acquire Translate Bio and its mRNA vaccine technology for $3.2 billion. On 8 September 2021, Sanofi announced that it would acquire US biotech company Kadmon Corporation for $1.9 billion On 18 November 2021, it was reported that Sanofi would be investing $180 million in French startup Owkin, whose predictive algorithms aim to improve the research and development of new cures against cancer. In December, the company announced that it would acquire Origimm Biotechnology GmbH and its acne vaccine candidate (ORI-001), as well as Amunix Pharmaceuticals, for an initial $1 billion plus potentially $200 million in additional milestones.

In April 2022, Sanofi broke ground on its biggest industrial investment, a $638m vaccine and enzymes production facility in Tuas, Singapore, targeted for completion in 2025.

In June 2022, Sanofi opened a 900,000 square foot campus at Cambridge Crossing in Cambridge, Massachusetts. The campus consists of two buildings at 350 and 450 Water Street.

In March 2023, the company announced it would acquire Provention Bio and its type 1 diabetes therapy pipeline.

In the fall of 2023, Sanofi announced plans to separate the OTC and focus on its key prescription production, increasing investment and reducing costs. The most likely way to separate a non-prescription division (about 11,000 employees, 2023 revenue — over $4 billion) is to create a public company headquartered in France. The division is planned for the fourth quarter of 2024.

In December 2023, the company has signed a 140 million dollars partnership with Aqemia, a company that solves a mathematical equation that eliminates the need for heavy computing facilities with large computing power.

In January 2024, Sanofi announced that it had agreed to buy a U.S. biotech firm Inhibrx for up to $2.2 billion, with a focus on obtaining Inhibrx's INBRX-101, an experimental treatment for Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency (AATD), an inherited rare disease that causes progressive deterioration of the lung tissue. The post-acquisition company now employs more than 90,000 employees in 90 countries.

In October 2024, Sanofi and CD&R entered exclusive negotiations to transfer a 50% controlling stake in Opella with Sanofi to remain a significant shareholder.

In May 2025, Sanofi announced the buyout of Vigil Neuroscience for $470 million.

In December 2025, it was announced that Sanofi had agreed to acquire the Emeryville, California -based company, Dynavax Technologies in an all-cash transaction valued at approximately US$2.2 billion. The acquisition, which is expected to close in the first quarter of 2026 subject to regulatory approvals, adds Dynavax’s approved and development-stage vaccine assets to Sanofi’s vaccines portfolio.

Note. In 2001–2004: Sanofi-Synthélabo; in 2004–2011: Sanofi-Aventis.

The following products are listed on the Sanofi Genzyme website. Generic drug names are given in parentheses following the brand name.

Product recall and effects : The epinephrine (adrenaline) auto-injection devices made by Sanofi SA currently on the market in the US and Canada were voluntarily recalled on 28 October 2015. The reason given by Sanofi was that the products had been found to potentially have inaccurate dosage delivery systems, which might include failure to deliver the drugs.

Sanofi US also added the following warning: If a patient experiencing a serious allergic reaction (i.e., anaphylaxis) did not receive the intended dose, there could be significant health consequences, including death, because anaphylaxis is a potentially life‑threatening condition.

In its news release on 28 October 2015, Sanofi Canada stated that it was "actively working with suppliers of alternative epinephrine auto-injectors to have a full stock available in Canada as soon as possible. Canadian customers were asked to immediately return the Allerject product to their local pharmacy to obtain an alternate epinephrine auto-injector."

The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) also filed a news release, confirming that the recall involved all Auvi-Q currently on the market in the United States. The FDA release went on to provide information for consumers re: exchanging the device for another brand of product, also provided on the Auvi-Q web site. Sanofi US would provide reimbursement for out of pocket costs incurred for the purchase of new, alternate epinephrine auto-injectors with proof of purchase.

The alternate products expected to most commonly replace the recalled Sanofi devices were the EpiPens made by Mylan in the US and by Pfizer—under license from Mylan—in Canada. Mylan already had an 85% market share of the auto-injectors in the USA in the first half of 2015. Maylan was expected to benefit from the recall by its competitor Sanofi, according to a report published in the Fierce Pharma newsletter of 2 November 2015. As Bernstein analyst Ronny Gal wrote in a note to clients,"....it is very hard to see Auvi-Q returning to the market, as it will need to be redesigned and face uphill battle to recapture patient trust after the recall." Gal also believed that the company would eventually have 95% of the epinephrine auto-injector market, according to another Fierce Pharma report on 3 November 2015.

The company also produces a broad range of over-the-counter products, among them Allegra, IcyHot for muscle pain, Gold Bond for skin irritation, and Selsun Blue dandruff shampoo. These brands were acquired in 2010, when Sanofi-Aventis purchased Chattem.

As of 2013, Sanofi was in a race with Amgen and Pfizer to win approval for a drug that inhibits PCSK9, a protein that slows the clearance of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol – the form of cholesterol that leads to heart attacks. Sanofi's drug, a monoclonal antibody, was discovered by Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and is called alirocumab. An FDA warning in March 2014, about possible cognitive adverse effects of PCSK9 inhibition threw the competition into disarray, as the FDA asked companies to include neurocognitive testing into their Phase III clinical trials.

In 2013, Sanofi announced that another candidate from its collaboration with Regeneron, a monoclonal antibody against the interleukin 6 receptor, sarilumab, had better efficacy than placebo in its first Phase III trial in rheumatoid arthritis.

In January 2012, Sanofi moved its head office location to 54, Rue La Boétie in the 8th arrondissement of Paris. This former mansion designed by architect René-Patouillard had previously been the head office of Alcatel-Lucent.

Sanofi's previous head office was located in the 13th arrondissement of Paris, at 174 Avenue de France. The architecture of the head office is of the predominant style of the area surrounding the François Mitterrand Library. After Sanofi and Aventis merged, the employees at the former Aventis head office in Schiltigheim, Alsace, moved to Paris.

In November 2022, Sanofi moved into its new global headquarters in the 17th arrondissement of Paris, at 46-48 Avenue de la Grande Armée.

In 2025 Sanofi opened a new 260,000-square-foot U.S. headquarters in May 2025 at M Station West in Morristown, New Jersey. Sanofi moved its US headquarters to Morristown, NJ from Bridgewater, NJ which is home to other large companies such as Brother USA, Biocon Biologics, Amneal Pharmaceuticals, and BAUSCH Health.

In addition to internal research and development activities, Sanofi is also involved in publicly funded collaborative research projects, with other industrial and academic partners. One example in the area of non-clinical safety assessment is the InnoMed PredTox project The company is expanding its activities in joint research projects within the framework of the Innovative Medicines Initiative of EFPIA and the European Commission.

In June 2010, Sanofi and the Charité University of Berlin signed a cooperation agreement for the research and development of medicines and therapies.

In January 2026, Sanofi announced a strategic investment of up to $25 million in Adagene to collaborate on masked antibody therapies.

In 2005, Sanofi Pasteur, the vaccines division of Sanofi Group, was awarded a $97 Million United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) contract.

In 2011, a Sanofi Pasteur plant flooded, causing it problems with mold. The facility, located in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, produced BCG vaccine products, made with the Glaxo 1077 strain, such as a tuberculosis vaccine ImmuCYST, a BCG Immunotherapeutic, a bladder cancer drug. By April 2012, the FDA had found dozens of documented problems with sterility at the plant, including mold, nesting birds, and rusted electrical conduits. The plant was closed for over two years, resulting in shortages of bladder cancer and tuberculosis vaccines. On 29 October 2014 Health Canada gave Sanofi permission to resume production of BCG.

In 2020, Sanofi, together with GSK, signed a deal with the US government's Operation Warp Speed to provide 100 million doses of COVID-19 vaccine for up to US$2.1 billion, if the vaccine was approved.

As of August 2020, COVID-19 vaccine development in Sanofi underscored its fundamental competitiveness weakness, with which management has been struggling and failed to deal with for many years, beyond cutting more costs. Unfortunately, even though the approach of Sanofi-GSK is based on pre-existing, approved platforms and technology (as with Flublok flu), without reinventing the wheel of the necessary infrastructure, the company lagged behind many other rivals in delivering a working vaccine. Sanofi planned to start Phase 1 clinical testing only in September and expected emergency use approval in the first half of 2021. Competitors such as Novavax had already completed Phase 1 studies, with promising results, and Moderna-NIH had already initiated its Phase 3 trial. According to CNBC reports, as part of the $2.1 billion US government deal, more than 750 million went to supporting Sanofi-GSK in vaccine development and clinical trials. Sanofi turn-outs "accelerate" the development via a smaller biotech firm, Translate Bio, with a $425M partnership.

At the end of September 2021, Sanofi announced that it would stop developing its mRNA COVID-19 vaccine. Despite promising results, the drug would not continue to Phase 3 trials, and the company stated that it would be 'too late to reach the market.'

On May 10, 2024, a Sanofi press release announced a co-exclusive licensing agreement between Sanofi and Novavax "to co-commercialize COVID-19 vaccine and develop novel flu-COVID-19 combination vaccines." The 2026 Nuvaxovid website, including vaccine locator page, is copyright Sanofi and does not feature the Novavax company name.

Opella is the former Consumer Healthcare (CHC) division of Sanofi, established as an independent company headquartered in France on April 30, 2025. Its formation followed the sale of a 50.0% controlling stake by Sanofi to the private equity firm Clayton, Dubilier & Rice (CD&R). Sanofi retained a significant 48.2% minority shareholding, while the French public investment bank Bpifrance acquired a 1.8% stake. The transaction provided Sanofi with approximately €10 billion in net cash proceeds.

Sanofi is a full member of the European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations (EFPIA), the Biotechnology Industry Organization (BIO), and the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA).

Sanofi's vaccine subsidiary, Sanofi Pasteur, is a member of EuropaBio.

In June 2021, Sanofi partnered with Capgemini, Orange & Generali to launch Future4care, an all-European start-up accelerator centered on digital health.

The Aventis Foundation, a German charitable trust, was established in 1996, as the Hoechst Foundation, with an endowment of €50 million. In 2000, the foundation was renamed the Aventis Foundation. The foundation promotes cultural and scientific projects, specifically focused on the Frankfurt Rhine-Main area.

The sans-culottes (French: [ sɑ̃kylɔt ] ; lit. ' without breeches ') were the common people of the lower classes in late 18th-century France, a great many of whom became radical and militant partisans of the French Revolution in response to their poor quality of life under the Ancien Régime.

The name sans-culottes refers to their clothing, and through that to their lower-class status: culottes were the fashionable silk knee-breeches of the 18th-century nobility and bourgeoisie, and the working class sans-culottes wore pantaloons, or long trousers, instead. The sans-culottes, most of them urban labourers, served as the driving popular force behind the revolution.

The word sans-culotte, which is opposed to " aristocrat ", seems to have been used for the first time on 28 February 1791 by Jean-Bernard Gauthier de Murnan in a derogatory sense, speaking about a " sans-culottes army". The word came into vogue during the demonstration of 20 June 1792.

They were judged by the other revolutionaries as "radicals" because they advocated a direct democracy, that is to say, without intermediaries such as members of parliament. Though ill-clad and ill-equipped, with little or no support from the middle and upper classes, they made up the bulk of the Revolutionary army and were responsible for many executions during the early years of the French Revolutionary Wars.

According to Peter Stephen Du Ponceau, secretary and interpreter to Baron de Steuben, Steuben first used the expression sans culottes in 1778: "The Baron loved to speak of that dinner, and of his sans culottes as he called us. Thus the denomination was first invented in America, and applied to the brave officers and soldiers of our revolutionary army, at a time when, it could not be foreseen, that the name which honoured the followers of Washington would afterwards be assumed by the satellites of a Marat and a Robespierre".

The most fundamental political ideals of the sans-culottes were social equality, economic equality, and popular democracy. They supported the abolition of all the authority and privileges of the monarchy, nobility, and Roman Catholic clergy, the establishment of fixed wages, the implementation of price controls to ensure affordable food and other essentials, and vigilance against counter-revolutionaries.

The sans-culottes... campaigned for a more democratic constitution, price controls, harsh laws against political enemies, and economic legislation to assist the needy.

They expressed their demands through petitions of the sections presented to the assemblies (the Legislative, and Convention) by the delegates. The sans-culottes had a third way of applying pressure to achieve their demands: the police and the courts received thousands of denunciations of traitors and supposed conspirators. The height of their influence spanned roughly from the original overthrow of the monarchy in 1792 to the Thermidorian Reaction in 1794. Throughout the revolution, the sans-culottes provided the principal support behind the more radical and anti-bourgeoisie factions of the Paris Commune, such as the Enragés and the Hébertists, and were led by populist revolutionaries such as Jacques Roux and Jacques Hébert.

In the summer of 1793 the sans-culottes, the Parisian enragés especially, accused even the most radical Jacobins of being too tolerant of greed and insufficiently universalist. From this far-left point of view, all Jacobins were at fault because all of them tolerated existing civil life and social structures.

The sans-culottes also populated the ranks of paramilitary forces charged with physically enforcing the policies and legislation of the revolutionary government, a task that commonly included violence and the carrying out of executions against perceived enemies of the revolution.

During the peak of their influence, the sans-culottes were seen as the truest and most authentic sons of the French Revolution, held up as living representations of the revolutionary spirit. During the height of revolutionary fervor, such as during the Reign of Terror when it was dangerous to be associated with anything counter-revolutionary, even public functionaries and officials actually from middle or upper-class backgrounds adopted the clothing and label of the sans-culottes as a demonstration of solidarity with the working class and patriotism for the new French Republic.

But by early 1794, as the bourgeois and middle-class elements of the revolution began to gain more political influence, the fervent working-class radicalism of the sans-culottes rapidly began falling out of favour within the National Convention. It was not long before Maximilien de Robespierre and the now dominant Jacobin Club turned against the radical factions of the National Convention, including the sans-culottes, despite their having previously been the strongest supporters of the revolution and its government. Several important leaders of the Enragés and Hébertists were imprisoned and executed by the very revolutionary tribunals they had supported. The execution of radical leader Jacques Hébert spelled the decline of the sans-culottes, and with the successive rise of even more conservative governments, the Thermidorian Convention and the French Directory, they were definitively silenced as a political force. After the defeat of the 1795 popular revolt in Paris, the sans-culottes ceased to play any effective political role in France until the July Revolution of 1830.

The distinctive costume of typical sans-culottes featured:

On 27 April 1791, Robespierre opposed plans to reorganize the National Guard and restrict its membership to active citizens, largely property owners. He demanded the reconstitution of the army on a democratic basis to allow passive citizens. He felt that the army had to become the instrument of defence of the Revolution and no longer be a threat to it. On 28 April, despite Robespierre's intensive campaign, the principle of an armed bourgeois militia was definitively enacted in the Assembly.

Along with other Jacobins, he urged in his magazine the creation of a revolutionary army in Paris, consisting of 20,000 men, with the goal to defend "liberty" (the revolution), maintain order in the sections, and educate the members in democratic principles; an idea he borrowed from Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Machiavelli. According to Jean Jaures, he considered this even more important than the right to strike.

Following the king's veto of the Assembly's efforts to raise a militia of volunteers, the reinstatement of Brissotin ministers and suppression of non-juring priests, the monarchy faced an abortive Demonstration of 20 June 1792. Sergent-Marceau and Panis [ fr ], the administrators of police, urged the sans-culottes to lay down their weapons, telling them it was illegal to present a petition in arms, although their march to the Tuileries was not banned. They invited the officials to join the procession and march along with them.

Early in the morning (10 August 1792) 30,000 Fédérés, and sans-culottes militants from the sections led a successful assault upon the Tuileries; according to Robespierre a triumph for the "passive" (non-voting) citizens. Sulpice Huguenin [ fr ], head of the sans-culottes in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, was appointed provisional president of the Insurrectionary Commune.

In Spring 1793, after the defection of Dumouriez, Robespierre urged the creation of a " sans-culotte army" to sweep away any conspirator.

On 1 May, the crowds threatened armed insurrection if the emergency measures demanded (price control) were not adopted. On 8 and 12 May Robespierre repeated in the Jacobin club the necessity of founding a revolutionary army consisting of sans-culottes, paid by a tax on the rich, to beat the aristocrats inside France and the convention. Every public square should be used to produce arms and pikes. On 18 May, Marguerite-Élie Guadet proposed to examine the "exactions" and to replace municipal authorities.

As rioting persisted, a commission of inquiry of twelve members, with a very strong Girondin majority, was set up to investigate the anarchy in the communes and the activities of the sans-culottes. On 28 May, the Paris Commune accepted the creation of a sans-culottes army to enforce revolutionary laws. Petitioners from the sections and the Commune appeared at the bar of the Convention at about five o'clock in the afternoon on 31 May. They demanded that a domestic revolutionary army should be raised and that the price of bread should be fixed at three sous a pound, that nobles holding senior rank in the army should be dismissed, that armouries should be created for arming the sans-culottes, the departments of State purged, suspects arrested, the right to vote provisionally reserved to sans-culottes only, and a fund set apart for the relatives of those defending their country and for the relief of aged and infirm. According to Hampson, the subject is quite extraordinarily complicated and obscure. The next day all Paris was in arms.

Hanriot was ordered to march his National Guard, by this time mostly consisting of sans-culottes, from the town hall to the Palais National. On 2 June 1793, a large force of supposedly 80,000 sans-culottes and National Guards led by Hanriot, surrounded the convention with 160–172 guns.

On 4 September, the sans-culottes again invaded the convention. They demanded tougher measures against rising prices and the setting up of a system of terror to root out the counter-revolution. The sans-culottes took an especially active interest in the revolutionary army.

A " sans-culotte army" (in a sense, Robespierre's brain-child) was formed in Paris.

Barère voiced the Committee of Public Safety's support for the measures desired by the assembly: he presented a decree that was passed immediately, establishing a paid armed force of 6,000 men and 1,000 gunners "designed to crush the counter-revolutionaries, to execute wherever the need arises the revolutionary laws and the measures of public safety that are decreed by the National Convention, and to protect provisions (A force of citizen-soldiers which could go into the countryside to supervise the requisition of grain, to prevent the manoeuvres of rich égoistes and deliver them up to the vengeance of the laws)".) For that reason, twelve travelling tribunals (with moveable guillotines) were set up.

Three months later, on 4 December, the departmental revolutionary armies (except in Paris) were banned on proposal of Tallien. The sections lost all rights to control their delegates and officials.

On 4 March 1794, there were rumours of uprising in the Cordeliers club. The Hébertists hoped that the National Convention would expel Robespierre and his Montagnard supporters. The sans-culottes did not respond, and Hanriot refused to cooperate. On 13 March Hébert, the voice of the sans-culottes, had been using the latest issue of Le Père Duchesne to criticise Robespierre. On 18 March Bourdon attacked the Commune and the sans-culottes army. Jacques Hébert, Ronsin, Vincent, Momoro, Clootz, De Kock were arrested on charges of complicity with foreign powers (William Pitt the Younger) and guillotined on 24 March. On 27 March the infantry and cavalry of the revolutionary army, for eight months active in Paris and surroundings, were finally disbanded, except their artillery. (Hanriot was denounced by the Revolutionary Tribunal as an accomplice of Hébert, but seems to have been protected by Robespierre.)

The working class was especially hurt by a hail storm which damaged grain crops in 1788, which caused bread prices to skyrocket. While the peasants of rural France could sustain themselves with their farms, and the wealthy aristocracy could still afford bread, the urban workers of France, the group that comprised the sans-culottes, suffered. In the city, the division grew between the sans-culottes and these wealthy aristocrats; the former had a particular hostility "towards those with large private incomes."

The faction known as the Montagnards expressed concern for the working classes of France. When the National Convention met to discuss the fate of the former king Louis XVI in 1792, the sans-culottes vehemently opposed a proper trial, instead opting for an immediate execution. The moderate Girondin faction voted for a trial, but the radical Montagnards sided with the sans-culottes, deeming that a trial was not necessary, and won with a slim majority. Louis XVI was executed on January 21, 1793.

The demands of the sans-culottes did not stop with the execution of the King, and the Montagnards worked hard to fulfil their mounting orders. This increased pressure from the radical masses exacerbated the ideological split between the Montagnards and the Girondins, and tensions began to grow within the convention. Eventually, by May 1793, the Montagnards worked with the National Guard —which was, at this time, mostly sans-culottes —to depose many of the Girondin deputies. Jeremy Popkin writes, "[the Montagnards and the sans-culottes ] surrounded the Convention, and two days later the intimidated assembly suspended twenty-nine Girondin deputies. The defeated Girondin leaders fled to the provinces. The Montagnards were left in control of the Convention, which itself was clearly at the mercy of whoever could command the armed sans-culottes battalions." Now, whoever was in control of France's destiny had to answer to the sans-culottes, who "effectively exercised legislative power" in situations of unrest. Otherwise, they would risk a similar uprising and their own exile, or possibly even execution. This political shift towards radicalism would soon turn into the Reign of Terror.

The mass violence of the sans-culottes created a lasting impact during the Reign of Terror. These revolutionaries allied themselves most readily with those in power who promised radical change. The sans-culottes believed in a complete upheaval of the government, pushing for the execution of any that were considered corrupt by the leaders, even going as far as wanting "the enemies of the republic [to] hang-main and the guillotine to stand like the first patriots, the finisher of the law." The support of the sans-culottes could be used as a political weapon to get rid of enemies of the Revolution. The key to Robespierre's Terror lay in their willingness and ability to mobilize. Thus, the Committee leaders used speeches to gain their support. In a speech On the Principles of Political Morality. Robespierre proclaimed: "It has been said that terror was the mainspring of despotic government. Does your government, then, resemble a despotism? Yes, as the sword which glitters in the hands of liberty's heroes resembles the one with which tyranny's lackeys are armed." Robespierre expressed a desire for liberty that the sans-culottes admired. They pushed the committee for radical changes and often found a voice with Robespierre.

The popular image of the sans-culotte has gained currency as an enduring symbol for the passion, idealism and patriotism of the common man of the French Revolution. The term sans-culottism, sans-culottisme in French, refers to this idealized image and the themes associated with it. Many public figures and revolutionaries who were not strictly working class styled themselves citoyens sans-culottes in solidarity and recognition. However, in the period immediately following the Thermidorian Reaction, the sans-culottes and other far-left political factions were heavily persecuted and repressed by the likes of the Muscadins.

The French Republican Calendar at first termed the complementary days at the end of the year Sansculottides ; however, the National Convention suppressed the name when adopting the Constitution of the Year III (1795) and substituted the name jours complémentaires ("additional days").

According to Sally Waller, part of the sans-culottes mantra was "permanent anticipation of betrayal and treachery". The members of the sans-culottes were constantly on edge and fearing betrayal, which can be attributed to their violent and radical rebellion tactics. Marxist historian Eric Hobsbawm observes that the sans-culottes were a "shapeless, mostly urban movement of the labouring poor, small craftsmen, shopkeepers, artisans, tiny entrepreneurs and the like". He further notes they were organised notably in the local political clubs of Paris and "provided the main striking-force of the revolution". Hobsbawm writes that these were the actual demonstrators, rioters and constructors of the street barricades. However, Hobsbawm maintains, sans-culottism provided no real alternative to the bourgeois radicalism of the Jacobins ; from Hobsbawm's Marxist perspective, the ideal of the sans-culottes, which sought to express the interests of the "little men" who existed between the poles of the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, was contradictory and ultimately unrealizable.

The Marxist historian Albert Soboul emphasized the importance of the sans-culottes as a social class, a sort of proto-proletariat that played a central role in the French Revolution. That view has been sharply attacked by scholars who say the sans-culottes were not a class at all. As one historian observes, Soboul's concept has not been used by scholars in any other period of French history.

The term "culottes" in more recent French describes women's underpants, an article of clothing that has little or no relation to the historical culottes, but now also refers to apparent skirts that are actually split with two legs. The term sans-culottes has been used colloquially to mean not wearing underpants.

A santon is a small hand-painted figurine cast in terracotta or a similar material that is used for building nativity scenes. Santons are a traditional product of the Provence region of southeastern France. A maker of santons is called a santonnier.

The word "santon" comes from the Provençal "santoun," or "little saint." They became popular during the French Revolution, when the churches were closed and the larger, traditional nativity scenes in churches prohibited. Smaller figurines began appearing in homes, and quickly gained popularity.

The traditional manufacture of santons is centred on Marseille, Aix-en-Provence, Arles and Aubagne. In the month leading up to Christmas, there are traditional santon fairs all over Provence where santons of all sizes can be acquired to decorate domestic creches.

Apart from the standard figures and animals associated with the nativity (including elephants and camels), there are countless other santons depicting traditional characters from Provençal village life, including the motley fool, the miller and the blind man. Another common figure is a shepherd facing the mistral and the other winds of Provence, holding his hat, with his cloak blowing.

Sarkozysm (Sarkozysme) is the name commonly given to the policies and political agenda of former French President Nicolas Sarkozy, including his presidential policies between 2007 and 2012. It can also refer to the supporters of Nicolas Sarkozy within the centre-right Les Republicains (LR).

Nicolas Sarkozy's platform for the 2007 presidential election was the fruit of at least five years of work by over 250 intellectuals and experts under the auspices of Emmanuelle Mignon, who is sometimes referred to as the "brain" of Sarkozysm.

Although Sarkozy declared himself to be above existing theories and political ideologies, he nevertheless associated his ideology and political agenda with the Gaullist tradition of Charles de Gaulle and the former Rally for the Republic (RPR). However, Sarkozy envisioned his agenda as representing a clear break with the policies and orientations of his predecessor and political nemesis, President Jacques Chirac. Indeed, Sarkozysm sees itself as a rupture (break) with Chirac's leadership of the right and has denounced the alleged "immobilism" of Chirac's presidency.

Some observers like liberal economist Jacques Marseille or journalist Alain Duhamel have considered Sarkozysm to be a mix of modern Bonapartism and pragmatism.

According to Pierre Giacometti, the core values of Sarkozysm are: a certain work ethic (valeur travail), the nation-state and voluntarism with a dose of personality cult.

Former MEP Jean-Louis Bourlanges described Sarkozy's ideology as a mix of economic liberalism and Jacobinism, although this did not preclude Sarkozy, as President in November 2008, to bail out troubled banks or create a sovereign fund of 20 billion euros to finance the development of businesses who could not finance themselves through the traditional banking system.

French philosopher Pierre Musso, in his book Le Sarkoberlusconisme, claims that Sarkozysm is comparable to the policies of Silvio Berlusconi in Italy: a political 'break' with the methods of the past, a common emphasis on a certain work ethic, economic liberalism with a dose of dirigisme (or Colbertism), and a pro-American foreign policy.

A relatively unique specificity of Sarkozysm, in its earlier years, was a so-called policy of ouverture, whereby Sarkozy actively recruited certain supporters or members of the centre-left Socialist Party (PS) to his government. Left-wing personalities including Bernard Kouchner, Éric Besson, Fadela Amara, Frédéric Mitterrand, Jean-Marie Bockel, Jean-Pierre Jouyet or Martin Hirsch all served as ministers in Sarkozy's governments.

Sarkozysm and Nicolas Sarkozy's presidency is also marked by a major change in political "style" and rhetoric.

Sarkozy was considered as a celebrity president during the first year of his term, and his opponents have often criticized his superficial attitudes and "bling bling" style. His close friendship with major businessmen and corporate CEOs (Arnaud Lagardère, Vincent Bolloré, Bernard Arnault) or prominent celebrities (Jean-Marie Bigard, Johnny Hallyday, Christian Clavier) have also been a source of unease with some.

Whereas former French Presidents tended to grant more autonomy and leeway to their Prime Ministers, Sarkozy's presidency was marked by a centralization of powers in the presidency and his style was branded by the press as "hyper-presidentialism".

Nicolas Sarkozy lost reelection to François Hollande on 6 May 2012, but within Sarkozy's party (the UMP), polls and the November 2012 UMP congress showed that activists and members of the UMP have remained strongly attached towards Nicolas Sarkozy and Sarkozysm. Both candidates for the presidency of the UMP in November 2012 – Sarkozy's Prime Minister François Fillon and UMP secretary-general Jean-François Copé have officially claimed loyalty to the Sarkozyst 'ideals'. Since 2017, Nicolas Sarkozy has again become the most appreciated right-wing politician of the French.

During 2023, a resurgence in popularity, or even a significant shift, emerged towards the traditional so-called 'hard' right, especially since the legal cases against it and their consequences (prison in particular), where the justice system is considered by some French people to be militant of the 'moral' left and which ultimately leads to a lack of objectivity in its decisions.

Sarkozysm and 'Sarkozysts' have also been used to denote Sarkozy's supporters and allies within the UMP, particularly during the period where he sought to take control the UMP (between 2002 and 2004) and until his election to the presidency in 2007.

Sarkozy's core group of supporters largely came from the balladurian liberal conservative faction of the former Rally for the Republic (RPR), a group of pro-European, fiscal conservatives and liberals who had supported Prime Minister Édouard Balladur 's candidacy in the 1995 presidential election against that of RPR leader Jacques Chirac. Sarkozy, the budget minister in Balladur's government (1993–1995) and his campaign spokesperson, was one of the main leaders of the balladurian faction of the RPR and gradually took its leadership after 1997. Original members of this faction of the RPR included the liberal Patrick Devedjian (unsuccessful candidate for the presidency of the RPR in 1999), Dominique Perben, Michel Barnier, Michel Giraud, Patrick Balkany, Brice Hortefeux, Christian Estrosi, Bernard Accoyer and Thierry Mariani. François Fillon, a former ally of Philippe Séguin and longtime opponent Chirac's leadership of the RPR, became a Sarkozyst in around 2003–2004.

The distinctions between Sarkozysts and non-Sarkozysts within the UMP were blurred after Sarkozy's accession to the presidency of the UMP in 2004 and later to the French presidency in 2007. Several politicians previously identified as allies of Jacques Chirac, such as Jean-François Copé, reemerged as Sarkozysts during this period. Several younger politicians in the UMP, such as Nadine Morano and today Guillaume Peltier have identified themselves as loyal Sarkozysts.

Peltier's motion in the November 2012 UMP congress, The Strong Right won the most votes of any other motion with 27.77%.

The Satire Ménippée (French pronunciation: [ satiʁ menipe ]) or La Satyre Ménippée de la vertu du Catholicon d'Espagne was a political and satirical work in prose and verse that mercilessly parodied the Catholic League and Spanish pretensions during the Wars of Religion in France, and championed the idea of an independent but Catholic France. The work was a collaborative effort of various functionaries, lawyers, clerics and scholars. It appeared at a time that coincided with the ascendance of Henry IV of France and the defeat of the League.

The title derives from the classical Greek and Roman literary genre " menippean satire ", a form of carnivalesque literature in a free-form mixture of prose, verse and dialogue. Mikhail Bakhtin called the Satyre Ménippée "one of the greatest political satires of world literature".

The Satyre Ménippée was written in 1593 and published in Tours in 1594 during the Etats Généraux convened in Paris by the leader of the Catholic League, Charles, Duke of Mayenne. Charles hoped to get himself elected to the French throne in the place of the pretender to the throne, the future Henry IV of France. The work was conceived by Pierre le Roy, canon of Rouen and chaplain to the cardinal of Bourbon, during discussions with friends at the home of Jacques Gillot, canon of the Sainte-Chapelle, in Paris. The work was written by Nicolas Rapin, Jean Passerat and Florent Chrestien, and edited/revised by Pierre Pithou.

The philosophy of the group around Pithou and Rapin, which formed the ideological motivation for Satire Ménippée, was that of the " Politiques " – moderate Catholics who privileged peace, conceived of a distinction between the State and Religion, and sought political accommodation with the Huguenots. By the end of the civil wars, the "politiques" were the principal target of attack of the Catholic League.

The work includes a description of a procession and all the forces of the League, a burlesque description of the opening of the États Généreaux, imaginary speeches by real personages such as the Duke of Mayenne, the legate of the Pope, and the cardinals Pelvé (attributed to Chrestien) and Aubray (attributed to Pithou), and a number of additional satires and epigrams. The writers paint the miseries of the nation and the blindness of their detractors, and they encourage an alliance of the people and the monarchy to save the nation. The comical and openly derisive brilliance of the work made it extremely popular at the time.

Notably, Diderot's Encyclopédie praises the work for its "singularity" and notes its usefulness to Henry IV.

Sauce Périgueux and its derivative Sauce Périgourdine, named after the city of Périgueux, capital of the Périgord region of France, are savoury sauces. Their principal ingredients are madeira and truffles.

Périgord in western France is noted for its truffles. A sauce Périgord, made of vegetables, ham or bacon, and mushrooms, sometimes with truffle peelings, is named after the region. The more elaborate sauce Périgueux is mentioned frequently in the recipes of Marie-Antoine Carême from the late 18th and early 19th centuries. Carême calls for the sauce to be served with birds including chicken, thrush, and pheasant, and fish including lemon sole, whiting, and salmon.

The author James Bentley calls sauce Périgueux, "an essential ingredient of many dishes and part of the repertoire of every French chef". He comments that it is often mistakenly called Dordogne sauce, "which obscures its origins in the capital of Périgord".

In L'art de la cuisine française, Carême's collected recipes, the ingredients of the sauce are not listed, but Auguste Escoffier, in his 1934 book Ma Cuisine, specifies a demi-glace finished with madeira, and chopped truffles. He recommends the sauce as an accompaniment to eggs; crépinettes of mutton, lamb or chicken; poussin ; boudin blanc ; saddle of hare ; young turkey; and pheasant. Alternatives to madeira are mentioned in Gustav Carlin's 1889 Le cuisinier moderne, which suggests champagne, and in James Bentley's 1986 Life and Food in the Dordogne, which replaces madeira with white wine and cognac.

Sauce Périgueux is the classic accompaniment to a Tournedos Rossini. Some modern recipes use tinned truffles: among the writers calling for these are Elizabeth David in French Provincial Cooking (1960) and Simone Beck, Louisette Bertholle and Julia Child in Mastering the Art of French Cooking (1961). Beck and her colleagues recommend the sauce as an accompaniment to fillet of beef, fresh foie gras, ham, veal, egg dishes and timbales.

Sauce Périgourdine is a derivative of sauce Périgueux and differs only in that the latter is finished with chopped truffles and the former with truffles cut into miniature globes or with whole slices of truffle.

Saucisse de Toulouse (Toulouse sausage) is a fresh sausage originating from Toulouse in southwest France. It is made from pork (75% lean, 25% belly), salt and pepper, has a natural casing of about 3 cm (1.2 in) in diameter and is usually sold in a coil (like Cumberland sausage).

It is an ingredient of most cassoulet recipes and is also served grilled or confit.

Saucisse de Toulouse does not have a protected status so variations on the original recipe can be sold under the same name. Producers' organisations have proposed a Label Rouge designation for the product the recipe for which would adhere to certain criteria: raw pork meat and fat (no more than 80% lean), ham without shank, shoulder without shank, loin, brisket, and back fat; a natural casing of pork or mutton; salt at an amount between 1.5% and 1.8% of the total ingredients; water, ice; sugars at a maximum of 1% of the total ingredients (only sucrose, dextrose, glucose, or lactose); aromatics, spices and wines at a maximum of 0.7% in total, and trace amounts of one of: ascorbic acid (E300), sodium ascorbate (E301), erythorbic acid (E315), or sodium erythorbate (E316) as a preservative.

A sausage roll is a savoury dish, popular in current and former Commonwealth nations, consisting of sausage meat wrapped in puff pastry. Although variations are known throughout Europe and in other regions, the sausage roll is most closely associated with British cuisine. The British bakery chain Greggs sells around 2.5 million sausage rolls per week, or around 140 million per year.

The basic composition of a sausage roll is sheets of puff pastry formed into tubes around sausage meat and glazed with egg or milk before being baked. They can be served either hot or cold. In the 19th century, they were made using shortcrust pastry instead of puff pastry. A vegetarian or vegan approximation of a sausage roll can be made in the same manner, using a meat substitute.

The wrapping of meat or other foodstuffs into dough can be traced back to the Classical Greek or Roman eras. Early versions of the roll with pork as a filling proved popular in London during the Napoleonic Wars and it became identified as an English dish.

On 20 September 1809, the Bury and Norwich Post mentions T. Ling, aged 75, (an industrious vendor of saloop, buns, and sausage rolls). The Times first mentions the food item in 1864 when William Johnstone, " wholesale pork pie manufacturer and sausage roll maker", was fined £15 (£ 1,300 in 2021), under the Nuisances Removal Act (Amendment) Act 1863, for having on his premises a large quantity of meat unsound, unwholesome and unfit for food. In 1894, a theft case provided further insights into the Victorian sausage roll production whereby the accused apprentice was taught to soak brown bread in red ochre, salt, and pepper to give the appearance of beef sausage for the filling.

Similar meat and pastry recipes include the Czech klobásník, the Belgian worstenbroodje, the Dutch saucijzenbroodje, the German Münsterländer Wurstbrötchen and sausage bread in the United States. Hong Kong has developed its own style of sausage roll. Instead of having sausage meat wrapped in puff pastry like the traditional Western style, the Hong Kong style "sausage bun" (Chinese: 腸仔包) consists of a sausage wrapped inside a soft milk bread style bun.

In the UK, the bakery chain Greggs sells around 2.5 million sausage rolls per week, or around 140 million per year. The sausage roll is most closely associated with British cuisine.

Savoyard (endonym : savoyârd) is a Franco-Provençal dialect of the Gallo-Romance family. It is spoken in some territories of the historical Duchy of Savoy, nowadays a geographic area spanning Savoie and Haute-Savoie, France and the Canton of Geneva, Switzerland. It has around 35,000 speakers today.

The Savoyard language is included in the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages as a dialect of the Franco-Provencal. However, Savoyard is itself subdivided into many sub-dialects in almost all major valleys.

Savoyard has seen its number of speakers greatly decrease since the annexation of Savoy to France in 1860, in particular because of the prohibition of speaking it at school, military service, as well as during the two world conflicts. The 20th century saw the number of speakers decrease from almost all of the population of the Savoyard countryside to a few tens of thousands.

However, during the 1980s, a renewed interest existed with the organization of many international festivals of the Franco-Provencal language, the creation of several associations with the aim of safeguarding this language, in particular, the group of Conflans, and the " Institut de la langue savoyarde ", the publication of many books (monographs, books, novels), as well as the teaching – although difficult, because of the lack of recognition as a regional language. Many exchanges between students who have taken this option are organized each year, especially during the Constantin-Désormeaux competition to reward the best work of students in this language. Bilingual signage is also beginning to be present in Savoy at the entrance of the agglomerations.

The way in which Savoyard must evolve, as for a possible pseudo-uniformization, a spelling common to the whole of the Franco-Provencal area, is however subject to many controversies between several currents. These currents are most often divided into two groups. Patoisants, a group mainly formed of retirees, who, for the most part, are native speakers, having unconsciously learned the language from an early age with their parents, often with regard to rural life, but who, for some of them, have only "re interested themselves" in the Savoyard at a late age : for the majority, they are for a preservation of the language, and its variations, prefer to use the graphie de Conflans (a type of semi-phonetic spelling). The other group, informal, is composed of the new speakers, whose most represented group is that of the arpitans. Most of these are intellectuals and have learned the language only late, voluntarily. Unlike the patoisants, they use the term patois only with native speakers, because they believe that for the general public, the term patois has a derogatory connotation, and only moderately use the word Franco-Provencal which is of a confused nature, they prefer the Arpitan neologism.

Savoyard is a dialect of Franco-Provençal, itself a Gallo-Romance language that developed mainly from Latin and the Gaulish dialects, with a Burgundian substrate whose importance remains debated. Emerging during the Carolingian period, together with the wider Franco-Provençal linguistic area, Savoyard underwent a series of developments and divisions that shaped the modern dialect and its different valley-based varieties.

The earliest development of Savoyard is associated with the Carolingian period, during the differentiation of the Oïl and Franco-Provençal linguistic areas. One explanation connects this separation with the political reorganization of northern Gaul after the reign of Clovis I, when Paris became the center of the Salian Frankish kingdom. As a result, linguistic developments characteristic of the Oil area were not always adopted in the Franco-Provençal area.

A major difference was the resistance of the Franco-Provençal area to the generalized final-stress pattern, or oxytonism, found in the Oil languages. Many final vowels, especially final -a marking the feminine, remained weakly pronounced or unstressed. Thus Latin rosa developed into French rose, while Savoyard preserved forms such as reu or rouza.

On the main substrate of Savoyard, which is Latin, Celtic and Gaulish traces from a late Latinisation remained present in the Savoyard language. Indeed, the main difference between Occitan and Franco-Provençal is the date of Latinisation, which for the latter was later than for the former. As a result, the Celtic substrate is much more important in the Franco-Provençal domain than in the Occitan domain, as shown by the many words from Gaulish dialects incorporated into the language.

One example is the word BLIGITICARE, meaning “to milk” in Gaulish, which in Savoyard gave bloshyi / blotsyé / blostyé [bləθi] or [bləstje], meaning “to finish milking” or “to milk a second time”. As with many other Gaulish forms that remained in Savoyard, one can observe the pejorative evolution of this word, “barbarian” in the eyes of Latin.

The Savoyard word nant, meaning “river”, which is now very common in Savoyard toponymy, is also a good example of the Celtic substrate. It is found in the Brittonic languages in related forms, such as Breton nant, meaning “canal”.

The Early Middle Ages were also the setting for barbarian invasions in Savoy, mainly by the Burgundians, who contributed a more or less significant number of words to Savoyard, such as tasson, meaning “badger”, and fata, meaning “pocket”. However, given the limited knowledge that linguists have of the Burgundian language, it is difficult to determine exactly the extent of the Burgundian substrate. It is therefore the subject of strong debate.

It should therefore be noted that Savoyard contains borrowings from Celtic languages, such as nant or nan, meaning “stream” or “torrent”, and from Burgundian, but also from neighbouring languages such as Occitan, and some from the Oïl languages. Nevertheless, the main substrate of Savoyard, as of the other Romance languages, remains Latin, including unstressed Latin final vowels, as in the name of the village La Giettaz, pronounced [ðjɛta], where the final a is barely heard.

The beginning of this long historical period was marked by a phase of strong linguistic evolution and fragmentation, not limited to the Franco-Provençal area, and still unclear in the case of Savoyard. Indeed, the developments between the Oil domain and the Franco-Provençal domain occurred either in a more or less similar way, or in a completely different way.

In the 12th century, a notable development occurred similarly in both domains: the weakening or disappearance of preconsonantal s before a voiceless consonant, for example tsasté > tsaté. On the other hand, the split that had begun between the two linguistic groups under the reign of Clovis became partly more pronounced in the 13th century, especially through the reduction, in Old French, of the affricate consonants [d͡ʒ] to [ʒ] — from Latin J, D + Y, and G + A — of [t͡s] to [s], and of [t͡ʃ] to [ʃ] — from Latin C + I, E.

Thus, from the 13th century onward, the Latin words centus and vocem evolved in French in the following way: diŭrnus gave djorn > jorn > jour, and centus gave tsentus > cent. In Franco-Provençal, however, a different pattern can be observed, as follows: cinque > tsin(q) > þẽ / [θẽ] > thin, and djor > dzor > zor, with some dialects continuing toward z or [ð], the sound of English th, except in certain parts of the Franco-Provençal area, where the forms in dz and ts were preserved for a longer or shorter period.

It is in this respect that a certain linguistic uncertainty remains, because [dz] and [ts] did not survive in exactly the same form throughout all of Savoy. Indeed, as shown by the map opposite, Latin C + A, whose original form [t͡s] gave, depending on the Savoyard variety, [st], [θ], [h], [s], and more recently [f] at Lanslebourg in the early 1900s. As for [d͡z], it gave [ʒ], [z], and [zd].

Most of these developments remain uncertain. However, the period during which [t͡s] evolved into [θ], and [d͡z] into [ʒ], is probably the one mentioned above, namely the 13th century, since it was during the same period that Spanish likewise saw its [t͡s] evolve into the inter dental [θ], identical to Savoyard sh.

The metatheses [st] and [zd] found in the Val d'Arly and the Beaufortain remain mysterious, and few explanations have been offered. One of the rare studies carried out on this subject was that of Jules Cornu, who in 1877 published his study “Métathèse de ts en st et de dz en zd” in Romania, volume 6, no. 23. He proposed an explanation according to which the sounds [zd] and [st], not being simple sounds, result from a linguistic development. He therefore argued that a development of the type ts > sts > st and dz > zdz > zd is probably at the origin of this variation, which is unique within the Franco-Provençal domain.

In addition to linguistic developments, the Middle Ages and the Renaissance were also a golden age of Savoyard literature. Numerous writings recounting important episodes in the Duchy of Savoy flourished. Thus, the texts of Jean Menenc, who in 1590 praised the merits of Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy, include the following excerpt:

Texts were not always favourable to the Duchy of Savoy, as shown by Le plaisant discours d'un médecin savoyart emprisonné pour avoir donné advis au Duc de Savoye de ne croire son devin, an Old French title dating from the summer of 1600. The following is an excerpt:

Par mon âme, je le fis bien bouillir (de colère)

Et il est duc et roi, par ma foi! [...]

Savoyard was and remains a geographically variable language, because the formation of a unitary Franco-Provençal language was not facilitated by the territorial divisions experienced by the Rhône-Alpes region. Only Savoy, the Aosta Valley, Vaud, Geneva and Valais experienced greater linguistic independence, since they were not attached to France. Another cause of the variations in Savoyard is the presence of mountains. Indeed, this natural obstacle does not facilitate movement, due to rugged terrain, heavy snowfall, and other factors, and is the cause of the isolation of many villages and hamlets. The major effect of this near autarky is that variations can be felt between certain valleys, and sometimes even between certain villages. Franco-Provençal nevertheless continued to be used in most of the Northern Alps, including the Dauphiné, Lyonnais and Bresse.

From the 19th century onward, a very large number of studies of the Savoyard language appeared. These studies, carried out by linguists such as Aimé Constantin, Jules Gilliéron, Joseph Désormaux, Jules Cornu and Graziadio Isaia Ascoli for Franco-Provençal as a whole, led to the publication of many dictionaries, such as the Dictionnaire Savoyard by Aimé Constantin and Joseph Désormaux.

However, a certain number of studies, research works and linguistic accounts concerning Savoyard existed before this period, as shown by the following excerpt from La precellence du langage Françoys, dating from 1579:

“En Savoy, un laboureur s'en allant labourer la terre dit qu'il s'en va arar, syncopant le latin arare... Or ce mesme pays a retenu plusieurs belles paroles de la langue latine, qui ne se trouvent point ès aultres dialectes” — Henry Estienne, La precellence du langage Françoys, 1579

However, these studies were not very numerous before the 19th century, and most of them were fairly brief. But from the linguistic awareness that developed at the end of the 19th century, specialists began to travel through the Savoyard mountains in search of testimonies and information concerning the different varieties of the language.

All this research led to the publication of hundreds of reports, dictionaries and articles in linguistic journals, such as the Revue des patois gallo-romans. All of these studies were brought together by Joseph Désormaux in his Bibliographie méthodique des parlers de Savoie: langue et littérature.

Despite the growing recognition of this language in academic circles, thanks to the above-mentioned studies, compulsory learning of French, the First World War and modernization only accelerated the already ongoing decline of the Savoyard language. Thus, from the end of the Second World War, and especially around the 1960s with the rural exodus and the transformation of the rural world, Savoyard was scarcely used except among the peasantry and older people, mainly to describe tools or agricultural work.

However, since the 1980s, there has been an increasingly visible enthusiasm for Savoyard. This has been mainly due to tourism and to an awareness of the heritage value represented by Savoyard, promoted by several groups and especially by the Groupe de Conflans, through its efforts to organize competitions and to develop an orthography allowing texts to be written and collected. Moreover, like any language, Savoyard possesses the invaluable richness of reflecting a local culture — Savoyard culture in this case — including ways of working, living and inhabiting the Alpine mountains.

Echoing this dynamic, Savoyard has for several decades been taught in bilingual schools by the Association des Enseignants de Savoyard (AES), despite legislative difficulties restricting this teaching, particularly regarding the Savoyard option in the Baccalauréat, which to this day has not been authorized by the Ministry of Education. The learning of this language does not stop there, however: many patois-speaking groups throughout the Pays de Savoie organize courses or evening gatherings for learning Savoyard in different communes.

Among the speech varieties of Savoy, there are certain specific features, both in phonetic treatment and in lexical corpus.

A frequently cited phonetic particularity is the palatalisation of the Latin group CA-, which, depending on the case, evolved into [θ] in the Annecy region, [st] in the Val d'Arly and Beaufortain, and [ts] in upper Maurienne. Thus, the word for “field”, from Latin campus, gives [θã], [stã] or [tsã] depending on the locality.

Another important characteristic concerns the names of the days of the week. In several Romance languages, these names continue a pattern in which the planetary or divine name precedes the word “day”, as in Latin-based forms such as Lunae dies, Martis dies and Mercurii dies. Savoyard, by contrast, preserves or reflects the inverse order, with dies placed first: dies Lunae, dies Martis, dies Mercurii, and so on. This gives the Savoyard forms Delon, Demârs, Demécro, Dejô or Dzou, Devendro, Dessando and Demenge.

In the lexicon, in addition to words for plant species specific to the mountain zone, such as vèrna and vèrôche for green alder, foyârd for beech, darbé for spruce, vouargno for silver fir, and shardosse for carline thistle, there are also many terms related to meteorology : bacan and bôrt temps for bad weather, coussie for storm, rosâ for shower, and niola for cloud.

Other lexical items relate to the environment, such as cllapiér and pèrrié for scree, ègrâs for stairs, bâlma for cave, tôva for peat bog, and lanshe for a sloping field. The latter is at the origin of the Savoyard word that became French avalanche, from Savoyard avâ, “to descend”, and lanshe, “field” or “sloping field”. Original expressions include fâ la pota, “to pout”, and étre louen, “to go away”. These linguistic creations strongly distinguish Savoyard from the dialects of Oïl and Oc.

Contrary to the widespread idea that Savoyard varies in an archaic and undetermined manner, many isoglosses can be observed, delimiting distinct areas.

In Savoyard, dje, from Latin ego, evolved into de in the west and north of Savoie, but into ze, zou, dze or zde in the eastern dialects.

The old form of the Franco-Provençal area for Latin C+A was ts. As stated above, it was preserved in middle Tarentaise, in the Belleville valley, and sporadically in various places in Savoy, including Mont-Saxonnex and the Bauges.

In most Savoyard dialects, namely those of the west, the north, and also of Maurienne, this earlier form gave way to the interdental sh, [θ]. However, three other areas underwent different developments: the Val d'Arly, middle Maurienne, and Haute Tarentaise. Haute Tarentaise simplified ts into s, while in middle Maurienne this form changed into h. In the Val d'Arly and the Beaufortain, [t͡s] was inverted into [st], which, unlike the former, is not a simple sound.

The third person singular, in cases where it is neuter, evolved in two different ways. In northern Savoy, it gave i, as in i plyu, “it rains”; while in the south, it is é, as in é plyu, “it rains”.

It may be noted that, in Savoyard, there are two major distinct zones of development; the isogloss between the two is relatively similar to that of the third person singular neuter. In the north, Latin C+I,E gave f, whose center of diffusion was probably Geneva. In the south, apart from the hiatus developments of Maurienne, C+I,E gave s in almost the entire department, except for a scattered development into sh in a few isolated places.

Verbs ending in Latin with the form IARE, as in Old French, gave IER, which is today the first group ending in -er. Then, in most Savoyard dialects, this ending changed into I. Only two major exceptions depart from this rule: Arly and Tarin. Indeed, these two groups, being fairly conservative, kept the form YÉ for this ending. Moreover, the evolution of Latin short E is similar and gave i in most Savoyard variants, again with the exception of Arly and Tarin, where the form é, yé remained. For example, Shi gives tsé or styé.

Latin short U, which in French gave OU, evolved into a-ou in Old Franco-Provençal; various developments then followed according to the dialect. In the majority of northern dialects, with the exception of Chablais, which preserved a-o, the diphthong was simplified into the monophthong eu, perhaps under French influence, since it is identical to the form present in Old French.

In the south, this evolution into eu is only very sporadic; however, the original diphthong was not preserved everywhere either. Indeed, the sound a-ou was preserved as such only in the Beaufortain and Haute-Tarentaise, as o-ou, and changed into ô or â in areas bordering the conservative zones. Elsewhere, a-ou most often gave euy, except in the Val d'Arly, where, apart from a few words, the diphthong was reversed, giving ou-eu.

The Latin group ST was simplified into t in most Savoyard speech varieties, as in French; for example, FESTA > fêta. By contrast, in Tarentaise from Moûtiers onward, as well as in middle and upper Maurienne, the group ST resulted in [θ] and then in [s], [h], [x], or may disappear completely. The distribution is fairly complicated; several forms are sometimes found within a single local speech variety. For example, at Bonneval-sur-Arc, ST normally becomes [s], but [x] before /r/.

This development is common to other Franco-Provençal regions: the upper Aosta Valley, the canton of Fribourg, and parts of the cantons of Vaud and Valais.

The following table compares selected Savoyard words with their equivalents in Latin, several neighboring Romance languages and English. For Savoyard, the table gives only one or more common forms; it does not attempt to list all local variants.

Through these examples, a characteristic already discussed of Savoyard, and of Franco-Provençal in general, stands out: the variation and evolution of words according to different localities. This fluctuation of the language, especially in nouns and adjectives, is mainly due, as stated above, to the isolation of villages from one another, most often caused by relief and environmental factors such as snow.

As a result, some Savoyard varieties are more conservative than others. This is reflected in the preservation of older forms in certain patois, as in the example of the word for “iron wire”, translated as fi d'arsho or arsto in the most conservative varieties, as opposed to the forms fi de fér or fi dè fér found in varieties that have been influenced by French. These variations are more or less strong between neighbouring localities depending on the region. The most linguistically homogeneous region is the valley of Thônes, because it is enclosed by high mountains, which formerly allowed only limited contact with the outside. Even in this relatively homogeneous valley, however, variations, though minimal, do appear.

However, the study published as the Atlas linguistique et ethnographique du Jura et des Alpes du Nord, conducted by Gaston Tuaillon and Jean-Baptiste Martin, shows that, out of more than 1,500 common words, Savoyard, despite this tendency toward strong linguistic variation, had 600 that were common to all varieties of the dialect. Examples include r'nolye, “frog”, r'masse, “broom”, and modâ, “to leave”, which most often vary only by one syllable or by pronunciation.

Nevertheless, some of these words considered common to all Savoyard varieties do vary in certain isolated localities or regions. The example used above, r'nolye, is one of these words, since it appears in equivalent forms across Savoyard varieties except in Maurienne, where it changes to ran-na.

The preceding description of isoglosses and variations makes it possible to distinguish several major Savoyard dialect groups.

The Tarin dialect is characterized, as stated above, by its fairly conservative character, through the maintenance of several fundamental features of Franco-Provençal, such as ts and dz. Unlike most Savoyard dialects, Tarin conjugates the verb “to be” according to the Latin forms eram, eras, erat, giving dz'érou, t'érâ, and so on, like the dialects of the Aosta Valley and Valais.

Another major characteristic of Tarin, which it shares with Mauriennais, is that it preserved final consonants, as in tsatèl, “castle”. These consonants are quite often articulated according to declension: the subject case gives tsatè, while the oblique and subject cases give tsatèl.

Within the Tarin dialect, two main special cases can be distinguished: Haute-Tarentaise, especially Tignes, and the village of Esserts-Blay. The former differs from Tarin in several respects. First, in Haute-Tarentaise, Latin C+A was simplified into s, as in al a oün sapèl tirolyin, “he has a Tyrolean hat”. It may also be noted that the diphthong a-ou changed only slightly, with the form o-ou. These differences nevertheless remain minimal in relation to the language as a whole.

Blaycherain, for its part, departs above all in the area of verbs, such as “to be”, which is most often said étre in Savoyard, but étökh in Esserts-Blay.

The Mauriennais speech varieties are characterized by their many archaisms, despite a very great diversity among the local forms. One of the most striking of these archaisms is the fossilized preservation of remnants of declension. From Saint-Rémy to Termignon, the masculine singular adjective used as a subject complement takes a form identical to that of the plural, inherited from the Latin nominative. Thus, at Saint-Martin-de-la-Porte, “the ripe pear” is said lo pezhuit mòy (Latin maturum), but “the pear is ripe” is lo pezhuit é mour (Latin maturus). Similarly, in the plural the sentence is lo pezhui son mour (Latin maturos).

At Villarembert, Fontcouverte and Saint-Pancrace, the declension system is even better preserved and affects masculine singular subject nouns and the definite article. One says le fòr é hhô, “the oven is hot”, but d'é éhheuyda lo fòrt, “I heated the oven”. This alternation between the subject-case form le fòr and the oblique-case form lo fòrt is found for a series of nouns that continue to decline in this way.

Another archaizing feature of Maurienne is the preservation of the infinitive r, found in several villages of middle and upper Maurienne. In middle Maurienne, this final r often merges with final l and becomes [r], [l], [ð], [t] or [n], depending on the village. Thus, “to sing” and “beautiful” are said shantèr and bèr, shantèl and bèl, shantèzh and bèzh, and so on.

A number of villages, especially in middle Maurienne, preserve the unstressed final t of the third person singular: Latin CANTAT becomes shantèt, “he sings”.

The last two villages of the valley, Bonneval-sur-Arc and Bessans, preserve the final plural -s : la vatsé, lé vatsés.

Some pronunciations are indeed endemic to Maurienne, and among these, three are particularly notable. The first is the pronunciation of Latin on, which in most Savoyard dialects is pronounced [ɔ̃] or [ɔɳ], whereas in Mauriennais it is pronounced [ũ], written oün. The second typical Mauriennais sound is [ỹ], as in pün, “fist”. The third is [ĩ], as in pïn, “pine”, a sound unknown in French and in Savoyard outside this area, like the other sounds. A second feature, less visible at first sight, is the difference in vocabulary found in certain words; the earlier example of r'nolye, which gives ran-na in Maurienne, is one of the clearest examples.

The pronunciation of the palatalized consonants Latin C+A and Latin C+I,E is very diverse. Latin C+I,E results in sh, hh, or a hiatus, especially in upper Maurienne. For the evolution of CA, sh dominates most of the valley, but ts is also found, especially in upper Maurienne and at Saint-Sorlin-d'Arves. The sh evolved into hh around Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne, as in hhyèvra, “goat”, into f at Lanslebourg, as in vafe, “cow”, and into s at Termignon, as in sòl, “cabbage”.

The voiced variants are generally the equivalents of the voiceless forms, for example sh = zh, ts = dz, and so on, but zh becomes d at Valmeinier and tends to disappear in the Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne area.

This Savoyard dialect, following the course of the Arly, may first be seen as a relatively homogeneous Savoyard variety. This group differs from the others in several major respects, including the already mentioned metathesis of ts into st throughout the Arly area, and to a lesser extent of dz into zd. In addition to this main characteristic, several others are endemic to this dialect.

First, the evolution of stressed short O into ou-eu, as in porta > poueurta, for example le boueu, “the stable”. It may also be noted that the evolution of Latin C+A into st was sometimes accompanied by the addition of a y after st, as in styé, “at” or “chez”. The y was also preserved as such in many cases, as discussed above in the section on the evolution of Latin IARE verbs and short E, especially with verbs in -yé descending from Latin verbs ending in IARE, as well as with many words that evolved into i in the rest of the Savoyard dialects.

Chambérian may be viewed as the dialect of Savoie Propre, excluding Arly, characterized mainly by its own lexical variants. The most striking case is the evolution of the demonstrative pronoun “that one” in this region. Indeed, in most other dialects it gives s'li, s'lé, or even sétye in Arly; however, in the Chambérian dialect, it gives, without exception, chô, as in y'è chô ki fô sin, “it is that one who does that”.

Another similar development is that of the preposition “voilà”, which evolved into forms such as vétyà or vatchà, and tlé in Faucignerand, but which is present in the Chambérian dialect in the form vékà, also found sporadically in a few other places.

The Chambérian dialect, like Faucignerand, is also characterized by the influence of French, especially in part of its vocabulary. Thus, several prepositions such as tanke, tinke, or ’four, d'feur, meaning “outside”, have, with a few exceptions, given way to jusk’, jeusk’ and d'yôr, d'jôr, forms influenced by French.

This influence is also present in vocabulary, as with the word shalande, which appears, especially in the western part of the Chambérian dialect area, in the forms noyé in the feminine and no-é. Conjugation is also, to a lesser extent, influenced by French, mainly with the pronoun "elle" (she) and the past participle of the verb “to have”. Thus, the pronoun " elle" (she), which is most often represented by lé or yé in Savoyard, gives èl in most of the Chambérian area. For the past participle of “to have”, one finds a form closer to French than avu or awu, with zu or yeû, as in No on-n-a yeû in Petit-Bugey and No on-n-a zu in Arvillard.

Several subdialects of Savoyard exist that exhibit unique features in terms of phonetics and vocabulary. This includes many words that have to do with the weather: bacan (French: temps mauvais); coussie (French: tempête); royé (French: averse); ni[v]ole (French: nuage);...and, the environment: clapia, perrier (French: éboulis); égra (French: sorte d'escalier de pierre); balme (French: grotte); tova (French: tourbière); and lanche (French: champ en pente).

Savoyard has been the subject of detailed study at the Centre de dialectologie of the Stendhal University, Grenoble, currently under the direction of Michel Contini.

Schneider Electric SE is a French multinational corporation that specializes in energy technology, covering electrification, automation, and digitalization for industry and homes.

Registered as a Societas Europaea, Schneider Electric is a Fortune Global 500 company, publicly traded on the Euronext Exchange, and is a component of the Euro Stoxx 50 stock market index. In fiscal year 2024, the company posted revenues of €38.15 billion.

Schneider Electric is the parent company of Square D, APC, AVEVA, and others. It is also a research company.

Schneider Electric was recognized as the most sustainable company in Corporate Knights 's The Global 100 index in 2025.

In 1836, brothers Adolphe and Joseph-Eugene Schneider took over an iron foundry in Le Creusot, France. Two years later, they founded Schneider-Creusot, the company that would eventually become Schneider Electric. Initially, Schneider-Creusot specialized in the production of steel, heavy machinery, and transportation equipment. In 1871, following France's defeat in the Franco-Prussian War, the company significantly developed its capacity for weapons manufacturing. Over the first half of the 20th century, Schneider-Creusot continued to grow, establishing manufacturing sites in France and abroad, including in pre-Soviet Russia and Czechoslovakia.

In the 1960s, following the death of Charles Schneider, Schneider-Creusot was absorbed by Belgium's Empain group, which merged Schneider-Creusot with its corporate structures to form Empain-Schneider. In 1981, the Empain family sold its controlling stake to Paribas. In the 1980s and 1990s, the company, once again operating under the Schneider name, divested from steel and shipbuilding and, through strategic acquisitions, began to focus on the electricity sector. These acquisitions included Télémécanique in 1988, Square D in 1991, and Merlin Gerin [ fr ] in 1992. In 1996, the company created the holding company Schneider Electric (China) Investment Company Ltd.

In January 1999, Schneider acquired the Scandinavian switch-maker Lexel. Later that year, the company renamed itself Schneider Electric, to reflect its focus on the electricity sector. In 2000, Schneider Electric acquired the French controls-maker Crouzet Automatismes from Thomson-CSF and the Swiss motion control specialist SIG Positec from SIG Group.

In October 2006, Schneider Electric announced that it would acquire the data center equipment manufacturer American Power Conversion for $6.1 billion. The following February, the move was finalized following its approval by the European Commission. In June 2010, Schneider and the rolling stock manufacturer Alstom jointly purchased Areva 's transmission and distribution businesses in a transaction totaling $2.73 billion.

In 2016, Schneider acquired Tower Electric, a British company that manufactured fixings and fastenings for construction and electrical firms. In 2017, Schneider Electric became the majority shareholder of Aveva, a provider of engineering and industrial software based in the UK. The next year, it acquired the Indian multinational Larsen & Toubro 's electrical and automatic business in a cash deal for ₹ 140 billion (US$1.5 billion).

In February 2020, Schneider made a €1.4 billion takeover bid for German company RIB Software, closing the deal in July 2020. Also in 2020, Schneider Electric acquired ProLeiT AG, a supplier of industrial control and MES software.

In January 2023, Schneider Electric's acquisition of Aveva was finalized.

In November 2023, Schneider Electric finalized its acquisition of EcoAct, a company devoted to climate consulting and net-zero solutions.

After 18 months in office, CEO Peter Herweck was removed by the board of directors and replaced with Olivier Blum in early November 2024.

In October 2024, Schneider Electric signed an agreement to acquire a controlling interest in Motivair Corporation, a company specialized in liquid cooling and advanced thermal management solutions for data centers.

In December 2024, the company announced a partnership with Nvidia to design data center cooling systems.

In March 2025, Schneider Electric announced plans to invest more than US$700 million in its United States operations through 2027, marking the company's largest single capital expenditure in the country.

Schuss ([ ʃʊs ], primarily German for 'shot', but also the same as the English noun 'schuss', i.e. a high speed ski run directly down a slope) was the unofficial Olympic mascot of the 1968 Winter Olympics in Grenoble, France, a one-legged humanoid skier with a large red and white head. Schuss is often considered the first Olympic mascot, and appeared on pins, small toys, and cardboard cutouts. Every subsequent Olympic Games has featured a mascot excluding the 1972 Winter Olympics in Sapporo, Japan, which only had an unofficial mascot, Takuchan.

In alpine skiing, a Schuss is German for a straight downhill run at high speed, similar as the noun schuss in English.

Schuss was designed by Aline Lafargue, a Paris film animator known for creating the children's program Le Petit Lion. She was informed of the contest with less than a day before the deadline, and had only one night to prepare her submission. There were no guidelines, and the only comparable reference was Willie, mascot of the 1966 FIFA World Cup in England. After considering a St. Bernard dog, lizard, chamois, and a snowman, Lafargue settled on the abstract character, and was selected the following day as the winner. Schuss was painted in the colors of France: blue, red and, white.

An initial mascot design was Dof, the skiing dolphin.

Schuss's head features incorrect Olympic rings which are not connected, and the character was not authorized by the Grenoble Organising Committee.

Schuss was "devoid of any endearing qualities", according to the Journal of Olympic History, which notes it was "ridiculed by some people as a 'Tadpole on a Skate' or a 'Sperm on a Ski'". Georges Pompidou, prime minister of France, endorsed Schuss as an "emblematic character of the Olympics". Schuss is now recognized by the International Olympic Committee as a mascot, though at the time, the Organising Committee referred to Schuss as a "character".

In France, the schéma directeur d'aménagement et de gestion des eaux (SDAGE) is a document that aims to put into effect the principles of the law of 3 January 1992 on the level of the major hydrographic basins. In translation, its name is outline for the organization of the development and management of water resources.

Water is a part of the nation's common heritage. Its protection, exploitation and setting into a usable state while respecting natural balances, is of general interest.

The use of water belongs to all, within the framework of laws and regulations as well as of rights already established.

The main subjects addressed by the SDAGE are written into the law:

The SDAGE scheme was drawn up together by the national, regional and département governments and is managed by the agence de l'eau (water agency).

The SDAGE serves as a general framework for the development and management of the water of each hydrographic unit, system or aquifer). These are the schémas d'aménagement et de gestion des eaux (SAGE), that is water resource development and management outlines.

The aquifer and the hydro-electric and recreational uses of water in the Ain valley compose a clear example of a site where a coordinated approach could be productive. However, the schéma is flexible enough to include specific needs as for example, that of Artois - Picardy, which is concerned specifically with the former mining basin of the Nord and Pas-de-Calais départements and the consequences of past and current exploitation of the région's coal.

Science and technology in France has a long history dating back to the Académie des Sciences, founded by Louis XIV in 1666, at the suggestion of Jean-Baptiste Colbert, to encourage and protect the spirit of French scientific research. France 's achievements in science and technology have been significant throughout the past centuries as France's economic growth and industrialisation process was slow and steady along the 18th and 19th centuries. Research and development efforts form an integral part of the country's economy.

Scientific research in the country is supported by industry, by the network of French universities and by higher education establishments outside the main framework, Grandes écoles.

France ranked 13th in the 2025 Global Innovation Index.

The tradition of scientific research in France can be traced back to the Scientific Revolution. France is home to some of the world's oldest universities (Montpellier, Paris) although they were, at the time of their foundation, more centered on philosophy, theology and law than on science.

Radioactivity was discovered by Henri Becquerel in 1896. The theoretical foundations and mathematical framework of special relativity were laid by Henri Poincaré, before Albert Einstein used them in 1905 and later.

The conservation of mass law was discovered by Antoine Lavoisier in 18th century France.

The Cartesian Coordinate System was discovered by René Descartes in 1637 (and independently by Pierre de Fermat at the same period). The first calculator by Blaise Pascal (Pascaline) was made in 1642. (see also Adding machine) Probability theory was developed by Pierre de Fermat and Blaise Pascal in the seventeenth century (with Gerolamo Cardano and Christiaan Huygens).

France is home to 11 Fields Medalists, second only to the United States in number of Fields Medalists. The fictitious mathematician Nicolas Bourbaki 's "association of collaborators" is based at École Normale Supérieure in France.

France carried out its first test of an atomic bomb in Algeria in 1960 and some operational French nuclear weapons became available in 1964. Then, France executed its first test of the much more powerful hydrogen bomb over its South Pacific Ocean test range in 1968; this first hydrogen bomb was dropped from a strategic bomber. France was the fourth de facto nuclear power after United States, Soviet Union and United Kingdom.

In 1961 CNES was established. In 1965, France was the third nation, after the former USSR and the United States, to launch its own space satellite. The French no longer launch their own satellites, however, preferring instead to contribute to the European Space Agency.

The Second French Empire, officially the French Empire, was the government of France from 1852 to 1870. It was established on 2 December 1852 by Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, president of France under the French Second Republic, who proclaimed himself Emperor of the French as Napoleon III. The period was one of significant achievements in infrastructure and economy, while France reasserted itself as a dominant power in Europe.

Historians in the 1930s and 1940s disparaged the Second Empire as a precursor of fascism, but by the late 20th century some re-evaluated it as an example of a modernizing regime. Historians have widely judged the Second Empire's foreign policy as a failure. However, assessments of its domestic legacy are more positive, especially from 1858 as Napoleon III liberalised his rule. Particular achievements included the development of a national railway network, which facilitated commerce and helped to develop a common national identity, and the extensive renovation of Paris to its modern form, with broad boulevards, striking public buildings, and a comprehensive, centrally-planned layout.

Internationally, Napoleon III tried to emulate his uncle Napoleon Bonaparte, engaging in numerous imperial ventures around the world as well as several wars in Europe. He began his reign with French victories in Crimea and in Italy, gaining Savoy and Nice, and very briefly, Venetia (before in turn ceding to Italy). Using very harsh methods, he built up the French Empire in North Africa, in East Africa and in French Indochina. Napoleon III also launched an intervention in Mexico seeking to erect the Second Mexican Empire and bring it into the French orbit, but this ended in a fiasco. He mishandled the Prussian threat, and by the end of his reign, the French emperor found himself without allies in the face of overwhelming German forces. The Second Empire came to an end during the Franco-Prussian War, following Napoleon III's capture at the Battle of Sedan and the proclamation of the Third French Republic on 4 September 1870.

On 2 December 1851, Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, who had been elected President of the Republic in 1848, staged a coup d'état by dissolving the National Assembly without having the constitutional right to do so. He thus became sole ruler of France, and re-established universal male suffrage, previously abolished by the Assembly. His decisions were popularly endorsed by a referendum later that month that attracted 92 percent support.

At that same referendum, a new constitution was approved. Formally enacted in January 1852, the new document made Louis-Napoléon president for 10 years, with no restrictions on re-election. It concentrated virtually all governing power in his hands. However, Louis-Napoléon was not content with merely being an authoritarian president. Almost as soon as he signed the new document into law, he set about restoring the empire. In response to officially inspired requests for the return of the empire, the Senate scheduled a second referendum in November, which passed with 97 percent support. As with the December 1851 referendum, most of the "yes" votes were manufactured out of thin air.

The empire was formally re-established by the Senate on 2 December 1852, and the Prince-President became "Napoléon III, Emperor of the French". The constitution had already concentrated so much power in his hands that the only substantive changes were to replace the word "president" with the word "emperor" and to make the post hereditary. The popular referendum became a distinct sign of Bonapartism, which Charles de Gaulle would later use.

With dictatorial powers, Napoleon III made building a good railway system a high priority. He consolidated three dozen small, incomplete lines into six major companies using Paris as a hub. Paris grew dramatically in terms of population, industry, finance, commercial activity and tourism. Working with Georges-Eugène Haussmann, Napoleon spent lavishly to rebuild the city into a world-class showpiece. The financial soundness for all six companies was solidified by government guarantees. Although France had started late, by 1870 it had an excellent railway system, supported as well by good roads, canals and ports.

Napoleon, in order to restore the prestige of the Empire before the newly awakened hostility of public opinion, tried to gain the support from the Left that he had lost from the Right. After the return from Italy, the general amnesty of 16 August 1859 had marked the evolution of the absolutist or authoritarian empire towards the liberal, and later parliamentary empire, which was to last for ten years.

The idea of Italian unification, which would inevitably end the temporal power of the popes, outraged French Catholics, who had been the leading supporters of the Empire. A keen Catholic opposition sprang up, voiced in Louis Veuillot 's paper the Univers, and was not silenced even by the Syrian expedition (1860) in favour of the Maronite Catholic side of the 1860 civil conflict in Mount Lebanon and Damascus.

Ultramontane Catholicism, longing for close links to the Pope in Rome, played a pivotal role in the democratisation of culture. The pamphlet campaign led by Mgr Gaston de Ségur, at the height of the Italian question in February 1860, made the most of the freedom of expression enjoyed by the Catholic Church in France. The goal was to mobilise Catholic opinion and encourage the government to support the Pope. A major result of the Catholic ultramontane campaign was to trigger reforms in the cultural sphere, which also granted freedoms to their political enemies the Republicans and freethinkers.

Although the Second Empire strongly favoured Catholicism, the official state religion, it tolerated Protestants and Jews, with no persecutions or pogroms. The state dealt with the small Protestant community of Calvinist and Lutheran churches, whose members included many prominent businessmen who supported the regime. The emperor's Decree Law of 26 March 1852 led to greater government interference in Protestant church affairs, thus reducing self-regulation in favor of Catholic bureaucrats who misunderstood and mistrusted Protestant doctrine. Their administration affected not only church-state relations but also the internal lives of Protestant communities.

Napoleon III manipulated a range of politicised police powers to censor the media and suppress opposition. Legally he had broad powers but in practice he was limited by legal, customary and moral deterrents. By 1851 political police had a centralised administrative hierarchy and were largely immune from public control. The Second Empire continued the system; proposed innovations were stalled by officials. Typically political roles were part of routine administrative duties. Although police forces were indeed strengthened, opponents exaggerated the increase of secret police activity and the imperial police lacked the omnipotence seen in later totalitarian states.

Napoleon began by removing the gag which was keeping the country in silence. On 24 November 1860, he granted to the Chambers the right to vote an address annually in answer to the speech from the throne, and to the press the right of reporting parliamentary debates. He counted on the latter concession to hold in check the growing Catholic opposition, which was becoming more and more alarmed by the policy of laissez-faire practiced by the emperor in Italy. The government majority already showed some signs of independence. The right of voting on the budget by sections, granted by the emperor in 1861, was a new weapon given to his adversaries. Everything conspired in their favour: the anxiety of those candid friends who were calling attention to the defective budget, the commercial crisis and foreign troubles.

Napoleon again disappointed the hopes of Italy, allowed Poland to be crushed, and allowed Prussia to triumph over Denmark regarding the Schleswig-Holstein question. These inconsistencies led opposition leaders to form the Union libérale, a coalition of the Legitimist, Liberal and Republican parties. The Opposition gained forty seats in the elections of May–June 1863, and Adolphe Thiers urgently gave voice to the opposition parties' demands for "necessary liberties".

It would have been difficult for the emperor to mistake the importance of this manifestation of French opinion, and in view of his international failures, impossible to repress it. The sacrifice of minister Persigny of the interior, who was responsible for the elections, the substitution for the ministers without portfolio of a sort of presidency of the council filled by Eugène Rouher, the "Vice-Emperor", and the nomination of Jean Victor Duruy, an anti-clerical, as minister of public instruction, in reply to those attacks of the Church which were to culminate in the Syllabus of 1864, all indicated a distinct rapprochement between the emperor and the Left.

But though the opposition represented by Thiers was rather constitutional than dynastic, there was another and irreconcilable opposition, that of the amnestied or voluntarily exiled republicans, of whom Victor Hugo was the eloquent mouthpiece. Thus those who had formerly constituted the governing classes were again showing signs of their ambition to govern. There appeared to be some risk that this movement among the bourgeoisie might spread to the people. Napoleon believed that he would consolidate his menaced power by again turning to the labouring masses, by whom that power had been established.

Assured of support, the emperor, through Rouher, a supporter of the absolutist régime, refused all fresh claims on the part of the Liberals. He was aided by international events such as the reopening of cotton supplies when the American Civil War ended in 1865, by the apparent closing of the Roman question by the convention of 15 September, which guaranteed to the Papal States the protection of Italy, and finally by the treaty of 30 October 1864, which temporarily put an end to the Second Schleswig War.

France was primarily a rural society, in which social class depended on family reputation and land ownership. A limited amount of upward mobility was feasible through the steadily improving educational system. Students from all levels of society were granted admission to public secondary schools, opening a ladder to sons of peasants and artisans. However, whether through jealousy of or distrust for the higher classes, few working-class families took advantage of education or wished to see their sons move up and out: very few sought admission to the 'grandes écoles.' The elite maintained their position while allowing social ascent through the professions for ambitious sons of wealthy farmers and small-town merchants.

The ultramontane party grumbled, while the industries formerly protected were dissatisfied with free trade reform. The working classes had abandoned their political neutrality. Disregarding Pierre-Joseph Proudhon 's impassioned attack on communism, they had gradually been won over by the collectivist theories of Karl Marx and the revolutionary theories of Mikhail Bakunin, as set forth at the congresses of the International. These labour congresses defied official proscriptions, and proclaimed that the social emancipation of the worker was inseparable from his political emancipation. The union between the internationalists and the republican bourgeois became an accomplished fact.

The Empire, taken by surprise, sought to curb both the middle classes and the labourers, goading both into revolutionary actions. There were multiple strikes. The elections of May 1869, which took place during these disturbances, inflicted upon the Empire a serious moral defeat. In spite of the government's warning against the "red terror", the conciliatory candidate Ollivier was rejected by Paris, while 40 irreconcilables and 116 members of the Third Party were elected. Concessions had to be made, and by the senatus-consulte of 8 September 1869, a parliamentary monarchy was substituted for the Emperor's personal government. On 2 January 1870 Ollivier was placed at the head of the first homogeneous, united and responsible ministry.

Although most of the country hailed this reconciliation of liberty and order, the republican party insisted on further reforms and liberties and demanding the overthrow of the Empire. The killing of the journalist Victor Noir by Pierre Bonaparte, a member of the imperial family, gave the revolutionaries their long desired opportunity (10 January). But the émeute (uprising) ended in a failure.

In a concession to democratic currents, the emperor put his policy to a plebiscite on 8 May 1870. The result was a substantial success for Bonaparte, with seven and a half million in favour and only one and a half million against. However, the vote also signified divisions in France. Those affirming were found mainly in rural areas, while the opposition prevailed in the big towns.

The Crimean War ended in 1856, a victory for Napoleon III and a resulting peace that excluded Russia from the Black Sea. His son Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte was born the same year, which promised a continuation of the dynasty.

In 1859, Napoleon led France to war with Austria over Italy. France was victorious and gained Savoy and Nice.

The commercial treaty with Great Britain in 1860 ratified the free trade policy of Richard Cobden and Michel Chevalier, had brought upon French industry the sudden shock of foreign competition. Thus both Catholics and protectionists discovered that authoritarian rule could be favourable when it served their ambitions or interests, but not when exercised at their expense.

France was officially neutral throughout the American Civil War (1861–1865) and never recognised the Confederate States of America. The Union warned that recognition would mean war. However, the textile industry needed Southern cotton, and Napoleon had imperial ambitions in Mexico, which could be greatly aided by the Confederacy. At the same time, other French political leaders, such as Foreign Minister Édouard Thouvenel, supported the United States. Napoleon helped finance the Confederacy but refused to intervene actively until Britain agreed, and London always rejected intervention. The Emperor realised that a war with the US without allies would spell disaster for France.

Napoleon dreamed of building a French economic sphere in Latin America, centered on Mexico. He helped to promote rapid economic modernisation, but his army battled diehard insurgents who had American support. By 1863, French military intervention in Mexico to set up a Second Mexican Empire headed by Emperor Maximilian, brother of Franz Joseph I of Austria, was a complete fiasco. The Mexicans fought back and after defeating the Confederacy the U.S. demanded the French withdraw from Mexico—sending 50,000 veteran combat troops to the border to ram the point home. The French army went home; the puppet emperor did not leave and was executed.

From 1861 to 1863, France embarked on colonising experiments in Cochinchina (southern Vietnam) and Annam (central Vietnam). The conquest was bloody but successful, and supported by large numbers of French soldiers, missionaries, and businessmen, as well as the local Chinese entrepreneurial element.

Mixed domestic gains and losses resulted from European policies. The support France gave to the Italian cause had aroused the eager hopes of other nations. The proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy on 17 March 1861 after the rapid annexation of Central Italy and the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies had proved the danger of half-measures. But when a concession, however narrow, had been made to the liberty of one nation, it could hardly be refused to the no less legitimate aspirations of the rest.

In 1863, these "new rights" again clamoured loudly for recognition: in Poland, in Schleswig and Holstein, in Italy, now united, with neither frontiers nor capital, and in the Danubian principalities. To extricate himself from the Polish impasse, the emperor again proposed a congress, with no luck. He was again unsuccessful: Great Britain refused even to admit the principle of a congress, while Austria, Prussia and Russia gave their adhesion only on conditions which rendered it futile, i.e. they reserved the vital questions of Venetia and Poland. The Emperor's support of the Polish rebels alienated the Russian leadership. The visit of Tsar Alexander II of Russia to Paris ended in near-disaster when he was twice attacked by Polish assassins, but escaped. In Berlin, Otto von Bismarck saw the opportunity to squeeze out the French by forming closer relationships with the Russians.

The success of the 1870 plebiscite, which should have consolidated the Empire, determined its downfall. It was thought that a diplomatic success would make the country forget liberty in favour of glory. It was in vain that after the parliamentary revolution of 2 January 1870, Comte Daru revived, through Lord Clarendon, Count Beust 's plan of disarmament after the Battle of Königgrätz. He met with a refusal from Prussia and from the imperial entourage. The Empress Eugénie was credited with the remark, "If there is no war, my son will never be emperor."

Napoleon III doubled the area of the French overseas empire; he established French rule in New Caledonia, and Cochinchina, established a protectorate in Cambodia (1863); and colonised parts of Africa. He joined Britain in sending an army to China during the Second Opium War and the Taiping Rebellion (1860), but French ventures failed to establish influence in Japan (1867) and Korea (1866).

To carry out his new overseas projects, Napoleon III created a new Ministry of the Navy and the Colonies, and appointed an energetic minister, Prosper, Marquis of Chasseloup-Laubat, to head it. A key part of the enterprise was the modernisation of the French Navy ; he began the construction of fifteen powerful screw steamers ; and a fleet of steam powered troop transports. The French Navy became the second most powerful in the world, after Britain's. He also created a new force of colonial troops, including elite units of naval infantry, Zouaves, the Chasseurs d'Afrique, and Algerian sharpshooters, and he expanded the Foreign Legion, which had been founded in 1831 and fought well in Crimea, Italy, and Mexico. French overseas territories had tripled in area; in 1870 they covered almost a million square kilometres, and controlled nearly five million inhabitants. While soldiers, administrators, businessmen, and missionaries came and left, very few Frenchmen permanently settled in the colonies, except in Algeria. The colonial trade reached 600 million francs, but the profits were overwhelmed by the expenses. However, a major goal was the 'mission civilisatrice', the mission to spread French culture, language, and religion, and this proved successful.

The rise of the neighbouring state of Prussia during the 1860s threatened French supremacy in western Europe. Napoleon, growing steadily weaker in body and mind, badly mishandled the situation, and eventually found himself in a war without allies. Britain was afraid of French militarism and refused to help. Russia was highly annoyed about French interference in supporting Polish rebels in the 1863 uprising. Napoleon had given strong support to Italy, but refused the demand for Rome, and kept French troops in Rome to protect the pope from the new Italian government, thus leading to Italian refusal to help. The United States remained alienated because of the fiasco in Mexico. Napoleon did not know what he wanted or what to do, but the reverse was true for Prussian Prime Minister Otto von Bismarck, who planned to create a great new German nation, based on Prussian power, as well as resurgent German nationalism based on the systematic humiliation of France. After seeing the defeat of Austria, the Emperor demanded a conscription law. The parliament disagreed, maintaining that professionals would be always the better option, and outvoted, he backed down.

The immediate issue was a trivial controversy regarding control of the Spanish throne. France was successful in the diplomatic standoff, but Napoleon wanted to humiliate the Prussian king, Wilhelm I. Bismarck in turn manipulated the situation such that France declared war against Prussia on 15 July 1870 after major protests in France (however, Napoleon was reluctant as he had become ill as well as being sceptical of the outcome), thus sparking the Franco-Prussian War. The French empire made the first move, as the Emperor led a charge that crossed the German border. On August 2, the French defeated a Prussian vanguard and occupied the town of Saarbrücken. Two days later, the Prussians launched an offensive that repulsed the French army. After the first nine days of August, France experienced major losses. The Emperor handed power to the other generals and let them command, then telegrammed his wife, asking if he should return to Paris. His wife refused, and thus he only sent his son home. The French prime minister resigned, being replaced with a more effective military leader, who soldered the disorganised and demoralised French. He forged the Army of Châlons, which, led by Marshal Patrice de MacMahon and the Emperor, attempted to relieve the Siege of Metz, where the largest French army lay entrapped. The army was repulsed by the Prussians, and retreated to Sedan, where it was surrounded and forced to surrender after the Battle of Sedan. Napoleon himself became a prisoner and Republican forces quickly took control of Paris.

France, under the leadership of Léon Gambetta, declared the establishment of the Third French Republic. Napoleon and Eugénie went into exile in England. Victory produced an onrush of German nationalism that Bismarck immediately seized to unite all of the German states (except Austria), thereby creating the German Empire, with the Prussian king as its emperor and Bismarck as chancellor. The new Germany was now continental Europe's dominant military force. Additionally, France was forced to give up the two border provinces of Alsace and Lorraine, and its humiliation lasted for generations.

The structure of the French government during the Second Empire was little changed from the First. Emperor Napoleon III stressed his own imperial role as the foundation of the government; if government was to guide the people toward domestic justice and external peace, it was his role as emperor, holding his power by universal male suffrage and representing all of the people, to function as supreme leader and safeguard the achievements of the revolution.

He had so often, while in prison or in exile, chastised previous oligarchical governments for neglecting social questions that it was imperative France now prioritise their solutions. His answer was to organise a system of government based on the principles of the "Napoleonic Idea". This meant that the emperor, the elect of the people as the representative of the democracy, ruled supreme. He himself drew power and legitimacy from his role as representative of the great Napoleon I of France, "who had sprung armed from the French Revolution like Minerva from the head of Jove ".

The anti-parliamentary French Constitution of 1852 instituted by Napoleon III on 14 January 1852 was largely a repetition of that of 1848. All executive power was entrusted to the emperor, who, as head of state, was solely responsible to the people. The people of the Empire, lacking democratic rights, were to rely on the benevolence of the emperor rather than on the benevolence of politicians. He was to nominate the members of the council of state, whose duty it was to prepare the laws, and of the senate, a body permanently established as a constituent part of the empire.

One innovation was made, namely that the legislative body was elected by universal suffrage but had no right of initiative, all laws being proposed by the executive power. This new political change was rapidly followed by the same consequence as had attended that of Brumaire. On 2 December 1852, France, still under the effect of Napoleon's legacy, and the fear of anarchy, conferred almost unanimously by a plebiscite the supreme power, with the title of emperor, upon Napoleon III.

The Legislative Body was not allowed to elect its own president or to regulate its own procedure, or to propose a law or an amendment, or to vote on the budget in detail, or to make its deliberations public. Similarly, universal suffrage was supervised and controlled by means of official candidature, by forbidding free speech and action in electoral matters to the Opposition, and by a gerrymandering in such a way as to overwhelm the liberal vote in the mass of the rural population. The press was subjected to a system of cautionnements ("caution money", deposited as a guarantee of good behaviour) and avertissements (requests by the authorities to cease publication of certain articles), under sanction of suspension or suppression. Books were subject to censorship.

To counteract the opposition of individuals, a surveillance of suspects was instituted. Felice Orsini 's attack on the emperor in 1858, though purely Italian in its motive, served as a pretext for increasing the severity of this régime by the law of general security (sûreté générale) which authorised the internment, exile or deportation of any suspect without trial. In the same way public instruction was strictly supervised, the teaching of philosophy was suppressed in the lycées, and the disciplinary powers of the administration were increased.

For seven years France had no democratic life. The Empire governed by a series of plebiscites. Up to 1857 the Opposition did not exist; from then until 1860 it was reduced to five members: Alfred Darimon, Émile Ollivier, Hénon, Jules Favre, and Ernest Picard. The royalists waited inactive after the new and unsuccessful attempt made at Frohsdorf in 1853, by a combination of the legitimists and Orléanists, to re-create a living monarchy out of the ruin of two royal families.

The Empress Eugenie created a memorial to the Second Empire in the United Kingdom in the 1880s. Exiled in Farnborough, England, she turned her house at Farnborough Hill into a Bonapartist shrine, filling the interior with the remnants of the imperial collection (returned to her in early 1881) and reconstructing elements of the display at the imperial palaces before 1870.

On an adjacent hill she created a mausoleum, today St Michael's Abbey, where the bodies of Napoleon III and the Prince Imperial were interred in 1888. The imperial crypt at Farnborough remains the only official monument to Napoleon III and the Second Empire.

The Secretariat-General for National Defence and Security (French: Secrétariat général de la Défense et de la Sécurité nationale, SGDSN) is an interdepartmental organ under the Prime Minister of France. Its head is the secretary of the National Defence and Security Council (Conseil de Défense et de Sécurité nationale, CDSN). It is seated at the Hôtel des Invalides in Paris.

The current Secretary General for National Defence and Security (Secrétaire général de la Défense et de la Sécurité nationale) is diplomat Nicolas Roche, formerly Chief of Staff to the Foreign Minister (2019 – 2022) and ambassador to Iran (2022 – 2025), appointed in 2025.

The organ was founded in 1906 as the Conseil supérieur de la Défense nationale ("High Council of National Defence" or CSDN); it was later known as the Comité de Défense nationale ("Committee for National Defence") then became the Secrétariat général de la Défense nationale (SGDN, "General Secretary for National Defence") in 1962. On 13 January 2010, the SGDN received its current name.

France's counter- disinformation watchdog, Viginum, is hosted within the SGDSN.

Secretary of State was the name of several official governmental positions – supervising war, foreign affairs, the navy, the king's household, the clergy, Paris, and Protestant affairs – in the Kingdom of France during the Ancien Régime, roughly equivalent to the positions of government ministers today. The positions were created in 1547, but they gained in importance only after 1588. The various secretaries of state were considered part of the Great Officers of the Crown of France.

Secretaries of State first appeared in 1547 under the reign of Henry II, but only gained in importance from 1588 on. The various secretaries of state were from that point on considered part of the Great Officers of the Crown of France.

At their creation, there were four secretaries of state, but at various times in their history there appeared five. Under Louis XV there were five secretaries in September 1718 (at the death of Guillaume Dubois) and again from 1763 to 1780, when fifth department was created for Henri Léonard Jean Baptiste Bertin dealing with financial affairs.

At the death of Louis XIV, the Regent Philippe II, Duke of Orléans suppressed the secretaries of state, relying instead on a collegial system of government, called the Polysynody, which lasted from 1715-1718. Instead of secretaries, their duties were handled by a Council of State, composed of various subcouncils of war, foreign affairs, the navy, etc. The slowness of this system proved ineffective, and the secretaries of state were brought back.

Each secretary of state was the head of a specialized department of state with a functional area of expertise (War, Foreign Affairs, the Navy, the Maison du Roi, Protestant Affairs) and a geographical area of expertise (several provinces). The secretaries gave council to the king, and countersigned (or co-signed) and expedited royal decisions (edicts and declarations).

The secretaries of state were members of the king's "Conseil privé", but rarely attended its sessions. The secretaries of war and of foreign affairs attended the "Conseil royal de commerce". All secretaries of state were members of the "Conseil des Dépêches". For more on these councils, see the article Conseil du Roi.

The secretary of state for foreign affairs was traditionally named by the honorific title " ministre d'État " upon assuming his position. The other secretaries usually gained this title over time.

The secretaries of state were appointed by the king and their positions were revocable. Nevertheless, their offices required purchase (between 500,000 and 900,000 livres), and this fee usually included a certificate, or "brevet de retenue", permitting reimbursement in the case of demission.

There were generally four, sometimes five, secretaries of state:

The positions of Secretary of State of Foreign Affairs and of War were constant, but the attributes and number of the other secretaries varied over time.

There was no Secretary of the Interior, as the secretaries of state divided administration of the provinces between themselves:

There was no secretary of state of justice (this was fulfilled by the Chancellor of France) nor of Finances (overseen by the position of Controller-General of Finances).

The General Secretariat for the Sea (French : Secrétariat général de la Mer, abbreviated SGMer) is a French government agency attached to the Prime Minister of France 's Office.

The mission is to exercise control, evaluation and forecasting within the framework of France 's public policies concerning the sea and the littoral. It also leads and coordinates the action of the maritime prefects.

The General Secretatiat for the Sea was created in 1995 and is attached to the office of Prime Minister of France.

The mission of the General Secretatiat is to exercise control, evaluation and forecasting within the framework of public policies concerning the sea and the littoral and ensures that the decisions of the government of France are designed and implemented in close consultation with the ensemble of professionals concerned, in order to ensure harmonious development of the different maritime activities. In doing so, it coordinates the monitoring of legal texts relating to the sea and proposes the necessary adaptations concerning the evolution of international and European Union law. The General Secretariat leads and coordinates the action of the maritime prefects and overseas Government delegates for State action at sea.

The Secretariat General is headed by a Secretary General of the Sea appointed by decree in the Council of Ministers, assisted by a Deputy Secretary General, a flag officer of the Navy. The Secretary General for the Sea is also assisted by three advisors for each of the major themes (state action at sea; maritime and port economy; Europe and the environment), themselves supported by thematic mission managers. These senior civil servants are seconded or made available to Secretariat General by several ministries or public establishments, guaranteeing the interministerial role of the Secretariat General and the plurality of its expertise.

Laïcité ([ la.i.si.te ] ; ' secularism ') is the constitutional principle of secularism in France. Article 1 of the French Constitution is commonly interpreted as the separation of civil society and religious society. It discourages religious involvement in government affairs, especially in the determination of state policies as well as the recognition of a state religion. It also forbids government involvement in religious affairs, and especially prohibits government influence in the determination of religion, such that it includes a right to the free exercise of religion.

French secularism has a long history: Enlightenment thinkers emphasized reason and self direction. Revolutionaries in 1789 violently overthrew the Ancien Régime, which included the Catholic Church. Secularism was an important ideology during the Second Empire and Third Republic. For the last century, the French government policy has been based on the 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State, which is however not applicable in Alsace and Moselle. While the term laïcité has been used from the end of the 19th century to denote the freedom of public institutions from the influence of the Catholic Church, the concept today covers other religious movements as well.

Laïcité relies on the division between private life, where adherents believe religion belongs, and the public sphere, in which each individual should appear as a simple citizen who is equal to all other citizens, not putting the emphasis on any ethnic, religious, or other particularities. According to this concept, the government must refrain from taking positions on religious doctrine and consider religious subjects only for their practical consequences on inhabitants' lives.

It is best described as a belief that government and political issues should be kept separate from religious organizations and religious issues (as long as the latter do not have notable social consequences). This is meant to both protect the government from any possible interference from religious organizations and to protect the religious organization from political quarrels and controversies.

Proponents argue that laïcité itself does not necessarily imply any hostility of the government with respect to any religion, asserting that French state secularism is actually based upon respect for freedom of thought and freedom of religion. Therefore, the absence of a state religion —and the subsequent separation of the state and church —is considered by proponents to be a prerequisite for such freedoms.

The French word laïc comes from Latin lāicus, which is a loanword from the Greek lāïkós (λᾱϊκός, 'of the people'), itself from lāós (λᾱός, 'people'). The French suffix -ité is equivalent to the English -ity. Secularism is a concept rooted in the French Revolution, beginning to develop since the French Third Republic after the Republicans gained control of the state.

While the term laity originally meant everyone who is not clergy, after the Revolution it came to denote separation of religion from all branches of government, prohibiting the establishment of a state religion and endorsing government neutrality with respect to religion and atheism.

From the end of the 19th century, the word laïcité has been synonymous with secularization —among countries where the Catholic Church had retained its influence—meaning the freedom of public institutions (especially primary schools) from the influence of the Church. Today, the concept covers other religious movements as well. Secularism took form for the first time during the French Revolution: the abolition of the Ancien Régime in August 1789 was accompanied by the end of religious privileges and the affirmation of universal principles, including the freedom of opinion and equal rights expressed by the 1789 Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen. The text of the Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen was incorporated into the preamble to the Constitution of October 4, 1958. This includes article 10 of the declaration: "No one should be harassed over his opinions, even religious, provided that their manifestation does not disturb the public order established by law."

Public education has been secular since the laws of March 28, 1882, and October 30, 1886, which established "moral and civic instruction" in place of teaching religious morals and secularism of personnel and programs, respectively.

In the 19th century, secularization laws gradually separated the state from historical ties with the Catholic Church and created new sociopolitical values constructed on the principles of republican universalism. This process, which took place in a larger movement linked to modernity, entrusted the French people with redefining the political and social foundations: the executive, legislative and judicial powers; the organization of the state, its components, its representations; the education system, the rites of civil life, and the development of law and morality; regardless of religious beliefs. The Third Republic notably recreated the organization of the school system, by establishing public, secular, and compulsory education (Jules Ferry laws). The Jules Ferry laws (1881–1882) are supplemented by the Goblet law (established in 1886) on the organization of primary education, article 17 of which provides that education in public schools is exclusively entrusted to secular staff. This process culminated in 1905 with the Law of Separation of Churches and State, which solidified secularization.

Although the term was current throughout the 19th century, France did not fully separate church and state until the passage of its 1905 law on the separation of the Churches and the State, prohibiting the state from recognizing or funding any religion.

However, the 1905 law did not use the word laïcité itself, and so the notion of laïcité as a legal principle is open to question, as it was never defined as such by the text of a law. It was not until the Constitution of 1946 from the French Fourth Republic that the word appeared explicitly as a constitutional principle entailing legal effect, but without being further specified. If built before 1905 religious buildings in France (mostly Catholic churches, Protestant chapels, and Jewish synagogues) became the property of the city councils. Those now have the duty to maintain the (often historical) buildings but cannot subsidize the religious organizations using them. In areas that were part of Germany at that time, and which did not return to France until 1918, some arrangements for the cooperation of church and state are still in effect today (see Alsace-Moselle).

Secularism is a core concept in the French Constitution : Article 1 formally states that:

The principle of laïcité in France is implemented through a number of policies, primarily based on the 1905 law. The French government is legally prohibited from recognizing any religion (except for legacy statutes like those of military chaplains and the local law of Alsace-Moselle). Instead, it recognizes religious organizations, according to formal legal criteria that do not address religious doctrine:

French political leaders, though not by any means prohibited from making religious remarks, mostly refrain from it. Religious considerations are generally considered incompatible with reasoned political debate. Political leaders are not allowed to practice any religion and are expected to differentiate whatever religious beliefs from their political arguments. Christine Boutin, who openly argued on religious grounds against a legal domestic partnership available regardless of the sex of the partners, quickly became the butt of late-night comedy jokes.

Many find that being discreet with one's religion is a necessary part of being French, which has led to frequent divisions with some non-Christian immigrants, especially with part of France's large Muslim population. As such, the debate has taken place over whether any religious apparel or displays by individuals (e.g., the Islamic hijab, Sikh turban, Christian crosses, and Jewish Stars of David and kippah) should be banned from public schools. Such a ban in France came into effect in 2004. In the spring of 2011, the official non-discrimination agency, la HALDE, reinforced laïcité in hospitals—as advocated by the Minister of the Interior, Claude Guéant —and in public service generally.

The strict separation of church and state which began with the 1905 law has evolved into what some religious leaders see as a "form of political correctness that made bringing religion into public affairs a major taboo." Former President Nicolas Sarkozy initially criticized this approach as a "negative laïcité " and wanted to develop a "positive laïcité " that recognizes the contribution of faith to French culture, history, and society, allows for faith in the public discourse, and enables government subsidies for faith-based groups. Sarkozy saw France's main religions as positive contributions to French society. He visited the pope in December 2007 and publicly acknowledged France's Christian roots, while highlighting the importance of freedom of thought, arguing that faith should come back into the public sphere. On 12 September 2008, in line with Sarkozy's views on the need for reform of laïcité, Pope Benedict XVI said that it was time to revisit the debate over the relationship between church and state, advocating a "healthy" form of laïcité. Meeting with Sarkozy, he stated:

In fact, it is fundamental, on the one hand, to insist upon the distinction between the political realm and that of religion in order to preserve both the religious freedom of citizens and the responsibility of the state toward them. [...] On the other hand, [it is important] to become more aware of the irreplaceable role of religion for the formation of consciences and the contribution which it can bring to – among other things – the creation of a basic ethical consensus within society.

In 2009, Sarkozy changed footing on the place of religion in French society, as he publicly declared the burqa as "not welcome" in France, and favoring legislation to outlaw it. In February 2010, two people in burqas managed to pass the security doors of a post office in their full veils, after which the two removed their head coverings, pulled out a gun, and held up the post office. Following March 2011, local elections strong disagreement appeared within the governing UMP over the appropriateness of holding a debate on laïcité as desired by the French President. On 30 March 2011, a letter appeared in La Croix signed by representatives of 6 religious bodies opposing the appropriateness of such a debate.

A law was passed on 2011 April 11 with strong support from political parties, as well as from Sarkozy, which made it illegal to hide the face in public spaces, affecting a few thousand women in France wearing the niqab and the burqa.

Scholar Olivier Roy has argued that the burkini bans (2016) and secularist policies of France provoked religious violence in France, to which Gilles Kepel responded that Britain, which has no such policies, still suffered a greater number of attacks in 2017 than France.

Lebanese-born French author Amin Maalouf has criticized the characterization of France's political structure as truly secular, remarking: "I have never understand how a country that called herself secular could call some of her citizens 'French Muslims', and deprive them of some of their rights merely because they belonged to a religion other than her own."

In an ethnographic study of Catholicism in contemporary Paris, the anthropologist Elayne Oliphant argued that although laïcité is often described as creating a space free from the presence of religion, Catholic objects, images and spaces continue to pervade the Parisian landscape in ways that pass unremarked, a condition she terms the "privilege" of Catholicism's banality: Catholic materiality occupies the public sphere as ostensibly neutral culture while signs of Islam are marked and regulated as religious. Whether this condition is better understood as "catholaïcité" or as a secularized Catholicism, she notes, remains debated.

Other countries have followed in the French model, having forms of secularism—examples include Albania, Mexico, and Turkey.

Public discourse in Quebec, the only predominantly French-speaking province in Canada, has been greatly influenced by the secularism of France since the 1960s. Prior to this time, Quebec was seen as a very observant Catholic society, where Catholicism was a de facto state religion. Quebec then underwent a period of rapid secularization called the Quiet Revolution. Quebec politicians have tended to adopt a more French-style understanding of secularism rather than the rest of Canada which is similar to the United Kingdom. This came to the fore during the debate on what constitutes the " reasonable accommodation " of religious minorities.

In September 2013, the government of Quebec proposed Bill 60, the "Charter affirming the values of State secularism and religious neutrality and of equality between women and men, and providing a framework for accommodation requests." The bill would alter the provincial human rights law to prohibit public employees from wearing objects that overtly indicate a religious preference. The people who would be most impacted by such a law would be Muslim women wearing a hijab, Jewish men wearing a kippah, and Sikh men (or women) wearing a turban. Employees who do not comply with the law would be terminated from their employment. The party that had proposed the bill, the Parti Québécois, was defeated in the 2014 election by the Quebec Liberal Party (who gained a majority of seats), which opposed the bill. As a result, the bill is considered 'dead'.

In 2019, Premier François Legault 's CAQ government passed Bill 21, a secularism law banning public officials in positions of coercive power from wearing or displaying any religious symbols. However, the display of religious symbols affixed in public institutions like hospitals will be left for each administration thereof to decide. To counter charges of hypocrisy, the crucifix in the Quebec National Assembly was also removed.

French laïcité influenced the Constitution of Mexico despite the Catholic Church maintaining strong influence. In March 2010, the Chamber of Deputies introduced legislation to amend the Constitution to make the Mexican government formally laico —meaning 'lay' or 'secular'. Critics of the move say the "context surrounding the amendment suggests that it might be a step backward for religious liberty and true separation of church and state".

Coming on the heels of the Church's vocal objection to legalization of abortion as well as same-sex unions and adoptions in Mexico City, "together with some statements of its supporters, suggests that it might be an attempt to suppress the Catholic Church's ability to engage in public policy debates." Mexico has had a history of religious suppression and persecution. Critics of the amendment reject the idea that "Utilitarians, Nihilists, Capitalists, and Socialists can all bring their philosophy to bear on public life, but Catholics (or religious minorities) must check their religion at the door" in a sort of "second-class citizenship" which they consider nothing more than religious discrimination.

In Turkey, a strong stance of secularism (Turkish : laiklik) has held sway since Mustafa Kemal Atatürk 's Turkish revolution in the early 20th century. On March 3, 1924, Turkey removed the caliphate system and gradually after that, all religious influence from the state. Sunni Islam, the majority religion, is now controlled by the Turkish government through the Department of Religious Affairs, and is state-funded while other religions or sects have independence on religious affairs. Islamic views that are deemed political are censored in accordance with the principle of secularism.

This system of Turkish laïcité permeates both the government and the religious sphere. The content of the weekly sermons in all state-funded mosques has to be approved by the state. Independent Sunni communities are also illegal. Minority religions, like Armenian or Greek Orthodoxy, are guaranteed by the constitution as individual faiths and are mostly tolerated, but this guarantee does not give any rights to any religious communities including Muslim ones. Turkey's view is that the Treaty of Lausanne gives certain religious rights to Jews, Greeks, and Armenians but not, for example, to Syrian-Orthodox or Roman Catholics, because the latter ones did not play any political roles during the treaty. However, the Treaty of Lausanne does not specify any nationality or ethnicity and simply identifies non-Muslims in general.

In 2009, the desire to reestablish the Greek Orthodox seminary on Heybeli Island near Istanbul became a political issue in regard to Turkey's accession to EU membership. The EU considers such prohibition to amount to suppression of religious freedom.

In the United States, the First Amendment to the Constitution contains a similar federal concept, although the term laicity is not used either in the Constitution or elsewhere and is sometimes used as a term to contrast European secularism with American secularism. That amendment includes clauses prohibiting both congressional governmental interference with the free exercise of religion and congressional laws regarding the establishment of religion. Originally this prevented the federal government from interfering with state-established religions. However, after the 14th amendment, these clauses have been held by the courts to apply to both the federal and state governments. Together, the "free exercise clause" and " establishment clause " are considered to accomplish a " separation of church and state."

Nonetheless, separation is not extended to bar religious conduct in public places or by public servants. Public servants, up to and including the President of the United States, often make proclamations of religious faith. Sessions of both houses of the United States Congress and most state legislatures typically open with a prayer by a minister of some faith or other, and many if not most politicians and senior public servants in Washington, DC, attend the annual Roman Catholic Red Mass at the Cathedral of St. Matthew the Apostle regardless of their personal religious convictions. In contrast to France, the wearing of religious insignia in public schools is largely noncontroversial as a matter of law and culture in the US; the main cases where there have been controversies are when the practice in question is potentially dangerous (for instance, the wearing of the Sikh kirpan knife in public places) and even then the issue is usually settled in favor of allowing the practice. In addition, the US government regards religious institutions as tax-exempt non-profit organizations, subject to limitations on their political involvement. In contrast to Europe, however, the government cannot display religious symbols (such as the cross) in public schools, courts, and other government offices, although some exceptions are made (e.g. recognition of a cultural group's religious holiday). The United States Supreme Court has also banned any activity in public schools and other government-run areas that can be viewed as a government endorsement of religion.

The French philosopher and Universal Declaration of Human Rights co-drafter Jacques Maritain, a devout Catholic convert and a critic of French laïcité, noted the distinction between the models found in France and in mid-20th century United States. He considered the US model of that time to be more amicable because it had both "sharp distinction and actual cooperation" between church and state (what he called "a historical treasure") and admonished the United States, "Please to God that you keep it carefully and do not let your concept of separation veer round to the European one."

Seine (French: [ sɛn ]) is a former department of France (1795 – 1968), which encompassed Paris and its immediate suburbs. Named after the river Seine which flowed through it, it was the only enclaved department of France, being surrounded entirely by the former Seine-et-Oise department.

Its prefecture was Paris; its INSEE number was 75 (now Paris). When the Seine department was disbanded its territory was divided among four new departments: Paris, Hauts-de-Seine, Seine-Saint-Denis and Val-de-Marne.

From 1929 to its abolition in 1968, the department consisted of the City of Paris and 80 surrounding suburban communes. It had an area of 480 km (185 sq. miles), 22% of that area being the City of Paris and 78% being suburbs. It was the only enclaved department in France. It was divided into three arrondissements : Paris, Sceaux and Saint-Denis.

For most of the Seine department's existence, its prefect also exercised direct authority over the City of Paris as well. For all but 14 months after 1794, Paris was the only commune without a mayor ; it had theoretically less autonomy than the smallest village.

Seine was created on 4 March 1790, as the department of Paris (département de Paris). In 1795, it was renamed as the department of Seine (département de la Seine) after the river Seine flowing through it.

At the first census of the French Republic in 1801, the Seine department had 631,585 inhabitants (87% of them living in the City of Paris, 13% in the suburbs) and was the second most populous department of the vast Napoleonic Empire (behind Nord), more populous than even the dense departments of what is now Belgium and the Netherlands.

With the growth of Paris and its suburbs over the next 150 years, the population of the Seine department increased tremendously.

By 1968 it contained 5,700,754 residents (45% of them living in the City of Paris, 55% in the suburbs), making it by far the most populous department of France. It was considered that the Seine department was now too large to be governed effectively. On 1 January 1968, it was split into four smaller departments: Paris, Hauts-de-Seine, Seine-Saint-Denis and Val-de-Marne. The latter three also include parts of the former Seine-et-Oise department, which was also abolished at the same time.

The breakup of the Seine department involved the following changes:

Taken together, Hauts-de-Seine, Val-de-Marne and Seine-Saint-Denis are known in France as the Petite Couronne (meaning "small ring"), as opposed to the Grande Couronne ("large ring") of the more distant suburbs. The Petite Couronne plus the City of Paris total 762 square kilometres (294 sq mi), more than the former Seine department (480 square kilometres, 190 sq mi).

The Métropole du Grand Paris, an administrative structure created in 2016, comprises Paris and the three departments of the Petite Couronne, plus seven additional communes in the Grande Couronne.

At the 2006 census, the population of the communes that had previously comprised the Seine department was 5,496,468. The population of the department peaked in 1968 at 5,700,754. It then lost inhabitants until 1999 (with a nadir of 5,203,818 inhabitants at the 1999 census) as residents increasingly relocated to the more distant suburbs of the metropolitan area of Paris, but since 1999 it has regained some inhabitants, with a population increase of 292,650 inhabitants between 1999 and 2006. This new population growth after a long period of decline is comparable to what is observed in the central areas of other large Western metropolises such as Inner London.

Of the new departments created in 1968, Paris was the most populous in 2006 with 2,181,371 inhabitants. The Paris department is currently the second-most populous of France behind that of Nord.

Sel gris (pl. sels gris, "gray salt" in French) is a coarse granular sea salt popularized by the French. Sel gris comes from the same solar evaporation salt pans as fleur de sel but is harvested differently; it is allowed to come into contact with the bottom of the salt pan before being raked, hence its gray color. Sel gris is coarser than fleur de sel but is also a moist salt, typically containing 13 percent residual moisture.

The bottom of the salt pan (French : oeillet) is typically composed of clay lined pools, basalt, sand, concrete, or tile. This keeps the salt from coming into contact with the silt beneath and becoming dirty. Every few days, or on occasion daily, the harvester (French: paludier) pushes or pulls the salt with a long wooden rake. This must be done carefully as the depth of the brine may be as little as 1 ⁄ 4 inch (6.4 mm) and the clay bottom must not be penetrated at the risk of contaminating the salt. The salt is raked toward the sides of the pan where it is then shoveled into a pile and left to dry slightly before storing. 90 to 165 pounds (41 to 75 kg) of sel gris can be harvested in one day, whereas for fleurs de sel the daily yield is only 4.5 to 6.6 pounds (2.0 to 3.0 kg).

Because of its mineral complexity and coarse grain size, sel gris can be used both as a cooking salt and a finishing salt. Being much denser than table and kosher salt, there is a lot more salt in an equivalent volume of sel gris.

Because it is a moist salt, it does not suck all the moisture out of food when used as a finishing salt, unlike kosher salt (which is designed to absorb blood and other fluids from meat).

Most producers of fleur de sel also produce sel gris.

48°50′54″N 2°20′14″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.84833°N 2.33722°E ﻿ / 48.84833; 2.33722 The Senate (French : Sénat, [ sena ]) is the upper house of the French Parliament, with the lower house being the National Assembly, the two houses constituting the legislature of France. It is made up of 348 senators (sénateurs and sénatrices) elected by part of the country's local councillors in indirect elections. Senators have six-year terms, with half of the seats up for election every three years. They represent France's departments (328), overseas collectivities (8) and citizens abroad (12).

Senators' mode of election varies upon their constituency's population size: in the less populated constituencies (one or two seats), they are elected individually, whereas in more populated ones (three seats or more), they are elected on lists. It is common for senators to hold dual mandates, such as in a regional council or departmental council.

The Senate enjoys less prominence than the National Assembly, which is elected on direct universal ballot and upon the majority of which the Government relies: in case of disagreement, the Assembly can in many cases have the last word, although the Senate keeps a role in some key procedures, such as constitutional amendments. However, following the 2024 snap legislative election and the ensuing political fragmentation in the Assembly, the newly-outed Barnier government held a working majority in the Senate but not in the Assembly, a first under the Fifth Republic, marking "a form of strengthening of the Senate".

Bicameralism was introduced in France amid the French Revolution in 1795 ; as in many countries, it assigned the upper chamber with the role of moderating the lower, although for a long time as an ally of the executive. The present selection mode of the Senate dates back to the start of the Third Republic, when it was turned into what Léon Gambetta famously called a "grand council of the communes of France". Over time, it developed a sense of independence as a "guardian of the institutions" and "guardian of liberties", favoured by the fact that senators are on average older than deputies in the Assembly, joining the Senate in the later part of their career. Debates in the Senate tend to be less tense and generally receive less media coverage. As a result of its election relying on what is often summed up as rural mayors, it has had a right-wing majority since 1958, with only a three-year exception in 2011–2014.

The President of the Senate is to step in as acting President of France in case of an incapacitation or a vacancy, which last happened in 1974. The officeholder also appoints three members of the Constitutional Council. Since 2014, Gérard Larcher has been President of the Senate.

The Senate is housed inside the Luxembourg Palace in the 6th arrondissement of Paris. Like the National Assembly, it is guarded by Republican Guards. In front of the building lies the Senate's garden, the Jardin du Luxembourg, open to the public.

France's first experience with an upper house was under the Directory from 1795 to 1799, when the Council of Ancients was the upper chamber. There were Senates in both the First and Second Empires (the former being known as the Sénat conservateur, the latter as the French Senate), but these were only nominally legislative bodies – technically they were not legislative, but rather advisory bodies on the model of the Roman Senate.

With the Restoration in 1814, a new Chamber of Peers was created, on the model of the British House of Lords. At first it contained hereditary peers, but following the July Revolution of 1830, it became a body whose members were appointed for life. The Second Republic returned to a unicameral system after 1848, but soon after the establishment of the Second Empire in 1852, a Senate was established as the upper chamber. In the Fourth Republic, the Senate was replaced by the Council of the Republic, but its function was largely the same. With the new Constitution of the Fifth Republic which came into force on 4 October 1958, the older name of Senate was restored.

In 2011, the Socialist Party won control of the Senate for the first time since the foundation of the Fifth Republic. In 2014, the centre-right Gaullists and their allies won back the control of the Senate; they retained their majority in 2017.

Under the Constitution of France, the Senate has nearly the same powers as the National Assembly. Bills may be submitted by the government (projets de loi) or by either house of Parliament (propositions de loi). Because both houses may amend the bill, it may take several readings to reach an agreement between the National Assembly and the Senate. When the Senate and the National Assembly cannot agree on a bill, the administration can decide, after a procedure called commission mixte paritaire, to give the final decision to the National Assembly, whose majority is normally on the government's side, but as regarding the constitutional laws the administration must have the Senate's agreement. This does not happen frequently; usually the two houses eventually agree on the bill, or the administration decides to withdraw it. This power however gives the National Assembly a prominent role in the law-making process, especially since the administration is necessarily of the same side as the Assembly, for the Assembly can dismiss the administration through a motion of censure.

The power to pass a vote of censure, or vote of no confidence, is limited. As was the case in the Fourth Republic's constitution, new cabinets do not have to receive a vote of confidence. Also, a vote of censure can occur only after 10 per cent of the members sign a petition; if rejected, those members that signed cannot sign another petition until that session of Parliament has ended. If the petition gets the required support, a vote of censure must gain an absolute majority of all members, not just those voting. If the Assembly and the Senate have politically distinct majorities, the Assembly will in most cases prevail; open conflict between the two houses is uncommon.

As per article 24 of the Constitution, the Senate is the representative of the territories and defends the local elected officials. The Senate also serves to monitor the administration's actions by publishing many reports each year on various topics.

Until September 2004, the Senate had 321 members, each elected to serve for a nine-year term. In that month, the term was reduced to six years, while – to reflect a growth in the country's population – the number of senators was set to increase progressively, to reach 348 by 2011. Senators had been elected in thirds every three years; this was also changed to one half of their number every three years.

The president of the Senate is elected by senators from among their members. The current incumbent is Gérard Larcher. The President of the Senate is, under the Constitution of the Fifth Republic, first in the line of succession—in case of death, resignation or removal from office (only for health reasons)—to the presidency of the French Republic, becoming Acting President of the Republic until a new election can be held. This happened twice for Alain Poher —once at the resignation of Charles de Gaulle and once at the death of Georges Pompidou.

The President of the Senate also has the right to designate three of the nine members of the Constitutional Council, serving for nine years.

Senators are elected indirectly by approximately 150,000 officials, known as the grands électeurs, including regional councillors, department councillors, mayors, municipal councillors in large communes, as well as members of the National Assembly. However, 90% of the electors are delegates appointed by councillors. This system introduces a bias in the composition of the Senate favoring rural areas. As a consequence, while the political majority changes frequently in the National Assembly, the Senate has remained politically right, with one brief exception (2011–2014), since the foundation of the Fifth Republic, much to the displeasure of the Socialists.

This has spurred controversy, especially after the 2008 election in which the Socialist Party, despite controlling all but two of France's regions, a majority of departments, as well as communes representing more than 50% of the population, still failed to achieve a majority in the Senate. The Senate has also been accused of being a "refuge" for politicians that have lost their seats in the National Assembly. The left, led by the Socialist Party, gained control of the Senate for the first time since 1958 during the 2011 election, leading to the election of Jean-Pierre Bel at its presidency. This proved a short-lived win, as the right, led by the Union for a Popular Movement, regained the Senate three years later.

As an indirectly elected house, the Senate is often criticised by political parties such as La France Insoumise on the left and the National Rally on the right as not being sufficiently popularly representative. Although both La France Insoumise and the National Rally enjoy significant representation in the National Assembly, they are far less represented in the Senate, as they do not have a large number of local councillors affiliated with them, who in turn elect the senators.

The left has historically opposed the very existence of a second chamber, while the right has defended it; controversies over the Senate's role are revived from time to time. The common phrase "a senator's pace" (un train de sénateur) mocks the upper house's perceived slow rhythm and readiness to let new legislation die.

Senegalese people in France (French : Les sénégalais en France) consist of migrants from Senegal and their descendants living and working in France.

Before World War II, Senegalese in France were a huge minority. The first Senegalese people in France were mostly Senegalese Tirailleurs who served France in World Wars and who settled in France after war. There were also navigators in ports and Senegalese students in French universities. There were also Senegalese domestic workers in France at that time.

From the late 19th to the early 20th centuries, the Senegal River valley experienced a great deal of climate change. Because there were few industries in Senegal, people emigrated to France to find jobs. The first wave of Senegalese immigration to France took place, like other sub-Saharian waves, around 1964.

A sensitive urban zone (French : Zone urbaine sensible, ZUS) is an urban area in France defined by the authorities to be a high-priority target for city policy, taking into consideration local circumstances related to the problems of its residents.

On the 26th of December 1996, 750 ZUS were founded by the décret n°96-1156. The 751th ZUS «Nouveau Mons» in Mons-en-Baroeul was founded on the 24th of August 2000 by the décret n°2000- 796. On the 31st of July 2001, the décret n°2001-707 has changed the périmeter of Grigny 's ZUS.

There are 751 sensitive urban zones in France, including 718 in mainland France. The government has published the list of zones and maps of each one.

Nearly five million people live in zones of difficulty with many problems:

A law passed November 14, 1996 created sensitive urban zones (ZUS) and urban tax-free zones (ZFU). 752 of these zones were created in France, including 718 in mainland France. The law of November 14, 1996 (which implements a renewed urban policy) distinguishes three levels of intervention:

The three levels of intervention (ZUS, ZRU and ZFU), characterized by fiscal and social measures of increasing importance, target the difficulties encountered in these districts with differing degrees of response. Contrary to generally accepted ideas, these sensitive districts are in the center of cities and not just the outskirts.

The situation in these areas in difficulty was (until recently) difficult to evaluate precisely, based on many statistics which were inadequate in certain areas, scattered or badly collected. To remedy these problems and more accurately measure the effect of policy implementation, the National Observatory of Sensitive Urban Zones (ZUS) was created in a law passed on August 1, 2003.

These ZUS are distributed throughout 490 communes and include 4.7 million inhabitants. Among them a subset of 416 zones of urban renewal (ZRU) was created, including 396 in mainland France. The ZRU contain 3.2 million inhabitants, and present unique challenges. Almost all departments are affected; the only exceptions are nine strongly agricultural departments.

In 2010, Raphaël Stainville of French newspaper Le Figaro called certain neighborhoods of the southern city Perpignan "veritable lawless zones", saying they had become too dangerous to travel in at night. He added that the same was true in parts of Béziers and Nîmes. In 2012, Gilles Demailly [ fr ], the mayor of the French city Amiens, in the wake of several riots, called the northern part of his city a lawless zone, where one could no longer order a pizza or call for a doctor. The head of a local association said institutional violence had contributed to the tensions resulting in the no-go zone. In 2014, Fabrice Balanche, a scholar of the Middle East, labelled the northern city of Roubaix, as well as parts of Marseille, "mini-Islamic states", saying that the authority of the state is completely absent there. In 2005 France's domestic intelligence network, the Renseignements Generaux, identified 150 "no-go zones" around the country where police would not enter without reinforcements. Christopher Dickey, writing in Newsweek, claimed the situation had arisen due to racism towards immigrants.

In January 2015, after the Charlie Hebdo shooting, several items on Fox News labeled the ZUS as "Islamic no-go zones ". French media agencies denied these claims. After complaints Fox News issued an apology, saying that there was "no credible information to support the assertion there are specific areas in these countries that exclude individuals based solely on their religion." A couple days later, Anderson Cooper on CNN issued an apology as well.

Septennat (from Latin septem = "seven" and annus = "year") was the name of the seven-year term of office of the President of France in the Third Republic, in the Fourth Republic and (until 2002) in the Fifth Republic.

In October 2000, the term of office was shortened to five years through a constitutional amendment based on the referendum on September 24, 2000. Since then, the term of office has been called “Quinquennat” (from French cinq or Latin quinque).

By Article 6 of Constitutional Law No. 2008-724 of July 23, 2008, the following paragraph was inserted after Article 6 paragraph 1:

Article 29 of the French Constitution of 1946 read Le président de la République est élu par le Parlement. Il est élu pour sept ans. Il n'est rééligible qu'une fois. (The President of the Republic is elected by Parliament. He is elected for seven years. He can only be re-elected once.)

Serfdom was a condition of debt bondage and indentured servitude. It developed during late antiquity and the Early Middle Ages in Europe and lasted in some countries until the mid-19th century and became the status of many peasants under feudalism, specifically relating to manorialism and similar systems.

Unlike slaves, serfs could not be bought, sold, or traded individually, though they could, depending on the area, be sold together with land. Actual slaves, such as the kholops in Russia, could, by contrast, be traded, abused with no rights over their own bodies, could not leave the land they were bound to, and marry only with their lord 's permission.

Serfs who occupied a plot of land were required to work for the lord of the manor who owned that land. In return, they were entitled to protection, justice, and the right to cultivate certain fields within the manor to maintain their own subsistence. Serfs were often required not only to work on the lord's fields, but in his mines and forests and to labour to maintain roads. The manor formed the basic unit of feudal society, and the lord of the manor and the villeins, and to a certain extent the serfs, were bound legally: by taxation in the case of the former, and economically and socially in the latter.

The decline of serfdom in Western Europe has sometimes been attributed to the widespread plague epidemic of the Black Death, which reached Europe in 1347 and caused massive fatalities, disrupting society. Conversely, serfdom grew stronger in Central and Eastern Europe, where it had been less common (this phenomenon was known as " second serfdom "). In Eastern Europe, the institution persisted until the mid-19th century. Serfdom in Russia gradually evolved from the usual European form to become de facto slavery, though it continued to be called serfdom; one way or another, reforms were carried out to reduce powers of the landowners. In the Habsburg monarchy, serfdom was abolished by the 1781 Serfdom Patent. Serfdom was abolished in Russia in 1861. Prussia declared serfdom unacceptable in its General State Laws for the Prussian States in 1792 and abolished in 1807, in the wake of the Prussian Reform Movement. In Finland, Norway, and Sweden, feudalism was never fully established, and serfdom did not exist; in Denmark, serfdom-like institutions did exist in the stavnsbånd, between 1733 and 1788 and its vassal Iceland (the more restrictive vistarband, from 1490 until 1894).

Also in countries outside Europe there have been descriptions of serfdom. James Lee and Cameron Campbell describe the Chinese Qing dynasty (1644–1912) as also maintaining a form of serfdom. Melvyn Goldstein described Tibet as having serfdom until 1959 but this is contested. Bhutan is described as having officially abolished serfdom by 1959.

The United Nations 1956 Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery prohibits serfdom as a practice similar to slavery.

Social institutions similar to serfdom were known in ancient times. The status of the helots in the ancient Greek city-state of Sparta resembled that of the medieval serfs. By the 3rd century AD, the Roman Empire faced a labour shortage. Large Roman landowners increasingly relied on Roman freemen, acting as tenant farmers, instead of slaves to provide labour.

These tenant farmers, eventually known as coloni, saw their condition steadily erode. Because the tax system implemented by Diocletian assessed taxes based on both land and the inhabitants of that land, it became administratively inconvenient for peasants to leave the land where they were counted in the census.

Medieval serfdom really began with the breakup of the Carolingian Empire around the 10th century. During this period, powerful feudal lords encouraged the establishment of serfdom as a source of agricultural labour. Serfdom, indeed, was an institution that reflected a fairly common practice whereby great landlords were assured that others worked to feed them and were held down, legally and economically, while doing so.

This arrangement provided most of the agricultural labour throughout the Middle Ages. Slavery persisted right through the Middle Ages, but it was rare.

In the later Middle Ages, serfdom began to disappear west of the Rhine even as it spread through eastern Europe. Serfdom reached Eastern Europe centuries later than Western Europe – it became dominant around the 15th century. In many of these countries serfdom was abolished during the Napoleonic invasions of the early 19th century, though in some it persisted until mid- or late- 19th century.

The word serf originated from the Middle French serf and was derived from the Latin servus (slave or servant). In Late Antiquity and most of the Middle Ages, what are now called serfs were usually designated in Latin as coloni. As slavery gradually disappeared and the legal status of servi became nearly identical to that of the coloni, the term changed meaning into the modern concept of "serf". The word "serf" is first recorded in English in the late 15th century, and came to its current definition in the 17th century. Serfdom was coined in 1850.

Serfs had a specific place in feudal society, as did barons and knights : in return for protection, a serf would reside upon and work a parcel of land within the manor of his lord. Thus, the manorial system exhibited a degree of reciprocity.

One rationale held that serfs and freemen "worked for all" while a knight or baron "fought for all" and a churchman "prayed for all"; thus everyone had a place (see Estates of the realm). The serf was the worst fed and rewarded. However, unlike slaves, they had certain rights in land and property.

A lord of the manor could not sell his serfs as a Roman might sell his slaves. On the other hand, if he chose to dispose of a parcel of land, the serfs associated with that land stayed with it to serve their new lord; simply speaking, they were implicitly sold in mass and as a part of a lot. This unified system preserved for the lord long-acquired knowledge of practices suited to the land. Further, a serf could not abandon his lands without permission, nor did he possess a saleable title in them.

A freeman became a serf usually through force or necessity. Sometimes the greater physical and legal force of a local magnate intimidated freeholders or allodial owners into dependency. Often a few years of crop failure, a war, or brigandage might leave a person unable to make his own way. In such a case, he could strike a bargain with a lord of a manor. In exchange for gaining protection, his service was required: in labour, produce, or cash, or a combination of all. These bargains became formalised in a ceremony known as "bondage", in which a serf placed his head in the lord's hands, akin to the ceremony of homage where a vassal placed his hands between those of his overlord. These oaths bound the lord and his new serf in a feudal contract and defined the terms of their agreement. Often these bargains were severe.

A 7th-century Anglo Saxon "Oath of Fealty" states:

By the Lord before whom this sanctuary is holy, I will to N. be true and faithful, and love all which he loves and shun all which he shuns, according to the laws of God and the order of the world. Nor will I ever with will or action, through word or deed, do anything which is unpleasing to him, on condition that he will hold to me as I shall deserve it, and that he will perform everything as it was in our agreement when I submitted myself to him and chose his will.

To become a serf was a commitment that encompassed all aspects of the serf's life. The children born to serfs inherited their status, and were considered born into serfdom. By taking on the duties of serfdom, people bound themselves and their progeny.

The social class of the peasantry can be differentiated into smaller categories. These distinctions were often less clear than suggested by their different names. Most often, there were two types of peasants:

Lower classes of peasants, known as cottars or bordars, generally comprising the younger sons of villeins; vagabonds; and slaves, made up the lower class of workers.

The colonus system of the late Roman Empire can be considered the predecessor of Western European feudal serfdom.

Freemen, or free tenants, held their land by one of a variety of contracts of feudal land-tenure and were essentially rent-paying tenant farmers who owed little or no service to the lord, and had a good degree of security of tenure and independence. In parts of 11th-century England freemen made up only 10% of the peasant population, and in most of the rest of Europe their numbers were also small.

Ministeriales were hereditary unfree knights tied to their lord, that formed the lowest rung of nobility in the Holy Roman Empire.

In England, after the Norman conquest of 1066, an unfree tenant who held their land subject to providing agricultural and other services to their lord was described as a villein. Villeins had limited rights and were tied to their lord. However they did have more rights and were of a higher status than the lowest serf. They had to work on the demesne (their lord's farm) in return for receiving small plots of land, to support their family.

Villeins were not freemen, for example, they and their daughters were not allowed to marry without their lord's permission. They could not move away without their lord's consent and the acceptance of the lord to whose manor they proposed to migrate to. Villeins were generally able to hold their own property, unlike slaves (serfs). Villeinage, as opposed to other forms of serfdom, was most common in Continental European feudalism, where land ownership had developed from roots in Roman law.

A variety of kinds of villeinage existed in Europe in the Middle Ages. Half-villeins received only half as many strips of land for their own use and owed a full complement of labour to the lord, often forcing them to rent out their services to other serfs to make up for this hardship. Villeinage was not a purely uni-directional exploitative relationship. In the Middle Ages, land within a lord's manor provided sustenance and survival, and being a villein guaranteed access to land, and crops secure from theft by marauding robbers. Landlords, even where they were legally entitled to do so, rarely evicted villeins because of the value of their labour. Villeinage was much preferable to being a vagabond, a slave, or an unlanded labourer.

In many medieval countries, a villein could gain freedom by escaping from a manor to a city or borough and living there for more than a year; but this action involved the loss of land rights and agricultural livelihood, a prohibitive price unless the landlord was especially tyrannical or conditions in the village were unusually difficult.

In medieval England, two types of villeins existed – villeins regardant that were tied to land and villeins in gross that could be traded separately from land.

In England, the Domesday Book, of 1086, uses bordarii (bordar) and cottarii (cottar) as interchangeable terms, cottar deriving from the native Anglo-Saxon tongue whereas bordar derived from the French.

Status-wise, the bordar or cottar ranked below a villein in the social hierarchy of a manor, holding a cottage, garden and just enough land to feed a family. In England, at the time of the Domesday Survey, this would have comprised between about 1 and 5 acres (0.4 and 2.0 hectares). Under an Elizabethan statute, the Erection of Cottages Act 1588, the cottage had to be built with at least 4 acres (0.02 km ; 0.01 sq mi) of land. The later inclosure acts (1604 onwards) removed the cottars' right to any land: "before the Enclosures Act the cottager was a farm labourer with land and after the Enclosures Act the cottager was a farm labourer without land".

The bordars and cottars did not own their draught oxen or horses. The Domesday Book showed that England comprised 12% freeholders, 35% serfs or villeins, 30% cotters and bordars, and 9% slaves.

Smerdy were a type of serfs above kholops in Medieval Poland and Kievan Rus'.

Kholops were the lowest class of serfs in the medieval and early modern Russia. They had status similar to slaves, and could be freely traded.

The last type of serf was the slave. Slaves had the fewest rights and benefits from the manor. They owned no tenancy in land, worked for the lord exclusively and survived on donations from the landlord. It was always in the interest of the lord to prove that a servile arrangement existed, as this provided him with greater rights to fees and taxes. The status of a man was a primary issue in determining a person's rights and obligations in many of the manorial court -cases of the period. Also, runaway slaves could be beaten if caught.

The usual serf (not including slaves or cottars) paid his fees and taxes in the form of seasonally appropriate labour. Usually, a portion of the week was devoted to ploughing his lord's fields held in demesne, harvesting crops, digging ditches, repairing fences, and often working in the manor house. The remainder of the serf's time was spent tending his own fields, crops and animals in order to provide for his family. Most manorial work was segregated by gender during the regular times of the year. During the harvest, the whole family was expected to work the fields.

A major difficulty of a serf's life was that his work for his lord coincided with, and took precedence over, the work he had to perform on his own lands: when the lord's crops were ready to be harvested, so were his own. On the other hand, the serf of a benign lord could look forward to being well fed during his service; it was a lord without foresight who did not provide a substantial meal for his serfs during the harvest and planting times. In exchange for this work on the lord's demesne, the serfs had certain privileges and rights, including for example the right to gather deadwood – an essential source of fuel – from their lord's forests.

In addition to service, a serf was required to pay certain taxes and fees. Taxes were based on the assessed value of his lands and holdings. Fees were usually paid in the form of agricultural produce rather than cash. The best ration of wheat from the serf's harvest often went to the landlord. Generally hunting and trapping of wild game by the serfs on the lord's property was prohibited. On Easter Sunday the peasant family perhaps might owe an extra dozen eggs, and at Christmas, a goose was perhaps required, too. When a family member died, extra taxes were paid to the lord as a form of feudal relief to enable the heir to keep the right to till what land he had. Any young woman who wished to marry a serf outside of her manor was forced to pay a fee for the right to leave her lord, and in compensation for her lost labour.

Often there were arbitrary tests to judge the worthiness of their tax payments. A chicken, for example, might be required to be able to jump over a fence of a given height to be considered old enough or well enough to be valued for tax purposes. The restraints of serfdom on personal and economic choice were enforced through various forms of manorial customary law and the manorial administration and court baron.

It was also a matter of discussion whether serfs could be required by law in times of war or conflict to fight for their lord's land and property. In the case of their lord's defeat, their own fate might be uncertain, so the serf certainly had an interest in supporting his lord.

Villeins had more rights and status than those held as slaves, but were under a number of legal restrictions that differentiated them from the freeman. Within his constraints, a serf had some freedoms. Though the common wisdom is that a serf owned "only his belly" – even his clothes were the property, in law, of his lord – a serf might still accumulate personal property and wealth, and some serfs became wealthier than their free neighbours, although this happened rarely. A well-to-do serf might even be able to buy his freedom.

A serf could grow what crop he saw fit on his lands, although a serf's taxes often had to be paid in wheat. The surplus he would sell at market.

The landlord could not dispossess his serfs without legal cause and was supposed to protect them from the depredations of robbers or other lords, and he was expected to support them by charity in times of famine. Many such rights were enforceable by the serf in the manorial court.

Forms of serfdom varied greatly through time and regions. In some places, serfdom was merged with or exchanged for various forms of taxation.

The amount of labour required varied. In Poland, for example, it was commonly a few days per year per household in the 13th century, one day per week per household in the 14th century, four days per week per household in the 17th century, and six days per week per household in the 18th century. Early serfdom in Poland was mostly limited to the royal territories (królewszczyzny).

"Per household" means that every dwelling had to give a worker for the required number of days. For example, in the 18th century, six people: a peasant, his wife, three children and a hired worker might be required to work for their lord one day a week, which would be counted as six days of labour.

Serfs served on occasion as soldiers in the event of conflict and could earn freedom or even ennoblement for valour in combat. Serfs could purchase their freedom, be manumitted by generous owners, or flee to towns or to newly settled land where few questions were asked. Laws varied from country to country: in England a serf who made his way to a chartered town (i.e. a borough) and evaded recapture for a year and a day obtained his freedom and became a burgher of the town.

In the Aztec Empire, the Tlacotin class held similarities to serfdom. Even at its height, slaves only ever made up 2% of the population.

The paroikoi were the Byzantine equivalent of serfs.

Serfdom in France started to diminish after the Black Death in France, when the lack of work force made manumission more common from that point onward, and by the 18th-century, serfdom had become relatively rare in most of France.

In 1779, the reforms of Jacques Necker abolished serfdom in all Crown lands in France. On the outbreak of the French Revolution of 1789, between 140,000 and 1,500,000 serfs remained in France, most of them on clerical lands in Franche-Comté, Berry, Burgundy and Marche. However, although formal serfdom no longer existed in most of France, the feudal seigneurial laws still granted noble landlords many of the rights previously exercised over serfs, and the peasants of Auvergne, Nivernais and Champagne, though formally not serfs, could still not move freely.

Serfdom was formally abolished in France on 4 August 1789, and the remaining feudal rights that gave landlords control rights over peasants were abolished in 1789-93.

In the Habsburg monarchy, the enlightened absolutist Emperor Joseph II issued the Serfdom Patent that abolished serfdom in Bohemia and the German speaking areas in 1781. In the Kingdom of Hungary, Joseph II issued a similar decree in 1785 after the peasant revolt in Transylvania.

The Serfdom Patent diminished the long-established mastery of the landlords, thus allowing the serfs to independently choose marriage partners, pursue career choices, and move between estates. The document allowed the serfs legal rights in the Habsburg monarchy, but it did not affect the financial dues and the physical corvée (unpaid labor) that the serfs legally owed to their landlords. It continued to exist and was only abolished during the revolutions of 1848.

In Gaelic Ireland, a political and social system existing in Ireland from the prehistoric period (500 BC or earlier) up until the Norman conquest (12th century AD), the bothach ("hut-dweller"), fuidir (perhaps linked to fot, "soil") and sencléithe ("old dwelling-house") were low-ranked semi-free servile tenants similar to serfs. According to Laurence Ginnell, the sencléithe and bothach "were not free to leave the territory except with permission, and in practice they usually served the flaith [prince]. They had no political or clan rights, could neither sue nor appear as witnesses, and were not free in the matter of entering into contracts. They could appear in a court of justice only in the name of the flaith or other person to whom they belonged, or whom they served, or by obtaining from an aire of the tuath to which they belonged permission to sue in his name." A fuidir was defined by D. A. Binchy as "a ' tenant at will,' settled by the lord (flaith) on a portion of the latter's land; his services to the lord are always undefined. Although his condition is servile, he retains the right to abandon his holding on giving due notice to the lord and surrendering to him two thirds of the products of his husbandry."

Serfdom in Poland became the dominant form of relationship between peasants and nobility in the 17th century, and was a major feature of the economy of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, although its origins can be traced back to the 12th century.

The first steps towards abolition of serfdom were enacted in the Constitution of 3 May 1791, and it was essentially eliminated by the Połaniec Manifesto. However, these reforms were partly nullified by the partition of Poland. Frederick the Great had abolished serfdom in the territories he gained from the first partition of Poland. Over the course of the 19th century, it was gradually abolished on Polish and Lithuanian territories under foreign control, as the region began to industrialize.

Serfdom became the dominant form of relation between Russian peasants and nobility in the 17th century. Serfdom only existed in central and southern areas of the Russian Empire. It was never established in the North, in the Urals, or in Siberia. The conscripted serfs dramatically increased the size of the Russian military during the Napoleonic Wars. According to the Encyclopedia of Human Rights :

In 1649 up to three-quarters of Muscovy 's peasants, or 13 to 14 million people, were serfs whose material lives were barely distinguishable from slaves. Perhaps another 1.5 million were formally enslaved, with Russian slaves serving Russian masters.

Russia's over 23 million (about 38% of the total population) privately held serfs were freed from their lords by an edict of Alexander II in 1861. The owners were compensated through taxes on the freed serfs. State serfs were emancipated in 1866.

Serge Gérard Christian Papin (French pronunciation: [ sɛʁʒ(ə) papɛ̃ ] ; born 1 August 1955) is a French business executive and politician. He was chairman and CEO of the cooperative retail group Système U from 2005 to 2018. He is known for promoting sustainable business practices and for launching the manifesto Osons Demain, pour la transition écologique des entreprises. In 2024, he became non-executive chairman of Auchan France, and in 2025, he was appointed Minister for Small and Medium Enterprises, Trade, Crafts, Tourism and Purchasing Power in Sébastien Lecornu 's second government.

Serge Gérard Christian Papin was born to Jean Papin and Madeleine Duranteau, both grocers. His family ran a store in La Châtaigneraie, Vendée. He studied at the Saint-Joseph College in Fontenay-le-Comte, later completing vocational studies in accounting and commerce. He holds a BEP in Commerce.

Papin began his career in retail in 1972 as a warehouse worker at an Intermarché in Fontenay-le-Comte. In 1976, he joined Système U Ouest, where he created its communications department and later managed the Super U store in Chantonnay, which he bought in 1989.

He rose through the ranks of the cooperative, becoming regional vice-president in 1997 and CEO of Système U Ouest in 1998. In 2005, he was appointed CEO of Système U National, leading the group’s modernization, marketing strategy, and ecological initiatives such as the Écovalor recycling project.

He left Système U in 2018, succeeded by Dominique Schelcher, after forging an alliance with Carrefour to strengthen negotiation power with suppliers.

After leaving Système U, Papin worked as a consultant, author, and public speaker on ecological and social transitions in retail. In 2024, he became non-executive chairman of Auchan France.

On 12 October 2025, Serge Papin was appointed Minister for Small and Medium Enterprises, Trade, Crafts, Tourism, and Purchasing Power in Sébastien Lecornu's second government.

Papin has four daughters from his first marriage and one son, born in 2010, from his second.

He was made an Officer of the National Order of Merit on 24 November 2021.

The Service central de la sécurité des systèmes d'informations (SCSSI) (English: Central Service for Information System Security) was responsible for regulation of the use of cryptosystems by the government of France. Users for authentication must make a declaration to the SCSSI that is then verified, and users for privacy purposes are required to have an authorization from SCSSI.

SCSSI superseded the Interministerial Office for Information Systems Security Service (DCSSI) in February 1996, and French law on ciphering changed in July 1996. It is somewhat similar to the British Communications-Electronics Security Group (CESG), which is part of GCHQ (the equivalent French organisation is DGSE).

SCSSI was one of the founding organisations of the Common Criteria, together with GCHQ, BSI, and NLNCSA

SCSSI became DCSSI in 2001 (cf. décret no 2001-693 du 31 juillet 2001) which became ANSSI in 2009 (cf. décret n° 2009-834 du 7 juillet 2009).

The SAC (French : Service d'Action Civique ; or Civic Action Service), officially created in January 1960, was a Gaullist militia founded by Jacques Foccart, Charles de Gaulle 's chief adviser for African matters, and Pierre Debizet [ fr ], a former Resistant and official director of the group. Important members included Charles Pasqua, part of the Gaullist movement and known as Jacques Chirac 's mentor, Etienne Léandri, a friend of Pasqua, Robert Pandraud or Christian Fouchet. The predecessor of the SAC was the service of order of the Rassemblement du Peuple Français (RPF) Gaullist party. The SAC was dissolved in 1982 under François Mitterrand 's government, after a particularly gruesome multiple murder triggered by internal rivalries.

The SAC was officially created as a 1901 law association on 4 January 1960, in the proclaimed aim of providing unconditional support to de Gaulle's policy. It was then officially directed by Pierre Debizet, a former Resistant, but its real leader was Jacques Foccart, in charge of the African policy of France for several decades.

The SAC recruited among the Gaullist movement, but also in the organized crime. Etienne Léandri, a friend of Charles Pasqua, was thus a former Collaborationist, reconverted in illegal drug trade and protected by the Central Intelligence Agency for his anti-communist activities. Others famous gangsters of the time who were SAC members include Jo Attia [ fr ] or Christian David (" le beau Serge "). Some of these criminals had taken part in the Resistance during the war, and even been deported, thus creating lasting links with future politicians, while others had been collaborationists.

The SAC always was independent from the Gaullist party itself, directly reporting to General de Gaulle through Foccart. The Parliamentary report published in 1982 talked of "God without the clergy" (" bon dieu sans les curés ").

After de Gaulle's change of policy concerning the Algerian War (1954-1962) and his subsequent support of Algerian independence, many SAC members, supporters or outright activists of "French Algeria" resigned. Pierre Debizet, official director of the SAC, was replaced by Paul Comiti [ fr ], a bodyguard of de Gaulle. General de Gaulle then sent the SAC against the Organisation armée secrète ' (OAS) terrorist group which launched a campaign of bombings and assassinations to try to block the implementation of the March 1962 Evian agreements on a cease-fire with the National Liberation Front (FLN).

After this period, which saw the longtime Gaullists quit the organisation, the SAC began to recruit more and more from underworld groups. It then became involved in all sorts of shady moves and covert actions for the Gaullist party. It has been suspected of participating in 1965 in the "disappearance" in Paris of Mehdi Ben Barka, leader of the Moroccan opposition to King Hassan II and of the Tricontinental Conference. Furthermore, Jacqueline Hémard [ fr ] and Ali Bourequat, "disappeared" under Hassan II, have accused the SAC of financing itself by drug trade with Morocco.

During May 1968, SAC members, disguised as ambulance crew, took demonstrators to their headquarters, rue de Solférino, where they were beaten up. They then prepared the Gaullist counter-demonstration which assured de Gaulle of the support of (parts of) the French people. After the June 1968 legislative election, the SAC expelled from the Youth Centres (" Maisons des Jeunes ") various movements and associations, including the Maoists and the so-called " Katangais ". Continuing this "policy of order", the SAC created in 1969 the right-wing students' union Union Nationale Inter-universitaire (UNI) in 1969 to counter the "leftist subversion" in the students' movement. Until 1976, the SAC supported the UNI in daily organisation, while many UNI members were also SAC members. Double membership of most activists continued after 1976, but the two organisations had distinct leadership.

Jacques Foccart called back Pierre Debizet to the head of the SAC during May 1968. Foccart excluded Charles Pasqua in the beginning of 1969, suspecting him of trying to take control of the militia. Furthermore, Pierre Debizet decided to change the membership card, which looked too much like a police card, and requested from each member an extract of his judicial record. Despite this cleaning-up of the organisation in 1968-69, SAC members have had problems with the law between 1968 and 1981 for various reasons, including: " assault (coups et blessures volontaires), illegal possession of fire-arms, fraud, aggravated assault, money counterfeiting, pimping, racketeering, arson, blackmail, illegal drug trade, holdup, abuse of trust (abus de confiance - i.e. corruption), bombings like during the Besançon courthouse attack, robberies and handling, being a member of a criminal organisation (association de malfaiteurs), degradation of vehicles, use of stolen cheques, outrage to public morality (outrage aux bonnes mœurs)."

Some SAC members have upheld a theory of the "two SAC" to defend themselves, alleging the coexistence, under the same appellation, of on one hand a group of staunchly right-wing Gaullist activists, often recruiting honourable persons (a magistrate, a certain number of workers' activists often linked to " yellow trade-unions " such as the CGSI, the CFT or the CSL), and on the other hand individuals located at the cross-roads between intelligence activities, organized crime and far right movements, used for the most shady actions.

In the 1970s, journalist Patrice Chairoff published in Libération left-wing newspaper, founded by Jean-Paul Sartre and others, a plan of the SAC envisioning the internment of leftists in stadiums. The document was attributed to the Marseillese Gérard Kappé [ fr ], a lieutenant of Charles Pasqua who claimed it was a forgery. Chairoff was the pseudonym of Dominique Calzi, a far-right activist and criminal, who had been a member of the SAC until quitting in 1971.

One of the main roles of the SAC, although not well known, was the internal surveillance of the Gaullist party. The departmental responsible of the SAC was a de jure member of the departmental committee of the Union des Démocrates pour la République (UNR), then of the Union des Démocrates pour la République (UDR) and Rally for the Republic (RPR) (successive incarnations of the Gaullist party), even though he was often not an adherent of the Gaullist party. It is through this tight network covering France that Jacques Foccart was very well informed. On many times, the notes communicated to Pierre Debizet by his departmental responsibles permitted to push out of the Gaullist party elected (or not) officials of the party suspected of some illegal activities, before having the French justice take care of it.

According to Daniele Ganser (2005), the SAC had Jacques Chirac as president in 1975. He later was twice prime minister before being elected president in 1995.

Pierre Debizet, national leader of the SAC, arrived in Marseille in May 1981, troubled by local rivalries within his organisation. Jacques Massié, a police inspector and the local leader of the SAC, was accused by those who later would assassinate him of corruption — and worse, of contacts with the left. He was in reality a competent police officer, who was to take the leadership of the SAC in the Bouches-du-Rhône with the support of Debizet. Some time afterward, Massié and all of his family were massacred on the night of July 18, 1981 in what is known as the "Auriol massacre". His murderers were arrested a few weeks later. Pierre Debizet was interrogated by the police, but eventually released without charges. The five SAC members of the Auriol commando were sentenced on May 1, 1985 to between 15 years of prison and life-sentences; the mastermind behind inspector Massié's murder was never identified.

The Auriol massacre took place soon after the 1981 election of François Mitterrand, candidate of the Socialist Party (PS). That election was the first victory of the left-wing since the 1958 establishment of the Fifth Republic by De Gaulle. The new parliamentary majority set up a parliamentary investigative commission, in which the opposition refused to sit. That Commission did not request the dissolving of the SAC, which the National Assembly nonetheless debated. The government disbanded the SAC in 1982, using a law which allows disbanding combat groups and private militias.

After the 1982 dissolving of the SAC, Charles Pasqua, future Interior Minister, created the " Solidarité et défense des libertés " organisation ("Solidarity and Defense of Freedoms"), which gathered RPR and Union for French Democracy (UDF) members, former SAC activists and even some members of far-right movements such as the " Parti des forces nouvelles " (PFN, Party of the New Forces). This descendant of the SAC was quickly dissolved. After the 1982 bombing of the rue Marbœuf, it organised a demonstration during which activists of the Centre national des indépendants et paysans (CNIP) and of the PFN distinguished themselves.

Furthermore, Pierre Debizet created the Mouvement initiative et liberté (MIL, Movement of Initiative and Freedom) after the May 1981 presidential election, but before the dissolving of the SAC in 1982. Rather than a resurgence of the SAC, it was thus more a parallel structure of the UNI estudiantine trade-union, which was supposed to assist SAC activists in finding more mainstream, professional activities, by entering the estudiantine movement.

In the early 1980s, the SAC also had some front organisations, such as the private security firm VHP Security, which had as subsidiary KO International Company, charged of the personal security of Jean-Marie Le Pen, leader of the far-right National Front (FN). Ante Gotovina, indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia on charges of war crimes, had worked for KO International Company.

The Seuil du Poitou (literally "Poitou's Threshold") is a geological denomination for an area in western central France where the Paris (Northeast) and Aquitaine (Southwest) sedimentary basins meet, and which also is a gap between the ancient mountain ranges Massif Armoricain (Northwest) and the Massif Central (Southeast).

Situated to the south of Poitiers, the area is the drainage divide between the Loire, Charente and Sèvre basins and a border between different climatic zones.

Maximum altitude on the Seuil du Poitou is 195 meters at Champagné-Saint-Hilaire.

Because it is a strategic way of access between the North and South of France, the area in or around the Seuil du Poitou has been the theater of many battles. In 732, the Battle of Tours took place some 50 km North of the Seuil du Poitou.

The history of silk production in Lyon involves the study of all the key players in the silk industry in Lyon. Over time, Lyon’s silk sector has encompassed every stage of producing and selling silk fabric from raw silk: spinning, creating patterns, weaving, finishing, and marketing. Collectively, this sector is referred to as the "Fabrique."

This history, spanning five centuries, originated on the banks of the Saône River during the Renaissance period. Fairs at this location facilitated the settlement of fabric merchants. The first weavers settled in Lyon under the auspices of a royal decree by King Francis I, and they rapidly prospered. However, this initial industrial momentum was interrupted by the Wars of Religion.

In the early 17th century, the invention of the drawloom enabled the Fabrique to master patterned fabrics. Its European expansion began during the reign of Louis XIV, as the fashions of the Versailles court set trends for all other European courts, propelling Lyon’s silk industry into prominence. During the 18th century, Lyon’s silk producers maintained their position through constant technical innovations, high-quality designers, and ongoing stylistic creativity.

The French Revolution dealt a severe blow to the Fabrique, but Napoleon strongly supported the sector, which peaked during the 19th century. Lyon became the global capital of silk, outpacing all other European silk industries and exporting a wide range of fabrics worldwide. Under the Second Empire, it was France’s most powerful export industry.

Although the first challenges arose in the 1880s, the advent of artificial textiles eventually ended Lyon’s industrial silk production in the 20th century. Traditional manufacturers struggled to adapt or did so too late. The silk industry collapsed in the 1930s, and despite numerous attempts at revival after World War II, the city’s activity became limited to haute couture and the restoration of antique fabrics.

The technique of producing silk thread from silkworm cocoons was discovered in China during the Shang dynasty (17th–11th century BCE). For a long time, silk production remained a Chinese monopoly, with the Roman Empire importing it at great expense until the 6th century CE. According to legend, monks sent by the Byzantine Emperor Justinian I smuggled silkworm eggs into Europe.

Silk has been present in Europe since the 4th century, originating in the Byzantine world. The silk weaving technique was later transmitted to the Muslim civilization, where it flourished during the Middle Ages. Through this channel, silk weaving was introduced into the medieval Christian world. When Roger of Hauteville conquered Muslim Sicily in the latter half of the 11th century, he partially preserved its culture, giving rise to a unique civilization known as Norman Sicily. A notable artifact of this cultural transmission is the coronation mantle of Roger II, King of Sicily, made of embroidered silk. Until the 13th century, silk weaving in Christian Europe was confined to Sicily and Calabria, before spreading to Lucca, Venice, and other Italian cities. Another significant transmission route was Muslim Spain, gradually reconquered by Christians over several centuries. Despite this, the technical and artistic contributions of the Muslim world were significant, as evidenced by typical Spanish motifs reproduced in Italian cities.

Silk manufacturing in Lyon emerged during the Renaissance. Benefiting from a highly favorable environment created by trade fairs, significant freedom in organizing the craft, and the regular presence of monarchs, the silk industry grew rapidly. It reached its first golden age under the reign of Henry II before experiencing a severe crisis during the Wars of Religion.

During the 15th century, Lyon became a significant trading hub, with Charles VII granting the city the right to hold two tax-free fairs. These grew to three and then four annually by 1463, becoming key events in European Renaissance commerce. Among other goods, many silks—primarily from Italy —were traded.

To curb the outflow of funds caused by the French elite’s insatiable demand for foreign silk, Louis XI sought to establish a silk manufacturing industry in Lyon. By the ordinance of November 23, 1466, he urged Lyon’s bourgeoisie to finance workshops. However, the merchants hesitated, not wanting to disrupt their relationships with Italian trade partners. The few workers who settled in Lyon were later sent to Tours, to the Château de Plessis-lès-Tours, in 1470.

This refusal by Lyonnais merchants can also be explained by economic conditions that seemed unfavorable for such an industry at the time. The local workforce was insufficient to enable low-cost production, and the profits from simply trading silk were comparatively certain and consistent. Italian silk merchants were essential to the success of the emerging fairs, and supporting the creation of an industry that would compete with their home cities risked driving them away. It was the transformation of these circumstances that, around fifty years later, allowed for the true establishment of Lyon's silk industry.

In the meantime, a merchant from Lucca, Nicolas de Guide, attempted to weave silk in Lyon in 1514. However, he was violently opposed by his compatriots, who accused him of competing with his city. Lacking support from the consulate [ fr ], he ultimately abandoned his efforts.

In 1536, Étienne Turquet [ fr ] and Barthélemy Naris, Piedmontese merchants established in Lyon, sought to create factories for the production of precious fabrics. Through royal letters patent, King Francis I granted them the same privileges as those in the city of Tours, thereby establishing the guild of workers in “cloths of gold, silver, and silk.” Turquet, Naris, and their workers were exempted from all taxes, guard duties, and militia service, on the condition that they worked within the city and not outside it. Turquet founded the “Fabrique Lyonnaise de Soierie” with the help of Lyonnais bourgeois such as the Senneton brothers and bankers like Camus, La Porte, and Faure. He also brought in workers from Avignon and Genoa.

Supported by the king, who granted Lyon a monopoly on importing raw silk in 1540, the silk industry quickly flourished. By 1548, during the procession marking the entrance of King Henry II, 459 master craftsmen participated, and between 800 and 1,000 people made a living from silk production in Lyon. This rapid growth was due in part to favorable economic conditions, an abundant supply of labor, and a flexible regulatory framework. At the time, Lyon was a particularly free city where artisans were not constrained by restrictive guilds, a liberty safeguarded by royal letters patent from 1486 and 1511. The initial company established by Turquet and Naris dissolved in 1540, with each continuing independently. New master silk weavers emerged, including Gibert de Crémone (who also operated in Saint-Chamond), Leydeul, and Rollet Viard, who owned looms in Avignon as well.

The rapid expansion of activity necessitated the creation of the first regulations for organizing the industry and the guild by 1554. These rules were drafted by the master craftsmen and the notable members of the consulate and were later formalized by the king. According to Roger Doucet, the apex of this initial period of Lyon’s silk industry occurred during the reign of Henry II. However, accurately measuring the production growth is challenging. Records provided by the consulate are often exaggerated and combine silk and wool workers into a single category. Despite these difficulties, the new industry successfully competed against imported Italian silks by offering lower prices on entry-level fabrics. Historian Richard Gascon estimated production growth based on the entry of bales of unprocessed or semi-processed silk intended for fabric production: from 1522 to 1544, the volume may have increased 2.5 times, and by eightfold between 1544 and 1569.

This success should not obscure the fact that, during this period, the Fabrique was only capable of producing plain fabrics, which did not rival the high-end creations of Italian cities. Despite some simple patterns achieved using ties or rods by Lyonnais artisans, Italian craftsmen remained the unrivaled masters of patterned silk production. It was not until the 1600s, with technical advancements brought by Claude Dangon [ fr ] —likely imported from Italy—that Lyon began to compete in this domain.

The occupation of Lyon by Protestant forces in 1562 and 1563 [ fr ] triggered a crisis that could have been temporary but, combined with other negative events, plunged Lyon’s silk industry into its first cyclical depression.

With Protestants seizing power in Lyon in 1562, many leading merchants—who were also major manufacturers—left the city. This sudden departure led to a shortage of raw materials for the workshops, while the commercial networks for selling their production were severely disrupted. The plague that followed in subsequent years exacerbated the depression. In their petitions to the king, the remaining master silk weavers claimed that two-thirds of the workers had disappeared.

Adding to these temporary catastrophes was an event that further weakened Lyon’s silk industry, which now faced fierce competition. In 1563, Charles IX, then just 13 years old and newly crowned in a kingdom ravaged by religious divisions, imposed a 50% tax on raw silk imports. This significantly reduced the competitiveness of Lyon’s weavers, as foreign products—often smuggled into France—became cheaper than local goods. At the same time, rival cities such as Geneva, Besançon, Turin, Milan, Modena, and Reggio began producing low-quality plain and striped fabrics at low prices. These cities attracted part of Lyon’s workforce, which was suffering from a lack of employment opportunities.

The decline in workforce numbers and production levels is difficult to quantify. Historian Richard Gascon estimates that the number of looms in Lyon dropped from about 3,000 in the late 1550s to roughly 200 in the 1570s.

At the end of the 16th century, King Henry IV, seeking to make France self-sufficient in silk thread production, encouraged the cultivation of silkworms. Supported by Olivier de Serres, who briefly planted mulberry trees in the gardens of the Tuileries, Henry IV promoted this development, particularly in the Cévennes and Ardèche regions, where the climate was favorable. Mulberry cultivation had already been initiated in Languedoc and Provence in 1564 by François Traucat, leading to the establishment of France’s first silkworm farms.

During the 17th and 18th centuries, Lyon’s silk industry was closely tied to the royal court and, to a lesser extent, to the conflicts affecting European monarchies. This dependence explains the alternating periods of prosperity and hardship that marked the silk workers’ lives and the trade as a whole.

At the beginning of the 17th century, the Fabrique in Lyon consisted of fewer than 1,000 master weavers, operating fewer than 2,000 looms and employing fewer than 3,000 people in total. Under Henry IV, Lyon's silk industry underwent two significant developments.

The first was the introduction of the drawloom (métier à la grande tire) by Claude Dangon [ fr ], imported from Italy, which enabled the weaving of patterned fabrics. This innovation allowed Lyon to compete with Paris and Tours and match the quality of the productions from Italian cities. At the time, northern and central Italian cities dominated European silk production in both quality and quantity, setting the styles sought after by elites across the continent. The quality of Lyonnais silk further improved in 1655 with the introduction of silk polishing, brought to the city by Octavio Mey.

The second major development was the establishment of regulations governing the profession. Until then, master weavers were free to organize their work as they saw fit. In 1596, apprenticeships were set at five years, followed by a two-year period as a journeyman. Masters were allowed no more than two apprentices and were prohibited from employing people outside their families for auxiliary tasks such as preparing warps and wefts.

Despite these advancements, Lyon remained a minor silk center compared to Italian cities until the mid-17th century. The trade-in luxury fabrics was still dominated by Italian merchants.

In 1667, Jean-Baptiste Colbert issued several ordinances to regulate the "Grande Fabrique de Soie" in Lyon. These decrees established strict guidelines for production, detailing the quality standards for royal orders and specifying factors such as fabric width and the number of threads to be used. They also mandated the maintenance of production logs. Extravagant fabrics were produced in Lyon for members of the royal court and to furnish royal residences such as the Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye and the Palace of Versailles. For example, the "brocade of love" in six pieces adorned the king’s chamber in 1673. Unfortunately, no pieces from this era survive, as worn fabrics were melted down to recover precious metals.

Colbert's mercantilist policies strongly supported the growth of French industrial production. His efforts were particularly effective for the Fabrique, as the number of weavers tripled between 1665 and 1690. To avoid alienating a clientele still attached to traditional Italian styles, French merchant-manufacturers refrained from innovating with motifs. In some cases, they even marketed their fabrics as Italian to reassure customers. The industry’s growth was not significantly disrupted by the revocation of the Edict of Nantes (1685), although many Protestant silk workers emigrated, taking refuge in places like Zurich and London (notably in the Spitalfields area).

From the late 17th century to the 1720s, royal commissions ceased entirely. The final years of Louis XIV's reign were challenging for the Lyonnais silk industry, as royal mourning periods reduced the demand for luxury fabrics.

Since Lyon's industry was entirely devoted to the French aristocratic market, it was forced to seek new outlets by appealing to less affluent customers who demanded simpler fabrics. However, this modest clientele could not fully compensate for the loss of orders from Versailles. It was during this period that a new commercial strategy began to emerge, which would prove successful in the 18th century. Leveraging the fact that Louis XIV's court was the most dazzling in Europe and that elite fashion trends were influenced by Versailles and Paris, Lyon's merchants began exporting annual novelties that became popular among foreign elites. A report submitted to the London Parliament in 1713 noted that English silk manufacturers had to adhere to French fashion trends to succeed domestically. However, the delays they faced in copying and distributing their designs to markets condemned them to less profitable sales in the high-end fabric segment. Nonetheless, English silk producers remained dominant in their domestic market.

To satisfy the constant demand for novelty, merchant-manufacturers began creating fabrics with original patterns, seeking to move away from traditional designs. This ongoing stylistic innovation, aided by the proximity of merchant-manufacturers to the courts of Paris and Versailles, gradually allowed Lyon to outcompete foreign textiles from Italy, England, and the Netherlands. However, commercial results remained mixed until the 1730s.

Building on favorable developments under Louis XIV, the Grande Fabrique thrived during the Age of Enlightenment, dominating the European silk trade and earning a reputation abroad as the "undisputed capital of silk." Numerous innovations in weaving technology emerged during this period, aimed at improving productivity and the quality of the final fabric.

After two centuries of following foreign, especially Italian, trends, Lyonnais silk producers fully emancipated themselves in the 18th century, engaging in a relentless pursuit of innovation and constant renewal. By this time, Paris had become the European center of fashion, and all major Lyonnais manufacturers had representatives there to stay up-to-date with court trends. These representatives worked closely with designers who spearheaded artistic developments. Two key figures in this creative endeavor were Jean Revel [ fr ] and Philippe de la Salle [ fr ]. The Fabrique gained such prestige that other European production centers began adopting Lyonnais styles.

During the 18th century, the majority of Lyon’s silk production was exported to Southern and Central Europe. Through Spain, their products even reached South America. Lyonnais silks were also highly sought after in Nordic countries, particularly Sweden. However, Lyon’s merchants faced stiff competition from other producers, including Italy and Great Britain. Britain, in particular, held a firm grip on its domestic market and North America.

The Fabrique was institutionally dominated by large merchants, who consistently received royal support. Throughout the 18th century, the governing bodies of the Fabrique implemented systems to foster innovation, enabling the entire sector to benefit from numerous inventions.

As in previous centuries, the Fabrique was plagued by conflicts between the elite silk merchants, who controlled the sales channels for their benefit, and master weavers and workers, who were largely barred from direct sales. The latter persistently sought greater inclusion in the silk trade, whether through institutional roles or guaranteed wages with standardized rates.

Tensions began to escalate in the 18th century with the consular ordinance of June 4, 1718, which imposed high entry fees to prevent master weavers from advancing to the merchant class. Following a royal commission in 1730, the Comptroller General of Finances, Philibert Orry, issued a new regulation on October 8, 1731, which strongly favored the major merchants. At this time, the Fabrique consisted of 120 to 180 large merchants, around 700 small merchants, and approximately 8,000 master-workers. The struggle for influence continued, culminating in the 1737 proclamation of a new regulation allowing small merchants and workers to form associations and sell directly without requiring the mediation of a major silk merchant. This regulation was suspended in 1739 and replaced in 1744 by a new set of rules re-establishing the dominance of the commercial elite. Its announcement in August 1744 provoked riots led by master workers. The king’s local forces were overwhelmed, and the government temporarily suspended the new regulation to restore order. However, the following year, the situation was forcibly resolved, and the 1744 regulation was permanently enforced.

In the 18th century, the Fabrique consisted of four overlapping but distinct social groups.

The elite comprised merchants who controlled the wholesale trade of raw silk, reselling the material to merchant-manufacturers. These families, numbering only a few dozen, also invested in spinning, woven silk resale, and banking. These merchants were often connected to Italian families from Turin or Milan.

A second group consists of around one hundred merchant-manufacturers, also known as "silk producers" (soyeux), who provide silk for weaving to master-workers, employ designers, and resell the ordered fabrics. About thirty of them are large-scale operators who interact with the group of international merchants, though they differ in that they lack control over the upstream commercial circuits. This class is further divided into two groups: the "large merchants," who sell in an actual store and employ many workers outside their workshops, and the "small merchants," who produce and sell on their own account, typically operating with an average of four looms in their homes.

The third group consists of the master-workers, who own one or more weaving looms. They receive threads and designs from the merchant-manufacturers and may, in turn, employ apprentices or helpers. This group struggles with the state of subjugation imposed by regulations, as well as the lack of guarantees regarding the compensation for their work, the "tariff." They organize themselves clandestinely, since any association of bodies is prohibited, and protest, sometimes violently, as in 1744.

Finally, the last group is made up of the countless helpers, apprentices, and workers who do not own their own production tools.

During the 18th century, many innovations were applied to the weaving loom to facilitate work, leading to new types of weaving. These innovations were driven by a commercial logic and were promoted by the trade sector. The merchant-manufacturers implemented "a public management of innovation, based on the shared negotiation of technical utility and the rapid dissemination of new techniques through financial, municipal, and community investment. In this sense, the corporation, far from being backward-looking, actually promotes technical innovation."

At the start of the century, systems to facilitate the reading of designs and the selection of threads for the shuttle passage were developed. These included the Basile Bouchon loom, introduced in 1725. A colleague of Bouchon, Jean-Baptiste Falcon [ fr ], invented the punched-card system carried by a prism, which allowed complex patterns to be spread much more quickly from one workshop to another. This period also saw an early attempt at mechanizing weaving looms, led by Jacques Vaucanson in the 1740s. However, this attempt was rejected by the workers of the Fabrique and was short-lived. These innovations, not always technically perfected, were not always adopted but were part of the ongoing improvement of loom performance.

Local authorities were well aware that innovation was the key to their commercial success. Support for inventors became institutionalized through two forms of financial reward. The first came directly from the Fabrique corporation, which provided, for example, 52,194 livres to Jean-Baptiste Falcon [ fr ] between 1738 and 1755 for his work on perfecting the loom. The second was managed by the municipality and the intendant, funded by the fabric duty on foreign textiles [ fr ], created in 1711. Starting in 1725, a portion of the revenue from this fund was granted to inventors, with this proportion increasing after the 1750s. These provisions were complemented by a diffusion bonus, rewarding those who adapted a new system to a large number of looms.

Over the century, the methods for validating funding requests became more sophisticated and relied on cross-expertise from academics and professionals. This cooperation between various trades marked a deep trend in Lyon's culture, which sought consensus and arbitration. It led, in the early 19th century, to the establishment of the industrial tribunal [ fr ].

During the 18th century, Lyonnais submitted 229 patent applications to the royal administration concerning textiles, 116 of which were solely aimed at improving the loom. Most of these applications came from weavers seeking to improve the long and delicate operations involved in creating patterns. Of the 170 inventors who petitioned the authorities to validate a technique, only 12 were large merchants. Designers were also inventors, combining stylistic research with technical research to develop new fabrics. For example, Jean Revel created the "retired" or "berclé" weave in the 1730s, which allowed the creation of half-tones. The resulting relief in the fabric and the color nuances were unknown at that time. This innovation was immediately adopted and imitated in Great Britain.

Lyon's elites thus multiplied their support for innovation and the dissemination of techniques, both in a spirit of respect for corporatist solidarities and in rewarding individual innovative practices. "In Lyon, inventions are a benefit to the city's and kingdom's economy before they become an asset in the hands of their creator." Exclusive privileges are therefore very rare in Lyon and rarely concern the world of silk.

During the Regency of Philippe d'Orléans, the Grand Fabrique experienced some instability as many orders came from individuals enriched by the Law system, whose ruin prevented the final payment. Additionally, the rise of the East India Company, which introduced new textiles to the French market, severely competed with Lyon silk.

The peace at the start of Louis XV ’s actual reign, along with many happy events in the royal family, including the birth of the Dauphin, led to a surge in orders for Lyon silk. This resulted in a period of prosperity for the Fabrique. The petitions from Lyon merchants, supported by the consulate, led to a major royal order for upholstery silk in 1730 for the Palace of Versailles. This order finally stabilized Lyon’s silk industry and allowed for strong growth until the 1750s. Activity doubled between 1720 and 1760. One of the leading silk houses of this period was the Charton family, which supplied the largest share of royal furnishings between 1741 and 1782.

This period also saw the emancipation of Lyonnais designers from the Italian style, allowing them to establish their trademark. This style quickly spread throughout Europe and helped boost the sales of Lyon silk among the elites across the continent. Designers trained in the presence of Lyonnais painters such as Charles Grandon [ fr ], Daniel Sarrabat (who had Philippe de la Salle [ fr ] as a student), or Donat Nonnotte. Uniquely in Europe, they often had stakes in silk businesses, thus acting as both patrons and employed designers. Likewise, they did not form an organized group and, unlike merchants or weavers, they did not have their own corporation. Thus, the design does not belong to the one who executes it, but to the silk house that commissioned it.

To find inspiration, after many years of study, they "frequented the engraving cabinets, art collections, the Gobelins workshops, theaters, the aristocracy's palaces, and the court." However, they were also fabric technicians, mechanics, and merchants, as a design is created based on its commercial impact, its feasibility, and the final quality of the fabric it adorns.

Among the designers of this period, Courtois made the first attempts at color degradation by juxtaposing threads in different shades, from light to dark. Ringuet was one of the first to attempt to imitate nature in floral designs. One of the great innovators of this period was Jean Revel, whose invention of the "berclé" weave, allowing for the blending of colors, had immediate success.

The emergence of the first forms of a distinctly French style dates back to the glory years of Louis XIV and Colbert ’s desire to create a powerful national industry. Competing with Italian and Spanish fashions, it first established itself at the French court and then slowly spread to all European courts. This style thus became, de facto, European.

At its beginnings, it was characterized by the appearance of asymmetry and sharper designs. Floral decoration was the preferred subject, repeated ad nauseam, but with constant renewal. "The motif is no longer stylized but is the result of the naturalistic reproduction of reality, studied directly or observed in botanical treatises." In the 1700s to 1710s, the so-called "Bizarre" style spread, offering an exuberant and fanciful treatment of naturalistic motifs. In long designs, there was a mix of familiar and unusual themes, chinoiseries and japoniseries, and motifs with seemingly incompatible proportions.

The 1720s to 1740s marked the Regency style, characterized by "decorations where flowers, plants, and fruits in nuanced and brilliant colors bloom generously amid architectural motifs, ruins, vases, baskets, shells, and rocks." At the beginning of Louis XV’s reign, "lace" motifs appeared. Semi-naturalistic floral designs, sometimes with fruits and leaves, were interwoven with lace imitations.

Finally, the 1730s to 1740s were marked by a taste for a more classic and realistic depiction of nature, though the 1740s also marked the Rococo period. It was also at this time that the first attempts at depicting relief on fabric were made, following Jean Revel's invention. To highlight this novelty, motifs were enlarged to large proportions, such as "giving a rose the size of a cabbage and an olive the size of a pumpkin."

The French style was not only characterized by innovations in designs but also in fabric, with the invention of new weaving processes.

The French style, following the prestige it gained under Louis XIV, gained an even greater place under Louis XV in all the luxury markets of Europe. In Britain, Holland, and Italy, the silk centers of the continent were forced to copy, albeit belatedly, French fabrics. Despite the very high reputation of Dutch weavers in the early 18th century, and laws prohibiting the entry of French silks into Italy, the Lyonnais managed to dominate all markets on the continent.

These merchants adopted an aggressive commercial policy. After offering the new fashion of the year and making substantial profits, and before local silk workers could produce fabrics imitating their designs, they drastically reduced the prices of their leftover stock to break the market and prevent imitators from making large profits off their work. This, of course, was just before the arrival of the new fashion, which rendered all unsold goods obsolete and even harder to sell.

This outward-facing commercial policy was supported by several royal decisions to protect the French industry. In 1711, the monarchy introduced a tax on the importation of raw silks, with collection taking place in Lyon through the establishment of a "foreign fabric tax fund." Lyon silk workers protested, arguing that their silk became less competitive than foreign fabrics. The state modified the law in 1716, significantly increasing duties on the import of foreign fabrics, which were also collected through the same fund. This protectionist stance softened in 1720 but continued thereafter.

Between 1750 and 1770, several crises severely affected the silk trade in the Rhone Valley. These difficult periods began with the War of the Austrian Succession (1740-1748) and the Seven Years' War (1756-1763). They were exacerbated by numerous deaths at court and conflicts in the northern countries, major silk importers. The crisis peaked in 1771 with the conflict between the Russian Empire, Poland, and the Ottoman Empire, also important clients of French merchants.

In 1756, the Abbé de Lacroix-Laval and a group of art enthusiasts founded a Fine Arts school. It became, in 1780, "the Royal Academic School of Drawing for the Progress of the Arts and the Manufactures of the City of Lyon," offering free courses. It trained many designers in classical painting and the reproduction of natural flowers in all their nuances. However, these designers sought to evolve and propose innovations to their patrons and clients. "Between 1750 and 1770, flower and plant garlands, branches, ribbons, and passementerie cordelières... flow vertically through fabrics in undulating movements, meanders, or 'rivers' in the Rococo style." The technique of design for weaving was first theorized by Joubert de l'Hiberderie in his "Manual for Designers for Fabric Manufacturing" in 1765.

The most iconic designer of this period is Philippe de la Salle [ fr ], considered in the 1760s to be the best in his profession. He, along with many others, also worked on the technical improvement of looms, particularly lightening the work of the lacemaker. He perfected the shuttles, other loom parts, and invented the removable semple. Supported as a designer, educator, and inventor by the Fabrique and the city of Lyon, he received 122,000 livres from them for his work. His fame was so great that he was invited to demonstrate weaving at the Tuileries in front of Louis XVI, who ennobled him in 1775.

A revival began at the start of Louis XVI's reign, especially in the 1780s, partly due to Thierry de Ville d'Avray [ fr ], the administrator of the royal furniture. Convinced of the excellence of Lyon's artisans, he placed a series of orders between 1785 and 1789, which revived the city's activity. These orders were for the royal apartments at Versailles [ fr ], Rambouillet, Saint-Cloud, and Compiègne.

To adapt to changing tastes, the Fabrique turned to embroidery, developing a large sector of embroiderers on silk. Merchant-manufacturers also experimented with fashionable techniques, such as mixing other fibers with silk, moiré Gros de Tours, or droguet, in which the warp played an equal role with the weft in creating the design.

The Fabrique continued its traditional production of large-patterned fabrics. The Louis XVI style, in the neoclassical movement that dominated the period, was reflected in Lyon silk with " pastoral compositions dotted with medallions and ribbon knots, in Trianon style, while mythological scenes or allegories, imitating bas-reliefs or antique cameos, formed elegant decorations punctuated by arabesques, garlands of pearls, vases, putti, and other ornaments in the taste of Greco-Roman antiquity." There were also droguets, dots, and stripes. The motifs became smaller, often no larger than two to three centimeters, and were arranged vertically. Camille Pernon and Jean-Démosthène Dugourc [ fr ] were important representatives of this style.

To satisfy their clientele, the silk workers continually refreshed their designs instead of seeking to develop simple, solid-colored silks. The houses employed designers, regularly sending them to Paris to stay informed of the latest fashions and to offer clients always-new decorations. Regulations attempted to protect these designs, and requests to the highest authorities led to the implementation of copyright laws. In 1787, a royal decree guaranteed designers exclusive rights to their work for periods ranging from six to twenty-five years. Among notable designers, sometimes designer-manufacturers, were Jacques-Charles Dutillieu, Joseph Bournes, François Grognard, and Pierre Toussaint Dechazelle [ fr ].

By the end of the 18th century, the reputation of Lyon silk workers allowed them to secure important orders from European courts, including those of Catherine II of Russia and Charles IV of Spain. Camille Pernon was introduced to the Russian court by Voltaire and became the empress's agent between 1783 and 1792.

With cycles of prosperity and difficult years, the idea of a minimum rate for weaving emerged and became a strong demand. In 1786, the Revolt of the Two Sous [ fr ], which saw merchants and weavers confront one another again, was severely repressed. The authorities then reiterated the absolute power of the consulate in regulating trade between major merchants and workers, the consulate itself being largely in the hands of the merchants. The royal power prohibited price increases and any workers' organization. This revolt, in its structure, foreshadowed the great workers' revolts of the 19th century.

At the dawn of the Revolution, Lyon had 14,000 looms, employing over 30,000 weavers and 30,000 workers for related activities, for a total population of around 150,000 inhabitants.

Lyon entered the revolutionary period in crisis. The years 1787-1788 were difficult for the silk industry, with production being halved overall.

In 1789, during the preparation for the Estates-General, the vote of the deputies revealed an irreparable rift between the weavers and the merchants. No representative of the merchants was elected, and only those from the master workers attended the Estates-General. In the grievances books, they expressed their desire for a fairer organization, holding the master merchants responsible for their misery.

The weavers obtained an official rate in November 1789 and decided to separate from the merchants by creating a distinct community at the Cathedral of Saint-Jean on May 3, 1790. They also placed great hopes in the law of June 16, 1791, which abolished corporations and their privileges. Meanwhile, the authorities attempted to protect French silks by establishing customs duties.

However, with the exodus of part of the nobility, the Fabrique automatically lost a significant portion of its clientele. The crisis set in with inflation and war, hindering trade. Expensive woven fabrics were replaced by simpler, plain fabrics decorated with embroidery. The siege of Lyon in 1793 caused a terrible exodus, severely limiting production capabilities. The population of Lyon, about 150,000, dropped to 102,000 in 1794, and then 88,000 in 1800. The ensuing repression led to the death of 115 of the 400 silk entrepreneurs in the city. Many merchant-manufacturers also emigrated, fleeing the fighting and political persecution. In 1793, the Royal School of Fine Arts was abolished.

Between 1794 and 1799, the world of merchant-manufacturers gradually reconstituted itself thanks to the arrival of houses operating in other French cities. As early as 1794, the silk manufacturers Laguelline, Ourson, and Benoit arrived from Nîmes and Anduze. By the end of the same year, Guérin settled in Lyon, coming from Saint-Chamond.

During these difficult years, to cope with the lack of labor, technical innovations were supported by the state through competitions and the establishment of schools. In particular, the drawing school was recreated in 1795 under the name "École de dessin de la fleur." The Lyon silk manufacturers sought ideas from English engineers in the cotton fabric production sector. This effort to mechanize the production tool led to the development of the Jacquard machine at the beginning of the 19th century.

The 19th century marks the peak of Lyon silk production. The production, diversity, and commercial expansion of this sector reached unprecedented levels. After the Napoleonic revival, the city thrived entirely on its weaving and trade, driving other industrial sectors and the banking sector. Silk brought global fame to the city, particularly through the Universal Expositions.

Under the Napoleonic Empire, the Fabrique slowly rebuilt its production capacities, welcoming foreign investors and fostering a more modern and efficient working environment. To address the labor shortage and speed up production, a decisive advance was made with the development of the Jacquard machine.

At the beginning of the 19th century, silk production rose from the ashes, notably under Napoleon 's influence. Aware of the economic potential of silk, he inquired about the situation of the Rhône economy, especially during his three-week stay at the Consulate of Lyon in the Cisalpine Republic in January 1802. He placed important orders for the Imperial Palaces. The first was granted to the merchant-manufacturer Pernon in 1802 for the Château de Saint-Cloud, followed by a second in 1807 for the throne room of Versailles. In 1808-1810, several other manufacturers (Lacostat & Trollier, Bissardon, Cousin & Bony, and Grand-frères) produced various pieces for Versailles and the Château de Meudon.

The most significant order came in 1811, for an exceptional amount of 2,000,000 francs to purchase over 80,000 meters of fabric. It was closely monitored by the administrator of the crown's furniture, Alexandre Desmazis, who stayed for a month in Lyon to oversee its implementation. It was divided among a dozen Lyon silk manufacturers, including Lacostat, Bissardon, Cousin & Bony, Grand-frères, Chuard, Dutillieu & Theoleyre, Corderier, Seguin, and Gros.

Due to official purchases, production continued to grow under the Empire, with an average increase of about 1.7% per year. This allowed production levels to return to and exceed those of 1789. In 1801, silk fabric production was 35% lower than it was before the Revolution, but it reached this level again by 1810. Alongside the Fabrique, part of the textile sector, especially the areas most closely related to it, such as the production of precious metal threads and embroidery, experienced significant development under Napoleon.

The destruction of the regulatory framework of corporations during the Revolution led to a deep disorganization of the industry. The imperial power, strongly urged by Lyon silk manufacturers, implemented several reforms to restore professional organization and tools to improve the silk trade. It was responsible for the restoration of the Chamber of Commerce in 1802, the creation of the Condition des Soies [ fr ] in 1805, and the establishment of the very first council of prud'hommes, initially dedicated exclusively to Lyon silk. Lyon silk manufacturers gathered within a Société des amis du commerce et des arts to support the establishment of a provident fund for weavers, a regulated tariff, and professional training to ensure a certain quality of craftsmanship. To support the artistic skills of the designers, an imperial school of fine arts was founded at the Saint-Pierre Palace, along with a museum in 1807, although the director Pierre Révoil quickly redirected the teaching towards art rather than industry. In the same movement, a drawing competition was established, with funding provided by the Chamber of Commerce.

Within the framework of imperial orders, significant progress was made in Lyon's dyeing chemistry sector. Following the discovery of defects in the first Pernon order, Lyon scholars conducted research to find more stable, beautiful, and affordable dyes. Napoleon also ordered the creation of a chemistry school in Lyon. The first director of this school, Jean-Michel Raymondf, discovered a process for producing Prussian blue with a form of cyanide, much cheaper than traditional methods.

This period also saw the first "Expositions des produits de l'industrie nationale," where some Lyon merchant-manufacturers showcased their expertise. The first to exhibit was Camille Pernon in 1802. Subsequently, more and more silk manufacturers participated, and the exhibition catalogs helped track the evolution of techniques, styles, and fashions.

The silk industry, struggling to find local investors capable of revitalizing production and trade, welcomed many foreign companies to replace those that had fallen during the Revolution. Branches were established in the city, placing orders for simple fabrics intended for export to Europe or even further. These companies invested significant capital in Lyon, thus aiding in the recovery of the production apparatus. Among them were Swiss companies (mainly from Geneva) such as Diodati, Odier & Juventin, Memo, L. Pons, Dassier, Debar & Cie; German companies Feronce & Crayen (from Leipzig) and H. Reiss (from Frankfurt); and Italian companies Soresi (from Milan) and Travi (from Turin). Likewise, French silk entrepreneurs unable to find employment at home searched for work abroad, sometimes as far away as the Caucasus region of the Russian empire.

In response to a prize offered in 1801 by the Société des amis du commerce et des arts for improving weaving looms, Joseph Marie Jacquard proposed a mechanism that allowed a single worker to create a complex fabric, instead of several workers as before. He built on the previous research of Basile Bouchon, who developed a needle loom in 1725, later improved by Jean-Baptiste Falcon [ fr ], who added a system of punched cards, and by Jacques Vaucanson ’s automatic cylinder mechanism from the 1750s.

Initially unreliable, the Jacquard mechanism was continually perfected, notably by Albert Dutillieu (who invented the regulator in 1811) and Jean-Antoine Breton (who developed the chain drive for the punched cards in 1817, a decisive improvement). However, the loom retained the name "Jacquard Loom," even though its historical significance did not fully correspond to its place in the technical evolution of weaving looms.

This investment in a mechanization device for production was explained by the persistent labor shortage that hindered all activity during this period. The population of Lyon was only 102,000 inhabitants, compared to 150,000 on the eve of the Revolution, and it did not increase beyond 120,000 inhabitants by the end of the Empire.

During the 19th century, the mechanized loom became essential for producing plain silks or those with simple patterns, but it was less useful for more complex designs, which required an enormous amount of preparation time, regardless of the loom used. This mechanization led to a continuous decrease in the cost of simple silks, while fabrics with the most elaborate patterns remained very expensive. Once perfected, the Jacquard loom achieved great success, with the number of machines increasing from 41 in 1811 to 1,879 in 1820, while draw looms quickly disappeared, with workers themselves appreciating the time savings.

During this period, the upheaval of social structures saw the rise of the bourgeoisie, who, like the nobility, wanted to dress in silk. The Restoration of 1814 allowed Lyon's silk industry to diversify, particularly in liturgical garments. By the middle of the century, Lyon’s silk industry was flourishing. It produced a wide range of goods, sold all over the world, and excelled in international competitions. During the Second Empire, it was the most important export industry in France. This prosperity was the result of the confluence of three factors: merchant-manufacturers who invested heavily and ventured into new markets; a mass of independent weavers, referred to strictly as canuts, with a great deal of expertise, especially among the elite; and an artistic and scientific sector that fostered continuous innovation.

The creation of a fabric within the Factory is a highly fragmented activity. It is therefore rare for merchant-manufacturer houses to employ weavers. Most of the time, they are order-givers, who contract manufacturers, finishers, and workshop managers. Similarly, many merchant-manufacturers do not sell their fabrics directly to the end customer. They usually go through commission agents tasked with placing their productions in cities around the world.

There was an exception to this fragmented organization: the La Sauvagère establishment, a factory-internship created in 1817 in Saint-Rambert-l'Île-Barbe [ fr ], a former commune now annexed to Lyon. It was a shawl factory that integrated all stages of production. In 1827, it had 250 weaving looms. Workers slept at the factory in separate dormitories. This factory was considered a model to follow, as the food was inexpensive, and there were schools for the children. Its owner managed it in a paternalistic way, fostering a master-servant relationship rather than a typical employer-employee relationship, as in the rest of the Factory.

Between 1815 and 1849, silk consumption quadrupled. Therefore, silk houses had to constantly find new sources of supply for raw silk or silk waste to be transformed into thread.

The masters of the Factory usually did not own their own silk production domain but bought raw silk or thread from specialized companies or intermediaries abroad. Until the mid-century, the raw material came half from the mulberry farms of the Cévennes and half from Piedmont and Asia. A few companies ventured into investment in production units, such as the Palluat-Testenoire [ fr ] house, which owned five factories near Mount Lebanon, or the Lyonnais Charles Payen, who established a successful spinning company in India starting in 1845.

Lyon’s presence in China became more notable, facilitated by the Lagrénée commercial exploration mission from 1843 to 1846. Commissioned by the French government, the mission organized a two-year stay in China, from 1844 to 1846, and collected a large assortment of textiles, cocoons, local products, and many reports on Chinese weaving techniques. The first house to settle there was that of Paul Desgrand [ fr ]. Exchanges between Lyon and China grew significantly, benefiting from the establishment of foreign concessions in China, the creation of a direct maritime line between Marseille and Shanghai, and the establishment of a warrant system.

In the 1850s, Cévennes silkworm farms were severely affected by several diseases: pébrine, flacherie, and muscardine. Despite Pasteur 's work, production collapsed. As diseases spread across Europe, silkworm breeders then sourced the raw material mainly from China and, for the rest, from various countries where they had investments. The control of this sector by Lyon entrepreneurs was largely facilitated by the 1860 free trade treaty between France and the United Kingdom. It allowed Lyon’s silk exchange to dominate its English competitors, thus supplying its workshops at the best cost and reselling them throughout Europe.

At the end of the Second Empire, Japan became a supplier. The opening of Japan to the outside world during the Meiji era, from 1868, enabled the Lyonnais to establish a presence there. The Hecht, Lilienthal & Cie company gained a near-monopoly in the sector by supplying the entire equipment for the imperial army. They were paid in silk thread, which they resold through their Lyon-based parent company. The introduction of the Jacquard loom in Japan around this time led to the spread of Lyon patterns in local production.

At the very end of the 19th century, an experiment was attempted using the golden silk orb-weaver (also known as nephila madagascariensis, or halabé in Malagasy). This silk-producing spider, known since the early 18th century and native to Madagascar, weaves enormous webs of very strong silk (golden yellow in color) that are particularly suited for making luxury clothing. Tests were conducted in Lyon in 1893 for a presentation at the 1894 Universal, International, and Colonial Exposition. Father Paul Camboué, a Jesuit missionary in Madagascar, sent numerous samples of silk to the silk condition laboratory. Although the laboratory was very interested in the samples, they considered them too few in number to assess the industrial potential of spider silk and doubted that the Malagasy spiders would acclimate to the Lyon climate.

Under a very narrow elite, a large mass of workers populated the Factory, which, during the July Monarchy, was "perhaps the highest concentration of workers in a single industry in Europe." This mass consisted of more women than men. Unlike most other industries, Lyon silk production remained artisanal for a long time. The first mechanical loom was only installed in 1843, and only 7,000 existed by 1875. By 1866, there were 30,000 looms in Lyon and 95,000 in the surrounding countryside.

At the beginning of the century, production was concentrated in the city, especially on the hill of La Croix-Rousse, which was then an independent commune and thus exempt from the octroi tax until its annexation to Lyon in 1851. Later, the Factory spread out its production sites throughout Lyon, Beaujolais, extending to Dauphiné, Bugey, and Savoy. The term "canut" (Lyonnais silk weaver) was coined at the start of the century.

As in previous centuries, production was carried out by independent artisans paid per piece, and their relationships with the order-givers were often tense. Two major conflicts affected the productive system in the 19th century:

Overall, and according to historian Pierre Léon, these revolts did not significantly disrupt overall prosperity and allowed weavers to gradually improve their living standards.

During the Second Empire, the workers’ council, at the behest of the Chamber of Commerce, began collecting fabric samples. These were intended to ensure ownership of a pattern as well as to inspire designers and manufacturers. Unlike the previous century, designers specialized in purely artistic roles as pattern creators. Innovations no longer came from them but from workers or manufacturers. Often hired young as employees by silk houses, they were trained there and contributed little artistically.

With the adoption of the plain fabric fashion during the Second Empire, silk houses needed fewer designers and stopped hiring them. By 1870, those who remained had aged and no longer trained new ones, paving the way for a renewal crisis at the start of the Third Republic.

Merchant-manufacturers completely control the outlets for production, with workshop managers never selling the fabrics they produce. The silk trade underwent significant changes throughout the century. Before 1815, the majority of the silk was distributed across the continent, in royal courts across Europe. Afterward, a sharp increase in customs tariffs shifted sales towards the United Kingdom and the United States. Around the 1870s, these two countries absorbed 70 to 80% of Lyon's silk purchases.

Over the course of the century, 80% of the production was exported from France. Merchants opened branches as far as Mexico, Rio de Janeiro, and Buenos Aires. This commercial success marked the decline of other national production centers (Avignon, Tours, Nîmes), which gradually faded. Similarly, European competition (Krefeld or Elberfeld in Prussia, Zurich, Spitalfields in London, or Manchester) faded before the power of Lyon's Fabrique, which ended up capturing most of the global silk market, especially the high-end products that the Lyonnais focused on. As the Fabrique exported its products massively to the United States, the beginning of the Civil War immediately stopped a third of the machinery. Fortunately, the signing of a free trade treaty between France and England in 1860 immediately opened numerous new outlets.

Merchants and commissioners renewed their sales strategies: they popularized the use of samples, organized renewal rhythms, product differentiation, and ensured better training for designers. They relied on a high-performance production force, following the model of dispersed manufacture. From a given order, work was distributed complexly through multiple negotiations between workshops, looms, journeymen, and apprentices, depending on the product's nuances. To regulate and direct this work, Lyon's Fabrique relied on three components: transactions, institutions, and the city. Thus, from the 18th century, a policy of innovation was established at the city level. Following the Revolution and the Le Chapelier law prohibiting subordinated relations, a sort of "code of the Fabrique" was set up through successive experiments to regulate prices, loans, debts, and access to the profession with a democratic-inspired regulation. This distinguished the Fabrique from Jacobinism and economic liberalism. These principles were embodied by the creation of the reformed Tribunal of Arts and Crafts (1790-1791), the labor tribunals (1806-1807), and mutual societies (Devoir Mutuel in 1828).

Over time, the final clientele evolved. Traditional elites were joined by the highest echelons of European and American bourgeoisie. The significant purchasing power of this segment of the population allowed them to afford the mid-range products offered by Lyon's silk manufacturers (plain, mixed silks), with silk remaining a powerful social marker.

Some of the major names in Lyon's silk industry in the 19th century include: Arlès Dufour (merchant of silks and banker), Baboin (specialized in silk tulle), Bellon and Couty (manufacturers whose company, later becoming Jaubert and Audras, was the largest in Lyon by the end of the Second Empire), Bonnet [ fr ] (specialized in black unis and promoter of factory-internats, later becoming Richard & Cottin), Dognin and Isaac [ fr ] (silk tulle manufacturers), Falsan [ fr ], Gindre (makers of satin and taffetas), Giraud, Girodon, Gour, Grand frères (later taken over by Tassinari & Chatel in 1870), Guerin (silk merchant and banker, descendant of a family from the 17th century), Le Mire, now known as Prelle, Martin (velvet and plush manufacturer), Monterrad (fabricators of fashioned silks), Montessuy & Chomer (makers of silk crepe), Payen [ fr ], Pignatel (silk merchants), Riboud, Testenoire. Also significant were the dye houses, such as Gillet (specialist in black dye), Guinon (Lyon's largest dyer), and Renard (founder of fuchsine), as well as families of thread makers. In 1866, there were 122 silk merchants, 354 merchant-manufacturers, 84 dyers, and many small businesses involved in the silk industry (card readers, comb makers, shuttle manufacturers, degreasers, finishers, etc.).

The world of silk entrepreneurs steadily expanded with the growth of the business, doubling in the first fifty years of the century. Afterward, the number of silk manufacturers stabilized at around 350 to 400. This meant that, on average, each one's wealth increased. At the same time, there was a concentration of power, placing most production means in the hands of an elite. In 1855, the top thirteen companies supplied 43% of the woven silk in the Lyon region. This proportion rose to 57% by 1867. These most powerful houses had the capital to invest in mechanical machines, standardizing their products. They often integrated numerous annexes such as embossing machine manufacturers, finishers, dyeing workshops (including the first chemical dyes), etc. Studying inheritances confirms this picture, showing how the world of trade gradually merged into that of industry, with cross-investments enabling this elite's wealth to grow considerably. This world of silk merchants was geographically concentrated, primarily at the base of the Croix-Rousse hill, in the Tolozan and Croix-Paquet neighborhoods.

Most of these large Lyon silk houses were created by newcomers in the 19th century, but some families had been involved in silk manufacturing and trading since the Old Regime, such as the Payen family, whose ancestor, Jean-François Payen d'Orville (1728-1804), was a silk merchant in Lyon and Paris, or the Baboin family, which already owned a silk manufacturing and trading business in Drôme and Lyon in the 18th century.

Other houses created in the 19th century took over structures that already existed in Lyon before the Revolution, such as the Belmont and Terret house, where in 1814, the Belmont brothers succeeded their father-in-law Jean-Charles Terret, an important silk manufacturer in Lyon at the end of the 18th century.

During the first two-thirds of the 19th century, silk production was the driving force behind the wealth of the Rhone city, with annual growth rates of about 4%, while the French average was 1.5%. The value of foreign sales was 60 million francs in 1832 and grew considerably to 454 million francs in 1860. This increase, like in previous centuries, was very uneven, with periods of pressure and off-seasons; however, it was not significantly affected by the two revolts of the canuts. Angleraud and Pellissier even argued that the French Revolution, despite the destructions, was "only a minor event in the long growth of the Lyon Fabrique."

The Industrial Revolution had little impact on the Fabrique, which remained a labor-intensive economy, easily supported by the high value of the finished product. The number of looms increased from 18,000 in 1815 to 37,000 around 1830 and 105,000 in 1876. The Prefect of the Rhône, in 1837, provided the following evolution: in 1789, there were 16,000 to 17,000 looms; under the Empire, 12,000; from 1824 to 1825, 27,000; and in 1833, 40,000. This growth forced the order-givers to install looms not in the city, which was saturated, but in the suburbs and surrounding countryside. The economic success of this sector allowed silk workers to gradually emerge from poverty, and for the most skilled among them, to achieve some degree of comfort. The turning point in this development occurred during the Second Empire, the peak of the Fabrique's prosperity.

The Fabrique was an expanding sector, which brought along other parts of the Lyon economy and scientific activity. Chemistry benefitted significantly. The preparation and dyeing of silk required mastery of many chemical products. Until the Revolution, dyes were obtained using natural products. A true revolution occurred in the 19th century, with Lyon chemists, driven by the needs of a powerful textile industry, fully involved in this transformation.

At the beginning of the 19th century, most of these substances were derived from sulfuric acid, which explains the presence of many "vitriol" manufacturers in Lyon. Before artificial dyes were invented, silk had to undergo a mordanting process to be dyed. The only effective vat dye was indigo, and others had to be preceded by a mordant. Lyon’s dyers experimented with many mordants (gallic acid, alum, green vitriol, rust, iron pyrolignite, verdigris, tin moss, etc.). In 1856, English chemist William Henry Perkin discovered aniline purple, later called mauveine in Lyon. "Not only was this dye easy to apply without a mordant, but it gave silk a particular sheen that could not be achieved with natural dyes."

This novelty sparked great interest in chemistry in Lyon, especially within the professional training at the Lycée de la Martinière, which produced chemists specializing in dyeing, such as Nicolas Guinon, Étienne Marnas, and Emmanuel Verguin [ fr ]. Verguin synthesized fuchsine, another aniline dye, in 1858, which was more stable than mauveine.

The style of Lyon’s Fabrique was primarily characterized by floral inspiration, often in a naturalistic perspective. Another typical aspect was the desire to showcase technical prowess. Throughout the century, the greatest silk houses presented the best of their know-how during the Expositions des produits de l'industrie française, and later at the World's fair, when they replaced the former in 1851. They made pieces pushing their technical capabilities for these events, which allowed them to secure prestigious orders. The products displayed represented the evolution of their style or clientele.

During the Restoration period, one fabric became particularly successful: the damask intaglio, contributing to the creation of the Restoration style. "Designed to give the illusion of an engraving, these fabrics require, more than any other, a deep knowledge of mechanics and the resources it can offer." The production of this fabric was made possible by technical improvements made by Étienne Maisiat and E. Moulin to the Jacquard loom, with the first installing a system of rods to make cuts and bindings almost invisible and the second inventing carding that produced the illusion of taille-douce. The main house exploiting this technique was Chuard, which received numerous awards. The Cordelier house also wove damask taille-douce.

During the July Monarchy, the silk sector, in addition to its traditional outlets (clothing and furnishings in Europe), saw the notable development of two areas: liturgical paraments in France and sales to the Orient. The rise of Catholic faith and the need, after difficult decades for parishes, to rebuild liturgical vestments provided a large clientele for the production of dalmatics, chasubles, pluvials, conopaeas, and dais. Among the manufacturers involved in this sector was the Lemire house. Already significant in the 18th century, trade with the Orient expanded greatly during this time, particularly with the productions of the Prelle house.

In the mid-19th century, the neo-Gothic movement spread throughout society, affecting all forms of art and craftsmanship. Neo-Gothic patterns appeared in pattern books around 1835, reaching their peak during the Second Empire. These patterns were intended not only for Catholic liturgy, with demand peaking between 1855 and 1867 but also for furniture and clothing [ fr ]. The Lemire and Prelle houses produced large quantities of fabrics using these patterns. Prelle, in particular, obtained designs from Viollet-le-Duc, Reverend Arthur Martin, and Abbot Franz Bock [ fr ]. Viollet-le-Duc drew inspiration from medieval iconography for his sketches but did not copy existing fabrics. Arthur Martin created designs for Prelle combining medieval and more modern styles. The latter, compiler of several studies on ecclesiastical clothing from the Middle Ages, provided the Lyon manufacturer with exact copies of fabrics he had collected and analyzed. Other houses followed, such as Tassinari & Chatel from 1866. However, these trends only affected a portion of the production, with the bulk remaining faithful to the defining traits of the Fabrique, notably floral figurative patterns.

Another trend emerged, driven by the tastes of the court, especially those of Empress Eugénie. Moving away from patterns, she sought solid fabrics whose appeal came from the material and colors. Manufacturers then offered "fabrics that were falsely solid, shiny taffetas with brilliant flaws, satins, moires, in gray, blue, and burgundy." Modern moire was invented in Lyon by Tignat in 1843. However, patterns still had imperial favor when tone-on-tone. To compensate for the absence of designs, manufacturers also used lace. Their prestigious fabrics still found clientele for items like shawls or ball gowns. In the 1860s, Lyon's Fabrique, with its solid fabrics, turned toward a more modest clientele. Using easily mechanized techniques, manufacturers varied weaves and dyes to offer diversity.

Alongside the reorientation of part of its production toward simple fabrics, Lyon silk sought to maintain its place in luxury furniture and clothing for the elite. To achieve this, they showcased technical prowess at exhibitions, such as the curtain designed in 1867 by the Lamy & Giraud house and created by designer Pierre-Adrien Chabal-Dussurgey, which required 91,606 cards for its weaving. During the Second Empire, Lyon’s Fabrique experienced unprecedented prestige at the first World Expositions. At the first, held in London in 1851, "the Lyon exhibition demonstrated the undeniable supremacy of 'high novelty' and 'great luxury,' exemplified by the Mathevon & Bouvard house, or the James, Bianchi & Duseigneur house. It displayed silk scarves and shawls from Grillat Ainé, and the famous silk woven portraits of Carquillat." After London, the 1855 Paris World Exposition further solidified Lyon’s dominance in the sector. The most admired house of this session was Schulz Frères, who produced Empress Eugénie 's wedding gown in 1853 and that of Brazilian Empress Teresa Cristina of the Two Sicilies in 1856.

With the advent of the Third Republic, the decline of Lyon’s Fabrique began. The main causes were the public's disinterest in finely crafted silks and the rise of new competition. Despite numerous attempts at adaptation and solutions, the sector collapsed with the crisis of the 1930s.

The golden years lasted until 1875-1876, but then the trend took a sharp downturn. At the turn of the 1880s, the years of crisis followed one another. The Lyon silk industry was first hit by the general contraction of the French and European economy. However, this cyclical event only partially explains the sector's difficulties. Additionally, fashion definitively turned away from pure and finely crafted silks, opting for mixed fabrics such as crepes, gauzes, and muslins. The rise of fabrics where silk was mixed with other materials (cotton, wool) was definitive, driven by cost reasons. Other, even lower-quality fabrics gained prominence due to their even lower prices, such as tussah silk made from the tussah silkworm or schappe.

At the same time, competition became fiercer in the context of protectionist tariffs. Textile industries across Europe, often more recent, quickly adapted to market demands. Lyon had to yield its top position in the global silk market to Milan. Even American, Japanese, and Chinese silks began to compete with those from Lyon. This difficulty in facing globalization was reflected in supply networks. While the crisis of the 1850s was overcome, it was due to investments in Italy and the Levant. However, Lyonnais manufacturers were barely present in Asia, with a few attempts, such as the Pila initiative, being exceptions.

Many silk houses closed during this decade. By the 1890s, the surviving houses were striving to adapt to this new situation.

Reactive, Lyon’s silk manufacturers managed to respond to the crisis during the Belle Époque by adapting heavily. Some houses were even created during these years, such as Société S. Blanc, F. Fontvieille & Cie in 1905, which specialized in silk fabrics for corsets and later expanded and diversified, experiencing significant growth. The most dynamic houses produced new fabrics, embraced mechanization, and wove other materials. However, World War I abruptly halted nearly all production.

Many manufacturers turned decisively towards new fabrics, regaining a prominent position in the global market for precious materials until the 1930s. These fabrics either mixed silk with other materials (wool, cotton) or used lower-quality silks. As a result, manufacturers did not hesitate to adopt the methods of their competitors to remove any competitive advantage.

In the same movement, a part of the textile industry turned to fully synthetic materials. Several silk manufacturers thus founded the "Société lyonnaise de la soie artificielle" in 1904; although many within the industry did not fully embrace this less noble thread. The commercial successes of the Lyon silk industry until the 1920s were largely due to rayon and fibranne. As a result, businesses that only used natural silk saw a significant decline, while the Lyon textile industry as a whole managed to maintain its position.

Industrialists embarked on an intense mechanization of their production tools. The number of mechanical looms increased from 5,000 in 1871 to 25,000 in 1894 and 42,500 in 1914. Pure silk, being fragile, was not suited for heavy mechanization. However, the rise of mixed threads or lower-quality silks resolved this issue, and many prominent silk manufacturers turned to these looms to reduce costs, such as the Bonneta [ fr ] house [ fr ]. This growth did not mean the immediate disappearance of hand looms, but their numbers quickly decreased. Before World War I, however, mechanization only affected lower and medium-quality silks, not rich silks or fabrics with complex patterns. The fragility of the finest fibers and the difficulty in preparing a Jacquard loom to reproduce intricate designs made their production on mechanical looms unprofitable at the time. The number of hand looms was 115,000 in 1873, still 56,000 in 1900, and only 17,300 in 1914. Overall, the increase in mechanical looms allowed the silk industry to boost production capacity by 25% between 1877 and 1914.

This change mainly affected looms located within the city walls. The Lyon hand looms were not replaced on-site but moved to neighboring regions, especially in Isère, towards Voiron, La Tour-du-Pin, or Bourgoin. Some companies even closed their hand loom operations in Lyon to open spinning mills abroad. For example, the Payen [ fr ] company opened and expanded several spinning factories in Italy. S. Blanc, F. Fontvieille & Cie owned a spinning factory in England. Similarly, the Guérin company invested in Italy, before purchasing the Mont Liban spinning mills in 1900 from Palluat, Testenoire, and Cie.

The most enterprising silk manufacturers surpassed the traditional practices of the industry and boldly ventured into the direct importation of raw or processed materials from Asia. The silk mills in the Far East had made significant qualitative and quantitative progress. Communication and transportation systems were far more efficient, as were international commercial networks, making direct purchases without intermediaries more reliable. Companies such as Permezel did not hesitate to pursue this strategy, as did Veuve Guérin et fils, which invested in mills in the Middle East by purchasing the Palluat-Testenoire [ fr ] factories.

To better understand Chinese silk, following the example of the Lagrénée mission of 1844, a second expedition was organized at the invitation of Frédéric Haas [ fr ], the French consul in Hankou. This time, the Lyon Chamber of Commerce sent Ulysse Pila [ fr ] as organizer and delegated commissioner. Delegates from other cities and industrial sectors were invited, bringing the expedition to a total of thirteen members. They left Marseille in September 1895, arrived in Saigon a month later, and traveled throughout China for two years. Upon their return, they published a book and numerous technical reports that were widely used by Lyon silk manufacturers.

The search for better silk thread supplies led the Chamber of Commerce to establish the "Silk Study Laboratory" in 1885. The goal was to better understand the silkworm to ensure the highest quality silk thread. This institute conducted research on the life of the silkworm and the characteristics of its silk. The results were used to improve the mechanization of spinning and weaving. This laboratory also expanded its research to all silkworm species, creating an important collection of animals. The laboratory was located on the second floor of the Condition des soies [ fr ] building. Alongside the laboratory, a silk museum was established to house the specimens collected by the institution, provided by silk merchants, other museums, consular agents, or individuals. By 1890, the museum was open to the public and educational institutions. It also showcased its collections throughout France at various events, such as universal exhibitions.

Other companies, finally, attempted to overcome the crisis by narrowing their activities around a core clientele and product. For instance, the Tassinari and Chatel company dedicated itself from the start of the crisis until the 1910s to upholstery fabrics. After 1910, the specialization policy continued with the abandonment of religious textiles.

Other businesses specialized in high-end clothing, opening counters in Paris close to the elites and top couturiers who dictated fashion trends. For example, the Atuyer-Bianchini-Férier company [ fr ] established itself near the Garnier Opera and hired prestigious artists to design its patterns, including Raoul Dufy from 1912 to 1928.

A majority of manufacturers during the Third Republic turned decisively towards the cheap silk market. Fabrics with classical floral patterns found fewer and fewer customers and began to decline around 1900. It was during this period that Art Nouveau patterns made their appearance, following the general fashion trend.

Accompanying the rise of the "Little Newness" trend during the Belle Époque, which saw manufacturers adopt the motifs and themes of High Newness in simplified configurations and lower-quality materials, many silk manufacturers decisively entered this market that had previously been left to foreign manufacturers. The most emblematic company of this commercial strategy was the one led by Léon Permezel, who, through various technical means, managed to add value to silk waste and less noble materials to mass-produce.

More symbolically, in 1886, the Lyon City Council created a brand featuring the city's arms, allowing buyers to recognize fabric woven in Lyon. In the same years, and despite some resistance within the professional community, the city opened a weaving school [ fr ] to help the textile industry have a pool of skilled weavers.

The Chamber of Commerce opened a business school in 1872, the École supérieure de commerce de Lyon, to improve the efficiency of salespeople in the textile industry. Hosting the school from Mulhouse that had moved after the annexation of Alsace-Lorraine by the German Empire, it was inspired by foreign institutions and quickly integrated a weaving course.

During the First World War, the textile industry suffered greatly. The luxury market was paralyzed, European clientele became inaccessible, and the profitable Russian Empire market vanished. At the other end of the supply chain, imports of raw silk, whether from Italy or Asia, came to a halt. Moreover, a large portion of workers and employers were mobilized [ fr ]. Activity sharply slowed in 1914. It timidly resumed in 1915 at a very low level and slowly improved during the war. Silk supply also restarted, and the issue for the firms became a shortage of labor.

The blockage of significant imports of German chemical products and the mobilization of production resources for other activities by the military posed heavy problems for dyers. The measures taken to continue production despite this were extended deadlines, the use of substitute products, and a reduction in the range of colors offered to clients.

Unlike other industries that could shift their focus to war efforts, the silk industry did not have this option. Therefore, it did not directly benefit from the 1914-1918 war. However, one effect of the conflict was that manufacturers who managed to find an outlet turned towards artificial silk or other fibers, continuing the evolution of production initiated before the war. Another consequence of the war was the opening of markets traditionally held by German manufacturers to French firms. The Netherlands and Scandinavian countries opened up to Lyon silks, and other markets, where Lyon agents had competed with Germans, became easier to prospect: the United States, Brazil, Argentina, and Spain.

After the difficulties caused by World War I, the silk industry rebounded vigorously. The modernization of production with the widespread shift to mechanization and the boost from Paris's status as the global fashion capital made this possible. Evolving from pre-war developments, silk manufacturers created a new model, successful during the 1920s, but insufficient to survive the Great Depression. This crisis revealed the remaining weaknesses within the silk industry and marked the end of the Lyon silk industry.

During the 1920s, the Lyon textile industry experienced significant commercial growth due to advanced mechanization, outlets in haute couture, and the rise of ready-to-wear fashion. This period also saw commercial circuits shift dramatically, focusing strongly on the new global power, the United States. Among the companies that experienced great success during this time were Bianchini-Férier, Ducharne, and Coudurier-Fructus.

During the 1920s, the textile industry entered a new era by definitively abandoning hand looms. For many major companies, this era saw a generational shift in leadership, with new leaders unafraid to embrace mechanization. Whether they focused on luxury or more accessible products, these companies industrialized. Traditional artisan weavers, who owned two or three looms and worked for a merchant-manufacturer, disappeared in large numbers during this time. There were still 17,300 hand looms in 1914, but by 1924, they had decreased to only 5,400, marking a definitive trend. For many companies, this industrialization was accompanied by rationalization of production, incorporating as many steps of the process as possible into a single factory. The Dognin company and Petits-fils de Cl.-J. Bonnet are examples of this policy. In general, companies already engaged in this process, or those that adopted it vigorously, achieved success, allowing them to invest in new openings or significant factory expansions. Simultaneously, many companies ventured into weaving artificial fibers, mainly viscose.

By modernizing, the silk manufacturers were in step with the prosperity of the Roaring Twenties. They followed the enthusiasm of urban middle-class consumers looking for fashionable clothing at a reasonable price. The commercial circuits set up moved from haute couture models, which were simplified and produced with cheaper materials. Couture houses thus sold not only unique, luxurious garments but also models designed for a clientele wishing to imitate the elites. "In America, primarily in New York, the models sold are adapted to be reproduced in mass. Each one is accompanied by a 'reference sheet,' given by the seller, which contains information to facilitate its replication: fabric quality, required meterage, or names of suppliers."

Lyon silk manufacturers also benefited from Paris’s status as the global fashion capital, allowing them to stay at the forefront of creativity. The majority of the houses closely followed Parisian haute couture trends, which dictated fashion developments. By creating high-quality novelty fabrics, they regained a dominant position in the global luxury market. The multiplication of haute couture houses at this time allowed most Lyon houses to find buyers. The clientele of these haute couture houses, which became heavily Americanized, consisted mostly of professional buyers, with a small portion being extremely wealthy individuals. While the former were highly sought after for their ability to ensure a collection's fame, the latter were valued for the volume of fabric they ordered. To have a team of designers capable of closely following Parisian fashion, the textile industry established a school directly in Paris, the Dubost School.

Among the houses that emerged during this period is Ducharne Silk, founded in 1920 in Lyon and Neuville-sur-Saône, which quickly turned toward manufacturing fabrics for French haute couture.

However, the luxury sector remained fragile. The tastes of the elite changed, and they moved toward less luxurious daytime clothing. Women, in particular, abandoned sophisticated dresses for daily activities, reserving them for evening outings. This reduced the demand for the most precious silks.

Most of the large Lyon silk houses maintained an elitist mode of operation and did not benefit from the cost reductions allowed by the introduction of artificial fibers, which could lower selling prices and target a more modest clientele. They only used artificial fibers marginally, to add specific features or new qualities to natural silk. In 1927, while the Lyon metropolitan area produced over a third of France's artificial fiber, its own fabrics contained no more than 10%, with many houses still refusing to introduce it into their products. When the 1929 crisis struck the United States, Lyon’s silk industry, which had massively exported for the American elite, felt the shock acutely. Despite full-order books, the industry continued to operate acceptably until 1932, but the leaders saw a crisis approaching, leaving them without viable fallback options. The prosperity of the 1920s had led to the rise of many small houses offering medium to low-quality silk fabrics. These flooded the market, which, when the crisis hit, became saturated for several years, forcing many actors to sell at a loss. Furthermore, their refusal to invest in cheaper materials (cotton, wool) deprived them of alternatives at a time when silk was no longer in demand.

The shock was severe. Between 1928 and 1934, the value of silk production collapsed by 76%. Over these eight years, fifty companies disappeared, reducing the number of silk houses from 119 to 69. Important and long-established companies, such as Guérin, Payen, and Ulysse Pilat, collapsed. In terms of value, during the same period, the city's silk exports fell from 5,150 million francs to 1,200 million francs. Exports, vital for the survival of the Lyon industry, also dwindled. In value, they dropped from 3,769 million francs in 1928 to 546 million francs in 1936. In volume, they only halved, indicating a sharp drop in selling prices.

To survive, many companies abandoned silk entirely and shifted fully to artificial fibers. Although these fibers were much less profitable, their low cost still allowed them to find a market. Thus, while the share of silk in Lyon’s exports dropped by 83% in just five years, between 1929 and 1934, rayon’s share increased by 91%. This abrupt and final conversion marked the end of silk in Lyon. By 1937, rayon represented 90% of the raw materials used by Lyon's textile companies. To survive, many companies turned to the domestic market, especially colonial markets, though these were limited. For the first time, the textile industry in Lyon could not find a unified response to overcome the new crisis. The various regulatory solutions proposed failed one after the other, and it remains unclear whether any of them would have provided a solution.

The lowest point was reached in 1936, but the timid recovery in 1937 and 1938 was just a brief stagnation before the new shock of World War II.

The shift of most manufacturers to rayon production in the 1930s was only an illusory solution, and this sector collapsed during the post-war period of economic growth. Despite efforts to organize and support the sector with advisory and mutual aid structures, natural silk was confined to a luxury market. Meanwhile, Lyon developed expertise in the preservation, restoration, and heritage enhancement of silk.

France’s entry into World War II dealt a severe blow to Lyon's silk industry. Imports of raw silk stopped, and exports became nearly impossible. They only resumed in 1946, making the use of rayon indispensable for continued production. As for the artificial silk industry, it found itself in competition for supplies in Vichy’s controlled economy with other national industries. Attempts by the Vichy administration to modernize textile production in Lyon produced minimal effects. They were hindered by local resistance, competition between structures, and the inherent difficulties of the period.

The import and export of silk were nearly at a standstill in 1945, only gradually resuming in the following years. The constraints of the administration and the disorganization of the sector prevented any significant production recovery until 1948. Additionally, in the early post-war years, there were difficulties in sourcing secondary raw materials (mainly dyestuffs).

The second half of the 20th century saw the traditional structure of Lyon’s textile industry disintegrate and disappear, despite numerous attempts to survive. The structures meant to reinvigorate it failed to halt the collapse in sales and workforce numbers. During this period, the Lyon textile industry ceased to be an economic force shaping the region. The few surviving houses focused on the elitist segments of high luxury, haute couture, and the restoration of antique fabrics.

The adoption of artificial silk, rayon, by Lyon silk manufacturers during the 1929 crisis was only a temporary solution to the crisis. This fiber was strongly challenged by the emergence of nylon in the 1950s. However, this new material required much heavier investments, which most textile houses could not afford. At the same time, efforts to modernize production tools were highly insufficient, with manufacturing times and volumes remaining lower than most other global textile production areas. The textile industry could not shift to producing low-cost ready-to-wear lines.

This led to another wave of disappearances. Between 1964 and 1974, the number of companies fell by 55%, and the number of factories by 49%. The smallest companies disappeared first, but some established institutions also went bankrupt, such as Gindre in 1954 and Dognin in 1975. The workforce in the textile industry dwindled significantly. Between 1974 and 1988, the number of workers in the region’s textile sector dropped from 43,000 to 18,000. The number of looms also decreased from 23,000 in 1974 to 15,000 in 1981 and 5,750 in 1993.

To resist the decline, several Lyon silk houses united in a structure to pool investments and better disseminate contacts and ideas. This "Groupement des créateurs de Haute Nouveauté," established in 1955, includes eight companies, such as Brochier, Blanc Fontvieille & Cie, and Bianchini-Férier. This institution achieved several successes, allowing many houses to withstand the crises of the sector. The silk industry later relied on several other organizations that helped it survive and grow, such as Unitex in 1974 (a Lyon association offering advice to textile companies), Inter-soie France in 1991 (an association gathering Lyon's silk industry players and organizing the Lyon silk market), and the international silk association.

The traditional outlets are no longer available to the Fabrique, with luxury almost no longer using silk and price competition for ordinary articles becoming untenable. As a result, the last Lyon silk companies have shifted toward technical textiles, restoration, and heritage activities.

The traditional clientele of the Fabrique, composed of elites willing to spend fortunes on evening and ceremonial clothing and home decoration, was in crisis in the 1930s and tended to disappear in the 1950s with the social changes occurring in developed countries. The wave of democratization and the influence of American culture delivered a definitive blow to orders for luxurious silk garments. Parisian fashion, the natural outlet and standard-bearer of Lyon's productions worldwide, is in severe crisis, with many haute couture houses closing and the remaining ones surviving only thanks to their ready-to-wear lines.

In the upholstery fabric sector, the Tassinari & Chatel house still exists, now owned by the fabric publisher Lelièvre, which primarily works for luxury hotels, states, and very wealthy individuals; the Prelle Manufacturing, still family-owned for five generations; and the Velours Blafo house, the new name of Blanc Fontvieille & Cie since 1990, a French leader in technical velvet manufacturing and specializing in flat, plain, and Jacquard fabrics.

These houses are increasingly turning toward other materials. The volumes of silk ordered have become low; as early as 1957, the textile industry in the Lyon area used only 800 tons of silk compared to more than 24,000 tons of artificial fibers. In 1992, silk fabric production had dropped to 375 tons. Some houses try to specialize in luxury products but face many difficulties.

The historic Bonnet house chose this reorientation in the 1970s by separating from factories producing mid-range fabrics and acquiring companies with quality know-how. By the 1990s, it produced luxury items (clothing and scarves) under its own brand or for houses such as Dior, Chanel, Gianfranco Ferré, or Calvin Klein. The management also attempted to capitalize on the historical dimension of the company by founding a museum [ fr ]. However, the company remained fragile and shut down in 2001.

Bianchini-Férier and Bucol, which also worked for haute couture, managed to survive. Bucol (founded in 1928) survived by dedicating itself entirely to Haute nouveauté, thanks to a solid network within Parisian haute couture. In 1985, it partnered with Hubert de Givenchy for the production of "simple or shaped crepe, sculpted or satin-striped muslin, multicolored flowers scattered in seeds or large prints, coordinated with polka dots, stripes, or geometric patterns." The same house collaborated with several contemporary artists in the 1980s to create woven paintings. Yaacov Agam, Pierre Alechinsky, Paul Delvaux, Jean Dewasne, Hans Hartung, Friedensreich Hundertwasser, and Roberto Matta participated in this. Acquired by the Hermès group, Bucol produces its printed silk squares for them and also manufactures for Dior, Balmain, or Chanel.

Early on, Lyon authorities sought to establish motif deposits. Initially, this was a practical endeavor, to enable property recognition, support the training of future designers, and provide inspiration for the houses. During the 19th century, this project took on a purely heritage and historical direction within the Musée des Tissus. This museum now hosts collections from the long history of Lyon's silk industry. Samples and designs kept by the labor tribunal were transferred to the museum in 1974 when the judicial body relocated.

The Musée des Tissus received a textile restoration workshop in 1985, partially funded by the French Ministry of Culture [ fr ]. Modeled after the Abegg Foundation [ fr ] workshop in Riggisberg, it specializes in restoring public or private pieces. It is also home to the International Center for the Study of Ancient Textiles, founded in 1954, which has over 500 members from 34 countries.

The Tassinari & Chatel and Prelle manufactures maintain the silk heritage for restoring period pieces. They benefited from the state's desire to carry out an extensive plan to restore the furnishings of royal castles in the 1960s and 1970s. This restoration work was combined with archaeological-type research by specialists from both companies to match colors, weavings, and patterns to the originals. This first project led them to work on restoration projects abroad. For example, the German government entrusted them with the restoration of several castles, including those of Brühl and Nymphenburg.

Several companies left the silk industry to survive by entering the high-value-added technical textiles market. In 1987, the four main companies in the Lyon region in this sector were Porcher [ fr ], Brochier, Hexel-Genin, and DMC. This strategy was somewhat successful. For example, the production of fiberglass fabric increased from 13,500 tons in 1981 to 30,000 tons in 1988.

Simit or koulouri is a circular bread, typically encrusted with sesame seeds or, less commonly, poppy, flax or sunflower seeds, found across the cuisines of the former Ottoman Empire and the Middle East, especially in Armenia, Turkey and the Balkans. Simit's size, crunch, chewiness, and other characteristics vary slightly by region.

In İzmir, simit is known as gevrek ("crisp"), although it is very similar to the Istanbul variety. Simit in Ankara are smaller and crisper than those of other cities.

The word simit comes from Arabic samīd (سميد) 'white bread, fine flour'.

Other names are based on the Byzantine Greek kollikion (κολλίκιον), or Ancient Greek kollyra (κολλύρα), or modern Greek koulouri (κουλούρι). In Latin it is known as arculata. Aramaic : ܩܶܠܽܘܪܳܐ/ܩܸܠܘܿܪܵܐ (qeluro/qelora) ; Turkish: gevrek ; South Slavic đevrek, ђеврек, gjevrek, ѓеврек, геврек. The Armenian name is բոկեղ (bokegh). In Judaeo-Spanish it is known as roskas turkas. In English, it is known as Turkish bagel, rosca, or koulouri. The earliest Ottoman records call it simid-i halka ' round simit'.

Simit has its origins in the Byzantine Empire, where it was known as boukellon (βούκελλον) or kollikion (κολλίκιον). Byzantine authors describe it as a ring-shaped bread, made from barley or wheat flour and popular among the army. The kollikion was first mentioned in the 9th century by Constantine VII Porphyrogennitos, who describes it as a small ring-shaped bread, sold in Constantinople. Today, in Greece, it is called koulouri (κουλούρι), where it is still regularly eaten.

Simit has been produced in Istanbul since 1525. In Üsküdar in 1593, the weight and price of simit was standardized. The 17th-century traveler Evliya Çelebi wrote that there were 70 simit bakeries in Istanbul during the 1630s. Jean Brindesi's early 19th-century oil paintings about Istanbul daily life show simit sellers on the streets. Warwick Goble, too, made an illustration of these simit sellers of Istanbul in 1906. Simit and its variants became popular across the Ottoman Empire.

Simit is generally served plain, or for breakfast with tea, fruit preserves, or cheese or ayran. Drinking tea with simit is traditional. Simit (bokegh in Armenian) is a traditional Christmas bread in Armenia.

Simit are generally sold by street vendors in Turkey, who either have a simit trolley or carry the simit in a tray on their head. Street merchants generally advertise simit as fresh (" Taze simit! "/" Taze gevrek! ") since they are baked throughout the day; otherwise hot (" Sıcak, sıcak! ") and extremely hot (" El yakıyor! " means "It burns the hand!") when they are not long out of the oven.

Simit is an important symbol for lower and middle-class people of Turkey. Sometimes it is called susam kebabı ("sesame kebab ").

In other parts of the Middle East, in Egypt it is consumed with boiled eggs and/or duggah, which is a mixture of herbs used as condiments. It is commonly used to break the fast, with yoghurt or buttermilk, in mosques in Mecca and Medina.

Today, many municipalities in Turkey produce simit through their own subsidiaries.

Certain varieties of Romanian covrigi are similar to simit, the places that sell them even being known as simigerii.

Another type of bread similar to simit is known as obwarzanek (in particular obwarzanek krakowski) in Poland and bublik in Russia, Ukraine and Belarus. The main difference is that the rings of dough are poached briefly in boiling water prior to baking (similarly to bagels), instead of being dipped in water and molasses syrup, as is the case with simit.

Girde (Uygur: Гирде) is a type of bread baked on the walls of tandoori oven, that is very similar to simit, and that the Uyghurs in China see as a characteristic item in their culture-specific kitchen.

Sinistrisme (French: [ sinistʁism ]) is a neologism invented by political scientist Albert Thibaudet in Les idées politiques de la France (1932) to explain the evolution and recombination of party systems, particularly in France, without substantial changes occurring to party ideology.

Thibaudet saw that, over time, issues that previously had not been politicised would emerge, drawing public concern and stimulating demand for political action. A new political movement would form to champion the new concerns, sending repercussions throughout the existing political system. The old party of the left would be split, with some accepting the new issues as legitimate, agreeing to cooperate with the newcomers and adapting their ideology accordingly. Others on the existing left would double down on their existing ideas, refusing change: without changing their ideas, they would end up pushed de facto one space to the right, and end up as the new centre.

Meanwhile, the old party of the centre would be pushed to the centre-right, and so on. As for the very far right, over time the issues of social conservation that motivated them would gradually lose their appeal, and as old issues died off, space would be freed up for the old right to become the new far right.

The analysis of Thibaudet was the following- the socially-conservative Liberal Monarchists had been the centre-left of the 1820s, but were pushed to become the new centre by the emergence of socially-conservative Moderate Republicans in the 1830s. These were pushed to the centre by the emergence of the Radicals in the 1870s; these were pushed to the centre by the emergence in the 1900s of the Radical-Socialists, who were pushed towards the centre by the growth of the socialist French Section of the Workers' International in the 1920s, who were, in turn, pushed towards the centre by the emergence in the 1950s of the French Communist Party.

This process, seen by Thibaudet as a historical necessity, thus explained, to Thibaudet, the tendency of social conservatives in France (at least in particular), to disavow the label droite (right), long associated in French history with monarchism, in favour of the left. The emergence of new rivals to their left meant that a political bloc suddenly found itself shifted one space to the right, without considering itself to be a party of the right. Thus, political groups in France usually used labels that to an outsider would seem to belong one space to the left:

This phenomenon was still at play well into the 20th century. Historian René Rémond observed that after 1924 the term "right-wing" vanished from the glossary of mainstream politics in France, such that "at the 1974 presidential election, only one candidate declared himself as belonging to the right: Jean-Marie Le Pen ; in 1981, there was none." Conservative (which had been the name of an ultra-royalist review in 1818–1820) was a synonym of "right-wing" often used under the Third Republic, in particular by the Bloc national Chamber. Independents, used in the 1920s for deputies close to the Action française royalist movement, was later used by less reactionary politicians.

Slavery in France, and by extension, the French Empire, covers a wide range of disparate topics.

During the Middle Ages, chattel slavery was legal in France itself. In the early Merovingian Middle Ages, there was a trade in slaves from the British Isles to France. In the Frankish Middle Ages, France served as a middle station in the saqaliba slave trade of Pagan slaves from Northeastern Europe to al-Andalus in the Southwest, which were transported from Prague to the Caliphate of Cordoba via France.

Chattel slavery in France gradually transitioned to serfdom and was finally abolished in the 1310s, specifically with a decree in 1315. While chattel slavery was never again made legal in France itself, it was later allowed in the French colonies from the 17th century. During the French colonial empire, slavery was legal in the colonies while remaining banned in France itself. Despite being illegal, some Africans remained enslaved within France in practice. This was a common parallel system used in many European countries at the time. In 1794, slavery was abolished in the French colonies of America and the Caribbean. Slavery was reintroduced in the colonies in 1802 and finally abolished in 1848 - with the exception of West African domestic slavery which persisted until the 20th century.

In 486, Clovis I, the son of Childeric, defeated Syagrius, a Roman military leader who competed with the Merovingians for power in northern France. Like the Roman empire before them, the Merovingians used slavery.

Slavery in Merovingian France included several Frankish queens in the Merovingian dynasty who had formerly been slaves. Only five slave queens have been identified in Merovingian France, though there may have been more: Ingund, Fredegund, Bilichild, Nanthild, and Balthild. Slavery continued during the Carolingian Empire.

Slavery was gradually phased out and replaced by serfdom in Francia in parallel with the establishment of feudalism in Western Europe (later France and Germany), a system which did not include slavery. This was a system that was completed by Charlemagne (r. 768 – 814), but the process of phasing out slavery had been set long before the reign of Charlemagne.

In Roman Gaul, the land estates of the Roman country villas in Gaul had been worked by slave laborers called ancillae (sing. ancilla) or servi (sing. servus), who worked the land of the landowner, the dominus. When Roman rule in Gaul was replaced by the migrating Germanic tribes in settling in Gaul in the 5th century, the Roman villa estates started to transition to become feudal estates, and the transition of slavery to serfdom was a part of this. The slavery system was dependent upon a strong central power and legal enforcement, which was no longer possible in the Post Roman world, where an estate was now forced to be self-sufficient, and rely on cooperation. In order to keep their labor force and ensure their cooperation, the landowners started to manumit their slaves and give their former slaves, called coloni or servi casati, their own land, known as mansi, in exchange for working also on the landowner's own land, demesne.

When the former slaves were given their own land, they could no longer be sold or bought as property, but was liberated and referred to as franci or coloni. As free peasants with their own land the former slave laborers were motivated to work better for the landowner; and when they were free to marry and leave their land as inheritance to their children, the labor force of the landowner started to reproduce itself instead of the landowner being responsible for supplying new laborers (via slave purchases). The method of freeing the slaves and giving them land in exchange for working duty on the landowners land, was seen as more efficient by the landowners, since the free laborers were motivated to work and did not have to be supervised; and while slavery was not abolished, the new labor method became so popular among the landowners that by the 7th century, the rural slave laborers had been almost completely replaced by free serf peasant laborers, and slavery reduced to urban house slaves. The former rural slaves mixed via intermarriage with the originally free rural population, and the peasantry merged to become a single class.

This development was completed during the reign of Charlemagne (r. 768 – 814), who wanted to unite Western Europe under an efficient central state control by establishing the feudal system, a system were serfs were included rather than slaves. By the 11th century, the feudal system had become more clearly defined in reference to serfdom: the manses igenuiles were the originally free peasants; the manses seviles were the descendants of the manumitted rural slaves; and the manses lidile were likely the descendants of the former Germanic settlers.

However, the transformation from rural slavery to serfdom did not eradicate slavery, only marginalized it. Urban house slaves continued to be popular for centuries after the eradication of rural slavery, and were phased out in favor of free workers much slower, disappearing earlier in the North and slower in the South. By the 12th and the 13th century, almost all rural slaves in Western Europe had been replaced by serfs; the urban house slaves had been replaced by free servants; and the rural peasantry had come to be collectively defined as serfs.

There is little information about the slave trade in Francia between the Roman era and the 8th century. However, it is believed to have continued along the old Roman slave route from the British Isles in the Northwest to Marseilles in the Southeast. This was the old slave route during Roman times, when slaves were the only type of goods desired from Northern Europe in exchange for luxury goods from the East.

This appear to have continued during the 6th and 7th century; Anglo-Saxon slaves are known to have been imported to Italy in this time period. One of the earliest accounts of slaves from early medieval Britain come from the description of fair-haired boys from York seen in Rome by Pope Gregory the Great, in a biography written by an anonymous monk. Pagan Angels and Saxons were known to be exported from the British Isles over the English channel to Arras and Tournai and then across France to the Mediterranian via the great slave port of Marseilles. It is known that the Frisian slave dealers visited Ango-Saxon London during the 7th and 8th centuries to purchase slaves, which they then sold along the river ways to the German cities and Southward to Paris.

However, from the 8th century onward, the slave trade in Francia became an important industry, when France became a slave trade transit area for European slaves to the Muslim world. While slavery was slowly phased out in France itself during the Middle Ages, the slave trade was nevertheless profitable in France, because it targeted European slaves for destinations in the big and profitable slave market of the Muslim world. This made France an important transit area for slaves trafficked from Europe North of France to the Muslim world in the South. This slave trade was profitable for France for centuries, despite slavery dying out in France itself.

In the Germanic Kingdoms, Christians were banned from selling Christians as slaves to the non-Christians in the Church council of Orleans (627 – 630) and the Council of Chalon (639 – 654). The prohibition in selling Christians made the trade in non-Christian specifically targeted for the slave trade. The slaves trafficked in the slave trade via France were therefore mainly Pagans.

There were two big slave routes in the Carolingian Empire in the 8th century: the South route trafficked Pagan Slavs via Bavaria over the Alps to Venice and from there via the Venetian slave trade to the Middle East; and the Western route from Germany to France via the Moselle, Meuse and Rhone to Arles and Marseilles, from where they were trafficked to their destination for slavery in al-Andalus, Maghreb and Egypt; the victims were mainly Pagan Slavs, but also Pagan Saxons and British peoples. Marseilles was one of the biggest slave markets in France, primarily dealing in non-Christian slaves, Moors, Pagans and Anglo-Saxon slaves.

During the 9th century, the slave trade in the Carolingian Empire was mainly a transit trade, in which Pagan slaves were trafficked via France to their destination in the Muslim world, were the slave market were. The Church repeatedly opposed the slave trade, but their prohibitions had limited effect, since the Franks wanted gold and Eastern luxury goods, and slaves were the only goods the Middle East wanted from Europe in exchange.

The Church Council of Estinnes (743) banned Christians to sell Christian slaves to non-Christians, and the Council of Meux (845) condemned both Christian and Jewish slave traders from selling slaves to the Muslims, and suggested that Christians buy the slaves being trafficked through France, in order to save them from being sold to the Islamic world.

The slave market in Rouen were still in operation in the early 11th century, but after this the slave trade in Western Europe started to rapidly die out, since the Eastern European Slavs had converted to Christianity (and it was no longer possible to acquire Pagan slaves).

Between the 8th and the 11th-century, France played an important role as the middleman in the Prague slave trade with saqaliba slaves (Pagan Slavs) from North East Europe to slavery in al-Andalus in the Southwest.

In Western Europe, a major slave trade route went from Prague in Central Europe via France to Moorish al-Andalus, which was both a destination for the slaves as well as center of slave trade to the rest of the Muslim world in the Middle East. Prague in the Duchy of Bohemia, which was a recently Christianized state in the early 10th century, became a major center of the European slave trade in between the 9th and the 11th century. The revenue from the Prague slave trade has been named as one of the economic foundations of the Bohemian state, financing the armies necessary to form a centralized state, which was not uncommon for the new Christian state in Eastern Europe.

The Duchy of Bohemia was a state in a religious border zone, bordering Pagan Slavic lands to the north, east and southeast. In the Middle Ages, religion was the determining factor in who was considered a legitimate target for enslavement. Christians prohibited Christians from enslaving other Christians, and Muslims prohibited Muslims from enslaving other Muslims; however, both approved of the enslavement of Pagans, who thereby became a lucrative target for slave traders.

The Pagan Slavic tribes of Central and Eastern Europe were targeted for slavery by several actors in the frequent military expeditions and raids alongside their lands. During the military campaigns of Charlemagne and his successor in the 9th century, Pagan Slavs were captured and sold by the Christian Franks along the Danube-Elbe rivers. By the mid-10th century, Prague had become a big center of the slave trade in Slavic Pagans to al-Andalus via France.

The slaves sold by the Vikings via the Eastern route could be Christian Western Europeans, but the slaves provided by the Vikings to the slave route of Prague-Magdeburg-Verdun were Pagan Slavs, who in contrast to Christians were legitimate for other Christians to enslave and sell as slaves to Muslims; according to Liutprand of Cremona, these slaves were trafficked to slavery in al-Andalus via Verdun, where some of them were selected to undergo castration to become eunuchs for the Muslim slave market in al-Andalus.

The slaves were transported from Prague to Al-Andalus via France. While the church discouraged the sale of Christian slaves to Muslims, the sale of Pagans to Muslims was not met with such opposition. Louis the Fair granted his permission to Jewish merchants to traffick slaves through his Kingdom provided they were non-baptized Pagans.

The saqaliba slave trade from Prague to al-Andalus via France lost its religious legitimacy and ended when the pagan Slavs of the north started to gradually adopt Christianity from the late 10th century, which made them out of bounds for Christian Bohemia to enslave and sell to Muslim al-Andalus. The Prague slave trade was not able to legitimately supply their slave pool after the Slavs gradually adopted Christianity from the late 10th century onward.

In 1198, the Trinitarians were founded by John of Matha with the purpose of ransoming war captive Christians by Muslims during the Crusades. King Louis IX installed a house of their order at his château of Fontainebleau. He chose Trinitarians as his chaplains, and was accompanied by them on his crusades. The Master of the Trinity was taken captive together with Saint Louis after the Battle of Mansurah.

In 1315, King Louis X passed a decree that abolished slavery and proclaimed that "France signifies freedom". The decree entailed that any slave setting foot on French ground should be freed. However some limited cases of slavery continued until the 17th century in some of France's Mediterranean harbors in Provence, and slavery was common in many of France's overseas territories until the 18th century and again for the first half of the 19th century.

Most aspects of serfdom were also de facto eliminated between 1315 and 1318. Louis X died two years after these events.

In 1318, King Philip V abolished serfdom in his domain.

However, according to the historian Sue Peabody, slavery continued in France in practice despite being formally banned under law. Peabody's study ‘There Are No Slaves in France’ concluded that Europeans have had a belief, dating to the 16th century, that slaves were automatically free upon reaching European soil, but that French sources often avoided using the term "slave" to refer to Black servants even when they lived under conditions of slavery. According to Peabody, French and other European slave owners benefited from legal grey areas relating to slaves on European soil.

During the early modern age, France fell victim to the slave raids of the Barbary slave trade.

The Franco-Ottoman alliance, which lasted between 1536 and 1798, placed France in a different position than other European nations in the context. The Franco-Ottoman alliance formally protected France more than other nations from attacks of the corsairs, who formally were Ottoman subjects. In contrast to other European nations, France could complain over the corsairs to the Ottoman sultan, who would be obligated to take action because of the Franco-Ottoman alliance. The Ottoman sultan did not support Ottoman attacks on French ships or raids of French coasts, and in contrast to the attacks on many other nations, the attacks on French ships and coasts were formally considered illegal also by the Ottomans.

In practice however, the corsair states of North Africa were Ottoman in name only and did not necessarily respect the obligations of the Ottoman sultan, who had weak control over the provinces, and France was subjected to their attacks despite the Franco-Ottoman alliance.

During the 1550s, the French provinces of Provence and Languedoc were devastated by slave razzias by the corsairs, which resulted in French complaints to the Ottoman sultan, and the city of Marseille petitioned regent Catherine de' Medici as well as taking separate measures to liberate enslaved natives and protect their commerce vessels, and reported to have lost twelve galleons aside from a large number of smaller boats.

Sultan Suleiman I ordered the corsairs to leave French vessels alone in 1565, out of respect for the alliance. However, such orders from the Ottoman sultans only placed a slight inhibition on the corsairs in regard to France, rather than to protect them fully. There were several slave raids toward France, such as for example in Northern France close to Calais in 1620.

Among the French victims of the Barbary slave trade was Antoine Quartier.

Since the abolition of slavery in 1315, France was regarded as a "free territory" meaning that any enslaved person arriving in France could claim their freedom. Indeed, there is some evidence of enslaved people fleeing and being declared free by French tribunals. Such right to freedom was contested by slave-owners from the French colonies, who were keen to take their slaves along when traveling to the mainland. In an attempt to reduce the legal grey area and support colonial forces, from 1716 to 1762, the Admiralty published multiple edicts allowing slave-owners to legally keep control over their slaves by declaring them to the authorities. The royal police was then tasked with enforcing those edicts by tracking and arresting fugitive slaves in Paris. In 1777, Louis XVI published a new edict formally banning Blacks from entering the French territory. From then on, slave-owners traveling from the colonies had to entrust their slaves to a "depot of blacks" upon arrival, while blacks previously present on the French territory had to be registered with the admiralty and to carry with them the proof of such registration, called "cartouche". A specific police taskforce for Blacks was created to verify the legality of black people in France. The enforcement of this new regime however remained imperfect.

After the French revolution, the Republic enshrined the principle of "free territory" in its laws in 1791, 3 years before abolishing slavery in its colonies, thereby allowing all enslaved entering the French territory to obtain their freedom. However, when Napoleon reintroduced slavery in 1802, he also repelled the "free territory" principle and reinstated the specialised police force from 1777, this time with stricter enforcement measures.

The French colonial empire practiced slavery in its colonies. Slavery was essential to cheaply extract raw materials and scale large agricultural cultivation. In the mid-16th century, enslaved people were trafficked from Africa to the Caribbean by European mercantilists. Nor were New France, Louisiana, or French African colonies immune.

The French West India Company developed tobacco plantations in French colonies. The company had a monopoly on the slave trade from Senegal, which since 1658, belonged to the Company of Cape Verde and Senegal. The slave trade continued under the operation of the Compagnie du Sénégal from 1658 to 1709. The company traded slaves with the Hausa Kingdoms, Mali, and the Moors in Mauritania.

As of 1778, the French were trafficking approximately 13,000 African people as slaves to the French West Indies each year. Slavery was abolished by the revolutionary convention of 1794.

Slavery was practiced by the French North American colony of New France (covering part of modern Canada). By 1750, two thirds of the enslaved peoples in New France were Indigenous, but by 1834, most enslaved people were black.

The city of Nantes played a main role in the slave trade, i.e. the highest number of expeditions started from this harbor: 1744 expeditions between the 17th and the 19th century out of a total of 4220 expeditions from France. Also Bordeaux (419 expeditions), La Rochelle (448 expeditions) and Le Havre (451 expeditions) outfitted large numbers of slave voyages.

In 1685, King Louis XIV passed the decree known as Code Noir (French pronunciation: [ kɔd nwaʁ ], Black Code). The code defined the conditions of slavery in the French colonial empire.

The Society of the Friends of the Blacks was founded in Paris in 1788, and remained active until 1793, during the midst of the French Revolution. It was led by Jacques Pierre Brissot, who frequently received advice from British abolitionist Thomas Clarkson, who led the abolitionist movement in Great Britain. At the beginning of 1789, the Society had 141 members.

The second general abolition of slavery took place on 4 February 1794, during the convention, the first elected Assembly of the First Republic (1792–1804), under the leadership of Maximilien Robespierre. Abbé Grégoire and the Society of the Friends of the Blacks were part of the abolitionist movement, which had laid important groundwork in building anti-slavery sentiment in the metropole. Another decisive reason for the sudden abolition of slavery was the success of the Slave Revolt in Saint-Domingue (Haitian Revolution).

The Law of 4 February 1794 abolished slavery in all French territories and possessions in the Americas and Caribbean, although slavery was maintained in the Mascarene Islands. The first article of the law stated that "Slavery was abolished" in the French colonies, while the second article stated that "slave-owners would be indemnified" with financial compensation for the value of their slaves. The French constitution passed in 1795 included a declaration of the rights of man, which abolishes slavery.

Napoleon re-introduced slavery in sugarcane-growing colonies through the Law of 20 May 1802. Slavery would be legal in French colonies until 1847.

In 1815, the Congress of Vienna declared its opposition to the slave trade. In 1818, the slave trade was banned in France. On July 18–19, 1845, the Mackau Laws were passed, which paved the way towards the abolition of slavery in France.

On April 27, 1848, the Proclamation of the Abolition of Slavery in the French Colonies was made. The effective abolition was enacted with the Decree abolishing Slavery of 27 April 1848 [ fr ].

The island of Martinique was the first French overseas colony where the decree actually came into force, on 23 May 1848.

Gabon was founded as a settlement for emancipated slaves.

The abolition didn't extend to all colonies, though. Several French colonies, especially in West Africa, had a practice of domestic slavery ("esclavage de case"), which was maintained in some cases until the 20th century. This includes Soudan (until 1894) or Senegal until 1904.

Even though slavery has been prohibited for more than one century, many criminal organizations continue to practice human trafficking and the slave trade. For this reason, on 25 July 2013, France recognized modern-day slavery as a crime punishable by up to 30 years in jail.

See French public institution Fondation pour la mémoire de l'esclavage in French (originally founded on 5 janvier 2004 under the name Comité national pour la mémoire et l'histoire de l'esclavage i.e National Committee for the Memory and the History of slavery).

A permanent structure in June 1999, known as “Le Comité marche ‘98” (The March ’98 Committee) has been created with the objectives to promote processes of recognition and reparation about the past actions of the French government on the issue of slavery in its former colonies. The second aim of the organization is also to preserve the memory of the abolition.

This association was initially chaired by Serge Romana, a geneticist and leading activist for the recognition of the history of Guadeloupean slavery. A first step in the achievement of the committee’s objectives came with the Taubira Law of 10 May 2001. This law recognizes slavery as a crime against humanity. A second crucial step was taken with the adoption of the Overseas Real Equality Act of 14 February 2017, which established 23 May as the commemorative date for the victims of colonial slavery. The association continues to promote annual commemorations known as “Feasts of Brotherhood and Reconciliation” or “Limié Ba Yo” (which translates as “Let’s put them in the spotlight”) every year on 23 May.

Smoking in France was first restricted on public transport by the 1976 Veil law. Further restrictions were established in the 1991 Évin law, which contains a variety of measures against alcoholism and tobacco consumption. A much stronger smoking ban was introduced on 1 February 2007. Smoking in enclosed public places such as offices, schools, government buildings and restaurants is strictly prohibited. Law officials may enforce the laws with minimum fines set at €500.

In the late 16th century, Jean Nicot introduced tobacco to France. He called it the "Queens Herb" but his name was used for nicotine. In 1610 Cardinal Crescenzio introduced smoking to France after learning about it in England. It became widely popular. After 1650, snuff became fashionable among the French upper classes, including the nobility, and clergy. It replaced smoking tobacco, which remained popular among the middle and lower classes and peasants.

According to Catherine Hill, in 1860, the sales of manufactured cigarettes were almost non-existent. The sales of cigarettes exhibited steady growth, reaching daily usage of 2 cigarettes per adult by 1939. There was a sharp reduction in World War II (1939–1945), then a rapid recovery. Sales continued rapid growth until 1975, followed by a period of stability between 1975 and 1992 (around 5.7 cigarettes). Major restrictions began in 1976. The pinnacle of cigarette consumption was attained in 1985, peaking at a maximum of 6 cigarettes per day.

Tobacco sales increased from 3 g per adult per day [in 1900]... to a maximum of 6.8 g in 1975, then decreased by 10% between 1991 and 1996. Since the early 1950s, the proportion of smokers has been on the decline in the male population and on the increase in the female population. In France, 60,000 deaths are attributable to tobacco smoking. These deaths represent 12% of the total mortality.

The first restrictions on smoking in France were established in the 1976 Veil law, which banned smoking on public transport. Further restrictions were introduced in the 1991 Évin law, which contained measures against alcoholism and tobacco consumption. A much stronger smoking ban was introduced in 2007, which prohibited smoking in enclosed public places such as offices, schools, government buildings, and restaurants. Law officials may enforce the laws with minimum fines set at €500.

The Veil law is named after Simone Veil, the French health minister, who took the initiative to fight against tobacco smoking in France in 1976. Veil banned advertising for tobacco or tobacco products and required tobacco companies to print severe warnings on their cigarette packages, such as " Abus Dangereux – [Overuse is Hazardous]." Another significant aspect of the Veil Law was to place limitations on smoking places affectés à un usage collectif (open to the public).

The Évin law is named after Claude Évin, the minister who pushed for it. The law leaves certain important criteria on what is allowed or not with respect to smoking sections to executive-issued regulations, and it is those regulations that were altered in 2007.

A legal challenge against the new regulations was filed before the Conseil d'État in 2007, but was rejected. Under the initial implementation rules of the 1991 Évin law, restaurants, cafés etc. just had to provide smoking and non-smoking sections, which in practice were often not well separated. In larger establishments, smoking and non-smoking sections could be separate rooms, but often they were just areas within the same room.

Smoking and vaping are banned in all indoor public places, including government buildings, offices, public transport, universities, museums, restaurants, cafés, nightclubs, etc. Cafés and shops selling tobacco-related products are submitted to the same regulations. No exceptions exist for special smoking rooms fulfilling strict conditions. Additionally, some outdoor public places also ban smoking and vaping (railway stations).

As of 2015, 32% of French adults declare themselves to be regular smokers. In case of violation of tobacco laws, smokers can face a fine of up to €450 and the owner of the venue up to €750. Plain packaging for cigarettes was introduced in 2017.

In November 2023, as part of an extensive anti-tobacco strategy, France declared that smoking is prohibited in certain public spaces.

In June 2025, the French government issued a decree banning smoking in several public places, near schools, and in places where children gather. Electronic cigarettes, however, are exempt from this ban.

Smuggling in pre-revolutionary France was a reaction to the economic hardships and internal Taxations throughout the country. Though the trade of contraband was lucrative throughout Europe, it was especially so in France and contributed to national tensions. While tobacco was commonly smuggled, common items such as salt and calico were carried across provincial borders to avoid high taxes. The smuggling trade was very profitable, and it allowed families to increase their income while subverting corrupt tax farmers. The prevalence of smuggling and the economic motivations surrounding the trade helped lead France towards revolution.

Several economic factors contributed to the prevalence of smuggling in the second half of the eighteenth century. Of the twenty-six million people in France, twenty-one million worked within the agricultural sector. However, most peasants who owned land held less than twenty acres, enough to support a single family. France strongly relied on its agricultural sector, and this over dependence left the population susceptible to droughts and other natural disasters. Urban peasants faced similar problems, as most of Paris's population served as Manual workers.

The census of 1791 revealed that there were 118,784 paupers, unskilled laborers, and beggars in Paris, about a quarter of the population. Therefore, most of the urban and rural populations were limited to lower-class occupations. There was also economic disparity between the sexes, as a male servant might earn 90 livres a year while a woman earned only 35–50 livres. Peasants dedicated half of their household income to food, leaving little money for other expenses.

Despite this wealth inequality, French foreign trade was widely successful until the beginning of the revolution, as the sugar trade in the West Indies brought great wealth to France's elite. The monarchy capitalized on this wealth by imposing trade monopolies with its Caribbean colonies. However, the Eden Treaty with England of May 1787 hindered the French manufacturing sector, as the agreement lowered internal tariffs on English goods. This trade agreement outraged French Merchants because they could not compete with British prices. Such Trade agreements contributed to poverty within France and encouraged illicit economic activity.

Smuggling within France was an extremely lucrative business due to high demand for expensive products, specifically tobacco, salt, and calico. Smugglers devised means of subverting the authorities. For example, female smugglers would often stuff salt into their dresses. Smugglers also trained dogs to carry salt, though no records exist on their prevalence or incarceration rates. In addition, many smuggling bands formed; French authorities were aware of at least 38 large smuggling bands in the second half of the eighteenth century. As indirect taxes were uniform throughout France, certain provinces charged vastly more for some items. For example, 49 kilos of salt cost 31 sous in Brittany but 591 sous in Anjoy. Crossing the Loire River, which separated the two territories, became a common means of transporting contraband.

Salt smuggling was particularly problematic for the authorities, as smugglers abused the gabelle, or salt tax. Many provinces mandated that every citizen buy at least seven pounds of salt per year. This salt could only be used for cooking, so many would have been required to buy more. As a result, many relied on purchasing contraband salt to escape these heavy fines. Calico was also a popular contraband item, as the French prized genuine Indian calico. Although calico's prohibition ended in 1759, calico's taxation remained high enough to justify smuggling. France's public monopoly and internal tax system also upset foreigners. Irish lawmaker Edmund Burke stated that the system was "unwisely, with being ill-contrived, [and] oppressive." Burke’s views show an international disapproval of France’s practices and an awareness that smuggling would be the taxes’ unintended consequence.

Smuggling posed a significant problem for authorities. French law considered smuggling a direct offense against the King ; smugglers avoided paying indirect taxes which composed 47% of the government's income, so it was as if they were stealing from the monarch. Smugglers also undermined the ferme générale, or the "Five Great Farms." This was a tax farming institution which collected and profited off indirect taxes. Therefore, the law dealt harshly with offenders to discourage further smuggling. Punishments for smuggling varied across France's provinces but always worsened with repeat offenses. Offenders were always fined and often served additional time depending on the region. In Provence, smuggling bands of five and larger received fines of 500 livres and served nine years in galleys for a first offense.

The law was especially harsh on nobles who dealt in contraband; commonly, those elites who were caught were stripped of their titles and their houses were razed. The severe punishment of the contraband industry shaped France's prison infrastructure. From 1685 to 1791, over 100,000 men went to the galleys for illegal trade. The government needed to build more prisons to meet demands, and this influx of prisoners would lead the French government to create the modern French prison.

French authorities also reacted by imposing increased regulations on the business practices and movements of peasants. Officers viewed travelers with suspicion and demanded that merchants show their paperwork to prove the legitimacy of their wares. The government also increased the Farm police to 20,000 guards which became the largest paramilitary force of the time in Europe. They patrolled the river Loire and prohibited fishing at night. Officers would also physically search any suspects. For example, they would squeeze women where salt could be hidden, often the padding within their dresses.

Due to the heightened repression on underground trade, smugglers often played integral roles in inciting armed rebellions against taxation officers. From 1660 to 1789, tax rebellion was the primary form of revolt within France. Notably, these rebellions were larger than the bread riots which propelled the beginning of the French Revolution. The most prominent of these revolts occurred from 11 to 14 July in 1789, when smugglers and common workers destroyed forty customs gates. Occurring before the Storming of the Bastille, this was one of the first demonstrations of popular support for the French Revolution.

Smugglers garnered large public support, and influential revolutionary figures and liberals defended these rebellions. Mirabeau, a noble and leader of the Revolution, argued that the true antagonist wasn't the smuggling trade but the Farm; he called these men " vampires " who control a system which "bleeds the people at the throat." These smuggler's rebellions also influenced physiocrats, liberal economic supporters for fair trade ; they advocated for a completely altered fiscal system which replaced taxes on goods with other taxes. Others such as the President of the Paris " Cour des Aides " Malesherbes asserted in 1775 that this crime didn't warrant such severe punishment. He argued that the King could resolve this form of despotism by calling the Estates General, an institution last seen in 1614. Louis XVI would form the Estates General four years later.

Snails are eaten by humans in many areas such as Africa, Southeast Asia and Mediterranean Europe, while in other cultures, snails are seen as a taboo food. Borrowed from the French word for 'snail', the term escargot is what English speakers use to specifically denote edible land snails. Snails as a food date back to ancient times, with numerous cultures worldwide having traditions and practices that attest to their consumption. In the modern era snails are farmed, an industry known as heliciculture.

The snails are collected after the rains and are put to "purge" (fasting). In the past, the consumption of snails had a marked seasonality, from April to June. Now, snail-breeding techniques make them available all year. Heliciculture occurs mainly in Spain, France, and Italy, which are also the countries with the greatest culinary tradition of the snail. Although throughout history the snail has had little value in the kitchen because it is considered "poverty food", in recent times it can be classified as a delicacy thanks to the appreciation given to it by haute cuisine chefs.

Escargot, French pronunciation: [ ɛskaʁɡo ], comes from the French term for snail. Usage of the French word "escargot" dates back to 1892. The French word, first recorded in the 14th century, derives from escaragol (Provençal) and then escargol (Old French). It ultimately traces back through Vulgar Latin coculium and Classical Latin conchylium to the Ancient Greek konchylion (κογχύλιον), which meant "edible shellfish, oyster". The Online Etymological Dictionary notes that the form of the word in Provençal and French seems to have been influenced by words related to the scarab.

Researchers have not been able to pinpoint when humans began consuming snails, although archaeological discoveries point to earlier stages than the invention of hunting. A lot of broken snail shells have been found in the Franchthi Cave, in the Greek Argolis, from the year 10,700 BCE. In Historia de gastronomía (2004), Fernández-Armesto points out the possible reasons: snails are easy to handle, and their cultivation "seems like a natural extension of harvesting".

It is difficult to go beyond the limits of a developmentalist and progressive model of the history of food, according to which it is unthinkable that no food was cultivated in such early times, but snail farming is so simple, requires so little technical effort and is conceptually so close to harvesting methods, that it seems doctrinaire to the point of stubbornness to exclude such a possibility.

Many sites in the Zagros Mountains of Iraq and the Kermanshah region of western Iran are from the late Pleistocene and include snail shells that have been interpreted as food debris. Specifically, these species were mainly Helix salomonica or Levantina spiriplana. The deposits with snails from the ancient Capsian culture (present-day Tunisia) are of notable importance, as well as those found in the Cantabrian Mountains, the Pyrenees and the northern Adriatic (present-day Croatia and Slovenia), in addition to many other remains of snails throughout the Mediterranean Basin. The most convincing evidence for prehistoric land snail consumption is found in the Maghreb, beginning in the Iberomaurusian (20,000 BP) and continuing through the Capsian to at least 6,000 BP. Outside the Mediterranean region, the occurrence of land snails as food debris is less common. According to Lubell (2004b), archaeological remains of land snails have been found in the Caribbean, Peru, Texas and other parts of North America, East Africa, Sudan, Nigeria, and the Philippines. Also, archaeological remains of freshwater snails have been found in Yunnan.

A snail sauce is mentioned in the Book of Rites, a Confucian text of ancient China.

The Romans considered escargots an elite food, as noted in the writings of Pliny the Elder. The Roman breeder Quintus Fulvius Lippinus is considered the "father" of heliciculture, or at least, the first written reference to snail farms. Lippinus established his study center in the Tuscan city of Tarquinia to feasibly domesticate various animals, such as dormouse and wild boar, among many others. However, he was best known for his enormous snails, of which he had several species brought from Illyria to Africa. With a fatty diet he devised to fatten them, he obtained large quantities of snails, which he then marketed in Rome. His snails set the trend among the Roman upper class, and the practice became popular. Lippinus was an innovator who managed a large company that marketed his snails beyond the Mare Nostrum. In De re coquinaria, one of the complete Roman cookbooks, four recipes based on snails are mentioned. Shells of the edible species Cernuella virgata and Otala lactea have been recovered from the Roman-era city Volubilis, in present-day Morocco. They are a harbinger of the escargot found in modern souks of the country.

Pope Pius V, who was an avid eater of snails, decided that they had to be considered as fish to continue eating them during Lent, exclaiming: Estote pisces in aeternum! ("You will be fish forever!") In Spain, the custom continued to have continuity as can be seen in the gastronomic literature of that time. In the Libro del arte de cozina [ es ] by Diego Granado, head chef of the Spanish royal household, a section was dedicated to the snail, explaining its biological characteristics, how to clean it, and various recipes on how to cook it, fry it, etc. This book was published in 1614 in Lleida, a city in western Catalonia famous for its culinary tradition of the snail.

In the stricter Orthodox Church tradition of fasting, snails are still considered fully Lenten, being invertebrates, and are historically and presently popular.

Not all land snails are edible since many are too small—not worthwhile to prepare and cook—and the palatability of the flesh varies among species.

Snail meat has several benefits compared to other meats, highlighting its low calorie and fat content. It is a source of protein (between 10 and 19%). Nutritional information can vary depending on the snail species and on who performs the nutritional analysis. Even so, it can be said that snails are rich in inorganic nutrients: 82% water, minerals such as magnesium and iron (mainly, but also calcium, phosphorus, potassium, and sodium), in addition to a high percentage of niacin (vitamin B3), since for every 100 g of snail meat, up to 55% of the DRI (in women) and 41% DRI (in men). Snails are a good source of selenium. Of the recommended daily requirement of selenium, the snail provides up to 50% (in women) and 30% (in men).

Snail flesh is a good supply of essential amino acids such as lysine, methionine, and cysteine, which are difficult to get in other sources of protein, according to Adeyeye et al. (2020). Scientists also point out that a variety of vitamins, including vitamins A, E, and B12, are present in snail meat and are crucial for maintaining general health and wellbeing.

Due to high iron content, snails are recommended for consumption by people suffering from iron-deficiency anemia. The fat content is low, but provides beneficial omega-3 fatty acids.

Research showed that snails have an avoidance response, including when they come into contact with a heated surface, which indicates their ability to feel pain..

Before use in the kitchen, snails must be cleaned to remove impurities. The cleaning process (called purgado in Spanish) consists of leaving them alive for several days without eating, or only eating flour. The flour method is a homemade resource to clean the animal's digestive tract. Formerly in Spain, snails were hung from mesh bags from which they could not escape. Snail chef Morell i Bitrià (1999) recommends not giving them anything to eat for at least eight days (ideally ten or twelve) and then washing them well. Snails that die during the purging process should be disposed of.

Snail slime should be removed with as many washes of water as possible, in a colander under running water or in a saucepan. Again they are washed, this time with salt water, which helps cut through the slime. This procedure can cause a great deal of pain for the snail. After being cleaned and washed several times, they are transferred to a pot with cold water and salt, when they emerge from their shells the heat is raised to the maximum, and they are cooked for approximately a quarter of an hour. After this, they are served in the chosen stew, sauce, or other recipe. This intermediate action is popularly known as "cheating" (engañar) the snail in Spain, as they come out of their shells once the water heats up, and when they're outside the flame is increased further to rapidly heat the water and kill the snails.

In bars where snails are offered as a tapa, it is common for them to be served with toothpicks, as this is the typical rustic utensil for eating snails. A serving commonly ranges between 25 and 30 snails. In haute cuisine -style catering, snails are consumed by grasping the shell with a pince à escargot and extracting the snail with a fork called fourchette à escargot.

On a culinary level, they can be cooked in many ways: stews, baked, a la gormanta, a la brutesque. In the cuisine of Lleida, they are an ingredient in many traditional dishes, in many cases mixed with other meats such as pig's feet, rabbit, chicken, lobsters and prawns, etc.

People in Cameroon, Ghana, Nigeria, and other countries in the area are used to eating African varieties of snail, which are larger. Typical of Equatorial Guinea is a giant sea snail called bilolá (Thetystrombus latus), eaten stewed or sautéed, which in Cape Verde is known as búzio cabra, and is grilled on skewers. It is also known as ìgbín amongst the Yoruba of western Nigeria.

There is a tradition of consuming snails in Andorra, Spain, France, Italy, and Portugal on the European side and Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia on the African side. Cornu aspersum is the most widespread species in the Mediterranean basin, the Iberian Peninsula, and the French Atlantic coast.

In French cuisine, snails are typically purged, killed, shelled, and cooked (usually with garlic butter, chicken stock or wine), and then placed back into the shells with the butter sauce and additional ingredients, such as garlic, thyme, parsley, or pine nuts. Special tongs for holding the shell and forks for extracting the meat are typically provided. Escargot is served on indented metal trays with places for six or 12 snails.

In Cretan cuisine, the snails are first boiled in white wine with bay leaves, celery, and onion and then coated with flour and fried with rosemary and vinegar.

In Maltese cuisine, snails (Maltese : bebbux) of the petit gris variety are simmered in red wine or ale with mint, basil and marjoram. The snails are cooked and served in their shells.

In Lebanon, land snails are collected from the mountains and then served alongside a tahini -based sauce called tarator in a dish called bzeh ma' tarator (Levantine Arabic : بزاق مع طراطور).

In Palestine, land snails are gathered similar to Lebanon, and often sold in markets. They are eaten by Palestinian Christians but are less popular among Muslims because most scholars of the Hanafi school predominant in the Levant rule out land snails as forbidden to eat under Islamic dietary laws, only permitting sea snails. Under Jewish dietary law, both land and sea snails are forbidden and are therefore not popular among Jewish or Palestinian citizens in Israel.

In Moroccan cuisine, snails, also called ghlal, are a popular street food. They are cooked in a jar filled with hot water, special spices, and herbs. After cooking, Moroccan snails are served in small bowls with broth and consumed hot. Moroccan snails are mostly enjoyed during winter as they are believed to be beneficial for health, especially when dealing with the common cold or rheumatism.

A city known for its snail culture is the town of Lleida, in the north-Spanish region of Catalonia, where the L'Aplec del Cargol festival has been held since 1980, receiving some 300,000 visitors during a weekend in May.

Snails were eaten periodically in Central Europe sometimes, as food or medicine. In Hungary they were used in Bereg, Ormánság, and Szilágyság (in the latter by the Romani people as medicine against labour pains).

Snails (balitong, bayuko, siput sedut, heong lor, etc.) are consumed in Cambodia, the Philippines, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Thailand, and Vietnam.

In Indonesia, snails from the rice fields are fried on satay (skewers), a dish known as sate bekicot, sate kakul, or grilled Tondano's sate kolombi.

In Banten, Jakarta, and West Java, snails from the rice fields are called tutut and are eaten with various sauces and curries.

Ghonghi is commonly consumed in the Terai region in Nepal. Ghongis are served with rice and have been a staple food of the indigenous people of Terai for ages.

Snails are eaten in Northeast India in the states of Manipur, Tripura and Nagaland. In Nagaland, snails are prepared with axone and pork meat, especially fats. Locally, it is called hamok. In Manipuri cuisine, they are called Tharoi thongba.

In North India, they are consumed in the states of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. In Bihar, especially in the Mithila region, they are called doka. At other places in Bihar and eastern Uttar Pradesh, they are called ainthi. They are boiled and the meat is extracted to cook a curry, typically eaten with rice.

In Bengal, snails are commonly eaten as a delicacy and are called geri gugli. Since they are widely available and low in cost, they are called 'poor man's food'.

The Société nationale des chemins de fer français ([ sɔsjete nɑsjɔnal de ʃ(ə)mɛ̃ d(ə) fɛʁ fʁɑ̃sɛ ], lit. ' National Company of the French Railways ', SNCF [ ɛsɛnseɛf ]) is France 's state-owned railway operator. Becoming effective on 1 January 1938 following an agreement on 31 August 1937 between the government, private railway companies and railway labor unions, it operates nearly all rail transport in France and Monaco, including the TGV, on France's high-speed rail network. Its functions include operation of railway services for passengers and freight (through its subsidiaries SNCF Voyageurs and Rail Logistics Europe), as well as railway infrastructure management (SNCF Réseau). The railway network consists of about 35,000 km (22,000 mi) of route, of which 2,600 km (1,600 mi) are high-speed lines and 14,500 km (9,000 mi) electrified. More than 14,000 trains are operated daily.

In 2010, the SNCF was ranked 22nd in France and 214th globally on the Fortune Global 500 list. It is the main business of the SNCF Group, which in 2020 had €30 billion of sales in 120 countries. The SNCF Group employs more than 275,000 employees in France and around the world. Since July 2013, the SNCF Group headquarters are located in a Parisian suburb at 2 Place aux Étoiles in Saint-Denis. The president of SNCF Group has been Jean Castex since 2025.

SNCF operates almost all of France's railway traffic, including the TGV (Train à Grande Vitesse, meaning "high-speed train"). In the 1970s, the SNCF began the TGV high-speed train program with the intention of creating the world's fastest railway network. It came to fruition in 1981 with the completion of the first high-speed line LGV Sud-Est ("Ligne à Grande Vitesse Sud-Est", meaning "southeast high-speed line"), where the first TGV service, from Paris to Lyon, was inaugurated. In 2017, the national rail network owned by SNCF Réseau had 28,710 km (17,839 mi) of lines, 58% of which were electrified and 2,640 high-speed lines. Every day, the SNCF runs 15,000 commercial trains and transports more than 5 million passengers and more than 250,000 tonnes of goods. TGV lines and TGV technology are now spread across several European countries.

The SNCF's TGV has set many world speed records, the most recent on 3 April 2007, when a new version of the TGV dubbed the V150 with larger wheels than the usual TGV, was able to cover more ground with each rotation and had a stronger 18,600-kilowatt (24,900-horsepower) engine, and broke the world speed record for conventional railway trains, reaching 574.8 km/h (357.2 mph).

The SNCF has a remarkable safety record. After nearly 30 years in operation, SNCF's TGV system has only experienced one fatal accident, which occurred during pre-opening testing and not in regular operation.

In 2011, SNCF in partnership with Keolis, unsuccessfully bid for the InterCity West Coast franchise. In April 2017 SNCF took a 30% shareholding in a joint venture with Stagecoach Group and Virgin Group to bid for the West Coast Partnership that will operate services on the West Coast Main Line from May 2020 and the High Speed 2 line from 2026.

In April 2019, Stagecoach were banned from bidding for any franchises including the West Coast Partnership which has meant that Virgin and SNCF have now had to withdraw from the shortlist.

Since the 1990s, SNCF has been selling railway carriages to regional governments, with the creation of the Train Express Régional brand. SNCF also maintains a broad scope of international business that includes work on freight lines, inter-city lines and commuter lines. SNCF experts provide logistics, design, construction, operations and maintenance services. SNCF operates the international ticketing agency SNCF Connect, formerly oui.sncf/Voyages-sncf.com and Rail Europe, previously Loco 2.

SNCF has employees in 120 countries offering extensive overseas and cross border consulting. Those projects include

SNCF was formed in 1938 with the nationalisation of France's main railway companies (Chemin de fer, literally, 'way of iron', means railway). These were the:

The French state originally took 51% ownership of SNCF. For a period of 45 years (until 1 January 1983), the other 49% belonged to shareholders of financial companies that succeeded the former companies. Since then, SNCF is wholly owned by the French state. The state invested large amounts of public subsidies into the system.

Following the Armistice of 22 June 1940 until August 1944, SNCF was requisitioned for the transport of Wehrmacht forces and armaments. The invading German troops had destroyed nearly 350 French railway bridges and tunnels. According to differing estimates, SNCF surrendered between 125,000 and 213,000 wagons and 1,000–2,000 locomotives.

France's railway infrastructure and rolling stocks were a target for the French Resistance aimed at disrupting and fighting the German occupying forces. This allowed SNCF employees to perform many acts of resistance, including the formation of the Résistance-Fer movement in 1943. Nearly 1,700 SNCF railway workers were killed or deported for resisting Nazi orders. 150 Résistance-Fer agents were shot for their acts of resistance, 500 of them were deported. Half of those deported died in concentration camps.

During the Holocaust in France, German occupying forces in France also requisitioned SNCF to transport nearly 77,000 Jews and other Holocaust victims to Nazi extermination camps. Later, these deportations were the subject of historical controversy and lawsuits (such as the Lipietz case) in France as well as in the United States (where subsidiary Keolis is (as of 2010) a transportation contractor) to the present day.

In 1992, SNCF commissioned French academics to write a history of SNCF activities during World War II. The resultant report was published in 1996.

In 2006, some sources claimed that SNCF billed Nazi-occupied France for third-class tickets for Holocaust victims transported to extermination camps, although passengers were transported in cattle cars. In 2003, a source reported that after the liberation of France SNCF continued to seek payment for transporting Holocaust victims to Germany. However, historian Michael Marrus has written that claims that SNCF billed for third-class tickets and continued to seek payment after the war ended were made as part of a legal case brought against SNCF, and did not match with historians' understanding of what happened. Marrus argues that SNCF had no margin of maneuver during the German occupation and that the actions of SNCF employees were not ideologically motivated. According to Serge Klarsfeld, president of the organization Sons and Daughters of Jewish Deportees from France, SNCF was forced by German and Vichy authorities to cooperate in providing transport for French Jews to the border and did not make any profit from this transport.

In December 2014, SNCF agreed to pay up to $60 million worth of compensation to Holocaust survivors in the United States. It corresponds to approximately $100,000 per survivor.

In the early 2000s, SNCF sought to get a contract from the state of California for a bullet train project between Los Angeles and San Francisco. SNCF recommended that the train take the most direct route between the two locations to reduce the complexity and cost of the project, but the SNCF's recommendations were cast aside by California politicians who wanted to divert the train through various communities, raising the cost and complexity of the project, as well as the expected travel time. SNCF pulled out of the project in 2011 and went to Morocco to help the country construct a bullet train service. By 2018, Morocco's bullet train started service while the California bullet train project was not close to being operational in 2022, with some saying that the project would never be completed.

In May 2014, the company had discovered that 2,000 new trains they ordered at a cost of 15 billion euros were too wide for many of France's regional platforms. Construction work started to reconfigure them.

On 1 January 2015, Réseau Ferré de France (RFF) merged with SNCF Infra and the Direction de la circulation ferroviaire (DCF) and became SNCF Réseau, the operational assets of SNCF became SNCF Mobilités, and both groups were placed under the control of SNCF.

Jean-Pierre Farandou, then head of the state-owned railway operator, informed on 26 July 2024 that SNCF's high-speed rail network Eurostar suffered from multiple instances of coordinated sabotage, causing significant disruptions to train services. The incident occurred just hours before the opening ceremony of the Olympics, which was considered a high-risk event. The affected lines were located in the western, northern, and eastern regions of France, impacting not only domestic trains but also those travelling to neighboring Belgium and London via the Channel Tunnel. It was expected that roughly 800,000 travellers were impacted because of this arson attack on French railway networks.

The industrial designer Paul Arzens styled many of SNCF's locomotives from the 1940s until the 1970s. A particularly distinctive type is the "broken nose" style of electric and diesel locomotives.

SNCF has codeshare agreements with the following airlines:

In exchange, SNCF allows passengers on these flights to book railway services between Charles de Gaulle Airport in Roissy (in Paris ’s suburbs) and Aix-en-Provence, Angers, Avignon, Bordeaux, Le Mans, Lille, Lyon Part-Dieu, Marseille, Montpellier, Nantes, Nîmes, Poitiers, Rennes, Strasbourg, Tours, and Valence with their airline. The IATA designator used by airlines in connection with these journeys is 2C.

Continental Airlines discontinued its codeshare with SNCF on 15 August 2010.

Until 1999, the SNCF's historic headquarters was located at 88 Rue Saint-Lazare in the 9th arrondissement. In 1996 the chairman of SNCF, Louis Gallois, announced that SNCF would move its headquarters to a new location during the middle of 1997.

From 1999 to 2013, SNCF's headquarters were located in the Montparnasse neighborhood of the 14th arrondissement of Paris, located near the Gare Montparnasse.

Since July 2013, the SNCF headquarters are located in the Parisian suburb of Saint-Denis at 2, place aux Étoiles, 93200 Saint Denis. The move was motivated by cutting operating costs by 10 million euros per year.

Since 1 January 2020 SNCF is a state-owned group consisting of a parent company (SNCF) with several independently operated subsidiaries:

SNCF has full or partial shares in a large number of companies, the majority of which are rail or transport related. These include:

According to a TNS SOFRES survey published in 2010, 66% of French people have a good image of SNCF. At the end of 2019, this proportion was measured at 50% by the Posternak-Ifop barometer on the image of companies. In 2020, Eight Advisory and IFOP unveil their ranking of the "most admired French companies": SNCF is in 23rd position.

Safety on trains is also often a priority. To do this, around 2,800 railway workers form the Railway Security, the general supervision of SNCF, of which 50% of the workforce is assigned to the Île-de-France region.

Furthermore, the experts of the BCG, Boston Consulting Group, use to compare the rail systems in 25 European countries. They rank France in tied 4th position (with Germany, Austria and Sweden), behind Switzerland, Denmark and Finland. The criteria are: the utilization rate, quality of service and safety.

SNCF's current visual logo was created in 2005 by the Carré Noir agency, a subsidiary of the Publicis communication group. It was slightly reworked in 2011: rounded corners, disappearance of shadows inside the letters as well as behind, and a clearer separation between them.

In 2005, the sound logo of the SNCF the four notes C – G – A♭ – E♭, in its sung version, was created by Michaël Boumendil and the agency Sixième Son.

David Gilmour, guitarist of the group Pink Floyd, used the jingle as the inspiration for the title track of his 2015 album Rattle That Lock. Simone Hérault has been the voice of SNCF since 1981.

Since the Auguste and Louis Lumière 's first film, SNCF has been the company that hosts the most film shoots in France, between 50 and 60 shoots per year, which represents around two-thirds of French productions. A selection of iconic films where SNCF is at the heart of the matter includes:

SNCF Voyageurs (French: [ ɛsɛnseɛf vwajaʒœʁ ], lit. ' SNCF Travelers ') is a state-owned enterprise founded on 1 January 2020, an independent subsidiary of the French National Railway Company (SNCF), in charge of operating passenger trains.

Its predecessor is (partially) SNCF Mobilités EPIC which was founded on 1 January 2015.

Its first CEO is Christophe Fanichet [ fr ]. He was appointed by SNCF President Jean-Pierre Farandou.

Additionally, SNCF Voyageurs oversees SNCF's investment in international high-speed service operators Eurostar and TGV Lyria.

On 1 January 2020, the 3 EPIC companies and their subsidiaries became one state-owned group consisting of a parent company with its subsidiaries: SNCF Voyageurs, SNCF Réseau, Rail Logistics Europe, Keolis and Geodis. The previous SNCF Mobilité was dismantled. SNCF Gares & Connexions was integrated to the new SNCF Réseau company, while the logistics activities, rail freight (Geodis and FRET SNCF) and Keolis directly joined the parent company. The TGV inOui service, along with the low cost Ouigo TGV service, Intercités traditional long-distance services, TER, RER, Transilien regional services and the web site Oui.sncf became a new company named SNCF Voyageurs.

Social apartheid is de facto segregation on the basis of class or economic status, in which an underclass is forced to exist separated from the rest of the population.

The word "apartheid", an Afrikaans word meaning "separation", gained its current connotation during the years of South Africa 's Apartheid system of government-imposed racial segregation, which took place between 1948 and early 1994.

As part of that system, the then- National Party -run government declared certain regions as being "for whites only", with populations of people of color being forcibly relocated to designated, remote areas, that were deemed less desirable to live in, under the Group Areas Act. The racial segregation and many other negative consequences that resulted from that Act remain in place today, despite South Africa now being a democracy.

This is especially obvious in Cape Town, where spatial planning under the Group Areas Act was so "successful" in terms of its intended outcomes, that many areas remain with very similar racial demographics to the way they were during Apartheid - generationally-transferred societal stratification.

Typically a component in social apartheid, urban apartheid refers to the spatial segregation of minorities to remote areas. In the context of South African Apartheid, this is defined by the reassigning of the four racial groups defined by the Population Registration Act of 1950, into "Group Areas" as outlined by the Group Areas Act of 1950. Outside of the South African context, the term has also come to be used to refer to ghettoization of minority populations in cities within particular suburbs or neighborhoods.

The term has become common in Latin America in particular in societies where the polarization between rich and poor has become pronounced and has been identified in public policy as a problem that needs to be overcome, such as in Brazil, where the term was coined to describe a situation where wealthy neighbourhoods are protected from the general population by walls, electric barbed wire and private security guards and where inhabitants of the poor slums are subjected to violence.

In Malaysia, as part of the concept of Ketuanan Melayu (lit. Malay supremacy), a citizen that is not considered to be of Bumiputera status face many roadblocks and discrimination in matters such as economic freedom, education, healthcare and housing.

"Social apartheid" can used to describe the systemic segregation and discrimination faced by Palestinians both in Israel and the occupied territories. The concept of apartheid brings into focus the wide discrepancies in housing, infrastructure, and public services that separate Jewish and Palestinian citizens, often as a product of government policy. Palestinian citizens of Israel are often concentrated in underdeveloped towns and neighborhoods with poor infrastructure and limited economic opportunities compared to predominantly Jewish areas.

In the occupied West Bank, this is even more profound, where Palestinians are severely restricted in their movements with checkpoints and the separation barrier, which impede access to basic services such as healthcare and education. Meanwhile, Israeli settlements built on occupied Palestinian territory enjoy better infrastructure and services, deepening the disparities.

The term social apartheid has also been used to explain and describe the ghettoization of Muslim immigrants to Europe in impoverished suburbs and as a cause of rioting and other violence. A notable case is the social situation in the French suburbs, in which largely impoverished Muslim immigrants being concentrated in particular housing projects, and being provided with an inferior standard of infrastructure and social services. The issue of urban apartheid in France was highlighted as such in the aftermath of the 2005 civil unrest in France. It has also be used to describe the segregation in Northern Ireland.

In South Africa, the term "social apartheid" has been used to describe persistent post- Apartheid forms of exclusion and de facto segregation which exist based on class but which have a racial component, because the majority of poor individuals in South Africa are black. "Social apartheid" has been cited as a factor in the composition of HIV/AIDS in South Africa.

National, provincial, and Municipal governments have rolled out various initiatives over the years which have been aimed at reversing the historic negative consequences of the Group Areas Act, and its racial segregation in terms of the country's suburbs. One such example is the City of Cape Town approving the use of land for below-market rate housing development (a form of social housing), such as that in the Conradie Park development in Pinelands.

This kind of zoning approval and funding support means that those who could not otherwise afford to live near to where they work (which, in the case of Cape Town, is likely somewhere in the City Bowl, where many companies are headquartered), can now have the opportunity to do so. That, in turn, enables them to find meaningful work (or any work), as well as have shorter commute times, and enjoy the nicer areas of the city in their free time, which are then more easily accessible to them. This building of affordable housing in well-reasoned areas is a major move towards reversing the impacts of past unequal treatment of racial groups in South Africa.

The modern social structure of France is complex, but generally similar to that of other European countries. Traditional social classes still have some presence, with a large bourgeoisie and especially petite bourgeoisie, and an unusually large proportion, for modern Europe, of farming smallholders. All these groups, and the remaining industrial working class, have considerable political power, which they are able to flex when required.

The " Old Regime " French society before the French Revolution was divided on the principle of the estates of the realm and they were as follows:

Following industrialization and the French Revolution altered the social structure of France and the bourgeoisie became the new ruling class. The feudal nobility was on the decline with agricultural and land yields decreasing, and arranged marriages between noble and bourgeois family became increasingly common, fusing the two social classes together during the 19th century.

The social classes in France during this period were as follows:

In the 21st century, social class in France is often measured by income and profession. Bon chic bon genre (BCBG) is a term for fashionable people of good family (" bon genre "), especially in Paris. Graduates of the École nationale d'administration, or énarques predominate in the upper levels of government and many industries, along with graduates of the other Grandes écoles, specialized state-run institutes of tertiary education. However, primary and secondary education is almost entirely at state schools, unlike say England, and is a major engine of social mobility. Cultural capital, a concept from France, is still considered an issue for the many French people in a process of social mobility.

Social housing in France is housing intended, following a public or private initiative, for people whose income does not exceed certain limits within the working and middle classes. The term encompasses the construction, occupancy, and management of this housing stock. It contributes to public housing policy and social economy policies that govern its administration. In other countries, social housing has similar objectives.

Social housing is a compromise between a precursor to “Fordism” outlined from the late 19th century to ease tensions in the labor world, the realization of a republican project to ensure greater de facto equality among citizens through legislation, and a modern project in the fields of urban planning, architecture, construction, and social engineering in the 20th century.

Social housing accounts for 17% of France’s total housing stock in 2013:.

According to a study by the Banque des Territoires in 2025, building new or renovated social housing seems impossible given the budgetary equation in France.

While the concern for housing low-income families is an ancient issue, found in Greco-Roman antiquity or in the 18th century with architect Claude-Nicolas Ledoux, the first French state initiative for social housing was the law of 30 November 1894, known as the Siegfried law, which created " habitation à bon marché [ fr ] " (HBM). This initiative was rooted in social surveys on the housing conditions of the working classes, such as Dr. Villermé’s work on the physical and moral state of workers in cotton, wool, and silk factories (1841) and Émile Cacheux [ fr ] ’s publications on workers’ housing.

Until 1953, state-led construction remained limited, except for post-war reconstructions, garden cities enabled by Henri Sellier ’s 1928 law, and decisions made during the Liberation by Raoul Dautry and Eugène Claudius-Petit. The period from 1953 to 1977 was marked by a major social housing construction movement driven by economic restructuring.

In 1977, the Barre law marked a state withdrawal from social housing construction, shifting from “brick-and-mortar” aid to personal aid. This led to management issues in the public housing stock, tarnishing the image of social housing. Over the past 30 years, numerous public interventions have shaped the transformation of social housing.

Sometimes the heat problems, especially in 1950s social housing, pose problems of convenience.

The Loi d'orientation pour la ville [ fr ] of 13 July 1991, known as the “anti-ghetto law,” targeted large estates and aimed to combat social and spatial segregation. Its objectives were vague: balancing housing, maintaining social housing, enabling urban and social evolution of large estates, and establishing a land policy.

In 2000, the Loi relative à la solidarité et au renouvellement urbains [ fr ] promoted social mixing. It applied to agglomerations with over 50,000 inhabitants and mandated a minimum of 20% social housing. Municipalities were urged to address deficits quickly. The use of the Solidarity and Urban Renewal Law (SRU) in 2000 followed a logic of social mixing [ fr ]. In 2003, the Urban Orientation and Programming Law for Urban Renewal was introduced, involving the demolition of dilapidated buildings in central neighborhoods and the construction of new housing. The Loi d'orientation et de programmation pour la ville et la rénovation urbaine [ fr ] (PNRU) called for demolishing over 250,000 housing units, with an equal number of social housing units to be rebuilt to achieve social mixing. The goal was to attract middle classes to stigmatized neighborhoods and distribute social classes more evenly spatially.

In France, of the 730 municipalities affected, 325 were non-compliant in 2008. Mayors cited high land prices and a lack of financial and technical resources. By 2010, 139,000 housing units had been demolished, with 133,000 rebuilt.

Maurice Blanc, in his article Espace, inégalité et transaction sociale published in 2012, notes that in housing policy, social mixing remains a primary motivation for successive governments. The lack of social mixing is seen as an urban concern. Social mixing cannot be measured by a quantitative indicator of the number of social housing units.

Moreover, the percentage of social housing in a municipality does not guarantee social mixing: the 20% social housing may be concentrated in one neighborhood, leading to uneven intra-municipal distribution and low social mixing. Additionally, social housing is often associated in the public imagination with low-income populations. However, comparing HLM income ceilings to the median income of 22 522 euros in Île-de-France shows that half the population is eligible for at least an integration subsidized rental loan or a social rental loan.

Income ceilings for an HLM based on its financing type in Île-de-France.

However, this is not always the case. Social housing rents may remain too high for the poorest groups, who may end up in substandard private-sector housing. Thus, middle classes often occupy social housing, while the poorest reside in private housing. Moreover, renovation-demolition of housing does not always lead to better social mixing, as displaced populations often relocate to similar areas.

Social housing was created to improve housing conditions for the working and middle classes. Article 140 of the Loi relative à la solidarité et au renouvellement urbains [ fr ] specifies that “any person or family experiencing particular difficulties” is entitled to such housing “due, in particular, to inadequate resources or living conditions.” Rent and income ceilings for tenants are set annually by decree and vary by location, type of agreement, and household composition. To keep rents low, public authorities provide indirect aid, paid not to the tenant but to the landlord, in the form of financing facilities, subsidies, tax deductions, etc. This aid comes with conditions on housing quality and rent levels.

Social housing is also a tool to address the right to housing, recognized by Law No. 2007-290 of 5 March 2007 establishing the enforceable right to housing (DALO Law). However, 70% of the French population is eligible for social housing based on income. Other housing policies, such as rent control, may be used to mitigate the adverse effects of shortages or to maintain housing stock at rent levels more affordable for most tenants.

The importance of social housing varies by country, but France has less than most Western European countries.

France’s social rental stock comprises 4.5 million rental units and 0.3 million hostel-type housing. Half of the social rental stock is located in Hauts-de-France, Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes, and Île-de-France. These units represent 19% of the housing stock, and 15.7% of households have moderate rent housing [ fr ] (HLM) as their primary residence. With 57% of French households owning their primary residence and 43% renting, 36.5% of renters in France have an HLM as their primary residence.

In 2016, 10.7 million people were social housing tenants. The average age of social housing tenants is 50, between that of private-sector tenants and owner-occupiers. The median standard of living for social housing occupants is 15,100 euros, lower than the rest of the population.

These tenants benefit from an implicit aid estimated at 227 euros by the INSEE. This implicit aid is often combined with housing assistance received by 6 million households (out of 26 million, including 11.2 million tenants), or 53% of tenants. The average amount of this aid is 210 euros per month.

In 2002, Hauts-de-Seine had 165,686 housing units. Municipalities averaged 24% social housing. However, significant disparities existed. Neuilly-sur-Seine had barely 3% social housing in its housing stock. The municipalities of Vaucresson, Ville-d'Avray, Marnes-la-Coquette, La Garenne-Colombes, Boulogne-Billancourt, Saint-Cloud, Sceaux, Bourg-la-Reine, Antony, Bois-Colombes, Asnières-sur-Seine, Levallois-Perret, Chaville, and Rueil-Malmaison had less than 13% social housing, failing to meet the SRU Law’s 20% requirement. Conversely, Châtenay-Malabry, Bagneux, Le Plessis-Robinson, Nanterre, Villeneuve-la-Garenne, and Gennevilliers had social housing rates above 38%.

In 2009, the department had 177,504 housing units, a 7% increase from 2002–2009. The municipalities not complying with the SRU Law remained the same as in 2002. However, Malakoff joined the 2002 municipalities with over 38% social housing.

In 2015, the department had 198,769 housing units, a 12% increase from 2009–2015 and a 20% increase from 2002–2015. After the SRU Law reform in 2013, the mandatory social housing rate rose from 20% to 25% per municipality. In 2015, non-compliant municipalities were: Neuilly-sur-Seine, Vaucresson, Ville-d'Avray, La Garenne-Colombes, Marnes-la-Coquette, Boulogne-Billancourt, Saint-Cloud, Bourg-la-Reine, Bois-Colombes, Levallois-Perret, Antony, Montrouge, Asnières-sur-Seine, Courbevoie, Sceaux, Garches, Sèvres, Issy-les-Moulineaux, Chaville, Vanves, Châtillon, and Rueil-Malmaison. Thus, 58% of Hauts-de-Seine municipalities had social housing rates below 25% in 2015. Leading municipalities were Malakoff, Fontenay-aux-Roses, Châtenay-Malabry, Villeneuve-la-Garenne, Nanterre, Gennevilliers, and Bagneux, with over 40% social housing.

Mayors cited high land prices and a lack of financial and technical resources. Additionally, some elected officials preferred paying penalties over building social housing, as penalties are not sufficiently dissuasive.

In mainland France, since January 1977, a housing unit qualifies as social housing through an agreement between the social landlord and the state. This agreement primarily enables future tenants to benefit from the APL, the Personalized Housing Allowance. The agreement’s text is set by decree. Beyond APL eligibility, the agreement outlines the landlord’s obligations in exchange for construction (or rehabilitation) benefits (see below: Financing). Compliance with rent and income ceilings are the two main obligations of the social landlord. Article 441 and subsequent articles of the Code de la construction et de l'habitation [ fr ] outline all obligations tied to the agreement. The agreement also grants the state a 30% reservation right on the housing units involved.

There are three types of HLM defined by construction aid levels and target populations

All HLM organizations belong to federations, which are grouped under the Union sociale pour l'habitat (USH). The main social organizations are public housing offices (OPH) and Entreprise sociale pour l'habitat [ fr ] (ESH). Public housing offices (OPH) are local public establishments with industrial and commercial status (EPIC), linked to a municipality, an Établissement public de coopération intercommunale, or a department. They are managed by a board of directors, chaired by an elected official from the linked authority, and a general director.

The largest OPH is the Paris OPH, with nearly 120,000 housing units; the smallest have a few hundred units. Social enterprises for housing (ESH) are private non-profit companies whose capital may be held by private or public individuals or entities. They must have a majority (or reference) shareholder. Tenants are also shareholders to participate in governance (board of directors or supervisory board).

The reference shareholders of ESHs are mainly Action Logement collectors (formerly 1% housing [ fr ]). Some insurers, banks, or industrial companies also hold capital. For example, Caisse d'Épargne is the reference shareholder of GCE Habitat and Erilia, and AXA is the majority shareholder of the 1001 Vies Habitat Group. The largest ESH is the Groupe 3F [ fr ], with nearly 200,000 housing units, with Solendi as the reference shareholder. Other social landlords may include mixed economy companies [ fr ], foundations, or cooperative societies. CDC Habitat, a subsidiary of the Caisse des dépôts et consignations (CDC), is also a major French landlord.

The Agence nationale de contrôle du logement social [ fr ] (ANCOLS) is responsible for monitoring and evaluating the actions of all social housing operators.

In France, social housing is financed by several actors: The state, in three main forms, briefly summarized below:

Local authorities can also contribute to housing projects:

Action Housing (formerly 1% housing) corresponds to the Employers’ Contribution to Housing (PEEC), promoting employee housing. These funds are used for loans or subsidies, supporting both rental housing and homeownership. In exchange, collectors receive reservation rights on supported projects. In 2019, the government plans to draw 500 million euros from Action Housing’s treasury to balance its own budget.

The Caisse des dépôts et consignations is the historical funder of social housing. It provides social landlords with loans, not subsidies, at interest rates significantly below market rates due to its management of Livret A savings funds. The Caisse requires these loans to be guaranteed by local authorities or, failing that, by the Social Housing Guarantee Fund (CGLLS). In exchange for their guarantee or financial support, local authorities receive reservation rights on the housing units (up to 20%).

Public policies encourage the sale of social housing to tenants or other social housing tenants. In such cases, a discount may be applied compared to market prices. Some departments (Haut-de-Seine, Essonne) have passed resolutions to reduce the departmental share of transfer taxes (notary fees) for sold social housing units. Buyers must commit to using the housing as their primary residence for five years and not reselling it for a profit during this period. Some municipalities, including Paris, prohibit the sale of social housing on their territory. Other countries (e.g., former Eastern Europe, such as Karl-Marx-Allee in Berlin, or the UK in the 1980s) have also experienced large-scale social housing sales.

On July 20, 2025, the tallest public housing tower in France, the Kennedy Tower, was demolished by detonation in Loos, as part of the urban rehabilitation.

Welfare in France (also known as social protection, from French : Protection sociale) includes all systems whose purpose is to protect people against the financial consequences of social risks (illness, maternity, old age, unemployment).

Social welfare refers to all the mechanisms of collective foresight, enabling individuals to cope with the financial consequences of "social risks". These are situations that could jeopardize the economic security of the individual or their family (defined as a group of people bound by ties of lineage and alliance), causing a decline in its resources or increase its expenditure (old age, sickness, disability, unemployment, maternity, family responsibilities, etc.). In France, the welfare system make up for about 500 billion euros annually, or more than 30% of GDP.

The origin of social protection in France dates back to medieval times, with fraternal benefit societies. In the second half of the nineteenth century, systems of social assistance developed gradually, often launched by employers marked by social Catholicism, then relayed by the first laws. In 1930, modern social insurance was created, offering employees protection against certain risks: accidents, sickness, disability, maternity, old age, death... During the Second World War, the National Council of Resistance designed the system of social security, now at the heart of social protection. It was created just after the Liberation, by an order of 4 October 1945, followed by other texts. Gradually, protection has covered the entire population, while the benefits extend.

When creating Social Security, France imitated more the Bismarckian system (insurance for workers) than the Beveridge one (widespread solidarity). Over the years, the solidarity (as opposed to a system of contributions) has gradually developed in the French system, which the foundation remains the concept of insurance. However, the desire to establish a universal system has faced opposition. This explains why the French welfare system is plural, with a wide variety of actors. The most important is the general scheme for employees of industry, commerce and services.

The French social protection system is gradually becoming universal, covering all individuals. At its origins (end of the nineteenth century), social protection has been built as a system of social insurance. Insurance was tied to the exercise of an occupation and the benefits were provided in case of the risk of loss of income due to the forced inactivity (accident, sickness, unemployment, old age). It only covered workers and their families. The right to social benefits depended on the payment of social security contributions, itself related to earnings. Non-employees, or individuals who have not contributed during their occupation, were entitled to welfare, reserved for cases of extreme distress.

Since its creation on October 4, 1945, Social Security administrations has had the objective of gradually extending social protection to all residents of the territory. Each member of the national community has now the right to benefit a minimum standard of living, whether exercising a profession and regardless of the ability to contribute. Indeed, the 22 August 1946 law extended the family allowances to the entire population.

The old age risk coverage has been almost universal since the establishment of minimum pension (1956) guaranteeing everyone a minimum pension, regardless of contributions to the mandatory pension insurance scheme. Health insurance has become universal after the establishment of personal insurance in case of sickness (1978) and especially since the Universal health coverage, established in 1999, allowing everyone to access a minimum of care. In addition, the "social minima", benefits ensuring a minimum income to a person in an insecure situation, offer anyone a minimum of resources to fight against the risk of social exclusion.

The social protection is largely dependent on the state. The state is a key player in the field of social protection. It produces legal texts, oversees the various agencies (including the Social Security administrations) and partly finance social protection through taxes or subsidies. However, it plays a role more or less important in the various forms of social protection. Universal social protection is organized into four levels.

The Social Security administrations provides basic coverage of four kind of risks: illness (i.e. illness, maternity, disability, death), employment (i.e. accident at work and occupational disease), old age and family. Each of these four risks correspond to a branch. The system is divided in different schemes classifying people according to their professional activity. These four schemes are:

Social Security administrations, established by the State in 1945, are managed by the social partners (employers' representatives and trade unions). The resources of Social Security (payroll taxes, i.e. social contributions) and expenses (benefits and allowances) has been determined since 1996 by the laws of social security funding, voted annually by the Parliament. The funds are collected by the URSSAF.

The complementary schemes provide additional coverage for risks already covered by Social Security. Some are mandatory (supplemental pension plans of private sector employees) and other optional (mutual health insurance, pension plans). Social partners set only the amount of revenue and expenditure allocated to these schemes. However, there are mandatory schemes (unemployment insurance or pensions of employees), and schemes who remain optional (mutual benefit societies).

The UNEDIC (National Union for Employment in Industry and Commerce) administers the unemployment insurance system.

The central government and the local administrations provide some assistance, mainly support to the poorest. Social assistance includes welfare benefits defined by law, and is therefore provided when conditions are met. They are provided and funded mainly by departments, but also by the central government (RMI or allowance for disabled adults).

The budget of social protection coverage is constantly increasing, and follows the growth of welfare spending. Sources of funding fall into three categories: individual contributions, "allocated taxes" (called so because the social protection is traditionally not financed by taxes) and contributions of the central government.

In recent years, the share of resources financing social protection has been changing. Traditionally, French social protection was financed by contributions rather than by taxes. Over the last three decades, there has been a reduction in the proportion of contributions (although still the primary source of funding) and an increase in funding from broader fiscal measures. In particular, revenue from the General Social Contribution (CSG), created in 1991, has increased considerably to become the second most important fiscal stream in France (after VAT). This development has arisen from the need to finance social protection not only with deductions from earnings, but also from a broader base. It also helps distinguish the financing of benefits corresponding to national solidarity from those covered by insurance. France has thus come closer to the average European Union member's social protection financing structure, although it remains among the countries having the highest percentage of direct contributions relative to earnings.

Social security contributions are mandatory payments made by the self-employed and employees (and their employers) to acquire rights to social benefits. They are not considered taxes in France, while in many Anglo-Saxon countries these contributions correspond to the payroll tax (or to a "pseudo-tax" by simply being added to total government revenue). The distinction between taxes and contributions is justified by the fact that contributions provide for direct benefits, while taxes are part of a solidarity system. There are five social security contributions that correspond to various risks. The traditional contributions are sickness-maternity-insurance-disability-death, old age, widowhood, and accidents at work. In 2004, the new solidarity contribution for autonomy (CSA) has been implemented. It is paid by private and public employers for health insurance.

Social contributions represent a major part of social welfare (66% in 2007). Indeed, social protection was built in France on a logic of social insurance system inspired by that implemented by Bismarck in Germany in the late nineteenth century. Their proportion has tended to decrease since the 1990s, because they are being replaced by fiscal resources, but also because of various contribution exemptions.

The funding by the tax "assigned taxes" constitutes a growing share of Social Welfare (nearly 21% in 2007, excluding transfers). This increase responds to the need not to weigh the financing of social benefits solely on labor income, and distinguish the financing of benefits under the National Solidarity and those of insurance. The "assigned taxes" are fiscal resources allocated to the financing of social benefits. They include:

The Generalized Social Contribution (CSG) is a tax to fund health insurance family benefits and the Retirement Solidarity Fund (FSV).

Contributions of the central government and attached bodies made up 10% of the social protection in 2007. They finance expenditure for solidarity purposes, including the Revenu Minimum d'Insertion (assurance of minimum income) and Fonds de solidarité vieillesse (solidarity fund retirement). They also finance part of employers’ contributions exemptions for low wages and subsidize some schemes (pension plans of certain professions in which the number of active contributors is less than the number of retirees).

Social benefits amount to 30% of gross domestic product and around 45% of household income. Three quarters of these benefits are paid by social security. The Social Welfare Report, published annually distinguishes five categories of benefits for as many risks:

The 1789 the French Revolution replaced the solidarity performed in the home or business (corporations) by a national solidarity based on assistance, made official in the United Nations' 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In practice little was done by the state. Private societies had long existed, catering to small groups of middle-class families who sought death and burial insurance.

After 1830 in France Liberalism and economic modernization were key goals. While liberalism was individualistic and laissez-faire in Britain and the United States, in France liberalism was based instead on a solidaristic conception of society, following the theme of the French Revolution, Liberté, égalité, fraternité ("liberty, equality, fraternity"). In the Third Republic, especially between 1895 and 1914 “Solidarité” ["solidarism"] was the guiding concept of a liberal social policy, whose chief champions were the prime ministers Leon Bourgeois (1895–96) and Pierre Waldeck-Rousseau (1899-1902). The French welfare state expanded when it tried to followed some of Bismarck's policies. Poor relief was the starting point.

During the Industrial Revolution in the nineteenth century, some new forms of protection emerged. The fraternal benefit societies, succeeding the corporations of the Old Regime abolished in 1791, based on voluntary collective foresight and limited to some activities or some businesses. They were legally recognized in 1835, and obtained full freedom of establishment and encouragement of the State in 1898, leading to hundreds of mutual aid societies with voluntary membership. Their main purpose was to provide health care and funerals for their members. They reached middle-class families and skilled workers, but few poor people. By 1904 the new National Mutualist Federation of France (FNMF) had 2 million members.

In 1893 France established a limited program of free medical assistance in urban areas. New laws modernized the medical profession, and provided services for the aged and infirm in 1905. The number of infants assisted grew from 95,000 in 1871 to 231,000 in 1912. In 1904 the department of child welfare was created and in 1905 assistance to infirm and incurable old people. Mutual benefit societies, based on volunteering and social assistance, had benefited only a limited portion of the population. This is why early in the twentieth century, there were attempts to implement the insurance of certain social risks. In 1898 was recognized the responsibility of the employer in case of accidents on the workplace, with the possibility to ensure to cope with that risk. For old people a law in 1910 established a compulsory insurance scheme for employees of trade and industry. Laws in 1928 and 1930 set up insurance for the risks of illness, maternity, invalidity, old age and death for employees, plus a special scheme for farmers. In 1932, a law provided families with allowances to cover expenses, financed by employer. On the eve of World War II, France had a comprehensive protection system but its coverage lagged far behind Germany, Britain and smaller countries. More attention was paid to industrial labour in the mid-1930s during a short period of socialist political ascendency, with the Matignon Accords and the reforms of the Popular Front. These reforms were expanded the Vichy regime in the 1940–42.

In 1945 the objectives for the system of social security were the unification of the system, the generalization of the protection and the extension of the coverage of risks, under the dual influence of Beveridge report of 1942 and the Bismarckian roots. The 4 October 1945 Order provides a coordinated network of caisses replacing the multiple previous agencies. However, the unit was not achieved at that time. Agricultural occupations retained their specific institutions. Employees benefiting special arrangements refused to integrate into the general system, and retained their own system, declared "transitional", but which is still lasting. These specific arrangements concern officials, sailors, railway workers, miners, among others. The 19 October 1945 Order built a system for illness, maternity, invalidity, old age, death. A law in 1946 extended the family allowances to the entire population and another law incorporated injury at work to Social Security.

In recent years, there were growing concerns about the rise in social exclusion among the population. According to a survey published by the CREDOC, a third of people between 25 and 59 had difficulty of insertion (unemployment during more than a year, beneficiaries of minimum social assistance or helped contract). On 2 October 2007, the newly elected French President Nicolas Sarkozy announced the organization of a Grenelle Insertion dedicated to the transformation of integration policies. Dedicated to return to work, the Grenelle insertion was concluded on 27 May 2008. It insisted on the need to reform the insertion system.

The various measures that had implemented to fight social exclusion -in particular the income support allowance (RMI), the single parent allowance (API) and the allocation disabled adult (AAH)- were criticized for favoring unemployment and working poverty, exclusion and precariousness. Indeed, the government claimed the gains from return to work, after a period of unemployment, were offset by the reduction of social benefits paid in the previous period. That led to threshold effects and to inactivity trap situations. The National Observatory of Poverty and social exclusion said that the number of excluded people was deteriorating, while the number of working poor 's was increasing (1.7 million in 2005).

The Grenelle Insertion was initiated in November 2007 to establish, for 6 months, negotiations and talks between social partners to rethink the whole system of insertion. Notably, it was decided that the income of active solidarity (RSA) be implemented. The RSA is intended to offset the loss of certain social benefits when resuming employment and provides additional income to the working poor.

Social republicanism (Républicanisme social) is a political current in the French left, particularly among social-democratic parties, with the goal of achieving a Republic rooted in social values.

Several organizations within the radical left. For instance, Attac (Association for the Taxation of Financial Transactions and for Citizens' Action) and the Left Party (PG).

The notion of citizenship in this context aligns with what is called, in political philosophy, a " republicanist " view of political freedom within the tradition of civic humanism inspired by neo-Athenian ideals: political freedom is seen as participation in the life of the city-state (cité). As such, the concept of participatory democracy is a key element of this political current.

This distinguishes it from liberal thought of the modern era, which, according to critics, starts not with the concept of a citizen (as a member of a community or humanity) but with the individual. In political liberalism, the individual is seen as preexisting society and must be protected against infringements by other individuals or the state. For its critics, this corresponds to negative liberty or the "liberty of the moderns," as defined by Benjamin Constant. From the liberal perspective, republicanism is not an ideology of modernity but one belonging to ancient communities ("liberty of the ancients").

Social security (French : sécurité sociale, pronounced [ sekyʁite sɔsjal ]) is divided by the French government into five branches: illness; old age/retirement; family; work accident ; and occupational disease. From an institutional point of view, French social security is made up of diverse organismes. The system is divided into three main Regimes : the General Regime, the Farm Regime, and the Self-employed Regime. In addition there are numerous special regimes dating from prior to the creation of the state system in the mid-to-late 1940s.

The main concept is that a unique and central institution will pay for all medical costs and pensions so as to provide an equal level of coverage to the whole population. All incomes are taxed to fund this system. The main advantage is that its negotiating power lowers very significantly the price of medicine and the system covers systematically all expenses without limit (100% coverage for any long term or critical problem such as diabetes or cancer). The main drawback being the significant cost (albeit lower than that in the US).

In 2018, Social security paid out €470 billion in social benefits, equivalent to 20% of France's GDP of €2,353 billion. Its main expenditure is on benefits for the sickness branch of the general scheme (€198.3 billion) and benefits for the old-age branch of the general scheme (€126.3 billion). Social security benefit fraud is relatively low (€2.3 billion), lower than social security contribution fraud by companies (€6.8 to €8.4 billion), and much lower than tax fraud (€80 to €100 billion).

From the Middle Ages, certain professional organizations provided limited assistance to their members. However, the abolition of corporations by the Allarde decree, in 1791, put an end to this early system of private professional collective security. It was nevertheless replaced by the sociétés de secours mutuels, or societies for mutual support, recognized and strictly regulated by the 1835 Humann law. These sociétés would thereafter be free from administrative control, and were encouraged by the law of 1 April 1898, referred to as the Charte de la mutualité, or Charter of mutuality. The 1898 law establishes the principles of mutualisme, as they are found today in French law; mutuelles, organizations for collective social insurance, were permitted to offer loans to any French person even if at the beginning, interest rates were too high for the average person.

Alongside the movement for mutual, private social insurance, legislators pushed state-sponsored social aid, which tended to nurture the principle of national solidarity. The law of 15 July 1893, instituted free medical assistance; the law of 9 April 1898, considerably facilitated the worker compensation claims; the law of 27 June 1904, created the service départemental d'aide sociale à l'enfance, a childbirth assistance program; and on 14 July 1905, an elderly and disabled persons assistance program was initiated. France also had, by the 1900s, the most extensive network of child welfare clinics and free or subsidized milk supplies in the world.

The development of insurance companies, at the beginning of the 20th century, was also encouraged by legislation. (Note that insurance companies are profit driven, and mutuelles are cooperatives.) On 9 April 1898, legislators required that employers purchase insurance for indemnity payments to injured employees. Then, on 5 April 1928, insurance was extended to cover illness, maternity, and death. On 30 April 1930, the law was again extended to apply to jobs in the agricultural sector, which incited spirted opposition. The bill was supported by Pierre Laval, who went on to serve as the French Prime Minister from 1942 to 1944, in the Vichy government. As a result, the French historian Fred Kupferman has called Laval "the father of social security" in France.

During the Second World War, the National Council of the French Resistance adopted plans to create a universal social security program to cover all citizens, regardless of class, in the event that sickness or injury made them unable to work. In the UK, the first report of the British economist William Beveridge outlined the general principles that would govern the integration and evolution of social security in post-war France. Indeed, the ordonnances of 4 and 19 April 1945, created a generalized, national social security system similar to that described in Beveridge's plan.

The Social Security is financed by payments from both employers and their employees and is administered and managed by all social partners, typically employee unions and/or companies.

The Constitution of the Fourth Republic, adopted by referendum in 1946, created a constitutional state obligation to provide financial assistance to those deemed most socially vulnerable, most notably women, children, and retired workers.

Nonetheless, social security was not entirely universal. The program of the National Resistance Council had envisioned universal social security, but the régime général, or unified social security program, actually created excluded miners, sailors, farmers, and government employees, all of whom were covered by régimes particuliers, or special administrative bodies. Finally, the law of 22 May 1946, limited coverage under the unified social security program to employees of the industrial and commercial sectors.

In the following decades, the unified social security program would gradually be extended by various laws:

The sickness insurance covers the cost of general medicine and special care and dentures, Pharmaceutical expenses and equipment, analysis and laboratory tests; hospitalization and treatment heavy care facilities, rehabilitation, prenuptial examination vaccinations, tests done in public health programs, and the accommodation and treatment of children or adolescents with disabilities. In case of sickness, health insurance provides daily allowances to the insured who is in physical disability and unable to continue or resume work. The daily allowance depends on the daily earning and on the number of dependent children. Health insurance also manages maternity (expenses for examinations and daily allowance during maternity leave), disability (pension granted when the person is unable to work), and deaths.

In order to be taken in charge by health insurance, care and products must meet two conditions: being provided by a public or private practitioner duly authorized to exercise and being included on the list of reimbursable drugs and products. Health insurance operate on the basis of tariffs set by convention or authority. Health insurance does not support all the expenses within the rates used to calculate benefits. In principle, the insured is required to advance the expenses, and social security then reimburses the insured. However, there are some conventions of "third-party payer" providing direct payment for the body to the service.

Health insurance depends on the professional past or present of a person. However, for those not fulfilling the conditions of membership on a professional basis but residing in France for at least three months in a regular situation, there is universal coverage. The insured entitlement to benefits in kind of health insurance and maternity his spouse or partner when it does not have a system of social protection, dependent children and any person taken in charge by the insured and who does not benefit from a system of social protection.

Since 2000, a universal health coverage has been in place, providing two fundamental rights for access to care: a right to health insurance for anyone in stable and regular residence in the territory and a right for the most disadvantaged, submitted to resources, to a free coverage, with exemption from fee.

The first component, for basic coverage, improves access to care for people suffering from extreme exclusion, but also many people temporarily or permanently deprived of the right to health insurance. It also introduced the principle of continuity of rights: a caisse can stop paying benefits only if another caisse takes over or if the insured person leaves the country.

The second component, the creation of an additional free coverage on the behalf of national solidarity, is included in the management of care by health insurance. This reform affects 10% of the most disadvantaged people meeting the criteria of resources and residence.

The accident insurance and occupational diseases is a branch of social security often managed by the same agencies that the health branch. It is the oldest branch of social security. The legislation go back to 1898 and were included in the 31 December 1946 law creating the Social Security.

There are three social accidents for which the risk is better covered than by the accident assurance health insurance. The accident at work is the accident, whatever the cause, occurring because of or in connection with a job, to any person employed by one or more employers or entrepreneurs. Travel accident is an accident occurring on a route between work and home or during a mission on behalf of the employer. A professional disease is a disease of occupational origin and included in a list indicating any occupational diseases, their causes and the duration of incubation.

In the cases of industrial accident, travel from home, or occupational disease, medical care and vocational rehabilitation are totally taken in charge by social security. In case of permanent reduction of working capacity, the victim is entitled a capital (if the rate of permanent disability is less than 10%), and an annuity (if the rate is more than 10%). In case of the death of the insured, the beneficiaries (spouse, children and descendants dependents) receive a pension.

A Caisse d'allocations familiales (‘Caf’ or ‘CAF’, and in English: Family Allocations Office) is a private-sector body with departmental responsibility for paying family and social benefits to individuals (statutory benefits) under conditions laid down by law.

Family benefits are granted to any French or foreign person residing in France with a dependent child or children living in France under 20 (or 21 years for housing allowances to family).

All the schemes of basic and supplementary pensions in France work on the method of distribution. The schemes redistribute every year, in the form of pensions paid to retirees, contributions received that year from the assets. If the rules of the various pension plans in France correspond to different concepts, they are based on common principles. All schemes incorporate mechanisms of solidarity: solidarity between generations (principle of distribution) and solidarity within a single generation (large redistributions between different occupational groups and gender). These principles of solidarity occurs both in the regimes, between the regimes and beyond regimes at the national level. There are transfers between the schemes, and therefore solidarity between the basic schemes, as well as mechanisms for schemes coordination. Solidarity at the national level consists of the minimum old-age pension assigned to all seniors who have limited resources, paid by the solidarity fund retirement (which also pay some family benefits), but also of state subsidies granted to certain regimes (farmers, SNCF, RATP, mining, marine, etc.), and finally of various taxes allocated to pensions. The retirement system in France is organized into three levels: a compulsory system, a scheme that is often mandatory, and optional arrangements.

The Allocation de Solidarité aux Personnes Agées (solidarity allowance for the elderly) (ASPA) is a French state pension for elderly people, whether or not they are former employees, on low incomes. It replaced the multiple components of the minimum pension (Minimum Vieillesse) from 1 January 2006. To qualify for ASPA, the recipient must live in France and meet age and financial need criteria.

The system of social security is financed largely by contributions based on the wages of employees. However, new funding policies have sought to broaden the base by taking into account all the household income, and policies to promote employment led to lighten the burden of contributions on low wages.

The income of social security schemes are traditionally divided along the following categories:

The budget of the social security system is separate from the budget of the state and is subject to a separate vote and an act of parliament (Loi de finances de la sécurité sociale). The 2010 budget amounted to 428 Bn €.

Although the social security system achieved surplus between 1999 and 2001 thanks to the late 1990s economic recovery, it has since been repeatedly achieved important deficits, especially in 2009-2011 in the aftermath of the Great Recession. The 2013 budget was forecast to reach 469 billion € and a deficit of 12.6 billion €. Marisol Touraine, Minister of Social Affairs and Health, announced in September 2016 that the social security budget would be balanced in 2017 for the first time in 16 years.

In addition to the three main regimes there are numerous special regimes dating from prior to the creation of the state system which refused to be merged into the general system when it was created. The main special regimes are:

Social-ecology is a political movement that seeks to "link social and ecological issues". Theorized by Éloi Laurent, it has mainly been used in France by the Socialist Party (PS).

In his 2011 book of the same name, Éloi Laurent proposes through social-ecology "a green economic model to reduce inequalities and preserve and conserve natural resources (p. 209), in order to adapt the globalized capitalist system to the context of the ecological crisis ".

Scholar Michel Gueldry points out that social-ecology, represented by Éloi Laurent in France, is just one expression of "ecological thought", along with " simple living " (Pierre Rabhi), libertarian eco-communalism (Murray Bookchin), ecosocialism, political ecology ("in the sense of the vast leftist movement that emerged in the 1960s and 1970s, such as Hervé Kempf in France") and deep ecology.

In 1992, Ségolène Royal, Minister for the Environment in the Pierre Bérégovoy government, declared on the political program L'Heure de vérité : "If I wanted to sum it up in one word, I'm a social-ecologist", after specifying that, for her, "the environment is also a humanism" and that "what concerns me are inequalities in relation to the environment, and that's how I chose my priorities". For her, social justice and the environment are intimately linked.

At the 1992 Rio Summit, she defended environmental justice in north–south economic relations, attacking the United States of America in the process.

In 2003, Laurent Fabius, whose movement played "a decisive role in the evolution of the Socialist Party 's ecological discourse" according to academic Timothée Duverger, argued "for a social-ecology", calling for ecology to become "central to the definition of the Socialist Party's policies".

In 2010, the SP placed the notion of social-ecology at the heart of its new project: in terms of ecology, it advocated "eco-conditionality of tax breaks for businesses and an eco-modulable VAT", as well as a "climate-energy contribution". Asked about this development in 2012, Jean-Luc Mélenchon, a proponent of ecosocialism, defined social-ecology as "ecology with a concern for the social. Or social with an ecological sensibility. It remains on the surface, without getting to the bottom of the system. Ecosocialism is socialism. It's the new definition of the socialist approach". During the 2012 presidential campaign, Aurélie Filippetti and several MPs and members of the Socialist Party's Ecological Pole put forward " François Hollande 's social-ecology against the environmental liabilities of the Right".

As already hinted at in 2009, social-ecology became the SP slogan from the 2015 French departmental election campaign, under the impetus of First Secretary Jean-Christophe Cambadélis. The term became part of the party's logo later that year, along with a leaf ; the move was seen as a handout from socialist leaders to voters and members of Europe Écologie Les Verts, then in the process of splitting. The Left Party denounced "a scandalous hold-up by the Socialist Party on eco-socialism", a term echoed in Jean-Christophe Cambadélis's motion: Cambadélis replied that "social-ecology has been defended by Laurent Fabius for 10 years now. Jean-Luc Mélenchon knew this, as he was once a member of this current within the Socialist Party". That same year, Marie-Noëlle Lienemann, a member of the SP national bureau, wondered about the alternative between social-ecology and ecosocialism, and felt that her party was "still groping about the concept. Each term has already been pre-empted by other political forces or associations". In the end, she chose the term ecosocialism.

The program presented by Benoît Hamon during his campaign for the 2017 citizens' primary has been described as social-ecological, or ecosocialist. François de Rugy, president of the Ecologist Party and candidate in this same primary, also presented himself on that occasion as a supporter of social-ecology. During the 2017 presidential campaign, Éloi Laurent noted that "the social-ecological approach and the need for a social-ecological transition have progressed much further politically [than he could] have imagined six years ago, when [he] published Social-écologie. This can be seen, in particular, by consulting the programs of the two left-wing candidates in the presidential election" (Benoît Hamon and Jean-Luc Mélenchon). During the campaign for the 2017 legislative elections, twelve SP figures led by former ministers Najat Vallaud-Belkacem, Mathias Fekl and Estelle Grelier, called for "reinventing the left of tomorrow" by advocating a " reformist social-ecology".

During the campaign for the Aubervilliers congress (March 2018), Libération included social-ecology in the terms of "the hollow rhetoric" that contributed to the downfall of the SP, along with other expressions such as " vivre-ensemble " (living together), or " gauche de gouvernement " (government left). After his election, Olivier Faure continued to use the expression to evoke his party's orientation: "Our party has become 'social-ecologist' and we no longer delegate these issues to political partners". For the 2019 European elections, Le Parisien noted that within the SP, "social-ecology" was "gradually taking precedence over social-democracy ", and that "under the influence of Place publique, the old party with the rose now advocated 'the meeting of social and ecology".

The alliance between the SP and the ecologists in the Nantes region is seen as an example of the practical application of social-ecology, with several figures emerging under the aegis of Jean-Marc Ayrault (Ronan Dantec, Jean-Philippe Magnen and François de Rugy). Johanna Rolland, Jean-Marc Ayrault's successor as mayor of Nantes, also claimed to be a social-ecologist. This is also the case for Damien Carême, mayor of Grande-Synthe (SP then EELV).

In June 2012, after the SP came to power, Environment Minister Nicole Bricq organized an environmental conference for the following month, "on an equal footing with the social conference", advocating social-ecology as a method. In 2014, Cécile Duflot (Europe Écologie Les Verts) resigned from the government, saying it had favored "social orthodoxy" over social ecology:

"Choosing social-ecology means not just preserving an obsolete model, but preparing for a job-intensive future where we produce and consume differently."

— Lilian Allemagna, Laure Bretton, Cécile Duflot, Une décision douloureuse mais nécessaire, Libération

The Society for French Historical Studies (SFHS) is, along with the Western Society for French History (WSFH), one of the two primary historical societies devoted to the study of French history headquartered in the United States.

The SFHS edits the journal French Historical Studies and holds an annual conference. SFHS is affiliated with the academic discussion forum H-France.

At its 1997 annual symposium convened in March in Lexington, Kentucky, SFHS hosted panels titled, "Gender, Work, and Politics in the Longue Durée: The Shifting Boundaries of Women's Work" and "Working Men, Women, and Children in the Streets of Paris: Class, Gender, and Age, 1830-1848." These panels and the paper presented represented a new interest in labor within the SFHS, compared to the previous focus on culture.

The SFHS was informally formed under the leadership of Evelyn Acomb in 1954, holding its first conference in April, 1955 in Ithaca, New York. The first issue of French Historical Studies was published in 1958 with Marvin L. Brown of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill serving as its first editor.

The Society of Ephors, or Société des Ephores, was a late 19th-century French political group established in the aftermath of the defeat of the Second Empire in the Franco-Prussian War under the aegis of the second president of the republic, Marshal Patrice MacMahon. Leaders like MacMahon, who some considered reactionary supporters of the French throne, did not call or move to reinstall the monarchy and instead supported the Third Republic and acknowledged its legitimacy.

This support was qualified, however, by strong nationalist, imperialist urges and an emphasis on military/technological progress to redress perceived French industrial lag relative to other great powers. As formal, national political parties developed in later years as the Third Republic stabilized, political clubs, like Le Société des Ephores, were subsumed into them.

Unlike other political clubs, especially the most radical left ones centered on Paris, the group's major support was found in provincial towns and France's secondary cities. This mirrored Napoleon III 's widespread backing from rural peasantry but sought to add moderate bourgeois elements who were disaffected with both Napoleon III's regime and the potentially revolutionary program espoused by the Paris Commune. The club was founded in Toulon in 1873 by former officers of the French Foreign Legion and other veterans of Napoleon III's campaigns who borrowed the name from the ancient Spartan government council. Their inaugural meeting place in Toulon, Place de la Liberté, can still be visited.

The society's founding motto was, Liberté, Progrès, Etat (Liberty, Progress, State). Many of their initial concerns stemmed from specific military deficiencies they had first-hand experienced against the Prussians. These included the quality of German Krupp howitzers relative to French artillery, the gap between railroad and railhead concentrations in France compared to Germany and Great Britain that inhibited French forces from concentrating or maneuvering quickly, and the employment of a small-scale, long-service professional army instead of a draft/conscription system that left France defenseless after the war's initial defeats destroyed most of the Second Empire's armies.

Politically, the society backed the government of Patrice MacMahon and balked at the restoration a French monarch, partially because of the division amongst monarchist ranks over which family (Orleans, Bourbon, or Bonaparte) should accede to the throne. As fervor for the monarchist cause receded as the 1870s progressed, the society gradually shifted towards support for the Opportunist Republican governments who had themselves staked out more of a claim on the political center.

Ephorist political theory was, at its core, a liberal one. This was the case, first, because of the diffusion and adoption of liberal ideals by the educated, cosmopolitan elite of Europe since the French Revolution, and, second, because of the economic and political success of Great Britain since the end of the First French Empire.

While looking to the British for inspiration, though, the Ephorists held it as given that a system that was over a century old could be improved. The philosophical justification for this had been provided by Roland Meynet a decade before, at a time when he could be considered a proto-Ephorist (and later a founding member of the society). Meynet called into question the fundamental liberal tenet that members of society are atomized individuals. He asserted that liberal thinking was flawed in that it stemmed from a false premise. That false premise was the Lockean assertion that the fundamental human unit is the individual in a state of nature in which man subdues nature and pulls from it his bounty, which is solely his. Liberals simply viewed society as the sum of such individuals. To rebut that claim, Meynet drew upon the theory of evolution, the political implication of which was that humans evolved in groups (hence human subgroups with different characteristics). In fact, individuality can only be expressed through relationships with other humans—an individual cannot be defined without invoking relation to a community. And as such there never was, and most importantly, could never have been such a state where it was most natural for an individual human to exist alone. An individual human could not have come to exist without the communal heritage of group evolution. Meynet therefore concluded that man's essential nature was communal. This reasoning supported the future Ephorist belief that the group, rather than the individual, was the fundamental unit of society.

After Meynet, Bernard Baas undercut the belief in the individual as responsible for securing his own self-interest. Baas was a pre-Pigouvian in that he realized that an individual's pursuit of his own self-interest was inevitably negatively or positively impacted by others pursuing their own self-interests. Building on Meynet's work, if the group was the fundamental unit of societal activity, then individual actions take place within a group context and naturally impact other members in the group. This would later be refined into the idea of an externality. From these conclusions, the reasoning that Ephorist thought followed was straightforward—pursuing solely one's own interests was not only selfish but unnatural. They believed that without the community, humanity in any real sense would cease. The truly natural state for man is to take into account the needs of the group. Unfortunately, Ephorists recognized that Western society had already been too heavily influenced by the ideas of the radical liberals, such as John Stuart Mill, to accept such an arrangement of their own accord (unlike, say Japan, which was a source of fascination for the Ephorists due to its unity of purpose). Much of their discussions centered around the need for an arrangement to reign in some of the greater excesses imbued by liberalism.

Together, Meynet's and Baas’ writings, and the philosophical work that grew from it, provided the intellectual foundation for Ephorism's emphasis on the role of the state. Ephorists started from the belief in the group as the fundamental entity, and as men of the Enlightenment, they recognized that the proper community was the legal, rational one of human thought and higher impulses—the state. They believed that in this way, the state is born of man's will. Foreshadowing Weber, the Ephorists saw the state as a rational construct that could utilize modern organizational methods to harness and direct the resources of society. (As such, the Ephorists were also early proponents of a professional bureaucracy and the empowerment of technocrats). Consequently, to accept one's natural role in society is to submit to the state. In that sense, Ephorists construed most activities as political and the state's role was only constrained by efficiency. Ultimately, though, the Ephorists felt it could not be contradicted that the state was essential to human existence—if the state withered, man withered.

I. The belief in the state as the supreme entity in political theory led to several positions held by the Ephorists. One was that the state would maintain balance in society—the government would mediate interactions between conflicting segments of society. With regards to the economy, this meant that the government would mediate relations between capital and labor to insure stability and fairness, rather than letting the two groups engage in a brute struggle of wills. Indeed, Ephorists believed one of the greatest weaknesses of liberal democracy was the inability to mediate compromise between conflicting groups. They viewed democracy as a winner-take-all system in which grievances were harbored and radical swings in policy could take place during transfers of power that damaged long-term progress.

II. Another Ephorist position was that private action should be mobilized for public benefit. Ephoristis recognized the strength that could come from individual actions pursuing self-interest. That could lead to new approaches and ideas (in short, innovation), but Ephorists wanted to ensure that those impulses would be directed to society's benefit. As a result, they sought to instill national pride in the population. This patriotism was to give a shared feeling of unity to the population and knowledge of communal identity (the goal was not to socialize wealth but to socialize the generator of wealth—the population). The Ephorists believed that their economic program—discussed below—would lead to an economic boom only after the cultural rebirth brought about through the inculcation of patriotism. As General Picard wrote in his opening address to the Ephorists, “[s]ociety represents the very personality of the individual divested of accidental differences […] where the individual feels the general interest as his own and wills therefore as might the general will.”

III. Education, both political and technical, also ranked as an important Ephorist interest. Uneducated, the populace might devolve into indulgence of basic passions and instincts, which bring about social disintegration, moral degeneration, and a mindless spirit of rebellion against society. Ephorism was, therefore, a political and moral movement at its core. It understood and championed politics as a training ground for self-sacrifice in pursuit of an idea, one which would provide the individual with his reason for being, his freedom, and all his rights.

IV. In economics, Ephorist views naturally led to a semi-market economy in which the state applied guidance and selective support to promote the general interest. Private property and the profit motive were incentives to productivity. But the Ephorists only accepted the pursuit of private interests to the extent they did not conflict with the interests of the state. The Ephorist's economic program included a drive toward self-sufficiency, government support for key industries, and an early form of currency direction. These would be carried out to ensure the development of national industries that would drive forward progress and guard against a foreign program of economic coercion (in particularly, Anglo-German pursuits of market dominance in areas key to military power). They also called for the state to ensure access to the raw material inputs needed for prosperity and security, mainly by guarding the French overseas empire. While the economic program was clear with its rewards for the productive of society (the acceptance of the profit motive), it also addressed the otherwise unproductive. Ephorists believed that all could (and should) be contributors to the grand project of human advancement, and they rejected the growing demands for social support programs in the form of charity. Instead, they advocated for giving the unemployed work in public projects and providing them opportunities for military service either abroad in the French Empire or home. These proposals were often attacked by radical socialists as a return of the corvee.

V. Perhaps the most important tenet of Ephorism for the members of the Societe was the primacy of scientific development. The Ephorist program recognized science as the most important segment of societal activity. Science drove the prosperity and security of the nation forward. As such, it had benefits for the entire population, but its benefit was evenly distributed. As a result, the Ephorists concluded that the government should support and direct scientific research (they also followed the same reasoning to support large-scale state-backed infrastructure projects). They stressed, though, applied, rather than abstract research. They felt that the pace of scientific discovery was rapid and increasing and that economic-military-technological advantage would come from applying science to practical issues. Scientific advance therefore became the ideal for Ephorists, one that is a continuous and inexhaustible process of historical actualization. It represented a distinct and singular embodiment of a civilization's traditions which, far from withering as a dead memory of the past, assumes the form of a personality focused on the end towards which it strives.

VI. Last, Ephorist political thought had a dim view of the international political environment. While Ephorists believed in the good of advancing standards of living, they believed that states were perpetually in competition, as evinced by the emergent continental competition between France and Germany, and a strong military was a necessity to defend and advance the group interests (as cohered in the state). Ephorists extended Darwin's principals to the world community and believed that superior systems would outcompete inferior ones and inherit the bounty of the future.

The Society of the Friends of the Blacks (Société des amis des Noirs or Amis des noirs) was a French abolitionist society founded by Jacques Pierre Brissot and Étienne Clavière and directly inspired by the Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade founded in London in 1787. The society's aim was to abolish both the institution of slavery in the France's overseas colonies and French involvement in the Atlantic slave trade.

The society was founded in Paris on 19 February 1788, and remained active until autumn 1791. Clavière was elected as their first president. The secretary Brissot frequently received advice from British abolitionist Thomas Clarkson, who led the abolitionist movement in Great Britain. At the beginning of 1789, the Society had 141 members and held 81 sessions in total. During the three-year period that it remained active, the society published abolitionist literature and frequently addressed its concerns on a substantive political level in the Constituent Assembly. It had ceased being as active for at least a year when the first law to abolish slavery in France and all its colonies and territories came to pass in 1794.

In February 1794, the National Convention passed the Law of 4 February 1794, which effectively abolished slavery and the slave trade and gave the formerly enslaved equal rights. This decision was reversed by Napoleon, who moved to reinstate slavery in the French colonial empire, and unsuccessfully tried to regain control of Saint-Domingue through a massive expedition sent in 1801.

Brissot's archive passed to his son in 1793, and were purchased in 1829 by Francis de Montrol, who used them to edit the Mémoires de Brissot. A part was acquired in 1982 by the National Archives of France, the rest by private collectors. Several articles and monographs have explored the question of how influential the Society was in bringing about the abolition of slavery. Historians disagree about its influence, with some crediting the Amis des Noirs as instrumental in abolition, to others who say the Society was nothing more than a "société de pensée" (philosophical society).

The economy of France was dependent upon revenues from the colonies, which were slave societies based largely on production of sugar from cane plantations. The French economy thrived due to the lucrative triangle trade. Demand for sugar was high in Europe. Conditions on the sugar plantations on the islands of Saint-Domingue, Guadeloupe and Martinique, in the Caribbean, were so harsh that slave mortality was very high. This required steady importing of new slaves from Africa. In La Louisiane, in the southern United States, slavery was also the basis of the economy in the New Orleans and Mobile regions. Southern Louisiana had numerous sugar plantations.

Figures indicate that slave-trade activity alone during the years leading up to the French Revolution resulted in some profit percentages exceeding 100 percent. In 1784, for example, the outfitter Chaurands realized a profit of 110 percent through the use of a single ship, the Brune. In 1789, one outfitter reached 120 per cent profit on his voyages.

Jacques Pierre Brissot organized the Société des amis des Noirs in February 1788. A follower of the Philosophes, Brissot's anti-slavery efforts were also due to his exposure to humanitarian activities on both sides of the Atlantic. In the United States, where he visited Philadelphia 's constitutional convention following the American Revolution, he became absorbed by [Thomas Jefferson]'s humanitarian ideals as expressed in the Declaration of Independence. In Britain, Thomas Clarkson invited Brissot to attend a meeting of the Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade. So enthused was Brissot that shortly thereafter he founded an abolitionist society in Paris. Its objectives were to suppress the slave trade and, at a later date, to attain equal rights for free persons of color. This was a class, generally in the French colonies, of persons of mixed French and African ancestry, generally born to French colonial fathers and mothers of African descent (some of whom were also of mixed-race.) The French-born or French Creoles extended them some rights, although not full equality to those of "pure" French descent.

The Amis advocated freedom in the French colonies, arguing that the ideas of the Revolution should extend to the colonies. The French concept of liberté, égalité, fraternité did not include the liberation of slaves, because the National Assembly argued that such abolition would be detrimental to the economy. The Amis des Noirs pushed for the abolition of slavery, although Clarkson recommended they reduce their demands to abolish the Atlantic slave trade (which Great Britain and the United States did in 1808.)

Brissot decided at the outset that he would publish written works to influence the public and politicians. and this he did in profusion. The Society published French translations of British abolitionist literature, and also works written by Brissot ("Mémoire sur les Noirs de l'Amerique septentrionale"), written in the midst of the French Revolution. It also published work by other members of the Amis des Noirs, such as Étienne Clavière ("De la France et des États-Unis" – co-written with Brissot) and Condorcet ("Réflexions sur l'esclavage des nėgres"). Members gave lectures to other societies as well, such as the Amis de l'humanité, and the Société des Amis de la Constitution. It was a reflection of not only the "Philosophe upbringing" of the Society members, but also of their efforts to be active participants in the moulding of the revolutionary government.

La Société des Amis des Noirs was most active distributing its anti-slavery literature in and around Paris, due to the lack of a stable and reliable communications network, particularly as the French Revolution proceeded. The Society did make attempts to convey its message to those living outside Paris. For instance, in 1791, the society gained assistance from its Jacobin friends: "The Friends of the Blacks had several meetings with their friends in Jacobin clubs in provincial cities and sent to every city government a lengthy pamphlet exposing the injustices done to people of color."

The political activities of the Friends of the Blacks included addresses to the National Assembly, for instance, speeches promoting the abolition of the slave trade were made in February and April 1790. Another address was delivered a few months later. Four months later, a discourse was presented concerning the violence in Saint Domingue, which had broken out in a struggle for rights by free people of color and slaves. In July 1791, Clavière addressed the National Assembly's commercial interests, discussing trade relations between France and its colonies.

The Society also directly appealed to government individuals such as Antoine Barnave, a member of the Committee on Colonies, and Jacques Necker, France's Controller-General of Finance. Although Necker acknowledged that slavery was inhumane, he would not sanction emancipation in French colonies unless the practice of slavery and the slave trade were halted simultaneously in every country. He believed that this was needed to maintain the existing economic balance among nations. In a 1789 letter, the Society urged Necker to form a committee similar to the one in Britain, and expressed hopes that debates over slavery in the British Parliament might have a positive effect on abolitionist sentiment in the Estates-General. Other Society addresses denounced individuals in the colonies. One such incident occurred in 1791, when the Amis des Noirs responded to criticism written by pro-slaver Arthur Dillon, Député de la Martinique, and owner of a large plantation.

In 1789, the royal government had requested petitions of grievances from all parts of the country. During the election of representatives to the Estates-General, Condorcet asked for a demand for abolition of the slave trade to be included in these cahiers de doléances. Out of the 600 cahiers assembled, fewer than 50 called for an end to the slave trade and slavery.

Society member Abbé Grégoire recommended in the fall of 1789 that two deputies to the Assembly be chosen from the population of free people of color. This was accepted by the Committee on Verification of Credentials in the National Assembly. Gregoire's was unable to present his proposal to the National Assembly because every time he rose to speak, he was shouted down by the colonists (usually planters) in the Assembly. In March 1790, Grégoire questioned the article on voting rights in the National Assembly, urging that free men of colour be given the franchise. The colonial deputies persuaded the National Assembly to close discussion of the matter. During that same month Barnave, a pro-slavery advocate, delivered his report on maintaining the slave trade. When Mirabeau, a member of the Society, advanced to the rostrum to protest, he was drowned out by cries of the opposition.

Focusing on the rights of free men of colour, abbé Grégoire and Jerome Pétion warned the Assembly on 15 May 1791 that if these people were not given their rights, violence would ensue in the colonies. Because of the increasing conflict in the colonies, as well as the growing influence of free men of colour with some deputies, Barnave felt that the members of the Society could not be ignored: "We can't win against the influence of the Friends of the Blacks."

On 15 May the Assembly decreed that all men of colour would be granted equal rights if they were born of free parents. Further legislation passed on 4 April 1792 (with influence from La Société des Amis des Noirs), stated that every free man of colour now enjoyed equal rights.

The Committee on Colonies was formed in March 1790 to deal with escalating problems arising from slavery unrest in the colonies. Its resolution of the problem leaned heavily in favour of the colonists, and its membership generally had little sympathy for conditions of slaves. The members of the committee included colonial landowners (who were usually slaveholders), other slave owners, lawyers and merchants, and all were advocates of French commercial interests. The final report of the Committee did not alleviate any of the problems relating to slavery. It stressed that it did not wish to interfere in the commercial interests of the colonies: "The National Assembly declares that it had not intended to innovate in any branch of commerce direct or indirect of France with its colonies..."

A group of National Assembly deputies who were either colonists or slave trade merchants lobbied the French chambers of commerce and city governments to maintain the slave trade and slavery, proclaiming that economic disaster would result from its abolition. The deputies argued their point so effectively that members of La Société des Amis des Noirs feared abolition would cause chaos. One such pro-slavery group was composed of the lobbyists for the French chambers of commerce, who designated themselves as the "Deputies Extraordinary of Manufactures and Commerce." Their main efforts focused on influencing the Committee on Agriculture and Commerce to maintain slavery and the slave trade. Since revenue from the colonies was collected mainly from the sale of slaves and crops, the committee was investigating the economic ramifications should this source of income cease to exist. Historian Quinney wrote in 1970 that Barnave's non-committal report to the National Assembly resulted from him learning that the Committee on Agriculture and Commerce "had already decided to advise the National Assembly to retain the trade and slavery."

A pro-slavery organization called the Massiac Club, headquartered in Paris, was composed of colonial planters living in Paris and throughout France. The club had its main headquarters in Paris, with chapters located in the provinces. Realizing that success was related to political influence, the club proceeded to systematically contact government officials.

The Massiac members opposed any type of abolition legislation, and communicated with each colonial deputy to ensure that pro-slavery interests were maintained. Mirabeau stated that when he attempted to sway the deputies in favour of abolition, every official he spoke to had already been approached by a member of the Massiac club. The Massiac group published and distributed literature, responding in toto to practically every idea the Amis des Noirs had put forward.

In a leaflet distributed to members of the Comité de Commerce de l'Assemblée Nationale, the Massiac accused the Amis des Noirs of being involved in subversive activity. The Massiac Club published a handbill that said the abolitionists were not truly humanitarian philanthropists, but rather an organization attempting to subvert social order. They claimed the Amis des Noirs should be viewed as counter-revolutionaries, and pro-British. The pro-slavers also distributed leaflets specifically denouncing individuals: Brissot, Grégoire and Pétion. They supported the slave trade in debates held in district assemblies within Paris, and attempted to influence voting in these districts when the question of the slave trade was introduced.

Historians have concluded that the Society was virtually impotent due to its organization, strategy, and membership criteria. In terms of organization, Quinney refers to the group's ineffective operations, stating that the government, which contained pro-slavery elements, had a nationwide propaganda network, while the Society was mainly Paris-based. Resnick concurs when he states: "Both leadership and membership at large were drawn heavily from the Paris area, with no established network of regional filiations."

In addition, they held meetings irregularly, without full membership present. Even in 1789, Thomas Clarkson commented upon the poor attendance at the meetings. The lack of organization and continuity was shown by the departure of Brissot in June 1789 for the United States to meet abolitionists, although he had organized the Society's first meeting in February 1789. He did not become active in the Society until the spring of 1790, when he again became the Society's president. The Society required presidents to serve only three months; they shared responsibility, but the short tenure hindered continuity of effort within the organization. The Society decided that a "General Assembly" would be elected from within. This body would not only represent the Society and make the rules, but would also hold exclusive voting rights in the election of the officials. Hence, from the organization's inception, rank and file membership were excluded from participating in the Society's operations.

Analysis of the membership list of the Society reveals a predominance of elite individuals. Although they possessed great influence, they had most of their power in Paris. There was a lack of popular participation, which reflected the structure of government and society. The founding members of the Society included such notables as Brissot, Condorcet, Lafayette, Louis Alexandre of La Rochefoucauld (1743–1792) 6th Duke of La Rochefoucauld, and Clavière. The Society began with a handful of abolitionists, increased to ninety-five by 1789, and would swell to a maximum of 141 associates in later years.

Of the 141 members, twenty-five percent were government employees, twenty-nine percent were nobility, and thirty-eight were professionals; the total of elitist membership made up 92% of all members. Cohen observed: "It [the Society]... concentrated on having important, well-connected members, rather than large members... The members [were] drawn from the French social elite... "

The Society restricted members to those who could pay dues and be recommended by four other men. There were different fee scales: two Louis per year for those who lived in Paris, and 24 livres per year for those living in the provinces. The membership practices of La Société des Amis des Noirs both hampered its attempt at increasing in size, and affected its ability to become a credible and effective entity.

Perroud states that Brissot's trip to London in November 1787 prompted him to form a similar abolitionist group in France. The British society had been formed only a few months earlier, in May 1787. A group of abolitionists in Paris discussed how the London society encouraged others to join its cause, and noted that France and Britain had a commonality with respect to abolishing slavery.

The Society translated and published British anti-slavery literature. Brissot, shortly after founding the Society, wrote to Quaker James Philips, an original member of the British abolitionist society. Brissot stated his intention for the Amis des Noirs to translate and publish British anti-slavery works for distribution to the French public.

Many French citizens believed that the Society was an offshoot of the British abolitionist movement, and some suspected the British were paying them to promote their cause. This resulted in a loss of credibility in the eyes of the French public. Britain and France had historically been antagonistic towards each other for decades. Britain had defeated France in the Seven Years' War and taken over much of its territory in North America. Influences from Britain were seen as "dealing with the enemy." This view extended to encompass the activities of the Society. The perception that it was a vehicle for British infiltration into French matters overshadowed its intentions.

The Society was rendered inactive by the outbreak of the Haitian Revolution, begun as a slave rebellion, as well as by the major crisis of the First French Republic (with the start of the French Revolutionary Wars). It remained active until 1793, publishing its calls in papers such as Patriote français, L'Analyse des papiers anglais, Le Courrier de Provence, and La chronique de Paris.

On 4 February 1794 (16 Pluviôse an II), approximately a year after the demise of the Amis des Noirs, the National Convention passed the Emancipation Declaration, abolishing slavery:

Liste des membres de la Société des Amis des Noirs till 11 June 1790.

It is unlikely Robespierre joined the society between June 1790 and September 1791. He quarreled with Pétion, the Lameths and Brissot in 1792 and they became his enemies. He sent Brissot to the scaffold in November 1793; Saint-George was imprisoned in December 1793. De Gouges was executed and Clavière, de Loménie, Condorcet and Pétion all committed suicide.

The Society of the Friends of Truth (French: Amis de la Verité), also known as the Social Club (French: Cercle social), was a French revolutionary organization founded in 1790. It was "a mixture of revolutionary political club, the Masonic Lodge, and a literary salon". It also published an influential revolutionary newspaper, the Mouth of Iron.

The Society of the Friends of Truth was established in early 1790 by Nicholas Bonneville, Claude Fauchet along with Condorcet and Lanthenas. The original purpose of the club was to become a "clearing-house" for correspondence between and among scholars from all over Europe. In the spirit of its founders, the club wished to cultivate a "public mandate" under which its activities would be governed. Thus, its newsletter, Mouth of Iron (La Bouche de fer), solicited letters from readers to comment on political affairs and to issue denunciations of counter-revolutionary plots.

The club was actually launched in the month of October 1790, when the sessions "of the Universal Confederation of the Friends of Truth" at the Cirque du Palais-Royal started. Before an audience that ranged from five thousand to eight thousand people every week, Claude Fauchet, self-appointed "attorney of Truth", lectured on Jean-Jacques Rousseau 's 1762 work The Social Contract. The club also formulated political theories on democratic government, ultimately dismissing direct democracy in favor of a system that resembled a popularly elected dictatorship that could be dismissed by the citizens whenever its actions became insupportable. The Social Club also advocated steps toward a more equitable distribution of wealth, always with an eye to Rousseau's ideals, but the club did not support land reform.

The meetings were described in detail in the "Mouth of Iron", which published the proceedings of the Fauchet lectures and discussions and the mail that arrived following them. This publication is important for understanding the genesis of democratic ideas during the French Revolution. The Social Club was also the first revolutionary group to identify itself clearly as a cosmopolitan organization, meaning that its aims superseded national boundaries. It made appeals to scholars worldwide, and it produced a polyglot edition of the 1791 Constitution for distribution globally. Its goal was to create a universal republic led by scholars.

Key figures attending the Social Club included Nicholas Bonneville and Claude Fauchet, as well as Sylvain Maréchal, "Gracchus" Babeuf, Goupil de Préfeln, Camille Desmoulins, Bertrand Barère, and the Marquis de Condorcet. About one-hundred-thirty persons were members and attended meetings regularly.

The meetings were public because the club wanted to show the widest possible audience what discourse in the atmosphere of a literary or philosophical salon might accomplish. (This explains the choice of the Cirque du Palais-Royal as a meeting-place, rather than some smaller venue like a private home.) Spectators were invited to ask questions, and a resolution was passed at the end of each session.

In 1791, the membership of the Social Club openly declared themselves republicans. It then became a meeting place for the Girondists, who would rival more radical Jacobin factions for primacy of republican ideology and action. The club's political orientation was liberal, and it promoted the ideal of a society composed of small and medium economic producers: craftsmen, farmers, merchants, and entrepreneurs.

The members of the Social Club also considered themselves contemporary feminists, and while no remarkable feminist change would come out of the club, the members of the club helped individually to develop the framework for what would become the Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen. Olympe de Gouges, the author of the Declaration of the Rights of Woman, was a member of the club and would often develop her ideas through the liberal conduit of the Social Club. While the members did proclaim themselves supporters of republican ideals publicly, their embrace of feminist ideals was regarded as much more treasonous (and as such, was quite under wraps).

From 1791 on, the club's offices operated a publishing business. It became a center for the dissemination of revolutionary literature, including numerous newspapers, political pamphlets, theatrical works, poetry, posters, etc. A number of seminal authors, Louis-Sébastien Mercier, Nicolas-Edme Rétif de la Bretonne, Bernardin de Saint-Pierre, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, Condorcet, Jacques Pierre Brissot, John Skey Eustace and Jean-Marie Roland, were published under the club's auspices.

After the fall of the Girondins, the club dissolved. Fauchet was arrested and executed on 31 October 1793. Bonneville, the printer, resumed activity after 9 Thermidor (27 July 1794). His press tried to resurrect the Social Club, but it never regained its previous audience. In a fragmented state, it continued to exist until Brumaire of year VIII (November 1800). By then, ideologues like Daunou, Volney, Daubenton, and Berthollet held center stage.

The Amis de la Verité was fondly remembered, and it became a touchstone for the romantics of the nineteenth century, like Charles Nodier and Victor Hugo, but it was also highly esteemed among politicians and social theorists such as Charles Fourier, Saint-Simon, and Karl Marx.

The revolutionary movement which began in 1789 in the Cercle Social, which in the middle of its course had as its chief representatives Leclerc and Roux, and which finally with Babeuf’s conspiracy was temporarily defeated, gave rise to the communist idea which Babeuf’s friend Buonarroti re-introduced in France after the Revolution of 1830. This idea, consistently developed, is the idea of the new world order. — Karl Marx, The Holy Family (German: Die heilige Familie).

La Bouche de fer, the Mouth of Iron, may have derived its name, sardonically, from Lucius Licinius Crassus 's observation about the consul, Domitius, "that it was no wonder that a man who had a beard of brass, also had a mouth of iron and a heart of lead." Others hold that the name comes from a mailbox in the shape of a lion's mouth, located at the headquarters of the club, at No. 4, rue du Théâtre-Français, where letters, petitions, proposals, denunciations, screeds, and other treatises could be deposited. A third theory is that this name, Mouth of Iron, was the same name as a lodge of freemasons to which Bonneville and Fauchet had once belonged.

In any case, the Mouth of Iron was published in Paris between October 1790 and 28 July 1791, at first, three times per week, then daily, beginning on 22 June 1791. The newsletter contained comments on "The Social Contract" of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, essays by Claude Fauchet, transcripts of speeches by Condorcet, petitions from the Club of the Cordeliers, etc. A subscription cost thirty-six pounds (livres) per year, and anyone who subscribed was automatically made a member of the Social Club; so, since casual readers and curiosity-seekers were counted as members, the size of the club's membership was probably somewhat overstated.

La Bouche de fer was the origin of the famous quote, often attributed to Denis Diderot : "Quand le dernier des rois sera pendu avec les boyaux du dernier prêtre célibataire, le genre humain pourra espérer être heureux." ("When the last king is hanged with the entrails of the last celibate priest, mankind may hope to be happy.")

The Société d'étude du XVIIe is a French learned society established in Paris in 1948 along the status of an association loi de 1901 in order to bring together specialists (historians, literary historians, art historians...) of this period and to develop studies on this century.

The society was established in 1948 by Georges Mongrédien, Monseigneur Marius-Henri Guervin and E. Houdart de La Motte.

Each year since 1984 the Society bestows a prize for the most significant work of the previous year, covering the seventeenth and which may be an audiovisual work.

Four times a year since 1949, the Society publishes the journal XVIIe ISSN 0012-4273, the main scientific journal on the 17th century, in an interdisciplinary setting. Since 2001, summaries, abstracts and articles have been available online.

It is considered a review of rank A by the ERIH (European Reference Index for Humanities).

The Société de Géographie (French: [ sɔsjete də ʒeɔgʁafi ] ; lit. ' "Geography Society" '), is the world's oldest geographical society. It was founded in 1821 as the first Geographic Society. Since 1878, its headquarters have been at 184 Boulevard Saint-Germain, Paris. The entrance is marked by two gigantic caryatids representing Land and Sea. It was here, in 1879, that the construction of the Panama Canal was decided. The society has been publishing the journal La Géographie since 1822.

The Geographical Society was founded at a meeting on 15 December 1821 in the Paris Hôtel de Ville. Among its 217 founders were some of the greatest scientific names of the time, including Pierre-Simon Laplace (the Society's first president), Georges Cuvier, Charles Pierre Chapsal, Vivant Denon, Joseph Fourier, Gay-Lussac, Claude Louis Berthollet, Alexander von Humboldt, Champollion, and François-René de Chateaubriand. Most of the men who had accompanied Bonaparte in his Egyptian expedition were members: Edme-François Jomard, Conrad Malte-Brun, Jules Dumont d'Urville, Jules Paul Benjamin Delessert, Hottinguer, Henri Didot, Bottin and others such as Jean-Baptiste Benoît Eyriès.

Although the Society rarely funded scientific travel, by issuing instructions to voyagers, encouraging research through competitions, and publishing the results of their work, it served in its early years as "an important institutional support" for the study of Mesoamerica. Two members in the "active core" of the society played central roles in this regard: Jomard and the Irish exile and former United States consul David Ballie Warden. Their terms for a competition for the best new work on "American antiquities", including maps "constructed according to exact methods" and "observations on the mores and customs of the indigenous peoples, and vocabularies of the ancient languages." extended decades-old scientific practices to a new field of anthropological inquiry.

The society was to be associated in time with the greatest French and foreign explorers from René Caillié, the first European to return alive from the town of Timbuktu, to the underwater explorer Jacques Cousteau, and leading geographers, among them Vidal de la Blache, founder of the French School of Geopolitics.

In 1879, under the leadership of Ferdinand de Lesseps, the Society hosted an international congress on the questioning of an Interocéanique canal across Central America, the findings of which led to the initial efforts to construct the Panama Canal.

The Society was the location of the Arab Congress of 1913, which took place from June 18 to June 23 of that year and marked the confluence of events surrounding the decline of the Ottoman Empire, the beginnings of Arab nationalism, and the early Arab reaction to Zionist immigration to Palestine.

The Society's revue has appeared monthly since 1822, as Bulletin de la Société de Géographie (1822–1899) – offering in octavo format early news of all the discoveries of the nineteenth century – or quarterly, as La Géographie, with a break from 1940 until 1946. Since 1947 the Society's magazine has appeared three times a year, as Acta Geographica.

The Grande Médaille d'Or des Explorations et Voyages de Découverte (Great Gold Medal of Exploration and Journeys of Discovery) has been awarded since 1829 for journeys whose outcomes have enhanced geographical knowledge. Notable recipients have been John Franklin (1829), John Ross (1834), David Livingstone (1857), Ernest Shackleton (1910) and Roald Amundsen (1913).

The Société de Géographie Peninsula in Kerguelen was named in honor of this institution.

The Société des Antiquaires de France (Society of Antiquaries of France) is a Parisian historical and archaeological society, founded in 1804 under the name of the Académie celtique (Celtic Academy). It is now based at the Louvre, in the pavillon Mollien.

The Académie celtique was founded by prefect Jacques Cambry, Jacques-Antoine Dulaure and Jacques Le Brigant on 9 germinal Year XII (30 March 1804), with the goal of studying Gallic civilization and French history and archaeology. Cambry was its first president, until his death in 1807. In 1813 it changed its name to the Société des Antiquaires de France, after the Society of Antiquaries of London, and from 1814 to 1848 it changed again to the Société royale des antiquaires de France under the Bourbon Restoration. According to the regime in France, it was then called the Société impériale des antiquaires de France or Société nationale des antiquaires de France, but it re-assumed its present name in 1871, and has not changed it since.

Since its foundation it has published a collection of Mémoires, and of Bulletins, as well as an annual directory of its members.

The site of the Société nationale des Antiquaires de France publishes prosopographical records of its members among which are:

The Société du bout du banc (French pronunciation: [ sɔsjete dy bu dy bɑ̃ ]), hosted by Jeanne Quinault, was one of the most famous literary salons of the 18th century in France.

Miss Quinault gave dinners at home, rue Sainte-Anne and later rue d'Anjou in Paris, where the best nobility was put on the same footing as poets and artists.

These dinners were held on Mondays, inviting members of French high society including Maurepas, Honoré-Armand de Villars, the Duke of Lauragais, the duke of Orléans, the Grand Prieur d’Orléans, the marquis de Livry, Antoine de Ferriol de Pont-de-Veyle – and hommes and femmes de lettres such as Caylus, Duclos, Voltaire, Piron, D'Alembert, Voisenon, Rousseau, Grimm, Diderot, Lagrange-Chancel, Collé, Moncrif, Grimod de La Reynière, Crébillon fils, Marivaux, Saint-Lambert, Fagan de Lugny, l’ abbé de La Marre, the chevalier Louis Caron-Destouches, Pierre-Thomas-Nicolas Hurtaut, Françoise de Graffigny...

Ultimately, the company became so numerous that the dinners had to stand out. Philosophers expelled the poets, gaiety vanished, and the company was dissolved.

Société Générale S.A. (French: [ sɔsjete ʒeneʁal ]), colloquially known in English-speaking countries as SocGen (pronounced [ sɔk ʒɛn ]), is a French multinational universal bank and financial services company founded in 1864. It is registered in downtown Paris and headquartered nearby in La Défense.

Société Générale is France's third largest bank by total assets after BNP Paribas and Crédit Agricole. According to S&P Global 's April 2026 report, it is Europe's seventh largest bank by assets, with $1.813 trillion in assets. It is considered to be a systemically important bank by the Financial Stability Board. It has been designated as a Significant Institution since the entry into force of European Banking Supervision in late 2014, and as a consequence is directly supervised by the European Central Bank.

From 1966 to 2003 it was known as one of the Trois Vieilles ("Old Three") major French commercial banks, along with Banque Nationale de Paris (from 2000 BNP Paribas) and Crédit Lyonnais.

The bank was founded by a group of industrialists and financiers during the Second Empire on 4 May 1864. Its full name was Société Générale pour favoriser le développement du commerce et de l'industrie en France ("General Company to Support the Development of Commerce and Industry in France"). The bank's first chairman was the prominent industrialist Eugène Schneider, followed by Edward Charles Blount. By 1870, the bank had 47 branches throughout France, including 15 in Paris. It set up a permanent office in London in 1871.

At the beginning, the bank used its own resources almost entirely for both financial and banking operations. In 1871, Société Générale moved into the public French issues market with a national debenture loan launched to cover the war indemnity stipulated in the Treaty of Frankfurt.

The bank was financially involved with some of the businesses created by Paulin Talabot, the railway and canal engineer. Talabot came to have an influential role in the bank.

In 1886, Société Générale was part of the bank consortium (along with the Franco-Egyptian Bank and the Crédit Industriel et Commercial) that financed the construction of the Eiffel Tower.

From 1871 to 1893, France went through a period of economic gloom marked by the failure of several banking establishments. The company continued to grow at a more moderate pace. In 1889, there were 148 banking outlets, demonstrating the group's capacity to withstand unfavourable economic conditions.

Starting in 1894, the bank set up the structures characterising a large, modern credit institution. As well as collecting company and private deposits, its branches started to provide short-term operating credits for industrialists and traders. It also moved into placing shares with the general public, issuing private debenture loans in France and also in Russia. Acquisition of equity stakes became a more secondary activity. The company's excellent financial health allowed it to expand its shareholding structure. In 1895, Société Générale had 14,000 shareholders.

In 1898, Société Générale entered the Belgian market. Because the Société Générale de Belgique predated its French namesake and had a dominant position in the national market, Société Générale agreed to create a bank with a different name, the Société Française de Banque et de Dépôts headquartered in Paris but entirely dedicated to operations in Belgium. The bank had its Brussels office from 1898 in the prestigious Hôtel de Ligne [ fr ] on Rue Royale, and also maintained a branch in Antwerp, at No.72-76 of Meir.

On 21 December 1911, the illegalist anarchist Bonnot Gang attacked Ernest Caby, a Société Générale courier responsible for transporting daily funds to the rue Ordener agency in Paris. In search of money, Raymond Callemin and Octave Garnier shot him down, stole the money he was carrying, and then fled with Jules Bonnot in a stolen luxury car. This attack, known as the Ordener attack, was the gang's first robbery and the first motorized bank heist in history.

By 1913, Société Générale had 122,000 shareholders. The war years were difficult and had serious consequences with the loss of Russian business. However, during the 1920s Société Générale became France's leading bank: its network had grown sharply since the 1890s, with a huge number of branches and seasonal offices allowing in-depth penetration of the provincial market (260 seasonal offices in 1910 and 864 in 1930).

The number of sales outlets rose from 1,005 in 1913 to 1,457 in 1933 (including those operated by the minority-held Société Générale Alsacienne de Banque). Thanks also to the dynamism of supervisory and management staff at head office and in the branch offices it moved ahead of Crédit Lyonnais (in terms of deposits collected and loans distributed) between 1921 and 1928. To satisfy the requirements of investing companies, Société Générale created a subsidiary, Calif, specialised in medium-term credit in 1928.

On an international level, the bank held an active participation in the Russo-Asian Bank, one of the leading bank of the Russian empire. Société Générale first settled in Russia through the Severnyi bank in 1901, before merging with the Russo-Asian bank in 1910, which held a majority stake in the Chinese Eastern Railway. It also invested in Russian industry including such companies as the Rutchenko Coal Company and the Makeevka Steel Company. Thanks to the connections of Talabot they were also involved in the Krivoi-Rog Iron Company.

The 1930s were another difficult period. Given the decline in international and French business, the bank was forced to nationalise its network by closing down local branches. On the eve of World War II, the number of sales outlets was not much greater than in 1922. However, Société Générale was active in placing numerous public loans launched during this period by the State or the colonies. The war and the German Occupation interrupted its advance, but the bank moved into Africa and the United States.

Société Générale was nationalised in 1945. It now had a single shareholder: the State. The period from 1945 to 1958 was characterised in France by rapid economic recovery but also a greater disequilibrium in the balance of payments, calling for continued exchange controls and virtually permanent credit control measures. It was not until 1959 that the economy really recovered, but credit controls were reinforced due to persistent inflationary pressures. Sharp growth in production and foreign trade opened up new areas of business for the banks.

The industry underwent some quite radical changes, one of the most striking of which was much greater specialisation of credit. The range of banking services on offer expanded uninterruptedly. Thanks to its presence in New York City, Société Générale was able to take advantage of the flow of business generated by the Marshall Plan.

Société Générale continued to expand in France and beyond. It moved into Italy and Mexico and altered the status of its establishments in Africa after decolonisation, in accordance with the laws passed by these newly independent countries.

From the mid-1960s, Société Générale gave new impetus to its French network, with an acceleration in growth after 1966 following elimination of prior authorisation for opening branch offices. International expansion was just as vigorous. It was no longer limited, as before, to the main financial centres (London, New York), neighbouring countries (Belgium, Spain) and the former colonies, with the primary aim of facilitating the business of French firms, but was also aimed at guaranteeing the bank's presence where new markets were developing, either to export the technical expertise it had acquired in certain fields, or to keep up its contact with the multi-nationals.

1966 and 1967 represented a fundamental turning point in banking regulations, the main development being attenuation of the distinction between deposit and investment banking, and creation of the home mortgage market. Société Générale took advantage of this and acquired leading positions in some new financing techniques designed primarily for companies, such as finance leasing, setting up specialised credit subsidiaries for this purpose.

The 1970s were characterised by two major developments: expansion of the international network and across-the-board introduction of IT facilities to cope with extension of the customer base and the development of deposit money. In 1971, the appearance of automatic cash machines crowned the success and development of the credit card. In 1973, Société Générale opened its representative office in the Soviet Union.

In 1976, during the Bastille Day holiday, a meticulously planned robbery was carried out against Société Générale's most heavily fortified vault in France by ex-paratrooper and wedding photographer Albert Spaggiari. The robbery which involved secretly tunneling underground and compromising the walls of the bank vault netted Spaggiari over 12 million in cash, jewellery, and bullion.

From the beginning of the 1980s, against a backdrop of deregulation and technological change, internationalisation of the markets and the emergence of new financial instruments, Société Générale set itself two commercial objectives. It focused increasingly on private customers via its network of branches and by acquiring specialised subsidiaries. It pursued and expanded its activities in the capital markets in France, and then, on a selective basis, in the different international financial centres. On 29 July 1987 Société Générale was privatised. It had been chosen from among the three leading French commercial banks nationalised in 1945 for its excellent risk-coverage, equity and productivity ratios. George Soros was a share-holder in 1988.

In 1986, Société Générale created Fimat International Banque S.A., a global brokerage, offering a range of clearing and execution services on listed or OTC derivatives and cash products. In 2005, Fimat completed the acquisition of Cube Financial. In January 2008, it merged with Calyon Financial to form Newedge ; in 2014, SG purchased Credit Agricole's stake.

In subsequent years, the Société Générale Group has focused on developing its activities around three core businesses through a combination of organic growth and acquisitions.

In the early 1990s, the Senegalese subsidiary of Société Générale teamed up with the Swiss processed-foods manufacturer Nestlé to illegally dispossess the real estate assets of the Industrial Company of Dairy Products (SIPL), thus leading the dairy company to bankruptcy.

Retail Banking was strengthened in 1997 through the acquisition of Crédit du Nord, highlighting the Group's determination to capitalise on the restructuring of the French banking system. At the same time, Société Générale looked to secure the long-term loyalty of its customers (launch of "one account number for life" and introduction of Jazz, a package of service offers). In 1999 it entered into a merger agreement with rival bank Paribas, but this was scuppered by a competitor, the Banque Nationale de Paris (BNP).

In 1998 Société Générale paid $540 million in cash to acquire Cowen & Company, a New York investment bank that specialized in the health care, technology and communications industries. Cowen was taken over by the Societe Generale Securities Corporation, the French bank's New York investment bank, and renamed the SG Cowen Securities Corporation. Joseph M. Cohen, Cowen's chief executive became its chairman, and Curtis R. Welling, an investment banker from Societe Generale's New York office became president and chief executive.

In 1998, Société Générale set up Retail Banking outside France as a separate division, underscoring the Group's resolve to make this business one of its strategic development axes. This activity was also strengthened in 1999 through the acquisitions made in Romania (BRD – Groupe Société Générale), Bulgaria (Société Générale Expresbank) and Madagascar.

In the early years of the 21st century, Société Générale's external growth strategy has been manifested through acquisitions in Central Europe (Komerční Banka in the Czech Republic and SKB Banka [ sl ] in Slovenia) in 2001. Investment banking at Societe Generale in Russia was run by Jacques Der Megreditchian until 2000 At that time, Société Générale became officially concerned with money laundering scandal and underground economy.

In 2001, Société Générale acquired a controlling interest in the TCW Group. The TCW Group, which was founded in 1971, was originally known as Trust Company of the West and is the parent of TCW/Crescent Mezzanine one of the leading mezzanine capital firms in the US. The TCW Group operated as a subsidiary of Société Générale Asset Management until it was sold to Carlyle Group.

Africa is also a major area of interest for the bank, with the 2002 purchase of 44,42 % of Eqdom in Morocco (the market leader in consumer lending) and Union Internationale de Banques [ fr ] in Tunisia. In addition, 51 percent of SSB Bank in Ghana in 2003 and 50 percent of Geniki Bank in Greece in 2004 were acquired. In terms of specialized financial services, a department created in mid-2001, the purchase of two Deutsche Bank subsidiaries, ALD Automotive for multi-brand auto leasing and financing and GEFA for corporate sales financing enabled Société Générale to increase its European presence in these sectors. In 2002, it continued to pursue its external growth strategy by purchasing Hertz Lease, a European subsidiary specializing in long-term leasing and fleet management for Ford Motor Company vehicles.

With a track record as leader in France for financial savings products (mutual funds, investment funds, company savings plans), the Group has developed its Asset Management and Private Banking activities: in 1999, its subsidiary, Société Générale Asset Management, pursued the strategy of developing both its mutual fund management business in France and its activities aimed at major institutional investors at an international level. With the launch of Société Générale AM UK in London and the acquisition of Yamaichi in Japan, Société Générale Asset Management has taken a decisive step in establishing its international presence and is now able to offer its customers truly global fund management capabilities. Société Générale also has a worldwide presence in private banking activities. After pursuing a deliberate policy of acquisitions in 1998, Société Générale Private Banking consolidated and developed its franchise in 1999 against a backdrop of intense competition.

During the 1st quarter 2004, the third branch of activity of the Société Générale Group, GIMS Global Investment Management and Services was created. In February 2004, Société Générale set up a new division named SG GSSI, Global Securities Services for Investors, which provides investor services on securities and derivatives, attached to the GIMS which regroups SG Asset Management, SG Private Banking and SG Global Securities Services for Investors. GIMS employed 7,600 people.

In 2005, the Société Générale acquired DeltaCredit, the largest mortgage bank in Russia, from The U.S. Russia Investment Fund for $100 million.

The Société Générale developed its Corporate and Investment Banking businesses under the SG CIB brand name, introduced in 1998, which as of 2014, is subsumed by SG SS. Société Générale was looking to develop its M&A, advisory and IPO activities through the acquisition of specialized firms (SG Hambros in the United Kingdom, Barr Devlin in the United States).

Following two years of crisis resulting from the revelation of the Kerviel fraud and then from the eruption of the 2008 financial crisis, the bank appeared to have put things behind it in 2010.

In business terms, Société Générale appeared intent on moving on and implementing an in-depth transformation in 2010. On 15 June, the Bank presented its Ambition SG 2015 programme to investors, the aim of this programme being to "deliver growth with lower risk" by 2015, using the lessons learned from the crisis.

In 2010, the company saw an upturn in its financial results. Over the first half, the Group recorded net income of €2.15 billion. These good figures were presented shortly after the publication of the results of the stress tests of 91 European banks, results that confirmed the financial solidity of the main four French banks, including Société Générale.

During the summer of 2011, the financial markets, fearing the collapse of the eurozone associated with the European sovereign debt crisis, were severely shaken. European and French bank shares recorded substantial falls. It was within this context that Britain's Mail on Sunday published, on Sunday 7 August, an article in which it announced Société Générale's imminent bankruptcy. The newspaper quickly published a retraction and its apologies but, despite that, the rumour gathered pace, notably on social networks, resulting in a spectacular fall in Société Générale's share price and in bearish speculation. Société Générale successfully filed a suit in the UK against Associated Newspapers (the Mail on Sunday' s parent company) for "substantial damage to its reputation and prejudice to its trade".

Bearish pressure, influenced by speculation but also by investor suspicion, continued to affect Société Générale's share price through to the end of 2011. For example, on the single day of August 10, 2011, Société Générale saw its share price lose 22%.

In June 2020, Société Générale reacquired the bank Shine.

In August 2020, it was reported that Société Générale experienced a €1.26 billion loss during the second fiscal quarter of 2020. It was the bank's weakest quarterly performance since 2008's Kerviel Fraud. As a result of this, Séverin Cabannes, the bank's global banking and investor solutions business head, is set to retire in 2021 and leave his place by the end of this year. Additionally, Philippe Heim, who serves as the head of international retail banking, financial services, and insurance, will also vacate his position as deputy chief executive immediately. In December 2013, the European Commission fined the bank close to 446 million Euro for its role in the LIBOR scandal regarding interest rate derivatives..In April 2016, the fine was reduced to approximately €228 million.

In December 2021, Amundi finalized its acquisition of Lyxor Asset Management from Société Générale. Lyxor was an investment company based in France, and a wholly owned subsidiary of Société Générale. It offered exchanged-traded index funds and other ETFs, exchanged-traded notes (ETN), and several other products to private and corporate investors.

In April 2022, Société Générale became the first major financial group to leave Russian market because of International sanctions during the Russo-Ukrainian War.

In May 2022, Société Générale announced the closing of the sale of Rosbank and the Group's Russian insurance subsidiaries to Interros Capital. This transaction results for Société Générale in a net loss of around 3.2 billion euros and has an impact of about -7 basis points on its capital ratio.

In March 2025, Alexis Kohler, President Emmanuel Macron 's chief of staff, was appointed as executive vice president of Société Générale, effective June 2025. Kohler will oversee M&A, equity capital markets, and acquisition finance activities, and will assist CEO Slawomir Krupa in implementing the bank's transformation programs. On April 10, 2025, Société Générale named William Connelly as its next Chairman, set to take over in May 2026.

Société Générale is a universal bank. The Group consists of three main pillars backed by two business lines. Société Générale is often nicknamed SocGen (pronounced "sock jenn") in the international financial world.

In 2013, Société Générale announced the implementation of a model based on three pillars:

The development of these three pillars is backed by two other core activities, namely:

Société Générale's head office is in the Tours Société Générale in the business district of La Défense in the city of Nanterre, west of Paris. The company moved there in June 1995 from its former head office [ fr ] along Boulevard Haussmann in the 9th arrondissement of Paris. The head office has 7,000 employees. The former head office remains as the company's registered office.

In 2015, Standard Ethics Aei has given a rating to Société Générale in order to include it in its Standard Ethics French Index.

The Group has a long-term active and generally very discreet support policy. Its sponsorship of rugby is well-known, but its support in other fields such as music, contemporary art, disabled sport (as an official partner of the Fédération Française Handisport, the French Federation for Disabled Sports) and corporate citizenship, professional integration and disadvantaged children, is less known.

In the early 1990s, the Senegalese subsidiary of Société Générale teamed up with the Swiss processed-foods manufacturer Nestlé to illegally dispossess the real estate assets of the Industrial Company of Dairy Products (SIPL), thus leading the dairy company to bankruptcy.

On 24 January 2008 the bank announced that a single futures trader at the bank had fraudulently lost the bank €4.9 billion (an equivalent of US$7.2 billion), the largest such loss in history. The company did not name the trader, but other sources identified him as Jérôme Kerviel, a relatively junior futures trader who allegedly orchestrated a series of bogus transactions that spiraled out of control amid turbulent markets in 2007 and early 2008.

Partly due to the loss, that same day two credit rating agencies reduced the bank's long term debt ratings: from AA to AA− by Fitch; and from Aa1/B to Aa2/B− by Moody's (B and B− indicate the bank's financial strength ratings).

Executives said the trader acted alone and that he may not have benefited directly from the fraudulent deals. The bank announced it will be immediately seeking €5.5 billion in financing. On the eve and afternoon of 25 January 2008, Police raided the Paris headquarters of Société Générale and Kerviel's apartment in the western suburb of Neuilly, to seize his computer files. French presidential aide Raymond Soubie stated that Kerviel dealt with $73.3 billion (more than the bank's market capitalization of $52.6 billion). Three union officials of Société Générale employees said Kerviel had family problems. On 26 January 2008 the Paris prosecutors' office stated that Jerome Kerviel, 31, in Paris, "is not on the run. He will be questioned at the appropriate time, as soon as the police have analysed documents provided by Société Générale." Spiegel Online stated that Kerviel may have lost 2.8 billion dollars on 140,000 contracts earlier negotiated due to DAX falling 600 points.

Société Générale SA says it had a net loss in the fourth quarter of 2007 after the French bank took a €4.9 billion ($7.18 billion) hit closing the unauthorized trading positions of Jérôme Kerviel.

The trial of Jérôme Kerviel began on 8 June 2010 at the Paris Palais de Justice, and lasted until 25 June. Société Générale filed the civil suit. The former Société Générale trader was represented by Olivier Metzner, and the Bank was represented by Jean Veil, Jean Reinhart and François Martineau. The trial aroused much media interest, with a record number of requests for accreditation from journalists. Following more than two weeks of highly technical debate with much focus on Jérôme Kerviel's character, the State Prosecutor called for the former trader to be given a five-year prison sentence, two of them suspended, whilst Kerviel's lawyer called for his client to be acquitted. The ruling was announced on 5 October 2010 at 11 am. Jérôme Kerviel was found guilty of the three charges filed against him: breach of trust, fraudulent inputting of data into an IT system and forgery and use of forged documents. He was found to be solely responsible for the record loss suffered by Société Générale in early 2008, and was sentenced to five years in prison, with two of those years suspended, and ordered to pay damages of €4.9 billion to the Bank.

Jérôme Kerviel immediately launched an appeal on the basis of an "unreasonable decision", according to his lawyer Olivier Metzner. Kerviel's sentence has therefore been suspended until the appeal, which is due to take place between 4 and 28 June 2012, and he is presumed innocent until that time. The huge amount of damages Kerviel was ordered to pay gave rise to much emotion amongst the general public and online. The sentencing of one man to pay such a large sum of money was met with incomprehension and anger amongst Internet users. The Bank announced that the sum was "symbolic" and it had no expectation that the sum would be paid by Jérôme Kerviel.

On 21 March 2008 Société Générale filed suit in Istanbul Commercial Court against Goldaş, a Turkish Jewelry firm, claiming the company had not paid for 15 tonnes(15,000 kg) of gold it had received through a consignment agreement. Goldaş stated that the consignment agreement was only for 3,250 kg of gold with a value of US$94 million. In June 2008, the court found Goldaş not guilty.

On 15 March 2009 AIG disclosed that, among its counterparties, Société Générale was to date the largest recipient of both credit default swap (CDS) collateral postings ($4.1 bn) and CDS payments ($6.9 bn), payments made possible in part by the 2008 U.S. government bailout of AIG.

French reporter Denis Robert and former No. 3 of Cedel Ernest Backes, a whistleblower of Clearstream have accused Société Générale of having non-published accounts in Clearstream, which was at the centre of a financial scandal in 2009.

In 2010 the French government's Autorité de la concurrence (the department in charge of regulating competition) fined eleven banks, including Société Générale, the sum of 384,900,000 Euros for colluding to charge unjustified fees on check processing, especially for extra fees charged during the transition from paper check transfer to "Exchanges Check-Image" electronic transfer.

In December 2013, the European Commission fined the bank close to €446 million for its role in the LIBOR scandal regarding interest rate derivatives.In April 2016, the fine was reduced to approximately €228 million.

In February 2014, Société Générale agreed to pay $122 million to the Fannie Mae and the Freddie Mac for misleading them in the purchase of mortgage-backed securities.

In January 2017, Société Générale agreed to pay $50 million to settle a claim by the American government of fraudulent concealment of residential mortgage-backed securities quality.

In March 2014, the Libyan Investment Authority has filed a $1.5 billion lawsuit in London's High Court against Société Générale. The claims against the bank involve derivative transactions that took place from 2007 to 2009, and Société Générale is accused of funneling at least $58 million in bribes to Gaddafi's son Saif al-Islam Gaddafi. The French bank denied those allegations

In February 2016, Société Générale paid $26.8 million to settle charges in a case of municipal bond derivatives where the French bank is accused of anticompetitive and fraudulent conduct.

In March 2016, Société Générale was mentioned in the Panama Papers : It was among the 10 banks that asked for the most offshore shell companies for the account of its clients via the Mossack Fonseca firm. Its headquarters were searched by the French tax police on 5 April 2016, as the bank was linked with the creation of 979 offshore companies. In 2012, CEO Frédéric Oudéa said that Société Générale withdrew from all countries belonging to the grey list of tax havens compiled by the OECD, including Panama. Despite this previous statement, Mr Oudéa defended that those offshore companies were not meant to be used as tax evasion vehicles.

In November 2018, the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) announced a $53,966,916.05 settlement with Société Générale S.A. to settle potential civil liability for apparent violations of U.S. sanctions. The settlement resolves OFAC's investigation into Société Générale S.A.'s processing of transactions to or through the United States or U.S. financial institutions in a manner that removed, omitted, obscured, or otherwise failed to include references to OFAC-sanctioned parties in the information sent to U.S. financial institutions that were involved in the transactions.

Société financière de radiodiffusion (lit. ' Broadcasting Funding Company ', SOFIRAD) was a French-government-operated company that managed the state's participation in radio and television broadcasting. At closing time, it was valued at €26,892,007.

Société financière de radiodiffusion was founded on 7 November 1942 under the name Société financière de radio (SOFIRA) (Radio Funding Company) to hold financial operations that were not possible for the state administration of national radio, especially concerning participation from private companies, eventually launching a "war of the waves". In 1943, the German-backed government created a radio station in Monaco, Radio Monte Carlo, with the aim of broadcasting propaganda towards southern France. The financial company grouped all French companies holding shares in the station.

After Liberation, on 13 November 1944, the administrative council changed; René Hoffherr became its president and its headquarters transferred from Cusset (Allier) to Paris. On 17 June 1946, the administrative council decided to add a D (this becoming SOFIRAD) to avoid confusions with another company also named Sofira. This holding allowed the French government to take part in the shares, and financial control, of the main peripheral stations in small countries along the French border: RMC from Monaco (in 1944), Europe 1 from the Saar Protectorate (in 1954), Sud Radio from Andorra (since 1961). Only Radio Andorra and RTL in Luxembourg remained outside its control. In 1968, SOFIRAD launched Monte Carlo Doualiya, an Arabic subsidiary of RMC, its first station.

In the late 1970s, SOFIRAD and Gaumont took control of Telefrance USA, a French-language television station in New York City that was available on cable networks there. After injections of capital, Gaumont faced financial issues and the channel was put into liquidation. In 1981, SOFIRAD tried a partnership in Brazil, by signing a contract to sell equipment without Coface 's warranty to the television network Rede Bandeirantes. The revenues gained from the airing of dubbed French films, sold by Sofirad do Brasil, reduced potential economic failures. In practice, SOFIRAD acquired a number of rights for films and their dubbing that were not released. The ratings of the first titles were seen as a deception and the revenues could not afford further rights. The company was liquidated and SOFIRAD agreed to a partial remittance agreement for the debt in exchange for payment over the years.

In 1981, SOFIRAD launched Africa No. 1 in association with the Gabonese president Omar Bongo, catering to the Françafrique.

Through a subsidiary company owned by RMC, but entirely managed by SOFIRAD, SOFIRAD started producing feature films and animated series. Following an agreement with Parafrance, it co-produced the film Les Uns et les Autres, and co-distributed twelve others, such as Rue Barbare and La Passante du Sans Souci. Independently, it produced animated series through its France Animation subsidiary (Les Mondes Engloutis, Tarzan, etc.). Initially named RMC Audiovisuel, SOFIRAD left the company in 1987 and planned to selling the Saint Lucian radio station Radio Caribbean International. It then left Europe 1 (in exchange for the building of a legal FM network) and Sud Radio in 1986, and from RMC later on, in 1998.

The dissolution of the company in 1999 following the sale of RMC was a lengthy process. The company was finally dissolved on 1 August 2017.

SOFIRAD's archives are preserved and searchable on the National Archives of France.

The solidarity tax on airplane tickets (Taxe de solidarité sur les billets d'avion, also known as Chirac Tax) is a surcharge on the civil aviation tax which is destined to finance Unitaid. This tax was initially proposed by Presidents Jacques Chirac of France and Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva of Brazil. It was initially adopted by five founding countries (France, Brazil, United Kingdom, Norway and Chile) during a conference in Paris on September 14, 2005. Nine countries actually implemented this tax: Cameroon, Chile, Congo, France, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritius, Niger and the Republic of Korea. Norway also contributes through its tax on CO 2 emissions.

The tax was first proposed by French president Jacques Chirac and his Brazilian counterpart Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. It was later adopted by five countries at the Ministerial conference on innovative development finance held in Paris in February 2005.

On 19 October 2019, the National Assembly adopted the first draft of the 2020 Budget which contained a provision instituting an additional contribution on air travel starting on 1 January 2020. This additional contribution is expected to yield € 180,000,000 in yearly revenues which will be attributed to the AFITF to fund public transport projects.

The tax is applied selectively depending on the final destination. Transit passengers are exempt under the following conditions;

The tax depends on the destination, either European Economic Area or outside EEA.

The tax raises approximately 160 million per year and since its introduction has raised over 1 billion.

The solidarity tax on wealth (French : Impôt de solidarité sur la fortune, ISF) was an annual direct wealth tax on those in France having assets in excess of €1,300,000 (since 2011). It was one of the Socialist Party 's 1981 electoral platform's measures, 110 Propositions for France. First named IGF (Impôt sur les Grandes Fortunes), it was abolished in 1986 by Jacques Chirac 's right-wing government, but reestablished in 1988 as ISF in slightly different terms after François Mitterrand 's reelection.

In September 2017, the French Government abolished ISF and replaced it with the wealth tax on real estate [ fr ] (IFI), from 2018.

The calculation applied to tax declarers, meaning that it could apply to a grouping of two individuals: married couples, cohabiting couples, or couples with a PACS. All global assets were taken into account for French residents; for others, the tax was based on assets that reside in France, with the exception of financial ones.

The ISF was controversial; critics claimed it drove away wealthy individuals from the country, resulting in financial loss. A report by senator Philippe Marini estimated that 843 people left France in 2006 because of the tax, resulting in a net loss of €2.8 billion.

In principle all assets were taken into account except for the following:

ISF brought in €4.42 billion in 2007, 19% more than in 2006. It constitutes 1.5% of France's total tax receipts.

Half of all households who pay ISF make an annual contribution of less than €2,000.

ISF was levied on what remained of the gross value after subtracting deductible debts. The gross value was determined by the declarer following certain rules. For example, the value of the principal home was reduced by 30%, as was done for some rental income. Certain real estate properties in countries with a fiscal convention such as Denmark, Luxembourg, Egypt, Finland, Netherlands, and Czech Republic were excluded. The furniture in the home could not exceed 5% of the total value of the other goods.

Following President Nicolas Sarkozy 's tax law of 2007, ISF was adjusted so that the sum of all taxes due in France would not exceed 50% of the annual revenues. He overturned this in 2011, at the same time as lowering the rates of the ISF.

After calculation, a deduction was granted for minors or any disabled persons living in the same household.

Sologne (/ s ə ˈ l ɔɪ n / ; French pronunciation: [ sɔlɔɲ ]) is a natural region in Centre-Val de Loire, France, extending over portions of the departements of Loiret, Loir-et-Cher and Cher. Its area is about 5,000 square kilometres (1,900 sq mi). To its north is the river Loire, to its south the river Cher, while the districts of Sancerre and Berry are to its east. Its inhabitants are known as the Solognots (masculine) and Solognotes (feminine).

Its name is thought to derive either from the Latin sœcalonia (" rye country") or sabulonia ("sandy country").

The Sologne is watered by the Cosson and the Beuvron, tributaries of the Loire, and the Sauldre, a tributary of the Cher, all three having a west-south-westerly direction. The pools and marshes which are characteristic of the region are due to the impermeability of its soil, which is a mixture of sand and clay.

In the middle of the 19th century Napoleon III led the way in the reclamation of swamps, the planting of pines and other trees and other land alterations. Arable farming and stock-raising are fairly flourishing in the Sologne, but there is little manufacturing activity, the cloth manufacture of Romorantin being the chief industry. Game is abundant, and the region owes much of its revived prosperity to the creation of large sporting estates.

In the early 18th century, Jean-Philippe Rameau composed a famous harpsichord piece, Les Niais de Sologne, whose name translates as "the simpletons of Sologne". The form is a rondo with two episodes that are variations on the main section. Despite the title (which may allude to the meandering melody throughout), its use of ornamentation denotes a work of great subtlety and sophistication.

The book Le Grand Meaulnes by Alain-Fournier is set in the region of Sologne and mentions several places, such as Bourges, Vierzon, and the Cher. It is somewhere in this region where Meaulnes becomes lost and stumbles across the mysterious estate.

Many stories and essays of Maurice Genevoix are set in Sologne.

The Château de Chambord is situated in the region.

Son et lumière (French pronunciation: [ sɔ̃n e lymjɛʁ ] (French, lit. "sound and light")), or a sound and light show, is a form of nighttime entertainment that is usually presented in an outdoor venue of historic significance.

Special lighting effects are projected onto the façade of a building or ruin and synchronized with recorded or live narration and music to dramatize the history of the place. The invention of the concept is credited to Paul Robert-Houdin, who was the curator of the Château de Chambord in France, which hosted the world's first son et lumière in 1952. Another was established in the early 1960s at the site of the Great Pyramid of Giza in Egypt.

This nighttime medium is used for ecclesiastical buildings, stately homes and ruins, and has become popular in France where about 50 annual productions take place, principally in the Loire Valley, at the Palace of Versailles and at Les Invalides in Paris.

The format usually involves no active participation by actors but a recorded narrative of the history of the building concerned by one or a cast of voices. To this is added music or sound effects as appropriate, all of which is synchronised to lighting and/or projection effects which provide the visual dimension. Pyrotechnic effects are occasionally included for added spectacle.

A relatively recent variation is that, rather than the music and narration coming through a concert-like sound system, they may use headsets, such as in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania's "Lights of Liberty". This allows an audience to move through a historic district as the show proceeds.

Composers who have produced son et lumière shows include Jacqueline Nova and Halim El-Dabh. French electronic music composer Jean Michel Jarre has incorporated son et lumière productions into his live concerts, which often take place outdoors at historical sites, sometimes with more than one million spectators.

In France, son et lumière shows are performed in and around France's historical châteaux. In neighboring Luxembourg, a son et lumière event took place in 2007 at the Chateau de Septfontaines.

In Britain, where the majority of such productions have been staged at churches, cathedrals and abbeys, indoor presentations are frequently preferred, particularly as architectural gems might otherwise not be shown to best advantage. The first British production was at Greenwich Palace in south London in 1957. In England in particular, where son et lumière is as well received as it is in France, many of the nations's principal historic houses and church buildings have enjoyed such a production. Canterbury Cathedral in England featured a son et lumière in 1965, produced as part of a European "Cathedrales en Lumière" series events, and in 2005, along with Rochester Cathedral and Castle as part of the European "Cathedrales en Lumière" project. Other UK locations include St Augustine's Abbey, St. George's Hall, Liverpool, Tewkesbury Abbey, St Paul's Cathedral, Hampton Court Palace, and at Chartwell, the country home of Winston Churchill. Part of the London 2012 Olympic bid involved the use of son et lumière inspired light projections of athletes upon various London buildings.

Shows have alo been mounted at the Forum in Rome and at the Parthenon in Athens.

In the United States, the first such presentation took place at Independence Hall in Philadelphia in 1962. Another presentation took place at George Washington's Mount Vernon in May 1976 as France's bicentennial gift to the United States. The opening performance was attended by French President Giscard d'Estaing and American President Gerald Ford.

In Canada, the National Capital Commission has sponsored a sound and light show on Parliament Hill in Ottawa every year since 1984, from early July to mid-September.

In Peru, a son et lumière show opened in the Park of the Reserve, Lima in 2007, called "Circuito Mágico del Agua" (magic water circuit), which holds the Guinness World Record as the world's largest water source exposed in a public park.

The first African production was at the Pyramids of Giza at Cairo, Egypt, in 1961, while the first in Asia was the Red Fort in Delhi, India in 1965 by the India Tourism Development Corporation.

In Israel, a son et lumière production is presented both at the Tower of David in the Citadel of the Old City of Jerusalem, and at the desert butte of Masada.

On December 31, 2017, the Burj Khalifa used an LED lighting system to present Light Up Dubai, a multimedia show that served as its New Year's countdown in lieu of a fireworks show (which had been one of the most expensive fireworks displays in the world). It set a record for the largest light and sound show displayed on a single building; for 2018-19, the show was supplemented by the return of its fireworks.

In India, popular shows are at Red Fort, Amer Fort, Khajuraho, Akbari Quila, Ajmer, Jantar Mantar, Jaipur, Purana Qila, Delhi, and Golconda Fort. Most of these shows highlight historic tapestry of the place.

In Australia, Blood Under the Southern Cross, shown at Sovereign Hill in Ballarat since 1992, depicts the events of the 1854 Eureka Rebellion.

Sophie Cluzel (French pronunciation: [ sɔfi klyzɛl ] ; born 7 January 1961) is a French politician of La République En Marche! (LREM) who served as the Secretary of State in charge of People with Disabilities in the governments of successive Prime Ministers Édouard Philippe and Jean Castex from 2017 to 2022.

Early in her career, Cluzel was the founder of various associations for the education of disabled children, including the SAIS 92 collective and the association Grandir à l'école (Growing up at school), an initiative dedicated to children with Down syndrome.

Cluzel served as president of the National Federation of Associations Serving Students with Disabilities and as administrator of the National Union of Associations of Parents to Mentally Handicapped Persons and their Friends (UNAPEI) from 2011 to 2013.

For the 2021 regional elections, Cluzel was nominated as LREM's candidate to become President of the Regional Council of Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur. Following an agreement between LREM and the Republicans (LR), she later ran on same ticket led by LR's Renaud Muselier, the incumbent president of the Regional Council.

Cluzel is married to a nephew of Jean Cluzel.

SOS Racisme (French pronunciation: [ ɛsɔɛs ʁasism ]) is a politically left-wing international movement of anti-racist NGOs. The oldest chapter of SOS Racisme was founded in 1984 in France, and it has counterparts in several other European countries or regions. Its Norwegian branch, which claimed to be both the largest chapter of SOS Racisme and the largest anti-racist organisation in Europe, was controversial for its strong Maoist stance and for defrauding the government, resulting in the organisation's conviction for fraud and its bankruptcy as well as criminal proceedings against its leaders.

SOS Racisme's stated goal is to fight racial discrimination. Often the plaintiff in discrimination trials, the organization also offers support to immigrants and racial minorities that are facing discrimination. It is also heavily involved in protesting and publicising examples of discrimination in society and in the law.

SOS Racisme uses testing as a method to expose racial discrimination by finding where racial double standards may exist. For example, two identical work applications might be submitted to a prospective employer, with the only difference being the name of the applicants. One with a name of French origin, the other with a name suggestive of an immigrant. Other testings could take place at a realty office, where two people whose only difference is race would both look for housing, etc.. This tactic has led to numerous lawsuits for racial discrimination, especially against nightclubs.

SOS Racisme was created one year after the March for Equality and Against Racism, considered to be the first national anti-racist movement in France, which took place in 1983. Most participants were young people from North African immigration, who protested against racist crimes. In 1984, a second march was organised, led by Farida Belghoul. That same year, the socialist government helped to create SOS Racisme, a more moderate anti-racist organisation, without the main leaders of the two marches, who denounced a "hijacking" of the movement by the Socialist Party. The UEJF, a Jewish student organisation, also played an important part in the creation of SOS Racisme.

The guiding principle of the association, brotherhood, is represented by the yellow hand logo upon which is written Touche pas à mon pote. This slogan, which means "Hands off my pal!", was adopted upon the creation of the organization in October 1984. SOS Racisme benefitted from open support from the PS in the 1980s, and many members of SOS Racisme became high-level PS politicians: Harlem Désir, president of SOS Racisme from 1984 to 1992, is today a Member of the European Parliament for the PS; Fodé Sylla, president of SOS Racisme from 1992 to 1999 was at that time a member of the PS (and later a Member of the European Parliament for the Communist Party, PCF); his successor, Malek Boutih, was national secretary of the PS in charge of social issues (including immigration-related issues); another president of SOS Racisme, Dominique Sopo [ fr ], started political activism in the UNEF-ID socialist student trade-union, before taking membership in the youth organisation of the PS.

SOS Racisme believes that, to put an end to racial discrimination, changes must be made to methods of urban planning and to education. Since the early 1990s, it has denounced the ghettos that are on the outskirts of big cities. The association advocates integration, and often cites examples of successful immigrants or their descendants.

At the turn of the century, SOS Racisme declared support for the Israeli–Palestinian peace process that was interrupted by the Second Intifada. It also denounced a resurgence of antisemitism in a book jointly published in 2002 with the UEJF, a Jewish student organization. Since then, the two organizations have continued to collaborate. Their Rire contre le racisme event (Laughing against racism) is held annually since 2004 at the Zenith concert hall in Paris, where it has featured performances by comedians such as Michel Boujenah, Dany Boon, Jean-Marie Bigard and Gad Elmaleh. In 2003, they also founded a joint student association called FEDER (Fédération des Enfants de la République) which runs for office in university elections.

In February 2006, during the Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy, SOS Racisme organized public meetings to defend their publication.

Its Norwegian branch SOS Rasisme was by far the largest chapter of SOS Racisme and claimed to have 40,000 members and 270 local branches. SOS Rasisme was closely affiliated with and largely controlled by the Workers' Communist Party and later by the Maoist party Serve the People – The Communist League (the Marxist-Leninist-Maoist faction which split from the Workers' Communist Party in 1997 as a result of an internal conflict), and was widely described as a front organization for those communist parties. SOS Rasisme went bankrupt in 2013 after being convicted of defrauding the government by exaggerating its membership, and 8 of its leaders, including its last President and its last Secretary-General, were indicted for fraud, embezzlement and money laundering in 2015 and subsequently convicted and sentenced to prison in 2016. SOS Rasisme faced strong criticism from the media in Norway and from all mainstream political parties over several years due to its dominance by Maoists, and SOS Racisme has been widely considered politically extreme in Norway and was shunned by some other anti-racist organisations.

Soused herring is raw herring (a variety of fish) soaked in a mild preserving liquid. It usually consists of raw herring in a mild vinegar pickle or Dutch brined herring. As well as vinegar, the marinade might contain cider, wine or tea, sugar, herbs (usually bay leaf), spices (usually mace), and chopped onion.

The word 'soused' can also describe a marinated herring that has been cooked. The herring is usually baked in the marinade, although it is sometimes instead fried and then soaked in the marinade. Soused herring is served cold.

The soused herring (maatjesharing, although referred to as maatjes in Netherlands, or Matjes/matjes (in Germany and Sweden) is an especially mild salt herring, made from immature herrings. The herrings are ripened for a couple of days in oak barrels in a salty solution, or brine. The pancreatic enzymes which support the ripening make this version of salt herring especially mild and soft. Raw herrings pickled in vinegar are called rollmops.

Dutch-made Hollandse Nieuwe, Holländischer Matjes and Hollandse maatjesharing have TSG Certification within the European Union, and German-produced Glückstädter Matjes, produced in Schleswig-Holstein, has PGI certification.

This process of preparing herring (known as " gibbing ") was developed in the Middle Ages by the Dutch. Herrings are caught between the end of May and the beginning of July in the North Sea near Denmark or Norway, before the breeding season starts. This is because herrings at this time are richer in oils (over 15%) and their roe and milt have not started to develop.

The brine used for Dutch soused herring has a much lower salt content and is much milder in taste than the German Loggermatjes. To protect against infection by nematodes of the genus Anisakis, European Union regulations state that fish should be frozen at −20 °C for at least 24 hours. In the modern day, soused herrings can therefore be produced throughout the year.

The Dutch newspaper Algemeen Dagblad has for more than thirty years organized a competition whereby the quality of soused herring was evaluated. In 2017, there was a controversy over this competition, as an economist produced two working papers accusing the newspaper of biased testing. As a consequence, the competition was discontinued. Subsequently, statisticians have argued that the economist's claims relied on questionable statistics.

Through a cut in the throat, the gills and part of the gullet are removed from the herring, eliminating any bitter taste. The liver and pancreas are left in the fish during the salt-curing process because they release enzymes essential for flavor. The herrings are then placed in the brine for approximately five days, traditionally in oak casks. They require no further preparation after fillet and skin removal and can be eaten as a snack with finely sliced raw onion and pickles.

As skin removal requires experience, fillets or double fillets should be attempted first. The soused herrings are silvery outside and pink inside when fresh, and should not be bought if they appear grey and oily.

Whereas salt herrings have a salt content of 20% and must be soaked in water before consumption, soused herrings do not need soaking.

In the Netherlands soused herring is most often served as a snack, most frequently plain, or with a garnish of diced raw onion. Whole herring is often eaten by lifting the herring by its tail and eating it upwards holding it over the mouth. Soused herring dishes in Northern Germany are traditionally served with potatoes boiled in their skins, French beans, finely sliced fried bacon and onion. It is also common in Germany to eat soused herring with sliced raw onion in a bread roll, in a dish called Matjesbrötchen.

In some regions (e. g. Holstein), it is served on dark bread with a cowberry and cream sauce. Soused herring can also be served with cream or yogurt sauces containing onions and gherkins, or in salads.

In Sweden matjessill is traditionally served with boiled potatoes, sour cream, chopped chives, crisp bread and snaps. Boiled eggs are popular together with this dish that is most traditionally served on Midsummer 's Eve – Finland has a similar custom but silli is not associated with crisp bread. Nowadays most Swedes and Finns eat herring which comes in cans and are sliced and with added sugar. The Swedish matjessill is most often more strongly spiced than other varieties.

Southern France, also known as the south of France or colloquially in French as le Midi, is a geographical area consisting of the regions of France that border the Atlantic Ocean south of the Marais Poitevin, Spain, the Mediterranean Sea and Italy. It includes southern Nouvelle-Aquitaine in the west, Occitania in the centre, the southern parts of Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes in the northeast, Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur in the southeast, as well as the island of Corsica in the southeast. Southern France is generally considered part of southern Europe because of its association with the Mediterranean Sea.

The colloquial French name for the region, le Midi, is derived from an Old French compound composed of mi ("middle") and di ("day"), meaning literally "midday". Thus, the term is comparable in both origin and meaning to Mezzogiorno, which indicates southern Italy, and Romanian Miazăzi which is a synonym for south – the direction of the Sun at "midday".

The area corresponds in large part to Occitania in southern Europe, the historical and cultural region in which Occitan (French : langue d'oc), as distinct from the langues d'oïl of northern France, was the predominant language. Despite being part of Occitania, the regions of Auvergne and Limousin are not normally considered part of southern France. The largest cities of southern France are Marseille, Toulouse, Bordeaux, Nice and Montpellier. The Pyrenees and French Alps are also located in the area, in respectively its southwestern and eastern parts. Corsica, which is south of Continental France and just north of Sardinia, Italy, may also be included.

Notable touristic landmarks include the Roman -era Pont du Gard and the Arena of Nîmes ; the Verdon Gorge, in Alpes-de-Haute-Provence ; the Canal du Midi, linking Toulouse by to the Mediterranean Sea ; and the natural regions of Larzac, Luberon and Camargue. The French Riviera is in southern France's southeastern quadrant. Several towns in southern France are renowned for their architecture and surroundings, such as Roussillon, Ménerbes, Cordes-sur-Ciel, Gordes, Rocamadour, Rennes-le-Château, Les Baux-de-Provence, Lourmarin, Gassin, Saint-Paul-de-Vence, L'Isle-sur-la-Sorgue, Seillans, Crillon-le-Brave and Saint-Rémy-de-Provence.

Southern France has a cuisine that is different from those of northern France and other Mediterranean countries. The major difference from the rest of France is in the use of olive oil, instead of butter. Local agriculture supplies the olives for consumption as well as cooking, the ducks and geese to make foie gras, haricot beans that are used in cassoulet, the sheep whose milk produces Roquefort cheese, tomatoes and melons. To accompany the richer food, the area also supplies much stronger wines, from Bordeaux, Cahors, Madiran, and Languedoc, all of which are washed down with brandy from Armagnac.

The following films are set in southern France:

Sovereigntist Right (French : Droite souverainiste, DSV) is a political nuance created by the French Ministry of the Interior on the occasion of the regional and departmental elections of 2021.

This nuance is attributed to any candidate, pair or list related to right-wing sovereigntism or supported by a right-wing sovereigntist party. Similarly, this nuance can be attributed to candidates claiming no label but whose background and positions allow them to be classified as such. Finally, an individual candidate can also claim this nuance themselves.

The nuance, part of the Répertoire national des élus was created by a circulaire from the Minister of the Interior, Gérald Darmanin, on 23 April, 2021.

During the regional and departmental elections of 2021, the nuance was in particular attributed to the candidates, pairs and lists presented by Debout la France.

On the occasion of the legislative elections of 2022, the nuance was also applied to the parties Les Patriotes and Génération Frexit, the two parties having established an electoral alliance with Debout la France.

The spokesperson of the Government (French : porte-parole du Gouvernment, in jargon PPG) is the minister in charge of the public relations of the Government of France.

The position has existed since 1969, with interruptions. It is held either concurrently with a departmental or junior portfolio, or alone with a sinecure rank of junior minister. Its best-known duty is to hold a press conference after the weekly Council of Ministers.

Maud Bregeon has held the position in the second Lecornu government since October 2025, with a rank of deputy minister under the prime minister.

The position was created in 1969 by Jacques Chaban-Delmas, the first prime minister of Georges Pompidou ; the first spokesman was Léo Hamon. As part of Chaban-Delmas's liberalization platform, it came in partial replacement to the earlier position of minister of information, who had supervised the broadcasting services under state monopoly, and whose duties were transferred to the Office of the Prime Minister and to the Ministry of Cultural Affairs. The Ministry of Information was restored by Pierre Messmer, Chaban-Delmas's successor, but eventually disbanded for good in 1974.

Another new junior minister of 1969, Jacques Baumel, was put in charge of “public relations”, with an unclear distribution of responsibilities with Hamon. The position was discontinued in the next government, and the responsibilities of the spokesman were first defined in a decree of 24 July 1972 (“to report on the work of the Government and to provide information relating to the action of public authorities”). Léo Hamon was nicknamed “ Léo Parleur ” (“Loudspeaker”, a pun on “Léo speaker”).

All governments since 1983 have had a spokesperson, except for the 1st Rocard government (May–June 1988), in office fox six weeks between presidential and legislative elections, and for the Jospin government after a year (1998–2002). While a number of holders until the 1990s were experienced figures, younger politicians have since then been frequently chosen; Nicolas Sarkozy (1993–1995), Jean-François Copé (2002–2007), and Gabriel Attal (2020–2022) used their term to raise their profile by intervening on a number of topics.

The president has at times had a spokesperson of his own, upgrading the position of press adviser; the most recent one was in 2017–2018. Some government departments have also appointed an official spokesperson.

The position of spokesperson is held either concurrently with a departmental or junior portfolio, or associated with a sinecure position of junior minister (deputy minister or secretary of state) under the prime minister. When junior to a departmental minister, the holder nonetheless reports directly to the prime minister with regard to the duties of spokesperson.

As for all other members of the government, the appointment, and removal, is by the president on the proposal of the prime minister. The choice is based on personal considerations rather than determined by a concurrent portfolio: the position has been held several times by the minister in charge of the Budget or of relations with Parliament due to their transverse role, but also by the minister in charge of agriculture, culture, education, or women's rights. Jean-François Copé kept the position for five years while moving between three departments.

The spokesperson has a specific private office, separate from one attached to an additional portfolio; it is located at the hôtel de Castries, in the 7th arrondissement of Paris. The office is supported by the Government Information Service (SIG), although the SIG remains under the authority of the prime minister.

The spokesperson has a dual role of “mouth and ear” of the Government, in charge not only of the usual responsibility of making public announcements and answering the news media, but also of staying attentive to public opinion and to report on it to the prime minister and other ministers.

To that end, the holder is required to keep abreast of the ongoing issues dealt with by all government departments, and works with some of the close advisers to the president and prime minister. The spokesperson takes part to a number of meetings at which government policy and strategy are discussed and decided, and advises on how to promote them to the media and the general public. Any intervention is bound by prior statements made by the prime minister and by the responsible ministers.

The spokesperson's best-known duty is to hold a press conference at the Élysée Palace, open to television cameras, after the meeting of the weekly Council of Ministers. Spokespersons also give regular interviews to explain and defend the government's handling of public affairs, either in general or on a specific current topic. Several former holders have commented on the uneasiness of the brief, such as François Baroin, who held it twice: “You can never be in a position to tell the whole truth. But I had made it my rule of never telling any sham. The job is after all about wooden language.” A 2021 book of interviews called it a “ lightning rod ”.

In light of the work involved, the spokesperson always attends the Council of Ministers by right, while most junior ministers only do when exceptionally summoned. It is the only minister who may take notes, which is by tradition forbidden to the others, although the president and the two senior civil servants who attend without taking part may do so.

Square des Francine is a public park created from a former watering pool for horses, situated at the edge of the Avenue de Sceaux in Versailles, France. In 2016 the pool was transformed into a geometrical shrubbery park with a playground for children around a fountain.

The Francines were a family who, over several generations, created and oversaw the hydraulic system that powered the many fountains in the garden of Versailles during the 17th and 18th centuries. The newly created fountain is named in their honour.

Originally, the Square des Francine was a vacant lot in the royal domain and dominated by the Gobert reservoirs, which was transformed into the Jardin des Etangs Gobert (Gobert Pond Garden) in 2014.

In 1808, renovations by the architect Jean-Prospèr Marital created a drinking trough 32m in diameter surrounded by a stone wall and a paved ground for receiving horses, and a wall built to hide the view from the Palace of Versailles

In 1934, the field around the horse watering pool was registered in Monuments historiques (national heritage site in France) as "Abreuvoir Louis XIV" (Horse-watering-pool of Louis XIV).

During World War II, the original construction was destroyed, leaving only the semicircular wall seen today.

Between 1955 and 1957, the city of Versailles developed the site into a public park with a pond of 80m2 surrounded by 4 wings of playing zone and the ring formed walking place around the wings.

Between 2012 and 2014, as part of a development plan for the Versailles Chantiers area, the semicircular wall was renovated. The rest of the area was also developed and the Square des Francine was opened to the public in 2016.

The city of Versailles develop the building of the SNCF train station of Versailles Chantiers and its area for:

Squid is eaten in many cuisines; in English, the culinary name calamari is often used for squid dishes. There are many ways to prepare and cook squid. Fried squid is common in the Mediterranean. In New Zealand, Australia, the United States, Canada, and South Africa, it is sold in fish and chip shops and in steakhouses. In Britain, it can be found in Mediterranean "calamari" or Asian "salt and pepper fried squid" forms in various establishments, often served as a bar snack, street food, or starter.

Squid can be prepared for consumption in a number of other ways. In Korea and Japan, it is sometimes served raw, and elsewhere it is used as sushi, sashimi and tempura items, grilled, stuffed, covered in batter, stewed in gravy and served in stir-fries, rice, and noodle dishes. Dried shredded squid is a common snack in some Asian regions, including East Asia.

The body (mantle), arms, tentacles, and ink of squid are all edible; the only parts of the squid that are not eaten are its beak and gladius (pen). The mantle can be stuffed whole, cut into flat pieces or sliced into rings.

In Chinese and Southeast Asian cuisine, squid is used in stir-fries, rice, and noodle dishes. It may be heavily spiced.

In China, Thailand, and Japan, squid is typically grilled whole and sold in food stalls.

Pre-packaged dried shredded squid or cuttlefish are snack items in Hong Kong, Taiwan, Korea, Japan, China and Russia, often shredded or rolled to reduce chewiness.

In Japan, squid is used in almost every type of dish, including sushi, sashimi, and tempura. It can also be marinated in soy sauce (ika okizuke), stewed (nabemono), and grilled (ikayaki). It is eaten raw as ika sōmen and katsu ika odori-don.

In Korea, squid is sometimes killed and served quickly. Unlike octopus, squid tentacles do not usually continue to move when reaching the table. This fresh squid is 산 오징어 (san ojingeo) (also with small octopuses called nakji). The squid is served with Korean mustard, soy sauce, chili sauce, or sesame sauce. It is salted and wrapped in lettuce or perilla leaves. Squid is also marinated in hot pepper sauce and cooked on a pan (nakji bokum or ojingeo bokum/ ojingeo-chae-bokkeum). They are also served by food stands as a snack food, battered and deep fried or grilled using hot skillets. They are also cut up into small pieces to be added to 해물파전 (Korean seafood pancake) or a variety of spicy seafood soups. Dried squid may also accompany alcoholic beverages as anju. Dried squid is served with peanuts. Squid is roasted and served with hot pepper paste or mayonnaise as a dip. Steamed squid and boiled squid are delicacies.

Also in Korea, squid is made into jeotgal (salted seafood). The ojingeo-jeot, thin strips of skinned, gutted, washed, salted, and fermented squid seasoned with spicy gochugaru (chili powder)-based spices and minced aromatic vegetables, is a popular banchan (side dish) served in small quantities as an accompaniment to bap (cooked rice). In Japan, a similar dish is called ika-no- shiokara. The heavily salted squid (usually sparkling enope (firefly) squid or spear squid), sometimes with innards, ferments for as long as a month, and is preserved in small jars. This salty, strong flavoured item is served in small quantities as an accompaniment to white rice or alcoholic beverages.

In the Philippines, squid is cooked as adobong pusit, squid in adobo sauce, along with the ink, imparting a tangy flavour, especially with fresh chillies. Battered squid rings, which is also sold as a popular deep-fried street food called calamares in the Philippines, is served with alioli, mayonnaise or chilli vinegar. Squid is grilled on charcoal, brushed with a soy sauce-based marinade, and stuffed with tomato and onions. Another recipe is rellenong pusit, stuffed with finely-chopped vegetables, squid fat, and ground pork. A variant of pancit noodles is pancit pusit, which is pancit bihon with squid added, along with the ink, giving the noodles its dark color.

In Taiwanese cuisine, squid is widely used in home cooking, night market food, rechao, and seafood dishes, appearing in stir-fries, soups, noodle dishes, and rice-based meals. Several locally recognized categories of squid are commonly distinguished by size and species, including sió-kńg (小卷, neritic squid), thò-thiu (透抽, typically referring to spear squid), hue-ki (花枝), ruǎn-si (軟絲) and jiû-hî (魷魚, a general term often applied to larger squid or dried squid products). These distinctions are culinary rather than strictly taxonomic and influence preparation methods and pricing.

Fresh squid is often blanched briefly or simmered in clear broths to highlight its natural sweetness, as seen in regional dishes such as neritic squid rice noodles (小卷米粉) from Tainan. Squid is also commonly stir-fried with vegetables, basil, or celery, or braised in soy-based sauces. Grilled squid is a popular night market item, typically cooked whole or cut into rings and seasoned with soy sauce, garlic, chili, or barbecue spice blends. In addition, dried shredded squid (魷魚絲) is widely consumed as a snack or accompaniment to alcoholic beverages, sometimes lightly roasted and served with chili sauce or mayonnaise. Pre-packaged shredded squid products are also common and are sold in supermarkets and convenience stores throughout Taiwan.

In Thailand, squid is a common protein source added to a variety of soup and stir-fry dishes in fresh form, often as a part of a medley with shrimp, and referred to as talay (ทะเล). In addition, shredded and rolled dried squid is a common snack food found in supermarkets and night markets across the country, often served with a Nam chim (น้ำจิ้ม) dipping sauce. Domestically landed Loligo squid fished from the Gulf of Thailand and the Andaman Sea are the most commonly featured species in each preparation.

In India and Sri Lanka, squid or cuttlefish is eaten in coastal areas such as Kerala and Tamil Nadu. Squid are eaten deep-fried (koonthal fry) or as squid gravy (koonthal varattiyathu/roast). In Kerala and Tamil Nadu, squid is called koonthal, kanava or kadamba. In coastal Karnataka, squid is also called bondaas.

Fried squid (calamari fritti in Italian) is a dish in Mediterranean cuisine, consisting of batter -coated, deep-fried squid (fried for less than two minutes to prevent toughness), which is served plain, with salt and lemon on the side.

In Spain, rabas or calamares a la romana (battered calamari, lit. 'Roman-style calamari') has the calamari rings covered in a thick batter, deep-fried, and served with lemon juice and mayonnaise or aioli. Traditionally in Cantabria and the Basque Country, rabas are cut into straight strips rather than rings. Battered and fried baby squid is known as puntillitas. Squid stewed in its own black ink is called calamares en su tinta or chipirones en su tinta, resulting in a black stew-like dish in which squid meat is very tender and is accompanied by a thick black sauce, usually made with onion, tomato and squid ink, among other ingredients.

In Italy and Spain, squid or cuttlefish ink is eaten in dishes such as paella, risotto, soups and pasta.

In Italy, Spain, Greece, Cyprus, Turkey, Portugal, Slovenia, Albania and Croatia, squid rings and arms are coated in batter and fried in oil. Other recipes from these regions feature squid (or octopus) simmered slowly, with vegetables such as squash or tomato. When frying, the squid flesh is kept tender due to a short cooking time; when simmering, the flesh is most tender when cooking is prolonged with reduced temperature. In Greece or Cyprus it is served also with tzatziki, a Greek yoghurt, cucumber and mint dip.

In Sardinia, squid are served with a sauce made from lemon, garlic, parsley, and olive oil.

In Portugal, lulas are commonly eaten grilled whole, in kebabs (" espetadas ") of squid rings with bell peppers and onion, or stewed, stuffed with minced meat (lulas recheadas); the battered version is known as lulas à sevilhana, named after Seville, the Andalusian city that popularised the dish. The city of Setúbal is also known for its fried cuttlefish (choco frito à setubalense).

In Malta, klamar mimli involves stuffing the squid with rice, breadcrumbs, parsley, garlic and capers and then gently stewing in red wine.

In Slovenia, squid are eaten grilled and stuffed with pršut and cheese, with blitva (Swiss chard).

In Egypt, Cyprus, and Turkey, squid rings and arms are coated in batter and fried in oil. Other recipes from these regions simmer squid with vegetables. Squid is also often stuffed.

In Lebanon, Turkey, and Palestine, fried squid is served with tarator, a sauce made using tahini. Like many seafood dishes, it may be served with a slice of lemon.

In Russia, a lightly boiled julienned squid with onion rings, garnished with mayonnaise, makes a salad. Another dish is a squid stuffed with rice and vegetables and then roasted.

In South Africa, Australia and New Zealand, fried calamari is popular in fish and chip shops; imitation calamari of whitefish may also be used.

In Australia, salt and pepper squid is a common dish in restaurants, fish and chip shops, and pubs.

In North America, fried squid is a staple in seafood and Italian restaurants. It is often served as an appetizer, garnished with parsley, or sprinkled with Italian-style parmesan cheese. It is served with dips: peppercorn mayonnaise, tzatziki, marinara sauce, tartar sauce, or cocktail sauce. In Mexico it is served with local hot sauce. Other dips, such as ketchup, aioli, and olive oil are used. In the United States, the government and industry worked together to popularize calamari consumption in the 1990s.

In the United States, in an attempt to popularize squid as a protein source in the 1970s, researchers at Massachusetts Institute of Technology developed a squid-gutting machine, and submitted squid cocktail, rings, and chowder to a 70-person tasting panel for market research. Despite a general lack of popularity of squid in the United States, as aside from the internal "ethnic market" polling had shown a negative public perception of squid foods, the tasting panel gave the dishes "high marks".

During the 2020 Democratic National Convention, calamari was featured prominently during the virtual roll call for the state of Rhode Island.

The English name calamari comes from the Italian calamari (plural of calamaro), Spanish calamares (plural of calamar), and Modern Greek καλαμάρι kalamári. Ultimately, all of these terms derive from the Late Latin calamarium, "pen case" or "ink pot", itself from the Latin calamarius, "pertaining to a writing-reed", after the resemblance in shape and the inky fluid that squid secrete; calamarius in turn derives from the Greek κάλαμος kalamos 'reed' or 'pen'.

The nutritional value of squid compares favorably with fish, being high in protein and phosphorus with trace amounts of calcium, thiamine, and riboflavin. Squid are 67.5–80.7% protein and 2.22–8.48% fat. A 2016 study of loligo squid found that 13% of the wet weight was oil, which is a rich source of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids (2.78% arachidonic acid, 3.10% linolenic acid, 5.20% linoleic acid, 15.40% docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), and 9.60% eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA)).

Allergies to calamari can occur. As with other molluscs, the allergen is usually tropomyosin.

Sri Lankans in France refer to residents and citizens of Sri Lankan ancestry, who were born in or immigrated to France legally and illegally. The estimated population of Sri Lankans in France is 52,300.

Although most of immigration from Sri Lanka started during the Sri Lankan Civil War, there have been a presence of Sri Lankans in France since the early 20th century since the times of Ceylon. Ceylonese in high positions often went to Europe to study, tour and visit, mostly in England, but also France such as that of Sir John Kotelawala. There have been Ceylonese who fought alongside the British on the Western Front (areas of present-day Belgium, France and Luxembourg) during WW1.

Since the Sri Lankan Civil War the issue of illegal Sri Lankan immigration is a topic of concern for France.

The Sri Lankan population in France is estimated at approximately 52,300. However, the actual number is difficult to ascertain since statistics by ethnicity or religious denomination are prohibited in France.

The Sri Lankan Diaspora have created a number of associations which organise Sri Lankan festivals, cultural functions and sports events for the Sri Lankan community.

State Medical Aid (AME), officially known as Aide Médicale de l'Etat, is a French social assistance scheme designed primarily to cover the medical expenses of foreign nationals residing illegally in France.

Assistance is granted because the person has been residing in France for more than three months, and has financial resources below the ceiling for universal health coverage (CMU).

It was created in 2000 at the same time as the CMU by the Jospin government, replacing free medical assistance financed by the départements. Since then, the Right has constantly sought to restrict access, putting forward financial, social, and symbolic arguments. They contrast the fear that the social protection system will go astray, encouraging illegal immigration, with the need to protect a vulnerable population as part of a public health approach. In their 2023 report, Claude Évin and Patrick Stéfanini conclude, however, that there is no evidence to support fears of abuse or fraud,

The precursor of the AME, free medical assistance (AMG) was created by the law of July 15, 1893: it gave the poorest patients free access to healthcare. After the creation of the social security system in 1945, the system was clarified by Decree no. 53-1186 of November 29, 1953, on the reform of assistance laws, article 1 of which states: “All persons residing in France benefit, if they meet the legal conditions for entitlement, from the forms of social assistance [...].” Act no. 83-663 of July 22, 1983, supplementing Act no. 83-8 of January 7, 1983, on the division of powers between communes, departments, regions, and the State, established the Aide Médicale Départementale (AMD) by transferring the AMG to the departments. Law no. 92-722 of July 29, 1992 - adapting Law no. 88-1088 of December 1, 1988, on the minimum integration income (RMI) and the fight against poverty and social and professional exclusion - relaxed the conditions for access to AMD, granting it to all RMI recipients.

Law 99-641 of July 27, 1999, on universal health coverage (CMU), introduced by Jospin government ministers Bernard Kouchner and Martine Aubry, came into force on January 1, 2000, replacing AMD with AME. This law was intended to replace the AMD with a “universal” health insurance scheme, but the condition of legal residence to benefit from health insurance (laid down in the “Pasqua law” of August 24, 1993, on immigration control and the conditions of entry, reception, and residence of foreigners in France) meant that a specific system was maintained for undocumented migrants.

In a report published in 2007, the IGAS and IGF concluded that the existing system should be maintained, and ruled out the possibility of limiting coverage to emergency care only or defining a specific basket of treatments. According to the report, far from being a major source of abuse, the AME meets a genuine public health objective.

Under President Nicolas Sarkozy, French Health Minister Roselyne Bachelot declared on June 16, 2010, to the Senate Finance Committee that a “financial contribution from beneficiaries” was necessary, and that she intended to “propose it in the next finance bill” for 2011. The government justifies this by the fact that the cost of the AME has been rising for several years (+15% in 2009, to 546 million euros). On November 2, 2010, the French National Assembly passed a bill to impose conditions on access to AME. The 2011 Finance Act introduces an annual entrance fee of 30 euros for foreign nationals over the age of majority, for applications submitted on or after March 1, 2011. This change puts an end to free access for applicants whose income is below an annually-reviewed amount. In 2011, illegal foreign nationals eligible for AME were those whose income did not exceed €634 per month. With the 2011 reform, only their spouses and children can be beneficiaries. Previously, ascendants and collaterals could also be beneficiaries. The daily Libération spoke of the “anger of associations” at the proposed reform, noting that “making 210,000 beneficiaries pay 30 euros would only bring in 6 million euros.” Others believe that the measure is likely to increase government spending. In 2011, the Besson law on immigration abolished the possibility for communal social action centers (CCAS) and inter-communal social action centers (CIAS) to compile files for access to the AME.

In early 2011, a fortnight after the vote on the reform, the Documentation française website discreetly published an expert report by IGAS and IGF, which explained that the entrance fee was “financially unsuitable, administratively complex and fraught with health risks.” The document, which contradicted the government, was kept secret. The associations denounced a “withholding of information” and a “denial of democracy.”

On July 31, 2012, as part of the Loi de finances rectificative, Parliament repealed the €30 deductible and the prior authorization of coverage for hospital care, in line with François Hollande 's campaign promise. The measure is denounced by the right; Dominique Tian (who will later be convicted of “laundering tax fraud ”) believes that the AME has an “exorbitant cost” due to “fraud,” and that abolishing the deductible will “create a call for candidates for illegal immigration.”

From 2012 onwards, the right-wing has made several attempts to reduce or abolish the AME, but each time the measure has been blocked by the National Assembly.

In September 2012, Jean-François Copé (UMP) called for its abolition “except emergencies”, and the National Rally for its outright abolition. In October, a UMP bill introduced by deputies Christian Jacob and Claude Goasguen, among others, aims to regulate state medical aid (AME). The UMP wants to reverse the measures canceled in 2012 and extend the prior agreement procedure to all outpatient care.

In 2017, the abolition of the AME was included in the programs of François Fillon and Marine Le Pen, who saw it as a “suction pump” for immigration. Emmanuel Macron stood out from the crowd, categorically refusing to go back on this scheme. In June 2018, LR senator Roger Karoutchi had amendments passed by the Senate during consideration of the Collomb bill and the 2020 finance bill, transforming the AME into “emergency medical aid” conditional on payment of an annual fee, and reserved for “serious illnesses and acute pain”, pregnancy-related care, statutory vaccinations, and preventive medicine examinations. In 2019, President Emmanuel Macron denounced the “misuse of medical systems by people not eligible for asylum,” to whom he now wished to reserve the scheme, against the advice of some LRM and MoDem MPs.

Edouard Philippe's government is changing the length-of-stay requirement (from three months' presence in France to three months' irregular residence), adding a requirement for first applications to be submitted physically at the counter of primary health insurance funds, and a nine-month waiting period for access to certain non-urgent care (hip or knee replacements, cataracts...). From 2021 onwards, certain operations or treatments considered “secondary” will be accessible only nine months after the AME application, which must be made to the health insurance fund, a hospital, or a permanence d'accès aux soins, and no longer to a commune, the departmental social services or an association.

In December 2022, LR Senator Christian Klinger took up the outline of Roger Karoutchi 's proposal and had the Senate adopt an amendment to the 2023 Finance Bill to replace the AME with a public health medical aid scheme. Michel Barnier (LR) defended the repeal of the AME during the 2022 Republican Congress ; it was also a measure included in the National Rally 's program for the 2022 presidential election.

In March 2023, LR senator Françoise Dumont pushed through an amendment to the immigration bill, replacing the AME with emergency assistance reserved for “the most serious situations and subject to payment of a stamp duty.” The aim is to “put a stop to the distribution of uncontrolled aid, which creates a migratory ‘draught’.” On September 17, 2023, Véronique Louwagie (LR) made a new proposal to reduce the number of people eligible for the scheme, to introduce a nine-month waiting period, and to prevent foreigners on the AME from obtaining reduced transport fares. In December 2023, cornered by the right-wing during the negotiations of the joint commission on the new immigration bill, Élisabeth Borne promised to “initiate a reform of the AME at the beginning of 2024.” The bill states that the AME will be maintained, but will be studied separately in 2024. On December 20, Élisabeth Borne asserts there is “no question of abolishing the AME.” After becoming prime minister, Gabriel Attal announced that the AME would be reformed by regulation before the summer of 2024, based on the Évin-Stefanini report, which worried associations.

Under the Barnier government, a review of the AME was one of the first measures announced by new Interior Minister Bruno Retailleau (LR) in 2024. The far right also demanded it, even though Health Minister Geneviève Darrieussecq (MoDem) had spoken out against its abolition a year earlier, and eight former health ministers warned against it.

The AME is governed by articles L251-1 et seq. of the French Social Action and Family Code.

In 2015, the typical beneficiary of this social benefit “is a young man aged between 30 and 34.” Two-thirds of beneficiaries live in the Paris region, Bouches-du-Rhône and French Guiana. Asylum seekers are covered by the universal health protection scheme and are therefore not eligible for the AME.

Since 2011, the AME has excluded care relating to medically assisted procreation, drugs with low medical value, originator drugs if generic versions are available, and spa treatments.

The AME does not exist in Mayotte, but care is covered by the regional health agency. People in an irregular situation have no protection and have to pay for their care, despite requests from the Défenseur des droits.

As its name suggests, the AME is financed by the State budget, not the health insurance scheme. More precisely, expenditure is one of the two actions (along with the Fonds d'indemnisation des victimes de l'amiante) of the “Protection maladie” program of the “santé” mission.

At December 31, 2020, the number of beneficiaries was 382,899, compared with 208,974 at December 31, 2011, and 180,415 at December 31, 2003. The budget was €588m in 2012 and €233.48m in 2007. In 2021, the Senate points to the under-budgeting of AME appropriations about actual expenditure, leading to a deficit, as well as “insufficient solutions to stem the flow.” For 2022, the budget presented in the finance bill is €1,079 million, broken down into €1,008 million for ordinary AME, €70 million for urgent care, and €1 million for humanitarian AME and medical aid for people in police custody.

This €1 billion in 2022 is equivalent to just under 0.5% of total health insurance expenditure (€254.9 billion).

The AME is accused of abuses and malfunctions, even though it is closely monitored by the IGAS and IGF (which published reports in 2003, 2007, 2010, 2019, and 2023). It is regularly called into question, mainly by elected representatives of the right and extreme right.

To justify this change in conditions of access to the AME, for example, UMP deputy Dominique Tian declared that “a worker who pays his compulsory social security contributions but has no supplementary health insurance is less well covered than an illegal foreigner receiving the AME,” which is false and contributes to the false information circulating about the AME to justify its repeal or changes.

Sociological studies show that obtaining this assistance is an obstacle course.

In 2019, only 51% of those eligible were covered. Access to the scheme is complex and increases primarily with the length of time spent in the country, but even after more than five years of residence in France, 35% of those eligible still do not have the AME. Fluency in French is the other main determinant of access to the AME, and the proportion of people benefiting from it falls to 17% for those with poor language skills.

In 2023, associations noted the growing difficulties in accessing the AME. Submitting the application in person at a CPAM counter, or in some departments after making an appointment on a website or via a surcharged number, is slow, a source of considerable difficulty, and varies greatly from one department to another.

In 2010, Jean Leonetti, vice president of the UMP group in the French National Assembly, claimed that the AME was being used by “fraud rings.” UMP deputy and urologist Bernard Debré also points to the risk of fraud: according to him, foreigners would like “us to find them a serious illness! Some are even prepared to undergo surgery four or five times” to increase their chances of regularization.

On the contrary, the IGAS and IGF report of 2010 considers that the risk of fraud is low and that the rise in costs (+13.3% in 2009) is not explained by an increase in the number of beneficiaries, but by efforts to improve control of entitlements in hospitals, which enables better recovery of expenses. Claude Goasguen, strongly opposed to the AME, acknowledged in 2011 that “observed fraud does not explain the growth in expenditure.”

In their 2023 report, Claude Évin and Patrick Stéfanini write that the facts listed in their report demonstrate that the system is “well supervised (...) controlled (...) does not generate healthcare consumption revealing atypicality, abuses or structural fraud [even if nothing can] protect against the risks of abuse or fraud in general.” Le Monde sums up the report, writing: “Far from the idea, still stirred up on the right, of a system exposed to fraud, the rapporteurs point out that there is no evidence to support the idea of ‘abuse’, and with 14% of cases audited, the AME is ‘the benefit managed by the Assurance-maladie with the highest audit rate’, even though it accounts for only 0.5% of overall expenditure.”

According to Le Figaro, the scope of application of the AME is broad. After three months' presence on French soil, “the AME covers 100% of medical and hospital care (at agreed rates), with no advance payment for: medical and dental care, medication, analysis costs, hospitalization and surgery, certain vaccinations and screening tests, contraception, voluntary termination of pregnancy, etc.” After nine months' presence in France, the scope is extended even further to care for “non-severe pathologies.” After 9 months in France, the scope is further extended to cover care for “non-severe pathologies.” These include operations to remove protruding ears, knee prostheses, shoulder prostheses, hip prostheses, and gastroplasties for obesity. For all these services, transport and physiotherapy are also covered. Until 2011, medically assisted reproduction (MAP) and spa treatments were also reimbursed. In the general press, several doctors have denounced forms of medical tourism at taxpayers' expense.

According to Jean-François Corty, vice-president of Médecins du Monde, the allegations are false: “Some comments by elected representatives mentioning abuses for cosmetic surgery or spa treatments are simply fantasy.” Claude Évin and Patrick Stéfanini also conclude that “the AME does not appear to be an attractive factor for prospective immigrants.” For Jean-François Corty, a doctor, researcher, and vice-president of Médecins du Monde, “the supposed ‘call d'air’ doesn't exist in the real world, it's just a figment of the imagination.”

Abolishing the AME would pose a serious public health problem, in terms of health, economics, and ethics. Restricting access to healthcare for the most vulnerable would lead to the spread and aggravation of progressive diseases. The result would be an influx of patients arriving later, with more severe disorders, and costing even more.

On this basis, most of the leaders of medical organizations are in favor of maintaining the AME: this is the case of the CSMF, MG France, UFML (Union Française pour une Médecine Libre), ISNI (InterSyndicale Nationale des Internes), and the national conference of CHU CME presidents.

In October 2023, Jean-François Delfraissy, President of the French National Consultative Ethics Committee for Health and Life Sciences, took a stand in favor of safeguarding the AME, which he saw as an indispensable mechanism: priority must be given to respecting the dignity of individuals, fraternity and solidarity. In 2017, a CCNE opinion on migrants' health denounced the “instrumentalization of health as a tool for refoulement”. Other voices along the same lines are being heard, such as those of hospital federations and the Ordre des Médecins, Médecins du Monde, and Comede.

On November 11, 2023, in an appeal sent to AFP, 3,500 doctors signed a “declaration of disobedience” following the Senate's adoption of an amendment abolishing the AME and transforming it into “emergency medical aid.” Among the signatories are Antoine Pelissolo and Patrick Pelloux.

In a press release published on November 28, 2023 (voted by 70 votes in favor, 7 against, and 8 abstentions), the French National Academy of Medicine reiterates the need to maintain the AME “which obeys the principle that guides our ethics as doctors, with the duty to care for any patient, whatever their situation, legal or otherwise.” and concludes “The ANM reaffirms its opposition to any restriction of the scope of care that implies an artificial distinction between urgent and non-urgent care.”

In their 2023 report, Claude Évin and Patrick Stéfanini oppose the Senate's plan to replace the AME with emergency medical aid, which would increase the “renunciation of care,” resulting in “a deterioration in the state of health of the people concerned, possible consequences for public health and increased pressure on healthcare establishments,” and ultimately an increase in the cost of the healthcare system.

The 2019 IGF-IGAS report presents the AME as one of the most generous systems in Europe, but this conclusion is called into question in the 2023 report, in which Claude Évin and Patrick Stéfanini compare the French system with that of Germany, Belgium, Denmark, Spain, Italy, Great Britain, Sweden, and Switzerland. They observe “a general difficulty in understanding the systems,” but make the “observation that the French system is, partly due to its centralized nature, the most structured and transparent of all.”

The State Public Works Engineering Corps (French: Ingénieurs des Travaux Publics de l'Etat (ITPE)) is a corps of civil servants (fonctionnaires) with a degree from the National School of State Public Works of the State (ENTPE), working for the Government of France. Its members are mainly employed as team or project managers in the French Civil Service, overseeing areas such as infrastructure, environment, transportation, and energy.

Public works engineers are civil servants who form the main technical supervisory body of the ministries responsible for the environment, housing, territories, transport, and the maritime sector. ITPEs, belonging to an interministerial body, may also work in most other French civil service ministries (Ministries of Justice, Foreign Affairs, National Education, Interior, Defense, Culture, Prime Minister's Office, etc.) and be assigned throughout France, including the French overseas territories and territories, as well as to certain positions within French embassies abroad.

During their studies at ENTPE, civil servant students (not yet tenured) are classified as:

The members of the corps are in charge of the supervision and management of public policies requiring technical and scientific skills; their work is not restricted to traditional public works areas, but include areas as :

Engineers carry out their assignments and responsibilities throughout France, including French overseas territories. They could also be stationed in French embassies abroad, as well as in international and European Union organizations, such as the World Bank and European Commission.

The majority of the engineers are recruited directly during their 2-years post secondary studies in classes préparatoires by taking a competitive examination in mathematics, physics, and engineering. If accepted they join the National School of Public Works (French: École nationale des travaux publics de l'État) as a paid civil servant in training for 3 years.

During their studies in this engineering school (grandes écoles d'ingénieurs), they receive a multidisciplinary education in the fields of competences in which they will be brought to work once graduated. They also carry out a professional internship per year of study, in France or abroad. After graduation, they can go directly to an assigned position in the civil service. It is also possible for them to be selected to do a thesis in a field of interest of the Government or to carry out an additional year of specialization study to occupy certain positions requiring specific technical skills.

State Secretariat for the Sea (Secrétariat d'État chargé de la Mer) is a French State Secretariat directly under the authority of the Prime Minister of France. Its mission is to develop and implement the government's policy in the field of the sea in its various aspects.

The Secretariat of State for the Sea develops and implements the government's policy in the field of the sea in its various aspects, national and international, particularly in terms of maritime economy, maritime influence and impact.

The Secretary of State for the Sea has authority, by delegation from the Prime Minister, over the General Inspectorate of Maritime Affairs and, jointly with the Minister of Agriculture and Food Sovereignty, over the Directorate general for Maritime affairs, Fisheries and Aquaculture. He has authority, by delegation from the Prime Minister, jointly with the Minister for Ecological Transition and Territorial Cohesion and the Minister for Energy Transition, over the general secretariat and the general commission for sustainable development.

In particular, the General Secretariat for the Sea is at his disposal. The State Secretariat for the Sea relies, in metropolitan France and overseas, on services and departments present in the regions and departments.

States of emergency in France (French : état d'urgence) are dispositions to grant special powers to the executive branch in case of exceptional circumstances.

Four main provisions concern various kinds of " states of emergency " in France: two of those stem from the Constitution of France, and the other two from a statute:

There are distinctions between article 16, article 36, and the 1955 Act, which concern mainly the distribution of powers. These dispositions have been used at various times, in 1955, 1958, 1961, 1988, 2005, 2015 and 2017.

The French constitution, adopted in October 1958, was drafted taking into account the difficulties experienced by the executive in 1940 during the Battle of France and the contemporary state of affairs, namely the Algerian war.

Article 16 of the constitution grants the President of France "extraordinary powers" in exceptional cases, leading to an effective "state of exception":

When the institutions of the Republic, the independence of the nation, the integrity of its territory, or the fulfillment of its international commitments are under grave and immediate threat and when the proper functioning of the constitutional governmental authorities is interrupted, the President of the Republic shall take the measures demanded by these circumstances after official consultation with the Prime Minister, the presidents of the Assemblies, and the Constitutional Council [ fr ].

He shall inform the nation of these measures by a message.

These measures must be prompted by a will to ensure within the shortest possible time that the constitutional governmental authorities have the means of fulfilling their duties. The Constitutional Council shall be consulted with regard to such measures.

The National Assembly may not be dissolved during the exercise of emergency powers.

After thirty days of the exercise of the exceptional powers, the Constitutional Council can be referred to by the President of the National Assembly, the President of the Senate, sixty députés or sénateurs (members of each chamber), to determine if the conditions provided in the first paragraph are still met. The Council shall rule in the shortest time possible by a public ruling. The Council rules ipso jure and rules in the same conditions after sixty days of the exercise of the exceptional powers and at any moment beyond this period.

The conditions are both that the state is confronted with exceptional circumstances and that the regular institutions are disrupted and cannot govern effectively. This article of the constitution of the French Fifth Republic has been qualified as "liberticide" by critics. Invoked on 23 April 1961 during the Algerian War ; normal functioning of institutions was quickly restored.

In the judgment Rubin de Servens of 2 March 1962, the Council of State [ fr ] judged that it could not itself invoke Article 16, as that constituted an "act of government". Furthermore, the State Council considered that it could only pronounce on rulings which were not legislative acts carried out during this period. Thus, a legislative measure (although the role of Parliament is not specified, just that it is not to be dissolved) which breaches fundamental liberties cannot be appealed against before the State Council.

In 1972, the Common Programme of the Left (issued from an alliance between the Socialist Party and the Communist Party) proposed to repeal Article 16. However, François Mitterrand 's programme for the socialist presidential campaign in 1981, that he eventually won, did not include this proposition. In 1992, the socialist government of Pierre Bérégovoy proposed to amend this article during a project of constitutional reform; however, the project was not implemented. Also in 1992, the Vedel Commission, created by François Mitterrand, proposed to give to the Conseil Constitutionnel (Constitutional Council), on the concerted initiative of the president of the Republic and the presidents of both chambers (the Assemblée nationale and the Sénat), the mission to determine that the conditions required for the use of Article 16 were, in fact, met.

On 23 July 2008, a constitutional act was passed which, among other amendments, added a paragraph to Article 16 of the constitution which stated that after 30 days the Constitutional Council can be requested to determine in a public ruling whether or not the conditions that justified the use of Article 16 are still current. At any time beyond 60 days, the Council rules on this issue without the need for a referral.

Article 36 of the constitution is concerned with the state of siege (État de siège (France) [ fr ], which can be decreed by the president in the Council of Ministers for a period of twelve days and which can only be extended with the approval of Parliament. A state of siege may be declared in case of an "imminent peril resulting from a foreign war [ guerre étrangère, or simply "war"] or an armed rebellion (une insurrection à main armée).

Military authorities may take police powers if they judge it necessary. Fundamental liberties may be restricted, such as the right of association, legalization of searches in private places day and night, the power to expel people who have been condemned for common law matters or people who do not have the right of residence in the territory, etc.

The state of emergency in France is framed by the Law n°55-385 of 3 April 1955 (pre-dating the constitution of the Fifth Republic) and modeled on the " état de siège ". It was created in the context of the Algerian War, to allow the authorities to manage the crisis without having to declare the " état de siège ", which allows the military to take over a large part of the civilian authorities and which was conceived for wartime.

The 1955 statute states that the state of emergency can be decreed by the president in the Council of Ministers. The decision to proclaim the state of emergency can only last for 12 days. To extend the state of emergency for a longer period of time necessitates a law passed regularly through the Parliament.

Proclaiming the state of emergency gives exceptional powers to the Minister of the Interior and to prefects. The Minister can pronounce house arrests. The prefects can regulate or forbid circulation and gathering in some areas: the power of curfew, which mayors can pronounce for the territory of their city independently of the state of emergency, is extended to prefects.

The Minister and the prefects can, for the part of the territory concerned by the state of emergency, order places of gathering to be closed. Authorities can also order that legally-detained weapons be relinquished to them. There is no need for the administration to motivate its decisions: house arrests or decisions forbidding someone to enter a defined area can be appealed.

All of those powers are not enacted by the simple proclamation of the state of emergency but may be decided by the authorities if the need arises.

If the decree, or later, the law, says so, the authorities can:

Article 12 of the 1955 law allows, if a decree specifically provides it, the transfer of some crimes from the judicial jurisdiction to that of the military.

This law is modeled after the society of the time, to deal with a specific crisis, and its objective was to prevent a civil war or very severe unrest emanating from a part of the population. Some parts have since become obsolete:

To control the COVID-19 pandemic in France, the Parliament created a sanitary state of emergency (état d'urgence sanitaire). To protect public health, the prime minister can:

This state of emergency is framed by the law of 23 March 2020 and can be declared in the Council of Ministers for a period of 2 months. Extensions to this must be voted for by Parliament.

Since 1955, a state of emergency has been decreed seven times:

Steak tartare, or tartar steak, is a French dish of raw ground (minced) beef. It is usually served with onions, capers, parsley or chive, salt, pepper, Worcestershire sauce and other seasonings, often presented separately, to be added to taste. It is commonly served topped with a raw egg yolk. It is similar to Piedmontese battuta al coltello, as well as Levantine kibbeh nayyeh, Ethiopian kitfo, Turkish çiğ köfte, German Mett and Korean yukhoe.

The name tartare is sometimes generalized to other raw meat or fish dishes. In France, a less-common variant called tartare aller-retour is a mound of mostly raw ground meat lightly seared on both sides.

A popular caricature of Turco-Mongol warriors—called Tatars or Tartars—has them tenderizing meat under their saddles, then eating it raw. This story was popularized by the French chronicler Jean de Joinville in the 13th century, although he never actually encountered Tatars himself and used the story as a way of showing that the Tartars were uncivilized. It is possible that this story was a confusion: The Cambridge Medieval History says the story was started by early chroniclers who saw Mongol horsemen putting thin slices of raw meat beneath their saddles, but that the meat was meant to help heal the horses' saddle sores rather than fill the men's stomachs. The book notes that the meat would have been drenched with sweat and inedible by the end of the day. The same story has been told about pastirma.

In the late 19th century, the Hamburg steak became popular on the menus of many restaurants in the port of New York. This kind of fillet was beef minced by hand, lightly salted, and often smoked, and usually served raw in a dish along with onions and bread crumbs. Hamburg steak gained popularity because of its ease of preparation and decreasing cost. This is evident from its detailed description in some of the most popular cookbooks of the day. This preparation style was used by 1887 in some U.S. restaurants and was also used for feeding patients in hospitals; the Hamburg steak was served raw or lightly cooked and was accompanied by a raw egg.

It is not known when the first restaurant recipe for steak tartare appeared. While not providing a clear name, it is possible that the dish was popularized in Paris by restaurateurs who misunderstood Jules Verne 's description of " koulbat " ("...a patty of crushed meat and eggs...") in his 1875 novel Michael Strogoff.

In the early 20th century, what is now generally known as "steak tartare" was called steak à l'Americaine in Europe. One variation on that dish included serving it with tartar sauce ; the 1922 edition of Escoffier 's Le Guide Culinaire defines " Steak à la tartare " as " steak à l'Americaine " made without egg yolk, served with tartar sauce on the side. " Steak à la tartare " (literally meaning "served with tartar sauce") was later shortened to "steak tartare". Over time, the distinction between steak à l'Americaine and its tartar-sauce variant disappeared. The 1938 edition of Larousse Gastronomique describes steak tartare as raw ground beef served with a raw egg yolk, without any mention of tartar sauce.

"À la tartare" or simply "tartare" can still mean "served with tartar sauce" for some dishes, mostly fried fish. At the same time, the name "tartare" is also sometimes applied to other dishes of raw meats or fish, such as tuna tartare, introduced in 1975 by the restaurant Le Duc in Paris.

Health concerns have reduced the popularity of this meat dish in some parts of the world because of the danger of contamination by bacteria and parasites such as Toxoplasma gondii and Taenia saginata.

According to the World Health Organization, when basic hygienic rules are followed and fresh meat is used, the risk of bacterial infection is low. However, in the United States, ground beef is not typically sold in the expectation that it will be eaten uncooked. The process of grinding beef can introduce any surface pathogens into the interior of the meat, where they pose greater danger. The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) recommends avoiding uncooked ground beef.

Toxoplasma gondii is a parasite that may be found in raw or undercooked meat. A multicentre case-control study found inadequately cooked or inadequately cured meat as the main risk factor for toxoplasma infection in all centres. Due to the risk of congenital toxoplasmosis in the fetus, pregnant women are advised not to eat raw meat.

Taenia saginata (beef tapeworm) may also be acquired via ingestion of undercooked beef. The tapeworm is transmitted to humans via infectious larval cysts found in cattle. People with taeniasis may not know they have a tapeworm infection because the symptoms are usually mild or nonexistent.

Steak tartare is served at many high-end restaurants in the United States.

In Wisconsin, a variation of a steak tartare sandwich called a " cannibal sandwich " is popular among those of German descent ; it uses sirloin, rye bread, salt, pepper, and chopped onions.

A popular street food in Mexico, carne tártara or carne apache, is a dish of ground beef cured in lime juice, like a ceviche.

Chilean cuisine features a dish of prepared raw beef called crudos.

In southern Brazil, German immigrants influenced Hackepeter or carne de onça in Curitiba, where this dish is very common and served covered with chives.

Ethiopians have long eaten a dish of raw, minced beef called kitfo.

Raw meat is found in Nepalese cuisine, notably among the Newar of Kathmandu Valley.

In Belgium, a filet américain nature is served like steak tartare; pre-seasoned raw minced meat is a filet américain préparé, and used in the Martino sandwich.

In Denmark, ''tartar'' is served on Danish dark rye bread, as a part of a smørrebrødsbord (smorgasbord).

In Poland, ''tatar'' is usually served with an egg yolk, chopped onions, pickles and bread, as an appetizer, especially with alcohol, usually vodka.

In Italy, raw beef in Piedmont is carne cruda all'albese (or battuta al coltello), often made with Fassona beef and seasoned simply with olive oil, lemon, salt, and pepper.

In Czechia, "tatarák" is usually served with egg yolk and is used as spread on fried bread coated with raw garlic.

Stellantis N.V. is a multinational automotive manufacturing corporation formed in 2021 through the merger of the French PSA Group and Italian-American Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA), which was itself created by the merger of Italy's Fiat S.p.A. and the US-based Chrysler, completed in stages between 2009 and 2014. Stellantis is headquartered in Hoofddorp, Netherlands, while the CEO now operates from Auburn Hills, Michigan, United States.

The company designs, manufactures, and markets vehicles under 14 brands: Abarth, Alfa Romeo, Chrysler, Citroën, Dodge, DS Automobiles, Fiat, Jeep, Lancia, Maserati, Opel, Peugeot, Ram, and Vauxhall. At the time of the merger, Stellantis employed approximately 300,000 people, with manufacturing operations in 30 countries and a commercial presence in over 130 markets worldwide.

The company says the name Stellantis is derived from the Latin verb stello 'to brighten with stars'. The present participle stellans means "starry" or "starlike". "N.V." stands for naamloze vennootschap, a publicly traded company, equivalent to the British " PLC " or French " S.A. ".

In early 2019, Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA) pursued a merger with French automaker Renault, reaching a provisional agreement. However, the deal collapsed due to political concerns from the French government and resistance from Renault's alliance partner, Nissan. FCA subsequently turned to another French automaker, the PSA Group, and in December 2019, the two companies agreed to merge, forming the world's fourth-largest automaker by global vehicle sales, with projected annual cost savings of €3.7 billion, or about US$4.22 billion.

The European Commission approved the merger on 21 December 2020 with minimal conditions. Shareholders of both companies approved the deal on 4 January 2021, and the merger was completed on 16 January 2021. The combined entity was renamed Stellantis N.V. on 17 January, with shares beginning to trade under the symbol "STLA" on the Milan Stock Exchange and Euronext Paris on 18 January and on the New York Stock Exchange on 19 January. For accounting purposes, PSA was designated the acquirer, and financial statements reflect PSA's historical performance.

Following the merger, the largest shareholders of Stellantis were EXOR NV, the investment company of the Agnelli family, the founders of Fiat, with a 14.2% stake; Peugeot Invest, the Peugeot family's holding company, with 7%; and Bpifrance, the French state-owned investment bank, with 6%.

The focus behind the creation of Stellantis was to establish a major global automotive group, modeled on French luxury conglomerates like LVMH or Kering, that would harmonize and leverage its portfolio of automotive brands, much like Volkswagen Group has done. Furthermore, the main reason that pushed towards the merger was the chronic delay of Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA) in the development of the electric motor, while PSA Group was much more advanced in its development.

The name Stellantis itself comes from the Latin, meaning "sparkling with stars", and comes from a passage in Virgil's Aeneid.

(Latin) "Hinc illum Corythi Tyrrhena ab sede profectum aurea nunc solio stellantis regia caeli accipit et numerum divorum altaribus auget" (Virgil, Aeneid VII, 209-211)

The choice of the name was precisely to enhance, or rather illuminate, the history of the brands present in the group, conveying a sense of dream and pursuit of excellence of the new automotive group. The name Stellantis was chosen by the French advertising agency Publicis in collaboration with the Nomen agency.

Carlos Tavares, the CEO of PSA Group, was appointed CEO of Stellantis with a five-year term. Immediately following the merger, Tavares announced plans to offer 29 electrified vehicle models by the end of 2021 and to invest over €30 billion in electrification and software by the end of the decade.

In response to the global semiconductor shortage that forced the company to slow or stop production at its plants, Stellantis signed a partnership with Foxconn in 2021 to co-develop automotive chips, and in 2023, the two companies launched a joint venture called SiliconAuto, based in the Netherlands.

In 2022, Stellantis halted Russian operations due to sanctions related to the invasion of Ukraine. In early 2024, Russian partners began producing Citroën-branded vehicles at the Kaluga plant, prompting Stellantis to state it had "lost control" of its assets in Russia.

In 2022, Stellantis established the electric vehicle battery joint ventures NextStar Energy with LG Energy Solution in Canada and StarPlus Energy with Samsung SDI in the US. NextStar was dissolved in February 2026.

Stellantis also faced legal and regulatory scrutiny. In May 2022, the company pleaded guilty to criminal charges and paid $300 million to settle a U.S. Department of Justice investigation into diesel emissions fraud affecting over 100,000 vehicles.

The company continued expanding its mobility and autonomous technology portfolio, acquiring carsharing platform Share Now in July 2022 and autonomous driving startup aiMotive in November 2022.

In October 2023, Stellantis acquired a 20% stake in Chinese EV manufacturer Leapmotor for €1.5 billion, forming a joint venture, Leapmotor International, to handle global sales and production outside China.

The company announced a €3 billion (US$3.2 billion) share buyback in 2024.

Under the leadership of Tavares, Stellantis faced mounting criticism over its cost-cutting strategy, declining sales, and strained relationships with key stakeholders. Tavares implemented aggressive restructuring measures, including workforce reductions and tight control over product development, which some analysts blamed for delays in new model launches and weakening brand performance, particularly in North America. U.S. dealers expressed concern about rising inventories and brand mismanagement, while the United Auto Workers criticized the company over job cuts and halted investment plans. Stellantis reported a 70% drop in net profit in 2024, with global shipments and U.S. market share declining significantly. Amid internal friction with the board and worsening financial performance, Tavares resigned in December 2024, two years before his contract was set to expire.

On 28 May 2025, the board unanimously appointed Antonio Filosa, a longtime executive who had led Stellantis operations in North and South America, as CEO, effective 23 June 2025. Filosa is expected to place renewed emphasis on the North American market.

In May 2026, the company announced it will manufacture Peugeot and Jeep vehicles in China following a deal with Dongfeng Motor Corporation. In July 2026, within the framework of the Dieselgate scandal, the British courts rejected the accusations against five manufacturers, including Peugeot-Citroën, finding in their favor. In August 2026, Stellantis returned to operating profit in the first half of 2026, but profitability per car still remains quite low.

Stellantis continues to lose significant market share due to the poor quality of its 1.2-liter PureTech engine, derived from PSA Group. This perception has caused lasting damage to the image of Stellantis vehicles equipped with that type of engine and that specific displacement.

The active brand portfolio of Stellantis as of 2025 is shown below. This list does not contain any discontinued brands owned by the company which have been placed into dormancy either directly or by its predecessor organizations.

Between the departure of Tavares as CEO and the appointment of Filosa, the company went six months without a CEO.

Stellantis stated that it supports the Trump administration's proposal to repeal the 2009 Endangerment Finding and all greenhouse gas emissions standards for motor vehicles, which would also repeal all federal regulation of GHGs across all sectors of the economy. Stellantis endorsed the Transportation Freedom Act in March 2025, a bill that would weaken and repeal many emissions regulations governing passenger vehicles in the United States. The bill sought to strip California of its authority to enforce the Advanced Clean Cars II policy, which required manufacturers to achieve 100% ZEV sales in participating states by 2035. According to the Alliance for Automotive Innovation, about 30% of the US vehicle market was regulated by ACC II, which is significantly lower than the company's stated decarbonization target for the US.

The company opposed Canada's Electric Vehicle Availability Standard in a December 2025 letter to PM Mark Carney and an October 2025 testimony in the House of Commons.

Although Stellantis CEO Carlos Tavares supported a phase-out date of internal combustion engine vehicles by 2035 in statements made in February 2024, the company advocated for flexibilities for meeting the 2025 targets in EU's CO 2 emissions standards for cars and vans in early 2025.

(51% Arab Organization for Industrialization (AOI); 49% Stellantis)

Stellantis Motorsport is a department led by director and senior vice president Jean-Marc Finot. It is responsible for the motorsport activities of the corporation's brands, divisions, and subsidiaries:

The Stellantis Motorsport Racing Shop combines Citroën Racing, Peugeot Sport and Opel Motorsports' customer racing distribution and retail sales operations. It is also known as Peugeot Citroën Racing Shop and Peugeot Citroën Opel Racing Shop.

The Stellantis Motorsport Cup is a rally competition run in Belgium, France and Spain using Peugeot 208 and Opel Corsa Rally4 cars. The cup originated in Belgium and Luxembourg as PSA Motorsport Cup Belux.

In 2021, Stellantis released its "Dare Forward" strategic plan, which aims to invest €50 billion before 2030 to fund electrification of vehicles and sets global sales and sustainability targets. Goals include achieving 100% battery electric vehicle (BEV) sales for passenger cars in Europe and 50% of passenger car and light-duty truck sales in the United States by 2030, across 75 electric vehicle models. Stellantis is using a mix of nickel-based (NMC) and cobalt-free battery packs, and lithium iron phosphate (LFP) packs for cheaper BEV variants, to power vehicles with front-, rear-, and all-wheel-drive systems, for driving ranges between 500 and 800 kilometers (300–500 miles).

In 2023, Stellantis introduced SUSTAINera, a hub for recycling and sourcing used parts to improve circular economy sustainability goals, reduce waste, and offset emissions. The initiative aims to contribute to the goal of achieving carbon net zero by 2038. Stellantis hopes to also further these goals by integrating its B-Parts aftermarket platform, acquired by PSA in 2020.

On 12 December 2024, it was reported that Stellantis have agreed to establish a joint-venture with CATL to invest €4.1 billion in building a large-scale lithium iron phosphate battery plant in Zaragoza, Spain. This is in line with its 2038 zero carbon target.

STMicroelectronics NV (commonly referred to as ST or STMicro) is a European multinational semiconductor contract manufacturing and design company. It is the largest of such companies in Europe. The company is incorporated in the Netherlands and headquartered in Plan-les-Ouates, Switzerland. It manufactures a wide range of microelectronics, including the widely-used STM8 and STM32 microcontrollers.

ST was founded in 1987 from the merger of two state-owned semiconductor corporations, SGS Microelettronica of Italy and Thomson Semiconducteurs of France, with the aim of creating a corporation that could compete effectively with international semiconductor manufacturers. From early on, the company's senior management sought out poorly-served niches in the global market, such as microcontrollers, application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) and analogue chips, and pursued vertical integration of its manufacturing. Another key strategy of ST was its focus on strategic partnerships, such as with Nokia and Seagate Technology ; it would form 31 separate strategic alliances within its first 14 years of operation. In 1994, ST was floated on the Paris and New York stock exchanges, as well as being listed on the Italian Bourse four years later, at which point Thomson SA sold its stake in the ST. To further consolidate and expand its position in the semiconductor industry, numerous acquisitions were completed during the 1990s, helping ST to become the third largest chipmaker (in terms of sales) during 2001.

The company's growth slowed somewhat during the 2000s; several major partnerships were formed during this decade, including the memory-oriented joint venture Numonyx between Intel and ST, the Crolles 2 Alliance between Motorola, TSMC, Philips, and the ST Ericsson joint venture that joined ST-NXP Wireless with Ericsson Mobile Platforms. In the 2010s, ST became a key supplier for SpaceX 's Starlink satellite communications network. In 2023, ST partnered with Synopsys to design a working chip on Microsoft 's cloud platform, marking the first instance that artificial intelligence (AI) software had been utilized for chip design. In 2025, ST launched a new chip co-developed this chip with Amazon Web Services (AWS) for the AI data centre sector.

ST was formed in 1987 by the merger of two government-owned semiconductor companies: Italian SGS Microelettronica (where SGS stands for Società Generale Semiconduttori, "General Semiconductor Company"), and French Thomson Semiconducteurs, the semiconductor arm of Thomson.

SGS Microelettronica originated in 1972 from the merger of two companies (the L'Aquila -based vacuum tube and semiconductor producer ATES (Aquila Tubi e Semiconduttori), and the Agrate Brianza -headquartered semiconductor specialist Società Generale Semiconduttori). By the mid-1980s, SGS had been under pressure from multiple larger American competitors, including Texas Instruments and Motorola.

Thomson Semiconducteurs was created in 1982 by the French government's widespread nationalization of industries following the election of François Mitterrand to the presidency. It comprised the semiconductor activities of the French electronics company Thomson; the US-based firm Mostek (bought from United Technologies in 1985); Silec (established in 1977); Eurotechnique (founded in 1979 as a joint venture between Saint-Gobain of France and US-based National Semiconductor); EFCIS (formerly known as CEA-Leti); and SESCOSEM (founded in 1969). While Thomson Semiconducteurs was both loss-making and bureaucratic, it had conducted advanced research into emerging chip technologies.

The motivation for the cross-border merger that created ST came from both political and economic sources. By creating SGS-Thomson Microelectronics as a new entity headquartered in Geneva, politicians in both France and Italy sought to create a more powerful European company that could stand up against American dominance of the industry, and even prevent Europe from greater dependence on imported technology. Furthermore, both SGS and Thomson already cooperated in some areas, including a strategic alliance to develop and produce non-volatile memory. Upon its creation in 1987, this new corporation was named SGS-THOMSON and headed by chief executive officer Pasquale Pistorio.

Shortly after its establishment, SGS-Thomson was the 14th largest semiconductor suppliers, recording US$850 million sales. Rather that competing head-to-head with its largest competitors, the early business strategy of STM was to orient towards various niches of the market that possessed high growth potential, which included sensors, microcontrollers, power electronics, and application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs). One key early example of this strategy took place in 1989, when STM produced a chip that integrated power supply and power management functions that improved the performance of the mobile phones produced by the Finnish firm Nokia. Furthermore, in contrast to many American and Japanese chip manufacturers that chose to halt production of analogue chips in favour of digital ones during the 1980s, ST retained its analogue capacity, which was required for managing power, radio frequency transmission, sound, and graphics; accordingly ST was well-positioned when such chips were needed in volume during the 1990s in growth areas such as mobile phones, wireless computers, and consumer devices such as DVD players.

Early on, ST entered into prosperous strategic alliances with the French firms Thomson Multimedia and Alcatel (in the consumer electronics and telecommunications sectors respectively). Recognising that the largest growth opportunities were in the wider international market, senior management successfully secured its first major oversea alliance with Seagate Technology, the world's largest producer of hard drives. Under this alliance, ST used its custom chips to develop smaller, cheaper, and more energy-efficient drives; accordingly, Seagate became one of ST's largest customers. ST typically pursued a strategy of gradually deepening its business relationships, over a ten year period, Nokia elevated ST from being an ordinary supplier, to a premier supplier, and then to a partner.

Throughout the 1990s, STM pursued vertical integration, performing the design, manufacture, and testing of its own semiconductors inhouse; this was in contrast to most European-based electronics firms, which were typically either downsizing or outsourcing production to other parties. The company experienced double-digit growth during the early 1990s.

On 8 December 1994, the company completed its initial public offering on the Paris and New York stock exchanges. Owner Thomson SA sold its stake in the company in 1998 when the company also listed on the Italian Bourse in Milan, after which the firm adopted its current name of STMicroelectronics.

ST has been an active participating in the consolidation of the semiconductor industry. Between 1989 and 2000, it acquired numerous other companies. In 1989, it bought the British company Inmos, known for its transputer microprocessors, from parent Thorn EMI. In 1999, it acquired the research & development company UK-based VLSI-Vision CMOS Image Sensor, which had been a spin-off from Edinburgh University ; following the purchase, it became STMicroelectronics' Imaging Division. In 2000, it purchased the semiconductor activities of the Canadian telecoms firm Nortel. That same year, ST also bought WaferScale Integration Inc. (WSI, Fremont, California), a vendor of EPROM and flash-memory-based programmable system chips;

In 2001, ST became the third largest chipmaker (in terms of sales) behind Intel and Toshiba and had operations across 27 countries. Bolstered by no less than 31 separate strategic alliances, the firm had experienced a compound average revenue growth rate of 20.3 percent between 1998 and 2001. Another factor credited for ST's strong performance was its decentralised corporate organisation, which minimised overhead and hierarchy and left many impactful decisions to peripherical figures. The firm's customer base comprised a wide array of manufacturers across the consumer electronics, telecommunications, computer peripherals, automobiles, and security sectors.

In 2002, Motorola and TSMC joined ST and Philips in a new technology partnership; the Crolles 2 Alliance was created, being named after a new 12" wafer manufacturing facility located in Crolles, France. Also in 2002, Alcatel 's Microelectronics division, which along with the incorporation of smaller ventures such as the UK company Synad Ltd, was acquired by ST, helping the company expand into the Wireless-LAN market. In 2007, the US-based video processing specialist Genesis Microchip was also bought.

In 2005, long-running chief executive officer Pasquale Pistorio was succeeded by Carlo Bozotti, who had previously headed the memory products division and had been with the company's predecessor since 1977. That same year, ST was ranked fifth, behind Intel, Samsung, Texas Instruments and Toshiba, but ahead of Infineon, Renesas, NEC, NXP Semiconductors and Freescale. The company was the largest European semiconductors supplier, ahead of Infineon and NXP.

Early in 2007, NXP Semiconductors (formerly Philips Semiconductors) and Freescale (formerly Motorola Semiconductors) decided to stop their participation in the Crolles 2 Alliance. Accordingly, this Alliance came to an end on 31 December 2007. On 22 May 2007, ST and Intel created a joint venture in the memory application called Numonyx : this new company merged ST and Intel Flash Memory activities. Semiconductor market consolidation continued with ST and NXP announcing on 10 April 2008, the creation of a new joint venture of their mobile activities, with ST owning 80% of the new company and NXP 20%. This joint venture began on 20 August 2008. On 10 February 2009, ST Ericsson, a joint venture bringing together ST-NXP Wireless and Ericsson Mobile Platforms, was established.

During the early 2010s, ST Ericsson, a 50/50 joint venture between STMicroelectronics and Ericsson, was active as a multinational manufacturer of wireless products and semiconductors that were typically supplied to mobile device manufacturers. Headquartered in Geneva, it was a fabless company, outsourcing semiconductor manufacturing to foundry companies. In March 2013, it was announced that ST Ericsson would be dissolved; ST took on all of ST-Ericsson products except for the LTE multimode modem that was transferred to Ericsson.

In 2011, ST announced the creation of a joint lab with Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies to conduct research and innovation in the fields of biorobotics, smart systems and microelectronics. Past collaborations with Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies included DustBot, a platform that integrated self-navigating "service robots" for waste collection.

During 2012, ST was reported to be the third largest R&D budget across the global semiconductor industry, behind only Intel and Samsung. Three years later, the MEMS division of ST was ranked as the biggest European competitor of Silex Microsystems.

Starting in 2015, ST and SpaceX have collaborated on design of custom-made components for satellite communication. Starlink products have been co-designed with ST engineers located in France and Italy, produced in fabs located in France while packaging and testing was performed in both Malaysia and Malta. Amongst other elements, ST is responsible for the manufacture of the Starlink user terminals.

In 2018, chief executive Carlo Bozotti was succeeded by Jean-Marc Chery.

In 2023, ST partnered with Synopsys to design a working chip on Microsoft 's cloud platform, marking the first instance that artificial intelligence (AI) software had been utilized for chip design.

In 2024, ST became the sixth shareholder of Quintauris, a joint company with the goal of standardizing RISC-V ecosystem.

In 2025, the Italian government was reportedly seeking greater oversight of ST, and sought to appoint Marcello Sala, head of the economy ministry's department overseeing state-run firms and asset disposals, to ST's supervisory board; this was allegedly motived by the company's planned $300 million cost-cutting program that could have involved more than 2,000 job cuts in Italy. According to the company, 1,000 of the 2,800 positions to be eliminated around the world will be in France.

On 3 June 2025, the ST division of France's General Confederation of Labour published a letter to ST leadership, criticising their relationship with Israel's military in the context of the Gaza genocide, such as the "ST-Up" startup incubator, which has been linked to "infiniDome", a startup developing GPS technology for drones, and "Lidwave", a startup developing real-time 4D mapping services, both allegedly intended for use by the IDF. As part of industrial action, CGT members at an STMicroelectronics factory in France engaged in a work stoppage against the company's provision of chips and semiconductors for the Israeli military.

In 2025, it was announced that ST had delivered in excess of five billion radio-frequency antenna chips for SpaceX's Starlink satellite network over a ten year period, and that this volume could be set to double within two years.

In 2025, ST launched a new chip oriented towards the AI data centre market, the firm had co-developed this chip with Amazon Web Services (AWS). In February 2026, ST started the supply a range of chip solutions for AWS' data centres under a multi-year deal that was valued in excess of $1 billion. One month later, it launched high-volume production of its PIC100 photonics chip, which is targeted at the data centre market.

As of December 31, 2014, the shareholders were:

Unlike fabless semiconductor companies, STMicroelectronics owns and operates its own semiconductor wafer fabs. The company owned five 8-inch (200 mm) wafer fabs and 1 12-inch (300 mm) wafer fab in 2006. Most of the production is scaled at 0.18 μm, 0.13 μm, 90 nm and 65 nm (measurements of transistor gate length). STMicroelectronics also owns back-end plants, where silicon dies are assembled and bonded into plastic or ceramic packages.

Grenoble is one of the company's most important R&D centres, employing around 4,000 staff. The Polygone site employs 2,200 staff and is one of the historical bases of the company (ex SGS). All the historical wafer fab lines are now closed but the site hosts the headquarters of many divisions (marketing, design, industrialization) and a R&D centre, focused on silicon and software design and fab process development.

The Crolles site hosts a 200 mm (8 in) and a 300 mm (12 in) fab and was originally built as a common R&D centre for submicrometre technologies as part of the 1990 Grenoble 92 partnership between SGS-Thomson and CNET, the R&D center of French telecom company France Telecom.

The 300 mm (12 in) fab was inaugurated by French president Jacques Chirac, on 27 February 2003. It includes an R&D centre which focuses on developing new nanometric technology processes for 90-nm to 32-nm scale using 300 mm (12 in) wafers and it was developed for The Crolles 2 Alliance. This alliance of STMicroelectronics, TSMC, NXP Semiconductors (formerly Philips semiconductor) and Freescale (formerly Motorola semiconductor) partnered in 2002 to develop the facility and to work together on process development. The technologies developed at the facility were also used by global semiconductor foundry TSMC of Taiwan, allowing TSMC to build the products developed in Crolles on behalf of the Alliance partners who required such foundry capacity.

Employing around 3,000 staff, Rousset hosts several division headquarters including smartcards, microcontrollers, and EEPROM as well as several R&D centers. Rousset also hosts an 8-inch (200-mm) fab, which was opened on May 15, 2000 by French prime minister Lionel Jospin.

The site opened in 1979 as a 100 mm (3.9 in) fab operated by Eurotechnique, a joint venture between Saint-Gobain of France and National Semiconductor of the US. Rousset was sold to Thomson-CSF in 1982 as part of the French government's 1981–82 nationalization of several industries. As part of the nationalisation, a former Thomson plant in the center of Aix-en-Provence operating since the 1960s was closed and staff were transferred to the new Rousset site. The original 100 mm (4 in) fab was upgraded into 130 mm (5 in) and later 150 mm (6 in) fab in 1996. It is now being shut down. The site also has a "Wafer Level Chip Scale Packaging" accreditation for eSIM ICs.

In 1988, a small group of employees from the Thomson Rousset plant (including the director, Marc Lassus) founded a start-up company, Gemalto (formerly known as Gemplus), which became a leader in the smartcard industry.

Employing 1,500 staff, this site hosts a fab and R&D centres.

Employing 6,000 staff, the Milan facilities match Grenoble in importance. Agrate Brianza employs around 4,000 staff and is a historical base of the company (ex SGS). The site has several fab lines (including a 300 mm (12 in) fab) and an R&D center. Castelletto, employs 300 to 400 staff and hosts some divisions and R&D centres.

The Catania plant in Sicily employs 5,000 staff and hosts several R&D centers and divisions, focusing on flash memory technologies as well as two fabs. The plant was launched in 1961 by ATES to supply under licensing to RCA of the US and initially using germanium. The site's two major wafer fabs are a 200 mm (8 in) fab, opened in April 1997 by then-Italian Prime Minister Romano Prodi, and a 300 mm (12 in) fab that has never been completed and which was transferred in its current state to "Numonyx" in 2008. A new manufacturing facility for silicon carbide (SiC) substrates of 150 mm should open here in 2023.

In October 2022, the EU supported STMicroelectronics for the construction of a silicon carbide wafer plant in Catania with €293 million through the Recovery and Resilience Facility to be completed in 2026, and in line with the European Chips Act.

STmicro eSIM and SIM production facility for embedded form factor eSIM.

As of 2010, ST employed around 1,800 people in Kirkop, making it the largest private sector employer, and the country's leading exporter.

In 1970, SGS created its first assembly back-end plant in Singapore, in the area of Toa Payoh. Then in 1981, SGS decided to build a wafer fab in Singapore. Converted up to 200 mm (8 in) fab, this is now an important 200 mm (8 in) wafer fab of the group. Ang Mo Kio also hosts some design centres. As of 2004, the site employed 6,000 staff.

This site is focused on application, design and support and has about 110 employees.

Founded in 1979 as a radiofrequency products facility, the Bouskoura site now hosts back-end manufacturing activity, which includes chip testing and packaging. Since 2022 it also features a production line for silicon carbide products that primarily will be used in electric vehicles.

The Norrköping plant is a wafer fab that, at the start of production in 2021, was the first to produce 200 mm (8 in) Silicone Carbide wafers. The wafers are mostly used for SiC power devices.

The Phoenix, Arizona 8 inch (200 mm) fab, the Carrollton, Texas 6 inch (150 mm) fab, and the Ain Sebaa, Morocco fab were beginning rampdown plans, and were destined to close by 2010.

The Casablanca, Morocco site consists of two assembly parts (Bouskoura and Aïn Sebaâ) and totals around 4000 employees. It was opened in the 1960s by Thomson.

The Bristol, United Kingdom site employing well over 300 at its peak (in 2001/2) but was ramped down to approx. 150 employees at close by early 2014.

The Ottawa, Ontario, Canada plant (approx. 450 employees) was to be close down by 2013 end.

The Stone of Terpon or Pebble of Antibes (Galet d'Antibes) is an ancient artifact excavated near the seawall of Antibes, France (the ancient Antipolis) in 1866. The stone is held in the Musée d’Histoire et d’Archéologie adjacent to that same seawall in Antibes. The stone's inscription has been dated to between 450 and 425 BC, and the object may once have marked the entrance to a brothel.

The inscription was dedicated by Terpon, servant of Aphrodite.

The stone is formed in a phallic shape (23" long, 8" thick, 73 lbs.), with a carved inscription in Ionic Greek reading:

In standard Greek orthography the text would read:

It forms a distich in dactylic hexameter :

The inscription can be roughly translated as: "I am Terpon, servant of noble Aphrodite, may Kypris return grace to those who set up (the stone)."

The Strasbourg Coup (French: Échauffourée de Strasbourg) was an attempted coup d'état launched on the 30th of October, 1836 by Louis Napoleon (later known as Emperor Napoleon III) in the Eastern French city of Strasbourg. The attempt was decisively defeated.

Since the death of Napoleon 's son Napoleon II in Vienna in 1832, Louis Napoleon had proclaimed himself the heir to his uncle and leader of the Bonapartist cause. In his planning he was strongly influenced by the dramatic success of Napoleon's return from Elba in 1815 when large swathes of the French Army had defected to him. Based in Switzerland, he had built a network of conspirators in the nearby city of Strasbourg including the colonel of a regiment garrisoned there. He had expected that defecting troops would follow him in a march to Paris to topple the July Monarchy of King Louis Philippe I.

Beginning at dawn on 30 October, the planned uprising collapsed quickly. King Louis Philippe had demanded that the Swiss government return Louis Napoleon to France, but the Swiss pointed out that he was a Swiss soldier and citizen and refused to hand him over. The King responded by sending an army to the Swiss border. Louis Napoleon thanked his Swiss hosts, and voluntarily left the country. The other mutineers were put on trial in Alsace, and were all acquitted.

He returned to Europe and lived in prominent exile in Britain. Following the French Revolution of 1848, Louis Napoleon was elected as President of the Second Republic and the seized power in an 1851 coup, declaring himself as Emperor Napoleon III the following year, which he ruled until 1870.

Streetlife: The Untold History of Europe's Twentieth Century is a 2011 book by the British academic Leif Jerram.

Jerram investigates the transformation of Europe from the street level "from riot and revolution to sporting culture and sexual adventure".

In The Independent Christopher Hirst characterized the work as "lively" and in The Financial Times the book was praised as an "enjoyably idiosyncratic and provocative journey". A lengthy review was also published in The Times Literary Supplement where the book was described as an "unromanticised, sweeping and informed cultural history of European cities in the long twentieth century". Diederick Klein Kranenburg in the journal International Review of Social History praised it as "both an important historical study and a real page turner".

Strudel (/ ˈ s t r uː d əl / STROO -dəl, German: [ ˈʃtʁuːdl̩ ]) is a type of layered baked good made with pastry, with a filling that is usually sweet, but savoury fillings are also common. It became popular in the 18th century throughout the Austrian Empire. Strudel is part of Austrian cuisine and German cuisine but is also common in other Central European cuisines. In Italy it is recognized as a prodotto agroalimentare tradizionale (PAT) of South Tyrol.

The oldest strudel recipes (a Millirahmstrudel and a turnip strudel) are from 1696, in a handwritten cookbook at the Wienbibliothek im Rathaus (formerly Wiener Stadtbibliothek). The pastry is believed to descend from the Hungarian rétes, which was traditionally a variation of the Ottoman baklava.

Strudel is an English loanword from German. The word derives from the German word Strudel, which in Middle High German literally means ' whirlpool ' or ' eddy '.

The origins of the strudel are believed to lie in the Hungarian rétes, which developed from the Turkish baklava during Ottoman rule in Hungary. Traditionally, the Hungarian rétes was made using the same method as baklava, layering paper-thin sheets of dough with filling. The strudel, with its distinctive rolled form, developed in the Austrian Empire around the turn of the 18th century.

Traditional strudel pastry, known as Strudelteig, differs from puff pastry in that it is very elastic. It is made from flour with a high gluten content, water, oil, and salt, with no sugar added. The dough is worked vigorously, rested, and then rolled out and stretched by hand very thinly with the help of a clean linen tea towel or kitchen paper. There are numerous techniques for manually pulling strudel dough. One method is to roll the dough thin before laying it over the back of the hands and drawing it thin by pulling the hands apart from one another. Purists say that it should be so thin that you can read a newspaper through it. A legend has it that the Austrian Emperor's perfectionist cook decreed that it should be possible to read a love letter through it. The thin dough is laid out on a tea towel, and the filling is spread on it. The dough with the filling on top is rolled up carefully with the help of the tea towel and baked in the oven.

The best-known strudels are apple strudel (Apfelstrudel in German) and Topfenstrudel (with sweet soft quark cheese, in Austrian German Topfen), followed by the Millirahmstrudel (milk-cream strudel, Milchrahmstrudel, filled with cubes of bread soaked in a sweet mixture based on milk and cream). Other strudel types include sour cherry (Weichselstrudel), sweet cherry, nut filled (Nussstrudel), apricot strudel, plum strudel, poppy seed strudel (Mohnstrudel), rhubarb strudel and raisin strudel. There are also savoury strudels incorporating spinach, cabbage, potato, pumpkin, and sauerkraut, and versions containing meat fillings such as the Lungenstrudel or Fleischstrudel.

In Hungary, the most common fillings include raisin- cottage cheese (túrós rétes), sour cherries (meggyes rétes), apples (almás rétes), poppy seeds (mákos rétes), walnuts (diós rétes), though sour cream and tejberizs (sweet rice porridge) also used to be common.

Regional apple varieties prevail with choice based on a firm to semi-firm texture once baked. Tasting notes are acidic with apple flavour. Varieties include Belle de Boskoop, Stayman Winesap, Gravenstein, Newtown Pippin, Bramley's Seedling, Karmijn de Sonnaville, Zabergau Reinette, Yellow Transparent, Calville Blanc, Granny Smith, Glockenapfel, Jonagold, Jonathan, Northern Spy, and Rhode Island Greening.

Strudel (in Yiddish : שטרודל, pron. shtrudl) in general is also associated with Ashkenazi Jewish cuisine, particularly of German, Swiss, and Austrian Ashkenazi Jews. Apple and raisin filling is popular, but cabbage has historically also been used as a filling for a savoury strudel. The cabbage is braised or caramelized with sliced onions and caraway seeds, sometimes with added sugar. Recipes may include chopped walnuts. Cabbage strudel (káposztás rétes in Hungarian) is especially associated with the cuisine of Hungarian Jews.

The 19th-century American writer Alice Lee Moqué recorded an encounter with savoury strudel, ordered mistakenly as a dessert, in her account of her travels through Dalmatia (modern-day Croatia), at the Hotel Petka in Gravosa (Gruz). Assuming "Sprudel" was a type of "German sweetcake", Moqué's travel partner carelessly ordered a "Kraut sprudel", only to find the sweet pie crust was filled with "the most awful mixture" of hot, boiled cabbage.

Observant Hungarian Jews would make the dough with oil and serve Strudel for Simchat Torah and Purim, to match the customary drink imbibed at these celebrations.

In Hebrew colloquial speech, the symbol @ in email addresses is called "shtrudel" (שטרודל), a German loan word for the pastry. There is also an official Hebrew language word for the @ symbol: " keruchit " (כרוכית), this also being the formal word for the strudel pastry. In both cases, the allusion is to the spiral form of strudel. (Other languages have evolved a name for the symbol in a similar way, by borrowing a food term, for example: rollmops in Czech and Slovak; and kanelbulle in Swedish.)

In Hungary, rétes, a traditional Hungarian strudel is consumed at Farsang or New Year, because it is believed to bring good luck and a long life. It is also the subject of several traditional Hungarian nursery rhymes, two of which are Aki nem lép egyszerre ('who doesn't match the pace') and Tekeredik a rétes ('the snake coils'):

Who doesn't match the pace, No rétes for the evening, For strudel is very good, It's what a soldier needs We're not going far Only to the edge of the world We won't be staying there long either Only for twelve hours

— Traditional. " Aki nem lép egyszerre " ('who doesn't match the pace')

The snake coils, Wants to be a rétes, The rétes coils, Wants to be a snake

— Traditional. " Tekeredik a rétes " ('the snake coils')

"The snake coils" is sung while children do a special circle dance, imitating the coiling and shapeshifting of the snake.

The stuffed cucumber is an ingredient found in various cuisines around the world. Some stuffed cucumber dishes, such as Korean oi sobaegi, incorporate preserved cucumbers, whereas others, such as American recipes, use fresh cucumbers. The ingredients used to actually stuff the cucumber vary widely from cuisine to cuisine. Some examples of versions of stuffed cucumber exist in French, American, Korean, and Turkish cuisine.

Many different dishes incorporating stuffed cucumber exist. In Korean cuisine, oi sobaegi is a kimchi made from stuffed cucumber filled with onions, shrimp, ginger, garlic and chili. In Nevşehir, Turkey, ripe cucumbers are dried in the sun, then stuffed with bulghur seasoned with dill, mint, tomato paste and onion.

American cookbooks from the early 20th century described many different fillings for stuffed cucumber, including French dressing, mayonnaise, tomatoes, walnuts, celery, onions, and lobster. After being hollowed out with a specialized tool, the filling is piped into the cucumber. Some versions and breaded and fried before being served whole, or sliced to serve as a garnish for another dish. While some are stuffed with Greek yogurt/ hung curd and served as a summer salad/starter. Others are stewed or baked in gravy. At state fairs in the United States in the 2010s, stuffed cucumbers were marketed as a "healthier alternative" to deep fried or chocolate covered fair food.

Cucumber farcis is the french dish, in English, literally stuffed cucumber, often with a creamy spread sometimes with ground meat, and then cooked or served in split and hollowed raw cucumber.

In France, a subprefecture (French : sous-préfecture, pronounced [ su pʁefɛktyʁ ]) is the commune that hosts the administrative centre of an arrondissement, the primary division of a department, except for the commune that serves that function for the whole department, known as the prefecture. The proper legal name is arrondissement chief place (French : chef-lieu d'arrondissement).

The term properly applies to the government office headed by the subprefect, a civil servant representing the central government, as well as the building that houses it. (Between May 1982 and February 1988, subprefects were known instead by the title of deputy commissioner of the Republic, commissaire adjoint de la République.) The subprefect is assisted by a secretary general ; in the arrondissement where the prefecture is located, its secretary general carries out duties equivalent to those of the subprefect.

The municipal arrondissements of Paris, Marseille and Lyon are special divisions of the commune rather than the department, and do not have a subprefect.

The Suebi Kingdom of Galicia first established cooperative relations with the Franks, specifically with those of Guntram of Orléans, in 574 under the initiative of king Miro. The development of positive relations between these two Germanic powers revolved around the shared threat of the Visigothic Kingdom, led by their aggressive expansionist king Liuvigild. From 574 until the Gothic conquest of Galicia, the Franks supported the Suebi's endeavors by aiding the Visigothic rebel Hermenegild, invading Septimania under the pretext of Hermenegild's death, and sending a naval relief force to Galicia in an effort to save the Suebi.

The Visigothic king Liuvigild began a prolonged, on-and-off military campaign against the Suebi in 569, beginning with the conquest of Leon, Palencia, and Zamora. In 573, Liuvigild conquered the semi-autonomous region of Sabaria, a buffer zone between the Visigoths and Galicia. After a short-lived Suebi counterattack in Plasencia and Coria, Las Hurdes, Las Batuecas, and the territory of the Ruccones (Asturias and Cantabria), Liuvigild managed to reverse Miro's gains and established the Duchy of Cantabria as a Visigothic puppet state in 574.

Being diplomatically isolated in the northwest fringes of the Iberian Peninsula, Miro sought to ally with Guntram, king of Orléans, an established enemy of Liuvigild. In 574, the envoys that were sent to Guntram were intercepted and detained by a close ally of Liuvigild, another regional Frankish king named Chilperic I of Neustria.

This pivotal moment in which the Suebi first contacted the Franks would be the first of three instances of alliance between the two powers.

In 579, Hermengild, the son of Liuvigild, converted to Chalcedonian Christianity against his father's Arian faith and began a rebellion. He was persuaded to do so by his wife, a Frankish woman named Ingund who also happened to be Guntram's niece. The Suebi, Franks, and Byzantines all pledged their support to Hermenegild.

After Miro unsuccessfully attempted to link up with the rebels in Seville in 583, Hermenegild was imprisoned and later executed in April of 585. Following suit, Guntram attempted to invade the Visigothic province of Septimania, but was repulsed by Reccared, another one of Liuvigild's sons.

After Miro's death in 583, a series of usurpers and pretenders came to rule the Suebi. In 585, Liuvigild invaded Galicia once more under the pretext of unseating the illegitimate usurper Andeca.

Around the same time Andeca was deposed and exiled to Beja, two events unfolded — yet another pretender named Malaric, claiming descent from Miro, declared himself King of the Suebi. Simultaneously, Guntram assembled a Frankish fleet to sail to Galicia and rescue the Suebi from the Visigothic invaders. Upon arriving, however, Liuvigild's troops intercepted the fleet, looted its cargo, and killed or enslaved the majority of its crew. Malaric, for his part, was captured by Liuvigild's generals and brought before him in chains.

With Malaric's defeat and the permanent dissolution of the Suebi Kingdom of Galicia, cordial and cooperative relations between Suebi and Franks ended for good.

The Superior Council of the Judiciary (French: Conseil supérieur de la magistrature - CSM) is a French constitutional body whose role is to guarantee the independence of the judiciary from the executive. More specifically, it is responsible for appointing and disciplining magistrates. It also intervenes at the request of the President of the Republic or the Minister of Justice to issue opinions on the operation of the justice system or the ethics of magistrates. Its operation is governed by articles 64 [ fr ] and 65 [ fr ] of the Constitution.

Its administrative counterparts [ fr ] are the Superior Council of Administrative Tribunals and Administrative Courts of Appeal [ fr ] and the Superior Council of Regional Audit Chambers [ fr ].

The Council is headquartered at the Hôtel Moreau, 20, rue de la Chaussée-d'Antin in the 9th arrondissement of Paris.

The term "Superior Council of the Judiciary" first appeared in the judicial vocabulary with a law of August 30, 1883 on the reform of judicial organization: this was the name given to the Court of Cassation ruling in all chambers on matters of magistrate discipline.

It was not until the Fourth Republic and the changes brought about by the Liberation that an autonomous constitutional body was created under the same name. The Council was chaired by the President of the Republic, with the Minister of Justice as Vice-President. It is made up of six members elected by the National Assembly, four magistrates elected by their peers, and two members appointed by the Head of State from among the judicial professions. The Council's powers are extensive: it proposes the appointment of judges to the President of the Republic; it ensures the independence and discipline of these judges and the administration of the courts.

The Constitution of October 4, 1958 radically reformed the Superior Council of the Judiciary. Its composition was modified: around the President of the Republic and the Minister of Justice, who remain President and Vice-President, nine members are appointed by the President of the Republic, either directly (two qualified personalities) or on the proposal of the bureau of the Court of Cassation (six magistrates) or the general assembly of the Council of State (one State Councillor). The Council's powers are limited: it now only proposes to the President of the Republic the appointment of all judges to the Court of Cassation and the first presidents of the Courts of Appeal; it gives a simple opinion on the proposed appointments of other judges; confirmed as a disciplinary council for judges, it rules under the chairmanship of the First President of the Court of Cassation.

The Constitutional Act of July 27, 1993 and the Organic Act of February 5, 1994 transformed the institution once again, creating two panels, one for judges and the other for prosecutors. The Council continues to be chaired by the President of the Republic, with the Minister of Justice continuing to hold the vice-presidency. Magistrates sitting on the Council are now elected by their peers. The Council is required to issue an opinion on all judicial appointments, and is given the power to issue an opinion (which does not have to be followed) on the appointment of public prosecutors, with the exception of those whose posts are currently filled by the Council of Ministers (public prosecutor at the Court of Cassation and public prosecutors at the Court of Appeal).

The Constitutional Act of July 23, 2008 put an end to the presidency of the Council by the President of the Republic, broadened its membership (with magistrates now in the minority), gave it consultative powers over the appointment of public prosecutors, and enabled individuals to refer disciplinary matters directly to it.

An organic law passed in 2016 put an end to the appointment of public prosecutors by the Council of Ministers.

Since 1953, the Council had been based at the Palais de l'Alma, 15 quai Branly [ fr ], Paris, in an annex of the French President's office, but on occasion, meetings were held at the Élysée Palace. Following the 2008 reform, the Council's headquarters were transferred to 20 avenue de Ségur [ fr ], then in June 2013 to the Hôtel Moreau.

A reform initiated in 1998 extended to public prosecutors appointments made in accordance with the advice of the Superior Council of the Judiciary. The text also modified the composition of the Council by providing for 21 members (11 outside personalities and 10 magistrates). The bill was adopted by the National Assembly and the Senate, and put to a vote in Congress on January 24, 2000. A few days before the vote, the Congress meeting was cancelled by President Jacques Chirac.

A constitutional bill presented to the Council of Ministers in 2013 aimed to restore the magistrates' majority on the Council, with the other personalities appointed by authorities independent of political power. The Council's role was strengthened with regard to the appointment and discipline of public prosecutors. In 2016, the text was adopted by both parliamentary chambers in identical terms, but Congress was not convened.

The Édouard Philippe government 's bills for a renewal of democratic life [ fr ], presented in 2018 and reworked in 2019, provided for the appointment of public prosecutors on the assent of the Superior Council of the Judiciary, which also became fully responsible for their discipline. The reform was finally abandoned in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Inspired by the prerogatives devolved to the Superior Councils of the Judiciary in several European Union countries, certain magistrates' unions have been calling for a far-reaching reform conferring on the Superior Council of the Judiciary the full power to appoint and discipline judges and prosecutors. In such a scenario, the Judicial Services Department [ fr ] would be attached to the Council rather than to the Ministry of Justice.

As part of the Estates General on Justice [ fr ] organized between 2021 and 2022 by Emmanuel Macron at the request of Chantal Arens [ fr ] and François Molins [ fr ], respectively First President and Public Prosecutor [ fr ] of the Court of Cassation, the organization steering working group is proposing a reform described as "disruptive", entrusting the Superior Council of the Judiciary with all budgetary management and human resources steering for the judicial system. In addition to transferring all the prerogatives currently conferred on the Minister of Justice in matters of appointment and discipline, the Superior Council of the Judiciary would also be responsible for the budgetary management of the courts and tribunals. In its final report, submitted to the President of the Republic on July 8, 2022, the States General Committee ruled out this proposal and suggested that the reform envisaged in 2018 would be completed. The Committee also proposed that the Council would be given a consultative role with regard to the justice budget.

According to the Constitution of October 4, 1958, "the President of the Republic is the guarantor of the independence of the judicial authority. He is assisted by the Superior Council of the Judiciary". In particular, the Council is responsible for appointing and disciplining magistrates.

In France, under Article 13 of the Constitution of October 4, 1958 [ fr ], it is the President of the Republic who appoints civil and military officials. In most cases, these appointments are made "on proposal" by another authority, which is bound by the President's choice. Judges are appointed by decree, the proposal being made either by the Superior Council of the Judiciary, or by the Minister of Justice:

In matters of appointments, the Superior Council of the Judiciary operates through two formations: one for judicial magistrates, chaired by the First President of the Court of Cassation, and one for prosecutors, chaired by the Prosecutor General at the Court of Cassation. Each formation includes magistrates and non-magistrate personalities, with the latter appointed by the President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly, the President of the Senate, and the Council of State, ensuring a balanced composition for overseeing magistrate appointments.

In disciplinary matters, the matter may be referred to the Superior Council of the Judiciary by:

In disciplinary matters, the Superior Council of the Judiciary operates through two formations: one for judicial magistrates, chaired by the First President of the Court of Cassation, and one for prosecutors, chaired by the Prosecutor General at the Court of Cassation. Each formation includes both magistrates and non-magistrate personalities to ensure balanced oversight of disciplinary proceedings for magistrates.

In the case of judges, the Council directly imposes disciplinary sanctions. In this case, the Council is regarded as an administrative court of first and last instance, whose decisions are subject to judicial review [ fr ] by the State Council.

In the case of public prosecutors, the Council confines itself to issuing an opinion, with disciplinary action being taken by the Minister of Justice (the CSM is therefore not a sanctioning court). The Minister's decision may be challenged before the Council of State, which then rules in the first and last instance as a judge of excess of power. If the Minister declares that he will follow the opinion of the CSM, renouncing his own power of decision, his decision may be annulled on the grounds of negative incompetence.

Sanctions (in the case of judges) and sanctions (in the case of public prosecutors) are decided by majority vote. In the event of a tied vote on the choice of sanction, the chairman of the panel has the casting vote.

The disciplinary sanctions applicable to magistrates are:

To ensure the independence of the judicial authority, the Superior Council of the Judiciary meets in plenary session to respond to advisory requests from the President of the Republic. It issues opinions on matters related to magistrate ethics and any issues concerning the functioning of the justice system raised by the Minister of Justice.

The Judicial Ethics Committee is tasked with issuing opinions on ethical questions concerning individual magistrates, upon their request or that of their hierarchical superiors, and reviewing magistrates' declarations of interests.

The formation of the Council responsible for judicial magistrates is chaired by the First President of the Court of Cassation. It includes seven magistrates and eight external personalities.

The formation responsible for prosecutors is chaired by the Prosecutor General at the Court of Cassation. It includes seven magistrates and eight external personalities.

Except for the two presidents, who serve as long as they hold their positions at the Court of Cassation, Council members are appointed for a four-year, non-renewable term.

Magistrates, excluding heads of jurisdiction, are elected on union lists (Union syndicale des magistrats, Syndicat de la magistrature, and Unité Magistrats) through indirect suffrage, with electors traveling to the grand chamber of the Court of Cassation.

The eight external personalities (the "lay members") include one Council of State member appointed by the Council of State, one lawyer, and six qualified individuals who are not members of Parliament, the judicial order, or the administrative order. The President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly, and the President of the Senate each appoint two qualified individuals. Nominations must be approved by parliamentary committees and respect gender parity.

The plenary formation of the Council, which responds to advisory requests from the President of the Republic or the Minister of Justice, includes seven magistrates and the eight external personalities. It is chaired by the First President of the Court of Cassation, who may be substituted by the Prosecutor General at that court.

Members of the Superior Council of the Judiciary must submit a declaration of interests and assets to the French High Authority for the Transparency of Public Life (French: Haute Autorité pour la transparence de la vie publique).

With the exception of disciplinary matters, the Minister of Justice may attend meetings of the Superior Council of the Judiciary.

The current members of the Council began their four-year term of office on February 8, 2023.

The Council's budget is part of program 335 of the "Justice" mission [ fr ]. In 2021, appropriations totaled 13,825,182 euros. Overheads account for a major share of operating expenses. They correspond mainly to the financing of rent and maintenance services for the Hôtel Moreau.

Formerly known as the "Administrative Secretary" until the Organic Law of July 22, 2010 on the application of Article 65 of the Constitution, the Secretary General of the Superior Council of the Judiciary is responsible for the Council's administrative and material operations, and manages the staff assigned to it. They are appointed by the President of the Republic on the joint recommendation of the First President of the Cour de Cassation and the Attorney General of the Cour de Cassation. Chosen from among magistrates with seven years' effective service, they are appointed for the duration of the term of office of the members of the Council, and may be reappointed once.

The General Secretary ensures the smooth running of the Council. To this end, they receive delegated signing authority from the First President of the Cour de cassation, who is the secondary authorizing officer for expenditure. Under the authority of the Presidents, they contribute to the organization of the Council's work, to which they provide assistance. They prepare working sessions (agenda, information gathering, operational monitoring of appointment and disciplinary procedures), take part in the Council's internal discussions, and implement and monitor decisions. Working full-time within the institution, this position is the point of contact for the courts, magistrates, other institutions and third parties.

The tables below show the number of magistrate appointments for 2022 (figures as of November 1).

Of the 1,532 cases referred to it by judges, the Council issued 6 unfavorable opinions; of the 630 cases referred to it by public prosecutors, the Council issued 2 unfavorable opinions, which were followed by the Minister of Justice.

As of November 1, 2022, the Council had received 280 complaints from individuals. Of these 280 complaints, 6 were declared admissible, 3 of which were subsequently rejected as unfounded. In this regard, the Council points out that "many litigants make misdirected requests, the handling of which does not fall within the Council's powers (requests for legal advice, the award of damages, intervention in ongoing proceedings, criminal prosecution, etc.) or concern persons for whom the Council is not materially competent (lawyers, bailiffs, legal experts, notaries, educators, probation officers, industrial tribunal members, administrative judges, consular judges, court clerks, public prosecutors, police officers, etc.)".

As at November 1, 2022, the Council had received 10 disciplinary cases. The Council's disciplinary activity gave rise to nine decisions for the judiciary and three opinions for the public prosecutor's office.

Surintendante de la Maison de la Reine (French pronunciation: [ syʁɛ̃tɑ̃dɑ̃t də la mɛzɔ̃ də la ʁɛn ], lit. ' Superintendent of the Queen's Household '), or only Surintendante, was the senior lady-in-waiting at the royal court of France from 1619 until the French revolution. The Surintendante was selected from the members of the highest French nobility.

The office was created in 1619. The Surintendante and the Governess of the Children of France were the only female office holders in France to give an oath of loyalty to the King himself.

The surintendante had about the same tasks as the Première dame d'honneur : receiving the oath of the female personnel before they took office and supervising them and the queen's daily routine, as well as organizing the accounts and staff list, but she was placed in rank above the première dame d'honneur. Whenever the surintendante was absent, she was replaced by the première dame d'honneur. The post of surintendante could be left vacant for long periods, and was abolished between the death of Marie Anne de Bourbon in 1741 and the appointment of the Princesse de Lamballe in 1775.

During the Second French Empire, the Grande-Maitresse of Empress Eugénie de Montijo was the equivalent of the Surintendante, being formally the highest female official at court but in practice with the same tasks as the dame d'honneur; this position was held by Anne d'Essling during that entire period (1853–1870).

Survivre (Survive), later renamed Survivre et Vivre (Survive and Live), was a political group founded on 27 July 1970 in Montreal, with the goals of promoting pacificism, ecology, and a new kind of science. It was headed by the French mathematician Alexander Grothendieck and later included several other well-known mathematicians such as Claude Chevalley and Pierre Samuel, as well as about 50 or 60 other members, both in North America and France. From August 1970 to June 1975, they published the journal Survivre... et vivre.

Grothendieck left in 1972 or 1973 and the visionary group dissolved in the middle of the 1970s, its members dispersing, or joining more politically engaged groups, or magazines like La Gueule Ouverte.

The group's purpose, as Alexander Grothendieck put it, was "the struggle for the survival of the human species, and even of life itself, threatened by the growing ecological imbalance caused by the indiscriminate use of science and technology and by suicidal social mechanisms, and also threatened by conflicts related to the proliferation of military devices and arms industries".

Grothendieck, a celebrated mathematician, was frequently invited to give talks in which he would combine mathematics with a discussion of the group's goals. He often asked the question "Can we continue scientific research?", arguing that specialized science was an extremely destructive and dangerous activity as it provided the tools for ecological destruction and world war. He promoted a New Science which would focus on the needs and desires of the people, involve non-specialists who perform research at their primary occupations, and would employ a holistic methodology in communion with nature.

The journal was originally issued monthly starting from August 1970, then announced a bimonthly rhythm in June 1971, and finally adopted an irregular rhythm until its final issue (number 19) in 1975. The issues appeared in French, some were also translated into English.

Many articles were written by Grothendieck, sometimes unsigned or under his pseudonym Diogène.

The Syndicat de la Magistrature (SM ; English: Union of the Magistracy) is France 's second largest magistrates ' trade union in terms of membership after the more conservative Union syndicale des magistrats (USM). It was founded on 8 June 1968 in the direct aftermath of the May 68 events.

The Syndicat de la Magistrature is considered close to left-wing parties such as the Socialist Party, historically, as well as La France Insoumise in more recent years. It favours a larger independence of the judiciary from the executive. It has criticised immigration laws it considers severe, " police violence ", as well as fast-tracking trials in case of immediate admission of guilt. Amid the 2005 civil unrest in neighbourhoods throughout the country with large immigrant populations, the union criticised then-Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy 's use of what it saw as inappropriate language. In the 2012 presidential election, it called to defeat Sarkozy.

The Syndicat de la Magistrature is member of Magistrats Européens pour la Démocratie et les Libertés (MEDEL), a progressive European NGO of judges and public prosecutors.

In 2013, the union became the centre of a political controversy that would become known as the Mur des cons affair (French : Affaire du Mur des cons), after journalists published images of a wall in the union's headquarters in Paris on which public personalities, most notably a number of politicians (including government ministers under former President Nicolas Sarkozy), were insulted through pinned photographs with comments. Justice Minister Christiane Taubira reacted to the affair by calling the comments on the wall "unbearable, stupid and unhealthy", stating in front of the Senate that she would ask for an investigation into any possible ethics breaches to get "rid (…) of the suspicion that weighs on [the judiciary's] impartiality".

In 2019, the union's former chairwoman Françoise Martres was found guilty of public insults by a Paris appellate court. Although it was not established that she had participated herself, she was held responsible for the insults.

The affair has been deemed "disatrous" for the judiciary as a whole, giving it a politicised image. The union has since largely lost its standing with the public. Its criticism in 2020 of newly appointed Justice Minister Éric Dupond-Moretti went ignored by President Emmanuel Macron. Dupond-Moretti would later himself state that the affair was "pathetic" for the union, arguing it does not represent the judiciary as a whole.

Systematic Paris-Region is an Île-de-France business cluster created in 2005, devoted to complex systems and ICT.

During its first two years of operation, The cluster Systematic Paris-Region has launched 207 research projects representing 975 million euros of investments consisting of 380 million from state aid, from the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR), Oséo and local authorities.

As of September 2011, Systematic Paris-Region has permitted the development of 318 collaborative R&D projects, at a total cost of 1.4 billion euros in R&D effort and a support revenue of about €500 million from the state (via the Fonds unique interministériel (Single Interministerial Fund)), national agencies, ANR, Oséo, EUREKA, ERDF and territorial collectivities.

The project of a French competitiveness cluster on free software was consigned to Systematic Paris-Region following the Comité interministériel d'aménagement et de développement du territoire (Interministerial Committee for the development and territorial competitiveness, CIADT) of July 5, 2007.

600 organizations are involved in the R&D network of the cluster: 366 SMEs-SMBs, 116 companies, 24 ETI, 79 research centers and educational institutions, 19 territorial authorities and 15 investors. The cluster brings together beyond the R&D collaborative ecosystem 1060 small and medium enterprises.

Since its inception in 2005, Systematic focuses its activity on the digital revolution for 6 markets :

From 2009 to 2010, Systematic deploys its technologies and solutions to two new market areas which development is increasingly reliant on the expertise and know-how of Systematic and its members:

This deployment will be driven by existing theme groups with coordination and oversight arrangements between the partners clusters. 39 R&D projects have already been launched by Systematic Paris-Region, which are part of the new themes. Each thematic group division has updated its strategic roadmap by including the following new elements:

Theme identified by prospective studies conducted in preparation of the strategic plan.

In France, the first four themes of the cluster Systematic Paris-Region comprised no less than 320,000 employees, including 250,000 in services and 70,000 in industry. By itself, the software segment in complex systems represent a global market of 300 billion euros.

Sébastien Lecornu (French pronunciation: [ sebastjɛ̃ ləkɔʁny ] ; born 11 June 1986) is a French politician who has served as Prime Minister of France since September 2025. Positioned on the right of the ideological political spectrum, Lecornu has promoted Gaullist, Séguinist, and socially conservative beliefs.

Since leaving The Republicans (LR) in 2017, Lecornu has been a member of Renaissance (RE). Lecornu was president of the Departmental Council of Eure from 2015 to 2017. In government, he served as secretary of state to the minister of the ecological and inclusive transition (2017–2018), minister for local authorities (2018–2020), minister of the overseas (2020–2022) and minister of the armed forces (2022–2025).

On 9 September 2025, Lecornu was appointed as prime minister by Emmanuel Macron after the Bayrou government was brought down by a vote of no confidence in the National Assembly. He unveiled his cabinet 26 days after being nominated and resigned hours later, making his first government the shortest-lived in the history of the French Fifth Republic. He remained in office as a caretaker prime minister until he was reappointed by President Macron on 10 October 2025.

Lecornu was born on 11 June 1986 in Eaubonne, Val-d'Oise Department, to Jean-Pierre Lecornu, an aeronautical technician at the Safran Aircraft Engines factory in Vernon, and Martine Rousseau, a medical secretary. Close to his Gaullist grandfather, a former resistance fighter and former vice-president of a chamber of commerce in Calvados, he was passionate about the army and politics and initially wanted to become a soldier. He also tried monastic life at the Abbey of Saint-Wandrille.

He completed his secondary studies at the private Catholic institution Saint-Adjutor de Vernon. Holder of a baccalauréat in economics and social sciences, he obtained a law degree and then began an unfinished master's degree in public law at the Panthéon-Assas University. His curriculum vitae, however, stated he had obtained that degree.

In 2002, Lecornu became an activist in the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP), joined the Young Right of the Vernon region (JDV), then campaigned during the campaign for the 2004 regional elections.

In 2005, he became a parliamentary assistant to Franck Gilard, the member of the National Assembly for Eure's 5th constituency ; Lecornu was, at the time, the youngest parliamentary assistant in the National Assembly. In 2008, he became an advisor to Secretary of State for European Affairs Bruno Le Maire ; at age 22 Lecornu was the youngest advisor to an official in the government of prime minister François Fillon.

He is a member of the National Gendarmerie operational reserve with the rank of lieutenant. He was appointed colonel as a reserve specialist in the fall of 2017.

In the 2014 municipal election, Lecornu was elected Mayor of Vernon.

The combination of two executive mandates being incompatible, he abandoned the town hall of Vernon on 4 December 2015.

Following the 2015 departmental elections in which he was elected councillor for the canton of Vernon alongside Catherine Delalande, Lecornu became President of the Departmental Council of Eure.

Lecornu has highlighted his refusal to raise taxes and rigorous management of public money. Mediapart points out that the hunt for RSA fraudsters has been – with great communication support – the flagship policy pursued by the department since the arrival of Lecornu. Another flagship policy was closing two priority education colleges, which was justified by their low occupancy rates.

In 2017, Lecornu was appointed to be a secretary of state to the minister for the ecological and inclusive transition by President Emmanuel Macron.

Lecornu was then suspended from his duties within The Republicans by the party and disciplinary exclusion proceedings were brought against him. He was excluded from LR on 31 October 2017, with Gérald Darmanin, also a member of the government, and the members of the National Assembly, Franck Riester and Thierry Solère. He then joined La République en marche.

Nicolas Hulot delegated issues related to energy in general to Lecornu. In particular, he was entrusted with several sensitive files such as the closure of the Fessenheim Nuclear Power Plant, the opening of the Flamanville 's EPR, or the Cigeo nuclear waste landfill project in Bure.

On 16 October 2018, Lecornu was appointed minister of local authorities to the minister of territorial cohesion and relations with local authorities, Jacqueline Gourault.

On 14 January 2019, Lecornu was appointed with Emmanuelle Wargon to lead the "great national debate", organised in order to get out of the crisis caused by the yellow vests movement.

On 6 July 2020, Lecornu was appointed minister of the overseas in the Castex government. In this capacity, he held crisis talks on the French Caribbean territory of Guadeloupe in late 2021, in an effort to defuse tensions amid unrest stemming from the government's handling of the COVID-19 pandemic there. He also announced that France would be willing to discuss autonomy for Guadeloupe.

Elected senator for Eure in September 2020, he left his seat to Nicole Duranton, as he had announced before his election, after a period of one month after entering the Luxembourg Palace. Affected by the accumulation of mandates, he resigned from his mandate as deputy mayor, which he had held since 2015, and from the municipal council of Vernon, on 3 November 2020; this resignation also led to his departure from the community council of the Seine Normandie Agglomeration.

A candidate for re-election in the canton of Vernon during the 2021 departmental elections, he came out on top in the first round with 58.74% of the votes cast, but the high abstention rate did not allow him to be directly elected. He was re-elected in the second round with 81.11% of the votes. To everyone's surprise, while still minister of overseas territories, he resumed the presidency of the Eure departmental council, obtaining the 39 votes of the majority, contrary to the practice established by Lionel Jospin in 1997 of not combining an executive mandate with a government function; he was authorized to do so "for a time" by Emmanuel Macron and Jean Castex.

On 20 May 2022, Lecornu was appointed minister of the armed forces in the Borne government.

Early in his tenure, Lecornu and Minister of Foreign Affairs Catherine Colonna travelled to Niger together to seal a regional redeployment, making the country the hub for French troops in the Sahel region.

After Ukraine was invaded by Russia in 2022 and NATO allies were in the midst of supplying arms to Ukraine, Lecornu stated at the end of December 2022 in an official visit to Kyiv that the two problems of maintenance and training were the reason for which the Leclerc tanks would stay at home. There were other troubling signs that all was not well with the effort to aid Ukraine. For example, although the CAESAR mobile artillery system had proven very useful to the June 2022 bombardment and recapture of Snake Island and dominated the battle elsewhere, the Ukrainians were having difficulty with the maintenance of the 18 systems and the solution was problematic. Ukrainian defence minister Oleksiy Reznikov hoped that French tradesmen could be sent to Ukraine to service the artillery pieces.

In December 2022, Lecornu and Mariusz Błaszczak signed an agreement between France and Poland on the 575 million euros ($611.69 million) sale of two Airbus Defence and Space observation satellites to Poland.

In April 2023, he presented the Military Programming Law (LPM), which is to apply from 2024 to 2030, and provides for 413 billion euros of military spending over the seven years of the fiscal year. The annual budget will thus increase from 32 billion in 2017 to 69 billion euros in 2030, a doubling of funding for the armed forces. This budget must notably cover investments in the French nuclear arsenal, the construction of a new aircraft carrier and the increase in the number of armed forces. The government also plans to raise the age limit for reservists to 70, whereas it is currently between 62 and 65, with the objective of providing the armed forces with 300,000 soldiers, including 100,000 reservists. The intelligence services should also see their budget increase by 60%.

In March 2024, Lecornu announced that Les Forges de Tarbes would henceforth have the capacity to produce 4,000 artillery shells per month. It produced 1,000 per month as of February 2022, the start of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Also in March 2024, according to Lecornu, the Russian war machine was able to fire between 10,000 and 15,000 shells per day in Ukraine war.

In July 2024, Lecornu and his counterparts from Germany, Italy and Poland signed a letter of intent to develop ground-launched cruise missiles with a range beyond 500 km (310 miles).

Lecornu was appointed prime minister on 9 September 2025 by President Emmanuel Macron. He succeeded François Bayrou, who was forced to resign on the same day following the failure of a vote of confidence in the National Assembly the day before.

Shortly after his appointment, Le Figaro and Paris Match revealed that Lecornu had visited former president Nicolas Sarkozy at his offices in the 8th arrondissement of Paris, who assured him of his friendship and support.

On 13 September 2025, in an interview with the regional daily press, he announced that he would abandon the abolition and reinstating of the two public holidays, an unpopular measure sought by his predecessor François Bayrou. Two days later, he announced the end of "lifetime benefits" for former members of the government as of 1 January 2026.

On 6 October 2025, Lecornu unveiled a cabinet that was similar to previous governments. He resigned hours later amidst threats across the political spectrum to oust him. Macron then tasked Lecornu with 48-hour talks to stabilise the government. Lecornu also assumed the role of the minister of the armed forces on an interim basis after Bruno Le Maire resigned after only a few hours in office. On 10 October 2025, Macron reinstated Lecornu as prime minister, resulting in similar criticism.

On 10 October Lecornu was reappointed by Emmanuel Macron as prime minister, four days after having resigned. He stated that he had accepted "out of a sense of duty" and asserted that he wanted to form a "new government team" which, according to him, would "embody renewal and the diversity of skills".

On 14 October, during his general policy statement amid internal conflicts with left-wing and right-wing politicians, he said he had "accepted the mission because France needs a budget, because there are emergency measures to be taken without delay", promised a "serious and reliable budget for France, useful and good for the French, within three months", and announced that he would propose "to Parliament this autumn that we suspend the 2023 pension reform until the presidential election " and that "no increase in the age will take place from now until January 2028".

In an address before the National Assembly, Lecornu said he supported the suspension of pension reforms until after the 2027 presidential election, which led the Socialists to pledge its support for him against a no-confidence motion. This led to Lecornu surviving two successive no-confidence motions filed by La France Insoumise and the National Rally respectively on 16 October.

His government narrowly passed a budget for social security for 2026 in a 247 – 234 vote in the National Assembly on 9 December.

Lecornu announced in January 2026 that he would invoke Article 49.3 of the constitution to force through the remaining 2026 budget, despite refusing to do so earlier. He faced confidence votes from La France Insoumise and the National Rally, which were both unsuccessful with 269 and 142 votes in favour respectively, falling short of a majority. Lecornu secured the support of the Socialist Party after making concessions on more social housing and €1 lunches for university students.

Lecornu described himself as "rather Gaullist, Séguinist, fundamentally right-wing", as well as "liberal and European ", while Le Monde described him in 2022 as "not really liberal or all that souverainist ", allowing himself to be "sucked in by the identity temptations of the right, while knowing how to make himself appreciated on his left flank".

Against what he calls l'excuse sociale ('the social excuses'), he threatened in 2016 to not proceed with the increase to the Revenu de solidarité active (RSA) decided by Manuel Valls 's team as part of the government 's plan to combat poverty, and denounced a "clientelism that reeks of old-fashioned politics".

Sébastien Lecornu opposed same-sex marriage in 2012. Declaring that "gay communitarianism frustrates [him] as much as homophobia", he added that "marriage is the basis for building a family in our societies. And a family is built between a man and a woman". In 2015, he spoke out against surrogacy and medically assisted procreation, before issuing an apparently contradictory opinion in 2019.

Presented as the president's unofficial "Mr. Hunter" at the beginning of Emmanuel Macron's first term, he defended traditional hunting as secretary of state to the minister of the ecological and inclusive transition, and lowered the price of the national hunting permit.

It was during Lecornu's term as minister of the armed forces that, in September 2023, journalist Ariane Lavrilleux was 39 hours in police custody and had her home searched for leaking information to the press about a secret Franco–Egyptian military operation. This is considered by Mediapart to be a "serious breach of the confidentiality of sources ". However, Lecornu has never "expressed any regret" over this affair.

In the context of the Gaza war, Mediapart and Disclose are investigating the €30 million in French arms exports to Israel. Questioned on this subject by the Foreign Affairs Committee, Sébastien Lecornu questioned the rigor of these media outlets and refused to answer the former's questions. Amnesty International France deplored the lack of transparency in arms export controls under his tenure as minister, recalling that he opposed the creation of a new extra-parliamentary commission to evaluate exports of war materials and goods for civilian and military use. According to Mediapart, Sébastien Lecornu never "assumed the need to impose an embargo on French arms sales to Israel, even as accusations of war crimes and then genocide in Gaza were becoming more precise".

Lecornu publicly stated that France does not sell weapons to Israel, but exports components used in the Iron Dome, which protects civilian populations, as well as elements subsequently assembled in Israel and re-exported, notably for use by the French Armed Forces. To support his statements, he declassified a document in June 2025, which he submitted to parliamentarians. Three months later, however, Mediapart published an article reporting on the ministry's latest report on arms exports from France. According to the article, "orders from Israel amounted to €27.1 million in 2024", partially contradicting the minister's statements.

In April 2025, Lecornu met Marine Le Pen several times in private meetings, organized at the home of his friend Thierry Solère or in his office at the Ministry of the Armed Forces. His entourage acknowledged that one of these discussions concerned the war in Ukraine, even though, as Mediapart notes, the National Rally was funded by Russia.

The Direction générale de la sécurité civile et de la gestion des crises (General directorate for civil defense and crisis management) is a civil defense agency of the French Government. It operates under the Ministry of the Interior and employs some 2,500 civilian and military personnel over 60 sites. Known as the Protection Civile until 1976, the Sécurité Civile is split into several branches:

Sécurité Civile aircraft operate under the rescue operation and civil-military cooperation branch of the Groupement des Moyens Aériens Sécurité Civile (Aerial Group). Aircraft carry the title SECURITE CIVILE on their fuselage sides, together with the international civil defence symbol. The aircraft are divided into the Groupement des Helicopteres de la Securite Civile (Helicopter Group) and the Groupement des Avions Bombardiers d'Eau (Water Bomber Group).

The Sécurité Civile helicopter group has 23 helicopter bases in mainland France and its overseas territories. It has a fleet of 35 helicopters and employs 230 pilots and flight engineers and 50 ground engineers. Over its 50 years of activity, the helicopter group has a track record of 480,000 flight hours, 250,000 rescue missions and 225,000 people rescued. Helicopter group aircraft use the callsign "DRAGON", followed by the number of the département in which their base is located.

Sécurité Civile currently operates 35 EC-145 helicopters that were delivered between 2002 and 2005. The fleet has accumulated over 100,000 flight hours. The EC-145 fleet is used for search and rescue, fire fighting, emergency medical services (EMS), surveillance and law enforcement. EC-145s are deployed on 22 Sécurité Civile bases in France and the French Overseas Territories. An order has been placed for a further five helicopters, to be delivered from January 2009. This will enable the phasing out of the six remaining Alouette III helicopters. The EC 145 carries out an average 10,000 rescue missions each year, representing over 13,300 flight hours.

Helicopter group bases of operation are located at:.

The Echelon Central (command centre), and helicopter maintenance base is located in Nîmes.

Helicopters are detached to several other bases seasonally. In summer, aircraft are detached to Courchevel, Alpes d'Huez, Gavarnie, Lacanau, and Chamonix. In winter, aircraft are detached to Chamonix and Alpes d'Huez.

12 Bombardier 415s are currently operated by the Sécurité Civile, each able to drop 6,137 L (1,350 imp gal; 1,621 US gal). France was the first nation to commit to the CL-415 Canadair in 1992, so that it could phase out its Canadair CL-215s.

Two pre-owned Bombardier Dash 8 Q400s, acquired from Scandinavian Airlines System, were modified by Cascade Aerospace of Abbotsford, British Columbia, for the Sécurité Civile to act as fire-fighting water bombers during fire season and as transport aircraft during the off season. This aircraft is designated the Q400-MR (Multi Role). The aircraft can be reconfigured into passenger, cargo or aerial fire control roles in under three hours and can drop 10,000 L (2,200 imp gal; 2,600 US gal) in the tanker role. 6 more were ordered in 2017 for 365M€, 4 of which were delivered by the end of 2021. Based at Garons Provence Airport.

All fixed-wing aircraft are based at Garons Provence Airport.

307 Sécurité Civile bomb disposal experts are based at 20 bomb disposal units, including 2 overseas units (Guadeloupe and French Guiana). They are responsible for the detection, removal, disposal or destruction of suspicious objects. They also provide assistance during official travel or large demonstrations and disarm and destroy dormant ammunition still present from the two world wars.

In 2004, 440 tonnes (430 long tons; 490 short tons) of munitions was disposed of, whilst forty-three bomb disposal experts were deployed on the sixtieth anniversary of the Normandy landings, seventeen on the sixtieth anniversary of the landing in Provence, and sixteen during the visit of Pope John Paul II to Lourdes.

Ségolène Royal (born Marie-Ségolène Royal, French pronunciation: [ maʁi seɡɔlɛn ʁwajal ] ; 22 September 1953) is a French politician. A member of the Socialist Party, she participated in the 2007 French presidential election but lost to Nicolas Sarkozy in the second round.

Royal was president of the Poitou-Charentes Regional Council from 2004 to 2014. She won the 2006 Socialist Party primary, becoming the first woman in France to be nominated as a presidential candidate by a major party. In the subsequent 2007 presidential election, she earned further distinction as the first woman to qualify for the second round of a presidential election, but ultimately lost to Sarkozy.

In 2008, Royal narrowly lost to Martine Aubry in the Socialist Party's election for First Secretary at the Party's twenty-second national congress. She lost the Socialist Party presidential primary in 2011, and failed in an attempt to win a seat in the National Assembly in the June 2012 parliamentary elections.

She has four children with François Hollande, her former domestic partner and Sarkozy's successor as president, and was appointed by him to the vice-chair directorship of the Banque Publique d'Investissement (BPI) in 2013. She served as Minister for Ecology from 2014 to 2017, in the Valls, then Cazeneuve cabinets.

Marie-Ségolène Royal was born on 22 September 1953 in the military base of Ouakam, Dakar, French West Africa (now Senegal), the daughter of Hélène Dehaye and Jacques Royal, a former artillery officer and aide to the mayor of Chamagne (Vosges). Her parents had eight children in nine years: Marie-Odette, Marie-Nicole, Gérard, Marie-Ségolène, Antoine, Paul, Henri and Sigisbert.

After secondary school in the small town of Melle, Deux-Sèvres, Marie-Ségolène attended a local university where she graduated 2nd in her class with a degree in economics. Her eldest sister then suggested she prepare the entrance exam to the elite Institut d'études politiques de Paris popularly called Sciences Po, which she attended on scholarship. There she discovered politics of class and feminism ("Sciences Po" at the time was 85% upper-class Parisian, mostly male).

In 1972, at the age of 19, Royal sued her father because he refused to divorce her mother and pay alimony and child support to finance the children's education. She won the case after many years in court, shortly before Jacques Royal died of lung cancer in 1981. Six of the eight children had refused to see him again, Ségolène included.

Royal, like the majority of France's political elite, is a graduate of the École nationale d'administration. She was in the same class as her former partner of 30 years, François Hollande, as well as Dominique de Villepin (prime minister under Jacques Chirac). Each class year at the ENA receives a nickname to distinguish it: Royal tried to get her peers to name their class after Louise Michel, a revolutionary from the 1870s, but they chose the name " Voltaire " instead. During her time at the ENA, Royal also dropped "Marie" from her hyphenated first name.

After graduating in 1980, she elected to serve as a judge (conseiller) of an administrative court before she was noticed by President François Mitterrand 's special adviser Jacques Attali and recruited to his staff in 1982. She held the junior rank of chargée de mission from 1982 to 1988.

She decided to become a candidate for the 1988 legislative election ; she registered in the rural, Western Deux-Sèvres Département. Her candidacy was an example of the French political tradition of parachutage (parachuting), appointing promising "Parisian" political staffers as candidates in provincial districts to test their mettle. She was up against an entrenched UDF incumbent, and Mitterrand is said to have told her: "You will not win, but you will next time." Straddling strongly Catholic and Protestant areas, that district had been held by conservatives since World War II. She did win against the odds, and remarked: " Pour un parachutage, l'atterrissage est réussi. " ("As far as parachuting goes, the landing was a success").

After this election, she served as representative in the National Assembly for the Deux-Sèvres' 2nd constituency (1988–1992, 1993–1997, 2002–2007).

On 28 March 2004, she obtained 55% in the second round in the regional election in Poitou-Charentes, notably defeating Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin 's protégée, Élisabeth Morin, in his home region. She was elected president of the region the next week. She kept her National Assembly seat until June 2007, when she chose not to run in the legislative election, in agreement with one of her presidential campaign's promises. She organised a run-off between two contenders; the winner, Delphine Batho, went on to win the district for her and Royal's party.

On 22 September 2005, Paris Match published an interview in which she declared that she was considering running for the presidency in 2007. In 2006 the CPE (first employment contract) laws were proposed with large protests as a result. Rather than going to the organised protest, she voted a law in her "région" whereby no company using that type of contract would receive the Région's subsidies. The government backed down and stated that the law would be put on the statute book, but that it would not be applied. After this event Royal was tipped as the lead contender in what is dubbed the "Sarko-Ségo" race against Nicolas Sarkozy.

By the beginning of September 2006, her intentions had become quite clear. She has said that only widespread sexism in the Socialist Party had prevented it from rallying around her candidacy as it would have had she been a man. She announced an official team to promote her campaign on 30 August. At this point, polls showed her to be much more popular than her closest competitor, former Prime Minister Lionel Jospin, and other Socialist heavyweights Dominique Strauss-Kahn, Jack Lang, another former Prime Minister Laurent Fabius and François Hollande.

Her status as a presidential candidate became more likely on 28 September 2006, when Lionel Jospin, the Socialist former Prime Minister and a fixture in French politics for nearly three decades, announced that he would not run after all. Jack Lang followed suit. On 16 November, Royal defeated Laurent Fabius and Dominique Strauss-Kahn in the French Socialist Party primary, becoming the party's candidate for the 2007 presidential election. The Socialist party's members voted 60.69% for her and gave a bit under 20% each to the more traditional contenders. She also won in 101 of 104 of the Socialist Party's fédérations, losing only Haute-Corse, Mayotte and Seine-Maritime (the latter being the home region of Laurent Fabius).

One of her top advisors, Éric Besson, resigned soon afterwards over a disagreement about the costs of this programme, which he believes could reach €35 billion, while others in the campaign team wanted to delay bringing out that figure.[The figure was equivalent to that of Mr. Sarkozy's but higher than Mr. Bayrou's, who was becoming a key figure in the race.] This led to an unusually bitter fall-out, and Mr Besson writing a book titled Qui connaît Madame Royal? (Who knows Mrs Royal?), published on 20 March. In it, Besson accuses Royal of being a populist, an authoritarian and a luddite and says that he will not vote for her and hopes that she is not elected. He then went on to join the Sarkozy campaign and was rewarded with a junior position in the next government on 18 May 2007.

Following the first round of the presidential election, she faced Nicolas Sarkozy in the second round of voting on 6 May in a two-way runoff. In the final round of voting on Sunday, 6 May, Sarkozy won the presidency with 53% of the vote. Royal conceded defeat and wished Sarkozy the best, requesting he keep her supporters in mind.

Royal later revealed she had offered defeated centrist candidate, François Bayrou, the premiership should she be elected.

Royal entered the leadership election of the Socialist Party to replace her former common law husband François Hollande as head of the party. She garnered the largest plurality of votes in the first round of voting, but not enough to win outright; she was eventually narrowly defeated in the second round by rival Martine Aubry by the margin of 42 votes. After a vote recount, Aubry was declared the winner 25 November 2008, with the margin widening to 102 votes. Royal has announced her intentions to contest the result. Royal has blamed party leaders and her former partner for her loss in the 2007 election.

Royal ran in the French Socialist Party presidential primary election of 2011, the party's first ever open primary. She arrived 4th in the first round on 9 October 2011 with a mere 6.95% of votes, considerably below the figures suggested by opinion polls.

In 2012, Royal ran for office representing Charente-Maritime's 1st constituency. She lost the election to a PRG candidate, Olivier Falorni.

After her separation with Hollande, political relations between them were tense, though they have both stated that they remained friends. In the 2008 Socialist Party leadership election, Hollande backed another candidate, and Royal has blamed him and the party establishment for her 2007 Presidential defeat.

On 2 April 2014, Royal was appointed Minister of Ecology, Sustainable Development and Energy in the second cabinet of Prime Minister Manuel Valls. In January 2015 she was third in line in governmental rank, after the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister.

Increasingly, commentators have seen Royal as President François Hollande ’s stand-in for some important state occasions. When Pope Francis touched down on French soil for the first time in his papacy with a visit to the European Parliament in Strasbourg in November 2014, Royal was the senior French official there to greet him. After the deadly attacks against a satirical newspaper and a kosher supermarket in January 2015, she travelled to Israel to represent France at the memorial services. In 2016 Royal promised to install 1,000 km of 'solar roadways' in the next five years. One kilometre was installed in Normandie, and after producing about a quarter of the power predicted, was mostly torn up inside three years.

When Emmanuel Macron was elected French President in May 2017, Royal hoped to be offered a position in his government but instead was offered the position of Ambassador for the Poles, which she accepted in June 2017. In late 2018 the publication of Royal's book "Ce que je peux enfin vous dire" (What I can finally tell you) detailing the sexism she had suffered throughout her political career, coincided with a decline in Macron's popularity at the time of the Gilets jaunes protests and resulted in speculation that Royal was contemplating a political comeback. After repeatedly and publicly criticising Macron's handling of pension reform, it was announced by the Council of Ministers that the Mission to the Poles would be ended, effectively removing Royal from her position, in tandem with an official investigation being launched inquiring about alleged misuse of public funds during Royal's time in office.

She announced her candidacy in the Socialist presidential primary for the 2027 French presidential election on 10 July 2026.

Royal has tended to campaign on family and other socially-oriented issues, rather than on economic or foreign policy issues. For instance, she has mounted campaigns against the exposure of children to violent television shows, including cartoons (see her 1989 book, listed below, Le Ras-le-bol des bébés zappeurs, roughly translated as "The Channel-Surfing Kids Are Fed Up"), and more generally has taken a stand on several issues regarding family values and the protection of children.

Royal stated as part of her 100-point platform that if elected, she would raise the lowest state pensions by five per cent, increase the monthly minimum wage to €1,500, raise benefits of handicapped citizens, implement state-paid rental deposits for the poorest citizens, and guarantee a job or job training to every student within six months of graduation. She pledged to abolish a flexible work contract for small companies. She pledged free contraception for all young women and a €10,000 interest-free loan for all young people.

The capitalists and the socialists have to be frightened. There is no alternative. They can't just dispose of people as they wish. They have to be held accountable.

Royal opposes movements of jobs between EU countries and outsourcing to developing countries. She pledged to abolish a flexible work contract for small companies. She did not directly address whether additional taxes would need to be raised to fund these programs, stating that they can be paid for by cutting waste in government. She was appointed to the vice-chair directorship of the Banque Publique d'Investissement, from which position she stated that the "BPI's purpose is not to do business nor to make profits".

The Socialist Party website states that during her tenure as Minister for the Environment, 1992–1993, Royal campaigned actively and successfully for the "Law on the treatment and recycling of Waste " (La loi sur le traitement et le recyclage des déchets), the "Law to preserve the countryside" (La loi sur la reconquête des paysages), a "Save our countrysides, savour their products" campaign to provide proper labelling for the products of 100 local areas (opération "Sauvons nos paysages, savourons leurs produits"), and the "Law against noise pollution" (La loi de lutte contre le bruit). She provided compensation for people adversely affected by airport noise.

During her tenure as Minister-delegate for the Family, Children, and the Handicapped, 2000–2002, Royal was active in the re-launch of the Priority Education Zones program (ZEP / zone d'éducation prioritaire), the creation of a government student lunch program, the implementation of language instruction as a priority in primary schools, the creation of a national home-tutoring program, Heures de Soutien Scolaire, and the creation of programs for parental involvement in schools, "la Semaine des parents à l'école", and national campaigns for the elections of parent-representatives. She also campaigned for the creation of local education and citizenship education contracts, the "Initiatives citoyennes" program for teaching children how to live together, the law on "Defense of children's rights and campaign against violence in the schools" (Loi de juin 1998 relative à la prévention et à la répression des infractions sexuelles ainsi qu'à la protection des mineurs), the "Campaign against hazing rituals in higher education" (Loi de juin 1998 contre le bizutage), the "Campaign against violence and racketeering" which included implementation of the "SOS Violence" telephone number, and the implementation of mandatory civics instruction in secondary schools.

In January 2006, she criticised secondary school teachers (workers of state public service) who give private lessons outside school hours, saying that they should spend more time in school. When a bootleg video of the speech surfaced on the Internet in November 2006, the teachers' union SNES rebuffed her, requesting that she renounce her proposal.

In 1989, Royal wrote The Channel-Surfing Kids Are Fed-Up, a book in which she criticised Japanese animation and superhero live-action series (then dominant in certain TV programs) as poor quality production detrimental for children.

Royal favours, and has worked for, the "Parental rights and obligations act" (Loi sur l'autorité parentale), the "Women's rights reform and anonymous childbirth act" (l'accouchement sous X), the creation of paternity leave, the creation of 40,000 new spaces in French nursery schools, and Social housing reform. She has been active in campaigns providing for "Parental time-off provisions and financial support for child illness care", Special education support (parents d'enfants handicapés), "Benefit allocations for students starting the new school year" (Allocation de rentrée scolaire), and the "Prostitution of Minors Act" (Loi contre la prostitution des mineurs) which provides penal measures for clients. Royal has supported the "Law against child pornography", the creation of the association "Childhood and the Media" (Enfance et média) against violence in the media, the creation of the Plan Handiscole for the education of handicapped children and adolescents and their integration into life at school, programs for mass and individual transportation, and the creation of the program "Tourism and the Handicapped" (Tourisme et handicap). In 2009, she declared herself to be "profoundly shocked" by statements of Pope Benedict XVI which claimed that the distribution of condoms will not stop the spread of AIDS. Royal added that "the responsibility of any religious leader" is to "defend the principle of life, and certainly not to urge human beings towards their deaths."

When she accepted her nomination as the Socialist presidential candidate, Royal said: "There is a strong correlation between the status of a woman and the state of justice or injustice in a country." According to an article in Ms. magazine, French women currently earn 80% of a male counterpart's salary.

Royal has been a long-standing critic of violence on television. She has voiced opinions in the past linking youth crime to exposure to pornography and television violence. She also described the M6 programme Loft Story, imitating the internationally popular Big Brother TV series, as contrary to principles of human dignity and risking transforming viewers into voyeurs instead of providing quality programming.

A law passed in February 2002, introduced by Royal on behalf of the Jospin government, allows some parental authority to be granted to same-sex partners. The law amended Article 377 of the Civil Code in allowing a parent to ask a judge to share his/her parental authority with a partner. Article 377–1, added by the law, ensures that "delegation may provide, for the needs of education of a child, that the father and mother, or one of them, shall share all or part of the exercise of parental authority with the third person delegatee".

In a June 2006 interview with LGBT publication Têtu, Royal said "opening up marriage to same-sex couples is needed in the name of equality, visibility and respect" and said that if her party formed the next government she would introduce a bill to legalise same-sex marriage and adoption.

According to her 2007 campaign website, Royal has advocated a policy of more humane prisons and supports creating better conditions inside penal institutions. The website states that she supports a system of rehabilitating offenders and reintegrating them into society.

Royal initially appeared to have few opinions on several notable foreign policy subjects, such as the accession of Turkey to the European Union, merely responding, "my opinion is that of the French people." On the subject of the Iranian nuclear program, Royal also took conflicting positions. She initially took a very hard line in a televised debate, contending that any nuclear power programme in Iran must be prevented since it would inevitably lead to weapons production. When she was criticised by French politicians for not understanding the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty – which gives signatories the right to nuclear power for non-military purposes – Royal softened her position and, through a spokesman, said that a civil nuclear program should be allowed as long as UN inspectors were permitted to conduct spot checks.

In early December 2006, controversy followed a brief tour of the Middle East. Meeting Hezbollah politician Ali Ammar, she took exception to his use of the euphemism "Zionist entity", but did not take issue with his comparison of the Palestinian territories to France under German occupation during World War II. This attracted criticism in France and in Israel which Royal visited next. However, the French ambassador to Lebanon, Bernard Emié, backed her explanation that she did not hear "the offending remarks" – the discussion took place via an interpreter supplied by the Lebanese parliament. In the same visit, Royal thanked the minister for being so "frank" when he described US foreign policy in the Middle East as "unlimited American insanity".

Royal visited China in January 2007; after speaking with a lawyer in that country she noted to the press that he had pointed out to her that the Chinese legal system was "faster" than the French one. She was immediately reminded by her opponents at home that the Chinese system orders 10,000 executions each year, and that defence lawyers there must be authorised by the Communist Party. She however brought up with her hosts the fate of three Chinese journalists recently imprisoned, and criticised the "meekness" of French entrepreneurs in tackling new markets such as China. Royal was criticised by French and international media by what was called "mangling the French language" in a soundbite delivered on the Great Wall of China. She used the word bravitude instead of the word bravoure, which means bravery.

In January 2007, during a meeting with Quebec opposition leader and Parti Québécois head André Boisclair, she declared her support for the Quebec sovereignty movement in its aim to secede from Canada. Royal said Quebec and France share common values, including "sovereignty and Quebec's freedom". Soon after, Royal took a phone call from comedian Gérald Dahan pretending to be Quebec Premier Jean Charest, and was tricked into making a quip about Corsica 's independence: "Not all French people would be opposed." She then added, "But don't repeat that or we'll have another scandal on our hands."

On 5 April 2007, when commenting on the kidnapping of two Frenchmen by the Taliban in Afghanistan, Royal called for sanctions to be imposed by the United Nations against regimes like the Taliban. This comment was widely interpreted as indicating that Royal did not understand that the Taliban no longer formed the Afghan government and that she was clueless on international matters.

During the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Royal repeatedly supported the Russian view that NATO was to blame for the war, and falsely claimed that the Mariupol hospital airstrike and the Bucha massacre never happened. According to her, the events were "war propaganda" promoted by Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy to interrupt the peace process. Royal's claims were condemned by Olivier Faure, the leader of Royal's Socialist Party, and Raphaël Glucksmann, its leader in the European Parliament.

On 30 April 2017, Youba Sokona resigned from the Africa Renewable Energy Initiative, citing “ European interference [to impose EU-preferred projects] in African governance that belongs to another era. ” Reports surfaced directly accusing Ségolène Royal of undermining African leadership. The initiative was scrapped in 2017.

In July 2025, Royal pointed out the growing disenchantment of African nations with France, accused of broken promises.

From the late 1970s, Royal was the partner of François Hollande, later to become President of France, whom she met at ENA. The couple had four children. They were neither married (considering it too " bourgeois ") nor bound by a PACS (pacte civil de solidarité, which provides for a civil union between two adults, regardless of gender), contrary to rumours. A news agency leaked news of their separation in June 2007, on the eve of the legislative election. According to the Guardian, she had asked Hollande "to move out of the house" and pursue his new love interest "which has been detailed in books and newspapers" – a reference to a much-discussed chapter by journalists explaining how Hollande was having a long-term affair with a journalist.

Royal's eldest son, Thomas Hollande, served as an adviser to her during her presidential candidacy, working on a website designed to appeal to young voters. Her brother Antoine named their brother Gérard Royal as the agent who placed the bomb that sank the Greenpeace ship Rainbow Warrior. Others argued that this statement is exaggerated and that Gérard was part of the logistics team. Royal's cousin Anne-Christine Royal followed the paternal side of the family and has been a candidate of the far-right Front National party at a local election in Bordeaux. Royal was listed as one of the fifty best-dressed over 50 by The Guardian in March 2013.

The Ségur Ordinance of 1781 was a French law that required French officer candidates to produce proof of having at least four generations of nobility. It is named after Philippe Henri de Ségur, the French minister of war at the time, although he advised against it. Officially called RÉGLEMENT portant que nul ne pourra être proposé à des sous - lieutenances s'il n'a fait preuve de quatre générations de noblesse (i.e. Regulation concerning that no one shall be proposed for a sub-lieutenancy if he has not provided proof of four generations of nobility), the ordinance was approved by Louis XVI on May 22, 1781.

The edict required all officer candidates in the French (i.e. non-foreign) infantry, cavalry and dragoons to prove four degrees of nobility in their patrilineal line. Alternatively, one had to be the son of an officer who held the Cross of Saint-Louis.

From then on it became nearly impossible for wealthy commoners or rich Nobles of the Robe to begin military service in one of the said branches of service directly as an officer (e.g., by purchasing an officer's certificate). Now, they had to rise through the ranks to gain a lieutenancy, like all low-born commoners (roturiers). That hard, uncertain slog took regularly one or two decades. For example, a commoner starting a military career between 14 and 18 years of age usually could not attain the rank of Second Lieutenant until his late-twenties to mid-thirties. Further promotions to a field or general rank became correspondingly difficult or even impossible.

In 1784, the provisions were extended to the hussars, mounted chasseurs, and the so-called foreign regiments (Régiments étrangers) of infantry, which had in fact long been predominantly French. The artillery and engineers remained excluded.

Preceding the French Revolution, French society had long been split into three "Estates". The First Estate contained members of the clergy, the Second Estate the French nobility, and the Third Estate the rest of the population. The Second Estate was divided into two subsets: the nobility of the sword and the nobility of the robe.

The sword, or court, nobility consisted of traditional French nobles who had hereditary connections to chivalric nobility of the Middle Ages. During the 18th century, their income was fairly static, consisting of profits from agrarian holdings and benefits from military commissions. These traditional nobles dominated the French court and considered advancement in the French Army as the highest form of aristocratic achievement. By contrast, the robe, or civic, nobility were French financiers, merchants, and real estate moguls who achieved political power through monetary advancement. Their status was newly gained relative to that of the sword nobility, often owing their position to personal success and/or intermediate family connections. They did not have the ornate genealogy of the court nobility.

The chivalric ideology of the established sword nobles naturally clashed with the presence of newer civic nobles who often lent their status to the payouts of high interest loans made to the French government. As civic nobility established generational lines, young civic nobles purchased their way to high ranks in the French Army, angering sword nobility who wished to maintain the exclusivity of officership.

The law was met with public outcry from members of the Third Estate. Many saw the ordinance as a way for the Second Estate to shut out the Bourgeois from army prestige, even though the original intent behind the law was only to exclude other nobles. The law also managed to further facilitate the niche status of robe nobility. These rich aristocrats were not bourgeois, yet their lack of long-term patrilineal legacies prevented them from being accepted among the court nobles. The resentment of both the robe nobility and the bourgeois would lead to political allegiances during the National Assembly of 1789–91. The perceived social and political injustice incited by the Ségur Ordinance was a role-player in the French Monarchy's downward spiral in the late 18th century, ultimately leading to the French Revolution.

The taille (French pronunciation: [ taj ]) was a direct land tax on the French peasantry and non-nobles (Third Estate) in Ancien Régime France. The tax was imposed on each household and was based on how much land it held, and was paid directly to the state.

Originally only an "exceptional" tax (i.e. imposed and collected in times of need, as the king was expected to survive on the revenues of the " domaine royal ", or lands that belonged to him directly), the taille became permanent in 1439, when the right to collect taxes in support of a standing army was granted to Charles VII of France during the Hundred Years' War. Unlike modern income taxes, the total amount of the taille was first set (after the Estates General was suspended in 1484) by the French king from year to year, and this amount was then apportioned among the various provinces for collection.

Exempted from the tax were clergy and nobles (except for non-noble lands they held in "pays d'état" [see below]), officers of the crown, military personnel, magistrates, university professors and students, and franchises (villes franches) such as Paris.

The provinces were of three sorts, the pays d'élection, the pays d'état and the pays d'imposition. In the pays d'élection (the longest held possessions of the French crown; some of these provinces had had the equivalent autonomy of a pays d'état in an earlier period, but had lost it through the effects of royal reforms) the assessment and collection of taxes were entrusted to elected officials (at least originally; later, these positions were bought), and the tax was generally "personal", meaning it was attached to non-noble individuals. In the pays d'état ("provinces with provincial estates" Brittany, Languedoc, Burgundy, Auvergne, Béarn, Dauphiné, Provence, and such portions of Gascony as Bigorre, Comminges, and the Quatre-Vallées ; these recently acquired provinces had been able to maintain a certain local autonomy in terms of taxation), the assessment of the tax was established by local councils and the tax was generally " real ", meaning that it was attached to non-noble lands (that is, even nobles possessing such lands were required to pay taxes on them). Finally, pays d'imposition were recently conquered lands which had their own local historical institutions (they were similar to the pays d'état under which they are sometimes grouped), although taxation was overseen by the royal intendant.

In an attempt to reform the fiscal system, new administrative divisions were created in the 16th century. The Recettes générales, commonly known as généralités and overseen in the beginning by receveurs généraux or généraux conseillers (royal tax collectors), were initially only taxation districts. Their role steadily increased and by the mid 17th century, the généralités were under the authority of an intendant, and they became a vehicle for the expansion of royal power in matters of justice, taxation, and policing. By the outbreak of the Revolution, there were 36 généralités; the last two were created as recently as 1784.

Until the late 17th century, tax collectors were called receveurs royaux. In 1680, the system of the Ferme Générale was established, a franchised customs and excise operation in which individuals bought the right to collect the taille on behalf of the king, through six-year adjudications (some taxes, including the aides and the gabelle, had been farmed out in this way as early as 1604). The major tax collectors in that system were known as the fermiers généraux ("farmers-general", in English).

Efficient tax collection was one of the major causes for French administrative and royal centralization in the Early Modern period. The taille became a major source of royal income (roughly half in the 1570s), the most important direct tax of pre- Revolutionary France, and provided for the growing cost of warfare in the 15th and 16th centuries. Records show the taille increasing from 2.5 million livres in 1515 to six million after 1551; in 1589 the taille reached a record 21 million livres (a period of high inflation), before dropping.

The taille was only one of a number of taxes. There also existed the "taillon" (a tax for military expenditures), a national salt tax (the gabelle), a tax on consumer goods usually used to pay for fortifications (the maltôte), national tariffs (the "aides") on various products (including wine), local tariffs on specialty products (the "douane") or levied on products entering the city (the "octroi") or sold at fairs, and local taxes. Finally, the church benefited from a mandatory tax or tithe called the "dîme".

Louis XIV created several additional tax systems, including the "capitation" (begun in 1695) which touched every person including nobles and the clergy (although exemption could be bought for a large one-time sum) and the "dixième" (1710–1717, restarted in 1733), which was a true tax on income and on property value and was meant to support the military. Every Frenchman, except the Dauphin of France and paupers were subject to the capitation tax. Noble capitation was assessed by the intendant of the generality, and at first it was established that the nobility pay 1/90 of their annual income. This was not always the case, however, as many of the nobility had the means to lobby against the tax, and regularly appeal the assessments. As capitation was paid at the place of residence, rich landlords with many estates, and those who lived in Paris or at the Court of Versailles, could evade it. The duc d'Orleans famously bragged about setting his own rate: "I work things out with the intendants; I pay more or less what I like."

In 1749, under Louis XV, a new tax based on the "dixième", the "vingtième" (or "one-twentieth"), was enacted to reduce the royal deficit, and this tax continued through the ancien régime. This tax was based solely on revenues (5% of net earnings from land, property, commerce, industry and from official offices), and was meant to reach all citizens regardless of status, but the clergy, the regions with "pays d'état" and the parlements protested; the clergy won exemption, the "pays d'état" won reduced rates, and the parlements halted new income statements, effectively making the "vingtième" a far less efficient tax than it was designed to be. The financial needs of the Seven Years' War led to a second (1756–1780), and then a third (1760–1763) "vingtième" being created. In 1754 the "vingtième" produced 11.7 million livres.

The taille was used very heavily by the French to fund their many wars like the Hundred Years' War and the Thirty Years' War. It eventually became one of the most hated taxes of the Ancien Régime.

Tall poppy syndrome is a term that originated in Australia and New Zealand in the 1980s that refers to people with notable public success or achievements that are ostracised by others as a form of egalitarianism. Intense scrutiny and criticism of such a person is termed as "cutting down the tall poppy".

The phrase "tall poppies" originates from Roman historian Livy 's account of the tyrannical Roman king Lucius Tarquinius Superbus. He is said to have received a messenger sent by his son, Sextus Tarquinius, asking what he should do next in Gabii, since he had become all-powerful there. Rather than answering the messenger verbally, Tarquin went into his garden, took a stick and swept it across his garden, thus cutting off the heads of the tallest poppies that were growing there. The messenger returned to Gabii and told Sextus what he had seen. Sextus realised that his father wished him to put to death all of the most eminent people of Gabii, which he then did.

Earlier stories with the same theme are found in Aristotle 's Politics (in which Periander, the tyrant of Corinth, makes the gesture to a herald of Thrasybulus, tyrant of Miletus) and in Herodotus ' Histories (in which Thrasybulus makes the gesture to Periander 's herald). However, these Greek stories involve fields of grain; Livy's Roman tale is the first to feature poppies.

In Australia and New Zealand, "cutting down the tall poppy" is sometimes used by business entrepreneurs to describe those who criticise other people for their success and achievements. It has been described as being the by-product of the Australian and New Zealand cultural value of egalitarianism.

In New Zealand, academic study concerning the prevalence of tall poppy syndrome and its impact on the economy of New Zealand has become an area of increased focus. Interest in the effects of tall poppy syndrome became reinvigorated in 2021 following the suicide of entrepreneur Jake Millar, who had received negative media coverage surrounding one of his start-up companies. While research is limited, a handful of studies into the economic impact of tall poppy syndrome conducted throughout the 2020s have shown a negative impact on entrepreneurship, risk-taking, and overall economic growth in New Zealand.

In Japan, a similar common expression is "the nail that sticks up gets hammered down" (出る杭は打たれる).

In the Netherlands, this expression is "to stick up above ground level" (boven het maaiveld uitsteken), with the cultural phenomenon being named maaiveldcultuur [ nl ].

In Chile, this expression is known as chaquetear ('pull the jacket').

In Scandinavia, this expression is known as the Law of Jante, a phrase that originates from a 1933 satirical novel by Aksel Sandemose. It is a code that contains rules and stipulations such as "you're not to think you are anything special" and "perhaps you don't think we know a few things about you?".

In Canada, the term "tall poppy syndrome" is used in particular to refer to successful women being criticised for their success.

Tallage or talliage (from the French tailler, i.e. a part cut out of the whole) may have signified at first any tax, but became in England and France a land use or land tenure tax. Later in England it was further limited to assessments by the crown upon cities, boroughs, and royal domains. In effect, tallage was a land tax.

Land taxes were not unknown in England, as the Anglo-Saxon kings had periodically levied a Danegeld on that basis, but tallage was brought to England by the Normans as a feudal duty. The word first appeared in the reign of Henry II as a synonym for the auxilium burgi, which was an occasional payment exacted by king and barons. Under Henry's sons it became a common source of royal revenue. It was condemned in the Magna Carta of 1215, and its imposition practically ceased by 1283 in favour of a general grant made in Parliament. There were three further attempts to impose tallage, and it was formally abolished in England in 1340 (Taxation, etc. Act 1340) under Edward III, when Parliament's consent to the imposition of common charges became required.

Like scutage, tallage was superseded by various property and trade taxes, and then the subsidy system in the 14th century, which involved poll taxes. The last occasion on which tallage was levied in England appears to be about the year 1332.

The famous statute of 25 Edw. 1 (34 Edw. 1. Stat. 4 in The Statutes at Large), De Tallagio non Concedendo, though it is printed among the statutes of the realm, and was cited as a statute in the preamble to the Petition of Right in 1628, and by the judges in John Hampden 's case in 1637, is probably an imperfect and unauthoritative abstract of the Confirmatio Cartarum. The first section reads:

No Tallage or Aid shall be taken or levied by Us or our Heirs in our Realm, without the good will and Assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and other Freemen of the Land.

Tallagium facere was the technical term for rendering accounts in the Exchequer, the accounts being kept by means of tallies or notched sticks. The tellers (a corruption of talliers) of the Exchequer were at one time important financial officers.

The system of keeping the national accounts by tallies was abolished by the Receipt of the Exchequer Act 1783 (23 Geo. 3. c. 82) and the office of teller by the Offices of Exchequer Act 1817 (57 Geo. 3. c. 84).

The tax was frequently levied on English Jews during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. A tallage of £60,000, known as the " Saladin tallage ", was levied at Guildford in 1189, the ostensible object being preparation for the Third Crusade.

It was reported that John may have imposed a tallage upon Jews in 1210 to the extent of 60,000 marks (£40,000). There are likewise records of tallages under Henry III of 4,000 marks (1225) and 5,000 marks (1270). Important tallages were made by Edward I in the second, third and fourth years (£1,000) and in the fifth year (25,000 marks) of his reign. These taxes were in addition to the various claims which were made upon Jews for relief, wardship, marriage, fines, law-proceedings, debts, licenses, amercements etc. and which Jews paid to the English exchequer, like other English subjects.

It has been claimed that after their expulsion from England in 1290, the loss of the income from Jews was a chief reason why Edward I was obliged to give up his right of tallage upon Englishmen.

Tallage lasted much longer in France, where it was a royal tax and one of estate owners with tenants. It came to be called 'taille' and was much used during the Hundred Years' War. It was not abolished in France until the French Revolution.

Tallage never became significantly developed in the German states. It remained a small tax owed to a feudal lord in lieu of other feudal duties, dying out along with other feudal duties.

Talossa, also known as the Kingdom of Talossa (Talossan : Regipäts Talossan [ ˈred͡ʒipæt͡s tɐɫɔˈsan ]), is one of the earliest micronations – founded in 1979 by then-14-year-old Robert Ben Madison of Milwaukee and at first confined to his bedroom; he adopted the name after discovering that the word means "inside the house" in Finnish. Among the first such projects still maintained, it has kept up a web presence since 1995. Its internet and media exposure since the late 1990s contributed to the appearance of other subsequent internet micronations.

Talossa claims several places on Earth as its territory, especially a portion of Milwaukee, calling it the "Greater Talossan Area"; no such claim, however, is recognized by the United Nations or by any sovereign nation. As of 5 August 2023, the number of active citizens is said to be 157. Including those who are no longer citizens for various reasons, those who are under the age of 14 and so are not yet citizens, and those from the ESB Affair there are 564 total registered individuals. The current King of Talossa is Sir Txec Róibeard dal Nordselvá, who in December 2024 succeeded John I.

Talossan culture has been developed over the years by Robert Madison and other fans. The Talossan language, also created by Madison in 1980, claims a vocabulary of 35 000 root words and 121 000 derived words – including fieschada ([fjeˈʃaðə]), meaning " love at first sight ".

Talossa was founded as a kingdom on 26 December 1979, by Madison, shortly after the death of his mother. Madison maintained Talossa throughout his adolescence, publishing a handwritten newspaper and designing a flag and emblem. During this time its only other members were about a dozen relatives and acquaintances. This changed in the mid-1990s, when a series of stories in the New York Times and Wired, subsequently republished elsewhere, drew his website to popular attention. Several new "citizens" joined Talossa as a result, and Madison began to claim that he was the inventor of the term "micronation".

In April 1996, Madison reestablished the dormant League of Secessionist States —an intermicronational organisation originally founded by him and two friends in 1980—and launched a website for it. Between 1997 and at least 2000, it was the most prominent intermicronational organisation on the Internet.

Madison disestablished the "kingdom" in late 2005, but Talossa is still active today despite the lack of involvement of the original founder.

Madison registered "Talossa" as a service mark in 2005 and created Talossa, Inc., a Wisconsin not-for-profit corporation. By 2013 the service mark had been cancelled and the corporation had been administratively dissolved.

Madison invented Talossan ([ tɐɫɔˈsan ] or el glheþ Talossan [ ɛɫ ʎeθ tɐɫɔˈsan ]) as a constructed language for his micronation. With its relatively large vocabulary, which is mostly French-based, it has been described at least once as one of the most detailed fictional languages ever invented. The former Association of Talossan Language Organisations (ATLO) maintained a website describing the language for new learners, providing language information, research and online translation to and from English. The ISO 639 designation is "tzl". That website is now deprecated, and new resources will be created with the formation of la Società per l'Ilesnaziun del Glheþ Naziunal (Society for the Facilitation of the National Language, SIGN).

The language was overseen by the Comità per l'Útzil del Glheþ ("Committee for the Use of the Language," CÚG), a group formed by Madison which periodically issued both Arestadas (decrees) to describe and document changes in language usage of the language and Pienamaintschen (supplements), to update the vocabulary list. The CÚG maintained a multi-lingual website providing access to the recent recommendations of the committee.

Tamaris is an archaeological site located in the commune of Martigues, in the Bouches-du-Rhône department of France. It was an ancient fortified settlement belonging to the Avatici, a Celtic-Ligurian tribe who inhabited the region during the Iron Age.

The settlement was occupied mainly during the first half of the 5th century BC. The site is considered one of the important examples of early urbanized settlements in southern Gaul before the Roman conquest.

During the Iron Age, the region around modern Martigues was inhabited by Celtic-Ligurian communities. Tamaris was one of several fortified settlements in the area, located near the Greek colony of Massalia (modern Marseille).

The settlement declined following the development of Massalia and changes in regional trade networks. Archaeological evidence indicates that Tamaris was occupied for a relatively short period before being abandoned.

Excavations at Tamaris have revealed defensive structures, including fortification walls, as well as residential buildings. The settlement displays differences between domestic areas, with simpler houses in the northern part and more complex domestic units in the southern part of the site.

Archaeological finds include locally produced material as well as imported Greek and Etruscan ceramics, reflecting the influence of Mediterranean trade on Iron Age communities in southern Gaul.

51°19′09″N 0°33′29″W ﻿ / ﻿ 51.3193°N 0.5581°W ﻿ / 51.3193; -0.5581 Tante Marie Culinary Academy is a cookery school in Woking, Surrey, England. It is the United Kingdom's oldest independent cookery school, established in 1954 by the cookery writer Iris Syrett.

It was the first school in the UK to offer a Cordon Bleu Diploma (though the Tante Marie Cordon Bleu diploma is its own independent qualification and the Academy is not part of the 'Le Cordon Bleu' international network). The diploma forms the backbone of Tante Marie's courses, which range in length from one day workshops in particular areas of cooking to the full-time, one-year professional Cordon Bleu Diploma which is awarded along with the Level 4 Diploma in Professional Culinary Arts, a formally accredited qualification, created by Tante Marie Culinary Academy with the Confederation of Tourism and Hospitality in 2010.

The Academy also has a restaurant staffed by graduates, who are studying for a Level 5 Diploma in Culinary and Hospitality Management whilst working in 'The Restaurant at Tante Marie'.

Iris Syrett died in 1964, after which Wendy Majerowicz became Principal. In 1967 the school moved to Woodham House, Carlton Road. John and Beryl Childs, who owned the school from 1982 to 1999, continued the development of courses and curriculum into a programme that has become recognised as one of the world's leading independent providers of culinary training.

Marcella O'Donovan, one of the school's teachers, bought the school with the backing of her family in 1999. The O'Donovans oversaw the introduction of new courses to cater for the gap year and the amateur cook market, while at the same time maintaining the school's professional emphasis.

In April 2008, the school was bought by its then Deputy Principal, Andrew Maxwel with Gordon Ramsay Holdings and Lyndy Redding, a former graduate of the Intensive Cordon Bleu Diploma course who now owns Absolute Taste, a catering and events planning business based in London.

In May 2014 it was announced the school would be moving to a site in Woking town centre. The new base opened in the refurbished Alexander House, Commercial Way, in early 2015. Two floors of the building house the cookery school, with training theatre kitchen, student kitchens and lectures rooms.

Tartar sauce (French : sauce tartare), often spelled tartare sauce in the UK and other Commonwealth countries, is a mayonnaise-based condiment typically containing chopped cornichons or gherkins and capers, along with soft herbs such as tarragon, dill, parsley and chives. In North American, British, and French cuisine, It is commonly served with breaded and fried seafood such as fried fish, clams, and squid. In Europe, it is also served with breaded and fried or grilled meats such as Wiener schnitzel and veal trotter, and cold meat and seafood dishes.

Tartar sauce is based on either mayonnaise or aioli, with certain other ingredients added. In the UK, recipes typically add to the base capers, gherkins, lemon juice, and dill. US recipes may include chopped dill pickles, onions (or chives), and fresh parsley ; many around the world combine elements of both. Chopped hard-boiled eggs or olives are sometimes added, as may be Dijon mustard and cocktail onions. Hungarian variants may include sour cream (or plain cream), powdered sugar, white pepper and white wine, besides the other core ingredients.

Tartar sauce is named for steak tartare (and thus ultimately named for the Tatars), with which it was commonly served in 19th century France. Recipes for tartar sauce have been found in English-language cookbooks dating to the mid-19th century, including a recipe in Modern Cookery for Private Families in 1860. It was also popular in Hungary in the late 19th century. Tatarska omacka is also very popular in Central and Eastern Europe, in countries like Slovakia, Czechia, Poland, Ukraine etc., where it is a beloved condiment.

Tarte aux mirabelles is a sweet French tart, combining pastry and mirabelle plums (stones removed). It is a speciality of Lorraine in north-east France, where the mirabelle is an important crop. It also features in the cuisine of other regions of the country.

The mirabelle plum has been cultivated since at least the 17th century. The Dictionnaire de l'Académie française and the Oxford English Dictionary both give the probable derivation of the name as Mirabel, a fairly frequent toponym in the south of France. A tart made with mirabelles is traditional in Lorraine and its neighbour Alsace and is found in other parts of France.

The type of pastry used for tarte aux mirabelles varies. The most frequently mentioned in recipes is pâte brisée, but other sweet pastries – pâte sablée and pâte sucrée – are specified by some cooks, and unsweetened shortcrust and puff are also used in some recipes. In Beaulieu-sur-Dordogne, Elizabeth David encountered a tarte aux mirabelles made with yeast pastry: "Those little round golden plums of early autumn on their light brioche-like base made an unexpected and memorable end to our outdoor feast".

The traditional tarte aux mirabelles consisted solely of fruit, pastry and a little sugar sprinkled on top before cooking. Some more recent recipes, including that of Albert and Michel Roux, have introduced a layer of crème pâtissière spread on the pastry base before the layer of fruit is added.

Tarte à l'oignon or Zewelwaï is a savoury tart with a baked filling of onions and cream. It is a speciality of the French region of Alsace, and may be served hot, warm or at room temperature. It is typically served as a starter.

Onion pastries are familiar in many French regions and elsewhere, including the Provençal pissaladière, Flemish flamiche and from Britain the Lancashire Butter pie. Elizabeth David singles out Zewelwaï as "the famous Alsatian speciality... a truly lovely first course".

The onions are thinly sliced and, in most versions, slowly cooked in fat. Different cooks and writers specify various fats, including butter and oil (David), lard (Jane Grigson), beef dripping (Felicity Cloake), olive oil (Gilles Pudlowski), butter (André Soltner), and goose fat (Anne Willan). Larousse Gastronomique 's Treasury of Country Cooking recommends simmering the onions in water; Gabriel Kreuther adds the onions raw to the filling.

The mixture to which the onions are added may contain cream, crème fraîche, whole eggs, egg yolks, and bacon. A variant made in the early months of the year, Zewelwaï printanière, substitutes spring onions for the usual brown ones. Most cooks blind bake the pastry case before adding the filling, although David does not. The pastry is generally shortcrust or a variant of it, but Larousse specifies puff pastry. The filled pastry case is then baked.

The cooked tart may be served hot, warm, or at room temperature.

Tartiflette (French pronunciation: [ taʁtiflɛt ]) is a dish from Savoy in the French Alps. It is made with potatoes, reblochon cheese, lardons and onions. A splash of white wine can be added too.

The word tartiflette is probably derived from the Arpitan word for potato (tartiflâ) or from the Savoyard tartifles, a term also found in Provençal and Gallo-Italian. This modern recipe was inspired by a traditional dish called péla : a gratin cooked in a long-handled pan.

Often served as an après-ski meal, tartiflette conveys an image of Alpine authenticity and conviviality.

As with many traditional dishes in the region, the potato is a staple ingredient. Savoy was historically part of the Holy Roman Empire, and the Savoyards were exposed to potato tubers earlier than the French. Tartiflette was first mentioned in a 1705 book, Le Cuisinier Royal et Bourgeois, written by François Massialot and his assistant cook B. Mathieu.

In its modern form, tartiflette began to appear on the menus of restaurants in the ski resorts in the 1980s. Its popularity is partly thanks to the promotional effort by Le Syndicat Interprofessionnel du Reblochon to boost the sales of reblochon, as is confirmed also by Christian Millau (of the Gault-Millau Guide) in his gastronomic dictionary.

A common related dish found throughout the region is the croziflette. Its preparation resembles that of the original dish in everything but the use of potatoes, in place of which minuscule squares of locally produced pasta are used. These are known as crozets de Savoie (which are usually made from buckwheat, but sometimes durum), hence the name of this dish, which is a blend of "crozet" and "tartiflette".

Another related dish is the morbiflette prepared with the Morbier cheese in place of the Reblochon.

In France, taxation is determined by the yearly budget vote by the French Parliament, which determines which kinds of taxes can be levied and which rates can be applied.

Taxation in France covers all taxes, duties, fees, contributions and social security contributions imposed by the public authorities on French individuals and companies or those living in France. Taxes are thus levied by the government, and collected by the public administrations. According to INSEE, public administrations can be defined as "all institutional units whose main function is to produce non-market goods and services or to redistribute national income and wealth, and whose resources come mainly from compulsory contributions paid by units belonging to other institutional sectors". French "public administrations" are made up of three different institutions:

Taxes in France are made up of taxes (compulsory, unrequited payments to public authorities), plus social security contributions. Most of the taxes are collected by the government and the local collectivities, while the social deductions are collected by the Social Security. There is a distinction to be made between taxes (impôts), which applies to production, importations, wealth and incomes, and social contributions (cotisations sociales), which are payments, calculated as a percentage of salary, which entitle employees to social benefits in the event of illness, unemployment or when they claim their pension. These social contributions are payable by both the employer and the employee. Taxes and contributions together are called in French prélèvements obligatoires (compulsory deductions).

All economic agents (individuals or legal entities involved in economic activity) pay tax in France. There are many types of tax, mainly affecting households and businesses. There is a distinction to be made between those liable to pay tax and taxpayers (economic agents who pay tax are called taxpayers, while taxpayers are those who actually bear the burden of tax). People having their tax residence in France are subject to French tax. Thus, they are natural or legal persons either living in France, i.e. have their homes or principal residence in France; working in France; or having the center of their economic interests in France. Any one of these criteria is sufficient for a person to be treated as taxable.

Despite a downward trend registered since 1999, the tax burden in 2022 (46,1% of GDP) remains at a high level, both historically and in comparison with other countries. OECD countries have experienced an increase in the tax burden since the mid-1960s comparable to that of France, rising from 25% of the GDP in 1965 to 34% in 2022. That of the countries of the European Union has increased by nearly 12 percentage points of GDP over the period. Efforts to control the increase in the tax burden have been made by the states of the OECD: the tax rate decelerated during the 90s and has decreased slightly since 2000. This is why France continues to be among the OECD countries whose tax rate is the highest. Taxes account for 46,1% of GDP against 34% on average in OECD countries. The overall rate of social security and tax on the average wage in 2022 was 82% of gross salary, compared with 77% of the total average tax wedge. The levels of social security contributions are particularly high (17% of GDP against 9% of GDP on average for OECD). The social security budgets are larger than the budget of the national government. The budgets of both the national government and social security organizations run deficits.

Taxes in France can be classified according to the institution which collects and benefit from them and to the people who pay them. Taxes are monetary benefits imposed on people according to their capacities and without return of benefit, for the purpose of public expenditure to achieve economic and social goals set by the government. As for tariffs, they are different from taxes because of their strictly economic aspect; their purpose is to protect the domestic market. However, some charges levied by the customs administration are taxes: the value added tax levied on goods from non-members of the European Union, the tax on petroleum products, which applies regardless of the origin of products, and other taxes. social security contributions are collected for social protection. Some other taxes, based on personal income, are allocated to social agencies and do not give taxpayers the right to benefit from them.

These taxes, collected by public administrations or by the institutions of the EU, apply to the production and the consumption of goods and of services. These taxes are independent from profits. They include taxes on the products and others taxes on the production. The taxes on the production cover essentially the taxe professionnelle, the taxe foncière, and the versement transport (the professional tax, tax land and the payment transport), which apply to the use of labour and the property or the use of land, buildings and other assets used for the sake of production. They are local taxes, so they are not collected by the central government (see Local taxes). Taxes on consumption traditionally consisted of indirect duties on the consumption and excise duties, applying only on the use of certain products (alcoholic beverages, manufactured, tobacco products and energy products). However, the establishment of the VAT and its generalization have considerably reduced the scope and thus the revenue of these indirect duties and excise duties even if one of them, the tax on petroleum products, is still considerable. In 2022, taxes on production paid by companies represented 3.3% of GDP in France, compared with an average of 1.5% for the eurozone and 1.7% for the European Union.

In order to establish a single market made up of the member states of the European Union, a number of directives on VAT has been enacted since 1967, with the obligation for states to adapt their domestic legislation. The rules relating to the scope, the tax base, the payment, the territoriality of goods and services as well as reporting requirements are partially harmonized, but states can apply transitional arrangements in respect of rates, exemptions and rights of deduction, whose rules are being harmonized.

The VAT (French: taxe sur la valeur ajoutée, TVA) is a general consumption tax, which applies to goods and services located in France. It is a proportional tax on output collected by the companies and ultimately completely supported by the final buyer, i.e. the consumer, since it is included in the price of goods or services. Indeed, VAT is applied to the "added value", i.e. the added value to the product or service at each stage of production or marketing, so that at the end of the economic circuit, the overall tax burden corresponds to the tax calculated on the final price paid by the consumer. The current standard rate is at 20%. Two reduced rates exist: a 10% rate for books, hotel stays, local public transportation, and restaurant meals; and 5.5% for most groceries. A specific rate of 2.1% applies only to prescription drugs covered by Social Security. In 2021, the state collected around 152 billion euro from the total VAT revenue, while other organizations collected roughly 91.2 billion euros.

The taxe intérieure de consommation sur les produits énergétiques (TICPE) applies to petroleum products and biofuels according to fixed rates provided by the legislation. It applies only in metropolitan France – in the overseas territories, there is a special consumption tax (TSC) on premium unleaded and diesel. It applies to motor fuels and heating fuels, such as petrol and gasoline, electricity, natural gas, coal and coke. It replaced the previous TIPP tax that only applied to petroleum products. In the face of the rise in oil prices, a reduction in the rate of the TIPP for fuel sold to consumers was adopted by the Parliament in 2006. The TIPP is collected by the services de la direction générale des douanes et des droits indirects (DGDDI) when fuel products are consumed on the domestic market. The revenue from the TICPE amounted to 30.5bn, or 1.15% of GDP, in 2022. Energy products are subject to both the tax on energy products (TICPE) and the value added tax (VAT). The TICPE is also included in the taxable amount of energy products subject to VAT.

Since January 2023, petrol is taxed at a rate of €0.53799/litre and diesel at a rate of €0.42875/litre, with a VAT of 16% added to the total price. As of 2022, a "maximum fuel price" has been established by the government, capped at €1.546/litre for EURO 95 petrol and at €1.525/litre for diesel as of 11 November 2023.

Wealth may be subject to taxation when transmitted for sale or for free (gift, inheritance). In most cases, inheritance tax has to be paid. However, there are a number of exemptions. To determine inheritance tax, you must first determine the net taxable assets, the taxable estate assets, the personal allowance, and finally the taxable portion. In addition, it may be taxed when owned: wealth is subject to annual taxation through the impôt de solidarité sur la fortune (ISF) and local property taxes are payable on real estate. Capital gains is payable when assets are disposed of, but this tax is a tax on the profit.

The taxes called droits d'enregistrement, correspond to the stamp acts. They mainly apply to the sale of buildings (in addition to local taxes), inheritance and gifts, assignment of businesses and registration of vehicles. Revenues collected by the state amounted in 2006 to €14.7 bn.

It was abolished by the French government in September 2017.

Wealth Tax (solidarity tax on wealth), in French impôt de solidarité sur la fortune (ISF) was an annual tax payable by individuals the net value of whose wealth exceeds a certain amount. It was established in 1989 to finance the RMI. In 2017, the return of ISF amounted to €5.067bn.

Individuals who are residents in France are taxed on their worldwide assets and individuals who are residents outside France under French law are taxed on their assets in France. The tax is set for each household (married couples or partners, persons cohabiting, and minor children). The tax base includes all property, rights and values that constitute the wealth of taxpayers at 1 January of the relevant tax year (buildings built or not, individual businesses, farms, movable furniture, financial investments, debts owed to you, automobiles, aircraft, pleasure boats,...). However, certain assets are wholly or partially exempted (mainly professional property, i.e. individual companies, rights on literary and artistic works held by the author, some rural property, objects and antiques, artwork or collectibles).

Individuals resident in France are entitled to a deduction of 30% against the value of their main home for wealth tax purposes.

A resident in France may potentially reduce wealth tax due to the restriction that applies to the amount of combined income tax, wealth tax, social charges (CSG and CRDS) and local property taxes that can be taken from one's taxable income.

This restriction is known as the Bouclier Fiscal or tax shield, and limits these taxes to no more than 50% of your taxable income.

On 6 August 2008, France enacted a law that entitles all those who have been non-resident in France for the five previous years, to exclude their non-French assets from wealth tax for the first five years of their residence in France.

While this minor tax applies only to the most wealthy of the population, and actually collects very little revenue (2% of overall tax revenue), it is very controversial. Many people on the political left consider it a symbol of solidarity, while many on the right argue that it encourages entrepreneurs to leave France. In 2018, to replace the solidarity tax on wealth, the tax on real estate wealth ("impôt sur la fortune immobilière" (IFI)) was introduced, along with a flat-rate levy of 30% on capital income, including both income tax and social security contributions. In 2022, revenue from the tax on real estate wealth will reach €1.83 billion, i.e. 1/3 of the potential revenue from the solidarity tax on wealth.

These taxes, known as Droits de Succession et de Donation, apply to both gifts and inheritances. The taxes apply where:

(a) The donor/deceased is resident in France at the date of the gift/death;

(b) The recipient is resident in France and has been so resident for at least 6 of the 10 tax years prior to the year in which the gift/inheritance is received; or

These provisions can be overridden by a Tax Treaty.

Tax is payable by the recipient, based on the amount received and their relationship with the donor or deceased.

Assets passing on death between spouses and PACS partners are now exempt from French succession tax, but gifts are still taxable between spouses and PACS partners.

As for wealth tax, the value of your main home can be reduced by 30% for succession tax purposes provided the property is also occupied as a main home by the surviving spouse or by one or several children. PACS partners can also benefit from the 30% deduction.

(nieces, nephews, uncles, aunts, cousins, great-aunts and uncles etc.)

Allowances are available, and the main ones are:

For example, a child can receive 100,000 * 2 = €200,000 from their parents in allowances before being taxed.

In France, unmarried couples (regardless of gender) can enter into a PACS (Pacte Civil de Solidarite) agreement.

The PACS is a written agreement which can now be achieved by going before a Notaire who then registers it with the authorities. The relations between the partners are similar to those of husband and wife.

The tax position for PACS partners is now aligned with that of a married couple. For income tax purposes, the couple is assessed to income tax as a household from the day the PACS agreement takes force.

For succession tax, the surviving PACS partner is exempt from tax on inheritances. For gifts, the allowance is now €80,724 and the tax rates are as for married couples. If a PACS agreement is broken before the end of the year following the year it was entered into, for motives other than marriage of the couple or death of one of the partners, the allowance will be denied and the tax relief clawed back.

As of 14 May 2009, France recognises most foreign Civil Partnerships as equivalent to a PACS.

In France there are three categories of taxes on income: the corporate tax, the income tax for individuals and taxes for social purposes (CSG and the CRDS, paid by the households). Taxes paid by employers on wages, namely social contributions, are not considered as taxes by the French central government.

The impôt sur le revenu (IR) is a tax on all income available to individuals in a year. With certain exceptions, net income is determined from total income, whatever its origin, after applying certain deductions, and then a single scale of taxation is applied. This scale is characterized by rates applied to slices of income according to the principle of progressivity. However, there are numerous provisions, so there are many systems of taxation depending on the type of income received. In addition, some income and capital gains are subject to a fixed rate of tax. The IR is payable each year on the total taxable income of the household. In 2021, proceeds from the IR amounted to €280;bn.

The income subject to IR is divided into seven categories: industrial and commercial profits, non-commercial and agricultural profits, land income, salaries and wages, pensions and annuities, movable income, and capital gains. Individuals' total income is taxed if they are resident in France, whether they have French nationality or not. Individuals not living in France are taxed only on their income from French sources. The tax is calculated for each "fiscal household", i.e. the family unit composed of either a single person, or two partners and their children or other dependents. Whatever the nationality, a person who is a tax resident in France is taxable on their worldwide income. People not living in France are subject to limited tax on their income from French sources only.

The amount of taxable income, or "revenu fiscal de référence" (RFR), is not equal to the income received by the household in the year. Instead, the RFR is determined by dividing the income by the number of "parts" in the fiscal household (1 part for every adult, 0.5 parts for each of the first two child, and 1 part for each successive child), and then diminished further by a standard deduction and any other deductions the taxpayer may have claimed in the year.

The table below shows the percentage of income tax applicable to taxable income, or RFR (rather than gross income).

Exemptions are made for social reasons. Taxpayers whose net income does not exceed €7,920 are exempted from the IR. In principle, taxable income is calculated from the income available to a fiscal household in one year. Some expenses by the household tax are deductible from total income. There can be cuts and maximum taxable amounts of the income.

The income tax is calculated by the administration based on the amounts reported by taxpayers who are required to declare their whole income earned during the previous year. But the calculation of income tax takes into account the personal situation of the taxpayer, in particular through the "family quotient" (or units in the household) on the one hand and in the allocation of reductions or tax credits to taxpayers, on the other hand. The family quotient can take into account family responsibilities and, according to them, eases the effects of progressive taxation since the progressive rate is applied to a partial income (the taxable income). This process consists of dividing the taxable income of the household tax into a number of units (or parts) equal to the number of individuals. The progressive scale of tax is then applied to taxable income per share. Finally, this partial tax is multiplied by the number of units to determine the taxable base.

The family quotient is one unit for a single person, two for a married couple, plus an extra half for each of the first two children and an additional unit for each child from the third.

There are certain limitations to the amount of tax savings that can be achieved under the parts system. If the system produces a tax bill which has been reduced by more than €2,301 (for 2009 income) per half part compared to what it would have been without reference to the parts, you are not allowed to use this system. You will always receive two parts for a married couple notwithstanding.

Various tax credits are available to set against the total tax calculated. These include tax credits for dividends, energy-saving work carried out on the main residence, purchase of an environmentally friendly car, employment of home help, child minding expenses, for filing tax returns electronically and paying tax by direct debit or electronically, for mortgage interest, among others.

Initially set to start in 2018, France will introduce a pay-as-you-earn scheme for the collection of the income tax in January 2019. To accommodate the progressive tax rates, which are computed on the total income and composition of the household, while preserving the privacy of employees to their employers, the administration only transmits to companies the individual tax rate to retain on their employees' paychecks.

Individuals receiving non-salary incomes must pay a monthly account on their estimated income tax by the tax administration.

For single people with taxable income of between 11.800 euros and 16,418 euros and couples with no children with taxable revenue between 17,454 and 25,983 euros (23,717 euros to 35,400 euros with a child), a tax credit of 480 euros for single people (960 euros for a couple) was introduced in 2013. For 2014 revenues the tax credit was increased to 1,135 euros for single people and 1,870 euros for couples. The 2023 budget law introduces a number of personal tax measures and measures to help households meet rising energy spending such as a support schemes to cope with rising energy prices (limitation of the rate increases of gas an electricity and a fuel allowance of €100 will be paid to the 10 million most modest workers who use their vehicle to go to work) and an aid for the ecological transition (an aid for the purchase of bicycles is renewed and increased in 2023, MaPrimeRénov' Serenity is strengthened and the One noNew social leasing scheme)

The contribution exceptionnelle sur les hauts revenus is a temporary tax introduced in 2012 by François Fillon as a measure to curb the budget deficit. For a single person the rate of the tax is 3% on income between 250,001 euros and 500,000 euros, for an income above 500,000 the rate is 4%.

For tax years 2013 & 2014 earnings above 1 million euros will be subject to a tax payable by the payer/employer. The tax is similar to the employer social security contributions which above 1 million euros amount to 0.22% of gross salary compared to 44% for salaries of 150,000 euros. The tax introduced by François Hollande as the 75% tax is in fact an additional employer contribution of 50% which when existing social security charges are added reaches 75%. The proposed tax was subsequently modified after being rejected by the Council of State and was implemented in 2014 in its current form and will be discontinued as of January 2015.

The corporate tax, in French impot sur les societes (IS), is an annual tax in principle that affects all profits made in France by corporations and other entities. It concerns about one-third of French companies. The standard rate is 33.3% for all of their activities. In 2016, the net proceeds from corporation tax amounted to €29.9 bn. The corporate tax rate in France is gradually being reduced, with the standard rate set to be lowered to 25% for all companies by 2022. For companies with a turnover of less than €10 million, profits up to €38,120 are taxed at a reduced rate of 15%. There are also additional taxes on top of the standard corporate income tax, such as a 3.3% social contribution tax for companies with a turnover of at least €7.63 million and a corporate tax liability over a certain threshold. The taxable income is equal to the difference between gross profit and costs and deductible expenses. The gross operating profit is made by the difference between sales and costs. In addition to the gross operating profit, all income or profits made apart are normally taxable: income from the rental of property, interests, deposits and bonds. A reduced rate applies to a limited number of Long Term Capital Gains. Since 2012 a tax credit equal to 7% of total salary costs can be deducted from the gross tax due.

Since its creation in 1945, the Social Security is mainly financed by social contributions or "cotisations sociales", i.e. deductions from wages. The purpose of social contributions is to finance social security benefits and programs, such as health insurance, pensions, family allowances, unemployment insurance, work accident/illness compensation, and social minimums. Social contributions are typically calculated as a proportional rate on salaries, though some are also charged as a flat fee. The social security system in France is based on a principle of solidarity, where some pay more in contributions than they receive in benefits, to support those who are less well-off. Until recently, there was no wide taxation on social expenditure, contrary to most of its European partners. However, in order to find a solution to the problems of financing of the social security, governments have had to broaden its range of resources by the introduction of additional tax, notably the general social contribution (CSG) and the repayment of the debt of social security (CRDS) at a rate of 0.5%, to repay the debt of the ASSO.

Established by the Finance Act 1991, the general social contribution (CSG) is payable by individuals living in France and who benefit from the compulsory health insurance. Revenues from the CSG are allocated to social security budget, specifically to the National Family Allowance, the Solidarity Fund pension schemes and insurance. Indeed, unlike the social contributions that give those who pay a right to benefit from them, the CSG, is levied without direct compensation (like any other tax). The CSG has a very broad base as it applies in principle to earnings and income from wealth. The CSG is made up of four different bases of assessment: earned income and replacement income; income from property; investment income; gambling winnings and bets. According to the DREES (The Department of Research, Studies, Evaluation and Statistics (DREES) is the ministerial statistical service for the health and social sectors), in 2021, the CSG will have cost taxpayers more than €129.4 billion and generated revenue for the State, an increase of 4.7% compared with 2020.

The contribution to the social debt (CRDS) was created in 1996. Like the CSG, it applies to earnings and to income from wealth. It was initially established for a period of 13 years, but this time limit was abolished in 2004. The territorial scope of the CRDS is the same as the CSG: thus, CRDS is paid by individuals living in France who benefit from a compulsory insurance scheme. The rate is 0.5%. The base of the CRDS is somewhat broader than the CSG, for it includes incomes exempted from CSG such as family benefits or housing allowances. The methods of recovering the CRDS are identical to those of the CSG. CRDS is not deductible from the tax base for tax on income. The yield for the year 2012 is €6,6bn.

In summary, the social charges are made up of four elements: the CSG, CRDS, PS and RSA. The amounts are different for each type of income, and the position can be summarized below:

There are no allowances on reliefs other than being able to deduct a proportion of the social charges payable on income taxed at the scale rates against earned or pension income. Thus, where income or gains are taxed at fixed rates, no deduction is available.

There are a huge number of local taxes. The most important are the direct taxes. The local direct taxes are the oldest taxes in the French tax system, as they succeed to direct contributions that were created in 1790 and 1791 as taxes collected by the central government then transferred to local authorities upon the tax reform of 1917. Local taxes are levied by the state for local authorities (regions, departments, municipalities, local public institutions). There are six main direct taxes (the council tax on second home; the property tax on built-up properties (TFPB); the propert tax on non-built properties (TFPNB); the annual tax on vacant accommodation (TLV) and council tax on vacant accommodation (THLV); the tax on the sale of bare land made suitable for building; the tax or fee for household waste collection (TEOM or REOM)). The rates are set by the territorial assemblies (regional or municipal councils) when they vote their annual budget. However, rates can not exceed certain limits set by the state. The tax bases are established by the state. There are many permanent or temporary exemptions. The revenue from local taxes amounted to €173bn in 2022 (6.6% of GDP). Apart from these four main taxes, there are many other taxes. Direct taxes include the taxe pour frais de chambres d'agriculture (expense of the chambers of agriculture), the taxe d'enlèvement des ordures ménagères (garbage collection), and the taxe sur les pylônes. Indirect taxes are taxes applying to spring water, mines, spectacles, advertising, navigation, electricity, pollution and workplace.

The professional tax (taxe professionnelle) is due each year by legal persons or natural persons who are self-employed in France. Various exemptions are provided (activities performed by the State, local authorities and public institutions, business and agricultural organizations, etc.). The tax base is constituted by the rental value of assets available to the taxpayer. This is then subject to discounts or rebates. The amount of business tax is calculated by multiplying the taxable net by the rates approved by each local beneficiaries. The rates are set by the local communities and organizations, within limits set by national legislation. In 2021, the amount of revenue collected through corporate taxes was €74bn.

The residence tax (taxe d'habitation) applies to all buildings sufficiently furnished and their dependencies (gardens, garages, private car parks): the tax is payable by any person who has a residential unit at one's disposal, for any reason (owner, renter, occupant for free), on 1 January of the taxable year. The tax base is a notional rental value of the residential property. In 2017, the revenue from the housing taxes amounted to €22,575bn.

The property tax on built lands (taxe foncière) is applied to properties built in France. The taxable properties consist of all permanent constructions, i.e. buildings (blocks of flats, houses, workshops, warehouses, etc.). The tax base is equal to 50% of the notional rental value of the building (i.e. the value set by the tax administration) and on land/location value. There are many exemptions and exceptions. In 2018, the product amounted to €42 bn.

In 2022, revenues amounted to 46.1% of GDP.

There are five beneficiaries of the tax revenues : in 2017, the "cotisations sociales" received the biggest percentage : 37%, social security administrations have received 17% of it; the state and the central government bodies 32%; the local administrations (APUL) 14%; the European Union (EU) less than 1%. Direct and indirect taxes account for 46.1% of GDP in 2022. State resources come almost entirely from taxes. The social security bodies are financed largely by social contributions but also by taxes, including the general social contribution (CSG) and the contribution for the repayment of the social debt (CRDS). Local administrations are mostly financed by the four main local direct taxes (housing tax, property taxes and business tax).

The public deficit amounted to 5,5% of the GDP (€50.6 billion) in 2023 compared to 2,8% on average in the euro zone, excluding France. According to the 2024 PSTAB, France's public deficit should fall back below 3% in 2027. At the end of the third quarter of 2023, public debt in the Maastricht sense stood at €3,088.2on, an increase of €41. 3bn, after + €34.5bn in the previous quarter. Expressed as percentage of gross domestic product (GDP), it stood at 111.7%, as in the second quarter of 2023. As in the previous quarter, the increase in public debt was accompanied by a fall in the general government cash position (-€17.3 bn), with the result that net debt rose by more than gross debt (+€61.0 bn) to 102.9% of GDP.

The deficit of social security administrations remains at €10,8;bn in 2023, but the corresponding debt ("social debt") has increased (€8,8bn in 2023). The deficit of local administrations is still limited, but amounted to €10bn in 2023, as a result of a spending growth significantly higher than that of the revenue in the recent years. As for the net tax revenue of the central government, net tax receipts amount to €38.6bn compared with €31.1bn at the end of February 2023, an increase of €7.5bn, because of increasing transfers of revenues to social security and local authorities to reduce their deficit. By 2022, public spending in France will have risen to €1,536bn, equivalent to 58.2 points of GDP. The public deficit for 2023 is €154.0bn, or 5.5% of gross domestic product (GDP). Although deficits have been commonplace, efforts have been made in recent years to cut back the growth of taxes and government spending. Deficit reduction became a top priority of the government when France committed to the European Monetary Union. The Maastricht Treaty targets for the EMU required the members countries to reduce the government's budget deficit to 3% of GDP and the public debt to 60% of GDP.

The evolution of the level of the tax burden since the early 1970s can be divided into three distinct phases. First, during the 70s and in the first half of the 1980s, the tax rate increased from 34% to 42%. Then it stabilized at a rate close to 42% until the early 1990s, when it resumed its growth rate to the historical height of 44.9% in 1999. Since then, the rate of PO government has declined slightly to between 43% and 47% of the GDP.

Over the last decades, the distribution of tax burden between the three main administrations has changed significantly. The share allocated to the state has tended to decline, while that allocated to the social security institutions and local governments has grown. The higher tax rate of social security is due to the general upward trend of social spending, particularly the higher spending on pension and health insurance systems. In 2021, the public spending on pensions represented 13.8 percent of the GDP, compared with 11.67 percent in 2002.

In this context, the structure of the funding of the social security administrations has been more and more assured by taxes rather than social contributions. In particular, new taxes were levied to help fund the social security administrations, such as the general social contribution (CSG) and the contribution for the repayment of the social debt (CRDS). More recently, the central government has helped to fund the social security administrations by the revenues from the excise on alcohol and tobacco, in part to offset reductions in social contributions. As for the growth of the revenues for the benefit of local administrations, it is only due to the devolution, begun with the 1992 laws, and continued with the reforms in 2003.

The tax system has never been united in France. There have always been an extreme diversity in collection, the base, the rates and the nature of the taxes. Until 1789, taxes were collected by the state, the church and lords. After the French revolution, taxes consisted of taxes on wealth and on incomes. The current tax system was shaped during the 20th century. All taxes created under the French Revolution were abolished, the last being the patentes, abolished in 1974. Whereas taxation aimed at assuring "the maintenance of the public force" and "the expenditures of the administrations"(Déclaration des droits de l'homme et du citoyen de 1789), taxation is now aiming at assuring efficient public services and a fair distribution of the wealth and the income.

Historically, most taxes have been paid either or in shares of harvest (dime and champart) or work (corvée, military service). Gradually, each of these taxes has been replaced by a cash contribution for being more convenient for both the beneficiary and the taxpayer. The taille, created in the 14th century, was one of the oldest taxes levied by the French monarchy. It was replaced by the fouage. Under the Old Regime, the collection of taxes was leased, i.e. that the state entrusted the task to entrepreneurs, big farmers, who paid the amount of the tax to be levied, then levied the tax for themselves. The system was convenient for both the state (the revenue was anticipated and it was disposed of the unpopularity of tax collectors) and for big farmers (the bargain was very profitable). However, the people considered the collection mainly a source of injustice and excesses.

Some notable indirect taxes under the Old Regime were the aides (indirect taxes collected by the state, applying to beverages), the banalités (tax imposed by the lords for the use of mills, ovens and wine presses), the casuel (collected by the Church at baptisms, marriages and funerals), the cens (tax collected by the lords, for the use of their land), the champart (collected by the lords, paid by an amount of the crops of grains), the dîme (collected by the church, applying to all the lands), the gabelle (collected by the king, for the consumption of salt), the minage (collected by the king or the lords, for the sales of grains at fairs and markets). There were three direct taxes, created between the 15th and the 18th centuries: the taille, the capitation and the dixième. The taille, created in the 15th century and used for more than three centuries, applied to incomes from non-privileged people from ownership, housing, farm land and breeding. The capitation, created in 1695, was a tax on social status that taxed everyone, however, for those subject to the taille the capitation was an addition to the taille. The dixième, created in 1710, applied to all the income from any ownership (land, real estate, annuities), at a rate of 10% (dixieme meaning tenth). In 1749, it was replaced by the vingtième (twentieth, i.e. a tax with a rate of 5%).

The French Revolution transformed the tax system completely. The former system was abolished. The parliament, on behalf of the people, took control of the right to levy taxes (the sovereign loses this right), destroyed all statutes and tax privileges (of the nobility and clergy, but also the provinces, cities, corporations, etc.) planned to establish a fair proportional contribution and made these changes official in the Declaration of Human Rights and the Citizen of 1789. Four direct taxes were created in the late 18th century, applying only to wealth: the land contribution, the housing contribution, the patentes (industry and trade), and the contribution from doors and windows.

Throughout the 19th century, taxes changed little. Taxes from the Revolution remained, i.e. taxes on wealth (Impôt sur la fortune) on the professional activity (the patente, ancestor of the taxe professionnelle), and many indirect taxes and "droits" applied to the trade of goods (inheritance, purchase of real estate). From the middle of the 19th century, there were debates for the creation of an income tax, proposed by Proudhon in 1848, then by Gambetta in 1869. In 1872, a tax on incomes from real estate was created. In 1876, Gambetta proposed to create a proportional tax on all incomes. The only result is the creation in 1896 of a tax on incomes from the stock exchange.

Before 1914, taxes mainly applied to the wealth (wealth, land, inheritance) or incomes from wealth. The tax burden did not exceed 10%. Many propositions, successively from Doumer, Cavaignac and Waldeck-Rousseau, failed, due to the opposition of the right. It was the Great War which gave the opportunity to create a tax on income, in 1917, thanks to Joseph Caillaux, the minister of Finances. At the same time, the four contributions created in 1790 and 1791 were turned into local taxes, and replaced by the income tax as the main national tax.

After the Second World War, the tax system underwent a certain number of reforms aiming at modernizing and adapting it. The income tax was adapted and old contributions abolished. A family quotient was created in 1945. The business tax was created in 1948, reformed in 1959. Finally, the last significant innovation in technical terms, the VAT was introduced in 1954. Then the French example was adopted gradually in most developed countries. The French tax system is currently controversial with the development of the European Union and globalization. Tax competition has risen sharply, and it becomes necessary to take into account the legal possibilities to avoid paying taxes (the practice of expatriation is legal, unlike tax evasion).

TechnipFMC plc is a French-American, UK-domiciled global oil and gas company that provides services for the energy industry. The company was formed by the merger of FMC Technologies of the United States and Technip of France that was announced in 2016 and completed in 2017.

TechnipFMC acts in three distinct segments: subsea, offshore, and surface projects. These projects include offshore oil and gas exploration and extraction platforms/rigs. The company is legally domiciled in the UK, and has major operations in Houston and Paris where its predecessor companies were headquartered. It has about 23,000 employees from 126 nationalities and operates in 48 countries. TechnipFMC stock is listed on the NYSE, and is a component of the Russell 1000 Index and the Dow Jones Sustainability Index.

TechnipFMC was formed through the merger of FMC Technologies Inc. and French oil-services Technip SA. On January 17, 2017, TechnipFMC announced that it is operating as a unified company after completion of the merger, which created a significant new player in an energy industry wracked by a nearly two-year slump in crude prices. The company has three headquarters in Houston, Paris, and London. The CEO is Doug Pferdehirt and the executive chairman is Thierry Pilenko. TechnipFMC also provides consulting and technology business through its two subsidiaries, PT and Genesis. Through 2016-2017 the TechnipFMC fleet expanded with the addition of four pipe-laying vessels (PLSVs) constructed under the DOF-Technip partnership, two foreign (Skandi Açu and Skandi Buzios) and two Brazilian (Skandi Olinda and Skandi Recife). Another ship who entered operations was the Deep Explorer, one of the most advanced diving support vessels (DSV) in the world.

In August 2019, Doug Pferdehirt announced that TechnipFMC will be split into two independent engineering companies. The separation is expected to be completed by the end of the first semester 2020. The former Technip entity, without the subsea business, was renamed Technip Energies. On March 15, 2020, the group announced the suspension of the spin-off due to market conditions in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. In February 2021, the spin-off was completed.

TechnipFMC owns and operates 21 vessels and 4 are under construction. These large vessels are used for installation of subsea oil extraction systems on the seabed. They are of four categories.

TechnipFMC designs and manufactures umbilical cable and flexible pipes. It has flexible pipe manufacturing plants in France, Brazil and Malaysia. It operates umbilical production facilities in the UK, United States, Angola, Singapore, Brazil and Malaysia. TechnipFMC built a Modular Manufacturing Yard at Dahej in the Gujarat state of India in 2017.

In 2010, the company's Paris-based predecessor (Technip) was fined $240 million for paying bribes to win contracts to build a liquefied-natural-gas plant in Nigeria.

In June 2019, TechnipFMC agreed to pay around US$300 million to resolve allegations it bribed government officials in Iraq (FMC) and Brazil, including at the country's state-controlled oil-and-gas company Petróleo Brasileiro S.A., also known as Petrobras.

TP, formerly Teleperformance, is a French multinational business process outsourcing company founded in 1978 with headquarters in France. It provides services for debt collection, telemarketing, customer relationship management, content moderation, and communication.

Daniel Julien created Teleperformance in June 1978, in Paris. In 1986, TP established international subsidiaries in Belgium and Italy. Two years later, TP expanded into Spain, Germany, Sweden and the United Kingdom.

Rochefortaise Communication merged with Teleperformance International in 1999 to form S.R. ance. This company became Teleperformance in 2006, and shortened its name to TP in 2025.

In 1992, TP USA was established, and Asia-Pacific contact centers were set up in the Philippines and Singapore in 1996. The Group expanded in Europe through numerous acquisitions and subsidiaries in Switzerland, Norway, Denmark, Greece, Spain, the Netherlands and Finland. From 1998 through 2002, the TP network expanded into Argentina, Brazil and Mexico.

TP USA purchased AOL 's 400-employee call center in Ogden, Utah, in 2006.

In 2007, TP acquired a 100% interest in Twenty4help, a European technical support company, and AllianceOne, a US-based accounts receivable management company. In 2008, the group's operations and strategy were centralized under the responsibility of Daniel Julien and Jacques Berrebi. The same year, TP acquired The Answer Group.

In 2010, TP acquired Scottish outsourcing call center beCogent for £35 million. It ceased operations in December 2021 mainly due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and remote work. By 2013 TP had six contact centers in Tunisia. In 2013, TP acquired full control of TLS Contact. In 2014, TP acquired Aegis USA Inc., an outsourcing and technology company in the United States, the Philippines and Costa Rica.

In August 2016, TP purchased California-based LanguageLine Solutions LLC for $1.52 billion from a private equity firm Abry Partners.

TP secured multiple United Kingdom government and NHS contracts to operate support services for the public during the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2020, TP launched TP Cloud Campus in Portugal, with mobile cloud-enabled workstations for virtual onboarding, training, and employee meetings. There are currently cloud campus hubs in the Philippines and Mexico.

In January 2024, TP completed the acquisition of Majorel, acquiring 99% of the company's shares from Bertelsmann and Moroccan real estate company Saham, in exchange for 3 billion euros and a 4% stake in TP. This led to the launch of TP's digital consulting arm, TP Infinity, the same month.

TP announced a partnership with Sanas, a provider of software that uses AI to adjust a speaker's accent in real-time, in February 2025. TP also made an equity investment of approximately $13 million in Sanas.

TP and Carnegie Mellon University announced a partnership in March 2025 to accelerate AI applied research.

In June 2025, TP purchased Vancouver-based AI crowdsourcing platform Agents Only. The company also launched TP.ai, an AI orchestration platform.

The key trends for TP are (as of the financial year ending 31 December):

Jacques Berrebi ended all operational duties in January 2009 and returned in 2012, at the age of 70. Co-founder Daniel Julien remained as chairman of the board, and Paulo César Salles Vasques was announced as the new chief executive officer of the group.

Following Vasques' resignation in October 2017, Julien was appointed as group chief executive officer by the board of directors. In June 2023, Bhupender Singh was appointed as TP Group Deputy Chief Executive Officer. In August 2024, Olivier Rigaudy, Agustin Grisanti and Scott Klein were appointed as deputy CEOs, and when Singh departed in October 2024, his role was assumed by Thomas Mackenbrock.

In March 2026, founder and CEO Daniel Julien stepped down from his executive role and transitioned to the position of Strategic Advisor to the Chairman & CEO. Deputy CEO Thomas Mackenbrock and Deputy CEO of Finance Olivier Rigaudy also stepped down from their executive roles. Benoît Gabelle, currently Deputy CFO, was appointed interim Chief Financial Officer. Jorge Amar, a global expert in AI-native customer operations at scale, was appointed Group Chief Executive Officer.

TP's Citizen of the World program helped relocate and build homes for the victims of the Typhoon Ketsana in 2009. Since 2006, Citizen of the World has made $60 million in donations to assist vulnerable populations in 50 countries.

TP partnered with One Tree Planted in 2022, funding the plantation of 500,000 trees across Europe, Asia, and the Americas. Also in 2022, TP entered a partnership with the Negros Occidental provincial government, to give priority to Negros Occidental Language Information Technology Center graduates in job applications.

Since 2022, TP has partnered with UNICEF to help protect and advance children’s rights, with a focus on quality education in areas most in need, like Brazil, Ghana, and the Philippines. TP also supports UNICEF’s Global Humanitarian Thematic Fund, contributing to emergency responses in countries and regions including Sudan, Ukraine, Syria, Türkiye, Nigeria, and Latin America and the Caribbean.

In 2008 a class action lawsuit was filed against Salt Lake City-based Teleperformance USA seeking unpaid wages for employees, alleging a violation of the Fair Labor Standards Act. On 19 May 2010, a settlement was reached for approximately $2 million to be paid to 15,862 workers in 10 US states. Instead of an out of court settlement, TP lost a similar case in the Netherlands Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal in The Hague.

A group of labor unions filed a complaint documenting unsafe working conditions, monitoring, surveillance, union busting and retaliation against employees in ten countries in April 2020. Due to COVID-19 restrictions, workers in the Philippines, including those supporting Amazon 's Ring camera contract, had to sleep at their work spaces and were unable to meet social distancing requirements. The Financial Times was able to verify this, including in a Cebu City office. After the working conditions were made public, the company promised to make improvements, but NBC News reported after six months the company was providing intermittent shuttle service, not properly sanitizing working spaces, and sending workers home without pay if they were quarantined.

In 2021, TP employees who work from home were sent contract addendums that would allow monitoring by AI-powered cameras to ensure compliance with security policies and to spot check for home-working infractions. As of August that year, the remote monitoring had been rolled out to India, Mexico, and the Philippines. UK employees were told remote scans would not be used for them, and Albania ruled out the use of webcams through their Data Protection Commission. An Apple spokesperson reported Apple "prohibits the use of video or photographic monitoring by our suppliers and have confirmed TP does not use video monitoring for any of their teams working with Apple."

Uber reported that it requested the following audit logs for its workers: monitoring to verify that only a hired employee is accessing data; that outsourced staff were not recording screen data on another device; and that no unauthorized person was near the computer. An Amazon spokesperson reported Amazon did not request additional monitoring for at-home workers.

In Colombia, the union Utraclaro, affiliated to UNI Global Union, has organized TP Colombia employees, including moderators. In 2021, after the union submitted its demands for the company to protect freedom of association, TP filed a lawsuit against the union in a labor court, alleging Ultraclaro did not follow proper processes when ratifying its bargaining demands. In November 2022, the Ministry of Labour launched an investigation into the company. After the announcement of the investigation, shares in the company dropped by 34%. In December 2022, the subsidiary received independent certification from Bureau Veritas on the "use and inclusion of the international standard ISO 26000 in the field of social responsibility within its operations in Colombia."

In April and May 2023, the company signed a global framework agreement enabling workers in Colombia, Romania and Poland to unionize. The Ministry of Labor later closed their investigation into TP, without any findings against the company.

In February 2024, TP received a certificate for diversity and inclusion management in Colombia from AENOR.

TP employs content moderators for platforms including TikTok, with moderators in Tunisia and Colombia, reviewing explicit content to remove it from the platform. Its " Trust and Safety " branch and moderation program were launched in 2019. After an investigation by Forbes reported the company retained explicit material, TP and TikTok were criticized by the United States Senate Committee on Commerce and by shareholders. In November 2022, the company announced that it would exit "the highly egregious part of the trust and safety business." However, it reversed its decision in March 2023. In 2025, the company is discovered to operate content moderation for Meta in the Ghanaian capital of Accra, which faced criticism for poor working conditions, low pay, and mental health affects on moderators.

Following the announcement, UNI Global Union released a statement, stating "we believe that TP's decision to re-enter full-service content moderation is a positive step."

The Temple " of Mars " is the vestige of a Romano-Celtic fanum and its courtyard, located in Corseul, in the department of Côtes-d'Armor, France.

The temple is located at a place called "Haut-Bécherel".

At the southeast corner of the site is the Haut-Bécherel farm, built in the 16th century. On its north side, this farm is encased and rests on the foundations of the south gallery of the sanctuary. The walls are built of cut and rubble granite as well as shale rubble. A bread oven and a well are associated with the building. The farm was built on an older site with tapered walls and a reuse of stones. Until the second half of the 20th century, it had five buildings. These, witnesses to an organizational evolution of the agricultural space, were destroyed in 1997.

The engineer Simon Garengeau who worked on the fortifications of Saint-Malo on Marquis de Vauban 's projects visited Corseul and wrote a report to the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres in 1709.

Excavations were carried out in the 19th century. The plan drawn up in 1869 by Émile Fornier is confirmed by aerial surveys and surveys carried out in recent years.

The Temple of Mars was classified as a monument historique by the 1840 list, while the Gallo-Roman site was classified in 1997.

The sanctuary, a Roman temple of Gaulish tradition, was probably built around the middle of the 1st century CE. It was used until the end of the 3rd century.

Inside, the cella originally held the statue of a deity to whom the fanum was dedicated, which would have been venerated by pilgrims walking in procession around its sacred chamber. It is traditionally referred to as the "temple of Mars", but this attribution to the cult of Mars is not based on any decisive evidence.

This temple retains only three sections of walls approximately ten meters high, which formed an octagonal cella. It features a courtyard surrounded by a gallery on three sides. The dimensions of the overall sanctuary structure are approximately 90 x 80 m. This makes it one of the largest sanctuaries in all of Gaul. The grounds altogether were almost one hectare.

A 3D architectural reconstruction was carried out by Yann Bernard and Gaétan Le Cloirec in 2016.

The Temple of Mercury at Puy de Dôme is a Gallo-Roman trachyte temple built in the 2nd century at the summit of the lava dome. It replaced a 1st-century arkose temple on the same site, which was apparently too small to accommodate the many pilgrims who visited. Its remains were revealed by excavation campaigns in 1875 and at the turn of the century.

The site was discovered in 1872 during the construction of a meteorological observatory. Very quickly, the first excavations took place between 1873 and 1878, conducted by The Academy of Sciences of Clermont-Ferrand, under Louis-Clémentin Bruyère's direction in 1875. This initial research made it possible to conceive of the first site plans.

The excavations were then stopped and the temple abandoned in that state. It was not until 1886 that steps were taken to protect it. It was classified as a historic monument in 1889.

A number of later discoveries led to a second series of excavations, under the direction of Auguste Audollent and Gabriel Ruprich-Robert. This series of campaigns particularly studied the surroundings of the site and discovered a small annex temple as well as a small statuette of Mercury beside it, further confirming the dedication of the place of worship.

In 1956, the installation of a microwave relay located at the top of the dome, above the current temple, took place without preliminary excavations. The workers discovered scattered coins.

Deterioration due to bad weather led to some consolidation and repair work, including a major restoration in 1978.

Excavations did not resume intensively and regularly until 2000. These campaigns, carried out from 2000 to 2004 under the direction of Dominique Tardy and Jean-Louis Paillet, made it possible to complete a precise architectural survey, and modern excavation techniques have enabled significant advancements of knowledge about the site. The contributions of these campaigns were supplemented by the archaeological diagnosis carried out in 2008 prior to the tourist development of the site and its restoration.

A partial restoration project of the lower parts of the sanctuary was conceived in 2008 by the state and département. It was carried out in two phases, the first of which lasted until 2014 and involved the reconstruction of a part of a terrace supported by the surrounding wall. The second phase will include clearing the site's view of obstructions caused by materials left behind from 19th-century excavations. The purpose of the restoration was stated to be the preservation of the ruins, which are subject to harsh climatic conditions, as well as imparting a better appreciation for the scale and appearance of the temple in its original state.

Some critics have denounced the restoration project for concealing the original ruins. Frédéric Trément, who excavated the site between 1999 and 2003, stated prior to the restoration that he was not consulted for the project and that, "the proposed reconstruction has the paradoxical consequence of making these ruins invisible behind an imposing and hideous Berlin Wall." Dominique Tardy similarly disapproved of the project:

Neither the reading of the site, from the vestiges alone, remains very obscure, nor the preservation of the authentic masonry - at least what remained of it - finds favor in this massive reconstruction, which also touches on the archaeological state of dismantling the edifice with particular regard to its southeast corner. We wanted to do this so that visitors understand better, but whether we go above or below, we no longer see the processional system; the result: people will certainly not understand more.

A first temple was built around 50 CE on the summit of Puy de Dôme. Although objects dating from prior to the Roman conquest have been discovered, no trace of a pre-Roman building has been found. As such, the site may have been the subject of only temporary visitation without permanent construction.

The 1st-century temple was destroyed around 150 CE and part of its materials used to build the second temple, lower on the slope, at an altitude around 1,435 meters. It is this temple which we can still see the remains of today.

Coins discovered at the site indicates that it was still in use in the 4th and 5th centuries, but the structure could have been ruined by this time, perhaps by the 3rd century, at the same time as the neighboring agglomeration of the Ceyssat Pass from which the path leads to the place of worship.

In the 12th century, a Romanesque church, built on the summit of the dome, was inhabited by a hermit.

The 2nd-century temple was built on a strong terrace, a quadrilateral with 60-meter sides allowing it to compensate the slope of the ground descending from north to south. Its façade looked east towards the Limagne plain where Augustonemetum was located, and weather permitting, it could be seen from the city. The temple was built with local trachyte, assembled in large blocks for the visible parts, with filling made up of smaller trachyte blocks.

The raw material was extracted near the Ceyssat pass, located at the foot of the Puy de Dôme, but the decoration called on other types of stone with more distant origins—white and colored marbles for the pavements, Autun shales, and arkose column capitals, for example. Bronze was also used. Fragments of the paving are visible at the Bargoin museum in Clermont-Ferrand. In all, the building filled an area of around 3,600 m.

The actual plan of the temple was a hybrid, an intermediate between Celtic and Mediterranean traditions. Thus the sanctuary included a cella as found in the fana of Celtic tradition, fronted by a Mediterranean pronaos. This cella and pronaos ensemble was located at the top of a series of terraces, intended to punctuate and dramatize the visitor's journey.

Thus the pilgrim, after a steep climb from the Ceyssat pass, and perhaps devotions made at the chapels along the path, would arrive upon a terrace that rose up in tiers and was occupied by altars and statues. From this theater, which could be used for specific ceremonies, the pilgrim would then take a passage that led to the eastern terrace overlooking Augustonemetum and the plain of Limagne. From there, one could access the pronaos and perform devotions in front of and around the cella. A gift might have been made to the god, which, if precious, would have been stored in the nearby treasure room of the temple, located between the two terraces.

During the 1974 excavations, a small bronze tablet with dovetailed handles was discovered, bearing a dedication to imperial power and the god Mercury "Dumiatis".

NUM[inibus] AUG[ustorum] ET DEO MERCURI DUMIATI MATUTINIUS VICTORINUS

This dedication is generally translated as: "In the name of Augustus and the god Mercury of The Dome, Matutinius Victorinus". Archaeologists have since attributed the sanctuary to the deities mentioned. This attribution was later reinforced by Auguste Audollent's discovery of a small Mercury statuette during his excavations in the early 20th century.

Other inscriptions, found in Germany and elsewhere, also express worship of the god Mercury, well-established in the city of Arverne. The votive altar of Miltenberg am Main invokes a Mercury Arvernorix, "king of the Arverni".

MERCVRIO ARVERNORIC[I] COSSILLUS DONAVI ES VISV L(A)ETVS LIBE(N)S MERITO

This dedication can be translated as: "To Mercury, king of the Arverni. Cossillus made this offering voluntarily after a dream."

Inscriptions from Cologne, Gripswald, Wenau, and Roermond more simply mention a Mercury "Arvernus". It is generally thought that these dedications are the result of Arvernian contingents within the Roman legion stationed on the Limes Germanicus. The dedications are a product of Gallo-Roman syncretism, meaning that - except during official Roman ceremonies, celebrated by expatriate settlers - the "Mercury" worshipped here was not identical with that of Rome.

Pliny the Elder reported that a colossal bronze statue had been erected for an Arverni sanctuary by the sculptor Zenodorus.

But all the gigantic statues of this class have been beaten in our period by Zenodorus with the Hermes or Mercury which he made in the community of the Arverni in Gaul; it took him ten years and the sum paid for its making was 40,000,000 sesterces. Having given sufficient proof of his artistic skill in Gaul he was summoned to Rome by Nero, and there made the colossal statue, 106 ft. high, intended to represent that emperor but now, dedicated to the sun after the condemnation of that emperor's crimes, it is an object of awe.

He does not specify whether the Zenodorus Mercury was erected in the sanctuary of Puy de Dôme. If this was the case, no archaeological trace remains.

However, the temple that can be seen today was built almost a century after the events reported by Pliny the Elder. According to the hypothesis where Zenodorus' statue was actually there, it could have been erected with the first temple, whose archaeological vestiges were largely destroyed during the construction of the microwave relay in 1956.

There are arguments to place the erection of the Greek sculptor's work at the summit. First, the fact that the construction of the original temple and the creation of the statue are contemporary. The first temple dates from the middle of the 1st century. Zenodorus stayed in Gaul before working on the colossus of Nero which would adorn the Domus Aurea before its transfer to the Colosseum. The second argument that can be used is that of visibility. The colossal statue would have been almost as visible from the surrounding area as the microwave relay is today. This visibility made it possible to identify the sacred mount of the god and made it possible to evoke that this one, one of whose theonyms is Arvernorix, "king of the Arverni", thus watched over his people.

There has been some debate over whether a mention of an Arverni temple called Vasso Galate in Gregory of Tours 's Historia Francorum could refer to the Temple of Mercury at Puy de Dôme. Gregory describes it briefly without, however, mentioning its location.

It is generally considered, since the work of Pierre-François Fournier that the Vasso Galate is the temple located at rue Rameau in Clermont-Ferrand and whose vestiges are also called Mur des Saracens or "Temple of Jaude". On the other hand, Auguste Audollent thought that the sanctuary mentioned by Gregory of Tours was that at Puy de Dôme. He was also surprised at the persistence of attendance in a supposedly destroyed temple. The confusion comes in part from the expression veniens vero arvernus which can be translated as "Coming to Auvernis" or "Coming to Clermont" (at the time of Gregory of Tours, Clermont-Ferrand was called Arvernis).

The term "Jaude" designating the district where the Clermont ruins are found would be related to "Galate" via a medieval form "Jalde". However it has also been argued that the Bishop of Tours' description of the Vasso Galate seems to agree better with the plan and ornamentation of the Puy de Dôme sanctuary. But on the other hand, the design of the temple of Clermont remains generally poorly known. Another consideration is a dedication to Mercury found in Germany which invokes the theonym Vassocaleti. Many authors have connected this epithet to Gregory's term for the temple.

The two temples are contemporary, with the Clermont site having produced coins dating from the reign of Augustus. And if the dedication of the sanctuary of Clermont remains unknown, there is consensus for considering the temple to be located at rue Rameau.

The Puy de Dôme sanctuary was serviced by a path that started from the Roman road linking Lugdunum (Lyon) to Mediolanum Santonum (Saintes), at the level of the Ceyssat Pass. There was a secondary town with at least one temple allowing the traveler in a hurry to fulfill their devotion to Mercury without having to climb to the top. A building acting as a road relay is also suspected. There are also traces of an artisanal district around the trachyte quarry which supplied the summit temple with the stone necessary for its construction. Finally, a funerary area is nearby

This secondary agglomeration fully participates in the sacralization of the mount, the road which leads to the sanctuary being dotted with temples, at the foot of the volcano, with the temple of the Tourette d'Enval in Orcines, passing through those, intermediate, from the Ceyssat Pass to the summit temple.

The very name of the Arverni capital in Roman times, Augustonemetum, "Sanctuary of Augustus", suggests the presence of an imperial cult within the city. This imperial cult, however, did not leave any tangible traces and the only sanctuary attested is that whose remains are called Mur des Saracens, located at rue Rameau in Clermont-Ferrand and identified, without the debate being settled, as the Vasso Galate mentioned by Gregory of Tours.

Augustonemetum had, however, a certain number of peri-urban sanctuaries, of various importance, such as the sanctuary of Source des Roches in Chamalières, whose activity did not reach the 1st century CE; the temple des Côtes in Blanzat, discovered by P. Eychart in the 1950s; that of Trémonteix, a private sanctuary linked to an ancient domain, discovered in 2012; or the Fanum of Brezet nearby Aulnat.

One of these sanctuaries, the Tourette d'Enval temple in Orcines can be directly associated with the cult complex formed by the Puy de Dôme sanctuary and the agglomeration of the Ceyssat Pass. Dedicated to Mercury, it marks the beginning of the ascent of the mountain.

A wider circle around Puy de Dôme also includes the sanctuaries of the Corent and Gergovie oppida, the first dating back to the 2nd century BCE and which remained active until the 3rd century CE, the second dating from the Augustan Age. A third fanum, that of La Sauvetat, below Puy de Corent to the south, can also be mentioned.

Finally, on the same ancient route as the agglomeration of the Ceyssat Pass, but located near the Lemovices border, was a secondary agglomeration provided with a sanctuary excavated in 1882 and in the 1950s. This sanctuary, the site of Beauclair on the territory of the municipalities of Giat and Voingt, produced graffiti naming the god Toutatis.

Term limits in France are limitations on how many times an officeholder may hold a specific office in France.

The first term limits in modern times were established in the French First Republic by the Constitution of 1795. Under this constitution, members of the French Directory were not permitted to serve consecutive terms. These limits existed until the republic was overthrown by Napoleon in 1799. Term limits were reestablished in the French Second Republic by the French Constitution of 1848 and lasted until the republic was overthrown by Napoleon III in 1852.

There were no presidential term limits in the French Third Republic or the French Fourth Republic. The President of France did not have term limits in the current French Fifth Republic until the Constitution of France was amended in 2008, limiting the president to two consecutive 5 year terms.

Sages of the Constitutional Council are restricted to a single nine-year term. An exception is permitted if a sage dies, in which case a replacement may finish the previous term before serving a full term.

The Prime Minister of France is not restricted by terms, instead holding office so long as support of the National Assembly is maintained.

A territorial collectivity (French : collectivité territoriale, previously collectivité locale), or territorial authority, in many francophone countries, is an administrative division governed by public law that exercises within its territory certain powers devolved to it by the State as part of a decentralization process. In France, it also refers to a chartered administrative division of France with recognized governing authority. It is the generic name for any territory with an elective form of local government and local regulatory authority. The nature of a French territorial collectivity is set forth in Article 72 of the Constitution of France (1958), which provides for local autonomy within limits prescribed by law.

The term collectivité territoriale is used in Burkina Faso, in France by its legislation and the Constitution, in Mali and in Morocco.

In Algeria and Senegal, they refer to it as collectivité locale. However, in France, it is also used by the State administration: the Direction Générale des Collectivités Locales deals with matters relating to local authorities.

In English-speaking countries, the term used is local government or local government area, and in German is Gebietskörperschaft.

Territorial authorities have legal status. They are often administered by a deliberative assembly, which may be elected by direct universal suffrage. Depending on local legislation, they may levy local taxes and receive funds from the State.

The Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe is a pan-European political assembly made up of 648 regional and municipal councillors, mayors and regional presidents, elected for four-year terms. It represents 200,000 territorial authorities in 47 European countries, including France's 36,000 communes. As the voice of territorial authorities, towns and regions, the Congress is responsible for strengthening local and regional democracy in its 47 member states by promoting consultation and political dialogue between governments and territorial authorities. To this end, it cooperates with the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe. The work of the Congress is structured around its two chambers, the Chamber of Local Authorities and the Chamber of Regions, and is organized around three statutory committees: a Monitoring Committee, a Governance Committee and a Current Affairs Committee.

In June 1992, at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, a plan of action for the 21st century called Agenda 21 was adopted, applying to territorial authorities, regions, départements, communities of communes or municipalities. The action plan was divided into 40 chapters, with a preamble and four sections. It includes recommendations in areas as varied as poverty, health, housing, pollution, the management of seas, forests and mountains, desertification, the management of water resources and sanitation, agricultural management and waste management.

Most French regions have an Agenda 21. Taking all territorial authorities together, there were 1128 local agendas listed in France in 2017.

This article describes the process by which metropolitan France - that part of France that is located in Europe, excluding its various overseas territories - came to consist of the territory it does today. Its current borders date from 1947.

Modern France is the successor state to the Kingdom of France, itself a successor to the Kingdom of West Francia, which came into being in 843 when the empire of Charlemagne was divided. Its rulers styled themselves as "King of the Franks", and their realm continued to be known as Francia, until king Philip II became the first to refer to himself as "King of France", in 1204.

Although in theory the medieval kingdom of France was not much smaller than the modern French Republic - stretching from the North Sea to the Mediterranean, and from the Atlantic Ocean to the Alps - the reality was that the king's direct authority was limited to a small area around Paris known as the île de France. The rest of the kingdom was made up of numerous all but independent fiefs ruled by the king's vassals : dukes and counts who owed him their loyalty and allegiance. To what extent areas like the County of Toulouse or the Duchy of Aquitaine can be considered part of the Kingdom of France before they were conquered by the king's armies is debatable. An integral part of the Kingdom of France's evolution through the Middle Ages is the story of how the Capetian kings, and their successors the Valois, brought these areas already in the kingdom under direct royal control, either through conquest, purchase or inheritance. Meanwhile, the acquisitions of the counties of Dauphine in 1349, and Provence in 1486, saw at once both the Royal Domain and the Kingdom of France expand their frontiers into the south-east, with both having previously been fiefs of the neighbouring Holy Roman Empire.

In 1066 Duke William of Normandy conquered England, making him and his successors simultaneously kings of England and - technically at least - vassals of the king of France. However, their loyalty and obedience to him was hardly a likely prospect, and the attempts of English kings to both directly control and expand their French territories sparked a succession of wars during the Late Middle Ages. On the one hand, the cost of defeat in battle could have calamitous consequences, and leave even more territory in English hands. But on the other, these wars served to unite the French feudal lords against a common enemy, and the king could use their military assistance to help conquer territory on behalf of the crown. Moreover, the wars with England - in particular the Hundred Years War, from which France ultimately emerged victorious in 1453 - helped forge a sense of French national identity.

At the beginning of the Early Modern Period, the final feudal lordships were absorbed into the royal domain, along with the large duchies of Brittany and Burgundy. By now France had become a much more centralised state, with its king exercising absolute power. Although attempts at expanding into the Italian peninsula and the Low Countries at the expense of the increasingly powerful Habsburg dynasty were ultimately unsuccessful, France's victory in the Thirty Years' War over Habsburg Spain and Austria cemented its position as the foremost power on the European continent. There followed a series of annexations during the reign of Louis XIV that greatly expanded the Kingdom of France in the north and in the east, such as Artois in 1659, Alsace in 1675, and Franche-Comté in 1678. However, only a small part of the wealthy County of Flanders, lost to the Habsburgs in 1493, was regained in 1668.

The Duchy of Lorraine remained some time an enclave in the French kingdom before it too was incorporated in 1766. But for a few smaller enclaves, this brought the territory of the kingdom into a consolidated block, known today as "l'Hexagone". Meanwhile, the island of Corsica, a long-time possession of the Republic of Genoa and briefly an independent republic, was conquered in 1768.

Following the revolution, the new republic annexed the last remaining exclaves surrounded by France, such as the papal territory of Avignon, and conquered the former Austrian Netherlands (modern day Belgium) and Luxembourg. Faced with war against virtually all the other nations in Europe, France reached by far its greatest territorial extent during the early nineteenth century when the Emperor Napoleon incorporated the Dutch Republic, Catalonia, Dalmatia, and parts of Germany and Italy into the First French Empire. However following Napoleon's final defeat at Waterloo in 1815, France's borders were returned to where they had been in 1791 (but for the small enclaves annexed by the republic).

Since then, France has been invaded by Prussia and twice by Germany, but has regained any lost territories on each occasion (Alsace and Lorraine changing hands four times in the process). Thus the territory of the Metropolitan France that emerged from the aftermath of World War II almost exactly corresponded with that of France on the eve of the revolution.

Although Algeria was designated a department of France in 1848, and remained so until its independence in 1962, it is not counted as part of Metropolitan France for the purposes of this article.

To a large extent, modern France lies within clear limits of physical geography. Roughly half of its margin lies on sea coasts: one continuous coastline along "La Manche" ("the sleeve" or English Channel) and the Atlantic Ocean forming the country's north-western and western edge, and a shorter, separate coastline along the Mediterranean Sea forming its south-eastern edge.

In the south-west, France's border with Spain and Andorra runs along the peaks of the Pyrenees mountain range, a border which has barely changed since the Middle Ages (and not changed at all since the 1659 Treaty of the Pyrenees). In the south-east, its border with Italy and Switzerland today runs through mostly through the Alps, though this border has undergone several minor alterations over recent centuries, most recently in the aftermath of World War II.

It is in the East and north-East that France's borders are both less defined by physical geography and have undergone the most significant changes since the Medieval period. After the consolidation of French territories on the left bank of the River Rhine in the seventeenth century, and the incorporation of Franche-Comte (previously ruled by Spain) and the Duchy of Lorraine (previously independent) in the eighteenth century, the border has followed one or another of the Jura ranges until it reaches the Rhine, which it follows downstream. The remaining section, between the Rhine and the North Sea, has the least clear natural definition.

The division of the Carolingian Empire into West, Middle and East Francia at the Treaty of Verdun in 843 - with three grandsons of the emperor Charlemagne installed as their kings - was regarded at the time as a temporary arrangement, yet it heralded the birth of what would later become France and Germany.

The first king of West Francia was Charles the Bald. The frontiers of his kingdom extended slightly further north and south than modern France, incorporating what is now Luxembourg and parts of Belgium, and the county of Barcelona (Catalonia). However, they did not extend as far east, with areas such as Lorraine, Alsace and Provence forming part of Middle Francia. The former kingdom of Burgundy was split in two, with West Francia receiving the Duchy of Burgundy and Middle Francia receiving the County of Burgundy (the two Burgundys would sit on each side of this border until 1678). Meanwhile, Brittany was an independent kingdom. While Charles's realm comprised the Frankish heartland - where the term "Frankish" would gradually evolve into "French" - the lands to the east of the Rhine comprising East Francia were inhabited mostly by Germanic and Slavic peoples.

However, the Carolingian dynasty was on shaky ground from the very start. Middle Francia broke apart almost immediately, its territory gradually incorporated into its Western and Eastern neighbours, while the West and East Frankish kings struggled to hold their realms together in the face of continual Viking raids and rebellious local lords. The Duke of Saxony, Henry the Fowler, became the first Germanic monarch in the east in 919, and his son Otto the Great went on to use Charlemagne's title of Holy Roman Emperor. In West Francia, the last Carolingian king was deposed in 987 by Hugh Capet, who founded the Capetian dynasty, though he continued to style himself "King of the Franks".

For the next 800 years, both the Holy Roman Emperors and the Kings of the Franks/ Kings of France would regard themselves as the true successor to Charlemagne. The Germanic monarchy may have adopted the grander of Charlemagne's titles, but they were never able to consolidate their power enough to create a single, centralised state, and the Holy Roman Empire would remain a loose confederation of kingdoms, duchies, principalities and bishoprics throughout its history. The West Frankish (later French) monarchy, on the other hand, would start from a very modest power base, grow its authority very gradually over many centuries, and eventually establish itself as one of the foremost powers in Western Europe.

Like its eastern neighbour, Hugh Capet's kingdom was incredibly decentralised, with his personal authority barely felt in those lands furthest from Paris, the city he made his capital. In areas like Brittany and Aquitaine, the local populations had relied on their local lord to raise armies to resist the Vikings, and as the power and wealth of these lords had grown, they had successfully founded their own dynasties that would go on to challenge the authority of the king. Much closer to the capital, meanwhile, was the Duchy of Normandy ("land of the Norsemen"), an all but independent Viking state. It had been founded in 911 when king Charles the Simple granted the land to Rollo in exchange for he and his men converting to Christianity, and promising not to raid any further up the river Seine. Although Rollo's descendants gradually adopted Frankish religion, culture and language, Normandy would remain a thorn in the King of France's side for more than 500 years.

On the other side of the kingdom, the threat was not from Vikings, but from the Umayyads, the Muslim rulers of Al-Andalus (Spain). During the ninth and tenth century the Counts of Barcelona succeeded in driving the Umayyads further south, and established new Catalan counties in the newly conquered lands. The last count of Barcelona appointed by a Frankish king, Wilfred the Hairy, left these counties to his children, thereby establishing his own Catalan dynasty. When a Muslim army burned the city of Barcelona in 985, Count Borrell II sought refuge in the Montserrat mountains and waited for help from the Frankish king, which never arrived, causing the Catalans great resentment towards the Franks. Hugh Capet became king two years later, and there is no evidence to suggest that Borrell ever swore allegiance to him, effectively ending whatever semblance of Frankish authority over Catalonia was left. By the time the king of France formally renounced his historical claim to the County of Barcelona in the Treaty of Corbeil in 1258, it had already been in a personal union with the Kingdom of Aragon for over a century.

The collection of territories that constituted the personal possession of the king, and over which he ruled directly, was known as the Crown lands or the "Royal domain". The process of assimilating the patchwork of feudal lands that made up the rest of the Kingdom of France into this domain would be very gradual, taking many centuries. For the early Capetian kings, the immediate obstacle was their domain's very limited size.

Until the reign of Philip II (1180–1222), the Royal Domain constituted one of the smallest fiefdoms in France, most of it consisting of the area around Paris (known as the île de France) and Orleans. Because it was from only these lands that the king could collect taxes or raise an army, he simply did not possess the military or financial means to expand the royal domain through conquest. However, under feudal law, if a king was at war his vassals were obliged to raise their own armies to fight alongside the king. Furthermore, the king had the power to introduce a special tax at times of war - the taille - which applied to all laypeople across the entire kingdom. Thus a successful military campaign could extend his personal authority over his kingdom, and potentially expand the royal domain. Moreover, a war with a foreign power would not necessarily be required, since feudal law gave the king of France the right to confiscate fiefs from vassals who were disobedient or disloyal, and he could potentially request military assistance from his other vassals to enforce this.

As it turned out, the perfect opportunity for the Capetians came in the shape of a foreign power who was simultaneously a disobedient vassal: the King of England. Following the conquest of England by William, Duke of Normandy in 1066, all subsequent English kings were now also vassals to the king of France and, in theory, owed him their loyalty and allegiance. In practice, of course, the kings on each side of the English Channel were almost never in allegiance with one another, and William the Conqueror's Norman and Plantagenet descendants increasingly came to regard Normandy as an extension of their own realm, a land loyal to only one king.

The English and French kings' mutual rivalry intensified as more and more lands on the French side of the channel came under the king of England's rule, most notably Anjou and Aquitaine in 1154. Geoffrey Plantagenet was already Count of Anjou and the ruler of neighbouring Maine and Touraine when he married Empress Matilda, granddaughter of William the Conqueror and claimant to the throne of England. Geoffrey and Matilda's son then went on to marry the richest heiress in Europe and ex-wife of the king of France, Eleanor of Aquitaine. By the time he became king Henry II of England in 1154, he ruled over an empire stretching from the Scottish borders to the Pyrenees, and held more lands in the Kingdom of France than the king of France himself.

Fortunately for the kings of France, there was dissent at the heart of the Plantagenet family. Henry II attempted to control his empire by granting different parts of it to each of his sons, but this served to make them both hungry for power and capable of mounting rebellions. Henry, Richard and John - along with their mother, Eleanor of Aquitaine - each rebelled and raised armies against their father at various times during his reign. Once King John had inherited the empire in 1199, he caused confusion among his barons by his irregular and violent behaviour, which culminated in their collective rebellion and a civil war.

Philip II was able to take advantage of this by first capturing the fortress of the Château Gaillard downstream from Paris, and then conquering the Duchy of Normandy which - along with Touraine and Anjou - he formally confiscated from king John of England in 1204.

The prospect of a powerful French king dominating Western Europe was a major concern to both the Holy Roman Emperor and the numerous counts and princes in the Low Countries, who felt threatened by this significant and rapid expansion of the Royal Domain (which had included the County of Vermandois, granted to the king after the death of its countess in 1293) and formed a coalition against Philip II. At the subsequent Battle of Bouvines in 1214, Philip soundly defeated this coalition and cemented his new acquisitions.

Thanks to Philip II's expansion of the royal domain, the annual revenue of the crown almost doubled between 1204 and 1222. His victory at Bovines also ensured the peaceful transfer of the county of Artois to the French Royal Domain upon the ascension of his son, Louis VIII, who had inherited it through his mother Isabella of Hainault, Count of Artois. Emboldened by his father's success against the Plantagenets, Louis confiscated the counties of Poitou, Saintonge, Angoumois, and Périgord from Henry III of England, thereby shrinking the Duchy of Aquitaine down to Gascony in the far south-west.

Despite Henry III formerly renouncing his claim to it in 1259, subsequent kings of England regarded the recapture of Normandy, homeland of their ancestor William the Conqueror, as essential. Although the Duchy was later reconquered by Henry V, it became French once and for all in 1449 (with the exception of the Channel Islands, which remain a possession of the British crown to this day).

The next substantial addition to the Royal Domain came in 1229, when Louis the Lion exploited the Albigensian Crusade against the Cathars and imposed his authority on the County of Toulouse, which became the province of Languedoc. Until the revolution, the province comprised eight of the modern French departments in Le Midi, and was able to preserve several of the County of Toulouse's own institutions, including a 'parliament' (a sovereign court of justice) and États (assemblies which voted on taxes and which decided on communal investments).

The fourteenth century saw the Kings of France both continue to bring more of their kingdom's lands under their direct control, and expand the frontiers of the kingdom to the south-east, at the expense of the Holy Roman Empire. Starting with the town of Viviers in 1306, king Philip IV began the gradual annexation of the Kingdom of Arles, an imperial fief. When the city of Lyon, a former capital of the Gauls and an important crossroads in European commerce, was handed over to Philip by the Archbishop of Lyon in 1312, Emperor Henry VII protested but made no attempts to reverse it.

In 1349, Philip VI purchased another imperial possession, the southern territory of Dauphiné, expanding both the Royal Domain and the kingdom of France towards the Alps. The title of Dauphin was subsequently given to his eldest son and heir - a condition of the sale - and used by all future heirs to the French throne. Charles V 's conquest of Provence in 1384, meanwhile, significantly increased the revenues of the French Crown, along with the length of the kingdom's southern coastline.

As their domain expanded, rather than rule their new acquisitions directly from Paris, several kings chose instead to create new dukedoms and grant them to a younger son, while the eldest continued to inherit the crown. This became known as the appanage system, and the first king to grant an appanage was Henry I in 1032. Louis VIII granted the counties of Poitou and Auvergne - captured from the English by his father Philip II - as appendages to his third son Alphonse in 1225.

Under this system the territory would, after the death of the junior royal son, pass down the senior male line. It could not be sold, and if there was no direct heir it would revert to the royal domain. Many dukedoms and counties did find their way back into the royal domain via this system (such as Poitou and Auvergne when Count Alphonse died childless in 1271). Although in theory these new dynasties - junior or "cadet" branches of the royal family - would be more loyal to the crown, the appanage system had the potential to backfire.

The House of Valois-Burgundy, effectively founded in 1363 when king John II awarded the Duchy of Burgundy to his youngest son Philip the Bold, gradually accumulated territories within both the Kingdom of France (such as Flanders and Artois in 1384) and the neighbouring Holy Roman Empire (such as Brabant in 1430 and Hainault in 1432). The Dukes of Burgundy would eventually hold territory encompassing much of the Netherlands, including the major trading centres of Bruges, Brussels, Antwerp and Amsterdam, which made the Burgundian Court one of the wealthiest in Europe.

In an attempt to seize control of the government during the reign of the mentally unstable Charles VI, in 1407 soldiers loyal to Duke John the Fearless murdered the king's brother, Louis, Duke of Orleans, plunging France into a civil war. John was himself murdered in 1419, prompting his son, Duke Philip the Good, to go as far as an alliance with the English during the latter stages of the Hundred Years' War, and the recognition of Henry V of England as Charles VI's successor, thereby disinheriting the king's own son. By then, the Dukes of Burgundy had become determined to create an independent and territorially continuous Burgundian State that could equal if not surpass the Kingdom of France in wealth and power, and were it not for the death of Duke Charles the Bold in battle in 1477 without a male heir, their objective may eventually been fulfilled.

The kings of England remained the dukes of Aquitaine, as they had been since 1154, and continued to rule the territory as a vassal of England rather than of France. Tensions came to a head in 1337 when Philip VI formally confiscated Aquitaine from Edward III of England as punishment for offering refuge to his political rival Robert III of Artois. Edward - grandson of Philip IV of France through his mother Isabella - responded by declaring himself king of France, initiating a conflict now known as the Hundred Years War.

Following devastating French defeats at Crécy (1346) and Poitiers (1356), Philip VI was forced to sign the Treaty of Brétigny in 1360. Edward agreed to renounce his claim to the French throne in exchange for a greatly enlarged Aquitaine and the port of Calais, which gave him control of the narrowest part of the English Channel.

Edward was proclaimed by the treaty as 'Lord of Aquitaine', in which capacity he was not considered a vassal to the kings of France nor was required to pay homage to them. In effect, Aquitaine was no longer part of the kingdom of France.

Fortunes continued to swing back and forth over the next century. During the reign of Charles V, English possessions were gradually whittled down to a small area of Atlantic coast between Bordeaux and the Pyrenees. Although a period of relative peace between England and France then ensued during the reign of Charles VI, he proved a weak and ineffective ruler prone to bouts of severe mental illness. A struggle for control of the government gradually ensued between two factions of the nobility: the Armagnacs, led by king's younger brother Louis, duke of Orléans, and the Burgundians, led by the king's uncle, Philip, duke of Burgundy. The association of Duke Louis in 1407 turned this struggle into all-out civil war.

Henry V of England sensed an opportunity to capitalise on the chaos in France, and invaded in 1415. Reasserting his great-grandfather Edward III's claim to the French throne, his victory at Agincourt (1415) wiped out most of Charles VI's best knights, and enabled him to conquer Normandy and parts of the île de France. In 1419, shortly after Henry entered Paris, John, Duke of Burgundy was assassinated by the Armagnacs, and John's son Philip swiftly formed an alliance with the English king.

At the Treaty of Troyes (1420), ratified by Charles VI and the Burgundians, Henry V of England was declared heir to the throne of France, and would act as regent until Charles VI died. Charles VI's son the Dauphin Charles, now the head of the Armagnac faction, was declared illegitimate and his daughter Princess Catherine was betrothed to the king of England. Although in theory the treaty handed over France in its entirety to the English, in practice it served to split France in two, with only those lands occupied by England and the Duke of Burgundy - north of the river Loire - formally recognising it. In any event, both Charles VI and Henry V died within a few weeks of each other in 1422, after which the Anglo-Burgundian half of France declared Henry and Catherine's infant son Henry VI as their new king (as Henry II of France), while the Armagnac half declared Charles VII as their new king.

The tide of the Hundred Years' War would turn dramatically upon the appearance of Joan of Arc, who led the French to relieve the Siege of Orléans (1429). At an audience with Charles VII shortly after, Joan told him she was on a mission from God, and must recapture Rheims and have him crowned in its cathedral as the rightful king of France (Henry VI of England had just been crowned king of France in Paris). Rheims was deep in the heart of English territory at the time, and Joan's mission seemed unlikely to succeed. But after a successful campaign through the Loire valley she achieved her aim and Charles VII was crowned at Rheims cathedral in July 1430.

Joan's belief that she was on a divine mission, and the somewhat miraculous turnaround of the Armagnacs' fortunes, turned what had been a conflict between English and French royal dynasties into a religious war. Consequently, when captured by the Burgundians and handed over to the English, they believed it necessary to convict her as heretic before burning her at the stake. Although her military exploits lasted barely a year, Joan had managed to inspire the French to such an extent that in the space of a generation, the English were driven out of France altogether (but for Calais).

The Burgundians ended their alliance with the English in 1435 at the Congress of Arras, effectively ending the Armagnac-Burgundian struggle and uniting the entire French nobility against the English. A far cry from the Plantagenet/Capetian territorial disputes of previous centuries, by now England was increasingly viewed as a foreign power that needed to be driven from French soil once and for all.

The French victory at Castillon in 1453 marked not only the end of the Hundred Years' War, but to three centuries of English rule in Gascony, finally bringing the south-west of France under royal control.

Both the succession of the Duchy of Burgundy, and the desire to gain a foothold in Italy, were the principal causes of the first of a series of conflicts with the ruling dynasty of Austria and the Holy Roman Empire, the Habsburgs.

Duke Charles the Bold of Burgundy’s dream of becoming king of a territorially continuous state were ended when he was killed in battle at the Battle of Nancy in 1477. With no son to succeed him, upon his death his various possessions were divided. Although his daughter, Mary of Burgundy inherited the Burgundian Netherlands and that part of Burgundy that lay outside of the Kingdom of France (the Franche-Comté, or Free County of Burgundy), under Salic Law the Duchy of Burgundy and the County of Flanders could not be passed down through a female line. Therefore, as far as king Louis XI was concerned, these had now been absorbed into the Kingdom of France, though he would have to go to war to assert his claim over the territories.

Louis was determined not only to gain direct control over Flanders - a French fief since the days of West Francia - but to seize Mary's other lands in the low countries, which included the wealthy cities of Antwerp and Amsterdam. He attempted to marry his young son to Mary so that a future grandson could inherit all Mary's processions. However, Mary instead married Maximilian of Austria, heir of the Habsburg dynasty, future Holy Roman Emperor and Louis XI's fierce rival. In the ensuing wars, Louis occupied Picardy and Artois, along with the county of Charolais further south, but was ultimately only able to hold on to Picardy at the Treaty of Senlis in 1493.

It was the son of Mary and Maximilian, Philip the Handsome, who went on to inherit Flanders, the Burgundian Netherlands and Franche-Comté, cementing a French-Habsburg rivalry that would endure for the next three centuries. The recapture of Flanders was attempted by many more French kings, with very limited success. Although it later briefly became part of the First French Republic, most of the medieval County of Flanders would spend the next 300 years as part of the Holy Roman Empire, before ultimately ending up forming part of modern-day Belgium.

Habsburg power was unexpectedly expanded even further as the result of a succession crisis in the Spanish kingdoms of Castile and Aragon, effectively united through the marriage of Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile. When their only son, eldest daughter and grandson all died in quick succession, Philip the Handsome's wife Joanna - Ferdinand and Isabella's second daughter - became the heir to both her parents' kingdoms. Although Philip died young and grief-stricken Joanna was incarcerated on grounds of insanity, their son Charles eventually inherited each of his four grandparents' realms: the Burgundian Netherlands, the Archduchy of Austria, and the kingdoms of Aragon and Castile (along with Aragon's processions in southern Italy and Castile's burgeoning empire in the Americas). In 1519, Charles was elected Holy Roman Emperor, succeeding his grandfather Maximilian as overlord of the numerous German states. From the point of view of France, it was now completely encircled by Habsburg lands.

Perhaps unsurprisingly given the vast empire he had inherited, Charles V believed it was his destiny to rule over all Christendom. The kings of France did all they could to curtail Charles's power during his reign, even forming alliances with England and the Muslim Ottoman Empire.

Charles VIII's invasion of Italy in 1494 began a series of conflicts known as the Italian Wars, during which the Kings of France jostled with the Habsburgs for control of the Italian peninsula. Attempting to capitalise on a power vacuum created by the collapse of the Italic League, Charles VIII attempted but ultimately failed to become King of Naples, a title which had been promised to Louis XI by his uncle René I of Naples.

Charles's successor Louis XII was much more successful in Italy, conquering both Naples and the Duchy of Milan during the Second Italian War (1499–1504). But French rule of Naples lasted only until 1504, while French rule in Milan persisted on-and-off until Francis I's disastrous defeat and capture at Pavia in 1525, after which Habsburg rule in Milan and Naples was assured. Francis was also forced to renounce in perpetuity his suzerainty over the County of Flanders.

Although Charles V's series of abdications in 1555 had divided the Habsburg inheritance into a Spanish branch and an Austrian branch, the lands which surrounded the Kingdom of France continued to be ruled by one man, his son Philip. Along with Spain, Philip ruled the Burgundian Netherlands (now reorganised into the Seventeen Provinces or " Spanish Netherlands "), Franche-Comté and more distantly, Milan. And until Philip's Spanish Armada was defeated in 1588, it was not clear that England would not become part of this encirclement.

The so-called " Spanish Road ", running south to north via Milan, Franche-Comté and the Spanish Netherlands, was a vital trade route and military supply line for Philip, particularly once the Dutch Republic began fighting a war of independence against him. It was also what enabled Philip to prepare for a land invasion of England, in the event that his Armada had been successful. Cutting off the Spanish Road became a key motivating factor in France's efforts to expand eastwards over the next two centuries.

At the time of his accession in 1589, the first French king from the House of Bourbon, Henry IV, brought the possessions of the last remaining great feudal house, the Albrets, to the royal domain. These possessions, comprising Béarn, Armagnac and Limousin, were inherited through his mother, Joan of Albret.

Henry IV also inherited another dispute with Habsburg Spain. By his mother, he was descended from the kings of Navarre, whose territory had been substantially reduced by Ferdinand of Aragon's invasion in 1513. Although left with only that part of Navarre north of the Pyrenees (Lower Navarre), from this time onwards the kings of France continued to claim the whole of Navarre and use the title of 'King of Navarre'.

Upon becoming King of Navarre, Henry IV also became - along with the Bishop of Urgell) - one of two Co-Princes of Andorra, the tiny principality in the Pyrenees created in 1278. All subsequent French heads of state would retain this title, although only one - the Emperor Napoleon - would ever annex the territory. The French president remains co-prince of Andorra to this day.

In 1599 Henry IV demanded the Duke of Savoy, Charles Emmanuel I, hand over several territories on the West Bank of the Rhône or face invasion. The Duke had seized the town of Saluzzo, a French exclave, 11 years earlier and was secretly plotting with the Spanish governor of Milan to secure military assistance in seizing more French territory. When he refused Henry's demands, the king invaded and quickly overran the Duchy. The treaty of Lyon, signed in 1601, let Charles Emmanuel keep Saluzzo but handed Bresse, Bugey, Valromey and the Pays de Gex - which together constitute the modern Ain department - to France which, crucially, closed off one of the Alpine valleys used by the Spanish Road.

Despite the ongoing rivalry with the Habsburgs, the prospect of any conflict with them greatly offended many of the Catholics of France, who saw Habsburg Spain as the first line of defence against the growing threat of Protestantism. Henry IV's queen, Marie de' Medici and the Duke d'Épernon were notable catholic members of the royal court who were opposed to any wars with Spain. Despite Henry's best efforts to balance the interests of Protestants and Catholics in his kingdom, he was assassinated by a Catholic zealot in 1610.

Henry's son Louis XIII and his prime minister Richelieu went on the offensive in 1635, invading Lombardy and severing the Spanish road. This brought France into the Thirty Years' War on the side of Sweden, the Dutch Republic and several German states, already fighting the Imperial forces of the Holy Roman Empire (still ruled by the Austrian Habsburgs) and Spain. However hostilities would continue between France and Spain even after the Peace of Westphalia had brought the Thirty Years' War to a close in 1648.

The capture of Breisach in 1639 left France in control of Alsace, destroying the Spanish road once and for all, while the French victory over Spain at the Battle of Rocroi in 1643 - just a few days into the long reign of Louis XIV - showed the rest of Europe that France was now the foremost military power on the continent.

The Westphalia treaty granted to France the margraviate of Haute-Alsace and the Décapole, a federation of ten Alsatian towns. Both had formerly been Austrian Habsburg processions. The treaty also confirmed French sovereignty over the Three Bishoprics, annexed a century earlier.

France went on to make gains against the Spanish in Flanders and in the Pyrenees, but with neither side able to make a decisive breakthrough and both financially exhausted, they agreed peace at the Treaty of the Pyrenees (1659). As well as the transfer of Artois from the Spanish Netherlands to France, the treaty finalised the Franco-Spanish frontier which remains unchanged to this day. In exchange for the county of Roussillon in north-eastern Principality of Catalonia, France promised to end its support of the Catalan revolt against Spanish rule, whilst the long-running dispute over the boundary between (Spanish) Upper Navarre and (French) Lower Navarre was ended. Meanwhile, the Isle of the Pheasants, the island on the Bidasoa river where the treaty was signed, has switched sovereignty between France and Spain every six months ever since and is the smallest condominium in the world.

Although the northern half of Spanish Netherlands had won its independence as the Dutch Republic, the southern half - which bordered France - remained in Spanish hands, and included the wealthy area of Flanders. Coveted by the kings of France since its loss in 1493, Louis XIV invaded Flanders both during the War of Devolution (1667–68) and the Franco-Dutch War (1672–1678). At the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle he gained Lille, Douai and Armentières, while at the Treaty of Nijmegen he gained Saint-Omer, Cambrai, Valenciennes and Maubeuge in Hainaut. Together with Louis' purchase of Dunkirk from king Charles II of England for £320,000 in 1662 (the English having earlier captured the town from the Spanish) - this all but marked the limit of France's expansion in the north, apart from a twenty-year period during the revolutionary/Napoleonic era.

Another important success of the Treaty of Nijmegen was the acquisition of Franche-Comte, the "Free County of Burgundy", which had been a Habsburg procession and a thorn in France's side since Mary of Burgundy's death in 1482, and separated from the Duchy of Burgundy since the death of her father Charles the Bold in 1477.

Emboldened by his earlier successes, Louis XIV occupied Habsburg-ruled Luxembourg during the Nine Years War. By the Treaty of Rijswijk in 1697 he renounced most of these newly-taken lands but retained Saarlouis and Lower Alsace, which included the town of Strasbourg. Thus almost the whole of Alsace was now entirely French: something that Germany, once it was at last unified in the 19th century, would later attempt to reverse.

Although French participation in the War of Spanish Succession did not result in any territorial gains, it marked a turning point in its centuries-old rivalry with the Habsburgs. When the Spanish and Austrian branches of the Habsburg dynasty went to war with one another in 1700 - drawing in most of the other powers of Europe - France allied with Spain, supporting the claim of Philip V (Louis XIV's grandson) to the Spanish throne. The Peace of Utrecht that ended the war, intending to preserve a balance of power on the continent, forced Philip and his heirs to cede any claim to the throne of France, guaranteeing the two kingdoms and their empires could never be ruled by the same person. The treaty also transferred the Spanish Netherlands to Austria, leaving the kingdom of Spain itself as the only Spanish territory on France's borders.

In the latter years of Louis XIV's reign, France's newly expanded borders in the east were strengthened by the construction of a network of modern fortresses. The fortified towns to the immediate north of the Duchy of Lorraine - Montmédy, Thionville, Longwy and Saarlouis - were intended to isolate it from the other states in the Holy Roman Empire, in particular the Austrian Netherlands, and ultimately undermine the independence of the dukes. Duke Charles IV and his nephew Charles V, who both served as officers in the Austrian army, adopted a policy hostile towards France.

Since 1632, France had repeatedly occupied Lorraine in periods of war, without annexing it. But an opportunity would present itself in 1736, upon the marriage of Duke Francis III to the heiress of the Austrian House of Habsburg Maria Theresa, which took place at a time when Austria was fighting the War of Polish succession against Spain and Sardinia. Francis agreed to leave Lorraine to the recently deposed King of Poland and Louis XV 's father-in-law, Stanisław Leszczyński, so that it would merge with the French crown after his death. In exchange, Francis would receive the Grand Duchy of Tuscany (which would become vacant once the last Medici Grand Duke died without an heir). The resulting Treaty of Vienna successfully brought an end to hostilities and ensured Lorraine became part of the French kingdom when duke Stanisław I died in 1766.

In 1760 the County of Charolais, a former Burgundian and later Spanish Habsburg exclave given to one of Louis XIV's generals Louis le Grand Condé by the Treaty of Nijmegen in 1678, was absorbed into France following the death of the last count of Charolais and Louis' descendent, Charles.

Meanwhile, having received limited military assistance from France in trying to crush a rebellion which had begun in 1729, the Republic of Genoa was losing its grip on the island of Corsica. After the proclamation of an independent Corsican Republic, and having been all but driven from the island but for two coastal forts, by 1767 it was clear the financially exhausted Genoese - who had also just been humiliated in the War of Austrian Succession - would not be able to repay France, and so offered to cede their claim to Corsica in exchange for their debt being annulled.

This provided a timely opportunity for Louis XV, who had hoped to establish a foothold in the Mediterranean by capturing British-held Menorca during the Seven Years' War, but had been forced to cede it back to Britain (along with almost all of France's North American and Asian colonies) at the 1763 Treaty of Paris. The Republic of Genoa formally renounced their claim to Corsica, which it had held since 1284, in May 1768 and pledged it to France, who invaded the island in September and completed their conquest at the Battle of Ponte Novu the following May.

Thus, on the eve of the Revolution, the modern, hexagonal shape of France was accomplished, but for a handful of foreign enclaves that remained in the recent zone of expansion: Franche-Comté, Alsace and Lorraine.

The French monarchy, along with the Kingdom of France itself, was abolished on 21 September 1792, when the First French Republic was proclaimed.

The Revolution did away with the concept of ownership of political entities by individuals. As such the French Republic was a unitary state rather than a mosaic of vassals or "semi-states". As a means of severing old ties of allegiance, and of rationalising administration, the old divisions of territory based on feudal ownership were replaced by "departments" of roughly uniform size and named after geographical features such as rivers (even Paris was in the "Seine" department).

The establishment of a revolutionary regime in France led most of the European monarchies to swiftly form coalitions against it. But the armies of the First Republic enjoyed a succession of victories against foreign powers which resulted in a considerable expansion of its territory. Its acquisitions in this period included:

With help from Great Britain, Corsican revolutionary and previous president of the Corsican Republic (1755–1768) Pasquale Paoli returned to the island in 1794 and proclaimed the Anglo-Corsican Kingdom. This was re-conquered by France in 1796.

Under Napoleon, French conquests continued. They were principally motivated by the aim of controlling the coasts of Europe. This was in the context of the struggle against the United Kingdom and the commercial blockade which that country imposed. In that way, the following were annexed:

After Napoleon's final defeat at the battle of Waterloo, at the 1815 Congress of Vienna the continuing state of the Kingdom of France resembled its borders of 1791, though with the following differences:

France kept all the enclaves that had still been part of the Holy Roman Empire before the Revolution in its northeast, scattered across five of the new departments:

France also kept two additional former enclaves: in the Haut-Rhin, the Republic of Mulhouse, which had been affiliated to the Helvetic Confederation since 1515 and thus no longer in the Holy Roman Empire since 1648, had voted in favour of its reunion to France in 1798; and in Vaucluse, Avignon and the Comtat Venaissin, which had been property of the Holy See since 1274, was unilaterally annexed in 1791 and subsequently recognised as such by the Pope in the Treaty of Tolentino in 1797.

In 1858, minister of the Estates of Savoy Camillo Cavour promised Emperor Napoleon III the Duchy of Savoy and the county of Nice, in exchange for French help in driving the Austrians out of Italy (which was part of the wider struggle to unify the Italian states). Following French-Sardinian victories over Austria at Magneta and Solferino the following year, Austria ceded Lombardy to France, who immediately exchanged it with Sardinia for Savoy and Nice, as had been agreed. These acquisitions, ratified by the Treaty of Turin, represent by far the most significant additions to France's territory since the Revolution.

The independent principality of Monaco, which had previously been surrounded by the Kingdom of Sardinia (and had been a Sardinian protectorate since 1815) was now surrounded by France. Shortly after the Sardinians left the area the inhabitants of two towns within the principality, Roquebrune and Menton, chose by referendum to be joined with the County of Nice and with France. On 2 February 1861, Prince Charles III of Monaco and Napoleon III signed a treaty at Paris by which, in exchange for 4,000,000 francs, the prince and his successors would renounce in perpetuity, in favour of the Emperor of the French, all rights direct and indirect on these two communes.

Following the defeat of the Second French Empire in the Franco-Prussian War and the ratification of the Treaty of Frankfurt in 1871, all of Alsace except the French-speaking Territory of Belfort, was annexed by the new German Empire, along with the districts of Sarreguemines and Metz, and large parts of the districts of Sarrebourg, Château-Salins and Briey in Lorraine. Together with the cantons of Saales and Schirmeck in the Vosges, this constituted a total of 1,694 communes and 1,597,000 inhabitants, over an area of 1,447,000 hectares, which was reorganised into the territory of Elsaß-Lothringen. The new border between Germany and France was drawn along largely ethnic and linguistic lines, with the mostly French-speaking Metz area the notable exception.

All these territories would be recovered at the end of the First World War, by Article 27 of the Treaty of Versailles.

Alsace and Lorraine were annexed by Germany again in 1940. Unlike the rest of occupied France and the unoccupied so-called "Free France" (Vichy France) – which became a Nazi puppet state – Alsace-Lorraine was formally incorporated into the Third Reich. It was returned to France once again after World War II.

In the Treaty of Paris in 1947, France gained approximately 700 km of territory from Italy, spread over the departments of the Alpes-Maritimes, Hautes-Alpes and Savoie.

Though the Paris Treaty settled disputes on these five points in the line of the border, in the area of the summits of Mont Blanc and Mont Blanc de Courmayeur, questions remain open.

In 2001, a treaty was concluded between France and Andorra mentioning amendment of the border. In it, two parcels of territory were exchanged, each 1.5 ha in area. The operation should permit Andorra to erect, on the land ceded to it, the viaduct which should link the Envalira tunnel to the French Route nationale 22.

Since 1945 very many minor modifications of the frontier have been concluded with Switzerland.:

In July 2006, a treaty between Luxembourg and France exchanged parcels of 8.096079 hectares, to allow the formation of infrastructure financed by the Government of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, on French territory, (in the commune of Russange, Moselle). The work was connected with the industrial site of West Belval.

Thales S.A., trading as Thales Group (French pronunciation: [ talɛs ]), is a French multinational aerospace and defence corporation specialising in electronics. It designs, develops and manufactures a wide variety of aerospace and military systems, devices and equipment but also operates in the cybersecurity and formerly civil ground transportation sectors. The company is headquartered in Paris ' business district, La Défense, and its stock is listed on Euronext Paris.

The company was originally founded as Thomson-CSF in 1968. Following its privatisation, heavy restructuring, and reorganisation around three business areas (defence, aerospace and information technology), the firm was rebranded Thales Group in 2000, reportedly due to the company's desire to simplify and improve the group's brand. Throughout the 2000s and 2010s, Thales Group has completed numerous acquisitions that have typically expanded its presence in the defence, ground transportation, and IT sectors.

Thales is partially owned by the French state and operates in more than 68 countries. In 2025, the company generated €22.22 billion in revenue and was the 10th largest defence contractor in the world, with 72 percent of its total revenue generated from its military activities.

The firm began as Compagnie Française Thomson-Houston (CFTH), established in 1893. In 1968, Thomson-Brandt (a renamed CFTH) merged its electronics arm with that of Compagnie générale de la télégraphie sans fil (CSF) to form Thomson-CSF. Following a series of reorganisations and different directions, including its nationalisation in 1982, privatisation in the late 1990s, and reorganisation around three business areas: defence, aerospace and information technology in 2000, the company changed its name to Thales Group in December of that year.

In June 2001, Thales formed ThalesRaytheonSystems, an equal-ownership joint venture with Raytheon combining their radar and communication systems divisions. It was restructured in 2016 to sell exclusively to NATO agencies and member states.

In 2002, Thales set up the joint venture company Armaris with the French shipbuilder DCN to offer a total "bottom up" shipbuilding capability. Also in 2002, Thales Broadcast Multimedia, a former subsidiary of Thales, provided China with standard short-wave radio-broadcasting equipment designed for general public radio broadcasting. Though the contract was not for this purpose, it later appeared that China used these ALLISS antennas for jamming foreign radio broadcasts to China.

In 2003, Thales UK's design won the competition for the Royal Navy Future Carrier (CVF), and the company now participates in an alliance company with BAE Systems and the United Kingdom's Ministry of Defence.

In October 2006, after receiving approval from the Australian Government, Thales acquired Australian Defence Industries, a manufacturer of military equipment such as smokeless gunpowder and the Bushmaster Protected Mobility Vehicle.

During 2006, Thales Navigation, a division that produced satellite navigation units, was sold to private equity group Shah Capital Partners for $170 million and renamed Magellan.

In April 2006, Thales announced it would acquire Alcatel 's space business (67 percent of Alcatel Alenia Space and 33 percent of Telespazio) and Alcatel's Rail Signalling Solutions division, in a deal which raised Alcatel's ownership of Thales to 21.66 percent. The French government would also decrease its ownership in Thales to 27.1 percent from 31.3 percent as part of the acquisition. The deal would also include the Systems Integration activities (those not dedicated to telecoms operators, and covering mainly the transport and energy sectors). In January 2007, the €1.7 billion deal ($2.24 billion) was approved.

In July 2008, Thales acquired British hardware security module vendor nCipher.

In December 2008, Alcatel agreed to sell a 20.8 percent stake in Thales Group to the French aircraft manufacturer Dassault Aviation in exchange for €1.57 billion ($2.27 billion).

In 2012, the German IT supplier SYSGO was taken over by Thales Group. It provides operating systems and services for embedded systems with high safety and security-related requirements, typically using Linux.

During 2014, Alcatel-Lucent initiated talks to sell its cybersecurity unit to Thales; the deal was signed in October of that year.

In 2016, Thales acquired the data security company Vormetric in exchange for $400 million.

In April 2017, it acquired the data analysis firm Guavus. Later that year, it bid €4.76 billion to purchase the digital security company Gemalto. During late 2018, Thales decided to divest nCipher as a condition for its acquisition of Gemalto. in June 2019 it divested nCipher to Entrust.

In 2023, Thales acquired the cybersecurity company Imperva from Thoma Bravo for $3.6 billion. The acquisition was completed in December 2023.

In early July 2026, Thales announced an agreement with the company Exail (which specializes in marine drones), with a view to a 100% buyout.

Thales Group supplies electronic devices and equipment used by the French Armed Forces from its past as Thomson-CSF, including the SPECTRA helmet for the army and the gendarmerie. It has worked with Dassault Aviation on the Dassault Rafale aircraft and made its SPECTRA defensive aids. Thales often worked with DCNS and designed the electronics used on French ships, and it is involved in the construction of both the Horizon and FREMM programs. Thales, as Thomson-CSF, was involved in the Taiwan frigates scandal, relating to the sale of La Fayette -class frigates to Taiwan.

It is also present in Eurosam as Thomson-CSF was a founder of the consortium along with Aérospatiale and Alenia Aeronautica. In February 2004, Thales was awarded a contract for a new command and control system for the French Navy, the SIC 21, that will be fitted on the aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle, along with numerous navy vessels and shore locations.

Additionally, the initially planned French aircraft carrier PA2 involved Thales as the main designer of the ship. However, the project was cancelled in 2013.

Thales is also working on X-ray imaging, finances, energy and operating commercial satellites.

By 2012, the company is mainly composed of five branches: Defense, Security, Space, Aerospace and Ground transportation.

Among the EU-supported projects Thales participates in are:

The company's design won the competition for the Royal Navy Future Carrier (CVF) programme, leading to the Queen Elizabeth-class aircraft carrier. It is part of the AirTanker consortium, the winning bid for the RAF's Future Strategic Tanker Aircraft. Thales UK won the contract for the British Army UAV programme, Watchkeeper ; however, in January 2026, the company divested its 49% stake in the manufacturing joint venture, UAV Tactical Systems (U-TacS), to its partner Elbit Systems. It also produces the SWARM remote weapon station. Thales simulators include full motion devices as well as flat panels and other training facilities.

Thales Air Defence produces a range of short-range missile systems such as the Starstreak surface-to-air missile and the Lightweight Multi-role Missile (LMM).

In 2022, following the start of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Thales was amongst several major arms manufacturers to report a sharp increase in interim sales and profits.

The Thales ATM (Air Traffic Management) solution is marketed under the name "TopSky", previously named "EuroCat". Thales supplies avionics to civil aircraft manufacturers, including fly-by-wire systems, cockpit systems, navigation computers, satellite communication, inflight entertainment and electrical systems. The coordination of Thales parts' servicing and maintenance is coordinated by its MRO division; OEM services, which handles the repair flow for component maintenance support.

In November 2017, Thales acquired a UK radar provider called Aveillant which produces software-defined holographic radar technology, which can detect small targets such as drones.

In February 2018, Thales won on a A$1.2 billion ($946 million) contract with Airservices Australia and the Australian Department of Defence to unify Australia's civil and military airspace under a single air traffic control system, named "OneSKY".

Thales has had major involvement in the UK rail industry as a result of the Racal merger and the 2006 acquisition of Alcatel's Rail Signalling Solutions division and transport business. As of 2025, Thales is to modernise 40 per cent of London Tube network London Underground.

In Denmark, Thales wholly owns the "East-west Consortium" that has been contracted to provide a nationwide travel card (Danish: " Rejsekort ").

In India, Thales was selected in December 2014 by the New Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) to deliver a completely automated fare collection system, as well as ticketing equipment. Thales has also been contracted by Hyderabad Metro Rail since 2017 to provide train control automation and communication services for the metro in Hyderabad.

In 2014, the company was tasked with equipping the public transport system of Bordeaux, France, with a contactless ticketing and revenue collection system, to be installed by February 2017. However, due to delays, the system was not expected to be operational until 2019.

In 2017, Thales was involved in a train collision in Singapore, resulting from a compatibility issue between the old signalling system's interface, and the new one. The accident resulted in 38 minor injuries. A similar incident occurred in March 2019 in Hong Kong on the Tsuen Wan line.

In Vietnam, the company was awarded a €265 million contract in 2017 to deliver the telecommunications system for the currently constructed Line 3 of the Hanoi metro. Running behind schedule by one year, the metro line is stated to be launched in 2023.

In Turkey, the Thales team delivered the first High Speed Line in the country in 2009, and has completed more than 400 km (250 mi) of the Ankara–Istanbul high-speed railway.

On 31 May 2024, Thales' ground transportation division was sold off to the Japanese firm Hitachi Rail in exchange for $2.5 billion.

Thales is also a major manufacturer of in-flight entertainment systems on board airliners. Thales' primary competitors in this area of business include Panasonic Avionics Corporation and Rockwell Collins.

Thales also produces and installs ticketing and communications systems for public transportation via its ticketing and revenue collection division. In November 2016, Thales announced its intention to divest from its transport ticketing, revenue collection, road toll and car park management business. The company entered into negotiations with Paris-based Latour Capital, but the negotiations ended in 2017 after Latour Capital announced this business was "not aligned closely enough with its investment priorities." After subsequent talks with Chinese investors failed, Thales abandoned the divestment.

Thales' international subsidiaries generated 52 percent of the company's revenue in 2008, with Thales UK being the largest of these accounting for 13 percent of group revenue. Its large presence in the UK (largely as a result of the Racal acquisition) has resulted in several high-profile contracts.

As of 30 June 2025, Thales' major shareholders are:

A High Court case decided in 2012 between Thales (supplier of Greater Manchester's tram management system) and Transport for Greater Manchester (TGM) considered the operation of an audit clause in a contract, and the extent to which a supplier must comply with this. Thales had submitted claims for increased costs and for extensions to the time allowed for delivery of the system. TGM made various requests for documents intended to better help assess their claims. The Court instructed Thales to supply the requested documents.

Thales had been contracted to provide a ticketing and revenue collection system for Transports Bordeaux Métropole (TBM), the public transport system for Bordeaux and surrounding area. Although the ticketing system in Bordeaux was originally due for launch in the summer of 2017, multiple delays pushed the new launch date back by 20 months to 2019. The project's many setbacks are considered to reflect negatively on the city's reputation, with Bordeaux's city's mayor and former French prime minister Alain Juppé, calling Thales' inability to meet its commitments "unacceptable behaviour".

Michel Josserand, former head of THEC, a subsidiary of Thales, and Dominique Monleau alleged that Thales has a centralised slush fund that it uses to bribe officials.

On 30 May 2005, Schabir Shaik, the financial advisor to Jacob Zuma, the deputy president of the African National Congress party, was found guilty by the High Court in Durban of organising a bribe on behalf of Thomson-CSF.

On 22 January 2020, the KwaZulu-Natal High Court in Pietermaritzburg ruled that both the Thales Group and Zuma could be criminally tried for alleged illegal arms dealings which Thales was allowed to undergo in South Africa. Zuma is said to have allowed these illegal Thales arms dealings when he was the nation's deputy president and is also believed to have partaken in them as well.

On 10 June 2011, Thales Group and the French government were ordered to pay 630 million euros (almost a billion US dollars) in fines after the courts heard that bribes had been paid to the Taiwanese government to win a large naval contract. Part (about 27%) of the responsibility was transferred to Thales Group because it held the legacy from Thomson-CSF. As of 2011, this is the largest corruption case in French history.

In June 2024, police in France, Spain and the Netherlands searched the offices of Thales as part of a corruption probe. The operation is the result of two investigations; the first, opened at the end of 2016, focuses on suspected corruption of a foreign official, criminal association and money laundering involving the sale of submarines, and the construction of the naval base in Brazil. The second concerns similar offences linked to the sale of military and civilian equipment abroad.

In October 2021, the Indonesian government carried out bombing attacks against civilians in Kiwirok, Bintang Mountains Regency, Papua (currently in Highland Papua). Australian investigative journalists found Thales-designed and -manufactured bombs had been used, together with drones made by the Chinese company Ziyan.

Despite an EU arms embargo after the invasion of Crimea, Thales continued to supply systems to the Russian Army. This includes 800 Catherine XP thermal imaging cameras. The contract was signed in 2012. Thales also supplied TACAN navigation systems for 60 Su-30, and SMD55S head-up displays. The contract for these systems was signed in 2014, and deliveries lasted until 2018. Around 20 Topowl helmets were supplied to Russia for the MiG 29.

Sofradir, a joint venture of Thales and Safran, supplied infrared detectors beyond 2016, with 258 of these remaining to be delivered.

Between 2018 and 2023, Thales supplied components for armed Israeli drones. According to Disclose, this equipment was likely used in strikes against Palestinian civilians. The company confirmed that it sold components to "Israeli entities". Since at least 2022, Thales has manufactured 155 mm artillery shells in Australia. These shells are exported by the United States to the Government of Israel, including $147.5 million worth of shells in December 2023. On 17 November 2023 and 3 April 2024, protesters occupied Thales offices in the Netherlands, accusing the company of being complicit in genocide in Gaza.

In June 2026, Thales' supplier Linxens came under scrutiny after the Financial Times reported that the holding company owning Linxens was created by a consortium including Wise Road Capital and JAC Capital, two Beijing-based private equity firms that the U.S. government placed on its trade restriction "entity list" in 2024 over national security concerns. Linxens manufactures the inlays used in UK biometric passports, which Thales has produced under a Home Office contract since 2018. The Labour party's business and trade select committee chair, Liam Byrne, said the report would be incorporated into an ongoing parliamentary inquiry into China and the UK economy. The Home Office said no personal data leaves the UK and that it did not consider Linxens' role in the supply chain to pose a security risk, while Linxens said its inlays are made in Thailand at a certified, regularly audited facility. Thales declined to comment, citing contractual confidentiality.

In November 2024, the UK Serious Fraud Office (SFO) launched an investigation into suspected bribery and corruption within Thales.

The SFO are working collaboratively with the French authority Parquet National Financier (PNF) in the investigation. The investigation, which was initiated as a result of an employee whistleblowing, came after police in France, the Netherlands and Spain searched Thales offices in June 2024 over suspicions of corruption linked to arms sales abroad.

Thani Mohamed Soilihi (born 20 June 1972 in Mayotte) is a French politician of the Renaissance party who served as Minister of State for Francophonie and International Partnerships in the successive governments of Prime Ministers Michel Barnier and François Bayrou from 2024 to 2025. He previously served as a member of the French Senate from 2011 to 2024, representing the department of Mayotte.

Soilhihi earned his law degree from the École du Centre Ouest des Avocats in Poitiers and began his career as a barrister in Mayotte in 1999. He later served as President of the Mayotte Bar Association from 2007 to 2010.

Between 2001 and 2008, Soilhihi was active in local politics as an opposition councillor in the town of Sada. On 25 September 2011, he was elected to the French Senate to represent Mayotte. Re-elected in the 2017 senatorial elections under the banner of the RDPI group, he was appointed Vice-President of the Senate, becoming the first parliamentarian from France's overseas territories to hold this office since Gaston Monnerville.

In the Senate, Soilhihi served on the Committee on Legal Affairs. In addition to his committee assignments, he was a judge of the Cour de Justice de la République.

In September 2024, Soilihi was appointed Secretary of State for La Francophonie and International Partnerships in the Barnier government, serving under Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs Jean-Noël Barrot.

On behalf of President Macron, Soilihi presented Cameroonian President Paul Biya in 2025 with a report on France's role in Cameroon between 1945 and 1971, drawn up by a commission of historians from both countries to shed light on the “ war of decolonization ” in Cameroon.

In 2013, Soilihi voted in favour of the law opening marriage to same-sex couples. In 2022, he also voted in favour of a ban of so-called conversion therapy in an effort to outlaw practices that seek to change a person's sexual orientation or gender identity.

Thani Mohamed Soilihi is in favor of a renewed development partnership between France and African countries, which he hopes will be more transparent, free from the clichés of neocolonial aid or a hidden withdrawal of France.

The March of the Consular Guard at Marengo (French : Marche de la Garde consulaire à Marengo), or more commonly known as The Consular March (French : Marche consulaire), is a march composed by Guillardel, head of the band of the Foot Grenadiers of the Consular Guard, during the period of the French Consulate in the French First Republic. This march was named after the 14 June 1800 Battle of Marengo during the War of the Second Coalition, and was probably composed and first performed at that battle, under the title Pas de charge de la Garde consulaire à Marengo.

During the First French Empire, this hymn replaced La Marseillaise as the national anthem, along with Veillons au salut de l'Empire and also the Chant du départ. It is performed at numerous official ceremonies or military parades such as the Bastille Day military parade, and is part of the regular repertoire of the Band of the Republican Guard during the reviews of the Republican Guard guard of honour.

The words of the paratrooper's prayer have been sung to the tune of the Consular Guard March since 1961, at the initiative of a student from the École militaire interarmes. This song has since become the traditional song of the École militaire interarmes.

Le Plus Grand Français de tous les temps ("The Greatest Frenchman of all Time") is a France 2 programme, which was aired in early 2005. It was based on an original series of Great Britons on the BBC. The show asked the French viewers who they thought was the Greatest Frenchman or Frenchwoman. The programme was presented by Michel Drucker and Thierry Ardisson. The final episode was broadcast at the French Senate.

The winner was former president and leader of the Free French movement Charles de Gaulle.

The show was criticized by some historians in that it focused only on personalities of recent French history. Key figures of French history who contributed to the founding of the French nation, such as national heroine Joan of Arc, kings Philip Augustus, Saint Louis, and Louis XIV, or Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte, were largely ignored.

The Little Prince (French: Le Petit Prince, pronounced [ lə p(ə)ti pʁãs ]) is a novella written and illustrated by French writer and aviator Antoine de Saint-Exupéry. It was first published in English and French in the United States by Reynal & Hitchcock in April 1943 and was published posthumously in France following liberation ; Saint-Exupéry's works had been banned by the Vichy Regime. The story follows a young prince who visits various planets, including Earth, and addresses themes of loneliness, friendship, love, and loss. Despite its style as a children's book, The Little Prince makes observations about life, adults, and human nature.

The Little Prince became Saint-Exupéry's most successful work, selling an estimated 140 million copies worldwide, which makes it one of the best-selling in history. By November 2024, the book had been translated into 600 different languages and dialects worldwide. It became the second most translated work ever published, trailing only the Bible. The Little Prince has been adapted to numerous art forms and media, including audio recordings, radio plays, live stage, film, television, ballet, and opera.

The book begins with the narrator reflecting back on the first drawing he made as a six-year-old of a boa constrictor who had eaten an elephant. Upon showing the picture to grown-ups, he was prompted to create his second drawing of the inside of the boa constrictor to prove the first drawing was not a hat. At this point, he was advised by the grown-up to put away his drawings and pursue something practical. As an adult, he kept his first drawing with him and showed it to new acquaintances to determine if the grown-up was as enlightened as a child. But the adults always reply that the picture was of a hat, so he learns to only talk of "reasonable" things to them, rather than the fanciful.

The narrator becomes an aircraft pilot, and one day, his plane crashes in the Sahara desert, far from civilization. The narrator must fix his airplane before his supply of water runs out. Here, he is greeted by a young boy who is named "the little prince."

The prince asks the narrator to draw a sheep. The narrator first shows him the picture of the elephant inside the snake, which, to the narrator's surprise, the prince interprets correctly. After three failed attempts at drawing a sheep, the frustrated narrator draws a crate, claiming the sheep is inside. Surprisingly, this drawing delights the little prince.

Over the course of days, while the narrator attempts to repair his plane, the prince recounts his life story. He used to live on a house-sized asteroid known on Earth as "B-612". The narrator recounts a story of a Turkish astronomer who, after discovering asteroid B-612, gave a presentation on his findings, but was ignored due to his traditional Turkish clothing. After dressing in European garments, however, namely a suit, his discoveries were accepted. The asteroid has three minuscule volcanoes (two active, and one dormant or extinct) and various plants.

The prince used to clean the volcanoes and weed unwanted seeds and sprigs that infested his soil, pulling out baobab trees that were constantly on the verge of overrunning the surface due to their size. The prince wants a sheep to eat the undesirable plants, but worries it will also eat plants with thorns.

The prince then describes a rose that grew on his asteroid. The rose exaggerated ailments and coughed to have the prince care for her. So, the prince made a screen and a glass globe to protect her from the cold and wind, watered her, and kept the caterpillars from eating her.

Despite falling in love with the rose, the prince also began to feel that she was taking advantage of him, and so he resolved to leave the planet to explore the rest of the universe. Upon saying their goodbyes, the rose apologized for failing to show that she loved him. She wished him well and turned down his desire to leave her in the glass globe, saying she would protect herself. The prince laments that he does not understand how to love his rose while being with her.

After leaving his planet, the prince visited six other planets, each of which was inhabited by one adult:

Landing in a desert, the prince believed that Earth was uninhabited. He then met a snake that claimed to have the power to return him to his home, if he ever wished that.

The prince next met a flower, who said that she had only seen a few men in that part of the world, and that they had no roots, letting the wind blow them around and living hard lives. After climbing the highest mountain he had ever seen, the prince hoped to see the whole of Earth, thus finding the people; however, he saw only the desolate landscape. When the prince called out, his echo answered him, which he interpreted as the voice of someone boring who only repeats words.

The prince encountered a row of rosebushes, becoming downcast at having once thought that his rose was unique and thinking she had lied about being unique. He began to feel that he was not a great prince, as his planet contained only three tiny volcanoes and a flower he now thought of as common. He started weeping until a fox came along.

The fox desired to be tamed and taught the prince how to tame him. By being tamed, something goes from being ordinary or commonplace to being special and unique... but "We only understand what we tame."

From the fox, the prince learns that his rose was indeed special because she was the object of the prince's love and time; he had "tamed" her, and now she was more precious than all of the other roses. Upon their departure, the fox says that important things can only be seen with the heart, not the eyes.

The prince then met two people from Earth:

Eight days after the plane crash, the narrator and the prince are dying of thirst. The prince becomes morose and longs to return home and see his flower. Although losing hope, the prince insists that “Somewhere in the desert there is a well,” urging the narrator to continue. And at dawn, the narrator finds the well, saving them.

The prince reminds the narrator that his plane must still be fixed, leaving him there until the work is done. Upon successfully repairing the plane and returning to the prince, the narrator finds the prince talking to the snake, discussing his return home and his desire to see his rose again, worrying that she has been left to fend for herself.

The prince bids farewell to the narrator and states that if it looks as though he has died, it is only because his body is too heavy to take with him to his planet. The prince warns the narrator not to watch him leave, as it will upset him. The narrator, realizing what will happen, refuses to leave the prince's side. The prince tells the narrator that he only needs to look at the stars to think of the prince's laughter and that it will seem as if all the stars are laughing. The prince then walks away and allows the snake to bite him, falling down.

The next morning, the narrator cannot find the prince's body. Managing to repair his airplane, he leaves the desert. The narrator ends his story by addressing the reader directly, requesting to be contacted if one ever encounters a boy like the prince.

The story of The Little Prince is recalled in a sombre, measured tone by the pilot-narrator, in memory of his small friend, "a memorial to the prince—not just to the prince, but also to the time the prince and the narrator had together." The Little Prince was created when Saint-Exupéry was "an ex-patriate and distraught about what was going on in his country and in the world." According to one analysis, "the story of the Little Prince features a lot of fantastical, unrealistic elements.... You can't ride a flock of birds to another planet... The fantasy of the Little Prince works because the logic of the story is based on the imagination of children, rather than the strict realism of adults."

An exquisite literary perfectionist, akin to the 19th century French poet Stéphane Mallarmé, Saint-Exupéry produced draft pages "covered with fine lines of handwriting, much of it painstakingly crossed out, with one word left standing where there were a hundred words, one sentence substitut[ing] for a page..." He worked "long hours with great concentration." According to the author himself, it was extremely difficult to start his creative writing processes. Biographer Paul Webster wrote of the aviator-author's style: "Behind Saint-Exupéry's quest for perfection was a laborious process of editing and rewriting which reduced original drafts by as much as two-thirds." The French author frequently wrote at night, usually starting at about 11 p.m. accompanied by a tray of strong black coffee. In 1942 Saint-Exupéry related to his American English teacher, Adèle Breaux, that at such a time of night he felt "free" and able to concentrate, "writing for hours without feeling tired or sleepy", until he instantaneously dozed off. He would wake up later, in daylight, still at his desk, with his head on his arms. Saint-Exupéry stated it was the only way he could work, as once he started a writing project it became an obsession.

A native speaker of French, Saint-Exupéry was never able to achieve anything more than haltingly poor English. Adèle Breaux, his young Northport English tutor to whom he later dedicated a writing ("For Miss Adèle Breaux, who so gently guided me in the mysteries of the English language"), related her experiences with her famous student as Saint-Exupéry in America, 1942–1943: A Memoir, published in 1971.

"Saint-Exupéry's prodigious writings and studies of literature sometimes gripped him, and on occasion he continued his readings of literary works until moments before take-off on solitary military reconnaissance flights, as he was adept at both reading and writing while flying. Taking off with an open book balanced on his leg, his ground crew would fear his mission would quickly end after contacting something 'very hard'. On one flight, to the chagrin of colleagues awaiting his arrival, he circled the Tunis airport for an hour so that he could finish reading a novel. Saint-Exupéry frequently flew with a lined carnet (notebook) during his long, solo flights, and some of his philosophical writings were created during such periods when he could reflect on the world below him, becoming 'enmeshed in a search for ideals which he translated into fable and parable'."

In The Little Prince, its narrator, the pilot, talks of being stranded in the desert beside his crashed aircraft. The account clearly drew on Saint-Exupéry's own experience in the Sahara, an ordeal described in detail in his 1939 memoir Wind, Sand and Stars (original French: Terre des hommes).

On 30 December 1935, at 2.45am, after 19 hours and 44 minutes in the air, Saint-Exupéry, along with his copilot-navigator André Prévot, crashed in the Sahara desert. They were attempting to break the speed record for a Paris-to- Saigon flight in a then-popular type of air race called a raid, that had a prize of 150,000 francs. Their plane was a Caudron C-630 Simoun, and the crash site is thought to have been near to the Wadi Natrun valley, close to the Nile Delta.

Both miraculously survived the crash, only to face rapid dehydration in the intense desert heat. Their maps were primitive and ambiguous. Lost among the sand dunes with a few grapes, a thermos of coffee, a single orange, and some wine, the pair had only one day's worth of liquid. They both began to see vivid hallucinations. By the second and third days, they were so dehydrated that they stopped sweating altogether. Finally, on the fourth day, a Bedouin on a camel discovered them and administered a native rehydration treatment, which saved Saint-Exupéry's and Prévot's lives.

In the novella, the fox, believed to be modelled after the author's intimate New York City friend, Silvia Hamilton Reinhardt, tells the prince that his rose is unique and special, as she is the one he loves. The novella's iconic phrase, "One sees clearly only with the heart" is believed to have been suggested by Reinhardt.

The fearsome, grasping baobab trees, researchers have contended, were meant to represent Nazism attempting to destroy the planet. The little prince's reassurance to the pilot that the prince's body is only an empty shell resembles the last words of Antoine's dying younger brother François, who told the author, from his deathbed: "Don't worry. I'm all right. I can't help it. It's my body".

Many researchers believe that the prince's kindhearted, but petulant and vain, Rose was inspired by Saint-Exupéry's Salvadoran wife Consuelo de Saint-Exupéry, with the small home planet being inspired by El Salvador where he crashed and stayed to recover while being within view of 3 volcanoes, one of which was Ilamatepec, also known as The Santa Ana Volcano. Despite a tumultuous marriage, Saint-Exupéry kept Consuelo close to his heart and portrayed her as the prince's rose, whom he tenderly protects with a wind screen and places under a glass dome on his tiny planet. Saint-Exupéry's infidelity and the doubts of his marriage are symbolized by the vast field of roses the prince encounters during his visit to Earth.

This interpretation was described by biographer Paul Webster who stated she was "the muse to whom Saint-Exupéry poured out his soul in copious letters... Consuelo was the rose in The Little Prince. "I should have judged her by her acts and not by her words", says the prince. "She wrapped herself around me and enlightened me. I should never have fled. I should have guessed at the tenderness behind her poor ruses."

Saint-Exupéry probably has drawn inspiration for the prince's character and appearance from his own self as a youth, as during his early years friends and family called him le Roi-Soleil ("the Sun King") because of his golden curly hair. The author had also met a precocious eight-year-old with curly blond hair while he was residing with a family in Quebec City in 1942, Thomas De Koninck, the son of philosopher Charles De Koninck. Another possible inspiration for the little prince has been suggested as Land Morrow Lindbergh, the young, golden-haired son of fellow aviator Charles Lindbergh and his wife, Anne Morrow Lindbergh, whom he met during an overnight stay at their Long Island home in 1939.

Some have seen the prince as a Christ figure, as the child is sin-free and "believes in a life after death ", subsequently returning to his personal heaven. When Life photojournalist John Phillips questioned the author-aviator on his inspiration for the child character, Saint-Exupéry told him that one day he looked down on what he thought was a blank sheet and saw a small childlike figure: "I asked him who he was", he replied. "I'm the Little Prince" was the reply.

One of Saint-Exupéry's earliest literary references to a small prince is to be found in his second news dispatch from Moscow, dated 14 May 1935. In his writings as a special correspondent for Paris-Soir, the author described traveling from France to the Soviet Union by train. Late at night, during the trip, he ventured from his first-class accommodation into the third-class carriages, where he came upon large groups of Polish families huddled together, returning to their homeland. His commentary not only described a diminutive prince but also touched on several other themes Saint-Exupéry incorporated into various philosophical writings:

I sat down [facing a sleeping] couple. Between the man and the woman a child had hollowed himself out a place and fallen asleep. He turned in his slumber, and in the dim lamplight I saw his face. What an adorable face! A golden fruit had been born of these two peasants..... This is a musician's face, I told myself. This is the child Mozart. This is a life full of beautiful promise. Little princes in legends are not different from this. Protected, sheltered, cultivated, what could not this child become? When by mutation a new rose is born in a garden, all gardeners rejoice. They isolate the rose, tend it, foster it. But there is no gardener for men. This little Mozart will be shaped like the rest by the common stamping machine.... This little Mozart is condemned.

— A Sense of Life: En Route to the U.S.S.R.

Upon the outbreak of the Second World War, a laureate of several of France's highest literary awards and a successful pioneering aviator prior to the war, Saint-Exupéry initially flew with a reconnaissance squadron as a reserve military pilot in the Armée de l'Air (French Air Force). After France's defeat in 1940 and its armistice with Germany, he and Consuelo fled Occupied France and sojourned in North America, with Saint-Exupéry first arriving by himself at the very end of December 1940. His intention for the visit was to convince the United States to quickly enter the war against Nazi Germany and the Axis forces, and he soon became one of the expatriate voices of the French Resistance. In the midst of personal upheavals and failing health, he produced almost half of the writings for which he would be remembered, including a tender tale of loneliness, friendship, love and loss, in the form of a young prince visiting Earth.

An earlier memoir by the author recounted his aviation experiences in the Sahara, and he is thought to have drawn on the same experiences as plot elements in The Little Prince.

He wrote and illustrated the manuscript during the summer and fall of 1942. Although greeted warmly by French-speaking Americans and by fellow expatriates who had preceded him in New York, his 27-month stay would be marred by health problems and racked with periods of severe stress and marital strife. These included partisan attacks on the author's neutral stance towards supporters of both ardent French Gaullist and Vichy France. Saint-Exupéry's American translator (the author spoke poor English) wrote: "He was restless and unhappy in exile, seeing no way to fight again for his country and refusing to take part in the political quarrels that set Frenchman against Frenchman." However, the period was to be both a "dark but productive time" during which he created three important works.

Between January 1941 and April 1943, the Saint-Exupérys lived in two penthouse apartments on Central Park South, then, at the Delamater-Bevin Mansion in Asharoken, Long Island, and still later, a rented brownstone on Beekman Place, again in New York City.

The couple also stayed in Quebec for five weeks during the late spring of 1942, where they met a precocious eight-year-old boy with blond curly hair, Thomas, the son of philosopher Charles De Koninck, with whom the Saint-Exupérys resided. During an earlier visit to Long Island in August 1939, Saint-Exupéry had also met Land Morrow Lindbergh, the young, golden-haired son of the pioneering American aviator Charles Lindbergh and his wife, Anne Morrow Lindbergh.

After returning to the US from his Quebec speaking tour, Saint-Exupéry was pressed to work on a children's book by Elizabeth Reynal, one of the wives of his US publisher, Reynal & Hitchcock. The French wife of Eugene Reynal had closely observed Saint-Exupéry for several months, and noting his ill health and high stress levels, she suggested to him that working on a children's story would help. The author wrote and illustrated The Little Prince at various locations in New York City but principally in the Long Island north-shore community of Asharoken in mid-to-late 1942, with the manuscript being completed in October.

Although the book was started in his Central Park South penthouse, Saint-Exupéry soon found New York City's noise and sweltering summer heat too uncomfortable to work in and so Consuelo was dispatched to find improved accommodations. After spending some time at an unsuitable clapboard country house in Westport, Connecticut, they found Bevin House, a 22-room mansion in Asharoken that overlooked Long Island Sound. The author-aviator initially complained, "I wanted a hut, and it's the Palace of Versailles." As the weeks wore on, the author became invested in his project and the home would become "a haven for writing, the best place I have ever had anywhere in my life." He devoted himself to the book on mostly midnight shifts, usually starting at about 11 pm, fueled by helpings of scrambled eggs on English muffins, gin and tonics, Coca-Colas, cigarettes and numerous visits by friends and expatriates who dropped in to see their famous countryman. One of the visitors was his wife's Swiss writer paramour Denis de Rougemont, who also modeled for a painting of the Little Prince lying on his stomach, feet and arms extended up in the air. De Rougemont would later help Consuelo write her autobiography, The Tale of the Rose, as well as write his own biography of Saint-Exupéry.

While the author's personal life was frequently chaotic, his creative process while writing was disciplined. Christine Nelson, curator of literary and historical manuscripts at the Morgan Library and Museum which had obtained Saint-Exupéry's original manuscript in 1968, stated: "On the one hand, he had a clear vision for the shape, tone, and message of the story. On the other hand, he was ruthless about chopping out entire passages that just weren't quite right", eventually distilling the 30,000 word manuscript, accompanied by small illustrations and sketches, to approximately half its original length. The story, the curator added, was created when he was "an ex-patriate and distraught about what was going on in his country and in the world."

The large white Second French Empire -style mansion, hidden behind tall trees, afforded the writer a multitude of work environments, but he usually wrote at a large dining table. It also allowed him to alternately work on his writings and then on his sketches and watercolours for hours at a time, moving his armchair and paint easel from the library towards the parlor one room at a time in search of sunlight. His meditative view of sunsets at the Bevin House were incorporated in the book, where the prince visits a small planet with 43 daily sunsets, a planet where all that is needed to watch a sunset "is move your chair a few steps."

The original 140-page autograph manuscript of The Little Prince, along with various drafts and trial drawings, were acquired from the author's close friend Silvia Hamilton in 1968 by curator Herbert Cahoon of the Pierpont Morgan Library (now The Morgan Library & Museum) in Manhattan, New York City. It is the only known surviving handwritten draft of the complete work. The manuscript's pages include large amounts of the author's prose that was struck-through and therefore not published as part of the first edition. In addition to the manuscript, several watercolour illustrations by the author are also held by the museum. They were not part of the first edition. The institution has marked both the 50th and 70th anniversaries of the novella's publication, along with the centenary celebration of the author's birth, with major exhibitions of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry 's literary works. Physically, the manuscript's onion skin media has become brittle and subject to damage. Saint-Exupéry's handwriting is described as being doctor-like, verging on indecipherable.

The story's keynote aphorism, On ne voit bien qu'avec le cœur. L'essentiel est invisible pour les yeux ("One sees clearly only with the heart. What is essential is invisible to the eye") was reworded and rewritten some 15 times before achieving its final phrasing. Saint-Exupéry also used a Dictaphone recorder to produce oral drafts for his typist. His initial 30,000-word working manuscript was distilled to less than half its original size through laborious editing sessions. Multiple versions of its many pages were created and its prose then polished over several drafts, with the author occasionally telephoning friends at 2:00 a.m. to solicit opinions on his newly written passages.

Many pages and illustrations were cut from the finished work as he sought to maintain a sense of ambiguity to the story's theme and messages. Included among the deletions in its 17th chapter were references to locales in New York, such as the Rockefeller Center and Long Island. Other deleted pages described the prince's vegetarian diet and the garden on his home asteroid that included beans, radishes, potatoes and tomatoes, but which lacked fruit trees that might have overwhelmed the prince's planetoid. Deleted chapters discussed visits to other asteroids occupied by a retailer brimming with marketing phrases, and an inventor whose creation could produce any object desired at a touch of its controls. Likely the result of the ongoing war in Europe weighing on Saint-Exupéry's shoulders, the author produced a sombre three-page epilogue lamenting "On one star someone has lost a friend, on another someone is ill, on another someone is at war...", with the story's pilot-narrator noting of The Prince: "he sees all that.... For him, the night is hopeless. And for me, his friend, the night is also hopeless." The draft epilogue was also omitted from the novella's printing.

In April 2012 a Parisian auction house announced the discovery of two previously unknown draft manuscript pages that included new text. In the newly discovered material the Prince meets his first Earthling after his arrival. The person he meets is an "ambassador of the human spirit". The ambassador is too busy to talk, saying he is searching for a missing six letter word: "I am looking for a six-letter word that starts with G that means 'gargling' ", he says. Saint-Exupéry's text does not say what the word is, but experts believe it could be "guerre" (or "war"). The novella thus takes a more politicized tack with an anti-war sentiment, as 'to gargle' in French is an informal reference to 'honour', which the author may have viewed as a key factor in military confrontations between nations.

Saint-Exupéry met Léon Werth (1878–1955), a writer and art critic, in 1931. Werth soon became Saint-Exupery's closest friend outside of his Aeropostale associates. Werth was an anarchist, a leftist Bolshevik supporter of Jewish descent, twenty-two years older than Saint-Exupéry.

Saint-Exupéry dedicated two books to him, Lettre à un otage [ fr ] (Letter to a Hostage) and Le Petit Prince (The Little Prince), and referred to Werth in three more of his works. At the beginning of the Second World War while writing The Little Prince, Saint-Exupéry lived in his downtown New York City apartment, thinking of his native France and his friends. Werth spent the war unobtrusively in Saint-Amour, his village in the Jura, a mountainous region near Switzerland where he was "alone, cold and hungry", a place that had few polite words for French refugees. Werth appears in the preamble to the novella, where Saint-Exupéry dedicates the book to him:

I ask children to forgive me for dedicating this book to a grown-up. I have a serious excuse: this grown-up is the best friend I have in the world. I have another excuse: this grown-up can understand everything, even books for children. I have a third excuse: he lives in France where he is hungry and cold. He needs to be comforted. If all these excuses are not enough then I want to dedicate this book to the child whom this grown-up once was. All grown-ups were children first. (But few of them remember it.) So I correct my dedication:

Saint-Exupéry's aircraft disappeared over the Mediterranean in July 1944. The following month, Werth learned of his friend's disappearance from a radio broadcast. Without having yet heard of The Little Prince, in November, Werth discovered that Saint-Exupéry had published a fable the previous year in the U.S., which he had illustrated himself, and that it was dedicated to him. At the end of the Second World War, which Antoine de Saint-Exupéry did not live to see, Werth said: "Peace, without Tonio (Saint-Exupéry) isn't entirely peace." Werth did not see the text for which he was so responsible until five months after his friend's death, when Saint-Exupéry's French publisher, Gallimard, sent him a special edition. Werth died in Paris in 1955.

All of the novella's simple but elegant watercolour illustrations, which were integral to the story, were painted by Saint-Exupéry. He had studied architecture as a young adult but nevertheless could not be considered an artist – which he self-mockingly alluded to in the novella's introduction. Several of his illustrations were painted on the wrong side of the delicate onion skin paper that he used as his medium of choice. As with some of his draft manuscripts, he occasionally gave away preliminary sketches to close friends and colleagues; others were even recovered as crumpled balls from the floors in the cockpits he flew. Two or three original Little Prince drawings were reported in the collections of New York artist, sculptor and experimental filmmaker Joseph Cornell. One rare original Little Prince watercolour would be mysteriously sold at a second-hand book fair in Japan in 1994, and subsequently authenticated in 2007.

An unrepentant lifelong doodler and sketcher, Saint-Exupéry had for many years sketched little people on his napkins, tablecloths, letters to paramours and friends, lined notebooks and other scraps of paper. Early figures took on a multitude of appearances, engaged in a variety of tasks. Some appeared as doll-like figures, baby puffins, angels with wings, and even a figure similar to that in Robert Crumb 's Keep On Truckin' of 1968. In a 1940 letter to a friend, he sketched a character with his own thinning hair, sporting a bow tie, viewed as a boyish alter-ego, and he later gave a similar doodle to Elizabeth Reynal at his New York publisher's office. Most often the diminutive figure was expressed as "...a slip of a boy with a turned up nose, lots of hair, long baggy pants that were too short for him and with a long scarf that whipped in the wind. Usually the boy had a puzzled expression... [T]his boy Saint-Exupéry came to think of as "the little prince", and he was usually found standing on top of a tiny planet. Most of the time he was alone, sometimes walking up a path. Sometimes there was a single flower on the planet." His characters were frequently seen chasing butterflies; when asked why they did so, Saint-Exupéry, who thought of the figures as his alter-egos, replied that they were actually pursuing a "realistic ideal". Saint-Exupéry eventually settled on the image of the young, precocious child with curly blond hair, an image which would become the subject of speculations as to its source. One "most striking" illustration depicted the pilot-narrator asleep beside his stranded plane prior to the prince's arrival. Although images of the narrator were created for the story, none survived Saint-Exupéry's editing process.

To mark both the 50th and 70th anniversaries of The Little Prince's publication, the Morgan Library and Museum mounted major exhibitions of Saint-Exupéry's draft manuscript, preparatory drawings, and similar materials that it had obtained earlier from a variety of sources. One major source was an intimate friend of his in New York City, Silvia Hamilton (later, Reinhardt), to whom the author gave his working manuscript just prior to returning to Algiers to resume his work as a Free French Air Force pilot. Hamilton's black poodle, Mocha, is believed to have been the model for the Little Prince's sheep, with a Raggedy Ann type doll helping as a stand-in for the prince. Additionally, a pet boxer, Hannibal, that Hamilton gave to him as a gift may have been the model for the story's desert fox and its tiger. A museum representative stated that the novella's final drawings were lost.

Seven unpublished drawings for the book were also displayed at the museum's exhibit, including fearsome looking baobab trees ready to destroy the prince's home asteroid, as well as a picture of the story's narrator, the forlorn pilot, sleeping next to his aircraft. That image was likely omitted to avoid giving the story a 'literalness' that would distract its readers, according to one of the Morgan Library's staff. According to Christine Nelson, curator of literary and historical manuscripts at the Morgan, "[t]he image evokes Saint-Exupéry's own experience of awakening in an isolated, mysterious place. You can almost imagine him wandering without much food and water and conjuring up the character of the Little Prince." Another reviewer noted that the author "chose the best illustrations... to maintain the ethereal tone he wanted his story to exude. Choosing between ambiguity and literal text and illustrations, Saint-Exupéry chose in every case to obfuscate." Not a single drawing of the story's narrator–pilot survived the author's editing process; "he was very good at excising what was not essential to his story".

In 2001 Japanese researcher Yoshitsugu Kunugiyama surmised that the cover illustration Saint-Exupéry painted for Le Petit Prince deliberately depicted a stellar arrangement created to celebrate the author's own centennial of birth. According to Kunugiyama, the cover art chosen from one of Saint-Exupéry's watercolour illustrations contained the planets Saturn and Jupiter, plus the star Aldebaran, arranged as an isosceles triangle, a celestial configuration which occurred in the early 1940s, and which he likely knew would next reoccur in the year 2000. Saint-Exupéry possessed superior mathematical skills and was a master celestial navigator, a vocation he had studied at Salon-de-Provence with the Armée de l'Air (French Air Force).

Stacy Schiff, one of Saint-Exupéry 's principal biographers, wrote of him and his most famous work, "rarely have an author and a character been so intimately bound together as Antoine de Saint-Exupéry and his Little Prince", and remarking of their dual fates, "the two remain tangled together, twin innocents who fell from the sky". She noted that the novella's mystique was "enhanced by the parallel between author and subject: imperious innocents whose lives consist of equal parts flight and failed love, who fall to earth, are little impressed with what they find here and ultimately disappear without a trace."

Weeks after his novella was first published in April 1943, Saint-Exupéry joined the Free French Forces as a pilot. He was part of a 32-ship military convoy that voyaged to North Africa, where he rejoined his old squadron to fight with the Allies, resuming his work as a reconnaissance pilot despite the efforts of his friends, colleagues and fellow airmen to dissuade him. After numerous narrow escapes, the pilot was finally lost in action during a July 1944 reconnaissance mission from Corsica to the continent in preparation for the Allied invasion of occupied France, only three weeks before the Liberation of Paris. He was 44 years old when he disappeared.

Many of the book's initial reviewers were flummoxed by the fable's multi-layered story line and its morals, perhaps expecting a significantly more conventional story from one of France's leading writers. Its publisher had anticipated such reactions to a work that fell neither exclusively into a children's nor adults' literature classification. The New York Times reviewer wrote shortly before its publication "What makes a good children's book?... The Little Prince, which is a fascinating fable for grown-ups [is] of conjectural value for boys and girls of 6, 8 and 10. [It] may very well be a book on the order of Gulliver's Travels, something that exists on two levels"; "Can you clutter up a narrative with paradox and irony and still hold the interest of 8 and 10-year olds?" Notwithstanding the story's duality, the review added that major portions of the story would probably still "capture the imagination of any child." Addressing whether it was written for children or adults, Reynal & Hitchcock promoted it ambiguously, saying that as far as they were concerned "it's the new book by Saint-Exupéry", adding to its dustcover "There are few stories which in some way, in some degree, change the world forever for their readers. This is one."

Others were not shy in offering their praise. Austin Stevens, also of The New York Times, stated that the story possessed "...large portions of the Saint-Exupéry philosophy and poetic spirit. In a way it's a sort of credo." P. L. Travers, author of the Mary Poppins series of children books, wrote in a New York Herald Tribune review: " The Little Prince will shine upon children with a sidewise gleam. It will strike them in some place that is not the mind and glow there until the time comes for them to comprehend it."

British journalist Neil Clark, in The American Conservative in 2009, offered an expansive view of Saint-Exupéry's overall work by commenting that it provides a "…bird's eye view of humanity [and] contains some of the most profound observations on the human condition ever written", and that the author's novella "doesn't merely express his contempt for selfishness and materialism [but] shows how life should be lived."

The book enjoyed modest initial success, residing on The New York Times Best Seller list for only two weeks, as opposed to his earlier 1939 English translation, Wind, Sand and Stars which remained on the same list for nearly five months. As a cultural icon, the novella regularly draws new readers and reviewers, selling almost two million copies annually and also spawning numerous adaptations. Modern-day references to The Little Prince include one from The New York Times that describes it as "abstract" and "fabulistic".

In April 2017, The Little Prince became the world's most translated non-religious book, with translations into 300 languages. This number had risen to 600 by November 2024.

Katherine Woods (1886–1968) produced the first English translation of 1943, which was later joined by several other English translations. Her translation contained some errors. Mistranslations aside, one reviewer noted that Woods's almost "poetic" English translation has long been admired by many Little Prince lovers, who have spanned generations, as her work maintains Saint-Exupéry's story-telling spirit and charm, if not its literal accuracy. As of 2019 at least seven additional English translations have been published:

The Little Prince was also translated by Bonnie Greer for a BBC radio adaptation in 1999.

Each translation approaches the essence of the original with an individual style and focus.

Le Petit Prince is often used as a beginner's book for French-language students, and several bilingual and trilingual translations have been published. As of 2017, it has been translated into more than 300 languages and dialects, including Sardinian, the constructed languages of Esperanto and Klingon, and the Congolese language Alur, as well as being printed in Braille for blind readers. It is also often used as an introduction into endangered varieties with very few speakers like Maya (2001), Aromanian (2006), or Banat Bulgarian (2017). It is one of the few modern books to have been translated into Latin, as Regulus, vel Pueri soli sapiunt in 1961 by Auguste Haury (1910–2002) and as Regulus in 2010 by Alexander Winkler. A translation of the book was published as U'cc priinsâž in Skolt Sámi translated by Skolt Sámi author Kati-Claudia Fofonoff in 2000, a language spoken in Sápmi. At the time, the language was spoken by less than 500 people making it the smallest language with a translation of Le Petit Prince. In 2005, the book was also translated into Toba Qom, an indigenous language of northern Argentina, as So Shiyaxauolec Nta'a. It was the first book translated into that language since the New Testament. It was also translated to a northern Italian dialect, Vogherese. Anthropologist Florence Tola, commenting on the suitability of the work for Toban translation, said there is "nothing strange [when] the Little Prince speaks with a snake or a fox and travels among the stars, it fits perfectly into the Toba mythology".

Linguists have compared the many translations and even editions of the same translation for style, composition, titles, wordings and genealogy. As an example: as of 2011 there are approximately 47 translated editions of The Little Prince in Korean, and there are also about 50 different translated editions in Chinese (produced in both mainland China and Taiwan). Many of them are titled Prince From a Star, while others carry the book title that is a direct translation of The Little Prince. By studying the use of word phrasings, nouns, mistranslations and other content in newer editions, linguists can identify the source material for each version: whether it was derived from the original French typescript, or from its first translation into English by Katherine Woods, or from a number of adapted sources.

The first edition to be published in France, Saint-Exupéry's birthplace, was printed by his regular publisher in that country, Gallimard, only after the German occupation of France ended. Prior to France's liberation new printings of Saint-Exupéry's works were made available only by means of secret print runs, such as that of February 1943 when 1,000 copies of an underground version of his best seller Pilote de guerre, describing the German invasion of France, were covertly printed in Lyon.

Commemorating the novella's 70th anniversary of publication, in conjunction with the 2014 Morgan Exhibition, Éditions Gallimard released a complete facsimile edition of Saint-Exupéry's original handwritten manuscript entitled Le Manuscrit du Petit Prince d'Antoine de Saint-Exupéry: Facsimilé et Transcription, edited by Alban Cerisier and Delphine Lacroix. The book in its final form has also been republished in 70th anniversary editions by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt (in English) and by Gallimard (in French).

A Portuguese translation of the novella in 2007, edited by Eidouro Gráfica e Editora Ltda and presented at the XIII Biannual Book Fair of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, holds the Guinness World Record for world's largest book published. The impressive tome measures 2.01 m (6 ft 7 in) high and 3.08 m (10 ft 1 in) wide when open, containing 128 pages.

It has been translated into minority languages, such as the Irish language, by Éabhloid publishers in 2015; and the Scots language in 2017 and Shetlandic in 2022, both by Edition Tintenfass.

After being translated by Bonifacio del Carril, The Little Prince was first published in Spanish as El principito in September 1951 by the Argentine publisher Emecé Editores. Other Spanish editions have also been created; in 1956 the Mexican publisher Diana released its first edition of the book, El pequeño príncipe, a Spanish translation by José María Francés. Another edition of the work was produced in Spain in 1964 and, four years later, in 1968, editions were also produced in Colombia and Cuba, with translation by Luis Fernández in 1961. Chile had its first translation in 1981; Peru in February 1985; Venezuela in 1986, and Uruguay in 1990. The book is among the few books in the Castilian cant Gacería (as El pitoche engrullón) or the Madrid slang Cheli (as El chaval principeras).

The Little Prince has an adaptation for the inhabitants of Bavaria, Austria and South Tyrol, covering for a large variety of the Bavarian language. The book was adapted by Johannes Limmer and published in 2019. It is called Da gloane Prinz and contains the original pictures of Saint-Exupéry.

The Little Prince is one of the most popular and beloved foreign works of literature in China. It is reported that there are more than 70 Chinese translations of the novella. According to the official website of the Succession Antoine de Saint-Exupéry-d'Agay, the version translated by Li Jihong, which was published in January 2013, sold over two million copies in less than four years. Cheng Li-chun published a translation in Taiwan in May 2022.

Due to Saint-Exupéry's wartime death, his estate received the civil code designation Mort pour la France (English: Died for France), which was applied by the French government in 1948. Amongst the law's provisions is an increase of 30 years in the duration of copyright; thus most of Saint-Exupéry's creative works will not fall out of copyright status in France for an extra 30 years.

The book will remain under copyright in the US until 2039 and will remain in copyright in France until 2033 or 2045.

The wide appeal of Saint-Exupéry's novella has led to it being adapted into numerous forms over the decades. Additionally, the title character himself has been adapted in a number of promotional roles, including as a symbol of environmental protection, by the Toshiba Group. He has also been portrayed as a "virtual ambassador" in a campaign against smoking, employed by the Veolia Energy Services Group, and his name was used as an episode title in the TV series Lost.

The multi-layered fable, styled as a children's story with its philosophical elements of irony and paradox directed towards adults, has allowed The Little Prince to be transferred into various other art forms and media, including:

In 1997, Jean-Pierre Davidts wrote what could be considered a sequel to The Little Prince, entitled Le petit prince retrouvé (The Little Prince Returns). In this version, the shipwrecked narrator encounters the little prince on a lone island; the prince has returned to seek help against a tiger who threatens his sheep. Another sequel titled The Return of the Little Prince was written by former actress Ysatis de Saint-Simone, niece of Consuelo de Saint-Exupéry.

New York City's Morgan Library & Museum mounted three showings of the original manuscript, with its first showing in 1994, on the occasion of the story's 50th anniversary of publication, followed by one celebrating the author's centennial of birth in 2000, with its last and largest exhibition in 2014 honouring the novella's 70th anniversary.

The 1994 exhibition displayed the original manuscript, translated by the museum's art historian Ruth Kraemer, as well as a number of the story's watercolours drawn from the Morgan's permanent collection. Also included with the exhibits was a 20-minute video it produced, My Grown-Up Friend, Saint-Exupéry, narrated by actor Macaulay Culkin, along with photos of the author, correspondence to Consuelo, a signed first edition of The Little Prince, and several international editions in other languages.

In January 2014, the museum mounted a third, significantly larger, exhibition centered on the novella's creative origins and its history. The major showing of The Little Prince: A New York Story celebrated the story's 70th anniversary. It examined both the novella's New York origins and Saint-Exupéry's creative processes, looking at his story and paintings as they evolved from conceptual germ form into progressively more refined versions and finally into the book's highly polished first edition. It was as if visitors were able to look over his shoulder as he worked, according to curator Christine Nelson. Funding for the 2014 exhibition was provided by several benefactors, including The Florence Gould Foundation, The Caroline Macomber Fund, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, Air France and the New York State Council on the Arts.

The new, more comprehensive exhibits included 35 watercolor paintings and 25 of the work's original 140 handwritten manuscript pages, with his almost illegible handwriting penciled onto 'Fidelity' watermarked onion skin paper. The autograph manuscript pages included struck-through content that was not published in the novella's first edition. As well, some 43 preparatory pencil drawings that evolved into the story's illustrations accompanied the manuscript, many of them dampened by moisture that rippled its onion skin media. One painting depicted the prince floating above Earth wearing a yellow scarf was wrinkled, having been crumpled up and thrown away before being retrieved for preservation. Another drawing loaned from Silvia Hamilton's grandson depicted the diminutive prince observing a sunset on his home asteroid; two other versions of the same drawing were also displayed alongside it allowing visitors to observe the drawing's progressive refinement. The initial working manuscript and sketches, displayed side by side with pages from the novella's first edition, allowed viewers to observe the evolution of Saint-Exupéry's work.

Shortly before departing the United States to rejoin his reconnaissance squadron in North Africa in its struggle against Nazi Germany, Saint-Exupéry appeared unexpectedly in military uniform at the door of his intimate friend, Silvia Hamilton. He presented his working manuscript and its preliminary drawings in a "rumpled paper bag", placed onto her home's entryway table, offering, "I'd like to give you something splendid, but this is all I have". Several of the manuscript pages bore accidental coffee stains and cigarette scorch marks. The Morgan later acquired the 30,000-word manuscript from Hamilton in 1968, with its pages becoming the centrepieces of its exhibitions on Saint-Exupéry's work. The 2014 exhibition also borrowed artifacts and the author's personal letters from the Saint-Exupéry-d'Gay Estate, as well as materials from other private collections, libraries and museums in the United States and France. Running concurrent with its 2014 exhibition, the Morgan held a series of lectures, concerts and film showings, including talks by Saint-Exupéry biographer Stacy Schiff, writer Adam Gopnik, and author Peter Sís on his new work The Pilot and The Little Prince: The Life of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry,

Additional exhibits included photos of Saint-Exupéry by Life photojournalist John Phillips, other photos of the author's New York area homes, an Orson Welles screenplay of the novella the filmmaker attempted to produce as a movie in collaboration with Walt Disney, as well as one of the few signed copies extant of The Little Prince, gifted to Hamilton's 12-year-old son.

French professional wrestler Daniel Dubail was billed as Le Petit Prince. Pakistani-British professional wrestler Mohammed Allam was billed as The Little Prince.

Since 2020, June 29 is International Little Prince Day. This date was chosen to commemorate the birth of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, which occurred on June 29, 1900. The Antoine de Saint-Exupéry Foundation started the initiative striving to promote the humanist values carried by the book published in 1943. Mark Osborne was one of the first personalities to participate in the Little Prince Day 2020.

In 2023, The Little Prince inspired a collaboration with Chinese toy brand Pop Mart and artist Hideaki Kawashima's Hirono series. Titled "Pop Mart x Le Petit Prince – La Nouvelle Série de Figurines par Hirono", the collection features reinterpretations of characters from the novella, including the Little Prince, the Rose, and the Fox. The figurines depict scenes such as the Little Prince standing atop his asteroid B612 and interacting with the Fox under a starry sky. The collaboration was marketed as a celebration of the story's themes of love, friendship, and exploration.

The Montblanc Luxury Writing Instrument Company created three series of luxury fountain pens based on the Little Prince series, including the Le Petit Prince, the Le Petit Prince Aviator and the Le Petit Prince and Planet pens in various models.

The Mountain (French : La Montagne), with its members collectively called Democratic Socialists (French : Démocrate-socialistes), was a political group of the French Second Republic.

The group drew its name from The Mountain, a group active in the early period of the French Revolution. Standing on a republican platform, its main opposition was the conservative Party of Order.

The Mountain achieved 25% of the vote, compared to 53% for the Party of Order. It was led by Alexandre Auguste Ledru-Rollin, one of the members of the Second Republic's early provisional government.

After 1848, the Odilon Barrot 's Party of Order -backed government sought to repress protests against alcohol excises and the 45 centime land tax as well as demand for cheap credit and other grievances. The Democratic Socialists clandestinely organized this dissent in the face of press censorship, restrictions on political meetings and harassment. Prior to the founding of The Mountain, the Solidarité républicaine organized early dissent among radical republicans. The Mountain's broader strategy was to prepare for the 1852 legislative and presidential elections by continuing to espouse its 'utopian' Christian socialist message alongside attempts to politicize the three million voters who had been disenfranchised in 1850 despite the Republic's constitution proclaiming universal manhood suffrage. Karl Marx again found cause for criticism, accusing The Mountain of impotently "prophesying future victories". On the 1849 legislative election, there were more votes cast for The Mountain candidates than for Ledru-Rollin (Democratic Socialist) and Raspail (Socialist) combined in the 1848 presidential election.

The causes behind The Mountain's success amongst particular demographics are disputed. Ted Margadant, Peter McPhee and John M. Merriman have argued that the peasant vote signalled an acceptance of modernization whilst Max Weber, Peter M. Jones and Alain Corbin have argued that peasant support was typical, even if the provincial rivalries and support for negative demands such as low taxation present were cloaked in urban political lexicon. Robert Tombs has pointed out that the demands of voters were expressed in a number of different ways and that support was fleeting (wine growers were also prepared to back Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte or the Bourbons to get excise duties cut) and that peasants in the south-west and Massif Central who backed The Mountain also accepted Bonaparte after his coup d'état of 1851 and the end of the Second Republic.

For the remainder of the Second Empire, Bonaparte found the core of his support lay in the peasantry. Resistance to the coup d'état was most strongly present in the normally republican regions, again suggesting continuity. When in the most widespread popular uprising of the 19th century they organized protests against the coup d'état that numbered 100,000 strong, it was in mainly Protestant areas that The Mountain derived its most cohesive support.

The Mountain stood on a platform of low taxation, which made it popular with peasants, especially in industries that were suffering, such as agriculture and forestry. France sustained steady economic growth during the latter part of the Restoration and the July Monarchy, although the late 1840s witnessed a downturn, which was one of the factors behind the 1848 Revolution.

The National Workshops proved unpopular with the peasantry and despite being formed by urban left-wing politicians The Mountain was particularly successful in rural areas such as central France and the western and central départments in and around the Massif Central. The Mountain promised to end the land tax of 45 centimes used to finance the National Workshops, reform military service and develop education.

Traditionally pro-revolutionary, left-wing and Protestant areas of the south, affected by a slump in the wine trade, also backed The Mountain in 1849. Friedrich Engels and later Marx attributed the relative lack of support for The Mountain in the urban proletariat to distrust engendered by Alexandre Auguste Ledru-Rollin 's involvement in and refusal to condemn the suppression of the June Days uprising.

Later in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon, Marx cited The Mountain's formation in the Second Republic as one of the many instances in this regime of history repeating itself "as farce".

The Plain (French : la Plaine), also known as the Marsh (French : le Marais), was the majority of independent deputies in the National Convention during the French Revolution. They were the most moderate and the most numerous group (around 400 deputies) of the National Convention, as they sat between the Girondins on their right and the Montagnards (the Mountain) on their left. Their name arises from the fact their benches were by the debating floor, lower down from the Montagnards. Its members were also known as Maraisards, or derogatorily Toads (French : crapauds du Marais) as toads live in marshes.

Coming mostly from the liberal and republican bourgeoisie, the Plain was attached to the political conquests of 1789 and to the work of the French Revolution and wanted the union of all republicans. In practice, this group was very heterogeneous as it included noblemen and clericals like Henri Grégoire, François Antoine de Boissy d'Anglas, Jean-Jacques-Régis de Cambacérès, and Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès ; at the same time, some of its members like Bertrand Barère, Pierre-Joseph Cambon, Lazare Carnot, and Georges Couthon joined the Montagnards in the spring of 1793.

At the time of the Montagnards' seizure of power (the days of 31 May and 2 June 1793), their centrist position at the National Convention remained ambiguous. While the Plain deputies tried to play the role of mediators, they admitted the merits of the public safety measures voted with their support, or even their impetus, for several months; however, most of them demonstrated their hostility towards Maximilien Robespierre on 9 Thermidor, Year II, by rallying the instigators of the plot who were representatives on a mission recalled to Paris (Paul Barras, Joseph Fouché, Louis-Marie Stanislas Fréron, and Jean-Lambert Tallien).

The Plain and Marsh names come from their position, which was compared with the geographical areas of plain and marsh and by opposition to the Montagnards. The newspaper L'Ami du peuple is credited with having invented the term Marsh in reference to the Plain. Its members were sometimes disdainfully called by their adversaries the "toads of the Marais". Pierre Joseph Duhem, a Montagnard deputy, was quoted as saying: "The toads of the Marais are raising their heads! So much the better; it will be easier to cut them off."

The origin of the name continues to be debated. If the name Girondins to describe the group of Jacques Pierre Brissot 's followers is simply explained by their geographical origin, those of the Montagnards and the members of the Plain continue to raise questions because several interpretations are possible. The most widespread consists of sticking to the letter of the terms used: the Montagnard deputies sat on the left on the highest benches of this assembly, hence the reference to the Mountain, and those of the Plain on the lower benches. This classification is already present in an ancient text that many revolutionaries read, the "Life of Solon" from the Parallel Lives, where Plutarch (taking up the texts of Herodotus and Aristotle) describes the political divisions in Ancient Athens in these terms: "The Hill-men favoured an extreme democracy ; the Plain-men an extreme oligarchy ; the Shore-men formed a third party, which preferred an intermediate and mixed form of government, was opposed to the other two, and prevented either from gaining the ascendancy." Biblical and evangelical references are also present because the Mountain is perceived as a new Mount Sinai (with the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen as a new Decalogue), with further references to the Sermon on the Mount of Jesus.

During its existence, the Plain represented centrist positions; however, it was not static and evolved. The Plain was more centrist starting from the National Convention that began in 1792 and ended in 1795, and during this time the Plain's independent deputies represented its largest group. As member of the Jacobin Club, the Plain was initially part of the left-wing groups. The 1791 French legislative election resulted in a majority of around 350 moderate constitutionalists (the Plain), followed by more than 250 Feuillants (divided into Fayettists and Lametists), and a left-wing made up of around 136 Jacobin deputies, including several provincial politicians (including Armand Gensonné, Marguerite-Élie Guadet, and Pierre Victurnien Vergniaud, originally from Gironde, hence the name of the Girondins), with a small group of more advanced democrats (Lazare Carnot, Georges Couthon, and Jean-Baptiste Robert Lindet). Parliamentary groups, such as the Plain, the Montagnards, and the Girondins, never had any official status; thus, historians generally tend to estimate the Girondins in the National Convention at around 150 and the Montagnards at around 120, with the remaining 480 of the 750 deputies being called the Plain. Deputies of the Plain managed to keep some speed in the debates while the Montagnards and the Girondins were mainly occupied with nagging the opposite side.

None of Revolutionary France 's three main political groups was an organized political party. While the Montagnards and the Girondins consisted of individuals with similar views and agendas who socialized together and often coordinated political plans, the Plain consisted of uncommitted delegates that did not adhere to a single ideology, were not part of any political club, and lacked leadership. They constituted the majority of delegates to the Convention at 389 of 749, and voted with the Girondins or the Montagnards depending on the persuasiveness of arguments on single issues, current circumstances, and mood of the National Convention. They initially sided with the Girondins; by 1793, many backed the Montagnards in executing Louis XVI and inaugurating the Reign of Terror. The January 4 address, made by Plain member Bertrand Barère, is credited in part for rallying undecided fellow members against the king.

Nearly all those elected to the Committee for Public Safety in 1793 were members of the Plain, including the popular Barère. Later in 1794, disaffected Montagnards members led by Jean-Lambert Tallien made a pact with Plain leaders Julien-François Palasne de Champeaux, François Antoine de Boissy d'Anglas and Pierre-Toussaint Durand de Maillane to end the Reign of Terror, ultimately inaugurating the Thermidorian Reaction. Other notable members in 1792 included Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès, Jean-Jacques-Régis de Cambacérès, Antoine Claire Thibaudeau, Henri Grégoire, Philippe-Antoine Merlin de Douai, Louis Gustave le Doulcet de Pontécoulant, Louis Marie de La Révellière-Lépeaux, dramatist Marie-Joseph Chénier, and Jacques-Antoine Dulaure who later sat with the Girondins. Pierre Claude François Daunou who associated with the Girondins has also been regarded as part of the Plain.

The Regordane Way is the southernmost section of the historical route that links Paris to Lower Languedoc and the Camargue. It runs from Le Puy-en-Velay, south west of St Etienne to Saint-Gilles-du-Gard to the south west of Nîmes, a distance of 211 kilometres or 140 miles.

The origin of its name is most likely that of the ancient Province through which it passes – la Regordana. This Province corresponded approximately to the triangular area linking the towns of Alés, Pradelles and Largentière.

Its existence dates back to the dawn of man and its importance certainly grew from the year 843 onwards, when it became the most easterly route of a nascent Gaul. The Regordane was the fourth most important pilgrimage route in Christendom during this era, bolstered by its strategic position as a point of departure for Santiago de Compostela, the Holy Land (St Gilles was a port at the time) and Rome.

The GR 700 is France 's newest Grande Randonnée route that follows approximately the pilgrimage path of the Chemin de St-Gilles and the mystical trail The Regordane. The Saint-Gilles Way dates back to the mid-9th century and was Christendom's fourth most important pilgrimage by the 11th century. It runs from Le Puy-en-Velay to Saint-Gilles du Gard in Camargue. The Regordane is a section of this trail that runs between Luc in Lozere and Alès at the foothills of the Cévennes.

The GR 700 runs from Le Puy en Velay to Saint-Gilles du Gard, but is not necessarily faithful to the original trails. The whole route uses the misnomer 'The Regordane Way.' This epithet is incorrect because it implies that the full route was formerly known as The Regordane, which was never the case. Moreover, the use of the word 'Way' implies a Roman origin (Way = Voie) which studies demonstrate is wrong.

The Sower is a 2017 France-Belgium co-production written and directed by Marine Francen and based on the short story L'homme semence by Violette Ailhaud. Set in 1851, The Sower takes place in a village where the women have been left on their own after all the men were rounded up in order to prevent an uprising. The film premiered at the San Sebastián International Film Festival in 2017 and was released in the U.S. in 2019.

During the French coup d'état of 1851, all the adult men of a small rural village are rounded up, leaving the women behind to fend for themselves. After months pass with no word from the men, the women believe they are dead and become concerned that no men at all have passed through the village. The younger women make a pact that if a man should come through, they will share him equally so that they might have children. They further pledge to only sleep with the man if he agrees to sleep with all of them.

In the summer a blacksmith, Jean, arrives looking for work. The women give him shelter, at first tentatively, not willing to admit that they are alone. However Violette, the young woman chosen to look after him, admits that all the men have been arrested and learns in return that Napoleon has declared himself emperor, and that all the prisoners have either died or been deported. Violette asks Jean not to tell the other women.

Jean decides to stay to help the women with the harvest. He seems to show a preference for Violette, and the other women who have made the pact with her urge Violette to seduce Jean so that he will stay.

Violette and Jean become lovers, and soon the other women begin to pressure Violette to remember their pact and to bring up the subject with Jean. Reluctantly she does. Jean is disgusted with the idea and Violette tells him he has the option to leave. After he disappears for a day, Violette goes through his things and discovers that he is in hiding and thus cannot leave. Returning, he agrees to sleep with the other women and honour Violette's pact.

Even as he sleeps with the other women, Violette and Jean stay intimate. He reveals to her that he killed a man and is now wanted, and must leave France. After Violette becomes pregnant, the first of the women to do so, Jean asks Violette to depart with him.

After two years, some of the men begin returning home. The women realize that the returning men will judge them and their children. To keep the secret of the paternity of the children, a village elder tells Violette that Jean must leave. Violette initially intends to go with him. But Jean, realizing that his future is uncertain, and that Violette has a strong and supportive community around her, departs the village unannounced, leaving Violette a letter explaining himself and promising to write once he is settled.

On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 100% based on reviews from 18 critics.

In the historiography of the French Revolution, the Thermidorian Reaction (French : Réaction thermidorienne or Convention thermidorienne, "Thermidorian Convention") is the common term for the period between the ousting of Maximilien Robespierre and politically-aligned deputies on 9 Thermidor II, or 27 July 1794, and the inauguration of the French Directory on 2 November 1795.

The Thermidorian Reaction was named after the month in which the coup took place and was the latter part of the National Convention 's rule of France. It was marked by the end of the Reign of Terror, decentralization of executive powers from the Committee of Public Safety, and a turn from the radical Jacobin policies of the Montagnard Convention to more moderate positions.

Economic and general populism, dechristianization, and harsh wartime measures were largely abandoned, as the members of the convention, disillusioned and frightened of the centralized government of the Terror, preferred a more stable political order that would have the approval of the plurality. The reaction included the First White Terror, in which the left was violently suppressed; the Jacobin Club was disbanded; the sans-culottes were dispersed; and Montagnard ideology was renounced.

The name Thermidorian originated with 9 Thermidor Year II (27 July 1794), the date according to the French Republican calendar when Maximilien Robespierre and other radical revolutionaries came under concerted attack in the National Convention. Thermidorian Reaction refers to the remaining period until the National Convention was superseded by the Directory ; this is also sometimes called the era of the Thermidorian Convention. Prominent figures of Thermidor include Paul Barras, Jean-Lambert Tallien, and Joseph Fouché.

Conspiracies against Robespierre, who had dominated the Committee of Public Safety, came together on 9 Thermidor (27 July) 1794. Tallien, a member and previous president of the National Convention, impugned Louis Antoine de Saint-Just and then went on to denounce the tyranny of Robespierre. The attack was taken up by Jacques Nicolas Billaud-Varenne. Cries went up of "Down with the tyrant! Arrest him!" Robespierre then made his appeal to the deputies of the right, yet failed. An order was made to arrest Robespierre and his followers.

Troops from the Paris Commune, who were loyal to Robespierre, arrived to liberate him and the other prisoners. The Convention responded by ordering troops of its own under Barras to counteract. The Robespierrists barricaded at the Hôtel de Ville. The Convention declared them to be outlaws, meaning that they could be executed within 24 hours without a trial. The Commune forces at the Hôtel de Ville deserted. The Convention troops under Barras approached the Hôtel around 2 a.m. on 28 July. Robespierre, his jaw broken by a possibly self-inflicted shot, was taken with most of his supporters. Robespierre was executed the same day with 21 of his associates, including François Hanriot, ex-commander of the Parisian National Guard; Jean-Baptiste Fleuriot-Lescot, mayor of Paris; Georges Couthon, Saint-Just and René-François Dumas, ex-president of the Revolutionary Tribunal.

Why Robespierre failed to order his supporters to attack the convention sources as he had in the past, and then tried to kill himself, is a topic of speculation.

The events of 9 Thermidor proved a watershed in the revolutionary process. The Thermidorian regime that followed proved to be an unpopular one, facing many rebellions after its execution of Robespierre and his allies, along with 70 members of the Paris Commune, the largest mass execution to have ever taken place in Paris. This led to a very fragile situation in France.

The hostility toward Robespierre did not vanish with his execution. Instead, the people decided to blame those who were involved with Robespierre in any way, namely the many members of the Jacobin Club, their supporters, and individuals suspected of being past revolutionaries. The massacre of these groups became known as the White Terror, and was partially carried out by the Muscadin, a group of dandyish street fighters organized by the new government.

Often, members of these targeted groups were the victims of prison massacres or put on trial without due process, which were overall similar conditions to those provided to the counter-revolutionaries during the Reign of Terror. At the same time, its economic policies paved the way for rampant inflation. Ultimately, power devolved to the hands of the Directory, an executive of five men who assumed power in France in November 1795, in year IV of the French Revolutionary calendar.

The Thermidorian regime excluded the remaining Montagnards from power, even those who had joined in conspiring against Robespierre and Saint-Just. The White Terror of 1795 resulted in numerous imprisonments and several hundred executions, almost exclusively of people on the political left. These numbers, while significant, were considerably smaller than those associated with the previous Reign of Terror, which killed over 40,000. Many executions took place without a trial.

On July 29 the victors of the 9th Thermidor condemned seventy members of the Paris Commune to death; thereafter the Commune was subject to the convention. As part of the reorganization of French politics, practitioners of the terror were called to defend their records; some such as Tallien, Barras, Fouché and Louis-Marie Stanislas Fréron rejoined the leadership. Others such as Jacques-Nicolas Billaud-Varenne, Collot d'Herbois, Barère and Vadier were sentenced to exile in South America, though the latter two managed to evade arrest. Many Jacobin clubs were closed. Freedom of worship was extended first to the Vendée and later to all France. On 24 December 1794, the Maximum (controls on prices and wages) was abolished. The government exacerbated this inflationary move by issuing more assignats. In April and May 1795, protests and riots in support of the radicals broke out culminating in an invasion of the convention by an insurrectionist mob on 20 May. On 22 May the Convention struck back, having troops under Pichegru surround the Faubourg St-Antoine and force the capitulation of the armed rebels. In May and June 1795, a "White Terror" raged in which Jacobins were victims and the judges were bourgeois "moderates". Throughout France the events of the September Massacres were repeated; however this time the victims were imprisoned officials of the Terror. In Paris, Royalist sentiments were openly tolerated.

Meanwhile, French armies overran the Netherlands and established the Batavian Republic, occupied the left bank of the Rhine and forced Spain, Prussia and several German States to sue for peace, enhancing the prestige of the convention. A new constitution called the Constitution of the Year III was drawn up on 22 August 1795, which eased back some of the democratic elements of the constitution of 1793, establishing an electoral college for the election of officials, a bicameral legislature and other provisions designed to protect the current holders of power. On 5 October (13 Vendémiaire), a revolt led by Royalists challenged the convention. It was put down by troops led by general Napoleon Bonaparte with "a whiff of grapeshot". On 25 October the Convention declared itself dissolved and was replaced by the Directory on 2 November 1795.

For historians of revolutionary movements, the term Thermidor has come to mean the phase in some revolutions when power slips from the hands of the original revolutionary leadership and a radical regime is replaced by a more conservative regime, sometimes to the point where the political pendulum may swing back towards something resembling a pre-revolutionary state.

Leon Trotsky in his book The Revolution Betrayed, alleged that the rise of Joseph Stalin to power was a Soviet Thermidor for 'not restoring capitalism', yet still being a 'counterrevolutionary regression' within the regime of the USSR, as Thermidor did not restore a monarchy, etc. Marxist-Leninists and Stalinists have periodically argued that Nikita Khruschev 's rise to power and the implementation of De-Stalinization as the Soviet Union's Thermidor. A CIA document considered Khruschev's " On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences " may have 'marked the "Thermidor" of the Russian Revolution '.

Thierry Jean Michel Repentin (French pronunciation: [ tjɛʁi ʀəpɑ̃tɛ̃ ] ; born 5 April 1963) is a French politician who has served as Mayor of Chambéry since 2020. A member of the Socialist Party (PS), he previously served as a Senator for Savoie (2004–2012; 2014) and in government as Minister Delegate for Vocational Training and Apprenticeship (2012–2013) and for European Affairs (2013–2014) under Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault.

Thierry Repentin was born in Saint-Pierre-d'Albigny and grew up in Saint-Jean-de-la-Porte. He was educated in Chambéry and graduated from the Grenoble Institute of Political Studies in Grenoble.

Repentin first worked as a parliamentary assistant to MEP Jean-Pierre Cot, before he served as chief of staff to Louis Besson from 1989 to 1995 during the first years of Besson's tenure as Mayor of Chambéry. Repentin later became an assistant of Besson when he was Secretary of State for Housing under Prime Minister Lionel Jospin from 1997 to 2001.

From 1995 to 2001, Repentin also served as a Deputy Mayor of Chambéry. From 2008 to 2014, he served as a Deputy Mayor of Sonnaz. He held a seat in the Departmental Council of Savoie (General Council of Savoie until 2015) from 1998 to 2020, first for the canton of Chambéry-Nord, then for the canton of Chambéry-1 starting in 2015 following redistricting. From 2001 to 2004, Repentin also held the presidency of Chambéry Métropole, a former agglomeration community centred around Chambéry.

He served as a member of the Senate, representing the Savoie department, from 2004 to 2012, when he was appointed to the government as Minister Delegate for Vocational Training and Apprenticeship under Prime Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault. In 2013, he was appointed Minister Delegate for European Affairs. He briefly returned to the Senate in 2014 after Manuel Valls was appointed prime minister. He stood for reelection later that year but was defeated.

From 2016 until 2021, Repentin was a member of the Regional Council of Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes. In 2020, he was elected Mayor of Chambéry.

The Third Force (French : Troisième Force [ tʁwazjɛm fɔʁs ]) was a political alliance during the Fourth Republic (1947–1958) which gathered the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO) party, the Democratic and Socialist Union of the Resistance (UDSR), the Radicals, the Popular Republican Movement (MRP) and other centrist politicians who were opposed to both the French Communist Party (PCF) and the Gaullist movement. The Third Force governed France from 1947 to 1951, succeeding the tripartisme alliance between the SFIO, the MRP and the PCF. The Third Force was also supported by the National Centre of Independents and Peasants (CNIP), which succeeded in having its most popular figure, Antoine Pinay, named Prime Minister in 1952, a year after the dissolving of the Third Force coalition.

During the later decades of the Third Republic, the majority of French voters and deputies belonged to the spectrum of numerous small liberal and republican parties of the centre-left and centre-right. During election-time, this spectrum tended to split in half, its centre-left wing cooperating in electoral lists with the main social-democratic/socialist party, the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO), and its centre-right wing with the main Catholic party, the Republican Federation (URD), itself a liberal/republican party. Periodically, however, the parties of the broad centre attempted to form an alliance amongst themselves to lock out socialists and the religious liberal right from power: the policy of creating a government of 'third force' through the tactic of 'republican concentration'. At that time, given the balance of political support and the divisions among the republicans, such a tactic was rarely successful.

After the war and the installation of the Fourth Republic, the appearance of powerful mass political movements on the far-left and far-right, the French Communist Party and the Gaullists, provided a renewed incentive for the miscellaneous parties of the centre to combine their forces to lock out the extremes. The Third Force government was organised after the dismissal of vice-premier Maurice Thorez and four other Communist ministers from Paul Ramadier 's government during the May 1947 crisis. The May 1947 crisis can be summarized as: "The Communists' refusal to continue support for the French colonial reconquest of Vietnam on one hand and a wage-freeze during a period of hyperinflation on the other were the immediate triggers to the dismissal of Thorez and his colleagues from the ruling coalition in May 1947". Nevertheless, the heterogeity of the Third Force increased the ministerial instability. Although it kept its majority after the 1951 legislative election, in part due to the change of voting system, it split over economic policies, laïcité and the financing of denominational schools. The SFIO left the cabinet and the following governments were formed by centrist and centre-right parties: the Radical Party, the UDSR, the MRP and the National Centre of Independents and Peasants.

The idea of reviving a Third Force between the centre-left and the centre-right in France has been raised periodically ever since. The Socialist Gaston Defferre and the Radical Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber advocated such an alliance in the 1960s, culminating in Defferre's disastrous candidacy in the 1969 presidential election. Presidents Valéry Giscard d'Estaing and François Mitterrand later unsuccessfully tried to revive the Third Force, the latter doing so in a sense by pursuing a policy of "ouverture" toward the Union for French Democracy after the failure of Mitterrand's Socialist Party and its allies to gain an outright majority in the 1988 legislative election. However, each time, the most important right-wing party, the Rally for the Republic (RPR), opposed such an alliance. This strategy is now followed by François Bayrou and the Democratic Movement (MoDem), a centrist party.

The Dîner des trois empereurs or Three Emperors Dinner was a banquet held at Café Anglais in Paris, France, on 7 June 1867. It consisted of 16 courses with eight wines served over eight hours.

The Three Emperors Dinner was prepared by chef Adolphe Dugléré at the request of King William I of Prussia who frequented the cafe during the Exposition Universelle. He requested a meal to be remembered and at which no expense was to be spared for himself and his guests, Tsar Alexander II of Russia, plus his son the Tsarevitch (who later became Tsar Alexander III), and Otto von Bismarck.

The name "Three Emperors Dinner" is something of a misnomer and apparently was applied retrospectively (apparently in analogy to the Battle of the Three Emperors), as only Alexander II bore the title of Emperor at the time. Wilhelm I would not be proclaimed Kaiser (Emperor) until 1871, whereas Alexander III would only ascend the Imperial Russian throne in 1881 after his father's assassination.

The cellar master, Claudius Burdel, was instructed to accompany the dishes with the greatest wines in the world, including a Roederer champagne in a special lead glass bottle, so Tsar Alexander could admire the bubbles and golden colour.

The banquet consisted of 16 courses with eight wines served over eight hours. The cost of the meal was 400 francs per person (over €9,000 in 2013 prices). The high price of the wines served contributed to the expense of the meal.

At 1 o'clock in the morning, Tsar Alexander is reported to have complained that the meal had not contained foie gras. Burdel explained that it was not the custom in French cuisine to eat foie gras in June. The following October, he was sent three terrines of foie gras made by Dugléré as a gift.

The table used for the banquet and a copy of the menu is on display at La Tour d'Argent restaurant in Paris.

The menu included the following, among the 16 courses:

Soufflé à la reine Filets de sole à la vénitienne Escalope de turbot au gratin Selle de mouton purée Bretonne

Poulet à la portugaise Pâté chaud de cailles Homard à la parisienne

Canetons à la rouennaise Ortolans sur canapés

Aubergines à l'espagnole Asperges en branches Cassolette princesse

Madère retour de l'Inde 1810 Xérès 1821 Châteaux d'Yquem 1847 Chambertin 1846 Châteaux Margaux 1847 Château Latour 1847 Châteaux Lafite 1848 Champagne Roederer frappé

Potage impératrice consists of a chicken stock thickened with tapioca and finished with egg yolks and cream, to which poached rounds of chicken forcemeat, cockscombs, cocks ' kidneys and green peas are added. Potage fontanges is a purée of fresh peas diluted with consommé with the addition of a chiffonade of sorrel and sprigs of chervil. Soufflé à la reine is a chicken soufflé with truffles Sauce vénitienne is a sauce of white wine, tarragon vinegar, shallots and chervil, mounted with butter and finished with chopped chervil and tarragon. Selle de mouton purée Bretonne is saddle of mutton with a purée of broad beans bound with Breton sauce. Poulet à la portugaise is whole chicken roasted with a covering of adobo paste consisting of tomato, red bell pepper, garlic, origanum, paprika, cayenne pepper, brown sugar, lemon juice, white wine, chicken stock and olive oil, stuffed with tomato flavoured rice. Pâté chaud de cailles is warm pâté of quail. Homard à la parisienne is lobster cooked in court bouillon, cut into slices and glazed with aspic, with a garnish of tomatoes stuffed with a macédoine of vegetables, dressed with a mixture of mayonnaise and aspic and garnished with sliced truffle. Canetons à la rouennaise is a dish of roast duckling stuffed with forcemeat. The legs and breasts are removed, the legs are grilled and the breasts are thinly sliced and arranged around the stuffing. The remaining carcass is pressed in a poultry press to extract all the juices and is added to a Rouennaise sauce, which is poured over the sliced duck. (This dish is today the speciality of the house at La Tour d'Argent.) Ortolans sur canapés, ortolans (now a protected species) on toast. Aubergines à l'espagnole is a dish of aubergine shells filled with chopped aubergine, tomato and ham and a gruyère gratin. Cassolette princesse, (a.k.a. Cassolette argenteuil), A cassolette with a border of duchesse potatoes and an asparagus filling in cream sauce. Bombe glacée is an ice cream dessert.

Australian chef Shannon Bennett attempted to recreate the banquet in 2002. It took six months to plan and required some changes due to key ingredients and wines no longer being available. Even using the nearest modern equivalent ingredients and wines, the cost of the meal was AUS$7,500 per person. The Australian Broadcasting Corporation broadcast the documentary Three Emperors Dinner about the original banquet and the modern recreation in 2003.

Théâtrophone (French pronunciation: [ teatʁɔfɔn ], "the theatre phone") was a telephonic distribution system available in portions of Europe that allowed the subscribers to listen to opera and theatre performances over the telephone lines. The théâtrophone evolved from a Clément Ader invention, which was first demonstrated in 1881, in Paris. Subsequently, in 1890, the invention was commercialized by Compagnie du Théâtrophone, which continued to operate until 1932.

The origin of the théâtrophone can be traced to a telephonic transmission system demonstrated by Clément Ader at the 1881 International Exposition of Electricity in Paris. The system was inaugurated by the French President Jules Grévy, and allowed broadcasting of concerts or plays. Ader had arranged 80 telephone transmitters across the front of a stage to create a form of binaural stereophonic sound. It was the first two-channel audio system, and consisted of a series of telephone transmitters connected from the stage of the Paris Opera to a suite of rooms at the Paris Electrical Exhibition, where the visitors could hear Comédie-Française and opera performances in stereo using two headphones; the Opera was located more than two kilometers away from the venue. In a note dated 11 November 1881, Victor Hugo describes his first experience of théâtrophone as pleasant.

In 1884, King Luís I of Portugal decided to use the system, when he could not attend an opera in person. The director of the Edison Gower Bell Company, who was responsible for this théâtrophone installation, was later awarded the Military Order of Christ.

The théâtrophone was made available in Belgium in 1884, and in Lisbon in 1885. In Sweden, the first telephone transmission of an opera performance took place in Stockholm in May 1887. The British writer Ouida describes a female character in the novel Massarenes (1897) as "A modern woman of the world. As costly as an ironclad and as complicated as theatrophone."

In 1890, the system became operational as a service under the name "théâtrophone" in Paris. The service was offered by Compagnie du Théâtrophone (The Théâtrophone Company), which was founded by MM. Marinovitch and Szarvady. The théâtrophone offered theatre and opera performances to the subscribers. The service can be called a prototype of the telephone newspaper, as it included five-minute news programs at regular intervals. The Théâtrophone Company set up coin-operated telephone receivers in hotels, cafés, clubs, and other locations, costing 50 centimes for five minutes of listening. The subscription tickets were also issued at a reduced rate, in order to attract regular patrons. The service was also available to home subscribers.

French writer Marcel Proust was a keen follower of théâtrophone, as evidenced by his correspondence. He subscribed to the service in 1911.

Many technological improvements were gradually made to the original théâtrophone system. The Brown telephone relay, invented in 1913, yielded interesting results for amplification of the current.

The théâtrophone finally succumbed to the rising popularity of radio broadcasting and the phonograph, and the Compagnie du Théâtrophone ceased its operations in 1932.

Similar systems elsewhere in Europe included Telefon Hírmondó (est. 1893) of Budapest and Electrophone of London (est. 1895). In the United States, systems included the Tellevent (1907), the Tel-musici (est. 1909), franchises of the United States Telephone Herald Company (est. 1910), the Musolaphone (est. 1910), and Grapevine radio (1930s).

The Andrew Crumey novel Mr Mee (2000) has a chapter depicting the installation of a théâtrophone in the home of Marcel Proust.

The Eça de Queiroz novel A Cidade e as Serras (1901) mentions the device as one of the many technological commodities available for the distraction of the upper classes.

In his utopian science fiction novel Looking Backward (1888), Edward Bellamy predicted sermons and music being available in the home through a system like théâtrophone.

Tibbloc is a French company specializing in multi-energy equipment rental, founded in 2007 and based in Saint-Julien-de-Concelles, near Nantes.

Tibbloc is an independent French equipment rental company specializing in temporary thermal solutions for heating, cooling, steam generation, air treatment and compressed air systems. Founded in 2007 and headquartered in Saint-Julien-de-Concelles, the company operates through 9 regional branches - including 8 locations across France (Lille, Paris, Metz, Lyon, Marseille, Angers, Nantes, Fos-sur-Mer) and 1 in Belgium (Vilvorde).

Tibbloc was founded in 2007 by Serge Brunerie and Gilles Bertrand. Mickaël Hamon joined them in 2013.

In July 2020, investment firm Ciclad acquired 75% of the company. The founders remained as minority shareholders. At that time, the company had around 70 employees and generated €19 million in revenue. In 2021, Tibbloc reached €24 million in revenue.

In 2023, the company acquired EnergyMode, an Austrian company specializing in mobile boiler rentals. The following year (2024), Tibbloc acquired Linkair, a French provider of temporary air solutions, including dehumidification and industrial air conditioning.

In December 2024, Gimv, a European investment firm listed in Brussels, acquired a majority stake in Tibbloc. The founders and management team, including Chairman, Éric Merilhou, and CEO, Yann Dauce, retained ownership stakes.

As of 2024, Tibbloc employs 130 people and generates €40 million in annual revenue.

Metropolitan France uses Central European Time (heure d'Europe centrale, UTC+01:00) as its standard time, and observes Central European Summer Time (heure d'été d'Europe centrale, UTC+02:00) from the last Sunday in March to the last Sunday in October. With its overseas territories, France uses 12 different time zones (13 including its claim in Antarctica), more than any other country in the world.

All parts of Overseas France use different time zones from Metropolitan France.

Metropolitan France follows the summer time schedule in Europe. Summer time starts on the last Sunday in March at 01:00 UTC, when local time changes from 02:00 (UTC+01:00) to 03:00 (UTC+02:00), and ends on the last Sunday in October at 01:00 UTC, when local time changes from 03:00 (UTC+02:00) to 02:00 (UTC+01:00).

Saint Pierre and Miquelon follows the daylight saving time schedule of Canada and of the United States. It starts on the second Sunday in March at 02:00 (UTC−03:00), when local time changes to 03:00 (UTC−02:00), and ends on the first Sunday in November at 02:00 (UTC−02:00), when local time changes to 01:00 (UTC−03:00).

Other parts of Overseas France do not observe summer time.

Before 1891, each town and city in Metropolitan France had its own time based on local solar time. In 1891, to avoid complications with railway timetables, time was unified in Metropolitan France and based on the solar time at the Paris Observatory — the Paris meridian being approximately 2°20′ east of the Greenwich meridian, Paris mean solar time was 9 minutes 21 seconds ahead of Greenwich Mean Time (GMT). In detail, the railway companies used a unified time which lagged behind Paris solar time by 5 minutes, for the benefit of non-punctual travellers. In 1911, Metropolitan France adopted GMT+0 as its official time, and used it until 1940 (with GMT+1 used during the summers from 1916 to 1940).

In the summer of 1940, the German military authorities switched the occupied northern part of Metropolitan France to GMT+2 (German summer time), while the non-occupied southern part of Metropolitan France remained at GMT+1 (French summer time). The Vichy authorities kept GMT+1 (French summer time) during the winter of 1940–1941 and adopted GMT+2 (double summer time, which was the same as German summer time) in May 1941 in order to unify the railway timetables between occupied and non-occupied Metropolitan France. In 1942, 1943, and 1944 the whole of Metropolitan France thus used GMT+2 during the summer, and GMT+1 during the winter.

At the Liberation of France in the summer of 1944, Metropolitan France kept GMT+2 as it was the time then used by the Allies (British Double Summer Time). In the winter of 1944–1945, Metropolitan France switched to GMT+1, same as in the United Kingdom, and switched again to GMT+2 in April 1945. In September 1945, Metropolitan France returned to GMT+1 (pre-war summer time), which the British had already done in July 1945. Metropolitan France was officially scheduled to return to GMT+0 on November 18, 1945 (the British returned to GMT+0 in on October 7, 1945), but the French government canceled the decision on November 5, 1945, and GMT+1 has since then remained the official time of Metropolitan France.

In 1976, daylight saving time (summer time) was reintroduced in Metropolitan France for the first time since WW2 because of the oil crisis, and since 1976 Metropolitan France has thus been at GMT+1 (now UTC+01:00) during the winter and GMT+2 (now UTC+02:00) during the summer. In 1996, daylight saving time was harmonized throughout the European Union by Directive 2000/84/EC, which moved the end of DST to the last Sunday in October.

A proposal to repeal this directive and require that member states observe their own choice of time year-round from 2021 is going through the legislative process as of March 2019. A non-binding public consultation showed that approximately 59% of respondents would prefer France to apply year-round summer time (UTC+02:00), with 37% in favour of year-round winter time (UTC+01:00) and 4% expressing no preference.

Since GMT (now UTC) is Metropolitan France's "natural" time zone (being geographically correct), its use of UTC+01:00 in winter can be seen as a form of daylight saving time in winter, while Central European Summer Time (UTC+02:00) can be seen as a form of "double summer time."

The IANA time zone database contains one zone for Metropolitan France in the file zone.tab, named Europe/Paris.

Led by Philippe Pétain, the Vichy regime that replaced the French Third Republic in 1940 chose the path of collaboration with the Nazi occupiers. This policy included the Bousquet - Oberg accords of July 1942 that formalized the collaboration of the French police with the German police. This collaboration was manifested in particular by antisemitic measures taken by the Vichy government, and by its active participation in the genocide.

The terms Zone libre (Free Zone), Vichy France, Vichy regime, southern zone, French State, and État français are all synonyms and refer to the state in the south of France governed from Vichy during World War II and headed by French World War I hero Marshal Philippe Pétain. The terms Zone occupée (Occupied Zone), Occupied France, and northern zone refer to the northern portion of France governed by the German military administration in Paris, taking orders from Berlin.

The Tocqueville effect (also known as the Tocqueville paradox) is the phenomenon in which, as social conditions and opportunities improve, social frustration grows more quickly. It is named after the French diplomat, historian, and political philosopher Alexis de Tocqueville.

The effect is based on Alexis de Tocqueville 's observations on the French Revolution and later reforms in Europe and the United States. Another way to describe the effect is the aphorism "the appetite grows by what it feeds on". For instance, after greater social justice is achieved, there may be more fervent opposition to even smaller social injustices than before.

The effect suggests a link between social equality or concessions by the regime and unintended consequences, as social reforms can raise expectations that are difficult to fulfill. According to the Tocqueville effect, a revolution is likely to occur after an improvement in social conditions, in contrast to Marx 's theory of revolution as a result of progressive immiseration of the proletariat (deterioration of conditions).

Around 1950, Harlan Cleveland introduced the phrase revolution of rising expectations, which in his Cold War context he considered particularly relevant to the Third World. Relatedly, political scientist James Chowning Davies has proposed a J curve of revolutions, which contends that periods of wealth and advancement are followed by periods of declining conditions, eventually leading to a revolution. Ted Robert Gurr also used the term relative deprivation to put forth that revolutions happen when there is an expectation of improvement, and a harsh reality in contrast.

There is a higher likelihood of the Tocqueville paradox occurring in centrally planned but locally implemented reforms when local implementation falls short of the higher reference point.

Alexis de Tocqueville first described the phenomenon in his book Democracy in America (1840):

The hatred that men bear to privilege increases in proportion as privileges become fewer and less considerable, so that democratic passions would seem to burn most fiercely just when they have least fuel. I have already given the reason for this phenomenon. When all conditions are unequal, no inequality is so great as to offend the eye, whereas the slightest dissimilarity is odious in the midst of general uniformity; the more complete this uniformity is, the more insupportable the sight of such a difference becomes. Hence it is natural that the love of equality should constantly increase together with equality itself, and that it should grow by what it feeds on.

The reform and revolution paradox was explained in his next book, The Old Regime and the Revolution (1856):

The regime that a revolution destroys is almost always better than the one that immediately preceded it, and experience teaches that the most dangerous time for a bad government is usually when it begins to reform.

Tokia Afféda Saïfi (born 11 July 1959 in Hautmont, Nord) is a French politician who served as Member of the European Parliament for the North-West of France from 1999 until 2019. She is a member of the Radical party and of the Union for a Popular Movement, part of the European People's Party. She is a former member of Ecology Generation.

Saïfi was first elected as Member of the European Parliament in the 1999 elections. During her first term in parliament, she first served on the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs. Following the 2004 elections, she joined the Committee on International Trade ; from 2014 until 2019, she served as the committee's vice-chairwoman under the leadership of Bernd Lange. In this capacity, she was the parliament's rapporteur on trade and investment-driven growth for developing countries as well as on human rights and social and environmental standards in international trade agreements.

In addition to her committee assignments, Saïfi was the vice-chairwoman of the parliament's delegation for relations with the Maghreb countries and the Arab Maghreb Union and a member of the delegation to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Mediterranean. In this capacity, she took part in the EU's observer mission for the 2012 legislative elections in Algeria.

In the Republicans’ 2016 presidential primaries, Saïfi endorsed Alain Juppé as the party's candidate for the office of President of France.

Tome des Bauges pronounced [ tɔm de boʒ ] is a variety of Tomme cheese made in the Bauges mountains in the French Alps, in the Savoie department of the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes region.

The spelling of the name, with a single "m", as opposed to the double in standard French, arises from the old Savoie spelling.

Tome des Bauges is a cow's milk cheese with a soft beige pâte (interior) and a thick grey-brown rind. It is made from whole unpasteurised milk, usually collected after each milking (morning and evening), skimmed in a " poche " (bag), heated to between 32° and 35°C, and then renneted. It is ripened for up to three months. It typically has a fat content of 45 per cent. According to Le guide des fromages (1999), the Tome des Bauges smells of wild hazelnut.

The cheese typically comes in wheels approximately 17 centimetres (6½ inches) in diameter and 5 centimetres (2 inches) in height, weighing a little over 1 kilogram. It is at its best from late summer to winter.

TotalEnergies SE is a French multinational integrated energy and petroleum company founded in 1924 and is one of the seven supermajor oil companies. Its businesses cover the entire oil and gas chain, from crude oil and natural gas exploration and production to power generation, transportation, refining, petroleum product marketing, and international crude oil and product trading. TotalEnergies is also a large-scale chemicals manufacturer.

TotalEnergies has its head office in the Tour Total in La Défense district in Courbevoie, west of Paris. The company is a component of the Euro Stoxx 50 stock market index. In the 2023 Forbes Global 2000, TotalEnergies was ranked as the 21st largest company in the world.

The company was founded after World War I, when petrol was seen as vital in case of a new war with Germany. The then–French President Raymond Poincaré rejected the idea of forming a partnership with Royal Dutch Shell in favour of creating an entirely French oil company. At Poincaré's behest in 1924 Col. Ernest Mercier, with the support of 90 banks and companies, founded the Compagnie Française des Pétroles (CFP) (in English, the French Petroleum Company).

As per the agreement reached during the San Remo conference of 1920, the French state received the 25% share held by Deutsche Bank in the Turkish Petroleum Company (TPC) as part of the compensation for war damages caused by Germany during World War I. The French government's stake in TPC was transferred to CFP, and the Red Line agreement in 1928 rearranged the shareholding of CFP in TPC (later renamed the Iraq Petroleum Company in 1929) to 23.75%. The company from the start was regarded as a private sector company in view of its listing on the Paris Stock Exchange in 1929.

During the 1930s, the company was engaged in exploration and production, primarily from the Middle East. Its first refinery began operating in Normandy in 1933. After World War II, CFP engaged in oil exploration in Venezuela, Canada, and Africa while pursuing energy sources within France. Exploration in Algeria, then a French colony, began in 1946, with Algeria becoming a leading source of oil in the 1950s.

In 1954 CFP branded its downstream products as Total in Africa and Europe.

Total entered the United States in 1971 by acquiring Leonard Petroleum of Alma, Michigan and several Standard Oil of Indiana stations in Metro Detroit.

In 1980, Total Petroleum (North America) Ltd., a company controlled 50% by CFP, bought the American refining and marketing assets of Vickers Petroleum as part of a sell-off by Esmark of its energy holdings. This purchase gave Total refining capacity, transportation, and a network of 350 service stations in 20 states.

The company renamed itself Total CFP in 1985, to build on the popularity of its gasoline brand. Later in 1991, the name was changed to Total, when it became a public company listed on the New York Stock Exchange. In 1991, the French government held more than 30 percent of the company's stock but by 1996 had reduced its stake to less than 1 percent. In the period between 1990 and 1994, foreign ownership of the firm increased from 23 percent to 44 percent.

Total continued to expand its retail presence in North America under several brand names. In 1989, Denver, Colorado –based Total Petroleum, Total CFP's North American unit, purchased 125 Road Runner retail locations from Texarkana, Texas –based Truman Arnold Companies. By 1993, Total Petroleum was operating 2,600 retail stores under the Vickers, Apco, Road Runner, and Total brands. That year, the company began remodeling and rebranding all of its North American gasoline and convenience stores to use the Total name. Four years later, Total sold its North American refining and retail operations to Ultramar Diamond Shamrock for $400 million in stock and $414 million in assumed debt.

In 1996, the Girassol oil field was discovered and operated by TotalEnergies SE. After Total's takeover of Petrofina of Belgium in 1999, it became known as Total Fina. Afterwards, it also acquired Elf Aquitaine. First named TotalFinaElf after the merger in 2000, its name reverted to Total in 2003. During that rebranding, the globe logo was unveiled.

Total's leadership had been aware of the deleterious effects of global warming since at least 1971; The company nevertheless openly denied the findings of climate science until the 1990s; Total also pursued a number of strategies to cover up the threat and contribution to climate change.

In 2003, Total signed for a 30% stake in the gas exploration venture in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) – South Rub' al-Khali joint venture along with Royal Dutch Shell and Saudi Aramco. The stake was later bought out by its partners.

In 2006, Saudi Aramco and Total signed a memorandum of understanding to develop the Jubail Refinery and Petrochemical project in Saudi Arabia which targeted 400,000 barrels per day (bpd). Two years later, the two companies officially established a joint venture called Saudi Aramco Total Refining and Petrochemical Company (SATORP) in which a 62.5% stake was held by Saudi Aramco and the balance 37.5% held by Total.

Total withdrew in 2006 from all Iranian development work because of United Nations concerns that resulted in sanctions over possible weaponization of the nuclear program of Iran.

During the 2009–2010 Iraqi oil services contracts tender, a consortium led by CNPC (37.5%), which also included TOTAL (18.75%) and Petronas (18.75%) was awarded a production contract for the " Halfaya field " in the south of Iraq, which contains an estimated 4.1 billion barrels (650,000,000 m) of oil.

In 2010 Total and Erg merged their respective subsidiaries Total Italia and Erg Petroli, forming TotalErg, 49% controlled by the French group and 51% by the Italian one. As of 2010, Total had over 96,000 employees and operated in more than 130 countries. In 2010, Total announced plans to pull out of the forecourt market in the United Kingdom.

In 2012, Total announced it was selling its 20% stake and operating mandate in its Nigerian offshore project to a unit of China Petrochemical Corp for $2.5 billion.

In 2013, Total started the operation at Kashagan with North Caspian Operating Company. It is the biggest discovery of oil reserves since 1968. In 2013, Total increased its stake in Novatek to 16.96%. In 2013, Total and its joint venture partner agreed to buy Chevron Corporation 's retail distribution business in Pakistan for an undisclosed amount.

In January 2014, Total became the first major oil and gas firm to acquire exploration rights for shale gas in the UK after it bought a 40 percent interest in two licences in the Gainsborough Trough area of northern England for $48 million. In July 2014, the company disclosed it was in talks to sell its LPG distribution business in France to Pennsylvania-based UGI Corporation for €450 million ($615 million).

On 20 October 2014, at 23:57 MST, a Dassault Falcon 50 business jet heading to Paris caught fire and exploded during takeoff after colliding with a snow removal vehicle in Vnukovo International Airport, killing four, including three crew members and CEO of Total S.A. Christophe de Margerie on board. Alcohol presence was confirmed in the blood of the driver of the vehicle on the ground. Patrick Pouyanne, who was Total's Refining Chief at that time, was appointed as CEO, and also as chairman of Total in 2015.

In 2015, Total unveiled plans to cut 180 jobs in the United Kingdom, reduce refinery capacity and slow spending on North Sea fields after it fell to a $5.7bn final-quarter loss. The company said it would also sell off $5bn worth of assets worldwide and cut exploration costs by 30%. In 2016, Total signed a $224M deal to buy Lampiris, the third-largest Belgian supplier of gas and renewable energy to expand its gas and power distribution activities. In 2016, Total bought French battery maker Saft Groupe S.A. in a $1.1bn deal, to boost its development in renewable energy and electricity businesses. In 2016, Total agreed to acquire $2.2-billion in upstream and downstream assets from Petrobras as part of the firms' strategic alliance announced earlier that year. For Total, these new partnerships with Petrobras reinforce Total's position in Brazil through access to new fields in the Santos Basin while entering the gas value chain. Between 2013 and 2017, Total organized the ARGOS Challenge, a robotic competition with the aim to develop robots for its oil and gas production sites. It was won by an Austrian-German team using a variant of the taurob tracker robot.

In 2017, Total signed a deal for a total amount of $4.8b with Iran for the development and production of South Pars, the world's largest gas field. The deal was the first foreign investment in Iran since in the 2015 sanctions over Iran's nuclear weaponisation were lifted by the JCPOA. In 2017, Total announced the acquisition of Maersk Oil for $7.45 billion in a share and debt transaction. This deal positioned Total as the second operator in the North Sea. In 2017, Total signed an agreement with EREN Renewable energy to acquire an interest of 23% in EREN RE for an amount of €237.5 million. In November 2017, Total announced the launch on the French residential market of Total Spring, a natural gas and green power offering that is 10% cheaper than regulated tariffs. Total is thus pursuing its strategy of downstream integration in the gas and power value chain in Europe.

On 10 January 2018 TotalErg was acquired by Gruppo API, with the exception of the Special Fluids division, acquired by the newly formed Total Italia. In 2018, Total officially withdrew from the Iranian South Pars gas field because of sanctions pressure from the US.

In 2019, Total announced the sale of a 30% stake in the Trapil pipeline network to crude oil storage operator Pisto SAS for €260 million. Later that year, Total signed deals to transfer 30% and 28.33% of its assets in Namibia 's Block 2913B and Block 2912 respectively to QatarEnergy. The company will also transfer 40% of its existing 25% interests in the Orinduik and Kanuku blocks of Guyana and 25% interest in Blocks L11A, L11B, and L12 of Kenya to QatarEnergy.

In July 2020 the company changed its name from Total SA to Total SE as part of registration as a European company. In 2020, the company announced its intention to cut 500 voluntary jobs in France.

In 2021, Total left the American Petroleum Institute lobby, due to differences in the common vision of how to tackle the fight against climate change. In 2021, Total said that it had registered an income of $3 billion for the period of January–March, which is close to the levels registered before the pandemic.

In 2021, the company announced a name change to TotalEnergies as an intended illustration of its investments in the production of green electricity. At the Ordinary and Extraordinary Shareholders' Meeting in May of that year, shareholders approved the name change to TotalEnergies.

In 2022, TotalEnergies announced it would end all operations in Myanmar, citing rampant human rights abuses and deteriorating rule of law since the 2021 Myanmar coup d'état and has also called for international sanctions targeting the oil and gas sector in the country, which is one of the main sources of revenue for Myanmar's government. As of 11 March 2022, Total was one of the only Western oil companies to continue operating in Russia after the Russian Invasion of Ukraine. In June 2022, TotalEnergies signed a partnership with QatarEnergy for the world's largest LNG expansion project, the North Field East (NFE). Holding the largest stake, 6.25%, TotalEnergies will hold the equivalent of one of the four trains. In September 2022, an additional agreement was signed to include the North Field South (NFS) which is the second phase of the NFE. This gave TotalEnergies a stake of 9.375% of the 25% stakes available to international companies.

On 30 March 2023, Total sold a shipment of LNG which it sourced from UAE to CNOOC on the Shanghai Petroleum and Natural Gas Exchange. It was reportedly the first trade to be settled in the renminbi (Chinese yuan) currency on the SHPGX. In July 2023, Iraq signed a $27 billion energy agreement with TotalEnergies to develop the country's energy sector and boost output of oil, gas and renewables. Additionally, Indian Oil Corp, has signed liquefied natural gas (LNG) import deals with ADNOC LNG and TotalEnergies in the same month. In October 2023, TotalEnergies sold its Canadian operations to Suncor Energy for C$1.47 billion($1.07 billion). TotalEnergies has agreed to buy liquefied natural gas from Qatar for 27 years, cementing the European nation's commitment to fossil fuels beyond 2050. In 2023, Total invested $300 million in a renewable energy joint venture with Adani Green Energy. The joint venture's portfolio capacity is 1,050 MW - 300 MW of operating capacity, 500 MW of solar projects under construction and 250 MW of projects under development, as well as solar and wind power projects in India. At the end of January 2024, TotalEnergies reached an agreement with OMV to purchase a 50% stake in its joint venture in Malaysia (SapuraOMV) for $903 million. The deal includes the repayment of a $350 million loan from OMV to the joint venture.

On 21 February 2024, TotalEnergies and Airbus entered a strategic partnership to meet emission-reduction goals through the use of sustainable aviation fuels (SAF). TotalEnergies will provide more than 50% of Airbus' European fuel requirements. Compared to fossil fuels, SAF can reduce CO 2 emissions by up to 90%. TotalEnergies and QatarEnergy entered an agreement on 6 March 2024 to purchase participating interests in South Africa 's Orange Basin offshore oil field. Under the agreement, TotalEnergies will have the exclusive right to operate its wells in Block 3B/4B with a 33% interest holding, while QatarEnergy will receive a 24% interest in the same block. On 22 April 2024, OmanLNG and TotalEnergies signed a deal in which OmanLNG will provide 800,000 metric tons of liquefied natural gas. On 14 November 2024, TotalEnergies announced that it will fill all of its upstream assets with real-time methane leak detection equipment by 2025 to help minimize the emissions. This is expected to help the company in its target of slashing methane emissions to nearly zero percent by 2030. On 15 November 2024, TotalEnergies, BP, Shell and Equinor promised to invest $500 million to increase the access to affordable energy, focusing primarily in sub-Saharan Africa, south and southeast Asia. This would include domestic solar energy systems, micro-electricity grids, energy production, transport, logistics and storage, e-mobility technologies, and modern cooking fuels such as liquefied petroleum gas (LPG). On 3 December 2024 TotalEnergies announced its plans to build a 0.3 gigawatt (GW) solar park in Saudi Arabia, while another leading company from France EDF has been assigned to build two solar parks with a total of 1.4 GW.

In January 2025, TotalEnergies sold all of its service stations in Mali to Coly Energy Mali, a subsidiary managed by the Beninese company Bénin Petro. On 18 February 2025, TotalEnergies confirmed its departure from Burkina Faso, after 70 years of presence, in Burkina Faso.

TotalEnergies was accused by the French court in October 2025 of having misled consumers with its environmental claims. They were told to remove messages of wanting to reach carbon neutrality by 2050 from the company website. It is the first time that the french "greenwashing" law has been imposed on a fossil fuel company.

In December 2025, the company terminated its ADR program and converted all ADRs into ordinary shares. As a reason, the company stated that the investor base is increasingly located in North America, with around 40.8% of the company being owned by North American investors, compared to 24.6% held by French investors, including employees.

In March 2026, the US President Donald Trump paid TotalEnergies $928 million to stop the wind project and fossil fuel investment planned for the US east cost. The money was reimbursed on the condition that it be used to reinvest in hydrocarbon projects.

The key trends of TotalEnergies are (as at the financial year ending 31 December):

TotalEnergies report its activities across Exploration & Production, Integrated Gas, Renewables & Power, Refining & Chemicals, and Marketing & Services.

In 2016 Total created two new corporate divisions: People & Social Responsibility (Human Resources; Health, Safety & Environment; the Security Division; and a new Civil Society Engagement Division) and Strategy & Innovation (Strategy & Climate Division, responsible for ensuring that strategy incorporates the 2 °C global warming scenario, Public Affairs, Audit, Research & Development, the Chief Digital Officer and the Senior Vice President Technology).

The company's headquarters is in the Tour Total in the La Défense district in Courbevoie, France, near Paris. The building was originally constructed between 1983 and 1985 for Elf Aquitaine ; Total SA acquired the building after its merger with Elf in 2000.

Total Italia S.p.A. (originally Total Italia S.r.l.) is an Italian company that operates in the distribution of lubricants. It is a subsidiary of TotalEnergies SE.

It was founded in 2018 by the split of the Special Fluids branch from TotalErg in view of the acquisition by Gruppo API. It takes its name from the old Total Italia, dissolved in 2010 with the birth of TotalErg.

Güzel Enerji Akaryakıt A.Ş. is a Turkish company that operates under Licensee of TotalEnergies S.A.

After operating in Turkey under the international energy company TotalEnergies S.A. since 1992. In March 2020, the takeover process (from Demirören Holding) was completed and the stations are now operated by OYAK.

TotalEnergies Stations continues to serve as Turkey's 5th largest fuel company in the fuel sector with a network of more than 500 stations.

Güzel Enerji Akaryakıt A.Ş / Total provides storage and distribution services with modern fuel oil and LPG storage facilities with a total capacity of 300,000 m3 in Aliağa, Gebze and Samsun, and LPG storage facilities in Yarımca, Ankara and Aliağa.

TotalEnergies also plans to run Exploration operations on Black Sea with Turkish National Oil Company, TPAO.

It offers wide range of products like Elf Lubricants, Excellium Gasoline, Otojet Electric Charge Stations and Bi'Güzel Coffees, Sandwiches, Pastries, and Desserts.

Gasoline can be bought via Cash, Card, Mobile app and DKV Card.

Güzel Enerji Akaryakıt A.Ş. was also a sponsor of Turkish National Man and Woman Basketball teams.

In May 2014, the company shelved its Joslyn North oil sands project in the Athabasca region of Alberta, Canada, indefinitely, citing concerns about operating costs. An estimated $11 billion has been spent on the project, in which Total is the largest shareholder with 38.5%. Suncor Energy holds 36.75%, Occidental Petroleum owns 15% and Japan 's Inpex has a 10% interest.

Total is involved in 23 projects of exploration and production in Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, South America and Russia.

In 1937, Iraq Petroleum Company (IPC), 23.75 percent owned by Total, signed an oil concession agreement with the Sultan of Muscat. IPC offered financial support to raise an armed force that would assist the Sultan in occupying the interior region of Oman, an area that geologists believed to be rich in oil. This led to the 1954 outbreak of Jebel Akhdar War in Oman that lasted for more than 5 years.

Total has been a significant investor in the Iranian energy sector since 1990. In 2017, Total and the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) signed a contract for the development and production of South Pars, the world's largest gas field. The project will have a production capacity of 2 billion cubic feet per day. The produced gas will supply the Iranian domestic market starting in 2021.

During the European Union 's sanctions against the military dictatorship Myanmar, Total is able to operate the Yadana natural gas pipeline from Burma to Thailand. Total is currently the subject of a lawsuit in French and Belgian courts for the condoning and use of the country's civilian slavery to construct the pipeline. The documentary 'Total Denial' shows the background of this project. The NGO Burma Campaign UK is currently campaigning against this project.

In 2011, Total agreed to buy 60% of photovoltaics company SunPower for $1.38 billion. By the 2013 annual reporting date, Total owned 64.65%.

In 2016, Total agreed to purchase French battery maker Saft Groupe S.A. for €1.1 billion. In 2016, Total signed a $224 million deal to buy Lampiris, the third-largest Belgian supplier of gas and renewable energy to expand its gas and power distribution activities. In December 2016, Total acquired about 23% of Tellurian Inc. for an amount of $207 million, to develop an integrated gas project.

In 2017, Total announced it would buy Maersk Oil from A.P. Moller-Maersk in a deal expected to close in the first quarter of 2018. In 2018, Total announced it was buying 74% of the French electricity and gas provider Direct Énergie from their main stockholders, for €1.4 billion.

In 2022, Total announced it had added 4 GW to its renewable energy portfolio through the acquisition of the Austin -based company, Core Solar. The following month, Total entered an agreement with GIP to acquire a 50% stake in Clearway, one of the largest renewable energy owners in the United States. As part of the transaction, GIP took a 50% minus one share stake in SunPower.

In October 2023, TotalEnergies announced it was purchasing Quadra, a Germany-based clean energy aggregator, for an undisclosed amount. In 2023, TotalEnergies acquired three gas-fired power plants with a total capacity of 1.5 GW in Texas from TexGen for $635 million.

In 2025, TotalEnergies merged its North Sea oil and gas assets with those of Neo Next Energy to form a new entity, Neo Next+. The company holds a significant minority stake in the joint venture, which aims to streamline operations and enhance competitiveness in the mature North Sea basin.

In 2001, Total signed a contract for oil-reconnaissance in areas offshore Western Sahara (near Dakhla), with the Moroccan "Office National de Recherches et d'Exploitations Petrolières" (ONAREP). In 2002, Hans Corell (the United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs) stated in a letter to the president of the Security Council that whenever the contracts are only for exploration they're not illegal, but if further exploration or exploitation are against the interests and wishes of the people of Western Sahara, it would be in violation of the principles of international law.

Finally, Total decided to not renew its license off Western Sahara.

In a move to cope with the 2021–2022 global energy crisis, which started with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and aggravated with Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine, France's TotalEnergies and UAE's ADNOC signed a strategic deal to partner on energy projects "for cooperation in the area of energy supplies".

The deal was secured on the second day of the UAE leader Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al-Nahyan's visit to Paris in 2022. The visit marked the UAE president's first overseas state visit since assuming the post earlier that year.

The deal was aimed at identifying and targeting potential joint investment projects in the UAE, France, and elsewhere in the sectors of renewables, hydrogen, and nuclear energy, as told by the French government in one of its statements. According to French President Emmanuel Macron's aides, France had been eager to secure diesel supply from the UAE.

The deal also received criticism from human rights groups that pressured Macron not to give the then "crown prince a pass on the UAE's atrocious human rights record", per the statement published by Human Rights Watch on its website.

In 1999, the Total SA company was fined €375,000 for the MV Erika oil spill that stretched 400 kilometers from La Rochelle to the western tip of Brittany. The company was only fined that amount because it was only partially liable because Total SA did not own the ship. The plaintiffs had sought more than $1.5 billion in damages. More than 100 groups and local governments joined in the suit. The Total company was fined just over $298,000. The majority of the money will go to the French government, several environmental groups, and various regional governments. The Total SA company was also fined $550,000 for the amount of marine pollution that came from it. After the oil spill it tried to restore its image and have opened a sea turtle conservation project in Masirah in recent years.

Prior to the verdict in which Total was found guilty one of the counterparts in the incident, Malta Maritime Authority (MMA), was not to be tried for having any hand in the incident. In 2005, Total submitted a report to the Paris courts which stated that Total had gathered a group of experts which stated the tanker was corroded and that Total was responsible for it. The courts sought a second expert reviewing this information, which was turned down.

In 2001, the AZF chemical plant exploded in Toulouse, France, while belonging to the Grande Paroisse branch of Total.

In 2008, Total was required to pay €192 million in compensation to victims of the pollution caused by the sinking of the ship MV Erika. This was in addition to the €200 million that Total spent to help clean up the spill. The company appealed twice against the verdict, losing both times.

In 2016, Total was ranked as the second-best of 92 oil, gas, and mining companies on indigenous rights in the Arctic. According to the CDP Carbon Majors Report 2017, the company was one of the top 100 companies producing carbon emissions globally, responsible for 0.9% of global emissions from 1998 to 2015. In 2021, Total was ranked as the 2nd most environmentally responsible company out of 120 oil, gas, and mining companies involved in resource extraction north of the Arctic Circle in the Arctic Environmental Responsibility Index (AERI).

According to a 2021 study, Total personnel were aware about the role that its products played in global warming as early as 1971, as well as throughout the 1980s. Despite this awareness, the company promoted doubt regarding the science of global warming by the late 1980s, and ultimately settled on a position in the late 1990s of publicly accepting climate science, while still promoting doubt and trying to delay climate action. In August 2024, South Africa's advertising regulator ruled that TotalEnergies' promotion of sustainability in an advertising campaign in the country was misleading. The campaign was run in collaboration with South Africa's nature conservation authority, Sanparks, to encourage people to visit the country's national parks.

Total has been accused of bribery on multiple occasions.

Total is being implicated in a bribe commission scandal which is currently emerging in Malta. It has emerged that Total had told Maltese agents that it would not be interested in doing business with them unless their team included George Farrugia, who is under investigation in the procurement scandal. George Farrugia has recently been given a presidential pardon in exchange for information about this scandal. Enemalta, Malta's energy supplier, swiftly barred Total and its agents, Trafigura from bidding and tenders. An investigation is currently underway and three people have been arraigned.

On 16 December 2008, the managing director of the Italian division of Total, Lionel Levha, and ten other executives were arrested by the public Prosecutor's office of Potenza, Italy, for a corruption charge of €15 million to undertake the oilfield in Basilicata on contract. Also arrested was the local deputy of Partito Democratico Salvatore Margiotta and an Italian entrepreneur.

In 2010, Total was accused of bribing Iraqi officials during former president Saddam Hussein's regime to secure oil supplies. A United Nations report later revealed that Iraqi officials had received bribes from oil companies to secure contracts worth over $10bn. On 26 February 2016, the Paris Court of Appeals considered Total guilty and ordered the company to pay a fine of €750,000 for corrupting Iraqi civil servants. The court's ruling overturns an earlier acquittal in the case.

In 2013, a case was settled that concerned charges that Total bribed an Iranian official with $60 million, which it documented as a "consulting charge," and which unfairly gave it access to Iran's Sirri A and Sirri E oil and gas fields. The bribery gave it a competitive advantage, earning it an estimated $150 million in profits. The Securities Exchange Commission and the Department of Justice settled the charges, expecting Total to pay $398 million.

Following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine which began on 24 February, many international, particularly Western companies pulled out of Russia. On 1 March, TotalEnergies announced it "will no longer provide capital for new projects in Russia" but has retained ownership of its 19.4% stake in privately owned Novatek, 20% stake in the Yamal project and 10% stake in Arctic LNG 2. This has led to criticism as insufficient, particularly given complete divestment of other major Western energy companies, and the European Union announcement of becoming more energy independent from Russia. Similarly in August 2022, an investigation by Global Witness showed that a Siberian gas field part-owned by TotalEnergies has been supplying a refinery, which is producing jet fuel for Russian warplanes. This contradicts Total's claims that this was unrelated to Russian military operations in Ukraine. On 26 April 2024, while presenting the firm's interim financial report TotalEnergy CEO Patrick Pouyanne said that importing Russian LNG to EU is not a very profitable operation and if EU sanctions Russian LNG, the price of LNG will go up quickly and globally TotalEngergy's portfolio will benefit from it. According to a 2024 analysis done by IEEFA, despite EU sanctions, Russian LNG import to France almost doubled to 4.4 billion cubic meters in the first half of 2024 compared to the same period a year ago. On 30 September 2025, Patrick Pouyanne suggested that Russian liquefied natural gas shipments could be redirected to other countries like India and Turkey if the European Union bans imports while sparing a key facility in Russia.

In December 2022, the NGOs Friends of the Earth, Survie and four Ugandan NGOs sent the oil group Total to court and accused it of violating the law on the duty of vigilance of large French companies in terms of human rights and environment. The Tilenga Project, which TotalEnergies is undertaking in conjunction with China National Offshore Oil Corporation consists of drilling for oil in the Murchison Falls National Park, a habitat for diverse species of birds and animals. The project also involves building a pipeline from the site in land-locked Uganda to Tanga in Tanzania. Critics of the project are concerned that, since the proposed pipeline passes through Lake Victoria and close to a number of wildlife areas in Tanzania and Kenya, oil spills could threaten the lake and could have adverse effects on the wildlife, some of which is endangered, in various national parks. In March 2025, a judicial investigation was opened in France for involuntary manslaughter against TotalEnergies in Mozambique. In December 2025, the United Kingdom pulled back US$1.15 billion from TotalEnergies' US$20 billion gas project in Mozambique citing risks of rising jihadism in the region.

Over a three-year period between 2020 and 2023, Total helped fund a military task force of up to 1,000 regular troops to protect its gas infrastructure from insurgents during the insurgency in Cabo Delgado. Internal reports revealed that between mid-2020 and late 2022 residents of nearby villages regularly reported human rights violations including torture, detentions and disappearances at the hands of the task force. Despite being aware of these of allegations Total continued funding the task force, opting to selectively punish offenders by withholding a monetary "hardship bonus".

TotalEnergies is an official recommended fuel and lubricants for all prominent Renault–Nissan–Mitsubishi Alliance members, including Renault (shared with BP), Nissan (shared with ExxonMobil), Infiniti, Dacia, Alpine and Datsun, Kia, three Stellantis marques (Citroën, Peugeot and DS), Honda (including Acura, shared with BP and ExxonMobil), Aston Martin, Mazda (shared with BP and its subsidiary Castrol), Sany and Tata Motors (shared with Petronas) for automobiles only as well as Peugeot Motocycles, Kawasaki Motors (fuel only), Energica, and Honda for motorcycles only.

Total has provided fuel and lubricants to professional auto racing teams.

Total has been a longtime partner of Citroën Sport in the World Rally Championship, Dakar Rally and World Touring Car Championship. Sébastien Loeb won nine WRC drivers titles, whereas Ari Vatanen and Pierre Lartigue won four editions of the Dakar Rally.

Total has been a partner of Peugeot Sport in Formula One from 1995 to 2000, the British Touring Car Championship in 1995 and 1996 and since 2001 in the World Rally Championship, Intercontinental Rally Challenge, 24 Hours of Le Mans, Intercontinental Le Mans Cup, Dakar Rally and Pikes Peak International Hill Climb. Total is also a partner of Peugeot Sport for its customer racing TCR Touring Car programme and its Le Mans Hypercar project in the FIA World Endurance Championship.

Total was a partner of Renault Sport in Formula One from 2009 to 2016. Their logo appeared on the Red Bull Racing cars between 2009 and 2016, the Renault F1 cars in 2009, 2010 and 2016, and the Lotus F1 cars from 2011 to 2014. Total also partnered Caterham F1 Team in 2011–2014, Scuderia Toro Rosso in 2014–2015 and Williams F1 Team in 2012–2013.

Also, Total was the title sponsor of the Copa Sudamericana football tournament in 2013 and 2014.

In 2017, Total was appointed by FIA and ACO as official fuel supplier of the World Endurance Championship and 24 Hours of Le Mans from 2018–19 season onwards.

Total is one of the official sponsors from 2013 to 2022 for one of the most popular and influential Mexican football teams, Club America.

In 2016, Total secured an eight-year sponsorship package from the Confederation of African Football (CAF) to support 10 of its principal competitions. Total will start with the Africa Cup of Nations to be held in Gabon, therefore, renaming it Total Africa Cup of Nations.

Following Total's purchase of Direct Énergie in the summer of 2018, the Direct Énergie cycling team changed its name the following year to Total Direct Énergie ahead of that year's edition of Paris–Roubaix. In 2021 the team changed its name again to Team TotalEnergies in time for that year's Tour de France.

In 2019, the company's Chief Executive Officer, Patrick Pouyanne pledged that Total would make a €100 million contribution to the reconstruction of the Notre-Dame cathedral after it was extensively damaged in a fire.

In 2020, the company confirmed a two-year sponsorship deal with CR Flamengo, being the first time a partner of a Brazilian football team.

The Toubon Law (full name: law 94-665 of 4 August 1994 relating to usage of the French language) is a French law mandating the use of the French language in official government publications, in all advertisements, in all workplaces, in commercial contracts, in some other commercial communication contexts, in all government-financed schools, and some other contexts.

The law does not concern private, non-commercial communications, such as non-commercial web publications by private bodies. It does not concern books, films, public speeches, and other forms of communications not constituting commercial activity. However, the law mandates the use of the French language in all broadcast audiovisual programs, with exceptions for musical works and "original version" films. Broadcast musical works are subject to quota rules under a related law whereby a minimum percentage of television shows and 35% of songs on the radio must be in the French language.

The law takes its common name from Jacques Toubon, who was Minister of Culture when it was passed, and who proposed the law to the National Assembly of France. A nickname is Loi Allgood – "Allgood" is a morpheme -for-morpheme translation of "Toubon" into English ("All Good" being a translation of "Tout bon") – as the law can largely be considered to have been enacted in reaction to the increasing usage of English in advertisements and other areas in France. As the law sought to strengthen French as the dominant language within the country and its territories, the law also 'came under considerable attack from the European Commission which regarded its provisions as particularly offensive to the concept of free competition across national borders.'

One broad provision of the law applying to workplaces is that "any document that contains obligations for the employee or provisions whose knowledge is necessary for the performance of one's work must be written in French." Among other things, this means that computer software developed outside France must have its user interface and instruction manuals translated into French to be legally used by companies in France. The law includes an exception that "these provisions do not apply to documents coming from abroad", but this exception has been interpreted narrowly by the appellate courts. For example, in 2006 a French subsidiary of a US company was given a hefty fine for delivering certain highly technical documents and software interfaces to its employees in the English language only, and this was upheld by the appellate court.

Another broad provision of the law is that it makes it mandatory for commercial advertisements and public announcements to be given in French. This does not rule out advertisements made in a foreign language: it is sufficient to provide a translation in a footnote. This was justified as a measure for the protection of the consumer. Additionally, product packaging must be in French, though, again, translation in multiple languages can be provided.

A similar restriction—though implemented by primary legislation regulations and not as application of the Loi Toubon—applies to product labeling: product labels should be intelligible and in French, though additional languages may be present. Some linguistic restrictions on product labeling were found to be incompatible with European law, particularly the directives concerning the freedom of movement of goods within the European Union. The French government then issued interpretation notes and amended regulations in order to comply.

In another provision, the law specifies obligations for public legal persons (government administrations, et al.), mandating the use of French in publications, or at least in summaries of publications. In France, it is a constitutional requirement that the public should be informed of the action of the government. Since the official language of France is French, it follows that the French public should be able to get official information in French.

Under the Toubon law, schools that do not use French as the medium of instruction are ineligible for government funding. This excludes the Breton language schools of Brittany.

Other restrictions concern the use of French in academic conferences. These are largely ignored by many public institutions, especially in the "hard" scientific fields. The original restrictions on colloquia also applied to private bodies, but that was found unconstitutional prior to enactment, on grounds that they violated freedom of speech, and the final form of the law was modified accordingly.

In the mid-1990s, soon after the Toubon Law came into force, two French lobbying groups—the Association pour la Défense de la Langue Française and the L'Avenir de la Langue Française —filed a complaint against Georgia Tech Lorraine, the Metz campus of the Georgia Institute of Technology. At the time of the complaint, all classes at this Lorraine school were conducted in English, and all course descriptions on its French Internet web site were in English only. The complaint invoked the Toubon Law to demand that the school's web site must be in French because the web site was effectively a commercial advertisement for the school's courses. Although the case was dismissed by the court on a minor legal technicality, and the lobbying groups chose to drop the matter, the school was moved to offer its French website in the French language in addition to English, although classes continued to be in English only.

In 2006, the French subsidiary of the US company General Electric Medical Systems was fined €500,000 plus an ongoing fine of €20,000 per day for not complying with the Toubon law.

In response to the law, the British Member of Parliament for South Hams, Anthony Steen introduced a Ten Minute Rule bill in Parliament that would ban French words being used in the United Kingdom.

The Tour de Grisset (Grisset Tower) is the remains of a small, Gallo-Roman temple or fanum located in Fréteval, Loir-et-Cher, France. It is one of the few Gallo-Roman fana to still be standing, and perhaps the only one with its brick vault still in place. Excavations in the 1960s revealed a bath complex and series of other structures at the site, and it has been proposed that a small, secondary agglomeration of structures (possibly additional fana) may also exist there.

Tour de Grisset is located in the commune of Fréteval. It sits on the left bank of the Loir, halfway up a gentle slope.

No mention of the tower is known before the 19th century, and it was in 1849 that a description and drawing of the fanum was first published. At the beginning of the 20th century, sections of walls belonging to other ancient buildings at the site could still be seen and were studied there. But after the First World War, interest declined and the remains of the fanum were not registered as historical monuments until 1948.

In 1963, the president of the Archaeological Society of Vendômois was alerted to the possible existence of architectural remains other than the fanum. Excavations took place in 1964 and 1965, at what turned out to be a bath complex. From 1968, aerial surveys revealed the presence of other buildings which were not excavated, allowing the filing of an application for protection with the Ministry of Culture, which resulted in the registration of the entire site in 1991. An exhaustive architectural survey was carried out in 1995.

Tour de Grisset makes up the remains of an ancient fanum's cella. It is one of only a handful still standing, and is noted for being the only known example whose vaulted ceiling survives.

The monument's exterior measures 6.80 × 6.15 m (22.31 × 20.18 feet), for interior dimensions of 3.65 by 3.60 metres (12.0 ft × 11.8 ft), and a ceiling height of 7.15 metres (23.5 ft).

The fanum is an example of Roman architecture that is adapted to the resources of the site. The walls are blockage clad with small sandstone or limestone rubble siding, alternating with beds of two to three rows of terracotta. The walls reach 1.3 metres (4 ft 3 in) in thickness. It is possible, though difficult to prove due to the façade's deterioration, that Tour de Grisset's masonry had geometric patterns made by arrangements of stones with different colors. This practice has been found elsewhere in the region, such as on the temple at Cherré and the Roman city walls of Le Mans.

The temple is estimated to have been built towards the end of the second century, or the first half of the third. In the late 1990s, its cella was found to be exactly in the center of a very small cadastre (12 m × 10 m [39 ft × 33 ft]), which could be the survival of an ancient structure accompanying the cella, perhaps the peripheral gallery of the shrine. Surrounding this on at least three sides is a wall, interpreted as part of the peribolos (court enclosure) of the temple.

The temple, of which Tour de Grisset is a remnant, was only one part of a vast complex comprising thermal baths partially excavated further south, a system for supplying or draining water, and buildings of still indeterminate function that were detected through aerial surveys. Two of the structures could possibly be fana as well.

The site as a whole suggests the existence of a small, ancient secondary agglomeration, because of the spatial distribution of the remains found so far, which could have arose piecemeal around the sanctuary. An ancient road from Le Mans to Chartres probably ran near the site.

An adjoining site to the north had been called "La Cohue" in medieval times, suggesting it may have served as a place for meetings or fairs, i.e. a conciliabulum.

The Tour du Mont Blanc or TMB is one of the most popular long-distance walks in Europe. It circles the Mont Blanc massif, covering a distance of roughly 165 kilometres (103 mi) with 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) of ascent/descent and passing through parts of Switzerland, Italy and France.

It is considered one of the classic long-distance hiking trails. The circular route is normally walked in a counter-clockwise direction in 9-14 days. It is also the route of an annual ultramarathon, the Ultra-Trail du Mont-Blanc, which covers the entire distance at once with a time limit of 46 hours and 30 minutes.

Usual start points are Les Houches in the Chamonix valley or Les Contamines in the Montjoie valley (in France), Courmayeur from the Italian side, and either Champex or a point near Martigny in Switzerland. The route passes through seven valleys around the Mont-Blanc massif, an anti-clockwise start in Chamonix would lead through the Chamonix (or Arve) valley, then Montjoie, Vallée des Glaciers, Italian Val Veni, Val Ferret, Swiss Val Ferret, and either the Arpette or Trient valley in Switzerland, dependent on the route chosen.

The "official" route has changed over the course of the years and many alternatives, or "variantes", exist to the standard route. Some can take an intrepid walker onto paths requiring greater fitness, awareness and skill. Others provide less demanding options, which are often quicker than the accepted route, but provide lesser viewpoints onto the mountain ranges. For a part of the way, between the summit of Brevent and the Col de la Croix du Bonhomme, the route coincides with the European long-distance footpath GR5 as it makes its way from the North Sea to the Mediterranean Sea. A link can also be made with the walkers' Haute Route from Chamonix to Zermatt in the Swiss Alps.

The highest points on any variant of the trail are the Col des Fours in France and the Fenêtre d'Arpette in Switzerland, both at an altitude of 2,665 m (8,743 ft). This altitude is not high enough to cause altitude sickness for most people, nevertheless the trail provides a physical challenge. Experience of walking in mountain country is vital and, because mountain weather can change very rapidly, participants on the Tour du Mont Blanc should be suitably equipped with appropriate gear.

Plentiful accommodation exists along the entire route, allowing it to be broken into segments to suit any fit person. This takes a variety of forms, from separate bedrooms to large mixed-sex dormitories. Cooked meals are available at most. With a start at Les Houches one might expect overnight stops at Les Contamines, Col de la Croix du Bonhomme refuge or Les Chapieux (depending on variant route taken), Elisabetta Soldini refuge, Courmayeur, Elena refuge, Champex, Trient village, Argentiere, La Flegere refuge and finally back to Les Houches. Despite the abundance of choice, the popularity of the trail can lead to problems finding accommodation, even if booking in advance.

The route of the Tour du Mont Blanc is used for an annual ultramarathon called the Ultra-Trail du Mont-Blanc (UTMB). The winning time to complete the entire circuit ranges from around 18 hours for the men to 22 hours for the women.

The tour of the Fontainebleau Forest (French : Tour du Massif de Fontainebleau, TMF) is a hiking path all around the Forest of Fontainebleau, in the Parisian region.

This footpath has been created in 1975 by the Office National des Forêts and was originally 65 km long. It used to be marked out with green and white markers. A new 74 km itinerary has since been published, especially in the guidebook La Seine-et-Marne... à pied which proposes several routes in the department of Seine-et-Marne. This tour links several well-known towns including Fontainebleau, Bourron-Marlotte, Barbizon, Bois-le-Roi and follow different GR footpaths such as the GR 1, the GR 2, the GR 11 or the GR 13 with about 1000 m of difference in height. It crosses varied landscapes including “ancient woodlands, rock piles, platières and a few breathtaking views”.

The tour can be achieved in two, three or four days, depending on hikers' walking speed. Several variants are possible. One possibility is to cover the circuit within four days, starting from Fontainebleau-Avon. The first stage leads the hikers to Bourron-Marlotte, a small town which used to be “the stopping place of numerous painters, musicians and writers”, such as Jean Renoir or Paul Cézanne. The second day allows hikers to reach the hermitage of Franchard, going through the town of Recloses and its remarkable church. Then, the third stage rejoins Bois-le-Roi. This step passes through the town of Barbizon, considered as “a village of painters” as it has received since the 1850s painters from all over the world and has been one of the centres of the impressionist movement. The forest around Barbizon has been the first protected area in France since a reserve has been created in 1861. It is also a worldwide recognized climbing area. To finish, the final step returns to Fontainebleau, following the Seine.

Pitching tents along the trail is not allowed. However, two bivouac areas with water points are located next to the footpath in Bourron-Marlotte and Bois-le-Roi. In Samois-sur-Seine, there is also a campsite. Several hostels, guesthouses or campsites are also available in the villages which border the circuit. Moreover, two restaurants in the forest (near Fontainebleau and Barbizon) and many more in the different towns allow the hikers to eat.

From Paris, the circuit can be reached by train in 40 minutes starting from Gare de Lyon and stopping either at Fontainebleau-Avon, Bois-le-Roi or Bourron-Marlotte-Grez train station. On weekends, there is also a stop in the middle of the forest (Fontainebleau-Forêt). The town of Barbizon can be reached by bus from Melun or Fontainebleau-Avon train station. By car, several car parks are located near the footpath, especially in the towns along the trail (Bois-le-Roi, Barbizon,…). From Paris, the motorway A6 in the direction of Lyon must be taken.

Tourte de blettes (torta de blea in Niçois) is a pie made with Swiss chard, which can be served as a main course or as a sweet dessert. It is a culinary specialty of the city of Nice.

It is made with an olive oil–based crust, Swiss chard, raisins, pine nuts, Parmesan or Gruyère cheese, sugar, and apples. Other leafy vegetables can be used instead of chard, including leeks, cabbage, spinach, and radish greens.

The pie is a traditional dessert emblematic of the cuisine of Nice, whose origins date back to the Middle Ages. This pastry is part of a long tradition of "herb pies", which included leafy vegetables such as spinach. Chard has long been a common vegetable in the region as it does well in the dry climate, which allows it to grow almost all year round. The first written recipe for the chard pie dates back to the 15th century. Over the centuries, recipes have evolved. For example, in the 18th century, there was a pie made with spinach, sugar, almonds and candied lemon peel. It is one of the thirteen desserts of Christmas in the Niçoise version of the Provençal tradition. It is also traditionally eaten on New Year's Eve.

Despite the presence of chard (a vegetable very popular in Niçoise cuisine, used in particular to make ravioli), this is a pastry, eaten cold or warm. Finely chopped chard leaves are mixed with ingredients that vary depending on the recipe but always include pine nuts and raisins. The pie is most often served covered in powdered sugar. There are also savory versions made with chard, rice, pork and hard cheese.

Sweet or savory, the pie calls for a regional white wine such as a Côtes-de-Provence, a Coteaux-d'Aix-en-Provence, a Coteaux-Varois-en-Provence, a Pierrevert, or a Bellet.

Le Tout-Paris (lit. ' All-Paris ') is a French expression referring to the stylish and affluent elite of Paris, who frequent fashionable events and places, and establish trends in upper-class culture. It is equivalent to high society or the jet set elsewhere.

The expression tout-Paris was used in the 17th century to refer to high society among the aristocratic inhabitants of the city of Paris. It was used in 1660 by Nicolas Boileau in his Satires to refer to the influential members of Parisian society who made Pierre Corneille 's play El Cid popular, in the famous sentence, "In vain, a minister sought support against El Cid—Tout Paris supported Chimene in love with Rodrigue". Boileau also used the expression in Chant III : "Where tout Paris as a crowd bears its sufferings". Voltaire and Jean le Rond D'Alembert also used the expression in their correspondence.

The current use of the expression Tout-Paris dates from the Belle Époque era of 19th-century Paris. Historian Anne Martin-Fugier dates it to the beginning of the 19th century, when in the aftermath of the French Revolution and the rise of Napoleon, when the non-aristocratic elites of the city began playing a role at the top of the city's affluent culture, forming a new social class.

A group made up of writers, politicians, bankers and prominent artists, this community lived in fashionable neighbourhoods, went to the theatre, and attended receptions at embassies. It also embodied a certain idea of Parisians' "good taste" (bon goût), setting trends with its pastimes, such as horse racing and holidays at the seaside. The activities of Tout-Paris were noted in the mass media.

An article in Le Gaulois, from August 24, 1895, titled "Mondanités: Paris hors Paris" (Worldly events: Paris outside of Paris), noted that composer Camille Saint-Saëns arrived at the coastal resort of Dieppe and gave a detailed list of other noteworthy social figures also present in the town: "It is tout Paris, that can be seen: Count and Countess Louis de Talleyrand-Périgord, M. Josselin de Rohan, Mme Madeleine Lemaire, M. Marcel Proust et M. Reynaldo Hahn, who are the hosts of the eminent artist."

Evoking the year 1841, poet Charles Baudelaire saw in Tout-Paris above all the passionate followers of literature and poetry: "During this time, tout Paris was made up of this elite group given the role of fashioning others' opinions, and who, when a poet is born, are always the first to be notified."

During the Belle Époque, Tout-Paris became a sort of club with its own rules. In 1901 the Annuaire du Tout Paris (Tout Paris Annual) appeared, counting writer Marcel Proust among its readers. Upon its creation in 1903, the Bottin mondain (fr) directory of high society in fact presented only a list of Parisian personalities. Le Tout-Paris was associated with particular fashionable places in the city, such as the restaurant Maxim's, the large urban forest Bois de Boulogne, Deauville, and so on, defining trends, giving an artist or writer their blessing, making or unmaking the reputation of a politician.

Beginning in the 1950s, Tout-Paris became increasingly associated with personalities connected with certain trendy nightclubs, such as Régine, creating notable discos where celebrities could be seen, among them Françoise Sagan, Jean-Claude Brialy, Jacques Chazot, Françoise Giroud, Yves Saint-Laurent, and so on.

Today, the expression is sometimes used to refer to subgroups of Paris culture's elite (the "literary tout-Paris", the "political tout-Paris", and so on), somewhat losing its original meaning, now referring to a broader group of arts personalities, athletes, media figures, or politicians covered in the popular media. Their attendance is covered at events such as concerts, galas, premiers, art gallery vernissages and nightclubs in the capitol.

With global travel and fashion, it is often used interchangeably with the global jet set of trendsetters. The rise of the tabloid press in the 20th century, and the blending of entertainment and current events news in publications such as Paris Match, has added to this public perception of Parisian celebrity.

The Tower of Vesunna is the vestige of a Gallo-Roman fanum (temple) dedicated to Vesunna, a tutelary goddess of the Petrocorii. The sanctuary was built in the 1st or 2nd century. Vesunna was the Gallo-Roman name for Périgueux, in the Dordogne department, in the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region of France.

The "Tower" is the remains of a fanum 's cella located in Périgord, in the center of the Dordogne department, south of Périgueux, in the district called Vésone, on the edge of the Périgueux – Brive railway line. It stands in a public garden known as Jardin de Vésone, 50 metres west of the Vesunna Gallo-Roman Museum which holds the remains of the domus of Bouquets. Its East side is now breached by a gap nearly nine meters wide.

The fanum is thought to have been constructed in the 2nd century or perhaps at the end of the 1st.

According to legend, Saint Front [ fr ] made the edifice's breach by driving out demons taking refuge in the tower with his staff. In reality, it was the result of removing large blocks that formed the entryway, causing the collapse of the portion above.

The first excavations inside the tower were undertaken by Msgr. Machéco de Prémeaux. They were halted in 1751 following a workers' panic. They were resumed by the Count de Taillefer and Joseph de Mourcin [ fr ] in 1820, inside and outside the tower. The excavations discovered the base of the circular wall that surrounds the tower. They recognized that the tower was the cella of a temple. This two-meter thick wall is 4.55 m from the exterior façade of the tower. Count de Taillefer assumed that it supported a peristyle (ambulatory), and proposed a reconstruction of the temple.

In 1833, the site, the property of Count Wlgrin de Taillefer, was ceded at his death to the city of Périgueux. In 1846, the tower was added to the Monument historique registry.

The construction of the Périgueux – Brive railway line, put into service in 1860, and the development of neighboring streets led to the destruction of the remains of the vast enclosure that protected the temple.

In 1894, the city of Périgueux acquired the garden surrounding the tower to install an archaeological park. Excavations were carried out which confirmed the discoveries of the Count of Taillefer: A large block construction interrupting the circular wall on the opposite side from the breach, connected to a vast set of buildings to the West of the temple. The interior of the tower was cleared to the level of the old foundation. It was during the excavations carried out by Charles Durand from 1906 to 1909 that the ambulatory of the temple was cleared along with its galleries and peristyle through which the entrance to the courtyard of the temple was made.

The Count of Taillefer supposed that this temple was dedicated to Isis, but the inscriptions preserved in the Museum of Art and Archeology of Périgord show that the temple was dedicated to the tutelary goddess of Vesunna:

According to Camille Jullian, "the cult of Tutela has a very Roman origin and it consists in worshipping under this name the unknown god who protects a people, a city, an individual, the deity under the supervision of whom one is placed... Here is marked the main characteristic of the worship of the tutelae : they are deities of cities, not of peoples... This is well indicated by the inscriptions: none is dedicated Tutelae populi, civitatis, but simply Tutelae, Tutelae augustae... TVTELAE VESUNNAE, in the well-known inscription of Périgueux, must be translated not as 'to the tutela of Vesunna' but as, 'to the tutela, Vesunna'.

For Émile Espérandieu, this is the case with The Tower of Vesunna. We do not know who Vesunna was whom the Petrocorii had made their tutela. We may suppose she could have been a spring goddess similar to the god Nemausus, who had given his name to the city of Nîmes and to the whole of the civitate there. It may be related that A bas-relief found to the south-west of Château Barrière depicting a seated panther bears the inscription:

The architecture of the temple is a combination of two cultural influences: the Celtic fanum, with a cella surrounded by a low ambulatory or gallery, and the Roman temple model with a columned pronaos opening onto a cella. This synthesis illustrates a cultural fusion, with both Romanization and the persistence of local tradition.

The round cella is all that remains of the temple, which gives it a height of approximately 24.46 meters (27 m when measured from the foundation). It has an external diameter of 19.6 meters. The wall is 2.10 m thick at the base and 1.80 m from a visible recess of the base above the current floor. At this level, the inside diameter of the tower is 17.10 m. Originally, a wall surrounded a rectangular courtyard of more than one and a half hectares (141 m by 122) in which the fanum was centered, raised by a podium which was accessed through a rectangular pronaos with 6 columns. The cella was surrounded by a 23-column peristyle.

The traditional French units of measurement prior to metrication were established under Charlemagne during the Carolingian Renaissance. Based on contemporary Byzantine and ancient Roman measures, the system established some consistency across his empire but, after his death, the empire fragmented and subsequent rulers and various localities introduced their own variants. Some of Charlemagne's units, such as the king's foot (French : pied du Roi) remained virtually unchanged for about a thousand years, while others important to commerce — such as the French ell (aune) used for cloth and the French pound (livre) used for amounts — varied dramatically from locality to locality. By the 18th century, the number of units of measure had grown to the extent that it was almost impossible to keep track of them and one of the major legacies of the French Revolution was the dramatic rationalization of measures by the new metric system. The change was extremely unpopular, however, and a metricized version of the traditional units — the mesures usuelles — had to be brought back into use for several decades.

Although in the pre-revolutionary era (before 1795) France used a system and units of measure that had many of the characteristics of contemporary English units (or the later Imperial System of units), France still lacked a unified, countrywide system of measurement. Whereas in England Magna Carta had decreed that "there shall be one unit of measure throughout the realm", Charlemagne and successive kings had tried but failed to impose a unified system of measurement in France.

The names and relationships of many units of measure were adopted from Roman units of measure, and many more were added – it has been estimated that there were seven or eight hundred different names for the various units of measure. Moreover, the quantity associated with each unit of measure differed from town to town and even from trade to trade. Some of the differences were large: for example the lieue (league) could vary from 3.268 km in Beauce to 5.849 km in Provence. It has been estimated that on the eve of the Revolution a quarter of a million different units of measure were in use in France. Although certain standards, such as the pied du Roi (the King's foot) had a degree of pre-eminence and were used by savants, many traders chose to use their own measuring devices, giving scope for fraud and hindering commerce and industry.

These definitions use the Paris definitions for the coutume of Paris, and definitions for other Ancien régime civil jurisdictions varied, at times quite significantly.

The medieval royal units of length were based on the toise, and in particular the toise de l'Écritoire, the distance between the fingertips of the outstretched arms of a man, which was introduced in 790 by Charlemagne.

The toise had 6 pieds (feet) each of 326.6 mm (12.86 in). In 1668 the reference standard was found to have been deformed, and it was replaced by the toise du Châtelet which, to accommodate the deformation of the earlier standard, was around 11 mm (0.56%) shorter.

In 1747 this toise was replaced by a new toise of near-identical length – the Toise du Pérou, custody of which was given to l'Académie des Sciences au Louvre.

Although the pouce (inch), pied (foot) and toise (fathom) were fairly consistent throughout most of pre-revolutionary France, some areas had local variants of the toise. Other units of measure such as the aune (ell), the perche (perch or rood), the arpent and the lieue (league) had a number of variations, particularly the aune (which was used to measure cloth).

The loi du 19 frimaire an VIII (Law of 10 December 1799) states that one decimal metre is exactly 443.296 French lines, or 3 pieds 11.296 lignes de la "Toise du Pérou". Thus the French royal foot is exactly ⁠ 4500 / 13 853 ⁠ metres (about 0.3248 m (12.79 in)).

In Quebec, the surveys in French units were converted using the relationship 1 pied (of the French variety, the same word being used for English feet as well) = 12.789 English inches. This makes the Quebec pied very slightly smaller (about 4 parts in one million) than the pied used in France.

Charlemagne's system had 12 onces (ounces) to the livre (pound). Between 1076 and 1093 Philip I (1052–1108) instituted a system of poids de marc (mark weight) used for minting coin, with 8 onces to a marc.

Jean II (1319–1364) constructed a new standard of measures, including a livre actuelle ("current" pound, also known as a livre de poids de marc or "mark weight" pound) of 2 marcs, i.e. 16 onces. The Charlemagne 12-ounce livre became known as the livre esterlin ("true" pound) in order to distinguish it. ″ Esterlin ″ was an Old French word (ca. 1190, Anglo-Norman dialect) that referred to Scottish coin (sterling, or ″denier″). As references cited later on this page show, its application changed over time in accordance with the changing historical context, though it is not current in Modern French.

The livre actuelle could be sub-divided into 2 demi-livres (half-pounds), 4 quarterons, or 8 demi-quarterons. Conversely, there were 100 livres in a quintal (cf. English hundredweight). The fractional parts of an once had different names in Apothecary measure (used in medicine) and measure of precious metals, but the fractional ratios were themselves the same: 1 once was 8 drachme (Apothecary, cf. English dram) or gros ; 1 drachme / gros was 3 scruples (Apothecary, cf. English scruple) or deniers, and 1 scruple / denier was 24 grains. This makes 384 deniers in a livre in weight measure, which contrasts with the old monetary livre in France which was divided into 240 deniers.

Jean II's standards are preserved in the Conservatoire Nationale des Arts et Métiers, which also holds a set of later-still physical standards from the 15th century, the so-called pile de Charlemagne. This pile defined the weight of 50 marcs, i.e. 400 onces, and thus 25 livres actuelles, or 33 1 ⁄ 3 livres esterlins. It had been kept in the royal palaces originally. In 1540 François I (1494–1547) had transferred it to the Cour des monnaies, where it had been held in a cabinet with three locks, whose keys had been held separately by the president of the Cour, one of its counsellors, and a clerk.

The thirteen individual pieces that made up the Parisian pile de Charlemagne comprised an outer containing cylinder nominally weighing 20 marcs, and a set of hollow nesting cups within, topped with a filled weight as the smallest piece. The heaviest cups were nominally 14, 8, 4, and 2 marcs, sub-totalling 48 marcs (including the 20 marc outer container); followed by a nominally 1 marc hollow cup which was termed the marc creux (hollow mark); and followed by 6 further cups (4, 2, and 1 onces, and 4, 2, and 1 gros) with a final seventh filled 1 gros weight, all totalling 1 marc, which was termed the marc plein (filled mark).

Unfortunately, the weights were not consistent, with the marc plein not being the same weight as the marc creux, and neither being the same as a mean 1 marc weight determined from the weight of the whole pile. So when the time came to work out the conversion factors between these measures and the metric system, the whole pile was taken to define 50 Parisian standard marcs, and thus 230 400 grains (the number of grains in 50 marcs). Louis Lefèvre‑Gineau initially determined that the metric weight of the whole pile was 12.227 947 5 kg, later corrected to 12.2376 kg, thereby making (by division and rounded to three decimal places) a marc 244.753 g, a livre esterlin 367.129 g, and a livre actuelle 489.506 g. Hence further the (Parisian) once was 30.594 g, the gros / drachme was 3.824 g, the denier / scruple was 1.274 g, and the grain was 0.053 g.

However, the actual weights of the pre-metric measures were nowhere near even this simple. These were just the Parisian standards, and individual provinces, cities, and even guilds, all had their own reference physical standards, which were not checked against one another and which sometimes conflated esterlin and actuelle. For just some examples: the Marseille livre was 399.6 g, the Montpelier one 394.9 g, the Toulon one 465.5 g, and the Toulouse one 413.2 g; with all of the fractional subdivisions having different values accordingly. The Limoges marc was 240.929 g, the Tours one 237.869 g, and the Troyes one 250.050 g.

Furthermore, there were also livres comprising different numbers of onces to both the actuelle and esterlin, including livres of 14, 18, and 20 onces, confusing things yet further. The livre in the poids de table (table weight) systems used in Provence and Languedoc (and a common name for provincial weight systems in general alongside poids de pays, country weight, and poids de ville, town weight) was the same weight as 15 onces or even as low as 13 onces in the Parisian poids de marc, and the livre in the poids de soie (silk weight) system of Lyon was similarly just 15 ⁄ 16 the weight of the Parisian livre. This caused an erroneous belief that these livres comprised 13, 14, or 15 onces, however this was a confusion stemming from the equivalent poids de marc weights, and both poids de table and poids de soie had 16 of their own, lighter, onces and so forth, Rouen had a poids de vicomté system.

Jacques Chirac Alain Juppé Jean-Louis Debré Jacques Toubon Claude Érignac

Charles Pieri François Santoni Jean-Guy Talamoni Pierre Lorenzi Jean-Dominique Allegrini-Simonetti

The Tralonca peace campaign was a 10-month period of negotiations and an attempted settlement between the government of France and the National Liberation Front of Corsica-Canal Historique (Fronte di Liberazione Naziunale di a Corsica-Canale Storicu, FLNC-CS), the largest Corsican paramilitary group at the time. The agreements were meant to bring stability to a then war-ridden Corsica in hopes of an eventual peace with all of the factions present during the period. This was to be achieved through greater autonomy within Corsica, economic growth through the establishment of an economic free zone, and infrastructure developments. The project was spearheaded by French prime minister Alain Juppé and FLNC-CS co-leader François Santoni.

The agreements failed largely due to the unwillingness of the French authorities to accept amnesty proposals and cease arrests of alleged FLNC-CS members, as well as Juppé’s general hostility towards Corsican separatists. Ceasefire agreements were due to be renewed on 12 October, but the ceasefire was broken on 9 October when the FLNC-CS committed a large bomb attack on the town hall of Bordeaux, a town Juppé was the mayor of during his tenure as prime minister. The process was interrupted multiple times due to wars between nationalist groups, most notably resulting in the death of an FLNC-CS officer and president of A Cuncolta Naziunalista, Pierre Lorenzi, who was assassinated by members of the rival FLNC-5 May.

On 6 January 1996, the French newspaper Libération reported the discovery of secret negotiations between French government officials and FLNC-CS officials. This coincided with minister of the interior Jean-Louis Debré announcing the “situation” in Corsica to be a priority for the year. On 10 January 1996, the process officially began when the FLNC-CS held a press conference in the occupied town of Tralonca and declared a truce of 3 months, with the possibility to renew the peace if negotiations continued with positive progress.

The beginning of a peace process worried many loyalists in the Corsican Assembly that concessions would be made regarding the status of Corsica. Thus, on 16 January, a group of loyalist councilors paid a personal visit to prime minister Alain Juppé, expressing their opposition to institutional change in Corsica. In the National Assembly, Jean-Louis Debré and Alain Juppé were harshly criticized by conservative deputies for negotiating with the FLNC-CS, whom they perceived as “ terrorists ”.

On 9 February, minister of justice Jacques Toubon visited Corsica to discuss the peace process and assess the situation. His visit was the subject of unrest, with two bomb attacks occurring just hours before his arrival.

On 12 March, Debré intervened in the National Assembly to respond to accusations regarding hid negiation with the FLNC-CS. Debré would continue to run into conflict with deputies of the National Assembly during the entire process.

On 27 March, Juppé declared during a meeting with various deputies that Corsica was going to become a free economic zone, starting that summer. This was done to alleviate the economic stress of the island. In the end, it took until October for the plan to be ratified, and it was never implemented. Corsica today is still one of the least developed regions in all of France.

On 12 April, the FLNC-CS officially renews its truce for another 6 months. The deadline is now 12 October.

A sore spot in negotiations occurs on 16 April. Two members of A Cuncolta Naziunalista, the political wing of the FLNC-CS, get into a firefight with two police officers. One officer is killed, one member of A Cuncolta is killed, and the other two are injured. A Cuncolta issued a meeting on the topic the next day, attempting to open dialogue. The French government, however, begins a wave of arrests targeting A Cuncolta officials. This continues into May.

On 16 May, the FLNC-CS issued an ultimatum to the police: “Militants threatened with arrest will respond with weapons”. This is disregarded, and the next day a major figure in A Cuncolta, Jean-Dominique Allegrini, is arrested.

On 28 May, Alain Juppé holds a meeting with the National Assembly where he declares Corsica to be a “double priority” for his government. He ends his speech with “Corsica is France”, sparking protests.

On 25 June, A Cuncolta Naziunalista begins a series of protests at courthouses across Corsica demanding the release of the A Cuncolta members arrested during the first wave of arrests. On 29 June, a protests to implement the free economic zone plan is supported by A Cuncolta.

On 11 July, Debré visits Ajaccio discreetly to discuss with the island's law enforcement.

On 17 July, Alain Juppé visits Corsica. The visit is meant to rejuvenate the relationship between island officials and Paris, but Juppé describes a “depressed” island. Many residents state that they are losing hope for the future of the peace deals.

On 3 August, the second wave of arrests begin. Many members of A Cuncolta are arrested and moved to Paris for trial. This one lasts the entire month of August.

On 5 August, Claude Érignac, prefect of Corsica, held a meeting where he requested exceptions for search and seizure laws in Corsica to prevent further armed conflict.

On 21 August, François Santoni harshly criticized Juppé and the state of the peace deals in the weekly editorial U Ribombu.

By the beginning of September, 7 A Cuncolta Naziunalista members remain in police custody, and many have been sentenced to prison. Many more were arrested throughout september, bringing the total number to around 30 arrests of separate individuals, though many members were arrested more than once.

On 5 October, the FLNC-Canal Historique, against the words of Santoni, prematurely ended the truce by committing a large bomb attack on the city hall of Bordeaux, Palais Rohan. This building was chosen because Juppé was also mayor of Bordeaux during his time as prime minister. The building is severely damaged. On 7 October, the FLNC-CS claimed the attack. The government responded by issuing a statement claiming it would fight Corsican terrorism “without failure”. The truce ended officially on 12 October.

Throughout the peace process, other organizations attempted many times to put an end to the negotiations. This was largely due to the " years of lead ", an ongoing civil war between various nationalist factions.

On 16 February 1996, a high-ranking FLNC-CS member, Jules Massa, was shot dead in Ajaccio by a joint commando of FLNC-Canal Habituel (Canal Abituale, FLNC-CA) and Resistenza members. François Santoni, co-leader of the FLNC-CS, was next to Massa when the attack occurred, and was likely the true target of the attack. Santoni personally denounces these two groups during his 28 February trial after his arrest. On 18 February, the FLNC-CS respond by assassinating Charles "Charly" Andreani, a Resistenza member.

On 8 March, a machine-gun attack targeted the home of Guy Benhamou, a journalist for the newspaper Libération, an expert on Corsican affairs, and a pro-peace activist. This attack caused Jean-Louis Debré to personally request police protection for Benhamou and his home. On 13 March, Santoni and fellow FLNC-CS co-leader Charles Pieri issued a condemnation for the attack.

On 12 March, Alain Orsoni, leader of the FLNC-CA, denounced the peace deal between the FLNC-CS and the French government. On 8 April, the FLNC-CA declared an adherence to Corsican autonomy and reject the ideas of Corsican independence. This controversial decision caused members of the FLNC-CA’s political wing, the Movement for Self-determination, to leave and create Corsica Viva, a new political party, earlier in the year, on 3 March.

On 22 March, an FLNC-CS commando operation attempted to destroy the offices of Habituel Gilbert Casanova. The commando was found by police, and two of the three members were arrested.

On 2 April, Fronte Ribellu carried out an attack against a large number of targets, mostly focused on gendarmeries. Fronte Ribellu split from the FLNC-CS a year prior.

On 5 May, the FLNC-CA announces a ceasefire of their own and an “imminent self-dissolution”. The date was chosen symbolically, as it was 20 years to the day of the formation of the original FLNC in 1976. This decision was implemented to promote a peace in Corsica led by the habituels. This, however, causes a group of members to seize most of the weapons from the habituels and create the FLNC-5 May (FLNC-5 Maghju, FLNC-5M).

On 1 July, Charles Pieri and president of A Cuncolta Naziunalista Pierre Lorenzi were the victim of a carbomb attack from the FLNC-5M. Lorenzi was killed, but Pieri survived, although he lost his right eye and part of his hearing.

The aftermath of the Bordeaux attack saw large-scale escalation from the Historiques in an attempt to relaunch its campaign even stronger than before. Meanwhile, Fronte Ribellu began organizing and advocating a “general uprising” against French rule in Corsica. This coincided with a series of anti-violence protests across France regarding the failure of the peace process.

On 17 October 1996, the FLNC-CS committed two large bomb attacks in Nîmes, targeting the local tax office and the courthouse. Later that same day, the Bastia courthouse was bombed as well.

Also on 17 October, Alain Juppé held a meeting with interior minister Jean-Louis Debré, defense minister Charles Millon, and justice minister Jacques Toubon, where a plan of action regarding Corsica was heavily discussed. Shortly after the meeting, a judicial investigation is opened into the FLNC-CS guerrillas present in Tralonca during the initial press conference on 10 January. The FLNC responds:

“Following the threats of arrest for the Tralonca press conference, we declare to the emissary of the Élysée as well as to prime minister Juppé that our organization is prepared to participate in the manifestation of truth by giving the necessary explanation to the conditions of organization of this press conference and the response which was made regarding it. Let us warn Juppé against any attempt at elimination [of our organization]. The response would be of unexpected scale.”

On 22 October, a parliamentary committee on the FLNC-CS was officially formed, composed of 40 members, none of which are deputies or senators from Corsica.

On 24 October, a wave of arrests are made targeting various nationalist officials in mainland France and Corsica. The FLNC-CS responds with a series of large-scale, violent attacks targeting police.

The events in Tralonca left a lasting impression on Corsican politics and the wider Corsican conflict. It is often cited as a major reason for the large-scale criticism against the Juppé government, specifically interior minister Jean-Louis Debré and Alain Juppé himself. This, combined with a large amount of other grievances, notably the 1995 strikes, led to Alain Juppé and his cabinet resigning after the 1997 parliamentary snap elections in which his party, Rally for the Republic, lost a large amount of seats. The FLNC-CS attempted to open dialogue with the new Jospin government by calling a truce in May 1997, but the truce ended very quickly after the government never responded and the FLNC-5M attempted to sabotage the new peace by committing attacks and claiming them to be the work of the FLNC-CS.

Jospin, however, would go on to attempt to create peace in Corsica. Tralonca's failure influenced the creation of the Matignon agreements, a series of negotiations between nationalist organizations, both military and political, and the government, which began in November 1999.

Tralonca's failure is a contributing factor to the major, “war-like” escalation of the conflict from 1996-2000. It raised more conflicts with the “warlord” groups fighting in Corsica, which would continue until the end of the years of lead in 2001. This conflict was a major part of the road to the assassination of Claude Érignac, who was a major figure in the Tralonca process as the prefect of Corsica.

The failure of the Tralonca peace campaign was cited by François Santoni as one of the many reasons for his departure from the FLNC-CS and his creation of Armata Corsa. Santoni claimed the ceasefire, though he disagreed with the state of it at the time, should’ve been honored “on principle”.

The Treaty of Amity and Commerce established formal diplomatic and commercial relations between the United States and France during the American Revolutionary War. It was signed on February 6, 1778, in Paris, together with its sister agreement, the Treaty of Alliance, and a separate, secret clause allowing Spain and other European nations to join the alliance. These were the first treaties negotiated by the fledgling United States, and the resulting alliance proved pivotal to American victory in the war; the agreements are sometimes collectively known as the Franco-American Alliance or the Treaties of Alliance.

The Treaty of Amity and Commerce recognized the independence of the U.S. and established mutual commercial and navigation rights between the two nations; it served as an alternative to the British Navigation Acts, which restricted American access to foreign markets. The Treaty of Alliance established a mutual defense pact, forbidding either nation from making a separate peace with Britain, and guaranteeing French support for the Americans should the British violate their peace with France.

Due to the critical material, financial, and military support secured by the treaties, their successful negotiation is considered the "single most important diplomatic success of the colonists". However, later complications with the Treaty of Alliance led to America forgoing any formal military alliance until the Declaration by United Nations in 1942.

Early in 1776, as members of the Second Continental Congress began to move closer to declaring independence from Britain, leading American statesmen began to consider the benefits of forming foreign alliances to assist in their rebellion against the British Crown. The most obvious potential ally was France, a long-time enemy and colonial rival of Britain who had lost much of their colonial possessions in the Americas after the French and Indian War. As a result, John Adams began drafting conditions for a possible commercial treaty between France and the future independent colonies of the United States, which declined the presence of French troops and any aspect of French authority in colonial affairs. Congress sent Silas Deane to France to negotiate.

On September 25 the Continental Congress ordered Benjamin Franklin and Arthur Lee to seek a treaty with France based upon Adams's draft treaty that had later been formalized into a Model Treaty which sought the establishment of reciprocal trade relations with France but declined to mention any possible military assistance from the French government. Despite orders to seek no direct military assistance from France, the American commissioners were instructed to work to acquire most favored nation trading relations with France, along with additional military aid, and also encouraged to reassure any Spanish delegates that the United States had no desire to acquire Spanish lands in the Americas, in the hopes that Spain would in turn enter a Franco-American alliance.

Despite an original openness to the alliance, after word of the Declaration of Independence and a British evacuation of Boston reached France, the French Foreign Minister, Comte de Vergennes, put off signing a formal alliance with the United States after receiving news of British victories over American General George Washington in New York. With the help of the Committee of Secret Correspondence, established by the Continental Congress to promote the American cause in France, and his standing as a model of republican simplicity within French society, Benjamin Franklin was able to gain a secret loan and clandestine military assistance from the Foreign Minister but was forced to put off negotiations on a formal alliance while the French government negotiated a possible alliance with Spain.

With the American victory at the Battles of Saratoga and growing rumors of secret British peace offers to Franklin, France sought to seize an opportunity to take advantage of the rebellion and abandoned negotiations with Spain to begin discussions with the United States on a formal alliance. With official approval to begin negotiations on a formal alliance given by King Louis XVI, the colonies turned down a British proposal for reconciliation in January 1778 and began negotiations that would result in the signing of the Treaty of Alliance and Treaty of Amity and Commerce.

The treaty established a comprehensive framework for mutual diplomatic, commercial, and navigational cooperation.

The Treaty of Amity and Commerce was signed on February 6, 1778, at the Hôtel de Crillon by American delegates Benjamin Franklin, Silas Deane, and Arthur Lee, and the French representative to the U.S., Conrad Alexandre Gérard de Rayneva.

Congress received the signed text on May 2, 1778, and ratified it on May 4, 1778, by unanimous vote; not all states were represented in the vote, as New Hampshire and North Carolina were absent while the attendance of Delaware and Massachusetts are uncertain. Urgency overrode the necessity of having all thirteen states ratify the document.

The Treaty was ratified by France on July 16, 1778.

On September 1, 1778, Congress formally expunged Articles 11 and 12, which dealt with import duties and exportation of molasses, respectively. Upon the Treaty's first printing in France the following month, references to these articles were removed, and all subsequent articles were renumbered.

While France had aided the colonists as early as June 1775, its support was largely clandestine and led by envoys and donors acting in their individual capacities. Along with the Treaty of Alliance, the Treaty of Amity and Commerce resulted in substantial and full-fledged support of the American cause, in the form of loans, military equipment, naval forces, technical and strategic assistance, and manpower. Aside from the direct strategic benefits, French recognition served to turn an "otherwise lopsided colonial rebellion" into a larger conflict, as France was the only nation roughly on parity with Britain. Open diplomatic support by the leading power of continental Europe also served to legitimatize the newly emerging United States, which in turn would invite other nations to recognize American independence and provide aid.

Shortly after the treaties were signed, French aid grew significantly and substantively. Over 12,000 soldiers, 22,000 sailors, and 63 warships served in the rebellion. Military leaders such as Lafayette and Comte de Rochambeau played a decisive role in the American victories at the Chesapeake and at Yorktown, which together hastened the end of the conflict. France played a leading role in brokering the 1783 Treaty of Paris that formally ended the war and led to de jure American independence; pursuant to the Treaty of Alliance, only when Britain and France settled their differences did the United States sign the Treaty of Paris.

The Treaty of Fontainebleau was a 1745 treaty in which France committed itself to support the Jacobite rising of 1745.

It was signed on 24 October 1745 in Fontainebleau, France, between Louis XV of France and the pretender to the thrones of Great Britain and Ireland, James Francis Edward Stuart. It was signed for France by the Marquis d'Argenson and for James's son, Charles Edward Stuart, "Prince Regent of Scotland", by Colonel Daniel O'Brien.

The treaty came following the Jacobite victory at the Battle of Prestonpans, after which George Kelly had been sent by Prince Charles to France in the hope of garnering French support. Based on the terms of the accord, Louis recognized James as the rightful King of Scotland and promised to support him, militarily if necessary, in a claim on the throne of England, if it became apparent that the English people supported a Stuart restoration. Under the treaty, France offered "all practical assistance" to the Jacobite cause.

In the event, the rising collapsed. Although preparations were made at Dunkirk for a French force to invade England, it never set sail.

The Treaty of Sablé (also known as the Treaty of Verger or the Treaty of Le Verger) was signed on 20 August 1488 in Sablé, between Duke Francis II of Brittany and King Charles VIII of France. A year after the signing of Sablé, the treaty was reneged upon in favour of a tripartite alliance at Amiens with Burgundy and England. The town of Sablé was therefore chosen for a summit in 1488 when the duchy was forced to do homage to the King of France for the last time. The duchy was later merged into the kingdom. Francis, who, under the terms of the treaty, was integrated a member of the French nobility, died on 9 September 1488.

Based on the terms of the accord, Francis acknowledged himself as a vassal of the king. Moreover, the duke pledged the territories of Saint Malo, Dinan, Fougères and Saint-Aubin-du-Cormier to be controlled by the French crown. Also, Francis promised to remove all foreign troops from his territories, as well as ensure to seek Charles's consent before marrying off his daughter, Anne. In return, Charles removed his forces from Brittany except in the town garrisons of the territories pledged by Francis. In another aspect of the treaty, Francis was no longer permitted to summon any troops from England.

Les Trente Glorieuses (French pronunciation: [ le tʁɑ̃t ɡlɔʁjøz ] ; lit. ' The Thirty Glorious (Years) ') was a thirty-year period of economic growth in France between 1945 and 1975, following the end of the Second World War.

The name was first used by the French demographer Jean Fourastié, who coined the term in 1979 with the publication of his book Les Trente Glorieuses, ou la révolution invisible de 1946 à 1975 ('The Glorious Thirty, or the Invisible Revolution from 1946 to 1975'). The term is derived from Les Trois Glorieuses ('The Glorious Three'), the three days of revolution from 27 to 29 July 1830 in France.

As early as 1944, after returning to a still partially occupied France as leader of the Free French, Charles de Gaulle introduced a dirigiste economic policy, which included substantial state-directed control over a capitalist economy that since 1940 had been controlled by German occupation. This was followed by thirty years of unprecedented growth, known as the Trente Glorieuses. Over this thirty-year period, France's economy grew rapidly, like economies of other developed countries within the framework of the Marshall Plan, such as West Germany, Italy, and Japan.

From 1946 to 1950, France, paralysed by an obsolete economy and infrastructures, did not achieve real growth, and living conditions remained very difficult after the war and the penury which resulted from it. The cost of living rose. Rationing, present until 1947–1948, and the housing crisis accentuated the problems of a people still scarred by World War II.

With restored borders and tariffs, this interchange was limited. With the 1951 introduction of the "Montanunion" European Coal and Steel Community trade according to supranational High Authority decisions, efficiency and prosperity rose.

These decades of economic prosperity combined high productivity with high average wages and high consumption, and were also characterised by a highly developed system of social benefits. The real purchasing power of the average French worker's salary went up by 170% between 1950 and 1975, while overall private consumption increased by 174% in the period 1950–1974.

The French standard of living, which had been damaged by both World Wars, became one of the world's highest. The population became far more urbanised. Many rural départements experienced a population decline, while the larger metropolitan areas grew considerably, especially Paris. Ownership of household goods and amenities increased considerably, while the wages of the French working class rose significantly as the economy became more prosperous. As noted by the historians Jean Blondel and Donald Geoffrey Charlton in 1974,

If it is still the case that France lags in the number of its telephones, working-class housing has improved beyond recognition and the various 'gadgets' of the consumer society —from television to motor cars—are now purchased by the working class on an even more avid basis than in other Western European countries.

In his 2013 book Capital in the Twenty-First Century, French economist Thomas Piketty describes the Trente Glorieuses as an exceptional 'catch up' period following the two world wars. He cites statistics showing that normal growth in wealthy countries is about 1.5–2%, whereas in Europe growth dropped to 0.5% between 1913 and 1950, and then 'caught up' with a growth rate of 4% between 1950 and 1970, until settling back to 1.5–2% from 1970 onward.

The Trial of the 66, also known as the Great Trial of the Anarchists (French : Grand procès des anarchistes), was a French political trial held in January 1883 against dozens of anarchists accused and sentenced for participating in the Black International. As a significant episode of repression against the anarchist movement, which was then in the process of formation and growth, the trial sought to decapitate the movement's structure in France, with very limited success.

Since the crushing of the Paris Commune during the Bloody Week and the banning of the Anti-authoritarian International (1872–1881) in the country and elsewhere, anarchists had been gradually evolving by adopting new strategies, such as the use of propaganda of the deed, and growing in numbers. In 1881, at the London Congress, a number of them supported the refounding of the International on anti-organizational and insurrectional principles, giving birth to the Black International. Peter Kropotkin, in connection with the Lyon Revolutionary Federation, subsequently undertook several trips across France, where he visited various groups and individuals. At the same time, the situation in France became increasingly unstable for the State, with the activities of the Black Band in Saône-et-Loire during the Montceau-les-Mines troubles, followed by the Assommoir bombing. The French State reacted with great violence, arresting dozens of anarchists and accusing them, during the trial held in early 1883, of belonging to this International, using various types of evidence, most notably the anarchist press itself.

For their part, the accused anarchists maintained that these allegations were false and that the trial was primarily intended to destroy the anarchist movement. Among them, Kropotkin, Toussaint Bordat, Joseph Bernard, and Émile Gautier were the primary figures the justice system sought to imprison. Almost all were convicted, eventually leading to the demonstration of 9 March 1883, followed by their appeal, where the sentences of a certain number were reduced. After their release, French authorities engaged in illegal stratagems aimed at incarcerating some of them once more. Far from marking the death of the anarchist movement in France, this period of repression did not interrupt its growth, a point that several of the accused, including Gautier and Kropotkin, had emphasized during the trial.

Following the crushing of the Communes in France by the nascent French Third Republic and the massacre of the Bloody Week, the emerging anarchist movement faced heavy repression both in France and abroad. In 1872, the Dufaure Law was passed, banning membership in the Anti-authoritarian International (1872–1881), their first and main organization during this period, and punishing any French citizen holding a position within the organization with five years in prison. Moreover, the anarchist movement, which was born roughly at the same time as the French Third Republic, developed a series of strategies and methods of action. One of these, propaganda of the deed, was theorized during the late 1870s. It involved using spectacular actions to incite the people to revolt and spark the revolution. This strategy was extensively debated within the anarchist movement.

In 1881, anarchists from the Anti-authoritarian International and other socialist factions met at the London Congress. There, they voted to re-establish (or perpetuate) the International on a basis that ensured group autonomy. They dissolved all visible structures except for a central correspondence bureau and enshrined propaganda of the deed and the recourse to insurrection as a central aspect of the organization. This marked the birth of what historiography has termed the Black International.

In parallel with these global dynamics, in France, new political events, specifically the amnesty of the Communards (1879–1880) and their return from exile or deportation, were giving fresh momentum to revolutionary and more specifically anarchist circles. According to historian Dominique Petit, the amnesty potentially led anarchists to believe that the State was more reluctant to relaunch a crackdown based on the Dufaure Law of 1872, which had been used at the time to suppress the Commune - explaining why they would have been less keen in hiding the International.

During this period, the anarchist movement was growing rapidly in Lyon and the surrounding regions, aided by the split within the Federation of the Socialist Workers of France (FTSF) between anarchists, such as Toussaint Bordat and Philippe Sanlaville, on one hand, and reformist socialists on the other. It also saw the birth of the first period of the Lyon anarchist press (1882–1884). Peter Kropotkin, who had been the delegate of the Lyon Revolutionary Federation to the London Congress, came back to France, traveled a lot and met several anarchists who were setting up groups, some in private meetings and some in more public ones.

Furthermore, republican paramilitary organizations, such as the Comité de la rue de Grolée in Lyon or the Black Band in Montceau-les-Mines, composed of armed and radical members accustomed to monitoring security forces and possessing networks across the country, gradually evolved toward anarchism and bolstered the anarchist ranks, causing a surge of activity for the movement in this region and deeply penetrating French territory.

During the year 1882, the situation in France became increasingly unstable, particularly around Lyon and the surrounding regions; the French State and the anarchists moved toward an increasingly confrontational stance, exacerbated by the severe famine affecting the city of Lyon. In the first half of the year, two anarchist workers shot their bosses and were celebrated in the anarchist press. Then, during the summer of 1882, events accelerated with the Black International congress held in Geneva in August, followed the next day by the start of the Montceau-les-Mines troubles. In Lyon itself, these riots and insurrections were met with waves of repression and arrests, as the Lyon Revolutionary Federation was accused of being behind the Black Band. In October, Fanny Madignier and at least two other anarchists carried out the Assommoir bombing to avenge these waves of repression, which in turn led to a new and much more significant crackdown. The arrests and raids took place following the Assommoir bombing and affected hundreds of anarchists across France. These actions were not based on charges related to the bombings themselves, for which the defendants' guilt could be difficult to prove, but rather by reusing the Dufaure Law. At the end, there were 66 accused, and their list was as follows :

Arrested: Louis Bardoux, André Courtois, Joseph Bruyère, François Dejoux, Jean-Marie Dupoizat, Eugène Farges, Louis Landeau, Joseph Trenta, Jules-Hyacinthe Trenta, Félicien Bonnet, Régis Faure, Louis Genet, Antoine Gleyzal (known as Garnier), Emile Hüser, Jacques Peillon, Pierre Pinoy, Michel Sala, Philippe Sanlaville, Charles Voisin, Jacques Zuida, Joseph Genoud, Étienne Faure, Jules Morel, Félix Tressaud, Pierre Michaud, François Pautet, Auguste Blonde, Dominique Crestin, François Péjot, Antoine Desgranges, Jean Ricard, Pierre Martin, Octave Liégeon, Joseph Bernard, Toussaint Bordat, Emile Gautier, Peter Kropotkin, Michel Chavrier, Jean Coindre, Joseph Cottaz, Joseph Damians, Nicolas Didelin, Victor Berlioz-Arthaud, Émile Hugonnard, Charles Sourisseau, Emile Viallet, and Louis Champalle. In flight: Georges Fabre, Louis Dejoux, Antoine Cyvoct, Henri Borréas, Auguste Ebersold, Georges Garraud (known as Valadier), Jean Baguet (known as Bayet), Joseph Bontoux, Jean-Marie Bourdon, François Chazy, Adolphe Dard, Jean Joly, Jean Renaud, and Emile Maurin.

The trial was held from 8 to 19 January 1883, and was presided over by Judge Jacomet, alongside three other judges named Dieu-Labrasserie, Groz, and Vallet. The prosecutor was Mr. G. Regnault. Most of the defendants did not hire lawyers; the others were defended by maîtres Maillard and Laguerre, of the Paris Bar, and maîtres Arcis, Boutier, Huguet, Minard, Roche, de Leiris, and de Lagrevol, of the Lyon Bar.

The anarchists indicted during the trial were accused of having participated in the Black International, that is, of having subscribed to the London Congress and thereby participating in the International, which was prohibited under the Dufaure Law. The prosecutor focused heavily on the London Congress, its decisions, its ideology, etc. He sought to prove that the defendants subscribed to this congress, notably by utilizing the anarchist press, including La Révolution sociale, Le Droit social, L’Étendard révolutionnaire, or Le Révolté, a vast array of seized correspondence between the individuals and groups, but also on the official congress proceedings for the London, 4 June 1882 Lausanne and 13-14 August 1882 Geneva Congresses, the manifestos and circulars shared by the groups, the 24 private meetings of the Lyon Federation - in which he had been able to have information through a snitch, according to the anarchists.

Although the indictment did not cover these points, he linked the Assommoir bombing and the Montceau-les-Mines troubles to the influence of both the anarchist press and the Black International, which he accused of having supported these initiatives or to have been behind them. He was helped in his accusations by the special commissaire of the Rhône, Perraudin, who testified for the prosecution and provided a statement in which he said:

The anarchist party originated in Lyon toward the end of 1880. It was following a regional congress of the East, held in Lyon, that the workers' party split into two camps: the voters and the abstentionists. At the head of the latter, initially few in number, was citizen Bernard, a locksmith born in Noyarey (Isère). At the outset, this group, initially of little importance and confined to the districts of La Guillotière and Les Brotteaux, focused on fighting against universal suffrage and spreading agitation among the working masses by means of strikes. Gradually, under Bernard's leadership, these groups developed and expanded to the districts of La Croix-Rousse and Perrache, forming, along with groups from Villefranche, Roanne, and Saint-Etienne, the Revolutionary Federation of the Eastern Region. As of 4 July 1881, the federated groups of Lyon had already attained a certain importance, for at a private general meeting held on that date at Cellerier’s home on Rue Sainte-Elisabeth, approximately 120 members were in attendance. It was during this meeting that, upon the proposal of companions Dejoux and Bernard, Prince Kropotkin was delegated to represent the Lyon Revolutionary Federation at the International Congress of London, which was to open on the 14th of the same month.

In closing his speech, which preceded the final defense statements of the accused, he targeted a few individuals in particular, stating that the court could be lenient toward the others but punish these anarchists severely. These were Peter Kropotkin, 'who was the father of the anarchist idea in Europe'; Émile Gautier, 'who was its apostle in France'; Joseph Bernard, 'who brought about the split of the workers' party in Lyon to found the Lyon Revolutionary Federation' and lastly, Toussaint Bordat, 'who was the organizer of that federation'.

For their part, the anarchists adopted several lines of defense. They presented the trial as an attack and a form of repression targeting the anarchist movement as a whole, rather than an International that most (though not all) claimed was non-existent or in opposition to their own positions. On these grounds, forty-seven of them (nearly all those appearing in court) co-signed the Declaration of the Anarchists, read by companion Tressaud from Marseille at 4 P. M. during the hearing on 12 January 1883. This declaration, which synthesized anarchist thought and ideology, subsequently achieved great resonance and was republished many times thereafter; it stated, among other things:

What anarchy is, and who the anarchists are, we are about to tell you: Anarchists, messieurs, are citizens who, in an age where the freedom of opinion is preached everywhere, have believed it to be their right and their duty to advocate for unlimited liberty. Yes, messieurs, we are several thousand, perhaps several million, throughout the world, for our only merit is saying out loud what the crowd thinks in silence, we are several million workers who demand absolute liberty, nothing but liberty, the whole of liberty! [...] For history is there to teach us that all governments are alike and are of equal worth. The best are the worst. There is more cynicism in some, more hypocrisy in others. At bottom, it is always the same methods, always the same intolerance. Even the most seemingly liberal governments have in reserve, under the dust of legislative arsenals, some 'good little law' regarding the International, to be used against troublesome oppositions. [...] Scoundrels that we are, we demand peace for all, science for all, work for all; and for all as well, independence and justice.

During the individual defenses following the interrogations, Joseph Bernard was the first to take the stand. He denied being a 'leader of the anarchist party' but stated that he would accept the title before the court. He made no mention of the International and instead recounted his life, noting that he began working at the age of fifteen and had devoted his efforts and activity, leaving behind normal youth pleasures like attending balls, first to the workers' party and later to the 'anarchist party', having served as a delegate to the first workers' congresses in France. He closed his statement by saying:

I want the social revolution ; I believe that it can only be achieved through force, and regardless of the sentence that awaits me, what I have done in the past, I shall do in the future. I have only one word left to say: If one day the humble and the disinherited, weary of suffering, take to the streets to claim their place in the sun, I will be there.

Bernard was followed by Félicien Bonnet, who briefly said that he was a socialist and wasn't a member of the International.

The defence by Toussaint Bordat, which lasted several hours and was one of the central events of the trial, began with a critique of the 'dramatic' atmosphere the authorities had imposed on the proceedings, which he claimed was 'intended to frighten people who are always quick to alarm'. He also criticized the press for adding to his previous sentences in their descriptions of him before launching into his formal defense. He spoke of his youth, during which he worked as a bricklayer, and compared his situation to the life of the bourgeois prosecutor facing him, declaring that while the prosecutor had the leisure to pursue studies, Bordat had to work by the sweat of his brow.

Next, he addressed his conduct during the Franco-Prussian War, as the prosecutor had accused the anarchists of being cowardly and unpatriotic. He highlighted the fact that he had volunteered for the French troops during the war when he was only sixteen years old. He noted that after being captured by the Prussians, he managed to escape and rejoin the French lines, only to desert later during the Commune, as he refused to march against it. He continued by stating that the Lyon Revolutionary Federation, of which he was a leading figure, would have never subscribed to the London Congress and therefore would not not belong to the Black International. Regarding the meeting of the International held in Geneva in August 1882, he maintained it was merely a gathering of friends intended solely to discuss the separation between anarchists and socialists and nothing more, he declared it ridiculous that France was prosecuting those who had participated in this meeting when neighboring monarchies had not done so on their part.

Bordat stated that he had no connection to the Montceau-les-Mines troubles, and that his travel to the region was simply in his capacity as a journalist for L'Étendard révolutionnaire ; he argued that convicting him for this was equivalent to attacking the freedom of the press. Returning to the subject of the International, the Lyonnese said that what truly existed was solidarity among revolutionaries of all countries. However, using rhetoric based on an organizational vision of the International, he declared that as anarchists, the Lyon Revolutionary Federation could not decently 'submit to orders coming from London' or belong to an 'association of an authoritarian nature'.

The canut produced the minutes of Federation meetings where the question of the International had allegedly been proposed by agents provocateurs, discussed and rejected, which he used to argue that, if they had already been members of the International, 'why would they have been asked to join it'?

Above all, Bordat implicated Georges Garraud, known as Valadier, who was a fugitive during the trial, accusing him of being the informant responsible for leaking information regarding the Federation's private meetings. This accusation caused a stir in the courtroom and prompted a categorical denial from Perraudin, the special commissaire of the Rhône. However, Bordat doubled down, declaring that he possessed documents provided by his own informants within the police force, documents he claimed to have hidden and that had not been seized during the raids on his home. Ultimately, the judge, the prosecutor, and Perraudin colluded to prevent Bordat from producing the documents, when requesting that he provide the name(s) of his source(s), leading to this reaction:

Only the papers I had no interest in hiding were found at my home; nothing was found that could compromise my friends. I have a police force of my own, messieurs, which I do not pay, for their services are beyond any payment. You wish to know the names of the authors of these documents, no doubt to have them arrested, but I do not wish to further increase the number of the accused. You, the impartial judge of a free country, believe in the truth of the assertions of your police, who take an oath and yet simultaneously claim they have seen and heard nothing. You may interrogate this police force, and, depending on what they tell you, sentence me to prison, to the galleys, or even to death… I shall always remain faithful to my word of honor and will name no one. If I were in possession of a few millions, I would have distributed some sums to these informants, witnesses whom you hold in such high regard, then, I am certain that, through their mouths, I would have been found innocent. In that case, they would have told the truth, though they would have had to be paid to tell it.

He closed his statement by asserting that it was a political trial and that the anarchists were merely seeking to apply the motto of the French Republic: Liberté, égalité, fraternité.

Émile Gautier, who held a doctorate in law, reflected on his bourgeois upbringing and compared himself to the prosecutor, stating that he could have 'ended up like him' but instead chose to dedicate his efforts to anarchism. He declared that the Lyon Federation was indeed part of 'an International Association', as demonstrated by Perraudin and the prosecutor; however, he maintained that he himself had never been a member of that federation, as he was based in Paris and had gone to Lyon for the first time in October 1882. He opposed the prosecutor's view that he had given a speech representing the Federation in Vienne, as he was already arrested on the mentioned date and had been replaced by Hugonnard in this endeavour.

Later in his speech, Gautier declared that the International had no longer existed since at least 1872, stating that the Hague Congress 'marked its demise'. He maintained that the links between anarchists were instead due to international solidarity within the movement and that the 'International anarchist party' would exist but wouldn't be touched by the Dufaure Law. He also maintained that it was a political trial, that they had not dared to attack Élisée Reclus because of his political and scientific importance, and that what the anarchists were being accused of was done by all political parties, namely, coordinating and reaching agreements across borders. He compared the Trial of the 66 to the trials of the Second Empire against the Republicans and closed his intervention with a definition of anarchism, followed by a declaration in which he affirmed:

The condemnation of the fifty-two defendants will not kill the anarchist party. Remember that in 1871, after the sinister slaughter of 35,000 Parisians, it was believed that the tombstone had been sealed over the murdered socialism, yet today socialism is stronger than ever. Despite your prosecutions, our proselytes will increase, and after your persecutions, if only one anarchist remains, I will be that one.

After Gautier, Michel Chavrier took the floor and declared that, despite his posturing, the prosecutor had failed to prove that the Lyon Revolutionary Federation was part of the Black International. He stated that he was still an anarchist and would remain one regardless of any convictions.

André Courtois, following immediately after, gave a very similar speech, declaring that there had never been any affiliation between the Lyon Revolutionary Federation and the International.

Dominique Crestin, the former manager of Le Droit social, followed them and declared the same, concluding his speech with:

After the eloquent words you have heard from the companions who preceded me at the stand, there is little left to say. I shall therefore confine myself to declaring that if, against all odds, we were to be convicted, I will do in the future what I have done in the past. I was an anarchist, and I shall remain one in spite of everything; the party may have men of greater talent within its ranks, but it will never have more zealous propagandists.

Antoine Desgranges, following next, gave a speech in which he objected to the anarchists being characterized as 'underlings' and idiots manipulated by 'leaders'. Reviewing his life, he spoke of how he was initially deeply involved in the syndicalist movement and local politics, even being elected as a municipal councillor, before concluding that the use of force was the only measure capable of improving the situation, thus becoming an anarchist. He mentioned the group Le Glaive ('The Sword') of Villefranche, to which he belonged, but denied that this group was linked to the International, maintaining that it was intended solely for social studies and that many socialist factions other than anarchists were represented there. He concluded by saying:

I have dedicated my life to the defense of the social revolution, and you can be certain, messieurs of the court, that when it breaks out, I will know how to make that ultimate sacrifice.

Étienne Faure, speaking next, offered a defense in which he maintained sarcastically: 'A certain fatality seems to hang over me; the more self-effacing my role is, the more people feel the need to exaggerate it'. He also criticized the prosecutor's erroneous characterization of his previous convictions in Switzerland.

After him, Régis Faure, from Saint-Étienne, took the floor. He was listened to by the audience with interest and maintained that when he had been arrested in Charolles, the questioning had focused on 'something else entirely' than the International. He denied that the Lyon Revolutionary Federation had any link with the latter. Against the accusation that he had been the delegate of the Saint-Étienne anarchist groups at the international congress of August 1882 in Geneva, he declared that he had never traveled to Geneva. He did, however, admit to having 'played a role in the socialist-revolutionary movement'. According to him, this was a class trial, as the Saint-Étienne Anarchist Alliance had a local name, which proved it was not regional but concentrated solely on Saint-Étienne. Furthermore, the fact that the Saint-Étienne anarchist groups possessed 'neither records, nor statutes, nor ID numbers, nor regulations, nor, in short, anything that characterizes an association', supposedly proved that the Dufaure Law did not apply to them. He concluded his speech by saying:

I condemn, and all my co-defendants will condemn with me, the threats and violent words directed against certain individuals. Not one of us would accept responsibility for the Lyon bombings, for we do not approve of them. I conclude by saying that if you are men of liberty, you will deliver a general acquittal.

The defence speech by Kropotkin, another central event of the trial, occurred after that of Régis Faure. He began his address by declaring:

I believe, messieurs, that you must have been struck, as I was, by the weakness of the accusations brought against us. Are you in the presence of an International Association? I could refrain from answering, for the proceedings are already well advanced and the proof has yet to be produced. It seems to me, moreover, that the prosecution collapsed at the same moment the following words were uttered by order of the public prosecutor: 'As long as there is an anarchist in Lyon', said this magistrate, 'I will prosecute him with the text of the law in hand'. These words alone suffice to indicate that the trial brought against us is a trial of opinion, a class trial. [...] Certainly, it would have been great if we could have come here and declared to you that we belonged to the International; but we could not do so, since that great association of workers no longer exists in France, ever since the iniquitous law of 1872 destroyed it. For my part, I would have been proud to confess to you that I was affiliated with that society, and even if the freedom of the defendants depended on it, I would have told you so!

In the following part of his speech, he revisited the prosecutor's accusations of anti-patriotism and pointed out that he was, quite naturally, more moved when he heard a Russian song than a French one; however, he stated that he loved France because it was the 'cradle of revolutions'; he also noted that during the Franco-Prussian War, it was the German socialists who had protested. For him, the travels and meetings he was accused of were merely simple trips, with no aim of propaganda or establishing groups. He revisited his biography, his imprisonment in Russia, and the fact that many of his companions had gone mad in prison there; he noted that, despite being a prince and an aristocrat, he had gradually taken the side of the proletarians during his youth. He also complained that the press misrepresented his life and that he was accused of being the leader of the anarchists, even though they wanted no leader, nor was he the founder, as he claimed the founders were 'Proudhon and Bakunin'. Kropotkin also made jokes that provoked laughter from the audience, declaring, for example:

I continually receive letters in which I am offered dynamite. My wife, who is in Lyon, herself receives proposals for infernal machines. Just as in Thonon, individuals would come to my home asking for jobs as gardeners or servants, when in reality they were there to spy on me; I would give them ten sous, pitying them for practicing such a vile trade. The next day, the newspaper Le Lyon Républicain dared to print: 'Our correspondent saw Prince Kropotkin, who told him he was the leader of the anarchist movement'.

According to him, the repression of the International would not lead to the disappearance of 'murdered socialism'; attempts had been made to destroy it twice before, under the Commune and by the Prussians, without success, only drawing more proselytes into the socialist ranks, echoing to some extent the position held by Gautier earlier. He then engaged in a more developed analysis of capitalism and the oppression it imposed upon the workers; highlighting the misery of the proletariat and contending that the anarchist social revolution would arrive within ten years, inviting the judges and the audience to make the right choice and become anarchists to hasten this revolution and join it once it happened.

Louis Genet, who spoke next, declared that there were no bylaws or regulations in the Vienne group to which he belonged, which wouldn't be part of the International, and that if he had attended the Geneva International meeting, it was in a private capacity and not as a group delegate.

For his part, Jean Ricard maintained that it was a mistake to label Kropotkin the 'father of anarchy', as this idea would have had first been formulated by Diderot ; according to him, one of its greatest theorists was Arthur Arnould, whose work L'Etat et la Révolution (1876) would be a definitive reference. He disputed the claim that the Lyon Revolutionary Federation was affiliated with the International, arguing that it was not the Jura Federation that had created the groups in question in France, but rather that they had emerged spontaneously from the will of several companions. He concluded his defence by declaring:

The International, the one most generally known, seeks to suspend work and organize a general strike; the anarchists seek to abolish the bosses. At the Geneva anarchist meeting that has been mentioned, the companions did not concern themselves with the International, but rather with the complete separation of the anarchist party from all political parties, whether radical or workers' parties. The International is a powerful association possessing everything that characterizes an association, whereas the Lyon Federation has no secret organization, no laws, no regulations, no leader, and no discipline. It is, therefore, not part of the association.

Michel Sala delivered an energetic defence, concluding with the following declaration:

I was an anarchist before entering prison, I shall be one upon leaving, and on the day the red flag flies in the street, I, like so many others, will go to take my place beneath its folds.

Alexandre Tressaud of Marseille, the anarchist who had been tasked with delivering their joint declaration earlier in the trial, defended himself by stating that the International had disappeared in France since the Commune, but also that it was merely a 'means, and what is truly pursued is the anarchist idea'. He then tried to show how the Lyon Federation, composed of autonomous members and groups, diverged from the International. In Marseille, he claimed, a federation did not even exist. He maintained that this was a class trial; then, facing accusations that anarchists attacked the family, he countered by saying that anarchists held a 'feeling and respect for the family to a degree at least as great as our accusers'. He highlighted the suicide of a lady named Feyghine, who 'took her own life for a bourgeois man,' and argued that the bourgeois, who were always speaking of morality and family, possessed multiple families and cheated on their wives.

When he made this remark, the judge interrupted him, stating that he could not encompass the entire bourgeoisie within 'exceptions'; Tressaud doubled down and then resumed by declaring that anarchists did not wish to abolish property but to extend it to all individuals at once, and that while universal suffrage might have seemed promising in 1848, its futility had now been demonstrated. He also complained that the interrogations conducted had not actually concerned affiliation with the International.

Pierre Martin, who succeeded him at the stand, opened his defense by returning to the subject of the International, asserting:

Even after everything that has been said by the defense counsel, even after everything that has been said by the defendants, I believe that one cannot draw the court's attention enough to this fact: the anarchist party possesses none of the characteristics that distinguish the International. It would have been necessary to demonstrate, establish, and specify that this party was a vast association with soldiers and leaders, a discipline, and bylaws. Has the prosecution been able to prove that the acts of each individual are the result of orders coming from any social authority whatsoever? One must say no, along with me. Nowhere has the slightest trace of affiliation been found; and yet, we all know that the government has at its service a foreseeing, perceptive police force, which often discovers that which does not exist. That is the case today. There is, moreover, a flagrant contradiction between our principles and those advocated by the International.

He added that the conviction of the defendants would change nothing and would increase anarchism instead of destroying it. Martin thus echoed the thesis of Gautier and Kropotkin, according to which repression would only serve to increase the number of anarchists. He then engaged in a discussion on anarchism as a philosophy desiring liberty, and denied that Kropotkin, Bordat, Gautier, and Bernard were leaders of the movement, for all anarchists were equals; he concluded that he could indeed be convicted as an anarchist, but not for affiliation with the International.

After him, Jacques Zuida stated that he was 'frankly anarchist'. He addressed the accusation of a lack of patriotism leveled against the anarchists by declaring that, as an Alsatian himself, he had enlisted as a volunteer in the French army during the Franco-Prussian War and had fought at the front, carrying out reconnaissance missions through the Prussian lines that provided useful intelligence. He concluded by saying that he 'was an anarchist yesterday, is one today, and would still be one tomorrow'.

Nicolas Didelin, a cousin of Louise Michel who followed him and had already been defended by his lawyer, declared that he was a committed 'socialist-anarchist' and that he fully adhered to the Declaration of the Anarchists read by companion Tressaud. He admitted to having called for the strike of conscripts and gave a speech on the matter, stating, among other things, that it was 'unjust for workers to lose the five best years of their youth preparing for the defense of property, often to be massacred for the preservation of the assets and privileges of others'.

François Péjot and Jacques Peillon, who followed next, gave brief speeches. The former declared that he was an anarchist and would continue to be one, and that he was not a leader, as such a thing did not exist within the movement. The latter declared that he did not belong to any International, that he was an anarchist in the past, was one at present, and would continue to be so.

Octave Liégeon admitted to being a member of the group Le Glaive ('The Sword') of Villefranche but that he wished he could have been even more active within it. He stated that his opinions were reflected in the declaration made by Régis Faure, then concluded by saying that he would remain an anarchist after his release from prison.

Philippe Sanlaville noted that he was very surprised to have been arrested for affiliation with the International, as he would have belonged to no group and had simply participated in meetings where the bourgeoisie was attacked, something he considered not only a right, but a duty. He concluded by attacking the bourgeois press and its 'vile assaults against the anarchists'.

Finally, Pierre Michaud, from Le Creusot in Saône-et-Loire, took the floor. He maintained that his anarchist group, Les Criminels ('The Criminals'), could not have joined the International because that organization did not exist. He stated that he had been a member of the trade union movement but had evolved, finding his place within his anarchist group instead.

In its judgment spanning 50 pages, the judge started by saying that he was relaxing de Gaudenzi, Girodon, Mathon, Ribeyre and Thomas for insufficient proof against them, and that it had based his subsequent assessment on five types of evidence; which included:

He started by starting to establish that the anarchist press concerned on paragraph 1 would be the official way that the anarchist groups corresponded, using for that, the formal confession of the accused regarding the editing of the newspapers Le Révolté, Le Droit social, and L’Étendard révolutionnaire ; the use of these articles by the defense itself; Bordat's admission at the trial concerning the blurring of lines between the editorial board of L’Étendard and the administration of the federation; the precise content of the newspapers regarding anarchist doctrine and tactics; the accused' acknowledgment of sending or receiving their seized correspondence (except 4 of them); the admission of statements made in public meetings; the lack of challenge regarding the documents listed in paragraph 5; and the legal validity of the search-and-seizure reports.

He continued by introducing the existence and activities of the Lyon Revolutionary Federation since 1881, citing the dispatch of two delegates to the Saint-Étienne Congress; the representation of the Federation by Peter Kropotkin at the London Congress; the reading of a report concerning Lyon by Kropotkin at this Congress; the publication of electoral manifestos advocating for abstention and propaganda of the deed in 1881; the sending of manifestos signed by the secretary to regional congresses; or the publication in Le Droit social on 5 March 1882, containing a list of sections and the names of their secretaries.

To prove the radicalism and the 'criminal intent' of the accused, he cited: the 'Social Movement' columns in the anarchist press, which would have attested to the relationships between groups; the organization of public meetings via personal summons to private gatherings; the subscription for a revolver of honor presented to Fournier; the calls to overturn jury verdicts; the death sentences issued against jurors and magistrates; the declaration of solidarity with the Montceau-les-Mines attacks; the encouragement given to the anarchist Jolly to assassinate the President of the Republic; the designation of specific monuments to be destroyed and categories of people to be eliminated; and the glorification of the dagger, poison, and dynamite.

Regarding the regional ramifications of the Lyon Federation and the collusion between the groups (St-Étienne, Villefranche, Vienne, etc.), he mentioned the activities of the Anarchist Youth and the Outlaws groups in Saint-Étienne; those of Le Glaive and the Indignés groups in Villefranche and Vienne; the circular from the Vienne group providing the address of the secretary, Martin; the address statistics sent from Villefranche to Bernard; the letter of 12 August 1882, from Saint-Étienne to Bordat; a letter from Auguste Ebersold to the Lyon Federation; the correspondence between Vienne and Villefranche; the letters from Jean Grave acknowledging the founding of groups by Gautier ; the letter from the Le Creusot group with the 'Revolutionary Federation' letterhead; the correspondence from Tressaud; the mail received from Bordeaux, Ganges, and Névian; the insertion of a decision signed by Bernard in La Révolution sociale for all French groups; and the reciprocal exchange of anarchist brochures and placards. He also accused the Lyon Federation of being behind the Assommoir bombing and of having sought to procure dynamite, through Bordat and other anarchists, in Switzerland or elsewhere.

Considering that the criminal intent of the anarchists was established by all these elements, the judge proceeded to the central question of the trial: whether or not they were affiliated with the International. He opened this section by declaring:

Whereas it is established for the Court, based on an examination of the case file, that the International Workingmen's Association, targeted by the Law of 1872, had ceased to exist several years prior; however, in the months of April and May 1881, under the influence of agitators from various countries and notably Kropotkin, an organizing committee was formed in London and addressed appeals to the revolutionaries of both worlds with a view to grouping all insurrectionary forces for the reconstitution of the International Workingmen's Association.

As in the prosecutor's closing argument, the London Congress occupied a significant place in the judge's reasoning. He noted that several defendants had traveled there or had sent delegates, notably Kropotkin, who served as a delegate for both the Jura Federation and the Lyon Federation, delivering a speech on behalf of the latter according to his own testimony in Le Révolté. Above all, the judge rejected the defense's claims that the International would still manifest itself through formal statutes, membership rolls, and so forth. In his view, the London Congress had very clearly evolved the structure of the organization by maintaining only the central information bureau as a permanent body; regarding this, he wrote:

Whereas it appears from the study conducted by the Court that the constitution of the International Association established in London possesses a unique character; as the distinctive trait of the anarchist idea is the absence of authority, constant effort was made during the meetings to remove anything that could be considered a power or even a leadership; it proceeded from the principle that all groups should maintain their autonomy and not abdicate power to administrators, as in the former International Association; in summary, it can henceforth be considered that the International Association manifests itself only through the assembly of group delegates composing a congress, deliberating on means of action, making the necessary resolutions, and temporarily ceasing its activity upon the dispersal of the delegates until such time as the central information bureau, at fixed dates or at an opportune moment, sends out summons to all groups worldwide;

He argued that the anarchists were not fools and knew that affiliation was punishable in France, citing a letter from Gautier to Arsène Crié dated 22 February 1881. In it, Gautier complained that certain anarchist press outlets wanted to publish the names of the delegates to the London Congress, stating that 'this was an absurdity' and that:

There is a 99-out-of-100 chance that the companions whose names are thus revealed will be arrested within 48 hours and duly convicted in countries where the International is outlawed. It is needless to add that this would mean the death of the party currently forming in France...

He maintained that Michaud's Le Creusot group had sought to affiliate with the congress by sending a delegate, citing a subscription list seized at his home intended for the dispatch of such a delegate; furthermore, that the Saint-Étienne groups had also sought to affiliate by entering into contact with the central information bureau. He also mentioned the fact that François Dejoux was sent as a delegate to the Lausanne Congress on 4 June 1882, representing the Lyon Federation, and that, upon his return, he had declared in the Lyon anarchist press :

I have seen the International Workingmen's Association as vibrant as ever.

According to him, based on seized letters, the anarchist press, and other evidence, Bordat, Morel, the Trenta brothers, Péjot, Régis Faure, Étienne Faure, Ricard, Michel Sala, Fages, Vaillat, Michel, an unnamed member of the Montceau-les-Mines group, and an unnamed delegate from Le Glaive group of Villefranche, had all participated in the international meeting in Geneva in August 1882.

Ultimately, of the 66 defendants, 14 of whom (20%) were fugitives, all but five were convicted. Sentences ranged from a few months in prison to the maximum penalty allowed by law for the affiliation to the International for those deemed most responsible, such as Kropotkin, Bordat, Gautier and Bernard. Those who managed to escape also received particularly harsh sentences. In total, the court handed down 165 years of imprisonment and a sum of 50,000 francs (≃250,000 USD of 2026), a considerable amount for the time.

While some of the convicted anarchists filed appeals, Michel returned to Paris, where she published La Vengeance Anarchiste and reunited with the carpenters' union of the Île-de-France region. A few days before the appeal ruling in March 1883, Michel and this union organized the demonstration of 9 March 1883. It was a particularly insurrectionary event, during which the crowd marched on the French Ministry of the Interior and the Élysée Palace, the seat of the French president, before being pushed back at the very last moment. This demonstration became famous for Michel's use of the black flag. After successfully evading capture, she eventually surrendered to the police. Four days later, the appellate judge called Rieussec decided to reduce the sentences of Liégeon, Crestin, Blonde, Péjot, Tressaud, Michaud, Bonnet, Régis Faure, Peillon, Voisin, Bayet, Gleizal dit Garnier, Pinoy, Sanlaville, Morel, Bruyère, and Dupoizat - arguing that the previous judgement had totally disregarded any mitigating circumstances (age, poverty, repentance, etc.) - the sentences of the 'figures' stayed the same, though.

According to the historian CEP, the French police undertook political maneuvers and dubious or illegal activities to imprison certain anarchists who had been released after serving their sentences, such as Sanlaville. He writes regarding him: 'Sanlaville was arrested on 7 June 1884, for being unable to pay the fines related to the Trial of the 66. In a report on him, the Special commissaire of the Rhône was satisfied with his incarceration and announced that it would be necessary to arrest other recently released anarchists: Bardoux, Bayet, Bonnet, and Fabre. This police maneuver was intended to 'instill a healthy fear' among those who, though released, 'nonetheless maintain a more correct attitude and abstain from putting themselves in the spotlight'. They were all arrested between June and July 1884, with the prosecutor attempting to have them sentenced to two years in prison. They were given the minimum sentence (one year) and, being unable to pay, had to be released halfway through the term. Sanlaville was released on 7 December 1884'.

Reflecting on the trial and its importance within the anarchist movement of the time, historian Vivien Bouhey writes:

The growth of this combat organization on [French] territory did not fail to provoke sharp reactions from the authorities (major trials thus took place, such as the one in 1883 in Lyon), which did not prevent many believers from joining the movement at all.

The triangular election (French : élection triangulaire) is a characteristic of the French electoral system as a consequence of the country's two-round voting system for elections to the National Assembly. Such a triangular election occurs when three candidates from the first round have reached the retention threshold, and none of them withdraws from the second round. The winner of this election is determined by a relative majority. Depending on the elimination thresholds adopted for the first round, the second round may also give rise to a quadrangular election (4) or even a quinquangular (5) or sexangular election (6).

A particularly notable triangular election took place during the 2024 French legislative election between the Ensemble pour la République, New Popular Front, and the Union of the Far-Right.

The first triangular elections appeared with the establishment of the two-round majority single-member constituency system. This electoral system was put in place during the legislative elections of 1852, and then kept during the Second French Empire and the French Third Republic, from the elections of 1876.

This voting method was originally considered favourable to the Legitimists, Orleanists, and Bonapartists, three political movements of the French right wing who suffered from division. Indeed, in the case of an incomplete bipolarisation of the vote, where a divided bloc withdraws in favour of the best of them during the second round, the triangular configuration is then more favourable to the political camp which has two qualified candidates.

This election system influences the politics of France more generally, as in order to be represented in the National Assembly without being able to win alone, you must have the support of other parties, in theory making the result more representative.

The occurrence of triangular races depends on the voting method of the elections, and more particularly on the qualification threshold for the second round.

In the 2021 French regional elections there were several run-offs, with the second round preventing the National Rally from winning any regions.

The number of three-way races per decade in various elections has never stabilised around any value. This is because of many influencing factors, sometimes favouring three-way races, sometimes causing the number of second rounds with more than two candidates to fall.

The higher the election threshold required to qualify for the second round, the fewer candidates there will be who will reach the second round and therefore the fewer three-way races.

The 12.5% threshold has not always been the same.

There were no more sexangular or quinquangular elections after the threshold change of 1966, and the number of quadrangular elections also shrank drastically.

If the threshold for remaining in the second round is a percentage of votes cast, which is the case for regional elections [ fr ] and municipal elections for municipalities with more than 1,000 inhabitants, then it is easier for a list or for a candidate to succeed in crossing this threshold, because too low a turnout would have no influence on the election.

Indeed, in the case of departmental elections [ fr ] and legislative elections where a percentage threshold of registered voters is in force, candidates wishing to qualify for the second round are dependent on abstention.

The voter turnout is a significant factor influencing the number of three-way races in departmental elections [ fr ] and legislative elections.

In the context of a 12.5% threshold of registered voters, for three candidates to qualify, the third must also win at least one eighth of the votes of registered voters. But this assumes that at least three eighths (37.5%) of registered voters go to the polls. Thus, a high abstention rate precludes any three-way race in the second round. The higher the turnout, the more it favours the possibility of there being a triangular election.

However, when comparing historical statistics of the participation rate and the number of second rounds with more than two candidates during the legislative elections under the Fifth Republic, no correlation is evident.

Another factor influencing the number of triangular races is the presence of partisanship, which in France is known as bipolarisation or tripolarisation.

To better understand the subject, here are some historical explanations concerning the influence of these phenomena on French parliamentary life between 1958 and 1997:

The relationship between bipolarization, tripolarization and the number of second rounds is therefore as follows:

In the event of bipolarization, voters shift massively to two political camps, in a more or less balanced way. In this situation, other candidates will then receive very few votes: in general, they will not reach the threshold for the second round. Bipolarization thus favours duels between two parties.

On the other hand, in the event of tripolarization, the votes of the French are distributed among three political groups, again in a more or less balanced way. Thus, in this situation and with a fairly good turnout, three candidates will remain into the second round. Tripolarization thus favours triangular elections.

When superimposing this influence factor on the curve of second rounds with more than two candidates during the legislative elections (1958-1997), the correlation is stronger.

A final crucial factor in understanding the number of triangular elections is withdrawal from the second round.

In the case 2024 French legislative election, 89 triangular races were recorded. This number represents only ten more than in the 1997 French legislative election, in a context where the National Front collected far fewer votes than the National Rally, and where the tripolarization of French political was similar to 2024. This was because before withdrawals, the number of three-way races was 306, a figure more in line with the context of tripolarization and high participation at the time. In the end, no less than two thirds of the three-way races were cancelled because candidates withdrew. The reason was that while the National Rally came out on top in the first round in many constituencies, the presidential majority and the new popular front withdrew their candidates who came in third place, in order to block the extreme right and form a "Republican Front". This practice of withdrawing the least well-placed candidates to prevent the first from winning the election was known before, but in a much less widespread manner.

To summarize the factors impacting the number of triangular elections and their influence, here is a summary table:

* Note that in the case of regional and municipal elections (of more than 1000 inhabitants) where the retention threshold is calculated from the number of votes cast, the participation rate has no influence on the number of three-way races.

In France, the correctional court (French : tribunal correctionnel) is the court of first instance that has jurisdiction in criminal matters regarding offenses classified as délits (middling-level crimes) committed by an adult. In 2013, French correctional courts rendered 576,859 judgments and pronounced 501,171 verdicts.

Lesser offenses called contraventions are judged by the Police Tribunal (proximity courts were permanently abolished on July 1, 2017). More serious wrongdoing such as felonies (crimes) are judged by the cour d'assises.

In terms of judicial organisation, the correctional court is one of the chambers of the tribunal de grande instance. At the largest of these courts, several chambers may hear criminal matters. Such courts number the chambers to distinguish them, and they are referred to as the nth correctional chamber or the nth chamber of the correctional court.

The jurisdiction of a court, such as the correctional court, is determined by the subject matter it handles (jurisdiction ratione materiae), the individuals it can judge (jurisdiction ratione personae), and the territorial area over which it exercises authority (jurisdiction ratione loci). The court must first assess its jurisdiction when a case is brought before it to determine if it can adjudicate, declaring its lack of jurisdiction (exception of incompetence) if it cannot.

In France, the correctional court is the criminal jurisdiction of first instance, and has jurisdiction to judge misdemeanors (délits). In first instance, it judges matters that concern the commission of a criminal offence [ fr ] (infraction pénale) considered a délit, similar in severity to a misdemeanor. In French law a misdemeanor is an offense punished by a prison sentence [ fr ] or by a fine of at least 3750 euros. The law also sets a maximum imprisonment term of ten years for misdemeanors punishable by imprisonment.

Since the classification of a misdemeanor is determined solely by the nature (imprisonment) or the minimum amount (€3,750 for fines) or maximum duration of the prescribed penalty (ten years for imprisonment), the correctional court’s jurisdiction covers criminal offenses [ fr ] across all areas: offenses against persons (involuntary homicide, aggravated assault, sexual assaults, discrimination, invasion of privacy, offenses against minors and families), offenses against property (theft, fraud, handling stolen goods, serious vandalism), offenses against state authority (corruption, contempt, rebellion, escape, forgery). These correctional offenses are defined and penalized by the Penal Code, as well as by special laws in other codes (e.g., weapons legislation, payment instruments, etc.) or non-codified laws (e.g., press law).

In some cases, multiple offenses may be committed simultaneously, or the commission of one may be linked to others, or they may occur sequentially without the offender being definitively convicted for one before committing the others. This is known as a combination of offenses [ fr ]. If all offenses in combination are misdemeanors, the correctional court adjudicates them together. In French law, a correctional court handling multiple misdemeanors in combination against the same person imposes a single penalty of the same type (e.g., imprisonment) for all offenses, not a separate penalty for each misdemeanor. However, as it can do when handling a single misdemeanor, the court may combine penalties of different types within certain limits (e.g., imprisonment and a fine).

If the offenses in combination are of different types, such as a misdemeanor and contraventions, the correctional court may handle all of them, particularly if there is a connection [ fr ] between them beyond the combination of offenses. The court must then rule on the related contraventions. Unlike the rule for combined misdemeanors, fines for contraventions accumulate with each other and with penalties imposed for combined misdemeanors. The court may then impose, for example, a prison sentence and multiple fines, corresponding to the number of related contraventions. The correctional court may also, when handling multiple cases with a connexité (connection), decide to consolidate them into a single case and impose a single type of penalty for all.

However, if one or more misdemeanors are connected to a crime, the criminal court has jurisdiction to adjudicate the related misdemeanors. The correctional court, however, cannot adjudicate the crime alongside the misdemeanors. If the crime and misdemeanor(s) in combination are not connected, separate proceedings (disjointed in legal terminology) are pursued: the assize court tries the crime, and the correctional court separately tries the misdemeanor(s).

The correctional court has no jurisdiction over:

Beyond these, the correctional court has jurisdiction to judge any other person who has reached the age of majority and has committed an offense. Its jurisdiction extends to co-authors and accomplices, assuming they too have also reached the age of majority. So for example two thieves who acted in concert, are co-authors of the theft, and any sponsor or silent partner is an accomplice by instigation. The three would judged together by the same correctional court assuming they were all adults. If one were a minor, his situation could only be determined by a juvenile court. Any proceedings that concern him would be severed from the correctional court case and take place only within the framework of the juvenile courts. So in some cases a matter might be examined by two different courts.

Territorial jurisdiction is determined by:

At least one of these five locations must be within the territorial jurisdiction of the judicial court for the correctional court to have jurisdiction over the misdemeanor.

As of 2022, there are 164 correctional courts, each with territorial jurisdiction corresponding to that of the judicial court or court of first instance.

If the correctional court finds that at least one of the jurisdictional criteria is absent, it must declare its lack of jurisdiction: this means that it must refuse to judge the matter. The jurisdictional exception is an absolute of the public order, which means that even if all parties had agreed to "choose" the tribunal correctionnel despite the rules of jurisdiction, the court has an obligation to declare itself as not having jurisdiction.

If during a trial the correctional court finds that the facts it is judging as a misdemeanor in fact amount to a crime, it must declare that it does not have jurisdiction and refer the matter to an investigating judge, whose involvement is mandatory for crimes.

Exceptions do exist to the exception of jurisdiction rule: a correctional court which would normally be without jurisdiction may in some cases need to judge a matter that arise in another jurisdiction. When a matter is judged outside of its territorial jurisdiction it is called dépaysement.

Finally, the law has come to recognize a practice of correctional courts, by fixing conditions where an act that can be characterized as a crime, rape for example can be judged by the correctional court as a lesser offense, such as sexual aggression rather than rape: this is called correctionnalization.

In certain cases, particularly for the proper administration of justice or public safety, a criminal case must be tried in a different territorial jurisdiction than the one determined by standard ratione loci rules, a process known as dépaysement. If a trial risks serious public order disturbance, the criminal chamber of the Court of Cassation may order the case transferred to another correctional court, upon request by the Prosecutor General at the Court of Cassation. Similarly, for the interest of proper administration of justice, the Court of Cassation may transfer a case at the request of the Prosecutor General at the Court of Cassation or the court of appeal, acting independently or at the parties’ request.

To avoid bias, when a case involves a judge, lawyer, public officer, member of the national gendarmerie, police, customs, prison administration official, or any person with public authority who regularly interacts with the competent correctional court’s judges or officials, the Prosecutor General of the court of appeal may transfer the case to the nearest judicial court within the appeal jurisdiction, on their own initiative, at the public prosecutor’s suggestion, or at the request of the person concerned, overriding standard territorial jurisdiction. This ensures impartiality in cases where professional relationships could influence proceedings.

Transfers also occur due to material impossibility, such as when the competent court cannot be legally constituted or justice is interrupted, with requests made by the Prosecutor General at the Court of Cassation or the public prosecutor at the seized court. In smaller jurisdictions, if legal incompatibilities prevent court formation, the president of the court of appeal may order the case transferred to a neighboring court within the same appeal jurisdiction, as specified in an annual ordinance designating transfer courts.

A lack of means in the cours d'assises in France allows some defendants to be judged by the correctional court after committing a crime. This is termed correctionnalisation. While illegal, the arrangement often suits both parties; the prosecutor or examining magistrate increases the likelihood of a shorter and simpler trial, as the criminal record lists only a misdemeanor, not a crime.

A French correctional court is composed of:

For the court to rule with a single judge, the potential penalty must be less than five years and involve specific misdemeanors outlined in the Code of Criminal Procedure, such as traffic offenses (e.g., driving under the influence) or assaults causing less than eight days of total incapacity for work (ITT) with only one aggravating circumstance. Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Article 398-1 outline some exceptions having to do with provisional detention and procedure for immediate appearance.

If the wrong judge is assigned, the case is referred to the collegial panel, as jurisdiction rules are matters of public policy. Typically, the president of the collegial panel will serve as the single judge. In cases where debates are expected to be lengthy, additional judges may attend to ensure continuity, as the rule requires that only judges who have heard the debates can deliberate (e.g., to address issues like a judge falling ill). However, only three judges deliberate on the case.

Proceedings are generally public. If publicity poses a risk to public order, the serenity of the debates, the dignity of a person, or the interests of a third party, the civil party or the public prosecutor may request that the case be heard in camera (closed session). This decision is announced publicly.

The president may prohibit access to the courtroom for minors or specific minors. They may also expel anyone disrupting the proceedings, including the defendant.

The procedure before the correctional court follows this order:

Following the civil party’s lawyer’s pleading (typically representing the victim), the public prosecutor (or their deputy) delivers an oral requisition, summarizing the evidence proving the defendant’s guilt and requesting a penalty on behalf of society. Contrary to common belief, the court is not obligated to follow the prosecutor’s requisitions, which are merely requests, similar to those made by the parties’ lawyers.

The judgment is delivered either “on the bench” (immediately) or “reserved” for a later specified date (which may be the same day at the end of the hearing or after a break). The public prosecutor and the clerk do not participate in the deliberation but must be present when the judgment is delivered. The offender, as well as the public prosecutor, may appeal the judgment. The civil party may also appeal, but only regarding their civil interests.

If the offender (i.e., the defendant) is absent from the hearing despite being duly summoned, the judgment is rendered in a contradictory manner but in their absence. Upon being notified of the judgment, they may appeal to be tried by the court of appeal.

Tripartisme (French: [ tʁipaʁtism ]) was the mode of government in France from 1944 to 1947, when the country was ruled by a three-party alliance of communists, socialists and Christian democrats, represented by the French Communist Party (PCF), the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO) and the Popular Republican Movement (MRP), respectively. The official charter of tripartisme was signed on 23 January 1946, following the resignation of Charles de Gaulle, who opposed the draft of the constitution. The draft envisioned a parliamentary system, whereas de Gaulle favored a presidential system.

The traditional political class, which had included all the right-wing parties plus the Radical-Socialist Party that symbolized the Third Republic (1871–1940), was completely discredited by 1944. The reasons for this perceived lack of legitimacy included in the first instance the Collaborationism of several of these actors, as well as the failure in the 1930s to put an end to the economic crisis that had characterized the years of the Great Depression. Thus the Democratic Republican Alliance, the main center-right party after the First World War, had opted for Collaborationism, an option endorsed by its leader Pierre-Étienne Flandin plus other members like Joseph Barthélémy.

The political class was considered jointly responsible for the collapse in 1940 of the Third Republic following the disastrous Battle of France, which the historian Marc Bloch later described as the "strange defeat" (l'étrange défaite). In this way, Gaullism and Communism emerged as the most popular political forces in the country. De Gaulle, who favored a presidential system, quit the government in 1946 and henceforth remained in the opposition until his triumphal return during the May 1958 crisis. For their part, the MRP, SFIO and PCF each achieved somewhere between 20% and 30% of the votes, with approximately 150 deputies each between September 1944 and May 1947. Afterwards, the PCF and de Gaulle's Rally of the French People (RPF) became France's main parties; however, both remained in opposition, because on their own they could not muster the absolute majority needed to form a government, and an alliance between them was inconceivable. The Three-Parties Alliance was succeeded in government by the Third Force, which comprised the Democratic and Socialist Union of the Resistance (UDSR), the SFIO and the MRP, with the Gaullists and the Communists forming the opposition.

After the liberation of France, the Vichy government was dissolved and the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF) was instituted. With most of the political class discredited, and containing many members who had more or less collaborated with the enemy, Gaullism and Communism became the most popular political forces in France. Charles de Gaulle had led the Resistance abroad, while the PCF was nicknamed the "party of the 75,000 executed" (parti des 75 000 fusillés) because it had spearheaded the Resistance in metropolitan France. On the other hand, the Radical-Socialist Party, which symbolized by itself the French Third Republic (1871–1940), was completely discredited for the role it had taken both before and during the war; equally, the conservative parties were vilified for their role during the Collaboration.

The March 1944 Charter of the Conseil National de la Résistance (CNR), the umbrella organization of the Resistance which was dominated by the Communist Francs-Tireurs et Partisans (FTP), envisioned the establishment of a social democracy, including a planned economy. Classical liberalism had been discredited during the 1929 crisis and its inability to come up with a suitable response to the Depression.

The GPRF introduced a program of social reforms and laid the foundations of the French welfare state. It also enacted some nationalizations in strategic or/and Collaborationist-controlled economic sectors (including the 1946 founding of Électricité de France electricity company, the 1945 nationalization of the AGF insurance firm, the nationalization of the Crédit Lyonnais bank in 1945 and the Société Générale bank in 1946, as well as the nationalization of the car maker Renault, which had been accused of Collaborationism). Trade union independence was guaranteed by the 1946 Charter of Amiens. This program comprised a substantial part of the so-called acquis sociaux (social rights) established in France during the second half of the twentieth century.

Charles de Gaulle led the GPRF from 1944 to 1946. Meanwhile, negotiations took place over the proposed new Constitution, which was to be put to a referendum. De Gaulle advocated a presidential system of government, and criticized the reinstatement of what he pejoratively called "the parties system". He resigned in January 1946 and was replaced by Félix Gouin (SFIO). Ultimately only the PCF and the SFIO supported the draft Constitution, which envisaged a form of government based on unicameralism ; but this was rejected in the referendum of 5 May 1946.

For the 1946 elections, the Rally of the Republican Lefts (Rassemblement des gauches républicaines), which encompassed the Radical-Socialist Party, the UDSR and other conservative parties, unsuccessfully attempted to oppose the MRP-SFIO-PCF alliance. The new Constituent Assembly included 166 MRP deputies, 153 PCF deputies and 128 SFIO deputies, giving the Tripartite alliance an absolute majority. Georges Bidault (MRP) replaced Félix Gouin as the head of government.

A new draft of the Constitution was written, which this time proposed the establishment of a bicameral form of government. Léon Blum (SFIO) headed the GPRF from 1946 to 1947. After a new legislative election in June 1946, the Christian-Democrat Georges Bidault assumed leadership of the cabinet. Despite de Gaulle's so-called discourse of Bayeux of 16 June 1946, in which he denounced the new institutions, the new draft was approved by the French people, with 53% of voters voting in favor (with 31% in abstention) in the 13 October 1946 referendum. This culminated in the establishment in the following year of the Fourth Republic, an arrangement in which executive power essentially resided in the hands of the President of the Council. The President of the Republic was given a largely symbolic role, although he remained chief of the Army and as a last resort could be called upon to resolve conflicts.

The PCF won the most votes of any party in the November 1946 elections, achieving 28.8% of the vote and prompting the Communist Maurice Thorez to make an unsuccessful bid for the presidency of the council.

The 1946 Constitution establishing the Fourth Republic, (1947–1958) created a parliamentary Republic, as distinct from the presidentialism which would characterize the Fifth Republic (1958-). Accordingly, the composition of the government was determined by the make-up of the Parliament, and heavily relied on the formation of alliances between the most popular parties, which in practice meant the MRP, the SFIO and the PCF.

The PCF refused to approve war credits for Indochina on 19 March 1947. Minimum wages were introduced on 31 March, while Paul Ramadier 's SFIO government heavily repressed the Madagascar insurrection, resulting in 90,000 – 100,000 deaths. When Charles de Gaulle created the Rally of the French People (RPF) in April 1947, the MRP prohibited its members from joining it. The MRP ceased to be the party of Gaullism and instead defined itself as Christian Democrat.

Tripartisme collapsed with the May 1947 crisis in which Ramadier's government excluded the Communist ministers from participating; this was the event that marked the official start of the Cold War in France. The May 1947 crisis could be described as the result of the Communists' refusal to continue support for the French colonial reconquest of Vietnam on the one hand plus a wage freeze during a period of hyperinflation on the other, which were the immediate causes of Maurice Thorez and his colleagues being dismissed from the ruling coalition in May 1947. From this moment on the Fourth Republic was plagued by parliamentary instability because two of France's most popular parties, de Gaulle's RPF and the PCF, remained on the opposition benches.

The Tripartite Agreement was an international monetary agreement entered into by the United States, France, and Great Britain in September 1936. The purpose of the agreement was to stabilize their nations' currencies both at home and in the international exchange markets after the collapse of the international monetary system during the Great Depression.

During the Great Depression, international monetary cooperation collapsed among liberal states. Following suspension of the gold standard by Great Britain in 1931 and the United States in 1933, a serious imbalance developed between their currencies and those of the gold bloc countries, particularly France. The devaluation of the dollar and the pound sterling raised import prices and lowered export prices in the United States and Great Britain.

In the United States and Great Britain sound money advocates were divided between those favoring reforms to stabilize the currency and others who called for an end to the gold standard and a managed currency.

The Tripartite Agreement was informal and provisional. Subscribing nations agreed to refrain from competitive depreciation to maintain currency values at existing levels, as long as that attempt did not interfere seriously with internal prosperity. France devalued its currency as part of the agreement. The remaining gold bloc nations, Belgium, Switzerland, and the Netherlands, also subscribed to the agreement.

Subscribing nations agreed to sell one another gold in the seller's currency at a price agreed in advance. The agreement stabilized exchange rates, ending the currency war of 1931 to 1936, but it failed to help the recovery of world trade.

The Triple Alliance (Dutch : Triple Alliantie ; Swedish : Trippelalliansen) was signed by the Kingdom of England, the Swedish Empire and the Dutch Republic in May 1668. It was created in response to the occupation of the Spanish Netherlands and Franche-Comté by France. Although Spain and Emperor Leopold were not signatories, they were closely involved in the negotiations.

It consisted of three separate agreements: a defensive alliance, an undertaking to oblige Spain and France to make peace, and secret clauses that included mediating an end to the war between Spain and Portugal and enforcing the peace by military action if required.

By 1663, Louis XIV had accepted that French and Dutch objectives in the Low Countries were incompatible and used the Second Anglo-Dutch War to launch the War of Devolution in May 1667. He and Leopold were co-heirs to Charles of Spain, and in January 1668, they signed a treaty that divided the Spanish Empire if Charles died without an heir, and it awarded Louis the Spanish Netherlands and set the terms of the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle.

The alliance was short-lived since both Sweden and England backed France at the outset of the Franco-Dutch War four years later, but it marked the point at which England and the Dutch came to see France as a common threat. That made it the forerunner of the Grand Alliance, which fought the 1688-1697 Nine Years' War and the 1701-1714 War of the Spanish Succession.

As part of the 1659 Treaty of the Pyrenees that ended the Franco-Spanish War, Louis XIV of France married Maria Theresa of Spain, eldest daughter of Philip IV of Spain. Despite being weakened by nearly a century of conflict, the Spanish Empire remained a huge global confederation. To prevent its acquisition by France, Maria Theresa renounced her inheritance rights and in return Louis was promised a dowry of 500,000 gold écus, a huge sum that was never paid.

In 1661, French Finance Minister Jean-Baptiste Colbert argued economic growth required possession of the Spanish Netherlands and the port of Antwerp. Acquisition would give France control of its own export trade, currently dominated by the Dutch Republic, a long-time ally. However, this implied conflict with Spain, Emperor Leopold as well as the Dutch. The 1648 Peace of Münster that confirmed independence from Spain shut the Scheldt estuary, closing Antwerp and making Amsterdam the richest commercial city in North Western Europe. Keeping it shut was a Dutch priority.

By 1663, Louis had concluded the States General of the Netherlands would never voluntarily agree to concessions and began planning to seize the area by force. As required by the 1662 Franco-Dutch Treaty of Paris, France entered the Second Anglo-Dutch War in July 1665; this gave Louis an excuse to expand his army, while he also calculated it would make harder for the Dutch to oppose him.

In September, Philip died, leaving his four-year-old son Charles II of Spain as king, and his widow, Mariana of Austria, as regent. Louis argued since the dowry remained unpaid, Maria Theresa's renunciation was invalid and so her rights "devolved" to him under the Jus Devolutionis, an obscure law restricting inheritance to children from a first marriage. He used it to claim much of the Spanish Netherlands. In April 1666, Charles' sister Margaret Theresa married Emperor Leopold; this meant on his death, Leopold would inherit the entire Spanish Empire.

Talks on ending the Anglo-Dutch War opened in Breda in May 1667. Louis launched the War of Devolution on 24 May, and by September, his troops had occupied much of the Spanish Netherlands. On 27 May, the Treaty of Madrid ended the 1654-1660 Anglo-Spanish War, and England agreed to mediate an end to the Portuguese Restoration War in return for commercial concessions. The Dutch raid on the Medway in June forced England to agree to the Treaty of Breda on 31 July, and negotiations then began between the two countries for a common front against France.

For De Witt, the French alliance secured his position against the Orangist opposition and ensured Dutch economic supremacy. By 1667, the prospect of France replacing Spain as a neighbour meant that most of the States General and the Dutch populace saw an English alliance as essential for mutual survival. Although Charles preferred France as an ally, he viewed Breda as a personal humiliation and blamed Louis, who failed to deliver on a promise to ensure that the Dutch accepted English terms. This perspective was widely shared by his advisors, including chief minister Lord Arlington, many of whom also viewed Spain as a better ally than France. Losses from war and the Great Fire of London meant both Parliament and the City of London wanted peace, which seemed best achieved by partnering with the Dutch.

Negotiations were led by Sir William Temple, English ambassador in The Hague and Brussels, who viewed French expansion as a bigger threat than Dutch economic strength. He was supported by François-Paul de Lisola ; he served as an imperial diplomat in London from 1667 to 1668 and The Hague from 1669 to 1673. Historian and political theorist Mark Goldie views Lisola's 1667 work 'The Buckler of State and Justice' as a key document in establishing France as England's enemy, rather than Spain.

In September, De Witt asked Louis his conditions for withdrawing from the Spanish Netherlands and offered to mediate with Spain to ensure their acceptance. Louis agreed, but only if the Dutch enforced them on both parties; this meant when Spain rejected his terms, the States of Holland passed resolutions on 10 December and 14 January 1668, approving military support for France. On 20 January 1668, Louis and Leopold agreed to a secret Partition Treaty, dividing the Spanish Empire if Charles died.

The French ambassador, Godefroi, Comte d'Estrades, was well-informed on negotiations for the Alliance and assured Louis that he could delay approval by bribes. However, Temple persuaded the States General to approve it before asking the provincial bodies although normal practice was the other way around. Once the States General announced their decision, public enthusiasm was so great that no one dared take d'Estrades' money. On 23 January 1668, the Alliance was signed by England and the Republic. Seeking to widen the coalition, Temple invited Sweden to join; it had signed a treaty with the Dutch in July 1667 and controlled the Baltic trade in pitch and timber, essential for shipbuilding.

The Alliance contained three separate elements; a defensive alliance, a guarantee of terms for ending the War of Devolution and secret clauses. Spain was held partially responsible for the war by arranging the 1666 marriage between Leopold and Margaret Theresa and so had to bear some of the cost. As agreed in September, France would withdraw from the Spanish Netherlands but retain Lille, Armentières, Bergues, Douai Tournai, Oudenaarde, Kortrijk, Veurne, Binche, Charleroi, and Ath.

The Alliance guaranteed to enforce compliance by Spain by a secret clause requiring it to end the war with Portugal. With Louis clearly preparing action, another clause committed to forcing France back to its 1659 boundaries if it continued the war. The English Parliament approved £300,000 if needed, and the States General activated 48 warships, and the recruitment of 18,000 additional troops. As a condition of signing, Sweden demanded reimbursement of 480,000 rixdollars, costs incurred for its attempt to capture Bremen in 1666, which it claimed was for the benefit of Spain. The Dutch and the English refused to pay and passed the obligation onto Spain; after protracted debate, Sweden signed on 5 May (NS), bringing together the three major powers in the Baltic and North Sea.

French troops entered Franche-Comté on 5 February; two weeks later, its conquest was complete and Louis decided to make peace. The cost of the war was far higher than expected, while Charles of Spain was reportedly close to death; if so, his agreement with Leopold meant Louis might achieve his objectives without fighting. In April, he met with English and Dutch representatives at Saint Germain to agree to terms, which were used at Aix-la-Chapelle in May. In Article 6, the Dutch and English undertook to enforce them if Spain did not comply, mirroring the 'secret' clause of the alliance against France. In reality, there was no English support for war with Spain on behalf of France or the Dutch, especially given the commercial terms of the 1667 Treaty of Madrid; besides, the Royal Navy was in no state to fight a war.

In the short term, the Triple Alliance was undermined by diverging interests. De Witt and Charles saw it as a way to improve their bargaining position with Louis, a perspective at odds with domestic opinion in both countries, which was strongly anti-French. In addition, the English were pro-peace, rather than pro-Dutch, and unresolved commercial disputes resulted in the Third Anglo-Dutch War. For Sweden, it was an opportunity to replace its regional rival Denmark-Norway as the primary Dutch ally in the Baltic, and end concessions imposed by the 1656 Treaty of Elbing.

However, the treaty marked the end of the longstanding Franco-Dutch alliance and the first step in creating the anti-French coalition that continued until the end of the War of the Spanish Succession in 1714. The balance of power concept advocated by Temple had two important implications for English policy: the ability to enforce it and a network of allies. From 1668 to 1674, Parliament voted large sums to strengthen the Royal Navy, and English diplomacy began to focus on powers like Sweden, Brandenburg and Denmark, instead of only Spain, the Dutch, France or the Holy Roman Empire.

De Witt hoped the threat of the Triple Alliance would force Louis to moderate his demands, but it simply showed the limits of his ability to control the States General. The Treaties of Breda and the Alliance were viewed as Dutch diplomatic triumphs, but while although De Witt understood the danger of thwarting French ambitions, he failed to convince his colleagues. Louis now decided the best way to acquire the Spanish Netherlands was to defeat the Dutch and began preparations for the 1672-1678 Franco-Dutch War.

Tristan Island or the Île Tristan is located at the mouth of the Pouldavid Estuary off the French port of Douarnenez in south-western Brittany. It is only about 450 m long and 250 m wide but despite its small size, it has a rich history. It is closely associated with Breton legends and the lost island of Ys. In the Middle Ages a priory was built there and the island was inhabited through much of the 20th century. In the 19th century, it became famous as the site of the first canning factory for sardines fished in the Bay of Douarnenez, the beginning of the sardine industry which was important for this region.

Now uninhabited, the island has become part of the national Parc naturel marin d'Iroise (Marine Park) established in 2007. It is accessible to tourists at low tide during spring tides most of the year, for a couple of hours at a time. A schedule is displayed on the mainland just across from the island, or can be obtained from the tourist office. At low tide, the island is connected to the mainland on the Douarnenez (or Eastern) side of the estuary.

Tristan bears traces of civilization dating back to the Bronze Age. The written history of the island begins around 1118 when, according to a charter dated 1126, Robert de Locuvan, bishop of Cornouaille, donated the Island of St Tutuarn and the lands belonging to it to the Abbey of Marmoutier. As a result, a priory was built on the island. Douarnenez is Breton for the land of the island, as the priory that owned the site on which the town was later built. In the 14th century, the island became known as Tristan, after the Breton legend of Tristan and Iseult.

One of the most colourful figures associated with Tristan was Guy Éder de la Fontenelle, a rebel-bandit who took possession of the island in 1595. He stationed his garrison of some 700 soldiers there, and proceeded to plunder most of the surrounding towns and villages.

After the island was acquired by Gustave le Guillou de Penanros in 1854, in the southern part of the island, La Planiche built a sardine press. Le Guillou de Penanros developed the harbour and the sardine processing plant on the island, the first of its kind. The sardine industry developed as Douarnenez' principal economic activity in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. In 1911, the island was purchased by Jean Richepin, an author and playwright. He built the rotunda and the Chapelle des Aviateurs commemorating the first transatlantic flight from Europe to the United States by Dieudonné Costes and Maurice Bellonte in September 1930.

In 1995, the island was bought by Conservatoire du Littoral. It has carried out restoration work on the buildings and maintained the paths and gardens. The island is now maintained as part of the national Parc naturel marin d'Iroise (Marine Park) established in 2007.

The small island has rocky coasts and sea cliffs. From its years of habitation, an orchard, and a tropical garden were cultivated and are still maintained. Several footpaths reveal views of the bay, as well as Tréboul and Port Rhu on the mainland. At the northern end of the island, a lighthouse and the ruins of an old fort can be seen.

Rabbits and lizards abound on the island, as do a wide variety of seabirds, especially cormorants, guillemots and herons. The vegetation is particularly rich in magnolias, medlars and quince trees. Cedars, oak and apple trees have been planted, as well as exotic varieties of bamboo, myrtle and mimosa. A large orchard is located in the southern part of the island, in addition to a tropical garden with a giant bamboo plantation, magnolia and fuchsia.

The recently renovated canning factory is now used as offices for staff working for the national Iroise Marine Park or Parc naturel marin d'Iroise created in 2007.

A truffle is the fruiting body of a subterranean ascomycete fungus, one of the species of the genus Tuber. More than one hundred other genera of fungi are classified as truffles including Geopora, Peziza, Choiromyces, and Leucangium. These genera belong to the class Pezizomycetes and the Pezizales order. Several truffle-like basidiomycetes are excluded from Pezizales, including Rhizopogon and Glomus.

Truffles are ectomycorrhizal fungi, so they are found in close association with tree roots. Spore dispersal is accomplished through fungivores, animals that eat fungi. These fungi have ecological roles in nutrient cycling and drought tolerance.

Some truffle species are prized as food. Edible truffles are used in Italian, French and other national hautes cuisines. Truffles are cultivated and harvested from natural environments.

The black truffle or black Périgord truffle (Tuber melanosporum), the second-most commercially valuable species, is named after the Périgord region in France. Black truffles associate with oaks, hazelnut, cherry, and other deciduous trees and are harvested in late autumn and winter. The genome sequence of the black truffle was published in March 2010.

The black summer truffle (Tuber aestivum) is found across Europe and is prized for its culinary value. Burgundy truffles (designated Tuber uncinatum, but the same species) are harvested in autumn until December and have aromatic flesh of a darker colour. These are associated with various trees and shrubs.

Tuber magnatum, the high-value white truffle (Italian : tartufo bianco) is found mainly in the Langhe and Montferrat areas of the Piedmont region in northern Italy, and most famously, in the countryside around the cities of Alba and Asti. A large percentage of Italy's white truffles also come from Molise.

Truffles are subterranean, highly prized fungi (Italian : diamonds of the earth) that grow on tree roots, often selling for thousands of dollars per pound due to their rarity and intense, savory umami flavour. They are found underground, usually with oak or hazelnut trees, and were historically hunted using pigs, though dogs are now preferred.

The " whitish truffle " (Tuber borchii) is a similar species native to Tuscany, Abruzzo, Romagna, Umbria, the Marche, and Molise. It is reportedly not as aromatic as those from Piedmont, although those from Città di Castello are said to come quite close.

A less common truffle is "garlic truffle" (Tuber macrosporum).

In the U.S. Pacific Northwest, several species of truffle are harvested both recreationally and commercially, most notably, Leucangium carthusianum, the Oregon black truffle; Tuber gibbosum, Oregon spring white truffle; and Tuber oregonense, Oregon winter white truffle. Kalapuya brunnea, the Oregon brown truffle, has also been commercially harvested and is of culinary note. The Oregon white truffle is increasingly harvested due to its high quality and also exported to other countries. Oregon celebrates its traditional truffle harvesting with a 'truffle festival', combined with culinary shows and wine tastings.

The pecan truffle (Tuber lyonii) syn. texense is found in the Southern United States, usually associated with pecan trees. Chefs who have experimented with them agree "they are very good and have potential as a food commodity". Although pecan farmers used to find them along with pecans and discard them, considering them a nuisance, they now sell for about $160 a pound and have been used in some gourmet restaurants.

The term "truffle" has been applied to several other genera of similar underground fungi. The genera Terfezia and Tirmania of the family Terfeziaceae are known as the "desert truffles" of Africa and the Middle East. Pisolithus tinctorius, which was historically eaten in parts of Germany, is sometimes called "Bohemian truffle".

Geopora spp. are important ectomycorrhizal partners of trees in woodlands and forests throughout the world. Pinus edulis, a widespread pine species of the Southwest US, is dependent on Geopora for nutrient and water acquisition in arid environments. Like other truffle fungi, Geopora produces subterranean sporocarps as a means of sexual reproduction. Geopora cooperi, also known as pine truffle or fuzzy truffle, is an edible species of this genus.

Rhizopogon spp. are ectomycorrhizal members of the Basidiomycota and the order Boletales, a group of fungi that typically form mushrooms. Like their ascomycete counterparts, these fungi can create truffle-like fruiting bodies. Rhizopogon spp. are ecologically important in coniferous forests where they associate with various pines, firs, and Douglas fir. In addition to their ecological importance, these fungi hold economic value, as well. Rhizopogon spp. are commonly used to inoculate coniferous seedlings in nurseries and during reforestation.

Hysterangium spp. are ectomycorrhizal members of the Basidiomycota and the order Hysterangiales that form sporocarps similar to true truffles. These fungi form mycelial mats of vegetative hyphae that may cover 25–40% of the forest floor in Douglas fir forests, thereby contributing to a significant portion of the biomass present in soils. Like other ectomycorrhizal fungi, Hysterangium spp. play a role in nutrient exchange in the nitrogen cycle by accessing nitrogen unavailable to host plants and acting as nitrogen sinks in forests.

Glomus spp. are arbuscular mycorrhizae of the phylum Glomeromycota within the order Glomerales. Members of this genus have low host specificity, associating with a variety of plants including hardwoods, forbs, shrubs, and grasses. These fungi commonly occur throughout the Northern Hemisphere.

Members of the genus Elaphomyces are commonly mistaken for truffles.

Phylogenetic analysis has demonstrated the convergent evolution of the ectomycorrhizal trophic mode in diverse fungi. The subphylum Pezizomycotina, containing the order Pezizales, is approximately 400 million years old. Within the order Pezizales, subterranean fungi evolved independently at least fifteen times. Contained within Pezizales are the families Tuberaceae, Pezizaceae, Pyronematacae, and Morchellaceae. All of these families contain lineages of subterranean or truffle fungi.

The oldest ectomycorrhizal fossils are from the Eocene about 50 million years ago. The specimens are preserved permineralized in-situ in the Eocene Okanagan Highlands Princeton chert site. This indicates that the soft bodies of ectomycorrhizal fungi do not easily fossilize. Molecular clockwork has suggested the evolution of ectomycorrhizal fungi occurred approximately 130 million years ago.

The evolution of subterranean fruiting bodies has occurred numerous times within the Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, and Glomeromycota. For example, the genera Rhizopogon and Hysterangium of Basidiomycota both form subterranean fruiting bodies and play similar ecological roles as truffle forming ascomycetes. The ancestors of the Ascomycota genera Geopora, Tuber, and Leucangium originated in Laurasia during the Paleozoic era.

Phylogenetic evidence suggests that most subterranean fruiting bodies evolved from above-ground mushrooms. Over time mushroom stipes and caps were reduced, and caps began to enclose reproductive tissue. The dispersal of sexual spores then shifted from wind and rain to utilising animals.

The phylogeny and biogeography of the genus Tuber was investigated in 2008 using internal transcribed spacers (ITS) of nuclear DNA and revealed five major clades (Aestivum, Excavatum, Rufum, Melanosporum and Puberulum); this was later improved and expanded in 2010 to nine major clades using 28S large subunits (LSU) rRNA of mitochondrial DNA. The Magnatum and Macrosporum clades were distinguished as distinct from the Aestivum clade. The Gibbosum clade was resolved as distinct from all other clades, and the Spinoreticulatum clade was separated from the Rufum clade.

The truffle habit has evolved independently among several basidiomycete genera. Phylogenetic analysis has revealed that basidiomycete subterranean fruiting bodies, like their ascomycete counterparts, evolved from above ground mushrooms. For example, Rhizopogon species likely arose from an ancestor shared with Suillus, a mushroom-forming genus. Studies have suggested that selection for subterranean fruiting bodies among ascomycetes and basidiomycetes occurred in water-limited environments.

Most sources agree that the term "truffle" is derived from the Latin term tūber by way of the Vulgar Latin tufera, meaning "swelling" or "lump". This then entered other languages through Old French dialects.

The mycelia of truffles form symbiotic, mycorrhizal relationships with the roots of several tree species, including beech, birch, hazel, hornbeam, oak, pine, and poplar. Mutualistic ectomycorrhizal fungi such as truffles provide valuable nutrients to plants in exchange for carbohydrates. Ectomycorrhizal fungi cannot survive in the soil without their plant hosts. In fact, many of these fungi have lost the enzymes necessary for obtaining carbon through other means. For example, truffle fungi have lost their ability to degrade the cell walls of plants, limiting their capacity to decompose plant litter. Plant hosts can also depend on their associated truffle fungi. Geopora, Peziza, and Tuber spp. are vital in the establishment of oak communities.

Tuber species prefer argillaceous or calcareous soils that are well drained and neutral or alkaline. Tuber truffles fruit throughout the year, depending on the species, and can be found buried between the leaf litter and the soil. Most fungal biomass is found in the humus and litter layers of soil.

Most truffle fungi produce both asexual spores (mitospores or conidia) and sexual spores (meiospores or ascospores / basidiospores). Conidia can be produced more readily and with less energy than ascospores and can disperse during disturbance events. Production of ascospores is energy intensive because the fungus must allocate resources to the production of large sporocarps. Ascospores are borne within sac-like structures called asci, which are contained within the sporocarp.

Because truffle fungi produce their sexual fruiting bodies underground, spores cannot be spread by wind and water. Therefore, nearly all truffles depend on mycophagous animal vectors for spore dispersal. This is analogous to the dispersal of seeds in fruit of angiosperms. When the ascospores are fully developed, the truffle exudes volatile compounds that attract animal vectors. For successful dispersal, these spores must survive passage through the digestive tracts of animals. Ascospores have thick walls composed of chitin to help them endure the environment of animal guts.

Animal vectors include birds, deer, and rodents such as voles, squirrels, and chipmunks. Many species of trees, such as Quercus garryana, are dependent on the dispersal of sporocarps to inoculate isolated individuals. For example, the acorns of Q. garryana may be carried to new territory that lacks the necessary mycorrhizal fungi for establishment.

Some mycophagous animals depend on truffles as their dominant food source. Flying squirrels, Glaucomys sabrinus, of North America play a three-way symbiosis with truffles and their associated plants. G. sabrinus is particularly adapted to finding truffles using its refined sense of smell, visual clues, and long-term memory of prosperous populations of truffles. This intimacy between animals and truffles indirectly influences the success of mycorrhizal plant species.

After ascospores are dispersed, they remain dormant until germination is initiated by exudates excreted from host plant roots. Following germination, hyphae form and seek out the roots of host plants. Arriving at roots, hyphae begin to form a mantle or sheath on the outer surface of root tips. Hyphae then enter the root cortex intercellularly to form the Hartig net for nutrient exchange. Hyphae can spread to other root tips colonising the entire root system of the host. Over time, the truffle fungus accumulates sufficient resources to form fruiting bodies. Rate of growth is correlated with increasing photosynthetic rates in the spring as trees leaf out.

Truffle fungi receive carbohydrates from their host plants, providing them with valuable micro- and macronutrients. Plant macronutrients include potassium, phosphorus, nitrogen, and sulfur. In contrast, micronutrients include iron, copper, zinc, and chloride. In truffle fungi, as in all ectomycorrhizae, the majority of nutrient exchange occurs in the Hartig net, the intercellular hyphal network between plant root cells. A unique feature of ectomycorrhizal fungi is the formation of the mantle on the outer surface of fine roots.

Truffles have been suggested to co-locate with the orchid species Epipactis helleborine and Cephalanthera damasonium, though this is not always the case.

Truffle fungi are ecologically important in nutrient cycling. Plants obtain nutrients via their fine roots. Mycorrhizal fungi are much smaller than fine roots, so they have a higher surface area and a greater ability to explore soils for nutrients. Acquisition of nutrients includes the uptake of phosphorus, nitrate or ammonium, iron, magnesium, and other ions. Many ectomycorrhizal fungi form fungal mats in the upper layers of soils surrounding host plants. These mats have significantly higher carbon and fixed nitrogen concentrations than surrounding soils. Because these mats are nitrogen sinks, leaching of nutrients is reduced.

Mycelial mats can also help maintain the structure of soils by holding organic matter in place and preventing erosion. Often, these networks of mycelium provide support for smaller organisms in the soil, such as bacteria and microscopic arthropods. Bacteria feed on the exudates released by mycelium and colonise the soil surrounding them. Microscopic arthropods such as mites feed directly on mycelium and release valuable nutrients for the uptake of other organisms. Thus, truffle fungi and other ectomycorrhizal fungi facilitate a complex system of nutrient exchange between plants, animals, and microbes.

Plant community structure is often affected by the availability of compatible mycorrhizal fungi. In arid-land ecosystems, these fungi become essential for the survival of their host plants by enhancing the ability to withstand drought. A foundation species in arid-land ecosystems of the Southwest U.S. is Pinus edulis, commonly known as pinyon pine. P. edulis associates with the subterranean fungi Geopora and Rhizopogon.

As global temperatures rise, so does the occurrence of severe droughts, detrimentally affecting the survival of aridland plants. This variability in climate has increased the mortality of P. edulis. Therefore, the availability of compatible mycorrhizal inoculum can greatly affect the successful establishment of P. edulis seedlings. Associated ectomycorrhizal fungi will likely play a significant role in the survival of P. edulis with continuing global climate change.

The mycelia or fruiting bodies release the volatile constituents responsible for the natural aroma of truffles or derive from truffle-associated microbes. The chemical ecology of truffle volatiles is complex, interacting with plants, insects, and mammals, which contribute to spore dispersal. Depending on the truffle species, lifecycle, or location, they include:

Several truffle species and varieties are differentiated based on their relative contents or absence of sulfides, ethers or alcohols, respectively. The sweaty-musky aroma of truffles is similar to that of the pheromone androstenol that also occurs in humans. As of 2010, the volatile profiles of seven black and six white truffle species have been studied.

Because truffles are subterranean, they are often located with the help of an animal (sometimes called a truffler) possessing a refined sense of smell. Traditionally, pigs have been used to extract truffles. Both the female pig's natural truffle-seeking and her intent to eat the truffle were thought to be due to a compound within the truffle similar to androstenol, the sex pheromone of boar saliva, to which the sow is keenly attracted. Studies in 1990 demonstrated that the compound actively recognised by both truffle pigs and dogs is dimethyl sulfide.

In Italy, the use of pigs to hunt truffles has been prohibited since 1985 because of damage caused by animals to truffle mycelia during the digging that dropped the production rate of the area for some years. An alternative to truffle pigs are dogs. Dogs offer an advantage because they do not have a strong desire to eat truffles, so they can be trained to locate sporocarps without digging them up. Pigs attempt to dig up truffles.

Fly species of the genus Suillia can also detect the volatile compounds associated with subterranean fruiting bodies. These flies lay their eggs above truffles to provide food for their young. At ground level, Suilla flies can be seen flying above truffles.

Truffles long eluded techniques of cultivation, as Jean-Anthelme Brillat-Savarin (1825) noted:

The most learned men have sought to ascertain the secret and fancied they discovered the seed. Their promises, however, were vain, and no planting was ever followed by a harvest. This perhaps is all right, for as one of the great values of truffles is their dearness, perhaps they would be less highly esteemed if they were cheaper.

Truffles can be cultivated. As early as 1808, attempts to cultivate truffles, known in French as trufficulture, were successful. People had long observed that truffles were growing among the roots of certain trees, and in 1808, Joseph Talon, from Apt (département of Vaucluse) in southern France, had the idea of transplanting some seedlings that he had collected at the foot of oak trees known to host truffles in their root system.

For discovering how to cultivate truffles, some sources now give priority to Pierre II Mauléon (1744–1831) of Loudun (in western France), who began to cultivate truffles around 1790. Mauléon saw an "obvious symbiosis" between the oak tree, the rocky soil, and the truffle and attempted to reproduce such an environment by taking acorns from trees known to have produced truffles and sowing them in chalky soil. His experiment was successful, with truffles found in the soil around the newly grown oak trees years later. In 1847, Auguste Rousseau of Carpentras (in Vaucluse) planted 7 hectares (17 acres) of oak trees (again from acorns found on the soil around truffle-producing oak trees), and he subsequently obtained large harvests of truffles. He received a prize at the 1855 World's Fair in Paris.

Others imitated these successful attempts in France and Italy. In the late 19th century, an epidemic of phylloxera destroyed many of the vineyards in southern France. Another epidemic killed most of the silkworms there, too, making the fields of mulberry trees useless. Trufficulture became an important source of income for those affected. The calcareous and exposed vineyard soils were well-suited to the cultivation of truffles. By 1890, truffières (truffle plantations) covered 750 km of land in France, and 2,000 tonnes of truffles were produced in that year.

From the 19th century to the present, truffle production fell by 97–99% to 20–50 tonnes annually. Reasons given for this decline include the Industrial Revolution, the subsequent rural flight and the multiple European wars of the 20th century, which reduced the rural population. For example, World War I resulted in the mobilisation of 65% of the agricultural workers from the region of Lot alone. Knowledge of truffle cultivation, the soil and the seasons was lost along with the people. Another consequence was no more grazing sheep or shepherds who pruned trees for feed and fuelwood, so former truffle plantations turned into closed forests that no longer produced truffles. Truffles were once sold at weekly markets (bi-weekly in the case of a market in Martel, Lot) and in quantities of two to six tonnes in good weeks, but only Lalbenque and Limogne today have weekly truffle markets. Prices have increased so that truffles, once seen as a food of the middle class, have become a luxury.

The situation changed in the late 1960s and early 1970s, with researchers in France and Italy establishing mycorrhizas with truffle spores. Beginning from the 1980s, truffle plantations are compensating for some of the decline in wild truffles, and exist in various countries including France, Italy, Spain and Australia. About 80% of the truffles now produced in France come from specially planted truffle groves. Investments in cultivated plantations are underway in many parts of the world using controlled irrigation for regular and resilient production.

A critical phase of the cultivation is the quality control of the mycorrhizal plants. Between 7 and 10 years are needed for the truffles to develop their mycorrhizal network, and only after that do the host plants come into production. Complete soil analysis to avoid contamination by other dominant fungi and very strict control of the formation of mycorrhizae are necessary to ensure the success of a plantation. Total investment per hectare for an irrigated and barrier-sealed plantation (against wild boars) can cost up to €10,000. Considering the level of initial investment and the maturity delay, farmers who have not taken care of both soil conditions and seedling conditions are at high risk of failure.

The first black truffles (Tuber melanosporum) to be produced in the Southern Hemisphere were harvested in Gisborne, New Zealand in 1993.

New Zealand's first burgundy truffle was found in July 2012 at a Waipara truffle farm. It weighed 330 g and was found by the farm owner's beagle.

In 1999, the first Australian truffles were harvested in Tasmania, the result of eight years of work. Trees were inoculated with the truffle fungus to create a local truffle industry. Their success and the value of the resulting truffles has encouraged a small industry to develop.

Truffle production has expanded into the colder regions of Victoria, New South Wales and Western Australia. In 2014, over 5,000 kilograms (11,000 pounds) of truffles were harvested by Truffle Hill, Manjimup, Western Australia.

In June 2014, a grower harvested Australia's largest truffle from their property at Robertson, in the Southern Highlands of New South Wales. It was a French black périgord fungus weighing in at 1.172 kg (2 lb 9 + 5 ⁄ 16 oz) and was valued at over $2,000 per kilogram.

Périgord truffles were first farmed in Tennessee in 2007. At its peak in the 2008–2009 season, one farm produced about 200 pounds of truffles, but Eastern filbert blight almost entirely wiped out the hazel trees by 2013 and production dropped, essentially ending the business. Eastern filbert blight similarly destroyed the orchards of other once-promising commercial farms in East Tennessee, while newer farms in California, North Carolina, Oregon, and Arkansas were started. As of 2022, the Appalachian truffle (Tuber canaliculatum) was being developed as a potential market.

Because of their high price and their strong aroma, truffles are used sparingly. Supplies can be found commercially as unadulterated fresh produce or preserved, typically in a light brine.

Their chemical compounds infuse well with fats such as butter, cream, cheeses, avocados, and coconut cream.

As the volatile aromas dissipate more quickly when heated, truffles are generally served raw and shaved over warm, simple foods which highlight their flavour, such as buttered pasta or eggs. Thin truffle slices may be inserted into meats, under the skins of roasted fowl, in foie gras preparations, in pâtés, or in stuffings. Some speciality cheeses contain truffles, as well. Truffles are also used for producing truffle salt and truffle honey.

While chefs once peeled truffles, in modern times, most restaurants brush the truffle carefully and shave it or dice it with the skin on to make the most of the valuable ingredient. Some restaurants stamp out circular discs of truffle flesh and use the skins for sauces.

Truffle oil is used as a lower-cost and convenient substitute for truffles, to provide flavouring, or to enhance the flavour and aroma of truffles in cooking. Some products called "truffle oils" contain no truffles or include pieces of inexpensive, unprized truffle varietals, which have no culinary value, simply for show. The vast majority is oil that has been artificially flavoured using a synthetic agent such as 2,4-dithiapentane.

The scientific name is included on the ingredient list of truffle oils infused with natural truffles.

Because more aromatic molecules in truffles are soluble in alcohol, they can carry a more complex and accurate truffle flavour than oil without synthetic flavourings. Many commercial producers use 2,4-dithiapentane regardless, as it has become the dominant flavour most consumers, unexposed to fresh truffles but familiar with oils, associate with them. Because most Western nations do not have ingredient labelling requirements for spirits, consumers often do not know if artificial flavourings have been used. It is used as a spirit in its own right, a cocktail mix or a food flavouring.

The first mention of truffles appears in the inscriptions of the neo-Sumerians regarding their Amorite enemy's eating habits (Third Dynasty of Ur, 2nd century BCE) and later in writings of Theophrastus in the 4th century BCE. In classical times, their origins were a mystery that challenged many; Plutarch and others thought them to be the result of lightning, warmth, and water in the soil, while Juvenal thought thunder and rain to be instrumental in their origin. Cicero deemed them children of the earth, while Dioscorides thought they were tuberous roots.

Rome and Thracia in the Classical period identified three kinds of truffles: Tuber melanosporum, T. magnificus, and T. magnatum. The Romans instead used a variety of fungus called terfez, also sometimes called a "desert truffle". Terfez used in Rome came from Lesbos, Carthage, and especially Libya, where the coastal climate was less dry in ancient times. Their substance is pale, tinged with rose. Unlike truffles, terfez have little inherent flavour. The Romans used the terfez as a flavour carrier because the terfez tends to absorb surrounding flavours. Because Ancient Roman cuisine used many spices and flavourings, the terfez may have been appropriate in that context.

Truffles were rarely used during the Middle Ages. Truffle hunting is mentioned by Bartolomeo Platina, the papal historian, in 1481, when he recorded that the sows of Notza were without equal in hunting truffles, but they should be muzzled to prevent them from eating the prize.

During the Renaissance, truffles regained popularity in Europe and were honoured at the court of King Francis I of France. They were popular in Parisian markets in the 1780s, imported seasonally from truffle grounds, where peasants had long enjoyed them. Brillat-Savarin (1825) noted that they were so expensive they appeared only at the dinner tables of great nobles and kept women. They were sometimes served with turkey.

The Trésor public (English: Public treasury) is the national administration of the Treasury in France. It is headed by the general directorate of public finances (Direction générale des finances publiques) in the Ministry of Economics and Finance.

Its origins can be traced back to King of France Philip Augustus (reigned from 1165 to 1223), who transformed France into the most prosperous and powerful country in Europe. His actions brought financial stability to his country. However, the modern Treasury came into being under the leadership of superintendents of finance such as Colbert, and above all with Count Mollien in the 19th century. It accompanied and embodied the emergence of the modern bureaucratic state.

From January 1806 to 1814, under Emperor Napoleon, Mollien was Minister of the Treasury (succeeding Barbé-Marbois after the bankruptcy of the Négociants réunis) and Napoleon's principal financial adviser. Mollien set up the Caisse de service, responsible for overseeing the movement of funds.

Until the 2012 reform, the Treasury was headed in each department by the Treasurer-Paymaster General (Trésorier-Payeur Général), a high-ranking official. In Paris, the function used to be divided into the Paymaster General of the Treasury (Payeur Général du Trésor), and the Receiver General of the Finances (Receveur Général des Finances). Each region had its own Treasurer-Paymaster General, the one for the département of the région préfecture. However, following the 2012 reform, the system has been greatly simplified, and relevant administrations for taxes (Direction générale des impôts) and public accounts (Direction générale de la comptabilité publique) were merged into the general directorate of public finances (Direction générale de finances publiques). During this process, redundant fiscal and financial functions were consolidated into a single departamental or regional director for public finances (Directeur département ou régional des finances publiques).

The Trésor also runs a certificate authority. In December 2013 it was revealed that it issued fake certificates impersonating Google in order to facilitate spying on French government employees via man-in-the-middle attacks.

The Trésor public is different from the Direction générale du Trésor (or French Treasury), which is the administration in charge of French State's debt and cash management (through the Agence France Trésor), and contributes to financial sector and economy financing regulation, economic policy and international economic and financial negotiations.

The Tyrrhenian-Adriatic sclerophyllous and mixed forests is an ecoregion in southern Italy, Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, the Dalmatian Islands and Pelješac peninsula of Croatia, and Malta.

The ecoregion has a Mediterranean climate, and is in the Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub biome.

The Tyrrhenian-Adriatic sclerophyllous and mixed forests has six major plant communities.

Two subspecies of large mammal herbivore, the European mouflon (Ovis aries musimon) and Corsican red deer (Cervus elaphus corsicanus), are endemic to Corsica and Sardinia.

Marmora's warbler (Curruca sarda) breeds in low scrubland in Corsica and Sardinia, including Cistus garrigue and low to medium-height maquis of tree-heath (Erica arborea), strawberry tree (Arbutus unedo) and Pistacia lentiscus, from March to July. The species winters across the Mediterranean in Tunisia, Libya, and Algeria.

16,489 km (21%) of the ecoregion is in protected areas.

The UDR group (French : groupe UDR), formerly the On the Right group (French: groupe À Droite!, AD!), is a French political group in the National Assembly created at the beginning of the 17th legislature (2024–present). It is presided by Éric Ciotti, and groups politicians of the Union of the Right for the Republic (UDR). The UDR group is allied to the National Rally group.

The parliamentary group On the Right was founded by The Republicans president Éric Ciotti following the 2024 legislative election before which a serious crisis broke out within his own The Republicans party. The new group with 16 deputies split from The Republicans group, renamed the Republican Right group in 2024.

The group was renamed to the UDR group on 11 September 2024, taking the name of Ciotti's Union of the Right for the Republic (UDR) party.

In France the Undersecretary of State (sous-secrétaire d'État) was a governmental role created during the Hundred Days and institutionalized in 1816. It served as an administrative and, later, political assistant to ministers, evolving significantly across the country's political regimes until being replaced by the title of Secretary of State under the Fifth Republic.

The role was created in France during the Hundred Days, with the first two Undersecretaries of State appointed to Foreign Affairs under the Napoleonic government of the Hundred Days. The institution was formalized by an ordinance on May 9, 1816, which allowed an Undersecretary of State (or more than one, if necessary) to be attached to a minister. Each minister held the title of Minister-Secretary of State (e.g., Minister-Secretary of State for the Interior). The mission of the Undersecretary of State covered the entire administration of the ministry, delegated by the minister.

Except during the Second French Empire, subsequent regimes up to and including the Fourth Republic maintained the principle of Undersecretaries of State. However, there were not always Undersecretaries of State in every government, and their numbers varied greatly from one government to another.

During the Hundred Days, Emperor Napoleon created the first Undersecretaries of State. By a decree on March 24, 1815, he appointed two individuals, Édouard Bignon and Louis-Guillaume Otto, to serve under Armand de Caulaincourt.

Under the Bourbon Restoration, Louis XVIII, by an ordinance on May 9, 1816, created the institution of Undersecretaries of State.

Under the July Monarchy, Louis-Philippe I retained the Undersecretaries of State. While their role under the Bourbon Restoration was primarily administrative, it became more political during the July Monarchy.

The number of Undersecretaries of State remained small: at most, at most there were three under the third Soult government for nine ministers; with other governments having two or one. Some governments functioned without them, and there were no Undersecretaries of State between March 1831 and March 1835.

Under the Second Republic, the Constituent Assembly, by a decree on June 14, 1848, confirmed by a law on March 15, 1849, prohibited Undersecretaries of State from being selected from among its members or those of the Legislative Assembly. Deprived of their political utility, Undersecretaries of State quickly disappeared.

Under the Second Empire, Napoleon III chose not to reinstate Undersecretaries of State.

Under the Third Republic, the first Undersecretaries of State were appointed on November 11, 1873, under the government of Albert de Broglie. The constitutional laws of February 24-25 and July 16, 1875 made no reference to them. However, their existence was recognized in the Organic Law of November 30, 1875, on the Election of Deputies.

Undersecretaries of State became more numerous, appearing in most governments, often in large numbers. Starting in 1893, some were assigned specific responsibilities, and Undersecretariats of State were established for those areas. For instance, from 1896 to 1913, with few interruptions, there was an Undersecretariat of State for Posts and Telegraphs.

In 1936, three women became members of a French government for the first time as Undersecretaries of State: Cécile Brunschvicg, Irène Joliot-Curie, and Suzanne Lacore, respectively assigned to National Education, Research, and Child Protection.

Several areas of ministerial action were initially entrusted to an Undersecretariat of State, such as technical education (1920) or youth and scientific research (1936).

From June 6 to June 16, 1940, General de Gaulle served as Undersecretary of State for National Defense and War in the cabinet of Paul Reynaud.

Undersecretaries of State were appointed by decree of the President of the Republic.

Unlike ministers, they were not members of the Council of Ministers by default. However, they almost always had access to the Cabinet Council and sometimes to the Council of Ministers.

They had access to either chamber of Parliament, even if they were not members, and had the same priority to speak as ministers.

They did not countersign acts of the President of the Republic.

The salary of Undersecretaries of State was not fixed by permanent law but determined annually by the budget law. Before World War I, it ranged from 20,000 to 30,000 francs per year. When an Undersecretary of State was also a member of Parliament, their parliamentary indemnity was deducted from this amount.

Under the Fourth Republic, some governments included both Secretaries of State and Undersecretaries of State.

In 1946, Andrée Viénot became the first woman to be appointed as a member of a government during the Fourth Republic, serving as Undersecretary of State for Youth and Sports.

Under the Fifth Republic, the title of Secretary of State definitively replaced that of Undersecretary of State.

UNEDIC is the acronym of "Union nationale interprofessionnelle pour l’emploi dans l’industrie et le commerce" (National Professional Union for Employment in Industry and Trade). It was created in 1958. Until 2009, it was an agency of the French government which provided unemployed people with social benefits. In 2009, it was merged with the ANPE into the newly created agency Pôle emploi, and was turned into an independent association.

The official acronym was UNEDIC, but it was commonly written Unedic. However, the acronym was sometimes written UNÉDIC or Unédic. From 2009, the official name is Unédic. While there is no accent on the word "emploi", there is an accent in "Unédic" because of the apostrophe just before the word in the complete name, in French.

Until 2009, Unedic was closely associated with the ASSEDIC (or Assedic). Both agencies were often referred to as "Unedic-Assedic" or "Assedic-Unedic" (with multiple variations on accents and capital letters).

The Unedic was an agency under governmental control. It was managed by the "social partners", which are both representatives of trade-unions and representatives of companies leaders. There are six trade-unions officially recognized by the government, which are CGT, CFDT, FO, CFE-CGC and CFTC, and three patronal organizations, Medef, CGPME et UPA. Representatives of both groups have equal power to manage the agency, as is the case for many other governmental agencies.

The agency used set the amount of unemployment contributions (paid by a part of salaries). It was affiliated to the Assedic agencies, which collected and paid the contributions. In 2008, it employed almost 15,000 people.

On 1 January 2009, the agency turned into an association led by social partners. The government is not implicated, the agency is totally independent. However, it continues to set the amounts of social contributions and employment benefits.

Unibail-Rodamco-Westfield SE (previously Unibail-Rodamco SE) is a multinational commercial real estate company headquartered in Paris, France, and is the owner and operator of Westfield shopping centres in Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Poland, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom and the United States.

Its history originates with the formation of initially two separate shopping centre operators, Unibail (founded in France in 1968) and Rodamco Europe (founded in the Netherlands in 1999), which merged in 2007 and became Unibail-Rodamco. In 2018, Unibail-Rodamco acquired US and UK operations of Australian shopping centre operator Westfield Corporation to form the current company.

Many of its shopping centres use the Westfield brand launched by Australian Westfield Group in 1960 and shared with Scentre Group for properties in Australia and New Zealand since 2014. As of 2024, Unibail-Rodamco-Westfield is the largest commercial real estate company in Europe, and is a component of the Euro Stoxx 50 stock market index, as well as the French CAC40. Its portfolio consists of retail property, office buildings, and convention centers within Europe and North America. Retail properties owned by Unibail-Rodamco before the merger carry the Westfield name. As of June 2026, the group owns 66 shopping centres in the US and Europe, representing around 88% of the Group’s €49 Bn asset portfolio – with 41 centres operating under the Westfield brand.

Unibail was founded in 1968 as a finance-leasing unit by a company called Worms & Cie. In 1991, Unibail started focusing on the property investment sector, and phased out involvement in lease financing. It built a property portfolio of close to 30 shopping centres across France – including the Forum des Halles and the arcade within CNIT – and substantial office properties in Paris and La Défense – including the Tour Ariane and the Paris Expo group of convention centres. Rodamco Europe formed in 1999 when Rodamco, a property investment fund set up by the Dutch asset management group Robeco in 1979, broke up into various independent listed companies covering different parts of the world. Rodamco Europe subsequently collected a portfolio primarily consisting of shopping centres and other retail spaces across 14 European countries, along with some office property in France and the Netherlands, acquiring smaller European rivals in the process.

On April 10, 2007, Rodamco Europe announced an agreement to conduct a merger of equals with Unibail to create the largest publicly traded property company in Europe. The merger was confirmed on June 21, 2007, after Unibail announced the acquisition of 80% of Rodamco's shares, making its offer for the remainder unconditional. The merged entity took effect as a société anonyme under the new name Unibail-Rodamco on June 25, 2007.

On June 1, 2011, Unibail-Rodamco hired former Fnac CEO Christophe Cuvillier as the new COO. In collaboration with CEO and chairman of the board Guillaume Poitrinal, he led the company to five years of growth in spite of tough economic conditions.

In May 2015, Unibail revealed it had signed an agreement with the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board to sell its 46.1% stake in German shopping mall operator MFI AG for €394 million.

In December 2017, Unibail took over Westfield Corporation, which operated 35 shopping centres in the US and the UK, for a reported price of US$ 24.8 billion. The shopping centres in Australia and New Zealand branded as Westfield and now held by Scentre Group were not acquired by Unibail. The deal was completed in June 2018, and a number of shopping centres owned by Unibail-Rodamco before the merger were rebranded as Westfields, with 10 flagships rebranding from September 2019.

In November 2020, Colin Dyer resigned as supervisory-board chairman after a shareholder meeting rejected the board's proposal to raise 3.5 billion euros ($4.15 billion). Dyer remained on the board but was replaced as chairman by former Unibail CEO Leon Bressler, one of a consortium of shareholders and investors who had opposed the capital increase and other proposed strategies. In January 2021, Jean-Marie Tritant was appointed chairman of the management board and chief executive officer of the group. In January 2026, Chief Strategy & Investment Officer and acting as COO Europe Vincent Rouget was appointed CEO of URW and Chairman of the Management Board.

By June 2026, a total of 21 centres in Europe had been rebranded as Westfields, while two new Westfields had opened – Westfield Mall of the Netherlands (opened in March, 2021) and Westfield Hamburg Überseequartier (opened in June, 2025). In 2022, URW launched Westfield Rise, an in-house media, brand experience and data partnerships agency. A licensing business was launched in 2025, with Cenomi Centers licensing the Westfield name to be used on up to eight of its shopping centres in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, with URW providing support in leasing, operations, marketing and retail media.

URW's sustainability leadership has been widely recognised. The Group ranked 24th in Corporate Knights' 2025 Global 100 list of the world's most sustainable companies, and first in the real estate category. For seven straight years URW has been ranked in CDP's top 'A' rating for Climate Change, and in the 2024 GRESB Assessment URW ranked second-highest of all European listed retail real estate companies, with an overall score of 92 out of 100. URW has also been named one of the 100 most sustainable companies in the world by Time Magazine.

The following are the company shareholders as of January 2026:

Unibail-Rodamco-Westfield is listed in several indexes, including:

Unibail-Rodamco-Westfield is rated A by Standard & Poor’s and Fitch Ratings.

In 2015, Standard Ethics Aei has given a rating to Unibail-Rodamco-Westfield in order to include it in its Standard Ethics French Index.

Unibail-Rodamco-Westfield works with architectural firms such as Thomas Mayne of Morphosis, Herzog & de Meuron, RIADH group (De La Hoz, Cottrell, Michelangeli), the firm Farshid Moussavi Architecture, Cuno & Jean Brullmann Crochon-Luc, and Jean-Paul Viguier.

The Union nationale des syndicats agricoles (UNSA) was collection of French farming unions that was active in the 1930s. It had originally been called the Union centrale des syndicats agricoles (UCSA) but in 1934 changed its name to the Union nationale at the same time as Jacques Le Roy Ladurie, a landowner who had led the dynamic Calvados syndicat became secretary-general.

The founders were Jacques Le Roy Ladurie, count Hervé Budes de Guébriant, Louis Salleron, Roger Grand (President until 1938), Joseph Boulangé (President from 1938) and Rémy Goussault.

In 1934 the UNSA joined with other groups to form Front paysan, of which Le Roy Ladurie was the General Secretary, of which the quasi- fascist Greenshirts of Henry Dorgères were also members.

The UNSA drew away from the Front paysan because the Greenshirts wanted a welfare regime fully subsidized by the state, while the UNSA saw an opportunity to provide peasant welfare using a tax on the purchase of agricultural products. The alliance went into hibernation in 1936 due to differences in strategy.

Dorgères was not invited to the Peasant Congress at Caen on 5–7 May 1937 where Le Roy Ladurie, influenced by Rémy Goussault and Louis Salleron, invited the leading conservative agrarians to declare their support for corporatism. The weekly Syndicats paysans, co-edited by Salleron and Le Roy Ladurie, first appeared on 1 July 1937.

By 1938 the UNSA was the largest national peasant organization, with many of its members young and technically skilled. They were opposed to the Popular Front government which they believed aimed at the eventual collectivisation of farms and in June 1938 Le Roy Ladurie and his ally Alain de Chantérac were arrested for leading a peasant rally in Castres. However, the UNSA was mainly devoted to strengthening local corporatist agricultural groups, aiming to progressively supplant the state in managing the agricultural economy while avoiding direct confrontation.

During the Vichy Government the UNSA became subsumed by the short lived Peasant Corporation which transformed after the war into the Fédération nationale des syndicats d'exploitants agricoles (FNSEA).

The Union of Independent Intellectuals (UII, Union des intellectuels indépendants) is a French political and cultural association that operated from 1950 to the early 2000s, providing a platform for right-wing national and anti-communist perspectives while advocating for freedom of expression.

The UII was founded around 1950 under the initiative of publisher Charles de Jonquières. It aimed to support individuals condemned during the purges following the Liberation of France. According to its statutes, the UII sought to "group all those who professionally or otherwise engage in intellectual activity and refuse any limitation of their freedom of thought or expression."

To this end, the UII was involved in forming the "Committee for Grand Amnesty Action" before the 1951 legislative election. This committee advocated for amnesty for the purged and was led by Pierre Leroy (future UII president) and Georges Rivollet.

The UII gained recognition for organizing informational meetings and debates. Notable participants included figures from the Vichy government, the Third Republic, and contemporary parliamentarians such as Jean-Louis Tixier-Vignancour and Pierre-Étienne Flandin. Events were held at venues such as the Sociétés savantes and the Salle Wagram but sometimes faced prohibitions due to protests from left-wing groups.

The UII also commemorated significant events, such as the anniversary of the Liberation of Paris and the election of Léon Bérard to the Académie française, celebrated at the Hôtel Lutetia.

The UII opposed Charles de Gaulle's return to power and urged a "No" vote in the 1958 referendum. It also supported the continuation of French Algeria and opposed the 1962 Evian Accords referendum. In the 1965 presidential election, the UII backed François Mitterrand against de Gaulle.

The UII’s anti-Gaullist stance led to the departure of several members. By 2002, Claude Adam, then president, noted that the organization had lost over half its members following the 1958 referendum.

The UII organized literary events, debates, and book signings featuring authors like Jacques Isorni and Xavier Vallat. It also supported traditionalist Catholic movements, collaborating with figures such as Marcel Lefebvre and François Ducaud-Bourget.

In 1977, under Claude Adam’s presidency, the UII established the "Independent Intellectuals Prize," awarded annually for works challenging contemporary conformity. Winners included notable authors like Vladimir Volkoff and Jean Raspail.

Prominent members and sympathizers included:

The Union of the Right for the Republic (French : Union des droites pour la République, UDR) is a far-right political party in France. Founded in 2012 by Éric Ciotti as a group within The Republicans (LR), the party took its current name and became a separate entity following the crisis within The Republicans ahead of the 2024 legislative election which saw Ciotti resign his position as LR leader. The UDR allied itself with the National Rally (RN) in the election and performed well, forming the UDR group in the National Assembly.

The party draws inspiration from right-libertarianism. In the European Parliament, it sits with the Patriots for Europe.

The Association of Friends of Éric Ciotti was founded on 3 September 2012 by Éric Ciotti. Its headquarters were established at 15 Quai des Deux-Emmanuel in Nice, France. The political party was also named "On the Right! Friends of Éric Ciotti".

In 2021, Ciotti, who was representing the 1st constituency of Alpes-Maritimes in the National Assembly, aimed to structure the right wing of The Republicans (LR) party, and set his conditions for candidates during his traditional reunion with the "Friends of Éric Ciotti". Seeking those nostalgic of François Fillon 's leadership, he used the database of supporters of the Republican Force [ fr ], and obtained between three and four hundred requests for membership in the Association of Friends of Éric Ciotti. While candidate for the presidency of The Republicans, Ciotti unveiled his campaign slogan, " la droite au cœur " (transl. The Right at the Heart), during a reunion of the "Friends of Éric Ciotti" in September 2022. In 2023, Nice municipal councillor Bernard Chaix became the vice president of the party.

During the 2024 legislative election, Ciotti made an agreement with the leadership of the National Rally (RN) without consulting his party. This deal aimed to run his candidates under the joint LR – RN label, registered with the prefecture under the name of his minor party "On the Right! Friends of Éric Ciotti". Campaign posters and candidate declarations bore the labels " Candidat républicain " (transl. Republican candidate) or " Républicains à droite " (transl. Republicans on the right), the later of which appeared on his office façade starting on 27 June. The Ministry of the Interior classified these candidates under the political designation " Union of the Far-Right " (UXD), a classification disputed by Ciotti, who demanded they be categorized under "Union of the Right", denouncing the ministry's decision as a "scandalous maneuver". A total of 64 candidates were registered under this label, with less than half coming from the LR party. The list also included former supporters of Éric Zemmour, close associates of CNews commentators Marion Maréchal and Pierre-Édouard Stérin, former Socialist Party politician Thierry Coudert [ fr ], and former La République en Marche! -supporting lawyer Alexandre Dupalais.

In the first round of the election, Christelle d'Intorni was reelected to her seat, and 60 candidates of the LR – RN alliance advanced to the second round, with 38 of them leading in their constituencies. In the second round, seventeen candidates supported by Éric Ciotti and the National Rally were elected, surpassing the mininmum threshold of fifteen deputies required to form a parliamentary group at the National Assembly. These newly-elected deputies established their own group in the 17th legislature of the French Fifth Republic, initially called the On the Right group.

On 31 August 2024, amid the ongoing unresolved crisis within The Republicans, Ciotti announced his intention to form a new party called the Union of the Right for the Republic (UDR). This name evoked a former Gaullist party, the Union of Democrats for the Republic, also abbreviated as UDR.

Following the 2026 municipal elections, senator Henri Leroy from Alpes-Maritimes defected from The Republicans to the UDR, becoming its first member in the Senate.

United Passions (French: United Passions: La Légende du football, literally United Passions: The Legend of Football, also known as United Passions: The Birth of the World Cup) is a 2014 English-language French drama film. It is about the origins of the world governing body of association football, Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA). Ninety-percent funded by FIFA, it stars Tim Roth, Gérard Depardieu and Sam Neill, and is directed by Frédéric Auburtin. It premiered at the Cannes Film Festival on 18 May 2014.

The film's North American release on 5 June 2015 was particularly unsuccessful, coinciding with the 2015 FIFA corruption case. In the United States, the film grossed $918 in its opening weekend, was lambasted by critics as propaganda, and is considered to be one of the worst films ever made. The film was also a major box-office bomb, losing $26.8 million worldwide and failing to obtain theatrical distribution in many markets.

In 1905, after the English football federation rejects an offer to join the formation of an international governing body for football, Robert Guérin forms FIFA, and makes himself the first president. Years after its formation, it is all but unknown. Jules Rimet, then president of FIFA, publicly mocks Uruguay 's victory in the 1924 Summer Olympic football games, hoping that this audacious move will make FIFA more publicly visible. However, the media does not publish his mockery. Still optimistic, he decides that the only way to make themselves known is to organize a truly international tournament: the World Cup.

Rimet is at the point of giving up organizing the World Cup due to a lack of funds until he receives an unexpected letter from Enrique Buero. Buero and his South American ties will fund the first World Cup, hoping that in doing so, it will make Uruguay and other South American countries more well-known. Rimet and Buero collude to award the first World Cup to Uruguay. In 1930, Uruguay wins the first World Cup. Rimet remains president of FIFA, working through the Great Depression, looming war, and disagreement among FIFA members; Rimet would organize the 1938 World Cup but would fail to do so in 1942 and 1946 due to World War II.

After the war, Rimet organized two more World Cups in 1950 and 1954. The World Cup and FIFA after the war grew significantly, with many new members joining in many parts of the world. After many years, FIFA is now under the reign of President João Havelange. Havelange is voted into power using expensive trips and various modern lobbying tactics. Havelange sees FIFA as an organization in financial disarray and works to find various sponsors to finance its operation. Throughout his tenure as the president of FIFA, he has a right-hand man, Sepp Blatter, who impresses Havelange with his unrelenting work. Eventually, Blatter becomes the next president of FIFA.

Corruption within FIFA builds up over the years from Havelange's expansion efforts. As president of FIFA, Blatter is tasked to clean this up, for which he is seen as a controversial president. Many FIFA officials attempt to vote him out of office because of how incorruptible he is. In a 2006 vote, Blatter is able to retain his presidency by cowing the corrupt members of FIFA, threatening to expose their ill deeds if they do not endorse Blatter and his anti-corruption campaign by voting for him as the FIFA president.

The film ends with Blatter announcing South Africa as the host nation for the 2010 World Cup.

Principal photography took place in Switzerland, Azerbaijan, France and Brazil. The opening scene was shot at a stadium in the Azerbaijani village of Sahil.

FIFA wanted the film finished for release in the summer of 2014, ahead of the FIFA World Cup in Brazil. The film's script was completed in four months. FIFA's original title suggestions for the film were Men of Legend and The Dreammakers.

According to Howler Magazine, $27 million of the film's budget came directly from FIFA while the remaining $5 million came from the Azerbaijani government.

The film's United States release coincided with the 2015 FIFA corruption case, in which several current and former members of FIFA's executive committee were arrested for charges of corruption. The corruption investigation led to the resignation of FIFA's president, Sepp Blatter, following decades of speculation and accusations of corruption at FIFA under his leadership.

The film was accused of ignoring these long-running claims. Roth has said that he asked the filmmakers: "Where's all the corruption in the script? Where is all the back-stabbing, the deals?" He said he attempted to convey these elements through his performance, saying: "It was a tough one. I tried to slide in a sense of it, as much as I could get in there." The film's director, Frédéric Auburtin, claimed he inserted "ironic parts" into the film.

Prior to its release, comedian John Oliver lampooned the film in a segment on his show Last Week Tonight, saying that the "movie, like FIFA itself, looks terrible" and asking, "Who makes a sports film where the heroes are the executives?" The film also faced criticism from the media concerning the £16 million cost of production, more than the annual turnover of most of FIFA's national associations.

The film was made on a budget of between $25–32 million, with the Los Angeles Times reporting an estimated budget of $29 million. Roughly £17 million (about USD$27 million; 90% of the total budget) was financed by FIFA. The film was reported to have lost around $26.8 million due to its poor theatrical returns.

In North America, the film was an instant box office bomb. It opened on Friday, 5 June 2015, and grossed a mere $319 on its opening day from 10 theatres in New York City, Los Angeles, Washington, D.C., Phoenix, Kansas City, Miami, Minneapolis, Houston, Dallas, and Philadelphia, followed by an even worse $288 on Saturday. For its three-day opening (Friday-to-Sunday), it grossed only $918—the worst opening of all time for a film opening in 10 to 15 theatres in U.S. box office history.

The FilmBar theatre in Downtown Phoenix reported a gross of $9, indicating that only one person bought a ticket to see the film. The film was withdrawn from cinemas by its distributor, Screen Media Films, following its appalling opening weekend performance at the box office. In North America, it ended up becoming the lowest-grossing film of all time, surpassing the previous record held by I Kissed a Vampire ($1,380) in 2012.

For the film's screening at the Zurich Film Festival on 5 October 2014, about 120 people paid $22.70 per ticket to view the film in a 500-seat cinema. Overall, the highest revenue outside of North America came from Russia and the CIS (£144,000), Portugal (£4,000) and Serbia (£2,000), while the revenues from Hungary, Slovenia, Switzerland and Ukraine were minimal. In France, the film was released straight to DVD.

On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 0%, with an average rating of 1.8/10, based on 18 reviews. On Metacritic, the film has a score of 1 out of 100, based on 9 critics, indicating "overwhelming dislike". It is regarded as one of the worst films ever made, and it was also given the site’s Moldy Tomato award for the worst-reviewed film of 2015. The film has been criticized for the poor quality of the drama, the unsuitability of the topic of administrative matters for a movie and the perceived biases of the film, with The Guardian describing it as "cinematic excrement" and "self- hagiography ", and others calling it a "cringeworthy, self-aggrandizing affair", and "astonishingly crass".

Several reviewers commented on the irony of the portrayal of Blatter in the film as an anti-corruption campaigner. Sara Stewart of the New York Post described it as "hilariously ill-timed", while Paul Field of the Daily Mirror said that this created "unintentional comedy gold".

Writing in the London Evening Standard, Des Kelly described United Passions as "the worst movie ever made" and "the most extraordinary vanity exercise; a vile, self-aggrandizing, sugar-coated pile of manure where Blatter and Co. manage to make North Korea's Kim Jong-un look self-effacing".

Daniel M. Gold of The New York Times said that United Passions is "one of the most unwatchable films in recent memory, a dishonest bit of corporate-suite sanitizing that's no good even for laughs". In a later interview, Gold said it would make the top three of his list of all-time bad films.

Auburtin, in his first interview since the film's disastrous US opening in June 2015, told The Hollywood Reporter that he tried to strike a balance between "a Disney propaganda film [and] a Costa-Gavras / Michael Moore movie", but the project ultimately tipped in FIFA's favour. He added, "Now I'm seen as bad as the guy who brought AIDS to Africa or the guy who caused the financial crisis. My name is all over [this mess], and apparently, I am a propaganda guy making films for corrupt people."

Roth, who has not seen the film and has declined repeated requests to speak about the film, confessed in May 2015, before the scandal broke, to the German newspaper Die Welt : "Yeah, I apologize I didn't question the director, I didn't question the script. This is a role that will have my father turning in his grave". He admitted that he took the role for the money, saying it helped him out of a "financial hole", and added: "[B]ut you know what? The hole FIFA has dug for itself is so deep, they'll never get out of it". Roth also added in a Reddit AMA regarding taking the role that "I had two kids in college so I had to make a decision and it was probably poorly judged but once you make that decision you have to follow through", but added, "I am glad I did it for my family."

Jason Barry, who plays an investigative reporter in the film, said in an interview that, like Roth, he had not watched it. "It's incredibly unusual for a non-studio to put that much money into a film with no distribution or anything already in place … no pre-sales, no sales done on Cannes," he said, adding that "some of my dialogue was cut because [Blatter] didn't like the tone of the way I was asking some of the questions. And let's be honest, in the script I'm not asking anything intense in any way shape or form. It makes Blatter out to be what Blatter thinks he is—the shining beacon of world football. It was a vanity project for FIFA."

United Passions received the Barry L. Bumstead Award during the 36th Golden Raspberry Awards, a special category for critical and financial failures that were not given an eligible release.

Upcoop (formerly Groupe Chèque Déjeuner, then Groupe Up) is a French cooperative headquartered in Gennevilliers, near Paris. Founded in 1964, the company issues meal vouchers and gift cards for businesses and public authorities.

Upcoop is a Société coopérative et participative (SCOP) with a share capital of €1,689,712. The company is 100% owned by its employee-members and has no external shareholders or investment funds. The cooperative heads a group of 88 entities. In January 2023, Upcoop became France's first mission-driven SCOP (entreprise à mission).

In 2024, the group reported consolidated revenue of €843 million and employs 3,210 people across 26 countries on 4 continents.

Upcoop issues meal vouchers (UpDéjeuner) and gift cards (UpCadhoc).

Upcoop operates in 26 countries across Europe, the Americas, Africa and Asia, including Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Mexico, Morocco, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Spain, Tunisia and Turkey.

The group first expanded internationally to Spain in 1992, then to Eastern Europe from 1995 onwards, and to Latin America with implantations in Mexico (2013) and Brazil (2015).

In August 2018, Upcoop acquired the Munich-based fintech company givve GmbH, a specialist in employee benefits and prepaid payment cards, for approximately €20 million. The transaction was advised by European corporate finance firm Clipperton.

Its main competitors include Sodexo and Edenred.

The Urba affair was a political financing scandal in France involving the covert funding of the Parti socialiste (PS) through kickbacks from companies awarded public works contracts. The system was created in 1971, two years after the Épinay Congress that formed the modern PS under François Mitterrand ; the Urba consultancy was formally established in 1973. Its ostensible purpose was to advise Socialist-led communes on infrastructure and public works. The scheme operated until 1990 and gave rise to criminal proceedings that concluded in 1997.

In the 1970s, French political parties received no state funding, and the rising cost of electoral campaigns — already notable in the 1965 French presidential election — pushed the PS leadership to seek alternative financing. Unable to secure state funding through legislation, the party constructed a centralized system based on false invoices (fausses factures).

Companies paid 2–4% of a contract's value to affiliated consultancies — including Urba, SAGES, and BLE — to win contracts in Socialist-run municipalities. In practice, the Urba network operated as a groupement d'intérêt économique (GIE) called GSR, comprising several linked firms: Urbatechnic, Urbaconseil, Gracco, Valorimo, and Mercure International. These firms retained 40% of commissions and remitted 30% to the national PS and 30% to the relevant local federation. The system operated from 1973 to 1990. A parallel scheme — the Gifco affair — operated the same way for the French Communist Party.

The affair became public in 1989. On 17 April, police inspector Antoine Gaudino of the financial section of the Marseille Regional Judicial Police (SRPJ), investigating a related false-invoices case, searched Urba's Marseille offices and discovered the notebooks of Joseph Delcroix, a PS activist who had meticulously recorded all of Urba's meetings across four school exercise books. Gaudino detained Delcroix — former director of Urba-Gracco in Paris — and Bruno Desjobert, director of Urba Marseille. Among the notebook entries was one dated 4 July 1987 stating that "the first forecasts for the presidential campaign are situated at 100,000 francs. 25,000,000 francs will be assumed by the GIE [Urba-Graco]" — a direct documentary link between the scheme and Mitterrand's 1988 presidential campaign. A second search on 19 April found that Urba CEO Gérard Monate had ordered his secretary to conceal the company's accounts. Monate had also intervened with government ministers to have the matter "arranged."

Gaudino and his colleague Alain Mayot spent three years attempting to bring the case to court, blocked at each stage by the executive. The prosecution initially refused to open a judicial inquiry; Gaudino was transferred to another department; both officers were eventually removed from the case. Gaudino published his findings in L'Enquête impossible (Albin Michel, 1990), alleging that Urba funds had financed Mitterrand's 1988 presidential campaign. Interior Minister Philippe Marchand dismissed him from the police in March 1991.

As the investigation advanced, the Rocard government responded with legislation. In autumn 1989 it introduced a political financing reform bill, attempting to attach an amnesty clause covering corruption offences committed before 15 June 1989. An initial attempt failed after press leaks prompted public outcry. On the night of 22 December 1989, with only a small number of Socialist MPs present, the National Assembly passed a version of the bill including the amnesty. The Conseil constitutionnel, presided by Robert Badinter, struck out the clause exempting sitting MPs, meaning the PS leadership responsible for the 1988 campaign finances escaped prosecution entirely.

In January 1991 a former Socialist official told investigators that Urba and similar firms had been collecting commissions for the PS, prompting the Le Mans examining magistrate Thierry Jean-Pierre to open a formal inquiry. On 7 April 1991, after raiding Urba's Paris offices, Justice Minister Henri Nallet immediately removed Jean-Pierre from the case — who had served as treasurer of Mitterrand's 1988 presidential campaign. Nallet described the raid as an «équipée sauvage» ("wild escapade"); his deputy Georges Kiejman called it a "judicial burglary." The Angers court of appeal ruled the procedure lawful, and the Cour de cassation upheld this ruling. Judge Renaud Van Ruymbeke took over the case in late 1991, raided PS headquarters in Paris, and placed Henri Emmanuelli under formal investigation in September 1992.

Emmanuelli, who had served as PS treasurer and later as president of the National Assembly, was convicted on 16 December 1997 of complicity in influence peddling. He received an 18-month suspended prison sentence and two years' deprivation of civic rights. Urba's former CEO Gérard Monate was also convicted. André Laignel, a co-defendant, was acquitted.

The affair also had indirect consequences for Prime Minister Pierre Bérégovoy. His creditor Roger-Patrice Pelat — who had given him an interest-free loan of one million francs, later revealed by Le Canard Enchaîné — was implicated in both the Urba funding network and the separate Pechiney-Triangle affair. Bérégovoy committed suicide on 1 May 1993, shortly after the Socialists lost parliamentary elections.

A court placed Urba in judicial liquidation in January 1990. The affair directly prompted three laws establishing state financing of political parties: the law of January 1990, a further law in January 1993, and the Séguin law of January 1995.

An aire urbaine (literal and official translation: "urban area") is an INSEE (France's national statistics bureau) statistical concept describing a core of urban development and the extent of its commuter activity. It was replaced by the concept " functional area " (French : aire d'attraction des villes), which uses the same definition as Eurostat 's functional urban areas, in 2020.

The aire urbaine is built from France's nationwide interlocking administrative commune municipalities: when a commune has over 2000 inhabitants and contains a centre of dense construction (buildings spaced no more than 200 metres apart), it is combined with other adjoining communes fulfilling the same criteria to become a single unité urbaine ("urban unit"); if an urban unit offers over 10,000 jobs and its economical development is enough to draw more than 40% of the population of a nearby municipalities (and other municipalities drawn to these in the same way) as commuters, it becomes a pôle urbain ("urban cluster") and the "commuter municipalities" become its couronne ("rim"), but this only on the condition that the urban unit itself is not part of another urban cluster's rim. The aire urbaine is an urban cluster and its rim combined, or a statistical area describing a central urban core and its economic influence on surrounding municipalities.

As of 2010, depending on their population and function, aires urbaines adopt the following secondary appellations:

In France, multiple words exist to define various kinds of urban area.

One of the first words used was the word agglomération, which was first used to deal with a group of people. The word was used, for instance, in a law from 5 April 1884 (loi du 5 avril 1884), in which Article 98 gives the mayor police power (pouvoirs de police), meaning authority over the city, but only within the agglomération. That law was used as a legal precedent in 1907 to forbid a mayor from setting a speed limit on the road next to a farm, considering that at that time, a group of houses inside a farm might be an agglomération, but the road next to it was not inside the agglomération.

Later, in the 1920s, the concept of agglomération was used in the code de la route (Highway code) to define specific law within or outside of such a zone.

In 1968, the French word agglomération was introduced in the French version of the Vienna Convention on Road Traffic in the place where the English word built-up area was used in the English version of the same treaty. In this treaty, the word is only defined as a concept signalled by an entry sign and an exit sign, while still allowing members of the treaty to have different definitions.

Nowadays, words with an English origin or meaning tend to be introduced into the French language as loanwords, in order to describe new concepts, words or meanings, or to replace old words. Such words include: aire urbaine (urban area); métropole (metropolis); agglomération (agglomeration); communauté urbaine (urban community); Grand + the name of a city (Grand Paris, Grand Toulouse).

As a member of the European Union and the OECD, for statistical purposes, France may need to consider the regions inside or outside of the limits of an urban area.

The following is a list of the twenty largest aires urbaines (metropolitan areas) in France, based on their population at the 2016 census. Population at the 2011 and 2006 census is indicated for comparison.

In both time intervals presented in the table below (2006 to 2011 and 2011 to 2016), the fastest-growing metropolitan areas in France were Bordeaux, Montpellier, Toulouse, Nantes, Rennes and Lyon with an average annual growth rate equal or greater than 1%.

The URSSAF (pronounced [ yʁsaf ] ; Unions de Recouvrement des Cotisations de Sécurité Sociale et d'Allocations Familiales, meaning the Organizations for the Collection of Social Security and Family Benefit Contributions) is a network of private organizations created in 1960 whose main task is to collect employee and employer social security contributions that finance the Régime general (general account) of France's social security system, including state health insurance (Assurance maladie en France [ fr ]).

They also manage two other salary deductions for the French Ministry of Public Action and Accounts :

URSSAF employees are not, as commonly assumed, civil servants, and thus they are covered by the same employment agreements as other social security employees.

Each organization is a private entity responsible for a particular public service and is headed by a Director.

Each of them (including the national fund) is controlled by an Administrative Council made up in equal parts of managers and workers. The decisions made by the Administrative Council are monitored by the State, represented by DRASS (Directions régionales des affaires sanitaires et sociales, or the regional director for health and social matters).

URSSAF organizations are spread across France to form a network totaling more than one hundred members (101 as of January 1, 2006), with at least one organization per department. Recovery decisions are subject to appeal in courts of general jurisdiction.

URSSAF is supervised primarily by the Ministry for Social Security, and secondarily by the Ministry for the Budget, Public Accounts and Civil Service.

The objectives of ACOSS (Agence centrale des organismes de sécurité sociale [ fr ], or the central agency for social security organizations) have been recorded in three successive COGs (conventions d'objectifs et de gestion, or agreements on objectives and management), the first covering the period 1998-2001, the second 2002 – 2005, and the current version covering 2006-2009. ACOSS has had to work within the framework of this third COG to lay off 600 employees out of a workforce of 14,500 between now and 2009.

In DOMs (départements d'outre-mer, or overseas departments), URSSAF organizations do not exist as such, so social security contributions are collected by the CGSS (Caisses générales de sécurité sociale, or general social security funds).

ACOSS is the national fund for the entire group of organizations (as decreed by the law of July 25, 1994), including the CNAM-TS for health insurance, the CNAF for family benefits and the CNAV for retirement.

ACOSS manages the social security budget.

Valeria Sarmiento (born 29 October 1948) is a film editor, director and screenwriter best known for her work in France, Portugal and her native Chile. She has worked both in film and television, directing 20 feature films, documentaries and television series '. She is the widow of Chilean film director Raúl Ruiz (1941-2011) with whom she collaborated for decades as regular editor and co-writer. She has also edited films for Luc Moullet, Robert Kramer and Ventura Pons and is a Guggenheim Fellow (1988).

Sarmiento was born in the Chilean municipality of Valparaíso and was first exposed to film at the age of five, becoming familiar with the work of Orson Welles, Alfred Hitchcock and others. She rarely saw French films due to censorship but, thanks to what she refers to as a "moment of magic", was able to watch Jean-Luc Godard 's Breathless (1960) at the age of twelve. She went on to study film and philosophy at the University of Valparaíso and married filmmaker Raúl Ruiz in 1969. In 1974, the couple were forced to move to Paris due to the 1973 Chilean coup d'état of Augusto Pinochet.

Sarmiento made her directorial debut with the documentary Un sueño como de colores (1972) about a group of Chilean women dedicated to striptease. Her later work as a director, usually in melodrama, romantic drama and costume drama, has also often featured strong female characters who face machismo and sexism. Her debut feature Notre mariage (1984) was a Grand Prix winner for Best New Director at the San Sebastián International Film Festival, her 1991 film Amelia Lópes O'Neill was entered into the 41st Berlin International Film Festival and her Napoleonic war epic Lines of Wellington competed for the Golden Lion at the 69th Venice International Film Festival.

A symposium on Sarmiento's feminism was held at Stanford University in May 2008, the Cinémathèque Française ran a Sarmiento retrospective in October 2018, and a Ruiz/Sarmiento retrospective will take place at the Filmoteca de Catalunya in October 2025.

On 18 January 2016, six French Foreign Legionnaires were killed in an avalanche in the Massif des Cerces, France.

The combination of heavy winter snowfall and strong winds in the Alps led to unstable snow formations in the high peaks. The avalanche warning was raised to 3 out of 5 (Considerable) beforehand.

An avalanche bulletin for the mountain sector warned that a single skier could trigger a surface avalanche that could then take several layers in the snow pack down to 2 meters deep.

On 18 January, a division of 51 Legionnaires, assigned to the 2nd Foreign Engineer Regiment (2nd REG) took part in an off-piste ski mountain exercise, to receive their Skier Certificate (BSM).

The (2nd REG) provides combat engineering services to the French Army's 27th Mountain Infantry Brigade, who were also present during the military exercise. The course took place 60 kilometres (35 miles) south of Albertville and near the Valfréjus ski resort, in the Massif des Cerces.

The company was at a height of 2,600m (8,500 ft) when the avalanche struck at 13:50, while 5-6 of the skiers neared Col de Le Petit Argentier. A large slab of ice, about 100 meters wide, broke off a ridge causing a mass avalanche. Several branches of snow about 400 meters wide, engulfed 13 of the skiers in a steep sector of the valley. In all, 18 of the skiers downstream were either buried or shaken. The rest of the company remained at the foot of the slope, near the Pas du Roc peak.

Rescue teams arrived within minutes. The 13 skiers were recovered and found buried under a meter of snow by rescuers with the help of search dogs and avalanche victim detection kits (DVA)'s they were equipped with.

French military and state prosecutors are investigating the case and assessing whether the unit took unnecessary risks. According to French media, the unit was due to be sent on a military operation. Around one-third of the company was projected to be deployed to the Sahel in the coming months in coordination with Operation Barkhane.

French president François Hollande expressed "the nation’s solidarity" over the deaths and wished the injured a speedy recovery. He asked Defence Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian to head to the scene of the accident.

The nationalities of the 6 Legionnaires killed, a mix of veterans and new recruits, was released the following day. A Malagasy (dual French citizenship), Italian, Nepalese, Moldovan, Albanian, and Hungarian, aged between 21 and 33 were killed.

Vallourec S.A. is a multinational manufacturing company headquartered in Meudon, France. Vallourec specializes in hot rolled seamless steel tubes, expandable tubular technology, automotive parts, and stainless steel, which it provides to energy, construction, automotive, and mechanical industries. Vallourec shares are listed on Euronext Paris.

As of 2022, Vallourec has 17,000 employees, numerous integrated manufacturing facilities, advanced R&D operations, and a presence in more than 20 countries.

Vallourec's history started near the end of 19th century, after the Mannesmann 's brothers discovered a process for rolling seamless steel tubes in Germany. French manufacturers then began to adopt this same method, as well as construct many industrial sites in Northern France and the Burgundy (Bourgogne) region. La Société Française des Corps Creux, located in Montbard, which was renamed Société Métallurgique de Montbard and listed on the Paris Stock Exchange in 1899, is one of the historic cornerstones of Vallourec. In 1907, Société Métallurgique de Montbard acquired a company in Aulnoye and changed its name to Société Montbard-Aulnoye.

During the 1920s and 1930s, many French industrial steel tube companies began to concentrate and specialize. In 1931, an industrial and commercial partnership was established between the factories in the cities of Valenciennes, Louvroil and Recquignies, forming a new company : Vallourec (using the first syllable of each city to create its name). In 1937, Société Montbard-Aulnoye and Société Louvroil et Recquignies merged as Société Louvroil Montbard-Aulnoye. Vallourec became the second largest steel tube manufacturer in France following the merger of the Société des Tubes de Valenciennes and the Société Louvroil-Montbard-Aulnoye, and was listed on the Paris Stock Exchange in 1957.

In 1963, Vallourec launched the VAM joint. The VAM joint rapidly became a benchmark product in the petroleum industry. In 1967, Vallourec acquired the tube division of Lorraine-Escaut, its main competitor. During the 1970s, Vallourec built an integrated steel and tube plant in Saint-Saulve, and also, formed several industrial and commercial partnerships, one such being with the Japanese company Sumitomo (Nippon Steel & Sumitomo Metal Corporation – NSSMC) – the 3rd largest manufacturer of steel tubes worldwide. In 1984, Vallourec entered the United States market with the foundation of VAM PTS (Premium Threading Services), a joint venture between Vallourec and Sumimoto.

1997 represents a turning point for Vallourec, following an alliance with the German company Mannesmann-Röhrenwerke Vallourec became a world leader in the seamless steel tube market. This jointly owned company was named Vallourec & Mannesmann Tubes (V&M Tubes). The newly formed group then continued to break into the international market with major acquisitions in both Brazil and the United States. The acquisition of North Star Steel, located in Youngstown, Ohio, considerably strengthened the company's presence in the United States.

In June 2005, Vallourec gained full control of V&M Tubes by purchasing Mannesmann-Röhrenwerke's 45% stake in the company. In 2006, following the purchase, the group entered the CAC 40 index, listed on the Paris Stock Exchange. Also, in that same year, following the acquisition of the American company OMSCO in September 2005, Vallourec became the world's second largest manufacturer of drill pipes. The drill pipe operations were regrouped under the name VAM Drilling, and in 2013 renamed Vallourec Drilling Products.

Vallourec continues to develop its operations in the Oil & Gas sectors, reinforcing its presence in China and the Middle East and investing in tubes for nuclear plants.

During the last years, Vallourec announced two major investments, in 2010, they announced plans to build a new tubing factory in Youngstown, Ohio for a sum of $650 million, to support the long-term development of alternative gas production (shale gas) in the United States. In 2011, Vallourec & Sumitomo Tubos do Brasil (VSB) was founded through a joint venture between Vallourec (56%) and Sumitomo (44%) featuring a new plant which is located in Jeceaba, Brazil.

On 1 October 2013, all of the company's divisions were rebranded under the name Vallourec.

Vallourec contributed to the renovation of Brazil's major football stadiums for the 2014 FIFA World Cup.

In January 2016, Vallourec announced a strategic partnership with Technip, one of the world leaders in project management and engineering for energy. In February 2016, Vallourec announced a 1 billion € capital increase and increased its participation in the Chinese company Tianda Oil Pipe (TOP).

In recent years Vallourec has reduced the European actives by selling off or closing down the steel works in Saint-Saulve, the rolling mills in Zeithain, Montbard, Déville-lès-Rouen, Düsseldorf-Reisholz, Düsseldorf-Rath and Mülheim-an-der-Ruhr.

In 2022 Philippe Guillemot replaces Edouard Guinotte as chairman and CEO of Vallourec.

In August 2024, ArcelorMittal acquired a 27.5% stake in Vallourec for €955 million from the investment fund Apollo. The increase in the steel giant's ownership raises the possibility of a future takeover bid. This strategic capital reinforcement, combined with the restructuring initiated by Philippe Guillemot, positions Vallourec on a path of sustainable and competitive growth in global markets.

Before moving the HQ to Meudon to save on rent the head office was in a six floor, 8,200 m (88,000 sq ft) facility in Boulogne-Billancourt. It moved there in May 2007 and left in August 2021. It included a 3,000 m (32,000 sq ft) interior green space.

Vallourec makes tubing products for the Oil & Gas, electrical, petrochemical, mechanical, and automotive industries. The company specializes in complex applications adapted for extreme conditions.

In the Oil & Gas industry, Vallourec is a major provider for tubing solutions used in exploration and production (casing and tubing, connections and risers), the transport of hydrocarbons (line pipe and integrated welding solutions), services for the oil industry, and tubes for refineries. Vallourec is specialized in products used in extreme conditions such as deep wells, corrosive environments, deviated wells, and high pressure and high temperature conditions as well.

Vallourec works with oil companies, engineering companies, and distributors alike.

Concerning power generation, Vallourec produces premium tubes with the ability to withstand high temperatures and pressures for both electrical and nuclear power plants. Vallourec works with manufacturers of boilers for power stations and producers of steam generators for nuclear power plants.

Vallourec also produces tubes for the mechanical, automotive and construction industries. Vallourec manufactures structural tubes used in the mechanical sector (agricultural machinery hoists, hydraulic jacks, cranes, etc.) and works with major automotive manufacturers and suppliers of tubes and other components.

In the construction industry, Vallourec manufactures tubes used in architectural projects, industrial or collective equipment, and private buildings. Vallourec has provided tubes for the construction of the steel structure of the Soccer City Stadium in Johannesburg, South Africa, the Stade de France, the Grande Arche de la Défense, Wembley Stadium in London, Bangkok Airport in Thailand, as well as certain necessary components used to build the top of One World Trade Center.

In preparation for the FIFA Confederations Cup Brazil 2013 and the 2014 FIFA World Cup, Vallourec provided structural seamless steel tubes for the renovation and construction of Brazilian stadiums.

Vallourec has a R&D team of 500 engineers and technicians in 6 research centers around the world: France (2 in Aulnoye), Germany (2 in Düsseldorf), Brazil (Belo Horizonte), and the United States (Houston).

In 2016, Vallourec dedicated €47 million to its R&D operations.

Vallourec has a presence in more than 20 countries, with 50 manufacturing facilities worldwide. In the past fifteen years, Vallourec has increased its industrial presence in Asia (China and Indonesia), Brazil, and the Middle East by increasing the local share of production.

Valréas (French pronunciation: [ valʁeas ] ; Occitan : Vauriàs) is a commune in the Vaucluse department in the Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur region in southeastern France.

The area around the town of Valréas is known as L'Enclave des Papes. It is an enclave of Vaucluse, surrounded by the department of the Drôme. The foundation of the Enclave began in 1317 when Pope John XXII bought Valreas for the papacy of Avignon. The story goes that following a visit to Valreas, feeling unwell he was offered some wine from the area. Liking it he decided to purchase the town to ensure his wine supply. Over the next 150 years or so his successors added to the Enclave by the addition of the small towns of Visan, Richerenches and Grillon. The boundaries were defined by tall stone markers carrying the coat of arms of the popes. The present-day boundaries are still delimited by some of these stones, one of which is outside the entrance to the Valreas Tourist office. When the departments of France were created after the Revolution the people of the Enclave requested to remain as part of the department of Vaucluse (see Comtat Venaissin). Hence the "Enclave des Papes".

The Valérie Bacot case, also known as the Clayette case, is a French legal case, which follows the 2016 murder of Daniel Polette by his wife Valérie Bacot, after years of abuse and forced prostitution by Polette.

On 13 March 2016 Bacot was raped by a client. Bacot killed her husband by shooting him in the back of the head with a pistol he had hidden in his car.

Bacot stated that she was afraid that her 14-year-old daughter would suffer the same fate as she did.

Her two eldest sons, aged 16 and 17, and Lucas Granet, her daughter's boyfriend, aged 16, helped her to bury the body in a wooded area. Valérie Bacot reported the disappearance of her husband to the police. The body was found on 3 October 2017 in La Clayette, in Saône-et-Loire, thanks to information given by Lucas's mother to the police and on the indications of Valérie Bacot.

Valérie Bacot is from Saône-et-Loire. Her parents separated in 1992. Her mother, Joëlle Aubagne, is described as an alcoholic who was authoritarian and violent. While she was the manager of a business in downtown La Clayette, she entered into a relationship with Daniel Polette. He moved in with them in December 1992 and began to rape Valérie when she was 12 years old. He was sentenced in April 1996 to four years in prison for sexual assault on a minor under the age of 15, he was released from prison after two and a half years and returned to the family home, where the rapes resumed. At the age of 17, Valérie Bacot fell pregnant by one of the rapes and her mother threw her out of the house.

However, at this time, her mother denies any form of rape and describes the relationship between Valérie Bacot and Daniel Polette as being love. This one demanding the return of her man and writing in a letter addressed to her mother "I want to live MY LIFE, that does not concern you." (...) "I want to stay with my man." Valérie Bacot then barely of age left the family home, her mother assuring that she had never chased her away.

She then moved with Daniel Polette, her step father, to the neighboring town of Baudemont and married him: they remained married for eighteen years and had four children. According to Valérie Bacot's support committee and her statements, her husband then forced her to prostitute herself in a converted minivan Valérie Bacot affirms that Daniel Polette aimed at her several times with an unloaded weapon and that he pulled the trigger, brandishing the threat to load the weapon the next time.

The couple's children claimed to have tried twice to alert the gendarmerie to the family situation, which the gendarmes denied during the trial.

Valérie Bacot recounted her ordeal in a book entitled Tout le monde savait (Everyone Knew), which was published in 2021 by Fayard.

Valérie Bacot and her children were arrested in October 2017 and she was placed in police custody and then indicted for murder while her two children were indicted for concealment of a corpse and not reporting a crime. After one year in pre-trial detention, she was released under judicial supervision.

On 21 November 2019 the trial of the three children who helped hide the body of their father and stepfather took place in Mâcon. On 19 December the juvenile court followed the recommendations of the prosecution and sentenced them to six months suspended prison sentence for concealing a corpse.

The trial of Valérie Bacot began on 21 June 2021 before the Assize Court of Chalon-sur-Saône. She faced life imprisonment. Before the trial she declared she was "deserving of a sentence".

Bacot was sentenced on 25 June 2021 to four years in prison, with three years suspended. Since she spent one year in pre-trial detention, she was free to return home.

The Vaunage (Occitan : Vaunatge) is an area of southern France made up of the plain and the small hills around Nages, which is known for its Gallic oppidum. The Vaunage area is located between Languedoc and Provence and between Sommières and Nîmes. It is north of the Camargue. From east to west the villages of Vaunage are: Caveirac, Clarensac, Langlade, Saint-Dionizy, Nages-et-Solorgues, Calvisson, Boissières, Saint-Côme-et-Maruéjols, Congénies.

According to the 1999 census, The population of the Vaunage was 15,250, the area being 9981 ha.

The name is a contraction of "Vallée de Nages", the valley of Nages. The valley is a furrowed combe at the edge of the garrigues plateau, surrounded by 200m-high hills that isolate it from the surroundings. There are two natural entrances, one to east coming from Nîmes, and one to the south towards Vergèze.

This geographical situation has led to a strong regional identity.

Le Camisard chief, Jean Cavalier called it "petite Chanaan", little Canaan.

This is an agricultural region, rich in history. There are hundreds of archaeological sites in this small area.

These valleys have been populated for over 2,000 years. Six oppida, dominated by that at Nages, were home to the Volques, who built them in the 8th century BC and remained there till the 1st century AD :

However it is the oppidum of Nages that has provided the richest archeological finds.

This region has a strong Protestant history, and is today predominantly Protestant. Congénies is unique in France in having a Quaker Meeting House and cemetery. One finds many recent chateaux, mas and bastides. The Camargue traditions such as the running of the bulls happen in each village. The soil is argilo-calcaire so the flora is essentially that of the garrigue- and this leads to fine wines. However, the region is being targeted by the expanding housing needs of Nîmes. The former railway has been transformed into a cycle way,«voie verte» opening the Vaunage to Green Tourism.

Cartulaire de Nîmes (en 955, occitan, cited by Idebert Exbrayat, in Si la Vaunage m'était contée, Nouvelle Édition, 1992) :

Poème sur la Vaunage (Voyage autour de la Vaunage de Maurice Aliger, membre de l' Académie de Nîmes. Page 30. Imprimerie BENE. 1983) :

The Loi Veil, officially the "Law of 17 January 1975 on the voluntary termination of pregnancy" (French : loi du 17 janvier 1975 relative à l'interruption volontaire de grossesse), is a law pertaining to the decriminalization of abortion in France. It was prepared by Simone Veil, minister of health during the presidency of Valéry Giscard d'Estaing.

The law was promulgated on 17 January 1975, with a duration of five years. It was renewed without time limit by a law passed on 31 December 1979.

The vote was preceded by various episodes related directly and indirectly to the ban on abortion, such as the legalization of contraception (1967), the Manifesto of the 343 (1971), the Bobigny trial [ fr ] (1972), and the Manifesto of the 331 [ fr ] (1973). After the Bobigny trial, the minister of justice instructed the Ministère public to cease prosecuting abortion.

An early law decriminalizing abortion was tabled under the presidency of Georges Pompidou (1969–1974).

Valéry Giscard d'Estaing promised to decriminalize abortion during his presidential campaign in 1974. As Minister of Justice, it fell to Jean Lecanuet to defend the law in Parliament, but he refused on grounds of personal ethics. Therefore, Minister of Health Simone Veil was charged with preparing the law soon after the election. She brought the law before the National Assembly on 26 November 1974, declaring in her speech:

I say this with all my conviction: Abortion must remain the exception, the last recourse for situations without any other option. But how can abortion be allowed without losing its character as an exception, without giving the impression that it is encouraged by society?

I would like, first and foremost, to share with you a woman's conviction — and I apologize for doing so in front of this Assembly almost exclusively composed of men — no woman resorts to an abortion with joy in her heart. Simply listen to women.

It is always a tragedy, and it will always remain a tragedy.

This is why, when the law presented before you takes account of the existing situation, when it admits the possibility of an abortion, it is to control it, and, as much as possible, to dissuade the woman.

— Simone Veil, Speech before the National Assembly, 26 November 1974

The vote was the object of heated, sometimes vicious, debate. Jean Foyer, who led the opposition to the law, declared in his response:

Have no doubt: Capital is already impatient to invest in this industry of death, and it will not be long until we come to know these "abor-toirs" in France, these abattoirs where they pile up the corpses of little babies, slaughterhouses my colleagues have had the opportunity to visit abroad.

After some 25 hours of intense debate by 74 speakers, the law was finally adopted by the Assembly on 29 November 1974 at 3:40 am, by a vote of 284 in favour and 189 against, thanks to the near-unanimous support from the parties of the left and the centre, against the objection of the majority, but not the entirety, of the members on the right, led by Jean Foyer (UDR), and including Simone Veil's own party.

The law was promulgated on 17 January. It was initially in force for a five-year period, on an experimental basis. It was renewed without time limit by law n°79-1204 on 31 December 1979.

The Loi Veil decriminalized voluntary termination of pregnancy before the end of the tenth week of gestation, with certain conditions:

The law also legalized voluntary termination of pregnancy for therapeutic reasons, which could be practiced under certain conditions:

Venus verrucosa, the warty venus, is a species of saltwater clam. It is a species of marine bivalve mollusc in the family Veneridae, sometimes collectively known as the venus clams.

This species is found around the European coast and also the southern African coast, from the Namibian coast to Mozambique, subtidally to 155 m.

This animal grows up to 60 mm in diameter. It has a bulky, oval shell with well-defined concentric ridges. The shell edges are knobbly and crossed.

Known as praire in France, it is an expensive delicacy there, and harvesting periods and size of catch (both minimum shell size and numbers taken) have had to be strictly regulated for its conservation. It is eaten either raw or baked in the oven with garlic butter.

The warty venus burrows in mud and sand.

Veolia Environnement S.A., branded as Veolia, is a French transnational company with activities in three main service and utility areas traditionally managed by public authorities – water management, waste management and energy services. In 2025, Veolia employed 215,000 employees in 56 countries. Its revenue in that year was recorded at €44.396 billion. It is quoted on Euronext Paris. It is headquartered in Aubervilliers.

Prior to 1998, Veolia was known as Compagnie Générale des Eaux. Between 1998 and 2003, the company was known as Vivendi Environnement, having been spun off from the Vivendi conglomerate, most of the rest of which became Vivendi.

In 2014, following a major restructuring, the company adopted the single name "Veolia" for all its operations, adding the name of the business sector to ensure clear identification (e.g., Veolia Environment. In french : "Veolia Environnement"). At the end of 2020, Veolia took over 29.9% of its competitor Suez Eau France as part of a strategy to expand its environmental services operations. The merger terms were signed in May 2021. In July 2022, Estelle Brachlianoff became the CEO of the group, succeeding Antoine Frérot, who stayed on as chairman of its board.

On 14 December 1853, a water company named Compagnie Générale des Eaux (CGE) was created by an Imperial decree of Napoleon III. In 1853, CGE obtained a concession to supply water to the public in Lyon, serving in this capacity for over a hundred years. In 1860, it obtained a 50-year concession with the City of Paris.

For a hundred years, Compagnie Générale des Eaux remained largely focused on the water sector. However, following the appointment of Guy Dejouany as CEO in 1976, CGE extended its activities into other sectors with a series of takeovers.

Beginning in 1980, CGE began diversifying its operations from water into waste management, energy, transport services, and construction and property. It did so by acquiring:

In 1998, CGE changed its name to "Vivendi", and the following year it sold off its property and construction divisions. Vivendi Environnement was formed in 1999 to consolidate its environmental divisions. Its divisions at the formation of Vivendi Environnement were:

Vivendi went on to list on the New York Stock Exchange (as "V"), and in December, announced a major merger with Canal+ and Seagram, the owner of Universal Studios film company, to become Vivendi Universal and now named Vivendi.

In July 2000, Vivendi Environnement was divested through IPOs in Paris and later New York in October 2001). Initially, Vivendi Universal retained a 70% stake in Vivendi Environnement in 2000, but by December 2002, it was reduced to 20.4%. In 2003, Vivendi Environnement was renamed to Veolia Environnement.

As a result of Vivendi Environnement spinning off from its parent Vivendi Universal in 2002, in 2003, Vivendi Environnement was renamed to Veolia Environnement. In 2005, the name "Veolia" was established as an umbrella brand for all of the Group's divisions (water, environmental services, energy services and transport) and a new logo was created. The names of the divisions at the time of rebranding were:

In November 2009, Antoine Frérot became the chairman and the CEO of the group after succeeding Henri Proglio who was appointed CEO of Électricité de France. The change was part of a huge politico-financial scandal in France as Proglio kept executive positions – and subsequent salary – in both companies until public criticism forced him to give up his Veolia revenues.

Its Veolia Water division remains the largest private operator of water services in the world, providing services across the globe. Transdev (formerly Veolia Transdev) was formed in 2011 from a merger of Veolia Transport with the old Transdev, a subsidiary of Caisse des Dépôts. Currently, Veolia owns 30% of the company's shares. Prior to the merger, Veolia Transport was the transport division of Veolia. It was originally part of the CGEA, which was acquired in 1980, and the transport division was then renamed Connex in 1999, then finally renamed to Veolia Transport in 2005.

At the time of merger, Veolia Transport recorded revenues of €7.863 billion in 2011 (For 2010: Europe 83%, included France 37.1%, North America 13.2%, Asia-Pacific 3.7%). It employed 101,798 people. It worked with public authorities under public-private partnerships to manage public transit systems (buses, trains, metros, ferries, etc.). On 6 December 2011, Veolia Environment, seeking to reduce debt and focus on its core businesses of water, waste and energy, announced that it will eventually sell its share in Veolia Transdev, within a two-year time frame, by when its own activities will have been reorganized. After this announcement, the Caisse des Dépôts et Consignations, for its part, officially reiterated its commitment to Veolia Transdev and its continued support as a shareholder to the group's development.

In early 2012, it was reported that Cube Infrastructure, a fund controlled by the French bank Natixis (Groupe BPCE), was likely to acquire about half of Veolia's stake in Transdev. The Caisse des Dépôts would take over the other half. This was later changed in October 2012 to Caisse des Dépôts acquiring 10% of the shares from Veolia. This however was not implemented. In December 2016, CDC finally bought 20% shares from Veolia. As a result, Veolia's share on the company reduced to 30%.

In January 2019, the 30% share was sold to the Rethmann Group, the owner of Rhenus. In 2012, the group launched a major restructuring plan: one Veolia per country for a single international headquarters. The company's activity is refocused on markets with large volumes and greater added value (difficult-to-treat pollution, the circular economy, more industrial groups as customers, etc.). Veolia Environnement officially becomes Veolia. In Latin America, Proactiva was a 50-50 joint venture formed in 1999 between Veolia Environnement and Fomento de Construcciones y Contratas (FCC), until Veolia bought the other 50% share from FCC in 2013. As a result, Veolia now owns 100% of Proactiva. In 2014, EDF took over Dalkia's activities in France while Veolia took over 100% of Dalkia's international activities.

In February 2016, Veolia acquired the American Kurion, which specializes in low-level radioactive residue remediation techniques, for 350 million dollars. The acquisition expanded the activities of Asteralis, its subsidiary focused on waste characterization and nuclear facility assessment. It was part of Veolia's 2016–2018 investment plan, which also included cost-reduction measures. In May 2016, Veolia announced the creation of the largest sewage sludge treatment plant in the world, located in Hong Kong. In June 2016, Veolia announced the acquisition for $325 million of the sulfuric acid activities of the company Chemours, resulting from the split of the specialty chemicals activities of DuPont. The following month, Veolia continued its acquisitions and acquired the Szakoly power plant, the fifth largest electricity production facility in Hungary from biomass and contributed to the development of renewable energies in the country.

In North America, Veolia Energy traded under the Trigen Energy name until February 2011. It was a major operator and developer of efficient district energy (heating, cooling, and cogeneration) systems in North America, located in ten major U.S. cities. It also provides facility operations, energy management, and advisory services. In July 2019, Veolia sold its heating and cooling networks in the United States for $1.25 billion to the French investment fund Antin Infrastructure Partners, which renamed the business Vicinity Energy. In December 2019, Veolia, through its subsidiary Veolia Nuclear Solutions, and the electrician EDF announced the creation of Graphitech, a company responsible for dismantling graphite technology nuclear reactors.

On 30 August 2020, Veolia made an offer to ENGIE to buy back 29.9% of Suez shares for the sum of 2.9 billion euros, and then proposed a public tender offer for Suez for the rest shares. In October 2020, Veolia acquired the 29.9% stake in Engie, for 3.4 billion euros. In April 2021, Veolia and Suez publish a joint press release claiming to have found common ground for Veolia to absorb a large part of Suez's international activities, which should bring Veolia's valuation to 37 billion euros. This operation values Suez at 13 billion euros.

A merger agreement was signed in May 2021 to formalize the transaction. In December 2021, the European Commission approved the takeover, subject to a series of conditions, including asset divestments to address competition concerns. In early 2022, Veolia announced the completion of its acquisition of Suez and its intention to integrate the acquired activities within the group.

In July 2022, Estelle Brachlianoff became the CEO of the Group after succeeding Antoine Frérot who remained as Chairman of its Board. In November 2025, Veolia Environnement acquired the American company Clean Earth for 3.04 billion dollars.

Veolia is established in 56 countries, with employees across the globe in 2024:

The group operates in the water, waste and energy sectors. It is present on five continents and has 215,000 employees. In 2025, the Veolia group had 110 million users for its drinking water supply services and 97 million for sanitation. According to company figures, it produced nearly 45 terawatt hours and recovered 64 million tonnes of waste. Its consolidated turnover is 44.4 billion euros for a net profit of 1,643 million euros. The company is listed on the Paris Stock Exchange under the VIE, Fortune 500, SBF 120 index.

On 31 December 2024, shares in Veolia Environnement were held as follows: 10.4% Individual shareholders, 8.9% Employees, 5.9% BlackRock, 5.8% Amundi, 4.7% Caisse des Dépôts et Consignations CNP, 3.4% Vanguard, 2.9% Impax, 2.1% BPCE, 2.0% Strate Street, 1.9% Pictet, 1.7% Norges, 1.4% Self detention, 48.8% Other institutional shareholders

Veolia issued two profit warnings in 2011 and announced plans to quit half of the 77 countries where it does business. It launched a €5 billion ($6.4 billion) fire sale of assets. The company and its top executives were facing the prospect of a U.S. class-action lawsuit in January 2012 over allegations that they made "misleading" statements between 2007 and 2011 about its financial well-being. The company, which was described as "struggling" by the Financial Times, said that a complaint had been filed against it in New York for violation of U.S. federal securities laws. Veolia's shares were the worst performer on France's CAC 40 index in 2011, falling 60%.

The following is a summary of data (in millions of euros):

The company reports activities related to sustainable development across its water, waste, and energy operations. Environmental and social objectives are included in its corporate strategy. The company is involved to a greater or lesser extent in the implementation of each of the 17 UN SDGs, and reports alignment with 13 of the 17 UN Sustainable Development Goals. The company's sustainability efforts are furthered by its Foundation and Institute which support activities related to research and environmental initiatives.

The Veolia Foundation supports non-profit activities related to sustainable development, professional continuous development and the protection of the environment in France and overseas. The foundation supports projects through financial aid and voluntary services provided by its employees. It also supports emergency relief operations in collaboration with humanitarian organisations.

Following the 2010 Haiti earthquake, the Veolia Foundation dispatched 30 tons of emergency supplies (mainly water treatment units) via French Red Cross air transportation. The Foundation also sent Veolia technical experts to provide water to the disaster's victims. In the Philippines, in November 2013 Typhoon Yolanda ravaged the center of the archipelago and affected 10 million inhabitants, Veolia Foundation intervened alongside the NGO Solidarités International in the region of Tacloban, the first coastal town in the path of the typhoon, to bring aid to the devastated population.

In 2016, after Hurricane Matthew hit Haiti, the Veolia Foundation intervened to restore drinking water with the NGO Acted.

The Institut Veolia was created in 2001 to conduct research and publish work on global challenges such as climate change, urbanisation and various economic, social and cultural issues related to the environment. The Institute is built around a committee that brings together seven experts and an international network of researchers and experts. Its activities include organising conferences and publishing articles and reports.

As of 31 December 2009, the Group's research and development investments reached €89.8 million (€92.1 million in 2008, €84.6 million in 2007).

The Research and Innovation division includes 850 experts and supports around 200 scientific partnerships with private and public organisations. The division focuses on four main issues:

Veolia's R&I division has determined nine main development programmes through which a number of research projects are managed:

On 4 May 2009, a Veolia Environmental Service's plant in West Carrollton, Ohio, United States, exploded. The blast leveled two buildings on the property which were a laboratory and a building that had several 200,000 gallon chemical tanks. This particular plant handles fuel blending among other services. Two workers at the plant were injured in the blast. The explosion caused $50 million in damage to the plant itself. More than a dozen homes up to a mile radius from the blast were also damaged due to the explosion.

Two workers died after a catastrophic mechanical failure in April 2011 at a waste water treatment plant in Gatlinburg, Tennessee, United States, owned by the local municipality and operated by Veolia Water. At least 1.5 million gallons of a mix of storm and sewage water were spilled into a nearby river after a sewage-holding wall collapsed.

On 4 February 2026, a wastewater plant in Wellington, New Zealand, operated and maintained by Veolia suffered a catastrophic failure due to waste water backing up from the outfall pipeline while the plant was undergoing maintenance. The flooding caused the control room to be submerged 3 metres deep, resulting in widespread damage to the facility and taking it completely offline, resulting in 70 million litres of untreated waste water per day to be discharged 5 metres off shore. The fallout, described by Wellington Mayor Andrew Little as an "Environmental disaster", resulted in the entire south coast of Wellington being off limits to residents due to safety concerns, contributing to widespread business losses and frustration among the residents of Wellington. The failure comes amid years of performance failures, non-compliance, and infringement notices in relation to the Wellington plant.

In 2017, French company Veolia sued Lithuania in Stockholm arbitration court demanding about 100 million euros in damages. Veolia alleges that Lithuanian government is involved in illegal conduct and that it expropriated Veolia's investments. This is Veolia's second arbitration lawsuit against Lithuania after it sued Lithuania in Washington arbitration court in 2016.

In February 2011, the Tower Hamlets London Borough Council of the London borough of Tower Hamlets, voted to review its position with Veolia and place no further contracts with it, after claiming that Veolia's work for the Israeli government assisted the "continued oppression of the Palestinian people".

The Justice and Peace Commission, part of the Catholic Church in England, urged London municipalities to stop doing business with Veolia because of its involvement with illegal settlements. Veolia stated that it did not consider its activities to be in violation of international law.

Palestinian human-rights organization Al-Haq instructed lawyers in the Netherlands to submit a formal objection against the decision of Stadsregio Arnhem Nijmegen, a municipality, to award a public transport concession to Hermes, the Dutch subsidiary of Veolia Transdev. The objection was based on Veolia's involvement in what Al-Haq claims are Israel's violations of international law.

In a 2012 interview with the Israeli press, Veolia's Denis Gasquet, senior executive vice president, admitted that Veolia had been under pressure from pro-Palestinian groups in Europe, particularly over the Jerusalem Light Rail. Parties within Veolia had argued that the group was losing tenders as a result, but Gasquest said he did not know of any tenders lost due to Veolia's activities in Israel. He confirmed Veolia's intention to stay in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories, while exiting the transport business.

On 1 April 2015, the company announced on its website "Veolia closes the sale of its activities in Israel." This was taken by supporters of the BDS (Boycott Divestment and Sanctions) movement to signify a success for their campaigning efforts: "The sale follows a worldwide campaign against the company’s role in illegal Israeli settlements that cost the firm billions of dollars of lost contracts."

Veolia offered unpaid internship positions under the Irish government's JobBridge initiative. This scheme was opposed by left-wing political groups, who claim it amounts to free labour and can cause a claimant who refuses many such offers to fall foul of a provision in the Irish Social Welfare that allows benefits to be withdrawn from unemployed who were fired.

On 22 June 2016, Michigan Attorney General Bill Schuette began its first civil action in the Flint water crisis by filing suit against Veolia North America and Lockwood, Andrews & Newnam (LAN) who were hired to consult Flint water plant officials after the switch to the Flint River in April 2015. The lawsuit, at that time, had accused Veolia and LAN of professional negligence and public nuisance. Veolia was also, at that time, accused of fraud. Veolia disputed the allegations, stating that it had raised concerns about potential lead and copper issues during its work and that city officials had limited the scope of its involvement while separate testing was being conducted by the city and the EPA.

The Vercingetorix Monument (French : Monument à Vercingétorix) is a statuary monument dedicated to the Gaulish chieftain Vercingetorix, defeated by Julius Caesar in the Gallic Wars. The monument was designed by Aimé Millet and constructed in 1865. It is designated as a monument historique.

The monument was commissioned by Emperor Napoleon III from the sculptor Aimé Millet and installed in 1865 on Mont Auxois, near Alise-Sainte-Reine in the Côte-d'Or department in the Burgundy region of eastern France. The site was the supposed site of Alesia. The architect for the memorial was Eugène Viollet-le-Duc. The base has a nationalistic inscription installed by Viollet-le-Duc, translating into French the words of Julius Caesar:

La Gaule unie Formant une seule nation Animée d'un même esprit, Peut défier l'Univers.

(Gaul united, Forming a single nation Animated by a common spirit, Can defy the Universe.)

Verjuice is a highly acidic juice made by pressing unripe grapes, crab-apples or other sour fruit. Sometimes lemon or sorrel juice, herbs or spices are added to change the flavor. It also goes by the name verjus.

The word verjuice (/ ˈ v ɜːr ˌ dʒ uː s / VUR -jooss) comes from the Middle French vert jus (lit. ' green juice '), which refers to its sour grape source. The authors of The Medieval Kitchen: Recipes from France and Italy (1998) write that the grape seeds preserved in salts were also called verjus during the Middle Ages.

From the Middle Ages through the Renaissance, verjus was widely used all over Western Europe as an ingredient in sauces, as a condiment, or to deglaze preparations. The modern form of dijon mustard was established in 1856 when Jean Naigeon of Dijon replaced the vinegar usually used in prepared mustard with verjuice.

Verjus is called husroum (حصرم) in Arabic; it is used extensively in Lebanese and Syrian cuisine. Verjus is known as ab-ghooreh (آب‌غوره) in Persian, and it is used extensively in Persian cuisine, such as in Shirazi salad.

Maggie Beer, a South Australian cook, vintner and food writer, started commercial production in 1984, after a harvest of Rhine Riesling grapes could not be sold. She persuaded a winemaker who was a friend to assist her in turning the juice into verjuice. After slow national sales, 15 years later came international sales, that were then followed in France and elsewhere by local product. Niagara Oast House Brewers in Niagara-on-the-Lake, Ontario, Canada, developed a farmhouse ale around the use of local Niagara Pinot Noir Verjus, with the first release in fall 2015.

Verjus comes in two colors, white and red. The red varies from gentle and floral, to rich and hearty; the white varies from light and mild, to tangy and aggressive.

It was once used in many contexts where modern cooks would use either wine or some variety of vinegar, but has become much less widely used as wines and variously flavored vinegars became more accessible. Nonetheless, it is still used in a number of dishes as well as in recipes from various cuisines, and can be purchased at some gourmet grocery stores or by local producers.

Modern cooks use verjuice most often in salad dressings as the acidic ingredient when wine is going to be served with the salad. This is because it provides a comparable sour taste component, yet without "competing with" (altering the taste of) the wine, the way vinegar or lemon juice would. Some people will drink verjus with sparkling water and ice, which tastes similar to lemonade.

In the Middle East, verjus is thought to have medicinal properties, and can help diagnose illnesses (as it relates to Iranian traditional medicine).

The Vermilion Coast Tracks follow the mediterranean coastline of the Pyrenees from Argelès-sur-Mer to Cerbère the border town with Spain. Passing through several types of forest, and vineyards, this tracks often provides excellent views over the sea. It is classified as one of Pyrénées-Orientales 's Great Hikes, and is located in the Massane Forest Natural Reserve.

The trailheads are at Cerbère, and Argelès, on the southern and northern edges of the Vermilion coast respectively. Most people take 1 to 2 days to complete the trails.

The trails passes through several areas of private land, and touches the edge of the Cerbère-Banyuls Natural Marine Reserve where a special scuba diving underwater trail is open to the public in the summer.

12km [7.5 miles], approximately 5 hours. A technical route for experienced walkers. Unsuitable in high winds. Starting in the village of Puig del Mas, follow the path that Jewish writer, Walter Benjamin and friends took to escape Nazi persecution in occupied France. Climb to The 13th century Torre de Querroig (672m).

12km [7.5 miles], approximately 4 hours. This trail can be done back and forth, in any direction. A well maintained path but the cliffs can be dangerous if it is windy, and the wind can be extremely strong at Cap Bear. The walk takes in the historic site of Paullilles, the 18th century museum, Redoute Bear and the active military installation, Fort Bear.

21.5km [13.5 miles], approximately 6 hours. Intermediate level with some technical areas. Begin from Place de l'Obélisque, in Port Vendres, walking via Cosprons, Fortress Galline, Batterie 500, Tour de Madeloc (656m), Batterie Taillefer, Fort Dugommier & Fort St Elme before dropping back to Port Vendres.

7km [3 miles], approximately 4 hours. Some steep climbs/descents and rocky ledges. Starting in La Vall (between Sorède and Argelès-sur-Mer) the walk climbs up to the Château d'Ultrera, passing the 10th century Chapelle de la Pavé.

The Verneuil method (or Verneuil process or Verneuil technique), also called flame fusion, was the first commercially successful method of manufacturing synthetic gemstones, developed in late 1883 by the French chemist Auguste Verneuil. It is primarily used to produce the ruby, sapphire and padparadscha varieties of corundum, as well as the diamond simulants rutile, strontium titanate and spinel. The principle of the process involves melting a finely powdered substance using an oxyhydrogen flame, and crystallising the melted droplets into a boule. The process is considered to be the founding step of modern industrial crystal growth technology, and remains in wide use to this day.

Since the study of alchemy began, there have been attempts to synthetically produce precious stones, and ruby, being one of the prized cardinal gems, has long been a prime candidate. In the 19th century, significant advances were achieved, with the first ruby formed by melting two smaller rubies together in 1817, and the first microscopic crystals created from alumina (aluminium oxide) in a laboratory in 1837. By 1877, chemist Edmond Frémy had devised an effective method for commercial ruby manufacture by using molten baths of alumina, yielding the first gemstone-quality synthetic stones. The Parisian chemist Auguste Verneuil, who applied to work with Frémy at age 17, became Frémy 's assistant in 1876 and helped develop the method, but soon went on to independently develop the flame fusion process, which would eventually come to bear his name.

One of Verneuil's sources of inspiration for developing his own method was the appearance of synthetic rubies sold by an unknown Genevan merchant in 1885. These "Geneva rubies" were determined to be artificial at the time but are now believed to be the first rubies produced by flame fusion, predating Verneuil's work by several years. After being introduced to the "Geneva rubies" by a mineralogist at the Natural Museum of History in Paris, Verneuil came to the conclusion that it was possible to recrystallise finely ground aluminium oxide into a large gemstone. This realisation, along with the availability of the recently developed oxyhydrogen torch and growing demand for synthetic rubies, led him to design the Verneuil furnace, where finely ground purified alumina and chromium oxide were melted by a flame of at least 2,000 °C (3,630 °F), and recrystallised on a support below the flame, creating a large crystal. Verneuil documented his work in sealed documents during the 1890s and publicly announced his work in 1902, publishing details outlining the process in 1904.

By 1910, Verneuil's laboratory had expanded into a 30-furnace production facility, with annual gemstone production by the Verneuil process having reached 1,000 kg (2,200 lb) in 1907. By 1912, production reached 3,200 kg (7,100 lb), and would go on to reach 200,000 kg (440,000 lb) in 1980 and 250,000 kg (550,000 lb) in 2000, led by Hrand Djevahirdjian 's factory in Monthey, Switzerland, founded in 1914. The most notable improvements in the process were made in 1932, by S. K. Popov, who helped establish the capability for producing high-quality sapphires in the Soviet Union through the next 20 years. A large production capability was also established in the United States during World War II, when European sources were not available, and jewels were in high demand for their military applications such as for timepieces.

The process was designed primarily for the synthesis of rubies, which became the first gemstone to be produced on an industrial scale. However, the Verneuil process could also be used for the production of other stones, including blue sapphire which required oxides of iron and titanium to be used in place of chromium oxide. The basic process can be used to form even more elaborate gemstones such as star sapphires, where titania (titanium dioxide) was added and the boule was kept in the heat longer, allowing needles of rutile to crystallise within it. In 1947, the Linde Air Products division of Union Carbide pioneered the use of the Verneuil process for creating such star sapphires, until production was discontinued in 1974 owing to overseas competition.

Despite some improvements in the method, the Verneuil process remains virtually unchanged to this day, while maintaining a leading position in the manufacture of synthetic corundum and spinel gemstones. Its most significant setback came in 1917, when Jan Czochralski introduced the Czochralski process, which has found numerous applications in the semiconductor industry, where a much higher quality of crystals is required than the Verneuil process can produce. Other alternatives to the process emerged in 1957, when Bell Labs introduced the hydrothermal process, and in 1958, when Carroll Chatham introduced the flux method. In 1989 Larry P Kelley of ICT, Inc. also developed a variant of the Czochralski process where natural ruby is used as the 'feed' material.

One of the most crucial factors in successfully crystallising an artificial gemstone is obtaining highly pure starting material, with at least 99.9995% purity. In the case of manufacturing rubies, sapphires or padparadscha, this material is alumina. The presence of sodium impurities is especially undesirable, as it makes the crystal opaque. But because the bauxite from which alumina is obtained is most likely by way of the Bayer process (the first stage of which introduces caustic soda in order to separate the Al 2 O 3) particular attention must be paid to the feedstock.

Depending on the desired colouration of the crystal, small quantities of various oxides are added, such as chromium oxide for a red ruby, or ferric oxide and titania for a blue sapphire. Other starting materials include titania for producing rutile, or titanyl double oxalate for producing strontium titanate. Alternatively, small, valueless crystals of the desired product can be used.

This starting material is finely powdered, and placed in a container within a Verneuil furnace, with an opening at the bottom through which the powder can escape when the container is vibrated. While the powder is being released, oxygen is supplied into the furnace, and travels with the powder down a narrow tube. This tube is located within a larger tube, into which hydrogen is supplied. At the point where the narrow tube opens into the larger one, combustion occurs, with a flame of at least 2,000 °C (3,630 °F) at its core. As the powder passes through the flame, it melts into small droplets, which fall onto an earthen support rod placed below. The droplets gradually form a sinter cone on the rod, the tip of which is close enough to the core to remain liquid. It is at that tip that the seed crystal eventually forms. As more droplets fall onto the tip, a single crystal, called a boule, starts to form, and the support is slowly moved downward, allowing the base of the boule to crystallise, while its cap always remains liquid. The boule is formed in the shape of a tapered cylinder, with a diameter broadening away from the base and eventually remaining more or less constant. With a constant supply of powder and withdrawal of the support, very long cylindrical boules can be obtained. Once removed from the furnace and allowed to cool, the boule is split along its vertical axis to relieve internal pressure, otherwise the crystal will be prone to fracture when the stalk is broken due to a vertical parting plane.

When initially outlining the process, Verneuil specified a number of conditions crucial for good results. These include: a flame temperature that is not higher than necessary for fusion; always keeping the melted product in the same part of the oxyhydrogen flame; and reducing the point of contact between the melted product and support to as small an area as possible. The average commercially produced boule using the process is 13 mm (0.51 in) in diameter and 25 to 50 mm (0.98 to 1.97 in) long, weighing about 125 carats (25.0 g). The process can also be performed with a custom-oriented seed crystal to achieve a specific desired crystallographic orientation.

Crystals produced by the Verneuil process are chemically and physically equivalent to their naturally occurring counterparts, and strong magnification is usually required to distinguish between the two. A telltale characteristic is the Verneuil crystal is curved growth lines (curved striae) form, as the cylindrical boule grows upwards in an environment with a high thermal gradient, while the equivalent lines in natural crystals are straight. Another distinguishing feature is the common presence of microscopic gas bubbles formed due to an excess of oxygen in the furnace; imperfections in natural crystals are usually solid impurities.

In France, the versement transport (abbreviated VT) is a hypothecated urban regional payroll tax levied on the total gross salaries of all employees of companies of more than 11 employees, originally intended to raise capital for investment in local public transport infrastructure, but more and more used to cover its operating expenses. The tax is levied on the employer, not the employee directly. The money is directed to the autorité organisatrice de transport urbain (AOT, "Urban Regional Transport Authority"), the local government authority responsible for organising public transport.

In 2010, for example, this tax financed nearly 40% of the operational cost for the public transport network in Ile-de-France through the Syndicat des transports d'Île-de-France (STIF), the AOT for the Île-de-France, which includes Paris. The STIF distributed the money between the RATP (the metropolitan transport authority), the SNCF (the state railway operator) and the Optile group (private companies that operate bus lines in the suburbs).

First established in the Paris region, in 1973 the VT was extended to all urban regions of over 300,000 people. In 1974 this was extended to those whose population exceeded 100,000, in 1982, to those over 30,000 (by the "Administration Territoriale de la République" law) and in 1999 to those over 10,000 (the "Loi relative au renforcement et à la simplification de la coopération intercommunale", more commonly known as the Chevènement law). The money is directed to the local autorité organisatrice de transport urbain. Between 1975 and 1982, the minimum population being fixed at 100,000 may have played a decisive part in the creation of AOTs encompassing several smaller communes, and in the extension of "périmètres de transport urbain" (PTUs, "Urban Transport limits", i.e. essentially the edges of fare zones).

The VT rate is variable depending on the size of the population in the PTU. Since 2011, it is limited to 0.9% for PTUs with fewer than 100,000 inhabitants.

Employers who grow to exceed the threshold of 11 employees are exempt from paying transport tax for three years and receive a discount of 75% the fourth year, 50% the fifth year and 25% in year six.

In the 1970s, this tax was used to modernise the public transport networks.

The Via Podiensis or the Le Puy Route is one of the four routes through France on the pilgrimage to the tomb of St. James the Great in Santiago de Compostela in Galicia in northwest Spain. It leaves from Le-Puy-en-Velay and crosses the countryside in stages to the stele of Gibraltar in the basque village of Uhart-Mixe. Near there it merges with two of the other routes, the via Turonensis and the via Lemovicensis which merge a little earlier.

The three then become the Navarre Route, passing via the French town of Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port and crossing the Pyrenees and the Spanish border by one path or another to Roncesvalles in the Spanish province of Navarre. Together they serve as the principal pilgrimage route across Spain, known as the Camino francés. The fourth French route, the via Tolosane, crosses the Pyrenees at a different point (Somport), becomes the Aragonese Way when it enters Spain, and joins the Camino frances further to the west.

Before le Puy, the via Gebennensis leaves from Geneva, gathering Swiss and German pilgrims and feeding into the via Podiensis. Though it bears a Latin name, the via Gebennensis is a modern route laid out in 1980-90, though the numerous hospitals it passes testify to the passage of pilgrims along this route in earlier ages.

From Geneva to the Pyrenees, the two routes (via Gebennensis and via Podiensis) are waymarked as one of the French major hiking routes, the GR 65, with a few local variations or detours, including GR 651 through the valley of Célé and GR 652 via Rocamadour.

According to the A Guide for the Traveller compiled by Aymeric Picaud in the 12th century, four routes lead to Santiago de Compostela:

In 950 or 951, Godescalc, bishop of Le Puy-en-Velay, set off on a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela. He was the first non-Hispanic to undertake the pilgrimage, leading a large caravan that included members of the clergy, their staff and servants, various nobles and gentlemen, their retainers and men at arms.

The route leaves Le Puy-en-Velay and passes Vals-près-le-Puy, Saint-Christophe-sur-Dolaison, Bains, Saint-Privat-d'Allier, Monistrol-d'Allier, Saugues, and Chanaleilles.

The route passes Saint-Alban-sur-Limagnole, Aumont-Aubrac, Malbouzon, Rieutort-d'Aubrac, Marchastel, and Nasbinals.

The route passes Aubrac, Saint-Chély-d'Aubrac, Saint-Côme-d'Olt, Espalion, Bessuéjouls, Estaing, Golinhac, Espeyrac, Sénergues, Conques, Noailhac, Decazeville, and Livinhac-le-Haut.

The route passes through Montredon, Saint-Félix, Figeac, and Béduer.

A variant route follows the valley of the river Lot, passing Gréalou, Cajarc, and Varaire. A second variation passes through the valley of the Célé, Espagnac-Sainte-Eulalie, Marcilhac-sur-Célé, Sauliac-sur-Célé, Cabrerets, Saint-Cirq-Lapopie. The two variants converge and pass through Cahors, Labastide-Marnhac, Lhospitalet, Lascabanes, Montcuq. A third variant running north of the route passes through Rocamadour.

The route passes Lauzerte, Moissac, and Auvillar.

The route passes Saint-Antoine-sur-l'Arrats, Flamarens, Miradoux, Lectoure, La Romieu, Condom, Valence-sur-Baïse, Larressingle, Beaumont sur l'Osse, the Abbaye de Flaran (off the route), Montréal-du-Gers, Lauraët, Lagraulet-du-Gers, Eauze, Manciet, Nogaro, Barcelonne-du-Gers.

The route passes Aire-sur-l'Adour, after which hikers and pilgrims can pass by either Pécorade and Geaune or by Miramont-Sensacq. Those two routes converge once more at Pimbo.

The route passes Arzacq-Arraziguet, Vignes, Louvigny, Uzan, Pomps, Arthez-de-Béarn, Sauvelade, Navarrenx, Charre, Aroue to reach the stèle of Gibraltar (Xibaltarre hilarria) in the village of Uhart-Mixe.

The distance from the stele of Gibraltar to Santiago de Compostela is 768 kilometers (477 miles).

The vice president of the Republic (French : vice-président de la République) was an office that existed in France only during the Second Republic (1848–1852), and only ever had one holder, Henri Georges Boulay de la Meurthe, elected in January 1849.

It was never re-established, despite occasional discussions in the founding years of the Fifth Republic. The president of the Senate (upper house) is designated to step in as acting president.

The vice presidency was established at the start of the Second Republic by the Constitution of 4 November 1848, specifically its articles 45, 70 and 71. It was broadly inspired by the vice president of the United States, as were some other features of the new constitution, which created France’s closest experiment towards a presidential system, with the introduction of a president, an office the First Republic had done without.

The holder, however, was not elected alongside the president on a ticket, but in an indirect election by the National Assembly (legislature) within the month after the presidential election (a direct election), from a list of three names proposed by the new president. In order to avoid dynastic links after the toppling of the July Monarchy, members of the president's family ("relations or kindred of the President to the sixth degree inclusive") were barred from the office. Like the president, the vice president could only be re-elected, or be elected as president himself, after an interval of four years.

Also, the vice president was to step in as acting president if the president was incapacitated, but not to ascend the office if it became vacant: a new president was to be elected within a month.

The vice president was ex officio the president of the Council of State, a position that has always been occupied by a member of the executive (today the prime minister).

Henri Georges Boulay de la Meurthe was elected to the new office on 20 January 1849, as the preferred choice of President Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, who had also proposed Count Achille Baraguey d’Hilliers and Alexandre-François Vivien. He was a devoted and discreet supporter of Bonaparte for the next three years; one biographer wrote that he was "always withdrawing, meddling in nothing, not even in his prerogatives". He supported his Coup of 2 December 1851 ; although he formally remained Vice President, the Constitution of 1848 was in effect suspended until the Constitution of 1852 came into force on 29 March and abolished the office. He was compensated with a lifetime seat in the re-established Senate.

The order was the one in which President Bonaparte had presented his three candidates, in a letter of 18 January. The election was held on 20 January. Although the Constitution did not specify a voting system, the president of the Assembly stated that the election required a majority of the votes cast; it was achieved in one round. Boulay de la Meurthe was immediately sworn in.

During the Second Empire (1852–1870), two influential figures, the Duke of Morny, an illegitimate half-brother of Napoleon III, and Eugène Rouher, were nicknamed "the Vice Emperor".

The interim of the presidency in case of an incapacitation or a vacancy was devolved to the Council of Ministers (government) during the Third Republic (1875–1940), to the president of the National Assembly (lower house) during the Fourth Republic (1946–1958), and to the president of the Senate (upper house) under the Fifth Republic (1958–present).

In the 1960s, after the founding years of the Fifth Republic, there were proposals within the right-wing majority to create a vice presidency, some linked to the perspective of turning it into a presidential system. One was put forward privately by Jacques Chaban-Delmas, the president of the National Assembly, to President Charles de Gaulle after he escaped the Petit-Clamart attack in 1962, and there were discussions at the 3rd UNR Conference in November 1963, which, by coincidence, was held in the days after the assassination of John F. Kennedy. Others were made by Pierre Marcilhacy in 1964 and by Paul Coste-Floret and Achille Peretti in 1966. De Gaulle and his entourage, however, saw this as a manoeuvre to ease his retirement, and the proposals came to nothing; he said of a potential vice president: "He would be my widow."

Influential personalities in the executive branch with a close personal connection to the president, or a strong enough position to bypass the prime minister, have sometimes been referred to as "Vice President", for example Claude Guéant, who was secretary general of the Presidency, then minister of the interior under Nicolas Sarkozy, and previously his chief of staff and presidential campaign manager; and Ségolène Royal, as minister for sustainable development under François Hollande, the two being a former couple of three decades and the parents of four children.

Vicente Agustín Sota Barros (24 April 1924 – 16 August 2017) was a Chilean politician. He served two stints in the Chamber of Deputies, first from 1965 to 1969 and again from 1990 to 1998.

Born in Talca on 28 April 1924, he earned a degree in industrial engineering from Pontifical Catholic University of Chile. Sota joined the National Falange in 1940, and upon the party's dissolution in 1957, became a member of the Christian Democratic Party. While affiliated with the PDC, Sota served in the Chamber of Deputies as a representative of central Santiago between 1965 and 1969. Shortly after the end of his first term in office, Sota cofounded the Popular Unitary Action Movement.

Sota left Chile for France after the 1973 Chilean coup d'état, where he spent thirteen years until returning to Chile in March 1986. The next year, Sota co-founded the Party for Democracy.

He won two more parliamentary elections after joining the PPD, in 1989 and 1993, representing district 31, which covered portions of Santiago from 1990 to 1998. Between November 1994 and March 1995, Sota served as President of the Chamber of Deputies of Chile.

He was born in Talca on 28 April 1924, the son of Ernesto Sota Álvarez and Teresa Barros. His father, a lawyer by training, worked at the court of that city and later, during the first government of Carlos Ibáñez del Campo, lived for a time in the countryside near San Fernando and subsequently in Santiago.

He married psychologist Carmen Gloria Aguayo Irribarra, who was appointed Minister of the Family by President Salvador Allende but was unable to assume office due to the 11 September 1973 coup. They had seven children.

He studied at the Colegio San Ignacio in Santiago, where he was a scholarship student through his sixth year of humanities and met Alberto Hurtado, who was his religion teacher and principal inspiration for his social-Christian vocation. He later entered the School of Engineering of the Pontifical Catholic University of Chile, qualifying as a chemical engineer and completing his professional practice at Codelco ’s El Teniente mine in Rancagua.

Professionally, he worked in the private metallurgical industry between 1950 and 1955 at the Oficina “Victoria” of the Compañía Salitrera Tarapacá in Antofagasta and at Fundación Libertad S.A. During this period, he founded the Servicio de Cooperación Técnica Industrial to promote technical activity in nitrate mining.

In 1956, he received a scholarship from the Institute of Inter-American Affairs that enabled him to pursue postgraduate studies at Cornell University in New York, United States. He also worked at INACAP and was appointed Director of Industrial Relations at Vestex.

After completing his parliamentary work, he served as manager of the Construction Industry of the Corporación de Fomento de la Producción (CORFO) in 1970 and 1973. He founded and organized the National Cement Industry, including Cemento Melón and Polpaico, and was also responsible for the "Estanco Automotriz". During this period, he joined the Center of Chemical Engineers of the Pontifical Catholic University of Chile.

Following the 11 September 1973 coup, he went into exile in France, where he lived for thirteen years. He worked as subdirector of marketing at the Société des Ciments Lafarge.

Vichy syndrome (French : syndrome de Vichy) is a term used to describe the guilt, denial and shame of French people regarding the actions of Vichy France. It was coined by Jewish historian Henry Rousso in his book The Vichy Syndrome (1987), wherein Vichy and the state collaboration of France remains a "past that doesn't pass away". Historiographical debates are still passionate and oppose different views on the nature and legitimacy of Vichy's collaborationism with Germany in the implementation of the Holocaust.

Three main periods have been distinguished in the historiography of Vichy. Firstly, the Gaullist period aimed at national reconciliation and unity under the figure of Charles de Gaulle, who conceived himself above political parties and divisions. Then, the 1960s had Marcel Ophüls 's film The Sorrow and the Pity (1971). In the 1990s, the trial of Maurice Papon, a civil servant in Bordeaux who had been in charge of the "Jewish Questions" during the war and was convicted after a very long trial (1981–1998) for crimes against humanity.

Papon's trial concerned more than individual actions but also the French administration's collective responsibility in the deportation of the Jews. His career after the war led him to be the prefect of the Paris police during the Algerian War (1954–1962), the treasurer of the Gaullist Union des Démocrates pour la République from 1968 to 1971 and the budget minister under President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing and Prime Minister Raymond Barre from 1978 to 1981, which was symptomatic of the quick rehabilitation of former collaborationists after the war.

Critics contend that his pathway was shared by others, although few had such public roles, and demonstrates France's collective amnesia. Others point out that the perception of the war and of the state collaboration has evolved during those years. Papon's career was considered more scandalous as he had been responsible, during his function as prefect of police of Paris, for the 1961 Paris massacre of Algerians during the war and was forced to resign from this position after the 1965 "disappearance" in Paris of the Moroccan anticolonialist leader Mehdi Ben Barka. Papon was convicted in 1998 for complicity with the Nazis in crimes against humanity. He was granted early release after serving only 4 years.

It is certain that the Vichy government and many of its top administration collaborated in the implementation of the Holocaust, but the exact level of such co-operation is still debated. Compared with the Jewish communities established in other countries invaded by Germany, French Jews suffered proportionately lighter losses (see Jewish death toll section above), but in 1942, repression and deportations started to strike French Jews, not just foreign Jews. Former Vichy officials later claimed that they did as much as they could to minimise the impact of the Nazi policies, but mainstream French historians contend that the Vichy regime went beyond the Nazis' expectations.

The regional newspaper Nice Matin revealed on 28 February 2007 that in more than 1,000 condominium properties on the Côte d'Azur, rules dating to Vichy were still "in force" or at least existed on paper. One of the rules, for example, stated:

The contractors shall make the following statements: they are of French nationality, are not Jewish, nor married to Jewish in the sense of the laws and ordinances in force [under Vichy, ed. note ]

The president of the Conseil Représentatif des Institutions juives de France -Côte d'Azur, a Jewish association group, issued a strong condemnation labelling it "the utmost horror" when one of the inhabitants of such a condominium qualified that as an "anachronism" with "no consequences". Jewish inhabitants were able and willing to live in the buildings, and to explain that, the Nice Matin reporter surmised that some tenants may have not read the condominium contracts in detail, and others have deemed the rules obsolete.

A reason for the latter is that any racially discriminatory condominium or other local rule that may have existed "on paper", Vichy-era or otherwise, was abrogated by the French Constitution of 27 October 1946, which established the French Fourth Republic and was upheld by French Fifth Republic (1958), and was inapplicable under French antidiscrimination law. Thus, even if the tenants or co-owners had signed or otherwise agreed to these rules after 1946, any such agreement would be null and void (caduque) under French law, as well as the rules. Rewriting or eliminating the obsolete rules would have had to be done at the occupants' expense, including notary fees of €900–7000 per building.

Until Jacques Chirac 's presidency, the official point of view of the French government was that the Vichy regime was an illegal government distinct from the French Republic, established by traitors under foreign influence. Vichy France eschewed the formal name of France ("French Republic") and styled itself the "French State", replacing the Republican motto of Liberté, Egalité, Fraternité (liberty, equality, fraternity) inherited from the 1789 French Revolution, with the motto Travail, Famille, Patrie (work, family, homeland). While the criminal behaviour of Vichy France was consistently acknowledged, this point of view denied any responsibility of the state of France by alleging that acts committed between 1940 and 1944 were unconstitutional acts devoid of legitimacy.

The main proponent of this view was Charles de Gaulle, who insisted, as did other historians afterwards, on the unclear conditions of the June 1940 vote granting full powers to Pétain, which was refused by the minority of Vichy 80. In particular, coercive measures used by Pierre Laval have been denounced by those historians who hold that the vote did not, therefore, have constitutional legality. In later years, de Gaulle 's position was reiterated by President François Mitterrand. "I will not apologize in the name of France. The Republic had nothing to do with this. I do not believe France is responsible", he said in September 1994.

The first president to accept responsibility for the arrest and deportation of Jews from France was Chirac. In a 16 July 1995 speech, he recognised the responsibility of "the French State" for seconding the "criminal folly of the occupying country", in particular the French police, headed by René Bousquet, charged in 1990 with crimes against humanity, which assisted the Nazis in the enactment of the so-called "Final Solution". The July 1942 Vel' d'Hiv Roundup is a tragic example of how the French police did the Germans' work and even went further than was demanded by military orders by sending children to Drancy internment camp, the last stop before the extermination camps.

President Emmanuel Macron 's statement on 16 July 2017 was even more specific, stating clearly that the Vichy regime was certainly the French State during the war and played a role in the Holocaust. Earlier in 2017, speeches made by Marine Le Pen made headlines by claiming that the Vichy government was "not France". Macron made this remark in discussing the Vel' d'Hiver roundup of Jews: "It is convenient to see the Vichy regime as born of nothingness, returned to nothingness. Yes, it is convenient, but it is false".

There was a currently controversial belief from the end of the war and through the 1960s that, in some way, almost everybody was in the Resistance, or at least supported it, and hard-line collaborators were a minority. Two additional popular beliefs go along with this theory, that of the "sword and shield", as well as the idea that to whatever extent there were harsh measures implemented by Vichy, it was because it was under the boot of the Germans and not due to the exercise of domestic governmental discretion.

During the war, the theory of the "sword and shield" (Thèse du bouclier et de l'épée [ fr ]) was raised as a defense of Vichy, whereby Pétain was seen as the "shield" protecting France and the French people within the country, while de Gaulle was seen as the "sword", engaging in combat from abroad. By this theory, Pétain was merely containing the German enemy to prevent an even worse outcome for France, while awaiting liberation through military action from without led by de Gaulle. This theory that Petain and de Gaulle were tacitly working together, first developed by Robert Aron in his 1954 Histoire de Vichy, was later deconstructed by historian Henry Rousso in his 1987 Syndrome de Vichy.

A lot of French people believed at the time of the occupation that this tacit agreement existed, according to Aron. Resistance member Gilbert Renault, alias Colonel Rémy, who founded the first resistance network in occupied France had great respect for Pétain, and felt that France could fight on two fronts, either with Pétain internally, or with de Gaulle from abroad, and he was not alone among resistance members who supported de Gaulle and sincerely admired Pétain.

Today, the few remaining Vichy supporters continue to maintain the official argument advanced by Pétain and Laval: state collaboration was supposed to protect the French civilian population from the Occupation's hardships. At his trial, Pétain proclaimed that Charles de Gaulle had represented the "sword" of France, and Pétain had been the "shield" protecting France.

Munholland reports a widespread consensus among historians regarding the authoritarian character of the Vichy regime and its

broadly stated desire to regenerate a "decadent" state and society that had become corrupted by an ambient lassitude, secularism, and hedonism under the Third Republic by returning to earlier and purer values and imposing a greater discipline and dynamism upon the industrial order.

Although that claim is rejected by the rest of the French population and by the state itself, another myth remains more widespread, the alleged "protection" by Vichy of French Jews by "accepting" to collaborate in the deportation and ultimately in the extermination of foreign Jews. That argument has been rejected by several historians who specialised in the subject, such as the widely recognised American historian Robert Paxton and the historian of the French police Maurice Rajsfus. Both were called on as experts during the Papon trial in the 1990s. Paxton declared before the court on 31 October 1997, "Vichy took initiatives.... The armistice allowed it a breathing space".

Vichy then decided on its own within the homeland, to implement the "National Revolution" ("Révolution nationale"). After naming the alleged causes of the defeat ("democracy, parliamentarism, cosmopolitanism, the left wing, foreigners, Jews,..."), Vichy had put in place by 3 October 1940 the first anti-Jewish legislation. From then on, Jewish people were considered "second-zone citizens."

Internationally, France "believed the war to be finished". Thus, by July 1940, Vichy eagerly negotiated with the German authorities in an attempt to gain a place for France in the Third Reich's "New Order", but "Hitler never forgot the 1918 defeat. He always said no." Vichy's ambition was doomed from the start. "Antisemitism was a constant theme", recalled Paxton. At first, it even opposed German plans. "At this time the Nazis had not yet decided to exterminate the Jews, but to expel them. Their idea was not to make of France an antisemitic country. On the contrary, they wanted to send there the Jews that they expelled" from the Reich.

The historic change came in 1941–1942, with the pending German defeat on the Eastern Front. The war then became "total", and in August 1941, Hitler decided on the "global extermination of all European Jews". The new policy was officially formulated during the January 1942 Wannsee Conference and had been implemented in all occupied countries in Europe by spring 1942. France, praising itself for having remained an independent state, as opposed to other occupied countries, "decided to cooperate. This is the second Vichy". The first train of deportees left Drancy on 27 March 1942, for Poland, the first in a long series.

Paxton recalled "The Nazis needed the French administration.... They always complained about the lack of staff", something which Maurice Rajsfus has also underlined. Although Paxton recognised during the trial that the "civil behavior of certain individuals" had permitted many Jews to escape deportation, he stated:

The French state, itself, participated in the policy of extermination of the Jews.... How can one claim the reverse when such technical and administrative resources were made available to them?

Pointing to the French police's registering of Jews and to Laval's decision, which had been taken completely autonomously in August 1942, to deport children along with their parents, Paxton added:

Contrary to preconceived ideas, Vichy did not sacrifice foreign Jews in the hope of protecting French Jews. At the hierarchy summit, it knew, from the start, that the deportation of French Jews was unavoidable.

Paxton then referred to the case of Italy, where deportation of Jewish people had started only after the German occupation. Italy surrendered to the Allies in mid-1943 but then was invaded by Germany. Fighting continued there until 1944. In particular, in Nice, "Italians had protected the Jews. And the French authorities complained about it to the Germans".

More recent work by the historian Susan Zuccotti finds that in general, the Vichy government facilitated the deportation of foreign Jews, rather than French Jews, until at least 1943:

Vichy officials [had] hoped to deport foreign Jews throughout France in order to ease pressure on native Jews. Pierre Laval himself expressed the official Vichy position.... In the early months of 1943, the terror [Adam] Munz and [Alfred] Feldman described in German-occupied France was still experienced by foreign Jews like themselves. It is difficult to know exactly how many French Jews were arrested, usually for specific or alleged offences, but on 21 January 1943, Helmut Knochen informed Eichmann in Berlin that there were 2,159 French citizens among the 3,811 prisoners at Drancy. Many had been at Drancy for several months. They had not been deported because, until January 1943, there had usually been enough foreigners and their children to fill the forty-three trains that had carried about 41,591 people to the east.... By January 1943, foreign Jews were increasingly aware of the danger and difficult to find. Nazi pressure for the arrest of French Jews and the deportation of those already at Drancy increased accordingly. Thus, when Knochen reported that there were 2,159 French citizens among the 3,811 prisoners at Drancy on 21 January 1943, he also asked Eichmann for permission to deport them. There had been no convoy from Drancy in December and January, and [SS Lieutenant Heinz] Röthke was pressuring Knochen to resume them. Röthke also wanted to empty Drancy in order to refill it. Despite Vichy officials' past disapproval and Eichmann's own prior discouragement of such a step, permission for the deportation of the French Jews at Drancy, except for those in mixed marriages, was granted from Berlin on 25 January.

Deportations from France started in summer 1942, several months after mass deportation from other countries had started. Whatever the Vichy government's initial or subsequent intent, the death rate was 15% for French Jews, slightly over half of that of non-citizen Jews residing in France. More Jews lived in France at the end of the Vichy regime than approximately ten years earlier.

Tractatus Theologico-Politicus (1670) Two Treatises of Government (1690) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) The Wealth of Nations (1776) Rights of Man (1791) A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792) Democracy in America (1835) On Liberty (1859) The Protestant Ethic (1905) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The General Theory (1936) The Road to Serfdom (1944) Human Action (1949) Capitalism and Freedom (1962) A Theory of Justice (1971) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974)

Victor de Broglie, 3rd Duke of Broglie (French: [ viktɔʁ də bʁɔj, - bʁœj ] ; 28 November 1785 – 25 January 1870), briefly Victor de Broglie, was a French peer, statesman, and diplomat. He was the third duke of Broglie and served as president of the Council during the July Monarchy, from August 1830 to November 1830 and from March 1835 to February 1836. Victor de Broglie was close to the liberal Doctrinaires who opposed the ultra-royalists and were absorbed, under Louis Philippe I 's rule, by the Orléanists.

Victor de Broglie was born in Paris on 28 November 1785, the youngest child and only son of Charles-Louis-Victor, prince de Broglie, and grandson of Victor-François, 2nd duc de Broglie. While his grandfather emigrated, his parents were imprisoned during the Terror. His father was guillotined in 1794, but his mother, the former Countess Sophie de Rosen (Paris 10 Mar 1764 – Paris 31 Oct 1828) managed to escape to Switzerland, where she remained until the fall of Robespierre. She then returned to Paris with her children – three older daughters and one son – and lived there quietly until 1796, when she married the Marc-René-Voyer de Paulmy, marquis d'Argenson, grandson of Louis XV 's minister of war. On his grandfather's death in 1804, Victor de Broglie became the third duc de Broglie.

Under the care of his stepfather, the young duke received a careful and liberal education and made his entrée into the aristocratic and literary society of Paris under the First French Empire. In 1821, his wife Albertine, the daughter of Erik Magnus Staël von Holstein (Albertine's biological father may have been Benjamin Constant) and Madame de Staël, gave birth to Albert, who would become the fourth duke of Broglie. His first-born daughter Louise would publish novels and biographies, and be famously painted by Ingres ; another son, Auguste, would have an ecclesiastical and academic career.

In 1809, de Broglie was appointed a member of the Council of State, over which the emperor Napoleon presided in person. In addition, he was sent by the Emperor on diplomatic missions, as an attaché, to various countries. Though he had never been in sympathy with the principles of the Empire, the duc de Broglie was not one of those who rejoiced at its downfall. In common with all men of experience and sense, he realized the danger to France of the rise to power of the forces of violent reaction. With Decazes and Richelieu, he saw that the only hope for a calm future lay in the reconciliation of the Restoration with the French Revolution. By the influence of his uncle, Amédée de Broglie, his right to a peerage had been recognized, and to his own great surprise he received, in June 1814, a summons from Louis XVIII to the Chamber of Peers. There, after the Hundred Days, he distinguished himself by his courageous defence of Marshal Ney, for whose acquittal he, alone of all the peers, both spoke and voted.

After this defiant act of opposition it was perhaps fortunate that his impending marriage gave him an excuse for leaving the country. On 15 February 1816, he was married at Leghorn to Albertine, baroness Staël von Holstein, the daughter of Madame de Staël. He returned to Paris at the end of the year, but took no part in politics until the elections of September 1816 broke the power of the ultraroyalists and substituted for the Chambre introuvable a moderate assembly composed of liberal Doctrinaires. De Broglie's political attitude during the years that followed is best summed up in his own words:

From 1812 to 1822 all the efforts of men of sense and character were directed to reconciling the Restoration and the Revolution, the old régime and the new France. From 1822 to 1827 all their efforts were directed to resisting the growing power of the counter-revolution. From 1827 to 1830 all their efforts aimed at moderating and regulating the reaction in a contrary sense.

During the last critical years of Charles X's reign, de Broglie identified himself with the liberal party – the Doctrinaires, among whom Royer-Collard and Guizot were the most prominent. The July Revolution of 1830 placed him in a difficult position; he knew nothing of the intrigues which placed Louis Philippe on the throne; the revolution accomplished, however, he was ready to uphold the fait accompli with characteristic loyalty, and on 9 August 1830 took office in the new government as President of the Council and Minister of Public Worship and Education. As he had foreseen, the ministry was short-lived, and on 2 November he was once more out of office.

During the critical time that followed, he consistently supported the principles which triumphed with the fall of Laffitte, representative of the center-left Parti du mouvement, and the accession to power of Casimir Perier, leader of the center-right Parti de la résistance, in March 1831. After the death of the latter and the insurrection of June 1832, De Broglie took office once more as Minister for Foreign Affairs (11 October).

His tenure of the foreign office was coincident with a very critical period in international relations. But for the sympathy of Britain under Palmerston, the July Monarchy would have been completely isolated in Europe, and this sympathy the aggressive policy of France in Belgium and on the Mediterranean coast of Africa had been in danger of alienating. The Belgian crisis had been settled, so far as the two powers were concerned, before De Broglie took office, but the concerted military and naval action for the coercion of the Dutch, which led to the French occupation of Antwerp, was carried out under his auspices. The good understanding of which this was the symbol characterized also the relations of De Broglie and Palmerston during the crisis of the first war of Muhammad Ali with the Porte, and in the affairs of the Spanish peninsula their common sympathy with constitutional liberty led to an agreement for common action, which took shape in the Quadruple Alliance between Britain, France, Spain and Portugal, signed at London on 22 April 1834. De Broglie had retired from office in the March preceding, and did not return to power until March of the following year, when he became head of the cabinet.

One of De Broglie's first act on his return was to have the National Assembly ratify the 4 July 1831 treaty with the United States, which it had rejected during his first term. His cabinet also voted the 1835 laws restricting freedom of press, following Giuseppe Fieschi 's attempted assassination against Louis-Philippe in July 1835.

In 1836, the government having been defeated on a proposal to reduce the five percents tax, he once more resigned.

He had remained in power long enough to prove what honesty of purpose, experience of affairs, and common sense can accomplish when allied with authority. The debt that France and Europe owed him may be measured by comparing the results of his policy with that of his successors under not dissimilar circumstances. He had found France isolated and Europe full of the rumours of war; he left her strong in the English alliance and the respect of Liberal Europe, and Europe freed from the restless apprehensions which were to be stirred into life again by the attitude of Thiers in the Eastern Question and of Guizot in the affair of the Spanish Marriages.

From 1836 to 1848, De Broglie held almost completely aloof from politics, to which his scholarly temperament little inclined him, a disinclination strengthened by the death of his wife on 22 September 1838. His friendship for Guizot, however, induced him to accept a temporary mission in 1845, and in 1847 to go as French ambassador to London.

The revolution of 1848 was a great blow to him, for he realized that it meant the final ruin of the constitutional monarchy, in his view the political system best suited to France. He took his seat, however, in the republican National Assembly and in the Convention of 1848, and, as a member of the section known as the " Burgraves ", fought against both socialism and what he foresaw as a coming autocratic reaction. He shared with his colleagues the indignity of the 2 December 1851 coup, and remained for the remainder of his life one of the bitterest enemies of the Second Empire, though he was heard to remark, with that caustic wit for which he was famous, that the empire was the government which the poorer classes in France desired and the rich deserved.

The last twenty years of his life were devoted chiefly to philosophical and literary pursuits. Having been brought up by his stepfather in the sceptical opinions of the time, he gradually arrived at a sincere belief in the Christian religion. "I shall die," he said, "a penitent Christian and an impenitent Liberal".

His literary works, though few of them have been published, were rewarded in 1856 by a seat in the Académie française, replacing Louis de Beaupoil de Saint-Aulaire, and he was also a member of the Académie des sciences morales et politiques. In the labors of those learned bodies he took an active and assiduous part.

Besides his Souvenirs, in 4 vols. (Paris, 1885–1888), the duc de Broglie left numerous works, of which only some have been published. Of these may be mentioned:

This last was confiscated by the imperial government before publication.

Victor Henri Rochefort, Marquis de Rochefort-Luçay (French pronunciation: [ viktɔʁ ɑ̃ʁi ʁɔʃfɔʁ maʁki də ʁɔʃfɔʁ lysɛ ] ; 30 January 1831 – 30 June 1913) was a French writer of vaudevilles and politician. He was born in Paris and died in Aix-les-Bains.

His father was a Legitimist noble who, as Edmond Rochefort, was well known as a writer of vaudevilles ; his mother's views were republican. After experience as a medical student, a clerk at the Hôtel de Ville in Paris, a playwright and a journalist, he joined the staff of Le Figaro in 1863; but a series of his articles, afterwards published as Les Français de la décadence (3 vols., 1866–68), brought the paper into collision with the authorities and caused the termination of his engagement.

In collaboration with different dramatists he had meanwhile written a long series of successful vaudevilles, which began with the Monsieur bien mis at the Théâtre des Folies-Dramatiques in 1856. On leaving Le Figaro Rochefort determined to start a paper of his own, La Lanterne. The paper was seized on its eleventh appearance, and in August 1868 Rochefort was fined 10,000 francs, with a year's imprisonment.

He then published his paper in Brussels, whence it was smuggled into France. Printed in French, English, Spanish, Italian and German, it went the round of Europe. After a second prosecution he fled to Belgium. A series of duels, of which the most famous was one fought with Paul de Cassagnac à propos of an article on Joan of Arc, kept Rochefort in the public eye.

In 1869, after two unsuccessful candidatures, he was returned to the Corps Législatif, (the then lower house of the French Parliament) by the first circonscription of Paris. He was arrested on the frontier, only to be almost immediately released, and forthwith took his seat.

He renewed his onslaught on the Empire, starting a new paper, La Marseillaise, as the organ of political meetings arranged by himself at La Villette. The staff was appointed on the votes of the members, and included Victor Noir and Paschal Grousset. The violent articles in this paper led to the duel which resulted in January 1870 in Grousset's second, Victor Noir, being shot and killed by Prince Pierre Bonaparte. The paper was seized, and Rochefort and Grousset were sent to prison for six months.

The revolution of September was the signal for his release. He became a member of the Government of National Defence, but this short association with the forces of law and order was soon broken on account of his openly expressed sympathy with the Communards. On 11 May 1871, he fled in disguise from Paris. A week earlier he had resigned with a handful of other deputies from the National Assembly rather than countenance the dismemberment of France. Arrested at Meaux by the Versailles government, he was detained for some time in prison with a nervous illness before he was condemned under military law to imprisonment for life.

In spite of Victor Hugo 's efforts on his behalf, he was transported to New Caledonia. In 1874, he escaped on board an American vessel to San Francisco. He lived in London and Geneva until the general amnesty permitted his return to France in 1880. In Geneva, he resumed the publication of La Lanterne, and in the Parisian papers articles constantly appeared from his pen.

When at length, in 1880, the general amnesty permitted his return to Paris, he founded L'Intransigeant in the radical and socialist interest. For a short time in 1885–86 he sat in the Chamber of Deputies, but found a great opportunity next year for his talent for inflaming public opinion in the Boulangist agitation. He was condemned to detention in a fortress in August 1889 at the same time as General Boulanger, whom he had followed into exile. He continued his polemic from London, and after the suicide of General Boulanger he attacked M. Constans, minister of the interior in the Freycinet cabinet, with the utmost violence, in a series of articles which led to an interpellation in the chamber in circumstances of wild excitement and disorder.

The Panama scandals furnished him with another occasion, and he created something of a sensation by a statement in Le Figaro that he had met M. Clemenceau at the table of the financier Cornelius Herz. In 1895 he returned to Paris, two years before the Dreyfus affair supplied him with another point d'appui. He became prominent among the anti-Dreyfusards along with people such as Edouard Drumont and Hubert-Joseph Henry, and had a principal share in the organization of the press campaign. Subsequently, he was editor of La Patrie. As a result of his aristocratic descent, this journalistic author is remembered today as "the prince of press controversy" ("le Prince des polémistes").

Henri had a long-standing relationship with editor/translator Anna-Catherine Strebinger, whom he married in May 1878. Anna-Catherine is featured prominently as "Catherine" in Wanda von Sacher-Masoch's memoir Confessions de Ma Vie. Catherine did translations of many of the works of Leopold von Sacher-Masoch. In her book, Wanda describes Catherine's relationship with Henri as being open, with Catherine openly taking many lovers.

His daughter, Noémie de Rochefort-Luçay, was a lifelong friend of British suffragette leader Emmeline Pankhurst, having met whilst at École Normale de Neuilly in Paris. She later married Swiss artist Auguste Frederic Dufaux, known as Frederic, and had three children including aviation pioneers Henri Dufaux and Armand Dufaux. Henri Rochefort financially supported his grandson's initial aeronautic experiments. Frederic Dufaux sculpted the bust for his father-in-law's grave at the Montmartre cemetery in Paris.

Besides his plays and articles in the journals Rochefort published several separate works, among them being:

A street in the 17th arrondissement of Paris, Rue Henri Rochefort, is named after him.

Victor Schœlcher (French: [ viktɔʁ ʃœlʃɛʁ ] ; 22 July 1804 – 25 December 1893) was a French abolitionist, writer, politician and journalist, best known for his leading role in the abolition of slavery in France in 1848, during the Second Republic.

Schœlcher was born in Paris on 22 July 1804. His father, Marc Schœlcher (1766–1832), from Fessenheim in Alsace, was the owner of a porcelain factory. His mother, Victoire Jacob (1767–1839), from Meaux in Seine-et-Marne, was a laundry maid in Paris at the time of their marriage. He was baptized in Saint-Laurent Church on 9 September 1804.

He enrolled in the Lycée Louis-le-Grand in 1818, but left one year later and began working at the family's porcelain factory in the rue du Faubourg Saint-Denis. In his teenage years Schœlcher became an opponent of the Bourbon monarchy while frequenting the literary and political salons of Paris. In 1820, at the age of 16, he joined Freemasonry, being initiated into the Parisian lodge Les Amis de la Vérité (Grand Orient de France), which was at the time very strongly politicized, not to say openly revolutionary. He later moved to another Parisian lodge, La Clémente Amitié.

In 1828, Schœlcher was sent by his father on an eighteen months-long trip in America, as a representative of the family's porcelain enterprise. While in the continent he visited Mexico, Cuba, and the southern United States. During this trip he learned much about slavery and began his career as an abolitionist writer, and returning to France in 1830 he published his first writing in the Revue de Paris, an article titled Des noirs ("Of the blacks"), in which he proposed a gradual abolition of slavery. Schœlcher inherited the family business on his father's death in 1832, but sold it on in order to dedicate himself to his abolitionism. In the following years he traveled through Europe, and in 1840 went to the West Indies to further study slavery and the results of its abolition in the British colonies. Next he went to Egypt, Greece and Turkey, where he studied Muslim slavery, and finally to West Africa, traveling through Senegal and Gambia between September 1847 and January 1848.

With the knowledge on slavery acquired in his travels—including that plantation owners did not educate the people they enslaved —Schœlcher became an advocate for the immediate emancipation of slaves, no longer supporting a gradual process. He published these ideas in Des colonies françaises: Abolition immédiate de l'esclavage ("Of the French colonies: Immediate abolition of slavery") in 1842, following his return from the West Indies. He was a member of the Société française pour l'abolition de l'esclavage ("French Society for the Abolition of Slavery") founded in 1834, modeled after contemporary British abolitionist societies. After the early 1830s he was also a republican activist in France, and was one of the founders of the progressive newspaper La Réforme in 1843, to which he was a regular contributor.

Schœlcher elaborated on social, economic, and political reforms he believed would be necessary to the Caribbean colonies after the abolition of slavery. He argued that the production of sugar could continue, though it should be rationalized with the construction of large central factories, and opposed the concentration of land ownership. Schœlcher was the first European abolitionist to visit Haiti after its independence, and had a large influence on the abolitionist movements in all of the French West Indies. He was actively against the debt collected from the Haitians as French slave owners sought reparations for their property lost in the Haitian Revolution.

In February 1848, a revolution in France overthrew the July Monarchy. Schœlcher arrived from Senegal on 3 March, and quickly went to meet with François Arago, the Minister of the Navy and Colonies of the provisional government of the new Republic. Arago appointed him under-secretary of state for the colonies the next day, as well as president of a new commission charged with drafting the immediate abolition of slavery, with Louis Percin and Henri-Alexandre Wallon assigned as secretaries.

Schœlcher had convinced Arago not to wait until the election of the constituent National Assembly, which would be deeply occupied with organizing the new republican institutions, to establish the abolitionist commission, arguing that any postponing of the emancipation could lead to revolt and bloodshed in the colonies. In his capacity as under-secretary of state and president of the commission, Schœlcher prepared and wrote the decree that was issued on 27 April 1848, through which the French government abolished slavery in all of its colonies and granted citizenship to the emancipated slaves.

Schœlcher's ultimate success in ending slavery gave birth to a new republican movement in the Caribbean colonies. He was elected deputy to the National Assembly in 1848 by the department of Martinique. The next year he ran for reelection but lost to Cyrille Bissette, a former " free man of colour " and abolitionist, but won in Guadeloupe and was again elected for that department in 1850. He introduced a bill for the abolition of the death penalty, which was to be discussed on the day on which President Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte seized power with a coup d'état, on 2 December 1851, dissolving the National Assembly. The next day Schœlcher, alongside Jean-Baptiste Baudin, was one of the few deputies present at the barricades in Paris to resist the coup.

Schœlcher was then exiled by the new regime. He lived briefly in Belgium before moving to London, where he settled in 1852. In the following years he became a specialist in the work of Georg Friedrich Handel, writing a biography of him in 1857. At the same time he published multiple writings criticizing Napoleon III, formerly president of France and now monarch of the Second French Empire, in works such as Dangers to England of the alliance with the men of the Coup d'État, which Schœlcher wrote in English and published in 1854. During this period he became a friend of fellow republican exile Victor Hugo.

Refusing to take advantage of the amnesty of 1859, Schœlcher only returned to France in late August 1870, after the declaration of war with Prussia. He was appointed staff colonel of the National Guard on 4 September, the day of the deposition of Napoleon III and the proclamation of the Third Republic. Organizing a legion of artillery, he took part in the defence of Paris. In 1871 he was again elected by Martinique for the National Assembly in Bordeaux, where he voted against the peace treaty. During the subsequent Paris Commune insurrection, Schœlcher tried unsuccessfully to mediate peace talks between the insurgents and the French government, and was briefly imprisoned by the communards. Afterwards he continued to serve in the National Assembly as a member of the Republican Union, and was elected senator for life in December 1875.

In 1875, Schœlcher became a member of the Societé pour l'amélioration du sort de la femme ("Society for the improvement of women's condition"), and in July 1876 he renewed his proposal for the abolition of capital punishment. In 1882 he co-founded, with Gaston Gerville-Réache, the newspaper Le Moniteur des Colonies. Schœlcher published his last work in 1889, a biography of Haitian revolutionary leader Toussaint Louverture (Vie de Toussaint Louverture). He died on 25 December 1893 in his house in Houilles, near Paris, aged 89.

Having never married or left issue, in his will Schœlcher distributed his money and donated his collection to Guadeloupe, which is now housed at the Schœlcher Museum (Musée Schœlcher) in Pointe-à-Pitre. First buried in the Père Lachaise Cemetery, his remains were transferred on 20 May 1949 to the Panthéon on the initiative of Senator Gaston Monnerville from Guiana. Schœlcher had wanted to be buried with his father Marc, who was therefore also interred in the Panthéon. The ashes of Félix Éboué, the first black person to be buried in the Panthéon, were transferred at the same time. In 1981, the newly elected President François Mitterrand placed a rose at Schœlcher's tomb in the Panthéon on the day of his inauguration ceremony.

Video gaming in France is one of the largest markets in Europe. The French government gives special tax breaks to video game companies. In 2014, the French diplomatic service released a report which calculates the profit generated by the French video game industry at €2.7 billion. It states that there are 300 video game companies in France. It estimates the number of jobs directly related to the video game industry at 5,000. It estimates the number of indirect jobs created by the video game industry at 10,000. The report found that in 2013, around 8 out of 10 people had played a video game in the last 12 months. In 2018, the number of players was estimated at 32.8 million.

In France video games have equal status as an artform, alongside more traditional formats, such as painting and theatre. In 2016, the French Minister of State for Digital Affairs, Axelle Lemaire, held talks with various French video game industry figureheads to find solutions to the problem of misogyny in video games. She mooted solutions like removing tax credits for publishers who publish games with misogynistic content, and creating a label which would identify video games with positive representations of women.

In 2019 there were a total of 1,130 gaming companies based in France. In 2002, the explosion of the Internet bubble provoked the end of three of the most prestigious French studios in a few months: Kalisto Entertainment, No Cliché and Lankhor. Between 2003 and 2013, the video game industry in France plunged more than 80% to 240 companies and 4,800 employees, moving from fifth to seventh in the world. Since the crash, companies in the sector struggle to develop beyond a certain size, with the majority of studios focusing on virtual platform development. Based on 2021 revenue estimates, France is the 7th largest video game market with an estimated amount of 38.08 million active consumers. In comparison, the United Kingdom accounts for approximately 37.66 million active consumers and Germany approximately 46.12 million. Despite these economic constraints, in the 2010s, French studios signed more and more contracts with international producers such as Capcom and Sega. Although French touch is no longer regarded as a guarantee of creativity, many French studios, such as Eugen Systems, Cyanide and Ankama, remain internationally respected developers in the field of simulation.

In 2021, the French video game industry generated €5.65 billion in revenue, a record high. Boosted by the COVID-19 pandemic, video game sales had a sharp increase as people spent more time at home and turned to gaming as an outlet. From €3.6 billion in revenue in 2016, the market grew 40% in five years.

43% of all mobile app downloads in France are categorized as games, accounting for €1.4 billion in revenue. In 2020, 2.4 million consoles were sold and 27.5 million games were sold across physical and digital copies. 43% of games sold were digital, while 57% were physical copies.

In 2025, the three largest French video game groups in terms of revenue are Ubisoft, Voodoo, and Gameloft.

As of 2021, there are a total of 36.5 million gamers in France, 53% of which are male. The age group of 24-35 year olds are the biggest gamer demographic by age, holding 31.1% of the French gamer population. However, 10-14 year olds in France have the highest percentage of gaming usage compared with other age groups, with over 96% of 10-14 year olds reporting to play video games in 2020.

Major video game development studios began to establish during the 1990s and 2000s. Several have found popular success and continue to develop today.

Arkane Studios was founded in 1999 in the city Lyon by Raphaël Colantonio, a former employee of Electronic Arts. The first video game from Arkane, Arx Fatalis, was released in 2002. Today, Arkane is known for Dishonored, an action-adventure series, along with the 2021 release of Deathloop. Arkane also developed their own video game engine, Void Engine, based on a foundation of id Tech 5 created by id Software.

Quantic Dream was founded in 1997 by David Cage. The studio is known for its releases of Detroit: Become Human and Heavy Rain. The focus of Quantic Dream is to produce narrative based video games in the format of Interactive Drama.

Dontnod Entertainment was founded in 2008 and is based in Paris. They are known for developing the graphic adventure series titled Life is Strange. Life is Strange was released episodically throughout 2015. Dontnod entertainment later released the first episode of Life is Strange 2 in September 2018 with the final episode released in December 2019.

Ubisoft was established in 1986 by Yves Guillemot and his four brothers. Ubisoft initially distributed CD audio media, computers, and additional software to farmers and subsequently shifted to publishing video games. Yves Guillemot has said that Ubisoft has found value in open sandbox games with single and multiplayer modes which is why the company works on online games. Ubisoft's best selling game as of 2022 is Far Cry 5 (2018), grossing more than US$300 million in the first week of release.

Gameloft was founded by Michael Guillemot, a brother of Yves Guillemot, in 1999 after seeing the potential of the emerging market of mobile games. The group also develops and publishes games for PC and consoles, such as Asphalt Legends (2018), The Oregon Trail (2021) and Disney Dreamlight Valley (2023).

Focus Entertainment was founded in 1996 and formerly Focus Home Entertainment. The publisher's most notable games are Farming Simulator, Pro Cycling Manager, and Trackmania.

The National School of Video Games and Digital Interactive Media (French: École Nationale du Jeu et des Médias Interactifs Numériques) located at the National Conservatory of Arts and Crafts (French: Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers), or CNAM-ENJMIN, is a public school located in Angoulême devoted to video games and more generally to interactive digital media. It is the only public school in Europe that trains video games.

LISAA School of Art & Design (L'Institut Supérieur des Arts Appliqués) was founded in 1986 by Michel Glize. The LISSA School of Animation and Video Game offers several courses for video game design at the Bachelor's and Master's levels of study. The school is based in Paris with other campuses located in Bordeaux, Strasbourg, Nantes, and Rennes. International campuses are located in India and China.

ISART Digital was founded in 2001 with main campuses based in France and Montreal. ISART Digital offers education in video games as well as 3D visual effects. The school implements a weekly rotating schedule with in-class instruction and industry experience at a workplace.

In January 2016, Prime Minister Manuel Valls entrusted two parliamentarians, Rudy Salles and Jérôme Durain, with the task of "defining a legislative and regulatory framework favoring the development of video game competitions in France". The report submitted by the two parliamentarians in March 2016 calls, among other things, to "define a real framework for online and offline competitions", "create a specialized committee attached to the CNOSF", "give players a real status" Protect young players "through various measures and" encourage the recruitment of foreign players ".

This mission led to a participation in the bill for a digital Republic, which was adopted in first reading in the Senate on 3 May, with 323 votes in favor and 1 vote against. The law officially recognizes in chapter 4 section 2 the practice of video games in competition in France and an official status for professional players.

In parallel with this law, the government announced in May 2016 the creation of a "professional contract specific to the professional video game player" as well as the birth of the independent association "eSport".

On October 20, 2016, Nasser Al-Khelaïfi announced the launch of Paris Saint-Germain eSports, a section of the PSG, with YellOwStaR, former professional player of League of Legends, as director. Paris Saint-Germain eSports, with a multi-million euro budget, has active divisions in FIFA, League of Legends (PSG Talon), Dota 2 (PSG.LGD), FIFA Online, Brawl Stars, and Arena of Valor.

The most sold console in France in 2012 is the Nintendo 3DS, with approximately 950,000 copies, followed by PlayStation 3 (700,000 copies), Wii (372,000 copies), Xbox 360 (360,000 copies) and finally The Wii U, released only on November 30, with 118,000 sold.

At the release of the Wii U in France on November 30, 2012, 240,000 copies are placed on the market on its release.

Now the Nintendo Switch is the best selling console, as it has sold over 6.1 million units in France as of 2022.

In 2006 two video game shows, the Festival du Jeu Vidéo and the Micromania Game Show were created.

The Video Game Festival was the largest video game show in France before disappearing in 2010 with the creation of Paris Games Week. The last edition of the Video Game Festival was held on September 10, 11 and 12, 2010, but the content offered to visitors was very different from that proposed in other years. Indeed, SELL wanted to withdraw from the partnership with the Festival to create its own show, the Paris Games Week, considering that the Festival was not sufficiently general public and was not adapted to the ambitions of the SELL. The next month takes place the first edition of the Paris Games Week. On April 12, 2011, Jean-Claude Larue, President of SELL, announced that a space devoted to French creation would be integrated into the Paris Games Week, managed by Jonathan Dumont, founder of the Festival du Jeu Vidéo. Consequently, the Festival merges with the new SELL show, signing the end of the show.

With the creation of Paris Games Week, the Micromania Game Show changes direction and becomes a "video game night" in a Parisian cinema where publishers and developers come to present their video games through live demonstrations.

The Paris Games Week takes place every year at the Porte de Versailles exhibition center and in 2014 is the second largest video game fair in Europe, with its number of visitors, behind gamescom in Germany (335,000 visitors in 2014).

In 2016, Axelle Lemaire met with representatives of the French video game industry to discuss possible measures to combat sexism in video games. Financial incentives and labels to distinguish games that had a positive image of women were proposed but later dismissed.

As part of its goal to keep the French language pure from anglicized words, the French cultural ministry issued an order in May 2022 to ban some video game jargon that derived from English terms. Examples include "joueur professionnel" for professional gamer.

Villa Kujoyama is a multidisciplinary research and creative residency located on Mount Higashi in Kyoto. Built in 1992 by architect Katō Kunio [ ja ; fr ] (加藤 邦男), and initiated by the Société de rapprochement intellectuel franco-japonais, Villa Kujoyama is today one of the oldest and most prestigious French residency programs in Asia.

In 2022, Villa Kujoyama celebrated its 30th anniversary. Since its creation, it has welcomed more than 400 artists and creators from various disciplines, who have been able to develop a project related to Japan.

Villa Kujoyama is one of the five branches of the Institut français du Japon. It operates in coordination with the Institut français and has been supported by the Bettencourt Schueller Foundation since 2014.

Through its activities, Villa Kujoyama invites the cultures of these two countries to dialogue by offering in-situ and outside-the-walls events, and translates on the art and culture level the proximities and bridges that exist between Japan and France. Connected with the French Institute, it offers artistic support, for up to 5 years after the residency. Post-residency programs allow artists to present their work in venues or extend their experience in Japan, with the support of partner venues of Villa Kujoyama.

Villa Kujoyama offers three distinct residential packages:

+ Duos or pairs Arts and Sciences (from 2025): one or one scientist in the field of natural sciences or formal sciences and a creator in the field of one of the artistic disciplines listed below teams up to present a joint project.

The 2024 Selection Process Application Rules list the following:

• Digital creation (digital arts, video game, VR)

• Cinema (Animation/Creative Documentary/Art video)

• Literature (fiction / essay / children’s literature / comics)

• Music (Classical / Contemporary / Jazz)

Villa Kujoyama has six housing workshops, and welcomes about fifteen residents each year. A dedicated team on site accompanies them in their administrative and artistic procedures. It helps them to achieve their projects by putting them in contact with local operators with artistic, cultural, academic and economic backgrounds, and organizes partnerships for the diffusion of their work during and after the residency. The laureates stay at Villa Kujoyama receiving a residence allowance, without obligation of result.

Through its activities, Villa Kujoyama invites the cultures of these two countries to dialogue by offering in-situ and outside-the-walls events, and translates on the art and culture level the proximities and bridges that exist between Japan and France. Connected with the French Institute, it offers artistic support, for up to 5 years after the residency. Post-residency programs allow artists to present their work in venues or extend their experience in Japan, with the support of partner venues of Villa Kujoyama30.

Villa Kujoyama is open to the public first Thursday of every months since March 2023, from 2pm to 9pm. This monthly opening allows artists in residence or formerly in residence to present their work and artworks to the public, amateur or professional, and to invite external speakers, to feed cultural exchanges.

The laureates of the Villa are invited each year to exhibit their work at the Nuit Blanche

KYOTO, a festival of contemporary creation organized by the French Institute of Kansai and the city of Kyoto. The works of the laureates are therefore presented not only at the Villa, but also in other partner places.

The various branches of the network of the French Institute of Japan also organize events that are an opportunity to diffuse the work of residents to a Francophile public through conferences, performances and exhibitions.

Residents are invited to take part in a wide variety of events outside the walls, through conferences, workshops, concerts, especially in schools and universities (Lycée français international de Kyoto, Kyoto University, Kanazawa College of Ar t).

Villa Kujoyama has a multi-year partnerships system to deepen artistic productions after the residency in Japan. In Paris, the partnership with Musée de la Chasse et la Nature et la Maison de la Culture du Japon, offers artists the opportunity to show their works as part of their program31, 32. In Val-d'Oise, the contemporary art center of the Maubuisson Abbey allows artists to finalize their creations begun during their residency at the Villa, by providing them with a workshop and curatorial and/ or logistical accompaniment33.

In collaboration with Villa Albertine in the United States, the Académie de France à Rome - Villa Medici and Casa de Velázquez in Madrid, Villa Kujoyama participates in ¡Viva Villa!. Created in 2016 to allow the restitution of their works by the artists returning from residence, it takes place from 2023, from a call for projects intended to cultural institutions established on the French territory 34. The objective is to allow the restitution of the work done by the artists, creators and researchers from these four residencies of French artists located abroad through a format’s diversity.35.

Villa Kujoyama, constructed in 1992, is the result of an earlier project dating back to 1926 when Paul Claudel held the position of the French Ambassador to Japan. The original concept was to establish a cultural center in the Kansai region, and with the support of Katsutaro Inabata 稲畑勝太郎 (1862-1949), who was then the President of the Chamber of Commerce and Industry in Osaka, the project came to fruition. The Japanese industrialist managed to bring together a group of francophile Japanese and established the Society for Franco-Japanese Intellectual Exchange, which pooled the required funds for the construction of a cultural institution on Mount Higashi, at the present site of Villa Kujoyama.

The original project, designed to create a summer university offering ten weeks per year of French language and culture courses, transformed into the establishment of a year-round Franco-Japanese Institute dedicated to teaching French language and promoting awareness of French ideas.

The Franco-Japanese Intellectual Exchange Society ensured the supervision of this new Institute, constructed with Japanese funds, while the functioning and cultural programming were taken care of by the French government. The Franco-Japanese Institute was inaugurated on November 5, 1927, and led by geographer Francis Ruellan in its early years.

In 1936, the Franco-Japanese Institute was relocated near the Imperial University in the developing district of Izumidono. A new building was constructed, while the site built on Mount Higashi in 1926 remained abandoned for nearly fifty years.

The building deteriorated, leading to increasing protests from local residents in the 1970s. Consequently, the demolition of the site was decided in 1981, and the Franco-Japanese Intellectual Exchange Society gathered funds to cover the costs of the building's destruction. With the land cleared, its sale is then planned. However, following the announcement, the French government shows interest in this land overlooking Kyoto and disapproves of the intended sale.

The French and Japanese administrators of the Franco-Japanese Intellectual Exchange Society agree to cancel the sale and consider a new use for the site. In 1986, they decided to construct an artist' residence, primarily due to Kyoto's artistic and historical nature, and the site's exceptional location as a veritable "balcony overlooking the city." The decision to establish the "Franco-Japanese Center for Exchanges and Creation" was made on November 11, 1986.

In the aftermath, a period of three years ensued, during which funds were raised from prominent companies in the Kansai region. This endeavor was overseen by Inabata Katsuo (稲畑勝雄), the grandson of Katsutaro Inabata. Once the funding was gathered, an additional three years were required to secure the construction permit from the local municipality.

The architectural project was entrusted to the architect Katō Kunio, who was a professor at the University of Kyoto at the time. It took the shape of a thousand-square-meter edifice, capable of accommodating up to six artists simultaneously for creative residencies. Katō Kunio crafted his vision at the crossroads of French and Japanese cultures, choosing to blend both "rigor of modular composition and freedom in the arrangement of spaces" into the design.

The construction phase began in January 1991 and spanned 18 months, culminating in the opening of its doors to the inaugural residents in October 1992. An official inauguration ceremony was held on November 5, 1992. Today, this establishment is known as Villa Kujoyama.

Between 1992 and 2012, Villa Kujoyama hosted 275 French artists and creators for residency periods lasting up to twelve months. During this period, the establishment was jointly managed by the Institut français, which handled program coordination and funding of artists and creators' pensions, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, responsible for financing the facility's operations and supporting its artistic and cultural activities.

Following over two decades of operation, Villa Kujoyama closed its doors for a two-year renovation period. Due to the aging condition of the building, there were discussions about discontinuing the program and shutting down the site.

The sustained operation of Villa Kujoyama is largely attributed to the active involvement of patrons. On the one hand, the Pierre Bergé - Yves Saint Laurent Foundation has played a vital role in supporting the renovation of the structure. The foundation contributed 500,000 € towards insulation, compliance upgrades, cleaning, and flooring works, essential for the successful refurbishment of the building. Thanks to this significant funding, the establishment was able to reopen its doors on January 1, 2014.

On the other hand, the Bettencourt Schueller Foundation also played a crucial role by committing to support Villa Kujoyama over three years, financing both its operations and artistic and cultural activities. The Foundation provided substantial support, amounting to 754,000 €, between 2014 and 2017. The Bettencourt Schueller Foundation renews its support as a patron of the residency program for the period 2022-2026.

The reopening of Villa Kujoyama provided an opportunity to redefine the establishment's missions and give a fresh perspective into the program.

More than 400 laureates have been in residence at Villa Kujoyama since its inception in 1992. They encompassed various disciplines ranging from contemporary artistic creation to research in humanities and social sciences.

Villa Kujoyama offers three distinct residency programs.

The first option (solo) allows a French or foreign candidate who has been residing in France for at least 5 years to present a research project for a residency of 4, 5, or 6 months. The second option (in pairs) offers a 4-month residency to two French or foreign candidates who have been residing in France for at least 5 years and allows them to work together on a joint project. The last option (in duo) is aimed at a French or foreign candidate who has been residing in France for at least 5 years and wishes to develop a collaborative project with a Japanese candidate residing in Japan, for a 4-month residency.

The Liliane Bettencourt Prize for the Intelligence of the Hand was created in 1999 by the Bettencourt Schueller Foundation to reward craftsmanship, creativity, and innovation in the field of arts and crafts.

As part of the partnership between Villa Kujoyama and the Bettencourt Schueller Foundation, two laureates of the Liliane Bettencourt Prize for the Intelligence of the Hand® are invited each year, starting from 2022, to stay at Villa Kujoyama for one month to develop a project related to their craftsmanship and Japanese culture. Nicolas Pinon (2022), Mona Oren (2022), Fanny Boucher (2023), and Grégoire Scalabre (2023) are the laureates of the Liliane Bettencourt Prize for the Intelligence of the Hand ® who have resided at Villa Kujoyama.

The status of the laureates invited to stay at Villa Kujoyama is different from that of the laureates of other residency programs at the Villa. However, the selected laureates have the opportunity to apply for other solo, pair, or duo residency programs offered by the Institut français.

Through its activities, Villa Kujoyama facilitates a meaningful dialogue between the cultures of Japan and France, exemplifying the interconnectedness and bridges that exist between them.

Since September 2022 and the arrival of the new director Adèle Fremolle, Villa Kujoyama opens its doors to the public every first Thursday of the month.

Villa Kujoyama offers artistic support, during and after the residency period, with the Institut français. The 5 years following the end of the residency, known as the post-residency period, allow artists to showcase their work in venues across France or to extend their experience in Japan with the support of Villa Kujoyama's partner institutions.

The residents of Villa Kujoyama are annually invited to showcase their artistic achievements during the Nuit Blanche Kyoto, a festival of contemporary creation co-organized by the Institut français fu Kansai and the city of Kyoto. This event provides a platform for the residents to exhibit their works not only within the premises of Villa Kujoyama but also in various other partner locations, enhancing their visibility and cultural exchange opportunities.

The Villa Kujoyama has established long-term partnerships that allow artists to further develop and enhance their artistic creations after their residency in Japan. In Paris, through collaborations with the Musée de la Chasse et la Nature and the Japanese cultural House in Paris (French : Maison de la culture du Japon à Paris), artists get the opportunity to showcase their works as part of these institutions' programming. Additionally, in the Val-d'Oise region, the contemporary art center of the Abbaye de Maubuisson offers artists a dedicated workspace and provides curatorial and logistical support, enabling them to complete the projects initiated during their stay at Villa Kujoyama.

In partnership with Villa Albertine in the United States, the Académie de France à Rome - Villa Médicis and the Casa de Velázquez in Madrid, Villa Kujoyama takes part to ¡Viva Villa!, a festival launched in 2016. In 2023, the festival turns into a call for project applications towards cultural institutions that allows artists, researchers and creators from these 4 French residencies to showcase their works in cultural institutions located on the French territory in a variety of formats.

Since 2014, Villa Kujoyama has expanded its range of hosted disciplines to include digital arts and crafts. This expansion was prompted by the desire of the Bettencourt Schueller Foundation to showcase creators and artisans on a global scale, while also ensuring the preservation and transmission of the expertise of craftsmanship in both countries.

The scope of disciplines broadened in 2019 to encompass street arts / circus / puppetry, video games and curating.

Since its establishment, Villa Kujoyama has served as a platform for cultural exchanges. As a unique space solely devoted to contemporary creation and crafts, it serves as an instrument of influence and dissemination of French excellence and know-how.

The inclusion of crafts in the program in Kyoto, a city known for its rich artisanal heritage spanning centuries, holds great significance and relevance for both French and Japanese participants. This aspect not only encourages more interactions between artists from both countries but also establishes a meaningful connection with the local community. The goal is to anchor the program in the Kyoto region and facilitate exchanges in a city that has mastered the art of combining traditional practices with contemporary activities.

Starting in 2014, the Bettencourt Schueller Foundation has played a vital role as the primary patron of Villa Kujoyama. As a recognized family foundation with a public interest focus since its establishment, the foundation is committed to "giving wings to talent" to contribute to the success and influence of France. In line with this vision, the foundation actively seeks, selects, supports, accompanies, and showcases individuals who are shaping the world of tomorrow in three key areas: life sciences, arts, and solidarity.

Since its establishment in 1987, the foundation has honored 634 laureates and provided support for more than 1000 projects, led by diverse teams, associations, institutions, and organizations.

Between 1992 and 2012, the direction of Villa Kujoyama was handled by the director of the Institut français du Japon — Kansai.

Villa Kujoyama is one of the five establishments of the Institut français du Japon since 2014. It operates independently with its own management and direction, much like the four other Instituts français (Tokyo, Kyoto, Fukuoka, Yokohama), the four Alliances françaises (Sapporo, Sendai, Aichi, Tokushima), and the Research Institute of the French cultural network in Japan.

Since its reopening, the directors are as follow:

A village perché is a village perched at the top of a relief, most commonly found in France. Naturally difficult to access, often with ramparts, 'villages perchés' are for the most part fortified settlements dating from the Middle Ages. Many are located in the south-east of France in the present Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur region, this type of habitat considered typical of Provence. The villages, situated on their "rocky acropolis", have retained their medieval appearance, from the orientation of the facades of their houses - towards the valley or the road of communication - a true front of fortification. Fernand Benoit emphasizes their occasional prehistoric origin by pointing out that Cicero, in reference to the Ligurians who inhabited the region, called them castellani, inhabitants of the castellas (Brutus, LXXIII, 256).

'Villages perchés' are found mainly in hilly areas where soil is poor and water scarce. This is generally case in Provence except in the lower Rhone valley and in the Durance valley, where alluvial land abounds and water is easily accessible from a well dug in the courtyard of the house. Moreover, this grouping in a community closed in on itself corresponds to regions of small properties, where the only fertile lands are situated at the bottom of a few valleys, and this aggregation has facilitated the existence of rural handicraft indispensable to the villagers. Conversely, the dispersed habitat implies larger, wealthier estates, hence the aphorism penned by Fernand Benoit: "Poverty concentrates the habitat, wealth disperses it".

There is a specific habitat type that is linked to the village perché: the 'high house'. Benoit explains that "its originality consists in placing the beasts below, man above." The building is subdivided into a barn on the ground floor, housing on one or two floors, and an attic. It was the type of house reserved for the peasant villagers who had little livestock to accommodate. It is still found today in a number of mountainous massifs of western Provence, including the Alps valleys of Bléone and Haut Verdon, in the mountain of Lure where it is common in Banon, Cruis, Saint-Étienne-les-Orgues and Sigonce. Most of these houses date from the 16th century, when the religious wars forced the populace to hide behind the village fortifications. When the wars were over, there was a drift to the periphery of the agglomeration and "houses on land", more able to accommodate annexed buildings.

Indeed, this type of dwelling, gathering people and animals in a village, could only remain frozen in time, any extension being impossible except vertically. Their architecture is therefore characteristic: a narrow facade with one or two windows, and an elevation not exceeding four to five floors, including attic with its outer pulley to hoist the forage. Currently, the only possible transformations - these houses having lost their agricultural status - are to install a garage on the ground floor and create new rooms in the attic. For those houses restored with taste, the floor of the habitation is reached by a staircase joined to the facade. The presence of terrace or balcony was constant. The terrace was used primarily for the drying of fruit and vegetables suspended from a wire called a 'trihard' when forming a trellis that covered a rustic pergola. Where it formed a loggia, columns supporting a canopy covered with tiles, it was called a 'galarié' or 'soulerie'.

A Village étape (French pronunciation: [ vilaʒ etap ]) is a French label given to a small town, typically under five thousand people, designated to provide a complete set of services for national or provincial highway travellers. While most do provide natural or cultural landmarks, activities or attractions in some form, the core requirements address quality or hours of operation for amenities such as restaurants, grocers, lodging and tourist information.

The village étape association was created in 1989. The first Village étape was Bessines-sur-Gartempe in 1995. In France, a village étape is a village near or just off a motorway or national dual-carriageway that has been accepted by the "Village étape" Association as meeting the following criteria:

The shopkeepers, hoteliers or restaurant keepers involved in the Village étape movement all have to sign the Villages étapes quality charter.

They can be easily identifiable by a "Philémon the hedgehog" sticker displayed in their windows.

As of April 2026 there are 77 communes listed as a Village étape:

Vincent Jules Auriol (French: [ vɛ̃sɑ̃ oʁjɔl ] ; 27 August 1884 – 1 January 1966) was President of France from 1947 to 1954. A member of the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO), he was the first president elected under the Fourth Republic. His presidential term was marked by the Indochina War, the implementation of the Monnet Plan for modernisation, as well as France joining the Council of Europe and NATO as a founding member.

First elected to the Chamber of Deputies from Haute-Garonne in 1914, Auriol served in government under the Third Republic as Minister of Finance (1936 – 1937) and Minister of Justice (1937 – 1938).

Auriol was born in Revel, Haute-Garonne, as the only child of Jacques Antoine Auriol (1855–1933), a baker nicknamed Paul, and Angélique Virginie Durand (1861–1945). His great-grandmother, Anne Auriol, was a first cousin of English engineer Isambard Kingdom Brunel. He earned a law degree at the Collège de Revel in 1904 and began his career as a lawyer in Toulouse. A committed socialist, Auriol co-founded the newspaper Le Midi Socialiste in 1908; he was head of the Association of Journalists in Toulouse at this time.

In 1914, Auriol entered the Chamber of Deputies as a Socialist deputy for Muret, a position he retained until 1942. He also served as Mayor of Muret from 3 May 1925 to 17 January 1947, and as a member of the Conseil Général of Haute-Garonne from 1928 to 17 January 1947. In December 1920, after the breakup of the SFIO, Auriol refused to join the newly created SFIC and became one of the leaders of the new SFIO (the remaining socialist minority), along with Léon Blum.

Auriol became the party's leading spokesman on financial issues. He chaired the Finance Committee in the Chamber of Deputies from 1924 to 1926. His first cabinet post was as Minister of Finance under Léon Blum, in which Auriol controversially devalued the French franc 30% against the United States dollar, leading to capital flight and greater economic unease. This and Blum's proposals for greater regulatory restrictions on industry led to Blum's resignation as Premier ; in the next government, led by Camille Chautemps, Auriol was made Minister of Justice, then later he was appointed as Minister of Coordination of Services of the Presidency of the Council in Blum's short-lived government in 1938. Édouard Daladier 's conservative – Radical government formed on 10 April 1938 returned Auriol to the Chamber of Deputies.

Auriol was one of the 80 deputies who voted against the extraordinary powers given to Prime Minister Philippe Pétain on 10 July 1940 that brought about the Nazi -backed Vichy government. As a result, he was placed under house arrest until he escaped to the French Resistance in October 1942, and fought with the resistance for a year. Auriol fled to London in October 1943. He represented the Socialists at the Free French Consultative Assembly (organized by Charles de Gaulle in Algiers later that year). In July 1944, he represented France at the United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference at Bretton Woods, United States.

After World War II, Auriol served as Minister of State in de Gaulle's provisional government. He was a member of the Constituent Assemblies which drafted the constitution of the short-lived French Fourth Republic, and was President of the Assemblies. He lobbied for a " third force " as an alternative to both Communism and Gaullism. Auriol led the French delegation to the United Nations and was France's first representative on the United Nations Security Council in 1946. He served as a Deputy for Haute-Garonne in the National Assembly from 1946 until 31 December 1947. Meanwhile, the National Assembly elected him on 16 January 1947 as the first President of the Fourth Republic by a wide margin, receiving 452 votes (51.19%) against the 242 (27.41%) for the People's Republican Movement (MRP) candidate, Auguste Champetier de Ribes.

As president, Auriol pursued a relatively weak presidency like the office under the Third Republic. He attempted to reconcile political factions within France and warm relations between France and its allies. He was criticized for France's ailing economy and political turmoil in the post-war period, and the war in Indochina. A series of debilitating strikes were waged across France in 1947, initiated by the Confédération Générale du Travail. The strikes escalated into violence in November of that year, leading, on 28 November, to the government deploying 80,000 French Army reservists to face the " insurrection ". The Communist Party, who often supported the strikes, were expelled from the legislature in early December. The strikes ended on 10 December, but more would come in 1948, and again in 1953 in response to the Joseph Laniel government's austerity program.

Apart from the inconclusive war in Indochina, France's colonial empire decayed under Auriol's presidency. Clashes in Morocco, Madagascar, Algeria, and Tunisia became more frequent; an Algerian independence movement, the Front de Libération Nationale, was founded in 1951, and in 1953 the French overthrew Mohammed V, the Sultan of Morocco, after he demanded greater autonomy. France fought an uprising in Madagascar and imprisoned Tunisian independence leader Habib Bourguiba in 1952.

When Auriol's term as president expired, he did not run for re-election, and was succeeded by René Coty as President of France on 16 January 1954. Auriol commented on leaving office: "The work was killing me; they called me out of bed at all hours of the night to receive resignations of prime ministers" (there were eighteen different governments during his seven years as president.)

After his presidency, Auriol assumed the role of elder statesman, and wrote articles on political topics. Auriol became a member of the Constitutional Council of France in 1958 at the establishment of the French Fifth Republic ; he resigned from the SFIO in the same year. He unsuccessfully lobbied against the constitution in the 1958 national referendum, and resigned from his position on the Constitutional Council in 1960 to protest the growing power of Charles de Gaulle's presidency. In 1965, he endorsed François Mitterrand for the presidency.

On 1 January 1966, Vincent Auriol died in hospital in the 7th arrondissement of Paris and was buried at Muret, Haute-Garonne.

On 1 June 1911, Auriol married Michelle Aucouturier. Around seven to eight years later, the couple had a son, Paul (1919–1992) and the aviator Jacqueline Auriol was his daughter-in-law.

Vincent Badie (16 July 1902 – 8 September 1989) was a French lawyer and politician.

Vincent Henri Badie was born in Béziers and practised as a lawyer at Montpellier. He was elected as Radical Party (PRS: Parti Radical Socialiste) candidate to the Chamber of Deputies in 1936 representing Hérault. He also served as mayor of Paulhan.

During the Second World War, in June 1940, he was one of the 80 who voted against the grant of special powers to Philippe Pétain and the creation of the Vichy régime. "Vive la République quand même!" (Long live the Republic all the same!). His opposition to Vichy led to his removal as mayor in 1941, and he was arrested and deported to Dachau concentration camp.

After the war he was again elected to parliament, again serving in the lower chamber, now called the National Assembly. He represented Hérault until 1958.

He served in government under Edgar Faure as Minister of Veterans and War Victims from 20 October 1955 to 1 February 1956 and again under Pierre Pflimlin from 14 May 1958 to 1 June 1958.

He did not support Charles de Gaulle in 1958 and opposed the creation of the Fifth French Republic. He died at Montpellier.

Historian Jean Sagnes published a series of interviews with Badie in Vive la République (Toulouse, 1987).

Vinci (French pronunciation: [ vɛ̃si ] ; corporately styled VINCI) is a French concessions and construction company founded in 1899 as Société Générale d'Entreprises. Its head office is in Nanterre, in the western suburbs of Paris. Vinci is listed on Euronext 's Paris stock exchange and is a member of the Euro Stoxx 50 index.

The company was founded by Alexandre Giros and Louis Loucheur as Société Générale d'Entreprises S.A. (SGE) in 1899. SGE was owned by Compagnie générale d'électricité (CGE), later Alcatel, from 1966 until 1981, when Saint-Gobain acquired a majority stake.

Companies acquired by SGE include Sogea (a civil engineering firm founded in 1878), bought in 1986, Campenon Bernard (a civil engineering and development firm founded in 1920), bought in 1988, and Norwest Holst (a British civil engineering firm founded in 1969 by the merger of Holst & Co, established in 1918, and Norwest Construction, established in 1923), bought in 1991.

In 1988, SGE was acquired by Compagnie générale des eaux, which was later renamed Vivendi. In 2000, the company changed its name to Vinci.

During 2001, Vinci acquired Groupe GTM, which was a combination of Dumez (founded in 1880) and GTM (founded in 1891). One year later, the British-based business Norwest Holst was renamed Vinci plc.

The company went on to acquire Autoroutes du Sud de la France (the Southern Freeways Company) in 2006, and Bachy-Soletanche, the world's second-largest geotechnical specialist contractor (after Bauer) in February 2007. It also bought the UK operations of Taylor Woodrow Construction for £74m in September 2008.

During August 2009, Vinci acquired a portion of the troubled contractor Haymills. One month later, it acquired the French engineering firm Cegelec from the Qatar Investment Authority in exchange for €1.18 billion ($1.69 billion). During February 2010, it bought the European aggregates businesses of Tarmac from Anglo American in exchange for £250 million. It also purchased Meteor Parking from the Go-Ahead Group in September 2010.

During the early 2010s, the company was awarded multiple contracts to construct portions of London's Crossrail project. In 2012, Vinci signed a deal to buy ANA Aeroportos de Portugal in exchange for €3,080 million. During December 2013, Vinci was awarded a contract worth €440 million to build an express-lane highway system in Atlanta, Georgia.

During 2014, Vinci sold 75% of the shares of Vinci Park to a consortium Ardian Infrastructure and Crédit Agricole Assurances; Vinci Park then became Indigo. In June 2016, Vinci sold the remaining 25.4% ex-Vinci Park shares to the consortium Ardian Infrastructure and Crédit Agricole Assurances.

During May 2015, Vinci and Orix were jointly awarded a 45-year contract to operate Itami Airport and Kansai International Airport in Osaka Prefecture, Japan, under a deal valued at around $18 billion.

In March 2017, the company won the concession to operate the international airport at Salvador, Bahia for 30 years. During October 2017, the Australian construction contractor Seymour Whyte was purchased by Vinci. In November 2017, the company invested in Sweden to acquire Eitech and Infratek, specialists in electrical works and engineering.

Between 2017 and 2020, Vinci, as part of a joint venture with Balfour Beatty and Systra, was awarded multiple contracts to work on Britain's High Speed 2 project.

In May 2019, Vinci acquired a 50.01% stake in Gatwick Airport ; at the time of the transaction, the company pledged to invest £1.1 billion into passenger improvements at the airport by 2023.

Throughout 2020, the company's activities were heavily influenced by the COVID-19 pandemic ; strict guidelines were implemented at its workplaces amongst other consequences. In the UK, Vinci was involved in the construction of several specialist hospitals.

During October 2020, Vinci issued a €5.2 billion ($6.08 billion) offer to the Spanish construction conglomerate ACS Group to acquire its ACS Industrial division; this transaction was completed during the following year. Additional arrangements between the two companies led to the creation of a joint venture focused on the renewable energy sector.

On 7 April 2021, Vinci was awarded a 30-year concession to operate the following Brazilian airports: Manaus-Brig. Eduardo Gomes International Airport, Tabatinga International Airport, Tefé Airport, Rio Branco International Airport, Cruzeiro do Sul International Airport, Porto Velho-Gov. Jorge Teixeira de Oliveira International Airport, and Boa Vista International Airport.

In October 2024, Vinci agreed terms to purchase FM Conway.

The breakdown of shareholders at 31 December 2019 is as follows:

As of 2013, the turnover was split as follows:

Net sales break down geographically as follows: France (58.9%), Europe (25.4%), North America (3.9%), Africa (3.5%) and other (8.3%).

In 2020, Vinci UK turnover was £858.5m, with pre-tax profit of £16.2m. However, by 2024, Vinci UK had endured two consecutive years of losses. Vinci Construction UK (comprising Taylor Woodrow Construction, Vinci Building and Vinci Facilities) made a pre-tax loss of £51.4m in 2023 (2022: £43.5m pre-tax loss) on £1.34bn of turnover (2022: £1.24bn).

During early 2024, the company announced that its turnover had risen by 12% to €69 billion, which was reportedly a 12 year high.

Vinci and its predecessor companies have been involved in many notable projects including:

Vinci is involved in construction of the first 43 km of the Moscow–Saint Petersburg motorway through the valuable Khimki Forest. This construction has raised many protests in Russia, 75% of the local community – about 208,000 citizens of Khimki – oppose the project. There have also been numerous human rights abuses surrounding the project, with journalists and activists arrested and assaulted.

Vinci attracted protests in relation to its project to build an airport in Notre-Dame-des-Landes near Nantes, expected to become the third largest airport in France and being built on a site of 2,000 hectares of woodland and marsh with an acknowledged social and ecological value. This project was financed through a public-private partnership with profits going to Vinci. In November 2012, protests took place to prevent the expulsion of villagers and farmers who were struggling to protect their environment who were receiving support at both a national and international level.

Vinci's Norwest Holst and Taylor Woodrow were revealed as subscribers to the UK's Consulting Association, exposed in 2009 for operating an illegal construction industry blacklist. Vinci was later one of eight businesses involved in the 2014 launch of the Construction Workers Compensation Scheme, condemned as a "PR stunt" by the GMB union, and described by the Scottish Affairs Committee as "an act of bad faith".

Vinci SA has faced scrutiny for its continued presence in Russia amid the war in Ukraine. According to Le Monde, despite halting new investments, the company remains active through its subsidiaries, raising concerns about its ongoing operations and ethical responsibilities.

The vingtième (French pronunciation: [ vɛ̃tjɛm ], twentieth) was an income tax of the ancien régime in France. It was abolished during the French Revolution.

It was first proposed by the minister of finance, Jean-Baptiste de Machault, comte d'Arnouville, in 1749. The War of the Austrian Succession had just ended, with the French government at the point of bankruptcy. A temporary income tax, the dixième (levied by Louis XIV in 1710 at the rate of one-tenth of annual income), had been levied during the war, but Louis XV had promised that it would be removed with the end of the war. The comte d'Arnouville planned to introduce a new permanent tax modelled upon the dixième, to create a sinking fund to repay the national debt. The vingtième, introduced in 1749, was to be one-twentieth of annual income (5%), collected directly by the government, from all people regardless of their rank - although the First and Second Estates were largely exempt or could buy exemption through the payment of a 'Don Gratuit' ('free gift' to the Crown).

Legislation establishing the new tax was put before the parlements for registration in 1749 and was briefly though vociferously opposed. The most determined objections came from the pays d'ètats, regions which traditionally avoided direct collection of similar taxes, the estates paying instead abonnements, or annual lump sum payments which usually ended up being much less than the proper amount collected individually.

After registration of the vingtième edicts by the parlements, the Languedoc estates voted to deny the government their usual annual payment, and were subsequently dissolved until 1752, the vingtième being collected directly by the royal intendant. In Brittany, the estates successfully prevented the collection of the new tax, leading to the imprisonment of several leading nobles.

Obtaining money from the clergy was to prove more difficult. The comte d'Arnouville estimated the taxable income of the clergy at the time at 114 million livres, and the average annual contribution made by the clergy to the government over the past fifty years was 3.65 million livres, falling somewhat short of the 5.7 million the vingtième would raise. At the Assembly of the Clergy in 1750, he requested a payment of 7.5 million livres over five years, to contribute to his sinking fund. Protests ensued when Louis pressed the issue, and the assembly was dissolved.

Opposition continued until the resignation of d'Arnouville from the ministry in 1754, whereupon his successor, Jean Moreau de Séchelles, relented and allowed the clergy to be exempt and the pays d'ètats of Brittany and Languedoc to contribute with a lump sum payment.

A second vingtième was levied at the beginning of the Seven Years' War in 1756, in the fashion of the old dixième, and as the war continued, a third tax was levied in 1760. At the conclusion of the war both the war taxes were expected to be removed, but the ministry were pressed for funds. Finance minister Henri Léonard Jean Baptiste Bertin not only extended the second vingtième, but attempted to instigate a land survey for the proper assessment of the tax. Aware that this would greatly increase their payments, the parlements resisted. Louis forced the legislation through the Paris parlement with a lit de justice, but continued opposition in the provinces led him to give way and dismiss Bertin, replacing him with Clément Charles François de Laverdy, a judge of the Paris Parlement. Although Laverdy allowed the extension of the second vingtième, he ensured it would be on the old property assessments, meaning it would not increase over time with the national income.

Although some improvements in the assessments were managed under the radical reforming administration of Maupeou and Terray, the taxes remained inefficient. In 1778 the Paris Parlement had demanded, without success, that the government should accept without contest the declarations of individual taxpayer. In 1780 Jacques Necker registered another extension of the second vingtième without difficulty.

The two vingtièmes were to be abolished and replaced with a new tax under Charles Alexandre de Calonne 's reform plans of 1786. After his failure to convince the Assembly of Notables of his reforms, and his subsequent resignation, the new finance minister Étienne Charles Loménie de Brienne largely adopted his plans. After a first attempt in June 1787, Louis XVI and de Brienne forced the registration of the reforms at Paris on August 6, 1787. A public controversy ensued, with the parlement declaring the legislation illegal. Louis exiled the parlementaires to the provinces, but de Brienne eventually settled the matter with a compromise consisting of yet another extension of the second vingtième in September.

The vingtièmes were finally abolished by the National Assembly in 1790, along with all the other vestiges of the taxation system of the ancien régime.

Although the European portion of France is part of the Schengen Area, its overseas departments, collectivities and other territories apply their own visa policies, which have some additional exemptions or restrictions compared to the visa policy of the Schengen Area.

Visa exemptions exist for the overseas departments and regions, overseas collectivities, and New Caledonia. Visits to the French Southern and Antarctic Lands and to Clipperton Island require specific authorizations.

Nationals of the following countries can enter and reside for an unlimited period without a visa in all French overseas departments and regions, overseas collectivities, and New Caledonia, except as otherwise noted:

Nationals of EU and EFTA member states may use their national identity card instead of their passport as a travel document to enter any French territory. They may also work freely in the parts of Overseas France that are part of the European Union (overseas departments and regions, and Saint Martin), as well as Saint Barthélemy, but those who are not nationals of France need a permit to work in Saint Pierre and Miquelon, New Caledonia, Wallis and Futuna, and French Polynesia.

For stays of up to 90 days in a 180-day period in all overseas departments and regions, Saint Barthélemy, Saint Martin, and Saint Pierre and Miquelon, and up to 3 months in a 6-month period in New Caledonia, Wallis and Futuna, and French Polynesia, visa-free entry is granted to nationals of the following countries and territories, except as otherwise noted:

The following categories of travelers may also transit without a visa:

For specific territories, nationals of the following countries are also granted visa-free stays of up to 90 days in a 180-day period, except as otherwise noted.

For French Guiana, Guadeloupe and Martinique:

Travelers coming directly from Sint Maarten may enter Saint Martin through their open border.

Nationals of China, India and Russia traveling from Mauritius or Seychelles to Réunion may obtain a free visa on arrival for a stay of up to 15 days.

For New Caledonia, Wallis and Futuna, and French Polynesia:

Foreign nationals who need a visa for a part of Overseas France can obtain one by lodging an application at a French embassy or consulate in their country of residence (or, in the case of foreign nationals already in a part of France, the local prefecture) for a fee of up to €99 (depending on the destination, length of stay, age and nationality).

Schengen short-stay visas are not valid for Overseas France (except for nationals of certain countries as listed above), and vice versa. A visa with the designation "départements français d'Amérique" (DFA) allows visiting all parts of Overseas France in the Americas (French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Saint Barthélemy, Saint Martin, and Saint Pierre and Miquelon). A visa with the designation "valable pour France sauf CTOM" allows visiting all parts of Overseas France in the Americas as well as Réunion.

Visa pour l'Image is an international photojournalism festival established in 1989, which takes place annually in the entire city of Perpignan, France. This is the main and most important festival of photojournalism in France and runs from late August to mid-September for a period of 15 days.

Visa pour l'Image not only offers exhibitions spread across the city, but also conferences and meetings. Photographers such as Herb Ritts and Claude Gassian have participated in the festival.

In April 2019, Renaud Dondieu de Vabres succeeded Jean-Paul Grimolet as president of the Visa association for the image that oversees the festival. In 2022, the festival will run from August 27 to September 11. The professional week takes place from August 29 to September 42. The period reserved for schools is from September 12 to 23.

Visa requirements for French citizens are administrative entry restrictions by the authorities of other states placed on citizens of France.

As of 2026, French citizens have visa-free or visa on arrival access to 185 countries and territories, ranking the French passport 4th in terms of travel freedom according to the Henley Passport Index.

Country colors need to be changed for Afghanistan and Ghana which have an evisa now

Visa requirements for French citizens for visits to various territories, disputed areas, partially recognized countries and restricted zones:

Certain countries and territories require travellers arriving from France to be vaccinated against specific diseases. This is a map of vaccination requirements for French citizens and residents arriving directly from the Schengen area, excluding those arriving from third countries.

Many countries increasingly consider the vaccination status of travellers with regard to quarantine requirements or when deciding to allow them entry at all. This is justified by research that shows that the Pfizer vaccine effect lasts for six months or so.

French identity card is valid for these countries :

Many countries require a minimum number of blank pages to be available in the passport being presented, typically one or two pages. Endorsement pages, which often appear after the visa pages, are not counted as being valid or available.

Many countries require passports to be valid for at least 6 months upon arrival and one or two blank pages.

Countries requiring passports to be validity at least 6 months on arrival include Afghanistan, Algeria, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Botswana, Brunei, Cambodia, Comoros, Côte d'Ivoire, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Guyana, Haiti, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq (except when arriving at Basra – 3 months and Erbil or Sulaimaniyah – on arrival), Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Laos, Madagascar, Malaysia, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mongolia, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Rwanda, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syria, Taiwan, Tanzania, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen.

Turkey usually requires passports to be valid for at least 5 months (150 days) upon entry, but for French citizens Turkish authorities allow to enter even with passport expired within last 5 years.

Countries requiring passport validity of at least 4 months on arrival include Azerbaijan, Micronesia, Zambia.

Countries requiring passport validity of at least 3 months on arrival include Albania, Bosnia and Herzegowina, Honduras, Moldova, Nauru, North Macedonia, Panama, Qatar and Senegal

Countries requiring passport validity of at least 1 month on arrival include Eritrea, Hong Kong, Lebanon, Macao, Maldives, New Zealand, South Africa.

Other countries require either a passport valid on arrival or passport valid throughout the period of intended stay.

Many African countries, including Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of the Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Gabon, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Liberia, Niger, Rwanda, Sierra Leone and Togo, require all incoming passengers older than nine months to one year to have a current International Certificate of Vaccination or Prophylaxis, as does the South American territory of French Guiana.

Some countries, including Australia, Canada, Fiji, New Zealand and the United States, routinely deny entry to non-citizens who have a criminal record, while others impose restrictions depending on the type of conviction and the length of the sentence.

The government of a country can declare a diplomat persona non grata, banning them from entering the country or expelling them if they have already entered. In non-diplomatic use, the authorities of a country may also declare a foreigner persona non grata permanently or temporarily, usually because of unlawful activity.

Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, and Yemen do not allow entry to people with passport stamps from Israel or whose passports have either a used or an unused Israeli visa, or where there is evidence of previous travel to Israel such as entry or exit stamps from neighbouring border posts in transit countries such as Jordan and Egypt.

To circumvent this Arab League boycott of Israel, the Israeli immigration services have now mostly ceased to stamp foreign nationals' passports on either entry to or exit from Israel (unless the entry is for some work-related purposes). Since 15 January 2013, Israel no longer stamps foreign passports at Ben Gurion Airport. Passports are still (as of 22 June 2017) stamped at Erez when passing into and out of Gaza.

Iran refuses admission to holders of passports containing an Israeli visa or stamp that is less than 12 months old.

Several countries mandate that all travellers, or all foreign travellers, be fingerprinted on arrival and will refuse admission to or even arrest travellers who refuse to comply. In some countries, such as the United States, this may apply even to transit passengers who merely wish to change planes rather than go landside.

Fingerprinting countries/regions include Afghanistan, Argentina, Brunei, Cambodia, China, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, India, Japan, Kenya (both fingerprints and a photo are taken), Malaysia upon entry and departure, Mongolia, Saudi Arabia, the Schengen Area, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates and the United States.

Many countries also require a photo be taken of people entering the country. The United States, which does not fully implement exit control formalities at its land frontiers (although long mandated by its own legislation), intends to implement facial recognition for passengers departing from international airports to identify people who overstay their visa.

Together with fingerprint and face recognition, iris scanning is one of three biometric identification technologies internationally standardised since 2006 by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) for use in e-passports and the United Arab Emirates conducts iris scanning on visitors who need to apply for a visa. The United States Department of Homeland Security has announced plans to greatly increase the biometric data it collects at US borders. In 2018, Singapore began trials of iris scanning at three land and maritime immigration checkpoints.

In a non-EU country where there is no French embassy, French citizens, like all other EU citizens, have the right to get consular protection from the embassy of any other EU country present in that country.

See also List of diplomatic missions of France.

Visabio is the French Government system for tracking applicants to its national visa system. It stores biometric data including fingerprints and photographs. Visabio is connected to the European Visa Information System (VIS), though Visabio has also been described as "the French segment of VIS." Customs officers in France use Visabio.

In 2007, it was estimated that the data of two million people would be added to the system each year, as all applications for a French visa would be entered into the system. Only children younger than 6 months would be exempted.

The perpetrator of the 2017 Paris machete attack was identified after a Visabio search, stated François Molins, the chief prosecutor of Paris.

The program arises from French national law Nr. 2003-1119 of 26 November 2003, also called "Sarkozy Law I," but officially entitled law of «Control of immigration, residence of foreigners in France, and nationality

Vivendi SE (stylized in all lowercase) is a French investment company headquartered in Paris. It wholly-owns Gameloft as well as investments in companies, primarily involved in content, entertainment, media, and telecommunications.

In 2000, Vivendi Universal was created from the merger of Groupe Canal+ and Seagram Company Ltd., owner of Universal Studios and Universal Music Group. Vivendi sold 80% of Vivendi Universal Entertainment (including Universal Studios) to the later-defunct General Electric (GE, owner of NBC) in 2004, forming what is NBCUniversal. In 2006, its name was reverted to Vivendi. GE bought out Vivendi's 20% stake in NBCUniversal during Comcast 's acquisition of the latter.

From 2021, Vivendi has spun off its fully owned assets in order to become an investment company. The process started with the floating of 60% of Universal Music Group, the world's largest music business and owned since the creation of Vivendi Universal. In 2024, this process concluded with the spin-off of three of its other fully owned assets into three companies: Canal+ (entertainment), Havas (advertising), and Louis Hachette Group (publishing, distribution, and travel retail). Other investments include stakes in Banijay Group and MediaForEurope.

On 14 December 1853, a water company named Compagnie générale des eaux (CGE) was created by an imperial decree of Napoleon III. In 1854, CGE obtained a concession in order to supply water to the public in Lyon, serving in that capacity for over a hundred years. In 1861, it obtained a 50-year concession with the City of Paris. CGE also supplied water to Nantes, Venice (from 1880), Istanbul (from 1882) and Porto (from 1883).

Following the appointment of Guy Dejouany as CEO in 1976, CGE extended its activities into other sectors with a series of takeovers. Beginning in 1980, CGE began diversifying from water into waste management, energy, transport services, and construction and property. It acquired the Compagnie générale d'entreprises automobiles (CGEA), specialized in industrial vehicles, which was later divided into two branches: Connex (later Veolia Transport) in 1999 and Onyx Environnement (later Veolia Environmental Services) in 1989. CGE then acquired the Compagnie générale de chauffe, and the Montenay group, with these companies later becoming the Energy Services division of CGE, and later renamed " Dalkia " in 1998.

In 1983, CGE helped to found Canal+, the first pay-TV channel in France, and in the 1990s began expanding into telecommunications and mass media, especially after Jean-Marie Messier succeeded Guy Dejouany on 27 June 1996, acquiring companies such as the Babelsberg Studio. In 1996, CGE created Neuf Cegetel to take advantage of the 1998 deregulation of the French telecommunications market, accelerating the move into the media sector which would culminate in the 2000 demerger into Vivendi Universal and Vivendi Environnement (Veolia).

On 27 March 1998, days after agreeing to fully acquire Havas, Compagnie Générale des Eaux announced it was changing its name to Vivendi. In 2000, it sold off its property and construction divisions the following year to what would become Vinci SA. Vivendi went on to acquire stakes in or merge with Cendant Software, Grupo Anaya, and Maroc Telecom. Beginning in 1998, Vivendi launched digital channels in Italy, Spain, Poland, Scandinavia, Belgium, and the Netherlands.

In June 1999, Vivendi merged with Pathé, and the exchange ratio for the merger was fixed at three Vivendi shares for every two Pathé shares. The Wall Street Journal estimated the value of the deal at US$2.59 billion. Following the completion of the merger, Vivendi retained Pathé's interests in British Sky Broadcasting Group PLC and CanalSatellite, a French broadcasting corporation, then sold all remaining assets to Jérôme Seydoux's family-owned holding company, Fornier SA, which changed its name to Pathé.

On 9 December 2000, Vivendi acquired Groupe Canal+, the French television network and film production company. On 11 December 2000, Vivendi Universal was created from the merger of Groupe Canal+, Canadian company Seagram Company Ltd (owner of Universal Studios), and Vivendi. That same day, Havas S.A. became Vivendi Universal Publishing.

Vivendi Universal acquired MP3.com and the leading American publisher Houghton Mifflin in 2001. To raise the funds, Vivendi Universal sold its remaining 9.9% stake in Havas Advertising to institutional investors and its trade and medical publishing businesses to a group led by Cinven.

Vivendi Environnement was formed in 1999 by Vivendi to consolidate its environmental divisions, which were CGEA Transport, Onyx Environnement (now Veolia Environmental Services), Dalkia and CGE water division. As a result, CGEA Transport was renamed Connex (later Veolia Transport), and CGE's water division was renamed Vivendi Water (now Veolia Water). In July 2000, Vivendi Environnement was divested through IPOs in Paris and later New York in October 2001. Initially, Vivendi Universal retained a 70% stake in Vivendi Environnement in 2000, but by December 2002, it was reduced to 20.4%. In 2003, Vivendi Environnement was renamed to Veolia Environnement.

Vivendi Universal disclosed a corporate loss of €23.3 billion in its 2002 annual report. It responded with financial reshuffling, trying to shore up media holdings while selling off shares in its spin-off companies. Amid intense media scrutiny, its chairman and CEO, Jean-Marie Messier (who had overseen the most dramatic phase of the company's diversification), was subsequently replaced by Jean-René Fourtou. Messier was found guilty of embezzlement in 2011, but not before he was paid over US$20 million as part of his severance package. The company reduced its stake in Vivendi Environnement to 40% and sold its stake in Vinci SA. The company then began reorganizing to stave off bankruptcy, announcing a strategy to sell non-strategic assets. Its largest single shareholder was the family of Edgar Bronfman Jr., who was head of Seagram at the time of the merger. Vivendi sold its stake in Vizzavi to Vodafone, with the exception of Vizzavi France. It also sold 20.4% of Vivendi Environnement's capital to a group of investors, and its stake in North American satellite operator EchoStar Communications Corporation. It also sold Vivendi Universal Publishing to Natexis Banque Populaire on behalf of Lagardère, resulting in the creation of Editis. It also sold Houghton Mifflin to Thomas H Lee, Blackstone and Bain consortium for US$1.66 billion. Also, in 2002, Vivendi Universal sold the Belgian and Dutch activities of its subsidiary Scoot Europe to Kapitol, the parent company of online directory Infobel.

In 2003, Vivendi Universal sold Canal+ Technologies to Thomson SA ; Tele+ to News Corporation and Telecom Italia. It also sold its 26.3% interest in Xfera. Also in 2003, it sold its consumer magazines to Socpresse and its free newspapers to France Antilles. On 1 December, Vivendi Universal closed a deal to sell MP3.com to CNET. Despite predictions that it would be unable to raise the cash needed, Vivendi Universal bought out one of the two minority shareholders in Cegetel, taking its holding to 60 percent, with Vodafone holding the remaining 40 percent. Management viewed the mobile communications firm as a core asset once the bulk of media assets had been sold off.

On 12 May 2004, 80% of Vivendi Universal Entertainment (owner of Universal Studios) was sold to General Electric (owner of National Broadcasting Company, Inc.) to form NBC Universal ; GE held an 80% stake while Vivendi held a 20% stake in the new company. At the same time, it sold a 50% stake in Canal+ and StudioCanal to the new company. Vivendi also sold its interests in Kencell (re-branded Celtel, Kenya), Monaco Telecom and Sportfive (which it held through Canal+ Group), and sold Newsworld International to the business partnership of Joel Hyatt and former Vice-President of the United States Al Gore. Vivendi also sold Babelsberg Studio.

On 16 December 2005, it was announced that Canal Plus would merge with TPS, France's second largest pay-TV provider. Vivendi owned 85% of the combined entity.

On 17 January 2006, Vivendi Universal announced it would end its American Depositary Receipt program and its listing on the New York Stock Exchange by the end of the second quarter of 2006, due to lowered trading volume on its shares and high costs. On 20 April, the company announced that shareholders had approved the name change to "Vivendi". In August, Vivendi signed a deal with Spiralfrog to distribute Vivendi's songs online in the United States and Canada.

On 2 December 2007, Vivendi announced that it would be merging its game publishing unit with Activision in a $ 18.8 billion deal. This will allow the merged company, Activision Blizzard, to rival Electronic Arts, the world's biggest video game publisher. The merger closed on 9 July 2008, for $9.8 billion. Vivendi held a 52% majority stake in the new business.

On 8 September 2009, Vivendi announced negotiations to buy the Brazilian phone operator Global Village Telecom (GVT). Vivendi took control of GVT at a cost of 56 reais per share, on 13 November, trumping Telefónica 's bid. Geneva-based Crédit des Alpes was the investment bank to the transaction, originating the acquisition proposal and advising GVT's majority shareholders.

On 3 December 2009, GE announced it would purchase Vivendi's stake in NBC Universal, which would become a joint venture between GE and Comcast. Vivendi sold its stake in NBC Universal on 25 January 2011.

On 4 April 2011, Vodafone sold its 44% stake in French mobile service provider SFR to Vivendi for about $11 billion and giving Vivendi full control of its largest unit.

In 2012, Vivendi announced having entered a strategic review of its assets and decided to refocus its activities on media and content activities while maximizing its telecoms assets.

On 25 July 2013, Activision Blizzard announced the buyout of 429 million shares from Vivendi for $5.83 billion, dropping the shareholder from a 63% stake to 11.8% by the end of the deal in September, ending Vivendi's majority ownership of Activision Blizzard. In November, Vivendi also sold its 53% stake in Maroc Telecom to Dubai -based Etisalat for around $4.2 billion. Vivendi also confirmed in November 2013 its intention to launch a demerger plan which would result in Vivendi becoming an international media group consisting primarily of Canal+, Universal Music Group, and GVT, while SFR would be listed separately on the stock market. As a result of the foregoing, Vivendi group results for the first semester of 2014 are in a strong growth, witnessing the success of its repositioning strategy. Net income was up 84,8% to €1.9 billion. In August 2014 Vivendi sells GVT to Telefônica Vivo, a subsidiary of Telefónica in Brazil.

The moves allowed Vivendi to pay down debt and increase cash returns to shareholders while leaving it able to do acquisitions of its own. After SFR deal closes, Vivendi was expected to have around €5 billion, leaving it with some room to maneuver even after it pays down debt and returns nearly €5 billion in dividends and share buybacks to shareholders.

In 2014, Vivendi decided to sell mobile companies SFR (France) to Patrick Drahi 's company, Altice, and GVT (Brazil) to the Brazilian company Telefônica Vivo. On 28 May, Vivendi sold half of its remaining shares (nearly 41.5 million shares) in Activision Blizzard for $850 million, reducing its stake to 6%.

In April 2015, it was announced that a shareholder in the company Bolloré raised its stake from 10.2 percent to 12.01 percent for a total fee of €568 million. In 2015, Vivendi bought 80% share in Dailymotion. According to the Wall Street Journal, the "French media group offered around $273 million for streaming service". Vivendi was in talks with Orange, to Buy 80% stake in Dailymotion. Also, Vivendi announced extra payouts in compromise with P. Schoenfeld Asset Management shareholder. It was revealed in October 2015 that Vivendi would increase its stake in Telecom Italia to around 19% of the ordinary share capital as part of its aims to increase its influence in the group. As of May 2017, Vivendi owns 24.6% of the company with Vivendi's CEO Arnaud de Puyfontaine becoming Executive Chairman of Telecom Italia. In October, Vivendi bought minority stakes in the French video game studios Gameloft and Ubisoft. On 17 December 2015, Vivendi acquired a 64.4% majority stake in Belgian online radio aggregator Radionomy (including its media player platform Winamp and internet radio streaming software Shoutcast). Its shareholders, including its employees and American-based investment firm Union Square Ventures, however, retained its stakes in the company.

In June 2016, after having triggered a mandatory tender offer in February 2016 by reaching 30% ownership, and then becoming its largest shareholder, Vivendi completed a hostile takeover of Gameloft with the acquisition of its founders' stake. At the same time, Vivendi also further increased its stake in Ubisoft, which had led to concern from the company's management that Vivendi was also planning a hostile takeover of Ubisoft, however as of 2018 Vivendi is no longer in the position to do so. Vivendi (once the owner of Blizzard, later Activision Blizzard), searching for a new games publisher property has started investing in both Ubisoft and Gameloft. The brothers in charge of Ubisoft and Gameloft, Yves Guillemot and Michel Guillemot respectively, view the investments as a hostile takeover attempt, and are raising capital from within the family and from Canadian investors to maintain control of the companies. As of 8 June 2016, Vivendi has acquired a controlling stake in Gameloft. In news from 11 September 2016 Yves Guillemot is set to buy an additional 3.5% of Ubisoft shares to raise his stake to 12.5% to attempt to block a takeover from Vivendi. Yves has been attempting to lobby other shareholders to prevent them from selling their shares to Vivendi. As of 20 March 2018, Vivendi has sold all its shares in Ubisoft and Tencent has bought in in their place. In an auction on 6 June, Vivendi won a bid to acquire Flavorus from SFX Entertainment for $4 million. Also that month, it acquired Paddington and Company Limited-owner of Paddington Bear and other properties, and The Copyrights Group. Vivendi declared that it owned 12.3% of Mediaset in December 2016. In September 2020, Vivendi owns 28.8% of Mediaset. In January 2019, Vivendi completed its €900 million acquisition of Editis, one of France's major book publishers.

In 2019, Vivendi acquired Nigeria's film studio ROK Studios which included its linear channels and VOD service, IROKO+.

At the end of the first quarter of 2020, Vivendi completed a partial sale of Universal Music Group (UMG) to a consortium led by Tencent, a Chinese media conglomerate. The amount of stake of the world's largest record label group that has been sold to the consortium is 10% and the valuation of which was $3.3 billion. The Tencent-led consortium retained an option to purchase another 10% at the same valuation until January 2021, which they opted to exercise in December 2020. Pershing Square Holdings later acquired 10% of UMG prior to its IPO on the Euronext Amsterdam stock exchange. The company went public on 21 September 2021, at a valuation of €46 billion. In April, Vivendi bought a 10.6% stake in Lagardère Group, another French media group, the assets of which include the world's third-largest book publisher Hachette. By August 2020, Vivendi had doubled its stake in Lagardère to 23.5%, becoming the largest shareholder of the rival group. In October, Vivendi acquired a 12% stake in South Africa's media company, MultiChoice. In December, Vivendi announced a deal to buy the French media conglomerate Prisma Media from Bertelsmann. In January 2021, Vivendi bought a 9.9% stake in the Spanish media conglomerate Prisa. In April 2021, Vivendi acquired Prisma (in which the Bolloré Group is the main shareholder).

In September 2021, Vivendi distributed 60% of its UMG shares to shareholders and retained 10% of shares in an IPO at Euronext Amsterdam. Amber Capital informed Vivendi of its intention to sell all its shares in Lagardère (17.93 of the share capital) and invited Vivendi to make an acquisition offer. Vivendi has acquired Amber Capital's shares for 24.1 euros per share. The transaction will be completed by 15 December 2022, after gaining the approvals required by the current regulations in light of the takeover that could result from the mandatory public offer following this acquisition. In December 2021, Vivendi announced its plan to accelerate the purchase of Amber's stake in Lagardère. As of June 2022, Vivendi owns 57.3% of Lagardère following the latter's IPO. Vivendi offered to divest the book publisher Editis, as Lagardère already owns Hachette.

In July 2022, Vivendi announced its plan to spin off Editis, anticipating the European competition regulators not to allow Editis and Lagardère Publishing to merge. In June 2023, Vivendi agreed to sell Editis to Czech billionaire Daniel Křetínský 's Czech Media Invest. In July 2023, Vivendi announced that Prisma Media entered into exclusive negotiations with Groupe Figaro for the sale of Gala magazine. The transactions for Editis and Gala magazine were finalized in November 2023.

On 13 December 2023, Vivendi announced that it was studying a split project to separate its three businesses, Canal+, Havas and its publishing unit (including its stake in Lagardère and Prisma Media) as well as Gameloft and its investments in other companies (Universal Music Group, TIM, MFE, Banijay, Prisa, Telefonica) into four separate companies. On 30 January 2024, the company's supervisory board approved the split project. On 22 July 2024, Vivendi announced that the publishing company post-split would become Louis Hachette Group while Canal+ and Havas would be listed on the London Stock Exchange and Euronext Amsterdam respectively while LHG would trade on Euronext Paris. Canal+ would retain its French corporate status. On 29 October 2024, the company's supervisory board approved the split plan. Vivendi would retain its listing on the Euronext Paris and would continue its operations as an investment company. On 9 December 2024, Vivendi's shareholders approved the split project. The spin-off companies started trading on 16 December 2024.

In 2025, the €20 million net income resulted from the 2024 split of Vivendi into several entities, an operation that led to a €6 billion 'loss' for Vivendi due to capital losses from these deconsolidations.

As of 31 December 2025, Vivendi own 11.45% of the Universal Music Group, whilst notifying a short position of 3.49% as well.

The official name of the company is Vivendi SE (Societas Europaea). The headquarters are located at 42 Avenue Friedland, 75008 Paris.

As of 31 December 2024, Vivendi is owned by:

As of 8 October 2025, the board is composed of the following:

Vivendi is a company primarily focused on digital entertainment. It currently owns the French video game company Gameloft.

Vivendi's president Vincent Bolloré, appointed in June 2014, aims at developing synergies between the company's subsidiaries now refocused on media: Gameloft.

In July 2016, Vivendi completed its takeover of Gameloft, the world's largest mobile-games publisher in terms of downloads. Gameloft reported that its games had amassed over 1 billion downloads in 2016.

In July 2024, Vivendi was alleged by Reporters Without Borders (RWB) to have been involved in a disinformation campaign against RWB. On 13 February 2024, in response to a request lodged by RWB, the Conseil d'État ordered CNews, part of the Vivendi group, to better respect journalistic standards and diversity. The February order by the Conseil d'État was followed by an intense disinformation campaign of hate speech against RWB. In July 2024, RWB published the results of its investigation into the disinformation campaign. Its findings included a fake website pretending to be run by RWB hosted on a server hosting "Fan de CNews", a fansite supporting CNews. The website was run by what RWB states is a disinformation agency called Progressif Media, hosted at Vivendi. The main investigator, Arnaud Froger, stated that Progressif Media used "counterfeiting, concealment, cybersquatting [and] trolling" as disinformation techniques against RWB.

Voies navigables de France (French pronunciation: [ vwa naviɡabl də fʁɑ̃s ] ; VNF, English: Navigable Waterways of France) is the French navigation authority responsible for the management of the majority of France 's inland waterways network and the associated facilities— towpaths, commercial and leisure ports, lock-keeper's houses and other structures.

VNF was established in 1991 and took over the responsibility for all waterways from the National Office of Navigation (French : Office National de la Navigation) in 1993. It is a public body and is under the control of the Minister of Ecology, Energy, Sustainable Development and Territorial Development (French : Ministère de l'Écologie, de l'Energie, du Développement durable et de l'Aménagement du territoire). The headquarters of VNF are in Béthune, Pas-de-Calais with local offices throughout France.

The French natural and man-made waterways network is the largest in Europe extending to over 8,500-kilometre (5,300 mi) of which VNF manages the navigable sections. The assets managed by VNF comprise 6,700-kilometre (4,200 mi) of waterways, made up of 3,800-kilometre (2,400 mi) of canals and 2,900-kilometre (1,800 mi) of navigable rivers, 494 dams, 1595 locks, 74 aqueducts, 65 reservoirs, 35 tunnels and a land area of 800 km (310 sq mi).

Two significant waterways which are not under VNF's control are the navigable sections of the River Somme and the Brittany Canals, which are both under local management, and neither is the River Lot in Aquitaine.

Approximately 20% of the network is suitable for commercial boats of over 1000 tonnes and the VNF has an ongoing programme of maintenance and modernisation to increase depth of waterways, widths of locks and headroom under bridges to support France's strategy of encouraging freight onto water as part of her sustainable development programme—a survey by Price Waterhouse Coopers showed that 75% of French companies were willing to switch to barge transport.

A major current initiative is the cross-border Seine–Nord Europe Canal project, connecting the Seine and the Scheldt, which will provide a continuous wide-gauge navigation from Le Havre to Antwerp.

The Volta Prize (French : prix Volta) was originally established by Napoleon III during the Second French Empire in 1852 to honor Alessandro Volta, an Italian physicist noted for developing the electric battery. This international prize awarded 50,000 French francs to extraordinary scientific discoveries related to electricity. The prize was instituted by the Ministry of Public Instruction with the personal funding of the French Emperor, the selection committee was usually constituted by members of the French Academy of Sciences.

Notable recipients have included, Heinrich Ruhmkorff, who commercialised the induction coil, and Zénobe Gramme, inventor of the Gramme dynamo and the first practical electric motor used in industry.

One of its most notable awards was made in 1880, when Alexander Graham Bell received the fourth edition of the Volta Prize for the invention of the telephone. Among the committee members who judged were Victor Hugo and Alexandre Dumas, fils. Since Bell was himself becoming more affluent, he used the prize money to create institutions in and around Washington, D.C., including the prestigious Volta Laboratory Association in 1880 (also known as the 'Volta Laboratory' and as the 'Alexander Graham Bell Laboratory') precursor to Bell Labs, with his endowment fund (the 'Volta Fund'), and then in 1887 the ' Volta Bureau ', which later became the Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing (AG Bell).

The Volta prize was inspired on the earlier French Academy of Sciences Galvanism Prize (French : Prix du galvanisme) created by Napoleon Bonaparte in 1801. A Grand Prize of 60,000 francs and a medal of 30,000 francs to be given for discoveries similar to those of Volta and Benjamin Franklin. The Grand Prize never found a deserving recipient.

Only four recipients received a secondary reward of 30,000 francs from the Galvanism Prize:

Additionally, the founder of the Volta prize and next Emperor of the French, Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte (Napoleon III), nephew of Bonaparte, was himself very invested in the development of electric science. He presented his own voltaic pile at the French Academy of Sciences in 1843, made out of a single metal and two acid solutions.

The rules of the Volta Prize were decreed by Napoleon III in Paris, on 23 February 1852. The decree contains five articles:

The articles descriptions above are not a literal translation from the original French articles.

The sum of money, 50,000 francs, was approximately $10,000 US dollars at that time (about $ 350,000 in current dollars), more than five times the annual salary of a Paris Faculty Professor at that time. Between the members of the committee, Edmond Becquerel and Jean-Baptiste Dumas were known to be reporters in certain editions.

All the Volta Prize editions are listed below:

Other minor recognitions were also given to Paul-Gustave Froment for the electric motor, to Auguste Achard for the electric brake, to Gaetan Bonelli for the electric loom, to David Edward Hughes for the printing telegraph, to Giovanni Caselli for the pantelegraph, to Victor Serrin for his lightning system, to Leopold Oudry for galvanoplasty, to Duchenne de Boulogne for the applications of electricity in medicine, to Gaston Planté for a development of a secondary battery, and to Ernest Onimus [ fr ] for his research on electric currents.

Vézelay Abbey (French : Abbaye Sainte-Marie-Madeleine de Vézelay) is a Benedictine and Cluniac monastery in Vézelay in the east-central French department of Yonne. It was constructed between 1120 and 1150. The Benedictine abbey church, now the Basilica of Sainte-Marie-Madeleine (Saint Mary Magdalene), with its complex program of imagery in sculpted capitals and portals, is one of the great masterpieces of Burgundian Romanesque art and architecture. Sacked by the Huguenots in 1569, the building suffered neglect in the 17th and the 18th centuries and some further damage during the period of the French Revolution.

The church and hill at Vézelay were added to the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites in 1979 because of their importance in medieval Christianity and outstanding architecture.

Relics of Mary Magdalene can be seen inside the Basilica.

The Benedictine abbey of Vézelay was founded, as many abbeys were, on land that had been a late Roman villa, of Vercellus (Vercelle becoming Vézelay). The villa had passed into the hands of the Carolingians and devolved to a Carolingian count, Girart, of Roussillon. The two convents he founded there were looted and dispersed by Moorish raiding parties in the 8th century, and a hilltop convent was burnt by Norman raiders. In the 9th century, the abbey was refounded under the guidance of Badilo, who became an affiliate of the reformed Benedictine order of Cluny. Vézelay also stood at the beginning of one of the four major routes through France for pilgrims going to Santiago de Compostela in Galicia, in the north-western corner of Spain.

About 1050 the monks of Vézelay began to claim to hold the relics of Mary Magdalene, brought, they said, from the Holy Land either by their 9th-century founder-saint, Badilo, or by envoys despatched by him. A little later a monk of Vézelay declared that he had detected in a crypt at St-Maximin in Provence, carved on an empty sarcophagus, a representation of the Unction at Bethany, when Jesus' head was anointed by Mary of Bethany, who was assumed in the Middle Ages to be Mary Magdalene. The monks of Vézelay pronounced this to be Mary Magdalene's tomb, from which her relics had been translated to their abbey. Freed captives then brought their chains as votive objects to the abbey, and it was the newly elected Abbot Geoffroy in 1037 who had the ironwork melted down and reforged as wrought iron railings surrounding the Magdalene's altar. Thus the erection of one of the finest examples of Romanesque architecture which followed was made possible by pilgrims to the declared relics and these tactile examples demonstrating the efficacy of prayers. Mary Magdalene is the prototype of the penitent, and Vézelay has remained an important place of pilgrimage for the Catholic faithful, though the actual claimed relics were torched by Huguenots in the 16th century.

To accommodate the influx of pilgrims a new abbey church was begun, dedicated on April 21, 1104, but the expense of building so increased the tax burden on the abbey's lands that the peasants rose up and killed the abbot. The crush of pilgrims was such that an extended narthex (an enclosed porch) was built, inaugurated by Pope Innocent II in 1132, to help accommodate the pilgrim throng.

Saint Bernard of Clairvaux preached at Vézelay in favor of a second crusade at Easter 1146, in front of King Louis VII. Richard I of England and Philip II of France met there and spent three months at the Abbey in 1190 before leaving for the Third Crusade. Thomas Becket, in exile, chose Vézelay for his Whitsunday sermon in 1166, announcing the excommunication of the main supporters of his English King, Henry II, and threatening the King with excommunication too. The nave, which had been burnt once, with great loss of life, burned again in 1165, after which it was rebuilt in its present form.

The abbey's self-assured monastic community was prepared to defend its liberties and privileges against all comers: the bishops of Autun, who challenged its claims to exemption; the counts of Nevers, who claimed jurisdiction in their court and rights of hospitality at Vézelay; the abbey of Cluny, which had reformed its rule and sought to maintain control of the abbot within its hierarchy; the townsmen of Vézelay, who demanded a modicum of communal self-government.

The beginning of Vézelay's decline coincided with the well-publicized discovery in 1279 of the body of Mary Magdalene at Saint-Maximin-la-Sainte-Baume in Provence, given regal patronage by Charles II, the Angevin king of Sicily. When Charles erected a Dominican convent at La Sainte-Baume, the shrine was found intact, with an explanatory inscription stating why the relics had been hidden. The local Dominican friars compiled an account of miracles that these relics had wrought. This discovery undermined Vézelay's position as the principal shrine of the Magdalene in Europe.

After the Revolution, Vézelay stood in danger of collapse. In 1834 the newly appointed French inspector of historical monuments, Prosper Mérimée (more familiar as the author of the novella Carmen), warned that it was about to collapse, and on his recommendation the young architect Eugène Viollet-le-Duc was appointed to supervise a massive and successful restoration, undertaken in several stages between 1840 and 1861, during which his team replaced a great deal of the weathered and vandalized sculpture. The flying buttresses that support the nave are his.

The tympanum of the central portal of the Madeleine de Vézelay is different from its counterparts across Europe. From the beginning, its tympanum was specifically designed to function as a spiritual defense of the Crusades and to portray a Christian allegory to the Crusaders' mission. When compared to contemporary churches such as St. Lazare d'Autun and St. Pierre de Moissac, the distinctiveness of Vézelay becomes apparent.

The art historian George Zarnecki wrote, "To most people the term Romanesque sculpture brings to mind a large church portal, dominated by a tympanum carved with an apocalyptic vision, usually the Last Judgment." This is true in most cases, but Vézelay is an exception. In a 1944 article, Adolf Katzenellenbogen interpreted Vézelay's tympanum as referring to the First Crusade and depicting the Pentecostal mission of the Apostles.

Thirty years before the Vézelay tympanum was carved, Pope Urban II planned on announcing his call for a crusade at La Madeleine. In 1095, Urban altered his plans and preached for the First Crusade at the Council of Clermont, but Vézelay remained a central figure in the history of the crusades. The tympanum was completed in 1130. Fifteen years after its completion, Bernard of Clairvaux chose Vézelay as the place from which he would call for a Second Crusade. Vézelay was even the staging point for the Third Crusade. It is there that King Richard the Lionheart of England and King Philip Augustus of France met and joined their armies for a combined western invasion of the holy land. It is appropriate, therefore, that Vézelay's portal reflect its place in the history of the crusades.

The art historian Peter Low argues for the central tympanum as a visualization of both the Pentecost and a passage from book of Ephesians chapter 2—proclaiming to the visiting laity the tenets of Benedictine monasticism and to visiting pilgrims the extent and reach of a universalizing church that welcomes "the full, even monstrous range of the globe's inhabitants."

The lintel of the Vézelay portal portrays the "ungodly" people of the world. It is a depiction of the first Pentecostal Mission to spread the word of God to all the people of the world. The figures in the tympanum who have not received the Word of God are depicted as not fully human. Some are shown with pig snouts, others are misshapen, and several are depicted as dwarves. One pygmy in particular is depicted as mounting a horse with the assistance of a ladder. On the far right, there is a man with elephantine ears, while in the center we see a man covered in feathers. The architects and artisans depicted the unbelievers as physically grotesque in order to provide a visual image of what they saw as the non-believers' moral turpitude. This is a direct reflection of Western perceptions of foreigners such as the Moors, who were being specifically targeted by the Crusaders. Even Pope Urban II, in his call for a crusade, helped promote this ethnocentric perception of the Turks by calling on westerners to, "exterminate this vile race." Most Westerners had absolutely no idea what the Turks and Muslims looked like, and they assumed that an absence of Christianity must coincide with repulsive physical attributes. It has also been argued that the disbelievers were carved as deformed monsters in an effort to dehumanize them. By dehumanizing their enemies in art, the Crusaders' mission to capture the holy land and convert or kill the Muslims was glorified and sanctified. The Vézelay lintel is, therefore, a political statement as well as a religious one.

Vézelay's political motivation becomes all the more apparent when compared with contemporary portal designs from other churches around France. The Vézelay lintel is distinct, but some comparisons can be made between it and other Romanesque portal sculptures of the time. Vézelay's lintel is comparable to the St. Lazare lintel in Autun in that both show humans who have sinned. While the Vézelay lintel is devoted to the depiction of "heathens," the Autun lintel shows the damned souls on Judgment Day. The similarity between both lintels is due in large part to the fact that the same master artisan, Master Gislebertus, was the primary architect on both sites. "Gislebertus... began his career at Cluny, then worked on the original west facade at Vézelay, and c. 1120 moved to Autun." In addition, the two tympana are similar in that they follow the tradition of placing the exaggerated Christ in the center of the image. Here is where the similarity stops, however. Autun is more traditional and typical of the Romanesque portal carvings. It depicts the Second Coming, which is a popular and typical depiction in Romanesque art. Frightful images of demons abound. The goals of the two different tympana are reflected in their design; Autun is designed to frighten people back to church while Vézelay is designed as a political statement to support the crusades.

The lower four compartments of the Vézelay tympanum show the nations that had already received the Gospels. They include the Byzantines, Armenians, and Ethiopians. The inclusion of the Byzantines is particularly important because it was the Byzantines who initially requested a Crusade to the holy land. The Byzantines had lost Jerusalem to the Seljuk Turks through warfare, and they were eager to seek western military support to reclaim that territory.

The characters in the lower Vézelay compartments are regal and well proportioned. They are a direct contrast to their "heathen" counterparts in the lintel. They are human as opposed to monstrous. In the eyes of the designers, they had received God's grace and are thus pictured as fully human in every detail. These compartments can, therefore, can be seen as an allegory for the crusading nations. The Crusader armies were made up of many different nationalities bound only by faith in the same God. Nations that had previously warred with one another were suddenly united for a common goal. The lower tympanum compartments are an expression of this newfound solidarity.

While the lower four compartments represent the Christian nations, the upper four compartments are a representation of the second mission of the Apostles. According to the Bible, "many wonders and signs were done by the apostles." These wonders included the healing of the sick and the casting out of demons and devils. These acts are represented in the upper four compartments of the Vézelay tympanum. In one compartment, a pair of lepers is shown with looks of astonishment as they compare limbs that have been miraculously healed. The demons are analogous to the non-Christians inhabiting the holy land. In reference to the Turkish take-over of the holy lands, Pope Urban said, "What a disgrace that a race so despicable, degenerate, and enslaved by demons should thus overcome a people endowed with faith in Almighty God!" It is not difficult to see the parallel between the Apostles' mission of casting out demons, and the designer's view of the crusaders' mission of casting out "a race... enslaved by demons." It is further evidence of the Vézelay portal's peculiar political motives.

The central portion of the Vézelay tympanum continues this process of politicizing religion. The central tympanum shows a benevolent Christ conveying his message to the Apostles, who flank him on either side. This Christ is distinct in Romanesque architecture. He is a stark contrast to the angry Christ of the St. Pierre de Moissac tympanum. The Moissac Christ is a forbidding figure that sits upon the throne of judgment. It is another example of the typical Romanesque Christ. His face is without caring or emotion. He holds the scrolls containing the deeds of mankind, and he stands ready to execute punishment on the damned. The Vézelay Christ, however, is pictured contraposto with arms wide. He is delivering a message, not exacting punishment. The Vézelay tympanum is remarkable because it is so different. The Vézelay Christ is sending the Crusaders out – he is not judging them. Indeed, the Crusaders were guaranteed remission of all sins if they participated in the Crusades. A forbidding Christ placed upon the throne of judgment would have been out of place at Vézelay. That is why the traditional Romanesque Christ, with its angry stare, was replaced at Vézelay by a kind and welcoming Christ with arms wide open.

In 1976, Hugues Delautre, one of the Franciscan fathers charged with stewardship of the Vézelay sanctuary, discovered that beyond the customary east-west orientation of the structure, the architecture of La Madeleine incorporates the relative positions of the Earth and the Sun into its design. Every June, just before the feast day of Saint John the Baptist, the astronomical dimensions of the church are revealed as the sun reaches its highest point of the year, at local noon on the summer solstice, when the sunlight coming through the southern clerestory windows casts a series of illuminated spots precisely along the longitudinal center of the nave floor.

A waffle is a dish made from usually leavened batter or dough that is cooked between two plates that are patterned to give a characteristic size, shape, and surface impression. There are many variations based on the type of waffle iron and recipe used. Waffles are eaten throughout the world, particularly in Belgium, which has over a dozen regional varieties. Waffles may be made fresh or simply heated after having been commercially baked and packaged fresh or frozen.

The word waffle first appears in the English language in 1725: "Waffles. Take flower, cream...." It is directly derived from the Dutch wafel, which itself derives from the Middle Dutch wafele.

While the Middle Dutch wafele is first attested to at the end of the 13th century, it is preceded by the French walfre in 1185. Both are from the Frankish word wafla ("honeycomb" or "cake").

Other spellings throughout modern and medieval Europe include waffe, wafre, wafer, wâfel, waufre, iauffe, gaufre, goffre, gauffre, wafe, waffel, wåfe, wāfel, wafe, vaffel, and våffla.

In ancient times, the Greeks cooked flat cakes, called obelios, between hot metal plates. As they spread throughout medieval Europe, the cakes—made from a mixture of flour, water or milk, and often eggs—became known as wafers and were also cooked over an open fire between iron plates with long handles.

Waffles are preceded, in the early Middle Ages, around the period of the 9th–10th centuries, with the simultaneous emergence of fer à hosties / hostieijzers (communion wafer irons) and moule à oublies (wafer irons). While the communion wafer irons typically depicted imagery of Jesus and his crucifixion, the moule à oublies featured more trivial Biblical scenes or simple, emblematic designs. The format of the iron itself was almost always round and considerably larger than those used for communion.

The oublie was, in its basic form, composed only of grain flour and water—just as the communion wafer was. It took until the 11th century, when the Crusades brought new culinary ingredients to Western Europe, for flavorings such as orange blossom water to be added to oublies; however, locally sourced honey and other flavorings may have already been in use before that time.

Oublies (which formally received this name c. 1200) spread throughout northwestern continental Europe. Their spread eventually led to the formation of the oublieurs guild in 1270. Oublieurs/obloyers were responsible for producing not only oublies but also a number of other contemporaneous and subsequent pâtisseries légères (light pastries), including the waffles that were soon to arise.

In the late 14th century, the first known waffle recipe was penned in an anonymous manuscript, Le Ménagier de Paris, written by a husband as a set of instructions to his young wife. While it technically contains four recipes, all are a variation of the first: Beat some eggs in a bowl, season with salt and add wine. Toss in some flour, and mix. Then fill, little by little, two irons at a time with as much of the paste as a slice of cheese is large. Then close the iron and cook both sides. If the dough does not detach easily from the iron, coat it first with a piece of cloth that has been soaked in oil or grease. The other three variations explain how cheese is to be placed between two layers of batter, grated and mixed into the batter, or left out, along with the eggs. However, this was a waffle / gaufre in name only, as the recipe contained no leavening.

Though some have speculated that waffle irons first appeared in the 13th–14th centuries, it was not until the 15th century that a true physical distinction between the oublie and the waffle began to evolve. Notably, while a recipe like the fourth in Le Ménagier de Paris was only flour, salt, and wine—indistinguishable from common oublie recipes of the time—what emerged was a new shape to many of the irons being produced. Not only were the newly fashioned ones rectangular, taking the form of the fer à hosties, but some circular oublie irons were cut down to create rectangles. It was also in this period that the waffle's classic grid motif appeared clearly in a French fer à oublie and a Belgian wafelijzer —albeit in a more shallowly engraved fashion—setting the stage for the more deeply gridded irons that were about to become commonplace throughout Belgium.

By the 16th century, paintings by Joachim de Beuckelaer, Pieter Aertsen and Pieter Bruegel clearly depict the modern waffle form. Bruegel's work, in particular, not only shows waffles being cooked, but fine detail of individual waffles. In those instances, the waffle pattern can be counted as a large 12x7 grid, with cleanly squared sides, suggesting the use of a fairly thin batter, akin to contemporary Brussels waffles (Brusselse wafels).

The earliest of the 16th century waffle recipes, Om ghode waffellen te backen —from the Dutch KANTL 15 manuscript (c. 1500–1560)—is only the second-known waffle recipe after the four variants described in Le Ménagier de Paris. For the first time, partial measurements were given, sugar was used, and spices were added directly to the batter: Take grated white bread. Take with that the yolk of an egg and a spoonful of pot sugar or powdered sugar. Take with that half water and half wine, and ginger and cinnamon.

Alternately attributed to the 16th and 17th centuries, Groote Wafelen from the Belgian Een Antwerps kookboek was published as the first recipe to use leavening (beer yeast): Take white flour, warm cream, fresh melted butter, yeast, and mix together until the flour is no longer visible. Then add ten or twelve egg yolks. Those who do not want them to be too expensive may also add the egg white and just milk. Put the resulting dough at the fireplace for four hours to let it rise better before baking it. Until this time, no recipes contained leavening, and dough could therefore be easily cooked in the thin moule à oublies. Groote Wafelen, in its use of leavening, was the genesis of contemporary waffles and validates the use of deeper irons (wafelijzers) depicted in the Beuckelaer and Bruegel paintings of the time.

By the mid-16th century, there were signs of waffles' mounting French popularity. François I, king from 1494 to 1547, who, it was said, les aimait beacoup (loved them a lot), had a set of waffle irons cast in pure silver. His successor, Charles IX enacted the first waffle legislation in 1560 in response to a series of quarrels and fights that had been breaking out between oublieurs. As a result of the legislation, oublieurs were required " d'être au moins à la distance de deux toises l'un de l'autre. " (to be no less than four yards from one to the other).

By the 17th century, unsweetened or honey-sweetened waffles and oublies—often made of non-wheat grains—were the type generally accessible to the average citizen. The wheat-based and particularly the sugar-sweetened varieties, while present throughout Europe, were prohibitively expensive for all but the monarchy and bourgeoisie. Even for the Dutch, who controlled much of the mid-century sugar trade, a kilogram of sugar was worth half an ounce of silver (the equivalent of ~$7 for a 5 lb. bag, 01/2016 spot silver prices), while, elsewhere in Europe, it fetched twice the price of opium. Wealthier families' waffles, often known as mestiers, were " smaller, thinner and above all more delicate, being composed of egg yolks, sugar, and the finest of the finest flour, mixed in white wine " and were served " like dessert pastry. "

By the dawn of the 18th century, expansion of Caribbean plantations had cut sugar prices in half. Waffle recipes abounded and became decadent in their use of sugar and other rare ingredients. For instance, Menon 's gaufre from Nouveau Traité de la Cuisine included a livre of sugar for a demi-livre of flour.

Germany became a leader in the development and publication of waffle recipes during the 18th century, introducing coffee waffles, the specific use of Hefeweizen beer yeast, cardamom, nutmeg, and a number of Zuickerwaffeln (sugar waffles). At the same time, the French introduced whipped egg whites to waffles, along with lemon zests, Spanish wine, and cloves. Joseph Gillier even published the first chocolate waffle recipe, featuring three ounces of chocolate grated and mixed into the batter, before cooking.

A number of 18th-century waffle recipes took on names to designate their country or region/city of origin— Schwedische Waffeln, Gauffres à l'Allemande and, most famous of all the 18th century varieties, Gauffres à la Flamande, which were first recorded in 1740. These Gauffres à la Flamande (Flemish waffles / Gaufres de Lille) were the first French recipe to use beer yeast, but unlike the Dutch and German yeasted recipes that preceded them, use only egg whites and over a pound of butter in each batch. They are also the oldest named recipe that survives in popular use to the present day, produced regionally and commercially by Meert.

The 18th century is also when the word waffle first appeared in the English language, in a 1725 printing of Court Cookery by Robert Smith. Recipes had begun to spread throughout England and America, though essentially all were patterned after established Dutch, Belgian, German, and French versions. Waffle parties, known as "wafel frolics", were documented as early as 1744 in New Jersey, and the Dutch had earlier established waffles in New Amsterdam (New York City).

Liège waffles, the most popular contemporary Belgian waffle variety, are supposed to have been invented during the 18th century as well, by the chef to the prince-bishop of Liège. However, there are no German, French, Dutch, or Belgian cookbooks that contain references to them in this period by any name, nor are there any waffle recipes that mention the Liège waffle's distinctive ingredients, brioche-based dough and pearl sugar. It is not until 1814 that Antoine Beauvilliers publishes a recipe in l'Art du Cuisiner where brioche dough is introduced as the base of the waffle and sucre cassé (crushed block sugar) is used as a garnish for the waffles, though not worked into the dough. Antonin Carême, the famous Parisian pastry chef, is the first to incorporate gros sucre into several waffle variations named in his 1822 work, Le Maitre d'Hotel Français. Then, in 1834, Leblanc publishes a complete recipe for gaufres grêlées (hail waffles), where gros sucre is mixed in. A full Gaufre de Liège recipe does not appear until 1921.

Waffles remained widely popular in Europe for the first half of the 19th century, despite the 1806 British Atlantic naval blockade that greatly inflated the price of sugar. This coincided with the commercial production of beet sugar in continental Europe, which, in a matter of decades, had brought the price down to historical lows. Within the transitional period from cane to beet sugar, Florian Dacher formalized a recipe for the Brussels Waffle, the predecessor to American "Belgian" waffles, recording the recipe in 1842/43. Stroopwafels (Dutch syrup wafels), too, rose to prominence in the Netherlands by the middle of the century. However, by the second half of the 1800s, inexpensive beet sugar became widely available, and a wide range of pastries, candies and chocolates were now accessible to the middle class, as never before; waffles' popularity declined rapidly.

By the early 20th century, waffle recipes became rare in recipe books, and only 29 professional waffle craftsmen, the oublieurs, remained in Paris. Waffles were shifting from a predominantly street-vendor-based product to an increasingly homemade product, aided by the 1918 introduction of the US company General Electric 's first electric commercial waffle maker. By the mid-1930s, dry pancake/waffle mix had been marketed by a number of companies, including Aunt Jemima, Bisquick, and a team of three brothers, the Dorsas from San Jose, California, United States. It is the Dorsas who would go on to innovate commercial production of frozen waffles, which they began selling under the name " Eggo " in 1953. Manufacturers are now testing the production of waffles with potato starch, which increase the stability of the waffle and protect them from sticking to the iron. Belgian-style waffles were showcased at Expo 58 in Brussels. Another Belgian introduced Belgian-style waffles to the United States at the 1962 Seattle World's Fair, but only really took hold at the 1964 New York World's Fair, when another Belgian entrepreneur introduced his "Bel-Gem" waffles. In practice, contemporary American "Belgian waffles" are actually a hybrid of pre-existing American waffle types and ingredients and some attributes of the Belgian model.

Even as most of the original recipes have faded from use, a number of the 18th- and 19th-century varieties can still be easily found throughout Northern Europe, where they were first developed.

Brussels waffles are prepared with an egg-white-leavened or yeast-leavened batter, traditionally an ale yeast; occasionally both types of leavening are used together. They are lighter, crisper and have larger pockets compared to other European waffle varieties, and are easy to differentiate from Liège waffles by their rectangular sides. In Belgium, most waffles are served warm by street vendors and dusted with confectioner's sugar, though in tourist areas they might be topped with whipped cream, soft fruit or chocolate spread.

Variants of the Brussels waffles – with whipped and folded egg whites cooked in large rectangular forms – date from the 18th century. However, the oldest recognized reference to "Gaufres de Bruxelles" (Brussels Waffles) by name is attributed from 1842/43 to Florian Dacher, a Swiss baker in Ghent, Belgium, who had previously worked under pastry chefs in central Brussels. Philippe Édouard Cauderlier [ fr ] would later publish Dacher's recipe in the 1874 edition of his recipe book "La Pâtisserie et la Confiture". Maximilien Consael [ nl ], another Ghent chef, had claimed to have invented the waffles in 1839, though there's no written record of him either naming or selling the waffles until his participation in the 1856 Brussels Fair. Neither man created the recipe; they simply popularized and formalized an existing recipe as the Brussels waffle.

The Liège waffle is a richer, denser, sweeter, and chewier waffle. Native to the greater Wallonia region of Eastern Belgium – and alternately known as gaufres de chasse (hunting waffles) – they are an adaptation of brioche bread dough, featuring chunks of pearl sugar which caramelize on the outside of the waffle when baked. It is the most common type of waffle available in Belgium and prepared in plain, vanilla and cinnamon varieties by street vendors across the nation.

Flemish waffles, or Gaufres à la Flamande, are a specialty of northern France and portions of western Belgium. The original recipe, published in 1740 by Louis-Auguste de Bourbon in Le Cuisinier Gascon, is as follows: Take "deux litrons" (1.7 liters or 7 cups) of flour and mix it in a bowl with salt and one ounce of brewer's yeast barm. Moisten it completely with warm milk. Then whisk fifteen egg whites and add that to the mixture, stirring continuously. Incorporate "un livre" (490 grams or 1.1 pounds) of fresh butter, and let the batter rise. Once the batter has risen, take your heated iron, made expressly for these waffles, and wrap some butter in a cloth and rub both sides of the iron with it. When the iron is completely heated, make your waffles, but do so gently for fear of burning them. Cooked, take them out, put them on a platter, and serve them with both sugar and orange blossom water on top.

American waffles vary significantly. Generally denser and thinner than the Belgian waffle, they are often made from a batter leavened with baking powder, which is sometimes mixed with pecans, chocolate chips or berries and may be round, square, or rectangular in shape. Like American pancakes they are usually served as a sweet breakfast food, topped with butter and maple syrup, bacon, and other fruit syrups, honey, or powdered sugar. They are also found in many different savory dishes, such as fried chicken and waffles or topped with kidney stew. They may also be served as desserts, topped with ice cream and various other toppings. A large chain (over 1,900 locations) of waffle specialty diners, Waffle House, is ubiquitous in the southern United States.

Belgian waffles are based on a simplified version of the Brussels waffle. Recipes are typically baking soda leavened, though some are yeast-raised. They are distinguished from standard American waffles by their use of 1 ½" depth irons. Belgian waffles take their name from the Bel-Gem brand, which was promoted by waffle vendor Maurice Vermersch, who came from Brussels, Belgium. The thicker style was also popularized at the 1964 New York World's Fair.

Bergische waffles, or Waffles from Berg county, are a specialty of the German region of Bergisches Land. The waffles are crisp and less dense than Belgian waffles, always heart shaped, and served with cherries, cream and optionally rice pudding as part of the traditional afternoon feast on Sundays in the region.

Hong Kong style waffle, in Hong Kong called a "grid cake" or "grid biscuits" (格仔餅), is a waffle usually made and sold by street hawkers and eaten warm on the street. It is similar to a traditional waffle but larger, round in shape and divided into four quarters. It is usually served as a snack. Butter, peanut butter and sugar are spread on one side of the cooked waffle, and then it is folded into a semicircle to eat. Eggs, sugar and evaporated milk are used in the waffle recipes, giving them a sweet flavor. They are generally soft and not dense. Traditional Hong Kong style waffles are full of the flavor of yolk. Sometimes different flavors, such as chocolate and honey melon, are used in the recipe and create various colors. Another style of Hong Kong waffle is the eggette or gai daan jai (鷄蛋仔), which have a ball-shaped pattern.

Pandan waffles originate from Vietnam and are characterized by the use of pandan flavoring and coconut milk in the batter. The pandan flavoring results in the batter's distinctive spring green color. When cooked, the waffle browns and crisps on the outside and stays green and chewy on the inside. Unlike most waffles, pandan waffles are typically eaten plain. In Vietnam they are relatively cheap and so are popular among children. They are a popular street food made in either cast iron molds heated with charcoal or in electric waffle irons.

Croffle (a compound word of croissant and waffle) bakes croissant dough in a waffle pan and eaten with ice cream or maple syrup. It is a popular dessert in Korea. On the Internet, jokes about "the greatest invention of the COVID-19 Age" spread. There are various types of croffles that utilize various toppings such as basil, corn, cheese and so on. It is also popular with people because it is easy to make and eat at home. The beginning of Croffle is the cafe "Le Petit Parisian" in Dublin, Ireland. According to the Irish newspaper Dublin Gadget (reported on July 20, 2017), Louise Lenox, a baker at the café in Camden Street, Dublin, first created a menu item called Croffle.

Kue gapit is an Indonesian kue kering (dry snack) which originates from West Java. Generally made from tapioca flour, its name comes from the cooking process, in which it is grilled between iron molds like a waffle. The snack comes in a variety of shapes and flavors.

Scandinavian style waffles, common throughout the Nordic countries, are thin and made in a round waffle iron. The batter is similar to other varieties, but does not contain sugar. The most common style are heart-shaped slices with a sweet topping such as cream or jam.

Gofri (singular gofre) are waffles in Italy and can be found in the Piedmontese cuisine: they are light and crispy in texture, contain no egg or milk (according to the most ancient recipe) and come both in sweet and savory versions. Central Italian cuisine also features waffle-like cookies, which are locally known as pizzelle, ferratelle (in Abruzzo) or cancelle (in Molise).

Stroopwafels are thin waffles with a syrup filling, which originated from the Dutch city of Gouda. The stiff batter for the waffles is made from flour, butter, brown sugar, yeast, milk, and eggs. Medium-sized balls of batter are put on the waffle iron. When the waffle is baked and while it is still warm, it is cut into two halves. The warm filling made from syrup is spread in between the waffle halves, which glues them together. They are popular in the Netherlands and Belgium and sold in pre-prepared packages in shops and markets.

Galettes campinoises /Kempense galetten are a type of waffle popular in Belgium. They are rigid and crunchy, but are buttery, crumbly and soft in the mouth.

Hotdog waffles (or waffle dogs) are cylindrical waffles with a hot dog cooked inside them, similar to a corn dog. It is made with specialized waffle irons with cylindrical hotdog-bun shaped molds.

They originate from Hawaii where it was first served at the KC Drive Inn in 1934, owned by the Japanese American Jiro Asato (who later legally changed his name to KC Jiro Asato). The original version has a distinctive shape, with an oblong middle section (containing the hotdog) surrounded by flattened square edges. It is served plain or with a combination of ketchup, mustard, and pickle relish. Its popularity spread to the continental United States, the Philippines (then an American colony), and throughout the rest of the Pacific Islands. Waffle dogs remain an iconic part of Hawaiian culture, though it has waned in popularity in the rest of the US.

It has also remained popular as a street food item in the Philippines, where variants can use other savory fillings like ham, bacon, longganisa, tuna, or cheese; as well as sweet fillings like ube, chocolate, or yema custard. The Filipino versions are also more uniformly cylindrical, with a grid pattern, and are usually served on bamboo skewers. The Filipino fast food chain Waffle Time, founded in 1998, specializes in hotdog waffles as well as other savory and sweet fillings.

In modern times, it has also gained popularity in Thailand and the rest of Southeast Asia, where it is served with ketchup, mayonnaise, or both.

A chaffle is a waffle made out of eggs and cheese as a replacement for buns in low-carb diets.

The wall of the Fermiers généraux (French : mur des Fermiers généraux, pronounced [ myʁ de fɛʁmje ʒeneʁo ]) was one of the several city walls of Paris built between the early Middle Ages and the mid 19th century. The purpose of the wall of the Fermiers généraux was to facilitate collection of municipal taxes on merchandise entering Paris.

Built between 1784 and 1791, the 24 km (15 mi) wall crossed the districts of the Place de l'Étoile, Batignolles, Pigalle, Belleville, Nation, the Place d'Italie, Denfert-Rochereau, Montparnasse and the Trocadéro, roughly following the route now traced by line 2 and line 6 of the Paris Métro. The wall was demolished in the early 1860s, although elements of some of its barrières or custom houses remain.

Unlike earlier walls, the Fermiers généraux wall was not intended to defend Paris from invaders but to enforce the payment of a toll on goods entering Paris (" octroi "). In France’s ancien régime, the Ferme générale (General Farm) was essentially an outsourced customs, excise and indirect tax operation. It collected duties on behalf of the King (plus hefty bonus fees for the collectors), under renewable six-year contracts. The major tax collectors in this highly unpopular tax farming system were known as the fermiers généraux (singular fermier général), which would be tax farmers-general in English.

The wall was commissioned by the nobleman and scientist Antoine Lavoisier. In addition to being a famous chemist, Lavoisier was an extremely rich shareholder and Administrator of the Ferme générale. He determined that the cost of building, staffing, and maintaining the wall would be compensated by better revenue collection. Indeed, tax evasion and smuggling posed major problems for the Ferme générale.

Architect Claude Nicolas Ledoux designed the wall. He had the support of Charles Alexandre de Calonne, Louis XVI's Controller-General of Finances. Both Ledoux and Calonne harbored the ambition of leaving a lasting mark on the city of Paris. Accordingly, Ledoux spared no expense in building the wall's 55 gates (barrières). These included 43 luxurious customs houses built in a neo-classical style that Ledoux baptized ‘ les Propylées de Paris’ (from the Greek propylaeum, a monumental gateway to a sacred enclosure).

Construction began on the left bank in 1784 and on the right bank in 1787. Cost overruns were enormous. Given the economic context, these overruns were particularly problematic because France was experiencing a severe financial and political crisis. A commission was formed in 1787 to provide an external audit of the project. Its findings were alarming – the Commission found, for example, that, while the estimated cost of the two customs houses at the place de l'Etoile was 96,000 pounds, the true total cost of construction was 500,000 pounds. Likewise, the cost of the two custom houses at what is now place d'Italie was originally estimated to be 110,000 pounds, but the final cost was more than 400,000 pounds. In 1787, the Finance Minister, Loménie de Brienne, was concerned about the high cost of the wall and considered stopping the work, but never did so. However, Ledoux was dismissed by Jacques Necker in May 1789, just prior to the start of the French Revolution.

The wall was severely criticized as it was being built. The Parisian writer (and tax critic) Louis-Sébastien Mercier, who witnessed the construction, dubbed the buildings "dens of the Tax Department metamorphosed into palaces with columns." The wall's tax-collection function also made it unpopular with the general public: for example, Beaumarchais ’ play on words of the time went Le mur murant Paris rend Paris murmurant ("The wall walling Paris keeps Paris murmuring"). Beaumarchais also penned the following epigram:

Pour augmenter son numéraire (To increase its cash)

Et raccourcir notre horizon (And to shorten our horizon), La Ferme a jugé nécessaire (The Ferme judges it necessary)

De mettre Paris en prison (To put Paris in prison).

During the outbreak of the French Revolution in July 1789, the wall was attacked and the interiors burned at the barrières de Blanche, Trois Frères and Saint-Georges. In the early years of the Revolution, with the Wall scarcely finished, tax farming and the toll on goods were abolished. Ledoux was imprisoned by Revolutionary authorities as punishment for building the wall but was ultimately released.

In 1798 French municipalities were again granted the octroi, which soon became their primary source of revenue. The city of Paris consequently assumed responsibility for maintaining the Wall and staffing its revenue officials. When in 1860 the suburban communes were annexed to Paris, the customs boundary moved out to the Thiers fortifications, with duties collected at its numerous gates (portes).

The wall, having become obsolete from a fiscal point of view, was demolished in less than a month in January 1860. The pavilions were sold at auction in January 1861. No public outcry arose in favor of their preservation. The Italian Gate, initially used by the municipality of the 13th arrondissement, was demolished in 1877. Under Haussmann's program of renovation of Paris, a series of boulevards was built over the wall’s path.

Only four customs houses have survived to this day. They are: the barrière de Chartres near the Parc Monceau, the barrière Saint-Martin at place de Stalingrad, the barrière du Trone at the place de la Nation and the barrière d'Enfer at the place Denfert-Rochereau.

Municipal customs duties were collected until the 1940s.

The Wall was slightly more than 3 metres (9 ft 10 in) high and 24 km (15 mi) long, following the then-boundaries of the city of Paris. No buildings could be erected within 98 metres (322 ft) of its exterior or within 11 metres (36 ft) of its interior. The outside of the wall was flanked by boulevards. Along the inside, surveillance by customs officials was facilitated by a raised protected walkway (chemin de ronde), except between the barrière d'Italie (now the Place d'Italie) and the barrière d’Enfer (now the Place Denfert-Rochereau).

When the entire wall was functioning in 1790, it included 55 barrières or custom houses. These facilities were spaced at an average distance of a little more than 400 metres (1,300 ft). The buildings were designed as places for collecting taxes but also as lodging for the employees of the Ferme. Of the 55 barrières, 13 consisted of two identical and symmetric buildings (examples of this design can be seen today at the two extant barriers at place de la Nation and place Denfert-Rochereau). Some of the barriers did not have tax collection offices – they functioned only as observation posts from which suspicious activities could be reported or acted on.

Some portions of the wall still exist, such as the rotunda of the Barrier of La Villette (at Place de Stalingrad), the Barrière du Trône (at Place de la Nation), the Barrière d'Enfer (at Place Denfert-Rochereau), and the rotunda of Parc Monceau. The wall itself was replaced by the route of the following streets:

Walloon (/ w ɒ ˈ l uː n / ; natively walon ; French : wallon, Belgian French pronunciation: [ walõ ]) is a Romance language that is spoken in much of Wallonia and, to a very small extent, in Brussels, Belgium; some villages near Givet, northern France; and a clutch of communities in northeastern Wisconsin, United States.

It belongs to the langues d'oïl dialect continuum, the most prominent member of which is French. The historical background of its formation was the territorial extension since 980 of the Principality of Liège to the south and west. Walloon is classified as "definitely endangered" by the UNESCO Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger.

Despite its rich literature, beginning anonymously in the 16th century and with well-known authors since 1756, the use of Walloon has decreased markedly since France's annexation of Wallonia in 1794. This period definitively established French as the language of social promotion, far more than it was before. After World War I, public schools provided French-speaking education to all children, inducing a denigration of Walloon, especially when accompanied by official orders in 1952 to punish its use in schools. Subsequently, since the middle of the 20th century, generational transmission of the language has decreased, resulting in Walloon almost becoming a dead language. Today it is scarcely spoken among younger people, with the vast majority of its native speakers being the elderly (aged 65 and over). In 2007, the number of people with knowledge of the language was estimated at 600,000.

Numerous associations, especially theatre companies, are working to keep the language alive. Formally recognized as a langue régionale endogène (regional indigenous language) of Belgium since 1990, Walloon has also benefited from a continued corpus planning process. The "Feller system" (1900) regularized transcription of the different accents. Since the 1990s, a common orthography was established (the Rifondou walon [ wa ; fr ]), which allowed large-scale publications, such as the Walloon Wikipedia officially in 2003. In 2004, a Walloon translation of a Tintin comic was released under the name L'èmerôde d'al Castafiore ; in 2007 an album consisting of Gaston Lagaffe comic strips was published in Walloon.

Walloon is more distinct as a language than Belgian French, which differs from the French spoken in France only in some minor points of vocabulary and pronunciation.

Linguists had long classified Walloon as a dialect of French, which in turn is a langue d'oïl. Like French, it descended from Vulgar Latin. Arguing that a French-speaking person could not understand Walloon easily, especially in its eastern forms, Jules Feller (1859–1940) insisted that Walloon had an original "superior unity", which made it a language.

The phonological divisions of regional languages of southern Belgium were studied by the contemporary linguist E.B. Atwood. He defined the precise geographical repartition of the four chief dialects of Walloon. In addition, he defined them against the dialects of Picard, Lorrain and Champenois.

Since then, most linguists (among them Louis Remacle), and gradually also Walloon politicians, regard Walloon as a regional language, the first in importance in Wallonia. It is the only one to have originated from that part of Belgium. The eleventh edition of the Encyclopædia Britannica identified Walloon as the "northernmost Romance language".

Walloon is spoken in the Wallonia Region in Belgium. In addition, it is spoken in:

Although Walloon was widely spoken until the mid-20th century, today only a small proportion of the inhabitants of the region are fluent in the language. Those born since the 1970s usually know little more than a few idiomatic expressions, often profanities. The Walloon language is still part of the Walloon heritage; it is one component of Walloon identity.

Four dialects of Walloon developed in four distinct zones of Wallonia:

Despite local phonetic differences, there is a regional movement towards the adoption of a common spelling, called the Rifondou walon. This orthography is diasystemic, reflecting different pronunciations for different readers, a concept inspired by the spelling of Breton. The written forms attempt to reconcile current phonetic uses with ancient traditions (notably the reintroduction of xh and oi that were used for writing Walloon until the late 19th century) and the language's own phonological logic.

Other regional languages spoken in Wallonia, outside the Walloon domain, are:

The Picard, Lorrain and Champenois dialects spoken in Wallonia are sometimes also referred to as "Walloon", which may lead to confusion.

Vowels heavily change based on dialects.

Unified Walloon provides a unified way to pronounce the vowels, although some sounds still vary based on dialect. All consonant variations were explained in the above section. Here is the Unified vowel chart:

The short high vowels are often pronounced /ɪ ʊ/.

The following is a table of phonemes varying based on dialects:

If there is a Rifondou grapheme for the sound, the source is. Otherwise, it is precised. These last two sounds are written as ⟨i⟩ and ⟨ou⟩ in Rifondou, as in r i fond ou. /kw~k/ is normalised as kw.

The Walloon alphabet generally consists of the basic ISO Latin Alphabet, and six types of diacritic. It also makes frequent use of digraphs. Various orthographies have been used, most notably the Feller system (sistinme Feller) and Unified Walloon (rifondou walon or rfondou walon).

Walloon is distinguished from other languages in the langue d'oïl family both by archaism coming from Latin and by its significant borrowing from Germanic languages, as expressed in its phonetics, its lexicon, and its grammar. At the same time, Walloon phonetics are singularly conservative: the language has stayed fairly close to the form it took during the High Middle Ages.

From a linguistic point of view, Louis Remacle has shown that a good number of the developments that we now consider typical of Walloon appeared between the 8th and 12th centuries. Walloon "had a clearly defined identity from the beginning of the 13th century". In any case, linguistic texts from the time do not mention the language, although they mention others in the langue d'oïl family, such as Picard and Lorrain. During the 15th century, scribes in the region called the language "Roman" when they needed to distinguish it. It is not until the beginning of the 16th century that first occurrence of the word "Walloon" appeared in the current linguistic sense. In 1510 or 1511, Jean Lemaire de Belges made the connection between Rommand to Vualon :

Et ceux cy [les habitants de Nivelles] parlent le vieil langage Gallique que nous appellons Vualon ou Rommand (...). Et de ladite ancienne langue Vualonne, ou Rommande, nous usons en nostre Gaule Belgique: Cestadire en Haynau, Cambresis, Artois, Namur, Liège, Lorraine, Ardenne et le Rommanbrabant, et est beaucoup differente du François, lequel est plus moderne, et plus gaillart.

And those people [the inhabitants of Nivelles] speak the old Gallic language which we call Vualon or Rommand (...). And we use the said old Vualon or Rommand language in our Belgian Gaul: That is to say in Hainaut, Cambrai, Artois, Namur, Liège, Lorraine, Ardennes and Rommand Brabant, and it is very different from French, which is more fashionable and courtly.

The word "Walloon" thus came closer to its current meaning: the vernacular of the Roman part of the Low Countries. One might say that the period which saw the establishment of the unifying supremacy of the Burgundians in the Walloon country was a turning-point in their linguistic history. The crystallization of a Walloon identity, as opposed to that of the thiois (i.e. Dutch-speaking) regions of the Low Countries, established "Walloon" as a word for designating its people. Somewhat later, the vernacular of these people became more clearly distinct from central French and other neighbouring langues d'oïl, prompting the abandonment of the vague term "Roman" as a linguistic, ethnic, and political designator for "Walloon".

Also at this time, following the Ordinance of Villers-Cotterêts in 1539, the French language replaced Latin for all administrative purposes in France. Established as the academic language, French became the object of a political effort at normalization; La Pléiade posited the view that when two languages of the same language family coexist, each can be defined only in opposition to the other. Around the year 1600, the French writing system became dominant in the Wallonia. From this time, too, dates a tradition of texts written in a language marked by traces of spoken Walloon. The written language of the preceding centuries, scripta, was a composite language with some Walloon characteristics but it did not attempt to be a systematic reproduction of the spoken language.

Walloon was the predominant language of the Walloon people until the beginning of the 20th century, although they had a passing knowledge of French. Since that time, the use of French has spread to the extent that now only 15% of the Walloon population speak their ancestral language. Breaking the statistics down by age, 70–80% of the population aged over 60 speak Walloon, while only about 10% of those under 30 do so. Passing knowledge of Walloon is much more widespread: claimed by some 36–58% of the younger age bracket. Laurent Hendschel estimates there are 1,300,000 bilingual people in Wallonia (Walloon-French, Picard-French...). Many French words that pertain to mining and to the textile trade derive from the Walloon-Picard complex.

Legally, Walloon has been recognized since 1990 by the French Community of Belgium, the cultural authority of Wallonia, as an "indigenous regional language" which must be studied in schools and encouraged. The Walloon cultural movement includes the Union Culturelle Wallonne, an organization of over 200 amateur theatre circles, writers' groups, and school councils. About a dozen Walloon magazines publish regularly. The Société de Langue et de Littérature Wallonne, founded in 1856, promotes Walloon literature and the study (dialectology, etymology, etc.) of the regional Roman languages of Wallonia. There is a difference between the Walloon culture, according to the Manifesto for Walloon culture, and the Walloon language (even if the latter is a part of the culture).

Walloon-language literature has been printed since the 16th century, or at least since the beginning of the 17th century. It had its "golden age" during the peak of the Flemish immigration to Wallonia in the 19th century: "That period saw an efflorescence of Walloon literature, plays and poems primarily, and the founding of many theaters and periodicals."

The New York Public Library holds a large collection of literary works in Walloon, quite possibly the largest outside Belgium, and its holdings are representative of the output. Out of nearly a thousand works, twenty-six were published before 1880. Thereafter the numbers rise gradually year by year, reaching a peak of sixty-nine in 1903. After that, publications in Walloon fell markedly, to eleven in 1913. Yves Quairiaux counted 4,800 plays for 1860–1914, published or not. In this period, plays were almost the only popular entertainment in Wallonia. The Walloon-language theatre remains popular in the region; theatre is flourishing with more than 200 non-professional companies playing in the cities and villages of Wallonia for an audience of over 200,000 each year.

During the 19th-century renaissance of Walloon-language literature, several authors adapted versions of Aesop's Fables to the racy speech (and subject matter) of Liège. They included Charles Duvivier (in 1842); Joseph Lamaye (1845); and the team of Jean-Joseph Dehin (1847, 1851–1852) and François Bailleux (1851–1866), who covered books I-VI. Adaptations into other dialects were made by Charles Letellier (Mons, 1842) and Charles Wérotte (Namur, 1844). Decades later, Léon Bernus published some hundred imitations of La Fontaine in the dialect of Charleroi (1872); he was followed during the 1880s by Joseph Dufrane, writing in the Borinage dialect under the pen-name Bosquètia. In the 20th century, Joseph Houziaux (1946) published a selection of 50 fables in the Condroz dialect. The motive among Walloon speakers in both France and Belgium was to assert regional identity against the growing centralism and encroachment of the language of the capital, on what had until then been predominantly monoglot areas.

There are links between French literature and Walloon literature. For instance, the writer Raymond Queneau set the publication of a Walloon Poets' anthology for Editions Gallimard. Ubu roi was translated into Walloon by André Blavier, an important 'pataphysician of Verviers, and friend of Queneau, for the new and important Puppet theater of Liège of Jacques Ancion. The Al Botroûle theater operated "as the umbilical cord" in Walloon, indicating a desire to return to the source. Jacques Ancion also wanted to develop a regular adult audience. "From the 19th century he included the Walloon play Tati l'Pèriquî by E. Remouchamps and the avant-garde Ubu roi by A. Jarry." The scholar Jean-Marie Klinkenberg writes, "[T]he dialectal culture is no more a sign of attachment to the past but a way to participate to a new synthesis".

Walloon is also being used in popular song. The best-known singer in Walloon in present-day Wallonia is William Dunker (b. 15 March 1959).

Below is the first article of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Walloon, French and German.

Walloons (/ w ɒ ˈ l uː n z / WOL -oonz ; French : Wallons [ walɔ̃ ] ; Walloon : Walons ; Dutch : Walen) are a Gallo-Romance ethnic group native to the Wallonia region of Belgium. Walloons primarily speak langues d'oïl such as Belgian French, Picard and Walloon. Walloons are primarily Roman Catholic, with a historical minority of Protestantism which dates back to the Reformation era.

In modern Belgium, Walloons are, by law, termed a "distinctive linguistic and ethnic community" within the country, as are the neighbouring Flemish, a Dutch (Germanic) speaking community.

When understood as a regional identification, the ethnonym is also extended to refer to the inhabitants of the Walloon region in general, regardless of ethnicity or ancestry.

The term Walloon is derived from * walha, a Proto-Germanic term used to refer to Celtic and Latin speakers.

Walloon originated in Romance languages alongside other related terms, but it supplanted them. Its oldest written trace is found in Jean de Haynin's Mémoires de Jean, sire de Haynin et de Louvignies in 1465, where it refers to Roman populations of the Burgundian Netherlands. Its meaning narrowed yet again during the French and Dutch periods and, at Belgian independence, the term designated only Belgians speaking a Romance language (French, Walloon, Picard, etc.) The linguistic cleavage in the politics of Belgium adds a political content to "the emotional cultural, and linguistic concept". The words Walloon and Wallons can be seen in the book of Charles White, The Belgic Revolution (1835): "The restless Wallons, with that adventurous daring which is their historical characteristic, abandoned their occupations, and eagerly seizing the pike and the musket marched towards the centre of the commotion." The Spanish terms of Walon and Walona from the 17th century referred to a Royal Guard Corps recruited in the Spanish Flanders. They were involved in many of the most significant battles of the Spanish Empire.

Albert Henry wrote that although in 1988 the word Walloon evoked a constitutional reality, it originally referred to Roman populations of the Burgundian Netherlands and was also used to designate a territory by the terms provinces wallonnes or pays wallon (Walloon country), from the 16th century to the Belgian revolution, and later Wallonia. The term 'Walloon country' was also used in Dutch viz. Walsch land. The term existed also in German, perhaps Wulland in Hans Heyst's 1571 book, where that word is later (1814) translated to Wallonia in English. In German it is however generally Wallonenland. In English, it is Walloon country (see further James Shaw). In French it is le Pays wallon. For Félix Rousseau, Walloon country is, after le Roman pays the old name of the country of the Walloons.

The term " state reform " in the Belgian context indicates a process towards finding constitutional and legal solutions for the problems and tensions among the different segments of the Belgian population, mostly Dutch-speakers of Flanders and French-speakers of Wallonia. In general, Belgium evolved from a unitary state to a federal state with communities, regions and language areas.

The area now known as Wallonia has been settled by various Celtic tribes and later by Roman and Frankish settlers. From the early Middle Ages up until the early modern period, the region has been separated between many city-states and external powers. Such changing rule brought variations to borders, culture, and language. The Walloon language, widespread in use up until the Second World War, has been dying out of common use due in part to its prohibition by the public school system, in favor of French.

Starting from the end of the 19th century, the Walloon Movement, aiming to assert the identity of Walloons as French-speaking (rather than Walloon speaking) people of Belgium. In this context, the concept of Wallonia, as a heartland of the Walloon people was invented in 1886.

Later, this was complicated by the federal structure given to Belgium, which splits Belgium into three communities with the privilege of using their own tongues in official correspondence, but also into three autonomous regions. The communities are: French community (though not Walloon, but sometimes controversially called Wallonia-Brussels), Flemish community (which uses Dutch), and German-speaking community. The division into political regions does not correspond with the communities: Flemish Region, Walloon Region (including the German community but generally called Wallonia), and the bilingual (French-Dutch) Brussels-Capital Region.

Many non-French-speaking observers (over)generalize Walloons as a term of convenience for all Belgian French-speakers (even those born and living in the Brussels-Capital Region). The mixing of the population over the centuries means that most families can trace ancestors on both sides of the linguistic divide. But, the fact that Brussels is around 85% French-speaking, but is located in Dutch-speaking Flanders, has led to friction between the regions and communities. The local dialect in Brussels, Brussels Vloms, is a Brabantic dialect, reflecting the Dutch heritage of the city.

Walloons are historically credited with pioneering the Industrial Revolution in Continental Europe in the early 19th century. In modern history, Brussels has been the major town or the capital of the region. Because of long Spanish and minor French rule, French became the sole official language. After a brief period with Dutch as the official language while the region was part of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, the people reinstated French after achieving independence in 1830. The Walloon region, a major coal and steel-producing area, developed rapidly into the economic powerhouse of the country. Walloons (in fact French-speaking elites who were called Walloons) became politically dominant. Many Flemish immigrants came to work in Wallonia. Between the 1930s and the 1970s, the gradual decline of steel and more especially coal, coupled with too little investment in service industries and light industry (which came to predominate in Flanders), started to tip the balance in the other direction. Flanders became gradually politically and economically dominant. In their turn, Walloon families have moved to Flanders in search of jobs. This evolution has not been without political repercussions.

The heartland of Walloon culture are the Meuse and Sambre river valleys, Charleroi, Dinant, Namur (the regional capital), Huy, Verviers, and Liège.

The Walloon language is an element of Walloon identity. However, the entire French-speaking population of Wallonia cannot be culturally considered Walloon, since a significant portion in the west (around Tournai and Mons) and smaller portions in the extreme south (around Arlon) possess other languages as mother tongues (namely, Picard, Champenois, Lorrain, Flemish, German and Luxembourgish).

A survey of the Centre liégeois d'étude de l'opinion pointed out in 1989 that 71.8% of the younger people of Wallonia understand and speak only a little or no Walloon language; 17.4% speak it well; and only 10.4% speak it exclusively. Based on other surveys and figures, Laurent Hendschel wrote in 1999 that between 30 and 40% people were bilingual in Wallonia (Walloon, Picard), among them 10% of the younger population (18–30 years old). According to Hendschel, 36 to 58% of young people had a passive knowledge of the regional languages. On the other hand, Givet commune, several villages in the Ardennes département in France, which publishes the journal Causons wallon (Let us speak Walloon); and two villages in Luxembourg are historically Walloon-speaking.

In 1572 Jean Bodin made a funny play on words which has been well known in Wallonia to the present:

Ouallonnes enim a Belgis appelamur [nous, les "Gaulois"], quod Gallis veteribus contigit, quuum orbem terrarum peragrarent, ac mutuo interrogantes qaererent où allons-nous, id est quonam profiscimur? ex eo credibile est Ouallones appellatos quod Latini sua lingua nunquam efferunt, sed g lettera utuntur.

Translation: "We are called Walloons by the Belgians because when the ancient people of Gallia were travelling the length and breadth of the earth, it happened that they asked each other: 'Où allons-nous?' [Where are we going? : the pronunciation of these French words is the same as the French word Wallons (plus 'us')], i.e. 'To which goal are we walking?.' It is probable they took from it the name Ouallons (Wallons), which the Latin speaking are not able to pronounce without changing the word by the use of the letter G." One of the best translations of his (humorous) sayings used daily in Wallonia is "These are strange times we are living in."

Shakespeare used the word Walloon: "A base Walloon, to win the Dauphin's grace/Thrust Talbot with a spear in the back." A note in Henry VI, Part I says, "At this time, the Walloons [were] the inhabitants of the area, now in south Belgium, still known as the 'Pays wallon'." Albert Henry agrees, quoting Maurice Piron, also quoted by A.J. Hoenselaars: "'Walloon' meaning 'Walloon country' in Shakespeare's ' Henry VI '..."

A 1786 history of the Netherlands noted, "[The] Haynault and Namur, with Artois, now no longer an Austrian Province, compose the Walloon country. The Walloon name and language are also extended into the adjacent districts of the neighbouring Provinces. A large part of Brabant, where that Province borders on Haynault and Namur, is named Walloon Brabant. The affinity of language seems also on some occasions to have wrought a nearer relation."

The Belgian revolution was recently described as firstly a conflict between the Brussels municipality which was secondly disseminated in the rest of the country, "particularly in the Walloon provinces". We read the nearly same opinion in Edmundson's book:

The royal forces, on the morning of September 23, entered the city at three gates and advanced as far as the Park. But beyond that point they were unable to proceed, so desperate was the resistance, and such the hail of bullets that met them from barricades and from the windows and roofs of the houses. For three days almost without cessation the fierce contest went on, the troops losing ground rather than gaining it. On the evening of the 26th the prince gave orders to retreat, his troops having suffered severely. The effect of this withdrawal was to convert a street insurrection into a national revolt. The moderates now united with the liberals, and a Provisional Government was formed, having amongst its members Charles Rogier, Van de Weyer, Gendebien, Emmanuel van der Linden d'Hooghvorst [ nl ], Félix de Mérode and Louis de Potter, who a few days later returned triumphantly from banishment. The Provisional Government issued a series of decrees declaring Belgium independent, releasing the Belgian soldiers from their allegiance, and calling upon them to abandon the Dutch standard. They were obeyed. The revolt, which had been confined mainly to the Walloon districts, now spread rapidly over Flanders.

Jacques Logie wrote: "On the 6th October, the whole Wallonia was under the Provisional Government's control. In the Flemish part of the country the collapse of the Royal Government was as total and quick as in Wallonia, except Ghent and Antwerp." Robert Demoulin, who was professor at the University of Liège, wrote: " Liège is in the forefront of the battle for liberty", more than Brussels but with Brussels. He wrote the same thing for Leuven. According to Demoulin, these three cities are the républiques municipales at the head of the Belgian revolution. In this chapter VI of his book, Le soulèvement national (pp. 93–117), before writing "On the 6th October, the whole Wallonia is free", he quotes the following municipalities from which volunteers were going to Brussels, the "centre of the commotion", in order to take part in the battle against the Dutch troops: Tournai, Namur, Wavre (p. 105) Braine-l'Alleud, Genappe, Jodoigne, Perwez, Rebecq, Grez-Doiceau, Limelette [ fr ], Nivelles (p. 106), Charleroi (and its region), Gosselies, Lodelinsart (p. 107), Soignies, Leuze, Thuin, Jemappes (p. 108), Dour, Saint-Ghislain, Pâturages [ fr ] (p. 109) and he concluded: "So, from the Walloon little towns and countryside, people came to the capital.." The Dutch fortresses were liberated in Ath (27 September), Mons (29 September), Tournai (2 October), Namur (4 October) (with the help of people coming from Andenne, Fosses, Gembloux), Charleroi (5 October) (with people who came in their thousands).The same day that was also the case for Philippeville, Mariembourg, Dinant, Bouillon. In Flanders, the Dutch troops capitulated at the same time in Bruges, Ypres, Ostend, Menen, Oudenaarde, Geeraardsbergen (pp. 113–114), but nor in Ghent nor in Antwerp (only liberated on 17 October and 27 October). Against these interpretation, in any case for the troubles in Brussels, John W. Rooney Jr wrote:

It is clear from the quantitative analysis that an overwhelming majority of revolutionaries were domiciled in Brussels or in the nearby suburbs and that the aid came from outside was minimal. For example, for the day of 23 September, 88% of dead and wounded lived in Brussels identified and if we add those residing in Brabant, it reached 95%. It is true that if you look at the birthplace of revolutionary given by the census, the number of Brussels falls to less than 60%, which could suggest that there was support "national" (to different provinces Belgian), or outside the city, more than 40%. But it is nothing, we know that between 1800 and 1830 the population of the capital grew by 75,000 to 103,000, this growth is due to the designation in 1815 in Brussels as a second capital of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the rural exodus that accompanied the Industrial Revolution. It is therefore normal that a large part of the population of Brussels be originating provinces. These migrants came mainly from Flanders, which was hit hard by the crisis in the textile 1826-1830. This interpretation is also nationalist against the statements of witnesses: Charles Rogier said that there were neither in 1830 nor nation Belgian national sentiment within the population. The revolutionary Jean-Baptiste Nothomb ensures that "the feeling of national unity is born today." As for Joseph Lebeau, he said that "patriotism Belgian is the son of the revolution of 1830.." Only in the following years as bourgeois revolutionary will "legitimize ideological state power.

A few years after the Belgian revolution in 1830, the historian Louis Dewez underlined that "Belgium is shared into two people, Walloons and Flemings. The former are speaking French, the latter are speaking Flemish. The border is clear (...) The provinces which are back the Walloon line, i.e.: the Province of Liège, the Brabant wallon, the Province of Namur, the Province of Hainaut are Walloon [...] And the other provinces throughout the line [...] are Flemish. It is not an arbitrarian division or an imagined combination in order to support an opinion or create a system: it is a fact..." Jules Michelet traveled in Wallonia in 1840 and mentions many times in his History of France his interest for Wallonia and the Walloons (this page on the Culture of Wallonia), 476 (1851 edition published online)

The Walloon Region institutionally comprises also the German-speaking community of Belgium around Eupen, in the east of the region, next to Germany which ceded the area to Belgium after the First World War. Many of the 60,000 or so inhabitants of this very small community reject being considered as Walloon and – with their community executive leader Karl-Heinz Lambertz want to remain a federating unit, and to have all the powers of the Belgian Regions and Communities. Even if they do not want them absolutely and immediately (10 July 2008, official speech for the Flanders' national holiday).

Since the 11th century, the great towns along the river Meuse, for example, Dinant, Huy, and Liège, traded with Germany, where Wallengassen (Walloons' neighborhoods) were founded in certain cities. In Cologne, the Walloons were the most important foreign community, as noted by three roads named Walloonstreet in the city. The Walloons traded for materials they lacked, such as copper, found in Germany, especially at Goslar. New Walloon immigrants settled in several cities in the late 17th century, including Magdeburg and Cottbus.

Walloons were one of the first foreign immigrant groups in Poland, with Walloons settling in Wrocław probably since the 12th century, however, the first written mention of Walloon immigrants in Wrocław comes from c. 1270. In the 12th century, Walloon brothers Aleksander and Walter from Malonne served as Catholic bishops of Płock and Wrocław in Poland, respectively, and there is a possibility that it was Bishop Walter who brought the first Walloon settlers to Poland. In the early 13th century Duke Henry the Bearded invited further Walloon immigrants to the area of Oława and Wierzbno to the south of Wrocław, and some descendants of Walloons from Wrocław also moved to Oława, Wierzbno, and Kraków. The guild of Walloon clothiers in Wrocław ceased to exist after 1422.

In the 13th century, the medieval German colonization of Transylvania, then part of the Kingdom of Hungary, now central and north-western Romania, also included numerous Walloons. Place names such as Wallendorf (Walloon Village) and family names such as Valendorfean (Wallon peasant) can be found among the Romanian citizens of Transylvania.

Starting from the 1620s, numerous Walloon miners and iron-workers, with their families, settled in Sweden to work in iron mining and refining. Walloon methods of iron production were incorporated into Swedish practice, to supplement the existing German techniques. Many Walloon workers settled around the mine at Dannemora producing Öregrund iron which represented 15 per cent of Sweden's iron production at that time.

They were originally led by the entrepreneur Louis de Geer, who commissioned them to work in the iron mines of Uppland and Östergötland. The wave of migration continued substantially into the 18th century. Walloon ancestry is traceable through Walloon surnames. Some people of Walloon descent belong to the Sällskapet Vallonättlingar (Society of Walloon Descendants).

During the 17th century Walloons from Sweden started arriving in Finland, during which Finland was part of Sweden. Some also came directly from Wallonia. Most of them settled along the coast in ironworks. Many of the ironworks in Finland were established by Walloons. Walloons largely used the same methods as in Sweden, although Walloon forging was not used, instead Walloon smiths used the German method. As in Sweden, the Walloon population in Finland eventually integrated to the wider society. Former Finnish prime minister Paavo Lipponen is of Walloon descent.

The Manifesto for Walloon culture in 1983 was a major event of the History of Wallonia quoted in the important books about the region's history.

This list includes people from the region before it became known as Wallonia.

Walser German (German : Walserdeutsch) and Walliser German (Walliserdeutsch, locally Wallisertiitsch) are a group of Highest Alemannic dialects spoken in parts of Switzerland (Valais, Ticino, Grisons), Italy (Piedmont, Aosta Valley), Liechtenstein (Triesenberg, Planken), and Austria (Vorarlberg).

Usage of the terms Walser and Walliser has come to reflect a difference of geography, rather than language. The term Walser refers to those speakers whose ancestors migrated into other Alpine valleys in medieval times, whereas Walliser refers only to a speaker from Upper Valais – that is, the upper Rhone valley. In a series of migrations during the Late Middle Ages, people migrated out of the Upper Valais, across the higher valleys of the Alps.

The Alemannic immigration to the Rhone valley started in the 8th century. There were presumably two different immigration routes, from what is now the Bernese Oberland, that led to two main groups of Walliser dialects. In the 12th or 13th century, the Walliser began to settle other parts of the Alps. These new settlements are known as Walser migration. In many of these settlements, people still speak Walser.

Because the people who speak Walser German live in the isolated valleys of the high mountains, Walser German has preserved certain archaisms retained from Old High German which were lost in other variants of German. The dialect of the Lötschental, for instance, preserved three distinct classes of weak verbs until the beginning of the 20th century.

Walser German dialects are considered endangered, and language shift to the majority language (French, Italian, Standard German) has taken place in the course of the later 20th century.

Walser German is part of the Highest Alemannic group, most closely related to dialects spoken in the Bernese Oberland and in Central Switzerland (Uri, Schwyz, Unterwalden, Glarus).

There is limited mutual intelligibility with High Alemannic forms of Swiss German (whose speakers are called Üsserschwyzer "outer Swiss" by the Walliser), and barely any mutual intelligibility with Standard German.

In Italy, Walser German is almost never spoken among children of Walser people and is rarely spoken by their parents and most commonly by the grandparents. Often, older people will speak to younger people in Walser German, with the younger people responding in Italian. Walser German is most commonly but not exclusively used in private and familial settings when no non-speakers are present.

The total number of speakers in the world estimated at 22,000 speakers (as of 2004), of whom about 10,000 are in Switzerland. Because the dialect group is quite spread out, there is rarely any contact between the dialects. Therefore, the dialects that compose Walser German are very different from each other as well. Specific Walser dialects can be traced to eastern or western dialects of the Upper Valais. Conservative Walser dialects are more similar to the respective groups of Wallis dialects than to neighboring Walser dialects.

Because the dialects of Walser German are different from each other, it is difficult to make generalizations about the language that apply to all the dialects. This section will be about the Walser German dialect of Formazza, or Pomattertitsch. Pomattertitsch is part of the Highest Alemannic German (höchstalemannisch) dialect group, which is made up of dialects that share similar features. The Highest Alemannic German group contains German dialects of Valais ; Walser German dialects in Italy and Ticino; and eastern Walser German dialects in Grisons, Vorarlberg, and Liechtenstein. The first feature that is shared by this group is the palatalization of Middle High German (MHG) -s- to -sch-. This is very typical of Walser German dialects in general. For Pomattertitsch, however, this does not apply to every word that contains - s -: su 'son', sunna 'sun', and si 'to be'. The second feature is a change from -nk- to -ch- or -h-: German denken to Pomattertitsch teche 'think', German trinken to Pomattertitsch triche 'drink'. The final feature is the lack of diphthongs where they are present in German words: German bauen to Pomattertitsch büwe 'build', German schneien to Pomattertitsch schnie 'snow'.

Again, this section will be about the Walser German dialect Pomattertitsch.

Pomattertitsch marks number (singular and plural) and gender (masculine, feminine, neuter) on nouns, like most dialects of German. It also marks case (nominative/accusative, genitive, dative) on nouns, although it has been reduced over time. It also distinguishes between strong and weak nouns.

Pomattertitsch has definite (English 'the') and indefinite (English 'a') articles that agree in case, number, and gender with the noun:

Adjectives also agree in number, and gender with the noun it is modifying in Pomattertitsch. For adjectives in the attributive position, there is also agreement in strong versus weak nouns, and in case.

In Pomattertitsch, there is a distinction between impersonal and personal pronouns. The impersonal pronoun is mu, which is third person singular. The personal pronouns agree in number and case, with third person agreeing in gender as well for singular pronouns only.

The verbs in Pomattertitsch can be categorized into one of four classes depending on their past participle and infinitive endings:

The two classes that are most productive are three and four. The third class is most productive in deriving verbs from nouns, and the fourth class is most productive in deriving loan-words from Italian.

Table 8 Verb Conjugations in Present Indicative of 'Normal Verbs':

Table 9 Verb Conjugations in Present Indicative of 'Special Verbs':

In Pomattertitsch, a 'dummy' auxiliary tö 'do' followed by the infinitive form of a verb is common for the present indicative, subjunctive, and imperative. This insertion has the same meaning as if the verb was to be conjugated normally: ich tö zellä 'I do speak/I speak'.

There is not a preterite form in Pomattertitsch. Instead, past tense is expressed using the present perfect, which is formed with auxiliaries 'to be' and 'to have' followed by the past participle. On the other hand, the future tense is expressed morphologically by adding the particle de at the end of an inflected verb and after enclitic pronouns, if there are any in the sentence.

The passive is expressed in Pomattertitsch by using the auxiliary cho 'come' followed by the past participle of the verb, which agrees in gender and number with the subject of the sentence: der salam chun röwä gässä 'salami is eaten raw'. The causative is expressed using tö 'do' followed by the agent of the caused event, then the preposition z (separate word, not morpheme), and then the infinitive: und töt ds metjie z ässä 'and he makes the girl eat'. The imperative is expressed most commonly by using tö 'do' plus the infinitive, as stated above: tö frägä! 'do ask, ask!'. Another way is the bare indicative stem for the singular form, and the same present indicative form for the plural: zel titsch, dü! 'speak German, you!' and chomet hier! 'come (pl) here!'.

There are two different subjunctive forms used in Pomattertitsch. The first form is used mainly in reported speech and in subordinate clauses that follow 'say' or 'think'. It also occurs in complement clauses that follow das 'that'. The second form is used for the conditional mood, where the conjunction wenn 'if' can be omitted without changing the meaning of the sentence.

The Walser German dialect group has the same word order as German, for the most part. For some dialects, however, there is a change occurring in the word order of verbal brace constructions. In German, the finite verb occurs in the second position, and the non-finite verb occurs in the final position:

Peter hat vorhin den Ball ins Tor geworfen

Peter has just now the ball into the goal thrown

'Peter threw the ball into the goal just now'

In some dialects, specifically Gressoney, Formazza, and Rimella, the finite and non-finite verbs occur right next to each other, with the complements and adverbials at the end of the sentence. An example of this in Rimella is given below:

de pappa òn d mamma hein gmacht ds chriz dem chénn

the father and the mother have made the cross to the child

'The father and mother made a cross for the child'

This is a change from SOV (subject, object, verb) to SVO word order. This change is due to the increasing influence of Italian on Walser German. However, the SOV word order is still used when there is negation and when there is an inverted subject.

Some southern dialects of Walser German are starting to omit the subject pronoun of sentences, just having the inflection on the verb to indicate what the subject is. This phenomenon is known as pro-dropping, and is common among languages. Italian is a pro-drop language, and German is not, which means that Italian is influencing some southern dialects of Walser German.

Comparison between the varieties titsch variant from Gressoney Saint-Jean and töitschu variant from Issime :

Below are some examples of texts, with corresponding translations, in some of the variants of the Walser found in different localities.

und hawwer noch gvunnut e vljeschpu. Esch hétschech àrkit, und nu schinetsch wié (n) e schtérnu. Wé làng? En ts hüüsch isch mì ljeksch wett... »

and we still found some embers there. It came back to life and now shines like a star. For how much longer? There is little wood left in the house... »

War, Wine, and Taxes: The Political Economy of Anglo-French Trade, 1689–1900 is a 2007 book by economic historian John V. C. Nye, published by Princeton University Press as part of its Princeton Economic History of the Western World series. Nye argues that Britain maintained higher average tariff rates than France throughout most of the nineteenth century, challenging the conventional characterization of Britain as the pioneer of free trade and France as protectionist. Nye traces British trade policy from the Glorious Revolution of 1689 to 1900, focusing on how prohibitive tariffs on French wine, brandy, and other imported wine and alcohol protected British brewing interests and enabled the government to impose heavy excise taxes on domestic beer production. The author contends that Britain did not become a genuine free trader until after the Anglo-French Commercial Treaty of 1860, and that British trade liberalization resulted from domestic fiscal considerations rather than ideological commitment to free trade principles. Nye's thesis has generated substantial scholarly debate, particularly regarding his use of average tariff rates as measures of protectionism and his interpretation of wine duties as protective rather than revenue-generating instruments.

The work is a systematic challenge to conventional narratives about nineteenth-century trade liberalization. Economic historian Nye employs quantitative analysis of tariff data to demonstrate that Britain maintained higher average tariff rates than France throughout most of the nineteenth century, contradicting the established characterization of Britain as the pioneer of free trade and France as protectionist.

Nye studies the origins of British trade policy to the conflicts between England and France beginning with the Glorious Revolution of 1689. He argues that the Wars of the League of Augsburg (1689-1697) and Spanish Succession (1701-1714) created opportunities for British protectionists to impose prohibitive tariffs on French imports, particularly wine. These measures, initially conceived as economic warfare, evolved into a sophisticated fiscal system that fundamentally shaped both nations' economic development.

Nye's thesis hinges on the relationship between wine tariffs and domestic excise taxes on beer. The virtual prohibition of cheaper French wines through volume-based tariffs—which by the 1690s had reduced French wine from over 70 percent of British wine imports to approximately 3 percent by the 1720s—protected British brewers from foreign competition. This protection enabled the state to impose increasingly heavy excise taxes on domestic beer production without fear of consumer substitution to imported alternatives. By the 1780s, taxes on alcoholic beverages accounted for nearly 40 percent of British government revenue, with beer-related excises contributing the largest share.

Nye investigates how this fiscal arrangement influenced industrial organization. He documents the consolidation of the British brewing industry into an oligopolistic structure centered in London, where a handful of large porter breweries dominated production by the late eighteenth century. This was in contrast to the 1600s, when the government encouraged small retail brewing believing that this would raise revenue, but that was not the case. The government's ability to collect excise taxes efficiently depended on this concentration, creating mutual dependence between the state and brewing interests. The import restrictions were the carrot to promote compliance with government taxation, and the monopolistic arrangements made it easier to promote cooperation between large brewers and the state. The failed Walpole excise reform of 1733, which attempted to replace customs duties with domestic excises on wine and tobacco, illustrates the political constraints this system imposed on fiscal reform.

Nye's quantitative analysis reveals that Britain's average tariff rates (measured as customs revenue divided by total import value) exceeded those of France from the 1820s through the 1870s. He addresses the methodological critique that such measures fail to distinguish between revenue and protective tariffs by demonstrating that British wine duties, though imposed on a product Britain did not produce, effectively protected domestic brewing interests and thus functioned as protective rather than purely revenue-generating measures.

Recognizing the limitations of average tariff rates as a measure of protectionism, Nye conducted additional robustness calculations using more sophisticated metrics. He examined the scholarly literature on trade restrictiveness indices, particularly Anderson and Neary's Trade Restrictiveness Index (TRI) published in Econometrica, though he noted that even this measure fails to account for the market power of dominant economies like Britain. To address these methodological concerns, Nye developed his own rigorous comparative analysis of British and French tariffs, published in a separate article that formed the basis for the book's technical appendix. This analysis demonstrated that his core findings about relative British protectionism remained robust under alternative measurement approaches.

The study identifies the Anglo-French Commercial Treaty of 1860 (Cobden-Chevalier Treaty) as the watershed moment in European trade liberalization, arguing that this bilateral agreement, rather than Britain's unilateral repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846, catalyzed the creation of a European free trade network. The treaty reduced British wine duties and shifted their basis from volume to alcoholic content, removing discrimination against lighter French wines. Following the treaty, British imports of French wine increased 600 percent, while a series of most-favored-nation agreements rapidly extended tariff reductions throughout Europe. This view of trade promotion through reciprocal tariffs and bilateral agreements is also supported by the work of the political scientist Robert Pahre.

Nye's interpretation challenges hegemonic stability theory, which portrays Britain as exercising economic leadership in promoting global free trade. He contends that Britain failed to lead when European free trade was emerging in the 1860s and proved unable to prevent its collapse when France and Germany adopted protectionist policies in the 1890s. British trade liberalization, he argues, resulted from domestic fiscal considerations and bilateral negotiations rather than ideological commitment or hegemonic leadership.

The work includes technical appendixes employing computable general equilibrium models to assess the welfare effects of British tariffs. These simulations, developed with Sami Dakhlia and published in a peer-reviewed article, suggest that British tariffs in 1841 and 1854 were farther from optimal levels than French tariffs. The CGE analysis demonstrates that unilateral tariff reductions would have yielded greater welfare gains for Britain than for France, supporting Nye's contention that Britain was more protectionist than France during this period. This rigorous quantitative approach addresses critics' concerns about the reliability of average tariff rates as measures of protectionism.

The book's political economy implications extend beyond trade policy to broader questions of state formation, fiscal capacity, and economic development. Nye demonstrates how initial protectionist measures designed for wartime revenue generation created entrenched domestic coalitions that shaped British political economy for over a century. The brewing industry's oligopolistic structure, reinforced by the fiscal system, illustrates how temporary policies can generate path-dependent institutional arrangements with lasting consequences. The work challenges conventional narratives about the relationship between economic ideology and policy outcomes, showing how Britain's rhetorical commitment to free trade coexisted with protective practices, while France's protectionist discourse masked relatively liberal trade policies.

A central methodological contribution of Nye's work addresses the challenge of measuring and comparing protectionism across countries. While the book initially employs average tariff rates (customs revenue divided by total import value) as a standard metric used in historical trade studies, Nye acknowledges this measure's limitations and subjects his thesis to extensive robustness testing.

The book engages with the broader scholarly debate over trade restrictiveness measurement, noting that the field remains divided on optimal approaches. Nye examines Anderson and Neary's Trade Restrictiveness Index (TRI), widely considered the most rigorous theoretical measure, but identifies its failure to account for the market power effects of large economies like nineteenth-century Britain. In response, Nye developed alternative calculations that incorporate general equilibrium effects and market power considerations.

The technical appendix presents computable general equilibrium (CGE) models created with Sami Dakhlia, demonstrating that British tariffs in 1841 and 1854 were farther from optimal levels than French tariffs. These simulations show that a unilateral reduction in tariffs would have generated greater welfare gains for Britain than for France, supporting the book's central claim about relative protectionism independent of the specific measurement approach employed.

Nye's thesis has generated substantial scholarly debate, particularly regarding methodology and measurement. While critics have questioned the use of average tariff rates, supporters note that Nye's analysis extends well beyond this simple metric to include sophisticated econometric modeling and careful consideration of alternative measures of trade restrictiveness. The debate has contributed to broader discussions in economic history about how to measure and compare trade policies across different institutional contexts.

Nye's thesis has generated substantial scholarly debate. Critics have questioned whether average tariff rates adequately measure protectionism and whether wine duties truly constituted protection in an economic sense. Nevertheless, the work has fundamentally challenged historians to reconsider the standard narrative of nineteenth-century trade policy and to examine more carefully the interconnections between fiscal needs, domestic political economy, and international commerce in the development of modern trade regimes.

Anthony Howe acknowledged that while "the Nye thesis is beset with difficulties," the work possessed "notable strengths." Howe praised the work as "the first substantial attempt to analyse the importance of the wine duties to the fiscal-military state," and noted that Nye "makes his case with elegance and economy." However, he criticized Nye for paying insufficient attention to the brewing industry's response to the removal of protections in the 1860s and for not adequately explaining why French leaders failed to recognize the liberalization of their own tariff policies before 1860. He concluded that readers willing to accept Nye's contention that trade policy should be assessed "not by contemporary perceptions but by the 'retroactive tools of discovery'" would find the book more rewarding than those with broader historical interests.

Michael S. Smith found Nye's arguments provocative but ultimately unconvincing. Smith acknowledged that Nye had "largely made good on his promise in the introduction to provoke thinking on a number of important historical issues," but doubted that many economic historians would accept Nye's claim to be initiating "a fundamental reassessment of our understanding of commercial policy in economic history." Smith particularly criticized Nye's reliance on average tariff rates as poor indicators of protectionism and found the technical appendix employing computer simulations to be "highly theoretical, and largely incomprehensible to noneconomists." He suggested that Nye's emphasis on proving British protectionism distracted from the valuable insights about eighteenth-century mercantilism.

Mark Thornton said the book showed "that England was a late comer to free trade while France was a relative trail blazer," though he noted this "modification does not change the overall historical story." He liked Nye's explanation of how the English could be economically successful yet "relatively backward in the areas of fine foods and beverages" while the French, though economically stagnant, built "their reputation for the finest gourmet foods and beverages." Thornton expressed surprise that Nye, as holder of the Frédéric Bastiat Chair in Political Economy, had "hardly mentioned" Bastiat's role in French tariff reduction campaigns of the 1840s.

Jonathan J. Liebowitz, from the University of Massachusetts Lowell, characterized the book as containing "provocative" arguments that "some of our fundamental beliefs about economic history are inadequate or just plain wrong." Liebowitz found Nye's analysis of how prohibitive tariffs on French wine shaped British consumption patterns compelling, and noted that "the English taste for these last two beverages [beer and gin] was thus not a genetic predisposition but arose from the absence of French wines 'at the very moment in history when mass consumer tastes were formed.'" Liebowitz appreciated Nye's use of economic evidence from earlier scholars but questioned whether tariffs should be neatly categorized as either protective or revenue-generating.

Jeff Horn, from Manhattan College, expressed sympathy with some of Nye's conclusions but regarded them as "unproven," finding himself "deeply troubled by the way Nye built his arguments." Horn criticized Nye for claiming originality while omitting "major recent works on the subject," particularly Will Ashworth's study on customs and excise that "put forward most of Nye's key arguments." Horn noted that despite the subtitle, "this book is not really about France," citing the absence of French-language sources and "spelling errors" in French documents. He suggested that "a longer book—this one is only 140 pages of text including the appendix—giving fuller treatment to and greater support for the chief claims and engaging the relevant literature thoroughly would have allowed Nye to make his case more convincingly."

James Shepherd, from Whitman College, praised it as an "excellent research monograph". Shepherd noted that while some of the research had appeared previously in journal articles, "it is most conveniently combined in this book." He emphasized that "of most interest to readers of this journal perhaps will be the author's emphasis upon the trade in French wine, and the protectionist actions of Britain against French wine, even through much of the nineteenth century."

A water agency in France, formerly called a basin agency, is a public administrative establishment that participates in water management within an administrative basin district, whose boundaries correspond to a large hydrographic basin. There are six of them, all established by the Water Law of 1964, specified by the Law of 3 January 1992. The hydrographic basins of the overseas departments of Guadeloupe, French Guiana, Martinique, and Réunion are equipped with a Water Office, with equivalent missions.

In 2000 the European Union created hydrographic districts based on the model of these basin agencies; in other countries their activities are fulfilled by a water board.

In France, a water agency's mission is to initiate, on the scale of its watershed, rational use of water resources, the fight against pollution, and the protection of aquatic environments. It is notably responsible for coordinating the master plan for water development and management (SDAGE) and the water development and management plans (SAGE) that stem from it.

It is a public administrative establishment of the state, endowed with legal personality and financial autonomy under the dual supervision of the Ministry responsible for the environment and that of the Ministry responsible for finance. Water agencies have regulatory power to determine, within the limits of the missions assigned to them by law, the areas and conditions of their action and to define the general conditions for the allocation of financial assistance that they can provide to public and private entities in the form of subsidies, performance bonuses, or repayable advances (Council of State, 11 March 2020, No. 426366).

They collect fees from users (withdrawal fees, pollution fees). The proceeds from fees, under the impetus of a board of directors bringing together various stakeholders in the water sector (administrations, users, local authorities), enable them to provide financial assistance for actions of common interest in the water sector carried out by local authorities, industries, and farmers (wastewater treatment, production of high-quality drinking water, implementation of cleaner production processes, restoration and maintenance of aquatic environments, etc.).

French water agencies also conduct cooperation policies in this area (Balkans, Vietnam, West Africa, Palestine).

In 2008 the Grenelle Environment Forum stipulates that water agencies may (from 2009 to 2014) acquire 20,000 hectares of wetlands (with the Coastal Conservancy) for environmental conservation and development of the Blue Framework, as part of the Green and Blue Framework.

In 2009 on World Wetlands Day, Chantal Jouanno (Secretary of State for Ecology) announces the creation of a national group formed on the model of the Grenelle Environment Forum (thus involving the State, social partners, NGOs, and local authorities) tasked with taking stock and proposing measures for the preservation and restoration of wetlands.

In 2009 the explanatory memorandum of the Grenelle II Law estimates that there are still around 1.5 million hectares of wetlands in France, which are a "biodiversity reservoir and a factor in improving the quality of surface waters, buffer zones reducing the risk of flooding in the event of heavy rainfall, and significant storage of organic carbon in soils", but are "often threatened by the expansion of urbanization or changes in land use." The law provides that agencies are invited to conduct "an active land acquisition policy in wetlands not covered by the CELRL's jurisdiction"; as a "last resort, after considering reclamation and restoration options" (explanatory memorandum of Article 51 of the Grenelle II Law), and that they must manage these 20,000 ha through agricultural leases (Article 51).

The passing of the Law for the Reconquest of Biodiversity, Nature, and Landscapes in 2016 introduces significant changes in the objectives of water agencies with a strengthening of their support for biodiversity. Until now, the preservation of aquatic environments was indeed a priority (acquisition of wetlands, restoration of rivers, etc.) with nearly 200 million euros per year or 10 % of the amount of fees. From 2016 onwards, the missions of the water agencies are expanded to include:

According to France Nature Environnement, water agencies increasingly contribute to financing, at the expense of their primary mission, which is to protect the water resource, other policies of the Ministry of Ecological and Solidarity Transition, especially biodiversity. As of 2018, only water agencies will finance the French Biodiversity Agency. Water agencies also finance organic agriculture.

Between 2008 and 2015, while pesticides were supposed to "if possible" decrease by half, their use increased by 22 %: this is therefore a failure. To better circumvent water law, the capillary network upstream of rivers is simply wiped off the map, which could pave the way for increased pesticide use. Bird populations are declining sharply, linked to the disappearance of insects due to pesticides. According to IPBES, the decline in biodiversity worldwide is alarming, to the point that it could compromise the well-being of human beings.

Rivers and streams are vectors for transporting plastics to the oceans. So according to the University of Basel, for example, the Rhine discharges 191 million floating plastic particles into the sea every day.

The French water agency is inspired by the Genossenschaften, German cooperative water management unions, the first of which managed the Emscher basin as early as 1904.

In the same spirit Spain created Hydrographic Confederations in 1940, and Britain established the Regional water authorities in 1975.

In the Netherlands it is the (Dutch) Water boards.

Water supply and sanitation in France is universal and of good quality. Salient features of the sector compared to other developed countries are the high degree of private sector participation using concession and lease contracts (gestion déléguée) and the existence of basin agencies that levy fees on utilities in order to finance environmental investments. Water losses in France (26%) are high compared to England (19%) and Germany (7%).

Access to improved water supply and to adequate sanitation in France is universal. However, not every household has access to water from the network or disposes its wastewater through sewers.

Concerning water supply, according to a survey undertaken by the Ministry of Agriculture in 1995, 370,000 permanent inhabitants in rural areas (0.5% of the total population) did not have access to piped water supply. They are supplied by 30,000 water points, most of them wells. The government plans to increase the access rate to 100%, improve water quality by establishing protection areas around wells and springs, and to increase the reliability of water supply by increasing production, storage and interconnection of existing networks.

Concerning sanitation, while most of the population is served by sewers, according to one source about 18.3 million people (18%) out of 65 are served by on-site sanitation systems such as septic tanks. The above-mentioned inventory by the Ministry of Agriculture notes that out of 40m inhabitants of rural areas – 25m permanent and 15m seasonal inhabitants – 21m are connected to a sewer system, 10.6m should be connected and 9.6m cannot be connected. The total of those not connected to sewers (20.2 million) is higher because it includes seasonal inhabitants. The government intends to increase the coverage to the sewer networks in rural areas, in particular in ecologically vulnerable zones.

According to the Centre d'Information sur l'Eau (CIEAU) residential water use in France is for the following uses:

Total domestic water use in France is about 6 billion cubic metres or only about 3 percent of total runoff (191 billion cubic metres). 62 percent of drinking water supply is from groundwater and 28 percent from surface water.

Service quality is generally good with continuous water supply. In early 2008 private operators published for the first time consolidated performance indicators on service quality. It showed that 99.7% of samples complied with bacteriological standards for drinking water quality, but only 82.3% of samples complied with standards for the discharge of treated wastewater. The share of unplanned water service interruptions was less than 3%. The indicators do not include statistics on sewer overflows. A decree of May 2007 requires public service providers to provide the same information on service quality to the public that has been provided by private service providers, beginning in 2008.

According to a 2008 survey by the water information centre C.I.Eau 81% of respondents think that tap water is safe to drink. As in other EU countries, water quality monitoring is carried out at two levels, first by the service provider on a permanent basis, and second by the authorities on a sample basis.

The lack of wastewater treatment in some cities and towns discharging wastewater into sensitive areas is another matter of concern. In January 2008 the European Commission sent France a final warning alerting it that it will be taken to the European Court of Justice (ECJ) for the second time and possibly face fines unless it quickly brings its waste water treatment up to EU standards. France is not complying with the 1991 EU directive on urban waste water treatment. The deadline for treating all wastewater covered by the directive was 31 December 2000. In 2004 the European Court of Justice (ECJ) condemned France for failing to designate eleven areas as sensitive and for inadequate treatment facilities in a number of settlements which discharge their waste waters into these areas. The ECJ also found that 121 settlements breached the directive by discharging their waste waters into previously designated sensitive areas. In 2006 France designated the eleven areas as sensitive. However, 140 settlements – including the city of Paris – continue to discharge into these sensitive areas. With regard to the 121 settlements discharging into the previously designated sensitive areas France proceeded to rearrange them into 164 settlements, resulting in some settlements no longer meeting the threshold level of 10,000 residents at which the directive applies. The Commission considers such rearranging of settlements to avoid compliance with the directive unacceptable. In November 2009 it referred the matter to the ECJ.

A 2001 report to the French Parliament by one of its members, Yves Tavernier from the Socialist Party, concluded the following:

"The French feel that the rapid and poorly distributed increase in the price of water leads to new social inequities. They find it hard to accept that the water tariff weighs essentially on urban users and that, in apartment buildings, it is included in the rent. They do not understand that agricultural production is exempt from the Polluter-pays principle and that it continues to deteriorate the quality of groundwater with impunity. They wonder about the lack of transparency that prevails in the provision of public water supply. Finally, they find it very hard to understand their water bills."

A representative survey of consumers carried out in December 2007 showed that most consumers believe prices are too high. However, it also showed that they overestimate the price of water (Euro 4.80/m3 instead of the actual average price of Euro 3.02/m3). About 55% of the French population believe that treated wastewater is directly being reused as drinking water, which is not the case. The survey also shows that 84% of French consumers trust that the quality of their tap water is good. 67% declare that they drink water from the tap at least once a week. Those who are dissatisfied about tap water quality complain mainly about high levels of chlorine and calcium carbonate.

In 2008 there were 15,250 water treatment plants and 17,300 wastewater treatment plants in France. The wastewater treatment plants produced about one million tons of sludge, half of which is being used in agriculture. The water and sewer network is about 800,000 km long.

Water supply, sewerage and wastewater treatment is a municipal responsibility in France. Many municipalities, in particular the smaller ones, have created municipal associations in order to benefit from economies of scale. Municipalities and municipal associations often contract out water supply and/or sanitation services to the private sector through long-term lease contracts (affermage).

Six water agencies plan the management of water resources, collect fees for the abstraction of water from rivers and aquifers as well as for the discharge of wastewater to the environment, and use the proceeds to subsidize investments in water supply and sanitation.

At the national level, no single Ministry is in charge of the sector and a variety of Ministries and other entities have attributions concerning specific aspects of the sector.

The legal framework for water resources management, water supply and sanitation consists of three main laws: The Loi sur l'eau (Water Law) of 3 January 1992, the Loi n°95-101 relative au renforcement de la protection de l'environnement (Strengthening of Environmental Protection Law) of 2 February 1995 (« Loi Barnier »), and the Loi sur l’eau et les milieux aquatiques (Water and Aquatic Environment Law) of 30 December 2006. The latter transposes the EU Water Framework Directive into French law.

At the level of the national government, several Ministries have a role in determining policies for water supply and sanitation: The Ministry of Ecology, Energy, Sustainable Development and Territorial Planning (Meeddat), the Ministry of Health (in charge of monitoring drinking water quality), the Ministry of Interior (in charge of supervising local government) and the Ministry of Economy and Finance (which supervises the Water Agencies together with the Ministry of Ecology).

Environmental regulation is the responsibility of the Ministry of Ecology. Wastewater discharge standards, drinking water quality standards and the framework for water resources management are defined by the European Union through various directives (see EU water policy). The country's six water agencies (Agences de l'Eau, formerly Agences de Bassins) play an important role to bring together stakeholders at the basin level in a "Water Parliament", in levying water abstraction fees and wastewater discharge fees, and in financing infrastructure with the revenues from these fees.

A National Office for Water and the Aquatic Environment (Onema) was created in 2007 under the Ministry of Ecology with the objectives of developing the knowledge of and information about water resources and their uses; enforcing legislation related to water; and to assist local and regional governments in planning the use of water resources. Onema has a good presence on the ground through nine interregional offices and departmental offices. Its functions are related to water resources and not to water supply and sanitation.

Unlike in a few other countries (such as England and Wales, Portugal or Chile) there is no national regulatory agency in France that would approve tariffs and set and control service standards. There are also no regulatory agencies at the level of the Regions and Departments, unlike in US states. The economic regulation of private service provision is undertaken purely by contract through the municipality.

However, the Cour des Comptes (National Audit Entity) plays a role in monitoring water and sewer tariffs as well as expenditures by utilities.

At the local level, in municipalities with more than 10,000 inhabitants Consultative Commissions for Local Public Services assist municipalities in regulating service providers. The Commissions were created through the 1992 water law. After the commissions initially met with little success, they were strengthened through another law in 2002. Their purpose now is to provide better information on public services through the review of annual reports by the service providers and to be consulted on key decisions such as the delegation of service provision to the private sector or the creation of a municipal enterprise. The consultative commissions are usually chaired by the mayor and their members are members of the municipal council or are nominated by the municipal council. According to a 2003 report by the Cour des Comptes only few Consultative Committees have been created and, where they have been created, they have sometimes never met.

There are about 16,700 "organizing entities" (municipalities and municipal associations) in the French sanitation sector and 12,400 in the water sector. Among the 36,700 municipalities in France, at least 23,000 are part of 2,000 intermunicipal utilities with the specific purpose to provide water supply and – in some cases – sanitation services. Sanitation services (understood as sewerage and wastewater treatment in this context) are sometimes provided by the same entity that provides water services, but in some cases they are provided directly by the municipality while an intermunicipal utility is in charge of water supply.

Municipal associations (établissements publics de coopération intercommunale, EPCI) play a key role in water and sanitation service provision in France. The first ones were created during the 19th century. Today municipal associations together include 91.7% of French municipalities (33,636) and 86.7% of the French population.

Not all municipal associations provide water and/or sanitation services. Some of them provide only urban transport or solid waste management, while others serve multiple purposes. The most common and oldest form of associations are the syndicats intercommunaux, of which there were 18,504 in January 2008. They do not have powers to levy taxes. 14,885 syndicats intercommunaux serve a single purpose (SIVU), which in the case of some of them is water supply and/or sanitation. The remainder serve multiple purposes (SIVOM).

Subsequent laws created new types of municipal associations that sometimes compete and overlap with the syndicats intercommunaux. In particular the Loi Chevènement of 1999, named after the Ministry of Interior at the time, Jean-Pierre Chevènement, created or reorganized four other forms of municipal associations:

Unlike the syndicats intercommunaux these four latter types of municipal associations can levy taxes. They also receive subsidies from the national government as an incentive to create the associations, with higher subsidies for the most integrated form of association (urban communities) and lower subsidies for the less integrated forms (community of communities). The syndicats intercommunaux, which do not receive subsidies from the national government and are now somewhat declining in numbers, often count communities of agglomerations and communities of municipalities as their members. The resulting duplication has been criticized as wasteful by the " Black Book of Intercommunality " in 2006. A 2005 report by the Cour des Comptes also stated that the quality of the municipal associations is "not fully satisfactory".

Example:SEDIF An example of a single-purpose intermunicipal association for water supply is the Syndicat des Eaux d'Ile-de-France (SEDIF), which regroups 144 municipalities in the metropolitan area of Paris except for the city of Paris itself. Leaving private service providers apart, it is the largest utility in France, serving more than 4 million users. While SEDIF owns its infrastructure, it has contracted out service provision to the private enterprise Veolia Eau. Some municipalities within SEDIF's service area have chosen to provide water services themselves through communities of municipalities or metropolitan communities.

Water privatization in France goes back to the mid-19th century when cities signed concessions with private water companies for the supply of drinking water. Today, according to the Ministry of Environment 75% of water and 50% of sanitation services in France are provided by the private sector, primarily by two firms, Veolia and Suez. In 1993 the Loi Sapin strengthened competition in the sector by limiting the duration of contracts to 20 years, among others. In 2010 the lease contracts for Paris with Suez and Veolia expired and the water system returned to public management (remunicipalization).

Since the early 1990s a number of measures have been undertaken to strengthen competition, to fight corruption and to improve transparency in the French water and sanitation sector.

In January 1993 the French Parliament approved the Sapin Law (Loi Sapin) concerning the prevention of corruption and on the "transparency of economic life and public procedures". It received its name from Michel Sapin, the Socialist Minister of Economy and Finance at the time. A study by the Water Directorate of the Ministry of Environment, carried out by the consultancy TNS Sofres in 2006, showed the following impact of the law in the water and sanitation sector:

However, it also noted that the decline in payments to private operators has not been passed on to consumers, because it is partially or fully compensated by increases in local taxes.

In 2001 the Association of French Mayors has developed a standard contract for water supply and sanitation services that aims at strengthening the position of municipalities vis-à-vis private operators.

In 2002 the Association of French Mayors, the Assembly of French Departments, the Association of French Regions and the Institut de la Gestion Déléguée (IGD) signed a "Charter of Local Public Services". In the charter these entities commit themselves, among others, to the free choice of management models and the reversibility of these choices; objective comparisons between management models; to ensure transparency of costs and to equitably share gains in performance; and to strengthen local democracy and independent evaluations. In order to facilitate objective comparisons through benchmarking, performance indicators should be developed and an Observatory of Local Public Services should be created to monitor the indicators. In 2004 IGD issued a draft document containing 10 proposed performance indicators for water supply and sanitation. Six years later, the observatory has not been created. However, private water companies have collected and published for the first time indicators about their performance in 2008. A decree of May 2007 requires public service providers to provide the same information on service quality to the public that has been provided by private service providers, beginning in 2008.

Water and sanitation tariffs in France vary substantially from one service provider to the other. The six French public water agencies regularly publish the results of water tariff surveys (Observatoires de Prix) that they carry out among service providers in the respective areas they cover comparting tariff levels.

According to a 2003 study by the French Supreme Audit Agency (Cour des Comptes), the complexity of water tariffs makes them difficult to understand for users despite efforts to improve the presentation of water bills. The agency also states that flat-rate tariffs that are not linked to consumption levels still persist, although the 1992 water law aimed at linking water tariffs to consumption.

According to a study by NUS consulting, in 2007 the average residential water and sanitation tariff for the five largest cities in France was €2.92 per cubic meter for a consumption of 120 cubic meters per connection and year. This was lower than the average of 11 EU countries in the same year, which was €3.25 per cubic meter. According to the same study tariffs were highest in Denmark (€5.63/m3) and Germany (€5.09/m3).

However, for commercial tariffs the picture is somewhat different. According to another study by NUS consulting the average water tariff (without sanitation) in France for a consumption of 10,000 cubic meters pere year was the equivalent of US$1.58, the 5th most expensive out of the 14 countries considered in the study. In the 14 mainly OECD countries tariffs excluding VAT varied between US$0.66 per cubic meter in the United States and the equivalent of US$2.25 per cubic meter in Denmark.

According to a study commissioned by the German water industry association BGW in 2006, the picture is again somewhat different. This study does not compare tariffs per cubic meter, but average water bills. The average annual per capita water bill was 85 Euro in France, the same as in Germany (85 Euro), higher than in Italy (59 Euro) and lower than in England and Wales (95 Euro).

Comparison of annual water and sanitation bills per capita in four EU countries

Source: Metropolitan Consulting Group: VEWA – Vergleich europaeischer Wasser- und Abwasserpreise, 2006, p. 7 of the executive summary

Equalized costs net of subsidies and taking into account differences in service quality show a different picture: England and Wales have the highest tariffs, followed by France and Germany. Tariffs in Italy remain the lowest, even taking subsidies and differences in service quality into account.

Comparison of annual water and sanitation bills per capita in four EU countries taking into account subsidies and differences in service quality

Fees are destined to the six water agencies at the basin level mentioned above. Taxes include a water consumption tax and VAT.

According to a study by the consulting firm BIPE drawing on national statistics the share of household expenditures devoted to water and sewer bills was 0.8% and the average annual water and sewer bill was 374 Euro per household in 2005.

Investments in water supply and sanitation were estimated at 5.6 billion Euro in 2007. In 2003 the Association of French Departments estimated that the renewal of the water supply distribution infrastructure alone would require investments of 53 billion Euro from 2004 to 2015 to replace 535,000 km of pipes (about 65% of the entire network). This corresponds to an average of 4.4 billion Euro per year or 80 Euro/capita/year.

Investments are financed from a variety of sources. In 2006 investments were financed by municipalities (58%), Water Agencies (18%), private water companies (13%) and subsidies from the Départements and regions (11%). The contribution by municipalities is fully financed from tariff revenues collected for water and sanitation services, as well as by substantial fees (part collectivité) paid by private operators to the municipalities (Euro 2bn in 2006, or 30% of the amount billed by private operators) for the costs of investments (service budget of the municipality). Only in the case of municipalities with less than 3,000 inhabitants some limited tax revenue (general budget) is used to finance water and sanitation investments. The basin agencies finance themselves through charges for water abstraction and wastewater discharge by utilities and industries.

In rural areas, investment subsidies are available from the National Fund for the Development of Water Supply (Fonds National pour le Développement des Adductions d’Eau, FNDAE) This fund, created in 1954, is funded by a surcharge on all water bills (55% of funding) and by a share in the revenues of the public agency in charge of organizing horse race betting, the Pari Mutuel Urbain (45%). The FNDAE has an annual budget of 145m Euro. It is managed by the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries and its departmental branches.

Some municipalities and water agencies are engaged in international cooperation to improve access to water supply and sanitation in developing countries. As opposed to "centralized" international cooperation implemented by the French Development Agency or multilateral development banks, in France this form of aid is called decentralized cooperation. In 2002 the Court of Audit of France condemned decentralized cooperation by water agencies as contrary to their objectives. In response, the conservative member of Parliament André Santini, President of the Council of the Water Agency for Seine-Normandie and President of SEDIF, the utility in charge of water supply in the region of Paris, introduced a law passed in 2005 named after himself and former Senator Jacques Oudin. The Loi Oudin-Santini allows water agencies and municipal water companies to spend up to 1% of their budget on international cooperation. According to the NGO psEau the law could mobilize up to Euro 100 million. However, far from all water companies make use of the option provided by the law. The NGO s-eau-s (pronounced SOS) criticized the law, because it allegedly promotes the "export of the French water management model" and the "conquest of markets by big French water companies".

According to a report by the Association of Private Water Companies in France (FP2E), water losses stood at 19% of water production in 2010 (81% efficiency of the supply network, losses being equal to 100% minus the efficiency of the supply network), up from 18% in 2008.

According to a study commissioned by the German water industry association BGW water losses in the distribution network in France have been estimated at an average 26 percent, compared to only 7 percent in Germany, 19 percent in England/Wales and 29 percent in Italy The study states that its methodology allows for an accurate comparison, including water used to flush pipes and for firefighting. This is consistent with the International Water Association's definition of non-revenue water, which includes authorized non-metered consumption such as for flushing and firefighting.

According to a 2002 study by the Association of French Departments, non-revenue water was actually slightly higher and stood at 28%.

Wenzhounese (simplified Chinese : 温州话 ; traditional Chinese : 溫州話 ; pinyin : Wēnzhōuhuà, Wenzhounese: Iu Chiu ho), also known as Oujiang (瓯江话 ; 甌江話 ; Ōujiānghuà), Tong Au (东瓯片 ; 東甌片 ; Dōng'ōupiàn) or Au Nyü (瓯语 ; 甌語 ; Ōuyǔ), is the language spoken in Wenzhou, the southern prefecture of Zhejiang, China. It is the most divergent division of Wu Chinese, with little to no mutual intelligibility with other Wu dialects or any other variety of Chinese. It features noticeable elements in common with Min Chinese, which is spoken to the south in Fujian. Oujiang is sometimes used as the broader term, and Wenzhou for Wenzhounese proper in a narrow sense.

Given its long history and the isolation of the region in which it is spoken, Wenzhounese is so unusual in its phonology that it has the reputation of being the least comprehensible dialect for an average Mandarin speaker. It preserves a large amount of vocabulary of classical Chinese lost elsewhere, earning itself the nickname "the living fossil ", and has distinct grammatical differences from Mandarin.

Wenzhounese is one of five varieties of Chinese other than Standard Mandarin used for broadcasting by China Radio International, alongside Cantonese, Hokkien, Teochew, and Hakka.

Wenzhounese is part of the Wu group of Chinese dialects, sharing many linguistic features with them. These are spoken over the Zhejiang and south Jiangsu provinces. Wenzhounese is seen as a typical representative of southern Wu.

Wenzhounese is spoken primarily in Wenzhou and the surrounding southern portion of Zhejiang, China. To a lesser extent, it is also spoken in scattered pockets of Fujian in southeastern China. Overseas, it is spoken in increasingly larger communities in the United States in Flushing Chinatown in the Queens borough of New York City, and the Chinatowns in Brooklyn in New York City. Wenzhounese is also spoken by some Overseas Chinese communities in Europe, in particular Italy, France, and Spain. It is used more widely among the Chinese people in Italy than Mandarin. Over 80% of the Chinese diaspora that are resident in the city of Prato, Tuscany, were born in Zhejiang Province.

Wenzhounese can be generally divided into the following three dialects:

The most important difference between eastern Wenzhounese dialects such as Wencheng and Wenzhou proper are tonal differences (Wencheng has no falling tones) and the retention of /f/ before /o/ :

The tones of all other Oujiang dialects are similar to Wenzhounese.

The only coda is the velar nasal, in /aŋ eŋ oŋ/ and syllabic [ŋ̍].

Wenzhou has three phonemic tones. While it has eight phonetic tones, most of these are predictable: The yīn–yáng tone split dating from Middle Chinese still corresponds to the voicing of the initial consonant in Wenzhou, and the shǎng tones are abrupt and end in glottal stop (this has been used as evidence for a similar situation independently posited for Old Chinese). The rù tones, however, are unusual in being distinct despite having lost their final stops; in addition, the vowel has lengthened, and the tone has become more complex than the other tones (though some speakers may simplify them to low falling or rising tones).

The shǎng and rù tones are barely distinguishable apart from the voicing of the initial consonant, and so are phonetically closer to two tones than four. Chen (2000) summarizes the tones as M & ML (ping), MH (shǎng), HM & L (qu), and dipping (MLM, rù); not only are the píng and qù pairs obviously distinct phonetically, but they behave as four different tones in the ways they undergo tone sandhi.

As in Shanghainese, in Wenzhounese only some of the syllables of a phonological word carry tone. In Wenzhounese there may be three such syllables, with the tone of any subsequent (post-tonic) syllables determined by the last of these. In addition, there may be pre-tonic syllables (clitics), which take a low tone. However, in Wenzhounese only one tonic word may exist in a prosodic unit ; all other words are reduced to low tone.

Up to three tonic syllables may occur together, but the number of resulting tones is reduced by tone sandhi. Of the six phonetic tones, there are only fourteen lexical patterns created by two tonic syllables. With one exception, the shǎng and qù tones reduce to HM (yīn qù) before any other tone, and again with one exception, the rù tone does not interact with a following tone. The shǎng and rù tones change a preceding non- rù tone to HM, and are themselves never affected.

(Sandhi that are exceptions to the generalizations above are in bold.)

With a compound word of three syllables, the patterns above apply to the last two. The antepenultimate tonic syllable takes only two possible tones, by dissimilation : low if the following syllable (in sandhi form) starts high (HM), high otherwise. So, for example, the unusually long compound noun "daily necessities" (lit., 'firewood-rice-oil-salt-sauce-vinegar-tea') has the underlying tones

Per sandhi, the last two syllables become L.L. The antepenult then dissimilates to H, and all pre-tonic syllables become L, for:

At a phrasal level, these tones may separate, with a HM tone, for example, shifting to the beginning of a phrase. In the lexicalized phrase "radio receiver" ('wireless telephone tube'), the underlying tones are

Per sandhi, the last two become HM.ML. There is no dissimilation, explained by this being grammatically a lexicalized phrase rather than a compound. The HM shifts forward, with intermediate syllables becoming M (the tone the HM leaves off at):

Although checked (MLM) syllables rarely change in compound words, they can change in phrases: "tall steel case" is underlyingly M.MLM.HM. The middle syllable shifts to HM, and sandhi operates on this *HM.HM sequence to produce HM.ML. The HM then shifts back, yielding /HM.M.ML/.

Such behaviour has been used to support arguments that contour tones in languages like Chinese are single units and they are independent of vowels or other segments.

Wenzhou has a tonal deictic morpheme. To convey the sense of "this", the classifier changes its tone to rù (dipping), and a voiced initial consonant is devoiced. For example, from /pa˧/ 'group' there is /pa˧˨˧/ 'this group', and from /le˧˩/ 'some (people)' there is /l̥e˧˨˧/ 'these (people)'.

Wenzhounese is reputed to have been used during the Second Sino-Japanese War during wartime communication via code talkers and in the Sino-Vietnamese War for programming military code. There is a common rhymed saying in China that reflects this comprehension difficulty: "Fear not the Heavens, fear not the Earth, but fear the Wenzhou man speaking Wenzhounese" (天 不 怕 ， 地 不 怕 ， 就怕 温州人 说 温州话).

There are several sub-branches of Oujiang dialects, and some are not mutually intelligible with the Wenzhou city dialect and the Wencheng dialect, but neighboring dialects are often mutually intelligible. For example, there are 2 dialects spoken in Li'ao Village in the Ouhai District of Wenzhou: one spoken in Baimen (白門), where the local people have 姜 as their surname, and one spoken in Wangzhai (王宅), where local people have normally 王 or 黄 as their surname. Their dialects are almost fully mutually intelligible, except for a few vocabulary items. An example would be the word for "garbage" (垃圾), which is /ʔlutsuu/ in the Baimen dialect and /ʔladʒee/ in the Wangzhai dialect.

A translation of part of the New Testament, specifically the four gospels and the book of Acts, was published in 1894 under the title " Chaò-Chḯ Yi-sû Chī-tuh Sang Iah Sing Shī: Sz̀ fuh-iang tà sź-du 'ae-djüe fa üe-tsiu t'û¹-'ò ", with the entire book in Romanized Wenzhou dialect.

Werner Rosenberg (1913-1988) known as Véro, was a German-born French photographer and photojournalist.

Werner Rosenberg was a Jewish German. From the age of fifteen he became a passionate devotee of photography.

In 1933, he went to Paris, though his parents refused to accompany him. There he made his living from photography, producing portraits and industrial photographs, and contributing to Vu magazine (1928-1940), under the pseudonym 'Véro'. He was made a naturalized French citizen in 1939.

During WW2 and the German occupation of France he joined the Catholic resistance movement Compagnons de France (the 'Companions of France') and assumed the identity 'Michel Thibault' to protect himself. Denounced in 1943, he was forced to hide in the countryside around Isère.

After the war, he returned to live with his family in Paris as a freelance photographer, providing illustrations and reports for the Catholic press.

In 1955 his softly backlit photograph of a woman and children dancing in a ring under a glade of saplings in late afternoon light was selected by Edward Steichen for the world-touring exhibition The Family of Man that he curated for the Museum of Modern Art, and that was seen by 9 million visitors.

Rosenberg's reluctance to publicise his work has meant that since the 1960s he has been largely overlooked, despite his considerable output, and the consistent quality of his street photography especially. It was not until 1999, when a monograph published by Editions Didier Richard 200 clichés pour un nouveau millénaire ('Two Hundred Photographs for a New Millennium') was posthumously released by Rosenberg's son Christophe, that the photographer 'Véro' once more came to attention. Journalist Éric Merlen wrote its introduction. The two hundred monochrome photographs, made in the genre of Humanist photography, show rural and urban life in France from 1945 to 1970, many taken in Isère.

Rosenberg, W. A., & Merlen, E. (1999). 200 clichés pour un nouveau millénaire. Claix: Editions Didier Richard.

West-Flemish (West-Vlams or West-Vloams or Vlaemsch (in French Flanders), Dutch : West-Vlaams, French: flamand occidental) is a Low Franconian language spoken in western Belgium and the neighbouring areas of France and the Netherlands. Vlaemsch, or West-Flemish, despite minor regional differences, is classified by many linguistic authorities, including the country of France, UNESCO, Glottolog and Ethnologue, as a distinct language (ISO 639-3: vls) within the Low Franconian branch of the West-Germanic family, rather than a dialect of Dutch. It is recognized as a separate entity due to its significant phonological, lexical, and grammatical differences from Standard Dutch, such as its unique monophthongization and negative concord systems. Its mutual intelligibility with Standard Dutch is limited, similarly to Afrikaans.

West-Flemish (Vlaemsch) is spoken by about a million people in the Belgian province of West Flanders, and a further 50,000 in the neighbouring Dutch coastal district of Zeelandic Flanders (200,000 if including the closely related dialects of Zeelandic) and 10–20,000 in the northern part of the French department of Nord. Some of the main cities where West Flemish is widely spoken are Bruges, Kortrijk, Ostend, Roeselare and Ypres in Belgium and Hazebrouck, Cassel, Halluin, and Bailleul in France. These areas are part of what was once the historic "County Of Flanders" (pre-dating both the Netherlands and Belgium) making it the home of the ethnic Flemish people, who are now spread across three countries.

West-Flemish (Vlaemsch) is listed as a "vulnerable" language in UNESCO 's online Red Book of Endangered Languages

Despite the linguistic continuum and its political status as a "Dialect", several factors lead speakers and some organizations to treat it as a separate language.

West-Flemish (Vlaemsch) is assigned its own unique ISO code (vls,ISO 639-3 Code), distinct from Dutch (nld). This technical classification by international standards bodies treats it as a separate entity for documentation and preservation purposes. West-Flemish also evolved differently from the Brabantic dialect that formed the basis of modern Standard Dutch. It retains archaic features (such as specific vowel shifts and consonant lenition) and has unique grammatical structures (like subject pronoun doubling) that are not found in Dutch.

For many native speakers, the term "dialect" is often perceived as highly offensive and implies inferiority or a mere deviation from the norm. Identifying West-Flemish (Vlaemsch) as a language validates its rich literary history, unique idioms and words, and its role as a primary vehicle of local culture, distinct from the "Hollandic" influence of the Netherlands.

The argument for language status is strengthened by features that create a barrier to mutual intelligibility, distinguishing it from standard regional accents. While Standard-Flemish (Belgian-Dutch) has near 100% intelligibility with Netherlands Dutch, West-Flemish (Vlaemsch) can cut intelligibility for speakers from the Netherlands or even other parts of Flanders significantly without prior exposure. West-Flemish possesses grammatical structures absent in Dutch, most notably subject pronoun doubling and a distinct negative concord system. It retains archaic consonant shifts and uses -s for plurals, aligning it more closely with English and Low Saxon than with modern Standard Dutch.

The "dialect" label is often a political designation rather than a linguistic one, stemming from the lack of standardization in official domains.

In Belgian Flanders, Standard Dutch is the sole official language of education, government, and media. West-Flemish is not standardized for these high-prestige domains, leading to its classification as a dialect in administrative contexts. However, it gained official recognition as a regional language in France in 2021. In Belgium, while not officially a "minority language" under the unratified European Charter, it is culturally protected and recognized as a distinct heritage within the Flemish Community. For speakers, the term "language" is correct and validates their distinct cultural identity and literary history, rejecting the implication that their speech is merely a "corrupted" and "Uncivilized" version of Standard Dutch as is often implied on social media and daily life.

Despite some perceived similarities, its pronunciation and rules set it apart from Dutch much more significantly than many initially think. Some words, when it comes to more advanced topics or daily life, highlight the differences drastically.

Beyond structural differences, West-Flemish (Vlaemsch) features a rich layer of context-dependent particles and interjections that defy direct translation. Words like "Mohow", "Habaja", "Mohow zeh", "Mohow wi", "Wi", and "Eyla" function as linguistic shapeshifters. Their meaning shifts entirely based on tone, sentence position, and the speaker's intent. For instance, "Mohow" serves as a versatile interjection expressing surprise, skepticism, or emphasis (e.g., "Mohow, da mjindje nî" – "Wow, I didn't think of that"), while "Wi" and "Zeh" act as modal particles that soften commands, seek validation, or add emotional weight to a statement. Although their exact English equivalents are debatable, these terms are indispensable for conveying the authentic nuance and rhythm of the language.

(The following linguistic sections will, due to frequent association, highlight the differences between Dutch and West-Flemish/Vlaemsch)

Contrary to popular belief, understanding between West-Flemish (Vlaemsch) and Dutch is limited. It has a phonology that differs significantly from each other, being similar to Afrikaans in the case of long E, O and A. Also where Dutch has sch some regional versions of West-Flemish, like Afrikaans, has sk. However, the best known traits are the replacement of Dutch (pre-)velar fricatives g and ch in Dutch (/x, ɣ/) with glottal h [h, ɦ],. The following differences are listed by their Dutch spelling, as some different letters have merged their sounds in Dutch but remained separate sounds in West-Flemish. Pronunciations can also differ slightly from region to region.

The absence of /x/ and /ɣ/ in West-Flemish makes pronouncing them very difficult for native speakers. That often causes hypercorrection of the /h/ sounds to a /x/ or /ɣ/.

Standard Dutch also has many words with an -en (/ən/) suffix (mostly plural forms of verbs and nouns). While Standard Dutch and most dialects do not pronounce the final n, the West-Flemish language typically drops the e and pronounces the n inside the base word. For base words already ending with n, the final n sound is often lengthened to clarify the suffix. That makes many words become similar to those of English: beaten, listen etc.

The short o ([ɔ]) can also be pronounced as a short u ([ɐ]), a phenomenon also occurring in Russian and some other Slavic languages, called akanye. That happens spontaneously to some words, but other words keep their original short o sounds. Similarly, the short a ([ɑ]) can turn into a short o ([ɔ]) in some words spontaneously.

The diphthong ui (/œy/) does not exist in West Flemish and is replaced by a long u ([y]) or a long ie ([i]). Like for the ui, the long o ([o]) can be replaced by an [ø] (eu) for some words but a [uo] for others. That often causes similarities to ranchers English.

Here are some examples showing the sound shifts that are part of the vocabulary:

Plural forms in Dutch most often add -en, but West-Flemish usually uses -s. Under the influence of Dutch, -s is being used by fewer people, and younger speakers tend to use -en.

The verbs zijn ("to be") and hebben ("to have") are also conjugated differently.

West-Flemish (Vlaemsch) often has a double subject.

Standard Dutch has an indefinite article that does not depend on gender, unlike in West Flemish. However, a gender-independent article is increasingly used. Like in English, n is pronounced only if the next word begins with a vowel sound.

Another feature of West Flemish is the conjugation of ja and nee ("yes" and "no") to the subject of the sentence. That is somewhat related to the double subject, but even when the rest of the sentence is not pronounced, ja and nee are generally used with the first part of the double subject.

This conjugation can be negated with the extra word, toet ([tut]), or strengthened by adding mo- or ba- (or both).

West-Flemish (Vlaemsch) speakers have historically faced and continue to experience linguistic discrimination and stigmatization, though the nature of this prejudice varies by region and context.

In French Flanders, the discrimination was systemic and severe. For over a century, the French Republic actively suppressed West-Flemish (Vlaemsch) as part of a policy. Until the mid-20th century, children were forbidden from speaking West-Flemish in schools. Those caught speaking it were often subjected to humiliation or severe physical punishment, such as being forced to wear a "symbol" (a token passed to the next child caught speaking the dialect). Speaking West-Flemish was framed as a sign of social backwardness, an inferior ethnicity and even suspected as disloyalty to the French nation, particularly during periods of tension with Germany. This led many parents to stop transmitting the language to their children to protect them from discrimination, accelerating its decline.

In Belgium, while West-Flemish is not legally suppressed, it faces social prejudice and stereotyping. Historically, and persisting among some older generations, West-Flemish was viewed as a "lower class" language unsuitable for professional or academic settings. Speakers often felt pressured to switch to Dutch to avoid discrimination and being perceived as uneducated or rural. In fiction and comedy, the language is disproportionately used to portray simple-minded characters, villains, or comic relief, reinforcing the association between the language and its people with a lack of intelligence or sophistication. The media landscape reinforces these prejudices by treating West-Flemish (Vlaemsch) as a comedic device rather than a serious mode of communication.

The distinct accent and vocabulary can lead to exclusion or mockery from speakers of Dutch varieties. Anecdotal evidence suggests native speakers sometimes face frustration or condescension when communicating with people from other regions (e.g., Antwerp or the Netherlands) who struggle to understand them or dismiss their speech as "mumbling."

While overt discrimination has decreased, a linguistic hierarchy remains. Dutch is the exclusive language of education, government, and formal media, implicitly marking West-Flemish as inferior or purely informal. However, a cultural revival movement is actively challenging this stigma, promoting the language as a vital part of regional and even part of the Flemish ethnic identity rather than a mark of backwardness. Ages of discimination against the Flemish have fortunately not succeeded in wiping out West-Flemish (Vlaemsch).

Western Armenian (Western Armenian : Արեւմտահայերէն, romanized: Arevmdahayeren [ ɑɾɛvmədɑhɑjɛˈɾɛn ]) is one of the two standardized forms of Modern Armenian, the other being Eastern Armenian. It is based mainly on the Istanbul Armenian dialect, as opposed to Eastern Armenian, which is mainly based on the Yerevan Armenian dialect.

Until the early 20th century, various Western Armenian dialects were spoken in the Ottoman Empire, predominantly in the historically Armenian populated regions of Western Armenia. The dialectal varieties of Western Armenian currently in use include Homshetsi, spoken by the Hemshin people ; the dialects of Armenians in Kessab, Latakia and Jisr al-Shughur in Syria, Anjar in Lebanon, and Istanbul and Vakıflı, in Turkey (part of the "Sueidia" dialect). The Sasun and Mush dialects are also spoken in modern-day Armenian villages such as Bazmaberd and Sasnashen. The Cilician dialect is also spoken in Cyprus, where it is taught in Armenian schools (Nareg), and is the first language of about 3,000 people of Armenian descent.

Forms of the Karin dialect of Western Armenian are spoken by several hundred thousand people in Northern Armenia, mostly in Gyumri, Artik, Akhuryan, and around 130 villages in the Shirak province, and by Armenians in Samtskhe–Javakheti province of Georgia (Akhalkalaki, Akhaltsikhe).

A mostly diasporic language and one that is not an official language of any state, Western Armenian faces extinction as its native speakers lose fluency in Western Armenian amid pressures to assimilate into their host countries. According to Ethnologue, there are 1.58 million native speakers of Western Armenian, primarily in Turkey, Armenia, Georgia, Lebanon, and Iraq. The language is classified as 6b (i.e., threatened, with interruptions in intergenerational transmission).

Western Armenian is an Indo-European language belonging to the Armenic branch of the family, alongside Eastern and Classical Armenian. According to Glottolog, Antioch, Artial, Asia Minor, Bolu, Hamshenic, Cilicia, Mush - Tigranakert, Stanoz, Vanic and Yozgat are the main dialects of Western Armenian.

Western Armenian is spoken by Armenians of most of Southeast Europe and West Asia except for Iran, and Rostov-on-Don in Russia. It is a moribund language spoken by only a small percentage of Armenians in Turkey (especially in Istanbul) as a first language, with 18 percent among the community in general and 8 percent among younger people. There are notable diaspora L2 Western Armenian speakers in Lebanon (Beirut), Syria (Aleppo, Damascus), California (Fresno, Los Angeles), and France (Marseilles).

Western Armenian used to be the dominant Armenian variety, but as a result of the Armenian genocide, the speakers of Western Armenian were mostly murdered or exiled. Those who fled to Eastern Armenia now speak either Eastern Armenian or have a diglossic situation between Western Armenian dialects in informal usage and an Eastern Armenian standard. The only Western Armenian dialect still spoken in Western Armenia is the Homshetsi dialect, since the Hemshin peoples, who were Muslim converts, did not fall victim to the Armenian genocide.

Western Armenian isn't just predominant for Armenians in West Asia, the Armenians living in Southeastern Europe/Balkans, mostly Bulgaria, Romania, Greece, and Turkey (Istanbul) are Western Armenian speakers, who immigrated of the Armenian Genocide. Historically there was presence of Western Armenians (Cilicians) in Moldova.

On 21 February 2009, International Mother Language Day, a new edition of the Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger was released by UNESCO in which the Western Armenian language in Turkey was defined as a definitely endangered language.

In modern-day Armenia, the city of Gyumri took host to large numbers of Armenian refugees fleeing the Ottoman Empire from the Armenian Genocide. Many of these people spoke the Karin dialect of Armenian, which is spoken in Gyumri but overtime many Eastern Armenian and Russian words have been borrowed into the dialect. There was also a wave of Armenians coming from the rest of West Asia who were Western Armenian, who moved to the Soviet Union, mostly in Soviet Armenia. Many have assimilated into the Eastern Armenian dialect.

With Western Armenian being declared an endangered language, there has been recent pushback on reviving the language in Los Angeles, which is home to the largest concentration of Western Armenians.

Shushan Karapetian, in her evaluation of both the Eastern and Western dialects of Armenian, concludes that heritage languages, in the face of an English dominant society, rapidly die out within no more than 2 generations, calling America a "linguistic graveyard." In US census data, the percentage of people of Armenian ancestry who speak Western Armenian at home has rapidly declined, down from 25% in 1980 to 16% in 2000.

Western Armenian has seven monophthongs.

⟨իւ⟩ /ʏ/ is sometimes realized as /ju/ in nonstandard speech. The cluster թիւն /tʏn/ also shows phonetic variation, even in formal speech, with pronunciations ranging from /t͡ʃ(j)un/ and /tjun/ to /t͡ʃʏn/ and /tʏn/.

Western Armenian has nine vowel sequences in which two vowels appear together in the orthography but belong to the same syllable, forming diphthongs.

The letter ⟨ե⟩ frequently participates in diphthongs, representing sounds such as /jɑ/ and /jo/. When word-initial, ⟨ե⟩ alone denotes /jɛ/. The letter ⟨յ⟩ functions as a postvocalic glide, marking /j/ following vowels.

The cluster ⟨իյ⟩ /ij/ (solely in the word in իյնալ [iˈnɑl]) has generally merged with ⟨ի⟩ /i/ through glide loss.

In some cases, vowel sequences span syllable or morpheme boundaries rather than forming true diphthongs; in those environments, glide formation (yod insertion) is expected.

This is the Western Armenian Consonantal System using letters from the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA), followed by the corresponding Armenian letter in brackets.

The /f/ in Armenian is rare and exclusively used in non-native words; the letter "ֆ" was added to the alphabet much later.

The /w/ glide is not used except for foreign proper nouns, like Washington (by utilizing the "u" vowel, Armenian "ու").

The letters ր and ռ, although theoretically different, are generally realized as a single phoneme [ɾ] in Western Armenian. They will both be transcribed as /r/ henceforth.

The phoneme /ŋ/ appears as an allophone of /n/ before a velar stop (i.e. a /g/ or a /k/).

The primary phonological difference between Western Armenian and Classical Armenian lies in the stop and affricate system.

Classical Armenian distinguished three series of stops and affricates: voiced, voiceless unaspirated (plain), and voiceless aspirated. Western Armenian reduced this to a two-way contrast: voiced vs. aspirated. As a result, Classical Armenian's voiced series became aspirated in Western Armenian, while its plain voiceless series became voiced.

In comparison, Eastern Armenian fully preserves this contrast.

Classical Armenian /d͡ʒur/ "water" (⟨ջուր⟩) became Western Armenian /t͡ʃur/.

* Note that the exact quality of ե, է, ր and ռ are not known in Classical Armenian. However, they used to be distinct.

Western Armenian uses Classical Armenian orthography, also known as Mashdotsian orthography. The Armenian orthography reform (commonly called Abeghian orthography), first introduced in the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic and used by most Eastern Armenian speakers from Armenia, has not been adopted by Eastern Armenian speakers of Iran and their diaspora or by speakers of Western Armenian, with the exception of periodicals published in Romania and Bulgaria under Communist regimes.

Armenian lacks grammatical gender, including in pronouns. A feminine suffix -ուհի /uhi/ exists but carries no grammatical effect.

Western Armenian nouns have six grammatical cases : nominative - accusative (subject / direct object), genitive - dative (possession / indirect object), ablative (origin) and instrumental (means). Except for personal pronouns, the nominative and accusative are the same, and the genitive and dative are the same, meaning that nouns have four distinct forms for case.

Nouns in Armenian also decline for number (singular and plural). They are pluralized with the suffixes -եր /ɛr/ or -ներ /nɛr/, which are generally not interchangeable but follow predictable attachment patterns. Two other non-productive plural suffixes, -ք /k/ and -ց /t͡s/, inherited from Classical Armenian, both survive in a small set of nouns. For example, տղայ /dəʁɑ/ "boy" forms the plural տղաք /dəʁɑk/ "boys," and տիկին /digin/ "madam" forms տիկնանց /dignɑnt͡s/ "madams." Such nouns may follow regular pluralization.

Declension in Armenian is based on how the genitive is formed. There are several declensions, the first three (genitive in i, u, and a respectively) being more common. The genitive in i, however, is by far the most common, while other forms are in gradual decline and are being replaced by the i -form, which has virtually attained the status of a regular form. The plural is consistent across almost all declensions.

Other rare declensional forms are also found, though they have almost completely fallen out of use.

The indefinite article in Western Armenian is մը /mə/, and it follows the noun:

When followed by ալ ("also, too") or by the present/imperfect forms of եմ ("to be"), the article takes the form մըն /mən/:

The definite article is a suffix attached directly to the noun.

It appears either as -ն /n/ after vowels or -ը /ə/ after consonants:

When the noun is immediately followed by ալ, ու ("and"), or by a form of եմ ("to be"), the -ն form is used regardless of final sound:

Adjectives in Western Armenian are invariable: they do not decline for case or number and always precede the noun:

In informal Western Armenian, the accusative case merges with the dative, so the same form is used for both. Speech that preserves the distinct accusative forms is considered more formal or prestigious, as it is descended from Classical Armenian զ- /z/.

In nonstandard speech, the genitive case sometimes merges with the dative, too. For instance, ինծի է (literally "to me it is") is used to mean "it's mine."

Some uses of the instrumental case can also be replaced by the dative + հետ /hɛd/, particularly in informal speech. For example, քեզմով առաջացանք /kɛzmov ɑrɑt͡ʃɑt͡sɑŋk/ "we advanced by means of/thanks to you" can also be expressed as քեզի հետ առաջացանք /kɛzi hɛd-/. A similar construction uses a genitive pronoun + հետ + a possessive enclitic, as in քու հետդ առաջացանք /ku hɛdət-/. These constructions overlap in meaning in some contexts, but are generally not interchangeable.

The primary distinction among proximal, medial, and distal demonstrative pronouns lies in the initial consonants ս (s), տ (d), and ն (n).

The accusative case is hardly seen in informal speech; it generally merges with the nominative case.

Armenian verbs are fully conjugated for all pronouns, and as such, the language is pro-drop. Verbs in Armenian are complex but are based on two basic series of forms, a "present" form and an "imperfect" form. From this, all other tenses and moods are formed with various particles and constructions. There is a third form, the preterite, which in Armenian is a tense in its own right, and takes no other particles or constructions.

The present tense in Western Armenian is based on three conjugations (a, e, i):

The present tense is made by adding the particle կը (gə) before the "present" form, except for five defective verbs: եմ (em : I am), կամ (gam : I exist, I'm there), ունիմ (unim : I have), գիտեմ (kidem : I know), կրնամ (gərnam : I can).

The future tense is formed by adding պիտի (bidi), often shortened to պիտ (bid) in rapid speech.

For defective verbs, the future tense is formed as follows: ըլլամ (used for both եմ and կամ), ունենամ, գիտնամ, and կարենամ/կրնամ, respectively.

In the vernacular language, the particle կոր /gor/ (< Turkish -iyor) is added after the verb to indicate present progressive tense. This distinction is not made in literary Armenian.

The Western European broadleaf forests is an ecoregion in Western Europe, and parts of the Alps. It comprises temperate broadleaf and mixed forests, that cover large areas of France, Germany and the Czech Republic and more moderately sized parts of Poland, Austria, Switzerland, Belgium and South Limburg (Netherlands). Luxembourg is also part of this ecoregion.

The Western European broadleaf forests ecoregion covers an area of 492,357 km (190,100 sq mi), including the Massif Central, Central German Uplands, Jura Mountains, Bavarian Plateau, and Bohemian Massif.

This area has been inhabited for thousands of years and holds several large cities such as Lyon, Nancy and Munich. Most of the countryside has been cleared for agricultural land, cultivated with cereals (corn, wheat, oats), and to a smaller extent grapes. The ecoregion hosts a good variety of animal species, birds in particular, but most large mammals are in decline.

The forest habitats of the ecoregion comprise mainly lowland and alti- montane mixed beech forests. There is also some natural beech woods, and the region also includes small parts of sub-Mediterranean forest habitats. The dominant trees in this forest are Quercus robur, Quercus petraea, Picea abies, Alnus glutinosa, Fagus sylvatica, Taxus baccata, Acer pseudoplatanus, Malus sylvestris, Viburnum lantana, Fraxinus excelsior, Tilia cordata, Aesculus hippocastanum, Rhamnus cathartica, Ulmus glabra, Ulmus minor, Populus alba, Salix alba, Pinus sylvestris, Betula pendula, Populus tremula, Populus nigra, Juglans regia, Juniperus communis, Prunus padus and Corylus avellana

Most of the original forest of the ecoregion has been cleared in the last 200 years, but a few larger patches remain, typically in non-arable montane areas that are part of national parks or protections. The woodlands of the ecoregion is generally second-growth and heavily fragmented.

National parks and larger nature protections in the ecoregion include:

Luxembourg maintains the Upper Sûre Natural Park, but this park covers mostly the Upper Sûre Lake, an artificial dam created in 1959, and no land area of significance. The lake is an important bird area. Luxembourg also holds part of the cross-border German-Luxembourg Nature Park in addition to several smaller nature reservations. Here eco-typical patches of forest are growing.

Austria does not have any protections in this ecoregion.

The whistled language of Aas (in French: langage sifflé d'Aas, occitan sifflé d'Aas ; in Occitan : siular d'Aas) is a whistled language used in the Pyrennees village of Aas, located in the Béarn area of southern France. Local pastoral activities and shepherds benefited from long distant communication allowed by whistled and the mountainous topography. Whistled Occitan is based on the local Béarnese dialect of Gascon, itself often regarded as a dialect of Occitan. According to Philippe Biu, it is "a practice known as the whistled language of Aas, but above all it is a technique [allowing] speech to be transposed as whistling".

The use of the language was first documented in the 15th century.

The local topography, notably including deep valleys, allows for quality sound transmission, with a usable range of over 2 kilometres (1.2 miles). The inhabitants of the area therefore began using a whistled transposition of the Gascon dialect of the Occitan language as a means of communicating between the pastures and the village, or from one part of a valley to another.

The language was transmitted from generation to generation, however, rural flight and the adoption of new communication techniques caused this transmission to cease.

After being informed of the practice, René-Guy Busnel [ fr ], acoustician and directeur d'études (university educator) at the École pratique des hautes études, documented the whistled language in 1950. The natural use of the language in the Ossau Valley ceased toward the end of the 20th century as the agricultural lifestyle disappeared along with the passing of the final remaining goatherds who used the language. Anne Pallas, the last historical user of the language, died in 1999.

The cultural heritage status of the language and regrets over its disappearance brought several local Béarnese language activists to contribute to revitalisation efforts. Participants travelled to La Gomera in the Canary Islands to learn from 'master whistlers' of Silbo Gomero. An association titled Lo siular d'Aas, led by Philippe Biu and containing over ten members, is working to revive the language. The University of Pau and the Adour Region (UPPA) offers a class taught by Philippe Biu. The Lo siular d'Aas association, the regional council, the UPPA and the middle school (collège) in Laruns support the preservation of the language with bilingual classes taught in French and Occitan.

Research projects and a digital content repository have been discussed.

In 2024, audio recordings of the language were released for the first time in open access and under a free license through a collaboration between the University of Toulouse and Wikimedia projects, notably the Lingua Libre project run by Wikimedia France. In the same year, a temporary exhibition titled Siffler le gascon, histoire d'une renaissance (Whistling Gascon, history of a renaissance) took place at Anglet. An interactive map created for the exhibition allowed guests to explore the Occitan area and hear the names of villages in the whistled language.

The language is articulated around four vowels (i, e, à, o) and four consonants (ke, ye, che, ge).

Window tax was a property tax based on the number of windows in a house. It was a significant social, cultural, and architectural force in England, Scotland, France and Ireland during the 18th and 19th centuries. To avoid the tax, some houses from the period can be seen to have bricked-up window-spaces for the purpose of (re)glazing after the repeal of the tax. In England and Wales it was introduced in 1696 and in Scotland from 1748. It was repealed in both cases in 1851. In France it was established in 1798 and was repealed in 1926.

The tax was introduced in England and Wales in 1696 under King William III, by the Taxation (No. 3) Act 1695 (7 & 8 Will. 3. c. 18), and was designed to impose tax relative to the prosperity of the taxpayer, but without the controversy that then surrounded the idea of income tax.

At that time, many people in Britain opposed income tax, on principle, because the disclosure of personal income was perceived by them to represent an unacceptable governmental intrusion into private matters, and a potential threat to personal liberty. The first permanent British income tax was not introduced until 1842, and the tax remained controversial into the 20th century.

When the window tax was introduced, it consisted of two parts: a flat-rate house tax of two shillings per house (equivalent to £ 16.32 in 2025), and a variable tax for the number of windows above ten in the house. Properties with between ten and twenty windows paid an extra four shillings (equivalent to £ 32.65 in 2025), and those above twenty windows paid an extra eight shillings (equivalent to £ 65.29 in 2025).

In 1709, with the union of England and Scotland, taxes were harmonised and a new top rate of 20s total was introduced for houses with 30 or more windows. In 1747 the 2s flat rate was detached from the window tax as a tax in its own right and the way the window tax was calculated was altered. 6d was charged for each window in a house with 10–14, 9d for each window in a house with 15–19, 1s for every window in a house with 20 or more. In 1758 the flat rate charge was increased to 3s. The number of windows that incurred tax was changed to seven in 1766 and eight in 1825.

The flat-rate tax was changed to a variable rate, dependent on the property value, in 1778. People who were exempt from paying church or poor rates, for reasons of poverty, were exempt from the window tax. Window tax was relatively unintrusive and easy to assess. An example was Manchester Royal Infirmary which had to pay a tax of 1/9d per window on the windows of the rooms occupied by staff of the infirmary in 1841—a total of £1 9/9d. Certain rooms, particularly dairies, cheese rooms and milkhouses, were exempt providing they were clearly labelled, and it is not uncommon to find the name of such rooms carved on the lintel. The bigger the house, the more windows it was likely to have, and the more tax the occupants would pay. Nevertheless, the tax was unpopular, because it was seen by some as a tax on "light and air".

In The Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith briefly discussed the window tax as one case among various forms of taxation. Smith observed that the tax was relatively inoffensive because its assessment did not require the assessor to enter the residence—a building's windows could be counted from the outside. On the other hand, Smith reported that others objected to the tax on the grounds of its inequality, since it was thought to have a disproportionate impact on the poor. Smith himself observed that the tax's effect was to lower rent.

In Scotland, a window tax was imposed after 1748. A house had to have at least seven windows or a rent of at least £5 to be taxed. Windows that have been filled with masonry may have no connection to taxation, but reflect the location of staircases, fireplaces or for purposes of maintaining the symmetry of a building facade.

In Ireland, the tax was introduced in 1799 and was not repealed until 1851. Similarly, a glass tax was introduced in 1825 and remained in place until 1845.

A similar tax also existed in France from 1798 to 1926.

There was a strong agitation in England in favour of the abolition of the tax during the winter of 1850–51, and it was accordingly repealed on 24 July 1851, and a tax on inhabited houses substituted. The Scottish and Irish window taxes were abolished at the same time.

The saying "daylight robbery" is popularly believed to originate with the window tax, but there appears to be no scholarly support for this. Another associated idea is that the tax inspired Europeans to begin using bricked-up windows, although this is most likely untrue, as blind windows were used for aesthetic purposes since at least the medieval period, such as on the Church of Saint John the Baptist, Kerch, Crimea, built in 757 AD. Windows were also bricked up in Europe from the 1600s to avoid taxes.

The Windward Islands moist forests ecoregion (WWF ID: NT0179) covers forested, high-precipitation areas of the volcanic Windward Islands. The forested areas are mostly at higher elevations in the interior of the islands, surrounded by dry forests, dry shrubland, or mangroves on the flat coastal lowlands. Closed forest of this ecoregion cover the majority of the islands. Species diversity is very high.

The Windward Islands are a volcanic island arc, with mountainous interiors in which steep slopes and difficulty converting the land to agriculture has provided some protection from human settlement and development. Moist forests are found on the islands of Dominica, Martinique, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent, and Grenada.

The climate of the ecoregion is Tropical rainforest climate (Köppen climate classification (Af)). This climate is characterized as hot, humid, and having at least 60 mm of precipitation every month. The rainy season occurs in the summer and fall, with precipitation ranging from 10,000 mm/year in the high elevations of Dominica to 3,750 mm/year in the lower elevations of Grenada.

70% of the ecoregion is closed, broadleaf evergreen forest. Another 20% is open forest. The characteristics tree species of the mature forests are gommier (Dacryodes excelsa), (Amanoa caribaea), and trees of genus (Sloanea). The mature forests feature widespread epiphytes and lianas, with an understory of Licania ternatensis and Tapura antilliana. Forests that have been cleared for agriculture or timber are typically reforested by Miconia mirabilis and Cecropia schreberiana.

The Witch trials in France are poorly documented, mainly because a lot of the documents of former witch trials have not been preserved, and no number can therefore be given for the executions of witch trials in France or the true extent of them. While there is much secondary information about witch trials in France, the poor state of documentation often makes them hard to confirm.

As no national Witchcraft Act was enacted in France, they fell under the jurisdiction of local courts and the witch hunt differed between regions. The witch trials of Northern France fell under the jurisdiction of the Parlement of Paris, which was normally not liberal in enforcing the death penalty. However, the local courts did not always defer to Paris, which is another contributing factor to the difficulty in estimating the witch hunt in France. Present day North Eastern France is known to have experienced a severe witch hunt, close to the border of the territories of the Catholic Prince Bishops as it was, but at that point this, part of France belonged to the Holy Roman Empire.

The first witch trial believed to be held at Le Châtelet in Paris, in 1390, ended with the execution of Jeanne de Brigue. During the first half of the 16th century, a few cases of witch trials are noted to have taken place in France. In 1539 a witch trial resulted in four executions in Beaujolais ; in 1553 a " Faustian magician" was executed in Poitiers ; and in 1558 and 1562 witch trials were conducted in Nevers and Toulouse respectively both of which resulted in three executions.

In France, no national witchcraft law was introduced, and the procedure of such a trial was therefore up to the local court and judge to decide. The book Demonomanie by Jean Bodin, which was published in 1578, was to have a great impact upon the witch trials in France.

Northern France was under the jurisdiction of the Parlement of Paris, and all sentences of local witchcraft trials therefore fell under its jurisdiction. This proved to have an inhibiting effect on witch trials in Northern France. Between 1568 and 1625, the Parlement of Paris only confirmed one hundred death sentences for witchcraft and thus confirmed less than five percent of the cases from local courts which were put before it.

The Parlement of Paris refused to follow the example of other countries and make witchcraft an "Exceptional Crime". In 1588, the Parliament issued regulations to prevent what they termed as "excessive" zeal and exaggerations in witchcraft persecutions. However, it is known that local courts ignored the recommendations of the Parlement of Paris, and the number of local witchcraft sentences which were never reported or appealed to Paris, is unknown or unconfirmed.

In 1624, a new law required all sentences made by a local court in Northern France to be confirmed by the Parlement of Paris before they could be carried out. With one exception, the Parlement of Paris stopped confirming death sentenced for witchcraft after 1625. However, local witch trials who did not report their cases to be confirmed by Paris would still go undetected.

The North East of present-day France, particularly Lorraine and Franche-Comté (at that time a part of the Holy Roman Empire), was an area strongly affected by witch hunt. About 800 witch trials took place in these areas with numerous executions in the period of 1603-1614 and 1627-1632, and again in France-Comté with 100 executions in 1658-1661.

Southern France was not under the jurisdiction of the Parlement of Paris, and a number of large witch trials were conducted there during the first half of the 17th century, among them being the famous Labourd witch-hunt of 1609 and the Aix-en-Provence possessions (1611).

Peronne Goguillon has been referred to as the last woman to be executed for witchcraft in France in 1678. There have been different opinions as to whether the Affair of the Poisons (1679–1682) should be defined a witch trial or not. While the accused of the Affair de Poisons had indeed positioned themselves as professional witches, they were prosecuted and executed for poison and murder rather than for witchcraft.

The 1682 Edict of Louis XIV described witchcraft as fraudulent magic, a definition which did not as such prevent witch trials, but made it more difficult to convict people of witchcraft.

A few witch trials were conducted in France during the 18th century, some of which resulted in death sentences for men. The execution of an alleged male sorcerer in Bordeaux in 1718 has traditionally been referred to as the last. However, a donkey -driver was in fact executed for this crime in Paris in 1724.

The last witch trial resulting in an execution in France was likely that of Louis Debaraz, who was executed in Lyon in 1745. He was executed as the last of several men implicated in the Lyon witch trials in 1743–1745, in which several men were charged with making a Devil's pact in order to find hidden treasures, following the case of Bertrand Guilladot. As late as 1768, a woman was tried and convicted of witchcraft in France, but she was only given a fine.

The roles of women in France have changed throughout history. In 1944, French women obtained women's suffrage. As in other Western countries, the role of women underwent many social and legal changes in the 1960s and 1970s. French feminism, which has its origins in the French Revolution, has been quite influential in the 20th century with regard to abstract ideology, especially through the writings of Simone de Beauvoir. In addition the article covers scholarly work on topics in history, education, reproductive rights, families, feminism, domestic violence, religion and art.

The traditional role of women in French society involved domestic duties such as housekeeping, preparation of meals in the customary fashion that involves a "succession of courses eaten one at a time", child rearing, harvesting of crops, and tending to farm animals.

In the Middle Ages, education for girls was highly dependent on class status. While convents were the most prominent educational facilities for select girls from the upper classes from the 6th-13th centuries, some were also able to attend village or castle schools. In convents, they learned Latin reading and writing, weaving, painting, morals, manners and music.

Upon the onset of the Industrial Revolution in France, women's roles changed with them becoming domestic helpers, factory workers, and washerwomen. That did not generally include women who had bourgeosie status, who often were dependent on the financial support of their husbands; such women of upper-class status also had the tendency to send their own children to wet nurses until weaned.

In the late 1800s, French women and girls demanded access to education, including high school diplomas and university admissions. In 1871, Julie Daubié became the first woman to graduate from the Sorbonne, followed a number of years later by Marie Curie.

Very slow population growth, especially compared to that of Germany, continued to be a serious issue in the early 20th century. Natalists wanted higher marriage rates and higher birth rates among the French, but they also encouraged immigration from the rest of Europe. Propagandists from the French pro-natalist movement advised women that they were abandoning their family responsibilities under the influence of feminism. One new role was for French women to marry "assimilable" immigrants in order to produce "indubitably French offspring." The Conseil Supérieur de la Natalité campaigned for provisions enacted in the Code de la Famille (1939), which increased state assistance to families with children and required employers to protect the jobs of fathers, including those who were immigrants, during the Great Depression.

The status of women in France took a major step forward in 1944, when French women finally gained the right to vote – decades later than other European countries, Australia or the United States. However, it was only in 1965 that they won the right to work without permission from their husbands, in addition to the right to open personal bank accounts. In 1967, the Neuwirth Law legalized French women's access to oral contraception, and in 1975, the Veil Act legalized abortion.

Due to effective health care provision in the country, as of 2024, the life expectancy of women in France is at an average of 85.6 years old.

Educational aspirations were rising and becoming increasingly institutionalised to supply the church and the state with the civil servants to serve as their future administrators. Girls were schooled too but not to assume political responsibility. They were ineligible for leadership positions and were generally considered to have an inferior intellect to that of their brothers. France had many small local schools in which working-class children, both boys and girls, learned to read, the better "to know, love, and serve God." The sons and daughters of the noble and bourgeois elites were given gender-specific educations: boys were sent to upper school, perhaps a university, and their sisters, if they were lucky enough to leave the house, would be sent to board at a convent with a vague curriculum.

The Enlightenment challenged that model, but no real alternative was presented for female education. Only through education at home were knowledgeable upper-class women formed, usually to the sole end of dazzling their salons.

Women in France obtained many reproductive rights in the second half of the 20th century. The Neuwirth Act of 1967 authorized contraception. The Veil Law of 1975 legalized abortion. The maternal mortality rate in France is 8.00 deaths/100,000 live births (as of 2010). France's HIV/AIDS rate is 0.4% of adults (aged 15–49) - estimates of 2009. France has been one of the first countries to take legal action against female genital mutilation (which occurs in its immigrant communities) and to prosecute those who perform the practice.

In common with other countries in Mediterranean Europe and of Roman Catholic tradition, French organization of family life has traditionally been conservative and founded on distinct gender roles. Under the Napoleonic Code, married women were subordinated to the husband's authority. Married French women obtained the right to work without their husband's consent in 1965. The paternal authority of a man over his family was ended in 1970 (before that, parental responsibilities belonged solely to the father who made all legal decisions concerning the children); and a new reform in 1985 abolished the stipulation that the father had the sole power to administer the children's property. Adultery was decriminalized in 1975. In 1990, a case in which a man had tortured and raped his wife had the Court of Cassation authorise the prosecution of spouses for rape or sexual assault. In 1992, the Court of Cassation convicted a man of the rape of his wife and stated that the presumption that spouses have consented to sexual acts that occur within marriage is valid only if the contrary is not proven. Until 1994, France kept in the French Penal Code the article from 1810 that exonerated rapists if they later married their victim, and in 1994, Law 94-89 criminalized all marital rape.

In 1999, France introduced PACS (a civil union, known as "civil solidarity pact", which can be contracted both by heterosexual and by same-sex couples). In 2005, France reformed its divorce laws, simplifying the procedure, in particular by reducing the separation period, necessary before a divorce in certain circumstances, from 6 years to 2 years (reduced to one year in 2021); there are now four types of divorce that can be obtained (divorce by mutual consent; divorce by acceptance; hostile divorce; divorce for separation). A law, passed 4 April 2006, makes rape by a partner (including in unmarried relationships, marriages, and civil unions) an aggravating circumstance in prosecuting rape.

In the past decades, social views on the traditional family have changed markedly, which is reflected in the high proportion of cohabitation and births outside of marriage and in a questioning of traditional expectations regarding the family; in the European Values Study (EVS) of 2008, 35.4% of respondents in France agreed with the assertion "Marriage is an outdated institution".

As of 2023, 63,9% of children were born outside of marriage. In France, legal reforms regarding the " illegitimacy " of children (born outside of marriage) began in the 1970s, but it was only in the 21st century that the principle of equality was fully upheld (through Act no. 2002-305 of 4 March 2002, removing mention of "illegitimacy" — filiation légitime and filiation naturelle and through Law 2009-61 of 16 January 2009). In 2001, France was forced by the European Court of Human Rights to change several laws that were deemed discriminatory, and in 2013, the Court ruled that those changes must be applied also to children born before 2001.

Feminism in France has its origins in the French Revolution. Some famous figures were notable in the 19th century, including Louise Michel, Russian-born Elisabeth Dmitrieff and Nathalie Lemel. French feminism encompasses a branch of feminist theories and philosophies that emerged in the 1970s to the 1990s. This French feminist theory, compared to Anglophone feminism, is distinguished by an approach which is more philosophical and literary, rather than focused on practical issues. Its writings tend to be effusive and metaphorical being less concerned with political doctrines.

Simone de Beauvoir, a French writer, intellectual, existentialist philosopher, political activist and social theorist, is a prominent feminist figure. She is known for her 1949 treatise The Second Sex, a detailed analysis of women's oppression and a foundational tract of contemporary feminism.

In the 21st century, France has taken many steps in order to combat domestic violence and violence against women, in particular by enacting Law No. 2010-769, of July 9, 2010, on Violence Against Women, Violence Between Spouses, and the Effects of These Types of Violence on Children. France has also ratified the Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence.

France has a long tradition of indulgence towards crimes of passion, which before 1975 were treated legally very leniently. In France, as of 2004 to 2009, former and current partners were responsible for more than 80% of all cases of murders of women.

The traditional religion of France is Roman Catholicism, but today it is no longer the state religion; and contemporary France is one of the most secular countries in Europe. In France, freedom of religion is guaranteed by the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen. The Republic is based on the principle of laïcité enforced by the 1880s Jules Ferry laws and the 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State. Today, France also has a sizable Muslim population. In 2010, France enacted a ban on face covering, prohibiting the wearing of niqab, burqa and similar outfits in public places. In 2014, the European Court of Human Rights upheld the French law, accepting the argument of the French government that the law was based on "a certain idea of living together".

Particularly noteworthy French women painters during the late 18th century include Adélaïde Labille-Guiard, Anne Vallayer-Coster, and Louise Élisabeth Vigée Le Brun. Vallayer-Coster was prominent for her figural paintings of King Louis XV 's daughters and his daughter-in-law Marie Antoinette. Marie Antoinette and the Mesdames de France, also helped Labille-Guiard and Vigée Le Brun obtain admission to the Académie which caused a huge stir among the press, who decided to pit them as rivals against each other. The French Revolution of 1789 created a hostile environment for artists at the time, particularly those supported by the royal family. Vigée Le Brun and Vallayer-Coster, along with many other female artists, fled to other parts of Europe and Russia. Labille-Guiard, however, chose to stay and built a respectable reputation painting the faces of the Revolution. After the Revolution, lesser known women artists were able to use the now wide-open biennial Salon (France) to display their art to a more receptive audience.

After the French Revolution, the number of French women artists sharply declined. It was the monarchy who gave women artists, especially painters, the opportunities to succeed. The Royal Academy was closed down and replaced with an institution that barred the admittance of women. Some female artists close to the monarchy were even executed. It wasn't until the end of the 19th century that a significant number of women were combating stereotypical gender roles. Traditional gender roles hindered prospective French women's artistic careers. While drawing and painting at the amateur level was encouraged as a part of a good bourgeois education, women were not socially permitted to engage in professional careers that were deemed unimportant to society and/or disrupted in the perceived women's role of being a fully functional wife and mother. Many of the artists of this time felt the need to choose between a career and marriage. Also, any female students who did receive training from a skilled artist, and the limited expectations generally had them left with the simplest of artistic tasks. In 1860, Marie Bracquemond, a rising impressionist artist, quipped of her instructor, famous painter Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres, "The severity of Monsieur Ingres frightened me... because he doubted the courage and perseverance of a woman in the field of painting... He would assign to them only the painting of flowers, of fruits, of still lifes, portraits and genre scenes."

In the 1870s, life drawing classes became more open to French female students aspiring to be artists in Paris. Perhaps the most successful French woman artist in this era was Rosa Bonheur, who was well known for her animal paintings as well her sculptures. At a time that was dominated by male artistic ability, Bonheur is received very positively and rated very well among all of her peers. In an attempt to reject the gender roles, she cut and maintained a short hairstyle and also requested permission from the police to wear man's pants in order to remain relatively unnoticed in farms and slaughterhouses while she painted animals and studied animal anatomy. Due to concerns like this, women were more likely to embrace movements like the Impressionism that put artistic emphasis on everyday subjects, and not historical themes, that could be painted at home. Despite these hindrances, France was still one of the leading countries for the private tutelage of artistic women at the end of the 18th century. When the École des Beaux-Arts —the primary training facility—eventually succumbed to heavy pressure and began admitting women in 1897, France was no longer the hold-out in providing women with a state-sponsored education.

Women painters built their own support network in Paris. By the 1880, the Union des Femmes Peintres et Sculpteurs played a central role although only a select few women were admitted into quality artistic schools, including the prestigious Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture (Royal Academy). Camille Claudel (1864–1943) was at first censored as she portrayed sexuality in her work. Her response was a symbolic intellectual style that was opposed to the "expressive" approach that was normally attributed to women artists. Her work became well regarded.

With regard to literature, France is well known for the writer George Sand (the pseudonym of Amantine Lucile Aurore Dupin).

Historians since the late 20th century have debated how women shared in the French Revolution and what impact it had on French women. Women had no political rights in pre-Revolutionary France; they were considered "passive" citizens, forced to rely on men to determine what was best for them. That changed dramatically in theory as there seemingly were great advances in feminism. Feminism emerged in Paris as part of a broad demand for social and political reform. These women demanded equality for women and then moved on to a demand for the end of male domination. Their chief vehicle for agitation were pamphlets and women's clubs. The Jacobin element in power abolished all the women's clubs in October 1793 and arrested their leaders. The movement was crushed. Devance explains the decision in terms of the emphasis on masculinity in wartime, Marie Antoinette 's bad reputation for feminine interference in state affairs, and traditional male supremacy. A decade later the Napoleonic Code confirmed and perpetuated women's second-class status.

The French Revolution also sparked the modern feminist movement as women's rights resonated globally. It inspired movements like New Zealand's suffrage bill and helped shape the foundation of modern feminism, challenging traditional gender roles and advocating for universal equality.

Women in pre-Revolutionary France could not vote or hold any political office. They were considered "passive" citizens, forced to rely on men to determine what was best for them in the government. It was the men who defined these categories, and women were forced to accept male domination in the political sphere.

Single and married women had the same lack of rights. They did have rights in civil and criminal courts, which allowed their testimonies to be heard. In some instances, women were allowed to be part of contractual relationships however, they were not allowed to be part of notarized acts such as wills. For most women, all of their rights were under their father's authority until marriage, then the authority would be passed down to the husband. Married women had no rights over themselves nor any property. Only in the instance of her husband's death women would be allowed ownership over property. Laws and traditions confined women to work strenuous, labor-intensive jobs, which gave earnings that were significantly lower than men's income, and did not allow rights to improve their status or become masters at their trade. Women had some political rights, including women in religious orders, noblewomen and some women of the Third Estate including widows. Their involvement in political matters pertained to being allowed to send representatives to participate in primary assemblies.

Women were taught to be committed to their husbands and "all his interests...[ Whatever it may be like cooking food, doing chores.]attention and care... [and] sincere and discreet zeal for his salvation." A woman's education often consisted of learning to be a good wife and mother; thus, women were not supposed to be involved in the political sphere, as the limit of their influence was the raising of future citizens. The subservient role of women before the revolution was perhaps best exemplified by the Frederician Code, published in 1761 and attacked by Enlightenment philosophers and publications.

The highly influential Encyclopédie in the 1750s set the tone of the Enlightenment, and its ideas exerted influence on the subsequent Revolution in France. Writing several articles on women in society, Louis de Jaucourt criticized traditional roles for women, arguing that "it would be difficult to demonstrate that the husband's rule comes from nature, in as much as this principle is contrary to natural human equality... a man does not invariably have more strength of body, of wisdom, of mind or conduct than a woman... The example of England and Russia shows clearly that women can succeed equally in both moderate and despotic government..." One of the greatest influences foreshadowing the revolutionary and republican transformations in women's roles was Jean-Jacques Rousseau 's educational treatise Emile (1762). Some liberal men advocated equal rights for women, including women's suffrage. Nicolas de Condorcet was especially noted for his advocacy, in his articles published in the Journal de la Société de 1789, and by publishing De l'admission des femmes au droit de cité ("For the Admission to the Rights of Citizenship For Women") Archived 2006-06-16 at the Wayback Machine in 1790.

When the Revolution started, some women struck forcefully, using the volatile political climate to assert their active natures. In the time of the Revolution, women could not be kept out of the political sphere. They swore oaths of loyalty, "solemn declarations of patriotic allegiance, [and] affirmations of the political responsibilities of citizenship." De Corday d'Armont is a prime example of such a woman: sympathetic to the revolutionary political faction of the Girondists, she assassinated the Jacobin leader, Jean-Paul Marat. Throughout the Revolution, other women such as Pauline Léon and her Society of Revolutionary Republican Women supported the radical Jacobins, staged demonstrations in the National Assembly and participated in the riots, often using armed force.

The Women's March on Versailles is but one example of feminist militant activism during the French Revolution. While largely left out of the thrust for increasing rights of citizens, as the question was left indeterminate in the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen, activists such as Pauline Léon and Théroigne de Méricourt agitated for full citizenship for women. Women were, nonetheless, "denied political rights of 'active citizenship' (1791) and democratic citizenship (1793)".

Pauline Léon, on 6 March 1792, submitted a petition signed by 319 women to the National Assembly requesting permission to form a garde national to defend Paris in case of military invasion. Léon requested permission be granted to women to arm themselves with pikes, pistols, sabers and rifles, as well as the privilege of drilling under the French Guards. Her request was denied. Later in 1792, Théroigne de Méricourt made a call for the creation of "legions of amazons" to protect the revolution. As part of her call, she claimed that the right to bear arms would transform women into citizens.

On 20 June 1792, many armed women took part in a procession that "passed through the halls of the Legislative Assembly, into the Tuileries Gardens, and then through the King's residence." Militant women also assumed a special role in the funeral of Marat, following his murder on 13 July 1793. As part of the funeral procession, they carried the bathtub in which Marat had been murdered as well as a shirt stained with Marat's blood.

The most radical militant feminist activism was practiced by the Society of Revolutionary Republican Women, which was founded by Léon and her colleague, Claire Lacombe on 10 May 1793. The club's goal was "to deliberate on the means of frustrating the projects of the enemies of the Republic." Up to 180 women attended the meetings of the Society. Of special interest to the Society was "combating hoarding [of grain and other staples] and inflation." On 20 May 1793, women were at the fore of a crowd that demanded "bread and the Constitution of 1793." When their cries went unnoticed, the women went on a rampage, "sacking shops, seizing grain and kidnapping officials."

The Society demanded a law in 1793 that would compel all women to wear the tricolore cockade insignia to demonstrate their loyalty to the Republic. They also repeated their demands for vigorous price controls to keep bread – the major food of the poor people – from becoming too expensive. After the Convention passed the cockade law in September 1793, the Revolutionary Republican Women demanded vigorous enforcement. Still, they were countered by market women, former servants, and religious women who adamantly opposed price controls (which would drive them out of business) and resented attacks on the aristocracy and religion. They said that "Only whores and female Jacobins wear cockades." Fistfights broke out in the streets between the two factions of women.

Meanwhile, the men who controlled the Jacobins rejected the Revolutionary Republican Women as dangerous rabble-rousers. At this point, the Jacobins controlled the government; they dissolved the Society of Revolutionary Republican Women and decreed that all women's clubs and associations were illegal. They sternly reminded women to stay home and tend to their families by leaving public affairs to the men. Organized women were permanently shut out of the French Revolution after October 30, 1793. Women's breasts were seen as a natural sign that women were to be barred from citizenship and the wielding of political power; women were to be relegated to the domestic sphere and motherhood.

Most of these outwardly activist women were punished for their militancy. The kind of punishment received during the Revolution included public denouncement, arrest, execution, or exile. Théroigne de Méricourt was arrested, publicly flogged and then spent the rest of her life sentenced to an insane asylum. Pauline Léon and Claire Lacombe were arrested, later released, and continued to receive ridicule and abuse for their activism. Many of the Revolution women were even publicly executed for "conspiring against the unity and the indivisibility of the Republic".

While some women chose a militant and often violent path, others chose to influence events through writing, publications, and meetings. Olympe de Gouges wrote several plays, short stories, and novels. Her publications emphasized that women and men are different, but this shouldn't stop them from equality under the law. In her 1791 Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen she insisted that women deserved rights, especially in areas concerning them directly, such as divorce and recognition of illegitimate children.

De Gouges also expressed non-gender political views; even before the start of the terror, Olympe de Gouges addressed Robespierre using the pseudonym "Polyme" calling him the Revolution's "infamy and shame." She warned of the Revolution's building extremism, saying that leaders were "preparing new shackles if [the French people's liberty were to] waver." Stating that she was willing to sacrifice herself by jumping into the Seine if Robespierre were to join her, de Gouges desperately attempted to grab the attention of the French citizenry and alert them to the dangers that Robespierre embodied. Olympe de Gouges was one of few public voices to protest the human slave trade and the only woman to openly criticize the government's suspending of the democratic constitution of 1793. In addition to these bold writings, her defense of the king was one of the factors leading to her execution. An influential figure, one of her suggestions early in the Revolution, to have a voluntary, patriotic tax, was adopted by the National Convention in 1789.

Madame Roland (aka Manon or Marie Roland) was another important female activist. Her political focus was not specifically on women or their liberation. She focused on other aspects of the government but was a feminist because she was a woman working to influence the world. Her letters to leaders of the Revolution influenced policy; in addition, she often hosted political gatherings of the Brissotins, a political group that allowed women to join.

While limited by her gender, Madame Roland took it upon herself to spread Revolutionary ideology and spread the word of events, as well as to assist in formulating the policies of her political allies. Unable to directly write policies or carry them through to the government, Roland influenced her political allies and promoted her political agenda. Roland attributed women's lack of education to the public view that women were too weak or vain to be involved in the serious business of politics. She believed that it was this inferior education that turned them into foolish people, but women "could easily be concentrated and solidified upon objects of great significance" if given a chance.

As she was led to the scaffold, Madame Roland shouted, "O liberty! What crimes are committed in thy name!" Witnesses of her life and death, editors, and readers helped to finish her writings, and several editions were published posthumously. While she did not focus on gender politics in her writings, by taking an active role in the tumultuous time of the Revolution, Roland took a stand for women of the time and proved they could take an intelligent, active role in politics.

Though women did not gain the right to vote due to the Revolution, they still greatly expanded their political participation and involvement in government. They set precedents for generations of feminists to come. A leading example of lasting feminine influence from that time was Madame de Staël (1766–1817) who both witnessed the tumultuous events, participated in, and commented on them.

During the French Revolution, male support played a significant role in advocating for revolutionary ideals and reforms. Many men, including intellectuals, politicians, and activists, were actively involved in various aspects of the revolutionary movement, contributing to its ideological foundations and practical implementations.

One notable example of male support for the French Revolution was the Marquis de Condorcet, a prominent Enlightenment philosopher and mathematician. Condorcet advocated for principles of equality, liberty, and fraternity, which were central to the revolutionary ethos. He played a crucial role in drafting documents such as the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, which outlined the fundamental rights and freedoms of individuals.

Additionally, Condorcet was a vocal proponent of women's rights during the Revolution. He collaborated closely with his wife, Sophie de Condorcet, in advocating for gender equality and women's inclusion in civil and political life. Their joint efforts, including Sophie's active participation in political discussions and writing, helped to advance the cause of women's rights during this period.

A major aspect of the French Revolution was the dechristianisation movement, which many common people disagreed with. Especially for women living in rural areas of France, the demise of the Catholic Church meant a loss of normalcy. For instance, the ringing of Church bells resonating through the town called people to confession and symbolised unity for the community. With the onset of the dechristianisation campaign, the Republic silenced these bells and sought simultaneously to silence the religious fervor of the majority Catholic population.

When these revolutionary changes to the Church were implemented, it spawned a counter-revolutionary movement, particularly amongst women. Although some of these women embraced the political and social amendments of the Revolution, they opposed the dissolution of the Catholic Church and the formation of revolutionary cults like the Cult of the Supreme Being advocated by Robespierre. As Olwen Hufton argues, these women began to see themselves as the "defenders of the faith". They took it upon themselves to protect the Church from what they saw as a heretical change to their faith, enforced by revolutionaries.

Counter-revolutionary women resisted what they saw as the intrusion of the state into their lives. Economically, many peasant women refused to sell their goods for assignats because this form of currency was unstable and was backed by the sale of confiscated Church property. By far the most important issue to counter-revolutionary women was the passage and the enforcement of the Civil Constitution of the Clergy in 1790. In response to this measure, women in many areas began circulating anti-oath pamphlets and refused to attend masses held by priests who had sworn oaths of loyalty to the Republic. This diminished the social and political influence of the juring priests because they presided over smaller congregations, and counter-revolutionary women did not seek them for baptisms, marriages, or confession. Instead, they secretly hid nonjuring priests and attended clandestine traditional masses. These women continued to adhere to traditional practices such as Christian burials and naming their children after saints despite revolutionary decrees to the contrary.

It was this determined resistance to the Civil Constitution of the Clergy and the dechristianisation campaigns that played a major role in the re-emergence of the Catholic Church as a prominent social institution. Olwen Hufton notes about the Counter-Revolutionary women: "for it is her commitment to her religion which determines in the post-Thermidorean period the re-emergence of the Catholic Church...". Although they struggled, these women were eventually vindicated in their bid to re-establish the Church and thereby also to reestablish traditional family life and social stability. This was seen in the Concordat of 1801, which formally reinstated the Catholic Church in France. This act came after years of attempts at dechristianisation or state-controlled religion, which were thwarted in part due to the resistance of religiously devout counter-revolutionary women.

The French law on workers’ and farmers’ pensions, enacted in 1910, established a compulsory funded pension system for individuals over the age of 65. The compulsory nature of contributions was annulled in 1911 by the Court of Cassation, and a 1912 amendment lowered the retirement age to 60.

Following its victory in 1871, the German Empire experienced significant industrial expansion. Chancellor Otto von Bismarck, pursuing a policy of defensive conservatism alongside the anti-socialist laws, introduced a system of social insurance that included health insurance in 1883, accident insurance in 1886, and disability and old-age insurance in 1889. In this “Bismarckian” model, social benefits were directly linked to worker contributions.

The 1889 law created a funded pension system jointly administered by employers and employees, with the State serving only a financial function. It provided an annuity equal to 16% of the average wage after thirty years of contributions. The upper age limit was set at 70; however, because German pension insurance combined disability and old-age benefits, the majority of employees—approximately 90%—retired on disability before reaching that age.

Several neighboring countries soon adopted similar systems, while France remained hesitant.

Since the Civil Service Pensions Law of 8 June 1853, which extended pension provisions to the entire public service, all civil and military civil servants have received pay-as-you-go pensions.

Several private-sector professions also gained pension rights. In 1850, the first private railway companies created pension funds for certain categories of employees. Miners obtained compulsory health insurance and a pension system in 1894, followed by workers in arsenals and armaments in 1897, and all railway workers in 1909. These initiatives were introduced by employers, primarily to stabilize and retain the workforce.

A third model for organizing social protection institutions, influenced by socialist mutualist ideas associated with figures such as Robert Owen and Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, also began to emerge.

The law of 5 April 1910 established the Workers’ and Farmers’ Pensions system (ROP), which broadly followed the German model. The State guaranteed benefits linked to contributions from employers and employees, as well as tenant farmers, sharecroppers, and domestic workers, and provided additional funding. Unlike the German system, however, it did not include disability coverage, even though in Germany most pension payments were made under that category before the age limit was reached.

The CGT opposed the law because the retirement age of 65 exceeded the average life expectancy. At the time, only about 8% of the population reached that age, and workers represented only a small fraction of that group. The union therefore criticized the measure as a “retirement for the dead.” It also objected to the limited role of contributors in managing a State-controlled funded scheme, expressing concern that accumulated capital might be used to prepare for or support military efforts.

A significant portion of employers also opposed the law.

The system applied compulsorily to all individuals with an annual wage below 3,000 francs. It was the first law in France to establish a compulsory and general retirement scheme for workers and farmers. It remained optional for tenant farmers, sharecroppers, cultivators, and for employees earning between 3,000 and 5,000 francs per year. Miners, who had their own system since 1894, were excluded from its scope.

A card-based system using socio-postal stamps [ fr ] was introduced, but it proved difficult to use and met with resistance from workers, as it resembled the worker’s booklet formerly used to control hired labor until 1890.

On 11 December 1911, the Court of Cassation effectively nullified the compulsory nature of the law by ruling that an employer could not require an employee to contribute, a decision reaffirmed in 1912. The 1912 revision of the law also allowed pensions to be claimed at age 60. Subsequent episodes of monetary depreciation in 1910 and 1918, linked to inflation, soon undermined the stability of this funded pension system.

After the First World War, the reintegration of the three departments of Alsace-Moselle raised the question of whether to abolish the Bismarckian system in force there or to extend it to the rest of France. The latter option was adopted, as France was then the last European country without general social insurance.

The four currency devaluations that occurred after 1936 further underscored the limitations of funded pension systems. Between 1936 and 1939, the issue generated 24 bills or legislative proposals.

A pay-as-you-go pension system was introduced in 1941 under the direction of René Belin, former CGT secretary, with the creation of the Old-Age Allowance for Salaried Workers (AVTS). It was subsequently generalized nationwide with the 1945 ordinance.

Worldline SA is a French payment processing company founded in 1972. In 2024 its revenue was €4.63 billion.

Worldline's first activities in processing payment card transactions date back to the 1970s, first under the name of Sligos - resulting from the merger in 1973 between Sliga, a subsidiary of the Crédit Lyonnais bank, and Cegos - then, from the 1980s, with Segin, specializing in particular in transactions on Minitel. From the 1990s, the company diversified into online payments with Axime, which gave birth - after its merger with Sligos - to Atos Group.

In 2004, Atos integrated its payment and online services activities into a division then called Atos Worldline.

In 2006, Atos Worldline included in its scope the Belgian companies Banksys, responsible for securing and guaranteeing electronic payments in Belgium, and Bank Card Company (BCC), specializing in the management of payment systems linked to the country's two largest credit card networks, Visa and MasterCard. The two companies, employing around 1,100 people with a turnover of €309 million, were bought out from their four shareholders: Dexia, Fortis, ING, and KBC.

In 2010, Atos Worldline acquired and integrated the Indian company Venture Infotek for around $100 million. The company, specializing in payment and transaction processing, had merchants, as well as banks and government programs, as clients locally.

In 2011, Atos acquired the IT services activities of Siemens, which also included electronic transaction activities, which were integrated into its Worldline division. In 2012, Atos Worldline acquired and integrated Quality Equipment, a Dutch electronic payment company, for an unknown amount.

In 2013, Atos branched out its Atos Worldline division, giving it more autonomy.

In 2014, Atos partially listed Worldline for 26.59% of its holdings, worth €575 million, valuing Worldline at €2.1 billion.

In November 2015, Worldline merged its electronic financial transaction processing activities with Equens, a Dutch company. As part of this merger, Worldline paid out 72 million euros and owned 63.6% of the created equensWorldline Company, the rest being held by the shareholders of Equens, Dutch, German and Italian banks. In the context of this merger, Worldline acquired the possibility in the long term to acquire the remaining shares of these banks.

In July 2017, Worldline announced the acquisition of the Swedish company Digital River World Payments (DRWP) for an undisclosed amount. The company, founded in 1997 and based in Stockholm, generated annual sales of $37 million.

Next, Worldline acquired First Data Baltics, a subsidiary of First Data Corp in Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia for approximately €73 million. These three subsidiaries generated a turnover of €23 million in 2016, employing around 200 people.

In May 2018, Worldline acquired SIX Payment Services (Europe) SA, the payment services division of the Swiss group SIX, for €2.3 billion, mainly financed by the issue of new shares. With the integration of SIX Payment Services' 1,600 employees and merchant acquisition activities and services serving more than 200,000 merchants for an income of around €530 million, Worldline gained a 30% increase in turnover as well as a number one place in Switzerland, Austria, and Luxembourg. Worldline's ambition through this operation was to create a European payment champion.

In January 2019, Atos, which then had a 50.8% stake, announced the sale by an exchange of shares of a 23.4% stake in Worldline to its shareholders.

In May 2019, Worldline gained independence when Atos' shareholders approved the plan to redistribute 23.4% of Worldline shares to their investors. Atos still remained Worldline's main shareholder at 27% just ahead of the SIX Group but lost the possibility to control its finances.

In September 2019, Worldline announced the completion of the acquisition of the 36.4% minority interest in equensWorldline, hence becoming the sole owner of equensWorldline.

In February 2020, Worldline announced the acquisition of Ingenico, the world leader in payments POS market and in merchant services, for €7.8 billion. The shareholders of Worldline would retain a 65% stake and those of Ingenico 35%. Following this announcement, Atos announced the sale of a 13.1% stake, keeping only a 3.8% stake in Worldline. In parallel, Bpifrance announced the increase of its stake in the company.

In March 2020, Worldline entered the CAC 40, the flagship index of the Paris stock market, which mainly reflected the evolution of the Group's liquidity and market capitalization from €2.2 billion in June 2014 at the time of its listing on the stock exchange to more than €11 billion when it entered the CAC 40.

In April 2020, Worldline announced the acquisition of GoPay through the purchase of 53% of its shares. The company also announced the contemplated purchase of all remaining shares for 2022. GoPay is a specialist in online payments in Eastern Europe. Through this acquisition, Worldline intended to reinforce its offers to merchants and to strengthen its position in Eastern and Central Europe.

In May 2020, its CEO Gilles Grapinet announced the creation of EDPIA (the European Digital Payment Industry Alliance), a professional organization bringing together the main European companies specializing in electronic payments (Ingenico, Nets, Nexi, and Worldline), and which has set itself the objective of better coordinating the representation of major industrialists in the sector with European authorities and other stakeholders in the payments ecosystem. Gilles Grapinet is its first president.

In July 2021, the Group announced the purchase of 80% of Axepta Italy, a subsidiary of BNP Paribas, for 180 million euros.

In October 2021, Worldline announced its Q3 2021 revenue and, as planned at the time of the Ingenico's acquisition, the new governance of the Group was implemented by the Board of Directors, with Bernard Bourigeaud appointed as Chairman while Gilles Grapinet remains CEO.

In March 2022, Worldline, announced its business expansion to Japan, offering credit card payment processing for merchants nationwide.

In February 2022, Worldline announced that it had entered into exclusive negotiations with the Apollo funds for the sale of its subsidiary TSS, which had taken over Ingenico's payment terminal activities, for 2.3 billion euros. In April 2022, Worldline announces the acquisition of a 51% stake in ANZ Bank's electronic payments business for A$925 million.

In April 2023, Crédit Agricole and Worldline enter into exclusive discussions to create a major player in merchant services in France. Both groups announce the contemplated creation of a joint company fully operational by 2025 combining Crédit Agricole's merchant acquiring footprint, French market intimacy and distribution power with Worldline's leading innovation, technology and global infrastructure. In January 2024, Crédit Agricole SA acquired a minority stake of 7%.

On 13 June 2024, at Worldline's Annual General Meeting and as announced on 21 March 2024, the Board of Directors decided, on the recommendation of the Nomination Committee, to appoint Mr Wilfried Verstraete as Chairman of the Board of Directors.

On 30 September, Gilles Grapinet stepped down as CEO and director of the company and Worldline is looking for a new CEO who will work with the Board of Directors to determine a new strategic plan. Marc-Henri Desportes, previously Worldline Deputy CEO and Head of Merchant Services, is acting as interim CEO.

In November 2024 it became public that Worldline considers selling its Mobility and e-Transactional Services (MTS) business.

On 1 March 2025, Pierre-Antoine Vacheron [ fr ] was appointed CEO, succeeding Marc-Henri Desportes.

In June 2025 a network of international press researchers, operating under the name "Dirty Payments", accused the company of handling billions of euros in fraudulent or unethical payments over decades, using subsidiaries. The German based Payone, of which Worldline SA held 60%, was accused in 2023 by the German Federal Financial Supervisory Authority of dealing with high risk customers, prone to Money laundering. Payone, by its own account, then cut ties with these customers in summer 2023, but they were apparently just handed over to another Worldline subsidiary, according to the researchers. Dutch investigators accused the company of continuing to work with customers, who had been identified by Worldlines own risk assessment as problematic. The publication of the findings caused Worldlines share price on 25 June 2025 to fall by 21%.

Worldline's revenue was divided, in 2024, as follows:

In spring 2017, Worldline developed in collaboration with the Belgian bank Belfius the first smartphone payment application in Belgium.

List of main shareholders as of 31 December 2024.

Worldline has come under criticism for maintaining its operations linked to Russia despite the country's invasion of Ukraine. While the company states that its business in Russia accounts for only a small portion of its revenue and is operated from outside the country, this continued engagement has drawn scrutiny amid international efforts to isolate Russia economically. Critics argue that such actions contradict global sanctions and ethical considerations, as the war in Ukraine persists with devastating consequences for civilians.

The Xicolatada (Catalan pronunciation: [ ʃikuləˈtaðə ] ; French pronunciation: [ ʃikɔlatada ]) is a traditional festival celebrated in the village of Palau-de-Cerdagne in Languedoc-Roussillon. It is celebrated yearly on 16 August, and has been for over 300 years.

In Catalonia, 15 August was once a festival day, and the locals would drink quite a bit, to the point that they felt a bit ill the following morning. To help them feel better, the village chocolatier would offer them a hot chocolate, which he claimed was an excellent remedy. Over the years, this habit grew into a custom, and eventually a municipal association was formed to remember the tradition and to organise the distribution of hot chocolate every year on 16 August, at precisely 11 in the morning. Today, the chocolate is brewed in large cauldrons over a wood fire. In 2007, 800 litres were consumed by 3000 people, many of whom were visitors; the festival draws many tourists to the village every year. To preserve the tradition, festival organisers have created a sort of confraternity called the Mestres xicolaters, or "master chocolatiers", who keep the recipes for the chocolate secret; the organisation also handles scheduling, which it does not reveal in advance.

Yenish (French : Yeniche, German : Jenisch, Luxembourgish : Jéinesch) is a variety of German spoken by the Yenish people, former nomads living mostly in Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Alsace, Luxembourg, and other parts of France.

Yenish has been documented since the 18th century. Yenish speakers generally speak their local German dialect, enriched by the Yenish vocabulary, which is derived in part from Rotwelsch, with influences from Yiddish, Romani, and other minority languages of their region.

The Yenish vocabulary contains many words of Romani and Yiddish (and through the latter route, Hebrew) origin; it also has many unusual metaphors and metonyms that replace the standard German words. Some original Yenish words have become parts of standard German.

The Yenish were originally travelers, they were people with professions outside of mainstream society that required them to move from town to town, such as showpeople, tinkers, and door-to-door salesmen. Today, the Yenish jargon is only used in certain isolated locations, such as certain poor districts of Berlin, Münster, some Eifel villages, and Luxembourg.

Individual variants of the Yenish language can be quite distinct, and have names of their own, such as Masematte, Lepper Talp, Heenese Vlek, and others.

Yenish has a grammatical syntax borrowed from the German language and its vocabulary is a mixture of Yiddish, Hebrew and German with some French and Romani terms.

The origin of Yenish peoples is unclear but it would be linked to a gradual interbreeding over the centuries between itinerant German and Ashkenazi Jewish populations, then the integration of certain members of the Roma communities: according to Yaron Matras of the University of Manchester, the Yenish community has, over the centuries, integrated members of minority communities such as Roma and Jews who, for one reason or another, left their own communities. This hypothesis is shared by Rémy Welschinger, who specifies that, due to the various wars and numerous food shortages, Jews and Yenish were forced to live marginally by exercising professions which required great mobility and that the two peoples were able to settle and their languages to mix. In this hypothesis, the Yenish language would mainly come from the mixture of Rotwelsch, the language of the marginalized of Germanic origin, and Yiddish and Hebrew, the languages of the Ashkenazi Jews, when the poor and marginalized itinerant German populations absorbed, notably via mixed unions, the Jews rejected on the road, following the persecutions carried out against them at the time. According to Sandrine Szwarc also raises the hypothesis that the Yenishes are, at least for certain families, descendants of Ashkenazi crypto-Jews.

According to the Encyclopedia of Hebrew Language and Linguistics, Yenish "words of Hebrew origin, such as laf 'no' (= לאו lav) and Schuck 'market' (= שוק šuq), entered Yenish with the Ashkenazi pronunciation employed when Hebrew words were integrated in the Judeo-German speech of German Jews", that is to say before its modification in contact with Slavic languages.

The Yenish (German : Jenische ; French : Yéniche, Taïtch, Luxembourgish : Jënesch) are an itinerant group in Western and Central Europe who live mostly in Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Luxembourg, Belgium, and parts of France, roughly centered on the Rhineland. The origins of the Yenish are unknown, though a number of theories for the group's origins have been proposed, including that the Yenish descended from members of the marginalised and vagrant poor classes of society of the early modern period, before emerging as a distinct group by the early 19th century. Most of the Yenish became sedentary in the course of the mid-19th to 20th centuries.

The Yenish people as a distinct group, as opposed to the generic class of vagrants of the early modern period, emerged towards the end of the 18th century. The adjective jenisch is first recorded in the early 18th century in the sense of " cant, argot ". A self-designation Jauner is recorded in 1793. Jenisch remained strictly an adjective that refers to the language, not the people, until the first half of the 19th century. Jean Paul (1801) glosses jänische Sprache (" Yenish language ") with " so nennt man in Schwaben die aus fast allen Sprachen zusammengeschleppte Spitzbubensprache " ("this is the term used in Swabia for an argot used by rogues which has been cobbled together from all sorts of languages"). An anonymous author in 1810 argues that Jauner is a deprecating term, equivalent to card sharp, and that the proper designation for the people should be " jenische Gasche ", " Gasche " being a slang word derived from the Romani term for "non-Romani".

The origins of the Yenish are unknown, though a number of theories for the group's origins have been proposed, including that the Yenish descended from members of the marginalised and vagrant poor classes of society of the early modern period, before emerging as a distinct group by the early 19th century.

Linguist Yaron Matras and anthropologist Rémy Welschinger have identified a history where Yenish communities absorbed members of other itinerant and marginalised communities who left those communities for various reasons over the centuries, including Romani and Jewish individuals.

Many Yenish people in Germany became sedentary in the second half of the 19th century. The Kingdom of Prussia in 1842 introduced a law forcing municipalities to provide social welfare to permanent residents without citizenship. As a consequence, there were attempts to prevent Yenish people from taking permanent residence. Recently established settlements of Yenish, Sinti, and Roma, dubbed "gypsy colonies" (Zigeunerkolonien), were discouraged and attempts were made to incite the settlers to move away, in the form of various forms of harassment, and in some cases physical attacks. By the late 19th century, many recently sedentary Yenish were nevertheless integrated into local populations, gradually moving away from their tradition of endogamy thus being absorbed into the general German population. Those Yenish who did not become sedentary by the late 19th century took to living in trailers.

The persecution of Romani people under Nazi Germany beginning in 1933 was directed not exclusively against the Romani people but also targeted "vagrants who travel around after the manner of the gypsies" (" nach Zigeunerart umherziehende Landfahrer "), which included the Yenish and people without permanent residence in general. Travellers were scheduled for internment in Buchenwald, Dachau, Sachsenhausen and Neuengamme. Yenish families began to be registered in a Landfahrersippenarchiv ('archive of travelling families'), but this effort was incomplete by the end of World War II. It appears that only very limited numbers of Yenish (compared with the number of Romani victims) were actually deported: five Yenish individuals are on record as having been deported from Cologne, and a total of 279 woonwagenbewoners ('caravan dwellers') are known to have been deported from the Netherlands in 1944. Lewy (2001) has discovered one case of the deportation of a Yenish woman in 1939. The Yenish people are mentioned as a persecuted group in the text of the 2012 Memorial to the Sinti and Roma Victims of National Socialism in Berlin.

In 2001, Swiss National Councillor Remo Galli, as speaker of the foundation Zukunft für Schweizer Fahrende, reported an estimate of 35,000 "travellers" (Fahrende, a term combining Sinti, Roma and Yenish), both sedentary and non-sedentary, in Switzerland, among them an estimated 20,000 Yenish people. Mariella Mehr had already claimed in 1979 that there were "about 20,000 Yenish", among whom only "a handful of families who are still travelling".

From the 1920s until the 1970s, the Swiss government had a semi-official policy of institutionalizing Yenish parents as mentally ill and having their children adopted by members of the sedentary Swiss population. The name of this program was Kinder der Landstrasse ('Children of the Road'). The separation of children was justified as the Yenish being a 'criminal milieu' of 'homelessness and vagrancy' was later criticized as a violation of the fundamental rights of the Yenishe to family life, with children separated from parents by force without due criminal procedure, and resulting in many of the children suffering an ordeal of successive foster homes and orphanages. In all, 590 children were taken from their parents and institutionalized in orphanages, mental institutions, and even prisons. Child removals peaked in the 1930s to 1940s, in the years leading up to and during World War II. After public criticism in 1972, the program was discontinued in 1973. In February 2025, the Swiss government formally acknowledged that the forced removals and assimilation efforts targeting the Yenish, Manouche, and Sinti people under the Kinder der Landstrasse program constitute a crime against humanity under international law.

An organisation for the political representation of travellers (Yenish as well as Sinti and Roma) was founded in 1975, named Wheel Cooperative of the Road [ de ] (Radgenossenschaft der Landstrasse). The Swiss federal authorities have officially recognized the "Swiss Yenish and Sinti" as a "national minority". With the ratification of the European language charter in 1997, Switzerland has given the status of a "territorial non-tied language" to the Yenish language.

Around 1800, a group of Yenish settled in Loosdorf near Melk, and since then a language island of Yenish has existed there. In November 2021, on the initiative of linguist Heidi Schleich and now chairman Marco Buckovez, the association Jenische in Österreich (Yenish in Austria) was founded with headquarters in Innsbruck. As part of a meeting with the ethnic group spokespersons of the parliamentary parties, the association submitted a request for recognition in accordance with the Ethnic Groups Act on 23 March 2022.

While there are references to Yenish people in France, there are no reported figures. Alain Reyniers [ fr ] wrote in a 1991 article in the journal Études Tsiganes [ fr ] that the Yenish "probably form the largest group of travellers in France today".

Yiddish, historically referred to as Judeo-German or Jewish German, is a West Germanic language and Jewish ethnolect historically spoken by Ashkenazi Jews. It originated in the Holy Roman Empire during the Middle Ages, and provided the nascent Ashkenazi community with a vernacular based on High German, fused with many elements taken from Hebrew (notably Mishnaic Hebrew) and to some extent Aramaic. Most varieties of Yiddish include elements of Slavic languages and the vocabulary contains traces of Romance languages. Yiddish has traditionally been written using the Hebrew alphabet.

For centuries, Yiddish was the vernacular of Ashkenazi communities. Starting in the late 18th century, under the sway of the Haskalah (Jewish Enlightenment), the language suffered decreasing prestige, being stigmatized by assimilationists and later also by Zionists, in favor of national languages and Hebrew. Efforts by the Yiddishist movement to counter that trend had limited success. Nevertheless, before World War II, the language still counted 11–13 million speakers. Some 85% of the approximately six million Jews who were murdered in the Holocaust were Yiddish speakers, resulting in a massive decline in use of the language. This, together with further assimilation following World War II, along with aliyah (immigration to Israel), sped up the process of language shift to national tongues and Modern Hebrew, particularly among secular Jews.

The number of Yiddish speakers is, however, on the rise in Haredi (ultra-Orthodox) communities. In 2014, YIVO stated that "most people who speak Yiddish in their daily lives are Hasidim and other Haredim ", whose population was estimated at the time to be between 500,000 and 1 million. A 2021 estimate from Rutgers University was that there were 250,000 American speakers, 250,000 Israeli speakers, and 100,000 speakers in the rest of the world (for a total of 600,000).

The earliest surviving references date from the 12th century and call the language לשון־אַשכּנז (loshn-ashknaz ; lit. ' language of Ashkenaz ') or טײַטש (taytsh), a variant of tiutsch, the contemporary name for Middle High German. Colloquially, the language is sometimes called מאַמע־לשון (mame-loshn ; lit. ' mother tongue '), distinguishing it from לשון־קודש (loshn koydesh ; lit. ' holy tongue '), meaning Hebrew, and תרגום-לשון (targum loshn ; lit. ' translation tongue '), meaning Aramaic. The term "Yiddish", short for "Yidish-Taitsh" ('Jewish German'), did not become the most frequently used designation in the literature until the 18th century. In the late 19th and into the 20th century, the language was more commonly called "Jewish", especially in non-Jewish contexts, but "Yiddish" is again the most common designation today.

Modern Yiddish has two major dialect groups : Eastern and Western. Eastern Yiddish is far more common today. It includes Southeastern, or Ukrainish (Ukrainian–Romanian); Mideastern, or Poylish (Polish–Galician–Eastern Hungarian); and Northeastern, or Litvish (Lithuanian–Belarusian) dialects. Eastern Yiddish differs from Western Yiddish both by its far greater size and the extensive inclusion of words of Slavic origin. Western Yiddish is divided into Southwestern (Swiss–Alsatian–Southern German), Midwestern (Central German), and Northwestern (Netherlandic–Northern German) dialects. Ethnologue classifies Western Yiddish as endangered.

The term "Yiddish" is also used in the adjectival sense, synonymously with "Ashkenazi Jewish", to designate attributes of Yiddishkeit ("Ashkenazi culture"; for example, Yiddish cooking and music).

By the 10th century, a distinctive Jewish culture had formed in Central Europe. By the high medieval period, their area of settlement, centered on the Rhineland (Mainz) and the Palatinate (notably Worms and Speyer), came to be known as Ashkenaz, a term also used for Scythia, and later of various areas of Eastern Europe and Anatolia. In the medieval Hebrew of Rashi (d. 1105), Ashkenaz becomes a term for Germany and Ashkenazi (אשכּנזי) for the Jews settling in this area. Ashkenaz bordered on the area inhabited by another distinctive Jewish cultural group, the Sephardi Jews, who ranged into southern France. Ashkenazi culture later spread into Eastern Europe with large-scale population migrations.

Nothing is known with certainty about the vernacular of the earliest Jews in Germany, but several theories have been put forward. As noted above, the first language of the Ashkenazim may have been Aramaic, the vernacular of the Jews in Roman-era Judea and ancient and early medieval Mesopotamia. The widespread use of Aramaic among the large non-Jewish Syrian trading population of the Roman provinces, including those in Europe, would have reinforced the use of Aramaic among Jews engaged in trade. In Roman times, many of the Jews living in Rome and Southern Italy appear to have been Greek -speakers, and this is reflected in some Ashkenazi personal names (such as Kalonymos and Yiddish Todres). Hebrew, on the other hand, was regarded as a holy language reserved for ritual and spiritual purposes and not for common use.

The established view is that, as with other Jewish languages, Jews speaking distinct languages learned new co-territorial vernaculars, which they then Judaized. In the case of Yiddish, this scenario sees it as emerging when speakers of Zarphatic (Judeo-French) and other Judeo-Romance languages began to acquire varieties of Middle High German, and from these groups the Ashkenazi community took shape. Exactly what German substrate underlies the earliest form of Yiddish is disputed. The Jewish community in the Rhineland would have encountered the Middle High German dialects from which the Rhenish German dialects of the modern period would emerge. Jewish communities of the high medieval period would have been speaking their own versions of these German dialects, mixed with linguistic elements that they themselves brought into the region, including many Hebrew and Aramaic words, but there is also Romance.

In Max Weinreich 's model, Jewish speakers of Old French or Old Italian who were literate in either liturgical Hebrew or Aramaic, or both, migrated through Southern Europe to settle in the Rhine Valley in an area known as Lotharingia (later known in Yiddish as Loter) extending over parts of Germany and France. There, they encountered and were influenced by Jewish speakers of High German languages and several other German dialects. Both Weinreich and Solomon Birnbaum developed this model further in the mid-1950s. In Weinreich's view, this Old Yiddish substrate later bifurcated into two distinct versions of the language, Western and Eastern Yiddish. They retained the Semitic vocabulary and constructions needed for religious purposes and created a Judeo-German form of speech, sometimes not accepted as a fully autonomous language.

Yiddish was a rich, living language, the chattering tongue of an urban population. It had the limitations of its origins. There were few Yiddish words for animals and birds. It had virtually no military vocabulary. Such voids were filled by borrowing from German, Polish and Russian. Yiddish was particularly good at borrowing: from Arabic, from Hebrew, from Aramaic and from anything with which it intersected. On the other hand, it contributed to English — American. [sic] Its chief virtue lay in its internal subtlety, particularly in its characterization of human types and emotions. It was the language of street wisdom, of the clever underdog, of pathos, resignation and suffering, all of which it palliated by humor, intense irony and superstition. Isaac Bashevis Singer, its greatest practitioner, pointed out that it is the only language never spoken by men in power.

Later linguistic research has refined the Weinreich model or provided alternative approaches to the language's origins, with points of contention being the characterization of its Germanic base, the source of its Hebrew/Aramaic adstrata, and the means and location of this fusion. Some theorists argue that the fusion occurred with a Bavarian dialect base. The two main candidates for the germinal matrix of Yiddish, the Rhineland and Bavaria, are not necessarily incompatible. There may have been parallel developments in the two regions, seeding the Western and Eastern dialects of Modern Yiddish. Dovid Katz proposes that Yiddish emerged from contact between speakers of High German and Aramaic-speaking Jews from the Middle East. The lines of development proposed by the different theories do not necessarily rule out the others (at least not entirely); an article in The Forward argues that "in the end, a new 'standard theory' of Yiddish's origins will probably be based on the work of Weinreich and his challengers alike."

Paul Wexler proposed a model in 1991 that took Yiddish, by which he means primarily eastern Yiddish, not to be genetically grounded in a Germanic language at all, but rather as " Judeo-Sorbian " (a proposed West Slavic language) that had been relexified by High German. In more recent work, Wexler has argued that Eastern Yiddish is unrelated genetically to Western Yiddish. Wexler's model has been met with little academic support, and strong critical challenges, especially among historical linguists.

Yiddish orthography developed towards the end of the High Medieval period. It is first recorded in 1272, with the oldest surviving literary document in Yiddish, a blessing found in the Worms machzor (a Hebrew prayer book).

This brief rhyme is decoratively embedded in an otherwise purely Hebrew text. Nonetheless, it indicates that the Yiddish of that day was a more or less regular Middle High German written in the Hebrew alphabet into which Hebrew words – מַחֲזוֹר, makhzor (prayerbook for the High Holy Days) and בֵּיתֿ הַכְּנֶסֶתֿ, 'synagogue' (read in Yiddish as beis hakneses) – had been included. The niqqud appears as though it might have been added by a second scribe, in which case it may need to be dated separately and may not be indicative of the pronunciation of the rhyme at the time of its initial annotation.

Over the 14th and 15th centuries, songs and poems in Yiddish, and macaronic pieces in Hebrew and German, began to appear. These were collected in the late 15th century by Menahem ben Naphtali Oldendorf [ he ]. During the same period, a tradition seems to have emerged of the Jewish community's adapting its own versions of German secular literature. The earliest Yiddish epic poem of this sort is the Dukus Horant, which survives in the famous Cambridge Codex T.-S.10.K.22. This 14th-century manuscript was discovered in the Cairo Geniza in 1896, and also contains a collection of narrative poems on themes from the Hebrew Bible and the Haggadah.

The advent of the printing press in the 16th century enabled the large-scale production of works at a cheaper cost, some of which have survived. One particularly popular work was Elia Levita 's Bovo-Bukh (בָּבָֿא־בּוך), composed around 1507–08 and printed several times, beginning in 1541 (under the title Bovo d'Antona). Levita, the earliest named Yiddish author, may also have written פּאַריז און װיענע Pariz un Viene (Paris and Vienna). Another Yiddish retelling of a chivalric romance, װידװילט Vidvilt (often referred to as "Widuwilt" by Germanizing scholars), presumably also dates from the 15th century, although the manuscripts are from the 16th. It is also known as Kinig Artus Hof, an adaptation of the Middle High German romance Wigalois by Wirnt von Grafenberg. Another significant writer is Avroham ben Schemuel Pikartei, who published a paraphrase on the Book of Job in 1557.

Women in the Ashkenazi community were traditionally not literate in Hebrew but did read and write Yiddish. A body of literature therefore developed for which women were a primary audience. This included secular works, such as the Bovo-Bukh, and religious writing specifically for women, such as the צאנה וראינה Tseno Ureno and the תחנות Tkhines. One of the best-known early woman authors was Glückel of Hameln, whose memoirs are still in print.

The segmentation of the Yiddish readership, between women who read מאַמע־לשון mame-loshn but not לשון־קדש loshn-koydesh, and men who read both, was significant enough that distinctive typefaces were used for each. The name commonly given to the semicursive form used exclusively for Yiddish was ווײַבערטײַטש (vaybertaytsh, 'women's taytsh ', shown in the heading and fourth column in the Shemot Devarim), with square Hebrew letters (shown in the third column) being reserved for text in that language and Aramaic. This distinction was retained in general typographic practice through to the early 19th century, with Yiddish books being set in vaybertaytsh (also termed מעשייט mesheyt or מאַשקעט mashket —the construction is uncertain).

An additional distinctive semicursive typeface was, and still is, used for rabbinical commentary on religious texts when Hebrew and Yiddish appear on the same page. This is commonly termed Rashi script, from the name of the most renowned early author, whose commentary is usually printed using this script. (Rashi is also the typeface normally used when the Sephardic counterpart to Yiddish, Judeo-Spanish or Ladino, is printed in Hebrew script.)

According to a study by the German media association Internationale Medienhilfe (IMH), more than 40 printed Yiddish newspapers and magazines were published worldwide in 2024, and the trend is rising.

The Western Yiddish dialect—sometimes pejoratively labeled Mauscheldeutsch, i. e. "Moses German" —declined in the 18th century, as the Age of Enlightenment and the Haskalah led to a view of Yiddish as a corrupt dialect. The 19th-century Prussian-Jewish historian Heinrich Graetz, for example, wrote that "the language of the Jews [in Poland]... degenerat[ed] into a ridiculous jargon, a mixture of German, Polish, and Talmudical elements, an unpleasant stammering, rendered still more repulsive by forced attempts at wit."

A Maskil (one who takes part in the Haskalah) would write about and promote acclimatization to the outside world. Jewish children began attending secular schools where the primary language spoken and taught was German, not Yiddish.

Yiddish grates on our ears and distorts. This jargon is incapable in fact of expressing sublime thoughts. It is our obligation to cast off these old rags, a heritage of the dark Middle Ages.

Owing to both assimilation to German and the revival of Hebrew, Western Yiddish survived only as a language of "intimate family circles or of closely knit trade groups".

In Eastern Europe, the response to these forces took the opposite direction, with Yiddish becoming the cohesive force in a secular culture (see the Yiddishist movement). Notable Yiddish writers of the late 19th and early 20th centuries are Sholem Yankev Abramovitch, writing as Mendele Mocher Sforim ; Sholem Rabinovitsh, widely known as Sholem Aleichem, whose stories about טבֿיה דער מילכיקער (Tevye der milkhiker, " Tevye the Milkman") inspired the Broadway musical and film Fiddler on the Roof ; and Isaac Leib Peretz.

In the early 20th century, especially after the Socialist October Revolution in Russia, Yiddish was emerging as a major Eastern European language. Its rich literature was more widely published than ever, Yiddish theatre and Yiddish cinema were booming, and for a time it achieved the status of one of the official languages of the short-lived Galician Soviet Socialist Republic. Educational autonomy for Jews in several countries (notably Poland) after World War I led to an increase in formal Yiddish-language education, more uniform orthography, and to the 1925 founding of the Yiddish Scientific Institute, YIVO. In Vilnius, there was debate over which language should take primacy, Hebrew or Yiddish.

Yiddish changed significantly during the 20th century. Michael Wex writes, "As increasing numbers of Yiddish speakers moved from the Slavic-speaking East to Western Europe and the Americas in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, they were so quick to jettison Slavic vocabulary that the most prominent Yiddish writers of the time—the founders of modern Yiddish literature, who were still living in Slavic-speaking countries—revised the printed editions of their oeuvres to eliminate obsolete and 'unnecessary' Slavisms." The vocabulary used in Israel absorbed many Modern Hebrew words, and there was a similar but smaller increase in the English component of Yiddish in the United States and, to a lesser extent, the United Kingdom. This has resulted in some difficulty in communication between Yiddish speakers from Israel and those from other countries.

" Khurbn Yiddish", as discussed by Professor Hannah Pollin-Galay, refers to the sociolect shaped by Yiddish speakers' experience during the Holocaust. Prisoners developed new words and slang, particularly relating to theft, protest, and sexuality.

There is significant phonological variation among the various Yiddish dialects. The description that follows is of a modern Standard Yiddish that was devised during the early 20th century and is frequently encountered in pedagogical contexts.

As in the Slavic languages with which Yiddish was long in contact (Russian, Belarusian, Polish, and Ukrainian), but unlike German, voiceless stops have little to no aspiration ; unlike many such languages, voiced stops are not devoiced in final position. Moreover, Yiddish has regressive voicing assimilation, so that, for example, זאָגט /zɔɡt/ ('says') is pronounced [zɔkt] and הקדמה /hakˈdɔmɜ/ ('foreword') is pronounced [haɡˈdɔmɜ].

The vowel phonemes of Standard Yiddish are:

In addition, the sonorants /l/ and /n/ can function as syllable nuclei :

[m] and [ŋ] appear as syllable nuclei as well, but only as allophones of /n/, after bilabial consonants and dorsal consonants, respectively.

The syllabic sonorants are always unstressed.

Stressed vowels in the Yiddish dialects may be understood by considering their common origins in the Proto-Yiddish sound system. Yiddish linguistic scholarship uses a system developed by Max Weinreich in 1960 to indicate the descendent diaphonemes of the Proto-Yiddish stressed vowels.

Each Proto-Yiddish vowel is given a unique two-digit identifier, and its reflexes use it as a subscript, for example, Southeastern o 11 is the vowel /o/, descended from Proto-Yiddish */a/. The first digit indicates Proto-Yiddish quality (1-=*[a], 2-=*[e], 3-=*[i], 4-=*[o], 5-=*[u]), and the second refers to quantity or diphthongization (−1=short, −2=long, −3=short but lengthened early in the history of Yiddish, −4=diphthong, −5=special length occurring only in Proto-Yiddish vowel 25).

Vowels 23, 33, 43 and 53 have the same reflexes as 22, 32, 42 and 52 in all Yiddish dialects, but they developed distinct values in Middle High German ; Katz (1987) argues that they should be collapsed with the −2 series, leaving only 13 in the −3 series.

In the vocabulary of Germanic origin, the differences between Standard German and Yiddish pronunciation are mainly in the vowels and diphthongs. All varieties of Yiddish lack the German front rounded vowels /œ, øː/ and /ʏ, yː/, having merged them with /ɛ, e:/ and /ɪ, i:/, respectively. In many respects, particularly with vowels and vowel diphthongs, and even how it forms diminutives, Yiddish is closer to Swabian German than to standard High German.

Diphthongs have also undergone divergent developments in German and Yiddish. Where Standard German has merged the Middle High German diphthong ei and long vowel î to /aɪ/, Yiddish has maintained the distinction between them; and likewise, the Standard German /ɔʏ/ corresponds to both the MHG diphthong öu and the long vowel iu, which in Yiddish have merged with their unrounded counterparts ei and î, respectively. Lastly, the Standard German /aʊ/ corresponds to both the MHG diphthong ou and the long vowel û, but in Yiddish, they have not merged. Although Standard Yiddish does not distinguish between those two diphthongs and renders both as /ɔɪ/, the distinction becomes apparent when the two diphthongs undergo Germanic umlaut, such as in forming plurals:

The vowel length distinctions of German do not exist in the Northeastern (Lithuanian) varieties of Yiddish, which form the phonetic basis for Standard Yiddish. In those varieties, the vowel qualities in most long/short vowel pairs diverged, and so the phonemic distinction has remained.

There are consonantal differences between German and Yiddish. Yiddish deaffricates the Middle High German voiceless labiodental affricate /pf/ to /f/ initially (as in פֿונט funt, but this pronunciation is also quasi-standard throughout northern and central Germany); /pf/ surfaces as an unshifted /p/ medially or finally (as in עפּל /ɛpl/ and קאָפּ /kɔp/). Additionally, final voiced stops appear in Standard Yiddish but not in Northern Standard German.

The pronunciation of vowels in Yiddish words of Hebrew origin is similar to Ashkenazi Hebrew but not identical. The most prominent difference is kamatz gadol in closed syllables being pronounced the same as patah in Yiddish but the same as any other kamatz in Ashkenazi Hebrew. Also, Hebrew features no reduction of unstressed vowels, and so the given name Jochebed יוֹכֶבֶֿד would be /jɔɪˈχɛvɛd/ in Ashkenazi Hebrew but /ˈjɔχvɜd/ in Standard Yiddish.

Patah in open syllable, as well as hataf patah, are unpredictably split between A 1 and A 2 : קַדַּחַת, נַחַת /kaˈdɔχɜs, ˈnaχɜs/ ; חֲלוֹם, חֲתֻנָּה /ˈχɔlɜm, ˈχasɜnɜ/. A shva typically reduces to zero, or becomes an "e" vowel (E 1); some exceptions exist, however.

Yiddish grammar can vary slightly depending on the dialect. The main article focuses on standard form of Yiddish grammar while also acknowledging some dialectal differences. Yiddish grammar has similarities to the German grammar system, as well as grammatical elements from Hebrew and Slavic languages.

Yiddish is written in the Hebrew alphabet, but its orthography differs significantly from that of Hebrew. In Hebrew, many vowels are represented only optionally by diacritical marks called niqqud whereas Yiddish uses letters to represent all vowels. Several Yiddish letters consist of another letter combined with a niqqud mark resembling a Hebrew letter–niqqud pair, but each of those combinations is an inseparable unit representing a vowel alone, not a consonant–vowel sequence. The niqqud marks have no phonetic value on their own.

In most varieties of Yiddish, however, words borrowed from Hebrew are written in their native forms without application of Yiddish orthographical conventions.

Ghosts love Yiddish and as far as I know, they all speak it.

On the eve of World War II, there were 11 to 13 million Yiddish speakers. The Holocaust, however, led to a dramatic, sudden decline in the use of Yiddish, as the eastern and central-European Jewish communities, both secular and religious, that extensively used Yiddish in their day-to-day life were largely destroyed. Around five million of those killed – 85 percent of the Jews murdered in the Holocaust – were speakers of Yiddish. Although millions of Yiddish speakers survived the war (including nearly all Yiddish speakers in the Americas), further assimilation in countries such as the United States and the Soviet Union, in addition to the strictly monolingual stance of the Haskalah and later Zionist movements, led to a decline in the use of Eastern Yiddish. However, the number of speakers within the widely dispersed Haredi (mainly Hasidic) communities is now increasing. Although used in various countries, Yiddish has attained official recognition as a minority language only in the Jewish Autonomous Oblast of Russia, Moldova, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Netherlands, and Sweden.

Reports of the number of current Yiddish speakers vary significantly. Ethnologue estimates, based on publications through 1991, that there were at that time 1.5 million speakers of Eastern Yiddish, of which 40% lived in Ukraine, 15% in Israel, and 10% in the United States. The Modern Language Association agrees with fewer than 200,000 in the United States. Western Yiddish is reported by Ethnologue to have had an ethnic population of 50,000 in 2000, and an undated speaking population of 5,400, mostly in Germany. A 1996 report by the Council of Europe estimates a worldwide Yiddish-speaking population of about two million. Further demographic information about the recent status of what is treated as an Eastern–Western dialect continuum is provided in the YIVO Language and Cultural Atlas of Ashkenazic Jewry.

In a study in the first half of 2024, the German media association Internationale Medienhilfe (IMH) found that the number of Yiddish media is increasing again, due to an increase in the Yiddish-speaking population, especially in the USA. According to IMH estimates, the number of speakers worldwide is approaching two million. In 2024, more than 40 print media were published worldwide in Yiddish - and the trend is rising.

The 1922 census of Palestine lists 1,946 Yiddish speakers in Mandatory Palestine (9 in the Southern District, 1,401 in Jerusalem-Jaffa, 4 in Samaria, and 532 in the Northern District), including 1,759 in municipal areas (999 in Jerusalem, 356 in Jaffa, 332 in Haifa, 5 in Gaza, 4 in Hebron, 3 in Nazareth, 7 in Ramleh, 33 in Tiberias, and 4 in Jenin).

In the Hasidic communities of Israel, boys speak more Yiddish amongst themselves, while girls use Hebrew more often. This is probably due to the tendency of girls to learn more secular subjects, thus increasing their contact with the Hebrew language, while boys are usually taught religious subjects in Yiddish.

Historically, there have been frequent debates about the extent of the linguistic independence of Yiddish from the languages that it absorbed. There has been periodic assertion that Yiddish is a dialect of German, or even "just broken German, more of a linguistic mishmash than a true language". Even when recognized as an autonomous language, it has occasionally been referred to, typically by people foreign to the language, as Judeo-German, along the lines of other Jewish languages like Judeo-Persian, Judeo-Spanish or Judeo-French. A widely cited summary of attitudes in the 1930s was published by Max Weinreich, quoting a remark by an auditor of one of his lectures: אַ שפּראַך איז אַ דיאַלעקט מיט אַן אַרמיי און פֿלאָט (a shprakh iz a dialekt mit an armey un flot — " A language is a dialect with an army and navy ").

Today's speakers consider Yiddish a separate language, officially recognized as such in the USSR (where it was viewed as "the Jewish language"), post-Soviet Russia and Sweden, thus complying to Max Weinreich's notion of official state recognition. Virtually all specialists working in the field of Yiddish view it as a separate language, including researchers and teachers who study and teach Yiddish in German-speaking countries. For centuries, Yiddish has been developing in countries separated from the German language space and has its own system of dialects. Contemporary debates on this subject are almost exclusively limited to the nature of medieval and early modern texts written in Western Yiddish dialects that seem much closer to varieties of German than today's Eastern Yiddish.

We shall get rid of the stunted and squashed jargons which we use now, these ghetto languages. They were the furtive tongues of prisoners.

— Theodor Herzl, Der Judenstaat, 1896.

The national language of Israel is Modern Hebrew. The debate in Zionist circles over the use of Yiddish in Israel and in the diaspora in preference to Hebrew also reflected the tensions between religious and secular Jewish lifestyles. Many secular Zionists wanted Hebrew as the sole language of Jews, to contribute to a national cohesive identity. Traditionally religious Jews, on the other hand, preferred use of Yiddish, viewing Hebrew as a respected holy language reserved for prayer and religious study. In the early 20th century, Zionist activists in the Mandate of Palestine tried to eradicate the use of Yiddish among Jews in preference to Hebrew, and make its use socially unacceptable.

This conflict also reflected the opposing views among secular Jews worldwide, one side seeing Hebrew (and Zionism) and the other Yiddish (and Internationalism) as the means of defining Jewish nationalism. In the 1920s and 1930s, גדוד מגיני השפה gdud maginéi hasafá, " Battalion for the Defence of the Language ", whose motto was " עברי, דבר עברית ivri, dabér ivrít ", that is, "Hebrew [i.e. Jew], speak Hebrew!", used to tear down signs written in "foreign" languages and disturb Yiddish theatre gatherings with stink bombs. In 1927, a proposal to institute a chair in Yiddish at Hebrew University was met with protests. However, according to linguist Ghil'ad Zuckermann, the members of this group in particular, and the Hebrew revival in general, did not succeed in uprooting Yiddish patterns (as well as the patterns of other European languages Jewish immigrants spoke) within what he calls "Israeli", i.e. Modern Hebrew. Zuckermann believes that "Israeli does include numerous Hebrew elements resulting from a conscious revival but also numerous pervasive linguistic features deriving from a subconscious survival of the revivalists’ mother tongues, e.g. Yiddish."

After the founding of the State of Israel, a massive wave of Jewish immigrants from Arab countries arrived. In short order, these Mizrahi Jews and their descendants would account for nearly half the Jewish population. While all were at least familiar with Hebrew as a liturgical language, essentially none had any contact with or affinity for Yiddish (some, of Sephardic origin, spoke Judeo-Spanish, others various Judeo-Arabic varieties). Thus, Hebrew emerged as the dominant linguistic common denominator between the different population groups.

According to Itay Zutra, a teacher of Yiddish at the University of Manitoba, Yiddish was portrayed as a feminine and emasculate language in Israel, sometimes even associated with being a homosexual. One such example of this is in the 1970 movie Shablul, where a frail Yiddish speaker, told he needs to be a strong Jewish man, goes to a karate instructor for help. The instructor, also a Yiddish speaker, agrees to teach him. The instructor then tries to grope and have sex with the man during a private session. It has also been argued by Yiddish writer and literary critic Shmuel Niger and professor Naomi Seidman that even before Zionism, Yiddish was seen as having an inherent level of femininity, while Hebrew was the opposite and was inherently masculine. Much of this stems from the fact that women were excluded from having formal training in Hebrew, which made Yiddish the only Jewish language women could speak, read and write in. As a consequence, Yiddish texts and the language as a whole inherently took on feminine traits, even when written and spoken by men.

Despite a past of marginalization and anti-Yiddish government policy, in 1996 the Knesset passed a law founding the "National Authority for Yiddish Culture", with the aim of supporting and promoting contemporary Yiddish art and literature, as well as preservation of Yiddish culture and publication of Yiddish classics, both in Yiddish and in Hebrew translation.

In religious circles, it is Ashkenazi Haredi Jews, particularly Hasidic Jews and the Lithuanian yeshiva world, who continue to teach, speak and use Yiddish (which, in Israel, has evolved into the Haredi dialect), making it a language used regularly by hundreds of thousands of Haredi Jews today. The largest of these centers are in Bnei Brak and Jerusalem.

There is a growing revival of interest in Yiddish culture among secular Israelis, with the flourishing of new proactive cultural organizations like YUNG YiDiSH, as well as Yiddish theatre (usually with simultaneous translation to Hebrew and Russian) and young people are taking university courses in Yiddish, some achieving considerable fluency.

In the early years of the 20th century, Yiddish was classified as a 'Semitic Language'. After much campaigning, in 1906, the South African legislator Morris Alexander won a parliamentary fight to have Yiddish reclassified as a European language, thereby permitting the immigration of Yiddish speakers to South Africa. While there used to be a large Yiddish press in South Africa now Yiddish has largely died out in South Africa being replaced with other languages.

In Mexico, Yiddish was spoken among the Ashkenazi Jewish population and Yiddish poet Isaac Berliner wrote about the life of Mexican Jews. Isaac Berliner's Yiddishism was a way for the Ashkenazi Jews in Mexico to build a secular culture in a Mexico skeptical of religion. Yiddish became a marker of Ashkenazi ethnic identity in Mexico.

In the Soviet Union during the era of the New Economic Policy (NEP) in the 1920s, Yiddish was promoted as the language of the Jewish proletariat. At the same time, Hebrew was considered a bourgeois and reactionary language and its use was generally discouraged. Yiddish was one of the recognized languages of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic. Until 1938, the Emblem of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic included the motto Workers of the world, unite! in Yiddish. Yiddish was also an official language in several agricultural districts of the Galician Soviet Socialist Republic.

The use of Yiddish as the primary spoken language by Jews was heavily encouraged by multiple Jewish political groups at the time. The Evsektsii, the Jewish Communist Group, and The Bund, the Jewish Socialist Group, both heavily encouraged the use of Yiddish. During the Bolshevik Era these political groups worked alongside the government to encourage the widespread Jewish use of Yiddish. Both the Evsektsii and the Bund supported the Jewish movement towards assimilation and saw Yiddish as a way to encourage it. They saw the use of Yiddish as a step away from the religious aspects of Judaism, instead favoring the cultural aspects of Judaism.

A public educational system entirely based on the Yiddish language was established and comprised kindergartens, schools, and higher educational institutions (technical schools, rabfaks and other university departments). These were initially created in the Russian Empire to stop Jewish children from taking too many spots in regular Russian schools. Imperial government feared that the Jewish children were both taking spots from non-Jews as well as spreading revolutionary ideas to their non-Jewish peers. As a result, in 1914 laws were passed that guaranteed Jews the right to a Jewish education and as a result the Yiddish education system was established. After the Bolshevik revolution in 1917 even more Yiddish schools were established. These schools thrived with government, specifically Bolshevik, and Jewish support. They were established as part of the effort to revitalize the Soviet Jewish Community. Specifically, the Bolsheviks wanted to encourage Jewish assimilation. While these schools were taught in Yiddish, the content was Soviet. They were created to attract Jews in to getting a Soviet education under the guise of a Jewish institution.

While schools with curriculums taught in Yiddish existed in some areas until the 1950s, there was a general decline in enrollment due to preference for Russian-speaking institutions and the declining reputation of Yiddish schools among Yiddish speaking Soviets. As the Yiddish schools declined, so did overall Yiddish culture. The two were inherently linked and with the downfall of one, so did the other. General Soviet denationalization programs and secularization policies also led to a further lack of enrollment and funding; the last schools to be closed existed until 1951. It continued to be spoken widely for decades, nonetheless, in areas with compact Jewish populations (primarily in Moldova, Ukraine, and to a lesser extent Belarus).

In the former Soviet states, recently active Yiddish authors include Yoysef Burg (Chernivtsi 1912–2009) and Olexander Beyderman (b. 1949, Odessa). Publication of an earlier Yiddish periodical (דער פֿרײַנד – der fraynd ; lit. The Friend), was resumed in 2004 with דער נײַער פֿרײַנד (der nayer fraynd ; lit. The New Friend, Saint Petersburg).

According to the 2010 census, 1,683 people spoke Yiddish in Russia, approximately 1% of all the Jews of the Russian Federation. According to Mikhail Shvydkoy, former Minister of Culture of Russia and himself of Jewish origin, Yiddish culture in Russia is gone, and its revival is unlikely.

From my point of view, Yiddish culture today isn't just fading away, but disappearing. It is stored as memories, as fragments of phrases, as books that have long gone unread.... Yiddish culture is dying and this should be treated with utmost calm. There is no need to pity that which cannot be resurrected – it has receded into the world of the enchanting past, where it should remain. Any artificial culture, a culture without replenishment, is meaningless.... Everything that happens with Yiddish culture is transformed into a kind of cabaret—epistolary genre, nice, cute to the ear and the eye, but having nothing to do with high art, because there is no natural, national soil. In Russia, it is the memory of the departed, sometimes sweet memories. But it's the memories of what will never be again. Perhaps that's why these memories are always so sharp.

The Jewish Autonomous Oblast was formed in 1934 in the Russian Far East, with its capital city in Birobidzhan and Yiddish as its official language. The intention was for the Soviet Jewish population to settle there. Jewish cultural life was revived in Birobidzhan much earlier than elsewhere in the Soviet Union. Yiddish theaters began opening in the 1970s. The newspaper ביראָבידזשאַנער שטערן (Birobidzhaner Shtern ; lit: Birobidzhan Star) includes a Yiddish section. In modern Russia, the cultural significance of the language is still recognized and bolstered. The First Birobidzhan International Summer Program for Yiddish Language and Culture was launched in 2007.

As of 2010, according to data provided by the Russian Census Bureau, there were 97 speakers of Yiddish in the JAO. A November 2017 article in The Guardian, titled, "Revival of a Soviet Zion: Birobidzhan celebrates its Jewish heritage", examined the current status of the city and suggested that, even though the Jewish Autonomous Region in Russia's far east is now barely 1% Jewish, officials hope to woo back people who left after Soviet collapse and to revive the Yiddish language in this region. Despite the small number of local speakers, the weekly state-run newspaper Birobidzhaner Shtern contains 2–4 pages in Yiddish, largely written by authors who live in other cities and countries, and its online version attracts international readership. Yiddish often appears in the local TV program Yiddishkeit, also available online.

Yiddish was an official language of the Ukrainian People's Republic (1917–1921). But due to the holocaust, assimilation, and migration of Ukrainian Jews abroad today only 3,100 of the remaining Jews speak Yiddish as their first language. The Southeast dialect of Yiddish has many Ukrainian loanwords due to the long contact between Yiddish speakers and Ukrainian speakers.

Several countries that ratified the 1992 European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages have included Yiddish in the list of their recognized minority languages: the Netherlands (1996), Sweden (2000), Romania (2008), Poland (2009), Bosnia and Herzegovina (2010). In 2005, Ukraine did not mention Yiddish as such, but "the language(s) of the Jewish ethnic minority".

In June 1999, the Swedish Parliament enacted legislation giving Yiddish legal status as one of the country's official minority languages (entering into effect in April 2000).

Additional legislation was enacted in June 2006 establishing a new governmental agency, the Swedish National Language Council, whose goal is to "collect, preserve, scientifically research, and spread material about the national minority languages." These languages include Yiddish.

The Swedish government has published documents in Yiddish detailing the national action plan for human rights. An earlier one provides general information about national minority language policies. On September 6, 2007, it became possible to register Internet domains with Yiddish names in the national top-level domain.se.

The first Jews were permitted to reside in Sweden during the late 18th century. The Jewish population in Sweden is estimated at 20,000. According to various reports and surveys, between 2,000 and 6,000 Swedish Jews have at least some knowledge of Yiddish. In 2009, the number of native speakers was estimated by linguist Mikael Parkvall to be 750–1,500. He says that most native speakers of Yiddish in Sweden today are adults, many of them elderly.

After the war Yiddish theater enjoyed great popularity in Sweden and all the great stars performed there. Since the recognition of Yiddish as an official minority language, Swedish schoolchildren have the right to study Yiddish at school as a mother tongue, and there are public radio broadcasts and television shows in Yiddish.

In the United States, at first most Jews were of Sephardic origin, and hence did not speak Yiddish. It was not until the mid-to-late 19th century, as first German Jews, then Central and Eastern European Jews, arrived in the nation, that Yiddish became dominant within the immigrant community. This helped to bond Jews from many countries. פֿאָרװערטס (Forverts – The Forward) was one of seven Yiddish daily newspapers in New York City, and other Yiddish newspapers served as a forum for Jews of all European backgrounds. In 1915, the circulation of the daily Yiddish newspapers was half a million in New York City alone, and 600,000 nationally. In addition, thousands more subscribed to the numerous weekly papers and the many magazines.

The typical circulation in the 21st century is a few thousand. The Forward still appears weekly and is also available in an online edition. It remains in wide distribution, together with דער אַלגעמיינער זשורנאַל (der algemeyner zhurnal – Algemeyner Journal ; algemeyner = general), a Chabad newspaper which is also published weekly and appears online. The widest-circulation Yiddish newspapers are probably the weekly issues Der Yid (דער איד "The Jew"), Der Blatt (דער בלאַט ; blat 'paper') and Di Tzeitung (די צײטונג 'the newspaper'). Several additional newspapers and magazines are in regular production, such as the weekly אידישער טריביון Yiddish Tribune and the monthly publications דער שטערן (Der Shtern The Star) and דער בליק (Der Blik The View). (The romanized titles cited in this paragraph are in the form given on the masthead of each publication and may be at some variance both with the literal Yiddish title and the transliteration rules otherwise applied in this article.) Thriving Yiddish theater, especially in the New York City Yiddish Theatre District, kept the language vital. Interest in klezmer music provided another bonding mechanism.

Most of the Jewish immigrants to the New York metropolitan area during the years of Ellis Island considered Yiddish their native language; however, native Yiddish speakers tended not to pass the language on to their children, who assimilated and spoke English. For example, Isaac Asimov states in his autobiography In Memory Yet Green that Yiddish was his first and sole spoken language, and remained so for about two years after he emigrated to the United States as a small child. By contrast, Asimov's younger siblings, born in the United States, never developed any degree of fluency in Yiddish.

Many "Yiddishisms", like "Italianisms" and "Spanishisms", entered New York City English, often used by Jews and non-Jews alike, unaware of the linguistic origin of the phrases. Yiddish words used in English were documented extensively by Leo Rosten in The Joys of Yiddish ; see also the list of English words of Yiddish origin.

In 1975, the film Hester Street, much of which is in Yiddish, was released. It was later chosen to be on the Library of Congress National Film Registry for being considered a "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" film.

In 1976, the Canadian-born American author Saul Bellow received the Nobel Prize in Literature. He was fluent in Yiddish, and translated several Yiddish poems and stories into English, including Isaac Bashevis Singer 's "Gimpel the Fool". In 1978, Singer, a writer in the Yiddish language, who was born in Poland and lived in the United States, received the Nobel Prize in Literature.

Legal scholars Eugene Volokh and Alex Kozinski argue that Yiddish is "supplanting Latin as the spice in American legal argot".

In the 2000 United States census, 178,945 people in the United States reported speaking Yiddish at home. Of these speakers, 113,515 lived in New York (63.43% of American Yiddish speakers); 18,220 in Florida (10.18%); 9,145 in New Jersey (5.11%); and 8,950 in California (5.00%). The remaining states with speaker populations larger than 1,000 are Pennsylvania (5,445), Ohio (1,925), Michigan (1,945), Massachusetts (2,380), Maryland (2,125), Illinois (3,510), Connecticut (1,710), and Arizona (1,055). The population is largely elderly: 72,885 of the speakers were older than 65, 66,815 were between 18 and 64, and only 39,245 were age 17 or lower.

In the six years since the 2000 census, the 2006 American Community Survey reflected an estimated 15 percent decline of people speaking Yiddish at home in the U.S. to 152,515. In 2011, the number of persons in the United States above the age of five speaking Yiddish at home was 160,968. 88% of them were living in four metropolitan areas – New York City and another metropolitan area just north of it, Miami, and Los Angeles.

There are a few predominantly Hasidic communities in the United States in which Yiddish remains the majority language including concentrations in the Crown Heights, Borough Park, and Williamsburg neighborhoods of Brooklyn. In Kiryas Joel in Orange County, New York, in the 2000 census, nearly 90% of residents of Kiryas Joel reported speaking Yiddish at home.

There are over 30,000 Yiddish speakers in the United Kingdom, and several thousand children now have Yiddish as a first language. The largest group of Yiddish speakers in Britain reside in the Stamford Hill district of North London, but there are sizable communities in northwest London, Leeds, Manchester and Gateshead. The Yiddish readership in the UK is mainly reliant upon imported material from the United States and Israel for newspapers, magazines and other periodicals. However, the London-based weekly Jewish Tribune has a small section in Yiddish called אידישע טריבונע Yidishe Tribune. From the 1910s to the 1950s, London had a daily Yiddish newspaper called די צײַט (Di Tsayt, Yiddish pronunciation: [ dɪ tsaɪt ] ; in English, The Time), founded, and edited from offices in Whitechapel Road, by Romanian-born Morris Myer, who was succeeded on his death in 1943 by his son Harry. There were also from time to time Yiddish newspapers in Manchester, Liverpool, Glasgow and Leeds. The bilingual Yiddish and English café Pink Peacock opened in Glasgow in 2021 but closed down in 2023.

Montreal had, and to some extent still has, one of the most thriving Yiddish communities in North America. Yiddish was Montreal's third language (after French and English) for the entire first half of the twentieth century. Der Keneder Adler (The Canadian Eagle, founded by Hirsch Wolofsky), Montreal's daily Yiddish newspaper, appeared from 1907 to 1988. The Monument-National was the center of Yiddish theater from 1896 until the construction of the Saidye Bronfman Centre for the Arts (now the Segal Centre for Performing Arts), inaugurated on September 24, 1967, where the established resident theater, the Dora Wasserman Yiddish Theatre, remains the only permanent Yiddish theatre in North America. The theatre group also tours Canada, US, Israel, and Europe.

Even though Yiddish has receded, it is the immediate ancestral language of Montrealers like Mordecai Richler and Leonard Cohen, as well as former interim city mayor Michael Applebaum. Besides Yiddish-speaking activists, it remains today the native everyday language of 15,000 Montreal Hasidim.

Major exceptions to the decline of spoken Yiddish are found in Haredi communities all over the world. In some of the more closely knit such communities, Yiddish is spoken as a home and schooling language, especially in Hasidic, Litvish, or Yeshivish communities, such as Brooklyn 's Borough Park, Williamsburg, and Crown Heights, and in the communities of Monsey, Kiryas Joel, and New Square in New York (over 88% of the population of Kiryas Joel is reported to speak Yiddish at home.) Also in New Jersey, Yiddish is widely spoken mostly in Lakewood Township, but also in smaller towns with yeshivas, such as Passaic, Teaneck, and elsewhere. Yiddish is also widely spoken in the Jewish community in Antwerp, and in Haredi communities such as the ones in London, Manchester, and Montreal. Yiddish is also spoken in many Haredi communities throughout Israel. Among most Ashkenazi Haredim, Hebrew is generally reserved for prayer, while Yiddish is used for religious studies, as well as a home and business language. In Israel, however, Haredim commonly speak modern Hebrew, with the notable exception of many Hasidic communities. However, many Haredim who use Modern Hebrew also understand Yiddish. There are some who send their children to schools in which the primary language of instruction is Yiddish. Members of anti-Zionist Haredi groups such as the Satmar Hasidim, who view the commonplace use of Hebrew as a form of Zionism, use Yiddish almost exclusively.

Hundreds of thousands of young children around the globe have been, and are still, taught to translate the texts of the Torah into Yiddish. This process is called טײַטשן (taytshn) – 'translating'. Many Ashkenazi yeshivas' highest level lectures in Talmud and Halakha are delivered in Yiddish by the rosh yeshivas as well as ethical talks of the Musar movement. Hasidic rebbes generally use only Yiddish to converse with their followers and to deliver their various Torah talks, classes, and lectures. The linguistic style and vocabulary of Yiddish have influenced the manner in which many Orthodox Jews who attend yeshivas speak English. This usage is distinctive enough that it has been dubbed " Yeshivish ".

While Hebrew remains the exclusive language of Jewish prayer, the Hasidim have mixed some Yiddish into their Hebrew, and are also responsible for a significant secondary religious literature written in Yiddish. For example, the tales about the Baal Shem Tov were written largely in Yiddish. The Torah Talks of the late Chabad leaders are published in their original form, Yiddish. In addition, some prayers, such as " God of Abraham ", were composed and are recited in Yiddish.

There has been a resurgence in Yiddish learning in recent times among many from around the world with Jewish ancestry. The language which had lost many of its native speakers during the Holocaust has been making something of a comeback. In Poland, which traditionally had Yiddish speaking communities, a museum has begun to revive Yiddish education and culture. Located in Kraków, the Galicia Jewish Museum offers classes in Yiddish Language Instruction and workshops on Yiddish songs. The museum has taken steps to revive the culture through concerts and events held on site. There are various universities worldwide which now offer Yiddish programs based on the YIVO Yiddish standard. Many of these programs are held during the summer and are attended by Yiddish enthusiasts from around the world. One such school located within Vilnius University (Vilnius Yiddish Institute) was the first Yiddish center of higher learning to be established in post-Holocaust Eastern Europe. Vilnius Yiddish Institute is an integral part of the four-century-old Vilnius University. Published Yiddish scholar and researcher Dovid Katz is among the Faculty.

Despite this growing popularity among many American Jews, finding opportunities for practical use of Yiddish is becoming increasingly difficult, and thus many students have trouble learning to speak the language. One solution has been the establishment of a farm in Goshen, New York, for Yiddishists.

Yiddish is the medium of instruction in many Hasidic חדרים khadorim, Jewish boys' schools, and some Hasidic girls' schools.

Some American Jewish day schools and high schools offer Yiddish education.

An organization called Yiddishkayt (ייִדישקײַט) promotes Yiddish-language education in schools.

Sholem Aleichem College, a secular Jewish primary school in Melbourne teaches Yiddish as a second language to all its students. The school was founded in 1975 by the Bund movement in Australia, and still maintains daily Yiddish instruction today, and includes student theater and music in Yiddish.

Google Translate includes Yiddish as one of its languages, as does Wikipedia. Hebrew-alphabet keyboards are available, and right-to-left writing is recognized. Google Search accepts queries in Yiddish.

Over eleven thousand Yiddish texts, estimated as between a sixth and a quarter of all the published works in Yiddish, are now online, based on the work of the Yiddish Book Center, volunteers, and the Internet Archive.

There are many websites on the Internet in Yiddish. In January 2013, The Forward announced the launch of the new daily version of its newspaper's website, which has been active since 1999 as an online weekly, supplied with radio and video programs, a literary section for fiction writers and a special blog written in local contemporary Hasidic dialects.

Many Jewish ethnolects influenced by Yiddish are available via online resources such as YouTube.

Computer scientist Raphael Finkel maintains a hub of Yiddish-language resources, including a searchable dictionary and spell checker.

In late 2016, Motorola Inc. released its smartphones with keyboard access for the Yiddish language in its foreign language option.

On April 5, 2021, Duolingo added Yiddish to its courses.

In addition to Modern Hebrew and New York English, especially as spoken by yeshivah students (sometimes known as Yeshivish), Yiddish has influenced Cockney in England, the city dialect of Amsterdam and to some degree the city dialects of Vienna and Berlin. French argot has some words coming from Yiddish.

Paul Wexler proposed that Esperanto was not an arbitrary pastiche of major European languages but a Latinate relexification of Yiddish, a native language of its founder. This model is generally unsupported by mainstream linguists.

Yiddish had an influence on Jewish Swedish, a dialect of Swedish used by Jews with loanwords from Hebrew and Yiddish. And Yiddish had an influence on Hungarian with extra influence on Jewish Hungarian, a dialect of Hungarian spoken by Hungarian Jews. Yiddish had influence on other European Jewish ethnolects like Jewish Russian and Jewish French. These ethnolects are shown in various pieces of media across various mediums both digital and physical.

The following is a short example of the Yiddish language written in both the Hebrew and Latin scripts with English and standard German for comparison.

Yoga in France is the practice of yoga, whether for exercise or other reasons, in France. The relaxation technique of yoga nidra was pioneered by Dennis Boyes, whose 1973 book preceded Satyananda Saraswati 's popularisation of the technique.

Yoga was brought to France in the early 1930s by Maryse Choisy, Cajzoran Ali and Constant Kerneiz. Choisy taught meditation and wrote books on the philosophy of yoga; Ali published the 1928 book Les divines postures ("The divine [yoga] postures"); and Kerneiz founded what was probably the first yoga school in France. A pupil of Kermeiz, Lucien Ferrer, opened the Académie occidentale de Yoga ("Western Yoga Academy") in 1950. From the 1960s, with growing interest in yoga as a philosophy, the number of French yoga books, journals, and courses increased rapidly. Ali taught yoga in France from 1935, and wrote about yoga in Choisy's esoteric journals, illustrated with photographs of dancers demonstrating the asanas.

In Brussels, from 1968 until his death in 2004, the French-speaking André Van Lysebeth single-handedly published a monthly yoga magazine, Yoga. He became widely-known in France and across Europe as a yoga teacher, running yoga holidays, publishing books including the 1968 J'Apprends le Yoga (published in English as Yoga Self-Taught), and training many teachers.

In 1971, Eva Ruchpaul founded the Institut Eva Ruchpaul in Paris; it has trained over 1000 yoga teachers.

In the 1990s, yoga grew to have millions of practitioners in France, as it continues to do in the 21st century.

In 1973, Dennis Boyes published his book Le Yoga du sommeil éveillé; méthode de relaxation, yoga nidra ("The Yoga of Waking Sleep: method of relaxation, yoga nidra") in Paris. This is the first known description of yoga nidra in a modern sense as a method of systematic relaxation in any language, preceding Satyananda Saraswati 's popularisation of the technique. In the book, Boyes makes use of relaxation techniques including the direction of attention to each part of the body:

Yoga has remained largely unregulated in France, without either state control or official instruction in state schools. Four French institutions are members of the standard-setting body, the Union Européenne de Yoga / European Union of Yoga, namely the EU Recherche sur le Yoga dans l'Éducation ("EU Research on Yoga in Education"), Fédération Inter Enseignements de Hatha-Yoga ("International Federation of Teaching Hatha Yoga"), Fédération Nationale des Enseignants de Yoga ("National Federation of Yoga Teachers"), and Institut Francais de Yoga ("French Yoga Institute").

The Young Plan was a 1929 attempt to settle issues surrounding the World War I reparations obligations that Germany owed under the terms of Treaty of Versailles. Developed to replace the 1924 Dawes Plan, the Young Plan was negotiated in Paris from February to June 1929 by a committee of international financial experts under the leadership of American businessman and economist Owen D. Young. Representatives of the affected governments then finalised and approved the plan at The Hague conference of 1929 – 30. Reparations were set at 36 billion Reichsmarks payable through 1988. Including interest, the total came to 112 billion Reichsmarks. The average annual payment was approximately two billion Reichsmarks (US$473 million in 1929). The plan came into effect on 17 May 1930, retroactive to 1 September 1929.

In a parallel agreement, France agreed to withdraw its troops from the occupied Rhineland in 1930, five years earlier than called for in the Treaty of Versailles.

Due to the effects of the Great Depression, the Young Plan was suspended by the Hoover Moratorium in June 1931 and payments reduced by 90% at the Lausanne conference in July 1932. The National Socialist government under Adolf Hitler made no payments after it came to power in 1933. However, Germany continued to pay interest on Dawes and Young bonds until 1939.

The Treaty of Versailles did not set the total amount or the terms for German reparations. It established an interim 20 billion Reichsmarks to be paid through April 1920 and left the full details to be determined by the Inter-Allied Reparations Commission. The Commission drew up the May 1921 London Schedule of Payments that fixed the total sum at 132 billion Reichsmarks. After Germany was declared in default in January 1923, French and Belgian troops occupied the Ruhr. Germany responded with passive resistance to the occupation, and the government's payments to the idled workers of the Ruhr fuelled the hyperinflation that nearly wrecked the economy. The Dawes Plan of 1924 was drafted to replace the London Schedule.

The Dawes Plan came into effect on 1 September 1924. It reopened the American capital market to Germany, and billions in long-term bonds and short-term loans flowed to the German private and public sectors in roughly equal parts. The economy of the Weimar Republic grew significantly during the Golden Twenties (1924–1929), and in spite of a negative trade balance, there was enough foreign exchange to pay the instalments of the plan. The payments came, however, at the price of a large foreign debt.

All sides began to be more uneasy about the plan from 1927 onwards. Wall Street banks and the United States Treasury grew increasingly concerned that Germany would become overindebted. Since 1924, foreign loans worth more than ten billion Reichsmarks had flowed into Germany. The question arose as to whether private loans or reparations should have priority in the event of a payment crisis.

The French government also became increasingly concerned. Since 1919 the United States had been calling for the repayment of the inter-allied war debts incurred by France in 1917 and 1918. France urgently needed loans to stabilise the franc after the inflation of 1924 and 1925, but the American capital market was closed to it as long as the war debt remained unpaid. The matter was settled with the Mellon–Berenger Agreement in April 1926 that established a schedule for French repayment to the United States. The French Chamber of Deputies, however, refused to ratify it until the German reparations issue was settled. Since the money from Germany was to be used for French payments to the United States, France became more willing to agree to a new reparations plan, even to settle for less than the 132 billion gold marks demanded in the 1921 London Schedule of Payments.

Germany was not completely satisfied with the Dawes Plan either. In 1928 the full annual payment of 2.5 billion Reichsmarks was due for the first time. It corresponded to 12.4 per cent of total German government expenditure and 3.3 per cent of national income. If the economy continued to develop positively, the plan's prosperity index would have required an even higher sum, which could have threatened to exceed Germany's ability to pay.

Following extensive diplomatic consultations during the autumn meeting of the League of Nations, the six interested powers – Germany, France, Great Britain, Belgium, Italy and Japan – agreed on 16 September 1928 to set up an international commission of experts under the leadership of American economist Owen D. Young to settle the reparations question and at the same time to begin negotiations on the evacuation of the occupied Rhineland. The fourteen international financial experts chosen to draw up the new reparations plan were to be independent and guided only by their economic expertise.

The governments of the six powers that had commissioned the drafting of the Young Plan agreed to it in principle in June 1929. The foreign ministers of France and Germany, Aristide Briand and Gustav Stresemann, then called for a conference to be held to decide on the final settlement of all questions still arising from the First World War.

At the first session of the Hague Conference from 6 to 31 August 1929, the British chancellor of the Exchequer, Labour Party politician Philip Snowden, demanded an increase of annual reparations payments to Britain by the equivalent of 48 million Reichsmarks. Snowden signalled that he was prepared to let the Young Plan fail if necessary. A solution was reached through shifts within the creditor instalments, above all at German expense, and compromise solutions were found on the question of deliveries in kind. Briand was then prepared to give in on the evacuation of the Rhineland and agreed to 30 June 1930 as the final date for the occupation.

The second session of the conference took place from 3 to 20 January 1930. Issues of a mostly technical nature were clarified, specifically the establishment of the Bank for International Settlements to handle the transfer of reparations payments and the question of whether, as provided for in the Treaty of Versailles, creditors could continue to impose sanctions in the event of a German default. It was agreed that the creditor nations would regain their "full freedom of action" if the International Court of Justice found that Germany was in the process of "tearing up" the Young Plan. The French saw in the statement the chance to fall back on the robust sanctions possibilities of the Versailles Treaty, while the Germans recognised in it merely the freedom of action to which every sovereign state was entitled under international law.

Due to the New York stock market crash of 24 October 1929, which had occurred between the two sessions at The Hague, it had become apparent that for the foreseeable future the American capital market would be unable to pre-finance the entire value of the German reparations debt for the European creditor powers. They had wanted to use mobilisation bonds to be able to repay the inter-Allied war debt to the US in a lump sum. The "New Plan", as the Young Plan was officially called, and the agreement on the evacuation of the Rhineland were nevertheless signed by the heads of government of the six powers on 20 January 1930.

The Young Plan provided for a German reparation debt of the equivalent of 36 billion Reichsmarks. It was to be repaid with interest through 1988, resulting in a total sum of 112 billion Reichsmarks. The annual installments were to rise rapidly from 1.7 billion to 2.1 billion Reichsmarks, falling to 1.65 billion after 1966. Taking 1930 as a basis, Germany would be required to pay annually, on average, the equivalent of about 12 per cent of its exports, 2.5 per cent of its net national product and 7.3 per cent of all public revenues.

The transfer protection of the Dawes Plan was abolished, meaning that in the future, Germany was responsible for ensuring that the sum raised from tax revenue could be transferred in foreign currency or in kind to the Bank for International Settlements. The institution took over the functions of the Reparation Commission, which was abolished, as was the office of the general agent for reparations payments. The control that the creditor powers had secured in the Dawes Plan over the German National Railway and the Reichsbank were also dropped, as was the prosperity index, which meant that Germany could be sure that it would not have to pay more if the economic situation was favourable.

The deliveries in kind (as, for example, coal), which had often competed with companies in the creditor countries, were to expire after ten years. The remaining payment obligation in foreign currency was divided into an unprotected installment, which had to be transferred in foreign currency under all circumstances and amounted to a constant 600 million Reichsmarks. The protected installment, which was more than twice as large, could initially be transferred in Reichsmarks in the event of a "relatively short depression", but the foreign currency had to be delivered within two years. The protected installment was closely linked to inter-allied war debts through the Concurrent Memorandum that the creditor powers attached to the Young Plan.

On 17 May 1930, the Young Plan came into force retroactively to 1 September 1929. At the same time, the Young bond was put on the market. Germany borrowed 1.47 billion Reichsmarks (300 million gold marks) at 5.5 percent interest for 35 years. Two-thirds of the sum went to the reparation creditors and to support the German economy and one-third to the postal service and the national railway. In spite of the poor capital market after the Wall Street crash, the bond was a success with the international public.

The Young Plan was mostly welcomed in France. The left-wing and liberal press judged it positively; only on the political right was criticism levelled that the plan and its accompanying withdrawal from the Rhineland affected both the financial and military security of the French Republic.

Since all the governments from 1926 to 1932 were based on the political centre in coalition with the nationalists and right-wing Catholics, difficulties arose in the French parliament. It had not been possible to complete the Young Plan by July 1929, the deadline for ratification of the agreement on inter-allied war debts. Poincaré therefore had to ask the parliament to ratify the Mellon–Berenger Agreement on French debt owed to the United States before Germany had agreed to the Young Plan. Both the political right and the opposition Socialists, who otherwise supported Briand's foreign policy, insisted on linking the two debts, a position that the United States strongly opposed. By a narrow majority, the Chamber of Deputies approved the Mellon–Bérenger Agreement on 12 July 1929 with the reservation that it would only be serviced as long as sufficient reparations were collected from Germany. Since a conditional ratification would not be recognised by the United States, the reservation did not acquire legal force and only the debt agreement became legally binding. Poincaré resigned a few days later.

He was succeeded by Aristide Briand, whose attempt to pass the Young Plan also failed. After he too resigned, André Tardieu of the Democratic Republican Alliance became prime minister. He succeeded on 29 March 1930 in securing a majority for the ratification of the Young Plan. Following the wishes of several deputies of the Republican Federation, he had delayed the parliamentary debate until the German Reichstag had given its approval. The speech of the new finance minister Paul Reynaud expressed a highly positive balance: the Young Plan had put reparations on an equal footing with Germany's private debt and thus secured them, it covered the inter-allied war debts and generated a surplus for the reconstruction of French territories destroyed in the war. Although Versailles' original sum of 132 billion gold marks plus interest had had to be dropped, "the sacrifice is the price of the permanent solution". He did not mention the original goal of mobilising reparations on a large scale and repaying the inter-allied debt as a lump sum because a financial operation of such a magnitude had become impossible after the New York Stock Exchange crash.

After the adoption of the Young Plan, the French sought closer cooperation with Germany. Tardieu told the German ambassador that "conscious rapprochement with Germany" was the goal of his government. With the seemingly permanent solution to the reparations question and the withdrawal from the occupied Rhineland, the last points of contention stemming from the Treaty of Versailles appeared to have been resolved and the way cleared for a secure and peaceful future.

Although the Young Plan had effectively reduced Germany's obligations, it was opposed by parts of the political spectrum in Germany. Nationalist parties had been most outspoken against reparations and seized on the Young Plan as an issue. A committee was formed of various nationalist groups under the leadership of Alfred Hugenberg, a media baron and head of the German National People's Party. One of the groups that joined was the Nazi Party led by Adolf Hitler.

The committee's goal was the enactment of what it called the "Law Against the Enslavement of the German People", or in its shortened form, the "Freedom Law". It would renounce all reparations and make it a criminal offense for any German official to sign a treaty that imposed new reparations obligations. It would also renounce the German acknowledgement of war guilt and the occupation of German territory, both of which were terms of the Treaty of Versailles The Freedom Law proposal was officially presented on 16 October 1929. The committee succeeded in collecting enough signatures to put the proposal before the Reichstag, which voted the bill down by a 318–82 margin. In the subsequent Freedom Law referendum, 94.5% of the votes cast were in favour of the proposed law, but voter turnout was just 14.9%, meaning that only 13.8% of eligible voters had voted in favour of the law. The referendum therefore failed, since it needed 50% of all eligible voters to pass.

The Young Plan was accepted by the Reichstag on 12 March 1930.

The Wall Street Crash of October 1929 had occurred between the initial agreement and the adoption of the Young Plan. With the severe world-wide economic downturn that heralded the Great Depression, United States President Herbert Hoover won support for a one-year moratorium on reparations payments from 15 nations by July 1931. A final effort to resolve the reparations issue was made at the Lausanne Conference of 1932. It essentially ended Germany's reparations payments.

However, Germany continued to pay interest on both Dawes and Young bonds, issued in 1924 and 1930. These were traded on the London Stock Exchange until the end of World War II, with Germany only stopping interest payments at the outbreak of war in 1939. In November 1934, Britain and Germany made what is known as the Anglo-German Payments Agreement, wherein among other terms, Germany agreed to continue paying interest on both Dawes and Young bonds in sterling.

It is estimated that Germany's total reparations payments up to 1931 came to about 36.1 billion marks.

After Germany's defeat in World War II, an international conference (London Agreement on German External Debts, 1953) decided that Germany would pay the remaining debt only after the country was reunified. West Germany nevertheless paid off the principal by 1980; then in 1995, after reunification, the new German government announced it would resume payments of the interest, including on the Young bonds. Germany was due to pay off the interest to the United States in 2010, and to other countries in 2020. In 2010, Time magazine reported that Germany made "final reparations-related payment for the Great War on Oct. 3, nearly 92 years after the country's defeat by the Allies".

Yvon Delbos (7 May 1885 – 15 November 1956) was a French Radical -Socialist Party politician and minister.

Delbos was born in Thonac, Dordogne, and entered a career as a journalist, and became a member of the Radical-Socialist Party. He subsequently served as Minister of Education (1925), Minister of Justice (1936), and notably as Minister of Foreign Affairs in the Popular Front governments of Léon Blum and Camille Chautemps.

In January 1937, unveiling a war memorial at Châteauroux, Delbos, in reply to Hitler 's Reichstag speech of the previous day, emphasised the need for Franco-German understanding and for both countries to find new markets so that industrial expansion might replace rearmament. After representing France at the Nine Power Treaty Conference at Brussels on 3 November, he expounded French Foreign Policy in a debate in the Chamber on 18–19 November, emphasizing Anglo-French friendship and the necessity for its maintenance. Ten days later, he visited London with Chautemps to receive a report from Neville Chamberlain and Anthony Eden on the result of the Halifax-Hitler talks. Afterwards, he set out on a tour of the central and eastern European capitols, visiting Warsaw on 3 December, Bucharest on 8 December, Belgrade on 12 December and Prague on 15 December, in each case discussing the European situation with the ministers of the countries in question, and seeking to foster friendly relations with France.

On 10 December 1937 it was announced that a plot to assassinate him at Prague had been discovered by the French Police and the prospective assailant was arrested. He was reappointed Foreign Minister in the reconstructed Chautemps government in the third week of January 1938 but was excluded from Léon Blum 's cabinet in March 1938.

During the Spanish Civil War, he worked alongside his British counterpart Anthony Eden in fleshing out the policy of nonintervention.

ZAD de Notre-Dame-des-Landes (also known as ZAD NDDL) is the best-known ' Zone to Defend ' in France. Located in the Loire-Atlantique department near to Nantes, it is a very large, mostly agricultural terrain of 1,650 hectares (4,080 acres) which became nationally famous in the early 2010s and has resisted several concerted attempts by the French state to evict it.

For decades there was local resistance to plans to build a new airport in the rural commune of Notre-Dame-des-Landes. In the 2000s much of the land was squatted as farmers defied eviction. The new occupants set up autonomous self-sufficient structures such as a communal bakery and animal husbandry. Attempts to evict the squatters saw largescale counter-mobilisations in 2012 and 2018. French president Emmanuel Macron announced in January 2018 that the plans for the airport would be shelved and the already existing airport at Nantes would be redeveloped instead. Many of the remaining projects at the ZAD then engaged in a process of legalisation.

There had been plans since the 1960s to build an airport at Notre-Dame-des-Landes (NDDL), which had been bitterly opposed by local farmers and environmentalists. As residents were evicted from their homes, they refused to leave and became squatters, joined by activists who built their own homes and lived in the trees. The first occupation was the Rosiers farm in August 2007.

Jean-Marc Ayrault, the Socialist prime minister and former mayor of Nantes, declared in 2012 "This airport will happen." The attempt to evict the squatters began in October 2012 and was called Opération César. It was met with barricades made from human chains and farmers' tractors. After government forces had destroyed 13 cabins and farmhouses, the call to reoccupy the ZAD resulted in a demonstration on 17 November of over 40,000 people. Many of them would participate in the building of a small village, henceforth to be the headquarters of the resistance. In the words of two participant-observers:

Once in the zad, thousands of us lined up either side of newly cut tracks, shoulder to shoulder, forming a human chain that stretched over half a kilometer from the trailers to the building site in the middle of a chestnut grove. Piece by piece, hand by hand, strangers passed planks, drainpipes, furniture, pots and pans, logs, bathtubs, stoves. As the sun set, someone brought a drum kit and amps into the middle of the coppice and experimental jazz accompanied the hammering that went on late into the night. This was theater as it should be, (...) a festival of disobedience.

Dubbed the la Chat-teigne, the hamlet included a bar, communal kitchen, blacksmith's workshops, dormitories, a first aid post, a bathroom (with hot tub), and a communications office broadcasting pirate radio. It was protected by 40 tractors linked together. The eviction operation involved 2,000 police and eventually the government backed down because of the public support for the occupiers. In this time over 200 support committees were set up, across France.

In 2016, Aéroport du Grand Ouest (AGO), a subsidiary of VINCI Airports, began eviction proceedings against the last eleven families living on the disputed terrain. Over one thousand people attended the court case to support the farmers. On the previous weekend, 20,000 people had blocked traffic on regional roads.

There were around 70 different networked sites on the ZAD by 2017. Amongst the self-organised projects there were vegetable plots, a bakery (making bread from locally grown grain), a brewery, a pirate radio station and a newspaper collective. There were also herds of cows, goats and sheep.

French president Emmanuel Macron announced in January 2018 that the plans for the airport would be shelved and the already existing airport at Nantes would be reinvigorated instead. The prime minister, Édouard Philippe, said that the squatters would have until spring to leave. This was a victory for campaigners who had fought for 50 years against the airport, using demonstrations, legal challenges, occupations (legal and illegal), sabotage and solidarity actions.

On the ZAD itself, there were different reactions to the victory and looming eviction battle. Some people wanted to negotiate with the state to formalise their occupations and some wanted to remain autonomous. The D281 road had been closed by the state in 2013, then unofficially reopened and controlled by Zadistes. When the local municipality demanded that it was opened again, opinions varied on whether it was good to show willingness to collaborate or if it was simply the first step in the state's plan to evict. After much debate, the road was reopened and the structures built on the road were moved. One house was moved twice and then was destroyed during the later eviction attempt. These tensions resulted in a person from the non-negotiation camp being beaten up on March 20. Several masked people attacked La gaîté squat and took the man away tied up in the boot of a car. After being beaten up he was dumped outside a psychiatric hospital in Blain. On the same night there was an arson attack on a farm called La Freusière.

In April 2018, a large scale eviction operation began as the French state tried to regain control of the autonomous zone. After the first morning (April 9), police claimed that 10 out of 97 squats had been evicted. One evicted project was a farm called 100 Noms (100 Names) which had a barn and a herd of twenty ewes. On the second day (April 10), squatters employed barricades of car tyres, wooden pallets, hay bales and electricity poles which they set on fire to hamper the police, who were bulldozing the self-built houses. On day three (April 11), over a thousand people attended a picnic which was then attacked by the police. Places that were evicted included la Boite Noire, Dalle à Caca, Jesse James and la Gaité.

After 10 days (April 19), the police had fired 11,000 projectiles. According to Europe 1 this could be broken down into almost 8,000 tear gas canisters and more than 3,000 stun grenades. The squatters reported 272 injuries, although they preferred to be vague on details since during the 2012 eviction attempt people reporting injuries had been arrested at the hospital (the police stated 77 officers had been wounded and also three journalists had been injured).

Prime Minister Édouard Philippe announced a halt to the eviction on April 26 and said it would be frozen until at least May 14. The state estimated that 29 projects had been destroyed and 60-70 still existed. The truce came about as representatives of the ZAD negotiated for legal recognition for 28 projects. Some projects agreed to file individual claims, whereas other refused to participate in the process. 1000 police officers were sent home, leaving 1500 at the ZAD.

Fifteen out of the 28 submitted projects were accepted, including the proposals from 100 Noms to make wool from a herd of 80 sheep and to make buckwheat pancakes. On Thursday, May 17, the eviction operations resumed. According to the Minister of Agriculture, Stéphane Travert, a dozen more sites would be evicted. On Tuesday, May 22, a 21-year-old man had his right hand amputated after it was severely damaged by a projectile canister.

There were many solidarity actions worldwide in response to the 2018 eviction attempt. Le Monde published an open letter calling for people in the film industry to support the ZAD, which was signed by over 250 filmmakers, including Pedro Costa, Philippe Garrel and Aki Kaurismäki.

In April 2019, Zadists were hoping to sign leases for their projects. Twenty projects on the ZAD opened their doors to visitors. These included L’Ambazada, Bellevue, Le Liminbout, Le Moulin and La Vacherie.

In 2020, the situation on the ZAD was described by the Prefect of Pays de la Loire as "relaxed but without full mutual understanding" ("la détente, pas encore totalement l’entente"). The site could cope with the COVID-19 pandemic in France because it had only 200 inhabitants spread over 1,695 hectares, although the farmers were finding it difficult that restriction had led to the open markets where they usually sold their produce being closed. At the same time, Vinci continued to press the state for the 1 billion euros in damages it is claiming for the cancellation of the plans for the new airport.

A Zone naturelle d'intérêt écologique, faunistique et floristique (Natural area of ecological, faunal and floristic interest), abbreviated as ZNIEFF, is a type of natural environment recognized by France.

The inventory of a ZNIEFF area is an inventory of natural resources and scientific program launched in 1982 by Minister of Environment Huguette Bouchardeau and confirmed by the Act of July 12, 1983 called the Bouchardeau act. A ZNIEFF is not a measure of regulatory protection, but an inventory. It corresponds to the census of outstanding natural land areas in the twenty-two metropolitan areas as well as the overseas departments of France. The designation of a ZNIEFF based primarily on the presence of species or groups of species with strong heritage interest. The presence of at least one population of critical species (fr:espèce déterminante in French) defines a ZNIEFF.

This is one of the bases for prioritizing natural heritage issues as part of the National Biodiversity Strategy, or Regional Biodiversity Strategies, National Strategy for creation of protected areas (SCAP), etc. It is used for environmental impact assessment. The Belgian equivalent of the ZNIEFF is the Site of Great Biological Interest (SGIB).

An inventory ZNIEFF second generation was launched in 1996, consisting of an update with harmonization of the methods of carrying out the inventory, better integrating some criteria feature of ecosystem.

Up to 9 April 2013, ZNIEFFs were upgraded and validated for the following territories: Limousin, Normandy (Upper and Lower), Champagne-Ardenne, Picardie, Pays de la Loire, Poitou-Charentes, Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur, Rhône-Alpes, Center, Corsica, Languedoc-Roussillon, Ile-de-France (excluding Seine-et-Marne), Auvergne, Nord-Pas-de-Calais, Lot-et-Garonne, Guyana and Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon.

This inventory is, in addition to an instrument of knowledge, one of the major elements of French conservation policy and taking into account the environment and spatial planning (green belt, ecological network (including European green infrastructure), protective measures, environmental mitigation, etc.) and in some projects creating protected areas (including nature reserves) or in the development of departmental career paths for the operation of conglomerates.

French jurisprudence confirms that it is not creating an inventory for measuring regulatory protection and does not prohibit planning. However, it must be included in all the accompanying planning documents

50°22′N 2°48′E ﻿ / ﻿ 50.36°N 2.80°E ﻿ / 50.36; 2.80

The Zone rouge (French for ' Red Zone ') is a chain of non-contiguous areas throughout northeastern France that the French government isolated after the First World War. The land, which originally covered more than 1,200 square kilometres (460 square miles), was deemed too physically and environmentally damaged by conflict for human habitation. Rather than attempt to immediately clean up the former battlefields, the land was allowed to return to nature. Restrictions within the Zone rouge still exist today, although the control areas have been greatly reduced.

The Zone Rouge was defined just after the war as "Completely devastated. Damage to properties: 100%. Damage to Agriculture: 100%. Impossible to clean. Human life impossible".

Under French law, activities such as housing, farming, or forestry were temporarily or permanently forbidden in the Zone rouge, because of the vast amounts of human and animal remains, and millions of items of unexploded ordnance contaminating the land. Some towns and villages were never permitted to be rebuilt after the war, such as Fleury-devant-Douaumont. As part of war reparations, Pinus nigra trees sent by Austria were planted in some parts of the zone.

World War I 's massive scale of industrially produced ammunition left France, Belgium and Germany with severe chemical and ecological consequences. In France, where the fighting was concentrated, this resulted in approximately 7% of French metropolitan territory being almost totally destroyed. This brought about significant reform, particularly towards laws of war.

As early as 1914, by a statute enacted unanimously, France committed to fully compensating those who suffered war damages (French: dommages de guerre). Five months after the 1918 armistice, after lengthy discussions and debates between senators and deputies, the French Parliament enacted the Charte des sinistrés, ' Charter of disaster victims ' dealing with war damages. It authorised the French government to buy land that seemed unable to be restored quickly or permanently. The government under President Georges Clemenceau required the prefects of the affected areas to take over the affected lands, with compensation to the owners or heirs of the plots of land. The prefects carried out this duty along with the relevant departments, including the Directorate of Agricultural Services and the Forest Conservation Office.

Some of the buried, abandoned or lost militaria in the Zone rouge is responsible for polluting the environment to a chronic extent, which in addition to the consequences from the firing of shells, explosions, use of chemical weapons, and many fires, leads to a considerable amount of pollution in the region and its surroundings.

After the armistice, the demining process led to large amounts of shells and other unexploded ordnance. These were disposed of either by illegal dumping or by burning the contents in makeshift incinerators and retrieving the metals.

In addition to the damage to the land in the Zone rouge, an immense source of pollution was created by discharging 35,000 tonnes of shells recovered in Belgium and northern France into the sea off the coast of Zeebrugge, in water a few metres deep. This practice of dumping weapons into the sea was resumed following the end of World War II.

Ninety years after the Great War, ecological irregularities persist in the eleven departments where the Zone rouge occurs (spanning two regions). The green and yellow zones can also be affected. However, it is the departments in the Zone rouge, notably Meuse, Pas-de-Calais, Nord and Somme, which are by far the most damaged. Specialists still observe a lesser presence and diversity of mushrooms, lichens and a significant number of plants and animals. Although this is partly due to other factors (agriculture, eco-landscape fragmentation, industrial and urban pollution), the magnitude of the ecological aftereffects of the Western Front remains open.

The areas are saturated with unexploded shells (including many gas shells), grenades, and rusting ammunition. Soils were heavily polluted by lead, mercury, chlorine, arsenic, various dangerous gases, acids, and human and animal remains. The area was also littered with ammunition depots and chemical plants. The land of the Western Front is covered in old trenches and shell holes.

Each year, numerous unexploded shells are recovered from former WWI battlefields in what is known as the iron harvest. According to the Sécurité Civile, the French agency in charge of the land management of Zone rouge, 300 to 700 more years at this current rate will be needed to clean the area completely. Some experiments conducted in 2005–2006 discovered up to 300 shells per hectare (120 per acre) in the top 15 centimetres (6 inches) of soil in the worst areas.

Some areas still remain heavily contaminated. For example, at a site in the vicinity of Verdun known as the Place à Gaz (49°17′48″N 5°32′07″E ﻿ / ﻿ 49.2968°N 5.5352°E ﻿ / 49.2968; 5.5352 ﻿ (Place à Gaz)), arsenic constitutes up to 176 grams per kilogram (18%) in the soil. In the 1920s, chemical warfare shells containing arsenic were destroyed there by thermal treatment.

Zone to Defend or ZAD (French : zone à défendre) is a French neologism used to refer to the site of an activist occupation that is intended to physically blockade a development project. By occupying the land, activists aim to prevent the project from going ahead. The acronym "ZAD" is a détournement of "deferred development area" (from French: zone d'aménagement différé). The ZADs are organized particularly in rural areas with an ecological or agricultural dimension, although the name has also been used by occupations in urban areas, for example in Décines-Charpieu and Rouen.

The most notable example is the ZAD de Notre-Dame-des-Landes which helped a broader campaign to defeat the Aéroport du Grand Ouest, a proposed airport in Notre-Dame-des-Landes, north of Nantes. The ZAD du Testet existed from 2011 until 2015 and prevented a dam from being constructed. Evicted ZADs have amongst other things contested the construction of an electricity substation, a motorway and a facility for the storage of nuclear waste. There have been ZADs in the departments of Aveyron, Bas-Rhin, Doubs, Isère, Loire-Atlantique, Meuse, Seine-Maritime, Tarn and Yvelines. The occupation of the Hambach Forest in Germany and the No TAV movement in Italy have both been compared to ZADs. The ZAD de la Colline was the first Swiss Zone to Defend.

The acronym "ZAD" meaning "zone to defend" (French : "zone à défendre") is a détournement of "deferred development area" (French : "zone d'aménagement différé"). In 2015, the French term "zadiste" (English: Zadist) entered the 2016 edition of Le Petit Robert dictionary as "a militant occupying a ZAD to oppose a proposed development that would damage the environment." The ZADs are organized particularly in areas with an ecological or agricultural dimension. The name has also been used by occupations in urban areas, for example in Rouen and in Décines-Charpieu.

Appearing in France in the early 2010s, the term was first popularized during the opposition to the airport construction project in Notre-Dame-des-Landes. In France, the most famous antecedents of the ZAD movement are the Larzac struggle (1971–1981), the protests against the proposed nuclear power plant at Creys-Malville, in Isère (1977), and at Plogoff in the 1970s and 1980s.

One of the movement's first slogans was "ZAD everywhere" (French : "Zad Partout") and though there are no official figures, in early 2016 La Gazette des Communes estimated there to have been at least a dozen ZADs across France since 2009. In other countries there are projects similar to the ZAD concept, such as the occupation of the Hambach Forest in Germany, the No TAV movement in the Susa Valley in Italy and the Grow Heathrow squat protesting against the expansion of Heathrow Airport in London.

The ZADs have multiplied in France after the state's failed eviction of the protest occupation at Notre-Dame-des-Landes in the autumn of 2012. One of the first to be set up afterwards was the ZAD de la ferme des Bouillons near Rouen. In addition to Notre-Dame-des-Landes ZAD, the best-known cases are the opposition to: the Sivens dam project in Tarn where the activist Rémi Fraisse was killed by the French police; the proposed Center Parcs project in the forest of Chambaran in Isère ; a nuclear waste storage project called Cigéo (French : Centre industriel de stockage géologique) in Bure.

Activists began a solidarity project called ZAD Patate in 2013, which opposed the destruction of market gardens on the plain of Montesson. In the Yvelines department, twenty kilometres to the west of central Paris, 400 small holdings were producing half of all the salad greens consumed in the capital. In 2014, plans to expand the commercial zone were halted, but the guerrilla gardening continued. The gardens have been sabotaged several times: an orchard of thirty fruit trees was cut down and a field of potatoes was destroyed.

The ZAD de Sainte-Colombe-en-Bruilhois was set up near Agen to prevent the development of a business park in December 2014. The Zadists were invited on to land by a local farmer and slowly expanded onto neighbouring lots. They demanded that 220 hectares of agricultural land be preserved. Most of the ZAD was evicted in May 2016, but the land of the farmer still needed to be expropriated, since he refused to sell it.

Not all ZADs involve permanent occupations. The ZAD du Triangle at Gonesse, to the north of Paris, was set up to counter plans by Auchan and Wanda Group to build a shopping centre called EuropaCity. A collective to protect the triangle of land at Gonesse was formed in 2011 and at times, for example in October 2019, tent occupations were used as part of the tactics to resist construction. As of 2020, the EuropaCity plans had been scrapped but activists were still wary of other developments. Local people in Brueil-en-Vexin camped on land for a weekend in 2019 to show opposition to plans to dig limestone quarries on agricultural land. A ZAD was discussed but not implemented. By September 2020, the plans were still under discussion and the activists restated their intention to create a ZAD if circumstances required it.

Activists attempted to set up a ZAD in March 2016 to resist the construction of a quarry for a new motorway in the Bager forest, which is located at Oloron-Sainte-Marie, in the Pyrénées-Atlantiques department near to the border with Spain. The mayor issued a byelaw forbidding camping and the police prevented them from founding a camp. By 2017, the ZAD had been initiated and it was still in existence in 2019.

After a demonstration of 2,500 people in October 2019 against a proposed marina, the ZAD de la Dune at Bretignolles-sur-Mer was founded. It was evicted in April 2020 when police took twenty Zadists away from the site to make identity checks and the mayor together with 70 local people went onto the site and burnt down all the structures. The mayor's actions were condemned by other politicians as reckless, particularly since restrictions were in place due to the COVID-19 pandemic. A ZAD in Ardèche was evicted in June and the local prefect said she would not tolerate any such project. In December 2019, residents of Entraigues-sur-la-Sorgue in Vaucluse set up the ZAD du Plan d’Entraigues-sur-la-Sorgue without occupying any land. They were concerned about a development plan which would build a prison and a landfill site.

A ZAD was occupied in Besançon in July 2020. The ZAD du Carnet was occupied in late August in order to stop the preparatory works for the expansion of the port of Saint-Nazaire in the Loire-Atlantique department. The site is between Frossay and Saint-Viaud. Activists voiced their concerns about destruction of 110 hectares of wetlands beside the Loire river.

The ZAD de l'Amassada at Saint-Victor-et-Melvieu, in the Aveyron department, was set up in December 2014 to oppose the construction of an electricity substation required by RTE (Réseau de Transport d'Électricité) to distribute the electricity generated by renewable sources, mainly wind turbines. The word "amassada" means "assembly" in the Occitan language. There was a "windy week" in 2016, in which more cabins were built on the terrain of 7 hectares, with people coming to help out from other ZADs such as Bure, Roybon and the Susa Valley. As a way to slow down the progress of the project, 136 people became individual owners of plots over 3,300m² of land and thus would have to be bought out individually by RTE, a subsidiary of EDF (Électricité de France).

RTE obtained a declaration of public utility for the project in June 2018, which meant they could evict the site. Then in January 2019, the squatters were given an eviction order and warned that they would be fined 2000 euros for every day that they stayed. A police raid in February resulted in the arrest of five people on the site, with other people remaining to ensure it was not evicted. Before their trial in July, two of the five were forbidden from entering the ZAD and three from entering Aveyron. In October 2019, the ZAD was evicted. A protest march in November brought 300 people bearing flowers to the site. The police used tear gas to disperse the crowd and arrested several people.

The ZAD at Bure, in the Meuse department, protested against the expansion of a nuclear waste storage facility known as the Meuse/Haute Marne Underground Research Laboratory. Every year, the French nuclear energy industry produces around 13,000 cubic metres of radioactive waste (this equates to 2 kg for every French person or enough to fill 120 double-decker buses). Subject to state approval, all this waste will be stored underground at Bure from 2025 onwards. Since 2004, there has been an anti-nuclear Maison de la Résistance (House of Resistance) in the centre of Bure since 2004, which acts as headquarters for the protests. Land in the forest of Mandres-en-Barrois, which would be destroyed by the construction, was occupied in 2015.

At a demonstration in 2017, the police used a water cannon and fired tear gas canisters and stun grenades. There were 30 wounded demonstrators, of which three were hospitalised. One of them, a 27-year-old man, was struck by an exploding GLI-4 grenade on his foot. It made a hole 13 centimetres long and 3 centimetres deep. The occupation at Mandres-en-Barrois was evicted in 2018. Thirty people had been living there and they retreated to the Maison de la Résistance. The Minister of the Interior at the time, Gerard Collomb, said "We do not want there to be places of lawlessness in France." After the eviction, there were calls to resquat the site and a large police presence remained to counter the threat.

The ZAD de la Colline became the first Swiss ZAD after land at Éclépens in the Canton of Vaud was occupied in October 2020, when environmental activists wanted to prevent the expansion of a quarry run by Holcim. The occupation was supported by an open letter from Jacques Dubochet, a Nobel Prize winning biophysicist. In November 2020, the squatters appealed a decision made by the municipality of La Sarraz to withdraw the permission of residence from a house used as their base. On 30 March 2021, 600 police officers evicted the ZAD, arresting 93 people. Two days later, two activists remained in a tree.

Land located at Mont-Saint-Aignan, in the Seine-Maritime department north of Rouen, was occupied in December 2012 by activists concerned by its sale to Immochan (now part of Auchan), a property development company. It is the last farm on the plateau. The site was four hectares and fifty people turned it into an organic farm, fighting the plan of Immochan to build a shopping centre.

The local council protected the land and in August 2015, Immochan sold the site to a local real estate company which proposed an organic farming project. The ZAD was then evicted by police exercising a 2013 court verdict. The Zadists were unhappy they had not been given an opportunity to buy the land and that their plan had been copied. They remained concerned that the land would be developed.

The ZAD du Moulin was established in 2017 to resist the building of the A355 motorway also known as GCO (French : Grand contournement ouest) near Strasbourg in the Bas-Rhin department. Eight huts were built along the proposed 24 kilometres of the motorway, which was intended as a bypass to reduce congestion on the A35 which dissects Strasbourg. The costs were slated to be over 500 million euros.

The ZAD was evicted by 500 police in September 2018. Members of the European Parliament Karima Delli and José Bové had joined the protestors in solidarity with their struggle to stop the road. Delli was sprayed with tear gas in her face and mouth by the police and fell unconscious. Bové stated "This violence is unacceptable."

ZAD Notre-Dame-des-Landes (also known as ZAD NDDL) is the most well-known 'Zone to Defend' in France. Located in the Loire-Atlantique department near to Nantes, it is a very large mostly agricultural terrain of 1,650 hectares (4,100 acres) which became nationally famous and has resisted several concerted attempts by the French state to evict it. The squatters joined the long struggle against an airport, the Aéroport du Grand Ouest (AGO). It was announced in 2018 that the plans for the airport were cancelled and also that the squatters would have until spring to leave.

In April 2018, a largescale eviction operation began as the French state tried to regain control of the autonomous zone. After 10 days (19 April), the police had fired 11,000 projectiles. The eviction was halted on 26 April and said it would be frozen until at least 14 May. The truce came about as representatives of the ZAD negotiated for legal recognition for 28 projects. Some projects agreed to file individual claims, whereas other refused to participate in the process.

The ZAD Rhineland was formed in 2020 to protect the village of Lützerath in the North Rhine-Westphalia state of Germany from demolition by RWE, which wants to expand the Garzweiler surface mine. The camp was set up on the land of a farmer resisting eviction and from 1 October 2021 onwards, the land had been expropriated by RWE. It is the first explicitly named ZAD in Germany.

The ZAD at Roybon, Isère, between Lyon and Grenoble, was created to oppose the proposed construction of a Center Parcs on the Chambarand plateau. Environmentalists had opposed the project since 2007, represented by the group 'For Chambaran without Center Parcs' (French : Pour les Chambaran sans Center Parcs) or PCSCP. The plans entailed building almost 1000 cottages in the forest. Plans were halted in December 2016, when the Court of Appeal in Lyon stated that two of the three orders permitting construction were illegal. The court agreed with environmentalist concerns regarding wastewater processing from a site with a maximum capacity of 5,600 people and also how the water table would be affected, with 76 hectares of wetland under threat. The court did not agree that the potential loss of protected species outweighed the potential creation of 600 jobs. The owner of Center Parcs, Pierre & Vacances, announced that they would appeal the decision. By 2018, the ZAD had several buildings including the Marquise and Barricade Sud. The thirty inhabitants were planning to construct a strawbale house and were growing vegetables and farming animals. Pierre & Vacances announced in July 2020 that they were scrapping the plans to build and the ZAD responded that after six years it had no intention of disbanding. This angered the mayor of Roybon, who demanded that the camp was evicted.

The demonstrations to protect the biodiversity of the wetlands in the area threatened by the proposed Sivens Dam resulted in the ZAD du Testet, which existed from 2011 until 2015. It was evicted several times and resquatted. In 2014, botanist Rémi Fraisse was killed by a stun grenade fired by police and the following year the dam was cancelled.

On 17 July 2020, activists from ANV-COP21 and Extinction Rebellion occupied land in Les Vaites on the east side of Besançon, as part of protests against an eco-development of 1150 apartments. Work had started in January 2020 on the site and was then stopped twice by legal challenges from environmental groups. After one month of occupation, the two groups handed over responsibility for the ZAD to the anonymous Zadists squatting the land. The mayor demanded that before negotiating anything, a watchtower built on the land needed to be demolished, but the Zadists refused. In August 2020, the collective of 180 people celebrated their second month of occupation.

À la Maréchale is a method of food preparation in haute cuisine. Dishes à la Maréchale are made from tender pieces of meat, such as cutlets, escalopes, supremes, sweetbreads, or fish, which are treated à l'anglaise (that is, coated with eggs and bread crumbs, and sautéed).

The dish is known since the 18th century at least. It is speculated that it could be associated with the Maréchale de Luxembourg (1707-1787), the wife of Charles-François-Frédéric de Montmorency-Luxembourg (1702–1764) and a major society hostess. According to food historian William Pokhlyobkin, the dish had to be so tender that "even a marshal (a synonym of an elder, satiated and toothless man) could eat it."

Numerous varieties of such dishes are described in 19th-century cookbooks. Various sorts of meat, poultry and fish prepared à la Maréchale are found in, for example, works by André Viard, Antoine Beauvilliers, Louis Eustache Ude, Marie-Antoine Carême, Jules Gouffé, Alexis Soyer, Charles Elmé Francatelli, Urbain Dubois and Charles Ranhofer. Some books included stuffed versions, such as "rabbit à la Maréchale " filled with duxelles and "fowl fillet à la Maréchale " stuffed with truffles and herbs or with herbs and forcemeat.

After the victory over Napoleon in 1814, dishes à la Maréchale were introduced to Russia. Rather elaborate varieties, usually involving hazel grouse fillets, are found in several classical Russian cookbooks. One of the first such books, The Last Work by Gerasim Stepanov, proposes to combine hazel grouse fillets and veal liver. Elena Molokhovets' A Gift to Young Housewives, the most successful Russian cookbook of the 19th century, has included since its first edition in 1861 a recipe for "hazel grouse à la Maréchale " stuffed with Madeira sauce with portobello mushrooms and truffles. A similar variety of " game cutlets à la Maréchale " with a quenelle and truffle stuffing is described in the textbook The Practical Fundamentals of the Cookery Art by Pelageya Alexandrova-Ignatieva published in the beginning of the 20th century.

In the Soviet times, the book Apportionments for dinners, separate dishes and other products of public catering (1928), which served as a standard reference for Soviet catering establishments, demanded renaming of many traditional restaurant dishes to replace the (mostly French-style) " bourgeoise " names with simple " proletarian " forms. This program was not realised immediately (at least not completely), and its successor, The Directory of Apportionments for Catering (1940), published by the Soviet Ministry of Food Industry, still included chicken and game fillets à la Maréchale stuffed with milk sauce and portobello mushrooms. The major Soviet cookbooks published after WWII, such as Cookery (1955) or Directory of Recipes and Culinary Products for Catering, included the same recipe but named it simply "chicken or game cutlet stuffed with milk sauce" and added a similar "chicken or game cutlet stuffed with liver". As a result, the term à la Maréchale disappeared from menus of Soviet restaurants.

August Escoffier notes in Le Guide Culinaire that the commonly used "English-style" coating in these dishes is an economical substitute for the original treatment with chopped truffles. While suprême de volaille and cervelle de veau are prepared this way, other dishes à la Maréchale in his guide, such as tournedos and foie gras collops, include truffles. A garnish of truffles and green asparagus tips is nowadays common for dishes à la Maréchale.

Dishes à la Maréchale are occasionally mentioned in Russian literature as a prime example of an "aristocratic" dish of high-level cuisine. In Anton Chekhov 's story "Peasants", Nikolay Tchikildyeev, a former hotel waiter, and a cook discussed

...the dishes that were prepared in the old days for the gentry. They talked of rissoles, cutlets, various soups and sauces, and the cook, who remembered everything very well, mentioned dishes that are no longer served. There was one, for instance -- a dish made of bulls' eyes, which was called "waking up in the morning." "And used you to do cutlets à la maréchal?" asked Nikolay. "No." Nikolay shook his head reproachfully and said: "Tut, tut! You were not much of a cook!"

In his mémoires, Alexander Martynov, a colonel of the Russian tsarist secret police Okhranka, recalls anarchist revolutionary Dmitry Bogrov 's assassination of the Russian prime minister Pyotr Stolypin in 1911. A year before, Bogrov wrote a phrase in a letter, which later became frequently cited, that he had "no interest in life. Nothing except an endless row of cutlets to be eaten." "In reality", Martynov commented, "the meaning of life for Bogrov was that these cutlets should be à la Maréchale."

Alexandrova-Ignatieva noted that côtelette de volaille (the precursor of chicken Kiev) is prepared like game cutlets à la Maréchale, with chicken used instead of hazel grouse. The same is stated in another Russian cookbook published at the same time which gives basically the same recipes for côtelette de volaille and côtelette à la Maréchale and notes that the only difference between them is that the former are made of chicken while the latter are made of game, such as grouse, blackcock, etc.

In French cuisine, à la zingara (lit. "gypsy style"), sometimes spelled as à la singara, is a garnish or sauce consisting of chopped ham, tongue, mushrooms and truffles combined with tomato sauce, tarragon and sometimes madeira. Additional ingredients may include white wine, cayenne pepper, lemon juice and orange rind. The sauce is prepared by cooking the ingredients until the mixture reduces and thickens. This garnish is served with meat such as veal, poultry and sometimes eggs.

Gypsy sauce (German : Zigeunersauce) may have originated from à la zingara. Gypsy sauce is prepared using many of the same ingredients as à la zingara. Simpler versions of gypsy sauce, including commercial varieties, typically use a lesser amount of ingredients, such as tomato paste, Hungarian paprika, bell peppers and sometimes onion.

À la zingara has sometimes been referred to as singara and zingara sauce. Conversely, à la zingara has also been referred to as separate from zingara sauce, such as in the 2009 book Dictionary of Food authored by Charles Sinclair and published by Bloomsbury Publishing, which has separate entries for à la zingara and zingara sauce, referring to à la zingara as " France In the gypsy style, i.e. with ham, tongue, mushrooms and tomatoes" and zingara sauce as " France A sauce for veal and poultry made to a variety of recipes and little used."

An 1869 recipe for blonde veal cutlets with ham à la zingara uses espagnole sauce and ham. The espagnole sauce is cooked with the veal, and then later the fat is skimmed from the sauce, which is then run through a sieve, after which it is served with the dish. An 1858 recipe for veal cutlets à la zingara is similar, with the addition of mushrooms and truffles in the center of the dish surrounding the veal and ham. After the meats are cooked and plated, The espagnole sauce is cooked in the pan the veal was cooked in, lemon juice and cayenne pepper are added, and then the sauce is poured over the cutlets.

Gypsy sauce is a sauce or demi-glace sauce used as an ingredient in dishes and as a condiment. The term “ Zigeuner ” has been used in Germany for over a century regarding the sauce. Some companies mass-produce it, including Remia, Verstegen and Unilever. Some controversy occurred in 2013 regarding use of the word "gypsy" on the labels of commercial varieties of the sauce and at German public building cafeterias.

The term Zigeuner has been used for over 100 years in Germany in reference to the sauce. This term was used in the 1903 book Le guide culinaire written by Auguste Escoffier.

Gypsy sauce is used in Austrian, French and German cuisine.

Contemporary gypsy sauce is typically prepared using tomato paste, Hungarian paprika, bell peppers and sometimes onion. It may be prepared as a spicy-hot sauce. Canned whole or crushed tomatoes are sometimes used. Additional ingredients used in its preparation include onion, garlic, chicken broth, milk, a sweetener such as sugar or honey, salt and pepper.

Another preparation of the sauce includes tomato slices or tomato purée, onions, smoked tongue, ham, mushrooms, truffles, white wine or Madeira wine, butter, paprika and pepper, which is very similar to the preparation of à la zingara. The simpler preparation of the sauce may have originated from the more complex à la zingara sauce.

Gypsy sauce is commercially mass-produced by some companies, such as Remia, Verstegen and Unilever, which is marketed under Unilever's Knorr brand name.

Gypsy sauce is used in the preparation of Zigeunerschnitzel, a German schnitzel dish.

In August 2013, a group representing Romani and Sinti peoples called for commercial varieties of the sauce to be renamed, stating that use of the word gypsy is offensive and discriminatory, and has negative connotations. The group requested that five German food companies rename the sauce, suggesting using the name "spicy sauce" or another similar name. Authorities in Hanover, Germany, issued an internal memo in October 2013 informing city staffers that they should avoid using the term to describe a type of schnitzel served in the cafeterias of city-run public buildings, instead calling it "Balkan-style" or "Budapest-style". During this time, food manufacturers essentially opposed renaming the commercial brands of the sauce. The German Association of Culinary Foodstuffs Manufacturers stated through a spokesperson that the sauce has significant brand recognition under this name, and that the word gypsy has been used for over 100 years to represent the sauce. However, in August 2020, companies such as Knorr replaced the name with "Hungarian-style paprika sauce", citing the recent debates about racism, spurred by the George Floyd protests.

École Supérieure de Cuisine Française (ESCF - Higher School of French Cuisine at Ferrandi) is a professional training school located in central Paris. Established by The Paris Chamber of Commerce and Industry (CCIP), the school is part of École Grégoire-Ferrandi and specializes in training students for work in hospitality management and French cuisine.

In 2005 the school founded Atelier Pierre Hermé, a workshop class focusing on techniques and creations of French pastry chef Pierre Hermé.

The Ferrandi School, as it was originally named, was founded by the Paris Chamber of Commerce and Industry in 1932 as the organization's first "Atelier École" to offer professional training in the food services. In 1983 the school established the École Supérieure de Cuisine Française program. In 1997 the Ferrandi School and another CCIP school called the Grégoire School, which specializes in craftsmanship and interior design, were incorporated to form École Grégoire Ferrandi.

Édouard Daladier (French: [ edwaʁ daladje ] ; 18 June 1884 – 10 October 1970) was a French Radical-Socialist (centre-left) politician, who was the Prime Minister of France in 1933, 1934 and again from 1938 to 1940.

Daladier was born in Carpentras and began his political career before World War I. During the war, he fought on the Western Front and was decorated for his service. After the war, he became a leading figure in the Radical Party and Prime Minister in 1933 and 1934. Daladier was Minister of Defence from 1936 to 1940 and Prime Minister again in 1938. As head of government, he expanded the French welfare state in 1939.

Along with Neville Chamberlain, Benito Mussolini and Adolf Hitler, Daladier signed the Munich Agreement in 1938, which gave Nazi Germany control over the Sudetenland. After Hitler's invasion of Poland in 1939, Britain and France declared war on Germany. During the Phoney War, France's failure to aid Finland against the Soviet Union 's invasion during the Winter War led to Daladier's resignation on 21 March 1940 and his replacement by Paul Reynaud. Daladier remained Minister of Defence until 19 May, when Reynaud took over the portfolio personally after the French defeat at Sedan.

After the Fall of France, Daladier was tried for treason by the Vichy government during the Riom Trial and imprisoned first in Fort du Portalet, then in Buchenwald concentration camp, and finally in Itter Castle. After the Battle of Castle Itter, Daladier resumed his political career as a member of the French Chamber of Deputies from 1946 to 1958. He died in Paris in 1970.

Daladier was born in Carpentras, Vaucluse, on 18 June 1884, the son of a village baker. He received his formal education at the lycée Duparc in Lyon, where he was first introduced to socialist politics. After his graduation, he became a school teacher and a university lecturer at Nîmes, Grenoble and Marseille and then at the Lycée Condorcet, in Paris, where he taught history. He began his political career by becoming the mayor of Carpentras, his home town, in 1912. He subsequently sought election to the Paris Chamber of Deputies but lost to a Radical-Socialist Party candidate; he later joined that party.

Daladier had received military training before the war under France's conscription system. In August 1914, he was mobilised at the age of 30 with the French Army 's 2nd Foreign Infantry Regiment when World War I started with the rank of sergeant. In mid-1915, the 2nd Foreign Infantry Regiment was destroyed in heavy fighting against the Imperial German Army on the Western Front. The surviving remnant of it was assigned to other units, Daladier being transferred into the 209th Infantry Regiment. In 1916, he fought with the 209th in the Battle of Verdun and was given a field commission as a lieutenant in the midst of the battle in April 1916 having received commendations for gallantry in action. In May 1917, he received the Legion of Honour for gallantry in action and ended the war as a captain leading a company. He had also been awarded the Croix de Guerre.

After his demobilisation, he was elected to the Paris Chamber of Deputies for Orange, Vaucluse, in 1919.

Later, he would become known to many as "the bull of Vaucluse" because of his thick neck, large shoulders and determined look. However, cynics also quipped that his horns were like those of a snail.

After he entered the Chamber of Deputies, Daladier became a leading member of the Radical-Socialist Party and was responsible for building it into a structured modern political party. For most of the interwar period, he was the chief figure of the party's left wing, supporters of a governmental coalition with the socialist Section française de l'Internationale ouvrière (SFIO). A government minister in various posts during the coalition governments between 1924 and 1928, Daladier was instrumental in the Radical-Socialists' break with the SFIO in 1926, the first Cartel des gauches with the centre-right Raymond Poincaré in November 1928. In 1930, he unsuccessfully attempted to gain socialist support for a centre-left government in coalition the Radical-Socialist and similar parties. In 1933, despite similar negotiations breaking down, he formed a government of the republican left.

In January 1934, he was considered the most likely candidate of the centre-left to form a government of sufficient honesty to calm public opinion after the revelations of the Stavisky Affair, a major corruption scandal. The government lasted less than a week, however, since it fell in the face of the 6 February 1934 riots. After Daladier fell, the coalition of the left initiated two years of right-wing governments.

After a year of being withdrawn from frontline politics, Daladier returned to public prominence in October 1934 and took a populist line against the banking oligarchy that he believed had taken control of French democracy: the Two Hundred Families. He was made president of the Radical-Socialist Party and brought the party into the Popular Front coalition. Daladier became Minister of National Defence in the Léon Blum government and retained the crucial portfolio for two years. Besides for serving as Defence Minister, Daladier was appointed the chairman of the newly founded Supreme Defence Committee. At the first meeting of the committee on 26 June 1936, Daladier complained that other nations had someone to direct their defence policies, citing the example of the War Minister Field Marshal Werner von Blomberg in Germany; the Defence Commissar Marshal Kliment Voroshilov in the Soviet Union; Benito Mussolini in Italy and Sir Thomas Inskip in Britain. Daladier stated from now on he would be playing that role in France. He then moved on to say that the first order of business was the nationalisation of the entire French arms industry as he accused French arms firms of failing to provide the military with the necessary weapons on time or in full, and stated that henceforward the French state would take direct control of all production. Daladier had a difficult relationship with Marshal Maxime Weygand -a man whom he greatly disliked-but Daladier was very close to Weygand's successor, Maurice Gamelin, whose views and judgements on military matters he greatly trusted and valued.

Daladier was much influenced by intelligence reports from the Deuxième Bureau that the factories of the German arms firms such as Krupp AG, Rheinmetall AG, and Borsig AG were being run at full capacity, suggesting that the Reich was preparing for war in the near-future. Daladier complained that Germany as the world's second largest economy had an automatic head-start in the arms race while France as the world's fourth largest economy was by definition behind the Reich in terms of arms production. In early July 1936, Daladier appeared by the Defence Committees of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate to warn that Germany was winning the arms race; the Wehrmacht would soon field 650,000 men; and that the Wehrmacht was buying tanks in massive numbers to win a "war of movement". Gamelin expressed much concern to Robert Jacomet, a senior civil servant at the Defence Ministry about the plans for nationalization of the arms industry, which he described as a "left-wing gimmick" instead of being a practical policy to win the arms race. Jacoment replied that Daladier was all for nationalization as he stated that "Time is short" and to create a "powerful parallel state industry" alongside the private sector arms industry would take too long. Jacoment stated: "Our interest is therefore to get our hands on the existing factories and modernise them fast". On 11 August 1936, the nationalization bill was approved by the National Assembly, and the French state took control of the arms industry.

As Defence Minister, Daladier asked the commander of the military, General Maurice Gamelin to submit a four-year plan for military modernization. When Gamelin submitted in a plan that was budgeted at 9 billion francs for the French Army, Daladier rejected it as too low and instead added in an extra 5 billion francs. During an "emotional" interview with Blum, Daladier persuaded him to accept the 14 billion franc plan as he issued a stark warning that the Reich was winning the arms race at present. On 7 September 1936, the Blum cabinet approved Daladier's 14 billion franc plan for rearmament. The American historian Joseph Maiolo wrote the rearmament program launched in 1936 was "the biggest arms program ever attempted by a French government in peacetime". As Defence Minister, Daladier favoured a hawkish line towards Italy, and in January 1937 played a crucial role in having Admiral François Darlan appointed commander of the Navy as Darlan saw Italy as France's primary opponent unlike his predecessor Admiral Georges Durand-Viel who was an admirer of Fascist Italy. The French Navy was not large enough to patrol both the Atlantic coastline and the Mediterranean Sea.

A key element in France's war plans against Germany was bringing in a massive number of soldiers from North Africa to France, and the prospect that Italy would cut the sea lanes linking Algeria to France was considered a major problem in Paris. Darlan argued that France needed control of the Mediterranean not because of the need for troops from Algeria, but because it was the only way for France to reach its allies in Eastern Europe and for reasons of trade. In the debate between Darlan vs. Maurice Gamelin who saw Italy more as a potential ally rather a potential enemy, Daladier came to favour Darlan. The Italian intervention in the Spanish Civil War along with Benito Mussolini 's openly pro-German foreign policy convinced Daladier by late 1937 that Italy was only a potential enemy and it should be assumed that France became involved in a war with Germany that Italy would inevitably enter the war on the side of the Reich. At a meeting of Comité Permeant de la Défense National in November 1937, Daladier stated: "The hypothesis of conflict with the Mediterranean as the center of preponderant action, raises different problems for our foreign and military policy...Given the two-bloc composition [in the Atlantic and Asia] of the Franco-British empire, an attack in the Mediterranean, the stem between these two blocs would allow Germany and Italy to obtain the most decisive results". In addition, Daladier noted that the Mediterranean Sea via the Suez canal was equally important to the British as almost all of the shipping that linked the United Kingdom to its colonies in Asia went through the Mediterranean, and the possibility of a potential Italian naval threat was the best way of securing an alliance with Britain. Daladier pushed for war planning that called for making the defeat of Italy the first priority while France remained on the defensive against the Reich along the Maginot Line.

After the fall of the Blum government, Daladier became head of government again on 10 April 1938, orienting his government towards the centre and ending the Popular Front.

Daladier's last government was in power at the time of the negotiations preceding the Munich Agreement during which France pressured Czechoslovakia to hand the Sudetenland to Nazi Germany. In April–May 1938, British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain strongly but unsuccessfully pressed Daladier to renounce the French-Czechoslovak alliance, which led to Britain becoming involved in the crisis. From the British perspective, the problem was not the Sudetenland but the French-Czechoslovak alliance. British military experts were almost unanimous that Germany would defeat France in a war unless Britain intervened. The British thought that allowing Germany to defeat France would unacceptably alter the balance of power, and so Britain would have no choice but to intervene if a French-German war broke out. The Franco-Czechoslovak alliance would have turned any German attack on Czechoslovakia into a French–German war. As British Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax stated at a Cabinet meeting in March 1938, "Whether we liked or not, we had to admit the plain fact that we could not afford to see France overrun." At the Anglo-French summit in London on 28–29 April 1938, Chamberlain pressured Daladier to renounce the alliance with Czechoslovakia, only to be firmly informed that France would stand by its obligations, which forced the British to be involved very reluctantly in the Sudetenland Crisis. The summit of 28–29 April 1938 represented a British "surrender" to the French, rather than a French "surrender" to the British since Daladier made it clear France would not renounce its alliance with Czechoslovakia. Daladier's unwillingness to renounce France's alliance with Czechoslovakia forced the British very much against their will into involvement with the Sudetenland crisis since because the French refused to renounce the alliance led to the British taking the next best course of action, namely pressuring Czechoslovakia into concessions to the Sudeten Germans.

Unlike Chamberlain, Daladier had no illusions about Hitler's ultimate goals. In fact, he told the British in a late April 1938 meeting that Hitler's real aim was to eventually secure "a domination of the Continent in comparison with which the ambitions of Napoleon were feeble". Daladier went on to say, "Today, it is the turn of Czechoslovakia. Tomorrow, it will be the turn of Poland and Romania. When Germany has obtained the oil and wheat it needs, she will turn on the West. Certainly we must multiply our efforts to avoid war. But that will not be obtained unless Great Britain and France stick together, intervening in Prague for new concessions [i.e. to the Sudeten Germans] but declaring at the same time that they will safeguard the independence of Czechoslovakia. If, on the contrary, the Western Powers capitulate again, they will only precipitate the war they wish to avoid." At the same time, Daladier was well aware that France could not hope to win a war against Germany without the "continental commitment" that the British Empire would commit a large expeditionary force to the defence of France as had occurred in World War I. Furthermore, 60% of French imports came via the sea, making France dependent upon help from Britain, the world's largest naval power. The way that Italy came to be aligned with Germany from 1936 onward led to the majority of the French Navy being concentrated in the Mediterranean Sea to face a potential threat from Italy, leaving the French Atlantic coastline wide open to the German Navy, which led France to seek Britain as an ally to protect the Atlantic sea-lanes. The greater population of Germany left the French dependent upon bringing soldiers recruited in Algeria to France, and which in turn made the French Navy's primary task was in securing control of the western Mediterranean. Daladier had pushed very strongly during the London summit for Anglo-French naval staff talks for a possible war against Italy as he argued that both Britain and France needed command of the Mediterranean. Daladier had pressed Chamberlain for the Royal Navy to abandon the Singapore strategy of sending the main British battle fleet to Singapore to defend Britain's Asian colonies against a Japanese threat and instead wanted the Royal Navy concentrated in European waters.

The French economic situation was very worrying since the French franc had been devalued on 4 May 1938 for the third time since October 1936. Daladier wanted to stabilise the franc and so had fixed the exchange rate to 176 francs per pound sterling. The crisis of 20–22 May 1938 made the franc come under immense financial pressure since many investors did not wish to hold French assets or debts if France went to war. Jacques Rueff, the director of direction générale du mouvement des fonds and special adviser to Finance Minister, Paul Marchandeau, stated in a report that the government must cut defence spending or find more sources of short-term loans, as the French government was running out of money. Marchandeau stated that ordinary charges upon the treasury in 1938 would "exceed" 42 billion francs, and Rueff warned that France would go bankrupt once the legal limits upon short-term loans from the Bank of France was reached. Marchandeau, in testimony before the Senate Finance Committee, stated that the government had only 30 million francs in its account and 230 million francs available from the Bank of France.

As French government expenditure for the month of May 1938 alone totalled 4,500 million francs, the British historian Martin Thomas wrote, "Daladier's government was utterly reliant upon the success of its devaluation". To provide revenue, the government needed to sell more short-term bonds, but investors were highly reluctant to buy French bonds if Germany was threatening Czechoslovakia and put France on the brink of war. Because the franc was tied to the pound, France needed loans from Britain, which were not forthcoming, and so France was left "with its hands tied". British and American investors were unwilling to buy French bonds as long as the Sudetenland Crisis continued, which caused "severe monetary problems" for the French government in August–September 1938. Only when Daladier moved the "free-market liberal" Paul Reynaud from the Justice Ministry to the Finance Ministry in November 1938 did France regain the confidence of international investors, who resumed buying French bonds.

Reports from the embassy in Warsaw and the legations in Belgrade and Bucharest emphasised that Yugoslavia and Romania would probably do nothing if Germany invaded Czechoslovakia, and Poland might very well join in with Germany since the Teschen conflict between Poland and Czechoslovakia had made them bitter enemies. Of France's potential allies in Eastern Europe, only the Soviet Union, which had no border with Czechoslovakia, professed a willingness to come to Czechoslovakia's aid if Germany invaded, but both Poland and Romania were unwilling to extend transit rights for the Red Army, which presented major problems. Daladier was advised by General Maurice Gamelin that the Yezhovshchina which had seen a significant number of the Red Army's generals shot on charges of treason for Germany and Japan in 1937–1938 had destroyed the Red Army as an effective fighting force. Daladier was told by the French General Staff that the Red Army was " une belle facade " whose contribution to a war against Germany would be "almost zero".

On 25 September 1938, at the Bad Godesberg Summit, Hitler rejected Chamberlain's offer to have the Sudetenland join Germany in a few months, declared that the timeline was unacceptable and that the Sudetenland had to "go home to the Reich " by 1 October, and stated that the Polish and Hungarian claims against Czechoslovakia must also be satisfied by 1 October or Czechoslovakia would be invaded. Upon hearing what Hitler had demanded at the summit, Daladier told his cabinet that France "intended to go to war".

The next day, Daladier told his close friend, US Ambassador William Christian Bullitt Jr., that he would much prefer war to the "humiliation" of the Bad Godesberg terms.

Daladier ordered the French military to mobilise and to put France on a war footing, with a blackout being imposed at night so that German bombers would be not guided to French cities by the lights. On 26 September, Daladier ordered General Maurice Gamelin to London to begin staff talks with the Imperial General Staff. On 27 September, Gamelin, when asked by his chef de cabinet if Daladier was serious about war, replied, "He'll do it, he'll do it".

However, on 29 September 1938, Chamberlain announced to the British House of Commons that he just received a phone call from Benito Mussolini, who said that Hitler had reconsidered his views and was now willing to discuss a compromise solution to the crisis in Munich. Ultimately, Daladier felt that France could not win against Germany without Britain on its side, and Chamberlain's announcement that he would be flying to Munich led him to attend the Munich Conference as well, which was held the next day on 30 September.

The Munich Agreement was a compromise since Hitler abandoned his more extreme demands such as settling the Polish and Hungarian claims by 1 October, but the conference concluded that Czechoslovakia was to turn over the Sudetenland to Germany within ten days in October and would be supervised by an Anglo-Franco-Italo-German commission. Daladier was happy to have avoided war but felt that the agreement he had signed on 30 September in Munich was a shameful treaty that had betrayed Czechoslovakia, France's most loyal ally in Eastern Europe. Although Daladier feared public hostility to the Munich Agreement on his return to Paris, he was acclaimed by the crowd, which cheered the fact that there would not be another war. Most famously, when he saw the enthusiastic crowds waving at his plane as it landed at Le Bourget Airfield before landing, he turned to his aide Alexis Léger (a.k.a. Saint-John Perse) and commented: " Ah! les cons! s'ils savaient... " ("Ah! The fools! If only they knew...").

Daladier had been made aware in 1932 by German rivals to Hitler that Krupp was manufacturing heavy artillery, and the Deuxième Bureau had a grasp of the scale of German military preparations but lacked hard intelligence of hostile intentions.

In October 1938, Daladier opened secret talks with the Americans on how to bypass the Neutrality Acts and to allow the French to buy American aircraft to make up for the underproductive French aircraft industry. Daladier commented in October 1938, "If I had three or four thousand aircraft, Munich would never have happened". He was most anxious to buy American war planes as the only way to strengthen the French Air Force. Major problems in the talks were how the French would pay for the American planes and how to bypass the Neutrality Acts.

In addition, France had defaulted on its World War I debts in 1932 and so fell foul of the 1934 Johnson Act, which banned American loans to nations that had defaulted on their World War I debts. In February 1939, the French offered to cede their possessions in the Caribbean and the Pacific, together with a lump sum payment of 10 billion francs, in exchange for the unlimited right to buy American aircraft on credit.

After tortuous negotiations, an arrangement was worked out in the spring of 1939 to allow the French to place huge orders with the American aircraft industry, but as most of the aircraft ordered had not arrived in France by 1940, the Americans arranged for French orders to be diverted to the British.

At a rally in Marseille in October 1938, Daladier announced a new policy: J'ai choisi mon chemin: la France en avant! ("I have chosen my path; forward with France!"). He stated that his government's domestic and foreign policies were to be based on "firmness". What that meant, in practice, was the end of the social reforms of the Popular Front government to increase French productivity, especially by ending the 40-hour work week. In a series of decree laws issued on 1 November 1938 by Finance Minister Paul Reynaud, which bypassed the National Assembly, the 40-hour work week was ended, taxes were sharply increased; social spending was slashed, defence spending was increased, the power of unions was restricted and (most controversially) Saturday was once again declared to be a workday. In a radio broadcast on 12 November 1938, Reynaud stated, "We are going blindfold towards an abyss". He also argued that however much pain his reforms might cause, they were absolutely necessary. As part of the effort to put the French economy on a war footing, Reynaud increased the military budget from 29 billion francs to 93 billion francs. In response, the French Communist Party called for a general strike to protest the decrees that ended almost all of the reforms of the Popular Front.

The one-day general strike of 30 November 1938, which pitted the government against unions supported by the Communist Party, proved to be the first test of Daladier's new policy of "firmness". Daladier declared a national emergency in response to the general strike, ordered the military to Paris and other major cities, suspended civil liberties, ordered the police to disperse striking workers with tear gas and to storm factories occupied by the workers and announced that any worker who took part in the strike would be fired immediately with no severance pay. After one day, the strike collapsed.

At the time, Daladier justified his policy of "firmness" under the grounds that if France was to face the German challenge, French production would have to be increased and said that was the price of freedom. At the same time, the energetic Colonial Minister Georges Mandel was set about organising the French Colonial Empire for war. He established armament factories in French Indochina to supply the French garrisons there to deter Japan from invading, increased the number of colonial "coloured" divisions from 6 to 12, built defensive works in Tunisia to deter an Italian invasion from Libya and organised the colonial economies for a " total war ". In France itself, Mandel launched a propaganda campaign emphasising how the French colonial Empire was a source of strength under the slogan "110 million strong, France can stand up to Germany" in reference to the fact that the population of Germany was 80 million and that of France was 40 million, with the extra 70 million credited to France being the population of its colonies.

The 40-hour work week was abolished under Daladier's government, but a more generous system of family allowances was established and set as a percentage of wages: for the first child 5%, for the second child 10% and for each additional child 15%. Also created was a home mother allowance, which had been advocated by natalist and Catholic women's groups since 1929. All mothers who were not professionally employed and whose husbands collected family allowances were eligible for the new benefit. In March 1939, the government added 10% for workers whose wives stayed home to take care of the children. Family allowances were enshrined in the Family Code of July 1939 and, with the exception of the stay-at-home allowance, are still in force. In addition, a decree was issued in May 1938 to allow the establishment of vocational guidance centres. In July 1937, a new law, which was followed by a similar law in May 1946, empowered the Department of Workplace Inspection to order temporary medical interventions.

On 30 November 1938, a major crisis in Franco-Italian relations began with stage-managed "spontaneous" demonstrations in the Italian Chamber of Deputies. On cue, the Italian deputies rose up to shout "Tunis, Corsica, Nice, Savoy!" Mussolini had expected that his "Sudeten methods" would lead to France ceding Tunisia, Corsica, Nice and Savoy to Italy, but Daladier rejected the Italian demands completely. In his annual Christmas radio broadcast to the French people, Daladier gave what the British historian D.C. Watt called "an extremely tough speech" rejecting all of the Italian demands and warned that France would go to war to defend its territory.

The British historian Richard Overy wrote: "The greatest achievement of Daladier in 1939 was to win from the British a firm commitment", the so-called "continental commitment" that every French leader had sought since 1919. Daladier had a low opinion of Britain and told Bullitt in November 1938 that he "fully expected to be betrayed by the British.... he considered Chamberlain a desiccated stick; the King a moron; and the Queen an excessively ambitious woman.... he felt that England had become so feeble and senile that the British would give away every possession of their friends rather than stand up to Germany and Italy". In late 1938 to early 1939, the British embassy was bombarded with rumours from reliable sources within the French government that France would seek an "understanding" with Germany that would resolve all problems in their relations. The fact that French Foreign Minister Georges Bonnet was indeed seeking such an understanding lent credence to such rumours.

Daladier let Bonnet pursue his own foreign policy in the hope that it might finally spur the British into making the "continental commitment" since a France aligned with Germany would make the Reich Europe's strongest power and leave Britain with no ally of comparable strength in Europe. In January 1939, Daladier let the Deuxième Bureau manufacture the "Dutch War Scare". French intelligence fed misinformation to MI6 that Germany was about to invade the Netherlands with the aim of using Dutch air fields to launch a bombing campaign to raze British cities to the ground. As France was the only nation in Western Europe with an army strong enough to save the Netherlands, the "Dutch War Scare" led the British to make anxious inquiries in Paris to ask the French to intervene if the Netherlands were indeed invaded. In response, Daladier stated that if the British wanted the French to do something for their security, it was only fair for the British do something for French security. Daladier gave evasive answers to the British ambassador Sir Eric Phipps that France would do if Germany invaded the Netherlands, and that "French military authorities do not consider France is now in a position to defend herself without the military assistance from the United Kingdom". On 6 February 1939, Chamberlain, in a speech to the House of Commons, finally made the "continental commitment" as he told the House: "The solidarity that unites France and Britain is such that any threat to the vital interests of France must bring about the co-operation of Great Britain". On 13 February 1939, staff talks between the British Imperial General Staff and the French General Staff were opened.

Daladier supported Chamberlain's policy of creating a "peace front" that was meant to deter Germany from aggression but was unhappy with the British "guarantee" of Poland, which Chamberlain had announced to the House of Commons on 31 March 1939. France had been allied to Poland since 1921, but Daladier had been bitter by the German-Polish Nonaggression Pact of 1934 and the Polish annexation of part of Czechoslovakia in 1938. Like other French leaders, he regarded the Sanation regime ruling Poland as a fickle and unreliable friend of France. The rise in French industrial output and the greater financial stability in 1939 as a result of Reynaud's reforms led Daladier to view the possibility of war with the Reich more favourably than had been the case in 1938. By September 1939, France's aircraft production was equal to Germany's, and 170 American planes were arriving per month.

The Neutrality Acts were still in effect, but the supportive stance of US President Franklin Roosevelt led Daladier to assume that the Americans would maintain a pro-French neutrality and that their tremendous industrial resources would aid France if the Danzig Crisis ended in war.

Daladier was far keener than Chamberlain was to bring the Soviet Union into the "peace front" and believed that only an alliance with the Soviets could deter Hitler from invading Eastern Europe. During the Danzig crisis, Daladier was far more committed to bringing the Soviet Union into the "peace front" meant to deter Germany from invading Poland than was Chamberlain, and Daladier often expressed with the British "go slow" negotiating tactics with Moscow.

Daladier did not want a war with Germany in 1939 but sought to have such an overwhelming array of forces arranged against Germany that Hitler would be deterred from invading Poland. Daladier believed that Polish Guarantee by Britain would encourage Poland to object to having the Soviet Union join the "peace front", which indeed proved to be the case. The Poles refused to grant transit rights to the Red Army, which the Soviets made a precondition for their joining the "peace front". Daladier felt that Chamberlain should not have made guarantee until the Poles had agreed to grant transit rights to the Red Army. He charged that the guarantee made British and French diplomats have more leverage over Polish Foreign Minister Colonel Jozef Beck, who was widely disliked by other diplomats for his stubbornness and haughty manners.

Daladier felt that on economic and military grounds, it was better to have the Soviet Union serve as the "eastern pivot" of the "peace front" than for Poland to do so, as the British preferred. Daladier disliked the Poles and the guarantee but believed in maintaining the alliance with Poland; he believed that France should stand by its commitments.

A public opinion poll in June 1939 showed that 76% of the French believed that France should immediately declare war if Germany tried to seize the Free City of Danzig. For Daladier, the possibility that the Soviet Union might join the "peace front" was a "lifeline" and the best way of stopping another world war. He was deeply frustrated by the Polish refusal to permit transit rights for the Red Army.

On 19 August 1939, Beck, in a telegram to Daladier, stated: "We have not got a military agreement with the USSR. We do not want to have one".

Though the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact of 23 August ruined Daladier's hopes of an Anglo-Franco-Soviet "peace front", he still believed that France and Britain could stop Germany together. On 27 August 1939, Daladier told Bullitt, "there was no further question of policy to be settled. His sister had put in two bags all the personal keepsakes and belonging he really cared about, and was prepared to leave for a secure spot at any moment. France intended to stand by the Poles, and if Hitler should refuse to negotiate with the Poles over Danzig, and should make war on Poland, France would fight at once".

After the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact was signed, Daladier responded to the public outcry by outlawing the French Communist Party on the basis that it had refused to condemn Joseph Stalin 's actions. During the Danzig Crisis, Daladier was greatly influenced by the advice that he received from Robert Coulondre, the French ambassador in Berlin, that Hitler would back down if France made a firm enough stand toward Poland. On 31 August 1939, Daladier read out to the French cabinet a letter he received from Coulondre: "The trial of strength turns to our advantage. It is only necessary to hold, hold, hold!"

After the German invasion of Poland on 1 September, he reluctantly declared war on 3 September and inaugurated the Phoney War. On 6 October, Hitler offered France and Britain a peace proposal. There were more than a few in the French government who were prepared to take Hitler up on his offer, but in a nationwide broadcast the next day, Daladier declared, "We took up arms against aggression. We shall not put them down until we have guarantees for a real peace and security, a security which is not threatened every six months". On 29 January 1940, in a radio address delivered to the people of France, The Nazi's Aim is Slavery, Daladier explicitly stated his opinion of the Germans: "For us, there is more to do than merely win the war. We shall win it, but we must also win a victory far greater than that of arms. In this world of masters and slaves, which those madmen who rule at Berlin are seeking to forge, we must also save liberty and human dignity".

In March 1940, Daladier resigned as prime minister because of his failure to aid Finland 's defence during the Winter War, and he was replaced by Paul Reynaud. Daladier remained defence minister, however, and his antipathy to the new prime minister prevented Reynaud from dismissing Maurice Gamelin as Supreme Commander of the French armed forces. As a result of the massive German breakthrough at Sedan, Daladier swapped ministerial offices with Reynaud and became foreign minister while Reynaud became defence minister. Gamelin was finally replaced by Maxime Weygand on 19 May 1940, nine days after the Germans began the Battle of France.

Under the impression that the French government would continue in North Africa, Daladier fled with other members of the government to French Morocco, but he was arrested and tried for treason by the Vichy government during the Riom Trial.

Daladier was interned in Fort du Portalet, in the Pyrenees. He was kept in prison from 1940 to April 1943, when he was handed over to the Germans and deported to Buchenwald concentration camp in Germany. In May 1943, he was transported to the Itter Castle, in North Tyrol, with other French dignitaries, where he remained until the end of the war. He was freed after the Battle for Castle Itter.

After the war ended, Daladier was re-elected to the Chamber of Deputies in 1946 and acted as a patron to the Radical-Socialist Party's young reforming leader, Pierre Mendès-France. He also was elected as the Mayor of Avignon in 1953. He opposed the transferral of powers to Charles de Gaulle after the May 1958 crisis but, in the subsequent legislative elections of that year, failed to secure re-election. He withdrew from politics after a career of almost 50 years at the age of 74.

Daladier died in Paris on 10 October 1970, at the age of 86. He was buried at the Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.

The Canadian historian Robert Young wrote that Daladier's historical reputation has been tainted by his association with appeasement with his image being of a "weary Sancho Panza to Chamberlain's Don Quixote", namely of a weak, cowardly man who signed the Munich Agreement out of personal weakness rather than conviction, which has made his historical reputation even worse than that of Chamberlain. Young further noted that though Daladier was no longer premier in May–June 1940, the popular image of the French defeat of 1940 is that of an effortless German triumph with the French hardly fighting at all in defence of their nation, which in turn has been linked to appeasement as the popular image of the appeasers is of cowardly, wimpy men unable to stand to Hitler. Young wrote that in the English-speaking world, a key difference in the historical writing about the origins of the Second World War is that British appeasers such as Chamberlain are seen as individuals with their support for appeasement being explained by their own personalities while the support of French appeasers such as Daladier for appeasement is explained by them being French with the clear implication that cowardice is the principal national characteristic of all French people. Young argued that the popular image in the English-speaking world of the French not fighting at all in defence of France in 1940 is not true as about 120,000 French servicemen were killed in action between 10 May-21 June 1940. Young has argued that the picture of Daladier as a key figure in a process of inexorable national decline that ended in France's defeat in 1940 is too teleological and deterministic and failed to address Daladier's efforts at increased rearmament and his attempts to forge an alliance with Great Britain against Germany. Young has further maintained too much of the historical writing on Daladier is more concerned about making sweeping generalisations about the French with the implied message that English-speaking peoples such as the British and the Americans are more courageous and honourable, which he deplored as nationalistic history-writing that prevented the historical understanding of what happened in France and why.

Édouard Marie Herriot (French: [ edwaʁ ma.ʁi ɛʁjo ] ; 5 July 1872 – 26 March 1957) was a French Radical politician of the Third Republic who served three times as Prime Minister (1924–1925; 1926; 1932) and twice as President of the Chamber of Deputies. He led the first Cartel des Gauches. Under the Fourth Republic, he served as President of the National Assembly until 1954. A historian by occupation, Herriot was elected to the Académie Française 's eighth seat in 1946. He served as Mayor of Lyon for more than 45 years, from 1905 until his death, except for a brief period from 1940 to 1945, when he saw his movements variously restricted for opposing the Vichy regime.

Herriot was born at Troyes, France on 5 July 1872. As Mayor of Lyon, Herriot improved relations between municipal government and local unions, increased public assistance funds, and began an urban renewal programme, amongst other measures. He died in Lyon on 26 March 1957. He went through a Deathbed conversion to Catholicism with Cardinal Pierre-Marie Gerlier, and was buried at the Loyasse Cemetery "with church ritual".

Herriot's denial of the Ukrainian Famine of 1932-33 came after a visit to Ukraine between 26 August and 9 September 1933, shortly after leaving the French Prime Ministership. Herriot denied accounts of the famine and said that Soviet Ukraine was "like a garden in full bloom".

Furthermore, he announced to the press that there was no famine in Ukraine, that he did not see any trace of hunger, and that the allegations of starving millions were being spread by adversaries of the Soviet Union. "When one believes that the Ukraine is devastated by famine, allow me to shrug my shoulders", he declared. The 13 September 1933 issue of Pravda was able to write that Herriot "categorically contradicted the lies of the bourgeoisie press in connection with a famine in the USSR."

Président of the Council of Ministers : 1924–1925 / 19–21 July 1926 / June–December 1932.

Minister of Transport, Public Works and Supply : 1916–1917.

Minister of Education and Fine Arts : 1926–1928.

Minister of Foreign Affairs : 1924–1925 / 19–21 July 1926 / June–December 1932.

President of the National Assembly of France : 1947–1954.

Member of the National Assembly of France for Rhône : 1946–1957 (He died in 1957). Elected in 1946, reelected in 1951, 1956.

Member of the Constitutional Assembly for Rhône : 1945–1946. Elected in 1945, reelected in June 1946.

President of the Chamber of Deputies of France : 1925–1926 / 1936–1940.

Member of the Chamber of Deputies of France for Rhône : 1919–1942 (Dissolution of Parliament by Philippe Pétain in 1942). Elected in 1919, reelected in 1924, 1928, 1932, 1936.

Senator of Rhône : 1912–1919. Elected in 1911.

General councillor of Rhône : 1945–1951.

Mayor of Lyon : 1905–1940 (Deposition by Vichy regime in 1940) / 1945–1957 (He died in 1957). Reelected in 1908, 1912, 1919, 1925, 1929, 1935, 1945, 1947, 1953.

Municipal councillor of Lyon : 1904–1940 (Deposition by the Vichy regime in 1940) / 1945–1957 (He died in 1957). Reelected in 1908, 1912, 1919, 1925, 1929, 1935, 1945, 1947, 1953.

President of the Radical Party : 1919–1926 / 1931–1936 / 1948–1953 / 1955–1957.

Herriot was declared an honorary citizen of the city of Veliki Bečkerek (today Zrenjanin) in 1933. There is also a street with his name in Zrenjanin.

His visit to a church in Kiev, where a fake religious service was organized for the occasion, is described in "The Mechanical Lions", one of the stories in A Tomb for Boris Davidovich by Danilo Kiš.

Électricité de France (French pronunciation: [ elɛktʁisite də fʁɑ̃s ] ; lit. ' Electricity of France '), commonly known as EDF, is a French multinational electric utility company owned by the government of France. Headquartered in Paris, with €139.7 billion in sales in 2023, EDF operates a diverse portfolio of at least 120 gigawatts of generation capacity in Europe, South America, North America, Asia, the Middle East, and Africa. In 2009, EDF was the world's largest producer of electricity. Its 56 active nuclear reactors in France are spread out over 18 sites (18 nuclear power plants). They comprise 32 reactors of 900 MW e, 20 reactors of 1,300 MW e, and 4 reactors of 1,450 MW e, all PWRs.

EDF was created on 8 April 1946 by the 1945 parliament, from the merging of various divided actors. EDF led France's post-war energy growth, with a unique focus on civil nuclear energy, through reconstruction and further industrialization within the Trente Glorieuses, being a flagship of France's new industrial landscape. In 2004, following integration into the European Common Market, EDF was privatized, although the government of France retained 84% equity. In 2017 EDF took over the majority of the reactor business Areva, in a French government-sponsored restructuring. That same year, following a wish to divest from nuclear energy, the possible closure of 17 of EDF's French nuclear power reactors by 2025 was announced. By 2022, this decision had been reversed, with the administration of president Emmanuel Macron announcing plans for a "nuclear renaissance", beginning with the projected construction of 6 EPR model 2 reactors with an option for 8 further reactors. Meanwhile, construction is ongoing on EPR model 1 reactors in France and Britain.

Following privatization, decades of under-investment, and the 2021–2022 global energy crisis, the French government announced the full renationalisation of the company for an estimated cost of €5 billion, which it completed on 8 June 2023.

EDF specialises in electricity, from engineering to distribution. The company's operations include the following: electricity generation and distribution; power plant design, construction and dismantling; energy trading; and transport. It is active in such power generation technologies as nuclear power, hydropower, wind power, solar energy, biomass, geothermal energy and fossil-fired energy.

In November 2022, EDF agreed to acquire GE Steam Power 's nuclear activities, which include the manufacture of non-nuclear equipment for new nuclear power plants including steam turbines and the maintenance and upgrade of existing nuclear power plants outside America. The acquisition was completed on 31 May 2024, and GE Power 's nuclear business is now known as Arabelle Solutions.

In July 2025, EDF withdrew from bidding on new nuclear projects abroad, other than in nearby EU countries, to concentrate on a future large domestic construction programme.

The electricity network in France is composed of the following:

The EDF head office is located along Avenue de Wagram in the 8th arrondissement of Paris. The EDF head office is shared between several EDF sites in Greater Paris.

EDF was founded on 8 April 1946, as a result of the nationalisation of around 1,700 smaller energy producers, transporters and distributors by the Minister of Industrial Production Marcel Paul. Mostly a state-owned EPIC, it became the main electricity generation and distribution company in France, enjoying a monopoly in electricity generation, although some small local distributors were retained by the nationalisation. This monopoly ended in 1999, when EDF was forced by a European Directive to open up 20% of its business to competitors.

Until 19 November 2004, EDF was a state-owned corporation, but became a limited-liability corporation under private law (société anonyme), after its status was changed by statute. The French government partially floated shares of the company on the Paris Stock Exchange in November 2005, although it retained almost 85% ownership as of the end of 2008.

On 22 November 2016, French competition regulators raided EDF offices, looking for evidence that EDF was abusing its dominant position to manipulate electricity prices and squeeze rivals.

Between 2001 and 2003, EDF was forced to reduce its equity capital by €6.4 billion total because of the performance of subsidiaries in South America and Europe. In 2001, it also acquired a number of British energy companies, becoming the UK's biggest electricity supplier.

The company remains heavily in debt. Its profitability suffered during the recession which began in 2008. It made €3.9 billion in 2009, which fell to €1.02 billion in 2010, with provisions set aside amounting to €2.9 billion.

In January 2013 the company sold its 1.6% stake in U.S. utility Exelon for $470 million.

In March 2016 EDF's Chief Financial Officer, Thomas Piquemal, who had argued that the final investment decision on building Hinkley Point C nuclear power station should be delayed for three years, resigned. With EDF's market value halved over the preceding year, the cost of the Hinkley Point C project now exceeded the entire market capitalisation of EDF.

In March 2017 EDF offered a €4bn rights issue of new shares to increase capital availability, at a 34.5% discount. The French government committed to purchasing €3bn of the rights issue. Shares prices fell to an all-time low due to the heavy discount on new shares.

EDF's net debt at the end of 2018 was €33 billion, but with future obligations such as pension liabilities and costs for managing nuclear waste allowed for, the adjusted net debt was €70 billion. In order to improve EDF's finances, as of 2019 EDF has sold €10 billion of assets, with plans to sell a further €2 to €3 billion of assets by 2021, and shareholders have been allocated new shares rather than cash dividends. Bonds have been issued in Asian currencies to expand sources of funding. It has financial commitments for new builds at Flamanville and Hinkley Point C. EDF is committed to spending €49.4 billion by 2025 for life extension of its French nuclear reactor fleet, which as of 2019 has an average age of 33 years, to 50 years.

In December 2021, EDF had about €43 billion of debt, which investment analysts Morningstar expected to exceed €60bn by the end of 2022. EDF's credit rating was downgraded in February 2022.

In February 2024, EDF took a €12.9 billion impairment charge on cost overruns building the Hinkley Point C nuclear power station, and a further €1.1 billion later for inflation.

France is the world's largest user of nuclear power for electricity (78% of French production in 2007).

In May 2004, the French Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy reasserted, in front of the French Parliament, the primacy of nuclear power, much to the relief of labour unions of EDF. In this speech, the minister re-phrased the famous slogan, "We do not have oil, but we have ideas", by declaring: "We do not have oil, we do not have gas, we do not have coal, but we had ideas". Depleted uranium from reprocessing the spent fuel of the 58 French nuclear power plants were exported from Le Havre to Russia in the last years and stored in Seversk where it was enriched, and the new fuel was exported back to France.

In 2013 EDF acknowledged the difficulties it was having building the new EPR nuclear reactor design, with its head of production and engineering, Hervé Machenaud, saying EDF had lost its dominant international position in design and construction of nuclear power stations. In September 2015 EDF's chief executive Jean-Bernard Lévy stated that the design of a "New Model" EPR was being worked on, which will be easier to build, to be ready for orders from about 2020.

In 2016 EDF's chief executive Jean-Bernard Lévy stated that EDF's 2030 strategy increased the emphasis on renewable energy, with a 2030 goal of doubling renewable energy capacity worldwide. He stated "I am convinced that we will still have a centralised and secure system in the future but it will be supplemented by a more intermittent and local decentralised system, in which customers will take charge of their consumption. In readiness for this, we must press on with research into electricity storage and smart electricity systems".

In 2011, a French court fined EDF €1.5m and jailed two senior employees for spying on Greenpeace, including hacking into Greenpeace's computer systems. Greenpeace was awarded €500,000 in damages. Although EDF claimed that a security firm had only been employed to monitor Greenpeace, the court disagreed, jailing the head and deputy head of EDF's nuclear security operation for three years each. Two employees of the security firm, Kargus, run by a former member of France's secret services, received sentences of three and two years respectively. Charges were mostly dismissed in appeal in 2013.

EDF's website was brought down by DDoS attacks three times in 2011, twice in April and once later in June.

The attacks were claimed by the hacktivist group Anonymous. Three men were later arrested and interviewed on charges of "obstructing functionality of a data processing service", "fraudulent access of a data processing service" and "participation in an association formed with the aim of preparing such infractions".

Motivations for the attack were thought to relate to the Fukushima nuclear accident in Japan. Unlike Switzerland and Germany, which plan to close down all nuclear reactors at the end of their lifespan, the government of France had no such plans to move away from nuclear power and three months after the Fukushima meltdown, stated a budget increase for nuclear power.

The downtime of the EDF website cost the company an estimated €162,000.

In February 2013 EDF Energy sought an estimated £5 million in damages from environmental activists from the No Dash for Gas campaign that occupied the EDF-owned West Burton CCGT power station in October 2012.

It is unusual in the UK for companies to seek damages from protesters. On 13 March 2013, EDF dropped their lawsuit against the protesters, after agreeing a permanent injunction against protesters entering EDF sites.

In 2017 EDF took over the majority of the reactor business of Areva, excluding the fuel business, in a French government sponsored restructuring following financial and technical problems at Areva due to the building of new EPR nuclear plants. The reactor business has been named Framatome.

In October 2019 French Finance Minister Bruno Le Maire released an audit report on the construction of the heavily delayed and nearly four times over-budget Flamanville 3 EPR development, started by Areva in 2007. The Finance Minister demanded EDF present within a month an action plan for the project, calling it a "failure for the entire French nuclear industry".

In April 2020 EDF estimated the economic slowdown due to the coronavirus pandemic could potentially reduce electricity consumption in France by 20%. EDF estimated annual nuclear output in France would be about 300 TWh in 2020 and 330-360 TWh in 2021 and 2022, down from a pre-coronavirus estimate of 375-390 TWh. Some nuclear reactors will likely be taken offline in the summer of 2020. EDF announced it had withdrawn financial targets for 2020 and 2021. A delay of planned 10-year reactor upgrades this year may be necessary.

To mitigate the impact EDF is targeting €500 million of cost savings to 2022, and aims to sell €3 billion of assets to 2022.

In October 2021, stress corrosion cracking in stainless steel safety system piping was discovered, eventually requiring rolling fleet-wide shutdowns for inspections and repair during 2022 and 2023. This reduced electricity production in 2022 to 279 TWh, 82 TWh less than expected, with a continuing shortfall in 2023. To meet demand, EDF had to buy electricity on the European market at high prices, costing an estimated € 29 billion to June 2023.

In late May 2022, when 12 nuclear reactors were offline, EDF increased the estimated earnings reductions for the inspections and repairs to €18.5 billion.

EDF had to sell a further 20 TWh of power to other domestic suppliers at a reduced price due to the government response to the 2021 global energy crisis. In January 2022, EDF calculated that the increase in reduced price wholesale supply would cost it €8.4 billion (£7 billion), and it withdrew its profit guidance. The EDF share price fell considerably. EDF's debt is about €41 billion, and Fitch Ratings lowered EDF's credit rating.

On 6 July 2022, French prime minister Élisabeth Borne announced that "the French government is aiming for a full nationalization of" EDF. Borne "vowed" to limit the impact of the rise in energy prices through the state having "full control over...electricity production and performance.” Borne told parliament, "we must ensure our sovereignty in the face of...the colossal challenges to come." Earlier in 2022, President Emmanuel Macron had "suggested" a renationalization of EDF as well as a "big expansion of nuclear energy in the coming decades" however, in 2021, he had to scrap an "overhaul" of EDF, codenamed "Project Hercules," that would have placed EDF's profitable renewables sector in a new company, due to opposition by unions and objections raised by the European Commission.

In March 2023, EDF created the Nuward subsidiary to design and manufacture a small modular reactor, for construction from 2030. In July 2024, EDF announced it was discontinuing the existing design, and will work on an SMR design based on existing rather than innovative technologies, following discussions with prospective SMR customers. In January 2025, EDF announced that the new Nuward conceptual design would be completed by mid-2026 to come to market in the 2030s, with an output of about 400 MWe and usable heat output 100 MWt.

In May 2024, EDF raised a loan of €5.8 billion over 3–5 years to finance the life extension of its older 900 MWe reactors by 10 years beyond 40 years. The loan is part of EDF's Green Financing Framework which is in accord with the EU taxonomy for sustainable activities which allows for private-public financing.

EDF has developed recharging points for the Toyota Plug-in HV in France

The French government has contributed $550 million to a partnership by Électricité de France with Renault-Nissan and with PSA Peugeot Citroen.

In 2018 EDF had plans to invest up to €25 billion in photovoltaics solar power generation, and introduce green electricity tariffs.

As of 2017, EDF still held the business of 85.5% of France's residential customers, though on a slow downward trend.

Apart from foreign producers and distributors, there are some significant competitors of EDF in France, although their market share is weaker in comparison:

Among the other rivals of EDF, one can count a number of municipally governed companies, known under the generic term 'entreprises locales de distribution' ('local businesses of distribution'), who are electricity producers exploiting EDF's network.

The nationalisation of electricity and gas on 8 April 1946, which profoundly changed the French electrical and gas organization, had however acknowledged the right of villages to keep their role in the public distribution of electricity and gas.

In 1946, certain firms, villages or groups of villages, did not accept the proposal of nationalisation and created autonomous state controls (who held the monopoly of distribution, until 2004, in their area). To note, contrary to the initial idea, local controllers of electricity, have had, since 1946, the choice to continue to produce electricity. In fact, their production was rather marginal, except in Rhône-Alpes; having often preferred buying the majority of the electrical power from EDF. With the recent opening of the electricity market, local controllers are considering developing, augmenting and diversifying their own production, (e.g. Ouest Énergie, the subsidiary company of SIEDS) and/or diversifying their sources of supply.

To date, the number of local businesses of distribution is approximately 170 and holds 5% of the distribution of French electrical power in 2,500 villages. Created by local authorities, they serve about 3 million people and represent 7,000 jobs. Around thirty of them – 9 during creation in 1962 – are federated in a national entity known as ANROC.

Several departments are not, therefore, served entirely or partly by EDF, for instance:

Enedis was one of the first companies to carry out preventive maintenance on these wooden poles, with the aim of safeguarding the safety of its personnel, in particular with the Polux tool, which has become its reference standard.

Élisabeth Moreno (born 20 September 1970) is a French-Cape Verdean businesswoman and politician who served as Minister Delegate for Gender Equality, Diversity and Equal Opportunities at the Prime Minister's Office in the government of Prime Minister Jean Castex from 2020 to 2022.

Moreno moved from Cape Verde to France with her family in the late 1970s, in order for them to access medical infrastructure to treat Moreno's younger sister for burns. Her career has included growing a company in the construction sector that she created with her husband, four years at France Telecom, and later at Dell. In 2006 she obtained an Executive MBA from ESSEC Business School and the University of Mannheim.

Before entering politics, Moreno worked as vice-president and managing director of Hewlett-Packard for Africa from 2019 until 2020, based in South Africa, and as president of Lenovo France from 2017 until 2019.

Under Moreno's leadership, the French government successfully introduced a bill intended to protect victims of domestic violence, allowing doctors to break patient confidentiality if they believe a life is "in immediate danger".

In January 2022, Moreno and Agnès Pannier-Runacher jointly published a book on feminism.

In the 2022 French legislative election, Moreno contested the 9th constituency for French residents overseas but was narrowly beaten by Karim Ben Cheïkh from Génération.s (NUPES) in the second round.

The Élysée Palace (French : Palais de l'Élysée, pronounced [ palɛ d(ə) lelize ]) is the official residence of the president of France in Paris. Completed in 1722, it was built for Louis Henri de La Tour d'Auvergne, a nobleman and army officer who had been appointed governor of Île-de-France in 1719. It is located on the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré in the 8th arrondissement, near the Champs-Élysées. The name Élysée derives from the Elysian Fields, the place of the blessed dead in Greek mythology.

The Élysée Palace has been the home of personalities such as Madame de Pompadour (1721–1764), Nicolas Beaujon (1718–1786), Bathilde d'Orléans (1750–1822), Joachim Murat (1767–1815), and Charles Ferdinand, Duke of Berry (1778–1820). On 12 December 1848, under the Second Republic, the French Parliament passed a law declaring the building the official residence of the French president. The Élysée Palace, which contains the presidential office and residence, is also the meeting place of the Council of Ministers, the weekly meeting of the Government of France that is presided over by the president of the Republic. Across the street is the Hôtel de Marigny, which has served as a state guest house where the French government has hosted visiting dignitaries.

The architect Armand-Claude Mollet possessed a property fronting on the road to the village of Roule, west of Paris (now the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré), and backing onto royal property, the Grand Cours through the Champs-Élysées. He sold this in 1718 to Louis Henri de La Tour d'Auvergne, Count of Évreux, with the agreement that Mollet would construct an hôtel particulier for the count, fronted by an entrance court and backed by a garden.

The construction of the palace was financed by the considerable dowry of 2,000,000 livres received by the Count of Évreux upon his marriage in 1707 to Marie-Anne Crozat, daughter of Antoine Crozat. This Toulouse businessman and shipowner was considered the wealthiest man in France at the beginning of the 18th century. His fortune was built on colonial slavery and the slave trade, particularly through the Compagnie de Guinée.

The Hôtel d'Évreux was finished and decorated by 1722, and though it has undergone many modifications since, it remains a fine example of the French neo-classical style. At the time of his death in 1753, Évreux was the owner of one of the most widely admired houses in Paris, and it was bought by the Marquise de Pompadour on 24 December 1753 for 730,000 livres. Opponents showed their distaste for the regime by hanging signs on the gates that read: "Home of the King's whore". After her death, it was left in her will to the crown.

In 1773, it was purchased by Nicolas Beaujon, banker to the court and one of the richest men in France, who needed a suitably sumptuous "country house" (for the city of Paris did not yet extend this far) to house his fabulous collection of great masters paintings. To this end, he hired the architect Étienne-Louis Boullée to make substantial alterations to the buildings (as well as design an English-style garden). Soon on display there were such well-known masterpieces as Holbein's The Ambassadors (now in the National Gallery in London), and Frans Hals ' Bohemian (now at the Louvre). His architectural alterations and art galleries gave this residence international renown as "one of the premier houses of Paris".

The palace and gardens were purchased from Beaujon by Bathilde d'Orléans, Duchess of Bourbon in 1787 for 1,300,000 livres. It was the Duchess who named it the Élysée. She also built a group of cottages in the gardens which she named the Hameau de Chantilly, after the Hameau at her father-in-law's Château de Chantilly. With the French Revolution, the Duchess fled the country and the Élysée was confiscated and leased out. The gardens were used for eating, drinking, and dancing, under the name Hameau de Chantilly, and the rooms became gambling houses.

The Élysée was sold in 1805 to Joachim and Caroline Murat, who administered major renovations that made the building more grand and "imperial". Later, the house was transferred to Caroline's brother, Emperor Napoleon, in 1808; it became known as the Élysée-Napoléon. After the Battle of Waterloo, Napoléon returned to the Élysée and signed his abdication there on 22 June 1815. He left the Élysée three days later.

Russian Cossacks camped at the Élysée when they occupied Paris in 1814. The property was then returned to its previous owner, the Duchesse de Bourbon, who then sold it to her royal cousin, Louis XVIII, in 1816. Between 1820 and 1848, the palace was primarily used to host guests of the royal family.

Following the French Revolution of 1848 and the abdication of Louis Philippe I, the provisional government of the Second Republic took over the palace. It was initially used to host musical performances and lectures before being renamed the Élysée National and designated as the official residence of the president of the Republic under the administration of Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte. The president also has the use of other official residences, including the Château de Rambouillet, forty-five kilometres southwest of Paris, as well as the Fort de Brégançon near Toulon.

In 1853, following his coup d'état that ended the Second Republic, Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, now Napoleon III, tasked architect Joseph-Eugène Lacroix [ fr ] with renovations; meanwhile he moved to the nearby Tuileries Palace, but kept the Élysée as a discreet place to meet his mistresses, moving between the two palaces through a secret underground passage that has since been demolished. Since Lacroix completed his work in 1867, the essential look of the Palais de l'Élysée has remained the same.

In 1873, under the Third Republic, the Élysée became the official presidential residence. In 1899, Félix Faure became the only officeholder to die in the palace.

In 1917, a chimpanzee escaped from a nearby ménagerie, entered the palace and was said to have tried to haul the wife of President Raymond Poincaré into a tree only to be foiled by Élysée guards. President Paul Deschanel, who resigned in 1920 because of mental illness, was said to have been so impressed by the chimpanzee's feat that, to the alarm of his guests, he took to jumping into trees during state receptions.

The Élysée Palace was closed in June 1940 and remained empty during World War II. It was reoccupied only in 1946 by Vincent Auriol, President of the Provisional Government of the French Republic, then first president of the Fourth Republic from 1947 to 1954. From 1959 to 1969, the Élysée was occupied by Charles de Gaulle, the first president of the Fifth Republic. De Gaulle did not like its lack of privacy and oversaw the purchase of the luxurious Hôtel de Marigny to lodge foreign state officials in visits to France, saying, "I do not like the idea of meeting Kings walking around my corridors in their pyjamas."

In the 1970s, President Georges Pompidou had some of the original rooms in the palace redesigned by Pierre Paulin in the modern style, of which only the Salle à Manger Paulin survives.

Socialist President François Mitterrand, who governed from 1981 to 1995, is said to have seldom used its private apartments, preferring the privacy of his own home on the more bohemian Rive Gauche. A discreet flat in the nearby presidential annexe Palais de l'Alma housed his mistress Anne Pingeot, mother of his illegitimate daughter Mazarine Pingeot.

By contrast, his successor Jacques Chirac lived throughout his two terms in office (1995–2007) in the Élysée apartments with his wife Bernadette. Chirac increased the Palace's budget by 105% to 90 million euros per year, according to the book L'argent caché de l'Élysée. One million euros per year is spent on drinks alone for the guests invited to the Élysée Palace, 6.9 million euros per year on bonuses for presidential staff and 6.1 million euros per year on the 145 extra employees Chirac hired after he was elected in 1995.

The Élysée has gardens, in which presidents hosted parties on the afternoon of Bastille Day until 2010. That year, then-President Nicolas Sarkozy decided to stop organising this event because of France's high debt and the economic crisis.

Emmanuel Macron, the president of France since 2017, currently resides at the palace.

The heavily guarded mansion and grounds are situated at 55 Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré at its intersection with Avenue de Marigny [ fr ]. A monumental gate with four Ionic order columns, flanked by walls topped by a balustrade, opens onto a large rounded courtyard. The majestic ceremonial courtyard imparts a degree of grandeur to the house. The main residence is constructed in the French neo-classical style. An entrance vestibule is aligned with the ceremonial courtyard and gardens. There is a long central building, a great – or state – apartment divided in the middle by a large salon that opens into the garden. This building also has a central three-storey section, and two single-floor wings: the Appartement des Bains to the right, and the Petit Appartement (private apartments) to the left. The French-style garden has a central path aligned with the central building, patterned flowerbeds and alleys of chestnut trees edged with hedgerows.

The Vestibule d'Honneur (Hall of Honour) is the room which the main entrance to the palace leads into. In this room the president of France meets visiting officials, world leaders and spiritual leaders.

The Salon d'Argent (Silver Room), in the east wing of the palace, was decorated by Caroline Murat, wife of Joachim Murat and sister of Napoleon I. The room is so called because of the silver coloured edges to the wall features, mantelpieces, tables, sofas, and armchairs, of which the last have swan sculptures at the sides. Three notable historical events happened in this room. On 22 June 1815, Napoleon formally signed his abdication warrant after losing the Battle of Waterloo that year; on 2 December 1851 Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte launched his coup d'état ; and in 1899, President Félix Faure met his mistress, Marguerite Steinheil.

The Salle à Manger Paulin (Paulin Dining Room), named after its architect, Pierre Paulin, is a complete contrast to most of the other rooms in the palace. It was designed as a private dining room for President Georges Pompidou and his wife Claude, and the interior and furniture date from the 1970s. The walls are made of 22 polyester panels, the chairs have a single leg attached to a round base, and the round table is made of glass. The room is lit by roof panels decorated with glass balls and rods.

The Salon des Portraits (Portrait Room) was used by the Emperor Napoleon III for portrait medallions of the most important sovereigns of the time, replacing earlier portraits of the Bonaparte family installed by Joachim Murat. The portraits are of: Pope Pius IX, Emperor Franz Josef I of Austria-Hungary, Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom, King Victor Emmanuel II of Italy, Tsar Nicholas I of Russia, King Frederick William IV of Prussia, Queen Isabel II of Spain, and King William I of Württemberg. Previously a dining room, President Nicolas Sarkozy used the room as his second office.

The Salle des Fêtes (Hall of Festivities) dominates the west wing of the palace. It was designed by Eugène Debressenne [ fr ] and opened on 10 May 1889 by the then president, Sadi Carnot, to coincide with the Exposition Universelle that year. The room has paintings on the ceiling called " La République sauvegarde la Paix " (The Republic Safeguards Peace), painted by Guillaume Dubufe in 1894. There are also six Gobelins tapestries in the room, which is predominantly laid out in red and gold decor. In 1984 President François Mitterrand added ten windows to the room to let in more light. It is in this room that all French presidents are inaugurated, and where they host official conferences and banquets.

The Jardins d'Hiver (Winter Gardens) was built in 1883 as a greenhouse for growing plants. Today it is no longer used for this purpose, being instead an extension of the Salon des Fêtes, and used for official banquets. There is a Gobelins tapestry on the wall, and three chandeliers hang from the ceiling.

The Salon Murat (Murat Room) is used every Wednesday by the president for meetings with the prime minister and the rest of the Government of France, along with the presidential secretary, known as the "Secretary-General of the Élysée". It was also in this room that Konrad Adenauer, Chancellor of Germany, signed the Élysée Treaty in 1963.

The Salon Cléopâtre (Cleopatra Room) gets its name from a Gobelins tapestry on the wall, installed during the presidency of Sadi Carnot, which depicts Antony and Cleopatra meeting at Tarsus. Also in the room is a portrait of Maria Amalia, Duchess of Parma, painted by Alexandre Roslin.

The Salon des Ambassadeurs (Ambassadors' Room) is where the French president officially receives ambassadors from abroad.

The Salon Bleu (Blue Room) is used as the office of the first lady of France.

The Escalier Murat (Murat Staircase) is the main staircase in the palace, linking the ground and first floors.

The Salon Doré (Golden Room) is named after the gold coloured edges to the wall features, doors, tables, and chairs. All the French presidents have used this room as their main study except Valéry Giscard d'Estaing and Emmanuel Macron.

The Salon Vert (Green Room) is named after the green curtains and chair covers (the doors, chairs, tables, and wall features have gold edges). The room is used for meetings, and it was here that Nicolas Sarkozy married his second wife, Carla Bruni, during his presidency.

The Salon Angle (Angle Room) is a former dining room that has been the office of the Secretary-General of the Élysée since 2007.

The Salon de Fougères (Flower Room) is named because it has floral patterned wallpaper. In the room is a portrait of King Louis XV, painted by Charles-André van Loo.

The Ancienne Chambre de la Reine and the Ancienne Chambre du Roi were the bedrooms of the former Kings and Queens of France. The latter room was formerly used as the office of the Secretary-General before he moved it to the Salon Angle.

Six other rooms on the first floor, in the east wing, are the president's private living quarters.

Émile Justin Louis Combes (French: [ emil kɔ̃b ] ; 6 September 1835 – 25 May 1921) was a French politician and freemason who led the Coalition of the Left (French: Bloc des gauches) cabinet from June 1902 to January 1905.

Émile Combes was born on 6 September 1835, in Roquecourbe, Tarn, the sixth child of Jean Combes, a dressmaker, and Marie-Rose Bannesborn.

He first learned Latin from his public schoolteacher and then from his godfather and cousin, a priest named Jean Gaubert. Gabriel Merle, biographer of Émile Combes, describes Jean Gaubert: "He has the prestige and authority of the priesthood and education. He is obeyed. And if he demands sacrifices, he also imposes them on himself. His insistence that one of his younger cousins should become a priest is astonishing. Having failed with Philippe around 1840 and Émile in 1847, he missed his last attempt with Henri around 1860."

Thanks to his knowledge of Latin, twelve-year-old Émile Combes entered the fourth year of the minor seminary in Castres. His godfather supported him financially through his studies, first at the seminary; then at the École des Carmes, an ecclesiastical school where future priests wishing to study at the Sorbonne were trained; and finally at the Grand Séminaire d'Albi, where Émile Combes wore the cassock and was tonsured. Here, his vocation to the priesthood was seen as unserious, and despite initial efforts to persist, he would abandon the idea before ordination.

His anti-clericalism would later lead him into becoming a Freemason. He was also in later life a spiritualist. He later took a diploma as a doctor of letters (1860). He then studied medicine and graduated in 1867, and setting up in practice at Pons in Charente-Inférieure. In 1881, he presented himself as a political candidate for Saintes, but was defeated. In 1885, he was elected to the senate by the département of Charente-Inférieure. He sat in the Democratic left, and was elected vice-president in 1893 and 1894. The reports which he drew up upon educational questions drew attention to him, and on 3 November 1895, he entered the Leon Victor Auguste Bourgeois cabinet as minister of public instruction, resigning with his colleagues on 21 April following.

He actively supported the Waldeck-Rousseau ministry, and upon its retirement in 1902, he was himself charged with the formation of a cabinet. In this, he took the portfolio of the Interior, and the main energy of the government was devoted to an anti-clerical agenda. The parties of the Left united upon this question in the Bloc republicain, supported Combes in his application of the law of 1901 on the religious associations, and voted the new bill on the congregations (1904). Under his guidance, France took the first definite steps toward the separation of church and state. By 1904, through his efforts, nearly 10,000 religious schools had been closed, and thousands of priests and nuns left France rather than be persecuted.

Combes was vigorously opposed by all the conservative parties, who saw the mass closure of church schools as a persecution of religion. Combes led the anti-clerical coalition on the left, facing opposition primarily organized by the pro-Catholic party Action libérale populaire (ALP). ALP had a stronger popular base, with better financing and a stronger network of newspapers, but had far fewer seats in the Chamber of Deputies.

Among people who looked with favor on his stubborn enforcement of the law, he was familiarly called le petit père. In October 1904, his Minister of War, General André, was uncovered 'republicanizing' the army. He took the promotion process out of the hands of senior officers and handled it directly as a political matter. He used Freemasons to spy on the religious behavior of all 19,000 officers; they flagged the observant Catholics and André made sure they would not be promoted. Exposed as the Affaire Des Fiches, the scandal undermined support for the Combes government. It also undermined morale in the army, as officers realized that hostile spies examining their private lives were more important to their careers than their own professional accomplishments.

Finally, the defection of the Radical and Socialist groups induced him to resign on 17 January 1905, although he had not met an adverse vote in the Chamber. His policy was still carried on; and when the law of the separation of church and state was passed, all the leaders of the Radical parties entertained him at a noteworthy banquet in which they openly recognized him as the real originator of the movement.

According to Geoffrey Kurtz, the years of Émile Combes' administration were a period of social reform "without equal" during the era of the Third Republic, which included such reforms as an eight-hour day for miners, a ten-hour day for many workers, the lowering of mandatory military service from 3 to 2 years, the elimination of certain middle-class draft exemptions, and some modest public assistance for the chronically ill, the disabled, and the elderly. In 1903, safety standards were extended to shops and offices. After 1903, maternity leave and day care were provided to women in the French Postal Service. In addition, a 1904 law "pioneered assistance to the children of single mothers, ignoring invidious distinctions between married and single mothers, in order to prevent abandonment," while a law of March 1904 established public employment agencies. Decrees aimed at improving working conditions and establishing an eight-hour day in naval arsenals were also introduced.

The campaign for the separation of church and state was the last big political action in his life. While still possessed of great influence over extreme Radicals, Combes took but little public part in politics after his resignation from the premiership in 1905. He joined the Aristide Briand ministry in October 1915 as one of the five Elder Statesmen, but without portfolio.

Combes died on 25 May 1921 in Pons, Charente-Maritime.

Émile Laurens was a French politician born on 29 January 1884 in Réquista, Aveyron and died on 16 June 1940 in Blois, Loir-et-Cher. He was recognized as having died for France.

He replaced the former and future Prime Minister Camille Chautemps as the Radical deputy for Loir-et-Cher after a a 1935 by-election where he narrowly beat the militant agrarian leader Henry Dorgères in the second round of voting He served as Under-Secretary of State to the Prime Minister's Office from 18 January 1938 to 13 March 1938 in the Fourth Chautemps Government.

In February 1940, Maurice Olivier, then mayor of Blois, resigned for health reasons, and Émile Laurens was appointed as his replacement.

On 16 June 1940 He was fatally wounded during the Battle of France when the German army bombarded the Town Hall in the Foix district in Blois, where he resided with his family.

A street name in the center of Blois commemorates Laurens today, located west of Place de la Résistance.

Émile Ogier (6 January 1862 – 30 April 1932) was a French politician. He primarily served in the governments of Alexandre Millerand and Georges Leygues of the Third Republic.

Ogier's first senior administrative position was as the Inspector of Administrative Services and the Prison Administration from 1901 to 1911. After this, he was the Secretary General of the Ministry of the Interior, being appointed on 5 July 1911. He was later succeeded by Jean Chiappe in this position on 8 October 1925. Ogier was also an advocate for the creation of more hospitals, which he warned about during the end of World War One to the inter-regional hospital unions, which were the predecessor to the Hospital Federation of France.

He would then serve as the Prefect of the Meuse from 1 August 1919 to 22 January 1920. Immediately following his tenure as a prefect, he became Minister of Liberated Regions on 20 January 1920. He was succeeded in this position on 16 January 1921. He was awarded the Legion of Honour with the class of Grand Officer on 26 January 1929. He would die on 30 April 1932.

The Éolienne Bollée is an unusual wind turbine, unique for having a stator and a rotor, as a water turbine has. The eponymous invention was first patented in 1868 by Ernest Sylvain Bollée in France. A further patent dated 1885 differed mainly in two ways: First, in how the turbine was turned to face the wind and second, in an improvement which increased the flow of wind through the turbine. The turbines built according to the 1885 patent were commercially successful.

Ernest Sylvain Bollée (19 July 1814 – 1891) and Auguste Sylvain Bollée (1847–1906) took out the original patent No. 79985 in 1868 for a "hydraulic wind engine". Ernest Bollée described himself as a hydraulic engineer in Le Mans, Sarthe. During the 1860s, due to poor health, Ernest delegated control of the three parts of his business to each of his sons. Auguste was given control of the wind engine manufacturing side of the business. The patent of 1885, with the improvements, is No.167726. In 1898 Auguste sold the business to Édouard-Émile Lebert. Auguste is estimated to have made about 260 Éoliennes. Lebert passed the business to Gaston Duplay in 1918 and on 1 January 1926 the business passed to the Société Anonyme des Éoliennes Bollée (SAEB). SAEB erected at least three 7-metre (23 ft) éoliennes. Operations seem to have ceased around 1931.

The Éolienne Bollée was designed to be constructed in a modular form, thus allowing éoliennes of various sizes to be built. The tower could be a standard pylon type, either of triangular or square plan, or a cast-iron column with an external spiral staircase. The éoliennes built with this type of tower have a very distinctive appearance. The actual turbine itself consists of two rings, the first being the stator and the second being the rotor. The stator has more blades than the rotor. A new device added to the 1885 patent was a funnel affixed to the stator, enabling the éolienne to capture wind from a larger area than the rotor, and increasing its speed through the turbine. A small fantail operated upwind of the rotor, and through a system of gears turned the turbine to face the wind. Also, through a counterweight system, it turned the turbine out of wind as the wind speed increased, thus preventing damage in very strong winds, when the éolienne would be edge on into the prevailing wind.

The cast-iron columns were made in 2.85-metre (9 ft 4 in) sections of 175 millimetres (6.9 in) diameter, having twelve cast-iron treads or wrought iron steps forming a complete spiral around the column. A half column was available, allowing éoliennes to be built to any desired height.

The Éolienne Bollée is unique amongst other forms of windmill because of the stator. All windmills have a rotor, whether it is the sails on a traditional windmill or the blades of a modern wind turbine. The Éolienne Bollée is the only wind-powered turbine where the wind passes through a set of fixed blades (stator) before driving the windmill itself (rotor).

The rotor is turned by the wind, and through a bevel wheel drives a shaft inside the column (if used) or in the centre of the tower. At the lower end this drives a horizontal shaft through a gearbox, which typically drives three throw pump.

The éoliennes came in four sizes: 2.5-metre (8 ft 2 in), 3.53-metre (11 ft 7 in), 5-metre (16 ft 5 in) and 7-metre (23 ft) diameter.

It was claimed that a 3.53 m éolienne with a 65-millimetre (2.6 in) pump would be able to pump:

Pumps were available in seven sizes: 33-millimetre (1.30 in), 42-millimetre (1.65 in), 52-millimetre (2.05 in), 65-millimetre (2.56 in), 80-millimetre (3.15 in), 100-millimetre (3.94 in), and 120-millimetre (4.72 in) diameter.

Lebert built some very similar wind engines with a single rotor, and lacking the stator (thus they were not true turbines). They were either 7.10 metres (23 ft 4 in) or 8.60 metres (28 ft 3 in) diameter. At least three of these are known to have been built, including at Rugles, Eure and Parigné-l'Évêque, Sarthe.

The Clarkson wind engine consisted of a rotor or a number of rotors, one behind the other, revolving in a casing with fixed guide vanes between and of opposite pitch to those of the rotors, and having a further casing to admit a fresh supply of wind to the rotors behind. The cylindrical casings are open at each end with a larger opening facing the wind. The wind catches a number of wheels and feathered vanes fixed to a shaft revolving in bearings inside the casings. When the wind has passed between the vanes of the front wheel it is directed by the guide vanes to the second wheel and is again taken up by guides and passed to a third wheel and so on, the action each time increasing the effect of the wind on the shaft and improving efficiency. The Clarkson of which an illustration survives (1919) was erected by the Air Power Co. of Prestwich, Cheshire on the estate of Lord Derby. This small engine was designed to work in a 12-mile-per-hour (19 km/h) wind, but could start under load in a wind of only 7 miles per hour (11 km/h). The wind wheel was only 5 feet (1.52 m) diameter and is designed to lift 100 imperial gallons (450 L; 120 US gal) of water per hour to a height of 50 feet (15.24 m) in a 12-mile-per-hour (19 km/h) wind, or double that quantity in a 15-mile-per-hour (24 km/h) wind. All the Air Power wind engines were fitted with roller bearings, a starting and stopping arrangement and an automatic gear to cut off all wind above any desired velocity. They were mounted on a strong steel tower, with a ladder and circular platform.

In the early years, under the Bollée family, the vast majority of purchasers were aristocrats and gentry, only six éoliennes being sold to municipalities by 1888. After Lebert took over, the pattern of sales changed, with more éoliennes being sold for communal water supply, particularly in Indre-et-Loire and Sarthe.

A few éoliennes were sold abroad, including two to a monastery at Cowfold, Sussex ; one to a monastery at Tarragona, Spain ; one to a hospital in Tunisia ; one to a mine in Brazil ; and one to Cotonou, Dahomey.

Some éoliennes have survived. In France, the oldest surviving éolienne is at the Bollée bell foundry in Saint-Jean-de-Braye, near Orléans. One is preserved in working order at Épuisay, Loir-et-Cher, and another at the Bollée museum in Orléans. A few have been restored to working order. The grounds of Château Bouvet-Ladubay in Saumur also contain an excellent example. The is an éolienne Bollée in the Parc de Clairbaudieres, Chateau Clerbaud in Paizay le Sec, Vienne.

The éolienne at Épuisay is on a square plan lattice tower of eight sections, 21 metres (68 ft 11 in) high. The 3.53-metre (11 ft 7 in) rotor drives a pump which pumps water from a depth of 116 metres (380 ft 7 in), the pump itself being at a depth of 35 metres (114 ft 10 in). A 2 horsepower (1.5 kW) petrol engine was provided to work the pumps in times of calm. By wind, 2.5 cubic metres (550 imp gal; 3.3 yd) an hour could be pumped.

The épuration légale (lit. ' legal purge ') was the wave of official trials and administrative sanctions conducted in France following the liberation and the collapse of the Vichy regime.

Instituted by the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF) under Charles de Gaulle, the formal legal purge was designed to re-establish the rule of law and replace the épuration sauvage ("wild purge")—the preceding phase of summary executions, arbitrary detentions, and extrajudicial reprisals carried out by local Resistance fighters and civilians.

Unlike the international Nuremberg trials, the épuration légale was conducted entirely as a domestic French judicial process. Approximately 300,000 cases were investigated, reaching into the civil administration, judiciary, press, and highest levels of the collaborationist government. More than half of these investigations were closed without indictment.

Between 1944 and 1951, special Courts of Justice (cours de justice) and the High Court of Justice pronounced 6,763 death sentences (3,910 of them in absentia). Of the 2,853 defendants sentenced to death in person, roughly 73 percent were commuted by de Gaulle, resulting in 791 judicial executions, including those of Vichy leaders Pierre Laval and Joseph Darnand, and the collaborationist writer Robert Brasillach. Far more common were sentences of dégradation nationale (loss of civic rights) under the newly created offense of indignité nationale, which was imposed on nearly 50,000 people. The purge phase effectively concluded with the general parliamentary amnesty laws of 1951 and 1953.

As Allied forces advanced through France in 1944, the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF) under General Charles de Gaulle sought to establish administrative and judicial control while navigating several competing precedents:

We could not accept that the administration of France be handed over to an Allied military command, as had been done in Italy... France was not an enemy territory to be placed under tutelage, but an ally resuming her sovereignty.

— Charles de Gaulle, Mémoires de guerre: L'Unité, 1942–1944

Thus de Gaulle insisted that liberated France adopt a solution both self-sovereign and orderly.

The GPRF viewed the épuration sauvage as a direct threat to public order and republican legitimacy, while fearing that sustained civil unrest would provide Allied leadership with grounds to impose military governance. To restore state authority and centralize judicial power, the Provisional Government deployed regional commissioners (Commissaires de la République) and established special domestic tribunals, channeling popular demands for retribution into the formal legal framework of the épuration légale.

The legal foundation of the purge rested on the doctrine of republican continuity. Under the GPRF's Ordinance of 9 August 1944 on the Restoration of Republican Legality, the Vichy regime was declared illegitimate ab initio :

The institutional template for the mainland purge was developed in French North Africa between 1943 and 1944:

Prosecuting collaboration under existing pre-war treason statutes presented a major legal challenge: Article 75 carried mandatory capital punishment or hard labor, which was disproportionate for low-level collaboration, political sympathizers, or collaborationist journalists. Standard criminal statutes could not easily penalize non-violent political collaboration without violating the principle against retroactive criminal law (nullum crimen sine lege). To resolve this, the GPRF issued the Ordinance of 26 August 1944 establishing the new offense of indignité nationale ("national unworthiness"):

To judge civilian and political offenses, the Provisional Government established a dual judicial structure separating the trials of top government leaders from those of ordinary collaborators.

On 18 November 1944, the GPRF issued an ordinance establishing the High Court of Justice (Haute Cour de justice) to try Marshal Philippe Pétain, heads of government, cabinet ministers, secretaries of state, and resident-generals accused of high treason and crimes against the internal and external security of the state. Under the Third Republic, the Senate had sat as the High Court of Justice, but this mechanism had been suspended by the Vichy regime under the Constitutional Act of 30 July 1940.

Because the pre-war Senate had dissolved and the majority of its members had voted full constituent powers to Pétain, the 1944 ordinance instituted a new judicial composition:

Following the election of the National Constituent Assembly, the law of 27 December 1945 reorganized the court to reflect the new democratic mandate. The professional magistrates were retained, but the 24 jurors were henceforth chosen by lot from a parliamentary list of 96 deputies, allocated proportionally according to political party representation. The court was modified by subsequent statutes on 15 September 1947 and 19 April 1948 to expedite remaining dockets before completing its final trials in 1949.

General collaboration offenses across France were handled at the regional level under the Ordinance of 26 June 1944, which established 90 departmental Courts of Justice (cours de justice) alongside attached Civic Sections (chambres civiques):

Following the liberation of Paris and the regions in the summer of 1944, the Provisional Government faced the logistical problem of detaining tens of thousands of suspected collaborators. Former internment centers and transit camps previously operated by the Vichy regime—such as the Drancy internment camp, the Vélodrome d'Hiver, the Gurs internment camp, and the Camp des Milles —were repurposed to hold detainees awaiting judicial examination. In Paris, local Resistance committees initially supervised Drancy until the National Gendarmerie assumed formal command on 15 September 1944.

Standard detention facilities, notably Fresnes Prison near Paris, held prominent political, cultural, and industrial figures accused of collaboration, including singer Tino Rossi, novelist Pierre Benoit, actress Arletty, and automotive industrialist Louis Renault, who died in custody in October 1944 while awaiting trial.

To regularize detentions that had begun as informal arrests by local Resistance factions, the GPRF enacted the Ordinance of 4 October 1944, granting departmental prefects emergency statutory powers to intern individuals deemed dangerous to national security or public order until the cessation of hostilities. At its peak in late 1944, administrative internment held an estimated 70,000 to 80,000 persons nationwide. For many detainees, transfer to state-controlled internment camps provided protection against vigilante reprisals and extrajudicial violence during the ongoing épuration sauvage.

On 31 October 1944, Minister of the Interior Adrien Tixier established departmental supervisory commissions (commissions de contrôle des internements administratifs) tasked with reviewing internment warrants, releasing individuals held without evidence, and regulating house arrests (résidences forcées). The GPRF also permitted the International Committee of the Red Cross to inspect the camps and evaluate living conditions.

As civil administration stabilized, the GPRF restricted the scope of extrajudicial detentions:

The first high official tried in the purge was Jean-Pierre Esteva, Resident General of France in Tunisia. He was sentenced to detention for life on 15 March 1945, avoiding capital punishment because the court recognised that he had assisted patriots in May 1943, just before leaving Tunisia. Esteva was pardoned on 11 August 1950 due to illness, and died a few months later.

The trial of Pétain began on 23 July 1945. Pétain's defense lawyer, Jacques Isorni, pointed out that the public prosecutor, André Mornet [ fr ], had also been in charge of the failed Riom Trials organized by Pétain under the Vichy regime. This did not sway the presiding judge, Pierre Mongibeaux, who had himself sworn allegiance to Pétain in 1941. The 89-year-old Marshal was sentenced to death on 15 August, but his sentence was commuted to life imprisonment by General de Gaulle. He lived six more years, imprisoned on the Île d'Yeu.

Pierre Laval, the French Prime Minister from July to December 1940 and from April 1942 to August 1944, had fled to Francoist Spain. Franco expelled him to Innsbruck in Austria, located in the U.S. Occupation Zone. Laval was extradited to French authorities and his trial commenced in October 1945. In a contentious and rushed trial, he was sentenced to death by the jury on 9 October 1945 and executed by firing squad at Fresnes Prison a week later.

By 1 July 1949, the High Court of Justice had adjudicated 108 cases, 106 of which involved former Vichy government ministers, secretaries of state, and high commissioners:

Between 1954 and 1960, the High Court judged prisoners who had been sentenced in absentia or had subsequently surrendered. More than a decade having passed, the court showed greater leniency; for example, former Moroccan Resident-General Charles Noguès, who had been sentenced in absentia to 20 years of forced labour in November 1947, had his sentence of indignité nationale suspended upon returning to France in October 1956.

Équinoxe is a French political party founded in 2021.

The party is centered around pro-nuclear environmentalism and eco-sufficiency. In its campaign for the 2024 European Parliament election, the party also supported a regulation of immigration to Europe, combined with the creation of a climate refugee status. Despite some ideological similarity on environmental issues, the party claims to have no links to Jean-Marc Jancovici, although some of its candidates in the 2024 European Parliament election were members of The Shifters, the nonprofit sister association of The Shift Project, co-founded by Jancovici.

The party contested the 2022 legislative election and the 2024 European Parliament election, and has been fielding 41 candidates for the 2024 legislative election, mostly in the Île-de-France region.

On 12 January 2025, during the partial legislative in Isère (first circonscription), its candidate Gaëlle Offranc-Piret had collected 7.6% of the votes (~2225).

Équinoxe's list in the 2024 European Parliament election was headed by Marine Cholley, chosen by party members in an internal election on 21 November 2023. The party scored 0.29% (73002) of votes nationwide, and did not win any seats.

Équinoxe was incorrectly announced as the winner in Clermont-Ferrand, with 19.9% of the votes. This was found to have been caused by an input error, with the party actually receiving 0.4% of votes in the city.

Éric Besson (born 2 April 1958) is a French politician and businessman. From 2009 to 2010, he was the Minister of Immigration, Integration, National Identity and Co-Development in the government of François Fillon.

He left the Socialist Party (PS) during the first round of the 2007 presidential elections to found The Progressives, a social democratic affiliate party of Nicolas Sarkozy 's Union for a Popular Movement (UMP). He has been Deputy Secretary-General of the UMP since 2009.

In 2012, Besson established a strategy consulting firm, Eric Besson Consulting, advising international industry and energy firms.

Eric Besson was born in Marrakesh, Morocco, on 2 April 1958. His mother is of Lebanese origin. His father, an officer in the French Air Force, was killed in a flight accident three months before Éric Besson's birth.

After graduating high school in Casablanca, he moved to France to attend the Montpellier Business School. He then studied at the Institut d'études politiques de Paris (Sciences Po), before unsuccessfully applying to the École nationale d'administration (ENA).

Besson subsequently joined the French car company Renault, then was editor-in-chief of business magazine Challenges, before joining the Vivendi foundation.

Besson was a member of the Socialist Party from 1993 to 2007. He has been mayor of Donzère since 1995 and was the député for the Drôme between 1997 and 2007, when he did not stand for re-election. During his time as a Member of Parliament, Besson was a member of the National Commission for Defense and the Armed Forces from 1997 to 1998, the Financial and Economic Planning Commission from 1998 to 2002, the Commission of Inquiry on the Activity and Functioning of Commercial Courts, and the Commission of Inquiry on Superphénix and fast neutron reactors (both in 1998).

Following his re-election in 2002, he became a full member of the Supervisory Board of the Social Debt Amortizement Fund and the Supervisory Board of the Agency for Industrial Innovation.

Besson was appointed the PS National Secretary for the Economy, Employment and Business in 2003, and National Secretary for the Economy and Taxation in 2005.

Besson began the 2007 French presidential election as a member of Ségolène Royal 's campaign team. However, he resigned as the PS finance secretary on 14 February 2007 over frustration about Royal's presidential campaign, which he saw as "badly organised". He then quit the Socialist Party on 21 February and supported Nicolas Sarkozy's presidential bid for which he was harshly criticized.

In May 2007, he was appointed as State Secretary for Prospectives and Evaluation of Public Policies under the government of Francois Fillon.

That year, he also launched a new political party, The Progressives, affiliated with the Union for a Popular Movement, Nicolas Sarkozy's party, through the Liaison Committee for the Presidential Majority.

In March 2008, he was re-elected as mayor of Donzère after the first round with 69.92% of the votes.

On 18 March 2008, following a ministerial reshuffle, the position of Secretary of State for the Digital Economy was created and subsequently given to Besson. The creation of the post was a response to the Attali report that stressed the importance of digital development for France's economic future. In this capacity, Besson conducted a strategic analysis of 10 challenges facing France until 2025.

In October 2008, the "2012 Digital France" plan was released. The plan sought to reduce "the gap between France and its international competitors" in this sector. The strategy to achieve this was based around three major objectives: ensuring far-reaching access to broadband Internet, ensuring production and supply of digital content, and reducing the digital divide. The purpose was to increase economic growth and modernize the country.

In January 2009, he was appointed Minister for Immigration, Integration, National Identity and Co-Development in the second government of Prime Minister François Fillon.

His tenure was characterized by a stronger fight against illegal immigration and human trafficking. While a guest on a French TV show, Besson described the immigration policy as based on "firmness and humanity". An immigration bill was presented in 2010 that prolonged the detention period of illegal immigrants, penalized employment of illegal immigrants, and called on immigrants wishing to acquire French citizenship to adhere "to the essential principles and values of the republic". Furthermore, Sarkozy gave the immigration ministry a target of 30,000 repatriations per year.

At the same time, the state budget for the reception and integration of those entering France legally was increased by more than 20% in order to discourage illegal immigration and, in turn, promote lawful ways of entering and settling in France. Entry formalities for foreigners were simplified, a long-term visa system was established, and 1,000 additional places in reception centers were opened to raise their capacity to absorb asylum seekers.

As part of an EU-wide resettlement system to distribute refugees in highly exposed countries such as Greece, Malta and Italy more evenly across the EU, Besson agreed to the resettlement of refugees from Malta to France, making France the first country to act on the scheme. Besson subsequently supported the creation of a common European asylum system and advocated for Malta to host the newly established European Asylum Support Office.

In September 2009, an area known as "the Jungle" near Calais, where many illegal immigrants had settled in order to cross the British channel to the UK, was cleared. According to Besson, the operation was targeting the "logistical infrastructure and mafia-style networks of people traffickers who sell the trip to England at a very high price".

Later in 2009, President Sarkozy initiated a public debate on French national identity. Besson was in charge of organizing the debate and argued that discussions about identity had been left to right-wing extremists such as Jean-Marie Le Pen for too long. The debate was concluded when Fillon announced the creation of an "experts committee" of politicians and historians in February 2010. The debate damaged Besson's political standing, with one weekly magazine calling him "the most hated man" in the Republic.

Éric Besson was appointed Minister for Industry, Energy and the Digital Economy on 14 November 2010.

In December that year, Besson sent a letter to the French state agency governing internet use in order to stop French web hosting company OVH from hosting the WikiLeaks website. The French government had previously deemed WikiLeaks a "criminal" website for violating the "confidentiality of diplomatic relations" and endangering people "protected by diplomatic secrecy", making it illegal for French companies to host WikiLeaks.

Besson also reiterated his support for the Union for the Mediterranean on a visit to the organization's secretariat in May 2011.

During his tenure, he oversaw the extension of France's push for greater digitalization. In his capacity as Minister, he organized a "digital G8 seminar" for young professionals in May 2011, followed by the G20 Young Entrepreneurs Alliance Summit in November.

Also in November, the "Digital France 2012–2020: assessment and prospects" report was published, a follow-up to the "2012 Digital France" plan. The report set new targets for 2020 for the expansion of digitalization and the enhancement of the digital economy.

In April 2011, the Union for a Popular Movement selected him as its candidate in the newly created Fifth constituency for French residents overseas (covering French citizens resident in Andorra, Monaco, Portugal and Spain) for the June 2012 legislative elections.

Besson expressed continued support for the use of nuclear energy and the export of French nuclear technology. On a visit to Japan's Fukushima Daiichi plant in 2012, the first by an overseas minister, Besson is reported to have said that nuclear energy was too important as an energy source to be abandoned. A study he commissioned on the future of France's energy mix by 2025 nevertheless listed various scenarios for ending reliance on nuclear energy among possible options.

Besson announced his retirement from national politics on 12 May 2012 and returned to the private sector. He retained his position of mayor of Donzère. Although he initially did not seek re-election as mayor, he once again ran for the position during the municipal elections in 2014 after the candidate he supported withdrew his candidacy for health reasons. Besson was re-elected in the first round with 61.49% of the votes.

Eric Besson Consulting was founded in 2012, advising energy and industrial production companies.

He is also a shareholder and member of the supervisory board of PayTop, a fintech start-up.

In 2016, he was elected to the board of Geocorail, an off-shore engineering company.

In July 2017, he became the president of the Blanc-Mesnil football club playing in the 5th French division. According to media reports, he plans to bring the club up to the professional level in 5 to 10 years and plans opening a sports academy by September 2018.

Besson was married from 1983–2009 to Sylvie Brunel, a geographer and writer and former president of Action Against Hunger, with whom he has three children. Their eldest child, Alexandra (born 1989), is a novelist.

Besson married Yasmine Tordjman in September 2010, an art student from Tunisia. She is the granddaughter of former Tunisian president Habib Bourguiba. In December 2012, the couple announced their intention to separate and divorced in 2015.

He married Jamila Azeroual in August 2015.

Éric Raoult (19 June 1955 – 16 April 2021) was a French politician, affiliated to The Republicans.

Raoult started his political career as aide to the mayor of Le Raincy, in 1983. He was first elected deputy in 1986.

In 1995, Raoult was Minister in charge of "integration and activities against exclusion". He was mayor of Le Raincy from 1995 until 2014.

Raoult was elected deputy for Seine-Saint-Denis in 2002, and reelected in 2007. He was the vice-president of the National Assembly. He lost his seat to Pascal Popelin in 2012.

During the 2005 civil unrest, Le Raincy was, although untouched by the riots, the first town to decree a curfew.

In 2007, Raoult voted against inscribing the abolition of capital punishment in the Constitution, advocating reserves for cases of "war, imminent danger or terrorist attacks".

In 2014, he was accused of sexual harassment by a former employee who claimed he had sent her 15,000 text messages in nine months. Eric Raoult acknowledged the text messages, but denied sexual harassment. In March 2014, he lost the election for mayor of Le Raincy to Jean-Michel Genestier.

Minister for Integration and the fight against exclusion. May–November 1995.

Minister Delegate to the Minister of Planning, City and Integration : November 1995 – 1997.

Vice-president of the National Assembly of France : 2002–2007.

Member of the National Assembly of France for Seine-Saint-Denis : 1986-1995 (Became minister in 1995) / Since 2002. Elected in 1986, reelected in 1988, 1993, 2002, 2007.

Regional councillor of Ile-de-France : 1992-2004 (Resignation). Reelected in 2004.

Mayor of Le Raincy : Since 1995. Reelected in 2001, 2008.

Deputy-mayor of Le Raincy : 1983–1995. Reelected in 1989.

Municipal councillor of Le Raincy : Since 1983. Reelected in 1989, 1995, 2001, 2008.

Établissement national des invalides de la marine (ENIM) (National Establishment for Marine Invalids) is a national public institution of France responsible for the special social security scheme for commercial, fishing, and yachting seamen.

Created in 1930 as a government agency, the ENIM became in 2010 a public administrative establishment. It is placed under the supervision of the ministers responsible for the Sea, Social Security, and the Budget and under the oversight of the new Directorate general for Maritime affairs, Fisheries and Aquaculture.

ENIM manages the special social security scheme for sailors and seafarers in the merchant marine, fishing fleet, marine farming and boating, with regard to the risks of old age, death, accidents at work and occupational diseases, illness, maternity and invalidity. It also ensures the taxation and collection of contributions and social security contributions ensuring the special social security regime for seafarers.

ENIM insures around 40,000 active sailors and around 120,000 pensioners in mainland France and overseas, their dependents as well as high school and university students studying at maritime educational establishments.

Headquarters is in Périgny. ENIM is also present in Saint-Malo (Department of Maritime Social Health Policies, Department of Maritime Social Policies in support of employers and the career of seafarers, and the Collection, Abuse, Fault and Fraud department (DRAFF); in Lorient (Department of Maritime Health Social Policies, Department of Maritime Social Policies of Health and Social Action and Prevention, and the Sub-Directorate for Information Systems; as well as in Paimpol (Department of Maritime Social Pension Policies).

The ENIM has a personnel cadre of 330 employees spread over the four geographical sites.

The Établissement public de sécurité ferroviaire (Public Railway Safety Establishment), abbreviated EPSF, is a public administrative body under the supervision of the Direction générale des infrastructures, des transports et des mobilités. It serves as France's national railway safety authority, in accordance with the provisions of EU Directive 2004/49/EC, which was repealed on June 16, 2020, by Directive 2016/798.

The EPSF functions independently of the Autorité de régulation des transports (ART), which is responsible for regulating the economic aspects of transport. While SNCF Réseau—France’s primary railway infrastructure manager—issues operational documentation that is binding for railway undertakings, the EPSF focuses on safety-related matters. It publishes informational resources, including procedures for rolling stock assistance, tunnel operations, and timetable compliance.

As the national railway safety authority, the EPSF is responsible for ensuring that the various entities involved in the French rail system—particularly railway undertakings (RUs) and infrastructure managers (IMs)—carry out their operational and management responsibilities safely.

The EPSF was established by Law No. 2006-10 of January 5, 2006, concerning transport safety and development. It operates under the supervision of the Minister of Transport. However, the Minister may only request that the EPSF's Managing Director re-examine a decision related to railway safety or interoperability in cases where there is a serious threat to public order or the continuity of public service. EPSF is placed under the financial supervision of the Minister for the Budget.

According to the French Transport Code, the EPSF is responsible for ensuring compliance with the rules governing the safety and interoperability of rail transport. This oversight is carried out at multiple levels, including the issuance of authorizations required to engage in railway activities, as well as through audits and inspections to verify that railway operators are fulfilling their responsibilities safely.

EPSF grants several types of operating authorizations, including:

Under the provisions of the European Union’s Fourth Railway Package—specifically Directives (EU) 2016/797 (“Interoperability”) and 2016/798 (“Safety”), implemented in France through Decree No. 2019-525 of May 27, 2019—the responsibilities for issuing single safety certificates and marketing authorizations for rail vehicles are shared between EPSF and the European Union Agency for Railways.

EPSF is also in charge of registering rail vehicles located in France and maintains the National Rail Vehicle Register. It has the authority to restrict, suspend, or withdraw authorizations if inspections or audits reveal non-compliance with the conditions under which those authorizations were granted. Furthermore, EPSF oversees the marketing of railway interoperability components within France.

Beyond its regulatory and oversight functions, EPSF also contributes to shaping the regulatory framework. It develops best practices, issues recommendations, and publishes technical documents to guide stakeholders in the railway sector.

EPSF is based in Amiens, where all its employees are grouped. In addition to a general secretariat and an information systems department, the organization of the establishment is structured into three departments covering the three main business lines:

EPSF has a twelve-member Board of Directors, including a government representative from the Conseil général de l'environnement et du développement durable, five ministerial representatives (Director of Transport Services, Director of Transport Infrastructures, Director of Enterprises, Director of Civil Security and Crisis Management, Director of the Budget), two members of parliament, two qualified personalities and two staff representatives.

The EPSF’s annual budget, approximately €13 million, is primarily funded by a state subsidy for public service obligations. Additional revenue comes from fees for processing applications and issuing licenses, such as the European train driver license.

The EPSF plays a critical role in maintaining France’s railway safety standards, aligning with EU regulations to ensure interoperability across Europe. According to a 2023 report by the International Union of Railways, France’s rigorous safety oversight, led by the EPSF, has contributed to one of the lowest railway accident rates in the EU. Major news outlets, such as Le Monde, have highlighted the EPSF’s role in modernizing safety protocols following high-profile rail incidents.

A Établissement public territorial de bassin, (Territorial basin public establishment or EPTB) is a French public entity responsible for the territorial planning and management of rivers and major watercourses within the geographical scope of a river basin or sub-basin. EPTBs operate as mixed syndicates or interdepartmental institutions, funded by the member local authorities.

The concept of EPTBs emerged in the late 20th century as part of France's efforts to enhance watershed-level water governance. The term was first formalized in 1997 by the Syndicat Mixte d'Études et d'Aménagement de la Garonne (SMEAG) for the Garonne River basin. The legal foundation for EPTBs was established under Article 46 of Law No. 2003-699 of 30 July 2003, which focused on the prevention of technological and natural risks and the remediation of damages.

Further legal reinforcement came with the Grenelle II Law (Law No. 2010-788) of 12 July 2010, which emphasized sustainable development and environmental protection. This legislation expanded the responsibilities of EPTBs, particularly in implementing water development and management plans (Schémas d’Aménagement et de Gestion des Eaux, or SAGE) under specific conditions.

EPTBs have authority in three main areas:

EPTBs operate across territories that often span multiple departments, regions, or even countries, fostering solidarity and acting as key players in territorial planning.

The Grenelle II Law of 2010 clarified that EPTBs implement the Schéma directeur d'aménagement et de gestion des eaux (SAGE) under specific conditions, such as recognition through the decree of 7 February 2005 or when the SAGE perimeter aligns with the EPTB’s jurisdiction without overlapping other local authority groupings.

As of 2023, France has established 42 EPTBs, each overseeing specific river basins or sub-basins. Notable examples include:

An établissement public à caractère industriel et commercial (French pronunciation: [ etablismɑ̃ pyblik a kaʁaktɛʁ ɛ̃dystʁijɛl e kɔmɛʁsjal ], EPIC ; lit. ' public institution of an industrial and commercial nature ') is, in France, a category of public undertaking. It includes state-controlled entities of an industrial or commercial nature, including some research institutes and infrastructure operators. Some former French colonies, such as Algeria, Burkina Faso and Mauritania also use this term for such agencies.

EPICs were first recognized as a specific form of public agencies by the Court of Arbitration's (French: Tribunal des conflits) case law in 1921. In accordance with Article 34 of the French Constitution, they can only be created by a law. Not every company whose capital is held by the state or a state-owned entity is an EPIC. An EPIC is under special laws which do not apply to enterprises under private company law, even if the capital of those companies is held by the state.

Former public service operations which have been turned into companies governed by private law include:

Étang de Lavalduc, or La Valduc, is a saltwater lagoon with varying levels of salinity in the Mediterranean Sea, west of the Étang de Berre and north of Fos-sur-Mer. The property belonging to the Salins du Midi company, which has made it a storage tank for brine. It is located in three municipalities: Saint-Mitre-les-Remparts, Istres and Fos-sur-Mer, Bouches-du-Rhône. Its coloring of an iridescent pink blue is due to the presence of small crustaceans such as Artemia salina.

Located at an average altitude of about 10 m below sea level, it is the lowest point in France.

The Étang de Lavalduc is, along with the Étang de Pourra, the Étang de Citis, the Étang de Engrenier, the Étang de Rassuen and the Étang de Estomac, part of the five ponds grouped between the Étang de Berre and the Gulf of Fos in the Mediterranean, near the plain of La Crau and the Parc naturel régional de Camargue.

The lagoon is located inside a basin of 2.5 x 1.750 km, formed by hydro-wind and even snow-wind, which it almost completely fills. It is the result of the action of snow and the mistral at the end of the Riss glaciation. A permanent body of water, at variable level, therefore with a fluctuating surface area, it is supplied regularly by injections of industrial brine. It is part of the municipalities of Istres, Saint-Mitre-les-Remparts and Fos-sur-Mer, according to a demarcation kept in the municipal archives of Saint-Miter, dated 15 April 1551. It is bordered by the east and west by hills covered with scrubland and pine forests. To the south and north, there are palustrine formations and elements of riparian forests.

A natural receptacle, it received from the Fanfarigoule, a source located north of the pond, so much water in 1960 that its level rose by three meters. The place is considered by geographers as the one where evaporation is the strongest in France. The Compagnie des Salins du Midi, which owned it, had to drain it in 1969 by pumping the water out into the sea through a canal that was once used. An underground channel was then built to divert water from the Crau. It connects to the Étang de Cities and, formerly, an open-air channel made it possible to supply Rassuen with the help of a fire pump. Archimedes' screws brought the water up to the western plateau, between the ponds of Estomac and Lavalduc.

In 1821, on Christmas Eve, a tidal wave six meters high, which lasted five days, brought the Mediterranean into the Étang de Engrenier and Lavalduc. During the earthquake of 1909, the waters of the important hydrological network of Crau significantly increased the supply of fresh water.

The salinity of the Étang de Lavalduc is artificial, since it comes from the brine injected by underground pipes from the oil silos at Manosque. In 1984, it was 360 g l − 1, i.e. 97% saturated (seawater from 2 to 6% with 35 g l − 1; the Dead Sea at 27.5% with 275 g l − 1). This brine is reserved for chemical use and not suitable for consumption, which represents 3,000,000 m (110,000,000 cu ft) stored in the Étang de Engrenier and Lavalduc.

Although watertight, and nothing proving the existence of a channel in antiquity, or that the ensemble formed with Engrenier constituted a deep cove, the two Étangs were salted and constituted an exploited reserve. The only reasonable explanation to date and proven by historical facts is that of a periodic supply by "salivades", that is to say seawater inflows during high tides or storms. This proposition is confirmed by Denizot, who mentions in particular a storm in 1821.

On the north shore of the Étang de Lavalduc, traces of saline largely emerged. Likewise on the planar isthmus of Aren that separates Lavalduc d'Engrenier.

On 12 March 2007, a sealing problem on a wellhead sent fuel oil to a retention basin, which in turn sent hydrocarbons in the leaching brine in the Étang de Engrenier and Lavalduc.

Étienne de Silhouette (5 July 1709 – 20 January 1767) was a French Ancien Régime Controller-General of Finances under Louis XV.

Sometimes said to be akin to the next Niccolò Machiavelli, he was born at Limoges where his father Chevalier Arnaud de Silhouette, of Biarritz or de Zulueta (in Basque), had been posted as a Bourbon administrator. De Silhouette studied finance and economics assiduously and spent a year in London learning about the economy of Britain.

He translated into French several works by Alexander Pope, Henry Bolingbroke, William Warburton 's The Alliance between Church and State, (1736) as Dissertations sur l'Union de la Religion, de la Morale, et de la Politique (1742) and Baltasar Gracián 's El político. The Prince of Condé 's party later used his translations from English to criticize him, but Madame de Pompadour 's support and vision saw him awarded with the position of Controller-General on 4 March 1759; this was one of the most extensive administrative positions in the Ancien Régime, albeit a very unstable one. His task was to curb France's spiralling deficit and strengthen the finances for the Seven Years' War against Britain (1754–1763). Public opinion preferred his 72-million- livres public loan to the ferme générale, an outsourced tax collection system. He managed to curtail Royal household expenditure, revised state pensions and to encourage free trade he reduced some ancient taxes whilst establishing new ones in accordance with the vision of a unified French market.

De Silhouette forecast a bleak budget for 1760: income of 286 million livres compared to expenses of 503 million livres, including at least 94 million in debt service. In an attempt to restore the kingdom's finances by the English method of taxing the rich and privileged (nobility and church were exempt from taxes in the Ancien Régime), de Silhouette devised the "general subvention," i.e., taxes on external signs of wealth (doors and windows, farms, luxury goods, servants, profits). On 26 October, he took the war measure of ordering the melting down of goldware and silverware. He was criticized by the nobility including Voltaire, who thought his measures, though theoretically beneficial, were not suitable for wartime and the French political situation.

On 20 November 1759, after eight months in the position, he left the court and retired to Bry-sur-Marne, where he set about improving the budget. After his death in 1767, his nephew and heir Clément de Laage completed his work.

Despite Étienne de Silhouette's short tenure as Treasury Chief, it caused him to become the subject of hostility. His penny-pinching manner led the term à la Silhouette to be applied to things perceived as cheap or austere.

During this period an art form of growing popularity was a shadow profile cut from black paper. It provided a simple and inexpensive alternative for those who could not afford more decorative and expensive forms of portraiture, such as painting or sculpture. Those who considered it cheap attached the word "silhouette" to it. This art-form is still practiced and named silhouette cutting, or art, to this day.

Despite his name being applied to the silhouette art form, Étienne de Silhouette ironically has no portraits in existence, not even a silhouette. Although several portraits were created depicting Silhouette, all were oil paintings destroyed during the French Revolution.

In the Belgian and French colonial empires, an évolué (French pronunciation: [ evɔlɥe ], lit. 'evolved one' or 'developed one') was an African who had been Europeanised through education and assimilation and had accepted European values and patterns of behaviour. Évolués spoke French and followed European rather than indigenous laws, usually held white-collar jobs (though rarely higher than clerks), and lived primarily in urban areas.

In the Belgian Congo (modern-day Democratic Republic of the Congo), most évolués emerged from the Congolese who filled skilled positions (such as clerks and nurses) made available by the economic boom in the country following World War II. Colonial administrators defined an évolué as "a man having broken social ties with his group, [and] having entered another system of motivations, another system of values." While there were no universal criteria for determining évolué status, it was generally accepted that one would have "a good knowledge of French, adhere to Christianity, and have some form of post-primary education."

Early on in their history, most évolués sought to use their unique status to earn special privileges in the Congo. They asked that the colonial administration recognize their role as mediators between the Belgians and the native "savages." On 12 July 1948, the Governor-General of the Belgian Congo issued an ordinance creating the carte de mérite civique (civic merit card), which could be granted to any Congolese who had no criminal record, did not practice polygamy, abandoned traditional religion, and had some degree of education.

French literacy was required except for those persons who had served 20 years as a customary chief or who had provided "good and faithful service" for 25 years in the administration. Cardholders were given an improved legal status and were exempt from certain restrictions on travel into European districts. Of the thousands of évolué s in the Congo, only a small proportion of them earned a carte. In 1957 there were 1,557 cardholders.

There was discontent about the limited nature of the privileges attached to the carte de mérite civique ; so in 1952, the colonial administration introduced the carte d'immatriculation, which granted to those who obtained it full legal equality with Europeans. The latter card was much more difficult to obtain. One who sought to obtain it had to have a letter of recommendation from his employer and pass an evaluation. The evaluation was administered by an investigative commission, which would visit a candidate in his home, examine his household items such as linen and silverware, and ascertain if he ate with his wife at the table and communicated with his children in French. After this, a candidate and his wife had to appear before the head magistrate of the provincial court to answer a series of questions. By 1958 only 217 Congolese had been awarded a carte d'immatriculation. Most évolué s found immatriculation irritating and by the mid-1950s, the project was thoroughly discredited.

Since opportunities for upward social mobility through the colonial structure were limited, the évolué class institutionally manifested itself through clubs and associations. Through these groups they could enjoy trivial privileges that made them feel distinct from the Congolese "masses". In 1947, there were 110 social clubs consisting of 5,609 members throughout the Congo's cities. From 1952 to 1956, the number of clubs rose from 131 to 317, with their membership increasing from 7,661 to 15,345.

Most of these associations were rather small, but some eventually grew in size to encompass entire regions and ethnic groups, such as the Alliance des Bakongo. Évolué s organised most of the educational opportunities for women in the Belgian Congo, since the colonial government put little effort into such ventures.

By 1958, colonial officials estimated that there were 175,000 people who could be classed as évolués in the colony. In the final years leading up to independence, évolués played a major role in colonial propaganda as they were felt to exemplify the success of the Belgian civilizing mission begun under King Leopold II. In particular, it was felt that after independence, the assimilation of European values by the évolués meant that Belgian civilian inhabitants of the Congo could continue to live in the Congo as part of a culturally European multiracial state.

Over time many évolué s grew disillusioned with their attempts to assimilate with European culture, as it did not lead to full equality and the elimination of discrimination they sought. As this occurred, many became politically active and began pushing for Congolese independence from Belgium.

The évolué system was also present in French Africa. Well-known évolués include Léopold Sédar Senghor, the first president of Senegal, and Félix Houphouët-Boigny, who held multiple ministerial posts in France and later became the first president of Ivory Coast.

The history of Paris dates back to approximately 259 BC, with the Parisii, a Celtic tribe settled on the banks of the Seine. In 52 BC, the fishermen village was conquered by the Romans, founding a Gallo-Roman town called Lutetia.

The city changed its name to Paris during the fourth century. During this period, the city was threatened by Attila the Hun and his army, and according to the legend, the inhabitants of Paris resisted the attacks thanks to the providential intervention of Saint Geneviève (patron saint of the city).

In 508 the first king of the Franks, Clovis I, made Paris the capital of his empire. In 987, the Capetian dynasty came to power until 1328.

During the eleventh century, Paris gradually became more prosper thanks to its trade in silver and because it was a strategic route for pilgrims and traders.

At the beginning of the twelfth century, the first university in France was founded thanks to the uprisings of students and professors. Louis IX appointed the chaplain, Robert de Sorbon, to establish the College, which was later named after him, the Sorbonne.

Three insurrections took place during the fourteenth century in Paris: the first, in 1358, when Étienne Marcel led a merchant revolt. The second was a tax riot known as the Maillot uprising in 1382, and the third was the Cabochien revolt in 1413. These riots were part of the Hundred Years’ War.

Additionally, the capital of France, which was the most populated city in Europe in 1328, was struck by the Bubonic plague, killing thousands of Parisians. Following the Hundred Years’ War, Paris was devastated and Joan of Arc was unable to keep the British from taking Paris. In 1431, Henry VI of England was crowned King of France and the English did not leave until 1436.

The city kept on growing during the following centuries, although monarchs preferred to live in the Loire Valley. In 1528, King Francis I returned the royal residence to Paris and the city became the largest in Western Europe.  

On 24 August, 1572, the royal council decided to assassinate the leaders of the Protestants (Hugonotes), which lead to Catholic mobs butchering protestants in Paris. Known as St. Bartholomew’s Day Massacre, it spread from Paris to the rest of the country during the following months.

Margaret of Valois, sister of King Charles IX, married Henri of Navarre (Head of the Huguenots dynasty) that same year, while Henry III tried to find a solution to the conflicts between the Catholics and Protestants. However, in 1588, the French Catholics forced Henry III to flee on the so-called Day of the Barricades and killed him a year later. He was succeeded by Henry of Navarre, becoming King Henry IV. A decade later, Henry IV decided to convert to Catholicism and was crowned King of France in 1594.

In 1648, the second Day of the Barricades took place when the Parisians opposed the King due to the deplorable level of poverty. This was the beginning of a long uprising called the Fronde parlementaire, a serie of civil wars that took place in France between 1648 and 1662. Fifteen years later, King Louis XVI moved the royal residence to Versailles.

As a consequence of the Fronde, poverty spread throughout Paris. During this period, there was an explosion of the Enlightenment philosophical movement, whose principles are based on reason, equality and freedom.

Philosophers and authors such as Voltaire, Rousseau, Diderot and Montesquieu fostered the Enlightenment, creating a need for a socio-economic equality that led to the revolution and the decline of the divine right monarchy.

On the 14 July 1789, the Parisians stormed the Bastille, symbol of the royal authority and on the 3 September 1791, the first written Constitution was created and approved by King Louis XVI. The King and ministers made up the executive branch and the Monarch was allowed a suspensive veto of the laws approved by the National Assembly.

On 10 August, 1792, the Parisians attacked the Tuileries Palace and the National Assembly suspended the King’s constitutional rights. The new parliament abolished the monarchy and proclaimed the Republic. As a consequence, on 17 August 1795, a new constitution was approved giving the executive power to a Directory.

The new Constitution was not accepted by monarchic groups and Jacobins. Several uprisings took place in Paris, but were all repressed by the army.

Nevertheless, on 9 November 1799, the army was unable to crush the coup d’état led by Napoleon Bonaparte, which overthrew the Directory and replaced it by the Consulate, Napoleon being First Consul.  

During the following fifteen years, Napoleon enlarged the Place du Carrousel, built two Arcs de Triomphe, a column, several markets, the Paris bourse and a few slaughter houses.

The Napoleonic Wars – and with it the Empire of Napoleon – ended on 20 November 1815, after Napoleon had been defeated at the Battle of Waterloo, and the second Treaty of Paris of 1815 was signed.

Once Napoleon had been defeated, France experienced great political uncertainty until Napoleon’s nephew organized a coup d’état in 1851 and became Emperor Napoleon III. During the following seventeen years, Napoleon III promoted the city’s urban development.

During this period and with Baron Haussmann as the prefect of Paris, the city changed its urban structure, rebuilding the center, knocking down its fortification and expanding the metropolitan territory.

On the 28 January 1871, Paris was conquered by the Prussian troops and a few years later (at the end of 1800), the Third Republic was proclaimed. With the new government, an era of economic growth began for the city, promoting in 1889 the construction of the Eiffel Tower, worldwide symbol of Paris.

From the twentieth century on, Paris suffered important changes with the reconstruction of different neighborhoods, many damaged during World War I and World War II.

During World War I, the city resisted the German offensives. However, in 1940, Paris was occupied by the Nazis, although the Parisians resisted and freed the capital on 25 August 1944.

During the war against Algeria, several violent manifestations took place in Paris against the war, with numerous attacks by the OAS (Organisation of the Secret Army).

During the months of May and June 1968, a series of protests took place in the capital of France, known as “May 68”. This was the largest student protest in the history of France and, possibly, the rest of Western Europe.

One of the last riots to take place in Paris was in March 2006, when students poured out onto the streets and protested against the labour market reform.

In November 2015, Paris witnessed a tragic event, several terrorist attacks hit the city and the suburbs of Saint-Denis, killing 137 people and injuring 415. 

History is written by the victors, it’s said. Certainly, much of what we know about the early story of Paris dates from the conquest of Gaul under Julius Caesar, who wrote about the capital of the Parisii tribe on an island in the Seine in 53 BC.

But we know from archaeological evidence – particularly dugout canoes discovered at Bercy, east of the city centre – that people were living in the area by at least 4000 BC.

That discovery highlights a key point about Paris – the importance of the river in the city’s early development and through the millennia.

The Seine is navigable from deep in the heart of France, past Paris and all the way north to the English Channel, and from there you can reach the the Atlantic. It provides an excellent route for trade and transport.

Perhaps unsurprisingly then, from the city’s earliest days through the Roman period into the Middle Ages, the most important people here were the boatmen.

It’s also crucial to observe that there was a road running north-south in prehistoric times, roughly following the line of today’s Rue Saint-Denis north of the Seine, and the Rue Saint-Jacques on the southern bank.

Today, there are two islands in the middle of the Seine: the Île de la Cité on which Notre-Dame Cathedral stands and, just upstream, the Île Saint-Louis.

In past times, there were quite a few islands in what was a marshy, boggy area. The Romans called the settlement Lutetia, using a word that was probably Gaulish as well as Latin: lutum, meaning mud. But that muddiness and those islands meant that it could be traversed, and it became a crossroads.

The Roman city was laid out on the Île de la Cité and in what’s now the Latin Quarter, the fifth arrondissement on the Left Bank, plus the two islands.

For the first four or five centuries of its existence, it was a modest, provincial place within greater Gaul, the capital of which was Lyon. It was mainly a transport hub and, being set back a bit from the German frontier, something of a garrison town. At its peak, it may have been home to 8,000 or so people, but it was never a great Roman city.

After a period of decline following a series of attacks by Germanic peoples, including latterly the Franks, the Romans left in the late fifth century AD. Almost all Roman buildings were then lost; parts of the thermal baths remained, and became incorporated into the medieval monastery that now forms the core of the Cluny Museum of the Middle Ages.

Others were rediscovered in the 19th century, notably the amphitheatre now known as the Arènes de Lutèce. But for 1500 years of Paris's history, there were virtually no visible remains of the Roman city.

In AD 508, not long after the Romans finally departed, the Frankish King Clovis named Paris as his capital. He established the dominance of the Franks, who ruled France throughout the Middle Ages. Despite this, Paris remained a small city for several more centuries until the dawn of the Frankish Capetian dynasty, founded by Hugh Capet in AD 987.

As the Capetian dynasty grew in importance – subjugating the Angevin and Plantagenet dynasties in western France, absorbing the Normans, and expanding its kingdom across most of southern France – so did Paris.

From the 12th and 13th centuries, the city became the intellectual hub of western Europe owing to the growth of the University of Paris.

Initially, teachers lectured to groups of young men in the streets; gradually learning became institutionalised. The Sorbonne was founded first, in 1253, followed by the other colleges of the university. Most of those were destroyed or used for other purposes after the French Revolution, but Paris remained a collegiate city.

The area of the Left Bank around the Sorbonne later became known as the Latin Quarter, from the idea that only Latin – the language of instruction – was spoken by the students here.

This district also became the centre of book production. Manuscripts were illuminated here; once printing presses were introduced in the 15th century, it became a hotbed of publishing. Even today, if you walk around the Latin Quarter you’ll see the headquarters of big publishing houses.

This added an extra dimension to the city: it was already a trading centre, a political centre, a religious centre – construction of the great cathedral of Notre-Dame had begun on the Île de la Cité in 1163 – and now it was an intellectual centre.

The Capetians were a lucky dynasty. For generations they produced male heirs – but in 1328, their luck ran out. The resulting succession dispute sparked a grim period in Parisian history and French history more generally.

On one side were supporters of a collateral line of the Capetians, the Valois; on the other side, the English who, through marriage, also had a claim to the French throne. Less than ten years after the death of the last Capetian king, Charles IV, tussles between competing claimants sparked the Hundred Years’ War.

It was during this conflict that the English crushed the French military machine at the battle of Agincourt in 1415, leading to the Treaty of Troyes five years later – in which it was agreed Henry V of England (or his heirs) would inherit the French throne on the death of Charles VI of France. And so it came to pass when, in 1431, Henry VI of England was crowned King of France. Paris was occupied by the English for 15 years from 1420, but they lost control of the city in 1435.

Paris had endured a tough time, with an economic depression and, in 1348, the Black Death, which wiped out perhaps half of the population. The city only really started reviving at the end of the 15th century, with the cultural flourishing of the Renaissance.

The Renaissance saw Paris expand, with many great buildings raised during the 16th and 17th centuries.

The Louvre, originally built as a defensive fortress, was converted into a royal palace in 1546. The magnificent Renaissance Hôtel de Ville (City Hall) was built in the 16th century (and though it was burned down during the Paris Commune, the brief revolutionary government of 1871, it was rebuilt in the same style).

The Hôtel des Invalides was commissioned in 1670 to care for wounded soldiers. It wasn’t just buildings, but the streets themselves: both the Champs-Elysées and the great square now called the Place de la Concorde, originally the Place Louis XV, were both developed in the 18th century.

The Reformation divided France, leading to a series of internal conflicts that would become known as the French Wars of Religion. Paris – which was strongly Catholic – was particularly resistant to the accession of the Protestant King Henry IV in 1589 until his conversion to Catholicism in 1593. It was Henry IV who founded the French Bourbon dynasty, which lasted to the French Revolution and even beyond.

Louis XIV, who reigned from 1643 to 1715 and became known as the Sun King, put Paris at the heart of his plans.

Louis thought of himself as the greatest ruler in western Europe – he wanted his capital to reflect his glory, to be seen as the new Rome. He instructed his first minister, Jean-Baptiste Colbert, to plough money into building projects.

It was in his reign that the east front was added to the Louvre, and of course Louis’ opulent palace was built at Versailles, where he spent most of his time.

Paris also became one of the great consumerist centres – a place where fashion and luxury items were created and sold, attracting the elite of western Europe. Fashion houses sprang up along the Rue Saint-Honoré, producing new designs for each of two annual seasons, much as they do today.

Already a major intellectual centre, Paris became a focal point of the Enlightenment. New ideas were discussed in academies, in printing houses, at salons in private houses, and in coffee-houses.

You can still get an idea of this mental ferment at cafés such as the Procope, where Voltaire and many of the big names of the 18th-century intellectual world went to drink coffee and talk.

Many in Paris did not share a life of indulgence or intellect, and in 1789, ordinary people’s dissatisfaction at the ancien régime, the political system that had controlled France since the Middle Ages, boiled over into revolution.

On 14 July, insurgents stormed the Bastille, where political prisoners were held. Less than a month later, on 10 August, Louis XVI and his family were seized in the Tuileries Palace; he was executed by guillotine in 1793. The monarchy was ousted; the First Republic was founded.

The popular classes of Paris were fundamental to the uprising – the yeast of revolution, if you like. And this urge to rebel resurfaced again and again in the first half of the 19th century, with two more revolutions in 1830 and 1848.

So when Napoleon III’s prefect, Georges-Eugène Haussmann, launched his sweeping redevelopment of Paris in 1854, driving his great boulevards through the old city, it was no accident that he demolished hundreds of tenements and other homes of poorer citizens, driving them out to the suburbs. The centre was reclaimed by the bourgeoisie.

The aggrandisement of Paris continued through the golden years of the Belle Époque, through the end of the 19th and into the early 20th century. The city witnessed a blossoming of art, fashion, theatre, music; the Folies Bergère opened, then the Moulin Rouge. It was a wonderful time – for the wealthy.

In 1914, the money ran out – and the luck. Paris was nearly invaded during the First World War, and even after the armistice of 1918, the city remained poor, with little in the way of public building works.

In 1940, during the Second World War, France fell; the Third Republic was overthrown, the puppet Vichy regime was installed, and Paris was essentially occupied by the Nazis.

France came out of the Second World War possibly even poorer than it did after the First World War, and though intellectually it remained strong – think of Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir and their fellow existentialists working on the Left Bank in the late 1940s – it wasn’t till the 1950s and sixties that Paris really got its mojo back.

Today, Paris is again one of the most desirable destinations in the world. Over more than 20 centuries, and despite plenty of bumps in the road, the “city of mud” has comprehensively transformed into the “city of light”.

Most visitors to Paris make a beeline for the Louvre, and rightly so: the palace houses one of the world’s great art collections. But while you’re there, consider a stop at a site that came to light far more recently.

During the major renovation project at the Louvre in the 1980s and 90s, when the glass pyramid was installed, a shopping mall was built beneath it – the Carrousel du Louvre. And it was during these excavations that workers discovered the foundations of the walls built by King Charles V in the 14th century, during the Hundred Years’ War with England, to bolster the existing fortifications.

The remnants, incorporated into the shopping centre, are massive, reminding us of the military aspect of this city, which needed to be defended from attack over many centuries. They also demonstrate just how small medieval Paris was – this bulwark marked the western boundary of the walled city.

In 1794, towards the end of the bloody period of the French Revolution known as ‘the Terror’, a plot of land seized from a convent was put to use as a cemetery. In early summer that year, the guillotine had been set up in the nearby Place de la Nation; dozens of people were being executed daily, and the bodies were piling up.

So the revolutionaries dug big pits at Picpus, into which they threw the bodies – and severed heads – of 1,306 victims of the guillotine executed between 14 June and 27 July.

The corpses were covered with lime and, at the end of that frantic period of guillotining, the pits were filled in. Then, from the late 19th century, aristocrats acquired the land, which became a private cemetery in which only descendants of those guillotined could be interred, including many elite French families.

A visit to Picpus provides an extraordinary snapshot not just of the revolution, but also of French political life over the centuries that followed. You might find a memorial to an aristocrat executed in June 1794, then one to his descendant killed in the First World War, or one who was deported and died in a Nazi concentration camp.

Paris’s sizeable Roman arena, the Arènes de Lutèce, was lost for centuries, rediscovered during construction of a tram depot in the 1860s, then excavated and restored in the 1880s and 90s.

Only fragments of the actual structure remained, but the shape and extent was clear: a huge amphitheatre, more than 130 metres across, that could hold some 15,000 spectators for shows including animal fights and gladiatorial contests.

It was built from the late first century AD, about 150 years after the Romans completed their conquest of Gaul and began to recon- struct the city they named Lutetia, on and around the Île de la Cité in the river Seine.

Today, the arena and the thermal baths that are now part of the nearby Cluny Museum are the only major monuments surviving from the Roman era. Stroll through a little covered passageway between shops on the Rue Monge, and you’ll discover an oasis of calm.

This street, running parallel to the Seine north of the Louvre, was the birthplace of consumerist culture – the place where the idea of ‘fashion’ and haute couture was created.

It’s where Rose Bertin, dressmaker to Marie-Antoinette, opened her shop in 1773, and many of the big fashion houses are still found here. But it’s an ancient street, so you’ll also come across several monuments to older times.

For example, you’ll see a plaque commemorating Joan of Arc’s attempt to capture Paris during the siege of the city in September 1429, when she was wounded by a crossbow bolt.

A little farther down the road, just north of the Place de la Concorde, you’ll find a plaque recording where the revolutionary leader Maximilien Robespierre lived between 1791 and 1794. So a stroll down the Rue Saint-Honoré reveals an interesting and reflective slice of Parisian life over the centuries.

In 1974, author Georges Perec wrote a short book – a pamphlet, really – titled Tentative d’épuisement d’un lieu parisien (An Attempt at Exhausting a Place in Paris). It was an account of what he saw while sitting in a cafe on the Place Saint-Sulpice, a large square on the Left Bank near the Jardin du Luxembourg.

In many ways it’s very basic: people board a bus, a man walks past with a plastic bag, pigeons take off, there’s a bit of rain, and so on. But it reveals a sort of Paris without Paris – without the history, without the great sights and monuments, just letting the bustle be the spectacle.

Paris can feel very planned, thanks to Baron Haussmann’s ambitious rebuilding project of the mid-19th century that created so many wide, straight boulevards. But when you visit, you feel as if you’re making your own city.

Sitting in the Café de la Mairie on the Place Saint-Sulpice, imagining yourself as Georges Perec watching the city go by, is a wonderfully satisfying way to experience Paris. While there, admire the impressive church of Saint-Sulpice, the capital’s second-largest (after Notre-Dame), built over the course of more than a century from 1646. Its strikingly lofty interior features fonts made from the shells of a giant clam, and wonderful murals by Eugène Delacroix.

Before Paris, there was Lutetia. In the 3rd century BC, the Gaulish Parisii settled on the banks of the Seine, around the Île de la Cité. Conquered by Rome in the 1st century BC, the city gained baths, a forum and an amphitheatre on the Left Bank. It is the name of the people, not of the Roman city, that eventually gave "Paris."

In the Middle Ages, Paris became the largest city in Christian Europe. Royal power settled on the Île de la Cité, commerce on the Right Bank (Place de Grève, today's Hôtel de Ville) and learning on the Left Bank, with the birth of the University in the 12th century, hence the "Latin Quarter." The building of Notre-Dame began in 1163, and King Philip Augustus had a fortress built to defend the Seine: the Louvre.

From the Renaissance to the Enlightenment, Paris was embellished: the Place des Vosges (1612), the Pont-Neuf, Les Invalides, the first grand mansions of the Marais. The city became a capital of arts, salons and the ideas that would lead to 1789.

On 14 July 1789, the storming of the Bastille changed history. Paris became the epicentre of the Revolution: the Conciergerie turned into the antechamber of the guillotine, the Place de la Concorde into a place of execution. It is one of the periods Timescope reconstructed in its early days, with the historian Héloïse Bocher.

Under Napoleon III, Baron Haussmann radically transformed the city: wide boulevards, uniform buildings, parks, sewers, stations. Much of medieval, insalubrious Paris disappeared. The century ended in apotheosis with the 1889 World's Fair and its contested star: the Eiffel Tower.

The Roaring Twenties, the Occupation and the Liberation, the great cultural projects (Pompidou, the Louvre and its pyramid, the BnF): the 20th century made Paris a world capital of culture. The city keeps reinventing itself, from the pedestrianised riverbanks to the 2024 Games.


The 1st arrondissement of Paris (I arrondissement) is one of the 20 arrondissements of the capital city of France. In spoken French, this arrondissement is colloquially referred to as le premier (the first). It is governed locally together with the 2nd, 3rd and 4th arrondissement, with which it forms the 1st sector of Paris (Paris-Centre).

Also known as Louvre, the arrondissement is situated principally on the right bank of the River Seine. It also includes the west end of the Île de la Cité. The locality is one of the oldest areas in Paris, the Île de la Cité having been the heart of the city of Lutetia, conquered by the Romans in 52 BC, while some parts on the right bank (including Les Halles) date back to the early Middle Ages.

It is the least populated of the city's arrondissements and one of the smallest by area, with a land area of only 1.83 km (0.705 sq. miles, or 451 acres). In 2023, it had a population of 15,114. A significant part of the area is occupied by the Louvre Museum and the Tuileries Gardens. The Forum des Halles is the largest shopping mall in Paris. Much of the remainder of the arrondissement is dedicated to business and administration.

The area now occupied by the first arrondissement attained its peak population in the period preceding the re-organization of Paris in 1860. In 1999, the arrondissement hosted 63,056 jobs, making it one of the most active for business after the 2nd, 8th, and 9th.

An immigrant is a person born in a foreign country not having French citizenship at birth. An immigrant may have acquired French citizenship since moving to France, but is still considered an immigrant in French statistics. On the other hand, persons born in France with foreign citizenship (the children of immigrants) are not listed as immigrants.

Each of the 20 Paris arrondissements is divided into four quarters (quartiers). The table below lists the four quarters of the 1st arrondissement:

Korean Air 's France office is in the 1st arrondissement.

At one time Air Inter 's head office was located in the first arrondissement. When Minerve, an airline, existed, its head office was in the first arrondissement.

In terms of state-operated schools, the first arrondissement has two nursery schools (écoles maternelles), two primary schools (écoles élémentaires), one école polyvalente, one high school (collège), and one sixth-form college (lycée).

The state-operated nursery schools are École Maternelle Auxerrois and École Maternelle Sourdiere. The state-operated primary schools are École Élémentaire Arbre Sec and École Élémentaire D'Argenteuil. The arrondissement has one école polyvalente, École Polyvalente Cambon. Collège Jean-Baptiste Poquelin is the sole state-operated high school in the arrondissement. Lycée Professionnel Commercial Pierre Lescot is the sole state-operated sixth-form college in the first arrondissement. Private primary and secondary institutions in the arrondissement include École Élémentaire Privée Notre-Dame-Saint-Roch, École du 2nd Degré Professionnel Privée Pigier, and École Technologique Privée de Dessin Technique et Artistique Sornas.

The Île-de-France (/ ˌ iː l d ə ˈ f r ɒ̃ s / ; French: [ il də fʁɑ̃s ] ; lit. ' Island of France ') is the most populous of the eighteen regions of France, with an official estimated population of 12,271,794 residents on 1 January 2023. Containing the capital city of France, Paris, it is located in the north-central part of the country and often called the Paris Region (French: Région parisienne, pronounced [ ʁeʒjɔ̃ paʁizjɛn ]). Île-de-France is densely populated and retains a prime economic position on the national stage. It covers 12,012 square kilometres (4,638 square miles), about 2% of metropolitan French territory. Its 2017 population was nearly one-fifth of the national total.

The region is made up of eight administrative departments : Paris, Essonne, Hauts-de-Seine, Seine-Saint-Denis, Seine-et-Marne, Val-de-Marne, Val-d'Oise and Yvelines. It was created as the "District of the Paris Region" in 1961. In 1976, when its status was aligned with the French administrative regions created in 1972, it was renamed after the historic province of Île-de-France. Residents are sometimes referred to as Franciliens, an administrative word created in the 1980s. The GDP of the region in 2019 was nearly one-third of the total for France, and 5% of the European Union's. It has the highest per capita GDP of any French region.

Beyond the city limits of Paris, the region has many other important historic sites, including the palaces of Versailles and Fontainebleau, as well as the most-visited tourist attraction in France, Disneyland Paris. Although it is the richest French region, a significant number of residents live in poverty. The official poverty rate in the Île-de-France was 15.9% in 2015. The region has witnessed increasing income inequality in recent decades, and rising housing prices have pushed the less affluent outside Paris.

Although the modern name Île-de-France literally means Island of France, its etymology is unclear. Despite its name, the region itself is not an island. The "island" may refer to the land between the rivers Oise, Marne and Seine, or it may also have been a reference to the Île de la Cité, where the French royal palace and cathedral were located.

Alternatively, the name may refer to the lands that were under the direct rule of the Capetian kings during the Middle Ages ; thus, the lands were an "island" in a sea of various feudal territories ruled by vassals of the king.

The Île-de-France was inhabited by the Parisii, a sub-tribe of the Celtic Senones, from around the middle of the 3rd-century BC. One of the area's major north–south trade routes crossed the Seine on the île de la Cité ; the meeting place of land and water trade routes gradually became an important trading centre. The Parisii traded with many river towns (some as far away as the Iberian Peninsula) and minted their own coins for that purpose.

The Romans conquered the area in 52 BC and began their settlement on Paris's Left Bank. It became a prosperous city with a forum, baths, temples, theatres, and an amphitheatre. Christianity was introduced in the middle of the 3rd century AD by Saint Denis, the first Bishop of Paris. According to legend, when Denis refused to renounce his faith before Roman authorities, he was beheaded on the hill that became known as Mons Martyrum (Latin "Hill of Martyrs"), later " Montmartre ". The legend further states that Denis walked headless from this hill to the north of the city. The place that he finally fell and was buried became an important religious shrine, the Basilica of Saint-Denis.

Clovis the Frank, the first king of the Merovingian dynasty, made the city his capital in 508. As the Frankish domination of Gaul began, there was a gradual immigration by the Franks to Paris and the Parisian Francien dialects were born. Fortification of the Île de la Cité failed to avert sacking by Vikings in 845, but Paris's strategic importance—with its bridges preventing ships from passing—was established by successful defence in the Siege of Paris (885–86). In 987, Hugh Capet, Count of Paris (comte de Paris) and Duke of the Franks (duc des Francs), was elected King of the Franks (roi des Francs). Under the rule of the Capetian kings, Paris gradually became the largest and most prosperous city in France.

The Kings of France enjoyed getting away from Paris and hunting in the game-filled forests of the region. They built palatial hunting lodges, most notably Palace of Fontainebleau and the Palace of Versailles. From the time of Louis XIV to the French Revolution, Versailles was the official residence of the Kings and the seat of the French government. Île-de-France became the term used for the territory of Paris and the surrounding province, which was administered directly by the King.

During the French Revolution, the royal provinces were abolished and divided into departments, and the city and region were governed directly by the national government. After World War II, as Paris faced a major housing shortage, hundreds of massive apartment blocks for low-income residents were built around the edges of Paris. In the 1950s and the 1960s, thousands of immigrants settled in the communes bordering the city. In 1959, under President Charles De Gaulle, a new region was created out of six departments, which corresponded approximately with the historic region, with the name District de la région de Paris ("District of the Paris Region"). On 6 May 1976, as part of the process of regionalisation, the district was reconstituted with increased administrative and political powers and renamed the Île-de-France region.

Île-de-France is in the north of France, neighboring Hauts-de-France to the north, Grand Est to the east, Bourgogne-Franche-Comté to the southeast, Centre-Val-de-Loire to the southwest, and Normandy to the west.

Île-de-France has a land area of 12,011 km (4,637 sq mi). It is composed of eight departments centred on its innermost department and capital, Paris. Around the department and municipality of Paris, urbanisation fills a first concentric ring of three departments commonly known as the petite couronne ("small ring"); it extends into a second outer ring of four departments known as the grande couronne ("large ring"). The former department of Seine, abolished in 1968, included the city proper and parts of the petite couronne.

The petite couronne consists of the departments of Hauts-de-Seine, Paris, Seine-Saint-Denis and Val-de-Marne ; the grande couronne consists of those of Seine-et-Marne, Yvelines, Essonne and Val-d'Oise. Politically, the region is divided into 8 departments, 25 arrondissements, 155 cantons and 1,276 communes, out of the total of 35,416 in metropolitan France.

The outer parts of the Île-de-France remain largely rural. Agricultural land, forest and natural spaces occupy 78.9 percent of the region, and 28 percent of the region's land is in urban use.

The River Seine flows through the middle of the region, which is crisscrossed by its tributaries and sub-tributaries, including the Rivers Marne, Oise and Epte. The River Eure does not cross the region but receives water from several rivers in the Île-de-France, including the Drouette and the Vesgre. The major rivers are navigable, and, because of the modest variations of altitude in the region (between 10 metres (33 ft) and 200 metres (660 ft)), they have a tendency to meander and curve. They also create many lakes and ponds, some of which have been transformed into recreation areas, including Moisson-Mousseaux, Cergy-Neuville and Villeneuve-Saint-Georges.

Île-de-France produced €742 billion (gross domestic product) or around 1/3 of the economy of France in 2019. The regional economy has gradually shifted toward high-value-added service industries (finance, IT services etc.) and high-tech manufacturing (electronics, optics, aerospace etc.). In 2014, industry represented just under five percent of active enterprises in the region, and 10.2 percent of salaried workers. Commerce and services account for 84 percent of the business establishments in the region, and have 83.3 percent of the salaried employees. Financial services and insurance are important sectors of the regional economy; the major French banks and insurance companies, including BNP Paribas, Société Générale and Crédit Agricole, all have their headquarters in the region. The region also hosts the headquarters of the top French telecom companies and utilities, including Orange S.A., Veolia and EDF. The French stock market, the Bourse de Paris, now known as Euronext Paris, occupies a historical building in the center of Paris and is ranked fourth among global stock markets, after New York, Tokyo and London. Other major sectors of the regional economy include energy companies (Orano, Engie, Électricité de France and Total S.A.). The two major French automobile manufacturers, Renault, in Flins-sur-Seine, and Groupe PSA, in Poissy, do much of their assembly work outside France but still have research centre and large plants in the region. The leading French and European aerospace and defense companies, including Airbus, Thales Group, Dassault Aviation, Safran Aircraft Engines, the European Space Agency, Alcatel-Lucent, and Arianespace, have a large presence in the region.

The region is served by Charles de Gaulle Airport. The airport is also the hub of Air France. In 2024, the airport handled 70,290,260 passengers and 466,543 aircraft movements, making it the world's fourteenth busiest airport and Europe's third busiest airport (after Heathrow and Istanbul) in terms of passenger numbers. Charles de Gaulle is the busiest airport within the European Union. In terms of cargo traffic, the airport is the second busiest in Europe, after Frankfurt, handling 1,914,681 tonnes of cargo in 2024. As of 2025, it was the airport served by the second highest number of airlines, after Suvarnabhumi Airport, with 105 airlines operating from it. Orly Airport also remains the busiest French airport for domestic traffic and the second busiest French airport overall in passenger traffic, with 33,123,027 passengers in 2024.

The energy sector is also well established in the region. The nuclear power industry, with its major firm being Orano, has its headquarters in Île-de-France, as does the main French oil company Total S.A., the top French company in the Fortune Global 500, and the main electric utility, Électricité de France. The energy firm Engie also has its main offices in the region at La Défense.

In 2018 just 7.2 percent of employees in the region were engaged in industry; 62.3 percent were engaged in commerce and market services; 25.5 percent in non-market services, including government, health and education; 4.8 percent in construction; and 0.2 percent in agriculture.

The largest non-government employers in the region as of the end of 2015 were the airline Air France (40,657); the SNCF (French Railways, 31,955); the telecom firm Orange S.A. (31,497); the bank Société Générale (27,361); the automotive firm Groupe PSA (19,648); EDF (Electricité de France, 18,199); and Renault (18,136). While the Petite Couronne, or departments closest to Paris, previously employed the most industrial workers, the largest number is now in the Grande Couronne, the outer departments.

The unemployment rate in the region stood at 8.6% at the end of 2016. It varied within the region from 7.8 percent in the city of Paris, to a high of 12.7 percent in Seine-Saint-Denis, and 10 percent in Val-d'Oise ; to regional lows of 7.4 percent in Yvelines ; 7.5 percent in Hauts-de-Seine ; 7.7 percent in Essonne ; 7.9 percent in Seine et Marne, and 8.8 percent in Val de Marne.

In 2018, 48 percent of the land of the Île-de-France was devoted to agriculture; 569,000 hectares were cultivated. The most important crops are grains (66 percent), followed by beets (7 percent), largely for industrial use, and grass for grazing. In 2014, 9,495 hectares were devoted to bio-agriculture. However, the number of persons employed in agriculture in the region dropped 33 percent between 2000 and 2015 to just 8,460 persons in 2015.

The Île-de-France is one of the world's top tourist destinations, with a record 23.6 million hotel arrivals in 2017, and an estimated 50 million visitors in all types of accommodation. The largest number of visitors came from the United States, followed by England, Germany and China. The top tourist attraction in the region in 2017 was Disneyland Paris, which received 14.8 million visitors in 2017, followed by the Cathedral of Notre-Dame (est. 12 million) and the Basilica of Sacre-Coeur at Montmartre (est. 11.1 million visitors).

Notable historic monuments in the Region outside of Paris include the Palace of Versailles (7,700,000 visitors), the Palace of Fontainebleau (500,000 visitors), the chateau of Vaux-le-Vicomte (300,000 visitors), and the Château de Malmaison, Napoleon's former country house; and the Basilica of Saint-Denis, where the Kings of France were interred before the French Revolution.

The Île-de-France is home to numerous high level sports clubs competing across France’s top levels. These include Paris Saint-Germain FC and Paris FC in Ligue 1, the top flight of French football, as well as Red Star FC, currently competing in Ligue 2, the nation’s second division.

In rugby union, the Île-de-France is home to Racing 92 and Stade Français of the Top 14, the top level of French rugby.

The region currently hosts two clubs competing in the LNH Division 1, the highest level of handball in France, Paris Saint-Germain Handball and Tremblay Handball.

The Île-de-France has also been the site of many notable sporting events, including the final of the 1998 FIFA World Cup, played at the Stade de France in Saint-Denis, as well as the 2024 Summer Olympics, held in Paris.

The Regional Council is the legislative body of the region. Its seat is in Saint-Ouen-sur-Seine, at 2 rue Simone-Veil. On 15 December 2015, a list of candidates of the Union of the Right, a coalition of centrist and right-wing parties, led by Valérie Pécresse, narrowly won the regional election, defeating the Union of the Left, a coalition of socialists and ecologists. The socialists had governed the region for the preceding 17 years.

Since 2016 the regional council has 121 members from the Union of the Right, 66 from the Union of the Left and 22 from the far-right National Front.

As of 1 January 2017, the population density of the region was 1010.9 inhabitants per square kilometer. The densest department is Paris itself, with 21,066 inhabitants per square kilometer. The least dense département is Seine-et-Marne with 239 residents per square kilometer.

As of 2015 according to the official government statistics agency INSEE, 15.9 percent of residents of the region had an income below the poverty level; for residents of the city of Paris, this proportion was 16.2 percent. Poverty was highest in the departments of Seine-Saint-Denis (29 percent), Val-d'Oise (17.1 percent), and Val-de-Marne (16.8 percent). It was lowest in Yvelines (9.7 percent); Seine-et-Marne (11.8 percent), Essonne (12.9 percent), and Hauts-de-Seine (12.4 percent). The department of Hauts-de-Seine is the wealthiest in France in terms of per capita GDP.

At the 2019 census, 75.1% of the inhabitants of Île-de-France were natives of Metropolitan France, 1.7% were born in Overseas France, and 23.1% were born in foreign countries. A quarter of the immigrants living in the Île-de-France were born in Europe (38% of whom in Portugal), 29% were born in the Maghreb and 22% in the rest of Africa (in particular West and Central Africa), 3% were born in Turkey and 15% in the rest of Asia, 5% were born in the Americas (not counting those born in the French overseas departments in the Americas, who are not legally immigrants), and 0.1% in Oceania (not counting those born in the French territories of the South Pacific, who are not legally immigrants).

In 2013, roughly 2,206,000 residents of the Île-de-France were immigrants, born outside of France. This amounted to 18.5% of the population of the region, twice the national average. Four out of ten immigrants living in France reside in the region. The immigrant population of the Île-de-France has a higher proportion of non-Europeans, as well as a higher proportion of immigrants with an advanced level of education, than the rest of France. The population of immigrants is more widely distributed throughout the region than it was in the early 2000s, but the concentrations remain high in certain areas, particularly Paris and the department of Seine-Saint-Denis. The proportion of residents born outside of Metropolitan France rose between the 1999 (19.7%) and 2019 censuses (24.9%).

In 2024, 152,548 babies were born in Île-de-France. 69,602 or 45.6% were born to both parents that were also born in France, 16,103 or 10.6% had a French-born mother and a foreign-born father, 14,338 or 9.4% had a foreign-born mother and a French-born father, and 52,505 or 34.4% had both parents that were born abroad.

The Petite Couronne (literally "Little Crown", or inner ring) is formed by the three departments bordering Paris, forming a geographical crown around it. These departments, until 1968 part of the disbanded Seine department, are Hauts-de-Seine, Seine-Saint-Denis and Val-de-Marne. The most populated towns of the Petite Couronne are Boulogne-Billancourt, Montreuil, Saint-Denis, Nanterre and Créteil.

The Métropole du Grand Paris is an administrative structure that comprises Paris and the three departments of the Petite Couronne, plus seven additional communes in the Grande Couronne.

The table below shows some statistical information about the area including Paris:

The Grande Couronne (literally Large Crown, or outer ring) includes the outer four departments of Île-de-France, which do not border Paris. They are Seine-et-Marne (77), Yvelines (78), Essonne (91) and Val-d'Oise (95). The last three departments formed the Seine-et-Oise department until it was disbanded in 1968. The city of Versailles is part of the area.

The city of Paris (also called the Commune or Department of Paris) had a population of 2,047,602 people within its administrative city limits as of 1 January 2026. It is surrounded by the Paris unité urbaine, or urban area, the most populous urban area in the European Union.

In 2023 the unité urbaine had a population of 11,013,774 in 2,824 km (1,090 sq mi). The Paris Region, or Île-de-France, covers 12,012 km (4,638 sq mi), and has its own regional council and president. It has a population of 12,463,067 as of January 2023, or 18.3 percent of the population of France. The metropolitan or functional area (aire d'attraction) of Paris covers 18,941 km (7,313 sq mi) and has 13,320,752 inhabitants (2023).

The population of the city of Paris reached a historic high of 2.9 million in 1921 but then declined; between 1954 and 1999 it declined at every census, falling to 2,125,246 in 1999. After that it began to climb again, reaching 2,240,621 in 2012, but falling to 2,103,778 in 2023.

The city's population loss reflected the experience of most other core cities in the developed world that have not expanded their boundaries. The principal factors in the process were a significant decline in household size, and a dramatic migration of residents to the suburbs between 1962 and 1975. Factors in the migration included deindustrialisation, high rent, the gentrification of many inner quarters, the transformation of living space into offices, and greater affluence among working families. The city's population loss was one of the most severe among international municipalities and the largest for any that had achieved more than 2,000,000 residents. Since then, an influx of younger residents and immigrants has contributed to the growth of the city.

According to Eurostat, the EU statistical agency, in 2012 the Commune of Paris was the most densely populated city in the European Union, with 21,616 people per square kilometre within the city limits (the NUTS-3 statistical area), ahead of Inner London West, which had 10,374 persons per square kilometre. According to the same census, three departments bordering Paris, Hauts-de-Seine, Seine-Saint-Denis and Val-de-Marne, had population densities of over ten thousand persons per square kilometre, ranking among the ten most densely populated areas of the EU.

Paris is one of the most densely populated cities in the world. Its density, excluding the outlying woodland parks of Boulogne and Vincennes, was 24,448 inhabitants per square kilometre (63,320/sq mi) in the 1999 official census, which could be compared only with some Asian megapolises and the New York City borough of Manhattan. Even including the two woodland areas, its population density was 20,755/km (53,760/sq mi) in 2017, the sixth-most-densely populated commune in France after Levallois-Perret, Vincennes, Le Pré-Saint-Gervais, Saint-Mandé and Montrouge, all of which border the city proper.

The most sparsely populated quarters are the western and central office and administration-focused arrondissements. The city's population is densest in the northern and eastern arrondissements; the 11th arrondissement had a density of 40,672 inhabitants per square kilometre (105,340/sq mi) in 1999, and some of the same arrondissement's eastern quarters had densities close to 100,000/km (260,000/sq mi) in the same year.

The city of Paris covers an area much smaller than the urban area of which it is the core. At present, Paris's real urbanisation, defined by the pôle urbain (urban cluster) statistical area, covers 2,845 km (1,098 sq mi), or an area about 27 times larger than the city itself. The administration of Paris's urban growth is divided between itself and its surrounding departments: Paris's closest ring of three adjoining departments, or petite couronne ("small ring") are fully saturated with urban growth, and the ring of four departments outside of these, the grande couronne departments, are only covered in their inner regions by Paris's urbanisation. These eight departments form the larger administrative Île-de-France région; most of this region is filled, and overextended in places, by the Paris functional area, which, in 2023, was populated by over 13 million people.

The Paris agglomeration has shown a steady rate of growth since the end of the late 16th century French Wars of Religion, save brief setbacks during the French Revolution and World War II. With 13.3 million inhabitants in 2023, the annual population growth rate of the Paris functional area was between 0.4% and 1.0% over the past 55 years.

By law, French censuses do not ask questions regarding ethnicity or religion, but do gather information concerning one's country of birth. From this it is still possible to determine that Paris and its metropolitan area is one of the most multi-cultural in Europe: According to the 2011 census, 456,105 residents of the municipality of Paris, or 20.3 percent, and 2,117,901 residents of the Paris Region (Île-de-France), or 17.9 percent, were born outside France. At the 1999 census, 4.2% of the population in Paris metropolitan area were recent immigrants (people who had immigrated to France between 1990 and 1999), the majority from Asia and Africa. 37 % of all immigrants in France live in the Paris region.

The first wave of international migration to Paris started as early as 1820, with the arrivals of German peasants fleeing an agricultural crisis in their homeland. Several waves of immigration followed continually until today: Italians and central European Jews during the 19th century; Russians after the revolution of 1917 and Armenians fleeing genocide in the Ottoman Empire; colonial subjects during World War I and later; Poles between the two world wars; Spaniards, Italians, Portuguese, and North Africans from the 1950s to the 1970s; North African Jews after colonies in that region gained independence; Africans and Asians since then.

The Paris metropolitan region, or aire urbaine, is estimated to be home to some 1.7 million Muslims, who comprise between 10–15 per cent of the area's population. However, without official data, the margin of error of these estimates is extremely high as it is based on one's country of birth (someone born in a Muslim country or born to a parent from a Muslim country is considered as a "potential Muslim"). According to the North American Jewish Data Bank, an estimated 310,000 Jews also live in Paris and the surrounding Île-de-France region, an area with a population of 11.7 million. Paris has historically been a magnet for immigrants, and it hosts one of the largest concentrations of immigrants in Europe today.

According to the National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies, responsible for the production and analysis of official statistics in France, 20 per cent of people living in the city of Paris are immigrants, and 41.3 per cent of people under 20 have at least one immigrant parent. Among the young people under 18, 12.1 per cent are of Maghrebi origin, 9.9 per cent of Subsaharan African origin, and 4.0 per cent of South European origin. In 2020–2021, about 6 million people, or 49% of the population of Paris, are either immigrants (21%) or have at least one immigrant parent (28%). These figures do not include French people born in Overseas France and their direct descendants.

(source: Insee, EAR 2006) Reading: 436 576 immigrants live in Paris, representing 20% of Parisians and 22.4% of immigrants in Île-de-France. 162 635 children under 20 with at least one immigrant parent live in Paris, representing 41.3 per cent of the total of children under 20 in Paris, and 15.4 per cent of the total of children under 20 with at least one immigrant parent in Île-de-France.

As of 2005 many expatriates settle in the western portion of Paris. Western Paris is in close proximity to many international schools and the La Défense area.

Many international students living in Paris live in the large dormitory complex of Cité Université Internationale de Paris, located just on the edge of the city in the 14th arrondissement.

As of 2012 tens of thousands of people of African origins live in Paris. This group includes those born in France who had African parents and naturalized French citizens born in Africa. The majority come from the Maghreb, including Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia. Other countries with populations in Paris include Burkina Faso, the Congo, Guinea, Mali, and Senegal.

As of 1998 Île-de-France has half of the Asian population of France. As of 1990 the majority of Asians living in France are ethnic Chinese originating from several countries.

In 1974 France stopped allowing foreign workers into its borders. The Asian population of France increased despite the closure. In 1975 there were 20,000 Asians in Île-de-France. In 1982 the region had 59,000. This increased to 108,000 in 1990.

In France the "Asians" are defined as people originating from the East Asian cultural sphere. The term does not include people from the Indian subcontinent.

For the entire Île-de-France region, there were a total of 108,511 persons who held or formerly held Cambodian, Chinese, Laotian, Taiwanese, and Vietnamese citizenships as of 1990. This included 64,361 current citizens of those countries and 44,150 former citizens who became naturalized as French citizens.

As of 1990, there were a combined total of 31,773 persons who held or formerly held Cambodian, Chinese, Laotian, Taiwanese, and Vietnamese citizenships in the City of Paris. This included 21,655 current citizens of those countries and 10,118 former citizens who became naturalized as French citizens.

As of 1990 fewer than 10,000 persons of East/Southeast Asian origin resided in six communes of Marne-la-Vallée. 26% of the population of Lognes was Asian, and other percentages were 8% in Noisiel, 5–6% in Noisy-le-Grand, and 5–6% in Torcy. In 1982 there were 6,000 Asians in Marne-la-Vallée, making up 3–4% of the area's population. In 1987 the number increased to 9,000.

As of circa 1998 Ivry-sur-Seine and Vitry-sur-Seine had a combined Asian population of 3,600.

As of circa 1998 there were about 6,000 East/Southeast Asians in and around Aulnay-sous-Bois, and there were 3,000 persons of East and Southeast Asian origin in Aulnay proper. Most of them were of Cambodian origin, including those with and without Cambodian citizenship. The commune also had an above-average number of persons of Laotian origin, including those with and without Laotian citizenship. Ethnicities included Khmer people, Lao people, and Overseas Chinese.

As of 1990, in the City of Paris there were 7,950 Cambodian citizens and 3,279 former Cambodian citizens who became naturalized as French. The combined total is 11,229.

That year, in the Île-de-France region there were 26,553 Cambodian citizens and 13,068 former Cambodian citizens naturalized as French. The combined total was 39,421.

As of 1990 the majority of Asians living in the Paris area are ethnic Chinese originating from several countries. The largest group includes ethnic Chinese from Indochina, and a smaller group originates from Zhejiang.

As of 2013 the official number of Japanese residents in Paris was 16,277.

As of 1990, in the City of Paris there were 2,185 Laotian citizens and 1,376 former Laotian citizens naturalized as French, making a combined total of 3,561.

As of that year, in the Île-de-France region there were 10,110 Laotian citizens and 8,177 former Laotian citizens, making a combined total of 18,287.

In periods before 1975 several Vietnamese arrived in Paris, including intellectuals, those who worked as civil servants in colonial times, and those who came to Paris to study and did not return home. Ethnic Vietnamese arriving after 1975 became a part of an ethnic network established by those that came before them. Many Vietnamese achieved proficiency in the medical, scientific, and computer science fields.

As of 1990, in the City of Paris there were 3,802 Vietnamese citizens and 4,155 former Vietnamese citizens naturalized as French, making a total of 7,957.

As of that year, in the Île-de-France region there were 16,387 Vietnamese citizens and 20,261 former Vietnamese citizens naturalized as French, making a total of 36,648.

Romani people first arrived in Paris in 1427.

Paris rose from 4.9% of the French population in 1801, to 8% in 1861, to 11.5% in 1901 to then 14.5% in 1921.

Paris is known as the City of Light. Part of the credit for this sobriquet can be ascribed to long-standing city ordinances that have restricted the height of buildings in the central city. A more modest skyline, interrupted only by the Eiffel Tower, the Tour Montparnasse, Sacré-Coeur, and a few church steeples, lends this city's citizens virtually unfettered access to natural light. Nonetheless, another significant contributor to the feeling of openness in Paris is the vast number of public spaces, both green and paved, interspersed throughout all twenty arrondissements, that afford the citizen the opportunity to escape, if only momentarily, his urban environment and partake of air and light like his cousins in the provinces. The following article (and its accompanying list) concern the public spaces known as squares and places in Paris.

The terminology of open spaces in Paris (square vs. place) may present some confusion to English speakers.

In the French language, the term square (a loan-word from English) refers to a small urban green space that is not large enough to be called a parc (the grassy variety) or a bois (the wooded variety), and is not sufficiently formal in its plantings to be called a jardin. (For a list of these spaces, see List of parks and gardens in Paris.) In English this may be called a " pocket park," a "green" as in "the village green ", or even a "square", as in the squares of Savannah, Georgia.

Conversely, the term place in French refers to a city square which usually does not include green space and may be paved. In the English-speaking world, this is usually termed a "square" such as Times Square in New York or Trafalgar Square in London.

In summary, the French have squares that might be, but are usually not, called "squares" in English, and they have places that are almost always called "squares" in English.

To make things a bit more complicated, in Paris, a "square" (small green space) may abut a place (large public square), or a "square" may, in fact, be contained within a place. The "square" and the associated place typically have different names. Some examples are:

Rarely, the "square" and its associated place share a name:

Finally, there are some pairs (of squares and places) where the name of the square is a bit artificial, but the relationship is, nonetheless, clear:

In all Parisian squares, gardens, and parks, you will find areas reserved for children, with playgrounds, sandboxes, see-saws, swings, merry-go-rounds, and the like. Some spaces offer a wider range of activities; some random examples are: toy boats to sail, as well as sulky and go-cart rentals in the Jardin du Luxembourg ; ping-pong tables in the Square Emile-Chautemps and the Jardin de l'Observatoire ; pony or carriage rides at the Parc Monceau ; tennis courts, boules, and croquet at the Jardin du Luxembourg ; Guignol marionette puppet shows at the Jardin du Ranelagh ; roller skating at the Parc Montsouris ; a bee-keeping school at the Jardin du Luxembourg ; bandstands featuring spring and summer concerts at the Square du Temple and the Parc des Buttes-Chaumont, etc.

These open spaces also beckon visitors just to wander and daydream, and many offer lush green lawns for sitting, taking a rest, or perhaps a picnic. One is advised, nonetheless, to watch for signs posted on lawns that are accessible to the public: pelouses autorisées (lawns authorized for use) and "pelouses au repos" (lawns for resting).

As of 1 May 2008, the city of Paris acknowledged the following public squares (in the broader 'English' sense of the word). A citizen of Paris will notice, of course, that the following alphabetized list includes both "squares" (smaller green spaces) and places (larger urban landmarks), which have been segregated from one another within this single list.

The 2026 Paris municipal election was held on 15 March 2026, with a runoff on 22 March to elect the 163 members of the Council of Paris and the 17 arrondissement councils. The Council of Paris subsequently elected the Mayor of Paris, while the arrondissement councils elected their respective mayors. The election followed the two-term tenure of incumbent mayor Anne Hidalgo, the first woman to serve as mayor, who announced in November 2024 that she would not seek a third term.

The main candidates were Emmanuel Grégoire of the Socialist Party (PS), Rachida Dati of The Republicans (LR), Sophia Chikirou of La France Insoumise (LFI), Pierre-Yves Bournazel of Horizons, and Sarah Knafo of Reconquête. Grégoire finished first in the first round with 37.98% of the vote, followed by Dati with 25.46%. Chikirou received 11.72%, Bournazel 11.34%, and Knafo 10.40%. Following the first round, Bournazel merged his list with Dati's while Knafo withdrew her candidacy and endorsed Dati.

In the second round, Grégoire received 50.52% of the vote and his alliance won 103 of the 163 seats. Dati received 41.52% and won 51 seats while Chikirou received 7.96% and won the remaining 9 seats. Grégoire was elected mayor, extending the Socialist Party's 25-year hold on Paris.

Anne Hidalgo, a member of the Socialist Party (PS), was first elected mayor of Paris in 2014 and re-elected in 2020, serving during major events including the 2015 terrorist attacks, the COVID-19 pandemic, and the 2024 Summer Olympics. Her administration focused on urban transformation projects such as the " 15-minute city " concept and expanding social housing. The number of cars in the city has been reduced, with 100 streets having permanently banned traffic. Despite some controversies and declining popularity, she remained a central figure in Parisian politics until her decision not to run in 2026, endorsing Senator Rémi Féraud as her preferred successor. The 2020 municipal elections were marked by low turnout (42% in the first round) due to the pandemic. Hidalgo formed an alliance with The Ecologists in the second round, increasing her majority by five seats. The opposition The Republicans list led by Rachida Dati lost 13 seats, holding 58 council seats, while the LREM list led by Agnès Buzyn won eight seats. La France Insoumise (LFI) held a single seat.

Under the 2025 PLM law, from 2026 onward, Parisians cast two ballots, one for the Council of Paris, and one for the arrondissement councils, each of which is presided over by a mayor. The reform was strongly supported by Rachida Dati, who was Minister of Culture at the time. Under the new law, councilors are elected from party lists using a two-round system. If no list achieves a majority on the first round, a second round is held on the following Sunday. Lists that receive at least 10 percent of the vote in the first round may participate in the second round, while lists receiving between 5 and 10 percent may merge with qualifying lists. The first-place finisher receives a majority bonus equal to 25 percent of the seats in the Council of Paris or 50 percent of the seats in the arrondissement councils, while the remaining seats are allocated proportionately. The mayors of Paris and the arrondissements are elected by the respective councils during the first plenary session. Mayors are chosen by majority vote in the first two rounds, or by plurality in the third round. In the event of a tie, the oldest candidate is elected.

(Lutte ouvrière - Le camp des travailleurs)

(Paris est à vous! avec Emmanuel Grégoire - L'union de la gauche et des écologistes)

(NPA Révolutionnaires - Paris, ouvrière et révolutionnaire)

(Sarah Knafo pour Paris - Une ville heureuse)

(Paris apaisé avec Pierre-Yves Bournazel)

(Les coupes budgétaires à Paris ça suffit!)

The outgoing Socialist mayor, Anne Hidalgo, announced on 26 November 2024, that she would not seek a third term and endorsed Senator Rémi Féraud, president of the Socialist group on the Paris Council, as her preferred successor. Her former first deputy, Emmanuel Grégoire, who had been elected to the National Assembly in the 2024 legislative election, also entered the race for the party's nomination. In January 2026, Hidalgo publicly claimed that "the left would lose" if Grégoire were chosen as its candidate. Grégoire later said, "She did everything she could to torpedo my candidacy. I'm not her candidate and I am not her heir."

Marion Waller, director of the Pavillon de l'Arsenal, joined the contest in May 2025. The Socialist Party scheduled its internal vote for 30 June 2025. During the campaign, former Paris mayor Bertrand Delanoë publicly backed Emmanuel Grégoire. On 30 June 2025, Grégoire secured the nomination in the first round of voting. He later received the backing of The Ecologists, the French Communist Party, Place Publique, and other smaller left-wing parties.

The mayor of Paris's 7th arrondissement and Minister of Culture, Rachida Dati, announced on January 17, 2024, that she would run for mayor of Paris for a third time. Senator and former mayor of the 16th arrondissement, Francis Szpiner, declared his candidacy on March 12, 2025, seeking the party's nomination and proposing an alliance with The Centrists. During the campaign, he criticized Dati as a "candidate of Macronism ".

The internal contest was overshadowed by legal controversies involving both candidates. On 15 April 2025, searches were carried out at Francis Szpiner's home and at the 16th arrondissement town hall as part of an investigation into alleged corruption and influence peddling linked to social housing allocations. Meanwhile, Rachida Dati, under formal investigation in connection with the Carlos Ghosn affair, failed in June 2025 to overturn the National Financial Prosecutor 's final submissions. On December 18, 2025, further searches took place at the 7th arrondissement town hall, the Ministry of Culture, and her home as part of a judicial investigation related to her former role as a Member of the European Parliament, including allegations that she had lobbied on behalf of Renault.

On August 28, 2025, the national nomination committee of The Republicans selected Rachida Dati as the party's candidate. Following this decision, Francis Szpiner withdrew his candidacy. Dati later secured the backing of the Democratic Movement, notably through the support of its Paris leader, Maud Gatel. However, the presidential party Renaissance opted to support a different candidate, confirming on October 28, 2025, its endorsement of Pierre-Yves Bournazel. Her refusal to take part in many media-organized debates ultimately led to their cancellation.

In autumn 2025, several media outlets reported that Deputy Sophia Chikirou was set to lead the list of La France Insoumise for the 2026 municipal election. On November 14, 2025, Chikirou officially declared her candidacy for mayor of Paris under the slogan "The New Popular Paris". On 29 January 2026, Ecologists elected officials Jérôme Gleizes and Émile Meunier announced they were joining Sophia Chikirou's list, breaking with their party's strategy. According to Le Monde, 20% of the spots on LFI lists in Paris were reserved for them as part of an agreement with dissident Ecologists officials grouped under the label "Popular Greens".

Pierre-Yves Bournazel, a member of Horizons and councillor in Paris's 18th arrondissement and former Deputy, announced in June 2025 that he would run for mayor of Paris. Renaissance ultimately settled on 28 October 2025, officially endorsing Bournazel rather than supporting Rachida Dati. This decision reflected broader national agreements between Renaissance and Horizons across several cities. However, the choice sparked internal tensions, particularly among Paris-based party members who favored backing Dati. In early February 2026, The Centrists also announced its support for Bournazel.

Sarah Knafo, a Member of the European Parliament for Reconquête, announced her candidacy for mayor of Paris on January 7, 2026. Her campaign has emphasized strong digital communication and focused on themes such as security, cleanliness, and city management. In February 2026, reports citing a study from Nature suggested that the algorithm of X may have amplified her content, raising questions about potential platform influence. She also proposed a “union of the right ” with Rachida Dati ahead of a possible second round. Around the same time, Aurélie Assouline and later Marie Toubiana, both members of The Republicans, joined or backed her campaign.

Thierry Mariani, Member of the European Parliament for the National Rally, announced his candidacy for mayor of Paris in June 2023 and confirmed it in December 2025. His list was supported by the Union of the Right for the Republic. In January 2026, the association La Maison des potes filed a complaint against him over a proposal on “national priority” in social housing.

The Senator and Ecologists candidate in the 2022 presidential election, Yannick Jadot, announced on January 20, 2025, his intention to run for mayor of Paris. Ten days later, he declared that he would not participate in the party's primary, after calling on other candidates to withdraw in his favor. The Ecologists held their primary on 16–23 March 2025. Four candidates competed in the first round: deputy mayor David Belliard, Anne-Claire Boux, Fatoumata Koné, and Aminata Niakaté. Belliard and Boux advanced to the second round with 48% and 27% of the vote respectively, ahead of Koné (15%) and Niakaté (10%). Between the two rounds, both eliminated candidates endorsed Boux. On 23 March 2025, David Belliard won the runoff with 52.6% of the vote and was designated the Ecologists’ lead candidate. He later withdrew in favor of Emmanuel Grégoire and joined his list as part of a broader left-wing alliance.

The campaign gained momentum in late 2024 after Anne Hidalgo announced she would not seek a third term, while remaining in office until 2026 and preparing her succession within the governing left.

Following the Socialist nomination, the Socialist Party (PS), The Ecologists (LE), and the French Communist Party (PCF) formed a joint first-round list, unveiled in December 2025 and led by Emmanuel Grégoire, with David Belliard and Ian Brossat among its figures. To the left, La France insoumise (LFI) pursued an independent strategy, nominating Sophia Chikirou and rejecting a first-round alliance with Grégoire.

On the right and centre-right, competition between Rachida Dati and Pierre-Yves Bournazel was marked by calls for unity. Bournazel maintained a “neither Dati nor Grégoire” stance, while leaving open the possibility of second-round negotiations. On the far right, the National Rally fielded a list led by Thierry Mariani, aiming primarily to secure representation on the Council of Paris. Meanwhile, Reconquête candidate Sarah Knafo entered the race in January 2026, seeking to distinguish her campaign from that of the RN.

Media coverage and campaign platforms highlighted several recurring themes:

Five lists, led by Grégoire, Dati, Chikirou, Bournazel, and Knafo qualified for the second round. Grégoire refused to merge his list with the list led by Chikirou: the two lists were separately present for the second round. Despite earlier ruling it out, Bournazel eventually agreed, under pressure from right-wing leaders, to merge his list with Dati's, though he chose not to run personally on the joint list, alongside some allies such as Clément Beaune.

After unsuccessful offers to merge her list with Dati, Knafo withdrew her list from the second round, declaring she was not withdrawing for Dati, but withdrawing "for Paris", to block the left. Following this, Grégoire accused President Emmanuel Macron of personally intervening to convince her to leave the race to the profit of Dati, a claim that Macron denied. On 18 March 2026, BFM TV hosted a three-hour debate between Chikirou, Grégoire, and Dati.

As of January 2023, there were 482 communes in France (metropolitan territory and overseas departments and regions) with population over 20,000, 287 communes with population over 30,000, 133 communes with population over 50,000 and 42 communes with population over 100,000. All figures reflect the municipal population (French : population municipale), meaning people who have their usual residence in the commune, excluding population counted apart. The population of the matching urban unit is usually several times that of its central commune. Populations as of 2006 and 2013 are also shown. Communes in the overseas and sui generis collectivities are listed in a separate table below.

For the overseas and sui generis collectivities the legal populations sources are:

Roman Republic 52–27 BC Roman Empire 27 BC–AD 395 Western Roman Empire 395–476 Kingdom of Soissons 476–486 Francia 486–843 West Francia 843–987 Kingdom of France 987–1792 French First Republic 1792–1804 First French Empire 1804–1814 Kingdom of France 1814–1815 First French Empire 1815 Kingdom of France 1815–1830 July Monarchy 1830–1848 French Second Republic 1848–1852 Second French Empire 1852–1870 French Third Republic 1870–1871 Paris Commune 1871 French Third Republic 1871-1940 Military Administration in France 1940–1944 ∟ part of German-occupied Europe from 1940 to 1944 Provisional Government of the French Republic 1944–1946 French Fourth Republic 1946–1958 French Fifth Republic 1958–present

The oldest traces of human occupation in Paris date from about 8000 BC, during the Mesolithic period. Between 250 and 225 BC, the Parisii settled on the banks of the Seine, built bridges and a fort, minted coins, and began to trade with other river settlements in Europe. In 52 BC, a Roman army led by Titus Labienus defeated the Parisii and established a Gallo-Roman garrison town called Lutetia. The town was Christianised in the 3rd century AD, and after the collapse of the Roman Empire, it was occupied by Clovis I, the King of the Franks, who made it his capital in 508.

During the Middle Ages, Paris was the largest city in Europe, an important religious and commercial centre, and the birthplace of the Gothic style of architecture. The University of Paris on the Left Bank, organised in the mid-13th century, was one of the first in Europe. It suffered from the Bubonic Plague in the 14th century and the Hundred Years' War in the 15th century, with recurrence of the plague. Between 1418 and 1436, the city was occupied by the Burgundians and English. In the 16th century, Paris became the book-publishing capital of Europe, though it was shaken by the French Wars of Religion between Catholics and Protestants. In the 18th century, Paris was the centre of the intellectual ferment known as the Enlightenment, and the main stage of the French Revolution from 1789. In the 19th century, Napoleon embellished the city with monuments to military glory. It became the European capital of fashion and the scene of two more revolutions (in 1830 and 1848). The centre of Paris was rebuilt between 1852 and 1870 with wide new avenues, squares and new parks, and the city was expanded to its present limits in 1860. In the latter part of the century, millions of tourists came to see the Paris International Expositions and the new Eiffel Tower.

In the 20th century, Paris suffered bombardment in World War I and German occupation from 1940 until 1944 in World War II. Between the two wars, Paris was the capital of modern art and a magnet for intellectuals, writers and artists from around the world. The population reached its historic high of 2.1 million in 1921, but declined for the rest of the century. New museums (The Centre Pompidou, Musée Marmottan Monet and Musée d'Orsay) were opened, and the Louvre given its glass pyramid. In the 21st century, Paris added new museums and a new concert hall, but in 2005 it also experienced violent unrest in the housing projects in the surrounding banlieues (suburbs), inhabited largely by immigrants from France's former colonies in the Maghreb and Sub-Saharan Africa. In 2015, two deadly terrorist attacks were carried out by Islamic extremists. The population of the city declined steadily from 1921 until 2004, due to a decrease in family size and an exodus of the middle class to the suburbs; but it is increasing slowly once again, as young people and immigrants move into the city.

In 2008, archaeologists of the National Institute for Preventive Archaeological Research (INRAP) digging in the 15th arrondissement, not far from the Left Bank of the Seine, discovered the oldest human remains and traces of a hunter-gatherer settlement in Paris, dating to about 8000 BC, during the Mesolithic period.

Other more recent traces of temporary settlements had been found at Bercy in 1991, dating from around 4500–4200 BC. The excavations at Bercy found the fragments of three wooden canoes used by fishermen on the Seine, the oldest dating to 4800–4300 BC. They are now on display at the Carnavalet Museum. Excavations at the 15th arrondissement site found traces of settlements from the middle Neolithic period (4200–3500 BC); the early Bronze Age (3500–1500 BC); and the first Iron Age (800–500 BC). Hatchets made in eastern Europe were found at the Neolithic site in Bercy, showing that first Parisians were already trading with other parts of Europe.

Between 250 and 225 BC, during the Iron Age, the Parisii settled on the banks of the Seine. At the beginning of the 2nd century BC, they built an oppidum, a walled fort, whose location is disputed. It may have been on the Île de la Cité, where bridges of an important trading route crossed the Seine. In his account of the Gallic Wars, Julius Caesar recorded meeting with the leaders of the Parisii on an island in the Seine. Other historians cite an absence of traces of an early Gallic settlement on the island, and believe the oppidum was actually in Nanterre, in the Paris suburbs, where vestiges of a large settlement were discovered during construction of a highway in the 1980s.

The settlement was called "Lucotocia" (according to the ancient Greek geographer Strabo) or "Leucotecia" (according to Roman geographer Ptolemy), and may have taken its name from the Celtic word lugo or luco, for a marsh or swamp. It had a strategic position on the main trade route, via the Seine and Rhône rivers, between Britain and to the Roman colony of Provence and the Mediterranean Sea. The location and the fees for crossing the bridge and passing along the river made the town prosperous, so much so that it was able to mint its own gold coins.

Julius Caesar and his Roman army campaigned in Gaul between 58 and 53 BC under the pretext of protecting the territory from Germanic invaders, but in reality to conquer it and annex it to the Roman Republic. The Parisii formed a secret alliance with the other Gallic tribes, under the leadership of Vercingetorix, and launched an uprising against the Romans in January 52 BC. The Parisii fought bravely and desperately in what became known as the Battle of Lutetia. The Commander of the Parisii, Camulogene, was killed and his soldiers were cut down by the disciplined Romans. Despite the defeat, the Parisii continued to resist the Romans. They sent eight thousand men to fight with Vercingetorix in his last stand against the Romans at the Battle of Alesia.

The Romans built an entirely new city as a base for their soldiers and the Gallic auxiliaries intended to keep an eye on the rebellious province. The new city was called Lutetia (Lutèce) or "Lutetia Parisiorum" ("Lutèce of the Parisii"), probably from the Latin word luta, meaning mud or swamp. The major part of the city was on the left bank of the Seine, which was higher and less prone to flood. It was laid out following the traditional Roman town design along a north–south axis.

The city was centered on the forum atop the Montagne Sainte-Geneviève. The main building of the forum was one hundred meters long and contained a temple, a basilica used for civic functions and a square portico which covered shops. Nearby was an enormous amphitheatre built in the 1st century AD, which could seat ten to fifteen thousand spectators, though the population of the city was only six to eight thousand. Fresh drinking water was supplied to the city by an aqueduct sixteen kilometres long from the basin of Rungis and Wissous. The aqueduct also supplied water to the famous baths, or Thermes de Cluny, built near the forum at the end of the 2nd century or beginning of the 3rd century. Under Roman rule, the town was thoroughly Romanised and grew considerably.

Besides the Roman architecture and city design, the newcomers imported Roman cuisine: modern excavations have found amphorae of Italian wine and olive oil, shellfish, and a popular Roman sauce called garum. Despite its commercial importance, Lutetia was only a medium-sized Roman city, considerably smaller than Lugdunum (Lyon) or Agedincum (Sens), which was the capital of the Roman province of Lugdunensis Quarta, in which Lutetia was located.

Christianity was introduced into Paris in the middle of the 3rd century AD. According to tradition, it was brought by Saint Denis, the Bishop of the Parisii, who was beheaded on Mount Mercury when he refused to renounce his faith. According to the tradition, Saint Denis picked up his head and carried it to a secret Christian cemetery of Vicus Cattulliacus about six miles away. A different version of the legend says that a devout Christian woman, Catula, came at night to the site of the execution and took his remains to the cemetery. The hill where he was executed, Mount Mercury, later became the Mountain of Martyrs ("Mons Martyrum"), eventually Montmartre. A church was built on the site of the grave of St. Denis, which later became the Basilica of Saint-Denis. By the 4th century, the city had its first recognized bishop, Victorinus (346). By 392, it had a cathedral.

Late in the 3rd century AD, the invasion of Germanic tribes, beginning with the Alamans in 275, caused many of the residents of the Left Bank to leave that part of the city and move to the safety of the Île de la Cité. Many of the monuments on the Left Bank were abandoned, and the stones used to build a wall around the Île de la Cité, the first city wall of Paris. A new basilica and baths were built on the island; their ruins were found beneath the square in front of the cathedral of Notre Dame. Beginning in 305, the name Lutetia was replaced on milestones by Civitas Parisiorum, or "City of the Parisii". By the period of the Late Roman Empire (the 3rd–5th centuries AD), it was known simply as "Parisius" in Latin and "Paris" in French.

From 355 until 360, Paris was ruled by Julian, the nephew of Constantine the Great and the Caesar, or governor, of the western Roman provinces. When he was not campaigning with the army, he spent the winters of 357-358 and 358–359 in the city living in a palace on the site of the modern Palais de Justice. In February 360, his soldiers proclaimed him Augustus, or Emperor, and for a brief time, Paris was the capital of the western Roman Empire, until he left in 363 and died fighting the Persians. Two other emperors spent winters in the city near the end of the Roman Empire while trying to halt the tide of Barbarian invasions : Valentinian I (365–367) and Gratian in 383.

The gradual collapse of the Roman empire due to the increasing Germanic invasions of the 5th century, sent the city into a period of decline. In 451, the city was threatened by the army of Attila the Hun. The Parisians were planning to abandon the city, but they were persuaded to resist by Saint Geneviève. Attila bypassed Paris and attacked Orléans. In 461, the city was threatened again by the Salian Franks led by Childeric I. The siege of the city lasted ten years. Once again, Geneviève organized the defense. She rescued the city by bringing wheat to the hungry city from Brie and Champagne. She became the patron saint of Paris shortly after her death.

The Franks, a Germanic-speaking tribe, moved into northern Gaul as Roman influence declined. Frankish leaders were influenced by Rome; some even fought with Rome to defeat Atilla the Hun. The Franks worshipped the German gods such as Thor. Frankish laws and customs became the basis of French law and customs.

Latin was no longer the language of everyday speech. The Franks became more politically influential and built up a large army. In 481, the son of Childeric, Clovis I, just sixteen years old, became the new ruler of the Franks. In 486, he defeated the last Roman armies, became the ruler of all of Gaul north of the river Loire and entered Paris. Clovis helped to drive the Visigoths out of Gaul. He was a king with no fixed capital and no central administration beyond his entourage. By deciding to be interred at Paris, Clovis gave the city symbolic weight. When his grandchildren divided royal power 50 years after his death in 511, Paris was kept as a joint property and a fixed symbol of the dynasty.

Clovis I and his successors of the Merovingian dynasty built a host of religious edifices in Paris, including a basilica on the Montagne Sainte-Geneviève, the cathedral of Saint-Étienne (where Notre Dame now stands), and several important monasteries, including one that later became the Abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés. They also built the Basilica of Saint-Denis, which became the necropolis of the kings of France. None of the Merovingian buildings survived, but there are four marble Merovingian columns in the church of Saint-Pierre de Montmartre. The kings of the Merovingian dynasty were buried in the Abbey of Saint-Germain-des Prés, however Dagobert I, the last king of the Merovingian dynasty, who died in 639, was the first Frankish king to be buried in the Basilica of Saint-Denis.

The kings of the Carolingian dynasty, who came to power in 751, moved the Frankish capital to Aix-la-Chapelle (Aachen) and paid little attention to Paris, though King Pepin the Short did build an impressive new sanctuary at Saint-Denis, which was consecrated in the presence of Charlemagne on 24 February 775.

In the 9th century, the city was repeatedly attacked by the Vikings, who sailed up the Seine on fleets of Viking ships. They demanded a ransom and ravaged the fields. In December 856, Vikings attacked and burned Paris. According to the Royal Frankish Annals, they burned all the churches of Paris with the exception of St. Germain-des-Prés, the Cathedral of St. Stephen, the Church of St. Vincent and St. Denis, which were spared due to a payment of ransom. In 885–886, they laid a one-year siege to Paris and tried again in 887 and in 889, but were unable to conquer the city, as it was protected by the Seine and the walls of the Île de la Cité. The two bridges, vital to the city, were additionally protected by two massive stone fortresses, the Grand Châtelet on the Right Bank and the "Petit Châtelet" on the Left Bank, built on the initiative of Joscelin, the bishop of Paris.

In the fall of 978, Paris was besieged by the Emperor Otto II during the Franco-German war of 978–980. At the end of the 10th century, a new dynasty of kings, the Capetians, founded by Hugh Capet in 987, came to power. Though they spent little time in the city, they restored the royal palace on the Île de la Cité and built a church where the Sainte-Chapelle stands today. Prosperity returned gradually to the city and the Right Bank began to be populated. On the Left Bank, the Capetians founded an important monastery: the Abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés. Its church was rebuilt in the 11th century.

At the beginning of the 12th century, the French kings of the Capetian dynasty controlled little more than Paris and the surrounding region, but they did their best to build up Paris as the political, economic, religious and cultural capital of France. The distinctive character of the city's districts continued to emerge at this time. The Île de la Cité was the site of the royal palace, and construction of the new Cathedral of Notre-Dame de Paris began in 1163.

The Left Bank (south of the Seine) was the site of the new University of Paris established by the Church and royal court to train scholars in theology, mathematics and law, and the two great monasteries of Paris: the Abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés and the Abbey of Saint Geneviève. The Right Bank (north of the Seine) became the centre of commerce and finance, where the port, the central market, workshops and the houses of merchants were located. A league of merchants, the Hanse parisienne, was established and quickly became a powerful force in the city's affairs.

At the beginning of the Middle Ages, the royal residence was on the Île de la Cité. Between 1190 and 1202, King Philip II built the massive fortress of the Louvre, which was designed to protect the Right Bank against an English attack from Normandy.

Before he departed for the Third Crusade, Philip II began construction of new fortifications for the city. He built a stone wall on the Left Bank, with thirty round towers. On the Right Bank, the wall extended for 2.8 kilometers, with forty towers to protect the new neighbourhoods of the growing medieval city. His third great project was to pave the mud streets with stone. Over the Seine, he also rebuilt two wooden bridges in stone, the Petit-Pont and Grand-Pont, and he began construction of a covered market, Les Halles.

King Philip IV (r. 1285-1314) reconstructed the royal residence on the Île de la Cité, transforming it into a palace. Two of the great ceremonial halls still remain within the structure of the Palais de Justice. He also built a more sinister structure, the Gibbet of Montfaucon, where the corpses of executed criminals were displayed. On 13 October 1307, he used his royal power to arrest the members of the Knights Templar, who, he felt, had grown too powerful, and on 18 March 1314, he had the Grand Master of the Order, Jacques de Molay, burned at the stake.

Between 1356 and 1383, King Charles V built a new wall of fortifications around the city. He also built the Bastille, a large fortress guarding the Porte Saint-Antoine at the eastern end of Paris, and an imposing new fortress at Vincennes, east of the city. Charles V moved his official residence from the Île de la Cité to the Louvre, but preferred to live in the Hôtel Saint-Pol.

The flourishing of religious architecture in Paris was largely the work of Suger, the abbot of Saint-Denis from 1122 to 1151 and an advisor to Kings Louis VI and Louis VII. He rebuilt the old Carolingian Basilica of Saint Denis, creating a dramatic wall of stained glass windows that flooded the church with light. This style, which later was named Gothic, was copied by other Paris churches and quickly spread to England and Germany. An even more ambitious building project, a new cathedral for Paris, was begun by bishop Maurice de Sully in about 1160 and continued for two centuries. The first stone of the choir of the cathedral of Notre Dame de Paris was laid in 1163, and the altar was consecrated in 1182.

In the 13th century, King Louis IX (r. 1226–1270), known to history as "Saint Louis", built the Sainte-Chapelle, a masterpiece of Gothic architecture, especially to house relics from the crucifixion of Christ. Built between 1241 and 1248, it has the oldest stained glass windows preserved in Paris. At the same time that the Saint-Chapelle was built, the great stained glass rose windows were added to the transept of the cathedral.

Under Kings Louis VI and Louis VII, Paris became one of the principal centers of learning in Europe. Students, scholars and monks flocked to the city from England, Germany and Italy. They studied first in the different schools attached to Notre-Dame and the Abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés. The most famous teacher was Pierre Abelard, who taught five thousand students at the Montagne Sainte-Geneviève. The University of Paris was originally organised in the mid-12th century.

Some twenty thousand students lived on the Left Bank, which became known as the Latin Quarter, because Latin was the language of instruction and the common language in which the foreign students could converse. In 1257, the chaplain of Louis IX, Robert de Sorbon, opened the oldest and most famous College of the University, which was later named after him, the Sorbonne. From the 13th to the 15th century, the University of Paris was the most important school of Roman Catholic theology in western Europe. Its teachers included Roger Bacon from England, Saint Thomas Aquinas from Italy, and Saint Bonaventure from Germany.

Beginning in the 11th century, Paris had been governed by a Royal Provost, appointed by the king, who lived in the fortress of Grand Châtelet. Saint Louis created a new position, the Provost of the Merchants, to share authority with the Royal Provost and recognize the growing power and wealth of the merchants of Paris. Saint Louis also created the first municipal council of Paris, with twenty-four members.

In 1328, Paris's population was about 200,000, which made it the most populous city in Europe. With the growth in population came growing social tensions; the first riots took place in December 1306 against the Provost of the Merchants, who was accused of raising rents. The houses of many merchants were burned, and twenty-eight rioters were hanged. In January 1357, Étienne Marcel, the Provost of Paris, led a merchants' revolt using violence in a bid to curb the power of the monarchy and obtain privileges for the city and the Estates General, which had met for the first time in Paris in 1347. After initial concessions by the Crown, the city was retaken by royalist forces in 1358 and Marcel was killed.

In the mid-14th century, Paris was struck by two great catastrophes: the bubonic plague and the Hundred Years' War. In the first epidemic of the plague in 1348–1349, forty to fifty thousand Parisians died, a quarter of the population. The plague returned in 1360–1361, 1363, and 1366–1368. There were at least 36 occasions of plague in the city between 1348 and 1480. During the 16th and 17th centuries, plague visited the city almost one year out of three. Other diseases that ravaged Paris included the mumps in 1414, scarlet fever in 1418 and smallpox in 1433 and 1438.

The war was even more catastrophic. Beginning in 1346, an English army under King Edward III of England engaged in a chevauchée in the countryside surrounding Paris. A decade later, when John II of France was captured by the English at the 1356 Battle of Poitiers, disbanded groups of mercenary soldiers pillaged the outskirts of Paris. An Anglo-Burgundian army briefly captured Paris during the night of 28 May 1418. Under the leadership of Henry V of England, Paris was again captured by the English in 1420; the infant Henry VI of England was crowned as the King of France there in 1431. Beginning in 1422, the north of France was ruled by John of Lancaster, 1st Duke of Bedford, the regent of Henry VI, who was residing in Paris. Charles VII of France only ruled France south of the Loire River. During her unsuccessful attempt to capture Paris on 8 September 1429, Joan of Arc was wounded just outside the Porte Saint-Honoré, the westernmost fortified entrance of the Wall of Charles V.

When the English left Paris in 1436, Charles VII was finally able to return. Many areas of the city were in ruins, and 100,000 Parisians, half of the city's population, had left Paris. When Paris was again the capital of France, the succeeding monarchs chose to live in the Loire Valley and visited Paris only on special occasions. King Francis I finally returned the royal residence to Paris in 1528.

By 1500, Paris had regained its former prosperity, and the population reached 250,000. Each new king of France added buildings, bridges and fountains to embellish his capital, most of them in the new Renaissance style.

King Louis XII rarely visited Paris, but he rebuilt the old wooden Pont Notre Dame, which had collapsed on 25 October 1499. On 15 July 1533, King Francis I laid the foundation stone for the first Hôtel de Ville, the city hall of Paris; it was not finished until 1628. Cortona also designed the first Renaissance church in Paris, the church of Saint-Eustache (1532). The first Renaissance house in Paris was the Hôtel Carnavalet, begun in 1545.

In 1534, Francis I became the first French king to make the Louvre his residence. Francis also reinforced the position of Paris as a center of learning and scholarship. In 1500, there were seventy-five printing houses in Paris, second only to Venice, and later in the 16th century, Paris brought out more books than any other European city. In 1530, Francis created a new faculty at the University of Paris with the mission of teaching Hebrew, Greek and mathematics. It became the Collège de France.

Francis I died in 1547, and his son, Henry II, continued to decorate Paris in the French Renaissance style: the finest Renaissance fountain in the city, the Fontaine des Innocents, was built to celebrate Henry's official entrance into Paris in 1549. Henry II also added a new wing to the Louvre, the Pavillon du Roi, and a magnificent hall for festivities and ceremonies, the Salle des Cariatides. Henry II died 10 July 1559. His widow, Catherine de' Medici, had the old residence demolished in 1563, and between 1564 and 1572 constructed a new royal residence, the Tuileries Palace, and a large Italian-style garden, the Jardin des Tuileries.

An ominous gulf was growing within Paris between the followers of the established Catholic church and those of Protestant Calvinism and Renaissance humanism. The Sorbonne and University of Paris forcefully attacked the Protestant and humanist doctrines, and the scholar Étienne Dolet was burned at the stake in 1546 on the orders of the theology faculty of the Sorbonne. But the new doctrines continued to grow in popularity, particularly among the French upper classes. Beginning in 1562, repression and massacres of Protestants in Paris alternated with periods of tolerance, during what became known as the French Wars of Religion (1562–1598). Paris was a stronghold of the Catholic League.

On the night of 23–24 August 1572, while many prominent Protestants from all over France were in Paris on the occasion of the marriage of Henry of Navarre—the future King Henry IV —to Margaret of Valois, the royal council decided to assassinate the leaders of the Protestants. The targeted killings quickly turned into a general slaughter of Protestants by Catholic mobs, known as St. Bartholomew's Day massacre, and it continued through August and September, spreading from Paris to the rest of the country. About three thousand Protestants were massacred in Paris and five to ten thousand elsewhere in France.

King Henry III attempted to find a peaceful solution to the religious conflicts, but the Duke of Guise and his followers in the capital forced him to flee on 12 May 1588, the so-called Day of the Barricades. On 1 August 1589, Henry III was assassinated in the Château de Saint-Cloud. Paris, along with the other towns of the Catholic League, held out until 1594 against Henry IV, who had succeeded Henry III. After a victory over the Holy Union at the Battle of Ivry on 14 March 1590, Henry IV proceeded to lay siege to Paris. The siege was long and unsuccessful. Henry IV agreed to convert to Catholicism. On 14 March 1594, Henry IV entered Paris, after having been crowned King of France at the Cathedral of Chartres on 27 February 1594.

Paris suffered greatly during the wars of religion of the 16th century; a third of the Parisians fled, many houses were destroyed, and the grand projects of the Louvre, the Hôtel de Ville, and the Tuileries Palace were unfinished. Henry IV took away the independence of the city government and ruled Paris directly through royal officers. He relaunched the building projects and built a new wing of the Louvre along the Seine, which connected the old Louvre with the new Tuileries Palace. The project of making the Louvre into a single great palace continued for the next three hundred years.

Henry IV's building projects for Paris were managed by the Duke of Sully, his forceful superintendent of buildings and minister of finances. Henry IV recommenced the construction of the Pont Neuf, started by Henry III in 1578; it was finished between 1600 and 1607. It was the first Paris bridge built without houses. Near the bridge, he built "La Samaritaine" (1602–1608), a large pumping station which provided drinking water as well as water for the gardens of the Louvre and the Tuileries.

Between 1605 and 1612, he built an elegant new residential square surrounded by brick houses and an arcade. In 1607, Henry began work on a new residential triangle, the Place Dauphine. It was his final project for the city of Paris. Henri IV was assassinated on 14 May 1610. Henry IV's widow Marie de' Medici decided to build her own residence, the Luxembourg Palace (1615–1630), modelled after the Pitti Palace in her native Florence. In the Italian gardens of her palace, she commissioned a Florentine fountain-maker, Tommaso Francini, to create the Medici Fountain. To provide water for her gardens and fountains, Marie de' Medici had the old Roman aqueduct from Rungis reconstructed. In 1616, she also created the Cours-la-Reine, a long promenade lined with eighteen hundred elm trees.

Louis XIII continued the Louvre project begun by Henri IV by creating the cour carrée, or square courtyard. His chief minister, the Cardinal de Richelieu, added another important building in the centre of Paris. In 1624, he started construction of a grand new residence for himself, the "Palais-Cardinal", now known as the Palais-Royal. In the first part of the 17th century, Richelieu helped introduce a new religious architectural style into Paris that was inspired by the famous churches in Rome. The first façade built in the Jesuit style was that of the church of Saint-Gervais (1616). The first church entirely built in the new style was Saint-Paul-Saint-Louis, on the Rue Saint-Antoine in Le Marais, between 1627 and 1647. The dome of Saint Peter's in Rome inspired the dome of the chapel of the Sorbonne (1635–1642) commissioned by Cardinal Richelieu, who was the proviseur, or head of the college. The chapel became his final resting place. The plan was taken from another Roman church, San Carlo ai Catinari. The new style, sometimes called Flamboyant Gothic or French baroque, appeared in many other new churches, including Notre-Dame de Bonne-Nouvelle (1624), Notre-Dame-des-Victoires (1629), Saint-Sulpice (1646), and Saint-Roch (1653). The largest project in the new style was Val-de-Grâce, built by Anne of Austria, the widow of Louis XIII. Modeled after the Escorial in Spain, it combined a convent, a church, and royal apartments for the widowed queen. One of the architects of Val-de-Grâce and several of the other new churches was François Mansart, most famous for the sloping roof that became the signature feature of the buildings of the 17th century. During the first half of the 17th century, the population of Paris nearly doubled, reaching 400,000 at the end of the reign of Louis XIII in 1643. To facilitate communication between the Right Bank and Left Bank, Louis XIII built five new bridges over the Seine, doubling the existing number. The nobility, government officials and the wealthy built elegant hôtels particuliers, or town residences, on the Right Bank in the new Faubourg Saint-Honoré, the Faubourg Saint-Jacques, and in the Marais near the Place des Vosges.

The old ferryboat between the Louvre and the Rue de Bac on the Left Bank was replaced by a wooden and then a stone bridge, the Pont Royal, finished by Louis XIV. Near the end of new bridge on the Left Bank, a new fashionable neighborhood, the Faubourg Saint-Germain, soon appeared. Under Louis XIII, two small islands in the Seine, the Île Notre-Dame and the Île-aux-vaches, which had been used for grazing cattle and storing firewood, were combined to form the Île Saint-Louis, which became the site of the splendid hôtels particuliers of Parisian financiers.

Under Louis XIII, Paris solidified its reputation as the cultural capital of Europe. Beginning in 1609, the Louvre Galerie was created, where painters, sculptors, and artisans lived and established their workshops. The Académie Française, modelled after the academies of Italian Renaissance princes, was created in 1635 by Cardinal Richelieu. The Royal Academy of Painting and Sculpture, later the Academy of Fine Arts, was founded in 1648. The first botanical garden in France was founded in 1633 and was the first public garden in Paris. The first permanent theatre in Paris was created by Cardinal Richelieu in 1635 within his Palais-Cardinal.

Richelieu died in 1642, and Louis XIII in 1643. At the death of his father, Louis XIV was only five years old, and his mother Anne of Austria became regent. Richelieu's successor, Cardinal Mazarin, tried to impose a new tax upon the Parlement of Paris, which consisted of a group of prominent nobles of the city. When they refused to pay, Mazarin had the leaders arrested. This marked the beginning a long uprising, known as the Fronde, that pitted the Parisian nobility against royal authority. It lasted from 1648 to 1653.

At times, the young Louis XIV was held under virtual house arrest in the Palais-Royal. He and his mother were forced to flee the city twice, in 1649 and 1651, until the army could retake control of Paris. As a result of the Fronde, Louis XIV had a profound lifelong distrust of Paris. He moved his Paris residence from the Palais-Royal to the more secure Louvre and then, in 1671, he moved the royal residence out of the city to Versailles and came into Paris as seldom as possible.

Despite the distrust of the king, Paris continued to grow and prosper, reaching a population of between 400,000 and 500,000. The king named Jean-Baptiste Colbert as his new Superintendent of Buildings, and Colbert began an ambitious building programme to make Paris the successor to ancient Rome. To make his intention clear, Louis XIV organised a festival in the carrousel of the Tuileries in January 1661, in which he appeared, on horseback, in the costume of a Roman Emperor. Louis XIV completed the Cour carrée of the Louvre and built a majestic row of columns along its east façade (1670). Inside the Louvre, his architect Louis Le Vau and his decorator Charles Le Brun created the Gallery of Apollo, the ceiling of which featured an allegoric figure of the young king steering the chariot of the sun across the sky. He enlarged the Tuileries Palace with a new north pavilion, and had André Le Nôtre, the royal gardener, remodel the gardens of the Tuileries.

Across the Seine from the Louvre, Louis XIV built the Collège des Quatre-Nations (1662–1672), an ensemble of four baroque palaces and a domed church, to house students (today it is the Institut de France). He built a new hospital for Paris, the Salpêtrière, and, for wounded soldiers, a new hospital complex with two churches: Les Invalides (1674). In the centre of Paris, he constructed two monumental new squares, the Place des Victoires (1689) and the Place Vendôme (1698). Louis XIV declared that Paris was secure against any attack and no longer needed its walls. He demolished the main city walls, creating the space which eventually became the Grands Boulevards. To celebrate the destruction of the old walls, he built two small arches of triumph, the Porte Saint-Denis (1672) and the Porte Saint-Martin (1676).

The cultural life of the city also flourished; the city's future most famous theater, the Comédie Française, was created in 1680 on a former tennis court on the Rue Fossés Saint-Germain-des-Prés. The city's first café-restaurant, the Café Procope, was opened in 1686 by the Italian Francesco Procopio dei Coltelli.

For the poor of Paris, life was very different. They were crowded into tall, narrow, five- or six-story high buildings that lined the winding streets on the Île de la Cité and other medieval quarters of the city. Crime in the dark streets was a serious problem. Metal lanterns were hung in the streets, and Colbert increased to four hundred the number of archers who acted as night watchmen. Gabriel Nicolas de la Reynie was appointed the first lieutenant-general of police of Paris in 1667, a position he held for thirty years; his successors reported directly to the king.

Louis XIV died on 1 September 1715. Philippe d'Orléans, the regent for the five-year-old King Louis XV, moved the royal residence and government back to Paris. The king lived in the Tuileries Palace, while the regent lived in his family's luxurious Parisian residence, the Palais-Royal (the former Palais-Cardinal of Cardinal Richelieu). The regent devoted his attention to theater, opera, costume balls, and the courtesans of Paris.

In 1719, he moved the Royal library to the Hôtel de Nevers near the Palais-Royal, where it eventually became part of the Bibliothèque nationale de France (National Library of France). On 15 June 1722, distrustful of the turbulence in Paris, the regent moved the court back to Versailles. Afterwards, Louis XV visited the city only on special occasions.

One of the major building projects in Paris of Louis XV and his successor, Louis XVI, was the new church of Sainte Geneviève on top of the Montagne Sainte-Geneviève on the Left Bank, the future Panthéon. The plans were approved by the king in 1757 and work continued until the French Revolution. Louis XV also built a new military school, the École Militaire (1773), a new medical school, the École de Chirurgie (1775), and a new mint, the Hôtel des Monnaies (1768). The predominant architectural style in Paris from the mid-17th century until the regime of Louis Philippe was neo-classicism, based on the model of Greco-Roman architecture.

Under Louis XV, the city expanded westward. A new boulevard, the Champs-Élysées, was laid out from the Tuileries Garden to the Seine to create a straight line of avenues and monuments known as Paris historical axis. At the beginning of the boulevard, a large square was created between 1766 and 1775. It was first called "Place Louis XV", then the "Place de la Révolution" after 10 August 1792, and finally the Place de la Concorde in 1795 at the time of the Directoire.

Between 1640 and 1789, Paris grew in population from 400,000 to 600,000. London passed it in population in about 1700, but it was still growing at a rapid rate, due largely to migration from the Paris basin and from the north and east of France. The center of the city became more and more crowded; building lots became smaller and buildings taller, up to four, five and even six stories. In 1784, the height of buildings was limited to nine toises, or about eighteen meters.

In the 18th century, Paris was the center of an explosion of philosophic and scientific activity known as the Age of Enlightenment. Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert published their Encyclopédie in 1751–52. Paris was the financial capital of France and continental Europe, the primary European center of book publishing, fashion, and the manufacture of fine furniture and luxury goods. Parisian bankers funded new inventions, theatres, gardens, and art.

The first café in Paris had been opened in 1672, and by the 1720s there were around 400 cafés in the city. They became meeting places for the city's writers and scholars. The Café Procope was frequented by Voltaire, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Diderot and d’Alembert. They became important centres for exchanging news, rumors and ideas, often more reliable than the newspapers of the day.

By 1763, the Faubourg Saint-Germain had replaced Le Marais as the most fashionable residential neighborhood for the aristocracy and the wealthy, who built magnificent private mansions, most of which later became government residences or institutions: the Hôtel d'Évreux (1718–1720) became the Élysée Palace, the residence of the presidents of the French Republic; the Hôtel Matignon, the residence of the prime minister; the Palais Bourbon, the seat of the National Assembly; the Hôtel Salm, the Palais de la Légion d'Honneur ; and the Hôtel de Biron eventually became the Rodin Museum.

Historian Daniel Roche estimated that in 1700 there were between 150,000 and 200,000 indigent persons receiving assistance in Paris, or about a third of the population.

Paris in the first half of the 18th century had many beautiful buildings, but many observers did not consider it a beautiful city. The philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau described his disappointment when he first arrived in Paris from Lyon in 1742:

In 1749, in his Embellissements de Paris, Voltaire observed: "The centre of the city is dark, cramped, hideous, something from the time of the most shameful barbarism." The city continued to spread outwards, especially toward the semi-rural west and northwest.

The city had no mayor or single city government; its police chief reported to the king, the prévôt des marchands de Paris represented the merchants, and the Parlement de Paris, made up of nobles, was largely ceremonial and had little real authority: they struggled to provide the basic necessities to a growing population. For the first time, metal plates or stone were put up to indicate the names of streets, and each building was given a number. Rules for hygiene, safety and traffic circulation were codified by the Lieutenant-General of Police. The first oil lamps were installed on the streets late in the 18th century.

Large steam pumps were built to distribute water to the neighbourhoods that could afford it. There were still no proper sewers; the river Bièvre served as an open sewer, discharging the sewage into the Seine. The first fire brigades were organised between 1729 and 1801, particularly after a large fire destroyed the opera house of the Palais-Royal in 1781. By 1750, there were more than ten thousand carriages for hire in Paris, the first Paris taxis.

Louis XVI ascended to the throne of France in 1774, and his new government in Versailles desperately needed money. In order to raise revenues by charging taxes on merchandise coming into the city, Paris was encircled between 1784 and 1791 by a new wall that stopped merchants who wished to enter Paris. The wall, known as the Wall of the Ferme générale, had fifty-six gates at which taxes had to be paid. The wall and the taxes were highly unpopular, and, along with shortages of bread, fuelled the growing discontent which eventually exploded in the French Revolution.

In 1789, the population of Paris was between 600,000 and 640,000. Then as now, most wealthier Parisians lived in the western part of the city, the merchants in the center, and the workers and artisans in the southern and eastern parts, particularly the Faubourg Saint-Honoré. The population included about one hundred thousand extremely poor and unemployed persons, many of whom had recently moved to Paris to escape hunger in the countryside. Known as the sans-culottes, they made up as much as a third of the population of the eastern neighborhoods.

On 11 July 1789, soldiers of the Royal-Allemand regiment attacked a demonstration on the Place Louis XV organized to protest the dismissal by the king of his reformist finance minister Jacques Necker. The reform movement turned quickly into the French Revolution. On 13 July, a crowd of Parisians occupied the Hôtel de Ville, and the Marquis de Lafayette organized the French National Guard to defend the city. On 14 July, a mob seized the arsenal at the Invalides, acquired thousands of guns, and stormed the Bastille. 87 revolutionaries were killed in the fighting. The governor of the Bastille, the Marquis de Launay, surrendered and then was killed. The provost of the merchants of Paris, Jacques de Flesselles, was also murdered.

The first independent Paris Commune, or city council, met in the Hôtel de Ville on 15 July and chose as the first mayor of Paris Jean Sylvain Bailly. Louis XVI came to Paris on 17 July, where he was welcomed by the new mayor. On 5 October 1789, a large crowd of Parisians marched to Versailles and, the following day, brought the royal family and government back to Paris, virtually as prisoners. The new government of France, the National Assembly, began to meet in the Salle du Manège near the Tuileries Palace.

On 21 May 1790, the Charter of the City of Paris was adopted, declaring the city independent of royal authority: it was divided into twelve municipalities, (later known as arrondissements), and forty-eight sections. Bailly was formally elected mayor by the Parisians on 2 August 1790.

Louis XVI and his family fled Paris on 21 June 1791, but were captured in Varennes and brought back to Paris on 25 June. Hostility grew within Paris between the liberal aristocrats and merchants, who wanted a constitutional monarchy, and the more radical sans-culottes from the working-class and poor neighbourhoods, who wanted a republic and the abolition of the Ancien Régime, including the privileged classes: the aristocracy and the Church. Aristocrats continued to leave Paris for safety in the countryside or abroad. On 17 July 1791, the National Guard fired upon a gathering of petitioners on the Champs de Mars, killing dozens and widening the gulf between the more moderate and more radical revolutionaries.

In April 1792, Austria declared war on France, and in June 1792, the Duke of Brunswick, commander of the army of the King of Prussia, threatened to destroy Paris unless the Parisians accepted the authority of their king. In response to the threat, on 10 August the leaders of the sans-culottes deposed the Paris city government and established their own government, the Insurrectionary Commune, in the Hôtel-de-Ville. Upon learning that a mob of sans-culottes was approaching the Tuileries Palace, the royal family took refuge at the nearby Assembly. In the attack of the Tuileries Palace, the mob killed the last defenders of the king, his Swiss Guards, then ransacked the palace. Threatened by the sans-culottes, the Assembly "suspended" the power of the king and, on 11 August, declared that France would be governed by a National Convention. On 13 August, Louis XVI and his family were imprisoned in the Temple fortress. On 21 September, the Convention abolished the monarchy, and the next day declared France to be a republic. The Committee of Public Safety, charged with hunting down the enemies of the Revolution, established its headquarters in the Pavillon de Flore, the south pavilion of the Tuileries, while the Tribunal, the revolutionary court, set up its courtroom within the old Palais de la Cité.

The new government imposed a Reign of Terror. From 2 to 6 September 1792, bands of sans-culottes broke into the prisons and murdered refractory priests, aristocrats and criminals. On 21 January 1793, Louis XVI was guillotined on the Place de la Révolution. Marie Antoinette was executed on 16 October 1793. Bailly, the first Mayor of Paris, was guillotined the following November. During the Reign of Terror, 16,594 persons were tried by the revolutionary tribune and executed by guillotine. Tens of thousands of others associated with the Ancien Régime were arrested and imprisoned. Property of the aristocracy and the Church was confiscated and declared Biens nationaux (national property). The churches were closed.

By order of the Legislative Assembly, the sans-culottes knocked down the spire of Notre Dame Cathedral in 1792. A decree of 1 August 1793 was issued to commemorate the first anniversary of the fall of the monarchy by destroying the tombs at the royal necropolis of Saint-Denis. A number of prominent historic buildings, including the enclosure of the Temple, the Abbey of Montmartre, and most of the Abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés, were nationalized and demolished. Many churches were sold as public property and were demolished.

A succession of revolutionary factions ruled Paris: on 1 June 1793, the Montagnards seized power from the Girondins, then were replaced by Georges Danton and his followers; in 1794, they were overthrown and guillotined by a new government led by Maximillien Robespierre. On 27 July 1794, Robespierre himself was arrested and was guillotined the next day. His execution marked the end of the Reign of Terror. The executions then ceased and the prisons gradually emptied.

A new government, the Directory, took the place of the Convention. It moved its headquarters to the Luxembourg Palace and limited the autonomy of Paris. When the authority of the Directory was challenged by a royalist uprising on 13 Vendémiaire (5 October 1795), the Directory called upon a young general, Napoléon Bonaparte, for help. Bonaparte used cannon and grapeshot to clear the streets of demonstrators. On 18 Brumaire (9 November 1799), he organised a coup d'état that overthrew the Directory and replaced it by the Consulate with Bonaparte as First Consul. This event marked the end of the French Revolution and opened the way to the First French Empire.

The population of Paris had dropped to 570,000 by 1797, but building still continued. A new bridge over the Seine, the modern Pont de la Concorde, which had been started under Louis XVI, was completed in 1791. Other landmarks were converted to new purposes: the Panthéon was transformed from a church into a mausoleum, the Louvre became a museum, and the Palais-Bourbon, a former residence of the royal family, became the home of the National Assembly. The two first covered commercial streets in Paris, the Passage du Caire and the Passage des Panoramas, were opened in 1799.

First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte moved into the Tuileries Palace on 19 February 1800 and immediately began to re-establish order after the years of uncertainty and terror of the Revolution. He made peace with the Catholic church by signing the Concordat of 1801 with Pope Pius VII ; masses were held again in all churches. He abolished the elected position of the Mayor of Paris, and replaced it with a Prefect of the Seine appointed by him on 17 February 1800. The first prefect, Louis Nicolas Dubois, was appointed on 8 March 1800. Each of the twelve arrondissements had its own mayor, but their power was limited to enforcing the decrees of Napoleon's ministers.

After he crowned himself Emperor on 2 December 1804, Napoleon began a series of projects to make Paris into an imperial capital to rival ancient Rome. He began construction of the Rue de Rivoli. The old convent of the Capucines was demolished, and he built a new street that connected Place Vendôme to the Grands Boulevards. The street was called the "Rue Napoléon", later renamed the Rue de la Paix.

In 1802, Napoleon built a revolutionary iron bridge, the Pont des Arts, across the Seine. It was decorated with two greenhouses of exotic plants and rows of orange trees. Passage across the bridge cost one sou. He gave the names of his victories to two new bridges, the Pont d'Austerlitz (1802) and the Pont d'Iéna (1807)

In 1806, in imitation of Ancient Rome, Napoleon ordered the construction of a series of monuments dedicated to the military glory of France. The first and largest was the Arc de Triomphe, finished only in July 1836 during the July Monarchy. He ordered the building of the smaller Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel (1806–1808), copied from the arch of Arch of Septimius Severus and Constantine in Rome. It was crowned with a team of bronze horses that he took from the façade of St Mark's Basilica in Venice. The Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel is the easternmost monument of the historical axis of Paris. He also commissioned the building of the Vendôme Column (1806–1810), copied from Trajan's Column in Rome. He took the foundations of an unfinished church, the Madeleine, which had been started in 1763, and transformed it into the Temple de la Gloire, a military shrine to display the statues of France's most famous generals.

Napoleon also looked after the infrastructure of the city, which had been neglected for years. In 1802, he began construction of the Canal de l'Ourcq to bring fresh water to the city and built the Bassin de la Villette to serve as a reservoir. To distribute the fresh water to the Parisians, he built a series of monumental fountains, the largest of which was the Fontaine du Palmier, on the Place du Châtelet. He also began construction of the Canal Saint-Martin to further river transportation within the city.

Napoleon's last public project, begun in 1810, was the construction of the Elephant of the Bastille, a fountain in the shape of a colossal bronze elephant, twenty-four meters high, which was intended for the center of the Place de la Bastille, but he did not have time to finish it. An enormous plaster mockup of the elephant stood in the square for many years after the emperor's final defeat and exile. In 1811, Napoleon decreed the building of an immense palace. It was intended to eclipse every palace in Europe in size and luxury, but only the foundations had been laid before Napoleon's fall from power brought an end to the project.

Following the downfall of Napoleon after the defeat of Waterloo on 18 June 1815, 300,000 British, Austrian, Russian and Prussian soldiers of the Seventh Coalition occupied Paris until December 1815. Louis XVIII returned to the city and moved into the former apartments of Napoleon at the Tuileries Palace. The Pont de la Concorde was renamed "Pont Louis XVI", a new statue of Henry IV was put back on the empty pedestal on the Pont Neuf, and the white flag of the Bourbons flew from the top of the column in Place Vendôme.

The aristocrats who had emigrated returned to their town houses in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, and the cultural life of the city quickly resumed, though on a less extravagant scale. A new opera house was constructed on Rue Le Peletier. The Louvre was expanded in 1827 with nine new galleries that put on display the antiquities collected during Napoleon's conquest of Egypt.

Work continued on the Arc de Triomphe, and the new churches in the neoclassical style were constructed to replace those destroyed during the Revolution: Saint-Pierre-du-Gros-Caillou (1822–1830); Notre-Dame-de-Lorette (1823–1836); Notre-Dame de Bonne-Nouvelle (1828–1830); Saint-Vincent-de-Paul (1824–1844) and Saint-Denys-du-Saint-Sacrement (1826–1835). The Temple of Glory (1807) created by Napoleon to celebrate military heroes was turned back into a church, the church of La Madeleine. King Louis XVIII also built the Chapelle expiatoire, a chapel devoted to Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette, on the site of the small Madeleine cemetery, where their remains (now in the Basilica of Saint-Denis) were buried following their execution.

Paris grew quickly, reaching a population of 800,000 by 1830. Between 1828 and 1860, the city built a horse-drawn omnibus system that was the world's first mass public transit system. It greatly speeded the movement of people inside the city and became a model for other cities. The old Paris street names, carved into stone on walls, were replaced by royal blue metal plates with the street names in white letters, the model still in use today. Fashionable new neighborhoods were built on the right bank around the church of Saint-Vincent-de-Paul, the church of Notre-Dame-de-Lorette, and the Place de l’Europe. The "New Athens" neighbourhood became, during the Restoration and the July Monarchy, the home of artists and writers: the actor François-Joseph Talma lived at number 9 Rue de la Tour-des-Dames; the painter Eugène Delacroix lived at 54 Rue Notre-Dame de-Lorette; the novelist George Sand lived in the Square d'Orléans. The latter was a private community that opened at 80 Rue Taitbout, which had forty-six apartments and three artists' studios. Sand lived on the first floor of number 5, while Frédéric Chopin lived for a time on the ground floor of number 9.

Louis XVIII was succeeded by his brother Charles X in 1824, but new the government became increasingly unpopular with both the upper classes and the general population of Paris. The play Hernani (1830) by the twenty-eight-year-old Victor Hugo, caused disturbances and fights in the theater audience because of its calls for freedom of expression. On 26 July, Charles X signed decrees limiting freedom of the press and dissolving the Parliament, provoking demonstrations which turned into riots which turned into a general uprising. After three days, known as the ‘’Trois Glorieuses’’, the army joined the demonstrators. Charles X, his family and the court left the Château de Saint-Cloud, and, on 31 July, the Marquis de Lafayette and the new constitutional monarch Louis Philippe I raised the tricolor flag again before cheering crowds at the Hôtel de Ville.

The Paris of King Louis Philippe I was the city described in the novels of Honoré de Balzac and Victor Hugo. The population of Paris increased from 785,000 in 1831 to 1,053,000 in 1848, as the city grew to the north and west, but the poorest neighborhoods in the center became even more densely crowded.

The heart the city, around the Île de la Cité, was a maze of narrow, winding streets and crumbling buildings from earlier centuries; it was picturesque, but dark, crowded, unhealthy and dangerous. Water was distributed by porters carrying buckets from a pole on their shoulders, and the sewers emptied directly into the Seine. A cholera outbreak in 1832 killed twenty thousand people. The Comte de Rambuteau, the Prefect of the Seine for fifteen years under Louis-Philippe, made tentative efforts to improve the center of the city: he paved the quays of the Seine with stone paths and planted trees along the river. He built a new street (now the Rue Rambuteau) to connect the Le Marais district with the markets and began construction of Les Halles, the famous central market of Paris, which was finished by Napoleon III.

Louis-Philippe lived in the ancestral Orléans family residence of the House of Orléans, the Palais-Royal, until 1832, before moving to the Tuileries Palace. His chief contribution to the monuments of Paris was the completion of the Place de la Concorde in 1836: the huge square was decorated with two fountains, one representing fluvial commerce, Fontaine des Fleuves, and the other maritime commerce, Fontaine des Mers, and eight statues of women representing eight great cities of France: Brest and Rouen (by Jean-Pierre Cortot), Lyon and Marseille (by Pierre Petitot), Bordeaux and Nantes (by Louis-Denis Caillouette), Lille and Strasbourg (by James Pradier). The statue of Strasbourg was a likeness of Juliette Drouet, the mistress of Victor Hugo. The Place de la Concorde was further embellished on 25 October 1836 by the placement of the Luxor Obelisk, weighing two hundred fifty tons, which was carried to France from Egypt on a specially built ship. In the same year, at the westernmost end of the Champs-Élysées, Louis-Philippe completed and dedicated the Arc de Triomphe, which had been begun by Napoleon.

The ashes of Napoleon were returned to Paris from Saint Helena in a solemn ceremony on 15 December 1840 at the Invalides. Louis-Philippe also placed the statue of Napoleon atop the column in the Place Vendôme. In 1840, he completed a column in the Place de la Bastille dedicated to the July 1830 revolution that had brought him to power. He also began the restoration of the churches of Paris damaged during the French Revolution, a project carried out by the architectural historian Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, beginning with the church of the Abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Prés. Between 1837 and 1841, he built a new Hôtel de Ville with an interior salon decorated by Eugène Delacroix.

The first railway stations in Paris were built under Louis-Philippe. Each belonged to a different company. They were not connected to each other and were outside the center of the city. The first, called the Embarcadère de Saint-Germain-en-Laye, was opened on 24 August 1837 on the Place de l'Europe. An early version of the Gare Saint-Lazare was begun in 1842, and the first lines Paris-Orléans and Paris-Rouen were inaugurated on 1 and 2 May 1843.

As the population of Paris grew, so did discontent in the working-class neighborhoods. There were riots in 1830, 1831, 1832, 1835, 1839 and 1840. The 1832 uprising, following the funeral of a fierce critic of Louis-Philippe, General Jean Maximilien Lamarque, was immortalized in Victor Hugo's novel Les Misérables.

The growing unrest finally exploded on 23 February 1848, when a large demonstration was broken up by the army. Barricades went up in the eastern working-class neighborhoods. The king reviewed his soldiers in front of the Tuileries Palace, but, instead of cheering him, many shouted "Long Live Reform!" Discouraged, he abdicated and went into exile in England.

In December 1848, Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte, the nephew of Napoleon I, became the first elected President of France, winning seventy-four percent of the vote. Because of the sharp divisions between monarchists and republicans, the "Prince-President" was able to accomplish little, and he was prevented by the Constitution from running for re-election. In December 1851, he organized a coup d'état, dismissed the Parliament, and on 2 December 1852, after winning approval in a national referendum, became Emperor Napoleon III.

At the beginning of Napoleon's reign, Paris had a population of about one million people, most of whom lived in crowded and unhealthy conditions. A cholera epidemic in the overcrowded center in 1848 killed twenty thousand people. In 1853, Napoleon launched a gigantic public works program under the direction of his new Prefect of the Seine, Georges-Eugène Haussmann, whose purpose was to put unemployed Parisians to work and bring clean water, light and open space to the centre of the city.

Napoleon began by enlarging the city limits beyond the twelve arrondissements established in 1795. The towns around Paris had resisted becoming part of the city, fearing higher taxes; Napoleon used his new imperial power to annex them, adding eight new arrondissements to the city and bringing it to its present size. Over the next seventeen years, Napoleon and Haussmann transformed entirely the appearance of Paris. They demolished most of the old neighborhoods on the Île de la Cité, replacing them with a new Palais de Justice and prefecture of police, and rebuilding the old city hospital, the Hôtel-Dieu. They completed the extension of the Rue de Rivoli, begun by Napoleon I, and built a network of wide boulevards to connect the railway stations and neighborhoods of the city to improve traffic circulation and create open space around the city's monuments. The new boulevards also made it harder to build barricades in the neighborhoods prone to uprisings and revolutions, but, as Haussmann himself wrote, this was not the main purpose of the boulevards. Haussmann imposed strict standards on the new buildings along the new boulevards; they had to be the same height, follow the same basic design, and be faced in a creamy white stone. These standards gave central Paris the street plan and distinctive look it still retains today.

Napoleon III also wanted to give the Parisians, particularly those in the outer neighborhoods, access to green space for recreation and relaxation. He was inspired by Hyde Park in London, which he had often visited when he was in exile there. He ordered the construction of four large new parks at the four cardinal points of the compass around the city; the Bois de Boulogne to the west; the Bois de Vincennes to the east; the Parc des Buttes-Chaumont to the north; and Parc Montsouris to the south, plus many smaller parks and squares around the city, so that no neighbourhood was more than a ten-minute walk from a park.

Napoleon III and Haussmann rebuilt two major railway stations, the Gare de Lyon and the Gare du Nord, to make them monumental gateways to the city. They improved the sanitation of the city by building new sewers and water mains under the streets and built a new reservoir and aqueduct to increase the supply of fresh water. In addition, they installed tens of thousands of gaslights to illuminate the streets and monuments. They began construction of the Palais Garnier for the Paris Opera and built two new theaters at the Place du Châtelet to replace those in the old theater district of the Boulevard du Temple, known as "The Boulevard of Crime", which had been demolished to make room for the new boulevards. They completely rebuilt the central market of the city, Les Halles, built the first railway bridge over the Seine, and also built the monumental Fontaine Saint-Michel at the beginning of the new Boulevard Saint-Michel. They also redesigned the street architecture of Paris, installing new street lamps, kiosks, omnibus stops and public toilets (called "chalets of necessity"), which were specially designed by the city architect Gabriel Davioud, and which gave the Paris boulevards their distinct harmony and look.

In the late 1860s, Napoleon III decided to liberalize his regime and gave greater freedom and power to the legislature. Haussmann became the chief target of criticism in the parliament, blamed for the unorthodox ways in which he financed his projects, for amputating four hectares from the thirty hectares of the Luxembourg Gardens in order to make room for new streets, and for the general inconvenience his projects caused to Parisians for nearly two decades. In January 1870, Napoleon was forced to dismiss him. A few months later, Napoleon was drawn into the Franco-Prussian War, then defeated and captured at the Battle of Sedan of 1–2 September 1870, but the work on Haussmann's boulevards continued during the Third Republic, which was established immediately after Napoleon's defeat and abdication, until they were finally finished in 1927.

The first large-scale industries arrived in Paris during the reign of Napoleon. They flourished in the outskirts of the city, where buildings and land, often taken from churches and convents closed during the French Revolution, were available. Large textile mills were built in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine and the Faubourg Saint-Denis, and the first sugar refinery using sugar beets was opened in Passy in 1812 to supplant West Indian sugar that could no longer be shipped to France due to British naval blockades. Iron and bronze foundries had been started late in the 18th century in the Faubourg Saint-Honoré and Chaillot, and early chemical works in Javel, La Chapelle and Clignancourt. In 1801, Paris had nine hundred enterprises that employed 60,000 workers, but only twenty-four enterprises had more than 100 workers. Most Parisians were employed in small workshops. Paris in the 19th century had many artisans producing luxury goods, particularly clothing, watches, fine furniture, porcelain, jewelry and leather goods, which commanded premium prices on the world market. Throughout the 19th century, the amount of industry and number of workers increased. In 1847, there were 350,000 workers in Paris in 65,000 enterprises, but only 7,000 enterprises had more than ten workers. The textile industry declined, but at mid-century Paris produced 20 percent of the steam engines and machinery in France and had the third largest metallurgy industry. New chemical plants, highly polluting, appeared around the edges of the city in Javel, Grenelle, Passy, Clichy, Belleville and Pantin.

Paris emerged as an international center of finance in the mid-19th century second only to London. It had a strong national bank and numerous aggressive private banks that financed projects all across Europe and the expanding Second French Empire. Napoleon III had the goal of overtaking London to make Paris the premier financial center of the world, but the war in 1870-71 hit finance hard and sharply reduced the range of the financial influence of Paris. One major development was the establishment of one of the main branches of the Rothschild family. In 1812, James Mayer Rothschild arrived in Paris from Frankfurt and set up the bank Rothschild Frères. This bank helped fund Napoleon I's brief return from Elba and became one of the leading banks in European finance. The Rothschild banking family of France, along with other new investment banks, funded some of France's industrial and colonial expansion. The Banque de France, founded in 1796, helped resolve the financial crisis of 1848 and emerged as a powerful central bank. The Comptoir National d'Escompte de Paris (CNEP) was established during the financial crisis and republican revolution of 1848. Its innovations included both private and public sources in funding large projects and the creation of a network of local offices to reach a much larger pool of depositors. Other major banks included the Société Générale and the Crédit Mobilier. The Crédit Lyonnais began in Lyon and moved to Paris.

The Paris Bourse (or stock exchange) emerged as a key market for investors to buy and sell securities. It was primarily a forward market, and it pioneered the creation of a mutual guarantee fund so that failures of major brokers would not escalate into a devastating financial crisis. Speculators in the 1880s, who disliked the control of the Bourse, used a less regulated alternative, the "Coulisse". However it collapsed in the face of the simultaneous failure of a number of its brokers in 1895–1896. The Bourse secured legislation that guaranteed its monopoly, increased control of the curb market, and reduced the risk of another financial panic.

The rule of Napoleon III came to an abrupt end when he was defeated and captured at the Battle of Sedan of 1–2 September 1870 at the end of the Franco-Prussian War. He abdicated on 4 September, with the Third Republic proclaimed that same day in Paris. On 19 September, the Prussian army arrived at Paris and besieged the city until January 1871. During the siege, the city suffered from cold and hunger. Cats, rats, dogs, horses, and other animals were killed for food, even Castor and Pollux, the two elephants of the zoo, as well as the elephant at the Jardin des Plantes. In January 1871, the Prussians began the bombardment of the city with heavy siege guns, and the city finally surrendered on 28 January. The Prussians briefly occupied the city and then took up positions nearby.

A revolt broke out on 18 March 1871, when radicalized soldiers from the Paris National Guard killed two French generals. Government officials and the army withdrew quickly to Versailles, and a new city council, the Paris Commune, dominated by anarchists and radical socialists, was elected and took power on March 26. The Commune tried to implement an ambitious and radical social program, but held power for only two months. Between May 21 and 28, the French army reconquered the city in bitter fighting in what became known as the semaine sanglante ("Bloody Week"). During the street fighting, the Communards were outnumbered four or five to one; they lacked competent officers and had no plan for the defense of the city, so each neighborhood was left to defend itself. Their military commander, Louis Charles Delescluze, committed suicide by dramatically standing atop a barricade on May 26. In the final days of the battle, the Communards set fire to the Tuileries Palace, the Hôtel de Ville, the Palais de Justice, the Palace of the Legion of Honor, besides other prominent government buildings, and executed hostages they had taken, including Georges Darboy, the archbishop of Paris.

Army casualties from the beginning of April through the Bloody Week amounted to 837 dead and 6,424 wounded. Nearly 7,000 Communards were killed in combat or summarily executed by army firing squads afterwards. They were buried in the city cemeteries and in temporary mass graves. About 10,000 Communards escaped and went into exile in Belgium, England, Switzerland and the United States. Of the 45,000 prisoners taken after the fall of the Commune, most were released, but 23 were sentenced to death, and about 10,000 were sentenced to prison or deportation to New Caledonia or other prison colonies. All the prisoners and exiles were amnestied in 1879 and 1880 and most returned to France, where some were elected to the National Assembly.

After the fall of the Commune, Paris was governed under the strict surveillance of the conservative national government. The government and parliament did not return to the city from Versailles until 1879, although the Senate returned earlier to its seat in the Luxembourg Palace. On 23 July 1873, the National Assembly endorsed the project of building a basilica at the site where the uprising of the Paris Commune had begun; it was intended to atone for the sufferings of Paris during the Franco-Prussian War and the Commune. The Basilica of Sacré-Cœur was built in a neo-Byzantine style and paid for by public subscription. It was not finished until 1919, but quickly became one of the most recognizable landmarks in Paris.

Radical Republicans dominated the Paris municipal elections of 1878, winning 75 of the 80 municipal council seats. In 1879, they changed the name of many of the Paris streets and squares: the Place du Château-d’Eau became the Place de la République, and a statue of the Republic was placed in the centre in 1883. The avenues de la Reine-Hortense, Joséphine and Roi-de-Rome were renamed Hoche, Marceau and Kléber, after generals who served during the period of the French Revolution. The Hôtel de Ville was rebuilt between 1874 and 1882 in the neo-Renaissance style, with towers modelled after those of the Château de Chambord. The ruins of the Cour des Comptes on the Quai d'Orsay, burned by the Communards, were demolished and replaced by a new railway station, the Gare d'Orsay (today's Musée d'Orsay). The walls of the Tuileries Palace were still standing. Baron Haussmann, Hector Lefuel and Eugène Viollet-le-Duc pleaded for the rebuilding of the palace but, in 1879, the city council decided against it, because the former palace was a symbol of monarchy. In 1883, it had the ruins pulled down. Only the Pavillon de Marsan (north) and the Pavillon de Flore (south) were restored.

The most memorable Parisian civic event during the period was the funeral of Victor Hugo in 1885. Hundreds of thousands of Parisians lined the Champs Élysées to see the passage of his coffin. The Arc de Triomphe was draped in black. The remains of the writer were placed in the Panthéon, formerly the church of Saint-Geneviève, which had been turned into a mausoleum for great Frenchmen during the Revolution of 1789, then turned back into a church in April 1816, during the Bourbon Restoration. After several changes during the 19th century, it was secularised again in 1885 on the occasion of Victor Hugo's funeral.

At the end of the century, Paris began to modernise its public transport system to try to catch up with London. The first metro line was begun in 1897 between the Porte Maillot and the Porte de Vincennes. It was finished in time for the 1900 Universal Exposition. Two new bridges were built over the Seine. One was the Pont Alexandre III, which connected the left bank with the site of the 1900 Exposition. Its cornerstone was laid in 1896 by Emperor Nicholas II of Russia, who, in 1894, had succeeded his father, Alexander III of Russia. The new avenue between the bridge and the Champs Élysées was first named the Avenue Alexandre III, then Avenue Nicolas II, and again Avenue Alexandre III until 1966, when it was finally renamed Avenue Winston-Churchill. The same engineers who built the modern iron structure of the Pont Alexandre III also built the Pont Mirabeau, which connected Auteuil and Javel.

In the late 19th and early 20th century, Paris became the birthplace of modern art and public cinema projections. Many notable artists lived and worked in Paris during the Belle Époque, often in Montmartre, where rents were low and the atmosphere congenial. Auguste Renoir rented space at 12 Rue Cartot in 1876 to paint his Bal du moulin de la Galette, which depicts a dance at Montmartre on a Sunday afternoon. Maurice Utrillo lived at the same address from 1906 to 1914, and Raoul Dufy shared an atelier there from 1901 to 1911. The building is now the Musée de Montmartre. Pablo Picasso, Amedeo Modigliani and other artists lived and worked in a building called Le Bateau-Lavoir from 1904 to 1909. In this building, Picasso painted one of his most important masterpieces, Les Demoiselles d'Avignon.

Several noted composers, including Erik Satie, also lived in this neighborhood. Most of the artists left after the outbreak of World War I, the majority of them to take up residence in the Montparnasse quarter.

On 25 December 1895, the Grand Café on the Boulevard des Capucines was the location of the first public projection of a motion picture, this one produced by the Lumière Brothers. Thirty-three spectators paid one franc each to see a series of short films, beginning with a film of workers leaving the Lumière brothers' factory in Lyon.

At the outset of the 20th century, Henri Matisse and several other artists, including the pre-cubists Georges Braque, André Derain, Raoul Dufy, Jean Metzinger and Maurice de Vlaminck, revolutionized the Paris art world with "wild", multi-coloured, expressive landscapes and figure paintings that critics referred to as Fauvism. Henri Matisse's two versions of The Dance signified a key point in his career and in the development of modern painting.

In late 19th- and early 20th-century Paris, wealth was growing rapidly, and it became increasingly concentrated. Paris from 1872 to 1927 was a "rentier society". Rentiers (that is, people who relied primarily on inherited wealth) made up about 10% of the population, but owned 70% of aggregate wealth; they spent heavily on luxuries as their income from capital assets could sustain a living standard far beyond what labor income alone would permit. Paris became world-famous for making consumerism a social priority and economic force, especially through its grand department stores and upscale arcades filled with luxury shops. These were "dream machines" that set the world standard for consumption of fine products by the upper classes as well as the rising middle class. Aristide Boucicaut, the son of a small clothing-shop owner, became partner in a variety store called Le Bon Marché in Paris in 1848. He became owner in 1852 and transformed it into the first modern department store in Paris with high-volume buying, low profit margins, seasonal sales, discounts, advertising, a mail-order catalog, and entertainment and prizes for customers, spouses and children. Goods were sold at fixed prices with guarantees that allowed exchanges and refunds. It became the model for other Paris department stores, including La Samaritaine, Printemps and Galeries Lafayette.

The French gloried in the national prestige brought by the great Parisian stores. Émile Zola set his novel Au Bonheur des Dames (1882–83) in a typical department store, based on research he did at Le Bon Marché in 1880. Zola represented it as a symbol of the new technology that was both improving society and devouring it. The novel describes merchandising, management techniques, marketing, and consumerism.

The Grands Magasins Dufayel was a huge department store with inexpensive prices built in 1890 in the northern part of Paris, where it reached a very large new customer base in the working class. In a neighborhood with few public spaces, it provided a consumer version of the public square. It educated workers to approach shopping as an exciting social activity, not just a routine exercise in obtaining necessities, in the same way as the bourgeoisie did at the famous department stores in the central city. Like the bourgeois stores, it helped transform consumption from a business transaction into a direct relationship between consumer and sought-after goods. Its advertisements promised the opportunity to participate in the newest, most fashionable consumerism at reasonable cost. The latest technology was featured, such as cinemas and exhibits of inventions such as X-ray machines (that could be used to fit shoes) and the gramophone.

Increasingly after 1870, the stores' work force became feminized, opening up prestigious job opportunities for young women. Despite the low pay and long hours, they enjoyed the exciting complex interactions with the newest and most fashionable merchandise and upscale customers.

In the second half of the 19th century, Paris hosted five international expositions that attracted millions of visitors and made Paris an increasingly important center of technology, trade, and tourism. The Expositions celebrated the cult of technology and industrial production, both through the impressive iron architecture in which the exhibits were displayed and the almost demonic energy of machines and installations in place.

The first was the Universal Exposition of 1855, hosted by Napoleon III, held in the gardens next to the Champs Élysées. It was inspired by the London's Great Exhibition in 1851 and was designed to showcase the achievements of French industry and culture. The classification system of Bordeaux wines was developed especially for the Exposition. The Théâtre du Rond-Point next to the Champs Élysées is a vestige of that exposition.

The Paris International Exposition in 1867, also hosted by Napoleon III, was held in an enormous oval exhibit hall 490 metres long and 380 metres wide in the Champ de Mars. Famous visitors included Czar Alexander II of Russia, Otto Von Bismarck, Kaiser William I of Germany, King Louis II of Bavaria and the Sultan of the Ottoman Empire, the first foreign trip ever made by an Ottoman ruler. The Bateaux Mouches excursion riverboats made their first journeys on the Seine during the 1867 Exposition.

The Universal Exposition of 1878 took place on both sides of the Seine, in the Champ de Mars and the heights of Trocadéro, where the first Palais de Trocadéro was built. Alexander Graham Bell displayed his new telephone, Thomas Edison presented his phonograph, and the head of the newly finished Statue of Liberty was displayed before it was sent to New York to be attached to the body. In honor of the Exposition, the Avenue de l’Opéra and Place de l’Opéra were lit with electric lights for the first time. The Exposition attracted thirteen million visitors.

The Universal Exposition of 1889, which also took place on the Champ de Mars, celebrated the centenary of the beginning of the French Revolution. The most memorable feature was the Eiffel Tower, 300 meters tall when it opened (now 324 with the addition of broadcast antennas), which served as the gateway to the Exposition. The Eiffel Tower remained the world's tallest structure until 1930. It was not popular with everyone: its modern style was denounced in public letters by many of France's most prominent cultural figures, including Guy de Maupassant, Charles Gounod and Charles Garnier. Other popular exhibits included the first musical fountain, lit with colored electric lights, changing in time to music. Buffalo Bill and sharpshooter Annie Oakley drew large crowds to their Wild West Show at the Exposition.

The Universal Exposition of 1900 celebrated the turn of the century. It also took place at the Champ de Mars and attracted fifty million visitors. In addition to the Eiffel Tower, the Exposition featured the world's largest ferris wheel, the Grande Roue de Paris, one hundred metres high, carrying 1,600 passengers in 40 cars. Inside the exhibit hall, Rudolph Diesel demonstrated his new engine, and the first escalator was on display. The Exposition coincided with the 1900 Paris Olympics, the first time that the Olympic games were held outside of Greece. It also popularised a new artistic style, Art Nouveau, to the world. Two architectural legacies of the Exposition, the Grand Palais and Petit Palais, are still in place.

The outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 saw patriotic demonstrations on the Place de la Concorde and at the Gare de l'Est and Gare du Nord as the mobilized soldiers departed for the front. Within a few weeks, however, the German Army had reached the Marne River, east of Paris. The French government moved to Bordeaux on 2 September, and the great masterpieces of the Louvre were transported to Toulouse.

Early in the First Battle of the Marne, on 5 September 1914 the French army desperately needed reinforcements. General Gallieni, the military governor of Paris, lacked trains. He requisitioned buses and, most famously, about 600 Paris taxicabs that were used to carry six thousand troops to the front at Nanteuil-le-Haudouin, fifty kilometers away. Each taxi carried five soldiers following the lights of the taxi ahead, and the mission was accomplished within twenty-four hours. The German troops were surprised and were pushed back by the French and British armies. The number of soldiers transported was small, but the effect on French morale was enormous; it confirmed the solidarity between the people and the army. The government returned to Paris, and theatres and cafés re-opened.

The city was bombed by German heavy Gotha bombers and by a Zeppelin.

The Parisians suffered epidemics of typhoid and measles ; a deadly outbreak of Spanish influenza during the winter of 1918-19 killed thousands of Parisians.

In the spring of 1918, the Imperial German Army launched a new offensive and threatened Paris once more, bombing it with the Paris Gun. On 29 March 1918, one shell struck the Church of Saint-Gervais and killed 88 persons. Sirens were installed to warn the population of impending bombardments. On 29 June 1917, soldiers of the American Expeditionary Forces arrived in France to reinforce the French and British armies. The German Army was pushed back once again, and the German Empire signed the Armistice of 11 November 1918. Hundreds of thousands of Parisians filled the Champs-Élysées on 17 November to celebrate the return of Alsace and Lorraine to France. Equally huge crowds welcomed President Woodrow Wilson to the Hôtel de Ville on 16 December. Huge crowds of Parisians also lined the Champs Élysées on 14 July 1919 for a victory parade by the Allied armies.

Life in Paris was difficult during the war: gas, electricity, coal, bread, butter, flour, potatoes and sugar were strictly rationed. Consumer co-operatives sprang up and municipalities developed communal gardening spaces. Coal was critically short in the unusually cold winter of 1916-17. The outer neighborhoods of the city, particularly the 13th, 14th, 15th and 18th arrondissements, became centers of the defense industry, producing trucks, cannons, ambulances, and munitions. A large Renault factory at Boulogne-Billancourt produced tanks, while a new factory in Javel mass-produced artillery shells; when the war ended, it became the first Citroën factory. The site is now Parc André Citroën. As factory workers were drafted and sent to the front, their places were taken by women as well as 183,000 colonials from Africa and Indo-China who were closely watched by the government. All classes supported the war effort in a burst of consensus known as the Union sacrée. Antiwar voices existed, but did not represent a strong base. While the government stressed efficiency and maximizing supplies for the army, the working class was largely committed to a traditional sense of consumer rights, whereby it was the duty of the government to provide the basic food, housing and fuel for the city. Hoarding and profiteering were evils that citizens should organize to combat. In 1917, women workers in clothing factories, department stores, banks, munition factories and other enterprises went on strike, winning a wage increase and a five-day week.

After the war, unemployment surged, prices soared, and rationing continued; Parisian households were limited to 300 grams of bread per day and meat only four days a week. A general strike paralysed the city on 21 July 1919. The French Communist and Socialist parties competed for influence with the workers. The future leader of Vietnam, Ho Chi Minh, worked in Paris from 1919 to 1923, studying nationalism and socialism. Leopold Senghor, the future first president of Senegal, arrived in 1928 to study and became a university professor and eventually a member of the Académie Française. The old fortifications surrounding the city were useless and torn down in the 1920s. They were replaced by tens of thousands of low-cost seven-story public housing units that were filled by low-income blue-collar workers who mostly voted socialist or communist. In the 1960s, they would be replaced by refugees from Algeria. The result was a bourgeois central city surrounded by a radicalized ring. In the central city, meanwhile, a number of new museums were built, especially in connection with the 1931 Colonial Exposition. That Exposition proved a disappointment in comparison with the city's previous successful international projects.

Despite the hardships, Paris resumed its place as the capital of the arts during what became known as les années folles, or "the crazy years." The city hosted world's fair in 1925 including such artists like Le Corbusier. The centre of artistic ferment moved from Montmartre to the neighbourhood of Montparnasse around the intersection of the Boulevard Raspail to the cafés Le Jockey, Le Dôme, La Rontonde, and, after 1927, La Coupole. Painters, writers and poets, including Ernest Hemingway, Igor Stravinsky, W. B. Yeats, James Joyce, and Ezra Pound came from around the world to take part in the " fête ". Paris was the birthplace of new artistics movements such as Dadaism and Surrealism. George Gershwin came to Paris in 1928 and stayed at the Majestic Hotel, where he composed An American in Paris, capturing the sound of the horns of the Paris taxis as they circled the Place de l'Étoile. Jazz allowed black communities to present their culture as innovative and civilized, but also opened associations among jazz, primitivism, and sexually suggestive performances. The American singer Josephine Baker and the Revue Nègre encapsulated these issues in sensational performances at the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées. A circle of Parisian men and women of colour presented their own Caribbean beguine style in distinction to jazz and promoted it as a source of pride and racial identification. They demonstrated an early instance of Negritude values intermingled with race-uplift concerns. The city also hosted the Summer Olympics in 1924.

The worldwide Great Depression hit home in 1931 and brought with it hardships and a more somber mood in Paris. The population declined slightly from its all-time peak of 2.9 million in 1921 to 2.8 million in 1936. The arrondissements in the centre lost as much as twenty percent of their population, while the outer neighborhoods gained ten percent. The low birth rate of Parisians was compensated by a new wave of immigration from Russia, Poland, Germany, eastern and central Europe, Italy, Portugal and Spain. Political tensions mounted in Paris with strikes, demonstrations and confrontations between the Communists and the Popular Front on the extreme left and the Action Française on the extreme right.

Despite the tensions, the city hosted yet another world's fair in 1937, in this case with the very long title Exposition Internationale des Arts et Techniques dans la Vie Moderne ("International Exposition of arts and technology in modern life"). It was held on both sides of the Seine at the Champ de Mars and the Colline de Chaillot. The Palais de Chaillot, the terraces of which were ornamented with gigantic water cannon fountains, was the main venue, along with the Palais de Tokyo, which now hosts the Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris ("Paris Museum of Modern Art") in its eastern wing. The pavilions of the Soviet Union, crowned by a hammer and sickle, and of Germany, with an eagle and swastika on its summit, faced each other in the center of the exhibition. Instead of a spirit of Paris proclaiming international harmony, the juxtaposition of these two foreign pavilions, trying to outdo each other in political grandiloquence, was a reminder that by the late 1930s, besides its other problems, the city was overshadowed by threatening international rivalries.

Following the German invasion of Poland in September 1939, France declared war on Germany. The French defense plan was purely passive; the French army simply waited for the Germans to attack. On 31 August, the French government began to evacuate 30,000 children from Paris to the provinces, the population was issued gas masks, and bomb shelters were constructed in the city squares. The major works of art of the Louvre and other museums were also evacuated to the Loire Valley and other locations, and the architectural landmarks were protected by sandbags. The French Army waited in the fortifications of the Maginot Line, while in Paris the cafés and theatres remained open.

The Germans attacked France on 10 May 1940. They bypassed the Maginot Line and advanced all the way to the English Channel before heading toward Paris. Paris was flooded with refugees from the battle zone. The Citroën factory was bombed on 2 June. On 10 June, the French government fled Paris, first to Tours and then to Bordeaux. On 12 June, Paris was declared an open city. The first German soldiers entered the French capital on June 14 and paraded down the Champs Élysées from the Arc de Triomphe. The city's conqueror, Adolf Hitler, arrived on June 24, visited various tourist sites and paid homage at Napoleon's tomb.

During the Occupation, the French Government moved to Vichy, and the flag of Nazi Germany flew over all the French government buildings. Signs in German were placed on the main boulevards, and the clocks of Paris were reset to Berlin time. The German military high command in France (the Militärbefehlshabers Frankreich) moved into the Majestic Hotel at 19 Avenue Kléber ; the Abwehr (the German military intelligence), took over the Hôtel Lutetia ; the Luftwaffe (the German air force) occupied the Hôtel Ritz ; the German Navy, the Hôtel de la Marine on the Place de la Concorde; the Gestapo occupied the building at 93 Rue Lauriston; and the German commandant of Paris and his staff moved into the Hôtel Meurice on the Rue de Rivoli. Certain movie theatres and cafés were set aside for German soldiers, while the German officers enjoyed the Ritz, Maxim's, La Coupole and the other exclusive restaurants; the exchange rate was fixed to favor the German occupiers.

For the Parisians, the occupation was a series of frustrations, shortages and humiliations. A curfew was in effect from nine in the evening until five in the morning; at night, the city went dark. Rationing of food, tobacco, coal and clothing was imposed from September 1940. Every year, the supplies grew scantier and the prices higher. A million Parisians left the city for the provinces, where there was more food and fewer Germans. French press and radio contained only German propaganda.

Jews were forced to wear the yellow Star of David badge and were barred from certain professions and public places. On 16–17 July 1942, 12,884 Jews, including 4,051 children and 5,082 women, were rounded up by the French police on orders of the Germans. Unmarried persons and couples without children were taken to Drancy, north of Paris, while seven thousand members of families went to the Vélodrome d’Hiver ("Vel' d'Hiv'"), on Rue Nélaton in the 15th arrondissement, where they were crowded together in the stadium for five days before being sent to the Auschwitz concentration camp, where many of them were murdered.

The first demonstration against the Occupation took place by Paris students on 11 November 1940. As the war continued, clandestine groups and networks were created, some loyal to the Communist Party, others to General de Gaulle in London. They wrote slogans on walls, organized an underground press, and sometimes attacked German officers and soldiers. Reprisals by the Germans were swift and harsh.

Paris was not bombed as often or as heavily as London or Berlin, but the factories and railway yards in the outer parts of the city and suburbs were frequent targets. A night raid on the La Chapelle railway station in the 18th arrondissement on 20–21 April 1944 killed between 640 and 670 persons and destroyed hundreds of buildings.

The Allies landed at Normandy on 6 June 1944 and two months later broke the German lines to advance toward Paris. As the Allies advanced, strikes organised by the Resistance disrupted the railways, police and other public services in the city. On August 19, the resistance networks gave the orders for a general uprising in the city. Its forces seized the prefecture of police and other public buildings in the heart of the city. General Leclerc 's French 2nd Armored Division and the American 4th Infantry Division entered the city on August 25 and converged in the centre, where they were met by delirious crowds. The German commander of Paris, Dietrich von Choltitz, ignored an order from Adolf Hitler to destroy the monuments of the city and surrendered it on 25 August. General de Gaulle arrived on 26 August and led a massive parade down the Champs Élysées, all the way to Notre-Dame for a Te Deum ceremony. On 29 August, the US Army's entire 28th Infantry Division, which had assembled in the Bois de Boulogne the previous night, paraded 24-abreast up the Avenue Hoche to the Arc de Triomphe, then down the Champs Élysées. The division, men and vehicles, marched through Paris "on its way to assigned attack positions northeast of the French capital."

The wear and tear of decades of neglect were painfully obvious in smoke-blackened stone facades, cracked and untended stucco, and peeling paintwork in post-World War II Paris. However, by the mid-1970s, Paris had been repaired and refurbished on a scale that echoed the age of Haussmann.

The Liberation of Paris and the end of the war did not end the hardships of the Parisians. Rationing of bread continued until February 1948, and coffee, cooking oil, sugar and rice were rationed until May 1949. Housing in Paris was old and run-down. In 1954, thirty-five percent of Paris apartment buildings had been built before 1871. Eighty-one percent of Paris apartments did not have their own bathroom, and fifty-five percent did not have their own toilet, yet housing was expensive and in short supply. In 1950, the government began a new large-scale project to construct apartment blocks for low-income Parisians, called HLMs (habitations à loyers modérés), usually on the edges of the city or in the suburbs.

The population of Paris did not return to its 1936 level until 1946 and grew to 2,850,000 by 1954, including 135,000 immigrants, mostly from Algeria, Morocco, Italy and Spain. The exodus of middle-class Parisians to the suburbs continued. The population of the city declined during the 1960s and 1970s (2,753,000 in 1962, 2.3 million in 1972) before finally stabilizing in the 1980s (2,168.000 in 1982, 2,152,000 in 1992).

With France badly hurt by the war, the question was whether Paris could recover its world stature. By the 1970s, Parisians on all sides feared that the city was "losing its star-quality attractiveness and prestige." They felt that the modernizing operations of the 1960s and 1970s had failed to reverse the declining quality of life, and that the capital had a diminished "lustre" and influence abroad.

The politics of Paris remained turbulent throughout the 1940s and early 1950s. A strike in December 1950 caused the cutoff of electricity and the shutdown of the Paris Métro. Communist-led demonstrators battled the police in the streets in 1948 and 1951. The struggle for the independence of Algeria and the resistance of French residents of Algeria, led to numerous bombings in 1961 and 1962 and deadly violent confrontations in Paris between demonstrators and the police. The deeply divided postwar Fourth Republic collapsed in 1958, and a new Constitution was adopted. A new government, under President Charles de Gaulle, was elected with a Fifth Republic proclaimed. In May 1968, Paris experienced student uprisings on the Left Bank: barricades and red flags appeared in the Latin Quarter on 2 May 1968, university buildings were occupied, and a general strike closed down much of Paris on 13 May. A massive counter-demonstration of one million people on the Champs Élysées in support of President de Gaulle on 30 May 1968 was followed by a gradual return to calm.

The cultural life of Paris resumed, this time centered on the cafés of Saint-Germain-des-Prés: the Café de Flore, the Brasserie Lipp and Les Deux Magots, where the philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre and writer Simone de Beauvoir held court, and the nightclubs La Rose Rouge and Le Tabou. The fashionable musical styles were bebop and jazz, led by Sidney Bechet and trumpet player Boris Vian. The new Museum of Modern Art of Paris opened in June 1947 in the old Palais de Tokyo of the 1937 Universal Exposition. Paris designers, led by Christian Dior, made Paris once again the capital of high fashion.

Paris had not had an elected mayor since the French Revolution. Napoleon Bonaparte and his successors had personally chosen a prefect to run the city. The law was changed on 31 December 1975 under President Valery Giscard d'Estaing. The first mayoral election in 1977 was won by Jacques Chirac, the former prime minister. Chirac served as mayor of Paris for eighteen years, until 1995, when he was elected president of the French Republic. He was succeeded as mayor by another candidate of the right, Jean Tiberi.

Each President of the Fifth Republic has sought to make his mark on Paris, and each initiated a plan of Grands Travaux ("Great Works"). The first President of the Fifth Republic, Charles De Gaulle, constructed a new central produce market at Rungis to replace the picturesque but antiquated market of Les Halles. But the most visible and appreciated improvement made by de Gaulle was the Malraux Law, drafted by writer and Minister of Culture André Malraux, which required the cleansing of centuries of soot and grime and restoration to original colours of the façades of the Cathedral of Notre Dame and other landmarks of Paris.

The major project of President Georges Pompidou was the Centre Georges Pompidou in the Beaubourg area of the 4th arrondissement. It is an ultramodern showcase of the contemporary arts, whose pipes, escalators ducts and other internal workings were exposed outside of the building. Pompidou's successor, Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, converted the Gare d'Orsay railway station into the Musée d'Orsay for art of the 19th century; commissioned in 1977, it was opened in 1986 under President François Mitterrand.

President François Mitterrand had fourteen years in power, enough time to complete more projects than any president since Napoleon III. His Grands Travaux included the Arab World Institute, a new site for the Bibliothèque nationale de France (BNF); a new opera house, the Opéra Bastille, opened in 1989 to celebrate the bicentennial of the French Revolution; a new Ministry of Finance in Bercy (the old Ministry had been housed in a wing of the Louvre), also opened in 1989. The Grande Arche in La Défense was also finished in 1989, a massive hollow cube-shaped building 112 metres high that completed the long perspective from the Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel through the Place de la Concorde and the Champs Élysées. The most famous project of all, the "Grand Louvre", included the expulsion of the Ministry of Finance, the reconstruction of large parts of the museum, an underground gallery, and the addition of a glass pyramid by I.M. Pei in the courtyard.

In the post-war era, Paris experienced its largest development since the end of the Belle Époque in 1914. The suburbs began to expand considerably, with the construction of large social estates known as cités and the beginning of La Défense, the business district. A comprehensive express subway network, the RER, was built to complement the Métro and serve the distant suburbs. A network of roads was developed in the suburbs centred on the Périphérique expressway encircling the city, which was completed in 1973.

Beginning in the 1970s, several suburbs (banlieues) of Paris experienced deindustrialisation. The once-thriving residential cités became ghettos for African and Arab immigrants and zones with high unemployment. At the same time, some neighbourhoods within the city of Paris and the western and southern suburbs successfully shifted their economic base from traditional manufacturing to high-value-added services and high-tech manufacturing, giving these neighbourhoods the highest per-capita incomes in France and among the highest in Europe. The resulting widening economic gap between these two areas led to periodic clashes between young residents of the northeast housing projects and the police.

In the first part of the 21st century, the vitality of the Paris economy made it an important financial centre and influential global city. The Paris region, including the business centre of La Défense just outside the city limits, had a 2012 GDP of € 612 billion (US$760 billion). In 2011 its GDP ranked second among the regions of Europe and its per-capita GDP was the 4th highest in Europe. In 2013 it hosted the world headquarters of 29 Fortune Global 500 companies, mostly in banking, finance, insurance and business services.

Tourism was an important part of the Paris economy. In 2013, the city of Paris welcomed 29.3 million tourists, the largest number of whom came from the United States, followed by the United Kingdom, Italy, Germany and Spain. There were 550,000 visitors from Japan, a decrease from previous years, while there was a growth of 20 percent in the number of visitors from China (186,000) and the Middle East (326,000).

The Paris region received 32.3 million visitors in 2013. As a destination for upscale European shopping, Paris was especially important. In 2014, visitors to Paris spent $17 billion (€13.58 billion), the third-highest sum globally after London and New York.

Fashion and luxury goods also made an important contribution to the Paris economy. In 2014 Paris was the home of the world's largest cosmetics company, L'Oréal, and three of the five top global makers of luxury fashion accessories; Louis Vuitton, Hermès and Cartier.

According to one study produced in 2009, Paris was the third most economically powerful city in the world among the 35 major cities in the study, ranking behind London and New York. The study ranked Paris first in terms of quality of life, and accessibility; third in cultural life, sixth in terms of economy, and seventh in research and development. Another study in 2012 grouped Paris with New York, London, and Tokyo as the four leading global cities. This study concluded that Paris ranked as the third global city for accountancy and management consultancy, network connectivity, and airline connections, and was fifth in terms of insurance.

In March 2001, Bertrand Delanoë became the first socialist mayor of Paris and the first openly gay mayor of the city. The socialists and their allies dominated city politics for the next thirteen years: Delanoë was re-elected in 2008, and on 5 April 2014, Anne Hidalgo, another socialist, was elected first female mayor of Paris. In 2020, Paris mayor Anne Hidalgo was re-elected. The two mayors made social issues and the environment a priority. In 2007, in an effort to reduce car traffic in the city, Mayor Delanoë introduced the Vélib', a system that rents bicycles at low cost for the use of local residents and visitors. To discourage automobile traffic, the city administration increased parking fees and added new restrictions on driving in the city. Between 2008 and 2013, the city converted a section of the highway along the Seine between the Pont de l'Alma and the Musée d'Orsay into a public park called the Promenade des Berges de la Seine. By early 2021, a number of Hidalgo's policies had gained international attention, such as her proposal to remove over half of Paris's car parking spaces and turn the Champs-Élysées into a "fantastic garden". In 2026, Emmanuel Grégoire was elected mayor, continuing the socialist grip on power.

In 2013, the Louvre was the most-visited art museum in the world, and the Centre Georges Pompidou was the most-visited museum of modern art.

A new national museum, The Musée du quai Branly, opened in 2006. It was the presidential grand project of Jacques Chirac, designed by architect Jean Nouvel to showcase the indigenous art of Africa, Oceania, Asia and the Americas.

A new private museum, the Contemporary Art museum of the Louis Vuitton Foundation, designed by architect Frank Gehry, opened in October 2014 in the Bois de Boulogne. On 14 January 2015, President Hollande inaugurated a new symphony hall, the Philharmonie de Paris, also designed by architect Jean Nouvel. The hall opened with a performance by the Orchestre de Paris of the Requiem of Gabriel Fauré, played to honour the victims of the Charlie Hebdo shooting that took place in the city a week earlier. It is located in the Parc de la Villette in the 19th arrondissement. The new concert hall cost 386 million Euros and was completed in seven years, two years longer than planned, and at three times the original planned cost. The architect did not attend the opening, protesting that the opening was rushed, the hall was not finished, and that the acoustics had not been properly tested, though journalists at the opening reported that the sound quality was perfectly clear. The architecture critic of The Guardian wrote that the building looked like a space ship that had crashed in France.

On 15 April 2019, the roof of the Notre-Dame de Paris caught fire, severely damaging the bell towers and resulting in the total collapse of the central spire and roof.

In 2024, the city hosted the Summer Olympics for a third time. Events were scheduled to be held in the Seine, despite swimming in the river being banned since 1923; a €1.4 billion cleanup effort by the French government sought to reduce bacterial levels in the river to those safe for swimming. The city also hosted the Summer Paralympics for the first time.

While Paris and the Paris region have some of the wealthiest neighbourhoods in France, it also has some of the poorest, particularly in the suburbs to the north and east, where many residents are immigrants or children of immigrants from the Maghreb and sub-Saharan Africa. Between 27 October and 14 November 2005, in what became known as the 2005 French riots, young residents of low-income housing projects in Clichy-sous-Bois, a Paris suburb, rioted, after two young men fleeing the police were accidentally electrocuted. The riots gradually spread to other suburbs and then across France, as rioters burned schools, day-care centres and other government buildings and almost nine thousand cars. The riots caused an estimated 200 million Euros in property damage, and led to almost three thousand arrests. On 14 November 2005, as the riots ended, President Jacques Chirac blamed the rioters for a lack of respect for the law and French values, but also condemned inequalities in French society and "the poison of racism".

On 7 January 2015, two Muslim extremists, both French citizens raised in the Paris region, attacked the Paris headquarters of Charlie Hebdo, a controversial satirical magazine that had poked ridicule at Mohammed, in what became known as the Charlie Hebdo shooting. They killed ten civilians, including five prominent cartoonists and the director of the magazine and two police officers. On 8–9 January, a third terrorist killed five more. Collectively known as the January 2015 Île-de-France attacks, these were the deadliest terrorist attacks in Paris since 1961. On 11 January, an estimated 1.5 million persons marched in Paris to show solidarity against terrorism and in defense of freedom of speech.

The attacks intensified the decades-old debate in the Paris press about immigration, integration and freedom of speech. The New York Times summarised the ongoing debate:

On 13 November 2015, there were simultaneous terrorist attacks in Paris conducted by three coordinated teams of terrorists. They sprayed several sidewalk cafes with machine-gun fire, set off bombs near the Stade de France, and killed 89 persons at the Bataclan theater, where a concert by the Eagles of Death Metal rock band had begun. The combined attacks killed 130 persons and injured more than 350. Seven terrorists killed themselves by setting off explosive vests. On the morning of November 18, three suspected terrorists, including Abdelhamid Abaaoud, the alleged mastermind of the attacks, were killed in a shootout with police in the Paris suburb of Saint-Denis. French president François Hollande declared that France was in a nationwide state of emergency, reestablished controls at the borders, and brought fifteen hundred soldiers into Paris. Schools, universities and other public institutions in Paris were closed for several days. It was the single most deadly terrorist attack in French history.

In 2008, Nicolas Sarkozy announced the Grand Paris renovation, a renovation so large in scale that Paris had never underwent before, surpassing even that of Haussmann around 150 years prior. The renovation started in 2016 and is set to end in 2030.

The geography of Paris is characterised by the urbanisation of the area it lies within, and its position in the Petite Couronne, Grande Couronne, and Île-de-France.

Paris is located in northern central France. By road, it is 450 kilometres (280 mi) southeast of London, 287 kilometres (178 mi) south of Calais, 305 kilometres (190 mi) southwest of Brussels, 774 kilometres (481 mi) north of Marseille, 385 kilometres (239 mi) northeast of Nantes, and 135 kilometres (84 mi) southeast of Rouen. Paris is located in the north-bending arc of the river Seine and includes two islands, the Île Saint-Louis and the larger Île de la Cité, which form the oldest part of the city. The river's mouth on the English Channel (La Manche) is about 233 miles (375 km) downstream from the city. The city is spread widely on both banks of the river.

Excluding the outlying parks of Bois de Boulogne and Bois de Vincennes, Paris covers an oval measuring about 87 square kilometres (34 square miles) in area, enclosed by the 35-kilometre (22-mile) ring road, the Boulevard Périphérique. The city's last major annexation of outlying territories in 1860 not only gave it its modern form but also created the 20 clockwise-spiralling arrondissements (municipal boroughs). From the 1860 area of 78 km (30 sq mi), the city limits were expanded marginally to 86.9 km (33.6 sq mi) in the 1920s. In 1929, the Bois de Boulogne and Bois de Vincennes forest parks were officially annexed to the city, bringing its area to about 105 km (41 sq mi). The metropolitan area of the city is 2,300 km (890 sq mi).

Paris has a typical Western European oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification : Cfb) which is affected by the North Atlantic Current. The overall climate throughout the year is mild and moderately wet. Summer days are usually warm and pleasant with average temperatures between 15 and 25 °C (59 and 77 °F), and a fair amount of sunshine. Each year, however, there are a few days when the temperature rises above 32 °C (90 °F). Longer periods of more intense heat sometimes occur, such as the heat wave of 2003 when temperatures exceeded 30 °C (86 °F) for weeks, reached 40 °C (104 °F) on some days and seldom cooled down at night. Spring and autumn have, on average, mild days and fresh nights but are changing and unstable. Surprisingly warm or cool weather occurs frequently in both seasons. In winter, sunshine is scarce; days are cool, nights cold but generally above freezing with low temperatures around 3 °C (37 °F). Light night frosts are however quite common, but the temperature will dip below −5 °C (23 °F) for only a few days a year. Snow falls every year, but rarely stays on the ground. The city sometimes sees light snow or flurries with or without accumulation. Paris has an average annual precipitation of 641 mm (25.2 in), and experiences light rainfall distributed evenly throughout the year. However the city is known for intermittent abrupt heavy showers.

Paris has a rich history of meteorological observations, with some going back as far as 1665. The highest recorded temperature is 42.6 °C (108.7 °F) on 25 July 2019, and the lowest is −23.9 °C (−11.0 °F) on 10 December 1879. Furthermore, the warmest night on record is 27.5 °C (81.5 °F) on 27 June 1772 and the coldest day is −13.0 °C (8.6 °F) on 30 December 1788.

The topography, or physical lay of the land, of Paris, the capital of France, is relatively flat, with an elevation of 35 m (115 ft) above sea level, but it contains a number of hills:

The highest elevation in the City of Paris is not, as often thought, on the hill of Montmartre, where the Basilica of Sacré-Cœur is located, but on the hill of Belleville on the rue du Télégraphe [ fr ], which reaches 148 m (486 ft). In the greater urban area, the highest point is in the Forest of Montmorency (Val-d'Oise département), 19.5 km (12.1 mi) north-northwest of the center of Paris as the crow flies, at 195 metres (640 ft) above sea level.

The lowest elevation is 24 m (79 ft), indicated on the river Seine at the western city limits.

Paris lies in the so-called "Paris Basin," a low-lying continental shelf that over geologic time was occasionally submerged in ocean waters leaving behind marine sedimentary deposits (e.g., limestone, excavated from the underground "Quarries of Paris" and used to construct many of the city's buildings).

. When the region is above sea-level, as at the present time, rivers draining water from the land form, and these cut channels into the landscape. The rivers therefore strongly influence the topography of Paris. The Seine river cuts through Paris, but has apparently meandered in the past within a larger valley whose edges lie on the outskirts of the metropolitan area (the edges of this larger valley are visible from tall buildings in Paris). Many of the "hills" in Paris, appear to be formed as the result of cutoffs from previous meanders in the Seine river, which is now largely channelized to maintain its stability.

The city of Paris is divided into twenty arrondissements municipaux, administrative districts, more simply referred to as arrondissements. These are not to be confused with departmental arrondissements, which subdivide the 101 French départements. The word "arrondissement", when applied to Paris, refers almost always to the municipal arrondissements.

The number of the arrondissement is indicated by the last two digits in most Parisian postal codes (75001 up to 75020).
